Schwartz’s
Principles of Surgery
Tenth Edition
Notice
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experience broaden 
our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are required. The authors and the 
publisher of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts 
to provide information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards 
accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error 
or changes in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party 
who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the 
information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they disclaim 
all responsibility for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the 
information contained in this work. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information 
contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised 
to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to 
administer to be certain that the information contained in this work is accurate and that 
changes have not been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for 
administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in connection with new 
or infrequently used drugs.
Editor-in-Chief
F. Charles Brunicardi, MD, FACS
Moss Foundation Chair in Gastrointestinal  
  and Personalized Surgery
Professor and Vice Chair Surgical Services
Chief of General Surgery, UCLA Santa Monica  
  Medical Center
Department of Surgery
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Los Angeles, California
Associate Editors
Dana K. Andersen, MD, FACS
Program Director
Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive  
  and Kidney Diseases
National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, Maryland
Timothy R. Billiar, MD, FACS 
George Vance Foster Professor and Chairman
Department of Surgery 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
David L. Dunn, MD, PhD, FACS 
Executive Vice President for Health Affairs
Professor of Surgery, Microbiology, and Immunology
University of Louisville
Louisville, Kentucky
John G. Hunter, MD, FACS 
Mackenzie Professor and Chair
Department of Surgery
Oregon Health & Science University
Portland, Oregon
Jeffrey B. Matthews, MD, FACS 
Surgeon-in-Chief and Chairman
Department of Surgery
Dallas B. Phemister Professor of Surgery
The University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Raphael E. Pollock, MD, PhD, FACS 
Professor and Director
Division of Surgical Oncology
Department of Surgery
Chief of Surgical Services, Ohio State University  
  Comprehensive Cancer Center, Arthur G. James  
  Cancer Hospital and Richard J. Solove  
  Research Institute
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center 
Columbus, Ohio
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Athens  London  Madrid  Mexico City  Milan 
New Delhi  Singapore  Sydney  Toronto
Schwartz’s
Principles of Surgery
Tenth Edition
kkjkjdht © 2015 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States kkjkjdht Act of 1976, no part of this publication may 
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher, with the 
exception that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, but they may not be reproduced for publication.
ISBN: 978-0-07-180092-1
MHID: 0-07-180092-1
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-179675-0,
MHID: 0-07-179675-4.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an 
editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, 
they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To 
contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
Previous editions © 2010, 2005, 1999, 1994, 1989, 1984, 1979, 1974, 1969 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
TERMS OF USE
This is a kkjkjdhted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as 
permitted under the kkjkjdht Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s 
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may 
be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION 
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS 
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be 
uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of 
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. 
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages 
that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply 
to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
To obtain material from the disk that  
accompanies the printed version of  
this eBook, please click here.
The tenth edition of Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery is 
dedicated to the late Dr. Stephen Lowry, consummate 
surgeon-scientist, educator, colleague, mentor, and long-
time contributor to Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery. 
At the time of his death, Dr. Lowry served as Richard 
Harvey Professor and Chair of the Department of Surgery 
and Senior Associate Dean for Education at the Rutgers-
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School (RWJMS) in New 
Brunswick, New Jersey. He was the inaugural holder 
of the Richard Harvey Professorship at RWJMS, which 
honors excellence in innovative teaching and exemplified 
his absolute dedication to medical education. Dr. Lowry’s 
dedicated and distinguished surgical career produced 
valuable contributions to both scientific knowledge and 
patient care, including his seminal investigations utilizing 
the human endotoxemia model that defined important 
aspects of the host inflammatory response following injury. 
His investigations had been supported by continuous 
National Institute of Health (NIH) funding for more than 
25 years and were recognized by the coveted Method to 
Extend Research in Time (MERIT) award from the NIH. 
He authored more than 400 scientific publications and 
was the recipient of numerous honors that recognized his 
academic achievements. Although Dr. Lowry received 
many accolades and awards throughout his career, he 
was first and foremost an enthusiastic teacher and sincere 
supporter of people, their goals, and their lives. Dr. 
Lowry genuinely enjoyed listening, learning, and sharing 
his knowledge and did so with a depth of feeling that 
inspired and encouraged those around him. As his wife 
Susette wrote, “Steve knew he would be remembered for 
his professional accomplishments, but never imagined 
he would be honored and missed for his personality and 
style that set him apart from the rest. The world really was 
a better place with Steve in it!” The loss of his warmth, 
professionalism, intellect, and enthusiasm for medical 
education will be greatly missed.
Siobhan Corbett, MD, and the editors of 
Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, Tenth edition
Stephen Lowry, MD, MBA (1947-2011)
Photograph used with permission johnemersonphotography.com
The Editors of Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery wish to 
dedicate this tenth edition to the memory of Dr. Robert S. 
Dorian, the sole author of the “Anesthesia” chapter in the 
last three editions. Dr. Dorian was born in Philadelphia and 
grew up in Livingston, New Jersey where his father was 
a prominent gynecologist. He received his undergraduate 
degree in Physics and Music from Tufts University in 
Boston while at the same time studying piano at the New 
England Conservatory of Music. Bob received his medical 
education at Rutgers Medical School in Piscataway, 
New Jersey. After completing an internship in surgery 
at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, he trained in 
anesthesiology at Weill Cornell Medical College and New 
York Hospital in New York City. He completed a fellowship 
in pediatric anesthesiology at Boston Children’s Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School. After his training, Bob 
established practice at the St. Barnabas Medical Center 
and rose to become the Chairman of the Department of 
Anesthesiology, a position he held for 14 years until his 
death. He was highly respected on both a national and 
international basis as an outstanding chairman.
Bob was a consummate anesthesiologist, educator, 
mentor, and wonderful friend. He was the greatest of clinical 
anesthesiologists and was dedicated to providing the 
highest level of care to his patients. He was an extraordinary 
teacher and as the Program Director of the St. Barnabas 
anesthesia residency program for ten years, he trained 
scores of residents. His residents adored him because of the 
tremendous amount of attention he gave to each resident 
to assure they were highly trained in their craft and that 
they were placed in the top fellowships around the nation. 
Bob was also an incredibly gifted musician, scholar, and 
thinker. His intellect, humanity, and humor were inspiring 
to everyone who knew him. Bob was respected on an 
international basis for his humanitarian work with frequent 
medical missions to underserved populations around the 
world. In this endeavor, he was often accompanied by his 
wife, Linda, and their daughters, Rose and Zoe. 
Dr. Dorian had a most special gift and that was to 
bring out the best in every person that he met and make 
them feel very special. He lit up every room and made each 
encounter an occasion to remember. Having a conversation 
with Bob was one of life’s great pleasures. Colleagues, 
nurses, and patients would look forward to his arrival 
because he would make them laugh and brighten their 
day. He was loved by all and will be sorely missed. Bob’s 
memory and legacy will live on in the thousands of patients 
that he cared for, in the academic programs that he fostered, 
in the generations of anesthesiologists that he trained, and 
in his remarkable family. His words and intellect will be 
preserved in this textbook of surgery.
James R. Macho, MD, FACS, and the editors of 
Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, Tenth edition 
Robert S. Dorian, MD, MBA (1954-2014)
Photo provided by Saint Barnabas Medical Center. Used with permission.
Contributors/ix
Acknowledgments/xix
Foreword/xxi
Preface/xxiii
Preface to the First Edition/xxv
Part I
Basic Considerations	
1
	 1.	Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training 
in Surgery......................................................... 3
Amy L. Hill, James Wu, Mark D. Girgis, Danielle Hsu, 
Areti Tillou, James Macho, Vishad Nabili, and 
F. Charles Brunicardi
	 2.	Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic 
Support............................................................13
Siobhan A. Corbett
	 3.	Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the 
Surgical Patient................................................65
G. Tom Shires III
	 4.	Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, 
and Transfusion................................................85
Bryan Cotton, John B. Holcomb, Matthew Pommerening, 
Kenneth Jastrow, and Rosemary A. Kozar
	 5.	Shock.............................................................109
Brian S. Zuckerbraun, Andrew B. Peitzman, and 
Timothy R. Billiar
	 6.	Surgical Infections..........................................135
Greg J. Beilman and David L. Dunn
	 7.	Trauma...........................................................161
Clay Cothren Burlew and Ernest E. Moore
	 8.	Burns.............................................................227
Jonathan Friedstat, Fred W. Endorf, and Nicole S. Gibran
	 9.	Wound Healing...............................................241
Adrian Barbul, David T. Efron, and Sandra L. Kavalukas
	10.	Oncology........................................................273
Funda Meric-Bernstam and Raphael E. Pollock
	11.	Transplantation...............................................321
Angelika C. Gruessner, Tun Jie, Klearchos Papas, 
Marian Porubsky, Abbas Rana, M. Cristy Smith, 
Sarah E. Yost, David L. Dunn, and Rainer W.G. Gruessner
	12.	Patient Safety.................................................365
Catherine L. Chen, Michol A. Cooper, Mark L. Shapiro, 
Peter B. Angood, and Martin A. Makary
	13.	Physiologic Monitoring of the 
Surgical Patient..............................................399
Louis H. Alarcon and Mitchell P. Fink
	14.	Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, 
Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery, 
and Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery..........415
Donn H. Spight, John G. Hunter, and Blair A. Jobe
	15.	Molecular and Genomic Surgery........................443
Xin-Hua Feng, Xia Lin, Juehua Yu, John Nemunaitis, 
and F. Charles Brunicardi
Part II
Specific Considerations	
471
16.	The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue....................473
Sajid A. Khan, Jonathan Bank, David H. Song, 
and Eugene A. Choi
	17.	The Breast......................................................497
Kelly K. Hunt, John F.R. Robertson, and Kirby I. Bland
	18.	Disorders of the Head and Neck........................565
Richard O. Wein, Rakesh K. Chandra, C. René Leemans, 
and Randal S. Weber
	19.	Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, 
and Pleura......................................................605
Katie S. Nason, Michael A. Maddaus, and James D. Luketich
	20.	Congenital Heart Disease.................................695
Tara Karamlou, Yasuhiro Kotani, and Glen A. Van Arsdell
	21.	Acquired Heart Disease....................................735
Shoichi Okada, Jason O. Robertson, Lindsey L. Saint, and 
Ralph J. Damiano, Jr.
22.	Thoracic Aneurysms and 
Aortic Dissection............................................785
Scott A. LeMaire, Raja R. Gopaldas, and Joseph S. Coselli
23.	Arterial Disease .............................................827
Peter H. Lin, Mun Jye Poi, Jesus Matos, 
Panagiotis Kougias, Carlos Bechara, and Changyi Chen
	24.	Venous and Lymphatic Disease.........................915
Jason P. Jundt, Timothy K. Liem, and Gregory L. Moneta
	25.	Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia................941
Blair A. Jobe, John G. Hunter, and David I. Watson
	26.	Stomach.......................................................1035
Yuko Kitagawa and Daniel T. Dempsey
	27.	The Surgical Management of Obesity...............1099
Philip R. Schauer and Bruce Schirmer
	28.	Small Intestine.............................................1137
Ali Tavakkoli, Stanley W. Ashley, and Michael J. Zinner
	29.	Colon, Rectum, and Anus...............................1175
Kelli M. Bullard Dunn and David A. Rothenberger
	30.	The Appendix................................................1241
Mike K. Liang, Roland E. Andersson, Bernard M. Jaffe, and 
David H. Berger
Contents
viii
Contents
	31.	Liver............................................................1263
Elaine Y. Cheng, Ali Zarrinpar, David A. Geller, 
John A. Goss, and Ronald W. Busuttil
	32.	Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic 
Biliary System..............................................1309
Thai H. Pham and John G. Hunter
	33.	Pancreas.......................................................1341
William E. Fisher, Dana K. Andersen, John A. Windsor, 
Ashok K. Saluja, and F. Charles Brunicardi
	34.	Spleen.........................................................1423
Adrian E. Park, Eduardo M. Targarona, 
and Igor Belyansky
	35.	Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and 
Retroperitoneum...........................................1449
Neal E. Seymour and Robert L. Bell
	36.	Soft Tissue Sarcomas.....................................1465
Janice N. Cormier, Alessandro Gronchi, and 
Raphael E. Pollock
	37.	Inguinal Hernias...........................................1495
Justin P. Wagner, F. Charles Brunicardi, 
Parviz K. Amid, and David C. Chen
	38.	Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal...................1521
Geeta Lal and Orlo H. Clark
	39.	Pediatric Surgery...........................................1597
David J. Hackam, Tracy Grikscheit, Kasper Wang,
Jeffrey S. Upperman, and Henri R. Ford
	40.	Urology........................................................1651
Karim Chamie, Jeffrey La Rochelle, Brian Shuch, 
and Arie S. Belldegrun
	41.	Gynecology...................................................1671
Chad Hamilton, Michael Stany, W. Thomas Gregory, 
and Elise C. Kohn
	42.	Neurosurgery................................................1709
Casey H. Halpern and M. Sean Grady
	43.	Orthopedic Surgery........................................1755
Bert J. Thomas, Freddie H. Fu, Bart Muller, Dharmesh Vyas, 
Matt Niesen, Jonathan Pribaz, and Klaus Draenert
	44.	Surgery of the Hand and Wrist........................1787
Scott D. Lifchez and J. Alex Kelamis
	45.	Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery.................1829
Joseph E. Losee, Michael L. Gimbel, J. Peter Rubin, 
Christopher G. Wallace, and Fu-Chan Wei
	46.	Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient.................1895
Robert S. Dorian
	47.	Surgical Considerations in the Elderly.............1923
Rosemarie E. Hardin and Michael E. Zenilman
	48.	Ethics, Palliative Care, and 
Care at the End of Life..................................1941
Daniel E. Hall, Peter Angelos, Geoffrey P. Dunn, 
Daniel B. Hinshaw, and Timothy M. Pawlik
	49.	Global Surgery..............................................1955
Raymond R. Price and Catherine R. deVries
Index/1983
Contributors
Louis H. Alarcon, MD
Associate Professor of Surgery and Critical Care 
Medicine, Medical Director, Trauma Surgery, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania
Chapter 13, Physiologic Monitoring of the Surgical 
Patient
Parviz K. Amid, MD, FACS, FRCS
Clinical Professor of Surgery, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Director Lichtenstein Amid Hernia 
Clinic at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 37, Inguinal Hernias
Dana K. Andersen, MD, FACS
Program Director, Division of Digestive Diseases and 
Nutrition, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
Chapter 33, Pancreas
Roland E. Andersson, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, County 
Hospital Ryhov, Jönköping, Department of Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
Chapter 30, The Appendix
Peter Angelos, MD, PhD, FACS 
Linda Kohler Anderson Professor of Surgery and 
Surgical Ethics, Chief, Endocrine Surgery, Associate 
Director, MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics, 
The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
Chapter 48, Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End 
of Life
Peter B. Angood, MD, FRCS(C), FACS, MCCM
President and Chief Executive Officer, American College 
of Physician Executives, Tampa, Florida
Chapter 12, Patient Safety
Stanley W. Ashley, MD
Frank Sawyer Professor of Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts
Chapter 28, Small Intestine
Jonathan Bank, MD
Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago 
Medicine & Biological Sciences, Chicago, Illinois
Chapter 16, The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Adrian Barbul, MD, FACS
Vice-Chair, Department of Surgery, Surgical Director, 
Washington Hospital Center, Washington DC
Chapter 9, Wound Healing
Carlos Bechara, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular 
Surgery & Endovascular Therapy, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
Greg J. Beilman, MD
Frank B. Cerra Professor of Critical Care Surgery, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Chapter 6, Surgical Infections
Robert L. Bell, MD, MA, FACS
Assistant Professor of Clinical Surgery, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Summit 
Medical Group, Berkeley Heights, New Jersey
Chapter 35, Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and 
Retroperitoneum
Arie S. Belldegrun, MD, FACS
Director, Institute of Urologic Oncology, Professor & 
Chief of Urologic Oncology, Roy and Carol Doumani 
Chair in Urologic Oncology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 40, Urology
Igor Belyansky, MD 
Director of Abdominal Wall Reconstruction Program, 
Department of General Surgery, Anne Arundel Medical 
Center, Annapolis, Maryland
Chapter 34, Spleen
David H. Berger, MD, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Vice President and Chief Medical 
Officer, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Chapter 30, The Appendix
x
Contributors
Timothy R. Billiar, MD, FACS
George Vance Foster Professor and Chairman, 
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 5, Shock
Kirby I. Bland, MD
Professor and Chair, Department of Surgery, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
Chapter 17, The Breast
F. Charles Brunicardi, MD, FACS
Moss Foundation Chair in Gastrointestinal and 
Personalized Surgery, Professor and Vice Chair, Surgical 
Services, Chief of General Surgery, UCLA Santa 
Monica Medical Center, Department of Surgery, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Chapter 15, Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Chapter 33, Pancreas
Chapter 37, Inguinal Hernias
Clay Cothren Burlew, MD, FACS
Director, Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Department 
of Surgery, Denver Health Medical Center, Associate 
Professor of Surgery, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Denver, Colorado
Chapter 7, Trauma
Ronald W. Busuttil, MD, PhD
Professor and Executive Chairman, Department of 
Surgery, University of California-Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California
Chapter 31, Liver
Karim Chamie, MD, MSHS
Assistant Professor of Urology, Institute of Urologic 
Oncology, Department of Urology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California 
Chapter 40, Urology
Rakesh K. Chandra, MD
Associate Professor of Otolaryngology, Chief, 
Rhinology & Skull Base Surgery, Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee
Chapter 18, Disorders of the Head and Neck
Catherine L. Chen, MD, MPH
Resident Physician, Department of Anesthesia  
and Perioperative Care, University of California,  
San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Chapter 12, Patient Safety
Changyi Chen, MD, PhD
Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery  
& Endovascular Therapy, Vice Chairman of Research, 
Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
David C. Chen, MD
Clinical Director, Lichtenstein Amid Hernia Clinic at 
UCLA, Physician, General Surgery, UCLA Center for 
Esophageal Disorders, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 37, Inguinal Hernias
Elaine Y. Cheng, MD
Fellow in Abdominal Transplant Surgery, Division of 
Liver and Pancreas Transplantation, Department of 
Surgery, University of California-Los Angeles,  
Los Angeles, California
Chapter 31, Liver
Eugene A. Choi, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
The University of Chicago Medicine & Biological 
Sciences, Chicago, Illinois
Chapter 16, The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Orlo H. Clark, MD, FACS
Professor, Surgery, University of California, San 
Francisco, California
Chapter 38, Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
Michol A. Cooper, MD, PhD
General Surgery Resident, Department of Surgery, Johns 
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland
Chapter 12, Patient Safety
Siobhan A. Corbett, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Surgery,  
Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers 
Biomedical and Health Sciences, New Brunswick,  
New Jersey
Chapter 2, Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic 
Support
Janice N. Cormier, MD, MPH
Professor, Departments of Surgical Oncology and 
Biostatistics and Biomathematics, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Chapter 36, Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Joseph S. Coselli, MD
Professor and Chief, Cullen Foundation Endowed Chair, 
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Chief, Adult Cardiac Surgery, Texas Heart Institute, 
Chief, Adult Cardiac Surgery Section and, Associate 
Chief, Cardiovascular Service, Baylor St. Luke’s 
Medical Center, Houston, Texas
Chapter 22, Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
Bryan A. Cotton, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Center for 
Translational Injury Research, Houston, Texas
Chapter 4, Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding and 
Transfusion
xi
Contributors
Ralph J. Damiano, MD 
John M. Schoenberg Professor of Surgery, Chief of 
Cardiac Surgery, Vice Chairman, Department of Surgery, 
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri
Chapter 21, Acquired Heart Disease
Daniel T. Dempsey, MD, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Chapter 26, Stomach
Catherine R. deVries, MD
Director, Center for Global Surgery, Professor, 
Department of Surgery, Associate Professor, Department 
of Family and Preventive Medicine, Division of Public 
Health, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
Chapter 49, Global Surgery
Robert S. Dorian, MD
Chairman, Department of Anesthesiology, Saint 
Barnabas Medical Center, Livingston, New Jersey
Chapter 46, Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
Klaus Draenert, MD
Zentrum fur Orthopadische, Wissenschaften,  
Gabriel-Max-Strasse 3, Munchen, Germany
Chapter 43, Orthopaedic Surgery
David L. Dunn, MD, PhD, FACS
Executive Vice President for Health Affairs, Professor of 
Surgery, Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky
Chapter 6, Surgical Infections
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Kelli M. Bullard Dunn, MD, FACS, FASCRS
Senior Associate Dean for Statewide Initiatives and 
Outreach, Associate Director for Clinical Programs, 
James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Professor of 
Surgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky
Chapter 29, Colon, Rectum, and Anus
Geoffrey P. Dunn, MD
Medical Director, Department of Surgery, Hamot 
Medical Center, Erie, Pensylvania
Chapter 48, Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End 
of Life
David T. Efron, MD, FACS
Associate Professor of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland
Chapter 9, Wound Healing
Fred W. Endorf, MD
Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Surgery, 
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota
Chapter 8, Burns
Xin-Hua Feng, PhD
Professor of Molecular Cell Biology, Michael E. 
DeBakey Department of Surgery, and Department 
of Molecular & Cellular Biology Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas
Chapter 15, Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Mitchell P. Fink, MD
Professor-in-Residence, Departments of Surgery and 
Anesthesiology, Vice Chair, Department of Surgery, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California
Chapter 13, Physiologic Monitoring of the Surgical 
Patient
William E. Fisher, MD, FACS
Professor and Chief, Division of General Surgery, 
George L. Jordan, M.D. Chair of General Surgery, 
Director, Elkins Pancreas Center, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 33, Pancreas
Henri R. Ford, MD
Vice President and Chief of Surgery, Children’s Hospital 
Los Angeles, Vice-Dean, Medical Education, Professor 
and Vice Chair for Clinical Affairs, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California,  
Los Angeles, California 
Chapter 39, Pediatric Surgery
Jonathan Friedstat, MD
Clinical Instructor, Harborview Medical Center,  
Seattle, Washington
Chapter 8, Burns
Freddie H. Fu, MD, DSc (Hon), DPs (Hon)
Distinguished Service Professor, University of 
Pittsburgh, David Silver Professor and Chairman, 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Head Team Physician, 
University of Pittsburgh Department of Athletics, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 43, Orthopaedic Surgery
David A. Geller, MD
Richard L. Simmons Professor of Surgery, Co-Director, 
UPMC Liver Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 31, Liver
Nicole S. Gibran, MD, FACS
Professor, Department of Surgery, Director, Medicine 
Regional Burn Center, Harborview Medical Center, 
Seattle, Washington
Chapter 8, Burns
Michael L. Gimbel, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania
Chapter 45, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
xii
Contributors
Mark D. Girgis, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Raja R. Gopaldas, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 
Hugh E. Stephenson, Jr., MD, Department of Surgery, 
University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, 
Missouri
Chapter 22, Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
John A. Goss, MD
Professor and Chief, Division of Abdominal 
Transplantation, Michael E. DeBakey Department of 
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Chapter 31, Liver
M. Sean Grady, MD, FACS
Charles Harrison Frazier Professor, Chairman, 
Department of Neurosurgery, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
Chapter 42, Neurosurgery
W. Thomas Gregory, MD
Associate Professor, Division of Female Pelvic Medicine 
and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, Oregon
Chapter 41, Gynecology
Tracy Grikscheit, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Pediatric 
Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 
Chapter 39, Pediatric Surgery
Alessandro Gronchi, MD
Department of Surgery - Sarcoma Service, Fondazione 
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori Via Venezian, 
Milan, Italy
Chapter 36, Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Angelika C. Gruessner, PhD
Professor of Public Health, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Rainer W.G. Gruessner, MD, FACS
Professor of Surgery and Immunology, Chairman, 
Department of Surgery, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
David J. Hackam, MD, PhD
Roberta Simmons Associate Professor of Pediatric 
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 39, Pediatric Surgery
Daniel E. Hall, MD, MDiv, MHSc
Core Investigator, Center for Health Equity Research 
and Promotion, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Associate Professor, 
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 48, Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End 
of Life
Casey H. Halpern, MD
Chief Resident, Department of Neurosurgery, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Chapter 42, Neurosurgery
Chad Hamilton, MD
Chief, Gynecologic Oncology Service, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Walter Reed National 
Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland
Chapter 41, Gynecology
Rosemarie E. Hardin, MD
Practice of Breast Oncology, Wheeling, West Virginia
Chapter 47, Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
Amy L. Hill, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Daniel B. Hinshaw, MD
Professor, Department of Surgery, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
Chapter 48, Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End 
of Life
John B. Holcomb, MD, FACS
Vice Chair and Professor of Surgery, Chief, Division of 
Acute Care Surgery, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Center for Translational Injury 
Research, Houston, Texas
Chapter 4, Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding and 
Transfusion
Danielle Hsu, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Kelly K. Hunt, MD, FACS
Hamill Foundation Distinguished Professorship in 
Honor of Dr. Richard G. Martin, Sr., Chief, Surgical 
Breast Oncology, Department of Surgical Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 17, The Breast
xiii
Contributors
John G. Hunter, MD, FACS
Professor and Chairman, Department of Surgery, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
Chapter 14, Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, 
Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery and 
Single Incision Laparoscopic Surgery
Chapter 25, Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
Chapter 32, Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary 
System
Bernard M. Jaffe, MD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Surgery, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana
Chapter 30, The Appendix
Kenneth Jastrow, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 4, Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding and 
Transfusion
Tun Jie, MD, MS, FACS
Interim Chief, Division of Abdominal Transplant 
Surgery, Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Blair A. Jobe, MD, FACS
Chair of Surgery, Western Pennsylvania Hospital, 
Director, Institute for the Treatment of Esophageal 
and Thoracic Disease, Allegheny Health Network, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 14, Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, 
Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery and 
Single Incision Laparoscopic Surgery
Chapter 25, Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
Jason P. Jundt, MD
Vascular Resident, Division of Vascular Surgery, 
Department of Surgery and Knight Cardiovascular 
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon
Chapter 24, Venous and Lymphatic Disease
Tara Karamlou, MD, MSc
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Pediatric 
Cardiac Surgery, Benioff Children’s Hospital University 
of California, San Francisco, California
Chapter 20, Congenital Heart Disease
Sandra L. Kavalukas, MS
Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania
Chapter 9, Wound Healing
J. Alex Kelamis, MD
Senior Resident, Department of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, 
University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, 
Maryland
Chapter 44, Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
Sajid A. Khan, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Section of Surgical Oncology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
Chapter 16, The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Yuko Kitagawa, MD, PhD, FACS
Professor and Chairman, Department of Surgery, Vice 
President, Keio University Hospital, Director of Keio 
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Keio University, 
Tokyo, Japan
Chapter 26, Stomach
Elise C. Kohn, MD
Senior Investigator, Head, Molecular Signaling Section, 
Head, Medical Ovarian Cancer Clinic, Medical 
Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
Chapter 41, Gynecology
Yasuhiro Kotani, MD, PhD
Clinical Fellow, Cardiovascular Surgery, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario
Chapter 20, Congenital Heart Disease
Panagiotis Kougias, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular 
Surgery & Endovascular Therapy, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
Rosemary A. Kozar, MD, PhD
Vice Chair of Research and Academic Development, 
“Red” Duke Professor of Surgery, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas
Chapter 4, Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding and 
Transfusion
Jeffrey La Rochelle, MD
Department of Urology, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon
Chapter 40, Urology
Geeta Lal, MD, MSc, FRCS(C), FACS
Associate Professor, Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa
Chapter 38, Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
C. René Leemans, MD, PhD
Professor and Chairman, Department of Otolaryngology-
Head & Neck Surgery, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Chapter 18, Disorders of the Head and Neck
xiv
Contributors
Scott A. LeMaire, MD
Professor and Director of Research, Division of 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vice Chair for Research, 
Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Texas Heart Institute, Professional 
Staff, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Baylor St. 
Luke’s Medical Center, Houston, Texas
Chapter 22, Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
Mike K. Liang, MD
Assistant Professor, Michael E. DeBakey Department of 
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Chapter 30, The Appendix
Timothy K. Liem, MD, FACS
Associate Professor of Surgery, Vice-Chair for Quality, 
Department of Surgery, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
Chapter 24, Venous and Lymphatic Disease
Scott D. Lifchez, MD, FACS
Assistant Professor, Department of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, 
Director of Hand Surgery, Johns Hopkins Bayview 
Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland
Chapter 44, Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
Xia Lin, PhD
Associate Professor of Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 15, Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Peter H. Lin, MD
Professor of Surgery, Chief, Division of Vascular 
Surgery & Endovascular Therapy, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
Joseph E. Losee, MD
Ross H. Musgrave Professor of Pediatric Plastic Surgery, 
Executive Vice-Chair, Department of Plastic Surgery, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania
Chapter 45, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
James D. Luketich, MD
Henry T. Bahnson Professor of Cardiothoracic 
Surgery, Chief, The Heart, Lung, and Esophageal 
Surgery Institute, Department of Surgery, Division of 
Thoracic and Foregut Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 19, Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
James R. Macho, MD, FACS
Emeritus Professor of Surgery, UCSF School of 
Medicine, Director of Surgical Critical Care, Saint 
Francis Memorial Hospital, San Francisco, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Michael A. Maddaus, MD
Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, Division 
of General Thoracic and Foregut Surgery, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Chapter 19, Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
Martin A. Makary, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Surgery, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Associate Professor 
of Health Policy & Management, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Director, Surgical 
Quality & Safety, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, 
Maryland
Chapter 12, Patient Safety
Jeffrey B. Matthews, MD, FACS
Surgeon-in-Chief and Chairman, Department of Surgery, 
Dallas B. Phemister Professor of Surgery, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Jesus Matos, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular 
Surgery & Endovascular Therapy, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
Funda Meric-Bernstam, MD
Professor, Dept. of Surgical Oncology, Medical Director, 
Institute of Personalized Cancer Therapy, University of 
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Chapter 10, Oncology
Gregory L. Moneta, MD, FACS
Professor and Chief, Division of Vascular Surgery, 
Department of Surgery and Knight Cardiovascular 
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon
Chapter 24, Venous and Lymphatic Disease
Ernest E. Moore, MD, FACS, MCCM
Professor and Vice Chairman of Research, Department 
of Surgery, University of Colorado Denver, Editor, 
Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Denver, 
Colorado
Chapter 7, Trauma
Vishad Nabili, MD, FACS
Associate Professor and Residency Program Director, 
Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Katie S. Nason, MD, MPH
Assistant Professor, Division of Thoracic Surgery, 
Department of General Surgery, University of Pittsburgh 
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 19, Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
xv
Contributors
John Nemunaitis, MD
Director, Mary Crowley Cancer Research Center, Dallas, 
Texas
Chapter 15, Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Matt Niesen, MD
Resident in Orthopaedic Surgery, UCLA Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Santa Monica, California
Chapter 43, Orthopaedic Surgery
Shoichi Okada, MD
Department of Surgery, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
Chapter 21, Acquired Heart Disease
Klearchos Papas, PhD
Professor of Surgery, Scientific Director of the Institute 
for Cellular Transplantation, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Adrian E. Park, MD, FRCSC, FACS, FCS(ECSA)
Chair, Department of Surgery, Anne Arundel Medical 
Center, Professor of Surgery, PAR, Johns Hopkins 
University, Annapolis, Maryland
Chapter 34, Spleen
Timothy M. Pawlik, MD, MPH, PhD, FACS
Professor of Surgery and Oncology, John L. Cameron 
M.D. Professor of Alimentary Tract Diseases, Chief, 
Division of Surgical Oncology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, Maryland
Chapter 48, Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End 
of Life
Andrew B. Peitzman, MD
Mark M. Ravitch Professor and Vice Chairman, 
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 5, Shock
Thai H. Pham, MD, FACS
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Surgical Services, North 
Texas Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of 
Texas Southwestern School of Medicine, Dallas, Texas
Chapter 32, Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary 
System
Mun Jye Poi, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular 
Surgery & Endovascular Therapy, Michael E. DeBakey 
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas
Chapter 23, Arterial Disease 
Raphael E. Pollock, MD, PhD, FACS
Professor and Director, Division of Surgical Oncology, 
Department of Surgery, Chief of Surgical Services, 
Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Richard J. Solove 
Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner 
Medical Center, College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio
Chapter 10, Oncology
Chapter 36, Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Matthew Pommerening, MD
Resident, Department of Surgery, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas
Chapter 4, Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding and 
Transfusion
Marian Porubsky, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Surgery, Division 
of Adominal Transplantation, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Jonathan Pribaz, MD
Resident in Orthopaedic Surgery, UCLA Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Santa Monica, California
Chapter 43, Orthopaedic Surgery
Raymond R. Price, MD
Director Graduate Surgical Education, Intermountain 
Healthcare, Associate Director Center for Global 
Surgery, Adjunct Associate Professor, Department of 
Surgery, Adjunct Associate Professor, Department of 
Family and Preventive Medicine, Division of Public 
Health, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
Chapter 49, Global Surgery
Abbas Rana, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
John F.R. Robertson, MD, ChB, BSc, 
FRCS(Glasg)
Professor of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of 
Nottingham, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK
Chapter 17, The Breast
Jason O. Robertson, MD, MS
Department of Surgery, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
Chapter 21, Acquired Heart Disease
David A. Rothenberger, MD
Jay Phillips Professor and Chairman, Department 
of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota
Chapter 29, Colon, Rectum, and Anus
xvi
Contributors
J. Peter Rubin, MD
UPMC Endowed Professor and Chair, Department 
of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
Chapter 45, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Lindsey L. Saint, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
Chapter 21, Acquired Heart Disease
Ashok K. Saluja, PhD
Eugene C & Gail V Sit Chair in Pancreatic & 
Gastrointestinal Cancer Research, Professor & Vice 
Chair of Research, Department of Surgery, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Chapter 33, Pancreas
Philip R. Schauer, MD
Professor of Surgery, Lerner College of Medicine, 
Director, Bariatric and Metabolic Institute
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
Chapter 27, The Surgical Management of Obesity
Bruce D. Schirmer, MD, FACS
Stephen H. Watts Professor of Surgery, University of 
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia
Chapter 27, The Surgical Management of Obesity
Neal E. Seymour, MD
Professor, Department of Surgery, Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Chief of General Surgery, Baystate 
Medical Center, Springfield, Massachusetts
Chapter 35, Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and 
Retroperitoneum
Mark L. Shapiro, MD, FACS 
Chief, Acute Care Surgery, Associate Director, Trauma, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina
Chapter 12, Patient Safety
G. Tom Shires III, MD, FACS
John P. Thompson Chair, Surgical Services, Texas 
Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, Dallas, Texas
Chapter 3, Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the 
Surgical Patient
Brian Shuch, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Urology, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
Chapter 40, Urology
M. Cristy Smith, MD
Associate Director of Mechanical Circulatory Support, 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Peacehealth St. Joseph Medical 
Center, Bellingham, Washington
Chapter 11, Transplantation
David H. Song, MD
Cynthia Chow Professor of Surgery, Chief, Section of 
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Vice Chairman, 
Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago 
Medicine & Biological Sciences, Chicago, Illinois
Chapter 16, The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Donn H. Spight, MD,FACS
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
Chapter 14, Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, 
Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery and 
Single Incision Laparoscopic Surgery
Michael Stany, MD
Gynecologic Oncologist, Walter Reed National Military 
Medical Center, Assistant Professor, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland
Chapter 41, Gynecology
Eduardo M. Targarona, MD, PhD, FACS
Chief of the Unit of Gastrointestinal and Hematological 
Surgery, Hospital Sant Pau, Professor of Surgery, 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Chapter 34, Spleen
Ali Tavakkoli, MD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
Chapter 28, Small Intestine
Bert J. Thomas, MD
Chief, Joint Replacement Service, Department of 
Orthopedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 43, Orthopaedic Surgery
Areti Tillou, MD, FACS
Associate Professor and Vice Chair for Education, 
Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Jeffrey S. Upperman, MD
Associate Professor of Surgery, Director of Trauma, 
Pediatric Surgery, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Keck 
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, California
Chapter 39, Pediatric Surgery
Glen A. Van Arsdell, MD
Head, Cardiovascular Surgery, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Professor of Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario
Chapter 20, Congenital Heart Disease
Justin P. Wagner, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California,  
Los Angeles, California
Chapter 37, Inguinal Hernias
xvii
Contributors
Christopher G. Wallace, MD, MS, FRCS (Plast)
Microsurgical Fellow, Department of Plastic Surgery, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Chapter 45, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Kasper S. Wang, MD
Associate Professor of Surgery, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California
Chapter 39, Pediatric Surgery
David I. Watson, MBBS, MD, FRACS
Professor & Head, Department of Surgery, Flinders 
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia
Chapter 25, Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
Randal S. Weber, MD, FACS
Professor and Chairman, Director of Surgical Services, 
Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Chapter 18, Disorders of the Head and Neck
Fu-Chan Wei, MD, FACS
Professor, Department of Plastic Surgery, Chang Gung 
Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University and Medical 
College, Taipei, Taiwan
Chapter 45, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Richard O. Wein, MD, FACS
Associate Professor, Department of Otolaryngology-
Head & Neck Surgery, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts
Chapter 18, Disorders of the Head and Neck
John A. Windsor, BSc MD, FRACS, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, University 
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Chapter 33, Pancreas
James Wu, MD
Clinical Instructor, Department of Surgery, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 1, Fundamental Principles of Leadership 
Training in Surgery
Sarah E. Yost, PharmD, BCPS
Clinical Pharmacist in Abdominal Transplant, 
Department of Pharmacy, The University of Arizona 
Medical Center, Tucson, Arizona
Chapter 11, Transplantation
Juehua Yu, PhD
Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Surgery, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
Chapter 15, Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Ali Zarrinpar, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Liver and 
Pancreas Transplantation, Department of Surgery, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California
Chapter 31, Liver
Michael E. Zenilman, MD
Professor and Vice-Chair of Surgery, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 
Director, National Capital Region, Johns Hopkins 
Medicine, Visiting Professor, SUNY Downstate School 
of Public Health, Brooklyn, New York, Surgeon-in-
Chief, Johns Hopkins Suburban Hospital, Bethesda, 
Maryland
Chapter 47, Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
Michael J. Zinner, MD
Moseley Professor and Chairman, Department of 
Surgery, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts
Chapter 28, Small Intestine
Brian S. Zuckerbraun, MD, FACS
Associate Professor of Surgery, Henry T. Bahnson 
Professor of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Chief, 
Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Chapter 5, Shock
VIDEO CONTRIBUTORS
Yolanda T. Becker, MD, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Director, Kidney and Pancreas 
Transplant Program, Surgical Director of Perioperative 
Services, University of Chicago Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois
Kidney Transplant
Janet M. Bellingham, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Surgery, University 
of Wisconsin School of Medicine, Madison, Wisconsin
Kidney Transplant
F. Charles Brunicardi, MD, FACS
Moss Foundation Chair in Gastrointestinal and 
Personalized Surgery, Professor and Vice Chair, Surgical 
Services, Chief of General Surgery, UCLA Santa 
Monica Medical Center, Department of Surgery, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, Laparoscopic Inguinal 
Hernia Repair
Sally E. Carty, MD
Division Chief, Endocrine Surgery, Professor, 
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Thyroidectomy
xviii
Contributors
Giselle G. Hamad, MD
Associate Professor of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Laparoscopic Incisional Hernia Repair
Michael J. Rosen, MD, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Case Western Reserve University, 
Director, Case Comprehensive Hernia Center, Cleveland, 
Ohio
Open Posterior Component Separation
Konstantin Umanskiy, MD, FACS
Assistant Professor of Surgery, The University of 
Chicago Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
Right Colectomy, Sigmoid Colectomy
INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD
Gaurav Agarwal, MS (Surgery), FACS
Professor, Department of Endocrine and Breast Surgery, 
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, India
Claudio Bassi, MD, FRCS, FACS, FEBS
Professor of Surgery, Surgical and Oncological 
Department, University of Verona, Pancreas Institute, 
Verona, Italy
Mordechai Gutman, MD
Head, Department of Surgery, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel-Hashomer, Israel
Serafin C. Hilvano, MD, FPCS, FACS, American 
Surgical Association(Hon.)
Professor Emeritus, Department of Surgery, College of 
Medicine, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, 
Philippines
Jamal J. Hoballah, MD, MBA
Professor and Chairman, Department of Surgery, 
American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, 
Lebanon
Seon-Hahn Kim, MD
Professor and Chairman, Department of Surgery, Korea 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea
Yuko Kitagawa, MD, PhD, FACS
Professor and Chairman, Department of Surgery, Vice 
President, Keio University Hospital, Director of Keio 
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Keio University, 
Tokyo, Japan
Miguel Angel Mercado Diaz, MD
Professor and Chairman, Department of General 
Surgery, National Institute of Medical Science and 
Nutrition, Mexico DF, Mexico
Gerald C. O’Sullivan, MD, FRCSI, FACS (Hon)
Professor of Surgery, University College Cork, Mercy 
University Hospital, Cork, Ireland
John F. Thompson, MD
Melanoma Institute Australia, Royal Prince Alfred 
and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, Australia, Discipline of 
Surgery, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
John A. Windsor, BSc MD, FRACS, FACS
Professor of Surgery, Department of Surgery, University 
of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Liwei Zhu, MD
Department of Surgery, Tianjin Medical University 
Hospital, Tianjin, China
Acknowledgments
The Editors would like to thank the following authors of 
the previous edition (9th) for their contributions. Portions 
of their work may have been revised, reconfigured, and/or 
serve as a foundation for chapters in the tenth edition:
Badar V. Jan, Ernest A. Gonzalez, Walter L. Biffl, 
Abhinav Humar, Patrick Cole, Lior Heller, Jamal Bullocks, 
Lisa A. Newman, Edward M. Copeland III, Karl F. Welke, 
Ross M. Ungerleider, Charles F. Schwartz, Gregory A. 
Crooke, Eugene A. Grossi, Aubrey C. Galloway, Kapil 
Sharma, Catherine Cagiannos, Tam T. Huynh, Jeffrey H. 
Peters, Allan Tsung, Richard H. Bell Jr., Carlos D. Godinez 
Jr., Vadim Sherman, Kurt D. Newman, Joanna M. Cain, 
Wafic ElMasri, Michael L. Smith, Joel A. Bauman, Michael 
H. Heggeness, Francis H. Gannon, Jacob Weinberg, Peleg 
Ben-Galim, Charles A. Reitman, and Subhro K. Sen.
This page intentionally left blank 
The adjective “tenth” connotes a milestone, and, in the 
case of a “tenth edition” of a textbook, it is evidence of 
readership acceptability. This continued reader response 
would evoke parental pride from those who generated the 
original publication more than 45 years ago. I can still 
vividly recall the meeting in New York City at which John 
DeCarville, an editor at McGraw-Hill, brought together 
David M. Hume, Richard C. Lillehei, G. Thomas Shires, 
Edward H. Storer, Frank C. Spencer, and me to create a 
new surgical textbook. The new surgical publication was 
to serve as a companion to Harrison’s recently introduced 
medical textbook. The favorable reception of the first 
edition was most encouraging. The consistency of style and 
the deliberate inclusion of 52 chapters to allow for review 
of one chapter a week throughout the year were particularly 
appealing. Subsequent to the initial publication and 
following the tragic and premature deaths of Dr. Lillehei, 
Dr. Hume, and Dr. Storer, Dr. Shires, Dr. Spencer, and I 
were privileged to shepherd six additional editions over 
the ensuing 35 years. Under the direction of Dr. F. Charles 
Brunicardi and his associate editors, a new vitality was 
infused over the three most recent editions.
The ten editions, as they are considered in sequence, 
serve as a chronicle of the dramatic evolution that has 
occurred in surgery over the past half century. Those, who 
have been charged with providing current information 
to the readership, have had to filter and incorporate 
extraordinary and unanticipated scientific breakthroughs 
and technical innovations. At the time of the genesis of 
the first edition, success had not been achieved in cardiac, 
hepatic, or intestinal transplantation. Adjuvant therapy 
for a broad variety of malignancies was in its infancy. 
Minimally invasive surgery would not become a reality 
for two decades. On the other side of the spectrum, 
operative procedures that occupied the focus of symposia 
have slipped into obscurity. Vagotomy for peptic ulcer has 
become a rarity, as a consequence of an appreciation of 
the role of Helicobacter pylori and the efficacy of proton 
pump inhibitors. Surgical procedures to decompress portal 
hypertension in the treatment of bleeding esophagogastric 
varices have essentially disappeared from the operating 
room schedule. They have been replaced by transjugular 
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) and the liberal 
application of hepatic transplantation.
As Bob Dylan pointed out, “The Times They Are 
A-changin.” And they most assuredly will continue 
to change, and at an unanticipated rate. The scientific 
basis for the practice of surgery is increasing at an ever 
accelerating pace, and the technologic improvements and 
breakthroughs are equally extraordinary. The dissemination 
of the expansion of knowledge has resulted in a shrinking 
of the globe, necessitating an extension or adaptation of the 
more modern approaches to underdeveloped nations and 
underprivileged populations. Global medicine has become 
a modern concern. The importance of internationalism is 
manifest in the clinical trials and data acquisition provided 
by our surgical colleagues on the other sides of the oceans 
that surround us. It is therefore appropriate that a more 
international flavor has been developed for Principles of 
Surgery related both to citations and contributors. A distinct 
consideration of global medicine and, also, the qualities of 
leadership in surgery that must be nurtured are evidence 
of the editorial credo of “maintaining modernization” and 
“anticipating the future.”
As the editors and contributors continue to provide the 
most up-to-date information with a clarity that facilitates 
learning, it is the hope that the seed, which was planted 
almost a half century ago, will continue to flourish and 
maintain the approval of its audience.
Seymour I. Schwartz, MD, FACS
Distinguished Alumni Professor of Surgery
University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry
Foreword
This page intentionally left blank 
Each new edition of this book is approached by the 
editorial team with a dual vision keeping a dedicated eye 
affixed to the foundations of surgery while bringing into 
sharper focus on new and emerging elements. We are 
entering into a spectacular era of surgery in which the 
highest quality of care is merging with minimally invasive 
surgery, robotic surgery, the use of supercomputers, and 
personalized genomic surgery, all designed to improve 
the outcomes and quality of life for our patients. With 
these advances in mind, several new chapters have been 
added and all previous chapters have been updated with 
an emphasis on evidence-based, state-of-the-art surgical 
care. While this tried-and-true method remains the basis 
for upholding and maintaining the superb efforts and 
achievements of Dr. Seymour Schwartz and previous co-
editors and contributors, this edition expands its vision to 
see beyond the operating theater and takes a look at the 
making of a surgeon as a whole, with the addition of the 
chapter, Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in 
Surgery. Surely excellence in craft must be mastered and 
equal importance must also be given to the nontechnical 
training of what it means to be a leader of a surgical team. 
To this effort, the editors were keen to include as 
the first chapter in this edition a comprehensive review of 
leadership methods and ideologies as well as underscoring 
the importance of instituting a formal leadership-training 
program for residents that emphasizes mentoring. Our own 
paths as surgeons have been defined by the mentoring 
relationship and we have undoubtedly benefitted greatly 
from the efforts of our mentors; we sincerely hope that 
those with whom we have entered into this time-honored 
tradition have reaped the benefit as well. Simply stated, 
leadership skills can and should be taught to surgical 
trainees and in doing so this will help them improve quality 
of care.
The editors are thankful that this text is a relied-
on source for training and crafting surgeons on a global 
basis. This is due in large part to the extraordinary efforts 
of our contributors, the leaders in their fields, who not 
only do so to train up-and-coming surgeons, but to impart 
their knowledge and expertise to the benefit of patients 
worldwide. The recent inclusion of many international 
authors to the chapters within is ultimately a testament to 
mentorship, albeit on a broader scale, and we thank them 
all, both near and far.
To our fellow editorial board members who have 
tirelessly devoted their time and knowledge to the integrity 
and excellence of their craft and this textbook, we extend 
our gratitude and thanks. We are to thankful to Brian 
Belval, Christie Naglieri, and all at McGraw-Hill for the 
continued belief in and support of this textbook. We wish to 
thank Katie Elsbury for her dedication to the organization 
and editing of this textbook. Last, we would like to thank 
our families who are the most important contributors of all. 
F. Charles Brunicardi, MD, FACS
Preface
This page intentionally left blank 
The raison d’être for a new textbook in a discipline which 
has been served by standard works for many years was 
the Editorial Board’s initial conviction that a distinct need 
for a modern approach in the dissemination of surgical 
knowledge existed. As incoming chapters were reviewed, 
both the need and satisfaction became increasingly apparent 
and, at the completion, we felt a sense of excitement at 
having the opportunity to contribute to the education of 
modern and future students concerned with the care of 
surgical patients.
The recent explosion of factual knowledge has 
emphasized the need for a presentation which would 
provide the student an opportunity to assimilate pertinent 
facts in a logical fashion. This would then permit correlation, 
synthesis of concepts, and eventual extrapolation to specific 
situations. The physiologic bases for diseases are therefore 
emphasized and the manifestations and diagnostic studies 
are considered as a reflection of pathophysiology. Therapy 
then becomes logical in this schema and the necessity 
to regurgitate facts is minimized. In appreciation of the 
impact which Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
has had, the clinical manifestations of the disease processes 
are considered in detail for each area. Since the operative 
procedure represents the one element in the therapeutic 
armamentarium unique to the surgeon, the indications, 
important technical considerations, and complications 
receive appropriate emphasis. While we appreciate that a 
textbook cannot hope to incorporate an atlas of surgical 
procedures, we have provided the student a single book 
which will satisfy the sequential demands in the care and 
considerations of surgical patients.
The ultimate goal of the Editorial Board has been to 
collate a book which is deserving of the adjective “modern.” 
We have therefore selected as authors dynamic and active 
contributors to their particular fields. The au courant 
concept is hopefully apparent throughout the entire work 
and is exemplified by appropriate emphasis on diseases of 
modern surgical interest, such as trauma, transplantation, 
and the recently appreciated importance of rehabilitation. 
Cardiovascular surgery is presented in keeping with the 
exponential strides recently achieved.
There are two major subdivisions to the text. In the 
first twelve chapters, subjects that transcend several organ 
systems are presented. The second portion of the book 
represents a consideration of specific organ systems and 
surgical specialties.
Throughout the text, the authors have addressed 
themselves to a sophisticated audience, regarding the 
medical student as a graduate student, incorporating 
material generally sought after by the surgeon in training 
and presenting information appropriate for the continuing 
education of the practicing surgeon. The need for a 
text such as we have envisioned is great and the goal 
admittedly high. It is our hope that this effort fulfills the 
expressed demands.
Seymour I. Schwartz, MD, FACS
Preface to the First Edition
This page intentionally left blank 
I
Part 
Basic Considerations
This page intentionally left blank 
Fundamental Principles of  
Leadership Training in Surgery
Amy L. Hill, James Wu, Mark D. Girgis, Danielle Hsu, 
Areti Tillou, James Macho, Vishad Nabili, and 
F. Charles Brunicardi
1
chapter 
INTRODUCTION
The field of surgery has evolved greatly from its roots, and 
surgical practice now requires the mastery of modern leader-
ship principles and skills as much as the acquisition of medical 
knowledge and surgical technique. Historically, surgeons took 
sole responsibility for their patients and directed proceedings in 
the operating room with absolute authority, using a command-
and-control style of leadership. Modern surgical practice has 
now evolved from single provider–based care toward a team-
based approach, which requires collaborative leadership skills. 
Surgical care benefits from the collaboration of surgeons, anes-
thesiologists, internists, radiologists, pathologists, radiation 
oncologists, nurses, pharmacists, social workers, therapists, hos-
pital staff, and administrators. Occupying a central role on the 
healthcare team, surgeons1 have the potential to improve patient 
outcomes, reduce medical errors, and improve patient satisfac-
tion through their leadership of the multidisciplinary team. 
Thus, in the landscape of modern healthcare systems, it is 
imperative that surgical training programs include formal 
instruction on leadership principles and skills to cultivate their 
trainees’ leadership capabilities.
Many medical and surgical communities, including resi-
dency training programs, acknowledge the need for improved 
physician leadership.2 Surgical trainees identify leadership skills 
as important, but report themselves as “not competent” or “min-
imally competent” in this regard.2,3 While a small number of 
surgical training programs have implemented formal curriculum 
focused on teaching leadership principles, it is now imperative 
that all surgical training programs teach these important skills to 
their trainees.4,5 Interviews of academic chairpersons identified 
several critical leadership success factors,6 including mastery 
of visioning, communication, change management, emotional 
intelligence, team building, business skills, personnel manage-
ment, and systems thinking. These chairpersons stated that the 
ability of emotional intelligence was “fundamental to their suc-
cess and its absence the cause of their failures,” regardless of 
medical knowledge.6 Thus, training programs need to include 
leadership training to prepare trainees for success in modern 
healthcare delivery.
In the United States, the Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) has established six 
core competencies—patient care, medical knowledge, practice-
based learning and improvement, interpersonal and communi-
cation skills, professionalism, and systems-based practice 
(Table 1-1)4—that each contain principles of leadership. The 
ACGME has mandated the teaching of these core competencies 
but has not established a formal guide on how to teach the lead-
ership skills described within the core competencies. Therefore, 
this chapter offers a review of fundamental principles of leader-
ship and an introduction of the concept of a leadership training 
program for surgical trainees.
DEFINITIONS OF LEADERSHIP
Many different definitions of leadership have been described. 
Former First Lady Rosalynn Carter once observed that, “A leader 
takes people where they want to go. A great leader takes people 
where they don’t necessarily want to go, but where they ought to 
be.” Leadership does not always have to come from a position 
of authority. Former American president John Quincy Adams 
stated, “If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, 
do more, and become more, you are a leader.” Another definition 
is that leadership is the process of using social influence to enlist 
the aid and support of others in a common task.7
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LEADERSHIP
Clearly, leadership is a complex concept. Surgeons should strive 
to adopt leadership qualities that provide the best outcomes for 
their patients, based on the following fundamental principles.
Vision
The first and most fundamental principle of leadership is to estab-
lish a vision that people can live up to, thus providing direction 
and purpose to the constituency. Creating a vision is a declaration 
of the near future that inspires and conjures motivation.8  A 
classic example of a powerful vision that held effective 
impact is President Kennedy’s declaration in 1961 that “. . . this 
nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this 
decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him 
safely to the earth.” Following his declaration of this vision with 
a timeline to achieve it, the United Sates mounted a remarkable 
unified effort, and by the end of the decade, Neil Armstrong 
Introduction	
3
Definitions of Leadership	
3
Fundamental Principles of  
Leadership	
3
Vision / 3
Willingness / 4
Time Management / 7
Leadership Styles	
9
Formal Leadership Training  
Programs in Surgery	
9
Mentoring / 10
Conclusion	
11
1
2
took his famous walk and the vision had been accomplished 
(Fig. 1-1).
On a daily basis, surgeons are driven by a powerful 
vision: the vision that our surgical care will improve patients’ 
lives. The great surgical pioneers, such as Hunter, Lister (Fig. 
1-2), Halsted, von Langenbeck, Billroth, Kocher (Fig. 1-3), 
Carrel, Gibbon, Blalock, Wangensteen, Moore, Rhoads, Hug-
gins, Murray, Kountz, Longmire, Starzl, and DeBakey (Fig. 
1-4), each possessed visions that revolutionized the field of 
surgery. In the nineteenth century, Joseph Lister changed the 
practice of surgery with his application of Pasteur’s germ 
theory. He set a young boy’s open compound leg fracture, a 
condition with a 90% mortality rate at that time, using carbolic 
acid dressings and aseptic surgical technique. The boy recov-
ered, and Lister gathered nine more patients. His famous pub-
lication on the use of aseptic technique introduced the modern 
era of sterile technique. Emil Theodor Kocher was the first to 
master the thyroidectomy, thought to be an impossible opera-
tion at the time, and went on to perform thousands of thyroid-
ectomies with a mortality of less than 1%. He was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1909 for describ-
ing the thyroid’s physiologic role in metabolism. Michael E. 
DeBakey’s powerful vision led to the development of numer-
ous groundbreaking procedures that helped pioneer the field of 
cardiovascular surgery. For example, envisioning an artificial 
4
Key Points
6
	 Surgical leaders must practice effective time management.
7
	 Different leadership styles are tools to use based on the 
team dynamic.
8
	 Surgical trainees can be taught leadership principles in 
formal leadership training programs to enhance their abil-
ity to lead.
9
	 Mentorship provides wisdom, guidance, and insight essen-
tial for the successful development of a surgical leader.
Table 1-1
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education core competencies
Core Competency
Description
Patient care
To be able to provide compassionate and effective healthcare in the modern-day healthcare environment
Medical knowledge
To effectively apply current medical knowledge in patient care and to be able to use medical tools (i.e., 
PubMed) to stay current in medical education
Practice-based learning 
and improvement
To critically assimilate and evaluate information in a systematic manner to improve patient care 
practices
Interpersonal and 
communication skills
To demonstrate sufficient communication skills that allow for efficient information exchange in 
physician-patient interactions and as a member of a healthcare team
Professionalism
To demonstrate the principles of ethical behavior (i.e., informed consent, patient confidentiality) and 
integrity that promote the highest level of medical care
Systems-based practice
To acknowledge and understand that each individual practice is part of a larger healthcare delivery 
system and to be able to use the system to support patient care
1
	 Effective surgical leadership improves patient care.
2
	 A fundamental principle of leadership is to provide a vision 
that people can live up to, thereby providing direction and pur-
pose to the constituency.
3
	 Surgical leaders have the willingness to lead through an active 
and passionate commitment to the vision.
4
	 Surgical leaders have the willingness to commit to lifelong 
learning.
5
	 Surgical leaders have the willingness to communicate 
effectively and resolve conflict.
artery for arterial bypass operations, Dr. DeBakey invented the 
Dacron graft, which has helped millions of patients suffering 
from vascular disease and enabled the development of endo-
vascular surgery. Dr. Frederick Banting, the youngest recipient 
of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, had a vision to 
discover the biochemical link between diabetes and glucose 
homeostasis. His vision and perseverance led to the discovery 
of insulin.9 In retrospect, the power and clarity of their visions 
were remarkable, and their willingness and dedication were 
inspiring. By studying their careers and accomplishments, 
surgical trainees can appreciate the potential impact of a well-
developed vision.
Leaders must learn to develop visions to provide direction 
for their team. The vision can be as straightforward as providing 
quality of care or as lofty as defining a new field of surgery. One 
can start developing their vision by brainstorming the answers 
to two simple questions: “Which disease needs to be cured?” 
and “How can it be cured?”10 The answers represent a vision 
and should be recorded succinctly in a laboratory notebook or 
journal. Committing pen to paper enables the surgical trainee to 
define their vision in a manner that can be shared with others.
Willingness
The Willingness Principle represents the active commitment of 
the leader toward their vision. A surgical leader must be willing 
5
Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in Surgery
CHAPTER 1
Figure 1-1.  Apollo 11 Lunar Module moon walk. Astronaut Edwin 
“Buzz” Aldrin walks by the footpad of the Apollo 11 Lunar Mod-
ule, July 1969. (Reproduced with permission from AP Photo/NASA. 
© 2014 The Associated Press.)
Figure 1-2.  Joseph Lister directing use of carbolic acid spray in 
one of his earliest antiseptic surgical operations, circa 1865. (Copy-
right Bettmann/Corbis/AP Images.)
Figure 1-3.  Emil Theodor Kocher. (Courtesy of the National 
Library of Medicine.)
Figure 1-4.  Michael E. DeBakey. (Reproduced with permission 
from AP Photo/David J. Phillip. © 2014 The Associated Press.)
to lead, commit to lifelong learning, communicate effectively, 
and resolve conflict.
To Lead.  A key characteristic of all great leaders is the will-
ingness to serve as the leader. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., 
who championed the civil rights movement with a power-
ful vision of equality for all based on a commitment to non-
violent methods,11 did so at a time when his vocalization of 
this vision ensured harassment, imprisonment, and threats of 
violence against himself, his colleagues, and his family and 
friends (Fig. 1-5). King, a young, highly educated pastor, had 
the security of employment and family, yet was willing to 
accept enormous responsibility and personal risk and did so 
in order to lead a nation toward his vision of civil rights, for 
which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964. Steve 
Jobs, co-founder of Apple Inc., chose to remain in his posi-
tion as chief executive officer (CEO) to pursue his vision of 
perfecting the personal computer at great personal expense. He 
described this experience as “. . . rough, really rough, the worst 
time in my life . . . . I would go to work at 7 a.m. and I’d get back 
at 9 at night, and the kids would be in bed. And I couldn’t 
speak, I literally couldn’t, I was so exhausted . . . . It got close 
to killing me.”12 Both individuals demonstrated a remarkable 
tenacity and devotion to their vision.
Willingness to lead is a necessity in any individual who 
desires to become a surgeon. By entering into the surgical the-
ater, a surgeon accepts the responsibility to care for and oper-
ate on patients despite the risks and burdens involved. They do 
so, believing fully in the improved quality of life that can be 
achieved. Surgeons must embrace the responsibility of lead-
ing surgical teams that care for their patients, as well as lead-
ing surgical trainees to become future surgeons. A tremendous 
sacrifice is required for the opportunity to learn patient care. 
Surgical trainees accept the hardships of residency with its 
6
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
accompanying steep learning curve, anxiety, long work hours, 
and time spent away from family and friends. The active, pas-
sionate commitment to excellent patient care reflects a natural 
willingness to lead based on altruism and a sense of duty toward 
those receiving care. Thus, to ensure delivery of the utmost level 
of care, surgical trainees should commit to developing and refin-
ing leadership skills.  These skills include a commitment 
to lifelong learning, effective communication, and conflict 
resolution.
To Learn.  Surgeons and surgical trainees, as leaders, must 
possess willingness to commit to continuous learning. Modern 
surgery is an ever-changing field with dynamic and evolving 
healthcare systems and constant scientific discovery and inno-
vation. Basic and translational science relating to surgical care 
is growing at an exponential rate. The sequencing of the human 
genome and the enormous advances in molecular biology and 
signaling pathways are leading to the transformation of per-
sonalized medicine and surgery in the twenty-first century (see 
Chap. 15).13 Performing prophylactic mastectomies with imme-
diate reconstruction for BRCA1 mutations and thyroidectomies 
with thyroid hormone replacement for RET proto-oncogene muta-
tions are two of many examples of genomic information guid-
ing surgical care. Technologic advances in minimally invasive 
surgery and robotic surgery as well as electronic records and 
other information technologies are revolutionizing the craft of 
surgery. The expansion of minimally invasive and endovascular 
surgery over the past three decades required surgeons to retrain 
Figure 1-5.  Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. acknowledges the crowd at 
the Lincoln Memorial for his “I Have a Dream” speech during the 
March on Washington, D.C., August 28, 1963. (Reproduced with 
permission from AP Photo. © 2014 The Associated Press.)
in new techniques using new skills and equipment. In this short 
time span, laparoscopy and endovascular operations are now 
recognized as the standard of care for many surgical diseases, 
resulting in shorter hospital stay, quicker recovery, and a kinder 
and gentler manner of practicing surgery. Remarkably, during 
the last century, the field of surgery has progressed at an expo-
nential pace and will continue to do so with the advent of using 
genomic analyses to guide personalized surgery, which will 
transform the field of surgery this century. Therefore, surgical 
leadership training should emphasize and facilitate the continual 
pursuit of knowledge.
Fortunately, surgical organizations and societies pro-
vide surgeons and surgical trainees a means to acquire new 
knowledge on a continuous basis. There are numerous local, 
regional, national, and international meetings of surgical orga-
nizations that provide ongoing continuing medical education 
credits, also required for the renewal of most medical licenses. 
The American Board of Surgery requires all surgeons to com-
plete meaningful continuing medical education to maintain 
certification.14 These societies and regulatory bodies enable 
surgeons and surgical trainees to commit to continual learning, 
and ensure their competence in a dynamic and rapidly 
growing field. 
Surgeons and trainees now benefit from the rapid expan-
sion of web-based education as well as mobile handheld tech-
nology. These are powerful tools to minimize nonproductive 
time in the hospital and make learning and reinforcement of 
medical knowledge accessible. Currently web-based resources 
provide quick access to a vast collection of surgical texts, lit-
erature, and surgical videos. Surgeons and trainees dedicated 
to continual learning should be well versed in the utilization 
of these information technologies to maximize their education. 
The next evolution of electronic surgical educational materials 
will likely include simulation training similar to laparoscopic 
and Da Vinci device training modules. The ACGME, acknowl-
edging the importance of lifelong learning skills and moderniza-
tion of information delivery and access methods, has included 
them as program requirements for residency accreditation.
To Communicate Effectively.  The complexity of modern 
healthcare delivery systems requires a higher level and col-
laborative style of communication. Effective communication 
directly impacts patient care. In 2000, the U.S. Institute of 
Medicine published a work titled, To Err Is Human: Building 
a Safer Health System, which raised awareness concerning the 
magnitude of medical errors. This work showcased medical 
errors as the eighth leading cause of death in the United States 
with an estimated 100,000 deaths annually.15 Subsequent stud-
ies examining medical errors have identified communication 
errors as one of the most common causes of medical error.16,17 
In fact, the Joint Commission identifies miscommunication as 
the leading cause of sentinel events. Information transfer and 
communication errors cause delays in patient care, waste sur-
geon and staff time, and cause serious adverse patient events.18 
Effective communication between surgeons, nurses, ancillary 
staff, and patients is not only a crucial element to improved 
patient outcomes, but it also leads to less medical litigation.19-21 
A strong correlation exists between communication and 
patient outcomes. 
Establishing a collaborative atmosphere is important since 
communication errors leading to medical mishaps are not sim-
ply failures to transmit information. Communication errors “are 
far more complex and relate to hierarchical differences, concerns 
3
4
5
7
Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in Surgery
CHAPTER 1
with upward influence, conflicting roles and role ambiguity, and 
interpersonal power and conflict.”17,22 Errors frequently origi-
nate from perceived limited channels of communication and 
hostile, critical environments. To overcome these barriers, sur-
geons and surgical trainees should learn to communicate in an 
open, universally understood manner and remain receptive to 
any team member’s concerns. A survey of physicians, nurses, 
and ancillary staff identified effective communication as a key 
element of a successful leader.23 As leaders, surgeons and surgi-
cal trainees who facilitate an open, effective, collaborative style 
of communication reduce errors and enhance patient care. A 
prime example is that successful communication of daily goals 
of patient care from the team leader improves patient outcomes. 
In one recent study, the modest act of explicitly stating daily 
goals in a standardized fashion significantly reduced patient 
length of intensive care unit stay and increased resident and 
nurse understanding of goals of care.24 Implementing standard-
ized daily team briefings in the wards and preoperative units 
led to improvements in staff turnover rates, employee satisfac-
tion, and prevention of wrong site surgery.22 In cardiac surgery, 
improving communication in the operating room and transition 
to the postanesthesia care unit was an area identified to decrease 
risk for adverse outcomes.25 Behaviors associated with ineffec-
tive communication, including absence from the operating room 
when needed, playing loud music, making inappropriate com-
ments, and talking to others in a raised voice or a condescending 
tone, were identified as patient hazards; conversely, behaviors 
associated with effective collaborative communication, such as 
time outs, repeat backs, callouts, and confirmations, resulted in 
improved patient outcomes.
One model to ensure open communication is through 
standardization of established protocols. A commonly accepted 
protocol is the “Time Out” that is now required in the modern 
operating room. During the Time Out protocol, all team mem-
bers introduce themselves and state a body of critical informa-
tion needed to safely complete the intended operation. This 
same standardization can be taught outside the operating room. 
Within the Kaiser system, certain phrases have been given a uni-
versal meaning: “I need you now” by members of the team is an 
understood level of urgency and generates a prompt physician 
response 100% of the time.22 As mentioned earlier, standardized 
forms can be useful tools in ensuring universally understood 
communication during sign-out. The beneficial effect of stan-
dardized communication further demonstrates how effective 
communication can improve patient care and is considered a 
vital leadership skill.
To Resolve Conflict.  Great leaders are able to achieve their 
vision through their ability to resolve conflict. During the pur-
suit of any vision, numerous conflicts arise on a daily basis; 
numerous conflicts arise on a daily basis when surgeons and 
surgical trainees provide high-quality care. Therefore, the tech-
niques for conflict resolution are essential for surgical leaders.
To properly use conflict resolution techniques, it is impor-
tant for the surgeon and surgical trainee to always remain objec-
tive and seek personal flexibility and self-awareness. The gulf 
between self-perception and the perception of others can be 
profound; in a study of cooperation and collaboration among 
operating room staff, the quality of their own collaboration was 
rated at 80% by surgeons, yet was rated at only 48% by oper-
ating room nurses.26 Systematic inclusion of modern conflict 
resolution methods that incorporate the views of all members of 
a multidisciplinary team help maintain objectivity. Reflection is 
often overlooked in surgical residency training but is a critical 
component of learning conflict resolution skills. Introspection 
allows the surgeon to understand the impact of his or her actions 
and biases. Objectivity is the basis of effective conflict resolu-
tion, which can improve satisfaction among team members and 
help deliver optimal patient care.
Modern conflict resolution techniques are based on 
objectivity, willingness to listen, and pursuit of principle-
based solutions.27 For example, an effective style of conflict 
resolution is the utilization of the “abundance mentality” model, 
which attempts to achieve a solution that benefits all involved 
and is based on core values of the organization, as opposed to 
the utilization of the traditional fault-finding model, which iden-
tifies sides as right or wrong.28 Application of the abundance 
mentality in surgery elevates the conflict above the affected par-
ties and focuses on the higher unifying goal of improved patient 
care. Morbidity and mortality (M&M) conferences are managed 
in this style and have the purpose of practice improvement and 
improving overall quality of care within the system, as opposed 
to placing guilt or blame on the surgeon or surgical trainees 
for the complication being reviewed. The traditional style of 
command-and-control technique based on fear and intimidation 
is no longer welcome in any healthcare system and can lead to 
sanctions, lawsuits, and removal of hospital privileges or posi-
tion of leadership.
Another intuitive method that can help surgical trainees 
learn to resolve conflict is the “history and physical” model of 
conflict resolution. This model is based on the seven steps of 
caring for a surgical patient that are well known to the surgical 
trainee.29 (1) The “history” is the equivalent of gathering subjec-
tive information from involved parties with appropriate empa-
thy and listening. (2) The “laboratory/studies” are the equivalent 
of collecting objective data to validate the subjective informa-
tion. (3) A “differential diagnosis” is formed of possible root 
causes of the conflict. (4) The “assessment/plan” is developed 
in the best interest of all involved parties. The plan, including 
risks and benefits, is openly discussed in a compassionate style 
of communication. (5) “Preoperative preparation” includes the 
acquisition of appropriate consultations for clearances, consid-
eration of equipment and supplies needed for implementation, 
and the “informed consent” from the involved parties. (6) The 
“operation” is the actual implementation of the agreed-upon 
plan, including a time-out. (7) “Postoperative care” involves 
communicating the operative outcome, regular postoperative 
follow-up, and the correction of any complications that arise. 
This seven-step method is an example of an objective, respect-
ful method of conflict resolution. Practicing different styles of 
conflict resolution and effective communication in front of the 
entire group of surgical trainees attending the leadership train-
ing program is an effective means of teaching conflict resolution 
techniques.
Time Management
It is important for leaders to practice effective time manage-
ment. Time is the most precious resource, as it cannot be 
bought, saved, or stored. Thus, management of time is essential 
for a productive and balanced life for those in the organization. 
The effective use of one’s time is best done through a formal 
time management program to improve one’s ability to lead by 
setting priorities and making choices to achieve goals. The effi-
cient use of one’s time helps to improve both productivity and 
quality of life.
8
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
It is important for surgeons and surgical trainees to 
learn and use a formal time management program. There are 
ever-increasing demands placed on surgeons and surgi-
cal trainees to deliver the highest quality care in highly 
regulated environments. Furthermore, strict regulations on 
limitation of work hours demand surgical trainees learn patient 
care in a limited amount of time.30 All told, these demands are 
enormously stressful and can lead to burnout, drug and alco-
hol abuse, and poor performance.30 A time-motion study of 
general surgery trainees analyzed residents’ self-reported time 
logs to determine resident time expenditure on educational/
service-related activities (Fig. 1-6).31 Surprisingly, senior resi-
dents were noted to spend 13.5% of their time on low-service, 
low-educational value activities. This time, properly managed, 
could be used to either reduce work hours or improve educa-
tional efficiency in the context of new work hour restrictions. 
It is therefore critical that time be used wisely on effectively 
achieving one’s goals.
Parkinson’s law, proposed in 1955 by the U.K. political 
analyst and historian Cyril Northcote Parkinson, states that 
work expands to fill the time available for its completion, 
thus leading individuals to spend the majority of their time on 
insignificant tasks.32 Pareto’s 80/20 principle states that 80% 
of goals are achieved by 20% of effort and that achieving the 
final 20% requires 80% of their effort. Therefore, proper plan-
ning of undertaking any goal needs to include an analysis of 
how much effort will be needed to complete the task.32 Formal 
time management programs help surgeons and surgical train-
ees better understand how their time is spent, enabling them to 
increase productivity and achieve a better balanced lifestyle.
Various time allocation techniques have been described.32 
A frequently used basic technique is the “prioritized list,” also 
known as the ABC technique. Individuals list and assign relative 
values to their tasks. The use of the lists and categories serves 
solely as a reminder, thus falling short of aiding the user in allo-
cating time wisely. Another technique is the “time management 
matrix technique.”28 This technique plots activities on two axes: 
importance and urgency, yielding four quadrants (Fig. 1-7). Con-
gruous with the Pareto’s 80/20 principle and Parkinson’s law, 
the time management matrix technique channels efforts into 
quadrant II (important but nonurgent) activities. The activities 
in this quadrant are high yield and include planning, creative 
activity, building relationships, and maintaining productivity. 
Too often, surgeons spend a majority of their time attending to 
Figure 1-6.  Surgery resident time-motion study. H & 
P = history and physical examination.
Figure 1-7.  Time management. (From Covey S. The Seven Habits 
of Highly Effective People. New York: Simon & Schuster; 1989.)
quadrant I (important and urgent) tasks. Quadrant I tasks include 
emergencies and unplanned or disorganized situations that 
require intensive and often inefficient effort. While most sur-
geons and surgical trainees have to deal with emergencies, they 
often develop the habit of inappropriately assigning activities 
into quadrant I; excess time spent on quadrant I tasks leads to 
stress or burnout for the surgeon and distracts from long-term 
goals. Efficient time management allows surgeons and surgi-
cal trainees to be proactive about shifting energy from quadrant 
I tasks to quadrant II, emphasizing preplanning and creativity 
over always attending to the most salient issue at hand, depend-
ing on the importance and not the urgency.
Finally, “the six areas of interest” is an alternative effec-
tive time management model that can help surgeons and surgi-
cal trainees achieve their goals, live a better balanced lifestyle, 
and improve the quality of their lives.32 The process begins by 
performing a time-motion study in which the activities of 6-hour 
increments of time over a routine week are chronicled. At the 
end of the week, the list of activities is analyzed to determine 
how the 168 hours in 1 week have been spent. The surgical 
trainee then selects six broad categories of areas of interest (i.e., 
family, clinical care, education, health, community service, hob-
bies, etc.), and sets a single activity goal in each category every 
day and monitors whether those goals are achieved. This tech-
nique is straightforward and improves one’s quality of life by 
setting and achieving a balanced set of goals of personal inter-
est, while eliminating time-wasting activities.
A formal time management program is essential for 
modern leadership. The practice and use of time management 
strategies can help surgeons and surgical trainees achieve and 
maintain their goals of excellent clinical care for their patients, 
while maintaining a more balanced lifestyle.
Category 4
Low education, low service
value
Eg.) Waiting during
mandatory in-house call
0
0
5
10
5
10
High education
High
service
High
service
High education
Category 2
High education, low
service value
Eg.) Teaching conferences
Category 3
Low education, high service
value
Eg.) Performing H & Ps
Category 1
High education, high service
value
Eg.) Operating room
Time-Motion Study
6
Important
Urgent
Quadrant I
Quadrant III
Quadrant II
Quadrant IV
Non-urgent
Time Management Matrix
Non-important
9
Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in Surgery
CHAPTER 1
LEADERSHIP STYLES
The principles of leadership can be practiced in a variety of 
styles. Just as there are many definitions of leadership, many 
classifications of styles exist as well. A landmark study by Dan-
iel Goleman in Harvard Business Review identified six distinct 
leadership styles, based on different components of emotional 
intelligence.33 Emotional intelligence is the ability to recognize, 
understand, and control the emotions in others and ourselves. 
By learning different styles, surgeons and trainees can recognize 
their own leadership style and the effect on the team dynamic. 
Furthermore, it teaches when the situation may demand change 
in style for the best outcome. The six leadership styles identi-
fied are Coercive, Authoritative, Affiliative, Democratic, Pace-
setting, and Coaching.
The Coercive leader demands immediate compliance. 
This style reflects the command and control style that has 
historically dominated surgery. Excessive coercive leadership 
erodes team members’ sense of responsibility, motivation, 
sense of participation in a shared vision, and ultimately, per-
formance. However, it is effective in times of crisis to deliver 
clear, concise instruction. This style should be used sparingly 
and is best suited for emergencies.
The Authoritative leader embodies the phrase “Come with 
me,” focusing on mobilizing the team toward a common, grand 
vision. This type of leader allows the team freedom to inno-
vate, experiment, and devise its own means. Goleman’s research 
indicates this style is often the most effective. These leaders 
display self-confidence, empathy, and proficiency in initiating 
new ideas and leading people in a new direction. This is best 
used when a shift in paradigm is needed.
The Affiliative leader creates harmony and builds emo-
tional bonds. This requires employment of empathy, building 
relationships, and emphasis on communication. An affiliative 
leader frequently gives positive feedback. This style can allow 
poor performance to go uncorrected if too little constructive/
critical advice is given. Affiliative leadership is most useful 
when motivating people during stressful circumstances or heal-
ing rifts in a team.
The Coaching style of leadership focuses on developing 
people for the future. Coaching is leadership through mentor-
ship. The coach gives team members challenging tasks, coun-
sels, encourages, and delegates. Unlike the affiliative leader 
who focuses on positive feedback, the coach helps people iden-
tify their weaknesses and improve their performance, and ties 
their work into their long-term career aspirations. This leader-
ship style builds team capabilities by helping motivated learners 
improve. However, this style does not work well when team 
members are defiant and unwilling to change or learn, or if the 
leader lacks proficiency.
The Democratic leader forges consensus through partici-
pation. This leadership style listens to and values each mem-
ber’s input. It is not the best choice in an emergency situation, 
when time is limited, or when teammates cannot contribute 
informed guidance to the leader. It can also be exasperating if a 
clear vision does not arise from the collaborative process. This 
style is most appropriate when it is important to obtain team 
consensus, quell conflict, or create harmony.
The Pacesetter leader sets high standards for performance 
and exemplifies them. These leaders identify poor performers 
and demand more from them. However, unlike the coach, the 
pacesetter does not build the skills of those who are not keeping 
up. Rather, a pacesetter will either take over the task himself 
or delegate the task to another team member. This leadership 
style works well when it is important to obtain high-quality 
results and there is a motivated, capable team. However, pace-
setters can easily become micromanagers who have difficulty 
delegating tasks to team members, which leads to burn out on 
the part of the leader. Additionally, team members can feel over-
whelmed and demoralized by the demands for excellence with-
out an empathic counter balance.
Each of the above styles of leadership has strengths and 
weakness. Importantly, leaders who are the most successful do 
not rely only on one leadership style alone. They use several of 
them seamlessly depending on the situation and the team 
members at hand.  Therefore, the more styles a leader has 
mastered, the better, with particular emphasis on the Authorita-
tive, Affiliative, Democratic, and Coaching styles. Each leader-
ship style is a tool that is ultimately employed to guide a team 
to realizing a vision or goal. Thus, leadership training programs 
should teach the proper use of all leadership styles while adher-
ing to the principles of leadership.
FORMAL LEADERSHIP TRAINING  
PROGRAMS IN SURGERY
Since it has been shown that effective leadership can improve 
patient outcomes, leadership principles and skills should be 
taught to surgical trainees using formal leadership training pro-
grams. The importance of teaching leadership skills is reflected 
by the ACGME mandated core competencies (see Table 1-1). 
However, surgical trainees, most notably chief residents, find 
themselves in various leadership roles without ever having 
experienced formalized leadership training, which has been 
shown to result in a self-perceived lack of leadership ability.23 
When surveyed on 18 core leadership skills (Table 1-2), 92% 
of residents rated all 18 skills as important, but over half rated 
themselves as “minimally” or “not competent” in 10 out of 
18 skills.2 It has been documented that trainees are requesting 
leadership training and wish to close the gap between perceived 
need for training and the implementation of formal leadership 
training programs.34–37
A number of leadership workshops have been created. 
Extracurricular leadership programs have been designed mostly 
for physicians with an MBA or management background but 
have not been incorporated into the core residency training pro-
gram.38 Also, there are many institutions that have published 
experiences with leadership retreats or seminars for residents 
or young physicians.39–42 The ACGME hosts multiple leader-
ship skills workshops for chief residents, mostly targeted toward 
pediatricians, family practitioners, and psychiatrists.43 Similarly, 
the American College of Surgeons leads an annual 3-day lead-
ership conference focusing on leadership attributes, consensus 
development, team building, conflict resolution, and translation 
of leadership principles into clinical practice.44 These programs 
were all received well by participants and represent a call for a 
formal leadership program for all surgical trainees.
An innovative leadership curriculum first implemented 
in 1999 taught general surgery trainees collaborative leader-
ship skills, at a time when the traditional command-and-control 
leadership style predominated.45 Surgical residents partici-
pated in 18-hour-long modules based on the leadership prin-
ciples and skills listed in Table 1-2, taught by the surgical faculty. 
7
10
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
A number of leadership techniques, including time management 
techniques and applied conflict resolution techniques described 
earlier, were designed and implemented as part of this leader-
ship training program. Within 6 months of implementation, resi-
dents’ self-perceived total commitment to the highest personal 
and professional standards, communication skills, visualization 
of clear missions of patient care, and leadership of others toward 
that mission increased significantly.45 Remarkably, the positive 
impact of this leadership curriculum was significant when mea-
sured using tools, such as the Multifactor Leadership Question-
naire (MLQ), social skills inventory, personality inventory, and 
internal strength scorecard.2,37,45-47 The MLQ is a well-validated 
instrument that objectively quantifies leadership beliefs and 
self-perceived outcomes across medical and nonmedical disci-
plines. Based on the MLQ, surgical residents more often use a 
passive-avoidant style of leadership that emphasizes taking cor-
rective action only after a problem is “significant and obvious.”37 
This tool can also be used to track progress toward more effective, 
collaborative styles of leadership. These studies demonstrated 
the ability to measure leadership behavior of surgical trainees in 
a standardized, quantifiable format.2,37,45-47 Taken together, these 
studies support the concept that leadership skills can and should 
Table 1-2
18 leadership training modules
Skills
Importance 
Mean Score
Competence 
Mean Score
Academic program 
development
3.2
2.4*
Leadership training
3.8
2.3*
Leadership theory
3.2
2.1*
Effective 
communication
3.7
2.7*
Conflict resolution
3.8
3*
Management principles
3.7
2.7*
Negotiation
3.7
2.8*
Time management
4
2.8*
Private or academic 
practice, managed care
3.6
2*
Investment principles
3.5
2.2*
Ethics
3.6
3.2
Billing, coding, and 
compliance
3.5
1.7*
Program improvement
3
2*
Writing proposals
3.3
2.2*
Writing reports
3.4
2.4*
Public speaking
3.7
2.7*
Effective presentations
3.7
2.7*
Risk management
3.5
2.1*
Total
3.6
2.5*
Source: Reprinted with permission from Itani KMF, Liscum K, Brunicardi 
FC. Physician leadership is a new mandate in surgical training. Am J 
Surg. 2004;187:328-331. © kkjkjdht Elsevier.
* P<0.001 by Student t test between mean importance and mean compe-
tence scores. 
be taught to surgical trainees, and there are many validated tools 
to measure outcomes. 
Mentoring
A formal leadership training program for surgical trainees 
should include mentoring. Mentoring is the active process by 
which an experienced, empathetic person guides another indi-
vidual in the development and self-recognition of their own 
vision, learning, core competencies, and professional develop-
ment. Halstead established the concept of a surgical mentor who 
directly provided the trainees with professional and technical 
guidance. Halstead’s concept went beyond a simple preceptor-
ship by emphasizing clinical decision making based on scien-
tific evidence. His goal was to develop surgeons who would go 
on to become outstanding leaders and innovators in the field. 
Although surgery has changed dramatically since Halstead’s 
era, mentorship remains crucial in surgical training. In addition 
to teaching technical skills, clinical judgment, and scientific 
inquiry, modern-day mentors must also model effective com-
munication, empathy, humanism, and the prioritization of com-
peting professional and personal activities.
The mentor must also be an experienced and trusted advi-
sor committed to the success of the mentee. A greater level 
of trust and commitment distinguishes the mentor from the 
teacher. More than a teacher, a mentor is a coach. The goal 
of a teacher is to pass on a defined level of knowledge for 
each stage of a student’s education. The underlying prem-
ise is a limited level of advancement for the student. The 
coach, on the other hand, has the sole purpose to make his 
or her student the best at their game with an unlimited level 
of advancement. Modern mentorship implies a partnership 
between the mentor and the mentee. Surgical residency pro-
gram chairs and program directors must recruit and develop 
faculty “coaches” to mentor residents to optimize their poten-
tial. Emeritus Chair of University of California, Los Ange-
les Head and Neck Surgery, Dr. Paul Ward, said it best: “We 
strive to produce graduates of our residency program who 
are among those who change the way we think and practice 
. . . .” Having more than 25 former residents become chairs of 
academic head and neck surgical programs, Dr. Ward embod-
ied the role as a surgeon’s coach. The responsibilities of an 
effective mentor are summarized by Barondess: “Mentoring, 
to be effective, requires of the mentor empathy, maturity, self-
confidence, resourcefulness, and willingness to commit time 
and energy to another. The mentor must be able to offer guid-
ance for a new and evolving professional life, to stimulate and 
challenge, to encourage self-realization, to foster growth, and 
to make more comprehensible the landscape in which the pro-
tégé stands.”48
One of the major goals of a mentor is to assess the aptitudes 
and abilities of the mentee with regard to the appropriateness 
of their vision for their surgical career. Proper selection of the 
appropriate mentor can bring to the mentee much needed wis-
dom, guidance, and resources and can expand the scope of their 
vision.  In addition, the mentor can refine the leadership 
skills taught to their mentees in formal training programs. 
Highly successful surgeons most often have had excellent sur-
gical mentors. It is impressive to note that more than 50% of 
United States Nobel laureates have served under other Nobel 
laureates in the capacity of student, postdoctoral fellow, or 
junior collaborator.49 In academic medicine, evidence-based 
studies have shown benefits to the mentees that include enhanced 
8
9
11
Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in Surgery
CHAPTER 1
research productivity, higher likelihood of obtaining research 
grants, and greater success in obtaining desired positions in 
practice or at academic institutions.50 Mentoring provides ben-
efits to the mentors themselves, including refinement of their 
own personal leadership skills and a strong sense of satisfaction 
and accomplishment.
Mentorship is essential to accomplish the successful 
development of surgical trainees and to help cultivate their 
vision. Therefore, formal leadership training programs that have 
a goal of training the future leaders in surgery should include 
mentoring.
CONCLUSION
Although there are several definitions of leadership and a variety 
of leadership styles, all end with the common goal of improving 
patient care in the modern era. All forms of leadership require a 
vision and willingness—the willingness to assume the respon-
sibility to lead, continue learning, practice effective commu-
nication styles, and resolve conflict. Effective leadership can 
change surgical departments and improve patient care through 
innovation. A growing body of evidence suggests the mastery of 
leadership requires practice through intentional curriculum and 
reinforcement through mentorship.
Surgical leadership is bred through its training programs. 
Thus, innovation in surgical training programs is needed to 
enhance the development of leadership skills of surgical train-
ees, to prepare them for practice in modern healthcare sys-
tems, and to optimize patient care, as well as compliance with 
requirements set forth by regulatory institutions governing 
surgery and surgical education. A growing body of literature 
supports the value of effective leadership in improving patient 
care, productivity, and the work environment while it validates 
the ability to measure the impact of leadership training. There-
fore, it is of paramount importance to teach modern leadership 
principles and skills to surgical trainees in order to create a 
new generation of surgeon leaders who will shape the modern 
era of surgery in the context of rapidly evolving science, tech-
nology, and systems of healthcare delivery.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in blue are key references.
  1.	Levinson W, Chaumeton N. Communication between surgeons 
and patients in routine office visits. Surgery. 1999;125:127-134.
  2.	Itani KM, Liscum K, Brunicardi FC. Physician leadership 
is a new mandate in surgical training. Am J Surg. 2004; 
187:328-331.
  3.	Jensen AR, Wright A, Lance A, et al. The emotional intel-
ligence of surgical residents: a descriptive study. Am J Surg. 
2008;195:5-10.
  4.	Lee L, Brunicardi FC, Scott BG, et al. Impact of a novel educa-
tion curriculum on surgical training within an academic training 
program. J Surg Res. 2008;145:308-312.
  5.	Larkin AC, Cahan MA, Whalen G, et al. Human Emotion 
and Response in Surgery (HEARS): a simulation-based cur-
riculum for communication skills, systems-based practice, and 
professionalism in surgical residency training. J Am Coll Surg. 
2010;211:285-292.
  6.	Lobas JG. Leadership in academic medicine: capabilities and 
conditions for organizational success. Am J Med. 2006;119: 
617-621.
  7.	Chemers MM. An Integrative Theory of Leadership. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1997:200.
  8.	Slap S. Bury My Heart at Conference Room B: The Unbeatable 
Impact of Truly Committed Managers. New York, NY: Portfo-
lio Penguin; 2010:234.
  9.	NobelPrize.org. Frederick G. Banting: Biography. Available 
at: http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laure-
ates/1923/banting-bio.html. Accessed June 23, 2013.
10.	Brunicardi FC. Presidential Address. Academic program devel-
opment. J Surg Res. 1999;83(1):1-6.
11.	Brunicardi FC, Cotton R, Cole G, et al. The leadership prin-
ciples of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and their relevance to 
surgery. J Natl Med Assoc. 2007;99:7-14.
12.	Isaacson W. Steve Jobs. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster; 2011.
13.	Brunicardi FC, Gibbs R, Wheeler D, et al. Overview of the 
development of personalized genomic medicine and surgery. 
World J Surg. 2011;35:1693-1699.
14.	American Board of Surgery CME Requirements for Recerti-
fication. Available at: http://www.absurgery.org/default.jsp? 
newscontinuingmedicaledrequirements. Accessed October 2, 
2013.
15.	Kohn LT, Corrigan J, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: Build-
ing a Safer Health System. Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press; 2000.
16.	Gawande AA, Zinner MJ, Studdert DM, et al. Analysis of 
errors reported by surgeons at three teaching hospitals. Surgery. 
2003;133:614-621.
17.	Sutcliffe KM, Lewton E, Rosenthal MM. Communication fail-
ures: an insidious contributor to medical mishaps. Acad Med. 
2004;79:186-194.
18.	Williams RG, Silverman R, Schwind C, et al. Surgeon informa-
tion transfer and communication: factors affecting quality and 
efficiency of inpatient care. Ann Surg. 2007;245:159-169.
19.	Ambady N, Laplante D, Nguyen T, et al. Surgeons’ tone of 
voice: a clue to malpractice history. Surgery. 2002;132:5-9.
20.	Nolin CE. Malpractice claims, patient communication, and crit-
ical paths: a lawyer’s perspective. Qual Manag Health Care. 
1995;3:65-70.
21.	Stewart MA. Effective physician-patient communication and 
health outcomes: a review. CMAJ. 1995;152:1423-1433.
22.	Leonard M. The human factor: the critical importance of effec-
tive teamwork and communication in providing safe care. Qual 
Safe Health Care. 2004;13(Suppl 1):i85-i90.
23.	Dine CJ, Kahn JM, Abella BS, et al. Key elements of clinical 
physician leadership at an academic medical center. J Grad 
Med Educ. 2011;3:31-36.
24.	Pronovost P, Berenholtz S, Dorman T, et al. Improving commu-
nication in the ICU using daily goals. J Crit Care. 2003;18:71-75.
25.	Gurses AP, Kim G, Martinez E, et al. Identifying and categoris-
ing patient safety hazards in cardiovascular operating rooms 
using an interdisciplinary approach: a multisite study. BMJ 
Qual Saf. 2012;21:810-818.
26.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room 
teamwork among physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye 
of the beholder. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:746-752.
27.	Weeks D. The Eight Essential Steps to Conflict Resolution: 
Preserving Relationships at Work, at Home, and in the Com-
munity. New York, NY: J.P. Tarcher/Perigee; 1994:290.
28.	Covey SR. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People: Restor-
ing the Character Ethic. New York, NY: Free Press; 2004.
29.	Lee L, Berger DH, Awad SS, et al. Conflict resolution: practi-
cal principles for surgeons. World J Surg. 2008;32:2331-2335.
30.	Antiel RM, Reed DA, Van Arendonk KJ, et al. Effects of duty 
hour restrictions on core competencies, education, quality of 
life, and burnout among general surgery interns. JAMA Surg. 
2013;148:448-455.
31.	Lyssa Ochoa M. Evaluation of resident training activities using 
a novel time-motion study prior to the implementation of the 80 
hour work week. Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons 
Annual Conference, 2006.
12
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
32.	Brunicardi FC, Hobson FL. Time management: a review for 
physicians. J Natl Med Assoc. 1996;88:581-587.
33.	Goleman D. Leadership that gets results. Harvard Business 
Review. 2000;78:78-93.
34.	Xirasagar S, Samuels ME, Stoskopf CH. Physician leadership 
styles and effectiveness: an empirical study. Med Care Res Rev. 
2005;62:720-740.
35.	Baird DS, Soldanska M, Anderson B, et al. Current leadership 
training in dermatology residency programs: a survey. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2012;66:622-625.
36.	Kiesau CD, Heim KA, Parekh SG. Leadership and business 
education in orthopaedic residency training programs. J Surg 
Orthop Adv. 2011;20:117-121.
37.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Daram P, et al. Transformational, trans-
actional, and passive-avoidant leadership characteristics of a 
surgical resident cohort: analysis using the multifactor lead-
ership questionnaire and implications for improving surgical 
education curriculums. J Surg Res. 2008;148:49-59.
38.	Ackerly DC, Sangvai DG, Udayakumar K, et al. Training 
the next generation of physician-executives: an innovative 
residency pathway in management and leadership. Acad Med. 
2011;86:575-579.
39.	Stoller JK, Rose M, Lee R, et al. Teambuilding and leadership 
training in an internal medicine residency training program. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2004;19:692-697.
40.	Hanna WC, Mulder D, Fried G, et al. Training future surgeons 
for management roles: the resident-surgeon-manager confer-
ence. Arch Surg. 2012;147:940-944.
41.	Boulanger B, Buencamino A, Dovichi S. Training young pedia-
tricians as leaders. Pediatrics. 2005;116:518.
42.	Leslie LK, Miotto MB, Liu GC, et al. Training young pedia-
tricians as leaders for the 21st century. Pediatrics. 2005;115: 
765-773.
43.	Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. Lead-
ership Skills for Chief Residents. Available at: http://www.
acgme.org/acgmeweb/. Accessed January 1, 2014.
44.	American College of Surgeons. Surgeons as leaders: from oper-
ating room to boardroom. Available at: http://www.facs.org/
education/surgeonsasleaders.html. Accessed January 1, 2014.
45.	Awad SS, Hayley B, Fagan SP, et al. The impact of a novel 
resident leadership training curriculum. Am J Surg. 2004;188: 
481-484.
46.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Brandt M, et al. Assessment of com-
munication skills of surgical residents using the Social Skills 
Inventory. Am J Surg. 2007;194:401-405.
47.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Brunicardi F, et al. Improving com-
prehensive surgical resident training through use of the NEO 
Five-Factor Personality Inventory: results from a cohort-based 
trial. Am J Surg. 2011;201:828-834.
48.	Barondess JA. On mentoring. J R Soc Med. 1997;90:347-349.
49.	Zuckerman H. Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United 
States. New York, NY: Free Press; 1977:335.
50.	Sambunjak D, Straus SE, Marusic A. Mentoring in academic 
medicine: a systematic review. JAMA. 2006;296:1103-1115.
Systemic Response to Injury and 
Metabolic Support
Siobhan A. Corbett*
2
*This chapter is dedicated to its previous author, Dr. Stephen Lowry, my mentor and friend.
chapter 
Overview: Injury-Associated Systemic 
Inflammatory Response	
13
The Detection of Cellular Injury	
14
The Detection of Injury is Mediated by 
Members of the Damage-Associated 
Molecular Pattern Family / 14
DAMPs Are Ligands for Pattern  
Recognition Receptors / 16
Pattern Recognition Receptor  
Signaling: Toll-Like Receptors  
and the Inflammasome / 18
Central Nervous System  
Regulation of Inflammation  
in Response to Injury	
18
Neuroendocrine Response to Injury / 19
The Cellular Stress Responses	
23
Reactive Oxygen Species and the  
Oxidative Stress Response / 23
The Heat Shock Response / 23
The Unfolded Protein Response / 23
Autophagy / 24
Apoptosis / 24
Necroptosis / 25
Mediators of Inflammation 	
26
Cytokines / 26
Eicosanoids / 31
Plasma Contact System / 33
Serotonin / 33
Histamine / 34
Cellular Response to Injury	
34
Cytokine Receptor Families and  
Their Signaling Pathways / 34
JAK-STAT Signaling / 34
Suppressors of Cytokine Signaling / 35
Chemokine Receptors Are Members of the 
G-Protein–Coupled Receptor Family / 35
Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily / 36
Transforming Growth Factor-β  
Family of Receptors / 36
Transcriptional and Translational 
Regulation of the Injury Response 	36
Transcriptional Events Following Blunt 
Trauma / 36
Transcriptional Regulation of Gene 
Expression / 36
Epigenetic Regulation of Transcription / 37
Translation Regulation of Inflammatory 
Gene Expression / 38
Cell-Mediated Inflammatory 
Response	
38
Platelets / 38
Lymphocytes and T-Cell Immunity / 38
Dendritic Cells	/ 39
Eosinophils / 39
Mast Cells / 39
Monocyte/Macrophages / 39
Neutrophils / 40
Endothelium-Mediated Injury	
40
Vascular Endothelium / 40
Neutrophil-Endothelium Interaction / 40
Chemokines / 40
Nitric Oxide / 41
Prostacyclin / 42
Endothelins / 42
Platelet-Activating Factor / 43
Natriuretic Peptides / 43
Surgical Metabolism	
43
Metabolism during Fasting / 44
Metabolism after Injury / 46
Lipid Metabolism after Injury / 46
Ketogenesis / 47
Carbohydrate Metabolism / 48
Protein and Amino Acid  
Metabolism / 50
Nutrition in the Surgical Patient	 50
Estimation of Energy Requirements / 51
Vitamins and Minerals / 51
Overfeeding / 52
Enteral Nutrition	
52
Rationale for Enteral Nutrition / 52
Hypocaloric Enteral Nutrition / 53
Enteral Formulas / 53
Access for Enteral Nutritional Support / 55
Parenteral Nutrition	
56
Rationale for Parenteral Nutrition / 56
Total Parenteral Nutrition / 57
Peripheral Parenteral Nutrition / 57
Initiation of Parenteral Nutrition / 58
Complications of Parenteral Nutrition / 58
OVERVIEW: INJURY-ASSOCIATED SYSTEMIC 
INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
The inflammatory response to injury or infection occurs as a 
consequence of the local or systemic release of “pathogen-
associated” or “damage-associated” molecules, which use 
similar signaling pathways to mobilize the necessary resources 
required for the restoration of homeostasis. Minor host insults 
result in a localized inflammatory response that is transient 
and in most cases beneficial. Major host insults, however, may 
lead to amplified reactions, resulting in systemic inflammation, 
remote organ damage, and multiple organ failure in as many 
as 30% of those who are severely injured. Recent data support 
this idea and suggest that severely injured patients who are des-
tined to die from their injuries differ from survivors only in the 
degree and duration of their dysregulated acute inflammatory 
response.1,2
This topic is highly relevant because systemic inflamma-
tion is a central feature3 of both sepsis and severe trauma. Under-
standing the complex pathways that regulate local and systemic 
inflammation is necessary to develop therapies to intervene dur-
ing overwhelming sepsis or after severe injury. Sepsis, defined 
by a systemic inflammatory response to infection, is a disease 
process with an incidence of over 900,000 cases per year. Fur-
ther, trauma is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity for 
individuals under age 45.
14
Key Points
1
	 Endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) 
are produced following tissue and cellular injury. These mol-
ecules interact with immune and nonimmune cell receptors to 
initiate a “sterile” systemic inflammatory response following 
severe traumatic injury.
2
	 In many cases, DAMP molecules are sensed by pattern rec-
ognition receptors (PRRs), which are the same receptors that 
cells use to sense invading pathogens. This explains, in part, 
the similar clinical picture of systemic inflammation observed 
in injured and/or septic patients.
3
	 The central nervous system receives information with regard 
to injury-induced inflammation via soluble mediators as well 
as direct neural projections that transmit information to reg-
ulatory areas in the brain. The resulting neuroendocrine reflex 
plays an important modulatory role in the immune response.
4
	 Inflammatory signals activate key cellular stress responses 
(the oxidative stress response, the heat shock protein 
response, the unfolded protein response, autophagy, and pro-
grammed cell death), which serve to mobilize cellular 
defenses and resources in an attempt to restore homeostasis.
5
	 The cells, mediators, signaling mechanisms, and pathways 
that compose and regulate the systemic inflammatory 
response are closely networked and tightly regulated by 
transcriptional events as well as by epigenetic mechanisms, 
posttranslational modification, and microRNA synthesis.
6
	 Nutritional assessments, whether clinical or laboratory 
guided, and intervention should be considered at an early 
juncture in all surgical and critically ill patients.
7
	 Management of critically ill and injured patients is optimized 
with the use of evidence-based and algorithm-driven therapy.
In this chapter, we will review what is known about the 
soluble and cellular effectors of the injury-induced inflam-
matory response; how the signals are sensed, transduced, and 
modulated; and how their dysregulation is associated with 
immune suppression. We will also discuss how these events are 
monitored and regulated by the central nervous system. Finally, 
we will review how injury reprograms cellular metabolism, in 
an attempt to mobilize energy and structural stores to meet the 
challenge of restoring homeostasis.
THE DETECTION OF CELLULAR INJURY
The Detection of Injury is Mediated by 
Members of the Damage-Associated Molecular 
Pattern Family
Traumatic injury activates the innate immune system to pro-
duce a systemic inflammatory response in an attempt to limit 
damage and to restore homeostasis. It includes two general 
responses: (a) an acute proinflammatory response resulting from 
innate immune system recognition of ligands, and (b) an anti-
inflammatory response that may serve to modulate the proin-
flammatory phase and direct a return to homeostasis (Fig. 2-1). 
This is accompanied by a suppression of adaptive immunity.4 
Rather than occurring sequentially, recent data indicate that all 
three responses are simultaneously and rapidly induced 
following severe traumatic injury.2 
The degree of the systemic inflammatory response fol-
lowing trauma is proportional to injury severity and is an 
independent predictor of subsequent organ dysfunction and 
resultant mortality. Recent work has provided insight into 
the mechanisms by which immune activation in this setting 
is triggered. The clinical features of the injury-mediated sys-
temic inflammatory response, characterized by increased 
body temperature, heart rate, respirations, and white blood cell 
count, are similar to those observed with infection (Table 2-1). 
While significant efforts have been devoted to establish-
ing a microbial etiology for this response, it is now widely 
accepted that systemic inflammation following trauma is 
sterile. Although the mechanisms for the sterile response are 
Figure 2-1.  Schematic representation of the systemic inflamma-
tory response syndrome (SIRS) after injury, followed by a period of 
convalescence mediated by the counterregulatory anti-inflammatory 
response syndrome (CARS). Severe inflammation may lead to 
acute multiple organ failure (MOF) and early death after injury 
(dark blue arrow). A lesser inflammatory response followed by 
excessive CARS may induce a prolonged immunosuppressed state 
that can also be deleterious to the host (light blue arrow). Normal 
recovery after injury requires a period of systemic inflammation 
followed by a return to homeostasis (red arrow). (Adapted with 
permission from Guirao X, Lowry SF. Biologic control of injury 
and inflammation: Much more than too little or too late. World J 
Surg. 1996;20:437. With kind permission from Springer Science + 
Business Media.)
less well understood, it is likely to result from endogenous 
molecules that are produced as a consequence of tissue dam-
age or cellular stress, as may occur with hemorrhagic shock 
and resuscitation.5 Termed alarmins or damage-associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs), these effectors, along with the 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), interact 
with specific cell receptors that are located both on the cell 
surface and intracellularly.6  The best described of these 
receptors are members of the toll-like receptor family.
1
2
MOF
Recovery
MOF
Days
Hours
SIRS
CARS
15
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
Table 2-1 
Clinical spectrum of infection and systemic inflamma-
tory response syndrome (SIRS)
Term
Definition
Infection
Identifiable source of microbial insult
SIRS
Two or more of following criteria are met:
  Temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F) or ≤36°C 
(96.8°F)
  Heart rate ≥90 beats per minute
  Respiratory rate ≥20 breaths per minute or 
Paco2 ≤32 mmHg or mechanical ventilation
White blood cell count ≥12,000/μL or 
≤4000/μL or ≥10% band forms
Sepsis
Identifiable source of infection + SIRS
Severe sepsis
Sepsis + organ dysfunction
Septic shock
Sepsis + cardiovascular collapse (requiring 
vasopressor support)
Paco2 = partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide.
Trauma DAMPs are structurally diverse endogenous mol-
ecules that are immunologically active. Table 2-2 includes 
a partial list of DAMPs that are released either passively 
from necrotic/damaged cells or actively from physiologically 
“stressed” cells by upregulation or overexpression. Once they 
are outside the cell, DAMPs promote the activation of innate 
immune cells, as well as the recruitment and activation of 
antigen-presenting cells, which are engaged in host defense.7 
The best-characterized DAMP with significant preclinical evi-
dence for its release after trauma and with a direct link to the 
systemic inflammatory response is high-mobility group pro-
tein B1 (HMGB1). Additional evidence for the role of DAMP 
molecules in postinjury inflammation, including mitochondrial 
proteins and DNA, as well as extracellular matrix molecules, is 
also presented.
Table 2-2 
Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and 
their receptors
DAMP Molecule
Putative Receptor(s)
HMGB1
TLRs (2,4,9), RAGE
Heat shock proteins
TLR2, TLR4, CD40, CD14
S100 protein
RAGE
Mitochondrial DNA
TLR9
Hyaluronan
TLR2, TLR4, CD44
Biglycan
TLR2 and TLR4
Formyl peptides 
(mitochondrial)
Formyl peptide receptor 1
IL-1α
IL-1 receptor
HMGB1 = high-mobility group protein B1; IL = interleukin; RAGE =  
receptor for advanced glycosylation end products; TLK = toll-like 
receptor.
High-Mobility Group Protein B1.  The best-characterized 
DAMP in the context of the injury-associated inflammatory 
response is HMGB1 protein, which is rapidly released into 
the circulation within 30 minutes following trauma. HMGB1 
is highly evolutionarily conserved across species. It was first 
described as a constitutively expressed, nonhistone chromo-
somal protein that participated in a variety of nuclear events, 
including DNA repair and transcription. HMGB1 was also 
detected in the cytosol and extracellular fluids at low levels, 
although its function outside the cell was not clear. Subsequent 
studies have proven, however, that HMGB1 is actively secreted 
from immune-competent cells stimulated by PAMPs (e.g., 
endotoxin) or by inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necro-
sis factor and interleukin-1). This process occurs outside the 
classic secretory pathway via a mechanism that is independent 
of endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex. Moreover, 
recent data indicate that HMGB1 release can be regulated by the 
inflammasome.8 Stressed nonimmune cells such as endothelial 
cells and platelet also actively secrete HMGB1. Finally, passive 
release of HMGB1 can occur following cell death, whether it is 
programmed or uncontrolled (necrosis). 
Once outside the cell, HMGB1 interacts with its putative 
receptors either alone or in concert with pathogenic molecules 
to activate the immune response, and in this way, functions as 
a proinflammatory cytokine. HMGB1 has been shown to signal 
via the toll-like receptors (TLR2, TLR4, TLR9), the receptor 
for advanced glycosylation end products (RAGE), CD24, and 
others. The activation of TLRs mainly occurs in myeloid cells, 
whereas RAGE is thought to be the receptor target in endo-
thelial and somatic cells. The diverse proinflammatory biologic 
responses that result from HMGB1 signaling include: (a) the 
release of cytokines and chemokines from macrophages/
monocytes and dendritic cells; (b) neutrophil activation and 
chemotaxis; (c) alterations in epithelial barrier function, includ-
ing increased permeability; and (d) increased procoagulant 
activity on platelet surfaces, among others.9 In particular, 
HMGB1 binding to TLR4 triggers the proinflammatory cyto-
kine release that mediates “sickness behavior.” This effect is 
dependent on the highly conserved domain structure of HMGB1 
that can be recapitulated by a synthetic 20-amino acid peptide 
containing a critical cysteine residue at position 106.10
Recent data have explored the role of this cysteine residue, 
as well as two others that are highly conserved, in the biologic 
function of HMGB1. They demonstrate that the redox state 
of the three residues regulates the receptor binding ability of 
HMGB1 to influence its activity, including cytokine produc-
tion. For example, a thiol at C106 is required for HMGB1 to 
promote macrophage tumor necrosis factor (TNF) release. In 
addition, a disulfide bond between C23 and C45 is also required 
for cytokine release because reduction of the disulfide linkage 
or further oxidation will reduce the ability of HMGB1 to func-
tion as a cytokine. Therefore, if all three cysteine residues are 
in reduced form, HMGB1 lacks the ability to bind and signal 
through TLR4, but gains the capacity to bind to CXCL12 to 
activate CXCR4 and serve as a chemotactic mediator. Impor-
tantly, shifts between the redox states have been demonstrated 
and indicate that redox state dynamics are important regulators 
of HMGB1.11
Importantly, HMGB1 levels in human subjects follow-
ing injury correlate with the Injury Severity Score, complement 
activation, and an increase in circulating inflammatory mediators 
such as TNF.12 Unchecked, excessive HMGB1 has the capacity 
16
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
to promote a self-injurious innate immune response. In fact, 
exogenous administration of HMGB1 to normal animals pro-
duces fever, weight loss, epithelial barrier dysfunction, and even 
death.
A Role for Mitochondrial DAMPs in the Injury-Mediated 
Inflammatory Response.  Mitochondrial proteins and/or 
DNA can act as DAMPs by triggering an inflammatory response 
to necrosis and cellular stress. Specifically, the release of mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) and formyl peptides from damaged or 
dysfunctional mitochondria has been implicated in activation of 
the macrophage inflammasome, a cytosolic signaling complex 
that responds to cellular stress. In support of this idea, plasma 
mtDNA has been shown to be thousands of times higher in both 
trauma patients and patients undergoing femoral fracture repair 
when compared to normal volunteers. Further, direct injection 
of mitochondria lysates in an animal model caused remote organ 
damage, including liver and lung inflammation.13 These data 
suggest that with stress or tissue injury, mtDNA and peptides 
are released from damaged mitochondria where they can con-
tribute to a sterile inflammatory response. From an evolution-
ary perspective, given that eukaryotic mitochondria derive from 
bacterial origin, it would make sense that they retain bacterial 
features capable of eliciting a strong response that is typically 
associated with a pathogen trigger. For example, mtDNA is cir-
cular and contains hypomethylated CpG motifs that resemble 
bacterial CpG DNA. It is thus capable of producing formylated 
peptides, which potently induce an inflammatory phenotype 
in neutrophils, by increasing chemotaxis, oxidative burst, and 
cytokine secretion. In addition, the mitochondrial transcription 
factor A (TFAM), a highly abundant mitochondrial protein, is 
functionally and structurally homologous to HMGB1. It has 
also been shown be released in high amounts from damaged 
cells where it acts in conjunction with mtDNA to activate TLR9 
signaling.14
Extracellular Matrix Molecules Act as DAMPs.  Recent work 
has explored the role of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins 
in the TLR-mediated inflammatory response that follows tissue 
injury. These molecules, which are sequestered under normal 
conditions, can be released in a soluble form with proteolytic 
digestion of the ECM. Proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, 
and glycoproteins such as fibronectin have all been implicated 
as key players in the DAMP/TLR interaction. Proteoglycans, 
in particular, have also been shown to activate the intracel-
lular inflammasomes that trigger sterile inflammation. These 
molecules, which consist of a protein core with one or more 
covalently attached glycosaminoglycan chains, can be mem-
brane-bound, secreted, or proteolytically cleaved and shed from 
the cell surface.
Biglycan is one of the first proteoglycans to be described 
as a TLR ligand.15 It consists of a protein core containing leucine-
rich repeat regions, with two glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side 
chains (chondroitin sulfate or dermatan sulfate). Although 
biglycan typically exists in a matrix-bound form, with tissue 
injury, it is released from the ECM in a soluble form where it 
interacts with TLR2 or TLR4 to generate an immediate inflam-
matory response.
Various proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, 
including TNF-α and interleukin (IL)-1β, are downstream 
effector molecules of biglycan/TLR2/4 signaling. Among 
these, the mechanism of biglycan-mediated autonomous 
synthesis and secretion of mature IL-1β is unique. Usually, 
release of mature IL-1β from the cell requires two signals, one 
which is needed to initiate synthesis (TLR2/4-mediated) and the 
other to process pro-IL-1β to its mature form (inflammasome-
mediated). How is it possible for biglycan to provide both sig-
nals? Current evidence indicates that when soluble biglycan 
binds to the TLR, it simultaneously serves as a ligand for a 
purinergic receptor, which facilitates the inflammasome acti-
vation required for IL-1β processing.16 These data support the 
idea that DAMP-mediated signals can initiate a robust inflam-
matory response.
DAMPs Are Ligands for Pattern  
Recognition Receptors 
The inflammatory response that occurs following traumatic 
injury is similar to that observed with pathogen exposure. 
Not surprising, surface and cytoplasmic receptors that 
mediate the innate immune response to microbial infec-
tion have been implicated in the activation of sterile inflam-
mation. In support of this idea, genes have been identified that 
are dysregulated acutely both in response to a microbial ligand 
administered to human volunteers and in response to traumatic 
injury in a large patient population.17 The classes of receptors 
that are important for sensing damaged cells and cell debris are 
part of the larger group of germline encoded pattern recog-
nition receptors (PRRs). The best-described ligands for these 
receptors are microbial components, the PAMPs. The PRRs of 
the innate immune system fall into at least four distinct classes: 
TLRs, calcium-dependent (C-type) lectin receptors (CLRs), ret-
inoic acid–inducible gene (RIG)-I-like receptors (RLRs), and 
the nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat–containing 
(NBD-LRR) proteins (NLRs; also nucleotide-binding and oligo-
merization domain [NOD]-like receptors). Following receptor 
ligation, intracellular signaling modulates transcriptional and 
posttranslational events necessary for host defense by coordi-
nating the synthesis and release of cytokines and chemokines to 
either initiate or suppress the inflammatory response. The best 
described of these, the TLRs, NLRs, and CLRs, are discussed 
in the following sections.
Toll-Like Receptors.  The TLRs are evolutionarily conserved 
type 1 transmembrane proteins that are the best-characterized 
PRRs in mammalian cells. They were first identified in 
Drosophila, where a mutation in the Toll gene led to its iden-
tification as a key component in their immune defense against 
fungal infection. The first human TLR, TLR4, was identified 
shortly thereafter. Now, more than 10 human TLR family mem-
bers have been identified, with distinct ligands that include 
lipid, carbohydrate, peptide, and nucleic acid components of 
various pathogens. TLRs are expressed on both immune and 
nonimmune cells. At first, the expression of TLR was thought to 
be isolated to professional antigen-presenting cells such as den-
dritic cells and macrophages. However, mRNA for TLR family 
members have been detected in most cells of myeloid lineage, 
as well as natural killer (NK) cells.18 In addition, activation of 
T cells increases their TLR expression and induces their sur-
vival and clonal expansion. Direct engagement of TLR in 
T-regulatory (Treg) cells promotes their expansion and repro-
grams them to differentiate into T helper cells, which in turn 
provides help to effector cells. In addition, B cells express a 
distinct subset of the TLR family that determines their ability to 
respond to DAMPs; however, the significance of restricted TLR 
expression in these cells is not yet clear.
2
17
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
All TLRs consist of an extracellular domain, character-
ized by multiple leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), and a carboxy-
terminal, intracellular toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain. The 
LRR domains recognize bacterial and viral PAMPs in the 
extracellular environment (TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, 
and TLR11) or in the endolysosomes (TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, 
TLR9, and TLR10). Although the role of TLRs in sepsis has 
been well described, more recent data indicate that a subset of 
the TLRs, TLR4 in particular, also recognizes DAMPs released 
from injured cells and tissues.19 Signal transduction occurs with 
receptor dimerization and recruitment of cytoplasmic adaptor 
proteins. These adaptor molecules initiate and amplify down-
stream signals, resulting in the activation of transcription. The 
transcription factors, which include nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), 
activator protein (AP)-1, and interferon regulatory factor (IRF), 
bind to regulatory elements in promoters and/or enhancers of 
target genes leading to the upregulation of a large cohort of 
genes that include interferon (IFN)-α and IFN-β, nitric oxide 
synthase 2 (NOS2A), and TNF, which play critical roles in ini-
tiating innate immune responses to cellular injury and stress. 
Given the importance of TLR triggering of the innate immune 
response to immune homeostasis, it is no surprise that the 
process is tightly regulated. TLR expression is significantly 
increased following blunt traumatic injury. Further, TLR sig-
naling is controlled at multiple levels, both posttranscription-
ally via ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and microRNA actions 
that affect mRNA stability, as well as by the localization of the 
TLRs and their signaling complexes within the cell.
Nucleotide-Binding Oligomerization Domain-Like Recep-
tor Family.  The NLRs are a large family of proteins composed 
of intracellular PRRs that sense both endogenous (DAMPs) and 
exogenous (PAMPs) molecules to trigger innate immune acti-
vation. The best characterized of the NLRs is the NLR family 
pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3), which is highly expressed 
in peripheral blood leukocytes. It forms the key “sensing” com-
ponent of the larger, multiprotein inflammasome complex, 
which is composed of NLRP3; the adapter protein apoptosis-
associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC); and 
the effector protein, caspase 1.20 In the cytoplasm, the receptor 
resides in an inactive form due to an internal interaction between 
two adjacent and highly conserved domains. In conjunction with 
a priming event, such as mitochondrial stress, phagocytosed 
DAMPs can be sensed by NLRP3, resulting in the removal of 
the self-repression. The protein can then oligomerize and recruit 
other complex members. The net result is the autoactivation of 
pro-caspase 1 to caspase 1. The NLRP3 inflammasome plays 
a central role in immune regulation by initiating the caspase 
1–dependent processing and secretion of the proinflammatory 
cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. In fact, NLRP3 is the key protein 
in the mechanism by which IL-1β production is regulated in 
macrophages. NLRP3 inflammasome activity is tightly regu-
lated by cell-cell interactions, cellular ion flux, and oxidative 
stress in order to maintain a balanced immune response to dan-
ger signals.
While the role of the NLRP3 inflammasome in the ster-
ile inflammatory response following trauma has not been well 
described, recent evidence suggests that genetic variations in the 
NLRP3 gene might affect the magnitude of immune inflammatory 
responses following trauma. Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
within the NLRP3 gene were found to be associated with increased 
risk of sepsis and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome in patients 
with major trauma.21 In an animal model of burn injury, early 
inflammasome activation has been detected in a variety of immune 
cells (NK cells, CD4/CD8 T cells, and B cells), as determined by 
the assessment of caspase 1 cleavage by flow cytometry.22 Fur-
ther, inhibition of caspase 1 activity in vivo results in increased 
burn mortality, suggesting that inflammasome activation may play 
an unanticipated protective role in the host response to injury that 
may be linked to increased production of specific cytokines. In 
addition to the NLRP3 inflammasome, there are numerous other 
NLRP sensors that are capable of detecting a diverse range of 
molecular targets. Among them are those endogenous molecules 
that are released as a consequence of tissue injury and cellular stress 
(hypoxia/hypoperfusion).
C-Type Lectin Receptors.  Macrophages and dendritic cells 
possess receptors that detect molecules released from damaged 
or dying cells in order to retrieve and process antigens from cell 
corpses for T-cell presentation. A key family of receptors that 
directs this process is the CLR family that includes the selectin 
and the mannose receptor families and that binds carbohydrates 
in a calcium-dependent fashion. Best described for their sens-
ing of PAMPs, particularly fungal antigens, the CLRs can also 
act to promote the endocytosis and clearance of cell corpses. 
More recent work has demonstrated, however, that a subset of 
CLR receptors such as dendritic cell-NK lectin group receptor-1 
(DNGR-1) and macrophage-inducible C-type lectin recep-
tor (Mincle) recognize DAMPS of intracellular origin, such 
as F-actin and the ribonucleoprotein SAP-130.23 Ligation and 
activation of Mincle promotes its interaction with an Fcγ recep-
tor, which contains immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation 
motifs. This leads to proinflammatory cytokine, chemokine, and 
nitric oxide production, in addition to neutrophil recruitment. In 
this way, Mincle may contribute to local inflammation at sites 
of tissue injury.
Soluble Pattern Recognition Molecules: The Pentraxins.  
Soluble pattern recognition molecules (PRMs) are a molecu-
larly diverse group of molecules that share a conserved mode 
of action that is defined by complement activation, agglutina-
tion and neutralization, and opsonization. The best described 
of the PRMs are the pentraxins. PRMs can be synthesized at 
sites of injury and inflammation by macrophages and dendritic 
cells, while neutrophils can store PRMs and can release them 
rapidly following activation. In addition, epithelial tissues (the 
liver in particular) serve as a reservoir source for systemic mass 
release. The short pentraxin, C-reactive protein (CRP), was the 
first PRM to be identified. Serum amyloid protein (SAP), which 
has 51% sequence similarity to human CRP, also contains the 
pentraxin molecular signature. CRP and SAP plasma levels are 
low (≤3 mg/L) under normal circumstances. However, CRP is 
synthesized by the liver in response to IL-6, increasing serum 
levels more than a 1000-fold. Thus, CRP is considered part of the 
acute-phase protein response in humans. For this reason, CRP 
has been studied as a marker of the proinflammatory response 
in many clinical settings, including appendicitis, vasculitis, and 
ulcerative colitis. CRP and SAP are ancient immune molecules 
that share many functional properties with antibodies: they bind 
bacterial polysaccharides, ECM components, apoptotic cells, and 
nuclear materials, as well as all three classes of Fcγ receptors 
(FcγR). Both molecules also participate in the activation and reg-
ulation of complement pathways. In this way, short pentraxins 
can link immune cells to the complement system.24
Finally, significant data support a role for pentraxin 3 
(PTX3), a long pentraxin family member, in the “sterile” 
18
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
inflammatory response associated with cellular stress. While 
CRP is produced solely in the liver, PTX3 is produced by vari-
ous cells in peripheral tissues, including immune cells. PTX3 
plasma concentrations increase rapidly in various inflammatory 
conditions, including sepsis. Further, in a recent prospective 
study of polytraumatized patients, serum PTX3 concentrations 
were highly elevated, peaking at 24 hours. In addition, PTX3 
concentrations at admission were associated with injury sever-
ity, whereas higher PTX3 serum concentrations 24 hours after 
admission correlated with lower probability for survival.25
Pattern Recognition Receptor Signaling: Toll-
Like Receptors and the Inflammasome
As noted earlier, members of the TLR family respond to endog-
enous molecules released from damaged or stressed cells. In 
animal models, activation of TLRs in the absence of bacterial 
pathogens correlates with the development of critical illness 
including “sterile inflammation.” What we know about TLR sig-
naling events has largely been derived from the TLR-mediated 
response to bacterial pathogens. However, it is likely that the 
intracellular adaptors required for signal transmission by TLRs 
in response to exogenous ligands are conserved and used for 
“damage” sensing of endogenous (“self”) ligands as well. The 
intracellular domain structure of TLRs is highly conserved and 
is characterized by a cytoplasmic toll/IL-1R homology (TIR) 
domain. Binding of ligand to the receptor results in a receptor 
dimer, either a homodimer (e.g., TLR4/TLR4) or heterodimer 
(e.g., TLR2/TLR1), which recruits a number of adaptor pro-
teins to the TIR domains, through TIR-TIR interaction.26 With 
one exception (TLR3), the universal adaptor protein central to 
the TLR signaling complex is myeloid differentiation factor 88 
(MyD88), a member of the IL-1 receptor subfamily. MyD88 
works through the recruitment of a second TIR-containing adap-
tor, MyD88 adaptor-like protein (Mal), in the context of TLR4 
and TLR2 signaling, which serves as a bridge between MyD88 
and activated TLRs to initiate signal transduction. It is interest-
ing that Mal’s adaptor function requires cleavage of the carboxy-
terminal portion of the protein by caspase 1, a key effector of 
the inflammasome.27 This finding suggests an important synergy 
between TLRs and NLRs that may potentiate TLR-mediated 
signaling. There are three other TIR domain-containing adaptor 
proteins that are also important to TLR-signaling events; these 
are TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing INF-β (TRIF), 
TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM), and sterile α- (SAM) 
and HEAT/armadillo (ARM) motif-containing protein (SARM). 
Two of these, TRIF and TRAM, are involved in the MyD88-
independent signaling pathways, which are activated by TLR3 
and TLR4.
Signaling through the MyD88-dependent pathway results 
in the activation of numerous cytoplasmic protein kinases 
including IL-1 receptor–associated kinases (IRAK-1 and 
IRAK-4), resulting in an interaction with TNF receptor–associ-
ated factor 6 (TRAF6). TRAF6, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, forms 
a complex with two other proteins, which together activate the 
complex that subsequently phosphorylates IκB kinase (IKK)-β 
and the MAP kinases (MAPKs). Ultimately, the phosphoryla-
tion of IκB by the IKK complex and NEMO (NF-κB essential 
modulator) leads to its degradation, which frees NF-κB and 
allows its translocation to the nucleus and the transcription of 
NF-κB target genes. Simultaneously, MAPK activation is criti-
cal for activation of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcrip-
tion factor, and thus production of inflammatory cytokines. 
The MyD88-independent pathway acts through TRIF to activate 
NF-κB, similar to the MyD88-dependent pathway. However, 
TRIF can also recruit other signaling molecules to phosphory-
late interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), which induces expres-
sion of type I IFN genes.26
Signaling from the Inflammasome.  As discussed earlier, 
activation and assembly of the inflammasome in response to 
DAMP sensing result in the cleavage of pro-caspase 1 into 
two products. This event is pivotal to all known inflamma-
some signaling pathways. The caspase 1 products assemble 
to form the IL-1 converting enzyme (ICE), which cleaves 
the IL-1 cytokines, IL-1β, IL-18, and IL-33. This final step is 
required for activation and secretion of the cytokines from the 
cell.20 IL-1β and IL-18 are potent proinflammatory cytokines 
that promote key immune responses that are essential to host 
defense. Thus, the synthesis, processing, and secretion of these 
cytokines are tightly regulated, as successful cytokine release 
requires a two-step process. The first signal, which is typically 
TLR-mediated, initiates the synthesis and storage of the inactive 
cytokine precursors in the cytoplasm. The second signal, which 
is inflammasome-mediated, initiates proteolytic cleavage of the 
procytokine, which is a requirement for its activation and secre-
tion from the cell. Of further interest, evidence has demonstrated 
that both IL-1β and IL-18 lack a signal sequence, which is usu-
ally necessary for those proteins that are destined for cellular 
export. These signal peptides target proteins to the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) and to the Golgi complex, where they are pack-
aged for secretion from the cell through the classical secretory 
pathway. More than 20 proteins in addition to IL-1β and IL-18 
undergo unconventional protein secretion independent of the 
ER and Golgi complex.28 The list includes signaling molecules 
involved in inflammatory, cell survival, and repair responses, 
such as HMGB1, IL-1α, galectins 1 and 3, and FGF2. Currently, 
the mechanisms responsible for unconventional protein secre-
tion are not understood; however, the process is also evident in 
yeast under conditions of cellular stress. It makes evolutionary 
sense that a mechanism for rapid secretion of stored proteins 
essential to the stress response is highly conserved.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION OF 
INFLAMMATION IN RESPONSE TO INJURY
The central nervous system (CNS) communicates with the 
body through ordered systems of sensory and motor neurons, 
which receive and integrate information to generate a coordi-
nated response. Rather than being an immune-privileged organ, 
recent work indicates that the CNS receives information with 
regard to injury-induced inflammation both via soluble media-
tors as well as direct neural projections that transmit informa-
tion to regulatory areas in the brain (Fig. 2-2). How does 
the CNS sense inflammation? DAMPs and inflammatory 
molecules convey stimulatory signals to the CNS via multiples 
routes. For example, soluble inflammatory signaling molecules 
from the periphery can reach neurons and glial cells directly 
through the fenestrated endothelium of the circumventricular 
organs (CVO) or via a leaky blood brain barrier in pathologic 
settings such as may occur following a traumatic brain injury.29 
In addition, inflammatory stimuli can interact with receptors 
located on the brain endothelial cells to generate a variety of 
proinflammatory mediators (cytokines, chemokines, adhesion 
molecules, proteins of the complement system, and immune recep-
tors) that directly impact the brain parenchyma. Not surprising, this 
3
19
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
response is countered by potent anti-inflammatory signaling, 
a portion of which is provided by the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis and the release of systemic glucocorticoids. 
Inflammatory stimuli in the CNS result in behavioral changes, 
such as increased sleep, lethargy, reduced appetite, and the 
most common feature of infection, fever.
Information regarding peripheral inflammation and tissue 
damage can also be signaled to the brain via afferent neural 
fibers, particularly those of the vagus nerve.30 These afferent 
fibers can interconnect with neurons that project to the hypo-
thalamus to modulate the HPA axis. In addition, afferent vagal 
nerve impulses modulate cells in the brain stem, at the dorsal 
motor nucleus of the vagus, from which efferent preganglionic 
parasympathetic impulses originate. Axons from these cells, which 
comprise the visceromotor component of the vagus nerve, form 
an “inflammatory reflex” that feeds back to the periphery to 
regulate inflammatory signaling events.31 Although the mech-
anisms by which cholinergic signals from the CNS regulate 
immune cells in the periphery are incompletely understood, 
recent evidence has provided some mechanistic insight. The 
first line of evidence to support this idea is the observation that 
vagal stimulation reduces proinflammatory cytokine produc-
tion from the spleen in several experimental models systems.32 
This effect is dependent on both the vagal efferent signals and, 
in part, splenic catecholaminergic nerve fibers that originate in 
the celiac plexus and that terminate in a T-cell–rich area of the 
spleen. Interestingly, these signals propagated by adrenergic 
nerves result in measurable increases in acetylcholine (ACh) 
levels in the spleen. In addition, the resident immune cells in 
the spleen require the expression of cholinergic receptors, 
specifically α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (α7nAChR), 
for the suppression of cytokine synthesis.33 How is this effect 
mediated? The apparent source of ACh is choline-acetyltrans-
ferase–expressing T cells, which compose 2% to 3% of CD4+ 
T cells in the spleen and are capable of ACh production. Data 
also indicate that the vagus nerve may regulate inflammation in 
tissues that it directly innervates.
Neuroendocrine Response to Injury
Traumatic injury results in complex neuroendocrine signaling 
from the brain that serves to enhance immune defense and rap-
idly mobilize substrates necessary to meet essential energy and 
structural needs. The two principle neuroendocrine pathways 
that orchestrate the host response are the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which results in the release of 
glucocorticoid hormones, and the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem, which results in release of the catecholamines, epineph-
rine, and norepinephrine. Virtually every hormone of the HPA 
axis influences the physiologic response to injury and stress 
(Table 2-3), but some with direct influence on the inflamma-
tory response or immediate clinical impact are highlighted here, 
including growth hormone (GH), macrophage inhibitory factor 
(MIF), aldosterone, and insulin.
The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis.  One of the main 
mechanisms by which the brain responds to injury-associated 
stress is through activation of the HPA axis. Following injury, 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) is secreted from the 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. This 
action is mediated in part by circulating cytokines produced as 
Figure 2-2.  Neural circuit relaying messages of localized injury to the brain (nucleus tractus solitarius). The brain follows with a hormone 
release (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH], glucocorticoids) into the systemic circulation and by sympathetic response. The vagal response 
rapidly induces acetylcholine release directed at the site of injury to curtail the inflammatory response elicited by the activated immunocytes. 
This vagal response occurs in real time and is site specific. EPI = epinephrine; IL-1 = interleukin-1; NOREPI = norepinephrine; TNF = 
tumor necrosis factor. (Adapted and re-created with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Tracey KJ. The inflammatory reflex. Nature. 
2002;420:853. kkjkjdht © 2002.)
TNF
IL-1
Central nervous system
ACTH
glucocorticoids
Sensory vagus
Sympathetic
Parasympathetic
(Motor vagus)
Acetylcholine
Injury
inflammation
Inflammatory
cascade
Injury site
EPI, NOREPI
20
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 2-3 
Hormones regulated by the hypothalamus, pituitary, 
and autonomic system
Hypothalamic Regulation
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone
Anterior Pituitary Regulation
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Cortisol
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Thyroxine
Triiodothyronine
Growth hormone
Gonadotrophins
Sex hormones
Insulin-like growth factor
Somatostatin
Prolactin
Endorphins
Posterior Pituitary Regulation
Vasopressin
Oxytocin
Autonomic System
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Aldosterone
Renin-Angiotensin System
Insulin
Glucagon
Enkephalins
a result of the innate immune response to injury. These include 
TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and the type I IFNs (IFN-α/β). Cytokines 
that are produced as a result of the adaptive immune response 
(IL-2 and IFN-γ) are also capable of increasing cortisol release. 
Direct neural input via afferent vagal fibers that interconnect 
with neurons projecting to the hypothalamus can also trigger 
CRH release. CRH acts on the anterior pituitary to stimulate 
the secretion of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) into the 
systemic circulation. Interestingly, the cytokines that act on the 
hypothalamus are also capable of stimulating ACTH release 
from the anterior pituitary so that marked elevations in ACTH 
and in cortisol can occur that are proportional in magnitude 
to the injury severity. Additionally, pain, anxiety, vasopres-
sin, angiotensin II, cholecystokinin, vasoactive intestinal pep-
tide, and catecholamines all contribute to ACTH release in the 
injured patient.
ACTH acts on the zona fasciculata of the adrenal glands 
to synthesize and secrete glucocorticoids (Fig. 2-3). Cortisol is 
the major glucocorticoid in humans and is essential for survival 
during significant physiologic stress. The resulting increase in 
cortisol levels following trauma have several important anti-
inflammatory actions.
Cortisol elicits its many actions through a cytosolic recep-
tor, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Because it is lipid soluble, 
cortisol can diffuse through the plasma membrane to interact 
with its receptor, which is sequestered in the cytoplasm in a com-
plex with heat shock proteins (Fig. 2-4). Upon ligand binding, 
the GR is activated and can employ a number of mechanisms 
to modulate proinflammatory gene transcription and signaling 
events, with a “net” anti-inflammatory effect.34 For example, the 
activated GR complex can interact with transcription factors to 
sequester them in the cytoplasm, promote their degradation, or 
inhibit them through other mechanisms. Affected target genes 
include proinflammatory cytokines, growth factors, adhesion 
molecules, and nitric oxide. In addition, glucocorticoids can 
negatively affect the access of the transcription factor, NF-κB, 
Figure 2-3.  Steroid synthesis from 
cholesterol. Adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH) is a principal regulator 
of steroid synthesis. The end products 
are mineralocorticoids, glucocorti-
coids, and sex steroids.
17-α-OH-progesterone
11-Deoxycortisol
Cortisol
Cholesterol
ACTH
Pregnenolone
17-α-OH-Pregnenolone
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estradiol
Sex steroids
Glucocorticoid
11-Deoxycorticosterone
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Mineralocorticoid
Progesterone
21
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
to the promoter regions of its target genes via a mechanism that 
involves histone deacetylase 2. In this way, glucocorticoids can 
inhibit a major mechanism by which TLR ligation induces proin-
flammatory gene expression.35 The GR complex can also bind to 
specific nucleotide sequences (termed glucocorticoid response 
elements) to promote the transcription of genes that have anti-
inflammatory functions. These include IL-10 and IL-1 receptor 
antagonist. Further, GR complex activation can indirectly influ-
ence TLR activity via an interaction with signaling pathways 
such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase and transforming 
growth factor–activated kinase-1 (TAK1) pathways. Finally, a 
recent report demonstrated that the GR complex can target both 
suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and type 1 IFNs to 
regulate TLR-induced STAT1 activation.36
Adrenal insufficiency represents a clinical syndrome high-
lighted largely by inadequate amounts of circulating cortisol 
and aldosterone. Classically, adrenal insufficiency is described 
in patients with atrophic adrenal glands caused by exogenous 
steroid administration who undergo a stressor such as surgery. 
These patients subsequently manifest signs and symptoms such 
as tachycardia, hypotension, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and 
fever. Critical illness may be associated with a relative adrenal 
insufficiency such that the adrenal gland cannot mount an effec-
tive cortisol response to match the degree of injury. More recently, 
investigators have determined that critical illness-associated 
cortisol insufficiency in trauma patients occurs more frequently 
than previously thought.37 It has a bimodal presentation in which 
the patient is at increased risk both early following the injury-
associated inflammatory response and in a delayed fashion, with 
sepsis being the initiating event. Laboratory findings in adre-
nal insufficiency include hypoglycemia from decreased gluco-
neogenesis, hyponatremia from impaired renal tubular sodium 
resorption, and hyperkalemia from diminished kaliuresis. Rig-
orous testing to establish the diagnosis includes monitoring 
of basal and ACTH-stimulated cortisol levels, both of which 
are lower than normal during adrenal insufficiency. Treatment 
strategies remain controversial; however, they include low-dose 
steroid supplementation.38
Macrophage Inhibitory Factor Modulates Cortisol Func-
tion.  Macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory 
cytokine expressed by a variety of cells and tissues, including 
the anterior pituitary, macrophages, and T lymphocytes. Sev-
eral important functions of MIF in innate and adaptive immune 
responses and in inflammation have been described, support-
ing the idea that MIF may function to counteract the anti-
inflammatory activity of glucocorticoids.39 For example, MIF 
has been reported to play a central role in the exacerbation of 
inflammation associated with acute lung injury, where it has 
been detected in the affected lungs and in alveolar macro-
phages. MIF has also been reported to upregulate the expres-
sion of TLR4 in macrophages.40 Finally, an early increase in 
plasma MIF has been detected in severely injured patients 
and was found to correlate with NF-κB translocation and 
respiratory burst in polymorphonuclear lymphocytes (PMNs) 
derived from severely injured patients. Further, nonsurvivors 
were shown to have higher serum MIF concentrations early 
after injury than survivors.41 These data suggest that targeting 
MIF after injury may be beneficial in preventing early PMN 
activation and subsequent organ failure in severely injured 
patients.
Growth Hormone, Insulin-Like Growth Factor, and Ghrelin.  
Growth hormone (GH) is a neurohormone expressed primar-
ily by the pituitary gland that has both metabolic and immuno-
modulatory effects. GH promotes protein synthesis and insulin 
resistance and enhances the mobilization of fat stores. GH secre-
tion is upregulated by hypothalamic GH-releasing hormone 
and downregulated by somatostatin. GH primarily exerts its 
downstream effects through direct interaction with GH recep-
tors and through the enhanced hepatic synthesis of insulin-like 
growth factor (IGF)-1, an anabolic growth factor that is known 
to improve the metabolic rate, gut mucosal function, and protein 
loss after traumatic injury. Less than 5% of IGF-1 circulates free 
in the plasma, with the remainder bound principally to one of 
six IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), the majority to IGFBP-3. In 
the liver, IGF stimulates protein synthesis and glycogenesis; in 
adipose tissue, it increases glucose uptake and lipid utilization; 
and in skeletal muscles, it mediates glucose uptake and pro-
tein synthesis. In addition to its effects on cellular metabolism, 
GH enhances phagocytic activity of immunocytes through 
increased lysosomal superoxide production. It also increases the 
Figure 2-4.  Simplified schematic of 
steroid transport into the nucleus. Ste-
roid molecules (S) diffuse readily across 
cytoplasmic membranes. Intracellu-
larly, the receptors (R) are rendered 
inactive by being coupled to heat shock 
protein (HSP). When S and R bind, HSP 
dissociates, and the S-R complex enters 
the nucleus, where the S-R complex 
induces DNA transcription, resulting in 
protein synthesis. mRNA = messenger 
RNA.
HSP
R
Protein synthesis
Cytoplasmic membrane
DNA
mRNA
S
R
S
S
S
S
S
S
HSP
R
S
Nucleus
22
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
proliferation of T-cell populations.42 The catabolic state that fol-
lows severe injury has been linked to the suppression of the GH-
IGF-IGFBP axis, as critical illness is associated with decreased 
circulating IGF levels. Not surprising, the administration of 
exogenous recombinant human GH (rhGH) has been studied in 
a prospective, randomized trial of critically ill patients where it 
was associated with increased mortality, prolonged ventilator 
dependence, and increased susceptibility to infection.43 More 
recently, circulating GH levels were examined on admission 
in 103 consecutive critically ill adult patients. In this study, 
circulating GH levels were about seven-fold increased in the 24 
nonsurvivors when compared with survivors, and GH level was 
an independent predictor of mortality, along with the APACHE 
II/SAPS II scores. In distinct contrast, the effect of rhGH admin-
istration in severely burned children, both acutely and following 
prolonged treatment, has been proven to be beneficial. Pediatric 
burn patients receiving rhGH demonstrated markedly improved 
growth and lean body mass, whereas hypermetabolism was sig-
nificantly attenuated.44 This finding was associated with signifi-
cant increases in serum GH, IGF-1, and IGFBP-3.
Ghrelin, a natural ligand for the GH-secretagogue receptor 
1a (GHS-R1a), is an appetite stimulant that is secreted by the 
stomach. GHS-R1a is expressed in a variety of tissues in differ-
ent concentrations including the immune cells, B and T cells, and 
neutrophils. Ghrelin seems to play a role in promoting GH secre-
tion and in glucose homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and immune 
function. In a rodent gut ischemia/reperfusion model, ghrelin 
administration inhibited proinflammatory cytokine release, 
reduced neutrophil infiltration, ameliorated intestinal barrier 
dysfunction, attenuated organ injury, and improved survival. It 
is interesting that this effect was dependent on an intact vagus 
nerve and that intracerebroventricular injection of ghrelin was 
also protective.45 These data suggest that the effect of ghrelin is 
mediated via the CNS, most likely through the “cholinergic anti-
inflammatory pathway.” More recently, high ghrelin levels were 
demonstrated in critically ill patients as compared to healthy 
controls, independent of the presence of inflammatory markers. 
Moreover, the high ghrelin levels were a positive predictor of 
intensive care unit survival in septic patients, matching previous 
results from animal models.
The Role of Catecholamines in Postinjury Inflammation.  
Injury-induced activation of the sympathetic nervous system 
results in secretion of ACh from the preganglionic sympathetic 
fibers innervating the adrenal medulla. The adrenal medulla is a 
special case of autonomic innervation and is considered a modi-
fied postganglionic neuron. Thus, ACh signaling to the resident 
chromaffin cells ensures that a surge of epinephrine (EPI) and 
norepinephrine (NE) release into the circulation takes place in a 
ratio that is tightly regulated by both central and peripheral mech-
anisms. Circulating levels of EPI and NE are three- to four-fold 
elevated, an effect that persists for an extended time. The release 
of EPI can be modulated by transcriptional regulation of phenyl-
ethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), which catalyzes the 
last step of the catecholamine biosynthesis pathway methylating 
NE to form EPI. PNMT transcription, a key step in the regulation 
of EPI production, is activated in response to stress and tissue 
hypoxia by hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1A).
Catecholamine release almost immediately prepares the 
body for the “fight or flight” response with well-described 
effects on the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems and on 
metabolism. These include increased heart rate, myocardial con-
tractility, conduction velocity, and blood pressure; the redirection 
of blood flow to skeletal muscle; increased cellular metabolism 
throughout the body; and mobilization of glucose from the liver 
via glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and ketogen-
esis. To compound the resulting hyperglycemia, insulin release 
is decreased mainly through the stimulation of α-adrenergic 
pancreatic receptors. Hyperglycemia, as will be discussed later, 
contributes to the proinflammatory response and to further mito-
chondrial dysfunction.
The goal of this well-orchestrated catecholamine response 
is to re-establish and maintain the systems’ homeostasis, includ-
ing the innate immune system. Circulating catecholamines can 
directly influence inflammatory cytokine production.46 Data 
indicate that basal EPI levels condition the activity and respon-
siveness of cytokine-secreting cells, which may explain large 
interindividual variability in innate cytokine profiles observed 
following injury. Epinephrine infusion at higher doses has been 
found to inhibit production of TNF-α in vivo and to enhance the 
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10.47 Addition-
ally, in vitro studies indicate that stress levels of glucocorticoids 
and EPI, acting in concert, can inhibit production of IL-12, a 
potent stimulator of Th1 responses. Further, they have been 
shown in vitro to decrease Th1 cytokine production and increase 
Th2 cytokine production to a significantly greater degree com-
pared to either adrenal hormone alone. Thus, catecholamines 
secreted from the adrenal gland, specifically EPI, play a role in 
both innate proinflammatory cytokine regulation and adaptive 
Th responses, and may act in concert with cortisol during the 
injury response to modulate cytokine activity.48
How are these effects explained? It is well established that 
a variety of human immune cells (e.g., mononuclear cells, mac-
rophages, granulocytes) express adrenergic receptors that are 
members of the family of G-protein–coupled receptors that act 
through the activation of intracellular second messengers such 
as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and calcium ion 
influx (discussed in more detail later). These second messengers 
can regulate a variety of immune cell functions, including the 
release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines.
The sympathetic nervous system also has direct immune-
modulatory properties via its innervation of lymphoid tissues 
that contain resting and activated immune cells. With stimu-
lation of these postganglionic nerves, NE is released where it 
can interact with β2-adrenergic receptors expressed by CD4+ T 
and B lymphocytes, many of which also express α2-adrenergic 
receptors. Additionally, endogenous catecholamine expres-
sion has been detected in these cells, as has the machinery 
for catecholamine synthesis. For example, human peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells contain inducible mRNA for the 
catecholamine-generating enzymes, tyrosine-hydroxylase and 
dopamine-β-hydroxylase, and data suggest that cells can regu-
late their own catecholamine synthesis in response to extracel-
lular cues. Exposure of peripheral blood mononuclear cells to 
NE triggers a distinct genetic profile that indicates a modulation 
of Th cell function. What the net effect of dopamine, NE, and 
EPI synthesis by circulating and resident immune cells may be 
relative to that secreted by the adrenal medulla is not clear and 
is an area that would certainly benefit from ongoing research 
efforts to identify novel therapeutic targets.
Aldosterone.  Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid released 
by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. It binds to the 
mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) of principal cells in the col-
lecting duct of the kidney where it can stimulate expression of 
genes involved in sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion 
23
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
to regulate extracellular volume and blood pressure. MRs have 
also been shown to have effects on cell metabolism and immu-
nity. For example, recent studies show aldosterone interferes 
with insulin signaling pathways and reduces expression of the 
insulin-sensitizing factors, adiponectin and peroxisome prolif-
erator activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ), which contribute to insu-
lin resistance. In the immune system, mononuclear cells, such 
as monocytes and lymphocytes, have been shown to possess 
an MR that binds aldosterone with high specificity, regulating 
sodium and potassium flux, as well as plasminogen activator 
inhibitor-1 and p22 phox expression, in these cells.49 Further, 
aldosterone inhibits cytokine-mediated NF-κB activation in 
neutrophils, which also possess a functional MR.
Insulin.  Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance are hallmarks 
of injury and critical illness due to the catabolic effects of cir-
culating mediators, including catecholamines, cortisol, gluca-
gon, and GH. The increase in these circulating proglycemic 
factors, particularly EPI, induces glycogenolysis, lipolysis, and 
increased lactate production independent of available oxygen 
in a process that is termed “aerobic glycolysis.” Although there 
is an increase in insulin production at the same time, severe 
stress is frequently associated with insulin resistance, leading 
to decreased glucose uptake in the liver and the periphery con-
tributing to acute hyperglycemia. Insulin is a hormone secreted 
by the pancreas, which mediates an overall host anabolic state 
through hepatic glycogenesis and glycolysis, peripheral glucose 
uptake, lipogenesis, and protein synthesis.50
The insulin receptor (IR) is widely expressed and con-
sists of two isoforms, which can form homo- or heterodimers 
with insulin binding. Dimerization leads to receptor autophos-
phorylation and activation of intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. 
Downstream signaling events are dependent on the recruitment 
of the adaptor proteins, insulin receptor substrate (IRS-1), and 
Shc to the IR. Systemic insulin resistance likely results from 
proinflammatory signals, which modulate the phosphorylation 
of IRS-1 to affect its function.
Hyperglycemia during critical illness is predictive of 
increased mortality in critically ill trauma patients.51 It can 
modulate the inflammatory response by altering leukocyte func-
tions, and the resulting decreases in phagocytosis, chemotaxis, 
adhesion, and respiratory burst activities are associated with an 
increased risk for infection. In addition, glucose administration 
results in a rapid increase in NF-κB activation and proinflamma-
tory cytokine production. Insulin therapy to manage hypergly-
cemia has grown in favor and has been shown to be associated 
with both decreased mortality and a reduction in infectious 
complications in select patient populations. However, the trend 
toward tight glycemic control in the intensive care unit failed 
to show benefit when examined in several reviews.52 Thus, the 
ideal blood glucose range within which to maintain critically ill 
patients and to avoid hypoglycemia has yet to be determined.
THE CELLULAR STRESS RESPONSES
Reactive Oxygen Species and the Oxidative 
Stress Response
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS, respec-
tively) are small molecules that are highly reactive due to the 
presence of unpaired outer orbit electrons. They can cause cel-
lular injury to both host cells and invading pathogens through 
the oxidation of cell membrane substrates. Oxygen radicals 
are produced as a by-product of oxygen metabolism in the mito-
chondria as well as by processes mediated by cyclooxygenases, 
NADPH oxidase (NOX), and xanthine oxidase. The main areas 
of ROS production include mitochondrial respiratory chain, 
peroxisomal fatty acid metabolism, cytochrome P450 reactions, 
and the respiratory burst of phagocytic cells. In addition, protein 
folding in the endoplasmic reticulum can also result in the for-
mation of ROS.53 Potent oxygen radicals include oxygen, super-
oxide, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals. RNS include 
NO and nitrite. The synthesis of ROS is regulated at several 
checkpoints and via several signaling mechanisms, including 
Ca2+ signaling, phosphorylation, and small G protein activation, 
which influence both the recruitment of the molecules required 
for NOX function and the synthesis of ROS in the mitochon-
dria. NOX activation is triggered by a number of inflammatory 
mediators (e.g., TNF, chemokines, lysophospholipids, comple-
ment, and leukotrienes). Host cells are protected from the dam-
aging effects of ROS through a number of mechanisms. The 
best described of these is via the upregulation and/or activation 
of endogenous antioxidant proteins. However, pyruvate kinase 
also provides negative feedback for ROS synthesis, as do mol-
ecules that react nonenzymatically with ROS. Under normal 
physiologic conditions, ROS production is balanced by these 
antioxidative strategies. In this context, ROS can act effectively 
as signaling molecules through their ability to modulate cyste-
ine residues by oxidation and thus influence the functionality of 
target proteins.54 This has recently been described as a mecha-
nism in the regulation of phosphatases. ROS can also contribute 
to transcription activity both indirectly, through its effects on 
transcription factor lifespan, and directly, through the oxidation 
of DNA. An important role for ROS has been well described 
in phagocytes, which use these small molecules for pathogen 
killing. Recent data, however, indicate that ROS may mediate 
inflammasome activation by diverse agonists.55 In addition, 
ROS appear to be involved in adaptive immunity. They have 
been described as a prime source of phosphatase activation in 
both B and T lymphocytes, which can regulate the function of 
key receptors and intracellular signaling molecules in these cells 
by affecting phosphorylation events.
The Heat Shock Response
Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a group of intracellular proteins 
that are increasingly expressed during times of stress, such as 
burn injury, inflammation, oxidative stress, and infection. HSPs 
are expressed in the cytoplasm, nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, 
and mitochondria, where they function as molecular chaperones 
that help monitor and maintain appropriate protein folding.56 
HSPs accomplish this task through the promotion of protein 
refolding, the targeting of misfolded proteins for degradation, 
and the assistance of partially folded proteins to appropriate 
membrane compartments. HSPs bind also bind foreign proteins 
and thereby function as intracellular chaperones for ligands such 
as bacterial DNA and endotoxin. HSPs are presumed to protect 
cells from the effects of traumatic stress and, when released by 
damaged cells, alert the immune system of the tissue damage. 
However, depending on their location and the type of immune 
cell in which they are expressed, HSPs may exert proinflamma-
tory immune activating signals or anti-inflammatory immune 
dampening signals (Table 2-4).57
The Unfolded Protein Response
Secreted, membrane-bound, and organelle-specific proteins fold 
in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where they also 
4
24
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
receive their posttranslational modifications. Millimolar cal-
cium concentrations are required to maintain the normal cel-
lular protein folding capacity. Cellular stress decreases calcium 
concentration in the ER, disrupting the machinery required for 
this process and leading to the accumulation of misfolded or 
unfolded proteins. These occurrences are sensed by a highly 
conserved array of signaling proteins in the ER, including ino-
sitol requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), protein kinase RNA (PKR)–
like ER kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 
(ATF6). Together, this complex generates the unfolded protein 
response (UPR), a mechanism by which ER distress signals 
are sent to the nucleus to modulate transcription in an attempt 
to restore homeostasis. Prolongation of the UPR, indicative of 
irreversible cellular damage, can result in cell death. Genes acti-
vated in the UPR result not only in the inhibition of translation, 
but also other potentially immunomodulatory events including 
induction of the acute-phase response, activation of NF-κB, and 
the generation of antibody-producing B cells.58
Burn injury leads to the marked reduction in ER calcium 
levels and activation of UPR sensing proteins. Moreover, recent 
data in a series of burn patients strongly link the UPR to insulin 
resistance and hyperglycemia in these patients.59 Thus, a better 
understanding of the UPR, which is triggered by severe inflam-
mation, may allow the identification of novel therapeutic targets 
for injury-associated insulin resistance.
Autophagy
Under normal circumstances, cells need to have a way of dis-
posing of damaged organelles and debris aggregates that are too 
large to be managed by proteasomal degradation. In order to 
accomplish this housekeeping task, cells use a process referred 
to as “macroautophagy” (autophagy), which is thought to have 
originated as a stress response.60 The steps of autophagy include 
the engulfment of cytoplasm/organelle by an “isolation mem-
brane,” which is also called a phagophore. The edges of the 
phagophore then fuse to form the autophagosome, a double-
membraned vesicle that sequesters the cytoplasmic material and 
that is a characteristic feature of autophagy. The autophagosome 
then fuses with a lysosome to form an autolysosome where the 
contents, together with the inner membrane, are degraded. This 
process is controlled by numerous autophagy-specific genes and 
by the specific kinase, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).
As noted earlier, autophagy is a normal cellular process 
that occurs in quiescent cells for cellular maintenance. How-
ever, under conditions of hypoxia and low cellular energy, 
autophagy is induced in an attempt to provide additional nutri-
ents for energy production. The induction of autophagy pro-
motes a shift from aerobic respiration to glycolysis and allows 
cellular components of the autophagosome to be hydrolyzed to 
energy substrates. Increased levels of autophagy are typical in 
activated immune cells and are a mechanism for the disposal of 
ROS and phagocytosed debris. 
Recent data support the idea that autophagy may also 
play an important role in the immune response.61 Autophagy 
is stimulated by Th1 cytokines and with activation of TLR in 
macrophages, but is inhibited by Th2 cytokines. It is also rec-
ognized as an important regulator of cytokine secretion, particu-
larly those cytokines of the IL-1 family that are dependent on 
inflammasome processing for activation. For example, autopha-
gosomes can sequester and degrade pro-IL-1β and inflamma-
some components. In animal models of sepsis, inhibition of 
autophagy results in increased proinflammatory cytokine levels 
that correlate with increased mortality.62 These data suggest that 
autophagy is a protective mechanism whereby the cell can regu-
late the levels of cytokine production.
Apoptosis
Apoptosis (regulated cell death) is an energy-dependent, orga-
nized mechanism for clearing senescent or dysfunctional cells, 
including macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes, without 
promoting an inflammatory response. This contrasts with cellular 
necrosis that results in disorganized intracellular molecule release 
with subsequent immune activation and inflammatory response. 
Systemic inflammation modulates apoptotic signaling in active 
immunocytes, which subsequently influences the inflammatory 
response through the loss of effector cells.
Apoptosis proceeds primarily through two pathways: 
the extrinsic pathway and the intrinsic pathway. The extrinsic 
TABLE 2-4 
The immunomodulatory functions of heat shock proteins (HSPs)
Cell Location
Recognized as DAMP?
Immunomodulatory Function
HSP90
Cytoplasm, endoplasmic 
  reticulum 
Can function both inside 
  and outside the cell
May act as DAMP  
  chaperone to activate  
  innate immune  
  response
Binds and optimizes RNA polymerase II action to regulate gene 
  transcription 
Stabilizes glucocorticoid receptor in the cytoplasm 
Important for processing and membrane expression of TLR 
Chaperones include IKK 
Facilitates antigen presentation to dendritic cells
HSP70
Can function both inside 
  and outside the cell 
Endoplasmic reticulum  
  homolog is BiP
Exogenous HSP70  
  elicits cellular  
  calcium flux, NF-κB  
  activation, cytokine  
  production
Can have anti-inflammatory actions when expression is  
  increased 
Inhibits TLR-mediated cytokine production via NF-κB 
Reduces dendritic cell capacity for T-cell stimulation 
BiP sequesters proteins important to the unfolded protein response
HSP60
Mitochondria
Exogenous HSP60  
  inhibits NF-κB  
  activation
Plays a role in intracellular protein trafficking 
Modulates cytokine synthesis
BiP = binding immunoglobulin protein; DAMP = damage-associated molecular pattern; IKK = IκB kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; TLR = toll-like 
receptor
25
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
pathway is activated through the binding of death receptors 
(e.g., Fas, TNFR), which leads to the recruitment of Fas-associ-
ated death domain protein and subsequent activation of caspase 
3 (Fig. 2-5). On activation, caspases are the effectors of apop-
totic signaling because they mediate the organized breakdown 
of nuclear DNA. The intrinsic pathway proceeds through protein 
mediators (e.g., Bcl-2, Bcl-2–associated death promoter, Bcl-2–
associated X protein, Bim) that influence mitochondrial mem-
brane permeability. Increased membrane permeability leads to 
the release of mitochondrial cytochrome C, which ultimately 
activates caspase 3 and thus induces apoptosis. These pathways 
do not function in a completely autonomous manner, because 
there is significant interaction and crosstalk between mediators 
of both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. Apoptosis is modulated 
by several regulatory factors, including inhibitor of apoptosis 
proteins and regulatory caspases (e.g., caspases 1, 8, 10).
Apoptosis during sepsis may influence the ultimate com-
petency of the acquired immune response. In a murine model 
of peritoneal sepsis, increased lymphocyte apoptosis was 
associated with mortality, which may be due to a resultant 
decrease in IFN-γ release. In postmortem analysis of patients 
who expired from overwhelming sepsis, there was an increase 
in lymphocyte apoptosis, whereas macrophage apoptosis did not 
appear to be affected. Clinical trials have observed an associa-
tion between the degree of lymphopenia and disease severity in 
sepsis. In addition, after the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by 
macrophages, anti-inflammatory mediators such as IL-10 are 
released that may exacerbate immune suppression during sep-
sis. Neutrophil apoptosis is inhibited by inflammatory products, 
including TNF, IL-1, IL-3, IL-6, granulocyte-macrophage col-
ony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and IFN-γ. This retardation 
in regulated cell death may prolong and exacerbate secondary 
injury through neutrophil free radical release as the clearance of 
senescent cells is delayed.63
Necroptosis
Cellular necrosis refers to the premature uncontrolled death of 
cells in living tissue typically caused by accidental exposure 
Figure 2-5.  Signaling pathway for tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR-1) (55 kDa) and TNFR-2 (75 kDa) occurs by the recruitment of 
several adapter proteins to the intracellular receptor complex. Optimal signaling activity requires receptor trimerization. TNFR-1 initially 
recruits TNFR-associated death domain (TRADD) and induces apoptosis through the actions of proteolytic enzymes known as caspases, a 
pathway shared by another receptor known as CD95 (Fas). CD95 and TNFR-1 possess similar intracellular sequences known as death domains 
(DDs), and both recruit the same adapter proteins known as Fas-associated death domains (FADDs) before activating caspase 8. TNFR-1 also 
induces apoptosis by activating caspase 2 through the recruitment of receptor-interacting protein (RIP). RIP also has a functional component 
that can initiate nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and c-Jun activation, both favoring cell survival and proinflammatory functions. TNFR-2 lacks a 
DD component but recruits adapter proteins known as TNFR-associated factors 1 and 2 (TRAF1, TRAF2) that interact with RIP to mediate 
NF-κB and c-Jun activation. TRAF2 also recruits additional proteins that are antiapoptotic, known as inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). 
DED = death effector domain; I-κB = inhibitor of κB; I-κB/NF-κB = inactive complex of NF-κB that becomes activated when the I-κB por-
tion is cleaved; JNK = c-Jun N-terminal kinase; MEKK1 = mitogen-activated protein/extracellular regulatory protein kinase kinase kinase-1; 
NIK = NF-κB–inducing kinase; RAIDD = RIP-associated interleukin-1b-converting enzyme and ced-homologue-1–like protein with death 
domain, which activates proapoptotic caspases. (Adapted with permission from Lin E, Calvano SE, Lowry SF. Tumor necrosis factor recep-
tors in systemic inflammation. In: Vincent J-L (series ed), Marshall JC, Cohen J, eds. Update in Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine: Vol. 31: 
Immune Response in Critical Illness. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2002:365. With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media.)
CD95
TNFR-1
(p55)
TNFR-2
(p75)
FADD
D
D
D
D D
D
D
E
D
D
D
D
E
D
D
D
D
E
D
D
E
D
FADD
Caspase 8
Caspase 2
Caspase
Cascade
Apoptosis
NIK
I-κB/NF-κB
NF-κB
MEKK1
JNK
c-Jun
RIP
RAIDD
TRAF2
IAP
T
R
A
D
D
D
D
D
D D
D
T
R
A
D
D
D
E
D
D
D
D
D
FADD
Recruited
TRAF1
TRAF2
IAP
26
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
to external factors, such as ischemia, inflammation, or trauma, 
which result in extreme cellular stress. Necrosis is character-
ized by the loss of plasma membrane integrity and cellular col-
lapse with extrusion of cytoplasmic contents, but the cell nuclei 
typically remain intact. Recent data have defined a process by 
which necrosis occurs through a series of well-described steps 
that are dependent on a signaling pathway that involves the 
receptor-interacting protein kinase (RIPK) complex. Termed 
“necroptosis,” it occurs in response to specific stimuli, such as 
TNF- and TLR-mediated signals.64 For example, ligation of the 
TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) under conditions in which caspase 8 
is inactivated (e.g., by pharmacologic agents) results in the over-
generation of ROS and a metabolic collapse. The net result is 
programmed necrosis (necroptosis). The effect of cell death by 
necroptosis on the immune response is not yet known. However, 
it is likely that the “DAMP” signature that occurs in response to 
necroptotic cell death is an important contributor to the systemic 
inflammatory response. Evidence to support this concept was pro-
vided by investigators who examined the role of necroptosis in 
murine models of sepsis. They demonstrated that Ripk3−/− mice 
were capable of recovering body temperature better, exhibited 
lower circulating DAMP levels, and survived at higher rates than 
their wild-type littermates.65 These data suggest that the cellular 
damage that occurs with programmed necrosis exacerbates the 
sepsis-associated systemic inflammatory response.
MEDIATORS OF INFLAMMATION 
Cytokines
Cytokines are a class of protein signaling compounds that are 
essential for both innate and adaptive immune responses. Cyto-
kines mediate a broad sequence of cellular responses, 
including cell migration, DNA replication, cell turnover, 
and immunocyte proliferation (Table 2-5). When functioning 
locally at the site of injury and infection, cytokines mediate 
the eradication of invading microorganisms and also promote 
wound healing. However, an exaggerated proinflammatory 
cytokine response to inflammatory stimuli may result in hemo-
dynamic instability (i.e., septic shock) and metabolic derange-
ments (i.e., muscle wasting). Anti-inflammatory cytokines also 
are released, at least in part, as an opposing influence to the 
proinflammatory cascade. These anti-inflammatory mediators 
may also result in immunocyte dysfunction and host immuno-
suppression. Cytokine signaling after an inflammatory stimulus 
can best be represented as a finely tuned balance of opposing 
influences and should not be oversimplified as a “black and 
white” proinflammatory/anti-inflammatory response. A brief 
discussion of the important cytokine molecules is included.
Tumor Necrosis Factor-α.  TNF-α is a cytokine that is rap-
idly mobilized in response to stressors such as injury and infec-
tion and is a potent mediator of the subsequent inflammatory 
response. TNF is primarily synthesized by immune cells, such 
as macrophages, dendritic cells, and T lymphocytes, but nonim-
mune cells have also been reported to secrete low amounts of 
the cytokine.
TNF is generated in a precursor form called transmem-
brane TNF that is expressed as a trimer on the surface of acti-
vated cells. After being processed by the metalloproteinase 
TNF-α–converting enzyme (TACE; also known as ADAM-17), 
a smaller, soluble form of TNF is released, which mediates 
its biologic activities through type 1 and 2 TNF receptors 
(TNFR1; TNFR2).66 Transmembrane TNF-α also binds to 
TNFR1 and TNFR2, but its biologic activities are likely medi-
ated through TNFR2. While the two receptors share homology 
in their ligand binding regions, there are distinct differences 
that regulate their biologic function. For example, TNFR1 is 
expressed by a wide variety of cells but is typically seques-
tered in the Golgi complex. Following appropriate cell signaling, 
TNFR1 is mobilized to the cell surface, where it sensitizes cells to 
TNF, or it can be cleaved from the surface in the form of a soluble 
receptor that can neutralize TNF.67 In contrast, TNFR2 expression 
is confined principally to immune cells where it resides in the 
plasma membrane. Both TNF receptors are capable of binding 
intracellular adaptor proteins that lead to activation of complex 
signaling processes and mediate the effects of TNF.
Although the circulating half-life of soluble TNF is brief, 
it acts upon almost every differentiated cell type, eliciting a wide 
range of important cellular responses. In particular, TNF elicits 
many metabolic and immunomodulatory activities. It stimulates 
muscle breakdown and cachexia through increased catabolism, 
insulin resistance, and redistribution of amino acids to hepatic 
circulation as fuel substrates. TNF also mediates coagulation 
activation, cell migration, and macrophage phagocytosis, and 
enhances the expression of adhesion molecules, prostaglandin 
E2, platelet-activating factor, glucocorticoids, and eicosanoids. 
Recent studies indicate that a significant early TNF response 
after trauma may be associated with improved survival in these 
patients.68
Interleukin-1.  IL-1α and IL-1β, which are encoded by two 
distinct IL-1 genes, were the first described members of the IL-1 
cytokine family. Currently, the family has expanded to 11 mem-
bers, with the three major forms being IL-1α, IL-1β, and IL-1 
receptor antagonist (IL-1Rα). IL-1α and IL-1β share similar 
biologic functions, but have limited sequence homology. They 
use the same cell surface receptor, termed IL-1 receptor type 1 
(IL-1R1), which is present on nearly all cells. Although IL-1Rα 
is synthesized and released in response to the same stimuli that 
lead to IL-1 production, it lacks the necessary domain to form 
a bioactive complex with the IL-1 receptor when bound. Thus, 
IL-1Rα serves as a competitive antagonist for the receptor. 
IL-1R activation initiates signaling events, which result in the 
synthesis and release of a variety of inflammatory mediators.
The IL-1α precursor is constitutively expressed and stored 
in a variety of healthy cells, including epithelium, endothelium, 
and platelets. Both the precursor and mature forms of IL-1α 
are active. With appropriate signals, IL-1α moves to the cell 
membrane where it can act on adjacent cells bearing the IL-1 
receptor. It can also be released directly from injured cells. In 
this way, IL-1α is believed to function as a DAMP, which pro-
motes the synthesis of inflammatory mediators, such as che-
mokines and eicosanoids. These mediators attract neutrophils 
to the injured site, facilitate their exit from the vasculature, and 
promote their activation. Once they have reached their target, 
neutrophil lifespan is extended by the presence of IL-1α.69
IL-1β, a multifunctional proinflammatory cytokine, is not 
detectable in healthy cells. Rather, its expression and synthesis 
occur in a more limited number of cells, such as monocytes, 
tissue macrophages, and dendritic cells, following their acti-
vation. IL-1β expression is tightly regulated at multiple levels 
(e.g., transcription, translation, and secretion), although the 
rate-limiting step is its transcription. IL-1β is synthesized and 
released in response to inflammatory stimuli, including cytokines 
5
27
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
Table 2-5
Cytokines and their sources
Cytokine
Source
Comment
TNF
Macrophages/monocytes
Kupffer cells
Neutrophils
NK cells
Astrocytes
Endothelial cells
T lymphocytes
Adrenal cortical cells
Adipocytes
Keratinocytes
Osteoblasts
Mast cells
Dendritic cells
Among earliest responders after injury; half-life <20 min; activates TNF receptors 1 
and 2; induces significant shock and catabolism
IL-1
Macrophages/monocytes
B and T lymphocytes
NK cells
Endothelial cells
Epithelial cells
Keratinocytes
Fibroblasts
Osteoblasts
Dendritic cells
Astrocytes
Adrenal cortical cells
Megakaryocytes
Platelets
Neutrophils
Neuronal cells
Two forms (IL-1 α and IL-1 β); similar physiologic effects as TNF; induces fevers 
through prostaglandin activity in anterior hypothalamus; promotes β-endorphin release 
from pituitary; half-life <6 min
IL-2
T lymphocytes
Promotes lymphocyte proliferation, immunoglobulin production, gut barrier 
integrity; half-life <10 min; attenuated production after major blood loss leads to 
immunocompromise; regulates lymphocyte apoptosis
IL-3
T lymphocytes
Macrophages
Eosinophils
Mast cells
IL-4
T lymphocytes
Mast cells
Basophils
Macrophages
B lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Stromal cells
Induces B-lymphocyte production of IgG4 and IgE, mediators of allergic and 
anthelmintic response; downregulates TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8
IL-5
T lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Mast cells
Basophils
Promotes eosinophil proliferation and airway inflammation
IL-6
Macrophages
B lymphocytes
Neutrophils
Basophils
Mast cells
Fibroblasts
Endothelial cells
Astrocytes
Elicited by virtually all immunogenic cells; long half-life; circulating levels 
proportional to injury severity; prolongs activated neutrophil survival
(Continued)
28
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 2-5
Cytokines and their sources
Cytokine
Source
Comment
Synovial cells
Adipocytes
Osteoblasts
Megakaryocytes
Chromaffin cells
Keratinocytes
IL-8
Macrophages/monocytes
T lymphocytes
Basophils
Mast cells
Epithelial cells
Platelets
Chemoattractant for neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes
IL-10
T lymphocytes
B lymphocytes
Macrophages
Basophils
Mast cells
Keratinocytes
Prominent anti-inflammatory cytokine; reduces mortality in animal sepsis and ARDS 
models
IL-12
Macrophages/monocytes
Neutrophils
Keratinocytes
Dendritic cells
B lymphocytes
Promotes Th1 differentiation; synergistic activity with IL-2
IL-13
T lymphocytes
Promotes B-lymphocyte function; structurally similar to IL-4; inhibits nitric oxide and 
endothelial activation
IL-15
Macrophages/monocytes
Epithelial cells
Anti-inflammatory effect; promotes lymphocyte activation; promotes neutrophil 
phagocytosis in fungal infections
IL-18
Macrophages
Kupffer cells
Keratinocytes
Adrenal cortical cells
Osteoblasts
Similar to IL-12 in function; levels elevated in sepsis, particularly gram-positive 
infections; high levels found in cardiac deaths
IFN-γ
T lymphocytes
NK cells
Macrophages
Mediates IL-12 and IL-18 function; half-life of days; found in wounds 5–7 d after 
injury; promotes ARDS
GM-CSF
T lymphocytes
Fibroblasts
Endothelial cells
Stromal cells
Promotes wound healing and inflammation through activation of leukocytes
IL-21
T lymphocytes
Preferentially secreted by Th2 cells; structurally similar to IL-2 and IL-15; activates 
NK cells, B and T lymphocytes; influences adaptive immunity
HMGB1
Monocytes/lymphocytes
High mobility group box chromosomal protein; DNA transcription factor; late 
(downstream) mediator of inflammation (ARDS, gut barrier disruption); induces 
“sickness behavior”
ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; GM-CSF = granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFN = interferon; Ig = immunoglobulin; IL = 
interleukin; NK = natural killer; Th1 = helper T cell subtype 1; Th2 = helper T cell subtype 2; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
(TNF, IL-18) and foreign pathogens. IL-1α or IL-1β itself can 
also induce IL-1β transcription. In contrast to IL-1α, IL-1β is 
synthesized as an inactive precursor molecule. The formation 
of mature IL-1β requires the assembly of the inflammasome 
complex by the cell and the activation of caspase 1, which is 
required for the processing of stored pro-IL-1β. Mature IL-1β 
is then released from the cell via an unconventional secretory 
pathway. IL-1β has a spectrum of proinflammatory effects that 
are largely similar to those induced by TNF, and injection of 
IL-1β alone is sufficient to induce inflammation. High doses of 
either IL-1β or TNF are associated with profound hemodynamic 
compromise. Interestingly, low doses of both IL-1β and TNF 
(continued)
29
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
combined elicit hemodynamic events similar to those elicited 
by high doses of either mediator, which suggests a synergistic 
effect.
There are two primary receptor types for IL-1: IL-1R1 
and IL-1R2. IL-1R1 is widely expressed and mediates inflam-
matory signaling on ligand binding. IL-1R2 is proteolytically 
cleaved from the membrane surface to soluble form on acti-
vation and thus serves as another mechanism for competition 
and regulation of IL-1 activity. IL-1α or IL-1β binds first to 
IL-1R1. This is followed by recruitment of a transmembrane 
coreceptor, termed the IL-1R accessory protein (IL-1RAcP). 
A complex is formed of IL-1R1 plus IL-1 plus the coreceptor. 
The signal is initiated with recruitment of the adaptor protein 
MyD88 to the toll–IL-1 receptor (TIR) domains of the recep-
tor complex and signal transduction then occurs via intermedi-
ates, which are homologous to the signal cascade initiated by 
TLRs. These events culminate in the activation of NF-κB and 
its nuclear translocation.70
Interleukin-2.  IL-2 is a multifunctional cytokine produced 
primarily by CD4+ T cells after antigen activation, which plays 
a pivotal role in the immune response. Other cellular sources 
for IL-2 include CD8+ and NK T cells, mast cells, and activated 
dendritic cells. Discovered as a T-cell growth factor, IL-2 also 
promotes CD8+ T-cell and NK cell cytolytic activity and mod-
ulates T-cell differentiation programs in response to antigen. 
Thus, IL-2 promotes naïve CD4+ T-cell differentiation into 
T helper 1 (Th1) and T helper 2 (Th2) cells while inhibiting 
T helper 17 (Th17) and T follicular helper (Tfh) cell differentia-
tion. Moreover, IL-2 is essential for the development and main-
tenance of T regulatory (Treg) cells and for activation-induced 
cell death, thereby mediating tolerance and limiting inappro-
priate immune reactions. The upregulation of IL-2 requires 
calcium as well as protein kinase C signaling, which leads to 
the activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor of 
activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-κB. MicroRNAs also play a 
role in the regulation of IL-2 expression.71
IL-2 binds to IL-2 receptors (IL-2R), which are expressed 
on leukocytes. IL-2Rs are formed from various combinations 
of three receptor subunits: IL-2Rα, IL-2Rβ, and IL-2Rγ; these 
form low-, medium-, and high-affinity forms of the recep-
tor depending on the subunit combination. IL-2Rγ has been 
renamed the common cytokine receptor γ chain (γc), which 
is now known to be shared by IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, 
and IL-21. Constitutive IL-2 receptor expression is low and is 
inducible by T-cell receptor ligation and cytokine stimulation. 
Importantly, the transcription of each receptor subunit is indi-
vidually regulated via a complex process to effect tight control 
of surface expression. Once the receptor is ligated, the major 
IL-2 signaling pathways that are engaged include Janus kinase 
(JAK) signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), 
Shc-Ras-MAPK, and phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT. 
Partly due to its short half-life of <10 minutes, IL-2 is not read-
ily detectable after acute injury. IL-2 receptor blockade induces 
immunosuppressive effects and can be pharmacologically used 
for organ transplantation. Attenuated IL-2 expression observed 
during major injury or blood transfusion may contribute to the 
relatively immunosuppressed state of the surgical patient.72
Interleukin-6.  Following burn or traumatic injury, DAMPs 
from damaged or dying cells stimulate TLRs to produce IL-6, 
a pleiotropic cytokine that plays a central role in host defense. 
IL-6 levels in the circulation are detectable by 60 minutes, peak 
between 4 and 6 hours, and can persist for as long as 10 days. 
Further, plasma levels of IL-6 are proportional to the degree of 
injury. In the liver, IL-6 strongly induces a broad spectrum of 
acute-phase proteins such as CRP and fibrinogen, among others, 
whereas it reduces expression of albumin, cytochrome P450, 
and transferrin. In lymphocytes, IL-6 induces B-cell matura-
tion into immunoglobulin-producing cells and regulates Th17/
Treg balance. IL-6 modulates T-cell behavior by inducing the 
development of Th17 cells and inhibiting Treg cell differen-
tiation in conjunction with transforming growth factor-β. IL-6 
also promotes angiogenesis and increased vascular permeabil-
ity, which are associated with local inflammatory responses. To 
date, 10 IL-6 family cytokines have been identified, including 
IL-6, oncostatin M, neuropoietin, IL-11, IL-27, and IL-31, all of 
which use trans signaling.73
The IL-6 receptor (IL-6R, gp80) is expressed on hepato-
cytes, monocytes, B cells, and neutrophils in humans. However, 
many other cells respond to IL-6 through a process known as 
trans signaling.74 In this case, soluble IL-6Rs (sIL-6R) exist in 
the serum and bind to IL-6, forming an IL-6/sIL-6R complex. 
The soluble receptor is produced by proteolytic cleavage from 
the surface of neutrophils in a process that is stimulated by CRP, 
complement factors, and leukotrienes. The IL-6/sIL-6R com-
plex can then bind to the gp130 receptor, which is expressed 
ubiquitously on cells. Upon IL-6 stimulation, gp130 transduces 
two major signaling pathways: the JAK-STAT3 pathway and 
the SHP2-Gab-Ras-Erk-MAPK pathway, which is regulated by 
cytoplasmic suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS3). These 
signaling events can lead to increased expression of adhesion 
molecules as well as proinflammatory chemokines and cyto-
kines. High plasma IL-6 levels have been associated with mor-
tality during intra-abdominal sepsis.75
Interleukin-10.  We have talked almost exclusively about the 
factors that initiate the inflammatory response following cellular 
stress or injury. The re-establishment of immune homeostasis 
following these events requires the resolution of inflammation 
and the initiation of tissue repair processes. IL-10 plays a central 
role in this anti-inflammatory response by regulating the dura-
tion and magnitude of inflammation in the host.
The IL-10 family currently has six members including 
IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26. IL-10 is produced 
by a variety of immune cells of both myeloid and lymphoid 
origin. Its synthesis is upregulated during times of stress and 
systemic inflammation; however, each cell type that produces 
IL-10 does so in response to different stimuli, allowing for tight 
control of its expression. IL-10 exerts effects by binding to the 
IL-10 receptor (IL-10R), which is a tetramer formed from two 
distinct subunits, IL-10R1 and IL-10R2. Specifically, IL-10 
binds first to the IL-10R1 subunit, which then recruits IL-10R2, 
allowing the receptor complex to form. Whereas IL-10R2 is 
widely expressed, IL-10R1 expression is confined to leuko-
cytes so that this differential expression of the receptor con-
fines the effects of IL-10 to the immune system. Once receptor 
ligation occurs, signaling proceeds by the activation of JAK1 
and STAT3. In particular, STAT3 in conjunction with IL-10 is 
absolutely required for the transcription of genes responsible 
for the anti-inflammatory response. IL-10 inhibits the secretion 
of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF and IL-1, partly 
through the downregulation of NF-κB, and thereby functions 
as a negative feedback regulator of the inflammatory cascade.76 
In macrophages, IL-10 suppresses the transcription of 20% of all 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced genes. Further, experimental 
30
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
models of inflammation have shown that neutralization of IL-10 
increases TNF production and mortality, whereas restitution of 
circulating IL-10 reduces TNF levels and subsequent deleteri-
ous effects. Increased plasma levels of IL-10 also have been 
associated with mortality and disease severity after traumatic 
injury. IL-10 may significantly contribute to the underlying 
immunosuppressed state during sepsis through the inhibition 
and subsequent anergy of immunocytes. For example, IL-10 
produced by Th2 cells directly suppresses Th1 cells and can 
feedback to suppress Th2 cell activity.77
Interleukin-12.  IL-12 is unique among the cytokines in being 
the only heterodimeric cytokine. This family, which includes 
IL-12, IL-23, IL-27, and IL-35, consists of an α-chain that is 
structurally similar to the IL-6 cytokine and a β-chain that is 
similar to the class I receptor for cytokines. The individual 
IL-12 family members are formed from various combinations of 
the α and β subunits. Despite the sharing of individual subunits 
and the similarities of their receptors, the IL-12 cytokines have 
different biologic functions. IL-12 and IL-23 are considered 
proinflammatory, stimulatory cytokines with key roles in the 
development of Th1 and Th17 subsets of helper T cells. In con-
trast, both IL-27 and IL-35 appear to have immunoregulatory 
functions that are associated with cytokine inhibition in specific 
Treg cell populations, particularly the Th17 cells.78 The effects 
of these cytokines require specific receptor chains that are also 
shared among the cytokines. The complexity of signaling is evi-
denced by the fact that these receptor chains can function both 
as dimers and as monomers. Ligation of the IL-12 receptors 
initiates signaling events mediated by the JAK-STAT pathway. 
IL-12 synthesis and release are increased during endotoxemia 
and sepsis.79 IL-12 stimulates lymphocytes to increase secretion 
of IFN-γ with the costimulus of IL-18 and also stimulates NK 
cell cytotoxicity and helper T-cell differentiation in this setting. 
IL-12 release is inhibited by IL-10. IL-12 deficiency inhibits 
phagocytosis in neutrophils. In experimental models of inflam-
matory stress, IL-12 neutralization conferred a mortality benefit 
in mice during endotoxemia. However, in a cecal ligation and 
puncture model of intraperitoneal sepsis, IL-12 blockade was 
associated with increased mortality. Furthermore, later stud-
ies of intraperitoneal sepsis observed no difference in mortal-
ity with IL-12 administration; however, IL-12 knockout mice 
exhibited increased bacterial counts and inflammatory cytokine 
release, which suggests that IL-12 may contribute to an antibac-
terial response. IL-12 administration in chimpanzees is capable 
of stimulating the release of proinflammatory mediators such as 
IFN-γ and also anti-inflammatory mediators, including IL-10, 
soluble TNFR, and IL-1 receptor antagonists. In addition, IL-12 
enhances coagulation as well as fibrinolysis.
Interleukin-18.  IL-18 is a member of the IL-1 superfamily of 
cytokines. First noted as an IFN-γ–inducing factor produced by 
LPS-stimulated macrophages, IL-18 expression is found both in 
immune cells and nonimmune cells at low to intermediate lev-
els. However, activated macrophages and Kupffer cells produce 
large amounts of mature IL-18. Similar to IL-1β, IL-18 is syn-
thesized and stored as an inactive precursor form (pro-IL-18), 
and activation requires processing by caspase 1 in response to 
the appropriate signaling. It then exits the cell through a nontra-
ditional secretory pathway. The IL-18 receptor (IL-18R) is com-
posed of two subunits, IL-18Rα and IL-18Rβ, and is a member 
of the IL-1R superfamily, which is structurally similar in its 
cytoplasmic domains to the TLR.
One unique biologic property of IL-18 is the potential, in 
conjunction with IL-12, to promote the Th1 response to bac-
terial infection. At the same time, exogenous IL-18 can also 
enhance the Th2 response and Ig-mediated humoral immunity, 
as well as augment neutrophil function. Recent studies suggest 
that IL-18 therapy may hold promise as effective therapy in pro-
moting immune recovery after severe surgical stress.80
Interferons.  Interferons were first recognized as soluble 
mediators that inhibited viral replication through the activa-
tion of specific antiviral genes in infected cells. Interferons are 
categorized into three types based on receptor specificity and 
sequence homology. The two major types, type I and type II, 
are discussed here.
Type I interferons, of which there are 20, include IFN-α, 
IFN-β, and IFN-ω, which are structurally related and bind to a 
common receptor, IFN-α receptor. They are likely produced by 
most cell types and tissues in response to appropriate pathogens 
or DAMP signaling. Type I interferons are expressed in response 
to many stimuli, including viral antigens, double-stranded 
DNA, bacteria, tumor cells, and LPS. Type I interferons influ-
ence adaptive immune responses by inducing the maturation 
of dendritic cells and by stimulating class I major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) expression. IFN-α and IFN-β also 
enhance immune responses by increasing the cytotoxicity of NK 
cells both in culture and in vivo. Further, they have been impli-
cated in the enhancement of chemokine synthesis, particularly 
those that recruit myeloid cells and lymphoid cells. Thus, IFN/
STAT signaling has important effects on the mobilization, tis-
sue recruitment, and activation of immune cells that compose 
the inflammatory infiltrate. In contrast, IFN-I appears to inhibit 
inflammasome activity, possibly via IL-10.81
Many of the physiologic effects observed with increased 
levels of IL-12 and IL-18 are mediated through IFN-γ. IFN-γ is 
a type II interferon that is secreted by various T cells, NK cells, 
and antigen-presenting cells in response to bacterial antigens, 
IL-2, IL-12, and IL-18. IFN-γ stimulates the release of IL-12 
and IL-18. Negative regulators of IFN-γ include IL-4, IL-10, 
and glucocorticoids. IFN-γ binding with a cognate receptor 
activates the JAK-STAT pathway, leading to subsequent induc-
tion of biologic responses. Macrophages stimulated by IFN-γ 
demonstrate enhanced phagocytosis and microbial killing and 
increased release of oxygen radicals, partly through an NADP-
dependent phagocyte oxidase. IFN-γ mediates macrophage 
stimulation and thus may contribute to acute lung injury after 
major surgery or trauma. Diminished IFN-γ level, as seen in 
knockout mice, is associated with increased susceptibility to 
both viral and bacterial pathogens. In addition, IFN-γ promotes 
differentiation of T cells to the helper T-cell subtype 1 and also 
enhances B-cell isotype switching to immunoglobulin G.82
Receptors of all IFN subtypes belong to the class II of 
cytokine receptors and use the JAK-STAT signaling pathway 
for nuclear signaling, although different STAT activation (e.g., 
STAT1 and STAT2) is favored by individual receptors.
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/
Interleukin-3/Interleukin-5.  GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 
compose a small family of cytokines that regulate the growth 
and activation of immune cells. They are largely the products of 
activated T cells, which when released stimulate the behavior 
of myeloid cells by inducing cytokine expression and antigen 
presentation. In this way, GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 are able to 
link the innate and acquired immune responses. With the exception 
31
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
of eosinophils, GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 are not essential for 
constitutive hematopoietic cell function. Rather, they play an 
important role when the host is stressed, by serving to increase 
the numbers of activated and sensitized cells required to bol-
ster host defense.83 Currently, GM-CSF is in clinical trials for 
administration to children with an Injury Severity Score >10 
following blunt or penetrating trauma. The goal of the study is 
to provide evidence of the effectiveness of GM-CSF as an agent 
that can ameliorate posttraumatic immune suppression.
Receptors for the GM-CSF/IL-3/IL-5 family of cytokines 
are expressed at very low levels on hematopoietic cells. Simi-
lar to the other cytokine receptors discussed, they are heterodi-
mers composed of a cytokine-specific α subunit and a common 
β subunit (βc), which is shared by all three receptors and is 
required for high-affinity signal transduction. The binding of 
cytokine to its receptor activates JAK2-STAT–, MAPK-, and 
PI3K-mediated signaling events to regulate a variety of impor-
tant cell behaviors including effector function in mature cells.
Eicosanoids
Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fat Metabolites: Arachidonic 
Acid.  Eicosanoids are derived primarily by oxidation of the 
membrane phospholipid, arachidonic acid [all-cis-5,8,11,14-
eicosatetraenoic acid; 20:4(ω-6) eicosatetraenoic acid], which 
is relatively abundant in the membrane lipids of inflammatory 
cells. They are composed of three families, which include pros-
taglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes. Arachidonic acid 
is not stored free in the cell but in an esterified form in phos-
pholipids and neutral lipids. When a cell senses the proper 
stimulus, arachidonic acid is released from phospholipids or 
diacylglycerols by the enzymatic activation of phospholipase 
A2 (Fig. 2-6A). Prostanoids, which include all of the prosta-
glandins and the thromboxanes, result from the sequential action 
of the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme and terminal synthetases 
on arachidonic acid. In contrast, arachidonic acid may be oxidized 
along the lipoxygenase pathway via the central enzyme 
5-lipoxygenase, to produce several classes of leukotrienes and 
lipoxins. In general, the effects of eicosanoids are mediated 
via specific receptors, which are members of a superfamily of 
G-protein–coupled receptors.
Eicosanoids are not stored within cells but are instead gen-
erated rapidly in response to many stimuli, including hypoxic 
injury, direct tissue injury, endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide), NE, 
vasopressin, angiotensin II, bradykinin, serotonin, ACh, cyto-
kines, and histamine. Eicosanoid pathway activation also leads 
to the formation of the anti-inflammatory compound lipoxin, 
which inhibits chemotaxis and NF-κB activation. Glucocor-
ticoids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and leukotriene 
Figure 2-6.  Schematic diagram of (A) arachidonic acid and (B) eicosapentaenoic acid metabolism. LT = leukotriene; PG = prostaglandin; 
TXA2 = thromboxane A2; HPEPE = hydroperoxyeicosapentaenoic acid.
Free eicosapentaenoic acid
Cyclooxygenase
Lipoxygenase
3-series
prostaglandins
5-series
leukotrienes
PGG3
LTA5
LTC5 LTB5
Anti-inflammatory and
inflammation resolving
PGH3
5-HPEPE
E-series
resolvins
B
Phospholipid
Phospholipase A2
Corticosteroids
Cyclooxygenase
Lipoxygenase
Prostaglandins
PGD2
PGE2
PGF2α
PGI2
Thromboxane
TXA2
Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
(HETE)
Leukotrienes
LTA4
LTB4
LTC4
LTD4
LTE4
Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid
(HPETE)
Cyclic endoperoxides
(PGG2,PGH2)
Arachidonic acid
A
32
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
inhibitors block the end products of eicosanoid pathways. 
Eicosanoids have a broad range of physiologic roles, includ-
ing neurotransmission and vasomotor regulation. They are also 
involved in immune cell regulation (Table 2-6) by modulating 
the intensity and duration of inflammatory responses. The pro-
duction of eicosanoids is cell- and stimulus-specific. Therefore, 
the signaling events that are initiated will depend on the con-
centrations and types of eicosanoids generated, as well as the 
unique complement of receptors expressed by their target cells. 
For example, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) suppresses the effec-
tor function of macrophages (i.e., phagocytosis and intracel-
lular pathogen killing) via a mechanism that is dependent on 
increased cAMP levels. PGE2 also modulates chemokine 
production and enhances local accumulation of regulatory T cells 
and myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Prostacyclin (PGI2) has an 
inhibitory effect on Th1- and Th2-mediated immune responses, 
while enhancing Th17 differentiation and cytokine production. 
Leukotrienes are potent mediators of capillary leakage as well 
as leukocyte adherence, neutrophil activation, bronchoconstric-
tion, and vasoconstriction. Leukotriene B4 is synthesized from 
arachidonic acid in response to acute Ca2+ signaling induced 
by inflammatory mediators.84 High-affinity leukotriene recep-
tors (BLT1) are expressed primarily in leukocytes, including 
granulocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, and differentiated 
T cells, whereas the low-affinity receptor is expressed in many 
cell types. Activation of BLT1 results in inhibition of adenyl-
ate cyclase and reduced production of cAMP. Not surprisingly, 
a role for leukotriene B4 signaling in abrogating the effects of 
prostaglandins on macrophage effector function has recently 
been shown.85
Recent evidence supports a role for lipid droplets (LDs) 
as an important intracellular source of arachidonic acid. LDs are 
neutral lipid storage organelles ubiquitous to eukaryotic cells 
that are a rich source of esterified arachidonic acid especially in 
leukocytes. Accumulation of LDs in response to TLR signaling 
has been reported with an associated increase in the generation 
of eicosanoid metabolites.86
While experimental models of sepsis have shown a ben-
efit to inhibiting eicosanoid production, human sepsis trials 
have failed to show a mortality benefit.87 Eicosanoids also have 
several recognized metabolic effects. COX pathway products 
inhibit pancreatic β-cell release of insulin, whereas lipoxygen-
ase pathway products stimulate β-cell activity. Prostaglandins 
such as PGE2 can inhibit gluconeogenesis through the binding 
of hepatic receptors and also can inhibit hormone-stimulated 
lipolysis.88
Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fat Metabolites: All-cis-
5,8,11,14,17-Eicosapentaenoic Acid [20:5(ω-3) Eicosa-
pentaenoic Acid].  As noted earlier, polyunsaturated fatty acid 
(PUFA) metabolites of endogenous arachidonic acid function 
as inflammatory mediators and have significant roles in the 
inflammatory response. The major direct dietary source of ara-
chidonic acid is from meat. However, a much larger quantity 
of ω-6 PUFAs is ingested as linoleic acid, which is found in 
many vegetable oils, including corn, sunflower, and soybean 
oils, and in products made from such oils, such as margarines. 
Linolenic acid is not synthesized in mammals; however, it can 
be converted to arachidonic acid through lengthening of the 
carbon chain and the addition of double bonds. The second 
major family of PUFAs is the ω-3 fatty acid. They can also 
be derived from shorter chain ω-3 fatty acids of plant origin 
such as α-linolenic acid, which can be converted after ingestion 
to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and to docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA). ω-3 fatty acids are found in cold water fish, especially 
tuna, salmon, mackerel, herring, and sardine, which can pro-
vide between 1.5 and 3.5 g of these long-chain ω-3 PUFAs per 
serving. EPA and DHA are also substrates for the COX and 
lipoxygenase (LOX) enzymes that produce eicosanoids, but the 
mediators produced have a different structure from the arachi-
donic acid–derived mediators, and this influences their potency 
(Fig. 2-6B). In addition, ω-3 fatty acids are reported to have spe-
cific anti-inflammatory effects, including inhibition of NF-κB 
activity, TNF release from hepatic Kupffer cells, and leukocyte 
adhesion and migration. These are achieved via two purported 
mechanisms: (a) by decreasing the production of arachidonic 
TABLE 2-6 
Systemic stimulatory and inhibitory actions of 
eicosanoids
Organ/Function
Stimulator
Inhibitor
Pancreas
  Glucose-stimulated 
  insulin secretion
  Glucagon secretion
12-HPETE
PGD2, PGE2
PGE2
Liver
  Glucagon-stimulated  
  glucose production
PGE2
Fat
  Hormone-stimulated  
  lipolysis
PGE2
Bone
  Resorption
PGE2, PGE-m, 6-K-
PGE1, PGF1α, PGI2
Pituitary
  Prolactin
  Luteinizing hormone
  Thyroid-stimulating  
  hormone
  Growth hormone
PGE1
PGE1, PGE2, 5-HETE
PGA1, PGB1, PGE1, 
PGE1
PGE1
Parathyroid
  Parathyroid hormone PGE2
PGF2
Lung
  Bronchoconstriction
PGF2α TXA2, LTC4, 
LTD4, LTE4
PGE2
Kidney
  Stimulation of renin  
  secretion
PGE2, PGI2
Gastrointestinal system
  Cytoprotective effect PGE2
Immune response
  Suppression of 
lymphocyte activity
PGE2
Hematologic system
  Platelet aggregation
TXA2
PGI2
5-HETE = 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid; 12-HPETE = 12-hydroxyper-
oxyeicosatetraenoic acid; 6-K-PGE1 = 6-keto-prostaglandin E1; LT = 
leukotriene; PG = prostaglandin; PGE-m = 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2 
(major urine metabolite of PGE2); TXA2 = thromboxane A2.
33
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
acid (ω-6)–derived proinflammatory mediators (by competi-
tion for the same enzymes) and (b) by generation of proresolv-
ing bioactive lipid mediators. In fact, key derivatives of ω-3 
PUFAs, termed resolvins, have been identified and synthesized. 
Resolvins are now categorized as either E-series (from EPA) or 
D-series (from DHA). In a variety of model systems, resolvins 
have been shown to attenuate the inflammatory phenotypes of a 
number of immune cells.89
The ratio of dietary ω-6 to ω-3 PUFAs is reflected in 
the membrane composition of various cells, including cells of 
the immune system, which has potential implications for the 
inflammatory response. For example, a diet that is rich in ω-6 
PUFAs will result in cells whose membranes are “ω-6 PUFA 
rich.” When ω-6 PUFAs are the main plasma membrane lipid 
available for phospholipase activity, more proinflammatory 
PUFAs (i.e., two-series prostaglandins) are generated. Many 
lipid preparations are soy-based and thus primarily composed of 
ω-6 fatty acids. These are thought to be “inflammation enhanc-
ing.” Nutritional supplementation with ω-3 fatty acid has the 
potential to dampen inflammation by shifting the cell membrane 
composition in favor of ω-3 PUFAs.
In experimental models of sepsis, ω-3 fatty acids inhibit 
inflammation, ameliorate weight loss, increase small-bowel 
perfusion, and may increase gut barrier protection. In human 
studies, ω-3 supplementation is associated with decreased 
production of TNF, IL-1β, and IL-6 by endotoxin-stimulated 
monocytes. In a study of surgical patients, preoperative supple-
mentation with ω-3 fatty acid was associated with reduced need 
for mechanical ventilation, decreased hospital length of stay, 
and decreased mortality with a good safety profile.90
Plasma Contact System
Complement.  Following traumatic injury, there is almost 
immediate activation of the complement system, which is a 
major effector mechanism of the innate immune system. The 
complement system was thought to act initially as the required 
“first line of defense” for the host against pathogens, by bind-
ing and clearing them from the circulation. Recent data indicate 
that complement also participates in the elimination of immune 
complexes as well as damaged and dead cells. In addition, com-
plement is recognized as contributing to mobilization of hema-
topoietic stem/progenitor cells and lipid metabolism.91 Although 
complement activation is typically depicted as a linear process in 
which parallel pathways are activated, it actually functions more 
like a central node that is tightly networked with other systems. 
Then, depending on the activating signal, several initiation and 
regulatory events act in concert to heighten immune surveillance.
Complement activation proceeds via three different path-
ways. Initiation of these pathways occurs by the binding and 
activation of the recognition unit of each pathway to its desig-
nated ligand. The classical pathway, which is often referred to 
as “antibody dependent,” is initiated by direct binding of C1q to 
its common ligands, which include immunoglobulin (Ig) M/IgG 
aggregates. Alternately C1q can activate complement signaling 
by binding to soluble pattern recognition molecules such as 
pentraxins (e.g., CRP). In a series of subsequent activation and 
amplification steps, the pathway ultimately leads to the assem-
bly of the C3 convertase, which cleaves C3 into C3a and C3b. 
As C3b then complexes with C3 convertase, the C5 convertase 
is activated, cleaving C5 into C5a and C5b. C3a and C5a are 
potent anaphylatoxins. C3b acts as an opsonin, whereas C5b 
initiates the formation of the membrane attack complex. When C5b 
associates with C6 and C7, the complex becomes inserted into 
cell membrane and interacts with C8, inducing the binding of 
several units of C9 to form a lytic pore.
The lectin pathway of complement activation is initiated 
by mannose-binding lectins or ficolins, which act as the soluble 
PRM by binding specific carbohydrate structures that are often 
present on pathogens. The alternative pathway also includes a 
PRM-based initiation mechanism that resembles those found 
in the lectin pathway but involves properdin. The latter rec-
ognizes several PAMPs and DAMPs on foreign and apoptotic 
cells. Once bound, it initiates and propagates the complement 
response by attracting fluid-phase C3b to recognized surfaces 
and by stabilizing C3 convertase complexes. Despite its name, 
the alternative pathway may account for up to 80% to 90% of 
total complement activation.92
The major source of the circulating complement compo-
nents is the liver. Complement proteins can also be produced 
locally where they have been implicated in the regulation of 
adaptive immune processes. Complement protein synthesis has 
been demonstrated in immune cells, including T cells, which 
when surface bound, interact with C3 and C4 receptors. Also, 
complement synergistically enhances TLR-induced production 
of proinflammatory cytokines through convergence of their sig-
naling pathways.
Kallikrein-Kinin System.  The kallikrein-kinin system is a 
group of proteins that contribute to inflammation, blood pres-
sure control, coagulation, and pain responses. Prekallikrein is 
synthesized in the liver and circulates in the plasma bound to 
high molecular weight kininogen (HK). A variety of stimuli 
lead to the binding of prekallikrein-HK complex to Hageman 
factor, (factor XII) followed by its activation, to produce the 
serine protease kallikrein, which plays a role in the coagula-
tion cascade. HK, produced by the liver, is cleaved by kalli-
krein to form bradykinin (BK). The kinins (e.g., BK) mediate 
several physiologic processes, including vasodilation, increased 
capillary permeability, tissue edema, pain pathway activation, 
inhibition of gluconeogenesis, and increased bronchoconstric-
tion. They also increase renal vasodilation and consequently 
reduce renal perfusion pressure. Kinin receptors are members 
of the rhodopsin family of G-protein–coupled receptors and are 
located on vascular endothelium and smooth muscle cells. Kinin 
receptors are rapidly upregulated following TLR4 signaling and 
in response to cytokines and appear to have important effects 
on both immune cell behavior and on immune mediators.93 For 
example, B1 activation results in increased neutrophil chemo-
taxis, while increased B2 receptor expression causes activation 
of arachidonic-prostaglandin pathways. Bradykinin and kal-
likrein levels are increased during gram-negative bacteremia, 
hypotension, hemorrhage, endotoxemia, and tissue injury. The 
degree of elevation in the levels of these mediators has been 
associated with the magnitude of injury and mortality. Clinical 
trials using bradykinin antagonists have shown some benefit in 
patients with gram-negative sepsis.94
Serotonin
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter (5-hydroxytryptamine 
[5-HT]) derived from tryptophan. Serotonin is synthesized by 
neurons in the CNS as well as by intestinal enterochromaffin 
cells, which are the major source of plasma 5-HT. Once in the 
plasma, 5-HT is taken up rapidly into platelets via the serotonin 
transporter (SERT) where it is either stored in the dense granules 
in millimolar concentrations or targeted for degradation. It is 
34
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
interesting that the surface expression of SERT on platelets is 
sensitive to plasma 5-HT levels, which in turn modulates plate-
let 5-HT content. Receptors for serotonin are widely distributed 
in the periphery and are found in the gastrointestinal tract, car-
diovascular system, and some immune cells.95 Serotonin is a 
potent vasoconstrictor and also modulates cardiac inotropy and 
chronotropy through nonadrenergic cAMP pathways. Serotonin 
is released at sites of injury, primarily by platelets. Recent work 
has demonstrated an important role for platelet 5-HT in the local 
inflammatory response to injury. Using mice that lack the non-
neuronal isoform of tryptophan hydroxylase (Tph1), the rate-
limiting step for 5-HT synthesis in the periphery, investigators 
demonstrated fewer neutrophils rolling on mesenteric venules.96 
Tph1–/– mice, in response to an inflammatory stimulus, also 
showed decreased neutrophil extravasation. Finally, survival 
of lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxic shock was reduced in 
Tph1–/– mice. Together, these data indicate an important role for 
nonneuronal 5-HT in neutrophil recruitment to sites inflamma-
tion and injury.
Histamine
Histamine is a short-acting endogenous amine that is widely 
distributed throughout the body. It is synthesized by histidine 
decarboxylase (HDC), which decarboxylates the amino acid his-
tidine. Histamine is either rapidly released or stored in neurons, 
skin, gastric mucosa, mast cells, basophils, and platelets, and 
plasma levels are increased with hemorrhagic shock, trauma, 
thermal injury, and sepsis.97 Not surprisingly, circulating cyto-
kines can increase immune cell expression of HDC to further 
contribute to histamine synthesis. There are four histamine 
receptor (HR) subtypes with varying physiologic roles, but they 
are all members of the rhodopsin family of G-protein–coupled 
receptors. H1R binding mediates vasodilation, bronchocon-
striction, intestinal motility, and myocardial contractility. H1R 
knockout mice demonstrate significant immunologic defects, 
including impaired B- and T-cell responses. H2R binding is 
best described for its stimulation of gastric parietal cell acid 
secretion. However, H2R can also modulate a range of immune 
system activities, such as mast cell degranulation, antibody 
synthesis, Th1 cytokine production, and T-cell proliferation. 
H3R was initially classified as a presynaptic autoreceptor in the 
peripheral nervous system and CNS. However, data using H3R 
knockout mice demonstrate that it also participates in inflamma-
tion in the CNS. H3R knockout mice display increased severity 
of neuroinflammatory diseases, which correlates with dysregu-
lation of blood-brain barrier permeability and increased expres-
sion of macrophage inflammatory protein 2, IFN-inducible 
protein 10, and CXCR3 by peripheral T cells. H4R is expressed 
primarily in bone marrow but has also been detected in leuko-
cytes, including neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells, dendritic 
cells, T cells, and basophils. H4R is emerging as an important 
modulator of chemoattraction and cytokine production in these 
cells. Thus, it is clear that cells of both the innate and adap-
tive immune response can be regulated by histamine, which is 
upregulated following injury.98
CELLULAR RESPONSE TO INJURY
Cytokine Receptor Families and  
Their Signaling Pathways
Cytokines act on their target cells by binding to specific mem-
brane receptors. These receptor families have been organized 
by structural motifs and include: type I cytokine receptors, 
type II cytokine receptors, chemokine receptors, TNF receptors 
(TNFRs), and transforming growth factor receptors (TGFRs). In 
addition, there are cytokine receptors that belong to the immu-
noglobulin receptor superfamilies. Several of these receptors 
have characteristic signaling pathways that are associated with 
them. These will be reviewed in the following sections.
JAK-STAT Signaling
A major subgroup of cytokines, comprising roughly 60 factors, 
bind to receptors termed type I/II cytokine receptors. Cytokines 
that bind these receptors include type I IFNs, IFN-γ, many ILs 
(e.g., IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and IL-13), and hematopoietic growth 
factors. These cytokines play essential roles in the initiation, 
maintenance, and modulation of innate and adaptive immunity 
for host defense. All type I/II cytokine receptors selectively asso-
ciate with the Janus kinases (JAKs), which represent a family of 
tyrosine kinases that mediate the signal transduction for these 
receptors. JAKs are constitutively bound to the cytokine recep-
tors, and on ligand binding and receptor dimerization, activated 
JAKs phosphorylate the receptor to recruit signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (STAT) molecules (Fig. 2-7). 
Activated STAT proteins further dimerize and translocate into 
JAK
JAK
P
P
JAK
JAK
P
STAT
STAT
P
P
P
STAT
P
STAT
STAT
STAT
SOCS
P
STAT
Nuclear translocation
Nucleus
Receptor
dimerization
Figure 2-7.  The Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway also requires dimer-
ization of monomeric units. STAT molecules possess “docking” 
sites that allow for STAT dimerization. The STAT complexes 
translocate into the nucleus and serve as gene transcription factors. 
JAK/STAT activation occurs in response to cytokines (e.g., inter-
leukin-6) and cell stressors, and has been found to induce cell pro-
liferation and inflammatory function. Intracellular molecules that 
inhibit STAT function, known as suppressors of cytokine signaling 
(SOCSs), have been identified. P = phosphate.
35
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
the nucleus where they modulate the transcription of target 
genes. Rather than being a strictly linear pathway, it is likely 
that individual cytokines activate more than one STAT. The 
molecular implications for this in terms of cytokine signaling 
are still being unraveled. Interestingly, STAT-DNA binding can 
be observed within minutes of cytokine binding. STATs have 
also been shown to modulate gene transcription via epigenetic 
mechanisms. Thus, JAKs and STATs are central players in the 
regulation of key immune cell function, by providing a signal-
ing platform for proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 via JAK1 and 
STAT3) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10 via STAT3) 
and integrating signals required for helper and regulatory T-cell 
development and differentiation. The JAK/STAT pathway is 
inhibited by the action of phosphatase, the export of STATs 
from the nucleus, and the interaction of antagonistic proteins.99
Suppressors of Cytokine Signaling
Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) molecules are a fam-
ily of proteins that function as a negative feedback loop for 
type I and II cytokine receptors by terminating JAK-STAT sig-
naling. There are currently eight family members; SOCS1-3 are 
typically associated with cytokine receptor signaling, whereas 
SOCS4-8 are associated with growth factor receptor signaling. 
PRRs, including both TLR and C-type lectin receptors, have also 
been shown to activate SOCS. Interestingly, induction of SOCS 
proteins is also achieved through activators of JAK-STAT sig-
naling, creating an inhibitory feedback loop through which cyto-
kines can effectively self-regulate by extinguishing their own 
signal. SOCS molecules can positively and negatively influence 
the activation of macrophages and dendritic cells and are crucial 
for T-cell development and differentiation. All SOCS proteins 
are able to regulate receptor signaling through the recruitment 
of proteasomal degradation components to their target proteins, 
whether the target is a specific receptor or an associated adap-
tor molecule. Once associated with the SOCS complex, target 
proteins are readily ubiquinated and targeted to the proteasome 
for degradation. SOCS1 and SOCS3 can also exert an inhibi-
tory effect on JAK-STAT signaling via their N-terminal kinase 
inhibitory region (KIR) domain, which acts as a pseudosubstrate 
for JAK. The KIR domain binds with high affinity to the JAK 
kinase domain to inhibit its activity. SOCS3 has been shown 
to be a positive regulator of TLR4 responses in macrophages 
via inhibition of IL-6 receptor–mediated STAT3 activation.100 A 
deficiency of SOCS activity may render a cell hypersensitive to 
certain stimuli, such as inflammatory cytokines and GHs. Inter-
estingly, in a murine model, SOCS knockout resulted in a lethal 
phenotype in part because of unregulated interferon signaling.
Chemokine Receptors Are Members of the 
G-Protein–Coupled Receptor Family
All chemokine receptors are members of the G-protein–coupled 
seven-transmembrane family of receptors (GPCR), which is one 
of the largest and most diverse of the membrane protein fami-
lies. GPCRs function by detecting a wide spectrum of extracel-
lular signals, including photons, ions, small organic molecules, 
and entire proteins. After ligand binding, GPCRs undergo con-
formational changes, causing the recruitment of heterotrimeric 
G proteins to the cytoplasmic surface (Fig. 2-8). Heterotrimeric 
G proteins are composed of three subunits, Gα, Gβ, and Gγ, 
each of which has numerous members, adding to the complex-
ity of the signaling. When signaling however, G proteins per-
form functionally as dimers because the signal is communicated 
either by the Gα subunit or the Gβγ complex. The GPCR fam-
ily includes the receptors for catecholamines, bradykinins, and 
leukotrienes, in addition to a variety of other ligands impor-
tant to the inflammatory response.101 In general, GPCRs can 
Figure 2-8.  G-protein–coupled receptors are transmembrane proteins. The G-protein receptors respond to ligands such as adrenaline and sero-
tonin. On ligand binding to the receptor (R), the G protein (G) undergoes a conformational change through guanosine triphosphate–guanosine 
diphosphate conversion and in turn activates the effector (E) component. The E component subsequently activates second messengers. The 
role of inositol triphosphate (IP3) is to induce release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). cAMP = cyclic adenosine triphosphate.
G
R
E
Ligand
Protein kinase C
activation
CA2+ release
R
G
E
Second messengers
(cAMP, IP3)
Ligand
ER
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
G-protein receptors
(vasoactive polypeptides, mitogens, phospholipids, 
neurotransmitters, prostaglandins)
36
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
be classified according to their pharmacologic properties into 
four main families: class A rhodopsin-like, class B secretin-
like, class C metabotropic glutamate/pheromone, and class D 
frizzled receptors. As noted earlier, GPCR activation by ligand 
binding results in an extracellular domain shift, which is then 
transmitted to cytoplasmic portion of the receptor to facilitate 
coupling to its principle effector molecules, the heterotrimeric G 
proteins. Although there are more than 20 known Gα subunits, 
they have been divided into four families based on sequence 
similarity, which has served to define both receptor and effec-
tor coupling. These include Gαs and Gαi, which signal through 
the activation (Gαs) or inhibition (Gαi) of adenylate cyclase to 
increase or decrease cAMP levels, respectively. Increased intra-
cellular cAMP can activate gene transcription through the activ-
ity of intracellular signal transducers such as protein kinase A. 
The Ga subunits also include the Gq pathway, which stimu-
lates phospholipase C-β to produce the intracellular messengers 
inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol. Inositol triphosphate 
triggers the release of calcium from intracellular stores, whereas 
diacylglycerol recruits protein kinase C to the plasma membrane 
for activation. Finally, Gα12/13 appears to act through Rho- and 
Ras-mediated signaling.
Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily
The signaling pathway for TNFR1 (55 kDa) and TNFR2 (75 
kDa) occurs by the recruitment of several adapter proteins to 
the intracellular receptor complex. Optimal signaling activity 
requires receptor trimerization. TNFR1 initially recruits TNFR-
associated death domain (TRADD) and induces apoptosis 
through the actions of proteolytic enzymes known as caspases, 
a pathway shared by another receptor known as CD95 (Fas). 
CD95 and TNFR1 possess similar intracellular sequences known 
as death domains (DDs), and both recruit the same adapter pro-
teins known as Fas-associated death domains (FADDs) before 
activating caspase 8. TNFR1 also induces apoptosis by activat-
ing caspase 2 through the recruitment of receptor-interacting 
protein (RIP). RIP also has a functional component that can 
initiate NF-κB and c-Jun activation, both favoring cell survival 
and proinflammatory functions. TNFR2 lacks a DD component 
but recruits adapter proteins known as TNFR-associated fac-
tors 1 and 2 (TRAF1, TRAF2) that interact with RIP to medi-
ate NF-κB and c-Jun activation. TRAF2 also recruits additional 
proteins that are antiapoptotic, known as inhibitor of apoptosis 
proteins (IAPs).
Transforming Growth Factor-β  
Family of Receptors
Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) is a pleiotropic cyto-
kine expressed by immune cells that has potent immunoregula-
tory activities. Specifically, recent data indicate that TGF-β is 
essential for T-cell homeostasis, as mice deficient in TGF-β1 
develop a multiorgan autoimmune inflammatory disease and 
die a few weeks after birth, an effect that is dependent on the 
presence of mature T cells. The receptors for TGF-β ligands 
are the TGF-β superfamily of receptors, which are type I trans-
membrane proteins that contain intrinsic serine/threonine kinase 
activity. These receptors comprise two subfamilies, the type I 
and the type II receptors, which are distinguished by the pres-
ence of a glycine/serine-rich membrane domain found in the 
type I receptors. Each TGF-β ligand binds a characteristic 
combination of type I and type II receptors, both of which are 
required for signaling. Whether the type I or the type II receptor 
binds first is ligand-dependent, and the second type I or type 
II receptor is then recruited to form a heteromeric signaling 
complex. When TGF-β binds to the TGF-β receptor, heterodi-
merization activates the receptor, which then directly recruits 
and activates a receptor-associated Smad (Smad2 or Smad3) 
through phosphorylation. An additional “common” Smad is 
then recruited. The activated Smad complex translocates into 
the nucleus and, with other nuclear cofactors, regulates the tran-
scription of target genes. TGF-β can also induce the rapid acti-
vation of the Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 
signaling pathway in addition to other MAPK pathways (JNK, 
p38MAPK). How does TGF-β inhibit immune responses? One 
of the most important effects is the suppression of IL-2 pro-
duction by T cells. It also inhibits T-cell proliferation.102 More 
recently, it was noted that TGF-β can regulate the maturation of 
differentiated dendritic cells and dendritic cell–mediated T-cell 
responses. Importantly, TGF-β can induce “alternative activa-
tion” macrophages, designated M2 macrophages, which express 
a wide array of anti-inflammatory molecules, including IL-10 
and arginase-1.
TRANSCRIPTIONAL AND TRANSLATIONAL 
REGULATION OF THE INJURY RESPONSE 
Transcriptional Events Following Blunt Trauma
Recent data have examined the transcriptional response in cir-
culating leukocytes in a large series of patients who suffered 
severe blunt trauma. This work identified an overwhelming 
shift in the leukocyte transcriptome, with more than 80% of 
the cellular functions and pathways demonstrating some altera-
tion in gene expression. In particular, changes in gene expres-
sion for pathways involved in the systemic inflammatory, 
innate immune, compensatory anti-inflammatory, and adaptive 
immune responses were simultaneous and marked. Moreover, 
they occurred rapidly (within 4 to 12 hours) and were prolonged 
for days and weeks. When different injuries (i.e., blunt trauma, 
burn injury, human model of endotoxemia) were compared, 
the patterns of gene expression were surprisingly similar, sug-
gesting that the stress response to both injury and inflammation 
is highly conserved and may follow a universal pathway that 
includes common denominators. Finally, delayed clinical recov-
ery and organ injury were not associated with a distinct pattern 
of transcriptional response elements.2 These data describe a new 
paradigm based on the observation of a rapid and coordinated 
transcriptional response to severe traumatic injury that involves 
both the innate and adaptive immune systems. Further, the data 
support the idea that individuals who are destined to die from 
their injuries are characterized primarily by the degree and dura-
tion of their dysregulated inflammatory response rather than a 
“unique signature” indicative of a “second hit.”
Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression
Many genes are regulated at the point of DNA transcription and 
thus influence whether messenger RNA (mRNA) and its subse-
quent product are expressed (Fig. 2-9). Gene expression relies 
on the coordinated action of transcription factors and coactiva-
tors (i.e., regulatory proteins), which are complexes that bind 
to highly specific DNA sequences upstream of the target gene 
known as the promoter region. Enhancer sequences of DNA 
mediate gene expression, whereas repressor sequences are non-
coding regions that bind proteins to inhibit gene expression. 
5
37
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
appendicitis, for example, increased NF-κB activity was associ-
ated with initial disease severity, and levels returned to baseline 
within 18 hours after appendectomy in concert with resolution 
of the inflammatory response.30
Epigenetic Regulation of Transcription
The DNA access of protein machineries involved in transcription 
processes is tightly regulated by histones, which are a family of 
basic proteins that associate with DNA in the nucleus. Histone 
proteins help to condense the DNA into tightly packed nucleo-
somes that limit transcription. Emerging evidence indicates 
that transcriptional activation of many proinflammatory genes 
requires nucleosome remodeling that is modulated by the post-
translational modification of histone proteins through the recruit-
ment of histone-modifying enzymes.103 There are at least seven 
identified chromatin modifications including acetylation, meth-
ylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitinylation, sumoylation, ADP 
ribosylation, deimination, and proline isomerization. Recently, 
the development of chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) cou-
pled to massively parallel DNA sequencing technology (ChIP-
Seq) has enabled the mapping of histone modifications in living 
cells in response to TLR signaling. In this way, it has allowed 
the identification of the large number of posttranslational histone 
modifications that are “written” and “erased” by histone-modify-
ing enzymes. The role of histone modifications in the regulation 
of gene expression is referred to as “epigenetic” control.
Addition of an acetyl group to lysine residues on histones 
is an epigenetic mark associated with gene activation. These 
acetyl groups are reversibly maintained by histone acetyltrans-
ferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases. Ultimately, histone 
acetylation is monitored by bromodomain-containing proteins 
such as the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) fam-
ily of proteins, which can regulate a number of important epige-
netically controlled processes.
Upon TLR4 activation, HATs are recruited to proinflam-
matory gene promoters where acetylation of specific histone 
Figure 2-9.  Gene expression and protein synthesis can occur 
within a 24-hour period. The process can be regulated at various 
stages: transcription, messenger RNA (mRNA) processing, or pro-
tein packaging. At each stage, it is possible to inactivate the mRNA 
or protein, rendering these molecules nonfunctional.
Transcription
DNA
mRNA
mRNA
Protein
Inactive
mRNA
Inactive
protein
Cytoplasm
Cell membrane
Nucleus
Figure 2-10.  Inhibitor of κB (I-κB) binding to the p50-p65 subunits of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) inactivates the molecule. Ligand binding 
to the receptor activates a series of downstream signaling molecules, of which I-κB kinase is one. The phosphorylated NF-κB complex further 
undergoes ubiquitinization and proteosome degradation of I-κB, activating NF-κB, which translocates into the nucleus. Rapid resynthesis of 
I-κB is one method of inactivating the p50-p65 complex. IL-1 = interleukin-1; P = phosphate; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
Ligand
(e.g.: TNF, IL-1)
P
I-κB kinase
Degradation 
of I-κB
Ubiquitinization
I-κB
p65
p50
I-κB
p65
p50
I-κB
p65
p50 P
p65
p50
Nuclear  
    translocation
Nucleus
NF-κB activation
For example, NF-κB is one of the best-described transcription 
factors, which has a central role in regulating the gene prod-
ucts expressed after inflammatory stimuli (Fig. 2-10). NF-κB 
is composed of two smaller polypeptides, p50 and p65. NF-κB 
resides in the cytosol in the resting state primarily through the 
inhibitory binding of inhibitor of κB (I-κB). In response to 
an inflammatory stimulus such as TNF, IL-1, or endotoxin, a 
sequence of intracellular mediator phosphorylation reactions 
leads to the degradation of I-κB and subsequent release of 
NF-κB. On release, NF-κB travels to the nucleus and promotes 
gene expression. NF-κB also stimulates the gene expression for 
I-κB, which results in negative feedback regulation. In clinical 
38
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
residues serves as an organizing node for a complex of pro-
teins that ultimately phosphorylate the large subunit of RNA 
polymerase II, promoting the elongation of inflammatory gene 
transcripts.104 Recently, investigators used a novel pharmaco-
logic approach that targeted inflammatory gene expression by 
interfering with the recognition of acetylated histones by BET 
proteins. A synthetic compound (I-BET) that “mimicked” acety-
lated histones functioned as a BET antagonist.105 In this way, 
pretreatment decreased overall histone acetylation to reduce 
the expression of select inflammatory genes in LPS-activated 
macrophages. Additionally, I-BET conferred protection against 
bacteria-induced sepsis. Recent studies have also demonstrated 
a role for histone methyltransferases in proinflammatory gene 
programs.
Translation Regulation of Inflammatory  
Gene Expression
Once mRNA transcripts are generated, they can also be regu-
lated by a variety of mechanisms, including (a) splicing, which 
can cleave mRNA and remove noncoding regions; (b) capping, 
which modifies the 5′ ends of the mRNA sequence to inhibit 
breakdown by exonucleases; and (c) the addition of a polyad-
enylated tail, which adds a noncoding sequence to the mRNA, 
to regulate the half-life of the transcript. Recent data have 
identified microRNAs (miRNAs) as important translational 
regulators of gene expression via their binding to partially 
complementary sequences in the 3′-untranslated region (3′-
UTR) of target mRNA transcripts.106 Binding of miRNA to the 
mRNA usually results in gene silencing. MicroRNAs are endog-
enous, single-stranded RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides 
in length that are highly conserved in eukaryotes. miRNAs are 
encoded either singly or can be transcribed in “polycistronic” 
clusters and produced by an elaborate expression and process-
ing mechanism. After a primary miRNA transcript is generated 
by RNA polymerase II or III, it is processed in the nucleus to 
produce a short hairpin precursor miRNA transcript. The pre-
cursor is then transported into the cytoplasm where the final 
mature miRNA is generated by a protein termed Dicer. The 
mature double-stranded miRNA is then incorporated into the 
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) in the cytoplasm. 
Once programmed with a small RNA, RISC can silence tar-
geted genes by one of several distinct mechanisms, working at 
(a) the level of protein synthesis through translation inhibition, 
(b) the transcript level through mRNA degradation, or (c) the 
level of the genome itself through the formation of heterochro-
matin or by DNA elimination. Recent data indicate that miRNAs 
are involved in TLR signaling in the innate immune system by 
targeting multiple molecules in the TLR signaling pathways.107 
For example, evidence has shown that miR-146a can inhibit the 
expression of IRAK1 and TRAF6, impair NF-κB activity, and 
suppress the expression of NF-κB target genes such as IL-6, 
IL-8, IL-1β, and TNF-α.
CELL-MEDIATED INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
Platelets
Platelets are small (2 μm), circulating fragments of a larger cell 
precursor, the megakaryocyte, that is located chiefly within the 
bone marrow. Although platelets lack a nucleus, they contain 
both mRNA and a large number of cytoplasmic and surface pro-
teins that equip them for diverse functionality. While their role 
in hemostasis is well described, more recent work suggests that 
platelets play a role in both local and systemic inflammatory 
responses, particularly following ischemia reperfusion. Platelets 
express functional scavenger and TLRs that are important detec-
tors of both pathogens and “damage”-associated molecules.108 At 
the site of tissue injury, complex interactions between platelets, 
endothelial cells, and circulating leukocytes facilitate cellular 
activation by the numerous local alarmins and immune media-
tors. For example, platelet-specific TLR4 activation can cause 
thrombocytes to bind to and activate neutrophils to extrude their 
DNA to form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), an action 
that facilitates the capacity of the innate immune system to trap 
bacteria, but also leads to local endothelial cell damage.109
Once activated, platelets adopt an initial proinflammatory 
phenotype by expressing and releasing a variety of adhesion 
molecules, cytokines, and other immune modulators, including 
HMGB1, IL-1β, and CD40 ligand (CD40L; CD154). However, 
activated platelets also express large amounts of the immuno-
suppressive factor TGF-β, which has been implicated in Treg 
cell homeostasis. Recently, in a large animal model of hemor-
rhage, TGF-β levels were shown to be significantly increased 
2 hours after injury, suggesting a possible mechanism for injury-
related immune dysfunction.110 And although soluble CD154 
was not increased following hemorrhage and traumatic brain 
injury in that study, in a murine model of mesenteric ischemia-
reperfusion injury platelet expression of CD40 and CD154 was 
linked to remote organ damage.
Lymphocytes and T-Cell Immunity
The expression of genes associated with the adaptive immune 
response is rapidly altered following severe blunt trauma.2 In 
fact, significant injury is associated with adaptive immune sup-
pression that is characterized by altered cell-mediated immu-
nity, specifically the balance between the major populations 
of Th cells. In fact, Th lymphocytes are functionally divided 
into subsets, which principally include Th1 and Th2 cells, as 
well as Th17 and inducible Treg cells. Derived from precursor 
CD4+ Th cells, each of these groups produces specific effector 
cytokines that are under unique transcriptional control. CD4 
T cells play central roles in the function of the immune system 
through their effects on B-cell antibody production and their 
enhancement of specific Treg cell functions and macrophage 
activation. The specific functions of these cells include the rec-
ognition and killing of intracellular pathogens (cellular immu-
nity; Th1 cells), regulation of antibody production (humoral 
immunity; Th2 cells), and maintenance of mucosal immunity 
and barrier integrity (Th17 cells). These activities have been 
characterized as proinflammatory (Th1) and anti-inflammatory 
(Th2), respectively, as determined by their distinct cytokine 
signatures (Fig. 2-11). Activation of Th1 cytokine-producing 
cells following injury has been linked to signaling events trig-
gered by endogenous ligands, often composed of intracellular 
proteins (e.g., mitochondrial and nuclear-binding proteins) or 
ECM fragments released with cellular damage. As discussed 
earlier, these DAMPs are recognized by members of the TLR 
superfamily, including TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9, and can acti-
vate innate immune pathways.
A healthy immune response depends on a balanced Th1/
Th2 response. Following injury, however, there is a reduction 
in Th1 cell differentiation and cytokine production in favor of 
an increased population of Th2 lymphocytes and their signaling 
products. As a consequence, both macrophage activation and 
proinflammatory cytokine synthesis are inhibited. This imbalance, 
39
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
which may be associated with decreased IL-12 production by 
activated monocytes/macrophages, has been associated with 
increased risk of infectious complications following surgery and 
trauma. What are the systemic mechanisms responsible for this 
shift? Several events have been implicated, including the direct 
effect of glucocorticoids on monocyte IL-12 production and 
T-cell IL-12 receptor expression. In addition, sympathoadrenal 
catecholamine production has also been demonstrated to reduce 
IL-12 production and proinflammatory cytokine synthesis.111 
Finally, more recent work has implicated circulating immature 
myeloid cells, termed myeloid-derived suppressor cells, that 
have immune suppressive activity particularly through their 
increased expression of arginase.112 These cells have the poten-
tial to deplete the microenvironment of arginine, leading to fur-
ther T-cell dysfunction.
Recent evidence suggests that Th17 cells and their effector 
cytokines, IL-17, IL-21, and IL-22, regulate mucosal immunity 
and barrier function. While their specific role in the inflamma-
tory response following trauma is not well understood, both 
murine and human studies indicate that normal Th17 effec-
tor functions are disordered following burn injury, due to the 
inhibition of normal Th17 cell development by IL-10.113 These 
changes may contribute to remote organ damage and further 
susceptibility to infection in this setting.
Dendritic Cells
Recent studies have focused on the cellular components of the 
immune system in the context of polytrauma. While the acti-
vation of granulocytes and monocyte/macrophages following 
trauma has been well described, more recent work has also 
demonstrated that dendritic cells (DCs) are also activated in 
response to damage signals, to stimulate both the innate and 
the adaptive immune responses. For example, primary “dan-
ger signals” that are recognized and activated by DCs include 
debris from damaged or dying cells (e.g., HMGB1, nucleic 
acids including single nucleotides, and degradation products of 
the ECM). DCs are specialized antigen-presenting cells (APCs) 
that have three major functions. They are frequently referred 
to as “professional APCs” since their principal function is to 
capture, process, and present both endogenous and exogenous 
antigens, which, along with their costimulatory molecules, 
are capable of inducing a primary immune response in rest-
ing naïve T lymphocytes. In addition, they have the capacity 
to further regulate the immune response, both positively and 
negatively, through the upregulation and release of immuno-
modulatory molecules such as the chemokine CCL5 and the 
CXC chemokine CXCL5. Finally, they have been implicated 
both in the induction and maintenance of immune tolerance 
as well as in the acquisition of immune memory.114 There are 
distinct classes and subsets of DC, which are functionally het-
erogeneous. Further, subsets of DC at distinct locations have 
been shown to express different levels damage-sensing recep-
tors (e.g., TLR) that dictate a preferential response to DAMP at 
that site. While relatively small in number relative to the total 
leukocyte population, the diverse distribution of DC in virtu-
ally all body tissues underlines their potential for a collabora-
tive role in the initiation of the trauma-induced sterile systemic 
inflammatory response.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils are immunocytes whose primary functions are 
antihelminthic. Eosinophils are found mostly in tissues such as 
the lung and gastrointestinal tract, which may suggest a role 
in immune surveillance. Eosinophils can be activated by IL-3, 
IL-5, GM-CSF, chemoattractants, and platelet-activating factor. 
Eosinophil activation can lead to subsequent release of toxic 
mediators, including ROSs, histamine, and peroxidase.115
Mast Cells
Mast cells are important in the primary response to injury 
because they are located in tissues. TNF release from mast cells 
has been found to be crucial for neutrophil recruitment and 
pathogen clearance. Mast cells are also known to play an impor-
tant role in the anaphylactic response to allergens. On activation 
from stimuli including allergen binding, infection, and trauma, 
mast cells produce histamine, cytokines, eicosanoids, proteases, 
and chemokines, which leads to vasodilatation, capillary leak-
age, and immunocyte recruitment. Mast cells are thought to be 
important cosignaling effector cells of the immune system via 
the release of IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13, and IL-14, as 
well as macrophage migration–inhibiting factor.116
Monocyte/Macrophages
Monocytes are mononuclear phagocytes that circulate in the 
bloodstream and can differentiate into macrophages, osteo-
clasts, and DCs on migrating into tissues. Macrophages are the 
main effector cells of the immune response to infection and 
TH1
Injury Severity:
IL-12, IL-18, IFN- , TNF, IL-1, IL-21, TGF-β
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, (Glucocorticoids)
IL-2
IL-3
IL-6
IL-12
IFN-
TNF-α
GM-CSF
TNF-β
IL-3
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6
IL-9
IL-10
IL-13
TNF-α
GM-CSF
Cell-mediated
Immunity
Antibody-mediated
Immunity
less severe more severe
TH2
Figure 2-11.  Specific immunity mediated by helper T lympho-
cytes subtype 1 (TH1) and subtype 2 (TH2) after injury. A TH1 
response is favored in lesser injuries, with intact cell-mediated and 
opsonizing antibody immunity against microbial infections. This 
cell-mediated immunity includes activation of monocytes, B lym-
phocytes, and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. A shift toward the TH2 
response from naïve helper T cells is associated with injuries of 
greater magnitude and is not as effective against microbial infec-
tions. A TH2 response includes the activation of eosinophils, mast 
cells, and B-lymphocyte immunoglobulin 4 and immunoglobulin 
E production. (Primary stimulants and principal cytokine products 
of such responses are in bold characters.) Interleukin-4 (IL-4) and 
IL-10 are known inhibitors of the TH1 response. Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) 
is a known inhibitor of the TH2 response. Although not cytokines, 
glucocorticoids are potent stimulants of a TH2 response, which 
may partly contribute to the immunosuppressive effects of corti-
sol. GM-CSF = granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; 
IL = interleukin; TGF = transforming growth factor; TNF = tumor 
necrosis factor. (Adapted with permission from Lin E, Calvano SE, 
Lowry SF. Inflammatory cytokines and cell response in surgery. 
Surgery. 2000;127:117. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
40
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
injury, primarily through mechanisms that include phagocyto-
sis of microbial pathogens, release of inflammatory mediators, 
and clearance of apoptotic cells. Moreover, these cells fulfill 
homeostatic roles beyond host defense by performing important 
functions in the remodeling of tissues, both during development 
and in the adult animal.
In tissues, mononuclear phagocytes are quiescent. How-
ever, they respond to external cues (e.g., PAMPs, DAMPs, acti-
vated lymphocytes) by changing their phenotype. In response 
to various signals, macrophages may undergo classical M1 
activation (stimulated by TLR ligands and IFN-γ) or alterna-
tive M2 activation (stimulated by type II cytokines IL-4/IL-13); 
these states mirror the Th1-Th2 polarization of T cells. The 
M1 phenotype is characterized by the expression of high levels 
of proinflammatory cytokines, like TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6, in 
addition to the synthesis of ROS and RNS. M1 macrophages 
promote a strong Th1 response. In contrast, M2 macrophages 
are considered to be involved in the promotion of wound repair 
and the restoration of immune homeostasis through their expres-
sion of arginase-1 and IL-10, in addition to a variety of PRRs 
(e.g., scavenging molecules).117
In humans, downregulation of monocyte TNFR expres-
sion has been demonstrated experimentally and clinically during 
systemic inflammation. In clinical sepsis, nonsurviving patients 
with severe sepsis have an immediate reduction in monocyte 
surface TNFR expression with failure to recover, whereas sur-
viving patients have normal or near-normal receptor levels from 
the onset of clinically defined sepsis. In patients with congestive 
heart failure, there is also a significant decrease in the amount 
of monocyte surface TNFR expression compared with control 
patients. In experimental models, endotoxin has been shown to 
differentially regulate over 1000 genes in murine macrophages 
with approximately 25% of these corresponding to cytokines 
and chemokines. During sepsis, macrophages undergo pheno-
typic reprogramming highlighted by decreased surface human 
leukocyte antigen DR (a critical receptor in antigen presenta-
tion), which also may contribute to host immunocompromise 
during sepsis.118
Neutrophils
Neutrophils are among the first responders to sites of infection 
and injury and, as such, are potent mediators of acute inflam-
mation. Chemotactic mediators from a site of injury induce 
neutrophil adherence to the vascular endothelium and promote 
eventual cell migration into the injured tissue. Neutrophils are 
circulating immunocytes with short half-lives (4 to 10 hours). 
However, inflammatory signals may promote the longevity of 
neutrophils in target tissues, which can contribute to their poten-
tial detrimental effects and bystander injury. Once primed and 
activated by inflammatory stimuli, including TNF, IL-1, and 
microbial pathogens, neutrophils are able to enlist a variety of 
killing mechanisms to manage invading pathogens. Phagocy-
tosed bacteria are killed using NADPH oxygenase-dependent 
generation of ROS or by releasing lytic enzymes and antibacte-
rial proteins into the phagosome. Neutrophils can also dump 
their granule contents into the extracellular space, and many 
of these proteins also have important effects on the innate and 
adaptive immune responses. When highly activated, neutrophils 
can also extrude a meshwork of chromatin fibers, composed 
of DNA and histones that are decorated with granule contents. 
Termed neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), this is an effec-
tive mechanism whereby neutrophils can immobilize bacteria to 
facilitate their killing.119 NETs may also serve to prime T cells, 
making their threshold for activation lower.
Neutrophils do facilitate the recruitment of monocytes into 
inflamed tissues. These recruited cells are capable of phagocy-
tosing apoptotic neutrophils to contribute to resolution of the 
inflammatory response.120
ENDOTHELIUM-MEDIATED INJURY
Vascular Endothelium
Under physiologic conditions, vascular endothelium has overall 
anticoagulant properties mediated via the production and cell 
surface expression of heparin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, tissue 
factor pathway inhibitor, protein S, thrombomodulin, plasmin-
ogen, and tissue plasminogen activator. Endothelial cells also 
perform a critical function as barriers that regulate tissue migra-
tion of circulating cells. During sepsis, endothelial cells are dif-
ferentially modulated, which results in an overall procoagulant 
shift via decreased production of anticoagulant factors, which 
may lead to microthrombosis and organ injury.
Neutrophil-Endothelium Interaction
The regulated inflammatory response to infection facilitates 
neutrophil and other immunocyte migration to compromised 
regions through the actions of increased vascular permeabil-
ity, chemoattractants, and increased endothelial adhesion fac-
tors referred to as selectins that are elaborated on cell surfaces 
(Table 2-7). In response to inflammatory stimuli released from 
sentinel leukocytes in the tissues, including chemokines, throm-
bin, leukotrienes, histamine, and TNF, vascular endothelium 
are activated and their surface protein expression is altered. 
Within 10 to 20 minutes, prestored reservoirs of the adhesion 
molecule P-selectin are mobilized to the cell surface where it 
can mediate neutrophil recruitment (Fig. 2-12). After 2 hours, 
endothelial cell transcriptional processes provide additional 
surface expression of E-selectin. E-selectin and P-selectin bind 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) on the neutrophils 
to orchestrate the capture and rolling of these leukocytes and 
allow targeted immunocyte extravasation. Immobilized chemo-
kines on the endothelial surface create a chemotactic gradient to 
further enhance immune cell recruitment.121 Also important are 
secondary leukocyte-leukocyte interactions in which PGSL-1 
and L-selectin binding facilitates further leukocyte tethering. 
Although there are distinguishable properties among individ-
ual selectins in leukocyte rolling, effective rolling most likely 
involves a significant degree of functional overlap.122
Chemokines
Chemokines are a family of small proteins (8 to 13 kDa) that 
were first identified through their chemotactic and activating 
effects on inflammatory cells. They are produced at high levels 
following nearly all forms of injury in all tissues, where they are 
key attractants for immune cell extravasation. There are more 
than 50 different chemokines and 20 chemokine receptors that 
have been identified. Chemokines are released from endothelial 
cells, mast cells, platelets, macrophages, and lymphocytes. They 
are soluble proteins, which when secreted, bind to glycosami-
noglycans on the cell surface or in the ECM. In this way, the 
chemokines can form a fixed chemical gradient that promotes 
immune cell exit to target areas. Chemokines are distinguished 
(in general) from cytokines by virtue of their receptors, which 
are members of the G-protein–coupled receptor superfamily. 
41
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
Most chemokine receptors recognize more than one chemokine 
ligand, leading to redundancy in chemokine signaling.
The chemokines are subdivided into families based on 
their amino acid sequences at their N-terminus. For example, 
CC chemokines contain two N-terminus cysteine residues 
that are immediately adjacent (hence the “C-C” designation), 
whereas the N-terminal cysteines in CXC chemokines are sepa-
rated by a single amino acid. The CXC chemokines are particu-
larly important for neutrophil (PMN) proinflammatory function. 
Members of the CXC chemokine family, which include IL-8, 
induce neutrophil migration and secretion of cytotoxic granu-
lar contents and metabolites. Additional chemokine families 
include the C and CX3C chemokines.121
Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide (NO) was initially known as endothelium-derived 
relaxing factor due to its effect on vascular smooth muscle. 
Normal vascular smooth muscle cell relaxation is maintained 
by a constant output of NO that is regulated in the endothe-
lium by both flow- and receptor-mediated events. NO can also 
reduce microthrombosis by reducing platelet adhesion and 
aggregation (Fig. 2-13) and interfering with leukocyte adhesion 
to the endothelium. NO easily traverses cell membranes, has 
a short half-life of a few seconds, and is oxidized into nitrate 
and nitrite.
Endogenous NO formation is derived largely from the 
action of NO synthase (NOS), which is constitutively expressed 
in endothelial cells (NOS3). NOS generates NO by catalyzing 
the degradation of L-arginine to L-citrulline and NO, in the pres-
ence of oxygen and NADPH. There are two additional isoforms 
of NOS: neuronal NOS (NOS1) and inducible NOS (iNOS/
NOS2). The vasodilatory effects of NO are mediated by guany-
lyl cyclase, an enzyme that is found in vascular smooth muscle 
cells and most other cells of the body. When NO is formed by 
endothelium, it rapidly diffuses into adjacent cells where it binds 
to and activates guanylyl cyclase. This enzyme catalyzes the 
dephosphorylation of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which serves as a second 
messenger for many important cellular functions, particularly 
for signaling smooth muscle relaxation.
NO synthesis is increased in response to proinflamma-
tory mediators such as TNF-α and IL-1β, as well as microbial 
products, due to the upregulation of iNOS expression.123 In fact, 
studies in both animal models and humans have shown that 
severe systemic injury and associated hemorrhage produce an 
early upregulation of iNOS in the liver, lung, spleen, and vascu-
lar system. In these circumstances, NO is reported to function 
as an immunoregulator, which is capable of modulating cyto-
kine production and immune cell development. In particular, 
recent data support a role for iNOS in the regulation of T-cell 
Table 2-7 
Molecules that mediate leukocyte-endothelial adhesion, categorized by family
Adhesion Molecule
Action
Origin
Inducers of Expression Target Cells
Selectins
  L-selectin
  P-selectin
  E-selectin
Fast rolling
Slow rolling
Very slow rolling
Leukocytes
Platelets and  
  endothelium
Endothelium
Native
Thrombin, histamine
Cytokines
Endothelium, platelets,  
  eosinophils
Neutrophils, monocytes
Neutrophils, monocytes,  
  lymphocytes
Immunoglobulins
  ICAM-1
  ICAM-2
  VCAM-1
  PECAM-1
Firm adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Firm adhesion
Firm adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Endothelium,  
  leukocytes, fibroblasts, 
  epithelium
Endothelium, platelets
Endothelium
Endothelium, platelets,  
  leukocytes
Cytokines
Native
Cytokines
Native
Leukocytes
Leukocytes
Monocytes, lymphocytes
Endothelium, platelets,  
  leukocytes
β2-(CD18) Integrins
  CD18/11a
  CD18/11b (Mac-1)
  CD18/11c
Firm adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Firm adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Adhesion
Leukocytes
Neutrophils, monocytes, 
  natural killer cells
Neutrophils, monocytes, 
  natural killer cells
Leukocyte activation
Leukocyte activation
Leukocyte activation
Endothelium
Endothelium
Endothelium
β1-(CD29) Integrins
  VLA-4
Firm adhesion/ 
  transmigration
Lymphocytes,  
  monocytes
Leukocyte activation
Monocytes, endothelium,  
  epithelium
ICAM-1 = intercellular adhesion molecule-1; ICAM-2 = intercellular adhesion molecule-2; Mac-1 = macrophage antigen 1; PECAM-1 = platelet-
endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1; VCAM-1 = vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; VLA-4 = very late antigen-4.
42
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
dysfunction in the setting of trauma as evidenced by suppressed 
proliferative and Th1 cytokine release.124
Increased NO is also detectable in septic shock, where it is 
associated with low peripheral vascular resistance and hypoten-
sion. Increased production of NO in this setting correlates with 
changes in vascular permeability and inhibition of noradrenergic 
nerve transmission. While the increased NO in sepsis is largely 
attributed to greater iNOS activity and expression, cytokines 
are reported to modulate NO release by increasing arginine 
availability through the expression of the cationic amino acid 
transporter (CAT) or by increasing tetrahydrobiopterin levels, 
a key cofactor in NO synthesis. Additional effects associated 
with excess NO include protein and membrane phospholipid 
alterations by nitrosylation and the inhibition of mitochondrial 
respiration. Inhibition of NO production seemed initially to be 
a promising strategy in patients with severe sepsis. However, 
a randomized clinical trial in patients with septic shock deter-
mined that treatment with a nonselective NOS inhibitor was 
associated with an increase in mortality compared with pla-
cebo.125 More recent data using an ovine model of peritonitis 
demonstrated that selective iNOS inhibition reduced pulmonary 
artery hypertension and gas exchange impairment and promoted 
higher visceral organ blood flow, coinciding with lower plasma 
cytokine concentrations.126 These data suggest that specific tar-
geting of iNOS in the setting of sepsis may remain a viable 
therapeutic option.
Prostacyclin
The immune effects of prostacyclin (PGI2) were discussed 
earlier. The best described effects of PGI2 are in the cardio-
vascular system, however, where it is produced by vascular 
endothelial cells. Prostacyclin is a potent vasodilator that also 
inhibits platelet aggregation. In the pulmonary system, PGI2 
reduces pulmonary blood pressure and bronchial hyperrespon-
siveness. In the kidneys, PGI2 modulates renal blood flow and 
glomerular filtration rate. Prostacyclin acts through its recep-
tor (a G-protein–coupled receptor of the rhodopsin family) to 
stimulate the enzyme adenylate cyclase, allowing the synthesis 
of cAMP from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This leads to a 
cAMP-mediated decrease in intracellular calcium and subse-
quent smooth muscle relaxation.
During systemic inflammation, endothelial prostacyclin 
expression is impaired, and thus the endothelium favors a more 
procoagulant profile. Exogenous prostacyclin analogues, both 
intravenous and inhaled, have been used to improve oxygen-
ation in patients with acute lung injury. Early clinical studies 
with prostacyclin have delivered some encouraging results, 
showing that infusion of prostacyclin improved cardiac index, 
splanchnic blood flow as measured by intestinal tonometry, and 
oxygen delivery in patients with sepsis. Importantly, there was 
no significant decrease in mean arterial pressure.127
Endothelins
Endothelins (ETs) are potent mediators of vasoconstriction and 
are composed of three members: ET-1, ET-2, and ET-3. ETs are 
21-amino-acid peptides derived from a 38-amino-acid precursor 
molecule. ET-1, synthesized primarily by endothelial cells, is 
the most potent endogenous vasoconstrictor and is estimated to 
be 10 times more potent than angiotensin II. ET release is upreg-
ulated in response to hypotension, LPS, injury, thrombin, TGF-
β, IL-1, angiotensin II, vasopressin, catecholamines, and anoxia. 
ETs are primarily released to the abluminal side of endothelial 
cells, and very little is stored in cells; thus a plasma increase 
in ET is associated with a marked increase in production. The 
half-life of plasma ET is between 4 and 7 minutes, which sug-
gests that ET release is primarily regulated at the transcriptional 
level. Three ET receptors, referred to as ETA, ETB, and ETC, 
have been identified and function via the G-protein–coupled 
receptor mechanism. ETB receptors are associated with 
increased NO and prostacyclin production, which may serve 
as a feedback mechanism. Atrial ETA receptor activation has 
been associated with increased inotropy and chronotropy. ET-1 
infusion is associated with increased pulmonary vascular resis-
tance and pulmonary edema and may contribute to pulmonary 
abnormalities during sepsis. At low levels, in conjunction with 
NO, ETs regulate vascular tone. However, at increased concen-
trations, ETs can disrupt the normal blood flow and distribu-
tion and may compromise oxygen delivery to the tissue. Recent 
data link ET expression in pulmonary vasculature with per-
sistent inflammation associated with the development of 
Capture
Fast
rolling
Slow
rolling
Arrest
50–150 µm/sec
20–50 µm/sec 10–20 µm/sec
0–10 µm/sec
Velocity:
Leukocyte
Seconds
0
Velocity (µm/second)
150
100
0
50
1
2
3
4
Endothelium
Figure 2-12.  Simplified sequence of selectin-mediated neutrophil-
endothelium interaction after an inflammatory stimulus. CAPTURE 
(tethering), predominantly mediated by cell L-selectin with contri-
bution from endothelial P-selectin, describes the initial recognition 
between leukocyte and endothelium, in which circulating leuko-
cytes marginate toward the endothelial surface. FAST ROLLING 
(20 to 50 μm/s) is a consequence of rapid L-selectin shedding 
from cell surfaces and formation of new downstream L-selectin 
to endothelium bonds, which occur in tandem. SLOW ROLLING  
(10 to 20 μm/s) is predominantly mediated by P-selectins. The slow-
est rolling (3 to 10 μm/s) before arrest is predominantly mediated 
by E-selectins, with contribution from P-selectins. ARREST (firm 
adhesion) leading to transmigration is mediated by β-integrins and 
the immunoglobulin family of adhesion molecules. In addition to 
interacting with the endothelium, activated leukocytes also recruit 
other leukocytes to the inflammatory site by direct interactions, 
which are mediated in part by selectins. (Adapted with permission 
from Lin E, Calvano SE, Lowry SF. Selectin neutralization: does it 
make biological sense? Crit Care Med. 1999;27:2050.)
43
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
pulmonary hypertension.128 ET expression is linked to posttrans-
lational and transcriptional initiation of the unfolded protein 
response in the affected cells, which results in the production of 
inflammatory cytokines. Finally, ET-1 levels correlate with lev-
els of brain natriuretic peptide and CRP, as well as the Sequen-
tial Organ Failure Assessment score in septic patients.129
Platelet-Activating Factor
Phosphatidylcholine is a major lipid constituent of the plasma 
membrane. Its enzymatic processing by cytosolic phospho-
lipase A2 (cPLA2) or calcium-independent phospholipase A2 
(iPLA2) generates powerful small lipid molecules, which func-
tion as intracellular second messengers. One of these is arachi-
donic acid, the precursor molecule for eicosanoids. Another is 
platelet-activating factor (PAF). During acute inflammation, 
PAF is released by immune cells following the activation of 
PLA2. The receptor for PAF (PAFR), which is constitutively 
expressed by platelets, leukocytes, and endothelial cells, is a 
G-protein–coupled receptor of the rhodopsin family. Ligand 
binding to the PAFR promotes the activation and aggregation of 
platelets and leukocytes, leukocyte adherence, motility, chemo-
taxis, and invasion, as well as ROS generation.130 Additionally, 
PAF activation of human PMNs induces extrusion of NETs, 
while platelet activation induces IL-1 via a novel posttranscrip-
tional mechanism. Finally, PAFR ligation results not only in 
the upregulation of numerous proinflammatory genes includ-
ing COX-2, iNOS, and IL-6, but also in the generation of lipid 
intermediates such as arachidonic acid and lysophospholipids 
through the activation of PLA2. Antagonists to PAF receptors 
have been experimentally shown to mitigate the effects of isch-
emia and reperfusion injury. Of note, human sepsis is asso-
ciated with a reduction in the levels of PAF-acetylhydrolase, 
which inactivates PAF by removing an acetyl group. Indeed, 
PAF-acetylhydrolase administration in patients with severe sep-
sis has yielded some reduction in multiple organ dysfunction 
and mortality131; however, larger phase III clinical trials failed 
to show benefit.
Natriuretic Peptides
The natriuretic peptides, atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and 
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), are a family of peptides that are 
released primarily by atrial tissue but are also synthesized by the 
gut, kidney, brain, adrenal glands, and endothelium. The func-
tionally active forms of the peptides are C-terminal fragments 
of a larger prohormone, and both N- and C-terminal fragments 
are detectable in the blood (referred to a N-terminal pro-BNP 
and pro-ANF, respectively). ANF and BNP share most biologic 
properties including diuretic, natriuretic, vasorelaxant, and car-
diac remodeling properties that are effected by signaling through 
a common receptor: the guanylyl cyclase-A (GC-A) receptor. 
They are both increased in the setting of cardiac disorders; how-
ever, recent evidence indicates some distinctions in the setting 
of inflammation. For example, endotoxemia in healthy volun-
teers increased plasma N-terminal pro-BNP without changing 
heart rate and blood pressure. Also, elevated pro-BNP has been 
detected in septic patients in the absence of myocardial dysfunc-
tion and appears to have prognostic significance.132
SURGICAL METABOLISM
The initial hours after surgical or traumatic injury are metaboli-
cally associated with a reduced total body energy expenditure 
and urinary nitrogen wasting. On adequate resuscitation and sta-
bilization of the injured patient, a reprioritization of substrate 
use ensues to preserve vital organ function and to support repair 
of injured tissue. This phase of recovery also is characterized 
cAMP
cAMP
cGMP
cGMP
NO
NO
PGI2
AA
Platelet
ET
ET
PGI2
Big ET
L-arginine
Endothelium
Smooth muscle
Relaxation
Figure 2-13.  Endothelial inter-
action with smooth muscle cells 
and with intraluminal platelets. 
Prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2, or 
PGI2) is derived from arachidonic 
acid (AA), and nitric oxide (NO) 
is derived from L-arginine. The 
increase in cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) and cyclic gua-
nosine monophosphate (cGMP) 
results in smooth muscle relaxation 
and inhibition of platelet thrombus 
formation. Endothelins (ETs) are 
derived from “big ET,” and they 
counter the effects of prostacyclin 
and NO.
44
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
by functions that participate in the restoration of homeostasis, 
such as augmented metabolic rates and oxygen consumption, 
enzymatic preference for readily oxidizable substrates such as 
glucose, and stimulation of the immune system. Understanding 
of the collective alterations in amino acid (protein), carbohy-
drate, and lipid metabolism characteristic of the surgical patient 
lays the foundation upon which metabolic and nutritional sup-
port can be implemented.
Metabolism during Fasting
Fuel metabolism during unstressed fasting states has historically 
served as the standard to which metabolic alterations after acute 
injury and critical illness are compared (Fig. 2-14). To maintain 
basal metabolic needs (i.e., at rest and fasting), a normal healthy 
adult requires approximately 22 to 25 kcal/kg per day drawn 
from carbohydrate, lipid, and protein sources. This requirement 
can be as high as 40 kcal/kg per day in severe stress states, such 
as those seen in patients with burn injuries.
In the healthy adult, principal sources of fuel during short-
term fasting (<5 days) are derived from muscle protein and body 
fat, with fat being the most abundant source of energy (Table 2-8). 
The normal adult body contains 300 to 400 g of carbohydrates 
in the form of glycogen, of which 75 to 100 g are stored in the 
liver. Approximately 200 to 250 g of glycogen are stored within 
skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle cells. The greater glycogen 
stores within the muscle are not readily available for systemic 
use due to a deficiency in glucose-6-phosphatase but are avail-
able for the energy needs of muscle cells. Therefore, in the fast-
ing state, hepatic glycogen stores are rapidly and preferentially 
depleted, which results in a fall of serum glucose concentration 
within hours (<16 hours).
During fasting, a healthy 70-kg adult will use 180 g of 
glucose per day to support the metabolism of obligate glycolytic 
cells such as neurons, leukocytes, erythrocytes, and the renal 
medullae. Other tissues that use glucose for fuel are skeletal 
muscle, intestinal mucosa, fetal tissues, and solid tumors.
Figure 2-14.  Fuel utilization in a 
70-kg man during short-term fasting 
with an approximate basal energy 
expenditure of 1800 kcal. During 
starvation, muscle proteins and fat 
stores provide fuel for the host, with 
the latter being most abundant. 
RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white 
blood cell. (Adapted from Cahill GF: 
Starvation in man. N Engl J Med. 
1970;282:668.)
Brain
RBC
WBC
Nerve
Kidney
Muscle
Heart
Kidney
Muscle
Amino
acids
Glycerol
16g
Fatty
acid
160g
40g
Fatty acid
120g
Ketone
60g
Glucose
180g
36g
144g
36g
Lactate + Pyruvate
LIVER
Glycogen
75g
Gluconeogenesis
Oxidation
Fuel utilization in short-term fasting man (70 kg)
Muscle
protein
75g
Fat stores
triglycerides
160g
Table 2-8 
A. Body fuel reserves in a 70-kg man and 
B. Energy equivalent of substrate oxidation
A. Component
Mass (kg)
Energy (kcal)
Days Available
Water and minerals
49
0
0
Protein
6.0
24,000
13.0
Glycogen
0.2
800
0.4
Fat
15.0
140,000
78.0
Total
70.2
164,800
91.4
B. Substrate
O2 Consumed (L/g)
CO2 Produced (L/g)
Respiratory 
Quotient
kcal/g
Recommended Daily 
Requirement
Glucose
0.75
0.75
1.0
4.0
7.2 g/kg per day
Dextrose
—
—
—
3.4
—
Lipid
2.0
1.4
0.7
9.0
1.0 g/kg per day
Protein
1.0
0.8
0.8
4.0
0.8 g/kg per day
45
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
Glucagon, NE, vasopressin, and angiotensin II can pro-
mote the utilization of glycogen stores (glycogenolysis) during 
fasting. Although glucagon, EPI, and cortisol directly promote 
gluconeogenesis, EPI and cortisol also promote pyruvate shut-
tling to the liver for gluconeogenesis. Precursors for hepatic glu-
coneogenesis include lactate, glycerol, and amino acids such as 
alanine and glutamine. Lactate is released by glycolysis within 
skeletal muscles, as well as by erythrocytes and leukocytes. The 
recycling of lactate and pyruvate for gluconeogenesis is com-
monly referred to as the Cori cycle, which can provide up to 
40% of plasma glucose during starvation (Fig. 2-15).
Lactate production from skeletal muscle is insufficient 
to maintain systemic glucose needs during short-term fasting 
(simple starvation). Therefore, significant amounts of protein 
must be degraded daily (75 g/d for a 70-kg adult) to provide the 
amino acid substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis. Proteolysis 
during starvation, which results primarily from decreased insu-
lin and increased cortisol release, is associated with elevated 
urinary nitrogen excretion from the normal 7 to 10 g per day up 
to 30 g or more per day.133 Although proteolysis during starva-
tion occurs mainly within skeletal muscles, protein degradation 
in solid organs also occurs.
In prolonged starvation, systemic proteolysis is reduced to 
approximately 20 g/d, and urinary nitrogen excretion stabilizes 
at 2 to 5 g/d (Fig. 2-16). This reduction in proteolysis reflects 
the adaptation by vital organs (e.g., myocardium, brain, renal 
cortex, and skeletal muscle) to using ketone bodies as their prin-
cipal fuel source. In extended fasting, ketone bodies become an 
important fuel source for the brain after 2 days and gradually 
become the principal fuel source by 24 days.
Enhanced deamination of amino acids for gluconeogen-
esis during starvation consequently increases renal excretion of 
RBC
WBC
Nerve
Kidney
Muscle
Muscle
Protein
pyruvate
Ketone
Lactate + Pyruvate
Fatty
acid
Glucose
Ketone
Glucose
Alanine
Glucose-alanine cycle
Cori cycle
LIVER
Gluconeogenesis
Figure 2-15.  The recycling of 
peripheral lactate and pyruvate for 
hepatic gluconeogenesis is accom-
plished by the Cori cycle. Alanine 
within skeletal muscles can also be 
used as a precursor for hepatic glu-
coneogenesis. During starvation, 
such fatty acid provides fuel sources 
for basal hepatic enzymatic function. 
RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white 
blood cell.
Fuel utilization in long-term fasting man (70 kg)
Heart
Kidney
Muscle
Amino
acids
Glycerol
18g
Fatty
acid
180g
45g
Fatty acid
135g
Ketone
68g
Glucose
80g
44g
36g
Lactate + Pyruvate
KIDNEY
Gluconeogenesis
15g
5g
40g
40g
10g (100 mEq) in urine
44g
36g
58g
Muscle
Protein
20g
Fat stores
Triglycerides
180g
Brain
RBC
WBC
Nerve
Kidney
Muscle
LIVER
Glycogen
Gluconeogenesis
Oxidation
Figure 2-16.  Fuel utilization in extended starvation. Liver glycogen stores are depleted, and there is adaptive reduction in proteolysis as a 
source of fuel. The brain uses ketones for fuel. The kidneys become important participants in gluconeogenesis. RBC = red blood cell; 
WBC = white blood cell. (Adapted from Cahill GF: Starvation in man. N Engl J Med. 1970;282:668.)
46
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
ammonium ions. The kidneys also participate in gluconeogen-
esis by the use of glutamine and glutamate, and can become the 
primary source of gluconeogenesis during prolonged starvation, 
accounting for up to one half of systemic glucose production.
Lipid stores within adipose tissue provide 40% or more of 
caloric expenditure during starvation. Energy requirements for 
basal enzymatic and muscular functions (e.g., gluconeogenesis, 
neural transmission, and cardiac contraction) are met by the 
mobilization of triglycerides from adipose tissue. In a resting, 
fasting, 70-kg person, approximately 160 g of free fatty acids 
and glycerol can be mobilized from adipose tissue per day. Free 
fatty acid release is stimulated in part by a reduction in serum 
insulin levels and in part by the increase in circulating glucagon 
and catecholamine. Such free fatty acids, like ketone bodies, are 
used as fuel by tissues such as the heart, kidney (renal cortex), 
muscle, and liver. The mobilization of lipid stores for energy 
importantly decreases the rate of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, 
and proteolysis, as well as the overall glucose requirement to 
sustain the host. Furthermore, ketone bodies spare glucose utili-
zation by inhibiting the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Metabolism after Injury
Injuries or infections induce unique neuroendocrine and immu-
nologic responses that differentiate injury metabolism from that 
of unstressed fasting (Fig. 2-17). The magnitude of metabolic 
expenditure appears to be directly proportional to the severity 
of insult, with thermal injuries and severe infections having the 
highest energy demands (Fig. 2-18). The increase in energy 
expenditure is mediated in part by sympathetic activation and 
catecholamine release, which has been replicated by the admin-
istration of catecholamines to healthy human subjects. Lipid 
metabolism after injury is intentionally discussed first, because 
this macronutrient becomes the primary source of energy during 
stressed states.134
Lipid Metabolism after Injury
Lipids are not merely nonprotein, noncarbohydrate fuel sources 
that minimize protein catabolism in the injured patient. Lipid 
metabolism potentially influences the structural integrity of cell 
membranes as well as the immune response during systemic 
inflammation. Adipose stores within the body (triglycerides) are 
the predominant energy source (50% to 80%) during critical ill-
ness and after injury. Fat mobilization (lipolysis) occurs mainly 
in response to catecholamine stimulus of the hormone-sensitive 
triglyceride lipase. Other hormonal influences that potentiate 
lipolysis include adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cat-
echolamines, thyroid hormone, cortisol, glucagon, GH release, 
and reduction in insulin levels.135
Lipid Absorption.  Although the process is poorly understood, 
adipose tissue provides fuel for the host in the form of free fatty 
acids and glycerol during critical illness and injury. Oxidation of 
1 g of fat yields approximately 9 kcal of energy. Although the liver 
is capable of synthesizing triglycerides from carbohydrates and 
Figure 2-17.  Acute injury is asso-
ciated with significant alterations 
in substrate utilization. There is 
enhanced nitrogen loss, indicative 
of catabolism. Fat remains the pri-
mary fuel source under these circum-
stances. RBC = red blood cell; WBC = 
white blood cell.
Figure 2-18.  Influence of injury severity on resting metabolism 
(resting energy expenditure, or REE). The shaded area indicates 
normal REE. (From Long CL, Schaffel N, Geiger J, et al. Metabolic 
response to injury and illness: estimation of energy and protein 
needs from indirect calorimetry and nitrogen balance. JPEN J Par-
enter Enteral Nutr. 1979;3(6):452. kkjkjdht © 1979 by A.S.P.E.N. 
Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications.)
WOUND
RBC
WBC
Nerve
Kidney
Muscle
Heart
Kidney
Muscle
Amino
acids
Glycerol
17g
Fatty
acid
170g
40g
Fatty acid
130g
Ketone
60g
Glucose
360g
180g
180g
Lactate
+
Pyruvate
KIDNEY
Gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis
LIVER
Oxidation
Fuel utilization following trauma
Muscle
Protein
250g
Fat stores
Triglycerides
170g
0
10
20
30
40
50
% REE
100
75
25
50
125
150
175
200
225
Days after injury
Major burns
Sepsis/peritonitis
Skeletal trauma
Normal
range
Elective surgery
Starvation
47
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
amino acids, dietary and exogenous sources provide the major 
source of triglycerides. Dietary lipids are not readily absorb-
able in the gut but require pancreatic lipase and phospholipase 
within the duodenum to hydrolyze the triglycerides into free 
fatty acids and monoglycerides. The free fatty acids and mono-
glycerides are then readily absorbed by gut enterocytes, which 
resynthesize triglycerides by esterification of the monoglycer-
ides with fatty acyl coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) (Fig. 2-19). Long-
chain triglycerides (LCTs), defined as those with 12 carbons or 
more, generally undergo this process of esterification and enter 
the circulation through the lymphatic system as chylomicrons. 
Shorter fatty acid chains directly enter the portal circulation and 
are transported to the liver by albumin carriers. Hepatocytes use 
free fatty acids as a fuel source during stress states but also can 
synthesize phospholipids or triglycerides (i.e., very-low-density 
lipoproteins) during fed states. Systemic tissue (e.g., muscle 
and the heart) can use chylomicrons and triglycerides as fuel by 
hydrolysis with lipoprotein lipase at the luminal surface of cap-
illary endothelium.136 Trauma or sepsis suppresses lipoprotein 
lipase activity in both adipose tissue and muscle, presumably 
mediated by TNF.
Lipolysis and Fatty Acid Oxidation.  Periods of energy 
demand are accompanied by free fatty acid mobilization from 
adipose stores. This is mediated by hormonal influences (e.g., 
catecholamines, ACTH, thyroid hormones, GH, and glucagon) 
on triglyceride lipase through a cAMP pathway (Fig. 2-20). In 
adipose tissues, triglyceride lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides into 
free fatty acids and glycerol. Free fatty acids enter the capillary 
circulation and are transported by albumin to tissues requir-
ing this fuel source (e.g., heart and skeletal muscle). Insulin 
inhibits lipolysis and favors triglyceride synthesis by augment-
ing lipoprotein lipase activity as well as intracellular levels of 
glycerol-3-phosphate. The use of glycerol for fuel depends on 
the availability of tissue glycerokinase, which is abundant in the 
liver and kidneys.
Free fatty acids absorbed by cells conjugate with acyl-
CoA within the cytoplasm. The transport of fatty acyl-CoA 
from the outer mitochondrial membrane across the inner mito-
chondrial membrane occurs via the carnitine shuttle (Fig. 2-21). 
Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), defined as those 6 to 12 
carbons in length, bypass the carnitine shuttle and readily cross 
the mitochondrial membranes. This accounts in part for the fact 
that MCTs are more efficiently oxidized than LCTs. Ideally, the 
rapid oxidation of MCTs makes them less prone to fat deposi-
tion, particularly within immune cells and the reticuloendothe-
lial system—a common finding with lipid infusion in parenteral 
nutrition.137 However, exclusive use of MCTs as fuel in animal 
studies has been associated with higher metabolic demands and 
toxicity, as well as essential fatty acid deficiency.
Within the mitochondria, fatty acyl-CoA undergoes beta 
oxidation, which produces acetyl-CoA with each pass through 
the cycle. Each acetyl-CoA molecule subsequently enters the 
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle for further oxidation to yield 
12 ATP molecules, carbon dioxide, and water. Excess acetyl-
CoA molecules serve as precursors for ketogenesis. Unlike 
glucose metabolism, oxidation of fatty acids requires propor-
tionally less oxygen and produces less carbon dioxide. This is 
frequently quantified as the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to 
oxygen consumed for the reaction and is known as the respira-
tory quotient (RQ). An RQ of 0.7 would imply greater fatty 
acid oxidation for fuel, whereas an RQ of 1 indicates greater 
carbohydrate oxidation (overfeeding). An RQ of 0.85 suggests 
the oxidation of equal amounts of fatty acids and glucose.
Ketogenesis
Carbohydrate depletion slows the entry of acetyl-CoA into 
the TCA cycle secondary to depleted TCA intermediates and 
enzyme activity. Increased lipolysis and reduced systemic car-
bohydrate availability during starvation diverts excess acetyl-
CoA toward hepatic ketogenesis. A number of extrahepatic 
Dietary
triglycerides
Intestinal lumen
Lymphatic duct
Pancreatic
lipase
Gut
enterocyte
Monoglycerides
Triglycerides
Monoglyceride + 2 Fatty acyI-CoA
Fatty acids
Chylomicron
+ Protein
Figure 2-19.  Pancreatic lipase 
within the small intestinal brush 
borders hydrolyzes triglycerides 
into monoglycerides and fatty acids. 
These components readily diffuse 
into the gut enterocytes, where they 
are re-esterified into triglycerides. 
The resynthesized triglycerides bind 
carrier proteins to form chylomicrons, 
which are transported by the lym-
phatic system. Shorter triglycerides 
(those with <10 carbon atoms) can 
bypass this process and directly enter 
the portal circulation for transport to 
the liver. CoA = coenzyme A.
48
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
tissues, but not the liver itself, are capable of using ketones for 
fuel. Ketosis represents a state in which hepatic ketone produc-
tion exceeds extrahepatic ketone utilization.
The rate of ketogenesis appears to be inversely related to the 
severity of injury. Major trauma, severe shock, and sepsis attenu-
ate ketogenesis by increasing insulin levels and by causing rapid 
tissue oxidation of free fatty acids. Minor injuries and infections 
are associated with modest elevations in plasma free fatty acid 
concentrations and ketogenesis. However, in minor stress states 
ketogenesis does not exceed that in nonstressed starvation.
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Ingested and enteral carbohydrates are primarily digested in the 
small intestine, where pancreatic and intestinal enzymes reduce 
the complex carbohydrates to dimeric units. Disaccharidases 
(e.g., sucrase, lactase, and maltase) within intestinal brush bor-
ders dismantle the complex carbohydrates into simple hexose 
units, which are transported into the intestinal mucosa. Glu-
cose and galactose are primarily absorbed by energy-dependent 
active transport coupled to the sodium pump. Fructose absorp-
tion, however, occurs by concentration-dependent facilitated 
diffusion. Neither fructose or galactose within the circulation 
nor exogenous mannitol (for neurologic injury) evokes an insu-
lin response. Intravenous administration of low-dose fructose in 
fasting humans has been associated with nitrogen conservation, 
but the clinical utility of fructose administration in human injury 
remains to be demonstrated.
Discussion of carbohydrate metabolism primarily refers to 
the utilization of glucose. The oxidation of 1 g of carbohydrate 
yields 4 kcal, but sugar solutions such as those found in intra-
venous fluids or parenteral nutrition provide only 3.4 kcal/g of 
dextrose. In starvation, glucose production occurs at the expense 
of protein stores (i.e., skeletal muscle). Hence, the primary goal 
for maintenance glucose administration in surgical patients is 
to minimize muscle wasting. The exogenous administration of 
small amounts of glucose (approximately 50 g/d) facilitates fat 
entry into the TCA cycle and reduces ketosis. Unlike in starva-
tion in healthy subjects, in septic and trauma patients, provision 
of exogenous glucose never has been shown to fully suppress 
amino acid degradation for gluconeogenesis. This suggests that 
during periods of stress, other hormonal and proinflammatory 
mediators have a profound influence on the rate of protein deg-
radation and that some degree of muscle wasting is inevitable. 
The administration of insulin, however, has been shown to 
reverse protein catabolism during severe stress by stimulating 
protein synthesis in skeletal muscles and by inhibiting hepato-
cyte protein degradation. Insulin also stimulates the incorpora-
tion of elemental precursors into nucleic acids in association 
with RNA synthesis in muscle cells.
In cells, glucose is phosphorylated to form glucose-6-
phosphate. Glucose-6-phosphate can be polymerized during gly-
cogenesis or catabolized in glycogenolysis. Glucose catabolism 
occurs by cleavage to pyruvate or lactate (pyruvic acid pathway) 
or by decarboxylation to pentoses (pentose shunt) (Fig. 2-22).
Excess glucose from overfeeding, as reflected by RQs 
>1.0, can result in conditions such as glucosuria, thermogenesis, 
and conversion to fat (lipogenesis). Excessive glucose adminis-
tration results in elevated carbon dioxide production, which may 
Hormone-receptor
activation
Capillary
Adipose
cell
FFA
cAMP
Protein kinase
Triglyceride lipase
Triglyceride
Diglyceride
Monoglyceride
Glycerol
FFA
FFA
FFA
Figure 2-20.  Fat mobilization in adipose tissue. Triglyceride lipase activation by hormonal stimulation of adipose cells occurs through 
the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. Triglycerides are serially hydrolyzed with resultant free fatty acid (FFA) release at 
every step. The FFAs diffuse readily into the capillary bed for transport. Tissues with glycerokinase can use glycerol for fuel by forming 
glycerol-3-phosphate. Glycerol-3-phosphate can esterify with FFAs to form triglycerides or can be used as a precursor for renal and hepatic 
gluconeogenesis. Skeletal muscle and adipose cells have little glycerokinase and thus do not use glycerol for fuel.
49
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
be deleterious in patients with suboptimal pulmonary function, 
as well as hyperglycemia, which may contribute to infectious 
risk and immune suppression.
Injury and severe infections acutely induce a state of 
peripheral glucose intolerance, despite ample insulin production 
at levels several fold above baseline. This may occur in part due 
to reduced skeletal muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase activity after 
injury, which diminishes the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-
CoA and subsequent entry into the TCA cycle. The three-carbon 
structures (e.g., pyruvate and lactate) that consequently accumu-
late are shunted to the liver as substrate for gluconeogenesis. 
Furthermore, regional tissue catheterization and isotope dilution 
studies have shown an increase in net splanchnic glucose pro-
duction by 50% to 60% in septic patients and a 50% to 100% 
increase in burn patients.137 The increase in plasma glucose lev-
els is proportional to the severity of injury, and this net hepatic 
gluconeogenic response is believed to be under the influence of 
glucagon. Unlike in the nonstressed subject, in the hypermeta-
bolic, critically ill patient, the hepatic gluconeogenic response 
to injury or sepsis cannot be suppressed by exogenous or excess 
glucose administration but rather persists. Hepatic gluconeogen-
esis, arising primarily from alanine and glutamine catabolism, 
provides a ready fuel source for tissues such as those of the ner-
vous system, wounds, and erythrocytes, which do not require 
insulin for glucose transport. The elevated glucose concentra-
tions also provide a necessary energy source for leukocytes in 
inflamed tissues and in sites of microbial invasions.
The shunting of glucose away from nonessential organs 
such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissues is mediated by cat-
echolamines. Experiments with infusing catecholamines and 
glucagon in animals have demonstrated elevated plasma glu-
cose levels as a result of increased hepatic gluconeogenesis and 
Carnitine
acyltransferase I
Transport
protein
Cytosol
Mitochondria
FFA
Acetyl-CoA
Beta Oxidation
Carnitine
Carnitine
acyltransferase II
CoA
Carnitine
Mitochondrial
membrane
O
R
C
Carnitine
O
R
C
CoA
R
O
C
CoA
O
R
C
Carnitine
CoA
Figure 2-21.  Free fatty acids (FFAs) in the cells form fatty acyl-
coenzyme A (CoA) with CoA. Fatty acyl-CoA cannot enter the 
inner mitochondrial membrane and requires carnitine as a carrier 
protein (carnitine shuttle). Once inside the mitochondria, carnitine 
dissociates and fatty acyl-CoA is re-formed. The carnitine molecule 
is transported back into the cytosol for reuse. The fatty acyl-CoA 
undergoes beta oxidation to form acetyl-CoA for entry into the tri-
carboxylic acid cycle. “R” represents a part of the acyl group of 
acyl-CoA.
Glycogen
Glucose
Glucose-6-Phosphate
6-Phosphogluconate
Pyruvic
acid
Lactic
acid
Pentose
monophosphate
shunt
Tricarboxylic acid
Figure 2-22.  Simplified schema of 
glucose catabolism through the pen-
tose monophosphate pathway or by 
breakdown into pyruvate. Glucose-
6-phosphate becomes an important 
“crossroad” for glucose metabolism.
50
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
peripheral insulin resistance. Interestingly, although glucocorti-
coid infusion alone does not increase glucose levels, it does pro-
long and augment the hyperglycemic effects of catecholamines 
and glucagon when glucocorticoid is administered concurrently 
with the latter.
Glycogen stores within skeletal muscles can be mobi-
lized by EPI activation of β-adrenergic receptors, GTP-binding 
proteins (G proteins), which subsequently activates the second 
messenger, cAMP. The cAMP activates phosphorylase kinase, 
which in turn leads to conversion of glycogen to glucose-1-
phosphate. Phosphorylase kinase also can be activated by the 
second messenger, calcium, through the breakdown of phos-
phatidylinositol phosphate, which is the case in vasopressin-
mediated hepatic glycogenolysis.138
Glucose Transport and Signaling.  Hydrophobic cell mem-
branes are relatively impermeable to hydrophilic glucose mol-
ecules. There are two distinct classes of membrane glucose 
transporters in human systems. These are the facilitated dif-
fusion glucose transporters (GLUTs) that permit the transport 
of glucose down a concentration gradient (Table 2-9) and the 
Na+/glucose secondary active transport system (SGLT), which 
transports glucose molecules against concentration gradients by 
active transport.
Numerous functional human GLUTs have been cloned 
since 1985. GLUT1 is expressed at its highest level in human 
erythrocytes, where it may function to increase the glucose car-
rying capacity of the blood. It is expressed on several other tis-
sues, but little is found in the liver and skeletal muscle. GLUT1 
plays a critical role in cerebral glucose uptake as the major 
GLUT isoform that is constitutively expressed by the endothe-
lium in the blood-brain barrier. GLUT2 is the major glucose 
transporter of hepatocytes. It is also expressed by intestinal 
absorptive cells, pancreatic β-cells, renal tubule cells, and insu-
lin-secreting β-cells of the pancreas. GLUT2 is important for 
glucose uptake and release in the fed and fasted states. GLUT3 
is highly expressed in neuronal tissue of the brain and appears to 
be important to neuronal glucose uptake. GLUT4 is significant 
to human metabolism because it is the primary glucose trans-
porter of insulin-sensitive tissues, adipose tissue, and skeletal 
and cardiac muscle. Under basal conditions, these transporters 
are usually packaged as intracellular vesicles, but when insulin 
levels rise, rapid translocation of these vesicles to the cell surface 
occurs, increasing glucose uptake and metabolism in these tissues 
and preventing chronic elevations in blood glucose levels. 
A defect in this insulin-mediated translocation of GLUT4 to the 
plasma membrane causes peripheral insulin resistance. GLUT4 
therefore plays a critical role in the regulation of whole-body 
glucose homeostasis. GLUT5 has been identified in several tis-
sues but is primarily expressed in the jejunum. Although it pos-
sesses some capacity for glucose transport, it is predominantly 
a fructose transporter.139
SGLTs are distinct glucose transport systems found in the 
intestinal epithelium and in the proximal renal tubules. These 
systems transport both sodium and glucose intracellularly, and 
glucose affinity for this transporter increases when sodium ions 
are attached. SGLT1 is prevalent on brush borders of small 
intestine enterocytes and primarily mediates the active uptake of 
luminal glucose. In addition, SGLT1 within the intestinal lumen 
also enhances gut retention of water through osmotic absorp-
tion. SGLT1 and SGLT2 are both associated with glucose reab-
sorption at proximal renal tubules.
Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism
The average protein intake in healthy young adults ranges from 
80 to 120 g/d, and every 6 g of protein yields approximately 1 g of 
nitrogen. The degradation of 1 g of protein yields approximately 
4 kcal of energy, similar to the yield in carbohydrate metabolism.
After injury, the initial systemic proteolysis, mediated pri-
marily by glucocorticoids, increases urinary nitrogen excretion 
to levels in excess of 30 g/d, which roughly corresponds to a 
loss in lean body mass of 1.5% per day. An injured individual 
who does not receive nutrition for 10 days can theoretically lose 
15% lean body mass. Therefore, amino acids cannot be con-
sidered a long-term fuel reserve, and indeed excessive protein 
depletion (i.e., 25% to 30% of lean body weight) is not compat-
ible with sustaining life.140
Protein catabolism after injury provides substrates for 
gluconeogenesis and for the synthesis of acute-phase proteins. 
Radiolabeled amino acid incorporation studies and protein anal-
yses confirm that skeletal muscles are preferentially depleted 
acutely after injury, whereas visceral tissues (e.g., the liver 
and kidney) remain relatively preserved. The accelerated urea 
excretion after injury also is associated with the excretion of 
intracellular elements such as sulfur, phosphorus, potassium, 
magnesium, and creatinine. Conversely, the rapid utilization 
of elements such as potassium and magnesium during recovery 
from major injury may indicate a period of tissue healing.
The net changes in protein catabolism and synthesis corre-
spond to the severity and duration of injury (Fig. 2-23). Elective 
operations and minor injuries result in lower protein synthesis 
and moderate protein breakdown. Severe trauma, burns, and 
sepsis are associated with increased protein catabolism. The 
rise in urinary nitrogen and negative nitrogen balance can be 
detected early after injury and peak by 7 days. This state of pro-
tein catabolism may persist for as long as 3 to 7 weeks. The patient’s 
prior physical status and age appear to influence the degree of 
proteolysis after injury or sepsis. Activation of the ubiquitin-
proteasome system in muscle cells is one of the major pathways 
for protein degradation during acute injury. This response is 
accentuated by tissue hypoxia, acidosis, insulin resistance, and 
elevated glucocorticoid levels.
NUTRITION IN THE SURGICAL PATIENT
The goal of nutritional support in the surgical patient is to 
prevent or reverse the catabolic effects of disease or injury. 
Although several important biologic parameters have been used 
Table 2-9 
Human facilitated diffusion glucose transporter 
(GLUT) family
Type
Amino Acids
Major Expression Sites
GLUT1
492
Placenta, brain, kidney, colon
GLUT2
524
Liver, pancreatic β-cells, 
kidney, small intestine
GLUT3
496
Brain, testis
GLUT4
509
Skeletal muscle, heart 
muscle, brown and white fat
GLUT5
501
Small intestine, sperm
51
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
to measure the efficacy of nutritional regimens, the ultimate 
validation for nutritional support in surgical patients should be 
improvement in clinical outcome and restoration of function.
Estimation of Energy Requirements
Overall nutritional assessment is undertaken to determine the 
severity of nutrient deficiencies or excess and to aid in predict-
ing nutritional requirements. Pertinent information is obtained 
by determining the presence of weight loss, chronic illnesses, 
or dietary habits that influence the quantity and quality of food 
intake. Social habits predisposing to malnutrition and the use of 
medications that may influence food intake or urination should 
also be investigated. Physical examination seeks to assess loss 
of muscle and adipose tissues, organ dysfunction, and subtle 
changes in skin, hair, or neuromuscular function reflecting 
frank or impending nutritional deficiency. Anthropometric data 
(i.e., weight change, skinfold thickness, and arm circumference 
muscle area) and biochemical determinations (i.e., creatinine 
excretion, albumin level, prealbumin level, total lymphocyte 
count, and transferrin level) may be used to substantiate the 
patient’s history and physical findings. However, it is imprecise 
to rely on any single or fixed combination of the findings to 
accurately assess nutritional status or morbidity. Appreciation 
for the stresses and natural history of the disease process, in 
combination with nutritional assessment, remains the basis for 
identifying patients in acute or anticipated need of nutritional 
support.
A fundamental goal of nutritional support is to meet the 
energy requirements for essential metabolic processes and tissue 
repair. Failure to provide adequate nonprotein energy sources 
will lead to consumption of lean tissue stores. The requirement 
for energy may be measured by indirect calorimetry and trends 
in serum markers (e.g., prealbumin level) and estimated from 
urinary nitrogen excretion, which is proportional to resting 
energy expenditure.138 However, the use of indirect calorimetry, 
particularly in the critically ill patient, is labor intensive and 
often leads to overestimation of caloric requirements.
Basal energy expenditure (BEE) may also be estimated 
using the Harris-Benedict equations:
BEE (men) = 66.47 + 13.75 (W) + 5.0 (H) – 6.76 (A) kcal/d 
BEE (women) = 655.1 + 9.56 (W) +  
1.85 (H) – 4.68 (A) kcal/d
where W = weight in kilograms; H = height in centimeters; and 
A = age in years.
These equations, adjusted for the type of surgical stress, 
are suitable for estimating energy requirements in the majority of 
hospitalized patients. It has been demonstrated that the provision 
of 30 kcal/kg per day will adequately meet energy requirements in 
most postsurgical patients, with a low risk of overfeeding. After 
trauma or sepsis, energy substrate demands are increased, neces-
sitating greater nonprotein calories beyond calculated energy 
expenditure (Table 2-10). These additional nonprotein calories 
provided after injury are usually 1.2 to 2.0 times greater than 
calculated resting energy expenditure, depending on the type of 
injury. It is seldom appropriate to exceed this level of nonprotein 
energy intake during the height of the catabolic phase.
The second objective of nutritional support is to meet 
the substrate requirements for protein synthesis. An appro-
priate nonprotein-calorie:nitrogen ratio of 150:1 (e.g., 1 g N = 
6.25 g protein) should be maintained, which is the basal calorie 
requirement provided to limit the use of protein as an energy 
source. There is now greater evidence suggesting that increased 
protein intake and a lower calorie:nitrogen ratio of 80:1 to 100:1 
may benefit healing in selected hypermetabolic or critically ill 
patients. In the absence of severe renal or hepatic dysfunction 
precluding the use of standard nutritional regimens, approxi-
mately 0.25 to 0.35 g of nitrogen per kilogram of body weight 
should be provided daily.141
Vitamins and Minerals
The requirements for vitamins and essential trace miner-
als usually can be met easily in the average patient with an 
Figure 2-23.  The effect of injury sever-
ity on nitrogen wasting. (From Long CL, 
Schaffel N, Geiger J, et al. Metabolic 
response to injury and illness: estimation 
of energy and protein needs from indirect 
calorimetry and nitrogen balance. JPEN 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1979;3(6):452. 
kkjkjdht © 1979 by A.S.P.E.N.  Reprinted 
by permission of Sage Publications.)
Nitrogen excretion (g/day)
12
8
0
4
16
20
24
28
32
Days
Major burns
Severe sepsis
Skeletal trauma
Infection
0
10
20
30
40
Elective surgery
Partial starvation
Total starvation
52
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
uncomplicated postoperative course. Therefore, vitamins usu-
ally are not given in the absence of preoperative deficiencies. 
Patients maintained on elemental diets or parenteral hyperali-
mentation require complete vitamin and mineral supplemen-
tation. Commercial enteral diets contain varying amounts of 
essential minerals and vitamins. It is necessary to ensure that 
adequate replacement is available in the diet or by supplemen-
tation. Numerous commercial vitamin preparations are avail-
able for intravenous or intramuscular use, although most do not 
contain vitamin K and some do not contain vitamin B12 or folic 
acid. Supplemental trace minerals may be given intravenously 
via commercial preparations. Essential fatty acid supplementa-
tion also may be necessary, especially in patients with depletion 
of adipose stores.
Overfeeding
Overfeeding usually results from overestimation of caloric 
needs, as occurs when actual body weight is used to calculate 
the BEE in patient populations such as the critically ill with sig-
nificant fluid overload and the obese. Indirect calorimetry can 
be used to quantify energy requirements but frequently overes-
timates BEE by 10% to 15% in stressed patients, particularly if 
they are receiving ventilatory support. In these instances, esti-
mated dry weight should be obtained from preinjury records or 
family members. Adjusted lean body weight also can be cal-
culated. Overfeeding may contribute to clinical deterioration 
via increased oxygen consumption, increased carbon dioxide 
production and prolonged need for ventilatory support, fatty 
liver, suppression of leukocyte function, hyperglycemia, and 
increased risk of infection.
ENTERAL NUTRITION
Rationale for Enteral Nutrition
Enteral nutrition generally is preferred over parenteral nutrition 
based on the lower cost of enteral feeding and the associated 
risks of the intravenous route, including vascular access com-
plications.142 Of further consideration are the consequences of 
gastrointestinal tract disuse, which include diminished secre-
tory IgA production and cytokine production as well as bac-
terial overgrowth and altered mucosal defenses. For example, 
laboratory models have long demonstrated that luminal nutrient 
contact reduces intestinal mucosal atrophy compared with par-
enteral or no nutritional support.
The benefits of enteral feeding in patients undergo-
ing elective surgery appear to be linked to their preoperative 
nutritional status. Studies comparing postoperative enteral and 
parenteral nutrition in patients undergoing gastrointestinal sur-
gery have demonstrated reduced infectious complications and 
acute-phase protein production in those fed by the enteral route. 
Yet prospectively randomized studies of patients with adequate 
nutritional status (albumin ≥4 g/dL) undergoing gastrointestinal 
surgery demonstrate no differences in outcome and complica-
tions between those administered enteral nutrition and those 
given maintenance intravenous fluids alone in the initial days 
after surgery.143 Furthermore, intestinal permeability studies in 
well-nourished patients undergoing upper gastrointestinal can-
cer surgery demonstrated normalization of intestinal permeabil-
ity and barrier function by the fifth postoperative day.144 The 
data for critically ill or injured patients are more definitive as to 
the benefits of enteral nutrition. Meta-analysis of studies involv-
ing critically ill patients demonstrates a 44% reduction in infec-
tious complications in those receiving enteral nutritional support 
compared with those receiving parenteral nutrition. Most pro-
spectively randomized studies in patients with severe abdomi-
nal and thoracic trauma demonstrate significant reductions in 
infectious complications in patients given early enteral nutri-
tion compared with those who were unfed or received parenteral 
nutrition. In critically ill patients, prospective studies have also 
demonstrated that early enteral nutrition is associated with bet-
ter small-intestinal carbohydrate absorption, shorter duration of 
mechanical ventilation, and shorter time in the intensive care 
unit. The exception has been in studies of patients with 
closed-head injury, in whom no significant differences in 
outcome were demonstrated between early jejunal feeding and 
other nutritional support modalities. Moreover, early gastric 
feeding after closed-head injury was frequently associated with 
underfeeding and calorie deficiency due to the difficulties in 
overcoming gastroparesis and the high risk of aspiration. While 
current evidence remains inconclusive about the benefits of 
“early” (as defined by feeding in the first 24 hours) versus “late” 
(as defined by feeding >24 hours after burn) enteral nutrition in 
burn patients as to its impact on mortality rates, there is reason 
to believe that early enteral nutrition may positively modulate 
the initial hypermetabolic response and help to maintain muco-
sal immunity.
In summary, enteral nutrition is preferred for most criti-
cally ill patients—an evidence-based practice supported by 
clinical data involving a variety of critically ill patient popula-
tions, including those with trauma, burns, head injury, major 
surgery, and acute pancreatitis. For intensive care unit 
patients who are hemodynamically stable and have a 
Table 2-10 
Caloric adjustments above basal energy expenditure (BEE) in hypermetabolic conditions
Condition
kcal/kg per Day
Adjustment above BEE
Grams of Protein/ 
kg per Day
Nonprotein Calories: 
Nitrogen
Normal/moderate 
malnutrition
25–30
1.1
1.0
150:1
Mild stress
25–30
1.2
1.2
150:1
Moderate stress
30
1.4
1.5
120:1
Severe stress
30–35
1.6
2.0
90–120:1
Burns
35–40
2.0
2.5
90–100:1
6
7
53
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
functioning gastrointestinal tract, early enteral feeding (within 
24 to 48 hours of arrival in the intensive care unit) has become 
a recommended standard of care.145 For patients undergoing 
elective surgery, healthy patients without malnutrition who are 
undergoing uncomplicated surgery can tolerate 10 days of par-
tial starvation (i.e., maintenance intravenous fluids only) before 
any clinically significant protein catabolism occurs. Earlier 
intervention is likely indicated for patients in whom preopera-
tive protein-calorie malnutrition has been identified. Other clini-
cal scenarios for which the benefits of enteral nutritional support 
have been substantiated include permanent neurologic impair-
ment, oropharyngeal dysfunction, short-bowel syndrome, and 
bone marrow transplantation.
Initiation of enteral nutrition should occur immediately 
after adequate resuscitation, most readily determined by ade-
quate urine output. The presence of bowel sounds and the pas-
sage of flatus or stool are not absolute prerequisites for initiation 
of enteral nutrition, but in the setting of gastroparesis, feedings 
should be administered distal to the pylorus. Gastric residuals of 
200 mL or more in a 4- to 6-hour period or abdominal distention 
requires cessation of feeding and adjustment of the infusion rate. 
Concomitant gastric decompression with distal small-bowel 
feedings may be appropriate in certain patients such as closed-
head injury patients with gastroparesis. There is no evidence to 
support withholding enteric feedings for patients after bowel 
resection or for those with low-output enterocutaneous fistulas 
of <500 mL/d. In fact, a recent systematic review of studies of 
early enteral feeding (within 24 hours of gastrointestinal sur-
gery) showed no effect on anastomotic leak and a reduction in 
mortality. Early enteral feeding is also associated with reduced 
incidence of fistula formation in patients with open abdomen. 
Enteral feeding should also be offered to patients with short-
bowel syndrome or clinical malabsorption, but necessary calo-
ries, essential minerals, and vitamins should be supplemented 
using parenteral modalities.
Hypocaloric Enteral Nutrition
As noted earlier, critically ill and/or injured patients demon-
strate increased resting energy expenditure associated with 
altered metabolism. While several methods exist to predict the 
energy requirement, the recommended caloric dose for critically 
ill patients varies, ranging from 25 to 30 kcal/kg. The perceived 
benefit of achieving the caloric target is to meet the patient’s 
energy needs and to avoid the loss of lean body mass. How-
ever, recent evidence supports the idea of caloric restriction, 
attributing its benefits to improved cellular function in terms 
of effects on mitochondrial free radical generation, the plasma 
membrane redox system, and insulin sensitivity. Further sup-
port was offered by a single-center, randomized controlled trial 
that compared permissive underfeeding with target enteral feed-
ing (caloric goal: 60% to 70% compared with 90% to 100% 
of calculated requirement) in critically ill medical and surgical 
patients.146 This study demonstrated that permissive underfeed-
ing was associated with lower mortality and morbidity than was 
target feeding. However, current guidelines do not recommend 
hypocaloric feeding without confirmation of these data from 
the multicenter trial that is currently ongoing. A recent study 
examined the use of trophic feedings in patients with acute lung 
injury. Trophic feedings refer to providing a minimal amount of 
enteral feedings, which are presumed to have beneficial effects 
despite not meeting daily caloric needs. When the trophic feed-
ing group (enteral feeding at 10 mL/h) was compared with the 
full-feeding group (25 mL/h) over the first 6 days of feeding, 
there was no improvement in ventilator-free days, 60-day mor-
tality, or infectious complications.147
Enteral Formulas
For most critically ill patients, the choice of enteral formula 
will be determined by a number of factors and will include a 
clinical judgment as to the “best fit” for the patients’ needs. 
In general, feeding formulas to consider are gastrointestinal 
tolerance-promoting, anti-inflammatory, immune-modulating, 
organ supportive, and standard enteral nutrition. In addition, 
guidelines from professional nutrition societies identify certain 
populations of patients who can benefit from formulations with 
specific pharmaconutrients.148 For many others, each physician 
must use his or her own clinical judgment about what formula 
will best meet the patient’s needs.
The functional status of the gastrointestinal tract determines 
the type of enteral solutions to be used. Patients with an intact 
gastrointestinal tract will tolerate complex solutions, but patients 
who have not been fed via the gastrointestinal tract for prolonged 
periods are less likely to tolerate complex carbohydrates. In those 
patients who are having difficulty tolerating standard enteral 
formulas, peptide- and MCT-based formulas with prebiotics 
can lessen gastrointestinal tolerance problems. Additionally, in 
patients with demonstrated malabsorption issues, such as with 
inflammatory bowel diseases or short-bowel syndrome, current 
guidelines endorse the provision of hydrolyzed protein formulas 
to improve absorption. Guidelines have not yet been made with 
regard to the fiber content of enteral formulas. However, recent 
evidence indicates that supplementation of enteral formulas with 
soluble dietary fiber may be beneficial for improving stool con-
sistency in patients suffering from diarrhea.
Factors that influence the choice of enteral formula also 
include the extent of organ dysfunction (e.g., renal, pulmonary, 
hepatic, or gastrointestinal), the nutrients needed to restore 
optimal function and healing, and the cost of specific products. 
There are still no conclusive data to recommend one category 
of product over another, and nutritional support committees 
typically develop the most cost-efficient enteral formulary for 
the most commonly encountered disease categories within the 
institution.
As discussed extensively in the first sections of this chap-
ter, surgery and trauma result in a significant “sterile” inflam-
matory response that impacts the innate and adaptive immune 
systems. The provision of immune-modulating nutrients, termed 
“immunonutrition,” is one mechanism by which the immune 
response can be supported and an attempt made to lower infec-
tious risk. At present, the best-studied immunonutrients are glu-
tamine, arginine, and ω-3 PUFAs.
“Immunonutrients.”  Glutamine is the most abundant amino 
acid in the human body, comprising nearly two thirds of the free 
intracellular amino acid pool. Of this, 75% is found within the 
skeletal muscles. In healthy individuals, glutamine is considered 
a nonessential amino acid, because it is synthesized within the 
skeletal muscles and the lungs. Glutamine is a necessary sub-
strate for nucleotide synthesis in most dividing cells and hence 
provides a major fuel source for enterocytes. It also serves as 
an important fuel source for immunocytes such as lymphocytes 
and macrophages and is a precursor for glutathione, a major 
intracellular antioxidant. During stress states such as sepsis, or 
in tumor-bearing hosts, peripheral glutamine stores are rapidly 
depleted, and the amino acid is preferentially shunted as a fuel 
54
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
source toward the visceral organs and tumors, respectively.149 
These situations create, at least experimentally, a glutamine-
depleted environment, with consequences including enterocyte 
and immunocyte starvation. Glutamine metabolism during 
stress in humans, however, may be more complex than is indi-
cated in previously reported animal data. Although it is hypoth-
esized that provision of glutamine may preserve immune cell 
and enterocyte function and enhance nitrogen balance during 
injury or sepsis, the clinical outcome is very strongly dependent 
on the patient population, as will be discussed later.
Arginine, also a nonessential amino acid in healthy sub-
jects, first attracted attention for its immunoenhancing proper-
ties, wound-healing benefits, and association with improved 
survival in animal models of sepsis and injury.150 As with glu-
tamine, the benefits of experimental arginine supplementation 
during stress states are diverse. In clinical studies involving 
critically ill and injured patients and patients who have under-
gone surgery for certain malignancies, enteral administration of 
arginine has led to net nitrogen retention and protein synthesis, 
whereas isonitrogenous diets have not. Some of these studies 
also provide in vitro evidence of enhanced immunocyte func-
tion. The clinical utility of arginine supplementation in improv-
ing overall patient outcome remains an area of investigation.
As previously discussed, ω-3 PUFAs (canola oil or fish 
oil) displace ω-6 fatty acids in cell membranes, which theoreti-
cally reduces the proinflammatory response from prostaglandin 
production. Hence, there has been significant interest in reduc-
ing the ratio of ω-6 to ω-3 fatty acids.
Low-Residue Isotonic Formulas.  Most low-residue isotonic 
formulas provide a caloric density of 1.0 kcal/mL, and approxi-
mately 1500 to 1800 mL are required to meet daily require-
ments. These low-osmolarity compositions provide baseline 
carbohydrates, protein, electrolytes, water, fat, and fat-soluble 
vitamins (some do not have vitamin K) and typically have a 
nonprotein-calorie:nitrogen ratio of 150:1. These contain no 
fiber bulk and therefore leave minimum residue. These solutions 
usually are considered to be the standard or first-line formulas 
for stable patients with an intact gastrointestinal tract.
Isotonic Formulas with Fiber.  Isotonic formulas with fiber 
contain soluble and insoluble fiber, which is most often soy 
based. Physiologically, fiber-based solutions delay intestinal 
transit time and may reduce the incidence of diarrhea compared 
with nonfiber solutions. Fiber stimulates pancreatic lipase activ-
ity and is degraded by gut bacteria into short-chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs), an important fuel for colonocytes. Recent data have 
also demonstrated the expression of SCFA receptors on leuko-
cytes, suggesting that fiber fermentation by the colonic microbi-
ome may indirectly regulate immune cell function. Future work 
in this area is likely to demonstrate important links between 
fiber type, microbiome composition, and immune health.
Immune-Enhancing Formulas.  Immune-enhancing formulas 
are fortified with special nutrients that are purported to enhance 
various aspects of immune or solid organ function. Such addi-
tives include glutamine, arginine, ω-3 fatty acids, and nucleo-
tides.151 Although several trials have proposed that one or more 
of these additives reduce surgical complications and improve 
outcome, these results have not been uniformly corroborated 
by other trials. The Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines cur-
rently do not recommend the addition of arginine supplements 
for critically ill patients due to the potential for harm when used 
in septic patients.152 With regard to ω-3 PUFAs, results from 
the EDEN-Omega study demonstrated that twice-daily enteral 
supplementation of ω-3 fatty acids, α-linolenic acid, and anti-
oxidants did not improve the primary endpoint of ventilator-free 
days or other clinical outcomes in patients with acute lung injury 
and may be harmful.153 Glutamine supplementation should be 
strictly guided by the individual patient condition. Enteral and 
parenteral supplementation with glutamine appears to have a 
harmful effect in critically ill patients with multiorgan failure 
as evidenced by significantly increased mortality (REDOXS 
study). However, for burn or trauma patients who are hemo-
dynamically stable and without evidence of organ dysfunction, 
glutamine supplementation has been shown to be beneficial in 
terms of decreased LOS and infectious complications.
Calorie-Dense Formulas.  The primary distinction of calorie-
dense formulas is a greater caloric value for the same volume. 
Most commercial products of this variety provide 1.5 to 2 kcal/mL 
and therefore are suitable for patients requiring fluid restriction 
or those unable to tolerate large-volume infusions. As expected, 
these solutions have higher osmolality than standard formulas 
and are suitable for intragastric feedings.
High-Protein Formulas.  High-protein formulas are available 
in isotonic and nonisotonic mixtures and are proposed for criti-
cally ill or trauma patients with high protein requirements. These 
formulas have nonprotein-calorie:nitrogen ratios between 80:1 
and 120:1. While some observational studies show improved 
outcomes with higher protein intakes in critically ill patients, 
there are limited data from randomized trials, which prevents 
making strong conclusions about the dose of protein in critically 
ill patients.
Elemental Formulas.  Elemental formulas contain predigested 
nutrients and provide proteins in the form of small peptides. 
Complex carbohydrates are limited, and fat content, in the form 
of MCTs and LCTs, is minimal. The primary advantage of such 
a formula is ease of absorption, but the inherent scarcity of fat, 
associated vitamins, and trace elements limits its long-term use 
as a primary source of nutrients. Due to its high osmolarity, 
dilution or slow infusion rates usually are necessary, particu-
larly in critically ill patients. These formulas have been used 
frequently in patients with malabsorption, gut impairment, and 
pancreatitis, but their cost is significantly higher than that of 
standard formulas. To date, there has been no evidence of their 
benefit in routine use.
Renal Failure Formulas.  The primary benefits of renal for-
mulas are the lower fluid volume and concentrations of potas-
sium, phosphorus, and magnesium needed to meet daily calorie 
requirements. This type of formulation almost exclusively 
contains essential amino acids and has a high nonprotein-
calorie:nitrogen ratio; however, it does not contain trace ele-
ments or vitamins.
Pulmonary Failure Formulas.  In pulmonary failure formulas, 
fat content is usually increased to 50% of the total calories, with 
a corresponding reduction in carbohydrate content. The goal is 
to reduce carbon dioxide production and alleviate ventilation 
burden for failing lungs.
Hepatic Failure Formulas.  Close to 50% of the proteins in 
hepatic failure formulas are branched-chain amino acids (e.g., 
leucine, isoleucine, and valine). The goal of such a formula is 
to reduce aromatic amino acid levels and increase the levels 
of branched-chain amino acids, which can potentially reverse 
encephalopathy in patients with hepatic failure.154 The use of 
55
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
these formulas is controversial, however, because no clear bene-
fits have been proven by clinical trials. Protein restriction should 
be avoided in patients with end-stage liver disease, because such 
patients have significant protein-energy malnutrition that pre-
disposes them to additional morbidity and mortality.155
Access for Enteral Nutritional Support
The available techniques and repertoire for enteral access have 
provided multiple options for feeding the gut. Presently used meth-
ods and preferred indications are summarized in Table 2-11.156
Nasoenteric Tubes.  Nasogastric feeding should be reserved 
for those with intact mentation and protective laryngeal reflexes 
to minimize risks of aspiration. Even in intubated patients, naso-
gastric feedings often can be recovered from tracheal suction. 
Nasojejunal feedings are associated with fewer pulmonary 
complications including risk of pneumonia, but access past the 
pylorus requires greater effort to accomplish. Therefore, routine 
use of small-bowel feedings is preferred in units where small-
bowel access is readily feasible. Where there may be difficul-
ties obtaining access, small-bowel feedings may be considered 
a priority for those patients at high risk for intolerance to enteral 
nutrition (e.g., high gastric residuals).
Blind insertion of nasogastric feeding tubes is fraught with 
misplacement, and air instillation with auscultation is inaccurate 
for ascertaining proper positioning. Radiographic confirmation 
is usually required to verify the position of the nasogastric feed-
ing tube.
Several methods have been recommended for the passage 
of nasoenteric feeding tubes into the small bowel, including use 
of prokinetic agents, right lateral decubitus positioning, gas-
tric insufflation, tube angulation, and application of clockwise 
torque. However, the successful placement of feeding tubes 
by these methods is highly variable and operator dependent. 
Furthermore, it is time consuming, and success rates for intu-
bation past the duodenum into the jejunum by these methods 
are <20%. Fluoroscopy-guided intubation past the pylorus has a 
>90% success rate, and more than half of these intubations result 
in jejunal placement. Similarly, endoscopy-guided placement 
past the pylorus has high success rates, but attempts to advance 
the tube beyond the second portion of the duodenum using a 
standard gastroduodenoscope are unlikely to be successful.
Small-bowel feeding is more reliable for delivering nutri-
tion than nasogastric feeding. Furthermore, the risks of aspi-
ration pneumonia can be reduced by 25% with small-bowel 
feeding compared with nasogastric feeding. The disadvantages 
of the use of nasoenteric feeding tubes are clogging, kink-
ing, and inadvertent displacement or removal of the tube and 
nasopharyngeal complications. If nasoenteric feeding will be 
required for longer than 30 days, access should be converted to 
a percutaneous one.157
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy.  The most common 
indications for percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) 
include impaired swallowing mechanisms, oropharyngeal or 
esophageal obstruction, and major facial trauma. It is frequently 
used for debilitated patients requiring caloric supplementation, 
hydration, or frequent medication dosing. It is also appropriate 
for patients requiring passive gastric decompression. Relative 
contraindications for PEG placement include ascites, coagu-
lopathy, gastric varices, gastric neoplasm, and lack of a suitable 
abdominal site. Most tubes are 18F to 28F in size and may be 
used for 12 to 24 months.
Identification of the PEG site requires endoscopic transil-
lumination of the anterior stomach against the abdominal wall. 
A 14-gauge angiocatheter is passed through the abdominal 
wall into the fully insufflated stomach. A guidewire is threaded 
through the angiocatheter, grasped by snares or forceps, and 
Table 2-11 
Options for enteral feeding access
Access Option
Comments
Nasogastric tube
Short-term use only; aspiration risks; nasopharyngeal trauma; frequent dislodgment
Nasoduodenal/nasojejunal tube
Short-term use; lower aspiration risks in jejunum; placement challenges (radiographic 
assistance often necessary)
Percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG)
Endoscopy skills required; may be used for gastric decompression or bolus feeds; aspiration 
risks; can last 12–24 mo; slightly higher complication rates with placement and site leaks
Surgical gastrostomy
Requires general anesthesia and small laparotomy; procedure may allow placement of extended 
duodenal/jejunal feeding ports; laparoscopic placement possible
Fluoroscopic gastrostomy
Blind placement using needle and T-prongs to anchor to stomach; can thread smaller catheter 
through gastrostomy into duodenum/jejunum under fluoroscopy
PEG-jejunal tube
Jejunal placement with regular endoscope is operator dependent; jejunal tube often dislodges 
retrograde; two-stage procedure with PEG placement, followed by fluoroscopic conversion 
with jejunal feeding tube through PEG
Direct percutaneous endoscopic 
jejunostomy (DPEJ)
Direct endoscopic tube placement with enteroscope; placement challenges; greater injury risks
Surgical jejunostomy
Commonly carried out during laparotomy; general anesthesia; laparoscopic placement 
usually requires assistant to thread catheter; laparoscopy offers direct visualization of catheter 
placement
Fluoroscopic jejunostomy
Difficult approach with injury risks; not commonly done
56
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
pulled out through the mouth. The tapered end of the PEG tube 
is secured to the guidewire and is pulled into position out of 
the abdominal wall. The PEG tube is secured without tension 
against the abdominal wall, and many have reported using the 
tube within hours of placement. It has been the practice of some 
to connect the PEG tube to a drainage bag for passive decom-
pression for 24 hours before use, allowing more time for the 
stomach to seal against the peritoneum.
If endoscopy is not available or technical obstacles pre-
clude PEG placement, the interventional radiologist can attempt 
the procedure percutaneously under fluoroscopic guidance by 
first insufflating the stomach against the abdominal wall with 
a nasogastric tube. If this also is unsuccessful, surgical gas-
trostomy tube placement can be considered, particularly with 
minimally invasive methods. When surgery is contemplated, it 
may be wise to consider directly accessing the small bowel for 
nutrition delivery.
Although PEG tubes enhance nutritional delivery, facili-
tate nursing care, and are superior to nasogastric tubes, serious 
complications occur in approximately 3% of patients. These 
complications include wound infection, necrotizing fasciitis, 
peritonitis, aspiration, leaks, dislodgment, bowel perforation, 
enteric fistulas, bleeding, and aspiration pneumonia.158 For 
patients with significant gastroparesis or gastric outlet obstruc-
tion, feedings through PEG tubes are hazardous. In such cases, 
the PEG tube can be used for decompression and allow access 
for converting the PEG tube to a transpyloric feeding tube.
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy-Jejunostomy and 
Direct Percutaneous Endoscopic Jejunostomy.  Although 
gastric bolus feedings are more physiologic, patients who can-
not tolerate gastric feedings or who have significant aspiration 
risks should be fed directly past the pylorus. In the percutane-
ous endoscopic gastrostomy-jejunostomy (PEG-J) method, a 
9F to 12F tube is passed through an existing PEG tube, past 
the pylorus, and into the duodenum. This can be achieved by 
endoscopic or fluoroscopic guidance. With weighted catheter 
tips and guidewires, the tube can be further advanced past the 
ligament of Treitz. However, the incidence of long-term PEG-J 
tube malfunction has been reported to be >50% as a result of ret-
rograde tube migration into the stomach, kinking, or clogging.
Direct percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy (DPEJ) tube 
placement uses the same techniques as PEG tube placement but 
requires an enteroscope or colonoscope to reach the jejunum. 
DPEJ tube malfunctions are probably less frequent than PEG-J 
tube malfunctions, and kinking or clogging is usually averted by 
placement of larger-caliber catheters. The success rate of DPEJ 
tube placement is variable because of the complexity of endo-
scopic skills required to locate a suitable jejunal site. In such 
cases where endoscopic means are not feasible, surgical jeju-
nostomy tube placement is more appropriate, especially when 
minimally invasive techniques are available.
Surgical Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy.  For a patient 
undergoing complex abdominal or trauma surgery, thought 
should be given during surgery to the possible routes for sub-
sequent nutritional support, because laparotomy affords direct 
access to the stomach or small bowel. The only absolute contra-
indication to feeding jejunostomy is distal intestinal obstruction. 
Relative contraindications include severe edema of the intestinal 
wall, radiation enteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, ascites, 
severe immunodeficiency, and bowel ischemia. Needle-catheter 
jejunostomies also can be done with a minimal learning curve. 
The biggest drawback usually is possible clogging and knotting 
of the 6F catheter.159
Abdominal distention and cramps are common adverse 
effects of early enteral nutrition. Some have also reported 
impaired respiratory mechanics as a result of intolerance to 
enteral feedings. These are mostly correctable by temporarily 
discontinuing feedings and resuming at a lower infusion rate.
Pneumatosis intestinalis and small-bowel necrosis are 
infrequent but significant problems in patients receiving jejunal 
tube feedings. Several contributing factors have been proposed, 
including the hyperosmolarity of enteral solutions, bacte-
rial overgrowth, fermentation, and accumulation of metabolic 
breakdown products. The common pathophysiology is believed 
to be bowel distention and consequent reduction in bowel wall 
perfusion. Risk factors for these complications include cardio-
genic and circulatory shock, vasopressor use, diabetes mellitus, 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Therefore, enteral 
feedings in the critically ill patient should be delayed until 
adequate resuscitation has been achieved. As alternatives, dilut-
ing standard enteral formula, delaying the progression to goal 
infusion rates, or using monomeric solutions with low osmolal-
ity requiring less digestion by the gastrointestinal tract all have 
been successfully used.
PARENTERAL NUTRITION
Parenteral nutrition is the continuous infusion of a hyperosmo-
lar solution containing carbohydrates, proteins, fat, and other 
necessary nutrients through an indwelling catheter inserted 
into the superior vena cava. To obtain the maximum benefit, the 
calorie:protein ratio must be adequate (at least 100 to 150 kcal/g 
nitrogen), and both carbohydrates and proteins must be infused 
simultaneously. When the sources of calories and nitrogen 
are given at different times, there is a significant decrease in 
nitrogen utilization. These nutrients can be given in quantities 
considerably greater than the basic caloric and nitrogen require-
ments, and this method has proved to be highly successful in 
achieving growth and development, positive nitrogen balance, 
and weight gain in a variety of clinical situations. Clinical trials 
and meta-analysis of studies of parenteral feeding in the peri-
operative period have suggested that preoperative nutritional 
support may benefit some surgical patients, particularly those 
with extensive malnutrition. Short-term use of parenteral nutri-
tion in critically ill patients (i.e., duration of <7 days) when 
enteral nutrition may have been instituted is associated with 
higher rates of infectious complications. After severe injury, 
parenteral nutrition is associated with higher rates of infectious 
risks than is enteral feeding (Table 2-12). Clinical studies have 
demonstrated that parenteral feeding with complete bowel rest 
results in augmented stress hormone and inflammatory mediator 
response to an antigenic challenge. However, parenteral feeding 
still is associated with fewer infectious complications than no 
feeding at all. In cancer patients, delivery of parenteral nutri-
tion has not been shown to benefit clinical response, prolong 
survival, or ameliorate the toxic effects of chemotherapy, and 
infectious complications are increased.
Rationale for Parenteral Nutrition
The principal indications for parenteral nutrition are malnu-
trition, sepsis, or surgical or traumatic injury in seriously ill 
patients for whom use of the gastrointestinal tract for feedings 
is not possible. In some instances, intravenous nutrition may 
be used to supplement inadequate oral intake. The safe and 
57
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
successful use of parenteral nutrition requires proper selection 
of patients with specific nutritional needs, experience with the 
technique, and an awareness of the associated complications. In 
patients with significant malnutrition, parenteral nutrition can 
rapidly improve nitrogen balance, which may enhance immune 
function. Routine postoperative use of parenteral nutrition is not 
shown to have clinical benefit and may be associated with a 
significant increase in complication rate. As with enteral nutri-
tion, the fundamental goals are to provide sufficient calories 
and nitrogen substrate to promote tissue repair and to maintain 
the integrity or growth of lean tissue mass. The following are 
patient groups for whom parenteral nutrition has been used in 
an effort to achieve these goals:
  1.	 Newborn infants with catastrophic gastrointestinal anom-
alies, such as tracheoesophageal fistula, gastroschisis, 
omphalocele, or massive intestinal atresia
  2.	 Infants who fail to thrive due to gastrointestinal insufficiency 
associated with short-bowel syndrome, malabsorption, 
enzyme deficiency, meconium ileus, or idiopathic diarrhea
  3.	 Adult patients with short-bowel syndrome secondary to mas-
sive small-bowel resection (<100 cm without colon or ileo-
cecal valve or <50 cm with intact ileocecal valve and colon)
  4.	 Patients with enteroenteric, enterocolic, enterovesical, or 
high-output enterocutaneous fistulas (>500 mL/d)
  5.	 Surgical patients with prolonged paralytic ileus after major 
operations (>7 to 10 days), multiple injuries, or blunt or 
open abdominal trauma, or patients with reflex ileus com-
plicating various medical diseases
  6.	 Patients with normal bowel length but with malabsorption 
secondary to sprue, hypoproteinemia, enzyme or pancreatic 
insufficiency, regional enteritis, or ulcerative colitis
  7.	 Adult patients with functional gastrointestinal disor-
ders such as esophageal dyskinesia after cerebrovascular 
accident, idiopathic diarrhea, psychogenic vomiting, or 
anorexia nervosa
  8.	 Patients with granulomatous colitis, ulcerative colitis, or 
tuberculous enteritis in whom major portions of the absorp-
tive mucosa are diseased
  9.	 Patients with malignancy, with or without cachexia, in 
whom malnutrition might jeopardize successful use of a 
therapeutic option
10.	 Patients in whom attempts to provide adequate calories by 
enteral tube feedings or high residuals have failed
11.	 Critically ill patients who are hypermetabolic for >5 days 
or for whom enteral nutrition is not feasible
Patients in whom hyperalimentation is contraindicated 
include the following:
1.	  Patients for whom a specific goal for patient management is 
lacking or for whom, instead of extending a meaningful life, 
inevitable dying would be delayed
2.	  Patients experiencing hemodynamic instability or severe 
metabolic derangement (e.g., severe hyperglycemia, azote-
mia, encephalopathy, hyperosmolality, and fluid-electrolyte 
disturbances) requiring control or correction before hyper-
tonic intravenous feeding is attempted
3.	  Patients for whom gastrointestinal tract feeding is feasible; 
in the vast majority of instances, this is the best route by 
which to provide nutrition
4.	  Patients with good nutritional status
5.	  Infants with <8 cm of small bowel, because virtually all have 
been unable to adapt sufficiently despite prolonged periods 
of parenteral nutrition
6.	  Patients who are irreversibly decerebrate or otherwise 
dehumanized
Total Parenteral Nutrition
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), also referred to as central paren-
teral nutrition, requires access to a large-diameter vein to deliver 
the entire nutritional requirements of the individual. Dextrose 
content of the solution is high (15% to 25%), and all other mac-
ronutrients and micronutrients are deliverable by this route.
Peripheral Parenteral Nutrition
The lower osmolarity of the solution used for peripheral par-
enteral nutrition (PPN), secondary to reduced levels of dex-
trose (5% to 10%) and protein (3%), allows its administration 
Table 2-12 
Incidence of septic morbidity in parenterally and enterally fed trauma patients
Blunt Trauma
Penetrating Trauma
Total
Complication
TEN n = 48
TPN n = 44
TEN n = 38
TPN n = 48
TEN n = 44
TPN n = 84
Abdominal abscess
2
1
2
6
4
7
Pneumonia
4
10
1
2
5
12
Wound infection
0
2
3
1
3
3
Bacteremia
1
4
0
1
1
5
Urinary tract
1
1
0
1
1
2
Other
5
4
1
1
6
5
Total complications
13
22
7
12
20
34
% Complications per 
patient group
27%
50%
18%
30%
23%
39%
Source: Reproduced with permission from Moore FA, Feliciano DV, Andrassy RJ et al. Early enteral feeding, compared with parenteral, reduces postop-
erative septic complications. Ann Surg. 1992;216(2):172-183.
58
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
via peripheral veins. Some nutrients cannot be supplemented 
because they cannot be concentrated into small volumes. There-
fore, PPN is not appropriate for repleting patients with severe 
malnutrition. It can be considered if central routes are not avail-
able or if supplemental nutritional support is required. Typi-
cally, PPN is used for short periods (<2 weeks). Beyond this 
time, TPN should be instituted.
Initiation of Parenteral Nutrition
The basic solution for parenteral nutrition contains a final con-
centration of 15% to 25% dextrose and 3% to 5% crystalline 
amino acids. The solutions usually are prepared in sterile condi-
tions in the pharmacy from commercially available kits contain-
ing the component solutions and transfer apparatus. Preparation 
in the pharmacy under laminar flow hoods reduces the incidence 
of bacterial contamination of the solution. Proper preparation 
with suitable quality control is absolutely essential to avoid sep-
tic complications.
The proper provision of electrolytes and amino acids 
must take into account routes of fluid and electrolyte loss, 
renal function, metabolic rate, cardiac function, and the under-
lying disease state.
Intravenous vitamin preparations also should be added to 
parenteral formulas. Vitamin deficiencies are rare occurrences 
if such preparations are used. In addition, because vitamin K 
is not part of any commercially prepared vitamin solution, it 
should be supplemented on a weekly basis. During prolonged 
parenteral nutrition with fat-free solutions, essential fatty acid 
deficiency may become clinically apparent and manifests as 
dry, scaly dermatitis and loss of hair. The syndrome may be 
prevented by periodic infusion of a fat emulsion at a rate equiva-
lent to 10% to 15% of total calories. Essential trace minerals 
may be required after prolonged TPN and may be supplied by 
direct addition of commercial preparations. The most frequent 
presentation of trace mineral deficiencies is the eczematoid rash 
developing both diffusely and at intertriginous areas in zinc-
deficient patients. Other rare trace mineral deficiencies include 
a microcytic anemia associated with copper deficiency and glu-
cose intolerance presumably related to chromium deficiency. 
The latter complications are seldom seen except in patients 
receiving parenteral nutrition for extended periods. The daily 
administration of commercially available trace mineral supple-
ments will obviate most such problems.
Depending on fluid and nitrogen tolerance, parenteral 
nutrition solutions generally can be increased over 2 to 3 days to 
achieve the desired infusion rate. Insulin may be supplemented 
as necessary to ensure glucose tolerance. Administration of 
additional intravenous fluids and electrolytes may occasionally 
be necessary in patients with persistently high fluid losses. The 
patient should be carefully monitored for development of elec-
trolyte, volume, acid-base, and septic complications. Vital signs 
and urinary output should be measured regularly, and the patient 
should be weighed regularly. Frequent adjustments of the vol-
ume and composition of the solutions are necessary during the 
course of therapy. Samples for measurement of electrolytes are 
drawn daily until levels are stable and every 2 or 3 days there-
after. Blood counts, blood urea nitrogen level, levels of liver 
function indicators, and phosphate and magnesium levels are 
determined at least weekly.
The urine or capillary blood glucose level is checked every 
6 hours, and serum glucose concentration is checked at least 
once daily during the first few days of the infusion and at frequent 
intervals thereafter. Relative glucose intolerance, which often 
manifests as glycosuria, may occur after initiation of parenteral 
nutrition. If blood glucose levels remain elevated or glycosuria 
persists, the dextrose concentration may be decreased, the infu-
sion rate slowed, or regular insulin added to each bottle. The 
rise in blood glucose concentration observed after initiating 
parenteral nutrition may be temporary, as the normal pancreas 
increases its output of insulin in response to the continuous car-
bohydrate infusion. In patients with diabetes mellitus, additional 
insulin may be required.
Potassium is essential to achieve positive nitrogen bal-
ance and replace depleted intracellular stores. In addition, a 
significant shift of potassium ion from the extracellular to the 
intracellular space may take place because of the large glucose 
infusion, with resultant hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and 
poor glucose utilization. In some cases as much as 240 mEq of 
potassium ion daily may be required. Hypokalemia may cause 
glycosuria, which would be treated with potassium, not insulin. 
Thus, before giving insulin, the serum potassium level must be 
checked to avoid exacerbating the hypokalemia.
Patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus may 
exhibit wide fluctuations in blood glucose levels while receiving 
parenteral nutrition. This may require protocol-driven intrave-
nous insulin therapy. In addition, partial replacement of dex-
trose calories with lipid emulsions may alleviate these problems 
in selected patients.
Lipid emulsions derived from soybean or safflower oils 
are widely used as an adjunctive nutrient to prevent the develop-
ment of essential fatty acid deficiency, although recent data sup-
port reducing the overall ω-6 PUFA load in favor of ω-3 PUFAs 
or MCTs. There is no evidence of enhanced metabolic benefit 
when >10% to 15% of calories are provided as lipid emulsions. 
Although the administration of 500 mL of 20% fat emulsion 
one to three times a week is sufficient to prevent essential fatty 
acid deficiency, it is common to provide fat emulsions on a daily 
basis to provide additional calories. The triple mix of carbohy-
drate, fat, and amino acids is infused at a constant rate during 
a 24-hour period. The theoretical advantages of a constant fat 
infusion rate include increased efficiency of lipid utilization 
and reduction in the impairment of reticuloendothelial function 
normally identified with bolus lipid infusions. The addition of 
lipids to an infusion bag may alter the stability of some micro-
nutrients in a dextrose–amino acid preparation.
The delivery of parenteral nutrition requires central intra-
venous access. Temporary or short-term access can be achieved 
with a 16-gauge percutaneous catheter inserted into a subclavian 
or internal jugular vein and threaded into the superior vena cava. 
More permanent access with the intention of providing long-
term or home parenteral nutrition can be achieved by placement 
of a catheter with a subcutaneous port for access by tunneling 
a catheter with a substantial subcutaneous length or threading a 
long catheter through the basilic or cephalic vein into the supe-
rior vena cava.
Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Technical Complications.  One of the more common and seri-
ous complications associated with long-term parenteral feed-
ing is sepsis secondary to contamination of the central venous 
catheter. Contamination of solutions should be also considered 
but is rare when proper pharmacy protocols have been fol-
lowed. Central line–associated bloodstream infections (CLA-
BSI) occur as a consequence of hematogenous seeding of the 
59
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
catheter with bacteria. One of the earliest signs of systemic sep-
sis from CLA-BSI may be the sudden development of glucose 
intolerance (with or without temperature increase) in a patient 
who previously has been maintained on parenteral alimentation 
without difficulty. When this occurs, or if high fever (>38.5°C 
[101.3°F]) develops without obvious cause, a diligent search 
for a potential septic focus is indicated. Other causes of fever 
should also be investigated. If fever persists, the infusion cath-
eter should be removed and submitted for culture. If the catheter 
is the cause of the fever, removal of the infectious source is 
usually followed by rapid defervescence. Some centers are now 
replacing catheters considered at low risk for infection over a 
guidewire. However, if blood cultures are positive and the cath-
eter tip is also positive, then the catheter should be removed and 
placed in a new site. Should evidence of infection persist over 
24 to 48 hours without a definable source, the catheter should 
be replaced into the opposite subclavian vein or into one of the 
internal jugular veins and the infusion restarted.160
The use of multilumen catheters may be associated with 
a slightly increased risk of infection. This is most likely asso-
ciated with greater catheter manipulation and intensive use. 
The rate of catheter infection is highest for those placed in the 
femoral vein, lower for those in the jugular vein, and lowest for 
those in the subclavian vein. When catheters are indwelling for 
<3 days, infection risks are negligible. If indwelling time is 3 to 
7 days, the infection risk is 3% to 5%. Indwelling times of 
>7 days are associated with a catheter infection risk of 5% to 
10%. Strict adherence to barrier precautions also reduces the rate 
of infection, as can the implementation of procedure checklists 
to ensure compliance with evidence-based guidelines shown to 
reduce infectious risk.161
Other complications related to catheter placement include 
the development of pneumothorax, hemothorax, hydrothorax, 
subclavian artery injury, thoracic duct injury, cardiac arrhyth-
mia, air embolism, catheter embolism, and cardiac perforation 
with tamponade. All of these complications may be avoided by 
strict adherence to proper techniques. Further, the use of ultra-
sonographic guidance during central venous line placement has 
been demonstrated to significantly decrease the failure rate, 
complication rate, and number of attempts required for success-
ful access.162
Metabolic Complications.  Hyperglycemia may develop with 
normal rates of infusion in patients with impaired glucose toler-
ance or in any patient if the hypertonic solutions are adminis-
tered too rapidly. This is a particularly common complication in 
patients with latent diabetes and in patients subjected to severe 
surgical stress or trauma. Treatment of the condition consists of 
volume replacement with correction of electrolyte abnormali-
ties and the administration of insulin. This complication can be 
avoided with careful attention to daily fluid balance and frequent 
monitoring of blood glucose levels and serum electrolytes.
Increasing experience has emphasized the importance 
of not overfeeding the parenterally nourished patient. This is 
particularly true for the depleted patient in whom excess calo-
rie infusion may result in carbon dioxide retention and respi-
ratory insufficiency. In addition, excess feeding also has been 
related to the development of hepatic steatosis or marked gly-
cogen deposition in selected patients. Cholestasis and forma-
tion of gallstones are common in patients receiving long-term 
parenteral nutrition. Mild but transient abnormalities of serum 
transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin levels occur 
in many parenterally nourished patients. Failure of the liver 
enzymes to plateau or return to normal over 7 to 14 days should 
suggest another etiology.
Intestinal Atrophy.  Lack of intestinal stimulation is associ-
ated with intestinal mucosal atrophy, diminished villous height, 
bacterial overgrowth, reduced lymphoid tissue size, reduced 
IgA production, and impaired gut immunity. The full clinical 
implications of these changes are not well realized, although 
bacterial translocation has been demonstrated in animal mod-
els. The most efficacious method to prevent these changes is to 
provide at least some nutrients enterally. In patients requiring 
TPN, it may be feasible to infuse small amounts of feedings via 
the gastrointestinal tract.
References
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references. 
    1.	Minei JP, Cuschieri J, Sperry J, et al. The changing pattern and 
implications of multiple organ failure after blunt injury with 
hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care Med. 2012;40(4):1129-1135.
    2.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm 
in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208(13): 
2581-2590.
    3.	Bone RC. The pathogenesis of sepsis. Ann Intern Med. 
1991;115(6):457-469.
    4.	Lowry SF. Human endotoxemia: a model for mechanistic 
insight and therapeutic targeting. Shock. 2005;24(Suppl 1): 
94-100.
    5.	Pugin J. How tissue injury alarms the immune system and 
causes a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Ann 
Intensive Care. 2012;2(1):27.
    6.	Manson J, Thiemermann C, Brohi K. Trauma alarmins 
as activators of damage-induced inflammation. Br J Surg. 
2012;99(Suppl 1):12-20.
    7.	Chan JK, Roth J, Oppenheim JJ, et al. Alarmins: awaiting a 
clinical response. J Clin Invest. 2012;122(8):2711-2719.
    8.	Lu B, Wang H, Andersson U, Tracey KJ. Regulation 
of HMGB1 release by inflammasomes. Protein Cell. 
2013;4(3):163-167.
    9.	Andersson U, Tracey KJ. HMGB1 is a therapeutic target 
for sterile inflammation and infection. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2011;29:139-162.
  10.	Yang H, Hreggvidsdottir HS, Palmblad K, et al. A critical 
cysteine is required for HMGB1 binding to Toll-like receptor 
4 and activation of macrophage cytokine release. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2010;107(26):11942-11947.
  11.	Yang H, Antoine DJ, Andersson U, Tracey KJ. The many 
faces of HMGB1: molecular structure-functional activity in 
inflammation, apoptosis, and chemotaxis. J Leukoc Biol. 
2013;93(6):865-873.
  12.	Peltz ED, Moore EE, Eckels PC, et al. HMGB1 is markedly 
elevated within 6 hours of mechanical trauma in humans. 
Shock. 2009;32(1):17-22.
  13.	Zhang Q, Raoof M, Chen Y, et al. Circulating mitochondrial 
DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury. Nature. 
2010;464(7285):104-107.
  14.	West AP, Shadel GS, Ghosh S. Mitochondria in innate 
immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(6):389-402.
  15.	Moreth K, Iozzo RV, Schaefer L. Small leucine-rich proteo-
glycans orchestrate receptor crosstalk during inflammation. 
Cell Cycle. 2012;11(11):2084-2091.
  16.	Babelova A, Moreth K, Tsalastra-Greul W, et al. Biglycan, 
a danger signal that activates the NLRP3 inflammasome 
via toll-like and P2X receptors. J Biol Chem. 2009;284(36): 
24035-24048.
  17.	Haimovich B, Reddell MT, Calvano JE, et al. A novel 
model of common Toll-like receptor 4- and injury-induced 
60
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
transcriptional themes in human leukocytes. Crit Care. 
2010;14(5):R177.
  18.	McGhan LJ, Jaroszewski DE. The role of toll-like receptor-4 
in the development of multi-organ failure following traumatic 
haemorrhagic shock and resuscitation. Injury. 2012;43(2): 
129-136.
  19.	Mollen KP, Levy RM, Prince JM, et al. Systemic inflamma-
tion and end organ damage following trauma involves func-
tional TLR4 signaling in both bone marrow-derived cells and 
parenchymal cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2008;83(1):80-88.
  20.	Latz E, Xiao TS, Stutz A. Activation and regulation of the 
inflammasomes. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;13(6):397-411.
  21.	Zhang AQ, Zeng L, Gu W, et al. Clinical relevance of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms within the entire NLRP3 gene in 
patients with major blunt trauma. Crit Care. 2011;15(6):R280.
  22.	Osuka A, Hanschen M, Stoecklein V, Lederer JA. A protec-
tive role for inflammasome activation following injury. Shock. 
2012;37(1):47-55.
  23.	Sancho D, Reis e Sousa C. Sensing of cell death by myeloid 
C-type lectin receptors. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013;25(1): 
46-52.
  24.	Kunes P, Holubcova Z, Kolackova M, Krejsek J. Pentraxin 
3(PTX 3): an endogenous modulator of the inflammatory 
response. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:920517.
  25.	Kleber C, Becker CA, Schmidt-Bleek K, Schaser KD, Haas 
NP. Are pentraxin 3 and transsignaling early markers for 
immunologic injury severity in polytrauma? A pilot study. 
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013;471(9):2822-2830.
  26.	Qian C, Cao X. Regulation of Toll-like receptor signaling 
pathways in innate immune responses. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2013;1283:67-74.
  27.	Ulrichts P, Bovijn C, Lievens S, Beyaert R, Tavernier J, 
Peelman F. Caspase-1 targets the TLR adaptor Mal at a cru-
cial TIR-domain interaction site. J Cell Sci. 2010;123(Pt 2): 
256-265.
  28.	Stow JL, Murray RZ. Intracellular trafficking and secretion 
of inflammatory cytokines. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 
2013;24(3):227-239.
  29.	Fung A, Vizcaychipi M, Lloyd D, Wan Y, Ma D. Central 
nervous system inflammation in disease related conditions: 
mechanistic prospects. Brain Res. 2012;1446:144-155.
  30.	Czura CJ, Tracey KJ. Autonomic neural regulation of immu-
nity. J Intern Med. 2005;257(2):156-166.
  31.	Olofsson PS, Rosas-Ballina M, Levine YA, Tracey KJ. 
Rethinking inflammation: neural circuits in the regulation 
of immunity. Immunol Rev. 2012;248(1):188-204.
  32.	Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, et al. Vagus nerve 
stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to 
endotoxin. Nature. 2000;405(6785):458-462.
  33.	Wang H, Yu M, Ochani M, et al. Nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor alpha7 subunit is an essential regulator of inflamma-
tion. Nature. 2003;421(6921):384-388.
  34.	Heitzer MD, Wolf IM, Sanchez ER, Witchel SF, DeFranco 
DB. Glucocorticoid receptor physiology. Rev Endocr Metab 
Disord. 2007;8(4):321-330.
  35.	Silverman MN, Sternberg EM. Glucocorticoid regulation of 
inflammation and its functional correlates: from HPA axis 
to glucocorticoid receptor dysfunction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2012;1261:55-63.
  36.	Hardy RS, Raza K, Cooper MS. Endogenous glucocorti-
coids in inflammation: contributions of systemic and local 
responses. Swiss Med Wkly. 2012;142:w13650.
  37.	Walker ML. Critical illness related corticosteroid insuffciency 
in trauma: a review. J Trauma Treat. 2012;1(6):139-144.
  38.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe 
sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1): 
296-327.
  39.	Flaster H, Bernhagen J, Calandra T, Bucala R. The mac-
rophage migration inhibitory factor-glucocorticoid dyad: 
regulation of inflammation and immunity. Mol Endocrinol. 
2007;21(6):1267-1280.
  40.	Roger T, David J, Glauser MP, Calandra T. MIF regulates 
innate immune responses through modulation of Toll-like 
receptor 4. Nature. 2001;414(6866):920-924.
  41.	Hayakawa M, Katabami K, Wada T, et al. Imbalance between 
macrophage migration inhibitory factor and cortisol induces 
multiple organ dysfunction in patients with blunt trauma. 
Inflammation. 2011;34(3):193-197.
  42.	Agnese DM, Calvano JE, Hahm SJ, Calvano SE, Lowry 
SF. Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 is upregu-
lated in LPS-treated THP-1 cells. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 
2002;3(2):119-125; discussion 25-26.
  43.	Takala J, Ruokonen E, Webster NR, et al. Increased mortal-
ity associated with growth hormone treatment in critically ill 
adults. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(11):785-792.
  44.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Kulp GA, Przkora R, Mlcak RP, 
Herndon DN. Combination of recombinant human growth 
hormone and propranolol decreases hypermetabolism and 
inflammation in severely burned children. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2008;9(2):209-216.
  45.	Cheyuo C, Jacob A, Wang P. Ghrelin-mediated sympathoinhi-
bition and suppression of inflammation in sepsis. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab. 2012;302(3):E265-E272.
  46.	Wong DL, Tai TC, Wong-Faull DC, et al. Epinephrine: a 
short- and long-term regulator of stress and development of 
illness: a potential new role for epinephrine in stress. Cell Mol 
Neurobiol. 2012;32(5):737-748.
  47.	van der Poll T, Coyle SM, Barbosa K, Braxton CC, Lowry SF. 
Epinephrine inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha and potenti-
ates interleukin 10 production during human endotoxemia. 
J Clin Invest. 1996;97(3):713-719.
  48.	Flierl MA, Rittirsch D, Huber-Lang M, Sarma JV, Ward PA. 
Catecholamines-crafty weapons in the inflammatory arsenal 
of immune/inflammatory cells or opening pandora’s box? Mol 
Med. 2008;14(3-4):195-204.
  49.	Gilbert KC, Brown NJ. Aldosterone and inflammation. Curr 
Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010;17(3):199-204.
  50.	Van den Berghe G. How does blood glucose control 
with insulin save lives in intensive care? J Clin Invest. 
2004;114(9):1187-1195.
  51.	Sung J, Bochicchio GV, Joshi M, Bochicchio K, Tracy K, 
Scalea TM. Admission hyperglycemia is predictive of outcome 
in critically ill trauma patients. J Trauma. 2005;59(1):80-83.
  52.	Kansagara D, Fu R, Freeman M, Wolf F, Helfand M. Intensive 
insulin therapy in hospitalized patients: a systematic review. 
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(4):268-282.
  53.	Preiser JC. Oxidative stress. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2012;36(2):147-154.
  54.	Nathan C, Cunninham-Bussell A. Beyond oxidative stress: 
an immunologist’s guide to reactive oxygen species. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2013;13:349-361.
  55.	Tschopp J, Schroder K. NLRP3 inflammasome activation: the 
convergence of multiple signalling pathways on ROS produc-
tion? Nat Rev Immunol. 2010;10(3):210-215.
  56.	Quintana FJ, Cohen IR. Heat shock proteins as endogenous 
adjuvants in sterile and septic inflammation. J Immunol. 
2005;175(5):2777-2782.
  57.	Muralidharan S, Mandrekar P. Cellular stress response and 
innate immune signaling: integrating pathways in host defense 
and inflammation. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;Aug 29.
  58.	Jeschke MG, Boehning D. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
insulin resistance post-trauma: similarities to type 2 diabetes. 
J Cell Mol Med. 2012;16(3):437-444.
  59.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Herndon DN, et al. Severe 
injury is associated with insulin resistance, endoplasmic 
61
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
reticulum stress response, and unfolded protein response. 
Ann Surg. 2012;255(2):370-378.
  60.	Jones SA, Mills KH, Harris J. Autophagy and inflammatory 
diseases. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013;91(3):250-258.
  61.	Levine B, Mizushima N, Virgin HW. Autophagy in immunity 
and inflammation. Nature. 2011;469(7330):323-335.
  62.	Yen YT, Yang HR, Lo HC, et al. Enhancing autophagy 
with activated protein C and rapamycin protects against 
sepsis-induced acute lung injury. Surgery. 2013;153(5): 
689-698.
  63.	Jean-Baptiste E. Cellular mechanisms in sepsis. J Intensive 
Care Med. 2007;22(2):63-72.
  64.	Kaczmarek A, Vandenabeele P, Krysko DV. Necroptosis: the 
release of damage-associated molecular patterns and its physi-
ological relevance. Immunity. 2013;38(2):209-223.
  65.	Duprez L, Takahashi N, Van Hauwermeiren F, et al. RIP 
kinase-dependent necrosis drives lethal systemic inflamma-
tory response syndrome. Immunity. 2011;35(6):908-918.
  66.	Waters JP, Pober JS, Bradley JR. Tumour necrosis factor in 
infectious disease. J Pathol. 2013;230(2):132-147.
  67.	Khalil AA, Hall JC, Aziz FA, Price P. Tumour necro-
sis factor: implications for surgical patients. ANZ J Surg. 
2006;76(11):1010-1016.
  68.	Namas R, Ghuma A, Torres A, et al. An adequately robust 
early TNF-alpha response is a hallmark of survival following 
trauma/hemorrhage. PLoS One. 2009;4(12):e8406.
  69.	Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis and treatment 
of inflammatory diseases. Blood. 2011;117(14):3720-3732.
  70.	Stylianou E, Saklatvala J. Interleukin-1. Int J Biochem Cell 
Biol. 1998;30(10):1075-1079.
  71.	Liao W, Lin JX, Leonard WJ. Interleukin-2 at the crossroads 
of effector responses, tolerance, and immunotherapy. Immu-
nity. 2013;38(1):13-25.
  72.	Bachmann MF, Oxenius A. Interleukin 2: from immunos-
timulation to immunoregulation and back again. EMBO Rep. 
2007;8(12):1142-1148.
  73.	Jawa RS, Anillo S, Huntoon K, Baumann H, Kulaylat M. 
Interleukin-6 in surgery, trauma, and critical care part II: clini-
cal implications. J Intensive Care Med. 2011;26(2):73-87.
  74.	Rose-John S. IL-6 trans-signaling via the soluble IL-6 recep-
tor: importance for the pro-inflammatory activities of IL-6. Int 
J Biol Sci. 2012;8(9):1237-1247.
  75.	Song M, Kellum JA. Interleukin-6. Crit Care Med. 2005;33 
(12 Suppl):S463-S465.
  76.	Hutchins AP, Diez D, Miranda-Saavedra D. The IL-10/
STAT3-mediated anti-inflammatory response: recent develop-
ments and future challenges. Brief Funct Genomics. 2013;Aug 
12.
  77.	Scumpia PO, Moldawer LL. Biology of interleukin-10 and 
its regulatory roles in sepsis syndromes. Crit Care Med. 
2005;33(12 Suppl):S468-S471.
  78.	Vignali DA, Kuchroo VK. IL-12 family cytokines: immuno-
logical playmakers. Nat Immunol. 2012;13(8):722-728.
  79.	Weijer S, Florquin S, van der Poll T. Endogenous inter-
leukin-12 improves the early antimicrobial host response 
to murine Escherichia coli peritonitis. Shock. 2005;23(1): 
54-58.
  80.	Kinoshita M, Miyazaki H, Ono S, Seki S. Immunoenhanc-
ing therapy with interleukin-18 against bacterial infection in 
immunocompromised hosts after severe surgical stress. 
J Leukoc Biol. 2013;93(5):689-698.
  81.	Kernbauer E, Maier V, Rauch I, Muller M, Decker T. Route 
of infection determines the impact of type I interferons on 
innate immunity to Listeria monocytogenes. PLoS One. 
2013;8(6):e65007.
  82.	Rauch I, Muller M, Decker T. The regulation of inflam-
mtion by interferons and their STATs. JAKSTAT. 2013;2(1): 
e23820-1-13.
  83.	Kamp VM, Leentjens J, Pillay J, et al. Modulation of granulo-
cyte kinetics by GM-CSF/IFN-gamma in a human LPS rechal-
lenge model. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;94(3):513-520.
  84.	Ott J, Hiesgen C, Mayer K. Lipids in critical care medi-
cine. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2011;85(5): 
267-273.
  85.	Soares EM, Mason KL, Rogers LM, Serezani CH, Faccioli 
LH, Aronoff DM. Leukotriene B4 enhances innate immune 
defense against the puerperal sepsis agent Streptococcus pyo-
genes. J Immunol. 2013;190(4):1614-1622.
  86.	Dichlberger A, Kovanen PT, Schneider WJ. Mast cells: 
from lipid droplets to lipid mediators. Clin Sci (Lond). 
2013;125(3):121-130.
  87.	Bernard GR, Wheeler AP, Russell JA, et al. The effects of 
ibuprofen on the physiology and survival of patients with 
sepsis. The Ibuprofen in Sepsis Study Group. N Engl J Med. 
1997;336(13):912-918.
  88.	Cook JA. Eicosanoids. Crit Care Med. 2005;33 
(12 Suppl):S488-S491.
  89.	Zhang MJ, Spite M. Resolvins: anti-inflammatory and prore-
solving mediators derived from omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids. Annu Rev Nutr. 2012;32:203-227.
  90.	Calder PC. n-3 fatty acids, inflammation, and immunity: 
relevance to postsurgical and critically ill patients. Lipids. 
2004;39(12):1147-1161.
  91.	Ricklin D, Hajishengallis G, Yang K, Lambris JD. Comple-
ment: a key system for immune surveillance and homeostasis. 
Nat Immunol. 2010;11(9):785-797.
  92.	Ricklin D, Lambris JD. Complement in immune and inflam-
matory disorders: pathophysiological mechanisms. J Immu-
nol. 2013;190(8):3831-3838.
  93.	Saxena P, Thompson P, d’Udekem Y, Konstantinov IE. 
Kallikrein-kinin system: a surgical perspective in post-
aprotinin era. J Surg Res. 2011;167(1):70-77.
  94.	Schmaier AH. The kallikrein-kinin and the renin-angiotensin 
systems have a multilayered interaction. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2003;285(1):R1-13.
  95.	Faerber L, Drechsler S, Ladenburger S, Gschaidmeier H, 
Fischer W. The neuronal 5-HT3 receptor network after 20 years 
of research: evolving concepts in management of pain and 
inflammation. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007;560(1):1-8.
  96.	Duerschmied D, Suidan GL, Demers M, et al. Platelet sero-
tonin promotes the recruitment of neutrophils to sites of 
acute inflammation in mice. Blood. 2013;121(6):1008-1015.
  97.	de Esch IJ, Thurmond RL, Jongejan A, Leurs R. The hista-
mine H4 receptor as a new therapeutic target for inflamma-
tion. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2005;26(9):462-469.
  98.	O’Mahony L, Akdis M, Akdis CA. Regulation of the immune 
response and inflammation by histamine and histamine recep-
tors. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(6):1153-1162.
  99.	Leonard WJ, O’Shea JJ. Jaks and STATs: biological implica-
tions. Annu Rev Immunol. 1998;16:293-322.
100.	Trengove MC, Ward AC. SOCS proteins in development and 
disease. Am J Clin Exp Immunol. 2013;2(1):1-29.
101.	Sun L, Ye RD. Role of G protein-coupled receptors in inflam-
mation. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2012;33(3):342-350.
102.	Yoshimura A, Wakabayashi Y, Mori T. Cellular and molecu-
lar basis for the regulation of inflammation by TGF-beta. 
J Biochem. 2010;147(6):781-792.
103.	Licciardi PV, Karagiannis TC. Regulation of immune 
responses by histone deacetylase inhibitors. ISRN Hematol. 
2012;2012:690901.
104.	Foster SL, Medzhitov R. Gene-specific control of the TLR-
induced inflammatory response. Clin Immunol. 2009;130(1): 
7-15.
105.	Nicodeme E, Jeffrey KL, Schaefer U, et al. Suppression 
of inflammation by a synthetic histone mimic. Nature. 
2010;468(7327):1119-1123.
62
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
106.	Ameres SL, Zamore PD. Diversifying microRNA sequence 
and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14(8):475-488.
107.	O’Neill LA, Sheedy FJ, McCoy CE. MicroRNAs: the fine-
tuners of Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2011;11(3):163-175.
108.	Andonegui G, Kerfoot SM, McNagny K, Ebbert KV, Patel 
KD, Kubes P. Platelets express functional Toll-like receptor-4. 
Blood. 2005;106(7):2417-2423.
109.	Clark SR, Ma AC, Tavener SA, et al. Platelet TLR4 acti-
vates neutrophil extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in 
septic blood. Nat Med. 2007;13(4):463-469.
110.	Sillesen M, Johansson PI, Rasmussen LS, et al. Platelet acti-
vation and dysfunction in a large-animal model of traumatic 
brain injury and hemorrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2013;74(5):1252-1259.
111.	Kimura F, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Ohtsuka M, Miyazaki 
M. Immunosuppression following surgical and traumatic 
injury. Surg Today. 2010;40(9):793-808.
112.	Pillay J, Tak T, Kamp VM, Koenderman L. Immune suppres-
sion by neutrophils and granulocytic myeloid-derived sup-
pressor cells: similarities and differences. Cell Mol Life Sci. 
2013;Feb 20.
113.	Rendon JL, Choudhry MA. Th17 cells: critical mediators 
of host responses to burn injury and sepsis. J Leukoc Biol. 
2012;92(3):529-538.
114.	Gallo PM, Gallucci S. The dendritic cell response to classic, 
emerging, and homeostatic danger signals. Implications for 
autoimmunity. Front Immunol. 2013;4:138.
115.	Afshar K, Vucinic V, Sharma OP. Eosinophil cell: pray tell us 
what you do! Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2007;13(5):414-421.
116.	Bachelet I, Levi-Schaffer F. Mast cells as effector cells: a co-
stimulating question. Trends Immunol. 2007;28(8):360-365.
117.	Wynn TA, Chawla A, Pollard JW. Macrophage biol-
ogy in development, homeostasis, and disease. Nature. 
2013;496(7446):445-455.
118.	Cavaillon JM, Adib-Conquy M. Monocytes/macrophages and 
sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(12 Suppl):S506-S509.
119.	Kaplan MJ, Radic M. Neutrophil extracellular traps: 
double-edged swords of innate immunity. J Immunol. 
2012;189(6):2689-2695.
120.	Alves-Filho JC, Tavares-Murta BM, Barja-Fidalgo C, et al. 
Neutrophil function in severe sepsis. Endocr Metab Immune 
Disord Drug Targets. 2006;6(2):151-158.
121.	Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P. Neutrophil recruitment and 
function in health and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2013;13(3):159-175.
122.	Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky MI, Nourshargh S. Getting 
to the site of inflammation: the leukocyte adhesion cascade 
updated. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007;7(9):678-689.
123.	Fortin CF, McDonald PP, Fulop T, Lesur O. Sepsis, leu-
kocytes, and nitric oxide (NO): an intricate affair. Shock. 
2010;33(4):344-352.
124.	Darwiche SS, Pfeifer R, Menzel C, et al. Inducible nitric 
oxide synthase contributes to immune dysfunction following 
trauma. Shock. 2012;38(5):499-507.
125.	Cauwels A. Nitric oxide in shock. Kidney Int. 2007;72(5): 
557-565.
126.	Su F, Huang H, Akieda K, et al. Effects of a selective iNOS 
inhibitor versus norepinephrine in the treatment of septic 
shock. Shock. 2010;34(3):243-249.
127.	Zardi EM, Zardi DM, Dobrina A, Afeltra A. Prostacyclin 
in sepsis: a systematic review. Prostaglandins Other Lipid 
Mediat. 2007;83(1-2):1-24.
128.	Yeager ME, Belchenko DD, Nguyen CM, Colvin KL, Ivy DD, 
Stenmark KR. Endothelin-1, the unfolded protein response, 
and persistent inflammation: role of pulmonary artery smooth 
muscle cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012;46(1):14-22.
129.	Piechota M, Banach M, Irzmanski R, et al. Plasma endothe-
lin-1 levels in septic patients. J Intensive Care Med. 2007; 
22(4):232-239.
130.	Rondina MT, Weyrich AS, Zimmerman GA. Platelets as 
cellular effectors of inflammation in vascular diseases. Circ 
Res. 2013;112(11):1506-1519.
131.	Zimmerman GA, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM, Stafforini DM. 
The platelet-activating factor signaling system and its regula-
tors in syndromes of inflammation and thrombosis. Crit Care 
Med. 2002;30(5 Suppl):S294-S301.
132.	Varpula M, Pulkki K, Karlsson S, Ruokonen E, Pettila V. 
Predictive value of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic pep-
tide in severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med. 
2007;35(5):1277-1283.
133.	Mitch WE, Price SR. Mechanisms activating proteolysis to 
cause muscle atrophy in catabolic conditions. J Ren Nutr. 
2003;13(2):149-152.
134.	Guirao X. Impact of the inflammatory reaction on interme-
diary metabolism and nutrition status. Nutrition. 2002;18 
(11-12):949-952.
135.	Souba WW. Nutritional support. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(1): 
41-48.
136.	Bistrian BR. Clinical aspects of essential fatty acid metabo-
lism: Jonathan Rhoads Lecture. JPEN J Parenter Enteral 
Nutr. 2003;27(3):168-175.
137.	Dahn MS, Mitchell RA, Lange MP, Smith S, Jacobs LA. 
Hepatic metabolic response to injury and sepsis. Surgery. 
1995;117(5):520-530.
138.	Vidal-Puig A, O’Rahilly S. Metabolism. Controlling the glu-
cose factory. Nature. 2001;413(6852):125-126.
139.	Mueckler M, Thorens B. The SLC2 (GLUT) family of 
membrane transporters. Mol Aspects Med. 2013;34(2-3): 
121-138.
140.	Volpi E, Sheffield-Moore M, Rasmussen BB, Wolfe RR. 
Basal muscle amino acid kinetics and protein synthesis 
in healthy young and older men. JAMA. 2001;286(10): 
1206-1212.
141.	Chernoff R. Normal aging, nutrition assessment, and clinical 
practice. Nutr Clin Pract. 2003;18(1):12-20.
142.	Heslin MJ, Brennan MF. Advances in perioperative nutrition: 
cancer. World J Surg. 2000;24(12):1477-1485.
143.	Heslin MJ, Latkany L, Leung D, et al. A prospective, ran-
domized trial of early enteral feeding after resection of upper 
gastrointestinal malignancy. Ann Surg. 1997;226(4):567-577; 
discussion 77-80.
144.	Brooks AD, Hochwald SN, Heslin MJ, Harrison LE, Burt M, 
Brennan MF. Intestinal permeability after early postoperative 
enteral nutrition in patients with upper gastrointestinal malig-
nancy. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1999;23(2):75-79.
145.	Abunnaja S, Cuviello A, Sanchez JA. Enteral and parenteral 
nutrition in the perioperative period: state of the art. Nutrients. 
2013;5(2):608-623.
146.	Arabi YM, Tamim HM, Dhar GS, et al. Permissive under-
feeding and intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients: 
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93(3): 
569-577.
147.	Rice TW, Wheeler AP, Thompson BT, et al. Initial trophic 
vs full enteral feeding in patients with acute lung injury: the 
EDEN randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(8):795-803.
148.	Bankhead R, Boullata J, Brantley S, et al. Enteral nutrition 
practice recommendations. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2009;33(2):122-167.
149.	Exner R, Tamandl D, Goetzinger P, et al. Perioperative GLY-
GLN infusion diminishes the surgery-induced period of 
immunosuppression: accelerated restoration of the lipopoly-
saccharide-stimulated tumor necrosis factor-alpha response. 
Ann Surg. 2003;237(1):110-115.
63
Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support
CHAPTER 2
150.	Luiking YC, Ten Have GA, Wolfe RR, Deutz NE. Arginine 
de novo and nitric oxide production in disease states. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012;303(10):E1177-E1189.
151.	Marik PE, Flemmer M. Immunonutrition in the surgical 
patient. Minerva Anestesiol. 2012;78(3):336-342.
152.	Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines. Enteral Feeding 
Guidelines. 2013. Available at: http://www.criticalcarenutri-
tion.com/docs/cpgs2012/Summary%20CPGs%202013%20
vs%202009_24April2013.pdf.
153.	Pontes-Arruda A, Martins LF, de Lima SM, et al. Enteral nutri-
tion with eicosapentaenoic acid, gamma-linolenic acid and 
antioxidants in the early treatment of sepsis: results from a mul-
ticenter, prospective, randomized, double-blinded, controlled 
study: the INTERSEPT study. Crit Care. 2011;15(3):R144.
154.	Btaiche IF. Branched-chain amino acids in patients with 
hepatic encephalopathy. 1982. Nutr Clin Pract. 2003;18(1): 
97-100.
155.	Patton KM, Aranda-Michel J. Nutritional aspects in liver disease 
and liver transplantation. Nutr Clin Pract. 2002;17(6):332-340.
156.	DiSario JA, Baskin WN, Brown RD, et al. Endoscopic 
approaches to enteral nutritional support. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2002;55(7):901-908.
157.	Heyland DK, Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Greenwood J. Optimiz-
ing the benefits and minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in 
the critically ill: role of small bowel feeding. JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. 2002;26(6 Suppl):S51-S55; discussion S6-S7.
158.	Scolapio JS. Methods for decreasing risk of aspiration pneu-
monia in critically ill patients. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
2002;26(6 Suppl):S58-S61.
159.	Vanek VW. Ins and outs of enteral access: part 2—long term 
access: esophagostomy and gastrostomy. Nutr Clin Pract. 
2003;18(1):50-74.
160.	Mermel LA, Allon M, Bouza E, et al. Clinical practice guide-
lines for the diagnosis and management of intravascular 
catheter-related infection: 2009 Update by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(1):1-45.
161.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Tools for 
Reducing Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infec-
tions. http://www.ahrq.gov/legacy/qual/clabsitools/ 
clabsitoolshtm-purpose.
162.	Maecken T, Grau T. Ultrasound imaging in vascular access. 
Crit Care Med. 2007;35(5 Suppl):S178-S185.
This page intentionally left blank 
Fluid and Electrolyte Management 
of the Surgical Patient
G. Tom Shires III
3
INTRODUCTION
Fluid and electrolyte management is paramount to the care of 
the surgical patient. Changes in both fluid volume and electro-
lyte composition occur preoperatively, intraoperatively, and 
postoperatively, as well as in response to trauma and sepsis. The 
sections that follow review the normal anatomy of body fluids, 
electrolyte composition and concentration abnormalities and 
treatments, common metabolic derangements, and alterna-
tive resuscitative fluids. These concepts are then discussed 
in relationship to management of specific surgical patients and 
their commonly encountered fluid and electrolyte abnormalities.
BODY FLUIDS
Total Body Water
Water constitutes approximately 50% to 60% of total body 
weight. The relationship between total body weight and total 
body water (TBW) is relatively constant for an individual and 
is primarily a reflection of body fat. Lean tissues such as muscle 
and solid organs have higher water content than fat and bone. 
As a result, young, lean males have a higher proportion of body 
weight as water than elderly or obese individuals. Deuterium 
oxide and tritiated water have been used in clinical research 
to measure TBW by indicator dilution methods. In an average 
young adult male, TBW accounts for 60% of total body weight, 
whereas in an average young adult female, it is 50%.1 The lower 
percentage of TBW in females correlates with a higher percent-
age of adipose tissue and lower percentage of muscle mass 
in most. Estimates of percentage of TBW should be adjusted 
downward approximately 10% to 20% for obese individuals and 
upward by 10% for malnourished individuals. The highest per-
centage of TBW is found in newborns, with approximately 80% 
of their total body weight comprised of water. This decreases 
to approximately 65% by 1 year of age and thereafter remains 
fairly constant.
Fluid Compartments
TBW is divided into three functional fluid compartments: 
plasma, extravascular interstitial fluid, and intracellular fluid 
(Fig. 3-1). The extracellular fluids (ECF), plasma and intersti-
tial fluid, together compose about one third of the TBW, and the 
intracellular compartment composes the remaining two thirds. 
The extracellular water composes 20% of the total body weight 
and is divided between plasma (5% of body weight) and inter-
stitial fluid (15% of body weight). Intracellular water makes 
up approximately 40% of an individual’s total body weight, 
with the largest proportion in the skeletal muscle mass. ECF 
is measured using indicator dilution methods. The distribution 
volumes of NaBr and radioactive sulfate have been used to mea-
sure ECF in clinical research. Measurement of the intracellular 
compartment is then determined indirectly by subtracting the 
measured ECF from the simultaneous TBW measurement.
Composition of Fluid Compartments 
The normal chemical composition of the body fluid compart-
ments is shown in Fig. 3-2. The ECF compartment is bal-
anced between sodium, the principal cation, and chloride 
and bicarbonate, the principal anions. The intracellular fluid 
compartment is composed primarily of the cations potassium 
and magnesium, and the anions phosphate and sulfate, and 
proteins. The concentration gradient between compartments is 
maintained by adenosine triphosphate–driven sodium-potassium 
pumps located with in the cell membranes. The composition of 
the plasma and interstitial fluid differs only slightly in ionic 
composition. The slightly higher protein content (organic anions) 
Introduction	
65
Body Fluids	
65
Total Body Water / 65
Fluid Compartments / 65
Composition of Fluid  
Compartments / 65
Osmotic Pressure / 66
Body Fluid Changes	
67
Normal Exchange of Fluid and  
Electrolytes / 67
Classification of Body Fluid Changes / 67
Disturbances in Fluid Balance / 68
Volume Control / 68
Concentration Changes / 69
Composition Changes: Etiology and  
Diagnosis / 70
Acid-Base Balance / 73
Fluid and Electrolyte Therapy	
76
Parenteral Solutions / 76
Alternative Resuscitative Fluids / 76
Correction of Life-Threatening  
Electrolyte Abnormalities / 77
Preoperative Fluid Therapy / 78
Intraoperative Fluid Therapy / 80
Postoperative Fluid Therapy / 80
Special Considerations for the  
Postoperative Patient / 80
Electrolyte Abnormalities in  
Specific Surgical Patients	
80
Neurologic Patients / 80
Malnourished Patients: Refeeding  
Syndrome / 81
Acute Renal Failure Patients / 81
Cancer Patients / 81
1
2
chapter 
in plasma results in a higher plasma cation composition relative 
to the interstitial fluid, as explained by the Gibbs-Donnan equi-
librium equation. Proteins add to the osmolality of the plasma 
and contribute to the balance of forces that determine fluid bal-
ance across the capillary endothelium. Although the movement 
of ions and proteins between the various fluid compartments is 
restricted, water is freely diffusible. Water is distributed evenly 
throughout all fluid compartments of the body so that a given 
volume of water increases the volume of any one compartment 
relatively little. Sodium, however, is confined to the ECF com-
partment, and because of its osmotic and electrical properties, 
it remains associated with water. Therefore, sodium-containing 
fluids are distributed throughout the ECF and add to the vol-
ume of both the intravascular and interstitial spaces. Although 
the administration of sodium-containing fluids expands the 
intravascular volume, it also expands the interstitial space by 
approximately three times as much as the plasma.
Osmotic Pressure
The physiologic activity of electrolytes in solution depends 
on the number of particles per unit volume (millimoles per 
liter, or mmol/L), the number of electric charges per unit volume 
66
Figure 3-1.  Functional body fluid 
compartments. TBW = total body 
water.
Key Points
1
	 Proper management of fluid and electrolytes facilitates crucial 
homeostasis that allows cardiovascular perfusion, organ system 
function, and cellular mechanisms to respond to surgical illness.
2 	 Knowledge of the compartmentalization of body fluids forms the 
basis for understanding pathologic shifts in these fluid spaces in 
disease states. Although difficult to quantify, a deficiency in the 
functional extracellular fluid compartment often requires resus-
citation with isotonic fluids in surgical and trauma patients.
3 	Alterations in the concentration of serum sodium have pro-
found effects on cellular function due to water shifts 
between the intracellular and extracellular spaces.
4 	 Different rates of compensation between respiratory and meta-
bolic components of acid-base homeostasis require frequent 
laboratory reassessment during therapy.
5 	 Although active investigation continues, alternative resus-
citation fluids have limited clinical utility, other than the 
correction of specific electrolyte abnormalities.
6 	 Most acute surgical illnesses are accompanied by some 
degree of volume loss or redistribution. Consequently, iso-
tonic fluid administration is the most common initial intra-
venous fluid strategy, while attention is being given to 
alterations in concentration and composition.
7 	 Some surgical patients with neurologic illness, malnutri-
tion, acute renal failure, or cancer require special attention 
to well-defined, disease-specific abnormalities in fluid and 
electrolyte status.
(milliequivalents per liter, or mEq/L), and the number of osmot-
ically active ions per unit volume (milliosmoles per liter, or 
mOsm/L). The concentration of electrolytes usually is expressed 
in terms of the chemical combining activity, or equivalents. An 
equivalent of an ion is its atomic weight expressed in grams 
divided by the valence:
Equivalent = atomic weight (g)/valence
For univalent ions such as sodium, 1 mEq is the same as 
1 mmol. For divalent ions such as magnesium, 1 mmol equals 
2 mEq. The number of milliequivalents of cations must be bal-
anced by the same number of milliequivalents of anions. How-
ever, the expression of molar equivalents alone does not allow a 
physiologic comparison of solutes in a solution.
The movement of water across a cell membrane depends 
primarily on osmosis. To achieve osmotic equilibrium, water 
moves across a semipermeable membrane to equalize the 
concentration on both sides. This movement is determined by 
the concentration of the solutes on each side of the membrane. 
Osmotic pressure is measured in units of osmoles (osm) or mil-
liosmoles (mOsm) that refer to the actual number of osmotically 
% of Total body weight
Plasma 5%
Interstitial
fluid 15%
Intracellular
volume 40%
Volume of TBW
Extracellular volume
Plasma
Interstitial
Intracellular volume
14,000 mL
3500 mL
10,500 mL
28,000 mL
42,000 mL
Male (70 kg)
10,000 mL
2500 mL
7500 mL
20,000 mL
30,000 mL
Female (60 kg)
67
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3-2.  Chemical composition of 
body fluid compartments.
active particles. For example, 1 mmol of sodium chloride con-
tributes to 2 mOsm (one from sodium and one from chloride). 
The principal determinants of osmolality are the concentrations of 
sodium, glucose, and urea (blood urea nitrogen, or BUN):
Calculated serum osmolality = 2 sodium +  
(glucose/18) + (BUN/2.8)
The osmolality of the intracellular and extracellular fluids 
is maintained between 290 and 310 mOsm in each compartment. 
Because cell membranes are permeable to water, any change in 
osmotic pressure in one compartment is accompanied by a redis-
tribution of water until the effective osmotic pressure between 
compartments is equal. For example, if the ECF concentration 
of sodium increases, there will be a net movement of water from 
the intracellular to the extracellular compartment. Conversely, 
if the ECF concentration of sodium decreases, water will move 
into the cells. Although the intracellular fluid shares in losses 
that involve a change in concentration or composition of the 
ECF, an isotonic change in volume in either one of the com-
partments is not accompanied by the net movement of water as 
long as the ionic concentration remains the same. For practical 
clinical purposes, most significant gains and losses of body fluid 
are directly from the extracellular compartment.
BODY FLUID CHANGES
Normal Exchange of Fluid and Electrolytes
The healthy person consumes an average of 2000 mL of water 
per day, approximately 75% from oral intake and the rest 
extracted from solid foods. Daily water losses include 800 to 
1200 mL in urine, 250 mL in stool, and 600 mL in insensible 
losses. Insensible losses of water occur through both the skin 
(75%) and lungs (25%) and can be increased by such factors as 
fever, hypermetabolism, and hyperventilation. Sensible water 
losses such as sweating or pathologic loss of gastrointestinal 
(GI) fluids vary widely, but these include the loss of electrolytes 
as well as water (Table 3-1). To clear the products of metabo-
lism, the kidneys must excrete a minimum of 500 to 800 mL of 
urine per day, regardless of the amount of oral intake.
The typical individual consumes 3 to 5 g of dietary salt per 
day, with the balance maintained by the kidneys. With hypo-
natremia or hypovolemia, sodium excretion can be reduced to 
as little as 1 mEq/d or maximized to as much as 5000 mEq/d 
to achieve balance except in people with salt-wasting kidneys. 
Sweat is hypotonic, and sweating usually results in only a small 
sodium loss. GI losses are isotonic to slightly hypotonic and 
contribute little to net gain or loss of free water when measured 
and appropriately replaced by isotonic salt solutions.
Classification of Body Fluid Changes
Disorders in fluid balance may be classified into three general 
categories: disturbances in (a) volume, (b) concentration, and 
(c) composition. Although each of these may occur simultane-
ously, each is a separate entity with unique mechanisms demand-
ing individual correction. Isotonic gain or loss of salt solution 
results in extracellular volume changes, with little impact on 
intracellular fluid volume. If free water is added or lost from the 
ECF, water will pass between the ECF and intracellular fluid 
until solute concentration or osmolarity is equalized between 
Plasma
CATIONS
154 mEq/L
154 mEq/L
CI−
SO42–
PO43–
Protein
Organic
Acids
103
HCO3−27
3
5
16
Na+
142
K+
4
Ca2+
5
Mg2+
3
ANIONS
Interstitial
fluid
CATIONS
153 mEq/L
153 mEq/L
CI−
PO43–
SO42–
Protein
Organic
Acids
114
HCO3−30
5
3
1
Na+
144
K+
4
Ca2+
3
Mg2+
2
ANIONS
Intracellular
fluid
CATIONS
200 mEq/L
200 mEq/L
K+
150
Protein
HCO3−
SO42–
HPO43–
10
150
40
Mg2+
40
Na+
10
ANIONS
68
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
the compartments. Unlike with sodium, the concentration of 
most other ions in the ECF can be altered without significant 
change in the total number of osmotically active particles, pro-
ducing only a compositional change. For instance, doubling the 
serum potassium concentration will profoundly alter myocardial 
function without significantly altering volume or concentration 
of the fluid spaces.
Disturbances in Fluid Balance
Extracellular volume deficit is the most common fluid disorder 
in surgical patients and can be either acute or chronic. Acute 
volume deficit is associated with cardiovascular and central ner-
vous system signs, whereas chronic deficits display tissue signs, 
such as a decrease in skin turgor and sunken eyes, in addition to 
cardiovascular and central nervous system signs (Table 3-2). 
Laboratory examination may reveal an elevated blood urea 
nitrogen level if the deficit is severe enough to reduce glomeru-
lar filtration and hemoconcentration. Urine osmolality usually 
will be higher than serum osmolality, and urine sodium will be 
low, typically <20 mEq/L. Serum sodium concentration does 
not necessarily reflect volume status and therefore may be high, 
normal, or low when a volume deficit is present. The most com-
mon cause of volume deficit in surgical patients is a loss of GI 
fluids (Table 3-3) from nasogastric suction, vomiting, diarrhea, 
or enterocutaneous fistula. In addition, sequestration secondary 
to soft tissue injuries, burns, and intra-abdominal processes such 
as peritonitis, obstruction, or prolonged surgery can also lead to 
massive volume deficits.
Extracellular volume excess may be iatrogenic or second-
ary to renal dysfunction, congestive heart failure, or cirrhosis. 
Both plasma and interstitial volumes usually are increased. 
Symptoms are primarily pulmonary and cardiovascular (see 
Table 3-2). In fit patients, edema and hyperdynamic circula-
tion are common and well tolerated. However, the elderly and 
patients with cardiac disease may quickly develop congestive 
Table 3-1
Water exchange (60- to 80-kg man)
Routes
Average Daily  
Volume (mL)
Minimal (mL)
Maximal (mL)
H2O gain:
  Sensible:
    Oral fluids
800–1500
0
1500/h
    Solid foods
500–700
0
1500
  Insensible:
    Water of oxidation
250
125
800
    Water of solution
0
0
500
H2O loss:
  Sensible:
    Urine
800–1500
300
1400/h
    Intestinal
0–250
0
2500/h
    Sweat
0
0
4000/h
  Insensible:
    Lungs and skin
600
600
1500
heart failure and pulmonary edema in response to only a moder-
ate volume excess.
Volume Control
Volume changes are sensed by both osmoreceptors and baro-
receptors. Osmoreceptors are specialized sensors that detect 
even small changes in fluid osmolality and drive changes in 
thirst and diuresis through the kidneys.2 For example, when 
plasma osmolality is increased, thirst is stimulated and water 
consumption increases, although the exact cell mechanism is not 
known.3 Additionally, the hypothalamus is stimulated to secrete 
vasopressin, which increases water reabsorption in the kidneys. 
Table 3-2 
Signs and symptoms of volume disturbances
System
Volume Deficit
Volume Excess
Generalized
Weight loss
Weight gain
Decreased skin turgor
Peripheral edema
Cardiac
Tachycardia
Increased cardiac 
output
Orthostasis/
hypotension
Increased central 
venous pressure
Collapsed neck veins
Distended neck veins
Murmur
Renal
Oliguria
—
Azotemia
GI
Ileus
Bowel edema
Pulmonary
—
Pulmonary edema
69
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
Table 3-3 
Composition of GI secretions
Type of Secretion
Volume (mL/24 h)
Na (mEq/L)
K (mEq/L)
Cl (mEq/L)
HCO3
− (mEq/L)
Stomach
1000–2000
60–90
10–30
100–130
0
Small intestine
2000–3000
120–140
5–10
90–120
30–40
Colon
—
60
30
40
0
Pancreas
600–800
135–145
5–10
70–90
95–115
Bile
300–800
135–145
5–10
90–110
30–40
Together, these two mechanisms return the plasma osmolality 
to normal. Baroreceptors also modulate volume in response to 
changes in pressure and circulating volume through specialized 
pressure sensors located in the aortic arch and carotid sinuses.4 
Baroreceptor responses are both neural, through sympathetic and 
parasympathetic pathways, and hormonal, through substances 
including renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, atrial natriuretic pep-
tide, and renal prostaglandins. The net result of alterations in 
renal sodium excretion and free water reabsorption is restoration 
of volume to the normal state.
Concentration Changes
Changes in serum sodium concentration are inversely pro-
portional to TBW. Therefore, abnormalities in TBW are 
reflected by abnormalities in serum sodium levels.
Hyponatremia.  A low serum sodium level occurs when there 
is an excess of extracellular water relative to sodium. Extracel-
lular volume can be high, normal, or low (Fig. 3-3). In most 
cases of hyponatremia, sodium concentration is decreased as a 
consequence of either sodium depletion or dilution.5 Dilutional 
hyponatremia frequently results from excess extracellular water 
and therefore is associated with a high extracellular volume sta-
tus. Excessive oral water intake or iatrogenic intravenous (IV) 
excess free water administration can cause hyponatremia. Post-
operative patients are particularly prone to increased secretion 
of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which increases reabsorption 
of free water from the kidneys with subsequent volume expan-
sion and hyponatremia. This is usually self-limiting in that both 
hyponatremia and volume expansion decrease ADH secretion. 
Additionally, a number of drugs can cause water retention and 
subsequent hyponatremia, such as the antipsychotics and tricy-
clic antidepressants as well as angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors. The elderly are particularly susceptible to drug-
induced hyponatremia. Physical signs of volume overload usu-
ally are absent, and laboratory evaluation reveals hemodilution. 
Depletional causes of hyponatremia are associated with either a 
decreased intake or increased loss of sodium-containing fluids. 
A concomitant ECF volume deficit is common. Causes include 
decreased sodium intake, such as consumption of a low-sodium 
diet or use of enteral feeds, which are typically low in sodium; 
GI losses from vomiting, prolonged nasogastric suctioning, or 
diarrhea; and renal losses due to diuretic use or primary renal 
disease.
Hyponatremia also can be seen with an excess of solute 
relative to free water, such as with untreated hyperglycemia or 
mannitol administration. Glucose exerts an osmotic force in the 
extracellular compartment, causing a shift of water from the 
intracellular to the extracellular space. Hyponatremia therefore 
can be seen when the effective osmotic pressure of the extracel-
lular compartment is normal or even high. When hyponatremia 
in the presence of hyperglycemia is being evaluated, the cor-
rected sodium concentration should be calculated as follows:
For every 100-mg/dL increment in plasma glucose above 
normal, the plasma sodium should  
decrease by 1.6 mEq/L
Lastly, extreme elevations in plasma lipids and proteins can 
cause pseudohyponatremia, because there is no true decrease in 
extracellular sodium relative to water.
Signs and symptoms of hyponatremia (Table 3-4) are 
dependent on the degree of hyponatremia and the rapidity with 
which it occurred. Clinical manifestations primarily have a 
central nervous system origin and are related to cellular water 
intoxication and associated increases in intracranial pressure. 
Oliguric renal failure also can be a rapid complication in the 
setting of severe hyponatremia.
A systematic review of the etiology of hyponatremia 
should reveal its cause in a given instance. Hyperosmolar 
causes, including hyperglycemia or mannitol infusion and pseu-
dohyponatremia, should be easily excluded. Next, depletional 
versus dilutional causes of hyponatremia are evaluated. In the 
absence of renal disease, depletion is associated with low urine 
sodium levels (<20 mEq/L), whereas renal sodium wasting 
shows high urine sodium levels (>20 mEq/L). Dilutional causes 
of hyponatremia usually are associated with hypervolemic cir-
culation. A normal volume status in the setting of hyponatremia 
should prompt an evaluation for a syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of ADH.
Hypernatremia.  Hypernatremia results from either a loss of 
free water or a gain of sodium in excess of water. Like hypo-
natremia, it can be associated with an increased, normal, or 
decreased extracellular volume (see Fig. 3-3). Hypervolemic 
hypernatremia usually is caused either by iatrogenic adminis-
tration of sodium-containing fluids, including sodium bicarbon-
ate, or mineralocorticoid excess as seen in hyperaldosteronism, 
Cushing’s syndrome, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Urine 
sodium concentration is typically >20 mEq/L, and urine osmo-
larity is >300 mOsm/L. Normovolemic hypernatremia can 
result from renal causes, including diabetes insipidus, diuretic 
use, and renal disease, or from nonrenal water loss from the 
GI tract or skin, although the same conditions can result in 
hypovolemic hypernatremia. When hypovolemia is present, the 
urine sodium concentration is <20 mEq/L and urine osmolarity 
3
70
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
is <300 to 400 mOsm/L. Nonrenal water loss can occur second-
ary to relatively isotonic GI fluid losses such as that caused by 
diarrhea, to hypotonic skin fluid losses such as loss due to fever, 
or to losses via tracheotomies during hyperventilation. Addi-
tionally, thyrotoxicosis can cause water loss, as can the use of 
hypertonic glucose solutions for peritoneal dialysis. With non-
renal water loss, the urine sodium concentration is <15 mEq/L 
and the urine osmolarity is >400 mOsm/L.
Symptomatic hypernatremia usually occurs only in patients 
with impaired thirst or restricted access to fluid, because thirst 
will result in increased water intake. Symptoms are rare until 
the serum sodium concentration exceeds 160 mEq/L but, once 
present, are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. 
Because symptoms are related to hyperosmolarity, central ner-
vous system effects predominate (see Table 3-4). Water shifts 
from the intracellular to the extracellular space in response to a 
hyperosmolar extracellular space, which results in cellular dehy-
dration. This can put traction on the cerebral vessels and lead to 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Central nervous system symptoms 
Figure 3-3.  Evaluation of sodium 
abnormalities. ADH = antidiuretic 
hormone; SIADH = syndrome of 
inappropriate secretion of antidi-
uretic hormone.
can range from restlessness and irritability to seizures, coma, 
and death. The classic signs of hypovolemic hypernatremia, 
(tachycardia, orthostasis, and hypotension) may be present, as 
well as the unique findings of dry, sticky mucous membranes.
Composition Changes: Etiology and Diagnosis
Potassium Abnormalities.  The average dietary intake of 
potassium is approximately 50 to 100 mEq/d, which in the 
absence of hypokalemia is excreted primarily in the urine. 
Extracellular potassium is maintained within a narrow range, 
principally by renal excretion of potassium, which can range 
from 10 to 700 mEq/d. Although only 2% of the total body 
potassium (4.5 mEq/L × 14 L = 63 mEq) is located within the 
extracellular compartment, this small amount is critical to car-
diac and neuromuscular function; thus, even minor changes 
can have major effects on cardiac activity. The intracellular 
and extracellular distribution of potassium is influenced by a 
number of factors, including surgical stress, injury, acidosis, 
and tissue catabolism.
High
Increased intake
Postoperative ADH secretion
Drugs
High
Iatrogenic sodium administration
Mineralocorticoid excess
Aldosteronism
Cushing’s disease
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Hyponatremia
Volume status
Normal
Hyperglycemia
↑Plasma Iipids/proteins
SIADH
Water intoxication
Diuretics
Hypernatremia
Volume status
Normal
Nonrenal water loss
Skin
GI
Renal water loss
Renal disease
Diuretics
Diabetes insipidus
Low
Decreased sodium intake
GI losses
Renal losses
Diuretics
Primary renal disease
Low
Nonrenal water loss
Skin
GI 
Renal water loss
Renal (tubular) disease
Osmotic diuretics
Diabetes insipidus
Adrenal failure
71
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
Hyperkalemia  Hyperkalemia is defined as a serum potassium 
concentration above the normal range of 3.5 to 5.0 mEq/L. 
It is caused by excessive potassium intake, increased release 
of potassium from cells, or impaired potassium excretion by 
the kidneys (Table 3-5).6 Increased intake can be either from 
oral or IV supplementation, or from red cell lysis after transfu-
sion. Hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and crush injuries can dis-
rupt cell membranes and release intracellular potassium into 
the ECF. Acidosis and a rapid rise in extracellular osmolality 
from hyperglycemia or IV mannitol can raise serum potassium 
levels by causing a shift of potassium ions to the extracellular 
compartment.7 Because 98% of total body potassium is in the 
intracellular fluid compartment, even small shifts of intracel-
lular potassium out of the intracellular fluid compartment can 
lead to a significant rise in extracellular potassium. A number 
of medications can contribute to hyperkalemia, particularly in 
the presence of renal insufficiency, including potassium-sparing 
diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Spironolactone 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors interfere with 
aldosterone activity, inhibiting the normal renal mechanism of 
potassium excretion. Acute and chronic renal insufficiency also 
impairs potassium excretion.
Symptoms of hyperkalemia are primarily GI, neuromus-
cular, and cardiovascular (Table 3-6). GI symptoms include 
nausea, vomiting, intestinal colic, and diarrhea. Neuromuscu-
lar symptoms range from weakness to ascending paralysis to 
respiratory failure. Early cardiovascular signs may be appar-
ent from electrocardiogram (ECG) changes and eventually lead 
Table 3-4 
Clinical manifestations of abnormalities in serum 
sodium level
Body System
Hyponatremia
Central nervous 
system
Headache, confusion, hyperactive or 
hypoactive deep tendon reflexes, seizures, 
coma, increased intracranial pressure
Musculoskeletal
Weakness, fatigue, muscle cramps/
twitching
GI
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, watery 
diarrhea
Cardiovascular
Hypertension and bradycardia 
if intracranial pressure increases 
significantly
Tissue
Lacrimation, salivation
Renal
Oliguria
Body System
Hypernatremia
Central nervous 
system
Restlessness, lethargy, ataxia, irritability, 
tonic spasms, delirium, seizures, coma
Musculoskeletal
Weakness
Cardiovascular
Tachycardia, hypotension, syncope
Tissue
Dry sticky mucous membranes, red 
swollen tongue, decreased saliva and tears
Renal
Oliguria
Metabolic
Fever
to hemodynamic symptoms of arrhythmia and cardiac arrest. 
ECG changes that may be seen with hyperkalemia include 
high peaked T waves (early), widened QRS complex, flattened 
P wave, prolonged PR interval (first-degree block), sine wave 
formation, and ventricular fibrillation.
Hypokalemia  Hypokalemia is much more common than 
hyperkalemia in the surgical patient. It may be caused by inad-
equate potassium intake; excessive renal potassium excretion; 
potassium loss in pathologic GI secretions, such as with diar-
rhea, fistulas, vomiting, or high nasogastric output; or intracel-
lular shifts from metabolic alkalosis or insulin therapy (see 
Table 3-5). The change in potassium associated with alkalosis 
can be calculated by the following formula:
Potassium decreases by 0.3 mEq/L for  
every 0.1 increase in pH above normal.
Additionally, drugs such as amphotericin, aminoglyco-
sides, cisplatin, and ifosfamide that induce magnesium depletion 
cause renal potassium wastage.8,9 In cases in which potassium 
deficiency is due to magnesium depletion,10 potassium repletion 
is difficult unless hypomagnesemia is first corrected.
The symptoms of hypokalemia (see Table 3-6), like those 
of hyperkalemia, are primarily related to failure of normal con-
tractility of GI smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, and cardiac mus-
cle. Findings may include ileus, constipation, weakness, fatigue, 
diminished tendon reflexes, paralysis, and cardiac arrest. In the 
setting of ECF depletion, symptoms may be masked initially 
and then worsened by further dilution during volume repletion. 
ECG changes suggestive of hypokalemia include U waves, 
T-wave flattening, ST-segment changes, and arrhythmias (with 
digitalis therapy).
Table 3-5 
Etiology of potassium abnormalities
Hyperkalemia
Increased intake
  Potassium supplementation
  Blood transfusions
  Endogenous load/destruction: hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, 
crush injury, gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Increased release
  Acidosis
  Rapid rise of extracellular osmolality (hyperglycemia or 
mannitol)
Impaired excretion
  Potassium-sparing diuretics
  Renal insufficiency/failure
Hypokalemia
Inadequate intake
  Dietary, potassium-free intravenous fluids, potassium-
deficient TPN
Excessive potassium excretion
  Hyperaldosteronism
  Medications
GI losses
  Direct loss of potassium from GI fluid (diarrhea)
  Renal loss of potassium (to conserve sodium in response 
to gastric losses)
72
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 3-6 
Clinical manifestations of abnormalities in potassium, magnesium, and calcium levels
Increased Serum Levels
System
Potassium
Magnesium
Calcium
GI
Nausea/vomiting, colic, diarrhea
Nausea/vomiting
Anorexia, nausea/vomiting, 
abdominal pain
Neuromuscular
Weakness, paralysis, respiratory 
failure
Weakness, lethargy, decreased 
reflexes
Weakness, confusion, coma, bone 
pain
Cardiovascular
Arrhythmia, arrest
Hypotension, arrest
Hypertension, arrhythmia, polyuria
Renal
—
—
Polydipsia
Decreased Serum Levels
System
Potassium
Magnesium
Calcium
GI
Ileus, constipation
—
—
Neuromuscular
Decreased reflexes, fatigue, 
weakness, paralysis
Hyperactive reflexes, muscle 
tremors, tetany, seizures
Hyperactive reflexes, paresthesias, 
carpopedal spasm, seizures
Cardiovascular
Arrest
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Calcium Abnormalities.  The vast majority of the body’s cal-
cium is contained within the bone matrix, with <1% found in the 
ECF. Serum calcium is distributed among three forms: protein 
found (40%), complexed to phosphate and other anions (10%), 
and ionized (50%). It is the ionized fraction that is responsible 
for neuromuscular stability and can be measured directly. When 
total serum calcium levels are measured, the albumin concentra-
tion must be taken into consideration:
Adjust total serum calcium down by 0.8 mg/dL  
for every 1 g/dL decrease in albumin.
Unlike changes in albumin, changes in pH will affect the 
ionized calcium concentration. Acidosis decreases protein bind-
ing, thereby increasing the ionized fraction of calcium.
Daily calcium intake is 1 to 3 g/d. Most of this is excreted 
via the bowel, with urinary excretion relatively low. Total body 
calcium balance is under complex hormonal control, but distur-
bances in metabolism are relatively long term and less important 
in the acute surgical setting. However, attention to the critical role 
of ionized calcium in neuromuscular function often is required.
Hypercalcemia  Hypercalcemia is defined as a serum calcium 
level above the normal range of 8.5 to 10.5 mEq/L or an increase 
in the ionized calcium level above 4.2 to 4.8 mg/dL. Primary 
hyperparathyroidism in the outpatient setting and malignancy 
in hospitalized patients, from either bony metastasis or secre-
tion of parathyroid hormone–related protein, account for most 
cases of symptomatic hypercalcemia.11 Symptoms of hypercal-
cemia (see Table 3-6), which vary with the degree of severity, 
include neurologic impairment, musculoskeletal weakness and 
pain, renal dysfunction, and GI symptoms of nausea, vomiting, 
and abdominal pain. Cardiac symptoms can be manifest as 
hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, and a worsening of digitalis 
toxicity. ECG changes in hypercalcemia include shortened QT 
interval, prolonged PR and QRS intervals, increased QRS volt-
age, T-wave flattening and widening, and atrioventricular block 
(which can progress to complete heart block and cardiac arrest).
Hypocalcemia  Hypocalcemia is defined as a serum calcium 
level below 8.5 mEq/L or a decrease in the ionized calcium 
level below 4.2 mg/dL. The causes of hypocalcemia include 
pancreatitis, massive soft tissue infections such as necrotiz-
ing fasciitis, renal failure, pancreatic and small bowel fistulas, 
hypoparathyroidism, toxic shock syndrome, abnormalities in 
magnesium levels, and tumor lysis syndrome. In addition, tran-
sient hypocalcemia commonly occurs after removal of a para-
thyroid adenoma due to atrophy of the remaining glands and 
avid bone remineralization, and sometimes requires high-dose 
calcium supplementation.12 Additionally, malignancies asso-
ciated with increased osteoblastic activity, such as breast and 
prostate cancer, can lead to hypocalcemia from increased bone 
formation.13 Calcium precipitation with organic anions is also a 
cause of hypocalcemia and may occur during hyperphosphate-
mia from tumor lysis syndrome or rhabdomyolysis. Pancreatitis 
may sequester calcium via chelation with free fatty acids. Mas-
sive blood transfusion with citrate binding is another mecha-
nism.14,15 Hypocalcemia rarely results solely from decreased 
intake, because bone reabsorption can maintain normal levels 
for prolonged periods.
Asymptomatic hypocalcemia may occur when hypopro-
teinemia results in a normal ionized calcium level. Conversely, 
symptoms can develop with a normal serum calcium level 
during alkalosis, which decreases ionized calcium. In general, 
neuromuscular and cardiac symptoms do not occur until the ion-
ized fraction falls below 2.5 mg/dL (see Table 3-6). Clinical 
findings may include paresthesias of the face and extremities, 
muscle cramps, carpopedal spasm, stridor, tetany, and seizures. 
Patients will demonstrate hyperreflexia and may exhibit positive 
Chvostek’s sign (spasm resulting from tapping over the facial 
nerve) and Trousseau’s sign (spasm resulting from pressure 
applied to the nerves and vessels of the upper extremity with 
a blood pressure cuff). Hypocalcemia may lead to decreased 
cardiac contractility and heart failure. ECG changes of hypocal-
cemia include prolonged QT interval, T-wave inversion, heart 
block, and ventricular fibrillation.
73
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
Phosphorus Abnormalities.  Phosphorus is the primary intra-
cellular divalent anion and is abundant in metabolically active 
cells. Phosphorus is involved in energy production during gly-
colysis and is found in high-energy phosphate products such 
as adenosine triphosphate. Serum phosphate levels are tightly 
controlled by renal excretion.
Hyperphosphatemia  Hyperphosphatemia can be due to 
decreased urinary excretion, increased intake, or endogenous 
mobilization of phosphorus. Most cases of hyperphosphatemia 
are seen in patients with impaired renal function. Hypoparathy-
roidism or hyperthyroidism also can decrease urinary excretion 
of phosphorus and thus lead to hyperphosphatemia. Increased 
release of endogenous phosphorus can be seen in association with 
any clinical condition that results in cell destruction, including 
rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis syndrome, hemolysis, sepsis, severe 
hypothermia, and malignant hyperthermia. Excessive phosphate 
administration from IV hyperalimentation solutions or phosphorus-
containing laxatives may also lead to elevated phosphate levels. 
Most cases of hyperphosphatemia are asymptomatic, but signifi-
cant prolonged hyperphosphatemia can lead to metastatic deposi-
tion of soft tissue calcium-phosphorus complexes.
Hypophosphatemia  Hypophosphatemia can be due to a 
decrease in phosphorus intake, an intracellular shift of phospho-
rus, or an increase in phosphorus excretion. Decreased GI uptake 
due to malabsorption or administration of phosphate binders and 
decreased dietary intake from malnutrition are causes of chronic 
hypophosphatemia. Most acute cases are due to an intracellular 
shift of phosphorus in association with respiratory alkalosis, 
insulin therapy, refeeding syndrome, and hungry bone syn-
drome. Clinical manifestations of hypophosphatemia usually 
are absent until levels fall significantly. In general, symptoms 
are related to adverse effects on the oxygen availability of tissue 
and to a decrease in high-energy phosphates, and can be mani-
fested as cardiac dysfunction or muscle weakness.
Magnesium Abnormalities.  Magnesium is the fourth most 
common mineral in the body and, like potassium, is found pri-
marily in the intracellular compartments. Approximately one 
half of the total body content of 2000 mEq is incorporated in 
bone and is slowly exchangeable. Of the fraction found in the 
extracellular space, one third is bound to serum albumin. There-
fore, the plasma level of magnesium may be a poor indicator 
of total body stores in the presence of hypoalbuminemia. Mag-
nesium should be replaced until levels are in the upper limit of 
normal. The normal dietary intake is approximately 20 mEq/d 
and is excreted in both the feces and urine. The kidneys have a 
remarkable ability to conserve magnesium, with renal excretion 
<1 mEq/d during magnesium deficiency.
Hypermagnesemia  Hypermagnesemia is rare but can be seen 
with severe renal insufficiency and parallel changes in potas-
sium excretion. Magnesium-containing antacids and laxatives 
can produce toxic levels in patients with renal failure. Excess 
intake in conjunction with total parenteral nutrition (TPN), or 
rarely massive trauma, thermal injury, and severe acidosis, 
may be associated with symptomatic hypermagnesemia. Clini-
cal examination (see Table 3-6) may find nausea and vomit-
ing; neuromuscular dysfunction with weakness, lethargy, and 
hyporeflexia; and impaired cardiac conduction leading to hypo-
tension and arrest. ECG changes are similar to those seen with 
hyperkalemia and include increased PR interval, widened QRS 
complex, and elevated T waves.
Hypomagnesemia  Magnesium depletion is a common prob-
lem in hospitalized patients, particularly in the critically ill.16 
The kidney is primarily responsible for magnesium homeosta-
sis through regulation by calcium/magnesium receptors on the 
renal tubular cells that respond to serum magnesium concentra-
tions.17 Hypomagnesemia may result from alterations of intake, 
renal excretion, and pathologic losses. Poor intake may occur in 
cases of starvation, alcoholism, prolonged IV fluid therapy, and 
TPN with inadequate supplementation of magnesium. Losses are 
seen in cases of increased renal excretion from alcohol abuse, 
diuretic use, administration of amphotericin B, and primary aldo-
steronism, as well as GI losses from diarrhea, malabsorption, 
and acute pancreatitis. The magnesium ion is essential for proper 
function of many enzyme systems. Depletion is characterized by 
neuromuscular and central nervous system hyperactivity. Symp-
toms are similar to those of calcium deficiency, including hyper-
active reflexes, muscle tremors, tetany, and positive Chvostek’s 
and Trousseau’s signs (see Table 3-6). Severe deficiencies can 
lead to delirium and seizures. A number of ECG changes also 
can occur and include prolonged QT and PR intervals, ST-seg-
ment depression, flattening or inversion of P waves, torsades 
de pointes, and arrhythmias. Hypomagnesemia is important 
not only because of its direct effects on the nervous system but 
also because it can produce hypocalcemia and lead to persis-
tent hypokalemia. When hypokalemia or hypocalcemia coex-
ists with hypomagnesemia, magnesium should be aggressively 
replaced to assist in restoring potassium or calcium homeostasis.
Acid-Base Balance
Acid-Base Homeostasis.  The pH of body fluids is maintained 
within a narrow range despite the ability of the kidneys to gen-
erate large amounts of HCO3
− and the normal large acid load 
produced as a by-product of metabolism. This endogenous acid 
load is efficiently neutralized by buffer systems and ultimately 
excreted by the lungs and kidneys.
Important buffers include intracellular proteins and phos-
phates and the extracellular bicarbonate–carbonic acid system. 
Compensation for acid-base derangements can be by respiratory 
mechanisms (for metabolic derangements) or metabolic mecha-
nisms (for respiratory derangements). Changes in ventilation in 
response to metabolic abnormalities are mediated by hydrogen-
sensitive chemoreceptors found in the carotid body and brain 
stem. Acidosis stimulates the chemoreceptors to increase ven-
tilation, whereas alkalosis decreases the activity of the chemo-
receptors and thus decreases ventilation. The kidneys provide 
compensation for respiratory abnormalities by either increasing 
or decreasing bicarbonate reabsorption in response to respiratory 
acidosis or alkalosis, respectively. Unlike the prompt change in 
ventilation that occurs with metabolic abnormalities, the com-
pensatory response in the kidneys to respiratory abnormalities 
is delayed. Significant compensation may not begin for 6 hours 
and then may continue for several days. Because of this delayed 
compensatory response, respiratory acid-base derangements 
before renal compensation are classified as acute, whereas those 
persisting after renal compensation are categorized as chronic. 
The predicted compensatory changes in response to meta-
bolic or respiratory derangements are listed in Table 3-7.18 
If the predicted change in pH is exceeded, then a mixed acid-
base abnormality may be present (Table 3-8).
Metabolic Derangements 
Metabolic Acidosis  Metabolic acidosis results from an 
increased intake of acids, an increased generation of acids, or an 
4
74
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 3-7 
Predicted changes in acid-base disorders
Disorder
Predicted Change
Metabolic
  Metabolic acidosis
  Metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory
  Acute respiratory acidosis
  Chronic respiratory  
  acidosis
  Acute respiratory alkalosis
  Chronic respiratory  
  alkalosis
Pco2 = 1.5 × HCO3
− + 8
Pco2 = 0.7 × HCO3
− + 21
Δ pH = (Pco2 – 40) × 0.008
Δ pH = (Pco2 – 40) × 0.003
Δ pH = (40 – Pco2) × 0.008
Δ pH = (40 – Pco2) × 0.017
Pco2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
Table 3-8 
Respiratory and metabolic components of acid-base disorders
Acute Uncompensated
Chronic (Partially Compensated)
Type of Acid-Base  
Disorder
pH
Pco2 (Respiratory 
Component)
Plasma HCO3
−a  
(Metabolic  
Component)
pH
Pco2 (Respiratory 
Component)
Plasma HCO3
−a 
(Metabolic  
Component)
Respiratory acidosis
↓↓
↑↑
N
↓
↑↑
↑
Respiratory alkalosis
↑↑
↓↓
N
↑
↓↓
↓
Metabolic acidosis
↓↓
N
↓↓
↓
↓
↓
Metabolic alkalosis
↑↑
N
↑↑
↑
↑?
↑
aMeasured as standard bicarbonate, whole blood buffer base, CO2 content, or CO2 combining power. The base excess value is positive when the standard 
bicarbonate is above normal and negative when the standard bicarbonate is below normal.
N = normal; Pco2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
increased loss of bicarbonate (Table 3-9). The body responds by 
several mechanisms, including producing buffers (extracellular 
bicarbonate and intracellular buffers from bone and muscle), 
increasing ventilation (Kussmaul’s respirations), and increas-
ing renal reabsorption and generation of bicarbonate. The kid-
ney also will increase secretion of hydrogen and thus increase 
urinary excretion of NH4
+ (H+ + NH3
+ = NH4
+). Evaluation of 
a patient with a low serum bicarbonate level and metabolic aci-
dosis includes determination of the anion gap (AG), an index 
of unmeasured anions.
AG = (Na) – (Cl + HCO3)
The normal AG is <12 mmol/L and is due primarily to the 
albumin effect, so that the estimated AG must be adjusted for 
albumin (hypoalbuminemia reduces the AG).19
Corrected AG = actual AG – [2.5(4.5 – albumin)]
Metabolic acidosis with an increased AG occurs either 
from ingestion of exogenous acid such as from ethylene gly-
col, salicylates, or methanol, or from increased endogenous acid 
production of the following:
• β-Hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate in ketoacidosis
• Lactate in lactic acidosis
• Organic acids in renal insufficiency
A common cause of severe metabolic acidosis in surgi-
cal patients is lactic acidosis. In circulatory shock, lactate is 
produced in the presence of hypoxia from inadequate tissue 
perfusion. The treatment is to restore perfusion with volume 
resuscitation rather than to attempt to correct the abnormality 
with exogenous bicarbonate. With adequate perfusion, the lactic 
acid is rapidly metabolized by the liver and the pH level returns 
to normal. In clinical studies of lactic acidosis and ketoacido-
sis, the administration of bicarbonate has not reduced morbidity 
or mortality or improved cellular function.20 The overzealous 
administration of bicarbonate can lead to metabolic alkalosis, 
which shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to the left; 
this interferes with oxygen unloading at the tissue level and can 
be associated with arrhythmias that are difficult to treat. An 
additional disadvantage is that sodium bicarbonate actually can 
exacerbate intracellular acidosis. Administered bicarbonate can 
combine with the excess hydrogen ions to form carbonic acid; 
this is then converted to CO2 and water, which thus raises the 
partial pressure of CO2 (Pco2). This hypercarbia could com-
pound ventilation abnormalities in patients with underlying 
acute respiratory distress syndrome. This CO2 can diffuse into 
cells, but bicarbonate remains extracellular, which thus worsens 
intracellular acidosis. Clinically, lactate levels may not be useful 
in directing resuscitation, although lactate levels may be higher 
in nonsurvivors of serious injury.21
Metabolic acidosis with a normal AG results from exog-
enous acid administration (HCl or NH4
+), from loss of bicar-
bonate due to GI disorders such as diarrhea and fistulas or 
ureterosigmoidostomy, or from renal losses. In these settings, 
the bicarbonate loss is accompanied by a gain of chloride; 
thus, the AG remains unchanged. To determine whether the 
loss of bicarbonate has a renal cause, the urinary [NH4
+] can 
be measured. A low urinary [NH4
+] in the face of hyperchlore-
mic acidosis would indicate that the kidney is the site of loss, 
and evaluation for renal tubular acidosis should be undertaken. 
Proximal renal tubular acidosis results from decreased tubular 
reabsorption of HCO3
−, whereas distal renal tubular acidosis 
results from decreased acid excretion. The carbonic anhydrase 
75
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
inhibitor acetazolamide also causes bicarbonate loss from the 
kidneys.
Metabolic Alkalosis  Normal acid-base homeostasis prevents 
metabolic alkalosis from developing unless both an increase in 
bicarbonate generation and impaired renal excretion of bicar-
bonate occur (Table 3-10). Metabolic alkalosis results from the 
loss of fixed acids or the gain of bicarbonate and is worsened 
by potassium depletion. The majority of patients also will have 
hypokalemia, because extracellular potassium ions exchange 
with intracellular hydrogen ions and allow the hydrogen ions to 
buffer excess HCO3
–. Hypochloremic and hypokalemic meta-
bolic alkalosis can occur from isolated loss of gastric contents 
in infants with pyloric stenosis or adults with duodenal ulcer 
disease. Unlike vomiting associated with an open pylorus, 
which involves a loss of gastric as well as pancreatic, biliary, 
and intestinal secretions, vomiting with an obstructed pylorus 
results only in the loss of gastric fluid, which is high in chloride 
and hydrogen, and therefore results in a hypochloremic alkalo-
sis. Initially the urinary bicarbonate level is high in compensa-
tion for the alkalosis. Hydrogen ion reabsorption also ensues, 
with an accompanied potassium ion excretion. In response to 
the associated volume deficit, aldosterone-mediated sodium 
reabsorption increases potassium excretion. The resulting hypo-
kalemia leads to the excretion of hydrogen ions in the face of 
alkalosis, a paradoxic aciduria. Treatment includes replacement 
of the volume deficit with isotonic saline and then potassium 
replacement once adequate urine output is achieved.
Respiratory Derangements.  Under normal circumstances 
blood Pco2 is tightly maintained by alveolar ventilation, 
controlled by the respiratory centers in the pons and medulla 
oblongata.
Respiratory Acidosis  Respiratory acidosis is associated with 
the retention of CO2 secondary to decreased alveolar ventila-
tion. The principal causes are listed in Table 3-11. Because 
compensation is primarily a renal mechanism, it is a delayed 
response. Treatment of acute respiratory acidosis is directed 
at the underlying cause. Measures to ensure adequate ventila-
tion are also initiated. This may entail patient-initiated volume 
expansion using noninvasive bilevel positive airway pressure 
or may require endotracheal intubation to increase minute ven-
tilation. In the chronic form of respiratory acidosis, the partial 
pressure of arterial CO2 remains elevated and the bicarbonate 
concentration rises slowly as renal compensation occurs.
Respiratory Alkalosis  In the surgical patient, most cases of 
respiratory alkalosis are acute and secondary to alveolar hyper-
ventilation. Causes include pain, anxiety, and neurologic dis-
orders, including central nervous system injury and assisted 
ventilation. Drugs such as salicylates, fever, gram-negative 
bacteremia, thyrotoxicosis, and hypoxemia are other possibili-
ties. Acute hypocapnia can cause an uptake of potassium and 
phosphate into cells and increased binding of calcium to albu-
min, leading to symptomatic hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, 
and hypocalcemia with subsequent arrhythmias, paresthesias, 
muscle cramps, and seizures. Treatment should be directed at 
the underlying cause, but direct treatment of the hyperventila-
tion using controlled ventilation may also be required.
Table 3-9 
Etiology of metabolic acidosis
Increased Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis
Exogenous acid ingestion
  Ethylene glycol
  Salicylate
  Methanol
Endogenous acid production
  Ketoacidosis
  Lactic acidosis
  Renal insufficiency
Normal Anion Gap
Acid administration (HCl)
Loss of bicarbonate
GI losses (diarrhea, fistulas)
Ureterosigmoidostomy
Renal tubular acidosis
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
Table 3-10 
Etiology of metabolic alkalosis
Increased bicarbonate generation
1.  Chloride losing (urinary chloride >20 mEq/L)
Mineralocorticoid excess
Profound potassium depletion
2.  Chloride sparing (urinary chloride <20 mEq/L)
Loss from gastric secretions (emesis or nasogastric  
  suction)
Diuretics
3.  Excess administration of alkali
Acetate in parenteral nutrition
Citrate in blood transfusions
Antacids
Bicarbonate
Milk-alkali syndrome
Impaired bicarbonate excretion
1.  Decreased glomerular filtration
2.  Increased bicarbonate reabsorption (hypercarbia or  
  potassium depletion)
Table 3-11 
Etiology of respiratory acidosis: hypoventilation
Narcotics
Central nervous system injury
Pulmonary: significant
  Secretions
  Atelectasis
  Mucus plug
  Pneumonia
  Pleural effusion
Pain from abdominal or thoracic injuries or incisions
Limited diaphragmatic excursion from intra-abdominal 
pathology
  Abdominal distention
  Abdominal compartment syndrome
  Ascites
76
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE THERAPY
Parenteral Solutions
A number of commercially available electrolyte solutions are 
available for parenteral administration. The most commonly 
used solutions are listed in Table 3-12. The type of fluid admin-
istered depends on the patient’s volume status and the type of 
concentration or compositional abnormality present. Both lac-
tated Ringer’s solution and normal saline are considered isotonic 
and are useful in replacing GI losses and correcting extracellular 
volume deficits. Lactated Ringer’s is slightly hypotonic in that 
it contains 130 mEq of lactate. Lactate is used rather than bicar-
bonate because it is more stable in IV fluids during storage. It 
is converted into bicarbonate by the liver after infusion, even 
in the face of hemorrhagic shock. Evidence has suggested that 
resuscitation using lactated Ringer’s may be deleterious because 
it activates the inflammatory response and induces apoptosis. 
The component that has been implicated is the D isomer of lac-
tate, which unlike the L isomer is not a normal intermediary in 
mammalian metabolism.22 However, subsequent in vivo stud-
ies showed significantly lower levels of apoptosis in lung and 
liver tissue after resuscitation with any of the various Ringer’s 
formulations.23
Sodium chloride is mildly hypertonic, containing 154 mEq 
of sodium that is balanced by 154 mEq of chloride. The high 
chloride concentration imposes a significant chloride load on 
the kidneys and may lead to a hyperchloremic metabolic acido-
sis. Sodium chloride is an ideal solution, however, for correcting 
volume deficits associated with hyponatremia, hypochloremia, 
and metabolic alkalosis.
The less concentrated sodium solutions, such as 0.45% 
sodium chloride, are useful for replacement of ongoing GI 
losses as well as for maintenance fluid therapy in the post-
operative period. This solution provides sufficient free water 
for insensible losses and enough sodium to aid the kidneys in 
adjustment of serum sodium levels. The addition of 5% dextrose 
(50 g of dextrose per liter) supplies 200 kcal/L, and dextrose is 
always added to solutions containing <0.45% sodium chloride 
to maintain osmolality and thus prevent the lysis of red blood 
cells that may occur with rapid infusion of hypotonic fluids. The 
addition of potassium is useful once adequate renal function and 
urine output are established.
Alternative Resuscitative Fluids
A number of alternative solutions for volume expansion and 
resuscitation are available (Table 3-13).24 Hypertonic saline 
solutions (3.5% and 5%) are used for correction of 
severe sodium deficits and are discussed elsewhere in 
this chapter. Hypertonic saline (7.5%) has been used as a treat-
ment modality in patients with closed head injuries. It has been 
shown to increase cerebral perfusion and decrease intracranial 
pressure, thus decreasing brain edema.25 However, there have 
also been concerns about increased bleeding, because hyper-
tonic saline is an arteriolar vasodilator. A trial of 853 patients 
receiving hypertonic saline versus hypertonic saline/dextran 
70 vs. 0.9% saline as initial resuscitation in the field showed 
a higher 28-day mortality in both hypertonic saline groups 
compared to 0.9% saline.26 Colloids also are used in surgical 
patients, and their effectiveness as volume expanders com-
pared with isotonic crystalloids has long been debated. Due 
to their molecular weight, they are confined to the intravas-
cular space, and their infusion results in more efficient tran-
sient plasma volume expansion. However, under conditions of 
Table 3-12 
Electrolyte solutions for parenteral administration
Electrolyte Composition (mEq/L)
Solution
Na
Cl
K
HCO3
−
Ca
Mg
mOsm
Extracellular fluid
142
103
4
27
5
3
280–310
Lactated Ringer’s
130
109
4
28
3
273
0.9% Sodium chloride
154
154
308
D5 0.45% Sodium chloride
77
77
407
D5W
253
3% Sodium chloride
513
513
1026
D5 = 5% dextrose; D5W = 5% dextrose in water.
Table 3-13 
Alternative resuscitative fluids
Solution
Molecular 
Weight
Osmolality 
(mOsm/L)
Sodium 
(mEq/L)
Hypertonic saline 
(7.5%)
—
2565
1283
Albumin 5%
70,000
300
130–160
Albumin 25%
70,000
1500
130–160
Dextran 40
40,000
308
154
Dextran 70
70,000
308
154
Hetastarch
450,000
310
154
Hextend
670,000
307
143
Gelofusine
30,000
NA
154
NA = not available.
5
77
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
severe hemorrhagic shock, capillary membrane permeability 
increases; this permits colloids to enter the interstitial space, 
which can worsen edema and impair tissue oxygenation. The 
theory that these high molecular weight agents “plug” capil-
lary leaks, which occur during neutrophil-mediated organ injury, 
has not been confirmed.27,28 Four major types of colloids are 
available—albumin, dextrans, hetastarch, and gelatins—that 
are described by their molecular weight and size in Table 3-13. 
Colloid solutions with smaller particles and lower molecular 
weights exert a greater oncotic effect but are retained within 
the circulation for a shorter period of time than larger and 
higher molecular weight colloids.
Albumin (molecular weight 70,000) is prepared from 
heat-sterilized pooled human plasma. It is typically avail-
able as either a 5% solution (osmolality of 300 mOsm/L) or 
25% solution (osmolality of 1500 mOsm/L). Because it is a 
derivative of blood, it can be associated with allergic reactions. 
Albumin has been shown to induce renal failure and impair 
pulmonary function when used for resuscitation in hemor-
rhagic shock.29
Dextrans are glucose polymers produced by bacteria 
grown on sucrose media and are available as either 40,000 or 
70,000 molecular weight solutions. They lead to initial volume 
expansion due to their osmotic effect but are associated with 
alterations in blood viscosity. Thus dextrans are used primar-
ily to lower blood viscosity rather than as volume expanders. 
Dextrans have been used, in association with hypertonic saline, 
to help maintain intravascular volume.
Hydroxyethyl starch solutions are another group of alter-
native plasma expanders and volume replacement solutions. 
Hetastarches are produced by the hydrolysis of insoluble amy-
lopectin, followed by a varying number of substitutions of 
hydroxyl groups for carbon groups on the glucose molecules. 
The molecular weights can range from 1000 to 3,000,000. 
The high molecular weight hydroxyethyl starch hetastarch, 
which comes as a 6% solution, is the only hydroxyethyl starch 
approved for use in the United States. Administration of hetas-
tarch can cause hemostatic derangements related to decreases 
in von Willebrand’s factor and factor VIII:C, and its use has 
been associated with postoperative bleeding in cardiac and neu-
rosurgery patients.30,31 Hetastarch also can induce renal dys-
function in patients with septic shock and was associated with 
a significant increased risk of mortality and acute kidney injury 
in the critically ill.32,33 Currently, hetastarch has a limited role 
in massive resuscitation because of the associated coagulopa-
thy and hyperchloremic acidosis (due to its high chloride con-
tent). Hextend is a modified, balanced, high molecular weight 
hydroxyethyl starch that is suspended in a lactate-buffered solu-
tion, rather than in saline. A phase III clinical study comparing 
Hextend to a similar 6% hydroxyethyl starch in patients under-
going major abdominal surgery demonstrated no adverse effects 
on coagulation with Hextend other than the known effects of 
hemodilution.34 Hextend has not been tested for use in mas-
sive resuscitation, and not all clinical studies show consistent 
results.35
Gelatins are the fourth group of colloids and are produced 
from bovine collagen. The two major types are urea-linked 
gelatin and succinylated gelatin (modified fluid gelatin, Gelo-
fusine). Gelofusine has been used abroad with mixed results.36 
Like many other artificial plasma volume expanders, it has 
been shown to impair whole blood coagulation time in human 
volunteers.37
Correction of Life-Threatening Electrolyte 
Abnormalities
Sodium
Hypernatremia  Treatment of hypernatremia usually consists of 
treatment of the associated water deficit. In hypovolemic patients, 
volume should be restored with normal saline before the concen-
tration abnormality is addressed. Once adequate volume has been 
achieved, the water deficit is replaced using a hypotonic fluid 
such as 5% dextrose, 5% dextrose in ¼ normal saline, or enterally 
administered water. The formula used to estimate the amount of 
water required to correct hypernatremia is as follows:
Water deficit (L)
serum sodium
140
=
−
×
140
TBW
Estimate TBW as 50% of lean body  
mass in men and 40% in women
The rate of fluid administration should be titrated to 
achieve a decrease in serum sodium concentration of no more 
than 1 mEq/h and 12 mEq/d for the treatment of acute symp-
tomatic hypernatremia. Even slower correction should be under-
taken for chronic hypernatremia (0.7 mEq/h), because overly 
rapid correction can lead to cerebral edema and herniation. The 
type of fluid used depends on the severity and ease of correc-
tion. Oral or enteral replacement is acceptable in most cases, 
or IV replacement with half- or quarter-normal saline can be 
used. Caution also should be exercised when using 5% dextrose 
in water to avoid overly rapid correction. Frequent neurologic 
evaluation as well as frequent evaluation of serum sodium levels 
also should be performed. Hypernatremia is less common than 
hyponatremia, but has a worse prognosis, and is an independent 
predictor of mortality in critical illness.38
Hyponatremia  Most cases of hyponatremia can be treated 
by free water restriction and, if severe, the administration of 
sodium. In patients with normal renal function, symptomatic 
hyponatremia usually does not occur until the serum sodium 
level is ≤120 mEq/L. If neurologic symptoms are present, 3% 
normal saline should be used to increase the sodium by no 
more than 1 mEq/L per hour until the serum sodium level 
reaches 130 mEq/L or neurologic symptoms are improved. 
Correction of asymptomatic hyponatremia should increase the 
sodium level by no more than 0.5 mEq/L per hour to a maxi-
mum increase of 12 mEq/L per day, and even more slowly in 
chronic hyponatremia. The rapid correction of hyponatremia 
can lead to pontine myelinolysis,39 with seizures, weakness, 
paresis, akinetic movements, and unresponsiveness, and may 
result in permanent brain damage and death. Serial magnetic 
resonance imaging may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.40
Potassium
Hyperkalemia  Treatment options for symptomatic hyperka-
lemia are listed in Table 3-14. The goals of therapy include 
reducing the total body potassium, shifting potassium from 
the extracellular to the intracellular space, and protecting the 
cells from the effects of increased potassium. For all patients, 
exogenous sources of potassium should be removed, including 
potassium supplementation in IV fluids and enteral and paren-
teral solutions. Potassium can be removed from the body using 
a cation-exchange resin such as Kayexalate that binds potas-
sium in exchange for sodium. It can be administered either 
78
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 3-14 
Treatment of symptomatic hyperkalemia
Potassium removal
  Kayexalate
    Oral administration is 15–30 g in 50–100 mL of 20%  
  sorbitol
    Rectal administration is 50 g in 200 mL of 20% sorbitol
  Dialysis
Shift potassium
  Glucose 1 ampule of D50 and regular insulin 5–10 units IV
  Bicarbonate 1 ampule IV
Counteract cardiac effects
  Calcium gluconate 5–10 mL of 10% solution
D50 = 50% dextrose.
orally, in alert patients, or rectally. Immediate measures also 
should include attempts to shift potassium intracellularly with 
glucose and bicarbonate infusion. Nebulized albuterol (10 to 
20 mg) may also be used. Use of glucose alone will cause a 
rise in insulin secretion, but in the acutely ill, this response 
may be blunted, and therefore both glucose and insulin may be 
necessary. Circulatory overload and hypernatremia may result 
from the administration of Kayexalate and bicarbonate, so care 
should be exercised when administering these agents to patients 
with fragile cardiac function. When ECG changes are pres-
ent, calcium chloride or calcium gluconate (5–10 mL of 10% 
solution) should be administered immediately to counteract the 
myocardial effects of hyperkalemia. Calcium infusion should be 
used cautiously in patients receiving digitalis, because digitalis 
toxicity may be precipitated. All of the aforementioned mea-
sures are temporary, lasting from 1 to approximately 4 hours. 
Dialysis should be considered in severe hyperkalemia when 
conservative measures fail.
Hypokalemia  Treatment for hypokalemia consists of potas-
sium repletion, the rate of which is determined by the symptoms 
(Table 3-15). Oral repletion is adequate for mild, asymptomatic 
hypokalemia. If IV repletion is required, usually no more than 
10 mEq/h is advisable in an unmonitored setting. This amount 
can be increased to 40 mEq/h when accompanied by continu-
ous ECG monitoring, and even more in the case of imminent 
cardiac arrest from a malignant arrhythmia-associated hypoka-
lemia. Caution should be exercised when oliguria or impaired 
renal function is coexistent.
Calcium
Hypercalcemia  Treatment is required when hypercalcemia is 
symptomatic, which usually occurs when the serum level exceeds 
12 mg/dL. The critical level for serum calcium is 15 mg/dL, when 
symptoms noted earlier may rapidly progress to death. The ini-
tial treatment is aimed at repleting the associated volume deficit 
and then inducing a brisk diuresis with normal saline. Treatment 
of hypercalcemia associated with malignancies is discussed 
later in this chapter.
Hypocalcemia  Asymptomatic hypocalcemia can be treated 
with oral or IV calcium (see Table 3-15). Acute symptomatic 
hypocalcemia should be treated with IV 10% calcium gluconate 
to achieve a serum concentration of 7 to 9 mg/dL. Associated 
deficits in magnesium, potassium, and pH must also be corrected. 
Hypocalcemia will be refractory to treatment if coexisting hypo-
magnesemia is not corrected first. Routine calcium supplementa-
tion is no longer recommended in association with massive blood 
transfusions.41
Phosphorus
Hyperphosphatemia  Phosphate binders such as sucralfate 
or aluminum-containing antacids can be used to lower serum 
phosphorus levels. Calcium acetate tablets also are useful when 
hypocalcemia is simultaneously present. Dialysis usually is 
reserved for patients with renal failure.
Hypophosphatemia  Depending on the level of depletion and 
tolerance to oral supplementation, a number of enteral and par-
enteral repletion strategies are effective for the treatment of 
hypophosphatemia (see Table 3-15).
Magnesium
Hypermagnesemia  Treatment for hypermagnesemia consists 
of measures to eliminate exogenous sources of magnesium, 
correct concurrent volume deficits, and correct acidosis if pres-
ent. To manage acute symptoms, calcium chloride (5 to 10 mL) 
should be administered to immediately antagonize the cardiovas-
cular effects. If elevated levels or symptoms persist, hemodialy-
sis may be necessary.
Hypomagnesemia  Correction of magnesium depletion can 
be oral if asymptomatic and mild. Otherwise, IV repletion is 
indicated and depends on severity (see Table 3-15) and clini-
cal symptoms. For those with severe deficits (<1.0 mEq/L) or 
those who are symptomatic, 1 to 2 g of magnesium sulfate may 
be administered IV over 15 minutes. Under ECG monitoring, it 
may be given over 2 minutes if necessary to correct torsades de 
pointes (irregular ventricular rhythm). Caution should be taken 
when giving large amounts of magnesium, because magnesium 
toxicity may develop. The simultaneous administration of cal-
cium gluconate will counteract the adverse side effects of a rap-
idly rising magnesium level and correct hypocalcemia, which is 
frequently associated with hypomagnesemia.
Preoperative Fluid Therapy
The administration of maintenance fluids should be all that is 
required in an otherwise healthy individual who may be under 
orders to receive nothing by mouth for some period before the 
time of surgery. This does not, however, include replenishment 
of a pre-existing deficit or ongoing fluid losses. The follow-
ing is a frequently used formula for calculating the volume of 
maintenance fluids in the absence of pre-existing abnormalities:
For the first 0–10 kg
For the next 10–20 kg
For weight >20 kg
Give 100 mL/kg per day
Give an additional 50 mL/ 
kg per day
Give an additional 20 mL/ 
kg per day
For example, a 60-kg female would receive a total of 
2300 mL of fluid daily: 1000 mL for the first 10 kg of body 
weight (10 kg × 100 mL/kg per day), 500 mL for the next 20 kg 
(10 kg × 50 mL/kg per day), and 800 mL for the last 40 kg (40 kg 
× 20 mL/kg per day).
An alternative approach is to replace the calculated daily 
water losses in urine, stool, and insensible loss with a hypo-
tonic saline solution rather than water alone, which allows 
79
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
the kidney some sodium excess to adjust for concentration. 
Although there should be no “routine” maintenance fluid orders, 
both of these methods would yield an appropriate choice of 
5% dextrose in 0.45% sodium chloride at 100 mL/h as initial 
therapy, with potassium added for patients with normal renal 
function. However, many surgical patients have volume and/or 
electrolyte abnormalities associated with their surgical disease. 
Preoperative evaluation of a patient’s volume status and pre-
existing electrolyte abnormalities is an important part of over-
all preoperative assessment and care. Volume deficits should 
be considered in patients who have obvious GI losses, such as 
through emesis or diarrhea, as well as in patients with poor oral 
intake secondary to their disease. Less obvious are those fluid 
losses known as third-space or nonfunctional ECF losses that 
occur with GI obstruction, peritoneal or bowel inflammation, 
ascites, crush injuries, burns, and severe soft tissue infections 
such as necrotizing fasciitis. The diagnosis of an acute volume 
deficit is primarily clinical (see Table 3-2), although the physi-
cal signs may vary with the duration of the deficit. Cardiovascu-
lar signs of tachycardia and orthostasis predominate with acute 
volume loss, usually accompanied by oliguria and hemoconcen-
tration. Acute volume deficits should be corrected as much as 
possible before the time of operation.
Once a volume deficit is diagnosed, prompt fluid replace-
ment should be instituted, usually with an isotonic crystalloid, 
depending on the measured serum electrolyte values. Patients 
with cardiovascular signs of volume deficit should receive a 
bolus of 1 to 2 L of isotonic fluid followed by a continuous infu-
sion. Close monitoring during this period is imperative. Resus-
citation should be guided by the reversal of the signs of volume 
deficit, such as restoration of acceptable values for vital signs, 
maintenance of adequate urine output (½–1 mL/kg per hour in 
an adult), and correction of base deficit. Patients whose volume 
deficit is not corrected after this initial volume challenge and 
Table 3-15 
Electrolyte replacement therapy protocol
Potassium
Serum potassium level <4.0 mEq/L:
  Asymptomatic, tolerating enteral nutrition: KCl 40 mEq per enteral access × 1 dose
  Asymptomatic, not tolerating enteral nutrition: KCl 20 mEq IV q2h × 2 doses
  Symptomatic: KCl 20 mEq IV q1h × 4 doses
  Recheck potassium level 2 h after end of infusion; if <3.5 mEq/L and asymptomatic, replace as per above protocol
Magnesium
Magnesium level 1.0–1.8 mEq/L:
  Magnesium sulfate 0.5 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL infused IV over 24 h × 3 d
  Recheck magnesium level in 3 d
Magnesium level <1.0 mEq/L:
  Magnesium sulfate 1 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL infused IV over 24 h × 1 d, then 0.5 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL  
  infused IV over 24 h × 2 d
  Recheck magnesium level in 3 d
If patient has gastric access and needs a bowel regimen:
  Milk of magnesia 15 mL (approximately 49 mEq magnesium) q24h per gastric tube; hold for diarrhea
Calcium
Ionized calcium level <4.0 mg/dL:
  With gastric access and tolerating enteral nutrition: Calcium carbonate suspension 1250 mg/5 mL q6h per gastric access;  
  recheck ionized calcium level in 3 d
  Without gastric access or not tolerating enteral nutrition: Calcium gluconate 2 g IV over 1 h × 1 dose; recheck ionized calcium  
  level in 3 d
Phosphate
Phosphate level 1.0–2.5 mg/dL:
  Tolerating enteral nutrition: Neutra-Phos 2 packets q6h per gastric tube or feeding tube
  No enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.15 mmol/kg IV over 6 h × 1 dose
  Recheck phosphate level in 3 d
Phosphate level <1.0 mg/dL:
  Tolerating enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.25 mmol/kg over 6 h × 1 dose
  Recheck phosphate level 4 h after end of infusion; if <2.5 mg/dL, begin Neutra-Phos 2 packets q6h
  Not tolerating enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.25 mmol/kg (LBW) over 6 h × 1 dose; recheck phosphate level 4 h after  
  end of infusion; if <2.5 mg/dL, then KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.15 mmol/kg (LBW) IV over 6 h × 1 dose
3 mmol KPHO4 = 3 mmol Phos and 4.4 mEq K+ = 1 mL
3 mmol NaPO4 = 3 mmol Phos and 4 mEq Na+ = 1 mL
Neutra-Phos 1 packet = 8 mmol Phos, 7 mEq K+, 7 mEq Na+
Use patient’s lean body weight (LBW) in kilograms for all calculations.
Disregard protocol if patient has renal failure, is on dialysis, or has a creatinine clearance <30 mL/min.
80
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
those with impaired renal function and the elderly should be 
considered for more intensive monitoring in an intensive care 
unit setting. In these patients, early invasive monitoring of cen-
tral venous pressure or cardiac output may be necessary.
If symptomatic electrolyte abnormalities accompany vol-
ume deficit, the abnormality should be corrected to the point 
that the acute symptom is relieved before surgical interven-
tion. For correction of severe hypernatremia associated with a 
volume deficit, an unsafe rapid fall in extracellular osmolarity 
from 5% dextrose infusion is avoided by slowly correcting the 
hypernatremia with 0.45% saline or even lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion rather than 5% dextrose alone. This will safely and slowly 
correct the hypernatremia while also correcting the associated 
volume deficit.
Intraoperative Fluid Therapy
With the induction of anesthesia, compensatory mechanisms are 
lost, and hypotension will develop if volume deficits are not 
appropriately corrected before the time of surgery. Hemody-
namic instability during anesthesia is best avoided by correct-
ing known fluid losses, replacing ongoing losses, and providing 
adequate maintenance fluid therapy preoperatively. In addi-
tion to measured blood loss, major open abdominal surgeries 
are associated with continued extracellular losses in the form 
of bowel wall edema, peritoneal fluid, and the wound edema 
during surgery. Large soft tissue wounds, complex fractures 
with associated soft tissue injury, and burns are all associated 
with additional third-space losses that must be considered in the 
operating room. These represent distributional shifts, in that the 
functional volume of ECF is reduced but fluid is not externally 
lost from the body. These functional losses have been referred 
to as parasitic losses, sequestration, or third-space edema, 
because the lost volume no longer participates in the normal 
functions of the ECF.
Until the 1960s saline solutions were withheld during sur-
gery. Administered saline was retained and was felt to be an 
inappropriate challenge to a physiologic response of intraopera-
tive salt intolerance. Basic and clinical research began to change 
this concept,42,43 eventually leading to the current concept that 
saline administration is necessary to restore the obligate ECF 
losses noted earlier. Although no accurate formula can predict 
intraoperative fluid needs, replacement of ECF during surgery 
often requires 500 to 1000 mL/h of a balanced salt solution to 
support homeostasis. The addition of albumin or other colloid-
containing solutions to intraoperative fluid therapy is not neces-
sary. Manipulation of colloid oncotic forces by albumin infusion 
during major vascular surgery showed no advantage in support-
ing cardiac function or avoiding the accumulation of extravas-
cular lung water.44
Postoperative Fluid Therapy
Postoperative fluid therapy should be based on the patient’s 
current estimated volume status and projected ongoing fluid 
losses. Any deficits from either preoperative or intraoperative 
losses should be corrected, and ongoing requirements should 
be included along with maintenance fluids. Third-space losses, 
although difficult to measure, should be included in fluid 
replacement strategies. In the initial postoperative period, an 
isotonic solution should be administered. The adequacy of 
resuscitation should be guided by the restoration of acceptable 
values for vital signs and urine output and, in more complicated 
cases, by the correction of base deficit or lactate. If uncertainty 
exists, particularly in patients with renal or cardiac dysfunction, 
a central venous catheter or Swan-Ganz catheter may be inserted 
to help guide fluid therapy. After the initial 24 to 48 hours, flu-
ids can be changed to 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline in patients 
unable to tolerate enteral nutrition. If normal renal function and 
adequate urine output are present, potassium may be added to 
the IV fluids. Daily fluid orders should begin with assessment of 
the patient’s volume status and assessment of electrolyte abnor-
malities. There is rarely a need to check electrolyte levels in the 
first few days of an uncomplicated postoperative course. How-
ever, postoperative diuresis may require attention to replace-
ment of urinary potassium loss. All measured losses, including 
losses through vomiting, nasogastric suctioning, drains, and 
urine output, as well as insensible losses, are replaced with the 
appropriate parenteral solutions as previously reviewed.
Special Considerations for the  
Postoperative Patient
Volume excess is a common disorder in the postoperative period. 
The administration of isotonic fluids in excess of actual needs 
may result in excess volume expansion. This may be due to the 
overestimation of third-space losses or to ongoing GI losses that 
are difficult to measure accurately. The earliest sign of volume 
overload is weight gain. The average postoperative patient who 
is not receiving nutritional support should lose approximately 
0.25 to 0.5 lb/d (0.11 to 0.23 kg/d) from catabolism. Additional 
signs of volume excess may also be present as listed in Table 3-2. 
Peripheral edema may not necessarily be associated with intra-
vascular volume overload, because overexpansion of total ECF 
may exist in association with a deficit in the circulating plasma 
volume.
Volume deficits also can be encountered in surgical 
patients if preoperative losses were not completely corrected, 
intraoperative losses were underestimated, or postoperative 
losses were greater than appreciated. The clinical manifestations 
are described in Table 3-2 and include tachycardia, orthostasis, 
and oliguria. Hemoconcentration also may be present. Treat-
ment will depend on the amount and composition of fluid lost. 
In most cases of volume depletion, replacement with an isotonic 
fluid will be sufficient while alterations in concentration 
and composition are being evaluated.
ELECTROLYTE ABNORMALITIES IN SPECIFIC 
SURGICAL PATIENTS
Neurologic Patients
Syndrome of Inappropriate Secretion of Antidiuretic 
Hormone.  The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidi-
uretic hormone (SIADH) can occur after head injury or surgery 
to the central nervous system, but it also is seen in association 
with administration of drugs such as morphine, nonsteroidals, 
and oxytocin, and in a number of pulmonary and endocrine 
diseases, including hypothyroidism and glucocorticoid defi-
ciency. Additionally, it can be seen in association with a number 
of malignancies, most often small cell cancer of the lung but 
also pancreatic carcinoma, thymoma, and Hodgkin’s dis-
ease.45 SIADH should be considered in patients who are 
euvolemic and hyponatremic with elevated urine sodium levels 
and urine osmolality. ADH secretion is considered inappropriate 
when it is not in response to osmotic or volume-related condi-
tions. Correction of the underlying problem should be attempted 
6
7
81
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
when possible. In most cases, restriction of free water will improve 
the hyponatremia. The goal is to achieve net water balance while 
avoiding volume depletion that may compromise renal function. 
Furosemide also can be used to induce free water loss. If hypo-
natremia persists after fluid restriction, the addition of isotonic or 
hypertonic fluids may be effective. The administration of isotonic 
saline may sometimes worsen the problem if the urinary sodium 
concentration is higher than the infused sodium concentration. 
The use of loop diuretics may be helpful in this situation by pre-
venting further urine concentration. In chronic SIADH, when 
long-term fluid restriction is difficult to maintain or is ineffective, 
demeclocycline and lithium can be used to induce free water loss.
Diabetes Insipidus.  Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disorder of 
ADH stimulation and is manifested by dilute urine in the case of 
hypernatremia. Central DI results from a defect in ADH secre-
tion, and nephrogenic DI results from a defect in end-organ 
responsiveness to ADH. Central DI is frequently seen in asso-
ciation with pituitary surgery, closed head injury, and anoxic 
encephalopathy.46 Nephrogenic DI occurs in association with 
hypokalemia, administration of radiocontrast dye, and use of 
certain drugs such as aminoglycosides and amphotericin B. In 
patients tolerating oral intake, volume status usually is normal 
because thirst stimulates increased intake. However, volume 
depletion can occur rapidly in patients incapable of oral intake. 
The diagnosis can be confirmed by documenting a paradoxical 
increase in urine osmolality in response to a period of water 
deprivation. In mild cases, free water replacement may be 
adequate therapy. In more severe cases, vasopressin can be 
added. The usual dosage of vasopressin is 5 U subcutaneously 
every 6 to 8 hours. However, serum electrolytes and osmolality 
should be monitored to avoid excess vasopressin administration 
with resulting iatrogenic SIADH.
Cerebral Salt Wasting.  Cerebral salt wasting is a diagnosis 
of exclusion that occurs in patients with a cerebral lesion and 
renal wasting of sodium and chloride with no other identifiable 
cause.47 Natriuresis in a patient with a contracted extracellular 
volume should prompt the possible diagnosis of cerebral salt 
wasting. Hyponatremia is frequently observed but is nonspecific 
and occurs as a secondary event, which differentiates it from 
SIADH.
Malnourished Patients: Refeeding Syndrome
Refeeding syndrome is a potentially lethal condition that can 
occur with rapid and excessive feeding of patients with severe 
underlying malnutrition due to starvation, alcoholism, delayed 
nutritional support, anorexia nervosa, or massive weight loss 
in obese patients.48 With refeeding, a shift in metabolism from 
fat to carbohydrate substrate stimulates insulin release, which 
results in the cellular uptake of electrolytes, particularly phos-
phate, magnesium, potassium, and calcium. However, severe 
hyperglycemia may result from blunted basal insulin secretion. 
The refeeding syndrome can be associated with enteral or par-
enteral refeeding, and symptoms from electrolyte abnormalities 
include cardiac arrhythmias, confusion, respiratory failure, and 
even death. To prevent the development of refeeding syndrome, 
underlying electrolyte and volume deficits should be corrected. 
Additionally, thiamine should be administered before the initia-
tion of feeding. Caloric repletion should be instituted slowly and 
should gradually increase over the first week.49 Vital signs, fluid 
balance, and electrolytes should be closely monitored and any 
deficits corrected as they evolve.
Acute Renal Failure Patients
A number of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities are specific to 
patients with acute renal failure. With the onset of renal fail-
ure, an accurate assessment of volume status must be made. If 
prerenal azotemia is present, prompt correction of the underly-
ing volume deficit is mandatory. Once acute tubular necrosis 
is established, measures should be taken to restrict daily fluid 
intake to match urine output and insensible and GI losses. Oli-
guric renal failure requires close monitoring of serum potas-
sium levels. Measures to correct hyperkalemia as reviewed in 
Table 3-14 should be instituted early, including consideration 
of early hemodialysis. Hyponatremia is common in established 
renal failure as a result of the breakdown of proteins, carbohy-
drates, and fats, as well the administration of free water. Dialy-
sis may be required for severe hyponatremia. Hypocalcemia, 
hypermagnesemia, and hyperphosphatemia also are associated 
with acute renal failure. Hypocalcemia should be verified by 
measuring ionized calcium, because many patients also are 
hypoalbuminemic. Phosphate binders can be used to control 
hyperphosphatemia, but dialysis may be required in more severe 
cases. Metabolic acidosis is commonly seen with renal failure, 
as the kidneys lose their ability to clear acid by-products. Bicar-
bonate can be useful, but dialysis often is needed. Although 
dialysis may be either intermittent or continuous, renal recovery 
may be improved by continuous renal replacement.50
Cancer Patients
Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities are common in patients with 
cancer. The causes may be common to all patient populations or 
may be specific to cancer patients and their treatment.51 Hypo-
natremia is frequently hypovolemic due to renal loss of sodium 
caused by diuretics or salt-wasting nephropathy as seen with 
some chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin. Cerebral salt 
wasting also can occur in patients with intracerebral lesions. 
Normovolemic hyponatremia may occur in association with 
SIADH from cervical cancer, lymphoma, and leukemia, or 
from certain chemotherapeutic agents. Hypernatremia in can-
cer patients most often is due to poor oral intake or GI volume 
losses, which are common side effects of chemotherapy. Central 
DI also can lead to hypernatremia in patients with central ner-
vous system lesions.
Hypokalemia can develop from GI losses associated with 
diarrhea caused by radiation enteritis or chemotherapy, or from 
tumors such as villous adenomas of the colon. Tumor lysis syn-
drome can precipitate severe hyperkalemia from massive tumor 
cell destruction.
Hypocalcemia can be seen after removal of a thyroid or 
parathyroid tumor or after a central neck dissection, which can 
damage the parathyroid glands. Hungry bone syndrome produces 
acute and profound hypocalcemia after parathyroid surgery for 
secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism because calcium is 
rapidly taken up by bones. Prostate and breast cancer can result 
in increased osteoblastic activity, which decreases serum calcium 
by increasing bone formation. Acute hypocalcemia also can occur 
with hyperphosphatemia, because phosphorus complexes with 
calcium. Hypomagnesemia is a side effect of ifosfamide and 
cisplatin therapy. Hypophosphatemia can be seen in hyperpara-
thyroidism, due to decreased phosphorus reabsorption, and in 
oncogenic osteomalacia, which increases the urinary excretion of 
phosphorus. Other causes of hypophosphatemia in cancer patients 
include renal tubular dysfunction from multiple myeloma, 
Bence Jones proteins, and certain chemotherapeutic agents. 
82
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Acute hypophosphatemia can occur as rapidly proliferating 
malignant cells take up phosphorus in acute leukemia. Tumor 
lysis syndrome or the use of bisphosphonates to treat hypercalce-
mia also can result in hyperphosphatemia.
Malignancy is the most common cause of hypercalcemia 
in hospitalized patients and is due to increased bone resorption 
or decreased renal excretion. Bone destruction occurs from bony 
metastasis as seen in breast or renal cell cancer but also can 
occur in multiple myeloma. With Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, hypercalcemia results from increased calcitriol for-
mation, which increases both absorption of calcium from the 
GI tract and mobilization from bone. Humoral hypercalcemia 
of malignancy is a common cause of hypercalcemia in cancer 
patients. As in primary hyperparathyroidism, a parathyroid-
related protein is secreted that binds to parathyroid receptors, 
stimulating calcium resorption from bone and decreasing renal 
excretion of calcium. The treatment of hypercalcemia of malig-
nancy should begin with saline volume expansion, which will 
decrease renal reabsorption of calcium as the associated volume 
deficit is corrected. Once an adequate volume status has been 
achieved, a loop diuretic may be added. Unfortunately, these 
measures are only temporary, and additional treatment is often 
necessary. A variety of drugs are available with varying times 
of onset, durations of action, and side effects.52 The bisphos-
phonates etidronate and pamidronate inhibit bone resorption 
and osteoclastic activity. They have a slow onset of action, but 
effects can last for 2 weeks. Calcitonin also is effective, inhibit-
ing bone resorption and increasing renal excretion of calcium. 
It acts quickly, within 2 to 4 hours, but its use is limited by the 
development of tachyphylaxis. Corticosteroids may decrease 
tachyphylaxis in response to calcitonin and can be used alone 
to treat hypercalcemia. Gallium nitrates are potent inhibitors of 
bone resorption. They display a long duration of action but can 
cause nephrotoxicity. Mithramycin is an antibiotic that blocks 
osteoclastic activity, but it can be associated with liver, renal, 
and hematologic abnormalities, which limits its use to the 
treatment of Paget’s disease of bone. For patients with severe, 
refractory hypercalcemia who are unable to tolerate volume 
expansion due to pulmonary edema or congestive heart failure, 
dialysis is an option.
Tumor lysis syndrome results when the release of intracel-
lular metabolites overwhelms the kidneys’ excretory capacity. 
This rapid release of uric acid, potassium, and phosphorus can 
result in marked hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphospha-
temia, and hypocalcemia, and acute renal failure. It is typically 
seen with poorly differentiated lymphomas and leukemias but 
also can occur with a number of solid tumor malignancies. 
Tumor lysis syndrome most commonly develops during treat-
ment with chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Once it develops, 
volume expansion should be undertaken and any associated 
electrolyte abnormalities corrected. In this setting, hypocal-
cemia should not be treated unless it is symptomatic to avoid 
metastatic calcifications. Dialysis may be required for man-
agement of impaired renal function or correction of electrolyte 
abnormalities.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in blue are key references.
  1.	 Aloia JF, Vaswani A, Flaster E, et al. Relationship of body 
water compartment to age, race and fat-free mass. J Lab Clin 
Med. 1998;132:483.
  2.	 Bourque CW, Oliet SHR. Osmoreceptors in the central ner-
vous system. Annu Rev Physiol. 1997;59:601.
  3.	 Verbalis JG. How does the brain sense osmolality? J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2007;18(12):3056.
  4.	 Stauss HM. Baroreceptor reflex function. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2002;283:R284.
  5.	 Miller M. Syndromes of excess antidiuretic hormone release. 
Crit Care Clin. 2001;17:11.
  6.	 Kapoor M, Chan G. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Crit 
Care Clin. 2001;17:571.
  7.	 Adrogue HJ, Lederer ED, Suki WN, et al. Determinants 
of plasma potassium in diabetic ketoacidosis. Medicine. 
1986;65:163.
  8.	 Zietse R, Zuotendijk R, Hoorn EJ. Fluid, electrolyte and acid-
base disorders associated with antibiotic therapy. Nat Rev 
Nephrol. 2009;5(4):193.
  9.	 Cobos E, Hall RR. Effects of chemotherapy on the kidney. 
Semin Nephrol. 1993;13:297.
10.	 Gennari FJ. Hypokalemia. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:451.
11.	 French S, Subauste J, Geraci S. Calcium abnormalities in hos-
pitalized patients. South Med J. 2012;105(4):231.
12.	 Witteveen JE, van Theil S, Romijn JA. Therapy of endo-
crine disease: hungry bone syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol. 
2013;168(3):R45.
13.	 Bushinsky DA, Monk RD. Calcium. Lancet. 1998;352:306.
14.	 Dunlay RW, Camp MA, Allon M, et al. Calcitriol in prolonged 
hypocalcemia due to tumor lysis syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 
1989;110:162.
15.	 Reber PM, Heath H. Hypocalcemic emergencies. Med Clin 
North Am. 1995;19:93.
16.	 Tong GM, Rude RK. Magnesium deficiency in critical illness. 
J Intensive Care Med. 2005;20(1):3.
17.	 Quamme GA. Renal magnesium handling: new insights in 
understanding old problems. Kidney Int. 1997;52:1180.
18.	 Marino PL. Acid-base interpretations. In: Marino PL, ed. The 
ICU Book. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1998:581.
19.	 Gluck SL. Acid-base. Lancet. 1998;352:474.
20.	 Kraut JA, Madias NE. Treatment of acute metabolic acidosis: a 
pathophysiologic approach. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012;8(10):589.
21.	 Pal JD, Victorino GP, Twomey P, et al. Admission serum 
lactate levels do not predict mortality in the acutely injured 
patient. J Trauma. 2006;60:583.
22.	 Koustova E, Standon K, Gushchin V, et al. Effects of lactated 
Ringer’s solution on human leukocytes. J Trauma. 2002;53:782.
23.	 Shires GT, Browder LK, Steljes TP, et al. The effect of shock 
resuscitation fluids on apoptosis. Am J Surg. 2005;189:85.
24.	 Roberts JS, Bratton SL. Colloid volume expanders: problems, 
pitfalls, and possibilities. Drugs. 1998;55:621.
25.	 Cottenceau V, Masson F, Mahamid E, et al. Comparison 
effects of equiosmolar doses of mannitol and hypertonic saline 
on cerebral blood flow and metabolism in traumatic brain 
injury. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(10):2003.
26.	 Bulger EM, May S, Kerby JD, et al. Out-of-hospital hyper-
tonic resuscitation after traumatic hypovolemic shock: a ran-
domized, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2011;253(3):431.
27.	 Ley K. Plugging the leaks. Nat Med. 2001;7:1105.
28.	 Conhaim RL, Watson KE, Potenza BM, et al. Pulmonary cap-
illary sieving of hetastarch is not altered by LPS-induced sep-
sis. J Trauma. 1999;46:800.
29.	 Lucas CE. The water of life: a century of confusion. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2001;192:86.
30.	 de Jonge E, Levi M. Effects of different plasma substitutes 
on blood coagulation: a comparative review. Crit Care Med. 
2001;291:1261.
31.	 Navickis RJ, Haynes GR, Wilkes MM. Effect of hydroxyethyl 
starch on bleeding after cardiopulmonary bypass: a meta-
analysis of randomized trilals. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;144(4):223.
83
Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 3
32.	 Schortgen F, Lacherade JC, Bruneel F, et al. Effects of 
hydroxyethylstarch and gelatin on renal function in severe 
sepsis: a multicenter randomized study. Lancet. 2001;357:911.
33.	 Zarychanski R, Abou-Setta AM, Turgeon AF, et al. Associa-
tion of hydroxyethyl starch administration with mortality and 
acute kidney injury in critically ill patients requiring volume 
resuscitation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2013;309(7):678.
34.	 Gan TJ, Bennett-Guerrero E, Phillips-Bute B, et al. Hextend, 
a physiologically balanced plasma expander for large volume 
use in major surgery: a randomized phase III clinical trial. 
Anesth Analg. 1999;88:992.
35.	 Boldt J, Haisch G, Suttner S, et al. Effects of a new modified, 
balanced hydroxyethyl starch preparation (Hextend) on mea-
sures of coagulation. Br J Anaesth. 2002;89:772.
36.	 Rittoo D, Gosling P, Bonnici C, et al. Splanchnic oxygen-
ation in patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 
and volume expansion with eloHAES. Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;10:128.
37.	 Coats TJ, Brazil E, Heron M, et al. Impairment of coagulation 
by commonly used resuscitation fluids in human volunteers. 
Emerg Med J. 2006;23:846.
38.	 Overgaard-Steensen C, Ring T. Clinical Review: Practical 
approach to hyponatremia and hypernatremia in critically ill 
patients. Crit Care. 2013;17(1):206.
39.	 Norenberg MD. Central pontine myelinolysis: historical and 
mechanistic considerations. Metab Brain Dis. 2010;25(1):97.
40.	 Graff-Radford J, Fugate JE, Kauffmann TJ. Clinical and radio-
logic correlations of central pontine myelinolysis syndrome. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86(11):1063.
41.	 American College of Surgeons. Shock. In: American College 
of Surgeons Advanced Trauma Life Support Manual. 9th ed. 
Chicago: American College of Surgeons; 2012.
42.	 Shires GT, Williams J, Brown F. Acute changes in extracel-
lular fluids associated with major surgical procedures. Ann 
Surg. 1961;154:803.
43.	 Shires GT, Jackson DE. Postoperative salt tolerance. Arch 
Surg. 1962;84:703.
44.	 Shires GT III, Peitzman AB, Albert SA, et al. Response 
of extravascular lung water to intraoperative fluids. Ann 
Surg. 1983;197:515.
45.	 Ellison DH, Burl T. Clinical practice. The syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuresis. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(20):2064.
46.	 Tisdall M, Crocker M, Watkiss J, et al. Disturbances of sodium 
in critically ill adult neurologic patients: a clinical review. 
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2006;18(1):57.
47.	 Yee AH, Burns JD, Wijdicks EF. Cerebral salt wasting: patho-
physiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 
2010;21(2):339.
48.	 Kozar RA, McQuiggan MM, Moore FA. Nutritional support 
in trauma patients. In: Shikora SA, Martindale RG, Schwait-
zberg SD, eds. Nutritional Considerations in the Intensive 
Care Unit. 1st ed. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing; 
2002:229.
49.	 Boateng AA, Sriram K, Mequid MM, et al. Refeeding syn-
drome: treatment considerations based on collective analysis 
of literature case reports. Nutrition. 2010;26(2):156.
50.	 Glassford NJ, Bellomo R. Acute kidney injury: how can we 
facilitate recovery? Curr Opin Crit Care. 2011;17(6):562.
51.	 Kapoor M, Chan GZ. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Crit 
Care Clin. 2002;17:503.
52.	 Clines GA. Mechanisms and treatment of hypercalcemia of 
malignancy. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2011; 
18(6)339.
This page intentionally left blank 
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding,  
and Transfusion
Bryan Cotton, John B. Holcomb, Matthew Pommerening, 
Kenneth Jastrow, and Rosemary A. Kozar
4
BIOLOGY OF HEMOSTASIS
Hemostasis is a complex process whose function is to limit 
blood loss from an injured vessel. Four major physiologic 
events participate in the hemostatic process: vascular constric-
tion, platelet plug formation, fibrin formation, and fibrinolysis. 
Although each tends to be activated in order, the four pro-
cesses are interrelated so that there is a continuum and mul-
tiple reinforcements. The process is shown schematically in 
Fig. 4-1.
Vascular Constriction
Vascular constriction is the initial response to vessel injury. It is 
more pronounced in vessels with medial smooth muscles and is 
dependent on local contraction of smooth muscle. Vasoconstric-
tion is subsequently linked to platelet plug formation. Throm-
boxane A2 (TXA2) is produced locally at the site if injury via 
the release of arachidonic acid from platelet membranes and 
is a potent constrictor of smooth muscle. Similarly, endothelin 
synthesized by injured endothelium and serotonin (5-hydroxy-
tryptamine [5-HT]) released during platelet aggregation are 
potent vasoconstrictors. Lastly, bradykinin and fibrinopeptides, 
which are involved in the coagulation schema, are also capable 
of contracting vascular smooth muscle.
The extent of vasoconstriction varies with the degree of 
vessel injury. A small artery with a lateral incision may remain 
open due to physical forces, whereas a similarly sized vessel 
that is completely transected may contract to the extent that 
bleeding ceases spontaneously.
Platelet Function
Platelets are anucleate fragments of megakaryocytes. The nor-
mal circulating number of platelets ranges between 150,000 and 
400,000/μL. Up to 30% of circulating platelets may be seques-
tered in the spleen. If not consumed in a clotting reaction, 
platelets are normally removed by the spleen and have an aver-
age life span of 7 to 10 days.
Platelets play an integral role in hemostasis by forming 
a hemostatic plug and by contributing to thrombin formation 
(Fig. 4-2). Platelets do not normally adhere to each other or 
to the vessel wall but can form a plug that aids in cessation of 
bleeding when vascular disruption occurs. Injury to the intimal 
layer in the vascular wall exposes subendothelial collagen to 
which platelets adhere. This process requires von Willebrand 
factor (vWF), a protein in the subendothelium that is lacking in 
patients with von Willebrand’s disease. vWF binds to glycopro-
tein (GP) I/IX/V on the platelet membrane. Following adhesion, 
platelets initiate a release reaction that recruits other platelets 
from the circulating blood to seal the disrupted vessel. Up to 
this point, this process is known as primary hemostasis. Platelet 
aggregation is reversible and is not associated with secretion. 
Additionally, heparin does not interfere with this reaction, and 
thus, hemostasis can occur in the heparinized patient. Adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP) and serotonin are the principal mediators in 
platelet aggregation.
Arachidonic acid released from the platelet membranes is 
converted by cyclooxygenase to prostaglandin G2 (PGG2) and 
then to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), which, in turn, is converted to 
TXA2. TXA2 has potent vasoconstriction and platelet aggrega-
tion effects. Arachidonic acid may also be shuttled to adjacent 
endothelial cells and converted to prostacyclin (PGI2), which 
is a vasodilator and acts to inhibit platelet aggregation. Platelet 
cyclooxygenase is irreversibly inhibited by aspirin and revers-
ibly blocked by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, but is 
not affected by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors.
In the second wave of platelet aggregation, a release reac-
tion occurs in which several substances including ADP, Ca2+, 
serotonin, TXA2, and α-granule proteins are discharged. Fibrin-
ogen is a required cofactor for this process, acting as a bridge for 
Biology of Hemostasis	
85
Vascular Constriction / 85
Platelet Function / 85
Coagulation / 86
Fibrinolysis / 88
Congenital Factor Deficiencies	
88
Coagulation Factor Deficiencies / 88
Platelet Functional Defects / 89
Acquired Hemostatic Defects	
90
Platelet Abnormalities / 90
Acquired Hypofibrinogenemia / 92
Myeloproliferative Diseases / 92
Coagulopathy of Liver Disease / 92
Coagulopathy of Trauma / 93
Acquired Coagulation Inhibitors / 93
Anticoagulation and Bleeding / 94
Transfusion	
96
Background / 96
Replacement Therapy / 96
Indications for Replacement of Blood and 
Its Elements / 97
Volume Replacement / 98
New Concepts in Resuscitation / 98
Complications of Transfusion / 100
Tests of Hemostasis and  
Blood Coagulation	
102
Evaluation of Excessive  
Intraoperative or  
Postoperative Bleeding	
104
chapter 
the GP IIb/IIIa receptor on the activated platelets. The release 
reaction results in compaction of the platelets into a plug, a pro-
cess that is no longer reversible. Thrombospondin, another pro-
tein secreted by the α-granule, stabilizes fibrinogen binding to 
the activated platelet surface and strengthens the platelet-platelet 
interactions. Platelet factor 4 (PF4) and α-thromboglobulin are 
also secreted during the release reaction. PF4 is a potent heparin 
antagonist. The second wave of platelet aggregation is inhibited 
by aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, by cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), and by nitric oxide. As a 
consequence of the release reaction, alterations occur in the 
phospholipids of the platelet membrane that allow calcium and 
clotting factors to bind to the platelet surface, forming enzymati-
cally active complexes. The altered lipoprotein surface (some-
times referred to as platelet factor 3) catalyzes reactions that 
are involved in the conversion of prothrombin (factor II) to 
86
Figure 4-1.  Biology of hemostasis. The four phys-
iologic processes that interrelate to limit blood loss 
from an injured vessel are illustrated and include 
vascular constriction, platelet plug formation, 
fibrin clot formation, and fibrinolysis.
Key Points
1
	 The life span of platelets ranges from 7 to 10 days. Drugs that 
interfere with platelet function include aspirin, clopidogrel, pra-
sugrel, dipyridamole, and the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa) 
inhibitors. Approximately 5 to 7 days should pass from the time 
the drug is stopped until an elective procedure is performed.
2
	 The acute coagulopathy of trauma results from a combination 
of activation of protein C and hyperfibrinolysis. It is distinct 
from disseminated intravascular coagulation, is present on 
arrival to the emergency department, and is associated with an 
increase in mortality.
3
	 Newer anticoagulants like dabigatran and rivaroxaban have no 
readily available method of detection of the degree of antico-
agulation and may not be readily reversible.
4
	 Therapeutic anticoagulation preoperatively and postop-
eratively is becoming increasingly more common. The 
patient’s risk of intraoperative and postoperative bleeding 
should guide the need for reversal of anticoagulation 
therapy preoperatively and the timing of its reinstatement 
postoperatively.
5
	 Damage control resuscitation has three basic components: 
permissive hypotension, minimizing crystalloid-based 
resuscitation, and the administration of predefined blood 
products.
6
	 The need for massive transfusion should be anticipated, 
and guidelines should be in place to provide early and 
increased amounts of red blood cells, plasma, and platelets.
Common pathway
Intrinsic pathway
Clotting factors
VIII, IX, X, XI, XII
Fibrin
1. Vascular phase
(Vasoconstriction)
2. Platelet phase
(Platelets aggregate)
3. Coagulation phase (Clot formation)
(Clot retraction)
4. Fibrinolysis
(Clot destruction)
Extrinsic pathway
Clotting factors
VII
Prothrombin
Thrombin
CA2+v
CA2+
thrombin (factor IIa) by activated factor X (Xa) in the pres-
ence of factor V and calcium, and it is involved in the reaction 
by which activated factor IX (IXa), factor VIII, and calcium 
activate factor X. Platelets may also play a role in the initial 
activation of factors XI and XII.
Coagulation
Hemostasis involves a complex interplay and combination of 
interactions between platelets, the endothelium, and multiple 
circulating or membrane-bound coagulation factors. While 
a bit simplistic and not reflective of the depth or complexity 
of these interactions, the coagulation cascade has traditionally 
been depicted as two possible pathways converging into a single 
common pathway (Fig. 4-3). While this pathway reflects the 
basic process and sequences that lead to the formation of a clot, 
the numerous feedback loops, endothelial interplay, and platelet 
87
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
functions are not included. The intrinsic pathway begins with 
the activation of factor XII that subsequently activates factors 
XI, IX, and VIII. In this pathway, each of the primary factors 
is “intrinsic” to the circulating plasma, whereby no surface is 
required to initiate the process. In the extrinsic pathway, tissue 
factor (TF) is released or exposed on the surface of the endo-
thelium, binding to circulating factor VII, facilitating its activa-
tion to VIIa. Each of these pathways continues on to a common 
sequence that begins with the activation of factor X to Xa 
(in the presence of VIIIa). Subsequently, Xa (with the help of 
factor Va) converts factor II (prothrombin) to thrombin and then 
factor I (fibrinogen) to fibrin. Clot formation occurs after fibrin 
monomers are cross-linked to polymers with the assistance of 
factor XIII.
One convenient feature of depicting the coagulation cas-
cade with two merging arms is that commonly used laboratory 
Figure 4-2.  Schematic of platelet activation and thrombus function.
Figure 4-3.  Schematic of the 
coagulation system. HMW = high 
molecular weight.
Platelet hemostatic
function
Vasoconstriction
ADP, serotonin,
Ca2+, fibrinogen
ADP, serotonin,
Ca2+, fibrinogen
Subendothelial collagen
Platelet adhesion secretion
Platelet aggregation secretion
Platelet aggregation
Platelet-fibrin
thrombus
(Reversible)
(Irreversible)
Coagulation activation
via tissue factor-
factor VIIa
IXa, Xa
Complexes on
activated platelets
Thrombin
+
Fibrinogen
Vascular endothelial
injury
Tissue factor-Factor VIIa
Inflammation
Complement activation
Fibrinolysis
? Physiologic
Factor V
Factor Va
Ca2+
Phospholipid
Ca2+
Ca2+
Prothrombin
(factor II) 
Thrombin
(factor IIa)
Intrinsic
Surface
Factor XII
Factor XIIa
 Kallikrein
Prekallikrein
HMW kininogen
Surface
Factor XIa
Factor IXa
Factor XI
Factor IX
Extrinsic
Vascular injury
Tissue factor +
factor VII
Factor Xa
Factor X
Ca2+
Fibrin
Factor XIII
Fibrin
Factor XIIIa
X-Linked fibrin
Fibrinogen
Factor VIIIa
Ca2+
Phospholipid
Factor VIII
tests segregate abnormalities of clotting to one of the two arms. 
An elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is 
associated with abnormal function of the intrinsic arm of the 
cascade (II, IX, X, XI, XII), while the prothrombin time (PT) is 
associated with the extrinsic arm (II, VII, X). Vitamin K defi-
ciency or warfarin use affects factors II, VII, IX, and X
Expanding from the basic concept of Fig. 4-3, the primary 
pathway for coagulation is initiated by TF exposure following 
subendothelial injury. Clot propagation ensues with what is a 
sequence of four similar enzymatic reactions, each involving a 
proteolytic enzyme generating the next enzyme by cleaving its 
proenzyme, a phospholipid surface (e.g., platelet membrane) in 
the presence of ionized calcium, and a helper protein. TF binds to 
VIIa, and this complex catalyzes the activation of factor X to Xa. 
This complex is four orders of magnitude more active at convert-
ing factor X than is factor VIIa alone and also activates factor IX 
to IXa. Factor Xa, together with Va, calcium, and phospholipid, 
composes the prothrombinase complex that converts prothrom-
bin to thrombin. The prothrombinase complex is significantly 
more effective at catalyzing its substrate than is factor Xa alone. 
Thrombin is then involved with the conversion of fibrinogen to 
fibrin and activation of factors V, VII, VIII, XI, and XIII.
In building on the redundancy inherent in the coagu-
lation system, factor VIIIa combines with IXa to form the 
intrinsic factor complex. Factor IXa is responsible for the bulk 
of the conversion of factor X to Xa. This complex (VIIIa-IXa) 
is 50 times more effective at catalyzing factor X activation 
than is the extrinsic (TF-VIIa) complex and five to six orders 
of magnitude more effective than factor IXa alone.
Once formed, thrombin leaves the membrane surface 
and converts fibrinogen by two cleavage steps into fibrin and 
two small peptides termed fibrinopeptides A and B. Removal 
of fibrinopeptide A permits end-to-end polymerization of the 
fibrin molecules, whereas cleavage of fibrinopeptide B allows 
side-to-side polymerization of the fibrin clot. This latter step is 
facilitated by thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI), 
which acts to stabilize the resultant clot.
88
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
In seeking to balance profound bleeding with overwhelm-
ing clot burden, several related processes exist to prevent prop-
agation of the clot beyond the site of injury.1 First, feedback 
inhibition on the coagulation cascade deactivates the enzyme 
complexes leading to thrombin formation. Thrombomodulin 
(TM) presented by the endothelium serves as a “thrombin sink” 
by forming a complex with thrombin, rendering it no longer 
available to cleave fibrinogen. This then activates protein C 
(APC) and reduces further thrombin generation by inhibiting 
factors V and VIII. Second, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
is released from the endothelium following injury, cleaving 
plasminogen to initiate fibrinolysis. APC then consumes plas-
minogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), leading to increased tPA 
activity and fibrinolysis. Building on the anticoagulant response 
to inhibit thrombin formation, tissue factor pathway inhibitor 
(TFPI) is released, blocking the TF-VIIa complex and reducing 
the production of factors Xa and IXa. Antithrombin III (AT-
III) then neutralizes all of the procoagulant serine proteases and 
also inhibits the TF-VIIa complex. The most potent mechanism 
of thrombin inhibition involves the APC system. APC forms a 
complex with its cofactor, protein S, on a phospholipid surface. 
This complex then cleaves factors Va and VIIIa so they are no 
longer able to participate in the formation of TF-VIIa or pro-
thrombinase complexes. This is of interest clinically in the form 
of a genetic mutation, called factor V Leiden. In this setting, fac-
tor V is resistant to cleavage by APC, thereby remaining active 
as a procoagulant. Patients with factor V Leiden are predisposed 
to venous thromboembolic events.
Degradation of fibrin clot is accomplished by plasmin, a 
serine protease derived from the proenzyme plasminogen. Plas-
min formation occurs as a result of one of several plasminogen 
activators. tPA is made by the endothelium and other cells of 
the vascular wall and is the main circulating form of this family 
of enzymes. tPA is selective for fibrin-bound plasminogen so 
that endogenous fibrinolytic activity occurs predominately at 
the site of clot formation. The other major plasminogen activa-
tor, urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), also produced by 
endothelial cells as well as by urothelium, is not selective for 
fibrin-bound plasminogen. Of note, the thrombin-TM complex 
activates TAFI, leading to a mixed effect on clot stability. In 
addition to inhibiting fibrinolysis directly, removal of the termi-
nal lysine on the fibrin molecule by TAFI renders the clot more 
susceptible to lysis by plasmin.
Fibrinolysis
Fibrin clot breakdown (lysis) allows restoration of blood flow 
during the healing process following injury and begins at the 
same time clot formation is initiated. Fibrin polymers are 
degraded by plasmin, a serine protease derived from the pro-
enzyme plasminogen. Plasminogen is converted to plasmin by 
one of several plasminogen activators, including tPA. Plasmin 
then degrades the fibrin mesh at various places, leading to the 
production of circulating fragments, termed fibrin degradation 
products (FDPs), cleared by other proteases or by the kidney and 
liver (Fig. 4-4). Fibrinolysis is directed by circulating kinases, 
tissue activators, and kallikrein present in vascular endothelium. 
tPA is synthesized by endothelial cells and released by the cells 
on thrombin stimulation. Bradykinin, a potent endothelial-
dependent vasodilator, is cleaved from high molecular weight 
kininogen by kallikrein and enhances the release of tPA. Both 
tPA and plasminogen bind to fibrin as it forms, and this trimo-
lecular complex cleaves fibrin very efficiently. After plasmin is 
generated, however, it cleaves fibrin somewhat less efficiently.
Figure 4-4.  Formation of fibrin degradation products (FDPs). tPA = 
tissue plasminogen activator.
Endothelium
Platelet
Thrombin
Plasminogen
tPA
Plasmin
Fibrin
FDP
As with clot formation, fibrinolysis is also kept in check 
through several robust mechanisms. tPA activates plasmino-
gen more efficiently when it is bound to fibrin, so that plasmin 
is formed selectively on the clot. Plasmin is inhibited by α2-
antiplasmin, a protein that is cross-linked to fibrin by factor XIII, 
which helps to ensure that clot lysis does not occur too quickly. 
Any circulating plasmin is also inhibited by α2-antiplasmin and 
circulating tPA or urokinase. Clot lysis yields FDPs including 
E-nodules and D-dimers. These smaller fragments interfere with 
normal platelet aggregation, and the larger fragments may be 
incorporated into the clot in lieu of normal fibrin monomers. 
This may result in an unstable clot as seen in cases of severe 
coagulopathy such as hyperfibrinolysis associated with trauma-
induced coagulopathy or disseminated intravascular coagulopa-
thy. The presence of D-dimers in the circulation may serve as a 
marker of thrombosis or other conditions in which a significant 
activation of the fibrinolytic system is present. Another inhibi-
tor of the fibrinolytic system is TAFI, which removes lysine 
residues from fibrin that are essential for binding plasminogen.
CONGENITAL FACTOR DEFICIENCIES
Coagulation Factor Deficiencies
Inherited deficiencies of all of the coagulation factors are seen. 
However, the three most frequent are factor VIII deficiency 
(hemophilia A and von Willebrand’s disease), factor IX defi-
ciency (hemophilia B or Christmas disease), and factor 
XI deficiency. Hemophilia A and hemophilia B are inherited as 
sex-linked recessive disorders with males being affected almost 
exclusively. The clinical severity of hemophilia A and hemo-
philia B depends on the measurable level of factor VIII or factor 
IX in the patient’s plasma. Plasma factor levels less than 1% 
of normal are considered severe disease, factor levels between 
1% and 5% moderately severe disease, and levels between 5% 
and 30% mild disease. Patients with severe hemophilia have 
spontaneous bleeds, frequently into joints, leading to crippling 
arthropathies. Intracranial bleeding, intramuscular hematomas, 
retroperitoneal hematomas, and gastrointestinal, genitourinary, 
and retropharyngeal bleeding are added clinical sequelae seen 
with severe disease. Patients with moderately severe hemophilia 
have less spontaneous bleeding but are likely to bleed severely 
after trauma or surgery. Mild hemophiliacs do not bleed sponta-
neously and have only minor bleeding after major trauma or sur-
gery. Since platelet function is normal in hemophiliacs, patients 
may not bleed immediately after an injury or minor surgery as 
89
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
they have a normal response with platelet activation and forma-
tion of a platelet plug. At times, the diagnosis of hemophilia is 
not made in these patients until after their first minor procedure 
(e.g., tooth extraction or tonsillectomy).
Patients with hemophilia A or B are treated with factor 
VIII or factor IX concentrate, respectively. Recombinant factor 
VIII is strongly recommended for patients not treated previously 
and is generally recommended for patients who are both human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
seronegative. For factor IX replacement, the preferred products 
are recombinant or high-purity factor IX. In general, activity 
levels should be restored to 30% to 40% for mild hemorrhage, 
50% for severe bleeding, and 80% to 100% for life-threatening 
bleeding. Up to 20% of hemophiliacs with factor VIII defi-
ciency develop inhibitors that can neutralize FVIII. For patients 
with low titers, inhibitors can be overcome with higher doses of 
factor VIII. For patients with high titer inhibitors, alternate treat-
ments should be used and may include porcine factor VIII, pro-
thrombin complex concentrates, activated prothrombin complex 
concentrates, or recombinant factor VIIa. For patients undergo-
ing elective surgical procedures, a multidisciplinary approach 
with preoperative planning and replacement is recommended.2
von Willebrand’s Disease.  von Willebrand’s disease (vWD), 
the most common congenital bleeding disorder, is characterized 
by a quantitative or qualitative defect in vWF, a large glycopro-
tein responsible for carrying factor VIII and platelet adhesion. 
The latter is important for normal platelet adhesion to exposed 
subendothelium and for aggregation under high shear condi-
tions. Patients with vWD have bleeding that is characteristic 
of platelet disorders such as easy bruising and mucosal bleed-
ing. Menorrhagia is common in women. vWD is classified into 
three types. Type I is a partial quantitative deficiency, type 
II is a qualitative defect, and type III is total deficiency. For 
bleeding, type I patients usually respond well to desmopressin 
(DDAVP). Type II patients may respond, depending on the par-
ticular defect. Type III patients are usually unresponsive. These 
patients may require vWF concentrates.3
Factor XI Deficiency.  Factor XI deficiency, an autosomal 
recessive inherited condition sometimes referred to as hemo-
philia C, is more prevalent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population 
but found in all races. Spontaneous bleeding is rare, but bleeding 
may occur after surgery, trauma, or invasive procedures. Treat-
ment of patients with factor XI deficiency who present with 
bleeding or in whom surgery is planned and who are known 
to have bled previously is with fresh frozen plasma (FFP). 
Each milliliter of plasma contains 1 unit of factor XI activity, 
so the volume needed depends on the patient’s baseline level, 
the desired level, and the plasma volume. Antifibrinolytics may 
be useful in patients with menorrhagia. Factor VIIa is recom-
mended for patients with anti-factor XI antibodies, although 
thrombosis has been reported.4 There has been renewed interest 
in factor XI inhibitors as antithrombotic agents, because patients 
with factor XI deficiency generally have only minimal bleeding 
risk unless a severe deficiency is present and seem to be pro-
tected from thrombosis.5
Deficiency of Factors II (Prothrombin), V, and X.  Inher-
ited deficiencies of factors II, V, and X are rare. These deficien-
cies are inherited as autosomal recessive. Significant bleeding 
in homozygotes with less than 1% of normal activity is encoun-
tered. Bleeding with any of these deficiencies is treated with 
FFP. Similar to factor XI, FFP contains one unit of activity 
of each per milliliter. However, factor V activity is decreased 
because of its inherent instability. The half-life of prothrom-
bin (factor II) is long (approximately 72 hours), and only about 
25% of a normal level is needed for hemostasis. Prothrombin 
complex concentrates can be used to treat deficiencies of pro-
thrombin or factor X. Daily infusions of FFP are used to treat 
bleeding in factor V deficiency, with a goal of 20% to 25% 
activity. Factor V deficiency may be coinherited with factor 
VIII deficiency. Treatment of bleeding in individuals with the 
combined deficiency requires factor VIII concentrate and FFP. 
Some patients with factor V deficiency are also lacking the fac-
tor V normally present in platelets and may need platelet trans-
fusions as well as FFP.
Factor VII Deficiency.  Inherited factor VII deficiency is a 
rare autosomal recessive disorder. Clinical bleeding can vary 
widely and does not always correlate with the level of FVII 
coagulant activity in plasma. Bleeding is uncommon unless the 
level is less than 3%. The most common bleeding manifesta-
tions involve easy bruising and mucosal bleeding, particularly 
epistaxis or oral mucosal bleeding. Postoperative bleeding is 
also common, reported in 30% of surgical procedures.6 Treat-
ment is with FFP or recombinant factor VIIa. The half-life of 
recombinant factor VIIa is only approximately 2 hours, but 
excellent hemostasis can be achieved with frequent infusions. 
The half-life of factor VII in FFP is up to 4 hours.
Factor XIII Deficiency.  Congenital factor XIII (FXIII) defi-
ciency, originally recognized by Duckert in 1960, is a rare 
autosomal recessive disease usually associated with a severe 
bleeding diathesis.7 The male-to-female ratio is 1:1. Although 
acquired FXIII deficiency has been described in association 
with hepatic failure, inflammatory bowel disease, and myeloid 
leukemia, the only significant association with bleeding in chil-
dren is the inherited deficiency.8 Bleeding is typically delayed 
because clots form normally but are susceptible to fibrinolysis. 
Umbilical stump bleeding is characteristic, and there is a high 
risk of intracranial bleeding. Spontaneous abortion is usual in 
women with factor XIII deficiency unless they receive replace-
ment therapy. Replacement can be accomplished with FFP, 
cryoprecipitate, or a factor XIII concentrate. Levels of 1% to 
2% are usually adequate for hemostasis.
Platelet Functional Defects
Inherited platelet functional defects include abnormalities of 
platelet surface proteins, abnormalities of platelet granules, and 
enzyme defects. The major surface protein abnormalities are 
thrombasthenia and Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Thrombasthe-
nia, or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, is a rare genetic platelet 
disorder, inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, in which 
the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa) complex is either 
lacking or present but dysfunctional. This defect leads to faulty 
platelet aggregation and subsequent bleeding. The disorder was 
first described by Dr. Eduard Glanzmann in 1918.9 Bleeding 
in thrombasthenic patients must be treated with platelet trans-
fusions. The Bernard-Soulier syndrome is caused by a defect 
in the GP Ib/IX/V receptor for vWF, which is necessary for 
platelet adhesion to the subendothelium. Transfusion of normal 
platelets is required for bleeding in these patients.
The most common intrinsic platelet defect is storage pool 
disease. It involves loss of dense granules (storage sites for 
ADP, adenosine triphosphate [ATP], Ca2+, and inorganic phos-
phate) and α-granules. Dense granule deficiency is the most 
prevalent of these. It may be an isolated defect or occur with 
90
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
partial albinism in the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. Bleed-
ing is variable, depending on the severity of the granule defect. 
Bleeding is caused by the decreased release of ADP from these 
platelets. A few patients have been reported who have decreased 
numbers of both dense and α-granules. They have a more severe 
bleeding disorder. Patients with mild bleeding as a consequence 
of a form of storage pool disease can be treated with DDAVP. It 
is likely that the high levels of vWF in the plasma after DDAVP 
somehow compensate for the intrinsic platelet defect. With 
more severe bleeding, platelet transfusion is required.
Acquired Hemostatic Defects
Platelet Abnormalities
Acquired abnormalities of platelets are much more common 
than acquired defects and may be quantitative or qualitative, 
although some patients have both types of defects. Quantita-
tive defects may be a result of failure of production, shortened 
survival, or sequestration. Failure of production is generally a 
result of bone marrow disorders such as leukemia, myelodys-
plastic syndrome, severe vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, che-
motherapeutic drugs, radiation, acute ethanol intoxication, or 
viral infection. If a quantitative abnormality exists and treatment 
is indicated either due to symptoms or the need for an invasive 
procedure, platelet transfusion is utilized. The etiologies of both 
qualitative and quantitative defects are reviewed in Table 4-1.
Table 4-1 
Etiology of platelet disorders
A.  Quantitative Disorders
1.  Failure of production: related to impairment in bone 
marrow function
a.  Leukemia
b.  Myeloproliferative disorders
c.  B12 or folate deficiencies
d.  Chemotherapy or radiation therapy
e.  Acute alcohol intoxication
f.  Viral infections
2.  Decreased survival
a.  Immune-mediated
1)  Idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP)
2)  Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
3)  Autoimmune disorders or B-cell malignancies
4)  Secondary thrombocytopenia
b.  Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
c.  Related to platelet thrombi
1)  Thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
2)  Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HS)
3.  Sequestration
a.  Portal hypertension
b.  Sarcoid
c.  Lymphoma
d.  Gaucher’s Disease
B.  Qualitative Disorders
1.  Massive transfusion
2.  Therapeutic platelet inhibitors
3.  Disease states
a.  Myeloproliferative disorders
b.  Monoclonal gammopathies
c.  Liver disease
Table 4-2 
Management of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(ITP) in adults
First Line
  a.  Corticosteroids: The majority of patients respond but 
only a few long term
  b.  Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or anti-D 
immunoglobulin: indicated for clinical bleeding
Second Line. Required in most patients
  a.  Splenectomy: open or laparoscopic. Criteria include 
severe thrombocytopenia, high risk of bleeding, and 
continued need for steroids. Failure may be due to 
retained accessory splenic tissue.
  b.  Rituximab, an anti-CD 20 monoclonal antibody
  c.  Thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonists such as 
romiplostim and eltrombopag
Third Line. To be used after failure of splenectomy and 
rituximab
  a.  TPO receptor agonists
  b.  Immunosuppressive agents. For failure of TPO receptor 
agonists
Quantitative Defects.  Shortened platelet survival is seen in 
immune thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagu-
lation, or disorders characterized by platelet thrombi such as 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic 
syndrome. Immune thrombocytopenia may be idiopathic or 
associated with other autoimmune disorders or low-grade B-cell 
malignancies, and it may also be secondary to viral infections 
(including HIV) or drugs. Secondary immune thrombocytopenia 
often presents with a very low platelet count, petechiae and pur-
pura, and epistaxis. Large platelets are seen on peripheral smear. 
Initial treatment consists of corticosteroids, intravenous gamma 
globulin, or anti-D immunoglobulin in patients who are Rh posi-
tive. Both gamma globulin and anti-D immunoglobulin are rapid 
in onset. Platelet transfusions are not usually needed unless cen-
tral nervous system bleeding or active bleeding from other sites 
occurs. Survival of the transfused platelets is usually short.
Primary immune thrombocytopenia is also known as 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). In children, it is 
usually acute in onset, short lived, and typically follows a viral 
illness. In contrast, ITP in adults is gradual in onset, chronic 
in nature, and has no identifiable cause. Because the circulat-
ing platelets in ITP are young and functional, bleeding is less 
for a given platelet count than when there is failure of platelet 
production. The pathophysiology of ITP is believed to involve 
both impaired platelet production and T cell–mediated plate-
let destruction.10 Management options are summarized in 
Table 4-2.11 Treatment of drug-induced immune thrombocyto-
penia may simply entail withdrawal of the offending drug, but 
corticosteroids, gamma globulin, and anti-D immunoglobulin 
may hasten recovery of the count. Heparin-induced thrombo-
cytopenia (HIT) is a form of drug-induced immune thrombo-
cytopenia. It is an immunologic event during which antibodies 
against platelet factor 4 (PF4) formed during exposure to hep-
arin affect platelet activation and endothelial function with 
resultant thrombocytopenia and intravascular thrombosis.12 
The platelet count typically begins to fall 5 to 7 days after 
91
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
heparin has been started, but if it is a re-exposure, the decrease 
in count may occur within 1 to 2 days. HIT should be suspected 
if the platelet count falls to less than 100,000 or if it drops by 
50% from baseline in a patient receiving heparin. While HIT 
is more common with full-dose unfractionated heparin (1%–
3%), it can also occur with prophylactic doses or with low 
molecular weight heparins. Interestingly, approximately 17% 
of patients receiving unfractionated heparin and 8% receiving 
low molecular weight heparin develop antibodies against PF4, 
yet a much smaller percentage develop thrombocytopenia and 
even fewer develop clinical HIT.13 In addition to the mild to 
moderate thrombocytopenia, this disorder is characterized by 
a high incidence of thrombosis that may be arterial or venous. 
Importantly, the absence of thrombocytopenia in these patients 
does not preclude the diagnosis of HIT.
The diagnosis of HIT may be made by using either a sero-
tonin release assay (SRA) or an enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA). The SRA is highly specific but not sensitive, 
so a positive test supports the diagnosis but a negative test does 
not exclude HIT.12 On the other hand, the ELISA has a low 
specificity, so although a positive ELISA confirms the presence 
of anti-heparin-PF4, it does not help in the diagnosis of clinical 
HIT. A negative ELISA, however, essentially rules out HIT.
The initial treatment of suspected HIT is to stop heparin 
and begin an alternative anticoagulant. Stopping heparin with-
out addition of another anticoagulant is not adequate to prevent 
thrombosis in this setting. Alternative anticoagulants are pri-
marily thrombin inhibitors. The most recent guideline by the 
American College of Chest Physicians recommends lepiru-
din, argatroban, or danaparoid for patients with normal renal 
function and argatroban for patients with renal insufficiency.14 
Because of warfarin’s early induction of a hypercoagulable 
state, warfarin should be instituted only once full anticoagula-
tion with an alternative agent has been accomplished and the 
platelet count has begun to recover.
These are also disorders in which thrombocytopenia is a 
result of platelet activation and formation of platelet thrombi. In 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), large vWF mol-
ecules interact with platelets, leading to activation. These large 
molecules result from inhibition of a metalloproteinase enzyme, 
ADAMtS13, which cleaves the large vWF molecules.15 TTP is 
classically characterized by thrombocytopenia, microangio-
pathic hemolytic anemia, fever, and renal and neurologic signs 
or symptoms. The finding of schistocytes on a peripheral blood 
smear aids in the diagnosis. Plasma exchange with replacement 
of FFP is the treatment for acute TTP.16 Additionally, rituximab, 
a monoclonal antibody against the CD20 protein on B lympho-
cytes, has shown promise as an immunomodulatory therapy 
directed against patients with acquired TTP, of which the major-
ity are autoimmune mediated.17
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) often occurs second-
ary to infection by Escherichia coli 0157:H7 or other Shiga 
toxin-producing bacteria. The metalloproteinase is normal in 
these cases. HUS is usually associated with some degree of renal 
failure, with many patients requiring renal replacement therapy. 
Neurologic symptoms are less frequent. A number of patients 
develop features of both TTP and HUS. This may occur with 
autoimmune diseases, especially systemic lupus erythematosus 
and HIV infection, or in association with certain drugs (such as 
ticlopidine, mitomycin C, gemcitabine) or immunosuppressive 
agents (such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus). Discontinuation 
of the involved drug is the mainstay of therapy. Plasmapheresis 
is frequently used, but it is not clear what etiologic factor is 
being removed by the pheresis.
Sequestration is another important cause of thrombocyto-
penia and usually involves trapping of platelets in an enlarged 
spleen typically related to portal hypertension, sarcoid, lym-
phoma, or Gaucher’s disease. The total body platelet mass is 
essentially normal in patients with hypersplenism, but a much 
larger fraction of the platelets are in the enlarged spleen. Platelet 
survival is mildly decreased. Bleeding is less than anticipated 
from the count because sequestered platelets can be mobilized to 
some extent and enter the circulation. Platelet transfusion does 
not increase the platelet count as much as it would in a normal 
person because the transfused platelets are similarly sequestered 
in the spleen. Splenectomy is not indicated to correct the throm-
bocytopenia of hypersplenism caused by portal hypertension.
Thrombocytopenia is the most common abnormality of 
hemostasis that results in bleeding in the surgical patient. The 
patient may have a reduced platelet count as a result of a vari-
ety of disease processes, as discussed earlier. In these circum-
stances, the marrow usually demonstrates a normal or increased 
number of megakaryocytes. By contrast, when thrombocytope-
nia occurs in patients with leukemia or uremia and in patients 
on cytotoxic therapy, there are generally a reduced number of 
megakaryocytes in the marrow. Thrombocytopenia also occurs 
in surgical patients as a result of massive blood loss with prod-
uct replacement deficient in platelets. Thrombocytopenia may 
also be induced by heparin administration during cardiac and 
vascular cases, as in the case of HIT, or may be associated with 
thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications. When thrombocy-
topenia is present in a patient for whom an elective operation 
is being considered, management is contingent upon the extent 
and cause of platelet reduction. A count of greater than 50,000/μL 
generally requires no specific therapy.
Early platelet administration has now become part of mas-
sive transfusion protocols.18,19 Platelets are also administered 
preoperatively to rapidly increase the platelet count in surgical 
patients with underlying thrombocytopenia. One unit of plate-
let concentrate contains approximately 5.5 × 1010 platelets and 
would be expected to increase the circulating platelet count by 
about 10,000/μL in the average 70-kg person. Fever, infection, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and the presence of antiplatelet alloan-
tibodies decrease the effectiveness of platelet transfusions. In 
patients refractory to standard platelet transfusion, the use of 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-compatible platelets coupled 
with special processors has proved effective.
Qualitative Platelet Defects.  Impaired platelet function often 
accompanies thrombocytopenia but may also occur in the pres-
ence of a normal platelet count. The importance of this is obvi-
ous when one considers that 80% of overall strength is related 
to platelet function. The life span of platelets ranges from 7 to 
10 days, placing them at increased risk for impairment by medi-
cal disorders and prescription and over-the-counter medications. 
Impairment of ADP-stimulated aggregation occurs with 
massive transfusion of blood products. Uremia may be 
associated with increased bleeding time and impaired aggrega-
tion. Defective aggregation and platelet dysfunction are also 
seen in patients with thrombocythemia, polycythemia vera, and 
myelofibrosis.
Drugs that interfere with platelet function include aspirin, 
clopidogrel, prasugrel, dipyridamole, and GP IIb/IIIa inhibi-
tors. Aspirin, clopidogrel, and prasugrel all irreversibly inhibit 
1
92
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
platelet function. Clopidogrel and prasugrel do so through selec-
tive irreversible inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggrega-
tion.20 Aspirin works through irreversible acetylation of platelet 
prostaglandin synthase.
There are no prospective randomized trials in general sur-
gical patients to guide the timing of surgery in patients on aspi-
rin, clopidogrel, or prasugrel.21 The general recommendation is 
that approximately 5 to 7 days should pass from the time the 
drug is stopped until an elective procedure is performed.22 Tim-
ing of urgent and emergent surgeries is even more unclear. Pre-
operative platelet transfusions may be beneficial, but there are 
no good data to guide their administration. However, new func-
tional tests are becoming available that may better demonstrate 
defects in platelet function and may serve to guide the timing 
of operation or when platelet transfusions might be indicated.
Other disorders associated with abnormal platelet func-
tion include uremia, myeloproliferative disorders, monoclonal 
gammopathies, and liver disease. In the surgical patient, plate-
let dysfunction of uremia can often be corrected by dialysis or 
the administration of DDAVP. Platelet transfusion may not be 
helpful if the patient is uremic when the platelets are given and 
only serve to increase antibodies. Platelet dysfunction in myelo-
proliferative disorders is intrinsic to the platelets and usually 
improves if the platelet count can be reduced to normal with 
chemotherapy. If possible, surgery should be delayed until the 
count has been decreased. These patients are at risk for both 
bleeding and thrombosis. Platelet dysfunction in patients with 
monoclonal gammopathies is a result of interaction of the mono-
clonal protein with platelets. Treatment with chemotherapy or, 
occasionally, plasmapheresis to lower the amount of monoclo-
nal protein improves hemostasis.
Acquired Hypofibrinogenemia
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC).  DIC is 
an acquired syndrome characterized by systemic activation of 
coagulation pathways that result in excessive thrombin genera-
tion and the diffuse formation of microthrombi. This disturbance 
ultimately leads to consumption and depletion of platelets and 
coagulation factors with the resultant classic picture of diffuse 
bleeding. Fibrin thrombi developing in the microcirculation may 
cause microvascular ischemia and subsequent end-organ failure 
if severe. There are many different conditions that predispose 
a patient to DIC, and the presence of an underlying condition 
is required for the diagnosis. For example, injuries resulting in 
embolization of materials such as brain matter, bone marrow, or 
amniotic fluid can act as potent thromboplastins that activate the 
DIC cascade.23 Additional etiologies include malignancy, organ 
injury (such as severe pancreatitis), liver failure, certain vascu-
lar abnormalities (such as large aneurysms), snake bites, illicit 
drugs, transfusion reactions, transplant rejection, and sepsis.24 In 
fact, DIC frequently accompanies sepsis and may be associated 
with multiple organ failure. As of yet, scoring systems for organ 
failure do not routinely incorporate DIC. The important interplay 
between sepsis and coagulation abnormalities was demonstrated 
by Dhainaut et al who showed that activated protein C was effec-
tive in septic patients with DIC.25 The diagnosis of DIC is made 
based on an inciting etiology with associated thrombocytopenia, 
prolongation of the prothrombin time, a low fibrinogen level, and 
elevated fibrin markers (FDPs, D-dimer, soluble fibrin mono-
mers). A scoring system developed by the International Society 
for Thrombosis and Hemostasis has been shown to have high 
sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing DIC as well as a strong 
Table 4-3 
Coagulation factors synthesized by the liver
Vitamin K–dependent factors: II (prothrombin factor), VII, 
IX, X
Fibrinogen
Factor V
Factor VIII
Factors XI, XII, XIII
Antithrombin III
Plasminogen
Protein C and protein S
correlation between an increasing DIC score and mortality, espe-
cially in patients with infections.26
The most important facets of treatment are relieving the 
patient’s causative primary medical or surgical problem and 
maintaining adequate perfusion. If there is active bleeding, 
hemostatic factors should be replaced with FFP, which is usu-
ally sufficient to correct the hypofibrinogenemia, although 
cryoprecipitate, fibrinogen concentrates, or platelet concentrates 
may also be needed. Given the formation of microthrombi 
in DIC, heparin therapy has also been proposed. Most stud-
ies, however, have shown that heparin is not helpful in acute 
forms of DIC, but may be indicated in cases where thrombosis 
predominates, such as arterial or venous thromboembolism and 
severe purpura fulminans.
Primary Fibrinolysis.  An acquired hypofibrinogenic state in 
the surgical patient can be a result of pathologic fibrinolysis. 
This may occur in patients following prostate resection when 
urokinase is released during surgical manipulation of the pros-
tate or in patients undergoing extracorporeal bypass. The sever-
ity of fibrinolytic bleeding is dependent on the concentration of 
breakdown products in the circulation. Antifibrinolytic agents, 
such as ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, interfere with 
fibrinolysis by inhibiting plasminogen activation.
Myeloproliferative Diseases
Polycythemia, or an excess of red blood cells, places surgical 
patients at risk. Spontaneous thrombosis is a complication of 
polycythemia vera, a myeloproliferative neoplasm, and can be 
explained in part by increased blood viscosity, increased plate-
let count, and an increased tendency toward stasis. Paradoxi-
cally, a significant tendency toward spontaneous hemorrhage 
also is noted in these patients. Thrombocytosis can be reduced 
by the administration of low-dose aspirin, phlebotomy, and 
hydroxyurea.27
Coagulopathy of Liver Disease
The liver plays a key role in hemostasis because it is responsible 
for the synthesis of many of the coagulation factors (Table 4-3). 
Patients with liver disease, therefore, have decreased production 
of several key non-endothelial cell-derived coagulation factors 
as well as natural anticoagulant proteins, causing a disturbance 
in the balance between procoagulant and anticoagulant path-
ways. This disturbance in coagulation mechanisms causes a 
complex paradigm of both increased bleeding risk and increased 
thrombotic risk. The most common coagulation abnormalities 
93
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
associated with liver dysfunction are thrombocytopenia and 
impaired humoral coagulation function manifested as prolonga-
tion of the prothrombin time and international normalized ratio 
(INR). The etiology of thrombocytopenia in patients with liver 
disease is typically related to hypersplenism, reduced produc-
tion of thrombopoietin, and immune-mediated destruction of 
platelets. The total body platelet mass is often normal in patients 
with hypersplenism, but a much larger fraction of the platelets 
is sequestered in the enlarged spleen. Bleeding may be less than 
anticipated because sequestered platelets can be mobilized to 
some extent and enter the circulation. Thrombopoietin, the pri-
mary stimulus for thrombopoiesis, may be responsible for some 
cases of thrombocytopenia in cirrhotic patients, although its role 
is not well delineated. Finally, immune-mediated thrombocyto-
penia may also occur in cirrhotics, especially those with hepatitis 
C and primary biliary cirrhosis.28 In addition to thrombocytope-
nia, these patients also exhibit platelet dysfunction via defective 
interactions between platelets and the endothelium, and possibly 
due to uremia and changes in endothelial function in the setting 
of concomitant renal insufficiency. Hypocoagulopathy is fur-
ther exacerbated with low platelet counts because platelets help 
facilitate thrombin generation by assembling coagulation factors 
on their surfaces. In conditions mimicking intravascular flow, 
low hematocrit and low platelet counts contributed to decreased 
adhesion of platelets to endothelial cells, although increased 
vWF, a common finding in cirrhotic patients, may offset this 
change in patients with cirrhosis.29 Hypercoagulability of liver 
disease has recently gained increased attention, with more evi-
dence demonstrating the increased incidence of thromboem-
bolism despite thrombocytopenia and a hypocoagulable state 
on conventional blood tests.30,31 This is attributed to decreased 
production of liver-synthesized proteins C and S, antithrombin, 
and plasminogen levels, as well as elevated levels of endothe-
lial-derived vWF and factor VIII, a potent driver of thrombin 
generation.32,33 Given the concomitant hypo- and hypercoagu-
lable features seen in patients with liver disease, conventional 
coagulation tests may be difficult to interpret, and alternative 
tests such as thromboelastography (TEG) may be more informa-
tive of the functional status of clot formation and stability in cir-
rhotic patients. Several studies imply that TEG provides a better 
assessment of bleeding risk than standard tests of hemostasis in 
patients with liver disease; however, no studies have directly 
tested this, and future prospective trials are needed.34
Before instituting any therapy to ameliorate thrombocyto-
penia, the actual need for correction should be strongly consid-
ered. In general, correction based solely on a low platelet count 
should be discouraged. Most often, treatment should be with-
held for invasive procedures and surgery. Platelet transfusions 
are the mainstay of therapy; however, the effect typically lasts 
only several hours. Risks associated with transfusions in gen-
eral and the development of antiplatelet antibodies in a patient 
population likely to need recurrent correction should be consid-
ered. A potential alternative strategy involves administration of 
interleukin-11 (IL-11), a cytokine that stimulates proliferation 
of hematopoietic stem cells and megakaryocyte progenitors.26 
Most studies using IL-11 have been in cancer patients, although 
some evidence exists that it may be beneficial in cirrhotics as 
well. Significant side effects limit its usefulness.35 A less 
well-accepted option is splenectomy or splenic embolization to 
reduce hypersplenism. In addition to the risks associated with 
these techniques, reduced splenic blood flow can reduce portal 
vein flow with subsequent portal vein thrombosis. Results are 
mixed following insertion of a transjugular intrahepatic porto-
systemic shunt (TIPS). Therefore, treatment of thrombocytope-
nia should not be the primary indication for a TIPS procedure.
Decreased production or increased destruction of coagula-
tion factors as well as vitamin K deficiency can all contribute 
to a prolonged PT and INR in patients with liver disease. As 
liver dysfunction worsens, so does the liver’s synthetic func-
tion, which results in decreased production of coagulation fac-
tors. Additionally, laboratory abnormalities may mimic those of 
DIC. Elevated D-dimers have been reported to increase the risk 
of variceal bleeding. The absorption of vitamin K is dependent 
on bile production. Therefore, liver patients with impaired bile 
production and cholestatic disease may be at risk for vitamin K 
deficiency.
Similar to thrombocytopenia, correction of coagulopathy 
should be reserved for treatment of active bleeding and prophy-
laxis for invasive procedures and surgery. Treatment of coagu-
lopathy caused by liver disease is usually done with FFP, but 
because the coagulopathy is usually not a result of decreased 
levels of factor V, complete correction is not usually possible. 
If the fibrinogen is less than 200 mg/dL, administration of cryo-
precipitate may be helpful. Cryoprecipitate is also a source of 
factor VIII for the rare patient with a low factor VIII level.
Coagulopathy of Trauma
Traditional teaching regarding trauma-related coagulopathy 
attributed its development to acidosis, hypothermia, and dilution 
of coagulation factors. Recent data, however, have shown that 
over one third of injured patients have evidence of coagulopa-
thy at the time of admission.36  More importantly, patients 
arriving with coagulopathy are at a significantly higher 
risk of mortality, especially in the first 24 hours after injury. In 
light of these findings, a dramatic increase in research focused 
on the optimal management of the acute coagulopathy of trauma 
(ACoT) has been observed over the past several years. ACoT 
is not a simple dilutional coagulopathy but a complex problem 
with multiple mechanisms.37 Whereas multiple contributing fac-
tors exist, the key initiators to the process of ACoT are shock 
and tissue injury. ACoT is a separate and distinct process from 
DIC, with its own specific components of hemostatic failure. 
Brohi et al have demonstrated that only patients in shock arrive 
coagulopathic and that it is the shock that induces coagulopathy 
through systemic activation of anticoagulant and fibrinolytic 
pathways.38 As shown in Fig. 4-5, hypoperfusion causes activa-
tion of TM on the surface of endothelial cells. Thrombin-TM 
complexes induce an anticoagulant state through activation of 
protein C and enhancement of fibrinolysis. This same complex 
also limits the availability of thrombin to cleave fibrinogen to 
fibrin, which may explain why injured patients rarely have low 
levels of fibrinogen.
Acquired Coagulation Inhibitors
Among the most common acquired coagulation inhibitors is the 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS), which includes the lupus 
anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies. These antibodies 
may be associated with either venous or arterial thrombosis, 
or both. In fact, patients presenting with recurrent thrombosis 
should be evaluated for APLS. Antiphospholipid antibodies are 
very common in patients with systemic lupus but may also be 
seen in association with rheumatoid arthritis and Sjögren’s syn-
drome. There are also individuals who will have no autoimmune 
disorders but develop transient antibodies in response to infections 
or those who develop drug-induced APLS. The hallmark of 
2
94
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
APLS is a prolonged aPTT in vitro but an increased risk of 
thrombosis in vivo.
Anticoagulation and Bleeding
Spontaneous bleeding can be a complication of any antico-
agulant therapy whether it is heparin, low molecular weight 
heparins, warfarin, factor Xa inhibitors, or new direct thrombin 
inhibitors. The risk of spontaneous bleeding related to heparin 
is reduced with a continuous infusion technique. Therapeutic 
anticoagulation is more reliably achieved with a low molecu-
lar weight heparin. However, laboratory testing is more chal-
lenging with these medications, as they are not detected with 
conventional coagulation testing. However, their more reliable 
therapeutic levels (compared to heparin) make them an attrac-
tive option for outpatient anticoagulation and more cost-effec-
tive for the inpatient setting. If monitoring is required (e.g., in 
the presence of renal insufficiency or severe obesity), the drug 
effect should be determined with an assay for anti-Xa activity.
Warfarin is used for long-term anticoagulation in various 
clinical conditions including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary 
embolism, valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, recurrent 
systemic emboli, recurrent myocardial infarction, prosthetic 
heart valves, and prosthetic implants. Due to the interaction 
of the P450 system, the anticoagulant effect of the warfarin 
is reduced (e.g., increases dose required) in patients receiv-
ing barbiturates as well as in patients with diets low in vita-
min K. Increased warfarin requirements may also be needed 
in patients taking contraceptives or estrogen-containing com-
pounds, corticosteroids, and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH). Medications that can alter warfarin requirements are 
shown in Table 4-4.
Although warfarin use is often associated with a significant 
increase in morbidity and mortality in acutely injured and emer-
gency surgery patients, with rapid reversal, these complications 
Figure 4-5.  Illustration of the pathophysiologic mechanism 
responsible for the acute coagulopathy of trauma. PAI-1 = plas-
minogen activator inhibitor 1; TAFI = thrombin-activatable fibri-
nolysis inhibitor.
Central role of thrombomodulin in
acute traumatic coagulopathy (ATC)
ActivationTAFI
Activation
of
protein C
Hypoperfusion
↑Thrombomodulin
Maintains
fibrinogen
level
Thrombomodulin/
Thrombin complex
PAI-1
Consumption
Fibrinolysis
ATC
Thrombin
Shock
Table 4-4 
Medications that can alter warfarin dosing
↓ warfarin effect 
↑ warfarin requirements
Barbiturates, oral contraceptives, 
estrogen-containing compounds, 
corticosteroids, adrenocorticotropic 
hormone
↑ warfarin effect 
↓ warfarin requirements
Phenylbutazone, clofibrate, 
anabolic steroids, L-thyroxine, 
glucagons, amiodarone, quinidine, 
cephalosporins
can be dramatically reduced. There are several reversal options 
that include vitamin K administration, plasma, cryoprecipitate, 
recombinant factor VIIa, and factor concentrates. Urgent rever-
sal for life-threatening bleeding should include vitamin K and 
a rapid reversal agent such as plasma or prothrombin complex 
concentrate. In the elderly or those with intracranial hemor-
rhage, concentrates are preferred, whereas in situations with 
hypovolemia from hemorrhage, plasma should be used.
Newer anticoagulants like dabigatran and rivaroxaban 
have no readily available method of detection of the degree of 
anticoagulation. More concerning is the absence of any 
available reversal agent. Unlike warfarin, the nonrevers-
ible coagulopathy associated with dabigatran and rivaroxaban 
is of great concern to those providing emergent care to these 
patients.39
The only possible strategy to reverse the coagulopathy 
associated with dabigatran may be emergent dialysis. Unfor-
tunately, the ability to rapidly dialyze the hemodynamically 
unstable bleeding patient or rapidly dialyze the anticoagulated 
patient with an intracranial bleed is challenging even at large 
medical centers. Recent data suggest that rivaroxaban, however, 
may be reversed with the use of prothrombin complex concen-
trates (four-factor concentrates only: II, VII, IX, and X).40 In 
less urgent states, these drugs can be held for 36 to 48 hours 
prior to surgery without increased risk of bleeding in those with 
normal renal function. Alternatively, activated clotting time 
(stand alone or with rapid TEG) or ecarin clotting time can be 
obtained in those on dabigatran, and anti-factor Xa assays can 
be obtained in those taking rivaroxaban.
Bleeding complications in patients on anticoagulants 
include hematuria, soft tissue bleeding, intracerebral bleeding, 
skin necrosis, and abdominal bleeding. Bleeding secondary to 
anticoagulation therapy is also not an uncommon cause of a 
rectus sheath hematomas. In most of these cases, reversal of 
anticoagulation is the only treatment that is necessary. Lastly, it 
is important to remember that symptoms of an underlying tumor 
may first present with bleeding while on anticoagulation.
Surgical intervention may prove necessary in patients 
receiving anticoagulation therapy. Increasing experience suggests 
that surgical treatment can be undertaken without full reversal of 
the anticoagulant, depending on the procedure being performed.41 
When the aPTT is less than 1.3 times control in a heparinized 
patient or when the INR is less than 1.5 in a patient on warfarin, 
reversal of anticoagulation therapy may not be necessary. How-
ever, meticulous surgical technique is mandatory, and the patient 
must be observed closely throughout the postoperative period.
Certain surgical procedures should not be performed in 
concert with anticoagulation. In particular, cases where even 
3
95
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
minor bleeding can cause great morbidity, such as the central 
nervous system and the eye, surgery should be avoided. Emergency 
operations are occasionally necessary in patients who have been 
heparinized. The first step in these patients is to discontinue 
heparin. For more rapid reversal, protamine sulfate is effective. 
However, significant adverse reactions, especially in patients 
with severe fish allergies, may be encountered when administer-
ing protamine.42 Symptoms include hypotension, flushing, bra-
dycardia, nausea, and vomiting. Prolongation of the aPTT after 
heparin neutralization with protamine may also be a result of the 
anticoagulant effect of protamine. In the elective surgical patient 
who is receiving coumarin-derivative therapy sufficient to effect 
anticoagulation, the drug can be discontinued several days before 
operation and the prothrombin concentration then checked (a 
level >50% is considered safe).43 Rapid reversal of anticoagula-
tion can be accomplished with plasma or prothrombin complex 
concentrates in the emergent situation. Parenteral administration 
of vitamin K also is indicated in elective surgical treatment of 
patients with biliary obstruction or malabsorption who may be 
vitamin K deficient. However, if low levels of factors II, VII, IX, 
and X (vitamin K–dependent factors) exist as a result of hepa-
tocellular dysfunction, vitamin K administration is ineffective.
The perioperative management of patients receiving long-
term oral anticoagulation therapy is an increasingly common 
problem. Definitive evidence-based guidelines regarding 
which patients require perioperative “bridging” anticoagu-
lation and the most effective way to bridge are lacking. However, 
the American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clin-
ical Practice Guidelines do serve as best practice for these situa-
tions.44 A few clinical scenarios exist where the patient should be 
transitioned to intravenous heparin from oral anticoagulants. A 
heparin infusion should be held for 4 to 6 hours before the proce-
dure and restarted within 12 to 24 hours of the end of its comple-
tion. The primary indication for this level of aggressiveness is 
patients with mechanical heart valves. Other indications include 
a recent (within 30 days) myocardial infarction, stroke, or pul-
monary embolism. Situations such as thromboembolic events 
greater than 30 days prior, hypercoagulable history, and atrial 
fibrillation do not require such stringent restarting strategies.
Cardiopulmonary Bypass.  Under normal conditions, homeo-
stasis of the coagulation system is maintained by complex inter-
actions between the endothelium, platelets, and coagulation 
factors. In patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 
contact with circuit tubing and membranes results in abnormal 
platelet and clotting factor activation, as well as activation of 
inflammatory cascades, that ultimately result in excessive fibri-
nolysis and a combination of both quantitative and qualitative 
platelet defects. Platelets undergo reversible alterations in mor-
phology and their ability to aggregate, which causes sequestra-
tion in the filter, partially degranulated platelets, and platelet 
fragments. This multifactorial coagulopathy is compounded by 
the effects of shear stress in the system, induced hypothermia, 
hemodilution, and anticoagulation.45
While on pump, activated clotting time measurements are 
obtained along with blood gas measurements; however, con-
ventional coagulation assays and platelet counts are not nor-
mally performed until rewarming and after a standard dose of 
protamine has been given. TEG may give a better estimate of 
the extent of coagulopathy and may also be used to anticipate 
transfusion requirements if bleeding is present.45
Empiric treatment with FFP and cryoprecipitate is often 
used for bleeding patients; however, there are no universally 
4
accepted transfusion thresholds. Platelet concentrates are given 
for bleeding patients in the immediate postoperative period; 
however, studies have shown that indiscriminate platelet ther-
apy conferred no therapeutic advantage.46 It is in these patients 
where rapid coagulation testing is required to assist with directed 
transfusion therapy.47 Many institutions now use antifibrinolyt-
ics, such as ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, at the time 
of anesthesia induction after several studies have shown that 
such treatment reduced postoperative bleeding and reoperation. 
Aprotinin, a protease inhibitor that acts as an antifibrinolytic 
agent, has been shown to reduce transfusion requirements asso-
ciated with cardiac surgery.48 Desmopressin acetate stimulates 
release of factor VIII from endothelial cells and may also be 
effective in reducing blood loss during cardiac surgery. The use 
of recombinant factor VIIa has also been studied but with con-
flicting results between improved hemostasis and thrombotic 
events and mortality, and thus its use is often employed only as 
a measure of last resort.45,49
Local Hemostasis.  Significant surgical bleeding is usually 
caused by ineffective local hemostasis. The goal is therefore 
to prevent further blood loss from a disrupted vessel that has 
been incised or transected. Hemostasis may be accomplished by 
interrupting the flow of blood to the involved area or by direct 
closure of the blood vessel wall defect.
Mechanical Procedures.  The oldest mechanical method of 
bleeding cessation is application of direct digital pressure, either 
at the site of bleeding or proximally to permit more definitive 
action. An extremity tourniquet that occludes a major vessel 
proximal to the bleeding site or the Pringle maneuver for liver 
bleeding are good examples. Direct digital pressure is very 
effective and has the advantage of being less traumatic than 
hemostatic or even “atraumatic” clamps.
When a small vessel is transected, a simple ligature is usu-
ally sufficient. However, for larger pulsating arteries, a transfix-
ion suture to prevent slipping is indicated. All sutures represent 
foreign material, and selection should be based on their intrinsic 
characteristics and the state of the wound. Direct pressure applied 
by “packing” a wound with gauze or laparotomy pads affords 
the best method of controlling diffuse bleeding from large areas, 
such as in the trauma situation. Packing bone wax on the raw 
surface to effect pressure can control bleeding from cut bone.
Thermal Agents.  Heat achieves hemostasis by denaturation of 
protein that results in coagulation of large areas of tissue. Elec-
trocautery generates heat by induction from an alternating cur-
rent source, which is then transmitted via conduction from the 
instrument directly to the tissue. The amplitude setting should 
be high enough to produce prompt coagulation, but not so high 
as to set up an arc between the tissue and the cautery tip. This 
avoids thermal injury outside of the operative field and also pre-
vents exit of current through electrocardiographic leads, other 
monitoring devices, or permanent pacemakers or defibrillators. 
A negative grounding plate should be placed beneath the patient 
to avoid severe skin burns, and caution should be used with cer-
tain anesthetic agents (diethyl ether, divinyl ether, ethyl chloride, 
ethylene, and cyclopropane) because of the hazard of explosion.
A direct current also can result in hemostasis. Because the 
protein moieties and cellular elements of blood have a nega-
tive surface charge, they are attracted to a positive pole where a 
thrombus is formed. Direct currents in the 20- to 100-mA range 
have successfully controlled diffuse bleeding from raw surfaces, 
as has argon gas.
96
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Topical Hemostatic Agents.  Topical hemostatic agents can 
play an important role in helping to facilitate surgical hemo-
stasis. These agents are classified based on their mechanism 
of action, and many act at specific stages in the coagulation 
cascade and take advantage of natural physiologic responses to 
bleeding.50 The ideal topical hemostatic agent has significant 
hemostatic action, minimal tissue reactivity, nonantigenicity, in 
vivo biodegradability, ease of sterilization, low cost, and can be 
tailored to specific needs.51
In 2010, Achneck et al published a comprehensive over-
view of absorbable, biologic, and synthetic agents.52 Absorb-
able agents include gelatin foams (Gelfoam), oxidized cellulose 
(Surgicel), and microfibrillar collagens (Avitene). Both gelatin 
foam and oxidized cellulose provide a physical matrix for clot-
ting initiation, while microfibrillar collagens facilitate plate-
let adherence and activation. Biologic agents include topical 
thrombin, fibrin sealants (FloSeal), and platelet sealants (Vita-
gel). Human or recombinant thrombin derivatives, which facili-
tate the formation of fibrin clots and subsequent activation of 
several clotting factors, take advantage of natural physiologic 
processes, thereby avoiding foreign body or inflammatory 
reactions.51 Caution must be taken in judging vessel caliber in 
the wound because thrombin entry into larger caliber vessels 
can result in systemic exposure to thrombin with a risk of dis-
seminated intravascular clotting or death. They are particularly 
effective in controlling capillary bed bleeding when pressure or 
ligation is insufficient; however, the bovine derivatives should 
be used with caution due to the potential immunologic response 
and worsened coagulopathy. Fibrin sealants are prepared from 
cryoprecipitate (homologous or synthetic) and have the advan-
tage of not promoting inflammation or tissue necrosis.53 Platelet 
sealants are a mixture of collagen and thrombin combined with 
plasma-derived fibrinogen and platelets from the patient, which 
requires the additional need for centrifugation and processing.
Topical agents are not a substitute for meticulous surgical 
technique and only function as adjuncts to help facilitate surgi-
cal hemostasis. The advantages and disadvantages of each agent 
must be considered, and use should be limited to the minimum 
amount necessary to minimize toxicity, adverse reactions, inter-
ference with wound healing, and procedural costs.
TRANSFUSION
Background
Human blood replacement therapy was accepted in the late nine-
teenth century. This was followed by the introduction of blood 
grouping by Landsteiner who identified the major A, B, and 
O groups in 1900, resulting in widespread use of blood prod-
ucts in World War I. Levine and Stetson in 1939 followed with 
the concept of Rh grouping. These breakthroughs established 
the foundation from which the field of transfusion medicine has 
grown. Whole blood was considered the standard in transfu-
sion until the late 1970s when component therapy began to take 
prominence. This change in practice was made possible by the 
development of improved collection strategies, infectious dis-
ease testing, and advances in preservative solutions and storage.
Replacement Therapy
Typing and Cross-Matching.  Serologic compatibility for A, 
B, O, and Rh groups is established routinely. Cross-matching 
between the donors’ red blood cells and the recipients’ sera (the 
major cross-match) is performed. Rh-negative recipients should 
be transfused only with Rh-negative blood. However, this group 
represents only 15% of the population. Therefore, the adminis-
tration of Rh-positive blood is acceptable if Rh-negative blood 
is not available. However, Rh-positive blood should not be 
transfused to Rh-negative females who are of child-bearing age.
In emergency situations, type O-negative blood may be 
transfused to all recipients. O-negative and type-specific red 
blood cells are equally safe for emergency transfusion. Prob-
lems are associated with the administration of four or more 
units of O-negative blood because there is a significant increase 
in the risk of hemolysis. In patients with clinically significant 
cold agglutinins, blood should be administered through a blood 
warmer. If these antibodies are present in high titer, hypother-
mia is contraindicated.
In patients who have been multiply transfused and who 
have developed alloantibodies or who have autoimmune hemo-
lytic anemia with pan-red blood cell antibodies, typing and 
cross-matching is often difficult, and sufficient time should 
be allotted preoperatively to accumulate blood that might be 
required during the operation. Cross-matching should always 
be performed before the administration of dextran because it 
interferes with the typing procedure.
The use of autologous transfusion is growing. Up to 5 units 
can be collected for subsequent use during elective procedures. 
Patients can donate and store their own blood if their hemoglo-
bin concentration exceeds 11 g/dL or if the hematocrit is greater 
than 34%. The first procurement is performed 40 days before 
the planned operation, and the last one is performed 3 days 
before the operation. Donations can be scheduled at intervals 
of 3 to 4 days. Recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO) 
accelerates generation of red blood cells and allows for more 
frequent harvesting of blood.
Banked Whole Blood.  Once the gold standard, whole 
blood is rarely available in Western countries. With sequen-
tial changes in storage solutions, the shelf life of red blood 
cells is now 42 days. Recent evidence has demonstrated that 
the age of red cells may play a significant role in the inflam-
matory response and incidence of multiple organ failure.54 The 
changes in the red blood cells that occur during storage include 
reduction of intracellular ADP and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-
DPG), which alters the oxygen dissociation curve of hemoglo-
bin, resulting in a decrease in oxygen transport. Stored RBCs 
progressively becomes acidodic with elevated levels of lactate, 
potassium, and ammonia.
Red Blood Cells and Frozen Red Blood Cells.  Red blood 
cells are the product of choice for most clinical situations requir-
ing resuscitation. Concentrated suspensions of red blood cells 
can be prepared by removing most of the supernatant plasma 
after centrifugation. The preparation reduces but does not elimi-
nate reactions caused by plasma components. Frozen red blood 
cells are not currently available for use in emergencies, as the 
thawing and preparation time is measured in hours. They are 
used for patients who are known to have been previously sensi-
tized. The red blood cell viability is improved, and the ATP and 
2,3-DPG concentrations are maintained.
Leukocyte-Reduced and Leukocyte-Reduced/Washed Red 
Blood Cells.  These products are prepared by filtration that 
removes about 99.9% of the white blood cells and most of the 
platelets (leukocyte-reduced red blood cells) and, if necessary, 
by additional saline washing (leukocyte-reduced/washed red 
blood cells). Leukocyte reduction prevents almost all febrile, 
97
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
nonhemolytic transfusion reactions (fever and/or rigors), allo-
immunization to HLA class I antigens, and platelet transfusion 
refractoriness and cytomegalovirus transmission. In most 
Western nations, it is the standard red blood cell transfusion 
product. Supporters of universal leukocyte reduction argue that 
allogenic transfusion of white cells predisposes to postoperative 
bacterial infection and multiorgan failure. Reviews of random-
ized trials and meta-analyses have not provided convincing evi-
dence either way,55,56 although a large Canadian retrospective 
study suggests a decrease in mortality and infections.57
Platelet Concentrates.  The indications for platelet transfu-
sion include thrombocytopenia caused by massive blood loss 
and replacement with platelet-poor products, thrombocytopenia 
caused by inadequate production, and qualitative platelet disor-
ders. The shelf life of platelets is 120 hours from time of donation. 
One unit of platelet concentrate has a volume of approximately 
50 mL. Platelet preparations are capable of transmitting infectious 
diseases and can account for allergic reactions similar to those 
caused by red blood cell transfusion. A therapeutic level of plate-
lets is in the range of 50,000 to 100,000/μL but is very dependent 
on the clinical situation. Recent evidence suggests that earlier use 
of platelets may improve outcomes in bleeding patients.58
In rare cases, in patients who become alloimmunized 
through previous transfusion or patients who are refractory from 
sensitization through prior pregnancies, HLA-matched platelets 
can be used.
Fresh Frozen Plasma.  Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) prepared 
from freshly donated blood is the usual source of the vitamin 
K-dependent factors and is the only source of factor V. FFP car-
ries similar infectious risks as other component therapies. Use of 
plasma as a primary resuscitation modality in patients who are 
rapidly bleeding has received attention over the last few years, 
and ongoing studies are under way to evaluate this concept. FFP 
can be thawed and stored for up to 5 days, greatly increasing 
its immediate availability. In an effort to increase the shelf life 
and avoid the need for refrigeration, lyophilized plasma is being 
tested. Preliminary animal studies suggest that it preserves the 
beneficial effects of FFP.59
Concentrates and Recombinant DNA Technology.  Techno-
logic advancements have made the majority of clotting factors 
and albumin readily available as concentrates. These products 
are readily available and carry none of the inherent infectious 
risks as other component therapies.
Tranexamic Acid.  Tranexamic acid (TXA; trade name: Cyk-
lokapron), an antifibrinolytic agent, has been used to decrease 
bleeding and the need for blood transfusions in coronary artery 
bypass grafting (CABG), orthotopic liver transplantation, hip 
and knee arthroplasty, and other surgical settings. The safety 
and efficacy of using TXA to treat trauma patients was recently 
evaluated in a large randomized, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial.60 In this trial, 20,211 adult trauma patients in 274 hospitals 
in 40 countries with significant hemorrhage (heart rate >110 
beats per minute and systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or 
both) or judged to be at risk for significant hemorrhage were 
randomized to either TXA or placebo administered as a load-
ing dose of 1 g over 10 minutes followed by an infusion of 1 g 
over 8 hours. It is important to understand that the responsible 
physician did not randomize patients with either a clear indica-
tion or a clear contraindication to TXA. The overall mortality 
rate in the cohort studied was 15.3%, of whom 35.3% died on 
the day of randomization. A total of 1063 patients died due to 
hemorrhage, and the majority died on the day of randomiza-
tion. The authors reported that TXA use resulted in a statisti-
cally significant reduction in the relative risk (RR) of all-cause 
mortality of 9% (14.5 vs. 16.0%, RR 0.91, confidence interval 
[CI] 0.85–0.97; P = .0035). A recent post hoc analysis of the 
CRASH-2 data showed that the greatest benefit of TXA admin-
istration occurred when patients received the medication soon 
after injury.61 In this analysis, TXA given between 1 and 3 hours 
after trauma reduced the risk of death due to bleeding by 21% 
(147/3037 [4.8%] vs. 184/2996 [6.1%], RR 0.79, CI 0.64–0.97; 
P = .03). Treatment given after 3 hours increased the risk of 
death due to bleeding (144/3272 [4.4%] vs. 103/3362 [3.1%], 
RR 1.44, CI 1.12–1.84; P = .004). Finally, a recent meta-analysis 
reported that TXA is effective for preventing blood loss in 
surgery and reducing transfusion and was not associated with 
increased vascular occlusive events.62
Adverse events associated with TXA use have been 
reported. These include acute gastrointestinal disturbances 
(nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, generally dose-related), visual 
disturbances (blurry vision and changes in color perception, 
especially with prolonged use), and occasional thromboem-
bolic events (e.g., deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism, generally observed in the setting of active intravas-
cular clotting). Its use is thus contraindicated in the settings of 
acquired defective color vision and active intravascular clot-
ting. TXA should be used with caution in the setting of urinary 
tract bleeding because ureteral obstruction due to clotting has 
been reported. TXA is contraindicated in patients with aneu-
rysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage; however, there have been 
no reported complications associated with intra- or extracranial 
hemorrhage associated with trauma. TXA should not be given 
with activated prothrombin complex concentrate or factor IX 
complex concentrates because these may increase the risk of 
thrombosis.
TXA is an antifibrinolytic that inhibits both plasminogen 
activation and plasmin activity, thus preventing clot breakdown 
rather than promoting new clot formation. TXA is an inhibitor 
of plasminogen activation and an inhibitor of plasmin activity. 
It occupies the lysine binding sites on plasminogen, thus pre-
venting its binding to lysine residues on fibrin. This reduces 
plasminogen activation to plasmin. Similarly, blockade of 
lysine-binding sites on circulating plasmin prevents binding 
to fibrin and thus prevents clot breakdown. TXA is 10 times 
more potent in vitro than aminocaproic acid. At therapeutically 
relevant concentrations, TXA does not affect platelet count or 
aggregation or coagulation parameters. It is excreted largely 
unchanged in urine and has a half-life of about 2 hours in cir-
culation. While prolonged use requires that dosing be adjusted 
for renal impairment, use in the acute trauma situation does 
not appear to require adjustment. No adjustment is needed 
for hepatic impairment. Based on the CRASH-2 trial, TXA is 
becoming more widely used in the United States for patients 
with ongoing bleeding, especially those with documented evi-
dence of fibrinolysis. Careful analysis of recently ongoing trials 
will further elucidate the safety profile of this powerful drug.63
Indications for Replacement of  
Blood and Its Elements
Improvement in Oxygen-Carrying Capacity.  Oxygen-
carrying capacity is primarily a function of the red blood cells. 
Thus, transfusion of red blood cells should augment oxygen-
carrying capacity. Additionally, hemoglobin is fundamental to 
98
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
arterial oxygen content and thus oxygen delivery. Despite this 
obvious association, there is little evidence that actually sup-
ports the premise that transfusion of red blood cells equates with 
enhanced cellular delivery and utilization. The reasons for this 
apparent discrepancy are related to changes that occur with stor-
age of blood. The decrease in 2,3-DPG and P50 impair oxygen 
offloading, and deformation of the red cells impairs microcir-
culatory perfusion.64
Treatment of Anemia: Transfusion Triggers.  A 1988 
National Institutes of Health Consensus Report challenged the 
dictum that a hemoglobin value of less than 10 g/dL or a hema-
tocrit level less than 30% indicates a need for preoperative red 
blood cell transfusion. This was verified in a prospective ran-
domized controlled trial in critically ill patients that compared 
a restrictive transfusion threshold to a more liberal strategy and 
demonstrated that maintaining hemoglobin levels between 7 and 
9 g/dL had no adverse effect on mortality. In fact, patients with 
APACHE II scores of ≤20 or patients age <55 years actually had 
a lower mortality.65
Despite these results, change in daily clinical practice has 
been slow. Critically ill patients still frequently receive transfu-
sions, with the pretransfusion hemoglobin approaching 9 g/dL 
in a recent large observational study.66 This outdated approach 
unnecessarily exposes patients to increased risk and little benefit.
One unresolved issue related to transfusion triggers is 
the safety of maintaining a hemoglobin of 7 g/dL in a patient 
with ischemic heart disease. Data on this subject are mixed, and 
many studies have significant design flaws, including their ret-
rospective nature. However, the majority of the published data 
favors a restrictive transfusion trigger for patients with non-ST 
elevation acute coronary syndrome, with many reporting worse 
outcomes in those patients receiving transfusions.67,68
Volume Replacement
The most common indication for blood transfusion in surgical 
patients is the replenishment of the blood volume; however, a 
deficit is difficult to evaluate. Measurements of hemoglobin 
or hematocrit levels are frequently used to assess blood loss. 
These measurements can be occasionally misleading in the face 
of acute loss. Both the amount and the rate of bleeding are fac-
tors in the development of signs and symptoms of blood loss.
Loss of blood in the operating room can be roughly evalu-
ated by estimating the amount of blood in the wound and on the 
drapes, weighing the sponges, and quantifying blood suctioned 
from the operative field. In patients with normal preoperative 
values, blood loss up to 20% of total blood volume can be 
replaced with crystalloid or colloid solutions. Blood loss above 
this value may require the addition of a balanced resuscitation 
including red blood cells, FFP, and platelets (detailed later in 
this chapter) (Table 4-5).
New Concepts in Resuscitation
Traditional resuscitation algorithms are sequentially based on 
crystalloid followed by red blood cells and then plasma and 
platelet transfusions and have been in widespread use since the 
1970s. No quality clinical data supported this concept. Recently 
the damage control resuscitation (DCR) strategy, aimed at halt-
ing and/or preventing rather than treating the lethal triad of 
coagulopathy, acidosis, and hypothermia, has challenged tradi-
tional thinking on early resuscitation strategies.69
Rationale.  In civilian trauma systems, nearly half of all 
deaths happen before a patient reaches the hospital, and many 
are nonpreventable.70 Patients who survive to an emergency 
center have a high incidence of truncal hemorrhage, and deaths 
in this group of patients may be potentially preventable. Trun-
cal hemorrhage patients in shock often present with the early 
coagulopathy of trauma in the emergency department and are at 
significant risk of dying.71-73
Many of these patients have suffered substantial bleeding 
and may receive a significant transfusion, generally defined as 
the administration of ≥4 to 6 units of red blood cells within 4 to 
6 hours of admission. This definition is admittedly arbitrary. 
Although 25% of all trauma admissions receive a unit of blood 
early after admission, only a small percentage of patients receive 
a massive transfusion. In the military setting, the percentage of 
massive transfusion patients almost doubles.74
Damage Control Resuscitation.  Standard advanced trauma 
life support guidelines start resuscitation with crystalloid, fol-
lowed by packed red blood cells.75 Only after several liters of 
crystalloid have been transfused does transfusion of units of 
plasma or platelets begin. This conventional massive trans-
fusion practice was based on a several small uncontrolled 
retrospective studies that used blood products containing 
increased amounts of plasma, which are no longer available.76 
Because of the known early coagulopathy of trauma, the cur-
rent approach to managing the exsanguinating patient involves 
early implementation of damage control resuscitation 
(DCR). Although most of the attention to hemorrhagic 
shock resuscitation has centered on higher ratios of plasma and 
platelets, DCR is actually composed of three basic components: 
permissive hypotension, minimizing crystalloid-based resusci-
tation, and the immediate release and administration of pre-
defined blood products (red blood cells, plasma, and platelets) 
in ratios similar to those of whole blood.
In Iraq and Afghanistan, DCR practices are demonstrating 
unprecedented success with improved overall survival.77 Civil-
ian data also suggest that a balanced resuscitation approach 
yields improved outcome in severely injured and bleeding 
trauma patients.69 To verify military and single-institution civil-
ian data on DCR, a multicenter retrospective study of modern 
transfusion practice at 17 leading civilian trauma centers was 
performed.78 It was found that plasma:platelet:red blood cell 
ratios varied from 1:1:1 to 0.3:0.1:1, with corresponding sur-
vival rates ranging from 71% to 41%. A significant center effect 
was seen, documenting wide variation in both transfusion prac-
tice and outcomes between Level 1 trauma centers. This varia-
tion correlated with blood product ratios. Increased plasma- and 
platelet-to-RBC ratios significantly decreased truncal hem-
orrhagic death and 30-day mortality without a concomitant 
increase in multiple organ failure as a cause of death. A prospec-
tive observational study evaluating current transfusion practice 
at 10 Level 1 centers was recently published, again documenting 
the wide variability in practice and improved outcomes with 
earlier use of increased ratios of plasma and platelets.79 Patients 
receiving ratios less than 1:2 were four times more likely to die 
than patients with ratios of 1:1 or higher.
Regardless of the optimal ratio, it is essential that the 
trauma center has an established mechanism to deliver these 
products quickly and in the correct amounts to these critically 
injured patients. In fact, several authors have shown that a 
well-developed massive transfusion protocol is associated with 
improved outcomes independent of the ratios chosen.80 This 
aggressive delivery of predefined blood products should begin 
prior to any laboratory-defined anemia or coagulopathy.
5
99
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
Table 4-5 
Replacement of clotting factors
Factor
Normal Level
Life Span In Vivo 
(Half-Life)
Fate during 
Coagulation
Level Required for 
Safe Hemostasis
Ideal Agent ACD Bank 
Blood (4°C [39.2°F])
Ideal Agent for  
Replacing Deficit
I (fibrinogen)
200–400 mg/100 mL
72 h
Consumed
60–100 mg/100 mL
Very stable
Bank blood; concentrated 
fibrinogen
II (prothrombin)
20 mg/100 mL (100% of 
normal level)
72 h
Consumed
15%–20%
Stable
Bank blood; concentrated 
preparation
V (proaccelerin, accelerator 
globulin, labile factor)
100% of normal level
36 h
Consumed
5%–20%
Labile (40% of normal 
level at 1 wk)
Fresh frozen plasma; blood 
under 7 d
VII (proconvertin, serum 
prothrombin conversion 
accelerator, stable factor)
100% of normal level
5 h
Survives
5%–30%
Stable
Bank blood; concentrated 
preparation
VIII (antihemophilic factor, 
antihemophilic globulin)
100% of normal level  
(50%–150% of normal 
level)
6–12 h
Consumed
30%
Labile (20%–40% of 
normal level at 1 wk)
Fresh frozen plasma; 
concentrated antihemophilic 
factor; cryoprecipitate
IX (Christmas factor, plasma 
thromboplastin component)
100% of normal level
24 h
Survives
20%–30%
Stable
Fresh-frozen plasma; bank 
blood; concentrated preparation
X (Stuart-Prower factor)
100% of normal level
40 h
Survives
15%–20%
Stable
Bank blood; concentrated 
preparation
XI (plasma thromboplastin 
antecedent)
100% of normal level
Probably 40–80 h
Survives
10%
Probably stable
Bank blood
XII (Hageman factor)
100% of normal level
Unknown
Survives
Deficit produces no 
bleeding tendency
Stable
Replacement not required
XIII (fibrinase, fibrin-
stabilizing factor)
100% of normal level
4–7 d
Survives
Probably <1%
Stable
Bank blood
Platelets
150,000–400,000/μL
8–11 d
Consumed
60,000–100,000/μL
Very labile (40% of 
normal level at 20 h;  
0 at 48 h)
Fresh blood or plasma; fresh 
platelet concentrate (not frozen 
plasma)
ACD = acid-citrate-dextrose.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Salzman EW: Hemorrhagic disorders. In: Kinney JM, Egdahl RH, Zuidema GD, eds. Manual of Preoperative and Postoperative Care. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1971:157. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
100
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 4-6 
Adult Transfusion Clinical Practice Guideline
A.  Initial Transfusion of Red Blood Cells (RBCs):
1.  Notify blood bank immediately of urgent need for RBCs.
O negative uncross-matched (available immediately).
As soon as possible, switch to O negative for females and O positive for males.
Type-specific uncross-matched (available in approximately 5–10 min).
Completely cross-matched (available in approximately 40 min).
2.  A blood sample must be sent to blood bank for a type and cross.
3.  The Emergency Release of Blood form must be completed. If the blood type is not known and blood is needed immediately, 
O-negative RBCs should be issued.
4.  RBCs will be transfused in the standard fashion. All patients must be identified (name and number) prior to transfusion.
5.  Patients who are unstable or receive 1–2 RBCs and do not rapidly respond should be considered candidates for the massive 
transfusion (MT) guideline.
B.  Adult Massive Transfusion Guideline:
1.  The Massive Transfusion Guideline (MTG) should be initiated as soon as it is anticipated that a patient will require massive 
transfusion (≥10 U RBCs in 24 h). The Blood Bank should strive to deliver plasma, platelets, and RBCs in a 1:1:1 ratio. To 
be effective and minimize further dilutional coagulopathy, the 1:1:1 ratio must be initiated early, ideally with the first  
2 units of transfused RBCs. Crystalloid infusion should be minimized.
2.  Once the MTG is activated, the Blood Bank will have 6 RBCs, 6 FFP, and a 6 pack of platelets packed in a cooler available 
for rapid transport. If 6 units of thawed FFP are not immediately available, the Blood Bank will issue units that are ready 
and notify appropriate personnel when the remainder is thawed. Every attempt should be made to obtain a 1:1:1 ratio of 
plasma:platelets:RBCs.
3.  Once initiated, the MT will continue until stopped by the attending physician. MT should be terminated once the patient is 
no longer actively bleeding.
4.  No blood components will be issued without a pickup slip with the recipient’s medical record number and name.
5.  Basic laboratory tests should be drawn immediately on ED arrival and optimally performed on point-of-care devices, 
facilitating timely delivery of relevant information to the attending clinicians. These tests should be repeated as clinically 
indicated (e.g., after each cooler of products has been transfused). Suggested laboratory values are:
•  CBC
•  INR, fibrinogen
•  pH and/or base deficit
•  TEG, where available
CBC = complete blood count; ED = emergency department; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; INR = international normalized ratio; TEG = thromboelastography.
An example of an adult massive transfusion clinical guide-
line specifying the early use of component therapy is shown in 
Table 4-6. Specific recommendations for the administra-
tion of component therapy during a massive transfusion are 
shown in Table 4-7. Because only a small percentage of trauma 
patients require a massive transfusion and because blood prod-
ucts in general are in short supply, the need for early prediction 
models has been studied and a comparison of results from both 
civilian and military studies is shown in Table 4-8.81-85 While 
compelling, none of these algorithms have been prospectively 
validated.
Complications of Transfusion (Table 4-9)
Transfusion-related complications are primarily related to 
blood-induced proinflammatory responses. Transfusion-related 
events are estimated to occur in approximately 10% of all trans-
fusions, but less than 0.5% are serious in nature. Transfusion-
related deaths, although rare, do occur and are related primarily 
to transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) (16%–22%), 
ABO hemolytic transfusion reactions (12%–15%), and bacterial 
contamination of platelets (11%–18%).86
Nonhemolytic Reactions.  Febrile, nonhemolytic reactions 
are defined as an increase in temperature (>1°C) associated with 
a transfusion and are fairly common (approximately 1% of all 
transfusions). Preformed cytokines in donated blood and recipi-
ent antibodies reacting with donated antibodies are postulated eti-
ologies. The incidence of febrile reactions can be greatly reduced 
by the use of leukocyte-reduced blood products. Pretreatment 
with acetaminophen reduces the severity of the reaction.
Bacterial contamination of infused blood is rare. Gram-
negative organisms, which are capable of growth at 4°C, are the 
most common cause. Most cases, however, are associated with 
the administration of platelets that are stored at 20°C or, even 
more commonly, with apheresis platelets stored at room tem-
perature. Cases from FFP thawed in contaminated water baths 
have also been reported.87 Bacterial contamination can result in 
sepsis and death in up 25% of patients.88 Clinical manifestations 
includes systemic signs such as fever and chills, tachycardia and 
hypotension, and gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal cramps, 
vomiting, and diarrhea). If the diagnosis is suspected, the trans-
fusion should be discontinued and the blood cultured. Emer-
gency treatment includes oxygen, adrenergic blocking agents, 
and antibiotics.
Allergic Reactions.  Allergic reactions are relatively frequent, 
occurring in about 1% of all transfusions. Reactions are usu-
ally mild and consist of rash, urticaria, and flushing. In rare 
instances, anaphylactic shock develops. Allergic reactions are 
6
101
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
Table 4-7 
Component therapy administration during massive 
transfusion
Fresh frozen 
plasma (FFP)
As soon as the need for massive transfusion 
is recognized.
For every 6 red blood cells (RBCs), give  
6 FFP (1:1 ratio).
Platelets
For every 6 RBCs and plasma, give one  
6 pack of platelets. 6 random-donor platelet 
packs = 1 apheresis platelet unit.
Platelets are in every cooler.
Keep platelet counts >100,000.
Cryoprecipitate After first 6 RBCs, check fibrinogen 
level. If ≤200 mg/dL, give 20 units 
cryoprecipitate (2 g fibrinogen). Repeat 
as needed, depending on fibrinogen 
level, and request appropriate amount of 
cryoprecipitate.
Table 4-8 
Comparison of massive transfusion prediction studies
Author
Variables
ROC AUC Value
McLaughlin et al81
SBP, HR, pH, Hct
0.839
Yücel et al82
SBP, HR, BD, Hgb, 
Male, + FAST, long 
bone/pelvic fracture
0.892
Moore et al83
SBP, pH, ISS >25
0.804
Schreiber et al84
Hgb ≤11, INR >1.5, 
penetrating injury
0.80
Cotton et al85
HR, SBP, FAST, 
penetrating injury
0.83-0.90
AUC = area under the curve; BD = base deficit; FAST = Focused assess-
ment with sonography for trauma; Hct = hematocrit; Hgb = hemoglobin; 
HR = heart rate; INR = international normalized ratio; ISS = injury 
severity score; ROC = receiver operating characteristic; SBP = systolic 
blood pressure.
caused by the transfusion of antibodies from hypersensitive 
donors or the transfusion of antigens to which the recipient is 
hypersensitive. Allergic reactions can occur after the adminis-
tration of any blood product but are commonly associated with 
FFP and platelets. Treatment and prophylaxis consist of the 
administration of antihistamines. In more serious cases, epi-
nephrine or steroids may be indicated.
Respiratory Complications.  Respiratory compromise may 
be associated with transfusion-associated circulatory overload 
(TACO), which is an avoidable complication. It can occur with 
rapid infusion of blood, plasma expanders, and crystalloids, par-
ticularly in older patients with underlying heart disease. Central 
venous pressure monitoring should be considered whenever 
large amounts of fluid are administered. Overload is manifest 
by a rise in venous pressure, dyspnea, and cough. Rales can gen-
erally be heard at the lung bases. Treatment consists of diuresis, 
slowing the rate of blood administration, and minimizing fluids 
while blood products are being transfused.
The syndrome of TRALI is defined as noncardiogenic 
pulmonary edema related to transfusion.89 It can occur with 
the administration of any plasma-containing blood product. 
Symptoms are similar to circulatory overload with dyspnea 
and associated hypoxemia. However, TRALI is characterized 
as noncardiogenic and is often accompanied by fever, rigors, 
and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on chest x-ray. It most com-
monly occurs within 1 to 2 hours after the onset of transfusion 
but virtually always before 6 hours. Toy et al recently reported 
a decrease in the incidence of TRALI with the reduction trans-
fusion of plasma from female donors, due to a combination of 
reduced transfusion of strong cognate HLA class II antibod-
ies and HNA antibodies in patients with risk factors for acute 
lung injury.90 Treatment of TRALI entails discontinuation of 
any transfusion, notification of the transfusion service, and pul-
monary support, which may vary from supplemental oxygen to 
mechanical ventilation.
Hemolytic Reactions.  Hemolytic reactions can be classified 
as either acute of delayed. Acute hemolytic reactions occur 
with the administration of ABO-incompatible blood and can be 
fatal in up to 6% of cases. Contributing factors include errors in 
the laboratory of a technical or clerical nature or the administra-
tion of the wrong blood type. Immediate hemolytic reactions 
are characterized by intravascular destruction of red blood 
cells and consequent hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria. 
DIC can be initiated by antibody-antigen complexes activat-
ing factor XII and complement, leading to activation of the 
coagulation cascade. Finally, acute renal insufficiency results 
from the toxicity associated with free hemoglobin in the plasma, 
resulting in tubular necrosis and precipitation of hemoglobin 
within the tubules.
Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions occur 2 to 10 days 
after transfusion and are characterized by extravascular hemo-
lysis, mild anemia, and indirect (unconjugated) hyperbilirubine-
mia. They occur when an individual has a low antibody titer at 
the time of transfusion, but the titer increases after transfusion 
as a result of an anamnestic response. Reactions to non-ABO 
antigens involve immunoglobulin G-mediated clearance by the 
reticuloendothelial system.
If the patient is awake, the most common symptoms of 
acute transfusion reactions are pain at the site of transfusion, 
facial flushing, and back and chest pain. Associated symptoms 
include fever, respiratory distress, hypotension, and tachycardia. 
In anesthetized patients, diffuse bleeding and hypotension are the 
hallmarks. A high index of suspicion is needed to make the diag-
nosis. The laboratory criteria for a transfusion reaction are hemo-
globinuria and serologic criteria that show incompatibility of the 
donor and recipient blood. A positive Coombs’ test indicates 
transfused cells coated with patient antibody and is diagnostic. 
Delayed hemolytic transfusions may also be manifest by fever 
and recurrent anemia. Jaundice and decreased haptoglobin usu-
ally occur, and low-grade hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria 
may be seen. The Coombs’ test is usually positive, and the blood 
bank must identify the antigen to prevent subsequent reactions.
If an immediate hemolytic transfusion reaction is sus-
pected, the transfusion should be stopped immediately, and 
a sample of the recipient’s blood drawn and sent along with 
the suspected unit to the blood bank for comparison with the 
pretransfusion samples. Urine output should be monitored and 
adequate hydration maintained to prevent precipitation of hemo-
globin within the tubules. Delayed hemolytic transfusion reac-
tions do not usually require specific intervention.
102
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 4-9 
Transfusion-related complications
Abbreviation
Complication
Signs and Symptoms
Frequency
Mechanism
Prevention
NHTR
Febrile,  
  nonhemolytic  
  transfusion  
  reaction
Fever
0.5%–1.5% of  
  transfusions
Preformed cytokines
Host Ab to donor  
  lymphocytes
Use leukocyte- 
  reduced blood
Store platelets <5 d
Bacterial  
  contamination
High fever, chills
Hemodynamic changes
DIC
Emesis, diarrhea
Hemoglobinuria
<<0.05% of blood
0.05% of platelets
Infusion of  
  contaminated blood
Allergic reactions
Rash, hives
Itching
0.1%–0.3% of  
  units
Soluble transfusion  
  constituents
Provide  
  antihistamine  
  prophylaxis
TACO
Transfusion- 
  associated  
  circulatory  
  overload
Pulmonary edema
? 1:200–1:10,00 of 
  transfused  
  patients
Large volume of  
  blood transfused  
  into an older patient 
  with CHF
Increase transfusion 
  time
Administer diuretics
Minimize  
  associated fluids
TRALI
Transfusion-related  
  acute lung injury
Acute (<6 h) hypoxemia
Bilateral infiltrates ±  
Tachycardia, 
hypotension
Anti-HLA or  
  anti-HNA Ab in  
  transfused blood  
  attacks circulatory  
  and pulmonary  
  leukocytes
Limit female donors
Hemolytic reaction, 
  acute
Fever
Hypotension
DIC
Hemoglobinuria
Hemoglobinemia
Renal insufficiency
1:33,000– 
  1:1,500,000 units
Transfusion of ABO- 
  incompatible blood
Preformed IgM Ab to  
  ABO Ag
Transfuse  
  appropriately  
  matched blood
Hemolytic reaction, 
  delayed (2–10 d)
Anemia
Indirect  
  hyperbilirubinemia
Decreased haptoglobin  
  level
Positive result on direct  
  Coombs’ test
IgG mediated
Identify patient’s 
  Ag to prevent  
  recurrence
Ab = antibody; Ag = antigen; CHF = congestive heart failure; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; HNA = 
anti-human neutrophil antigen; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M.
Transmission of Disease.  Malaria, Chagas’ disease, brucel-
losis, and, very rarely, syphilis are among the diseases that have 
been transmitted by transfusion. Malaria can be transmitted by 
all blood components. The species most commonly implicated 
is Plasmodium malariae. The incubation period ranges from 
8 to 100 days; the initial manifestations are shaking chills and 
spiking fever. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection resembling 
infectious mononucleosis also has occurred.
Transmission of hepatitis C and HIV-1 has been dra-
matically minimized by the introduction of better antibody and 
nucleic acid screening for these pathogens. The residual risk 
among allogeneic donations is now estimated to be less than 
1 per 1,000,000 donations. The residual risk of hepatitis B is 
approximately 1 per 300,000 donations.91 Hepatitis A is very 
rarely transmitted because there is no asymptomatic carrier 
state. Improved donor selection and testing are responsible for 
the decreased rates of transmission. Recent concerns about the 
rare transmission of these and other pathogens, such as West 
Nile virus, are being addressed by current trials of “pathogen 
inactivation systems” that reduce infectious levels of all viruses 
and bacteria known to be transmittable by transfusion. Prion dis-
orders (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) also are transmissible by 
transfusion, but there is currently no information on inactivation 
of prions in blood products for transfusion.
TESTS OF HEMOSTASIS AND BLOOD COAGULATION
The initial approach to assessing hemostatic function is a care-
ful review of the patient’s clinical history (including previous 
abnormal bleeding or bruising), drug use, and basic laboratory 
testing. Common screening laboratory testing includes platelet 
count, PT or INR, and aPTT. Platelet dysfunction can occur 
103
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
at either extreme of platelet count. The normal platelet count 
ranges from 150,000 to 400,000/μL. Whereas a platelet count 
greater than 1,000,000/μL may be associated with bleeding or 
thrombotic complications, increased bleeding complications 
may be observed with major surgical procedures when the plate-
lets are below 50,000/μL and with minor surgical procedures 
when counts are below 30,000/μL, and spontaneous hemorrhage 
can occur when the counts fall below 20,000/μL. Despite a lack 
of evidence supporting their use, platelet transfusions are still 
recommended in ophthalmologic and neurosurgical procedures 
when the platelet count is less than 100,000/μL.
The PT and aPTT are variations of plasma recalcification 
times initiated by the addition of a thromboplastic agent. The 
PT reagent contains thromboplastin and calcium that, when 
added to plasma, leads to the formation of a fibrin clot. The 
PT test measures the function of factors I, II, V, VII, and X. 
Factor VII is part of the extrinsic pathway, and the remaining 
factors are part of the common pathway. Factor VII has the 
shortest half-life of the coagulation factors, and its synthesis 
is vitamin K dependent. The PT test is best suited to detect 
abnormal coagulation caused by vitamin K deficiencies and 
warfarin therapy.
Due to variations in thromboplastin activity, it can be dif-
ficult to accurately assess the degree of anticoagulation on the 
basis of PT alone. To account for these variations, the INR is 
now the method of choice for reporting PT values. The Interna-
tional Sensitivity Index (ISI) is unique to each batch of thrombo-
plastin and is furnished by the manufacturer to the hematology 
laboratory. Human brain thromboplastin has an ISI of 1, and the 
optimal reagent has an ISI between 1.3 and 1.5.
The INR is a calculated number derived from the follow-
ing equation:
INR = (measured PT/normal PT)ISI
The aPTT reagent contains a phospholipid substitute, 
activator, and calcium, which in the presence of plasma leads 
to fibrin clot formation. The aPTT measures function of fac-
tors I, II, and V of the common pathway and factors VIII, IX, 
X, and XII of the intrinsic pathway. Heparin therapy is often 
monitored by following aPTT values with a therapeutic target 
range of 1.5 to 2.5 times the control value (approximately 50 to 
80 seconds). Low molecular weight heparins are selective Xa 
inhibitors that may mildly elevate the aPTT, but therapeutic 
monitoring is not routinely recommended.
The bleeding time is used to evaluate platelet and vascular 
dysfunction, although not as frequently as in the past. Several 
standard methods have been described; however, the Ivy bleed-
ing time is most commonly used. It is conducted by placing a 
sphygmomanometer on the upper arm and inflating it to 40 mmHg, 
and then a 5-mm stab incision is made on the flexor surface of 
the forearm. The time is measured to cessation of bleeding, and 
the upper limit or normal bleeding time with the Ivy test is 7 
minutes. A template aids in administering a uniform test and 
adds to the reproducibility of the results. An abnormal bleeding 
time suggests platelet dysfunction (intrinsic or drug-induced), 
vWD, or certain vascular defects. Many laboratories are replac-
ing the template bleeding time with an in vitro test in which 
blood is sucked through a capillary and the platelets adhere to 
the walls of the capillary and aggregate. The closure time in this 
system appears to be more reproducible than the bleeding time 
and also correlates with bleeding in vWD, primary platelet func-
tion disorders, and patients who are taking aspirin.
Additional medications may significantly impair hemo-
static function, such as antiplatelet agents (clopidogrel and GP 
IIb/IIIa inhibitors), anticoagulant agents (hirudin, chondroitin 
sulfate, dermatan sulfate), and thrombolytic agents (streptokinase, 
tPA). If abnormalities in any of the coagulation studies cannot 
be explained by known medications, congenital abnormalities of 
coagulation or comorbid disease should be considered.
Unfortunately, while these conventional tests (PT, aPTT) 
capture the classic intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation cascade, 
they do not reflect the complexity of in vivo coagulation.92 
Although they are useful to follow warfarin and heparin thera-
pies, they poorly reflect the status of actively bleeding patients. 
This is not surprising given that these tests use only plasma and 
not whole blood to provide their assessment of the patient’s clot-
ting status. To better assess the complex and rapidly changing 
interactions of an actively bleeding patient, many centers have 
moved to whole blood-viscoelastic testing such as TEG or rota-
tional thromboelastometry (ROTEM). In addition, some centers 
have demonstrated that the graphical display options allow for 
more rapid return of results and that these tests are actually less 
expensive than standard coagulation panels.
TEG was originally described by Hartert in 1948.93 Con-
tinuous improvements in this technique have made this test a 
valuable tool for the medical personnel interested in coagula-
tion. The TEG monitors hemostasis as a dynamic process rather 
than revealing information of isolated conventional coagula-
tion screens.94 The TEG measures the viscoelastic properties of 
blood as it is induced to clot under a low-shear environment 
(resembling sluggish venous flow). The patterns of change in 
shear-elasticity enable the determination of the kinetics of clot 
formation and growth as well as the strength and stability of 
the formed clot. The strength and stability provide information 
about the ability of the clot to perform the work of hemostasis, 
while the kinetics determines the adequacy of quantitative fac-
tors available for clot formation. A sample of celite-activated 
whole blood is placed into a prewarmed cuvette, and the clotting 
process is activated with kaolin with standard TEG and kaolin 
plus tissue factor with rapid TEG. A suspended piston is then 
lowered into the cuvette that moves in rotation of a 4.5-degree 
arc backward and forward. The normal clot goes through accel-
eration and strengthening phase. The fiber strands that interact 
with activated platelets attach to the surface of the cuvette and 
the suspended piston. The clot forming in the cuvette trans-
mits its movement onto the suspended piston. A “weak” clot 
stretches and therefore delays the arc movement of the piston, 
which is graphically expressed as a narrow TEG. A strong clot, 
in contrast, will move the piston simultaneously and propor-
tionally to the cuvette’s movements, creating a thick TEG. The 
strength of a clot is graphically represented over time as a char-
acteristic cigar-shape figure (Fig. 4-6).
Coagulation
LY
Fibrinolysis
R
MA
K
Angle
Figure 4-6.  Illustration of a thromboelastogram (TEG) tracing. K = 
clot kinetics; LY = lysis; MA = maximal amplitude; R = reaction time.
104
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Several parameters are generated from the TEG tracing. 
The r-value (reaction time) represents the time between the 
start of the assay and initial clot formation. This reflects clot-
ting factor activity and initial fibrin formation and is increased 
with factor deficiency or severe hemodilution. The k-time (clot 
kinetics) is the time needed to reach specified clot strength and 
represents the interactions of clotting factors and platelets. As 
such, the k-time is prolonged with hypofibrinogenemia and sig-
nificant factor deficiency. Prolonged r-value and k-time are com-
monly addressed with plasma transfusions. The alpha or angle 
(∝) is the slope of the tracing and reflects clot acceleration. The 
angle reflects the interactions of clotting factors and platelets. 
The slope is decreased with hypofibrinogenemia and platelet 
dysfunction. Decreased angles are treated with cryoprecipitate 
transfusion or fibrinogen administration. The maximal ampli-
tude (mA) is the greatest height of the tracing and represents clot 
strength. Its height is reduced with dysfunction or deficiencies in 
platelets or fibrinogen. Decreased mA is addressed with platelet 
transfusion and, in cases where the angle is also decreased, with 
cryoprecipitate (or fibrinogen) as well. The G-value is a paramet-
ric measure derived from the mA value and reflects overall clot 
strength or firmness. An increased G-value is associated with 
hypercoagulability, whereas a decrease is seen with hypocoagu-
lable states. Finally, the LY30 is the amount of lysis occurring in 
the clot, and the value is the percentage of amplitude reduction 
at 30 minutes after mA is achieved. The LY30 represents clot 
stability and when increased fibrinolysis is present.
TEG is the only test measuring all dynamic steps of clot for-
mation until eventual clot lysis or retraction. TEG has also been 
shown to identify on admission those patients likely to develop 
thromboembolic complications after injury and postoperatively.95-97
Recent trauma data have shown TEG to be useful in pre-
dicting early transfusion of red blood cells, plasma, platelets, 
and cryoprecipitate.98 TEG can also predict the need for life-
saving interventions shortly after arrival and to predict 24-hour 
and 30-day mortality.99 Lastly, TEG can be useful to guide 
administration of TXA to injured patients with hyperfibrinoly-
sis.100 Our center now uses TEG rather than PT and a PTT to 
evaluate injured patients in the emergency room.101
EVALUATION OF EXCESSIVE INTRAOPERATIVE 
OR POSTOPERATIVE BLEEDING
Excessive bleeding during or after a surgical procedure may be 
the result of ineffective hemostasis, blood transfusion, unde-
tected hemostatic defect, consumptive coagulopathy, and/or 
fibrinolysis. Excessive bleeding from the operative field unas-
sociated with bleeding from other sites usually suggests inad-
equate mechanical hemostasis.
Massive blood transfusion is a well-known cause of throm-
bocytopenia. Bleeding following massive transfusion can occur 
due to hypothermia, dilutional coagulopathy, platelet dysfunction, 
fibrinolysis, or hypofibrinogenemia. Another cause of hemostatic 
failure related to the administration of blood is a hemolytic trans-
fusion reaction. The first sign of a transfusion reaction may be 
diffuse bleeding. The pathogenesis of this bleeding is thought to 
be related to the release of ADP from hemolyzed red blood cells, 
resulting in diffuse platelet aggregation, after which the platelet 
clumps are removed out of the circulation.
Transfusion purpura occurs when the donor platelets are 
of the uncommon PlA1 group. This is an uncommon cause of 
thrombocytopenia and associated bleeding after transfusion. 
The platelets sensitize the recipient, who makes antibody to the 
foreign platelet antigen. The foreign platelet antigen does not 
completely disappear from the recipient circulation but attaches 
to the recipient’s own platelets. The antibody then destroys the 
recipient’s own platelets. The resultant thrombocytopenia and 
bleeding may continue for several weeks. This uncommon cause 
of thrombocytopenia should be considered if bleeding follows 
transfusion by 5 or 6 days. Platelet transfusions are of little help 
in the management of this syndrome because the new donor 
platelets usually are subject to the binding of antigen and dam-
age from the antibody. Corticosteroids may be of some help 
in reducing the bleeding tendency. Posttransfusion purpura is 
self-limited, and the passage of several weeks inevitably leads 
to subsidence of the problem.
DIC is characterized by systemic activation of the coagu-
lation system, which results in the deposition of fibrin clots and 
microvascular ischemia and may contribute to the development 
of multiorgan failure. Consumption and subsequent exhaustion 
of coagulation proteins and platelets due to the ongoing acti-
vation of the coagulation system may induce severe bleeding 
complications.
Lastly, severe hemorrhagic disorders due to thrombo-
cytopenia have occurred as a result of gram-negative sepsis. 
Defibrination and hemostatic failure also may occur with menin-
gococcemia, Clostridium perfringens sepsis, and staphylococcal 
sepsis. Hemolysis appears to be one mechanism in sepsis leading 
to defibrination.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in blue are key references.
    1.	Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Davenport RA. Acute coagulopathy of 
trauma: mechanism, identification and effect. Curr Opin Crit 
Care. 2007;13:680-685.
    2.	Kulkarani R. Comprehensive care of the patient with haemo-
philia and inhibitors undergoing surgery: practical aspects. 
Hemophilia. 2013;19(1):2-10.
    3.	Federicini AB, Mannucci PM. Management of inherited von 
Willebrand disease in 2007. Ann Med. 2007;39:(5):346-358.
    4.	Girolami A, de Marinis GB, Bonamigo E, Lombardi AM. 
Recombinant FVIIa concentrate-associated thrombotic events 
in congenital bleeding disorders other than hemophilias. 
Hematology. 2012;17(6):346-349.
    5.	Peyvandi F, Bolton-Maggs PHB, Batorova A, De Moerloose 
P. Rare bleeding disorders. Haemophilia. 2012;18(Suppl 4): 
148-153.
    6.	Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Rare coagulation disorders. 
Thromb Haemost. 1999;82(4):1207-1214.
    7.	Anwar R, Miloszewski KJ. Factor XIII deficiency. Br J 
Haematol. 1999;107(3):468-484.
    8.	Anwar R, Minford A, Gallivan L, Trinh CH, Markham AF. 
Delayed umbilical bleeding—a presenting feature for factor 
XIII deficiency: clinical features, genetics, and management. 
Pediatrics. 2002;109(2):E32.
    9.	George JN, Caen JP, Nurden AT. Glanzmann’s thrombas-
thenia: the spectrum of clinical disease. Blood. 1990;75(7): 
1383-1395.
  10.	Stasi R, Evangelista ML, Stipa E, et al. Idiopathic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura: current concepts in pathophysiology and 
management. Thromb Haemost. 2008;99:4-13.
  11.	George JN. Sequence of treatments for adults with primary 
immune thrombocytopenia. Am J Hematol. 2012;87:S12-S15.
  12.	Baldwin ZK, Spitzer AL, Ng VL, Harkin AH. Contemporary 
standards for the diagnosis and treatment of heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia (HIT). Surgery. 2008;143:305-312.
105
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
  13.	Amiral J, Peynaud-Debayle E, Wolf M, et al. Generation of 
antibodies to heparin-PF4 complexes without thrombocyto-
penia in patients treated with unfractionated or low-molecular 
weight heparin. Am J Hematol. 1996;52:90-95.
  14.	Linkins LA, Dans AL, Moores LK, Bona R, Davidson BL, 
Schulman S, Crowther M; American College of Chest 
Physicians. Treatment and prevention of heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia: Antithrombotic Therapy and Preven-
tion of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest 
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e495S-530S.
  15.	Zimrin AB, Hess JR. Thrombocytopenic purpura: going 
against the evidence. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:2247-2248.
  16.	Kremer Hovinga JA, Meyer SC. Current management of 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Curr Opin Hematol. 
2008;15(5):445-450.
  17.	Fakhouri F, Vernant JP, Veyradier A, et al. Efficiency of cura-
tive and prophylactic treatment with rituximab in ADAMT13-
deficient thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: a study of 
11 cases. Blood. 2005;106:1932-1937.
  18.	Brown LM, Call MS, Knudson M, et al. A normal platelet 
count may not be enough: the impact of admission platelet 
count on mortality and transfusion in severely injured trauma 
patients. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3):S337-S342.
  19.	 Holcomb JB, Zarzabal LA, Michalek JE, et al. Increased platelet: 
RBC ratios are associated with improved survival after massive 
transfusion. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3): S318-S328.
  20.	Eikelboom JW, Hirsh J, Spencer FA, Baglin TP, Weitz JI. 
Antiplatelet Drugs: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention 
of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physi-
cians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 
2012;141(2 Suppl):e89S-e119S.
  21.	Sarode R. How do I transfuse platelets (PLTs) to reverse anti-
PLT drug effect? Transfusion. 2012;52:695-701.
  22.	Lavelle WF, Lavell EA, Uhl R. Operative delay for orthopedic 
patients on clopidogrel (Plavix): a complete lack of consensus. 
J Trauma. 2008;64:996.
  23.	 Hess JR, Lawson JH. The coagulopathy of trauma versus dissem-
inated intravascular coagulation. J Trauma. 2006;60:S12-S19.
  24.	Taylor FB, Toh CH, Hoots WK, Wada H, Levi M. Towards 
definition, clinical and laboratory criteria, and a scoring sys-
tem for disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thromb 
Haemost. 2001;86:1327-1330.
  25.	Dhainaut JF, Yan SB, Joyce DE, et al. Treatment effects of 
drotrecogin alfa (activated) in patients with or without overt 
disseminated intravascular coagulation. J Thromb Haemost. 
2004;2:1924-1933.
  26.	Angstwurm MW, Dempfle CE, Spannagl M. New dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation score: a useful tool to predict 
mortality in comparison with Acute Physiology and Chronic 
Health Evaluation II and Logistic Organ Dysfunction scores. 
Crit Care Med. 2006;34:314-320.
  27.	Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: 
2012 update on diagnosis, risk stratification, and management. 
Am J Hematol. 2012;87(3):285-293.
  28.	Feistauer SM, Penner E, Mayr WR, et al. Target platelet anti-
gen of autoantibodies in patients with primary biliary cirrho-
sis. Hepatology. 1997;25:1343.
  29.	 Lisman T, Bongers TN, Adelmeijer J, et al. Elevated levels of von 
Willebrand factor in cirrhosis support platelet adhesion despite 
reduced functional capacity. Hepatology. 2006;44:53-61.
  30.	Northup PG, McMahon MM, Ruhl AP, et al. Coagulopathy 
does not fully protect hospitalized cirrhosis patients from 
peripheral venous thromboembolism. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2006;101:1524.
  31.	Gatt A, Riddell A, Calvaruso V, et al. Enhanced thrombin 
generation in patients with cirrhosis-induced coagulopathy. 
J Thromb Haemost. 2010;8:1994.
  32.	Tripodi A, Mannucci PM. The coagulopathy of chronic liver 
disease. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:147.
  33.	Tripodi A, Primignani M, Lemma L, et al. Detection of the 
imbalance of procoagulant versus anticoagulant factors 
in cirrhosis by a simple laboratory method. Hepatology. 
2010;52:249-255.
  34.	Stavitz RT. Potential applications of thromboelastography in 
patients with acute and chronic liver disease. Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2012;8:513-520.
  35.	Ghalib R, Levine C, Hassan M, et al. Recombinant human 
interleukin-11 improves thrombocytopenia in patients with 
cirrhosis. Hepatology. 2003;37:1165-1171.
  36.	Nunez TC, Cotton BA. Transfusion therapy in hemorrhagic 
shock. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2009;15:536-541.
  37.	Hess JR, Brohi K, Dutton RP, et al. The coagulopathy of 
trauma: a review of mechanisms. J Trauma. 2008;65:748-754.
  38.	Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Ganter MT, et al. Acute coagulopathy of 
trauma: hypoperfusion induces systemic anticoagulation and 
hyperfibrinolysis. J Trauma. 2008;64:1211-1217.
  39.	Cotton BA, McCarthy J, Holcomb JB. The (irreversible) harm 
of dabigatran etexilate in acutely injured patients. N Eng J 
Med. 2011;365(21):2039-2040.
  40.	Eerenberg ES, Kamphuisen PW, Sijpkens MK, et al. Reversal 
of rivaroxaban and dabigatran by prothrombin complex con-
centrate. A randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study 
in healthy subjects. Circulation. 2011;124:1573-1579.
  41.	Kearon C, Hirsh J. Management of anticoagulation before and 
after elective surgery. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1506.
  42.	Lindblad B. Protamine sulfate: a review of its effects—
hypersensitivity and toxicity. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1989;3:195.
  43.	Dentali, F, Ageno, W, Crowther, M. Treatment of coumarin-
associated coagulopathy: a systematic review and proposed 
treatment algorithms. J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:1853.
  44.	 Douketis JD Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, et al. Periopera-
tive Management of Antithrombotic Therapy Antithrombotic 
Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American 
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e326S-e350S.
  45.	Besser MW, Klein AA. The coagulopathy of cardiopulmonary 
bypass. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2011;47(5–6):197-212.
  46.	Simon TL, Akl BF, Murphy W. Controlled trial of routine 
administration of platelet concentrates in cardiopulmonary 
bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 1984;37:359-364.
  47.	Taneja R, Fernandes P, Marwaha G, Cheng D, Bainbridge D. 
Perioperative coagulation management and blood conserva-
tion in cardiac surgery: a Canadian survey. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth. 2008;22:662-669.
  48.	Murkin JM, Lux J, Shannon NA, et al: Aprotinin significantly 
decreases bleeding and transfusion requirements in patients 
receiving aspirin and undergoing cardiac operations. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:554.
  49.	 Andersen ND, Syamal D, Williams JB, et al. Intraoperative use 
of low-dose recombinant activated Factor VII during thoracic 
aortic operations. Ann Thoracic Surg. 2012;93(6):1921-1929.
  50.	Palm M, Altman J. Topical hemostatic agents: a review. 
Dermatol Surg. 2008;34:431-445.
  51.	Larson PO. Topical hemostatic agents for dermatologic sur-
gery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1988;14:623-632.
  52.	Achneck HE, Sileshi, B, Jamiolkowski, RM, et al. A Com-
prehensive review of topical hemostatic agents: Efficacy 
and recommendations for use. Ann Surg 2010; 25:217-228.
  53.	Martinowitz U, Schulman S. Fibrin sealant in surgery of 
patients with a hemorrhagic diathesis. Thromb Haemost. 
1995;74:486-492.
  54.	Kiraly LN, Underwood S, Differding JA, Schreiber MA. 
Transfusion of aged packed red blood cells results in decreased 
tissue oxygenation in critically injured trauma patients. 
J Trauma. 2009;67(1):29-32.
106
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
  55.	McAlister FA, Clark HD, Wells PS, Laupacis A. Perioperative 
allogeneic blood transfusion does not cause adverse sequelae 
in patients with cander: a meta-analysis of unconfounded stud-
ies. Br J Surg. 1998;85:171-178.
  56.	Vamvakas EC, Blajchman MA. Universal WBC reduction: the 
case for and against. Transfusion. 2001;41:691-712.
  57.	Hebert PC, Fergusson D, Blajchman MA, Leukoreduction 
Study Investigators. Clinical outcomes following institution of 
the Canadian universal leukoreduction program for red blood 
cell transfusions. JAMA. 2003;289(15):1941-1949.
  58.	Inaba K, Lustenberger T, Rhee P, et al. The impact of platelet 
transfusion in massively transfused trauma patients. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2010;211(5):573-579.
  59.	Sondeen JL, Prince MD, Medina L, et al. Comparison of 
lyophilized swine plasma to fresh frozen plasma plus two 
ratios of packed red blood cells in a cold, coagulopathic, 
poly trauma severe hemorrhage shock swine model. Shock. 
2008;29(suppl 1):13-14.
  60.	CRASH-2 Collaborators, Shakur H, Roberts I, et al. Effects 
of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, 
and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant 
haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2010 Jul 3;376(9734):23-32.
  61.	CRASH-2 Collaborators, Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, 
et al. The importance of early treatment with tranexamic 
acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analy-
sis of the CRASH-2 randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 
2011;377:1096.
  62.	Henry DA, Carless PA, Moxey AJ, et al. Antifibrinolytic use 
for minimizing perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(3):CD001886.
  63.	Kirkpatrick AW, Holcomb JB, Stephens MH, Gruen R; 
Members of the Evidence-Based Reviews in Surgery Group. 
Tranexamic acid effects in trauma patients with significant 
hemorrhage. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;215(3):438-440.
  64.	Gerber DR. Transfusion of packed red blood cells in patients 
with ischemic heart disease. Crit Care Med. 2008;36: 
1068-1074.
  65.	Herbert PC, Wells GW, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, 
randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion require-
ment in critical care. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:409-417.
  66.	 Corwin HL, Gettinger A, Pearl RG, et al. The CRIT Study: ane-
mia and blood transfusion in the critically ill—current clinical 
practice in the United States. Crit Care Med. 2004;32:399-352.
  67.	Carson JL, Terrin ML, Noveck H, et al. Liberal or restrictive 
transfusion in high-risk patients after hip surgery. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;365(26):2453-2462.
  68.	Carson JL, Carless PA, Hebert PC. Transfusion thresholds and 
other strategies for guiding allogeneic red blood cell transfu-
sion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;4:CD002042.
  69.	Cotton BA, Reddy N, Hatch QM, et al. Damage control 
resuscitation is associated with a reduction in resuscitation 
volumes and improvement in survival in 390 damage con-
trol laparotomy patients. Ann Surg. 2011;254(4):598-605.
  70.	Kauvar DS, Lefering R, Wade CE. Impact of hemorrhage 
on trauma outcome: an overview of epidemiology, clini-
cal presentations, and therapeutic considerations. J Trauma. 
2006;60(6 Suppl):S3.
  71.	Niles SE, McLaughlin DF, Perkins J, et al. Increased mortal-
ity associated with early coagulopathy after trauma in combat 
casualties. J Trauma. 2008;64:1459-1463.
  72.	Macleod J, Lynn M, McKenney MG, Jeroukhimov I, Cohn 
SM. Predictors of mortality in trauma patients. Am Surg. 
2004;70:805-810.
  73.	Brohi K, Singh J, Heron M, Coats T. Acute traumatic coagu-
lopathy. J Trauma. 2003;54:1127-1130.
  74.	Cap AP, Spinella PC, Borgman MA, Blackbourne LH, Per-
kins JG. Timing and location of blood product transfusion 
and outcomes in massively transfused combat casualties. J 
Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2 Suppl 1):S89-S94.
  75.	Carrico CJ, Canizaro PC, Shires GT. Fluid resuscitation fol-
lowing injury: rationale for the use of balanced salt solutions. 
Crit Care Med. 1976;4:46.
  76.	Harrigan C, Lucas CE, Ledgerwood AM, et al. Serial changes 
in primary hemostasis after massive transfusion. Surgery. 
1985;98:836.
  77.	Borgman MA, Spinella PC, Perkins JG, et al. The ratio of 
blood products transfused affects mortality in patients receiv-
ing massive transfusions at a combat support hospital. J Trauma. 
2007;63:805.
  78.	Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased 
plasma and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves out-
come in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. 
Ann Surg. 2008;248:447-458.
  79.	Holcomb JB, del Junco DJ, Fox EE, et al, for the PROM-
MTT Study Group. The prospective, observational, multi-
center, massive transfusion study, PROMMTT: comparative 
effectiveness of a time-varying treatment and competing risks. 
Arch Surg. 2012;15:1-10.
  80.	Cotton BA, Au BK, Nunez TC, et al. Predefined massive 
transfusion protocols are associated with a reduction in organ 
failure and postinjury complications. J Trauma. 2009;66: 
41-48; discussion 48-49.
  81.	McLaughlin DF, Niles SE, Salinas J, et al. A predictive model 
for massive transfusion in combat casualty patients. J Trauma. 
2008;64(2 Suppl):S57.
  82.	Yücel N, Lefering R, Maegele M, et al. Trauma-Associated 
Severe Hemorrhage (TASH) score: probability of mass trans-
fusion as surrogate for life threatening hemorrhage after mul-
tiple trauma. J Trauma. 2006;60:1228.
  83.	Moore FA, Nelson T, McKinley BA, et al. Massive transfu-
sion in trauma patients: tissue hemoglobin oxygen saturation 
predicts poor outcome. J Trauma. 2008;64:1010.
  84.	Schreiber MA, Perkins J, Kiraly L, et al. Early predictors of 
massive transfusion in combat casualties. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;205:541.
  85.	Cotton BA, Dossett LA, Haut ER, et al. Multicenter validation 
of a simplified score to predict massive transfusion in trauma. 
J Trauma. 2010;69(Suppl 1):S33-S39.
  86.	Despotis GJ, Zhang L, Lublin DM. Transfusion risks and 
transfusion-related pro-inflammatory responses. Hematol 
Oncol Clin N Am. 2007;21:147.
  87.	Pandey S, Vyas GN. Adverse-effects of plasma transfusion. 
Transfusion. 2012;52:65S-79S.
  88.	Goodnough LT, Brecher ME, Kanter MH: Transfusion medi-
cine: blood transfusion. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:438.
  89.	Looney MR, Gropper MA, Matthay MA. Transfusion-related 
acute lung injury. Chest. 2004;126:249.
  90.	Toy P, Gajic O, Bacchetti P, et al. Transfusion-related 
acute lung injury: incidence and risk factors. Blood. 
2012;119(7):1757-1767.
  91.	Zou S, Stramer SL, Dodd RY. Donor testing and risk: cur-
rent prevalence, incidence, and residual risk of transfusion-
transmissible agents in US allogeneic donations. Transfusion 
Med Rev. 2012;26(2):119-128.
  92.	Hoffman M, Monroe DM. Coagulation 2006: a modern view 
of hemostasis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2007;21:1-11.
  93.	Hartert H. Blutgerinnungsstudien mit der thrombelastogra-
phie, einem neuen untersuchungsverfahren. Klin Wochenschr. 
1948;26:577.
  94.	Mallet SV, Cox DJA. Thromboelastography: a review article. 
Br J Anaesth. 1992;69:307.
  95.	Cotton BA, Radwan ZA, Matijevic N, et al. Admission 
rapid thromboelastography (rTEG) predicts development of 
pulmonary embolism in trauma patients. J Trauma. 2012;72(6): 
1470-1477.
107
Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding, and Transfusion
CHAPTER 4
  96.	Caprini JA, Arcelus JI, Laubach M, et al. Postoperative hyper-
coagulability and deep-vein thrombosis after laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 1995;9:304-309.
  97.	Dai Y, Lee A, Critchley LA, et al. Does thromboelastography 
predict postoperative thromboembolic events? A systematic 
review of the literature. Anesth Analg. 2009;108:734-742.
  98.	Cotton BA, Faz G, Hatch Q, et al. Rapid thromboelastogra-
phy (r-TEG) delivers real-time results that predict transfusion 
within one hour of admission. J Trauma. 2011;71(2):407-417.
  99.	Schöchl H, Cotton BA, Inaba K, et al. FIBTEM provides 
early prediction of massive transfusion in trauma. Crit Care. 
2011;15:R265-R271.
100.	Cotton BA, Harvin JA, Kostousouv V, et al. Hyperfibrinolysis 
on admission is an uncommon but highly lethal event asso-
ciated with shock and pre-hospital fluid administration. 
J Trauma. 2012;72(2):365-370.
101.	Holcomb JB, Minei KM, Scerbo ML, et al. Admission rapid 
thromboelastography (r-TEG) can replace conventional 
coagulation tests in the emergency department: experi-
ence with 1974 consecutive trauma patients. Ann Surg. 
2012;256(3):476-486.
This page intentionally left blank 
Shock
Brian S. Zuckerbraun, Andrew B. Peitzman, and 
Timothy R. Billiar
5
EVOLUTION IN UNDERSTANDING SHOCK
Overview
Shock, at its most rudimentary definition and regardless of the 
etiology, is the failure to meet the metabolic needs of the cell 
and the consequences that ensue. The initial cellular injury 
that occurs is reversible; however, the injury will become 
irreversible if tissue perfusion is prolonged or severe enough 
such that, at the cellular level, compensation is no longer pos-
sible. Our evolution in the understanding of shock and the dis-
ease processes that result in shock made its most significant 
advances throughout the twentieth century as our appreciation 
for the physiology and pathophysiology of shock matured. Most 
notably, this includes the sympathetic and neuroendocrine stress 
responses on the cardiovascular system. The clinical manifesta-
tions of these physiologic responses are most often what lead 
practitioners to the diagnosis of shock as well as guide the 
management of patients in shock. However, hemodynamic 
parameters such as blood pressure and heart rate are relatively 
insensitive measures of shock, and additional considerations 
must be used to help aid in early diagnosis and treatment of 
patients in shock. The general approach to the management of 
patients in shock has been empiric: assuring a secure airway 
with adequate ventilation, control of hemorrhage in the bleeding 
patient, and restoration of vascular volume and tissue perfusion.
Historical Background
Integral to our understanding of shock is the appreciation that 
our bodies attempt to maintain a state of homeostasis. Claude 
Bernard suggested in the mid-nineteenth century that the 
“Shock is the manifestation of the rude unhinging of the 
machinery of life.”1
—Samuel V. Gross, 1872
Evolution in Understanding  
Shock	
109
Overview / 109
Historical Background / 109
Current Definitions and Challenges / 110
Pathophysiology of Shock	
111
Neuroendocrine and Organ-Specific 
Responses to Hemorrhage / 112
Afferent Signals / 112
Efferent Signals / 113
Circulatory Homeostasis / 114
Metabolic Effects	
114
Cellular Hypoperfusion / 115
Immune and Inflammatory 
Responses	
115
Cytokines/Chemokines / 116
Complement / 118
Neutrophils / 118
Cell Signaling / 118
Forms of Shock	
119
Hypovolemic/Hemorrhagic / 119
Traumatic Shock / 123
Septic Shock (Vasodilatory Shock) / 124
Cardiogenic Shock / 126
Obstructive Shock / 128
Neurogenic Shock / 129
Endpoints in Resuscitation	
130
Assessment of Endpoints in  
Resuscitation / 130
organism attempts to maintain constancy in the internal envi-
ronment against external forces that attempt to disrupt the milieu 
interieur.2 Walter B. Cannon carried Bernard’s observations 
further and introduced the term homeostasis, emphasizing that 
an organism’s ability to survive was related to maintenance of 
homeostasis.3 The failure of physiologic systems to buffer the 
organism against external forces results in organ and cellular 
dysfunction, what is clinically recognized as shock. He first 
described the “fight or flight response,” generated by elevated 
levels of catecholamines in the bloodstream. Cannon’s observa-
tions on the battlefields of World War I led him to propose that 
the initiation of shock was due to a disturbance of the nervous 
system that resulted in vasodilation and hypotension. He pro-
posed that secondary shock, with its attendant capillary perme-
ability leak, was caused by a “toxic factor” released from the 
tissues.
In a series of critical experiments, Alfred Blalock docu-
mented that the shock state in hemorrhage was associated with 
reduced cardiac output due to volume loss, not a “toxic factor.”4 
In 1934, Blalock proposed four categories of shock: hypovo-
lemic, vasogenic, cardiogenic, and neurogenic. Hypovolemic 
shock, the most common type, results from loss of circulating 
blood volume. This may result from loss of whole blood (hem-
orrhagic shock), plasma, interstitial fluid (bowel obstruction), 
or a combination. Vasogenic shock results from decreased resis-
tance within capacitance vessels, usually seen in sepsis. Neuro-
genic shock is a form of vasogenic shock in which spinal cord 
injury or spinal anesthesia causes vasodilation due to acute loss 
of sympathetic vascular tone. Cardiogenic shock results from 
failure of the heart as a pump, as in arrhythmias or acute myo-
cardial infarction (MI).
This categorization of shock based on etiology persists 
today (Table 5-1). In recent clinical practice, further classification 
has described six types of shock: hypovolemic, septic (vasodila-
tory), neurogenic, cardiogenic, obstructive, and traumatic shock. 
1
chapter 
Obstructive shock is a form of cardiogenic shock that results 
from mechanical impediment to circulation leading to depressed 
cardiac output rather than primary cardiac failure. This includes 
etiologies such as pulmonary embolism or tension pneumo-
thorax. In traumatic shock, soft tissue and bony injury leads 
to the activation of inflammatory cells and the release of cir-
culating factors, such as cytokines and intracellular molecules 
that modulate the immune response. Recent investigations have 
revealed that the inflammatory mediators released in response to 
tissue injury (damage-associated molecular patterns [DAMPs]) 
are recognized by many of the same cellular receptors (pat-
tern recognition receptors [PRRs]) and activate similar signal-
ing pathways as do bacterial products elaborated in sepsis 
(pathogen-associated molecular patterns), such as lipopolysac-
charide.5 These effects of tissue injury are combined with the 
effects of hemorrhage, creating a more complex and amplified 
deviation from homeostasis.
In the mid to later twentieth century, the further develop-
ment of experimental models contributed significantly to the 
understanding of the pathophysiology of shock. In 1947, Wiggers 
developed a sustainable, irreversible model of hemorrhagic 
shock based on uptake of shed blood into a reservoir to maintain 
a set level of hypotension.6 G. Tom Shires added further under-
standing of hemorrhagic shock with a series of clinical stud-
ies demonstrating that a large extracellular fluid deficit, greater 
than could be attributed to vascular refilling alone, occurred in 
severe hemorrhagic shock.7,8 The phenomenon of fluid redistri-
bution after major trauma involving blood loss was termed third 
spacing and described the translocation of intravascular volume 
110
Key Points
1
	 Shock is defined as a failure to meet the metabolic demands of 
cells and tissues and the consequences that ensue.
2
	 A central component of shock is decreased tissue perfusion. 
This may be a direct consequence of the etiology of shock, 
such as in hypovolemic/hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, or neuro-
genic etiologies, or may be secondary to elaborated or released 
molecules or cellular products that result in endothelial/cellu-
lar activation, such as in septic shock or traumatic shock.
3
	 Physiologic responses to shock are based on a series of affer-
ent (sensing) signals and efferent responses that include neu-
roendocrine, metabolic, and immune/inflammatory signaling.
4
	 The mainstay of treatment of hemorrhagic/hypovolemic shock 
includes volume resuscitation with blood products. In the case 
of hemorrhagic shock, timely control of bleeding is essen-
tial and influences outcome.
5
	 Prevention of hypothermia, acidemia, and coagulopathy is 
essential in the management of patients in hemorrhagic 
shock.
6
	 The mainstay of treatment of septic shock is fluid resuscita-
tion, initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy, and control 
of the source of infection. This includes drainage of 
infected fluid collections, removal of infected foreign bod-
ies, and débridement of devitalized tissues.
7
	 A combination of physiologic parameters and markers of 
organ perfusion/tissue oxygenation are used to determine if 
patients are in shock and to follow the efficacy of resuscitation.
Table 5-1 
Classification of shock
Hypovolemic
Cardiogenic
Septic (vasogenic)
Neurogenic
Traumatic
Obstructive
into the peritoneum, bowel, burned tissues, or crush injury sites. 
These seminal studies form the scientific basis for the current 
treatment of hemorrhagic shock with red blood cells and lac-
tated Ringer’s solution or isotonic saline.
As resuscitation strategies evolved and patients survived 
the initial consequences of hemorrhage, new challenges of 
sustained shock became apparent. During the Vietnam War, 
aggressive fluid resuscitation with red blood cells and crystal-
loid solution or plasma resulted in survival of patients who pre-
viously would have succumbed to hemorrhagic shock. Renal 
failure became a less frequent clinical problem; however, a new 
disease process, acute fulminant pulmonary failure, appeared 
as an early cause of death after seemingly successful surgery to 
control hemorrhage. Initially called DaNang lung or shock lung, 
the clinical problem became recognized as acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS). This led to new methods of prolonged 
mechanical ventilation. Our current concept of ARDS is a com-
ponent in the spectrum of multiple organ system failure.
Studies and clinical observations over the past two decades 
have extended the early observations of Canon, that “restora-
tion of blood pressure prior to control of active bleeding may 
result in loss of blood that is sorely needed,” and challenged the 
appropriate endpoints in resuscitation of uncontrolled hemor-
rhage.9 Core principles in the management of the critically ill 
or injured patient include: (a) definitive control of the airway 
must be secured, (b) control of active hemorrhage must occur 
promptly (delay in control of bleeding increases mortality, and 
recent battlefield data would suggest that in the young and oth-
erwise healthy population commonly injured in combat, control 
of bleeding is the paramount priority), (c) volume resuscitation 
with blood products (red blood cells, plasma, and platelets) with 
limited volume of crystalloid must occur while operative con-
trol of bleeding is achieved, (d) unrecognized or inadequately 
corrected hypoperfusion increases morbidity and mortality (i.e., 
inadequate resuscitation results in avoidable early deaths from 
shock), and (e) excessive fluid resuscitation may exacerbate 
bleeding (i.e., uncontrolled resuscitation is harmful). Thus both 
inadequate and uncontrolled volume resuscitation is harmful.
Current Definitions and Challenges
A modern definition and approach to shock acknowledges 
that shock consists of inadequate tissue perfusion marked by 
111
Shock
CHAPTER 5
decreased delivery of required metabolic substrates and inad-
equate removal of cellular waste products.This involves fail-
ure of oxidative metabolism that can involve defects of 
oxygen (O2) delivery, transport, and/or utilization. Current 
challenges include moving beyond fluid resuscitation based on 
endpoints of tissue oxygenation, and using therapeutic strategies 
at the cellular and molecular level. This approach will help to 
identify compensated patients or patients early in the course of 
their disease, initiate appropriate treatment, and allow for con-
tinued evaluation for the efficacy of resuscitation and adjuncts.
Current investigations focus on determining the cellular 
events that often occur in parallel to result in organ dysfunc-
tion, shock irreversibility, and death. This chapter will review 
our current understanding of the pathophysiology and cellular 
responses of shock states. Current and experimental diagnostic 
and therapeutic modalities for the different categories of shock 
are reviewed, with a focus on hemorrhagic/hypovolemic shock 
and septic shock.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SHOCK
Regardless of etiology, the initial physiologic responses in 
shock are driven by tissue hypoperfusion and the develop-
ing cellular energy deficit.This imbalance between cel-
lular supply and demand leads to neuroendocrine and 
inflammatory responses, the magnitude of which is usually 
proportional to the degree and duration of shock. The specific 
responses will differ based on the etiology of shock, as certain 
physiologic responses may be limited by the inciting pathol-
ogy. For example, the cardiovascular response driven by the 
sympathetic nervous system is markedly blunted in neurogenic 
or septic shock. Additionally, decreased perfusion may occur as 
a consequence of cellular activation and dysfunction, such as in 
septic shock and to a lesser extent traumatic shock (Fig. 5-1). 
Many of the organ-specific responses are aimed at maintaining 
perfusion in the cerebral and coronary circulation. These are 
regulated at multiple levels including (a) stretch receptors 
and baroreceptors in the heart and vasculature (carotid sinus 
and aortic arch), (b) chemoreceptors, (c) cerebral ischemia 
responses, (d) release of endogenous vasoconstrictors, (e) shift-
ing of fluid into the intravascular space, and (f) renal reabsorp-
tion and conservation of salt and water.
Furthermore, the pathophysiologic responses vary with 
time and in response to resuscitation. In hemorrhagic shock, the 
body can compensate for the initial loss of blood volume primar-
ily through the neuroendocrine response to maintain hemody-
namics. This represents the compensated phase of shock. With 
continued hypoperfusion, which may be unrecognized, cellular 
death and injury are ongoing and the decompensation phase of 
shock ensues. Microcirculatory dysfunction, parenchymal tissue 
damage, and inflammatory cell activation can perpetuate hypo-
perfusion. Ischemia/reperfusion injury will often exacerbate the 
initial insult. These effects at the cellular level, if untreated, will 
lead to compromise of function at the organ system level, thus 
leading to the “vicious cycle” of shock (Fig. 5-2). Persistent 
hypoperfusion results in further hemodynamic derangements 
and cardiovascular collapse. This has been termed the irrevers-
ible phase of shock and can develop quite insidiously and may 
only be obvious in retrospect. At this point, there has occurred 
extensive enough parenchymal and microvascular injury such 
that volume resuscitation fails to reverse the process, leading 
to death of the patient. In experimental animal models of hem-
orrhagic shock (modified Wiggers model), this is represented 
by the “uptake phase” or “compensation endpoint” when shed 
blood must be returned to the animal to sustain the hypotension 
at the set level to prevent further hypotension and death.10 If 
shed blood volume is slowly returned to maintain the set level 
of hypotension, eventually the injury progresses to irreversible 
shock, where further volume will not reverse the process and the 
animal dies (Fig. 5-3).
2
Bacterial products
(i.e., LPS)
Direct effect
Pattern recognition receptor activation
(Toll-like receptors, RAGE)
Tissue
injury
Damage associated
molecular patterns
(i.e., HMGB1, heparan sulfate)
Released/elaborated
mediators of
inflammation
Cellular activation
Decreased tissue perfusion
Cellular hypoxia/ischemia
Shock
Disruption
host-microbe
equilibrium
Acute heart failure
Neurogenic
Hemorrhage
Trauma
Cellular effect
Figure 5-1.  Pathways leading to 
decreased tissue perfusion and shock. 
Decreased tissue perfusion can result 
directly from hemorrhage/hypovolemia, 
cardiac failure, or neurologic injury. 
Decreased tissue perfusion and cellu-
lar injury can then result in immune and 
inflammatory responses. Alternatively, 
elaboration of microbial products during 
infection or release of endogenous cellular 
products from tissue injury can result in 
cellular activation to subsequently influ-
ence tissue perfusion and the develop-
ment of shock. HMGB1 = high mobility 
group box 1; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; 
RAGE = receptor for advanced glycation 
end products.
3
112
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 5-2.  The “vicious cycle of shock.” Regardless of the etiol-
ogy, decreased tissue perfusion and shock results in a feed-forward 
loop that can exacerbate cellular injury and tissue dysfunction.
Figure 5-3.  Rat model of hemorrhagic 
shock through the phases of compensa-
tion, decompensation, and irreversibility. 
The percentages shown above the curve 
represent survival rates. (Adapted with 
permission from Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins/Wolters Kluwer Health: Shah 
NS, Kelly E, Billiar TR, et al. Utility of 
clinical parameters of tissue oxygenation 
in a quantitative model of irreversible 
hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 1998;10:343-
346. kkjkjdht © 1998.)
Neuroendocrine and Organ-Specific Responses 
to Hemorrhage
The goal of the neuroendocrine response to hemorrhage is to 
maintain perfusion to the heart and the brain, even at the expense 
of other organ systems. Peripheral vasoconstriction occurs, and 
fluid excretion is inhibited. The mechanisms include autonomic 
control of peripheral vascular tone and cardiac contractility, 
hormonal response to stress and volume depletion, and local 
microcirculatory mechanisms that are organ specific and regu-
late regional blood flow. The initial stimulus is loss of circulat-
ing blood volume in hemorrhagic shock. The magnitude of the 
neuroendocrine response is based on both the volume of blood 
lost and the rate at which it is lost.
Afferent Signals
Afferent impulses transmitted from the periphery are pro-
cessed within the central nervous system (CNS) and activate the 
reflexive effector responses or efferent impulses. These effec-
tor responses are designed to expand plasma volume, maintain 
peripheral perfusion and tissue O2 delivery, and restore homeo-
stasis. The afferent impulses that initiate the body’s intrinsic 
adaptive responses and converge in the CNS originate from a 
variety of sources. The initial inciting event usually is loss of 
circulating blood volume. Other stimuli that can produce the 
neuroendocrine response include pain, hypoxemia, hypercarbia, 
acidosis, infection, change in temperature, emotional arousal, or 
hypoglycemia. The sensation of pain from injured tissue is trans-
mitted via the spinothalamic tracts, resulting in activation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, as well as activation of the 
autonomic nervous system (ANS) to induce direct sympathetic 
stimulation of the adrenal medulla to release catecholamines.
Baroreceptors also are an important afferent pathway in 
initiation of adaptive responses to shock. Volume receptors, 
sensitive to changes in both chamber pressure and wall stretch, 
are present within the atria of the heart. They become activated 
with low volume hemorrhage or mild reductions in right atrial 
pressure. Receptors in the aortic arch and carotid bodies respond 
to alterations in pressure or stretch of the arterial wall, respond-
ing to larger reductions in intravascular volume or pressure. 
These receptors normally inhibit induction of the ANS. When 
activated, these baroreceptors diminish their output, thus dis-
inhibiting the effect of the ANS. The ANS then increases its 
output, principally via sympathetic activation at the vasomotor 
centers of the brain stem, producing centrally mediated constric-
tion of peripheral vessels.
Chemoreceptors in the aorta and carotid bodies are sensi-
tive to changes in O2 tension, H+ ion concentration, and carbon 
dioxide (CO2) levels. Stimulation of the chemoreceptors results 
in vasodilation of the coronary arteries, slowing of the heart 
rate, and vasoconstriction of the splanchnic and skeletal circula-
tion. In addition, a variety of protein and nonprotein mediators 
are produced at the site of injury as part of the inflammatory 
response, and they act as afferent impulses to induce a host 
response. These mediators include histamine, cytokines, eico-
sanoids, and endothelins, among others that are discussed in 
greater detail later in this chapter in the Immune and Inflamma-
tory Responses section.
Decreased cardiac output
Decreased tissue perfusion
↓ Venous
return
↓ Coronary
perfusion
Metabolic
acidosis
Cellular
hypoxia
Parenchymal cell injury
Endothelial activation/
microcirculatory damage
Cellular
aggregation
Intracellular
fluid loss
Rat hemorrhagic shock model
24-hour survival following resuscitation
Mean arterial pressure
Compensated
Decompensated
Irreversible
% Shed
blood return
Transition to acute irreversible shock
Transition to subacute lethal shock
A
B
Death
100%
90%
50%
30%
10%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0%
Compensation 
endpoint
80
40
A
B
113
Shock
CHAPTER 5
Efferent Signals
Cardiovascular Response.  Changes in cardiovascular func-
tion are a result of the neuroendocrine response and ANS 
response to shock, and constitute a prominent feature of both 
the body’s adaptive response mechanism and the clinical signs 
and symptoms of the patient in shock. Hemorrhage results in 
diminished venous return to the heart and decreased cardiac 
output. This is compensated by increased cardiac heart rate and 
contractility, as well as venous and arterial vasoconstriction. 
Stimulation of sympathetic fibers innervating the heart leads to 
activation of β1-adrenergic receptors that increase heart rate and 
contractility in this attempt to increase cardiac output. Increased 
myocardial O2 consumption occurs as a result of the increased 
workload; thus, myocardial O2 supply must be maintained 
or myocardial dysfunction will develop. The cardiovascular 
response in hemorrhage/hypovolemia differs from the responses 
elicited with the other etiologies of shock. These are compared 
in Table 5-2.
Direct sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral circula-
tion via the activation of α1-adrenergic receptors on arterioles 
induces vasoconstriction and causes a compensatory increase 
in systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure. The arte-
rial vasoconstriction is not uniform; marked redistribution of 
blood flow results. Selective perfusion to tissues occurs due to 
regional variations in arteriolar resistance, with blood shunted 
away from less essential organ beds such as the intestine, kid-
ney, and skin. In contrast, the brain and heart have autoregu-
latory mechanisms that attempt to preserve their blood flow 
despite a global decrease in cardiac output. Direct sympathetic 
stimulation also induces constriction of venous vessels, decreas-
ing the capacitance of the circulatory system and accelerating 
blood return to the central circulation.
Increased sympathetic output induces catecholamine 
release from the adrenal medulla. Catecholamine levels peak 
within 24 to 48 hours of injury and then return to baseline. Persis-
tent elevation of catecholamine levels beyond this time suggests 
ongoing noxious afferent stimuli. The majority of the circulating 
epinephrine is produced by the adrenal medulla, while norepi-
nephrine is derived from synapses of the sympathetic nervous 
system. Catecholamine effects on peripheral tissues include 
stimulation of hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis to 
increase circulating glucose availability to peripheral tissues, 
an increase in skeletal muscle glycogenolysis, suppression of 
insulin release, and increased glucagon release.
Table 5-2 
Hemodynamic responses to different types of shock
Type of Shock
Cardiac Index
SVR
Venous  
Capacitance
CVP/PCWP
SvO2
Cellular/Metabolic 
Effects
Hypovolemic
↓
↑
↓
↓
↓
Effect
Septic
↑↑
↓
↑
↑↓
↑↓
Cause
Cardiogenic
↓↓
↑↑
→
↑
↓
Effect
Neurogenic
↑
↓
→
↓
↓
Effect
The hemodynamic responses are indicated by arrows to show an increase (↑), severe increase (↑↑), decrease (↓), severe decrease (↓↓), varied response 
(↑↓), or little effect (→). CVP = central venous pressure; PCWP = pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; Svo2 = mixed venous oxygen saturation; SVR = 
systemic vascular resistance.
Hormonal Response.  The stress response includes activation 
of the ANS as discussed earlier in the Afferent Signals section, 
as well as activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. 
Shock stimulates the hypothalamus to release corticotropin-
releasing hormone, which results in the release of adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary. ACTH subsequently 
stimulates the adrenal cortex to release cortisol. Cortisol acts 
synergistically with epinephrine and glucagon to induce a 
catabolic state. Cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis and insu-
lin resistance, resulting in hyperglycemia as well as muscle 
cell protein breakdown and lipolysis to provide substrates for 
hepatic gluconeogenesis. Cortisol causes retention of sodium 
and water by the nephrons of the kidney. In the setting of severe 
hypovolemia, ACTH secretion occurs independently of cortisol 
negative feedback inhibition.
The renin-angiotensin system is activated in shock. 
Decreased renal artery perfusion, β-adrenergic stimulation, 
and increased renal tubular sodium concentration cause the 
release of renin from the juxtaglomerular cells. Renin cata-
lyzes the conversion of angiotensinogen (produced by the 
liver) to angiotensin I, which is then converted to angiotensin 
II by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) produced in the 
lung. While angiotensin I has no significant functional activ-
ity, angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor of both splanchnic 
and peripheral vascular beds, and also stimulates the secretion 
of aldosterone, ACTH, and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Aldo-
sterone, a mineralocorticoid, acts on the nephron to promote 
reabsorption of sodium and, as a consequence, water. Potassium 
and hydrogen ions are lost in the urine in exchange for sodium.
The pituitary also releases vasopressin or ADH in 
response to hypovolemia, changes in circulating blood volume 
sensed by baroreceptors and left atrial stretch receptors, and 
increased plasma osmolality detected by hypothalamic osmo-
receptors. Epinephrine, angiotensin II, pain, and hyperglycemia 
increase production of ADH. ADH levels remain elevated for 
about 1 week after the initial insult, depending on the sever-
ity and persistence of the hemodynamic abnormalities. ADH 
acts on the distal tubule and collecting duct of the nephron to 
increase water permeability, decrease water and sodium losses, 
and preserve intravascular volume. Also known as arginine 
vasopressin, ADH acts as a potent mesenteric vasoconstrictor, 
shunting circulating blood away from the splanchnic organs 
during hypovolemia.11 This may contribute to intestinal isch-
emia and predispose to intestinal mucosal barrier dysfunction 
114
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
in shock states. Vasopressin also increases hepatic gluconeo-
genesis and increases hepatic glycolysis.
In septic states, endotoxin directly stimulates arginine 
vasopressin secretion independently of blood pressure, osmotic, 
or intravascular volume changes. Proinflammatory cytokines 
also contribute to arginine vasopressin release. Interestingly, 
patients on chronic therapy with ACE inhibitors are more at risk 
of developing hypotension and vasodilatory shock with open 
heart surgery. Low plasma levels of arginine vasopressin were 
confirmed in these patients.12
Circulatory Homeostasis
Preload.  At rest, the majority of the blood volume is within the 
venous system. Venous return to the heart generates ventricular 
end-diastolic wall tension, a major determinant of cardiac out-
put. Gravitational shifts in blood volume distribution are quickly 
corrected by alterations in venous capacity. With decreased arte-
riolar inflow, there is active contraction of the venous smooth 
muscle and passive elastic recoil in the thin-walled systemic 
veins. This increases venous return to the heart, thus maintain-
ing ventricular filling.
Most alterations in cardiac output in the normal heart are 
related to changes in preload. Increases in sympathetic tone 
have a minor effect on skeletal muscle beds but produce a dra-
matic reduction in splanchnic blood volume, which normally 
holds 20% of the blood volume.
The normal circulating blood volume is maintained within 
narrow limits by the kidney’s ability to manage salt and water 
balance with external losses via systemic and local hemody-
namic changes and hormonal effects of renin, angiotensin, and 
ADH. These relatively slow responses maintain preload by 
altering circulating blood volume. Acute responses to intravas-
cular volume include changes in venous tone, systemic vascular 
resistance, and intrathoracic pressure, with the slower hormonal 
changes less important in the early response to volume loss. 
Furthermore, the net effect of preload on cardiac output is influ-
enced by cardiac determinants of ventricular function, which 
include coordinated atrial activity and tachycardia.
Ventricular Contraction.  The Frank-Starling curve describes 
the force of ventricular contraction as a function of its preload. 
This relationship is based on force of contraction being deter-
mined by initial muscle length. Intrinsic cardiac disease will 
shift the Frank-Starling curve and alter mechanical performance 
of the heart. In addition, cardiac dysfunction has been demon-
strated experimentally in burns and in hemorrhagic, traumatic, 
and septic shock.
Afterload.  Afterload is the force that resists myocardial work 
during contraction. Arterial pressure is the major component 
of afterload influencing the ejection fraction. This vascular 
resistance is determined by precapillary smooth muscle sphinc-
ters. Blood viscosity also will increase vascular resistance. As 
afterload increases in the normal heart, stroke volume can be 
maintained by increases in preload. In shock, with decreased 
circulating volume and therefore diminished preload, this com-
pensatory mechanism to sustain cardiac output is impeded. The 
stress response with acute release of catecholamines and sym-
pathetic nerve activity in the heart increases contractility and 
heart rate.
Microcirculation.  The microvascular circulation plays an 
integral role in regulating cellular perfusion and is significantly 
influenced in response to shock. The microvascular bed is 
innervated by the sympathetic nervous system and has a pro-
found effect on the larger arterioles. Following hemorrhage, 
larger arterioles vasoconstrict; however, in the setting of sepsis 
or neurogenic shock, these vessels vasodilate. Additionally, a 
host of other vasoactive proteins, including vasopressin, angio-
tensin II, and endothelin-1, also lead to vasoconstriction to limit 
organ perfusion to organs such as skin, skeletal muscle, kidneys, 
and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to preserve perfusion of the 
myocardium and CNS.
Flow in the capillary bed is heterogeneous in shock 
states, which likely is secondary to multiple local mechanisms, 
including endothelial cell swelling, dysfunction, and activa-
tion marked by the recruitment of leukocytes and platelets.13 
Together, these mechanisms lead to diminished capillary perfu-
sion that may persist after resuscitation. In hemorrhagic shock, 
correction of hemodynamic parameters and restoration of O2 
delivery generally lead to restoration of tissue O2 consumption 
and tissue O2 levels. In contrast, regional tissue dysoxia often 
persists in sepsis, despite similar restoration of hemodynamics 
and O2 delivery. Whether this defect in O2 extraction in sepsis is 
the result of heterogeneous impairment of the microcirculation 
(intraparenchymal shunting) or impaired tissue parenchymal 
cell oxidative phosphorylation and O2 consumption by the mito-
chondria is not resolved.14 Interesting data suggest that in sepsis 
the response to limit O2 consumption by the tissue parenchymal 
cells is an adaptive response to the inflammatory signaling and 
decreased perfusion.15
An additional pathophysiologic response of the microcir-
culation to shock is failure of the integrity of the endothelium 
of the microcirculation and development of capillary leak, intra-
cellular swelling, and the development of an extracellular fluid 
deficit. Seminal work by Shires helped to define this phenom-
enon.8,16 There is decreased capillary hydrostatic pressure sec-
ondary to changes in blood flow and increased cellular uptake 
of fluid. The result is a loss of extracellular fluid volume. The 
cause of intracellular swelling is multifactorial, but dysfunction 
of energy-dependent mechanisms, such as active transport by 
the sodium-potassium pump, contributes to loss of membrane 
integrity.
Capillary dysfunction also occurs secondary to activation 
of endothelial cells by circulating inflammatory mediators gen-
erated in septic or traumatic shock. This exacerbates endothelial 
cell swelling and capillary leak, as well as increases leukocyte 
adherence. This results in capillary occlusion, which may persist 
after resuscitation, and is termed no-reflow. Further ischemic 
injury ensues as well as release of inflammatory cytokines to 
compound tissue injury. Experimental models have shown that 
neutrophil depletion in animals subjected to hemorrhagic shock 
produces fewer capillaries with no-reflow and lower mortality.13
METABOLIC EFFECTS
Cellular metabolism is based primarily on the hydrolysis of 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The splitting of the phosphoan-
hydride bond of the terminal or γ-phosphate from ATP is the 
source of energy for most processes within the cell under nor-
mal conditions. The majority of ATP is generated in our bodies 
through aerobic metabolism in the process of oxidative phos-
phorylation in the mitochondria. This process is dependent on 
the availability of O2 as a final electron acceptor in the electron 
transport chain. As O2 tension within a cell decreases, there is 
a decrease in oxidative phosphorylation, and the generation 
115
Shock
CHAPTER 5
of ATP slows. When O2 delivery is so severely impaired such 
that oxidative phosphorylation cannot be sustained, the state is 
termed dysoxia.17 When oxidative phosphorylation is insuffi-
cient, the cells shift to anaerobic metabolism and glycolysis to 
generate ATP. This occurs via the breakdown of cellular glyco-
gen stores to pyruvate. Although glycolysis is a rapid process, 
it is not efficient, allowing for the production of only 2 mol 
of ATP from 1 mol of glucose. This is compared to complete 
oxidation of 1 mol of glucose that produces 38 mol of ATP. 
Additionally, under hypoxic conditions in anaerobic metabo-
lism, pyruvate is converted into lactate, leading to an intracel-
lular metabolic acidosis.
There are numerous consequences secondary to these met-
abolic changes. The depletion of ATP potentially influences all 
ATP-dependent cellular processes. This includes maintenance 
of cellular membrane potential, synthesis of enzymes and pro-
teins, cell signaling, and DNA repair mechanisms. Decreased 
intracellular pH also influences vital cellular functions such 
as normal enzyme activity, cell membrane ion exchange, and 
cellular metabolic signaling.18 These changes also will lead to 
changes in gene expression within the cell. Furthermore, acido-
sis leads to changes in calcium metabolism and calcium signal-
ing. Compounded, these changes may lead to irreversible cell 
injury and death.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine have a profound impact 
on cellular metabolism. Hepatic glycogenolysis, gluconeogen-
esis, ketogenesis, skeletal muscle protein breakdown, and adi-
pose tissue lipolysis are increased by catecholamines. Cortisol, 
glucagon, and ADH also contribute to the catabolism during 
shock. Epinephrine induces further release of glucagon, while 
inhibiting the pancreatic β-cell release of insulin. The result is a 
catabolic state with glucose mobilization, hyperglycemia, pro-
tein breakdown, negative nitrogen balance, lipolysis, and insulin 
resistance during shock and injury. The relative underuse of glu-
cose by peripheral tissues preserves it for the glucose-dependent 
organs such as the heart and brain.
Cellular Hypoperfusion
Hypoperfused cells and tissues experience what has been termed 
oxygen debt, a concept first proposed by Crowell in 1961.19 The 
O2 debt is the deficit in tissue oxygenation over time that occurs 
during shock. When O2 delivery is limited, O2 consumption can 
be inadequate to match the metabolic needs of cellular respira-
tion, creating a deficit in O2 requirements at the cellular level. 
The measurement of O2 deficit uses calculation of the difference 
between the estimated O2 demand and the actual value obtained 
for O2 consumption. Under normal circumstances, cells can 
“repay” the O2 debt during reperfusion. The magnitude of 
the O2 debt correlates with the severity and duration of hypo-
perfusion. Surrogate values for measuring O2 debt include base 
deficit and lactate levels and are discussed later in the Hypovo-
lemic/Hemorrhagic section.
In addition to induction of changes in cellular metabolic 
pathways, shock also induces changes in cellular gene expres-
sion. The DNA binding activity of a number of nuclear tran-
scription factors is altered by hypoxia and the production of O2 
radicals or nitrogen radicals that are produced at the cellular 
level by shock. Expression of other gene products such as heat 
shock proteins, vascular endothelial growth factor, inducible 
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), heme oxygenase-1, and cytokines 
also are clearly increased by shock.20 Many of these shock-
induced gene products, such as cytokines, have the ability to 
subsequently alter gene expression in specific target cells and 
tissues. The involvement of multiple pathways emphasizes the 
complex, integrated, and overlapping nature of the response to 
shock.
IMMUNE AND INFLAMMATORY RESPONSES
The inflammatory and immune responses are a complex set of 
interactions between circulating soluble factors and cells that 
can arise in response to trauma, infection, ischemia, toxic, or 
autoimmune stimuli.20 The processes are well regulated and can 
be conceptualized as an ongoing surveillance and response sys-
tem that undergoes a coordinated escalation following injury 
to heal disrupted tissue or restore host-microbe equilibrium, as 
well as active suppression back to baseline levels. Failure to 
adequately control the activation, escalation, or suppression of 
the inflammatory response can lead to systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome and potentiate multiple organ failure.
Both the innate and adaptive branches of the immune 
system work in concert to rapidly respond in a specific and 
effective manner to challenges that threaten an organism’s 
well-being. Each arm of the immune system has its own set of 
functions, defined primarily by distinct classes of effector cells 
and their unique cell membrane receptor families. Alterations 
in the activity of the innate host immune system can be respon-
sible for both the development of shock (i.e., septic shock fol-
lowing severe infection and traumatic shock following tissue 
injury with hemorrhage) and the pathophysiologic sequelae 
of shock such as the proinflammatory changes seen following 
hypoperfusion (see Fig. 5-1). When the predominantly para-
crine mediators gain access to the systemic circulation, they 
can induce a variety of metabolic changes that are collectively 
referred to as the host inflammatory response. Understanding 
of the intricate, redundant, and interrelated pathways that com-
prise the inflammatory response to shock continues to expand. 
Despite limited understanding of how our current therapeutic 
interventions impact the host response to illness, inappropriate 
or excessive inflammation appears to be an essential event in 
the development of ARDS, multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome (MODS), and posttraumatic immunosuppression that 
can prolong recovery.21
Following direct tissue injury or infection, there are 
several mechanisms that lead to the activation of the active 
inflammatory and immune responses. These include release 
of bioactive peptides by neurons in response to pain and the 
release of intracellular molecules by broken cells, such as heat 
shock proteins, mitochondrial products, heparan sulfate, high 
mobility group box 1, and RNA. Only recently has it been 
realized that the release of intracellular products from dam-
aged and injured cells can have paracrine and endocrine-like 
effects on distant tissues to activate the inflammatory and 
immune responses.22 This hypothesis, which was first pro-
posed by Matzinger, is known as danger signaling. Under this 
novel paradigm of immune function, endogenous molecules 
are capable of signaling the presence of danger to surrounding 
cells and tissues. These molecules that are released from cells 
are known as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) 
(Table 5-3). DAMPs are recognized by cell surface receptors 
to effect intracellular signaling that primes and amplifies the 
immune response. These receptors are known as pattern rec-
ognition receptors (PRRs) and include the Toll-like receptors 
(TLRs) and the receptor for advanced glycation end products. 
116
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Interestingly, TLRs and PRRs were first recognized for their 
role in signaling as part of the immune response to the entry 
of microbes and their secreted products into a normally sterile 
environment. These bacterial products, including lipopolysac-
charide, are known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns. 
The salutary consequences of PRR activation most likely relate 
to the initiation of the repair process and the mobilization of 
antimicrobial defenses at the site of tissue disruption. How-
ever, in the setting of excessive tissue damage, the inflamma-
tion itself may lead to further tissue damage, amplifying the 
response both at the local and systemic level.20 PRR activation 
leads to intracellular signaling and release of cellular products 
including cytokines (Fig. 5-4).
Before the recruitment of leukocytes into sites of injury, 
tissue-based macrophages or mast cells act as sentinel respond-
ers, releasing histamines, eicosanoids, tryptases, and cytokines 
(Fig. 5-5). Together these signals amplify the immune response 
Figure 5-4.  A schema of information flow between immune 
cells in early inflammation following tissue injury and infection. 
Cells require multiple inputs and stimuli before activation of a 
full response. DAMPs = damage-associated molecular patterns; 
HMGB1 = high mobility group box 1; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
by further activation of neurons and mast cells, as well as 
increasing the expression of adhesion molecules on the endothe-
lium. Furthermore, these mediators cause leukocytes to release 
platelet-activating factor, further increasing the stickiness of the 
endothelium. Additionally, the coagulation and kinin cascades 
impact the interaction of endothelium and leukocytes.
Cytokines/Chemokines
The immune response to shock encompasses the elaboration 
of mediators with both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
properties (Table 5-4). Furthermore, new mediators, new rela-
tionships between mediators, and new functions of known 
mediators are continually being identified. As new pathways 
are uncovered, understanding of the immune response to injury 
and the potential for therapeutic intervention by manipulating 
the immune response following shock will expand. What seems 
clear at present, however, is that the innate immune response 
can help restore homeostasis, or if it is excessive, promote cel-
lular and organ dysfunction.
Multiple mediators have been implicated in the host 
immune response to shock. It is likely that some of the most 
important mediators have yet to be discovered, and the roles 
of many known mediators have not been defined. A compre-
hensive description of all of the mediators and their complex 
interactions is beyond the scope of this chapter. For a general 
overview, a brief description of the more extensively studied 
mediators, and some of the known effects of these substances, 
see the discussion below. A more comprehensive review can be 
found in Chap. 2.
Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) was one of the first 
cytokines to be described and is one of the earliest cytokines 
released in response to injurious stimuli. Monocytes, macro-
phages, and T cells release this potent proinflammatory cyto-
kine. TNF-α levels peak within 90 minutes of stimulation and 
return frequently to baseline levels within 4 hours. Release of 
TNF-α may be induced by bacteria or endotoxin and leads to 
the development of shock and hypoperfusion, most commonly 
observed in septic shock. Production of TNF-α also may be 
induced following other insults, such as hemorrhage and isch-
emia. TNF-α levels correlate with mortality in animal models 
of hemorrhage.23 In contrast, the increase in serum TNF-α levels 
reported in trauma patients is far less than that seen in septic 
patients.24 Once released, TNF-α can produce peripheral vaso-
dilation, activate the release of other cytokines, induce proco-
agulant activity, and stimulate a wide array of cellular metabolic 
changes. During the stress response, TNF-α contributes to the 
muscle protein breakdown and cachexia.
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) has actions similar to those of 
TNF-α. IL-1 has a very short half-life (6 min) and primarily 
acts in a paracrine fashion to modulate local cellular responses. 
Systemically, IL-1 produces a febrile response to injury by 
activating prostaglandins in the posterior hypothalamus, and 
causes anorexia by activating the satiety center. This cytokine 
also augments the secretion of ACTH, glucocorticoids, and 
β-endorphins. In conjunction with TNF-α, IL-1 can stimu-
late the release of other cytokines such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, 
IL-8, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and 
interferon-γ.
IL-2 is produced by activated T cells in response to a 
variety of stimuli and activates other lymphocyte subpopu-
lations and natural killer cells. The lack of clarity regarding 
the role of IL-2 in the response to shock is intimately associated 
Table 5-3 
Endogenous damage-associated molecular pattern 
molecules
Mitochondrial DNA
Hyaluronan oligomers
Heparan sulfate
Extra domain A of fibronectin
Heat shock proteins 60, 70, Gp96
Surfactant Protein A
β-Defensin 2
Fibrinogen
Biglycan
High mobility group box 1
Uric acid
Interleukin-1α
S-100s
Nucleolin
Neuropeptides
Tissue-based macrophages/
mast cells 
Histamines,
leukotrienes,
chemokines,
TNF 
Trauma
DAMPs (HMGB1,
heparan sulfate,
uric acid)
Macrophages
       Bacteria and
bacterial
products
Complement
Neutrophils
Degranulation
Chemokines,
TNF
Defensins
TNF,
Interferon-
Lymphocytes
Antigen
Stimulation/activation
Production
117
Shock
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5-5.  Signaling via the pattern recognition receptor TLR4. LPS signaling via TLR4 requires the cofactors LPS binding protein (LBP), 
MD-2, and CD14. Endogenous danger signals released from a variety of sources also signal in a TLR4-dependent fashion, although it is as yet 
unknown what cofactors may be required for this activity. Once TLR4 is activated, an intracellular signaling cascade is initiated that involves 
both a MyD88-dependent and independent pathway. DAMP = damage-associated molecular pattern; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; MD-2 = 
myeloid differentiation factor-2; MyD88 = myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88; NF-κB = nuclear factor-κB; TLR4 = Toll-like 
receptor-4. (Reproduced with permission from Mollen KP, Anand RJ, Tsung A, et al.83 Emerging paradigm: toll-like receptor 4-sentinel for 
the detection of tissue damage. Shock. 2006;26:430–437.)
MKK3
p 38
MKK 7
JNK
DAMP
LPS signaling
Hemorrhagic shock
Ischemia/reperfusion
Tissue trauma
Toxic exposure
Danger signaling
Injury
Necrosis
CD14
HMGB-1
HMGB-1
LPS
Activated
TLR4
TRAM
TRIF
IRF 3
MyD88-
dependent
pathway
MyD88-
independent
pathway
Nuclear membrane
Other
co-
receptors
? ?
?
?
Secretion from
stressed cells
Breakdown
of matrix
MyD88
MAL
IRAK 4
IRAK 1
TRAF 6
TAK 1
IKK 1
IKK 2
IRF 3
MD-2
NEMO
IκB
p 50
p 65
NF-κB
p 50
p 65
TBK 1
Cell membrane
Cell membrane
TLR4
TLR4
TLR4
MD-2
LBP
with that of understanding immune function after injury. 
Some investigators have postulated that increased IL-2 secre-
tion promotes shock-induced tissue injury and the develop-
ment of shock. Others have demonstrated that depressed IL-2 
production is associated with, and perhaps contributes to, the 
depression in immune function after hemorrhage that may 
increase the susceptibility of patients who develop shock to 
suffer infections.25,26 It has been postulated that overly exuber-
ant proinflammatory activation promotes tissue injury, organ 
dysfunction, and the subsequent immune dysfunction/suppres-
sion that may be evident later.21 Emphasizing the importance 
of temporal changes in the production of mediators, both the 
118
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
initial excessive production of IL-2 and later depressed IL-2 
production are probably important in the progression of shock.
IL-6 is elevated in response to hemorrhagic shock, major 
operative procedures, or trauma. Elevated IL-6 levels correlate 
with mortality in shock states. IL-6 contributes to lung, liver, 
and gut injury after hemorrhagic shock.27 Thus, IL-6 may play a 
role in the development of diffuse alveolar damage and ARDS. 
IL-6 and IL-1 are mediators of the hepatic acute phase response 
to injury; enhance the expression and activity of complement, 
C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, amyloid A, and 
α1-antitrypsin; and promote neutrophil activation.28
IL-10 is considered an anti-inflammatory cytokine that 
may have immunosuppressive properties. Its production is 
increased after shock and trauma, and it has been associated with 
depressed immune function clinically, as well as an increased 
susceptibility to infection.29 IL-10 is secreted by T cells, mono-
cytes, and macrophages, and inhibits proinflammatory cytokine 
secretion, O2 radical production by phagocytes, adhesion mol-
ecule expression, and lymphocyte activation.29,30 Administra-
tion of IL-10 depresses cytokine production and improves some 
aspects of immune function in experimental models of shock 
and sepsis.31,32
Recent studies point to the importance of chemokines, a 
specific set of cytokines, that have the ability to induce che-
motaxis of leukocytes. Chemokines bind to specific chemokine 
receptors and transduce chemotactic signals to leukocytes. The 
significance of this large family of chemoattractant cytokines 
in immunology is difficult to understate, as almost every facet 
of the immune system is influenced by chemokines, including 
immune system development, immune surveillance, immune 
priming, effector responses, and immune regulation.33
Complement
The complement cascade can be activated by injury, shock, 
and severe infection, and contributes to host defense and pro-
inflammatory activation. Significant complement consump-
tion occurs after hemorrhagic shock.34 In trauma patients, the 
degree of complement activation is proportional to the mag-
nitude of injury and may serve as a marker for severity of 
injury. Patients in septic shock also demonstrate activation 
of the complement pathway, with elevations of the activated 
complement proteins C3a and C5a. Activation of the comple-
ment cascade can contribute to the development of organ 
dysfunction. Activated complement factors C3a, C4a, and 
C5a are potent mediators of increased vascular permeability, 
smooth muscle cell contraction, histamine and arachidonic 
acid by-product release, and adherence of neutrophils to vas-
cular endothelium. Activated complement acts synergistically 
with endotoxin to induce the release of TNF-α and IL-1. The 
development of ARDS and MODS in trauma patients corre-
lates with the intensity of complement activation.35 Comple-
ment and neutrophil activation may correlate with mortality in 
multiply injured patients.
Neutrophils
Neutrophil activation is an early event in the upregulation of 
the inflammatory response; neutrophils are the first cells to be 
recruited to the site of injury. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
(PMNs) remove infectious agents, foreign substances that have 
penetrated host barrier defenses, and nonviable tissue through 
phagocytosis. However, activated PMNs and their products 
may also produce cell injury and organ dysfunction. Activated 
PMNs generate and release a number of substances that may 
induce cell or tissue injury, such as reactive O2 species, lipid-
peroxidation products, proteolytic enzymes (elastase, cathep-
sin G), and vasoactive mediators (leukotrienes, eicosanoids, 
and platelet-activating factor). Oxygen free radicals, such as 
superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radical, 
are released and induce lipid peroxidation, inactivate enzymes, 
and consume antioxidants (such as glutathione and tocopherol). 
Ischemia-reperfusion activates PMNs and causes PMN-induced 
organ injury. In animal models of hemorrhagic shock, activation 
of PMNs correlates with irreversibility of shock and mortality, 
and neutrophil depletion prevents the pathophysiologic sequelae 
of hemorrhagic and septic shock. Human data corroborate the 
activation of neutrophils in trauma and shock and suggest a 
role in the development of MODS.36 Plasma markers of PMN 
activation, such as elastase, correlate with severity of injury in 
humans.
Interactions between endothelial cells and leukocytes are 
important in the inflammatory process. The vascular endothe-
lium contributes to regulation of blood flow, leukocyte adher-
ence, and the coagulation cascade. Extracellular ligands such as 
intercellular adhesion molecules, vascular cell adhesion mole-
cules, and the selectins (E-selectin, P-selectin) are expressed on 
the surface of endothelial cells and are responsible for leukocyte 
adhesion to the endothelium. This interaction allows activated 
neutrophils to migrate into the tissues to combat infection, but 
also can lead to PMN-mediated cytotoxicity and microvascular 
and tissue injury.
Cell Signaling
A host of cellular changes occur following shock. Although 
many of the intracellular and intercellular pathways that are 
important in shock are being elucidated, undoubtedly there are 
many more that have yet to be identified. Many of the media-
tors produced during shock interact with cell surface receptors 
on target cells to alter target cell metabolism. These signaling 
pathways may be altered by changes in cellular oxygenation, 
redox state, high-energy phosphate concentration, gene expres-
sion, or intracellular electrolyte concentration induced by shock. 
Cells communicate with their external environment through the 
use of cell surface membrane receptors, which, once bound by 
a ligand, transmit their information to the interior of the cell 
through a variety of signaling cascades. These signaling path-
ways may subsequently alter the activity of specific enzymes 
or the expression or breakdown of important proteins or affect 
Table 5-4 
Inflammatory mediators of shock
Proinflammatory
Anti-Inflammatory
Interleukin-1α/β
Interleukin-4
Interleukin-2
Interleukin-10
Interleukin-6
Interleukin-13
Interleukin-8
Prostaglandin E2
Interferon
TGFβ
TNF
PAF
PAF = platelet activating factor; TGFβ = transforming growth factor 
beta; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.
119
Shock
CHAPTER 5
intracellular energy metabolism. Intracellular calcium (Ca2+) 
homeostasis and regulation represent one such pathway. Intra-
cellular Ca2+ concentrations regulate many aspects of cellular 
metabolism; many important enzyme systems require Ca2+ for 
full activity. Profound changes in intracellular Ca2+ levels and 
Ca2+ transport are seen in models of shock.37 Alterations in Ca2+ 
regulation may lead to direct cell injury, changes in transcription 
factor activation, alterations in the expression of genes impor-
tant in homeostasis, and the modulation of the activation of cells 
by other shock-induced hormones or mediators.38,39
A proximal portion of the intracellular signaling cascade 
consists of a series of kinases that transmit and amplify the sig-
nal through the phosphorylation of target proteins. The O2 radi-
cals produced during shock and the intracellular redox state are 
known to influence the activity of components of this cascade, 
such as protein tyrosine kinases, mitogen activated kinases, 
and protein kinase C.40-42 Either through changes in these sig-
naling pathways, changes in the activation of enzyme systems 
through Ca2+-mediated events, or direct conformational changes 
to oxygen-sensitive proteins, O2 radicals also regulate the activ-
ity of a number of transcription factors that are important in 
gene expression, such as nuclear factor-κB, APETALA1, and 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1.43,44 It is therefore becoming increas-
ingly clear that oxidant-mediated direct cell injury is merely one 
consequence of the production of O2 radicals during shock.
The study of the effects of shock on the regulation of gene 
expression as an important biologic effect was stimulated by the 
work of Buchman and colleagues.45 The effects of shock on the 
expression and regulation of numerous genes and gene prod-
ucts has been studied in both experimental animal models and 
human patients. These studies include investigations into single 
genes of interest as well as large-scale genomic and proteomic 
analysis.46-48 Changes in gene expression are critical for adaptive 
and survival cell signaling. Polymorphisms in gene promoters 
that lead to a differential level of expression of gene products 
are also likely to contribute significantly to varied responses 
to similar insults.49,50 In a recent study, the genetic responses 
to traumatic injury in humans or endotoxin delivery to healthy 
human volunteers demonstrated that severe stresses produce a 
global reprioritization affecting >80% of the cellular functions 
and pathways.51 The similarities in genomic responses between 
different injuries revealed a fundamental human response to 
stressors involving dysregulated immune responses (Fig. 5-6). 
Furthermore, in the traumatic injury patients, complications like 
nosocomial infections and organ failure were not associated 
with any genomic evidence of a second hit and differed only 
in the magnitude and duration of this genomic reprioritization.
FORMS OF SHOCK
Hypovolemic/Hemorrhagic
The most common cause of shock in the surgical or trauma 
patient is loss of circulating volume from hemorrhage. Acute 
blood loss results in reflexive decreased baroreceptor stimulation 
from stretch receptors in the large arteries, resulting in decreased 
inhibition of vasoconstrictor centers in the brain stem, increased 
chemoreceptor stimulation of vasomotor centers, and diminished 
output from atrial stretch receptors. These changes increase vaso-
constriction and peripheral arterial resistance. Hypovolemia also 
induces sympathetic stimulation, leading to epinephrine and nor-
epinephrine release, activation of the renin-angiotensin cascade, 
and increased vasopressin release. Peripheral vasoconstriction 
is prominent, while lack of sympathetic effects on cerebral and 
coronary vessels and local autoregulation promote maintenance 
of cardiac and CNS blood flow.
Diagnosis.  Treatment of shock is initially empiric. A secure 
airway must be confirmed or established and volume infusion 
initiated while the search for the cause of the hypotension is pur-
sued. Shock in a trauma patient or postoperative patient should 
be presumed to be due to hemorrhage until proven otherwise. 
The clinical signs of shock may be evidenced by agitation, cool 
clammy extremities, tachycardia, weak or absent peripheral 
pulses, and hypotension. Such apparent clinical shock results 
from at least 25% to 30% loss of the blood volume. However, 
substantial volumes of blood may be lost before the classic clini-
cal manifestations of shock are evident. Thus, when a patient 
is significantly tachycardic or hypotensive, this represents both 
significant blood loss and physiologic decompensation. The 
clinical and physiologic response to hemorrhage has been clas-
sified according to the magnitude of volume loss. Loss of up to 
15% of the circulating volume (700–750 mL for a 70-kg patient) 
may produce little in terms of obvious symptoms, while loss 
of up to 30% of the circulating volume (1.5 L) may result in 
mild tachycardia, tachypnea, and anxiety. Hypotension, marked 
tachycardia (i.e., pulse greater than 110–120 beats per minute 
[bpm]), and confusion may not be evident until more than 30% 
of the blood volume has been lost; loss of 40% of circulating vol-
ume (2 L) is immediately life threatening and generally requires 
operative control of bleeding (Table 5-5). Young healthy 
patients with vigorous compensatory mechanisms may tolerate 
larger volumes of blood loss while manifesting fewer clinical 
signs despite the presence of significant peripheral hypoperfu-
sion. These patients may maintain a near-normal blood pres-
sure until a precipitous cardiovascular collapse occurs. Elderly 
patients may be taking medications that either promote bleeding 
(e.g., warfarin or aspirin) or mask the compensatory responses 
Dysregulated adaptive immune response
Magnitude of response Magnitude of response
Uncomplicated outcome
Complicated outcome
Dysregulated innate immune response
Figure 5-6.  The concurrent dysregulated innate immune responses 
that promote inflammation and dysregulated adaptive immune 
responses that result in immunosuppression occur in patients fol-
lowing traumatic injury. However, these genetic responses can 
result in complicated outcomes in trauma patients if the magnitude 
or duration of these responses is pronounced. (Reproduced with 
permission from Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic 
storm in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208:2581–
2590. © 2011 Xiao et al. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111354.)
120
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
to bleeding (e.g., β-blockers). In addition, atherosclerotic vascu-
lar disease, diminishing cardiac compliance with age, inability 
to elevate heart rate or cardiac contractility in response to hem-
orrhage, and overall decline in physiologic reserve decrease the 
elderly patient’s ability to tolerate hemorrhage. Recent data in 
trauma patients suggest that a systolic blood pressure (SBP) of 
less than 110 mmHg is a clinically relevant definition of hypo-
tension and hypoperfusion based on an increasing rate of mor-
tality below this pressure (Fig. 5-7).52
In addressing the sensitivity of vital signs and identifying 
major thoracoabdominal hemorrhage, a study retrospectively 
identified patients with injury to the trunk and an abbreviated 
injury score of 3 or greater who required immediate surgical 
intervention and transfusion of at least 5 units of blood within 
the first 24 hours. Ninety-five percent of patients had a heart 
rate greater than 80 bpm at some point during their postinjury 
course. However, only 59% of patients achieved a heart rate 
greater than 120 bpm. Ninety-nine percent of all patients had a 
recorded blood pressure of less than 120 mmHg at some point. 
Ninety-three percent of all patients had a recorded SBP of less 
than 100 mmHg.53 A more recent study corroborated that tachy-
cardia was not a reliable sign of hemorrhage following trauma 
and was present in only 65% of hypotensive patients.54
Serum lactate and base deficit are measurements that are 
helpful to both estimate and monitor the extent of bleeding and 
shock. The amount of lactate that is produced by anaerobic res-
piration is an indirect marker of tissue hypoperfusion, cellular 
O2 debt, and the severity of hemorrhagic shock. Several stud-
ies have demonstrated that the initial serum lactate and serial 
lactate levels are reliable predictors of morbidity and mortality 
Figure 5-7.  The relationship between systolic blood pressure and mortality in trauma patients with hemorrhage. These data suggest that a systolic 
blood pressure of less than 110 mmHg is a clinically relevant definition of hypotension and hypoperfusion based on an increasing rate of mortality 
below this pressure. Base deficit (BD) is also shown on this graph. ED = emergency department. (Reproduced with permission from Eastridge 
BJ, Salinas J, McManus JG, et al.52 Hypotension begins at 110 mm Hg: redefining “hypotension” with data. J Trauma. 2007;63:291–297.)
with hemorrhage following trauma (Fig. 5-8).55 Similarly, base 
deficit values derived from arterial blood gas analysis provide 
clinicians with an indirect estimation of tissue acidosis from 
hypoperfusion. Davis and colleagues stratified the extent of base 
deficit into mild (–3 to –5 mmol/L), moderate (–6 to –9 mmol/L), 
and severe (less than –10 mmol/L), and from this established a 
correlation between base deficit upon admission and transfusion 
requirements, the development of multiple organ failure, and 
death (Fig. 5-9).56 Both base deficit and lactate correlate with 
the extent of shock and patient outcome, but interestingly do not 
firmly correlate with each other.57-59 Evaluation of both values 
may be useful in trauma patients with hemorrhage.
Although hematocrit changes may not rapidly reflect the 
total volume of blood loss, admission hematocrit has been shown 
to be associated with 24-hour fluid and transfusion requirements 
and more strongly associated with packed red blood cell trans-
fusion than tachycardia, hypotension, or acidosis.60 It must be 
noted that lack of a depression in the initial hematocrit does not 
rule out substantial blood loss or ongoing bleeding.
In management of trauma patients, understanding the pat-
terns of injury of the patient in shock will help direct the evalu-
ation and management. Identifying the sources of blood loss in 
patients with penetrating wounds is relatively simple because 
potential bleeding sources will be located along the known or 
suspected path of the wounding object. Patients with penetrating 
injuries who are in shock usually require operative intervention. 
Patients who suffer multisystem injuries from blunt trauma have 
multiple sources of potential hemorrhage. Blood loss sufficient 
to cause shock is generally of a large volume, and there are a 
limited number of sites that can harbor sufficient extravascular 
Table 5-5 
Classification of hemorrhage
Class
Parameter
I
II
III
IV
Blood loss (mL)
<750
750–1500
1500–2000
>2000
Blood loss (%)
<15
15–30
30–40
>40
Heart rate (bpm)
<100
>100
>120
>140
Blood pressure
Normal
Orthostatic
Hypotension
Severe hypotension
CNS symptoms
Normal
Anxious
Confused
Obtunded
bpm = beats per minute; CNS = central nervous system.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95 100 105
Systolic BP in the ED
110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
% Mortality
Base deficit
% Mortality
BD
121
Shock
CHAPTER 5
blood volume to induce hypotension (e.g., external, intratho-
racic, intra-abdominal, retroperitoneal, and long bone fractures). 
In the nontrauma patient, the GI tract must always be considered 
as a site for blood loss. Substantial blood loss externally may be 
suspected from prehospital medical reports documenting a sub-
stantial blood loss at the scene of an accident, history of massive 
blood loss from wounds, visible brisk bleeding, or presence of 
a large hematoma adjacent to an open wound. Injuries to major 
arteries or veins with associated open wounds may cause 
massive blood loss rapidly. Direct pressure must be applied and 
Figure 5-8.  Progressive increases in serum lactate, muscle lactate, 
and liver lactate in a baboon model of hemorrhagic shock. (From 
Peitzman et al,7 with permission. Reprinted with permission from 
the Journal of the American College of Surgeons, formerly Surgery 
Gynecology & Obstetrics)
Figure 5-9.  The relationship between base deficit (negative base excess) and mortality in trauma patients. BEA = base excess arterial; 
ECF = extracellular fluid. (Reproduced with permission from Siegel JH, Rivkind AI, Dalal S, et al. Early physiologic predictors of injury 
severity and death in blunt multiple trauma. Arch Surg. 1990;125:498. kkjkjdht © 1990 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.)
sustained to minimize ongoing blood loss. Persistent bleeding 
from uncontrolled smaller vessels can, over time, precipitate 
shock if inadequately treated.
When major blood loss is not immediately visible in the 
setting of trauma, internal (intracavitary) blood loss should be 
suspected. Each pleural cavity can hold 2 to 3 L of blood and 
can therefore be a site of significant blood loss. Diagnostic and 
therapeutic tube thoracostomy may be indicated in unstable 
patients based on clinical findings and clinical suspicion. In 
a more stable patient, a chest radiograph may be obtained to 
look for evidence of hemothorax. Major retroperitoneal hem-
orrhage typically occurs in association with pelvic fractures, 
which is confirmed by pelvic radiography in the resuscitation 
bay. Intraperitoneal hemorrhage is probably the most com-
mon source of blood loss inducing shock. The physical exam 
for detection of substantial blood loss or injury is insensitive 
and unreliable; large volumes of intraperitoneal blood may be 
present before physical examination findings are apparent. Find-
ings with intra-abdominal hemorrhage include abdominal dis-
tension, abdominal tenderness, or visible abdominal wounds. 
Hemodynamic abnormalities generally stimulate a search for 
blood loss before the appearance of obvious abdominal findings. 
Adjunctive tests are essential in the diagnosis of intraperitoneal 
bleeding; intraperitoneal blood may be rapidly identified by 
diagnostic ultrasound or diagnostic peritoneal lavage. Further-
more, patients who have sustained high-energy blunt trauma 
who are hemodynamically stable or who have normalized their 
vital signs in response to initial volume resuscitation should 
undergo computed tomography scans to assess for head, chest, 
and/or abdominal bleeding.
Treatment.  Control of ongoing hemorrhage is an essential 
component of the resuscitation of the patient in shock. As 
mentioned in the earlier Diagnosis section, treatment of hem-
orrhagic shock is instituted concurrently with diagnostic 
evaluation to identify a source. Patients who fail to respond to 
initial resuscitative efforts should be assumed to have ongo-
ing active hemorrhage from large vessels and require prompt 
Serum lactate
Muscle lactate
Liver lactate
Time (hours)
Serum lactate (mg/100 ml)
Tissue lactate ( M/gm tissue)
0
1
2
3
4
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
60
90
120
150
Extracellular BEA, mmol/L
100
5
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
010
2
–6
–14
–22
–38
% Mortality
Base excess = –11.8
LD50
% Mortality = eλ
1 + eλx 100
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
% Predicted death on the basis of 
linear logistic model from BEAECF
% Observed death
0
–0.19
–0.17
–4.5
–7.4
–9.7
–11.8
–14
–16.4
–19.2 –23.5
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
122
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
operative intervention. Based on trauma literature, patients 
with ongoing hemorrhage demonstrate increased survival if 
the elapsed time between the injury and control of bleeding is 
decreased. Although there are no randomized controlled trials, 
retrospective studies provide compelling evidence in this regard. 
To this end, Clarke and colleagues61 demonstrated that trauma 
patients with major injuries isolated to the abdomen requiring 
emergency laparotomy had an increased probability of death 
with increasing length of time in the emergency department for 
patients who were in the emergency department for 90 minutes 
or less. This probability increased approximately 1% for each 3 
minutes in the emergency department.
The appropriate priorities in these patients are (a) secure 
the airway, (b) control the source of blood loss, and (c) intrave-
nous (IV) volume resuscitation. In trauma, identifying the body 
cavity harboring active hemorrhage will help focus operative 
efforts; however, because time is of the essence, rapid treat-
ment is essential and diagnostic laparotomy or thoracotomy 
may be indicated. The actively bleeding patient cannot be 
resuscitated until control of ongoing hemorrhage is achieved. 
Our current understanding has led to the management strategy 
known as damage control resuscitation.62 This strategy begins 
in the emergency department and continues into the operating 
room and into the intensive care unit (ICU). Initial resuscitation 
is limited to keep SBP around 80 to 90 mmHg. This prevents 
renewed bleeding from recently clotted vessels. Resuscitation 
and intravascular volume resuscitation are accomplished with 
blood products and limited crystalloids, which is addressed 
further later in this section.Too little volume allowing per-
sistent severe hypotension and hypoperfusion is dangerous, yet 
too vigorous of a volume resuscitation may be just as deleteri-
ous. Control of hemorrhage is achieved in the operating room, 
and efforts to warm patients and to prevent coagulopathy using 
multiple blood products and pharmacologic agents are used in 
both the operating room and ICU.
Cannon and colleagues first made the observation that 
attempts to increase blood pressure in soldiers with uncontrolled 
sources of hemorrhage is counterproductive, with increased 
bleeding and higher mortality.3 This work was the foundation 
for the “hypotensive resuscitation” strategies. Several labora-
tory studies confirmed the observation that attempts to restore 
normal blood pressure with fluid infusion or vasopressors were 
rarely successful and resulted in more bleeding and higher mor-
tality.63 A prospective, randomized clinical study compared 
delayed fluid resuscitation (upon arrival in the operating room) 
with standard fluid resuscitation (with arrival by the paramed-
ics) in hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injury.64 The 
authors reported that delayed fluid resuscitation resulted in lower 
patient mortality. Further laboratory studies demonstrated that 
fluid restriction in the setting of profound hypotension resulted 
in early deaths from severe hypoperfusion. These studies also 
showed that aggressive crystalloid resuscitation attempting to 
normalize blood pressure resulted in marked hemodilution, 
with hematocrits of 5%.63 Reasonable conclusions in the setting 
of uncontrolled hemorrhage include: Any delay in surgery for 
control of hemorrhage increases mortality; with uncontrolled 
hemorrhage attempting to achieve normal blood pressure may 
increase mortality, particularly with penetrating injuries and 
short transport times; a goal of SBP of 80 to 90 mmHg may be 
adequate in the patient with penetrating injury; and profound 
hemodilution should be avoided by early transfusion of red 
blood cells. For the patient with blunt injury, where the major 
cause of death is a closed head injury, the increase in mortality 
with hypotension in the setting of brain injury must be avoided. 
In this setting, an SBP of 110 mmHg would seem to be more 
appropriate.
Patients who respond to initial resuscitative effort but 
then deteriorate hemodynamically frequently have injuries that 
require operative intervention. The magnitude and duration of 
their response will dictate whether diagnostic maneuvers can 
be performed to identify the site of bleeding. However, hemo-
dynamic deterioration generally denotes ongoing bleeding for 
which some form of intervention (i.e., operation or interven-
tional radiology) is required. Patients who have lost significant 
intravascular volume, but whose hemorrhage is controlled or 
has abated, often will respond to resuscitative efforts if the depth 
and duration of shock have been limited.
A subset of patients exists who fail to respond to resus-
citative efforts despite adequate control of ongoing hemor-
rhage. These patients have ongoing fluid requirements despite 
adequate control of hemorrhage, have persistent hypotension 
despite restoration of intravascular volume necessitating vaso-
pressor support, and may exhibit a futile cycle of uncor-
rectable  hypoperfusion, acidosis, and coagulopathy that 
cannot be interrupted despite maximum therapy. These 
patients have deteriorated to decompensated or irreversible 
shock with peripheral vasodilation and resistance to vasopres-
sor infusion. Mortality is inevitable once the patient manifests 
shock in its terminal stages. Unfortunately, this is often diag-
nosed in retrospect.
Fluid resuscitation is a major adjunct to physically con-
trolling hemorrhage in patients with shock. The ideal type of 
fluid to be used continues to be debated; however, crystalloids 
continue to be the mainstay of fluid choice. Several studies 
have demonstrated increased risk of death in bleeding trauma 
patients treated with colloid compared to patients treated with 
crystalloid.65 In patients with severe hemorrhage, restoration of 
intravascular volume should be achieved with blood products.66
Ongoing studies continue to evaluate the use of hypertonic 
saline as a resuscitative adjunct in bleeding patients.67 The ben-
efit of hypertonic saline solutions may be immunomodulatory. 
Specifically, these effects have been attributed to pharmacologic 
effects resulting in decreased reperfusion-mediated injury with 
decreased O2 radical formation, less impairment of immune 
function compared to standard crystalloid solution, and less 
brain swelling in the multi-injured patient. The reduction of total 
volume used for resuscitation makes this approach appealing as 
a resuscitation agent for combat injuries and may contribute to 
a decrease in the incidence of ARDS and multiple organ failure.
Transfusion of packed red blood cells and other blood 
products is essential in the treatment of patients in hemorrhagic 
shock. Current recommendations in stable ICU patients aim for 
a target hemoglobin of 7 to 9 g/dL68,69; however, no prospective 
randomized trials have compared restrictive and liberal transfu-
sion regimens in trauma patients with hemorrhagic shock. The 
current standard in severely injured patients is termed damage 
control resuscitation and consists of transfusion with red blood 
cells, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and platelet units given in equal 
number.70 Civilian and military trauma data show that the devel-
opment of coagulopathy of trauma is predictive of mortality.71 
Data collected from a U.S. Army combat support hospital helped 
to propagate this practice, showing in patients who received mas-
sive transfusion of packed red blood cells (>10 units in 24 hours) 
that a high plasma-to-RBC ratio (1:1.4 units) was independently 
4
5
123
Shock
CHAPTER 5
associated with improved survival (Fig. 5-10).72 A number of 
civilian studies have demonstrated similar results.73 Similarly, 
platelet transfusion is important. Studies have demonstrated 
that low platelet counts in trauma patients were associated with 
increased mortality74 and that increased platelet use appears to 
improve outcome.75,76 The benefit of platelet transfusion may be 
most pronounced in trauma patients with brain injury.77 Platelets 
should be transfused in the bleeding patient to maintain counts 
above 50 × 109/L.
There is a potential role for other coagulation factor-based 
products, such as fibrinogen concentrates and prothrombin 
complex concentrates. Use of these agents may be guided by a 
drop in fibrinogen levels to less than 1 g/L or, less specifically, 
by thromboelastogram findings to suggest hyperfibrinolysis. 
Data also support the use of antifibrinolytic agents in bleeding 
trauma patients, specifically tranexamic acid (a synthetic lysine 
analogue that acts as a competitive inhibitor of plasmin and 
plasminogen). The multinational Clinical Randomization of an 
Antifibrinolytic in Significant Haemorrhage 2 (CRASH-2) trial 
suggested that early use of tranexamic acid limits rebleeding 
and reduces mortality78 (Fig. 5-11). In the past, coagulopathy 
associated with the bleeding patient was presumed to be due 
solely to dilution and depletion of clotting factors and platelets. 
We now understand that an acute coagulopathy of trauma occurs 
as an immediate consequence of injury, with abnormal admis-
sion coagulation as a predictor of high mortality.79 Traditional 
measurement of platelets, international normalized ratio, and 
partial thromboplastin time may not reflect the coagulopathy of 
trauma or response to therapy effectively. Recently, thrombo-
elastography (TEG) has been used as a quicker, more compre-
hensive determination of coagulopathy and fibrinolysis in the 
injured patient. Holcomb and colleagues recently reported that 
TEG predicted patients with substantial bleeding and red cell 
transfusion better than conventional coagulopathy tests, need 
for platelet transfusion better than platelet count, and need for 
plasma transfusion better than fibrinogen levels.80
Additional resuscitative adjuncts in patients with hemor-
rhagic shock include minimization of heat loss and maintaining 
normothermia. The development of hypothermia in the bleeding 
patient is associated with acidosis, hypotension, and coagulopathy. 
Figure 5-10.  Increasing ratio of transfusion of fresh frozen plasma 
to red blood cells improves outcome of trauma patients receiving 
massive transfusions. RBC = red blood cell. (Reproduced with 
permission from Borgman MA, Spinella PC, Perkins JG, et al.72 
The ratio of blood products transfused affects mortality in patients 
receiving massive transfusions at a combat support hospital. J 
Trauma. 2007;63:805-813.)
Hypothermia in bleeding trauma patients is an independent 
risk factor for bleeding and death. This likely is secondary to 
impaired platelet function and impairments in the coagulation 
cascade. Several studies have investigated the induction of con-
trolled hypothermia in patients with severe shock based on the 
hypothesis of limiting metabolic activity and energy require-
ments, creating a state of “suspended animation.” These studies 
are promising and continue to be evaluated in large trials.
Traumatic Shock
The systemic response after trauma, combining the effects 
of soft tissue injury, long bone fractures, and blood loss, is 
clearly a different physiologic insult than simple hemorrhagic 
shock. Multiple organ failure, including ARDS, develops rela-
tively often in the blunt trauma patient, but rarely after pure 
hemorrhagic shock (such as a GI bleed). The hypoperfusion 
deficit in traumatic shock is magnified by the proinflamma-
tory activation that occurs following the induction of shock. 
In addition to ischemia or ischemia-reperfusion, accumulating 
evidence demonstrates that even simple hemorrhage induces 
proinflammatory activation that results in many of the cellu-
lar changes typically ascribed only to septic shock.81,82 At the 
cellular level, this may be attributable to the release of cel-
lular products termed damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs; i.e., riboxynucleic acid, uric acid, and high mobility 
group box 1) that activate the same set of cell surface recep-
tors as bacterial products, initiating similar cell signaling.5,83 
These receptors are termed pattern recognition receptors 
(PRRs) and include the TLR family of proteins. Examples of 
traumatic shock include small-volume hemorrhage accompa-
nied by soft tissue injury (femur fracture, crush injury) or any 
combination of hypovolemic, neurogenic, cardiogenic, and 
obstructive shock that precipitates rapidly progressive pro-
inflammatory activation. In laboratory models of traumatic 
shock, the addition of a soft tissue or long bone injury to hem-
orrhage produces lethality with significantly less blood loss 
when the animals are stressed by hemorrhage. Treatment of 
OR (95% CI) of tranexamic acid
Time to treatment (h)
0.5
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Figure 5-11.  Early treatment (within 3 hours) of trauma patients with 
tranexamic acid reduces mortality. However, later treatment exacer-
bated outcome. OR = odds ratio. (Reprinted from Roberts I, Shakur H, 
Afolabi A, et al.78 The importance of early treatment with tranexamic 
acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analysis of the 
CRAST-2 randomised controlled trial. The Lancet. 2011;377:1096-
1101. kkjkjdht ©2011 with permission from Elsevier.)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Mortality
(Low) 1:8
65%
34%
19%
(Medium) 1:2.5
(High) 1:1.4
Plasma:RBC ratio groups
124
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
traumatic shock is focused on correction of the individual ele-
ments to diminish the cascade of proinflammatory activation 
and includes prompt control of hemorrhage, adequate volume 
resuscitation to correct O2 debt, débridement of nonviable tis-
sue, stabilization of bony injuries, and appropriate treat-
ment of soft tissue injuries.
Septic Shock (Vasodilatory Shock)
In the peripheral circulation, profound vasoconstriction is the 
typical physiologic response to the decreased arterial pressure 
and tissue perfusion with hemorrhage, hypovolemia, or acute 
heart failure. This is not the characteristic response in vasodila-
tory shock. Vasodilatory shock is the result of dysfunction of the 
endothelium and vasculature secondary to circulating inflam-
matory mediators and cells or as a response to prolonged and 
severe hypoperfusion. Thus, in vasodilatory shock, hypotension 
results from failure of the vascular smooth muscle to constrict 
appropriately. Vasodilatory shock is characterized by peripheral 
vasodilation with resultant hypotension and resistance to treat-
ment with vasopressors. Despite the hypotension, plasma cate-
cholamine levels are elevated, and the renin-angiotensin system 
is activated in vasodilatory shock. The most frequently encoun-
tered form of vasodilatory shock is septic shock. Other causes 
of vasodilatory shock include hypoxic lactic acidosis, carbon 
monoxide poisoning, decompensated and irreversible hemor-
rhagic shock, terminal cardiogenic shock, and postcardiotomy 
shock (Table 5-6). Thus, vasodilatory shock seems to represent 
the final common pathway for profound and prolonged shock 
of any etiology.84
Despite advances in intensive care, the mortality rate for 
severe sepsis remains at 30% to 50%. In the United States, 
750,000 cases of sepsis occur annually, one third of which are 
fatal.85 Sepsis accounts for 9.3% of deaths in the United States, 
as many yearly as MI. Septic shock is a by-product of the body’s 
response to disruption of the host-microbe equilibrium, result-
ing in invasive or severe localized infection.
In the attempt to eradicate the pathogens, the immune and 
other cell types (e.g., endothelial cells) elaborate soluble media-
tors that enhance macrophage and neutrophil killing effector 
mechanisms, increase procoagulant activity and fibroblast activ-
ity to localize the invaders, and increase microvascular blood 
flow to enhance delivery of killing forces to the area of invasion. 
When this response is overly exuberant or becomes systemic 
rather than localized, manifestations of sepsis may be evident. 
Table 5-6 
Causes of septic and vasodilatory shock
Systemic response to infection
Noninfectious systemic inflammation
  Pancreatitis
  Burns
Anaphylaxis
Acute adrenal insufficiency
Prolonged, severe hypotension
  Hemorrhagic shock
  Cardiogenic shock
  Cardiopulmonary bypass
Metabolic
  Hypoxic lactic acidosis
  Carbon monoxide poisoning
These findings include enhanced cardiac output, peripheral vaso-
dilation, fever, leukocytosis, hyperglycemia, and tachycardia. 
In septic shock, the vasodilatory effects are due, in part, to the 
upregulation of the inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase 
(iNOS or NOS 2) in the vessel wall. iNOS produces large quan-
tities of nitric oxide for sustained periods of time. This potent 
vasodilator suppresses vascular tone and renders the vasculature 
resistant to the effects of vasoconstricting agents.
Diagnosis.  Attempts to standardize terminology have led to 
the establishment of criteria for the diagnosis of sepsis in the 
hospitalized adult. These criteria include manifestations of the 
host response to infection in addition to identification of an 
offending organism. The terms sepsis, severe sepsis, and sep-
tic shock are used to quantify the magnitude of the systemic 
inflammatory reaction. Patients with sepsis have evidence of an 
infection, as well as systemic signs of inflammation (e.g., fever, 
leukocytosis, and tachycardia). Hypoperfusion with signs of 
organ dysfunction is termed severe sepsis. Septic shock requires 
the presence of the above, associated with more significant 
evidence of tissue hypoperfusion and systemic hypotension. 
Beyond the hypotension, maldistribution of blood flow and 
shunting in the microcirculation further compromise delivery 
of nutrients to the tissue beds.86,87
Recognizing septic shock begins with defining the patient 
at risk. The clinical manifestations of septic shock will usually 
become evident and prompt the initiation of treatment before 
bacteriologic confirmation of an organism or the source of an 
organism is identified. In addition to fever, tachycardia, and 
tachypnea, signs of hypoperfusion such as confusion, malaise, 
oliguria, or hypotension may be present. These should prompt 
an aggressive search for infection, including a thorough physical 
examination, inspection of all wounds, evaluation of intravas-
cular catheters or other foreign bodies, obtaining appropriate 
cultures, and adjunctive imaging studies, as needed.
Treatment.  Evaluation of the patient in septic shock begins 
with an assessment of the adequacy of their airway and ven-
tilation. Severely obtunded patients and patients whose work 
of breathing is excessive require intubation and ventilation to 
prevent respiratory collapse. Because vasodilation and decrease 
in total peripheral resistance may produce hypotension, fluid 
resuscitation and restoration of circulatory volume with bal-
anced salt solutions is essential. This resuscitation should be at 
least 30 mL/kg within the first 4 to 6 hours. Incremental fluid 
boluses should be continued based on the endpoint of resuscita-
tion, including clearance of lactate. Starch-based colloid solu-
tions should be avoided, as recent evidence suggests that these 
fluids may be deleterious in the setting of sepsis.86,88,89 Empiric 
antibiotics must be chosen carefully based on the most likely 
pathogens (gram-negative rods, gram-positive cocci, and anaer-
obes) because the portal of entry of the offending organism and 
its identity may not be evident until culture data return or imag-
ing studies are completed. Knowledge of the bacteriologic pro-
file of infections in an individual unit can be obtained from most 
hospital infection control departments and will suggest potential 
responsible organisms. Antibiotics should be tailored to cover 
the responsible organisms once culture data are available, and 
if appropriate, the spectrum of coverage narrowed. Long-term, 
empiric, broad-spectrum antibiotic use should be minimized to 
reduce the development of resistant organisms and to avoid the 
potential complications of fungal overgrowth and antibiotic-
associated colitis from overgrowth of Clostridium difficile. 
6
125
Shock
CHAPTER 5
IV antibiotics will be insufficient to adequately treat the infec-
tious episode in the settings of infected fluid collections, 
infected foreign bodies, and devitalized tissue. These situations 
require source control and involve percutaneous drainage and 
operative management to target a focus of infection. These situ-
ations may require multiple operations to ensure proper wound 
hygiene and healing.
After first-line therapy of the septic patient with antibiot-
ics, IV fluids, and intubation if necessary, vasopressors may be 
necessary to treat patients with septic shock. Catecholamines are 
the vasopressors used most often, with norepinephrine being the 
first-line agent followed by epinephrine. Occasionally, patients 
with septic shock will develop arterial resistance to catechol-
amines. Arginine vasopressin, a potent vasoconstrictor, is often 
efficacious in this setting and is often added to norepinephrine.
The majority of septic patients have hyperdynamic physi-
ology with supranormal cardiac output and low systemic vascu-
lar resistance. On occasion, septic patients may have low cardiac 
output despite volume resuscitation and even vasopressor sup-
port. Dobutamine therapy is recommended for patients with car-
diac dysfunction as evidenced by high filling pressures and low 
cardiac output or clinical signs of hypoperfusion after achieve-
ment of restoration of blood pressure following fluid resusci-
tation. Mortality in this group is high. Despite the increasing 
incidence of septic shock over the past several decades, the over-
all mortality rates have changed little. Studies of interventions, 
including immunotherapy, resuscitation to pulmonary artery 
endpoints with hemodynamic optimization (cardiac output and 
O2 delivery, even to supranormal values), and optimization of 
mixed venous O2 measurements up to 72 hours after admis-
sion to the ICU, have not changed mortality.
Over the past decade, multiple advances have been made 
in the treatment of patients with sepsis and septic shock and 
collaborative groups such as the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
continue to evaluate, modify, and put forth recommendations 
based on data (Fig. 5-12).86 Negative results from previous stud-
ies have led to the suggestion that earlier interventions directed 
at improving global tissue oxygenation may be of benefit. To 
this end, Rivers and colleagues reported that goal-directed ther-
apy of septic shock and severe sepsis initiated in the emergency 
department and continued for 6 hours significantly improved 
outcome.90 This approach involved adjustment of cardiac pre-
load, afterload, and contractility to balance O2 delivery with O2 
demand. They found that goal-directed therapy during the first 
6 hours of hospital stay (initiated in the emergency department) 
had significant effects, such as higher mean venous O2 satu-
ration, lower lactate levels, lower base deficit, higher pH, and 
decreased 28-day mortality (49.2% vs. 33.3%) compared to the 
standard therapy group. The frequency of sudden cardiovascular 
collapse was also significantly less in the group managed with 
goal-directed therapy (21.0% vs. 10.3%). Interestingly, the goal-
directed therapy group received more IV fluids during the initial 
6 hours, but the standard therapy group required more IV fluids 
by 72 hours. The authors emphasize that continued cellular and 
tissue decompensation is subclinical and often irreversible when 
obvious clinically. Goal-directed therapy allowed identification 
and treatment of these patients with insidious illness (global tis-
sue hypoxia in the setting of normal vital signs).
Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance are typical in criti-
cally ill and septic patients, including patients without underly-
ing diabetes mellitus. A recent study reported significant positive 
impact of tight glucose management on outcome in critically ill 
patients.91 The two treatment groups in this randomized, pro-
spective study were assigned to receive intensive insulin therapy 
(maintenance of blood glucose between 80 and 110 mg/dL) or 
conventional treatment (infusion of insulin only if the blood glu-
cose level exceeded 215 mg/dL, with a goal between 180 and 
200 mg/dL). The mean morning glucose level was significantly 
higher in the conventional treatment as compared to the inten-
sive insulin therapy group (153 vs. 103 mg/dL). Mortality in the 
intensive insulin treatment group (4.6%) was significantly lower 
than in the conventional treatment group (8.0%), representing 
a 42% reduction in mortality. This reduction in mortality was 
most notable in the patients requiring longer than 5 days in the 
ICU. Furthermore, intensive insulin therapy reduced episodes of 
septicemia by 46%, reduced duration of antibiotic therapy, and 
decreased the need for prolonged ventilatory support and renal 
replacement therapy.
Another treatment protocol that has been demonstrated 
to increase survival in patients with ARDS investigated the 
use of lower ventilatory tidal volumes compared to traditional 
tidal volumes.92 The majority of the patients enrolled in this 
multicenter, randomized trial developed ARDS secondary to 
pneumonia or sepsis. The trial compared traditional ventilation 
treatment, which involved an initial tidal volume of 12 mL/kg 
of predicted body weight, with ventilation with a lower tidal 
To be Completed Within 3 Hours:
1) Measure lactate level
2) Obtain blood cultures prior to administration of antibiotics
3) Administer broad spectrum antibiotics
4) Administer 30 mL/kg crystalloid for hypotension or lactate ≥ 4 mmol/L
To be Completed Within 6 Hours:
5) Apply vasopressors (for hypotension that does not respond to initial fluid resuscitation)
to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) ≥ 65 mm Hg
6) In the event of persistent arterial hypotension despite volume resuscitation (septic
shock) or initial lactate ≥ 4 mmol/L (36 mg/dL):
 
- Measure central venous pressure (CVP)*
 
- Measure central venous oxygen saturation (Scvo2)*
7) Remeasure lactate if initial lactate was elevated*
*Targets for quantitative resuscitation included in the guidelines are CVP of ≥ 8 mm Hg,
Scvo2 of ≥ 70%, and normalization of lactate. 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundles
Figure 5-12.  Updated bundles of care 
from the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
2012. (From Dellinger RP, Levy MM, 
Rhodes A, et al. Surviving Sepsis Cam-
paign: international guidelines for man-
agement of severe sepsis and septic shock, 
2012. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39:165-
228, Figure 1. With kind permission from 
Springer Science + Business Media.)
126
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
volume, which involved an initial tidal volume of 6 mL/kg of 
predicted body weight. The trial was stopped after the enroll-
ment of 861 patients because mortality was lower in the group 
treated with lower tidal volumes than in the group treated with 
traditional tidal volumes (31.0% vs. 39.8%, P = .007), and the 
number of days without ventilator use during the first 28 days 
after randomization was greater in this group (mean ± SD, 12 ± 
11 vs. 10 ± 11 days; P = .007). The investigators concluded 
that in patients with acute lung injury and ARDS, mechanical 
ventilation with a lower tidal volume than is traditionally used 
results in decreased mortality and increases the number of days 
without ventilator use. Additional strategies in ARDS manage-
ment include higher levels of positive end expiratory pressure 
(PEEP), alveolar recruitment maneuvers, and prone positioning.
The use of corticosteroids in the treatment of sepsis and 
septic shock has been controversial for decades. The observa-
tion that severe sepsis often is associated with adrenal insuf-
ficiency or glucocorticoid receptor resistance has generated 
renewed interest in therapy for septic shock with corticosteroids. 
A single IV dose of 50 mg of hydrocortisone improved mean 
arterial blood pressure response relationships to norepinephrine 
and phenylephrine in patients with septic shock and was most 
notable in patients with relative adrenal insufficiency. A more 
recent study evaluated therapy with hydrocortisone (50 mg IV 
every 6 hours) and fludrocortisone (50 μg orally once daily) 
versus placebo for 1 week in patients with septic shock.93 As 
in earlier studies, the authors performed corticotropin tests on 
these patients to document and stratify patients by relative adre-
nal insufficiency. In this study, 7-day treatment with low doses 
of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone significantly and safely 
lowered the risk of death in patients with septic shock and rela-
tive adrenal insufficiency. In an international, multicenter, ran-
domized trial of corticosteroids in sepsis (CORTICUS study; 
499 analyzable patients), steroids showed no benefit in intent-
to-treat mortality or shock reversal.94 This study suggested that 
hydrocortisone therapy cannot be recommended as routine 
adjuvant therapy for septic shock. However, if SBP remains 
less than 90 mmHg despite appropriate fluid and vasopressor 
therapy, hydrocortisone at 200 mg/d for 7 days in four divided 
doses or by continuous infusion should be considered.
Additional adjunctive immune modulation strategies 
have been developed for the treatment of septic shock. These 
include the use of antiendotoxin antibodies, anticytokine anti-
bodies, cytokine receptor antagonists, immune enhancers, a non–
isoform-specific nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, and O2 radical 
scavengers. These compounds are each designed to alter some 
aspect of the host immune response to shock that is hypoth-
esized to play a key role in its pathophysiology. However, most 
of these strategies have failed to demonstrate efficacy in human 
patients despite utility in well-controlled animal experiments. 
It is unclear whether the failure of these compounds is due to 
poorly designed clinical trials, inadequate understanding of the 
interactions of the complex host immune response to injury and 
infection, or animal models of shock that poorly represent the 
human disease.
Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock is defined clinically as circulatory pump 
failure leading to diminished forward flow and subsequent tis-
sue hypoxia, in the setting of adequate intravascular volume. 
Hemodynamic criteria include sustained hypotension (i.e., SBP 
<90 mmHg for at least 30 minutes), reduced cardiac index 
(<2.2 L/min per square meter), and elevated pulmonary artery 
wedge pressure (>15 mmHg).95 Mortality rates for cardiogenic 
shock are 50% to 80%. Acute, extensive MI is the most common 
cause of cardiogenic shock; a smaller infarction in a patient 
with existing left ventricular dysfunction also may precipitate 
shock. Cardiogenic shock complicates 5% to 10% of acute MIs. 
Conversely, cardiogenic shock is the most common cause of 
death in patients hospitalized with acute MI. Although shock 
may develop early after MI, it typically is not found on admis-
sion. Seventy-five percent of patients who have cardiogenic 
shock complicating acute MIs develop signs of cardiogenic 
shock within 24 hours after onset of infarction (average 7 hours).
Recognition of the patient with occult hypoperfusion is 
critical to prevent progression to obvious cardiogenic shock with 
its high mortality rate; early initiation of therapy to maintain 
blood pressure and cardiac output is vital. Rapid assessment, 
adequate resuscitation, and reversal of the myocardial ischemia 
are essential in optimizing outcome in patients with acute MI. 
Prevention of infarct extension is a critical component. Large 
segments of nonfunctional but viable myocardium contribute to 
the development of cardiogenic shock after MI. In the setting of 
acute MI, expeditious restoration of cardiac output is mandatory 
to minimize mortality; the extent of myocardial salvage possible 
decreases exponentially with increased time to restoration of 
coronary blood flow. The degree of coronary flow after per-
cutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty correlates with 
in-hospital mortality (i.e., 33% mortality with complete reper-
fusion, 50% mortality with incomplete reperfusion, and 85% 
mortality with absent reperfusion).96 Inadequate cardiac func-
tion can be a direct result of cardiac injury, including profound 
myocardial contusion, blunt cardiac valvular injury, or direct 
myocardial damage (Table 5-7).95-98 The pathophysiology of 
cardiogenic shock involves a vicious cycle of myocardial isch-
emia that causes myocardial dysfunction, which results in more 
myocardial ischemia. When sufficient mass of the left ventricu-
lar wall is necrotic or ischemic and fails to pump, the stroke 
Table 5-7 
Causes of cardiogenic shock
Acute myocardial infarction
  Pump failure
  Mechanical complications
    Acute mitral regurgitation
    Acute ventricular septal defect
    Free wall rupture
    Pericardial tamponade
Arrhythmia
End-stage cardiomyopathy
Myocarditis
Severe myocardial contusion
Left ventricular outflow obstruction
  Aortic stenosis
  Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Obstruction to left ventricular filling
  Mitral stenosis
  Left atrial myxoma
Acute mitral regurgitation
Acute aortic insufficiency
Metabolic
Drug reactions
127
Shock
CHAPTER 5
volume decreases. An autopsy series of patients dying from 
cardiogenic shock has found damage to 40% of the left ven-
tricle.99 Ischemia distant from the infarct zone may contribute to 
the systolic dysfunction in patients with cardiogenic shock. The 
majority of these patients have multivessel disease, with lim-
ited vasodilator reserve and pressure-dependent coronary flow 
in multiple areas of the heart. Myocardial diastolic function is 
impaired in cardiogenic shock as well. Decreased compliance 
results from myocardial ischemia, and compensatory increases 
in left ventricular filling pressures progressively occur.
Diminished cardiac output or contractility in the face of 
adequate intravascular volume (preload) may lead to under-
perfused vascular beds and reflexive sympathetic discharge. 
Increased sympathetic stimulation of the heart, either through 
direct neural input or from circulating catecholamines, increases 
heart rate, myocardial contraction, and myocardial O2 consump-
tion, which may not be relieved by increases in coronary artery 
blood flow in patients with fixed stenoses of the coronary arter-
ies. Diminished cardiac output may also decrease coronary 
artery blood flow, resulting in a scenario of increased myocar-
dial O2 demand at a time when myocardial O2 supply may be 
limited. Acute heart failure may also result in fluid accumula-
tion in the pulmonary microcirculatory bed, decreasing myocar-
dial O2 delivery even further.
Diagnosis.  Rapid identification of the patient with pump 
failure and institution of corrective action are essential in pre-
venting the ongoing spiral of decreased cardiac output from 
injury causing increased myocardial O2 needs that cannot be 
met, leading to progressive and unremitting cardiac dysfunc-
tion. In evaluation of possible cardiogenic shock, other causes 
of hypotension must be excluded, including hemorrhage, sepsis, 
pulmonary embolism, and aortic dissection. Signs of circulatory 
shock include hypotension, cool and mottled skin, depressed 
mental status, tachycardia, and diminished pulses. Cardiac 
exam may include dysrhythmia, precordial heave, or distal heart 
tones. Confirmation of a cardiac source for the shock requires 
electrocardiogram and urgent echocardiography. Other useful 
diagnostic tests include chest radiograph, arterial blood gases, 
electrolytes, complete blood count, and cardiac enzymes. Inva-
sive cardiac monitoring, which generally is not necessary, can 
be useful to exclude right ventricular infarction, hypovolemia, 
and possible mechanical complications.
Making the diagnosis of cardiogenic shock involves the 
identification of cardiac dysfunction or acute heart failure in 
a susceptible patient. In the setting of blunt traumatic injury, 
hemorrhagic shock from intra-abdominal bleeding, intrathoracic 
bleeding, and bleeding from fractures must be excluded, before 
implicating cardiogenic shock from blunt cardiac injury. Rela-
tively few patients with blunt cardiac injury will develop cardiac 
pump dysfunction. Those who do generally exhibit cardiogenic 
shock early in their evaluation. Therefore, establishing the diag-
nosis of blunt cardiac injury is secondary to excluding other 
etiologies for shock and establishing that cardiac dysfunction is 
present. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring with a pulmonary 
artery catheter may uncover evidence of diminished cardiac out-
put and elevated pulmonary artery pressure.
Treatment.  After ensuring that an adequate airway is present 
and ventilation is sufficient, attention should be focused on sup-
port of the circulation. Intubation and mechanical ventilation 
often are required, if only to decrease work of breathing and 
facilitate sedation of the patient. Rapidly excluding hypovolemia 
and establishing the presence of cardiac dysfunction are essen-
tial. Treatment of cardiac dysfunction includes maintenance of 
adequate oxygenation to ensure adequate myocardial O2 delivery 
and judicious fluid administration to avoid fluid overload and 
development of cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Electrolyte 
abnormalities, commonly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, 
should be corrected. Pain is treated with IV morphine sulfate 
or fentanyl. Significant dysrhythmias and heart block must be 
treated with antiarrhythmic drugs, pacing, or cardioversion, if 
necessary. Early consultation with cardiology is essential in 
current management of cardiogenic shock, particularly in the 
setting of acute MI.95
When profound cardiac dysfunction exists, inotropic sup-
port may be indicated to improve cardiac contractility and car-
diac output. Dobutamine primarily stimulates cardiac β1 receptors 
to increase cardiac output but may also vasodilate peripheral 
vascular beds, lower total peripheral resistance, and lower sys-
temic blood pressure through effects on β2 receptors. Ensuring 
adequate preload and intravascular volume is therefore essen-
tial prior to instituting therapy with dobutamine. Dopamine 
stimulates receptors (vasoconstriction), β1 receptors (cardiac 
stimulation), and β2 receptors (vasodilation), with its effects on 
β receptors predominating at lower doses. Dopamine may be 
preferable to dobutamine in treatment of cardiac dysfunction 
in hypotensive patients. Tachycardia and increased peripheral 
resistance from dopamine infusion may worsen myocardial 
ischemia. Titration of both dopamine and dobutamine infusions 
may be required in some patients.
Epinephrine stimulates α and β receptors and may 
increase cardiac contractility and heart rate; however, it also 
may have intense peripheral vasoconstrictor effects that impair 
further cardiac performance. Catecholamine infusions must 
be carefully controlled to maximize coronary perfusion, while 
minimizing myocardial O2 demand. Balancing the beneficial 
effects of impaired cardiac performance with the potential side 
effects of excessive reflex tachycardia and peripheral vasocon-
striction requires serial assessment of tissue perfusion using 
indices such as capillary refill, character of peripheral pulses, 
adequacy of urine output, or improvement in laboratory param-
eters of resuscitation such as pH, base deficit, and lactate. Inva-
sive monitoring generally is necessary in these unstable patients. 
The phosphodiesterase inhibitors amrinone and milrinone may 
be required on occasion in patients with resistant cardiogenic 
shock. These agents have long half-lives and induce thrombocy-
topenia and hypotension, and use is reserved for patients unre-
sponsive to other treatment.
Patients whose cardiac dysfunction is refractory to cardio-
tonics may require mechanical circulatory support with an intra-
aortic balloon pump.100 Intra-aortic balloon pumping increases 
cardiac output and improves coronary blood flow by reduction of 
systolic afterload and augmentation of diastolic perfusion pres-
sure. Unlike vasopressor agents, these beneficial effects occur 
without an increase in myocardial O2 demand. An intra-aortic 
balloon pump can be inserted at the bedside in the ICU via the 
femoral artery through either a cutdown or using the percutaneous 
approach. Aggressive circulatory support of patients with cardiac 
dysfunction from intrinsic cardiac disease has led to more wide-
spread application of these devices and more familiarity with their 
operation by both physicians and critical care nurses.
Preservation of existing myocardium and preservation of 
cardiac function are priorities of therapy for patients who have 
suffered an acute MI. Ensuring adequate oxygenation and O2 
128
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
delivery, maintaining adequate preload with judicious volume 
restoration, minimizing sympathetic discharge through adequate 
relief of pain, and correcting electrolyte imbalances are all 
straightforward nonspecific maneuvers that may improve exist-
ing cardiac function or prevent future cardiac complications. 
Anticoagulation and aspirin are given for acute MI. Although 
thrombolytic therapy reduces mortality in patients with acute 
MI, its role in cardiogenic shock is less clear. Patients in car-
diac failure from an acute MI may benefit from pharmaco-
logic or mechanical circulatory support in a manner similar 
to that of patients with cardiac failure related to blunt cardiac 
injury. Additional pharmacologic tools may include the use of 
β-blockers to control heart rate and myocardial O2 consumption, 
nitrates to promote coronary blood flow through vasodilation, 
and ACE inhibitors to reduce ACE-mediated vasoconstric-
tive effects that increase myocardial workload and myocardial 
O2 consumption.
Current guidelines of the American Heart Association 
recommend percutaneous transluminal coronary angiography 
for patients with cardiogenic shock, ST elevation, left bundle-
branch block, and age less than 75 years.101,102 Early definition 
of coronary anatomy and revascularization is the pivotal step in 
treatment of patients with cardiogenic shock from acute MI.103 
When feasible, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty 
(generally with stent placement) is the treatment of choice. 
Coronary artery bypass grafting seems to be more appropriate 
for patients with multiple vessel disease or left main coronary 
artery disease.
Obstructive Shock
Although obstructive shock can be caused by a number of dif-
ferent etiologies that result in mechanical obstruction of venous 
return (Table 5-8), in trauma patients, this is most commonly 
due to the presence of tension pneumothorax. Cardiac tam-
ponade occurs when sufficient fluid has accumulated in the 
pericardial sac to obstruct blood flow to the ventricles. The 
hemodynamic abnormalities in pericardial tamponade are due 
to elevation of intracardiac pressures with limitation of ventric-
ular filling in diastole with resultant decrease in cardiac output. 
Acutely, the pericardium does not distend; thus small volumes 
of blood may produce cardiac tamponade. If the effusion accu-
mulates slowly (e.g., in the setting of uremia, heart failure, or 
malignant effusion), the quantity of fluid producing cardiac 
tamponade may reach 2000 mL. The major determinant of the 
degree of hypotension is the pericardial pressure. With either 
cardiac tamponade or tension pneumothorax, reduced filling 
of the right side of the heart from either increased intrapleural 
pressure secondary to air accumulation (tension pneumothorax) 
or increased intrapericardial pressure precluding atrial filling 
secondary to blood accumulation (cardiac tamponade) results 
in decreased cardiac output associated with increased central 
venous pressure.
Diagnosis and Treatment.  The diagnosis of tension pneu-
mothorax should be made on clinical examination. The clas-
sic findings include respiratory distress (in an awake patient), 
hypotension, diminished breath sounds over one hemithorax, 
hyperresonance to percussion, jugular venous distention, and 
shift of mediastinal structures to the unaffected side with tra-
cheal deviation. In most instances, empiric treatment with 
pleural decompression is indicated rather than delaying to 
wait for radiographic confirmation. When a chest tube can-
not be immediately inserted, such as in the prehospital setting, 
the pleural space can be decompressed with a large-caliber 
needle. Immediate return of air should be encountered with 
rapid resolution of hypotension. Unfortunately, not all of the 
clinical manifestations of tension pneumothorax may be evi-
dent on physical examination. Hyperresonance may be diffi-
cult to appreciate in a noisy resuscitation area. Jugular venous 
distention may be absent in a hypovolemic patient. Tracheal 
deviation is a late finding and often is not apparent on clinical 
examination. Practically, three findings are sufficient to make 
the diagnosis of tension pneumothorax: respiratory distress or 
hypotension, decreased lung sounds, and hypertympany to per-
cussion. Chest x-ray findings that may be visualized include 
deviation of mediastinal structures, depression of the hemidia-
phragm, and hypo-opacification with absent lung markings. As 
discussed earlier, definitive treatment of a tension pneumotho-
rax is immediate tube thoracostomy. The chest tube should be 
inserted rapidly, but carefully, and should be large enough to 
evacuate any blood that may be present in the pleural space. 
Most recommend placement in the fourth intercostal space 
(nipple level) at the anterior axillary line.
Cardiac tamponade results from the accumulation of blood 
within the pericardial sac, usually from penetrating trauma or 
chronic medical conditions such as heart failure or uremia. 
Although precordial wounds are most likely to injure the heart 
and produce tamponade, any projectile or wounding agent that 
passes in proximity to the mediastinum can potentially produce 
tamponade. Blunt cardiac rupture, a rare event in trauma vic-
tims who survive long enough to reach the hospital, can produce 
refractory shock and tamponade in the multiply-injured patient. 
The manifestations of cardiac tamponade, such as total circula-
tory collapse and cardiac arrest, may be catastrophic, or they 
may be more subtle. A high index of suspicion is warranted to 
make a rapid diagnosis. Patients who present with circulatory 
arrest from cardiac tamponade require emergency pericardial 
decompression, usually through a left thoracotomy. The indi-
cations for this maneuver are discussed in Chap. 7. Cardiac 
tamponade also may be associated with dyspnea, orthopnea, 
cough, peripheral edema, chest pain, tachycardia, muffled heart 
tones, jugular venous distention, and elevated central venous 
pressure. Beck’s triad consists of hypotension, muffled heart 
tones, and neck vein distention. Unfortunately, absence of these 
clinical findings may not be sufficient to exclude cardiac injury 
and cardiac tamponade. Muffled heart tones may be difficult to 
appreciate in a busy trauma center, and jugular venous disten-
tion and central venous pressure may be diminished by coexis-
tent bleeding. Therefore, patients at risk for cardiac tamponade 
Table 5-8 
Causes of obstructive shock
Pericardial tamponade
Pulmonary embolus
Tension pneumothorax
IVC obstruction
  Deep venous thrombosis
  Gravid uterus on IVC
  Neoplasm
Increased intrathoracic pressure
  Excess positive end-expiratory pressure
  Neoplasm
IVC = inferior vena cava.
129
Shock
CHAPTER 5
whose hemodynamic status permits additional diagnostic tests 
frequently require additional diagnostic maneuvers to confirm 
cardiac injury or tamponade.
Invasive hemodynamic monitoring may support the diag-
nosis of cardiac tamponade if elevated central venous pressure, 
pulsus paradoxus (i.e., decreased systemic arterial pressure with 
inspiration), or elevated right atrial and right ventricular pres-
sure by pulmonary artery catheter is present. These hemody-
namic profiles suffer from lack of specificity, the duration of 
time required to obtain them in critically injured patients, and 
their inability to exclude cardiac injury in the absence of tam-
ponade. Chest radiographs may provide information on the pos-
sible trajectory of a projectile, but rarely are diagnostic because 
the acutely filled pericardium distends poorly. Echocardiogra-
phy has become the preferred test for the diagnosis of cardiac 
tamponade. Good results in detecting pericardial fluid have been 
reported, but the yield in detecting pericardial fluid depends on 
the skill and experience of the ultrasonographer, body habitus of 
the patient, and absence of wounds that preclude visualization 
of the pericardium. Standard two-dimensional and transesopha-
geal echocardiography are sensitive techniques to evaluate the 
pericardium for fluid and are typically performed by examiners 
skilled at evaluating ventricular function, valvular abnormali-
ties, and integrity of the proximal thoracic aorta. Unfortunately, 
these skilled examiners are rarely immediately available at all 
hours of the night, when many trauma patients present; there-
fore, waiting for this test may result in inordinate delays. In 
addition, although both ultrasound techniques may demonstrate 
the presence of fluid or characteristic findings of tamponade 
(large volume of fluid, right atrial collapse, poor distensibility 
of the right ventricle), they do not exclude cardiac injury per se. 
Pericardiocentesis to diagnose pericardial blood and potentially 
relieve tamponade may be used. Performing pericardiocentesis 
under ultrasound guidance has made the procedure safer and 
more reliable. An indwelling catheter may be placed for sev-
eral days in patients with chronic pericardial effusions. Needle 
pericardiocentesis may not evacuate clotted blood and has the 
potential to produce cardiac injury, making it a poor alternative 
in busy trauma centers.
Diagnostic pericardial window represents the most direct 
method to determine the presence of blood within the pericar-
dium. The procedure is best performed in the operating room 
under general anesthesia. It can be performed through either the 
subxiphoid or transdiaphragmatic approach. Adequate equip-
ment and personnel to rapidly decompress the pericardium, 
explore the injury, and repair the heart should be present. Once 
the pericardium is opened and tamponade relieved, hemody-
namics usually improve dramatically and formal pericardial 
exploration can ensue. Exposure of the heart can be achieved 
by extending the incision to a median sternotomy, performing a 
left anterior thoracotomy, or performing bilateral anterior tho-
racotomies (“clamshell”).
Neurogenic Shock
Neurogenic shock refers to diminished tissue perfusion as 
a result of loss of vasomotor tone to peripheral arterial beds. 
Loss of vasoconstrictor impulses results in increased vascular 
capacitance, decreased venous return, and decreased cardiac 
output. Neurogenic shock is usually secondary to spinal cord 
injuries from vertebral body fractures of the cervical or high 
thoracic region that disrupt sympathetic regulation of peripheral 
vascular tone (Table 5-9). Rarely, a spinal cord injury without 
bony fracture, such as an epidural hematoma impinging on the 
spinal cord, can produce neurogenic shock. Sympathetic input 
to the heart, which normally increases heart rate and cardiac 
contractility, and input to the adrenal medulla, which increases 
catecholamine release, may also be disrupted, preventing the 
typical reflex tachycardia that occurs with hypovolemia. Acute 
spinal cord injury results in activation of multiple secondary 
injury mechanisms: (a) vascular compromise to the spinal cord 
with loss of autoregulation, vasospasm, and thrombosis; (b) loss 
of cellular membrane integrity and impaired energy metabo-
lism; and (c) neurotransmitter accumulation and release of free 
radicals. Importantly, hypotension contributes to the worsening 
of acute spinal cord injury as the result of further reduction in 
blood flow to the spinal cord. Management of acute spinal cord 
injury with attention to blood pressure control, oxygenation, and 
hemodynamics, essentially optimizing perfusion of an already 
ischemic spinal cord, seems to result in improved neurologic 
outcome. Patients with hypotension from spinal cord injury are 
best monitored in an ICU and carefully followed for evidence 
of cardiac or respiratory dysfunction.
Diagnosis.  Acute spinal cord injury may result in bradycardia, 
hypotension, cardiac dysrhythmias, reduced cardiac output, and 
decreased peripheral vascular resistance. The severity of the spi-
nal cord injury seems to correlate with the magnitude of cardio-
vascular dysfunction. Patients with complete motor injuries are 
over five times more likely to require vasopressors for neuro-
genic shock compared to those with incomplete lesions.104 The 
classic description of neurogenic shock consists of decreased 
blood pressure associated with bradycardia (absence of reflex-
ive tachycardia due to disrupted sympathetic discharge), warm 
extremities (loss of peripheral vasoconstriction), motor and sen-
sory deficits indicative of a spinal cord injury, and radiographic 
evidence of a vertebral column fracture. Patients with multisys-
tem trauma that includes spinal cord injuries often have head 
injuries that may make identification of motor and sensory defi-
cits difficult in the initial evaluation. Furthermore, associated 
injuries may occur that result in hypovolemia, further compli-
cating the clinical presentation. In a subset of patients with spi-
nal cord injuries from penetrating wounds, most of the patients 
with hypotension had blood loss as the etiology (74%) rather 
than neurogenic causes, and few (7%) had the classic findings of 
neurogenic shock.105 In the multiply injured patient, other causes 
of hypotension, including hemorrhage, tension pneumothorax, 
and cardiogenic shock, must be sought and excluded.
Treatment.  After the airway is secured and ventilation is ade-
quate, fluid resuscitation and restoration of intravascular volume 
often will improve perfusion in neurogenic shock. Most patients 
with neurogenic shock will respond to restoration of intravas-
cular volume alone, with satisfactory improvement in perfusion 
and resolution of hypotension. Administration of vasoconstric-
tors will improve peripheral vascular tone, decrease vascular 
capacitance, and increase venous return, but should only be 
considered once hypovolemia is excluded as the cause of the 
Table 5-9 
Causes of neurogenic shock
Spinal cord trauma
Spinal cord neoplasm
Spinal/epidural anesthetic
130
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
hypotension and the diagnosis of neurogenic shock established. 
If the patient’s blood pressure has not responded to what is felt 
to be adequate volume resuscitation, dopamine may be used 
first. A pure α agonist, such as phenylephrine, may be used pri-
marily or in patients unresponsive to dopamine. Specific treat-
ment for the hypotension is often of brief duration, as the need 
to administer vasoconstrictors typically lasts 24 to 48 hours. On 
the other hand, life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmias and hypo-
tension may occur up to 14 days after spinal cord injury.
The duration of the need for vasopressor support for neuro-
genic shock may correlate with the overall prognosis or chances 
of improvement in neurologic function. Appropriate rapid resto-
ration of blood pressure and circulatory perfusion may improve 
perfusion to the spinal cord, prevent progressive spinal cord 
ischemia, and minimize secondary cord injury. Restoration of 
normal blood pressure and adequate tissue perfusion should pre-
cede any operative attempts to stabilize the vertebral fracture.
ENDPOINTS IN RESUSCITATION
Shock is defined as inadequate perfusion to maintain normal 
organ function. With prolonged anaerobic metabolism, tissue 
acidosis and O2 debt accumulate. Thus, the goal in the treatment 
of shock is restoration of adequate organ perfusion and tissue 
oxygenation. Resuscitation is complete when O2 debt is 
repaid, tissue acidosis is corrected, and aerobic metabo-
lism is restored. Clinical confirmation of this endpoint remains 
a challenge.
Resuscitation of the patient in shock requires simultaneous 
evaluation and treatment; the etiology of the shock often is not 
initially apparent. Hemorrhagic shock, septic shock, and trau-
matic shock are the most common types of shock encountered 
on surgical services. To optimize outcome in bleeding patients, 
early control of the hemorrhage and adequate volume resuscita-
tion, including both red blood cells and crystalloid solutions, 
are necessary. Expedient operative resuscitation is mandatory 
to limit the magnitude of activation of multiple mediator sys-
tems and to abort the microcirculatory changes, which may 
evolve insidiously into the cascade that ends in irreversible 
hemorrhagic shock. Attempts to stabilize an actively bleeding 
patient anywhere but in the operating room are inappropriate. 
Any intervention that delays the patient’s arrival in the operat-
ing room for control of hemorrhage increases mortality, thus 
the important concept of operating room resuscitation of the 
critically injured patient.
Recognition by care providers of the patient who is in the 
compensated phase of shock is equally important, but more dif-
ficult based on clinical criteria. Compensated shock exists when 
inadequate tissue perfusion persists despite normalization of 
blood pressure and heart rate. Even with normalization of blood 
pressure, heart rate, and urine output, 80% to 85% of trauma 
patients have inadequate tissue perfusion, as evidenced by 
increased lactate or decreased mixed venous O2 saturation.55,106 
Persistent, occult hypoperfusion is frequent in the ICU, with 
a resultant significant increase in infection rate and mortality 
in major trauma patients. Patients failing to reverse their lactic 
acidosis within 12 hours of admission (acidosis that was persis-
tent despite normal heart rate, blood pressure, and urine output) 
developed an infection three times as often as those who normal-
ized their lactate levels within 12 hours of admission. In addi-
tion, mortality was fourfold higher in patients who developed 
infections. Both injury severity score and occult hypotension 
(lactic acidosis) longer than 12 hours were independent predic-
tors of infection.107 Thus, recognition of subclinical hypoperfu-
sion requires information beyond vital signs and urinary output.
Endpoints in resuscitation can be divided into systemic 
or global parameters, tissue-specific parameters, and cellu-
lar parameters. Global endpoints include vital signs, cardiac 
output, pulmonary artery wedge pressure, O2 delivery and con-
sumption, lactate, and base deficit (Table 5-10).
Assessment of Endpoints in Resuscitation
Inability to repay O2 debt is a predictor of mortality and organ 
failure; the probability of death has been directly correlated to 
the calculated O2 debt in hemorrhagic shock. Direct measure-
ment of the O2 debt in the resuscitation of patients is difficult. 
The easily obtainable parameters of arterial blood pressure, 
heart rate, urine output, central venous pressure, and pulmonary 
artery occlusion pressure are poor indicators of the adequacy 
of tissue perfusion. Therefore, surrogate parameters have been 
sought to estimate the O2 debt; serum lactate and base deficit 
have been shown to correlate with O2 debt.
Lactate.  Lactate is generated by conversion of pyruvate to 
lactate by lactate dehydrogenase in the setting of insufficient 
O2. Lactate is released into the circulation and is predominantly 
taken up and metabolized by the liver and kidneys. The liver 
accounts for approximately 50% and the kidney for about 30% 
of whole body lactate uptake. Elevated serum lactate is an indi-
rect measure of the O2 debt, and therefore an approximation 
of the magnitude and duration of the severity of shock. The 
admission lactate level, highest lactate level, and time interval 
to normalize the serum lactate are important prognostic indi-
cators for survival. For example, in a study of 76 consecutive 
patients, 100% survival was observed among the patients with 
normalization of lactate within 24 hours, 78% survival when 
lactate normalized between 24 and 48 hours, and only 14% sur-
vivorship if it took longer than 48 hours to normalize the serum 
lactate.55 In contrast, individual variability of lactate may be too 
great to permit accurate prediction of outcome in any individual 
case. Base deficit and volume of blood transfusion required in 
the first 24 hours of resuscitation may be better predictors of 
mortality than the plasma lactate alone.
Base Deficit.  Base deficit is the amount of base in millimoles 
that is required to titrate 1 L of whole blood to a pH of 7.40 
with the sample fully saturated with O2 at 37°C (98.6°F) and 
Table 5-10 
Endpoints in resuscitation
Systemic/global
  Lactate
  Base deficit
  Cardiac output
  Oxygen delivery and consumption
Tissue specific
  Gastric tonometry
  Tissue pH, oxygen, carbon dioxide levels
  Near infrared spectroscopy
Cellular
  Membrane potential
  Adenosine triphosphate
7
131
Shock
CHAPTER 5
a partial pressure of CO2 of 40 mmHg. It usually is measured 
by arterial blood gas analysis in clinical practice as it is readily 
and quickly available. The mortality of trauma patients can be 
stratified according to the magnitude of base deficit measured 
in the first 24 hours after admission.60 In a retrospective study 
of over 3000 trauma admissions, patients with a base deficit 
worse than 15 mmol/L had a mortality of 70%. Base deficit can 
be stratified into mild (3–5 mmol/L), moderate (6–14 mmol/L), 
and severe (15 mmol/L) categories, with a trend toward higher 
mortality with worsening base deficit in patients with trauma. 
Both the magnitude of the perfusion deficit as indicated by the 
base deficit and the time required to correct it are major factors 
determining outcome in shock.
Indeed, when elevated base deficit persists (or lactic aci-
dosis) in the trauma patient, ongoing bleeding is often the etiol-
ogy. Trauma patients admitted with a base deficit greater than 
15 mmol/L required twice the volume of fluid infusion and six 
times more blood transfusion in the first 24 hours compared to 
patients with mild acidosis. Transfusion requirements increased 
as base deficit worsened, and ICU and hospital lengths of stay 
increased. Mortality increased as base deficit worsened; the fre-
quency of organ failure increased with greater base deficit.56 
The probability of trauma patients developing ARDS has been 
reported to correlate with severity of admission base deficit 
and lowest base deficit within the first 24 hours postinjury.58 
Persistently high base deficit is associated with abnormal O2 
utilization and higher mortality. Monitoring base deficit in the 
resuscitation of trauma patients assists in assessment of O2 
transport and efficacy of resuscitation.57
Factors that may compromise the utility of the base defi-
cit in estimating O2 debt are the administration of bicarbonate, 
hypothermia, hypocapnia (overventilation), heparin, ethanol, 
and ketoacidosis. However, the base deficit remains one of the 
most widely used estimates of O2 debt for its clinical relevance, 
accuracy, and availability.
Gastric Tonometry.  Lactate and base deficit indicate global 
tissue acidosis. Several authors have suggested that tissue-
specific endpoints, rather than systemic endpoints, are more 
predictive of outcome and adequate resuscitation in trauma 
patients. With heterogeneity of blood flow, regional tissue 
beds may be hypoperfused. Gastric tonometry has been used 
to assess perfusion of the GI tract. The concentration of CO2 
accumulating in the gastric mucosa can be sampled with a spe-
cially designed nasogastric tube. With the assumption that gas-
tric bicarbonate is equal to serum levels, gastric intramucosal 
pH (pHi) is calculated by applying the Henderson-Hasselbalch 
equation. pHi should be greater than 7.3; pHi will be lower in 
the setting of decreased O2 delivery to the tissues. pHi is a good 
prognostic indicator; patients with normal pHi have better out-
comes than those patients with pHi less than 7.3.108,109 Goal-
directed human studies, with pHi as an endpoint in resuscitation, 
have shown normalization of pHi to correlate with improved 
outcome in several studies and with contradictory findings in 
other studies. Use of pHi as a singular endpoint in the resuscita-
tion of critically ill patients remains controversial.110
Near Infrared Spectroscopy.  Near infrared (NIR) spectros-
copy can measure tissue oxygenation and redox state of cyto-
chrome a,a3 on a continuous, noninvasive basis. The NIR probe 
emits multiple wavelengths of light in the NIR spectrum (650 
to 1100 nm). Photons are then either absorbed by the tissue or 
reflected back to the probe. Maximal exercise in laboratory studies 
resulted in reduction of cytochrome a,a3; this correlated with 
tissue lactate elevation. NIR spectroscopy can be used to com-
pare tissue oxyhemoglobin levels (indicating tissue O2 supply 
to cytochrome a,a3 with mitochondrial O2 consumption), thus 
demonstrating flow-independent mitochondrial oxidative dys-
function and the need for further resuscitation. Trauma patients 
with decoupled oxyhemoglobin and cytochrome a,a3 have redox 
dysfunction and have been shown to have a higher incidence of 
organ failure (89% vs. 13%).111,112
Tissue PH, Oxygen, and Carbon Dioxide Concentra-
tion.  Tissue probes with optical sensors have been used to 
measure tissue pH and partial pressure of O2 and CO2 in sub-
cutaneous sites, muscle, and the bladder. These probes may use 
transcutaneous methodology with Clark electrodes or direct per-
cutaneous probes.113,114 The percutaneous probes can be inserted 
through an 18-gauge catheter and hold promise as continuous 
monitors of tissue perfusion.
Right Ventricular End-Diastolic Volume Index.  Right ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume index (RVEDVI) seems to more 
accurately predict preload for cardiac index than does pulmo-
nary artery wedge pressure.115 Chang and colleagues reported 
that 50% of trauma patients had persistent splanchnic ischemia 
that was reversed by increasing RVEDVI. RVEDVI is a param-
eter that seems to correlate with preload-related increases in 
cardiac output. More recently, these authors have described left 
ventricular power output as an endpoint (LVP >320 mmHg⋅L/
min per square meter), which is associated with improved clear-
ance of base deficit and a lower rate of organ dysfunction fol-
lowing injury.116
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
    1.	Gross S. A System of Surgery: Pathologic, Diagnostic, Thera-
peutic and Operative. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1872.
    2.	Bernard C. Lecons sur les Phenomenes de la Via Communs 
aux Animaux et aux Vegetaux. Paris: JB Ballieve; 1879.
    3.	Cannon W. Traumatic Shock. New York: Appleton and Co.; 
1923.
    4.	Blalock A. Principles of Surgical Care, Shock and Other 
Problems. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1940.
    5.	Mollen KP, Levy RM, Prince JM, et al. Systemic inflamma-
tion and end organ damage following trauma involves func-
tional TLR4 signaling in both bone marrow-derived cells and 
parenchymal cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2008;83(1):80-88.
    6.	Wiggers C. Experimental Hemorrhagic Shock. Physiology of 
Shock. New York: Commonwealth; 1950.
    7.	Peitzman AB, Corbett WA, Shires GT III, Illner H, Shires 
GT, Inamdar R. Cellular function in liver and muscle dur-
ing hemorrhagic shock in primates. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1985;161(5):419-424.
    8.	Carrico CJ, Canizaro PC, Shires GT. Fluid resuscitation fol-
lowing injury: rationale for the use of balanced salt solutions. 
Crit Care Med. 1976;4(2):46-54.
    9.	Shaftan GW, Chiu CJ, Dennis C, Harris B. Fundamen-
tals of physiologic control of arterial hemorrhage. Surgery. 
1965;58(5):851-856.
  10.	Shah NS, Kelly E, Billiar TR, et al. Utility of clinical param-
eters of tissue oxygenation in a quantitative model of irrevers-
ible hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 1998;10(5):343-346.
  11.	Dunser MW, Wenzel V, Mayr AJ, Hasibeder WR. Manage-
ment of vasodilatory shock: defining the role of arginine vaso-
pressin. Drugs. 2003;63(3):237-256.
132
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
  12.	Argenziano M, Chen JM, Choudhri AF, et al. Management of 
vasodilatory shock after cardiac surgery: identification of pre-
disposing factors and use of a novel pressor agent. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;116(6):973-980.
  13.	Barroso-Aranda J, Schmid-Schonbein GW, Zweifach BW, 
Engler RL. Granulocytes and no-reflow phenomenon in 
irreversible hemorrhagic shock. Circ Res. 1988;63(2):437-
447.
  14.	Ince C, Sinaasappel M. Microcirculatory oxygenation and 
shunting in sepsis and shock. Crit Care Med. 1999;27(7): 
1369-1377.
  15.	Singer M, De Santis V, Vitale D, Jeffcoate W. Multior-
gan failure is an adaptive, endocrine-mediated, metabolic 
response to overwhelming systemic inflammation. Lancet. 
2004;364(9433):545-548.
  16.	Shires T, Coln D, Carrico J, Lightfoot S. Fluid therapy in hem-
orrhagic shock. Arch Surg. 1964;88:688-693.
  17.	Robin ED. Of men and mitochondria: coping with hypoxic 
dysoxia. The 1980 J. Burns Amberson Lecture. Am Rev Respir 
Dis. 1980;122(4):517-531.
  18.	Stacpoole PW. Lactic acidosis and other mitochondrial disor-
ders. Metabolism. 1997;46(3):306-321.
  19.	Crowell JW, Smith EE. Oxygen deficit and irreversible hem-
orrhagic shock. Am J Physiol. 1964;206:313-316.
  20.	Nathan C. Points of control in inflammation. Nature. 
2002;420(6917):846-852.
  21.	Sauaia A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Haenel JB, Read RA, Lezotte 
DC. Early predictors of postinjury multiple organ failure. Arch 
Surg. 1994;129(1):39-45.
  22.	Matzinger P. The danger model: a renewed sense of self. 
Science. 2002;296(5566):301-305.
  23.	Jiang J, Bahrami S, Leichtfried G, Redl H, Ohlinger W, Schlag 
G. Kinetics of endotoxin and tumor necrosis factor appearance 
in portal and systemic circulation after hemorrhagic shock in 
rats. Ann Surg. 1995;221(1):100-106.
  24.	Endo S, Inada K, Yamada Y, et al. Plasma endotoxin and cyto-
kine concentrations in patients with hemorrhagic shock. Crit 
Care Med. 1994;22(6):949-955.
  25.	Puyana JC, Pellegrini JD, De AK, Kodys K, Silva WE, Miller 
CL. Both T-helper-1- and T-helper-2-type lymphokines 
are depressed in posttrauma anergy. J Trauma. 1998;44(6): 
1037-1045; discussion 1045-1046.
  26.	Faist E, Schinkel C, Zimmer S, Kremer JP, Von Donners-
marck GH, Schildberg FW. Inadequate interleukin-2 synthesis 
and interleukin-2 messenger expression following thermal and 
mechanical trauma in humans is caused by defective trans-
membrane signalling. J Trauma. 1993;34(6):846-853; discus-
sion 853-854.
  27.	Meng ZH, Dyer K, Billiar TR, Tweardy DJ. Essential role for 
IL-6 in postresuscitation inflammation in hemorrhagic shock. 
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001;280(2):C343-C351.
  28.	Meng ZH, Dyer K, Billiar TR, Tweardy DJ. Distinct effects 
of systemic infusion of G-CSF vs. IL-6 on lung and liver 
inflammation and injury in hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 
2000;14(1):41-48.
  29.	Neidhardt R, Keel M, Steckholzer U, et al. Relationship of 
interleukin-10 plasma levels to severity of injury and clinical 
outcome in injured patients. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):863-870; 
discussion 870-871.
  30.	Kasai T, Inada K, Takakuwa T, et al. Anti-inflammatory cyto-
kine levels in patients with septic shock. Res Commun Mol 
Pathol Pharmacol. 1997;98(1):34-42.
  31.	Kahlke V, Dohm C, Mees T, Brotzmann K, Schreiber S, Sch-
roder J. Early interleukin-10 treatment improves survival and 
enhances immune function only in males after hemorrhage 
and subsequent sepsis. Shock. 2002;18(1):24-28.
  32.	Karakozis S, Hinds M, Cook JW, Kim D, Provido H, Kirkpat-
rick JR. The effects of interleukin-10 in hemorrhagic shock. 
J Surg Res. 2000;90(2):109-112.
  33.	Comerford I, McColl SR. Mini-review series: focus on che-
mokines. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011;89(2):183-184.
  34.	Younger JG, Sasaki N, Waite MD, et al. Detrimental effects of 
complement activation in hemorrhagic shock. J Appl Physiol. 
2001;90(2):441-446.
  35.	Moore EE, Moore FA, Franciose RJ, Kim FJ, Biffl WL, 
Banerjee A. The postischemic gut serves as a priming bed for 
circulating neutrophils that provoke multiple organ failure. 
J Trauma. 1994;37(6):881-887.
  36.	Adams JM, Hauser CJ, Livingston DH, Lavery RF, Fekete 
Z, Deitch EA. Early trauma polymorphonuclear neutro-
phil responses to chemokines are associated with develop-
ment of sepsis, pneumonia, and organ failure. J Trauma. 
2001;51(3):452-456; discussion 456-457.
  37.	Lau YT, Hwang TL, Chen MF, Liu MS. Calcium transport 
by rat liver plasma membranes during sepsis. Circ Shock. 
1992;38(4):238-244.
  38.	Somogyi R, Zhao M, Stucki JW. Modulation of cytosolic-
[Ca2+] oscillations in hepatocytes results from cross-talk 
among second messengers. The synergism between the alpha 
1-adrenergic response, glucagon and cyclic AMP, and their 
antagonism by insulin and diacylglycerol manifest themselves 
in the control of the cytosolic-[Ca2+] oscillations. Biochem J. 
1992;286(Pt 3):869-877.
  39.	Trump BF, Berezesky IK. Calcium-mediated cell injury and 
cell death. FASEB J. 1995;9(2):219-228.
  40.	Powers KA, Szaszi K, Khadaroo RG, et al. Oxidative stress 
generated by hemorrhagic shock recruits Toll-like recep-
tor 4 to the plasma membrane in macrophages. J Exp Med. 
2006;203(8):1951-1961.
  41.	Suzuki YJ, Forman HJ, Sevanian A. Oxidants as stimulators 
of signal transduction. Free Radic Biol Med. 1997;22(1-2): 
269-285.
  42.	Mollen KP, McCloskey CA, Tanaka H, et al. Hypoxia activates 
c-Jun N-terminal kinase via Rac1-dependent reactive oxygen 
species production in hepatocytes. Shock. 2007;28(3):270-277.
  43.	Bertges DJ, Fink MP, Delude RL. Hypoxic signal transduction 
in critical illness. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(4 Suppl):N78-86.
  44.	Guillemin K, Krasnow MA. The hypoxic response: huffing 
and HIFing. Cell. 1997;89(1):9-12.
  45.	Buchman TG, Cabin DE, Vickers S, et al. Molecular biol-
ogy of circulatory shock. Part II. Expression of four groups of 
hepatic genes is enhanced after resuscitation from cardiogenic 
shock. Surgery. 1990;108(3):559-566.
  46.	Cobb JP, O’Keefe GE. Injury research in the genomic era. 
Lancet. 2004;363(9426):2076-2083.
  47.	Cobb JP, Laramie JM, Stormo GD, et al. Sepsis gene 
expression profiling: murine splenic compared with hepatic 
responses determined by using complementary DNA microar-
rays. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(12):2711-2721.
  48.	Wiegand G, Selleng K, Grundling M, Jack RS. Gene expres-
sion pattern in human monocytes as a surrogate marker for 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Mol Med. 
1999;5(3):192-202.
  49.	Gray IC, Campbell DA, Spurr NK. Single nucleotide poly-
morphisms as tools in human genetics. Hum Mol Genet. 
2000;9(16):2403-2408.
  50.	Mira JP, Cariou A, Grall F, et al. Association of TNF2, a TNF-
alpha promoter polymorphism, with septic shock susceptibility 
and mortality: a multicenter study. JAMA. 1999;282(6):561-568.
  51.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm in 
critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208(13):2581-
2590.
  52.	Eastridge BJ, Salinas J, McManus JG, et al. Hypotension 
begins at 110 mm Hg: redefining “hypotension” with data. 
J Trauma. 2007;63(2):291-297; discussion 297-299.
  53.	Luna GK, Eddy AC, Copass M. The sensitivity of vital signs 
in identifying major thoracoabdominal hemorrhage. Am J 
Surg. 1989;157(5):512-515.
133
Shock
CHAPTER 5
  54.	Victorino GP, Battistella FD, Wisner DH. Does tachycardia 
correlate with hypotension after trauma? J Am Coll Surg. 
2003;196(5):679-684.
  55.	Abramson D, Scalea TM, Hitchcock R, Trooskin SZ, Henry 
SM, Greenspan J. Lactate clearance and survival following 
injury. J Trauma. 1993;35(4):584-588; discussion 588-589.
  56.	Davis JW, Parks SN, Kaups KL, Gladen HE, O’Donnell-Nicol 
S. Admission base deficit predicts transfusion requirements 
and risk of complications. J Trauma. 1996;41(5):769-774.
  57.	Kincaid EH, Miller PR, Meredith JW, Rahman N, Chang MC. 
Elevated arterial base deficit in trauma patients: a marker of 
impaired oxygen utilization. J Am Coll Surg. 1998;187(4): 
384-392.
  58.	Rixen D, Raum M, Bouillon B, Lefering R, Neugebauer E. 
Base deficit development and its prognostic significance in 
posttrauma critical illness: an analysis by the trauma regis-
try of the Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Unfallchirurgie. Shock. 
2001;15(2):83-89.
  59.	Rutherford EJ, Morris JA Jr., Reed GW, Hall KS. Base defi-
cit stratifies mortality and determines therapy. J Trauma. 
1992;33(3):417-423.
  60.	Thorson CM, Van Haren RM, Ryan ML, et al. Admission 
hematocrit and transfusion requirements after trauma. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2013;216(1):65-73.
  61.	Clarke JR, Trooskin SZ, Doshi PJ, Greenwald L, Mode CJ. 
Time to laparotomy for intra-abdominal bleeding from trauma 
does affect survival for delays up to 90 minutes. J Trauma. 
2002;52(3):420-425.
  62.	Holcomb JB, Jenkins D, Rhee P, et al. Damage control 
resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy 
of trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62(2):307-310.
  63.	Marshall HP Jr., Capone A, Courcoulas AP, et al. Effects of 
hemodilution on long-term survival in an uncontrolled hem-
orrhagic shock model in rats. J Trauma. Oct 1997;43(4): 
673-679.
  64.	Bickell WH, Wall MJ Jr., Pepe PE, et al. Immediate versus 
delayed fluid resuscitation for hypotensive patients with pene-
trating torso injuries. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(17):1105-1109.
  65.	Human albumin administration in critically ill patients: system-
atic review of randomised controlled trials. Cochrane Injuries 
Group Albumin Reviewers. BMJ. 1998;317(7153):235-240.
  66.	Mann DV, Robinson MK, Rounds JD, et al. Superiority of 
blood over saline resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock: 
a 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Ann Surg. 
1997;226(5):653-661.
  67.	Vassar MJ, Fischer RP, O’Brien PE, et al. A multicenter trial 
for resuscitation of injured patients with 7.5% sodium chlo-
ride. The effect of added dextran 70. The Multicenter Group 
for the Study of Hypertonic Saline in Trauma Patients. Arch 
Surg. 1993;128(9):1003-1011; discussion 1011-1013.
  68.	Hebert PC, Yetisir E, Martin C, et al. Is a low transfusion 
threshold safe in critically ill patients with cardiovascular dis-
eases? Crit Care Med. 2001;29(2):227-234.
  69.	Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, ran-
domized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements 
in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care 
Investigators, Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. N Engl J 
Med. 1999;340(6):409-417.
  70.	Holcomb JB, Del Junco DJ, Fox EE, et al. The Prospec-
tive, Observational, Multicenter, Major Trauma Transfusion 
(PROMMTT) study: comparative effectiveness of a time-vary-
ing treatment with competing risks. Arch Surg. 2012:1-10.
  71.	Gonzalez EA, Moore FA, Holcomb JB, et al. Fresh frozen 
plasma should be given earlier to patients requiring massive 
transfusion. J Trauma. 2007;62(1):112-119.
  72.	Borgman MA, Spinella PC, Perkins JG, et al. The ratio 
of blood products transfused affects mortality in patients 
receiving massive transfusions at a combat support hospi-
tal. J Trauma. 2007;63(4):805-813.
  73.	Stansbury LG, Dutton RP, Stein DM, Bochicchio GV, Sca-
lea TM, Hess JR. Controversy in trauma resuscitation: do 
ratios of plasma to red blood cells matter? Transfus Med Rev. 
2009;23(4):255-265.
  74.	Hess JR, Lindell AL, Stansbury LG, Dutton RP, Scalea TM. 
The prevalence of abnormal results of conventional coagu-
lation tests on admission to a trauma center. Transfusion. 
2009;49(1):34-39.
  75.	Cosgriff N, Moore EE, Sauaia A, Kenny-Moynihan M, Burch 
JM, Galloway B. Predicting life-threatening coagulopathy in 
the massively transfused trauma patient: hypothermia and 
acidoses revisited. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):857-861; discussion 
861-862.
  76.	Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased plasma 
and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves outcome in 
466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. Ann Surg. 
2008;248(3):447-458.
  77.	Brasel KJ, Vercruysse G, Spinella PC, et al. The association 
of blood component use ratios with the survival of massively 
transfused trauma patients with and without severe brain 
injury. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3):S343-352.
  78.	Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al. The importance of 
early treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma 
patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9771):1096-
1101, 1101 e1091-1092.
  79.	Niles SE, McLaughlin DF, Perkins JG, et al. Increased mortal-
ity associated with the early coagulopathy of trauma in com-
bat casualties. J Trauma. 2008;64(6):1459-1463; discussion 
1463-1465.
  80.	Holcomb JB, Minei KM, Scerbo ML, et al. Admission rapid 
thrombelastography can replace conventional coagulation 
tests in the emergency department: experience with 1974 con-
secutive trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2012;256(3):476-486.
  81.	Roumen RM, Redl H, Schlag G, et al. Inflammatory media-
tors in relation to the development of multiple organ fail-
ure in patients after severe blunt trauma. Crit Care Med. 
1995;23(3):474-480.
  82.	Leone M, Boutiere B, Camoin-Jau L, et al. Systemic endo-
thelial activation is greater in septic than in traumatic-
hemorrhagic shock but does not correlate with endothelial 
activation in skin biopsies. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(4): 
808-814.
  83.	Mollen KP, Anand RJ, Tsung A, Prince JM, Levy RM, 
Billiar TR. Emerging paradigm: toll-like receptor 4-senti-
nel for the detection of tissue damage. Shock. 2006;26(5): 
430-437.
  84.	Landry DW, Oliver JA. The pathogenesis of vasodilatory 
shock. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(8):588-595.
  85.	Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, Clermont G, 
Carcillo J, Pinsky MR. Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the 
United States: analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated 
costs of care. Crit Care Med. 2001;29(7):1303-1310.
  86.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving Sep-
sis Campaign: international guidelines for management of 
severe sepsis and septic shock, 2012. Intensive Care Med. 
2013;39(2):165-228.
  87.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe 
sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1): 
296-327.
  88.	Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Billot L. Hydroxyethyl starch or saline 
in intensive care. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(8):775.
  89.	Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 
130/0.42 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367(2):124-134.
  90.	Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed 
therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1368-1377.
134
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
  91.	van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Inten-
sive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345(19):1359-1367.
  92.	Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with tra-
ditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. The Acute Respiratory Dis-
tress Syndrome Network. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(18): 
1301-1308.
  93.	Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treatment 
with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on 
mortality in patients with septic shock. JAMA. 2002;288(7): 
862-871.
  94.	Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D, et al. Hydrocortisone therapy 
for patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(2): 
111-124.
  95.	Hollenberg SM, Kavinsky CJ, Parrillo JE. Cardiogenic shock. 
Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(1):47-59.
  96.	Webb JG, Lowe AM, Sanborn TA, et al. Percutaneous cor-
onary intervention for cardiogenic shock in the SHOCK 
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42(8):1380-1386.
  97.	Edens JW, Chung KK, Pamplin JC, et al. Predictors of early 
acute lung injury at a combat support hospital: a prospective 
observational study. J Trauma. 2010;69(Suppl 1):S81-86.
  98.	Aji J, Hollenberg S. Cardiogenic shock: giving the heart a 
break. Crit Care Med. 2006;34(4):1248-1249.
  99.	Alonso DR, Scheidt S, Post M, Killip T. Pathophysiology of 
cardiogenic shock. Quantification of myocardial necrosis, 
clinical, pathologic, and electrocardiographic correlations. 
Circulation. 1973;48(3):588-596.
100.	Goldstein DJ, Oz MC. Mechanical support for postcardi-
otomy cardiogenic shock. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2000;12(3):220-228.
101.	Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Third universal defi-
nition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012; 
60(16):1581-1598.
102.	Gibbons RJ, Smith SC Jr., Antman E. American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association clinical practice guidelines: 
Part II: evolutionary changes in a continuous quality improve-
ment project. Circulation. 2003;107(24):3101-3107.
103.	Menon V, Hochman JS. Management of cardiogenic shock 
complicating acute myocardial infarction. Heart. 2002; 
88(5):531-537.
104.	Levi L, Wolf A, Belzberg H. Hemodynamic parameters in 
patients with acute cervical cord trauma: description, interven-
tion, and prediction of outcome. Neurosurgery. 1993;33(6): 
1007-1016; discussion 1016-1007.
105.	Zipnick RI, Scalea TM, Trooskin SZ, et al. Hemodynamic 
responses to penetrating spinal cord injuries. J Trauma. 1993; 
35(4):578-582; discussion 582-583.
106.	Abou-Khalil B, Scalea TM, Trooskin SZ, Henry SM, Hitch-
cock R. Hemodynamic responses to shock in young trauma 
patients: need for invasive monitoring. Crit Care Med. 1994; 
22(4):633-639.
107.	Claridge JA, Crabtree TD, Pelletier SJ, Butler K, Sawyer RG, 
Young JS. Persistent occult hypoperfusion is associated with 
a significant increase in infection rate and mortality in major 
trauma patients. J Trauma. 2000;48(1):8-14; discussion 14-15.
108.	Ivatury RR, Simon RJ, Havriliak D, Garcia C, Greenbarg 
J, Stahl WM. Gastric mucosal pH and oxygen delivery and 
oxygen consumption indices in the assessment of adequacy of 
resuscitation after trauma: a prospective, randomized study. 
J Trauma. 1995;39(1):128-134; discussion 134-126.
109.	Maynard N, Beale R, Smithies M, Bihari D. Gastric intramu-
cosal pH in critically ill patients. Lancet. 1992;339(8792): 
550-551.
110.	Gomersall CD, Joynt GM, Freebairn RC, Hung V, Buckley 
TA, Oh TE. Resuscitation of critically ill patients based on 
the results of gastric tonometry: a prospective, randomized, 
controlled trial. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(3):607-614.
111.	Cairns CB, Moore FA, Haenel JB, et al. Evidence for early 
supply independent mitochondrial dysfunction in patients 
developing multiple organ failure after trauma. J Trauma. 
1997;42(3):532-536.
112.	Cohn SM, Crookes BA, Proctor KG. Near-infrared spectros-
copy in resuscitation. J Trauma. 2003;54(5 Suppl):S199-202.
113.	Knudson MM, Bermudez KM, Doyle CA, Mackersie RC, 
Hopf HW, Morabito D. Use of tissue oxygen tension measure-
ments during resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma. 
1997;42(4):608-614; discussion 614-606.
114.	McKinley BA, Marvin RG, Cocanour CS, Moore FA. Tissue 
hemoglobin O2 saturation during resuscitation of traumatic 
shock monitored using near infrared spectrometry. J Trauma. 
2000;48(4):637-642.
115.	Cheatham ML, Nelson LD, Chang MC, Safcsak K. Right ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume index as a predictor of preload 
status in patients on positive end-expiratory pressure. Crit 
Care Med. 1998;26(11):1801-1806.
116.	Chang MC, Meredith JW, Kincaid EH, Miller PR. Maintain-
ing survivors’ values of left ventricular power output dur-
ing shock resuscitation: a prospective pilot study. J Trauma. 
2000;49(1):26-33; discussion 34-37.
Surgical Infections
Greg J. Beilman and David L. Dunn
6
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Although treatment of infection has been an integral part of the 
surgeon’s practice since the dawn of time, the body of knowl-
edge that led to the present field of surgical infectious disease 
was derived from the evolution of germ theory and antisepsis. 
Application of the latter to clinical practice, concurrent with the 
development of anesthesia, was pivotal in allowing surgeons to 
expand their repertoire to encompass complex procedures that 
previously were associated with extremely high rates of mor-
bidity and mortality due to postoperative infections. However, 
until recently the occurrence of infection related to the surgical 
wound was the rule rather than the exception. In fact, the devel-
opment of modalities to effectively prevent and treat infection 
has occurred only within the last several decades.
A number of observations by nineteenth-century physi-
cians and investigators were critical to our current understand-
ing of the pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment of surgical 
infections. In 1846, Ignaz Semmelweis, a Magyar physician, 
took a post at the Allgemein Krankenhaus in Vienna. He noticed 
that the mortality from puerperal (“childbed”) fever was much 
higher in the teaching ward (1:11) than in the ward where 
patients were delivered by midwives (1:29). He also made 
the interesting observation that women who delivered prior to 
arrival on the teaching ward had a negligible mortality rate. The 
tragic death of a colleague due to overwhelming infection after 
a knife scratch received during an autopsy of a woman who had 
died of puerperal fever led Semmelweis to observe that patho-
logic changes in his friend were identical to those of women 
dying from this postpartum disease. He then hypothesized that 
puerperal fever was caused by putrid material transmitted from 
patients dying of this disease by carriage on the examining 
fingers of the medical students and physicians who frequently 
went from the autopsy room to the wards. The low mortal-
ity noted in the midwives’ ward, Semmelweis realized, was 
Historical Background	
135
Pathogenesis of Infection	
137
Host Defenses / 137
Definitions / 138
Microbiology of  
Infectious Agents	
139
Bacteria / 139
Fungi / 140
Viruses / 140
Prevention and Treatment  
of Surgical Infections	
141
General Principles / 141
Source Control / 141
Appropriate Use of Antimicrobial  
Agents / 142
Infections of Significance  
in Surgical Patients	
147
Surgical Site Infections / 147
Intra-Abdominal Infections / 149
Organ-Specific Infections / 150
Infections of the Skin and  
Soft Tissue / 151
Postoperative Nosocomial  
Infections / 152
Sepsis / 154
Blood-Borne Pathogens / 156
Biologic Warfare Agents	
156
Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax) / 156
Yersinia pestis (Plague) / 157
Smallpox / 157
Francisella tularensis  
(Tularemia) / 157
chapter 
because midwives did not participate in autopsies. Fired with 
the zeal of his revelation, he posted a notice on the door to the 
ward requiring all caregivers to rinse their hands thoroughly in 
chlorine water prior to entering the area. This simple interven-
tion reduced mortality from puerperal fever to 1.5%, surpassing 
the record of the midwives. In 1861, he published his classic 
work on childbed fever based on records from his practice. 
Unfortunately, Semmelweis’ ideas were not well accepted by 
the authorities of the time.1 Increasingly frustrated by the indif-
ference of the medical profession, he began writing open letters 
to well-known obstetricians in Europe, and was committed to 
an asylum due to concerns that he was losing his mind. He died 
shortly thereafter. His achievements were only recognized after 
Pasteur’s description of the germ theory of disease.
Louis Pasteur performed a body of work during the latter 
part of the nineteenth century that provided the underpinnings 
of modern microbiology, at the time known as “germ theory.” 
His work in humans followed experiments identifying infec-
tious agents in silkworms. He was able to elucidate the principle 
that contagious diseases are caused by specific microbes and 
that these microbes are foreign to the infected organism. Using 
this principle he developed techniques of sterilization critical to 
oenology, and identified several bacteria responsible for human 
illnesses, including Staphylococcus and Streptococcus pneu-
moniae (pneumococcus).
Joseph Lister, the son of a wine merchant, was appointed 
professor of surgery at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary in 1859. In 
his early practice, he noted that over 50% of his patients under-
going amputation died because of postoperative infection. After 
hearing of Pasteur’s theory, Lister experimented with the use of 
a solution of carbolic acid, which he knew was being used to 
treat sewage. He first reported his findings to the British Medi-
cal Association in 1867 using dressings saturated with carbolic 
acid on 12 patients with compound fractures; 10 recovered 
without amputation, one survived with amputation, and one 
died of causes unrelated to the wound. In spite of initial resis-
tance, his methods were quickly adopted throughout Europe.
From 1878 until 1880, Robert Koch was the District Medi-
cal Officer for Wollstein, which was an area in which anthrax 
was endemic. Performing experiments in his home, without the 
benefit of scientific equipment and academic contact, Koch 
developed techniques for culture of Bacillus anthracis and 
proved the ability of this organism to cause anthrax in healthy 
animals. He developed the following four postulates to identify 
the association of organisms with specific diseases: (a) the sus-
pected pathogenic organism should be present in all cases of 
the disease and absent from healthy animals, (b) the suspected 
pathogen should be isolated from a diseased host and grown 
in a pure culture in vitro, (c) cells from a pure culture of the 
suspected organism should cause disease in a healthy animal, 
and (d) the organism should be reisolated from the newly dis-
eased animal and shown to be the same as the original. He used 
these same techniques to identify the organisms responsible for 
cholera and tuberculosis. During the next century, Koch’s pos-
tulates, as they came to be called, became critical to our under-
standing of surgical infections and remain so today.2
The first intra-abdominal operation to treat infection via 
“source control” (i.e., surgical intervention to eliminate the 
source of infection) was appendectomy. This operation was 
pioneered by Charles McBurney at the New York College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, among others.3 McBurney’s classic 
report on early operative intervention for appendicitis was pre-
sented before the New York Surgical Society in 1889. Appen-
dectomy for the treatment of appendicitis, previously an often 
fatal disease, was popularized after the 1902 coronation of King 
136
Key Points
1
	 Sepsis is both the presence of infection and the host response to 
infection (systemic inflammatory response syndrome, SIRS). 
Sepsis is a clinical spectrum, ranging from sepsis (SIRS plus 
infection) to severe sepsis (organ dysfunction), to septic shock 
(hypotension requiring vasopressors). Outcomes in patients with 
sepsis are improved with an organized approach to therapy that 
includes rapid resuscitation, antibiotics, and source control.
2
	 Source control is a key concept in the treatment of most surgi-
cally relevant infections. Infected or necrotic material must be 
drained or removed as part of the treatment plan in this setting. 
Delays in adequate source control are associated with wors-
ened outcomes.
3
	 Principles relevant to appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis for 
surgery: (a) select an agent with activity against organisms 
commonly found at the site of surgery, (b) the initial dose of 
the antibiotic should be given within 30 minutes prior to the 
creation of the incision, (c) the antibiotic should be redosed 
during long operations based upon the half-life of the agent to 
ensure adequate tissue levels, and (d) the antibiotic regimen 
should not be continued for more than 24 hours after surgery 
for routine prophylaxis.
4
	 When using antimicrobial agents for therapy of serious infec-
tion, several principles should be followed: (a) identify likely 
sources of infection, (b) select an agent (or agents) that will 
have efficacy against likely organisms for these sources, (c) 
inadequate or delayed antibiotic therapy results in increased 
mortality, so it is important to begin therapy rapidly with 
broader coverage, (d) when possible, obtain cultures early 
and use results to refine therapy, (e) if no infection is iden-
tified after 3 days, strongly consider discontinuation of 
antibiotics, based upon the patient’s clinical course, (f) dis-
continue antibiotics after an appropriate course of therapy.
5
	 The incidence of surgical site infections can be reduced by 
appropriate patient preparation, timely perioperative anti-
biotic administration, maintenance of perioperative normo-
thermia and normoglycemia, and appropriate wound 
management.
6
	 The keys to good outcomes in patients with necrotizing soft 
tissue infection are early recognition and appropriate 
debridement of infected tissue with repeated debridement 
until no further signs of infection are present.
7
	 Transmission of HIV and other infections spread by blood 
and body fluid from patient to health care worker can be 
minimized by observation of universal precautions, which 
include routine use of barriers when anticipating contact 
with blood or body fluids, washing of hands and other skin 
surfaces immediately after contact with blood or body flu-
ids, and careful handling and disposal of sharp instruments 
during and after use.
Edward VII of England was delayed due to his need for an 
appendectomy, which was performed by Sir Frederick Treves. 
The king desperately needed an appendectomy but strongly 
opposed going into the hospital, protesting, “I have a corona-
tion on hand.” However, Treves was adamant, stating, “It will 
be a funeral, if you don’t have the operation.” Treves carried the 
debate, and the king lived.
During the twentieth century the discovery of effective 
antimicrobials added another tool to the armamentarium of 
modern surgeons. Sir Alexander Fleming, after serving in the 
British Army Medical Corps during World War I, continued 
work on the natural antibacterial action of the blood and antisep-
tics. In 1928, while studying influenza virus, he noted a zone of 
inhibition around a mold colony (Penicillium notatum) that ser-
endipitously grew on a plate of Staphylococcus, and he named 
the active substance penicillin. This first effective antibacterial 
agent subsequently led to the development of hundreds of potent 
antimicrobials, set the stage for their use as prophylaxis against 
postoperative infection, and became a critical component of the 
armamentarium to treat aggressive, lethal surgical infections.
Concurrent with the development of numerous antimicro-
bial agents were advances in the field of clinical microbiology. 
Many new microbes were identified, including numerous anaer-
obes; the autochthonous microflora of the skin, gastrointestinal 
tract, and other parts of the body that the surgeon encountered 
in the process of an operation were characterized in great 
detail. However, it remained unclear whether these organisms, 
anaerobes in particular, were commensals or pathogens. Sub-
sequently, the initial clinical observations of surgeons such as 
Frank Meleney, William Altemeier, and others provided the 
key, when they observed that aerobes and anaerobes could 
137
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
synergize to cause serious soft tissue and severe intra-abdomi-
nal infection.4,5 Thus, the concepts that resident microbes were 
nonpathogenic until they entered a sterile body cavity at the 
time of surgery, and that many, if not most, surgical infections 
were polymicrobial in nature, became critical ideas, and were 
promulgated by a number of clinician-scientists over the last 
several decades.6,7 These tenets became firmly established after 
microbiology laboratories demonstrated the invariable pres-
ence of aerobes and anaerobes in peritoneal cultures obtained 
at the time of surgery for intra-abdominal infection due to a 
perforated viscus or gangrenous appendicitis. Clinical trials 
provided ample evidence that optimal therapy for these infec-
tions required effective source control, plus the administration 
of antimicrobial agents directed against both types of pathogens.
William Osler, a prolific writer and one of the fathers of 
American medicine, made an observation in 1904 in his treatise 
The Evolution of Modern Medicine that was to have profound 
implications for the future of treatment of infection: “Except 
on few occasions, the patient appears to die from the body’s 
response to infection rather than from it.”8 The discovery of the 
first cytokines began to allow insight into the human organism’s 
response to infection, and led to an explosion in our understand-
ing of the host inflammatory response. Expanding knowledge of 
the multiple pathways activated during the response to invasion 
by infectious organisms has permitted the design of new thera-
pies targeted at modifying the inflammatory response to infec-
tion, which seems to cause much of the organ dysfunction and 
failure. Preventing and treating this process of multiple organ 
failure during infection is one of the major challenges of modern 
critical care and surgical infectious disease.
PATHOGENESIS OF INFECTION
Host Defenses
The mammalian host possesses several layers of endogenous 
defense mechanisms that serve to prevent microbial invasion, 
limit proliferation of microbes within the host, and contain or 
eradicate invading microbes. These defenses are integrated and 
redundant so that the various components function as a com-
plex, highly regulated system that is extremely effective in cop-
ing with microbial invaders. They include site-specific defenses 
that function at the tissue level, as well as components that 
freely circulate throughout the body in both blood and lymph. 
Systemic host defenses invariably are recruited to a site of infec-
tion, a process that begins immediately upon introduction of 
microbes into a sterile area of the body. Perturbation of one 
or more components of these defenses (e.g., via immunosup-
pressants, foreign body, chronic illness, and burns) may have 
substantial negative impact on resistance to infection.
Entry of microbes into the mammalian host is precluded 
by the presence of a number of barriers that possess either an 
epithelial (integument) or mucosal (respiratory, gut, and uro-
genital) surface. Barrier function, however, is not solely limited 
to physical characteristics. Host barrier cells may secrete sub-
stances that limit microbial proliferation or prevent invasion. 
Also, resident or commensal microbes (endogenous or autoch-
thonous host microflora) adherent to the physical surface and to 
each other may preclude invasion, particularly of virulent organ-
isms (colonization resistance).9
The most extensive physical barrier is the integument or 
skin. In addition to the physical barrier posed by the epithelial 
surface, the skin harbors its own resident microflora that may 
block the attachment and invasion of noncommensal microbes. 
Microbes are also held in check by chemicals that sebaceous 
glands secrete and by the constant shedding of epithelial cells. 
The endogenous microflora of the integument primarily com-
prises gram-positive aerobic microbes belonging to the genera 
Staphylococcus and Streptococcus, as well as Corynebacterium 
and Propionibacterium species. These organisms plus Entero-
coccus faecalis and faecium, Escherichia coli and other Entero-
bacteriaceae, and yeast such as Candida albicans can be isolated 
from the infraumbilical regions of the body. Diseases of the skin 
(e.g., eczema and dermatitis) are associated with overgrowth of 
skin commensal organisms, and barrier breaches invariably lead 
to the introduction of these microbes.
The respiratory tract possesses several host defense mech-
anisms that facilitate the maintenance of sterility in the distal 
bronchi and alveoli under normal circumstances. In the upper 
respiratory tract, respiratory mucus traps larger particles, includ-
ing microbes. This mucus is then passed into the upper airways 
and oropharynx by ciliated epithelial cells, where the mucus 
is cleared via coughing. Smaller particles arriving in the lower 
respiratory tract are cleared via phagocytosis by pulmonary 
alveolar macrophages. Any process that diminishes these host 
defenses can lead to development of bronchitis or pneumonia.
The urogenital, biliary, pancreatic ductal, and distal respi-
ratory tracts do not possess resident microflora in healthy indi-
viduals, although microbes may be present if these barriers are 
affected by disease (e.g., malignancy, inflammation, calculi, 
or foreign body), or if microorganisms are introduced from an 
external source (e.g., urinary catheter or pulmonary aspiration). 
In contrast, significant numbers of microbes are encountered in 
many portions of the gastrointestinal tract, with vast numbers 
being found within the oropharynx and distal colon or rectum, 
although the specific organisms differ.
One would suppose that the entire gastrointestinal tract 
would be populated via those microbes found in the orophar-
ynx, but this is not the case.9 This is because after ingestion 
these organisms routinely are killed in the highly acidic, low-
motility environment of the stomach during the initial phases of 
digestion. Thus, small numbers of microbes populate the gastric 
mucosa ~102 to 103 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL. This popu-
lation expands in the presence of drugs or disease states that 
diminish gastric acidity. Microbes that are not destroyed within 
the stomach enter the small intestine, in which a certain amount 
of microbial proliferation takes place, such that approximately 
105 to 108 CFU/mL are present in the terminal ileum.
The relatively low-oxygen, static environment of the colon 
is accompanied by the exponential growth of microbes that com-
prise the most extensive host endogenous microflora. Anaerobic 
microbes outnumber aerobic species approximately 100:1 in the 
distal colon, and approximately 1011 to 1012 CFU/g are present 
in feces. Large numbers of facultative and strict anaerobes (Bac-
teroides fragilis,distasonis, and thetaiotaomicron, Bifidobacte-
rium, Clostridium, Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus, 
and Peptostreptococcus species) as well as several orders of 
magnitude fewer aerobic microbes (Escherichia coli and other 
Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus faecalis and faecium, Can-
dida albicans and other Candida spp.) are present. Intriguingly, 
although colonization resistance on the part of this extensive, 
well-characterized host microflora effectively prevents invasion 
of enteric pathogens such as Salmonella, Shigella, Vibrio, and 
other enteropathogenic bacterial species, these same organisms 
138
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
provide the initial inoculum for infection should perforation of 
the gastrointestinal tract occur. It is of great interest that only 
some of these microbial species predominate in established 
intra-abdominal infections.
Once microbes enter a sterile body compartment (e.g., 
pleural or peritoneal cavity) or tissue, additional host defenses 
act to limit and/or eliminate these pathogens. Initially, sev-
eral primitive and relatively nonspecific host defenses act to 
contain the nidus of infection, which may include microbes as 
well as debris, devitalized tissue, and foreign bodies, depend-
ing on the nature of the injury. These defenses include the 
physical barrier of the tissue itself, as well as the capacity of 
proteins, such as lactoferrin and transferrin to sequester the 
critical microbial growth factor iron, thereby limiting micro-
bial growth. In addition, fibrinogen within the inflammatory 
fluid has the ability to trap large numbers of microbes dur-
ing the process in which it polymerizes into fibrin. Within 
the peritoneal cavity, unique host defenses exist, including a 
diaphragmatic pumping mechanism whereby particles, includ-
ing microbes within peritoneal fluid are expunged from the 
abdominal cavity via specialized structures (stomata) on the 
undersurface of the diaphragm that lead to thoracic lymphatic 
channels. Concurrently, containment by the omentum, the so-
called “gatekeeper” of the abdomen and intestinal ileus, serves 
to wall off infections. However, the latter processes and fibrin 
trapping have a high likelihood of contributing to the forma-
tion of an intra-abdominal abscess.
Microbes also immediately encounter a series of host 
defense mechanisms that reside within the vast majority of 
tissues of the body. These include resident macrophages and 
low levels of complement (C) proteins and immunoglobulins 
(e.g., antibodies).10 The response in macrophages is initiated by 
genome-encoded pattern recognition receptors which respond to 
invading microbes. With exposure to a foreign organism, these 
receptors recognize microbial pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs) and endogenous danger-associated molec-
ular patterns (DAMPs). Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are one 
well-defined example of a PAMP that plays an important role 
in pathogen signaling.11 Resident macrophages secrete a wide 
array of substances in response to the above-mentioned pro-
cesses, some of which appear to regulate the cellular compo-
nents of the host defense response. This results in recruitment 
and proliferation of inflammatory cells. Macrophage cytokine 
synthesis is upregulated. Secretion of tumor necrosis factor-
alpha (TNF-α), of interleukins (IL)-1β, 6, and 8; and of gamma 
interferon (IFN-γ) occurs within the tissue milieu, and, depend-
ing on the magnitude of the host defense response, the systemic 
circulation.12 Concurrently, a counterregulatory response is ini-
tiated consisting of binding protein (TNF-BP), cytokine recep-
tor antagonists (e.g., IL-1ra), and anti-inflammatory cytokines 
(IL-4 and IL-10).
The interaction of microbes with these first-line host 
defenses leads to microbial opsonization (C1q, C3bi, and IgFc), 
phagocytosis, and both extracellular (C5b6-9 membrane attack 
complex) and intracellular microbial destruction (via cellular 
ingestion into phagocytic vacuoles). Concurrently, the classi-
cal and alternate complement pathways are activated both via 
direct contact with and via IgM>IgG binding to microbes, lead-
ing to the release of a number of different complement protein 
fragments (C3a, C4a, C5a) that are biologically active, acting 
to markedly enhance vascular permeability. Bacterial cell wall 
components and a variety of enzymes that are expelled from 
leukocyte phagocytic vacuoles during microbial phagocytosis 
and killing act in this capacity as well.
Simultaneously, the release of substances to which poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in the bloodstream are 
attracted takes place. These consist of C5a, microbial cell wall 
peptides containing N-formyl-methionine, and macrophage 
secretion of cytokines such as IL-8. This process of host defense 
recruitment leads to further influx of inflammatory fluid into the 
area of incipient infection, and is accompanied by diapedesis of 
large numbers of PMNs, a process that begins within several 
minutes and may peak within hours or days. The magnitude 
of the response and eventual outcome generally are related to 
several factors: (a) the initial number of microbes, (b) the rate 
of microbial proliferation in relation to containment and killing 
by host defenses, (c) microbial virulence, and (d) the potency of 
host defenses. In regard to the latter, drugs or disease states that 
diminish any or multiple components of host defenses are asso-
ciated with higher rates and potentially more grave infections.
Definitions
Several possible outcomes can occur subsequent to microbial 
invasion and the interaction of microbes with resident and 
recruited host defenses: (a) eradication, (b) containment, often 
leading to the presence of purulence—the hallmark of chronic 
infections (e.g., a furuncle in the skin and soft tissue or abscess 
within the parenchyma of an organ or potential space), (c) 
locoregional infection (cellulitis, lymphangitis, and aggressive 
soft tissue infection) with or without distant spread of infection 
(metastatic abscess), or (d) systemic infection (bacteremia or 
fungemia). Obviously, the latter represents the failure of resi-
dent and recruited host defenses at the local level, and is asso-
ciated with significant morbidity and mortality in the clinical 
setting. In addition, it is not uncommon that disease progres-
sion occurs such that serious locoregional infection is associated 
with concurrent systemic infection. A chronic abscess also may 
intermittently drain and/or be associated with bacteremia.
Infection is defined by the presence of microorganisms 
in host tissue or the bloodstream. At the site of infection the 
classic findings of rubor, calor, and dolor in areas such as the 
skin or subcutaneous tissue are common. Most infections in nor-
mal individuals with intact host defenses are associated with 
these local manifestations, plus systemic manifestations such as 
elevated temperature, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, 
tachycardia, or tachypnea. The systemic manifestations noted 
previously comprise the systemic inflammatory response syn-
drome (SIRS). A documented or suspected infection with 
some of the findings of SIRS define sepsis.13
SIRS can be caused by a variety of disease processes, 
including pancreatitis, polytrauma, malignancy, transfusion 
reaction, as well as infection (Fig. 6-1). There are a variety of 
systemic manifestations of infection, with the classic factors 
of fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea, broadened to include a 
variety of other variables (Table 6-1).13 Sepsis (SIRS caused 
by infection) is mediated by the production of a cascade of pro-
inflammatory mediators produced in response to exposure to 
microbial products. These products include lipopolysaccharide 
(endotoxin, LPS) derived from Gram-negative organisms; pep-
tidoglycans and teichoic acids from gram-positive organisms; 
many different microbial cell wall components, such as mannan 
from yeast and fungi; and many others.
Severe sepsis is characterized as sepsis (defined previ-
ously) combined with the presence of new-onset organ failure. 
1
139
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Figure 6-1.  Relationship between infection and 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). 
Sepsis is the presence both of infection and the sys-
temic inflammatory response, shown here as the 
intersection of these two areas. Other conditions 
may cause SIRS as well (trauma, aspiration, etc.). 
Severe sepsis (and septic shock) are both subsets 
of sepsis.
Table 6-1 
Criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS)
General variables
Fever (core temp >38.3°C)
Hypothermia (core temp <36°C)
Heart rate >90 bpm
Tachypnea
Altered mental status
Significant edema or positive fluid balance (>20 mL/kg over  
  24 h)
Hyperglycemia in the absence of diabetes
Inflammatory variables
Leukocytosis (WBC >12,000)
Leukopenia (WBC <4000)
Bandemia (>10% band forms)
Plasma C-reactive protein >2 s.d. above normal value
Plasma procalcitonin >2 s.d. above normal value
Hemodynamic variables
Arterial hypotension (SBP <90 mm Hg, MAP <70, or SBP  
  decrease >40 mm Hg)
Organ dysfunction variables
Arterial hypoxemia
Acute oliguria
Creatinine increase
Coagulation abnormalities
Ileus
Thrombocytopenia
Hyperbilirubinemia
Tissue perfusion variables
Hyperlactatemia
Decreased capillary filling
bpm = beats per minute; MAP = mean arterial pressure; SBP = sys-
tolic blood pressure; s.d. = standard deviations; Svo2 = venous oxygen 
saturation; WBC = white blood cell count.
Trauma
Burn
Pancreatitis
Aspiration
Infection
SIRS
Severe 
sepsis
Sepsis
Septic 
shock
Severe sepsis is the most common cause of death in noncoro-
nary critical care units and the 11th most common cause of 
death overall in the United States, with a mortality rate of 
10.3 cases/100,000 population in 2010.14 A number of organ 
dysfunction scoring systems have been described.15,16,17 With 
respect to clinical criteria, a patient with sepsis and the need for 
ventilatory support, with oliguria unresponsive to aggressive 
fluid resuscitation, or with hypotension requiring vasopressors 
should be considered to have developed severe sepsis. Septic 
shock is a state of acute circulatory failure identified by the 
presence of persistent arterial hypotension (systolic blood pres-
sure <90 mm Hg) despite adequate fluid resuscitation, with-
out other identifiable causes. Septic shock is the most severe 
manifestation of infection, occurring in approximately 40% of 
patients with severe sepsis; it has an attendant mortality rate of 
30% to 66%.18,19
While classification of severity of shock has been suc-
cessful in driving efforts to improve patient outcomes, staging 
of sepsis by other patient characteristics remains in its infancy. 
The impetus for development of such a scheme is related to 
the heterogeneity of the patient population developing sepsis, 
an example of which would include two patients, both in the 
intensive care unit (ICU), who develop criteria consistent with 
septic shock. While both have infection and sepsis-associated 
hypotension, one might expect a different outcome in a young, 
healthy patient who develops urosepsis than in an elderly, immu-
nosuppressed lung transplant recipient who develops invasive 
fungal infection. One schema for providing such a classifica-
tion is the predisposition, infection, response and organ failure 
(PIRO) classification.20 This scheme has borrowed from the 
tumor-node-metastasis staging scheme developed for oncol-
ogy. The PIRO staging system stratifies patients based on their 
predisposing conditions (P), the nature and extent of the infec-
tion (I), the nature and magnitude of the host response (R), and 
the degree of concomitant organ dysfunction (O). Clinical trials 
using this classification system have confirmed the validity of 
this concept.21, 22
MICROBIOLOGY OF INFECTIOUS AGENTS
A partial list of common pathogens that cause infections in sur-
gical patients is provided in Table 6-2.
Bacteria
Bacteria are responsible for the majority of surgical infections. 
Specific species are identified using Gram’s stain and growth 
characteristics on specific media. The Gram’s stain is an impor-
tant evaluation that allows rapid classification of bacteria by 
color. This color is related to the staining characteristics of the 
bacterial cell wall: gram-positive bacteria stain blue and Gram-
negative bacteria stain red. Bacteria are classified based upon 
140
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
a number of additional characteristics, including morphology 
(cocci and bacilli), the pattern of division (e.g., single organ-
isms, groups of organisms in pairs [diplococci], clusters [staph-
ylococci], and chains [streptococci]), and the presence and 
location of spores.
Gram-positive bacteria that frequently cause infections in 
surgical patients include aerobic skin commensals (Staphylococcus 
Table 6-2 
Common Pathogens in Surgical Patients
Gram-positive aerobic cocci
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Streptococcus pyogenes
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Enterococcus faecium, E. faecalis
Gram-negative aerobic bacilli
Escherichia coli
Haemophilus influenzae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Proteus mirabilis
Enterobacter cloacae, E. aerogenes
Serratia marcescens
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus
Citrobacter freundii
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Xanthomonas maltophilia
Anaerobes
Gram-positive
Clostridium difficile
Clostridium perfringens, C. tetani, C. septicum
Peptostreptococcus spp.
Gram-negative
Bacteroides fragilis
Fusobacterium spp.
Other bacteria
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Nocardia asteroides
Legionella pneumophila
Listeria monocytogenes
Fungi
Aspergillus fumigatus, A. niger, A. terreus, A. flavus
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Candida albicans
Candida glabrata, C. paropsilosis, C. krusei
Coccidiodes immitis
Cryptococcus neoformans
Histoplasma capsulatum
Mucor/Rhizopus
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-Barr virus
Hepatitis A, B, C viruses
Herpes simplex virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
Varicella zoster virus
aureus and epidermidis and Streptococcus pyogenes) and enteric 
organisms such as Enterococcus faecalis and faecium. Aerobic 
skin commensals cause a large percentage of surgical site infections 
(SSIs), either alone or in conjunction with other pathogens; entero-
cocci can cause nosocomial infections (urinary tract infections 
[UTIs] and bacteremia) in immunocompromised or chronically ill 
patients, but are of relatively low virulence in healthy individuals.
There are many pathogenic Gram-negative bacterial spe-
cies that are capable of causing infection in surgical patients. 
Most Gram-negative organisms of interest to the surgeon are 
bacilli belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae, including 
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Serratia marcescens, 
and Enterobacter, Citrobacter, and Acinetobacter spp. Other 
Gram-negative bacilli of note include Pseudomonas spp., 
including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and fluorescens and Xan-
thomonas spp.
Anaerobic organisms are unable to grow or divide poorly 
in air, as most do not possess the enzyme catalase, which allows 
for metabolism of reactive oxygen species. Anaerobes are the 
predominant indigenous flora in many areas of the human body, 
with the particular species being dependent on the site. For 
example, Propionibacterium acnes and other species are a major 
component of the skin microflora and cause the infectious mani-
festation of acne. As noted previously, large numbers of anaer-
obes contribute to the microflora of the oropharynx and colon.
Infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis was once 
one of the most common causes of death in Europe, causing 
one in four deaths in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, thoracic surgical inter-
vention was often required for severe pulmonary disease, now an 
increasingly uncommon occurrence in developed countries. This 
organism and other related organisms (M avium-intracellulare and 
M leprae) are known as acid-fast bacilli. Other acid-fast bacilli 
include Nocardia spp. These organisms typically are slow-
growing, sometimes necessitating observation in culture for 
weeks to months prior to final identification, although deoxyri-
bonucleic acid (DNA)-based analysis is increasingly available 
to provide a means for preliminary, rapid detection.
Fungi
Fungi typically are identified by use of special stains (e.g., 
potassium hydroxide (KOH), India ink, methenamine silver, 
or Giemsa). Initial identification is assisted by observation of 
the form of branching and septation in stained specimens or in 
culture. Final identification is based on growth characteristics 
in special media, similar to bacteria, as well as on the capacity 
for growth at a different temperature (25°C vs. 37°C). Fungi 
of relevance to surgeons include those that cause nosocomial 
infections in surgical patients as part of polymicrobial infec-
tions or fungemia (e.g., Candida albicans and related species), 
rare causes of aggressive soft tissue infections (e.g., Mucor, 
Rhizopus, and Absidia spp.), and so-called opportunistic patho-
gens that cause infection in the immunocompromised host (e.g., 
Aspergillus fumigatus, niger, terreus, and other spp., Blastomy-
ces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis, and Cryptococcus neo-
formans). Agents currently available for antifungal therapy are 
described in Table 6-3.
Viruses
Due to their small size and necessity for growth within cells, 
viruses are difficult to culture, requiring a longer time than is 
typically optimal for clinical decision making. Previously, viral 
141
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Table 6-3 
Antifungal agents and their characteristics
Antifungal
Advantages
Disadvantages
Amphotericin B
Broad-spectrum, inexpensive
Renal toxicity, premeds, IV only
Liposomal Amphotericin B
Broad-spectrum
Expensive, IV only, renal toxicity
Azoles
Fluconazole
IV and PO availability
Narrow-spectrum, drug interactions
Itraconazole
IV and PO availability
Narrow spectrum, no CSF penetration
Drug interactions, decreased cardiac contractility
Posaconazole
Broad-spectrum, zygomycete 
activity
PO only
Voriconazole
IV and PO availability, broad-
spectrum
IV diluent accumulates in renal failure (PO)
Visual disturbances
Echinocandins
Anidulafungin, caspofungin, 
micafungin
Broad-spectrum
IV only, poor CNS penetration
infection was identified by indirect means (i.e., the host anti-
body response). Recent advances in technology have allowed 
for the identification of the presence of viral DNA or ribonucleic 
acid (RNA) using methods such as polymerase chain reaction. 
Similarly to many fungal infections, most clinically relevant 
viral infections in surgical patients occur in the immunocom-
promised host, particularly those receiving immunosuppression 
to prevent rejection of a solid organ allograft. Relevant viruses 
include adenoviruses, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, her-
pes simplex virus, and varicella-zoster virus. Surgeons must be 
aware of the manifestations of hepatitis B and C virus, as well 
as human immunodeficiency virus infections, including their 
capacity to be transmitted to health care workers (see General 
Principles section). Prophylactic and therapeutic use of antiviral 
agents is discussed in Chap. 11.
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF  
SURGICAL INFECTIONS
General Principles
Maneuvers to diminish the presence of exogenous (surgeon 
and operating room environment) and endogenous (patient) 
microbes are termed prophylaxis, and consist of the use of 
mechanical, chemical, and antimicrobial modalities, or a com-
bination of these methods.
As described previously, the host resident microflora of 
the skin (patient and surgeon) and other barrier surfaces rep-
resent a potential source of microbes that can invade the body 
during trauma, thermal injury, or elective or emergent surgi-
cal intervention. For this reason, operating room personnel are 
versed in mild mechanical exfoliation of the skin of the hands 
and forearms using antibacterial preparations, and the intraop-
erative aseptic technique is employed. Similarly, application of 
an antibacterial agent to the skin of the patient at the proposed 
operative site takes place prior to creating an incision. Also, if 
necessary, hair removal should take place using a clipper rather 
than a razor; the latter promotes overgrowth of skin microbes in 
small nicks and cuts. Dedicated use of these modalities clearly 
has been shown to diminish the quantity of skin microflora, and 
although a direct correlation between praxis and reduced infec-
tion rates has not been demonstrated, comparison to infection 
rates prior to the use of antisepsis and sterile technique makes 
clear their utility and importance.
The aforementioned modalities are not capable of steril-
izing the hands of the surgeon or the skin or epithelial surfaces 
of the patient, although the inoculum can be reduced consider-
ably. Thus, entry through the skin, into the soft tissue, and into 
a body cavity or hollow viscus invariably is associated with the 
introduction of some degree of microbial contamination. For 
that reason, patients who undergo procedures that may be asso-
ciated with the ingress of significant numbers of microbes (e.g., 
colonic resection) or in whom the consequences of any type 
of infection due to said process would be dire (e.g., prosthetic 
vascular graft infection) should receive an antimicrobial agent.
Source Control
The primary precept of surgical infectious disease therapy 
consists of drainage of all purulent material, débridement of 
all infected, devitalized tissue, and debris, and/or removal of 
foreign bodies at the site of infection, plus remediation of the 
underlying cause of infection.23 A discrete, walled-off 
purulent fluid collection (i.e., an abscess) requires drain-
age via percutaneous drain insertion or an operative approach 
in which incision and drainage take place. An ongoing source 
of contamination (e.g., bowel perforation) or the presence of 
an aggressive, rapidly spreading infection (e.g., necrotizing 
soft tissue infection) invariably requires expedient, aggressive 
operative intervention, both to remove contaminated material 
and infected tissue (e.g., radical débridement or amputation) and 
to remove the initial cause of infection (e.g., bowel resection). 
Other treatment modalities such as antimicrobial agents, albeit 
critical, are of secondary importance to effective surgery with 
regard to treatment of surgical infections and overall outcome. 
Rarely, if ever, can an aggressive surgical infection be cured 
only by the administration of antibiotics, and never in the face of 
an ongoing source of contamination. Also, it has been repeatedly 
demonstrated that delay in operative intervention, whether due 
2
142
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
to misdiagnosis or the need for additional diagnostic studies, is 
associated with increased morbidity and occasional mortality.24
Appropriate Use of Antimicrobial Agents
A classification of antimicrobial agents, mechanisms of action, 
and spectrum of activity is shown in Table 6-4. Prophylaxis 
consists of the administration of an antimicrobial agent or 
agents prior to initiation of certain specific types of surgi-
cal procedures in order to reduce the number of microbes that 
enter the tissue or body cavity. Agents are selected according 
to their activity against microbes likely to be present at 
the surgical site, based on knowledge of host microflora. 
For example, patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery 
should receive antimicrobial prophylaxis directed against skin 
flora, gram negative aerobes, and anaerobic bacteria. There are 
a wide variety of agents that meet these criteria with recently 
published guidelines.25
By definition, prophylaxis is limited to the time prior to 
and during the operative procedure; in the vast majority of cases 
only a single dose of antibiotic is required, and only for certain 
types of procedures (see Surgical Site Infections). However, 
patients who undergo complex, prolonged procedures in which 
the duration of the operation exceeds the serum drug half-life 
should receive an additional dose or doses of the antimicrobial 
agent.25 There is no evidence that administration of postopera-
tive doses of an antimicrobial agent provides additional benefit, 
and this practice should be discouraged, as it is costly and is 
associated with increased rates of microbial drug resistance. 
Guidelines for prophylaxis are provided in Table 6-5.
Empiric therapy comprises the use of an antimicrobial 
agent or agents when the risk of a surgical infection is high, 
based on the underlying disease process (e.g., ruptured appen-
dicitis), or when significant contamination during surgery has 
occurred (e.g., inadequate bowel preparation or considerable 
spillage of colon contents). Obviously, prophylaxis merges into 
empirical therapy in situations in which the risk of infection 
increases markedly because of intraoperative findings. Empiri-
cal therapy also often is employed in critically ill patients in 
whom a potential site of infection has been identified and severe 
sepsis or septic shock occurs. Invariably, empirical therapy 
should be limited to a short course of drug (3 to 5 days), and 
should be curtailed as soon as possible based on microbiologic 
data (i.e., absence of positive cultures) coupled with improve-
ments in the clinical course of the patient.
Similarly, empirical therapy merges into therapy of estab-
lished infection in some patients as well. However, among 
surgical patients, the manner in which therapy is employed, par-
ticularly in relation to the use of microbiologic data (culture and 
antibiotic sensitivity patterns), differs depending on whether the 
infection is monomicrobial or polymicrobial. Monomicrobial 
infections frequently are nosocomial infections occurring in 
postoperative patients, such as UTIs, pneumonia, or bacteremia. 
Evidence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (fever, 
tachycardia, tachypnea, or elevated leukocyte count) in such 
individuals, coupled with evidence of local infection (e.g., an 
infiltrate on chest roentgenogram plus a positive Gram’s stain 
in bronchoalveolar lavage samples) should lead the surgeon to 
initiate empirical antibiotic therapy. An appropriate approach to 
antimicrobial treatment involves de-escalation therapy, where 
initial antimicrobial selection is broad, with a later narrowing of 
agents based on patient response and culture results. Initial drug 
selection must be based on initial evidence (Gram-positive vs. 
Gram-negative microbes, yeast), coupled with institutional and 
unit-specific drug sensitivity patterns. It is important to ensure 
that antimicrobial coverage chosen is adequate, since delay in 
appropriate antibiotic treatment has been shown to be associated 
with significant increases in mortality. A critical component of 
this approach is appropriate collection of culture specimens to 
allow for thorough analysis, since within 48 to 72 hours, culture 
and sensitivity reports will allow refinement of the antibiotic 
regimen to select the most efficacious agent.The clinical 
course of the patient is monitored closely, and in some 
cases (e.g., UTI) follow-up studies (urine culture) should be 
obtained after completion of therapy.
Although the primary therapeutic modality to treat poly-
microbial surgical infections is source control as delineated 
previously, antimicrobial agents play an important role as well. 
Culture results are of lesser importance in managing these types 
of infections, as it has been repeatedly demonstrated that only a 
limited cadre of microbes predominate in the established infec-
tion, selected from a large number present at the time of initial 
contamination. Invariably it is difficult to identify all microbes 
that comprise the initial polymicrobial inoculum. For this rea-
son, the antibiotic regimen should not be modified solely on the 
basis of culture information, as it is less important than the clini-
cal course of the patient. For example, patients who undergo 
appendectomy for gangrenous, perforated appendicitis, or bowel 
resection for intestinal perforation, should receive an antimicro-
bial agent or agents directed against aerobes and anaerobes for 
3 to 5 days, occasionally longer. If the patient regains bowel 
function during this time, conversion from an intravenous to an 
oral regimen (e.g., ciprofloxacin plus metronidazole) can occur. 
This is safe, and may facilitate earlier discharge.
A survey of several decades of clinical trials examining 
the effect of antimicrobial agent selection on the treatment of 
intra-abdominal infection revealed striking similarities in out-
come among regimens that possessed aerobic and anaerobic 
activity (~10% to 30% failure rates): most failures could not 
be attributed to antibiotic selection, but rather were due to the 
inability to achieve effective source control.26
Duration of antibiotic administration should be decided 
at the time the drug regimen is prescribed. As mentioned pre-
viously, prophylaxis is limited to a single dose administered 
immediately prior to creating the incision. Empiric therapy 
should be limited to 3 to 5 days or less, and should be cur-
tailed if the presence of a local site or systemic infection is 
not revealed.27 In fact, prolonged use of empirical antibiotic 
therapy in culture-negative critically ill patients is associated 
with increased mortality, highlighting the need to discontinue 
therapy when there is no proven evidence of infection.28
Therapy for monomicrobial infections follows standard 
guidelines: 3 to 5 days for UTIs, 7 to 10 days for pneumonia, 
and 7 to14 days for bacteremia. Longer courses of therapy in 
this setting do not result in improved care and are associated 
with increased risk of superinfection by resistant organisms.29,30 
There is some evidence that measuring and monitoring serum 
procalcitonin trends in the setting of infection allows earlier 
cessation of antibiotics without decrement in the rate of clini-
cal cure.31 Antibiotic therapy for osteomyelitis, endocarditis, 
or prosthetic infections in which it is hazardous to remove the 
device consists of prolonged courses of an antibiotic or several 
agents in combination for 6 to 12 weeks. The specific agents are 
selected based on analysis of the degree to which the organism 
is killed in vitro using the minimum inhibitory concentration 
3
4
143
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Table 6-4 
Antimicrobial agents
Organism
Antibiotic Class, 
Generic Name
Trade Name
Mechanism of Action
S. pyogenes
MSSA
MRSA
S. epidermidis
Enterococcus
VRE
E. coli
P. aeruginosa
Anaerobes
Penicillins
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors (bind 
penicillin-binding 
protein)
Penicillin G
1
0
0
0
+/-
0
0
0
1
Nafcillin
Nallpen, Unipen
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
0
0
0
Piperacillin
Pipracil
1
0
0
0
+/-
0
1
1
+/-
Penicillin/beta 
lactamase inhibitor 
combinations
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors/beta 
lactamase inhibitors
Ampicillin-sulbactam
Unasyn
1
1
0
+/-
1
+/-
1
0
1
Ticarcillin-clavulanate
Timentin
1
1
0
+/-
+/-
0
1
1
1
Piperacillin-tazobactam
Zosyn
1
1
0
1
+/-
0
1
1
1
First-generation 
cephalosporins
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors (bind 
penicillin-binding 
protein)
Cefazolin, cephalexin
Ancef, Keflex
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
0
Second-generation 
cephalosporins
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors (bind 
penicillin-binding 
protein)
Cefoxitin
Mefoxin
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
1
Cefotetan
Cefotan
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
1
Cefuroxime
Ceftin
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
0
Third- and 
fourth-generation 
cephalosporins
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors (bind 
penicillin-binding 
protein)
(Continued)
144
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 6-4 
Antimicrobial agents
Organism
Antibiotic Class, 
Generic Name
Trade Name
Mechanism of Action
S. pyogenes
MSSA
MRSA
S. epidermidis
Enterococcus
VRE
E. coli
P. aeruginosa
Anaerobes
Ceftriaxone
Rocephin
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
0
Ceftazidime
Fortaz
1
+/-
0
+/-
0
0
1
1
0
Cefepime
Maxipime
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
1
0
Cefotaxime
Cefotaxime
1
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
+/-
0
ceftaroline
Teflaro
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
Carbapenems
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitors (bind 
penicillin-binding 
protein)
Imipenem-cilastatin
Primaxin
1
1
0
1
+/-
0
1
1
1
Meropenem
Merrem
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
Ertapenem
Invanz
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
+/-
1
Aztreonam
Azactam
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
Aminoglycosides
Alteration of cell 
membrane, binding 
and inhibition of 30S 
ribosomal unit
Gentamicin
0
1
0
+/-
1
0
1
1
0
Tobramycin, amikacin
0
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
1
0
Fluoroquinolones
Inhibit topoisomerase II 
and IV (DNA synthesis 
inhibition)
Ciprofloxacin
Cipro
+/-
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
Levofloxacin
Levaquin
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
+/-
0
Glycopeptides
Cell wall synthesis 
inhibition 
(peptidoglycan synthesis 
inhibition)
0
0
Vancomycin
Vancocin
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
(continued)
145
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Quinupristin-
Dalfopristin
Synercid
Inhibits 2 sites on 50S 
ribosome (protein 
synthesis inhibition)
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
+/-
Linezolid
Zyvox
Inhibits 50S ribosomal 
activity (protein 
synthesis inhibition)
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
+/-
Daptomycin
Cubicin
Binds bacterial 
membrane, results in 
depolarization, lysis
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
Rifampin
Inhibits DNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase
1
1
1
1
+/-
0
0
0
0
Clindamycin
Cleocin
Inhibits 50S ribosomal 
activity (protein 
synthesis inhibition)
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Metronidazole
Flagyl
Production of toxic 
intermediates (free 
radical production)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Macrolides
Inhibit 50S ribosomal 
activity (protein 
synthesis inhibition)
Erythromycin
1
+/-
0
+/-
0
0
0
0
0
Azithromycin
Zithromax
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Clarithromycin
Biaxin
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Bactrim, Septra
Inhibits sequential steps 
of folate metabolism
+/-
1
0
+/-
0
0
1
0
0
Tetracyclines
Bind 30S ribosomal 
unit (protein synthesis 
inhibition)
Minocycline
Minocin
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
+/-
Doxycycline
Vibromycin
1
+/-
0
0
0
0
1
0
+/-
Tigacycline
Tygacil
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
E coli = Escherichia coli; MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA = methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus; P aeruginosa = Pseudomonas aeruginosa; S epidermidis = Staphylococcus  
epidermidis; S pyogenes = Streptococcus pyogenes; VRE = vancomycin-resistant enterococcus.
1 = Reliable activity; +/– = variable activity; 0 = no activity.
The sensitivities presented are generalizations. The clinician should confirm sensitivity patterns at the locale where the patient is being treated since these patterns may vary widely depending on location.
146
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
(MIC) of a standard pure inoculum of 105 CFU/mL of the organ-
ism isolated from the site of infection or bloodstream. Sensi-
tivities are reported in relation to the achievable blood level of 
each antibiotic in a panel of agents. The least toxic, least expen-
sive agent to which the organism is most sensitive should be 
selected, although the latter parameter is of paramount impor-
tance. Serious or recrudescent infection may require therapy 
with two or more agents, particularly if a multidrug-resistant 
pathogen is causative, limiting therapeutic options to drugs to 
which the organism is only moderately sensitive. Commonly 
an agent may be administered intravenously for 1 to 2 weeks, 
following which the treatment course is completed with an oral 
drug. However, this should only be undertaken in patients who 
demonstrate progressive clinical improvement, and the oral 
agent should be capable of achieving high serum levels as well 
(e.g., fluoroquinolones).
The majority of studies examining the optimal duration of 
antibiotic therapy for the treatment of polymicrobial infection 
have focused on patients who develop peritonitis. CoGeNT data 
exist to support the contention that satisfactory outcomes are 
achieved with 12 to 24 hours of therapy for penetrating gastro-
intestinal trauma in the absence of extensive contamination, 3 to 
5 days of therapy for perforated or gangrenous appendicitis, 
5 to 7 days of therapy for treatment of peritoneal soilage due 
to a perforated viscus with moderate degrees of contamination, 
and 7 to 14 days of therapy to adjunctively treat extensive peri-
toneal soilage (e.g., feculent peritonitis) or that occurring in the 
immunosuppressed host.32 It bears repeating that the eventual 
outcome is more closely linked to the ability of the surgeon to 
achieve effective source control than to the duration of anti-
biotic administration. One small randomized trial has reported 
Table 6-5 
Prophylactic use of antibiotics (adapted from ref 25)
Site
Antibiotic
Alternative (e.g., penicillin allergic)
Cardiovascular surgery
Cefazolin, cefuroxime
Vancomycin, clindamycin
Gastroduodenal area; small 
intestine, nonobstructed
Cefazolin
Clindamycin or vancomycin + aminoglycoside or 
aztreonam or fluoroquinolone
Biliary tract: open 
procedure, laparoscopic 
high risk
Cefazolin, cefoxitin, cefotetan, 
ceftriaxone, ampicillin-sulbactam,
Clindamycin or vancomycin + aminoglycoside or 
aztreonam or fluoroquinolone
Metronidazole + aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone
Biliary tract: laparoscopic 
low risk
None
none
Appendectomy, 
uncomplicated
Cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefazolin + 
metronidazole
Clindamycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonam or 
fluoroquinolone
Metronidazole + aminoglycoside or flouroquinolone
Colorectal surgery, 
obstructed small intestine
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone plus 
metronidazole, Ertapenem, cefoxitin, 
cefotetan, ampicillin-sulbactam
Clindamycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonam or 
fluoroquinolone, metronidazole + aminoglycoside or 
fluoroquinolone
Head and neck; clean 
contaminated
Cefazolin or cefuroxime + 
metronidazole, ampicillin-sulbactam
clindamycin
Neurosurgical procedures
Cefazolin
Clindamycin, Vancomycin
Orthopedic surgery
Cefazolin, ceftriaxone
Clindamycin, Vancomycin
Breast, hernia
Cefazolin
Clindamycin, Vancomycin
similar outcomes of 3 day vs. standard duration therapy in sec-
ondary microbial peritonitis.33
In the later phases of postoperative antibiotic treatment of 
serious intra-abdominal infection, the absence of an elevated white 
blood cell (WBC) count, lack of band forms of PMNs on periph-
eral smear, and lack of fever (<100.5°F) provide close to com-
plete assurance that infection has been eradicated.34 Under these 
circumstances, antibiotics can be discontinued with impunity. 
However, the presence of one or more of these indicators does 
not mandate continuing antibiotics or altering the antibiotic(s) 
administered. Rather, a search for an extra-abdominal source of 
infection or a residual or ongoing source of intra-abdominal infec-
tion (e.g., abscess or leaking anastomosis) should be sought, the 
latter mandating maneuvers to effect source control.
Allergy to antimicrobial agents must be considered prior 
to prescribing them. First, it is important to ascertain whether 
a patient has had any type of allergic reaction in association 
with administration of a particular antibiotic. However, one 
should take care to ensure that the purported reaction consists 
of true allergic symptoms and signs, such as urticaria, broncho-
spasm, or other similar manifestations, rather than indigestion 
or nausea. Penicillin allergy is quite common, the reported inci-
dence ranging from 0.7% to 10%. Although avoiding the use 
of any beta-lactam drug is appropriate in patients who mani-
fest significant allergic reactions to penicillins, the incidence 
of cross-reactivity appears low for all related agents, with 1% 
cross-reactivity for carbapenems,35 5% to 7% cross-reactivity 
for cephalosporins, and extremely small or nonexistent cross-
reactivity for monobactams.
Severe allergic manifestations to a specific class of agents, 
such as anaphylaxis, generally preclude the use of any agents in 
147
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
that class, except under circumstances in which use of a certain 
drug represents a lifesaving measure. In some centers, patients 
undergo intradermal testing using a dilute solution of a particular 
antibiotic to determine whether a severe allergic reaction would 
be elicited by parenteral administration. A pathway, including 
such intradermal testing, has been effective in reduction of van-
comycin use to 16% in surgical patients with reported allergy to 
penicillin.36 This type of testing is rarely employed because it is 
simpler to select an alternative class of agent. Should adminis-
tration of a specific agent to which the patient is allergic become 
necessary, desensitization using progressively higher doses of 
antibiotic can be undertaken, providing the initial testing does 
not cause severe allergic manifestations.
Misuse of antimicrobial agents is rampant in both the 
inpatient and outpatient setting, and is associated with an 
enormous financial impact on health care costs, adverse 
reactions due to drug toxicity and allergy, the occurrence of 
new infections such as Clostridium difficile colitis, and the 
development of multiagent drug resistance among nosocomial 
pathogens. Each of these factors has been directly correlated 
with overall drug administration. It has been estimated that in 
the United States, in excess of $20 billion is spent on antibiot-
ics each year, and the appearance of so-called “super bugs”—
microbes sensitive to few if any agents—has been sobering.37 
The responsible practitioner limits prophylaxis to the period 
during the operative procedure, does not convert prophylaxis 
into empirical therapy except under well-defined conditions, 
sets the duration of antibiotic therapy from the outset, curtails 
antibiotic administration when clinical and microbiologic evi-
dence does not support the presence of an infection, and limits 
therapy to a short course in every possible instance. Prolonged 
treatment associated with drains and tubes has not been shown 
to be beneficial.
INFECTIONS OF SIGNIFICANCE  
IN SURGICAL PATIENTS
Surgical Site Infections
Surgical site infections (SSIs) are infections of the tissues, 
organs, or spaces exposed by surgeons during perfor-
mance of an invasive procedure. SSIs are classified into 
incisional and organ/space infections, and the former are further 
subclassified into superficial (limited to skin and subcutaneous 
tissue) and deep incisional categories.38,39 The development of 
SSIs is related to three factors: (a) the degree of microbial con-
tamination of the wound during surgery, (b) the duration of the 
procedure, and (c) host factors such as diabetes, malnutrition, 
obesity, immune suppression, and a number of other underlying 
disease states. Table 6-6 lists risk factors for development of 
SSIs. By definition, an incisional SSI has occurred if a surgical 
wound drains purulent material or if the surgeon judges it to be 
infected and opens it.
Surgical wounds are classified based on the presumed 
magnitude of the bacterial load at the time of surgery (Table 6-7).40 
Clean wounds (class I) include those in which no infection 
is present; only skin microflora potentially contaminate the 
wound, and no hollow viscus that contains microbes is entered. 
Class I D wounds are similar except that a prosthetic device 
(e.g., mesh or valve) is inserted. Clean/contaminated wounds 
(class II) include those in which a hollow viscus such as the 
respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary tracts with indigenous 
Table 6-6 
Risk factors for development of surgical site infections
Patient factors
Older age
Immunosuppression
Obesity
Diabetes mellitus
Chronic inflammatory process
Malnutrition
Smoking
Renal failure
Peripheral vascular disease
Anemia
Radiation
Chronic skin disease
Carrier state (e.g., chronic Staphylococcus carriage)
Recent operation
Local factors
Open compared to laparoscopic surgery
Poor skin preparation
Contamination of instruments
Inadequate antibiotic prophylaxis
Prolonged procedure
Local tissue necrosis
Blood transfusion
Hypoxia, hypothermia
Microbial factors
Prolonged hospitalization (leading to nosocomial  
  organisms)
Toxin secretion
Resistance to clearance (e.g., capsule formation)
bacterial flora is opened under controlled circumstances without 
significant spillage of contents.
While elective colorectal cases have classically been 
included as class II cases, a number of studies in the last decade 
have documented higher SSI rates (9% to 25%).41-43 One study 
identified two-thirds of infections presenting after discharge 
from hospital, highlighting the need for careful follow-up of 
these patients.41 Infection is also more common in cases involv-
ing entry into the rectal space.42 In a recent single center qual-
ity improvement study using a multidisciplinary approach, one 
group of clinicians has demonstrated the ability to decrease SSI 
from 9.8% to 4.0%.43
Contaminated wounds (class III) include open accidental 
wounds encountered early after injury, those with extensive 
introduction of bacteria into a normally sterile area of the body 
due to major breaks in sterile technique (e.g., open cardiac mas-
sage), gross spillage of viscus contents such as from the intes-
tine, or incision through inflamed, albeit nonpurulent tissue. 
Dirty wounds (class IV) include traumatic wounds in which a 
significant delay in treatment has occurred and in which necrotic 
tissue is present, those created in the presence of overt infection 
as evidenced by the presence of purulent material, and those 
created to access a perforated viscus accompanied by a high 
degree of contamination. The microbiology of SSIs is reflective 
of the initial host microflora such that SSIs following creation of 
a class I wound are invariable, due solely to skin microbes found 
5
148
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 6-7 
Wound class, representative procedures, and expected infection rates
Wound Class
Examples of Cases
Expected Infection Rates
Clean (class I)
Hernia repair, breast biopsy specimen
1%–2%
Clean/contaminated (class II)
Cholecystectomy, elective GI surgery (not colon)
2.1%–9.5%
Clean/contaminated (class II)
Colorectal surgery
4%–14%
Contaminated (class III)
Penetrating abdominal trauma, large tissue injury, enterotomy 
during bowel obstruction
3.4%–13.2%
Dirty (class IV)
Perforated diverticulitis, necrotizing soft tissue infections
3.1%–12.8%
Table 6-8 
Quality improvement organizations in the United States of interest to surgeons
Abbreviation 
Organization
Website
SCIP
Surgical Care Improvement Project
www.premierinc.com/safety/topics/scip/
NSQIP
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program
www.acsnsqip.org
IHI
Institute for Healthcare Improvement
www.ihi.org
CMS
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
www.cms.gov
NCQA
National Committee for Quality Assurance
www.ncqa.org
SIS
Surgical Infection Society
www.sisna.org
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
www.cdc.gov/HAI/ssi/ssi.html
on that portion of the body, while SSIs subsequent to a class II 
wound created for the purpose of elective colon resection may 
be caused by either skin microbes or colonic microflora, or both.
In the United States, hospitals are required to conduct sur-
veillance for the development of SSIs for a period of 30 days 
after the operative procedure.44 Such surveillance has been 
associated with greater awareness and a reduction in SSI rates, 
probably in large part based upon the impact of observation and 
promotion of adherence to appropriate care standards. Begin-
ning in 2012, all hospitals receiving reimbursement from the 
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services are required to 
report SSIs.
A recent refinement of risk indexes has been implemented 
through the National Healthcare Safety Network, a secure, web-
based system of surveillance utilized by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention for surveillance of health care associ-
ated infections. This refinement utilized data reported from 847 
hospitals in nearly one million patients over a two- year period 
to develop procedure-specific risk indices for SSIs.45
SSIs are associated with considerable morbidity and 
occasional lethality, as well as substantial health care costs and 
patient inconvenience and dissatisfaction.46 For that reason, sur-
geons strive to avoid SSIs by using the maneuvers described in 
the previous section. Also, the use of prophylactic antibiotics 
may serve to reduce the incidence of SSI rates during certain types 
of procedures. For example, it is well accepted that a single 
dose of an antimicrobial agent should be administered immedi-
ately prior to commencing surgery for class I D, II, III, and IV 
types of wounds. It seems reasonable that this practice should 
be extended to patients in any category with high National 
Nosocomial Infection Surveillance (NNIS) scores, although 
this remains to be proven. Thus, the utility of prophylactic anti-
biotics in reducing the rate of wound infection subsequent to 
clean surgery remains controversial, and these agents should 
not be employed under routine circumstances (e.g., in healthy 
young patients). However, because of the potential dire conse-
quences of a wound infection after clean surgery in which pros-
thetic material is implanted into tissue, patients who undergo 
such procedures should receive a single preoperative dose of 
an antibiotic.
A number of health care organizations within the United 
States have become interested in evaluating performance of 
hospitals and physicians with respect to implementing pro-
cesses that support delivery of standard of care. One major pro-
cess of interest is reduction in SSIs, since the morbidity (and 
subsequent cost) of this complication is high. Several of these 
organizations are noted in Table 6-8. Appropriate guidelines 
in this area incorporating the principles discussed previously 
have been developed and disseminated.47 However, observers 
have noted that adherence to these guidelines has been poor.48 
Most experts believe that better adherence to evidence-based 
practice recommendations and implementing systems of care 
149
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
with redundant safeguards will result in reduction of surgical 
complications and better patient outcomes. More important, 
the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the largest 
third party insurance payer in the United States, has required 
reporting by hospitals of many processes related to reduction 
of surgical infections, including appropriate use of periopera-
tive antibiotics. This information, which is currently reported 
publicly by hospitals, has led to significant improvement in 
reported rates of these process measures. However, the effect of 
this approach on the incidence of SSIs is not known at this time.
Surgical management of the wound also is a critical deter-
minant of the propensity to develop a SSI. In healthy individu-
als, class I and II wounds may be closed primarily, while skin 
closure of class III and IV wounds is associated with high rates 
of incisional SSIs (~25% to 50%). The superficial aspects of 
these latter types of wounds should be packed open and allowed 
to heal by secondary intention, although selective use of delayed 
primary closure has been associated with a reduction in inci-
sional SSI rates.49 It remains to be determined whether NNIS-
type stratification schemes can be employed prospectively in 
order to target specific subgroups of patients which will benefit 
from the use of prophylactic antibiotic and/or specific wound 
management techniques. One clear example based on CoGeNT 
data from clinical trials is that class III wounds in healthy 
patients undergoing appendectomy for perforated or gangre-
nous appendicitis can be primarily closed as long as antibiotic 
therapy directed against aerobes and anaerobes is administered. 
This practice leads to SSI rates of approximately 3% to 4%.50
Recent investigations have studied the effect of additional 
maneuvers in an attempt to further reduce the rate of SSIs. The 
adverse effects of hyperglycemia on WBC function have been 
well described.51 A number of recent studies in patients under-
going several different types of surgery describe increased risk 
of SSI in patients with hyperglycemia.52,53 Although randomized 
trials have not been performed, it is recommended that clini-
cians maintain appropriate blood sugar control in patients in the 
perioperative period to minimize the occurrence of SSI.
Figure 6-2.  Negative pressure wound therapy in a patient after amputation for wet gangrene (A), and in a patient with enterocutaneous fistula 
(B). It is possible to adapt these dressings to fit difficult anatomy and provide appropriate wound care while reducing frequency of dressing 
change. It is important to evaluate the wound under these dressings if patient demonstrates signs of sepsis with an unidentified source, since 
typical clues of wound sepsis such as odor and drainage are hidden by the suction apparatus.
The respective effects of body temperature and the level 
of inhaled oxygen during surgery on SSI rates also have been 
studied, and both hypothermia and hypoxia during surgery 
are associated with a higher rater of SSIs. Although an initial 
study provided evidence that patients who received high levels 
of inhaled oxygen during colorectal surgery developed fewer 
SSIs,54 a recent meta-analysis suggest that the overall benefit is 
small and may not warrant use.55 Further evaluation via multi-
center studies is needed prior to implementation of hyperoxia as 
standard therapy, but it is clear that intraoperative hypothermia 
and hypoxia should be prevented.
Effective therapy for incisional SSIs consists solely of 
incision and drainage without the additional use of antibiotics. 
Antibiotic therapy is reserved for patients in whom evidence of 
significant cellulitis is present, or who concurrently manifest 
a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The open wound 
often is allowed to heal by secondary intention, with dressings 
being changed twice a day. The use of topical antibiotics and 
antiseptics to further wound healing remains unproven, although 
anecdotal studies indicate their potential utility in complex 
wounds that do not heal with routine measures.56 Despite a pau-
city of prospective studies,57 vacuum-assisted closure is increas-
ingly used in management of large, complex open wounds and 
can be applied to wounds in locations that are difficult to man-
age with dressings (Fig. 6-2). One also should consider obtain-
ing wound cultures in patients who develop SSIs and whom 
have been hospitalized or reside in long-term care facilities due 
to the increasing incidence of infection caused by multidrug 
resistant organisms. The treatment of organ/space infections is 
discussed in the following section.
Intra-Abdominal Infections
Microbial contamination of the peritoneal cavity is termed peri-
tonitis or intra-abdominal infection, and is classified according 
to etiology. Primary microbial peritonitis occurs when microbes 
invade the normally sterile confines of the peritoneal cavity via 
hematogenous dissemination from a distant source of infection or 
150
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
direct inoculation. This process is more common among patients 
who retain large amounts of peritoneal fluid due to ascites, and 
among those individuals who are being treated for renal failure 
via peritoneal dialysis. These infections invariably are monomi-
crobial and rarely require surgical intervention. The diagnosis is 
established based on identification of risk factors as noted previ-
ously, physical examination that reveals diffuse tenderness and 
guarding without localized findings, absence of pneumoperi-
toneum on an imaging study, the presence of more than 100 
WBCs/mL, and microbes with a single morphology on Gram’s 
stain performed on fluid obtained via paracentesis. Subsequent 
cultures typically will demonstrate the presence of gram posi-
tive organisms in patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis. In 
patients without this risk factor organisms can include E. coli, 
K. pneumoniae, pneumococci, and others, although many 
different pathogens can be causative. Treatment consists of 
administration of an antibiotic to which the organism is sen-
sitive; often 14 to 21 days of therapy are required. Removal 
of indwelling devices (e.g., a peritoneal dialysis catheter or a 
peritoneovenous shunt) may be required for effective therapy 
of recurrent infections.
Secondary microbial peritonitis occurs subsequent to con-
tamination of the peritoneal cavity due to perforation or severe 
inflammation and infection of an intra-abdominal organ. Exam-
ples include appendicitis, perforation of any portion of the gas-
trointestinal tract, or diverticulitis. As noted previously, effective 
therapy requires source control to resect or repair the diseased 
organ; débridement of necrotic, infected tissue and debris; and 
administration of antimicrobial agents directed against aerobes 
and anaerobes.58 This type of antibiotic regimen should be cho-
sen because in most patients the precise diagnosis cannot be 
established until exploratory laparotomy is performed, and the 
most morbid form of this disease process is colonic perforation, 
due to the large number of microbes present. A combination of 
agents or single agents with a broad spectrum of activity can be 
used for this purpose; conversion of a parenteral to an oral regi-
men when the patient’s ileus resolves provides results similar 
to those achieved with intravenous antibiotics. Effective source 
control and antibiotic therapy is associated with low failure 
rates and a mortality rate of approximately 5% to 6%; inability 
to control the source of infection is associated with mortality 
greater than 40%.59
The response rate to effective source control and use of 
appropriate antibiotics has remained approximately 70% to 
90% over the past several decades.60 Patients in whom stan-
dard therapy fails typically develop one or more of the follow-
ing: an intra-abdominal abscess, leakage from a gastrointestinal 
anastomosis leading to postoperative peritonitis, or tertiary 
(persistent) peritonitis. The latter is a poorly understood entity 
that is more common in immunosuppressed patients in whom 
peritoneal host defenses do not effectively clear or sequester 
the initial secondary microbial peritoneal infection. Microbes 
such as Enterococcus faecalis and faecium, Staphylococcus 
epidermidis, Candida albicans, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
commonly are identified, typically in combination, and their 
presence may be due to their lack of responsiveness to the ini-
tial antibiotic regimen, coupled with diminished activity of host 
defenses. Unfortunately, even with effective antimicrobial agent 
therapy, this disease process is associated with mortality rates 
in excess of 50%.61
Formerly, the presence of an intra-abdominal abscess 
mandated surgical reexploration and drainage. Today, the vast 
majority of such abscesses can be effectively diagnosed via 
abdominal computed tomographic (CT) imaging techniques 
and drained percutaneously. Surgical intervention is reserved 
for those individuals who harbor multiple abscesses, those with 
abscesses in proximity to vital structures such that percutaneous 
drainage would be hazardous, and those in whom an ongoing 
source of contamination (e.g., enteric leak) is identified. The 
necessity of antimicrobial agent therapy and precise guidelines 
that dictate duration of catheter drainage have not been estab-
lished. A short course (3 to 7 days) of antibiotics that possess 
aerobic and anaerobic activity seems reasonable, and most prac-
titioners leave the drainage catheter in situ until it is clear that 
cavity collapse has occurred, output is less than 10 to 20 mL/d, 
no evidence of an ongoing source of contamination is present, 
and the patient’s clinical condition has improved.
Organ-Specific Infections
Hepatic abscesses are rare, currently accounting for approxi-
mately 15 per 100,000 hospital admissions in the United States. 
Pyogenic abscesses account for approximately 80% of cases, 
the remaining 20% being equally divided among parasitic and 
fungal forms.62 Formerly, pyogenic liver abscesses mainly were 
caused by pylephlebitis due to neglected appendicitis or diver-
ticulitis. Today, manipulation of the biliary tract to treat a vari-
ety of diseases has become a more common cause, although in 
nearly 50% of patients no cause is identified. The most com-
mon aerobic bacteria identified in recent series include E coli, 
K pneumoniae, and other enteric bacilli, enterococci, and Pseu-
domonas spp., while the most common anaerobic bacteria are 
Bacteroides spp., anaerobic streptococci, and Fusobacterium 
spp. Candida albicans and other related yeast cause the majority 
of fungal hepatic abscesses. Small (<1 cm), multiple abscesses 
should be sampled and treated with a 4 to 6 week course of 
antibiotics. Larger abscesses invariably are amenable to per-
cutaneous drainage, with parameters for antibiotic therapy and 
drain removal similar to those mentioned previously. Splenic 
abscesses are extremely rare and are treated in a similar fashion. 
Recurrent hepatic or splenic abscesses may require operative 
intervention—unroofing and marsupialization or splenectomy, 
respectively.
Secondary pancreatic infections (e.g., infected pancreatic 
necrosis or pancreatic abscess) occur in approximately 10% to 
15% of patients who develop severe pancreatitis with necrosis. 
The surgical treatment of this disorder was pioneered by Bradley 
and Allen, who noted significant improvements in outcome for 
patients undergoing repeated pancreatic débridement of infected 
pancreatic necrosis.63 Current care of patients with severe acute 
pancreatitis includes staging with dynamic, contrast material-
enhanced helical CT scan to evaluate the extent of pancreatitis 
(unless significant renal dysfunction exists in which case one 
should forego the use of contrast material) coupled with the 
use of one of several prognostic scoring systems. Patients who 
exhibit clinical signs of instability (e.g., oliguria, hypoxemia, 
large-volume fluid resuscitation) should be carefully monitored 
in the ICU and undergo follow-up contrast enhanced CT exami-
nation when renal function has stabilized to evaluate for devel-
opment of local pancreatic complications (Fig. 6-3). A recent 
change in practice has been the elimination of the routine use 
of prophylactic antibiotics for prevention of infected pancre-
atic necrosis. Enteral feedings initiated early, using nasojeju-
nal feeding tubes placed past the ligament of Treitz, have been 
associated with decreased development of infected pancreatic 
151
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
necrosis, possibly due to a decrease in gut translocation of bac-
teria. These topics have been recently reviewed.64,65
The presence of secondary pancreatic infection should be 
suspected in patients whose systemic inflammatory response 
(fever, elevated WBC count, or organ dysfunction) fails to 
resolve, or in those individuals who initially recuperate, only to 
develop sepsis syndrome 2 to 3 weeks later. CT-guided aspira-
tion of fluid from the pancreatic bed for performance of Gram’s 
stain and culture analysis can be useful. A positive Gram’s stain 
or culture from CT-guided aspiration, or identification of gas 
within the pancreas on CT scan, mandate surgical intervention.
The approach of open necrosectomy with repeated 
debridements, although life saving, is associated with sig-
nificant morbidity and prolonged hospitalization. Efforts to 
reduce the amount of surgical injury, while still preserving the 
improved outcomes associated with debridement of the infected 
sequestrum have led to a variety of less invasive approaches.66 
These include endoscopic approaches, laparoscopic approaches 
and other minimally invasive approaches. There are a limited 
number of randomized trials reporting the use of these new tech-
niques currently. An important concept common to all of these 
approaches, however, is the attempt to delay surgical interven-
tion, since a number of trials have identified increased mortality 
when intervention occurs during the first two weeks of illness.
Data supporting the use of endoscopic approaches to this 
problem include nearly a dozen case series and a randomized 
trial.67,68 The reported mortality rate was 5%, with a 30% com-
plication rate. Most authors noted the common requirement 
for multiple endoscopic debridements (similar to the open 
approach), with a median of 4 endoscopic sessions required. 
Fewer series report experience with the laparoscopic approach, 
either transgastric or transperitoneal, entering the necrosis 
through the transverse mesocolon or gastrocolic ligament. The 
laparoscopic technique is carefully described in a recent pub-
lication.69 Laparoscopic intervention is limited by the dif-
ficulty in achieving multiple debridements and the technical 
expertise required to achieve an adequate debridement. Mortal-
ity in 65 patients in 9 case series reported was 6% overall.
Debridement of necrosis through a lumbar approach has 
been advocated by a number of authors. This approach, devel-
oped with experience in a large number of patients,70 has been 
recently subjected to a single center randomized prospective 
Figure 6-3.  Contrast-enhanced CT scan of pancreas 1½ weeks after 
presentation showing large central peripancreatic fluid collection.
trial.71 This approach includes delay of intervention when pos-
sible until 4 weeks after the onset of disease. Patients receive 
transgastric or preferably retroperitoneal drainage of the seques-
trum. If patients do not improve over 72 hours, they are treated 
with video-assisted retroperitoneal drainage (VARD), consist-
ing of dilation of the retroperitoneal drain tract, placement of 
and irrigation, and debridement of the pancreatic bed (Fig. 6-4). 
Repeat debridements are performed as clinically indicated, 
with most patients requiring multiple debridements. In the 
trial reported, patients randomized to VARD (n=43) compared 
to those randomized to the standard open necrosectomy (n=45) 
had a decreased incidence of the composite endpoint of complica-
tions and death (40% vs. 69%), with comparable mortality rate, 
hospital, and ICU lengths of stay. Patients randomized to VARD 
had fewer incisional hernias, new-onset diabetes, and need for 
pancreatic enzyme supplementation.
It is apparent that patients with infected pancreatic necro-
sis can safely undergo procedures that are more minimal than 
the gold-standard open necrosectomy with good outcomes. 
However, to obtain good outcomes these approaches require an 
experienced multidisciplinary team consisting of interventional 
radiologists, gastroenterologists, surgeons, and others. Impor-
tant concepts for successful management include careful pre-
operative planning, delay (if possible) to allow maturation of 
the fluid collection, and the willingness to repeat procedures as 
necessary till the majority if not all nonviable tissue has been 
removed.
Infections of the Skin and Soft Tissue
These infections can be classified according to whether or not sur-
gical intervention is required. For example, superficial skin and 
skin structure infections such as cellulitis, erysipelas, and lym-
phangitis invariably are effectively treated with antibiotics alone, 
although a search for a local underlying source of infection should 
be undertaken. Generally, drugs that possess activity against the 
causative gram-positive skin microflora are selected. Furuncles 
or boils may drain spontaneously or require surgical incision and 
drainage. Antibiotics are prescribed if significant cellulitis is pres-
ent or if cellulitis does not rapidly resolve after surgical drainage. 
Community-acquired methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) infection should be suspected if infection persists after 
treatment with adequate drainage and administration of first line 
antibiotics. These infections may require more aggressive drain-
age and altered antimicrobial therapy.72
Aggressive soft tissue infections are rare, difficult to diag-
nose, and require immediate surgical intervention plus admin-
istration of antimicrobial agents. Failure to do so results in an 
extremely high mortality rate (~80%–100%), and even with 
rapid recognition and intervention, current mortality rates are 
high (16%–24%).73 Eponyms and classification in the past have 
been a hodgepodge of terminology, such as Meleney’s syner-
gist gangrene, rapidly spreading cellulitis, gas gangrene, and 
necrotizing fasciitis, among others. Today it seems best to delin-
eate these serious infections based on the soft tissue layer(s) 
of involvement (e.g., skin and superficial soft tissue, deep soft 
tissue, and muscle) and the pathogen(s) that cause them.
Patients at risk for these types of infections include those 
who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or diabetic; those who 
suffer from peripheral vascular disease; or those with a combi-
nation of these factors. The common thread among these host 
factors appears to be compromise of the fascial blood supply 
to some degree, and if this is coupled with the introduction of 
6
152
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
B
C
Figure 6-4.  Infected pancreatic necrosis. (A) Open necrosectomy 
specimen with pancreatic stent in situ. It is important to gently 
debride only necrotic pancreatic tissue, relying on repeated opera-
tion to ensure complete removal. (B) For video-assisted retroperito-
neal debridement (VARD), retroperitoneal access is gained through 
radiologic placement of a drain, followed by dilation 2-3 days later. 
(C) Retroperitoneal cavity seen through endoscope during VARD.
exogenous microbes, the result can be devastating. However, it 
is of note that over the last decade, extremely aggressive nec-
rotizing soft tissue infections among healthy individuals due to 
streptococci have been described as well.
Initially, the diagnosis is established solely upon a constel-
lation of clinical findings, not all of which are present in every 
patient. Not surprisingly, patients often develop sepsis syndrome 
or septic shock without an obvious cause. The extremities, 
perineum, trunk, and torso are most commonly affected, in that 
order. Careful examination should be undertaken for an entry site 
such as a small break or sinus in the skin from which grayish, 
turbid semipurulent material (“dishwater pus”) can be expressed, 
as well as for the presence of skin changes (bronze hue or brawny 
induration), blebs, or crepitus. The patient often develops pain 
at the site of infection that appears to be out of proportion to 
any of the physical manifestations. Any of these findings man-
dates immediate surgical intervention, which should consist of 
exposure and direct visualization of potentially infected tissue 
(including deep soft tissue, fascia, and underlying muscle) and 
radical resection of affected areas. Radiologic studies should not 
be undertaken in patients in whom the diagnosis seriously is con-
sidered, as they delay surgical intervention and frequently pro-
vide confusing information. Unfortunately, surgical extirpation 
of infected tissue frequently entails amputation and/or disfigur-
ing procedures; however, incomplete procedures are associated 
with higher rates of morbidity and mortality (Fig. 6-5).
During the procedure a Gram’s stain should be performed 
on tissue fluid. Antimicrobial agents directed against Gram-
positive and Gram-negative aerobes and anaerobes (e.g., vanco-
mycin plus a carbapenem), as well as high-dose aqueous penicillin 
G (16,000,000 to 20,000,000 U/d), the latter to treat clostridial 
pathogens, should be administered. Approximately 50% of such 
infections are polymicrobial, the remainder being caused by a sin-
gle organism such as Streptococcus pyogenes, Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa, or Clostridium perfringens. The microbiology of these 
polymicrobial infections is similar to that of secondary microbial 
peritonitis, with the exception that Gram-positive cocci are more 
commonly encountered. Most patients should be returned to the 
operating room on a scheduled basis to determine if disease pro-
gression has occurred. If so, additional resection of infected tis-
sue and debridement should take place. Antibiotic therapy can be 
refined based on culture and sensitivity results, particularly in the 
case of monomicrobial soft tissue infections. Hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy may be of use in patients with infection caused by gas-
forming organisms (e.g., Clostridium perfringens), although the 
evidence to support efficacy is limited to underpowered studies 
and case reports.In the absence of such infection, hyperbaric oxy-
gen therapy has not shown to be effective.74
Postoperative Nosocomial Infections
Surgical patients are prone to develop a wide variety of nosoco-
mial infections during the postoperative period, which include 
SSIs, UTIs, pneumonia, and bacteremia. SSIs are discussed ear-
lier, and the latter types of nosocomial infections are related to 
prolonged use of indwelling tubes and catheters for the purpose 
of urinary drainage, ventilation, and venous and arterial access, 
respectively.
The presence of a postoperative UTI should be considered 
based on urinalysis demonstrating WBCs or bacteria, a positive 
test for leukocyte esterase, or a combination of these elements. 
The diagnosis is established after >104 CFU/mL of microbes 
are identified by culture techniques in symptomatic patients, 
153
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Figure 6-5  Necrotizing soft tissue infection. (A) This patient presented with hypotension due to severe late necrotizing fasciitis and myositis 
due to beta-hemolytic streptococcal infection. The patient succumbed to his disease after 16 hours despite aggressive debridement. (B) This 
patient presented with spreading cellulites and pain on motion of his right hip 2 weeks after total colectomy. Cellulitis on right anterior thigh is 
outlined. (C) Classic dishwater edema of tissues with necrotic fascia. (D) Right lower extremity after debridement of fascia to viable muscle.
or >105 CFU/mL in asymptomatic individuals. Treatment for 
3 to 5 days with a single antibiotic directed against the most 
common organisms (e.g., E. Coli, K. pneumonia) that achieves 
high levels in the urine is appropriate. Initial therapy is directed 
by Gram’s stain results and is refined as culture results become 
available. Postoperative surgical patients should have indwell-
ing urinary catheters removed as quickly as possible, typically 
within 1 to 2 days, as long as they are mobile, to avoid the devel-
opment of a UTI.
Prolonged mechanical ventilation is associated with nos-
ocomial pneumonia. These patients present with more severe 
disease, are more likely to be infected with drug-resistant 
pathogens, and suffer increased mortality compared to patients 
who develop community-acquired pneumonia. The diagnosis 
of pneumonia is established by presence of a purulent sputum, 
elevated leukocyte count, fever, and new chest X-ray abnor-
malities, such as consolidation. The presence of two of the clini-
cal findings, plus chest X-ray findings, significantly increases 
154
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
the likelihood of pneumonia.75 Consideration should be given 
to performing bronchoalveolar lavage to obtain samples for 
Gram’s stain and culture. Some authors advocate quantitative 
cultures as a means to identify a threshold for diagnosis.76 Sur-
gical patients should be weaned from mechanical ventilation as 
soon as feasible, based on oxygenation and inspiratory effort, 
as prolonged mechanical ventilation increases the risk of noso-
comial pneumonia.
Infection associated with indwelling intravascular cath-
eters has become a common problem among hospitalized 
patients. Because of the complexity of many surgical proce-
dures, these devices are increasingly used for physiologic moni-
toring, vascular access, drug delivery, and hyperalimentation. 
Among the several million catheters inserted each year in the 
United States, approximately 25% will become colonized, and 
approximately 5% will be associated with bacteremia. Duration 
of catheterization, insertion or manipulation under emergency 
or nonsterile conditions, use for hyperalimentation, and the use 
of multilumen catheters increase the risk of infection. Use of a 
central line insertion protocol that includes full barrier precau-
tions and chlorhexidine skin prep has been shown to decrease 
the incidence of infection.77 Although no randomized trials have 
been performed, peripherally inserted central venous catheters 
have a catheter-related infection rate similar to those inserted in 
the subclavian or jugular veins.78
Many patients who develop intravascular catheter infec-
tions are asymptomatic, often exhibiting solely an elevation in 
the blood WBC count. Blood cultures obtained from a periph-
eral site and drawn through the catheter that reveal the presence 
of the same organism increase the index of suspicion for the 
presence of a catheter infection. Obvious purulence at the exit 
site of the skin tunnel, severe sepsis syndrome due to any type 
of organism when other potential causes have been excluded, 
or bacteremia due to Gram-negative aerobes or fungi should 
lead to catheter removal. Selected catheter infections due to 
low-virulence microbes such as Staphylococcus epidermidis can 
be effectively treated in approximately 50% to 60% of patients 
with a 14- to 21-day course of an antibiotic, which should be 
considered when no other vascular access site exists.79 The use 
of antibiotic-bonded catheters and chlorhexidine sponges at the 
insertion site have been associated with lower rates of coloni-
zation.77 Use of ethanol or antimicrobial catheter “locks” have 
shown promise in reducing incidence of infection in dialysis 
catheters.80 The surgeon should carefully consider the need for 
any type of vascular access device, rigorously attend to their 
maintenance to prevent infection, and remove them as quickly 
as possible. Use of systemic antibacterial or antifungal agents to 
prevent catheter infection is of no utility and is contraindicated.
Sepsis
Severe sepsis is increasing in incidence, with over 1.1 million 
cases estimated per year in the United States with an annual 
cost of 24 billion dollars. This rate is expected to increase as the 
population of aged in the United States increases. One third of 
sepsis cases occur in surgical populations and sepsis is a major 
cause of morbidity and mortality.81 The treatment of sepsis has 
improved dramatically over the last decade, with mortality rates 
dropping to under 30%. Factors contributing to this improve-
ment in mortality relate both to recent randomized prospective 
trials demonstrating improved outcomes with new therapies, 
and to improvements in the process of care delivery to the sepsis 
patient. The “Surviving Sepsis Campaign,” a multidisciplinary 
group that worked to develop treatment recommendations has 
published guidelines incorporating evidence-based treatment 
strategies most recently in 2013.13 These guidelines are sum-
marized in Table 6-9.
Patients presenting with severe sepsis should receive 
resuscitation fluids to achieve a central venous pressure target of 
8-12 mm Hg, with a goal of mean arterial pressure of ≥ 65 mHg 
and urine output of ≥ 0.5 mL/kg/h. Delaying this resuscitative 
step for as little as 3 hours until arrival in the ICU has been 
shown to result in poor outcome.82 Typically this goal neces-
sitates early placement of central venous catheter.
A number of studies have demonstrated the importance 
of early empirical antibiotic therapy in patients who develop 
sepsis or nosocomial infection. This therapy should be initiated 
as soon as possible with broad spectrum antibiotics directed 
against most likely organisms, since early appropriate antibi-
otic therapy has been associated with significant reductions in 
mortality, and delays in appropriate antibiotic administration are 
associated with increased mortality. Use of institutional and unit 
specific sensitivity patterns are critical in selecting an appropri-
ate agent for patients with nosocomial infection. It is key, how-
ever, to obtain cultures of appropriate areas without delaying 
initiating antibiotics so that appropriate adjustment of antibiotic 
therapy can take place when culture results return.
Additionally, early identification and treatment of septic 
sources is key for improved outcomes in patients with sepsis. 
Although there are no randomized trials demonstrating this 
concept, repeated evidence in studies of patients who develop 
intraabdominal infection, necrotizing soft tissue infection, and 
other types of infections demonstrate increased mortality with 
delayed treatment. As discussed earlier, one exception is that of 
infected pancreatic necrosis.
Multiple recent trials have evaluated the use of vasopres-
sors and inotropes for treatment of septic shock. The current 
first-line agent for treatment of hypotension is norepinephrine. 
It is important to titrate therapy based on other parameters such 
as mixed venous oxygen saturation and plasma lactate levels as 
well as mean arterial pressure to reduce the risk of vasopressor-
induced perfusion deficits. Several recent randomized trials 
have failed to demonstrate benefit with use of pulmonary arte-
rial catheterization, leading to a significant decrease in its use.
A number of other adjunctive therapies are useful in treat-
ment of the patient with severe sepsis and septic shock. Low-
dose corticosteroids (hydrocortisone at ≤300 mg/day) can be 
used in patients with septic shock who are not responsive to 
fluids and vasopressors. However, a recent randomized trial 
failed to show survival benefit. Patients with acute lung injury 
associated with sepsis should receive mechanical ventilation 
with tidal volumes of 6 mL/kg and pulmonary airway plateau 
pressures of ≤30 cm H2O. Finally, red blood cell transfusion 
should be reserved for patients with hemoglobin of <7 grams/
dL, with a more liberal transfusion strategy reserved for those 
patients with severe coronary artery disease, ongoing blood loss, 
or severe hypoxemia.
Resistant Organisms:  In the 1940s, penicillin was first pro-
duced for widespread clinical use. Within a year of its introduc-
tion, the first resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus were 
identified. There are two major components that are responsible 
for antibiotic resistance. First, there may be a genetic component 
innate to the organism that prevents an effect of a particular anti-
biotic. For instance, if an organism does not have a target recep-
tor specific to the mechanism of action of a particular antibiotic, 
155
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
Table 6-9 
Summary of Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines 
Initial Evaluation and Infection Issues
Initial resuscitation: Begin resuscitation immediately in patients with hypotension or elevated serum lactate with resuscitation 
goal of central venous pressure (CVP) 8 to 12 mm Hg, mean arterial pressure of ≥65 mm Hg, urine output of ≥0.5 mL/kg/h, and 
mixed venous oxygen saturation of 65%.
Target resuscitation to normalize lactate in patients with elevated lactate levels.
Diagnosis: Obtain appropriate cultures prior to antibiotics but do not delay antibiotic therapy. Use rapid antigen assays in patients 
with suspected fungal infection. Imaging studies should be performed promptly to confirm a source of infection.
Antibiotic therapy: Begin IV antibiotic therapy as early as possible: should be within the first hour after recognition of severe 
sepsis/septic shock. Use broad spectrum antibiotic regimen with penetration into presumed source, reassess regimen daily with 
deescalation as appropriate. Discontinue antibiotics in 7–10 d for most infections, stop antibiotics for noninfectious issues.
Source control: Establish anatomic site of infection as rapidly as possible, implement source control measures immediately after 
initial resuscitation. Remove intravascular access devices if potentially infected.
Infection prevention: Selective oral and digestive tract decontamination.
Hemodynamic Support and Adjunctive Therapy
Fluid therapy: Fluid resuscitate using crystalloid, using fluid volumes of 1000 mL (crystalloid), target CVP of 8 to12 mm Hg.
Vasopressors/Inotropic Therapy: Maintain MAP of ≥65 mm Hg, centrally-administered norepinephrine is first-line choice. 
Dopamine should not be used for “renal protection,” insert arterial catheters for patients requiring vasopressors. Phenylephrine is 
not recommended in treatment of septic shock. Dobutamine infusion can be used in setting of myocardial dysfunction. Do not use 
strategy of targeting supranormal cardiac index.
Steroids: Consider intravenous hydrocortisone (dose ≤300 mg/d) for adult septic shock when hypotension responds poorly to 
fluids and vasopressors.
Other Supportive Therapy
Blood product administration: Transfuse red blood cells when hemoglobin decreases to <7.0 g/dL.
Mechanical ventilation: Target an initial tidal volume of 6 mL/kg body weight and plateau pressure of ≤30 cm H2O in patients 
with acute lung injury. Use positive end-expiratory pressure to avoid lung collapse. Use a weaning protocol to evaluate the 
potential for discontinuing mechanical ventilation. Pulmonary artery catheter is not indicated for routine monitoring.
Sedation: Minimize sedation using specific titration endpoints.
Glucose control: Use protocolized approach to blood glucose management targeting upper blood glucose target of 180 mg/dL.
Prophylaxis: Use stress ulcer (proton pump inhibitor or H2 blocker) and deep venous thrombosis (low-dose unfractionated or 
fractionated heparin) prophylaxis.
Limitation of support: Discuss advance care planning with patients and families and set realistic expectations.
Adapted from Dellinger et. al13
the antibiotic will not be effective against this organism. A good 
example is penicillin and Gram-negative organisms, as these 
microbes lack penicillin-binding proteins. The second com-
ponent driving resistance is that related to antibiotic selection. 
Over generations of exposure to a particular antibiotic, selection 
pressure will drive proliferation of more organisms resistant to 
that antibiotic. It is this mechanism that leads to antibiotic resis-
tance in the world today, given that there are millions of kilo-
grams of antibiotics used annually in people, in agriculture, and 
for animal use. This has led to antibiotic resistance described 
in all classes of antibiotics in common use today. Antibiotic 
resistance comes at a high cost, with a significant increase in 
mortality associated with infection from resistant organisms, 
and an economic cost of billions of dollars per year.
Resistance mechanisms are varied, and include one of 
three routes. Resistance can be intrinsic to the organism (natu-
ral resistance), can be mutational and mediated by changes in 
the chromosomal makeup of the organism, and finally can be 
mediated by extrachromosomal transfer of genetic material via 
transposons or plasmids. Resistance due to mutation includes 
mechanisms mediated by target site modification, reduced per-
meability/uptake, metabolic bypass, or derepression of multi-
drug efflux systems. Genes transferred via plasmid or transposon 
include those that cause drug inactivation, increases in antibiotic 
efflux systems, target site modification, and metabolic bypass.
There are several drug resistant organisms of interest to 
the surgeon. MRSA occurs as a hospital-associated infection 
more common in chronically ill patients receiving multiple 
courses of antibiotics. However, recent strains of MRSA have 
emerged in the community among patients without preexisting 
risk factors for disease.72 These strains, which produce a toxin 
known as Panton-Valentin leukocidin, make up an increasingly 
high percentage of surgical site infections since they are resis-
tant to commonly employed prophylactic antimicrobial agents.83 
Extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing strains of 
Enterobacteraceae, originally geographically localized and 
infrequent, have become much more widespread and common 
in the last decade.84 These strains, typically Klebsiella or E coli 
156
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
species, produce a plasmid-mediated inducible β-lactamase. 
Commonly encountered plasmids also confer resistance to 
many other antibiotic classes (multidrug resistance). A common 
laboratory finding with ESBL is sensitivity to first-, second-, 
or third- generation cephalosporins with resistance to others. 
Unfortunately, use of this seemingly active agent leads to rapid 
induction of resistance and failure of antibiotic therapy. The 
appropriate antibiotic choice in this setting is a carbepenem. 
While Enterococcus used to be considered a low virulence 
organism in the past, infections caused by E faecium and faeca-
lis have been found to be increasingly virulent, especially in the 
immunocompromised host. The last decade has seen increased 
isolation of a vancomycin-resistant strain of Enterococcus.85 
This resistance is transposon-mediated via the vanA gene and 
is typically seen in E faecium strains. A real concern in this 
setting is transfer of genetic material to S aureus in a host coin-
fected with both organisms. This is thought to be the mechanism 
behind the half dozen recently described cases of vancomycin 
resistance in S aureus.
Blood-Borne Pathogens
While alarming to contemplate, the risk of human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) transmission from patient to surgeon is low. 
As of May 2011, there had been six cases of surgeons with HIV 
seroconversion from a possible occupational exposure, with no 
new cases reported since 1999. Of the numbers of health care 
workers with likely occupationally acquired HIV infection (n = 
200), surgeons were one of the lower risk groups (compared to 
nurses at 60 cases and nonsurgeon physicians at 19 cases).86 The 
estimated risk of transmission from a needlestick from a source 
with HIV-infected blood is estimated at 0.3%. Transmission of 
HIV (and other infections spread by blood and body fluid) from 
patient to health care worker can be minimized by observation 
of universal precautions, which include the following: (a) rou-
tine use of barriers (such as gloves and/or goggles) when antici-
pating contact with blood or body fluids, (b) washing of hands 
and other skin surfaces immediately after contact with blood or 
body fluids, and (c) careful handling and disposal of sharp 
instruments during and after use.
Postexposure prophylaxis for HIV has significantly 
decreased the risk of seroconversion for health care workers 
with occupational exposure to HIV. Steps to initiate postexpo-
sure prophylaxis should be initiated within hours rather than 
days for the most effective preventive therapy. Postexposure 
prophylaxis with a two- or three-drug regimen should be ini-
tiated for health care workers with significant exposure to 
patients with an HIV-positive status. If a patient’s HIV status 
is unknown, it may be advisable to begin postexposure prophy-
laxis while testing is carried out, particularly if the patient is at 
high risk for infection due to HIV (e.g., intravenous narcotic 
use). Generally, postexposure prophylaxis is not warranted for 
exposure to sources with unknown status, such as deceased per-
sons or needles from a sharps container.
The risks for surgeons of acquiring HIV infection have 
recently been evaluated by Goldberg and coauthors.87 They 
noted that the risks are related to the prevalence of HIV infec-
tion in the population being cared for, the probability of trans-
mission from a percutaneous injury suffered while caring for 
an infected patient, the number of such injuries sustained, and 
the use of postexposure prophylaxis. Annual calculated risks 
in Glasgow, Scotland, ranged from one in 200,000 for general 
surgeons not utilizing postexposure prophylaxis to as low as 
7
one in 10,000,000 with use of routine postexposure prophylaxis 
after significant exposures.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus that affects only 
humans. Primary infection with HBV generally is self-limited, 
but can cause fulminant hepatitis or progress to a chronic car-
rier state. Death from chronic liver disease or hepatocellular 
cancer occurs in roughly 30% of chronically infected persons. 
Surgeons and other health care workers are at high risk for this 
blood-borne infection and should receive the HBV vaccine; 
children are routinely vaccinated in the United States.88 This 
vaccine has contributed to a significant decline in the number of 
new cases of HBV per year in the United States, from approxi-
mately 250,000 annually in the 1980s to 3,350 in 2010.89,90 This 
is truly one of the unsung victories in vaccination strategy in 
the last 20 years.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), previously known as non-A, 
non-B hepatitis, is a RNA flavivirus first identified specifi-
cally in the late 1980s. This virus is confined to humans and 
chimpanzees. A chronic carrier state develops in 75% to 80% 
of patients with the infection, with chronic liver disease occur-
ring in three-fourths of patients who develop chronic infec-
tion. The number of new infections per year has declined 
since the 1980s due to routine testing of blood donors for this 
virus. Fortunately, HCV is not transmitted efficiently through 
occupational exposures to blood, with the seroconversion rate 
after accidental needlestick approximately 1.8%.91 To date, 
a vaccine to prevent HCV infection has not been developed. 
Experimental studies in chimpanzees with HCV immunoglob-
ulin using a model of needlestick injury have failed to demon-
strate a protective effect, and no effective antiviral agents for 
postexposure prophylaxis are available. Treatment of patients 
who develop HCV infection includes ribavirin and pegylated 
gamma interferon.92
BIOLOGIC WARFARE AGENTS
Several infectious organisms have been studied by the United 
States and the former Soviet Union and presumably other enti-
ties for potential use as biologic weapons. Programs involving 
biologic agents in the United States were halted by presidential 
decree in 1971. However, concern remains that these agents 
could be used by rogue states or terrorist organizations as 
weapons of mass destruction, as they are relatively inexpen-
sive to make in terms of infrastructure development. A related 
issue is the recent controversy regarding publication of genetic 
sequences and synthesis of virulent viruses, such as the 1918 
influenza strain, responsible for death of an estimated 3% of the 
world population. Given these concerns, physicians, including 
surgeons should familiarize themselves with the manifestations 
of infection due to these pathogens. The typical agent is selected 
for the ability to be spread via the inhalational route, as this 
is the most efficient mode of mass exposure. Several potential 
agents are discussed in the following sections.
Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax)
Anthrax is a zoonotic disease occurring in domesticated and 
wild herbivores. The first identification of inhalational anthrax 
as a disease occurred among woolsorters in England in the 
late 1800s. The largest recent epidemic of inhalational anthrax 
occurred in Sverdlovsk, Russia, in 1979 after accidental 
release of anthrax spores from a military facility. Inhalational 
anthrax develops after a 1- to 6-day incubation period, with 
157
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
nonspecific symptoms, including malaise, myalgia, and fever. 
Over a short period of time, these symptoms worsen, with 
development of respiratory distress, chest pain, and diapho-
resis. Characteristic chest roentgenographic findings include 
a widened mediastinum and pleural effusions. A key aspect 
in establishing the diagnosis is eliciting an exposure history. 
Rapid antigen tests are currently under development for iden-
tification of this gram-positive rod. Postexposure prophylaxis 
consists of administration of either ciprofloxacin or doxycy-
cline.93 If an isolate is demonstrated to be penicillin-sensitive, 
the patient should be switched to amoxicillin. Inhalational 
exposure followed by the development of symptoms is asso-
ciated with a high mortality rate. Treatment options include 
combination therapy with ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, and 
rifampin; clindamycin added to block production of toxin, 
while rifampin penetrates into the central nervous system and 
intracellular locations.
Yersinia pestis (Plague)
Plague is caused by the Gram-negative organism Yersinia pes-
tis. The naturally occurring disease in humans is transmitted via 
flea bites from rodents. It was the first biologic warfare agent, 
and was used in the Crimean city of Caffa by the Tartar army, 
whose soldiers catapulted bodies of plague victims at the Geno-
ese. When plague is used as a biologic warfare agent, clinical 
manifestations include epidemic pneumonia with blood-tinged 
sputum if aerosolized bacteria are used, or bubonic plague if 
fleas are used as carriers. Individuals who develop a painful 
enlarged lymph node lesion termed a “bubo” associated with 
fever, severe malaise, and exposure to fleas should be suspected 
to have plague. Diagnosis is confirmed via aspirate of the bubo 
and a direct antibody stain to detect plague bacillus. Typical 
morphology for this organism is that of a bipolar safety-pin–
shaped Gram-negative organism. Postexposure prophylaxis for 
patients exposed to plague consists of doxycycline. Treatment 
of the pneumonic or bubonic/septicemic form includes adminis-
tration of either streptomycin, an aminoglycoside, doxycycline, 
ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, or chloramphenicol.94
Smallpox
Variola, the causative agent of smallpox, was a major cause of 
infectious morbidity and mortality until its eradication in the 
late 1970s. During the European colonization of North America, 
British commanders may have used it against native inhabit-
ants and the colonists by distribution of blankets from smallpox 
victims. Even in the absence of laboratory-preserved virus, the 
prolonged viability of variola virus has been demonstrated in 
scabs up to 13 years after collection; the potential for reverse 
genetic engineering using the known sequence of smallpox also 
makes it a potential biologic weapon. This has resulted in the 
United States undertaking a vaccination program for key health 
care workers.95 Variola virus is highly infectious in the aerosol-
ized form; after an incubation period of 10 to 12 days, clini-
cal manifestations of malaise, fever, vomiting, and headache 
appear, followed by development of a characteristic centripetal 
rash (which is found to predominate on the face and extremi-
ties). The fatality rate may reach 30%. Postexposure prophy-
laxis with smallpox vaccine has been noted to be effective for up 
to 4 days postexposure. Cidofovir, an acyclic nucleoside phos-
phonate analogue, has demonstrated activity in animal models 
of poxvirus infections and may offer promise for the treatment 
of smallpox.96
Francisella tularensis (Tularemia)
The principal reservoir of this Gram-negative aerobic organism 
is the tick. After inoculation, this organism proliferates within 
macrophages. This organism has been considered a potential 
bioterrorist threat due to a very high infectivity rate after aero-
solization. Patients with tularemia pneumonia develop a cough 
and demonstrate pneumonia on chest roentgenogram. Enlarged 
lymph nodes occur in approximately 85% of patients. The 
organism can be cultured from tissue samples, but this is dif-
ficult, and the diagnosis is based on acute-phase agglutination 
tests. Treatment of inhalational tularemia consists of administra-
tion of an aminoglycoside or second-line agents such as doxy-
cycline and ciprofloxacin.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
  1.	Nuland SB. The Doctors’ Plague: Germs, Childbed Fever, and 
the Strange Story of Ignaz Semmelweis. New York: WW Nor-
ton & Co.: 2003:1.
  2.	Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD. Germ theory of infection 
and disease. In: Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD: The Rise 
of Surgery: From Empiric Craft to Scientific Discipline. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 1978:387.
  3.	Rutkow E. Appendicitis: The quintessential American surgical 
disease. Arch Surg. 1998; 133:1024.
  4.	Meleney F. Bacterial synergism in disease processes with 
confirmation of synergistic bacterial etiology of certain types 
of progressive gangrene of the abdominal wall. Ann Surg. 
1931;94:961-981.
  5.	Altemeier WA. Manual of Control of Infection in Surgical 
Patients. Chicago: American College of Surgeons Press: 1976:1.
  6.	Bartlett JG. Intra-abdominal sepsis. Med Clin North Am. 
1995;79:599-617.
  7.	Dunn DL, Simmons RL. The role of anaerobic bacteria in intra-
abdominal infections. Rev Infect Dis. 1984;6:S139-S146.
  8.	Osler W. The Evolution of Modern Medicine. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press: 1913:1.
  9.	Dunn DL. Autochthonous microflora of the gastrointestinal 
tract. Perspect Colon Rectal Surg. 1990;2:105-119.
10.	van Till JW, van Veen SQ, van Ruler O, et al. The innate 
immune response to secondary peritonitis. Shock. 2007 Nov; 
28(5):504-517.
11.	Zeytun A, Chaudhary A, Pardington P, et al. Induction of cyto-
kines and chemokines by Toll-like receptor signaling: strategies 
for control of inflammation. Crit Rev Immunol. 2010;30(1): 
53-67.
12.	Aziz M, Jacob A, Yang WL, et al. Current trends in inflamma-
tory and immunomodulatory mediators in sepsis. J Leukoc Biol. 
2013;(3)320-342.
13.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sep-
sis campaign: international guidelines for management of 
severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med. 2013; 
41: 580-637.
14.	Murphy SL, Xu Jiaquan, Kochanek KD. Deaths: preliminary 
data for 2010. National Vital Statistics Reports. 2012;60(4): 
1-52.
15.	Marshall JC, Cook DJ, Christou NV, et al. Multiple organ dys-
function score: a reliable descriptor of a complex clinical out-
come. Crit Care Med. 1995;23:1638-1652.
16.	Ferreira FL, Bota DP, Bross A, et al. Serial evaluation of the 
SOFA score to predict outcome in critically ill patients. JAMA. 
2002;286:1754-1758.
17.	Sauaia A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Lezotte DC. Early risk 
factors for postinjury multiple organ failure. World J Surg. 
1996;20:392-400.
158
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
18.	Zahar JR, Timsit JF, Garrouste-Orgeas M, et al. Outcomes in 
severe sepsis and patients with septic shock: pathogen species 
and infection sites are not associated with mortality. Crit Care 
Med. 2011;39(8):1886-1895.
19.	Dreiher J, Almog Y, Sprung CL, et al. Temporal trends in 
patient characteristics and survival of intensive care admis-
sions with sepsis: a multicenter analysis. Crit Care Med. 
2012;40(3):855-860.
20.	Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC, et al. 2001 SCCM/ESICM/
ACCP/ATS/SIS International Sepsis Definitions Conference. 
Crit Care Med. 2003 Apr;31(4):1250-1256.
21.	Howell MD, Talmor D, Schuetz P, et al. Proof of principle: the 
predisposition, infection, response, organ failure sepsis staging 
system. Crit Care Med. 2011 Feb;39(2):322-327.
22.	Nguyen HB, Van Ginkel C, Batech M, Banta J, Corbett SW. 
Comparison of predisposition, insult/infection, response, 
and organ dysfunction, Acute physiology and chronic health 
evaluation II, and mortality in emergency department sepsis in 
patients meeting criteria for early goal-directed therapy and the 
severe sepsis resuscitation bundle. J Crit Care. 2012 Aug;27(4): 
362-369.
23.	Dunn DL. The biological rationale. In: Schein M, Marshall JC 
(eds): Source Control: A Guide to the Management of Surgical 
Infections. New York: Springer-Verlag: 2003:9.
24.	Pieracci FM, Barie PS. Management of severe sepsis of abdom-
inal origin. Scand J Surg. 2007;96(3):184-196.
25.	Bratzler DW, Dellinger EP, Olson KM, et al. Clinical prac-
tice guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery. Am J 
Health Syst Pharm. 2013;70:195-283.
26.	Solomkin JS, Meakins JL Jr., Allo MD, et al. Antibiotic trials in 
intra-abdominal infections: a critical evaluation of study design 
and outcome reporting. Ann Surg. 1984;200:29-39.
27.	Kumar A. Optimizing antimicrobial therapy in sepsis and 
septic shock. Crit Care Clin. 2009;25(4):733-751.
28.	Aarts MA, Brun-Buisson C, Cook DJ, et al. Antibiotic man-
agement of suspected nosocomial ICU-acquired infection: does 
prolonged empiric therapy improve outcome? Intensive Care 
Med. 2007;33(8):1369-1378.
29.	Hillier S, Roberts Z, Dunstan F, et al. Prior antibiotics and risk 
of antibiotic-resistant community-acquired urinary tract infec-
tion: a case-control study. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2007;60: 
92-99.
30.	Smith BP, Fox N, Fakhro A, et al. “SCIP” ping antibiotic pro-
phylaxis guidelines in trauma: The consequences of noncompli-
ance. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2):452-456.
31.	Schuetz P, Müller B, Christ-Crain M, et al. Procalcitonin to 
initiate or discontinue antibiotics in acute respiratory tract 
infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 9:CD007498.
32.	Mazuski JE, Sawyer RG, Nathens AB, et al. The Surgi-
cal Infection Society guidelines on antimicrobial therapy for 
intra-abdominal infections: an executive summary. Surg Infect 
(Larchmt). 2002;3(3):161-173.
33.	Basoli A, Chirletti P, Cirino E, et al. A prospective, double-
blind, multicenter, randomized trial comparing ertapenem 3 vs 
>or=5 days in community-acquired intraabdominal infection. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(3):592-600
34.	Stone HH, Bourneuf AA, Stinson LD. Reliability of crite-
ria for predicting persistent or recurrent sepsis. Arch Surg. 
1985;120:17-20.
35.	Romano A, Viola M, Guéant-Rodriguez RM, et al. Imipenem in 
patients with immediate hypersensitivity to penicillins. N Engl 
J Med. 2006;354(26):2835-2837.
36.	Park M, Markus P, Matesic D, Li JT. Safety and effectiveness 
of a preoperative allergy clinic in decreasing vancomycin use in 
patients with a history of penicillin allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma 
Immunol. 2006;97:681-687.
37.	Galán JC, González-Candelas F, Rolain JM, Cantón R. Antibiot-
ics as selectors and accelerators of diversity in the mechanisms 
of resistance: from the resistome to genetic plasticity in the 
β-lactamases world. Front Microbiol. 2013;4:9.
38.	Rosenberger LH, Politano AD, Sawyer RG. The surgical care 
improvement project and prevention of post-operative infec-
tion, including surgical site infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 
2011;12(3):163-168. doi: 10.1089/sur.2010.083.
39.	Alexander JW, Solomkin JS, Edwards MJ. Updated recom-
mendations for control of surgical site infections. Ann Surg. 
2011;253(6):1082-1093.
40.	Martone WJ, Nichols RL. Recognition, prevention, surveil-
lance, and management of surgical site infections: introduc-
tion to the problem and symposium overview. Clin Infect Dis. 
2001;33:S67-S68.
41.	Kobayashi M, Mohri Y, Inoue Y, Miki C, Kusunoki M. Con-
tinuous follow-up of surgical site infections for 30 days after 
colorectal surgery. World J Surg. 2008;32:1142-1146.
42.	Konishi T, Watanabe T, Kishimoto J, Nagawa H. Elective colon 
and rectal surgery differ in risk factors for wound infection: 
results of prospective surveillance. Ann Surg. 2006;244:758-763.
43.	Cima R, Dankbar E, Lovely J, et al. Colorectal surgery sur-
gical site infection reduction program: a national surgical 
quality improvement program-driven multidisciplinary single-
institution experience. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(1):23-33.
44.	Weiss CAIII, Statz CL, Dahms RA, et al. Six years of surgical 
wound infection surveillance at a tertiary care center: review 
of the microbiologic and epidemiological aspects of 20,007 
wounds. Arch Surg. 1999;134:1041-1048.
45.	Mu Y, Edwards JR, Horan TC, et al. Improving risk-adjusted 
measures of surgical site infection for the national health-
care safety network. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2011; 
32(10):970-986.
46.	Scott RD II. The direct medical costs of healthcare-associated 
infections in U.S. hospitals and the benefits of prevention. 2009. 
Available at:http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/pdfs/hai/Scott_CostPaper.
pdf, Accessed March 3, 2013.
47.	Bratzler DW, Houck PM. Surgical Infection Prevention Guide-
lines Writers Workgroup, et al. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for 
surgery: an advisory statement from the National Surgical Infec-
tion Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38:1706-1715.
48.	Meeks DW, Lally KP, Carrick MM, et al. Compliance with 
guidelines to prevent surgical site infections: as simple as 1-2-
3? Am J Surg. 2011;201(1):76-83.
49.	Duttaroy DD, Jitendra J, Duttaroy B, et al. Management 
strategy for dirty abdominal incisions: primary or delayed 
primary closure? A randomized trial. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 
2009:10(2):129-136.
50.	Margenthaler JA, Longo WE, Virgo KS, et al. Risk factors for 
adverse outcomes after the surgical treatment of appendicitis in 
adults. Ann Surg. 2003;238:59-66.
51.	McManus LM, Bloodworth RC, Prihoda TJ, et al. Agonist-
dependent failure of neutrophil function in diabetes correlates 
with extent of hyperglycemia. J Leukoc Biol. 2001;70:395-404.
52.	Richards JE, Kauffmann RM, Obremskey WT, May AK. 
Stress-induced hyperglycemia as a risk factor for surgical-site 
infection in nondiabetic orthopedic trauma patients admitted to 
the intensive care unit. J Orthop Trauma. 2013;27(1):16-21.
53.	Ata A, Lee J, Bestle SL, et al. Postoperative hyperglycemia and 
surgical site infection in general surgery patients. Arch Surg. 
2010;145(9):858-864.
54.	Greif R, Akca O, Horn EP, et al. Supplemental perioperative 
oxygen to reduce the incidence of wound infection. N Engl J 
Med. 2000;342:161-167.
55.	Kao LS, Millas SG, Pedroza C, et al. Should perioperative supple-
mental oxygen be routinely recommended for surgery patients? 
A Bayesian meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2012;256(6):894-901.
56.	Grubbs BC, Statz CL, Johnson EM, et al. Salvage therapy of 
open, infected surgical wounds: a retrospective review using 
Techni-Care. Surg Infect. 2000;1:109-114.
159
Surgical Infections
CHAPTER 6
57.	Roberts DJ, Zygun DA, Grendar J, et al. Negative-pressure 
wound therapy for critically ill adults with open abdominal 
wounds: a systematic review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;73(3):629-639.
58.	Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Baron EJ, et al. Infectious Diseases 
Society of America: Guidelines for the selection of anti-infective 
agents for complicated intra-abdominal infections. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2003;37:997-1005.
59.	Solomkin JS, Dellinger EP, Christou NV, et al. Results of a 
multicenter trial comparing imipenem/cilastatin to tobramy-
cin/clindamycin for intra-abdominal infections. Ann Surg. 
1990;212:581-591.
60.	Solomkin JS, Yellin AE, Rotstein OD, et al. Protocol 017 Study 
Group. Ertapenem versus piperacillin/tazobactam in the treat-
ment of complicated intraabdominal infections: results of a 
double-blind, randomized comparative phase III trial. Ann Surg. 
2003;237:235-245.
61.	Chromik AM, Meiser A, Hölling J, et al. Identification of 
patients at risk for development of tertiary peritonitis on a 
surgical intensive care unit. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13(7): 
1358-1367.
62.	Pang TC, Fung T, Samra J, et al. Pyogenic liver abscess: an 
audit of 10 years’ experience. World J Gastroenterol. 2011; 
17(12):1622-1630.
63.	Bradley EL III, Allen K. A prospective longitudinal study of 
observation versus surgical intervention in the management of 
necrotizing pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 1991;161:19.
64.	Charbonney E, Nathens AB. Severe acute pancreatitis: a review. 
Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2008;9(6):573-578.
65.	Freeman ML, Werner J, van Santvoort HC, et al. Interventions 
for necrotizing pancreatitis: summary of a multidisciplinary 
consensus conference. Pancreas. 2012;41(8):1176-1194.
66.	Wysocki AP, McKay CJ, Carter CR. Infected pancreatic necro-
sis: minimizing the cut. ANZ J Surg. 2010;80(1-2):58-70.
67.	Haghshenasskashani A, Laurence JM, Kwan V, et al. Endo-
scopic necrosectomy of pancreatic necrosis: a systematic 
review. Surg Endosc. 2011; 25(12):3724-3730.
68.	Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al. Endo-
scopic transgastric vs surgical necrosectomy for infected nec-
rotizing pancreatitis: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(10): 
1053-1061.
69.	Fink D, Soares R, Matthews JB, Alverdy JC. History, goals, and 
technique of laparoscopic pancreatic necrosectomy. J Gastroin-
test Surg. 2011;15(7):1092-1097.
70.	van Santvoort HC, Bakker OJ, Bollen TL, et al. A Conserva-
tive and Minimally Invasive Approach to Necrotizing Pan-
creatitis Improves Outcome. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(4): 
1254-1263.
71.	van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. A step-
up approach or open necrosectomy for necrotizing pancre-
atitis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(16):1491-1502.
72.	Beilman GJ, Sandifer G, Skarda D, et al. Emerging infections 
with community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus in outpatients at an Army Community Hospital. Surg 
Infect (Larchmt). 2005;6(1):87-92.
73.	Kao LS, Lew DF, Arab SN, et al. Local variations in the epi-
demiology, microbiology, and outcome of necrotizing soft-
tissue infections: a multicenter study. Am J Surg. 2011; 202(2): 
139-145.
74.	George ME, Rueth NM, Skarda DE, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen 
does not improve outcome in patients with necrotizing soft tis-
sue infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2009;10(1):21-28.
75.	Klompas M. Does this patient have ventilator-associated pneu-
monia? JAMA. 2007 11;297(14):1583-1593.
76.	Riaz OJ, Malhotra AK, Aboutanos MB, et al. Bronchoalveolar 
lavage in the diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia: to 
quantitate or not, that is the question. Am Surg. 2011;77(3): 
297-303.
77.	O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, et al. Guidelines for 
the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2011; 52(9): e162–e193.
78.	Safdar N, Maki DG. Risk of catheter-related bloodstream infec-
tion with peripherally inserted central venous catheters used in 
hospitalized patients. Chest. 2005;128(2);489-495.
79.	Marr KA, Sexton DJ, Conlon PJ, et al. Catheter-related bac-
teremia and outcome of attempted catheter salvage in patients 
undergoing hemodialysis. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127:275.
80.	Broom JK, Krishnasamy R, Hawley CM, et al. A randomised con-
trolled trial of Heparin versus EthAnol Lock THerapY for the pre-
vention of Catheter Associated infecTion in Haemodialysis patients 
– the HEALTHY-CATH trial. BMC Nephrol. 2012;13:146.
81.	Moore LJ, Moore FA. Epidemiology of sepsis in surgical 
patients. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(6):1425-1443.
82.	Otero RM, Nguyen HB, Huang DT, et al. Early goal-directed 
therapy in severe sepsis and septic shock revisited: Concepts, 
controversies, and contemporary findings. Chest. 2006;130(5) 
1579-1595.
83.	Miller LG, McKinnell JA, Vollmer ME, Spellberg B. Impact 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus prevalence 
among S aureus isolates on surgical site infection risk after 
coronary artery bypass surgery. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2011;32(4):342-350.
84.	Han JH, Nachamkin I, Zaoutis TE, et al. Risk factors for 
gastrointestinal tract colonization with extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella 
species in hospitalized patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2012;33(12):1242-1245.
85.	Calfee DP. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and 
vancomycin-resistant enterococci, and other Gram-positives in 
healthcare. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2012;25(4):385-394.
86.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Surveillance of 
Occupationally Acquired HIV/AIDS in Healthcare Personnel, 
as of December 2010, http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/
hiv/Surveillance-Occupationally-Acquired-HIV-AIDS.html. 
Accessed March 3, 2013.
87.	Goldberg D, Johnston J, Cameron S, et al. Risk of HIV trans-
mission from patients to surgeons in the era of post-exposure 
prophylaxis. J Hosp Infect. 2000;44:99-105.
88.	Recommended Adult Immunization Schedule-United States. 
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/adult.
html Accessed March 4, 2013.
89.	Centers for Disease Control. Hepatitis B vaccination–United 
States, 1982–2002. MMWR. 2002;51:549.
90.	Centers for Disease Control, Viral Hepatitis Statistics and Surveil-
lance, http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Statistics/2010Surveillance/
Table3.1.htm. Accessed March 3, 2013.
91.	MacCannell T, Laramie AK, Gomaa A, Perz JF. Occupational 
exposure of health care personnel to hepatitis B and hepati-
tis C: prevention and surveillance strategies. Clin Liver Dis. 
2010;14(1):23-36.
92.	Katz LH, Goldvaser H, Gafter-Gvili A, Tur-Kaspa R. Extended 
peginterferon plus ribavirin treatment for 72 weeks versus 
standard peginterferon plus ribavirin treatment for 48 weeks in 
chronic hepatitis C genotype 1 infected slow-responder adult 
patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD008516.
93.	Inglesby TV, O’Toole T, Henderson DA, et al. Anthrax as a 
biological weapon, 2002: updated recommendations for man-
agement. JAMA. 2002;287:2236-2252.
94.	Inglesby TV, Dennis DT, Henderson DA, et al. Plague as a bio-
logical weapon; medical and public health management. Work-
ing group on civilian biodefense. JAMA 2000;283:2281-2290.
95.	Russell PK, Gronvall GK. U.S. medical countermeasure devel-
opment since 2001: a long way yet to go. Biosecur Bioterror. 
2012;10(1):66-76.
96.	DeClercq E. Cidofovir in the treatment of poxvirus infections. 
Antiviral Res 2002;55:1-13
This page intentionally left blank 
Trauma
Clay Cothren Burlew and Ernest E. Moore
7
INTRODUCTION
Trauma, or injury, is defined as cellular disruption caused by 
an exchange with environmental energy that is beyond the 
body’s resilience which is compounded by cell death due to 
ischemia/reperfusion. Trauma remains the most common cause 
of death for all individuals between the ages of 1 and 44 years 
and is the third most common cause of death regardless of 
age.1 It is also the leading cause of years of productive 
life lost. Unintentional injuries account for over 110,000 deaths 
per year, with motor vehicle collisions accounting for over 
40%. Homicides, suicides, and other causes are responsible for 
another 50,000 deaths each year. However, death rate under-
estimates the magnitude of the societal toll. For example, in 
2004 there were approximately 167,000 injury-related deaths, 
but 29.6 million injured patients treated in emergency depart-
ments (EDs). Injury-related medical expenditures are estimated 
to be $117 billion each year in the United States.2 The aggregate 
lifetime cost for all injured patients is estimated to be in excess 
of $260 trillion. For these reasons, trauma must be considered 
a major public health issue. The American College of Surgeons 
Committee on Trauma addresses this issue by assisting in the 
development of trauma centers and systems. The organization 
of trauma systems has had a significant favorable impact on 
patient outcomes.3–5
INITIAL EVALUATION AND RESUSCITATION  
OF THE INJURED PATIENT
Primary Survey
The Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) course of the 
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma was 
developed in the late 1970s, based on the premise that appropri-
ate and timely care can significantly improve the outcome for 
the injured patient.6 ATLS provides a structured approach to 
Introduction	
161
Initial Evaluation and Resuscitation 
of the Injured Patient	
161
Primary Survey / 161
Secondary Survey / 173
Mechanisms and Patterns of Injury / 173
Regional Assessment and Special  
Diagnostic Tests / 174
General Principles of  
Management	
183
Transfusion Practices / 184
Prophylactic Measures / 185
Operative Approaches and Exposure / 187
Damage Control Surgery / 192
Treatment of Specific Injuries	
195
Head Injuries / 195
Cervical Injuries / 197
Chest Injuries / 200
Abdominal Injuries / 203
Pelvic Fracture Hemorrhage Control / 212
Extremity Vascular Injuries, Fractures, 
and Compartment Syndromes / 214
Surgical Intensive Care  
Management	
215
Postinjury Resuscitation / 215
Abdominal Compartment Syndrome / 217
Special Populations	
218
Pregnant Patients / 218
Geriatric Patients / 221
Pediatric Patients / 222
chapter 
the trauma patient with standard algorithms of care; it empha-
sizes the “golden hour” concept that timely, prioritized interven-
tions are necessary to prevent death and disability. The ATLS 
format and basic tenets are followed throughout this chapter, 
with some modifications. The initial management of seriously 
injured patients consists of phases that include the primary survey/ 
concurrent resuscitation, the secondary survey/diagnostic evalu-
ation, definitive care, and the tertiary survey. The first step in 
patient management is performing the primary survey, the goal 
of which is to identify and treat conditions that constitute an 
immediate threat to life. The ATLS course refers to the primary 
survey as assessment of the “ABCs” (Airway with cervical 
spine protection, Breathing, and Circulation). Although 
the concepts within the primary survey are presented in a 
sequential fashion, in reality they are pursued simultaneously in 
coordinated team resuscitation. Life-threatening injuries must 
be identified (Table 7-1) and treated before being distracted by 
the secondary survey.
Airway Management with Cervical Spine Protection  Ensur-
ing a patent airway is the first priority in the primary survey. This 
is essential, because efforts to restore cardiovascular integrity 
will be futile unless the oxygen content of the blood is adequate. 
Simultaneously, all patients with blunt trauma require cervical 
spine immobilization until injury is excluded. This is typically 
accomplished by applying a hard collar or placing sandbags on 
both sides of the head with the patient’s forehead taped across 
the bags to the backboard. Soft collars do not effectively immo-
bilize the cervical spine. For penetrating neck wounds, however, 
cervical collars are not believed useful because they provide 
no benefit, but may interfere with assessment and treatment. 7,8
In general, patients who are conscious, without tachypnea, 
and have a normal voice are unlikely to require early airway 
intervention. Exceptions are penetrating injuries to the neck 
with an expanding hematoma; evidence of chemical or thermal 
1
2
162
Table 7-1 
Immediately life-threatening injuries to be identified 
during the primary survey
Airway
  Airway obstruction
  Airway injury
Breathing
  Tension pneumothorax
  Open pneumothorax
  Massive air leak
  Flail chest with underlying pulmonary contusion
Circulation
Hemorrhagic shock
  Massive hemothorax
  Massive hemoperitoneum
  Mechanically unstable pelvis fracture with bleeding
  Extremity blood loss
Cardiogenic shock
  Cardiac tamponade
Neurogenic shock
Disability
  Intracranial hemorrhage/mass lesion
  Cervical spine injury
Key Points
1
  Trauma remains the most common cause of death for all 
individuals between the ages of 1 and 44 years and is the 
third most common cause of death regardless of age.
2
  The initial management of seriously injured patients consists 
of performing the primary survey (the “ABCs”—Airway 
with cervical spine protection, Breathing, and Circulation); 
the goals of the primary survey are to identify and treat con-
ditions that constitute an immediate threat to life.
3
  All patients with blunt injury should be assumed to have unsta-
ble cervical spine injuries until proven otherwise; one must 
maintain cervical spine precautions and in-line stabilization.
4
  Patients with ongoing hemodynamic instability, whether 
“nonresponders” or “transient responders,” require prompt 
intervention; one must consider the four categories of shock 
that may represent the underlying pathophysiology: hemor-
rhagic, cardiogenic, neurogenic, and septic.
5
  Indications for immediate operative intervention for pene-
trating cervical injury include hemodynamic instability and 
significant external arterial hemorrhage; the management 
algorithm for hemodynamically stable patients is based on 
the presenting symptoms and anatomic location of injury, 
with the neck being divided into three distinct zones.
6
  The gold standard for determining if there is a blunt 
descending torn aorta injury is CT scanning; indications 
are primarily based on injury mechanisms.
7
  The abdomen is a diagnostic black box. However, physi-
cal examination and ultrasound can rapidly identify 
patients requiring emergent laparotomy. Computed 
tomographic (CT) scanning is the mainstay of evaluation 
in the remaining patients to more precisely identify the 
site and magnitude of injury.
8
  Manifestation of the “bloody vicious cycle” (the lethal 
combination of coagulopathy, hypothermia, and meta-
bolic acidosis) is the most common indication for dam-
age control surgery. The primary objectives of damage 
control laparotomy are to control bleeding and limit GI 
spillage.
9
  Blunt injuries to the carotid and vertebral arteries are usu-
ally managed with systemic antithrombotic therapy.
10
  The abdominal compartment syndrome may be primary 
(i.e., due to the injury of abdominal organs, bleeding, and 
packing) or secondary (i.e., due to reperfusion visceral 
edema, retroperitoneal edema, and ascites).
injury to the mouth, nares, or hypopharynx; extensive subcuta-
neous air in the neck; complex maxillofacial trauma; or airway 
bleeding. Although these patients may initially have an ade-
quate airway, it may become obstructed if soft tissue swelling, 
hematoma formation, or edema progresses. In these cases, pre-
emptive intubation should be performed before airway access 
becomes challenging.
Patients who have an abnormal voice, abnormal breathing 
sounds, tachypnea, or altered mental status require further airway 
evaluation. Blood, vomit, the tongue, foreign objects, and soft 
tissue swelling can cause airway obstruction; suctioning affords 
immediate relief in many patients. In the comatose patient, the 
tongue may fall backward and obstruct the hypopharynx; this 
can be relieved by either a chin lift or jaw thrust. An oral airway 
or a nasal trumpet is also helpful in maintaining airway patency, 
although the former is not usually tolerated by an awake patient. 
Establishing a definitive airway (i.e., endotracheal intubation) is 
indicated in patients with apnea; inability to protect the airway 
due to altered mental status; impending airway compromise due 
to inhalation injury, hematoma, facial bleeding, soft tissue swell-
ing, or aspiration; and inability to maintain oxygenation. Altered 
mental status is the most common indication for intubation. Agi-
tation or obtundation, often attributed to intoxication or drug use, 
may actually be due to hypoxia.
Options for endotracheal intubation include nasotracheal, 
orotracheal, or operative routes. Nasotracheal intubation can 
be accomplished only in patients who are breathing spontane-
ously. Although nasotracheal intubation is frequently used by 
prehospital providers, the application for this technique in the 
ED is limited to those patients requiring emergent airway sup-
port in whom chemical paralysis cannot be used. Orotracheal 
intubation is the preferred technique used to establish a defini-
tive airway. Because all patients are presumed to have cervi-
cal spine injuries, manual in-line cervical immobilization is 
essential.6 Correct endotracheal placement is verified with 
direct laryngoscopy, capnography, audible bilateral breath 
sounds, and finally a chest film. The GlideScope, a video 
laryngoscope that uses fiber optics to visualize the vocal cords, 
is being employed more frequently.9 Advantages of orotracheal 
intubation include the direct visualization of the vocal cords, 
ability to use larger-diameter endotracheal tubes, and appli-
cability to apneic patients. The disadvantage of orotracheal 
3
163
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
intubation is that conscious patients usually require neuro-
muscular blockade, which may result in inability to intubate, 
aspiration, or medication complications. Those who attempt 
rapid-sequence induction must be thoroughly familiar with the 
procedure (see Chap. 13).
Patients in whom attempts at intubation have failed or 
who are precluded from intubation due to extensive facial 
injuries require operative establishment of an airway. Crico-
thyroidotomy (Fig. 7-1) is performed through a generous verti-
cal incision, with sharp division of the subcutaneous tissues. 
Visualization may be improved by having an assistant retract 
laterally on the neck incision using army-navy retractors. The 
cricothyroid membrane is verified by digital palpation and 
opened in a horizontal direction. The airway may be stabilized 
before incision of the membrane using a tracheostomy hook; the 
hook should be placed under the thyroid cartilage to elevate the 
airway. A 6.0 endotracheal tube (maximum diameter in adults) 
is then advanced through the cricothyroid opening and sutured 
into place. In patients under the age of 11, cricothyroidotomy is 
relatively contraindicated due to the risk of subglottic stenosis, 
and tracheostomy should be performed.
Emergent tracheostomy is indicated in patients with laryn-
gotracheal separation or laryngeal fractures, in whom cricothy-
roidotomy may cause further damage or result in complete loss 
Figure 7-1.  Cricothyroidotomy is recommended for emergent 
surgical establishment of a patent airway. A vertical skin incision 
avoids injury to the anterior jugular veins, which are located just 
lateral to the midline. Hemorrhage from these vessels obscures 
vision and prolongs the procedure. When a transverse incision is 
made in the cricothyroid membrane, the blade of the knife should 
be angled inferiorly to avoid injury to the vocal cords. A. Use of 
a tracheostomy hook stabilizes the thyroid cartilage and facilitates 
tube insertion. B. A 6.0 endotracheal tube is inserted after digital 
confirmation of airway access.
of the airway. This procedure is best performed in the OR where 
there is optimal lighting and availability of more equipment 
(e.g., sternal saw). In these cases, often after a “clothesline” 
injury, direct visualization and instrumentation of the trachea 
usually is done through the traumatic anterior neck defect or 
after a generous collar skin incision (Fig. 7-2). If the trachea is 
completely transected, a nonpenetrating clamp should be placed 
on the distal aspect to prevent tracheal retraction into the medi-
astinum; this is particularly important before placement of the 
endotracheal tube.
Breathing and Ventilation  Once a secure airway is obtained, 
adequate oxygenation and ventilation must be ensured. All 
injured patients should receive supplemental oxygen and be 
monitored by pulse oximetry. The following conditions con-
stitute an immediate threat to life due to inadequate ventilation 
and should be recognized during the primary survey: tension 
pneumothorax, open pneumothorax, flail chest with underlying 
pulmonary contusion, and massive air leak. All of these diag-
noses should be made during the initial physical examination.
The diagnosis of tension pneumothorax is presumed in 
any patient manifesting respiratory distress and hypotension in 
combination with any of the following physical signs: tracheal 
deviation away from the affected side, lack of or decreased 
breath sounds on the affected side, and subcutaneous emphy-
sema on the affected side. Patients may have distended neck 
veins due to impedance of venous return, but the neck veins 
may be flat due to concurrent systemic hypovolemia. Tension 
pneumothorax and simple pneumothorax have similar signs, 
symptoms, and examination findings, but hypotension quali-
fies the pneumothorax as a tension pneumothorax. Although 
immediate needle thoracostomy decompression with a 14-gauge 
angiocatheter in the second intercostal space in the midclavicu-
lar line may be indicated in the field, tube thoracostomy should 
be performed immediately in the ED before a chest radiograph 
is obtained (Fig. 7-3). Recent studies suggest the preferred loca-
tion for needle decompression may be the 5th intercostal space 
in the anterior axillary line due to body habitus.10 In cases of 
tension pneumothorax, the parenchymal tear in the lung acts as 
a one-way valve, with each inhalation allowing additional air to 
Figure 7-2.  A “clothesline” injury can partially or completely tran-
sect the anterior neck structures, including the trachea. With com-
plete tracheal transection, the endotracheal tube is placed directly 
into the distal aperture, with care taken not to push the trachea into 
the mediastinum.
A
B
164
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
accumulate in the pleural space. The normally negative intra-
pleural pressure becomes positive, which depresses the ipsilat-
eral hemidiaphragm and shifts the mediastinal structures into 
the contralateral chest. Subsequently, the contralateral lung is 
compressed and the heart rotates about the superior and inferior 
vena cava; this decreases venous return and ultimately cardiac 
output, which culminates in cardiovascular collapse.
An open pneumothorax or “sucking chest wound” occurs 
with full-thickness loss of the chest wall, permitting free com-
munication between the pleural space and the atmosphere 
(Fig. 7-4). This compromises ventilation due to equilibration of 
atmospheric and pleural pressures, which prevents lung inflation 
and alveolar ventilation, and results in hypoxia and hypercar-
bia. Complete occlusion of the chest wall defect without a tube 
thoracostomy may convert an open pneumothorax to a tension 
pneumothorax. Temporary management of this injury includes 
covering the wound with an occlusive dressing that is taped on 
three sides. This acts as a flutter valve, permitting effective ven-
tilation on inspiration while allowing accumulated air to escape 
from the pleural space on the untaped side, so that a tension 
pneumothorax is prevented. Definitive treatment requires clo-
sure of the chest wall defect and tube thoracostomy remote from 
the wound.
Flail chest occurs when three or more contiguous ribs are 
fractured in at least two locations. Paradoxical movement of this 
free-floating segment of chest wall is usually evident in patients 
with spontaneous ventilation, due to the negative intrapleural 
pressure of inspiration. However, the additional work of breathing 
Figure 7-3.  A. Tube thoracostomy is performed in the midaxillary 
line at the fourth or fifth intercostal space (inframammary crease) 
to avoid iatrogenic injury to the liver or spleen. B. Heavy scissors 
are used to cut through the intercostal muscle into the pleural space. 
This is done on top of the rib to avoid injury to the intercostal bun-
dle located just beneath the rib. C. The incision is digitally explored 
to confirm intrathoracic location and identify pleural adhesions. D. 
A 28F chest tube is directed superiorly and posteriorly with the aid 
of a large clamp.
Figure 7-4.  A. Full-thickness loss of the chest wall results in an 
open pneumothorax. B. The defect is temporarily managed with 
an occlusive dressing that is taped on three sides, which allows 
accumulated air to escape from the pleural space and thus prevents 
a tension pneumothorax. Repair of the chest wall defect and tube 
thoracostomy remote from the wound is definitive treatment.
and chest wall pain caused by the flail segment is rarely suf-
ficient to compromise ventilation. Instead, it is the decreased 
compliance and increased shunt fraction caused by the associ-
ated pulmonary contusion that is the source of acute respiratory 
failure. Pulmonary contusion often progresses during the first 
12 hours. Resultant hypoventilation and hypoxemia may require 
intubation and mechanical ventilation. The patient’s initial chest 
radiograph often underestimates the extent of the pulmonary 
parenchymal damage (Fig. 7-5); close monitoring and frequent 
clinical re-evaluation are warranted.
Massive air leak occurs from major tracheobronchial 
injuries. Type I injuries are those occurring within 2 cm of the 
carina.11,12 These are often not associated with a pneumothorax 
due to the envelopment in the mediastinal pleura. Type II inju-
ries are more distal injuries within the tracheobronchial tree and 
manifest with pneumothorax. Bronchoscopy confirms diagnosis 
and directs management.
Circulation with Hemorrhage Control  With a secure airway 
and adequate ventilation established, circulatory status is the next 
priority. An initial approximation of the patient’s cardiovascular 
165
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7-5.  A. Admission chest film may not show the full extent 
of the patient’s pulmonary parenchymal injury. B. This patient’s 
left pulmonary contusion blossomed 12 hours later, and its associ-
ated opacity is noted on repeat chest radiograph.
Figure 7-6.  Intraosseous infusions are indicated for children 
<6 years of age in whom one or two attempts at IV access have 
failed. A. The proximal tibia is the preferred location. Alterna-
tively, the distal femur can be used if the tibia is fractured. B. The 
needle should be directed away from the epiphyseal plate to avoid 
injury. The position is satisfactory if bone marrow can be aspirated 
and saline can be easily infused without evidence of extravasation.
Figure 7-7.  Saphenous vein cutdowns are excellent sites for fluid 
resuscitation access. A. The vein is consistently found 1 cm ante-
rior and 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus. B. Proximal and 
distal traction sutures are placed with the distal suture ligated. C. 
A 14-gauge IV catheter is introduced and secured with sutures and 
tape to prevent dislodgment.
status can be obtained by palpating peripheral pulses. In general, 
systolic blood pressure (SBP) must be 60 mm Hg for the carotid 
pulse to be palpable, 70 mm Hg for the femoral pulse, and 80 mm 
Hg for the radial pulse. Any episode of hypotension (defined as a 
SBP <90 mm Hg) is assumed to be caused by hemorrhage until 
proven otherwise. Patients with acute massive blood loss may 
have paradoxical bradycardia.13 Blood pressure and pulse should 
be measured at least every 5 minutes in patients with significant 
blood loss until normal vital sign values are restored. High energy 
auto-pedestrian victims should have their pelvis wrapped with a 
sheet until radiography can be done.
IV access for fluid resuscitation is obtained with two 
peripheral catheters, 16-gauge or larger in adults. For patients 
in whom peripheral angiocatheter access is difficult, intraos-
seous (IO) needles can be rapidly placed in the proximal tibia 
of the lower extremity (Fig. 7-6).14,15 All medications adminis-
tered IV may be administered in a similar dosage intraosseously. 
Although safe for emergent use, the needle should be removed 
once alternative access is established to prevent osteomyelitis. 
Blood should be drawn simultaneously for a bedside hemoglobin 
level and routine trauma laboratory tests. In the seriously injured 
patient arriving in shock, an arterial blood gas, cross-matching 
for possible red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, and a coagula-
tion panel should be obtained. In these patients, secondary large 
bore cannulae should be obtained via the femoral or subclavian 
veins, or saphenous vein cutdown; Cordis introducer catheters 
are preferred over triple-lumen catheters. In general, initial 
access in trauma patients is best secured in the groin or ankle, 
so that the catheter will not interfere with the performance of 
other diagnostic and therapeutic thoracic procedures. Saphenous 
vein cutdowns at the ankle provide excellent access (Fig. 7-7). 
The saphenous vein is reliably found 1 cm anterior and 1 cm 
superior to the medial malleolus. Standard 14-gauge catheters 
can be quickly placed, even in an exsanguinating patient with 
166
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
collapsed veins. If IV access cannot be achieved readily, the 
IO route is very useful, particularly for drug administration.14,15 
Additional venous access often is obtained through the femoral 
or subclavian veins with Cordis introducer catheters. A rule of 
thumb to consider for secondary access is placement of femoral 
access for thoracic trauma and jugular or subclavian access for 
abdominal trauma. However, jugular or subclavian catheters 
provide a more reliable measurement of central venous pressure 
(CVP), which may be helpful in determining the volume status 
of the patient and in excluding cardiac tamponade. In severely 
injured children < 6 years of age, the preferred venous access is 
peripheral intravenous catheters followed by an IO needle. Cen-
tral venous catheter placement or saphenous vein cutdown may 
be considered as the third choice of access based upon provider 
experience. Inadvertent femoral artery cannulation, however, 
may result in limb-threatening distal arterial spasm.
External control of any visible hemorrhage should be 
achieved promptly while circulating volume is restored. Manual 
compression of open wounds with ongoing bleeding should be 
done with a single 4 × 4 gauze and a gloved hand. Covering the 
wound with excessive dressings may permit ongoing unrecog-
nized blood loss that is hidden underneath the dressing. Blind 
clamping of bleeding vessels should be avoided because of the 
risk to adjacent structures, including nerves. This is particularly 
true for penetrating injuries of the neck, thoracic outlet, and 
groin, where bleeding may be torrential and arising deep within 
the wound. In these situations, a gloved finger is placed through 
the wound directly onto the bleeding vessel and enough pressure 
is applied to control active bleeding. The surgeon performing 
this maneuver must then walk with the patient to the OR for 
definitive treatment. For bleeding of the extremities it is tempt-
ing to apply tourniquets for hemorrhage control, but digital 
occlusion will usually control the bleeding, and complete vas-
cular occlusion risks permanent neuromuscular impairment. 
Patients in shock have a lower tolerance to warm ischemia, 
and an occluded extremity is prone to small vessel thrombosis. 
Figure 7-8.  More than 1500 mL of blood in the pleural space is considered a massive hemothorax. Chest film findings reflect the positioning 
of the patient. A. In the supine position, blood tracks along the entire posterior section of the chest and is most notable pushing the lung away 
from the chest wall. B. In the upright position, blood is visible dependently in the right pleural space.
For patients with open fractures, fracture reduction with stabi-
lization via splints will limit bleeding both externally and into 
the subcutaneous tissues. Scalp lacerations through the galea 
aponeurotica tend to bleed profusely; these can be temporarily 
controlled with skin staples, Raney clips, or a large full-thickness 
continuous running nylon stitch.
During the circulation section of the primary survey, four 
life-threatening injuries must be identified promptly: (a) mas-
sive hemothorax, (b) cardiac tamponade, (c) massive hemoperi-
toneum, and (d) mechanically unstable pelvic fractures with 
bleeding. Massive hemoperitoneum and mechanically unstable 
pelvic fractures are discussed in “Emergent Abdominal Explo-
ration” and “Pelvic Fractures and Emergent Hemorrhage Con-
trol,” respectively. Three critical tools used to differentiate these 
in the multisystem trauma patient are chest radiograph, pelvis 
radiograph, and focused abdominal sonography for trauma 
(FAST) (see “Regional Assessment and Special Diagnostic 
Tests”). A massive hemothorax (life-threatening injury number 
one) is defined as >1500 mL of blood or, in the pediatric popu-
lation, >25% of the patient’s blood volume in the pleural space 
(Fig. 7-8). Although it may be estimated on chest radiograph, 
tube thoracostomy is the only reliable means to quantify the 
amount of hemothorax. After blunt trauma, a major hemothorax 
usually is due to multiple rib fractures with severed intercostal 
arteries, but occasionally bleeding is from lacerated lung paren-
chyma which is usually associated with an air leak. After pen-
etrating trauma, a great vessel or pulmonary hilar vessel injury 
should be presumed. In either scenario, a massive hemothorax is 
an indication for operative intervention, but tube thoracostomy 
is critical to facilitate lung re-expansion, which may improve 
oxygenation and cardiac performance as well as tamponade 
venous bleeding.
Cardiac tamponade (life-threatening injury number two) 
occurs most commonly after penetrating thoracic wounds, 
although occasionally blunt rupture of the heart, particularly 
the atrial appendage, is seen. Acutely, <100 mL of pericardial 
167
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
blood may cause pericardial tamponade.16 The classic Beck’s 
triad—dilated neck veins, muffled heart tones, and a decline in 
arterial pressure—is usually not appreciated in the trauma bay 
because of the noisy environment and associated hypovolemia. 
Because the pericardium is not acutely distensible, the pres-
sure in the pericardial sac will rise to match that of the injured 
chamber. When this pressure exceeds that of the right atrium, 
right atrial filling is impaired and right ventricular preload is 
reduced. This ultimately leads to decreased right ventricular out-
put. Additionally, increased intrapericardial pressure impedes 
myocardial blood flow, which leads to subendocardial ischemia 
and a further reduction in cardiac output.
Diagnosis of hemopericardium is best achieved by bedside 
ultrasound of the pericardium (Fig. 7-9). Early in the course of 
tamponade, blood pressure and cardiac output will transiently 
improve with fluid administration due to increased central 
venous pressure. In patients with any hemodynamic distur-
bance, a pericardial drain is placed using ultrasound guidance 
(Fig. 7-10). Removing as little as 15 to 20 mL of blood will 
often temporarily stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status, 
Figure 7-9.  Subxiphoid pericardial ultrasound reveals a large peri-
cardial fluid collection.
Figure 7-10.  Pericardiocentesis is indicated for patients with evidence of pericardial tamponade. A. Access to the pericardium is obtained 
through a subxiphoid approach, with the needle angled 45 degrees up from the chest wall and toward the left shoulder. B. Seldinger technique 
is used to place a pigtail catheter. Blood can be repeatedly aspirated with a syringe or the tubing may be attached to a gravity drain. Evacuation 
of unclotted pericardial blood prevents subendocardial ischemia and stabilizes the patient for transport to the operating room for sternotomy.
and alleviate subendocardial ischemia with associated lethal 
arrhythmias, and allow safe transport to the OR for sternotomy. 
Pericardiocentesis is successful in decompressing tamponade in 
approximately 80% of cases; the majority of failures are due to 
the presence of clotted blood within the pericardium. Patients 
with a SBP <60 mm Hg warrant resuscitative thoracotomy (RT) 
with opening of the pericardium for rapid decompression and to 
address the injury.
The utility of RT has been debated for decades. Current 
indications are based on 30 years of prospective data, supported 
by a recent multicenter prospective study (Table 7-2).17,18 RT 
Table 7-2 
Current indications and contraindications for emer-
gency department thoracotomy
Indications
  Salvageable postinjury cardiac arrest:
  Patients sustaining witnessed penetrating trauma to the 
  torso with <15 min of prehospital CPR
  Patients sustaining witnessed blunt trauma with <10 min 
  of prehospital CPR
  Patients sustaining witnessed penetrating trauma to the 
  neck or extremities with <5 min of prehospital CPR
  Persistent severe postinjury hypotension (SBP ≤60 mm  
  Hg) due to:
  Cardiac tamponade
  Hemorrhage—intrathoracic, intra-abdominal, extremity, 
  cervical
  Air embolism
Contraindications
  Penetrating trauma: CPR >15 min and no signs of life 
  (pupillary response, respiratory effort, motor activity)
  Blunt trauma: CPR >10 min and no signs of life or 
  asystole without associated tamponade
CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation; SBP = systolic blood pressure.
168
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
is associated with the highest survival rate after isolated car-
diac injury; 35% of patients presenting in shock and 20% with-
out vital signs (i.e., no pulse or obtainable blood pressure) are 
salvaged after isolated penetrating injury to the heart. For all 
penetrating wounds, survival rate is 15%. Conversely, patient 
outcome is poor when RT is done for blunt trauma, with 2% 
survival among patients in shock and <1% survival among those 
with no vital signs. Thus, patients undergoing cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation upon arrival to the ED should undergo RT selec-
tively based on injury and transport time (Fig. 7-11). RT is best 
accomplished using a generous left anterolateral thoracotomy, 
with the skin incision started to the right of the sternum (Fig. 7-12). 
A longitudinal pericardiotomy anterior to the phrenic nerve is 
used to release cardiac tamponade and permits access to the 
heart for cardiac repair and open cardiac massage. Cross-clamp-
ing of the aorta improves central circulation, augments cerebral 
and coronary blood flow, and limits further abdominal blood 
loss (Fig. 7-13). The patient must sustain a SBP of 70 mm Hg 
after RT and associated interventions to be considered resusci-
tatable, and hence transported to the OR.17,18
Disability and Exposure  The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) 
score should be determined for all injured patients (Table 7-3). 
It is calculated by adding the scores of the best motor response, 
best verbal response, and the best eye response. Scores range 
from 3 (the lowest) to 15 (normal). Scores of 13 to 15 indicate 
mild head injury, 9 to 12 moderate injury, and ≤8 severe injury. 
Patient
Undergoing
CPR
–
No Signs of
Life*
Blunt Trauma
CPR < 10 min
----------
Penetrating Torso Trauma
CPR < 15 min
----------
Penetrating Non-Torso Trauma
CPR < 5 min
Resuscitative Thoracotomy
Yes
Dead
Cardiac
Activity?
No
Tamponade?
No
Repair Heart
Assess
Viability
Yes
OR
Thoracic
Hemorrhage
Air Emboli
Tamponade
Extrathoracic
Hemorrhage
SBP < 70,
apply Aortic
X-clamp
Hilar X-clamp
Control
No
Yes
*no respiratory or
motor effort, electrical
activity, or pupillary
activity
Profound
Refractory
Shock
Figure 7-11.  Algorithm directing the use of resuscitative thoracotomy (RT) in the injured patient undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR). ECG = electrocardiogram; OR = operating room; SBP = systolic blood pressure.
The GCS is a quantifiable determination of neurologic function 
that is useful for triage, treatment, and prognosis.
Neurologic evaluation is critical before administration of 
neuromuscular blockade for intubation. Subtle changes in mental 
status can be caused by hypoxia, hypercarbia, or hypovolemia, 
or may be an early sign of increasing intracranial pressure. 
An abnormal mental status should prompt an immediate re-
evaluation of the ABCs and consideration of central nervous sys-
tem injury. Deterioration in mental status may be subtle and may 
not progress in a predictable fashion. For example, previously 
calm, cooperative patients may become anxious and combative 
as they become hypoxic. However, a patient who is agitated and 
combative from drugs or alcohol may become somnolent if hypo-
volemic shock develops. Patients with neurogenic shock are typi-
fied by hypotension with relative bradycardia, and are often first 
recognized due to paralysis, decreased rectal tone or priapism. 
Patients with high spinal cord disruption are at greatest risk for 
neurogenic shock due to physiologic disruption of sympathetic 
fibers; treatment consists of volume loading and a dopamine infu-
sion which is both inotropic and chronotropic. Seriously injured 
patients must have all of their clothing removed to avoid over-
looking limb- or life-threatening injuries.
Shock Classification and Initial Fluid Resuscitation  Clas-
sic signs and symptoms of shock are tachycardia, hypotension, 
tachypnea, altered mental status, diaphoresis, and pallor 
(Table 7-4). In general, the quantity of acute blood loss correlates 
169
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
with physiologic abnormalities. For example, patients in class 
II shock are tachycardic but they do not exhibit a reduction in 
blood pressure until over 1500 mL of blood loss, or class III 
shock. Physical findings should be used as an aid in the evalu-
ation of the patient’s response to treatment. The goal of fluid 
resuscitation is to re-establish tissue perfusion. Fluid resusci-
tation begins with a 2 L (adult) or 20 mL/kg (child) IV bolus 
of isotonic crystalloid, typically Ringer’s lactate. For persistent 
hypotension (SBP <90 mm Hg in an adult), the current trend is 
to activate a massive transfusion protocol (MTP) in which red 
blood cells (RBC) and fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) are adminis-
tered early. The details of a MTP are discussed later. Patients 
who have a good response to fluid infusion (i.e., normalization 
of vital signs, clearing of the sensorium) and evidence of good 
Figure 7-12.  A. Resuscitative tho-
racotomy (RT) is performed through 
the fifth intercostal space using the 
anterolateral approach. B and C. The 
pericardium is opened anterior to the 
phrenic nerve, and the heart is rotated 
out for evaluation. D. Open cardiac 
massage should be performed with 
a hinged, clapping motion of the 
hands, with sequential closing from 
palms to fingers. The two-handed 
technique is strongly recommended 
because the one-handed massage 
technique poses the risk of myocar-
dial perforation with the thumb.
Figure 7-13.  Aortic cross-clamp is 
applied with the left lung retracted 
superiorly, below the inferior pul-
monary ligament, just above the dia-
phragm. The flaccid aorta is identified 
as the first structure encountered on 
top of the spine when approached 
from the left chest.
170
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
peripheral perfusion (warm fingers and toes with normal cap-
illary refill) are presumed to have adequate overall perfusion. 
Urine output is a quantitative, reliable indicator of organ per-
fusion. Adequate urine output is 0.5 mL/kg per hour in an adult, 
1 mL/kg per hour in a child, and 2 mL/kg per hour in an infant 
<1 year of age. Because measurement of this resuscitation-
related variable is time dependent, it is generally more useful 
in the OR and intensive care unit (ICU) setting, than in initial 
evaluation in the trauma bay.
There are several caveats to be considered when evaluating 
the injured patient for shock. Tachycardia is often the earliest 
sign of ongoing blood loss, but the critical issue is change over 
time. Furthermore, individuals in good physical condition with 
a resting pulse rate in the fifties may manifest a relative tachy-
cardia in the nineties; although clinically significant, this does 
not meet the standard definition of tachycardia. Conversely, 
patients receiving cardiac medications such as beta blockers 
may not be capable of increasing their heart rate to compen-
sate for hypovolemia. Bradycardia can occur with rapid severe 
blood loss13; this is an ominous sign, often heralding impending 
cardiovascular collapse. Other physiologic stresses, aside from 
hypovolemia, may produce tachycardia, such as hypoxia, pain, 
anxiety, and stimulant drugs (cocaine, amphetamines). As noted 
previously, decreased SBP is not a reliable early sign of hypovo-
lemia, because blood loss must exceed 30% before hypotension 
occurs. Additionally, younger patients may maintain their SBP 
due to sympathetic tone despite severe intravascular deficits 
until they are on the verge of cardiac arrest. Pregnant patients 
have a progressive increase in circulating blood volume over 
gestation; therefore, they must lose a relatively larger volume of 
Table 7-3 
Glasgow coma scalea
Adults
Infants/Children
Eye opening
4
Spontaneous
Spontaneous
3
To voice
To voice
2
To pain
To pain
1
None
None
Verbal
5
Oriented
Alert, normal vocalization
4
Confused
Cries, but consolable
3
Inappropriate words
Persistently irritable
2
Incomprehensible words
Restless, agitated, moaning
1
None
None
Motor response
6
Obeys commands
Spontaneous, purposeful
5
Localizes pain
Localizes pain
4
Withdraws
Withdraws
3
Abnormal flexion
Abnormal flexion
2
Abnormal extension
Abnormal extension
1
None
None
aScore is calculated by adding the scores of the best motor response, best verbal response, and eye opening. Scores range from 3 (the lowest) to 15 (normal).
Table 7-4 
Signs and symptoms of advancing stages of hemorrhagic shock
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
Blood loss (mL)
Up to 750
750–1500
1500–2000
>2000
Blood loss (%BV)
Up to 15%
15%–30%
30%–40%
>40%
Pulse rate
<100
>100
>120
>140
Blood pressure
Normal
Normal
Decreased
Decreased
Pulse pressure (mm Hg)
Normal or increased
Decreased
Decreased
Decreased
Respiratory rate
14–20
>20–30
30–40
>35
Urine output (mL/h)
>30
>20–30
5–15
Negligible
CNS/mental status
Slightly anxious
Mildly anxious
Anxious and confused
Confused and lethargic
BV = blood volume; CNS = central nervous system.
171
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
blood before manifesting signs and symptoms of hypovolemia 
(see Special Trauma Populations).
Based on the initial response to fluid resuscitation, hypo-
volemic injured patients can be separated into three broad cat-
egories: responders, transient responders, and nonresponders. 
Individuals who are stable or have a good response to the ini-
tial fluid therapy as evidenced by normalization of vital signs, 
mental status, and urine output are unlikely to have significant 
ongoing hemorrhage, and further diagnostic evaluation for 
occult injuries can proceed in an orderly fashion (see “Sec-
ondary Survey”). At the other end of the spectrum are patients 
classified as “nonresponders” who have persistent hypotension 
despite aggressive resuscitation. These patients mandate imme-
diate identification of the source of hypotension with appropri-
ate intervention to prevent a fatal outcome. Transient responders 
are those who respond initially to volume loading with improve-
ment in vital signs, but then deteriorate hemodynamically again. 
This group of patients can be challenging to triage for definitive 
management.
Persistent Hypotension  Patients with ongoing hemodynamic 
instability, whether “nonresponders” or “transient responders,” 
require systematic evaluation and prompt intervention.The 
spectrum of disease in patients with persistent hypoten-
sion ranges from overwhelming multisystem injury to easily 
reversible problems such as a tension pneumothorax. One must 
first consider the four categories of shock that may be the under-
lying cause: hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, neurogenic, and septic. 
In patients with persistent hypotension and tachycardia, cardio-
genic or hemorrhagic shock are the likely causes. Ultrasound 
evaluation of the pericardium, pleural cavities, and abdomen in 
combination with plain radiographs of the chest and pelvis will 
usually identify the source of hemorrhagic and/or cardiogenic 
shock. Evaluation of the CVP may further assist in distinguish-
ing between these two categories. A patient with distended neck 
veins and a CVP of >15 cm H2O is likely to be in cardiogenic 
shock. The CVP may be falsely elevated, however, if the patient 
is agitated and straining, or fluid administration is overzealous; 
isolated readings must be interpreted with caution. A patient 
with flat neck veins and a CVP of <5 cm H2O is likely hypovo-
lemic due to ongoing hemorrhage. Serial base deficit measure-
ments are helpful; a persistent base arterial deficit of >8 mmol/L 
implies ongoing cellular shock.19,20 Serum lactate is also used 
to monitor the patient’s physiologic response to resuscitation.21 
Evolving technology, such as near infrared spectroscopy, may 
provide noninvasive monitoring of oxygen delivery to tissue.22 
Except for patients transferred from outside facilities >12 hours 
after injury, few patients present in septic shock in the trauma 
bay. Patients with neurogenic shock as a component of hemody-
namic instability often are recognized during the disability sec-
tion of the primary survey to have paralysis, but those patients 
chemically paralyzed before physical examination may be mis-
diagnosed.
The differential diagnosis of cardiogenic shock in trauma 
patients is: (a) tension pneumothorax, (b) pericardial tamponade, 
(c) blunt cardiac injury, (d) myocardial infarction, and (e) bron-
chovenous air embolism. Tension pneumothorax, the most 
frequent cause of cardiac failure, and pericardial tamponade 
have been discussed earlier. Although as many as one-third of 
patients sustaining significant blunt chest trauma experience 
some degree of blunt cardiac injury, few such injuries result in 
hemodynamic embarrassment. Patients with electrocardiographic 
(ECG) abnormalities or dysrhythmias require continuous ECG 
monitoring and antidysrrhythmic treatment as needed. Unless 
myocardial infarction is suspected, there is no role for routine 
serial measurement of cardiac enzyme levels—they lack speci-
ficity and do not predict significant dysrhythmias.23 In patients 
who have no identified injuries who are being considered for 
discharge from the ED, the combination of a normal EKG and 
troponin level at admission and 8 hours later, rules out signifi-
cant blunt cardiac injury.24 The patient with hemodynamic insta-
bility requires appropriate resuscitation and may benefit from 
hemodynamic monitoring to optimize preload and guide inotro-
pic support. Echocardiography (ECHO) is performed to exclude 
valvular or septal injuries, and the most common finding is right 
ventricular dyskinesia due to the anterior orientation of the right 
versus left ventricle. Transthoracic and transesophageal ECHO 
are now becoming routine in many surgical intensive care units 
(SICUs).25,26 Patients with refractory cardiogenic shock may 
occasionally require placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump 
to decrease myocardial work and enhance coronary perfusion. 
Acute myocardial infarction may be the cause of a motor vehi-
cle collision or other trauma in older patients. Although optimal 
initial management includes treatment for the evolving infarc-
tion, such as lytic therapy and emergent angioplasty, these deci-
sions must be individualized in accordance with the patient’s 
other injuries.
Air embolism is a frequently overlooked lethal complica-
tion of pulmonary injury. Air emboli can occur after blunt or 
penetrating trauma, where air from an injured bronchus enters 
an adjacent injured pulmonary vein (bronchovenous fistula) and 
returns air to the left heart. Air accumulation in the left ven-
tricle impedes diastolic filling, and during systole air is pumped 
into the coronary arteries, disrupting coronary perfusion. The 
typical case is a patient with a penetrating thoracic injury who 
is hemodynamically stable but experiences cardiac arrest after 
being intubated and placed on positive pressure ventilation. The 
patient should immediately be placed in Trendelenburg’s posi-
tion to trap the air in the apex of the left ventricle. Emergency 
thoracotomy is followed by cross-clamping of the pulmonary 
hilum on the side of the injury to prevent further introduction of 
air (Fig. 7-14). Air is aspirated from the apex of the left ventricle 
and then the aortic root with an 18-gauge needle and 50-mL 
syringe. Vigorous massage is used to force the air bubbles 
through the coronary arteries; if this is unsuccessful, a tubercu-
lin syringe is used to aspirate air bubbles from the right coronary 
artery. Once circulation is restored, the patient should be kept 
in Trendelenburg’s position with the pulmonary hilum clamped 
until the pulmonary venous injury is controlled operatively.
Persistent hypotension due to uncontrolled hemorrhage is 
associated with high mortality. A rapid search for the source or 
sources of hemorrhage includes visual inspection with knowl-
edge of the injury mechanism, FAST, and chest and pelvic radio-
graphs. During diagnostic evaluation, type O RBCs (O-negative 
for women of childbearing age) and thawed AB plasma should 
be administered at a ratio of 2:1. Type-specific RBCs should be 
administered as soon as available. The acute coagulopathy of 
trauma is now well recognized, and underscores the importance 
of pre-emptive blood component administration. The resurgent 
interest in viscoelastic hemostatic assays (thrombelastography 
[TEG] and thrombelastometry [ROTEM]) has facilitated the 
appropriate and timely use of clotting adjuncts, including the 
prompt recognition of fibrinolysis. In patients with clear indi-
cations for operation, essential films should be taken and the 
4
172
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 7-14.  A. A Satinsky clamp is used to clamp the pulmonary hilum to prevent further bronchovenous air embolism. B. Sequential sites 
of aspiration include the left ventricle, the aortic root, and the right coronary artery.
patient transported to the OR immediately. Such patients include 
those with blunt trauma and massive hemothorax, those with 
penetrating trauma and an initial chest tube output of >1 L, and 
those with abdominal trauma and ultrasound evidence of exten-
sive hemoperitoneum. In patients with gunshot wounds to the 
chest or abdomen, a chest and abdominal film, with radiopaque 
markers at the wound sites, should be obtained to determine the 
trajectory of the bullet or location of a retained fragment. For 
example, a patient with a gunshot wound to the upper abdo-
men should have a chest radiograph to ensure that the bullet did 
not traverse the diaphragm causing intrathoracic injury. Simi-
larly, a chest radiograph is important in a patient with a gunshot 
wound to the right chest to evaluate the left hemithorax. If a 
patient arrives with a penetrating weapon remaining in place, 
the weapon should not be removed in the ED, because it could 
be tamponading a lacerated blood vessel (Fig. 7-15). The sur-
geon should extract the offending instrument in the controlled 
environment of the OR, ideally once an incision has been made 
with adequate exposure. In situations where knives are embed-
ded in the head or neck, preoperative imaging may be useful to 
anticipate arterial injuries.
In patients without clear operative indications and persis-
tent hypotension, one should systematically evaluate the five 
potential sources of blood loss: scalp, chest, abdomen, pelvis, 
and extremities. Significant bleeding at the scene may be noted 
by paramedics, but its quantification is unreliable. Examination 
should seek active bleeding from a scalp laceration that may 
be readily controlled with clips or staples. Thoracoabdominal 
trauma should be evaluated with a combination of chest radio-
graph, FAST, and pelvic radiograph. If the FAST results are 
negative and no other source of hypotension is obvious, diag-
nostic peritoneal aspiration should be entertained.27 Extremity 
examination and radiographs should be used to search for asso-
ciated fractures. Fracture-related blood loss, when additive, may 
Figure 7-15.  If a weapon is still in place, it should be removed in the operating room, because it could be tamponading a lacerated blood 
vessel.
173
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
be a potential source of the patient’s hemodynamic instability. 
Each rib fracture can produce 100 to 200 mL of blood loss; for tibial 
fractures, 300 to 500 mL; for femur fractures, 800 to 1000 mL; and 
for pelvic fractures >2000 mL. Although no single injury can 
account for the patient’s hemodynamic instability, the sum of 
the injuries may result in life-threatening blood loss. The diag-
nostic measures advocated earlier are those that can be easily 
performed in the trauma bay. Transport of a hypotensive patient 
out of the ED for computed tomographic (CT) scanning is haz-
ardous; monitoring is compromised, and the environment is 
suboptimal for dealing with acute problems. The surgeon must 
accompany the patient and be prepared to abort the CT scan with 
diversion to the OR. This dilemma is becoming less common in 
many trauma centers where CT scanning is done in the ED.
The concept of hypotensive resuscitation in the ED 
remains controversial, and it is primarily relevant for patients 
with penetrating vascular injuries. Experimental work suggests 
that an endogenous sealing clot of an injured artery may be dis-
rupted at an SBP of >90 mm Hg28; thus, many believe that this 
should be the preoperative blood pressure target for patients 
with potential torso arterial injuries. On the other hand, optimal 
management of traumatic brain injury (TBI) includes maintain-
ing the SBP >100 mm Hg,29 and thus, hypotensive resuscitation 
is not appropriate for most blunt trauma patients.
Secondary Survey
Once the immediate threats to life have been addressed, a thor-
ough history is obtained and the patient is examined in a sys-
tematic fashion. The patient and surrogates should be queried to 
obtain an AMPLE history (Allergies, Medications, Past illnesses 
or Pregnancy, Last meal, and Events related to the injury). 
The physical examination should be literally head to toe, with 
special attention to the patient’s back, axillae, and perineum, 
because injuries here are easily overlooked. All potentially seri-
ously injured patients should undergo digital rectal examina-
tion to evaluate for sphincter tone, presence of blood, rectal 
perforation, or a high-riding prostate; this is particularly critical 
in patients with suspected spinal cord injury, pelvic fracture, 
or transpelvic gunshot wounds. Vaginal examination with a 
speculum should be performed in women with pelvic fractures 
to exclude an open fracture. Specific injuries, their associated 
signs and symptoms, diagnostic options, and treatments are dis-
cussed in detail later in this chapter.
Adjuncts to the physical examination include vital sign 
and CVP monitoring, ECG monitoring, nasogastric tube place-
ment, Foley catheter placement, radiographs, hemoglobin, uri-
nalysis, and base deficit measurements, and repeat FAST exam. 
A nasogastric tube should be inserted in all intubated patients 
to decrease the risk of gastric aspiration but may not be neces-
sary in the awake patient. Nasogastric tube placement in patients 
with complex mid-facial fractures is contraindicated; rather, a 
tube should be placed orally if required. Nasogastric tube evalu-
ation of stomach contents for blood may suggest occult gastro-
duodenal injury or the errant path of the nasogastric tube on a 
chest film may indicate a left diaphragm injury. A Foley cath-
eter should be inserted in patients unable to void to decompress 
the bladder, obtain a urine specimen, and monitor urine output. 
Gross hematuria demands evaluation of the genitourinary sys-
tem for injury. Foley catheter placement should be deferred until 
urologic evaluation in patients with signs of urethral injury: 
blood at the meatus, perineal or scrotal hematomas, or a high-
riding prostate. Although policies vary at individual institutions, 
most agree patients in extremis with need for Foley catheter 
placement should undergo one attempt at catheterization; if the 
catheter does not pass easily, a percutaneous suprapubic cystos-
tomy should be considered.
Selective radiography and laboratory tests are done early 
in the evaluation after the primary survey. For patients with 
severe blunt trauma, chest and pelvic radiographs should be 
obtained. Historically, a lateral cervical spine radiograph was 
also obtained, hence the reference to the big three films, but 
currently patients preferentially undergo CT scanning of the 
spine rather than plain film radiography. For patients with trun-
cal gunshot wounds, anteroposterior and at times lateral radio-
graphs of the chest and abdomen are warranted. It is important 
to mark the entrance and exit sites of penetrating wounds with 
ECG pads, metallic clips, or staples so that the trajectory of 
the missile can be estimated. Limited one-shot extremity radio-
graphs also may be taken. In critically injured patients, blood 
samples for a routine trauma panel (type and cross-match, com-
plete blood count, blood chemistries, coagulation studies, and 
arterial blood gas analysis) should be sent to the laboratory. For 
less severely injured patients only a complete blood count and 
urinalysis may be required. Because older patients may present 
in subclinical shock, even with minor injuries, routine analysis 
of an arterial blood gas in patients over the age of 55 should be 
considered. Repeat FAST is performed if there are any signs of 
abdominal injury or unexplained blood loss.
Many trauma patients cannot provide specific information 
about the mechanism of their injury. Emergency medical ser-
vice personnel and police are trained to evaluate an injury scene 
and should be questioned while they are present in the ED. For 
automobile collisions, the speed of the vehicles involved, angle 
of impact, use of restraints, airbag deployment, condition of the 
steering wheel and windshield, amount of intrusion, ejection of 
the patient from the vehicle, and fate of other passengers should 
be ascertained. For other injury mechanisms, critical informa-
tion includes such things as height of a fall, surface impact, 
helmet use, and weight of an object by which the patient was 
crushed. In patients sustaining gunshot wounds, velocity, cali-
ber, distance, and presumed path of the bullet are important, 
if known. For patients with stab wounds, the length and type 
of object is helpful. Finally, some patients experience a com-
bination of blunt and penetrating trauma. Do not assume that 
someone who was stabbed was not also assaulted; the patient 
may have a multitude of injuries and cannot be presumed to 
have only injuries associated with the more obvious penetrating 
mechanism. In short, these details of information are critical 
to the clinician to determine overall mechanism of injury and 
anticipate its associated injury patterns.
Mechanisms and Patterns of Injury
In general, more energy is transferred over a wider area during 
blunt trauma than from a penetrating wound. As a result, blunt 
trauma is associated with multiple widely distributed injuries, 
whereas in penetrating wounds the damage is localized to the 
path of the bullet or knife. In blunt trauma, organs that can-
not yield to impact by elastic deformation are most likely to be 
injured, namely, the solid organs (liver, spleen, and kidneys). 
For penetrating trauma, organs with the largest surface area 
when viewed from the front are most prone to injury (small 
bowel, liver, and colon). Additionally, because bullets and 
knives usually follow straight lines, adjacent structures are com-
monly injured (e.g., the pancreas and duodenum).
174
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Trauma surgeons often separate patients who have sus-
tained blunt trauma into categories according to their risk for 
multiple injuries: those sustaining high energy transfer inju-
ries and those sustaining low energy transfer injuries. Injuries 
involving high energy transfer include auto-pedestrian acci-
dents, motor vehicle collisions in which the car’s change of 
velocity (ΔV) exceeds 20 mph or in which the patient has been 
ejected, motorcycle collisions, and falls from heights >20 ft.30 
In fact, for motor vehicle accidents the variables strongly asso-
ciated with life-threatening injuries, and hence reflective of the 
magnitude of the mechanism, are death of another occupant in 
the vehicle, extrication time of >20 minutes, ΔV >20 mph, lack 
of restraint use, and lateral impact.30 Low-energy trauma, such 
as being struck with a club or falling from a bicycle, usually 
does not result in widely distributed injuries. However, poten-
tially lethal lacerations of internal organs can occur, because 
the net energy transfer to any given location may be substantial.
In blunt trauma, particular constellations of injury or injury 
patterns are associated with specific injury mechanisms. For 
example, when an unrestrained driver sustains a frontal impact, 
the head strikes the windshield, the chest and upper abdomen 
hit the steering column, and the legs or knees contact the dash-
board. The resultant injuries can include facial fractures, cervi-
cal spine fractures, laceration of the thoracic aorta, myocardial 
contusion, injury to the spleen and liver, and fractures of the 
pelvis and lower extremities. When such patients are evaluated, 
the discovery of one of these injuries should prompt a search 
for the others. Collisions with side impact also carry the risk 
of cervical spine and thoracic trauma, diaphragm rupture, and 
crush injuries of the pelvic ring, but solid organ injury usually 
is limited to either the liver or spleen based on the direction of 
impact. Not surprisingly, any time a patient is ejected from the 
vehicle or thrown a significant distance from a motorcycle, the 
risk of any injury exists.
Penetrating injuries are classified according to the wound-
ing agent (i.e., stab wound, gunshot wound, or shotgun wound). 
Gunshot wounds are subdivided further into high- and low-velocity 
injuries, because the speed of the bullet is much more important 
than its weight in determining kinetic energy. High-velocity gun-
shot wounds (bullet speed >2000 ft/s) are infrequent in the 
civilian setting. Shotgun injuries are divided into close-range 
(<20 feet) and long-range wounds. Close-range shotgun wounds 
are tantamount to high-velocity wounds because the entire energy 
of the load is delivered to a small area, often with devastating 
results. In contrast, long-range shotgun blasts result in a diffuse 
pellet pattern in which many pellets miss the victim, and those 
that do strike are dispersed and of comparatively low energy.
Regional Assessment and Special  
Diagnostic Tests
Based on mechanism, location of injuries identified on physi-
cal examination, screening radiographs, and the patient’s over-
all condition, additional diagnostic studies often are indicated. 
However, the seriously injured patient is in constant jeopardy 
when undergoing special diagnostic testing; therefore, the sur-
geon must be in attendance and must be prepared to alter plans 
as circumstances demand. Hemodynamic, respiratory, and men-
tal status will determine the most appropriate course of action. 
With these issues in mind, additional diagnostic tests are dis-
cussed on an anatomic basis.
Head  Evaluation of the head includes examination for injuries 
to the scalp, eyes, ears, nose, mouth, facial bones, and intracranial 
structures. Palpation of the head will identify scalp lacerations, 
which should be evaluated for depth, and depressed or open 
skull fractures. The eye examination includes not only pupillary 
size and reactivity, but also examination for visual acuity and 
for hemorrhage within the globe. Ocular entrapment, caused by 
orbital fractures with impingement on the ocular muscles, is evi-
dent when the patient cannot move his or her eyes through the 
entire range of motion. It is important to perform the eye exami-
nation early, because significant orbital swelling may prevent 
later evaluation. A lateral canthotomy may be needed to relieve 
periorbital pressure. The tympanic membrane is examined to 
identify hemotympanum, otorrhea, or rupture, which may signal 
an underlying head injury. Otorrhea, rhinorrhea, raccoon eyes, 
and Battle’s sign (ecchymosis behind the ear) suggest a basilar 
skull fracture. Although such fractures may not require treat-
ment, there is an association with blunt cerebrovascular injuries, 
cranial nerve injuries, and risk of meningitis.
Anterior facial structures should be examined to rule out 
fractures. This entails palpating for bony step-off of the facial 
bones and instability of the midface (by grasping the upper pal-
ate and seeing if this moves separately from the patient’s head). 
A good question to ask awake patients is whether their bite feels 
normal to them; abnormal dental closure suggests malalignment 
of facial bones and a possibility for a mandible or maxillary 
fracture. Nasal fractures, which may be evident on direct inspec-
tion or palpation, typically bleed vigorously. This may result in 
the patient’s having airway compromise due to blood running 
down the posterior pharynx, or there may be vomiting provoked 
by swallowed blood. Nasal packing or balloon tamponade may 
be necessary to control bleeding. Examination of the oral cavity 
includes inspection for open fractures, loose or fractured teeth, 
and sublingual hematomas.
All patients with a significant closed head injury (GCS 
score <14) should undergo CT scanning of the head. Addition-
ally, elderly patients or those patients on antiplatelet agents 
or anticoagulation should be imaged despite a GCS of 15.31,32 
For penetrating injuries, plain skull films may be helpful in the 
trauma bay to determine the trajectory of injury in hemodynami-
cally unstable patients who cannot be transported for CT scan. 
The presence of lateralizing findings (e.g., a unilateral dilated 
pupil unreactive to light, asymmetric movement of the extremi-
ties either spontaneously or in response to noxious stimuli, or 
unilateral Babinski’s reflex) suggests an intracranial mass lesion 
or major structural damage.
Such lesions include hematomas, contusions, hemorrhage 
into ventricular and subarachnoid spaces, and diffuse axonal 
injury (DAI). Epidural hematomas occur when blood accumu-
lates between the skull and dura, and are caused by disruption 
of the middle meningeal artery or other small arteries in that 
potential space, typically after a skull fracture (Fig. 7-16). Sub-
dural hematomas occur between the dura and cortex and are 
caused by venous disruption or laceration of the parenchyma of 
the brain. Due to associated parenchymal injury, subdural hema-
tomas have a much worse prognosis than epidural collections. 
Hemorrhage into the subarachnoid space may cause vasospasm 
and further reduce cerebral blood flow. Intraparenchymal hema-
tomas and contusions can occur anywhere within the brain. DAI 
results from high-speed deceleration injury and represents direct 
axonal damage from shear effects. CT scan may demonstrate 
blurring of the gray and white matter interface and multiple 
small punctate hemorrhages, but magnetic resonance imaging 
is a more accurate test. Although prognosis for these injuries 
175
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
is extremely variable, early evidence of DAI is associated with 
a poor outcome. Stroke syndromes should prompt a search for 
carotid or vertebral artery injury using multislice CT angiogra-
phy (CTA) (Fig. 7-17).
Significant intracranial penetrating injuries usually are 
produced by bullets from handguns, but an array of other weap-
ons or instruments can injure the cerebrum via the orbit or 
through the thinner temporal region of the skull. Although the 
diagnosis usually is obvious, in some instances wounds in the 
auditory canal, mouth, and nose can be elusive. Prognosis is 
variable, but virtually all supratentorial wounds that injure both 
hemispheres are fatal.
Neck  All blunt trauma patients should be assumed to have 
cervical spine injuries until proven otherwise. During cervi-
cal examination one must maintain cervical spine precautions 
Figure 7-16.  Epidural hematomas 
(A) have a distinctive convex shape 
on computed tomographic scan, 
whereas subdural hematomas (B) 
are concave along the surface of the 
brain.
Figure 7-17.  A. A right middle 
cerebral infarct noted on a computed 
tomographic scan of the head. Such 
a finding should prompt imaging to 
rule out an associated extracranial 
cerebrovascular injury. B. An inter-
nal carotid artery pseudoaneurysm 
documented by angiography.
B
A
and in-line stabilization. Due to the devastating consequences 
of quadriplegia, a diligent evaluation for occult cervical spine 
injuries is mandatory. In the awake patient, the presence of pos-
terior midline pain or tenderness should provoke a thorough 
radiologic evaluation. Additionally, intubated patients, patients 
with distracting injuries, or another identified spine fracture 
should undergo CT imaging. A ligamentous injury may not be 
visible with standard imaging techniques.33 Flexion and exten-
sion views or MRI are obtained to further evaluate patients at 
risk or those with persistent symptoms, but generally are not 
done in the acute setting.
Spinal cord injuries can vary in severity. Complete injuries 
cause either quadriplegia or paraplegia, depending on the level 
of injury. These patients have a complete loss of motor func-
tion and sensation two or more levels below the bony injury. 
176
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Patients with high spinal cord disruption are at risk for shock 
due to physiologic disruption of sympathetic fibers. Significant 
neurologic recovery is rare. However, there are several partial or 
incomplete spinal cord injury syndromes where the prognosis is 
better. Central cord syndrome typically occurs in older persons 
who experience hyperextension injuries. Motor function, pain, 
and temperature sensation are preserved in the lower extremities 
but diminished in the upper extremities. Some functional recov-
ery usually occurs, but is often not a return to normal. Anterior 
cord syndrome is characterized by diminished motor function, 
pain, and temperature sensation below the level of the injury, 
but position sensing, vibratory sensation, and crude touch are 
maintained. Prognosis for recovery is poor. Brown-Séquard 
syndrome is usually the result of a penetrating injury in which 
one-half of the spinal cord is transected. This lesion is charac-
terized by the ipsilateral loss of motor function, proprioception, 
Penetrating
Neck Injury
Hemodynamically Unstable
Uncontrolled Hemorrhage
Hard signs: massive hemoptysis, rapidly expanding hematoma
Operative
Exploration
Observe
Hemodynamically Stable
Soft signs: dysphagia, venous bleeding,
subcutaneous emphysema, hematoma,
hoarseness, stridor, odynophagia
Asymptomatic
Zone I
Zone II
Zone III
angioembolization
for Zone III
+
Zone I
Zone II
Zone III
Transcervical GSW
All Others
CTA
neck/
chest
+
angiography
esophagram
bronchoscopy
CTA
neck/
chest
+
 angiography
esophagram
bronchoscopy
+
and vibratory sensation, whereas pain and temperature sensation 
are lost on the contralateral side.
During the primary survey, identification of injuries to 
the neck with exsanguination, expanding hematomas, airway 
obstruction, or aerodigestive injuries is a priority. A more sub-
tle injury that may not be identified is a fracture of the larynx 
due to blunt trauma. Signs and symptoms include hoarseness, 
subcutaneous emphysema (Fig. 7-18), and a palpable fracture. 
Penetrating injuries of the anterior neck that violate the pla-
tysma are potentially life-threatening because of the density of 
critical structures in this region. Although operative exploration 
is appropriate in some circumstances, selective nonoperative 
management has been proven safe (Fig. 7-19).34 Indications for 
immediate operative intervention for penetrating cervical injury 
include hemodynamic instability, significant external hemor-
rhage, or evidence of aerodigestive injury. The management 
Figure 7-18.  A laryngeal fracture 
results in air tracking around the 
trachea along the prevertebral space 
(arrows).
Figure 7-19.  Algorithm for the management of penetrating neck injuries. CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomographic 
angiography; GSW = gunshot wound.
177
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
algorithm for hemodynamically stable patients is based on the 
presenting symptoms and anatomic location of injury, with the 
neck being divided into three distinct zones (Fig. 7-20). 
Zone I is inferior to the clavicles encompassing the tho-
racic outlet structures, zone II is between the thoracic outlet and 
the angle of the mandible, and zone III is above the angle of the 
mandible. Due to technical difficulties of injury exposure and 
varying operative approaches, a precise preoperative diagnosis 
is desirable for symptomatic zone I and III injuries. Therefore, 
these patients should ideally undergo diagnostic imaging before 
operation if they remain hemodynamically stable. Management 
of patients is further divided into those who are symptomatic 
and those who are not (Fig 7-19). Specific symptoms or signs 
that should be identified include dysphagia, hoarseness, hema-
toma, venous bleeding, minor hemoptysis, and subcutaneous 
emphysema. Symptomatic patients should undergo CTA with 
further evaluation or operation based upon the imaging find-
ings; less than 15% of penetrating cervical trauma requires neck 
exploration.35 Asymptomatic patients are typically observed for 
6 to12 hours. The one caveat is asymptomatic patients with a 
transcervical gunshot wound; these patients should undergo 
CTA to determine the track of the bullet. CTA of the neck and 
chest determines trajectory of the injury tract; further studies are 
performed based on proximity to major structures.35 Such addi-
tional imaging includes angiography, soluble contrast esopha-
gram followed by barium esophagram, esophagoscopy, or 
bronchoscopy. Angiographic diagnosis, particularly of zone III 
injuries, can then be managed by selective angioembolization.
Figure 7-21.  Persistence of a hemothorax despite two tube tho-
racostomies is termed a caked hemothorax and is an indication for 
prompt thoracotomy.
I
II
III
Figure 7-20.  For the purpose of evaluating penetrating injuries, 
the neck is divided into three zones. Zone I is to the level of the 
clavicular heads and is also known as the thoracic outlet. Zone II is 
located between the clavicles and the angle of the mandible. Zone 
III is above the angle of the mandible.
Chest  Blunt trauma to the chest may involve the chest wall, 
thoracic spine, heart, lungs, thoracic aorta and great vessels, and 
rarely the esophagus. Most of these injuries can be evaluated by 
physical examination and chest radiography, with supplemental 
CT scanning based on initial findings. Any patient who undergoes 
an intervention in the ED—endotracheal intubation, central line 
placement, tube thoracostomy—needs a repeat chest radiograph 
to document the adequacy of the procedure. This is particularly 
true in patients undergoing tube thoracostomy for a pneumotho-
rax or hemothorax. Patients with persistent pneumothorax, large 
air leaks after tube thoracostomy, or difficulty ventilating should 
undergo fiber-optic bronchoscopy to exclude a tracheobronchial 
injury or presence of a foreign body. Patients with hemothorax 
must have a chest radiograph documenting complete evacuation 
of the chest; a persistent hemothorax that is not drained by two 
chest tubes is termed a caked hemothorax and mandates immedi-
ate thoracotomy (Fig. 7-21).
Occult thoracic vascular injury must be diligently sought 
due to the high mortality of a missed lesion. Widening of the 
mediastinum on initial anteroposterior chest radiograph, caused 
by a hematoma around an injured vessel that is contained by 
the mediastinal pleura, suggests an injury of the great vessels. 
The mediastinal abnormality may suggest the location of the 
arterial injury (i.e., left-sided hematomas are associated with 
descending torn aortas, whereas right-sided hematomas are 
commonly seen with innominate injuries) (Fig. 7-22). Poste-
rior rib fractures, sternal fractures with laceration of small ves-
sels, and mediastinal venous bleeding also can produce similar 
hematomas. Other chest radiographic findings suggestive of an 
aortic tear are summarized in Table 7-5 (Fig. 7-23). However, 
at least 7% of patients with a descending torn aorta have a nor-
mal chest radiograph.36 Therefore, screening spiral CT 
scanning is performed based on the mechanism of injury: 
high-energy deceleration motor vehicle collision with frontal 
or lateral impact (> 30 mph frontal impact and >23 mph lateral 
impact), motor vehicle collision with ejection, falls of >25 ft, or 
direct impact (horse kick to chest, snowmobile or ski collision 
5
6
178
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
with tree). 37,38 In >95% of patients who survive to reach the ED, 
the aortic injury occurs just distal to the left subclavian artery, 
where it is tethered by the ligamentum arteriosum (Fig. 7-24). 
In 2% to 5% of patients the injury occurs in the ascending aorta, 
in the transverse arch, or at the diaphragm. Reconstructions with 
multislice CTA obviate the need for invasive arteriography.37
For penetrating thoracic trauma, physical examination, 
plain posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs with metal-
lic markings of wounds, pericardial ultrasound, and CVP mea-
surement will identify the majority of injuries. Injuries of the 
esophagus and trachea are exceptions. Bronchoscopy should be 
performed to evaluate the trachea in patients with a persistent air 
leak from the chest tube or mediastinal air. Because esophagos-
copy can miss injuries following an apparent normal endoscopy, 
patients at risk should undergo soluble contrast esophagraphy 
followed by barium examination to look for extravasation of 
contrast to identify an injury.39 As with neck injuries, hemody-
namically stable patients with transmediastinal gunshot wounds 
should undergo CT scanning to determine the path of the bullet; 
this identifies the vascular or visceral structures at risk for injury 
Table 7-5 
Findings on chest radiograph suggestive of a descending 
thoracic aortic tear
1. Widened mediastinum
2. Abnormal aortic contour
3. Tracheal shift
4. Nasogastric tube shift
5. Left apical cap
6. Left or right paraspinal stripe thickening
7. Depression of the left main bronchus
8. Obliteration of the aorticopulmonary window
9. Left pulmonary hilar hematoma
Figure 7-22.  Location of the hematoma within the mediastinal silhouette suggests the type of great vessel injury. A predominant hematoma 
on the left suggests the far more common descending torn aorta (A; arrows), whereas a hematoma on the right indicates a relatively unusual 
but life-threatening innominate artery injury (B; arrows).
Figure 7-23.  Chest film findings associated with descending 
torn aorta include apical capping (A; arrows) and tracheal shift 
(B; arrows).
179
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
and directs angiography or endoscopy as appropriate. If there is a 
suspicion of a subclavian artery injury, brachial-brachial indices 
should be measured, but >60% of patients with an injury may 
not have a pulse deficit.40 Therefore, CTA should be performed 
based on injury proximity to intrathoracic vasculature. Finally, 
with wounds identified on the chest, penetrating trauma should 
not be presumed to be isolated to the thorax. Injury to contigu-
ous body cavities (i.e., the abdomen and neck) must be excluded; 
plain radiographs are a rapid, effective screening modality.
Abdomen  The abdomen is a diagnostic black box. Fortunately, 
with few exceptions, it is not necessary to determine in the 
Figure 7-24.  Imaging to diagnose descending torn aorta includes computed tomographic angiography (A), with three-dimensional recon-
structions (B, anterior; C, posterior) demonstrating the proximal and distal extent of the injury (arrows).
emergency department which intra-abdominal organs are 
injured, only whether an exploratory laparotomy is neces-
sary. However, physical examination of the abdomen can be 
unreliable in making this determination, and drugs, alcohol, and 
head and spinal cord injuries complicate clinical evaluation. The 
presence of abdominal rigidity and hemodynamic compromise 
is an undisputed indication for prompt surgical exploration. For 
the remainder of patients, a variety of diagnostic adjuncts are 
used to identify abdominal injury.
The diagnostic approach differs for penetrating trauma 
and blunt abdominal trauma. As a rule, minimal evaluation is 
7
180
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 7-25.  Algorithm for the evaluation of penetrating abdominal injuries. AASW = anterior abdominal stab wound; CT = computed 
tomography; DPL = diagnostic peritoneal lavage; GSW = gunshot wound; LWE = local wound exploration; RUQ = right upper quadrant; 
SW = stab wound.
required before laparotomy for gunshot or shotgun wounds that 
penetrate the peritoneal cavity, because over 90% of patients 
have significant internal injuries. Anterior truncal gunshot 
wounds between the fourth intercostal space and the pubic sym-
physis whose trajectory as determined by radiograph or wound 
location indicates peritoneal penetration should undergo lapa-
rotomy (Fig. 7-25). The exception is penetrating trauma isolated 
to the right upper quadrant; in hemodynamically stable patients 
with trajectory confined to the liver by CT scan, nonoperative 
observation may be reasonable.41 In obese patients, if the gun-
shot wound is thought to be tangential through the subcutaneous 
tissues, CT scan can delineate the track and exclude peritoneal 
violation. Laparoscopy is another option to assess peritoneal 
penetration for tangential wounds. If there is doubt, however, 
it is always safer to explore the abdomen. In the scenario of 
tangential high energy GSWs, however, it is possible to sus-
tain a transmitted intraperitoneal hollow visceral injury due to a 
blast insult. Gunshot wounds to the back or flank are more dif-
ficult to evaluate because of the retroperitoneal location of the 
injured abdominal organs. Triple-contrast CT scan can delineate 
the trajectory of the bullet and identify peritoneal violation or 
retroperitoneal entry, but may not identify the specific injuries. 
In contrast to gunshot wounds, stab wounds that penetrate the 
peritoneal cavity are less likely to injure intra-abdominal organs. 
Anterior abdominal stab wounds (from costal margin to inguinal 
Penetrating
Abdominal
Trauma
Hemodynamically
Unstable
Hemodynamically
Stable
Operating
Room
GSW
SW
Anterior
Abdomen
RUQ
Tangential*,
Back/Flank
CT
Scan
 AASW
with
+ LWE** 
Back/Flank
Serial
Exams/
Labs
+
*Tangential GSWs may also be evaluated with diagnostic laparoscopy.
** A positive local wound exploration is defined as violation of the posterior fascia. 
CT
Scan
Left-sided thoracoabdominal
DPL vs.
laparoscopy
+
+
Evisceration/
Peritonitis
ligament and bilateral midaxillary lines) should be explored 
under local anesthesia in the ED to determine if the fascia has 
been violated. Injuries that do not penetrate the peritoneal cav-
ity do not require further evaluation, and the patient may be 
discharged from the ED. Patients with fascial penetration must 
be further evaluated for intra-abdominal injury, because there 
is up to a 50% chance of requiring laparotomy. Debate remains 
over whether the optimal diagnostic approach is serial examina-
tion, diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL), or CT scanning; the 
most recent evidence supports serial examination and labora-
tory evaluation.42,43 Patients with stab wounds to the right upper 
quadrant can undergo CT scanning to determine trajectory and 
confinement to the liver for potential nonoperative care.41 Those 
with stab wounds to the flank and back should undergo triple-
contrast CT to assess for the potential risk of retroperitoneal 
injuries of the colon, duodenum, and urinary tract.
Penetrating thoracoabdominal wounds may cause occult 
injury to the diaphragm. Patients with gunshot or stab wounds 
to the left lower chest should be evaluated with diagnostic lapa-
roscopy or DPL to exclude diaphragmatic injury. For patients 
undergoing DPL evaluation, laboratory value cutoffs to rule out 
diaphragm injury are different from traditional values formerly 
used for abdominal stab wounds (see Table 7-6). An RBC count 
of >10,000/μL is considered a positive finding and an indica-
tion for abdominal evaluation; patients with a DPL RBC count 
181
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
between 1000/μL and 10,000/μL should undergo laparoscopy 
or thoracoscopy. Diagnostic laparoscopy may be preferred in 
patients with a positive chest radiograph (hemothorax or pneu-
mothorax) or in those who would not tolerate a DPL.
Blunt abdominal trauma is evaluated initially by FAST 
examination in most major trauma centers, and this has largely 
supplanted DPL (Fig. 7-26). FAST is not 100% sensitive, how-
ever, so diagnostic peritoneal aspiration is warranted in hemo-
dynamically unstable patients without a defined source of blood 
loss to rule out abdominal hemorrhage.27 FAST is used to iden-
tify free intraperitoneal fluid (Fig. 7-27) in Morrison’s pouch, 
the left upper quadrant, and the pelvis. Although this method is 
exquisitely sensitive for detecting intraperitoneal fluid of >250 
mL, it does not reliably determine the source of hemorrhage nor 
grade solid organ injuries.44 Patients with fluid on FAST exami-
nation, considered a “positive FAST,” who do not have immedi-
ate indications for laparotomy and are hemodynamically stable 
undergo CT scanning to quantify their injuries. Injury grading 
using the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma grad-
ing scale (Table 7-7) is an important component of nonoperative 
management of solid organ injuries. Additional findings that 
should be noted on CT scan in patients with solid organ injury 
include contrast extravasation (i.e., a “blush”), the amount of 
intra-abdominal hemorrhage, and presence of pseudoaneu-
rysms (Fig. 7-28). CT also is indicated for hemodynamically 
Table 7-6 
Criteria for “positive” finding on diagnostic peritoneal 
lavage
Abdominal 
Trauma
Thoracoabdominal 
Stab Wounds
Red blood cell count >100,000/mL
>10,000/mL
White blood cell 
count
>500/mL
>500/mL
Amylase level
>19 IU/L
>19 IU/L
Alkaline 
phosphatase level
>2 IU/L
>2 IU/L
Bilirubin level
>0.01 mg/dL
>0.01 mg/dL
Equivocal
+
Hemodynamically
stable
FAST +
DPA
Laparotomy
Peritonitis?
FAST +
Candidate for
nonoperative
management
or
patient with
cirrhosis
Indications for CT:
-Altered mental status
-Confounding injury
-Gross hematuria
-Pelvic fracture
-Abdominal tenderness
-Unexplained Hct <35%
Abdominal CT
Repeat FAST
in 30 minutes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Figure 7-26.  Algorithm for the initial evaluation of a patient with suspected blunt abdominal trauma. CT = computed tomography; DPA = 
diagnostic peritoneal aspiration; FAST = focused abdominal sonography for trauma; Hct = hematocrit.
stable patients for whom the physical examination is unreliable. 
Despite the increasing diagnostic accuracy of multidetector CT 
scanners, identification of intestinal injuries remains a limita-
tion. Bowel injury is suggested by findings of thickened bowel 
wall, “streaking” in the mesentery, free fluid without associated 
solid organ injury, or free intraperitoneal air.45,46 Patients with 
free intra-abdominal fluid without solid organ injury are closely 
monitored for evolving signs of peritonitis; if patients have a 
significant closed head injury or cannot be serially examined, 
DPL should be performed to exclude bowel injury. If DPL is 
pursued, an infraumbilical approach is used (Fig. 7-29). After 
placement of the catheter, a 10-mL syringe is connected and the 
abdominal contents aspirated (termed a diagnostic peritoneal 
aspiration). The aspirate is considered to show positive find-
ings if >10 mL of blood is aspirated. If <10 mL is withdrawn, a 
liter of normal saline is instilled. The effluent is withdrawn via 
siphoning and sent to the laboratory for RBC count, white blood 
cell (WBC) count, and determination of amylase, bilirubin, and 
alkaline phosphatase levels. Values representing positive find-
ings are summarized in Table 7-6.
Pelvis  Blunt injury to the pelvis may produce complex frac-
tures with major hemorrhage (Fig. 7-30). Plain radiographs 
will reveal gross abnormalities, but CT scanning is necessary to 
determine the precise geometry. Sharp spicules of bone can lac-
erate the bladder, rectum, or vagina. Alternatively, bladder rup-
ture may result from a direct blow to the torso if the bladder is 
full. CT cystography is performed if the urinalysis findings are 
positive for RBCs. Urethral injuries are suspected if examina-
tion reveals blood at the meatus, scrotal or perineal hematomas, 
or a high-riding prostate on rectal examination. Urethrograms 
should be obtained for stable patients before placing a Foley 
catheter to avoid false passage and subsequent stricture. Major 
vascular injuries causing exsanguination are uncommon in blunt 
pelvic trauma; however, thrombosis of either the arteries or 
veins in the iliofemoral system may occur, and CT angiography 
should be performed for evaluation. Life-threatening hemor-
rhage can be associated with pelvic fractures and may initially 
preclude definitive imaging. Treatment algorithms for patients 
with complex pelvic fractures and hemodynamic instability are 
presented later in the chapter.
Extremities  Physical examination often identifies arterial inju-
ries, and findings are classified as either hard signs or soft signs 
of vascular injury (Table 7-8). In general, hard signs constitute 
182
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
indications for operative exploration, whereas soft signs are 
indications for further testing or observation. Bony fractures or 
knee dislocations should be realigned before definitive vascular 
examination. On-table angiography may be useful to localize 
the arterial injury and thus, limit tissue dissection in patients 
with hard signs of vascular injury. For example, a patient with 
an absent popliteal pulse and femoral shaft fracture due to a 
bullet that entered the lateral hip and exited below the medial 
knee could have injured either the femoral or popliteal artery 
anywhere along its course (Fig. 7-31). In management of 
vascular trauma, controversy exists regarding the treatment of 
patients with soft signs of injury, particularly those with injuries in 
proximity to major vessels. It is known that some of these patients 
will have arterial injuries that require repair. The most common 
Figure 7-27.  Focused abdominal sonography for trauma imaging detects intra-abdominal hemorrhage. Hemorrhage is presumed when a fluid 
stripe is visible between the right kidney and liver (A), between the left kidney and spleen (B), or in the pelvis (C).
approach has been to measure SBP using Doppler ultrasonogra-
phy and compare the value for the injured side with that for 
the uninjured side, termed the A-A index.47 If the pressures are 
within 10% of each other, a significant injury is unlikely and 
no further evaluation is performed. If the difference is >10%, 
CT angiography or arteriography is indicated. Others argue 
that there are occult injuries, such as pseudoaneurysms or inju-
ries of the profunda femoris or peroneal arteries, which may 
not be detected with this technique. If hemorrhage occurs from 
these injuries, compartment syndrome and limb loss may occur. 
Although busy trauma centers continue to debate this issue, the 
surgeon who is obliged to treat the occasional injured patient 
may be better served by performing CT angiography in selected 
patients with soft signs. Blunt or penetrating trauma to the 
183
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
extremities requires an evaluation for fractures, ligamentous 
injury, and neurovascular injury. Plain radiographs are used to 
evaluate fractures, whereas ligamentous injuries, particularly 
those of the knee and shoulder, can be imaged with magnetic 
resonance imaging.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
Over the past 25 years there has been a remarkable change in 
management practices and operative approach for the injured 
patient. With the advent of CT scanning, nonoperative man-
agement of solid organ injuries has replaced routine operative 
exploration. Those patients who do require operation may be treated 
with less radical resection techniques, such as splenorrhaphy or 
Table 7-7 
American Association for the Surgery of Trauma grading scales for solid organ injuries
Subcapsular Hematoma
Laceration
Liver Injury Grade
  Grade I
<10% of surface area
<1 cm in depth
  Grade II
10%–50% of surface area
1–3 cm
  Grade III
>50% of surface area or >10 cm in depth
>3 cm
  Grade IV
25%–75% of a hepatic lobe
  Grade V
>75% of a hepatic lobe
  Grade VI
Hepatic avulsion
Splenic Injury Grade
  Grade I
<10% of surface area
<1 cm in depth
  Grade II
10%–50% of surface area
1–3 cm
  Grade III
>50% of surface area or >10 cm in depth
>3 cm
  Grade IV
>25% devascularization
Hilum
  Grade V
Shattered spleen
Complete devascularization
Figure 7-28.  Computed tomographic images reveal critical information about solid organ injuries, such as associated contrast extravasation 
from a grade IV laceration of the spleen (A; arrows) and the amount of subcapsular hematoma in a grade III liver laceration (B; arrows).
partial nephrectomy. Colonic injuries, previously mandating 
colostomy, are now repaired primarily in virtually all cases. 
Additionally, the type of anastomosis has shifted from a double-
layer closure to a continuous running single-layer closure; this 
method is technically equivalent to and faster than the inter-
rupted multilayer techniques.48 Adoption of damage control 
surgical techniques in physiologically deranged patients has 
resulted in limited initial operative time, with definitive injury 
repair delayed until after resuscitation in the surgical intensive 
care unit (SICU) with physiologic restoration.49 Abdominal drains, 
once considered mandatory for parenchymal injuries and some 
anastomoses, have disappeared; fluid collections are managed by 
percutaneous techniques. Newer endovascular techniques such 
as stenting of arterial injuries and angioembolization are routine 
184
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
adjuncts. Blunt cerebrovascular injuries have been recognized 
as a significant, preventable source of neurologic morbidity and 
mortality. The use of preperitoneal pelvic packing for unstable 
pelvic fractures as well as early fracture immobilization with 
external fixators are paradigm shifts in management. Finally, 
the institution of massive transfusion protocols balances the 
benefit of blood component therapy against immunologic risk. 
Viscoelastic hemostatic assays (TEG and ROTEM) have been 
shown to be superior to traditional laboratory tests, and have 
been central to the evolving concept of goal-directed hemosta-
sis.50 These conceptual changes have significantly improved 
survival of critically injured patients; they have been promoted 
and critically reviewed by academic trauma centers via forums 
such as the American College of Surgeons Committee on 
Trauma, the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma, 
the International Association of Trauma Surgery and Intensive 
Care, the Pan-American Trauma Congress, and other surgical 
organizations.
Transfusion Practices
Injured patients with life-threatening hemorrhage develop an 
acute coagulopathy of trauma (ACOT). Cohen et al51 have 
shown convincingly that activated protein C is a key element, 
although the complete mechanism remains to be elucidated. 
Fibrinolysis is another important component of the ACOT; 
present in only 5% of injured patients requiring hospitaliza-
tion, but 20% in those requiring massive transfusion.52 Fresh 
whole blood, arguably the optimal replacement, is not avail-
able in the United States. Rather, its component parts, packed 
red blood cells (PRBCs), fresh-frozen plasma, platelets, and 
cryoprecipitate, are administered. Specific transfusion triggers 
Figure 7-29.  Diagnostic peritoneal lavage is performed through an infraumbilical incision unless the patient has a pelvic fracture or is preg-
nant. A. The linea alba is sharply incised, and the catheter is directed into the pelvis. B. The abdominal contents should initially be aspirated 
using a 10-mL syringe.
for individual blood components exist. Although current criti-
cal care guidelines indicate that PRBC transfusion should occur 
once the patient’s hemoglobin level is <7 g/dL,53 in the acute 
phase of resuscitation a hemoglobin of 10 g/dL is suggested to 
facilitate hemostasis.54 The traditional thresholds for blood com-
ponent replacement in the patient manifesting a coagulopathy 
have been INR >1.5, PTT >1.5 normal, platelet count > 50,000/
μL, and fibrinogen >100 mg/dl. However, these guidelines have 
been replaced by TEG and ROTEM criteria in many trauma 
centers. Such guidelines are designed to limit the transfusion 
of immunologically active blood components and decrease the 
risk of transfusion-associated lung injury and secondary mul-
tiple organ failure.55,56
In the critically injured patient requiring large amounts 
of blood component therapy, a massive transfusion protocol 
should be followed (Fig. 7-32). This approach calls for admin-
istration of various components in a specific ratio during trans-
fusion to achieve restoration of blood volume and correction 
of coagulopathy. Although the optimal ratio is yet to be deter-
mined, current scientific evidence indicates a presumptive 1:2 
red cell:plasma ratio in patients at risk for massive transfusion 
(10 units of PRBCs in 6 hours).57-60 Because complete typing 
and cross-matching takes up to 45 minutes, patients requiring 
emergent transfusions are given type O, type-specific, or bio-
logically compatible RBCs. Blood typing, and to a lesser extent 
cross-matching, is essential to avoid life-threatening intravas-
cular hemolytic transfusion reactions. Trauma centers and their 
associated blood banks must have the capability of transfusing 
tremendous quantities of blood components, because it is not 
unusual to have 100 component units transfused during one 
procedure and have the patient survive. Massive transfusion 
185
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7-30.  The three types of mechanically unstable pelvis fractures are lateral compression (A), anteroposterior compression (B), and 
vertical shear (C).
Table 7-8 
Signs and symptoms of peripheral arterial injury
Hard Signs (Opera-
tion Mandatory)
Soft Signs (Further  
Evaluation Indicated)
Pulsatile hemorrhage
Proximity to vasculature
Absent pulses
Significant hematoma
Acute ischemia
Associated nerve injury
A-A index of <0.9
Thrill or bruit
A-A index = systolic blood pressure on the injured side compared with 
that on the uninjured side.
protocols, established preemptively, permit coordination of the 
activities of surgeons, anesthesiologists, and blood bank direc-
tors to facilitate transfusion at these rates should a crisis occur.
Postinjury coagulopathy is associated with core hypother-
mia and metabolic acidosis, termed the bloody vicious cycle.49 
The pathophysiology is multifactorial and includes 
inhibition of temperature-dependent enzyme-activated coagu-
lation cascades, platelet dysfunction, endothelial abnormalities, 
and fibrinolytic activity. Such coagulopathy may be insidious, 
so the surgeon must be cognizant of subtle signs such as exces-
sive bleeding from the cut edges of skin. Although the coagulo-
pathic “ooze” may seem minimal compared with the torrential 
hemorrhage from a hole in the aorta, blood loss from the entire 
area of dissection can lead to exsanguination. Point-of-care 
TEG results, which provide a comprehensive assessment of clot 
capacity and fibrinolysis, can be available within 10 minutes. 
This concept has been termed . In contrast, traditional labora-
tory tests of coagulation capability (i.e., INR, PTT, fibrinogen 
levels, and platelet count) requires at least 30 minutes. Such a 
delay is particularly troublesome for patients who have lost two 
blood volumes while waiting for the test results to return. Using 
damage control techniques to limit operative time and provide 
physiologic restoration in the SICU can be lifesaving (see sec-
tion Damage Control Surgery).
Prophylactic Measures
All injured patients undergoing an operation should receive 
preoperative antibiotics. The type of antibiotic is determined 
8
186
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
by the anticipated source of contamination in the abdomen or 
other operative region; additional doses should be administered 
during the procedure based on blood loss and the half-life of the 
antibiotic. Extended postoperative antibiotic therapy is adminis-
tered only for contaminated open fractures. Tetanus prophylaxis 
is administered to all patients according to published guidelines.
Trauma patients are at risk for venous thromboembolism 
and its associated morbidity and mortality. In fact, pulmonary 
embolus can occur much earlier in the patient’s hospital course 
than previously believed.61 Patients at higher risk for venous 
thromboembolism are those with multiple fractures of the pelvis 
and lower extremities, coma or spinal cord injury, and requiring 
ligation of large veins in the abdomen and lower extremities. 
Morbidly obese patients and those over 55 years of age are at 
additional risk. Administration of low molecular weight heparin 
(LMWH) is initiated as soon as bleeding has been controlled and 
there is stable intracranial pathology. Higher doses of LMWH 
are required in injured patients to attain adequate anti-Xa levels, 
and antiplatelet therapy should probably be added. In high-risk 
patients, removable inferior vena caval filters should be con-
sidered if there are prolonged contraindications to administra-
tion of LMWH. Additionally, pulsatile compression stockings 
(also termed sequential compression devices) are used routinely 
unless there is a fracture.
A final prophylactic measure that is usually not consid-
ered is thermal protection. Hemorrhagic shock impairs perfu-
sion and metabolic activity throughout the body, with resultant 
decrease in heat production and body temperature. Removing 
the patient’s clothes causes a second thermal insult, and infusion 
of cold PRBCs or room temperature crystalloid exacerbates the 
Figure 7-31.  On-table angiography in the operating room isolates the 
area of vascular injury to the superficial femoral artery in a patient with 
a femoral fracture after a gunshot wound to the lower extremity.
Massive Transfusion Protocol
Trigger: Uncontrolled hemorrhage
• e.g., SBP < 90mmHg Despite 3 ½ Liter Crystalloid (50mL/kg)
• e.g., EBL >150 mL/min
• e.g., pH<7.1; body temperature <34°C; ISS > 25
Surgery & Anesthesia Response
Continued Treatment of Shock
Hemorrhage Control
Correct Hypothermia
Correct Acidosis
Normalize Ca++
Check labs q30 min as needed
Ongoing Component Therapy
PT, PTT > 1.5 control  2 units thawed plasma
rapidTEG-ACT >110 sec 
2 units thawed plasma
Platelet count < 50,000/mcL
1 unit of apheresis platelets
rapidTEG-MA < 55mm 
1 unit of apheresis platelets
Fibrinogen < 100 mg/dL 10 units pooled cryoprecipitate
rapidTEG-angle < 63 degrees  10 units pooled cryoprecipitate
rapidTEG EPL > 15% 
 5g amicar
Blood Bank Response
Shipments are delivered every 30 min until Massive 
Transfusion Protocol is terminated. Each shipment’s quantity 
can be doubled at the request of Surgery or Anesthesia.
Shipments > 4 are determined by patient’s clinical course 
and lab values.
Shipment     PRBCs
FFP
Platelets
Cryo
1
4
2
3
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
1
1
10
10
Figure 7-32.  Denver Health Medical Center’s Massive Transfusion Protocol. ACT = activated clotting time; Cryo = cryoprecipitate; FFP = 
fresh-frozen plasma; INR = International Normalized Ratio; MA = maximum amplitude; PRBCs = packed red blood cells; PTT = partial 
thromboplastin time; SBP = systolic blood pressure; TEG = thromboelastography; EPL = estimated percent lysis.
187
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
problem. As a result, injured patients can become hypothermic, 
with temperatures below 34°C (93.2°F) upon arrival in the OR. 
Hypothermia aggravates coagulopathy and provokes myocar-
dial irritability. Therefore, prevention must begin in the ED 
by maintaining a comfortable ambient temperature, covering 
patients with warm blankets, and administering warmed IV flu-
ids and blood products. Additionally, in the OR a Bair Hugger 
warmer (the upper body or lower body blanket) and heated 
inhalation via the ventilatory circuit is instituted. For cases of 
severe hypothermia (temperature <30°C [86°F]), arteriovenous 
rewarming should be considered.
Operative Approaches and Exposure
Cervical Exposure  Operative exposure for midline structures 
of the neck (e.g.,trachea, thyroid, bilateral carotid sheaths) is 
obtained through a collar incision; this is typically performed 
two finger breadths above the sternal notch, but can be varied 
based on the level of anticipated injury. After subplatysmal 
flap elevation, the strap muscles are divided in the midline to 
gain access to the central neck compartment. More superior 
and lateral structures are accessed by extending the collar inci-
sion upward along the sternocleidomastoid muscle; this may be 
done bilaterally if necessary. Unilateral neck exploration is done 
through an incision extending from the mastoid down to the 
clavicle, along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle (Fig. 7-33). The carotid sheath, containing the carotid 
artery, jugular vein, and vagus nerve, is opened widely to exam-
ine these structures. The facial vein, which marks the carotid 
bifurcation, is usually ligated for exposure of the internal carotid 
artery.
Figure 7-33.  A. Unilateral neck exploration is performed through an incision along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle; 
exposure of the carotid artery requires early division of the facial vein. B. The distal internal carotid artery is exposed by dividing the ansa 
cervicalis, which permits mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve. C. Further exposure is facilitated by resection of the posterior belly of the 
digastric muscle.
188
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Exposure of the distal carotid artery in zone III is difficult 
(see Fig. 7-33). The first step is division of the ansa cervicalis 
to facilitate mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve. Next, the 
posterior portion of the digastric muscle, which overlies the 
internal carotid, is transected. The glossopharyngeal and vagus 
nerves are also mobilized and retracted as necessary. If acces-
sible, the styloid process and attached muscles are removed. At 
this point anterior displacement of the mandible (subluxation) 
may be helpful. In desperate situations, the vertical ramus of the 
mandible may be divided. However, this maneuver often entails 
resection of the parotid gland and the facial nerve is at risk for 
exposure of the distal internal carotid.
Thoracic Incisions  An anterolateral thoracotomy, with the 
patient placed supine, is the most versatile incision for emer-
gent thoracic exploration. The location of the incision is in the 
fifth interspace, in the inframammary line (Fig. 7-34). If access 
is needed to both pleural cavities, the original incision can be 
extended across the sternum with a Lebsche knife, into a “clam-
shell” thoracotomy (Fig. 7-35). If the sternum is divided, the 
internal mammary arteries should be ligated to prevent blood 
loss. The heart, lungs, descending aorta, pulmonary hilum, and 
esophagus are accessible with this approach. For control of 
the great vessels, the superior portion of the sternum may be 
divided with extension of the incision into the neck considered. 
A method advocated for access to the proximal left subclavian 
artery is through a fourth interspace anterolateral thoracotomy, 
superior sternal extension, and left supraclavicular incision 
(“trap door” thoracotomy). Although the trap door procedure 
is appropriate after resuscitative thoracotomy, the proximal left 
subclavian artery can be accessed more easily via a sternotomy 
with a supraclavicular extension. If the left subclavian artery 
is injured outside the thoracic outlet, vascular control can be 
obtained via the sternotomy and definitive repair done through 
the supraclavicular incision. Emergent median sternotomy is 
limited to anterior stab wounds to the heart. Typically, these 
patients have pericardial tamponade and undergo placement 
of a pericardial drain before a semiurgent median sternotomy 
is performed. Patients in extremis, however, should undergo 
anterolateral thoracotomy.
1
2
3
B
Figure 7-34.  Options for thoracic exposure include the most versa-
tile incision, the anterolateral thoracotomy (1), as well as a median 
sternotomy (2) and a “trap door” thoracotomy (3). Any thoracic 
incision may be extended into a supraclavicular or anterior neck 
incision for wider exposure.
Figure 7-35.  A. A “clamshell” thoracotomy provides exposure to 
bilateral thoracic cavities. B. Sternal transection requires individual 
ligation of both the proximal and distal internal mammary arteries 
on the undersurface of the sternum.
Median sternotomy with cervical extension is used for 
rapid exposure in patients with presumed proximal subclavian, 
innominate, or proximal carotid artery injuries. Care must be 
taken to avoid injury to the phrenic and vagus nerves that pass 
over the subclavian artery and to the recurrent laryngeal nerve 
passing posteriorly. Posterolateral thoracotomies are used for 
exposure of injuries to the trachea or main stem bronchi near the 
carina (right posterolateral thoracotomy), tears of the descend-
ing thoracic aorta (left posterolateral thoracotomy with left heart 
bypass), and intrathoracic esophageal injuries.
Emergent Abdominal Exploration  Abdominal exploration in 
adults is performed using a generous midline incision because 
of its versatility. For children under the age of 6, a transverse 
incision may be advantageous. Making the incision is faster 
with a scalpel than with an electrosurgical unit; incisional 
abdominal wall bleeding should be ignored until intra-abdominal 
sources of hemorrhage are controlled. Liquid and clotted blood 
are evacuated with multiple laparotomy pads to identify the 
major source(s) of active bleeding. After blunt trauma the spleen 
and liver should be palpated first and packed if fractured, and 
189
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
the infracolic mesentery inspected to exclude a zone I vascu-
lar injury. In contrast, after a penetrating wound the search for 
bleeding should pursue the trajectory of the penetrating device. 
If the patient has an SBP of <70 mmHg when the abdomen is 
opened, digital pressure or a clamp should be placed on the aorta 
at the diaphragmatic hiatus. After the source of hemorrhage is 
localized, direct digital occlusion (vascular injury) or laparot-
omy pad packing (solid organ injury) is used to control bleed-
ing (Fig. 7-36). If the liver is the source in a hemodynamically 
unstable patient, additional control of bleeding is obtained by 
clamping the hepatic pedicle with a vascular clamp or Rummel 
tourniquet (Pringle maneuver) (Fig. 7-37). Similarly, clamping 
the splenic hilum may more effectively control bleeding than 
packing alone. When the spleen is mobilized, it should be gently 
rotated medially to expose the lateral peritoneum; this perito-
neum and endoabdominal fascia are incised, which allows blunt 
dissection of the spleen and pancreas as a composite from the 
retroperitoneum anterior to Gerota’s fascia (Fig. 7-38).
Rapid exposure of the intra-abdominal vasculature can 
prove challenging in the face of exsanguinating hemorrhage. 
Proximal control of the aorta is obtained at the diaphragmatic 
hiatus; if an aortic injury is supraceliac, transecting the left crus 
of diaphragm or extending the laparotomy via a left thoracot-
omy may be necessary. The first decision is whether the patient 
has a supracolic or an infracolic vascular injury. Supracolic 
injuries (aorta, celiac axis, proximal superior mesenteric artery 
[SMA], and left renal arteries) are best approached a left medial 
visceral rotation (Fig. 7-39). This is done by incising the lateral 
peritoneal reflection (white line of Toldt) beginning at the distal 
descending colon and extending the incision along the colonic 
splenic flexure, around the posterior aspect of the spleen, and 
behind the gastric fundus, ending at the esophagus. The left 
Figure 7-36.  A sagittal view of packs placed to control hepatic 
hemorrhage. Lap = laparotomy.
Figure 7-37.  The Pringle maneuver, performed with a vascular 
clamp, occludes the hepatic pedicle containing the portal vein, 
hepatic artery, and common bile duct.
Figure 7-38.  To mobilize the spleen, an incision is 
made into the endoabdominal fascia 1 cm lateral to 
the reflection of the peritoneum onto the spleen (A). 
While the spleen is gently rotated medially, a plane is 
developed between the pancreas and left kidney (B). 
With complete mobilization, the spleen can reach the 
level of the abdominal incision.
190
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
colon, spleen, pancreas, and stomach are then rotated toward 
the midline. The authors prefer to leave the kidney in situ when 
mobilizing the viscera because this exaggerates the separation 
of the renal vessels from the SMA. The operative approach for 
SMA injuries is based on the level of injury. Fullen zone I SMA 
injuries, located posterior to the pancreas, are best exposed by 
a left medial visceral rotation. Fullen zone II SMA injuries, 
extending from the pancreatic edge to the middle colic branch, 
on the other hand, are approached via the lesser sac along the 
inferior edge of the pancreas at the base of the transverse meso-
colon; the pancreatic body may be divided to gain proximal vas-
cular access. More distal SMA injuries, Fullen zones III and IV, 
are approached directly within the mesentery. A venous injury 
behind the pancreas, from the junction of the superior mesen-
teric, splenic, and portal veins, is accessed by dividing the neck 
of the pancreas. Inferior vena cava injuries are approached by 
a right medial visceral rotation (Fig. 7-40). Proximal control is 
obtained just above the iliac bifurcation with direct pressure via 
a sponge stick; the injury is identified by cephalad dissection 
along the anterior surface of the inferior vena cava. A Satinsky 
clamp can be used to control anterior caval wounds.
Injuries of the iliac vessels pose a unique problem for emer-
gent vascular control due to the number of vessels, their close 
proximity, and cross circulation. Proximal control at the infra-
renal aorta arrests the arterial bleeding and avoids splanchnic 
and renal ischemia; however, venous injuries are not controlled 
with aortic clamping. Tamponade with a folded laparotomy pad 
Figure 7-39.  A left medial visceral rotation is used to expose the 
abdominal aorta.
Figure 7-40.  A right medial visceral rotation is used to expose the 
infrahepatic vena cava.
Figure 7-41.  Pelvic vascular isolation. A. Initially, clamps are placed 
on the aorta, inferior vena cava, and bilateral external iliac vessels. B. 
With continued dissection, the clamps can be moved progressively 
closer to the vascular injury to limit unwarranted ischemia.
held directly over the bleeding site usually will establish hemo-
stasis sufficient to prevent exsanguination. If hemostasis is not 
adequate to expose the vessel proximal and distal to the injury, 
sponge sticks can be strategically placed on either side of the 
injury and carefully adjusted to improve hemostasis. Alter-
natively, complete pelvic vascular isolation (Fig. 7-41) may be 
required to control hemorrhage for adequate visualization of the 
191
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
injuries. The right common iliac artery obscures the bifurcation 
of the vena cava and the right iliac vein; the iliac artery may 
require division to expose venous injuries in this area (Fig. 7-42). 
The artery must be repaired after the venous injury is treated, 
however, because of limb-threatening ischemia.
Once overt hemorrhage is controlled, sources of enteric 
contamination are identified by serially running along the small 
and large bowel, looking at all surfaces. Associated hematomas 
should be unroofed to rule out adjacent bowel injury. The ante-
rior and posterior aspects of the stomach should be inspected, 
which requires opening the lesser sac for complete visualiza-
tion. Duodenal injuries should be evaluated with a wide Kocher 
maneuver. During exploration of the lesser sac, visualization 
and palpation of the pancreas is done to exclude injury. Palpat-
ing the anterior surface is not sufficient, because the investing 
fascia may mask a pancreatic injury; mobilization, including 
evaluation of the posterior aspect, is critical. After injuries are 
identified, whether to use damage control techniques or perform 
primary repair of injuries is based on the patient’s intraoperative 
physiologic status (see sections, Damage Control Surgery and 
Treatment of Specific Injuries). In a patient with multisystem 
trauma, enteral access via gastrostomy tube or needle-catheter 
jejunostomy should be considered. If abdominal closure is indi-
cated after the patient’s injuries are addressed, the abdomen is 
irrigated with warm saline and the midline fascia is closed with 
a running heavy suture. The skin is closed selectively based on 
the amount of intra-abdominal contamination.
Vascular Repair Techniques  Initial control of vascular inju-
ries is accomplished digitally by applying enough direct pres-
sure to stop the hemorrhage. Sharp dissection with fine scissors 
is used to define the injury and mobilize sufficient length for 
proximal and distal control. Fogarty thromboembolectomy 
should be done proximally and distally to optimize collateral 
blood flow. Heparinized saline (50 units/mL) is then injected 
into the proximal and distal ends of the injured vessel to prevent 
small clot formation on the exposed intima and media. Ragged 
edges of the injury site should be débrided using sharp dissec-
tion. Intravascular shunts are used when there are multiple life-
threatening injuries or the arterial injury is anticipated to require 
saphenous vein interposition reconstruction.
Figure 7-42.  The right common 
iliac artery can be divided to expose 
the bifurcation of the inferior vena 
cava and the right common iliac vein.
Options for the treatment of vascular injuries are listed 
in Table 7-9. Arterial repair should always be done for the 
aorta, carotid, innominate, brachial, superior mesenteric, proper 
hepatic, renal, iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries. Named 
arteries that usually tolerate ligation include the right or left 
hepatic artery and the celiac artery. In the lower extremities, 
at least one artery with distal runoff should be salvaged. Arte-
rial injuries that may be treated nonoperatively include small 
pseudoaneurysms, intimal dissections, small intimal flaps, and 
small arteriovenous fistulas in the extremities. Follow-up imag-
ing is performed 1 to 2 weeks after injury to confirm healing. 
Venous repair should be performed for injuries of the superior 
vena cava, the inferior vena cava proximal to the renal veins, 
and the portal vein, although the portal vein may be ligated 
in extreme cases. The SMV should be repaired optimally, but 
>80% of patients will survive following ligation. Similarly the 
left renal vein can usually be ligated adjacent to the IVC due to 
collateral decompression.
The type of operative repair for a vascular injury is based 
on the extent and location of injury. Lateral suture repair is pre-
ferred for arterial injuries with minimal loss of tissue. End-to-end 
Table 7-9 
Options for the treatment of vascular injuries
Observation
Ligation
Lateral suture repair
End-to-end primary anastomosis
Interposition grafts
  Autogenous vein
  Polytetrafluoroethylene graft
Dacron graft
Transpositions
Extra-anatomic bypass
Interventional radiology
  Stents
  Embolization
192
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
primary anastomosis is performed if the vessel can be repaired 
without tension. Arterial defects of 1 to 2 cm often can be 
bridged by mobilizing the severed ends of the vessel after ligat-
ing small branches. The surgeon should not be reluctant to divide 
small branches to obtain additional length, because most injured 
patients have normal vasculature, and the preservation of poten-
tial collateral flow is not as important as in revascularization for 
atherosclerosis. The aorta, subclavian artery, and brachial artery, 
however, are difficult to mobilize for additional length. To avoid 
postoperative stenosis, particularly in smaller arteries, beveling 
or spatulation should be used so that the completed anastomosis 
is slightly larger in diameter than the native artery (Fig. 7-43). 
The authors emphasize the parachute technique to ensure preci-
sion placement of the posterior suture line (Fig. 7-44). If this 
technique is used, traction must be maintained on both ends of 
the suture, or leakage from the posterior aspect of the suture line 
may occur. A single temporary suture 180 degrees from the pos-
terior row may be used to maintain alignment for challenging 
anastomoses.
Interposition grafts are used when end-to-end anastomosis 
cannot be accomplished without tension despite mobilization. 
For vessels <6 mm in diameter (e.g., internal carotid, brachial, 
superficial femoral, and popliteal arteries), autogenous saphe-
nous vein from the contralateral groin should be used, because 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts of <6 mm have a prohibi-
tive rate of thrombosis. Larger arteries (e.g., subclavian, innomi-
nate, aorta, common iliac) are bridged by PTFE grafts. PTFE is 
preferred over Dacron because of the reported decreased risk of 
infection.62 Aortic or iliac arterial injuries may be complicated 
by enteric contamination from colon or small bowel injuries. 
There is a natural reluctance to place artificial grafts in such cir-
cumstances, but graft infections are rare and the time required to 
perform an axillofemoral bypass is excessive.63 Therefore, after 
the control of hemorrhage, bowel contamination is contained 
and the abdomen irrigated before placing PTFE grafts.64 After 
placement of the graft, it is covered with peritoneum or omen-
tum before definitive treatment of the enteric injuries.
Figure 7-44.  The parachute technique is helpful for accurate 
placement of the posterior sutures of an anastomosis when the arte-
rial end is fixed and an interposition graft is necessary. Traction 
must be maintained on both ends of the suture to prevent loosening 
and leakage of blood. Six stitches should be placed before the graft 
is pulled down to the artery.
Figure 7-43.  Small arteries repaired with an end-to-end anastomo-
sis are prone to stricture. Enlarging the anastomosis by beveling the 
cut ends of the injured vessel can minimize this problem. A curved 
hemostat is a useful adjunct to create the curve.
Transposition procedures can be used when an artery has 
a bifurcation and one vessel can be ligated safely. Injuries of the 
proximal internal carotid can be treated by mobilizing the adja-
cent external carotid, dividing it distal to the internal injury, and 
performing an end-to-end anastomosis between it and the distal 
internal carotid (Fig. 7-45). The proximal stump of the internal 
carotid is oversewn, with care taken to avoid a blind pocket 
where a clot may form. Injuries of the common and external 
iliac arteries can be handled in a similar fashion (Fig. 7-46), 
while maintaining flow in at least one internal iliac artery.
Venous injuries are inherently more difficult to reconstruct 
due to their propensity to thrombose. Small injuries without loss 
of tissue can be treated with lateral suture repair. More com-
plex repairs with interposition grafts may thrombose but this 
typically occurs gradually over 1 to 2 weeks. During this time 
adequate collateral circulation develops, which is sufficient to 
avoid acute venous hypertension. Therefore, it is reasonable to 
use ringed PTFE for venous interposition grafting and accept a 
gradual, but eventual, thrombosis while allowing time for col-
lateral circulation to develop. Such an approach is reasonable 
for venous injuries of the superior vena cava, suprarenal vena 
cava, SMV, and popliteal vein because ligation of these is asso-
ciated with significant morbidity. In the remainder of venous 
injuries the vein may be ligated. In such patients, chronic venous 
hypertensive complications in the lower extremities often can be 
avoided by (a) temporary use of elastic bandages (Ace wraps) 
applied from the toes to the hips at the end of the procedure, and 
(b) temporary continuous elevation of the lower extremities to 
30 to 45 degrees. These measures should be maintained for 1 
week; if the patient has no peripheral edema with ambulation, 
these maneuvers are no longer required.
Damage Control Surgery
The recognition of the bloody vicious cycle and the introduc-
tion of damage control surgery (DCS) have improved the 
193
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
survival of critically injured patients. Conceptually, the bloody 
vicious cycle, first described in 1981, is the lethal combina-
tion of coagulopathy, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis 
(Fig. 7-47).49 Hypothermia from evaporative and conductive 
heat loss and diminished heat production occurs despite the use 
of warming blankets and blood warmers. The metabolic acidosis 
of shock is exacerbated by aortic clamping, administration of 
vasopressors, massive RBC transfusions, and impaired myocar-
dial performance. The acute coagulopathy of trauma, described 
previously, is compounded by hemodilution, hypothermia, and 
acidosis. Once the cycle starts, each component magnifies the 
other, which leads to a downward spiral and ultimately a fatal 
arrhythmia. The purpose of DCS is to limit operative time so that 
the patient can be returned to the SICU for physiologic restora-
tion and the cycle thereby broken. Indications to limit the initial 
operation and institute DCS techniques include a combination of 
refractory hypothermia (temperature <35°C), profound acidosis, 
(arterial pH <7.2, base deficit <15 mmol/L), and refractory coag-
ulopathy.49,65 The decision to abbreviate a trauma laparotomy is 
made intraoperatively as the patient’s clinical course becomes 
clearer and laboratory values become available.66
The goal of DCS is to control surgical bleeding and limit 
GI spillage. The operative techniques used are temporary mea-
sures, with definitive repair of injuries delayed until the patient 
is physiologically replete. Controlling surgical bleeding while 
preventing ischemia is of utmost importance during DCS. Aor-
tic injuries must be repaired using an interposition PTFE graft. 
Although celiac artery injuries may be ligated, the SMA must 
maintain flow, and the early insertion of an intravascular shunt is 
advocated. Similarly, perfusion of the iliac system and infraingui-
nal vessels can be restored with a vascular shunt, with interposi-
tion graft placement delayed until hours later. Venous injuries are 
Figure 7-45.  Carotid transposition is an effective approach for 
treating injuries of the proximal internal carotid artery.
Figure 7-46.  Transposition procedures can be used for iliac artery injuries to eliminate the dilemma of placing an interposition polytetra-
fluoroethylene graft in the presence of enteric contamination. A. Right common iliac artery transposed to left common iliac artery. B. Left 
internal iliac artery transposed to the distal right common iliac artery. C. Right internal iliac artery transposed to the right external iliac artery.
A
B
C
194
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
preferentially treated with ligation in damage control situations, 
except for the suprarenal inferior vena cava and popliteal vein. 
For extensive solid organ injuries to the spleen or one kidney, 
excision is indicated rather than an attempt at operative repair. 
For hepatic injuries, perihepatic packing of the liver will usually 
Severe Trauma
Blood Loss
Tissue Injury
Massive RBC
Transfusion
Iatrogenic
Factors
Cellular
Shock
Core
Hypothermia
Metabolic Acidosis
Hypocalcemia
Immuno-
Activation
Activation/Consumption
of Complement System
Progressive
Systemic
Coagulopathy
Acute
Endogenous
Coagulopathy
Clotting Factor
Deficiencies
Pre-existing
Diseases
FFP resistant
FFP sensitive
Figure 7-47.  The bloody vicious cycle. FFP = fresh-frozen plasma; RBC = red blood cell.
tamponade bleeding (see Fig. 7-36). Translobar gunshot 
wounds of the liver are best controlled with balloon catheter 
tamponade, whereas deep lacerations can be controlled with 
Foley catheter inflation deep within the injury track (Fig. 7-48). 
For thoracic injuries requiring DCS several options exist. For 
Figure 7-48.  A. An intrahepatic balloon used to tamponade hemorrhage from transhepatic penetrating injuries is made by placing a red rubber 
catheter inside a 1-inch Penrose drain, with both ends of the Penrose drain ligated. B. Once placed inside the injury tract, the balloon is inflated 
with saline until hemorrhage stops. C. A Foley catheter with a 30-mL balloon can be used to halt hemorrhage from deep lacerations to the liver.
195
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
bleeding peripheral pulmonary injuries, wedge resection using 
a stapler is performed. In penetrating injuries, pulmonary trac-
totomy is used to divide the parenchyma (Fig. 7-49); individual 
vessels and bronchi are then ligated using a 3-0 polydioxanone 
suture (PDS) and the track left open. Patients who sustain more 
proximal injuries may require formal pulmonary resection but 
pneumonectomy is poorly tolerated. Cardiac injuries may be 
temporarily controlled using a running 3-0 nonabsorbable 
polypropylene suture or skin staples. Pledgeted repair should be 
performed for the relatively thin right ventricle.
The second key component of DCS is limiting enteric 
content spillage. Small GI injuries (stomach, duodenum, small 
intestine, and colon) may be controlled using a rapid whipstitch 
of 2-0 polypropylene. Complete transection of the bowel or 
segmental damage is controlled using a GIA stapler, often with 
resection of the injured segment. Alternatively, open ends of 
the bowel may be ligated using umbilical tapes to limit spill-
age. Pancreatic injuries, regardless of location, are packed and 
the evaluation of ductal integrity postponed. Urologic injuries 
may require catheter diversion. Before the patient is returned 
to the SICU, the abdomen must be temporarily closed. Origi-
nally, penetrating towel clips were used to approximate the 
skin; however, the ensuing bowel edema often produces a 
delayed abdominal compartment syndrome. Currently, tempo-
rary closure of the abdomen is accomplished using an antimi-
crobial surgical incise drape (Ioban, 3M Health Care, St Paul, 
MN) (Fig. 7-50). In this technique, the bowel is covered with a 
fenestrated subfascial sterile drape (45 × 60 cm Steri-Drape 3M 
Health Care), and two Jackson-Pratt drains are placed along the 
fascial edges; this is then covered using an Ioban drape, which 
allows closed suction to control reperfusion-related ascitic fluid 
egress while providing adequate space for bowel expansion to 
prevent abdominal compartment syndrome. During the initial 
DCS stage, the subfascial sterile drape is not covered by a blue 
towel so that the status of the bowel and hemorrhage control 
can be assessed. Return to the OR within 24 hours is planned 
once the patient clinically improves, as evidenced by normo-
thermia, normalization of coagulation test results, and correc-
tion of acidosis.
Figure 7-49.  Pulmonary tractotomy divides the pulmonary paren-
chyma using either a transection/anastomosis (TA) or gastrointes-
tinal anastomosis (GIA) stapler. The opened track permits direct 
access to injured vessels or bronchi for individual ligation.
TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC INJURIES
Head Injuries
Intracranial Injuries  CT scanning, performed on all patients 
with a significant closed head injury (GCS score <14), identifies 
and quantitates intracranial lesions. Patients with intracranial 
hemorrhage, including epidural hematoma, subdural hematoma, 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, intracerebral hematoma or contu-
sion, and diffuse axonal injury, are admitted to the SICU. In 
patients with abnormal findings on CT scans and GCS scores of 
≤8, intracranial pressure (ICP) should be monitored using fiber-
optic intraparenchymal devices or intraventricular catheters.29 
Although an ICP of 10 mm Hg is believed to be the upper limit 
of normal, therapy generally is not initiated until ICP is >20 mm 
Hg.29 Indications for operative intervention to remove space-
occupying hematomas are based on the clot volume, amount 
of midline shift, location of the clot, GCS score, and ICP.29 A 
shift of >5 mm typically is considered an indication for evacu-
ation, but this is not an absolute rule. Smaller hematomas that 
are in treacherous locations, such as the posterior fossa, may 
require drainage due to brain stem compression or impending 
herniation. Removal of small hematomas may also improve 
ICP and cerebral perfusion in patients with elevated ICP that 
is refractory to medical therapy. Patients with diffuse cerebral 
edema resulting in excessive ICP may require a decompressive 
craniectomy, although a recent AAST multicenter trial ques-
tions the benefits.67,68 Patients with open or depressed skull frac-
tures, with or without sinus involvement, may require operative 
intervention. Penetrating injuries to the head require operative 
intervention for hemorrhage control, evacuation of blood, skull 
fracture fixation, or débridement.
General surgeons in communities without emergency neu-
rosurgical coverage should have a working knowledge of burr 
hole placement in the event that emergent evacuation is required 
for a life-threatening epidural hematoma (Fig. 7-51).69 The typi-
cal clinical course of an epidural hematoma is an initial loss of 
consciousness, a lucid interval, and recurrent loss of conscious-
ness with an ipsilateral fixed and dilated pupil. While decom-
pression of subdural hematomas may be delayed, epidural 
hematomas require evacuation within 70 minutes.68 The final 
stages of this sequence are caused by blood accumulation that 
forces the temporal lobe medially, with resultant compression of 
the third cranial nerve and eventually the brain stem. The burr 
hole is made on the side of the dilated pupil to decompress the 
intracranial space. After stabilization, the patient is transferred 
to a facility with neurosurgical capability for formal craniotomy.
In addition to operative intervention, postinjury care 
directed at limiting secondary injury to the brain is critical. The 
goal of resuscitation and management in patients with head 
injuries is to avoid hypotension (SBP of <100 mm Hg) and 
hypoxia (partial pressure of arterial oxygen of <60 or arterial 
oxygen saturation of <90).29 Attention, therefore, is focused on 
maintaining cerebral perfusion rather than merely lowering ICP. 
Resuscitation efforts aim for a euvolemic state and an SBP of 
>100 mm Hg. Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is equal to the 
mean arterial pressure minus the ICP, with a target range of >50 
mm Hg.29 CPP can be increased by either lowering ICP or rais-
ing mean arterial pressure. Sedation, osmotic diuresis, paralysis, 
ventricular drainage, and barbiturate coma are used in sequence, 
with coma induction being the last resort. The partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide (Pco2) should be maintained in a normal range 
(35–40 mm Hg), but for temporary management of acute 
196
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 7-50.  Temporary closure of the abdomen entails covering the bowel with a fenestrated subfascial 45 × 60 cm sterile drape (A), placing 
Jackson-Pratt drains along the fascial edge (B), and then occluding with an Ioban drape (C, D).
A
B
C
D
197
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
intracranial hypertension, inducing cerebral vasoconstriction 
by hyperventilation to a Pco2 of <30 mm Hg is occasionally 
warranted. Moderate hypothermia (32°–33°C [89.6°–91.4°F]) 
has been proposed to improve neurologic outcomes when main-
tained for at least 48 hours, but studies to date have not vali-
dated this concept.29,70,71 Patients with intracranial hemorrhage 
should be monitored for postinjury seizures, and prophylactic 
anticonvulsant therapy (e.g., phenytoin [dilantin]) is indicated 
for 7 days after injury. 29, 72
Maxillofacial Injuries  Maxillofacial injuries are common 
with multisystem trauma and require coordinated management 
by the trauma surgeon and the specialists in otolaryngology, 
plastic surgery, ophthalmology, and oral and maxillofacial 
surgery. Delay in addressing these systems that control vision, 
hearing, smelling, breathing, eating, and phonation may pro-
duce dysfunction and disfigurement with serious psychological 
impact. The maxillofacial complex is divided into three regions; 
the upper face containing the frontal sinus and brain, the mid-
face containing the orbits, nose, and zygomaticomaxillary com-
plex, and the lower face containing the mandible. High-impact 
kinetic energy is required to fracture the frontal sinus, orbital 
rims, and mandible, whereas low-impact forces will injure the 
nasal bones and zygoma.
The most common scenario, which at times may be life-
threatening, is bleeding from facial fractures.73 Temporizing 
measures include nasal packing, Foley catheter tamponade of 
Figure 7-51.  A burr hole is made for decompression of an epidural 
hematoma as a life-saving maneuver. One or more branches of the 
external carotid artery usually must be ligated to gain access to the 
skull. No attempt should be made to control intracranial hemor-
rhage through the burr hole. Rather, the patient’s head should be 
wrapped with a bulky absorbent dressing and the patient transferred 
to a neurosurgeon for definitive care.
Figure 7-52.  Three-dimensional computed tomographic scan 
illustrating Le Fort II maxillary (L) and alveolar (A) fractures, and 
fracture of the mandible (M) at the midline and at the weaker con-
dyle (C). (Image used with permission from Vincent D. Eusterman, 
MD, DDS.)
posterior nasal bleeding, and oropharyngeal packing. Prompt 
angioembolization will halt exsanguinating hemorrhage. Frac-
tures of tooth-bearing bone are considered open fractures and 
require antibiotic therapy and semiurgent repair to preserve the 
airway as well as the functional integrity of the occlusion (bite) 
and the aesthetics of the face. Orbital fractures may compro-
mise vision, produce muscle injury causing diplopia, or change 
orbital volume to produce a sunken appearance to the orbit. 
Nose and nasoethmoidal fractures should be assessed carefully 
to identify damage to the lacrimal drainage system or to the 
cribriform plate producing cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea. After 
initial stabilization, a systematic physical examination of the 
head and neck should be performed that also includes cranial 
nerve examination and three-dimensional CT scanning of the 
maxillofacial complex (Fig. 7-52).
Cervical Injuries
Spine  Treatment of injuries to the cervical spine is based on 
the level of injury, the stability of the spine, the presence of sub-
luxation, the extent of angulation, the level of neurologic deficit, 
and the overall condition of the patient. In general, physician- 
supervised axial traction, via cervical tongs or the more com-
monly used halo vest, is used to reduce subluxations and stabi-
lize the injury. Immobilization of injuries also is achieved with 
spinal orthoses (braces), particularly in those with associated 
thoracolumbar injuries. Surgical fusion typically is performed 
in patients with neurologic deficit, those with angulation of 
>11 degrees or translation of >3.5 mm, and those who remain 
unstable after halo placement. Indications for immediate opera-
tive intervention are deterioration in neurologic function and 
fractures or dislocations with incomplete deficit. Historically, 
methylprednisolone was administered to patients with acute spi-
nal cord injury after blunt injury, with clinical data suggesting 
198
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
a small benefit to initiating a 24-hour infusion if started within 
3 hours and a 48-hour infusion if started 3 to 8 hours.74 Current 
guidelines, however, no longer recommend steroids for acute 
injuries.75 The role and timing of operative surgical decompres-
sion after acute spinal cord injury is debated. However, evi-
dence supports urgent decompression of bilateral locked facets 
in patients with incomplete tetraplegia or with neurologic dete-
rioration. Urgent decompression in acute cervical spinal cord 
injury is safe. Performing surgery within 24 hours may decrease 
length of stay and complications.76 Complete injuries of the spi-
nal cord remain essentially untreatable. Yet, approximately 3% 
of patients who present with flaccid quadriplegia have concus-
sive injuries, and these patients represent the very few who seem 
to have miraculous recoveries.
Vascular  Cervical vascular injuries due to either blunt or pen-
etrating trauma can result in devastating neurologic sequelae 
or exsanguination. Penetrating injuries to the carotid artery 
and internal jugular vein usually are obvious on operative neck 
exploration. The principles of vascular repair techniques (dis-
cussed previously) apply to carotid injuries, and options for 
repair include end-to-end primary repair (often possible with 
mobilization of the common carotid), graft interposition, and 
transposition procedures. All carotid injuries should be repaired 
except in patients who present in coma with a delay in transport. 
Prompt revascularization of the internal carotid artery, using a 
Figure 7-53.  The Denver grading scale for blunt cerebrovascular injuries. Grade I: irregularity of the vessel wall, dissection/intramural 
hematoma with <25% luminal stenosis. Grade II: visualized intraluminal thrombus or raised intimal flap, or dissection/intramural hematoma 
with 25% or more luminal narrowing. Grade III: pseudoaneurysm. Grade IV: vessel occlusion. Grade V: vessel transection. CAI = carotid 
artery injury; VAI = vertebral artery injury.
temporary Pruitt-Inahara shunt, should be considered in patients 
arriving in profound shock. Otherwise, carotid shunting should 
be done selectively as in elective carotid endarterectomy but 
the patient should be systemically anticoagulated. Currently, we 
administer heparin with an ACT target of 250 sec. Tangential 
wounds of the internal jugular vein should be repaired by lateral 
venorrhaphy, but extensive wounds are efficiently addressed by 
ligation. However, it is not advisable to ligate both jugular veins 
due to potential intracranial hypertension. Vertebral artery inju-
ries due to penetrating trauma are difficult to control operatively 
because of the artery’s protected location within the foramen 
transversarium. Although exposure from an anterior approach 
can be accomplished by removing the anterior elements of the 
bony canal and the tough fascia covering the artery between the 
elements, typically the most efficacious control of such inju-
ries is angioembolization. Fogarty catheter balloon occlusion, 
however, is useful for controlling acute bleeding if encountered 
during neck exploration.
Blunt injury to the carotid or vertebral arteries may cause 
dissection, thrombosis, or pseudoaneurysm, typically in the sur-
gically inaccessible distal internal carotid (Fig. 7-53).77 Early 
recognition and management of these injuries is paramount, 
because patients treated with antithrombotics have a stroke rate 
of <1% compared with stroke rates of 20% in untreated patients. 
Because treatment must be instituted during the latent period 
199
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
between injury and onset of neurologic sequelae, diagnos-
tic imaging is performed based on identified risk factors 
(Fig. 7-54).78 After identification of an injury, antithrombotics 
are administered if the patient does not have contraindications 
(intracranial hemorrhage, falling hemoglobin level with solid 
organ injury or pelvic fracture). Heparin, started without a load-
ing dose at 15 units/kg per hour, is titrated to achieve a PTT 
between 40 and 50 seconds or antiplatelet agents are initiated 
Figure 7-54.  Screening and treatment algorithm for blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVIs). Angio = angiography; ASA = acetylsalicylic 
acid; BRB = bright red blood; CHI = closed head injury; C-spine = cervical spine; CT = computed tomography; DAI = diffuse axonal injury; 
GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale score; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; MS = mental status; Neg = negative; pt = patient; PTT = partial 
thromboplastin time; TIA = transient ischemic attack.
Signs/Symptoms of BCVI
Potential arterial hemorrhage 
from neck/nose/mouth 
Cervical bruit in pt < 50 yrs old 
Expanding cervical hematoma 
Focal neurologic defect: TIA, 
hemiparesis, vertebrobasilar 
symptoms, Horner’s Syndrome 
Neurologic deficit inconsistent 
with head CT 
Stroke on CT or MRI
Risk Factors for BCVI
High energy transfer mechanism 
associated with: 
Displaced mid-face fracture 
(LeFort II or III) 
Mandible fracture 
Complex skull fracture/basilar 
skull fracture/occipital condyle 
fracture 
CHI consistent with DAI and 
GCS < 6 
Cervical subluxation or 
ligamentous injury 
Cervical spine fractures 
Near hanging with anoxic brain 
injury 
Clothesline type injury or seat 
belt abrasion with significant 
swelling, pain, or altered MS 
TBI with thoracic injuries 
Scalp degloving 
Thoracic vascular injuries 
Blunt cardiac rupture 
Yes 
Yes 
No
No
Multi-Slice 
CTA*
Surgically Accessible?
Grade I Injury 
Antithrombotic Therapy: Heparin (PTT 40-50 sec) 
or Antiplatelet Therapy
No
Discontinue 
Antithrombotics
Repeat CTA in 7-10 days 
Antithrombotics for 3-6 months and re-image 
Consider endovascular stenting for severe luminal 
narrowing or expanding pseudoaneurysm 
Injury Healed? 
Yes 
No
Positive 
Equivocal 
Finding or 
High Clinical 
Suspicion 
Arteriogram
No
Yes 
Negative 
* CTA with multidetector-row CT, 16-channel or 
higher. If fewer than 16 channels, interpret CTA 
with caution; digital subtraction arteriography is 
gold standard. 
Grade II-IV Injury 
Grade V Injury 
Operative Repair 
Endovascular 
Treatment 
Yes 
Stop
Stop 
Surgically Accessible?
(aspirin 325 mg/d or clopidogrel 75 mg/d). The types of anti-
thrombotic treatment appear equivalent in published studies to 
date, and the duration of treatment is empirically recommended 
to be 6 months.79,80 The role of carotid stenting for grade III 
internal carotid artery injuries remain controversial. Thrombosis 
of the internal jugular veins caused by blunt trauma can occur 
unilaterally or bilaterally and is often discovered incidentally, 
because most patients are asymptomatic. Bilateral thrombosis 
9
200
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
can aggravate cerebral edema in patients with serious head inju-
ries; stent placement should be considered in such patients if 
ICP remains elevated.
Aerodigestive  Subclinical fractures of the larynx and trachea 
may manifest as cervical emphysema. Fractures documented by 
CT scan are usually repaired. Common injuries include thyroid 
cartilage fractures, rupture of the thyroepiglottic ligament, dis-
ruption of the arytenoids or vocal cord tears, and cricoid frac-
tures. After débridement of devitalized tissue, tracheal injuries 
are repaired end-to-end using a single layer of interrupted absorb-
able sutures. Associated injuries of the esophagus are common in 
penetrating injuries due to its close proximity. After débridement 
and repair, vascularized tissue is interposed between the repaired 
esophagus and trachea, and a closed suction drain is placed. The 
sternocleidomastoid muscle or strap muscles are useful for inter-
position and help prevent postoperative fistulas.
Chest Injuries
The most common injuries from both blunt and penetrating 
thoracic trauma are hemothorax and pneumothorax. More than 
85% of patients can be definitively treated with a chest tube. 
The indications for thoracotomy include significant initial or 
ongoing hemorrhage from the tube thoracostomy and specific 
imaging-identified diagnoses (Table 7-10). One caveat concerns 
the patient who presents after a delay. Even when the initial 
chest tube output is 1.5 L, if the output ceases and the lung 
is re-expanded, the patient may be managed nonoperatively if 
hemodynamically stable.
Great Vessels  Over 90% of thoracic great vessel injuries are 
due to penetrating trauma, although blunt injury to the innomi-
nate, subclavian, or descending aorta may cause a pseudoaneu-
rysm or frank rupture.40,81,82 Simple lacerations of the ascending 
or transverse aortic arch can be repaired with lateral aortorrha-
phy. Repair of posterior injuries, or those requiring interposi-
tion grafting of the arch, require full cardiopulmonary bypass, 
and repair of complex injuries may require circulatory arrest. 
Innominate artery injuries are repaired using the bypass exclu-
sion technique,82 which avoids the need for cardiopulmonary 
bypass. Bypass grafting from the proximal aorta to the distal 
innominate with a prosthetic tube graft is performed before 
the postinjury hematoma is entered. The PTFE graft is anas-
tomosed end to side from the proximal undamaged aorta and 
anastomosed end-to-end to the innominate artery (Fig. 7-55). 
The origin of the innominate is then oversewn at its base to 
exclude the pseudoaneurysm or other injury. Subclavian artery 
injuries can be repaired using lateral arteriorrhaphy or PTFE 
graft interposition; due to its multiple branches and tethering of 
the artery, end-to-end anastomosis is not advocated if there is a 
significant segmental loss.
Descending thoracic aortic injuries may require urgent 
if not emergent intervention. However, operative intervention 
for intracranial or intra-abdominal hemorrhage or unstable 
pelvic fractures takes precedence. To prevent aortic rupture, 
Table 7-10 
Indications for operative treatment of thoracic injuries
•  Initial tube thoracostomy drainage of >1000 mL 
(penetrating injury) or >1500 mL (blunt injury)
•  Ongoing tube thoracostomy drainage of >200 mL/h for  
3 consecutive hours in noncoagulopathic patients
•  Caked hemothorax despite placement of two chest tubes
•  Selected descending torn aortas
•  Great vessel injury (endovascular techniques may be used 
in selected patients)
•  Pericardial tamponade
•  Cardiac herniation
•  Massive air leak from the chest tube with inadequate 
ventilation
•  Tracheal or main stem bronchial injury diagnosed by 
endoscopy or imaging
•  Open pneumothorax
•  Esophageal perforation
•  Air embolism
A
B
C
Figure 7-55.  A. Angiography reveals a 1-cm pseudoaneurysm of the innominate artery origin. B. In the first stage of the bypass exclusion 
technique, a 12-mm polytetrafluoroethylene graft is anastomosed end to side from the proximal undamaged aorta, tunneled under the vein, and 
anastomosed end to end to the innominate artery. C. The origin of the innominate is then oversewn at its base to exclude the pseudoaneurysm.
201
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
pharmacologic therapy with a selective β1 antagonist, esmolol, 
should be instituted in the trauma bay, with a target SBP of <100 
mm Hg and heart rate of <100/min.36,83 Endovascular stenting is 
now the mainstay of treatment, but open operative reconstruc-
tion is warranted, or necessary, in select patients.84,85 Endovas-
cular techniques are particularly appropriate in patients who 
cannot tolerate single lung ventilation, patients >60- years-old 
who are at risk for cardiac decompensation with aortic clamping, 
or patients with uncontrolled intracranial hypertension. While 
endograft sizing has improved, the major question is long-term 
outcome in younger patients. Open repair of the descending aorta 
is accomplished using partial left heart bypass.86 With the patient 
in a right lateral decubitus position, the patient’s hips and legs 
are rotated 45 degrees toward the supine position to gain access 
to the left groin for common femoral artery cannulation. Using 
a left posterolateral thoracotomy, the fourth rib is transected to 
expose the aortic arch and left pulmonary hilum. Partial left heart 
bypass is performed by cannulating the superior pulmonary vein 
with return through the left common femoral artery (Fig. 7-56). A 
centrifugal pump is used to provide flow rates of 2.5 to 4 L/min 
to maintain a distal perfusion pressure of >65 mm Hg. This pre-
vents ischemic injury of the spinal cord as well as the splanchnic 
bed, and reduces left ventricular afterload.36 Heparinization is not 
required, a significant benefit in patients with multiple injuries, 
particularly in those with intracranial hemorrhage. Unless con-
traindicated, however, low-dose heparin (100 units/kg) typically 
is administered to a target ACT of 250 sec to prevent throm-
boembolic events. Once bypass is initiated, vascular clamps are 
applied on the aorta between the left common carotid and left 
subclavian arteries, on the left subclavian, and on the aorta distal 
to the injury. In most patients a short PTFE graft (usually 18 mm 
in diameter) is placed using a running 3-0 polypropylene suture. 
However, primary arterial repair should be done when possible. 
Air and thrombus are flushed from the aortic graft before the final 
suture is tied, and the occluding vascular clamps are removed. 
The patient is then weaned from the centrifugal pump, the can-
nulas are removed, and primary repair of the cannulated vessels 
is performed. Removal of air or potential clot in the pulmonary 
vein is important during decannulation to avoid left heart emboli 
to the systemic circulation.
LA
Figure 7-56.  When repairing a tear of the descending thoracic 
aorta, perfusion of the spinal cord while the aorta is clamped is 
achieved by using partial left heart bypass. The venous cannula 
is inserted into the left superior pulmonary vein because it is less 
prone to tearing than the left atrium (LA).
Figure 7-57.  A variety of techniques 
may be necessary to repair cardiac 
wounds. Generally, pledget support 
is used for the relatively thin-walled 
right ventricle.
Heart  Blunt and penetrating cardiac injuries have widely dif-
fering presentations and therefore disparate treatments. Sur-
vivable penetrating cardiac injuries consist of wounds that can 
be repaired operatively; most are stab wounds. Before repair 
of the injury is attempted, hemorrhage should be controlled; 
injuries to the atria can be clamped with a Satinsky vascular 
clamp, whereas digital pressure is used to occlude the majority 
of ventricular wounds. Foley catheter occlusion of larger stel-
late lesions may be effective, but even minimal traction may 
enlarge the original injury. Temporary control of hemorrhage, 
and at times definitive repair, may be accomplished with skin 
staples for left ventricular lacerations; the myocardial edges of 
the laceration must coapt in diastole for stapling to be techni-
cally feasible. Definitive repair of cardiac injuries is performed 
with either running 3-0 polypropylene suture or interrupted, 
pledgeted 2-0 polypropylene suture (Fig. 7-57).87 Use of 
202
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
pledgets may be particularly important in the right ventricle to 
prevent sutures from pulling through the thinner myocardium. 
Injuries adjacent to coronary arteries should be repaired using 
horizontal mattress sutures, because use of running sutures 
results in coronary occlusion and distal infarction. Gunshot 
wounds may result in stellate lesions or contused, extremely 
friable myocardium adjacent to the wound. When the edges 
of such complex wounds cannot be fully approximated and 
hence the repair is not hemostatic, the authors have used surgi-
cal adhesive (BioGlue) to achieve hemostasis.88 Occasionally, 
interior structures of the heart may be damaged. Intraoperative 
auscultation or postoperative hemodynamic assessment usu-
ally identifies such injuries.89 Echocardiography (ECHO) can 
diagnose the injury and quantitate its effect on cardiac output. 
Immediate repair of valvular damage or septal defects rarely 
is necessary and would require cardiopulmonary bypass, but 
structural intracardiac lesions may progress and, thus, patients 
must have a follow-up ECHO.
Patients with blunt cardiac injury typically present with 
persistent tachycardia or conduction disturbances, but occasion-
ally present with tamponade due to atrial or right ventricular 
rupture. There are no pathognomonic ECG findings, and cardiac 
enzyme levels do not correlate with the risk of cardiac complica-
tions.23 Therefore, patients for whom there is high clinical suspi-
cion of cardiac contusion and who are hemodynamically stable 
should be monitored for dysrhythmias for 24 hours by telem-
etry. Patients with hemodynamic instability should undergo 
ECHO to evaluate for wall motion abnormalities, pericardial 
fluid, valvular dysfunction, chordae rupture, or diminished ejec-
tion fraction. If such findings are noted or if vasoactive agents 
are required, cardiac function can be continuously monitored 
using a pulmonary artery catheter and serial SICU transthoracic 
or transesophageal ECHO.
Trachea, Bronchi, and Lung Parenchyma  Less than 1% 
of all injured patients sustain intrathoracic tracheobronchial 
injuries, and only a small number require operative interven-
tion. Although penetrating injuries may occur throughout the 
tracheobronchial system, blunt injuries most commonly occur 
within 2.5 cm of the carina. For patients with a massive air leak 
requiring emergent exploration, initial control of the injury to 
provide effective ventilation is obtained by passing an endo-
tracheal tube either beyond the injury or into the contralateral 
mainstem bronchus. Principles of repair are similar to those 
for repair of cervical tracheal injuries. Devitalized tissue is 
débrided, and primary end-to-end anastomosis with 3-0 PDS 
suture is performed. Dissection should be limited to the area of 
injury to prevent disruption of surrounding bronchial vascula-
ture and ensuing ischemia and stricture. Suture lines should be 
encircled with vascularized tissue, either pericardium, intercos-
tal muscle, or pleura. Expectant management is employed for 
bronchial injuries that are less than one-third the circumference 
of the airway and have no evidence of a persistent major air 
leak.11,12 In patients with peripheral bronchial injuries, indicated 
by persistent air leaks from the chest tube and documented by 
endoscopy, bronchoscopically directed fibrin glue sealing may 
be useful.
The majority of pulmonary parenchymal injuries are sus-
pected based upon identification of a pneumothorax; the vast 
majority is managed by tube thoracostomy. Identified paren-
chymal injuries encountered during thoracic exploration for a 
massive hemothorax are managed without resection as much 
as possible. Peripheral lacerations with persistent bleeding can 
be managed with stapled wedge resection using a stapler. For 
central injuries, the current treatment is pulmonary tractotomy, 
which permits selective ligation of individual bronchioles and 
bleeders, prevents the development of an intraparenchymal 
hematoma or air embolism, and reduces the need for formal 
lobar resection (see Fig. 7-49).90,91 A stapling device, pref-
erably the longest stapler available, is inserted directly into 
the injury track and positioned along the thinnest section of 
overlying parenchyma. The injury track is thus filleted open, 
which allows direct access to the bleeding vessels and leak-
ing bronchi. The majority of injuries are definitively managed 
with selective ligation, and the defect is left open. Occasion-
ally, tractotomy reveals a more proximal vascular injury that 
must be treated with formal lobectomy. Injuries severe enough 
to mandate pneumonectomy usually are fatal because of right 
heart decompensation.92
One parenchymal injury that may be discovered during 
thoracic imaging is a posttraumatic pulmonary pseudocyst, col-
loquially termed a pneumatocele.93 Traumatic pneumatoceles 
typically follow a benign clinical course and are treated with 
aggressive pain management, pulmonary toilet, and serial chest 
radiography to monitor for resolution of the lesion. If the patient 
has persistent fever or leukocytosis, however, chest CT is done 
to evaluate for an evolving abscess, because pneumatoceles may 
become infected. CT-guided catheter drainage may be required 
in such cases, because 25% of patients do not respond to anti-
biotic therapy alone. Surgery, ranging from partial resection 
to anatomic lobectomy, is indicated for unresolving complex 
pneumatoceles or infected lesions refractory to antibiotic ther-
apy and drainage.
The most common complication after thoracic injury is 
development of an empyema. Management is based on CT 
diagnostic criteria.94 Percutaneous drainage is indicated for a 
single loculation without appreciable rind. While fibrinolytics 
are often used for empyema there is a paucity of data to support 
their use. Early decortication via video-assisted thoracic surgery 
should be done promptly in patients with multiple loculations 
or a pleural rind of >1 cm.95 Antibiotic treatment is based on 
definitive culture results, but presumptive antibiotics should 
cover MRSA in the SICU.
Esophagus  Due to the proximity of the structures, esopha-
geal injuries often occur with tracheobronchial injuries, par-
ticularly in cases of penetrating trauma. Operative options are 
based on the extent and location of esophageal injury. With 
sufficient mobilization, a primary single-layer end-to-end 
anastomosis may be performed after appropriate débridement. 
As with cervical repairs, if there are two suture lines in close 
approximation (trachea or bronchi and esophagus) interpo-
sition of a vascularized pedicle is warranted to prevent fis-
tula formation. Perforations at the gastroesophageal junction 
may be treated with repair and Nissan fundoplication or, for 
destructive injuries, segmental resection and gastric pull-up. 
With large destructive injuries or delayed presentation of inju-
ries, esophageal exclusion with wide drainage, diverting loop 
esophagostomy, and placement of a gastrostomy tube should 
be considered.
Chest Wall and Diaphragm  Virtually all chest wall injuries, 
consisting of rib fractures and laceration of intercostal ves-
sels, are treated nonoperatively with pain control, pulmonary 
toilet or ventilatory management, and drainage of the pleural 
203
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
space as indicated. Early institution of effective pain control 
is essential. The authors advocate pre-emptive rib blocks with 
0.25% bupivacaine hydrochloride (Marcaine) in the trauma 
bay, followed by thoracic wall pain catheters.96 Epidural anes-
thesia is reserved for multiple segmental fractures. Persistent 
hemorrhage from a chest tube after blunt trauma most often 
is due to injured intercostal arteries; for unusual persistent 
bleeding (see Table 7-10), thoracotomy with direct ligation or 
angioembolization may be required to arrest hemorrhage. In 
cases of extensive flail chest segments or markedly displaced 
rib fractures, open reduction and internal fixation of the frac-
ture with plates may be warranted. The current role of opera-
tive rib fixation remains controversial. Chest wall defects, 
particularly those seen with open pneumothorax, are repaired 
using local approximation of tissues or tissue transfer for cov-
erage. Scapular and sternal fractures rarely require operative 
intervention but are markers for significant thoracoabdominal 
force during injury; significant displacement may benefit from 
sternal plating (Fig. 7-58). Careful examination and imaging 
should exclude associated injuries, including blunt cardiac 
injury and descending aortic tears. On the other hand, clavicle 
fractures often are isolated injuries and should be managed 
with pain control and immobilization. The exception is pos-
terior dislocation of the clavicular head, which may injure the 
subclavian vessels.
Blunt diaphragmatic injuries usually result in a linear tear, 
and most injuries are large, whereas penetrating injuries are 
variable in size and location depending on the agent of injury. 
Regardless of the etiology, acute injuries are usually repaired 
through an abdominal approach to manage potential associated 
intraperitoneal visceral injury. After delineation of the injury, 
the chest should be evacuated of all blood and particulate 
matter, and thoracostomy tube placed if not previously done. 
Allis clamps are used to approximate the diaphragmatic edges, 
and the defect is closed with a running No. 1 polypropylene 
suture. Occasionally, large avulsions or shotgun wounds with 
extensive tissue loss will require polypropylene or biologic 
mesh to bridge the defect. Alternatively, transposition of the 
diaphragm cephalad one to two intercostal spaces may allow 
repair without undue tension.61
Abdominal Injuries
Liver and Extrahepatic Biliary Tract  The liver’s large size 
makes it the organ most susceptible to blunt trauma, and it is 
frequently involved in upper torso penetrating wounds. Nonop-
erative management of solid organ injuries is pursued in hemo-
dynamically stable patients who do not have overt peritonitis 
or other indications for laparotomy. Patients with > grade II 
injuries should be admitted to the SICU with frequent hemody-
namic monitoring, determination of hemoglobin, and abdominal 
examination. The only absolute contraindication to nonopera-
tive management is hemodynamic instability. Factors such as 
high injury grade, large hemoperitoneum, contrast extravasa-
tion, or pseudoaneurysms may predict complications or failure 
of nonoperative management. Angioembolization and endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) are useful 
adjuncts that can improve the success rate of nonoperative man-
agement.97,98 The indication for angiography to control hepatic 
hemorrhage is transfusion of 4 units of RBCs in 6 hours or 6 units 
of RBCs in 24 hours without hemodynamic instability.
In the 15% of patients for whom emergent laparotomy 
is mandated, the primary goal is to arrest hemorrhage. Initial 
control of hemorrhage is best accomplished using perihepatic 
packing and manual compression. With extensive injuries and 
major hemorrhage a Pringle maneuver should be done immedi-
ately. Intermittent release of the Pringle is helpful to attenuate 
hepatic cellular loss. In either case, the edges of the liver lacera-
tion should be opposed for local pressure control of bleeding. 
Hemorrhage from most major hepatic injuries can be controlled 
with effective perihepatic packing. The right costal margin is 
elevated, and the pads are strategically placed over and around 
the bleeding site (see Fig. 7-36). Additional pads should be 
placed between the liver, diaphragm, and anterior chest wall 
until the bleeding has been controlled. Sometimes 10 to 15 pads 
may be required to control the hemorrhage from an extensive 
right lobar injury. Packing of injuries of the left lobe is not as 
effective, because there is insufficient abdominal and thoracic 
wall anterior to the left lobe to provide adequate compression 
with the abdomen open. Fortunately, hemorrhage from the left 
lobe usually can be controlled by mobilizing the lobe and com-
pressing it between the surgeon’s hands. If the patient has per-
sistent bleeding despite packing, injuries to the hepatic artery, 
portal vein, and retrohepatic vasculature should be considered. 
A Pringle maneuver can help delineate the source of hemor-
rhage. In fact, hemorrhage from hepatic artery and portal vein 
injuries will halt with the application of a vascular clamp across 
the portal triad; whereas, bleeding from the hepatic veins and 
retrohepatic vena cava will continue.
Injuries of the portal triad vasculature should be addressed 
immediately. In general, ligation from the celiac axis to the 
Figure 7-58.  Significant sternal displacement (A; arrows) can be 
reduced and stabilized with sternal plating (B).
204
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
level of the common hepatic artery at the gastroduodenal arte-
rial branch is tolerated due to the extensive collaterals, but 
the proper hepatic artery should be repaired. The right or left 
hepatic artery, or in urgent situations the portal vein, may be 
selectively ligated; occasionally, lobar necrosis will necessi-
tate delayed anatomic resection. If the right hepatic artery is 
ligated, cholecystectomy also should be performed. If the vascu-
lar injury is a stab wound with clean transection of the vessels, 
primary end-to-end repair is done. If the injury is destructive, 
temporary shunting should be performed followed by interposi-
tion reversed saphenous vein graft (RSVG). Blunt avulsions of 
the portal structures are particularly problematic if located at 
the hepatic plate, flush with the liver; hemorrhage control at the 
liver can be attempted with directed packing or Fogarty cath-
eters. If the avulsion is more proximal, at the superior border of 
the pancreatic body or even retropancreatic, the pancreas must 
be transected to gain access for hemorrhage control and repair.
If massive venous hemorrhage is seen from behind the 
liver despite use of the Pringle maneuver, the patient likely has 
a hepatic vein or retrohepatic vena cava injury. If bleeding can 
be controlled with perihepatic packing, the packing should be 
left undisturbed and the patient observed in the SICU. Place-
ment of a hepatic vein stent by interventional radiology may 
be considered. If bleeding continues despite repeated attempts 
at packing, then direct repair, with or without hepatic vascular 
isolation, should be attempted. Three techniques have been used 
to accomplish hepatic vascular isolation: (a) direct repair with 
suprahepatic and infrahepatic clamping of the vena cava and 
stapled assisted parenchymal resection;99 (b) temporary shunt-
ing of the retrohepatic vena cava; and (c) venovenous bypass 
(Fig. 7-59).100
Numerous methods for the definitive control of hepatic 
parenchymal hemorrhage have been developed. Minor lac-
erations may be controlled with manual compression applied 
directly to the injury site. Topical hemostatic techniques include 
the use of an electrocautery (with the device set at 100 watts), 
argon beam coagulator, microcrystalline collagen, thrombin-
soaked gelatin foam sponge, fibrin glue, and BioGlue. Suturing 
of the hepatic parenchyma with a blunt tipped 0 chromic suture 
(e.g., a “liver suture”) can be an effective hemostatic technique. 
A running suture is used to approximate the edges of shal-
low lacerations, whereas deeper lacerations are approximated 
using interrupted horizontal mattress sutures placed parallel to 
the edge of the laceration. When the suture is tied, tension is 
adequate when visible hemorrhage ceases or the liver blanches 
around the suture. Caution must be used to prevent hepatic 
necrosis. This technique of placing large liver sutures controls 
bleeding through reapproximation of the liver laceration rather 
than direct ligation of bleeding vessels. Aggressive finger frac-
ture to identify bleeding vessels followed by individual clip or 
suture ligation was advocated previously but currently has a 
limited role in hemostasis. Hepatic lobar arterial ligation may 
be appropriate for patients with recalcitrant arterial hemorrhage 
from deep within the liver and is a reasonable alternative to 
a deep hepatotomy, particularly in unstable patients. Omen-
tum can be used to fill large defects in the liver. The tongue of 
omentum not only obliterates potential dead space with viable 
tissue but also provides an excellent source of macrophages. 
Additionally, the omentum can provide buttressing support for 
parenchymal sutures.
Translumbar penetrating injuries are particularly chal-
lenging, because the extent of the injury cannot be fully visual-
ized. As discussed later in “Damage Control Surgery,” options 
include intraparenchymal tamponade with a Foley catheter or 
balloon occlusion (see Fig. 7-48).101 If tamponade is successful 
with either modality, the balloon is left inflated for 24 to 48 
hours followed by sequential deflation and removal at a second 
laparotomy. Hepatotomy with ligation of individual bleeders 
occasionally may be required; however, division of the over-
lying viable hepatic tissue may cause considerable blood loss 
in the coagulopathic patient. Finally, angioembolization is an 
effective adjunct in any of these scenarios and should be con-
sidered early in the course of treatment.
Several centers have reported patients with devastat-
ing hepatic injuries or necrosis of the entire liver who have 
undergone successful hepatic transplantation.102 Clearly this is 
dramatic therapy, and the patient must have all other injuries 
delineated, particularly those of the central nervous system, 
and have an excellent chance of survival excluding the hepatic 
injury. Because donor availability will limit such procedures, 
hepatic transplantation for trauma will continue to be performed 
only in extraordinary circumstances.
Cholecystectomy is performed for injuries of the gallblad-
der and after operative ligation of the right hepatic artery. Injuries 
of the extrahepatic bile ducts are a challenge due to their small 
size and thin walls. Because of the proximity of other portal struc-
tures and the vena cava, associated vascular injuries are common. 
These factors may preclude primary repair. Small lacerations with 
no accompanying loss or devitalization of adjacent tissue can be 
treated by the insertion of a T tube through the wound or by lat-
eral suturing using 6-0 monofilament absorbable suture. Virtu-
ally all transections and any injury associated with significant 
tissue loss will require a Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy.103 
Figure 7-59.  Venovenous bypass permits hepatic vascular isola-
tion with continued venous return to the heart. IMV = inferior mes-
enteric vein; IVC = inferior vena cava; SMV = superior mesenteric 
vein.
205
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
The anastomosis is performed using a single-layer interrupted 
technique with 5-0 monofilament absorbable suture. To reduce 
anastomotic tension, the jejunum should be sutured to the areo-
lar tissue of the hepatic pedicle or porta hepatis. Injuries of the 
hepatic ducts are almost impossible to satisfactorily repair under 
emergent circumstances. One approach is to intubate the duct for 
external drainage and attempt a repair when the patient recovers 
or attempt stenting via ERC. Alternatively, the duct can be ligated 
if the opposite lobe is normal and uninjured.
Patients undergoing perihepatic packing for extensive 
liver injuries typically are returned to the OR for pack removal 
24 hours after initial injury. Earlier exploration may be indi-
cated in patients with evidence of ongoing hemorrhage. Signs 
of rebleeding are usually conspicuous, and include a falling 
hemoglobin, accumulation of blood clots under the temporary 
abdominal closure device, and bloody output from drains; the 
magnitude of hemorrhage is reflected in ongoing hemodynamic 
instability and metabolic monitoring. Postoperative hemorrhage 
should be re-evaluated in the OR once the patient’s coagulopa-
thy is corrected. Alternatively, angioembolization is appropri-
ate for complex injuries. Patients with hepatic ischemia due to 
prolonged intraoperative use of the Pringle maneuver have an 
expected elevation but subsequent resolution of transaminase 
levels, whereas patients requiring hepatic artery ligation may 
have frank hepatic necrosis. Although febrile patients should be 
Figure 7-60.  Complications after hepatic trauma include bilomas (A; arrow), hepatic duct injuries (B), and hepatic necrosis after hepatic 
artery ligation or embolization (C).
evaluated for infectious complications, patients with complex 
hepatic injuries typically have intermittent “liver fever” for the 
first 5 days after injury.
Aside from hemorrhage and hepatic necrosis, additional 
complications after significant hepatic trauma include bilomas, 
arterial pseudoaneurysms, and biliary fistulas (Fig. 7-60). 
Bilomas are loculated collections of bile, which may or may not 
be infected. If infected, they should be treated like an abscess 
via percutaneous drainage. Although small, sterile bilomas 
eventually will be reabsorbed, larger fluid collections should 
be drained. Biliary ascites, due to the disruption of a major bile 
duct, often requires reoperation and wide drainage. Primary 
repair of the injured intrahepatic duct is unlikely to be success-
ful. Resectional débridement is indicated for the removal of 
peripheral portions of nonviable hepatic parenchyma.
Pseudoaneurysms and biliary fistulas are rare complica-
tions in patients with hepatic injuries. Because hemorrhage 
from hepatic injuries often is treated without isolating individ-
ual bleeding vessels, arterial pseudoaneurysms may develop, 
with the potential for rupture. Rupture into a bile duct results 
in hemobilia, which is characterized by intermittent episodes 
of right upper quadrant pain, upper GI hemorrhage, and jaun-
dice. If the aneurysm ruptures into a portal vein, portal venous 
hypertension with bleeding esophageal varices may occur. 
Either scenario is best managed with hepatic arteriography and 
206
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
embolization. Biliovenous fistulas, causing jaundice due to 
rapid increases in serum bilirubin levels, should be treated with 
ERCP and sphincterotomy. Rarely, a biliary fistulous commu-
nication will form with intrathoracic structures in patients with 
associated diaphragm injuries, resulting in a bronchobiliary or 
pleurobiliary fistula. Due to the pressure differential between 
the biliary tract (positive) and the pleural cavity (negative), the 
majority require operative closure. Occasionally, endoscopic 
sphincterotomy with stent placement will be required to address 
the pressure differential, and the pleurobiliary fistula will close 
spontaneously.
Spleen  Until the 1970s, splenectomy was considered manda-
tory for all splenic injuries. Recognition of the immune function 
of the spleen refocused efforts on operative splenic salvage in 
the 1980s.104,105 After demonstrated success in pediatric patients, 
however, nonoperative management has become the preferred 
means of splenic salvage. The identification of contrast extrava-
sation as a risk factor for failure of nonoperative management 
led to liberal use of angioembolization. The role of selective 
angioembolization (SAE) in splenic salvage remains controver-
sial with some groups advocated pre-emptive SAE.106 It is clear, 
however, that up to 20% of patients with splenic trauma warrant 
early splenectomy and that failure of nonoperative management 
often represents inappropriate patient selection.107,108 Unlike 
hepatic injuries, which usually rebleed within 48 hours, delayed 
hemorrhage or rupture of the spleen can occur up to weeks after 
injury. Indications for early intervention include initiation of 
blood transfusion within the first 12 hours and hemodynamic 
instability.
Splenic injuries are managed operatively by splenectomy, 
partial splenectomy, or splenic repair (splenorrhaphy), based on 
the extent of the injury and the physiologic condition of the 
patient. Splenectomy is indicated for hilar injuries, pulverized 
splenic parenchyma, or any >grade II injury in a patient with 
coagulopathy or multiple injuries. The authors use autotrans-
plantation of splenic implants (Fig. 7-61) to achieve partial 
immunocompetence in younger patients who do not have an 
associated enteric injury. Drains are not used. Partial splenec-
tomy can be employed in patients in whom only the superior or 
inferior pole has been injured. Hemorrhage from the raw splenic 
Figure 7-61.  Autologous splenic transplantation is performed by placing sections of splenic parenchyma, 40 × 40 × 3 mm in size, into 
pouches in the greater omentum.
Figure 7-62.  Interrupted pledgeted sutures may effectively control 
hemorrhage from the cut edge of the spleen.
edge is controlled with horizontal mattress sutures, with gentle 
compression of the parenchyma (Fig. 7-62). As with hepatic 
injuries, splenorrhaphy hemostasis is achieved by topical meth-
ods (electrocautery; argon beam coagulation; application of 
thrombin-soaked gelatin foam sponges, fibrin glue, or BioGlue), 
envelopment of the injured spleen in absorbable mesh, and pled-
geted suture repair.
After splenectomy or splenorrhaphy, postoperative hemor-
rhage may be due to loosening of a tie around the splenic ves-
sels, an improperly ligated or unrecognized short gastric artery, 
or recurrent bleeding from the spleen if splenic repair was used. 
An immediate postsplenectomy increase in platelets and WBCs 
is normal; however, beyond postoperative day 5, a WBC count 
above 15,000/mm3 and a platelet/WBC ratio of <20 are strongly 
associated with sepsis and should prompt a thorough search for 
underlying infection.109 A common infectious complication after 
splenectomy is a subphrenic abscess, which should be managed 
with percutaneous drainage. Additional sources of morbidity 
include a concurrent but unrecognized iatrogenic injury to the 
pancreatic tail during rapid splenectomy resulting in pancreatic 
ascites or fistula, and a gastric perforation during short gastric 
ligation. Enthusiasm for splenic salvage was driven by the rare, 
but often fatal, complication of overwhelming postsplenectomy 
207
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
sepsis. Overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis is caused by 
encapsulated bacteria, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus 
influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis, which are resistant to 
antimicrobial treatment. In patients undergoing splenectomy, 
prophylaxis against these bacteria is provided via vaccines 
administered optimally at 14 days.110
Stomach and Small Intestine  Little controversy exists 
regarding the repair of injuries to the stomach or small bowel 
because of a rich blood supply. Gastric wounds can be oversewn 
with a running single-layer suture line or closed with a stapler. 
If a single-layer closure is chosen, full-thickness bites should be 
taken to ensure hemostasis from the well-vascularized gastric 
wall. The most commonly missed gastric injury is the poste-
rior wound of a totally penetrating injury. Injuries also can be 
overlooked if the wound is located within the mesentery of the 
lesser curvature or high in the posterior fundus. To delineate a 
questionable injury, the stomach can be digitally occluded at the 
pylorus while methylene blue-colored saline is instilled via a 
nasogastric tube. Alternatively, air can be introduced via the NG 
tube with the abdomen filled with saline. Partial gastrectomy 
may be required for destructive injuries, with resections of the 
distal antrum or pylorus reconstructed using a Billroth proce-
dure. Patients with injuries that damage both Latarjet nerves or 
vagi should undergo a drainage procedure (see Chap. 26). Small 
intestine injuries can be repaired using a transverse running 3-0 
PDS suture if the injury is less than one- third the circumference 
of the bowel. Destructive injuries or multiple penetrating inju-
ries occurring close together are treated with segmental resec-
tion followed by end-to-end anastomosis using a continuous, 
single-layer 3-0 polypropylene suture.111 Mesenteric injuries 
may result in an ischemic segment of intestine, which mandates 
resection.
Following repair of GI tract injuries, there is an obligatory 
postoperative ileus. Return of bowel function is indicated by a 
decrease in gastrostomy or nasogastric tube output. The topic of 
nutrition is well covered in other chapters, but a few issues war-
rant mention. Multiple studies have confirmed the importance 
of early total enteral nutrition (TEN) in the trauma population, 
particularly its impact in reducing septic complications.112 The 
route of enteral feedings (stomach vs. small bowel) tends to be 
less important, because gut tolerance appears equivalent unless 
there is upper GI tract pathology. Although early enteral nutri-
tion is the goal, evidence of bowel function should be apparent 
before advancing to goal tube feedings. Overzealous jejunal 
feeding can lead to small bowel necrosis in the patient recover-
ing from profound shock. Patients undergoing monitoring for 
nonoperative management of grade II or higher solid organ inju-
ries should receive nothing by mouth for at least 48 hours in case 
they require an operation. Although there is general reluctance 
to initiate TEN in patients with an open abdomen, a recent mul-
ticenter trial demonstrates TEN in the postinjury open abdomen 
is feasible.113 For those patients without a bowel injury, TEN 
was associated with higher fascial closure rates, decreased com-
plications, and decreased mortality. TEN in patients with bowel 
injuries does not appear to alter fascial closure rates, compli-
cations, or mortality; hence EN appears to be neither advanta-
geous nor detrimental in these patients. Prospective randomized 
controlled trials are warranted to further clarify the role of EN 
in this subgroup. Once resuscitation is complete, initiation of 
TEN, even at trophic levels (20 mL/h), should be considered in 
all injured patients with an open abdomen.
Duodenum and Pancreas  The spectrum of injuries to the 
duodenum includes hematomas, perforation (blunt blow-outs, 
lacerations from stab wounds, or blast injury from gunshot 
wounds), and combined pancreaticoduodenal injuries. The 
majority of duodenal hematomas are managed nonoperatively 
with nasogastric suction and parenteral nutrition. Patients with 
suspected associated perforation, suggested by clinical deterio-
ration or imaging with retroperitoneal free air or contrast extrav-
asation, should undergo operative exploration. A marked drop 
in nasogastric tube output heralds resolution of the hematoma, 
which typically occurs within 2 weeks; repeat imaging to con-
firm these clinical findings is optional. If the patient shows no 
clinical or radiographic improvement within 3 weeks, operative 
evaluation is warranted.
Small duodenal perforations or lacerations should be 
treated by primary repair using a running single-layer suture 
of 3-0 monofilament. The wound should be closed in a direc-
tion that results in the largest residual lumen. Challenges arise 
when there is a substantial loss of duodenal tissue. Extensive 
injuries of the first portion of the duodenum (proximal to the 
duct of Santorini) can be repaired by débridement and end-to-
end anastomosis because of the mobility and rich blood supply 
of the distal gastric atrium and pylorus. In contrast, the sec-
ond portion is tethered to the head of the pancreas by its blood 
supply and the ducts of Wirsung and Santorini; therefore, no 
more than 1 cm of duodenum can be mobilized away from the 
pancreas, and this does not effectively alleviate tension on the 
suture line. Moreover, suture repair using an end-to-end anas-
tomosis in the second portion often results in an unacceptably 
narrow lumen. Therefore, defects in the second portion of the 
duodenum should be patched with a vascularized jejunal graft. 
Duodenal injuries with tissue loss distal to the papilla of Vater 
and proximal to the superior mesenteric vessels are best treated 
by Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy with the distal portion of 
the duodenum oversewn (Fig. 7-63). In particular, injuries in 
the distal third and fourth portions of the duodenum (behind 
the mesenteric vessels) should be resected, and a duodenojeju-
nostomy performed on the left side of the superior mesenteric 
vessels.
Optimal management of pancreatic trauma is determined 
by where the parenchymal damage is located and whether the 
intrapancreatic common bile duct and main pancreatic duct 
remain intact. Patients with pancreatic contusions (defined 
as injuries that leave the ductal system intact) can be treated 
nonoperatively or with closed suction drainage if undergoing 
laparotomy for other indications. Patients with proximal pan-
creatic injuries, defined as those that lie to the right of the supe-
rior mesenteric vessels, are also managed with closed suction 
drainage,114 In contrast, distal pancreatic injuries are managed 
based upon ductal integrity. Pancreatic duct disruption can be 
identified through direct exploration of the parenchymal lacera-
tion, operative pancreatography, ERCP, or magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography. Patients with distal ductal disruption 
undergo distal pancreatectomy, preferably with splenic preser-
vation.
Injuries to the pancreatic head add an additional element of 
complexity because the intrapancreatic portion of the common 
bile duct traverses this area and often converges with the pan-
creatic duct. In contrast to diagnosis of pancreatic duct injuries, 
identification of intrapancreatic common bile duct disruption is 
relatively simple. The first method is to squeeze the gallbladder 
and look for bile leaking from the pancreatic wound. Otherwise, 
208
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 7-64.  For injuries of the pancreatic head that involve the pancreatic duct but spare the common bile duct, central pancreatic resection 
with Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy prevents pancreatic insufficiency.
Figure 7-63.  Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy is used to treat duo-
denal injuries between the papilla of Vater and superior mesenteric 
vessels when tissue loss precludes primary repair.
cholangiography, optimally via the cystic duct, is diagnostic. 
Definitive treatment of this injury entails division of the com-
mon bile duct superior to the first portion of the duodenum, with 
ligation of the distal duct and reconstruction with a Roux-en-Y 
choledochojejunostomy. For injuries to the head of the pancreas 
that involve the main pancreatic duct but not the intrapancreatic 
bile duct, there are few options. Distal pancreatectomy alone is 
rarely indicated due to the extended resection of normal gland 
and the resultant risk of pancreatic insufficiency. Central pan-
createctomy preserves the common bile duct, and mobilization 
of the pancreatic body permits drainage into a Roux-en-Y pan-
creaticojejunostomy (Fig. 7-64). Although this approach avoids 
a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure), the complex-
ity may make the pancreaticoduodenectomy more appropriate in 
patients with multiple injuries. Some injuries of the pancreatic 
head do not involve either the pancreatic or common bile duct; 
if no clear ductal injury is present, drains are placed. Rarely, 
patients sustain destructive injuries to the head of the pancreas 
or combined pancreaticoduodenal injuries that require pancre-
aticoduodenectomy. Examples of such injuries include transec-
tion of both the intrapancreatic bile duct and the main pancreatic 
duct in the head of the pancreas, avulsion of the papilla of Vater 
from the duodenum, and destruction of the entire second portion 
of the duodenum. In these cases of extensive injuries, damage 
control principles are often employed.
In contrast to proximal injuries, pancreatic resection con-
tinues to be advocated for major ductal disruption in the more 
distal pancreas. Several options exist for treating injuries of the 
pancreatic body and tail. In stable patients, spleen-preserving 
distal pancreatectomy should be performed. An alternative, 
209
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7-65.  A. Pyloric exclusion is used to treat combined injuries of the duodenum and the head of the pancreas as well as isolated duodenal 
injuries when the duodenal repair is less than optimal. B and C. The pylorus is oversewn through a gastrotomy, which is subsequently used 
to create a gastrojejunostomy. The authors frequently use needle-catheter jejunostomy tube feedings for these patients.
which preserves both the spleen and distal transected end of the 
pancreas, is either a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy or pan-
creaticogastrostomy. If the patient is physiologically compro-
mised, distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy is the preferred 
approach. Regardless of the choice of definitive procedure, the 
pancreatic duct in the proximal edge of transected pancreas 
should be individually ligated or occluded with a TA stapler. 
Application of fibrin glue over the stump may be advantageous.
Pyloric exclusion often is used to divert the GI stream after 
high-risk, complex duodenal repairs (Fig. 7-65).115 If the duo-
denal repair breaks down, the resultant fistula is an end fistula, 
which is easier to manage and more likely to close than a lateral 
fistula. To perform a pyloric exclusion, first a gastrostomy is 
made on the greater curvature near the pylorus. The pylorus is 
then grasped with a Babcock clamp, via the gastrostomy, and 
oversewn with an O polypropylene suture. A gastrojejunos-
tomy restores GI tract continuity. Vagotomy is not necessary 
because a risk of marginal ulceration has not been documented. 
Perhaps surprisingly, the sutures maintain diversion for only 3 
to 4 weeks. Alternatively, the most durable pyloric closure is a 
double external staple line across the pylorus using a TA stapler.
Complications should be expected after major pancreati-
coduodenal injuries. Delayed hemorrhage is rare but may occur 
with pancreatic necrosis or abdominal infection; this usually can 
be managed by angioembolization. If closed suction drains have 
been inserted for major pancreatic trauma, these should remain 
in place until the patient is tolerating an oral diet or enteral nutri-
tion. Pancreatic fistula is diagnosed after postoperative day 5 
in patients with drain output of >30 mL/d and a drain amylase 
level three times the serum value. Pancreatic fistula develops 
in over 20% of patients with combined injuries and should be 
managed similar to fistulas after elective surgery (see Chap. 33). 
Similarly, a duodenal fistula, presumptively an end fistula if a 
pyloric exclusion has been done, will typically heal in 6 to 
8 weeks with adequate drainage and control of intra-abdominal 
sepsis. Pancreatic pseudocysts in patients managed nonopera-
tively suggest a missed injury, and ERCP should be done to 
evaluate the integrity of the pancreatic duct. Late pseudocysts 
may be a complication of operative management and are treated 
much like those in patients with pancreatitis (see Chap. 33). 
Intra-abdominal abscesses are common and routinely managed 
with percutaneous drainage.
Colon and Rectum  Currently, three methods for treating 
colonic injuries are used: primary repair, end colostomy, and 
primary repair with diverting ileostomy. Primary repairs include 
lateral suture repair or resection of the damaged segment with 
reconstruction by ileocolostomy or colocolostomy. All sutur-
ing and anastomoses are performed using a running single-layer 
technique (Fig. 7-66).111 The advantage of definitive treatment 
must be balanced against the possibility of anastomotic leak-
age if suture lines are created under suboptimal conditions. 
Alternatively, although use of an end colostomy requires a 
second operation, an unprotected suture line with the potential 
for breakdown is avoided. Numerous large retrospective and 
several prospective studies have now clearly demonstrated 
that primary repair is safe and effective in virtually all patients 
with penetrating wounds.116 Colostomy is still appropriate in a 
210
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
few patients, but the current dilemma is how to select which 
patients should undergo the procedure. Currently, the overall 
physiologic status of the patient, rather than local factors, directs 
decision making. Patients with devastating left colon injuries 
requiring damage control are clearly candidates for temporary 
colostomy. Diverting ileostomy with colocolostomy, however, 
is used for most other high-risk patients.
Rectal injuries are similar to colonic injuries with respect 
to the ecology of the luminal contents, overall structure, and 
blood supply of the wall, but access to extraperitoneal injuries is 
limited due to the surrounding bony pelvis. Therefore, indirect 
treatment with intestinal diversion usually is required. The cur-
rent options are loop ileostomy and sigmoid loop colostomy. 
These are preferred because they are quick and easy to perform, 
and provide essentially total fecal diversion. For sigmoid colos-
tomy, technical elements include: (a) adequate mobilization of 
the sigmoid colon so that the loop will rest on the abdominal 
wall without tension, (b) maintenance of the spur of the colos-
tomy (the common wall of the proximal and distal limbs after 
maturation) above the level of the skin with a one-half-inch 
nylon rod or similar device, (c) longitudinal incision in the tenia 
coli, and (d) immediate maturation in the OR (Fig. 7-67). If the 
injury is accessible (e.g., in the posterior intraperitoneal portion 
of the rectum), repair of the injury should also be attempted. 
However, it is not necessary to explore the extraperitoneal rec-
tum to repair a distal perforation. If the rectal injury is extensive, 
another option is to divide the rectum at the level of the injury, 
oversew or staple the distal rectal pouch if possible, and create 
an end colostomy (Hartmann’s procedure). Extensive injuries 
may warrant presacral drainage with Penrose drains placed 
along Waldeyer’s fascia via a perianal incision (see Fig. 7-67). 
In rare instances in which destructive injuries are present, an 
abdominoperineal resection may be necessary to avert lethal 
pelvic sepsis.
Complications related to colorectal injuries include intra-
abdominal abscess, fecal fistula, wound infection, and stomal 
complications. Intra-abdominal abscesses occur in approximately 
10% of patients, and most are managed with percutaneous drain-
age. Fistulas occur in 1% to 3% of patients and usually present 
as an abscess or wound infection with subsequent continuous 
drainage of fecal output; the majority will heal spontaneously 
with routine care (see Chap. 29). Stomal complications (necro-
sis, stenosis, obstruction, and prolapse) occur in 5% of patients 
and may require either immediate or delayed reoperation. Stomal 
necrosis should be carefully monitored, because spread beyond 
the mucosa may result in septic complications, including necro-
tizing fasciitis of the abdominal wall. Penetrating injuries that 
involve both the rectum and adjacent bony structures are prone 
to development of osteomyelitis. Bone biopsy is performed for 
diagnosis and bacteriologic analysis, and treatment entails long-
term IV antibiotic therapy and occasionally débridement.
Abdominal and Pelvic Vasculature  Injury to the major arter-
ies and veins in the abdomen can be a technical challenge.117–121 
Although penetrating trauma indiscriminately affects all blood 
vessels, blunt trauma most commonly involves renal vasculature 
and occasionally the abdominal aorta. Patients with a penetrat-
ing aortic wound who survive to reach the OR frequently have 
a contained hematoma within the retroperitoneum. Due to lack 
of mobility of the abdominal aorta, few injuries are amenable 
to primary repair. Small lateral perforations may be controlled 
with 4-0 polypropylene suture or a PTFE patch, but end-to-end 
interposition grafting with a PTFE tube graft is the most com-
mon repair. Blunt injuries are typically extensive intimal tears 
of the infrarenal aorta and are exposed via a direct approach; 
most require an interposition graft. To avoid future vascular-
enteric fistulas, the vascular suture lines should be covered with 
omentum.
Figure 7-66.  Technique for bowel repair and anas-
tomosis. A. The running, single-layer suture is started 
at the mesenteric border. B. Stitches are spaced 3 to 
4 mm from the edge of the bowel and advanced 3 
to 4 mm, including all layers except the mucosa. C. 
The continuous suture is tied near the antimesenteric 
border.
211
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Penetrating wounds to the superior mesenteric artery 
(SMA) are typically encountered upon exploration for a gun-
shot wound, with “black bowel” and associated supramesocolic 
hematoma being pathognomonic. Blunt avulsions of the SMA 
are rare but should be considered in patients with a seat belt sign 
who have midepigastric pain or tenderness and associated hypo-
tension. For injuries of the SMA, temporary damage control 
with a Pruitt-Inahara shunt can prevent extensive bowel necro-
sis; additionally, temporary shunting allows control of visceral 
contamination before placement of a PTFE graft. For defini-
tive repair, end-to-end interposition RSVG from the proximal 
SMA to the SMA past the point of injury can be performed 
if there is no associated pancreatic injury. Alternatively, if the 
patient has an associated pancreatic injury, the graft should be 
tunneled from the distal aorta beneath the duodenum to the 
distal SMA. For proximal SMV injuries, digital compression for 
hemorrhage control is followed by attempted venorrhaphy; liga-
tion is an option in a life-threatening situation, but the resultant 
bowel edema requires aggressive fluid resuscitation. Tempo-
rary abdominal closure and a second-look operation to evaluate 
bowel viability should be done.
Transpelvic gunshot wounds or blunt injuries with asso-
ciated pelvic fractures are the most common scenarios in 
patients with iliac artery injuries. As with abdominal vascu-
lar injuries, a Pruitt-Inahara shunt can be used for temporary 
shunting of the vessel for damage control. Definitive interposi-
tion grafting with excision of the injured segment is appropri-
ate (see “Vascular Repair Techniques”). Careful monitoring 
for distal embolic events and reperfusion injury necessitating 
fasciotomy is imperative.
In general, outcome after pelvic vascular injuries is related 
to (a) the technical success of the vascular reconstruction and 
(b) associated soft tissue and nerve injuries. Vascular repairs 
rarely fail after the first 12 hours, whereas, soft tissue infection 
is a limb threat for several weeks. Following aortic interposi-
tion grafting, the patient’s SBP should not exceed 120 mm Hg 
for at least the first 72 hours postoperatively. Patients requiring 
Figure 7-67.  Loop colostomy will completely divert 
the fecal flow, allowing the low rectal injury to heal. 
For extensive wounds, presacral drains are inserted 
through a perianal incision (box) and advanced along 
Waldeyer’s fascia (dashed line).
ligation of an inferior vena cava injury often develop marked 
bilateral lower extremity edema. To limit the associated morbid-
ity the patient’s legs should be wrapped with elastic bandages 
from the toes to the hips and elevated at a 45- to 60-degree 
angle. For superior mesenteric vein injuries, either ligation or 
thrombosis after venorrhaphy results in marked bowel edema; 
fluid resuscitation should be aggressive and abdominal pres-
sure monitoring routine in these patients. Prosthetic graft infec-
tions are rare complications, but prevention of bacteremia is 
imperative67; administration of antibiotics perioperatively and 
treatment of secondary infections is indicated. Long-term arte-
rial graft complications such as stenosis or pseudoaneurysms 
are uncommon, and routine graft surveillance rarely is per-
formed. Consequently, long-term administration of antiplatelet 
agents or antithrombotics is not routine.
Genitourinary Tract  When undergoing laparotomy for 
trauma, the best policy is to explore all penetrating wounds 
to the kidneys.122 Parenchymal renal injuries are treated with 
hemostatic and reconstructive techniques similar to those used 
for injuries of the liver and spleen: topical methods (electrocau-
tery; argon beam coagulation; application of thrombin-soaked 
gelatin foam sponge, fibrin glue, or BioGlue) and pledgeted 
suture repair. Two caveats are recognized, however: The col-
lecting system should be closed separately, and the renal capsule 
should be preserved to close over the repair of the collecting 
system (Fig. 7-68). Renal vascular injuries are common after 
penetrating trauma and may be deceptively tamponaded, which 
results in delayed hemorrhage. Arterial reconstruction using 
graft interposition should be attempted for renal preservation. 
For destructive parenchymal or irreparable renovascular inju-
ries, nephrectomy may be the only option; a normal contralat-
eral kidney must be palpated, because unilateral renal agenesis 
occurs in 0.1% of patients.
Over 90% of blunt renal injuries are treated nonopera-
tively. Hematuria typically resolves within a few days with bed 
rest, although rarely bleeding is so persistent that bladder 
212
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 7-68.  When renorrhaphy 
is undertaken, effective repair is 
assisted by attention to several key 
points: A. Vascular occlusion con-
trols bleeding and permits adequate 
visualization. B. The renal capsule is 
carefully preserved. C. The collect-
ing system is closed separately with 
absorbable suture. D. The preserved 
capsule is closed over the collecting 
system repair.
irrigation to dispel blood clots is warranted. Persistent gross 
hematuria may require embolization, whereas urinomas can 
be drained percutaneously. Operative intervention after blunt 
trauma is limited to renovascular injuries and destructive paren-
chymal injuries that result in hypotension. The renal arteries 
and veins are uniquely susceptible to traction injury caused 
by blunt trauma. As the artery is stretched, the inelastic intima 
and media may rupture, which causes thrombus formation and 
resultant stenosis or occlusion. The success rate for renal artery 
repair approaches 0%, but an attempt is reasonable if the 
injury is <5 hours old or if the patient has a solitary kidney or 
bilateral injuries.123 Image-guided endostent placement is now 
employed for many of these injuries recognized by CT scan-
ning. Reconstruction after blunt renal injuries may be diffi-
cult, however, because the injury is typically at the level of the 
aorta. If repair is not possible within this time frame, leaving 
the kidney in situ does not necessarily lead to hypertension or 
abscess formation. The renal vein may be torn or completely 
avulsed from the vena cava due to blunt trauma. Typically, the 
large hematoma causes hypotension, which leads to operative 
intervention. During laparotomy for blunt trauma, expand-
ing or pulsatile perinephric hematomas should be explored. If 
necessary, emergent vascular control can be obtained by plac-
ing a curved vascular clamp across the hilum from an inferior 
approach. Techniques of repair and hemostasis are similar to 
those described earlier.
Injuries to the ureters are uncommon but may occur in 
patients with pelvic fractures and penetrating trauma. An 
injury may not be identified until a complication (i.e., a uri-
noma) becomes apparent. If an injury is suspected during 
operative exploration but is not clearly identified, methylene 
blue or indigo carmine is administered IV with observation 
for extravasation. Injuries are repaired using 5-0 absorbable 
monofilament, and mobilization of the kidney may reduce 
tension on the anastomosis. Distal ureteral injuries can be 
treated by reimplantation facilitated with a psoas hitch and/or 
Boari flap. In damage control circumstances, the ureter can be 
ligated on both sides of the injury and a nephrostomy tube 
placed.
Bladder injuries are subdivided into those with intraperito-
neal extravasation and those with extraperitoneal extravasation. 
Ruptures or lacerations of the intraperitoneal bladder are opera-
tively closed with a running, single-layer, 3-0 absorbable mono-
filament suture. Laparoscopic repair is becoming common in 
patients not requiring laparotomy for other injuries. Extraperito-
neal ruptures are treated nonoperatively with bladder decompres-
sion for 2 weeks. Urethral injuries are managed by bridging the 
defect with a Foley catheter, with or without direct suture repair. 
Strictures are not uncommon but can be managed electively.
Female Reproductive Tract  Gynecologic injuries are rare. 
Occasionally the vaginal wall will be lacerated by a bone frag-
ment from a pelvic fracture. Although repair is not mandated, 
it should be performed if physiologically feasible. More impor-
tant, however, is recognition of the open fracture, need for 
possible drainage, and potential for pelvic sepsis. Penetrating 
injuries to the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries are 
also uncommon, and routine hemostatic techniques are used. 
Repair of a transected fallopian tube can be attempted but prob-
ably is unjustified, because a suboptimal repair will increase 
the risk of tubal pregnancy. Transection at the injury site with 
proximal ligation and distal salpingectomy is a more prudent 
approach.
Pelvic Fracture Hemorrhage Control
Patients with pelvic fractures who are hemodynamically unsta-
ble are a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge for the trauma 
team. These injuries often occur in conjunction with other 
life-threatening injuries, and there is no universal agreement 
213
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
among clinicians on management. Current management algo-
rithms in the United States incorporate variable time frames for 
bony stabilization and fixation, as well as hemorrhage control 
by preperitoneal pelvic packing and/or angioembolization. Early 
institution of a multidisciplinary approach with the involvement 
of trauma surgeons, orthopedic surgeons, interventional radiolo-
gists, the director of the blood bank, and anesthesiologists is 
imperative due to high associated mortality rates (Fig. 7-69).
Evaluation in the ED focuses on identification of injuries 
mandating operative intervention (e.g., massive hemothorax, 
ruptured spleen) and injuries related to pelvic fracture that alter 
management (e.g., injuries to the iliac artery). Immediate tem-
porary stabilization with sheeting of the pelvis or application 
of commercially available compression devices should be per-
formed. In high risk patients, (e.g. autopedestrian accident) with 
profound shock, this should be done before radiographic confir-
mation. If the patient’s primary source of bleeding is the fracture-
related hematoma, several options exist for hemorrhage control. 
Because 85% of bleeding due to pelvic fractures is venous or 
bony in origin the authors advocate immediate external fixation 
and preperitoneal pelvic packing.124,125 Anterior external fixation 
decreases pelvic volume, which promotes tamponade of venous 
bleeding and prevents secondary hemorrhage from the shifting 
of bony elements. Pelvic packing, in which six laparotomy pads 
(four in children) are placed directly into the paravesical space 
through a small suprapubic incision, provides tamponade for the 
bleeding (Fig. 7-70). Pelvic packing also eliminates the often 
difficult decision by the trauma surgeon: OR vs. interventional 
radiology? All patients can be rapidly transported to the OR 
and packing can be accomplished in under 30 minutes. In the 
authors’ experience, this results in hemodynamic stability and 
abrupt cessation of the need for ongoing blood transfusion in the 
majority of cases.125 Patients also can undergo additional pro-
cedures such as laparotomy, thoracotomy, external fixation of 
extremity fractures, open fracture débridement, or craniotomy. 
Currently, angiography is reserved for patients with evidence of 
Figure 7-69.  Management algorithm for patients with pelvic fractures with hemodynamic instability. CT = computed tomography; ED = 
emergency department; FAST = focused abdominal sonography for trauma; HD = hemodynamic; PLT = platelets; PRBCs = packed red blood 
cells; SICU = surgical intensive care unit.
Resuscitate with 2 L crystalloid – measure base deficit – rule out thoracic source (portable chest radiograph) – sheet the pelvis.
If immediate red blood cell (RBC) transfusion, discuss the role pelvic packing (alert the operating room).
Transfuse fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and RBC 1:2; 1 apheresis unit of platelets for each 5 units RBCs; perform thromboelastography.
Immediate notification: Attending Trauma Surgeon, Attending Orthopaedic Surgeon, blood bank resident, IR fellow
FAST Exam
Positive
Negative
2 units RBCs/ED trauma bay
HD Stable
SICU + CT scans**
Laparotomy,
Pelvic Fixation and Pelvic Packing
Assess Tube Thoracostomy Output
Operating Room
Hemodynamically Stable?
Yes
Operating Room:
Pelvic Fixation and Pelvic Packing
Re-ultrasound Abdomen
Assess Tube Thoracostomy Output
HD Unstable
Ongoing Transfusion Requirements after packing?
(>4 units RBCs from pelvic source with normal coags)
No
Angiography
SICU
Yes
No
** normalize coagulation status, 
abdominal CT scan if no laparotomy done.
214
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
ongoing pelvic bleeding after admission to the SICU (>4 units 
of RBCs in the first 12 postoperative hours after the coagulopa-
thy is corrected). Patients undergo standard posttrauma resusci-
tative SICU care, and the pelvic packs are removed within 48 
hours, a time frame chosen empirically based on the authors’ 
experience with liver packing. The authors elect to repack the 
patient’s pelvis if there is persistent oozing and perform serial 
washouts of the preperitoneal space if it appears infected.
Another clinical challenge is the open pelvic fracture. In 
many instances the wounds are located in the perineum, and 
the risk of pelvic sepsis and osteomyelitis is high. To reduce 
the risk of infection, performance of a diverting sigmoid colos-
tomy is recommended. The pelvic wound is manually débrided 
and then irrigated daily with a high-pressure pulsatile irrigation 
system until granulation tissue covers the wound. The wound is 
then left to heal by secondary intention with a wound vacuum-
assisted wound closure (VAC) device.
Extremity Vascular Injuries, Fractures, and 
Compartment Syndromes
Patients with injured extremities often require a multidisci-
plinary approach with involvement of trauma, orthopedic, and 
plastic surgeons to address vascular injuries, fractures, soft tis-
sue injuries, and compartment syndromes. Immediate stabili-
zation of fractures or unstable joints is done in the ED using 
Hare traction, knee immobilizers, or plaster splints. In patients 
with open fractures the wound should be covered with povidone 
iodine (Betadine)-soaked gauze and antibiotics administered. 
Options for fracture fixation include external fixation or open 
reduction and internal fixation with plates or intramedullary 
nails. Vascular injuries, either isolated or in combination with 
fractures, require emergent repair. Common combined injuries 
include clavicle/first rib fractures and subclavian artery injuries, 
dislocated shoulder/proximal humeral fractures and axillary 
artery injuries, supracondylar fractures/elbow dislocations and 
brachial artery injuries, femur fracture and superficial femoral 
artery injuries, and knee dislocation and popliteal vessel injuries. 
On-table angiography in the OR facilitates rapid intervention 
and is warranted in patients with evidence of limb threat at ED 
arrival. Arterial access for on-table lower extremity angiography 
can be obtained percutaneously at the femoral vessels with a 
standard arterial catheter, via femoral vessel exposure and direct 
cannulation, or with superficial femoral artery (SFA) exposure 
just above the medial knee. Controversy exists regarding which 
should be done first, fracture fixation or arterial repair. The 
authors prefer placement of temporary intravascular shunts first 
with arterial occlusions to minimize ischemia during fracture 
treatment, with definitive vascular repair following. Rarely, 
immediate amputation may be considered due to the severity of 
orthopedic and neurovascular injuries. This is particularly true 
if primary nerve transection is present in addition to fracture and 
arterial injury.126 Collaborative decision making by the trauma, 
orthopedic, and plastic/reconstructive team is essential.
Operative intervention for vascular injuries should fol-
low standard principles of repair (see “Vascular Repair Tech-
niques”). For subclavian or axillary artery repairs, 6-mm PTFE 
Figure 7-70.  A. Pelvic packing is performed through a 6- to 8-cm midline incision made from the pubic symphysis cephalad, with division 
of the midline fascia. B. The pelvic hematoma often dissects the preperitoneal and paravesical space down to the presacral region, which 
facilitates packing; alternatively, blunt digital dissection opens the preperitoneal space for packing. C. Three standard surgical laparotomy 
pads are placed on each side of the bladder, deep within the preperitoneal space; the fascia is closed with an O polydioxanone monofilament 
suture and the skin with staples.
215
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
graft and RSVG are used. Because associated injuries of the 
brachial plexus are common, a thorough neurologic examina-
tion of the extremity is mandated before operative interven-
tion. Operative approach for a brachial artery injury is via a 
medial upper extremity longitudinal incision; proximal control 
may be obtained at the axillary artery, and an S-shaped exten-
sion through the antecubital fossa provides access to the dis-
tal brachial artery. The injured vessel segment is excised, and 
an end-to-end interposition RSVG graft is performed. Upper 
extremity fasciotomy is rarely required unless the patient 
manifests preoperative neurologic changes or diminished pulse 
upon revascularization, or the time to operative intervention is 
extended. For SFA injuries, external fixation of the femur typi-
cally is performed, followed by end-to-end RSVG of the injured 
SFA segment. Close monitoring for calf compartment syndrome 
is mandatory. Preferred access to the popliteal space for an acute 
injury is the medial one-incision approach with detachment of 
the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and gracilis muscles 
(Fig. 7-71). Another option is a medial approach with two inci-
sions using a longer RSVG, but this requires interval ligation 
of the popliteal artery and geniculate branches. Rarely, with 
open wounds a straight posterior approach with an S-shaped 
incision can be used. If the patient has an associated popliteal 
vein injury, this should be repaired first with a PTFE interposi-
tion graft while the artery is shunted. For an isolated popliteal 
artery injury, RSVG is performed with an end-to-end anastomosis. 
Compartment syndrome is common, and presumptive four-
compartment fasciotomies are warranted in patients with com-
bined arterial and venous injury. Once the vessel is repaired and 
restoration of arterial flow documented, completion angiogra-
phy should be done in the OR if there is no palpable distal pulse. 
Vasoparalysis with verapamil, nitroglycerin, and papaverine 
may be used to treat vasoconstriction (Table 7-11).
Compartment syndromes, which can occur anywhere in 
the extremities, involve an acute increase in pressure inside a 
closed space, which impairs blood flow to the structures within. 
Causes of compartment syndrome include arterial hemorrhage 
into a compartment, venous ligation or thrombosis, crush inju-
ries, and reperfusion injury. In conscious patients, pain is the 
prominent symptom, and active or passive motion of muscles in 
the involved compartment increases the pain. Paresthesias may 
also be described. In the lower extremity, numbness between 
the first and second toes is the hallmark of early compartment 
syndrome in the exquisitely sensitive anterior compartment and 
its enveloped deep peroneal nerve. Progression to paralysis can 
occur, and loss of pulses is a late sign. In comatose or obtunded 
patients, the diagnosis is more difficult to secure. In patients 
with a compatible history and a tense extremity, compartment 
pressures should be measured with a hand-held Stryker device. 
Fasciotomy is indicated in patients with a gradient of <35 mm 
Hg (gradient = diastolic pressure – compartment pressure), 
ischemic periods of >6 hours, or combined arterial and venous 
injuries. The lower extremity is most frequently involved, and 
compartment release is performed using a two-incision, four-
compartment fasciotomy (Fig. 7-72). Of note, the soleus muscle 
must be detached from the tibia to decompress the deep flexor 
compartment.
SURGICAL INTENSIVE CARE MANAGEMENT
Postinjury Resuscitation
ICU management of the trauma patient, either with direct 
admission from the ED or after emergent operative intervention, 
is considered in distinct phases, because there are differing goals 
Table 7-11 
Arterial vasospasm treatment guideline
Step 1:  Intra-arterial alteplase (tissue plasminogen activator) 
  5 mg/20 mL bolus
If spasm continues, proceed to step 2.
Step 2:  Intra-arterial nitroglycerin 200 μg/20 mL bolus
Repeat same dose once as needed.
If spasm continues, proceed to step 3.
Step 3:  Inter-arterial verapamil 10 mg/10 mL bolus
If spasm continues, proceed to step 4.
Step 4:  Inter-arterial papaverine drip 60 mg/50 mL given 
  over 15 min
Figure 7-71.  A. The popliteal space is commonly accessed using a single medial incision (the detached semitendinosus, semimembranosus, 
and gracilis muscles are identified by different suture types). B. Alternatively, a medial approach with two incisions may be used. Insertion 
of a Pruitt-Inahara shunt (arrow) provides temporary restoration of blood flow, which prevents ischemia during fracture treatment.
216
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
and priorities. The period of acute resuscitation, typically lasting 
for the first 12 to 24 hours after injury, combines several key 
principles: optimizing tissue perfusion, ensuring normothermia, 
and restoring coagulation. There are a multitude of management 
algorithms aimed at accomplishing these goals, the majority of 
which involve goal-directed resuscitation with initial volume 
loading to attain adequate preload, followed by judicious use 
of inotropic agents or vasopressors.127 Although the optimal 
hemoglobin level remains debated, during shock resuscitation a 
hemoglobin level of >10 g/dL is generally accepted to optimize 
hemostasis and ensure adequate oxygen delivery. After the first 
24 hours of resuscitation, a more judicious transfusion trigger 
of a hemoglobin level of <7 g/dL in the euvolemic patient limits 
the adverse inflammatory effects of stored RBCs. The resuscita-
tion of the severely injured trauma patient may require a con-
siderable amount of crystalloid resuscitation, but recent trends 
have focused on limiting crystalloid loading. Although early 
colloid administration is appealing, evidence to date does not 
support this concept. In fact, optimizing crystalloid administra-
Figure 7-72.  A. The anterior and 
lateral compartments are approached 
from a lateral incision, with identi-
fication of the fascial raphe between 
the two compartments. Care must be 
taken to avoid the superficial pero-
neal nerve running along the raphe. 
B. To decompress the deep flexor 
compartment, which contains the tib-
ial nerve and two of the three arteries 
to the foot, the soleus muscle must be 
detached from the tibia.
tion is a challenging aspect of early care (i.e., balancing cardiac 
performance against generation of an abdominal compartment 
syndrome and generalized tissue edema).
Invasive monitoring with pulmonary artery catheters 
is controversial but may be a necessary adjunct in occasional 
patients with multiple injuries who require advanced inotropic 
support. Not only do such devices allow minute-to-minute mon-
itoring of the patient, but the added information on the patient’s 
volume status, cardiac function, peripheral vascular tone, and 
metabolic response to injury permits appropriate therapeutic 
intervention. With added information on the patient’s cardiac 
function, cardiac indices and oxygen delivery become important 
variables in the ongoing ICU management. Resuscitation to val-
ues of >500 mL/min per square meter for the oxygen delivery 
index and >3.8 L/min per square meter for the cardiac index are 
the goals.133 Pulmonary artery catheters also enable the physi-
cian to monitor response to vasoactive agents. Although norepi-
nephrine is the agent of choice for patients with low systemic 
vascular resistance who are unable to maintain a mean arterial 
217
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Table 7-12 
Abdominal compartment syndrome grading system
Bladder Pressure
Grade
mmHg
cm H2O
I
10–15
13–20
II
16–25
21–35
III
26–35
36–47
IV
>35
>48
pressure of >60 mm Hg, patients may have an element of myo-
cardial dysfunction requiring inotropic support. The role of rela-
tive adrenal insufficiency is another controversial area.
Optimal early resuscitation is mandatory and determines 
when the patient can undergo definitive diagnosis as well as 
when the patient can be returned to the OR after initial damage 
control surgery. Specific goals of resuscitation before repeated 
“semielective” transport include a core temperature of >35°C 
(95°F), base deficit of <6 mmol/L, and normal coagulation indi-
ces. Although correction of metabolic acidosis is desirable, how 
quickly this should be accomplished requires careful consider-
ation. Adverse sequelae of excessive crystalloid resuscitation 
include increased intracranial pressure, worsening pulmonary 
edema, and intra-abdominal visceral and retroperitoneal edema 
resulting in secondary abdominal compartment syndrome. 
Therefore, it should be the overall trend of the resuscitation 
rather than a rapid reduction of the base deficit that is the goal. 
The goal is to normalize lactate within 24 hours.
In general, wounds sustained from trauma should be 
examined daily for progression of healing and signs of infection. 
Complex soft tissue wounds of the abdomen, such as deglov-
ing injuries after blunt trauma (termed Morel-Lavallee lesions), 
shotgun wounds, and other destructive blast injuries, are par-
ticularly difficult to manage. Following initial débridement of 
devitalized tissue, wound care includes wet-to-dry dressing 
changes twice daily or application of a VAC device. Repeated 
operative débridement may be necessary, and early involvement 
of the reconstructive surgery service for possible flap cover-
age is advised. Midline laparotomy wounds are inspected 48 hours 
postoperatively by removing the sterile surgical dressing. If an 
ileostomy or colostomy is required, one should inspect it daily 
to ensure that it is viable. If the patient develops high-grade 
fever, the wound should be inspected sooner to exclude an 
early necrotizing infection. If a wound infection is identified—
as evidenced by erythema, pain along the wound, or purulent 
drainage—the wound should be widely opened by removing 
skin staples. After ensuring that the midline fascia is intact with 
digital palpation, the wound is initially managed with wet-to-dry 
dressing changes. The most common intra-abdominal complica-
tions are anastomotic failure and abscess. The choice between 
percutaneous and operative therapy is based on the location, 
timing, and extent of the collection.
Abdominal Compartment Syndrome
The abdominal compartment syndrome is classified as patho-
logic intra-abdominal hypertension due to intra-abdominal 
injury (primary) or splanchnic reperfusion after massive resus-
citation (secondary). Secondary abdominal compart-
ment syndrome may result from any condition requiring 
extensive crystalloid resuscitation, including extremity trauma, 
chest trauma, or even postinjury sepsis. The sources of increased 
intra-abdominal pressure include gut edema, ascites, bleeding, 
and packs. A diagnosis of intra-abdominal hypertension can-
not reliably be made by physical examination; therefore, it is 
obtained by measuring the intraperitoneal pressure. The most 
common technique is to measure the patient’s bladder pressure. 
Fifty milliliters of saline is instilled into the bladder via the aspi-
ration port of the Foley catheter with the drainage tube clamped, 
and a three-way stopcock and water manometer is placed at the 
level of the pubic symphysis. Bladder pressure is then measured 
on the manometer in centimeters of water (Table 7-12) and cor-
related with the physiologic impact of abdominal compartment 
syndrome. Conditions in which the bladder pressure is unreli-
able include bladder rupture, external compression from pelvic 
packing, neurogenic bladder, and adhesive disease.
Increased abdominal pressure affects multiple organ sys-
tems (Fig. 7-73). Abdominal compartment syndrome, as noted 
earlier, is defined as intra-abdominal hypertension sufficient to 
produce physiologic deterioration and frequently manifests via 
such end-organ sequelae as decreased urine output, increased 
pulmonary inspiratory pressures, decreased cardiac preload, and 
increased cardiac afterload. Because any of these clinical symp-
toms of abdominal compartment syndrome may be attributed 
to the primary injury, a heightened awareness of this syndrome 
must be maintained. Organ failure can occur over a wide range 
of recorded bladder pressures. Generally, no specific bladder 
pressure prompts therapeutic intervention, except when the 
pressure is >35 mm Hg. Rather, emergent decompression is 
carried out when intra-abdominal hypertension reaches a level 
at which end-organ dysfunction occurs. Mortality is directly 
affected by the timing of decompression, with 60% mortal-
ity in patients undergoing presumptive decompression, 70% 
mortality in patients with a delay in decompression, and nearly 
uniform mortality in those not undergoing decompression. Usu-
ally decompression is performed operatively, either in the ICU 
if the patient is hemodynamically unstable or in the OR. ICU 
bedside laparotomy is easily accomplished, avoids transport of 
hemodynamically compromised patients, and requires minimal 
equipment (e.g., scalpel, suction device, cautery, and dressings 
for temporary abdominal closure). In patients with significant 
intra-abdominal fluid as the primary component of abdominal 
compartment syndrome, rather than bowel or retroperitoneal 
edema, decompression can be accomplished effectively via a 
percutaneous drain. This method is particularly applicable for 
nonoperative management of major liver injuries. These patients 
are identified by bedside ultrasound, and the morbidity of a lap-
arotomy is avoided. When operative decompression is required 
with egress of the abdominal contents, temporary coverage is 
obtained using a subfascial 45 × 60 cm sterile drape and Ioban 
application (see Fig. 7-50).
The performance of damage control surgery and recog-
nition of abdominal compartment syndrome have dramatically 
improved patient survival, but at the cost of an open abdomen. 
Several management points deserve attention. Despite having a 
widely open abdomen, patients can develop recurrent abdomi-
nal compartment syndrome, which increases their morbidity 
and mortality; therefore, bladder pressure should be moni-
tored every 4 hours, with significant increases in pressures 
alerting the clinician to the possible need for repeat operative 
10
218
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
decompression. Patients with an open abdomen lose between 
500 and 2500 mL per day of abdominal effluent. Appropriate 
volume compensation for this albumin-rich fluid remains con-
troversial, with regard to both the amount administered (replace-
ment based on clinical indices vs. routine ½ mL replacement for 
every milliliter lost) as well as the type of replacement (crystal-
loid vs. colloid).
Following resuscitation and management of specific inju-
ries, the goal of the operative team is to close the abdomen as 
quickly as possible. Multiple techniques have been introduced 
to obtain fascial closure of the open abdomen to minimize mor-
bidity and cost of care. Historically, for patients who could not 
be closed at repeat operation, approximation of the fascia with 
mesh (prosthetic or biologic) was used, with planned reopera-
tion. Another option was split-thickness skin grafts applied 
directly to the exposed bowel for coverage; removal of the skin 
grafts was planned 9 to 12 months after the initial surgery, with 
definitive repair of the hernia by component separation. How-
ever, delayed abdominal wall reconstruction was resource inva-
sive, with considerable patient morbidity. The advent of VAC 
technology has revolutionized fascial closure. The authors cur-
rently use a sequential closure technique with the wound VAC 
device that is based on constant fascial tension and return to the 
OR every 48 hours until closure is complete (Fig. 7-74). 128 The 
authors’ success rate with this approach exceeds 95%. This is 
important because among patients not attaining fascial closure, 
20% suffer GI tract complications that prolong their hospital 
course. These include intra-abdominal abscess, enteric fistula, 
and bowel perforations (Fig. 7-75). Management requires fre-
quent operative or percutaneous drainage of abscesses, control 
of fistulas, and prolonged nutritional support.
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Pregnant Patients
During pregnancy, 7% of women are injured. Motor vehicle col-
lisions and falls are the leading causes of injury, accounting for 
70% of cases. Fetal death after trauma most frequently occurs 
after motor vehicle collisions, but only 11% of fetal deaths are 
due to the death of the mother; therefore, early trauma resusci-
tation and management is directed not only at the mother but 
also at the fetus. Domestic violence is also common, affecting 
between 10% and 30% of pregnant women and resulting in fetal 
mortality of 5%.
Pregnancy results in physiologic changes that may impact 
postinjury evaluation (Table 7-13). Heart rate increases by 10 
to 15 beats per minute during the first trimester and remains 
elevated until delivery. Blood pressure diminishes during the 
first two trimesters due to a decrease in systemic vascular resis-
tance and rises again slightly during the third trimester (mean 
values: first = 105/60, second = 102/55, third = 108/67). Intra-
vascular volume is increased by up to 8 L, which results in a 
relative anemia but also a relative hypervolemia. Consequently 
a pregnant woman may lose 35% of her blood volume before 
exhibiting signs of shock. Pregnant patients have an increase in 
tidal volume and minute ventilation but a decreased functional 
residual capacity; this results in a diminished Pco2 and respi-
ratory alkalosis. Also, pregnant patients may desaturate more 
rapidly, particularly in the supine position and during intuba-
tion. Supplemental oxygen is always warranted in the trauma 
patient but is particularly critical in the injured pregnant patient, 
because the oxygen dissociation curve is shifted to the left for 
the fetus compared to the mother (i.e., small changes in mater-
nal oxygenation result in larger changes for the fetus because 
the fetus is operating in the steep portions of the dissociation 
curve). Anatomic changes contribute to these pulmonary func-
tional alterations and are relevant in terms of procedures. With 
the gravid uterus enlarged, DPL should be performed in a supra-
umbilical site with the catheter directed cephalad. In addition, 
the upward pressure on the diaphragm calls for caution when 
placing a thoracostomy tube; standard positioning may result 
in an intra-abdominal location or perforation of the diaphragm.
Other physiologic changes during pregnancy affect the GI, 
renal, and hematologic systems. The lower esophageal sphincter 
has decreased competency, which increases the risk for aspira-
tion. Liver function test values increase, with the alkaline phos-
phatase level nearly doubling. The high levels of progesterone 
impair gallbladder contractions, which results in bile stasis and 
an increased incidence of gallstone formation; this may not 
Figure 7-73.  Abdominal compartment 
syndrome is defined by the end organ 
sequelae of intra-abdominal hypertension. 
CO = cardiac output; CVP = central venous 
pressure; ICP = intracranial pressure; PA = 
pulmonary artery; SV = stroke volume; 
SVR = systemic vascular resistance; UOP = 
urine output; VEDV = ventricular end dia-
stolic volume.
↓ Renal blood flow
↓ UOP
Hypoxemia
 ↑ Airway pressures
 ↓ Compliance
 ↑ PA pressures
 ↑ CVP readings
↓ CO
↓ VEDV
↓ SV
↑ SVR
↑ ICP
Splanchnic
ischemia
Extremity
ischemia
Increased abdominal pressure
Intrathoracic pressure
↑
Venous return
↓
Compression of kidneys
219
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
Figure 7-74.  The authors’ sequential closure technique for the open abdomen. A. Multiple white sponges (solid arrow), stapled together, 
are placed on top of the bowel underneath the fascia. Interrupted No. 1 polydioxanone sutures are placed approximately 5 cm apart (dashed 
arrow), which puts the fascia under moderate tension over the white sponge. B. After the sticky clear plastic vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) 
dressing is placed over the white sponges and adjacent 5 cm of skin, the central portion is removed by cutting along the wound edges. C and 
D. Black VAC sponges are placed on top of the white sponges and plastic-protected skin with standard occlusive dressing and suction. 
E. On return to the operating room (OR) 48 hours later, fascial sutures are placed from both the superior and inferior directions until tension 
precludes further closure; skin is closed over the fascial closure with skin staples. F. White sponges (fewer in number) are again applied and 
fascial retention sutures are placed with planned return to the OR in 48 hours.
220
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
affect the trauma bay evaluation but becomes important in a pro-
longed ICU stay. Plasma albumin level decreases from a normal 
of around 4.3 g/dL to an average of 3.0 g/dL. Renal blood flow 
increases by 30% during pregnancy, which causes a decrease in 
serum level of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. The uterus 
may also compress the ureters and bladder, causing hydrone-
phrosis and hydroureter. Finally, as noted earlier there is a rela-
tive anemia during pregnancy, but a hemoglobin level of <11 g/dL 
is considered abnormal. Additional hematologic changes 
include a moderate leukocytosis (up to 20,000 mm3) and a rela-
tive hypercoagulable state due to increased levels of factors VII, 
VIII, IX, X, and XII and decreased fibrinolytic activity.
During evaluation in the ED, the primary and secondary 
surveys commence, with mindfulness that the mother always 
receives priority while conditions are still optimized for the 
fetus.129 This management includes provision of supplemen-
tal oxygen (to prevent maternal and fetal hypoxia), aggressive 
fluid resuscitation (the hypervolemia of pregnancy may mask 
signs of shock), and placement of the patient in the left lateral 
decubitus position (or tilting of the backboard to the left) to 
avoid caval compression. Assessment of the fetal heart rate is 
the most valuable information regarding fetal viability. Fetal 
monitoring should be performed with a cardiotocographic 
device that measures both contractions and fetal heart tones 
(FHTs). Because change in heart rate is the primary response 
of the fetus to hypoxia or hypotension, anything above an FHT 
of 160 is a concern, whereas bradycardia (FHT of <120) is 
considered fetal distress. Ideally, if possible, a member of the 
obstetrics team should be present during initial evaluation to 
perform a pelvic examination using a sterile speculum. Vaginal 
bleeding can signal early cervical dilation and labor, abruptio 
placentae, or placenta previa. Amniotic sac rupture can result 
in prolapse of the umbilical cord with fetal compromise. Strong 
contractions are associated with true labor and should prompt 
consideration of delivery and resuscitation of the neonate. 
Focused prenatal history taking should elicit a history of preg-
nancy-induced hypertension, gestational diabetes, congenital 
Figure 7-75.  Complications after split-thickness skin graft closure 
of the abdomen include enterocutaneous fistulas (intubated here 
with a red rubber catheter) (A; arrow) and rupture of the graft with 
exposure of the bowel mucosa (B).
Table 7-13 
Physiologic effects of pregnancy
Cardiovascular
  Increase in heart rate by 10–15 bpm
  Decreased systemic vascular resistance resulting in:
  (a) Increased intravascular volume
  (b) Decreased blood pressure during the first two 
trimesters
Pulmonary
  Elevated diaphragm
  Increased tidal volume
  Increased minute ventilation
  Decreased functional residual capacity
Hematopoietic
  Relative anemia
  Leukocytosis
  Hypercoagulability
  (a) Increased levels of factors VII, VIII, IX, X, XII
  (b) Decreased fibrinolytic activity
Other
  Decreased competency of lower esophageal sphincter
  Increased enzyme levels on liver function tests
  Impaired gallbladder contractions
  Decreased plasma albumin level
  Decreased blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels
  Hydronephrosis and hydroureter
221
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
heart disease, preterm labor, or placental abnormalities. Ask-
ing the patient when the baby first moved and if she is currently 
experiencing movement of the fetus is important. Determin-
ing fetal age is key for considerations of viability. Gestational 
age may be estimated by noting fundal height, with the fundus 
approximating the umbilicus at 20 weeks and the costal margin 
at 40 weeks. Discrepancy in dates and size may be due to uter-
ine rupture or hemorrhage.
Initial evaluation for abdominopelvic trauma in pregnant 
patients should proceed in the standard manner. Ultrasound 
(FAST) of the abdomen should evaluate the four windows 
(pericardial, right and left upper quadrant, and bladder) and 
additionally assess FHTs, fetal movement, and sufficiency of 
amniotic fluid. DPL can be performed in pregnant women via 
a supraumbilical, open technique. Trauma radiography of preg-
nant patients presents a conundrum. Radiation damage has three 
distinct phases of damage and effect: preimplantation, during 
the period of organogenesis from 3 to 16 weeks, and after 16 
weeks. Generally, it is accepted that “safe” doses of radiation 
from radiography are <5 rad.130 A chest radiograph results in a 
dose of 0.07 mrad; CT scan of the chest, <1 rad; and CT scan of 
the abdomen, 3.5 rad. It is important, therefore, to limit radio-
graphs to those that are essential and to shield the pelvis with 
a lead apron when possible. If clinically warranted, however, a 
radiograph should be obtained.
The vast majority of injuries are treated similarly whether 
the patient is pregnant or not. Following standard protocols 
for nonoperative management of blunt trauma avoids the risks 
associated with general anesthesia. A particular challenge in the 
pregnant trauma patient is a major pelvic fracture. Because uter-
ine and retroperitoneal veins may dilate to 60 times their origi-
nal size, hemorrhage from these vessels may be torrential. Fetal 
loss may be related to both maternal shock and direct injury 
to the uterus or fetal head. Penetrating injuries in this patient 
population also carry a high risk. The gravid uterus is a large 
target, and any penetrating injury to the abdomen may result in 
fetal injury depending on trajectory and uterine size. Gunshot 
wounds to the abdomen are associated with a 70% injury rate to 
the uterus and 35% mortality rate of the fetus. If the bullet tra-
verses the uterus and the fetus is viable, cesarean section should 
be performed. On the other hand, stab wounds do not often 
penetrate the thick wall of the uterus. Indications for emergent 
cesarean section include: (a) severe maternal shock or impend-
ing death (if the fetus is delivered within 5 minutes, survival is 
estimated at 70%), (b) uterine injury or significant fetal distress 
(anticipated survival rates of >70% if FHTs are present and fetal 
gestational age is >28 weeks).131
Any patient with a viable pregnancy should be monitored 
after trauma, with the length of monitoring determined by the 
injury mechanism and patient physiology. Patients who are 
symptomatic, defined by the presence of uterine irritability or 
contractions, abdominal tenderness, vaginal bleeding, or blood 
pressure instability, should be monitored in the hospital for at 
least 24 hours. In addition, patients at high risk for fetal loss 
(those experiencing vehicle ejection or involved in motorcycle 
or pedestrian collisions and those with maternal tachycardia, 
Injury Severity Score of >9, gestational period of >35 weeks, 
or history of prior assault) also warrant careful monitoring.132 
Patients without these risk factors who are asymptomatic can be 
monitored for 6 hours in the ED and sent home if no problems 
develop. They should be counseled regarding warning signs that 
mandate prompt return to the ED.
Geriatric Patients
Elderly trauma patients (>65 years of age) are hospitalized twice 
as often as those in any other age group, and this population 
accounts for one quarter of all trauma admissions. Although the 
physiology of aging separates older trauma patients from the 
younger generation (Table 7-14), treatment must remain indi-
vidualized (some octogenarians look and physiologically act 
50 years old, whereas others appear closer to 100 years). No 
chronologic age is associated with a higher morbidity or mor-
tality, but a patient’s comorbidities do impact the individual’s 
postinjury course and outcome. For example, recognition that a 
patient is taking beta blockers affects the physician’s evaluation 
of vital signs in the ED and impacts treatment course in the ICU. 
Early monitoring of arterial blood gas values will identify occult 
shock. A base deficit of >6 mmol/L is associated with a twofold 
higher risk of mortality in patients over the age of 55 than in 
younger patients (67% vs. 30%).133
Although the published literature on geriatric traumatic 
brain injury is relatively sparse and uncontrolled with regard to 
management, some interesting points are noted. First, outcomes 
are worse in this age group than in their younger counterparts. 
Based on data from the Traumatic Coma Databank, mortality 
in patients with severe head injury more than doubles after the 
age of 55. Moreover, 25% of patients with a normal GCS score 
of 15 had intracranial bleeding, with an associated mortality of 
50%.123 Just as there is no absolute age that predicts outcome, 
admission GCS score is a poor predictor of individual outcome. 
Table 7-14 
Physiologic effects of aging
Cardiovascular
Increased prevalence of heart disease
Fatty deposition in the myocardium, resulting in:
(a) Progressive stiffening and loss of elasticity
(b) Diminished stroke volume, systolic contraction, and 
diastolic relaxation
Decrease in cardiac output of 0.5% per year
Atherosclerotic disease that limits cardiac response to stress
Increased risk of coronary ischemia
Thickening and calcification of the cardiac valves, which 
  results in valvular incompetence
Pulmonary
Loss of compliance
Progressive loss of alveolar size and surface area
Air trapping and atelectasis
Intracranial
Loss of cerebral volume, resulting in:
(a) Increased risk of tearing of bridging veins with smaller 
injuries
(b) Accumulation of a significant amount of blood before 
symptoms occur
Senescence of the senses
Other
Decline in creatinine clearance by 80%–90%
Osteoporosis, which causes a greater susceptibility to 
  fractures
222
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Therefore, the majority of trauma centers advocate an initial 
aggressive approach with re-evaluation at the 72-hour mark to 
determine subsequent care.
One of the most common sequelae of blunt thoracic 
trauma is rib fractures. In the aging population, perhaps due to 
osteoporosis, less force is required to cause a fracture. In fact, in 
one study, 50% of patients >65 years old sustained rib fractures 
from a fall of <6 ft, compared with only 1% of patients <65 
years of age. Concurrent pulmonary contusion is noted in up to 
35% of patients, and pneumonia complicates the injuries in 10% 
to 30% of patients with rib fractures, not surprisingly leading to 
longer ICU stays.135,136 Additionally, mortality increases linearly 
with the number of rib fractures. Patients who sustain more than 
six rib fractures have pulmonary morbidity rates of >50% and 
overall mortality rates of >20%.
Chronologic age is not the best predictor of outcome, but 
the presence of pre-existing conditions, which affect a patient’s 
physiologic age, is associated with increased mortality rates. 
Injury Severity Score is probably the best overall predictor of 
patient outcome in the elderly; however, for any given individual 
its sensitivity may not be precise, and there is a time delay in 
obtaining sufficient information to calculate the final score. In 
addition to pre-existing conditions and severity of injury, the 
occurrence of complications compounds the risk for mortality.
Pediatric Patients
Twenty million children, or almost one in four children, are 
injured each year, with an associated cost of treating the injured 
child of $16 billion per year. Injury is the leading cause of death 
among children over the age of 1 year, with 15,000 to 25,000 
pediatric deaths per year. Disability after traumatic injury is 
more devastating, with rates 3 to 10 times that of the death rate. 
Pediatric trauma involves different mechanisms, different con-
stellations of injury, and the potential for long-term problems 
related to growth and development. As with adult trauma, over 
85% of pediatric trauma has a blunt mechanism, with boys 
injured twice as often as girls.137 Falls are the most common 
cause of injury in infants and toddlers. In children, bicycle 
mishaps are the most common cause of severe injury, whereas 
motor vehicle-related injury predominates in adolescence. 
Although unintentional injuries are by far the most common 
type of injuries in childhood, the number of intentional injuries, 
such as firearm-related injury and child abuse, is increasing.
ED preparation for the pediatric trauma patient includes 
assembling age-appropriate equipment (e.g., intubation equip-
ment; IV catheters, including intraosseous needles and 4F single-
lumen lines), laying out the Broselow Pediatric Emergency 
Tape (which allows effective approximation of the patient’s 
weight, medication doses, size of endotracheal tube, and chest 
tube size), and turning on heat lamps. Upon the pediatric 
patient’s arrival, the basic tenets of the ABCs apply, with some 
caveats. In children, the airway is smaller and more cephalad in 
position compared with that of adults, and in children younger 
than 10 years, the larynx is funnel shaped rather than cylindrical 
as in adults. Additionally, the child’s tongue is much larger in 
relation to the oropharynx. Therefore, a small amount of edema 
or obstruction can significantly reduce the diameter of the air-
way (thus increasing the work of breathing), and the tongue 
may posteriorly obstruct the airway, causing intubation to be 
difficult. During intubation, a Miller (straight) blade rather than 
a Macintosh (curved) blade may be more effective due to the 
acute angle of the cephalad, funnel-shaped larynx. Administration 
of atropine before rapid-sequence intubation will prevent bra-
dycardia. Adequate ventilation is critical, because oxygen con-
sumption in infants and young children is twice that in adults; 
onset of hypoxemia, followed by cardiac arrest, may be precipi-
tous. Because gastric distension can inhibit adequate ventila-
tion, placement of a nasogastric tube may facilitate effective 
gas exchange. Approximately one third of preventable deaths 
in children are related to airway management; therefore, if 
airway control cannot be obtained using a standard endotra-
cheal method, surgical establishment of an airway should be 
considered. In children older than 11 years, standard cricothy-
roidotomy is performed. Due to the increased incidence of sub-
glottic stenosis in younger patients, needle cricothyroidotomy 
with either a 14- or 16-gauge catheter is advocated, although it 
is rarely used. Alternatively, tracheostomy may be performed. 
In children, the standard physiologic response to hypovole-
mia is peripheral vasoconstriction and reflex tachycardia; this 
may mask significant hemorrhagic injury, because children 
can compensate for up to a 25% loss of circulating blood vol-
ume with minimal external signs. “Normal” values for vital 
signs should not necessarily make one feel more secure about 
the child’s volume status. Volume restoration is based on the 
child’s weight; two to three boluses of 20 mL/kg of crystalloid 
is appropriate.
After initial evaluation based on the trauma ABCs, iden-
tification and management of specific injuries proceeds. Acute 
traumatic brain injury is the most common cause of death and 
disability in any pediatric age group. Although falls are the most 
common mechanism overall, severe brain injury most often is 
due to child abuse (in children <2 years) or motor vehicle col-
lisions (in those >2 years). Head CT should be performed to 
determine intracranial pathology, followed by skull radiogra-
phy to diagnose skull fractures. As in adults, CPP is monitored, 
and appropriate resuscitation is critical to prevent the second-
ary insults of hypoxemia and hypovolemia. Although some data 
indicate that the pediatric brain recovers from traumatic injury 
better than the adult brain, this advantage may be eliminated if 
hypotension is allowed to occur.
As is true in adults, the vast majority of thoracic trauma 
is also blunt. However, because a child’s skeleton is not com-
pletely calcified, it is more pliable. Significant internal organ 
damage may occur without overlying bony fractures. For exam-
ple, adult patients with significant chest trauma have a 70% 
incidence of rib fractures, whereas only 40% of children with 
significant chest trauma do. Pneumothorax is treated similarly 
in the pediatric population; patients who are asymptomatic with 
a pneumothorax of <15% are admitted for observation, whereas 
those who have a pneumothorax of >15% or who require posi-
tive pressure ventilation undergo tube decompression. Presence 
of a hemothorax in this age group may be particularly prob-
lematic, because the child’s chest may contain his or her entire 
blood volume. If the chest tube output is initially 20% of the 
patient’s blood volume (80 mL/kg) or is persistently >1 to 2 mL/
kg per hour, thoracotomy should be considered. Aortic injuries 
are rare in children, and tracheobronchial injuries are more ame-
nable to nonoperative management. Thoracic injuries are second 
only to brain injuries as the main cause of death according to 
the National Pediatric Trauma Registry; however, the overall 
mortality rate of 15% correlates with the levels in many adult 
studies.
The evaluation for abdominal trauma in the pediatric 
patient is similar to that in the adult. FAST is valid in the pediatric 
223
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
age group to detect intra-abdominal fluid.138 The mechanism 
of injury often correlates with specific injury patterns. A child 
sustaining a blow to the epigastrium (e.g., hitting the handle-
bars during a bike accident) should be evaluated for a duode-
nal hematoma and/or a pancreatic transection. After a motor 
vehicle collision in which the patient was wearing a passenger 
restraint, injuries comprising the “lap belt complex” or “seat 
belt syndrome” (i.e., abdominal wall contusion, small bowel 
perforation, flexion-distraction injury of the lumbar spine, dia-
phragm rupture, and occasionally abdominal aortic dissection) 
may exist. Nonoperative management of solid organ injuries, 
first used in children, is the current standard of care in the hemo-
dynamically stable patient. If the patient shows clinical deterio-
ration or hemodynamic lability, has a hollow viscus injury, or 
requires >40 mL/kg of packed RBCs, continued nonoperative 
management is not an option. Success rates of nonoperative 
management approach 95%, with an associated 10% to 23% 
transfusion rate. Blood transfusion rates, however, are signifi-
cantly lower in patients managed nonoperatively than in patients 
undergoing operation (13% vs. 44%).139
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
    1.	Minino AM, Heron MP, Murphy SL, et al. Deaths: final data 
for 2004. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 55, August 21, 2007; 55(19): 
1-120. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/
nvsr55/nvsr55_19.pdf [accessed October 29, 2012].
    2.	National Center for Injury Prevention and Control: CDC 
Injury Fact Book. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, November 2006. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/ncipc/fact_book/InjuryBook2006.pdf [accessed October 
29, 2012].
    3.	Esposito TJ and Brasel KJ. Epidemiology. Mattox KL, Moore 
EE, Feliciano DV (eds): Trauma, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2013.
    4.	Eastman AB. Wherever the dart lands: toward the ideal trauma 
system. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;211(2):153-168.
    5.	MacKenzie EJ, Rivara FP, Jurkovich GJ, et al. A national 
evaluation of the effect of trauma-center care on mortality. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354(4):366-378.
    6.	American College of Surgeons: Advanced Trauma Life Sup-
port, 9th ed. Chicago: American College of Surgeons, 2012.
    7.	Haut ER, Kalish BT, Efron DT, et al. Spine immobilization 
in penetrating trauma: more harm than good? J Trauma. 
2010;68(1):115-120.
    8.	Lustenberger T, Talving P, Lam L, et al. Unstable cervical 
spine fracture after penetrating neck injury: a rare entity in an 
analysis of 1,069 patients. J Trauma. 2011;70(4):870-872.
    9.	Sakles JC, Mosier JM, Chiu S, Keim SM. Tracheal intubation 
in the emergency department: a comparison of GlideScope 
video laryngoscopy to direct laryngoscopy in 822 intubations. 
J Emerg Med. 2012;42(4):400-405.
  10.	Inaba K, Ives C, McClure K, et al. Radiologic evaluation of 
alternative sites for needle decompression of tension pneumo-
thorax. Arch Surg. 2012;147(9):813-818.
  11.	Carretta A, Melloni G, Bandiera A, Negri G, Voci C, Zannini P. 
Conservative and surgical treatment of acute posttraumatic tra-
cheobronchial injuries. World J Surg. 2011;35(11):2568-2574.
  12.	Gómez-Caro A, Ausín P, Moradiellos FJ, et al. Role of con-
servative medical management of tracheobronchial injuries. J 
Trauma. 2006;61(6):1426-1434.
  13.	Demetriades D, Chan LS, Bhasin P, et al. Relative brady-
cardia in patients with traumatic hypotension. J Trauma. 
1998;45(3):534-539.
  14.	Voigt J, Waltzman M, Lottenberg L. Intraosseous vascular 
access for in-hospital emergency use: a systematic clinical 
review of the literature and analysis. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2012;28(2):185-199.
  15.	Weiser G, Hoffmann Y, Galbraith R, Shavit I. Current 
advances in intraosseous infusion - a systematic review. 
Resuscitation. 2012;83(1):20-26.
  16.	Callaham M. Pericardiocentesis in traumatic and nontraumatic 
cardiac tamponade. Ann Emerg Med. 1984;13(10):924-945.
  17.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Western trauma 
association critical decisions in Trauma: resuscitative thora-
cotomy. J Trauma, in press.
  18.	Moore EE, Knudson MM, Burlew CC, et al. WTA Study 
Group. Defining the limits of resuscitative emergency depart-
ment thoracotomy: a contemporary Western Trauma Associa-
tion perspective. J Trauma. 2011;70(2):334-339.
  19.	Ouellet JF, Roberts DJ, Tiruta C, et al. Admission base deficit 
and lactate levels in Canadian patients with blunt trauma: are 
they useful markers of mortality? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;72(6):1532-1535.
  20.	Callaway DW, Shapiro NI, Donnino MW, Baker C, Rosen 
CL. Serum lactate and base deficit as predictors of mortal-
ity in normotensive elderly blunt trauma patients. J Trauma 
2009;66(4):1040-1044.
  21.	Kliegel A, Losert H, Sterz F, et al. Serial lactate determina-
tions for prediction of outcome after cardiac arrest. Medicine 
(Baltimore) 2004;83(5):274-279.
  22.	Cohn SM, Nathens AB, Moore FA, et al. Tissue oxygen satu-
ration predicts the development of organ dysfunction during 
traumatic shock resuscitation. J Trauma. 2007;62:44-54.
  23.	Clancy K, Velopulos C, Bilaniuk JW, et al. Screening for blunt 
cardiac injury: An an Eastern Association for the Surgery of 
Trauma practice management guideline. J Trauma Acute Care 
Surg. 2012;73:S301-S306.
  24.	Velmahos GC, Karaiskakis M, Salim A, et al. Normal electro-
cardiography and serum troponin I levels preclude the pres-
ence of clinically significant blunt cardiac injury. J Trauma. 
2003;54(1):45-50.
  25.	Ferrada P, Murthi S, Anand RJ, Bochicchio GV, Scalea T. 
Transthoracic focused rapid echocardiographic examination: 
real-time evaluation of fluid status in critically ill trauma 
patients. J Trauma. 2011;70:56-62.
  26.	Arntfield RT, Millington SJ. Point of care cardiac ultrasound 
applications in the emergency department and intensive care 
unit–a review. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2012;8(2):98-108.
  27.	Dolich MO, McKenney MG, Varela JE, et al. 2,576 ultra-
sounds for blunt abdominal trauma. J Trauma. 2001; 50: 
108-112.
  28.	Sondeen JL, Coppes VG, Holcomb JB. Blood pressure at 
which rebleeding occurs after resuscitation in swine with aor-
tic injury. J Trauma. 2003; 54(Suppl):S110-S117.
  29.	Brain Trauma Foundation, American Association of Neu-
rological Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons: 
Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain 
injury. J Neurotrauma 24(Suppl):S1, 2007.
  30.	Ryb GE, Dischinger PC, Kufera JA, et al. Delta V, princi-
pal direction of force, and restraint use contributions to motor 
vehicle crash mortality. J Trauma. 2007;63:1000-1005.
  31.	Ivascu FA, Howells GA, Junn FS, Bair HA, Bendick PJ, 
Janczyk RJ. Predictors of mortality in trauma patients with 
intracranial hemorrhage on preinjury aspirin or clopidogrel. J 
Trauma. 2008;65(4):785-788.
  32.	Moore MM, Pasquale MD, Badellino M. Impact of age and 
anticoagulation: need for neurosurgical intervention in trauma 
patients with mild traumatic brain injury. J Trauma Acute 
Care Surg. 2012;73(1):126-130.
  33.	Diaz JJ Jr., Aulino JM, Collier B, et al. The early work-up for 
isolated ligamentous injury of the cervical spine: Does does 
224
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
computed tomography scan have a role? J Trauma. 2005; 
59:897-903.
  34.	Sekharan J, Dennis JW, Veldenz HC, et al. Continued experi-
ence with physical examination alone for evaluation and man-
agement of penetrating zone 2 neck injuries: Results results of 
145 cases. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32:483-489.
  35.	Inaba K, Branco BC, Menaker J, et al. Evaluation of multi-
detector computed tomography for penetrating neck injury: 
a prospective multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;72:576-583.
  36.	Fabian TC, Richardson JD, Croce MA, et al. Prospective 
study of blunt aortic injury: multicenter trial of the American 
Association for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Trauma. 
1997;42:374-380,
  37.	Dyer DS, Moore EE, Ilke DN, et al. Thoracic aortic injury: 
how predictive is mechanism and is chest computed tomog-
raphy a reliable screening tool? A prospective study of 1,561 
patients. J Trauma. 2000;48:673-682.
  38.	Siegel JH, Smith JA, Siddiqi SQ. Change in velocity and 
energy dissipation on impact in motor vehicle crashes as a 
function of the direction of crash: key factors in the production 
of thoracic aortic injuries, their pattern of associated injuries 
and patient survival. A Crash Injury Research Engineering 
Network (CIREN) study. J Trauma 2004;57(4):760-777.
  39.	Flowers JL, Graham SM, Ugarte MA, et al. Flexible endos-
copy for the diagnosis of esophageal trauma. J Trauma. 1996; 
40:261-265.
  40.	Cox CS Jr., Allen GS, Fischer RP, et al. Blunt vs. penetrat-
ing subclavian artery injury: Presentation, injury pattern, and 
outcome. J Trauma .1999;46:445-449.
  41.	Demetriades D, Hadjizacharia P, Constantinou C, et al. Selec-
tive nonoperative management of penetrating abdominal solid 
organ injuries. Ann Surg. 2006; 244:620-628.
  42.	Biffl WL, Cothren CC, Brasel KJ, et al. A prospective obser-
vational multicenter study of the optimal management of 
patients with anterior abdominal stab wounds. J Trauma. 
2008; 64:250.
  43.	Biffl WL, Kaups KL, Pham TN, et al. Validating the West-
ern Trauma Association algorithm for managing patients with 
anterior abdominal stab wounds: a Western Trauma Associa-
tion multicenter trial. J Trauma. 2011;71(6):1494-1502.
  44.	Ochsner MG, Knudson MM, Pachter HL, et al. Significance 
of minimal or no intraperitoneal fluid visible on CT scan asso-
ciated with blunt liver and splenic injuries: A a multicenter 
analysis. J Trauma. 2000; 49:505-510.
  45.	Yu J, Fulcher AS, Turner MA, Cockrell C, Halvorsen RA. 
Blunt bowel and mesenteric injury: MDCT diagnosis. Abdom 
Imaging. 2011;36(1):50-61.
  46.	LeBedis CA, Anderson SW, Soto JA. CT imaging of blunt 
traumatic bowel and mesenteric injuries. Radiol Clin North 
Am. 2012;50(1):123-136.
  47.	Fox N, Rajani RR, Bokhari F, et al. Evaluation and manage-
ment of penetrating lower extremity arterial trauma: an Eastern 
Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management 
guideline. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S315-S320.
  48.	Burch JM, Franciose RJ, Moore EE, et al. Single-layer con-
tinuous vs. two-layer interrupted intestinal anastomosis—a 
prospective randomized study. Ann Surg. 2000; 231:832-837.
  49.	Moore EE. Thomas G. Orr Memorial Lecture.Staged lapa-
rotomy for the hypothermia, acidosis, and coagulopathy syn-
drome. Am J Surg. 1996;172:405-410.
  50.	Gonzalez E, Pieracci FM, Moore EE, Kashuk JL. Coagulation 
abnormalities in the trauma patient: the role of point-of-care 
thromboelastography. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010;36:723-737.
  51.	Cohen MJ, Call M, Nelson M, et al. Critical role of activated 
protein C in early coagulopathy and later organ failure, infec-
tion and death in trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2012;255(2): 
379-385.
  52.	Cotton BA, Harvin JA, Kostousouv V, et al. Hyperfibri-
nolysis at admission is an uncommon but highly lethal event 
associated with shock and prehospital fluid administration. 
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2):365-370.
  53.	Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, ran-
domized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements 
in critical care. New Engl J Med. 1999; 340:409-417.
  54.	West MA, Shapiro MB, Nathens AB, et al. Inflammation and 
the host response to injury, a large-scale collaborative project: 
Patient-oriented research core-standard operating procedures 
for clinical care. IV. Guidelines for transfusion in the trauma 
patient. J Trauma. 2006; 61:436-439.
  55.	Toy P, Popovsky MA, Abraham E, et al. Transfusion-related 
acute lung injury: definition and review. Crit Care Med. 2005; 
33:721-726.
  56.	Moore FA, Moore EE, Sauaia A. Blood transfusion: an inde-
pendent risk factor for postinjury multiple organ failure. Arch 
Surg. 1997;132:620-624.
  57.	Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Sauaia A, et al. Postinjury life- threat-
ening coagulopathy: is 1:1 fresh frozen plasma: packed red 
blood cells the answer? J Trauma. 2008;65:261-270.
  58.	Davenport R, Curry N, Manson J, et al. Hemostatic effects of 
fresh frozen plasma may be maximal at red cell ratios of 1:2. 
J Trauma. 2011;70(1):90-95.
  59.	Stanworth SJ, Morris TP, Gaarder C, et al. Reappraising 
the concept of massive transfusion in trauma. Crit Care. 
2010;14(6):R239.
  60.	Dzik WH, Blajchman MA, Fergusson D, et al. Clinical review: 
Canadian National Advisory Committee on Blood and Blood 
Products–Massive transfusion consensus conference 2011: 
report of the panel. Crit Care. 2011;15(6):242.
  61.	Menaker J, Stein DM, Scalea TM. Incidence of early pulmo-
nary embolism after injury. J Trauma. 2007; 63:620-624.
  62.	Prager M, Polterauer P, Böhmig HJ, et al. Collagen vs. 
gelatin-coated Dacron vs. stretch polytetrafluoroethylene in 
abdominal aortic bifurcation graft surgery: results of a seven-
year prospective, randomized multicenter trial. Surgery. 
2001;130(3):408-414.
  63.	Mattox KL. Red River anthology. J Trauma. 1997;42(3): 
353-368.
  64.	Richardson JD, Bergamini TM, Spain DA, et al. Opera-
tive strategies for management of abdominal aortic gunshot 
wounds. Surgery. 1996;120(4):667-671.
  65.	Cosgriff N, Moore EE, Sauaia A, Kenny-Moynihan M, Burch 
JM, Galloway B. Predicting life-threatening coagulopathy in 
the massively transfused trauma patient: hypothermia and aci-
doses revisited. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):857-861.
  66.	Maegele M, Spinella PC, Schöchl H. The acute coagulopathy 
of trauma: mechanisms and tools for risk stratification. Shock. 
2012;38(5):450-458.
  67.	Nirula R, Millar D, Greene T, et al. Decompressive crani-
ectomy for medical management for refractory intracranial 
hypertension: An AAST-MITC propensity score analysis. J 
Trauma, in press.
  68.	Cooper DJ, Rosenfeld JV, Murray L, et al. DECRA Trial Inves-
tigators; Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society 
Clinical Trials Group. Decompressive craniectomy in diffuse 
traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(16):1493-1502.
  69.	Rinker C, McMurry F, Groeneweg V, et al. Emergency cra-
niotomy in a rural level III trauma center. J Trauma. 1998; 
44:984-989.
  70.	Hutchison JS, Ward RE, Lacroix J, et al. Hypothermia Pediat-
ric Head Injury Trial Investigators and the Canadian Critical 
Care Trials Group. Hypothermia therapy after traumatic brain 
injury in children. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(23):2447-2456.
  71.	Kramer C, Freeman WD, Hoffman-Snyder C, et al. Therapeu-
tic hypothermia for severe traumatic brain injury: a critically 
appraised topic. Neurologist. 2012;18(3):173-177.
225
Trauma
CHAPTER 7
  72.	Pieracci FM, Moore EE, Beauchamp K, et al. A cost- 
minimization analysis of phenytoin vs. levetiracetam for early 
seizure pharmacoprophylaxis after traumatic brain injury. 
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(1):276-281.
  73.	Cogbill T, Cothren CC, Ahearn MK, et al. Management of 
severe hemorrhage associated with maxillofacial injuries: a 
multicenter perspective. J Trauma. 2008; 64:250.
  74.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Holford TR, et al. Administration 
of methylprednisolone for 24 or 48 hours or tirilazad mesyl-
ate for 48 hours in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury. 
Results of the Third National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Ran-
domized Controlled Trial. National Acute Spinal Cord Injury 
Study. JAMA. 1997;277:1597-1604.
  75.	Stahel PF, Vanderheiden T, Finn MA. Management strategies 
for acute spinal cord injury: current options and future per-
spectives. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2012;18(6):651-660.
  76.	Fehlings MG, Perrin RG: The timing of surgical intervention 
in the treatment of spinal cord injury: a systematic review of 
recent clinical evidence. Spine. 2006; 31:S28,-S35.
  77.	Biffl WL, Moore EE, Offner PJ, et al. Blunt carotid arterial 
injuries: implications of a new grading scale. J Trauma. 1999; 
47:845-853.
  78.	Burlew CC, Biffl WL, Moore EE, Barnett CC, Johnson JL, 
Bensard DD. Blunt cerebrovascular injuries: redefining 
screening criteria in the era of noninvasive diagnosis. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(2):330-335.
  79.	Cothren CC, Moore EE, Biffl WL, et al. Anticoagulation is 
the gold standard therapy for blunt carotid injuries to reduce 
stroke rate. Arch Surg. 2004; 139:540-545.
  80.	Edwards NM, Fabian TC, Claridge JA, et al. Antithrombotic 
therapy and endovascular stents are effective treatment for 
blunt carotid injuries: results from long-term followup. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2007; 204:1007-1013.
  81.	Bladergroen M, Brockman R, Luna G, et al. A twelve-
year study of cervicothoracic vascular injuries. Am J Surg. 
1989;157:483-486.
  82.	Johnston RH, Wall MJ, Mattox KL. Innominate artery trauma: 
a thirty-year experience. J Vasc Surg. 1993; 17:134-139.
  83.	Fabian TC, Davis KA, Gavant ML, et al. Prospective study of 
blunt aortic injury: helical CT is diagnostic and antihyperten-
sive therapy reduces rupture. Ann Surg. 1998;227:666.
  84.	Karmy-Jones R, Nicholls S, Gleason TG. The endovascular 
approach to acute aortic trauma. Thorac Surg Clin. 2007; 
17:109-128.
  85.	Demetriades D, Velmahos GC, Scalea TM, et al. Diagnosis 
and treatment of blunt thoracic aortic injuries: changing per-
spectives. J Trauma. 2008;64(6):1415-1418.
  86.	Moore EE, Burch JM, Moore JB. Repair of the torn descend-
ing thoracic aorta using the centrifugal pump with partial left 
heart bypass. Ann Surg. 2004; 240:38-43.
  87.	Wall MJ, Tsai P, Mattox KL. Heart and Thoracic Vascular 
Injury. Mattox KL, Moore EE, Feliciano DV (eds): Trauma, 
7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013.
  88.	Jones EL, Burlew CC, Moore EE. BioGlue hemostasis of 
penetrating cardiac wounds in proximity to the left anterior 
descending coronary artery. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;72(3):796-798.
  89.	Cothren CC, Moore EE. Traumatic ventricular septal defect. 
Surgery. 2007;142:776-777.
  90.	Wall MJ Jr., Hirshberg A, Mattox KL. Pulmonary tractotomy 
with selective vascular ligation for penetrating injuries to the 
lung. Am J Surg. 1994; 168:665-669.
  91.	Cothren C, Moore EE, Biffl WL, et al. Lung-sparing tech-
niques are associated with improved outcome compared 
with anatomic resection for severe lung injuries. J Trauma 
2002;53:483-487.
  92.	Cryer HG, Mavroudis C, Yu J, et al. Shock, transfusion, 
and pneumonectomy. Death is due to right heart failure 
and increased pulmonary vascular resistance. Ann Surg. 
1990;212:197-201.
  93.	Luo L, Yin L, Liu Z, Xiang Z. Posttraumatic pulmonary pseu-
docyst: Computed tomography findings and management in 
33 patients. J Trauma and Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(5): 
1225-1228.
  94.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Burlew CC, et al. Western Trauma 
Association critical decisions in trauma: Management man-
agement of parapneumonic effusion. J Trauma Acute Care 
Surg. 2012;73: 1372-1379.
  95.	de Souza A, Offner PJ, Moore EE, et al. Optimal management 
of complicated empyema. Am J Surg. 2000; 180:507-511.
  96.	Truitt MS, Murry J, Amos J, et al. Continuous intercos-
tal nerve blockade for rib fractures: ready for primetime? J 
Trauma. 2011;71(6):1548-1552.
  97.	Kozar RA, Moore FA, Cothren CC, et al. Risk factors for 
hepatic morbidity following nonoperative management: mul-
ticenter study. Arch Surg. 2006; 141:451-458.
  98.	Malhotra AK, Fabian TC, Croce MA, et al. Blunt hepatic 
injury: a paradigm shift from operative to nonoperative man-
agement in the 1990s. Ann Surg . 2000;231:804-813.
  99.	Peitzman AB, Marsh JW. Advanced operative techniques 
in the management of complex liver injury. J Trauma Acute 
Care Surg. 2012;73(3):765-770.
100.	Biffl WL, Moore EE, Franciose RJ. Venovenous bypass and 
hepatic vascular isolation as adjuncts in the repair of destruc-
tive wounds to the retrohepatic inferior vena cava. J Trauma. 
1998; 45:400-403.
101.	Poggetti RS, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Balloon tamponade 
for bilobar transfixing hepatic gunshot wounds. J Trauma. 
1992; 33:694-697.
102.	Delis SG, Bakoyiannis A, Selvaggi G, et al. Liver transplanta-
tion for severe hepatic trauma: experience from a single cen-
ter. World J Gastroenterol. 2009;15(13):1641-1644.
103.	Lillemoe KD, Melton GB, Cameron JL, et al. Postoperative 
bile duct strictures: management and outcome in the 1990s. 
Ann Surg. 2000;232:430-441.
104.	Pickhardt B, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Operative splenic 
salvage in adults: a decade perspective. J Trauma. 1989; 29: 
1386-1391.
105.	Feliciano DV, Spjut-Patrinely V, Burch JM, et al. Splenor-
rhaphy: the alternative. Ann Surg. 1990; 211:569-580.
106.	Stassen NA, Bhullar I, Cheng JD, et al. Selective nonoperative 
management of blunt splenic injury: an Eastern Association 
for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline. 
J Trauma and Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(5):S294-S300.
107.	McIntyre LK, Schiff M, Jurkovich GJ. Failure of nonoperative 
management of splenic injuries: Causes and consequences. 
Arch Surg. 2005;140:563-568.
108.	Smith HE, Biffl WL, Majercik SD, et al. Splenic artery embo-
lization: have we gone too far? J Trauma. 2006; 61:541-546.
109.	Toutouzas KG, Velmahos GC, Kaminski A, et al. Leukocy-
tosis after posttraumatic splenectomy: a physiologic event or 
sign of sepsis? Arch Surg. 2002; 137:924-928.
110.	Howdieshell TR, Heffernan D, Dipiro JT. Therapeutic Agents 
Committee of the Surgical Infection Society. Surgical infec-
tion society guidelines for vaccination after traumatic injury. 
Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2006;7(3):275-303.
111.	Burch JM, Franciose RJ, Moore EE, et al. Single-layer con-
tinuous vs. two-layer interrupted intestinal anastomosis: 
a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg Surg. 2000;231: 
832-837.
112.	Todd SR, Kozar RA, Moore FA. Nutrition support in adult 
trauma patients. Nutr Clin Pract. 2006; 21:421-429.
113.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Cuschieri J, et al; the WTA Study Group. 
Who should we feed? Western Trauma Association multi-
institutional study of enteral nutrition in the open abdomen 
after injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:1380-1387.
226
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
114.	Sharpe JP, Magnotti LJ, Weinberg JA, et al. Impact of a 
defined management algorithm on outcome after traumatic 
pancreatic injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72: 
100-105.
115.	Vaughn GD, Frazier OH, Graham D, et al. The use of pyloric 
exclusion in the management of severe duodenal injuries. Am 
J Surg. 1977;134:785.
116.	Nelson R, Singer M. Primary repair for penetrating colon inju-
ries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD002247, 2003.
117.	Asensio JA, Britt LD, Borzotta A, et al. Multi-institutional 
experience with the management of superior mesenteric artery 
injuries. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193:354-356.
118.	Burch JM, Richardson RJ, Martin RR, et al. Penetrating iliac 
vascular injuries: experience with 233 consecutive patients. 
J Trauma. 1990; 30:1450-1459.
119.	Mullins RJ, Lucas CE, Ledgerwood AM. The natural his-
tory following venous ligation for civilian injuries. J Trauma. 
1980;20:737-743.
120.	Roth SM, Wheeler JR, Gregory RT, et al. Blunt injury of the 
abdominal aorta: a review. J Trauma. 1997; 42:748-755.
121.	Jurkovich GJ, Hoyt DB, Moore FA, et al. Portal triad injuries. 
J Trauma. 1995;39:426-434.
122.	Voelzke BB, McAninch JW. Renal gunshot wounds: clinical 
management and outcome. J Trauma. 2009;66(3):593-600.
123.	Knudson MM, Harrison PB, Hoyt DB, et al. Outcome after 
major renovascular injuries: A Western trauma association 
multicenter report. J Trauma. 2000; 49:1116-1122.
124.	Cothren CC, Osborn PM, Moore EE, et al: Preperitoneal pel-
vic packing for hemodynamically unstable pelvic fractures: A 
paradigm shift. J Trauma. 62:834-839.
125.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Smith WR, et al. Preperitoneal pelvic 
packing/external fixation with secondary angioembolization: 
optimal care for life-threatening hemorrhage from unstable 
pelvic fractures. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(4):628-635.
126.	Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ, Kellam JF, et al. An analysis of 
outcomes of reconstruction or amputation of leg-threatening 
injuries. N Engl J Med . 2002;347:1924-1931.
127.	Moore FA, McKinley BA, Moore EE, et al. Inflammation and 
the Host Response to Injury, a large-scale collaborative proj-
ect: patient-oriented research core—standard operating proce-
dures for clinical care. III. Guidelines for shock resuscitation. 
J Trauma, 2006;61:82-89.
128.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Biffl WL, Bensard DD, Johnson JL, 
Barnett CC. One hundred percent fascial approximation can be 
achieved in the postinjury open abdomen with a sequential clo-
sure protocol. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(1):235-241.
129.	Sela HY, Weiniger CF, Hersch M, Smueloff A, Laufer N, 
Einav S. The pregnant motor vehicle accident casualty: adher-
ence to basic workup and admission guidelines. Ann Surg. 
2011;254(2):346-352.
130.	ACOG Committee on Obstetric Practice: ACOG Commit-
tee Opinion. Number 299, September 2004. Guidelines 
for diagnostic imaging during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
2004;104:647-651.
131.	Morris JA, Rosenbower TJ, Jurkovich GJ, et al: . Infant sur-
vival after cesarean section for trauma. Ann Surg. 1996;223: 
481-488.
132.	Curet MJ, Schermer CR, Demarest GB, et al. Predictors of out-
come in trauma during pregnancy: Identification of patients 
who can be monitored for less than 6 hours. J Trauma. 
2000;49:18-24.
133.	Davis JW, Kaups KL. Base deficit in the elderly: a marker of 
severe injury and death. J Trauma. 1998; 45:873-877.
134.	Reynolds FD, Dietz PA, Higgins D, et al. Time to deteriora-
tion of the elderly, anticoagulated, minor head injury patient 
who presents without evidence of neurologic abnormality. 
J Trauma. 2003;54:492-496.
135.	Bulger EM, Arneson MA, Mock CN, et al. Rib fractures in the 
elderly. J Trauma 2000;48:1040-1046.
136.	Bergeron E, Lavoie A, Clas D, et al. Elderly trauma patients 
with rib fractures are at greater risk of death and pneumonia. 
J Trauma. 2003;54:478-485.
137.	Tepas JJ. The national pediatric trauma registry: a legacy of 
commitment to control childhood injury. Semin Pediatr Surg. 
2004;13:126-132.
138.	Partrick DA, Bensard DD, Moore EE, et al. Ultrasound is an 
effective triage tool to evaluate blunt abdominal trauma in the 
pediatric population. J Trauma. 1998;45:57-63.
139.	Partrick DA, Bensard DD, Moore EE, et al. Nonopera-
tive management of solid organ injuries in children results 
in decreased blood utilization. J Pediatr Surg. 1999;34: 
1695-1699.
Burns
Jonathan Friedstat, Fred W. Endorf,  
and Nicole S. Gibran
8
Surgical care of the burned patient has evolved into a special-
ized field incorporating the interdisciplinary skills of burn 
surgeons, nurses, therapists, and other healthcare specialists. 
However, recent mass casualty events have been a reminder 
that healthcare systems may be rapidly pressed to care for large 
numbers of burn patients. Naturally, general surgeons may be 
at the forefront in these events, so it is crucial that they are com-
fortable with the care of burned patients and well equipped to 
provide standard of care.
BACKGROUND
Burn injury historically carried a poor prognosis. With advances 
in fluid resuscitation1 and the advent of early excision of the burn 
wound,2 survival has become an expectation even for patients with 
severe burns. Continued improvements in critical care and prog-
ress in skin bioengineering herald a future in which functional and 
psychological outcomes are equally important as survival alone. 
With this shift in priority, the American Burn Association (ABA) 
has emphasized referral to specialized burn centers after early sta-
bilization. Specific criteria should guide transfer of patients with 
more complex injuries or other medical needs to a burn center 
(Table 8-1).  The ABA has published standards of care3 and 
created a verification process to ensure that burn centers 
meet those standards.4 Because of increased prehospital safety 
measures, burn patients are being transferred longer distances 
to receive definitive care at regional burn centers5; recent data 
from one burn center with a particularly wide catchment area con-
firmed that even transport times averaging 7 hours did not affect 
the long-term outcomes of burn patients.6
INITIAL EVALUATION
Initial evaluation of the burned patient involves four crucial 
assessments: airway management, evaluation of other injuries, 
estimation of burn size, and diagnosis of CO and cyanide poi-
soning. With direct thermal injury to the upper airway or smoke 
inhalation, rapid and severe airway edema is a potentially lethal 
threat. Anticipating the need for intubation and establishing an 
early airway are critical. Perioral burns and singed nasal hairs 
are signs that the oral cavity and pharynx should be further eval-
uated for mucosal injury, but these physical findings alone do 
not indicate an upper airway injury. Signs of impending respira-
tory compromise may include a hoarse voice, wheezing, or stri-
dor; subjective dyspnea is a particularly concerning symptom 
and should trigger prompt elective endotracheal intubation. In 
patients with combined multiple trauma, especially oral trauma, 
nasotracheal intubation may be useful but should be avoided if 
oral intubation is safe and easy.
Burned patients should be first considered trauma patients, 
especially when details of the injury are unclear. A primary sur-
vey should be conducted in accordance with Advanced Trauma 
Life Support guidelines. Concurrently with the primary sur-
vey, large-bore peripheral intravenous (IV) catheters should be 
placed and fluid resuscitation should be initiated; for a burn 
larger than 40% total body surface area (TBSA), two large-
bore IVs are ideal. IV placement through burned skin is safe 
and effective but requires attention to securing the catheters. 
Central venous access may provide useful information as to 
volume status and be useful in severely burned patients. Rarely, 
IV resuscitation is indicated in patients with burns smaller than 
15% who can usually hydrate orally. Pediatric patients with 
burns larger than 15% may require intraosseous access in emer-
gent situations if venous access cannot be attained. An early 
and comprehensive secondary survey must be performed on 
all burn patients, but especially those with a history of asso-
ciated trauma such as with a motor vehicle collision. Also, 
patients from structural fires in which the manner of egress 
is not known should be carefully evaluated for injuries from a 
possible jump or fall. Urgent radiology studies, such as a chest 
x-ray, should be performed in the emergency department, but 
nonurgent skeletal evaluation (i.e., extremity x-rays) can be 
done in the intensive care unit (ICU) to avoid hypothermia and 
delays in burn resuscitation. Hypothermia is a common pre-
hospital complication that contributes to resuscitation failure. 
Patients should be wrapped with clean blankets in transport. 
Cooling blankets should be avoided in patients with moderate 
or large (>20% TBSA) burns.
Background	
227
Initial Evaluation	
227
Classification of Burns	
228
Burn Depth	
229
Prognosis	
230
Resuscitation	
230
Transfusion	
231
Inhalation Injury and  
Ventilator Management	
231
Treatment of the Burn Wound	
232
Nutrition	
232
Complications in Burn Care	
233
Surgery	
233
Wound Coverage	
234
Rehabilitation	
235
Prevention	
235
Radiation Burns	
235
Future Areas of Study	
236
1
chapter 
Patients with acute burn injuries should never receive pro-
phylactic antibiotics. This intervention has been clearly demon-
strated to promote development of fungal infections and resistant 
organism and was abandoned in the mid-1980s. A tetanus 
booster should be administered in the emergency room. 
The importance of pain management for these patients has 
been widely recognized over the past 25 years. However, we 
must also consider treatment of long-term anxiety. Therefore, 
it is important to administer an anxiolytic such as a benzodiaz-
epine with the initial narcotics.
Most burn resuscitation formulas estimate fluid require-
ments using the burn size as a percentage of TBSA (%TBSA). 
The “rule of nines” is a crude but quick and effective method 
of estimating burn size (Fig. 8-1). In adults, the anterior and 
posterior trunk each account for 18%, each lower extremity is 
18%, each upper extremity is 9%, and the head is 9%. In chil-
dren under 3 years old, the head accounts for a larger relative 
surface area and should be taken into account when estimating 
burn size. Diagrams such as the Lund and Browder chart give 
a more accurate accounting of the true burn size in children. 
The importance of an accurate burn size assessment cannot 
be overemphasized. Superficial or first-degree burns should 
not be included when calculating the %TBSA, and thorough 
cleaning of soot and debris is mandatory to avoid confusing 
228
1
	 Follow American Burn Association criteria for transfer of a 
patient to a regional burn center.
2
	 Never administer prophylactic antibiotics other than tetanus 
vaccination.
3
	 Early excision and grafting of full-thickness and deep partial-
thickness burns improve outcomes.
Key Points
4
	 Intravenous fluid resuscitation for patients with burns 
greater than 20% of total body surface area (children with 
burns >15% of total body surface area) should be titrated to 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) greater than 60 mmHg and 
urine output greater than 30 mL/h.
Table 8-1
Guidelines for referral to a burn center
Partial-thickness burns greater than 10% TBSA
Burns involving the face, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum, or 
major joints
Third-degree burns in any age group
Electrical burns, including lightning injury
Chemical burns
Inhalation injury
Burn injury in patients with complicated pre-existing 
medical disorders
Patients with burns and concomitant trauma in which 
the burn is the greatest risk. If the trauma is the greater 
immediate risk, the patient may be stabilized in a trauma 
center before transfer to a burn center.
Burned children in hospitals without qualified personnel for 
the care of children
Burn injury in patients who will require special social, 
emotional, or rehabilitative intervention
TBSA = total body surface area.
soiled skin with burns. Examination of referral data suggests 
that physicians inexperienced with burns tend to overestimate 
the size of small burns and underestimate the size of large 
burns, with potentially detrimental effects on pretransfer 
resuscitation.7
An important contributor to early mortality in burn patients 
is carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning resulting from smoke inha-
lation. The affinity of CO for hemoglobin is approximately 200 
to 250 times more than that of oxygen, which decreases the 
levels of normal oxygenated hemoglobin and can quickly lead 
to anoxia and death.8 Unexpected neurologic symptoms should 
raise the level of suspicion, and an arterial carboxyhemoglobin 
level must be obtained because pulse oximetry can be falsely 
elevated. Administration of 100% oxygen is the gold standard 
for treatment of CO poisoning and reduces the half-life of CO 
from 250 minutes in room air to 40 to 60 minutes on 100% 
oxygen.9 Some authors have proposed hyperbaric oxygen as an 
adjunctive therapy for CO poisoning.10 However, the data are 
mixed regarding the success of hyperbaric oxygen, and its asso-
ciated logistical difficulties and complications have limited its 
usefulness for patients with moderate or large burns.11,12 Patients 
who sustain a cardiac arrest as a result of their CO poisoning 
have an extremely poor prognosis regardless of the success 
of initial resuscitation attempts.13 Hydrogen cyanide toxicity 
may also be a component of smoke inhalation injury. Afflicted 
patients may have a persistent lactic acidosis or ST elevation 
on electrocardiogram (ECG).14 Cyanide inhibits cytochrome 
oxidase, which is required for oxidative phosphorylation.15 
Treatment consists of sodium thiosulfate, hydroxocobalamin, 
and 100% oxygen. Sodium thiosulfate works by transforming 
cyanide into a nontoxic thiocyanate derivative, but it works 
slowly and is not effective for acute therapy. Hydroxocobala-
min quickly complexes with cyanide, is excreted by the kidney, 
and is recommended for immediate therapy.9 In the majority of 
patients, the lactic acidosis will resolve with ventilation, and 
sodium thiosulfate treatment becomes unnecessary.16
CLASSIFICATION OF BURNS
Burns are commonly classified as thermal, electrical, or chemi-
cal burns, with thermal burns consisting of flame, contact, or 
scald burns. Flame burns are not only the most common cause 
for hospital admission of burns, but also have the highest mor-
tality. This is primarily related to their association with struc-
tural fires and the accompanying inhalation injury and/or CO 
poisoning.17
Electrical burns make up only 4% of U.S. hospital admis-
sions but have special concerns including the potential for car-
diac arrhythmias and compartment syndromes with concurrent 
rhabdomyolysis. A baseline ECG is recommended in all patients 
2
229
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
with an electrical injury, and a normal ECG in a low-voltage 
injury may preclude hospital admission. Because compartment 
syndrome and rhabdomyolysis are common in high-voltage 
electrical injuries, vigilance must be maintained for neurologic 
or vascular compromise, and fasciotomies should be performed 
even in cases of moderate clinical suspicion. Long-term neuro-
logic and visual symptoms are not uncommon with high-voltage 
electrical injuries, and ophthalmologic and neurologic consul-
tation should be obtained to better define a patient’s baseline 
function.18
Chemical burns are less common but potentially severe 
burns. The most important components of initial therapy are 
careful removal of the toxic substance from the patient and 
irrigation of the affected area with water for a minimum of 
30 minutes, except in cases of concrete powder or powdered 
forms of lye, which should be swept from the patient to avoid 
activating the aluminum hydroxide with water. The offending 
agents in chemical burns can be systemically absorbed and may 
cause specific metabolic derangements. Formic acid has been 
known to cause hemolysis and hemoglobinuria, and hydroflu-
oric acid causes hypocalcemia. Hydrofluoric acid is a particu-
larly common offender due to its widespread industrial uses. 
Calcium-based therapies are the mainstay of treating hydroflu-
oric acid burns, with topical application of calcium gluconate 
onto wounds19 and IV administration of calcium gluconate for 
systemic symptoms. Intra-arterial calcium gluconate infusion 
provides effective treatment of progressive tissue injury and 
intense pain.20,21 Patients undergoing intra-arterial therapy need 
continuous cardiac monitoring. Persistent refractory hypocalce-
mia with electrocardiac abnormalities may signal the need for 
emergent excision of the burned areas.
BURN DEPTH
Based on the original burn depth classification by Dupuytren 
in 1832,22 burn wounds are commonly classified as super-
ficial (first-degree), partial-thickness (second-degree), full-
thickness (third-degree), and fourth-degree burns, which affect 
underlying soft tissue. Partial-thickness burns are classified as 
either superficial or deep partial-thickness burns by depth of 
involved dermis. Clinically, first-degree burns are painful but 
do not blister, second-degree burns have dermal involvement 
and are extremely painful with weeping and blisters, and third-
degree burns are leathery, painless, and nonblanching. Jackson 
described three zones of tissue injury following burn injury.23 
The zone of coagulation is the most severely burned portion and 
is typically in the center of the wound. As the name implies, the 
affected tissue is coagulated and sometimes frankly necrotic, 
much like a third- or fourth-degree burn, and will need excision 
and grafting. Peripheral to that is a zone of stasis, with variable 
degrees of vasoconstriction and resultant ischemia, much like a 
second-degree burn. Appropriate resuscitation and wound care 
may help prevent conversion to a deeper wound, but infection 
or suboptimal perfusion may result in an increase in burn depth. 
This is clinically relevant because many superficial partial-
thickness burns will heal with expectant management, and the 
9%
4.5%
4.5%
9%
9%
18%
1%
1%
18%
18%
18%
Front
Back
Figure 8-1.  The “rule of nines” can be used as a quick reference for estimating a patient’s burn size by dividing the body into regions to 
which total body surface area is allocated in multiples of nine.
230
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
majority of deep partial-thickness burns require excision 
and skin grafting.  The last area of a burn is called the zone 
of hyperemia, which will heal with minimal or no scarring and 
is most like a superficial or first-degree burn.
Unfortunately, even experienced burn surgeons have lim-
ited ability to accurately predict the healing potential of partial-
thickness burns soon after injury; one reason is that burn wounds 
evolve over the 48 to 72 hours after injury. Numerous techniques 
have been developed with the idea that better early prediction of 
burn depth will expedite appropriate surgical decision making. 
One of the most effective ways to determine burn depth is full-
thickness biopsy, but this has several limitations; not only is the 
procedure painful and potentially scarring, but accurate interpre-
tation of the histopathology requires a specialized pathologist and 
may have slow turnaround times.24 Laser Doppler can measure 
skin perfusion to predict burn depth with a positive predictive 
value of up to 80% in some studies.25,26 Noncontact ultrasound 
has been postulated as a painless modality to predict nonhealing 
wounds and has the advantage of easily performed serial mea-
surements.27 Unfortunately, none of these newer therapies have 
proven adequately superior to justify their cost and as yet have 
not substituted serial examination by experienced burn surgeons.
PROGNOSIS
The Baux score (mortality risk equals age plus %TBSA) was used 
for many years to predict mortality in burns. Analysis of multiple 
risk factors for burn mortality has validated age and %TBSA as 
the strongest predictors of mortality.28 Advancements in burn care 
have lowered overall mortality to the point that the Baux score 
may no longer be accurate. However, age and burn size, as well 
as inhalation injury, continue to be the most robust indicators for 
burn mortality.29 Age even as a single variable strongly predicts 
mortality in burns,30 and in-hospital mortality in elderly burn 
patients is a function of age regardless of other comorbidities.31 
In nonelderly patients, comorbidities such as preinjury human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), metastatic cancer, and kidney 
or liver disease may influence mortality and length of stay.32 A 
recent large database study of 68,661 burn patients found that the 
variables with the highest predictive value for mortality were age, 
%TBSA, inhalation injury, coexistent trauma, and pneumonia.33
RESUSCITATION
A myriad of formulas exist for calculating fluid needs during 
burn resuscitation, suggesting that no one formula benefits 
all patients. The most commonly used formula, the Parkland 
or Baxter formula, consists of 3 to 4 mL/kg/% burn of lac-
tated Ringer’s, of which half is given during the first 8 hours 
after burn and the remaining half is given over the subsequent 
16 hours. The concept behind continuous fluid requirements is 
simple. The burn (and/or inhalation injury) drives an inflamma-
tory response that leads to capillary leak; as plasma leaks into 
the extravascular space, crystalloid administration maintains the 
intravascular volume. Therefore, if a patient receives a large 
fluid bolus in a prehospital setting or emergency department, 
that fluid has likely leaked into the interstitium and the patient 
still requires ongoing burn resuscitation according to the esti-
mates. Continuation of fluid volumes should depend on the time 
since injury, urine output, and mean arterial pressure (MAP). As 
the leak closes, the patient will require less volume to maintain 
these two resuscitation endpoints. Children under 20 kg have the 
additional requirement that they do not have sufficient glycogen 
stores to maintain an adequate glucose level in response to the 
inflammatory response. Specific pediatric formulas have been 
described, but the simplest approach is to deliver a weight-based 
maintenance IV fluid with glucose supplementation in addition 
to the calculated resuscitation fluid with lactated Ringer’s.
It is important to remember that any formula for burn 
resuscitation is merely a guideline, and fluid must be titrated 
based on appropriate measures of adequate resuscitation. A 
number of parameters are widely used to gauge burn resuscita-
tion, but the most common remain the simple outcomes of blood 
pressure and urine output. As in any critically ill patient, a target 
MAP of 60 mmHg ensures optimal end-organ perfusion. 
Goals for urine output should be 30 mL/h in adults and 
1 to 1.5 mL/kg/h in pediatric patients. Because blood pressure 
and urine output may not correlate perfectly with true tissue 
perfusion, the search continues for other adjunctive parameters 
that may more accurately reflect adequate resuscitation. Some 
centers have found serum lactate to be a better predictor of mor-
tality in severe burns,34,35 and others have found that base deficit 
predicts eventual organ dysfunction and mortality.36,37 Because 
burned patients with normal blood pressure and serum lactate 
levels may have compromised gastric mucosal perfusion, con-
tinuous measurement of mucosal pH with its logistical diffi-
culties has garnered limited popularity.38,39 Invasive monitoring 
with pulmonary artery catheters typically results in significant 
excessive fluid administration without improved cardiac output 
or preload measurements; use of invasive monitoring seems to 
have variable effects on long-term outcomes.40
Actual administrated fluid volumes typically exceed vol-
umes predicted by standard formulas.41 One survey of burn cen-
ters showed that 58% of patients end up getting more fluids than 
would be predicted by Baxter’s formula.42 Comparison of modern-
day patients with historical controls shows that over-resuscitation 
may be a relatively recent trend.43 One theory is that increased 
opioid analgesic use results in peripheral vasodilation and hypo-
tension and the need for greater volumes of bloused resuscita-
tive fluids.44 A classic study by Navar et al showed that burned 
patients with inhalation injury required an average of 5.76 mL/
kg/% burn, vs. 3.98 mL/kg/% burn for patients without inhalation 
injury, and this has been corroborated by subsequent studies.45,46  
Prolonged mechanical ventilation may also play a role in increased 
fluid needs.47 A recent multicenter study found that age, weight, 
%TBSA, and intubation on admission were significant predic-
tors of more fluid delivery during the resuscitation period. Those 
patients receiving higher fluid volumes were at increased risk 
of complications and death.48 Common complications include 
abdominal compartment syndrome, extremity compartment syn-
drome, intraocular compartment syndrome, and pleural effusions. 
Monitoring bladder pressures can provide valuable information 
about development of intra-abdominal hypertension.
The use of colloid as part of the burn resuscitation has gen-
erated much interest over the years. In late resuscitation when the 
capillary leak has closed, colloid administration may decrease 
overall fluid volumes and potentially may decrease associated 
complications such as intra-abdominal hypertension.49 However, 
albumin use has never been shown to improve outcomes in burn 
patients and has controversial effects on mortality in critically ill 
patients.50,51 Attempts to minimize fluid volumes in burn resusci-
tation have included study of hypertonic solutions, which appear 
to transiently decrease initial resuscitation volumes, with the 
downside of causing hyperchloremic acidosis.52
3
4
231
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
Other adjuncts are being increasingly used during initial burn 
resuscitation. High-dose ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may decrease 
fluid volume requirements and ameliorate respiratory embarrass-
ment during resuscitation.53 Plasmapheresis may also decrease 
fluid requirements in patients who require higher volumes than 
predicted to maintain adequate urine output and MAP. It is postu-
lated that plasmapheresis may filter out inflammatory mediators, 
thus decreasing ongoing vasodilation and capillary leak.54
One recent adjunct that has found increasing utility in other 
surgical ICUs has been the application of bedside thoracic ultra-
sound.55 Ultrasound offers the potential to make rapid, nonin-
vasive assessments during acute changes in clinical condition. 
For burn patients, bedside ultrasonography may be indicated 
for evaluation of volume status, gross assessment of cardiac 
function, and diagnosis of pneumothorax. Determining patient 
cardiac function and volume status may guide fluid resuscita-
tion. Cardiac function can be evaluated with three common heart 
views: the parasternal long axis, parasternal short axis, and apical 
four-chamber views.56 Volume status can be estimated by exami-
nation of cardiac function, evaluation of the inferior vena cava 
(IVC) diameter, and changes with respiration. Ultrasound also 
allows timely diagnosis of pneumothorax.57 A high-frequency 
probe with an adequate window between ribs permits identifica-
tion of lung parenchyma against the chest well. A pneumothorax 
appears as a transition on ultrasound between lung parenchyma, 
which has a heterogeneous appearance, and air, which has a 
hypoechoic appearance. Further studies are warranted to identify 
indications for the use of ultrasound in burned patients.
TRANSFUSION
The role of blood transfusion in critically injured patients has 
undergone a reevaluation in recent years.58,59 Blood transfusions 
are considered to be immunosuppressive, which is one explana-
tion for the common responses seen to blood transfusions, such 
as increased infection and shorter time to recurrence after onco-
logic surgery.60 A large multicenter study of blood transfusions 
in burn patients found that increased numbers of transfusions 
were associated with increased infections and higher mortality 
in burn patients, even when correcting for burn severity.61 A 
follow-up study implanting a restrictive transfusion policy in 
burned children showed that a hemoglobin threshold of 7 g/dL 
had no more adverse outcomes vs. a traditional transfusion trig-
ger of 10 g/dL. In addition, costs incurred to the institution were 
significantly less.62 These data, in concert with other reported 
complications such as transfusion-related lung injury,63 have 
led to recommendations that blood transfusions be used only 
when there is an apparent physiologic need. Attempts to mini-
mize blood transfusion in nonburned critically ill patients have 
led to use of erythropoietin by some centers. However, burn 
patients often have elevated erythropoietin levels, and a ran-
domized study in burn patients showed that recombinant human 
erythropoietin did not effectively prevent anemia or decrease 
the number of transfusions given.64
INHALATION INJURY AND VENTILATOR 
MANAGEMENT
Inhalation injuries are commonly seen in tandem with burn inju-
ries and are known to increase mortality in burned patients.65 
Smoke inhalation is present in as many as 35% of hospital-
ized burn patients and may triple the hospital stay compared to 
isolated burn injuries.66 The combination of burns, inhalation 
injury, and pneumonia increases mortality by up to 60% over 
burns alone.67 Subsequent development of the adult respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS) is common in these patients and may 
be caused in part by recruitment of alveolar leukocytes with an 
enhanced endotoxin-activated cytokine response.68 When ARDS 
complicates burns and inhalation injury, mortality approaches 
66%; in one study, patients with burns ≥60% TBSA in combi-
nation with inhalation injury and ARDS had 100% mortality.69
Smoke inhalation causes injury in two ways: by direct heat 
injury to the upper airways and inhalation of combustion prod-
ucts into the lower airways. Direct injury to the upper airway 
causes airway swelling that typically leads to maximal edema 
in the first 24 to 48 hours after injury and often requires a short 
course of endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Com-
bustion products found in smoke, most commonly from syn-
thetic substances in structural fires, cause lower airway injury. 
These irritants cause direct mucosal injury, which in turn leads 
to mucosal sloughing, edema, reactive bronchoconstriction, and 
finally obstruction of the lower airways. Injury to both the epi-
thelium and pulmonary alveolar macrophages causes release of 
prostaglandins, chemokines, and other inflammatory mediators; 
neutrophil migration; increased tracheobronchial blood flow; 
and finally increased capillary permeability. All of these com-
ponents of acute lung injury increase the risk of pneumonia and 
ARDS following an inhalation injury.
The physiologic effects of smoke inhalation are numer-
ous. Inhalation injury decreases lung compliance70 and increases 
airway resistance work of breathing.71 Inhalation injury in the 
presence of burns also increases overall metabolic demands.72 
The most common physiologic derangement seen with inhala-
tion injury is increased fluid requirement during resuscitation. 
Since severe inhalation injury may result in mucosal slough-
ing with obstruction of smaller airways, bronchoscopy findings 
including carbon deposits, erythema, edema, bronchorrhea, and 
a hemorrhagic appearance may be useful for staging inhalation 
injury. Furthermore, bronchoalveolar lavage within 24 hours 
after an inhalation injury demonstrates a high rate of positive 
quantitative cultures,73 suggesting that pneumonia develops 
soon after the acute lung injury. Because bronchoscopy is an 
invasive test, attempts have been made to utilize other diag-
nostic modalities, such as thoracic computed tomography (CT) 
scans74 and xenon ventilation-perfusion scanning.75 Decreased 
Pao2:Fio2 ratio (<200) on admission may not only predict inhala-
tion injury but also indicate increased fluid needs more accurately 
than bronchoscopic grading of the severity of inhalation.76
Treatment of inhalation injury consists primarily of sup-
portive care. Aggressive pulmonary toilet and routine use of 
nebulized bronchodilators such as albuterol are recommended. 
Nebulized N-acetylcysteine is an antioxidant free radical scav-
enger designed to decrease the toxicity of high oxygen concen-
trations. Aerosolized heparin aims to prevent formation of fibrin 
plugs and decrease the formation of airway casts. These agents 
seem to improve pulmonary toilet but have no demonstrated 
effect on mortality.77 Aerosolized tissue plasminogen activator78 
and recombinant human antithrombin79 have shown promise in 
sheep models, but have not yet seen widespread clinical use. 
Administration of intrabronchial surfactant has been used as 
a salvage therapy in patients with severe burns and inhalation 
injury.80 Inhaled nitric oxide may also be useful as a last effort in 
burn patients with severe lung injury who are failing other means 
of ventilatory support.81 The use of steroids has traditionally 
232
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
been avoided due to worse outcomes in burn patients,82 but new 
promising data in late ARDS have prompted scientific review 
of steroid use.83
New ventilator strategies have contributed to the improved 
mortality with ARDS. Although ARDS still contributes to mor-
tality in burn patients, treatments have improved so that mortality 
is primarily from multisystem organ failure rather than isolated 
respiratory causes.84 The ARDS Network Study finding that low 
tidal volume (6 cc/kg) or “lung-protective ventilation” had a 22% 
lower mortality than patients with traditional tidal volumes (12 
cc/kg)85 has dramatically changed the management of patients 
with acute lung injury. A similar approach had previously been 
shown to improve outcomes in pediatric burn patients.86 In 
patients with refractory hypoxemia despite lung-protective ven-
tilation, prone positioning may improve oxygenation but has not 
shown a definitive effect on mortality.87 No specific studies have 
examined prone positioning in burned patients, and caution must 
be used in patients with facial burns who are already at risk for 
loss of the endotracheal tube. High-frequency percussive ventila-
tion (HFPV) has shown early promise in patients with inhalation 
injury.88 One study showed notable decreases in both morbid-
ity and mortality with HFPV, especially in patients with burns 
less than 40% TBSA and inhalation injury.89 A related technique 
is high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, which has been used 
primarily as a salvage modality in patients refractory to more 
conventional measures.90 Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO) is typically reserved for salvage situations, and experi-
ence with this modality is limited to small numbers of patients.91 
A promising area of future study may be arteriovenous carbon 
dioxide removal, a technique that has proven superior to both 
low tidal volume ventilation and HFPV in a sheep model but has 
not yet transitioned from bench to bedside.92
TREATMENT OF THE BURN WOUND
Multitudes of topical therapies exist for the treatment of burn 
wounds. Silver sulfadiazine is one of the most widely used in 
clinical practice. Silver sulfadiazine has a wide range of antimi-
crobial activity, primarily as prophylaxis against burn wound 
infections rather than treatment of existing infections. It has the 
added benefits of being inexpensive and easily applied and has 
soothing qualities. It is not significantly absorbed systemically 
and thus has minimal metabolic derangements. Silver sulfadi-
azine has a reputation for causing neutropenia, but this asso-
ciation is more likely due to neutrophil margination from the 
inflammatory response. True allergic reactions to the sulfa com-
ponent of silver sulfadiazine are rare, and at-risk patients can 
have a small test patch applied to identify a burning sensation 
or rash. Silver sulfadiazine destroys skin grafts and is contrain-
dicated on burns or donor sites in proximity to newly grafted 
areas. Also, silver sulfadiazine may retard epithelial migration 
in healing partial-thickness wounds.
Mafenide acetate, either in cream or solution form, is an 
effective topical antimicrobial. It is effective even in the pres-
ence of eschar and can be used in both treating and preventing 
wound infections; the solution formulation is an excellent anti-
microbial for fresh skin grafts. Use of mafenide acetate may 
be limited by pain with application to partial-thickness burns. 
Mafenide is absorbed systemically, and a major side effect is 
metabolic acidosis resulting from carbonic anhydrase inhibition.
Silver nitrate has broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity as 
a topical solution. The solution used must be dilute (0.5%), and 
prolonged topical application leads to electrolyte extravasation 
with resulting hyponatremia. A rare complication is methemo-
globinemia. Although inexpensive, silver nitrate solution causes 
black stains, and laundry costs may offset any fiscal benefit to 
the hospital. Increasingly, Dakin’s solution (0.5% sodium hypo-
chlorite solution) is being used as an inexpensive topical anti-
microbial.
For smaller burns or larger burns that are nearly healed, 
topical ointments such as bacitracin, neomycin, and polymyxin 
B can be used. These are also useful for superficial partial-
thickness facial burns as they can be applied and left open to 
air without dressing coverage. Meshed skin grafts in which the 
interstices are nearly closed are another indication for use of 
these agents, preferably with greasy gauze to help retain the 
ointment in the affected area. All three have been reported to 
cause nephrotoxicity and should be used sparingly in large 
burns. The recent media fascination with methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has led to widespread use by 
community practitioners of mupirocin for new burns. Unless 
the patient has known risk factors for MRSA, mupirocin should 
only be used in culture-positive burn wound infections to pre-
vent emergence of further resistance.
Silver-impregnated dressings such as Acticoat (Smith & 
Nephew, London, United Kingdom), Aquacel Ag (Convatec, 
Princeton, NJ), and Mepilex Ag (Mölnlycke Health Care US, 
LLC, Norcross, GA) are increasingly being used for donor sites, 
skin grafts, and partial-thickness burns. These may be more com-
fortable for the patient, reduce the number of dressing changes, 
and shorten hospital length of stay, but they do limit serial wound 
examinations. Biologic membranes such as Biobrane (Dow-
Hickham, Sugarland, TX) provide a prolonged barrier under 
which wounds may heal. Because of the occlusive nature of 
these dressings, these are typically used only on fresh superficial 
partial-thickness burns that are clearly not contaminated.
NUTRITION
Nutritional support may be more important in patients with 
large burns than in any other patient population. Not only does 
adequate nutrition play a role in acute issues such as immune 
responsiveness, but the hypermetabolic response in burn injury 
may raise baseline metabolic rates by as much as 200%.93 This 
can lead to catabolism of muscle proteins and decreased lean 
body mass that may delay functional recovery.94 Early enteral 
feeding for patients with burns larger than 20% TBSA is safe and 
may reduce loss of lean body mass,95 slow the hypermetabolic 
response,96 and result in more efficient protein metabolism.97 
If the enteral feeds are started within the first few hours after 
admission, gastric ileus can be avoided. Adjuncts such as meto-
clopramide promote gastrointestinal motility; if other measures 
for gastric feeding are unsuccessful, advancing the tube into 
the small bowel with nasojejunal feeding can be attempted.98 In 
endotracheally intubated patients, trips to the operating room do 
not necessitate holding enteral feedings.99 Immune-modulating 
supplements such as glutamine may decrease infectious compli-
cations and mortality in burn patients,100 likely via prevention of 
T-cell suppression in mesenteric lymph nodes.101
Calculating the appropriate caloric needs of the burn 
patient can be challenging. A commonly used formula in non-
burned patients is the Harris-Benedict equation, which calcu-
lates caloric needs using factors such as gender, age, height, and 
weight. This formula uses an activity factor for specific injuries, 
233
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
and for burns, the basal energy expenditure is multiplied by two. 
The Harris-Benedict equation may be inaccurate in burns of less 
than 40% TBSA, and in these patients, the Curreri formula may 
be more appropriate. This formula estimates caloric needs to be 
25 kcal/kg/d plus 40 kcal/%TBSA/d. Indirect calorimetry can 
also used to calculate resting energy expenditure, but in burn 
patients, a “metabolic cart” has not been documented to be more 
beneficial than the predictive equations.102 Titrating caloric 
needs closely is important, because overfeeding patients will 
lead to storage of fat instead of muscle anabolism.103
Modifying the hypermetabolic response is an area of 
intense study with several recent findings. β-Blocker use in pedi-
atric patients decreases heart rate and resting energy expenditure 
and abrogates protein catabolism, even in long-term use.104 There 
may be benefits to β-blockade in adult patients,105 and many cen-
ters use β-blockers routinely in the adult population with limited 
safety and efficacy data. The anabolic steroid oxandrolone has 
been extensively studied in pediatric patients as well, and has 
demonstrated improvements in lean body mass and bone density 
in severely burned children.106 The weight gain and functional 
improvements seen with oxandrolone may persist even after 
stopping administration of the drug.107 A recent double-blind, 
randomized study of oxandrolone showed decreased length of 
stay, improved hepatic protein synthesis, and no adverse effects 
on endocrine function, although the authors noted a rise in trans-
aminases with unclear clinical significance.108 Intensive insulin 
therapy in critically ill patients has shown benefit, presumably 
from avoidance of hyperglycemia.109 However, in burn patients, 
the insulin itself may have a metabolic benefit, with improve-
ments in lean body mass and amelioration of the inflammatory 
response to burn injury.110,111 Oral hypoglycemic agents such as 
metformin also help to avoid hyperglycemia and may contribute 
to prevention of muscle catabolism.112
COMPLICATIONS IN BURN CARE
There are several complications commonly associated with 
treatment of burn patients. Though not always avoidable, main-
taining vigilance for typical complications and using appro-
priate techniques for prevention may limit the frequency and 
severity of complications. Ventilator-associated pneumonia, as 
in all critically ill patients, is a significant problem in burned 
patients. However, it is so common in patients with inhalation 
injury that a better nomenclature may be postinjury pneumonia. 
Unfortunately, commonly used scores in critical illness such as 
the Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) have not been 
shown to be reliable in burn patients. Quantitative broncho-
scopic cultures in the setting of clinical suspicion of pneumo-
nia should guide treatment of pneumonia.113 Simple measures 
such as elevating the head of the bed and maintaining excel-
lent oral hygiene and pulmonary toilet are recommended to 
help decrease the risk of postinjury pneumonia. There is some 
question as to whether early tracheostomy decreases infectious 
morbidity in burn patients and whether it improves long-term 
outcomes. There do not seem to be any major differences in 
the rates of pneumonia with early tracheostomy, though there 
may be reduced development of subglottic stenosis compared 
with prolonged endotracheal intubation.114,115 Practical consid-
erations such as protection of facial skin grafts may influence 
the decision for tracheostomy placement. One major consider-
ation in deciding whether to perform a tracheostomy has been 
the presence of eschar at the insertion site, which complicates 
tracheostomy site care and increases the risk of airway infec-
tion. Bedside percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy is a facile 
method for performing tracheostomy and is reported to be as 
safe as open tracheostomy in the burn population.116
Massive resuscitation of burned patients may lead to an 
abdominal compartment syndrome characterized by increased 
airway pressures with hypoventilation, and decreased urine 
output and hemodynamic compromise. Decompressive lapa-
rotomy is the standard of care for refractory abdominal com-
partment syndrome but carries an especially poor prognosis in 
burn patients.117 Adjunctive measures such as minimizing fluid, 
performing torso escharotomies, decreasing tidal volumes, 
and chemical paralysis should be initiated before resorting to 
decompressive laparotomy. Patients undergoing massive resus-
citation also develop elevated intraocular pressures and may 
require lateral canthotomy.118
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) has been commonly believed 
to be a rare phenomenon in burned patients, and there is a pau-
city of controlled studies regarding heparin prophylaxis in this 
population.119 However, recent data show that up to 25% of burn 
patients develop DVT, and fatal pulmonary emboli have been 
reported in burn patients.120,121 A large retrospective study in 
patients with routine prophylaxis found DVT in only 0.25% 
of patients and reported no bleeding complications.122 Thus, it 
appears that heparin prophylaxis is safe in burn patients and may 
help prevent thrombotic complications.
Unfortunately, the use of both prophylactic and therapeu-
tic heparin may be associated with heparin-associated throm-
bocytopenia (HIT). One study of HIT in burn patients showed 
an incidence of 1.6% in heparinized burn patients. Thrombotic 
complications included DVT, pulmonary embolus, and even 
arterial thrombosis requiring limb amputation. Nonheparin 
anticoagulation for HIT commonly caused bleeding complica-
tions requiring transfusion.123 Although rare, a high index of 
suspicion for HIT should be maintained in thrombocytopenic 
burn patients, particularly if the platelet counts drop at hospital 
days 7 to 10.
Burn patients often require central venous access for fluid 
resuscitation and hemodynamic monitoring. Because of the ana-
tomic relation of their burns to commonly used access sites, 
burn patients may be at higher risk for catheter-related blood-
stream infections. The 2009 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention National Healthcare Safety Network report (http://
www.cdc.gov/nhsn/dataStat.html) indicates that American burn 
centers have higher infectious complication rates than any other 
ICUs. Because burn patients may commonly exhibit leukocyto-
sis with a documented bloodstream infection, practice has been 
to rewire lines over a guide wire and to culture the catheter tip. 
However, this may increase the risk of catheter-related infec-
tions in burned patients, and a new site should be used if at all 
possible.124
SURGERY
Full-thickness burns with a rigid eschar can form a tourniquet 
effect as the edema progresses, leading to compromised venous 
outflow and eventually arterial inflow. The resulting compart-
ment syndrome is most common in circumferential extremity 
burns, but abdominal and thoracic compartment syndromes also 
occur. Warning signs of impending compartment syndrome 
may include paresthesias, pain, decreased capillary refill, and 
progression to loss of distal pulses; in an intubated patient, 
234
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
the surgeon should anticipate the compartment syndrome and 
perform frequent neurovascular evaluations. Abdominal com-
partment syndrome should be suspected with decreased urine 
output, increased ventilator airway pressures, and hypotension. 
Hypoventilation, increased airway pressures, and hypotension 
may also characterize thoracic compartment syndrome. Escha-
rotomies are rarely needed within the first 8 hours following 
injury and should not be performed unless indicated because 
of the terrible aesthetic sequelae. When indicated, they are usu-
ally performed at the bedside, preferably with electrocautery to 
minimize blood loss. Extremity incisions are made on the lateral 
and medial aspects of the limbs in an anatomic position and 
may extend onto thenar and hypothenar eminences of the hand. 
Digital escharotomies do not usually result in any meaningful 
salvage of functional tissue and are not recommended. Inad-
equate perfusion despite proper escharotomies may indicate the 
need for fasciotomy, but this procedure should not be routinely 
performed as part of the eschar release. Thoracic escharotomies 
should be placed along the anterior axillary lines with bilateral 
subcostal and subclavicular extensions. Extension of the ante-
rior axillary incisions down the lateral abdomen typically will 
allow adequate release of abdominal eschar.
The strategy of early excision and grafting in burned 
patients revolutionized survival outcomes in burn care. Not 
only did it improve mortality, but early excision also decreased 
reconstruction surgery, hospital length of stay, and costs of 
care.125,126 Once the initial resuscitation is complete and the 
patient is hemodynamically stable, attention should be turned 
to excising the burn wound. Burn excision and wound coverage 
should ideally start within the first several days, and in larger 
burns, serial excisions can be performed as patient condition 
allows. Excision is performed with repeated tangential slices 
using a Watson or Goulian blade until viable, diffusely bleeding 
tissue remains. It is appropriate to leave healthy dermis, which 
will appear white with punctate areas of bleeding. Excision to 
fat or fascia may be necessary in deeper burns. The downside of 
tangential excision is a high blood loss, though this may be ame-
liorated using techniques such as instillation of an epinephrine 
tumescence solution underneath the burn. Pneumatic tourni-
quets are helpful in extremity burns, and compresses soaked in a 
dilute epinephrine solution are necessary adjuncts after excision. 
A fibrinogen and thrombin spray sealant (Tisseel Fibrin Sealant; 
Baxter, Deerfield, IL) also has beneficial effects on both hemo-
stasis and graft adherence to the wound bed. The use of these 
techniques has markedly decreased the number of blood trans-
fusions given during burn surgery.127 For patients with clearly 
deep burns and concern for excessive blood loss, fascial exci-
sion may be employed. In this technique, electrocautery is used 
to excise the burned tissue and the underlying subcutaneous tis-
sue down to muscle fascia. This technique markedly decreases 
blood loss but results in a cosmetically inferior appearance due 
to the loss of subcutaneous tissue. For excision of burns in dif-
ficult anatomic areas such as the face, eyelids, or hands, a pres-
surized water dissector may offer more precision but is time 
consuming, has a steep learning curve, and is expensive.128
WOUND COVERAGE
Since full-thickness burns are impractical for most burn 
wounds, split-thickness sheet autografts harvested with a 
power dermatome make the most durable wound coverings and 
have a decent cosmetic appearance. In larger burns, meshed 
­autografted skin provides a larger area of wound coverage. 
This also allows drainage of blood and serous fluid to prevent 
accumulation under the skin graft with subsequent graft loss. 
Areas of cosmetic importance such as the face, neck, and hands 
should be grafted with nonmeshed sheet grafts to ensure opti-
mal appearance and function. Unfortunately, even extensive 
meshing of skin grafts in patients with limited donor sites may 
not provide adequate amounts of skin. Options for temporary 
wound coverage include human cadaveric allograft, which is 
incorporated into the wound but is rejected by the immune sys-
tem and must be eventually replaced. This allows temporary 
biologic wound coverage until donor sites heal enough so that 
they may be reharvested. Xenograft appears to function as well 
as allograft for temporary wound coverage and is considerably 
less ­expensive.
The search for a perfect permanent synthetic skin substi-
tute remains elusive. Integra (Integra LifeSciences Corporation, 
Plainsboro, NJ) is a bilayer product with a porous collagen-
chondroitin 6-sulphate inner layer that is attached to an outer 
silastic sheet, which helps prevent fluid loss and infection as 
the inner layer becomes vascularized, creating an artificial neo-
dermis. At approximately 2 weeks after placement, the silastic 
layer can be removed and a thin autograft can be placed over 
the neodermis. This results in faster healing of the more super-
ficial donor sites and seems to be associated with hypertrophic 
scarring and improved joint function.129 Alloderm (LifeCell 
Corporation, The Woodlands, TX) is another dermal substi-
tute consisting of cryopreserved acellular human dermis. This 
must also be used in combination with thin split-thickness skin 
grafts.130
Epidermal skin substitutes such as cultured epithelial auto-
grafts are an option in patients with massive burns and very 
limited donor sites.131 Their clinical use has been limited by a 
long turnaround time for culturing, as well as the fragility of the 
cultured skin, which creates great difficulty with intraoperative 
handling and graft take. There are promising developments in 
skin culturing techniques and engineered skin development, but 
no other products are Food and Drug Administration approved 
and commercially available.132
Thighs make convenient anatomic donor sites; they are 
easily harvested and relatively hidden from an aesthetic stand-
point. The thicker skin of the back is useful in older patients, 
who have thinner skin elsewhere and may have difficulty with 
healing of donor sites. The buttocks are an excellent donor site 
in infants and toddlers; silver sulfadiazine can be applied to the 
donor site with a diaper as coverage. The scalp is also an excel-
lent donor site; the skin is thick and the many hair follicles allow 
rapid healing, with the added advantage of being completely 
hidden once hair regrows. Epinephrine tumescence is necessary 
for harvesting the scalp, for both hemostasis of this hypervas-
cular area and also to create a smooth contoured surface for 
harvesting.
The list of commonly used donor site dressings is long 
and includes simple transparent films to hydrocolloids, petro-
latum gauzes, and silver-impregnated dressings. Donor sites 
close to fresh grafts may be dressed with a porous nonadher-
ent gauze, and both the donors and grafts are soaked with an 
antimicrobial solution. Principals behind choosing a dressing 
should balance ease of care, comfort, infection control, and 
cost. The choice of donor site dressing is largely institution 
dependent, and few data support the clear superiority of any 
single treatment plan.
235
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
REHABILITATION
Rehabilitation is an integral part of the clinical care plan for the 
burn patient and should be initiated on admission. Immediate 
and ongoing physical and occupational therapy is mandatory to 
prevent functional loss. Patients who are unable to actively par-
ticipate should have passive range of motion done at least twice 
a day. This includes patients with burns over joints, such as with 
hand burns. Patients should be taught exercises they can do them-
selves to maintain full range of motion. Patients with foot and 
extremity burns should be instructed to walk independently with-
out crutches or other assistive devices to prevent extremity swell-
ing, desensitize the burned areas, and prevent disuse atrophy; 
when patients are not ambulating, they must elevate the affected 
extremity to minimize swelling. If postoperative immobilization 
is used for graft protection, the graft should be evaluated early and 
at frequent intervals so that active exercise can be resumed at the 
earliest possible occasion. The transition to outpatient care should 
also include physical and occupational therapy, with introduction 
of exercises designed to accelerate return to activities of daily 
living as well as specific job-related tasks. Tight-fitting pressure 
garments provide vascular support in burns that are further along 
in the healing process. Whether they prevent hypertrophic scar 
formation has been long debated. However, they do provide vas-
cular support that many patients find more comfortable.
Once patients have recovered from their acute burns, many 
face management of the hypertrophic burn scars. In patients 
with healed burns or donor sites, hypertrophic scar-related mor-
bidity includes pruritus, erythema, pain, thickened tight skin, 
and even contractures. Within these scars, there is believed to be 
an increased inflammatory response that has increased neovas-
cularization, abundant collagen production, and abnormal extra-
cellular matrix structure. Treatment for these scars has included 
nonsurgical therapies such as compression garments, silicone 
gel sheeting, massage, physical therapy, and corticosteroid. Sur-
gical excision and scar revision represent more invasive scar 
management approaches that are often necessary for functional 
and aesthetic recovery.
Laser-based therapies provide addition treatment options 
for symptomatic hypertrophic scars. Two of the most common 
ones are the pulsed dye laser (PDL) and the ablative carbon 
dioxide (CO2) laser. The PDL causes photothermolysis of 
hemoglobin, resulting in coagulative necrosis.133 It obliterates 
small capillaries close to the skin and has had success treating 
congenital, cutaneous vascular malformations. The CO2 laser 
has been used for treatment of acne and recently has been gain-
ing increasing acceptance for its use to treat hypertrophic burn 
scars.134 It works by ablating microscopic columns of tissue to 
flatten scars and is also believed to stimulate matrix metallo-
proteinases and other signaling pathways to induce collagen 
reorganization. Lasers are believed to help with scar remodel-
ing and collagen reorganization. Outpatient and office-based 
treatment sessions are tolerated well by most patients. There is 
wide practice variation on when to start therapy and the number 
of treatments, but the literature has general support for start-
ing treatment at 6 to 12 months and offering three treatments. 
More research is needed to determine the full potential of laser 
therapy to provide burn survivors a less invasive treatment of 
hypertrophic scars with improved symptoms and quality of life.
Psychological rehabilitation is equally important in the 
burn patient. Depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, concerns 
about image, and anxiety about returning to society constitute 
predictable barriers to progress in both the inpatient and outpa-
tient setting. Psychological distress occurs in as many as 34% 
of burn patients and persists in severity long after discharge.135 
Despite this, many patients will be able to quickly return to 
work or school, and goals should be set accordingly. The return 
to school for pediatric patients is actually very prompt, averag-
ing about 10 days after discharge. However, further study is 
needed to determine whether attendance and performance suffer 
despite early re-entry to school.136 The involvement of clinical 
psychologists and psychiatrists is invaluable in providing guid-
ance and coping techniques to lessen the significant psychologi-
cal burden of burn injury.
PREVENTION
Despite many areas of progress in prevention, burns continue 
to be a common source of injury. Some successful initiatives 
have included community-based interventions targeting simple 
home safety measures. Smoke alarms are known to decrease 
mortality from structural fires, but not all homes are equipped 
with proper smoke alarms, particularly in low-income house-
holds. Mandatory smoke alarm installation via community ini-
tiatives can be successful, but seems to be contingent on close 
long-term follow-up to ensure proper maintenance and func-
tion.137,138 Regulation of hot water heater temperatures has had 
some success and may be even more effective in conjunction 
with community-based programs emphasizing education and 
in-home inspections.139,140
RADIATION BURNS
Interest in mass burn casualty disaster planning invariably 
includes a discussion of radiation burns. The 1945 nuclear 
bombing on Hiroshima and Nagasaki provided several impor-
tant lessons for healthcare providers. First, the proximity to the 
detonated bomb directly impacted mortality. The fatality rate at 
0.6 miles from ground zero was 86%, decreased to 27% at 0.6 to 
1.6 miles, and was 2% for patients 1.6 to 3.1 miles away. Over 
122,338 individuals died in Hiroshima, and 68,000 of these 
deaths occurred in the first 20 days. Of the survivors, 79,130 
people were injured and 118,613 remain uninjured. Estimates 
of the injuries at Hiroshima suggest that 90% of patients had 
burns, 83% sustained traumatic injuries, and 37% had radiation 
injuries.141,142
The mechanism of the explosion explains how radioactive 
material is distributed. A 20-kiloton nuclear device generates 
180 mph winds 0.8 miles from the epicenter. The explosion 
results in a direct pressure wave and an indirect wind drag. The 
direct pressure can destroy windows and buildings, rupture ear-
drums, and cause pulmonary contusions, pneumothoraces, and 
hemothoraces. Radiation travels linearly, resulting in varying 
degree of burns depending on the distance from ground zero 
and time of exposure. A fireball at detonation sends radioactive 
material into the air and follows wind patterns settling to the 
ground in a predictable pattern. Thermal injuries near ground 
zero result in 100% fatalities due to incineration.141,142
Radioactive material results in both acute injury from 
immediate exposure and more prolonged injury from delayed 
exposure to radioactive fallout or contamination. When a 
10-kiloton nuclear bomb is detonated, people at a distance 0.7 
miles from ground zero absorb 4.5 Gy. At 60 days, the medial 
lethal radiation dose (LD50) is 3.5 Sv; with aggressive medical 
236
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
care, this dose might be doubled to nearly 7 Sv. To put this in 
context, radiation exposure from a diagnostic CT of the chest or 
abdomen is 5 mSv, and the average annual background absorbed 
radiation dose is 3.6 mSv. Radiation is known to impact several 
organ systems and result in several syndromes based on increas-
ing exposure doses. These syndromes include hematologic (1–8 Sv 
exposure), gastrointestinal (8–30 Sv exposure), and cardiovas-
cular/neurologic syndromes (>30 Sv exposure), with the latter 
two being nonsurvivable.141-143
After initial evaluation and decontamination by removing 
clothing, a useful way to estimate exposure is by determining 
the time to emesis. Patients who do not experience emesis within 
4 hours of exposure are unlikely to have severe clinical effects. 
Emesis within 2 hours suggests a dose of at least 3 Sv, and 
emesis within 1 hour suggests at least 4 Sv. The hematologic 
system follows a similar dose-dependent temporal pattern for 
predicting radiation exposure, mortality, and treatment. These 
have been determined based on the Armed Forces Radiobiology 
Research Institute’s Biodosimetry Assessment Tool, which can 
be downloaded from www.afrri.usuhs.mil.
The combination of radiation exposure and burn wounds 
has the potential to increase mortality compared with traditional 
burns. Early closure of wounds before radiation depletes circu-
lating lymphocytes may be needed for wound healing (which 
occurs within 48 hours). Also, in radiation injuries combined 
with burn or trauma, laboratory lymphocyte counts may be 
unreliable.141-144 A significant difference between burn/traumatic 
injuries and radiation injures is that burn/traumatic injuries can 
result in higher mortality when not treated within hours.
Decontamination and triage are vital to maximize the num-
ber of survivors. Initial decontamination requires removal of 
clothing and washing wounds with water. Irrigation fluid should 
be collected to prevent radiation spread into the water supply. 
Work by many professional organizations, including the ABA, 
has focused on nationwide triage for disasters and will be vital to 
save as many lives as possible. Yet, it is likely that expectant or 
comfort care could be offered to more patients than typically seen 
in civilian hospitals, due to resource availability after the disaster.
FUTURE AREAS OF STUDY
It has long been anecdotally noted that two patients of similar 
ages and burn size may have very divergent responses to their 
burn injuries. Attention is being increasingly turned to identify-
ing genetic differences among burn patients and how they affect 
response to injury. Specific allele variants have been linked with 
increased mortality in burned patients.145 It may be that genetic 
differences may predispose burn patients to severe sepsis,146 per-
haps by downregulating the immune response.147 The Inflam-
mation and the Host Response to Injury trial was a prospective, 
multicenter, federally funded study that aimed to define specific 
genetic pathways that differ in the response to both burns and 
traumatic injury.148 Blood and tissue samples from a strictly 
defined patient population were analyzed using gene arrays 
to determine whether differential expression in certain genetic 
pathways affects clinical outcomes.149 Although data from this 
study are still being analyzed, some interesting findings sug-
gest that sepsis, trauma, and burn patients share common gene 
expression patterns, starting early after injury. These genes can 
upregulate proinflammatory pathways as well as disrupt antigen 
presentation pathways. A better understanding of these com-
mon genomic responses may allow for the targeted treatment 
of immunologic and signal pathways to help improve patient 
survival from burn injuries.
With the dramatic progress in improving survival follow-
ing a major burn injury during the twentieth century, under-
standing and addressing functional and psychological outcomes 
is critical to the well-being of burn survivors. Since 1993, the 
National Institute of Disability and Rehabilitation Research has 
funded four burn model systems to identify long-term sequelae 
of burn injuries and to develop ways to improve outcomes for 
survivors. Ongoing outcome studies are crucial for dismantling 
barriers that our patients face in returning to their communities 
and to the workplace or to school.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Baxter CR, Shires T. Physiological response to crystalloid 
resuscitation of severe burns. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1968;150:874.
2.	Janzekovic Z. A new concept in the early excision and imme-
diate grafting of burns. J Trauma. 1970;10(12):1103-1108.
3.	Practice Guidelines for Burn Care. J Burn Care Rehabil. 
2001;22:1S.
4.	Supple KG, Fiala SM, Gamelli RL. Preparation for burn ­center 
verification. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1997;18:58-60.
5.	Klein, MB, Kramer CB, Nelson J, et al. Geographic access to 
burn center hospitals. JAMA. 2009;302(16):1774-1781.
6.	 Klein MB, Nathens AB, Emerson D, et al. An analysis of the 
long-distance transport of burn patients to a regional burn 
center. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):49-55.
7.	Freiburg C, Igneri P, Sartorelli K, et al. Effects of differ-
ences in percent total body surface area estimation on fluid 
resuscitation of transferred burn patients. J Burn Care Res. 
2007;28(1):42-48.
8.	Prien T, Traber DL. Toxic smoke compounds and inhalation 
injury: a review. Burns Incl Therm Inj. 1988;14:451-460.
9.	Crapo RO. Smoke-inhalation injuries. JAMA. 1981;246: 
1694-1696.
10.	Hampson NB, Mathieu D, Piantadosi CA, et al. Carbon mon-
oxide poisoning: interpretation of randomized clinical trials 
and unresolved treatment issues. Undersea Hyperb Med. 
2001;28:157.
11.	Juurlink DN, Stanbrook MB, McGuigan MA. Hyperbaric oxy-
gen for carbon monoxide poisoning. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2000;2:CD002041.
12.	Grube BJ, Marvin JA, Heimbach DM. Therapeutic hyperbaric 
oxygen: help or hindrance in burn patients with carbon mon-
oxide poisoning? J Burn Care Rehabil. 1988;9:249.
13.	Hampson NB, Zmaeff JL. Outcome of patients experiencing 
cardiac arrest with carbon monoxide poisoning treated with 
hyperbaric oxygen. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;38:36.
14.	Becker CE. The role of cyanide in fires. Vet Hum Toxicol. 
1985;27:487-490.
15.	Charnock EL, Meehan JJ. Postburn respiratory injuries in chil-
dren. Pediatr Clin N Am. 1980;27:661-676.
16.	Barillo DJ, Goode R, Esch V. Cyanide poisoning in victims of 
fire: analysis of 364 cases and review of the literature. J Burn 
Care Rehabil. 1994;15(1):46-57.
17.	American Burn Association. Burn incidence and treatment in 
the US: 2007 fact sheet. Available at http://www.ameriburn.
org/resources_factsheet.php. Accessed January 6, 2008.
18.	Arnoldo B, Klein M, Gibran NS. Practice guidelines for the 
management of electrical injuries. J Burn Care Res. 2006; 
27(4):439-447.
19.	Chick LR, Borah G. Calcium carbonate gel therapy for 
hydrofluoric acid burns of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1990;86(5):935-940.
237
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
20.	Hatzifotis M, Williams A, Muller M, et al. Hydrofluoric acid 
burns. Burns. 2004;30(2):156-159.
21.	Dunser MW, Ohlbauer M, Rieder J, et al. Critical care man-
agement of major hydrofluoric acid burns: a case report, 
review of the literature, and recommendations for therapy. 
Burns. 2004;30(4):391-398.
22.	 Dupuytren G, Doane AS. Clinical Lectures on Surgery: Delivered 
at Hotel Dieu. Boston: Carter, Hendee; 1832.
23.	Jackson D. The diagnosis of the depth of burning. J Br Surg. 1953; 
40:588-596.
24.	Watts AM, Tyler MP, Perry ME, et al. Burn depth and its histo­
logical measurement. Burns. 2001;27(2):154-160.
25.	Bray R, Forrester K, Leonard C, et al. Laser Doppler imag-
ing of burn scars: a comparison of wavelength and scanning 
methods. Burns. 2003;29(3):199-206.
26.	Mileski WJ, Atiles L, Purdue G, et al. Serial measurements 
increase the accuracy of laser Doppler assessment of burn 
wounds. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2003;24:187-191.
27.	Iraniha S, Cinat ME, VanderKam VM, et al. Determination 
of burn depth with noncontact ultrasonography. J Burn Care 
Rehabil. 2000;21(4):333-338.
28.	Zawacki BE, Azen SP, Imbus SH, et al. Multifactorial pro-
bit analysis of mortality in burn patients. Ann Surg. 1979; 
189:1-5.
29.	Ryan CM, Schoenfeld DA, Thorpe WP, et al. Objective esti-
mates of the probability of death from burn injuries. N Engl J 
Med. 1998;362-366.
30.	Moreau AR, Westfall PH, Cancio LC, et al. Development and 
validation of an age-risk score for mortality prediction after 
thermal injury. J Trauma. 2005;58(5):967-972.
31.	Mandell SP, Pham T, Klein MB. Repeat hospitalization 
and mortality in older adult burn patients. J Burn Care Res. 
2013;34(1):e36-41.
32.	Thombs BD, Singh VA, Halonen J, et al. The effects of preex-
isting medical comorbidities on mortality and length of hospi-
tal stay in acute burn injury: evidence from a national sample 
of 31,338 adult patients. Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):629-634.
33.	McGwin G, George RL, Cross JM, et al. Improving the 
ability to predict mortality among burn patients. Burns. 
2008;34(3):320-327.
34.	Jeng JC, Jablonski K, Bridgeman A, et al. Serum lactate, not 
base deficit, rapidly predicts survival after major burns. Burns. 
2002;28(2):161-166.
35.	Cochrane A, Edelman LS, Saffle JR, et al. The relationship 
of serum lactate and base deficit in burn patients to mortality. 
J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(2):231-240.
36.	Cartotto R, Choi J, Gomez M, et al. A prospective study on the 
implications of a base deficit during fluid resuscitation. J Burn 
Care Rehabil. 2003;24(2):75-84.
37.	Andel D, Kamolz LP, Roka J, et al. Base deficit and lactate: 
early predictors of morbidity and mortality in patients with 
burns. Burns. 2007;33(8):973-978.
38.	Venkatesh B, Meacher R, Muller MJ, et al. Monitoring tissue 
oxygenation during resuscitation of major burns. J Trauma. 
2001;50(3):485-494.
39.	Lorente JA, Ezpleta A, Esteban A, et al. Systemic hemo-
dynamics, gastric intramucosal Pco2 changes, and outcome 
in critically ill burn patients. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(6): 
1728-1735.
40.	Holm C, Mayr M, Tegeler J, et al. A clinical randomized study 
on the effects of invasive monitoring on burn shock resuscita-
tion. Burns. 2004;30(8):798-807.
41.	Cartotto RC, Innes M, Musgrave MA, et al. How well does the 
Parkland formula estimate actual fluid resuscitation volumes? 
J Burn Care Rehabil. 2002;23(4):258-265.
42.	 Engrav LH, Colescott PL, Kemalyan N, et al. A biopsy of the 
use of the Baxter formula to resuscitate burns or do we do it 
like Charlie did it? J Burn Care Rehabil. 2000;21(2):91-95.
43.	 Friedrich JB, Sullivan SR, Engrav LH, et al. Is supra-
Baxter resuscitation in burn patients a new phenomenon? 
Burns. 2004;30(5):464-466.
44.	Sullivan SR, Friedrich JB, Engrav LH, et al. “Opioid 
creep” is real and may be the cause of “fluid creep.” Burns. 
2004;30(6):583-590.
45.	Navar PD, Saffle JR, Warden GD. Effect of inhalation injury 
on fluid resuscitation requirements after thermal injury. Am J 
Surg. 1985;150(6):716-720.
46.	Dai NT, Chen TM, Cheng TY, et al. The comparison of early 
fluid therapy in extensive flame burns between inhalation and 
noninhalation injuries. Burns. 1998;24(7):671-675.
47.	Cancio LC, Chavez S, Alvarado-Ortega M, et al. Predicting 
increased fluid requirements during the resuscitation of ther-
mally injured patients. J Trauma. 2004;56(2):404-414.
48.	Klein MB, Hayden D, Elson C, et al. The association between 
fluid administration and outcome following major burn: a 
multicenter study. Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):622-628.
49.	O’Mara MS, Slater H, Goldfarb IW, et al. A prospective, ran-
domized evaluation of intra-abdominal pressures with crys-
talloid and colloid resuscitation in burn patients. J Trauma. 
2005;58(5):1011-1018.
50.	Cochrane A, Morris SE, Edelman LS, et al. Burn patient char-
acteristics and outcomes following resuscitation with albumin. 
Burns. 2007;33(1):25-30.
51.	Perel P, Roberts I. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resus-
citation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2007;4:CD000567.
52.	Kinsky MP, Milner SM, Button B, et al. Resuscitation 
of severe thermal injury with hypertonic saline dextran: 
effects on peripheral and visceral edema in sheep. J Trauma. 
2000;49(5):844-853.
53.	Tanaka H, Matsuda T, Miyagantani Y, et al. Reduction of 
resuscitation fluid volumes in severely burned patients using 
ascorbic acid administration: a randomized, prospective study. 
Arch Surg. 2000;135(3):326-331.
54.	Warden GD, Stratta RJ, Saffle JR, et al. Plasma exchange 
therapy in patients failing to resuscitate from burn shock. 
J Trauma. 1983;23:945.
55.	Cannon JW, Chung KK, King DR. Advanced technologies 
in trauma critical care management. Surg Clin North Am. 
2012;92(4):903-923.
56.	Gunst M, Sperry J, Ghaemmaghami V, et al. Bedside echo-
cardiographic assessment for trauma/critical care: the BEAT 
exam. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(3):e1-3.
57.	Yarmus L, Feller-Kopman D. Pneumothorax in the critically 
ill patient. Chest. 2012;141(4):1098-1105.
58.	Callcut RA, Cotton BA, Muskat P, et al. Defining when to ini-
tiate massive transfusion: a validation study of individual mas-
sive transfusion triggers in PROMMTT patients. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(1):59-68.
59.	Brown LM, Aro SO, Cohen MJ, et al. A high fresh frozen 
plasma: packed red blood cell transfusion ratio decreases 
mortality in all massively transfused trauma patients regard-
less of admission international normalized ratio. J Trauma. 
2011;71(2 Suppl 3):S358-S363.
60.	Benson D, Barnett CC Jr. Perioperative blood transfu-
sions promote pancreas cancer progression. J Surg Res. 
2011;166(2):275-279.
61.	Palmieri TL, Caruso DM, Foster KN, et al. Effect of blood 
transfusion on outcome after major burn injury: a multicenter 
study. Crit Care Med. 2006;34(6):1602-1607.
62.	Palmieri TL, Lee T, O’Mara MS, et al. Effects of a restrictive 
blood transfusion policy on outcomes in children with burn 
injury. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):65-70.
63.	Higgins S, Fowler R, Callum J, et al. Transfusion-related 
acute lung injury in patients with burns. J Burn Care Res. 
2007;28(1):56-64.
238
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
64.	Still JM Jr, Belcher K, Law EJ, et al. A double-blinded pro-
spective evaluation of recombinant human erythropoietin in 
acutely burned patients. J Trauma. 1995;38(2):233-236.
65.	Muller MJ, Pegg SP, Rule MR. Determinants of death follow-
ing burn injury. Br J Surg. 2001;88:583.
66.	Tredget EE, Shankowsky HA, Taerum TV, et al. The role of 
inhalation injury in burn trauma. A Canadian experience. Ann 
Surg. 1990;212(6):720-727.
67.	Shirani KZ, Pruitt BA, Mason AD. The influence of inha-
lation injury and pneumonia on burn mortality. Ann Surg. 
1987;205(1):82-87.
68.	Wright MJ, Murphy JT. Smoke inhalation enhances early 
alveolar leukocyte responsiveness to endotoxin. J Trauma. 
2005;59(1):64-70.
69.	Darling GE, Keresteci MA, Ibanez D, et al. Pulmonary com-
plications in inhalation injuries with associated cutaneous 
burn. J Trauma. 1996;40(1):83-89.
70.	Jones WG, Barie PS, Madden M, et al. The use of compliance 
in predicting early mortality after inhalation injury. Curr Surg. 
1988;45(4):309-312.
71.	Mlcak R, Cortiella J, Desai M, et al. Lung compliance, airway 
resistance, and work of breathing in children after inhalation 
injury. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1997;18(6):531-534.
72.	Demling R, Lalonde C, Youn YK, et al. Effect of graded 
increases in smoke inhalation injury on the early systemic 
response to a body burn. Crit Care Med. 1995;23(1):171-178.
73.	Mosier MJ, Gamelli RL, Halerz MM, et al. Microbial con-
tamination in burn patients undergoing urgent intubation as 
part of their early airway management. J Burn Care Res. 
2008;29(2):304-310.
74.	Gore MA, Joshi AR, Nagarajan G, et al. Virtual bronchoscopy 
for diagnosis of inhalation injury in burnt patients. Burns. 
2004;30:165-168.
75.	Schall GL, McDonald HD, Carr LB, et al. Xenon ventilation-
perfusion lung scans: the early diagnosis of inhalation injury. 
JAMA. 1978;240:2441.
76.	 Endorf F, Gamelli RL. Inhalation injury, pulmonary perturba-
tions, and fluid resuscitation. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):80-83.
77.	Ramzy PI, Barret JP, Herndon DN. Thermal injury. Crit Care 
Clin. 1999;15(2):333-352.
78.	Enkhbaatar P, Murakami K, Cox R, et al. Aerosolized tissue 
plasminogen inhibitor improves pulmonary function in sheep 
with burn and smoke inhalation. Shock. 2004;22(1):70-75.
79.	Murakami K, McGuire R, Cox RA, et al. Recombinant anti-
thrombin attenuates pulmonary inflammation following smoke 
inhalation and pneumonia in sheep. Crit Care Med. 2003; 
31(2):577-583.
80.	 Pallua N, Warbanow K, Noah EM, et al. Intrabronchial surfactant 
application in cases of inhalation injury: first results from patients 
with severe burns and ARDS. Burns. 1998;24(3):197-206.
81.	Sheridan RL, Zapol WM, Ritz RH, et al. Low-dose inhaled 
nitric oxide in acutely burned children with profound respira-
tory failure. Surgery. 1999;126:856.
82.	Moylan JA, Alexander LG Jr. Diagnosis and treatment of 
inhalation injury. World J Surg. 1978;2:185-191.
83.	Thompson BT. Glucocorticoids and acute lung injury. Crit 
Care Med. 2003;31:S253.
84.	Hollingsed TC, Saffle JR, Barton RG, et al. Etiology and con-
sequences of respiratory failure in thermally injured patients. 
Am J Surg. 1993;166:592.
85.	 Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with tradi-
tional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome. The Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome Network. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1301.
86.	Sheridan RL, Kacmarek RM, McEttrick MM, et al. Permis-
sive hypercapnia as a ventilatory strategy in burned children: 
effect on barotrauma, pneumonia, and mortality. J Trauma. 
1995;39:854.
87.	Venet C, Guyomarch S, Migeot C, et al. The oxygenation 
variations related to prone positioning during mechanical ven-
tilation: a clinical comparison between ARDS and non-ARDS 
hypoxemic patients. Intensive Care Med. 2001;27:1352.
88.	Reper P, Van Bos R, Van Loey K, et al. High frequency per-
cussive ventilation in burn patients: hemodynamics and gas 
exchange. Burns. 2003;29:603.
89.	Hall JJ, Hunt JL, Arnoldo BD, et al. Use of high-frequency 
percussive ventilation in inhalation injuries. J Burn Care Res. 
2007;28(3):396-400.
90.	Cartotto R, Ellis S, Gomez M, et al. High frequency oscil-
latory ventilation in burn patients with the acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. Burns. 2004;30:453-463.
91.	Patton ML, Simone MR, Kraut JD, et al. Successful utilization 
of ECMO to treat an adult burn patient with ARDS. Burns. 
1998;24:566.
92.	Schmalstieg FC, Keeney SE, Rudloff HE, et al. Arteriovenous 
CO2 removal improves survival compared to high frequency 
percussive and low tidal volume ventilation in a smoke/burn 
sheep acute respiratory distress syndrome model. Ann Surg. 
2007;246(3):512-521; discussion 521-523.
93.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Mlcak R, et al. Persistence of muscle 
catabolism after severe burn. Surgery. 2000;128(2):312-319.
94.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Chinkes DL, et al. Determinants of 
skeletal muscle catabolism after severe burn. Ann Surg. 
2000;232(4):455-465.
95.	Gottschlich MM, Jenkins ME, Mayes T, et al. The 2002 clini-
cal research award: an evaluation of the safety of early vs. 
delayed enteral support and effects on clinical, nutritional, and 
endocrine outcomes after severe burns. J Burn Care Rehabil. 
2002;23(6):401-415.
96.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Chinkes DL, et al. Effects of early exci-
sion and aggressive enteral feeding on hypermetabolism, 
catabolism, and sepsis after severe burn. J Trauma. 2003; 
54(4):755-764.
97.	Jeschke MG, Herndon DN, Ebener C, et al. Nutritional 
intervention high in vitamins, protein, amino acids, and 
(omega)3 fatty acids improves protein metabolism during 
the hypermetabolic state after thermal injury. Arch Surg. 
2001;136(11):1301-1306.
98.	Sefton EJ, Boulton-Jones JR, Anderton D, et al. Enteral feed-
ing in patients with major burn injury: the use of nasojeju-
nal feeding after the failure of nasogastric feeding. Burns. 
2002;28(4):386-390.
99.	Jenkins ME, Gottschlich MM, Warden GD. Enteral feeding 
during operative procedures in thermal injuries. J Burn Care 
Rehabil. 1994;15:199.
100.	Garrel D, Patenaude J, Nedelec B, et al. Decreased mortality 
and infectious morbidity in adult burn patients given enteral 
glutamine supplements: a prospective, controlled, randomized 
clinical trial. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(10):2444-2449.
101.	Choudry MA, Haque F, Khan M, et al. Enteral nutritional 
supplementation prevents mesenteric lymph node T-cell 
suppression in burn injury. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(6): 
1764-1770.
102.	Liusuwan RA, Palmieri TL, Kinoshita L, et al. Compari-
son of measured resting energy expenditure vs. predictive 
equations in pediatric burn patients. J Burn Care Rehabil. 
2005;26(6):464-470.
103.	 Hart DW, Wolf SE, Herndon DN, et al. Energy expenditure and 
caloric balance after burn: increased feeding leads to fat rather 
than lean mass accretion. Ann Surg. 2002;235(1):152-161.
104.	Herndon DN, Hart DW, Wolf SE, et al. Reversal of catabo-
lism by beta-blockade after severe burns. N Engl J Med. 2001; 
345(17):1223-1229.
105.	 Arbabi S, Ahrns KS, Wahl WL, et al. Beta-blocker use is associ-
ated with improved outcomes in adult burn patients. J Trauma. 
2004;56(2):265-269; discussion 269-271.
239
BURNS
CHAPTER 8
106.	Murphy KD, Thomas S, Mlcak RP, et al. Effects of long-
term oxandrolone administration in severely burned children. 
­Surgery. 2004;136(2):219-224.
107.	Demling RH, DeSanti L. Oxandrolone induced lean mass gain 
during recovery from severe burns is maintained after discon-
tinuation of the anabolic steroid. Burns. 2003;29:793.
108.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Suman OE, et al. The effect of 
oxandrolone on the endocrinologic, inflammatory, and hyper-
metabolic responses during the acute phase postburn. Ann 
Surg. 2007;246(3):351-360; discussion 360-362.
109.	 Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin 
therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1359-1367.
110.	Thomas SJ, Morimoto K, Herndon DN, et al. The effect of 
prolonged euglycemic hyperinsulinemia on lean body mass 
after severe burn. Surgery. 2002;132(2):341-347.
111.	Jeschke MG, Klein D, Herndon DN. Insulin treatment 
improves the systemic inflammatory reaction to severe 
trauma. Ann Surg. 2004;239(4):553-560.
112.	Gore DC, Wolf SE, Sanford A, et al. Influence of metfor-
min on glucose intolerance and muscle catabolism following 
severe burn injury. Ann Surg. 2005;241(2):334-342.
113.	Pham TN, Neff MJ, Simmons JM, et al. The clinical pulmo-
nary infection score poorly predicts pneumonia in patients 
with burns. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):76-79.
114.	Barret JP, Desai MH, Herndon DN. Effects of tracheosto-
mies on infection and airway complications in pediatric burn 
patients. Burns. 2000;26:190.
115.	Saffle JR, Morris SE, Edelman L. Early tracheostomy does 
not improve outcome in burn patients. J Burn Care Rehabil. 
2002;23:431.
116.	Gravvanis AI, Tsoutsos DA, Iconomou TG, et al. Percutane-
ous vs. conventional tracheostomy in burned patients with 
inhalation injury. World J Surg. 2005;29(12):1571-1575.
117.	Hershberger RC, Hunt JL, Arnoldo BD, Purdue GF. Abdomi-
nal compartment syndrome in the severely burned patient. 
J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(5):708-714.
118.	Sullivan SR, Ahmadi AJ, Singh CN, et al. Elevated orbital 
pressure: another untoward effect of massive resuscitation 
after burn injury. J Trauma. 2006;60(1):72-76.
119.	Faucher LD, Conlon KM. Practice guidelines for deep 
venous thrombosis prophylaxis in burns. J Burn Care Res. 
2007;28(5):661-663.
120.	Wibbenmeyer LA, Hoballah JJ, Amelon MJ, et al. The 
prevalence of venous thromboembolism of the lower extrem-
ity among thermally injured patients determined by duplex 
sonography. J Trauma. 2003;55:1162-1167.
121.	Wahl WL, Brandt MM, Ahrns KS, et al. Venous thrombosis 
incidence in burn patients: preliminary results of a prospective 
study. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2002;23:97.
122.	Fecher AM, O’Mara MS, Goldfarb IW, et al. Analysis of deep 
vein thrombosis in burn patients. Burns. 2004;30(6):591-593.
123.	Scott JR, Klein MB, Gernsheimer T, et al. Arterial and venous 
complications of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in burn 
patients. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):71-75.
124.	O’Mara MS, Reed NL, Palmieri TL, et al. Central venous 
catheter infections in burn patients with scheduled catheter 
exchange and replacement. J Surg Res. 2007;142(2):341-350.
125.	 Engrav LH, Heimbach DM, Reus JL, et al. Early excision and graft-
ing vs. nonoperative treatment of burns of indeterminant depth: a 
randomized prospective study. J Trauma. 1983;23:1001-1004.
126.	Thompson P, Herndon DN, Abston S, et al. Effect of early 
excision on patients with major thermal injury. J Trauma. 
1987;27(2):205-207.
127.	Sheridan RL, Tompkins RG. What’s new in burns and metab-
olism. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;198(2):243-263.
128.	Klein MB, Hunter S, Heimbach DM, et al. The Versajet water 
dissector: a new tool for tangential excision. J Burn Care 
Rehabil. 2005;26(6):483-487.
129.	Jones I, Currie L, Martin R. A guide to biological skin substi-
tutes. Br J Plast Surg. 2002;55(3):185-193.
130.	Kearney JN. Clinical evaluation of skin substitutes. Burns. 
2001;27(5):545-551.
131.	Compton CC, Gill JM, Bradford DA, et al. Skin regenerated 
from cultured epithelial autografts on full-thickness burn 
wounds from 6 days to 5 years after grafting. A light, elec-
tron microscopic and immunohistochemical study. Lab Invest. 
1989;60(5):600-612.
132.	Boyce ST, Kagan RJ, Yakuboff KP, et al. Cultured skin sub-
stitutes reduce donor skin harvesting for closure of excised, 
full-thickness burns. Ann Surg. 2002;235(2):269-279.
133.	Parrett BM, Donelan MB. Pulsed dye laser in burn scars: 
current concepts and future directions. Burns. 2010;36(4): 
443-449.
134.	Cho SB, Lee SJ, Chung WS, et al. Treatment of burn scar 
using a carbon dioxide fractional laser. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2010;9(2):173-175.
135.	Carniol PJ, Meshkov L, Grunebaum LD. Laser treatment of 
facial scars. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011; 
19(4):283-288.
136.	Christiansen M, Carrougher GJ, Engrav LH, et al. Time to 
school re-entry after burn injury is quite short. J Burn Care 
Res. 2007;28(3):478-481; discussion 482-483.
137.	Ballesteros MF, Jackson ML, Martin MW. Working toward 
the elimination of residential fire deaths: The Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention’s Smoke Alarm Installation and 
Fire Safety Education (SAIFE) Program. J Burn Care Reha-
bil. 2005;26(5):434-439.
138.	DiGuiseppi C, Roberts I, Wade A, et al. Incidence of fires 
and related injuries after giving out free smoke alarms: cluster 
randomised controlled trial. Br Med J. 2002;325:995-998.
139.	Fallat ME, Rengers SJ. The effect of education and safety 
devices on scald burn prevention. J Trauma. 1993;34:560-564.
140.	Cagle KM, Davis JW, Dominic W, et al. Results of a focused 
scald-prevention program. J Burn Care Res. 2006;27:859-863.
141.	Wolbarst AB, Wiley AL Jr, Nemhauser JB, et al. Medi-
cal response to a major radiologic emergency: a primer 
for medical and public health practitioners. Radiology. 
2010;254(3):660-677.
142.	Flynn DF, Goans RE. Nuclear terrorism: triage and medical 
management of radiation and combined-injury casualties. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86(3):601-636.
143.	DiCarlo AL, Maher C, Hick JL, et al. Radiation injury after 
a nuclear detonation: medical consequences and the need for 
scarce resources allocation. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 
2011;5(Suppl 1):S32-S44.
144.	Palmer JL, Deburghgraeve CR, Bird MD, et al. Development 
of a combined radiation and burn injury model. J Burn Care 
Res. 2011;32(2):317-323.
145.	Barber RC, Aragaki CC, Chang LY, et al. CD14-159 C allele 
is associated with increased risk of mortality after burn injury. 
Shock. 2007;27(3):232-237.
146.	Barber RC, Chang LY, Arnoldo BD, et al. Innate immunity 
SNPs are associated with risk for severe sepsis after burn 
injury. Clin Med Res. 2006;4(4):250-255.
147.	Moore CB, Medina MA, van Deventer HW, et al. Downregu-
lation of immune signaling genes in patients with large surface 
burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(6):879-887.
148.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. Inflammation and host 
response to injury large-scale collaborative research program. 
A genomic storm in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 
2011;208(13):2581-2590.
149.	Klein MB, Silver G, Gamelli RL, et al. Inflammation and the 
Host Response to Injury Investigators. Inflammation and the 
host response to injury: an overview of the multicenter study 
of the genomic and proteomic response to burn injury. J Burn 
Care Res. 2006;27(4):448-451.
This page intentionally left blank 
Wound Healing
Adrian Barbul, David T. Efron, and 
Sandra L. Kavalukas
9
HISTORY OF WOUND HEALING
The earliest accounts of wound healing date back to about 2000 
b.c., when the Sumerians employed two modes of treatment: 
a spiritual method consisting of incantations, and a physical 
method of applying poultice-like materials to the wound. The 
Egyptians were the first to differentiate between infected and 
diseased wounds compared to noninfected wounds. The 1650 
b.c. Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus, a copy of a much older 
document, describes at least 48 different types of wounds. A 
later document (Ebers Papyrus, 1550 b.c.) relates the use of con-
coctions containing honey (antibacterial properties), lint (absor-
bent properties), and grease (barrier) for treating wounds. These 
same properties are still considered essential in contemporary 
daily wound management.
The Greeks, equipped with the knowledge bequeathed 
by the Egyptians, went even further and classified wounds 
as acute or chronic in nature. Galen of Pergamum (120–201 
a.d.), appointed as the doctor to the Roman gladiators, had an 
enormous number of wounds to deal with following gladiato-
rial combats. He emphasized the importance of maintaining a 
moist environment to ensure adequate healing. It took almost 19 
centuries for this important concept to be proven scientifically, 
when it was shown that the epithelialization rate increases by 
50% in a moist wound environment when compared to a dry 
wound environment.1
The next major stride in the history of wound healing 
was the discovery of antiseptics and their importance in reduc-
ing wound infections. Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis, a Hungarian 
obstetrician (1818–1865), noted that the incidence of puerperal 
fever was much lower if medical students, following cadaver-
dissection class and prior to attending childbirth, washed their 
hands with soap and hypochlorite. Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) 
was instrumental in dispelling the theory of spontaneous 
chapter 
History of Wound Healing	
241
Phases of Wound Healing	
241
Hemostasis and Inflammation / 242
Proliferation / 244
Matrix Synthesis / 244
Maturation and Remodeling / 245
Epithelialization / 245
Role of Growth Factors in  
Normal Healing / 246
Wound Contraction / 246
Heritable Diseases of Connective 
Tissue	
246
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome / 246
Marfan’s Syndrome / 246
Osteogenesis Imperfecta / 248
Epidermolysis Bullosa / 248
Acrodermatitis Enteropathica / 249
Healing in Specific Tissues	
249
Gastrointestinal Tract / 249
Bone / 249
Cartilage / 251
Tendon / 251
Nerve / 251
Fetal Wound Healing / 251
Classification of Wounds	
252
Factors Affecting Wound Healing / 252
Chronic Wounds / 259
Excess Healing    	
261
Treatment of Wounds	
264
Local Care / 264
Antibiotics / 265
Dressings / 265
Skin Replacements / 266
generation of germs and proving that germs existed in and were 
always introduced from the environment. Joseph Lister probably 
made one of the most significant contributions to wound healing. 
On a visit to Glasgow, Scotland, Lister noted that some areas of 
the city’s sewer system were less murky than the rest. He dis-
covered that the water from pipes that were dumping waste con-
taining carbolic acid (phenol) was clear. In 1865, Lister began 
soaking his surgical instruments in phenol and spraying the 
operating rooms, reducing the postoperative mortality rates from 
50% to 15%. After attending an impressive lecture by Lister in 
1876, Robert Wood Johnson left the meeting and began 10 years 
of research that would ultimately result in the production of an 
antiseptic dressing in the form of cotton gauze impregnated with 
iodoform. Since then, several other materials have been used to 
impregnate cotton gauze to achieve antisepsis.
The 1960s and 1970s led to the development of polymeric 
dressings. These polymeric dressings can be custom made to 
specific parameters, such as permeability to gases (occlusive 
vs. semiocclusive), varying degrees of absorbency, and differ-
ent physical forms. Due to the ability to customize, the available 
range of materials that aid in wound care has grown exponen-
tially to include an ever-expanding variety. Currently, the prac-
tice of wound healing encompasses manipulation and/or use of, 
among others, inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and bio-
engineered tissue. It is the combination of all these modali-
ties that enables optimal wound healing. 
PHASES OF WOUND HEALING    
As noted by John Hunter (1728–1793), a keen observer of 
biologic phenomena, “. . . the injury alone has in all cases a 
tendency to produce the disposition and the means of a cure.”2 
Normal wound healing follows a predictable pattern that can 
be divided into overlapping phases defined by characteristic 
1
cellular populations and biochemical activities: (a) hemosta-
sis and inflammation, (b) proliferation, and (c) maturation and 
remodeling. An approximate timeline of these events is 
depicted in Fig. 9-1. This sequence of events is fluid and 
overlapping, and in most circumstances spans the time from 
injury to resolution of acute wounds. All wounds need to prog-
ress through this series of cellular and biochemical events that 
242
Figure 9-1.  The cellular, biochemical, and 
mechanical phases of wound healing.
Key Points
1
	 Wound healing is a complex cellular and biochemical cascade 
that leads to restitution of integrity and function.
2
	 Although individual tissues may have unique healing charac-
teristics, all tissues heal by similar mechanisms, and the pro-
cess undergoes phases of inflammation, cellular migration, 
proliferation, matrix deposition, and remodeling.
3
	 Factors that impede normal healing include local, systemic, 
and technical conditions that the surgeon must take into 
account.
4
	 Clinically, excess healing can be as significant a problem 
as impaired healing; genetic, technical, and local factors 
play a major role.
5
	 Optimal outcome of acute wounds relies on complete eval-
uation of the patient and of the wound and application of 
best practices and techniques.
Phases of healing
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Maturation
Proliferation
Inflammation
months
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Relative number of cells
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Fibroblasts
Lymphocytes
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Relative amount of
matrix synthesis
Days postwounding
Collagen I
Collagen III
Wound-breaking
strength
Fibronectin
characterizes the phases of healing in order to successfully 
re-establish tissue integrity.
Hemostasis and Inflammation
Hemostasis precedes and initiates inflammation with the ensuing 
release of chemotactic factors from the wound site (Fig. 9-2A). 
Wounding by definition disrupts tissue integrity, leading to 
2
243
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
division of blood vessels and direct exposure of extracellular 
matrix to platelets. Exposure of subendothelial collagen to plate-
lets results in platelet aggregation, degranulation, and activation 
of the coagulation cascade. Platelet α granules release a num-
ber of wound-active substances, such as platelet-derived growth 
factor (PDGF), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), platelet-
activating factor (PAF), fibronectin, and serotonin. In addition 
to achieving hemostasis, the fibrin clot serves as scaffolding for 
the migration into the wound of inflammatory cells such as poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs, neutrophils) and monocytes.
Cellular infiltration after injury follows a characteristic, 
predetermined sequence (see Fig. 9-1). PMNs are the first infil-
trating cells to enter the wound site, peaking at 24 to 48 hours. 
Increased vascular permeability, local prostaglandin release, 
and the presence of chemotactic substances such as complement 
factors, interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 
TGF-β, platelet factor 4, or bacterial products all stimulate neu-
trophil migration.
The postulated primary role of neutrophils is phagocytosis 
of bacteria and tissue debris. PMNs are also a major source of 
cytokines early during inflammation, especially TNF-α3 which 
may have a significant influence on subsequent angiogenesis and 
Figure 9-2.  The phases of wound healing viewed histologically. 
A. The hemostatic/inflammatory phase. B. Latter inflammatory phases 
reflecting infiltration by mononuclear cells and lymphocytes. C. The 
proliferative phase, with associated angiogenesis and collagen synthesis.
Epidermis
Fibrin
Platelets
Clot
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Scab
Collagen
Macrophage
Endothelial
buds
Disrupted
blood vessel
Red blood
cells
Dermis
A
B
C
Epidermis
Dermis
Epidermis
Dermis
Fibroblast
collagen synthesis (see Fig. 9-2B). PMNs also release proteases 
such as collagenases, which participate in matrix and ground sub-
stance degradation in the early phase of wound healing. Other 
than their role in limiting infections, these cells do not appear to 
play a role in collagen deposition or acquisition of mechanical 
wound strength. On the contrary, neutrophil factors have been 
implicated in delaying the epithelial closure of wounds.4
The second population of inflammatory cells that invades 
the wound consists of macrophages, which are recognized as 
being essential to successful healing.5 Derived from circulat-
ing monocytes, macrophages achieve significant numbers in the 
wound by 48 to 96 hours postinjury and remain present until 
wound healing is complete.
Macrophages, like neutrophils, participate in wound 
débridement via phagocytosis and contribute to microbial stasis via 
oxygen radical and nitric oxide synthesis (see Fig. 9-2B,C). The 
macrophage’s most pivotal function is activation and recruit-
ment of other cells via mediators such as cytokines and growth 
factors, as well as directly by cell-cell interaction and intercellu-
lar adhesion molecules (ICAM). By releasing such mediators as 
TGF-β, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like 
growth factor (IGF), epithelial growth factor (EGF), and lac-
tate, macrophages regulate cell proliferation, matrix synthesis, 
and angiogenesis.6,7 Macrophages also play a significant role in 
regulating angiogenesis and matrix deposition and remodeling 
(Table 9-1).
T lymphocytes comprise another population of inflam-
matory/immune cells that routinely invades the wound. Less 
numerous than macrophages, T-lymphocyte numbers peak at 
about 1 week postinjury and truly bridge the transition from 
the inflammatory to the proliferative phase of healing. Though 
known to be essential to wound healing, the role of lymphocytes 
in wound healing is not fully defined.8 A significant body of 
Table 9-1 
Macrophage activities during wound healing
Activity
Mediators
Phagocytosis
Reactive oxygen species
Nitric oxide
Débridement
Collagenase, elastase
Cell recruitment 
and activation
Growth factors: PDGF, TGF-β, EGF,  
  IGF
Cytokines: TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6
Fibronectin
Matrix synthesis
Growth factors: TGF-β, EGF, PDGF
Cytokines: TNF-α, IL-1, IFN-γ
Enzymes: arginase, collagenase
Prostaglandins
Nitric oxide
Angiogenesis
Growth factors: FGF, VEGF
Cytokines: TNF-α
Nitric oxide
EGF = epithelial growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; IGF = 
insulin-like growth factor; IFN-γ = interferon-γ; IL = interleukin;  
PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-β = transforming growth 
factor-β; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α; VEGF = vascular endothe-
lial growth factor.
244
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 9-3.  The steps of collagen synthesis. mRNA = messenger RNA.
data supports the hypothesis that T lymphocytes play an active 
role in the modulation of the wound environment. Depletion of 
most wound T lymphocytes decreases wound strength and col-
lagen content,9 while selective depletion of the CD8+ suppressor 
subset of T lymphocytes enhances wound healing. However, 
depletion of the CD4+ helper subset has no effect.10 Lympho-
cytes also exert a downregulating effect on fibroblast collagen 
synthesis by cell-associated interferon (IFN)-γ, TNF-α, and 
IL-1. This effect is lost if the cells are physically separated, sug-
gesting that extracellular matrix synthesis is regulated not only 
via soluble factors but also by direct cell-cell contact between 
lymphocytes and fibroblasts.11
Proliferation
The proliferative phase is the second phase of wound healing 
and roughly spans days 4 through 12 (see Fig. 9-2C). It is dur-
ing this phase that tissue continuity is re-established. Fibroblasts 
and endothelial cells are the last cell populations to infiltrate the 
healing wound, and the strongest chemotactic factor for fibro-
blasts is PDGF.12,13 Upon entering the wound environment, 
recruited fibroblasts first need to proliferate, and then become 
activated, to carry out their primary function of matrix synthesis 
remodeling. This activation is mediated mainly by the cytokines 
and growth factors released from wound macrophages.
Fibroblasts isolated from wounds synthesize more colla-
gen than nonwound fibroblasts, they proliferate less, and they 
actively carry out matrix contraction. Although it is clear that 
the cytokine-rich wound environment plays a significant role in 
this phenotypic alteration and activation, the exact mediators 
are only partially characterized.14,15 Additionally, lactate, which 
accumulates in significant amounts in the wound environment 
over time (~10 mmol), is a potent regulator of collagen syn-
thesis through a mechanism involving adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP)-ribosylation.16,17
Endothelial cells also proliferate extensively during this 
phase of healing. These cells participate in the formation of 
new capillaries (angiogenesis), a process essential to successful 
wound healing. Endothelial cells migrate from intact venules 
close to the wound. Their migration, replication, and new capil-
lary tubule formation is under the influence of such cytokines 
and growth factors as TNF-α, TGF-β, and VEGF. Although 
many cells produce VEGF, macrophages represent a major 
source in the healing wound, and VEGF receptors are located 
specifically on endothelial cells.18,19
Matrix Synthesis
Biochemistry of Collagen.  Collagen, the most abundant pro-
tein in the body, plays a critical role in the successful comple-
tion of adult wound healing. Its deposition, maturation, and 
subsequent remodeling are essential to the functional integrity 
of the wound.
Although there are at least 18 types of collagen described, 
the main ones of interest to wound repair are types I and III. 
Type I collagen is the major component of extracellular matrix 
in skin. Type III, which is also normally present in skin, becomes 
more prominent and important during the repair process.
Biochemically, each chain of collagen is composed of a 
glycine residue in every third position. The second position in 
the triplet is made up of proline or lysine during the translation 
process. The polypeptide chain that is translated from mRNA 
contains approximately 1000 amino acid residues and is called 
protocollagen. Release of protocollagen into the endoplasmic 
reticulum results in the hydroxylation of proline to hydroxy-
proline and of lysine to hydroxylysine by specific hydroxylases 
(Fig. 9-3). Prolyl hydroxylase requires oxygen and iron as cofac-
tors, α-ketoglutarate as co-substrate, and ascorbic acid (vitamin 
C) as an electron donor. In the endoplasmic reticulum, the pro-
tocollagen chain is also glycosylated by the linking of galactose 
and glucose at specific hydroxylysine residues. These steps of 
hydroxylation and glycosylation alter the hydrogen bonding 
forces within the chain, imposing steric changes that force 
the protocollagen chain to assume an α-helical configuration. 
Lysyl
oxidase
ALDOL condensation
Collagen genes
Pre-mRNA
mRNA transcription
mRNA processing
mRNA translation
OH
OH
Triple helix formation
Ribosome
on rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi
Secretory vesicle
Cell membrane
Proline and Lysine hydroxylation
Collagen mRNA
Syndesine
Aldimine
C
H      O
C
H      O
H      O H      O
HO
HO
Procollagen peptidase
Extracellular space
α-1
α-1
α-2
Nonenzymatic
NH2
C
C
C
C
245
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
Three α-helical chains entwine to form a right-handed super-
helical structure called procollagen. At both ends, this struc-
ture contains nonhelical peptide domains called registration 
peptides. Although initially joined by weak, ionic bonds, the 
procollagen molecule becomes much stronger by the covalent 
cross-linking of lysine residues.
Extracellularly, the nonhelical registration peptides are 
cleaved by a procollagen peptidase, and the procollagen strands 
undergo further polymerization and cross-linking. The resulting 
collagen monomer is further polymerized and cross-linked by 
the formation of intra- and intermolecular covalent bonds.
Collagen synthesis, as well as posttranslational modifica-
tions, are highly dependent on systemic factors such as an ade-
quate oxygen supply; the presence of sufficient nutrients (amino 
acids and carbohydrates) and cofactors (vitamins and trace met-
als); and the local wound environment (vascular supply and lack 
of infection). Addressing these factors and reversing nutritional 
deficiencies can optimize collagen synthesis and deposition.
Proteoglycan Synthesis.  Glycosaminoglycans comprise a large 
portion of the “ground substance” that makes up granulation tissue. 
Rarely found free, they couple with proteins to form proteoglycans. 
The polysaccharide chain is made up of repeating disaccharide 
units composed of glucuronic or iduronic acid and a hexosamine, 
which is usually sulfated. The disaccharide composition of proteo-
glycans varies from about 10 units in the case of heparan sulfate to 
as much as 2000 units in the case of hyaluronic acid.
The major glycosaminoglycans present in wounds are der-
matan and chondroitin sulfate. Fibroblasts synthesize these com-
pounds, increasing their concentration greatly during the first 3 
weeks of healing. The interaction between collagen and proteo-
glycans is being actively studied. It is thought that the assembly 
of collagen subunits into fibrils and fibers is dependent upon the 
lattice provided by the sulfated proteoglycans. Furthermore, it 
appears that the extent of sulfation is critical in determining the 
configuration of the collagen fibrils. As scar collagen is depos-
ited, the proteoglycans are incorporated into the collagen scaf-
folding. However, with scar maturation and collagen remodeling, 
the content of proteoglycans gradually diminishes.
Maturation and Remodeling
The maturation and remodeling of the scar begins during the 
fibroplastic phase and is characterized by a reorganization of 
previously synthesized collagen. Collagen is broken down by 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and the net wound collagen 
content is the result of a balance between collagenolysis and 
collagen synthesis. There is a net shift toward collagen synthe-
sis and eventually the re-establishment of extracellular matrix 
composed of a relatively acellular collagen-rich scar.
Wound strength and mechanical integrity in the fresh 
wound are determined by both the quantity and quality of the 
newly deposited collagen. The deposition of matrix at the wound 
site follows a characteristic pattern: fibronectin and collagen 
type III constitute the early matrix scaffolding; glycosamino-
glycans and proteoglycans represent the next significant matrix 
components; and collagen type I is the final matrix. By several 
weeks postinjury, the amount of collagen in the wound reaches 
a plateau, but the tensile strength continues to increase for sev-
eral more months.20 Fibril formation and fibril cross-linking 
result in decreased collagen solubility, increased strength, and 
increased resistance to enzymatic degradation of the collagen 
matrix. Fibrillin, a glycoprotein secreted by fibroblasts, is essen-
tial for the formation of elastic fibers found in connective tissue. 
Scar remodeling continues for many (6 to 12) months postin-
jury, gradually resulting in a mature, avascular, and acellular 
scar. The mechanical strength of the scar never achieves that of 
the uninjured tissue.
There is a constant turnover of collagen in the extracellular 
matrix, both in the healing wound as well as during normal tissue 
homeostasis. Collagenolysis is the result of collagenase activity, 
a class of MMPs that require activation. Both collagen synthesis 
and lysis are strictly controlled by cytokines and growth factors. 
Some factors affect both aspects of collagen remodeling. For 
example, TGF-β increases new collagen transcription and also 
decreases collagen breakdown by stimulating synthesis of tis-
sue inhibitors of metalloproteinase.21 This balance of collagen 
deposition and degradation is the ultimate determinant of wound 
strength and integrity.
Epithelialization
While tissue integrity and strength are being re-established, the 
external barrier must also be restored. This process is characterized 
primarily by proliferation and migration of epithelial cells adja-
cent to the wound (Fig. 9-4). The process begins within 1 day of 
injury and is seen as thickening of the epidermis at the wound 
edge. Marginal basal cells at the edge of the wound lose their 
firm attachment to the underlying dermis, enlarge, and begin to 
migrate across the surface of the provisional matrix. Fixed basal 
cells in a zone near the cut edge undergo a series of rapid mitotic 
divisions, and these cells appear to migrate by moving over 
one another in a leapfrog fashion until the defect is covered.22 
Figure 9-4.  The healing by epithelialization of superficial cutane-
ous wounds.
Hair follicle
Sweat gland
Blood vessels
Wound
Epidermis
Dermis
Regenerating
epithelium
Epithelial
island
Epidermis
Dermis
Hair follicle
Sweat gland
Blood vessels
Epidermis
Dermis
246
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Once the defect is bridged, the migrating epithelial cells lose 
their flattened appearance, become more columnar in shape, 
and increase their mitotic activity. Layering of the epithelium is 
re-established, and the surface layer eventually keratinizes.23 
Re-epithelialization is complete in less than 48 hours in 
the case of approximated incised wounds, but may take sub-
stantially longer in the case of larger wounds, where there is a 
significant epidermal/dermal defect. If only the epithelium and 
superficial dermis are damaged, such as occurs in split-thickness 
skin graft donor sites or in superficial second-degree burns, then 
repair consists primarily of re-epithelialization with minimal or 
no fibroplasia and granulation tissue formation. The stimuli for 
re-epithelialization remain incompletely defined; however, it 
appears that the process is mediated by a combination of a loss 
of contact inhibition; exposure to constituents of the extracel-
lular matrix, particularly fibronectin; and cytokines produced by 
immune mononuclear cells.24,25 In particular EGF, TGF-β, basic 
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), PDGF, and IGF-1 have been 
shown to promote epithelialization.
Role of Growth Factors in Normal Healing
Growth factors and cytokines are polypeptides produced in nor-
mal and wounded tissue that stimulate cellular migration, pro-
liferation, and function. They often are named for the cells from 
which they were first derived (e.g., platelet-derived growth fac-
tor, PDGF) or for their initially identified function (e.g., fibro-
blast growth factor, FGF). These names are often misleading 
because growth factors have been demonstrated to have mul-
tiple functions. Most growth factors are extremely potent and 
produce significant effects in nanomolar concentrations.
They may act in an autocrine manner (where the growth fac-
tor acts on the cell producing it), a paracrine manner (by release 
into the extracellular environment, where it acts on the immedi-
ately neighboring cells), or in an endocrine manner (where the 
effect of the substance is distant to the site of release, and the 
substance is carried to the effector site through the blood stream). 
The timing of release may be as important as concentration in 
determining the effectiveness of growth factors. As these poly-
peptides exert their effects by cell-surface receptor binding, the 
appropriate receptor on the responding cells must be present at the 
time of release in order for the biologic effect to occur. Table 9-2 
summarizes the principal growth factors found in healing wounds 
and their known effects on cells participating in the healing pro-
cess. Growth factors have divergent actions on different cells; 
they can be chemoattractive to one cell type while stimulating 
replication of a different cell type. Little is known about the ratio 
of growth factor concentrations, which may be as important as the 
absolute concentration of individual growth factors.
Growth factors act on cells via surface receptor binding. 
Various receptor types have been described, such as ion chan-
nels, G-protein linked, or enzyme linked. The response elicited 
in the cell is usually one of phosphorylation or dephosphoryla-
tion of second-messenger molecules through the action of phos-
phatases or kinases, resulting in activation or deactivation of 
proteins in the cytosol or nucleus of the target cell. Phosphoryla-
tion of nuclear proteins is followed by the initiation of transcrip-
tion of target genes.26 The signal is stopped by internalization of 
the receptor-ligand complex.
Wound Contraction
All wounds undergo some degree of contraction. For wounds that 
do not have surgically approximated edges, the area of the wound 
will be decreased by this action (healing by secondary intention); 
the shortening of the scar itself results in contracture. The myofi-
broblast has been postulated as being the major cell responsible 
for contraction, and it differs from the normal fibroblast in that 
it possesses a cytoskeletal structure. Typically this cell contains 
α-smooth muscle actin in thick bundles called stress fibers, giving 
myofibroblasts contractile capability.27 The α-smooth muscle actin 
is undetectable until day 6, and then is increasingly expressed for 
the next 15 days of wound healing.28 After 4 weeks, this expres-
sion fades and the cells are believed to undergo apoptosis.29 A puz-
zling point is that the identification of myofibroblasts in the wound 
does not correspond directly to the initiation of wound contraction, 
which starts almost immediately after injury.
Fibroblasts placed in a collagen lattice in vitro actively 
move in the lattice and contract it without expressing stress fibers. 
It is postulated that the movement of cells with concomitant reor-
ganization of the cytoskeleton is responsible for contraction.30
HERITABLE DISEASES OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Heritable diseases of connective tissue consist of a group of 
generalized, genetically determined, primary disorders of one 
of the elements of connective tissue: collagen, elastin, or muco-
polysaccharide. Five major types, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 
Marfan’s syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, epidermolysis 
bullosa, and acrodermatitis enteropathica, will be discussed, as 
each provides unique challenges to the surgeon.
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of 10 disorders 
that present as a defect in collagen formation. Over half of 
the affected patients manifest genetic defects encoding alpha 
chains of collagen type V, causing it to be either quantitatively 
or structurally defective. These changes lead to “classic” EDS 
with phenotypic findings that include thin, friable skin with 
prominent veins, easy bruising, poor wound healing, atrophic 
scar formation, recurrent hernias, and hyperextensible joints. 
Gastrointestinal problems include bleeding, hiatal hernia, intes-
tinal diverticulae, and rectal prolapse. Small blood vessels are 
fragile, making suturing difficult during surgery. Large vessels 
may develop aneurysms, varicosities, or arteriovenous fistulas 
or may spontaneously rupture.31–33 Table 9-3 presents a descrip-
tion of EDS subtypes including a recently recognized autoso-
mal recessive form characterized by tenascin-X deficiency. The 
defect is a quantitative loss of protein, resulting in phenotypic 
changes similar to those observed in other types of EDS.
EDS must be considered in every child with recurrent her-
nias and coagulopathy, especially when accompanied by platelet 
abnormalities and low coagulation factor levels. Inguinal her-
nias in these children resemble those seen in adults. Great care 
should be taken to avoid tearing the skin and fascia. The trans-
versalis fascia is thin, and the internal ring is greatly dilated. 
An adult-type repair with the use of mesh or felt may result in a 
lower incidence of recurrence.34
The biochemical changes and phenotypic manifestation of 
the disease represent a major challenge to the surgeon. Dermal 
wounds should be closed in two layers, approximated with the 
sutures under tension, and the stitches should be left in place 
twice as long as usual. In addition, external fixation with adhe-
sive tape can help reinforce the scar and prevent stretching.35
Marfan’s Syndrome
Patients with Marfan’s syndrome have tall stature, arachnodactyly, 
lax ligaments, myopia, scoliosis, pectus excavatum, and aneurysm 
247
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
Table 9-2 
Growth factors participating in wound healing
Growth Factor
Wound Cell Origin
Cellular and Biologic Effects
PDGF
Platelets, macrophages, monocytes, smooth  
  muscle cells, endothelial cells
Chemotaxis: fibroblasts, smooth muscle, monocytes,  
  neutrophils
Mitogenesis: fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells
Stimulation of angiogenesis
Stimulation of collagen synthesis
Enhance re-epithelization
Modulate tissue remodeling
FGF
Fibroblasts, endothelial cells, keratinocytes,  
  smooth muscle cells, chondrocytes
Stimulation of angiogenesis (by stimulation of  
  endothelial cell proliferation and migration)
Mitogenesis: mesoderm and neuroectoderm
HGF
Fibroblasts
Stimulates fibroblasts, keratinocytes, chondrocytes,  
  myoblasts
Suppresses inflammation, granulation tissue formation,  
  angiogenesis, re-epithelialization
Keratinocyte growth  
  factor
Keratinocytes, fibroblasts
Significant homology with FGF; stimulates  
  keratinocytes
EGF
Platelets, macrophages, monocytes (also  
  identified in salivary glands, duodenal  
  glands, kidney, and lacrimal glands)
Stimulates proliferation and migration of all epithelial  
  cell types
TGF-α
Keratinocytes, platelets, macrophages
Homology with EGF; binds to EGF receptor
Mitogenic and chemotactic for epidermal and  
  endothelial cells
TGF-β (three isoforms:  
  β1, β2, β3)
Platelets, T lymphocytes, macrophages,  
  monocytes, neutrophils, fibroblasts,  
  keratinocytes
Stimulates angiogenesis
Stimulates leukocyte chemotaxis
TGF-β1 stimulates wound matrix production  
  (fibronectin, collagen glycosaminoglycans);  
  regulation of inflammation
TGF-β3 inhibits scar formation
Insulin-like growth  
  factors (IGF-1, IGF-2)
Platelets (IGF-1 in high concentrations in  
  liver; IGF-2 in high concentrations in fetal  
  growth); likely the effector of growth  
  hormone action
Promote protein/extracellular matrix synthesis
Increase membrane glucose transport
Vascular endothelial  
  growth factor
Macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells,  
  keratinocytes
Mitogen for endothelial cells (not fibroblasts)
Stimulates angiogenesis
Proinflammatory
IL-1
IL-4
IL-6
Activin
Angiopoitein-1/-2 
  CX3CL1
Macrophages, leukocytes, keratinocytes,  
  fibroblasts
Leukocytes
Fibroblasts, endothelial cells, macrophages,  
  keratinocytes
Keratinocytes, fibroblasts
Endothelial cells
Macrophages, endothelial cells
Proinflammatory
Stimulates angiogenesis, re-epithelialization, tissue  
  remodeling
Enhances collagen synthesis
Stimulates inflammation, angiogenesis, re-epithelialization, 
  collagen deposition, tissue remodeling
Stimulates granulation tissue formation, keratinocyte  
  differentiation, re-epithelialization
Stimulates angiogenesis
Stimulates inflammation, angiogenesis, collagen  
  deposition
Granulocyte- 
  macrophage colony- 
  stimulating factor
Macrophage/monocytes, endothelial cells,  
  fibroblasts
Stimulates macrophage differentiation/proliferation
CX3CL1 = chemokine (C-X3-C motif) ligand; EGF = epidermal growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; HGF = hepatocyte growth factor; IL =  
interleukin; PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; TGF = transforming growth factor.
248
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
of the ascending aorta. Patients who suffer from this syndrome also 
are prone to hernias. Surgical repair of a dissecting aneurysm is dif-
ficult, as the soft connective tissue fails to hold sutures. Skin may be 
hyperextensible but shows no delay in wound healing.36,37
The genetic defect associated with Marfan’s syndrome is 
a mutation in the FBN1 gene, which encodes for fibrillin. Previ-
ously, it was thought that structural alteration of the microfibril-
lar system was responsible for the phenotypic changes seen with 
the disease. However, recent research indicates an intricate role 
that FBN1 gene products play in TGF-β signaling. These extra-
cellular matrix molecules normally bind and regulate TGF-β 
signaling; abnormal FBN1 gene function may cause an increase 
in TGF-β signaling, particularly in the aortic wall.38
Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Patients with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) have brittle bones, 
osteopenia, low muscle mass, hernias, and ligament and joint 
laxity. OI is a result of a mutation in type I collagen. Mutations 
in prolidase, an enzyme responsible for cleaving c-terminal pro-
line and hydroxyproline, may have a role in the disease. There 
are four major OI subtypes with mild to lethal manifestations. 
Patients experience dermal thinning and increased bruisability. 
Scarring is normal, and the skin is not hyperextensible. Surgery 
can be successful but difficult in these patients, as the bones 
fracture easily under minimal stress.31,34 Table 9-4 lists the vari-
ous features associated with the clinical subtypes of OI.
Epidermolysis Bullosa
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is classified into four major sub-
types: EB simplex, junctional EB, dystrophic EB, and Kindler’s 
syndrome. The first three are determined by location in various 
Table 9-3 
Clinical, genetic, and biochemical aspects of Ehlers-Danlos subtypes
Type
Clinical Features
Inheritance
Biochemical Defect
I
Skin: soft, hyperextensible, easy bruising, fragile, atrophic scars;  
hypermobile joints; varicose veins; premature births
AD
Not known
II
Similar to type I, except less severe
AD
Not known
III
Skin: soft, not hyperextensible, normal scars; small and large joint  
hypermobility
AD
Not known
IV
Skin: thin, translucent, visible veins, normal scarring, no hyperextensi-
bility; no joint hypermobility; arterial, bowel, and uterine rupture
AD
Type III collagen defect
V
Similar to type II
XLR
Not known
VI
Skin: hyperextensible, fragile, easy bruising; hypermobile joints;  
hypotonia; kyphoscoliosis
AR
Lysyl hydroxylase  
deficiency
VII
Skin: soft, mild hyperextensibility, no increased fragility; extremely lax 
joints with dislocations
AD
Type I collagen gene 
defect
VIII
Skin: soft, hyperextensible, easy bruising, abnormal scars with purple  
discoloration; hypermobile joints; generalized periodontitis
AD
Not known
IX
Skin: soft, lax; bladder diverticula and rupture; limited pronation and  
supination; broad clavicle; occipital horns
XLR
Lysyl oxidase defect with 
abnormal copper use
X
Similar to type II with abnormal clotting studies
AR
Fibronectin defect
TNx
Hypermobile joints, skin fragility
AR
Absence of tenascin  
X protein
AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; XLR = X-linked recessive.
Source: Reproduced and updated with permission from Phillips et al.31 kkjkjdht © Elsevier.
skin layers; the last can present as multiple blisters throughout 
different layers of skin. There are identified genetic defects for 
each subtype, but the overall phenotype is remarkably similar. 
The disease manifestations include impairment in tissue adhe-
sion within the epidermis, basement membrane, or dermis, 
resulting in tissue separation and blistering with minimal trauma. 
Characteristic features of EB are blistering and ulceration. The 
recessively inherited dystrophic type is characterized by defects 
in the COL7A1 gene, encoding type 7 collagen, important for 
connecting the epidermis to the dermis, and therefore pheno-
typically resulting in blistering.39 Management of nonhealing 
Table 9-4 
Osteogenesis imperfecta: clinical and genetic features
Type
Clinical Features
Inheritance
I
Mild bone fragility, blue sclera
Dominant
II
“Prenatal lethal”; crumpled long 
bones, thin ribs, dark blue sclera
Dominant
III
Progressively deforming; mul-
tiple fractures; early loss of 
ambulation
Dominant/ 
recessive
IV
Mild to moderate bone fragil-
ity; normal or gray sclera; mild 
short stature
Dominant
Source: Reproduced with permission from Phillips et al.31 kkjkjdht © 
Elsevier.
249
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
wounds in patients with EB is a challenge, as their nutritional 
status is compromised because of oral erosions and esophageal 
obstruction. Surgical interventions include esophageal dilata-
tion and gastrostomy tube placement. Dermal incisions must 
be meticulously placed to avoid further trauma to skin.34,40 The 
skin requires nonadhesive pads covered by a “bulky” dressing 
to avoid blistering.
Acrodermatitis Enteropathica
Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is an autosomal recessive 
disease of children that causes an inability to absorb sufficient 
zinc from breast milk or food. The AE mutation affects zinc 
uptake in the intestine by preventing zinc from binding to the 
cell surface and its translocation into the cell. Recently, the 
genetic defect has been localized on chromosome 8q24.3 
identified as the SLC39A4 gene, expressed in the intestinal 
lumen and upregulated based on zinc stores.41 Zinc deficiency is 
associated with impaired granulation tissue formation, as zinc is 
a necessary cofactor for DNA polymerase and reverse transcrip-
tase, and its deficiency may impair healing due to inhibition of 
cell proliferation.
AE is characterized by impaired wound healing as well 
as erythematous pustular dermatitis involving the extremities 
and the areas around the bodily orifices. Diagnosis is con-
firmed by the presence of an abnormally low blood zinc level 
(>100 mg/dL). Oral supplementation with 100 to 400 mg zinc 
sulfate orally per day is curative for impaired healing.42,43
HEALING IN SPECIFIC TISSUES
Gastrointestinal Tract
Healing of full-thickness injury to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
remains an unresolved clinical issue. Healing of full-thickness 
GI wounds begins with a surgical or mechanical reapposition 
of the bowel ends, which is most often the initial step in the 
repair process. Sutures or staples are principally used, although 
various other means such as buttons, plastic tubes, and various 
wrappings have been attempted with variable success. Failure 
of healing results in dehiscence, leaks, and fistulas, which carry 
significant morbidity and mortality. Conversely, excessive heal-
ing can be just as troublesome, resulting in stricture formation 
and stenosis of the lumen. Repair of the GI tract is vital to restor-
ing the integrity of the luminal structure and to the resumption 
of motor, absorptive, and barrier functions.
The gross anatomic features of the GI tract are remarkably 
constant throughout most of its length. Within the lumen, the 
epithelium is supported by the lamina propria and underlying 
muscularis mucosa. The submucosa lies radially and circumfer-
entially outside of these layers, is comprised of abundant col-
lagenous and elastic fibers, and supports neural and vascular 
structures. Further toward the peritoneal surface of the bowel 
are the inner and outer muscle layers and ultimately a peritoneal 
extension, the serosa. The submucosa is the layer that imparts 
the greatest tensile strength and greatest suture-holding capac-
ity, a characteristic that should be kept in mind during surgical 
repair of the GI tract. Additionally, serosal healing is essential 
for quickly achieving a watertight seal from the luminal side 
of the bowel. The importance of the serosa is underscored by 
the significantly higher rates of anastomotic failure observed 
clinically in segments of bowel that are extraperitoneal and lack 
serosa (i.e., the esophagus and rectum).
Injuries to all parts of the GI tract undergo the same 
sequence of healing as cutaneous wounds. However, there are 
some significant differences (Table 9-5). Mesothelial (serosal) 
and mucosal healing can occur without scarring. The early integ-
rity of the anastomosis is dependent on formation of a fibrin seal 
on the serosal side, which achieves watertightness, and on the 
suture-holding capacity of the intestinal wall, particularly the 
submucosal layer. There is a significant decrease in marginal 
strength during the first week due to an early and marked col-
lagenolysis. The lysis of collagen is carried out by collagenase 
derived from neutrophils, macrophages, and intraluminal bac-
teria. Recently, it has been shown that strains of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa undergo phenotypic shifts characterized by higher 
collagenase secretion in an injured/anastomosed bowel environ-
ment.44 Collagenase activity occurs early in the healing process, 
and during the first 3 to 5 days, collagen breakdown far exceeds 
collagen synthesis. The integrity of the anastomosis represents 
equilibrium between collagen lysis, which occurs early, and col-
lagen synthesis, which takes a few days to initiate (Fig. 9-5). 
Collagenase is expressed postinjury in all segments of the GI 
tract, but it is much more marked in the colon compared to the 
small bowel. Collagen synthesis in the GI tract is carried out by 
both fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. Colon fibroblasts pro-
duce greater amounts of collagen than skin fibroblasts, reflect-
ing different phenotypic features, as well as different responses 
to cytokines and growth factors among these different fibro-
blast populations. Ultimate anastomotic strength is not always 
related to the absolute amount of collagen, and the structure and 
arrangement of the collagen matrix may be more important.45
Technical Considerations.  Traditional teaching holds that in 
order for an anastomosis to heal without complications it must 
be tension-free, have an adequate blood supply, receive adequate 
nutrition, and be free of sepsis. Although sound principles for all 
wound healing, there are several considerations unique to anas-
tomotic healing. From a technical viewpoint, the ideal method 
of suturing two ends of bowel together has not yet been identi-
fied. Although debate exists concerning methods of creating an 
anastomosis, clinically there has been no convincing evidence 
that a given technique has any advantage over another (i.e., hand-
sutured vs. stapled, continuous vs. interrupted sutures, absorbable 
vs. nonabsorbable sutures, or single- vs. two-layer closure). A 
recent meta-analysis revealed that stapled ileocolic anastomoses 
have fewer leak rates than hand-constructed ones, but no data on 
colo-colic or small bowel anastomoses have been offered yet.46 It 
is known, however, that hand-sutured everting anastomoses are 
at greater risk of leakage and cause greater adhesion formation, 
but have a lower incidence of stenosis. Because no overall defi-
nite superiority of any one method exists, it is recommended that 
surgeons be familiar with several techniques and apply them as 
circumstances dictate.
The amount of intravenous fluid administered periopera-
tively affects many aspects of recovery from colonic surgery; 
experimental and clinical data show that anastomotic healing 
may be adversely affected by overzealous fluid administration, 
which results in fluid accumulation in the third space, increased 
abdominal pressure, and tissue edema, all of which can com-
promise blood flow in the small vessels at the healing edge.47,48
Bone
Following any type of injury to bone, several changes take place 
at the site of injury to restore structural and functional integ-
rity. Most of the phases of healing resemble those observed 
250
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 9-5.  Diagrammatic representation of the concept of GI 
wound healing as a fine balance between collagen synthesis and 
collagenolysis. The “weak” period when collagenolysis exceeds 
collagen synthesis can be prolonged or exacerbated by any factors 
that upset the equilibrium. (Reproduced with permission from Hunt 
TK, Van Winkle W Jr. Wound healing: normal repair. In: Dunphy 
JE, ed. Fundamentals of Wound Management in Surgery. New York: 
Chirurgecom, Inc.; 1976:29.)
Days
Tensile strength
Resultant curve
Strength of new
collagen increases
with synthesis
Strength of collagen
decreases due to
lysis
Table 9-5 
Comparison of wound healing in the gastrointestinal tract and skin
GI Tract
Skin
Wound  
environment
pH
Varies throughout GI tract in accordance with 
local exocrine secretions
Usually constant except during sepsis or 
local infection
Microorganisms
Aerobic and anaerobic, especially in the colon and 
rectum; problematic if they contaminate the  
peritoneal cavity
Skin commensals rarely cause problems; 
infection usually results from exogenous 
contamination or hematogenous spread
Shear stress
Intraluminal bulk transit and peristalsis exert  
distracting forces on the anastomosis
Skeletal movements may stress the suture 
line but pain usually acts as a protective 
mechanism preventing excess movement
Tissue  
oxygenation
Dependent on intact vascular supply and  
neocapillary formation
Circulatory transport of oxygen as well as 
diffusion
Collagen  
synthesis
Cell type
Fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells
Fibroblasts
Lathyrogens
d-Penicillamine has no effect on collagen  
cross-linking
Significant inhibition of cross-linking 
with decreased wound strength
Steroids
Contradictory evidence exists concerning their 
negative effect on GI healing; increased abscess in 
the anastomotic line may play a significant role
Significant decrease in collagen  
accumulation
Collagenase 
activity
—
Increased presence throughout GI tract after  
transection and reanastomosis; during sepsis 
excess enzyme may promote dehiscence by 
decreasing suture-holding capacity of tissue
Not as significant a role in cutaneous 
wounds
Wound 
strength
—
Rapid recovery to preoperative level.
Less rapid than GI tissue
Scar formation Age
Definite scarring seen in fetal wound sites
Usually heals without scar formation in 
the fetus
in dermal healing, but some notable individual characteristics 
apply to bone injuries. The initial stage of hematoma formation 
consists of an accumulation of blood at the fracture site, which 
also contains devitalized soft tissue, dead bone, and necrotic 
marrow. The next stage accomplishes the liquefaction and deg-
radation of nonviable products at the fracture site. The normal 
bone adjacent to the injury site can then undergo revasculariza-
tion, with new blood vessels growing into the fracture site. This 
is similar to the formation of granulation tissue in soft tissue. 
The symptoms associated with this stage are characteristic of 
inflammation, with clinical evidence of swelling and erythema.
Three to 4 days following injury, soft tissue forms a bridge 
between the fractured bone segments in the next stage (soft callus 
stage). This soft tissue is deposited where neovascularization has 
taken place and serves as an internal splint, preventing damage to 
the newly laid blood vessels and achieving a fibrocartilaginous 
union. The soft callus is formed externally along the bone shaft 
and internally within the marrow cavity. Clinically, this phase is 
characterized by the end of pain and inflammatory signs.
The next phase (hard callus stage) consists of mineralization 
of the soft callus and conversion to bone. This may take up to 
2 to 3 months and leads to complete bony union. The bone is now 
considered strong enough to allow weight bearing and will appear 
healed on radiographs. This stage is followed by the remodeling 
phase, in which the excessive callus is reabsorbed and the mar-
row cavity is recanalized. This remodeling allows for the correct 
transmission of forces and restores the contours of the bone.
251
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
As in dermal healing, the process of osseous union is 
mediated by soluble growth factors and cytokines. The most 
extensively studied group is the bone morphogenic proteins 
(BMPs), which belong to the TGF-β superfamily. By stimulat-
ing the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondroblasts 
and osteoblasts, BMPs directly affect bone and cartilage repair. 
Other growth factors such as PDGF, TGF-β, TNF-α, and bFGF 
also participate in bony repair by mediating the inflammatory 
and proliferative phases of healing.
Cartilage
Cartilage consists of cells (chondrocytes) surrounded by an 
extracellular matrix made up of several proteoglycans, collagen 
fibers, and water. Unlike bone, cartilage is very avascular and 
depends on diffusion for transmittal of nutrients across the 
matrix. Additionally, the hypervascular perichondrium contrib-
utes substantially to the nutrition of the cartilage. Therefore, 
injuries to cartilage may be associated with permanent defects 
due to the meager and tenuous blood supply.
The healing response of cartilage depends on the depth of 
injury. In a superficial injury, there is disruption of the proteogly-
can matrix and injury to the chondrocytes. There is no inflamma-
tory response, but an increase in synthesis of proteoglycan and 
collagen dependent entirely on the chondrocyte. Unfortunately, 
the healing power of cartilage is often inadequate, and over-
all regeneration is incomplete. Therefore, superficial cartilage 
injuries are slow to heal and often result in persistent structural 
defects.
In contrast to superficial injuries, deep injuries involve 
the underlying bone and soft tissue. This leads to the exposure 
of vascular channels of the surrounding damaged tissue that 
may help in the formation of granulation tissue. Hemorrhage 
allows for the initiation of the inflammatory response and the 
subsequent mediator activation of cellular function for repair. 
As the granulation tissue is laid down, fibroblasts migrate 
toward the wound and synthesize fibrous tissue that under-
goes chondrification. Gradually, hyaline cartilage is formed, 
which restores the structural and functional integrity of the 
injured site.
Tendon
Tendons and ligaments are specialized structures that link mus-
cle and bone, and bone and bone, respectively. They consist 
of parallel bundles of collagen interspersed with spindle cells. 
Tendons and ligaments can be subjected to a variety of injuries, 
such as laceration, rupture, and contusion. Due to the mobility 
of the underlying bone or muscles, the damaged ends usually 
separate. Tendon and ligament healing progresses in a similar 
fashion as in other areas of the body (i.e., through hematoma 
formation, organization, laying down of reparative tissue, and 
scar formation). Matrix is characterized by accumulation of type 
I and III collagen along with increased water, DNA, and gly-
cosaminoglycan content. As the collagen fibers are organized, 
transmission of forces across the damaged portion can occur. 
Restoration of the mechanical integrity may never be equal to 
that of the undamaged tendon.
Tendon vasculature has a clear effect on healing. Hypo-
vascular tendons tend to heal with less motion and more scar 
formation than tendons with better blood supply. The special-
ized cells, tenocytes, are metabolically very active and retain a 
large regenerative potential, even in the absence of vascular-
ity. Cells on the tendon surface are identical to those within the 
sheath and play a role in tendon healing as well.
Nerve
Nerve injuries are very common, with an estimated 200,000 
repairs performed every year in the United States. Peripheral 
nerves are a complex arrangement of axons, nonneuronal cells, 
and extracellular elements. There are three types of nerve inju-
ries: neurapraxia (focal demyelination), axonotmesis (interrup-
tion of axonal continuity but preservation of Schwann cell basal 
lamina), and neurotmesis (complete transection). Following all 
types of injury, the nerve ends progress through a predictable 
pattern of changes involving three crucial steps: (a) survival of 
axonal cell bodies; (b) regeneration of axons that grow across 
the transected nerve to reach the distal stump; and (c) migration 
and connection of the regenerating nerve ends to the appropriate 
nerve ends or organ targets.
Phagocytes remove the degenerating axons and myelin 
sheath from the distal stump (Wallerian degeneration). Regen-
erating axonal sprouts extend from the proximal stump and 
probe the distal stump and the surrounding tissues. Schwann 
cells ensheathe and help in remyelinating the regenerating axons. 
Functional units are formed when the regenerating axons connect 
with the appropriate end targets. Several factors play a role in 
nerve healing, such as growth factors, cell adhesion molecules, 
and nonneuronal cells and receptors. Growth factors include 
nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, basic and 
acidic fibroblastic growth factors, and neuroleukin. Cell adhesion 
molecules involved in nerve healing include nerve adhesion mol-
ecule, neuron-glia adhesion molecule, myelin adhesion glycopro-
tein, and N-cadherin. This complex interplay of growth factors 
and adhesion molecules helps in nerve regeneration.
Fetal Wound Healing
The main characteristic that distinguishes the healing of fetal 
wounds from that of adult wounds is the lack of scar formation. 
Understanding how fetal wounds achieve integrity without evi-
dence of scarring holds promise for the possible manipulation of 
unwanted fibrosis or excessive scar formation in adults.
Although early fetal healing is characterized by the 
absence of scarring and resembles tissue regeneration, there is 
a phase of transition during gestational life when a more adult-
like healing pattern emerges. This so-called “transition wound” 
occurs at the beginning of the third trimester, and during this 
period, there is scarless healing; however, there is a loss of the 
ability to regenerate skin appendages.49 Eventually a classic, 
adult-patterned healing with scar formation occurs exclusively, 
although overall healing continues to be faster than in adults.
There are a number of characteristics that may influence 
the differences between fetal and adult wounds. These include 
wound environment, inflammatory responses, differential 
growth factor profiles, and wound matrix.
Wound Environment.  The fetus is bathed in a sterile, 
temperature-stable fluid environment, although this alone does 
not explain the observed differences. Experiments have demon-
strated that scarless healing may occur outside of the amniotic 
fluid environment, and conversely, scars can form in utero.50,51
Inflammation.  The extent and robustness of the inflamma-
tory response correlates directly with the amount of scar for-
mation in all healing wounds. Reduced fetal inflammation due 
to the immaturity of the fetal immune system may partially 
explain the lack of scarring observed. Not only is the fetus 
neutropenic, but fetal wounds contain lower numbers of PMNs 
and macrophages.52
252
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 9-6.  Different clinical approaches to the closure and heal-
ing of acute wounds.
Figure 9-7.  The acquisition of wound mechanical strength over 
time in normal, delayed, and impaired healing.
Growth Factors.  Fetal wounds are notable for the absence of 
TGF-β, which may have a significant role in scarring. Conversely, 
blocking TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 using neutralizing antibodies con-
siderably reduces scar formation in adult wounds. Exogenous 
application of TGF-β3 downregulates TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 lev-
els at the wound site with a resultant reduction in scarring.53 Thus, 
the balance between the concentration and/or activity of TGF-β 
isoforms may be important for regulating scar production.
Wound Matrix.  The fetal wound is characterized by excessive 
and extended hyaluronic acid production, a high-molecular-
weight glycosaminoglycan that is produced primarily by fibro-
blasts. Although adult wounds also produce hyaluronic acid, its 
synthesis is sustained only in the fetal wound. Components of 
amniotic fluid, most specifically fetal urine, have a unique abil-
ity to stimulate hyaluronic acid production.54 Fetal fibroblasts 
produce more collagen than adult fibroblasts, and the increased 
level of hyaluronic acid may aid in the orderly organization of 
collagen. As a result of these findings, hyaluronic acid is used 
topically to enhance healing and to inhibit postoperative adhe-
sion formation.55 The collagen pattern of fetal wounds is reticular 
in nature and resembles surrounding tissue, while adult patterns 
express large bundles of parallel collagen fibrils oriented perpen-
dicular to the surface.56
CLASSIFICATION OF WOUNDS
Wounds are classified as either acute or chronic. Acute wounds 
heal in a predictable manner and time frame. The process occurs 
with few, if any, complications, and the end result is a well-healed 
wound. Surgical wounds can heal in several ways. An incised 
wound that is clean and closed by sutures is said to heal by pri-
mary intention. Often, because of bacterial contamination or tis-
sue loss, a wound will be left open to heal by granulation tissue 
formation and contraction; this constitutes healing by secondary 
intention. Delayed primary closure, or healing by tertiary inten-
tion, represents a combination of the first two, consisting of the 
placement of sutures, allowing the wound to stay open for a few 
days, and the subsequent closure of the sutures (Fig. 9-6).
The healing spectrum of acute wounds is broad (Fig. 9-7). 
In examining the acquisition of mechanical integrity and strength 
during healing, the normal process is characterized by a con-
stant and continual increase that reaches a plateau at some point 
postinjury. Wounds with delayed healing are characterized by 
decreased wound-breaking strength in comparison to wounds 
that heal at a normal rate; however, they eventually achieve the 
same integrity and strength as wounds that heal normally. Condi-
tions such as nutritional deficiencies, infections, or severe trauma 
cause delayed healing, which reverts to normal with correction 
of the underlying pathophysiology. Impaired healing is charac-
terized by a failure to achieve mechanical strength equivalent to 
normally healed wounds. Patients with compromised immune 
systems such as those with diabetes, chronic steroid usage, or tis-
sues damaged by radiotherapy are prone to this type of impaired 
healing. The surgeon must be aware of these situations and 
exercise great care in the placement of incision and suture selec-
tion, postoperative care, and adjunctive therapy to maximize the 
chances of healing without supervening complications.    
Normal healing is affected by both systemic and local factors 
(Table 9-6). The clinician must be familiar with these factors and 
should attempt to counteract their deleterious effects. Complica-
tions occurring in wounds with higher risk can lead to failure of 
healing or the development of chronic, nonhealing wounds.
Factors Affecting Wound Healing
Advanced Age.  Most surgeons believe that aging produces 
intrinsic physiologic changes that result in delayed or impaired 
wound healing. Clinical experience with elderly patients tends 
to support this belief. Studies of hospitalized surgical patients 
show a direct correlation between older age and poor wound 
healing outcomes such as dehiscence and incisional hernia.57,58 
Normal healing
Delayed healing
Impaired healing - 
chronic
Time
Wound mechanical strength
Primary Intention
Secondary Intention
Tertiary Intention
Contraction
Contraction
Connective Tissue
Repair
Connective Tissue
Repair
Epithelialization
Epithelialization
3
253
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
However, these statistics fail to take into account underlying 
illnesses or diseases as a possible source of impaired wound 
healing in the elderly. The increased incidence of cardiovascu-
lar disease, metabolic diseases (diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, 
and vitamin deficiencies), and cancer, and the widespread use 
of drugs that impair wound healing may all contribute to the 
higher incidence of wound problems in the elderly. However, 
more recent clinical experience suggests that major operative 
interventions can be accomplished safely in the elderly.
The results of animal studies regarding the effects of aging 
on wound healing have yielded contradictory results. In healthy 
human volunteers, there was a significant delay of 1.9 days in the 
epithelialization of superficial skin defects in those older than 70 
years of age when compared to younger volunteers.59 In the same 
volunteers, using a micro-model of fibroplasia, no difference in 
DNA or hydroxyproline wound accumulation could be demon-
strated between the young and elderly groups; however, the young 
volunteers had a significantly higher amount of total α-amino 
nitrogen in their wounds, a reflection of total protein content of the 
wound. Thus, although wound collagen synthesis does not seem to 
be impaired with advanced age, noncollagenous protein accumula-
tion at wounded sites is decreased with aging, which may impair 
the mechanical properties of scarring in elderly patients.
Hypoxia, Anemia, and Hypoperfusion.  Low oxygen tension 
has a profoundly deleterious effect on all aspects of wound heal-
ing. Fibroplasia, although stimulated initially by the hypoxic 
wound environment, is significantly impaired by local hypoxia. 
Optimal collagen synthesis requires oxygen as a cofactor, partic-
ularly for the hydroxylation steps. Increasing subcutaneous oxy-
gen tension levels by increasing the fraction of inspired oxygen 
(Fio2) of inspired air for brief periods during and immediately 
following surgery results in enhanced collagen deposition and 
in decreased rates of wound infection after elective surgery.60–62
Major factors affecting local oxygen delivery include 
hypoperfusion either for systemic reasons (low volume or car-
diac failure) or due to local causes (arterial insufficiency, local 
vasoconstriction, or excessive tension on tissues). The level of 
vasoconstriction of the subcutaneous capillary bed is exquisitely 
Table 9-6 
Factors affecting wound healing
Systemic
  Age
  Nutrition
  Trauma
  Metabolic diseases
  Immunosuppression
  Connective tissue disorders
  Smoking
Local
  Mechanical injury
  Infection
  Edema
  Ischemia/necrotic tissue
  Topical agents
  Ionizing radiation
  Low oxygen tension
  Foreign bodies
responsive to fluid status, temperature, and hyperactive sympa-
thetic tone as is often induced by postoperative pain. Correc-
tion of these factors can have a remarkable influence on wound 
outcome, particularly on decreasing wound infection rates.61–63 
Mild to moderate normovolemic anemia does not appear to 
adversely affect wound oxygen tension and collagen synthesis, 
unless the hematocrit falls below 15%.63
Steroids and Chemotherapeutic Drugs.  Large doses or 
chronic usage of glucocorticoids reduce collagen synthesis and 
wound strength.64 The major effect of steroids is to inhibit the 
inflammatory phase of wound healing (angiogenesis, neutrophil 
and macrophage migration, and fibroblast proliferation) and the 
release of lysosomal enzymes. The stronger the anti-inflamma-
tory effect of the steroid compound used, the greater the inhibitory 
effect on wound healing. Steroids used after the first 3 to 4 days 
postinjury do not affect wound healing as severely as when they 
are used in the immediate postoperative period. Therefore, if 
possible, their use should be delayed, or alternatively, forms 
with lesser anti-inflammatory effects should be administered.
In addition to their effect on collagen synthesis, steroids 
also inhibit epithelialization and contraction and contribute to 
increased rates of wound infection, regardless of the time of 
administration.64 Steroid-delayed healing of cutaneous wounds 
can be stimulated to epithelialize by topical application of vita-
min A.64,65 Collagen synthesis of steroid-treated wounds also 
can be stimulated by vitamin A.
All chemotherapeutic antimetabolite drugs adversely 
affect wound healing by inhibiting early cell proliferation and 
wound DNA and protein synthesis, all of which are critical to 
successful repair. Delay in the use of such drugs for about 2 weeks 
postinjury appears to lessen the wound healing impairment.66 
Extravasation of most chemotherapeutic agents is associated 
with tissue necrosis, marked ulceration, and protracted healing 
at the affected site.67
Metabolic Disorders.  Diabetes mellitus is the best known of 
the metabolic disorders contributing to increased rates of wound 
infection and failure.68 Uncontrolled diabetes results in reduced 
inflammation, angiogenesis, and collagen synthesis. Addition-
ally, the large- and small-vessel disease that is the hallmark of 
advanced diabetes contributes to local hypoxemia. Defects in 
granulocyte function, capillary ingrowth, and fibroblast pro-
liferation all have been described in diabetes. Obesity, insulin 
resistance, hyperglycemia, and diabetic renal failure contribute 
significantly and independently to the impaired wound healing 
observed in diabetics.69 In wound studies on experimental dia-
betic animals, insulin restores collagen synthesis and granula-
tion tissue formation to normal levels if given during the early 
phases of healing.70 In clean, noninfected, and well-perfused 
experimental wounds in human diabetic volunteers, type 1 
diabetes mellitus was noted to decrease wound collagen accu-
mulation in the wound, independent of the degree of glycemic 
control. Type 2 diabetic patients showed no effect on collagen 
accretion when compared to healthy, age-matched controls.71 
Furthermore, the diabetic wound appears to be lacking in suf-
ficient growth factor levels, which signal normal healing. It 
remains unclear whether decreased collagen synthesis or an 
increased breakdown due to an abnormally high proteolytic 
wound environment is responsible.
Careful preoperative correction of blood sugar levels 
improves the outcome of wounds in diabetic patients. Increas-
ing the inspired oxygen tension, judicious use of antibiotics, and 
254
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
correction of other coexisting metabolic abnormalities all can 
result in improved wound healing.
Uremia also has been associated with disordered 
wound healing. Experimentally, uremic animals demonstrate 
decreased wound collagen synthesis and breaking strength. 
The contribution of uremia alone to this impairment, rather 
than that of associated malnutrition, is difficult to assess.69 The 
clinical use of dialysis to correct the metabolic abnormalities 
and nutritional restoration should impact greatly on the wound 
outcome of such patients.
Obesity is the largest growing public health problem in 
the United States and the world. Over 60% of Americans are 
overweight or obese. Uncomplicated obesity (i.e., in the absence 
of comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, 
or respiratory insufficiency) has by itself significant deleterious 
effects on wound healing. Visceral adiposity is active metaboli-
cally and immunologically and, through generation of proin-
flammatory cytokines and adipokines, leads to the development 
of the metabolic syndrome. Many of these molecules have 
effects on cells participating in the healing response. In nondia-
betic obese rodents, wounds are mechanically weaker, and there 
is less dermal and reparative scar collagen. Pre-adipocytes infil-
trate the dermis, and although they can evolve into fibroblasts, 
their regulatory mechanisms appear different from those of 
dermal or wound fibroblasts. Many studies indicate that obese 
patients have high rates of perioperative complications, with 
estimates as high as 30% for wound dehiscence, 17% for surgi-
cal site infections, 30% for incisional hernias, 19% for seromas, 
13% for hematomas, and 10% for fat necrosis.72–74 Increased 
subcutaneous fat was associated with a 10-fold increased risk 
of surgery-related complications including anastomotic leaks, 
abdominal collection, and wound infections.75 In many studies, 
obesity is a constant and major risk factor for hernia formation 
and recurrence after repair. The mechanism by which obesity 
impairs wound healing awaits complete delineation.
Nutrition.  The importance of nutrition in the recovery from trau-
matic or surgical injury has been recognized by clinicians since 
the time of Hippocrates. Poor nutritional intake or lack of indi-
vidual nutrients significantly alters many aspects of wound heal-
ing. The clinician must pay close attention to the nutritional status 
of patients with wounds, since wound failure or wound infections 
may be no more than a reflection of poor nutrition. Although the 
full interaction of nutrition and wound healing is still not fully 
understood, efforts are being made to develop wound-specific 
nutritional interventions and institute the pharmacologic use of 
individual nutrients as modulators of wound outcomes.
Experimental rodents fed either a 0% or 4% protein diet 
have impaired collagen deposition with a secondary decrease in 
skin and fascial wound-breaking strength and increased wound 
infection rates. Induction of energy-deficient states by providing 
only 50% of the normal caloric requirement leads to decreased 
granulation tissue formation and matrix protein deposition in 
rats. Acute fasting in rats markedly impairs collagen synthesis 
while decreasing procollagen mRNA.76
Clinically, it is extremely rare to encounter pure energy 
or protein malnutrition, and the vast majority of patients exhibit 
combined protein-energy malnutrition. Such patients have dimin-
ished hydroxyproline accumulation (an index of collagen depo-
sition) into subcutaneously implanted polytetrafluoroethylene 
tubes when compared to normally nourished patients (Fig. 9-8). 
Furthermore, malnutrition correlates clinically with enhanced 
rates of wound complications and increased wound failure 
Figure 9-8.  Effect of malnutrition on collagen deposition in exper-
imental human wounds. OHP = hydroxyproline.
following diverse surgical procedures. This reflects impaired 
healing response as well as reduced cell-mediated immunity, 
phagocytosis, and intracellular killing of bacteria by macro-
phages and neutrophils during protein-calorie malnutrition.76
Two additional nutrition-related factors warrant discus-
sion. First, the degree of nutritional impairment need not be 
long-standing in humans, as opposed to the experimental situa-
tion. Thus patients with brief preoperative illnesses or reduced 
nutrient intake in the period immediately preceding the injury 
or operative intervention will demonstrate impaired fibropla-
sias.77,78 Second, brief and not necessarily intensive nutritional 
intervention, either via the parenteral or enteral route, can 
reverse or prevent the decreased collagen deposition noted with 
malnutrition or with postoperative starvation.79
The possible role of single amino acids in enhanced 
wound healing has been studied for the last several decades. 
Arginine appears most active in terms of enhancing wound 
fibroplasia. Arginine deficiency results in decreased wound-
breaking strength and wound-collagen accumulation in chow-
fed rats. Rats that are given 1% arginine HCl supplementation, 
and therefore are not arginine-deficient, have enhanced wound-
breaking strength and collagen synthesis when compared to 
chow-fed controls.80 Studies have been carried out in healthy 
human volunteers to examine the effect of arginine supple-
mentation on collagen accumulation. Young, healthy, human 
volunteers (aged 25–35 years) were found to have signifi-
cantly increased wound-collagen deposition following oral 
supplementation with either 30 g of arginine aspartate (17 g of 
OHP (nmol/mg)
1.5
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
Adequate
food intake
Inadequate
food intake
1.5
1.0
0.5
OHP (µg/cm)
0.0
Well
nourished
Malnourished
255
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
free arginine) or 30 g of arginine HCl (24.8 g of free arginine) 
daily for 14 days.81 In a study of healthy older humans (aged 
67–82 years), daily supplements of 30 g of arginine aspartate 
for 14 days resulted in significantly enhanced collagen and total 
protein deposition at the wound site when compared to controls 
given placebos. There was no enhanced DNA synthesis present 
in the wounds of the arginine-supplemented subjects, suggest-
ing that the effect of arginine is not mediated by an inflam-
matory mode of action.82 In this and later studies, arginine 
supplementation, whether administered orally or parenterally, 
had no effect on the rate of epithelialization of a superficial 
skin defect. This further suggests that the main effect of argi-
nine on wound healing is to enhance wound collagen depo-
sition. Recently, a dietary supplemental regimen of arginine, 
β-hydroxy-β-methyl butyrate, and glutamine was found to 
significantly and specifically enhance collagen deposition in 
elderly, healthy human volunteers when compared to an isoca-
loric, isonitrogenous supplement (Fig. 9-9).83 As increases in 
breaking strength during the first weeks of healing are directly 
related to new collagen synthesis, arginine supplementation 
may result in an improvement in wound strength as a conse-
quence of enhanced collagen deposition.
The vitamins most closely involved with wound healing 
are vitamin C and vitamin A. Scurvy or vitamin C deficiency 
leads to a defect in wound healing, particularly via a failure in 
collagen synthesis and cross-linking. Biochemically, vitamin C 
is required for the conversion of proline and lysine to hydroxy-
proline and hydroxylysine, respectively. Vitamin C deficiency 
has also been associated with an increased incidence of wound 
infection, and if wound infection does occur, it tends to be more 
severe. These effects are believed to be due to an associated 
impairment in neutrophil function, decreased complement activ-
ity, and decreased walling-off of bacteria secondary to insuffi-
cient collagen deposition. The recommended dietary allowance is 
60 mg daily. This provides a considerable safety margin for most 
Figure 9-9.  Ratios of 14-day to 7-day values for aspartate (ASP), 
hydroxyproline (OHP), lysine (LYS), and α-amino nitrogen (αAN) 
in volunteers given dietary supplements of arginine, β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate, and glutamine. *P < .05. (Reproduced with 
permission from Williams JZ, Abumrad NN, Barbul A. Effect of a 
specialized amino acid mixture on human collagen deposition. Ann 
Surg. 2002;236:369.)
5
4
3
2
1
ASP
LYS
OHP
Experimental
Control
αAN
healthy nonsmokers. In severely injured or extensively burned 
patients, this requirement may increase to as high as 2 g daily. 
There is no evidence that excess vitamin C is toxic; however, 
there is no evidence that supertherapeutic doses of vitamin C are 
of any benefit.84
Vitamin A deficiency impairs wound healing, while sup-
plemental vitamin A benefits wound healing in nondeficient 
humans and animals. Vitamin A increases the inflammatory 
response in wound healing, probably by increasing the lability 
of lysosomal membranes. There is an increased influx of macro-
phages, with an increase in their activation and increased colla-
gen synthesis. Vitamin A directly increases collagen production 
and epidermal growth factor receptors when it is added in vitro to 
cultured fibroblasts. As mentioned before, supplemental vitamin 
A can reverse the inhibitory effects of corticosteroids on wound 
healing. Vitamin A also can restore wound healing that has been 
impaired by diabetes, tumor formation, cyclophosphamide, and 
radiation. Serious injury or stress leads to increased vitamin A 
requirements. In the severely injured patient, supplemental doses 
of vitamin A have been recommended. Doses ranging from 
25,000 to 100,000 IU per day have been advocated.
The connections between specific minerals and trace ele-
ments and deficits in wound healing are complex. Frequently, 
deficiencies are multiple and include macronutrient deficien-
cies. As with some of the vitamins described earlier, the specific 
trace element may function as a cofactor or part of an enzyme 
that is essential for homeostasis and wound healing. Clinically, 
preventing deficiencies is often easier to accomplish than diag-
nosing them.
Zinc is the most well-known element in wound healing and 
has been used empirically in dermatologic conditions for cen-
turies. It is essential for wound healing in animals and humans. 
There are over 150 known enzymes for which zinc is either an 
integral part or an essential cofactor, and many of these enzymes 
are critical to wound healing.85 With zinc deficiency, there is 
decreased fibroblast proliferation, decreased collagen synthesis, 
impaired overall wound strength, and delayed epithelialization. 
These defects are reversed by zinc supplementation. To date, no 
study has shown improved wound healing with zinc supplemen-
tation in patients who are not zinc deficient.86
Infections.  Wound infections continue to represent a major 
medical problem, both in terms of how they affect the outcome 
of surgical procedures (surgical site infections), and for their 
impact on the length of hospital stay and medical costs.87 Many 
otherwise successful surgical operations fail because of the 
development of wound infections. The occurrence of infections 
is of major concern when implants are used, and their occur-
rence may lead to the removal of the prosthetic material, thus 
subjecting the patient to further operations and severe risk of 
morbidity and mortality. Infections can weaken an abdominal 
closure or hernia repair and result in wound dehiscence or recur-
rence of the hernia. Cosmetically, infections can lead to disfig-
uring, unsightly, or delayed closures.
Exhaustive studies have been undertaken that examine the 
appropriate prophylactic treatment of operative wounds. Bacte-
rial contaminants normally present on skin are prevented from 
entry into deep tissues by intact epithelium. Surgery breaches 
the intact epithelium, allowing bacteria access to these tissues 
and the bloodstream. Antibiotic prophylaxis is most effective 
when adequate concentrations of antibiotic are present in the 
tissues at the time of incision, and assurance of adequate pre-
operative antibiotic dosing and timing has become a significant 
256
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
hospital performance measure.88 Addition of antibiotics after 
operative contamination has occurred clearly is ineffective in 
preventing postoperative wound infections.
Studies that compare operations performed with and with-
out antibiotic prophylaxis demonstrate that class II, III, and IV 
procedures (see below) treated with appropriate prophylactic 
antibiotics have only one third the wound infection rate of pre-
viously reported untreated series.89 More recently, repeat dos-
ing of antibiotics has been shown to be essential in decreasing 
postoperative wound infections in operations with durations 
exceeding the biochemical half-life (t1/2) of the antibiotic or 
in which there is large-volume blood loss and fluid replace-
ment.90,91 In lengthy cases, those in which prosthetic implants 
are used, or when unexpected contamination is encountered, 
additional doses of antibiotic may be administered for 24 hours 
postoperatively.
Selection of antibiotics for use in prophylaxis should be tai-
lored to the type of surgery to be performed, operative contami-
nants that might be encountered during the procedure, and the 
profile of resistant organisms present at the institution where the 
surgery is performed. The continuing widespread appearance of 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and vanco-
mycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) has significantly restricted the 
selection of these agents for routine use. Surgery-specific treat-
ment guidelines are provided in Table 9-7.90
Patients with prosthetic heart valves or any implanted vas-
cular or orthopedic prostheses should receive antibiotic prophy-
laxis prior to any procedure in which significant bacteremia is 
anticipated. Dental procedures require prophylaxis with broad-
spectrum penicillins or amoxicillin, while urologic instrumenta-
tion should be pretreated with a second-generation cephalosporin. 
Patients with prostheses who undergo gastrointestinal surgery 
should receive anaerobic coverage combined with a cephalo-
sporin. Nasal screening and decolonization for Staphylococcus 
aureus carriers is recommended for selected procedures (i.e., car-
diac, orthopedic, neurosurgical procedures with implants).
The incidence of wound infection is about 5% to 10% 
nationwide and has not changed during the last few decades. 
Quantitatively, it has been shown that if the wound is contami-
nated with >105 microorganisms, the risk of wound infection 
is markedly increased, but this threshold may be much lower 
in the presence of foreign materials. The source of pathogens 
for the infection is usually the endogenous flora of the patient’s 
skin, mucous membranes, or from hollow organs. The most 
common organisms responsible for wound infections in order 
of frequency are Staphylococcus species, coagulase-negative 
Streptococcus, enterococci, and Escherichia coli. The incidence 
of wound infection bears a direct relationship to the degree of 
contamination that occurs during the operation from the dis-
ease process itself (clean—class I, clean contaminated—class 
II, contaminated—class III, and dirty—class IV). Many factors 
contribute to the development of postoperative wound infec-
tions. Most surgical wound infections become apparent within 
7 to 10 days postoperatively, although a small number manifest 
years after the original operative intervention. With the hos-
pital stay becoming shorter and shorter, many infections are 
detected in the outpatient setting, leading to underreporting of 
the true incidence of wound infections absent intensive surveil-
lance. There has been much debate about the actual definition 
of wound infection. The narrowest definition would include 
wounds that drain purulent material with bacteria identified on 
culture. The more broad definition would include all wounds 
draining pus, whether or not the bacteriologic studies are posi-
tive; wounds that are opened by the surgeon; and wounds that 
the surgeon considers infected.92
Anatomically, wound infections can be classified as super-
ficial incisional, deep incisional, and organ/space wound infec-
tions, involving fascia, muscle, or the abdominal cavity. About 
three fourths of all wound infections are superficial, involving 
skin and subcutaneous tissue only. Clinical diagnosis is easy 
when a postoperative wound looks edematous and erythematous 
and is tender. Often the presentation is more subtle, and develop-
ment of postoperative fever, usually low-grade; development of 
a mild and unexplained leukocytosis; or the presence of undue 
incisional pain should direct attention to the wound. Inspection 
of the wound is most useful in detecting subtle edema around 
the suture or staple line, manifested as a waxy appearance of the 
skin, which characterizes the early phase of infection. If a wound 
infection is suspected, several stitches or staples around the most 
suspicious area should be removed with insertion of a cotton-
tipped applicator into the subcutaneous area to open a small seg-
ment of the incision. This causes minimal if any discomfort to 
the patient. Presence of pus mandates further opening of the sub-
cutaneous and skin layers to the full extent of the infected pocket. 
Samples should be taken for aerobic and anaerobic cultures, with 
very few patients requiring antibiotic therapy. Patients who are 
immunosuppressed (diabetics and those on steroids or chemo-
therapeutic agents), who have evidence of tissue penetration or 
systemic toxicity, or who have had prosthetic devices inserted 
(vascular grafts, heart valves, artificial joints, or mesh) should 
be treated with systemic antibiotics.92
Deep wound infections arise immediately adjacent to 
the fascia, either above or below it, and often have an intra-
abdominal component. Most intra-abdominal infections do not, 
however, communicate with the wound. Deep infections present 
with fever and leukocytosis. The incision may drain pus spon-
taneously, or the intra-abdominal extension may be recognized 
following the drainage of what was thought to be a superficial 
wound infection, but pus draining between the fascial sutures 
will be noted. Sometimes wound dehiscence will occur.
The most dangerous of the deep infections is necrotizing 
fasciitis. It results in high mortality, particularly in the elderly. 
This is an invasive process that involves the fascia and leads 
to secondary skin necrosis. Pathophysiologically, it is a septic 
thrombosis of the vessels between the skin and the deep layers. 
The skin demonstrates hemorrhagic bullae and subsequent frank 
necrosis, with surrounding areas of inflammation and edema. The 
fascial necrosis is usually wider than the skin involvement or than 
the surgeon estimates on clinical grounds. The patient is toxic and 
has high fever, tachycardia, and marked hypovolemia, which if 
uncorrected, progresses to cardiovascular collapse. Bacteriologi-
cally, this is a mixed infection, and samples should be obtained 
for Gram stain smears and cultures to aid in diagnosis and treat-
ment. As soon as bacteriologic studies have been obtained, high-
dose penicillin treatment needs to be started (20–40 million U/d 
intravenously) due to concern over the presence of Clostridia 
perfringens and other related species; broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics should be added and the regimen modified based on culture 
results. Cardiovascular resuscitation with electrolyte solutions, 
blood, and/or plasma is carried out as expeditiously as possible 
prior to induction of anesthesia. The aim of surgical treatment 
is thorough removal of all necrosed skin and fascia. If viable 
skin overlies necrotic fascia, multiple longitudinal skin inci-
sions can be made to allow for excision of the devitalized fascia. 
257
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
Table 9-7 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery
Nature of Operation
Common Pathogens
Recommended Antimicrobials
Adult Dosage 
before Surgery1
Cardiac
Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis
Cefazolin or
Cefuroxime or
Vancomycin4
1–2 g IV2,3
1.5 g IV3
1 g IV
Gastrointestinal
  esophageal/gastroduodenal
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
gram-positive cocci
High risk5 only: cefazolin6
1–2 g IV2
  Biliary tract
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
enterococci, clostridia
High risk7 only: cefazolin6,8
1–2 g IV2
  Colorectal
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
anaerobes, enterococci
Oral: neomycin + erythromycin 
base9 or metronidazole9
Parenteral: cefoxitin6 or
Cefotetan6or
Cefazolin + 
Metronidazole6 or
Ampicillin/sulbactam
—see note 9
1–2 g IV
1–2 g IV
1–2 g IV2
0.5 g IV
3 g IV
  Appendectomy,  
  nonperforated11
Same as for colorectal
Cefoxitin6 or cefotetan6 or
Cefazolin6 +
Metronidazole
1–2 g IV
1–2 g IV2
0.5 g IV
Genitourinary 
  Cystoscopy alone
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
enterococci 
High risk only12: ciprofloxacin10 or
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
500 mg PO or  
400 mg IV
1 DS tablet
  Cystoscopy with manipulation 
  or upper tract  
  instrumentation13
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
enterococci
Ciprofloxacin10or
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
500 mg PO or  
400 mg IV
1 DS tablet
  Open or laparoscopic  
  surgery14
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
enterococci
Cefazolin6
1–2 g IV2
Gynecologic and obstetric
  Vaginal, abdominal, or  
laparoscopic hysterectomy
Enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
anaerobes, group B streptococci, 
enterococci
Cefazolin6 or cefoxitin6 or cefotetan6 
or Ampicillin/sulbactam6,10
1–2 g IV2
3 g IV
  Cesarean section
Same as for hysterectomy
Cefazolin6
1–2 g IV2
  Abortion, surgical
Same as for hysterectomy
Doxycycline
300 mg PO15
Head and neck surgery
  Incisions through oral or  
  pharyngeal mucosa
Anaerobes, enteric gram-negative 
bacilli, S. aureus
Clindamycin or
Cefazolin +
Metronidazole or
Ampicillin/sulbactam10
600–900 mg IV
1–2 g IV2
0.5 g IV
3 g IV
Neurosurgery
S. aureus, S. epidermidis
Cefazolin
1–2 g IV2
Ophthalmic
S. epidermidis, S. aureus, streptococci, 
enteric gram-negative bacilli,  
Pseudomonas spp.
Gentamicin, tobramycin, cipro-
floxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, 
moxifloxacin, ofloxacin or neomycin-
gramicidin-polymyxin B
OR cefazolin
Multiple drops 
topically over 2 to 
24 hours
100 mg subcon-
juctivally
Orthopedic
S aureus, S. epidermidis
Cefazolin16 or Vancomycin2,16
1–2 g IV2, 1 g IV
Thoracic (noncardiac)
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, streptococci, 
enteric gram-negative bacilli
Cefazolin or
Ampicillin/sulbactam10 or  
Vancomycin4
1–2 g IV2
3 g IV
1 g IV
258
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Although removal of all necrotic tissue is the goal of the first 
surgical intervention, the distinction between necrotic and simply 
edematous tissue often is difficult. Careful inspection every 12 to 
24 hours will reveal any new necrotic areas, and these need fur-
ther débridement and excision. When all necrotic tissue has been 
removed and the infection has been controlled, the wounds may 
be covered with homo- or xenografts until definitive reconstruc-
tion and autografting can take place.
The mere presence of bacteria in an open wound, either acute 
or chronic, does not constitute an infection, because large numbers 
of bacteria can be present in the normal situation. In addition, the 
bacteria identified by cultures may not be representative of the 
bacteria causing the actual wound infection. There seems to be 
confusion as to what exactly constitutes wound infection. For pur-
poses of clarity, we have to differentiate between contamination, 
colonization, and infection. Contamination is the presence of bac-
teria without multiplication, colonization is multiplication without 
host response, and infection is the presence of host response in 
reaction to deposition and multiplication of bacteria. The presence 
of a host response helps to differentiate between infection and 
colonization as seen in chronic wounds. The host response that 
helps in diagnosing wound infection comprises cellulitis, abnormal 
Table 9-7 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery
Nature of Operation
Common Pathogens
Recommended Antimicrobials
Adult Dosage 
before Surgery1
Vascular
  Arterial surgery involving 
a prosthesis, the abdominal 
aorta, or a groin incision
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, enteric 
gram-negative bacilli
Cefazolin or
Vancomycin4
1–2 g IV2
1 g IV
  Lower extremity amputation  
  for ischemia
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, enteric 
gram-negative bacilli, clostridia
Cefazolin or  
Vancomycin4
1–2 g IV2
1 g IV
1Parenteral prophylactic antimicrobials can be given as a single IV dose begun within 60 min before the operation. For prolonged operations (>3 h) or 
those with major blood loss, or in patients with extensive burns, additional intraoperative doses should be given at intervals 1–2 times the half-life of the 
drug (ampicillin/sulbactam q2 h, cefazolin q4 h, cefuroxime q4 h, cefoxitin q2 h, clindamycin q6 h, vancomycin q12 h) for the duration of the procedure 
in a patient with normal renal function. If vancomycin or a fluoroquinolone is used, the infusion should be started 60–120 min before the initial incision to 
minimize the possibility of an infusion reaction close to the time of induction of anesthesia and to have adequate tissue levels at the time of incision.
2The recommended dose of cefazolin is 1 g for patients who weigh 80 kg and 2 g for those >80 kg. Morbidly obese patients may need higher doses.
3Some experts recommend an additional dose when patients are removed from bypass during open heart surgery.
4Vancomycin can be used in hospitals in which methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and S. epidermidis are a frequent cause of postopera-
tive wound infection, in patients previously colonized with MRSA, or for those who are allergic to penicillin or cephalosporins. Rapid IV administration 
may cause hypotension, which could be especially dangerous during induction of anesthesia. Even when the drug is given over 60 min, hypotension may 
occur; treatment with diphenhydramine (Benadryl and others) and further slowing of the infusion rate may be helpful. Some experts would give 15 mg/kg of 
vancomycin to patients weighing more than 75 kg up to a maximum of 1.5 g with a slower infusion rate (90 min for 1.5 g). For procedures in which  
gram-negative bacilli are common pathogens, many experts would add another drug such as an aminoglycoside (gentamicin, tobramycin, or amikacin), 
aztreonam, or a fluoroquinolone.
5Morbid obesity, GI obstruction, decreased gastric acidity or gastrointestinal motility, gastric bleeding, malignancy or perforation, or immunosuppression.
6For patients allergic to penicillin and cephalosporins, clindamycin or vancomycin with either gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, or aztreonam is a 
reasonable alternative. Fluoroquinolones should not be used for prophylaxis in cesarean section.
7Age >70 y, acute cholecystitis, nonfunctioning gallbladder, obstructive jaundice, or common duct stones.
8Cefotetan, cefoxitin, and ampicillin/sulbactam are reasonable alternatives.
9In addition to mechanical bowel preparation, 1 g of neomycin plus 1 g of erythromycin at 1 p.m., 2 p.m., and 11 p.m. or 2 g of neomycin plus 2 g of metro-
nidazole at 7 p.m. and 11 p.m. the day before an 8 a.m. operation.
10Due to increasing resistance of E. coli to fluoroquinolones and ampicillin/sulbactam, local sensitivity profiles should be reviewed prior to use.
11For a ruptured viscous, therapy is often continued for about 5 d.
12Urine culture positive or unavailable, preoperative catheter, transrectal prostate biopsy, or placement of prosthetic material.
13Shock wave lithotripsy, ureteroscopy.
14Including percutaneous renal surgery, procedures with entry into the urinary tract, and those involving implantation of a prosthesis. If manipulation of 
bowel is involved, prophylaxis is given according to colorectal guidelines.
15Divided into 100 mg before procedure and 200 mg after.
16If a tourniquet is to be used in the procedure, the entire dose of antibiotic must be infused prior to its inflation.
Source: Reprinted with special permission from Treatment Guidelines from The Medical Letter, October 2012; Vol. 10(122):73. www.medicalletter.org.
discharge, delayed healing, change in pain, abnormal granulation 
tissue, bridging, and abnormal color and odor.
As discussed previously, neutrophils play a major role in 
preventing wound infections. Chronic granulomatous disease 
(CGD) comprises a genetically heterogeneous group of dis-
eases in which the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH)-dependent oxide enzyme is deficient. This 
defect impairs the intracellular killing of microorganisms, leav-
ing the patient liable to infection by bacteria and fungi. Afflicted 
patients have recurrent infections and form granulomas, which 
can lead to obstruction of the gastric antrum and genitourinary 
tracts and poor wound healing. Surgeons become involved when 
the patient develops infectious or obstructive complications.
The nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction test is used to 
diagnose CGD. Normal neutrophils can reduce this compound, 
while neutrophils from affected patients do not, facilitating the 
diagnosis via a colorimetric test. Clinically, patients develop 
recurrent infections such as pneumonia, lymphadenitis, hepatic 
abscess, and osteomyelitis. Organisms most commonly responsi-
ble are Staphylococcus aureus, Aspergillus, Klebsiella, Serratia, 
or Candida. When CGD patients require surgery, a preopera-
tive pulmonary function test should be considered since they are 
259
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
predisposed to obstructive and restrictive lung disease. Wound 
complications, mainly infection, are common. Sutures should 
be removed as late as possible since the wounds heal slowly. 
Abscess drains should be left in place for a prolonged period 
until the infection is completely resolved.93
Hyperglycemia has been shown to be a significant risk fac-
tor of postoperative infections.94 Tight blood glucose control, 
beginning preoperatively and continued into the operating room 
and beyond, has been associated with significant reduction in 
infectious complications, in particular following cardiac sur-
gery.95,96 Too tight of a glycemic control (80–100 mg/dL) appears 
to be associated with more complications and is as effective, if not 
less than, moderate control (120–180 mg/dL).97,98
Another host factor that has been implicated in the devel-
opment of superficial surgical site infection relates to the state 
of the subcutaneous capillary bed. Thomas K. Hunt had shown 
through several decades of work that this capillary bed is exqui-
sitely sensitive to hypovolemia,99 hypothermia,100 and stress, 
leading to rapid vasoconstriction with secondary impaired oxy-
gen delivery and increased rates of infection.61 Maintenance of 
euvolemia, core temperature above 36 to 36.5°C, and pain con-
trol have all been shown singly and additively to reduce rates 
of wound infections.63 Another suggestion has been to increase 
inspired Fio2 to 0.8 for the duration of the operation and in the 
immediate postoperative period, as a means of increasing sub-
cutaneous tissue oxygen delivery. Although successful in most 
studies,62,101 there have also been negative results from such a 
single approach102; this suggests that addressing volume, tem-
perature, pain control, and oxygen delivery in concert may be 
the more fruitful approach to reduce surgical wound infections.
Chronic Wounds
Chronic wounds are defined as wounds that have failed to pro-
ceed through the orderly process that produces satisfactory ana-
tomic and functional integrity or that have proceeded through 
the repair process without producing an adequate anatomic and 
functional result. The majority of wounds that have not healed 
in 3 months are considered chronic. Skin ulcers, which usually 
occur in traumatized or vascular compromised soft tissue, are 
also considered chronic in nature, and proportionately are the 
major component of chronic wounds. In addition to the factors 
discussed earlier that can delay wound healing, other causative 
mechanisms may also play a role in the etiology of chronic 
wounds. Repeated trauma, poor perfusion or oxygenation, and/
or excessive inflammation contribute to the causation and the 
perpetuation of the chronicity of wounds.
Unresponsiveness to normal regulatory signals also has been 
implicated as a predictive factor of chronic wounds. This may 
come about as a failure of normal growth factor synthesis,103 and 
thus an increased breakdown of growth factors within a wound 
environment that is markedly proteolytic because of overexpres-
sion of protease activity or a failure of the normal antiprotease 
inhibitor mechanisms.104 Fibroblasts from chronic wounds also 
have been found to have decreased proliferative potential, per-
haps because of senescence105 or decreased expression of growth 
factor receptors.106 Chronic wounds occur due to various etiologic 
factors, and several of the most common are discussed later.
Malignant transformation of chronic ulcers can occur in 
any long-standing wound (Marjolin’s ulcer). Any wound that 
does not heal for a prolonged period of time is prone to malig-
nant transformation. Malignant wounds are differentiated clini-
cally from nonmalignant wounds by the presence of overturned 
wound edges (Fig. 9-10). In patients with suspected malignant 
transformations, biopsy of the wound edges must be performed 
to rule out malignancy. Cancers arising de novo in chronic 
wounds include both squamous and basal cell carcinomas.
Ischemic Arterial Ulcers.  These wounds occur due to a lack 
of blood supply and are painful at presentation. They usually are 
associated with other symptoms of peripheral vascular disease, 
such as intermittent claudication, rest pain, night pain, and color 
or trophic changes. These wounds commonly are present at the 
most distal portions of the extremities such as the interdigital 
clefts, although more proximal locations are also encountered. 
On examination, there may be diminished or absent pulses with 
decreased ankle-brachial index and poor formation of granula-
tion tissue. Other signs of peripheral ischemia, such as dryness 
of skin, hair loss, scaling, and pallor can be present. The wound 
itself usually is shallow with smooth margins, and a pale base 
and surrounding skin may be present. The management of these 
wounds is two-pronged and includes revascularization and wound 
care.107 Nonhealing of these wounds is the norm unless successful 
revascularization is performed. After establishing adequate blood 
supply, most such wounds progress to heal satisfactorily.
A strategy of prevention is extremely important in the 
approach to patients with limb ischemia. In bedridden patients, 
especially those who are sedated (in the intensive care unit), 
demented, or with peripheral neural compromise (neuropathy or 
paraplegia), pressure ulcers develop rapidly and often uneces-
sarily. Removal of restrictive stockings (in patients with critical 
ischemia), frequent repositioning, and surveillence are vital to 
preventing these ulcers.108
Venous Stasis Ulcers.  Although there is unanimous agree-
ment that venous ulcers are due to venous stasis and hydrostatic 
back pressure, there is less consensus as to what are the exact 
pathophysiologic pathways that lead to ulceration and impaired 
healing. On the microvascular level, there is alteration and dis-
tention of the dermal capillaries with leakage of fibrinogen into 
the tissues; polymerization of fibrinogen into fibrin cuffs leads 
to perivascular cuffing that can impede oxygen exchange, thus 
contributing to ulceration. These same fibrin cuffs and the leakage 
of macromolecules such as fibrinogen and α2-macroglobulin trap 
growth factors and impede wound healing.103 Another hypoth-
esis suggests that neutrophils adhere to the capillary endothelium 
and cause plugging with diminished dermal blood flow. Venous 
hypertension and capillary damage lead to extravasation of hemo-
globin. The products of this breakdown are irritating and cause 
pruritus and skin damage. The resulting brownish pigmentation 
of skin combined with the loss of subcutaneous fat produces char-
acteristic changes called lipodermatosclerosis. Regardless of the 
pathophysiologic mechanisms, the clinically characteristic picture 
is that of an ulcer that fails to re-epithelialize despite the presence 
of adequate granulation tissue.
Venous stasis occurs due to the incompetence of either the 
superficial or deep venous systems. Chronic venous ulcers usu-
ally are due to the incompetence of the deep venous system and 
are commonly painless. Stasis ulcers tend to occur at the sites 
of incompetent perforators, the most common being above the 
medial malleolus, over Cockett’s perforator. Upon examination, the 
typical location combined with a history of venous incompetence 
and other skin changes is diagnostic. The wound usually is shal-
low with irregular margins and pigmented surrounding skin.
The cornerstone of treatment of venous ulcers is compres-
sion therapy, although the best method to achieve it remains 
260
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
controversial. Compression can be accomplished via rigid or 
flexible means. The most commonly used method is the rigid, 
zinc oxide–impregnated, nonelastic bandage. Others have 
proposed a four-layered bandage approach as a more optimal 
method of obtaining graduated compression.109 Wound care in 
these patients focuses on maintaining a moist wound environ-
ment, which can be achieved with hydrocolloids. Other, more 
modern approaches include use of vasoactive substances and 
growth factor application, as well as the use of skin substitutes. 
Recently, sprayed allogeneic keratinocytes and fibroblasts plus 
four-layer bandages have been shown to hasten healing when 
compared to compression alone.110 Most venous ulcers can be 
healed with perseverance and by addressing the venous hyperten-
sion.109 Unfortunately, recurrences are frequent despite preventa-
tive measures, largely because of patients’ lack of compliance.111
Diabetic Wounds.  Ten percent to 25% of diabetic patients 
run the risk of developing ulcers. There are approximately 
50,000 to 60,000 amputations performed in diabetic patients 
each year in the United States. The major contributors to the 
formation of diabetic ulcers include neuropathy, foot defor-
mity, and ischemia. It is estimated that 60% to 70% of diabetic 
ulcers are due to neuropathy, 15% to 20% are due to ischemia, 
and another 15% to 20% are due to a combination of both. 
The neuropathy is both sensory and motor and is secondary 
to persistently elevated glucose levels. The loss of sensory 
function allows unrecognized injury to occur from ill-fitting 
shoes, foreign bodies, or other trauma. The motor neuropathy 
or Charcot’s foot leads to collapse or dislocation of the inter-
phalangeal or metatarsophalangeal joints, causing pressure on 
areas with little protection. There is also severe micro- and 
macrovascular circulatory impairment.
Once ulceration occurs, the chances of healing are poor. 
The treatment of diabetic wounds involves local and systemic 
measures.112 Achievement of adequate blood sugar levels is very 
important. Most diabetic wounds are infected, and eradication 
of the infectious source is paramount to the success of healing. 
Treatment should address the possible presence of osteomyelitis 
and should employ antibiotics that achieve adequate levels both in 
soft tissue and bone. Wide débridement of all necrotic or infected 
tissue is another cornerstone of treatment. Off-loading of the 
ulcerated area by using specialized orthotic shoes or casts allows 
for ambulation while protecting the fragile wound environment. 
Topical application of PDGF and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor has met with limited but significant 
success in achieving closure.113  The application of engineered 
skin allograft substitutes, although expensive, also has shown 
some significant success.114  Prevention and specifically foot care 
play an important role in the management of diabetics.115 
Decubitus or Pressure Ulcers.  The incidence of pressure 
ulcers ranges from 2.7% to 9% in the acute care setting, in com-
parison to 2.4% to 23% in long-term care facilities. A pressure 
ulcer is a localized area of tissue necrosis that develops when 
soft tissue is compressed between a bony prominence and an 
external surface. Excessive pressure causes capillary collapse 
and impedes the delivery of nutrients to body tissues. Pressure 
ulcer formation is accelerated in the presence of friction, shear 
forces, and moisture. Other contributory factors in the patho-
genesis of pressure ulcers include immobility, altered activity 
Figure 9-10.  Typical appearance of the malignant transformation of a long-standing chronic wound. (Photos used with permission by 
Dr. Robert S. Kirsner, University of Miami.)
261
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
levels, altered mental status, chronic conditions, and altered 
nutritional status. The four stages of pressure ulcer formation 
are as follows: stage I, nonblanching erythema of intact skin; 
stage II, partial-thickness skin loss involving epidermis or der-
mis or both; stage III, full-thickness skin loss, but not through 
the fascia; and stage IV, full-thickness skin loss with extensive 
involvement of muscle and bone.
The treatment of established pressure ulcers is most suc-
cessful when carried out in a multidisciplinary manner by 
involving wound care teams consisting of physicians, nurses, 
dietitians, physical therapists, and nutritionists. Care of the ulcer 
itself comprises débridement of all necrotic tissue, maintenance 
of a favorable moist wound environment that will facilitate 
healing, relief of pressure, and addressing host issues such as 
nutritional, metabolic, and circulatory status. Débridement is 
most efficiently carried out surgically, but enzymatic proteo-
lytic preparations and hydrotherapy also are used. The wound 
bed should be kept moist by employing dressings that absorb 
secretions but do not desiccate the wound.116 Operative repair, 
usually involving flap rotation, has been found to be useful in 
obtaining closure. Unfortunately, recurrence rates are extremely 
high, owing to the population at risk and the inability to fully 
address the causative mechanisms.117
EXCESS HEALING    
Clinically, excess healing can be as significant as wound failure. 
It is likely that more operative interventions are required for 
correction of the morbidity associated with excessive 
healing than are required for wound failure. The clinical 
manifestations of exuberant healing are protean and differ in the 
skin (mutilating or debilitating scars, burn contractions), ten-
dons (frozen repairs), the GI tract (strictures or stenoses), solid 
organs (cirrhosis, pulmonary fibrosis), or the peritoneal cavity 
(adhesive disease).
Hypertrophic scars (HTSs) and keloids represent an over-
abundance of fibroplasia in the dermal healing process. HTSs 
rise above the skin level but stay within the confines of the origi-
nal wound and often regress over time. Keloids rise above the 
skin level as well, but extend beyond the border of the original 
wound and rarely regress spontaneously (Fig. 9-11). Both HTSs 
and keloids occur after trauma to the skin and may be tender, 
pruritic, and cause a burning sensation. Keloids are 15 times 
more common in darker-pigmented ethnicities, with individuals 
of African, Spanish, and Asian ethnicities being especially sus-
ceptible. Men and women are equally affected. Genetically, the 
predilection to keloid formation appears to be autosomal domi-
nant with incomplete penetration and variable expression.117,118
HTSs usually develop within 4 weeks after trauma. The risk 
of HTS increases if epithelialization takes longer than 21 days, 
independent of site, age, and race. Rarely elevated more than 
4 mm above the skin level, HTSs stay within the boundaries 
of the wound. They usually occur across areas of tension and 
flexor surfaces, which tend to be at right angles to joints or skin 
creases. The lesions are initially erythematous and raised and 
over time may evolve into pale, flatter scars.
Keloids can result from surgery, burns, skin inflammation, 
acne, chickenpox, zoster, folliculitis, lacerations, abrasions, tat-
toos, vaccinations, injections, insect bites, or ear piercing, or 
may arise spontaneously. Keloids tend to occur 3 months to 
years after the initial insult, and even minor injuries can result in 
large lesions. They vary in size from a few millimeters to large, 
Figure 9-11.  Recurrent keloid on the neck of a 17-year-old patient 
that had been revised several times. (Reproduced with permission 
from Murray JC, Pinnell SR. Keloids and excessive dermal scar-
ring. In: Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, eds. Wound 
Healing: Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1993. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
pedunculated lesions with a soft to rubbery or hard consistency. 
While they project above surrounding skin, they rarely extend 
into underlying subcutaneous tissues. Certain body sites have 
a higher incidence of keloid formation, including the skin of 
the earlobe as well as the deltoid, presternal, and upper back 
regions. They rarely occur on eyelids, genitalia, palms, soles, 
or across joints. Keloids rarely involute spontaneously, and 
surgical intervention can lead to recurrence, often with a worse 
result (Table 9-8).
Histologically, both HTSs and keloids demonstrate 
increased thickness of the epidermis with an absence of rete 
ridges. There is an abundance of collagen and glycoprotein depo-
sition. Normal skin has distinct collagen bundles, mostly paral-
lel to the epithelial surface, with random connections between 
bundles by fine fibrillar strands of collagen. In HTS, the collagen 
bundles are flatter and more random, and the fibers are in a wavy 
pattern. In keloids, the collagen bundles are virtually nonexistent, 
and the fibers are connected haphazardly in loose sheets with 
a random orientation to the epithelium. The collagen fibers are 
larger and thicker, and myofibroblasts are generally absent.119
Keloidal fibroblasts have normal proliferation param-
eters but synthesize collagen at a rate 20 times greater than that 
observed in normal dermal fibroblasts, and 3 times higher than 
fibroblasts derived from HTS. Abnormal amounts of extracellu-
lar matrix such as fibronectin, elastin, and proteoglycans also are 
produced. The synthesis of fibronectin, which promotes clot gen-
eration, granulation tissue formation, and re-epithelialization, 
4
262
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
decreases during the normal healing process; however, produc-
tion continues at high levels for months to years in HTSs and 
keloids. This perturbed synthetic activity is mediated by altered 
growth factor expression. TGF-β expression is higher in HTS, 
and both HTS- and keloid-derived fibroblasts respond to lower 
concentrations of TGF-β than do normal dermal fibroblasts. 
HTSs also express increased levels of insulin-like growth fac-
tor-1, which reduces collagenase mRNA activity and increases 
mRNA for types I and II procollagen.120 Keloid fibroblasts 
have enhanced expression of TGF-β1 and TGF-β2, VEGF, and 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and an increased number of 
PDGF receptors; they also have upregulated antiapoptotic gene 
expression, which can be differentially expressed within differ-
ent areas of the same scar.
The underlying mechanisms that cause HTSs and keloids 
are not known. The immune system appears to be involved in the 
formation of both HTSs and keloids, although the exact relation-
ship is unknown. Much is inferred from the presence of various 
immune cells in HTSs and keloids. For example, in both HTSs 
and keloids, keratinocytes express human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA)-2 and ICAM-1 receptors, which are absent in normal scar 
keratinocytes. Keloids also have increased deposition of immu-
noglobulins IgG, IgA, and IgM, and their formation correlates 
with serum levels of IgE. Antinuclear antibodies against fibro-
blasts, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells are found in keloids, 
but not HTSs. HTSs have higher T lymphocyte and Langerhans 
cell contents. There is also a larger number of mast cells present 
in both HTSs and keloids compared to normal scars. Another 
recently described cell population is the fibrocyte, a leukocyte 
subpopulation derived from peripheral mononuclear cells. Pres-
ent in large numbers at the site of excess scarring, fibrocytes can 
stimulate fibroblast numbers and collagen synthesis. They also 
generate large numbers of cytokines, growth factors, and extra-
cellular matrix proteins, which are characteristically upregulated 
in keloid tissue. Other mechanisms that may cause abnormal 
scarring include mechanical tension (although keloids often 
occur in areas of minimal tension) and prolonged irritation and/
or inflammation that may lead to the generation of abnormal con-
centrations of profibrotic cytokines.
Treatment goals include restoration of function to the area, 
relief of symptoms, and prevention of recurrence. Many patients 
TABLE 9-8 
Characteristics of keloids and hypertrophic scars
Keloid
Hypertrophic Scar
Incidence
Rare
Frequent
Ethnic groups
African American, Asian, Hispanic
No predilection
Prior injury
Yes
Yes
Site predilection
Neck, chest, ear lobes, shoulders, upper back
Anywhere
Genetics
Autosomal dominant with incomplete penetration
No
Timing
Symptom-free interval; may appear years after injury
4–6 weeks postinjury
Symptoms
Pain, pruritus, hyperesthesia, growth beyond wound margins
Raised, some pruritus, respects wound 
confines
Regression
No
Frequent spontaneous
Contracture
Rare
Frequent
Histology
Hypocellular, thick, wavy collagen fibers in random orientation
Parallel orientation of collagen fibers
seek intervention due to cosmetic concerns. Because the under-
lying mechanisms causing keloids and HTSs remain unknown, 
many different modalities of treatment have been used without 
consistent success.121
Excision alone of keloids is subject to a high recurrence 
rate, ranging from 45% to 100%. Inclusion of the dermal 
advancing edge that characterizes keloids, use of incisions in 
skin tension lines, and tension-free closure all have been pro-
posed to decrease recurrence rates. There are fewer recurrences 
when surgical excision is combined with other modalities such 
as intralesional corticosteroid injection, topical application of 
silicone sheets, or the use of radiation or pressure. Surgery is 
recommended for debulking large lesions or as second-line 
therapy when other modalities have failed. Silicone application 
is relatively painless and should be maintained for 24 hours a 
day for about 3 months to prevent rebound hypertrophy. It may 
be secured with tape or worn beneath a pressure garment. The 
mechanism of action is not understood, but increased hydration 
of the skin, which decreases capillary activity, inflammation, 
hyperemia, and collagen deposition, may be involved. Silicone 
is more effective than other occlusive dressings and is an espe-
cially good treatment for children and others who cannot toler-
ate the pain involved in other modalities.102
Intralesional corticosteroid injections decrease fibroblast 
proliferation, collagen and glycosaminoglycan synthesis, the 
inflammatory process, and TGF-β levels. When used alone, 
however, there is a variable rate of response and recurrence; 
therefore, steroids are recommended as first-line treatment for 
keloids and second-line treatment for HTSs if topical thera-
pies have failed. Intralesional injections are more effective on 
younger scars. They may soften, flatten, and give symptomatic 
relief to keloids, but they cannot make the lesions disappear and 
they cannot narrow wide HTSs. Success is enhanced when used 
in combination with surgical excision. Serial injections every 
2 to 3 weeks are required. Complications include skin atrophy, 
hypopigmentation, telangiectasias, necrosis, and ulceration.
Although radiation destroys fibroblasts, it has variable, 
unreliable results and produces poor results, with 10% to 100% 
recurrence when used alone. It is more effective when combined 
with surgical excision. The timing, duration, and dosage for 
radiation therapy are still controversial, but doses ranging from 
263
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
1500 to 2000 rads appear effective. Given the risks of hyperpig-
mentation, pruritus, erythema, paresthesias, pain, and possible 
secondary malignancies, radiation should be reserved for adults 
with scars resistant to other modalities.
Pressure aids collagen maturation, flattens scars, and 
improves thinning and pliability. It reduces the number of cells 
in a given area, possibly by creating ischemia, which decreases 
tissue metabolism and increases collagenase activity. External 
compression is used to treat HTSs, especially after burns. Ther-
apy must begin early, and a pressure between 24 and 30 mmHg 
must be achieved in order to exceed capillary pressure, yet pre-
serve peripheral blood circulation. Garments should be worn for 
23 to 24 hours a day for up to 1 or more years to avoid rebound 
hypertrophy. Scars older than 6 to 12 months respond poorly.
Topical retinoids also have been used as treatment for both 
HTSs and keloids, with reported responses of 50% to 100%. 
Intralesional injections of IFN-γ, a cytokine released by T lym-
phocytes, reduce collagen types I, II, and III by decreasing 
mRNA and possibly by reducing levels of TGF-β. As mono-
therapy, IFN-γ has failed because of high recurrence rates due 
to resistance to repeated injections. More recently, imiquimod, 
an immunomodulator that induces IFN-γ and other cytokines at 
the site of application, has been recommended following exci-
sion. Intralesional injections of chemotherapeutic agents such 
as 5-fluorouracil have been used both alone and in combina-
tion with steroids. The use of bleomycin or mitomycin C has 
been reported to achieve some success in older scars resistant 
to steroids.
Peritoneal Scarring.  Peritoneal adhesions are fibrous bands 
of tissues formed between organs that are normally separated 
and/or between organs and the internal body wall. Most intra-
abdominal adhesions are a result of peritoneal injury, either by 
a prior surgical procedure or due to intra-abdominal infection. 
Postmortem examinations demonstrate adhesions in 67% of 
patients with prior surgical procedures and in 28% with a history 
of intra-abdominal infection. Intra-abdominal adhesions are the 
most common cause (65%–75%) of small bowel obstruction, 
especially in the ileum. Operations in the lower abdomen have 
a higher chance of producing small bowel obstruction. Follow-
ing rectal surgery, left colectomy, or total colectomy, there is an 
11% chance of developing small bowel obstruction within 1 year, 
and this rate increases to 30% by 10 years. Adhesions also are a 
leading cause of secondary infertility in women and can cause 
substantial abdominal and pelvic pain. Adhesions account for 
2% of all surgical admissions and 3% of all laparotomies in 
general surgery.122
Adhesions form when the peritoneal surface is damaged due 
to surgery, thermal or ischemic injury, inflammation, or foreign 
body reaction. The injury disrupts the protective mesothelial cell 
layer lining the peritoneal cavity and the underlying connective 
tissue. The injury elicits an inflammatory response consisting of 
hyperemia, fluid exudation, release and activation of white blood 
cells and platelets in the peritoneal cavity, activation of inflam-
matory cytokines, and the onset of the coagulation and comple-
ment cascades. Fibrin deposition occurs between the damaged but 
opposed serosal surfaces. These filmy adhesions often are tran-
sient and degraded by proteases of the fibrinolytic system, with 
restoration of the normal peritoneal surface. If insufficient fibri-
nolytic activity is present, permanent fibrous adhesions will form 
by collagen deposition within 1 week of the injury (Fig. 9-12).
Extensive research has been done on the effect of surgery 
and peritonitis on the fibrinolytic and inflammatory cascades 
within the peritoneal cavity. During normal repair, fibrin is 
principally degraded by the fibrinolytic protease plasmin, 
which is derived from inactive plasminogen through the action 
of two plasminogen activators (PA): tissue-type plasminogen 
activator (tPA) and urokinase-type plasminogen activator 
(uPA). Fibrinolytic activity in peritoneal fluid is reduced after 
abdominal surgery due to initial decreases in tPA levels and 
later to increases in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
which are induced by various cytokines, including TNF-α, 
IL-1, and interleukin-6 (IL-6).123
There are two major strategies for adhesion prevention or 
reduction. Surgical trauma is minimized within the peritoneum 
by careful tissue handling, avoiding desiccation and ischemia, 
and spare use of cautery, laser, and retractors. Fewer adhesions 
form with laparoscopic surgical techniques due to reduced tis-
sue trauma. The second major advance in adhesion prevention 
has been the introduction of barrier membranes and gels, which 
separate and create barriers between damaged mesothelial sur-
faces, allowing for adhesion-free healing. Currently, only three 
products are Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for 
reducing adhesion formation: Interceed (oxidized regenerated 
cellulose, indicated only in pelvic surgery), Seprafilm (a film 
composed of hyaluronic acid and carboxymethylcellulose) that is 
usually applied below the incision, and Adept (4% icodextrin, a 
corn starch derivative in electrolyte solution, also for use mainly 
in pelvic surgery). However, use of these substances directly 
over bowel anastomoses is contraindicated due to an elevated 
risk of leak.124 There have been innumerable studies investigat-
ing different molecules in hopes of preventing adhesion forma-
tion, but most of the success is limited to animal models, and 
clinically significant results in humans have yet to be achieved.
Thrombin
Coagulation
Fibrinogen
Peritoneal fluid
Inflammation
Fibrin
+ +
PAI-1, PAI-2
tPA, uPA
Fibrin residues
Fibrinolysis
Fibrinolysis
degradation
Restitution
Fibroblasts and capillaries
Fibrous adhesion
Peritoneal injury
Bleeding
Macrophages
mesothelium
Platelets
TF
Figure 9-12.  Fibrin formation and degradation in peritoneal tis-
sue repair and adhesion formation. PAI-1, PAI-2 = types 1 and 
2 plasminogen activator inhibitor; TF = tissue factor; tPA = tissue 
plasminogen activator; uPA = urokinase plasminogen activator.
264
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
TREATMENT OF WOUNDS
Local Care (Fig. 9-13)    
Management of acute wounds begins with obtaining a careful 
history of the events surrounding the injury. The history is fol-
lowed by a meticulous examination of the wound. Examina-
tion should assess the depth and configuration of the wound, 
the extent of nonviable tissue, and the presence of foreign bod-
ies and other contaminants. Examination of the wound 
may require irrigation and débridement of the edges of 
the wound and is facilitated by use of local anesthesia. Antibi-
otic administration and tetanus prophylaxis may be needed, and 
planning the type and timing of wound repair should take place.
After completion of the history, examination, and admin-
istration of tetanus prophylaxis, the wound should be meticu-
lously anesthetized. Lidocaine (0.5%–1%) or bupivacaine 
(0.25%–0.5%) combined with a 1:100,000 to 1:200,000 dilution 
of epinephrine provides satisfactory anesthesia and hemostasis. 
Epinephrine should not be used in wounds of the fingers, toes, 
ears, nose, or penis, due to the risk of tissue necrosis secondary 
to terminal arteriole vasospasm in these structures. Injection of 
these anesthetics can result in significant initial patient discom-
fort, and this can be minimized by slow injection, infiltration of 
the subcutaneous tissues, and buffering the solution with sodium 
bicarbonate. Care must be observed in calculating the maximum 
dosages of lidocaine or bupivacaine in order to avoid toxicity-
related side effects.
Irrigation to visualize all areas of the wound and remove 
foreign material is best accomplished with normal saline (with-
out additives). High-pressure wound irrigation is more effective 
in achieving complete débridement of foreign material and non-
viable tissues. Iodine, povidone-iodine, hydrogen peroxide, and 
organically based antibacterial preparations have all been shown 
to impair wound healing due to injury to wound neutrophils 
and macrophages, and thus should not be used. All hematomas 
present within wounds should be carefully evacuated and any 
remaining bleeding sources controlled with ligature or cautery. 
If the injury has resulted in the formation of a marginally viable 
flap of skin or tissue, this should be resected or revascularized 
prior to further wound repair and closure.
Figure 9-13.  Algorithm for management of acute 
wounds.
Management of acute wounds
1. Examination
a) Depth?
 Underlying structures injured
b) Configuration?
c) Nonviable tissue?
4. Follow-up
a) Cellulitis/drainage?
b) Suture removal
 -4–5 days for face
 -7–10 days other skin
3. Approximation
a) Deep layers
 -Fascial layers only
 -Absorbable suture
b) Superficial layers
 -Meticulous alignment
 -Nonabsorbable sutures
 in skin
 -Staples
 -Monofilament
 -Dermal glues
2. Preparation
a) Anesthetic
 -Lidocaine w or w/o epinephrine
b) Exploration
 -Underlying structures injured
c) Cleansing
 -Pulsed irrigation, saline only
d) Hemostasis
e) Débride nonviable tissue
f) Betadine on surrounding skin
g) Antibiotics (rare)
h) Tetanus
After the wound has been anesthetized, explored, irri-
gated, and débrided, the area surrounding the wound should 
be cleaned, inspected, and the surrounding hair clipped. The 
area surrounding the wound should be prepared with povi-
done iodine, chlorhexidine, or similar bacteriostatic solutions 
and draped with sterile towels. Having ensured hemostasis 
and adequate débridement of nonviable tissues and removal of 
any remaining foreign bodies, irregular, macerated, or beveled 
wound edges should be débrided in order to provide a fresh edge 
for reapproximation. Although plastic surgical techniques such 
as W- or Z-plasty are seldom recommended for acute wounds, 
great care must be taken to realign wound edges properly. This 
is particularly important for wounds that cross the vermilion 
border, eyebrow, or hairline. Initial sutures that realign the edges 
of these different tissue types will speed and greatly enhance the 
aesthetic outcome of the wound repair.
In general, the smallest suture required to hold the vari-
ous layers of the wound in approximation should be selected in 
order to minimize suture-related inflammation. Nonabsorbable 
or slowly absorbing monofilament sutures are most suitable for 
approximating deep fascial layers, particularly in the abdomi-
nal wall. Subcutaneous tissues should be closed with braided 
absorbable sutures, with care to avoid placement of sutures in 
fat. Although traditional teaching in wound closure has empha-
sized multiple-layer closures, additional layers of suture closure 
are associated with increased risk of wound infection, especially 
when placed in fat. Drains may be placed in areas at risk of 
forming fluid collections.
In areas of significant tissue loss, rotation of adjacent mus-
culocutaneous flaps may be required to provide sufficient tissue 
mass for closure. These musculocutaneous flaps may be based 
on intrinsic blood supply or may be moved from distant sites 
as free flaps and anastomosed into the local vascular bed. In 
areas with significant superficial tissue loss, split-thickness skin 
grafting (placed in a delayed manner to assure an adequate tis-
sue bed) may be required and will speed formation of an intact 
epithelial barrier to fluid loss and infection. Split-thickness skin 
grafts are readily obtained using manual or mechanical derma-
tomes, and the grafts may be “meshed” in order to increase the 
surface area of their coverage. It is essential to ensure hemostasis 
5
265
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
of the underlying tissue bed prior to placement of split-thickness 
skin grafts, as the presence of a hematoma below the graft will 
prevent the graft from taking, resulting in sloughing of the graft. 
In acute, contaminated wounds with skin loss, use of porcine 
skin xenografts or skin cadaveric allografts is prudent until the 
danger of infection passes.
After closing deep tissues and replacing significant tissue 
deficits, skin edges should be reapproximated for cosmesis and 
to aid in rapid wound healing. Skin edges may be quickly reap-
proximated with stainless steel staples or nonabsorbable mono-
filament sutures. Care must be taken to remove these from the 
wound prior to epithelialization of the skin tracts where sutures 
or staples penetrate the dermal layer. Failure to remove the 
sutures or staples prior to 7 to 10 days after repair will result 
in a cosmetically inferior wound. Where wound cosmesis is 
important, the above problems may be avoided by placement 
of buried dermal sutures using absorbable braided sutures. This 
method of wound closure allows for a precise reapproxima-
tion of wound edges and may be enhanced by application of 
wound closure tapes to the surface of the wound. Intradermal 
absorbable sutures do not require removal. Use of skin tapes 
alone is only recommended for closure of the smallest superfi-
cial wounds. Larger wounds generate sufficient lateral tension 
that the epithelial edges either separate or curl upward under 
the tapes, resulting in inadequate epithelial apposition and poor 
cosmesis.
The development of octyl-cyanoacrylate tissue glues 
have shown new promise for the management of simple, linear 
wounds with viable skin edges. These new glues are less prone 
to brittleness and have superior burst-strength characteristics. 
Studies have shown them to be suitable for use in contaminated 
situations without significant risk of infection. When used in the 
above types of wounds, these glues appear to provide superb 
cosmetic results and result in significantly less trauma than 
sutured repair, particularly when used in pediatric patients.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics should be used only when there is an obvious wound 
infection. Most wounds are contaminated or colonized with bac-
teria. The presence of a host response constitutes an infection 
and justifies the use of antibiotics. Signs of infection to look for 
include erythema, cellulitis, swelling, and purulent discharge. 
Indiscriminate use of antibiotics should be avoided to prevent 
emergence of multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Antibiotic treatment of acute wounds must be based on 
organisms suspected to be found within the infected wound 
and the patient’s overall immune status. When a single specific 
organism is suspected, treatment may be commenced using 
a single antibiotic. Conversely, when multiple organisms are 
suspected, as with enteric contamination or when a patient’s 
immune function is impaired by diabetes, chronic disease, or 
medication, treatment should commence with a broad-spectrum 
antibiotic or several agents in combination. Lastly, the location 
of the wound and the quality of tissue perfusion to that region 
will significantly impact wound performance after injury. Anti-
biotics also can be delivered topically as part of irrigations or 
dressings, although their efficacy is questionable.
Dressings
The main purpose of wound dressings is to provide the ideal envi-
ronment for wound healing. The dressing should facilitate the 
major changes taking place during healing to produce an optimally 
healed wound. Although the ideal dressing still is not a clinical 
reality, technological advances are promising (Table 9-9).
Covering a wound with a dressing mimics the barrier role 
of epithelium and prevents further damage. In addition, appli-
cation of compression provides hemostasis and limits edema. 
Occlusion of a wound with dressing material helps healing by 
controlling the level of hydration and oxygen tension within the 
wound. It also allows transfer of gases and water vapor from 
the wound surface to the atmosphere. Occlusion affects both 
the dermis and epidermis, and it has been shown that exposed 
wounds are more inflamed and develop more necrosis than cov-
ered wounds. Occlusion also helps in dermal collagen synthesis 
and epithelial cell migration and limits tissue desiccation. Since 
it may enhance bacterial growth, occlusion is contraindicated in 
infected and/or highly exudative wounds.
Dressings can be classified as primary or secondary. A 
primary dressing is placed directly on the wound and may pro-
vide absorption of fluids and prevent desiccation, infection, and 
adhesion of a secondary dressing. A secondary dressing is one 
that is placed on the primary dressing for further protection, 
absorption, compression, and occlusion. Many types of dress-
ings exist and are designed to achieve certain clinically desired 
endpoints.
Absorbent Dressings.  Accumulation of wound fluid can lead 
to maceration and bacterial overgrowth. Ideally, the dressing 
should absorb without getting soaked through, as this would 
permit bacteria from the outside to enter the wound. The dress-
ing must be designed to match the exudative properties of the 
wound and may include cotton, wool, and sponge.
Nonadherent Dressings.  Nonadherent dressings are impreg-
nated with paraffin, petroleum jelly, or water-soluble jelly for use 
as nonadherent coverage. A secondary dressing must be placed 
on top to seal the edges and prevent desiccation and infection.
Occlusive and Semiocclusive Dressings.  Occlusive and 
semiocclusive dressings provide a good environment for clean, 
minimally exudative wounds. These film dressings are water-
proof and impervious to microbes but permeable to water vapor 
and oxygen.
Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Dressings.  These dressings 
are components of a composite dressing. Hydrophilic dressing 
aids in absorption, whereas a hydrophobic dressing is water-
proof and prevents absorption.
Hydrocolloid and Hydrogel Dressings.  Hydrocolloid and 
hydrogel dressings attempt to combine the benefits of occlusion 
and absorbency. Hydrocolloids and hydrogels form complex 
Table 9-9 
Desired characteristics of wound dressings
Promote wound healing (maintain moist environment)
Conformability
Pain control
Odor control
Nonallergenic and nonirritating
Permeability to gas
Safety
Nontraumatic removal
Cost-effectiveness
Convenience
266
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
structures with water, and fluid absorption occurs with particle 
swelling, which aids in atraumatic removal of the dressing. 
Absorption of exudates by the hydrocolloid dressing leaves a 
yellowish-brown gelatinous mass after dressing removal that 
can be washed off. Hydrogel is a cross-linked polymer that has 
high water content. Hydrogels allow a high rate of evaporation 
without compromising wound hydration, which makes them 
useful in burn wound treatment.
Alginates.  Alginates are derived from brown algae and con-
tain long chains of polysaccharides containing mannuronic and 
glucuronic acid. The ratios of these sugars vary with the species 
of algae used, as well as the season of harvest. Processed as 
the calcium form, alginates turn into soluble sodium alginate 
through ion exchange in the presence of wound exudates. The 
polymers gel, swell, and absorb a great deal of fluid. Alginates 
are being used when there is skin loss, in open surgical wounds 
with medium exudation, and on full-thickness chronic wounds.
Absorbable Materials.  Absorbable materials are mainly used 
within wounds as hemostats and include collagen, gelatin, oxi-
dized cellulose, and oxidized regenerated cellulose.
Medicated Dressings.  Medicated dressings have long been 
used as a drug-delivery system. Agents delivered in the dress-
ings include benzoyl peroxide, zinc oxide, neomycin, and 
bacitracin-zinc. These agents have been shown to increase epi-
thelialization by 28%.
The type of dressing to be used depends on the amount 
of wound drainage. A nondraining wound can be covered with 
semiocclusive dressing. Drainage of less than 1 to 2 mL/d may 
require a semiocclusive or absorbent nonadherent dressing. 
Moderately draining wounds (3–5 mL/d) can be dressed with 
a nonadherent primary layer plus an absorbent secondary layer 
plus an occlusive dressing to protect normal tissue. Heavily 
draining wounds (>5 mL/d) require a similar dressing as mod-
erately draining wounds, but with the addition of a highly absor-
bent secondary layer.
Mechanical Devices.  Mechanical therapy augments and 
improves on certain functions of dressings, in particular the 
absorption of exudates and control of odor. The vacuum-assisted 
closure (VAC) system assists in wound closure by applying 
localized negative pressure to the surface and margins of the 
wound. The negative-pressure therapy is applied to a special 
foam dressing cut to the dimensions of the wound and positioned 
in the wound cavity or over a flap or graft. The continuous nega-
tive pressure is very effective in removing exudates from the 
wound. This form of therapy has been found to be effective 
for chronic open wounds (diabetic ulcers and stages III and IV 
pressure ulcers), acute and traumatic wounds,125 flaps and grafts, 
and subacute wounds (i.e., dehisced incisions), although more 
randomized trials need to be carried out to confirm efficacy.
Skin Replacements
All wounds require coverage in order to prevent evaporative 
losses and infection and to provide an environment that pro-
motes healing. Both acute and chronic wounds may demand use 
of skin replacement, and several options are available.
Conventional Skin Grafts.  Skin grafts have long been used to 
treat both acute and chronic wounds. Split- (partial-) thickness 
grafts consist of the epidermis plus part of the dermis, whereas 
full-thickness grafts retain the entire epidermis and dermis. 
Autologous grafts (autografts) are transplants from one site on 
the body to another; allogeneic grafts (allografts, homografts) 
are transplants from a living nonidentical donor or cadaver to 
the host; and xenogeneic grafts (heterografts) are taken from 
another species (e.g., porcine). Split-thickness grafts require less 
blood supply to restore skin function. The dermal component 
of full-thickness grafts lends mechanical strength and resists 
wound contraction better, resulting in improved cosmesis. Allo-
geneic and xenogeneic grafts require the availability of tissue, 
are subject to rejection, and may contain pathogens.
The use of skin grafts or bioengineered skin substitutes 
and other innovative treatments (e.g., topically applied growth 
factors, systemic agents, and gene therapy) cannot be effective 
unless the wound bed is adequately prepared. This may include 
débridement to remove necrotic or fibrinous tissue, control 
of edema, revascularization of the wound bed, decreasing the 
bacterial burden, and minimizing or eliminating exudate. Tem-
porary placement of allografts or xenografts may be used to 
prepare the wound bed.
Skin Substitutes.  Originally devised to provide coverage of 
extensive wounds with limited availability of autografts, skin 
substitutes also have gained acceptance as natural dressings. 
Manufactured by tissue engineering, they combine novel mate-
rials with living cells to provide functional skin substitutes, pro-
viding a bridge between dressings and skin grafts.
Skin substitutes have theoretical advantages of being read-
ily available and not requiring painful harvest, and they may be 
applied freely or with surgical suturing. In addition, they pro-
mote healing, either by stimulating host cytokine generation or 
by providing cells that may also produce growth factors locally. 
Their disadvantages include limited survival, high cost, and the 
need for multiple applications (Table 9-10). Allografting, albeit 
with a very thin graft, may at times be required to accomplish 
complete coverage.
A variety of skin substitutes are available, each with its 
own set of advantages and disadvantages; however, the ideal 
skin substitute has yet to be developed (Table 9-11). The devel-
opment of the newer composite substitutes, which provide both 
the dermal and epidermal components essential for permanent 
skin replacement, may represent an advance toward that goal. 
The acellular (e.g., native collagen or synthetic material) com-
ponent acts as a scaffold, promotes cell migration and growth, 
and activates tissue regeneration and remodeling. The cellular 
elements re-establish lost tissue and associated function, syn-
thesize extracellular matrix components, produce essential 
mediators such as cytokines and growth factors, and promote 
proliferation and migration.
Cultured epithelial autografts (CEAs) represent expanded 
autologous or homologous keratinocytes. CEAs are expanded 
from a biopsy of the patient’s own skin, will not be rejected, 
Table 9-10 
Desired features of tissue-engineered skin
Rapid re-establishment of functional skin (epidermis/dermis)
Receptive to body’s own cells (e.g., rapid “take” and  
  integration)
Graftable by a single, simple procedure
Graftable on chronic or acute wounds
Engraftment without use of extraordinary clinical  
  intervention (i.e., immunosuppression)
267
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
and can stimulate re-epithelialization as well as the growth of 
underlying connective tissue. Keratinocytes harvested from a 
biopsy roughly the size of a postage stamp are cultured with 
fibroblasts and growth factors and grown into sheets that can 
cover large areas and give the appearance of normal skin. Until 
the epithelial sheets are sufficiently expanded, the wound must 
be covered with an occlusive dressing or a temporary allograft 
or xenograft. The dermis regenerates very slowly, if at all, for 
full-thickness wounds, because the sheets are very fragile, are 
difficult to work with, are susceptible to infection, and do not 
resist contracture well, leading to poor cosmetic results.
CEAs are available from cadavers, unrelated adult donors, 
or neonatal foreskins. Fresh or cryopreserved cultured alloge-
neic keratinocytes can be left in place long enough to be super-
seded by multiplying endogenous skin cells because, unlike 
allografts containing epidermal Langerhans cells, they do not 
express major histocompatibility antigens. Cryopreserved CEAs 
are readily available “off the shelf,” and provide growth factors 
that may aid healing. However, like autologous keratinocyte 
sheets, the grafts lack the strength provided by a dermal compo-
nent and pose a risk of disease transmission.
Viable fibroblasts can be grown on bioabsorbable or non-
bioabsorbable meshes to yield living dermal tissue that can act 
as a scaffold for epidermal growth. Fibroblasts stimulated by 
growth factors can produce type I collagen and glycosamino-
glycans (e.g., chondroitin sulfates), which adhere to the wound 
surface to permit epithelial cell migration, as well as adhesive 
ligands (e.g., the matrix protein fibronectin), which promote cell 
adhesion. This approach has the virtue of being less time-con-
suming and expensive than culturing keratinocyte sheets. There 
are a number of commercially available, bioengineered dermal 
replacements approved for use in burn wound treatment as well 
as other indications.
Bioengineered skin substitutes have evolved from kera-
tinocyte monolayers to dermal equivalents to split-thickness 
products with a pseudo-epidermis, and most recently, to prod-
ucts containing both epidermal and dermal components that 
resemble the three-dimensional structure and function of nor-
mal skin (see Table 9-11). Indicated for use with standard com-
pression therapy in the treatment of venous insufficiency ulcers 
and for the treatment of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers, these 
bilayered skin equivalents also are being used in a variety of 
wound care settings.
Table 9-11 
Advantages and disadvantages of various bioengineered skin substitutes
Skin Substitute
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cultured allogeneic kerati-
nocyte graft
No biopsy needed
“Off the shelf” availability
Provides wound coverage
Promotes healing
Unstable
Does not prevent wound contracture
Inadequate cosmesis
Possibility of disease transmission
Fragile
Bioengineered dermal 
replacement
Prevents contracture
Good prep for graft application
Limited ability to drive re-epithelialization
Largely serves as temporary dressing
Cultured bilayer skin 
equivalent
More closely mimics normal anatomy
Does not need secondary procedure
Easily handled
Can be sutured, meshed, etc.
Cost
Short shelf life
True engraftment questionable
Growth Factor Therapy.  As discussed previously, it is 
believed that nonhealing wounds result from insufficient 
or inadequate growth factors in the wound environment. A 
simplistic solution would be to flood the wound with single 
or multiple growth factors in order to “jump-start” healing and 
re-epithelialization. Although there is a large body of work dem-
onstrating the effects of growth factors in animals, translation 
of these data into clinical practice has met with limited suc-
cess. Growth factors for clinical use may be either recombi-
nant or homologous/autologous. Autologous growth factors are 
harvested from the patient’s own platelets, yielding an unpre-
dictable combination and concentration of factors, which are 
then applied to the wound. This approach allows treatment with 
patient-specific factors at an apparently physiologic ratio of 
growth factor concentrations. Disappointingly, a recent meta-
analysis failed to demonstrate any value for autologous platelet-
rich plasma in the treatment of chronic wounds.126 Recombinant 
molecular biologic means permit the purification of high con-
centrations of individual growth factors. Current FDA-approved 
formulations, as well as those used experimentally, deliver con-
centrations approximately 103 times higher than those observed 
physiologically.
At present, only platelet-derived growth factor BB 
(PDGF-BB) is currently approved by the FDA for treatment of 
diabetic foot ulcers. Application of recombinant human PDGF-
BB in a gel suspension to these wounds increases the incidence 
of total healing and decreases healing time. Several other growth 
factors have been tested clinically and show some promise, but 
currently none are approved for use. A great deal more needs 
to be discovered about the concentration, temporal release, and 
receptor cell population before growth factor therapy is to make 
a consistent impact on wound healing.
Gene or Cell Therapy.  Given the disappointing results from 
the application of purified growth factors onto wounds, the pos-
sible therapeutic potential of gene therapy has been recognized 
and studied. Direct access to the open wound bed, which char-
acterizes almost all chronic wounds, has facilitated this therapy. 
Gene delivery to wounds includes traditional approaches such 
as viral vectors and plasmid delivery or, more recently, electro-
poration and microseeding.
Although a variety of genes expressing interleukin-8, 
PDGF, IGF-1, keratinocyte growth factor, and laminin-5 have 
268
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
been successfully delivered to wounds in both animal and 
human models, the effects have been modest and specific to 
unique wound situations. Delivering extra genes into the wound 
bed presents the challenge of expression of the necessary signals 
to turn the genes on and off at appropriate times so that dys-
regulated, hypertrophic, and abnormal healing does not occur. 
Elaborate systems have been created for topical use as on/off 
switches for genes. The more important question is which genes 
to express, in what temporal sequence, and in what regions of 
the wound bed, as it is unlikely that a single gene coding for one 
protein can significantly affect overall healing. There is growing 
consensus that delivery of genes is not going to represent the 
universal solution. Although gene therapy replaces missing or 
defective genes, most acute wounds already have and express 
the necessary genes for successful healing and the wound envi-
ronment produces signals adequate to the activation of these 
genes. What, if any, are the deficiencies in gene expression or 
activity in failed wounds is unknown.
Another approach is to deliver multiple genes coding 
for proteins that can act synergistically and even in a timed 
sequence, as would occur during normal healing. This would 
involve the use of activated cells that participate in the heal-
ing sequence that could be delivered in an activated state to 
the wound environment. Use of mesenchymal stem cells as a 
delivery vector for many genes simultaneously is the latest such 
approach. The feasibility of applying bone marrow-derived, 
umbilical cord-derived, adipose-derived, and epidermal stem 
cells that can differentiate into various cells that participate in 
the wound healing response also has been documented. These 
cells, as part of their differentiation and activation in the wound, 
have been shown to produce a variety of growth factors includ-
ing VEGF, PDGF, bFGF, and MMP-9. The challenges remain 
how to maintain the viability and activity of the transplanted 
cells, how to document that the observed effects are due to the 
delivered cells, and what are the mechanisms necessary for reg-
ulating or ending their activity.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
    1.	Winter GD. Formation of the scab and the rate of epithelialisa-
tion of superficial wounds in the skin of the young domestic 
pig. Nature. 1962;193:293.
    2.	Gulliver G, ed. The Works of John Hunter. London: Longman; 
1837.
    3.	Feiken E, Romer J, Eriksen J, et al. Neutrophils express tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha during mouse skin wound healing. J Invest 
Dermatol. 1995;105:120.
    4.	Dovi JV, He L-K, DiPietro LA. Accelerated wound closure in 
neutrophil-depleted mice. J Leukoc Biol. 2003;73:448.
    5.	Leibovich SJ, Ross R. The role of the macrophage in wound 
repair. A study with hydrocortisone and antimacrophage 
serum. Am J Pathol. 1975;78:71.
    6.	DiPietro LA. Wound healing: the role of the macrophage and 
other immune cells. Shock. 1995;4:233.
    7.	Zabel DD, Feng JJ, Scheuenstuhl H, et al. Lactate stimula-
tion of macrophage-derived angiogenic activity is associated 
with inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis. Lab Invest. 
1996;74:644.
    8.	Schäffer MR, Barbul A. Lymphocyte function in wound heal-
ing and following injury. Br J Surg. 1998;85:444.
    9.	Efron JE, Frankel HL, Lazarou SA, et al. Wound healing and 
T-lymphocytes. J Surg Res. 1990;48:460.
  10.	Barbul A, Breslin RJ, Woodyard JP, et al. The effect of in vivo 
T helper and T suppressor lymphocyte depletion on wound 
healing. Ann Surg. 1989;209:479.
  11.	Rezzonico R, Burger D, Dayer JM. Direct contact between 
T lymphocytes and human dermal fibroblasts or synoviocytes 
down-regulates types I and III collagen production via cell-
associated cytokines. J Biol Chem. 1998;273:18720.
  12.	Grotendorst GR. Chemoattractants and growth factors. In: 
Cohen K, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, eds. Wound Heal-
ing, Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1992:237.
  13.	Bonner JC, Osornio-Vargas AR, Badgett A, et al. Differential 
proliferation of rat lung fibroblasts induced by the platelet-
derived growth factor-AA, -AB, and -BB isoforms secreted by 
rat alveolar macrophages. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1991; 
5:539.
  14.	Pricolo VE, Caldwell MD, Mastrofrancesco B, et al. Modula-
tory activities of wound fluid on fibroblast proliferation and 
collagen synthesis. J Surg Res. 1990;48:534.
  15.	Regan MC, Kirk SJ, Wasserkrug HL, et al. The wound envi-
ronment as a regulator of fibroblast phenotype. J Surg Res. 
1991;50:442.
  16.	Gimbel ML, Hunt TK, Hussain MZ. Lactate controls collagen 
gene promoter activity through poly-ADP-ribosylation. Surg 
Forum. 2000;51:26.
  17.	Ghani QP, Hussain MZ, Hunt TK. Control of procollagen gene 
transcription and prolyl hydroxylase activity by poly(ADP-
ribose). In: Poirier G, Moreaer A, eds. ADP-Ribosylation 
Reactions. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1992:111.
  18.	Xiong M, Elson G, Legarda D, et al. Production of vascular 
endothelial growth factor by murine macrophages: regulation 
by hypoxia, lactate, and the inducible nitric oxide synthase 
pathway. Am J Pathol. 1998;153:587.
  19.	Ferrara N, Davis-Smith T. The biology of vascular endothelial 
growth factor. Endocrine Rev. 1997;18:4.
  20.	Levenson SM, Geever EF, Crowley LV, et al. The healing of 
rat skin wounds. Ann Surg. 1965;161:293.
  21.	Zhou LJ, Ono I, Kaneko F. Role of transforming growth 
factor-beta 1 in fibroblasts derived from normal and hypertro-
phic scarred skin. Arch Dermatol Res. 1997;289:645.
  22.	Stenn KS, Depalma L. Re-epithelialization. In: Clark RAF, 
Hensen PM, eds. The Molecular and Cellular Biology of 
Wound Repair. New York: Plenum; 1988:321.
  23.	Johnson FR, McMinn RMH. The cytology of wound healing 
of the body surface in mammals. Biol Rev. 1960;35:364.
  24.	Woodley DT, Bachman PM, O’Keefe EJ. The role of matrix 
components in human keratinocyte re-epithelialization. In: 
Barbul A, Caldwell MD, Eaglstein WH, et al, eds. Clinical 
and Experimental Approaches to Dermal and Epidermal 
Repair. Normal and Chronic Wounds. New York: Wiley-Liss; 
1991:129.
  25.	Lynch SE. Interaction of growth factors in tissue repair. In: 
Barbul A, Caldwell MD, Eaglstein WH, et al, eds. Clinical and 
Experimental Approaches to Dermal and Epidermal Repair. 
Normal and Chronic Wounds. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1991:341.
  26.	Jans DA, Hassan G. Nuclear targeting by growth factors, 
cytokines, and their receptors: a role in signaling? Bioassays. 
1998;20:400.
  27.	Schmitt-Graff A, Desmouliere A, Gabbiani G. Heterogeneity 
of myofibroblast phenotypic features: an example of fibro-
blastic cell plasticity. Virchows Arch. 1994;425:3.
  28.	Darby I, Skalli O, Gabbiani G. Alpha-smooth muscle actin is 
transiently expressed by myofibroblasts during experimental 
wound healing. Lab Invest. 1990;63:21.
  29.	Desmouliere A, Redard M, Darby I, et al. Apoptosis medi-
ates the decrease in cellularity during the transition between 
granulation tissue and scar. Am J Pathol. 1995;146:56.
269
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
  30.	Ehrlich HP. Wound closure: evidence of cooperation between 
fibroblasts and collagen matrix. Eye. 1988;2:149.
  31.	Phillips C, Wenstrup RJ. Biosynthetic and genetic disorders 
of collagen. In: Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, eds. 
Wound Healing Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadel-
phia: WB Saunders; 1992:152.
  32.	Sidhu-Malik NK, Wenstrup RJ. The Ehlers-Danlos syn-
dromes and Marfan syndrome: inherited diseases of connec-
tive tissue with overlapping clinical features. Semin Dermatol. 
1995;14:40.
  33.	Woolley MM, Morgan S, Hays DM. Heritable disorders of 
connective tissue. Surgical and anesthetic problems. J Pediatr 
Surg. 1967;2:325.
  34.	McEntyre RL, Raffensperger JG. Surgical complications of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in children. J Pediatr Surg. 1977; 
13:531.
  35.	Malfait F, Wenstrup RJ, DePaepe AD. Clinical and genetic 
aspects of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic type. Genetics 
Med. 2010;12:597.
  36.	Hunt TK. Disorders of wound healing. World J Surg. 1980; 
4:271.
  37.	Anonymous. Heritable disorders of connective tissue. JAMA. 
1973;224(5 Suppl):774.
  38.	le Goff C, Cormier-Daire V. From tall to short: the role of 
TGF-β signaling in growth and its disorders. Am J Med 
Genetics Part C (Semin Med Genetics). 2012;160C:145.
  39.	Knaup J, Verwanger T, Gruber C, et al. Epidermolysis bul-
losa: a group of skin disease with different causes but com-
monalities in gene expression. Exp Dermatol. 2012;21:527.
  40.	Carter DM, Lin AN. Wound healing and epidermolysis bul-
losa. Arch Dermatol. 1988;124:732.
  41.	Coromilas A, Brandling-Bennett H, Morel K, et al. Novel 
SLC39A4 mutation in acrodermatitis enteropathica. Pediatr 
Dermatol. 2011;28:697.
  42.	Kruse-Jarres JD. Pathogenesis and symptoms of zinc defi-
ciency. Am Clin Lab. 2001;20:17.
  43.	Okada A, Takagi Y, Nezu R, et al. Zinc in clinical surgery—a 
research review. Jpn J Surg. 1990;20:635.
  44.	Olivas A, Shogan B, Valuckaite V, et al. Intestinal tissues 
induce an SNP mutation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa that 
enhances its virulence: possible role in anastomotic leak. 
PLOS One. 2012;7(8):e44326.
  45.	Thornton FJ, Barbul A. Healing in the gastrointestinal 
tract. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77:549.
  46.	Choy PYG, Bissett IP, Docherty JG, Parry BR, Merrie AEH. 
Stapled versus handsewn methods for ileocolic anastomoses. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;3:CD004320.
  47.	Marjanovic G, Vilain C, Juettner E, et al. Impact of differ-
ent crystalloid volume regimens on anastomotic stability. Ann 
Surg. 2009;249:181-185.
  48.	Schnuriger B, Inaba K, Wu T, et al. Crystalloids after primary 
colon resection and anastomosis at initial trauma laparotomy: 
excessive volumes are associated with anastomotic leak-
age. J Trauma. 2011;70:603-610.
  49.	Lorenz PH, Whitby DJ, Longaker MT, et al. Fetal wound 
healing. The ontogeny of scar formation in the non-human 
primate. Ann Surg. 1993;217:391.
  50.	Longaker MT, Whitby DJ, Ferguson MWJ, et al. Adult skin 
wounds in the fetal environment heal with scar formation. Ann 
Surg. 1994;219:65.
  51.	Lorenz HP, Longaker MT, Perkocha LA, et al. Scarless 
wound repair: a human fetal skin model. Development. 
1992;114:253.
  52.	Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al. Comparison of 
fetal, newborn and adult rabbit wound healing by histologic, 
enzyme-histochemical and hydroxyproline determinations. 
J Pediatr Surg. 1991;20:315.
  53.	Shah M, Foreman DM, Ferguson MWJ. Neutralizing antibody 
to TGF-β1,2 reduces cutaneous scarring in adult rodents. J Cell 
Sci. 1994;107:1137.
  54.	Longaker MT, Adzick NS. The biology of fetal wound heal-
ing: a review. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;87:788.
  55.	Seeger JM, Kaelin LD, Staples EM, et al. Prevention of post-
operative pericardial adhesions using tissue-protective solu-
tions. J Surg Res. 1997;68:63.
  56.	Longaker MT, Whitby DJ, Adzick NS, et al. Studies in fetal 
wound healing. VI: Second and early third trimester fetal 
wounds demonstrate rapid collagen deposition without scar 
formation. J Pediatr Surg. 1990;25:63.
  57.	Halasz NA. Dehiscence of laparotomy wounds. Am J Surg. 
1968;116:210.
  58.	Mendoza CB, Postlethwait RW, Johnson WD. Incidence 
of wound disruption following operation. Arch Surg. 1970; 
101:396.
  59.	Holt D, Kirk SJ, Regan MC, et al. Effect of age on wound 
healing in healthy humans. Surgery. 1992;112:293.
  60.	Jonson K, Jensen JA, Goodson WH III, et al. Tissue oxygen-
ation, anemia, and perfusion in relation to wound healing in 
surgical patients. Ann Surg. 1991;214:605.
  61.	Hopf HW, Hunt TK, West JM, et al. Wound tissue oxygen ten-
sion predicts the risk of wound infection in surgical patients. 
Arch Surg. 1997;132:997.
  62.	Greif R, Akca O, Horn EP, et al. Supplemental periopera-
tive oxygen to reduce the incidence of surgical-wound infec-
tion. Outcomes Research Group. N Engl J Med. 2000;342: 
161.
  63.	Kurz A, Sessler D, Leonhardt R. Perioperative normother-
mia to reduce the incidence of surgical-wound infection and 
shorten hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1209.
  64.	Ehrlich HP, Hunt TK. Effects of cortisone and vitamin A on 
wound healing. Ann Surg. 1968;167:324.
  65.	Anstead GM. Steroids, retinoids, and wound healing. Adv 
Wound Care. 1998;11:277.
  66.	Ferguson MK. The effect of antineoplastic agents on wound 
healing. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1982;154:421.
  67.	Larson DL. Alterations in wound healing secondary to infu-
sion injury. Clin Plast Surg. 1990;17:509.
  68.	Cruse PJE, Foord RA. A prospective study of 23,649 surgical 
wounds. Arch Surg. 1973;107:206.
  69.	Yue DK, McLennan S, Marsh M, et al. Effects of experimen-
tal diabetes, uremia, and malnutrition on wound healing. 
Diabetes. 1987;36:295.
  70.	Goodson WH III, Hunt TK. Studies of wound healing in 
experimental diabetes mellitus. J Surg Res. 1977;22:221.
  71.	Black E, Vibe-Petersen J, Jorgensen LN, et al. Decrease in 
collagen deposition in wound repair in type I diabetes inde-
pendent of glycemic control. Arch Surg. 2003;138:34.
  72.	Spiliotis J, Tsiveriotis K, Datsis AD, et al. Wound dehiscence 
is still a problem in the 21th century: a retrospective study. 
World J Emerg Surg. 2009;4:12.
  73.	Coon D, Gusenoff JA, Kannan N, et al. Body mass and surgi-
cal complications in the postbariatric reconstructive patient: 
analysis of 511 cases. Ann Surg. 2009;249:397-401.
  74.	Arthurs ZM, Cuadrado D, Sohn V, et al. Post-bariatric pan-
niculectomy: pre-panniculectomy body mass index impacts 
the complication profile. Am J Surg. 2007;193:567-570.
  75.	Tsukada K, Miyazaki T, Kato H, et al. Body fat accumulation 
and postoperative complications after abdominal surgery. Am 
Surg. 2004;70:347–351.
  76.	Williams JZ, Barbul A. Nutrition and wound healing. Surg 
Clin North Am. 2003;83:571.
  77.	Goodson WH, Jensen JA, Gramja-Mena L, et al. The influ-
ence of a brief preoperative illness on postoperative healing. 
Ann Surg. 1987;205:250.
270
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
  78.	Winsor JA, Knight GS, Hill GL. Wound healing in surgical 
patients: recent food intake is more important than nutritional 
status. Br J Surg. 1988;75:135.
  79.	Haydock DA, Hill GL. Improved wound healing response in 
surgical patients receiving intravenous nutrition. Br J Surg. 
1987;74:320.
  80.	Seifter E, Rettura G, Barbul A, et al. Arginine: an essential 
amino acid for injured rats. Surgery. 1978;84:224.
  81.	Barbul A, Lazarou S, Efron DT, et al. Arginine enhances 
wound healing in humans. Surgery. 1990;108:331.
  82.	Kirk SJ, Regan MC, Holt D, et al. Arginine stimulates wound 
healing and immune function in aged humans. Surgery. 
1993;114:155.
  83.	Williams JZ, Abumrad NN, Barbul A. Effect of a specialized 
amino acid mixture on human collagen deposition. Ann Surg. 
2002;236:369.
  84.	Levenson SM, Seifter E, VanWinkle W. Nutrition. In: Hunt 
TK, Dunphy JE, eds. Fundamentals of Wound Management in 
Surgery. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1979:286.
  85.	Jeejeebhoy KN, Cheong WK. Essential trace metals: defi-
ciencies and requirements. In: Fischer JE, ed. Nutrition and 
Metabolism in the Surgical Patient. Boston: Little, Brown and 
Company; 1996:295.
  86.	Wilkinson EAJ, Hawke CI. Oral zinc for arterial and venous 
ulcers (Cochrane Review), in The Cochrane Library, 1:2002. 
Oxford: Update Software.
  87.	Robson MC. Wound infection: a failure of wound healing 
caused by an imbalance of bacteria. Surg Clin North Am. 
1997;77:637.
  88.	Birkmeyer NJO, Birkmeyer JD. Strategies for improving 
surgical quality: should payers reward excellence or effort? 
N Engl J Med. 2006;354:864.
  89.	Classen DC, Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, et al. The timing of pro-
phylactic administration of antibiotics and the risk of surgical-
wound infection. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:281.
  90.	Anonymous. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery. Med Letter. 
2012;10:73.
  91.	Gupta N, Kaul-Gupta R, Carstens MM, et al. Analyzing pro-
phylactic antibiotic administration in procedures lasting more 
than four hours: are published guidelines being followed? 
Am Surg. 2003;69:669.
  92.	Arnold MA, Barbul A. Surgical site infections. In: Cameron 
JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 9th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-
Elsevier; 2008:1152-1160.
  93.	Liese JG, Jenrossek V, Jannson A, et al. Chronic granuloma-
tous disease in adults. Lancet. 1996;347:220.
  94.	Ramos M, Khalpey Z, Lipsitz S, et al. Relationship of peri-
operative hyperglycemia and postoperative infections in 
patients who undergo general and vascular surgery. Ann Surg. 
2008;248:585-591.
  95.	Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers P, et al. Inten-
sive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:1359-1367.
  96.	Lazar HL, Chipkin SR, Fitzgerald CA, et al. Tight glyce-
mic control in diabetic coronary artery bypass graft patients 
improves perioperative outcomes and decreases recurrent 
ischemic events. Circulation. 2004;109:1497-1502.
  97.	Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraop-
erative insulin therapy versus conventional glucose manage-
ment during cardiac surgery: a randomized trial. Ann Int Med. 
2007;146:233-243.
  98.	Lazar HL, McDonnell MM, Chipkin S, et al. Effects of 
aggressive versus moderate glycemic control on clinical out-
comes in diabetic coronary artery bypass patients. Ann Surg. 
2011;254:458-463.
  99.	Gottrup F, Firmin R, Rabkin J, et al. Directly measured tissue 
oxygen tension and arterial oxygen tension assess tissue perfu-
sion. Crit Care Med. 1987;15:1030-1036.
100.	Sheffield CW, Sessler DI, Hopf HW, et al. Centrally and 
locally mediated thermoregulatory responses alter subcutane-
ous oxygen tension. Wound Repair Regen. 1996;4:339-345.
101.	Maragakis LL, Cosgrove SE, Martinez EA, et al. Intraopera-
tive fraction of inspired oxygen is a modifiable risk factor for 
surgical site infection after spinal surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:556-562.
102.	Meyhoff C, Weyyerslev J, Jorgensen LN, et al. Effect of high 
perioperative oxygen fraction on surgical site infection and 
pulmonary complications after abdominal surgery: the PROXI 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2009;302:1543-1550.
103.	Falanga V, Eaglstein WH. The “trap” hypothesis of venous 
ulceration. Lancet. 1993;341:1006.
104.	Lobmann R, Ambrosch A, Schultz G, et al. Expression 
of matrix-metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in the 
wounds of diabetic and non-diabetic patients. Diabetologia. 
2002;45:1011.
105.	Stanley A, Osler T. Senescence and the healing rates of venous 
ulcers. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33:1206.
106.	Kim BC, Kim HT, Park SH, et al. Fibroblasts from chronic 
wounds show altered TGF-β-signaling and decreased TGF-β 
type II receptor expression. J Cell Physiol. 2003;195:331.
107.	Hopf HW, Ueno C, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the treat-
ment of arterial insufficiency ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2006;14:693.
108.	Hopf HW, Ueno C, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the pre-
vention of lower extremity arterial ulcers. Wound Repair 
Regen. 2008;16:175.
109.	Robson MC, Cooper DM, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for 
the treatment of venous ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2006;14:649.
110.	Kirsner RS, Marston WA, Snyder RJ, et al. Sprayed-applied 
cell therapy with human allogeneic fibroblasts and keratino-
cytes for treatment of chronic venous leg ulcers: a phase 2, 
multicenter, double-blind, randomized, place-controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2012;380:977-985.
111.	Robson MC, Cooper DM, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for 
the prevention of venous ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2008;16:147.
112.	Steed DL, Attinger C, Colaizzi T, et al. Guidelines for treat-
ment of diabetic ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2006;14:680.
113.	Jeffcoate WJ, Harding KG. Diabetic foot ulcers. Lancet. 
2003;361:1545.
114.	Steed DL, Attinger C, Brem H, et al. Guidelines for the 
prevention of diabetic ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2008;16:169.
115.	Whitney J, Phillips L, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for 
the treatment of pressure ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2006;14:663.
116.	Stechmiller JK, Cowan L, Whitney J, et al. Guidelines for 
the prevention of pressure ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 
2008;16:151.
117.	Niessen FB, Spauwen PH, Schalkwijk J, et al. On the nature of 
hypertrophic scars and keloids: a review. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1999;104:1435.
118.	Marneros AG, Norris JE, Olsen BR, et al. Clinical genetics of 
familial keloids. Arch Dermatol. 2001;137:1429.
119.	Gauglitz GG, Korting HC, Pavicic T, et al. Hypertrophic scar-
ring and keloids: pathomechanisms and current and emerging 
treatment strategies. Mol Med. 2011;17:113-125.
120.	Butler PD, Longaker MT, Yang GP. Current progress in 
keloid research and treatment. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206:731.
271
Wound Healing
CHAPTER 9
121.	Mustoe TA. Evolution of silicone therapy and mecha-
nism of action in scar management. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 
2008;32:82.
122.	Dijkstra FR, Nieuwenhuijzen M, Reijnen MM, et al. Recent 
clinical developments in pathophysiology, epidemiology, 
diagnosis and treatment of intra-abdominal adhesions. Scand 
J Gastroenterol Suppl. 2000;232:52.
123.	Cheong YC, Laird SM, Shellton JB, et al. The correlation of 
adhesions and peritoneal fluid cytokine concentrations: a pilot 
study. Hum Reprod. 2002;17:1039.
124.	Zeng Q, Yu Z, You J, Zhang Q. Efficacy and safety of Sepra-
film for preventing postoperative abdominal adhesion: system-
atic review and meta-analysis. World J Surg. 2007;31:2125.
125.	Armstrong DG, Lavery L. Negative pressure wound therapy 
after partial diabetic foot amputation: a multicentre, ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1704.
126.	Martinez-Zapata MJ, Marti-Carvajal AJ, Sola I, et al. Autol-
ogous platelet-rich plasma for treating chronic wounds. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD006899.
This page intentionally left blank 
Oncology
Funda Meric-Bernstam and  
Raphael E. Pollock
10
ONCOLOGY AND SURGICAL PRACTICE
As the population ages, oncology is becoming a larger portion 
of surgical practice. The surgeon often is responsible for the 
initial diagnosis and management of solid tumors. Knowledge 
of cancer epidemiology, etiology, staging, and natural history is 
required for initial patient assessment, as well as to determina-
tion of the optimal surgical therapy.
Modern cancer therapy is multidisciplinary, involving the 
coordinated care of patients by surgeons, medical oncologists, 
radiation oncologists, reconstructive surgeons, pathologists, 
radiologists, and primary care physicians. Primary (or 
definitive) surgical therapy refers to en bloc resection of 
tumor with adequate margins of normal tissues and regional 
lymph nodes as necessary. Adjuvant therapy refers to radia-
tion therapy and systemic therapies, including chemotherapy, 
­immunotherapy, hormonal therapy, and, increasingly, biologic 
therapy. The primary goal of surgical and radiation therapy is 
local and regional control. On the other hand, the primary goal of 
systemic therapy is systemic control by treatment of distant foci 
of subclinical disease to prevent distant recurrence. Surgeons 
must be familiar with adjuvant therapies to coordinate multidis-
ciplinary care and to determine the best sequence of therapy.
Recent advances in molecular biology are revolutionizing 
medicine. New information is being translated rapidly into clini-
cal use, with the development of new prognostic and predictive 
markers and new biologic therapies. Increasingly cancer therapy 
is getting personalized, incorporating information about each 
patient’s tumor characteristics, patient’s own genome, as well 
as host immune responses and tumor microenvironment, into 
clinical decision-making. It is therefore essential that surgeons 
Oncology and Surgical  
Practice	
273
Epidemiology	
274
Basic Principles of Cancer  
Epidemiology / 274
Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the 
United States / 274
Global Statistics on Cancer Incidence  
and Mortality / 275
Cancer Biology	
277
Hallmarks of Cancer / 277
Cell Proliferation and Transformation / 277
Cancer Initiation / 278
Cell-Cycle Dysregulation in Cancer / 279
Oncogenes / 279
Alterations in Apoptosis in  
Cancer Cells / 281
Autophagy in Cancer Cells / 283
Cancer Invasion / 283
Angiogenesis / 283
Metastasis / 284
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition / 285
Cancer Stem Cells / 285
Cancer Etiology	
285
Cancer Genomics / 285
Tumor Heterogeneity and Molecular 
­Evolution / 287
Genes Associated with Hereditary Cancer 
Risk / 287
BRCA1, BRCA2, and Hereditary 
­Breast-Ovarian Cancer / 291
APCGene and Familial Adenomatous 
­Polyposis / 291
PTEN and Cowden Disease / 292
RET Proto-Oncogene and Multiple 
­Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2 / 293
Chemical Carcinogens / 293
Physical Carcinogens / 293
Viral Carcinogens / 295
Cancer Risk Assessment	
296
Cancer Screening	
297
Cancer Diagnosis	
299
Cancer Staging	
300
Tumor Markers	
301
Prognostic and Predictive Tissue  
Markers / 301
Serum Markers / 302
Circulating Tumor Cells / 303
Bone Marrow Micrometastases / 304
Surgical Approaches to  
Cancer Therapy	
304
Multidisciplinary Approach to Cancer / 304
Surgical Management of Primary  
Tumors / 304
Surgical Management of the Regional 
Lymph Node Basin / 305
Surgical Management of Distant 
­Metastases / 306
Chemotherapy	
306
Clinical Use of Chemotherapy / 306
Principles of Chemotherapy / 307
Anticancer Agents / 307
Combination Chemotherapy / 307
Drug Toxicity / 308
Administration of Chemotherapy / 308
Hormonal Therapy	
308
Targeted Therapy	
309
Immunotherapy	
309
Gene Therapy	
312
Mechanisms of Intrinsic and 
Acquired Drug Resistance	
312
Radiation Therapy	
313
Physical Basis of Radiation  
Therapy / 313
Biologic Basis of Radiation  
Therapy / 313
Radiation Therapy Planning / 314
Side Effects / 314
Cancer Prevention	
314
Trends in Oncology	
316
Cancer Screening and  
Diagnosis / 316
Surgical Therapy / 316
Systemic Therapy / 316
1
chapter 
Key Points
1
	 Modern cancer therapy is multidisciplinary, involving coordi-
nated care by surgeons, medical oncologists, radiation oncolo-
gists, reconstructive surgeons, pathologists, radiologists, and 
primary care physicians.
2
	 Understanding cancer biology is essential to successfully 
implement personalized cancer therapy.
understand the principles of molecular oncology to appropri-
ately interpret these new contributions and incorporate 
them into practice.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Basic Principles of Cancer Epidemiology
The term incidence refers to the number of new cases occur-
ring. Incidence is usually expressed as the number of new cases 
per 100,000 persons per year. Mortality refers to the number 
of deaths occurring and is expressed as the number of deaths 
per 100,000 persons per year. Incidence and mortality data are 
usually available through cancer registries. Mortality data are 
also available as public records in many countries where deaths 
are registered as vital statistics, often with the cause of death. 
In areas where cancer registries do not exist, mortality data are 
used to extrapolate incidence rates. These numbers are likely to 
be less accurate than registry data, as the relationship between 
incidence and cause-specific death is likely to vary significantly 
among countries owing to the variation in health care delivery.
The incidence of cancer varies by geography. This is due 
in part to genetic differences and in part to differences in envi-
ronmental and dietary exposures. Epidemiologic studies that 
monitor trends in cancer incidence and mortality have tremen-
dously enhanced our understanding of the etiology of cancer. 
Furthermore, analysis of trends in cancer incidence and mortal-
ity allows us to monitor the effects of different preventive and 
screening measures, as well as the evolution of therapies for 
specific cancers.
The two types of epidemiologic studies that are conducted 
most often to investigate the etiology of cancer and the effect of 
prevention modalities are cohort studies and case-control stud-
ies. Cohort studies follow a group of people who initially do not 
have a disease over time and measure the rate of development of 
a disease. In cohort studies, a group that is exposed to a certain 
environmental factor or intervention usually is compared to a 
group that has not been exposed (e.g., smokers vs. nonsmokers). 
Case-control studies compare a group of patients affected with a 
disease to a group of individuals without the disease for a given 
exposure. The results are expressed in terms of an odds ratio, or 
relative risk. A relative risk <1 indicates a protective effect of 
the exposure, whereas a relative risk >1 indicates an increased 
risk of developing the disease with exposure.
Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the 
United States
In the year 2013, it is estimated that 1.6 million new cancer 
cases will be diagnosed in the United States, excluding carci-
noma in situ of any site except bladder, and excluding basal 
cell and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin.1 In addition, 
64,640 cases of carcinoma in situ of the breast, and 61,300 of 
melanoma in situ are expected.1
It is estimated that in 2013 estimated 580,350 people 
will die of cancer in the United States, corresponding to about 
1600  deaths per day.1 The estimated new cancer cases and 
deaths by cancer type are shown in Table 10-1.1 The most com-
mon causes of cancer death in men are cancers of the lung and 
bronchus, prostate, and colon and rectum; in women, cancers 
are of the lung and bronchus, breast, and colon and rectum.1 
These four cancers account for almost half (48%) of total cancer 
deaths among men and women.
The annual age-adjusted cancer incidence rates among 
males and females for selected cancer types are shown in 
Fig. 10-1.1 Incidence rates are declining for most cancer sites, 
but they are increasing among both men and women for mela-
noma of the skin, cancers of the liver and thyroid (Fig. 10-2).1 
Incidence rates are decreasing for all four major cancer sites 
except for breast cancer in women. Age-adjusted incidence rate 
of breast cancer started to decrease from 2001 to 2004.2 This 
decrease in breast cancer incidence has at least temporally been 
associated with the first report of the Women’s Health Initiative, 
which documented an increased risk of coronary artery disease 
and breast cancer with the use of hormone replacement therapy; 
this was followed by a drop in the use of hormone replace-
ment therapy by postmenopausal women in the United States.2 
Unfortunately after this initial drop, breast cancer incidence has 
remained relatively stable from 2005 to 2009.
Declines in colorectal cancer incidence have been mainly 
attributed to increased screening that allows for removal of pre-
cancerous polyps. Prostate cancer rates rapidly increased and 
decreased between 1995 and 1998. These trends are thought to 
be attributable to increased use of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
screening.3 Although analysis now suggest prostate cancer inci-
dence has declined steadily by 1.9% per year from 2000 to 2009, 
annual rates fluctuate likely reflecting variations in screening.
Differences in lung cancer incidence patterns between 
women and men are thought to reflect historical differences in 
tobacco use. Differences in smoking prevalence is also thought 
to contribute to regional differences in lung cancer incidence. 
Lung cancer incidence is fourfold higher in Kentucky which 
has the highest smoking prevalence, compared with Utah, that 
has the lowest smoking prevalence (128 vs. 34 lung cancer cases 
per 100,000 men).1
The 5-year survival rates for selected cancers are listed in 
Table 10-2. From 2005 to 2009, cancer death rates decreased by 
1.8% per year in males and by 1.5% per year in females.1 These 
declines in mortality have been consistent in the past decade, 
and larger than what was observed in the previous decade.3 Over 
the past two decades, death rates have decreased from their peak 
by more than 30% for colorectal cancer, female breast cancer, 
274
2
3
	 The following alterations are critical for malignant cancer 
growth: self-sufficiency of growth signals, insensitivity to 
growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of apoptosis, potential 
for limitless replication, angiogenesis, invasion and metas-
tasis. Reprogramming of energy metabolism and evading 
immune destruction.
275
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Table 10-1 
Estimated new cancer cases and deaths, United States, 2013a
ESTIMATED 
NEW CASES
ESTIMATED 
DEATHS
ESTIMATED 
NEW CASES
ESTIMATED 
DEATHS
All cancers
1,660,290
580,350
Genital system
339,810
58,480
Oral cavity and pharynx
41,380
7,890
Uterine cervix
12,340
4,030
Digestive system
290,200
144,570
Uterine corpus
49,560
8,190
Esophagus
17,990
15,210
Ovary
22,240
14,030
Stomach
21,600
10,990
Vulva
4,700
990
Small intestine
8,810
1,170
Vagina and other genital, female
2,890
840
Colon and rectum
142,820
50,830
Prostate
238,590
29,720
Anus, anal canal, and anorectum 7,060
880
Testis
7,920
370
Liver and intrahepatic bile duct
30,640
21,670
Penis and other genital, male
1,570
310
Gallbladder and other biliary
10,310
3,230
Urinary system
140,430
29,790
Pancreas
45,220
38,460
Urinary bladder
72,570
15,210
Other digestive organs
5,750
2,130
Kidney and renal pelvis
65,150
13,680
Respiratory system
246,210
163,890
Ureter and other urinary organs
2,710
900
Larynx
12,260
3,630
Eye and orbit
2,800
320
Lung and bronchus
228,190
159,480
Brain and other nervous system
23,130
14,080
Other respiratory organs
5,760
780
Endocrine system
62,710
2,770
Bones and joints
3,010
1,440
Thyroid
60,220
1,850
Soft tissue (including heart)
11,410
4,390
Other endocrine
2,490
920
Skin (excluding basal and 
squamous)
82,770
12,650
Lymphoma
79,030
20,200
Melanoma
76,690
9,480
Multiple myeloma
22,350
10,710
Other nonepithelial
6,080
3,170
Leukemia
48,610
23,720
Breast
234,580
40,030
Other and unspecified primary 
sitesb
31,860
45,420
aExcludes basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas except those of urinary bladder.
bMore deaths than cases suggest lack of specificity in recording underlying causes of death on death certificate.
Source: Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel R et al. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2013;63:11. © 2013 
American Cancer Society, Inc.
male lung cancer and more than 40% for prostate cancer. The 
decrease in lung cancer death rates in men is thought to be due 
to a decrease in tobacco use, whereas the decreases in death 
rates from breast, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer reflect 
advances in early detection and treatment.
Global Statistics on Cancer Incidence 
and Mortality
The five most common cancers for men worldwide are lung, 
prostate, colorectal cancer, stomach, liver, and for women are 
breast, colorectal, cervix, lung, and stomach.4 Notably, for sev-
eral cancer types there is wide geographical variability in cancer 
incidence (Fig. 10-3). The mortality rates for different cancers 
also vary significantly among countries. This is attributable not 
only to variations in incidence but also to variations in survival 
after a cancer diagnosis. The survival rates are influenced by 
treatment patterns as well as by variations in cancer screening 
practices, which affect the stage of cancer at diagnosis. For 
example, the 5-year survival rate for stomach cancer is much 
higher in Japan, where the cancer incidence is high enough to 
warrant mass screening, which is presumed to lead to earlier 
diagnosis. In the case of prostate cancer, on the other hand, the 
mortality rates diverge much less than the incidence rates among 
countries. Survival rates for prostate cancer are much higher in 
North America than in developing countries.5 It is possible that 
the extensive screening practices in the United States allow dis-
covery of cancers at an earlier, more curable stage; however, it 
is also possible that this screening leads to discovery of more 
latent, less biologically aggressive cancers, which may not have 
caused death even if they had not been identified.
About one million new cases of stomach cancer were esti-
mated to have occurred in 2008 (988,000 cases, 7.8% of the 
total), making it the fourth most common malignancy in the 
world, behind cancers of the lung, breast, and colorectal cancer. 
The incidence of stomach cancer varies significantly among dif-
ferent regions of the world. The difference in risk by country is 
presumed to be primarily due to differences in dietary factors. 
The risk is increased by high consumption of preserved salted 
foods such as meats and pickles, and decreased by high intake of 
fruits and vegetables.5 There also is some international variation 
276
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 10-1.  Ten leading cancer types with the estimated new cancer cases and deaths by sex in the United States, 2013. *Excludes basal 
and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas except those of the urinary bladder. Estimates are rounded to the nearest 10 (Modified 
with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel R et al. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2013;63:11. © 2013 
American Cancer Society, Inc.)
Males
Females
Breast
Lung & bronchus
Colorectum
Uterine corpus
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Thyroid
Melanoma of the skin
Pancreas
Kidney & renal pelvis
Ovary
All Sites
232,340
110,110
69,140
49,560
45,310
32,140
31,630
24,720
22,480
22,240
805,500
29%
14%
9%
6%
6%
4%
4%
3%
3%
3%
100%
Males
Females
Lung & bronchus
Prostate
Colorectum
Pancreas
Liver & intrahepatic bile duct
Leukemia
Esophagus
Urinary bladder
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Kidney & renal pelvis
All Sites
Lung & bronchus
Breast
Colorectum
Pancreas
Ovary
Leukemia
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Uterine corpus
Liver & intrahepatic bile duct
Brain & other nervous system
All Sites
72,220
39,620
24,530
18,980
14,030
10,060
8,430
8,190
6,780
6,150
271,430
26%
14%
9%
7%
5%
4%
3%
3%
2%
2%
100%
87,260
29,720
26,300
19,480
14,890
13,660
12,220
10,820
10,590
8,780
306,920
28%
10%
9%
6%
5%
4%
4%
4%
3%
3%
100%
Prostate
Lung & bronchus
Colorectum
Urinary bladder
Melanoma of the skin
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Kidney & renal pelvis
Oral cavity & pharynx
Leukemia
Pancreas
All Sites
238,590
118,080
73,680
54,610
45,060
40,430
37,600
29,620
27,880
22,740
854,790
28%
14%
9%
6%
5%
5%
4%
3%
3%
3%
100%
Estimated new cases*
Estimated deaths
in the incidence of infection with Helicobacter pylori, which 
is known to play a major role in gastric cancer development.5 
Fortunately, a steady decline is being observed in the incidence 
and mortality rates of gastric cancer. This may be related to 
improvements in preservation and storage of foods as well as 
due to changes in the prevalence of H. pylori.5 More than 70% 
of cases (713,000 cases) occur in developing countries, and half 
the cases in the world occur in Eastern Asia (mainly in China).4 
Age-standardized incidence rates are about twice as high for 
men as for women, ranging from 3.9 in Northern Africa to 
42.4 in Eastern Asia for men, and from 2.2 in Southern Africa to 
18.3 in Eastern Asia for women. Stomach cancer is the second 
leading cause of cancer death in both sexes worldwide.
Overall, the incidence of breast cancer is rising in most 
countries. Incidence varies from 19.3 per 100,000 women in 
Eastern Africa to 89.7 per 100,000 women in Western Europe, 
and are high in developed regions of the world (except Japan) 
and low in most of the developing regions.4 Although breast 
cancer has been linked to cancer susceptibility genes, mutations 
in these genes account for only 5% to 10% of breast tumors, 
which suggests that the wide geographic variations in breast 
cancer incidence are not due to geographic variations in the 
prevalence of these genes. Most of the differences, therefore, are 
attributed to differences in reproductive factors, diet, alcohol, 
obesity, physical activity, and other environmental differences. 
Indeed, breast cancer risk increases significantly in females 
who have migrated from Asia to America.5 The range of breast 
cancer mortality rates is much less (approximately 6 to 19 per 
100,000) because of the more favorable survival of breast can-
cer in developed regions. As a result, breast cancer ranks as the 
fifth cause of death from cancer overall (458,000 deaths), but 
it is still the most frequent cause of cancer death in women in 
both developing (269,000 deaths, 12.7% of total) and developed 
regions (estimated 189,000 deaths). 4
There is a 25-fold variation in colon cancer incidence 
worldwide.5 The incidence of colon and rectal cancer is higher 
in developed countries than in developing countries. The 
incidence rates are highest in North America, Australia and 
New Zealand, and Western Europe, and especially in Japanese 
men.5 In contrast, the incidence is relatively low in North Africa, 
South America, and eastern, Southeastern, and Western Asia. 
These geographic differences are thought to reflect environmen-
tal exposures and are presumed to be related mainly to dietary 
differences in consumption of animal fat, meat, and fiber.5
Worldwide liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in 
men (523,000 cases, 7.9% of the total) and the seventh in women 
(226,000 cases, 6.5% of the total). Almost 85% of liver cancer 
cases occur in developing countries, and particularly in men.4  
277
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
The overall sex ratio male:female is 2:4. The regions of high 
incidence are Eastern and Southeastern Asia, Middle and 
Western Africa, as well as Melanesia and Micronesia/Polyne-
sia (particularly in men). Low rates are estimated in developed 
regions, with the exception of Southern Europe. There were an 
estimated 694,000 deaths from liver cancer in 2008 (477,000 
in men, 217,000 in women), and because of its high fatality 
(overall ratio of mortality to incidence of 0.93), liver cancer is 
the third most common cause of death from cancer worldwide. 
The geographical distribution of the mortality rates is similar to 
that observed for incidence. Worldwide, the major risk factors 
for liver cancer are infection with hepatitis B and C viruses and 
consumption of foods contaminated with aflatoxin. Hepatitis B 
immunization in children has recently been shown to reduce the 
incidence of liver cancer.5
In summary, the incidence rates of many common cancers 
vary widely by geography. This is due in part to genetic differ-
ences, including racial and ethnic differences. It is due also in 
part to differences in environmental and dietary exposures, fac-
tors that can potentially be altered. Therefore, establishment of 
regional and international databases is critical to improving our 
understanding of the etiology of cancer and will ultimately assist 
in the initiation of targeted strategies for global cancer preven-
tion. Furthermore, the monitoring of cancer mortality rates and 
5-year cancer-specific survival rates will identify regions where 
there are inequities of health care, so that access to health care 
can be facilitated and guidelines for treatment can be established.
CANCER BIOLOGY
Hallmarks of Cancer
Although there are >100 types of cancer, it has been proposed 
that there are six essential alterations in cell physiology that 
dictate malignant growth: self-sufficiency of growth signals, 
insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of apopto-
sis (programmed cell death), potential for limitless replication, 
angiogenesis, and invasion and metastasis.6 Recently two 
additional hallmarks have emerged—reprogramming of 
energy metabolism and evading immune destruction.7 These 
hallmarks of cancer are being pursued as targets for cancer 
therapy (Figure 10-4).
Cell Proliferation and Transformation
In normal cells, cell growth and proliferation are under strict 
control. In cancer cells, cells become unresponsive to normal 
growth controls, which leads to uncontrolled growth and pro-
liferation. Human cells require several genetic changes for neo-
plastic transformation. Cell type–specific differences also exist 
for tumorigenic transformation. Abnormally proliferating, trans-
formed cells outgrow normal cells in the culture dish (i.e., in 
vitro) and commonly display several abnormal characteristics.8 
These include loss of contact inhibition (i.e., cells continue to 
proliferate after a confluent monolayer is formed); an altered 
appearance and poor adherence to other cells or to the substra-
tum; loss of anchorage dependence for growth; immortalization; 
Figure 10-2.  Trends in cancer incidence rates for selected cancer by sex among males and females for selected cancer types, United States, 
1975 to 2009. Rates are age adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. (Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel 
R et al. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2013;63:11. © 2013 American Cancer Society, Inc.)1
+Liver includes intrahepatic bile duct
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
0
25
Year of diagnosis
Liver+
Liver+
Thyroid
Thyroid
Uterine corpus
Melanoma of the skin
Melanoma of the skin
Urinary bladder
Colorectum
Colorectum
Lung & bronchus
Lung & bronchus
Breast
Prostate
Male
Female
Rate per 100,000 population
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
0
25
Year of diagnosis
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
3
278
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-2 
Five-year relative survival rates adjusted to normal life expectancy by year of diagnosis, 
United States, 1975–2008
RELATIVE 5-YEAR SURVIVAL RATES (%)
Cancer Type
1975–1977
1987–1989
2002-2008
All cancers
49
56
68
Brain
22
29
35
Breast (female)
75
84
90
Uterine cervix
69
70
69
Colon
51
61
65
Uterine corpus
87
83
83
Esophagus
5
10
19
Hodgkin’s disease
72
79
87
Kidney
50
57
72
Larynx
66
66
63
Leukemia
34
43
58
Liver
3
5
16
Lung and bronchus
12
13
17
Melanoma of the skin
82
88
93
Multiple myeloma
25
28
43
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
47
51
71
Oral cavity
53
54
65
Ovary
36
38
43
Pancreas
2
4
6
Prostate
68
83
100
Rectum
48
58
68
Stomach
15
20
28
Testis
83
95
96
Thyroid
92
95
98
Urinary bladder
73
79
80
Source: Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel R et al. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA: a cancer 
journal for clinicians. 2013;63:11. © 2013 American Cancer Society, Inc.
and gain of tumorigenicity (i.e., the ability to give rise to tumors 
when injected into an appropriate host).
Cancer Initiation
Tumorigenesis is proposed to have three steps: initiation, promo-
tion, and progression. Initiating events such as gain of function of 
genes known as oncogenes or loss of function of genes known as 
tumor-suppressor genes may lead a single cell to acquire a dis-
tinct growth advantage. Although tumors usually arise from a sin-
gle cell or clone, it is thought that sometimes not a single cell but 
rather a large number of cells in a target organ may have under-
gone the initiating genetic event. Thus, many normal-appearing 
cells may have an increased malignant potential. This is referred 
to as a field effect. The initiating events are usually genetic and 
occur as deletions of tumor-suppressor genes or amplification or 
mutation of oncogenes. Subsequent events can lead to accumula-
tions of additional deleterious mutations in the clone.
Cancer is thought to be a disease of clonal progression as 
tumors arise from a single cell and accumulate mutations that 
confer on the tumor an increasingly aggressive behavior. Most 
tumors go through a progression from benign lesions to in situ 
tumors to invasive cancers (e.g., atypical ductal hyperplasia to 
ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma of the 
breast). Fearon and Vogelstein proposed the model for colorec-
tal tumorigenesis presented in Fig. 10-5.9 Colorectal tumors 
arise from the mutational activation of oncogenes coupled with 
mutational inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes, the latter 
being the predominant change.9 Mutations in at least four or five 
genes are required for formation of a malignant tumor, while 
fewer changes suffice for a benign tumor. Although genetic 
mutations often occur in a preferred sequence, a tumor’s bio-
logic properties are determined by the total accumulation of its 
genetic changes.
Gene expression is a multistep process that starts from 
transcription of a gene into messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) 
and then translation of this sequence into the functional protein. 
There are several controls at each level. In addition to alterations 
at the genome level (e.g., amplifications of a gene), alterations 
279
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
at the transcription level (e.g., methylation of the DNA leading 
to transcriptional silencing) or at the level of mRNA process-
ing, mRNA stability, mRNA translation, or protein stability, all 
can alter the levels of critical proteins and thus contribute to 
tumorigenesis. Alternatively, changes in the genomic sequence 
can lead to a mutated product with altered function.
Cell-Cycle Dysregulation in Cancer
The proliferative advantage of tumor cells is a result of their 
ability to bypass quiescence. Cancer cells often show altera-
tions in signal transduction pathways that lead to proliferation 
in response to external signals. Mutations or alterations in the 
expression of cell-cycle proteins, growth factors, growth factor 
receptors, intracellular signal transduction proteins, and nuclear 
transcription factors all can lead to disturbance of the basic regu-
latory mechanisms that control the cell cycle, allowing unregu-
lated cell growth and proliferation.
The cell cycle is divided into four phases (Fig. 10-6).10 
During the synthetic or S phase, the cell generates a single copy 
of its genetic material, whereas in the mitotic or M phase, the 
cellular components are partitioned between two daughter cells. 
The G1 and G2 phases represent gap phases during which the 
cells prepare themselves for completion of the S and M phases, 
respectively. When cells cease proliferation, they exit the cell 
cycle and enter the quiescent state referred to as G0. In human 
tumor cell-cycle regulators like INK4A, INK4B, and KIP1 are 
frequently mutated or altered in expression. These alterations 
underscore the importance of cell-cycle regulation in the pre-
vention of human cancers.
Oncogenes
Normal cellular genes that contribute to cancer when abnor-
mal are called oncogenes. The normal counterpart of such a 
gene is referred to as a proto-oncogene. Oncogenes are usu-
ally designated by three-letter abbreviations, such as myc or ras. 
Oncogenes are further designated by the prefix “v-” for virus 
or “c-” for cell or chromosome, corresponding to the origin 
of the oncogene when it was first detected. Proto-oncogenes 
can be activated (show increased activity) or overexpressed 
(expressed at increased protein levels) by translocation (e.g., 
abl), promoter insertion (e.g., c-myc), mutation (e.g., ras), or 
amplification (e.g., HER2/neu). More than 100 oncogenes have 
been identified.
Oncogenes may be growth factors (e.g., platelet-derived 
growth factor), growth factor receptors (e.g., HER2), intracellu-
lar signal transduction molecules (e.g., ras), nuclear transcription 
factors (e.g., c-myc), or other molecules involved in the regula-
tion of cell growth and proliferation. Growth factors are ubiqui-
tous proteins that are produced and secreted by cells locally and 
that stimulate cell proliferation by binding specific cell-surface 
receptors on the same cells (autocrine stimulation) or on neigh-
boring cells (paracrine stimulation). Persistent overexpression 
Figure 10-3.  Estimated cancer incidence worldwide in 2008. Age-standardized incidence rates per 100,000 for all cancers (upper left), breast 
cancer (upper right), liver cancer (lower left), and stomach cancer (lower right). (Modified with permission from Ferlay, IARC)4
All cancers
< 11.2
< 0.3
< 0.5
< 0.7
< 1.0
< 11.2
< 0.4
< 0.7
< 1.0
< 1.6
< 4.9
Liver cancer
Stomach cancer
< 13.4
< 16.6
< 22.5
< 31.9
< 2.2
< 3.1
< 4.1
< 6.0
< 11.4
Breast
280
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
of growth factors can lead to uncontrolled autostimulation and 
neoplastic transformation. Alternatively, growth factor recep-
tors can be aberrantly activated (turned on) through mutations 
or overexpressed (continually presenting cells with growth- 
stimulatory signals, even in the absence of growth factors), which 
leads cells to respond as if growth factor levels are altered. The 
growth-stimulating effect of growth factors and other mitogens 
is mediated through postreceptor signal transduction molecules. 
These molecules mediate the passage of growth signals from the 
outside to the inside of the cell and then to the cell nucleus, ini-
tiating the cell cycle and DNA transcription. Aberrant activation 
or expression of cell-signaling molecules, cell-cycle molecules, 
or transcription factors may play an important role in neoplastic 
transformation. Protein tyrosine kinases account for a large por-
tion of known oncogenes. One of the best-studied oncogenes, 
HER2 is discussed as an example later.
Aerobic glycolysis
inhibitors
Sustaining
proliferative
signaling
Evading
growth
suppressors
Enabling
replicative
immortality
Activating
invasion &
metastasis
Inducing
angiogenesis
Genome
instability &
mutation
Resisting
cell
death
Deregulating
cellular
energetics
Tumor-
promoting
inflammation
Avoiding
immune
destruction
EGFR
inhibitors
Cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors
PARP
inhibitors
Inhibitors of
VEGF signaling
Inhibitors of
HGF/c-Met
Immune activating
anti-CTLA4 mAb
Telomerase
Inhibitors
Selective anti-
inflammatory drugs
Proapoptotic
BH3 mimetics
Figure 10-4.  Hallmarks of cancer and their therapeutic implications. Drugs that interfere with each of the acquired capabilities necessary for 
tumor growth and progression are in clinical trials and in some cases approved for clinical use in treating forms of human cancer. The drugs 
listed are illustrative examples.(Modified with permission from ­Hanahan et al. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)7
Chromosome
alteration
gene:
5q
Mutation or loss
FAP
12p
Mutation
K-ras
18q
Loss
DCC?
17p
Loss
p53
DNA
hypomethylation
Normal
epithelium
Hyperprolif
epithelium
Early
adenoma
Intermediate
adenoma
Late 
adenoma
Carcinoma
Metastasis
Other
alterations
Figure 10-5.  A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Tumorigenesis proceeds through a series of genetic alterations involving onco-
genes and tumor-suppressor genes. In general, the three stages of adenomas represent tumors of increasing size, dysplasia, and villous content. 
Individuals with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) inherit a mutation on chromosome arm 5q. In tumors arising in individuals without 
polyposis, the same region may be lost or mutated at a relatively early stage of tumorigenesis. A ras gene mutation (usually K-ras) occurs in 
one cell of a pre-existing small adenoma which, through clonal expansion, produces a larger and more dysplastic tumor. The chromosome 
arms most frequently deleted include 5q, 17p, and 18q. Allelic deletions of chromosome arms 17p and 18q usually occur at a later stage of 
tumorigenesis than do deletions of chromosome arm 5q or ras gene mutations. The order of these changes varies, however, and accumulation 
of these changes, rather than their order of appearance, seems most important. Tumors continue to progress once carcinomas have formed, 
and the accumulated chromosomal alterations correlate with the ability of the carcinomas to metastasize and cause death. DCC = deleted in 
colorectal cancer gene. (Modified with permission from Fearon et al. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)9
281
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
HER2, also known as neu or c-erbB-2, is a member of 
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family and is one 
of the best-characterized tyrosine kinases. Unlike other recep-
tor tyrosine kinases, HER2/neu does not have a direct soluble 
ligand. It plays a key role in signaling, however, because it is 
the preferred partner in heterodimer formation with all the other 
EGFR family members (EGFR/c-erbB-1, HER2/c-erbB-3, 
and HER3/c-erbB-4), which bind at least 30 ligands, includ-
ing epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor 
α (TGFα), heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor, amphireg-
ulin, and heregulin.11 Heterodimerization with HER2 potenti-
ates recycling of receptors rather than degradation, enhances 
signal potency and duration, increases affinity for ligands, and 
increases catalytic activity.11
HER2 can interact with different members of the HER 
family and activate mitogenic and antiapoptotic pathways 
(Fig. 10-7). The specificity and potency of the intracellular 
signals are affected by the identity of the ligand, the composi-
tion of the receptors, and the phosphotyrosine-binding proteins 
associated with the erbB molecules. The Ras- and Shc-activated 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is a target 
of all erbB ligands, which increase the transcriptional activ-
ity of early response genes such as c-myc, c-fos, and c-jun.12 
MAPK-independent pathways such as the phosphoinositide-3 
kinase (PI3K) pathway also are activated by most erbB dimers, 
although the potency and kinetics of activation may differ. Stim-
ulation of the PI3K pathway through HER2 signaling also can 
lead to activation of survival molecule Akt, which suppresses 
apoptosis through multiple mechanisms. The critical role of HER2 
in cancer biology has been leveraged for therapeutics, leading to 
several HER2- targeted drugs with different mechanism of action 
Cell with duplicated chromosomes
Chromosome separation
Mitosis
Cell division
Cell with chromosomes in the nucleus
DNA synthesis
Chromosome duplication
M
G1
S
G2
CDK
Cyclin
Figure 10-6.  Schematic representation of the phases of the cell 
cycle. Mitogenic growth factors can drive a quiescent cell from G0 
into the cell cycle. Once the cell cycle passes beyond the restric-
tion point, mitogens are no longer required for progression into 
and through S phase. The DNA is replicated in S phase, and the 
chromosomes are condensed and segregated in mitosis. In early G1 
phase, certain signals can drive a cell to exit the cell cycle and enter 
a quiescent phase. Cell-cycle checkpoints have been identified in 
G1, S, G2, and M phases. CDK = cyclin-dependent kinase. (Adapted 
from Kastan et al )10
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA): mono-
clonal antibodies trastuzumab and pertuzumab, small molecule 
inhibitor lapatinib, and antibody-drug conjugate ado-trastu-
zumab emtansine.
The mutant rat neu gene was first recognized as an 
oncogene in neuroblastomas from carcinogen-treated rats.13 
The HER2 gene is frequently amplified and the protein over-
expressed in many cancers, including breast, ovarian, lung, 
gastric, and oral cancers. Overexpression of HER2 results in 
ligand-independent activation of HER2 kinase, which leads to 
mitogenic signaling. HER2 overexpression is associated with 
increased cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth 
as well as resistance to proapoptotic stimuli. Further, overex-
pression of HER2 increases cell migration and upregulates the 
activities of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and in vitro 
invasiveness. In animal models, HER2 increases tumorigenic-
ity, angiogenesis, and metastasis. These results all suggest that 
HER2 plays a key role in cancer biology. More recently HER2 
mutations have also been reported in human cancer. HER2 
mutations have been detected in 2% to 4% of nonsmall cell 
lung cancer.14-17 In frame insertions within exon 20 has been the 
most commonly reported mutation. HER2 mutations are more 
common in nonsmokers and are nonoverlapping with other 
oncogenic mutations in lung cancer (e.g., EGFR and Ras). Data 
from 8 breast cancer genome-sequencing projects identified 
25 patients with HER2 somatic mutations in cancers lacking 
HER2 gene amplification.18 Seven of 13 mutations were func-
tionally characterized and found to be activating mutations. 
All of these mutations were sensitive to the irreversible kinase 
inhibitor, neratinib. A prospective, multi-institutional clinical 
trial has been launched to screen patients with stage IV breast 
cancer for HER2 somatic mutations and determine the clinical 
outcome of treating them with HER2-targeted therapy.
Alterations in Apoptosis in Cancer Cells
Apoptosis is a genetically regulated program to dispose of cells. 
Cancer cells must avoid apoptosis if tumors are to arise. The 
growth of a tumor mass is dependent not only on an increase 
in proliferation of tumor cells but also on a decrease in their 
apoptotic rate. Apoptosis is distinguished from necrosis because 
it leads to several characteristic changes. In early apoptosis, the 
changes in membrane composition lead to extracellular expo-
sure of phosphatidylserine residues, which avidly bind annexin, 
a characteristic that is used to discriminate apoptotic cells in 
laboratory studies. Late in apoptosis there are characteristic 
changes in nuclear morphology, such as chromatin condensa-
tion, nuclear fragmentation, and DNA laddering, as well as 
membrane blebbing. Apoptotic cells are then engulfed and 
degraded by phagocytic cells. The effectors of apoptosis are 
a family of proteases called caspases (cysteine-dependent and 
aspartate-directed proteases). The initiator caspases (e.g., 8, 9, 
and 10), which are upstream, cleave the downstream execu-
tioner caspases (e.g., 3, 6, and 7) that carry out the destructive 
functions of apoptosis.
Two principal molecular pathways signal apoptosis by 
cleaving the initiator caspases with the potential for crosstalk: 
the mitochondrial pathway and the death receptor pathway. In 
the mitochondrial (or intrinsic) pathway, death results from the 
release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria. Cytochrome c, 
procaspase 9, and apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (Apaf-1) 
form an enzyme complex, referred to as the apoptosome, that 
activates the effector caspases. In addition to these proteins, 
282
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
the mitochondria contain other proapoptotic proteins such as 
second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase/direct inhibi-
tor of apoptosis-binding protein with low pI (Smac/DIABLO. 
The mitochondrial pathway can be stimulated by many factors, 
including DNA damage, reactive oxygen species, or the with-
drawal of survival factors. The permeability of the mitochondrial 
membrane determines whether the apoptotic pathway will pro-
ceed. The Bcl-2 family of regulatory proteins includes both pro-
apoptotic proteins (e.g., Bax, BAD, and Bak) and antiapoptotic 
proteins (e.g., Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL). The activity of the Bcl-2 pro-
teins is centered on the mitochondria, where they regulate mem-
brane permeability. Growth factors promote survival signaling 
through the PI3K/Akt pathway, which phosphorylates and inac-
tivates proapoptotic BAD. In contrast, growth factor withdrawal 
may promote apoptosis through signaling by unphosphorylated 
BAD. The heat shock proteins, including Hsp70 and Hsp27, are 
also involved in inhibition of downstream apoptotic pathways by 
blocking formation of the apoptosome complex and inhibiting 
release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria.19
The second principal apoptotic pathway is the death recep-
tor pathway, sometimes referred to as the extrinsic pathway. 
Cell-surface death receptors include Fas/APO1/CD95, tumor 
necrosis factor receptor 1, and KILL-ER/DR5, which bind 
their ligands Fas-L, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and TNF-
related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), respectively. When 
the receptors are bound by their ligands, they form a death- 
inducing signaling complex (DISC). At the DISC, procaspase 
8 and procaspase 10 are cleaved, yielding active initiator cas-
pases.20 The death receptor pathway may be regulated at the cell 
surface by the expression of “decoy” receptors for Fas (DcR3) 
and TRAIL (TRID and TRUNDD). The decoy receptors are 
closely related to the death receptors but lack a functional death 
domain; therefore, they bind death ligands but do not transmit 
a death signal. Another regulatory group is the FADD-like 
interleukin-1 protease-inhibitory proteins (FLIPs). FLIPs have 
homology to caspase 8; they bind to the DISC and inhibit the 
activation of caspase 8. Finally, inhibitors of apoptosis proteins 
(IAPs) block caspase 3 activation and have the ability to regu-
late both the death receptor and the mitochondrial pathway.
In human cancers, aberrations in the apoptotic program 
include increased expression of Fas and TRAIL decoy receptors; 
increased expression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2; increased expression 
Ligands
PI3K
ILK
EZH2
GSK3
MDM2
Forkhead
Caspase-9
Caspases
Fas-L
Akt
IKK
Bad
IκB
p27
p21
4E-BP1
TSC1/2
sos
Grb2
Shc
src
MEKK
MEK
SEK
MAPK
SAPK
ELK
MYC
CREB
JUN
S6K
S6
elF4E
Alterations in gene
expression
Migration
Growth
Proliferation
Angiogenesis
Survival
NF-κB
Bcl-xL
PLC-γ
IP3
1,2 diacyl-
glycerol
Ca++
mobilization
Protein
kinase C
Raf-1
Adhesion
mTOR
HER
1/3/4
HER2
FAK
Ras
Figure 10-7.  The HER2 signaling pathway. HER2 can interact with different members of the HER family and activate mitogenic and 
antiapoptotic pathways. 4E-BP1= eIF4E binding protein 1; CREB = cyclic adenosine monophosphate element binding; eIF4E = eukaryotic 
initiation factor 4E; EZH = enhancer of zeste homolog; FAK = focal adhesion kinase; Fas-L = Fas ligand; GSK3 = glycogen synthase kinase-3; 
HER = human epidermal growth receptor; IKK = IκB kinase; ILK= integrin-linked kinase; IP3 = inositol triphosphate; IκB = inhibitor of 
NF-κB; MAPK = mitogen-activated protein kinase; MDM2 = mouse double minute 2 homologue; MEK = mitogen-activated protein/extra-
cellular signal regulated kinase kinase; MEKK = MEK kinase; mTOR = mammalian target of rapamycin; NF-κB = nuclear factor κB; PI3K = 
phosphoinositide-3 kinase; PLC-γ = phospholipase Cγ; SAPK = stress-activated protein kinase; SEK = SAPK/extracellular signal regulated 
kinase kinase; TSC = tuberous sclerosis complex. (Modified with permission from Meric-Bernstam et al.)171
283
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
of the IAP-related protein survivin; increased expression of 
c-FLIP; mutations or downregulation of proapoptotic Bax, cas-
pase 8, APAF1, XAF1, and death receptors CD95, TRAIL-R1, 
and TRAIL-R2; alterations of the p53 pathway; overexpression 
of growth factors and growth factor receptors; and activation of 
the PI3K/Akt survival pathway.20
Autophagy in Cancer Cells
Autophagy (self-eating) is a major cellular pathway for protein 
and organelle turnover. This process helps maintain a balance 
between anabolism and catabolism for normal cell growth and 
development. Inability to activate autophagy in response to 
nutrient deprivation, or constitutive activation of autophagy 
in response to stress, can lead to cell death; thus autophagy is 
sometimes referred to as a second form of programmed cell 
death. Autophagy plays an essential role during starvation, 
cellular differentiation, cell death, and aging. Autophagy is 
also involved in the elimination of cancer cells by triggering 
a nonapoptotic cell death program, which suggests a negative 
role in tumor development. Mouse models that are heterozy-
gotes for the beclin 1 gene, an important gene for autophagy, 
have altered autophagic response and show a high incidence of 
spontaneous tumors, which establishes a role for autophagy in 
tumor suppression.21 This also suggests that mutations in other 
genes operating in this pathway may contribute to tumor forma-
tion through deregulation of autophagy. However, autophagy 
also acts as a stress response mechanism to protect cancer cells 
from low nutrient supply or therapeutic insults. Studies on the 
molecular determinants of autophagy are ongoing to determine 
whether autophagy can be modulated for therapeutic purposes.
Cancer Invasion
A feature of malignant cells is their ability to invade the sur-
rounding normal tissue. Tumors in which the malignant cells 
appear to lie exclusively above the basement membrane are 
referred to as in situ cancer, whereas tumors in which the malig-
nant cells are demonstrated to breach the basement membrane, 
penetrating into surrounding stroma, are termed invasive cancer. 
The ability to invade involves changes in adhesion, initiation of 
motility, and proteolysis of the extracellular matrix (ECM).
Cell-to-cell adhesion in normal cells involves interactions 
between cell-surface proteins. Calcium adhesion molecules of 
the cadherin family (E-cadherin, P-cadherin, and N-cadherin) 
are thought to enhance the cells’ ability to bind to one another 
and suppress invasion. Migration occurs when cancer cells pen-
etrate and attach to the basal matrix of the tissue being invaded; 
this allows the cancer cell to pull itself forward within the tissue. 
Attachment to glycoproteins of the ECM such as fibronectin, 
laminin, and collagen is mediated by tumor cell integrin recep-
tors. Integrins are a family of glycoproteins that form heterodi-
meric receptors for ECM molecules. The integrins can form at 
least 25 distinct pairings of their α and β subunits, and each 
pairing is specific for a unique set of ligands. In addition to 
regulating cell adhesion to the ECM, integrins relay molecular 
signals regarding the cellular environment that influence shape, 
survival, proliferation, gene transcription, and migration.
Factors that are thought to play a role in cancer cell motil-
ity include autocrine motility factor, autotaxin, scatter factor 
(also known as hepatocyte growth factor), TGFα, EGF, and 
insulin-like growth factors.
Serine, cysteine, and aspartic proteinases and MMPs have 
all been implicated in cancer invasion. Urokinase and ­tissue 
plasminogen activators (uPA and tPA) are serine proteases 
that convert plasminogen into plasmin. Plasmin, in return, can 
degrade several ECM components. Plasmin also may activate 
MMPs. uPA has been more closely correlated with tissue inva-
sion and metastasis than tPA. Plasminogen activator inhibitors 1 
and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2) are produced in tissues and counteract 
the activity of plasminogen activators.
MMPs comprise a family of metal-dependent endopepti-
dases. Upon activation, MMPs degrade a variety of ECM com-
ponents. Although MMPs often are referred to by their common 
names, which reflect the ECM component for which they have 
specificity, a sequential numbering system has been adopted for 
standardization. For example, collagenase-1 is now referred to 
as MMP-1. The MMPs are further classified as secreted and 
membrane-type MMPs. Most of the MMPs are synthesized as 
inactive zymogens (pro-MMP) and are activated by proteolytic 
removal of the propeptide domain outside the cell by other 
active MMPs or serine proteinases.
MMPs are upregulated in almost every type of cancer. 
Some of the MMPs are expressed by cancer cells, whereas oth-
ers are expressed by the tumor stromal cells. Experimental mod-
els have demonstrated that MMPs promote cancer progression 
by increasing cancer cell growth, migration, invasion, angiogen-
esis, and metastasis. MMPs exert these effects by cleaving not 
only structural components of the ECM but also growth factor–
binding proteins, growth factor precursors, cell adhesion mol-
ecules, and other proteinases. The activity of MMPs is regulated 
by their endogenous inhibitors and tissue inhibitors of MMPs 
(TIMP-1, TIMP-2, TIMP-3, and TIMP-4).
Angiogenesis
Angiogenesis is the establishment of new blood vessels from a 
pre-existing vascular bed. This neovascularization is essential 
for tumor growth and metastasis. Tumors develop an angiogenic 
phenotype as a result of accumulated genetic alterations and in 
response to local selection pressures such as hypoxia. Many of 
the common oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes have been 
shown to play a role in inducing angiogenesis.
In response to the angiogenic switch, pericytes retract and 
the endothelium secretes several growth factors such as basic 
fibroblast growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), 
and insulin-like growth factor. The basement membrane and 
stroma around the capillary are proteolytically degraded, a pro-
cess that is mediated in most part by uPA. The endothelium then 
migrates through the degraded matrix, initially as a solid cord 
and later forming lumina. Finally, sprouting tips anastomose to 
form a vascular network surrounded by a basement membrane.
Angiogenesis is mediated by factors produced by various 
cells, including tumor cells, endothelial cells, stromal cells, and 
inflammatory cells. The first proangiogenic factor was identi-
fied by Folkman and colleagues in 1971.22 Since then, several 
other factors have been shown to be proangiogenic or antian-
giogenic. Of the angiogenic stimulators, the best studied are the 
vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs). The VEGF family 
consists of six growth factors (VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C, 
VEGF-D, VEGF-E, and placental growth factor) and three 
receptors (VEGFR1 or Flt-1, VEGFR2 or KDR/FLK-1, and 
VEGFR3 or Flt-4).23 Neuropilin 1 and 2 also may act as recep-
tors for VEGF.24 VEGF is induced by hypoxia and by different 
growth factors and cytokines, including EGF, PDGF, TNF-α, 
TGFβ, and interleukin-1β. VEGF has various functions, includ-
ing increasing vascular permeability, inducing endothelial cell 
284
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 10-8.  A schematic representation of the metastatic process. A. The metastatic process begins with an in situ cancer surrounded by an 
intact basement membrane. B. Invasion requires reversible changes in cell-cell and cell–extracellular matrix adherence, destruction of proteins 
in the matrix and stroma, and motility. C. Metastasizing cells can enter the circulation via the lymphatics. D. They can also directly enter 
the circulation. E. Intravascular survival of the tumor cells and extravasation of the circulatory system follow. F. Metastatic single cells can 
colonize sites and remain dormant for years as occult micrometastases. G. Subsequent progression and neovascularization leads to clinically 
detectable metastases and progressively growing, angiogenic metastases. (Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Steeg PS. 
Metastasis suppressors alter the signal transduction of cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:55. kkjkjdht © 2003.)27
proliferation and tube formation, and inducing endothelial cell 
synthesis of proteolytic enzymes such as uPA, PAI-1, uroki-
nase plasminogen activator receptor, and MMP-1. Furthermore, 
VEGF may mediate blood flow by its effects on the vasodila-
tor nitric oxide and act as an endothelial survival factor, thus 
protecting the integrity of the vasculature. The proliferation 
of new lymphatic vessels, lymphangiogenesis, is also thought 
to be controlled by the VEGF family. Signaling in lymphatic 
cells is thought to be modulated by VEGFR3.25 Experimental 
studies with VEGF-C and VEGF-D have shown that they can 
induce tumor lymphangiogenesis and direct metastasis via the 
lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes.25, 26
PDGFs A, B, C, and D also play important roles in angio-
genesis. PDGFs cannot only enhance endothelial cell prolifera-
tion directly but also upregulate VEGF expression in vascular 
smooth muscle cells, promoting endothelial cell survival via a 
paracrine effect.23 The angiopoietins angiopoietin-1 and angio-
poietin-2 (Ang-1 and Ang-2), in return, are thought to regulate 
blood vessel maturation. Ang-1 and Ang-2 both bind angiopoi-
etin-1 receptor (also known as tyrosine-protein kinase receptor 
TIE-2), but only the binding of Ang-1 activates signal transduc-
tion; thus Ang-2 is an Ang-1 antagonist. Ang-1, via the Tie-2 
receptor, induces remodeling and stabilization of blood vessels. 
Upregulation of Ang-2 by hypoxic induction of VEGF inhibits 
Ang-1–induced Tie-2 signaling, which results in destabilization 
of vessels and makes endothelial cells responsive to angiogenic 
signals, thus promoting angiogenesis in the presence of VEGF. 
Therefore the balance between these factors determines the 
angiogenetic capacity of a tumor.
Tumor angiogenesis is regulated by several factors in a 
coordinated fashion. In addition to upregulation of proangio-
genic molecules, angiogenesis also can be encouraged by sup-
pression of naturally occurring inhibitors. Such inhibitors of 
angiogenesis include thrombospondin 1 and angiostatin. Angio-
genesis is a prerequisite not only for primary tumor growth 
but also for metastasis. Angiogenesis in the primary tumor, as 
determined by microvessel density, has been demonstrated to 
be an independent predictor of distant metastatic disease and 
survival in several cancers. Expression of angiogenic factors 
such as VEGFs has had prognostic value in many studies. These 
findings further emphasize the importance of angiogenesis in 
cancer biology.
Metastasis
Metastases arise from the spread of cancer cells from the pri-
mary site and the formation of new tumors in distant sites. The 
metastatic process consists of a series of steps that need to be 
completed successfully (Fig. 10-8).27 First, the primary cancer 
must develop access to the circulation through either the blood 
circulatory system or the lymphatic system. After the cancer 
cells are shed into the circulation, they must survive. Next, the 
circulating cells lodge in a new organ and extravasate into the 
285
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
new tissue. Next, the cells need to initiate growth in the new tis-
sue and eventually establish vascularization to sustain the new 
tumor. Overall, metastasis is an inefficient process, although 
the initial steps of hematogenous metastasis (the arrest of tumor 
cells in the organ and extravasation) are believed to be per-
formed efficiently. Only a small subset of cancer cells is then 
able to initiate micrometastases, and an even smaller portion 
goes on to grow into macrometastases.
Metastases can sometimes arise several years after the 
treatment of primary tumors. For example, although most breast 
cancer recurrences occur within the first 10 years after the initial 
treatment and recurrences are rare after 20 years, breast cancer 
recurrences have been reported decades after the original tumor. 
This phenomenon is referred to as dormancy, and it remains 
one of the biggest challenges in cancer biology. Persistence 
of solitary cancer cells in a secondary site such as the liver or 
bone marrow is one possible contributor to dormancy.28 Another 
explanation of dormancy is that cells remain viable in a qui-
escent state and then become reactivated by a physiologically 
perturbing event. Interestingly, primary tumor removal has been 
proposed to be a potentially perturbing factor.29 An alternate 
explanation is that cells establish preangiogenic metastases in 
which they continue to proliferate but that the proliferative rate 
is balanced by the apoptotic rate. Therefore, when these small 
metastases acquire the ability to become vascularized, substan-
tial tumor growth can be achieved at the metastatic site, leading 
to clinical detection.
Several types of tumors metastasize in an organ-specific 
pattern. One explanation for this is mechanical and is based on 
the different circulatory drainage patterns of the tumors. When 
different tumor types and their preferred metastasis sites were 
compared, 66% of organ-specific metastases were explained on 
the basis of blood flow alone. The other explanation for pref-
erential metastasis is what is referred to as the “seed and soil” 
theory, the dependence of the seed (the cancer cell) on the soil 
(the secondary organ). According to this theory, once cells have 
reached a secondary organ, their growth efficiency in that organ 
is based on the compatibility of the cancer cell’s biology with 
its new microenvironment. For example, breast cancer cells 
may grow more efficiently in bone than in some other organs 
because of favorable molecular interactions that occur in the 
bone microenvironment. The ability of cancer cells to grow in 
a specific site likely depends on features inherent to the cancer 
cell, features inherent to the organ, and the interplay between the 
cancer cell and its microenvironment.30
Many of the oncogenes discovered to date, such as HER2 
and ras, are thought to potentiate not only malignant transforma-
tion but also one or more of the steps required in the metastatic 
process. Experimental models have suggested a role for several 
molecules, including RhoC, osteopontin and interleukin-11, and 
Twist, in tumor metastasis. Metastasis also may involve the loss 
of metastasis-suppressor genes. Laboratory work involving can-
cer cell lines that have been selected to have a higher metastatic 
potential have led to the realization that these more highly meta-
static cells have a different gene expression profile than their 
less metastatic parental counterparts. This in turn has led to the 
currently held belief that the ability of a primary tumor to metas-
tasize may be predictable by analysis of its gene expression 
profile. Indeed, several studies have recently focused on identi-
fying a gene expression profile or a molecular signature that is 
associated with metastasis. It has been shown that such a gene 
expression profile can be used to predict the probability that the 
patient will remain free of distant metastasis.31 This suggests 
that the metastatic potential of a tumor is already predetermined 
by the genetic alterations that the cancer cells acquire early in 
tumorigenesis. Notably, this hypothesis differs from the mul-
tistep tumorigenesis theory in that the ability to metastasize is 
considered an inherent quality of the tumor from the beginning. 
It is assumed that metastasis develops not from a few rare cells 
in the primary tumor that acquire the ability to metastasize but 
that all cells in tumors with such molecular signatures develop 
the ability to metastasize. The reality probably lies in between 
since some early genetic changes detectable in the entire tumor 
can give tumors an advantage in the metastatic process, whereas 
additional genetic changes can give a clone of cells additional 
advantages, thus allowing them to succeed in metastasis.
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
A regulatory program referred to as epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) is a fundamental event in morphogenesis. 
During EMT epithelial cells are converted to migratory 
and invasive cells.32 EMT, has also been implicated as the 
mechanism through which epithelial cells acquire the abil-
ity to migrate, invade, resist apoptosis and metastasize. EMT 
is a developmental process, and a set of pleiotropically act-
ing transcriptional factors, including Snail, Twist, Slug, and 
Zeb1/2orchestrateEMT. Several of these transcription factors 
can directly repress E-cadherin gene expression, depriving 
­cancer cells of this key suppressor of motility and invasiveness. 
It has been proposed that the process of invasion and metastases 
requires significant plasticity, suggesting that EMT is required 
for invasion, intravasation and extravasation, and suppression of 
EMT regulators (and consequently EMT reversion, or MET) is 
required for metastatic outgrowth.33-35
Cancer Stem Cells
Stem cells are cells that have the ability to perpetuate themselves 
through self-renewal and to generate mature cells of a particular 
tissue through differentiation.36 It has recently been proposed that 
stem cells themselves may be the target of transformation. It was 
first documented for leukemia and multiple myeloma that only a 
small subset of cancer cells is capable of extensive proliferation. It 
has subsequently also been shown for many solid cancers that only 
a small proportion of cells is clonogenic in culture and in vivo. 
In leukemia and multiple myeloma only a small subset of cancer 
cells is capable of extensive proliferation. Similarly, in many solid 
tumor types only a small proportion of cells is clonogenic in cul-
ture and in vivo. If indeed tumor growth and metastasis are driven 
by a small population of cancer stem cells, this may alter our cur-
rent approaches to cancer therapy. Currently available drugs can 
shrink metastatic tumors but often cannot eradicate them. The fail-
ure of these treatments usually is attributed to the acquisition of 
drug resistance by the cancer cells; however, the cancer stem cell 
hypothesis raises the possibility that existing therapies may simply 
fail to kill cancer stem cells effectively. Therapeutic approaches 
targeting stem cells specifically are under study.
CANCER ETIOLOGY
Cancer Genomics
One widely held opinion is that cancer is a genetic disease that 
arises from an accumulation of genomic alterations that leads to 
the selection of cells with increasingly aggressive behavior. These 
alterations may lead either to a gain of function by oncogenes 
286
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Adulthood
Early clonal
expansion
Benign
tumour
Early invasive
cancer
Late invasive
cancer
Chemotherapy-
resistant
recurrence
Fertilized egg
Intrinsic
mutation processes
Passenger mutation
Driver mutation
Chemotherapy
resistance mutation
Environmental
and lifestyle exposures
10s–1,000s of mitoses
depending on the organ
10s–100s of mitoses
depending on the cancer
10s–100,000 of more
passenger mutations
Mutator
phenotype
Chemotherapy
1–10 or more
driver mutations
Gestation
Infancy
Childhood
Figure 10-9.  Accumulation of somatic mutations acquired by the cancer cell. Mutations may be acquired while the cell lineage is phenotypi-
cally normal, reflecting intrinsic mutations acquired during normal cell division as well as the effects of exogenous mutagens. Other processes 
such as example DNA repair defects may contribute to the mutational burden. Passenger mutations do not have any effect on the cancer cell, 
but driver mutations cause clonal expansion. Relapse after chemotherapy can be associated with resistance mutations that may predate the 
initiation of treatment.(Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. 
Nature. 2009;458:719. kkjkjdht © 2009.)37
or to a loss of function by tumor-suppressor genes. These 
acquired gene alterations are termed somatic mutations to dis-
tinguish them from germline mutations that are inherited from 
parents and transmitted to offspring. Somatic mutations in a 
cancer genome may consist of several classes of DNA sequence 
changes. These include substitutions of one base by another; 
insertions or deletions of small or large segments of DNA; rear-
rangements, in which the DNA sequence has been broken and 
then rejoined to another DNA segment; copy number losses that 
may result in complete absence of a DNA sequence and copy 
number gains from the two copies present in the normal diploid 
genome.
Somatic mutations in a cancer cell genome have accumu-
lated over the lifetime of the patient (Fig. 10-9).37 DNA in normal 
cells is continuously damaged by internal and external mutagens. 
Most of this damage is repaired; however, a small fraction may 
remain as fixed mutations. Mutation rates increase in the pres-
ence of substantial exogenous mutagenic exposures, such as 
tobacco carcinogens or various forms of radiation, including 
ultraviolet light. These exposures are associated with increased 
rates of lung and skin cancer, respectively, and somatic muta-
tions within such cancers often exhibit the distinctive mutational 
signatures known to be associated with the mutagen.38 The rates 
of somatic mutations are also increased in several rare inher-
ited diseases, such as Fanconi anemia, ataxia telangiectasia, and 
xeroderma pigmentosum, which are associated with increased 
risks of cancer.39, 40 The rest of the somatic mutations in a can-
cer cell have been acquired after the cancer cell already shows 
phenotypic evidence of neoplastic change. Whether the somatic 
mutation rate is always higher during this part of the lineage 
is controversial. This is clearly the case for some cancers. For 
instance, colorectal and endometrial cancers with defective DNA 
mismatch repair due to abnormalities in genes such as MLH1 and 
MSH2, exhibit increased rates of single nucleotide changes and 
small insertions/deletions atpolynucleotide tract.41 These tumor 
types are often referred to as “mutator phenotypes.”
To date about 300 genes that have been reported to be 
mutated and causally implicated in cancer development.42 Ninety 
percent of cancer genes show somatic mutations in cancer, 20% 
show germline mutations, and 10% show both. The most com-
mon class of genomic alterations among the known cancer 
genes is a chromosomaltranslocation that creates a chimeric 
gene. Many more cancer genes have been found in leukemias, 
lymphomas, and sarcomas than in other types of cancer; and 
these genes are usually altered by chromosomal translocation. 
The most common cancer genes are protein kinases. Several 
domains that are involved in DNA binding and transcriptional 
regulation are also common in proteins encoded by cancer 
genes. Somatic mutations in a cancer genome may be classified 
according to its consequences for cancer development. “Driver” 
mutations confer a growth advantage to the cells carrying them 
and have been positively selected during the evolution of the 
cancer. The remainder of mutations are “bystanders” or “pas-
sengers” that do not confer growth advantage. It is likely that 
most somatic mutations are passenger mutations. Each tumor 
may have dozens to hundreds of genomic alterations, making 
it critical to determine which alterations are indeed drivers, and 
potentially better therapeutic targets.
There are several ongoing large scale studies to charac-
terize and catalogue genomic alterations in different cancer 
types, including the Cancer Genome Project at the Sanger 
Institute, United Kingdom, and The Cancer Genome Atlas 
project (TCGA). There are also increasing number of pub-
lically accessible resources, including COSMIC (http://
www.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic), which curates comprehensive 
information on somatic mutations in human cancer.43 These 
resources are being utilized to determine the most common 
genomic alterations in common tumor types. This informa-
tion is being integrated into clinical practice in many tumor 
types, such as lung cancer, where molecular drivers are being 
chosen taking into consideration in systemic therapy selec-
tion (Fig. 10-10).
287
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Hereditary:
Nonhereditary:
Tumor
Tumor
Figure 10-11.  “Two-hit” tumor formation in both hereditary 
and nonhereditary cancers. A “one-hit” clone is a precursor to the 
tumor in nonhereditary cancer, whereas all cells are one-hit clones 
in hereditary cancer. (Adapted by permission from Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd.  Knudson AG. Two genetic hits (more or less) to 
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2001;1:157. kkjkjdht © 2001.)51
Unknown
KIF5B-RET
ROS1 fusions
NRAS
MAP2K1
AKT1
PIK3CA
BRAF
HER2
ALK
fusions
KRAS
EGFR
Figure 10-10.  Molecular subsets of lung adenocarcinoma. Pie 
chart shows the percentage of tumors with each potentially action-
able alteration.(Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers 
Ltd. Pao W, Hutchinson KE. Chipping away at the lung cancer 
genome. Nat Med. 2012;18:349. kkjkjdht © 2012.)172
Tumor Heterogeneity and Molecular Evolution
There is increasing recognition that tumors are heterogeneous; 
this represents an important challenge to utilizing genomic alter-
ations to personalize cancer therapy (Fig. 10-11).44 First, there 
is significant intertumoral heterogeneity, such that patients with 
tumors that seem similar histologically, may differ in genomic 
alterations and in malignant potential.45-47 Second, during can-
cer progression, subclones frequently arise, resulting in dif-
ferences in the proportion and pattern of genomic alterations 
between the primary tumor and the metastases or local-regional 
recurrences.44 Third, there may also be significant intratumoral 
heterogeneity, with spatially separated heterogeneous somatic 
mutations and chromosomal imbalances.48 Such spatial hetero-
geneity of subclones within the primary tumor or metastases 
provides an additional challenge, as it has been proposed that 
sequencing of a biopsy specimen or only a portion of the tumor 
could miss therapeutically relevant genomic alterations. The 
genomic alterations found in a tumor can also change under the 
selective pressure of a targeted therapy, adding to the challenge 
of implementing genomically-informed personalized therapy.
Genes Associated with Hereditary Cancer Risk
Most of our information on human cancer genes has been gained 
from hereditary cancers. In the case of hereditary cancers, the 
individual carries a particular germline mutation in every cell. 
To date, over 70 genes have been associated with hereditary 
cancers (Table 10-3).42 A few of these hereditary cancer genes 
are oncogenes, but most are tumor-suppressor genes. Although 
hereditary cancer syndromes are rare, somatic mutations that 
occur in sporadic cancer have been found to disrupt the cellular 
pathways altered in hereditary cancer syndromes, which sug-
gests that these pathways are critical to normal cell growth, cell 
cycle, and proliferation.
The following factors may suggest the presence of a 
hereditary cancer49:
1.	  Tumor development at a much younger age than usual
2.	  Presence of bilateral disease
3.	  Presence of multiple primary malignancies
4.	  Presentation of a cancer in the less affected sex (e.g., male 
breast cancer)
5.	  Clustering of the same cancer type in relatives
6.	  Occurrence of cancer in association with other conditions 
such as mental retardation or pathognomonic skin lesions
It is crucial that all surgeons caring for cancer patients 
be aware of hereditary cancer syndromes, because a patient’s 
genetic background has significant implications for patient 
counseling, planning of surgical therapy, and cancer screen-
ing and prevention. Some of the more commonly encountered 
hereditary cancer syndromes are discussed here.
rb1Gene.  The retinoblastoma gene rb1 was the first tumor 
suppressor to be cloned. The rb1 gene product, the Rb pro-
tein, is a regulator of transcription that controls the cell cycle, 
differentiation, and apoptosis in normal development.50 
­Retinoblastoma has long been known to occur in hereditary 
and nonhereditary forms. Interestingly, although most children 
with an affected parent develop bilateral retinoblastoma, some 
develop unilateral retinoblastoma. Furthermore, some chil-
dren with an affected parent are not affected themselves but 
then have an affected child, which indicates that they are rb1 
mutation carriers. These findings led to the theory that a single 
mutation is not sufficient for tumorigenesis. Alfred Knudson 
hypothesized that hereditary retinoblastoma involves two 
mutations, of which one is germline and one somatic, whereas 
nonhereditary retinoblastoma is due to two somatic mutations 
(Fig. 10-12).51 Thus, both hereditary and nonhereditary forms 
of retinoblastoma involve the same number of mutations, a 
hypothesis known as Knudson’s “two-hit” hypothesis. A “hit” 
may be a point mutation, a chromosomal deletion referred to 
as allelic loss, or a loss of heterozygosity, or silencing of an 
existing gene.
p53 and Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.  Li-Fraumeni syndrome 
(LFS) was first defined on the basis of observed clustering of 
malignancies, including early-onset breast cancer, soft tissue 
sarcomas, brain tumors, adrenocortical tumors, and leukemia.52  
Criteria for classic LFS in an individual (the proband) include: 
288
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-3 
Selected genes associated with hereditary cancer
SYMBOL
NAME
TUMOR TYPES  
(GERMLINE MUTATIONS)
CANCER SYNDROME
ALK
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (Ki-1)
Neuroblastoma
Familial neuroblastoma
APC
adenomatous polyposis of the colon gene
Colorectal, pancreatic, 
desmoid, hepatoblastoma, 
glioma, other CNS
Adenomatous polyposis coli; Turcot 
syndrome
ATM
ataxia telangiectasia mutated
Leukemia, lymphoma, 
medulloblastoma, glioma
Ataxia-telangiectasia
BLM
Bloom Syndrome
Leukemia, lymphoma, 
skin squamous cell, other 
cancers
Bloom Syndrome
BMPR1A
bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type IA
Gastrointestinal polyps
Juvenile polyposis
BRCA1
familial breast/ovarian cancer gene 1
Breast, ovarian
Hereditary breast/ovarian cancer
BRCA2
familial breast/ovarian cancer gene 2
Breast, ovarian, pancreatic Hereditary breast/ovarian cancer
BRIP1
BRCA1 interacting protein C-terminal 
helicase 1
AML, leukemia, breast
Fanconi anaemia J, breast cancer 
susceptiblity
BUB1B
BUB1 budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles 
1 homolog beta (yeast)
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Mosaic variegated aneuploidy
CDH1
cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (epithelial) 
(ECAD)
Gastric, lobular cancer
Familial gastric carcinoma
CDK4
cyclin-dependent kinase 4
Melanoma
Familial malignant melanoma
CDKN2A
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A 
(p16(INK4a)) gene
Melanoma, pancreatic
Familial malignant melanoma
CDKN2a(p14)
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor  
2A– p14ARF protein
Melanoma, pancreatic
Familial malignant melanoma
CHEK2
CHK2 checkpoint homolog (S. pombe)
Breast
Familial breast cancer
CYLD
familial cylindromatosis gene
Cylindroma
Familial cylindromatosis
DDB2
damage-specific DNA binding protein 2
Skin basal cell, skin 
squamous cell, melanoma
Xeroderma pigmentosum (E)
DICER1
dicer 1, ribonuclease type III
Pleuropulmonary blastoma Familial Pleuropulmonary Blastoma
EGFR
epidermal growth factor receptor 
(erythroblastic leukemia viral (v-erb-b) 
oncogene homolog, avian)
NSCLC
Familial lung cancer
ERCC2, 3, 4, 5
excision repair cross-complementing rodent 
repair deficiency, complementation group
Skin basal cell, skin 
squamous cell, melanoma
Xeroderma pigmentosum  
(D, B, F, G))
EXT1
multiple exostoses type 1 gene
exostoses, osteosarcoma
exostoses, osteosarcoma
FANCA, C, D2, 
E, F, G
Fanconi anemia, complementation group
AML, leukemia
Fanconi anaemia A, C, D2, E, F, G
FH
fumarate hydratase
leiomyomatosis, renal
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal 
cell cancer
GPC3
glypican 3
Wilms’ tumor
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome
HRAS
v-Ha-ras Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene 
homolog
v-Ha-ras Harvey rat 
sarcoma viral oncogene 
homolog
Costello syndrome
HRPT2
Hyperparathyroidism 2 (parafibromin)
parathyroid adenoma, 
mulitiple ossifying jaw 
fibroma
Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor 
syndrome
KIT
v-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog
GIST, epithelioma
Familial gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor
289
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Table 10-3 
Selected genes associated with hereditary cancer (continued)
SYMBOL
NAME
TUMOR TYPES  
(GERMLINE MUTATIONS)
CANCER SYNDROME
MADH4
Homolog of Drosophila Mothers Against 
Decapentaplegic 4 gene
Gastrointestinal polyps
Juvenile polyposis
MEN1
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene
Parathyroid adenoma, 
pituitary adenoma, 
pancreatic islet cell, 
carcinoid
Parathyroid adenoma, pituitary 
adenoma, pancreatic islet cell, 
carcinoid
MLH1
E. coli MutL homolog gene
Colorectal, endometrial, 
ovarian, CNS
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer, Turcot syndrome
MPL
myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene, 
thrombopoietin receptor
MPD
Familial essential thrombocythemia
MSH2
mutS homolog 2 (E. coli)
colorectal, endometrial, 
ovarian
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal 
cancer
MSH6
mutS homolog 6 (E. coli)
colorectal, endometrial, 
ovarian
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal 
cancer
MUTYH
mutY homolog (E. coli)
Colorectal
Adenomatous polyposis coli
NBS1
Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1 (nibrin)
NHL, glioma, 
medulloblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
Nijmegen breakage syndrome
NF1
neurofibromatosis type 1 gene
Neurofibroma, glioma
Neurofibromatosis type 1
NF2
neurofibromatosis type 2 gene
Meningioma, acoustic 
neuroma
Neurofibromatosis type 2
PALB2
partner and localizer of BRCA2
Wilms tumor, 
medulloblastoma, AML, 
breast
Fanconi anaemia N, breast cancer 
susceptibility
PHOX2B
paired-like homeobox 2b
Neuroblastoma
Familial neuroblastoma
PMS1
PMS1 postmeiotic segregation increased 1  
(S. cerevisiae)
Colorectal, endometrial, 
ovarian
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal 
cancer
PMS2
PMS2 postmeiotic segregation increased 2  
(S. cerevisiae)
Colorectal, endometrial, 
ovarian, medulloblastoma, 
glioma
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer, Turcot syndrome
PRKAR1A
protein kinase, cAMP-dependent, regulatory, 
type I, alpha (tissue specific extinguisher 1)
Myxoma, endocrine, 
papillary thyroid
Carney complex
PTCH
Homolog of Drosophila Patched gene
Skin basal cell, 
medulloblastoma
Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma 
Syndrome
PTEN
phosphatase and tensin homolog gene
Hamartoma, glioma, 
prostate, endometrial
Cowden Syndrome, Bannayan-
Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome
RB1
retinoblastoma gene
Retinoblastoma, sarcoma, 
breast, small cell lung
Familial retinoblastoma
RECQL4
RecQ protein-like 4
Osteosarcoma, skin basal 
and squamous cell
Rothmund-Thompson Syndrome
RET
ret proto-oncogene
Medullary thyroid, 
papillary thyroid, 
pheochromocytoma
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A/2B
SBDS
Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome 
protein
AML, MDS
Schwachman-Diamond syndrome
SDH5
chromosome 11 open reading frame 79
Paraganglioma
Familial paraganglioma
SHD, B, D
succinate dehydrogenase complex
Paraganglioma, 
pheochromocytoma
Familial paraganglioma
(Continued )
290
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 10-12.  Tumor heterogeneity. A. Patients with tumors with similar histologies may differ in genetic mutation status and other molecu-
lar features B. Cells within the primary tumor can acquire or lose genomic alterations in metastatic sites. C. Intratumoral spatial heterogeneity: 
common initiating genomic events usually exist in all tumor cells but additional spatially separated heterogeneous somatic mutations or copy 
number changes may accumulate. (Adapted with permission from Meric-Bernstam and Mills)44
Table 10-3 
Selected genes associated with hereditary cancer (continued)
SYMBOL
NAME
TUMOR TYPES  
(GERMLINE MUTATIONS)
CANCER SYNDROME
SMARCB1
SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin 
dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily 
b, member 1
Malignant rhabdoid
Rhabdoid predisposition syndrome
STK11
serine/threonine kinase 11 gene (LKB1)
Jejunal hamartoma, ovarian, 
testicular, pancreatic
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
SUFU
suppressor of fused homolog (Drosophila)
Medulloblastoma
Medulloblastoma predisposition
TCF1
transcription factor 1, hepatic (HNF1)
Hepatic adenoma, 
hepatocellular carcinoma
Familial Hepatic Adenoma
TP53
tumor protein p53
Breast, sarcoma, 
adrenocortical carcinoma, 
glioma, multiple other 
tumor types
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
TSC1
tuberous sclerosis 1 gene
Hamartoma, renal cell
Tuberous sclerosis 1
TSC2
tuberous sclerosis 2 gene
Hamartoma, renal cell
Tuberous sclerosis 2
TSHR
thyroid stimulating hormone receptor
Thyroid adenoma
VHL
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome gene
Renal, hemangioma, 
pheochromocytoma
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
WRN
Werner syndrome (RECQL2)
Osteosarcoma, 
meningioma, others
Werner Syndrome
WT1
Wilms’ tumor 1 gene
Wilms’
Denys-Drash syndrome, Frasier 
syndrome, Familial Wilms tumor
XPA, C
xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation 
group
Skin basal cell, skin 
squamous cell, melanoma
Xeroderma pigmentosum (A C)
A, amplification; AEL, acute eosinophilic leukemia; AL, acute leukemia; ALCL, anaplastic large-cell lymphoma; ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia; 
AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; AML*, acute myelogenous leukemia (primarily treatment associated); APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia;  
B-ALL, B-cell acute lymphocytic leukaemia; B-CLL, B-cell Lymphocytic leukemia; B-NHL, B-cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma; CLL, chronic lymphatic 
leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; D, large deletion; DFSP, derma-
tofibrosarcoma protuberans; DLBL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; DLCL, diffuse large-cell lymphoma; Dom, dominant; E, epithelial; F, frameshift; 
GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumour; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; L, leukaemia/lymphoma; M, mesenchymal; MALT, mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue lymphoma; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; Mis, Missense; MLCLS, mediastinal large cell lymphoma with sclerosis; MM, multiple  
myeloma; MPD, Myeloproliferative disorder; N, nonsense; NHL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma; NK/T, natural killer T cell; NSCLC, non small cell lung  
cancer; O, other; PMBL, primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma; pre-B All, pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; Rec, recessive; S, splice site;  
T, translocation; T-ALL, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; T-CLL, T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; TGCT, testicular germ cell tumour;  
T-PLL, T cell prolymphocytic leukemia
Source: Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.  Futreal PA et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:177. kkjkjdht © 2004.
A Intratumoural heterogeneity
between patients
B Intratumoural heterogeneity
between primary and
metastatic sites
C Intratumoural spatial
heterogeneity
291
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
(a) a bone or soft tissue sarcoma when younger than 45 years, 
(b) a first-degree relative with cancer before age 45 years, and 
(c) another first- or second-degree relative with either a sar-
coma diagnosed at any age or any cancer diagnosed before 
age 45 years.53 Approximately 70% of LFS families have been 
shown to have germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene 
p53.54 Breast carcinoma, soft tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma, brain 
tumors, adrenocortical carcinoma, Wilms’ tumor, and phyllodes 
tumor of the breast are strongly associated; pancreatic cancer 
is moderately associated; and leukemia and neuroblastoma are 
weakly associated with germline p53 mutations.55 Mutations 
of p53 have not been detected in approximately 30% of LFS 
families, and it is hypothesized that genetic alterations in other 
proteins interacting with p53 function may play a role in these 
families.
Of the known genes in human cancer, p53 is the most com-
monly mutated. The p53 protein regulates cell-cycle progression 
as well as apoptotic cell death as part of stress response path-
ways after exposure to ionizing or ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, 
chemotherapy, acidosis, growth factor deprivation, or hypoxia. 
When cells are exposed to stressors, p53 acts as a transcrip-
tion factor for genes that induce cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis. A 
majority of p53 mutations are found within a central DNA rec-
ognition motif and disrupt DNA binding by p53. Families with 
germline missense mutations in the DNA-binding domain show 
a more highly penetrant phenotype than families with other p53 
mutations.56 Furthermore, proband cancers are linked with sig-
nificantly younger age at diagnosis in patients with missense 
mutations in the DNA-binding domain.56
BRCA1, BRCA2, and Hereditary  
Breast-Ovarian Cancer
Syndrome.  It is estimated that 5% to 10% of breast cancers are 
hereditary. Of women with early-onset breast cancer (aged 40 
years or younger), nearly 10% have a germline mutation in one 
of the breast cancer genes BRCA1 or BRCA2.57 Mutation carriers 
are more prevalent among women who have a first- or second-
degree relative with premenopausal breast cancer or ovarian can-
cer at any age. The likelihood of a BRCA mutation is higher in 
patients who belong to a population in which founder mutations 
may be prevalent, such as in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. 
For a female BRCA1 mutation carrier, the cumulative risks of 
developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer by age 70 have been 
estimated to be 87% and 44%, respectively.58 The cumulative 
risks of breast cancer and ovarian cancer by age 70 in families 
with BRCA2 mutation have been estimated to be 84% and 27%, 
respectively.59 Although male breast cancer can occur with either 
BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, the majority of families (76%) with 
both male and female breast cancer have mutations in BRCA2.59 
Besides breast and ovarian cancer, BRCA1 and BRCA2 muta-
tions may be associated with increased risks for several other 
cancers. BRCA1 mutations confer a fourfold increased risk for 
colon cancer and threefold increased risk for prostate cancer.58 
BRCA2 mutations confer a fivefold increased risk for prostate 
cancer, sevenfold in men younger than 65 years.60 Furthermore, 
BRCA2 mutations confer a fivefold increased risk for gallbladder 
and bile duct cancers, fourfold increased risk for pancreatic can-
cer, and threefold increased risk for gastric cancer and malignant 
melanoma.60
BRCA1 was the first breast cancer susceptibility gene 
identified and has been mapped to 17q21. BRCA2, mapped to 
13q12.3, was reported shortly afterward. BRCA1 and BRCA2 
encode large nuclear proteins, 208 kDa and 384 kDa, respec-
tively, that have been implicated in processes fundamental to 
all cells, including DNA repair and recombination, checkpoint 
control of the cell cycle, and transcription.61 Although early 
studies suggested that the two proteins function together as a 
complex, subsequent data demonstrated that they have distinct 
functions.62, 63 In fact, breast cancers arising from BRCA1 or 
BRCA2 mutations are different at the molecular level and have 
been found to have distinct gene expression profiles.64 BRCA1-
associated tumors are more likely to be estrogen receptor nega-
tive, whereas BRCA2-associated tumors are more likely to be 
estrogen receptor positive. Currently, studies are ongoing to 
determine whether BRCA1 and BRCA2 status can be used to 
guide systemic therapy choices for breast cancer.
APC Gene and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Patients affected with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) 
characteristically develop hundreds to thousands of polyps in 
the colon and rectum. The polyps usually appear in adoles-
cence and, if left untreated, progress to colorectal cancer. FAP 
is associated with benign extracolonic manifestations that may 
be useful in identifying new cases, including congenital hyper-
trophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, epidermoid cysts, and 
osteomas. In addition to colorectal cancer, patients with FAP 
are at risk for upper intestinal neoplasms (gastric and duode-
nal polyps, duodenal and periampullary cancer), hepatobiliary 
tumors (hepatoblastoma, pancreatic cancer, and cholangiocar-
cinoma), thyroid carcinomas, desmoid tumors, and medullo-
blastomas.
The product of the adenomatous polyposis coli tumor- 
suppressor gene (APC) plays an important role in cell-cell inter-
actions, cell adhesion, regulation of β-catenin, and maintenance 
of cytoskeletal microtubules. Alterations in APC lead to dys-
regulation of several physiologic processes that govern colonic 
epithelial cell homeostasis, including cell-cycle progression, 
migration, differentiation, and apoptosis. Mutations in the APC 
have been identified in FAP and in 80% of sporadic colorectal 
cancers.65 Furthermore, APC mutations are the earliest known 
genetic alterations in colorectal cancer progression, which 
emphasizes its importance in cancer initiation. The germline 
mutations in APC may arise from point mutations, insertions, 
or deletions that lead to a premature stop codon and a truncated, 
functionally inactive protein. The risk of developing specific 
manifestations of FAP is correlated with the position of the FAP 
mutations, a phenomenon referred to as genotype-phenotype 
correlation. For example, desmoids usually are associated with 
mutations between codons 1403 and 1578.66, 67 Mutations in the 
extreme 5’ or 3’ ends of APC, or in the alternatively spliced 
region of exon 9, are associated with an attenuated version of 
FAP. Better understanding of the genotype-phenotype correla-
tions may assist in patient counseling and therapeutic planning.
Mismatch Repair Genes and Hereditary Nonpolyposis 
Colorectal Cancer.  Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer 
(HNPCC), also referred to as Lynch syndrome, is an autoso-
mal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome that predisposes to a 
wide spectrum of cancers, including colorectal cancer without 
polyposis. Some have proposed that HNPCC consists of at least 
two syndromes: Lynch syndrome 1, which entails hereditary 
predisposition for colorectal cancer with early age of onset 
(approximately age 44 years) and an excess of synchronous and 
metachronous colonic cancers; and Lynch syndrome 2, featur-
ing a similar colonic phenotype accompanied by a high risk 
292
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
for carcinoma of the endometrium, transitional cell carcinoma 
of the ureter and renal pelvis, and carcinomas of the stomach, 
small bowel, ovary, and pancreas.68 The diagnostic criteria 
for HNPCC are referred to as the Amsterdam criteria, or the 
3-2-1-0 rule. The classic Amsterdam criteria were revised to 
include other HNPCC-related cancers (Table 10-4).69 These 
criteria are met when three or more family members have histo-
logically verified, HNPCC-associated cancers (one of whom is 
a first-degree relative of the other two), two or more generations 
are involved, at least one individual was diagnosed before age 
50 years, and no individuals have FAP.69
During DNA replication, DNA polymerases may intro-
duce single nucleotide mismatches or small insertion or 
deletion loops. These errors are corrected through a process 
referred to as mismatch repair. When mismatch repair genes 
are inactivated, DNA mutations in other genes that are criti-
cal to cell growth and proliferation accumulate rapidly. In 
HNPCC, germline mutations have been identified in several 
genes that play a key role in DNA nucleotide mismatch repair: 
hMLH1 (human mutL homologue 1), hMSH2 (human mutS 
homologue 2), hMSH6, and hPMS1 and hPMS2 (human post-
meiotic segregation 1 and 2), of which hMLH1 and hMSH2 are 
the most common.70-75 The hallmark of HNPCC is microsatel-
lite instability, which occurs on the basis of unrepaired mis-
matches and small insertion or deletion loops. Microsatellite 
instability can be tested by comparing the DNA of a patient’s 
tumor with DNA from adjacent normal epithelium, amplifying 
the DNA with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a stan-
dard set of markers, comparing the amplified genomic DNA 
sequences, and classifying the degree of microsatellite insta-
bility as high, low, or stable. Such microsatellite instability 
testing may help select patients who are more likely to have 
germline mutations.
PTEN and Cowden Disease
Somatic deletions or mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene 
PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromo-
some 10) have been observed in a number of glioma breast, 
prostate, and renal carcinoma cell lines and several primary 
tumor specimens.76
PTEN encodes a 403-amino-acid protein, tyrosine phospha-
tase. PTEN negatively controls the PI3K signaling pathway for 
the regulation of cell growth and survival by dephosphorylating 
Table 10-4
Revised criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colon ­cancer 
(HNPCC) (Amsterdam criteria II)
Three or more relatives with an HNPCC-associated cancer 
  (colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, cancer of the  
  small bowel, ureter, or renal pelvis), one of whom is a 
  first-degree relative of the other two
At least two successive generations affected
At least one case diagnosed before age 50 y
Familial adenomatous polyposis excluded
Tumors verified by pathologic examination
Source: Modified with permission from Vasen et al. kkjkjdht 
­Elsevier.69
phosphoinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate; thus mutation of PTEN 
leads to constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling path-
way. The “hot spot” for PTEN mutations has been identified in 
exon 5. Forty-three percent of CD mutations have been identi-
fied in this exon, which contains the tyrosine phosphatase core 
domain. This suggests that the PTEN catalytic activity is vital 
for its biologic function. PTEN was identified as the suscep-
tibility gene for the autosomal dominant syndrome Cowden 
disease (CD) or multiple hamartoma syndrome.77 Trichilem-
momas, benign tumors of the hair follicle infundibulum, and 
mucocutaneous papillomatosis are pathognomonic of CD. 
Other common features include thyroid adenomas and mul-
tinodular goiters, breast fibroadenomas, and hamartomatous 
GI polyps. The diagnosis of CD is made when an individual 
or family has a combination of pathognomonic major and/or 
minor criteria proposed by the International Cowden Consor-
tium.78 CD is associated with an increased risk of breast and 
thyroid cancers. Breast cancer develops in 25% to 50% of 
affected women.78
p16 and Hereditary Malignant Melanoma.  The gene p16, 
also known as INK4A, CDKN1, CDKN2A, and MTS1, is a 
tumor suppressor that acts by binding CDK4 and CDK6 and 
inhibiting the catalytic activity of the CDK4-CDK6/cyclin D 
complex that is required for phosphorylation of Rb and sub-
sequent cell-cycle progression. Studies suggest that germline 
mutations in p16 can be found in 20% of melanoma-prone 
families.79 Mutations in p16 that alter its ability to inhibit 
the catalytic activity of the CDK4-CDK6/cyclin D complex 
not only increase the risk of melanoma by 75-fold but also 
increase the risk of pancreatic cancer by 22-fold.80 Interest-
ingly, p16 mutations that do not appear to alter its function 
increase the risk of melanoma by 38-fold and do not increase 
the risk of pancreatic cancer.80 Genomic characterization of 
primary tumors has revealed that p16 is inactivated through 
point mutation, promoter methylation, or deletion in a signifi-
cant portion of sporadic tumors, including cancers of the pan-
creas, esophagus, head and neck, stomach, breast, and colon, 
as well as melanomas.
E-cadherin and Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer.  E-cadherin 
is a cell adhesion molecule that plays an important role in nor-
mal architecture and function of epithelial cells. The adhesive 
function of E-cadherin is dependent on interaction of its cyto-
plasmic domain with β- and γ-catenins and may be regulated by 
phosphorylation of β-catenin.
Hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma is an autosomal dom-
inant cancer syndrome that results from germline mutations in 
the E-cadherin gene, CDH1. Carriers of CDH1 mutations have 
a 70% to 80% chance of developing gastric cancer.81 Further-
more, mutations of CDH1 have been described in sporadic can-
cers of the ovary, endometrium, breast, and thyroid. However, 
frequent mutations have been identified in only two particular 
tumors: diffuse gastric carcinomas and lobular breast carcino-
mas. Invasive lobular breast carcinomas often show inactivating 
mutations in combination with a loss of heterozygosity of the 
wild-type CDH1 allele.82 Interestingly, in gastric carcinomas 
the predominant mutations are exon skipping causing in-frame 
deletions, whereas most mutations identified in lobular breast 
cancers are premature stop codons; this suggests a genotype-
phenotype correlation.
293
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
RET Proto-Oncogene and Multiple Endocrine 
Neoplasia Type 2
The RET (rearranged during transfection) gene encodes for a 
transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a role in pro-
liferation, migration, and differentiation of cells derived from 
the neural crest. Gain-of-function mutations in the RET gene 
are associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma in isolation 
or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes. 
MEN2A is associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma and 
pheochromocytoma (in 50%) or parathyroid adenoma (in 
20%), whereas MEN2B is associated with medullary thy-
roid carcinoma, marfanoid habitus, mucosal neuromas, and 
ganglioneuromatosis.83RET mutations lead to uncontrolled 
growth of the thyroid C cells, and in familial medullary cancer, 
C-cell hyperplasia progresses to bilateral, multicentric medul-
lary thyroid cancer. Mutations in the RET gene have also been 
identified in half of sporadic medullary thyroid cancers.
Genetic Modifiers of Risk.  Individuals carrying identical 
germline mutations vary in regard to cancer penetrance (whether 
cancer will develop or not) and cancer phenotype (the tissues 
involved). It is thought that this variability may be due to envi-
ronmental influences or, if genetic, to genetic modifiers of risk. 
Similarly, genetic modifiers of risk also can play a role in deter-
mining whether an individual will develop cancer after exposure 
to carcinogens.
Chemical Carcinogens
The first report indicating that cancer could be caused by envi-
ronmental factors was by John Hill, who in 1761 noted the 
association between nasal cancer and excessive use of tobacco 
snuff.84 Currently, approximately 60% to 90% of cancers are 
thought to be due to environmental factors. Any agent that can 
contribute to tumor formation is referred to as a carcinogen and 
can be a chemical, physical, or viral agent. Chemicals are clas-
sified into three groups based on how they contribute to tumor 
formation. The first group of chemical agents, the genotoxins, 
can initiate carcinogenesis by causing a mutation. The second 
group, the cocarcinogens, by themselves cannot cause cancer 
but potentiate carcinogenesis by enhancing the potency of geno-
toxins. The third group, tumor promoters, enhances tumor for-
mation when given after exposure to genotoxins.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 
maintains a registry of human carcinogens that is available 
through the World Wide Web (http://www.iarc.fr). The com-
pounds are categorized into five groups based on an analysis of 
epidemiologic studies, animal models, and short-term mutagen-
esis tests. Group 1 contains what are considered to be proven 
human carcinogens, based on formal epidemiologic studies 
among workers who were exposed for long periods (several 
years) to the chemicals.85 Group 2A contains what are consid-
ered to be probable human carcinogens. Suggestive epidemio-
logic evidence exists for compounds in this group, but the data 
are insufficient to establish causality. There is evidence of carci-
nogenicity, however, from animal studies carried out under con-
ditions relevant to human exposure. Group 2B contains what are 
considered to be possible carcinogens, because these substances 
are associated with a clear statistically and biologically signifi-
cant increase in the incidence of malignant tumors in more than 
one animal species or strain. Group 3 agents are not classifiable, 
and Group 4 agents are probably not carcinogenic to humans. 
Selected substances that have been classified as proven carcino-
gens (group 1) by the IARC in an expert panel review in 2009 
are listed in Table 10-5.86
Physical Carcinogens
Physical carcinogenesis can occur through induction of inflam-
mation and cell proliferation over a period of time or through 
exposure to physical agents that induce DNA damage. Foreign 
bodies can cause chronic irritation that can expose cells to carci-
nogenesis due to other environmental agents. In animal models, 
for example, subcutaneous implantation of a foreign body can 
lead to the development of tumors that have been attributed to 
chronic irritation from the foreign objects. In humans, clinical 
scenarios associated with chronic irritation and inflammation 
such as chronic nonhealing wounds, burns, and inflammatory 
bowel syndrome have all been associated with an increased 
risk of cancer. H. pylori infection is associated with gastritis 
and gastric cancer, and thus, its carcinogenicity may be con-
sidered physical carcinogenesis. Infection with the liver fluke 
Opisthorchis viverrini similarly leads to local inflammation and 
­cholangiocarcinoma.
The induction of lung and mesothelial cancers by asbes-
tos fibers and nonfibrous particles such as silica are other 
examples of foreign body-induced physical carcinogenesis.87  
Animal experiments have demonstrated that the dimensions 
and durability of the asbestos and other fibrous minerals are the 
key determinants of their carcinogenicity.88 Short fibers can be 
inactivated by phagocytosis, whereas long fibers (>10 μm) are 
cleared less effectively and are encompassed by proliferating 
epithelial cells. The long fibers support cell proliferation and 
have been shown to preferentially induce tumors. Asbestos- 
associated biologic effects also may be mediated through 
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. Furthermore, an inter-
action occurs between asbestos and silica and components of 
cigarette smoke. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in 
cigarette smoke are metabolized by epithelial cells and form 
DNA adducts. If PAH is coated on asbestos, PAH uptake is 
increased.87 Both PAH and asbestos impair lung clearance, 
potentially increasing uptake further. Therefore, physical car-
cinogens may be synergistic with chemical carcinogens.
Radiation is the best-known agent of physical carcinogens 
and is classified as ionizing radiation (X-rays, gamma rays, and 
alpha and beta particles) or nonionizing radiation (UV). The car-
cinogenic potential of ionizing radiation was recognized soon 
after Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen’s discovery of X-rays in 1895. 
Within the next 20 years, a large number of radiation-related 
skin cancers were reported. Long-term follow-up of survivors 
of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki revealed that 
virtually all tissues exposed to radiation are at risk for cancer.
Radiation can induce a spectrum of DNA lesions that 
includes damage to the nucleotide bases and cross-linking, and 
DNA single- and double-strand breaks (DSBs). Misrepaired 
DSBs are the principal lesions of importance in the induction 
of chromosomal abnormalities and gene mutations. DSBs in 
irradiated cells are repaired primarily by a nonhomologous end-
joining process, which is error prone; thus, DSBs facilitate the 
production of chromosomal rearrangements and other large-
scale changes such as chromosomal deletions. It is thought that 
radiation may initiate cancer by inactivating tumor-suppressor 
genes. Activation of oncogenes appears to play a lesser role in 
radiation carcinogenesis.
294
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-5
Group 1 chemical carcinogens and evidence for carcinogenicity in humans and for genotoxicity as the main mechanism
TUMOR SITES OR TYPES WITH SUFFICIENT 
EVIDENCE IN HUMANS
EVIDENCE OF GENOTOXICITY AS THE 
MAIN MECHANISM
4-Aminobiphenyl
Urinary bladder
Strong
Benzidine
Urinary bladder
Strong
Dyes metabolized to benzidine
..
Strong*
4,4’-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)
..
Strong*
2-Napthylamine
Urinary bladder
Strong
Ortho-toluidine
Urinary bladder
Moderate
Auramine production
Urinary bladder
Weak/lack of data†
Magenta production
Urinary bladder
Weak/lack of data†
Benzo[α]pyrene
..
Strong*
Soot (chimney sweeping)
Skin, lung
Moderate
Coal gasification
Lung
Strong
Coal-tar distillation
Skin
Strong
Coke production
Lung
Strong
Coal-tar pitches (paving, roofing)
Lung
Strong
Aluminum production
Lung, urinary bladder
Weak/moderate†‡
Aflatoxins
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Strong
Benzene
ANLL
Strong
Bis(chloromethyl)ether/ chloromethyl 
methylether
Lung
Moderate/strong
1,3-Butadiene
Haematolymphatic organs
Strong
Dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD)
All cancers combined**
See text§
2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran
..
See text*§
3,3’,4,4’,5-Pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126)
..
See text*§
Ethylene oxide
..
Strong*
Formaldehyde
Nasopharynx
Leukemia**
Strong
Moderate
Sulfur mustard
Lung
Strong
Vinyl chloride
Hepatic angiosarcoma, hepatocellular 
carcinoma
Strong
Iron and steel founding
Lung
Weak/moderate
Isopropyl alcohol manufacture using strong 
acids
Nasal cavity
Weak/lack of data
Mineral oils
Skin
Weak/lack of data
Occupational exposure as a painter
Lung, urinary bladder, pleural mesothelioma
Strong‡
Rubber-manufacturing industry
Leukaemia, lymphoma**, urinary bladder, 
lung**, stomach**
Strong‡
Shale oils
Skin
Weak/lack of data
Strong inorganic acid mists
Larynx
Weak/lack of data
ANLL, acute non-lymphocytic leukaemia; ALL, acute lymphocytic leukaemia; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; MM, multiple myeloma;  
NHL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma; STS, soft-tissue sarcoma.
*Agents classified in Group 1 on the basis of mechanistic information.
†Weak evidence in workers, but strong evidence for some chemicals in this industry.
‡Due to the diversity and complexity of these exposures, other mechanisms may also be relevant.
§Strong evidence for an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated mechanism. 
¶Particularly myeloid leukemia. 
||After maternal exposure (before or ­during pregnancy, or both).
**New epidemiological findings.
Source: Adapted from Baan et al 2009. kkjkjdht Elsevier.86
295
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Table 10-6
Selected viral carcinogensa
VIRUS
PREDOMINANT TUMOR TYPEb
Epstein-Barr virus
Burkitt’s lymphoma
Hodgkin’s disease
Immunosuppression-related 
lymphoma
Sinonasal angiocentric T-cell 
lymphoma
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatitis C virus
Hepatocellular carcinoma
HIV type 1
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Human papillomavirus 
16 and 18
Cervical cancer
Anal cancer
Human T-cell 
lymphotropic viruses
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
aData based on information in the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer monographs.85
bOnly tumor types for which causal relationships are established are 
listed. Other cancer types may be linked to the agents with a lower 
­frequency or with insufficient data to prove causality.
Although it has been assumed that the initial genetic 
events induced by radiation constitute direct mutagenesis from 
radiation, other indirect effects may contribute to carcinogen-
esis. For example, radiation induces genomic instability in cells 
that persists for at least 30 generations after irradiation. There-
fore, even if cells do not acquire mutations at initial irradiation, 
they remain at risk for developing new mutations for several 
generations. Moreover, even cells that have not been directly 
irradiated appear to be at risk, a phenomenon referred to as the 
bystander effect.
Nonionizing UV radiation is a potent DNA-damaging 
agent and is known to induce skin cancer in experimental ani-
mals. Most nonmelanoma human skin cancers are thought to 
be induced by repeated exposure to sunlight, which leads to a 
series of mutations that allow the cells to escape normal growth 
control. Patients with inherited xeroderma pigmentosum lack 
one or more DNA repair pathways, which confers susceptibility 
to UV-induced cancers, especially on sun-exposed body parts. 
Patients with ataxia telangiectasia mutated syndrome also have 
a radiation-sensitive phenotype.
Viral Carcinogens
One of the first observations that cancer may be caused by 
transmissible agents was by Peyton Rous in 1910 when he 
demonstrated that cell-free extracts from sarcomas in chickens 
could transmit sarcomas to other animals injected with these 
extracts.89 This was subsequently discovered to represent viral 
transmission of cancer by the Rous sarcoma virus. At present, 
several human viruses are known to have oncogenic proper-
ties, and several have been causally linked to human cancers 
(Table 10-6).85 It is estimated that 15% of all human tumors 
worldwide are caused by viruses.90
Viruses may cause or increase the risk of malignancy 
through several mechanisms, including direct transformation, 
expression of oncogenes that interfere with cell-cycle check-
points or DNA repair, expression of cytokines or other growth 
factors, and alteration of the immune system. Oncogenic viruses 
may be RNA or DNA viruses. Oncogenic RNA viruses are ret-
roviruses and contain a reverse transcriptase. After the viral 
infection, the single-stranded RNA viral genome is transcribed 
into a double-stranded DNA copy, which is then integrated into 
the chromosomal DNA of the cell. Retroviral infection of the 
cell is permanent; thus, integrated DNA sequences remain in 
the host chromosome. Oncogenic transforming retroviruses 
carry oncogenes derived from cellular genes. These cellular 
genes, referred to as proto-oncogenes, usually are involved in 
mitogenic signaling and growth control, and include protein 
kinases, G proteins, growth factors, and transcription factors 
(Table 10-7).90
Integration of the provirus upstream of a proto-oncogene 
may produce chimeric virus-cell transcripts and recombination 
during the next round of replication that could lead to incorpo-
ration of the cellular gene into the viral genome.90 Then again, 
many retroviruses do not possess oncogenes but can cause 
tumors in animals regardless. This occurs by integration of the 
provirus near a normal cellular proto-oncogene and activation 
of the expression of these genes by the strong promoter and 
enhancer sequences in the integrated viral sequence.
Unlike the oncogenes of the RNA viruses, those of the 
DNA tumor viruses are viral, not cellular, in origin. These genes 
are required for viral replication using the host cell machinery. 
In permissive hosts, infection with an oncogenic DNA virus 
may result in a productive lytic infection, which leads to cell 
death and the release of newly formed viruses. In nonpermis-
sive cells, the viral DNA can be integrated into the cellular 
chromosomal DNA, and some of the early viral genes can be 
synthesized persistently, which leads to transformation of cells 
to a neoplastic state. The binding of viral oncoproteins to cellu-
lar tumor-suppressor proteins p53 and Rb is fundamental to the 
carcinogenesis induced by most DNA viruses, although some 
target different cellular proteins.
Like other types of carcinogenesis, viral carcinogenesis 
is a multistep process. Some retroviruses contain two cellular 
oncogenes, rather than one, in their genome and are more rap-
idly tumorigenic than single-gene transforming retroviruses, 
which emphasizes the cooperation between transforming genes. 
Furthermore, some viruses encode genes that suppress or delay 
apoptosis.
Although immunocompromised individuals are at ele-
vated risk, most patients infected with oncogenic viruses do not 
develop cancer. When cancer does develop, it usually occurs 
several years after the viral infection. It is estimated, for exam-
ple, that the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) among 
individuals infected with hepatitis C virus is 1% to 3% after 
30 years.91 There may be synergy between various environmen-
tal factors and viruses in carcinogenesis.
Recognition of a viral origin for some tumors has led to 
the pursuit of vaccination as a preventive strategy. The use of 
childhood hepatitis B vaccination has already translated into a 
decrease in liver cancer incidence in the Far East.5 Similarly, it 
is recognized that cervical cancer and its obligate precursors, 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grades 2 and 3, and adenocar-
cinoma in situ, are caused by oncogenic human papillomavirus 
(HPV); administration of HPV vaccine to HPV-naive women, 
296
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
substantially reduces the incidence of HPV16/18-related cer-
vical precancers and cervical cancer.92 The American Cancer 
Society now recommends routine HPV vaccination principally 
for females aged 11 to 12 years, but also for females aged 13 to 
18 years to ‘’catch up’’ those who missed the opportunity to be 
vaccinated or who need to complete the vaccination series.93
CANCER RISK ASSESSMENT
Cancer risk assessment is an important part of the initial evalua-
tion of any patient. A patient’s cancer risk not only is an impor-
tant determinant of cancer screening recommendations but also 
may alter how aggressively an indeterminant finding will be 
pursued for diagnosis. A “probably benign” mammographic 
lesion, for example, defined as one with <2% probability of 
malignancy (American College of Radiology category III) is 
usually managed with a 6-month follow-up mammogram in a 
patient at baseline cancer risk, but obtaining a tissue diagnosis 
may be preferable in a patient at high risk for breast cancer.94
Cancer risk assessment starts with taking a complete his-
tory that includes history of environmental exposures to poten-
tial carcinogens and a detailed family history. Risk assessment 
for breast cancer, for example, includes obtaining a family 
history to determine whether another member of the family is 
known to carry a breast cancer susceptibility gene; whether there 
is familial clustering of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, thyroid 
cancer, sarcoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, endometrial cancer, 
brain tumors, dermatologic manifestations, leukemia, or lym-
phoma; and whether the patient is from a population at increased 
risk, such as individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Patients 
who have a family history suggestive of a cancer susceptibility 
syndrome such as hereditary breast-ovarian syndrome, LFS, or 
CD would benefit from genetic counseling and possibly genetic 
testing.
There are several models that can estimate risk based 
on complex family histories and assist clinicians in estimat-
ing breast cancer risk or the likelihood that a BRCA mutation 
is present, including the Claus model, Tyrer-Cuzick model 
BRCAPRO model, and the Breast and Ovarian Analysis of 
Disease Incidence and Carrier Estimation Algorithm (BOA-
DICEA) model.95-98 Patients who do have a strong hereditary 
component of risk can be evaluated on the basis of their age, 
race, personal history, and exposures. One of the most com-
monly used models for risk assessment in breast cancer is the 
Gail model.99 Gail and colleagues analyzed the data from 2852 
breast cancer cases and 3146 controls from the Breast Cancer 
Detection and Demonstration Project, a mammography screen-
ing project conducted in the 1970s, and developed a model for 
projecting breast cancer incidence. The model uses risk fac-
tors such as an individual’s age, age at menarche, age at first 
live birth, number of first-degree relatives with breast cancer, 
number of previous breast biopsy specimens, and whether the 
biopsy specimen results revealed atypical ductal hyperplasia 
(Table 10-8).99 This model has led to the development of a 
Table 10-7
Selected cellular oncogenes in retroviruses
ONCOGENE
VIRUS NAME
ORIGIN
PROTEIN PRODUCT
abl
Abelson murine leukemia virus
Mouse
Tyrosine kinase
fes
ST feline sarcoma virus
Cat
Tyrosine kinase
fps
Fujinami sarcoma virus
Chicken
Tyrosine kinase
src
Rous sarcoma virus
Chicken
Tyrosine kinase
erbB
Avian erythroblastosis virus
Chicken
Epidermal growth factor receptor
fms
McDonough feline sarcoma virus
Cat
Colony-stimulating factor receptor
kit
Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma virus
Cat
Stem cell factor receptor
mil
Avian myelocytoma virus
Chicken
Serine/threonine kinase
mos
Moloney murine sarcoma virus
Mouse
Serine/threonine kinase
raf
Murine sarcoma virus 3611
Mouse
Serine/threonine kinase
sis
Simian sarcoma virus
Monkey
Platelet-derived growth factor
H-ras
Harvey murine sarcoma virus
Rat
GDP/GTP binding
K-ras
Kirsten murine sarcoma virus
Rat
GDP/GTP binding
erbA
Avian erythroblastosis virus
Chicken
Transcription factor (thyroid hormone 
receptor)
ets
Avian myeloblastosis virus E26
Chicken
Transcription factor
fos
FBJ osteosarcoma virus
Mouse
Transcription factor (AP1 component)
jun
Avian sarcoma virus 17
Chicken
Transcription factor (AP1 component)
myb
Avian myeloblastosis virus
Chicken
Transcription factor
myc
MC29 myelocytoma virus
Chicken
Transcription factor (NF-κB family)
AP1, activator protein 1; FBJ, Finkel-Biskis-Jinkins; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB.
Source: Modified from Butel JS. Viral carcinogenesis: revelation of molecular mechanisms and etiology of human disease. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21:405. 
By permission of Oxford University Press.
297
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
and over her ­lifetime (to age 90 years). Notably, these risk pro-
jections assume that the woman is undergoing regular clinical 
breast examinations and screening mammograms. Also of note 
is that this ­program ­underestimates the risk for women who have 
already had a diagnosis of invasive or noninvasive breast cancer 
and does not take into account specific genetic predispositions 
such as mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. However, risk assess-
ment tools such as this have been validated and are now in wide-
spread clinical use. Similar models are in development or are 
being validated for other cancers. For example, a lung cancer 
risk prediction model, which includes age, sex, asbestos expo-
sure history, and smoking history, has been found to predict 
risk of lung cancer.101 There is now growing interest in using 
each individuals genotype, such as presence or absence of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms which each may confer low or inter-
mediate cancer risk. Risk models that include biological as well 
as environmental factors may accurately predict cancer risk, 
providing better guidance as to which patients should undergo 
more intensive screening (e.g., screening with magnetic resonance 
imaging of the breast, computerized tomography screening of 
the lung), and should be considered for preventive strategies.
CANCER SCREENING
Early detection is the key to success in cancer therapy. Screen-
ing for common cancers using relatively noninvasive tests is 
expected to lead to early diagnosis, allow more conservative 
surgical therapies with decreased morbidity, and potentially 
improve surgical cure rates and overall survival rates. Key 
factors that influence screening guidelines are how prevalent 
the cancer is in the population, what risk is associated with the 
screening measure, and whether early diagnosis actually affects 
outcome. The value of a widespread screening measure is likely 
to go up with the prevalence of the cancer in a population, which 
often determines the age cutoffs for screening and explains why 
screening is done only for common cancers. The risks asso-
ciated with the screening measure are a significant consider-
ation, especially with more invasive screening measures such 
as colonoscopy. The consequences of a false-positive screen-
ing test result also need to be considered. For example, when 
1000 screening mammograms are taken, only 2 to 4 new cases 
of cancer will be identified; this number is slightly higher (6 to 
10 prevalent cancers per 1000 mammograms) for initial screen-
ing mammograms.102 However, as many as 10% of screening 
mammograms may be potentially suggestive of an abnormal-
ity, which requires further imaging (i.e., a 10% recall rate). Of 
those women with abnormal mammogram findings, only 5% to 
10% will be determined to have a breast cancer. Among women 
for whom biopsy specimen is recommended, 25% to 40% will 
have a breast cancer. A false-positive screening result is likely 
to induce significant emotional distress in patients, leads to 
unnecessary biopsy specimens, and has cost implications for 
the health care system.
The 2013 American Cancer Society guidelines for the early 
detection of cancer are listed in Table 10-9.93 These guidelines 
are updated periodically to incorporate emerging technologies 
and new data on the efficacy of screening measures. Besides 
the American Cancer Society, several other professional bodies 
make recommendations for screening. Although the screening 
guidelines differ somewhat, most organizations do not empha-
size one screening strategy as superior to another, but all empha-
size the importance of age-appropriate screening.
Table 10-8 
Assessment of risk for invasive breast cancer
RISK FACTOR
RELATIVE RISK (%)
Age at menarche (years)
>14
1.00
12–13
1.10
<12
1.21
Age at first live birth (years)
Patients with no first-degree relatives  
  with cancer
<20
1.00
20–24
1.24
25–29 or nulliparous
1.55
≥30
1.93
Patients with one first degree-relative  
  with cancer
<20
1.00
20–24
2.64
25–29 or nulliparous
2.76
≥30
2.83
Patients with ≥2 first-degree relatives  
  with cancer
<20
6.80
20–24
5.78
25–29 or nulliparous
4.91
≥30
4.17
Breast biopsies (number)
Patients aged <50 y at counseling
0
1.00
1
1.70
≥2
2.88
Patients aged ≥50 y at counseling
0
1.00
1
1.27
≥2
1.62
Atypical hyperplasia
  No biopsies
1.00
  At least 1 biopsy, no atypical 
    hyperplasia
0.93
  No atypical hyperplasia, hyperplasia 
    status unknown for at least 1 biopsy
1.00
  Atypical hyperplasia in at least 1 biopsy
1.82
Source: Modified from Gail MH et al.99
breast cancer risk assessment tool, which is available on the 
World Wide Web.100 This tool incorporates the risk factors used 
in the Gail model, as well as race and ethnicity, and allows 
a health professional to ­project a woman’s individualized 
­estimated risk for invasive breast cancer over a 5-year period 
298
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-9
American Cancer Society recommendations for early detection of cancer in average-risk, asymptomatic  
individuals
CANCER SITE
POPULATION
TEST OR PROCEDURE
FREQUENCY
Breast
Women, aged ≥20y
BSE
It is acceptable for women to choose not to do BSE or to 
do BSE regularly (monthly) or irregularly. Beginning in 
their early 20s, women should be told about the benefits 
and limitations of BSE. Whether a woman ever performs 
BSE, the importance of prompt reporting of any new breast 
symptoms to a health professional should be emphasized. 
Women who choose to do BSE should receive instruction 
and have their technique reviewed on the occasion of a 
periodic health examination.
CBE
For women in their 20s and 30s, it is recommended that CBE 
be part of a periodic health examination, preferably at least 
every 3 y. Asymptomatic women aged ≥40 y should continue 
to receive a CBE as part of a periodic health examination, 
preferably annually.
Mammography
Begin annual mammography at age 40 y.a
Cervix
Woman, aged  
21–65 y
Pap test and HPV DNA 
test
Cervical cancer screening should begin at age 21 y. For 
women aged 21–29 y, screening should be done every 3 y 
with conventional or liquid-based Pap tests.
For women aged 30–65 y, screening should be done every 
5 y with both the HPV test and the Pap test (preferred), or 
every 3 y with the Pap test alone (acceptable). Women aged 
>65 y who have had ≥3 consecutive negative Pap tests or 
≥2 consecutive negative HPV and Pap tests within the last 
10 y, with the most recent test occurring within the last 5 y, 
and women who have had a total hysterectomy should stop 
cervical cancer screening. Women at any age should not be 
screened annually by any screening method.
Colorectal
Men and women 
aged ≥50 y
FOBT with at least 50% 
test sensitivity for cancer, 
or FIT with at least 50% 
test sensitivity for cancer, 
or
Annual, starting at age 50 y. Testing at home with 
adherence to manufacturer’s recommendation for collection 
techniques and number of samples is recommended. FOBT 
with the single stool sample collected on the clinician’s 
fingertip during a DRE in the healthcare setting is not 
recommended. Guaiac-based toilet bowl FOBT tests also are 
not recommended. In comparison with guaiac-based tests 
for the detection of occult blood, immunochemical tests are 
more patient-friendly, and are likely to be equal or better 
insensitivity and specificity. There is no justification for 
repeating FOBT in response to an initial positive finding.
Stool DNA testb, or
Interval uncertain, starting at age 50 y.
FSIG, or
Every 5 y, starting at age 50 y. FSIG can be performed alone, 
or consideration can be given to combining FSIG performed 
every 5 y with a highly sensitive guaiac-based FOBT or FIT 
performed annually.
DCBE, or
Every 5 y, starting at age 50 y.
Colonoscopy
Every 10 y, starting at age 50 y.
CT colonography
Every 5 yr, starting at age 50 y.
Endometrial
Women, at 
menopause
At the time of menopause, women at average risk should 
be informed about the risks and symptoms of endometrial 
cancer and strongly encouraged to report any unexpected 
bleeding or spotting to their physicians.
299
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Screening guidelines are developed for the general baseline-
risk population. These guidelines need to be modified for patients 
who are at high risk. For example, more intensive colorectal can-
cer screening is recommended for individuals at increased risk 
because of a history of adenomatous polyps, a personal history 
of colorectal cancer, a family history of either colorectal can-
cer or colorectal adenomas diagnosed in a first-degree relative 
before age 60 years, a personal history of inflammatory bowel 
disease of significant duration, or a family history or genetic test 
result indicating FAP or HNPCC. For some diseases, in higher 
risk populations, both the screening modality and the screening 
intensity may be altered. For example, breast magnetic reso-
nance imaging is recommended as an adjunct to mammography 
for breast cancer screening in BRCA mutation carriers, first-
degree relatives of carriers, and women with a lifetime breast 
cancer risk of 20% to 25% or higher.103
More recently, the National Lung Screening Trial demon-
strated a 20% reduction in lung cancer deaths in adults aged 55 to 
74 years who were at high risk of lung cancer and randomized 
to low-dose helical computed tomography (LDCT) screening 
compared with screening with annual CXR.104 In 2013, the 
American Cancer Society updated their lung cancer screening 
recommendations to emphasize that clinicians with access to 
high-volume, high-quality lung cancer screening and treatment 
centers should ascertain the smoking history of their patients 
55 to 74 years of age, and should discuss lung cancer screening 
with those who have at least a 30 pack-year smoking history, 
currently smoke, or have quit within the past 15 years, and who 
are in relatively good health.105 It is recommended that this dis-
cussion include the benefits, uncertainties, and harms associated 
with screening for lung cancer with LDCT.
CANCER DIAGNOSIS
The definitive diagnosis of solid tumors is obtained by perform-
ing a biopsy specimen of the lesion. Biopsy findings determine 
the tumor histology and grade and thus, assist in definitive thera-
peutic planning. Biopsy specimens of mucosal lesions usually are 
Table 10-9
American Cancer Society recommendations for early detection of cancer in average-risk, asymptomatic  
individuals (continued)
CANCER SITE
POPULATION
TEST OR PROCEDURE
FREQUENCY
Lung
Current or former 
smokers aged 50–74 
in good health with at 
least a 30 pack-year 
history
LDCT
Clinicians with access to high-volume, high-quality lung 
cancer screening and treatment centers should initiate a 
discussion about lung cancer screening with apparently 
healthy patients aged 55–74 y who have at least a 30 pack-y 
smoking history, and who currently smoke or have quit 
within the past 15 y. A process of informed and shared 
decision-making with a clinician related to the potential 
benefits, limitations, and harms associated with screening for 
lung cancer with LDCT should occur before any decision is 
made to initiate lung cancer screening. Smoking cessation 
counseling remains a high priority for clinical attention in 
discussions with current smokers, who should be informed of 
their continuing risk of lung cancer. Screening should not be 
viewed as an alternative to smoking cessation.
Prostate
Men, aged ≥50 y
DRE and PSA
Men who have at least a 10-y life expectancy should have an 
opportunity to make an informed decision with their health 
care provider about whether to be screened for prostate 
cancer, after receiving information about the potential 
benefits, risks, and uncertainties associated with prostate 
cancer screening. Prostate cancer screening should not occur 
without an informed decision-making process.
Cancer-related 
checkup
Men and women 
aged ≥20 y
On the occasion of a periodic health examination, the cancer-
related checkup should include examination for cancers 
of the thyroid, testicles, ovaries, lymph nodes, oral cavity, 
and skin, as well as health counseling about tobacco, sun 
exposure, diet and nutrition, risk factors, sexual practices, 
and environmental and occupational exposures.
ACS, American Cancer Society; BSE, breast self-examination; CBE, clinical breast examination; Pap, Papanicolaou; HPV, human papillomavirus; 
FOBT, fecal occult blood test; FIT, fecal immunochemical test; DRE, digital rectal examination; FSIG, flexible sigmoidoscopy; DCBE, double-contrast 
barium enema; CT, computed tomography; LDCT, low-dose helical CT; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
aBeginning at age 40 y, annual CBE should ideally be performed prior to mammography.
bThe stool DNA test approved for colorectal cancer screening in 2008 is no longer commercially available. New stool DNA tests are presently undergoing 
evaluation and may become available at some future time.
Source: Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Smith RA et al. Cancer screening in the United States, 2013: a review of current American 
Cancer Society guidelines, current issues in cancer screening, and new guidance on cervical cancer screening and lung cancer screening. CA: a cancer 
journal for clinicians. 2013;63:87. © 2013 American Cancer Society, Inc.
300
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
obtained endoscopically (e.g., via colonoscope, bronchoscope, or 
cystoscope). Lesions that are easily palpable, such as those of the 
skin, can either be excised or sampled by punch biopsy ­specimen. 
Deep-seated lesions can be localized with computed tomographic 
(CT) scan or ultrasound guidance for biopsy specimen.
A sample of a lesion can be obtained with a needle or with 
an open incisional or excisional biopsy specimen. Fine-needle 
aspiration is easy and relatively safe, but has the disadvantage 
of not giving information on tissue architecture. For example, 
fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimen of a breast mass can 
make the diagnosis of malignancy but cannot differentiate 
between an invasive and noninvasive tumor. Therefore core-
needle biopsy specimen is more advantageous when the histo-
logic findings will affect the recommended therapy. Core biopsy 
specimen, like fine-needle aspiration, is relatively safe and can 
be performed either by direct palpation (e.g., a breast mass or 
a soft tissue mass) or can be guided by an imaging study (e.g., 
stereotactic core biopsy specimen of the breast). Core biopsy 
specimens, like fine-needle aspirations, have the disadvantage 
of introducing sampling error. For example, 19% to 44% of 
patients with a diagnosis of atypical ductal hyperplasia based on 
core biopsy specimen findings of a mammographic abnormality 
are found to have carcinoma upon excision of the lesion.106 It is 
crucial to ensure that the histologic findings are consistent with 
the clinical scenario and to know the appropriate interpretation 
of each histologic finding. A needle biopsy specimen for which 
the report is inconsistent with the clinical scenario should be 
either repeated or followed by an open biopsy specimen.
Open biopsy specimens have the advantage of providing 
more tissue for histologic evaluation and the disadvantage of 
being an operative procedure. Incisional biopsy specimens are 
reserved for very large lesions in which a definitive diagnosis 
cannot be made by needle biopsy specimen. Excisional biopsy 
specimens are performed for lesions for which either core 
biopsy specimen is not possible or the results are nondiagnostic. 
Excisional biopsy specimens should be performed with curative 
intent, that is, by obtaining adequate tissue around the lesion to 
ensure negative surgical margins. Marking of the orientation of 
the margins by sutures or clips by the surgeon and inking of the 
specimen margins by the pathologist will allow for determina-
tion of the surgical margins and will guide surgical re-excision 
if one or more of the margins are positive for microscopic tumor 
or are close. The biopsy specimen incision should be oriented to 
allow for excision of the biopsy specimen scar if repeat opera-
tion is necessary. Furthermore, the biopsy specimen incision 
should directly overlie the area to be removed rather than tun-
neling from another site, which runs the risk of contaminating 
a larger field. Finally, meticulous hemostasis during a biopsy 
specimen is essential, because a hematoma can lead to contami-
nation of the tissue planes and can make subsequent follow-up 
with physical examinations much more challenging.
CANCER STAGING
Cancer staging is a system used to describe the anatomic extent 
of a malignant process in an individual patient. Staging sys-
tems may incorporate relevant clinical prognostic factors such 
as tumor size, location, extent, grade, and dissemination to 
regional lymph nodes or distant sites. Accurate staging is essen-
tial in designing an appropriate treatment regimen for an individual 
patient. Staging of the lymph node basin is considered a standard 
part of primary surgical therapy for most surgical procedures and 
is discussed later in this chapter. Cancer patients who are con-
sidered to be at high risk for distant metastasis ­usually undergo 
a preoperative staging work-up. This involves a set of imaging 
studies of sites of preferential metastasis for a given cancer type. 
For a patient with breast cancer, for example, a staging work-up 
would include a chest radiograph, bone scan, and liver ultra-
sound, or CT scan of the abdomen to evaluate for lung, bone, 
and liver metastases, respectively. A distant staging work-up 
usually is performed only for patients likely to have metastasis 
based on the characteristics of the primary tumor; for example, 
a staging work-up for a patient with ductal carcinoma in situ of 
the breast or a small invasive breast tumor is likely to be low 
yield and not cost effective.
Recently there also is interest in using molecular imaging 
with positron emission tomography (PET) scanning, or PET/
CT, for cancer staging. Most commonly PET scanning is per-
formed with fluorine 18 incorporated into fluorodeoxyglucose 
(FDG). FDG PET assesses the rate of glycolysis. FDG uptake 
is increased in most malignant tissues but also in benign patho-
logic conditions such as inflammatory disorders, trauma, infec-
tion, and granulomatous disease. It may be especially useful in 
the staging and management of lymphoma, lung cancer, and 
colorectal cancer. The role of PET in evaluating many other 
cancers is evolving, and additional molecular tracers, such as 
3′-deoxy-3′-18 F-fluorothymidine, used to assess proliferation, 
are being actively pursued.
Standardization of staging systems is essential to allow 
comparison of results from different studies from different insti-
tutions and worldwide. The staging systems proposed by the 
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union 
Internationale Contre le Cancer (International Union Against 
Cancer, or UICC) are among the most widely accepted stag-
ing systems. Both the AJCC and the UICC have adopted a 
shared tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) staging system that 
defines the cancer in terms of the anatomic extent of disease 
and is based on assessment of three components: the size of 
the primary tumor (T), the presence (or absence) and extent of 
nodal metastases (N), and the presence (or absence) and extent 
of distant metastases (M).
The TNM staging applies only to tumors that have been 
microscopically confirmed to be malignant. Standard TNM 
staging (clinical and pathologic) is completed at initial diag-
nosis. Clinical staging (cTNM or TNM) is based on informa-
tion gained up until the initial definitive treatment. Pathologic 
staging (pTNM) includes clinical information and information 
obtained from pathologic examination of the resected primary 
tumor and regional lymph nodes. Other classifications, such as 
retreatment staging (rTNM) or autopsy staging (aTNM), should 
be clearly identified as such.
The clinical measurement of tumor size (T) is the one 
judged to be the most accurate for each individual case based 
on physical examination and imaging studies. For example, 
in breast cancer the size of the tumor could be obtained from 
a physical examination, mammogram, or ultrasound, and the 
tumor size is based only on the invasive component.
If even one lymph node is involved by tumor, the N com-
ponent is at least N1. For many solid tumor types, simply the 
absence or presence of lymph node involvement is recorded, 
and the tumor is categorized either as N0 or N1. For other tumor 
types, the number of lymph nodes involved, the size of the lymph 
nodes or the lymph node metastasis, or the regional lymph node 
basin involved also has been shown to have prognostic value. 
301
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
In these cancers, the designations N1, N2, and N3 suggest an 
increasing abnormality of lymph nodes based on size, charac-
teristics, and location. NX indicates that the lymph nodes cannot 
be fully assessed.
Cases in which there is no distant metastasis are designated 
M0, cases in which one or more distant metastases are detected 
are designated M1, and cases in which the presence of distant 
metastasis cannot be assessed are designated MX. In clinical 
practice, negative findings on clinical history and examination 
are sufficient to designate a case as M0. However, in clinical 
trials, routine follow-up often are performed to standardize the 
detection of distant metastases.
The practice of dividing cancer cases into groups accord-
ing to stage is based on the observation that the survival rates are 
higher for localized (lower-stage) tumors than for tumors that 
have extended beyond the organ of origin. Therefore, staging 
assists in selection of therapy, estimation of prognosis, evalu-
ation of treatments, and exchange of information among treat-
ment centers. Notably, the AJCC regularly updates its staging 
system to incorporate advances in prognostic technology to 
improve the predictive accuracy of the TNM system. Therefore 
it is important to know which revision of a staging system is 
being used when evaluating studies.
TUMOR MARKERS
Prognostic and Predictive Tissue Markers
Tumor markers are substances that can be detected in higher than 
normal amounts in the serum, urine, or tissues of patients with 
certain types of cancer. Tumor markers are produced either by the 
cancer cells themselves or by the body in a response to the cancer.
Over the past decade, there has been an especially high interest 
in identifying tissue tumor markers that can be used as prognostic 
or predictive markers. Although the terms prognostic marker and 
predictive marker are sometimes used interchangeably, the term 
prognostic marker generally is used to describe molecular mark-
ers that predict disease-free survival, disease-specific survival, and 
overall survival, whereas the term predictive marker often is used in 
the context of predicting response to certain therapies.
The goal is to identify prognostic markers that can give 
information on prognosis independent of other clinical charac-
teristics and therefore can provide information to supplement 
the projections based on clinical presentation. This would allow 
practitioners to further classify patients as being at higher or 
lower risk within clinical subgroups and to identify patients 
who may benefit most from adjuvant therapy. For example, 
ideal prognostic tumor markers would be able to help deter-
mine which patients with node-negative breast cancer are at 
higher risk of relapse so that adjuvant systemic therapy could 
be given only to that group. However, although a large number 
of studies have identified potential novel prognostic markers, 
most have not been tested with enough vigor to be shown to 
be of clinical utility. In the 2007 American Society of Clinical 
Oncology (ASCO) guidelines, it was decided that level of uPA/
PAI-1 measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay could 
be used to determine prognosis in cases of newly diagnosed 
­node-negative breast cancer.107 In contrast, the data for many 
other markers, including DNA content, proportion of tumor 
cells in S phase, Ki-67, cyclin E, p27, p21, thymidine kinase, 
topoisomerase II, HER2, p53, and cathepsin D, were felt to be 
insufficient to support their use in the management of breast cancer 
patients.107 Similarly, in the 2006 ASCO GI tumor guidelines, 
Low-risk
group
Intermediate-
risk group
High-risk
group
0
0
5
5
10
10
15
15
20
20
25
25
30
30
35
35
40
40
45
50
Rate of distant recurrence at 10 y
(% of patients)
Recurrence score
Figure 10-13.  Distant recurrence as a continuous function of the 
recurrence score derived from tumor levels of expression of 21 
genes. (From Paik S, et al: A multigene assay to predict recurrence 
of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351:281. kkjkjdht © 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society. 
Reprinted with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society.)110
the data were felt to be insufficient to recommend the routine 
use of p53, ras, thymidine synthase, dihydropyrimidine dehy-
drogenase, thymidine phosphorylase, microsatellite instability, 
18q loss of heterozygosity, or deleted-in-colon-cancer protein in 
the management of patients with colorectal cancer.108
Predictive markers are markers that can prospectively 
identify patients who will benefit from a certain therapy. For 
example in breast cancer, estrogen receptor (ER) and HER2 
assessment can identify patients who can benefit from antiestro-
gen therapies (e.g., tamoxifen) and anti-HER2 targeted therapies 
(e.g., trastuzumab), respectively, and the 2007 ASCO guide-
lines recommend that these markers be routinely assessed.107 
High-throughput techniques such as transcriptional profiling 
allow for assessment of the relative mRNA levels of thousands 
of genes simultaneously in a given tumor using microarray tech-
nology. With the advent of such molecular profiling technolo-
gies, researchers have focused on identifying expression profiles 
that are prognostic for different cancer types. For breast cancer, 
although many such multiparameter tests are under develop-
ment, few have reached the large-scale validation stage.109 In 
2007, ASCO guidelines suggested that one of these, the Onco-
type DX assay, can be used to predict recurrence in women with 
node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer who are treated with 
tamoxifen.107 Oncotype DX is a quantitative reverse-transcrip-
tase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test that used paraffin-
fixed tissue. A 21-gene recurrence score (RS) is generated based 
on the expression of 16 cancer genes and 5 reference genes. 
The levels of expression are used to derive an RS that ranges 
from 0 to 100, using a prospectively defined mathematical algo-
rithm. This novel quantitative approach to the evaluation of the 
best-known molecular pathways in breast cancer has produced 
impressive results. Use of this multigene assay to predict recur-
rence was validated in the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast 
and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-14 trial, in which ER-positive, 
node-negative patients had received tamoxifen.110 By multivari-
ate Cox proportional analysis, RS was found to be indepen-
dently associated with recurrence risk, with a hazard ratio of 
3.21 (95% confidence interval of 2.23 to 4.65, P<.001). The 
RS was indeed able to stratify patients by freedom from distant 
recurrence (Fig. 10-13).110 The Trial Assessing Individualized 
302
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Options for Treatment for breast cancer (TAILORx) is evalu-
ating the utility of Oncotype DX for predicting prognosis in 
patients with ER-positive, node-negative tumors and will focus 
on women with intermediate RS scores in whom the role of 
chemotherapy is unclear. Several other multigene predictors 
for breast cancer are available including MammaPrint, a gene 
expression profiling platform assessing a 70-gene transcrip-
tional signature.111 This assay was approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) in February 2007. The usefulness 
of this assay in making therapy-related decisions is being tested 
prospectively in a large-scale study, the Microarray in Node-
Negative Disease May Avoid Chemotherapy (MINDACT) trial.
Multigene profiles to predict prognosis are in development 
or in validation phases for many other solid tumor types, includ-
ing lung cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal 
cancer, and melanoma. Gene signatures and genomic alterations 
also are being studied for their ability to predict response to 
specific chemotherapy regimens or targeted therapies. Many 
of these multigene marker sets will likely be incorporated into 
clinical practice in the years to come.
Serum Markers
Serum markers are under active investigation because they may 
allow early diagnosis of a new cancer or may be used to follow 
cancer response to therapy or monitor for recurrence. Unfor-
tunately, identification of serum markers of clinical value has 
been challenging. Many of the tumor markers proposed so far 
have had low sensitivities and specificities.109 Tumor marker 
levels may not be elevated in all patients with cancer, especially 
in the early stages, when a serum marker would be most use-
ful for diagnosis. Therefore when a tumor marker is used to 
monitor recurrence, it is important to be certain that the level of 
the tumor marker was elevated before primary therapy. More-
over, tumor marker levels can be elevated in benign conditions. 
Many tumor markers are not specific for a certain type of cancer 
and can be elevated with more than one type of tumor. Since 
there may be significant laboratory variability, it is important to 
obtain serial results from the same laboratory. In spite of these 
many clinical limitations, several serum markers are in clinical 
use. A few of the commonly measured serum tumor markers are 
discussed in the following sections.
Prostate-Specific Antigen.  Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
is an androgen-regulated serine protease produced by the pros-
tate epithelium. PSA is normally present in low concentrations 
in the blood of all adult males. PSA levels may be elevated in 
the blood of men with benign prostate conditions such as pros-
tatitis and benign prostatic hyperplasia, as well as in men with 
prostate cancer. PSA levels have been shown to be useful in 
evaluating the effectiveness of prostate cancer treatment and 
monitoring for recurrence after therapy. In monitoring for recur-
rence, a trend of increasing levels is considered more significant 
than a single absolute elevated value.
Although PSA has been widely used for prostate cancer 
screening, the utility of PSA screening remains controversial. 
There is concern that the number of men who avoid dying from 
prostate cancer due to screening is small, while the harms relat-
edto the treatment of screen-detected cancers, including incon-
tinence and erectile dysfunction are at least moderate. In 2012, 
the US Preventive Services Task Force concluded with moder-
ate certainty that the harms of PSA testing outweigh the benefits 
and on that basis recommended against PSA-based screening 
for all men.112 In 2010, the American Cancer Society updated its 
guidelines for the early detection of prostate cancer to state that 
men who have at least a 10-year life expectancy should have an 
opportunity to make an informed decision with their health care 
provider about whether to be screened for prostate cancer with 
digital rectal exam and serum PSA, after receiving information 
about the benefits, risks, and uncertainties associated with pros-
tate cancer screening;113 this recommendation was reinforced in 
their 2013 guidelines.93
Carcinoembryonic Antigen.  Carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA) is a glycoprotein found in the embryonic endoder-
mal epithelium. Elevated CEA levels have been detected in 
patients with primary colorectal cancer as well as in patients 
with breast, lung, ovarian, prostate, liver, and pancreatic can-
cer. Levels of CEA also may be elevated in benign conditions, 
including diverticulitis, peptic ulcer disease, bronchitis, liver 
abscess, and alcoholic cirrhosis, especially in smokers and in 
elderly persons.
CEA measurement is most commonly used in the man-
agement of colorectal cancer. However, the appropriate use of 
CEA testing in patients with colorectal cancer has been debated. 
Use of CEA level as a screening test for colorectal cancer is 
not recommended. CEA levels may be useful if obtained pre-
operatively and postoperatively in patients with a diagnosis of 
colorectal cancer. Preoperative elevation of CEA level is an 
indicator of poor prognosis. However, the 2007 ASCO clinical 
practice guidelines state that the data are insufficient to support 
the use of CEA to determine whether to give a patient adjuvant 
therapy; the data are stronger for the use of CEA for monitoring 
for postoperative recurrence.107 CEA measurement is the most 
cost-effective approach for detecting metastasis, with 64% of 
recurrences being detected first by an elevation in CEA level. 
Therefore, in cases in which the patient would be a candidate 
for resection of recurrent colorectal cancer or systemic therapy, 
the 2006 ASCO guidelines recommend that postoperative CEA 
testing be performed every 3 months in patients with stage II 
or III disease for at least 3 years.108 CEA is the marker of choice 
for monitoring metastatic colorectal cancer during systemic 
therapy.108
There is also interest in using CEA levels for monitoring 
patients with breast cancer. However, the 2007 ASCO guide-
lines state that the routine use of CEA for screening, diagnosis, 
staging, or surveillance of breast cancer is not recommended 
because available data are insufficient.107 For monitoring 
patients during active therapy, CEA can be used in conjunc-
tion with diagnostic imaging and history and physical exami-
nation.107 In the absence of measurable disease, an increase in 
CEA level may be taken to indicate treatment failure. However, 
caution is advised when interpreting rising levels in the first 
4 to 6 weeks of therapy.107
Alpha-Fetoprotein. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a glyco-
protein normally produced by a developing fetus. AFP levels 
decrease soon after birth in healthy adults. An elevated level of 
AFP suggests the presence of either primary liver cancer or a germ 
cell tumor of the ovary or testicle. Rarely, other types of cancer 
such as gastric are associated with an elevated AFP level. Benign 
conditions that can cause elevations of AFP include cirrhosis, 
hepatic necrosis, acute hepatitis, chronic active hepatitis, ataxia-
telangiectasia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and pregnancy.114
The sensitivity of an elevated AFP level for detecting 
HCC is approximately 60%. AFP is considered to be sensitive 
303
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
and specific enough to be used for screening for HCC in high-
risk populations. Current consensus recommendations are to 
screen healthy hepatitis B virus carriers with annual or semi-
annual measurement of AFP level and to screen carriers with 
cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis and patients with cirrhosis of any 
etiology with twice-yearly measurement of AFP level and liver 
ultrasonography.115 Although AFP testing has been used widely 
for a long time, its efficacy in early diagnosis of HCC is limited. 
With improvements in imaging technology, a larger proportion 
of patients diagnosed with HCC are now AFP seronegative.
Cancer Antigen 19-9.  Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) is a 
tumor-related antigen that was originally defined by a mono-
clonal antibody produced by a hybridoma prepared from murine 
spleen cells immunized with a human colorectal cancer cell 
line.108 The data are insufficient to recommend use of CA 19-9 
for screening, diagnosis, surveillance, or monitoring of therapy 
for colon cancer.108 Based on the 2006 ASCO guidelines, there 
are also insufficient data to recommend use of CA 19-9 for 
screening, diagnosis, or determination of the operability of pan-
creatic cancer.108 However, for patients with locally advanced 
or metastatic cancer receiving active therapy, CA 19-9 can be 
measured at the start of therapy and every 1 to 3 months while 
therapy is given; elevations in serial CA 19-9 levels may indi-
cate progressive disease and should be confirmed by additional 
studies.108
Cancer Antigen 15-3.  Cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3) is 
an epitope of a large membrane glycoprotein encoded by the 
MUC1 gene that tumor cells shed into the bloodstream. The CA 
15-3 epitope is recognized by two monoclonal antibodies in a 
sandwich radioimmunoassay. CA 15-3 levels are most useful 
in following the course of treatment in women diagnosed with 
advanced breast cancer. CA 15-3 levels are infrequently elevated 
in early-stage breast cancer. CA 15-3 levels can be increased 
in benign conditions such as chronic hepatitis, tuberculosis, sar-
coidosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, pregnancy, and lactation, and in other types 
of cancer such as lung, ovarian, endometrial, and GI cancers.
The sensitivity of CA 15-3 is higher for metastatic disease, 
and in these cases studies have shown sensitivity to be between 
54% and 87%, with specificity as high as 96%. This has led to 
interest in using CA 15-3 for monitoring patients with advanced 
breast cancer for recurrence. Elevated CA 15-3 levels have been 
reported before relapse in 54% of patients, with a lead time of 
4.2 months. Therefore, detection of elevated CA 15-3 levels 
during follow-up should prompt evaluation for recurrent dis-
ease. However, 6% to 8% of patients without recurrence will 
have elevated CA 15-3 levels that require evaluation. Further-
more, monitoring with the use of CA 15-3 levels has shown no 
demonstrated impact on survival. Therefore, the 2007 ASCO 
guidelines state that the routine use of CA 15-3 for screen-
ing, diagnosis, staging, or surveillance of breast cancer is not 
recommended because available data are insufficient.107 For 
monitoring patients during active therapy, CA 15-3 can be used 
in conjunction with diagnostic imaging and history and physi-
cal examination.107 In the absence of measurable disease, an 
increase may be interpreted to indicate treatment failure. How-
ever, caution is advised when interpreting rising levels in the 
first 4 to 6 weeks of therapy.107
Cancer Antigen 27-29.  The MUC-1 gene product in the 
serum may be quantitated by using radioimmunoassay with 
a monoclonal antibody against the cancer antigen 27-29 (CA 
27-29). CA 27-29 levels can be elevated in breast cancer as well 
as in cancers of the colon, stomach, kidney, lung, ovary, pan-
creas, uterus, and liver. First-trimester pregnancy, endometrio-
sis, benign breast disease, kidney disease, and liver disease also 
may be associated with elevated CA 27-29 levels.
CA 27-29 has been reported to have a sensitivity of 57%, 
a specificity of 98%, a positive predictive value of 83%, and 
a negative predictive value of 93% in detecting breast cancer 
recurrences.116 Although CA 27-29 has been found to predict 
recurrence an average of 5.3 months before other symptoms or 
tests, testing of CA 27-29 levels has not been demonstrated to 
affect disease-free and overall survival rates.116, 117 Therefore, 
the 2007 ASCO guidelines state that, as with CA 15-3, the rou-
tine use of CA 27-29 for screening, diagnosis, staging, or sur-
veillance of breast cancer is not recommended because available 
data are insufficient.107 CA 27-29 levels can be used together 
with diagnostic imaging and history and physical examination 
to monitor patients during active therapy.107 When no measur-
able disease is present, an increase in level may be considered 
to indicate treatment failure. However, rising levels in the first 
4 to 6 weeks of therapy should be interpreted with caution.107
Circulating Tumor Cells
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cells present in the blood 
that possess antigenic or genetic characteristics of a specific 
tumor type.107 One CTC detection methodology is capture and 
quantitation of CTCs with immunomagnetic beads coated with 
antibody specific for cell-surface, epithelial, or cancer antigens. 
Another methodology used to detect cancer cells in the periph-
eral blood is RT-PCR. It has been suggested that measurement 
of CTCs can be an effective tool for selecting patients who 
have a high risk of relapse and for monitoring efficacy of can-
cer ­therapy.
CTCs have probably been most extensively studied in 
breast cancer.107 The most promising data come from the use 
of CTC measures in metastatic breast cancer. In a prospective 
multicenter trial, the number of CTCs (≥5 CTCs vs. <5 CTCs 
per 7.5 mL of whole blood) before treatment of metastatic breast 
cancer was an independent predictor of progression-free and 
overall survival rates.118 The presence of >5 CTCs after the first 
course of therapy predicted lack of response to treatment. This 
technology, known as CellSearch, has been approved by the 
FDA for clinical use. Further, in a recent single institutional 
study, detection of one or more CTCs in Stage I-III breast can-
cer patients was associated with both decreased progression-free 
survival and overall survival.119
However, there is limited data to prove that the use of CTC 
testing leads to improved survival or improved quality of life; 
thus the ASCO 2007 guidelines update did not recommend the 
use of CTC measurement in any clinical setting.107 The clini-
cal utility of measuring CTC response to initial therapy is now 
being tested prospectively in a multicenter clinical trial. The use 
of CTC levels as a tool in treating many other types of tumor is 
also under active investigation.
The prognostic implications of detection of CTCs by 
RT-PCR have been intensively studied for melanoma. In the 
recent multicenter Sunbelt Melanoma Trial, serial RT-PCR was 
performed on peripheral blood samples using four markers—
tyrosinase, melanoma antigen reacting to T cell (MART-1), 
melanoma antigen 3 (MAGE3), and gp 100—to detect occult 
melanoma cells in the bloodstream.120 Although there were 
no differences in survival between patients in whom at least 
one marker was detected and those in whom no markers were 
304
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
detected, the disease-free survival and distant disease-free sur-
vival were worse for patients in whom more than one marker 
was detected at any time during follow-up.120 The detection of 
occult cancer cells with RT-PCR remains investigational, how-
ever, and is not used to direct therapy for melanoma and other 
cancer types at this time.
Bone Marrow Micrometastases
Micrometastatic disease in the bone marrow, also referred to as 
minimal residual disease, also is being investigated as a poten-
tial prognostic marker. Bone marrow micrometastatic disease 
usually is detected by staining bone marrow aspirates with 
monoclonal antibodies to cytokeratin, but other methodologies 
such as flow cytometry and RT-PCR are being explored. Breast 
cancer patients with bone marrow micrometastasis have larger 
tumors, tumors with a higher histologic grade, more lymph node 
metastases, and more hormone receptor-negative tumors than 
patients without bone marrow micrometastasis. In 4700 patients 
with stage I, II, or III breast cancer, micrometastasis was a sig-
nificant prognostic factor associated with poor overall survival, 
breast cancer-specific survival, disease-free survival, and dis-
tant disease-free survival during a 10-year observation period.121 
Recently, in the American College of Surgeons Oncology 
Group Z0010 trial enrolled women with clinical T1 to T2N0M0 
invasive breast carcinoma in a prospective observational study 
to determine to determine the association between survival and 
metastases detected by immunochemical staining of bone mar-
row specimens from patients with early-stage breast cancer.122 
Of 3413 bone marrow specimens examined by immunocyto-
chemistry, only 104 (3.0%) were positive for tumor. Bone 
marrow involvement was associated with a decreased overall 
survival but this association was not significant on multivariable 
analysis. The prognostic implication of bone marrow involve-
ment is also being studied by the National Surgical Adjuvant 
Breast and Bowel Project Protocol BP-59.
At this time the routine use of bone marrow testing is 
not recommended.107 Ongoing clinical trials are evaluating the 
role of routine assessment of bone marrow status in the care 
of patients with early and advanced breast cancer. The utility 
of assessment of bone marrow micrometastasis is also being 
evaluated in other tumor types, including gastric, esophageal, 
colorectal, lung, cervical, and ovarian cancer.123
SURGICAL APPROACHES TO CANCER THERAPY
Multidisciplinary Approach to Cancer
Although surgery is an effective therapy for most solid tumors, 
patients who die from cancer usually die of metastatic disease. 
Therefore, to improve patient survival rates, a multimodality 
approach, including systemic therapy and radiation therapy is 
key for most tumors. It is important that surgeons involved in 
cancer care not only know the techniques for performing a can-
cer operation but also know the alternatives to surgery and be 
well versed in reconstructive options. It is also crucial that the 
surgeon be familiar with the indications for and complications 
of preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy. Although the surgeon may not be delivering these other 
therapies, as the first physician to see a patient with a cancer 
diagnosis, he or she is ultimately responsible for initiating the 
appropriate consultations. For this reason, the surgeon often 
is responsible for determining the most appropriate adjuvant 
­therapy for a given patient as well as the best sequence for 
therapy. In most instances, a multidisciplinary approach begin-
ning at the patient’s initial presentation is likely to yield the 
best result.
Surgical Management of Primary Tumors
The goal of surgical therapy for cancer is to achieve oncologic 
cure. A curative operation presupposes that the tumor is con-
fined to the organ of origin or to the organ and the regional 
lymph node basin. Patients in whom the primary tumor is not 
resectable with negative surgical margins are considered to have 
inoperable disease. The operability of primary tumors is best 
determined before surgery with appropriate imaging studies that 
can define the extent of local-regional disease. For example, 
a preoperative thin-section CT scan is obtained to determine 
resectability of pancreatic cancer, which is based on the absence 
of extrapancreatic disease, the absence of tumor extension to the 
superior mesenteric artery and celiac axis, and a patent superior 
mesenteric vein-portal vein confluence.124 Disease involving 
multiple distant metastases is deemed inoperable because it is 
usually not curable with surgery of the primary tumor. There-
fore patients who are at high risk of having distant metastasis 
should undergo a staging work-up before surgery for the pri-
mary tumor. On occasion, primary tumors are resected in these 
patients for palliative reasons, such as improving the quality 
of life by alleviating pain, infection, or bleeding. An example 
of this is toilet mastectomies for large ulcerated breast tumors. 
Patients with limited metastases from a primary tumor on occa-
sion are considered surgical candidates if the natural history of 
isolated distant metastases for that cancer type is favorable or 
the potential complications associated with leaving the primary 
tumor intact are significant.
In the past it was presumed that the more radical the sur-
gery, the better the oncologic outcome would be. Over the past 
three decades, this has been recognized as not necessarily being 
true, which has led to more conservative operations, with wide 
local excisions replacing compartmental resections of sarco-
mas, and partial mastectomies, skin-sparing mastectomies, and 
breast-conserving therapies replacing radical mastectomies for 
breast cancer. The uniform goal for all successful oncologic 
operations seems to be achieving widely negative margins with 
no evidence of macroscopic or microscopic tumor at the surgi-
cal margins. The importance of negative surgical margins for 
local tumor control and/or survival has been documented for 
many tumor types, including sarcoma, breast cancer, pancre-
atic cancer, and rectal cancer. Thus it is clear that every effort 
should be made to achieve microscopically negative surgical 
margins. Inking of the margins, orientation of the specimen by 
the surgeon, and immediate gross evaluation of the margins by 
a pathologist using frozen-section analysis when necessary may 
assist in achieving negative margins at the first operation. In 
the end, although radiation therapy and systemic therapy can 
assist in decreasing local recurrence rates in the setting of posi-
tive margins, adjuvant therapy cannot substitute for adequate 
surgery.
Although it is clear that the surgical gold standard is nega-
tive surgical margins, the appropriate surgical margins for opti-
mal local control are controversial for many cancer types. In 
contrast, in melanoma the optimal margin width for any tumor 
depth has been better defined, owing to the systematic study of 
this question in randomized clinical trials.125, 126 Although such 
randomized studies may not be possible for all tumor types, it 
305
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
is important to determine optimum surgical margins for each 
cancer type so that adjuvant radiation and systemic therapy can 
be offered to patients deemed to be at increased risk for local 
treatment failure. There are also ongoing studies on approaches 
to assess margins intraoperatively, to allow immediate intraop-
erative reexcisions as needed, and maximizing local control.
Surgical Management of the Regional Lymph 
Node Basin
Most neoplasms have the ability to metastasize via the lymphat-
ics. Therefore, most oncologic operations have been designed 
to remove the primary tumor and draining lymphatics en bloc. 
This type of operative approach usually is undertaken when the 
lymph nodes draining the primary tumor site lie adjacent to the 
tumor bed, as is the case for colorectal cancers and gastric can-
cers. For tumors in which the regional lymph node basin is not 
immediately adjacent to the tumor (e.g., melanomas), lymph 
node surgery can be performed through a separate incision. 
Unlike most carcinomas, soft tissue sarcomas rarely metasta-
size to the lymph nodes (<5%); therefore lymph node surgery 
usually is not necessary.
It is generally accepted that a formal lymphadenectomy is 
likely to minimize the risk of regional recurrence of most can-
cers. For example, the introduction of total mesorectal excision 
of rectal cancer has been associated with a large decline in local-
regional recurrence, and this procedure has become the new 
standard of operative management.127 On the other hand, there 
have been two opposing views regarding the role of lymphad-
enectomy in survival of cancer patients. The traditional Halsted 
view states that lymphadenectomy is important for staging and 
survival. The opposing view counters that cancer is systemic at 
inception and that lymphadenectomy, although useful for stag-
ing, does not affect survival. For most cancers, involvement of 
the lymph nodes is one of the most significant prognostic fac-
tors. Interestingly, in some studies removal of a larger number of 
lymph nodes has been found to be associated with an improved 
overall survival rate for many tumors, including breast cancer, 
colon cancer, and lung cancer. Although this seems to support 
the Halsted theory that more extensive lymphadenectomy yield-
ing of nodes reduces the risk of regional recurrence, there may 
be alternative explanations for the same finding. For example, 
the surgeon who performs a more extensive lymphadenectomy 
may obtain wider margins around the tumor or even provide 
better overall care, such as ensuring that patients receive the 
appropriate adjuvant therapy or undergo a more thorough 
staging work-up. Alternatively, the pathologist may perform 
a more thorough examination, identifying more nodes and 
more accurately staging the nodes. The effect of appropriate 
staging on survival is twofold. Patients with nodal metastases 
may be offered adjuvant therapy, which improves their survival 
chances. Further, the improved staging can improve perceived 
survival rates through a “Will Rogers effect”; that is, identifica-
tion of metastases that had formerly been silent and unidentified 
leads to stage migration and thus to a perceived improvement in 
chances of survival. Clearly the impact of lymphadenectomy on 
survival will not be easily resolved.
Surgical management of the clinically negative regional 
lymph node basin has evolved with the introduction of lym-
phatic mapping technology (Fig. 10-14).128 Lymphatic mapping 
and sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen were first reported 
in 1977 by Cabanas for penile cancer.129 Now, sentinel node 
biopsy specimen is the standard of care for the management of 
melanoma and breast cancer. Moreover, the utility of sentinel 
node biopsy specimen in other cancer types is being explored.
The first node to receive drainage from the tumor site is 
termed the sentinel node. This node is the node most likely to 
contain metastases, if metastases to that regional lymph node 
basin are present. The goal of lymphatic mapping and senti-
nel lymph node biopsy specimen is to identify and remove the 
lymph node most likely to contain metastases in the least inva-
sive fashion. The practice of sentinel lymph node biopsy speci-
men followed by regional lymph node dissection for selected 
patients with a positive sentinel lymph node avoids the morbid-
ity of lymph node dissections in patients with negative nodes. 
An additional advantage of the sentinel lymph node technique 
is that it directs attention to a single node, which allows more 
careful analysis of the lymph node most likely to have a positive 
yield and increases the accuracy of nodal staging. Two criteria 
are used to assess the efficacy of a sentinel lymph node biopsy 
specimen: the sentinel lymph node identification rate and the 
false-negative rate. The sentinel lymph node identification rate 
is the proportion of patients in whom a sentinel lymph node 
was identified and removed among all patients undergoing an 
attempted sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen. The false-
negative rate is the proportion of patients with regional lymph 
node metastases in whom the sentinel lymph node was found 
Figure 10-14.  Lymphatic mapping and sen-
tinel lymph node biopsy specimen for breast 
cancer. A. Peritumoral injection of blue dye. 
B. Blue dye draining into the sentinel lymph 
node. (Modified with permission from Meric F, 
Hunt KK. With kind permission from Springer 
Science and Business Media.)128
306
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
to be negative. False-negative biopsy specimen results may be 
due to identifying the wrong node or to missing the sentinel 
node (i.e., surgical error) or they may be due to the cancer cells’ 
establishing metastases not in the first node encountered but in 
a second-echelon node (i.e., biologic variation). Alternatively, 
false-negative biopsy specimen results may be due to inadequate 
histologic evaluation of the lymph node. The false-negative 
rates for sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen in study series 
range between 0% and 11%. Both increases in the identification 
rate and decreases in the false-negative rate have been observed 
as surgeons gain experience with the technique.
Lymphatic mapping is performed by using isosulfan blue 
dye, technetium-labeled sulfur colloid or albumin, or a combi-
nation of both techniques to detect sentinel nodes. The combina-
tion of blue dye and technetium has been reported to improve 
the capability of detecting sentinel lymph nodes. The nodal 
drainage pattern usually is determined with a preoperative lym-
phoscintigram, and the “hot” and/or blue nodes are identified 
with the assistance of a gamma probe and careful nodal basin 
exploration. Careful manual palpation is a crucial part of the 
procedure to minimize the false-negative rate.
The nodes are evaluated with serial sectioning, hematoxy-
lin and eosin staining, and immunohistochemical analysis with 
S-100 protein and homatropine methylbromide staining for mel-
anoma and cytokeratin staining for breast cancer. The utility 
of molecular techniques such as RT-PCR to assess the sentinel 
nodes is still being explored.
Another area of active investigation is the prognostic value 
of minimal nodal involvement. For example, in breast cancer, 
nodes with isolated tumor cell deposits of <0.2 mm (also called 
nanometastasis) are considered to be N0 by the sixth edition of 
the AJCC staging manual. However, some retrospective studies 
have suggested that even this amount of nodal disease burden has 
negative prognostic implications.130 Molecular ultrastaging with 
RT-PCR for patients with node-negative disease was assessed in 
a prospective multicenter trial and was found not to be prognos-
tic in malignant melanoma.120 However, a recent meta-analysis 
of 22 studies enrolling 4019 patients found that PCR positivity 
was associated with worse overall and disease-free survival.131 
Further study of the utility of ultrastaging of nodes in breast can-
cer, melanoma, and several other tumor types is ongoing.
Until recently, in breast cancer management, when sen-
tinel node mapping revealed a positive sentinel node, this was 
followed by a completion axillary lymph node dissection. 
Recently results of the American College of Surgeons Oncology 
Group Z0011 trial, challenged this practice. ACOSOG Z11 was 
a phase 3 multicenter noninferiority trial conducted to determine 
the effects of complete axillary lymph node dissectionon sur-
vival of patients with sentinel lymph node metastasis of breast 
cancer.122 Patients were women with clinical T1-T2 invasive 
breast cancer, no palpable adenopathy, and 1 to 2 SLNs con-
taining metastases identified by frozen section, touch prepara-
tion, or hematoxylin-eosin staining on permanent section. All 
patients underwent breast-conserving surgery and tangential 
whole-breast irradiation. Those with sentinel node metastases 
identified by sentinel node biopsy specimen were random-
ized to undergo axillary lymph node dissection or no further 
axillary treatment. At a median follow-up of 6.3 years, 5-year 
overall survival was 91.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], 
89.1%–94.5%) with axillary lymph node dissection and 92.5% 
(95% CI, 90.0%–95.1%) with sentinel node alone. The 5-year 
disease-free survival was 82.2% (95% CI, 78.3%–86.3%) with 
axillary lymph node ­dissection, and 83.9% (95% CI, 80.2%–
87.9%) with sentinel node alone. Thus ACOSOGZ11 demon-
strated that among breast cancer patients with limited sentinel 
node metastasis treated with breast conservation and systemic 
therapy, the use of sentinel node alone compared with axillary 
lymph node dissection did not result in inferior survival. This 
study challenges the traditional surgical dictum of regional man-
agement, and has led to a selective utilization of completion 
axillary lymph node dissection in breast cancer patients under-
going breast conservation. The role of completion lymph node 
dissections in melanoma is under investigation.
Surgical Management of Distant Metastases
The treatment of a patient with distant metastases depends on 
the number and sites of metastases, the cancer type, the rate 
of tumor growth, the previous treatments delivered and the 
responses to these treatments, and the patient’s age, physical 
condition, and desires. Although once a tumor has metastasized 
it usually is not curable with surgical therapy, such therapy has 
resulted in cure in selected cases with isolated metastases to the 
liver, lung, or brain.
Patient selection is the key to the success of surgical ther-
apy for distant metastases. The cancer type is a major deter-
minant in surgical decision making. A liver metastasis from a 
colon cancer is more likely to be an isolated and thus resectable 
lesion than a liver metastasis from a pancreatic carcinoma. The 
growth rate of the tumor also plays an important role and can 
be determined in part by the disease-free interval and the time 
between treatment of the primary tumor and detection of the dis-
tant recurrence. Patients with longer disease-free intervals have 
a higher survival rate after surgical metastasectomy than those 
with a short disease-free interval. Similarly, patients who have 
synchronous metastases (metastases diagnosed at the initial can-
cer diagnosis) do worse after metastasectomy than patients who 
develop metachronous metastases (metastasis diagnosed after a 
disease-free interval). The natural history of metastatic disease 
is so poor for some tumors (e.g., pancreatic cancer) that there 
is no role at this time for surgical metastasectomy. In cancers 
with a more favorable outlook, observation for several weeks or 
months, potentially with initial treatment with systemic therapy, 
can allow the surgeon to monitor for metastases at other sites.
In curative surgery for distant metastases, as with surgery 
for primary tumors, the goal is to resect the metastases with 
negative margins. In patients with hepatic metastases that are 
unresectable because their location near intrahepatic blood ves-
sels precludes a margin-negative resection, or because they are 
multifocal or hepatic function is inadequate, tumor ablation with 
cryotherapy or radiofrequency ablation is an alternative.132, 133 
Curative resections or ablative procedures should be attempted 
only if the lesions are accessible and the procedure can be 
­performed safely.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Clinical Use of Chemotherapy
In patients with documented distant metastatic disease, chemo-
therapy is usually the primary modality of therapy. The goal 
of therapy in this setting is to decrease the tumor burden, thus 
prolonging survival. It is rare to achieve cure with chemother-
apy for metastatic disease for most solid tumors. Chemotherapy 
administered to a patient who is at high risk for distant recur-
rence but has no evidence of distant disease is referred to as 
307
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
adjuvant chemotherapy. The goal of adjuvant chemotherapy 
is eradication of micrometastatic disease, with the intent of 
decreasing relapse rates and improving survival rates.
Adjuvant therapy can be administered after surgery (post-
operative chemotherapy) or before surgery (preoperative che-
motherapy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, or induction therapy). 
A portion or all of the planned adjuvant chemotherapy can be 
administered before the surgical removal of the primary tumor. 
Preoperative chemotherapy has three potential advantages. The 
first is that preoperative regression of tumor can facilitate resec-
tion of tumors that were initially inoperable or allow more con-
servative surgery for patients whose cancer was operable to begin 
with. In the NSABP B-18 project, for example, women were ran-
domly assigned to receive adjuvant doxorubicin and cyclophos-
phamide preoperatively or postoperatively. More patients treated 
before surgery than after surgery underwent breast-conserving 
surgery (68% vs. 60%).134 The second advantage of preopera-
tive chemotherapy is the treatment of micrometastases without 
the delay of postoperative recovery. The third advantage is the 
ability to assess a cancer’s response to treatment clinically, after 
a number of courses of chemotherapy, and pathologically, after 
surgical resection. This is especially important if alternative 
treatment regimens are available to be offered to patients whose 
disease responded inadequately. Molecular characterization of 
the residual disease may also give insight into mechanisms of 
chemoresistance and possible therapeutic targets.
There are some potential disadvantages to preoperative 
chemotherapy, however. Although disease progression while 
the patient is receiving preoperative chemotherapy is rare in 
chemotherapy-sensitive tumors such as breast cancer, it is more 
frequent in relatively chemotherapy-resistant tumors such as 
sarcomas.135 Thus, patient selection is critical to ensure that the 
opportunity to treat disease surgically is not lost by giving pre-
operative chemotherapy. Often, rates of postoperative wound 
infection, flap necrosis, and delays in postoperative adjuvant 
therapy do not differ between patients who are treated with 
preoperative chemotherapy and patients who are treated with 
surgery first. However, preoperative chemotherapy can intro-
duce special challenges to tumor localization, margin analysis, 
lymphatic mapping, and pathologic staging.
Response to chemotherapy is monitored clinically with 
imaging studies as well as physical examinations. Response 
usually is defined as complete response, partial response, stable 
disease, or progression. Response generally is assessed using 
the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 
criteria.136 Objective tumor response assessment is critical, 
because tumor response is used as a prospective endpoint in 
clinical trials and tumor response is a guide to clinicians regard-
ing continuation of current therapy.
Principles of Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy destroys cells by first-order kinetics, which 
means that with the administration of a drug a constant percent-
age of cells is killed, not a constant number of cells. If a patient 
with 1012 tumor cells is treated with a dose that results in 99.9% 
cell kill (3-log cell kill), the tumor burden will be reduced from 
1012 to 109 cells (or 1 kg to 1 g). If the patient is re-treated with 
the same drug, which theoretically could result in another 3-log 
cell kill, the cells would decrease in number from 109 to 106  
(1 g to 1 mg) rather than being eliminated totally.
Chemotherapeutic agents can be classified according to 
the phase of the cell cycle during which they are effective. 
­Cell-cycle phase-nonspecific agents (e.g., alkylating agents) 
have a linear dose-response curve, such that the fraction of cells 
killed increases with the dose of the drug.137 In contrast, the 
cell-cycle phase-specific drugs have a plateau with respect to 
cell killing ability, and cell kill will not increase with further 
increases in drug dose.
Anticancer Agents
Alkylating Agents.  Alkylating agents are cell-cycle–nonspecific 
agents, that is, they are able to kill cells in any phase of the cell 
cycle. They act by cross-linking the two strands of the DNA helix 
or by causing other direct damage to the DNA. The damage to the 
DNA prevents cell division and, if severe enough, leads to apopto-
sis. The alkylating agents are composed of three main subgroups: 
classic alkylators, nitrosoureas, and miscellaneous DNA-binding 
agents (Table 10-10).
Antitumor Antibiotics.  Antitumor antibiotics are the prod-
ucts of fermentation of microbial organisms. Like the alkylat-
ing agents, these agents are cell-cycle nonspecific. Antitumor 
antibiotics damage the cell by interfering with DNA or RNA 
synthesis, although the exact mechanism of action may differ 
by agent.
Antimetabolites.  Antimetabolites are generally cell-cycle–
specific agents that have their major activity during the S phase 
of the cell cycle and have little effect on cells in G0. These drugs 
are most effective, therefore, in tumors that have a high growth 
fraction. Antimetabolites are structural analogues of naturally 
occurring metabolites involved in DNA and RNA synthesis. 
Therefore, they interfere with normal synthesis of nucleic acids 
by substituting for purines or pyrimidines in the metabolic path-
way to inhibit critical enzymes in nucleic acid synthesis. The 
antimetabolites include folate antagonists, purine antagonists, 
and pyrimidine antagonists.
Plant Alkaloids.  Plant alkaloids are derived from plants such 
as the periwinkle plant, Vinca rosea (e.g., vincristine, a vinca 
alkaloid), or the root of American mandrake, Podophyllum pel-
tatum (e.g., etoposide, a podophyllotoxin).137 Vinca alkaloids 
affect the cell by binding to tubulin in the S phase. This blocks 
microtubule polymerization, which results in impaired mitotic 
spindle formation in the M phase. Taxanes such as paclitaxel, 
on the other hand, cause excess polymerization and stability of 
microtubules, which blocks the cell cycle in mitosis. The epi-
podophyllotoxins act to inhibit a DNA enzyme called topoisom-
erase II by stabilizing the DNA-topoisomerase II complex. This 
results in an inability to synthesize DNA, and thus the cell cycle 
is stopped in the G1 phase.137
Combination Chemotherapy
Combination chemotherapy may provide greater efficacy than 
single-agent therapy by three mechanisms: (a) it provides maxi-
mum cell kill within the range of toxicity for each drug that can 
be tolerated by the host, (b) it offers a broader range of coverage 
of resistant cell lines in a heterogeneous population, and (c) it 
prevents or delays the emergence of drug-resistant cell lines.137 
When combination regimens are devised, drugs known to be 
active as single agents usually are selected. Drugs with different 
mechanisms of action are combined to allow for additive or syn-
ergistic effects. Combining cell-cycle–specific and cell-cycle–
nonspecific agents may be especially advantageous. Drugs with 
differing dose-limiting toxic effects are combined to allow for 
308
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-10
Classification of chemotherapeutic agents
Alkylating agents
Classic alkylating agents
Busulfan
Chlorambucil
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard)
Melphalan
Mitomycin C
Triethylene thiophosphoramide (thiotepa)
Nitrosoureas
Carmustine (BCNU)
Lomustine (CCNU)
Semustine (MeCCNU)
Streptozocin
Miscellaneous DNA-binding agents
Carboplatin
Cisplatin
Dacarbazine (DTIC)
Hexamethylmelamine
Procarbazine
Antitumor antibiotics
Bleomycin
Dactinomycin (actinomycin D)
Daunorubicin
Doxorubicin
Idarubicin
Plicamycin (mithramycin)
Antimetabolites
Folate analogues
Methotrexate
Purine analogues
Azathioprine
Mercaptopurine
Thioguanine
Cladribine (2-chlorodeoxyadenosine)
Fludarabine
Pentostatin
Pyrimidine analogues
Capecitabine
Cytarabine
Floxuridine
Gemcitabine
Ribonucleotide reductase inhibitors
Hydroxyurea
Plant alkaloids
Vinca alkaloids
Vinblastine
Vincristine
Vindesine
Vinorelbine
Epipodophyllotoxins
Etoposide
Teniposide
Taxanes
Paclitaxel
Docetaxel
Miscellaneous agents
Asparaginase
Estramustine
Mitotane
each drug to be given at therapeutic doses. Drugs with different 
patterns of resistance are combined whenever possible to mini-
mize cross-resistance. The treatment-free interval between 
cycles is kept to the shortest possible time that will allow for 
recovery of the most sensitive normal tissue.
Drug Toxicity
Tumors are more susceptible than normal tissue to chemother-
apeutic agents, in part because they have a higher proportion 
of dividing cells. Normal tissues with a high growth fraction, 
such as the bone marrow, oral and intestinal mucosa, and 
hair follicles, are also sensitive to chemotherapeutic effects. 
Therefore, treatment with chemotherapeutic agents can pro-
duce toxic effects such as bone marrow suppression, stoma-
titis, ulceration of the GI tract, and alopecia. Toxic effects 
usually are graded from 0 to 4 on the basis of World Health 
Organization standard criteria.138 Significant drug toxicity may 
necessitate a dosage reduction. A toxic effect requiring a dose 
modification or change in dose intensity is referred to as a 
dose-limiting toxic effect. Because maintaining dose intensity 
is important to preserve as high a tumor cell kill as possible, 
several supportive strategies have been developed, such as 
administration of colony-stimulating factors and erythropoi-
etin to treat poor bone marrow reserve and administration of 
cytoprotectants such as mesna and amifostine to prevent renal 
dysfunction.
Administration of Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy usually is administered systemically (IV, IM, 
SC, or PO). Systemic administration treats micrometastases at 
widespread sites and prevents systemic recurrence. However, it 
increases the drug’s toxicity to a wide range of organs through-
out the body. One method to minimize systemic toxicity while 
enhancing target organ delivery of chemotherapy is regional 
administration of chemotherapy. Many of these approaches 
require surgical access, such as intrahepatic delivery of chemo-
therapy for hepatic carcinomas or metastatic colorectal cancer 
using a hepatic artery infusion pump, limb perfusion for extrem-
ity melanoma and sarcoma, and intraperitoneal hyperthermic 
perfusion for pseudomyxoma peritonei. Alternately, percutane-
ous access may be utilized, such as limb infusion with percuta-
neously placed catheters.
HORMONAL THERAPY
Some tumors, most notably breast and prostate cancers, origi-
nate from tissues whose growth is under hormonal control. 
The first attempts at hormonal therapy were through surgical 
ablation of the organ producing the hormones involved, such 
as oophorectomy for breast cancer. Currently, hormonal anti-
cancer agents include androgens, antiandrogens, antiestrogens, 
estrogens, glucocorticoids, gonadotropin inhibitors, progestins, 
309
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
aromatase inhibitors, and somatostatin analogues. Hormones 
or hormone-like agents can be administered to inhibit tumor 
growth by blocking or antagonizing the naturally occurring sub-
stance, such as with the estrogen antagonist tamoxifen. Other 
substances that block the synthesis of the natural hormone can 
be administered as alternatives. Aromatase inhibitors, for exam-
ple, block the peripheral conversion of endogenous androgens 
to estrogens in postmenopausal women. Hormonal therapy pro-
vides a highly tumor-specific form of therapy in sensitive tis-
sues. In breast cancer, estrogen and progesterone receptor status 
is used to predict the success of hormonal therapy. Androgen 
receptor is also being pursued as a therapeutic target for breast 
cancer treatment.
TARGETED THERAPY
Over the past decade, increased understanding of cancer biol-
ogy has fostered the emerging field of molecular therapeutics. 
The basic principle of molecular therapeutics is to exploit the 
molecular differences between normal cells and cancer cells to 
develop targeted therapies. Thus targeted therapies usually are 
directed at the processes involved in tumor growth rather than 
directly targeting the tumor cells. The ideal molecular target 
would be exclusively expressed in the cancer cells, be the driv-
ing force of the proliferation of the cancer cells, and be critical 
to their survival. A large number of molecular targets are cur-
rently being explored, both preclinically and in clinical trials. 
The major groups of targeted therapy agents are inhibitors of 
growth factor receptors, inhibitors of intracellular signal trans-
duction, cell-cycle inhibitors, apoptosis-based therapies, and 
antiangiogenic compounds.
Protein kinases have come to the forefront as attrac-
tive therapeutic targets with the success of imatinib mesylate 
(Gleevec) in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia and GI 
stromal tumors, and trastuzumab (Herceptin) in treating breast 
cancer, and vemurafanib in treating melanoma. These drugs 
work by targeting bcr-abland c-kit (imatinib) and HER2 and 
Braf, respectively. For example, recently a phase III random-
ized trial demonstrated that, compared with dacarbazine, stan-
dard of care chemotherapy option for patients with metastatic 
melanoma with a V600E BRAF mutation, the BRAF inhibitor 
vemurafenib led to significantly higher response rates (48% vs. 
5%).139 At 6 months, overall survival was 84% (95% CI, 78 to 89) 
in the vemurafenib group and 64% (95% CI, 56 to 73) in the 
dacarbazine group. The hazard ratio for tumor progression in the 
vemurafenib group was 0.26 (95% CI, 0.20 to 0.33; P<0.001). 
The estimated median progression-free survival was 5.3 months 
in the vemurafenib group and 1.6 months in the dacarbazine 
group. This trial highlights the fact that in at least some tumor 
types targeted therapies that inhibit a genomic alteration that is 
a driver is likely to be more effective than an unselected thera-
peutic option.
Sequencing of the human genome has revealed approxi-
mately 500 protein kinases. Several tyrosine kinases have been 
shown to have oncogenic properties and many other protein 
kinases have been shown to be aberrantly activated in cancer 
cells.90 Therefore, protein kinases involved in these aberrantly 
activated pathways are being aggressively pursued in molecular 
therapeutics. Potential targets like HER2 can be targeted via dif-
ferent strategies, such as transcriptional downregulation, targeting 
of mRNA, RNA inhibition, antisense strategies, direct inhibition 
of protein activity, and induction of immunity against the protein. 
Most of the compounds in development are monoclonal antibod-
ies like trastuzumab or small-molecule kinase inhibitors like ima-
tinib or vemurafanib. Some other agents, such as sunitinib, are 
multi-targeted kinase inhibitors. Selected FDA-approved targeted 
therapies are listed in Table 10-11. Many of the promising path-
ways, such as the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway are being pursued as 
therapeutic targets with several drugs in development, targeting 
different aspects of the pathway (Fig. 10-15).140
Development of molecularly targeted agents for clinical 
use presents several unique challenges. Once an appropriate 
compound is identified and confirmed to have activity in pre-
clinical testing, predictive markers for activity in the preclinical 
setting must be defined. Expression of a target may not be suf-
ficient to predict response, because the pathway of interest may 
not be activated or critical to the cancer’s survival. Although 
in traditional phase I trials the goal is to identify the maximum 
tolerated dosage, the maximum dosage of biologic agents may 
not be necessary to achieve the desired biologic effect. Thus 
assays to verify modulation of the target need to be developed to 
determine at what dosage the desired effect is achieved. When 
phase II and III clinical trials are initiated, biomarker modu-
lation studies should be integrated into the trial to determine 
whether clinical response correlates with target modulation and 
thus to identify additional parameters that impact response. 
Rational dose selection and limitation of study populations 
to patients most likely to respond to the molecular therapy as 
determined by predictive markers are most likely to lead to suc-
cessful clinical translation of a product. Finally, most biologic 
agents are cytostatic, not cytotoxic. Thus rational combination 
therapy mixing new biologic agents with either established che-
motherapeutic agents that have synergy or with other biologic 
agents is more likely to lead to cancer cures.
IMMUNOTHERAPY
The aim of immunotherapy is to induce or potentiate inherent 
antitumor immunity that can destroy cancer cells. Central to the 
process of antitumor immunity is the ability of the immune sys-
tem to recognize tumor-associated antigens present on human 
cancers and to direct cytotoxic responses through humoral or 
T-cell–mediated immunity. Overall, T-cell–mediated immunity 
appears to have the greater potential of the two for eradicating 
tumor cells. T cells recognize antigens on the surfaces of target 
cells as small peptides presented by class I and class II MHC 
molecules.
Several antitumor strategies are under investigation. One 
approach to antitumor immunity is nonspecific immunotherapy, 
which stimulates the immune system as a whole through admin-
istration of bacterial agents or their products, such as bacille 
Calmette-Guérin. This approach is thought to activate the effec-
tors of antitumor response such as natural killer cells and macro-
phages, as well as polyclonal lymphocytes.141 Another approach 
to nonspecific immunotherapy is systemic administration of 
cytokines such as interleukin-2, interferon-α, and interferon-γ. 
Interleukin-2 stimulates proliferation of cytotoxic T lympho-
cytes and maturation of effectors such as natural killer cells into 
lymphokine-activated killer cells. Interferons, on the other hand, 
exert antitumor effects directly by inhibiting tumor cell prolif-
eration and indirectly by activating host immune cells, includ-
ing macrophages, dendritic cells, and natural killer cells, and by 
enhancing human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I expression 
on tumor cells.141
310
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 10-11 
Selected FDA-approved targeted therapies
GENERIC NAME
TRADE NAME
TARGET
FDA-APPROVED INDICATIONS
Ado-trastuzumab 
emtansine
Kadcyla
HER2
Breast cancer
Axitinib
Inlyta
KIT, FDGFRβ, VEGFR1/2/3
RCC
Bevacizumab
Avastin
VEGF
Colorectal cancer, lung cancer, glioblastoma, 
NSCLC
RCC
Bosutinib
Bosulif
ABL
CML(Philadelphia chromosome+)
Cabozantinib
Cometriq
FLT3, KIT, MET, RET, VEGR2 Medullary thyroid cancer
Cetuximab
Erbitux
EGFR
Colorectal cancer (KRAS wild-type)
Squamous cell cancer of the head and neck
Dasatinib
Sprycel
ABL, src family, KIT, EPHA2, 
PDGFR-β
CML
Erlotinib
Tarceva
EGFR
NSCLC,
Pancreatic cancer
Everolimus
Afinitor
mTOR
PNET,
RCC,
Breast cancer.
Nonresectable subependymal giant cell astrocytoma 
associated with tuberous sclerosis
Gefitinib
Iressa
EGFR
NSCLC with known/previous benefit from gefitinib 
(limited approval)
Imatinib
Gleevec
KIT, ABL, PDGFR
CML,
GIST (KIT+),
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Lapatinib
Tykerb
EGFR and HER2
Breast cancer (HER2+)
Nilotinib
Tasigna
ABL
CML (Philadelphia chromosome+)
Panitumumab
Vectibix
EGFR
Colorectal cancer (KRAS wild type)
Pazopanib
Votrient
VEGFR, PDGFR, KIT
RCC
Pertuzumab
Perjeta
HER2
Breast cancer (HER+)
Ponatinib
Iclusig
ABL, FGFR1-3, FLT3, 
VEGFR2
CML, ALL (Philadelphia chromosome+)
Regorafenib
Stivarga
KIT, PDGFRβ, RAF, RET, 
VEGFR1/2/3
Colorectal cancer, GIST
Sorafenib
Nexavar
VEGFR, PDGFR, KIT, RAF
HCC
RCC
Sunitinib
Sutent
VEGFR PDGFR KIT, Flt-3, 
RET
GIST,
RCC,
PNET
Temsirolimus
Torisel
mTOR
RCC
Trastuzumab
Herceptin
HER2
Breast cancer (HER2+)
Gastric cancer (HER2+)
Vandetanib
Caprelsa
EGFR, RET, VEGFR2
Medullary thyroid cancer
Vemurafenib
Zelboraf
BRAF
Melanoma (BRAF V600E mutant)
CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EPHA2, ephrin A2; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; Flt-3, fms-
related tyrosine kinase 3; GIST, GI stromal tumor; HCC, Hepatocellular cancer, HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; mTOR, mammalian 
target of rapamycin; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer, PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PNET, 
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, RCC, renal cell carcinoma; RET, rearranged during transfection; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR, 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
311
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
Antigen-specific immunotherapy can be active, as is 
achieved through antitumor vaccines, or passive. In pas-
sive immunotherapy, antibodies to specific tumor-associated 
antigens can be produced by hybridoma technique and then 
administered to patients whose cancers express these antigens, 
inducing antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
The early attempts at vaccination against cancers used allo-
geneic cultured cancer cells, including irradiated cells, cell lysates, 
and shed antigens isolated from tissue culture supernatants. An 
alternate strategy is the use of autologous tumor vaccines. These 
have the potential advantage of being more likely to contain anti-
gens relevant for the individual patient but have the disadvantage 
of requiring a large amount of tumor tissue for preparation, which 
restricts eligibility of patients for this modality. Strategies to 
enhance immunogenicity of tumor cells include the introduction of 
genes encoding cytokines or chemokines, and fusion of the tumor 
cells to allogeneic MHC class II-bearing cells.142 Alternatively, 
heat shock proteins derived from a patient’s tumor can be used, 
because heat shock protein peptide complexes are readily taken 
up by dendritic cells for presentation to T cells.142
Identification of tumor antigens has made it possible to 
perform antigen-specific vaccination. For example in the case 
of melanoma, several antigens have been identified that can be 
recognized by both CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and CD4+ helper 
T  cells, including MART-1, gp 100, MAGE1, tyrosinase, 
TRP-1, TRP-2, and NY-ESO-1.143 Antigens tested usually are 
­overexpressed or mutated in cancer cells. Tissue specificity 
and immunogenicity are important determinants in choosing an 
appropriate target. Vaccines directed at defined tumor antigens 
aim to combine selected tumor antigens and appropriate routes 
for delivering these antigens to the immune system to optimize 
antitumor immunity.144 Several different vaccination approaches 
are under study, including tumor cell-based vaccines, peptide-
based vaccines, recombinant virus-based vaccines, DNA-based 
vaccines, and dendritic cell vaccines.
In adoptive transfer, antigen-specific effector cells (i.e., 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes) or antigen-nonspecific effector cells 
(i.e., natural killer cells) can be transferred to a patient. These 
effector cells can be obtained from the tumor (tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes) or the peripheral blood.
Clinical experience in patients with metastatic disease has 
shown objective tumor responses to a variety of immunothera-
peutic modalities. It is thought, however, that the immune sys-
tem is overwhelmed with the tumor burden in this setting, and 
thus adjuvant therapy may be preferable, with immunotherapy 
reserved for decreasing tumor recurrences. Trials to date sug-
gest that immunotherapy is a potentially useful approach in the 
adjuvant setting. How to best select patients for this approach 
and how to integrate immunotherapy with other therapies are 
not well understood for most cancer types.
Tolerance to self-antigens expressed in tumors is a limi-
tation in generating antitumor responses.145 Recently, several 
Glucose
Amino
Acids
IRS1
PI3K
PDK1
PIP2
PIP3
ATP
AMPK
Activators
MAP4K3
AMPK
Rapalogs
FKBP12
Akt
TSC2 TSC1
PI3K
Inhibitors
Akt
Inhibitors
PTEN
mTORC2
Proctor
RICTOR
mTOR
mLST8
SIN1
GSK3
FOXO
BAD
ASK1
GDP
GTP
Rheb
Rheb
mTORC1
PRAS40
mTOR
RAPTOR
mLST8
4EBP1
S6K
eIF4E
PDCD4
eEF3K
S6
eIF4B
mTOR
Kinase Inhibitors
Dual Pl3K/mTOR
Kinase Inhibitors
P
P
Figure 10-15.  Targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. This central pathway is altered in many tumor types and is being pursued as a thera-
peutic target through development of numerous pathway inhibitors targeting PI3K, Akt, mTOR, dual inhibitors as well as several upstream 
and downstream regulators. (Modified with permission from McAuiliffe et al. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)140
312
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
pathways that modulate tolerance and approaches to manipulat-
ing these pathways have been identified: pathways that activate 
professional antigen-presenting cells such as Toll-like receptors, 
growth factors, and the CD40 pathway; cytokines to enhance 
immunoactivation; and pathways that inhibit T-cell inhibitory 
signals or Tregs.145
A new strategy being actively explored involves the use of 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4). CTLA-4 exists on 
the surfaces of T cells and has a homeostatic immunosuppressive 
function, downregulating the response of T cells to stimuli.146
In a recent phase 3 study, ipilimumab—which blocks 
CTLA-4, was administered with or without glycoprotein 100 
(gp100) peptide vaccine and was compared with gp100 alone in 
HLA-A*0201-positive patients with previously treated metastatic 
melanoma. The median overall survival was significantly longer 
for patients receiving ipilimumab with or without gp100, com-
pared with patients who receiving gp100.147 In another Phase III 
trial, ipilimumab in combination with dacarbazine, compared with 
dacarbazine plus placebo, improved overall survival in patients 
with previously untreated metastatic melanoma.148 Anti-CTLA-4 
antibodies are under study for use in melanoma as well as several 
other cancer types as single agents, in combination with targeted 
therapies, interleukin-2, chemotherapy, or peptide vaccines.146
Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a 40kDa type 1 
transmembrane protein that is thought to play an important role 
in suppressing the immune system. PD-L1 binds to its receptor, 
PD-1, which is found on activated T cells, B cells, and myeloid 
cells. The PD1/PDL1 pathway is increasingly recognized as a 
key contributor to tumor-mediated immune suppression. Thus 
both anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 strategies are actively being pur-
sued for cancer therapy.
GENE THERAPY
Gene therapy is being pursued as a possible approach to modify-
ing the genetic program of cancer cells as well as treating meta-
bolic diseases. The field of cancer gene therapy uses a variety 
of strategies, ranging from replacement of mutated or deleted 
tumor-suppressor genes to enhancement of immune responses 
to cancer cells.149 Indeed, in preclinical models, approaches 
such as replacement of tumor-suppressor genes leads to growth 
arrest or apoptosis. However, the translation of these findings 
into clinically useful tools presents special challenges.
One of the main difficulties in getting gene therapy tech-
nology from the laboratory to the clinic is the lack of a perfect 
delivery system. An ideal vector would be administered through 
a noninvasive route and would transduce all of the cancer cells 
and none of the normal cells. Furthermore, the ideal vector 
would have a high degree of activity, that is, it would produce an 
adequate amount of the desired gene product to achieve target 
cell kill. Unlike genetic diseases in which delivery of the gene 
of interest into only a portion of the cells may be sufficient to 
achieve clinical effect, cancer requires either that the therapeutic 
gene be delivered to all of the cancer cells or that a therapeutic 
effect be achieved on nontransfected cells as well as transfected 
cells through a bystander effect. But then, treatment of a meta-
bolic disease requires prolonged gene expression, whereas tran-
sient expression may be sufficient for cancer therapy.
Several vector systems are under study for gene ther-
apy; however, none is considered ideal. One of the promising 
approaches to increase the number of tumor cells transduced 
is the use of a replication-competent virus like a parvovirus, 
human reovirus, or vesicular stomatitis virus that selectively 
replicates within malignant cells and lyses them more efficiently 
than it does normal cells. Another strategy for killing tumor cells 
with suicide genes exploits tumor-specific expression elements, 
such as the MUC-1, PSA, CEA, or VEGF promoters, that can 
be used to achieve tissue-specific or tumor-specific expression 
of the desired gene.
Because the goal in cancer therapy is to eradicate systemic 
disease, optimization of delivery systems is the key to success 
for gene therapy strategies. Gene therapy is likely to be most 
successful when combined with standard therapies, but it will 
provide the advantage of customization of therapy based on the 
molecular status of an individual’s tumor.
MECHANISMS OF INTRINSIC AND ACQUIRED 
DRUG RESISTANCE
Several tumor factors influence tumor cell kill. Tumors are het-
erogeneous, and, according to the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis, 
tumor cells are genetically unstable and tend to mutate to form 
different cell clones. This has been used as an argument for giv-
ing chemotherapy as soon as possible in treatment to reduce 
the likelihood that resistant clones will emerge. Tumor size is 
another important variable. Large tumor, may have greater het-
erogeneity, although heterogeneity may also differ based on bio-
logical subtype. Moreover, according to the gompertzian model, 
cancer cells initially grow rapidly (exponential growth phase), 
then the growth slows down owing to hypoxia and decreased 
nutrient supply. Because of the larger proportion of cells divid-
ing, smaller tumors may be more chemosensitive.
Multiple mechanisms of systemic therapy resistance have 
been identified (Table 10-12).150 Cells may exhibit reduced sen-
sitivity to drugs by virtue of their cell-cycle distribution. For 
example, cells in the G0 phase are resistant to drugs active in 
the S phase. This phenomenon of “kinetic resistance” usually 
is temporary, and if the drug level can be maintained, all cells 
will eventually pass through the vulnerable phase of the cell 
cycle.137 Alternatively, tumor cells may exhibit “pharmacologic 
resistance,” in which the failure to kill cells is due to insuffi-
cient drug concentration. This may occur when tumor cells are 
located in sites where effective drug concentrations are difficult 
to achieve (such as the central nervous system) or can be due 
to enhanced metabolism of the drug after its administration, 
decreased conversion of the drug to its active form, or decrease 
in the intracellular drug level caused by increased removal of 
the drug from the cell associated with enhanced expression of 
P-glycoprotein, the protein product of multidrug resistance gene 
1. Other mechanisms of resistance include decreased affinity 
of the target enzyme for the drug, altered amount of the tar-
get enzyme, or enhanced repair of the drug-induced defect. For 
drug-sensitive cancers, another factor limiting optimal killing is 
improper dosing. A dose reduction of 20% because of drug tox-
icity can lead to a decline in the cure rate by as much as 50%.137 
Furthermore, a twofold increase in dose can be associated with 
a tenfold (1 log) increase in tumor cell kill.
Cancer cells demonstrate adaptive responses to targeted 
therapy, like activating alternate pathways of survival; thus 
these alterations may blunt therapeutic efficacy. Cancer cells 
also acquire resistance upon prolonged treatment with targeted 
therapy through a variety of mechanisms. One mechanism is 
through the loss of the target. For example, this was observed 
in a study of patients with HER2-positive breast cancer patients 
313
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
high-energy photons (gamma rays and X-rays) and charged parti-
cles (electrons). Gamma rays are photons that are released from the 
nucleus of a radioactive atom. X-rays are photons that are created 
electronically, such as with a clinical linear accelerator. Currently, 
high-energy radiation is delivered to tumors primarily with linear 
accelerators. X-rays traverse the tissue, depositing the maximum 
dose beneath the surface, and thus spare the skin. Electrons are used 
to treat superficial skin lesions, superficial tumors, or surgical beds 
to a depth of 5 cm. Gamma rays typically are produced by radioac-
tive sources used in brachytherapy.
The dose of radiation absorbed correlates with the energy 
of the beam. The basic unit is the amount of energy absorbed per 
unit of mass (joules per kilogram) and is known as a gray(Gy). 
One gray is equivalent to 100 rads, the unit of radiation mea-
surement used in the past.
Biologic Basis of Radiation Therapy
Radiation deposition results in DNA damage manifested by 
single- and double-strand breaks in the sugar phosphate back-
bone of the DNA molecule.158 Cross-linking between the DNA 
strands and chromosomal proteins also occurs. The mechanism 
of DNA damage differs by the type of radiation delivered. Elec-
tromagnetic radiation is indirectly ionizing through short-lived 
hydroxyl radicals produced primarily by the ionization of cel-
lular hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).158 Protons and other heavy par-
ticles are directly ionizing and directly damage DNA.
Radiation damage is manifested primarily by the loss of 
cellular reproductive integrity. Most cell types do not show 
signs of radiation damage until they attempt to divide, so slowly 
proliferating tumors may persist for months and appear viable. 
Some cell types, however, undergo apoptosis.
The extent of DNA damage after radiation exposure is 
dependent on several factors. The most important of these is cel-
lular oxygen. Hypoxic cells are significantly less radiosensitive 
than aerated cells. Because the presence of oxygen is thought to 
prolong the half-life of free radicals produced by the interaction 
of X-rays and cellular H2O2, indirectly ionizing radiation is less 
efficacious in tumors with areas of hypoxia.158 In contrast, radia-
tion damage from directly ionizing radiation is independent of 
cellular oxygen levels.
The extent of DNA damage from indirectly ionizing 
radiation is dependent on the phase of the cell cycle. The most 
radiation-sensitive phases are G2 and M, whereas G1 and late 
S phases are less sensitive. Thus irradiation of a population of 
tumor cells results in killing of a greater proportion of cells in 
G2 and M phases. However, delivery of radiation in divided 
doses, a concept referred to as fractionation, allows the surviv-
ing G1 and S phase cells to progress to more sensitive phases, a 
process referred to as reassortment. In contrast to DNA dam-
age after indirectly ionizing radiation, that after exposure to 
directly ionizing radiation is less dependent on the cell-cycle 
phase.159
Several chemicals can modify the effects of ionizing radia-
tion. These include hypoxic cell sensitizers such as metronida-
zole and misonidazole, which mimic oxygen and increase cell 
kill of hypoxic cells.158 A second category of radiation sensitiz-
ers are the thymidine analogues iododeoxyuridine and bromo-
deoxyuridine. These molecules are incorporated into the DNA 
in place of thymidine and render the cells more susceptible to 
radiation damage; however, they are associated with consider-
able acute toxicity. Several other chemotherapeutic agents sen-
sitize cells to radiation through various mechanisms, including 
Table 10-12 
General mechanisms of drug resistance
Cellular and biochemical mechanisms
Decreased drug accumulation
Decreased drug influx
Increased drug efflux
Altered intracellular trafficking of drug
Decreased drug activation
Increased inactivation of drug or toxic intermediate
Increased repair of drug-induced damage to:
DNA
Protein
Membranes
Alteration of drug targets (quantitatively or qualitatively)
Alteration of cofactor or metabolite levels
Alteration of gene expression
DNA mutation, amplification, or deletion
Altered transcription, posttranscription processing, or 
translation
Altered stability of macromolecules
Mechanisms relevant in vivo
Pharmacologic and anatomic drug barriers (tumor 
sanctuaries)
Host-drug interactions
Increased drug inactivation by normal tissues
Decreased drug activation by normal tissues
Relative increase in normal tissue drug sensitivity 
(toxicity)
Host-tumor interactions
Source: Modified with permission from Morrow et al.150
who were treated with neoadjuvant trastuzumab-based chemo-
therapy.151 Post-neoadjuvant treatment, a third of the samples 
from patients who did not have a complete pathologic response 
displayed loss of the HER2 amplification that had been present 
in their pretreatment-biopsy specimens151. Another means by 
which cancers develop resistance is the acquisition of additional 
genomic aberrations. In lung cancer, a second mutation in EGFR 
(T790M) and MET amplification have been described as two 
main mechanisms of drug resistance to EGFR inhibitors erlo-
tinib and gefinitib.152-154 Other mechanisms like novel genetic 
changes, including HER2 and EGFR amplification, PIK3CA 
mutations, and markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
have also been reported in EGFR inhibitor resistant lung.155, 156 
Analysis of metastases from patients with colorectal cancer who 
developed resistance to cetuximab or panitumumab showed the 
emergence of KRAS amplification in one sample and acquisi-
tion of secondary KRAS mutations in 60% of the cases.157 These 
studies emphasize the utility of repeat tumor biopsy specimens 
at the time of relapse or progression to identify mechanisms of 
resistance and best combinatorial therapies.
RADIATION THERAPY
Physical Basis of Radiation Therapy
Ionizing radiation is energy strong enough to remove an orbital 
electron from an atom. This radiation can be electromagnetic, like a 
high-energy photon, or particulate, such as an electron, proton, neu-
tron, or alpha particle. Radiation therapy is delivered primarily as 
314
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
5-fluorouracil, actinomycin D, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, topote-
can, doxorubicin, and vinorelbine.158
Radiation Therapy Planning
Radiation therapy is delivered in a homogeneous dose to a well-
defined region that includes tumor and/or surrounding tissue at 
risk for subclinical disease. The first step in planning is to define 
the target to be irradiated as well as the dose-limiting organs in 
the vicinity.160 Treatment planning includes evaluation of alter-
native treatment techniques, which is done through a process 
referred to as simulation. Once the beam distribution that will 
best achieve homogeneous delivery to the target volume and 
minimize the dose to the normal tissue is determined, immo-
bilization devices and markings or tattoos on the patient’s skin 
are used to ensure that each daily treatment is given in the same 
way. Conventional fractionation is 1.8 to 2 Gy/d, administered 
5 days each week for 3 to 7 weeks.
Radiation therapy may be used as the primary modality 
for palliation in certain patients with metastatic disease, primar-
ily patients with bony metastases. In these cases, radiation is 
recommended for symptomatic metastases only. However, lytic 
metastases in weight-bearing bones such as the femur, tibia, or 
humerus also are considered for irradiation. Another circum-
stance in which radiation therapy might be appropriate is spinal 
cord compression due to metastases to the vertebral body that 
extend posteriorly to the spinal canal.
The goal of adjuvant radiation therapy is to decrease local-
regional recurrence rates. Adjuvant radiation therapy can be 
given before surgery, after surgery, or, in selected cases, during 
surgery. Preoperative radiation therapy has several advantages. 
It may minimize seeding of the tumor during surgery and it 
allows for smaller treatment fields because the operative bed has 
not been contaminated with tumor cells. Also, radiation therapy 
for inoperable tumors may achieve adequate reduction to make 
them operable. The disadvantages of preoperative therapy are 
an increased risk of postoperative wound healing problems 
and the difficulty in planning subsequent radiation therapy in 
patients who have positive surgical margins. If radiation therapy 
is given postoperatively, it is usually given 3 to 4 weeks after 
surgery to allow for wound healing. The advantage of postop-
erative radiation therapy is that the surgical specimen can be 
evaluated histologically and radiation therapy can be reserved 
for patients who are most likely to benefit from it. Further, the 
radiation therapy can be modified on the basis of margin status. 
The disadvantages of postoperative radiation therapy are that 
the volume of normal tissue requiring irradiation may be larger 
owing to surgical contamination of the tissue planes and that the 
tumor may be less sensitive to radiation owing to poor oxygen-
ation. Postlaparotomy adhesions may decrease the mobility of 
the small bowel loops, increasing the risk for radiation injury in 
abdominal or pelvic irradiation. Given the potential advantages 
and disadvantages of both approaches, the roles of preoperative 
and postoperative radiation therapy are being actively evaluated 
and compared for many cancer types.
Another mode of postoperative radiation therapy is 
brachytherapy. In brachytherapy, unlike in external beam 
therapy, the radiation source is in contact with the tissue being 
irradiated. The radiation source may be cesium, gold, iridium, 
or radium. Brachytherapy is administered via temporary or per-
manent delivery implants such as needles, seeds, or catheters. 
Temporary brachytherapy catheters are placed either during 
open surgery or percutaneously soon after surgery. The implants 
are loaded interstitially, and treatment usually is given postop-
eratively for a short duration, such as 1 to 3 days. Although 
brachytherapy has the disadvantages of leaving scars at the cath-
eter insertion site and requiring special facilities for inpatient 
brachytherapy the advantage of patient convenience owing to 
the shorter treatment duration, has made intracavitary treatment 
approaches very popular for the treatment of breast cancer.
Another short delivery approach is intraoperative radio-
therapy (IORT), often used in combination with external beam 
therapy. The oncologic consequences of the limited treatment 
volume and duration associated with brachytherapy and IORT 
are not well understood. Accelerated partial breast irradiation 
with interstitial brachytherapy, intracavitary brachytherapy 
(MammoSite), IORT, and three-dimensional conformal external 
beam radiotherapy is being compared with whole breast irra-
diation in an intergroup phase III trial (NSABP B-39/Radiation 
Therapy Oncology Group 0413). Several additional studies of 
adjuvant IORT also are ongoing internationally. There has also 
been increasing interest in utilizing intensity-modulated radiation 
therapy (IMRT). IMRT is a complex technique for the delivery 
of radiation therapy preferentially to target structures while mini-
mizing doses to adjacent normal critical structures.161 It is widely 
utilized for the treatment of a variety of tumor types, including 
the central nervous system, head and neck, breast, prostate, gas-
trointestinal tract, and gynecologic organs, as well as in patients 
where previous radiation therapy has been delivered.
It is thought that chemotherapy given concurrently with 
radiation improves survival rates. Chemotherapy before radia-
tion has the advantage of reducing the tumor burden, which 
facilitates radiation therapy. On the other hand, some chemo-
therapy regimens, when given concurrently with radiation, may 
sensitize the cells to radiation therapy. Chemoradiation is being 
pursued in many tumor types, including rectal cancer, pancre-
atic cancer, and esophageal cancer.162-164 In a recent Cochrane 
review of six randomized controlled trials, it was demonstrated 
that in patients T3/4 rectal cancer, chemoradiation was associ-
ated with a significantly lower local recurrence rate compared 
with radiation therapy alone (OR 0.56, 95% CI 0.42-0.75, 
P<0.0001), but was not associated with improved survival.162
Side Effects
Both tumor and normal tissue have radiation dose-response rela-
tionships that can be plotted as a sigmoidal curve (Fig. 10-16).160 
A minimum dose of radiation must be given before any response 
is seen. The response to radiation then increases slowly with 
an increase in dose. At a certain dose level the curves become 
exponential, with increases in tumor response and normal tissue 
toxicity with each incremental dose increase. The side effects of 
radiation therapy can be acute, occurring during or 2 to 3 weeks 
after therapy, or chronic, occurring weeks to years after ­therapy. 
The side effects depend on the tissue included in the target 
­volume. Some of the major acute and chronic sequelae of radia-
tion are summarized in Table 10-13.160, 165 In addition to these 
effects, a small increase in the risk for secondary malignancies 
is attributable to radiation therapy.
CANCER PREVENTION
The truth of the old axiom, “An ounce of prevention is worth 
a pound of cure” is being increasingly recognized in oncology. 
Cancer prevention can be divided into three categories: (a) pri-
mary prevention (i.e., prevention of initial cancers in healthy 
315
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
individuals), (b) secondary prevention (i.e., prevention of can-
cer in individuals with premalignant conditions), and (c) ter-
tiary prevention (i.e., prevention of second primary cancers in 
patients cured of their initial disease).
The systemic or local administration of therapeutic agents 
to prevent the development of cancer, called chemoprevention, 
is being actively explored for several cancer types. In breast can-
cer, the NSABP Breast Cancer Prevention Trial demonstrated 
that tamoxifen administration reduces the risk of breast cancer 
by one half and reduces the risk of estrogen receptor-positive 
tumors by 69% in high-risk patients.166 Therefore, tamoxifen has 
been approved by the FDA for breast cancer chemoprevention. 
Table 10-13 
Local effects of radiation
ORGAN
ACUTE CHANGES
CHRONIC CHANGES
Skin
Erythema, wet or dry desquamation, epilation
Telangiectasia, subcutaneous fibrosis, ulceration
GI tract
Nausea, diarrhea, edema, ulceration, hepatitis
Stricture, ulceration, perforation, hematochezia
Kidney
—
Nephropathy, renal insufficiency
Bladder
Dysuria
Hematuria, ulceration, perforation
Gonads
Sterility
Atrophy, ovarian failure
Hematopoietic tissue
Lymphopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia
Pancytopenia
Bone
Epiphyseal growth arrest
Necrosis
Lung
Pneumonitis
Pulmonary fibrosis
Heart
—
Pericarditis, vascular damage
Upper aerodigestive tract
Mucositis, xerostomia, anosmia
Xerostomia, dental caries
Eye
Conjunctivitis
Cataract, keratitis, optic nerve atrophy
Nervous system
Cerebral edema
Necrosis, myelitis
Tumor control
Complications
A
B
Dose
Percent
Figure 10-16.  The probability of tumor control and of complica-
tions at different radiation doses. A. At lower doses, the probability 
of complications is low, with a moderate chance of tumor control. 
B. Increasing the dose may gain a higher chance of tumor control at 
the price of significantly higher complication risks. (Modified with 
permission from Eisbruch A, Lichter AS. With kind permission from 
Springer Science and Business Media.)160
The subsequent NSABP P-2 trial demonstrated that raloxifene is 
as effective as tamoxifen in reducing the risk of invasive breast 
cancer and is associated with a lower risk of thromboembolic 
events and cataracts but a non-statistically significant higher 
risk of noninvasive breast cancer; these findings led the FDA to 
approve raloxifene for prevention as well. Several other agents 
are also under investigation.167 Celecoxib has been shown to 
reduce polyp number and polyp burden in patients with FAP, 
which led to its approval by the FDA for these patients. In head 
and neck cancer, 13-cis-retinoic acid has been shown both to 
reverse oral leukoplakia and to reduce second primary tumor 
development.168, 169 Thus, the chemoprevention trials completed 
so far have demonstrated success in primary, secondary, and 
tertiary prevention. Although the successes of these chemopre-
vention studies are impressive, much remains to be done over 
the next few years to improve patient selection and decrease 
therapy-related toxic effects. It is important for surgeons to be 
aware of these preventive options, because they are likely to be 
involved in the diagnosis of premalignant and malignant condi-
tions and will be the ones to counsel patients about their che-
mopreventive options.
In selected circumstances, the risk of cancer is high 
enough to justify surgical prevention. These high-risk set-
tings include hereditary cancer syndromes such as hereditary 
breast-ovarian cancer syndrome, hereditary diffuse gastric can-
cer, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, FAP, and hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, as well as some nonhereditary 
conditions such as chronic ulcerative colitis. Most prophylac-
tic surgeries are large ablative surgeries (e.g., bilateral risk-
reducing mastectomy or total proctocolectomy). Therefore, it is 
important that the patient be completely informed about poten-
tial surgical complications as well as long-term lifestyle conse-
quences. Further, the conservative options of close surveillance 
and chemoprevention need to be discussed. The patient’s can-
cer risk needs to be assessed accurately and implications for 
survival discussed. Ultimately, the decision to proceed with 
surgical prevention should be individualized and made with 
caution.
316
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
TRENDS IN ONCOLOGY
Cancer Screening and Diagnosis
It is clear that the practice of oncology will change dramati-
cally over the next few decades, because our understanding of 
the molecular basis of cancer and available technologies are 
evolving rapidly. One of the critical changes expected is earlier 
detection of cancers. With improvements in available imaging 
modalities and development of newer functional imaging tech-
niques, it is likely that many tumors will be detected at earlier, 
more curable stages in the near future.
Another area of rapid development is the identification of 
serum markers. High-throughput technologies such as matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spec-
troscopy and liquid chromatography ion-spray tandem mass 
spectroscopy have revolutionized the field of proteomics and 
are now being used to compare the serum protein profiles of 
patients with cancer with those of individuals without cancer. 
Identification of unique proteins as well as unique proteomic 
profiles for most cancer types is being pursued actively by many 
researchers and, if successful, could dramatically enhance our 
ability to detect cancers early.170 In addition, there is greater 
interest placed in leveraging circulating free DNA as a potential 
approach for cancer screening.
Surgical Therapy
The current trend in surgery is toward more conservative resec-
tions. With earlier identification of tumors, more conservative 
operations may be possible. The goal, however, is always to 
remove the tumor en bloc with wide negative margins. Another 
interesting area being explored is the destruction of tumors by 
techniques such as radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, and 
heat-producing technologies like lasers, microwaves, or focused 
ultrasound. Pilot studies have demonstrated that radiofrequency 
ablation is effective for destruction of small primary breast can-
cers. Although this approach remains experimental and poten-
tially of limited applicability because of the need for expertise 
in breast imaging, the development of imaging technologies that 
can accurately map the extent of cancer cells, these types of 
noninvasive interventions are likely to come to the forefront. 
However, use of these techniques will be limited to treatment of 
cancers not involving hollow viscera.
The debate over how to manage the regional lymph node 
basins for certain cancer types continues. With an increasing 
understanding of the metastatic process, surgeons may be able 
to stratify patients on the basis of the likelihood that their disease 
will spread metastatically, based on the gene expression profile 
of their primary tumors, and offer regional therapy accordingly. 
There is also a growing interest in minimally invasive surgical 
treatments for a variety of cancer types.
Systemic Therapy
The current trend in systemic therapy is toward individualized 
therapy. It is now presumed that all cancers of a certain cell ori-
gin are the same. Thus all patients are offered the same systemic 
therapy. Not all patients respond to these therapies; however, 
this emphasizes the biologic variability within the tumor groups. 
Therefore, the intent is to determine the underlying biology of 
each tumor to tailor therapy accordingly. Genomic, transcrip-
tional, and proteomic profiling approaches are being used to 
identify molecular signatures that correlate with response to cer-
tain agents. It is likely that in the near future all tumors can be 
tested and treatments individualized. Patients who will respond 
to conventional therapies can be treated with these regimens, 
whereas patients who will not respond will not, which spares 
them the toxicity. Instead, the latter patients can be offered 
novel therapies. Furthermore, with emerging biologic therapies, 
it is likely that patients may be given a combination of biologic 
therapies that specifically target the alterations in their own 
tumors. Patients can be genotyped for critical alleles that may 
affect drug metabolism and thus, may influence the efficacy as 
well as the side effect of the drugs given. Finally, stratification 
of patients by gene expression profile for prognosis may assist 
in determining which patients are at higher risk of relapse, so 
that patients whose tumors have less aggressive biologic char-
acteristics can be spared further therapy.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:11-30.
2.	Ravdin PM, Cronin KA, Howlader N, et al. The decrease in 
breast-cancer incidence in 2003 in the United States. NEngl 
JMed. 2007;356:1670-1674.
3.	Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:71-96.
4.	 Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin 
DM. GLOBOCAN 2008 v2.0, Cancer Incidence and Mortal-
ity Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 10 [Internet]. Lyon, 
France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2010. 
Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr, Accessed March 1, 2013.
5.	Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 
2002.CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:74-108.
6.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 
2000;100:57-70.
7.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next gen-
eration. Cell. 2011;144:646-674.
8.	Pelengaris S, Khan M, Evan G. c-MYC: more than just a ­matter 
of life and death. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:764-776.
9.	Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal 
tumorigenesis. Cell. 1990;61:759-767.
10.	Kastan M, Skapek S. Molecular biology of cancer: the cell 
cycle. In: DeVita V, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. ­Cancer: 
Principles and Practice of Oncology. 7th ed: Lippincott 
­Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
11.	Eccles SA. The role of c-erbB-2/HER2/neu in breast cancer 
progression and metastasis. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 
2001;6:393-406.
12.	Wang SC, Hung MC. HER2 overexpression and cancer target-
ing. Semin Oncol. 2001;28:115-124.
13.	Schechter AL, Stern DF, Vaidyanathan L, et al. The neu onco-
gene: an erb-B-related gene encoding a 185,000-Mr tumour 
antigen. Nature. 1984;312:513-516.
14.	Arcila ME, Chaft JE, Nafa K, et al. Prevalence, clinicopatho-
logic associations, and molecular spectrum of ERBB2 (HER2) 
tyrosine kinase mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Clinical 
cancer research: an officialJournal of the American Associa-
tion for Cancer Research.2012;18:4910-4918.
15.	Wang SE, Narasanna A, Perez-Torres M, et al. HER2 kinase 
domain mutation results in constitutive phosphorylation and 
activation of HER2 and EGFR and resistance to EGFR tyro-
sine kinase inhibitors. Cancer Cell. 2006;10:25-38.
16.	Li D, Ambrogio L, Shimamura T, et al. BIBW2992, an irre-
versible EGFR/HER2 inhibitor highly effective in preclinical 
lung cancer models. Oncogene. 2008;27:4702-4711.
17.	Shimamura T, Ji H, Minami Y, et al. Non-small-cell lung 
cancer and Ba/F3 transformed cells harboring the ERBB2 
317
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
G776insV_G/C mutation are sensitive to the dual-specific 
epidermal growth factor receptor and ERBB2 inhibitor HKI-
272. Cancer Res. 2006;66:6487-6491.
18.	 Bose R, Kavuri SM, Searleman AC, et al. Activating HER2 muta-
tions in HER2 gene amplification negative breast cancer.Cancer 
Discov. 2013;3:224-237.
19.	Kim R, Tanabe K, Uchida Y, Emi M, Inoue H, Toge T. Current 
status of the molecular mechanisms of anticancer drug-induced 
apoptosis. The contribution of molecular-level analysis to 
­cancer chemotherapy. Cancer ChemotherPharmacol. 2002;50: 
343-352.
20.	Igney FH, Krammer PH. Death and anti-death: tumour resis-
tance to apoptosis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:277-288.
21.	Yu EW, Koshland DE Jr. Propagating conformational 
changes over long (and short) distances in proteins. Proc Natl 
AcadSciUSA. 2001;98:9517-520.
22.	Folkman J, Merler E, Abernathy C, Williams G. Isolation 
of a tumor factor responsible for angiogenesis. J ExpMed. 
1971;133:275-288.
23.	McCarty MF, Liu W, Fan F, et al. Promises and pitfalls of 
anti-angiogenic therapy in clinical trials. Trends Mol Med. 
2003;9:53-58.
24.	Soker S, Takashima S, Miao HQ, Neufeld G, Klagsbrun M. 
Neuropilin-1 is expressed by endothelial and tumor cells as 
an isoform-specific receptor for vascular endothelial growth 
factor. Cell. 1998;92:735-745.
25.	Stacker SA, Achen MG, Jussila L, Baldwin ME, Alitalo K. 
Lymphangiogenesis and cancer metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2002;2:573-583.
26.	He Y, Kozaki K, Karpanen T, et al. Suppression of tumor 
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis by blocking 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 signaling. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 2002;94:819-825.
27.	Steeg PS. Metastasis suppressors alter the signal transduction 
of cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:55-63.
28.	Naumov GN, MacDonald IC, Weinmeister PM, et al. Per-
sistence of solitary mammary carcinoma cells in a second-
ary site: a possible contributor to dormancy. Cancer Res. 
2002;62:2162-2168.
29.	Demicheli R. Tumour dormancy: findings and hypotheses 
from clinical research on breast cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 
2001;11:297-306.
30.	Chambers AF, Groom AC, MacDonald IC. Dissemination and 
growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2002;2:563-572.
31.	 van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, et al. A gene-expression 
signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;347:1999-2009.
32.	De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT 
during cancer initiation and progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2013;13:97-110.
33.	Alderton GK. Metastasis: epithelial to mesenchymal and back 
again. Nat RevCancer. 2013;13:3.
34.	Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, et al. Metastatic colonization 
requires the repression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transi-
tion inducer Prrx1. Cancer Cell. 2012;22:709-724.
35.	Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J. Spatio-
temporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is 
essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis. Cancer 
Cell. 2012;22:725-736.
36.	Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem cells, 
cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature. 2001;414:105-111.
37.	Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer 
genome. Nature. 2009;458:719-724.
38.	Olivier M, Hussain SP, Caron de Fromentel C, Hainaut P, 
Harris CC. TP53 mutation spectra and load: a tool for gen-
erating hypotheses on the etiology of cancer. IARC Sci Publ. 
2004:247-270.
39.	Kennedy RD, D’Andrea AD. DNA repair pathways in clini-
cal practice: lessons from pediatric cancer susceptibility syn-
dromes. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3799-3808.
40.	Hanks S, Rahman N. Aneuploidy-cancer predisposition syn-
dromes: a new link between the mitotic spindle checkpoint 
and cancer. Cell Cycle. 2005;4:225-227.
41.	Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Genetic instabilities 
in human cancers. Nature. 1998;396:643-649.
42.	Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, et al. A census of human 
cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:177-183.
43.	Forbes SA, Tang G, Bindal N, et al. COSMIC (the Catalogue 
of Somatic Mutations in Cancer): a resource to investigate 
acquired mutations in human cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2010;38:D652-D657.
44.	Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB. Overcoming implementation 
challenges of personalized cancer therapy. Nat Rev Clin 
Oncol. 2012;9:542-548.
45.	Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, et al. Molecular portraits of 
human breast tumours. Nature. 2000;406:747-752.
46.	Sorlie T, Tibshirani R, Parker J, et al. Repeated observation 
of breast tumor subtypes in independent gene expression data 
sets. Proc Natl Acad Sciences USA. 2003;100:8418-8423.
47.	Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, et al. Gene expression 
patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses 
with clinical implications. Proc Natl AcadSciences USA. 
2001;98:10869-10874.
48.	Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, et al. Intratumor het-
erogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion 
sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:883-892.
49.	Vahteristo P, Tamminen A, Karvinen P, et al. p53, CHK2, and 
CHK1 genes in Finnish families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: 
further evidence of CHK2 in inherited cancer predisposition. 
Cancer Res. 2001;61:5718-5722.
50.	DiCiommo D, Gallie BL, Bremner R. Retinoblastoma: the 
disease, gene and protein provide critical leads to understand 
cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 2000;10:255-269.
51.	Knudson AG. Two genetic hits (more or less) to cancer. Nat 
Rev Cancer. 2001;1:157-162.
52.	Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr. Soft-tissue sarcomas, breast cancer, 
and other neoplasms. A familial syndrome? Ann Intern Med. 
1969;71:747-752.
53.	Li FP, Fraumeni JF Jr., Mulvihill JJ, et al. A cancer family 
syndrome in twenty-four kindreds. Cancer Res. 1988;48: 
5358-5362.
54.	Birch JM, Hartley AL, Tricker KJ, et al. Prevalence and diver-
sity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 
Li-Fraumeni families. Cancer Res. 1994;54:1298-1304.
55.	Birch JM, Alston RD, McNally RJ, et al. Relative frequency 
and morphology of cancers in carriers of germline TP53 muta-
tions. Oncogene. 2001;20:4621-4628.
56.	Birch JM, Blair V, Kelsey AM, et al. Cancer phenotype cor-
relates with constitutional TP53 genotype in families with the 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Oncogene. 1998;17:1061-1068.
57.	Loman N, Johannsson O, Kristoffersson U, Olsson H, Borg A. 
Family history of breast and ovarian cancers and BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutations in a population-based series of early-onset 
breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:1215-1223.
58.	Ford D, Easton DF, Bishop DT, Narod SA, Goldgar DE. Risks 
of cancer in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Linkage 
Consortium. Lancet. 1994;343:692-695.
59.	Ford D, Easton DF, Stratton M, et al. Genetic heterogeneity 
and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 
breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consor-
tium. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:676-689.
60.	 The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Cancer risks in BRCA2 
mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91:1310-1316.
61.	Venkitaraman AR. Cancer susceptibility and the functions of 
BRCA1 and BRCA2. Cell. 2002;108:171-182.
318
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
62.	Liu Y, West SC. Distinct functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in 
double-strand break repair. Breast Cancer Res. 2002;4:9-13.
63.	Venkitaraman AR. Functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 
in the biological response to DNA damage. J Cell Sci. 
2001;114:3591-3598.
64.	Hedenfalk I, Duggan D, Chen Y, et al. Gene-expression profiles 
in hereditary breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:539-548.
65.	Sieber OM, Tomlinson IP, Lamlum H. The adenomatous pol-
yposis coli (APC) tumour suppressor–genetics, function and 
disease. Mol Med Today. 2000;6:462-469.
66.	Caspari R, Olschwang S, Friedl W, et al. Familial adeno-
matous polyposis: desmoid tumours and lack of ophthalmic 
lesions (CHRPE) associated with APC mutations beyond 
codon 1444. Hum Mol Genet. 1995;4:337-340.
67.	 Davies DR, Armstrong JG, Thakker N, et al. Severe Gardner 
syndrome in families with mutations restricted to a specific 
region of the APC gene. Am J Hum Genet. 1995;57:1151-1158.
68.	Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P, et al. Genetics, natural his-
tory, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolypo-
sis colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology. 
1993;104:1535-1549.
69.	Vasen HF, Watson P, Mecklin JP, Lynch HT. New clinical cri-
teria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, 
Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative 
group on HNPCC. Gastroenterology. 1999;116:1453-1456.
70.	Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutations of 
a mutS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. 
Cell. 1993;75:1215-1225.
71.	Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, et al. The human mutator gene 
homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpol-
yposis colon cancer. Cell. 1993;75:1027-1038.
72.	Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutation 
of MSH6 as the cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer. Nat Genet. 1997;17:271-272.
73.	Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT, et al. Mutation in the 
DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associ-
ated with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature. 
1994;368:258-261.
74.	Papadopoulos N, Nicolaides NC, Wei YF, et al. Mutation 
of a mutL homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science. 
1994;263:1625-1629.
75.	Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, et al. Mutations of 
two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon can-
cer. Nature. 1994;371:75-80.
76.	Steck PA, Pershouse MA, Jasser SA, et al. Identification of a 
candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1, at chromosome 
10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple advanced cancers. Nat 
Genet. 1997;15:356-362.
77.	Liaw D, Marsh DJ, Li J, et al. Germline mutations of the 
PTEN gene in Cowden disease, an inherited breast and thyroid 
cancer syndrome. Nat Genet. 1997;16:64-67.
78.	Eng C. Will the real Cowden syndrome please stand up: 
revised diagnostic criteria. J Med Genet. 2000;37:828-830.
79.	Greene MH. The genetics of hereditary melanoma and nevi. 
1998 update. Cancer. 1999;86:2464-2477.
80.	Goldstein AM, Fraser MC, Struewing JP, et al. Increased 
risk of pancreatic cancer in melanoma-prone kindreds with 
p16INK4 mutations. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:970-974.
81.	 Fitzgerald RC, Caldas C. E-cadherin mutations and hereditary 
gastric cancer: prevention by resection? Dig Dis. 2002;20:23-31.
82.	Berx G, Van Roy F. The E-cadherin/catenin complex: an 
important gatekeeper in breast cancer tumorigenesis and 
malignant progression. Breast Cancer Res. 2001;3:289-293.
83.	Alsanea O, Clark OH. Familial thyroid cancer. Curr Opin 
Oncol. 2001;13:44-51.
84.	Redmond DE Jr. Tobacco and cancer: the first clinical report, 
1761. N Engl J Med.1970;282:18-23.
85.	http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Classification/index.php: 
IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks 
to Humans, Complete List of Agents Evaluated and Their 
Classification, International Agency for Research on Cancer 
(IARC). Accessed January 16, 2008.
86.	Baan R, Grosse Y, Straif K, et al. A review of human 
­carcinogens–Part F: chemical agents and related occupations. 
Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:1143-1144.
87.	Timblin C, Jannsen-Heininger Y, Mossman B. Physical agents 
in human carcinogenesis. In: Coleman W, Tsongalis G, eds. 
The Molecular Basis of Human Cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana 
Press; 2002:223.
88.	Stanton MF, Layard M, Tegeris A, et al. Relation of particle 
dimension to carcinogenicity in amphibole asbestoses and 
other fibrous minerals. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1981;67:965-975.
89.	 Rous P. A transmissible avian neoplasm. (Sarcoma of the com-
mon fowl) by Peyton Rous, M.D., Experimental Medicine for 
Sept. 1, 1910, vol. 12, pp. 696-705. JExp Med. 1979;150:738-753.
90.	Butel JS. Viral carcinogenesis: revelation of molecular 
mechanisms and etiology of human disease. Carcinogenesis. 
2000;21:405-426.
91.	El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatitis C in the 
United States. Hepatology. 2002;36:S74-S83.
92.	Ault KA. Effect of prophylactic human papillomavirus L1 
virus-like-particle vaccine on risk of cervical intraepithelial 
neoplasia grade 2, grade 3, and adenocarcinoma in situ: a 
combined analysis of four randomised clinical trials. Lancet. 
2007;369:1861-1868.
93.	Smith RA, Brooks D, Cokkinides V, Saslow D, Brawley 
OW. Cancer screening in the United States, 2013: A review 
of current American Cancer Society guidelines, current 
issues in cancer screening, and new guidance on cervical 
cancer screening and lung cancer screening. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2013;63:87-105.
94.	Whitman G, Stelling C. Stereotactic core needle biopsy of 
breast lesions: Experience at the University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center. In: Singletary S, ed. Breast Cancer. 
New York Springer-Verlag; 1999:4.
95.	Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. Autosomal dominant 
inheritance of early-onset breast cancer. Implications for risk 
prediction. Cancer. 1994;73:643-651.
96.	Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer prediction 
model incorporating familial and personal risk factors. Stat 
Med. 2004;23:1111-1130.
97.	Berry DA, Iversen ES, Jr, Gudbjartsson, et al. BRCAPRO 
validation, sensitivity of genetic testing of BRCA1/BRCA2, 
and prevalence of other breast cancer susceptibility genes. 
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2701-2712.
98.	Antoniou AC, Pharoah PP, Smith P, Easton DF. The BOA-
DICEA model of genetic susceptibility to breast and ovarian 
cancer. Br J Cancer. 2004;91:1580-1590.
99.	Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individu-
alized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white 
females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
1989;81:1879-1886.
100.	http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool: Breast Cancer Risk Assess-
ment Tool, National Cancer Institute. Accessed December 26, 
2008.
101.	Bach PB, Kattan MW, Thornquist MD, et al. Variations in 
lung cancer risk among smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003; 
95:470-478.
102.	Bassett L, Hendrick R, Bassford T. Quality determinants 
of mammography. In: Agency for Health Care Policy and 
Research PHS, ed. Clinical Practice Guideline No 13. Rockville, 
HHS, US; 1994.
103.	Saslow D, Boetes C, Burke W, et al. American Cancer Soci-
ety guidelines for breast screening with MRI as an adjunct to 
mammography. Cancer J Clin. 2007;57:75-89.
104.	Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer 
mortality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;365:395-409.
319
ONCOLOGY
CHAPTER 10
105.	Wender R, Fontham ET, Barrera E, Jr., et al. American Can-
cer Society lung cancer screening guidelines. Cancer J Clin. 
2013;63:106-117.
106.	Jacobs TW, Connolly JL, Schnitt SJ. Nonmalignant lesions 
in breast core needle biopsies: to excise or not to excise? 
Am J Surg Pathol. 2002;26:1095-1110.
107.	 Harris L, Fritsche H, Mennel R, et al. American Society of Clini-
cal Oncology 2007 update of recommendations for the use of 
tumor markers in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:5287-5312.
108.	Locker GY, Hamilton S, Harris J, et al. ASCO 2006 update of 
recommendations for the use of tumor markers in gastrointes-
tinal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5313-5327.
109.	Way BA, Kessler G. Tumour marker overview. Lab Med 
Newsletter. 1996;4:1-7.
110.	Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict 
recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2817-2826.
111.	van ‘t Veer LJ, Dai H, van de Vijver MJ, et al. Gene expres-
sion profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer. 
Nature. 2002;415:530-536.
112.	Moyer VA. Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern 
Med. 2012;157:120-134.
113.	Wolf AM, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al. American Cancer 
Society guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: 
update 2010. Cancer J Clin. 2010;60:70-98.
114.	http://www.labcorp.com/datasets/labcorp/html/chapter/mono/
ri000600.htm: Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP), Serum, Tumor 
Marker (Serial Monitor), Laboratory Corporation of America. 
Accessed December 26, 2008.
115.	Nguyen MH, Keeffe EB. Screening for hepatocellular carci-
noma. J ClinGastroenterol. 2002;35:S86-S91.
116.	Chan DW, Beveridge RA, Muss H, et al. Use of Truquant BR 
radioimmunoassay for early detection of breast cancer recur-
rence in patients with stage II and stage III disease. J Clin 
Oncol. 1997;15:2322-2328.
117.	Outcomes of cancer treatment for technology assessment and 
cancer treatment guidelines. American Society of Clinical 
Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:671-679.
118.	Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, et al. Circulating tumor 
cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:781-791.
119.	Lucci A, Hall CS, Lodhi AK, et al. Circulating tumour cells in 
non-metastatic breast cancer: a prospective study. LancetOncol. 
2012;13:688-695.
120.	Scoggins CR, Ross MI, Reintgen DS, et al. Prospective multi-
institutional study of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction for molecular staging of melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 
2006;24:2849-2857.
121.	Braun S, Vogl FD, Naume B, et al. A pooled analysis of bone 
marrow micrometastasis in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005; 
353:793-802.
122.	Giuliano AE, Hawes D, Ballman KV, et al. Association of 
occult metastases in sentinel lymph nodes and bone marrow 
with survival among women with early-stage invasive breast 
cancer. JAMA. 2011;306:385-393.
123.	Janni W, Rack B, Lindemann K, Harbeck N. Detection of 
micrometastatic disease in bone marrow: is it ready for prime 
time? Oncologist. 2005;10:480-492.
124.	Grau A, Spitz F, Bouvet M. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. In: 
Feig B, Berger D, Fuhrman G, eds. The M D Anderson Surgi-
cal Oncology Handbook. Philadelphia Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2003:303.
125.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Smith T, et al. Long-term results of a 
prospective surgical trial comparing 2 cm vs. 4 cm excision 
margins for 740 patients with 1-4 mm melanomas. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2001;8:101-108.
126.	Moore HG, Riedel E, Minsky BD, et al. Adequacy of 1-cm 
distal margin after restorative rectal cancer resection with 
sharp mesorectal excision and preoperative combined-
modality­ therapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:80-85.
127.	Kapiteijn E, van de Velde CJ. The role of total mesorectal 
excision in the management of rectal cancer. Surg Clin North 
Am. 2002;82:995-1007.
128.	Meric F, Hunt KK. Surgical options for breast cancer. In: Hunt 
KK, Robb GL, Strom EA, Ueno NT, eds. M D Anderson Can-
cer Care Series-Breast Cancer. New York Springer-Verlag; 
2001:187-222.
129.	 Cabanas RM. An approach for the treatment of penile carcinoma. 
Cancer. 1977;39:456-466.
130.	Querzoli P, Pedriali M, Rinaldi R, et al. Axillary lymph node 
nanometastases are prognostic factors for disease-free survival 
and metastatic relapse in breast cancer patients. ClinCancer 
Res. 2006;12:6696-6701.
131.	Mocellin S, Pilati P, Lise M, Nitti D. Meta-analysis of 
hepatic arterial infusion for unresectable liver metastases 
from colorectal cancer: the end of an era? J Clin Oncol. 
2007;25:5649-5654.
132.	Pearson AS, Izzo F, Fleming RY, et al. Intraoperative radio-
frequency ablation or cryoablation for hepatic malignancies. 
Am J Surg. 1999;178:592-599.
133.	 Curley SA, Izzo F. Radiofrequency ablation of primary and 
metastatic hepatic malignancies. Int J Clin Oncol. 2002;7: 
72-81.
134.	Fisher B, Bryant J, Wolmark N, et al. Effect of preoperative 
chemotherapy on the outcome of women with operable breast 
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:2672-2685.
135.	Meric F, Hess KR, Varma DG, et al. Radiographic response to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a predictor of local control and 
survival in soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2002;95:1120-1126.
136.	Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guide-
lines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. 
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, 
National Cancer Institute of the United States, National Can-
cer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:205-216.
137.	Page R. Principles of Chemotherapy. In: Pazdur R, Hoskins 
W, Coia L, eds. Cancer Management: A Multidisciplinary 
Approach. Melville PRR Inc; 2001:21.
138.	Miller AB, Hoogstraten B, Staquet M, Winkler A. Reporting 
results of cancer treatment. Cancer. 1981;47:207-214.
139.	Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved survival 
with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2507-2516.
140.	McAuliffe PF, Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB, Gonzalez-
Angulo AM. Deciphering the role of PI3K/Akt/mTOR path-
way in breast cancer biology and pathogenesis. Clin Breast 
Cancer. 2010;10 Suppl 3:S59-S65.
141.	Mocellin S, Rossi CR, Lise M, Marincola FM. Adjuvant 
immunotherapy for solid tumors: from promise to clinical 
application. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2002;51:583-595.
142.	Perales MA, Wolchok JD. Melanoma vaccines. Cancer Invest. 
2002;20:1012-1026.
143.	Lizee G, Cantu MA, Hwu P. Less yin, more yang: confront-
ing the barriers to cancer immunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 
2007;13:5250-5255.
144.	Dermime S, Armstrong A, Hawkins RE, Stern PL. Cancer 
vaccines and immunotherapy. Br Med Bull. 2002;62:149-162.
145.	Berinstein NL. Enhancing cancer vaccines with immunomod-
ulators. Vaccine. 2007;25 Suppl 2:B72-B88.
146.	Cranmer LD, Hersh E. The role of the CTLA4 blockade 
in the treatment of malignant melanoma. Cancer Invest. 
2007;25:613-631.
147.	Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival 
with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. The 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:711-723.
148.	Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, et al. Ipilimumab plus 
dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic melanoma. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2517-2526.
320
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
149.	Cusack JC, Jr., Tanabe KK. Introduction to cancer gene ther-
apy. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11:497-519.
150.	Morrow C, Cowan K. Drug resistance and its clinical circum-
vention. In: Bast R, Kufe D, Pollock R, eds. Cancer Medicine. 
Hamilton: B.C. Decker, Inc; 2000:539.
151.	 Mittendorf EA, Wu Y, Scaltriti M, et al. Loss of HER2 amplifica-
tion following trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant systemic therapy 
and survival outcomes. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:7381-7388.
152.	Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, et al. Acquired resistance of 
lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated 
with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain. PLoS 
Med. 2005;2:e73.
153.	Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET ampli-
fication leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activat-
ing ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007;316:1039-1043.
154.	Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, et al. MET amplification occurs 
with or without T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung 
tumors with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:20932-20937.
155.	Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, et al. Genotypic 
and histological evolution of lung cancers acquiring resistance 
to EGFR inhibitors. Sci Transl Med. 2011;3:75ra26.
156.	Takezawa K, Pirazzoli V, Arcila ME, et al. HER2 ampli-
fication: a potential mechanism of acquired resistance to 
EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant lung cancers that lack the 
second-site EGFRT790M mutation. Cancer Discov. 2012;2: 
922-933.
157.	Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, et al. Emergence of KRAS 
mutations and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in 
colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012;486:532-536.
158.	Mundt A, Roeske J, Weichelbaum R. Principles of Radiation 
Oncology. In: Bast R, Kuff D, Pollock R, eds. Cancer Medi-
cine. Hamilton B.C. Decker Inc; 2000:465.
159.	 Raju MR, Carpenter SG. A heavy particle comparative study. 
Part IV: acute and late reactions. Br J Radiol. 1978;51:720-727.
160.	Eisbruch A, Lichter AS. What a surgeon needs to know about 
radiation. Ann Surg Oncol. 1997;4:516-522.
161.	Hartford AC, Galvin JM, Beyer DC, et al. American Col-
lege of Radiology (ACR) and American Society for 
Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) Practice Guideline for Inten-
sity-modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT). Am J Clin Oncol. 
2012;35:612-617.
162.	McCarthy K, Pearson K, Fulton R, Hewitt J. Pre-operative 
chemoradiation for non-metastatic locally advanced rectal 
cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:CD008368.
163.	Evans DB, Varadhachary GR, Crane CH, et al. Preoperative 
gemcitabine-based chemoradiation for patients with resect-
able adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. J Clin Oncol. 
2008;26:3496-3502.
164.	Courrech Staal EF, Aleman BM, Boot H, van Velthuysen ML, 
van Tinteren H, van Sandick JW. Systematic review of the 
benefits and risks of neoadjuvant chemoradiation for oesopha-
geal cancer. BrJSurg. 2010;97:1482-1496.
165.	 Daly J, Bertagnolli M, DeCosse J. Oncology. In: Schwartz S, 
Spencer F, Galloway A, eds. Principles of Surgery. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 1999:297.
166.	Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen for 
prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical 
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 1998;90:1371-1388.
167.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Effects 
of tamoxifen vs raloxifene on the risk of developing inva-
sive breast cancer and other disease outcomes: the NSABP 
Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 
2006;295:2727-2741.
168.	Lippman SM, Batsakis JG, Toth BB, et al. Comparison of 
low-dose isotretinoin with beta carotene to prevent oral carci-
nogenesis. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:15-20.
169.	Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second 
primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous-cell carcinoma 
of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:795-801.
170.	Sidransky D. Emerging molecular markers of cancer. Nat Rev 
Cancer. 2002;2:210-219.
171.	Meric-Bernstam F, Hung MC. Advances in targeting human 
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 signaling for cancer ther-
apy. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:6326-6330.
172.	Pao W, Hutchinson KE. Chipping away at the lung cancer 
genome. Nat Med. 2012;18:349-351.
Transplantation
Angelika C. Gruessner, Tun Jie, Klearchos Papas, 
Marian Porubsky, Abbas Rana, M. Cristy Smith, 
Sarah E. Yost, David L. Dunn, and Rainer W.G. Gruessner
11
BACKGROUND
Organ transplantation is a relatively novel field of medicine 
that has made significant progress since the second half of the 
twentieth century. Advances in surgical technique and 
a better understanding of immunology are the two main 
reasons that transplants have evolved from experimental proce-
dures, just several decades ago, to a widely accepted treatment 
today for patients with end-stage organ failure. Throughout 
the world, for a variety of indications, kidney, liver, pancreas, 
intestine, heart, and lung transplants are now the current stan-
dard of care.
But the success of transplantation has created new chal-
lenges. A better understanding of the pathophysiology of end-
stage organ failure as well as advances in critical care medicine 
and in the treatment of various diseases led to expanding the 
criteria for, and decreasing the contraindications to, transplants. 
Background	
321
Definitions	
321
History	
322
Transplant Immunobiology	
323
Transplant Antigens	
324
Allorecognition and  
Lymphocyte Activation	
324
Clinical Rejection	
324
Hyperacute / 324
Acute / 324
Chronic / 324
Clinical Immunosuppression	
324
Induction	
325
Depleting Antibodies / 325
Nondepleting Antibodies / 325
Maintenance	
325
Corticosteroids / 325
Azathioprine / 326
Mycophenolate Mofetil / 326
Sirolimus / 327
Cyclosporine / 328
Tacrolimus / 328
Belatacept / 328
Humoral Rejection	
328
Rituximab / 328
Bortezomib / 329
Eculizumab / 329
Infections and Malignancies	
329
Infections / 329
Malignancies / 330
Organ Procurement and  
Preservation	
330
Deceased Donors / 330
Living Donors / 332
Organ Preservation / 332
Kidney Transplantation	
334
Introduction / 334
Pretransplant Evaluation / 334
Medical Evaluation / 335
Surgical Evaluation / 336
Recipient Operation / 336
Grafts with Multiple Renal Arteries / 337
En Bloc Grafts / 338
Perioperative Care / 338
Results / 339
Pancreas Transplantation	
340
Donor Operation / 340
Back Table Preparation of the  
Pancreas Graft / 341
Recipient Operation / 341
Complications / 343
Living Donor Pancreas Transplants / 343
Results / 344
Islet versus Pancreas Transplants / 344
Islet Transplantation	
344
Liver Transplantation	
345
History / 345
Indications / 346
Recipient Selection / 347
Contraindications / 348
Surgical Procedure / 348
Pediatric Transplants / 349
Deceased Donor Split-Liver  
Transplants / 349
Living Donor Transplants / 349
Postoperative Care / 349
Evaluation of Graft Function / 351
Complications / 351
Intestine and Multivisceral  
Transplantation	
352
Indications and Recipient  
Selection / 352
Surgical Procedure / 352
Postoperative Care / 353
Heart and Lung Transplantation	 354
History / 354
Heart Transplants / 355
Lung Transplants / 356
Heart-Lung Transplants / 358
Xenotransplants	
358
chapter 
As a result, the discrepancy between the ever-growing num-
ber of patients awaiting a transplant and the limited number of 
organs available is one of the biggest challenges (Fig. 11-1). In 
2009 alone, according to the United Network for Organ Shar-
ing (UNOS), about 105,000 patients in the United States were 
awaiting a transplant, yet the number of transplants performed 
was only about 28,000 (Fig. 11-2).
DEFINITIONS
In addition to being the overall name of this relatively new 
field of medicine, transplantation is the process of transferring 
an organ, tissue, or cell from one place to another. An organ 
transplant is a surgical procedure in which a failing organ is 
replaced by a functioning one. The organ is transplanted either 
orthotopically (implanted in the same anatomic location in the 
recipient as it was in the donor) or heterotopically (implanted in 
1
another anatomic location). Orthotopic transplants require the 
removal of the diseased organ (heart, lungs, liver, or intestine); 
in heterotopic transplants, the diseased organ is kept in place 
(kidney, pancreas).
According to the degree of immunologic similarity between 
the donor and recipient, transplants are divided into three main 
categories: (a) An autotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, 
or an organ from one part of the body to another part in the same 
person, so no immunosuppression is required. This type of trans-
plant includes skin and vein, bone, cartilage, nerve, and islet cell 
transplants. (b) An allotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, 
or an organ from one person to another of the same species. The 
immune system of the recipient recognizes the donated organ as a 
foreign body, so immunosuppression is required in order to avoid 
rejection. (c) A xenotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, or an 
organ from one organism to another from a different species. To 
date, animal-to-human transplants are still experimental proce-
dures, given the very complex immunologic and infectious issues 
that have yet to be solved.
HISTORY
Over the centuries, multiple references to transplantation can 
be found in the literature. Yet transplantation as a recognized 
scientific and medical field began to emerge only in the middle 
of the twentieth century. Two major events preceded the rise of 
transplantation.
322
Figure 11-1.  Patients on the waiting list and the 
number of organ transplants performed, 2000 to 
2009. (U.S. data from the Scientific Registry of 
Transplant Recipients Annual Report, http://srtr.
org)
Key Points
1
	 The field of transplantation has made tremendous advances in 
the last 50 years, mainly due to refinements in surgical technique 
and development of effective immunosuppressive medications.
2
	 Although immunosuppressive medications are essential for 
transplantation, they are associated with significant short- and 
long-term morbidity.
3
	 Opportunistic infections can be significantly lowered by the 
use of appropriate antimicrobial agents.
4
	 Kidney transplantation represents the treatment of choice for 
almost all patients with end-stage renal disease. The gap 
between demand (patients on the waiting list) and supply 
(available kidneys) continues to widen.
5
	 Pancreas transplantation represents the most reliable way 
to achieve euglycemia in patients with poorly controlled 
diabetes.
6
	 The results of islet transplantation continue to improve but 
still trail those of pancreas transplantation.
7
	 Liver transplantation has become the standard of care for 
many patients with end-stage liver failure and/or liver 
cancer.
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
100,000
110,000
Number of patients
# Waiting
# Transplanted
First, the surgical technique of the vascular anastomosis 
was developed by French surgeon Alexis Carrel.1 This led to 
increased transplant activity, especially in animal models. 
Russian surgeon Yu Yu Voronoy was the first to report a series 
of human-to-human kidney transplants in the 1940s.2 But the 
outcomes were dismal, mainly because of the lack of under-
standing of the underlying immunologic processes.
Second, the findings of British scientist Sir Peter B. 
Medawar in the 1940s were also key.3 In his work with skin 
grafts in animal models and in human burn patients, he learned 
that the immune system plays a crucial role in the failure of 
skin grafts. His research led to a better understanding of the 
immune system and is considered to be the birth of transplant 
immunobiology.
The first human transplant with long-term success was 
performed by Joseph Murray in Boston, Massachusetts, in 
1954.4 Because it was a living related kidney transplant between 
identical twins, no immunosuppression was required; the recipi-
ent lived for another 8 years before he died of issues unrelated to 
the transplanted kidney. Other centers performed similar trans-
plants and could reproduce the good results.
Ultimately, attempts were made to perform kidney trans-
plants between nonidentical individuals. For immunosup-
pression, total-body radiation and an anticancer agent called 
6-mercaptopurine were used; given the profound toxicity of 
both those methods of immunosuppression, results were dis-
couraging. A breakthrough was achieved in the early 1960s with 
323
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
the introduction of maintenance immunosuppression through a 
combination of corticosteroids and a less toxic derivative of 
6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine.5,6
Increasing experience with kidney transplants and the better 
results achieved with maintenance immunosuppression paved the 
way for the era of extrarenal transplants (Table 11-1). In 1963, 
the first liver transplant was performed by Thomas Starzl in 
Denver, Colorado, and the first lung transplant was performed 
by James Hardy in Jackson, Mississippi. In 1966, the first pan-
creas transplant was performed by William Kelly and Richard 
Lillehei in Minneapolis, Minnesota. In 1967, the first successful 
heart transplant was performed by Christiaan Barnard in Cape 
Town, South Africa. The early years of transplantation were 
marked by high mortality, mainly because of irreversible 
rejection. Dramatic changes occurred with the further develop-
ment of immunosuppression. The groundbreaking event was the 
introduction of the first anti-T lymphocyte (T cell) drug, cyclo-
sporine, in the early 1980s.7 Since then, with an even better under-
standing of immunologic processes, many other drugs have been 
introduced that target specific pathways of rejection. As a result, 
rejection rates have decreased substantially, allowing a 1-year 
graft survival rate in excess of 80% in all types of transplants.
The gradual increase in the organ shortage led to innova-
tive surgical techniques. For example, deceased donor split-liver 
Figure 11-2.  Patients on the waiting list and 
the number of organ transplants performed, 
2009. KP = kidney and pancreas. (U.S. data 
from the Scientific Registry of Transplant 
Recipients Annual Report, http://srtr.org)
Total
Kidney
Pancreas and KP
Liver
Intestine
Heart
Lungs
Heart/Lung
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
100,000
110,000
Number of patients
# Waiting
# Transplanted
Table 11-1 
Transplant history
Organ
Year
Surgeon
Location
Kidney
1954
Joseph E. Murray
Boston, MA
Liver
1963
Thomas E. Starzl
Denver, CO
Lung
1963
James D. Hardy
Jackson, MS
Pancreas
1966
Richard C. Lillehei
Minneapolis, MN
Heart
1967
Christiaan N. Barnard
Cape Town, South Africa
Small intestine
1967
Richard C. Lillehei
Minneapolis, MN
Heart/lung
1981
Bruce Reitz
Stanford, CA
Multivisceral
1989
Thomas E. Starzl
Pittsburgh, PA
transplants and living donor liver transplants have helped expand 
the liver donor pool. Similarly, living donor intestine and pan-
creas techniques have been developed. The evolution of donor 
nephrectomy from an open to a minimally invasive procedure 
(laparoscopic or robotic) has helped increase the pool of living 
kidney donors.
TRANSPLANT IMMUNOBIOLOGY
The outcomes of early transplants were unsatisfactory. The 
limiting factor was the lack of understanding of immunologic 
processes. Irreversible rejection was the reason for graft loss in 
the vast majority of recipients. A better understanding of trans-
plant immunobiology led to significant improvements in patient 
and graft survival rates.8,9 The immune system is designed as 
a defense system to protect the body from foreign pathogens, 
such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi, but it also acts to reject 
transplanted cells, tissues, and organs, recognizing them as for-
eign. It mediates other complex processes as well, such as the 
body’s response to trauma or to tumor growth. No matter what 
the pathogen is, the immune system recognizes it as a foreign 
antigen and triggers a response that eventually leads either to 
death or to rejection of the pathogen.
324
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
TRANSPLANT ANTIGENS
Transplants between genetically nonidentical persons lead to 
recognition and rejection of the organ by the recipient’s immune 
system, if no intervention is undertaken. The main antigens 
responsible for this process are part of the major histocompat-
ibility complex (MHC). In humans, these antigens make up the 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system. The antigen-encoding 
genes are located on chromosome 6. Two major classes of HLA 
antigens are recognized. They differ in their structure, function, 
and tissue distribution. Class I antigens (HLA-A, HLA-B, and 
HLA-C) are expressed by all nucleated cells. Class II antigens 
(HLA-DR, HLA-DP, and HLA-DQ) are expressed by antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) such as B lymphocytes, dendritic cells, 
macrophages, and other phagocytic cells.
The principal function of HLA antigens is to present the 
fragments of foreign proteins to T lymphocytes. This leads to 
recognition and elimination of the foreign antigen with great 
specificity. HLA molecules play a crucial role in transplant 
recipients as well. They can trigger rejection of a graft via two 
different mechanisms. The most common mechanism is cellular 
rejection, in which the damage is done by activated T lympho-
cytes. The process of activation and proliferation is triggered 
by exposure of T lymphocytes to the donor’s HLA molecules. 
The other mechanism is humoral rejection, in which the dam-
age is done by circulating antibodies against the donor’s HLA 
molecules. The donor-specific antibodies can be present either 
pretransplant, due to previous exposure (because of a previous 
transplant, pregnancy, blood transfusion, or immunization), or 
posttransplant. After binding to the donor’s HLA molecules, the 
complement cascade is activated, leading to cellular lysis.
ALLORECOGNITION AND LYMPHOCYTE 
ACTIVATION
The immune system of each person is designed to discriminate 
between self and nonself cells and tissues. This process is called 
allorecognition, with T cells playing the crucial role. The rec-
ognition of foreign HLA antigens by the recipient’s T cells may 
occur by either a direct or an indirect pathway. Direct recogni-
tion occurs when the recipient’s T cells are activated by direct 
interaction with the donor’s HLA molecules. Indirect recogni-
tion occurs when the recipient’s T cells are activated by interac-
tion with APCs that have processed and presented the foreign 
antigen. The foreign antigen can be shed from the graft into the 
circulation, or it can be identified by the APCs in the graft itself.
Independent of the pathway of foreign HLA antigen presen-
tation, the ensuing activation of T cells is similar. A two-signal 
model, T-cell activation begins with the engagement of the T-cell 
receptor (TCR)/CD3 complex with the foreign molecule. This 
interaction causes transmission of the signal into the cell, named 
signal 1. However, this signal alone is not sufficient to activate 
the T cell. An additional costimulatory signal is required, named 
signal 2. Two well-characterized costimulatory interactions are 
the CD40/CD154 and B7/CD28 pathways. The “master switch” 
is turned on by the interaction of CD40 protein with APCs, along 
with the interaction of CD154 protein with T cells; this ligation 
induces the upregulation of other costimulatory molecules. Trans-
mission of signal 1 and signal 2 into the cell nucleus leads to 
upregulation of the transcription of genes for several cytokines, 
including the T-cell growth factor interleukin-2 (IL-2). In turn, 
IL-2 activates a number of pathways, leading to proliferation and 
differentiation of T cells. Rejection is a result of an attack of acti-
vated T cells on the transplanted organ.
Although T-cell activation is the main culprit in rejection, 
B-cell activation and subsequent antibody production also play 
a role. After the foreign HLA antigen is processed by B cells, it 
interacts with activated helper T cells, leading to differentiation 
of B cells into plasma cells and subsequently to their prolifera-
tion and antibody production.
CLINICAL REJECTION
Graft rejection is due to a complex interaction of different parts 
of the immune system, including B and T lymphocytes, APCs, 
and cytokines. The end result is graft damage caused by inflam-
matory injury. According to its onset and pathogenesis, rejec-
tion is divided into three main types: hyperacute, acute, and 
chronic (each described in the following sections).
Hyperacute
Hyperacute rejection, a very rapid type of rejection, results 
in irreversible damage and graft loss within minutes to hours 
after organ reperfusion. It is triggered by preformed antibodies 
against the donor’s HLA or ABO blood group antigens. These 
antibodies activate a series of events that result in diffuse intra-
vascular coagulation, causing ischemic necrosis of the graft. 
Fortunately, pretransplant blood group typing and cross-matching 
(in which the donor’s cells are mixed with the recipient’s serum, 
and then destruction of the cells is observed) have virtually 
eliminated the incidence of hyperacute rejection.
Acute
Acute rejection, the most common type of rejection, usually 
occurs within a few days or weeks posttransplant. According 
to the mechanism involved, it is further divided into cellular 
(T-cell–mediated) rejection, humoral (antibody-mediated) 
rejection, or a combination of both. The diagnosis is based on 
the results of biopsies of the transplanted organ, special immu-
nologic stains, and laboratory tests (such as elevated creatinine 
levels in kidney transplant recipients, elevated liver function 
values in liver transplant recipients, and elevated levels of glu-
cose, amylase, and lipase in pancreas transplant recipients).
Chronic
Chronic rejection is a slow type of rejection. It can manifest 
within the first year posttransplant, but most often progresses 
gradually over several years. The mechanism is not well under-
stood, but the pathologic changes eventually lead to fibrosis and 
loss of graft function. With advances in immunosuppression, 
this relatively rare form of rejection is becoming more common.
CLINICAL IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
A successful transplant is a balance between the recipient’s 
immune response, the donor’s allograft, and pharmacologic 
immunosuppression. Immunosuppressive regimens are very 
important to graft and patient survival posttransplant. 
Immunosuppression has evolved from the use of aza-
thioprine and steroids in the 1960s and 1970s to the develop-
ment, in the 1980s, of cyclosporine, which increased allograft 
survival.10,11 The introduction of tacrolimus and mycophenolate 
mofetil (MMF) in the 1990s further changed the field of trans-
plantation, enabling a variety of combinations to be used for 
immunosuppression (Table 11-2).
2
325
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Table 11-2 
Immunosuppressive drugs by grouping
Immunophilin binders
  Calcineurin inhibitors
    Cyclosporine
    Tacrolimus
  Noninhibitors of calcineurin
    Sirolimus
Antimetabolites
  Inhibitors of de novo purine synthesis
    Azathioprine
    Mycophenolate mofetil
Biologic immunosuppression
  Polyclonal antibodies
    Atgam
    Antithymocyte immunoglobulin
  Monoclonal antibodies
    Muromonab-CD3
    Basiliximab
    Belatacept
    Alemtuzumab
    Rituximab
    Bortezomib
    Eculizumab
Other
  Corticosteroids
Immunosuppressants usually are used in multidrug regi-
mens, aimed at increasing efficacy by targeting multiple path-
ways to lower the immune response and to decrease the toxicity 
of individual agents. Certain regimens may involve withdrawal, 
avoidance, or minimization of certain classes of drugs. Trans-
plant centers generally institute their immunosuppressive pro-
tocols based on experience, risk profiles, cost considerations, 
and outcomes. Immunosuppression is delivered in two phases: 
induction (starting immediately posttransplant, when the risk of 
rejection is highest) and maintenance (usually starting within 
days posttransplant and continuing for the life of the recipient 
or graft). Thus, the level of immunosuppression is highest in the 
first 3 to 6 months posttransplant; during this time, prophylaxis 
against various bacterial, viral, or even antifungal opportunistic 
infections is also given.12,13
A conventional immunosuppressive protocol might 
include (a) induction with anti-T-lymphocyte–depleting or 
nondepleting antibodies and (b) maintenance with calcineurin 
inhibitors, antiproliferative agents, and corticosteroids. Char-
acteristics of the most common immunosuppressive agents are 
listed in Table 11-3.
INDUCTION
Induction includes the use of depleting (polyclonal) antibodies 
or nondepleting antibodies within the first month posttransplant. 
Studies have shown that induction with antibody regimens may 
prevent acute rejection, potentially leading to improved graft sur-
vival and the use of less maintenance immunosuppression.
Depleting Antibodies
Rabbit antithymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin) is a purified 
gamma globulin obtained by immunizing rabbits with human 
thymocytes. Atgam, which has largely been replaced by Thy-
moglobulin, is a purified gamma globulin obtained by immu-
nizing horses with human thymocytes. These agents contain 
antibodies to T cells and B lymphocytes (B cells), integrins, 
and other adhesion molecules, thereby resulting in rapid deple-
tion of peripheral lymphocytes. Typically, the total dose of Thy-
moglobulin is roughly 6 mg/kg, a dose that has been shown to 
confer adequate lymphocyte depletion and better allograft sur-
vival. Doses of 3 mg/kg may not effectively prevent acute rejec-
tion, but more doses and prolonged duration increase the risk of 
infection and the potential occurrence of lymphoma. Thymo-
globulin administration causes a cytokine release syndrome, so 
premedications (acetaminophen and diphenhydramine) are usu-
ally given. The principal side effects of Thymoglobulin include 
fever, chills, arthralgias, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and an 
increased incidence of a variety of infections.14,15
Nondepleting Antibodies
Basiliximab (Simulect) is an anti-CD25 monoclonal antibody. 
The alpha subunit of the IL-2 receptor, also known as Tac or 
CD25, is found exclusively on activated T cells. Blockade 
of this component by monoclonal antibody selectively pre-
vents IL-2–induced T-cell activation. No lymphocyte deple-
tion occurs with basiliximab; it is not designed to be used to 
treat acute rejection. Its selectivity in blocking IL-2–mediated 
responses makes it a powerful induction agent without the 
added risks of infections, malignancies, or other major side 
effects. Currently, basiliximab is the only available anti-CD25 
monoclonal antibody approved for clinical use. Usually, it is 
followed by the use of calcineurin inhibitors, corticosteroids, 
and MMF as maintenance immunosuppression.16
Alemtuzumab (Campath), another anti-CD52 monoclo-
nal antibody, was initially used to treat chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia. The use of alemtuzumab has grown in the field of 
transplantation, given its profound lymphocyte-depleting 
effects. It causes cell death by complement-mediated cytoly-
sis, antibody-mediated cytotoxicity, and apoptosis. One dose 
alone (30 mg) depletes 99% of lymphocytes. Monocyte recov-
ery can be seen at 3 months posttransplant; B-cell recovery at 
12 months; and T-cell recovery, albeit only to 50% of base-
line, at 36 months. Alemtuzumab causes a significant cytokine 
release reaction and often requires premedications (steroids and 
antihistamines). Because of the long-lasting T-cell depletion, 
the risks of infection and posttransplant lymphoproliferative 
disorder remain. Currently, alemtuzumab is available only 
through a limited distribution program, not through commercial 
medication distributors.17,18
MAINTENANCE
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids have had a role in immunosuppression since 
the beginning of the field of transplantation. Despite numer-
ous attempts to limit or discontinue their use, they remain an 
integral component of most immunosuppressive protocols, for 
both induction and maintenance. Moreover, they are often the 
first-line agents in the treatment of acute rejection. Steroids 
bind to glucocorticoid-responsive elements in DNA that prevent 
the transcription of cytokine genes and cytokine receptors. In 
addition, steroids have an impact on lymphocyte depletion, on 
decreases in cell-mediated immunity, and on T-cell activation 
of many phases of rejection.
326
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Nonetheless, the numerous adverse effects of steroid ther-
apy contribute significantly to morbidity in transplant recipi-
ents.19 Common side effects include acne, increased appetite 
and associated weight gain, mood changes, diabetes, hyperten-
sion, and impaired wound healing.
One of the most common maintenance immunosuppres-
sive regimens consists of triple-drug therapy: prednisone, a cal-
cineurin inhibitor, and an antimetabolite. Large doses of steroids 
are usually given perioperatively and in the immediate postop-
erative period. Protocols vary by center, but the steroid dose is 
usually tapered to an adult dose of roughly 5 to 15 mg daily, or 
completely stopped at some point. Steroids are substrates for 
CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and P-glycoprotein pathways where drug 
interactions might need to be monitored.20,21
Azathioprine
An antimetabolite, azathioprine (AZA) is converted to 
6-mercaptopurine and inhibits both the de novo purine synthe-
sis and salvage purine synthesis. AZA decreases T-lymphocyte 
activity and decreases antibody production. It has been used 
in transplant recipients for more than 40 years, but became an 
adjunctive agent after the introduction of cyclosporine. With the 
development of newer agents such as MMF, the use of AZA has 
Table 11-3 
Summary of the main immunosuppressive drugs
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Adverse Effects
Clinical Uses
Dosage
Cyclosporine 
(CSA)
Binds to cyclophilin
Inhibits calcineurin and 
IL-2 synthesis
Nephrotoxicity
Tremor
Hypertension
Hirsutism
Improved bioavailability of  
  microemulsion form
Oral dose 5 mg/kg  
  per day (given in two 
  divided doses)
Tacrolimus 
(FK506)
Binds to FKBP
Inhibits calcineurin and 
IL-2 synthesis
Nephrotoxicity
Hypertension
Neurotoxicity
GI toxicity (nausea,  
  diarrhea)
Improved patient and graft  
  survival in (liver) primary  
  immunosuppression and  
  rescue therapy
Used as mainstay of  
  maintenance protocols
IV 0.015 mg/kg per day  
  as continuous infusion
PO 0.05 mg/kg per day  
  (given every 12 h)
Mycophenolate 
mofetil
Antimetabolite
Inhibits enzyme 
  necessary for de novo 
  purine synthesis
Leukopenia
GI toxicity
Effective for primary  
  immunosuppression in  
  combination with tacrolimus
1 g bid PO
Sirolimus
Inhibits lymphocyte 
  effects driven by IL-2 
  receptor
Thrombocytopenia
Increased serum  
  cholesterol/LDL
Poor wound healing
May allow early withdrawal  
  of steroids and decreased  
  calcineurin doses
2–4 mg/d, adjusted to  
  trough drug levels
Corticosteroids
Multiple actions
Anti-inflammatory
Inhibits lymphokine  
  production
Cushingoid state
Glucose intolerance
Osteoporosis
Used in induction, maintenance, 
  and treatment of acute  
  rejection
Varies from milligrams to 
  several grams per day
Maintenance doses, 
  5–10 mg/d
Azathioprine
Antimetabolite
Interferes with DNA  
  and RNA synthesis
Thrombocytopenia
Neutropenia
Liver dysfunction
Used in maintenance  
  protocols or if intolerance  
  to mycophenolate mofetil
1–3 mg/kg per day for 
  maintenance
Belatacept
T-cell blocker
Increased risk of  
  bacterial infections
New drug for maintenance  
  immunosuppression in renal  
  transplants only
5–10 mg/kg per day  
  infusion
FKBP = FK506-binding protein; GI = gastrointestinal; IL = interleukin; IV = intravenous; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; PO = oral
decreased significantly. However, it is preferred in recipients 
who are considering conceiving a child, because MMF is tera-
togenic in females and can cause birth defects. AZA might be 
an option for recipients who cannot tolerate the gastrointestinal 
(GI) side effects of MMF.
The most significant side effect of AZA, often dose-
related, is bone marrow suppression. Leukopenia is often 
reversible with dose reduction or temporary cessation of the 
drug. Other significant side effects include hepatotoxicity, pan-
creatitis, neoplasia, anemia, and pulmonary fibrosis. Its most 
significant drug interaction is with allopurinol, which blocks 
AZA’s metabolism, increasing the risk of pancytopenia. Rec-
ommendations are to not use AZA and allopurinol together, or if 
doing so is unavoidable, to decrease the dose of AZA by 75%.22
Mycophenolate Mofetil
Approved in May 1995 by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) for preventing acute rejection after kidney 
transplants, MMF has now been incorporated into routine 
maintenance regimens after many solid organ transplants. 
Mycophenolate is the prodrug of mycophenolate acid, derived 
from Penicillium fungi. Mycophenolate acid is an inhibitor of 
inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) involved in 
327
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Table 11-4 
Side effects and drug interactions of the main immunosuppressive drugs
Common Side Effects
Other Medications That 
Increase Blood Levels
Other Medications 
That Decrease Blood 
Levels
Other Medications 
That Potentiate  
Toxicity
Cyclosporine 
(CSA)
Hypertension, 
nephrotoxicity, 
hirsutism, neurotoxicity, 
gingival hyperplasia, 
hypomagnesemia, 
hyperkalemia
Verapamil, diltiazem, 
clarithromycin, azithromycin, 
erythromycin, azole antifungals, 
protease inhibitors, grapefruit 
juice
Isoniazid, 
carbamazepine, 
phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, rifampin,  
St. John’s Wort
Nephrotoxicity: 
ganciclovir, 
aminoglycosides, 
NSAIDs, ACE-Is, and 
ARBs
Tacrolimus 
(FK506)
Hypertension, 
nephrotoxicity, alopecia, 
hyperglycemia, 
neurotoxicity, 
hypomagnesemia, 
hyperkalemia
Verapamil, diltiazem, 
clarithromycin, azithromycin, 
erythromycin, azole antifungals, 
protease inhibitors, grapefruit 
juice
Isoniazid, 
carbamazepine, 
phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, rifampin,  
St. John’s wort
Nephrotoxicity: 
ganciclovir, 
aminoglycosides, 
NSAIDs, ACE-Is, and 
ARBs
Sirolimus
Thrombocytopenia and 
neutropenia, elevated 
cholesterol, extremity 
edema, impaired wound 
healing
Verapamil, diltiazem, 
clarithromycin, azithromycin, 
erythromycin, azole antifungals, 
protease inhibitors, grapefruit 
juice
Isoniazid, 
carbamazepine, 
phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, rifampin,  
St. John’s wort
—
Mycophenolate 
mofetil
Leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia,  
GI upset
—
Cholestyramine, 
antacids
Bone marrow 
suppression: 
valganciclovir, 
ganciclovir, TMP-SMX
Corticosteroids
Hyperglycemia, 
osteoporosis, cataracts, 
myopathy, weight gain
—
—
—
Azathioprine
Leukopenia, anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, 
neoplasia, hepatitis, 
cholestasis
—
—
Bone marrow 
suppression: allopurinol, 
sulfonamides
ACE-I = angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker; NSAID = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; TMP-SMX = 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
the de novo pathway of purine synthesis.23 MMF is available 
in capsules (250 and 500 mg); the starting dose is 1 g twice 
daily. In hopes of decreasing the GI side effects, an enteric-
coated formulation called Myfortic was developed; its benefits 
have not been clearly demonstrated in studies, but in some 
conversion studies, patients did report less GI intolerance. The 
pharmacokinetics of MMF are complex; mycophenolic acid 
(MPA) levels are not routinely performed at most transplant 
centers. Studies have shown that MPA levels and the incidence 
of rejection are not significantly correlated.24 The most com-
mon side effects of MMF are GI in nature, most commonly 
diarrhea, nausea, dyspepsia, and bloating. Esophagitis and 
gastritis occur in roughly 5% of recipients and may represent 
a cytomegalovirus (CMV) or herpesvirus family infection. 
The other important side effects are leukopenia, anemia, and 
thrombocytopenia (Table 11-4). Leukopenia can sometimes be 
reversed by lowering the MMF dose and discontinuing other 
agents like valganciclovir. MMF does not have any signifi-
cant drug interactions, but clinicians should be careful to avoid 
additive toxicities with other medications that might lead to 
leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
Sirolimus
The first mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors to 
enter clinical use was sirolimus (Rapamune). A key regulatory 
kinase, mTOR changes cells from the G1 to S phase in the cell 
cycle, in response to proliferation signals provided by cytokines 
like IL-2. The mTOR inhibitors bind to FK506-binding pro-
tein (FKBP), and the sirolimus-FKBP complex binds to mTOR. 
Sirolimus also inhibits proliferation of vascular smooth muscle 
cells, possibly easing the vasculopathy and progressive fibrosis 
that can affect allografts. Sirolimus is a substrate for CYP3A4/4 
and has many significant drug interactions (see Table 11-4).
To date, sirolimus has been used in a variety of combina-
tions for maintenance immunosuppression, alone or in conjunc-
tion with one of the calcineurin inhibitors. In such combinations, 
sirolimus usually is used to help withdraw, or completely avoid 
the use of, steroids. It also has been used as an alternative to 
328
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
tacrolimus or cyclosporine, in a calcineurin-sparing protocol. 
One of the most significant side effects of sirolimus is hyper-
triglyceridemia, a condition that may be resistant to statins and 
fibrates. Impaired wound healing (immediately posttransplant in 
particular), thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia also are 
associated with sirolimus, and these problems are exacerbated 
when it is used in combination with MMF.25,26
Cyclosporine
The introduction of cyclosporine in the early 1980s dramatically 
altered the field of transplantation by significantly improving 
outcomes after kidney transplantation. Cyclosporine binds with 
its cytoplasmic receptor protein, cyclophilin, which subsequently 
inhibits the activity of calcineurin, thereby decreasing the expres-
sion of several critical T-cell activation genes, the most impor-
tant being for IL-2. As a result, T-cell activation is suppressed.27
Many formulations of cyclosporine exist, so it is important 
to know which one the transplant recipient is taking. Sandim-
mune, an older, oil-based formulation, has poor bioavailabil-
ity and variable absorption. The newer formulations, Gengraf 
and Neoral, are microemulsified with improved bioavailability. 
Cyclosporine can be given intravenously or orally to maintain 
trough levels of 250 to 350 ng/mL for the first 3 months post-
transplant; then it can be tapered to 150 to 250 ng/mL.28
The metabolism of cyclosporine is via the cytochrome 
P450 system, resulting in many significant drug interactions 
(see Table 11-4). Calcineurin inhibitors are nephrotoxic and 
constrict the afferent arteriole in a dose-dependent, reversible 
manner (Table 11-5). They also can cause hyperkalemia and 
hypomagnesemia. Several neurologic complications, including 
headaches, tremor, and seizures, also have been reported.29
Cyclosporine has several undesirable cosmetic effects, 
including hirsutism and gingival hyperplasia. It is associated 
with a higher incidence of hypertension and hyperlipidemia than 
is tacrolimus.
Tacrolimus
The calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus (Prograf) is now the 
backbone of most immunosuppressive regimens. Tacrolimus 
Table 11-5 
Drug interactions and side effects associated with 
calcineurin inhibitors
Interactions
Medications
Inhibition of 
metabolism
Clarithromycin, erythromycin, azole 
antifungals, diltiazem, verapamil, 
nicardipine, amiodarone, grapefruit juice, 
ritonavir, azithromycin
Induction of 
metabolism
Nevirapine, rifampin, St. John’s wort, 
carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
caspofungin
Hyperkalemia
Potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is), 
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 
β-blockers, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Nephrotoxicity Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
aminoglycosides, amphotericin, ACE-Is, 
ARBs
acts by binding FKBPs, causing roughly 10 to 100 times more 
potent inhibition of IL-2 production than cyclosporine (which 
acts by binding cyclophilins). It can be given intravenously, 
orally, or sublingually to maintain trough levels of 8 to 12 ng/mL 
for the first 3 months posttransplant; then it can be tapered to 
6 to 10 ng/mL.
The metabolism of tacrolimus is via the cytochrome P450 
system, resulting in many significant drug interactions (see 
Table 11-4).
Tacrolimus causes a higher incidence of new-onset dia-
betes posttransplant than does cyclosporine. Other side effects 
include alopecia, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, hypertension, 
hyperkalemia, hypomagnesemia, and an increased incidence of 
certain types of infection.30
Belatacept
The best-characterized pathway of T-cell costimulation includes 
CD28; its homologue, the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated 
protein 4 (CTLA4); and their ligands, CD80 and CD86. Belata-
cept (also known as LEA29Y) was developed through two amino 
acid substitutions to abatacept (also known as CTLA4-Ig), a 
fusion protein consisting of the extracellular domain of CTLA4 
and the Fc domain of immunoglobulin G (IgG). It is a high-
avidity molecule with slower dissociation rates.
Recent trials have compared the use of belatacept vs. a 
standard cyclosporine protocol in recipients of living donor, 
deceased donor, and extended-criteria donor kidneys. Belata-
cept was not inferior to cyclosporine in both patient and allograft 
survival rates, but was associated with a higher rate of biopsy-
proven acute cellular rejection.
In terms of adverse effects, belatacept differs from stan-
dard calcineurin-based regimens because of an increased risk 
of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD); the 
greatest risk is in recipients who are Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-
seronegative pretransplant. The FDA recommends the use of 
belatacept only in seropositive recipients. Studies in liver trans-
plant recipients were halted early because of increased mortality 
rates.
However, belatacept does have a lower incidence of car-
diovascular risk factors including metabolic lipid disorders, 
hypertension, neurotoxicity, glucose abnormalities, and adverse 
cosmetic effects. Except for the increased risk of malignancy, 
the more favorable adverse effect profile of belatacept and its 
convenient monthly dosing schedule may make it an attrac-
tive option for maintenance of immunosuppression, possibly 
improving compliance.31,32
HUMORAL REJECTION
Rituximab
A chimeric anti-CD20 (anti-B cell) monoclonal antibody, 
rituximab is currently FDA approved for treating lymphoma. 
The CD20 antigen is expressed early in the B-cell cycle but 
is absent on mature plasma cells. The variable region binds 
to CD20 through three different mechanisms: (a) antibody-
dependent cell cytotoxicity, (b) complement-dependent cell 
killing, and (c) induction of apoptotic cell death. The use of 
rituximab has grown to include the treatment of antibody-medi-
ated rejection and use in desensitization protocols. Studies so 
far have been small, with rituximab usually used in conjunction 
with plasmapheresis, steroids, and intravenous immunoglobu-
lin (IVIG).33-35
329
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Bortezomib
A proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib is FDA approved for treating 
multiple myeloma. It can directly target plasma cells. Traditional 
treatments have been successful in removing antibodies, inhibit-
ing antibody activity, or lowering antibody production; however, 
targeting mature antibody production in plasma cells has not met 
with success. Bortezomib has been shown to cause apoptosis of 
normal plasma cells, thereby decreasing alloantibody produc-
tion in sensitized patients. Several case reports and series have 
described the use of bortezomib for the treatment of antibody-
mediated rejection and in desensitization protocols.34,36,37
Eculizumab
A humanized monoclonal antibody with high affinity for C5, 
eculizumab is a first-in-class, FDA-approved agent for treating 
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and hemolytic uremic 
syndrome. It blocks the activation of the terminal complement 
cascade. Most antibody-mediated rejection episodes are associ-
ated with early complement activation as evidenced on renal 
transplant biopsies by the presence of C4d+ staining of the 
peritubular capillaries. Given its highly selective mechanism 
of action, this agent is predicted to be useful to treat antibody-
mediated rejection and to desensitize patients pretransplant. 
However, its serious adverse effects include an increased risk of 
infections, especially due to encapsulated bacteria such as Neis-
seria meningitidis. Patients should be immunized with menin-
gococcal vaccine at least 2 weeks before the administration of 
eculizumab.34,38,39
INFECTIONS AND MALIGNANCIES
Advances in immunosuppression have led to improved graft 
survival rates. However, the growing population of immuno-
suppressed patients, in turn, has led to an increased incidence of 
opportunistic infections and malignancies. Such posttransplant 
complications have become important barriers to long-term 
disease-free survival.
Infections
Transplant recipients are predisposed to a variety of infec-
tions. Immunosuppression is the obvious reason. Moreover, 
such patients have already endured end-stage organ disease 
pretransplant and then the stress of an invasive transplant 
operation. Posttransplant, they continue to have significant 
comorbid conditions.
Early.  Early infections (i.e., infections occurring within 1 
month posttransplant) can be due to a wide spectrum of patho-
gens (bacterial, viral, and fungal). In the immediate postopera-
tive period, recipients are significantly compromised from the 
stress of the operation, from induction immunosuppression, and 
often from initially impaired graft function. Infections during 
this period can be devastating.
It is imperative to differentiate between medical and 
surgical infections. Surgical infections are the most common 
and require expedient surgical intervention. Typical examples 
include generalized peritonitis, intra-abdominal abscesses, and 
wound infections.
In liver and pancreas recipients, surgical infections are 
most severe. The incidence of intra-abdominal infections is 
decreasing, but they remain a significant problem: they are the 
second most common reason (after vascular thrombosis) for 
graft loss in pancreas recipients.
Lengthy operations with significant blood loss, prolonged 
warm and cold ischemic times, and spillage of contaminated 
fluid (bile, urine, or bowel contents) predispose patients to intra-
abdominal infections. Other prominent risk factors are the 
high level of induction immunosuppression immediately 
posttransplant and anastomotic leaks. Furthermore, pretrans-
plant infections can re-emerge or worsen.
The signs and symptoms of intra-abdominal infections are 
those of peritonitis: fever, hypotension, ileus, and abdominal 
pain, although the latter can be masked by immunosuppres-
sion. Treatment entails a prompt return to the operating room. 
Intra-abdominal infections are usually polymicrobial, involving 
several bacterial and fungal species. Common bacterial isolates 
include Escherichia coli, as well as Enterococcus, Klebsiella, 
and Pseudomonas species. Common fungal isolates are Can-
dida albicans, Candida krusei, and Candida glabrata. Local-
ized infections or abscesses can be treated with percutaneous 
drainage and antibiotics.
Medical infections include respiratory, urinary tract, 
and bloodstream infections. Medical treatment should also be 
aggressive, often including empiric antibiotics and antifungal 
medications even before culture results are available. Recipients 
of organs from infected donors should be treated per the results 
of donor culture speciation and the antibiotic sensitivity profile.
Late.  Late infections primarily are due to chronic immunosup-
pression, specifically the depression of cell-mediated immunity 
that renders recipients susceptible to viruses, fungi, and parasites.
Members of the herpesvirus group are the most common 
etiologic agents of viral infections posttransplantation, with her-
pes simplex virus (HSV), CMV, and EBV being the most prom-
inent. Pretransplant exposure to viruses may confer immunity. 
Recipients who are seronegative for HSV, CMV, and/or EBV 
have a higher incidence of posttransplant infections, especially 
if they receive donor allografts from seropositive donors.
CMV is a latent infection that can be transmitted to sero-
naive recipients by donor organs from seropositive individuals, 
can reactivate during immunosuppression, or both. Infections 
usually occur 3 to 6 months posttransplant or during treatment 
for rejection. The incidence of CMV has been greatly reduced 
with 12-week acyclovir prophylaxis.40 CMV infections range 
from an asymptomatic or mild flu-like syndrome to tissue-inva-
sive disease resulting in pneumonitis, hepatitis, and GI ulcer-
ations. Symptomatic infections and all tissue-invasive CMV 
disease should be treated with intravenous (IV) ganciclovir, a 
reduction in immunosuppression, or both, although successful 
treatment of mild to moderate rejection and concurrent mild to 
moderate CMV disease has been described.
EBV infections range from a mild mononucleosis syn-
drome to severe hepatitis and highly morbid PTLD. PTLD 
ranges from a localized tumor to a progressive, diffuse infiltra-
tion of various organs including the brain. It results from the 
proliferation of EBV-positive B cells in immunosuppressed 
patients. The main risk factors are a high degree of immunosup-
pression and a predisposing EBV serostatus (seronaive recipi-
ent, seropositive donor). Among patients with early lesions, the 
first line of treatment is to reduce immunosuppression. For those 
with more advanced PTLD, rituximab is used.
After 6 months posttransplant, the risk of invasive fungal 
infections is closely associated with environmental exposures. 
Blastomyces dermatitidis grows in moist soil in the Midwest 
and Southeast regions of the United States. Diagnosis is con-
firmed by biopsy; the preferred treatment is IV amphotericin B.
3
330
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Coccidioides immitis can cause invasive coccidioidomy-
cosis after inhalation of aerosolized infectious particles. It is 
endemic in the Southwest, Northern Mexico, and various parts 
of Central and South America. This infection can be resilient 
and difficult to treat. The first line of treatment is high-dose 
amphotericin B.
Histoplasma capsulatum is found in chicken and bat drop-
pings in the Ohio River and Mississippi River valleys. Dissemi-
nation is commonplace; up to a quarter of patients have central 
nervous system (CNS) involvement. Treatment consists of pro-
longed (3 to 13 months) administration of oral itraconazole.
Opportunistic infections with Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, 
Mucor, and Rhizopus species are rare but can cause serious 
infections. Patients with invasive Candida or Aspergillus infec-
tions have a 20% mortality rate. Prophylaxis with fluconazole 
has been shown to reduce invasive fungal infections in liver 
recipients.41
Pneumocystis jiroveci (also known as PCP) is ubiqui-
tous and can cause pulmonary disease in immunocompromised 
patients. However, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-
SMX) is effective prophylaxis against PCP, and daily, lifelong 
administration has virtually eliminated this infection among 
transplant recipients.
Malignancies
Chronic immunosuppression increases the risk of develop-
ing certain types of malignancies. The most extensive data, 
from a cohort study involving more than 175,000 solid organ 
transplant recipients, showed that 10,656 of them developed 
malignancies. The standardized incidence ratio was 2.10 (as 
compared with the general population). Recipients had at least 
a fivefold increase (as compared with the general population) in 
these types of malignancies: Kaposi’s sarcoma, nonmelanoma 
skin cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and cancer of the liver, 
anus, vulva, and lip. In addition, recipients had a statistically 
significant increase (as compared with the general population) 
in melanoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and cancer of the lung, 
kidney, colon, rectum, and pancreas.42
ORGAN PROCUREMENT AND PRESERVATION
Organ procurement is a key element in organ transplantation. 
Currently, 58 organ procurement organizations (OPOs) exist in 
the United States, all members of the Organ Procurement and 
Transplantation Network (OPTN), which is a federally man-
dated network created by and overseen by UNOS. Each OPO is 
responsible for evaluating and procuring deceased donor organs 
for transplantation in a specific geographic region. Hospitals 
receiving any type of federal reimbursement for their services 
(whether transplant-related or not) are required to report all 
deaths to their OPO in a timely manner. Each OPO then deter-
mines the medical suitability of the deceased for organ dona-
tion; requests consent for donation from family members; if 
consent is given, contacts the OPTN to analyze and identify 
potential recipients whose HLA antigens most closely match 
those of the donor; and arranges for the recovery and transport 
of any donated organs.
Strategies to increase organ donation and utilization have 
been successfully implemented in the last 10 years. The nation-
wide “Organ Donation Breakthrough Collaborative,” sponsored 
by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in 2003, 
brought the OPOs and transplant communities into a single 
concerted program to develop best practices guidelines. How-
ever, a severe donor shortage remains. The number of living 
organ donors peaked in 2007 and has declined since.
Alternative options include tissue engineering and stem 
cell research, but those fields are in their infancy in terms of pro-
ducing fully functional and vascularized human organs. With the 
development of genetic knockout pigs, xenotransplantation still 
shows promise, but two problems in particular—immunologic 
barriers and xenosis (also known as zoonosis) of endogenous 
porcine retroviruses—have yet to be satisfactorily addressed.
Today, the gap between patients waiting for organ trans-
plants and the number of organs available continues to widen. 
More than 110,000 patients are on the waiting list for solid organ 
transplants, but only 28,456 transplants were performed in 2011.
Deceased Donors
Most transplants today utilize organs from deceased donors. 
Formerly, death was determined by the cessation of both cardiac 
and respiratory function.
Donation after Brain Death.  In 1968, the concept of “irre-
versible coma” was introduced by an ad hoc committee report 
at Harvard Medical School; that concept was pivotal to the final 
acceptance, in 1981, of “brain death” as a legal definition in the 
United States. The legal language states that the declaration of 
brain death should be in accordance with acceptable medical stan-
dards, but does not specify clinical methodology. It is customary 
for hospitals to establish their own policies to declare brain death, 
according to their standards of care and local regulations.
Typically, brain death is defined as the irreversible cessa-
tion of brain function, including the brainstem. The presence of 
medical conditions that mimic brain death—such as drug over-
dose, medication side effects, severe hypothermia, hypoglyce-
mia, induced coma, and chronic vegetative state—need to be 
excluded. The latest evidence-based guideline on determining 
brain death in adults reaffirmed the validity of current clinical 
practice.43 Briefly, the clinical diagnosis of brain death consists 
of four essential steps: (a) establishment of the proximate cause 
of the neurologic insult; (b) clinical examinations to determine 
coma, absence of brainstem reflexes, and apnea; (c) utilization 
of ancillary tests, such as electroencephalography (EEG), cere-
bral angiography, or nuclear scans, in patients who do not meet 
clinical criteria; and (d) appropriate documentation. A similar 
guideline on determining brain death in pediatric patients was 
recently developed.44
Once the diagnosis of brain death has been established, the 
local OPO assumes the care of the potential donor and initiates 
the process of donor evaluation and organ donation, and the 
potential donor is screened for contraindications to donation. 
The medical history and social history are obtained from the 
available family members. A battery of tests, including sero-
logic or molecular detection of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) and viral hepatitis, are performed. The exact medical con-
ditions that preclude donation vary; nonetheless, in the United 
States, infections and other medical conditions that determine 
eligibility are dictated by UNOS bylaws and routinely reviewed 
and updated.
The OPO focuses on preserving organ function and opti-
mizing peripheral oxygen delivery until organ procurement 
commences.45 In all deceased donors, core temperature, sys-
temic arterial blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, and 
urine output must be determined routinely and frequently. 
Arterial blood gases, serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, 
331
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
serum creatinine, liver enzyme, hemoglobin, and coagulation 
tests need to be monitored regularly. In all brain-dead donors, 
elevated intracranial pressure triggers a compensatory catechol-
amine response to maintain cerebral profusion pressure. Isch-
emic injury to the spinal cord and the sympathetic system may 
lead to a profound vasodilation. As a result, brain-dead donors 
frequently have severe hemodynamic and metabolic derange-
ments, so aggressive monitoring and intervention are required 
to prevent loss of precious organs.
Previous studies of deceased donor care focused on organ-
specific resuscitation protocols that resulted in only marginal 
gains in the number of organs transplanted. The latest develop-
ments center on multisystem protocols to increase the number 
of organs transplanted per donor (OTPD).46,47 The goals are to 
maintain a core temperature between 36.0 and 37.5°C, a mean 
arterial pressure >70 mmHg or a systolic pressure >100 mmHg, 
and a hemoglobin level between 7 and 10 g/dL; hormonal 
therapy and aggressive treatment of arrhythmias and metabolic 
derangements are also called for.47
Surgical Technique.  Procurement of multiple organs (heart, 
lungs, kidney, liver, pancreas, and/or small bowel), or multivis-
ceral procurement, was first described by the Pittsburgh group 
in 1987.48 Since then, most centers have incorporated changes, 
especially with regard to the timing and location of dissection 
and flushing.49,50 The basic steps involve a long incision to pro-
vide wide exposure of all thoracic and abdominal organs 
(Fig. 11-3). A Cattell-Braasch maneuver (complete mobiliza-
tion of the distal small bowel, right colon, and duodenum) is 
performed to allow for identification of the distal aorta, iliac 
bifurcation, and distal inferior vena cava (IVC). The infrare-
nal aorta is the site for inserting the cannula that will allow for 
flushing of the organs with cold preservation solution. Some-
times, division of the inferior mesenteric artery is necessary to 
facilitate the exposure of the distal aorta. The third portion of the 
duodenum is retracted cephalad to expose the root of the supe-
rior mesenteric artery (SMA). Limited dissection is performed 
at the root of the SMA, which is encircled with a vessel loop 
to enable its temporary occlusion at the time of flushing, thus 
reducing the incidence of overperfusion injury to the pancreas.
A large anomalous or replaced right hepatic artery typi-
cally rises from the SMA, and this should be identified and 
Figure 11-3.  Exposure for thoracic and abdominal organ 
procurement.
preserved. Lateral to the SMA is the inferior mesenteric vein 
(IMV), which can be cannulated for portal flushing. Dissection 
of the hepatic hilum and the pancreas should be limited to the 
common hepatic artery (CHA), and branches of the CHA (e.g., 
splenic, left gastric, and gastroduodenal arteries) are exposed. 
The gastrohepatic ligament is carefully examined to preserve a 
large anomalous or replaced left hepatic artery, if present. The 
supraceliac aorta can be exposed by dividing the left triangular 
ligament of the liver and the gastrohepatic ligament.
The common bile duct is transected at the superior mar-
gin of the head of the pancreas. The gallbladder is incised and 
flushed with ice-cold saline to clear the bile and sludge. If the 
pancreas is to be procured, the duodenum is flushed with anti-
microbial solution. Before the cannulation of the distal aorta, 
systemic heparinization (300 units/kg) is administered. The 
supraceliac aorta is clamped; cold preservation fluid is infused 
via the aortic (systemic) and IMV (portal) cannulas. The tho-
racic organs, liver, pancreas, and kidneys are then removed.
Donation after Cardiac Death.  Given the severe shortage of 
donor organs, donation after cardiac death (DCD)—also known 
as donation by non–heart-beating donors (NHBDs)—was 
reintroduced to the transplant community in the 1990s.51 The 
category of DCD (Maastricht classification) was initially pro-
posed at an international workshop and is now widely adopted 
for organ procurement.52 Currently, most NHBDs in the United 
States meet Maastricht classification III; that is, they have suf-
fered a devastating injury with no chance of a meaningful recov-
ery but do not meet the criteria for brain death. After consent for 
donation is obtained from the next of kin, the donor’s life sup-
port is removed. After the cessation of cardiac and respiratory 
function, organ procurement commences. DCD procurement 
protocols vary between states; religious and cultural differences 
need to be taken into consideration. The surgical team must be 
familiar with, and respect, the local protocol.
With cardiac death (as opposed to brain death), warm 
ischemic injury to organs can occur during the period between 
circulatory cessation and rapid core cooling through perfusion 
of preservation solution. However, the difference in long-term 
outcomes is negligible for recipients of organs from either type 
of donor. Still, a significant percentage of liver grafts procured 
after cardiac death, especially those with more than 25 minutes 
of warm ischemic time, develop devastating ischemic cholan-
giopathy and fail.53
A new development to minimize ischemic injury to organs 
procured after cardiac death has been the application of extra-
corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). With ECMO, DCD 
differs in two key ways: (a) cannulation occurs before with-
drawal of life support and (b) organs are perfused via ECMO 
with warm oxygenated blood after declaration of cardiac death. 
The initial experience with organs procured using ECMO has 
been encouraging.
Surgical Technique.  Surgeons who perform multiple organ 
retrieval should be familiar and experienced with the super-
rapid technique described by the Pittsburgh group.54 Preferably, 
NHBDs undergo withdrawal of life support in the operating 
room after the surgical site is prepped and draped, as soon as the 
surgical team is ready. Alternatively, the NHBD is transported 
to the operating room after declaration of cardiac death.
A midline incision is used to rapidly gain entry into the 
abdominal cavity. An assistant retracts the small bowel and the 
sigmoid colon laterally, so that the bifurcation of the aorta can 
332
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
be easily identified on the left side of the vertebral column. A 
short segment of the distal aorta is dissected out from the retro-
peritoneum. A moist umbilical tape is passed around the aorta, 
which is used to secure a cannula. The distal aorta is clamped. 
Next, a cannula is passed cephalad through an aortotomy and 
secured. Flushing with cold preservation solution is started at 
once, followed by cross-clamping the aorta proximally (thoracic 
aorta) and venting through the vena cava. The portal flush is 
then instituted.
The rest of the procedure is similar to procurement after 
brain death, with two noticeable differences. First, to avoid 
injury to a large anomalous or replaced left hepatic artery, the 
gastrohepatic ligament and the left gastric artery are separated 
from the stomach at the lesser curvature. Second, to avoid injury 
to a large anomalous or replaced right hepatic artery, the SMA 
is examined before it is divided. If the pancreas is not procured, 
a common aortic patch encompassing both the SMA and the 
celiac artery can be procured with the liver.
Living Donors
The maxim of medical ethics is “primum non nocere” (above 
all, do no harm), and for that reason, living organ donation pres-
ents unique ethical and legal challenges. Performing potentially 
harmful operations to remove organs from healthy individuals 
seems, at first glance, to contradict that maxim. But in fact, the 
ethical framework of living organ donation rests on three guid-
ing principles respected in all discussions of medical practice: 
beneficence to the recipient, nonmaleficence to the donor, and 
the donor’s right to autonomy.55 In order to achieve optimal 
outcomes (the common good), transplant professionals should 
focus on maximizing the benefits for the recipient and minimiz-
ing the damage to the donor. The Uniform Anatomical Gift Act 
adopted by all states in the United States (with slight variations) 
provides the legal framework for competent adult living donors 
to decide whether or not to donate. It is the fiduciary duty of 
transplant professionals to explain the risks of organ donation. 
Any decision to donate should be uncoerced, and no entice-
ments should be offered.
The use of living donors offers numerous advantages for 
recipients in need. First and foremost is the availability of 
lifesaving organs for those who would otherwise succumb to 
the progression of their end-stage disease. In certain parts of 
the world, such as East Asia, the concept of brain death and the 
use of deceased donors conflict with the prevailing culture or 
religion. Even in countries where the use of deceased donors 
is accepted, the use of living donors may significantly shorten 
the waiting time for recipients. A shorter waiting time generally 
implies a healthier recipient—one whose body has not been rav-
aged by prolonged end-stage organ failure. Moreover, with the 
use of living donors, transplants are planned (rather than emer-
gency) procedures, allowing for better preoperative preparation 
of the recipient. Receiving an organ from a closely matched 
relative may also have immunologic benefits. And long-term 
results may be superior with the use of living donors, as is cer-
tainly the case with kidney transplants.
The major disadvantage is the risk to the living donor. 
Medically, there is no possibility of benefit to the donor, only 
the potential for harm. The risk of death associated with dona-
tion depends on the organ being removed. For a nephrectomy, 
the estimated mortality risk is less than 0.05%; for a partial 
hepatectomy, about 0.2%. The risk of surgical and medical 
complications also depends on the procedure being performed. 
In addition, long-term complications may be associated with a 
partial loss of organ function after donation. The guiding prin-
ciple should be minimization of risk to the donor. All potential 
risks must be carefully explained to the potential donor, and 
written informed consent must be obtained.56
Surgical Technique.  The kidney, the first organ to be trans-
planted from living donors, is still the most common organ 
donated by these individuals. The donor’s left kidney is usually 
preferable because of the long vascular pedicle. Use of living 
donor kidneys with multiple renal arteries should be avoided, in 
order to decrease the complexity of the vascular reconstruction 
and to help avoid graft thrombosis. Most donor nephrectomies 
are now performed via minimally invasive techniques, that is, 
laparoscopically, whether hand-assisted or not. With laparo-
scopic techniques, an intraperitoneal approach is most com-
mon: it involves mobilizing the colon, isolating the ureter and 
renal vessels, mobilizing the kidney, dividing the renal vessels 
and the distal ureter[C6], and removing the kidney (Fig. 11-4). 
Extensive dissection around the ureter should be avoided, and 
the surgeon should strive to preserve as much length of the renal 
artery and vein as possible.
Liver transplants with living donors are not as commonly 
performed, given the significantly higher rates of donor mor-
tality and morbidity. Initially, only adult donors for pediatric 
recipients were selected, but now, living donor liver transplants 
also involve adult donors for adult recipients. In dual graft living 
donor liver transplants, segmental grafts from two living donors 
augment the recipient’s graft size.57 The donor hepatectomy is 
similar to a major lobar hepatectomy, except that it is impor-
tant to preserve the integrity of the vascular structure until graft 
resection (Fig. 11-5).
Living donor transplants of organs other than the kidney 
and liver are fairly uncommon, but certain centers do perform 
such transplants. Living donor pancreas transplants involve per-
forming a distal pancreatectomy, with the graft consisting of the 
body and tail of the pancreas; vascular inflow and outflow are 
provided by the splenic artery and splenic vein. Living donor 
intestinal transplants usually involve removal of about 200 cm 
of the donor’s ileum, with inflow and outflow provided by the 
ileocolic vessels. Living donor lung transplants involve removal 
of one lobe of one lung from each of two donors; both grafts are 
then transplanted into the recipient.
Organ Preservation
The development and continuing refinement of organ preser-
vation methods have completely revolutionized the transplant 
field. Extending the time that organs can be safely stored after 
procurement has enabled better organ utilization and better 
recipient outcomes.58,59 Hypothermia and pharmacologic inhibi-
tion are the two most frequent methods. Both slow—yet cannot 
completely shut down—the removed organ’s metabolic activ-
ity, so both have adverse effects, such as cellular swelling and 
degradation. Cold storage solutions were introduced to mitigate 
some of the adverse effects of hypothermia or pharmacologic 
inhibition alone. Such solutions help prevent cellular swelling 
and the loss of cellular potassium.
One, and perhaps the most effective, preservation solu-
tion was developed at the University of Wisconsin and remains 
in wide use.60 Its ingredients include lactobionate (which helps 
prevent cellular swelling and reperfusion injury), raffinose, and 
hydroxyethyl starch (which helps reduce swelling of endothelial 
333
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 11-4.  Laparoscopic left donor nephroureterectomy. A. Takedown of splenic flexure of colon to expose the left renal hilum. B. Dis-
section of left ureter off the psoas muscle. C. Dissection of left renal vein and gonadal vein. Left ureter seen lateral to the dissection. 
D. Dissection of left renal artery. Lumbar veins clipped and divided. E. Endo-TA stapler transection of the left renal artery. F. Placement of 
ports and Pfannenstiel incision for the donor kidney extraction.
Figure 11-5.  Donor hepatectomy (right hepatectomy). A. The liver parenchymal transection line (c, the Cantlie line) marked with cautery. 
Right portal vein (p) and right hepatic artery (a) isolated. b = bile duct. Cystic duct was cannulated for intraoperative cholangiography. 
B. Exposure of hepatic veins after transection of the parenchyma. IVC = inferior vena cava; L = left hepatic vein; M = middle hepatic vein; 
R = right hepatic vein
A
B
334
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
cells, thereby decreasing edema). Histidine-tryptophan- 
ketoglutarate solution is also currently in wide use.61
Despite enhancements in preservation methods, the 
amount of time that an organ can be safely stored remains rel-
atively short (hours, not days), particularly with organs from 
marginal donors. Among kidney recipients, delayed graft func-
tion becomes significantly more frequent after cold ischemic 
times of more than 24 hours, necessitating temporary dialysis, 
which is associated with increased risks of graft loss and higher 
costs.62 Among liver recipients, primary nonfunction and bili-
ary complications ensue after prolonged cold ischemic times. 
In the case of heart and lung recipients, ischemic times should 
be under 6 hours. All of those times assume the use of normal 
donors.
There is revived interest in the use of the pulsatile perfu-
sion pump, a kidney graft preservation method that has been 
available for more than 40 years.63 With the increasing shortage 
of available donor organs and the rise in the use of organs after 
cardiac death, the pulsatile perfusion pump is garnering renewed 
enthusiasm as an adjunct method of preservation, even for donor 
organs other than kidneys.64,65
KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION
Introduction
Ullman reported the first attempted human kidney transplant 
in 1902.66 For the next 50 years, sporadic attempts all ended in 
either technical failure or in graft failure from rejection. Joseph 
Murray performed the first successful kidney transplant in 
1954, an epochal event in the history of organ transplantation. 
In that first case, the immunologic barrier was circumvented by 
transplanting a kidney between identical twins.67 For his pivotal 
contribution, Murray shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or 
Medicine in 1990 with E. Donnall Thomas for their discoveries 
concerning “organ and cell transplantation in the treatment of 
human disease.”
The introduction of AZA (Imuran) in 1960 marked the 
beginning of a new era in kidney transplantation. With the com-
bination of steroids and AZA for maintenance immunosuppres-
sion, the 1-year graft survival rate with a living related donor 
kidney approached 80%; with a deceased donor kidney, the rate 
was 65%.68 In the ensuing years, major milestones included the 
introduction of more effective immunosuppressive medications 
with lower toxicity profiles, such as polyclonal antilymphocyte 
globulin in the 1970s, cyclosporine in the 1980s, tacrolimus in 
the 1990s, and biologics in the first decade of the twenty-first 
century, as previously mentioned.
Parallel to the developments in medical science were the 
transplant community’s concerted efforts to improve use of 
healthcare resources. In the United States, the Social Security 
amendments of 1972 provided Medicare coverage for patients 
with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The National Organ 
Transplant Act of 1984 initiated the process of creating what 
later became UNOS, an umbrella organization to ensure access 
to organs by patients in need, to enhance organ procurement 
and allocation, and to improve posttransplant outcomes. This 
infrastructure later became the blueprint for other countries to 
follow. As a result, organ transplantation is the most transparent 
field of medicine. Data such as transplant center performance 
are readily available on public websites; penalties for violation 
of regulations and for underperformance often result in trans-
plant programs being shut down.
Today, a kidney transplant remains the most definitive and 
durable renal replacement therapy for patients with ESRD. It 
offers better survival and improved quality of life and is con-
siderably more cost-effective than dialysis.69,70 According 
to the 2010 Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients 
(SRTR) annual report, a total of 84,614 adult patients were on 
the kidney transplant waiting list, including 33,215 added just 
that year.71 Yet in 2009, only 15,964 adult kidney transplants 
were performed in the United States (9912 with a deceased 
donor and 6052 with a living donor). Of note, the number of 
patients added to the kidney transplant waiting list has increased 
every year, but the number of kidney transplants performed has 
been declining since 2006. On the positive side, posttransplant 
outcomes have continued to improve: in 2009, the 1-year graft 
survival rate with a living donor kidney was 96.5%; with a 
deceased donor kidney, the rate was 92.0%.
The advantages of a living donor kidney transplant include 
better posttransplant outcomes, avoidance of prolonged waiting 
time and dialysis, and the ability to coordinate the donor and 
recipient procedures in a timely fashion. Living donor kidney 
recipients enjoy better long-term outcomes, a low incidence 
of delayed graft function, and reduced risks of posttransplant 
complications. Furthermore, the elective nature of living donor 
kidney transplants provides unique opportunities for recipient 
desensitization treatment if the donor and recipient are ABO- 
incompatible or if the HLA cross-match results are positive.
Some of the challenges transplant professionals face today 
are closing the growing gap between supply and demand and 
thereby reducing the current prolonged waiting times; refining 
immunosuppressive medications to achieve better outcomes 
with reduced toxicity; and caring for patients who develop 
rejection, especially antibody-mediated rejection.
Pretransplant Evaluation
Active infection or the presence of a malignancy, active sub-
stance abuse, and poorly controlled psychiatric illness are the 
few absolute contraindications to a kidney transplant. Stud-
ies have demonstrated the overwhelming benefits of kidney 
transplants in terms of patient survival, quality of life, and 
cost-effectiveness, so most patients with ESRD are referred for 
consideration of a kidney transplant. However, to achieve opti-
mal transplant outcomes, the many risks (such as the surgical 
stress to the cardiovascular system, the development of infec-
tions or malignancies with long-term immunosuppression, and 
the psychosocial and financial impacts on compliance) must be 
carefully balanced.
Any problems detected during the evaluation of transplant 
candidates are communicated to their referring physician and/or 
to a specialist if advanced evaluation and treatment are needed, 
ultimately improving overall care. Essentially, the pretransplant 
evaluation is a multifaceted approach to patient education and 
disease management.
Before the pretransplant medical evaluation begins, kidney 
transplant candidates are encouraged to attend a group meeting 
focused on patient education. The meeting is coordinated by 
a transplant physician or surgeon. The intent is to familiarize 
patients with the pretransplant evaluation process and with per-
tinent medical concepts and terms. In an open forum format, 
important decisions such as type of donor (living vs. deceased) 
are discussed. The group meeting empowers patients to fully 
participate in their care and serves as an impetus for a meaning-
ful dialogue with healthcare professionals.
4
335
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Medical Evaluation
Cardiovascular Disease.  Diabetes and hypertension are the 
leading causes of chronic renal disease. Concomitant cardiovas-
cular disease (CVD) is a common finding in this population. An 
estimated 30% to 42% of deaths with a functioning kidney graft 
are due to CVD.72,73 Therefore, assessment of the potential kid-
ney transplant candidate’s cardiovascular status is an important 
part of the pretransplant evaluation.
In fact, the American Heart Association and the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology Foundation recently published their 
expert consensus on CVD evaluation and management for solid 
organ transplant candidates.74 The process should focus on care-
ful screening for the presence of significant cardiac conditions 
(e.g., angina, valvular disease, and arrhythmias) and for a prior 
history of congestive heart failure, coronary interventions, or 
valvular surgery. The perioperative risk assessment is based on 
patient symptoms and exercise tolerance. For all kidney trans-
plant candidates, a resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) 
should be obtained. In addition, in this population, the use of 
echocardiography to analyze left ventricular function and to 
assess for pulmonary hypertension is useful.
Stress testing may be considered in patients with no active 
cardiac condition but with risk factors such as diabetes, hemo-
dialysis for more than 1 year, left ventricular hypertrophy, age 
greater than 60 years, smoking, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. 
The utility of noninvasive stress testing (as compared with 
angiographic studies) for evaluating coronary artery disease is 
controversial; an additional prognostic marker is the troponin T 
(cTnT) level.
Malignancies.  Because of the long-term use of immunosup-
pressive medications, transplant recipients are at increased risk 
for development of malignancies. Untreated and/or active malig-
nancies are absolute contraindications to a transplant (with two 
exceptions: nonmelanocytic skin cancer and incidental renal cell 
cancer identified at the time of concurrent nephrectomy [i.e., for 
polycystic kidney disease] and renal transplantation). For most 
patients who have undergone treatment of low-grade tumors 
with a low risk of recurrence (e.g., completely locally excised 
low-grade squamous cell cancer of the skin, colon cancer in a 
polyp absent stalk invasion), a wait of at least 2 years after suc-
cessful treatment is recommended before a kidney transplant 
can be considered. However, for certain types of tumors, espe-
cially at advanced stages or those with a high risk of recurrence 
(e.g., melanoma, lymphoma, renal cell cancer, breast cancer, 
colon cancer), a delay of at least 5 years is advisable. Accord-
ing to the Israel Penn International Transplant Tumor Registry, 
tumor recurrence posttransplant is not infrequent: the recurrence 
rate is 67% in patients with multiple myeloma, 53% in nonme-
lanocytic skin cancer, 29% in bladder cancer, and 23% in breast 
cancer.75
Infections.  A thorough history of infections and immuniza-
tions should be obtained from transplant candidates, who need 
all recommended age-appropriate vaccinations according to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. 
Ideally, vaccinations should be completed at least 4 to 6 weeks 
before the kidney transplant takes place. Immunosuppressive 
medications blunt the immune response and reduce the effec-
tiveness of vaccinations; even more important, with attenuated 
vaccines, vaccine-derived infections could occur. If a splenec-
tomy is anticipated (e.g., in recipients whose donor is ABO-
incompatible or whose HLA cross-match results are positive), 
then they should be immunized against encapsulated organisms 
(such as Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, and 
Streptococcus pneumoniae) well in advance of the splenectomy.
Transplant candidates should undergo routine tuberculosis 
(TB) screening. According to the latest CDC report, in 2011, 
3929 TB cases were diagnosed in persons born in the United 
States and 6546 were diagnosed in foreign-born persons.76 Sero-
logic screening combined with a chest roentgenogram for fun-
gal infections such as coccidioidomycosis or histoplasmosis, in 
patients who either have a history of those infections or are from 
an endemic area, are recommended. Chronic infections such as 
osteomyelitis or endocarditis must be fully treated; a suitable 
waiting period after successful treatment must occur, in order 
to ensure that relapse does not occur.
Hepatitis can be caused by five different type of viruses, 
hepatitis virus A, B, C, D, and E, with the first three being the 
most common. Acute viral hepatitis is a contraindication to a 
kidney transplant; however, chronic viral hepatitis (most com-
monly caused by hepatitis B [HBV] or C [HCV]) does not pre-
clude a recipient from undergoing a kidney transplant. In such 
candidates, obtaining a liver biopsy is essential to assess the 
disease severity. Recipients infected with HBV should undergo 
antiviral treatment (e.g., lamivudine) to prevent reactivation and 
progression of liver disease. Note that HBV is a noncytopathic 
virus; the liver damage is the result of an immune-mediated 
process.77 Moreover, the presence of normal liver enzymes in 
patients with HBV antigenemia does not predict the severity of 
parenchymal damage.
Transplant candidates with chronic HCV infection often 
have HCV-related glomerulonephritis. As with HBV infection, 
the clinical presentation and biochemical findings with HCV 
infection are often unreliable in predicting liver damage. In 
patients with evidence of cirrhosis, a combined liver-kidney trans-
plant should be considered. In appropriate candidates, pretrans-
plant antiviral treatment with interferon-α may be considered. 
However, after a kidney transplant, interferon treatment is not 
recommended, because it may precipitate graft rejection.
Thanks to the excellent outcomes of highly active anti-
retroviral therapy (HAART), infection with HIV is no longer 
considered a contraindication to a kidney transplant. Kidney 
transplant candidates with HIV must have an undetectable HIV 
viral load and a CD4 lymphocyte count greater than 200/mm3; 
in addition, they must not have had any opportunistic infection 
in the previous year.78
Latent viral infections such as CMV and EBV are of par-
ticular interest, given the risks of reactivation posttransplant and 
the detrimental effects on graft and patient survival. Knowing 
the serologic status of CMV and EBV infections helps trans-
plant professionals gauge the risk of immunosuppressive regi-
mens and the impact of the donor’s viral status, thereby guiding 
plans for posttransplant antiviral prophylaxis treatment or, as 
noted earlier, avoiding transplants between a seropositive donor 
and a seronaive recipient.
Kidney Disease.  The third most common cause of graft loss 
in kidney transplant recipients is recurrence of glomerular 
diseases such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), 
immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, hemolytic uremic 
syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and membranopro-
liferative glomerulonephritis. FSGS deserves special mention 
for its frequent occurrence and dramatic presentation of early 
graft loss. An estimated 30% to 40% of FSGS patients develop 
recurrent disease posttransplant; of those, up to half eventually 
336
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
lose their graft.79 In recipients with a history of FSGS, posttrans-
plant nephrotic proteinuria should be promptly investigated; if 
diagnosis is confirmed by kidney biopsy, rescue plasmapheresis 
should be instituted at once. Adjuvant therapy with rituximab 
recently has been proposed.80
Hypercoagulopathy.  Kidney transplant candidates with a 
history of thrombotic events, repeated miscarriages, or a fam-
ily history of thrombophilia should be screened for the fol-
lowing coagulopathic disorders: activated protein C resistance 
ratio, factor V Leiden mutation, factor II 20210 gene mutation, 
antiphospholipid antibody, lupus anticoagulation, protein C or 
S deficiency, antithrombin III deficiency, and hyperhomocys-
teinemia. In recipients at risk for hypercoagulopathy, pediatric 
kidney grafts should be avoided; so should any kidney allografts 
with a complex vascular anatomy.81 A perioperative anticoagu-
lation protocol is recommended in this population.
Surgical Evaluation
Urologic Evaluation.  Kidney transplant candidates (pediatric 
patients, in particular) with chronic kidney disease as a result 
of congenital or genitourinary abnormalities should undergo 
a thorough urologic evaluation. A voiding cystourethrogram 
and a complete lower urinary tract evaluation to rule out out-
let obstruction are essential. Indications for a native nephrec-
tomy include chronic pyelonephritis, large polycystic kidneys 
with loss of intra-abdominal domain, significant vesicoureteral 
reflux, or uncontrollable renovascular hypertension.
Vascular Evaluation.  The potential implant sites for a kidney 
graft include the recipient’s aorta, vena cava, and iliac vessels. 
Careful physical examination often reveals significant central 
and/or peripheral vascular disease. Findings such as a pulsatile 
intra-abdominal mass, diminished or absent peripheral pulse, 
claudication, rest pain, and tissue loss in lower extremities 
should be further evaluated by abdominal computed tomogra-
phy scan or ultrasound, Doppler studies, and/or angiography. 
With the popularity of endovascular interventions, transplant 
surgeons should also be familiar with such technology and have 
detailed anatomic studies of patients with vascular stents.
Immunologic Evaluation.  ABO blood typing and HLA typ-
ing (HLA-A, -B, and -DR) are required before a kidney trans-
plant. The method of screening for preformed antibodies against 
HLA antigens (because of prior transplants, blood transfusions, 
or pregnancies) is evolving. The panel-reactive antibody (PRA) 
assay is a screening test that examines the ability of serum from 
a kidney transplant candidate to lyse lymphocytes from a panel 
of HLA-typed donors. A numeric value, expressed as a percent-
age, indicates the likelihood of a positive cross-match with a 
donor. A higher PRA level identifies patients at high risk for a 
positive cross-match and therefore serves as a surrogate marker 
to measure the difficulty of finding a suitable donor and the risk 
of graft rejection.
The latest development in anti-HLA antibody screening 
is Luminex technology, using HLA-coated fluorescent micro-
beads and flow cytometry. In theory, this technology pinpoints 
donor-specific antibodies (DSAs) in the serum of a kidney 
transplant candidate with a high PRA level. Since all organ 
donors must undergo HLA typing, a negative cross-match for 
recipients with a high PRA level can be ensured by avoiding the 
selection of donors carrying unacceptable antigens (i.e., a vir-
tual cross-match).82 Kidney transplant candidate data (including 
ABO blood types, HLA types, and DSAs) are now entered into a 
nationwide central database to facilitate deceased donor kidney 
allocation, as described earlier.
Psychosocial Evaluation.  Psychiatric disorders have been 
recognized as important contributing factors to poor outcomes 
posttransplant. Patients with uncontrolled psychiatric disorders 
are at high risk for noncompliance with treatment, impaired cog-
nitive function, and the development of substance abuse. The 
psychosocial evaluation is essential to ensure that transplant 
candidates understand the risks and benefits of the procedure 
and that they adhere to the lifetime immunosuppressive medica-
tion regimen.
Recipient Operation
Kidney allografts usually are transplanted heterotopically. The 
iliac fossa is recognized as the ideal position because of its prox-
imity to the recipient’s bladder and iliac vessels.83,84
Retroperitoneal allograft placement also allows easy 
access for percutaneous biopsies and interventions for ureteral 
complications. The right iliac fossa is the preferred site because 
of its easy access to the recipient’s iliac vessels. However, if a 
pancreas transplant is anticipated in the future or if now failed 
kidney grafts have been placed at the right iliac fossa, then the 
left iliac fossa is used for implantation. The current surgical 
technique for kidney transplants was developed and popularized 
in the 1950s and 1960s and has changed little since.85
A large-bore three-lumen urinary catheter is inserted after 
the recipient is anesthetized, and it is occluded with a clamp 
beneath the surgical drapes. Recipients whose native kidneys 
produce urine will naturally fill up the urinary bladder; those 
individuals whose kidneys do not will require insufflation of 
saline prior to creation of the ureteral anastomosis.
Exposure of the operative field starts with a curvilinear 
skin incision, one to two finger widths above the midline pubic 
bone and the lateral edge of the rectus sheath. Superiorly, the 
extension of the incision depends on the recipient’s body habitus 
and the size of the donor kidney. The anterior rectus sheath is 
incised, medially to laterally, until the lateral edge of the rectus 
sheath is exposed. The posterior rectus sheath is missing below 
the arcuate line, thus providing direct access to the extraperito-
neal space. The rectus muscle can be easily mobilized medially 
without being divided. The remainder of the fascial incision is 
along the lateral edge of the rectus sheath until the desired expo-
sure is achieved (Fig. 11-6).
The retroperitoneal space of the iliac fossa is entered by 
mobilizing the peritoneum medially. The inferior epigastric ves-
sels, the round ligament (in females), and the spermatic cord 
and its vasculature (in males) are encountered in this space; the 
former two structures are divided, while the latter is retracted 
with a vascular loop. A self-retained retractor is used to expose 
the surgical field. The iliac vessels should be dissected with 
great care. To minimize the risk of lymphocele development 
postoperatively, dissection of the iliac artery should be limited; 
the intertwining lymphatics around the iliac vessels should be 
ligated. In general, the donor’s renal artery and vein are anasto-
mosed to the recipient’s external iliac vessels in an end-to-side 
fashion (Fig. 11-7). In recipients with a severely calcified iliac 
artery, the internal iliac artery can be used as an alternative, and 
in select cases, an endarterectomy must be performed.
After restoring the circulation to the donor’s kidney, uri-
nary continuity can be established via several approaches. The 
approach chosen depends on such factors as the length of the 
donor ureter and a recipient history of bladder surgery, native 
337
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
nephrectomy, or pelvic radiation. The two most common pro-
cedures to restore urinary continuity are the Leadbetter-Politano 
and a modification of the Lich (e.g., extravesical) ureteroneo-
cystostomy, which actually was designed to avoid ureteral reim-
plantation.
During the former procedure, a large cystotomy is cre-
ated in the dome of the bladder, and the donor ureter is brought 
through a lateral and somewhat inferior 1-cm submucosal tunnel 
into the bladder, the end of which is spatulated and then sewn in 
place without tension with interrupted absorbable sutures placed 
through the mucosa and submucosa on the inside of the bladder.
An extravesical ureteroneocystostomy is performed by 
careful dissection of a 1-cm portion of the muscular layers on the 
anterolateral portion of the bladder until a “bubble” of mucosa 
is exposed. The donor ureter is spatulated in a diamond-shaped 
fashion, the bladder mucosa is incised, absorbable interrupted 
sutures are placed in four quadrants, and a mucosa-to-mucosa 
anastomosis is created using running absorbable sutures with 
a temporary ureteral stent in place of the first three-quarters of 
A
B
C
Figure 11-6.  Incision and exposure for kidney transplant. A. Mark for the skin incision. B. Anterior rectus sheath incised obliquely. The 
abdominal muscle transected lateral to the rectus muscle. C. External iliac artery and vein dissected.
Figure 11-7.  Vascular anastomoses of kidney transplant. A. Arterial anastomosis: donor renal artery with Carrel patch to recipient external 
iliac artery, end-to-side. B. Venous anastomosis: donor renal vein with caval extension conduit to recipient external iliac vein, end-to-side.
A
B
the anastomosis. The muscular layers of the bladder are then 
carefully approximated over the anastomosis to prevent reflux.
The decision to place a ureteral stent depends on the sur-
geon, who must try to balance the risk of infectious compli-
cations with the possible technical complications of a ureteral 
anastomosis, but in general, this is not required except during 
the rarely performed donor ureter to recipient ureter anastomo-
sis or in the case of a pediatric kidney transplant. Fixation of 
the donor’s kidneys is not necessary, except in the case of small 
kidneys (usually from a pediatric donor) or en bloc kidneys.
Grafts with Multiple Renal Arteries
In 10% to 30% of donor kidneys, multiple renal arteries are 
encountered. Unless kidney transplant candidates have hyperco-
agulopathy, grafts with multiple renal arteries fare as well as those 
with single vessels.86 Vascular reconstruction options include 
implanting the donor’s arteries separately, reconstructing the mul-
tiple arteries into a common channel, or combining multiple arter-
ies into a common Carrel patch (Fig. 11-8).
338
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
En Bloc Grafts
Debate persists about whether to implant kidneys obtained from 
young donors (<5 years or whose body weight is under 20 kg) as a 
single en bloc unit into one recipient or separately into two recipi-
ents. The underlying issues are the shortage of donor organs, the 
complexity of the surgical procedure, the risks of graft thrombo-
sis, ureteral complications, and long-term outcomes.
In en bloc kidney transplants, the donor aorta and vena 
cava are used as the vascular inflow and outflow conduits. 
Therefore, reconstruction of the en bloc graft pretransplant is 
key to a successful transplant. The donor’s suprarenal vena 
cava and aorta are oversewn. The lumbar branches of the cava 
and aorta are ligated. Dissection around the renal hilum should 
be avoided. The orientation of the cava and aorta should be 
A
B
Figure 11-8.  Arterial and venous reconstruction. A. Two renal arteries combined into a single Carrel patch (arrow). Right renal vein exten-
sion conduit constructed with stapled caval patch. IVC = inferior vena cava; R = right renal vein. B. Three renal arteries anastomosed to 
external iliac artery separately.
A
B
Figure 11-9.  En bloc kidney transplant (3-month-old donor kidneys). A. En bloc kidneys benched. Vascular integrity tested with methylene 
blue (blue hue look of the kidneys). B. En bloc kidneys transplanted in to a 62-year-old woman. Donor aorta anastomosed to recipient’s 
external iliac artery; donor cava, to recipient’s external iliac vein.
clearly marked, in order to avoid torsion of the anastomosis. If 
the color of the two kidneys looks different after reperfusion, 
repositioning should be attempted to rule out vascular torsion; 
fixation of the en bloc kidneys to the retroperitoneum is often 
necessary. The donor’s ureters are implanted to the recipient’s 
bladder, either as two separate anastomoses or as a common 
patch (Fig. 11-9). Only a handful of centers have performed 
en bloc kidney transplants, but the long-term outcomes are 
encouraging.87,88
Perioperative Care
Preoperatively, a thorough history and physical examination 
should be performed. Any changes in transplant candidates’ 
recent medical history should be investigated in great detail. 
339
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
In those recipients with a historically negative PRA level who 
have recently undergone blood transfusions, a prospective tis-
sue cross-match is necessary to avoid graft rejection. Electrolyte 
panels should be checked. Emergency dialysis may be neces-
sary for transplant candidates experiencing hyperkalemia or 
fluid overload.
For dialysis-dependent transplant candidates, the catheter 
sites should be examined preoperatively to rule out infections. 
Vascular access for hemodialysis is essential to avoid compli-
cations related to posttransplant acute tubular necrosis (ATN). 
Vascular evaluation is mandatory; any changes in results should 
be investigated by appropriate imaging studies.
As is routine for other major surgical procedures, trans-
plant candidates should preoperatively undergo a chest x-ray, a 
12-lead ECG, blood typing, cross-match tests, and prophylaxis 
against surgical site infection (by administration of a nonneph-
rotoxic antibiotic with activity against both common skin micro-
flora and gram-negative pathogens); candidates should receive 
nothing to eat or drink.
Intraoperatively, transplant recipients should be kept 
well-hydrated to avoid ATN and should receive heparin prior to 
vascular occlusion. Before reperfusion of the transplanted kid-
ney, the desired central venous pressure should be maintained 
at around 10 mmHg, and the systolic blood pressure should be 
above 120 mmHg. In pediatric recipients of an adult graft, a 
superphysiologic condition may be necessary to avoid ATN or 
graft thrombosis. Mannitol often is administered before reper-
fusion as a radical scavenger and diuretic agent, and a diuretic 
such as furosemide is administered as well.
Postoperatively, the guiding principles for the care of 
kidney transplant recipients are the same as for other surgical 
patients. The crucial elements include hemodynamic stability 
and fluid and electrolyte balance. To achieve a euvolemic state, 
the recipient’s urine output is replaced with either an equal or a 
reduced volume of IV fluid on an hourly basis, depending on the 
medical status. In recipients undergoing brisk dieresis, aggressive 
replacement of electrolytes (including calcium, magnesium, and 
potassium) may be necessary. In recipients experiencing ATN, 
fluid overload, or hyperkalemia, however, fluid restriction, treat-
ment for hyperkalemia, and even hemodialysis may be necessary.
Hypotension is an unusual event immediately posttrans-
plant. The differential diagnoses include hypovolemia, vasodila-
tion, and myocardial infarction with cardiac failure. Immediate 
action should be taken to avoid life-threatening complications. 
Posttransplant hypertension can be mediated by catecholamines, 
fluid overload, or immunosuppressive agents.
Postoperatively, urine output is used as a surrogate marker 
to monitor graft function. Among recipients whose native kid-
neys produce significant amounts of urine, normal or increased 
urine output can be misleading; for them, serum blood urea 
nitrogen and creatinine levels are more reliable indicators of 
kidney graft function.
Suddenly decreased or minimal urine output requires 
immediate attention. A change in volume status is the most 
common cause, but other culprits include blockage of the uri-
nary catheter, urinary leak, vascular thrombosis, hypotension, 
drug-related nephrotoxicity, ATN, and rejection (all of which 
must be thoroughly investigated). Diagnostic studies such as 
Doppler ultrasound, nuclear renograms, or biopsies should be 
considered.
Postoperative bleeding is an uncommon event after a kid-
ney transplant. Recipients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet 
treatments are at increased risk. Signs and symptoms (such as 
an expanding hematoma over the surgical site, increased pain 
over the graft, a falling hemoglobin level, hypotension, and 
tachycardia) should arouse suspicion of hemorrhage. Doppler 
ultrasound is useful to establish the underlying cause. Surgical 
exploration seldom is required, because the accumulated hema-
toma tamponades the bleed. Indications for surgical explora-
tion include ongoing transfusion requirement, hemodynamic 
instability, and graft dysfunction from hematoma compression. 
For recipients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatments, the 
threshold for surgical exploration is lower. Small unligated ves-
sels at the donor’s renal hilum or recipient’s retroperitoneum are 
likely sources of bleeding.
One of the most devastating postoperative complications 
in kidney recipients is graft thrombosis. It is rare, occurring in 
fewer than 1% of recipients. The recipient risk factors include 
a history of recipient hypercoagulopathy and severe peripheral 
vascular disease; donor-related risk factors include the use 
of en bloc or pediatric donor kidneys, procurement damage, 
technical factors such as intimal dissection or torsion of ves-
sels, and hyperacute rejection. Graft thrombosis usually occurs 
within the first several days posttransplant. Acute cessation of 
urine output in recipients with brittle posttransplant diuresis 
and the sudden onset of hematuria or graft pain should arouse 
suspicion of graft thrombosis. Doppler ultrasound may help 
confirm the diagnosis. In cases of graft thrombosis, an urgent 
thrombectomy is indicated; however, it rarely results in graft 
salvage.
Urologic complications are seen in up to 5% of recipi-
ents. The cause is often related to ureteral ischemia, damage 
during procurement of the donor’s distal ureter, or technical 
errors. Symptoms of urine leak include fever, pain, swelling at 
the graft site, increased creatinine level, decreased urine output, 
and cutaneous urinary drainage. Diagnosis can be confirmed 
by a combination of ultrasound, nuclear renography, drainage 
of perinephric fluid collection, and comparison of serum and 
fluid creatinine levels. Depending on the location and volume 
of the urine leak, satisfactory results can be achieved by surgi-
cal exploration and repair or by percutaneous placement of a 
nephrostomy and ureteral stenting.
Early urinary obstruction can be due to edema, blood clots, 
torsion of the ureter, or compression from a hematoma. Late 
urinary obstruction is often related to ischemia. The appear-
ance of hydronephrosis on ultrasound is a good initial indicator. 
Treatment includes percutaneous placement of a nephrostomy 
and ureteral stenting. If transluminal intervention fails, surgical 
intervention (such as ureteral reimplantation or a ureteropyelos-
tomy) can be undertaken.
Results
A kidney transplant remains the most common solid organ 
transplant in the world today. With the introduction of induc-
tion immunosuppressive therapy and ever-improving, less toxic 
immunosuppressive medications, posttransplant outcomes have 
become better and better. According to a recent analysis of 
more than 250,000 U.S. adult kidney transplant recipients, the 
actual half-life (50% graft survival) of a deceased donor kidney 
was 6.6 years in 1989, 8 years in 1995, and 8.8 years in 2005. 
Interestingly, during that same period—though with a much 
better overall outcome—the half-life of a living donor kidney 
has essentially remained the same: 11.4 years in 1989 and 11.9 
years in 2005.89
340
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
The biggest improvements have been in the reduction of 
1-year graft failure. With a deceased donor kidney, the 1-year 
graft failure rate dropped from 20% in 1989 to less than 7% in 
2009; with a living donor kidney, the rate dropped from 8.5% in 
1989 to less than 3% in 2009.89 Furthermore, steroid-free proto-
cols90 and calcineurin-free protocols91 have been validated and 
implemented in the last two decades, further reducing medication-
related side effects and vastly improving the quality of life for 
tens of thousands of recipients.
Currently, the most common cause of graft loss is recipi-
ent death (usually from cardiovascular causes) with a function-
ing graft. The second most common cause is chronic allograft 
nephropathy; characterized by a slow, unrelenting deterioration 
of graft function, it likely has multiple causes (both immuno-
logic and nonimmunologic).92,93 The graft failure rate due to 
complications related to surgical technique has remained at 
about 2%.
PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
A successful pancreas transplant is currently the only definitive 
long-term treatment for patients with insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus (IDDM) that (a) restores normal glucose hemostasis 
without exposing patients to the risk of severe hypoglycemia 
and (b) prevents, halts, or reverses the development or pro-
gression of secondary complications of diabetes.94
Given its vast medical, social, and financial implications, 
diabetes mellitus is a huge burden to patients and to society as 
a whole. An estimated 10% to 15% of the U.S. population is 
affected by it; of all diabetic patients, 10% have early-onset dis-
ease. In the United States, diabetes mellitus is the most common 
cause of end-stage kidney disease, blindness, impotence, major 
limb amputations, and coronary or peripheral vascular bypass 
procedures. It is one of the most common causes of death, along 
with myocardial infarction and stroke. Diabetes significantly 
decreases not only the quality of life but also life expectancy.
Despite improvements in exogenous insulin administra-
tion (including the use of devices such as insulin pumps), wide 
fluctuations in glucose levels and the risk of hypoglycemic epi-
sodes are common. The Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT) demonstrated in the late 1990s that intensive 
insulin therapy may slow the rate of secondary complications 
of diabetes—yet at the expense of (life-threatening) iatrogenic 
hypoglycemia. The annual mortality rate of patients with 
insulin-induced inadvertent hypoglycemia is estimated to be as 
high as 2% to 3%.
Since the first pancreas transplant in December 1966, per-
formed by William Kelly and Richard Lillehei at the Univer-
sity of Minnesota, more than 25,000 pancreas transplants in the 
United States and more than 10,000 pancreas transplants from 
all over the world have been reported to the International Pan-
creas Transplant Registry (IPTR), which is maintained at the 
University of Arizona.94,95
Pancreas transplants are performed in three recipient 
categories:
•  Simultaneous pancreas and kidney (SPK) transplant in 
diabetic and uremic patients. Almost 80% of pancreas 
transplants are performed in this category. The recipient is 
already obligated to lifelong immunosuppressive therapy, 
due to the need for a kidney transplant, so only the surgical 
risk of a pancreas transplant is added. A successful SPK 
transplant renders the recipient dialysis-free and insulin-
independent.
•  Pancreas after kidney (PAK) transplant in diabetic and 
posturemic patients. Approximately 15% of all pancreas 
transplants fall into this category. These patients previ-
ously underwent a kidney transplant with either a living or 
deceased donor, but are candidates for a subsequent pan-
creas transplant because of poor glucose control or because 
of progression of secondary diabetic complications (which 
may include the development of diabetic nephropathy in the 
transplanted kidney).
•  Pancreas transplant alone (PTA) in nonuremic patients 
with brittle diabetes mellitus. Only about 8% of all pan-
creas transplants are in this category. These patients have 
not yet developed advanced diabetic nephropathy, but their 
glucose levels are extremely labile despite best efforts to 
control it. Because of the lifelong need for immunosuppres-
sive therapy, the surgical risk has to be balanced with the 
medical risks of brittle diabetes (e.g., frequent episodes of 
hypoglycemia and hypoglycemic unawareness).
In SPK recipients, a plethora of literature exists that 
demonstrates significant improvements in secondary dia-
betic complications (across all organ systems) posttransplant. 
Improvements have been reported in diabetic nephropathy, 
neuropathy (autonomic and peripheral), micro- and macrovas-
cular disease, retinopathy, gastroparesis, and other secondary 
complications.96 Currently, more than 1000 pancreas trans-
plants are performed annually in the United States, with the 
goal of conferring the following benefits: excellent glucose 
control (similar to that of a functioning native pancreas), pre-
vention or improvement of secondary diabetic complications, 
and increased quality of life and life expectancy. In addition, 
pancreas transplants can be successfully performed in patients 
who have undergone a total pancreatectomy for benign disease 
(such as chronic pancreatitis) to treat both endocrine and exo-
crine deficiency after surgery.97
Donor Operation
The general criteria for selecting deceased donors for pancreas 
procurement are similar to those for other solid organs; a history 
of type 1 diabetes mellitus obviously is a contraindication. Rela-
tive contraindications include previous pancreatic procedure(s), 
as well as pancreatic disorders, such as chronic pancreatitis and 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. Hyperglycemia in 
itself is not a contraindication to pancreas procurement, because 
its cause in brain-dead donors usually is severe insulin resis-
tance, which is rarely observed in recipients.
In light of better anatomic understanding and improved 
surgical skills, all three abdominal organs that share a common 
blood supply (pancreas, liver, and intestine) can be procured 
at the same time and transplanted into three different recipi-
ents (Fig. 11-10). During pancreas procurement, a “no-touch” 
technique of the gland is preferred; dissection of the pancreas is 
carried out in a way that avoids direct manipulation of the organ 
such that simultaneous procurement of the spleen, duodenum, 
and surrounding connective tissues occurs.
In contrast to the liver and kidneys, the pancreas should 
not be extensively flushed at the end of the procurement. To 
minimize the amount of preservation fluid that reaches the pan-
creas, the splenic artery and SMA can be temporarily clamped 
at their origin from the aorta. Usually, the celiac axis with an 
5
341
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
aortic Carrel patch is retained with the liver. The splenic artery 
is divided close to its origin and is retained with the pancreas. 
The SMA is also procured with an aortic Carrel patch and is 
retained with the pancreas.
In case of a replaced or aberrant right hepatic artery, this 
first branch off of the SMA is carefully dissected out from the 
posterior surface of the pancreas. A replaced or aberrant right 
hepatic artery does not transverse the pancreas and is not a con-
traindication to combined pancreas and liver procurement. But 
with this anatomic variant, an aortic Carrel patch with the proxi-
mal SMA and replaced or aberrant right hepatic artery remains 
with the liver; the distal SMA with the inferior pancreaticoduo-
denal artery remains with the pancreas.
In the relatively rare event that the liver is not procured, 
then neither the splenic nor the gastroduodenal arteries need to 
be divided at their respective takeoff; the donor’s celiac axis and 
the SMA are included on a common Carrel patch. This tech-
nique allows a single arterial anastomosis to be performed in the 
recipient without reconstruction. At the end of the procurement, 
the pancreas is attached to the spleen, duodenum, and proximal 
jejunum, which is stapled at both ends.98
Back Table Preparation of the  
Pancreas Graft
Back table preparation of the pancreas graft consists of four 
steps: (a) removal of the spleen; (b) shortening, restapling, and/
MHV
LHV
RHV
IPDA
MCA
RCA
Figure 11-10.  Simultaneous pancreas, in situ 
split-liver, and intestine procurement. IPDA = 
inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery; LHV = left 
hepatic vein; MCA = middle cerebral artery; 
MHV = middle hepatic vein; RCA = right coro-
nary artery; RHV= right hepatic vein. (Repro-
duced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, 
eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: 
Springer, 2004; Color Plate VI, Figure 8.1.3.11. 
With kind permission of Springer Science + Busi-
ness Media.)
or suture reinforcement of the mesenteric root; (c) trimming of 
any excess distal and proximal duodenum, along with reinforce-
ment of the proximal staple line; and (d) arterial reconstruction.
Back table preparation is carried out in a basin filled 
with chilled preservation solution. The most common tech-
nique to create a single arterial inflow to the pancreas graft is 
the “Y-graft” reconstruction, using a resected segment of the 
donor iliac artery bifurcation. In this technique, the donor exter-
nal iliac artery is anastomosed end-to-end to the donor SMA, 
and the donor internal iliac artery is anastomosed end-to-end to 
the splenic artery (Fig. 11-11). This procedure allows the donor 
common iliac artery to be anastomosed as a single vessel to the 
recipient’s common iliac artery. For venous outflow, the portal 
vein is kept relatively short, in order to avoid the risk of venous 
thrombosis by kinking or impingement.98
Recipient Operation
Over the years, different surgical techniques have been described 
for (a) the management of exocrine pancreatic secretions and (b) 
the type of venous drainage. For the secretions, the two most 
common techniques are drainage of the duodenal segment to the 
bladder (bladder drainage) or to the small bowel (enteric drain-
age) (Figs. 11-12 and 11-13). For venous drainage, systemic 
venous drainage is preferred over portal venous drainage.
The pancreas graft is usually placed intra-abdominally and 
preferably on the right side, because the iliac vessels are in a more 
342
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
shallow position on the right than on the left side; moreover, 
the vessels are already appropriately aligned for the vascular 
anastomoses (i.e., a lateral position for the common iliac vein, a 
medial position for the common iliac artery). Venous and arte-
rial anastomoses are performed end-to-side. After restoration of 
SA
IIA
EIA
SMA
SMA
Figure 11-11.  Posterior view of the pancreas graft with Y-graft 
reconstruction. EIA = external iliac artery; IIA = internal iliac 
artery; SA = splenic artery; SMA = superior mesenteric artery. 
(Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Trans-
plantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer, 2004; Color Plate 
VII, Figure 8.1.3.13[B]. With kind permission of Springer Science 
+ Business Media.)
Figure 11-12.  Whole-organ transplant with systemic 
vein and bladder exocrine drainage. (Reproduced from 
Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Transplanta-
tion of the Pancreas. New York: Springer, 2004; Color 
Plate XIV, Figure 8.2.2.2[B]. With kind permission of 
Springer Science + Business Media.)
blood flow to the graft, hemostasis must be meticulously main-
tained. Because the donor portal vein purposely is kept short, 
ligation and transection of all of the recipient’s internal iliac vein 
branches are frequently performed, in order to prevent tension on 
the venous anastomosis. The pancreas usually is placed with the 
pancreatic head and duodenum pointing caudally.
Bladder drainage is performed using either a hand-sewn 
or a stapled anastomosis in which the antimesenteric side of the 
donor duodenum is sewn to the superior portion of the dome of 
the bladder. The stapled technique requires that a circular cut-
ting stapler be inserted through the open distal end of the donor 
duodenum, which is subsequently closed. Bladder drainage has 
two main advantages. First, rejection of the exocrine pancreas 
precedes rejection of the endocrine pancreas by 5 to 7 days. 
Amylase levels are measured routinely in the recipient’s urine. 
With bladder drainage, antirejection treatment can successfully 
be implemented when the recipient is still normoglycemic and 
only hypoamylasuric. In the absence of hyperglycemia, more 
than 90% of pancreas rejection episodes are reversible. Second, 
bladder drainage avoids the bacterial contamination that occurs 
with enteric drainage. If an anastomotic leak occurs, it is easier 
to treat, because the infection usually remains localized to the 
right lower quadrant.
Enteric drainage is more physiologic and has advantages 
as well. The antimesenteric side of the donor’s duodenum is 
anastomosed to the antimesenteric portion of the recipient’s 
jejunum in a side-to-side fashion. The enteric anastomosis can 
also involve a defunctionalized Roux-en-Y loop, which mini-
mizes the potential complications if an enteric leak occurs.98 
Currently, in the United States, more than 80% of all pancreas 
transplants are performed with enteric drainage for the exocrine 
pancreatic secretions, and more than 90% employ systemic 
venous drainage.95
343
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11-13.  Whole-organ transplant with systemic vein and 
enteric exocrine drainage. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, 
Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: 
Springer, 2004; Color Plate XIV, Figure 8.2.2.2[A]. With kind per-
mission of Springer Science + Business Media.)
Complications
The technical complication rate for pancreas transplants is 
higher than for any other solid organ transplant. Four fac-
tors contribute to the high surgical complication rate99: (a) the 
nature of the organ itself with inherent organ-specific surgical 
complications (e.g., pancreatitis, abscesses, necrosis, fistulas, 
and pseudocysts) and its low blood flow (which significantly 
increases the risk of thrombosis, as compared with a kidney or 
liver transplant); (b) the risk of a leak or infection after con-
necting two hollow viscera (the duodenum and either the blad-
der or small intestine); (c) the increased incidence of rejection 
episodes, because the pancreas is one of the most immunogenic 
solid organs; and (d) the underlying disease of diabetes mellitus, 
predisposing patients not only to infections but also to cardio-
vascular and other complications.
The most common surgical complications are throm-
bosis (an incidence of 5%–15%), intra-abdominal abscesses 
(5%–10%), and bleeding (6%–8%). Other pancreas-specific 
complications include graft pancreatitis (frequently due to pro-
curement or reperfusion injury), pancreatic fistulas, and pan-
creatic pseudocysts. Anastomotic leaks do not always require a 
graft pancreatectomy, but arterial pseudoaneurysms, arteriove-
nous fistulas, and wound dehiscence may. Bleeding frequently 
requires relaparotomy.
Thrombosis usually occurs within the first week posttrans-
plant. It manifests as a sudden increase in insulin requirements 
or as a sharp drop in urinary amylase levels. Venous thrombosis, 
which is more common than arterial thrombosis, is associated 
with distinct clinical symptoms, including a swollen and tender 
graft, hematuria, lower extremity edema, and deep vein throm-
bosis, the latter two occurring ipsilaterally. Arterial thrombosis 
is less symptomatic and may not initially cause pain; its diag-
nosis is usually confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography. Surgi-
cal exploration in recipients with thrombosis usually requires a 
graft pancreatectomy.
With the advent of advanced interventional radiologic pro-
cedures to drain intra-abdominal abscesses, the reoperation rate 
has markedly decreased. Pancreas transplant recipients are 
usually kept on broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents for the first 
7 days posttransplant.
The most common nonsurgical complication posttrans-
plant is rejection. The incidence of rejection is about 30% within 
the first year. The diagnosis is usually based on an increase in 
serum amylase and lipase levels and, in bladder-drained recipi-
ents, a decrease in urinary amylase levels. A sustained drop in 
urinary amylase levels greater than 25% from baseline should 
prompt a pancreas graft biopsy to rule out rejection. In enteric-
drained recipients, one must rely on serum amylase and lipase 
levels only. Other signs and symptoms of rejection include 
tenderness over the graft, unexplained fever, and hyperglyce-
mia, which usually is a late finding; fewer than 5% of all rejec-
tion episodes can be reversed in its presence. The diagnosis of 
rejection should be confirmed by a percutaneous pancreas graft 
biopsy.
Other nonsurgical complications include infections with 
CMV, HCV, or extra-abdominal bacteria or fungi; malignan-
cies, such as PTLD; and, rarely, graft-versus-host disease. For 
such complications, the diagnosis and treatment are similar to 
what is recommended after other solid organ transplants.
Bladder-drained pancreas recipients may experience an 
array of unique urologic complications. Usually the result of 
the irritating nature of pancreatic enzymes on the urothelium in 
the bladder and urethra, these urologic complications can lead 
to cystitis, hematuria, and dysuria. With the loss of bicarbonate 
from pancreatic secretions, dehydration and metabolic acidosis 
are not uncommon. Many of these complications are chronic, 
such that approximately 20% to 30% of all bladder-drained 
recipients require conversion to enteric drainage within the first 
5 years posttransplant.100
Living Donor Pancreas Transplants
Pancreas transplants using living donors also can be performed 
safely and successfully in select donors and recipients. Since 
1979, about 150 such transplants have been performed world-
wide, with 1-year graft survival rates in excess of 85% over 
the last decade. A meticulous donor evaluation using standard 
criteria remains key to a low donor metabolic and surgical com-
plication rate. The concept of procuring the distal pancreas from 
a living donor is based on the observation that patients with 
benign or malignant pancreatic disorders can undergo a distal 
hemipancreatectomy without any serious change in endocrine 
function.
Living donor pancreas transplants are ideal for patients 
with an identical twin, but other relatives can be suitable donors 
as well. In particular, patients with high PRA levels should be 
considered for a living donor transplant.
Living donor pancreas transplants decrease the number of 
deaths of diabetic patients on the waiting list, help overcome the 
organ shortage, reduce mortality and morbidity, and improve 
the quality of life for patients with debilitating side effects of 
diabetes. The use of living donors also reduces the risk of graft 
rejection, as compared with the use of deceased donors. Yet 
living donor pancreas transplants remain relatively rare, per-
formed under very selective circumstances. In terms of surgical 
technique, the donor splenic artery and vein are anastomosed to 
the recipient’s external iliac artery and vein in an end-to-side 
fashion, and exocrine drainage can occur via an anastomosis 
344
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
of the pancreatic duct and transected end of the pancreas to the 
bladder or bowel101 (Fig. 11-14).
Results
As of December 2010, more than 35,000 pancreas transplants 
had been reported to the IPTR: more than 25,000 transplants 
in the United States and more than 10,000 in other countries 
According to IPTR data, recipient age at the time of the trans-
plant has increased significantly, and so has the number of trans-
plants for patients with type 2 diabetes. The trend over time 
has been toward stricter donor criteria, with a concentration on 
younger donors, preferably trauma victims, and on short pan-
creas graft preservation time.
Drainage techniques have changed over time, too: enteric 
drainage of exocrine pancreatic secretions is now predominant, 
in combination with systemic drainage of the venous efflu-
ent of the pancreas graft. Immunosuppressive protocols have 
developed toward antibody induction therapy, followed by 
administration of tacrolimus and MMF for maintenance. Ste-
roid avoidance has increased over time in all three recipient 
categories.
These changes have led to improved patient and graft 
survival rates. In all three recipient categories, early technical 
graft loss rates have decreased significantly to about 8%. Like-
wise, the 1-year immunologic graft loss rate has also decreased, 
ranging from 2% to 6%. The 1-year patient survival rates now 
exceed 90% in all three recipient categories. The highest 1-year 
pancreas graft survival rate is in SPK recipients: 86% for the 
pancreas and 93% for the kidney. The 1-year pancreas graft sur-
vival rate is 80% in PAK recipients and 78% in PTA recipients.
Figure 11-14.  Segmental transplant with systemic vein and blad-
der exocrine drainage. The donor splenic artery and splenic vein 
are anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient’s external iliac artery 
and vein. The splenic artery anastomosis is lateral and proximal 
to the splenic vein anastomosis. A two-layer ductocystostomy is 
constructed. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, 
eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer, 2004; 
Color Plate XVI, Figure 8.2.2.4. With kind permission of Springer 
Science + Business Media.)
Significant improvements have been noted not only in 
1-year pancreas graft function but also in long-term success 
rates. The most recent 5-, 10-, and 20-year pancreas graft func-
tion rates are 80%, 68%, and 45% for SPK recipients; 62%, 
46%, and 16% for PAK recipients; and 59%, 39%, and 12% for 
PTA recipients, respectively. The quality of the deceased donor 
graft is of paramount importance. The use of anti–T-cell induc-
tion therapy has had a significant impact on long-term graft sur-
vival, specifically in PTA recipients.
IPTR data show significant improvements in patient sur-
vival and pancreas graft function rates since the inception of 
UNOS, over a course of 24 years.92,95,99,102 Clearly, pancreas 
transplants now offer excellent outcomes for patients with 
IDDM.
Islet vs. Pancreas Transplants
Pancreas transplants are frequently compared with islet trans-
plants, which are less invasive and, therefore, more appealing. It 
is important to emphasize that these two types of transplants are 
not mutually exclusive but rather complementary. The results of 
islet transplants have improved over the past decade, but overall 
islet graft function, specifically long-term function, still signifi-
cantly trails overall pancreas graft function.103 Islet trans-
plants involve pancreas procurement (as described earlier) 
and then separation of islets from the exocrine pancreatic tissues 
using proteolytic enzymes (as described later). The human pan-
creas contains about one million islets, of which half are lost 
during the isolation process. About 10,000 islets per kilogram of 
body weight are needed to achieve insulin independence when 
transplanted into the liver. Frequently, one donor pancreas does 
not suffice; in fact, up to four donor pancreases have been used 
for one islet recipient.
Because of the relatively disappointing long-term out-
comes, insurance providers in the United States do not provide 
reimbursement for islet transplants. Transplant centers with 
both pancreas and islet transplant programs follow an algorithm 
that favors islet transplants in patients with a high surgical risk 
and pancreas transplants in patients with a low surgical risk. 
Although solitary donor pancreases are not in short supply, 
only one donor pancreas is required for a successful pancreas 
transplant; in contrast, two to four donor pancreases are com-
monly used for one islet recipient with less favorable long-term 
outcomes.
Of note, the primary goal of current islet transplant trials 
is not insulin independence but rather a reduction in the inci-
dence and severity of hypoglycemic events, a reduction in exog-
enous insulin requirements, and an amelioration of hemoglobin 
A1c levels. Islet transplants rarely maintain long-term insulin 
independence. A recent study showed a higher rate of insulin 
independence in PTA recipients than in recipients of an islet 
transplant alone, despite the use of up to three donor pancreases 
in each of the islet recipients.104 Until islet transplant results sig-
nificantly improve and include long-term insulin independence, 
a pancreas transplant remains the treatment of choice for β-cell 
replacement therapy in patients with IDDM.
ISLET TRANSPLANTATION
Transplanting islets of Langerhans isolated from deceased 
donor pancreases is an appealing option for patients with 
type 1 diabetes. An islet transplant involves the procurement 
of a donor pancreas and its transportation to a specialized islet 
6
345
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
isolation facility, where the pancreas is enzymatically digested; 
then, the islets are purified from the rest of the digested pan-
creas using density gradients. The purified islets are then cul-
tured and evaluated for their identity, viability, and potency, 
before being infused into the portal vein of a diabetic recipient. 
When the procedure is successful, these islet cells engraft into 
the recipient and secrete insulin, providing excellent moment-
to-moment control of blood glucose, as is seen with a whole-
pancreas transplant.
A successful islet transplant offers advantages over exog-
enous insulin injections—advantages that are similar to those of 
a whole-pancreas transplant. These advantages include restor-
ing β-cell secretory capacity, improving glucose counterregula-
tion, restoring hypoglycemia awareness, providing perfect or 
near-perfect glucose homeostasis, and, potentially, preventing 
secondary diabetic complications.
Unlike a whole-pancreas transplant, an islet transplant 
does not involve a major surgical procedure with its associated 
mortality and morbidity. Instead, it can generally be performed 
as an outpatient procedure using percutaneous catheter-based 
therapy to cannulate a branch of the portal vein, with minimal 
recovery time for the recipient. Potential complications associ-
ated with islet injection include portal hypertension, portal vein 
thrombosis, hepatic abscesses, and bacteremia. Theoretically, 
islet transplants could have wider application (as compared with 
current practice and with whole-pancreas transplants), given the 
significantly lower surgical risk, the relatively small tissue vol-
ume transplanted, and the potential for islet immunomodula-
tion or immunoisolation, which could minimize or eliminate the 
need for immunosuppression.
The first reported attempt at an islet transplant was in 1893 
by Watson-Williams and Harsant: they transplanted a sheep’s 
minced pancreas into the subcutaneous tissue of a young boy 
with ketoacidosis.105 The discovery of insulin may have reduced 
interest in islet transplants as a treatment for diabetes, at least 
until the realization that insulin could not provide perfect glyce-
mic control and that, therefore, patients ultimately suffered dev-
astating secondary complications. Several milestones ensued: 
the first whole-pancreas transplants,106 early success with rodent 
islet transplants,107 and then, in the 1970s, human islet autotrans-
plants after pancreatectomy, in order to address the intractable 
pain associated with chronic pancreatitis, by Sutherland, Najar-
ian, and colleagues in Minnesota.108
Until recently, attempts to extend those trailblazing find-
ings of clinical islet autotransplants to clinical islet allotrans-
plants in patients with type 1 diabetes met with generally very 
poor success. For example, in 1995, a report of the International 
Islet Transplant Registry indicated that of 270 recipients, only 
5% were insulin-independent at 1 year posttransplant.
In 2000, Shapiro and colleagues reported the results of the 
Edmonton protocol, which enabled consistent diabetes rever-
sal and short-term (<1 year) insulin independence.109-111 The 
Edmonton protocol prescribed transplanting a large number of 
freshly isolated islets (>10,000 islet equivalents per kilogram 
body weight, typically requiring the use of two to four pan-
creases) with a specialized “islet-sparing,” steroid-free immu-
nosuppressive protocol consisting of low-dose tacrolimus, 
sirolimus, and IL-2 receptor antibody induction. Those results 
were replicated at other experienced transplant centers,112,113 but 
the rates of long-term (>5 year) insulin independence remained 
poor, well below those of whole-pancreas transplants.114 Still, 
despite the low rates of long-term insulin independence, most 
islet recipients were C-peptide positive and retained hypo-
glycemia awareness, indicating residual islet function and 
benefit. In fact, at 9 years posttransplant, 15% remained insulin-
independent, and 73% had hypoglycemia awareness and cor-
rected hemoglobin A1c levels.115
In the mid-2000s, new trials began with the goal of estab-
lishing protocols that enable insulin independence, using islets 
from a single donor pancreas; the results were good, especially 
with strict donor and recipient selection.116,117 In the most expe-
rienced centers, long-term rates of diabetes reversal are now 
about 50% at 5 years posttransplant. The reasons include refine-
ments in pancreas preservation, islet isolation, and culture pro-
tocols, as well as the use of newer induction immunosuppressive 
agent combinations, such as a T-cell–depleting antibody (anti-
CD3 antibody, alemtuzumab, or antithymocyte globulin) and 
a tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) inhibitor (etanercept or 
infliximab). Presumably, viable β-cell mass is now preserved, 
both pre and posttransplant.116-120 Thus, islet transplant results 
are approaching those of whole-pancreas transplants; however, 
because islets from more than one pancreas are typically needed, 
those results cannot be directly compared with the results of 
whole-pancreas transplants.121,122
In the United States, an islet transplant is still officially 
deemed an experimental procedure. In contrast, since 2001, it 
has been considered a standard of care and is fully reimbursed 
in Canada and, more recently, in the United Kingdom, Sweden, 
Switzerland, France, and Italy as well. Worldwide, since 2000, 
more than 750 patients with diabetes have undergone an islet 
transplant, and 80 ongoing trials have enrolled up to 1500 islet 
recipients.118 One of the U.S. trials (a multicenter phase 3 regis-
tration trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health) aims 
to collect the necessary data for submitting a biological license 
application (BLA) to the FDA. A successful BLA would open 
the road for islet transplants to become a standard of care and 
thus reimbursable by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services.
The full potential of islet transplants remains to be real-
ized, but the future is exciting. As the latest improvements in 
pancreas preservation, islet isolation and purification, islet cul-
ture, and islet immunoisolation are implemented clinically, the 
hope is that sustained insulin independence will become con-
sistently possible with a single pancreas donor and without the 
need for systemic immunosuppression.
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
The first attempts at liver transplants in the late 1960s through 
the 1980s were largely experimental endeavors, with a 1-year 
survival rate of only 30%. But breakthroughs in immunosup-
pression, surgical technique, organ preservation, anesthesia, 
and critical care have improved that rate to approximately 85% 
today. Liver transplants remain daunting, especially in the face 
of an organ shortage that results in sicker potential candidates. 
Unfortunately, the perioperative mortality rate and the 1-year 
mortality rate are among the highest of any surgical operation 
currently performed.
History
The first experimental liver transplants in dogs are often attrib-
uted to C. Stuart Welch in 1955 and then Jack Cannon in 1956. 
However, current scholarship reveals that Vittorio Staudacher 
first described the technique in 1952.123 A series of canine 
346
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
experiments followed, which refined the surgical technique to 
ensure perioperative survival.
The next obstacle—immunologic rejection—was 
addressed by drug immunosuppression with AZA and predni-
sone. The first human liver transplant trials started in 1963 with 
Thomas Starzl, but a series of deaths led to a voluntary morato-
rium for 3.5 years. With the resumption of clinical transplants 
in 1967, Starzl performed the first successful liver transplant. 
Still, for the next decade, survival rates were dismal: only 20% 
of the 170 liver transplant recipients in Starzl’s program at the 
University of Colorado survived more than 5 years.124
Several innovations dramatically improved outcomes. The 
advent of better immunosuppressive drugs was instrumental. In 
1978, cyclosporine was introduced clinically in England. It was 
soon combined with prednisone to great effect. The arrival of 
tacrolimus in the 1990s further improved graft survival.
Technical advances were also significant. Donor procure-
ment techniques and cold organ preservation protocols were 
standardized, and the recipient operation was also refined. 
Choledochocholedochostomy or choledochojejunostomy to a 
Roux-en-Y limb became standard and significantly decreased 
the frequency of biliary complications. Innovations, including 
living donor liver transplants and deceased donor split-liver 
transplants, enabled more pediatric recipients to be transplanted. 
Improvements in portosystemic shunting and perioperative criti-
cal care also were contributory.
Indications
In general, any form of irreversible liver disease is an indication 
for a liver transplant. Chronic alcoholic disease and HCV 
are the most common indications in the United States. An 
extensive list of acute and chronic diseases of the liver that are 
treatable by a liver transplant is provided in Table 11-6. 
Offering transplants to alcoholic patients has always 
drawn some opposition, because of the perception of it being 
a self-inflicted illness, as well as concerns about recidivism 
and the recipient’s possible inability to maintain postoperative 
immunosuppression and care. Yet studies have shown that such 
patients have excellent outcomes and that liver transplants for 
them are cost-effective.125-127 Because patients who drink 4 to 
8 ounces of liquor daily for 10 to 15 years have an increased 
risk of developing cirrhosis, the general requirement for accep-
tance as a transplant candidate is 6 months of abstinence. 
Furthermore, most transplant centers recommend rehabilitation 
and Alcoholics Anonymous programs.
Transplants for HCV have yielded worse outcomes than 
transplants for other diseases.128 The reason is the universal 
recurrence of the virus posttransplant. Viral levels reach pre-
transplant levels as early as 72 hours posttransplant.129 The 
course of the viral infection is often accelerated posttransplant: 
10% to 20% of recipients develop cirrhosis after just 5 years.130 
Studies have suggested that use of older donors may increase the 
chance of aggressive recurrence.131 The best method to prevent 
recurrence would be to eradicate the infection pretransplant, but 
doing so is not always possible because patients with decom-
pensated cirrhosis often cannot tolerate treatment. Once recur-
rence occurs, treatment methods are limited. One study found 
that pegylated interferon and ribavirin therapy achieved a sus-
tained viral response in 44% of patients.132
A substantial number of patients undergo liver transplants 
for cholestatic disorders. Primary biliary cirrhosis, an autoim-
mune disease, is characterized by damage to the intralobular bile 
Table 11-6 
Diseases amenable to treatment by a liver transplant
Autoimmune liver diseases
  Autoimmune hepatitis
  Primary biliary cirrhosis
  Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Congenital
  Biliary atresia
Viral hepatitis
  Hepatitis B
  Hepatitis C
Alcoholic liver disease
Metabolic diseases
  α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
  Cystic fibrosis
  Hemochromatosis
  Tyrosinemia
  Wilson’s disease
Hepatic malignancy
  Hepatocellular carcinoma
  Neuroendocrine tumor metastatic to liver
Fulminant hepatic failure
Other
  Alagille syndrome
  Cryptogenic cirrhosis
  Budd-Chiari syndrome
  Polycystic liver disease
  Amyloidosis
7
ducts that progresses to liver cirrhosis. Trends toward earlier 
treatment may explain the slight decrease in liver transplants 
for this disorder.133 Posttransplant outcomes in patients with 
this disorder have been excellent, with many centers achieving 
1-year survival rates of 90% to 95%. Recurrence is relatively 
uncommon: a large series reported a 30% recurrence rate at 
10 years posttransplant.134
The second most common cholestatic disorder among 
liver transplant candidates is primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
It is characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of large intra- 
and extrahepatic biliary ducts; 70% of such patients also have 
inflammatory bowel disease. Recurrent cholangitis is common 
and increases mortality rates beyond what would be expected 
on the basis of laboratory values. On behalf of such patients, 
appeals can often be made for priority in allocation to the UNOS 
regional review boards. Posttransplant outcomes for such 
patients have been excellent. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a 
significant risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma, so annual screen-
ings (including imaging and measurement of serum CA 19-9 
levels) should be carried out. Recurrence is fairly uncommon: 
studies have reported a recurrence rate of up to 20% at 10 years 
posttransplant.135
Progressive metabolic disorders also are treatable with 
liver transplants. Hemochromatosis, an inherited disorder, 
results in excessive intestinal iron absorption. Iron deposition 
can cause cirrhosis and severe cardiomyopathy. Careful cardiac 
evaluation is necessary pretransplant.
Another metabolic disorder, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, 
is characterized by insufficient levels of a protease inhibitor, 
347
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
resulting in early-onset emphysema and cirrhosis. Careful pul-
monary evaluation is necessary pretransplant.
Wilson’s disease, an autosomal recessive disorder char-
acterized by impaired cellular copper transport, leads to cop-
per accumulation in the liver, brain, and cornea. Patients can 
develop significant neurologic complications and cirrhosis. 
Several reports suggest improvement of neurologic deficiencies 
posttransplant.136,137
Transplants can also be performed in patients with hepatic 
malignancies, but only in accordance with strict criteria. Hepa-
tocellular carcinoma (HCC), a complication of cirrhosis, is the 
most common type of hepatic malignancy. Resection is the first 
line of treatment if possible, but often, cirrhosis is too advanced. 
If the tumor meets the Milan criteria, a liver transplant can be 
performed. These criteria were established by a landmark paper 
in 1996 showing that patients with a single tumor under 5 cm 
in diameter, or with three tumors under 3 cm in diameter, in 
the absence of vascular invasion, had a 4-year survival rate of 
85%.138 Patients with such tumors receive exception points, 
based on their UNOS region, allowing for a timely transplant 
before their tumors spread.
Transplants for cholangiocarcinoma are still in the experi-
mental stages but may be performed if the center has an experi-
mental protocol in place. The Mayo Clinic protocol, which uses 
neoadjuvant therapy and strict exclusion criteria, has resulted in 
a 5-year survival rate of 82%.139
Acute fulminant hepatic failure also is an indication for 
a liver transplant; in fact, such patients are the highest priority 
for the next available liver in their UNOS region. This devas-
tating illness is defined by acute and severe liver injury with 
impaired synthetic function and encephalopathy in a person who 
had normal liver function. It is often caused by acetaminophen 
overdose; acute fulminant viral hepatitis A, B, and E; other viral 
infections; drug toxicity; ingestion of Amanita mushrooms; 
acute fatty liver of pregnancy; or Wilson’s disease. A significant 
number of patients will recover with supportive care. The diffi-
culty lies in predicting who will not recover and therefore would 
benefit from a liver transplant. The King’s College criteria 
were developed for this purpose: patients with acetaminophen-
induced disease, a pH <7.3 or grade III/IV encephalopathy, a 
prothrombin time >100 seconds, and serum creatinine >3.4 mg/
dL meet those criteria.140 Management of acute liver failure is 
very intensive. Such patients suffer from severe coagulopathy, 
hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and renal dysfunction. They are 
susceptible to infections, which are frequently overwhelming. 
Cerebral edema, a serious complication of acute liver failure, 
is a leading cause of death from brain herniation. Intracranial 
pressure monitoring and serial imaging are often necessary; if 
a patient develops irreversible brain damage, a transplant is not 
performed.
Recipient Selection
The diagnosis of cirrhosis itself is not an indication for a trans-
plant. Patients may have compensated cirrhosis for years such 
that the traditional indication for a transplant is decompensated 
cirrhosis, manifested by hepatic encephalopathy, ascites, spon-
taneous bacterial peritonitis, portal hypertensive bleeding, and 
hepatorenal syndrome (each described below).
Hepatic encephalopathy is an altered neuropsychiatric 
state caused by metabolic abnormalities resulting from liver fail-
ure. The early stages result in sleep disturbances and depression. 
As the liver disease progresses, patients can become somnolent 
and confused and, in the end stages, comatose. Ammonia is pro-
duced by enterocytes from glutamine and from colonic bacterial 
catabolism, and the use of serum ammonia levels as a marker of 
encephalopathy is controversial because a variety of factors can 
influence levels. Hyperammonemia suggests worsening liver 
function and bypass of portal blood flow around the liver. GI 
bleeding and infection can exacerbate hepatic encephalopathy.
Ascites (the accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity) 
that is caused by cirrhosis is a transudate with a high serum-asci-
tes gradient (>1.1 g/dL). Associated with portal hypertension, it 
is treated initially with sodium restriction and diuretics. Refrac-
tory ascites necessitates large-volume paracentesis and even-
tually a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS). 
Contraindications to TIPS placement include significant hepatic 
encephalopathy, advanced liver disease, congestive heart fail-
ure, renal insufficiency, and severe pulmonary hypertension.141
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, an infection of the 
ascitic fluid without an evident intra-abdominal source, is 
characterized by fever, abdominal pain, and an ascitic fluid 
polymorphonuclear count ≥250 cell/mm3 on paracentesis. The 
first line of empiric treatment is with a third-generation cepha-
losporin because the majority of cases are caused by aerobic 
gram-negative microbes such as E. coli, although Gram stain 
and culture results should be used to guide therapy.
Portal hypertensive bleeding can be a devastating event 
for patients with cirrhosis. Each bleeding event carries a 30% 
mortality rate and accounts for a third of all deaths related to 
cirrhosis. Only 50% of bleeding events cease spontaneously, 
so treatment must be expedient. The initial medical treatment 
is with vasopressin and octreotide. The initial intervention is 
endoscopy with sclerotherapy and band ligation of bleeding 
varices. If those initial attempts fail, more aggressive treatment 
is necessary with a balloon tamponade (using a Sengstaken-
Blakemore tube) and with emergent TIPS placement. The last 
line of treatment is emergency surgery to place a portosystemic 
shunt, transect the esophagus, or devascularize the gastro-
esophageal junction (Sugiura procedure). Preventing variceal 
bleeding is essential and can be achieved, with some success, 
using β-blockers.
Hepatorenal syndrome is a form of acute renal failure that 
develops as liver disease worsens. The etiology is unclear, but 
splanchnic vasodilation from portal hypertension and increased 
production of circulating vasodilators result in a decline in renal 
perfusion. Characterized by oliguria (<500 mL of urine/day) and 
low urine sodium levels (<10 mEq/L), hepatorenal syndrome is 
often reversed by a liver transplant, even after dialysis depen-
dence. Pretransplant, other causes of renal failure need to be 
excluded, including ATN, drug nephrotoxicity, and chronic 
renal disease. The initial medical therapy includes octreotide, 
midodrine, and vasopressin analogs, but the syndrome often 
progresses to dialysis dependence.
The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) was 
originally developed to assess risk for TIPS placement.142 Later 
analysis revealed it to be an excellent model to predict survival 
among patients with cirrhosis, especially those on the waiting 
list for a liver transplant.143 In 2002, liver graft allocation was 
restructured to be based on the MELD score.
Although the historic indication for a liver transplant is 
decompensated cirrhosis, a landmark analysis comparing wait-
ing list mortality with posttransplant mortality established that 
a minimum MELD score of 18 is necessary to have a survival 
benefit posttransplant. A MELD score between 15 and 18 does 
348
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
not confer a survival advantage, but a transplant may be justified 
if the patient has significant morbidity from cirrhosis.144
Acute liver failure itself is an indication for a liver trans-
plant. To qualify for Status 1 (first priority for a donor liver 
within the UNOS region), the transplant candidate must meet 
the following criteria: (a) onset of hepatic encephalopathy 
within 8 weeks after the first symptoms of liver disease; (b) 
absence of pre-existing liver disease; and (c) ventilator depen-
dence, dialysis, or an international normalized ratio (INR) >2.0.
Contraindications
In general terms, contraindications to a liver transplant include 
insufficient cardiopulmonary reserve, uncontrolled malignancy 
or infection, and refractory noncompliance. Older age is only a 
relative contraindication: carefully selected recipients over the 
age of 70 years can achieve satisfactory outcomes.145
Patients with reduced cardiopulmonary reserve are 
unlikely to survive a liver transplant. Candidates should have 
a normal ejection fraction. If coronary arterial disease is pres-
ent, they should undergo revascularization pretransplant. Severe 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with oxygen 
dependence is a contraindication. Severe pulmonary hyper-
tension with a mean pulmonary artery pressure greater than 35 
mmHg that is refractory to medical therapy is also a contra-
indication. Candidates with pulmonary hypertension should be 
evaluated with a right heart catheterization.
For candidates with alcoholic liver disease, few reliable 
predictors of posttransplant relapse exist.146 Most centers require 
6 months of abstinence from drugs and alcohol. Insurance com-
panies often make more stringent demands, including random 
drug screening and 1 year of abstinence.
Uncontrolled infections pretransplant are a substantial risk 
posttransplant when the patient becomes significantly immuno-
suppressed. Fungal and multidrug-resistant bacterial infections 
are relative contraindications. Some centers require an extended 
period of treatment and documented eradication pretransplant. 
HIV infection is a relative contraindication; some centers have 
strict protocols that exclude patients with a history of acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related illnesses as well as 
those who are coinfected with HCV.
Ideally, patients with a history of malignancy (with the 
exception of HCC) should be cured of the cancer pretransplant. 
In most cases, this means eradication, completion of curative 
therapy, and absence of recurrence over a certain period of time, 
which varies by the tumor type, but can be up to 5 years or 
longer for aggressive tumors (see earlier Malignancy section).
Surgical Procedure
A liver transplant is among the most extensive operations per-
formed, and it can be associated with considerable blood loss. 
A bilateral subcostal incision with midline extension is used. 
Mechanical retraction spreads the rib cage to allow access. 
The ligamentous attachments of the liver are dissected free. 
The vascular structures are isolated, including the suprahepatic 
and infrahepatic vena cava, the portal vein, and hepatic artery 
(Fig. 11-15). The bile duct, portal structures, and vena cava are 
divided, completing the hepatectomy (Fig. 11-16)—often the 
bloodiest and most difficult part of the operation, particularly 
in the presence of extensive varices and severe coagulopathy.
After the liver is removed, the anhepatic phase begins. 
This phase is characterized by the absence of inferior vena caval 
return to the heart and by portal congestion due to clamping of the 
portal vein. Significant hemodynamic instability and increased 
variceal bleeding can occur. Patients who are unable to tolerate 
this phase can be placed on venovenous bypass, with cannulas 
drawing blood from the IVC via the femoral vein and via the 
portal vein, returning it to the systemic circulation via the sub-
clavian vein. Venovenous bypass itself can cause complications, 
including air embolism, thromboembolism, and trauma to the 
cannulated vessels.
The donor liver is placed in the orthotopic position. The 
suprahepatic vena caval anastomosis is performed first in an 
end-to-end fashion, followed by the infrahepatic vena caval and 
portal anastomosis, both also end-to-end. The liver is then reper-
fused, often leading to a period of hemodynamic instability and 
cardiac arrhythmias due to the release of byproducts of ischemia 
from the donor liver. Coagulopathy also can worsen because of 
these byproducts as well as fibrinolysis.
The arterial anastomosis between the donor common 
hepatic or celiac trunk is most often performed with the recipi-
ent CHA in an end-to-end fashion. Of course, many variations 
are possible. After arterial reperfusion, the bile duct anastomosis 
Figure 11-15.  Cirrhotic liver immobilized in preparation for com-
plete hepatectomy.
Figure 11-16.  Isolation and division of the hilar structures to dis-
eased liver-hepatic artery, portal vein, and common bile duct.
349
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
is performed between the donor and recipient common ducts, 
also in an end-to-end fashion. If necessary for technical reasons, 
the recipient common duct can be joined to a Roux-en-Y limb. 
Some surgeons choose to insert a T-tube or place internal stents 
in the common bile duct to protect the anastomosis.
The piggyback technique is a common variation of the 
standard technique. The recipient’s IVC is preserved by care-
fully dissecting off the posterior aspect of the liver. This added 
dissection is a disadvantage of this variation, often increas-
ing hepatectomy time and blood loss. The recipient’s liver is 
removed by dividing it at the confluence of the hepatic veins. 
The preserved IVC is an advantage of this variation, allow-
ing venous return from the lower body to the heart during the 
anhepatic phase and improving renal perfusion. No randomized 
studies, however, have demonstrated the superiority of the pig-
gyback technique over the standard technique.
Pediatric Transplants
Outcomes after pediatric liver transplants are among the best 
after any type of transplant, with a 1-year survival rate of 90%. 
The most common indication is biliary atresia. After diagno-
sis is confirmed, a Kasai procedure is promptly carried out: a 
Roux-en-Y loop of bowel is directly anastomosed to the hilum 
of the liver. The Kasai procedure often allows time for the chil-
dren to grow in size, reducing the risk of a transplant when it is 
required, as it eventually is in 75% of such children.
The other common indication for a pediatric liver trans-
plant is a metabolic disorder, such as α1-antitrypsin deficiency, 
tyrosine metabolism deficiencies, and primary oxalosis. Since 
the MELD score was developed for adults, pediatric liver allo-
cation is based on an analogous model, the Pediatric End-Stage 
Liver Disease (PELD) score, which incorporates bilirubin lev-
els, INR, albumin levels, age, and growth failure.
The surgical procedure is similar to the adult procedure. 
Graft implantation is more challenging, given the pediatric 
recipient’s smaller vascular structures. As a result, surgical 
complications are much more common in pediatric recipients. 
Hepatic artery thrombosis is about three times more common. 
Donor size matching is very important in the pediatric popula-
tion and often limits the donor pool for pediatric recipients. To 
address this issue, deceased donor split-liver transplants and liv-
ing donor transplants (both described in the following sections) 
have been developed.
Deceased Donor Split-Liver Transplants
A deceased donor allograft can be split into two grafts, most 
frequently into a left lateral segment for a child and an extended 
right segment for an adult (Fig. 11-17). It can be done in vivo 
(during the donor operation) or ex vivo (on the back table 
after the donor liver is removed). Both techniques have simi-
lar outcomes. Increased morbidity is associated with splitting 
allografts, whether for adult or pediatric recipients; however, 
the technique is justified given the donor shortage and has been 
important for improving access to transplants for pediatric 
recipients.147
Living Donor Transplants
Donation by an adult living donor to an adult recipient requires 
either the right or left lobe of the liver (Fig. 11-18). Donation 
by an adult living donor to a pediatric recipient requires the left 
lateral lobe (Fig. 11-19). Donor safety is paramount. The donor 
operation has a 0.2% mortality rate and significant morbidity 
rates, including rehospitalization (8.5%), bile leak or stricture 
Donor
Left hepatic vein
Left portal vein
Left hepatic artery
Recipient
Hepatic artery
Portal vein
Roux limb
Figure 11-17.  Donor and recipient procedure for living donor liver 
transplant into a pediatric recipient.
(6.0%), reoperation (4.5%), and major postoperative infections 
(1.1%).148 Careful donor selection is vital. Potential donors 
should be medically and psychologically healthy, their hepatic 
anatomy should be amenable to donation, and absolutely no 
coercion can occur. A separate donor team should serve as the 
donor advocate and thoroughly explain all risks.
Careful recipient selection is essential. Transplant candi-
dates also must qualify for a deceased donor liver transplant, 
because a significant number of living donor transplant recipi-
ents will eventually require a retransplant. Transplant candidates 
should be medically fit enough to withstand the rigors of the 
operation and of the postoperative course with a partial graft. An 
absolute contraindication is a critical illness: the limited success 
of such transplants does not justify the risks to the living donor. 
The obvious advantages of a living donor transplant are that 
it can be done expediently (avoiding the waiting list mortality 
associated with candidates for a deceased donor transplant) and 
that it can be planned.
Postoperative Care
A liver transplant imposes significant trauma on the major 
organ systems. Immediately posttransplant, the first goal is 
to stabilize those systems. Acid-base equilibrium and hemo-
dynamic stability are often difficult to maintain but are essential. 
350
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 11-18.  A. Hepatic transection completed for right lobe removal. CA = cystic artery; CBD = common bile duct; CD = cystic duct; 
FL = falciform ligament; IVC = inferior vena cava; LHD = left hepatic duct; LHV= left hepatic vein; MHV = middle hepatic vein; MPV = 
main portal vein; PHA = proper hepatic artery; RHA = right hepatic artery; RHV = right hepatic vein; RPV = right portal vein; S2, S3, S4 = 
segments 2, 3, and 4. B. Implantation of the donor right lobe with the MHV. CHA = common hepatic artery. (Reproduced with permission 
from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. © 2008 by The McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc.)
CHA
RHV
MPV
MHV
LHV
LHV
S4
S2
FL
S3
IVC
IVC
LHV
RHV
M
H
V
LHD
LHALPV
MPV
PHA
C
B
D
R.P.V.
R.P.A.
RHD
C.A.
C.D.
A
B
351
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
Periods of hypotension can increase the risk of hepatic artery 
thrombosis. Careful attention needs to be paid to ongoing 
bleeding. Appropriate hemoglobin levels should be main-
tained. Ongoing bleeding mandates a return trip to the operat-
ing room; the rate of reoperation can be as high as 25% among 
high-risk patients. Transfusion of platelets and fresh frozen 
plaza must be done prudently, because theoretically their 
administration can increase the risk of hepatic artery throm-
bosis. Graft function should be evaluated frequently; if it is 
impaired, an ultrasound is urgently required to assess for the 
presence of vascular complications.
Evaluation of Graft Function
Evaluation of the graft begins in the operating room. Its appear-
ance overall, any swelling, and the quantity and quality of 
bile production after reperfusion can help assess function. In 
the intensive care unit, hemodynamic stability, correction of 
coagulopathy, euglycemia, successful temperature regulation, 
clearance of lactic acid, and restoration of neurologic status 
Figure 11-19.  A. Hepatic transection completed for removal of 
left lateral segments (S2 and S3). Bile ducts to segments 2 and 
3 divided; vascular structures still intact. B. Implantation of the 
donor left lobe. (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner 
RWG, Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. © 2008 by The McGraw-Hill Compa-
nies, Inc.)
are all signs of a functioning graft, even before the first set of 
liver function test results are obtained. Transaminases usually 
peak by postoperative day 2. An aspartate transaminase (AST) 
level greater than 2500 IU/L is suggestive of significant injury. 
Cholestasis usually peaks from postoperative day 7 to 12. The 
INR should improve shortly after reperfusion.
In 3% to 4% of patients undergoing a liver transplant, the 
graft does not function for any identifiable reason, a condition 
termed primary nonfunction; in such cases, a retransplant is the 
only option. Some studies suggest that a peak AST level of 5000 
IU/L may be predictive of primary nonfunction.149-151 Factors 
associated with primary nonfunction include donor macroste-
atosis, prolonged cold and warm ischemic times, and prolonged 
donor hospital stay.151
Complications
Vascular complications occur in about 8% to 12% of recipients 
and include thrombosis, stenosis, and pseudoaneurysm formation.
The most common vascular complication is hepatic artery 
thrombosis. Recent reviews suggest that its incidence is between 
1.6% and 4%152; the mortality rate is 50%, even after definitive 
therapy.153 Early presentation can be quite dramatic, with ful-
minant hepatic necrosis, primary nonfunction, transaminitis, or 
fever. Late presentation, however, can be asymptomatic or subtle, 
with cholangitis, bile leak, mild transaminitis, hepatic abscesses, 
or failure to thrive. Diagnostic imaging with ultrasound has more 
than 90% sensitivity and specificity. If hepatic artery thrombosis 
is identified, urgent re-exploration is needed. A thrombectomy or 
revision of an anastomosis may be successful, but with significant 
hepatic necrosis, a retransplant is necessary.
Thrombosis of the portal vein is very uncommon. Signs of 
early thrombosis include liver dysfunction, ascites, and variceal 
bleeding. Upon diagnosis, an operative thrombectomy should 
be attempted.
Biliary complications remain the Achilles’ heel of liver 
transplantation, affecting 10% to 35% of these organ recipients. 
Signs include fever and abdominal pain, with bilious drainage 
from surgical drains. Diagnosis is made with cholangiography.
Complications manifest themselves as leaks or stric-
tures. Leaks require a reoperation and surgical correction, 
whereas strictures can most often be managed with radiologic 
or endoscopic interventions. Two common reconstructions are 
choledochostomy and choledochojejunostomy. Some centers 
also routinely use T-tube stents or internal stents. Consensus 
has not been reached as to which reconstruction technique is 
superior. Early infectious complications are often associated 
with initial graft function and pretransplant risk factors. Intra-
abdominal infections should raise concerns of a possible bile 
leak. Fungal infections are often associated with poor graft 
function. Given the immunosuppressed and compromised 
state of liver recipients, early infectious complications can be 
devastating.
The types of opportunistic infections that occur in liver 
transplant recipients are similar to those that occur in other types 
of solid organ transplant recipients and are due to suppression 
of cell-mediated immunity by chronic immunosuppressive drug 
administration.
Acute rejection occurs in approximately 20% of liver 
recipients. The first line of treatment is with a high dose of a 
corticosteroid, which is usually effective; if not, antilympho-
cyte therapy is initiated. Rejection of the liver (unlike other 
transplanted organs) does not adversely affect patient or graft 
S2 + 3
A
B
352
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
survival rates. Maintenance immunosuppression consists of a 
corticosteroid, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate.
INTESTINE AND MULTIVISCERAL 
TRANSPLANTATION
After the introduction of long-term total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN) in the late 1970s and the early success of liver, kidney, 
and heart transplants, the first attempts at intestine transplants 
were made. Over the first two decades, the results were dismal. 
But the introduction of the immunosuppressive drug tacrolimus 
in the late 1980s led to significant improvement in graft and 
patient survival rates. Nonetheless, intestine transplants remain 
the least frequently performed of all transplants, with the lowest 
graft survival rates.
The main obstacle is the high immunogenicity of the 
intestine, caused by its abundant lymphoid tissue. High levels 
of immunosuppression are needed, yet the rejection rate is still 
high. The microbial colonization of the intestine confers the risk 
of translocation of pathogenic microorganisms into the recipi-
ent’s circulation, causing severe systemic infections. Through 
the first decade of the twenty-first century, the survival of 
patients on long-term TPN was superior to the survival of intes-
tine transplant recipients, so a transplant was considered only 
as rescue therapy for patients with life-threatening TPN-related 
complications.
Over the last several years, improvements in surgical 
techniques, in perioperative and postoperative care, and par-
ticularly in immunosuppressive protocols have led to signifi-
cantly better patient and graft survival rates posttransplant.154 
Recent data indicate that survival rates after an intestine trans-
plant often are better than, or at least similar to, survival rates 
among patients receiving chronic TPN in the home setting.155 
Today, an intestine or multivisceral transplant is recognized as 
a feasible treatment.
Indications and Recipient Selection
An intestine transplant is indicated for patients with irreversible 
intestine failure in combination with TPN failure. The definition 
of intestine failure does not specify the exact length of the remain-
ing intestine. Intestine failure is typically multifactorial. Variables 
include what part of the small intestine is absent, whether or not 
the ileocecal valve is present, whether or not the patient under-
went an ostomy, and how long the remaining colon is. TPN fail-
ure is defined as significant biochemical or pathologic evidence 
of liver injury, loss of central vein access with thrombosis of at 
least two central veins, frequent indwelling catheter infection or 
a single episode of fungal infection, and recurrent episodes of 
severe dehydration despite IV fluid supplementation.
Indications for a transplant differ between the adult and 
pediatric population. The leading causes of intestine failure are 
summarized in Table 11-7. The disease involvement of organs 
other than the intestine dictates the extent of the operation 
required. Liver failure is often seen in patients on long-term 
TPN. If pathologic or biochemical evidence of severe liver 
damage is combined with signs of portal hypertension, then a 
combined liver-intestine transplant is the treatment of choice. 
However, a multivisceral transplant (liver, pancreas, stomach, 
duodenum, and/or small intestine) might be necessary among 
children who suffer diffuse intestinal dysmotility syndromes 
and adults who develop diffuse portomesenteric thrombosis, 
extensive intra-abdominal desmoid disease encasing the main 
Table 11-7 
Leading causes of intestine failure
Children
Adults
Gastroschisis
Visceral ischemia secondary to 
SMA/SMV thrombosis
Midgut volvulus
Crohn’s disease
Intestinal atresia
Trauma
Necrotizing enterocolitis Mesenteric desmoid tumors
Microvillus involution 
disease
Radiation enteritis
Hirschsprung’s disease
Massive resection secondary to 
tumors
Crohn’s disease
Chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction
Pseudo-obstruction
Autoimmune enteropathy
SMA = superior mesenteric artery; SMV = superior mesenteric vein
visceral vascular structures with concurrent short gut syndrome, 
or massive abdominal trauma.
Surgical Procedure
For both the donor and recipient surgery, the key decision is 
which organs will be transplanted.156 For an isolated intestine 
transplant, the blood supply is based on the arterial inflow from 
the SMA and on the venous outflow from the superior mesen-
teric vein (SMV). Both vessels are isolated at the root of the 
mesentery.
For a combined liver-intestine transplant, the blood supply 
is based on the arterial inflow from the celiac axis and SMA, 
which are procured en bloc with an aortic patch. The liver, duo-
denum, pancreas, and small intestine—because of their close 
anatomic relationship—are procured en bloc. If the hepatoduo-
denal ligament is left intact, no biliary reconstruction is neces-
sary, which virtually eliminates the risk of postoperative biliary 
complications.157 Because the entire splanchnic system drains 
into the liver, venous drainage is achieved by anastomosis of the 
hepatic veins to the recipient’s vena cava.
For both an isolated intestine transplant and a combined 
liver-intestine transplant, the proximal transection of the GI tract 
occurs at the first portion of the duodenum. For a multivisceral 
transplant, the stomach is part of the graft; hence, the transection 
of the GI tract occurs at the distal esophagus. Figs. 11-20  to 
11-22 show these three main types of transplants.
The vast majority of intestine transplants use a deceased 
donor organ. However, advances in surgical techniques have 
made the use of living donors a feasible alternative for either 
an isolated intestine transplant or a combined liver-intestine 
transplant. With a living donor, the donor operation is slightly 
different: for an isolated intestine transplant, 150 to 200 cm of 
the donor’s ileum, on a vascular pedicle comprising the ileocolic 
artery and vein, are used158 (Fig. 11-23); for a combined liver-
intestine transplant, performed almost exclusively for pediatric 
recipients, segments II and III of the donor’s liver are used, in 
addition to the intestine (Fig. 11-24).
Similarly, the recipient operation also varies by the organs 
transplanted. Generally, the recipient’s infrarenal aorta is used to 
353
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
achieve the arterial inflow to the graft. For an isolated intestine 
transplant, venous drainage is achieved via systemic or porto-
mesenteric drainage; for a combined liver-intestine transplant or 
a multivisceral transplant, venous drainage is achieved via the 
hepatic veins. Systemic venous drainage, given its lesser techni-
cal difficulty, is preferred over portomesenteric drainage. The 
diversion of splanchnic flow into the systemic venous circulation 
Figure 11-20.  Isolated intestine transplant.
Figure 11-21.  Combined liver-intestine transplant.
Figure 11-22.  Multivisceral transplant.
can cause several metabolic abnormalities, but no hard evidence 
shows any negative impact clinically on the recipient.
After the organs are perfused, the continuity of the 
recipient’s GI tract is restored, which includes the place-
ment of a gastrostomy or jejunostomy feeding tube and an 
ileostomy. In the early postoperative period, the ileostomy 
enables regular endoscopic surveillance and biopsy of the 
intestinal mucosa. Once the recipient recovers, the ileostomy 
can be taken down.
The last, but often the most difficult, part of the recipi-
ent operation is abdominal wall closure. It is especially chal-
lenging in intestine transplant recipients because they have 
usually undergone multiple previous procedures, resulting in 
many scars, ostomies, feeding tubes, and the loss of abdomi-
nal domain. To provide sufficient coverage of the transplanted 
organs, the use of prosthetic mesh often is necessary.
Postoperative Care
Initial postoperative care for intestine transplant recipients does 
not significantly differ from that for other organ transplant 
recipients. In the intensive care unit, each recipient’s cardio-
vascular, pulmonary, and renal function is closely monitored; 
aggressive resuscitation with fluid, electrolytes, and blood prod-
ucts is performed. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are an integral 
component of care.
Of all solid organ transplants, intestine transplants have 
the highest rate of rejection. With intestine transplants, no sero-
logic marker of rejection is available, so frequent biopsies and 
histologic evaluation of the intestinal mucosa are of utmost 
importance. Rejection leads to structural damage of the intes-
tinal mucosa. Translocation of endoluminal pathogens into the 
circulation can cause systemic infections.
Thanks to the introduction of new immunosuppressive 
protocols, the rejection rates and the overall patient and graft 
354
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
survival rates have improved significantly. Variations between 
the protocols exist, but the general concept is to induce immu-
nosuppression with polyclonal T-cell antibody and high doses 
of a corticosteroid, followed by maintenance doses of cortico-
steroids and the calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus.
Immediately posttransplant, recipients are maintained 
on TPN. Enteral nutrition is initiated as early as possible, but 
is advanced very cautiously. It can take several weeks for the 
transplanted intestine to achieve structural integrity and func-
tionality and for the recipient to tolerate the full strength of tube 
feeds.
Despite all the recent advances, the complication rate 
posttransplant remains high. The most common complica-
tions include intra-abdominal abscesses, enteric leaks, intra-
abdominal sepsis, the need for a reoperation, graft thrombosis, 
life-threatening bleeding, and central line problems. Immuno-
suppression-specific complications include rejection, PTLD, 
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), infections, and malignan-
cies. Tailoring the recipient’s immunosuppression plays a 
critical role in preventing these complications: a low level of 
immunosuppression leads to graft rejection, but too much 
confers a high risk of infectious complications, PTLD, and, less 
commonly, GVHD—all of which are associated with a signifi-
cantly increased risk of graft failure and mortality.
The long-term results of intestine transplants have 
improved significantly, even though they still remain inferior to 
the results of other abdominal organ transplants.159,160
Figure 11-23.  A. Donor operation. About 180 to 200 cm of distal ileum on a vascular pedicle comprising the ileocolic artery and vein are 
removed. B. Recipient operation. The donor’s ileocolic artery and vein (or the terminal branches of the donor’s superior mesenteric artery 
and vein) are anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient’s infrarenal aorta and vena cava. (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner RWG, 
Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. © 2008 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
HEART AND LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
History
The first successful heterotopic heart transplant, in an animal 
model, was performed by Carrel and Guthrie in 1905.161 Subse-
quent progress with cardiopulmonary bypass and immunologic 
modulation facilitated the first successful adult human heart 
transplant, performed by Christiaan Barnard in 1967 in Cape 
Town, South Africa.162 However, it was Norman Shumway at 
Stanford who persisted with heart transplants, in the face of 
disappointing patient outcomes at a number of early centers. 
Thanks to the diligence of Shumway and colleagues in perfect-
ing heart transplant techniques, along with the development, 
by Caves, of endomyocardial biopsy as a method of allograft 
rejection surveillance, human heart transplants began to reap-
pear in the 1980s as a viable solution to end-stage heart failure. 
By 1981, the introduction of cyclosporin A finally created the 
necessary clinical immunologic modulation necessary to make 
long-term survival of heart recipients a reality.161
Lung transplants have a similar history. In the 1950s, 
Metras in France and Hardin and Kittle in the United States 
performed canine lung transplants, demonstrating that meticu-
lous anastomotic technique could produce normal pulmonary 
pressures. Hardy performed the first human lung transplant in 
1963, although the patient lived only 18 days. The first suc-
cessful long-term lung transplant was performed in 1983 in 
Toronto. These early lung recipients, however, were plagued 
A
B
355
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
by infection, rejection, and, most significantly, bronchial anas-
tomotic dehiscence. Cooper and colleagues soon determined 
that the high-dose corticosteroids used for immunosuppression 
were responsible for the frequent occurrence of dehiscence. The 
combination of high-dose corticosteroids and ischemic donor 
bronchi was deadly to lung recipients. Cooper, Morgan, and 
colleagues showed that the bronchial anastomosis could be pro-
tected by wrapping it with a vascular omental pedicle, which not 
only provided neovascularity but also offered a buttress against 
any partial dehiscence.163
Once cyclosporine became available for lung recipients, 
corticosteroid doses could be quickly tapered and stopped; 
cyclosporine poses no danger to the integrity of the bronchial 
anastomosis. In fact, the introduction of cyclosporine allowed 
the success of the first combined heart-lung transplant at Stan-
ford in 1981 (after unsuccessful attempts by Cooley in 1969, 
Lillehei in 1970, and Barnard in 1981, all of whom used only 
high-dose corticosteroids for immunosuppression). The 1980s 
marked the start of the modern age of thoracic transplants.
Heart Transplants
Indications.  The most common diagnosis leading to a heart 
transplant is ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy, which stems 
from coronary artery disease, followed by idiopathic dilated 
myopathy and congenital heart disease. About 3000 patients are 
added to the waiting list each year.
Evaluation.  Pretransplant, both candidates and potential 
donors are evaluated to ensure their suitability for the procedure. 
Transplant candidates undergo echocardiography, right and left 
heart catheterization, evaluation for any undiagnosed malignan-
cies, laboratory testing to assess the function of other organs 
(such as the liver, kidneys, and endocrine system), a dental 
examination, psychosocial evaluation, and appropriate screen-
ing (such as mammography, colonoscopy, and prostate-specific 
antigen testing). Once the evaluation is complete, the selec-
tion committee determines, at a multidisciplinary conference, 
whether or not a heart transplant is needed and is likely to be 
successful. Transplant candidates who meet all of the center’s 
criteria are added to the waiting list, according to the UNOS 
criteria, which are based on health status.
Once a potential deceased donor is identified, the surgeon 
reviews the status report and screening examination results. The 
donor is initially matched to the recipient per the recipient’s 
status on the UNOS waiting list, the size match, and the blood 
type. Results of the donor’s serologic testing, echocardiography, 
chest x-ray, hemodynamic testing, and possibly coronary artery 
evaluation are assessed, in order to determine whether or not the 
donor’s heart can withstand up to 4 hours of cold ischemic time 
during procurement, transport, and surgery.
Procedure.  Heart transplants are most often performed ortho-
topically (Fig. 11-25). The recipient’s native heart is removed, 
Figure 11-24.  Recipient operation. For a combined living donor 
liver-intestine transplant in a pediatric recipient, liver segments 2 
and 3 are implanted in standard fashion (the donor’s left hepatic 
vein to the recipient’s vena cava, the donor’s left hepatic artery to 
the recipient’s proper or common hepatic artery, the donor’s left 
portal vein branch to the recipient’s portal vein trunk). The donor’s 
ileocolic artery and vein are anastomosed to the recipient’s infra-
renal aorta and cava. In the recipient, a duodenum-to-donor ileum 
anastomosis and a distal Bishop-Coop ileostomy are constructed to 
re-establish bowel continuity. A very short Roux-en-Y loop (10 to 
20 cm) is anastomosed to the donor’s bile duct(s). (Reproduced with 
permission from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor 
Organ Transplantation. Color Plates, Figure IN-6. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2008. © 2008 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
Figure 11-25.  A donor’s heart brought forward for anastomosis.
356
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
leaving the superior vena cava, the IVC, the left atrial cuff, the 
aorta, and the pulmonary artery in situ, in order to allow for 
anastomosis of the donor’s heart. Usually the left atrial cuff 
is anastomosed first, providing left heart inflow. Right heart 
inflow is achieved using a bicaval technique, by directly sew-
ing the donor’s superior vena cava and IVC to the recipient’s 
venae cavae or by creating an anastomosis of the right atrium 
to a right atrial cuff. The donor’s main pulmonary artery is con-
nected to the recipient’s pulmonary artery, and finally, the aortic 
anastomosis is completed (Fig. 11-26).
Once the cross-clamp is removed, the heart is allowed to 
receive circulation from the recipient and begins to function 
normally. Inotropic support with isoproterenol, dobutamine, or 
epinephrine is often required for 3 to 5 days, in order to support 
recovery from the cold ischemia.164
On rare occasions, a heterotopic or “piggyback” heart can 
be transplanted, leaving the native heart in place. But this sce-
nario is becoming very uncommon with the increasing use of 
mechanical circulatory support for single-ventricle failure.
Posttransplant Care.  Patient survival rates for heart recipi-
ents differ slightly after primary transplants vs. retransplants. 
After primary transplants, the patient survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 
years are 87%, 79%, and 72%, respectively; after retransplants, 
the rates are 82%, 67%, and 58%.165 An increasing number of 
heart recipients have now survived more than 15 to 20 years 
with their first graft, especially those with no significant history 
of either cellular or antibody-mediated rejection.
Heart recipients must be monitored for both early and late 
complications. Early complications include primary graft dys-
function, acute cellular or antibody-mediated rejection, right 
heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension, and infec-
tion. Hemodynamic values are monitored to assess early graft 
function; pharmacologic and sometimes mechanical support is 
instituted if needed.
The goal of immunosuppression is to prevent rejection, 
which is assessed by immunosuppressive levels and, early on, 
by endomyocardial biopsy. Both T-cell–mediated (cellular) and 
B-cell–mediated (antibody-mediated) rejection are monitored. 
Figure 11-26.  Suture lines for bicaval anastomosis (a), biatrial 
anastomosis (b), aortic anastomosis (c), and pulmonary artery anas-
tomosis (d).
Most of the immunosuppression used is aimed at T cells; 
however, if the recipient has many preformed antibodies or 
develops donor-specific antibodies, other strategies (such as 
plasmapheresis or rituximab) are used to reduce the antibody 
load. Immunosuppressive regimens can vary by center, but most 
often consist of three categories of medications: a calcineurin 
inhibitor (usually tacrolimus or cyclosporine), an antiprolifera-
tive agent (MMF or AZA), and a corticosteroid (prednisone). 
Other immunosuppressive agents can be used, depending on the 
needs of individual recipients.
Recipients are also assessed for any infections, with visual 
inspection of wound healing and with monitoring of the com-
plete blood count and cultures as needed. Other common early 
sequelae include drug-induced nephrotoxicity, glucose intoler-
ance, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, osteoporosis, malignancies, 
and biliary disease.
Late complications include acquired transplant vasculopa-
thy, progressive renal failure, and, most commonly, malignan-
cies, especially skin cancer and PTLD. Accelerated coronary 
artery disease is the third most common cause of death post-
transplant (after infections and acute rejection) and the most 
common cause after the first year. Coronary artery disease can 
begin to develop as early as 1 year posttransplant. Its pathogen-
esis is unknown, but it is believed to be immunologic. Because 
of these late complications, most transplant centers continue 
to perform screening tests and recipient examinations at least 
annually after the first year.
Lung Transplants
Indications.  The indications for a lung transplant include 
congenital disease, emphysema, COPD, cystic fibrosis, 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, primary pulmonary hypertension, 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, and the need for a retransplant after 
primary graft failure. Each year in the United States, about 1600 
patients are added to the waiting list; nearly a third of them have 
COPD and/or emphysema. The next most common diagnosis 
among patients on the waiting list is cystic fibrosis. A lung allo-
cation score (LAS) was instituted in 2005. The average lung 
transplant candidate requires oxygen (often 4 L/min or more 
at rest) and has an extensively compromised quality of life, as 
documented by the results of pulmonary function and 6-minute 
walk tests.
Evaluation.  Evaluation for a lung transplant is very similar 
to evaluation for a heart transplant, except that lung trans-
plant candidates undergo more extensive pulmonary function 
testing, a 6-minute walk test, chest computed tomography, 
ventilation-perfusion (V-Q) scanning, and arterial blood gas 
assessment. In addition, all lung transplant candidates must 
have adequate cardiac function and must meet psychosocial 
requirements.
Potential lung donors are also screened for blood type 
and size match. Larger lungs are accepted for COPD patients; 
smaller lungs are chosen for the restricted chest cavity of fibrotic 
patients. Donors should have a partial pressure of oxygen in 
arterial blood (Pao2) value >300 mmHg on a fraction of inspired 
oxygen (Fio2) of 100% and a positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) value of 5. Ideally, donors will have normal chest x-ray 
results, but exceptions for isolated abnormalities that will not 
affect subsequent graft function can be made. Living donors 
can donate a single lobe to a smaller recipient, such as a child. 
Single-lung transplants are common in many centers and can 
a
a
c
b
d
357
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
serve to increase the availability of lungs for multiple recipients. 
Newer concepts, such as “lung in the box” extracorporeal lung 
perfusion and stem cell technologies, may further improve the 
availability of donor lungs by optimizing the use of otherwise 
marginal grafts.
Procedure.  Lung transplants can be done either as (a) sin-
gle-lung transplants (to either side via thoracotomy) or as (b) 
sequential bilateral-lung transplants (via bilateral thoracoto-
mies or via a single clamshell incision that divides the sternum; 
Fig. 11-27). They can be done absent extracorporeal mechani-
cal cardiopulmonary perfusion (bypass), with the lung with the 
worst function (as predicted by preoperative ventilation and 
perfusion scanning) transplanted first. Despite careful surgi-
cal technique and excellent anesthesia, the poor pulmonary 
reserve of some lung recipients may require the institution of 
cardiopulmonary bypass to complete the transplant. Bypass 
is initiated through the chest by direct cardiac cannulation or 
peripherally via the femoral vessels.
Once the thoracotomy is made, a recipient pneumonec-
tomy is performed with care, in order to avoid injury to the 
phrenic or recurrent laryngeal nerves. The pulmonary veins and 
main pulmonary artery are encircled outside the pericardium. 
At this point, once the main pulmonary vessels are occluded, 
the need for cardiopulmonary bypass can be assessed. The ves-
sels and bronchus are ligated; the donor’s lung is prepared and 
brought to the table wrapped in cold iced gauze, in order to 
extend the cold preservation time. The bronchial anastomosis 
(Fig. 11-28) is performed first and then covered with peribron-
chial tissue or pericardium. The pulmonary artery and, finally, 
the vein are anastomosed. The lung is then deaired before the 
final anastomotic suture is tightened, with gentle lung insuffla-
tion. All clamps are removed, and the lung is aerated. At least 
two chest tubes are left in place. After the transplant is complete, 
a bronchoscopy is performed to clear the airway of blood and 
secretions.
Posttransplant Care.  Patient survival rates for lung recipients 
vary significantly after primary vs. redo transplants. After pri-
mary transplants, the patient survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years 
are 83%, 62%, and 46%, respectively; after retransplants, the 
rates are 64%, 38%, and 28%.
Postoperative care of lung recipients can be very labor- 
intensive. These patients require meticulous ventilator manage-
ment, in order to maintain Fio2 at a minimum and to keep Pao2 
at 70 mmHg. Most patients are extubated within the first 24 to 
48 hours. Recipients can require multiple bronchoscopies for 
both airway management and surveillance biopsies. Diuretics 
are used generously to counteract any positive fluid balance 
from the operation and to help with pulmonary recovery.
Early complications include technical complications, 
graft dysfunction, infections, and rejection. Technical com-
plications often involve stenosis of one or more anastomoses 
leading to graft dysfunction. Bronchoscopy, V-Q scanning, 
echocardiography, and radiologic imaging are useful in iden-
tifying the causes of graft dysfunction. In up to 20% of recipi-
ents, primary early graft dysfunction can occur with no obvious 
cause. Such dysfunction may be due to some pathology from 
the donor, perhaps an unknown aspiration, infection, or contusion; 
or it could result from poor graft preservation at the time of 
organ procurement. In the intensive care unit, aggressive ven-
tilator and pharmacologic management can help, but recipients 
can nonetheless progress to the need for mechanical support 
in the form of ECMO. Infections are treated with appropriate 
antibiotics, which can be challenging in patients with cystic 
fibrosis and a history of multidrug-resistant organisms. Rejec-
tion is monitored by biopsies and treated as needed.
Late complications include airway complications, such as 
strictures and, rarely, dehiscence, bronchiolitis obliterans, and 
malignancies. Strictures are treated with bronchoscopic dilation 
and intervention. Bronchiolitis obliterans often is a sequela of 
chronic rejection, but can be due to aspiration, chronic infec-
tions, or various other causes. In recipients with a progres-
sive fall in their forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), 
bronchiolitis obliterans is suspected. All recipients should be 
taught to perform microspirometry at home as a screening 
Figure 11-27.  Clamshell incision. Bronchial anastomosis with 
ligated pulmonary arteries and veins.
Figure 11-28.  Bronchial anastomosis.
358
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
tool posttransplant. Biopsies are performed to confirm the diag-
nosis of any complication and, if possible, the cause. Despite 
aggressive screening and treatment, more than 50% of recipients 
will develop graft dysfunction. Most if not all of the sequelae of 
chronic immunosuppression that occur in lung transplant recipi-
ents are similar to those occurring in other groups of solid organ 
transplants.
Heart-Lung Transplants
Every year in the United States, 30 to 50 patients are added to 
the list of patients waiting to receive a simultaneous heart-lung 
transplant. The most common diagnosis is idiopathic pulmo-
nary fibrosis, followed by primary pulmonary hypertension. 
Heart-lung candidates are often younger than their single-organ 
counterparts. The patient survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years are 
66%, 48%, and 39%, respectively. Often, lung complications 
ultimately lead to graft failure. The immunosuppression is the 
same as that for single thoracic organ recipients, with emphasis 
on weaning the patient off corticosteroids as early as possible.
Xenotransplants
Xenotransplants (i.e., cross-species transplants of organs, tis-
sues, or cells) have immense, yet untapped, potential to solve 
the critical shortage of available grafts. A primary hurdle is the 
formidable immunologic barrier between species, especially 
with vascularized whole organs.1661-170 Other problems include 
the potential risk of transmitting infections (known as zoono-
ses or xenoses) and the ethical problems of using animals for 
widespread human transplants, even though great progress has 
been made in the past few years in efforts to overcome these 
problems.166-172
Pigs are generally accepted as the most likely donor spe-
cies for xenotransplants into human beings.173 Pigs would also 
be easier to raise on a large-scale basis. Guidelines for raising 
pigs in specialized facilities designated as pathogen-free have 
been established; in anticipation of clinical trials, such facilities 
have already been created and populated.171,172
The immunologic barrier in pig-to-human xenotrans-
plants is highly complex, but generally involves four sub-
types of rejection.166 The first is hyperacute rejection (HAR), 
which is mediated by the presence of natural (preformed) 
xenoantibodies in humans. These antibodies bind to antigens 
found mainly on the vascular endothelial cells of porcine 
donor organs, leading to complement activation, intravas-
cular coagulation, and rapid graft ischemia soon after the 
transplant. The second subtype is acute humoral xenograft 
rejection (AHXR), a delayed form of antibody-mediated 
rejection seen in pig-to-nonhuman-primate transplants after 
steps to prevent HAR—steps such as depletion of anti-pig 
antibodies or complement from nonhuman primates’ serum. 
Alternative names for AHXR include acute vascular rejection 
or delayed xenograft rejection. The third subtype is an acute 
cellular rejection process (similar to the classic T-cell–medi-
ated acute rejection seen in allograft recipients). The fourth 
subtype is chronic rejection in grafts that survive for more 
than a few weeks (similar to the chronic rejection seen in 
long-surviving allograft recipients, with features of chronic 
vasculopathy).
Many different options are being tested to overcome this 
immunologic barrier, including the genetic engineering of pigs, 
the use of agents to inhibit platelet aggregation and complement 
activation, and the administration of powerful immunosuppres-
sive drugs.166-173
During the first decade of the twenty-first century, the field 
of whole-organ xenotransplantation progressed significantly, 
thanks to the increasing availability of genetically engineered 
pigs and new immunosuppressive protocols. At a recent sympo-
sium organized by the International Xenotransplantation Asso-
ciation, data presented demonstrated extended survival time of 
porcine solid organs in nonhuman primates: from about 30 days 
to an average of 60 days and even up to 250 days (depending 
on the model).166,169,174,175 However, clinical application is still 
limited by thrombotic microangiopathy and consumptive coagu-
lopathy; novel methods to prevent those complications will be 
required for further progress.
Cellular xenotransplants have made great strides and 
are currently in the early stages of clinical trials. Porcine 
islet xenotransplants are the most advanced form; five inde-
pendent groups have now demonstrated survival and func-
tion of porcine islets in nonhuman primates for more than 
100 days.166,175-181 For the clinical trials, cost-benefit models 
have been developed, and the regulatory framework has been 
established.170-172,178 One trial of particular interest involves 
transplanting encapsulated porcine islets without immunosup-
pression.179 Early results are encouraging. But the efficacy of 
that approach may be limited until further genetic engineering 
enables proper oxygenation and nourishment of islet grafts, 
thereby supporting their viability and function.
The future of xenotransplantation is exciting. Continued 
active research will focus on further genetic engineering of 
pigs, newer immunosuppressive drugs, and tissue engineer-
ing approaches that will minimize or eliminate the need for 
immunosuppression. Given recent progress, routine clinical 
application of cellular xenotransplants is likely within the next 
decade.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Carrel A. The surgery of blood vessels, etc. B Johns Hopkins 
Hosp 1907;18:18-28.
2.	Hamilton D, Reid, WA. Yu Yo Voronoy and the first human 
kidney allograft. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1984;159(3):289-294.
3.	Medawar PB. Immunity to homologous grafted skin; the 
suppression of cell division in grafts transplanted to immu-
nized animals. Br J Exp Pathol. 1946;27:9-14.
4.	Merrill JP Murray J, Harrison JH. Successful homotransplan-
tation of the human kidney between identical twins. JAMA. 
1956;160(4):277-282.
5.	Murray JE, Merrill J, Harrison JH, et al. Prolonged sur-
vival of human-kidney homografts by immunosuppressive 
drug therapy. N Engl J Med. 1963;268:1315-1323.
6.	Starzl TE, Waddell WR, Marchioro TL. Reversal of rejection 
in human renal homografts with subsequent development of 
homograft tolerance. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1963;117(4):385.
7.	Calne RY, Rolles K, Thiru S, et al. Cyclosporin A initially 
as the only immunosuppressant in 34 recipients of cadav-
eric organs: 32 kidneys, 2 pancreases, and 2 livers. Lancet. 
1979;2(8151):1033-1036.
8.	Hall BM, Dorsch S, Roser B. Cellular basis of allograft-
rejection in vivo. 1. Cellular requirements for 1st set rejection 
of heart grafts. J Exp Med. 1978;148(4):878-889.
9.	Hall BM, Dorsch S, Roser B. Cellular basis of allograft-
rejection in vivo. 2. Nature of memory cells mediating second 
set heart graft rejection. J Exp Med. 1978;148(4):890-902.
359
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
10.	Hariharan S, Johnson CP, Bresnahan BA, et al. Improved graft 
survival after renal transplantation in the United States, 1988 
to 1996. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(9):605-612.
11.	Cicciarelli J. Cyclosporine and trends in kidney transplanta-
tion. Clin Transpl. 1986;6;223-320.
12.	Meier-Kriesche HU, Li S, Gruessner RW, et al. Immuno-
suppression: evolution in practice and trends, 1994-2004. 
Am J Transplant. 2006;6(5 Pt 2):1111-1131.
13.	Halloran PF. Immunosuppressive drugs for kidney transplan-
tation. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(26):2715-2729.
14.	Zand MS, Vo T, Huggins J, et al. Polyclonal rabbit anti-
thymocyte globulin triggers B-cell and plasma cell apop-
tosis by multiple pathways. Transplantation. 2005;79(11): 
1507-1515.
15.	Brennan DC, Daller JA, Lake KD, Cibrik D, Del Castillo D. 
Rabbit antithymocyte globulin versus basiliximab in renal 
transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(19):1967-1977.
16.	Vega O, Cardenas G, Correa-Rotter R, Alberu J, Morales-
Buenrostro LE. Basilizimab vs. limited dose daclizumab (2 
mg/kg) administered in single or two separated doses in kid-
ney transplantation. Rev Invest Clin. 2008;60(2):82-86.
17.	Kirk AD, Hale DA, Mann RB, et al. Results from a human 
renal allograft tolerance trial evaluating the humanized CD52-
speficic monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab (CAMPAH-1H). 
Transplantation. 2003;76(1):120-129.
18.	Agarwal A, Shen LY, Kirk AD. The role of alemtuzumab 
in facilitating maintenance immunosuppression minimiza-
tion following solid organ transplantation. Transpl Immunol. 
2008;20(1-2):6-11.
19.	Fryer JP, Granger DK, Leventhal JR, et al. Steroid-related 
complications in the cyclosporine era. Clin Transplant. 1994; 
8:224.
20.	Humar A, Crotteau S, Gruessner A, et al. Steroid minimization 
in liver transplant recipients: impact on hepatitis C recurrence 
and posttransplant diabetes. Clin Transplant. 2007;21:526.
21.	Matas AJ, Kandaswamy R, Gillingham KJ, et al. Prednisone-
free maintenance immunosuppression—a 5-year experience. 
Am J Transplant. 2005;5:2473.
22.	Elion GB. The George Hitchings and Gertrude Elion Lec-
ture. The pharmacology of azathioprine. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
1993;685:400-407.
23.	Remuzzi G, Lesti M, Gotti E, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil ver-
sus azathioprine for prevention of acute rejection in renal trans-
plantation (MYSS): a randomized trial. Lancet. 2004;364:503.
24.	Bolin P, Tanriover B, Zibari GB, et al. Improvement in 
3-month patient-reported gastrointestinal symptoms after 
conversion from mycophenolate mofetil to enteric-coated 
mycophenolate sodium in renal transplant patients. Trans-
plantation. 2007;84(11):1443-1451.
25.	Kaplan B, Schold J, Srinivas T, et al. Effect of sirolimus 
withdrawal in patients with deteriorating renal function. Am 
J Transpl. 2004;4(10):1709-1712.
26.	Larson TS, Dean PG, Stegall MD, et al. Complete avoidance 
of calcineurin inhibitors in renal transplantation: a randomized 
trial comparing sirolimus and tacrolimus. Am J Transplant. 
2006;6:514.
27.	Burke JF, Pirsch JD, Ramos EL, et al. Long-term efficacy and 
safety of cyclosporine in renal transplant recipients. N Engl J 
Med. 1994;331:358.
28.	Calne RY, Rolles K, White DJG, et al. Cyclosporin A initially 
as the only immunosuppressant in 34 recipients of cadaveric 
organs. Lancet. 1979;2:1033.
29.	Sweny P, Farrington K, Younis F, et al. Sixteen months expe-
rience with cyclosporin A in human kidney transplantation. 
Transplant Proc. 1981;13:365.
30.	Mihatsch MJ, Kyo M, Morozumi K, et al. The side-effects 
of ciclosporine-A and tacrolimus. Clin Nephrol. 1998;49(6): 
356-363.
31.	Larsen CP, Pearson TC, Adams AB, et al. Rational devel-
opment of LEA29Y (belatacept), a high-affinity variant of 
CTLA4-Ig with potent immunosuppressive properties. Am J 
Transplant. 2005;5:443.
32.	Vincenti F, Larsen C, Durrback A, et al. Costimulation block-
ade with belatacept in renal transplantation. N Engl J Med. 
2005;353;770.
33.	 Pescovitz MD. Rituximab, an anti-cd20 monoclonal antibody: 
history and mechanism of action. Am J Transplant. 2006;6:859.
34.	Blume OR, Yost SE, Kaplan B. Antibody-mediated rejection: 
pathogenesis, prevention, treatment, and outcomes. J Trans-
plant. 2012:201754.
35.	Becker YT, Becker BN, Pirsch JD, Sollinger HW. Rituximab 
as treatment for refractory kidney transplant rejection. Am J 
Transplant. 2004;4:996.
36.	Perry DK, Burns JM, Pollinger HS, et al. Proteasome inhi-
bition causes apoptosis of normal human plasma cells pre-
venting alloantibody production. Am J Transplant. 2009; 
9:201.
37.	Everly MJ, Everly JJ, Susskind B, et al. Bortezomib provides 
effective therapy for antibody- and cell-mediated acute rejec-
tion. Transplantation. 2008;86:1754.
38.	Lock JE, Magro CM, Singer AL, et al. The use of antibody 
to complement protein C5 for salvage treatment of severe 
antibody-mediated rejection. Am J Transplant. 2011;24:e61.
39.	Stegall MD, Diwan T, Raghavaiah S, et al. Terminal com-
plement inhibition decreases antibody-mediated rejection in 
sensitized renal transplant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2011; 
11:2405.
40.	Hodson EM, Jones CA, Webster AC, et al. Antiviral medi-
cations to prevent cytomegalovirus disease and early death 
in recipients of solid-organ transplants: a systemic review 
of randomized controlled trials. Lancet. 2005;365(9477): 
2105-2115.
41.	Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorell TC, Craig JC. Antifun-
gal agents for preventing fungal infections in solid organ 
transplant recipients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;3: 
CD004291.
42.	Engels EA, Pfeiffer RM, Fraumeni JF Jr., et al. Spectrum 
of cancer risk among US solid organ transplant recipients. 
JAMA. 2011;306(17):1891-1901.
43.	Wijdicks EFM, Varelas PN, Gronseth GS, et al. Evidence-based 
guideline update: determining brain death in adults. Report of 
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy 
of Neurology. Neurology. 2010;74(23):1911-1918.
44.	Nakagawa TA, Ashwal S, Mathur M, et al. Guidelines for the 
determination of brain death in infants and children: an update 
of the 1987 Task Force Recommendations—Executive Sum-
mary. Ann Neurol. 2012;71(4):573-585.
45.	Delgado DH, Rao V, Ross HJ. Donor management in cardiac 
transplantation. Can J Cardiol. 2002;18(11):1217-1223.
46.	Malinoski DJ, Daly MC, Patel MS, et al. Achieving donor 
management goals before deceased donor procurement is 
associated with more organs transplanted per donor. J Trauma. 
2011;71(4):990-995.
47.	Shemie SD, Ross H, Pagliarello J, et al. Organ donor manage-
ment in Canada: recommendations of the forum on Medical 
Management to Optimize Donor Organ Potential. Can Med 
Assoc J. 2006;174(6):S13-S30.
48.	Starzl TE, Miller C, Broznick B, et al. An improved tech-
nique for multiple organ harvesting. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1987;165(4):343-348.
49.	Abu-Elmagd K, Fung J, Bueno J, et al. Logistics and 
technique for procurement of intestinal, pancreatic, and 
hepatic grafts from the same donor. Ann Surg. 2000;232(5): 
680-687.
50.	Boggi U, Vistoli F, Del Chiaro M, et al. A simplified tech-
nique for the en bloc procurement of abdominal organs that 
360
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
is suitable for pancreas and small-bowel transplantation. Sur-
gery. 2004;135(6):629-641.
51.	Cho YW, Terasaki PI, Cecka JM. High kidney graft survival 
rates using non-heart-beating trauma donors. Transplant Proc. 
1998;30(7):3795-3796.
52.	Kootstra G, Daemen JHC, Oomen APA. Categories of 
non-heart-beating donors. Transplant Proc. 1995;27(5): 
2893-2894.
53.	Jay CL, Lyuksemburg V, Ladner DP, et al. Ischemic chol-
angiopathy after controlled donation after cardiac death liver 
transplantation a meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2011;253(2): 
259-264.
54.	Casavilla A, Ramirez C, Shapiro R, et al. Liver and kidney 
transplantation from non-heart beating donors: the Pittsburgh 
experience. Transplant Proc. 1995;27(1):710-712.
55.	Reese PP, Caplan AL, Kesselheim AS, et al. Creating a medi-
cal, ethical, and legal framework for complex living kidney 
donors. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1(6):1148-1153.
56.	Barr ML, Belghiti J, Villamil FG, et al. A report of the Van-
couver forum on the care of the live organ donor: lung, liver, 
pancreas, and intestine data and medical guidelines. Trans-
plantation. 2006;81(10):1373-1385.
57.	Jeon H, Lee SG. Living donor liver transplantation. Curr Opin 
Organ Transplant. 2010;15(3):283-287.
58.	St. Peter SD, Imber CJ, Friend PJ. Liver and kidney preserva-
tion by perfusion. Lancet. 2002;359(9306):604-613.
59.	Van der Werf WJ, D’Alessandro AM, Hoffmann RM, et al. 
Procurement, preservation, and transport of cadaver kidneys. 
Surg Clin North Am. 1998;78(1):41.
60.	Dalessandro AM, Southard JH, Love RB, et al. Organ preser-
vation. Surg Clin North Am. 1994;74(5):1083.
61.	Feng L, Zhao N, Yao X, et al. Histidine-tryptophan- 
ketoglutarate solution vs. University of Wisconsin solution for 
liver transplantation: a systematic review. Liver Transplant. 
2007;13(8):1125-1136.
62.	Siedlecki A, Irish W, Brennan DC. Delayed graft function 
in the kidney transplant. Am J Transplant. 2011;11(11): 
2279-2296.
63.	Sterling WA, Pierce JC, Lee HM, et al. Comparison of meth-
ods of preservation of cadaver kidneys. Transplant Proc. 
1972;4(4):621-623.
64.	Leeser DB, Bingaman AW, Poliakova L, et al. Pulsatile 
pump perfusion of pancreata before human islet cell isolation. 
Transplant Proc. 2004;36(4):1050-1051.
65.	van der Plaats A, Maathuis MHJ, Hart NAT, et al. The Gronin-
gen hypothermic liver perfusion pump: functional evaluation 
of a new machine perfusion system. Ann Biomed Engineer. 
2006;34(12):1924-1934.
66.	Ullman E. Tissue and organ transplantation. Ann Surg. 1914; 
60:195-219.
67.	Murray JE, Hills W. The first successful organ transplants in 
man. J Am Coll Surg. 2005;200(1):5-9.
68.	Murray JE. The 50th anniversary of the first successful 
human organ transplant. Revista De Investigacion Clinica. 
2005;57(2):118-119.
69.	Wolfe RA, Ashby VB, Milford EL, et al. Comparison of 
mortality in all patients on dialysis, patients on dialysis 
awaiting transplantation, and recipients of a first cadaveric 
transplant. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(23):1725-1730.
70.	Wyld M, Morton RL, Hayen A, et al. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of utility-based quality of life in chronic kidney 
disease treatments. PLoS Med. 2012;9(9):e1001307.
71.	Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients. http://srtr. 
transplant.hrsa.gov/annual_reports/2010/chapter_index.htm.
72.	Ojo AO, Hanson JA, Wolfe RA, et al. Long-term survival in 
renal transplant recipients with graft function. Kidney Int. 
2000;57(1):307-313.
73.	 Kahwaji J, Bunnapradist S, Hsu JW, et al. Cause of death with 
graft function among renal transplant recipients in an integrated 
healthcare system. Transplantation. 2011;91(2):225-230.
74.	Lentine KL, Costa SP, Weir MR, et al. Cardiac disease 
evaluation and management among kidney and liver 
transplantation candidates: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association and the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation: endorsed by the American Soci-
ety of Transplant Surgeons, American Society of Trans-
plantation, and National Kidney Foundation. Circulation. 
2012;126(5):617-663.
75.	Penn I. Evaluation of transplant candidates with pre-existing 
malignancies. Ann Transplant. 1997;2(4):14-17.
76.	Trends in tuberculosis–United States, 2011. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(11):181-185.
77.	Chisari FV, Ferrari C. Hepatitis B virus immunopathogenesis. 
Annu Rev Immunol. 1995;13:29-60.
78.	Harbell J, Fung J, Nissen N, et al. Surgical complications in 
275 HIV-infected liver and/or kidney transplantation recipi-
ents. Surgery. 2012;152(3):376-381.
79.	Fine RN. Recurrence of nephrotic syndrome/focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis following renal transplantation in children. 
Pediatr Nephrol. 2007;22(4):496-502.
80.	Araya CE, Dharnidharka VR. The factors that may predict 
response to rituximab therapy in recurrent focal segmen-
tal glomerulosclerosis: a systematic review. J Transplant. 
2011;2011:374213.
81.	Pham PT, Pham PA, Pham PC, et al. Evaluation of adult kid-
ney transplant candidates. Semin Dial. 2010;23(6):595-605.
82.	Taylor CJ, Kosmoliaptsis V, Summers DM, et al. Back to the 
future: application of contemporary technology to long-standing 
questions about the clinical relevance of human leukocyte 
antigen-specific alloantibodies in renal transplantation. Hum 
Immunol. 2009;70(8):563-568.
83.	Hume DM, Merrill JP, Miller BF, et al. Experiences with renal 
homotransplantation in the human: report of 9 cases. J Clin 
Invest. 1955;34(2):327-382.
84.	 Murray JE, Merrill JP, Harrison JH. Kidney transplantation 
between 7 pairs of identical twins. Ann Surg. 1958;148(3): 
343-359.
85.	Starzl TE, Marchioro TL, Dickinson TC, et al. Technique of 
renal homotransplantation: experience with 42 cases. Arch 
Surg. 1964;89(1):87-104.
86.	Ghazanfar A, Tavakoli A, Zaki MR, et al. The outcome of 
living donor renal transplants with multiple renal arteries; a 
large cohort study with a mean follow-up period of 10 years. 
Transplant Proc. 2010;42:1654.
87.	Laurence JM, Sandroussi C, Lam VWT, et al. Utilization of 
small pediatric donor kidneys: a decision analysis. Transplan-
tation. 2011;91(10):1110-1113.
88.	Lau KK, Berg GM, Schjoneman YG, et al. Pediatric en bloc 
kidney transplantation into pediatric recipients. Pediatr Trans-
plant. 2010;14(1):100-104.
89.	Lamb KE, Lodhi S, Meier-Kriesche HU. Long-term renal 
allograft survival in the United States: a critical reappraisal. 
Am J Transplant. 2011;11(3):450-462.
90.	Rizzari MD, Suszynski TM, Gillingham KJ, et al. Ten-year 
outcome after rapid discontinuation of prednisone in adult 
primary kidney transplantation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2012;7(3):494-503.
91.	Vincenti F, Larsen CP, Alberu J, et al. Three-year outcomes 
from BENEFIT, a randomized, active-controlled, parallel-
group study in adult kidney transplant recipients. Am J Trans-
plant. 2012;12(1):210-217.
92.	Massy ZA, Guijarro C, Wiederkehr MR, et al. Chronic renal 
allograft rejection: immunologic and nonimmunologic risk 
factors. Kidney Int. 1996;49(2):518-524.
361
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
93.	Traynor C, Jenkinson A, Williams Y, et al. Twenty-year 
survivors of kidney transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2012; 
12:3289.
94.	Sutherland ER, Gruessner RWG. History of pancreas trans-
plantation (Chapter 4). In: Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, 
eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer-
Verlag; 2004:39-68.
95.	Gruessner AC. 2011 update on pancreas transplantation: 
comprehensive trend analysis of 25,000 cases followed up 
over the course of twenty-four years at the International 
Pancreas Transplant Registry (IPTR). Rev Diabet Stud. 
2011;8:6-16.
96.	Effects of pancreas transplantation on secondary complica-
tions of diabetes (Chapter 16). In: Gruessner RWG, Suther-
land DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 2004:455-508.
97.	Gruessner RW, Sutherland DE, Drangstveit MB, Kandas-
wamy R, Gruessner AC. Pancreas allotransplants in patients 
with a previous total pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. 
J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206:458-465.
98.	Surgical aspects of pancreas transplantation (Chapter 8). In: 
Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the 
Pancreas. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:111-178.
99.	Sutherland DER, Zamir GA, Brayman KL. Transplantation 
of the pancreas. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds. Current 
Surgical Therapy. 10th ed. New York: Elsevier Saunders; 
2011:460-471.
100.	Postoperative management (Chapter 9). In: Gruessner RWG, 
Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:179-266.
101.	Pancreas transplantation (Section II). In: Gruessner RWG, 
Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New 
York: McGraw-Hill; 2008:369-437.
102.	Gruessner AC, Sutherland DER, Gruessner RWG. Long-term 
outcome after pancreas transplantation. Curr Opin Transplant. 
2012;17:100-105.
103.	Shapiro AM, Ricordi C, Hering BJ. International trial of 
the Edmonton protocol for islet transplantation. N Engl J 
Med. 2006;355:1318-3130.
104.	Maffi P, Scavini M, Socci C, et al. Risks and benefits of 
transplantation in the cure of type 1 diabetes; whole pancreas 
versus islet transplantation. A single center study. Rev Diabet 
Stud. 2011;8:44-50.
105.	Williams PW. Notes on diabetes treated with extract and by 
grafts of sheep’s pancreas. Br Med J. 1894;1303-1304.
106.	Kelly WD, Lillehei RC, Merkel FK, et al. Allotransplantation 
of the pancreas and duodenum along with the kidney in dia-
betic nephropathy. Surgery. 1967;61(6):827-837.
107.	Ballinger WF, Lacy PE. Transplantation of intact pancreatic 
islets in rats. Surgery. 1972;72:175-186.
108.	Najarian JS, Sutherland DE, Baumgartner D, et al. Total or 
near total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation for 
treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1980;192(4): 
526-542.
109.	Shapiro AM, Lakey JR, Ryan EA, et al. Islet transplantation 
in seven patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus using a glu-
cocorticoid-free immunosuppressive regimen. N Engl J Med. 
2000;343(4):230-238.
110.	Ryan EA, Lakey JR, Paty BW, et al. Successful islet trans-
plantation: continued insulin reserve provides long-term gly-
cemic control. Diabetes. 2002;51(7):2148-2157.
111.	Ryan EA, Lakey JR, Rajotte RV, et al. Clinical outcomes and 
insulin secretion after islet transplantation with the Edmonton 
protocol. Diabetes. 2001;50(4):710-719.
112.	Shapiro AM, Ricordi C, Hering B. Edmonton’s islet suc-
cess has indeed been replicated elsewhere. Lancet. 2003; 
362(9391):1242.
113.	Shapiro AM, Ricordi C, Hering Bj, et al. International trial of 
the Edmonton protocol for islet transplantation. N Engl J Med. 
2006;355(13):1318-1330.
114.	Ryan EA, Paty BW, Senior PA, et al. Five-year follow-up after 
clinical islet transplantation. Diabetes. 2005;54(7):2060-2069.
115.	McCall M, James Shapiro AM. Update on islet transplanta-
tion. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(7):1-16.
116.	Markmann JF, Deng S, Huang X, et al. Insulin independence 
following isolated islet transplantation and single islet infu-
sions. Ann Surg. 2003;237(6):741-749.
117.	Hering BJ, Kandaswamy R, Ansite JD, et al. Single-donor, 
marginal-dose islet transplantation in patients with type 1 dia-
betes. JAMA. 2005;293(7):830-835.
118.	Shapiro AM. Strategies toward single-donor islets of Lang-
erhans transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2011; 
16(6):627-631.
119.	Bellin MD, Kandaswamy R, Parkey J, et al. Prolonged insulin 
independence after islet allotransplants in recipients with 
type 1 diabetes. Am J Transplant. 2008;8(11):2463-2470.
120.	Bellin MD, Barton FB, Heitman A, et al. Potent induction 
immunotherapy promotes long-term insulin independence 
after islet transplantation in type 1 diabetes. Am J Transplant. 
2012;12(6):1576-1583.
121.	Rickels MR. Recovery of endocrine function after islet 
and pancreas transplantation. Curr Diabet Rep. 2012;12: 
587-596.
122.	Barton FB, Rickels MR, Alejandro R, et al. Improvement in 
outcomes of clinical islet transplantation: 1999-2010. Diabe-
tes Care. 2012;35(7):1436-1445.
123.	Busuttil RW, De Carlis LG, Mihaylov PV, Gridelli B, Fassati 
LR, Starzl TE. The first report of orthotopic liver transplan-
tation in the Western world. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(6): 
1385-1387.
124.	Starzl TE, Demetris AJ, Trucco M, et al. Cell migration 
and chimerism after whole-organ transplantation: the basis 
of graft acceptance. Hepatology. 1993;17(6):1127-1152.
125.	Cohen C, Benjamin M. Alcoholics and liver transplantation. 
The Ethics and Social Impact Committee of the Transplant 
and Health Policy Center. JAMA. 1991;265(10):1299-1301.
126.	Lucey MR. Liver transplantation in patients with alcoholic 
liver disease. Liver Transplant. 2011;17(7):751-759.
127.	Longworth L, Young T, Buxton MJ, et al. Midterm cost-
effectiveness of the liver transplantation program of England 
and Wales for three disease groups. Liver Transplant. 2003; 
9(12):1295-1307.
128.	Charlton M, Ruppert K, Belle SH, et al. Long-term results and 
modeling to predict outcomes in recipients with HCV infec-
tion: results of the NIDDK liver transplantation database. 
Liver Transplant. 2004;10(9):1120-1130.
129.	Garcia-Retortillo M, Forns X, Feliu A, et al. Hepatitis C virus 
kinetics during and immediately after liver transplantation. 
Hepatology. 2002;35(3):680-687.
130.	Berenguer M, Prieto M, Rayon JM, et al. Natural history of 
clinically compensated hepatitis C virus-related graft cirrho-
sis after liver transplantation. Hepatology. 2000;32(4 Pt 1): 
852-858.
131.	Lake JR, Shorr JS, Steffen BJ, Chu AH, Gordon RD, Wiesner 
RH. Differential effects of donor age in liver transplant recipi-
ents infected with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and without viral 
hepatitis. Am J Transplant. 2005;5(3):549-557.
132.	Neff GW, Montalbano M, O’Brien CB, et al. Treatment of 
established recurrent hepatitis C in liver-transplant recipi-
ents with pegylated interferon-alfa-2b and ribavirin therapy. 
Transplantation. 2004;78(9):1303-1307.
133.	Lee J, Belanger A, Doucette JT, Stanca C, Friedman S, Bach 
N. Transplantation trends in primary biliary cirrhosis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;5(11):1313-1315.
362
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
134.	Liermann Garcia RF, Evangelista Garcia C, McMaster P, 
Neuberger J. Transplantation for primary biliary cirrhosis: 
retrospective analysis of 400 patients in a single center. Hepa-
tology. 2001;33(1):22-27.
135.	Campsen J, Zimmerman MA, Trotter JF, et al. Clinically 
recurrent primary sclerosing cholangitis following liver 
transplantation: a time course. Liver Transplant. 2008;14(2): 
181-185.
136.	Schilsky ML, Scheinberg IH, Sternlieb I. Liver transplantation 
for Wilson’s disease: indications and outcome. Hepatology. 
1994;19(3):583-587.
137.	Medici V, Mirante VG, Fassati LR, et al. Liver transplantation 
for Wilson’s disease: the burden of neurological and psychiat-
ric disorders. Liver Transplant. 2005;11(9):1056-1063.
138.	Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, et al. Liver transplanta-
tion for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinomas 
in patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(11): 
693-699.
139.	Heimbach JK, Haddock MG, Alberts SR, et al. Transplanta-
tion for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Liver Transplant. 2004;10 
(10 Suppl 2):S65-S68.
140.	O’Grady JG, Alexander GJ, Hayllar KM, Williams R. Early 
indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure. Gastroen-
terology. 1989;97(2):439-445.
141.	Boyer TD, Haskal ZJ. The role of transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt (TIPS) in the management of portal 
hypertension: update 2009. Hepatology. 2010;51(1):306.
142.	Kamath PS, Wiesner RH, Malinchoc M, et al. A model to 
predict survival in patients with end-stage liver disease. Hepa-
tology. 2001;33(2):464-470.
143.	Wiesner R, Edwards E, Freeman R, et al. Model for end-stage 
liver disease (MELD) and allocation of donor livers. Gastro-
enterology. 2003;124(1):91-96.
144.	Merion RM, Schaubel DE, Dykstra DM, Freeman RB, Port 
FK, Wolfe RA. The survival benefit of liver transplantation. 
Am J Transplant. 2005;5(2):307-313.
145.	Safdar K, Neff GW, Montalbano M, et al. Liver transplant for 
the septuagenarians: importance of patient selection. Trans-
plant Proc. 2004;36(5):1445-1448.
146.	Bellamy CO, DiMartini AM, Ruppert K, et al. Liver transplan-
tation for alcoholic cirrhosis: long term follow-up and impact 
of disease recurrence. Transplantation. 2001;72(4):619-626.
147.	Vagefi PA, Parekh J, Ascher NL, Roberts JP, Freise CE. Out-
comes with split liver transplantation in 106 recipients: the 
University of California, San Francisco, experience from 1993 
to 2010. Arch Surg. 2011;146(9):1052-1059.
148.	Brown RS Jr., Russo MW, Lai M, et al. A survey of liver 
transplantation from living adult donors in the United States. 
N Engl J Med. 2003;348(9):818-825.
149.	Bilzer M, Gerbes AL. Preservation injury of the liver: mech-
anisms and novel therapeutic strategies. J Hepatol. 2000; 
32(3):508-515.
150.	Jaeschke H. Preservation injury: mechanisms, prevention, and 
consequences. J Hepatol. 1996;25(5):774-780.
151.	Serracino-Inglott F, Habib NA, Mathie RT. Hepatic ischemia-
reperfusion injury. Am J Surg. 2001;181(2):160-166.
152.	Drazan K, Shaked A, Olthoff KM, et al. Etiology and man-
agement of symptomatic adult hepatic artery thrombo-
sis after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Am Surg. 
1996;62(3):237-240.
153.	Tzakis AG, Gordon RD, Shaw BW Jr., Iwatsuki S, Starzl 
TE. Clinical presentation of hepatic artery thrombosis after 
liver transplantation in the cyclosporine era. Transplantation. 
1985;40(6):667-671.
154.	Grant D, Abu-Elmagd K, Reyes J, et al. 2003 report of the 
intestine transplant registry: a new era has dawned. Ann Surg. 
2005;241(4):607-613.
155.	Abu-Elmagd K, Mazariegos G, Bond G, et al. Intestinal 
transplantation: current status and future considerations. 
Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101(9):S145-S146.
156.	Yersiz H, Renz JF, Hisatake GM, et al. Multivisceral and 
isolated intestinal procurement techniques. Liver Transplant. 
2003;9(8):881-886.
157.	Bueno J, Abu-Elmagd K, Mazariegos G, Madariaga J, Fung 
J, Reyes J. Composite liver–small bowel allografts with 
preservation of donor duodenum and hepatic biliary system 
in children. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35(2):291-295; discussion 
95-96.
158.	Farmer DG, McDiarmid SV, Edelstein S, et al. Improved out-
come after intestinal transplantation at a single institution over 
12 years. Transplant Proc. 2004;36(2):303-304.
159.	Tzakis AG, Kato T, Levi DM, et al. 100 multivisceral trans-
plants at a single center. Ann Surg. 2005;242(4):480-490; dis-
cussion 91-93.
160.	Gruessner RWG, Sharp HL. Living related intestinal 
transplantation: first report of a standardized surgical 
technique. Transplant. 1997;64:1605-1607.
161.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB. Heart failure. 
In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. 
Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. New York: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes; 
2003:1725.
162.	First human heart transplant. The History Channel website. 
Retrieved October 15, 2012, from http://www.history.com/
this-day-in-history/first-human-heart-transplant.
163.	Meyers BF, Patterson GA, Haverich A, Harringer W. Lung 
transplantation, heart-lung transplantation. In: Pearson FG, 
Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. 
New York: Churchill-Livingston; 2002:1085-1131.
164.	Costanzo MR, Dipchand A, Starling R, et al. The International 
Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation Guidelines for 
care of heart transplant recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2010;29(8):914-956.
165.	National Transplant Data. UNOS/HRSA website. Retrieved 
October 12, 2012, from http://www.optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
latestData.
166.	Esker B, Cooper DKC. Overcoming the barriers to xenotrans-
plantation: prospects for the future. Exp Rev Clin Immunol. 
2010;6(2):219-230.
167.	Schuurman HJ. Xenotransplantation: from the lab to the clinic: 
Sunrise Symposium at the XXIII International Congress of the 
Transplantation Society, Vancouver, Canada, August 2010. 
Clin Transplant. 2011;25(4):E415-E421.
168.	Dooldeniya MD, Warrens AN. Xenotransplantation: where 
are we today? J R Soc Med. 2003;96:111.
169.	Thompson P, Badell IR, Lowe M, et al. Alternative immu-
nomodulatory strategies for xenotransplantation: CD40/154 
pathway-sparing regimens promote xenograft survival. Am J 
Transplant. 2012;12(7):1765-1775.
170.	Hering BJ, Cooper DKC, Cozzi E, et al. The International 
Xenotransplantation Association consensus statement on con-
ditions for undertaking clinical trials of porcine islet products 
in type I diabetes: executive summary. Xenotransplantation. 
2009;16:196-202.
171.	Schuurman HJ. Regulatory aspects of pig-to-human islet 
transplantation. Xenotransplantation. 2008;15(2):116-120.
172.	Schuurman HJ. The International Xenotransplantation Associ-
ation consensus statement on conditions for undertaking clini-
cal trials of porcine islet products in type 1 diabetes—chapter 2: 
Source pigs. Xenotransplantation. 2009;16(4):215-222.
173.	Dorling A. Clinical xenotransplantation: pigs might fly? Am J 
Transplant. 2002;2:695.
174.	Greenstein JL, Schuurman H-J. Solid organ xenotransplanta-
tion: progress, promise, and regulatory issues. J Comm Bio-
tech. 2001;8:15-29.
363
Transplantation
CHAPTER 11
175.	Thompson P, Badell IR, Lowe M, et al. Islet xenotransplanta-
tion using gal-deficient neonatal donors improves engraftment 
and function. Am J Transplant. 2011;11:2593-2602.
176.	Rood PPM, Cooper DKC. Islet xenotransplantation: are 
we really ready for clinical trials? Am J Transplant. 2006; 
6(6):1269-1274.
177.	Mihalicz D, Rajotte R, Rayat G. Porcine islet xenotransplan-
tation for the treatment of type I diabetes. In: Type I Diabe-
tes: Pathogenesis, Genetics and Immunotherapy. New York: 
InTech; 2011:479-502.
178.	Beckwith J, Nyman JA, Flanagan B, et al. A health-economic 
analysis of porcine islet xenotransplantation. Xenotransplan-
tation. 2010;17:233-242.
179.	Elliot RB, Living Cell Technologies, Ltd. Towards xenotrans-
plantation of pig islets in the clinic. Curr Opin Organ Trans-
plant. 2011;16(2):195-200.
180.	Marigliano M, Bertera S, Grupillo M, et al. Pig-to-nonhuman 
primate pancreatic islet xenotransplantation: an overview. 
Curr Diab Rep. 2011;11(5):402-412.
181.	Dufrane D, Gianello P. Pig islet for xenotransplantation in 
human: structural and physiological compatibility for human 
clinical application. Transplant Rev (Orlando). 2012;26: 
183-188.
This page intentionally left blank 
Patient Safety
Catherine L. Chen, Michol A. Cooper,  
Mark L. Shapiro, Peter B. Angood, and Martin  
A. Makary
12
BACKGROUND
Patient harm due to medical mistakes can be catastrophic, result-
ing in high-profile consequences for the patient, surgeon, and 
institution.  A single error can even destroy a surgeon’s 
career. While mistakes are inherent to human nature, it is 
becoming more recognized that many mistakes are preventable.
Patient safety is a science that promotes the use of 
­evidence-based medicine and local wisdom to minimize the 
impact of human error on quality patient care. Wrong-site/
wrong-procedure surgeries, retained sponges, unchecked 
blood transfusions, mismatched organ transplants, and over-
looked allergies are all examples of potentially catastrophic 
events that can be prevented by implementing safer hospital 
systems. This chapter provides an overview of the modern-day 
field of patient safety by reviewing key measures of safety and 
quality, components of culture, interventions and tools, and risk 
management strategies in surgery.
THE SCIENCE OF PATIENT SAFETY
Medicine is considered a high-risk system with a high error rate, 
but these two characteristics are not always correlated. Other 
high-risk industries have managed to maintain an impeccably 
low error rate. For example, one of the highest risk systems in 
existence today, the U.S. Navy’s nuclear submarine program, 
has an unmatched safety record.
Much of the credit for their safety record is due to the 
culture of the nuclear submarine program, with its insistence 
on individual ownership, responsibility, attention to detail, 
professionalism, moral integrity, and mutual respect. These 
characteristics have created the cultural context necessary 
for high-quality communications under high-risk, high-stress 
­conditions. Each reactor operator is aware of what is going on 
at all times and is responsible for understanding the implications 
and possible consequences of any action. Communication flows 
freely between crewmen and officers, and information about 
any mistakes that occur are dispersed rapidly through the entire 
system so that other workers can learn how to prevent similar 
mistakes in the future.1
High Reliability Organizations
The nuclear submarine program is an example of an organi-
zation that has achieved the distinction of being considered a 
“high reliability organization.” High reliability organization 
theory recognizes that there are certain high-risk industries and 
organizations that have achieved very low accident and error 
rates compared to what would be expected given the inherent 
risks involved in their daily operations. Other high reliability 
industries and organizations include aircraft carrier flight decks, 
nuclear power plants, and the Federal Aviation Administration’s 
air traffic control system. In fact, one reason why nuclear 
power plants have such an excellent reliability record may be 
that their operators are often former naval submarine officers 
whose ­previous experience and training within one highly reli-
able organization are easily transferable to other organizations.1
One of the assumptions underlying the science of high 
reliability organizations is that humans who operate and ­manage 
Background	
365
The Science of Patient Safety	
365
High Reliability Organizations / 365
The Institute Of Medicine Report / 366
The Conceptual Model / 366
Creating a Culture of Safety	
368
Assessing An Organization’s Safety 
­Culture / 368
Teamwork and Communication	
368
Measuring Teamwork / 369
Communication Tools	
370
Operating Room Briefings / 370
Operating Room Debriefings / 370
Sign Outs / 371
Implementation / 372
Comprehensive Unit-Based Safety 
Program	
372
Measuring Quality in Surgery	
373
Agency For Healthcare Research and 
Quality Patient Safety Indicators / 373
The Surgical Care Improvement Project 
Measures / 374
National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program / 374
The Leapfrog Group / 375
World Health Organization “Safe Surgery 
Saves Lives” Initiative / 375
National Quality Forum / 376
“Never Events” in Surgery	
376
Retained Surgical Items / 377
Surgical Counts / 378
Wrong-Site Surgery / 378
The Joint Commission Universal Protocol 
To Ensure Correct Surgery / 378
Transparency in Healthcare	
379
Risk Management	
380
The Importance Of Communication in 
Managing Risk / 380
Complications	
380
Complications in Minor Procedures / 380
Organ System Complications / 383
Wounds, Drains, And Infection / 389
Nutritional And Metabolic Support 
­Complications / 391
Problems With Thermoregulation / 393
1
2
chapter 
complex systems are themselves not sufficiently complex to 
sense and anticipate the problems generated by the system.2 
This introduces another important idea undergirding the sci-
ence of patient safety: the concept of normal accident theory. 
Instead of attributing accidents to individual error, this theory 
states that accidents are intrinsic to high-volume activities and 
even inevitable in some settings. Accidents should not be used 
merely to identify and punish the person at fault, but should be 
seen as a systems problem and addressed at a broader level. As 
Reason states, even the “best people can make the worst errors 
as a result of latent conditions.”2
High-risk systems, as defined by Perrow in 19841:
• Have the potential to create a catastrophe, loosely defined as 
an event leading to loss of human or animal life, despoiling 
of the environment, or some other situation that gives rise to 
the sense of “dread.”
• Are complex, in that they have large numbers of highly inter-
dependent subsystems with many possible combinations that 
are nonlinear and poorly understood.
• Are tightly coupled, so that any perturbation in the ­system 
is transmitted rapidly between subsystems with little 
­attenuation.
However, high reliability organization theory suggests that 
proper oversight of people, processes, and technology can han-
dle complex and hazardous activities and keep error rates accept-
ably low.2 Studies of multiple high reliability organizations show 
that they share the following common characteristics2:
• People are supportive of one another.
• People trust one another.
• People have friendly, open relationships emphasizing cred-
ibility and attentiveness.
• The work environment is resilient and emphasizes creativity 
and goal achievement, providing strong feelings of credibility 
and personal trust.
Developing these characteristics is an important step 
toward achieving a low error rate in any organization. For this 
reason, safety culture is a measure used by hospitals nationwide 
to improve outcomes and is increasingly recognized as a metric 
of hospital quality.
The Institute of Medicine Report
Although healthcare as a whole can be considered a high-risk 
system, it is far from a high reliability organization. This fact 
was brought to light in the Institute of Medicine’s report “To Err 
Is Human: Building a Safer Health System,” which was pub-
lished in 2000.3 A landmark document in raising awareness of 
the magnitude of the problem of medical mistakes, the report is 
the most frequently cited document in the medical literature in 
recent years.4 The Institute of Medicine (IOM) report shocked 
the healthcare community by concluding that between 44,000 
and 98,000 deaths and over 1 million injuries occurred each year 
in American hospitals due to medical error. In fact, the number 
of deaths attributed to medical error is the aviation equivalent 
of one jumbo jet crash per day. As this report was disseminated, 
awareness about medical errors increased, and physicians and 
other health providers began speaking openly about mistakes 
and the difficulties they face when dealing with them.
The IOM report brought much-needed attention to the 
field of patient safety. In addition, it standardized the language 
used to describe errors in medicine, defining important terms 
for future research and quality improvement (Table 12-1). Fol-
lowing its publication, interest in patient safety research and 
programs increased exponentially. In an effort to improve 
patient safety, health services researchers began to collaborate 
with scientists from other disciplines, such as human factors 
engineering, psychology, and informatics to develop innova-
tive solutions to longstanding safety problems. The discussion 
around patient safety also became more personalized by high-
lighting the stories of individual patients who had died from 
medical errors. Most importantly, the report transformed the 
conversation about patient safety from blaming individuals for 
errors to improving the systems that allow them to take place 
(Case 12-1).5
The Conceptual Model
The Donabedian model of measuring quality identifies three 
main types of improvements: changes to structure, process, and 
outcome (Fig. 12-1).6  Structure refers to the physical and 
organizational tools, equipment, and policies that improve 
safety. Structural measures ask, “Do the right tools, equipment, 
and policies exist?” Process is the application of these tools, 
equipment, and policies/procedures to patients (good practices 
366
Key Points
1 	 Patient harm due to medical mistakes can be catastrophic and, 
in some cases, result in high-profile consequences not only for 
the patient, but also for the surgeon and institution.
2 	 Patient safety is a science that promotes the use of evidence-
based medicine and common sense improvements in an 
attempt to minimize the impact of human error on the routine 
delivery of services.
3 	 The structure-process-outcome framework within the context 
of an organization’s culture helps to clarify how risks and 
­hazards embedded within the organization’s structure may 
potentially lead to error and injure or harm patients.
4 	 Poor communication contributes to approximately 60% of 
the sentinel events reported to The Joint Commission.
5 	 Operating room briefings are team discussions of critical 
issues and potential hazards that can improve the safety of 
the operation and have been shown to improve operating 
room culture and decrease operating room delays.
6 	 National Quality Forum surgical “never events” include 
retained surgical items, wrong-site surgery, and death on 
the day of surgery of a normal healthy patient (American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Class 1).
7 	 Patient rapport is the most important determinant of 
­malpractice claims against a surgeon.
3
367
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
Table 12-1 
Types of medical error
Adverse event
•  Injury caused by medical management rather than the underlying condition of the patient
•  Prolongs hospitalization, produces a disability at discharge, or both
•  Classified as preventable or unpreventable
Negligence
•  Care that falls below a recognized standard of care
•  Standard of care is considered to be care a reasonable physician of similar knowledge, training, and experience would use in 
similar circumstances
Near miss
•  An error that does not result in patient harm
•  Analysis of near misses provides the opportunity to identify and remedy system failures before the occurrence of harm
Sentinel event
•  An unexpected occurrence involving death or serious physical or psychological injury
•  The injury involves loss of limb or function
•  This type of event requires immediate investigation and response
•  Other examples
•  Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administration of blood or blood products having major blood group 
incompatibilities
•  Wrong-site, wrong-procedure, or wrong-patient surgery
•  A medication error or other treatment-related error resulting in death
•  Unintentional retention of a foreign body in a patient after surgery
Source: From Woreta et al,50 with permission.
Case 12-1  Systems change resulting from medical 
error
Libby Zion was an 18-year-old woman who died after being 
admitted to the New York Hospital with fever and agitation 
on the evening of October 4, 1984. Her father, Sidney 
Zion, a lawyer and columnist for the N.Y. Daily News, was 
convinced that his daughter’s death was due to inadequate 
staffing and overworked physicians at the hospital and was 
determined to bring about changes to prevent other patients 
from suffering as a result of the teaching hospital system. 
Due to his efforts to publicize the circumstances surrounding 
his daughter’s death, Manhattan District Attorney Robert 
Morgenthau agreed to let a grand jury consider murder 
charges. Although the hospital was not indicted, in May 
1986, a grand jury issued a report strongly criticizing “the 
supervision of interns and junior residents at a hospital in 
NY County.”
  As a result, New York State Health Commissioner David 
Axelrod convened a panel of experts headed by Bertrand 
M. Bell, a primary care physician at Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine who had long been critical of the lack of 
supervision of physicians-in-training, to evaluate the training 
and supervision of doctors in New York State. The Bell 
Commission recommended that residents work no more than 
80 hours per week and no more than 24 consecutive hours 
per shift, and that a senior physician needed to be physically 
present in the hospital at all times. These recommendations 
were adopted by New York State in 1989. In 2003, the 
Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education 
followed by mandating that all residency training programs 
adhere to the reduced work hour schedule.
Context: Are we improving the safety culture?
Outcome
Process
Structure
Figure 12-1.  Donebedian model for measuring quality. (From 
Makary et al,6 with permission.)
and evidence-based medicine). Process measures ask, “Are the 
right tools, policies, and equipment being used?” Outcome is 
the result on patients. Outcome measures ask, “How often are 
patients harmed?” In this model, structure (how care is orga-
nized) plus process (what we do) influences patient outcomes 
(the results achieved).7
The structure, process, and outcome components of qual-
ity measurement all occur within the context of an organiza-
tion’s overall culture. The local culture impacts all aspects of 
the delivery of care because it affects how front-line personnel 
understand and deliver safe patient care. In fact, culture (col-
lective attitudes and beliefs of caregivers) is increasingly being 
recognized to be the fourth measurable component to the struc-
ture-process-outcome model. This recognition is based on grow-
ing evidence that local culture is linked to a variety of important 
clinical outcomes.7 For any new patient safety initiative to be 
deemed successful, any change in structure or process must lead 
to a corresponding positive change in patient outcomes.8
368
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
CREATING A CULTURE OF SAFETY
Culture is to an organization what personality is to the 
­individual—a hidden, yet unifying theme that provides meaning, 
direction, and mobilization.2 Organizations with effective safety 
cultures share a constant commitment to safety as a ­top-level 
priority that permeates the entire organization. These organiza-
tions frequently share the following characteristics9:
• An acknowledgment of the high-risk, error-prone nature of an 
organization’s activities
• A nonpunitive environment where individuals are able to 
report errors or close calls without fear of punishment or 
retaliation
• An expectation of collaboration across ranks to seek solutions 
to vulnerabilities
• A willingness on the part of the organization to direct 
resources to address safety concerns
Traditional surgical culture stands almost in direct 
­opposition to the values upheld by organizations with effec-
tive safety cultures for several reasons. Surgeons are less likely 
to acknowledge their propensity to make mistakes or to admit 
these mistakes to others.10 Surgeons tend to minimize the effect 
of stress on their ability to make decisions.11 The surgical cul-
ture, especially in the operating room (OR), is traditionally rife 
with hierarchy. Intimidation of other OR personnel by surgeons 
was historically accepted as the norm. This can prevent nurses 
and other OR staff from pointing out potential errors or mis-
takes. Moreover, this culture is not limited to the OR. In the 
intensive care unit (ICU), when compared to physicians, nurses 
reported more difficulty speaking up, disagreements were not 
appropriately resolved, and decisions were made without ade-
quate input.12 In addition, the field of medicine strongly values 
professional autonomy, which frequently promotes individual-
ism over cooperation, often to the detriment of patient care.13 
Finally, patient safety, although often viewed as important, is 
seldom promoted from an organizational priority to an organiza-
tional value. Organizations often do not feel the need to devote 
resources to overhauling their patient safety systems as long as 
they perceive their existing processes to be adequate. It often 
takes a high-profile sentinel event to motivate leaders to com-
mit the necessary time and resources to improving patient safety 
within their organization, as exemplified by the Dana-Farber 
Institute in the aftermath of Betsy Lehman’s death (Case 12-2).
Assessing an Organization’s Safety Culture
Efforts to foster cultural change within an organization with 
regard to patient safety have been limited in the past by the 
inability to measure the impact of any given intervention. How-
ever, studies have shown that employee attitudes about culture 
are associated with error reduction behaviors in aviation and 
with patient outcomes in ICUs. The Safety Attitudes Question-
naire (SAQ) is a validated survey instrument that can be used 
to measure culture in a healthcare setting.6 Adapted from two 
safety tools used in aviation, the Flight Management Attitudes 
Questionnaire and its predecessor, the Cockpit Management 
Attitudes Questionnaire, the SAQ consists of a series of ques-
tions measuring six domains: teamwork climate, safety climate, 
job satisfaction, perception of management, stress recognition, 
and working conditions.
The safety climate scale portion of the questionnaire 
­consists of the following seven items:
Case 12-2  High-profile sentinel event
On December 3, 1994, Betsy Lehman, a Boston Globe 
health columnist, died as a result of receiving four times 
the intended dose of chemotherapy for breast cancer. 
Remarkably, 2 days later, Maureen Bateman, a teacher being 
treated for cancer, also received a chemotherapy overdose 
and suffered irreversible heart damage. After investigating 
the medication errors, the prescribing doctor, three druggists, 
and 15 nurses were disciplined by state regulators. The 
hospital was sued by the two women’s families and by one 
of the doctors disciplined.
  As a result of this widely publicized event, the Dana-
Farber Cancer Institute invested more than $11 million to 
overhaul their safety programs, including providing new 
training for their employees and giving doctors more time 
to meet with patients. The hospital adopted a full disclosure 
policy so that patients would be informed anytime a mistake 
had affected their care. Dana-Farber also started a patient 
committee providing advice and feedback on ways to 
improve care at the hospital.
• I am encouraged by my colleagues to report any patient safety 
concerns I may have.
• The culture in this clinical area makes it easy to learn from 
the mistakes of others.
• Medical errors are handled appropriately in this clinical area.
• I know the proper channels to direct questions regarding 
patient safety in this clinical area.
• I receive appropriate feedback about my performance.
• I would feel safe being treated here as a patient.
• In this clinical area, it is difficult to discuss mistakes.
Although perceptions of teamwork climate can differ 
as a function of one’s role in the OR, perceptions of safety 
­climate are relatively consistent across OR providers in a given 
hospital. Validated in over 500 hospitals, the SAQ is used to 
establish benchmark safety culture scores by healthcare worker 
type, department, and hospital. Using this survey, hospitals can 
compare culture between different types of healthcare workers 
within a department as well as culture between departments 
throughout the institution. Scores can be compared to those of 
other participating institutions to compare safety climates. This 
allows hospitals to participate with one another to implement 
programs to improve safety culture. In addition, scores are used 
to evaluate the effectiveness of safety interventions by compar-
ing the SAQ safety climate scores after implementation to base-
line scores.
Strong teamwork is at the core of any effective organiza-
tion and is a key element to ensuring patient safety in the OR. 
Teamwork is dependent on the underlying culture and patterns 
of communication. The ability for all team members, to “speak 
up” about patient safety concerns is one of the most important 
elements of creating a culture of patient safety.
TEAMWORK AND COMMUNICATION
According to The Joint Commission, communication break-
down is one of the top three root causes of sentinel events 
such as wrong-site surgery (Fig. 12-2). Poor communication 
­contributed to over 60% of sentinel events reported to The Joint 
369
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Medication Use
Continuum of Care
Care Planning
Operative Care
Information Management
Physical Environment
Assessment
Communication
Leadership
Human Factors
Percent of Events (%)
Figure 12-2.  Root causes of sentinel events 2004 to 
2012. (From Makary et al,17 with permission from Else-
vier. ©2006 by the American College of Surgeons.)
Commission in 2011.14  Good communication is an essen-
tial component of teamwork and is especially is impor-
tant in the OR, one of the most complex work environments in 
healthcare.
Within the realm of patient care, there are enormous 
amounts of information being exchanged between healthcare 
providers on a daily basis. Much of this information, if priori-
tized correctly, has the potential to prevent unintended medical 
errors and serious harm to patients. The importance of good 
communication in preventing medical errors is undeniable; 
however, it is difficult to achieve. The traditional surgical hier-
archy can prevent OR personnel from sharing important patient 
data and expressing safety concerns. One perioperative field 
study showed a 30% rate of communication failure in the OR, 
with 36% of these breakdowns having a substantial impact on 
patient safety.15
In addition to overcoming the cultural barrier to ­better team-
work and communication, The prospective study by ­Christian 
and associates of patient safety in the OR demonstrated that the 
standard workflow of the OR itself presents many opportunities 
for the loss or degradation of critical information.16 Hand-offs 
of patient care from the OR to other locations or providers are 
particularly prone to information loss, which has been demon-
strated in other clinical settings. ­Hand-offs and auxiliary tasks, 
such as the surgical count, frequently take place during critical 
portions of the case and place competing demands on provider 
attention from primary patient-centered activities. Communi-
cation between the surgeon and pathologist also is vulnerable, 
because the communication often occurs through secondary 
messengers such as nurses or technicians. This information loss 
can lead to delays, overuse of staff and resources, uncertainty in 
clinical decision making and planning, and oversights in patient 
preparation.
Measuring Teamwork
Research in commercial aviation has demonstrated a strong 
correlation between better teamwork and improved safety per-
formance. Cockpit crew members’ reluctance to question a 
­captain’s judgment has been identified as a root cause of avia-
tion accidents. Good attitudes about teamwork are associated 
with error-reduction behaviors in aviation, improved patient 
outcomes in ICUs, and decreased nurse turnover in the OR. It is 
also associated with higher job satisfaction ratings and less sick 
time taken from work.
The SAQ can be used to measure teamwork and provide 
benchmarks for departments or hospitals seeking to measure 
and improve their teamwork climate.17 The SAQ teamwork 
4
scores are responsive to interventions that aim to improve team-
work among operating teams, such as the implementation of 
ICU checklists, executive walk rounds, and preoperative brief-
ing team discussions. The communication and collaboration 
sections of the SAQ reflect OR caregiver views on teamwork 
and can be used to distinguish meaningful interventions from 
impractical and ineffective programs.
In a survey of OR personnel across 60 hospitals, the SAQ 
identified substantial differences in the perception of team-
work in the OR depending on one’s role. Physicians frequently 
rated the teamwork of others as good, while nurses at the same 
institutions perceived teamwork as poor (Fig. 12-3). Similar 
discrepancies have been found in ICUs. These discrepancies 
can be attributed to differences in the communication skills 
that are valued by surgeons and nurses. For example, nurses 
describe good collaboration as having their input respected, 
while physicians describe good collaboration as having nurses 
who can anticipate their needs and follow instructions. Efforts 
to improve the communication that takes place between phy-
sicians and nurses can directly improve the perception of 
teamwork and collaboration by the OR team (Table 12-2). 
Empowering well-respected surgeons to promote principles of 
teamwork and communication can go a long way toward trans-
forming attitudinal and behavioral changes in fellow physicians 
as well as other members of the surgical team. Surgeons are 
increasingly encouraging the respectful and timely voicing of 
concerns of OR personnel.
100%
87%
Surgeon rates OR nurse
OR nurse rates surgeon
48%
90%
80%
70%
60%
Percent rating quality of collaboration
and communication as high or very high
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Figure 12-3.  Differences in teamwork perceptions between sur-
geons and operating room (OR) nurses. (From Makary et al,17 with 
permission. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
370
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 12-2 
Percentage of operating room caregivers reporting a high or very high level of collaboration with other members of 
the operating room team
Caregiver Position 
Performing Rating
Caregiver Position Being Rated
Surgeon
Anesthesiologist
Nurse
CRNA
Surgeon
85
84
88
87
Anesthesiologist
70
96
89
92
Nurse
48
63
81
68
CRNA
58
75
76
93
The best teamwork scores were recorded by anesthesiologists when they rated their teamwork with other anesthesiologists (“high” or “very high” 96% of 
the time). The lowest teamwork ratings were recorded by nurses when they rated their teamwork with surgeons (“high” or “very high” 48% of the time).
CRNA = certified registered nurse anesthetist.
Source: From Makary et al,17 with permission from Elsevier. ©2006 by the American College of Surgeons.
Table 12-3 
Five-point operating room briefing
What are the names and roles of the team members?
Is the correct patient/procedure confirmed? (The Joint  
  Commission Universal Protocol [TIME-OUT])
Have antibiotics been given? (if appropriate)
What are the critical steps of the procedure?
What are the potential problems for the case?
Source: From Makary et al,19 with permission from Elsevier. ©2007 by 
the American College of Surgeons.
COMMUNICATION TOOLS
High reliability organizations such as aviation frequently use 
tools such as prompts, checks, standard operating protocols, 
and communication interventions such as team briefings and 
debriefings. These tools identify and mitigate hazards and allow 
an organization to complete tasks more efficiently. They also 
foster a culture of open communication and speaking up if a 
team member senses a safety concern. Safety checks and 
standardized team discussions serve as prompts to help 
“engineer out” human error, providing quality assurance and 
improving information flow. They also can prevent errors 
related to omissions, which are more likely to occur when there 
is information overload, multiple steps in a process, repetitions 
in steps, and planned departures from routine processes, and 
when there are other interruptions and distractions present while 
the process is being executed. These same interventions have 
been shown to improve patient safety in ORs and ICUs.18,19
Operating Room Briefings
Preoperative briefings and checklists, when used appropriately, 
help to facilitate transfer of information between team members 
(Table 12-3). A briefing, or checklist, is any preprocedure dis-
cussion of requirements, needs, and special issues of the proce-
dure. Briefings often are locally adapted to the specific needs 
of the specialty. They have been associated with an improved 
safety culture, including increased awareness of wrong-site/
wrong-procedure errors, early reporting of equipment problems, 
reduced operational costs and fewer unexpected delays. In one 
5
study, 30.9% of OR personnel reported a delay before the insti-
tution of OR briefings, and only 23.3% reported delays after 
briefings were instituted.20 OR briefings are increasingly being 
used to ensure evidence-based measures, such as the appropriate 
administration of preoperative antibiotics and deep vein throm-
bosis (DVT) prophylaxis, are used. Briefings allow personnel to 
discuss potential problems, before they become a “near miss” 
or cause actual harm.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has recently 
developed a comprehensive perioperative checklist as a primary 
intervention of the “Safe Surgery Saves Lives” program—an 
effort to reduce surgical deaths across the globe (Fig. 12-4).21 
The WHO checklist includes prompts to ensure that infection 
prevention measures are followed, potential airway complica-
tions are precluded (e.g., anesthesia has necessary equipment 
and assistance for a patient with a difficult airway), and the 
groundwork for effective surgical teamwork is established (e.g., 
proper introductions of all OR personnel). Aspects of The Joint 
Commission’s preprocedure “Universal Protocol” (or “time-
out”) also are included in the checklist (e.g., checks to ensure 
operation performed on correct patient and correct site).
Operating Room Debriefings
Postprocedural debriefings improve patient safety by allowing 
for discussion and reflection on causes for errors and critical 
incidents that occurred during the case. Errors or critical inci-
dents are regarded as learning opportunities rather than cause 
for punishment. During the debriefing, the team also can discuss 
what went well during the case and designate a point person to 
follow up on any proposed actions that result from the discus-
sion. In addition, most debriefings include a verification of the 
sponge, needle, and instrument counts and confirmation of the 
correct labeling of the surgical specimen.
Errors in surgical specimen labeling have not received 
as much attention as incorrect sponge or instrument counts as 
an indicator of the quality of communication in the OR. How-
ever, an error in communication or during the hand-off process 
increases the risk of mislabeling a surgical specimen before its 
arrival in a pathology laboratory. In one study, this type of identi-
fication error occurred in 4.3 per 1000 surgical specimens, which 
implies an annualized rate of occurrence of 182 mislabeled 
371
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
specimens per year (Fig. 12-5).22 Errors involving specimen iden-
tification can result in delays in care, the need for an additional 
biopsy or therapy, failure to use appropriate therapy, or therapy 
administered to the wrong body site, side, or patient. These sys-
tem failures can lead to significant harm to the patient, costs to 
the institution, and distrust by a community. Given the frequency 
of occurrence and the feasibility and validity of measuring them, 
mislabeled surgical specimens may serve as a useful indicator 
of patient safety, and should be included in any postprocedural 
debriefing checklist.
Figure 12-5.  Incidence of identification errors 
observed per 1000 specimens (n = 21,351). 
(From Makary et al,22 with permission. Copy-
right Elsevier.)
Figure 12-4.  World Health Organization surgical safety checklist. (Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization Safe Sur-
gery Saves Lives. Available at: http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/en/. Accessed November 8, 2012.)
Surgical Safety Checklist
Has the patient conﬁrmed his/her identity, 
site, procedure, and consent?
Yes
Is the site marked?
Yes
Not applicable
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Difﬁcult airway or aspiration risk?
No
Yes, and equipment/assistance available
Risk of >500ml blood loss (7ml/kg in children)?
No
Yes, and two IVs/central access and ﬂuids 
planned
Conﬁrm all team members have 
introduced themselves by name and role.
Conﬁrm the patient’s name, procedure, 
and where the incision will be made.
Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given within 
the last 60 minutes?
Yes
Not applicable
Anticipated Critical Events
To Surgeon:
What are the critical or non-routine steps?
How long will the case take?
What is the anticipated blood loss?
To Anaesthetist:
Are there any patient-speciﬁc concerns?
To Nursing Team:
Has sterility (including indicator results) 
been conﬁrmed?
Are there equipment issues or any concerns?
Yes
Nurse Verbally Conﬁrms:
The name of the procedure
Completion of instrument, sponge and
needle counts
Specimen labelling (read specimen labels
aloud, including patient name)
Whether there are any equipment problems
to be addressed
What are the key concerns for recovery and
management of this patient? 
This checklist is not intended to be comprehensive. Additions and modiﬁcations to ﬁt local practice are encouraged.
(with at least nurse and anaesthetist)
(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)
(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)
© WHO, 2009
Before induction of anaesthesia
Before skin incision
Before patient leaves operating room
Revised 1 / 2009
To Surgeon, Anaesthetist and Nurse:
Is essential imaging displayed?
Not applicable
Is the anaesthesia machine and medication
check complete?  
Is the pulse oximeter on the patient and
functioning?
Known allergy? 
Does the patient have a: 
Specimen
not labeled
Empty
container
Incorrect
laterality
Incorrect
tissue site
Incorrect
patient
name
No patient
name
No tissue
site
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Incidence (per 1000 specimens)
Error type
Sign Outs
In healthcare, information frequently passes to covering provid-
ers without prioritizing potential concerns. This makes sign outs 
a very vulnerable process of care, which can lead to catastrophic 
events.
The term sign out can refer to either the verbal or written 
communication of patient information to familiarize oncoming 
physicians about patients who will be under their care. Sign outs 
should occur whenever a patient’s care setting or provider is 
changing. When performed well, sign outs help to ensure the 
372
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
transfer of pertinent information. However, previous studies 
have shown the hand-off process to be variable, unstructured, 
and prone to error. Common categories of communication fail-
ure during sign outs include content omissions, such as failure 
to mention active medical problems, and failures in the actual 
communication process, such as leaving illegible or unclear 
notes (Case 12-3).23 These failures lead to confusion and uncer-
tainty by the covering physician during patient care decisions, 
resulting in the delivery of inefficient and suboptimal care.
The use of more structured verbal communication such 
as the Situational Debriefing Model, otherwise known as SBAR 
(situation, background, assessment, and recommendation), used 
by the U.S. Navy, can be applied to healthcare to improve the 
communication of critical information in a timely and orderly 
fashion.23 In addition, all sign outs should begin with the state-
ment, “In this patient, I am most concerned about . . .” to signal 
to the healthcare provider on the receiving end the most impor-
tant safety concerns regarding that specific patient.
Implementation
Tools such as checklists, sign outs, briefings, and debrief-
ings improve communication between healthcare providers 
and create a safer patient environment (Fig. 12-6). Although 
their use in healthcare is still highly variable, specialties that 
Case 12-3  Inadequate sign out leading to medical error
Josie King was an 18-month-old child who was admitted to Johns Hopkins Hospital in January of 2001 for first- and second-
degree burns. She spent 10 days in the pediatric intensive care unit and was well on her way to recovery. She was transferred to an 
intermediate care floor with the expectation that she would be sent home in a few days.
  The following week, her central line was removed, but nurses would not allow Josie to drink anything by mouth. Around 1 p.m. 
the next day, a nurse came to Josie’s bedside with a syringe of methadone. Although Josie’s mother told the nurse that there was 
no order for narcotics, the nurse insisted that the orders had been changed and administered the drug. Josie’s heart stopped, and her 
eyes became fixed. She was moved to the pediatric intensive care unit and placed on life support. Two days later, on February 22, 
2001, she died from severe dehydration.
  After her death, Josie’s parents, Sorrel and Jay King, were motivated to work with leaders at Johns Hopkins to ensure that no 
other family would have to endure the death of a child due to medical error. They later funded the Josie King Patient Safety Program 
and an academic scholarship in the field of safety.
have ­incorporated them, such as intensive care and anesthesia, 
have made impressive strides in patient safety. Currently, com-
munication breakdowns, information loss, hand off, multiple 
competing tasks, and high workload are considered “annoy-
ing but accepted features” of the perioperative environment.17 
As physician attitudes toward errors, stress, and teamwork in 
medicine become more favorable toward the common goals of 
reducing error and improving teamwork and communication, 
medicine will likely achieve many of the milestones in safety 
that high-reliability industries such as aviation have already 
accomplished.
COMPREHENSIVE UNIT-BASED SAFETY 
PROGRAM
As medical care and hospitals continue to expand, the care 
that is provided to patients is becoming more fragmented. 
This ­fragmentation makes communication more difficult and 
opportunities for medical errors more common. These problems 
require common sense solutions, often necessitating a change 
in the way that care is delivered on the local level. Unit-based 
meetings to discuss processes that are potentially dangerous 
for patients can quickly bring danger areas out into the open. 
Figure 12-6.  Impact of operating room briefings on team-
work and communication. (From Makary et al,19 with per-
mission from Elsevier. ©2007 by the American College of 
Surgeons.)
A preoperative
discussion
increased my
awareness of the
surgical site and
side being
operated on.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percent of respondents who agreed
60
70
80
90
100
The surgical site
of the operation
was clear to me
before the
incision.
Decision making
utilized input
from relevant
personnel.
Surgery and
anesthesia
worked together
as a well-
coordinated
team.
Prebriefing
Postbriefing
373
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
Table 12-4 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality patient 
safety indicators
Provider-level patient safety indicators
•  Complications of anesthesia
•  Death in low mortality diagnosis-related groups
•  Decubitus ulcer
•  Failure to rescue
•  Foreign body left in during procedure
•  Iatrogenic pneumothorax
•  Selected infections due to medical care
•  Postoperative hip fracture
•  Postoperative hemorrhage or hematoma
•  Postoperative physiologic and metabolic derangements
•  Postoperative respiratory failure
•  Postoperative pulmonary embolism or deep vein 
thrombosis
•  Postoperative sepsis
•  Postoperative wound dehiscence in abdominopelvic 
surgical patients
•  Accidental puncture and laceration
•  Transfusion reaction
•  Birth trauma—injury to neonate
•  Obstetric trauma—vaginal delivery with instrument
•  Obstetric trauma—vaginal delivery without instrument
•  Obstetric trauma—cesarean delivery
Area-level patient safety indicators
•  Foreign body left in during procedure
•  Iatrogenic pneumothorax
•  Selected infections due to medical care
•  Postoperative wound dehiscence in abdominopelvic 
surgical patients
•  Accidental puncture and laceration
•  Transfusion reaction
•  Postoperative hemorrhage or hematoma
Source: From Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality27
These meetings should be held on a regular basis and bring 
together a multidisciplinary team of physicians, nurses, techni-
cians, social workers, and other staff who can each voice their 
concerns about safety hazards in their area. This enables all 
aspects of patient care to be addressed and improved continu-
ously, thereby streamlining and improving patient care.24
The implementation of the Comprehensive Unit-Based 
Safety Program (CUSP) involves measurement of a unit’s safety 
culture prior to starting the program and inclusion of hospital 
management from the start. Having management involved 
allows for more efficient allocation of resources and allows 
them to better understand the problems faced by front-line pro-
viders. Once CUSP is in place, changes can be made using local 
wisdom to advance patient care.24 The impact of changes made 
using CUSP can be measured using both patient outcomes and 
safety culture data.
Implementation of CUSP has been associated with 
improved patient outcomes including decreased surgical site 
infections. In a 2-year study of colorectal patients, where the 
first year was pre-CUSP implementation and the second year 
was post-CUSP implementation, there was a 33% decrease 
in the surgical site infection rate after CUSP.25 In this study, 
the CUSP group met monthly and came up with a list of inter-
ventions based on their experience with these cases, including 
­standardization of skin preparation and warming of patients in 
the preanesthesia area. This study showed that CUSP can be 
highly effective in ameliorating patient harm and improving 
patient care.
MEASURING QUALITY IN SURGERY
Despite the newfound focus on patient safety in surgery and the 
number of initiatives being undertaken by many organizations 
to improve their safety culture, there are few tools to actually 
measure whether these efforts actually are effective in reduc-
ing the number of errors. Several agencies and private groups 
have developed criteria to evaluate quality and safety within 
hospitals.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
Patient Safety Indicators
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) was 
created in 1989 as a Public Health Service agency in the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services. Its mission is to improve 
the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of healthcare for 
all Americans. Nearly 80% of the AHRQ’s budget is awarded 
as grants and contracts to researchers at universities and other 
research institutions across the country. The AHRQ sponsors 
and conducts research that provides evidence-based information 
on healthcare outcomes, quality, cost, use, and access. It has 
advocated the use of readily available hospital inpatient admin-
istrative data to measure healthcare quality. The information 
helps healthcare decision makers make more informed decisions 
and improve the quality of healthcare services.26
One of the major contributions of the AHRQ is a set of 
Patient Safety Indicators (PSIs), initially released in 2003 and 
revised in 2010. PSIs are a tool to help health system leaders 
identify potential adverse events occurring during hospital-
ization. Developed after a comprehensive literature review, 
­analysis of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth 
­Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes, review 
by a clinician panel, implementation of risk adjustment, and 
empirical analyses, these 27 indicators provide information on 
potential in-hospital complications and adverse events follow-
ing surgeries, procedures, and childbirth (Table 12-4).
Provider-level indicators provide a measure of the poten-
tially preventable complications for patients who received 
their initial care and the complication of care within the same 
­hospitalization. They include only those cases where a second-
ary diagnosis code flags a potentially preventable complica-
tion. Area-level indicators capture all cases of the potentially 
­preventable complications that occur in a given area (e.g., 
­metropolitan area or county), either during their initial hospital-
ization or resulting in subsequent hospitalization.27
Currently, PSIs are considered indicators, not definitive 
measures, of patient safety concerns. They can identify potential 
safety problems that merit further investigation. They also can 
be used to better prioritize and evaluate local and national initia-
tives, and even as benchmarks for tracking progress in patient 
safety. In the future, further growth in electronic health data 
will make administrative data based tools like the PSIs more 
useful.28
374
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
The Surgical Care Improvement Project 
Measures
The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) was established 
in 2003 by a national partnership of organizations committed 
to improving surgical care by reducing surgical complica-
tions. The steering committee is comprised of groups such as 
the ­Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the American 
Hospital Association, Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), Institute for Healthcare Improvement, The Joint 
Commission, and others.
The incidence of postoperative complications ranges from 
6% for patients undergoing noncardiac surgery to more than 
30% for patients undergoing high-risk surgery. Common post-
operative complications include surgical site infections (SSIs), 
myocardial infarction, postoperative pneumonia, and thrombo-
embolic complications. Patients who experience postoperative 
complications have increased hospital length of stay (3–11 days 
longer than those without complications), increased hospital 
costs (ranging from $1398 for an infectious complication to 
$18,310 for a thromboembolic event), and increased mortality 
(median patient survival decreases by up to 69%).29
Despite well-established evidence that many of these 
adverse events are preventable, failure to comply with standards 
of care known to prevent them results in unnecessary harm to a 
large number of patients. SCIP has identified three broad areas 
within surgery where potential complications have a high inci-
dence and cost and there is a significant opportunity for pre-
vention: SSIs, venous thromboembolism, and adverse cardiac 
events. The SCIP measures aim to reduce the incidence of these 
events during the perioperative period by advocating the use 
of proven process and outcome measures. These process and 
outcome measures are detailed in Table 12-5.
SSIs account for 14% to 16% of all hospital-acquired 
infections and are a common complication of care, occurring in 
2% to 5% of patients after clean extra-abdominal operations and 
up to 20% of patients undergoing intra-abdominal procedures. 
By implementing steps to reduce SSIs, hospitals could recog-
nize a savings of $3152 and reduction in extended length of stay 
by 7 days on each patient developing an infection.30
Adverse cardiac events occur in 2% to 5% of patients 
undergoing noncardiac surgery and as many as 34% of patients 
undergoing vascular surgery. Certain perioperative cardiac 
events, such as myocardial infarction, are associated with a 
mortality rate of 40% to 70% per event, prolonged hospitaliza-
tion, and higher costs. Appropriately administered β-blockers 
reduce perioperative ischemia, especially in at-risk patients. It 
has been found that nearly half of the fatal cardiac events could 
be preventable with β-blocker therapy.30
DVT occurs after approximately 25% of all major surgi-
cal procedures performed without prophylaxis, and pulmonary 
embolism (PE) occurs after 7%. Despite the well-established 
efficacy and safety of preventive measures, studies show that 
prophylaxis often is underused or used inappropriately. Both 
low-dose unfractionated heparin and low molecular weight 
heparin have similar efficacy in DVT and PE prevention. 
­Prophylaxis using low-dose unfractionated heparin has been 
shown to reduce the incidence of fatal PEs by 50%.30
The SCIP effort provides an infrastructure and guidelines 
for data collection and quality improvement on a national scale. 
By achieving high levels of compliance with evidence-based 
practices to reduce SSIs, venous thromboembolism events, and 
perioperative cardiac complications, the potential number of 
Table 12-5 
The Surgical Care Improvement Project measures
Process of care performance measures
Infection
•  Prophylactic antibiotic received within 1 h before 
surgical incision
•  Prophylactic antibiotic selection for surgical patients
•  Prophylactic antibiotics discontinued within 24 h after 
surgery end time (48 h for cardiac patients)
•  Cardiac surgery patients with controlled 6 a.m. 
postoperative serum glucose
•  Surgery patients with appropriate hair removal
•  Colorectal surgery patients with immediate postoperative 
normothermia
Venous thromboembolism
•  Surgery patients with recommended venous 
thromboembolism prophylaxis ordered
•  Surgery patients who received appropriate venous 
thromboembolism prophylaxis within 24 h before 
surgery to 24 h after surgery
Cardiac events
•  Surgery patients on a β-blocker prior to arrival who 
received a β-blocker during the perioperative period
Proposed outcome measures
Infection
•  Postoperative wound infection diagnosed during index 
hospitalization
Venous thromboembolism
•  Intra- or postoperative pulmonary embolism diagnosed 
during index hospitalization and within 30 d of surgery
•  Intra- or postoperative deep vein thrombosis diagnosed 
during index hospitalization and within 30 d of surgery
Cardiac events
•  Intra- or postoperative acute myocardial infarction 
diagnosed during index hospitalization and within 30 d 
of surgery
Global measures
•  Mortality within 30 d of surgery
•  Readmission within 30 d of surgery
Source: From Surgical Care Improvement Project,30 with permission.
lives saved in the Medicare patient population alone exceeds 
13,000 annually.29
National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program
The National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) 
is a measurement program that allows hospitals to sample their 
rates of postoperative events and compare them to similar hos-
pitals. Created by the Veterans Health Administration (VA) in 
1991, NSQIP has been credited with measuring and improving 
morbidity and mortality outcomes at the VA, reducing 30-day 
mortality rate after major surgery by 31%, and 30-day postop-
erative morbidity by 45% in its first decade.31 Beta testing at 
18 non-VA sites from 2001 to 2004 demonstrated the feasibility 
and utility of the program in the private sector. The program was 
subsequently expanded to the private sector in 2004 when the 
American College of Surgeons endorsed the program and encour-
aged hospital participation to measure and evaluate outcomes on 
375
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
a large scale. A study of 118 hospitals participating in NSQIP 
between 2005 to 2007 showed that 82% of hospitals decreased 
their complication rates, and there was a decrease in morbidity 
of 11% and mortality of 17% annually per hospital.32 Currently, 
over 400 private-sector U.S. hospitals participate in the program.
NSQIP uses a risk-adjusted ratio of the observed to expected 
outcome (focusing primarily on 30-day morbidity and mortal-
ity) to compare the performance of participating hospitals with 
their peers. The data the program has compiled also can be used 
to conduct observational studies using prospectively collected 
information on more than 1.5 million patients and operations. 
The expansion of NSQIP to the private sector has helped shift 
the focus from merely preventing the provider errors and sentinel 
events highlighted by the IOM publication “To Err Is Human” to 
the larger goal of preventing all adverse postoperative outcomes.
Several insights about patient safety have arisen as a result 
of NSQIP. First, safety is indistinguishable from overall quality 
of surgical care and should not be addressed separately. Defining 
quality in terms of keeping a patient safe from adverse outcomes 
allows the NSQIP data to be used to assess and improve quality 
of care by making improvements in patient safety. In other words, 
prevention of errors is synonymous with the reduction of adverse 
outcomes and can be used as a reliable quality measure. Second, 
during an episode of surgical care, adverse outcomes, and hence, 
patient safety, are primarily determined by the quality of the 
systems of care. Errors in hospitals with higher than expected 
observed to expected outcomes ratios are more likely to be from 
system errors than from provider incompetence. This under-
scores the importance of adequate communication, coordination, 
and teamwork in achieving quality surgical care. Finally, reliable 
comparative outcomes data are imperative for the identification 
of system problems. Risk-adjusted rates of adverse outcomes 
must be compared with those at peer institutions to appreciate 
more subtle system errors that lead to adverse outcomes to prompt 
changes in the quality of an institution’s processes and structures.
The Leapfrog Group
One of the largest efforts to standardize evidence-based medicine 
in the United States is led by The Leapfrog Group, an alliance of 
large public and private healthcare purchasers representing more 
than 37 million individuals across the United States. This health-
care consortium was founded in 2000 with the aim to exert their 
combined leverage toward improving nationwide standards of 
healthcare quality, optimizing patient outcomes, and ultimately 
lowering healthcare costs. The Leapfrog Group’s strategy to 
achieve these goals is through providing patient referral, finan-
cial incentives, and public recognition for hospitals that practice 
or implement evidence-based healthcare standards.
The healthcare quality and safety practices (leaps) that 
Leapfrog initially identified to measure healthcare standards 
were hospital use of computerized physician order entry sys-
tems, 24-hour ICU physician staffing, and evidence-based hos-
pital referral (EBHR) standards for five high-risk operations.33 
In 2010, after the National Quality Forum (NQF) released its 
updated Safe Practices for Better Healthcare, Leapfrog added 
a safe practices leap, which includes eight practices from the 
NQF report.34
Leapfrog collects data on these practices through admin-
istration of an ongoing, voluntary, web-based hospital quality 
and safety survey. This survey is conducted in 41 regions that 
cover over half of the U.S. population and 62% of all hospital 
beds in the country. In 2011, more than 1200 urban, suburban, 
and rural hospitals participated in the survey. Leapfrog asks 
for information on eight high-risk conditions or procedures, 
including coronary artery bypass graft, percutaneous coronary 
intervention, abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair, pan-
creatic resection, and esophagectomy. These procedures were 
chosen because evidence exists that adherence to certain pro-
cess measures can dramatically improve the outcomes of these 
procedures. In addition, more than 100 studies also have dem-
onstrated that better results are obtained at high-volume hos-
pitals when undergoing cardiovascular surgery, major cancer 
resections, and other high-risk procedures. Hospitals fulfilling 
the EBHR Safety Standard are expected to meet the hospital 
and surgeon volume criteria shown in Table 12-6. Hospitals that 
do not meet these criteria but adhere to the Leapfrog-endorsed 
process measures for coronary artery bypass graft surgery, per-
cutaneous coronary intervention, AAA repair, and care for high-
risk neonates, receive partial credit toward fulfilling the EBHR 
Safety Standard. ­Leapfrog purchasers work to recognize and 
reward hospitals that provide care for their enrollees who meet 
EBHR standards.32
In a recent study, Brooke and associates analyzed whether 
achieving Leapfrog’s established evidence-based standards for 
AAA repair, including meeting targets for case volume and peri-
operative β-blocker usage, correlated with improved patient out-
comes over time.33 After controlling for differences in hospital 
and patient characteristics, hospitals that implemented a policy 
for perioperative β-blocker usage had an estimated 51% reduc-
tion in mortality following open AAA repair cases. Among 111 
California hospitals in which endovascular AAA repair was 
performed, in-hospital mortality was reduced by an estimated 
61% over time among hospitals meeting Leapfrog case volume 
standards, although this result was not statistically significant. 
These results suggest that hospital compliance with Leapfrog 
standards for elective AAA repair is an effective means to help 
improve in-hospital mortality outcomes over time and support 
further efforts aimed at standardizing patient referral to hospi-
tals that comply with evidence-based medicine standards for 
other surgical procedures.
The newest effort of the Leapfrog group is to promote 
transparency of hospital outcomes using a safety scorecard. This 
information can be viewed at hospitalsafetyscore.org.
World Health Organization “Safe Surgery 
Saves Lives” Initiative
In October 2004, the WHO launched a global initiative to 
strengthen healthcare safety and monitoring systems by creat-
ing the World Alliance for Patient Safety. As part of the group’s 
efforts to improve patient safety, the alliance implemented a 
Table 12-6 
Recommended annual volumes: hospitals and surgeons
1.  Coronary artery bypass graft
≥450/100
2.  Percutaneous coronary intervention
≥400/75
3.  Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
≥50/22
4.  Aortic valve replacement
≥120/22
5.  Pancreatic resection
≥11/2
6.  Esophagectomy
≥13/2
7.  Bariatric surgery
>100/20
Source: From The Leapfrog Group,34 with permission.
376
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
series of safety campaigns that brought together experts in spe-
cific problem areas through individual Global Patient Safety 
Challenges. The second Global Patient Safety Challenge focuses 
on improving the safety of surgical care. The main goal of the 
campaign, called Safe Surgery Saves Lives, is to reduce surgi-
cal deaths and complications through the universal adaptation 
of a comprehensive perioperative surgical safety checklist in 
ORs worldwide. In addition to the checklist, the WHO defined 
a set of uniform measures for national and international surveil-
lance of surgical care to better assess the quantity and quality 
of surgical care being delivered worldwide.21 At the population 
level, metrics include the number of surgeon, anesthesia, and 
nurse providers per capita, the number of ORs per capita, and 
overall surgical case volumes and mortality rates. At the hospi-
tal level, metrics include safety improvement structures and a 
surgical “Apgar score,” a validated method of prognosticating 
patient outcomes based on intraoperative events (i.e., hypoten-
sion, tachycardia, blood loss).35
National Quality Forum
The National Quality Forum (NQF) is a coalition of health-
care organizations that has worked to develop and implement 
a national strategy for healthcare quality measurement and 
reporting. Their mission is to improve the quality of American 
healthcare by setting national priorities and goals for perfor-
mance improvement, endorsing national consensus standards 
for measuring and publicly reporting on performance, and pro-
moting the attainment of national goals through education and 
outreach programs.
One of the major contributions of the NQF is the develop-
ment of a list of Serious Reportable Events, which are frequently 
referred to as “never events.”36 According to the NQF, “never 
events” are errors in medical care that are clearly identifiable, 
preventable, and serious in their consequences for patients and 
that indicate a real problem in the safety and credibility of a 
healthcare facility. Examples of “never events” include sur-
gery performed on the wrong body part; a foreign body left 
in a patient after surgery; a mismatched blood transfusion; a 
major medication error; a severe “pressure ulcer” acquired 
in the hospital; and preventable postoperative deaths 
(Table 12-7).  Criteria for inclusion as a “never event” are 
listed below. The event must be:
• Unambiguous (i.e., the event must be clearly identifiable 
and measurable, and thus feasible to include in a reporting 
­system);
• Usually preventable, with the recognition that some events 
are not always avoidable, given the complexity of healthcare;
6
Table 12-7 
Surgical “never events”
•  Surgery performed on the wrong body part
•  Surgery performed on the wrong patient
•  Wrong surgical procedure performed on a patient
•  Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after 
surgery or other procedure
•  Intraoperative or immediately postoperative death in an 
ASA Class 1 patient
ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Source: From National Quality Forum,36 with permission.
• Serious, resulting in death or loss of a body part, disability, or 
more than transient loss of a body function; and
• Any one of the following:
• Adverse, and/or
• Indicative of a problem in a healthcare facility’s safety 
­systems, and/or
• Important for public credibility or public accountability.
These events are not a reasonable medical risk of under-
going surgery that the patient must accept but medical errors 
that should never happen (Case 12-4). The occurrence of any of 
these events signals that an organization’s patient safety culture 
or processes have defects that need to be evaluated and cor-
rected (Table 12-8).
“NEVER EVENTS” IN SURGERY
Never events are errors in medical care that are clearly identifi-
able, preventable, and serious in their consequences for patients 
and that indicate a real problem in the safety and credibility of a 
healthcare facility.36 Despite widespread agreement that surgi-
cal never events are preventable and despite several national 
and local programs being launched to decrease them, never 
events are still a significant problem. A study from Mehtsun 
Case 12-4  Surgical “never event”
In 2002, Mike Hurewitz, a reporter for The Times Union 
of Albany, suddenly began vomiting blood 3 days after 
donating part of his liver to his brother while recovering on 
a hospital floor in which 34 patients were being cared for by 
one first-year resident. He aspirated and died immediately 
with no other physician available to assist the overworked 
first-year resident.
  Recognized for its advances in the field of liver 
transplantation, at the time, Mount Sinai Hospital was 
performing more adult-to-adult live-donor operations than 
any other hospital in the country. But the program was shut 
down by this event. Mount Sinai was held accountable for 
inadequate care and was banned from performing any live-
donor adult liver transplants for more than 1 year. Of the 92 
complaints investigated by the state, 75 were filed against 
the liver transplant unit, with 62 involving patient deaths. 
The state concluded that most of the 33 serious violations 
exhibited by the hospital occurred within the liver transplant 
unit.
  As a result of the investigation, Mount Sinai revamped 
many of the procedures within its transplant unit. Among the 
changes, first-year residents no longer staffed the transplant 
service, two healthcare practitioners physically present in the 
hospital oversaw the transplant unit at all times, and any page 
coming from the transplant unit had to be answered within 
5 minutes of the initial call. In addition, nurses monitored 
patients’ vital signs more closely after surgery, transplant 
surgeons were required to make postoperative visits to 
both organ donor and recipient, and each registered nurse 
was assigned to four patients, rather than six or seven. The 
death also led New York to become the first state to develop 
guidelines for treating live organ donors. Finally, Mike 
Hurewitz’s widow became a patient safety advocate, urging 
stricter controls on live donor programs.
377
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
and colleagues showed that from October 1990 to October 2010, 
nationwide there were 9744 paid malpractice claims for never 
events. Of these, mortality was reported in 6.6%, permanent 
injury in 33%, and temporary injury in 59%. The cost of the 
never events totaled $1.3 billion. Also, of physicians who were 
named in a surgical never event claim, 12.4% were named in a 
future never events claim.37 Another study in 2010 by The Joint 
Commission found that wrong-site surgery occurs 40 times per 
week nationwide.38 Future directions for decreasing these prob-
lems include public reporting of never events by hospitals to 
increase hospital accountability, more formal training in team-
work, and CUSP programs in hospitals that have higher rates of 
never events to help elucidate the root cause.
Retained Surgical Items
A retained surgical item refers to any surgical item found to be 
inside a patient after he or she has left the OR, thus requiring 
a second operation to remove the item.39 Estimates of retained 
foreign bodies in surgical procedures range from one case per 
8000 to 18,000 operations, corresponding to one case or more 
each year for a typical large hospital or approximately 1500 cases 
per year in the United States.40 This estimate is based on an anal-
ysis of malpractice claims and is likely to underestimate the true 
incidence. The risk of having a retained surgical item increases 
during emergency surgery, when there are unplanned changes in 
procedure (due to new diagnoses encountered in the OR), and in 
patients with higher body mass index (Table 12-9).40
The most common retained surgical item is a ­surgical 
sponge, but other items, such as surgical instruments and 
needles, can also be inadvertently left inside a patient after 
Table 12-8 
Four patient events that advanced the modern field of patient safety
Patient
Institution
Year
Event
Root Cause
Outcome
Libby Zion
New York Hospital, 
New York, NY
1984
Missed allergy 
to Demerol
Physician fatigue
Bell Commission shortened 
resident work hours
Betsy Lehman
Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA
1994
Chemotherapy 
overdose
Lack of medication 
checks and triggers
Fired doctor, three pharmacists, 
15 nurses; overhauled safety 
program
Josie King
Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, MD
2001
Severe 
dehydration
Poor communication
Increased safety research 
funding
Mike Hurewitz
Mt. Sinai Hospital,  
New York, NY
2002
Inadequate 
postoperative 
care
Inadequate supervision
Transplant program shut down 
until better patient safety 
safeguards implemented
Table 12-9 
Risk factors for retained surgical sponges
•  Emergency surgery
•  Unplanned changes in procedure
•  Patient with higher body mass index
•  Multiple surgeons involved in same operation
•  Multiple procedures performed on same patient
•  Involvement of multiple operating room nurses/staff 
members
•  Case duration covers multiple nursing “shifts”
an operation. Retained surgical sponges are commonly discov-
ered as an incidental finding on a routine postoperative radio-
graph, but also have been discovered in patients presenting with 
a mass or abdominal pain. Patients with sponges that were origi-
nally left in an intracavitary position (such as inside the chest or 
abdomen) also can present with complications such as abscess, 
erosion through the skin, fistula formation, bowel obstruction, 
hematuria, or the development of a new, tumor-like lesion.
Retained surgical needles usually are discovered inciden-
tally, and reports of retained needles are uncommon. Retained 
surgical needles have not been reported to cause injury in the 
same way that nonsurgical needles (e.g., sewing needles, hypo-
dermic needles) have been reported to perforate bowel or lodge 
in vessels and migrate. However, there have been reports of 
chronic pelvic pain and ocular irritation caused by retained sur-
gical needles. A study of plain abdominal radiographs in pigs 
has demonstrated that medium- to large-size needles can eas-
ily be detected. The decision to remove these retained needles 
depends on symptoms and patient preference. Needles smaller 
than 13 mm have been found to be undetectable on plain radio-
graph in several studies, have not been shown to cause injury to 
vessels or visceral organs, and can probably be left alone.
Although the actual incidence of retained surgical instru-
ments is unknown, they are retained with far less frequency than 
surgical sponges. The initial presentation of a retained surgical 
instrument is most commonly pain in the surgical site or the 
sensation of a mass of fullness after a surgical procedure that 
leads to the discovery of a metallic object on a radiographic 
study. Commonly retained instruments include the malleable 
and “FISH” instrument that are used to protect the viscera when 
closing abdominal surgery.
A retained surgical foreign body should be included in 
the differential diagnosis of any postoperative patient who 
presents with pain, infection, a palpable mass, or a radiopaque 
structure on imaging. The diagnosis can usually be made using 
a computed tomographic (CT) scan, and this is often the only 
test needed. If a retained surgical item is identified in the set-
ting of an acute clinical presentation, the treatment usually is 
removal of the item. However, if the attempt to remove the 
retained ­surgical item can potentially cause more harm than the 
item itself, as in the case of a needle or a small part of a surgical 
item, then removal is occasionally not recommended. Retained 
surgical sponges should always be removed.
378
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
The American College of Surgeons and the Association 
of Perioperative Registered Nurses, in addition to The Joint 
­Commission, have issued guidelines to try to prevent the occur-
rence of retained surgical items. Current recommendations 
include the use of standard counting procedures, performing a 
thorough wound exploration before closing a surgical site, and 
using only x-ray–detectable items in the surgical wound. These 
organizations also strongly endorse the completion of a postop-
erative debriefing after every operation. An x-ray at the comple-
tion of an operation is encouraged if there is any concern for a 
foreign body based on confusion regarding the counts by even a 
single member of the OR team or in the presence of a risk factor.
Surgical Counts
The benefit of performing surgical counts to prevent the occur-
rence of retained surgical items is controversial. The increased 
risk of a retained surgical item during emergency surgery in 
the study by Gawande and colleagues appeared to be related to 
bypassing the surgical count in many of these cases.40 However, 
in another study, the “falsely correct count,” in which a count 
is performed and declared correct when it is actually incorrect, 
occurred in 21% to 100% of cases in which a retained surgical 
item was found.39 This type of count was the most common 
circumstance encountered in all retained surgical item cases, 
which suggests that performing a surgical count in and of itself 
does not prevent this error from taking place. The counting pro-
tocol also imposes significant demands on the nursing staff and 
distracts them from focusing on other primarily patient-centered 
tasks, often during critical portions of the case.16
A retained surgical item can occur even in the presence of 
a known incorrect count. This event is usually a result of poor 
communication in which a surgeon will dismiss the incorrect 
count and/or fail to obtain a radiograph before the patient leaves 
the OR. Having stronger institutional policies in place in case 
of an incorrect count (such as requiring a mandatory radiograph 
while the patient is still in the OR) can avoid conflict among 
caregivers and mitigate the likelihood of a retained surgical item 
occurring as a result of a known incorrect count.
Although there is no single tool to prevent all errors, the 
development of multiple lines of defense to prevent retained 
surgical items and universally standardizing and adhering to OR 
safety protocols by all members of the surgical team will help 
reduce the incidence of this never event.41 Surgeons should take 
the lead in the prevention of retained surgical items by avoid-
ing the use of small or nonradiologically detectable sponges in 
large cavities, performing a thorough wound inspection before 
closing any surgical incision, and having a vested interest in 
the counting procedure performed by nursing staff. The value 
of routine radiography to prevent a retained surgical item in 
emergency cases or when major procedures involving multiple 
surgical teams are being performed is becoming more apparent.
The widely accepted legal doctrine when a foreign body is 
erroneously left in a patient is that the mere presence of the item 
in the plaintiff’s body indicates that the patient did not receive 
proper surgical care. The characteristics of the surgeon and their 
style, bedside manner, honesty, and confidence demonstrated 
in the management of the case can go a long way in averting a 
lawsuit or mitigating damages.
Wrong-Site Surgery
Wrong-site surgery is any surgical procedure performed on the 
wrong patient, wrong body part, wrong side of the body, or 
wrong level of a correctly identified anatomic site. It is difficult 
to determine the true incidence of wrong-site surgery for several 
reasons. First, there is no standard definition for what consti-
tutes wrong-site surgery among various healthcare organiza-
tions. Another factor is that wrong-site surgery is underreported 
by healthcare providers. Finally, the total number of potential 
opportunities for each type of wrong-site error is unknown. 
However, various studies show incidences ranging from one in 
112,994 cases to one in 15,500 cases.42 The Washington Uni-
versity School of Medicine suggests a rate of one in 17,000 
operations, which adds up to approximately 4000 wrong-site 
surgeries in the United States each year. If these numbers are 
correct, wrong-site surgery is the third most frequent life-threat-
ening medical error in the United States.43
Several states now require mandatory reporting of all 
wrong-site surgery events, including near misses. These data 
provide some insight into the number of actual errors compared 
to the number of potential opportunities to perform wrong-site 
surgery. Of the 427 reports of wrong-site surgery submitted 
from June 2004 through December 2006 to the Pennsylvania 
Patient Safety Reporting System, more than 40% of the errors 
actually reached the patient, and nearly 20% involved comple-
tion of a wrong-site procedure.42
The risk of performing wrong-site surgery increases when 
there are multiple surgeons involved in the same operation or 
multiple procedures are performed on the same patient, espe-
cially if the procedures are scheduled or performed on different 
areas of the body.43 Time pressure, emergency surgery, abnor-
mal patient anatomy, and morbid obesity are also thought to be 
risk factors.43 Communication errors are the root cause in more 
than 70% of the wrong-site surgeries reported to The Joint Com-
mission.42 Other risk factors include receiving an incomplete 
preoperative assessment; having inadequate procedures in place 
to verify the correct surgical site; or having an organizational 
culture that lacks teamwork or reveres the surgeon as someone 
whose judgment should never be questioned.42
There is a one in four chance that surgeons who work on 
symmetric anatomic structures will be involved in a wrong-site 
error sometime during their careers.43 The specialties most com-
monly involved in reporting wrong-site surgeries according to 
The Joint Commission are orthopedic/podiatric surgery (41%), 
general surgery (20%), neurosurgery (14%), urology (11%), and 
maxillofacial, cardiovascular, otolaryngology, and ophthalmol-
ogy (14%).42 Most errors involved symmetric anatomic struc-
tures: lower extremities (30%), head/neck (24%), and genital/
urinary/pelvic/groin (21%).38 Although orthopedic surgery is the 
most frequently involved, this may be due to the higher volume 
of cases performed as well as the increased opportunity for later-
alization errors inherent in the specialty. In addition, because the 
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has historically 
tried as a professional organization to reduce wrong-site opera-
tions, orthopedic surgeons may be more likely to report these 
events when they do occur.43
The Joint Commission Universal Protocol to 
Ensure Correct Surgery
The movement to eliminate wrong-site surgery began among 
professional orthopedic societies in the mid-1990s, when 
both the Canadian Orthopaedic Association and the ­American 
­Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons issued position statements 
and embarked on educational campaigns to prevent the occur-
rence of wrong-site surgery within their specialty.43 Other 
­organizations that issued position statements advocating for the 
379
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
elimination of wrong-site surgery include the North American 
Spine Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology, the 
Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses, and the ­American 
College of Surgeons. After issuing a review of wrong-site 
­surgery in their Sentinel Event Alert in 1998, The Joint Commis-
sion made the elimination of wrong-site surgery one of their first 
National Patient Safety Goals in 2003 and adopted a universal 
protocol for preventing wrong-site, wrong-procedure, and wrong-
person surgery in 2004. The protocol has been endorsed by more 
than 50 professional associations and organizations.
A preoperative “time-out” or “pause for the cause” to con-
firm the patient, procedure, and site to be operated on before 
incision was recommended by The Joint Commission and is 
now mandatory for all ORs in the United States. Elements of 
the protocol include the following:
• Verifying the patient’s identity
• Marking the surgical site
• Using a preoperative site verification process such as a 
­checklist
• Confirming the availability of appropriate documents and 
studies before the start of a procedure
• Taking a brief time-out immediately before skin incision, in 
which all members of the surgical team actively communicate 
and provide oral verification of the patient’s identity, surgical 
site, surgical procedure, administration of preoperative medi-
cations, and presence of appropriate medical records, imaging 
studies, and equipment
• Monitoring compliance with protocol recommendations
Focusing on individual process components of the uni-
versal protocol, such as surgical site marking or the time-out, 
is not enough to prevent wrong-site surgery. Over a 30-month 
period in Pennsylvania, 21 wrong-side errors occurred despite 
the proper use of time-out procedures, with 12 of these errors 
resulting in complete wrong-side procedures. During the same 
period, correct site markings failed to prevent another 16 wrong-
site surgeries, of which six were not recognized until after the 
procedure had been completed.43
Site verification begins with the initial patient encounter 
by the surgeon, continues throughout the preoperative verifica-
tion process and during multiple critical points in the OR, and 
requires the active participation of the entire operating team, 
especially the surgeon and anesthesia provider. Based on a 
recent review of malpractice claims, two thirds of wrong-site 
operations could have been prevented by a site-verification 
­protocol.44
Despite the proliferation of wrong-site protocols in the last 
decade, their effectiveness is difficult to measure as the inci-
dence of wrong-site surgery is too rare to measure as a rate. 
Interestingly, the number of sentinel events reported to The 
Joint Commission has not changed significantly since the wide-
spread implementation of the Universal Protocol in 2004.43 This 
could be due to an increase in reporting rather than an actual 
increase in the incidence of wrong-site surgery.
The legal treatment of wrong-site surgery is similar to that 
of surgical items erroneously left in a patient: the mere fact that it 
occurred indicates that the patient did not receive proper surgical 
care. A malpractice claim may lead to a settlement or award on 
verdict in the six- or seven-figure range in 2011 U.S. dollars.37
Ultimately, the occurrence of retained surgical items 
or wrong-site surgery is a reflection of the quality of profes-
sional communication between caregivers and the degree of 
­teamwork among the members of the operating team. In addi-
tion to ­standardizing procedures like the surgical count, institut-
ing mandatory postoperative radiographs in the presence of a 
known miscount, and reforming the processes of patient iden-
tification and site verification, organizations should also strive 
to create a culture of safety, create independent and redundant 
checks for key processes, and create a system in which caregivers 
can learn from their mistakes (Table 12-10).45
TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTHCARE
Despite a large increase in data being collected about patient 
safety and harm, much of it is not available to the public or 
other hospitals. This lack of transparency allows some hospitals 
to continue to practice outdated medicine and, in some cases, 
puts patients at a higher risk of serious complications. In a study 
by Mark Chassin, the health commissioner of New York State, 
having hospitals publicly disclose their mortality rates for coro-
nary artery bypass graft (CABG) procedures resulted in a 41% 
decline in mortality from CABGs statewide.46 In this study, 
when CABG mortality data were initially made public, there 
was a wide range in cardiac surgery-related mortality from 1% 
to 18%, depending on the hospital; the standard of care is 2%. 
The reasons for higher mortality in the poorly performing hos-
pitals ranged from poor communication between care teams to 
one rogue surgeon operating when the surgeon should not have 
been. The consequence of making this data transparent was 
that the hospitals held multidisciplinary, CUSP-like meetings, 
where as a team they decided on the measures to implement for 
improvement. Through this, over the next year, most hospitals 
decreased their mortality rate to below 2%. Even the hospital 
that had an 18% mortality rate decreased it to 7% within 3 years 
and 1.7% over the next several years.
Transparency in healthcare is becoming central to the 
healthcare quality discussion. A new SCIP core measure is pub-
lishing practitioner performance, and all Leapfrog survey results 
are published online where other hospitals and the public can 
see them. Additionally, different large medical societies, includ-
ing the Society for Thoracic Surgery (STS), are encouraging and 
rewarding practitioners and hospitals that are transparent with 
their outcomes. Making hospital outcomes transparent makes 
hospitals accountable to the public for their outcomes and, in the 
case of New York, caused a radical improvement in the quality 
of care provided to patients. It also empowers patients by mak-
ing them better informed about which hospital they choose for 
their care, which will further incentivize hospitals to improve.
Table 12-10 
Best practices for operating room safety
•  Conduct The Joint Commission Universal Protocol (“time-
out”) to prevent wrong-site surgery.
•  Perform an operating room briefing (checklist) to identify 
and mitigate hazards early.
•  Promote a culture of speaking up about safety concerns.
•  Use a screening x-ray to detect foreign bodies in high-risk 
cases.
•  Begin patient sign-outs with the most likely immediate 
safety hazard.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Michaels RK, et al. Achieving 
the National Quality Forum’s “Never Events”: Prevention of wrong site, 
wrong procedure, and wrong patient operations. Ann Surg 245:526, 2007.
380
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
RISK MANAGEMENT
Between one half and two thirds of hospital-wide adverse events 
are attributable to surgical care. Most surgical errors occur in 
the OR and are technical in nature. Surgical complications 
and adverse outcomes have previously been linked to lack of 
surgeon specialization, low hospital volume, communication 
breakdowns, fatigue, surgical residents and trainees, and numer-
ous other factors.47
However, poor surgical outcomes are not necessarily cor-
related with a surgeon’s level of experience in performing a cer-
tain procedure. In one study, three fourths of the technical errors 
that occurred in a review of malpractice claims data involved fully 
trained and experienced surgeons operating within their area of 
expertise, and 84% occurred in routine operations that do not 
require advanced training. Rather than surgeon expertise, these 
errors likely occurred due to situations complicated by patient 
comorbidity, complex anatomy, repeat surgery, or equipment 
problems (Table 12-11). Because these errors occurred during 
routine operations, previous suggestions to limit the performance 
of high-complexity operations using selective referral, regionaliza-
tion, or limitation of privileging may not actually be effective in 
reducing the incidence of technical error among surgical patients.47
In any event, although there has been much emphasis on 
reducing the prevalence of surgical technical errors as a way of 
improving surgical care, a technical error in the OR may not be 
the most important indicator of whether a surgeon will be sued by 
a patient. Recent studies point to the importance of a surgeon’s 
communication skills in averting malpractice litigation. In the 
American College of Surgeons’ Closed Claims Study, although 
intraoperative organ injuries occurred in 40% of patients, a sur-
gical technical misadventure was the most deficient component 
of care in only 12% of patients. In fact, communication and 
practice pattern violations were the most common deficiency in 
care for one third of patients in the Closed Claims Study who 
received the expected standard of surgical care.48
The Importance of Communication in 
Managing Risk
The manner and tone in which a physician communicates is 
potentially more important to avoiding a malpractice claim than 
the actual content of the dialogue. For example, a physician 
relating to a patient in a “negative” manner may trigger litigious 
feelings when there is a bad result, whereas a physician relating 
in a “positive” manner may not. Expressions of dominance, in 
which the voice tone is deep, loud, moderately fast, unaccented, 
and clearly articulated, may communicate a lack of empathy and 
understanding for the patient, whereas concern or anxiety in the 
surgeon’s voice is often positively related to expressing concern 
and empathy. General and orthopedic surgeons whose tone of 
voice was judged to be more dominant were more likely to have 
been sued than those who sounded less dominant.49
When significant medical errors do occur, physicians 
have an ethical and professional responsibility to immediately 
disclose them to patients. Failure to disclose errors to patients 
undermines public confidence in medicine and can create legal 
liability related to fraud. Physicians’ fear of litigation represents 
a major barrier to error disclosure. However, when handled 
appropriately, immediate disclosure of errors frequently leads 
to improved patient rapport, improved satisfaction, and fewer 
malpractice claims.50 In fact, rapport is the most important 
factor in determining whether a lawsuit is filed against a 
­physician. 
In 1987, the Department of Veterans Affairs Hospital in 
Lexington, Kentucky, implemented the nation’s first formal 
apology and medical error full disclosure program, which called 
for the hospital and its doctors to work with patients and their 
families to settle a case. As a result, the hospital improved from 
having one of the highest malpractice claims totals in the VA 
system to being ranked among the lowest quartile of a compara-
tive group of similar hospitals for settlement and litigation costs 
over a 7-year period. Its average payout in 2005 was $16,000 per 
settlement, vs. the national VA average of $98,000 per settle-
ment, and only two lawsuits went to trial during a 10-year period. 
As a result of the success of this program, the ­Department of 
Veteran Affairs expanded the program to all VA hospitals 
nationwide in October 2005. This model also was replicated at 
the University of Michigan Health System with similar results. 
Its full-disclosure program cut the number of pending lawsuits 
by one half and reduced litigation costs per case from $65,000 
to $35,000, saving the hospital approximately $2 million in 
defense litigation bills each year. In addition, University of 
Michigan doctors, patients, and lawyers are happier with this 
system. The cultural shift toward honesty and openness also 
has led to the improvement of systems and processes to reduce 
medical errors, especially repeat medical errors.51
With regard to risk management, the importance of good 
communication by surgeons and other care providers cannot be 
overemphasized. Whether alerting other members of the care 
team about a patient’s needs, openly discussing concerns the 
patient and/or family might have, or disclosing the cause of a 
medical error, open communication with all parties involved can 
reduce anger and mistrust of the medical system; the frequency, 
morbidity, and mortality of preventable adverse events; and the 
likelihood of litigation.
COMPLICATIONS
Despite the increased focus on improving patient safety and 
minimizing medical errors, it is impossible to eliminate human 
error entirely. Individual errors can cause minor or major com-
plications during or after a surgical procedure. Although these 
types of errors may not be publicized as much as wrong-site 
surgery or a retained surgical item, they can still lead to surgical 
complications that prolong the course of illness, lengthen hospi-
tal stay, and increase morbidity and mortality rates.
Complications in Minor Procedures
Central Venous Access Catheters.  Complications of central 
venous access catheters are common. Improvements in ultra-
sound technology and mass education surrounding the use and 
Table 12-11 
Common causes of lawsuits in surgery
•  Positional nerve injury
•  Common bile duct injury
•  Failure to diagnose or delayed diagnosis
•  Failure to treat, delayed treatment, or wrong treatment
•  Inadequate documentation
•  Inappropriate surgical indication
•  Failure to call a specialist
•  Cases resulting in amputation/limb loss
7
381
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
techniques in ultrasonography have led to increased employment 
and enthusiasm for its use in central venous catheter placement. 
Numerous institutions have recently begun to mandate use of 
ultrasound for placement of all central venous lines. Anecdotally, 
many subclavian catheters have been alternatively placed at the 
internal jugular position due to a perceived benefit of decreasing 
complications. Literature exists that there is some merit to this; 
however, one should proceed with caution as the decrease in pneu-
mothoraces may not be balanced by the increase in line infections 
as the neck is difficult to keep the site clean and the dressing intact. 
Steps to decrease complications include the following:
• Ensure that central venous access is indicated.
• Experienced personnel should insert the catheter or should 
supervise the insertion.
• Use proper positioning and sterile technique.
• Ultrasound is recommended for internal jugular vein ­insertion.
• All central venous catheters should be assessed on a daily 
basis and should be exchanged only for specific indications 
(not as a matter of routine).
• All central catheters should be removed as soon as possible.
Common complications of central venous access include 
the following.
Pneumothorax  Occurrence rates from both subclavian and 
internal jugular vein approaches are 1% to 6%. Prevention 
requires proper positioning of the patient and correct insertion 
technique. A postprocedure chest x-ray is mandatory to con-
firm the presence or absence of a pneumothorax, regardless of 
whether a pneumothorax is suspected. Pneumothorax rates are 
higher among the inexperienced but occur with experienced 
operators as well. If the patient is stable, and the pneumothorax 
is small (<15%), close expectant observation may be adequate. 
If the patient is symptomatic, a thoracostomy tube should 
be placed. Occasionally, pneumothorax will occur as late as 
48 to 72 hours after central venous access attempts. This 
usually creates sufficient compromise that a tube thoracostomy 
is required.
Arrhythmias  Arrhythmias result from myocardial irritability 
secondary to guidewire placement and usually resolve when the 
catheter or guidewire is withdrawn from the right heart. Pre-
vention requires electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring whenever 
possible during catheter insertion and rapid recognition when a 
new arrhythmia begins.
Arterial Puncture  Inadvertent puncture or laceration of an 
adjacent artery with bleeding can occur, but the majority 
will resolve with direct pressure on or near the arterial injury 
site. Rarely will angiography, stent placement, or surgery be 
required to repair the puncture site, but close observation and 
a chest x-ray are indicated. Ultrasound guided insertion has 
not mitigated this complication, but may decrease the inci-
dence of arterial puncture. Ultrasound has also been shown 
to decrease the number of attempts and the time it takes to 
complete insertion.
Lost Guidewire  A guidewire or catheter that inadvertently 
migrates further into the vascular space away from the insertion 
site can be readily retrieved with interventional angiography 
techniques. A prompt chest x-ray and close monitoring of the 
patient until retrieval are indicated.
Air Embolus  Although estimated to occur in only 0.2% to 1% 
of patients, an air embolism can be dramatic and fatal. If an 
embolus is suspected, the patient should immediately be placed 
into a left lateral decubitus Trendelenburg position, so the 
entrapped air can be stabilized within the right ventricle. Aus-
cultation over the precordium may reveal a “crunching” noise, 
but a portable chest x-ray will help confirm the diagnosis. Aspi-
ration via a central venous line accessing the heart may decrease 
the volume of gas in the right side of the heart and minimize the 
amount traversing into the pulmonary circulation. Subsequent 
recovery of intracardiac and intrapulmonary air may require 
open surgical or angiographic techniques. Treatment may prove 
futile if the air bolus is larger than 50 mL, however.
Pulmonary Artery Rupture  Flow-directed, pulmonary artery 
(“Swan-Ganz”) catheters can cause pulmonary artery rupture 
due to excessive advancement of the catheter into the pulmo-
nary circulation. There usually is a sentinel bleed with coughing 
noted when a pulmonary artery catheter balloon is inflated, fol-
lowed by uncontrolled hemoptysis. Reinflation of the catheter 
balloon is the initial step in management, followed by imme-
diate airway intubation with mechanical ventilation, an urgent 
portable chest x-ray, and notification of the OR that an emergent 
thoracotomy may be required. If there is no further bleeding 
after the balloon is reinflated, the x-ray shows no significant 
consolidation of lung fields from ongoing bleeding, and the 
patient is easily ventilated, then a conservative nonoperative 
approach may be considered. However, more typically a pul-
monary angiogram with angioembolization or vascular stenting 
is required. Hemodynamically unstable patients rarely survive 
because of the time needed to initiate and perform interventional 
procedures or a thoracotomy and to identify the ruptured branch 
of the pulmonary artery.
Central Venous Line Infection  The CDC reports mortal-
ity rates of 12% to 25% when a central venous line infection 
becomes systemic, with a cost of approximately $25,000 per 
episode.52-54 The CDC does not recommend routine central 
line changes, but when the clinical suspicion is high, the site 
of venous access must be changed. Nearly 15% of hospital-
ized patients will acquire central venous line sepsis. In many 
instances, once an infection is recognized as central line sepsis, 
removing the line is adequate. Staphylococcus aureus infections, 
however, present a unique problem because of the potential for 
metastatic seeding of bacterial emboli. The required treatment 
is 4 to 6 weeks of tailored antibiotic therapy. Using a check-
list when inserting central venous catheters has been shown 
to significantly decrease rates of line infections.55 Following a 
checklist strategy and close monitoring of catheters has resulted 
in significant reductions in infection rates for numerous institu-
tions and many are now reporting zero annual infection rates.
Arterial Lines.  Arterial lines are placed to facilitate arterial 
blood gas sampling and hemodynamic monitoring. The use of 
ultrasound to assist in placement of these catheters has become 
commonplace and markedly reduces the number of attempts and 
time for insertion completion.
Arterial access requires a sterile Seldinger technique, 
and a variety of arteries are used, including the radial, femoral, 
­brachial, axillary, dorsalis pedis, or superficial temporal arter-
ies. Although complications occur less than 1% of the time, they 
can be catastrophic. Complications include thrombosis, bleeding, 
hematoma, arterial spasm (nonthrombotic pulselessness), and 
infection. Thrombosis or embolization of an extremity arterial 
catheter can result in the loss of a digit, hand, or foot, and the 
risk is nearly the same for both femoral and radial cannulation. 
382
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Thrombosis with distal tissue ischemia is treated with 
­anticoagulation, but occasionally surgical intervention is required. 
Pseudoaneurysms and arteriovenous fistulae can also occur.
Endoscopy and Bronchoscopy.  The principal risk of gas-
trointestinal (GI) endoscopy is perforation. Perforations occur 
in 1:10,000 patients with endoscopy alone, but have a higher 
incidence rate when biopsies are performed (up to 10%). This 
increased risk is due to complications of intubating a GI diver-
ticulum (either esophageal or colonic), or from the presence of 
weakened or inflamed tissue in the intestinal wall (e.g., diver-
ticulitis, glucocorticoid use, or inflammatory bowel disease).
Patients will usually complain of diffuse abdominal pain 
shortly after the procedure, and then progress with worsen-
ing abdominal discomfort and peritonitis on examination. In 
obtunded or elderly patients, a change in clinical status may take 
24 to 48 hours. Radiologic studies to look for free intraperitoneal 
air, retroperitoneal air, or a pneumothorax are diagnostic. Open 
or laparoscopic exploration locates the perforation and allows 
repair and local decontamination of the surrounding tissues.
The occasional patient who may be a candidate for non-
operative management is one in whom perforation arises during 
an elective, bowel-prepped endoscopy and who does not have 
significant pain or clinical signs of infection. These patients 
must be closely observed in a monitored setting, on strict dietary 
restriction and broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Complications of bronchoscopy include bronchial plug-
ging, hypoxemia, pneumothorax, lobar collapse, and bleed-
ing. When diagnosed in a timely fashion, they are rarely life 
threatening. Bleeding usually resolves spontaneously and rarely 
requires surgery, but may require repeat endoscopy for thermo-
coagulation or fibrin glue application. The presence of a pneu-
mothorax necessitates placement of a thoracostomy tube when 
significant deoxygenation occurs or the pulmonary mechanics 
are compromised. Lobar collapse or mucous plugging usu-
ally responds to aggressive pulmonary toilet, but occasionally 
requires repeat bronchoscopy. If biopsies have been performed, 
the risk for these complications increases.
Tracheostomy.  Tracheostomy facilitates weaning from a 
ventilator, may decrease length of ICU or hospital stay, and 
improves pulmonary toilet. Tracheostomies are performed open, 
percutaneously, with or without bronchoscopy, and with or 
without Doppler guidance. Arguments for percutaneous trache-
ostomy largely side with efficiency and cost containment over 
open tracheostomy. A recent literature review examining early 
(<3–7 days) vs. late (>14 days) tracheostomy demonstrates lit-
tle difference in outcomes but does demonstrate greater patient 
comfort in those patients with tracheostomy than those with an 
endotracheal tube. Complications and outcomes between the 
two different methods remain largely equivalent.
Recent studies do not support obtaining a routine chest 
x-ray after percutaneous or open tracheostomy.56,57 However, 
significant lobar collapse can occur from copious tracheal secre-
tions or mechanical obstruction. The most dramatic complica-
tion of tracheostomy is tracheoinnominate artery fistula (TIAF) 
(Fig. 12-7).58,59 This occurs rarely (~0.3%) but carries a 50% to 
80% mortality rate. TIAFs can occur as early as 2 days or as 
late as 2 months after tracheostomy. A sentinel bleed occurs in 
50% of TIAF cases, followed by a large-volume bleed. Should 
a TIAF be suspected, the patient should be transported imme-
diately to the OR for fiberoptic evaluation. If needed, remove 
the tracheostomy and place a finger through the tracheostomy 
site to apply direct pressure anteriorly for compression of 
Figure 12-7.  This illustration depicts improper positioning of the 
percutaneous needle. It is possible to access the innominate artery 
via the trachea, thus placing the patient at risk for early tracheoin-
nominate artery fistula.
the innominate artery while preparation for a more definitive 
approach is organized.
Percutaneous Endogastrostomy.  A misplaced percutane-
ous endogastrostomy (PEG) tube may lead to intra-abdominal 
sepsis with peritonitis and/or an abdominal wall abscess with 
necrotizing fasciitis. As in other minor procedures, the initial 
placement technique must be fastidious to avoid complications. 
Transillumination of the abdomen may decrease the risk for 
error, but this is unsubstantiated in the literature. Inadvertent 
colotomies, intraperitoneal placement of the tube and subse-
quent leakage of tube feeds with peritonitis, and abdominal 
wall abscesses require surgery to correct the complications and 
to replace the PEG with an alternate feeding tube, usually a 
jejunostomy.
A dislodged or prematurely removed PEG tube should be 
replaced as early as possible after dislodgment because the gas-
trostomy site closes rapidly. A contrast x-ray (sinogram) should 
be performed to confirm the tube’s intragastric position before 
feeding. If there is uncertainty of the tube location, conversion 
to an open tube placement procedure is required.
Tube Thoracostomy.  Chest tube insertion is performed for 
pneumothorax, hemothorax, pleural effusions, or empyema. In 
most patients, a chest tube can be easily placed with a combi-
nation of local analgesia and light conscious sedation. Com-
mon complications include inadequate analgesia or sedation, 
incomplete penetration of the pleura with formation of a subcu-
taneous track for the tube, lacerations to the lung or diaphragm, 
intraperitoneal placement of the tube through the diaphragm, 
and bleeding related to these various lacerations or injury to 
pleural adhesions. Additional problems include slippage of 
the tube out of position or mechanical problems related to the 
drainage system. In patients with bullous disease, there can be 
significant intrapleural scarring and it can be easy to mistakenly 
place the chest tube into a bullae. All of these complications 
can be avoided with proper initial insertion techniques, plus a 
daily review of the drainage system and follow-up radiographs. 
Tube removal can create a residual pneumothorax if the patient 
does not maintain positive intrapleural pressure by Valsalva’s 
maneuver during tube removal and dressing application.
Complications of Angiography.  Intramural dissection of a 
cannulated artery can lead to complications such as ischemic 
stroke from a carotid artery dissection or occlusion, mesenteric 
ischemia from dissection of the superior mesenteric artery, 
383
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
or a more innocuous finding of “blue toe syndrome” from a 
dissected artery in a peripheral limb. Invasive or noninvasive 
imaging studies confirm the suspected problem. The severity of 
ischemia and extent of dissection determine if anticoagulation 
therapy or urgent surgical exploration is indicated.
Bleeding from a vascular access site usually is obvious, 
but may not be visible when the blood loss is tracking into the 
retroperitoneal tissue planes after femoral artery cannulation. 
These patients can present with hemorrhagic shock; an abdomi-
nopelvic CT scan delineates the extent of bleeding along the 
retroperitoneum. Initial management is direct compression at 
the access site and resuscitation as indicated. Urgent surgical 
exploration may be required to control the bleeding site and 
evacuate larger hematomas.
Renal complications of angiography occur in 1% to 2% 
of patients. Contrast nephropathy is a temporary and prevent-
able complication of radiologic studies such as CT, angiogra-
phy, and/or venography. Intravenous (IV) hydration before and 
after the procedure is the most efficient method for preventing 
contrast nephropathy. Nonionic contrast also may be of benefit 
in higher-risk patients. Close communication between provid-
ers is often required to resolve the priorities in care as well as 
to balance the risks versus benefits of renal protection when 
managing patients in need of angiographic procedures.
Complications of Biopsies.  Lymph node biopsies have 
direct and indirect complications that include bleeding, infec-
tion, lymph leakage, and seromas. Measures to prevent direct 
complications include proper surgical hemostasis, proper skin 
preparation, and a single preoperative dose of antibiotic to cover 
skin flora 30 to 60 minutes before incision. Bleeding at a biopsy 
site usually can be controlled with direct pressure. Infection at 
a biopsy site will appear 5 to 10 days postoperatively and may 
require opening of the wound to drain the infection. Seromas 
or lymphatic leaks resolve with aspiration of seromas and the 
application of pressure dressings, but may require repeated 
treatments or even placement of a vacuum drain.
Organ System Complications
Neurologic System.  Neurologic complications that occur 
after surgery include motor or sensory deficits and mental sta-
tus changes. Peripheral motor and sensory deficits are often due 
to neurapraxia secondary to improper positioning and/or pad-
ding during operations. Treatment is largely clinical observa-
tion, and the majority of deficits resolve spontaneously within 
1 to 3 months.
Direct injury to nerves during a surgical intervention is a 
well-known complication of several specific operations, includ-
ing superficial parotidectomy (facial nerve), carotid endarterec-
tomy (hypoglossal nerve), thyroidectomy (recurrent laryngeal 
nerve), prostatectomy (nervi erigentes), inguinal herniorrhaphy 
(ilioinguinal nerve), and mastectomy (long thoracic and thora-
codorsal nerves). The nerve injury may be a stretch injury or an 
unintentionally severed nerve. In addition to loss of function, 
severed nerves can result in a painful neuroma that may require 
subsequent surgery.
Mental status changes in the postoperative patient can 
have numerous causes (Table 12-12). Mental status changes 
must be continually assessed. A noncontrast CT scan should be 
used early to detect new or evolving intracranial causes.
Atherosclerotic disease increases the risk for intra-
operative and postoperative stroke (cerebrovascular acci-
dent). Postoperatively, hypotension and hypoxemia are 
the most likely causes of a cerebrovascular accident. 
­Neurologic consultation should be obtained immediately to 
confirm the diagnosis. Management is largely supportive 
and includes adequate intravascular volume replacement 
plus optimal oxygen delivery. Advents in interventional 
radiology by radiologists and vascular and neurologic 
surgeons have proven successful alternatives in patients requir-
ing diagnostic and therapeutic care in the immediate and acute 
postoperative period. Catheter-directed therapy with antico-
agulants such as the kinases and tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA) has potential benefit in postoperative thrombosis where 
reoperation carries significant risk. In addition, endoluminal 
stents with drug-eluting stents (DESs) or non-DESs have been 
used with some degree of success. DESs do require systemic 
antiplatelet therapy due to the alternative coagulation path-
way. Duration of antiplatelet therapy of 1 year is routine.
Eyes, Ears, and Nose.  Corneal abrasions are unusual, but 
are due to inadequate protection of the eyes during anesthesia. 
Overlooked contact lenses in patients occasionally may cause 
conjunctivitis.
Table 12-12 
Common causes of mental status changes
Electrolyte Imbalance
Toxins
Trauma
Metabolic
Medications
Sodium
Ethanol
Closed head injury
Thyrotoxicosis
Aspirin
Magnesium
Methanol
Pain
Adrenal insufficiency
β-Blockers
Calcium
Venoms and poisons
Shock
Hypoxemia
Narcotics
Inflammation
Ethylene glycol
Psychiatric
Acidosis
Antiemetics
Sepsis
Carbon monoxide
Dementia
Severe anemia
MAOIs
AIDS
Depression
Hyperammonemia
TCAs
Cerebral abscess
ICU psychosis
Poor glycemic control
Amphetamines
Meningitis
Schizophrenia
Hypothermia
Antiarrhythmics
Fever/hyperpyrexia
Hyperthermia
Corticosteroids, 
anabolic steroids
AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; ICU = intensive care unit; MAOI = monoamine oxidase inhibitor; TCA = tricyclic antidepressant.
384
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Persistent epistaxis can occur after nasogastric tube place-
ment or removal, and nasal packing is the best treatment option 
if prolonged persistent direct pressure on the external nares fails. 
Anterior and posterior nasal gauze packing with balloon tam-
ponade, angioembolization, and fibrin glue placement may be 
required in refractory cases. The use of antibiotics for posterior 
packing is controversial.
External otitis and otitis media occasionally occur post-
operatively. Patients complain of ear pain or decreased hearing, 
and treatment includes topical antibiotics and nasal deconges-
tion for symptomatic improvement.
Ototoxicity due to aminoglycoside administration occurs 
in up to 10% of patients, and is often irreversible. Vancomycin-
related ototoxicity occurs about 3% of the time when used alone, 
and as often as 6% when used with other ototoxic agents.60,61
Vascular Problems of the Neck.  Complications of carotid 
endarterectomy include central or regional neurologic defi-
cits or bleeding with an expanding neck hematoma. An acute 
change in mental status or the presence of localized neurologic 
deficit requires an immediate return to the OR. An expanding 
hematoma may warrant emergent airway intubation and subse-
quent transfer to the OR for control of hemorrhage. Intraopera-
tive anticoagulation with heparin during carotid surgery makes 
bleeding a postoperative risk. Other complications include arte-
riovenous fistulae, pseudoaneurysms, and infection, all of which 
are treated surgically.
Intraoperative hypotension during manipulation of the 
carotid bifurcation can occur and is related to increased tone 
from baroreceptors that reflexly cause bradycardia. Should 
hypotension occur when manipulating the carotid bifurcation, 
an injection of 1% lidocaine solution around this structure 
should attenuate this reflexive response.
The most common delayed complication following carotid 
endarterectomy remains myocardial infarction. The possibility 
of a postoperative myocardial infarction should be considered 
as a cause of labile blood pressure and arrhythmias in high-risk 
patients.
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands.  Surgery of the thyroid and 
parathyroid glands can result in hypocalcemia in the immedi-
ate postoperative period. Manifestations include ECG changes 
(shortened P-R interval), muscle spasm (tetany, Chvostek’s sign, 
and Trousseau’s sign), paresthesias, and laryngospasm. Treat-
ment includes calcium gluconate infusion and, if tetany ensues, 
chemical paralysis with intubation. Maintenance treatment is 
thyroid hormone replacement (after thyroidectomy) in addition 
to calcium carbonate and vitamin D.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) injury occurs in less than 
5% of patients. Of those with injury, approximately 10% are 
permanent. Dissection near the inferior thyroid artery is a com-
mon area for RLN injury. At the conclusion of the operation, if 
there is suspicion of an RLN injury, direct laryngoscopy is diag-
nostic. The cord on the affected side will be in the paramedian 
position. With bilateral RLN injury, the chance of a successful 
extubation is poor. If paralysis of the cords is not permanent, 
function may return 1 to 2 months after injury. Permanent RLN 
injury can be treated by various techniques to stent the cords in 
a position of function.
Superior laryngeal nerve injury is less debilitating, as the 
common symptom is loss of projection of the voice. The glottic 
aperture is asymmetrical on direct laryngoscopy, and manage-
ment is limited to clinical observation.
Respiratory System.  Surgical complications that put the 
respiratory system in jeopardy are not confined to techni-
cal errors. Malnutrition, inadequate pain control, inadequate 
mechanical ventilation, inadequate pulmonary toilet, and aspi-
ration can cause serious pulmonary problems.
Pneumothorax can occur from central line insertion during 
anesthesia or from a diaphragmatic injury during an abdomi-
nal procedure. Hypotension, hypoxemia, and tracheal deviation 
away from the affected side may be present. A tension pneumo-
thorax can cause complete cardiovascular collapse. Treatment 
is by needle thoracostomy, followed by tube thoracostomy. The 
chest tube is inserted at the fifth intercostal space in the anterior 
axillary line. The anterior chest wall is up to 1 cm thicker than 
the lateral chest wall, so needle decompression is more effec-
tive in the lateral position. Attempted prehospital needle decom-
pression in the traditional anterior position results in only 50% 
needle entry into the thoracic cavity.
Hemothoraces should be evacuated completely. Delay in 
evacuation of a hemothorax leaves the patient at risk for empy-
ema and entrapped lung. If evacuation is incomplete with tube 
thoracostomy, video-assisted thoracoscopy or open evacuation 
and pleurodesis may be required.
Pulmonary atelectasis results in a loss of functional resid-
ual capacity (FRC) of the lung and can predispose to pneumonia. 
Poor pain control in the postoperative period contributes to poor 
inspiratory effort and collapse of the lower lobes in ­particular. 
The prevention of atelectasis is facilitated by sitting the patient 
up as much as possible, early ambulation, and a­dequate pain 
control. An increase in FRC by 700 mL or more can be accom-
plished by sitting patients up to greater than 45°. For mechani-
cally ventilated patients, simply placing the head of the bed at 
30 to 45° elevation and delivering adequate tidal volumes 
(8–10 mL/kg) improves pulmonary outcomes.
Patients with inadequate pulmonary toilet are at increased 
risk for bronchial plugging and lobar collapse. Patients with 
copious and tenacious secretions develop these plugs most 
often, but foreign bodies in the bronchus can be the cause of 
lobar collapse as well. The diagnosis of bronchial plugging is 
based on chest x-ray and clinical suspicion with acute pulmo-
nary decompensation with increased work of breathing and 
hypoxemia. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be useful to clear 
mucous plugs and secretions.
Aspiration complications include pneumonitis and pneu-
monia. The treatment of pneumonitis is similar to that for acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (see later in this section) and 
includes oxygenation with general supportive care. Antibiotics 
are not indicated. Hospitalized patients who develop aspiration 
pneumonitis have a mortality rate as high as 70% to 80%. Early, 
aggressive, and repeated bronchoscopy for suctioning of aspi-
rated material from the tracheobronchial tree will help mini-
mize the inflammatory reaction of pneumonitis and facilitate 
improved pulmonary toilet. Forced diuresis to overcome ana-
sarca and over-resuscitation remains controversial and unsub-
stantiated. Complications of forced diuresis include electrolyte 
disturbances, replacement of those electrolytes, metabolic alka-
losis, hypotension, and acute kidney injury.
Pneumonia is the second most common nosocomial infec-
tion and is the most common infection in ventilated patients. 
Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) occurs in 15% to 40% 
of ventilated ICU patients, with a probability rate of 5% per 
day, up to 70% at 30 days. The 30-day mortality rate of noso-
comial pneumonia can be as high as 40% and depends on the 
385
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
microorganisms involved and the timeliness of initiating appro-
priate antimicrobials Protocol-driven approaches for prevention 
and treatment of VAP are recognized as beneficial in managing 
these difficult infectious complications.
Once the diagnosis of pneumonia is suspected (an abnor-
mal chest x-ray, fever, productive cough with purulent sputum, 
and no other obvious fever sources), it is invariably necessary 
to initially begin treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics 
until proper identification, colony count (≥100,000 colony-
forming units [CFU]), and sensitivity of the microorganisms 
are determined.62 The spectrum of antibiotic coverage should 
be narrowed as soon as the culture sensitivities are determined. 
Double-coverage antibiotic strategy for the two pathogens, 
Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter spp., may be appropriate if 
the local prevalence of these particularly virulent organisms is 
high. One of the most helpful tools in treating pneumonia and 
other infections is the tracking of a medical center’s antibiogram 
every 6 to 12 months.63
Epidural analgesia decreases the risk of perioperative 
pneumonia. This method of pain control improves ­pulmonary 
toilet and the early return of bowel function; both have a 
­significant impact on the potential for aspiration and for acquir-
ing pneumonia. The routine use of epidural analgesia results 
in a lower incidence of pneumonia than patient-controlled 
­analgesia.64
Acute lung injury (ALI) was a diagnosis applied to 
patients with similar findings to those with acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS). The Berlin definition of ARDS 
developed by the American-European Consensus Confer-
ence of 2012 effectively not only simplifies the definition of 
ARDS, but eliminates the term ALI from critical care vernacu-
lar. ARDS is now classified by partial pressure of oxygen in 
arterial blood (Pao2)/fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) ratios as 
mild (300–201 mmHg), moderate (200–101 mmHg), and severe 
(<100 mmHg). Elements of modification of the definition 
include the following: less than 7 days of onset; removal of 
pulmonary artery occlusion pressure; and clinical judgment 
for characterizing hydrostatic pulmonary edema is acceptable, 
unless risk factors for ARDS have been eliminated, in which 
case objective analysis is necessary.65-68
The definition of ARDS traditionally included five crite-
ria (Table 12-13). The multicenter ARDS Research Network 
(ARDSnet) research trial demonstrated improved clinical out-
comes for ARDS patients ventilated at tidal volumes of only 
5 to 7 mL/kg.69 This strategy is no longer prescribed solely for 
patients with ARDS, but is also recommended for patients with 
normal pulmonary physiology as well who are intubated for rea-
sons other than acute respiratory failure. The beneficial effects 
of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) for ARDS were con-
firmed in this study as well. The maintenance of PEEP during 
ventilatory support is determined based on blood gas analysis, 
pulmonary mechanics, and requirements for supplemental oxy-
gen. As gas exchange improves with resolving ARDS, the initial 
step in decreasing ventilatory support should be to decrease the 
levels of supplemental oxygen first, and then to slowly bring 
the PEEP levels back down to minimal levels.70 This is done 
to minimize the potential for recurrent alveolar collapse and a 
worsening gas exchange.
Not all patients can be weaned easily from mechanical 
ventilation. When the respiratory muscle energy demands are 
not balanced or there is an ongoing active disease state external 
to the lungs, patients may require prolonged ventilatory ­support. 
Table 12-13 
Inclusion criteria for the acute respiratory distress 
­syndrome
Acute onset
Predisposing condition
Pao2:Fio2 <200 (regardless of positive end-expiratory  
  pressure)
Bilateral infiltrates
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure <18 mmHg
No clinical evidence of right heart failure
Fio2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; Pao2 = partial pressure of arterial 
oxygen
Protocol-driven ventilator weaning strategies are successful and 
have become part of the standard of care. The use of a wean-
ing protocol for patients on mechanical ventilation greater than 
48 hours reduces the incidence of VAP and the overall length 
of time on mechanical ventilation. Unfortunately, there is still 
no reliable way of predicting which patient will be success-
fully extubated after a weaning program, and the decision for 
extubation is based on a combination of clinical parameters and 
measured pulmonary mechanics.71 The Tobin Index (frequency 
[breaths per minute]/tidal volume [L]), also known as the rapid 
shallow breathing index, is perhaps the best negative predic-
tive instrument.72 If the result equals less than 105, then there 
is nearly a 70% chance the patient will pass extubation. If the 
score is greater than 105, the patient has an approximately 80% 
chance of failing extubation. Other parameters such as the nega-
tive inspiratory force, minute ventilation, and respiratory rate 
are used, but individually have no better predictive value than 
the rapid shallow breathing index.73
Malnutrition and poor nutritional support may adversely 
affect the respiratory system. The respiratory quotient 
(RQ), or respiratory exchange ratio, is the ratio of the rate of 
­carbon dioxide (CO2) produced to the rate of oxygen uptake 
(RQ = Vco2/V
.
o2). Lipids, carbohydrates, and protein have dif-
fering effects on CO2 production. Patients consuming a diet of 
mostly carbohydrates have an RQ of 1 or greater. The RQ for a 
diet of mostly lipids is closer to 0.7, and that for a diet of mostly 
protein is closer to 0.8. Ideally, an RQ of 0.75 to 0.85 suggests 
adequate balance and composition of nutrient intake. An excess 
of carbohydrate may negatively affect ventilator weaning 
because of the abnormal RQ due to higher CO2 production and 
altered pulmonary gas exchange.
Although not without risk, tracheostomy decreases the 
pulmonary dead space and provides for improved pulmonary 
toilet. When performed before the tenth day of ventilatory sup-
port, tracheostomy may decrease the incidence of VAP, the 
overall length of ventilator time, and the number of ICU patient 
days.
The occurrence of PE is probably underdiagnosed. Its 
­etiology is thought to stem from DVT. This concept, however, 
has recently been questioned from Spaniolas et al.74 The diag-
nosis of PE is made when a high degree of clinical suspicion for 
PE leads to imaging techniques such as ventilation:perfusion 
nuclear scans or CT pulmonary angiogram. Clinical findings 
include elevated central venous pressure, hypoxemia, shortness 
of breath, hypocarbia secondary to tachypnea, and right heart 
strain on ECG. Ventilation:perfusion nuclear scans are often 
386
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
indeterminate in patients who have an abnormal chest x-ray and 
are less sensitive than a CT angiogram or pulmonary angio-
gram for diagnosing PE. The pulmonary angiogram remains 
the gold standard for diagnosing PE, but spiral CT angiogram 
has become an alternative method because of its relative ease 
of use and reasonable rates of diagnostic accuracy. For cases 
without clinical contraindications to therapeutic anticoagula-
tion, patients should be empirically started on heparin infusion 
until the imaging studies are completed if the suspicion of a PE 
is high.
Sequential compression devices on the lower extremities 
and low-dose subcutaneous heparin or low molecular weight 
heparinoid administration are routinely used to prevent DVT 
and, by inference, the risk of PE. Neurosurgical and orthopedic 
patients have higher rates of PE, as do obese patients and those 
at prolonged bed rest.
When anticoagulation is contraindicated, or when a known 
clot exists in the inferior vena cava (IVC), decreasing risk for 
PE includes insertion of an IVC filter. The Greenfield filter has 
been most widely studied, and it has a failure rate of less than 
4%. Newer devices include those with nitinol wire that expands 
with body temperature and retrievable filters. Retrievable filters, 
however, must be considered as permanent. In most studies, the 
actual retrievable rate only reached about 20%. Some studies 
recognize the benefit of automated reminders and diligence of 
outlying patient follow-up, where higher retrieval rates have 
been achieved.75 Patients with spinal cord injury and multiple 
long-bone or pelvic fractures frequently receive IVC filters, and 
there appears to be a low, but not insignificant, long-term com-
plication rate with their use. However, IVC filters do not prevent 
PEs that originate from DVTs of the upper extremities.
Cardiac System.  Arrhythmias are often seen preoperatively 
in elderly patients but may occur postoperatively in any age 
group. Atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia76 and 
occurs between postoperative days 3 to 5 in high-risk patients. 
This is typically when patients begin to mobilize their intersti-
tial fluid into the vascular fluid space. Contemporary evidence 
suggests that rate control is more important than rhythm con-
trol for atrial fibrillation.77,78 The first-line treatment includes 
β-blockade and/or calcium channel blockade. β-Blockade must 
be used judiciously, because hypotension, as well as withdrawal 
from β-blockade with rebound hypertension, is possible. Cal-
cium channel blockers are an option if β-blockers are not toler-
ated by the patient, but caution must be exercised in those with 
a history of congestive heart failure. Although digoxin is still a 
standby medication, it has limitations due to the need for opti-
mal dosing levels. Cardioversion may be required if patients 
become hemodynamically unstable and the rhythm cannot be 
controlled.
Ventricular arrhythmias and other tachyarrhythmias may 
occur in surgical patients as well. Similar to atrial rhythm prob-
lems, these are best controlled with β-blockade, but the use 
of other antiarrhythmics or cardioversion may be required if 
patients become hemodynamically unstable.
Cardiac ischemia is a cause of postoperative mortality. 
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) can present insidiously, or 
it can be more dramatic with the classic presentation of short-
ness of breath, severe angina, and sudden cardiogenic shock. 
The workup to rule out an AMI includes an ECG and cardiac 
enzyme measurements. The patient should be transferred to a 
monitored (telemetry) floor. Morphine, supplemental oxygen, 
nitroglycerine, and aspirin (MONA) are the initial therapeutic 
maneuvers for those being investigated for AMI.
Gastrointestinal System.  Surgery of the esophagus is poten-
tially complicated because of its anatomic location and blood 
supply. Nutritional support strategies should be considered for 
esophageal resection patients to maximize the potential for sur-
vival. The two primary types of esophageal resection performed 
are the transhiatal resection and the transthoracic (Ivor-Lewis) 
resection.79 The transhiatal resection has the advantage that a 
formal thoracotomy incision is avoided. However, dissection of 
the esophagus is blind, and anastomotic leaks occur more than 
with other resections. However, when a leak does occur, simple 
opening of the cervical incision and draining the leak is all that 
is usually required.
The transthoracic Ivor-Lewis resection includes an esoph-
ageal anastomosis performed in the chest near the level of the 
azygos vein. These have lower leak rates, but leaks result in 
mediastinitis and can be difficult to control. The reported mor-
tality is about 50% with an anastomotic leak, and the overall 
mortality is about 5%, which is similar to transhiatal resection.
Postoperative ileus is related to dysfunction of the neural 
reflex axis of the intestine. Excessive narcotic use may delay 
return of bowel function. Epidural anesthesia results in better 
pain control, and there is an earlier return of bowel function 
and a shorter length of hospital stay. The limited use of naso-
gastric tubes and the initiation of early postoperative feeding 
are associated with an earlier return of bowel function.80 The 
use of chewing gum and other oral stimulants to minimize ileus 
remains controversial.
Pharmacologic agents commonly used to stimulate bowel 
function include metoclopramide and erythromycin. Metoclo-
pramide’s action is limited to the stomach and duodenum, and it 
may help primarily with gastroparesis. Erythromycin is a motilin 
agonist that works throughout the stomach and bowel. Several 
studies demonstrate significant benefit from the administration 
of erythromycin in those suffering from an ileus.81 Alvimopan, 
a newer agent and a mu-opioid receptor antagonist, has shown 
some promise in many studies for earlier return of gut function 
and subsequent reduction in length of stay.82,83 Neostigmine has 
been used in refractory pan-ileus patients (Ogilvie’s syndrome) 
with some degree of success. It is recommended for patients 
receiving this type of therapy to be in a monitored unit.84 0
Small bowel obstruction occurs in less than 1% of early 
postoperative patients. When it does occur, adhesions are usu-
ally the cause. Internal and external hernias, technical errors, 
and infections or abscesses are also causative. Hyaluronidase 
is a mucolytic enzyme that degrades connective tissue, and the 
use of a methylcellulose form of hyaluronidase, Seprafilm, has 
been shown to result in a 50% decrease in adhesion formation in 
some patients.85,86 This should translate into a lower occurrence 
of postoperative bowel obstruction, but this has yet to be proven.
Fistulae are the abnormal communication of one struc-
ture to an adjacent structure or compartment and are associated 
with extensive morbidity and mortality. Common causes for 
fistula formation are summarized in the mnemonic FRIENDS 
(Foreign body, Radiation, Ischemia/Inflammation/Infection, 
Epithelialization of a tract, Neoplasia, Distal obstruction, and 
Steroid use). Postoperatively, they are most often caused by 
infection or obstruction leading to an anastomotic leak. The 
cause of the fistula must be recognized early, and treatment may 
include nonoperative management with observation and nutri-
tional support, or a delayed operative management strategy that 
also includes nutritional support and wound care.
GI bleeding can occur perioperatively (Table 12-14). 
Technical errors such as a poorly tied suture, a nonhemostatic 
387
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
Table 12-14 
Common causes of upper and lower gastrointestinal 
(GI) hemorrhage
Upper GI Bleed
Lower GI Bleed
Erosive esophagitis
Angiodysplasia
Gastric varices
Radiation proctitis
Esophageal varices
Hemangioma
Dieulafoy’s lesion
Diverticulosis
Aortoduodenal fistula
Neoplastic diseases
Mallory-Weiss tear
Trauma
Peptic ulcer disease
Vasculitis
Trauma
Hemorrhoids
Neoplastic disease
Aortoenteric fistula
Intussusception
Ischemic colitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Postprocedure bleeding
Hyperbilirubinemia in the surgical patient can be a 
­complex problem. Cholestasis makes up the majority of causes 
for hyperbilirubinemia, but other mechanisms of hyperbiliru-
binemia include reabsorption of blood (e.g., hematoma from 
trauma), decreased bile excretion (e.g., sepsis), increased 
unconjugated bilirubin due to hemolysis, hyperthyroidism, and 
impaired excretion due to congenital abnormalities or acquired 
disease. Errors in surgery that cause hyperbilirubinemia largely 
involve missed or iatrogenic injuries.
The presence of cirrhosis predisposes to postoperative 
complications. Abdominal or hepatobiliary surgery is problem-
atic in the cirrhotic patient. Ascites leak in the postoperative 
period can be an issue when any abdominal operation has been 
performed. Maintaining proper intravascular oncotic pressure in 
the immediate postoperative period can be difficult, and resus-
citation should be maintained with crystalloid solutions. Pre-
vention of renal failure and the management of the hepatorenal 
syndrome can be difficult, as the demands of fluid resuscitation 
and altered glomerular filtration become competitive. Spirono-
lactone with other diuretic agents may be helpful in the post-
operative care. These patients often have a labile course, and 
bleeding complications due to coagulopathy are common. The 
operative mortality in cirrhotic patients is 10% for Child class 
A, 30% for Child class B, and 82% for Child class C patients.93
Pyogenic liver abscess occurs in less than 0.5% of adult 
admissions, due to retained necrotic liver tissue, occult intesti-
nal perforations, benign or malignant hepatobiliary obstruction, 
sepsis, and hepatic arterial occlusion. The treatment is long-term 
antibiotics with percutaneous drainage of large abscesses.
Pancreatitis can occur following injection of contrast dur-
ing cholangiography and ERCP. These episodes range from a 
mild elevation in amylase and lipase with abdominal pain, to a 
fulminant course of pancreatitis with necrosis requiring surgi-
cal débridement. Traumatic injuries to the pancreas can occur 
during surgical procedures on the kidneys, GI tract, and spleen 
most commonly. Treatment involves serial CT scans and per-
cutaneous drainage to manage infected fluid and abscess col-
lections; sterile collections should not be drained because drain 
placement can introduce infection. A pancreatic fistula may 
respond to antisecretory therapy with a somatostatin analogue. 
Management of these fistulae initially includes ERCP with or 
without pancreatic stenting, percutaneous drainage of any fistula 
fluid collections, total parenteral nutrition (TPN) with bowel 
rest, and repeated CT scans. The majority of pancreatic fistulae 
will eventually heal spontaneously.
Renal System.  Renal failure can be classified as prerenal 
failure, intrinsic renal failure, and postrenal failure. Postrenal 
failure, or obstructive renal failure, should always be consid-
ered when low urine output (oliguria) or anuria occurs. The 
most common cause is a misplaced or clogged urinary catheter. 
Other, less common causes to consider are unintentional ligation 
or transection of ureters during a difficult surgical dissection 
(e.g., colon resection for diverticular disease) or a large retro-
peritoneal hematoma (e.g., ruptured aortic aneurysm).
Oliguria is initially evaluated by flushing the urinary cath-
eter using sterile technique. Urine electrolytes should also be 
measured (Table 12-15). A hemoglobin and hematocrit level 
should be checked immediately. Patients in compensated shock 
from acute blood loss may manifest anemia and end-organ mal-
perfusion as oliguria.
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) carries a mortality risk of 
25% to 50% due to the many complications that can cause, 
or result from, this insult. When ATN is due to poor inflow 
staple line, or a missed injury can all lead to postoperative intes-
tinal bleeding.87,88 The source of bleeding is in the upper GI tract 
about 85% of the time and is usually detected and treated endo-
scopically. Surgical control of intestinal bleeding is required in 
up to 40% of patients.89
When patients in the ICU have a major bleed from stress 
gastritis, the mortality risk is as high as 50%. It is important to 
keep the gastric pH greater than 4 to decrease the overall risk for 
stress gastritis in patients mechanically ventilated for 48 hours 
or greater and patients who are coagulopathic.90 Proton pump 
inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, and intragastric antacid 
installation are all effective measures. However, patients who 
are not mechanically ventilated or who do not have a history of 
gastritis or peptic ulcer disease should not be placed on gastritis 
prophylaxis postoperatively because it carries a higher risk of 
causing pneumonia.
Hepatobiliary-Pancreatic System.  Complications involv-
ing the hepatobiliary system are usually due to technical errors. 
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the standard of care 
for cholecystectomy, but common bile duct injury remains a 
nemesis of this approach. Intraoperative cholangiography has 
not been shown to decrease the incidence of common bile duct 
injuries because the injury to the bile duct usually occurs before 
the cholangiogram.91,92 Early recognition and immediate repair 
of an injury are important, because delayed bile duct leaks often 
require a more complex repair.
Ischemic injury due to devascularization of the common 
bile duct has a delayed presentation days to weeks after an 
operation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) demonstrates a stenotic, smooth common bile duct, and 
liver function studies are elevated. The recommended treatment 
is a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy.
A bile leak due to an unrecognized injury to the ducts may 
present after cholecystectomy as a biloma. These patients may 
present with abdominal pain and hyperbilirubinemia. The diag-
nosis of a biliary leak can be confirmed by CT scan, ERCP, or 
radionuclide scan. Once a leak is confirmed, a retrograde biliary 
stent and external drainage are the treatment of choice.
388
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
­(prerenal failure), the remedy begins with IV administration of 
crystalloid or colloid fluids as needed. If cardiac insufficiency 
is the problem, the optimization of vascular volume is achieved 
first, followed by inotropic agents, as needed. Intrinsic renal 
failure and subsequent ATN are often the result of direct renal 
toxins. Aminoglycosides, vancomycin, and furosemide, among 
other commonly used agents, contribute directly to nephrotox-
icity. Contrast-induced nephropathy usually leads to a subtle or 
transient rise in creatinine. In patients who are volume depleted 
or have poor cardiac function, contrast nephropathy may perma-
nently impair renal function.94-97
The treatment of renal failure due to myoglobinuria has 
shifted away from the use of sodium bicarbonate for alkalinizing 
the urine, to merely maintaining brisk urine output of 100 mL/h 
with crystalloid fluid infusion. Mannitol and furosemide are not 
recommended. Patients who do not respond to resuscitation are 
at risk for needing renal replacement therapy. Fortunately, most 
of these patients eventually recover from their renal dysfunction.
Musculoskeletal System.  A compartment syndrome can 
develop in any compartment of the body. Compartment syn-
drome of the extremities generally occurs after a closed fracture. 
The injury alone may predispose the patient to compartment 
syndrome, but aggressive fluid resuscitation can exacerbate 
the problem. Pain with passive motion is the hallmark of com-
partment syndrome, and the anterior compartment of the leg is 
usually the first compartment to be involved. Confirmation of 
the diagnosis is obtained by direct pressure measurement of the 
individual compartments. If the pressures are greater than 20 to 
25 mmHg in any of the compartments, then a four-compartment 
fasciotomy is considered. Compartment syndrome can be due 
to ischemia-reperfusion injury, after an ischemic time of 4 to 
6 hours. Renal failure (due to myoglobinuria), tissue loss, and 
a permanent loss of function are possible results of untreated 
compartment syndrome.
Decubitus ulcers are preventable complications of 
­prolonged bed rest due to traumatic paralysis, dementia, chemi-
cal paralysis, or coma. Unfortunately, they are still occurring 
despite extensive research and clinical initiatives that demon-
strate successful prevention strategies. Ischemic changes in the 
microcirculation of the skin can be significant after 2 hours of 
sustained pressure. Routine skin care and turning of the patient 
help ensure a reduction in skin ulceration. This can be labor 
intensive, and special mattresses and beds are available to help. 
The treatment of a decubitus ulcer in the noncoagulopathic 
patient is surgical débridement. Once the wound bed has a via-
ble granulation base without an excess of fibrinous debris, a 
vacuum-assisted closure dressing can be applied. Wet to moist 
Table 12-15 
Urinary electrolytes associated with acute renal failure 
and their possible etiologies
FENa
Osmolarity
URNa
Etiology
Prerenal
<1
>500
<20
CHF, cirrhosis
Intrinsic 
failure
>1
<350
>40
Sepsis, shock
CHF = congestive heart failure; FENa = fractional excretion of sodium; 
URNa = urinary excretion of sodium.
Table 12-16 
Rate of viral transmission in blood product transfusionsa
HIV
1:1.9 million
HBVb
1:137,000
HCV
1:1 million
aPost-nucleic acid amplification technology (1999). Earlier rates were 
erroneously reported higher due to lack of contemporary technology.
bHBV is reported with pre-nucleic acid amplification technology. Sta-
tistical information is unavailable with post-nucleic acid amplification 
technology at this writing.
Note that bacterial transmission is 50 to 250 times higher than viral 
transmission per transfusion.
HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus.
dressings with frequent dressing changes is the alternative and is 
labor intensive. Expensive topical enzyme preparations are also 
available. If the wounds fail to respond to these measures, soft 
tissue coverage by flap is considered.
Contractures are the result of muscle disuse. Whether from 
trauma, amputation, or vascular insufficiency, contractures can 
be prevented by physical therapy and splinting. If not attended 
to early, contractures will prolong rehabilitation and may lead 
to further wounds and wound healing issues. Depending on the 
functional status of the patient, contracture releases may be 
required for long-term care.
Hematologic System.  The transfusion guideline of maintain-
ing the hematocrit level in all patients at greater than 30% is no 
longer valid. Only patients with symptomatic anemia, who have 
significant cardiac disease, or who are critically ill and require 
increased oxygen-carrying capacity to adequately perfuse end 
organs require higher levels of hemoglobin. Other than these 
select patients, the decision to transfuse should generally not 
occur until the hemoglobin level reaches 7 mg/dL or the hema-
tocrit reaches 21%.
Transfusion reactions are common complications of blood 
transfusion. These can be attenuated with a leukocyte filter, but 
not completely prevented. The manifestations of a transfusion 
reaction include simple fever, pruritus, chills, muscle rigidity, 
and renal failure due to myoglobinuria secondary to hemolysis. 
Discontinuing the transfusion and returning the blood products 
to the blood bank is an important first step, but administration of 
antihistamine and possibly steroids may be required to control 
the reaction symptoms. Severe transfusion reactions are rare but 
can be fatal.
Infectious complications in blood transfusion range from 
cytomegalovirus transmission, which is benign in the nontrans-
plant patient, to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infec-
tion, to passage of the hepatitis viruses (Table 12-16).
Patients on warfarin (Coumadin) who require surgery 
can have anticoagulation reversal by administration of fresh-
frozen plasma. Each unit of fresh frozen plasma contains 200 to 
250 mL of plasma and includes one unit of coagulation factor 
per milliliter of plasma.
Thrombocytopenia may require platelet transfusion for a 
platelet count less than 20,000/mL when invasive procedures are 
performed, or when platelet counts are low and ongoing bleed-
ing from raw surface areas persists. One unit of platelets will 
increase the platelet count by 5000 to 7500 per mL in adults. 
It is important to delineate the cause of the low platelet count. 
389
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
Usually there is a self-limiting or reversible condition such as 
sepsis. Rarely, it is due to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia I 
and II. Complications of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia II 
can be serious because of the diffuse thrombogenic nature of the 
disorder. Simple precautions to limit this hypercoagulable state 
include saline solution flushes instead of heparin solutions and 
limiting the use of heparin-coated catheters. The treatment is 
anticoagulation with synthetic agents such as argatroban.
For patients with uncontrollable bleeding due to dis-
seminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), a potentially 
useful drug is factor VIIa, but its use should be judicious.98-100 
­Originally used in hepatic trauma and obstetric emergen-
cies, this agent was lifesaving in some circumstances. The 
­CONTROL Trial,101 however, has largely decreased overuse of 
this agent because investigators demonstrated no benefit over 
simple factor replacement in severely coagulopathic patients. 
Factor VIIa use may also be limited due to its potential throm-
botic complications. For some situations, the combination of 
ongoing, nonsurgical bleeding and renal failure can occasionally 
be successfully treated with desmopressin.
In addition to classic hemophilia, other inherited coagula-
tion factor deficiencies can be difficult to manage in surgery. 
When required, transfusion of appropriate replacement prod-
ucts is coordinated with the regional blood bank center before 
­surgery. Other blood dyscrasias seen by surgeons include hyper-
coagulopathic patients. Those who carry congenital anomalies 
such as the most common factor V Leiden deficiency, as well 
as protein C and S deficiencies, are likely to form thromboses if 
inadequately anticoagulated, and these patients should be man-
aged in conjunction with a hematologist.
Abdominal Compartment Syndrome.  Multisystem trauma, 
thermal burns, retroperitoneal injuries, and surgery related to the 
retroperitoneum are the major initial causative factors that may 
lead to abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS). Ruptured 
AAA, major pancreatic injury and resection, or multiple intes-
tinal injuries are also examples of clinical ­situations in which 
a large volume of IV fluid resuscitation puts these patients at 
risk for intra-abdominal hypertension. Manifestations of ACS 
typically include progressive abdominal distention followed by 
increased peak airway ventilator pressures, oliguria followed by 
anuria, and an insidious development of intracranial hyperten-
sion.102 These findings are related to elevation of the diaphragm 
and inadequate venous return from the vena cava or renal veins 
secondary to the transmitted pressure on the venous system.
Measurement of abdominal pressures is easily accom-
plished by transducing bladder pressures from the urinary 
catheter after instilling 100 mL of sterile saline into the urinary 
bladder.103 A pressure greater than 20 mmHg constitutes intra-
abdominal hypertension, but the diagnosis of ACS requires 
intra-abdominal pressure greater than 25 to 30 mmHg, with at 
least one of the following: compromised respiratory mechan-
ics and ventilation, oliguria or anuria, or increasing intracranial 
pressures.104-106
The treatment of ACS is to open any recent abdominal 
incision to release the abdominal fascia or to open the fascia 
directly if no abdominal incision is present. Immediate improve-
ment in mechanical ventilation pressures, intracranial pressures, 
and urine output is usually noted. When expectant management 
for ACS is considered in the OR, the abdominal fascia should 
be left open and covered under sterile conditions (e.g., a vac-
uum-assisted open abdominal wound closure system) with plans 
made for a second-look operation and delayed fascial closure. 
Patients with intra-abdominal hypertension should be monitored 
closely with repeated examinations and measurements of blad-
der pressure, so that any further deterioration is detected and 
operative management can be initiated. Left untreated, ACS 
may lead to multiple system end-organ dysfunction or failure 
and has a high mortality.
Abdominal wall closure should be attempted every 48 to 
72 hours until the fascia can be reapproximated. If the abdo-
men cannot be closed within 5 to 7 days following release of the 
abdominal fascia, a large incisional hernia is the net result. A vari-
ety of surgical options have evolved for prevention and closure of 
the resultant hernias, but no standard approach has yet evolved.
Wounds, Drains, and Infection
Wound (Surgical Site) Infection.  No prospective, random-
ized, double-blind, controlled studies exist that demonstrate 
antibiotics used beyond 24 hours in the perioperative period 
prevent infections. Prophylactic use of antibiotics should sim-
ply not be continued beyond this time. Irrigation of the operative 
field and the surgical wound with saline solution has shown 
benefit in controlling wound inoculum.107 Irrigation with an 
antibiotic-based solution has not demonstrated significant ben-
efit in controlling postoperative infection.
Antibacterial-impregnated polyvinyl placed over the oper-
ative wound area for the duration of the surgical procedure has 
not been shown to decrease the rate of wound infection.108-112 
Although skin preparation with 70% isopropyl alcohol has the 
best bactericidal effect, it is flammable and could be hazard-
ous when electrocautery is used. The contemporary formulas 
of chlorhexidine gluconate with isopropyl alcohol remain more 
advantageous.113-115
There is a difference between wound colonization and infec-
tion. Overtreating colonization is just as injurious as ­undertreating 
infection. The strict definition of wound (soft ­tissue) infection is 
more than 105 CFU per gram of tissue. This warrants expeditious 
and proper antibiotic/antifungal treatment.63,116 Often, however, 
clinical signs raise enough suspicion that the patient is treated 
before a confirmatory culture is undertaken. The clinical signs of 
wound infection include rubor, tumor, calor, and dolor (redness, 
swelling, heat, and pain). Once the diagnosis of wound infection 
has been established, the most definitive treatment remains open 
drainage of the wound. The use of antibiotics for wound infection 
treatment should be limited.117-120
One type of wound dressing/drainage system that is gain-
ing popularity is the vacuum-assisted closure dressing. The 
principle of the system is to decrease local wound edema and 
to promote healing through the application of a sterile dressing 
that is then covered and placed under controlled suction for a 
period of 2 to 4 days at a time. Although costly, the benefits are 
frequently dramatic and may offset the costs of nursing care, 
frequent dressing changes, and operative wound débridement.
Drain Management.  The four indications for applying a surgi-
cal drain are:
• To collapse surgical dead space in areas of redundant tissue 
(e.g., neck and axilla)
• To provide focused drainage of an abscess or grossly infected 
surgical site
• To provide early warning notice of a surgical leak (either 
bowel contents, secretions, urine, air, or blood)—the ­so-called 
sentinel drain
• To control an established fistula leak
390
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Open drains are often used for large contaminated wounds 
such as perirectal or perianal fistulas and subcutaneous abscess 
cavities. They prevent premature closure of an abscess cavity 
in a contaminated wound. More commonly, surgical sites are 
drained by closed suction drainage systems, but data do not sup-
port closed suction drainage to “protect an anastomosis” or to 
“control a leak” when placed at the time of surgery. Closed suc-
tion devices can exert a negative pressure of 70 to 170 mmHg 
at the level of the drain; therefore, the presence of this excess 
suction may call into question whether an anastomosis breaks 
down on its own or whether the drain creates a suction injury 
that promotes leakage (Fig. 12-8).121
On the other hand, CT- or ultrasound-guided placement of 
percutaneous drains is now the standard of care for abscesses, 
loculated infections, and other isolated fluid collections such 
as pancreatic leaks. The risk of surgery is far greater than the 
placement of an image-guided drain.
The use of antibiotics when drains are in place is often 
unnecessary as the drain provides direct source control. Twenty-
four to 48 hours of antibiotic use after drain placement is pro-
phylactic, and after this period, only specific treatment of 
positive cultures should be performed, to avoid increased drug 
resistance and superinfection.
Urinary Catheters.  Several complications of urinary cath-
eters can occur that lead to an increased length of hospital stay 
and morbidity. In general, use of urinary catheters should be 
minimized and every opportunity to expeditiously remove them 
should be encouraged. If needed, it is recommended that the 
catheter be inserted its full length up to the hub and that urine 
flow is established before the balloon is inflated, because mis-
placement of the catheter in the urethra with ­premature inflation 
of the balloon can lead to tears and disruption of the urethra.
Enlarged prostatic tissue can make catheter insertion dif-
ficult, and a catheter coudé may be required. If this attempt is 
also unsuccessful, then a urologic consultation for endoscopic 
placement of the catheter may be required to prevent harm to 
the urethra. For patients with urethral strictures, filiform-tipped 
catheters and followers may be used, but these can potentially 
cause bladder injury. If endoscopic attempts fail, the patient 
may require a percutaneously placed suprapubic catheter to 
obtain decompression of the bladder. Follow-up investigations 
of these patients are recommended so definitive care of the ure-
thral abnormalities can be pursued.
The most frequent nosocomial infection is urinary tract 
infection (UTI). These infections are classified into compli-
cated and uncomplicated forms. The uncomplicated type is a 
UTI that can be treated with outpatient antibiotic therapy. The 
complicated UTI usually involves a hospitalized patient with 
an indwelling catheter whose UTI is diagnosed as part of a 
fever workup. The interpretation of urine culture results of less 
than 100,000 CFU/mL is controversial. Before treating such a 
patient, one should change the catheter and then repeat the cul-
ture to see if the catheter was simply colonized with organisms. 
Cultures with more than 100,000 CFU/mL should be treated 
with the appropriate antibiotics and the catheter changed or 
removed as soon as possible. Undertreatment or misdiagnosis 
of a UTI can lead to urosepsis and septic shock.
Recommendations are mixed on the proper way to treat 
Candida albicans fungal bladder infections. Continuous blad-
der washings with fungicidal solution for 72 hours have been 
recommended, but this is not always effective. Replacement of 
the urinary catheter and a course of fluconazole are appropriate 
A
B
Figure 12-8.  This illustration demonstrates typical intraoperative 
placement of closed suction devices in pancreatic or small bowel 
surgery, where there may be an anastomosis. At negative pressures 
of 70 to 170 mmHg, these devices may actually encourage anas-
tomotic leaks and not prevent them or become clogged by them.
treatments, but some infectious disease specialists claim that 
C. albicans in the urine may serve as an indication of ­fungal 
infection elsewhere in the body. If this is the case, then 
screening cultures for other sources of fungal infection should 
be performed whenever a fungal UTI is found.
Empyema.  One of the most debilitating infections is an 
empyema, or infection of the pleural space. Frequently, an 
391
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
overwhelming pneumonia is the source of an empyema, but 
a retained hemothorax, systemic sepsis, esophageal perfora-
tion from any cause, and infections with a predilection for the 
lung (e.g., tuberculosis) are potential etiologies as well. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by chest x-ray or CT scan, ­followed by 
aspiration of pleural fluid for bacteriologic analysis. Gram’s 
stain, lactate dehydrogenase, protein, pH, and cell count are 
obtained, and broad-spectrum antibiotics are initiated while 
the laboratory studies are performed. Once the specific 
organisms are confirmed, anti-infective agents are tailored 
appropriately. Placement of a thoracostomy tube is needed to 
evacuate and drain the infected pleural fluid, but depending 
on the specific nidus of infection, video-assisted thoracos-
copy may also be helpful for irrigation and drainage of the 
infection. Refractory empyemas require specialized surgical 
approaches.
Abdominal Abscesses.  Postsurgical intra-abdominal abscesses 
can present with vague complaints of intermittent abdominal 
pain, fever, leukocytosis, and a change in bowel habits. Depend-
ing on the type and timing of the original procedure, the clinical 
assessment of these complaints is sometimes difficult, and a 
CT scan is usually required. When a fluid collection within the 
peritoneal cavity is found on CT scan, antibiotics and percutane-
ous drainage of the collection is the treatment of choice. Initial 
antibiotic treatment is usually with broad-spectrum antibiotics 
such as piperacillin-tazobactam or imipenem. Should the patient 
exhibit signs of peritonitis and/or have free air on x-ray or CT 
scan, then re-exploration should be considered.
For patients who present primarily (i.e., not postopera-
tively) with the clinical and radiologic findings of an abscess 
but are clinically stable, the etiology of the abscess must be 
determined. A plan for drainage of the abscess and decisions 
about further diagnostic studies with consideration of the tim-
ing of any definitive surgery all need to be balanced. This 
can be a complex set of decisions, depending on the etiology 
(e.g., appendicitis or diverticulitis), but if the patient exhib-
its signs of peritonitis, urgent surgical exploration should be 
performed.
Necrotizing Fasciitis.  Postoperative infections that prog-
ress to the fulminant soft tissue infection known as necrotiz-
ing fasciitis are uncommon. Group A streptococcal (M types 
1, 3, 12, and 28) soft tissue infections, as well as infections 
with Clostridium perfringens and C. septicum, carry a mortality 
of 30% to 70%. Septic shock can be present, and patients can 
become hypotensive less than 6 hours following inoculation. 
Manifestations of a group A Streptococcus pyogenes infection 
in its most severe form include hypotension, renal insufficiency, 
coagulopathy, hepatic insufficiency, ARDS, tissue necrosis, and 
­erythematous rash.
These findings constitute a surgical emergency, and the 
mainstay of treatment remains wide débridement of the necrotic 
tissue to the level of bleeding, viable tissue. A gray serous fluid 
at the level of the necrotic tissue is usually noted, and as the 
infection spreads, thrombosed blood vessels are noted along the 
tissue planes involved with the infection. Typically, the patient 
requires serial trips to the OR for wide débridement until the 
infection is under control. Antibiotics are an important adjunct 
to surgical débridement, and broad-spectrum coverage should 
be used because these infections may be polymicrobial (i.e., so-
called mixed-synergistic infections). S. pyogenes is eradicated 
with penicillin, and it should still be used as the initial drug of 
choice.
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome, Sepsis, 
and Multiple-Organ Dysfunction Syndrome.  The systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and the multiple-
organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) carry significant mortal-
ity risks (Table 12-17). Specific criteria have been established 
for the diagnosis of SIRS (Table 12-18), but two criteria are not 
required for the diagnosis of SIRS: lowered blood pressure and 
blood cultures positive for infection. SIRS is the result of proin-
flammatory cytokines related to tissue malperfusion or injury. 
The dominant cytokines implicated in this process include 
interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, and tissue necrosis factor (TNF). Other 
mediators include nitric oxide, inducible macrophage-type nitric 
oxide synthase, and prostaglandin I2.
Sepsis is categorized as sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic 
shock. Sepsis is SIRS plus infection. Severe sepsis is sepsis 
plus signs of cellular hypoperfusion or end-organ dysfunction. 
Septic shock is sepsis plus hypotension after adequate fluid 
resuscitation.
MODS is the culmination of septic shock and multiple 
end-organ failure.122 Usually there is an inciting event (e.g., 
perforated sigmoid diverticulitis), and as the patient undergoes 
resuscitation, he or she develops cardiac hypokinesis and oli-
guric or anuric renal failure, followed by the development of 
ARDS and eventually septic shock with death.
The international Surviving Sepsis Campaign (http://
www.sccm.org/Documents/SSC-Guidelines.pdf) continues to 
demonstrate the importance of early recognition and initiation 
of specific treatment guidelines for optimal management of sep-
sis. Management of SIRS/MODS includes aggressive global 
resuscitation and support of end-organ perfusion, correction of 
the inciting etiology, control of infectious complications, and 
management of iatrogenic complications.123-125 Drotrecogin-α, 
or recombinant activated protein C, appears to specifically 
counteract the cytokine cascade of SIRS/MODS, but its use is 
still limited.126,127 Other adjuncts for supportive therapy include 
Table 12-17
Mortality associated with patients exhibiting two or 
more criteria for systemic inflammatory response 
­syndrome (SIRS)
Prognosis
Mortality (%)
2 SIRS criteria
5
3 SIRS criteria
10
4 SIRS criteria
15–20
Table 12-18
Inclusion criteria for the systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome
Temperature >38°C or <36°C (>100.4°F or <96.8°F)
Heart rate >90 beats/min
Respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or Paco2 <32 mmHg
White blood cell count <4000 or >12,000 cells/mm3 or >10% 
immature forms
Paco2 = partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide.
392
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
tight glucose control, low tidal volumes in ARDS, vasopressin 
in septic shock, and steroid replacement therapy.
Nutritional and Metabolic Support 
Complications
Nutrition-Related Complications.  A basic principle is to use 
enteral feeding whenever possible, but complications can inter-
vene such as aspiration, ileus, and to a lesser extent, sinusitis. 
There is no difference in aspiration rates when a small-caliber 
feeding tube is placed post-pyloric or if it remains in the stom-
ach. Patients who are fed via nasogastric tubes are at risk for 
aspiration pneumonia, because these relatively large-bore tubes 
stent open the gastroesophageal junction, creating the possibil-
ity of gastric reflux. The use of enteric and gastric feeding tubes 
obviates complications of TPN, such as pneumothorax, line 
sepsis, upper extremity DVT, and the related expense. There is 
growing evidence to support the initiation of enteral feeding in 
the early postoperative period, before the return of bowel func-
tion, where it is usually well tolerated.
In patients who have had any type of nasal intubation 
who are having high, unexplained fevers, sinusitis must be 
entertained as a diagnosis. CT scan of the sinuses is warranted, 
­followed by aspiration of sinus contents so the organism(s) are 
appropriately treated.
Patients who have not been enterally fed for prolonged 
periods secondary to multiple operations, those who have had 
enteral feeds interrupted for any other reason, or those with poor 
enteral access are at risk for the refeeding syndrome, which is 
characterized by severe hypophosphatemia and respiratory fail-
ure. Slow progression of the enteral feeding administration rate 
can avoid this complication.
Common TPN problems are mostly related to electrolyte 
abnormalities that may develop. These electrolyte errors include 
deficits or excesses in sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, 
and phosphate. Acid-base abnormalities can also occur with the 
improper administration of acetate or bicarbonate solutions.
The most common cause for hypernatremia in hospitalized 
patients is underresuscitation, and conversely, hyponatremia is 
most often caused by fluid overload. Treatment for hyponatre-
mia is fluid restriction in mild or moderate cases and the admin-
istration of hypertonic saline for severe cases. An overly rapid 
correction of the sodium abnormality may result in central pon-
tine myelinolysis, which results in a severe neurologic deficit. 
Treatment for hyponatremic patients includes fluid restriction 
to correct the free water deficit by 50% in the first 24 hours. 
An overcorrection of hyponatremia can result in severe cerebral 
edema, a neurologic deficit, or seizures.
Glycemic Control.  In 2001, Van den Berghe and colleagues 
demonstrated that tight glycemic control by insulin infusion 
is associated with a 50% reduction in mortality in the critical 
care setting.128 This prospective, randomized, controlled trial 
of 1500 patients had two study arms: the intensive-control 
arm, where the serum glucose was maintained between 80 and 
110 mg/dL with insulin infusion; and the control arm, where 
patients received an insulin infusion only if blood glucose was 
greater than 215 mg/dL, but serum glucose was then maintained 
at 180 to 200 mg/dL.
The tight glycemic control group had an average serum 
glucose level of 103 mg/dL, and the average glucose level in 
the control group was 153 mg/dL. Hypoglycemic episodes (glu-
cose <40 mg/dL) occurred in 39 patients in the tightly controlled 
group, while the control group had episodes in six patients. 
The overall mortality was reduced from 8% to 4.6%, but the 
mortality of those patients whose ICU stay lasted longer than 
5 days was reduced from 20% to 10%. Secondary findings 
included an improvement in overall morbidity, a decreased per-
centage of ventilator days, less renal impairment, and a lower 
incidence of bloodstream infections. These finding have been 
corroborated by subsequent similar studies, and the principal 
benefit appears to be a greatly reduced incidence of nosocomial 
infections and sepsis. It is not known whether the benefits are 
due to strict euglycemia, to the anabolic properties of insulin, or 
both, but the maintenance of strict euglycemia between 140 and 
180 mg/dL appears to be a powerful therapeutic strategy.128-130 
A number of studies followed this sentinel publication of tight 
glycemic control. NICE-SUGAR131 and COIITSS132 revisited 
the Van den Berghe study and found that the glycemic goals 
found initially to improve outcomes in critically ill patients 
were now found to be associated with a higher mortality when 
glucose was kept below 180 mg/dL, due to an increase in inci-
dents of hypoglycemia. When targeted goals of 180 mg/dL are 
achieved, less occurrences of hypoglycemia have been docu-
mented and improved survivorship has been achieved. In addi-
tion, some studies find no relationship between glycemic control 
and improved outcomes. Thus, glycemic control in the critically 
ill still remains unclear and elusive at best.133,134 Part of the dif-
ficulty in achieving “tight glycemic control” is the necessity for 
frequent (every 1–2 hours) blood glucose determinations. When 
this is performed, glycemic control is enhanced and hypoglyce-
mia is avoided.
Metabolism-Related Complications.  “Stress dose steroids” 
have been advocated for the perioperative treatment of patients 
on corticosteroid therapy, but recent studies strongly discour-
age the use of supraphysiologic doses of steroids when patients 
are on low or maintenance doses (e.g., 5–15 mg) of prednisone 
daily. Parenteral glucocorticoid treatment need only replicate 
physiologic replacement steroids in the perioperative period. 
When patients are on steroid replacement doses equal to or 
greater than 20 mg per day of prednisone, it may be appropriate 
to administer additional glucocorticoid doses for no more than 
2 perioperative days.135-137
Adrenal insufficiency may be present in patients with a 
baseline serum cortisol less than 20 μg/dL. A rapid provocative 
test with synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone may confirm 
the diagnosis. After a baseline serum cortisol level is drawn, 
250 μg of cosyntropin is administered. At exactly 30 and 
60 minutes following the dose of cosyntropin, serum cortisol 
levels are obtained. There should be an incremental increase 
in the cortisol level of between 7 and 10 μg/dL for each half 
hour. If the patient is below these levels, a diagnosis of adrenal 
insufficiency is made, and glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
administration is then warranted. Mixed results are common, 
but the complication of performing major surgery on an adre-
nally insufficient patient is sudden or profound hypotension that 
is not responsive to fluid resuscitation.123
Thyroid hormone abnormalities usually consist of previ-
ously undiagnosed thyroid abnormalities. Hypothyroidism and 
the so-called sick-euthyroid syndrome are more commonly 
recognized in the critical care setting. When surgical patients 
are not progressing satisfactorily in the perioperative period, 
screening for thyroid abnormalities should be performed. If 
the results show mild to moderate hypothyroidism, then thy-
roid replacement should begin immediately and thyroid func-
tion studies should be monitored closely. All patients should 
393
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
be ­reassessed after the acute illness has subsided regarding the 
need for chronic thyroid replacement therapy.
Problems with Thermoregulation
Hypothermia.  Hypothermia is defined as a core tempera-
ture less than 35°C (95°F) and is divided into subsets of mild 
(35–32°C [95–89.6°F]), moderate (32–28°C [89.6–82.4°F]), 
and severe (<28°C [<82.4°F]) hypothermia. Shivering, the 
body’s attempt to reverse the effects of hypothermia, occurs 
between 37 and 31°C (98.6 and 87.8°F), but ceases at tempera-
tures below 31°C (87.8°F). Patients who are moderately hypo-
thermic are at higher risk for complications than are those who 
are more profoundly hypothermic.
Hypothermia creates a coagulopathy that is related to 
platelet and clotting cascade enzyme dysfunction. This triad 
of metabolic acidosis, coagulopathy, and hypothermia is com-
monly found in long operative cases and in patients with blood 
dyscrasias. The enzymes that contribute to the clotting cascade 
and platelet activity are most efficient at normal body tempera-
tures; therefore all measures must be used to reduce heat loss 
intraoperatively.138
The most common cardiac abnormality is the develop-
ment of arrhythmias when body temperature drops below 35°C 
(95°F). Bradycardia occurs with temperatures below 30°C 
(86°F). It is well known that hypothermia may induce CO2 
retention, resulting in respiratory acidosis. Renal dysfunction 
of hypothermia manifests itself as a paradoxic polyuria and is 
related to an increased glomerular filtration rate, as peripheral 
vascular constriction creates central shunting of blood. This is 
potentially perplexing in patients who are undergoing resus-
citation for hemodynamic instability, because the brisk urine 
output provides a false sense of an adequate intravascular fluid 
volume.
Induced peripheral hypothermia for hyperpyrexia due to 
infection (not to include neurologic or cardiac disease) is likely 
deleterious and does not appear to be beneficial. Placing cool-
ing blankets on or under the patient or ice packs in the axillae 
or groin may be effective in cooling the skin, and when this 
occurs, a subsequent feedback loop triggers the hypothalamus 
to raise the internally regulated set point, thus raising core tem-
perature even higher. This paradoxical reaction may be why 
outcomes for those who feel the need to treat a fever in the 
ICU by cooling the skin and arguably the core have worse out-
comes. Cooling core temperatures can be achieved reliably with 
catheter-directed therapy with commercially available devices. 
Whether this is a worthwhile practice or not may be contro-
versial. Poor data exist in support of treating fevers lower than 
42°C in any fashion.133,134,139-142
Adult trauma patients who underwent induced hypother-
mia had poor outcomes in a recent investigation, and thus, this 
remains a procedure to be avoided. In a similar vein, pediatric 
patients who were induced did not show any improvement, and 
therefore, induced hypothermia is not recommended. Compli-
cations with induced hypothermia include, but are not limited 
to, hypokalemia, diuresis, DVT (due to catheter-related vein 
injury), arrhythmias, shivering, undiagnosed catheter-related 
bloodstream infection, and bacteremia.143-146
Neurologic dysfunction is inconsistent in hypothermia, 
but a deterioration in reasoning and decision-making skills 
progresses as body temperature falls, and profound coma (and 
a flat electroencephalogram) occurs as the temperature drops 
below 30°C (86°F). The diagnosis of hypothermia is important, 
so accurate measurement techniques are required to get a true 
core temperature.
Methods used to warm patients include warm air circula-
tion over the patient and heated IV fluids, and more aggres-
sive measures such as bilateral chest tubes with warm solution 
lavage, intraperitoneal rewarming lavage, and extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation. A rate of temperature rise of 2 to 
4°C/h (3.6–7.2°F/h) is considered adequate, but the most com-
mon complication for nonbypass rewarming is arrhythmia with 
ventricular arrest.
Hyperthermia.  Hyperthermia is a core temperature 
greater than 38.6°C (101.5°F) and has a host of etiologies 
(Table 12-19).147 Hyperthermia can be environmentally induced 
(e.g., summer heat with inability to dissipate heat or control 
exposure), iatrogenically induced (e.g., heat lamps and medica-
tions), endocrine in origin (e.g., thyrotoxicosis), or neurologi-
cally induced (i.e., hypothalamic).
Malignant hyperthermia occurs after exposure to agents 
such as succinylcholine and some halothane-based inhala-
tional anesthetics. The presentation is dramatic, with rapid 
onset of increased temperature, rigors, and myoglobinuria 
related to myonecrosis. Medications must be discontinued 
immediately and dantrolene administered (2.5 mg/kg every 
5 minutes) until symptoms subside. Aggressive cooling meth-
ods are also implemented, such as an alcohol bath, or packing 
in ice. In cases of severe malignant hyperthermia, the mortality 
rate is nearly 30%.
Thyrotoxicosis can occur after surgery due to undiag-
nosed Graves’ disease. Hyperthermia (>40°C [104°F]), anxi-
ety, copious diaphoresis, congestive heart failure (present in 
about one fourth of episodes), tachycardia (most commonly 
atrial fibrillation), and hypokalemia (up to 50% of patients) 
are hallmarks of the disease. The treatment of thyrotoxicosis 
includes glucocorticoids, propylthiouracil, β-blockade, and 
iodide (Lugol’s solution) delivered in an emergent fashion. As 
the name suggests, these patients are usually toxic and require 
supportive measures as well. Acetaminophen, the cooling 
modalities noted in the previous paragraph, and vasoactive 
agents often are indicated.
Table 12-19 
Common causes of elevated temperature in surgical 
patients
Hyperthermia
Hyperpyrexia
Environmental
Sepsis
Malignant hyperthermia
Infection
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Drug reaction
Thyrotoxicosis
Transfusion reaction
Pheochromocytoma
Collagen disorders
Carcinoid syndrome
Factitious syndrome
Iatrogenic
Neoplastic disorders
Central/hypothalamic responses
Pulmonary embolism
Adrenal insufficiency
394
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Bierly PE III, Spender JC. Culture and high reliability orga-
nizations: the case of the nuclear submarine. J Manage. 
1995;21:639.
2.	Ruchlin HS, Dubbs NL, Callahan MA. The role of leadership 
in instilling a culture of safety: lessons from the literature. J 
Healthcare Mgmt. 2004;49:47.
3.	Kohn KT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 1999.
4.	Hindle D, Braithwaite J, Iedema R. Patient Safety Research: A 
Review of the Technical Literature. Sydney, Australia: Centre 
for Clinical Governance Research, University of South Wales; 
2005:8.
5.	Stelfox HT, Palmisani S, Scurlock C, et al. The “To Err Is 
Human” report and the patient safety literature. Qual Saf 
Health Care. 2006;15:174.
6.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Patient safety in 
surgery. Ann Surg. 2006;243:628.
7.	Berenholtz SM, Pronovost PJ. Monitoring patient safety. Crit 
Care Clin 2007;23:659.
8.	Baker DP, Gustafson S, Beaubien J, et al. Medical team 
training. In: Medical Teamwork and Patient Safety: The 
Evidence-Based Relation. Literature Review. AHRQ Publication 
No. 05-0053. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality; April 2005. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/
qual/medteam/medteam4.htm. Accessed November 13, 2012.
9.	Pizzi LT, Goldfarb NI, Nash DB. Promoting a culture of 
safety. In: Making Health Care Safer: A Critical Analysis 
of Patient Safety Practices. Evidence Report/Technology 
Assessment: Number 43. AHRQ Publication No. 01-E058. 
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 
July 2001. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/ptsafety/
chap40.htm. Accessed November 12, 2012.
10.	Chan DK, Gallagher TH, Reznick R, et al. How surgeons dis-
close medical errors to patients: a study using standardized 
patients. Surgery. 2005;138:851.
11.	Sexton JB, Thomas EJ, Helmreich RL. Error, stress, and team-
work in medicine and aviation: cross sectional surveys. BMJ. 
2000;320:745.
12.	Thomas EJ, Sexton JB, Helmreich RL. Discrepant attitudes 
about teamwork among critical care nurses and physicians. 
Crit Care Med. 2003;31:956.
13.	Amalberti R, Auroy Y, Berwick D, et al. Five system bar-
riers to achieving ultrasafe health care. Ann Intern Med. 
2005;142:756.
14.	The Joint Commission. Sentinel Event Statistics. Available 
at: http://www.jointcommission.org/SentinelEvents/Statistics. 
Accessed November 8, 2012.
15.	Lingard L, Espin S, Whyte S, et al. Communication failures 
in the operating room: an observational classification of recur-
rent types and effects. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13:330.
16.	Christian CK, Gustafson ML, Roth EM, et al. A prospec-
tive study of patient safety in the operating room. Surgery. 
2006;139:159.
17.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating 
room teamwork among physicians and nurses: teamwork 
in the eye of the beholder. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:746.
18.	Pronovost PJ, Berenholtz SM, Goeschel CA, et al. Creating 
high reliability in health care organizations. Health Serv Res. 
2006;41:1599.
19.	Makary MA, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Operating 
room briefings and wrong-site surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;204:236.
20.	Nundy S, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Impact of pre-
operative briefings on operating room delays. Arch Surg. 
2008;143:1068.
21.	World Health Organization. Guidelines for Safe Surgery. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009.
22.	Makary MA, Epstein J, Pronovost PJ, et al. Surgical specimen 
identification errors: a new measure of quality in surgical care. 
Surgery. 2007;141:450.
23.	Arora V, Johnson J, Lovinger D, et al. Communication fail-
ures in patient sign-out and suggestions for improvement: a 
critical incident analysis. Qual Saf Health Care. 2005;14:401.
24.	Cooper M, Makary M. A comprehensive unit-based safety 
(CUSP) in surgery: improving quality through transparency. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(1):51-63.
25.	Wick ED, Hobson DB, Bennett JL, et al. Implemen-
tation of a surgical comprehensive unit-based safety 
­program to reduce surgical site infections. J Am Coll Surg. 
2012;215(2):193-200.
26.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. AHRQ Pro-
file: Quality Research for Quality Healthcare. AHRQ Pub-
lication No. 00-P005. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality; March 2001. Available at: http://www.
ahrq.gov/about/profile.htm. Accessed November 2, 2012.
27.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Patient Safety 
Indicators Overview. AHRQ Quality Indicators. Rockville, 
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; February 
2006. Available at: http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/
psi_overview.htm. Accessed November 10, 2012.
28.	Zhan C, Miller MR. Administrative data based patient safety 
research: a critical review. Qual Saf Health Care. 2003;12:58.
29.	Bratzler DW. The Surgical Infection Prevention and Surgical 
Care Improvement Projects: promises and pitfalls. Am Surg. 
2006;72:110.
30.	The Joint Commission. SCIP Target Areas. Available at: 
http://www.jointcommission.org/surgical_care_improve-
ment_project/. Accessed November 1, 2012.
31.	Khuri SF. Safety, quality, and the National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program. Am Surg. 2006;72:994.
32.	Hall BL, Hamilton BH, Richards K, Bilimoria KY, Cohen 
ME, Ko CY. Does surgical quality improve in the American 
College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program: an evaluation of all participating hospitals. Ann 
Surg. 2009;250(3):363-376.
33.	Brooke BS, Perler BA, Dominici F, et al. California hospitals 
meeting Leapfrog quality standards for abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2008;47:1155.
34.	The Leapfrog Group. Available at: http://www.leapfroggroup.
org/56440/leapfrog_hospital_survey_copy/leapfrog_safety_
practices/evidence-based_hospital_referral. Accessed November 
7, 2010.
35.	Gawande AA, Kwaan MR, Regenbogen SE, et al. An Apgar 
score for surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:201.
36.	Serious Reportable Events in Healthcare 2011 Update: A 
Consensus Report. Washington, DC: National Quality Forum; 
2011.
37.	Mehtsun W, Ibrahim A, Pronovost P, Diener-West M, Makary 
M. Surgical never events: cost and outcome for patients and 
providers. Surgery. 2013;153(4):465-472.
38.	Crane M. Wrong-site surgery occurs 40 times a week. Med-
scape Medical News; 2011. Available at: http://www.med-
scape.com/viewarticle/745581. Accessed September 17, 2013.
39.	Gibbs VC, Coakley FD, Reines HD. Preventable errors in the 
operating room: retained foreign bodies after surgery—Part 1. 
Curr Probl Surg. 2007;44:281.
40.	Gawande AA, Studdert DM, Orav EJ, et al. Risk factors for 
retained instruments and sponges after surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2003;34:229.
41.	Lincourt AE, Harrell A, Cristiano J, et al. Retained foreign 
bodies after surgery. J Surg Res. 2007;138:170.
42.	Doing the “right” things to correct wrong-site surgery. Penn-
sylvania Patient Safety Reporting System (PA-PSRS) Patient 
Safety Advisory. 2007;4:1.
395
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
43.	Clarke JR, Johnston J, Finley ED. Getting surgery right. Ann 
Surg. 2007;246:395.
44.	Kwaan MR, Studdert DM, Zinner MJ, et al. Incidence, pat-
terns, and prevention of wrong-site surgery. Arch Surg. 
2006;141:353.
45.	Michaels RK, Makary MA, Dahab Y, et al. Achieving the 
National Quality Forum’s “never events”: prevention of 
wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong patient opera-
tions. Ann Surg. 2007;245:526.
46.	Chassin MR. Achieving and sustaining improved quality: les-
sons from New York state and cardiac surgery. Health Aff. 
2002;21(4):40-51.
47.	Regenbogen SE, Greenberg CC, Studdert DM, et al. Patterns 
of technical error among surgical malpractice claims: an anal-
ysis of strategies to prevent injury to surgical patients. Ann 
Surg. 2007;246:705.
48.	Griffen FD, Stephens LS, Alexander JB, et al. The American 
College of Surgeons’ closed claims study: new insights for 
improving care. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:561.
49.	Ambady N, LaPlante D, Nguyen T, et al. Surgeons’ tone of 
voice: a clue to malpractice history. Surgery. 2002;132:5.
50.	Woreta TA, Makary MA. Patient safety. In: Makary M, ed. 
General Surgery Review. Washington, DC: Ladner-Drysdale; 
2008:553.
51.	Wojcieszak D, Banja J, Houk C. The Sorry Works! Coalition: 
making the case for full disclosure. Jt Comm J Qual Patient 
Saf. 2006;32:344.
52.	Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of 
antiseptic-impregnated central venous catheters for the pre-
vention of catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA. 
1999;282:554.
53.	O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Dellinger EP, et al. Guidelines 
for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. 
Am J Infect Control. 2002;30:476.
54.	Stoiser B, Kofler J, Staudinger T, et al. Contamination of 
central venous catheters in immunocompromised patients: 
a comparison between two different types of central venous 
catheters. J Hosp Infect. 2002;50:202.
55.	Berenholtz S, Pronovost P, Lipsett P, et al. Eliminating 
­catheter-related bloodstream infections in the intensive care 
unit. Crit Care Med. 2004;32:2014.
56.	Tyroch AH, Kaups K, Lorenzo M, et al. Routine chest radio-
graph is not indicated after open tracheostomy: a multicenter 
perspective. Am Surg. 2002;68:80.
57.	Datta D, Onyirimba F, McNamee MJ. The utility of chest 
radiographs following percutaneous dilatational tracheos-
tomy. Chest. 2003;123:1603.
58.	Gelman JJ, Aro M, Weiss SM. Tracheo-innominate artery 
­fistula. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;179:626.
59.	Keceligil HT, Erk MK, Kolbakir F, et al. Tracheoinnomi-
nate artery fistula following tracheostomy. Cardiovasc Surg. 
1995;3:509.
60.	Rybak MJ, Abate BJ, Kang SL, et al. Prospective evaluation 
of the effect of an aminoglycoside doing regimen on rates of 
observed nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. Animicrob Agents 
Chemother. 1999;43:1549.
61.	Sandur S, Stoller JK. Pulmonary complications of mechanical 
ventilation. Clin Chest Med. 1999;20:223.
62.	Salem M, Tainsh RE, Bromberg J, et al. Perioperative gluco-
corticoid coverage: a reassessment 42 years after emergence 
of a problem. Ann Surg. 1994;219:416.
63.	Hughes MG, Evans HL, Chong TW, et al. Effect of an inten-
sive care unit rotating empiric antibiotic schedule on the devel-
opment of hospital-acquired infections on the non-­intensive 
care unit ward. Crit Care Med. 2004;32:53.
64.	Horn SD, Wright HL, Couperus JJ, et al. Association between 
patient-controlled analgesia pump use and postoperative sur-
gical site infection in intestinal surgery patients. Surg Infect 
(Larchmt). 2002;3:109.
65.	Ferguson ND, Fan E, Camporota L, et al. The Berlin 
definition of ARDS: an expanded rationale, justifica-
tion, and supplementary material. Intensive Care Med. 
2012;38(10):1573-1582.
66.	Villar J, Kacmarek RM. The American-European Consensus 
Conference definition of the acute respiratory distress syn-
drome is dead, long live positive end-expiratory pressure! Med 
Intensiva. 2012;36(8):571-575.
67.	ARDS Definition Task Force, Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, 
et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the Berlin 
Definition. JAMA. 2012;307(23):2526-2533.
68.	Thille AW, Esteban A, Fernández-Segoviano P, et al. Com-
parison of the Berlin definition for acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome with autopsy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2013;187(7):761-767.
69.	The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventila-
tion with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional 
tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1301.
70.	Valente Barbas CS. Lung recruitment maneuvers in acute 
respiratory distress syndrome and facilitating resolution. Crit 
Care Med. 2003;31:S265.
71.	Singh JM, Stewart TE. High-frequency mechanical ventilation 
principles and practices in the era of lung-protective ventila-
tion strategies. Respir Care Clin North Am. 2002;8:247.
72.	Yang KL, Tobin MJ. A prospective study of indexes predict-
ing the outcome of trials of weaning from mechanical ventila-
tion. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:1445.
73.	Epstein SK. Etiology of extubation failure and the predictive 
value of the rapid shallow breathing index. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med. 1995;152:545.
74.	Spaniolas K, Velmahos GC, Wicky S, et al. Is upper extremity 
deep venous thrombosis underdiagnosed in trauma patients? 
Am Surg. 2008;74(2):124-128.
75.	Dabbagh O, Nagam N, Chitima-Matsiga R, et al. Retrievable 
inferior vena cava filters are not getting retrieved: where is the 
gap? Thromb Res. 2010;126(6):493-497.
76.	Falk RH. Atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1067.
77.	Van Gelder IC, Hagens VE, Bosker HA, et al. A comparison 
of rate control and rhythm control in patients with recurrent 
persistent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1834.
78.	Wyse DG, Waldo AL, DiMarco JP, et al. A comparison of rate 
control and rhythm control in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1825.
79.	Franklin RH. Ivor Lewis Lecture, 1975. The advancing 
frontiers of oesophageal surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 
1977;59:284.
80.	Stewart BT, Woods RJ, Collopy BT, et al. Early feeding after 
elective open colorectal resections: a prospective randomized 
trial. Aust N Z J Surg. 1998;68:125.
81.	Asao T, Kuwano H, Nakamura J, et al. Gum chewing enhances 
early recovery from postoperative ileus after laparoscopic col-
ectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;195:30.
82.	Kelley SR, Wolff BG, Lovely JK, Larson DW. Fast-track 
pathway for minimally invasive colorectal surgery with 
and without alvimopan (Entereg)(TM): which is more cost-­
effective? Am Surg. 2013;79(6):630-633.
83.	Wang S, Shah N, Philip J, et al. Role of alvimopan (entereg) 
in gastrointestinal recovery and hospital length of stay after 
bowel resection. P T. 2012;37(9):518-525.
84.	Elsner JL, Smith JM, Ensor CR. Intravenous neostigmine 
for postoperative acute colonic pseudo-obstruction. Ann 
­Pharmacother. 2012;46(3):430-435.
85.	Tang CL, Seow-Choen F, Fook-Chong S, et al. Bioresorbable 
adhesion barrier facilitates early closure of the defunctioning 
ileostomy after rectal excision: a prospective, randomized 
trial. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46:1200.
86.	Beck DE, Cohen Z, Fleshman JW, et al. A prospective, 
randomized, multicenter, controlled study of the safety of 
396
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Seprafilm adhesion barrier in abdominopelvic surgery of the 
intestine. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46:1310.
87.	Smoot RL, Gostout CJ, Rajan E, et al. Is early colonoscopy 
after admission for acute diverticular bleeding needed? Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1996.
88.	Sorbi D, Gostout CJ, Peura D, et al. An assessment of the 
management of acute bleeding varices: a multicenter prospec-
tive member-based study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:2424.
89.	Domschke W, Lederer P, Lux G. The value of emergency 
endoscopy in upper gastrointestinal bleeding: review and 
analysis of 2014 cases. Endoscopy. 1983;15:126.
90.	Cash BD. Evidence-based medicine as it applies to acid 
suppression in the hospitalized patient. Crit Care Med. 
2002;30:S373.
91.	Lidwig K, Bernhardt J, Steffen H, et al. Contribution of intraop-
erative cholangiography to incidence and outcome of ­common 
bile duct injuries during laparoscopic ­cholecystectomy. Surg 
Endosc. 2002;16:1098.
92.	Flum DR, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, et al. Intraoperative 
cholangiography and risk of common bile duct injury during 
­cholecystectomy. JAMA. 2003;289:1639.
93.	Yoon YH, Hsiao-ye Y, Grant BF, et al. Liver cirrhosis mor-
tality in the United States, 1970-98. Surveillance Report 
No. 57. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism; December 2001.
94.	Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, et al. Effects of saline, man-
nitol, and furosemide to prevent acute decreases in renal 
function induced by radiocontrast agents. N Engl J Med. 
1994;331:1416.
95.	Stevens MA, McCullough PA, Tobin KJ, et al. A prospec-
tive randomized trial of prevention measures in patients at 
high risk for contrast nephropathy: results of the P.R.I.N.C.E. 
study. Prevention of Radiocontrast Induced Nephropathy 
Clinical Evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:403.
96.	Birck R, Krzossok S, Markowetz F, et al. Acetylcysteine for 
prevention of contrast nephropathy: meta-analysis. Lancet. 
2003;362:598.
97.	Baker CS, Wragg A, Kumar S, et al. A rapid protocol for the 
prevention of contrast-induced renal dysfunction: the RAPPID 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:2114.
98.	Laffan M, O’Connell NM, Perry DJ, et al. Analysis and results 
of the recombinant factor VIIa extended-use registry. Blood 
Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2003;14:S35.
99.	Hedner U. Dosing with recombinant factor VIIa based on cur-
rent evidence. Semin Hematol. 2004;41:35.
100.  Midathada MV, Mehta P, Waner M, et al. Recombinant 
factor VIIa in the treatment of bleeding. Am J Clin Pathol. 
2004;121:124.
101.	Dutton RP, Parr M, Tortella BJ, et al. Recombinant acti-
vated factor VII safety in trauma patients: results from the 
­CONTROL trial. J Trauma. 2011;71(1):12-19.
102.	Bloomfield GL, Dalton JM, Sugerman HJ, et al. Treatment 
of increasing intracranial pressure secondary to the acute 
abdominal compartment syndrome in a patient with combined 
abdominal and head trauma. J Trauma. 1995;39:1168.
103.	Kron I, Harman PK, Nolan SP. The measurement of intra-
abdominal pressure as a criterion for abdominal re-­exploration. 
Ann Surg. 1984;199:28.
104.	Ivatury RR, Porter JM, Simon RJ, et al. Intra-abdominal 
hypertension after life-threatening penetrating abdominal 
trauma: prophylaxis, incidence, and clinical relevance to 
gastric mucosal pH and abdominal compartment syndrome. 
J Trauma. 1998;44:1016.
105.	Ivatury RR, Sugerman HJ, Peitzman AB. Abdominal 
­compartment syndrome: recognition and management. Adv 
Surg. 2001;35:251.
106.	Saggi BH, Sugerman HJ, Ivatury RR, et al. Abdominal com-
partment syndrome. J Trauma. 1998;45:597.
107.	Anglen J, Apostoles PS, Christensen G, et al. Removal of sur-
face bacteria by irrigation. J Orthop Res. 1966;14:251.
108.	Lewis DA, Leaper DJ, Speller DC. Prevention of bacterial 
colonization of wounds at operation: comparison of iodine-
impregnated (“Ioban”) drapes with conventional methods. 
J Hosp Infect. 1984;5:431.
109.	O’Rourke E, Runyan D, O’Leary J, et al. Contaminated iodo-
phor in the operating room. Am J Infect Control. 2003;31: 
255.
110.	Ostrander RV, Brage ME, Botte MJ. Bacterial skin contami-
nation after surgical preparation in foot and ankle surgery. 
Clin Orthop. 2003;406:246.
111.	Ghogawala Z, Furtado D. In vitro and in vivo bactericidal 
activities of 10%, 2.5%, and 1% povidone-iodine solution. 
Am J Hosp Pharm. 1990;47:1562.
112.	Anderson RL, Vess RW, Carr JH. Investigations of intrinsic 
Pseudomonas cepacia contamination in commercially manu-
factured povidone-iodine. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
1991;12:297.
113.	Birnbach DJ, Meadows W, Stein DJ, et al. Comparison of 
povidone iodine and DuraPrep, an iodophor-in-isopropyl alco-
hol solution, for skin disinfection prior to epidural catheter 
insertion in parturients. Anesthesiology. 2003;98:164.
114.	Moen MD, Noone MG, Kirson I. Povidone-iodine spray 
technique versus traditional scrub-paint technique for 
preoperative abdominal wall preparation. Am J Obstet 
­Gynecol. 2002;187:1434; discussion 1436.
115.	Strand CL, Wajsbort RR, Sturmann K. Effect of iodophor vs 
iodine tincture skin preparation on blood culture contamina-
tion rate. JAMA. 1993;269:1004.
116.	Paterson DL, Ko WC, Von Gottberg A, et al. International 
prospective study of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteremia: 
implications of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase production 
in nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:26.
117.	Wittmann DH, Schein M. Let us shorten antibiotic prophy-
laxis and therapy in surgery. Am J Surg. 1966;172:26S.
118.	Dellinger EP. Duration of antibiotic treatment in surgi-
cal infections of the abdomen. Undesired effects of anti-
biotics and future studies. Eur J Surg Suppl. 1996;576:29; 
discussion 31.
119.	Fry DE. Basic aspects of and general problems in surgical 
infections. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2001;2(Suppl 1):S3.
120.	Barie PS. Modern surgical antibiotic prophylaxis and 
­therapy—less is more. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2000;1:23.
121.	Grobmyer SR, Graham D, Brennan MF, et al. High-pressure 
gradients generated by closed-suction surgical drainage sys-
tems. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2002;3:245.
122.	Power DA, Duggan J, Brady HR. Renal-dose (low-dose) 
dopamine for the treatment of sepsis-related and other forms 
of acute renal failure: ineffective and probably dangerous. 
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol Suppl. 1999;26:S23.
123.	Vincent JL, Abraham, E, Annane D, et al. Reducing mortality 
in sepsis: new directions. Crit Care. 2002;6(Suppl 3):S1.
124.	Malay MB, Ashton RC Jr., Landry DW, et al. Low-dose 
vasopressin in the treatment of vasodilatory septic shock. 
J Trauma. 1999;47:699; discussion 703.
125.	Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treatment 
with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mor-
tality in patients with septic shock. JAMA. 2002;288:862.
126.	Dhainaut JF, Laterre PF, LaRosa SP, et al. The clinical evalua-
tion committee in a large multicenter phase 3 trial of drotreco-
gin alfa (activated) in patients with severe sepsis (PROWESS): 
role, methodology, and results. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:2291; 
comment 2405.
127.	Betancourt M, McKinnon PS, Massanari RM, et al. An evalu-
ation of the cost effectiveness of drotrecogin alfa (activated) 
relative to the number of organ system failures. Pharmacoeco-
nomics. 2003;21:1331.
397
Patient Safety
CHAPTER 12
128.	Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive 
insulin therapy in the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:1359.
129.	Finney SJ, Zekveld C, Elia A, et al. Glucose control and mor-
tality in critically ill patients. JAMA. 2003;290:2041.
130.	Furnary AP, Gao G, Grunkemeier GL, et al. Continuous insu-
lin infusion reduces mortality in patients with diabetes under-
going coronary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2003;125:1007.
131.	NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Chittock DR, 
et al. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in criti-
cally ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(13):1283-1297.
132.	COIITSS Study Investigators, Annane D, Cariou A, et al. 
Corticosteroid treatment and intensive insulin therapy for 
septic shock in adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2010;303(4):341-348.
133.	Saberi F, Heyland D, Lam M, et al. Prevalence, incidence, 
and clinical resolution of insulin resistance in critically ill 
patients: an observational study. JPEN J Parenter Enteral 
Nutr. 2008;32(3):227-235.
134.	Arabi YM, Dabbagh OC, Tamim HM, et al. Intensive versus 
conventional insulin therapy: a randomized controlled trial 
in medical and surgical critically ill patients. Crit Care Med. 
2008;36(12):3190-3197.
135.	La Rochelle GE Jr., La Rochelle AG, Ratner RE, et al. Recov-
ery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in patients with 
rheumatic diseases receiving low-dose prednisone. Am J Med. 
1993;95:258.
136.	Bromberg JS, Alfrey EJ, Barker CF, et al. Adrenal suppres-
sion and steroid supplementation in renal transplant recipients. 
Transplantation. 1991;51:385.
137.	Freidman RJ, Schiff CF, Bromberg JS. Use of supplemen-
tal steroids in patients having orthopaedic operations. J Bone 
Joint Surg. 1995;77:1801.
138.	Kempainen RR, Brunette DD. The evaluation and manage-
ment of accidental hypothermia. Respir Care. 2004;49:192.
139.	Niven DJ, Stelfox HT, Léger C, et al. Assessment of the safety 
and feasibility of administering antipyretic therapy in criti-
cally ill adults: a pilot randomized clinical trial. J Crit Care. 
2013;28(3):296-302.
140.	Schortgen F, Clabault K, Katsahian S, et al. Fever control 
using external cooling in septic shock: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Am J Respir Criti Care Med. 2012;185(10): 
1088-1095.
141.	Hoedemaekers CW, Ezzahti M, Gerritsen A, et al. Compari-
son of cooling methods to induce and maintain normo- and 
hypothermia in intensive care unit patients: a prospective 
intervention study. Crit Care (London). 2007;11(4):R91.
142.	O’Donnell J, Axelrod P, Fisher C, et al. Use and effectiveness 
of hypothermia blankets for febrile patients in the intensive 
care unit. Clin Infect Dis. 1997;24(6):1208-1213.
143.	Adelson PD, Wisniewski SR, Beca J, et al. Comparison of 
hypothermia and normothermia after severe traumatic brain 
injury in children (Cool Kids): a phase 3, randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12(6):546-553.
144.	Georgiou AP, Manara AR. Role of therapeutic hypothermia in 
improving outcome after traumatic brain injury: a systematic 
review. Br J Anaesth. 2013;110(3):357-367.
145.	Peterson K, Carson S, Carney N. Hypothermia treatment for 
traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Neurotrauma. 2008;25(1):62-71.
146.	Schulman CI, Namias N, Doherty J, et al. The effect of anti-
pyretic therapy upon outcomes in critically ill patients: a ran-
domized, prospective study. Surg Infect. 2005;6(4):369-375.
147.	O’Donnell J, Axelrod P, Fisher C, et al. Use and effectiveness 
of hypothermia blankets for febrile patients in the intensive 
care unit. Clin Infect Dis. 1977;24:1208.
This page intentionally left blank 
Physiologic Monitoring of the 
Surgical Patient
Louis H. Alarcon and Mitchell P. Fink
13
Introduction	
399
Arterial Blood Pressure	
400
Noninvasive Measurement of Arterial 
Blood Pressure / 400
Invasive Monitoring of Arterial Blood 
Pressure / 401
Electrocardiographic Monitoring	 401
Cardiac Output and Related  
Parameters	
402
Determinants of Cardiac  
Performance / 402
Placement of the Pulmonary Artery  
Catheter / 402
Hemodynamic Measurements / 403
Measurement of Cardiac Output by  
Thermodilution / 403
Mixed Venous Oximetry / 404
Effect of Pulmonary Artery  
Catheterization on Outcome / 405
Minimally Invasive Alternatives to the 
Pulmonary Artery Catheter / 407
Respiratory Monitoring	
409
Arterial Blood Gases / 409
Determinants of Oxygen Delivery / 409
Peak and Plateau Airway Pressure / 409
Pulse Oximetry / 410
Capnometry / 410
Renal Monitoring	
410
Urine Output / 410
Bladder Pressure / 411
Neurologic Monitoring	
411
Intracranial Pressure / 411
Electroencephalogram and Evoked  
Potentials / 411
Transcranial Doppler  
Ultrasonography / 411
Jugular Venous Oximetry / 412
Transcranial Near-Infrared  
Spectroscopy / 412
Brain Tissue Oxygen Tension / 412
Conclusions	
412
Introduction
The Latin verb monere, which means “to warn, or advise” is 
the origin for the English word monitor. In modern medical 
practice, patients undergo monitoring to detect pathologic 
variations in physiologic parameters, providing advanced 
warning of impending deterioration in the status of one or 
more organ systems. The intended goal of this endeavor is 
to allow the clinician to take appropriate actions in a timely 
fashion to prevent or ameliorate the physiologic derange-
ment. Furthermore, physiologic monitoring is used not only 
to warn, but also to titrate therapeutic interventions, such as 
fluid resuscitation or the infusion of vasoactive or inotro-
pic drugs. The intensive care unit (ICU) and operating room 
are the two locations where the most advanced monitoring 
capabilities routinely are employed in the care of critically 
ill patients.
In the broadest sense, physiologic monitoring encompasses 
a spectrum of endeavors, ranging in complexity from the routine 
and intermittent measurement of the classic vital signs (i.e., tem-
perature, heart rate, arterial blood pressure, and respiratory rate) 
to the continuous recording of the oxidation state of cytochrome 
oxidase, the terminal element in the mitochondrial electron trans-
port chain. The ability to assess clinically relevant parameters of 
tissue and organ status and employ this knowledge to improve 
patient outcomes represents the “holy grail” of critical care med-
icine. Unfortunately, consensus often is lacking regarding the 
most appropriate parameters to monitor in order to achieve this 
goal. Furthermore, making an inappropriate therapeutic decision 
due to inaccurate physiologic data or misinterpretation of good 
data can lead to a worse outcome than having no data at all. 
1
Of the highest importance is the integration of physio-
logic data obtained from monitoring into a coherent and 
evidenced-based treatment plan. Current technologies available 
to assist the clinician in this endeavor are summarized in this 
chapter. Also presented is a brief look at emerging techniques 
that may soon enter into clinical practice.
In essence, the goal of hemodynamic monitoring is to 
ensure that the flow of oxygenated blood through the microcir-
culation is sufficient to support aerobic metabolism at the cel-
lular level. In general, mammalian cells cannot store oxygen for 
subsequent use in oxidative metabolism, although a relatively 
tiny amount is stored in muscle tissue as oxidized myoglobin. 
Thus, aerobic synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the 
energy “currency” of cells, requires the continuous delivery of 
oxygen by diffusion from hemoglobin in red blood cells to the 
oxidative machinery within mitochondria. Delivery of oxygen 
to mitochondria may be insufficient for several reasons. For 
example, cardiac output, hemoglobin concentration of blood, 
or the oxygen content of arterial blood each can be inadequate 
for independent reasons. Alternatively, despite adequate cardiac 
output, perfusion of capillary networks can be impaired as a 
consequence of dysregulation of arteriolar tone, microvascular 
thrombosis, or obstruction of nutritive vessels by sequestered 
leukocytes or platelets. Hemodynamic monitoring that does not 
take into account all of these factors will portray an incomplete 
and perhaps misleading picture of cellular physiology.
chapter 
Under normal conditions when the supply of oxygen is 
plentiful, aerobic metabolism is determined by factors other 
than the availability of oxygen. These factors include the hor-
monal milieu and mechanical workload of contractile tissues. 
However, in pathologic circumstances when oxygen availabil-
ity is inadequate, oxygen utilization (VO2) becomes dependent 
upon oxygen delivery (DO2). The relationship of VO2 to DO2 
over a broad range of DO2 values is commonly represented as 
two intersecting straight lines. In the region of higher DO2 val-
ues, the slope of the line is approximately zero, indicating that 
VO2 is largely independent of DO2. In contrast, in the region of 
low DO2 values, the slope of the line is nonzero and positive, 
indicating that VO2 is supplydependent. The region where the 
two lines intersect is called the point of critical oxygen delivery 
(DO2crit), and represents the transition from supply-independent 
to supply-dependent oxygen uptake. Below a critical threshold 
of oxygen delivery, increased oxygen extraction cannot com-
pensate for the delivery deficit; hence, oxygen consumption 
begins to decrease. The slope of the supply-dependent region of 
the plot reflects the maximal oxygen extraction capability of the 
vascular bed being evaluated.
The subsequent sections will describe the techniques and 
utility of monitoring various physiologic parameters.
Arterial Blood Pressure
The pressure exerted by blood in the systemic arterial sys-
tem, commonly referred to as “blood pressure,” is a cardinal 
parameter measured as part of the hemodynamic monitoring 
of patients. Extremes in blood pressure are either intrinsically 
deleterious or are indicative of a serious perturbation in normal 
physiology. Arterial blood pressure is a complex function of 
both cardiac output and vascular input impedance. Thus, inex-
perienced clinicians may assume that the presence of a normal 
blood pressure is evidence that cardiac output and tissue perfu-
sion are adequate. This assumption frequently is incorrect and 
is the reason why some critically ill patients may benefit from 
forms of hemodynamic monitoring in addition to measurement 
of arterial pressure.
Blood pressure can be determined directly by measuring 
the pressure within the arterial lumen or indirectly using a cuff 
around an extremity. When the equipment is properly set up and 
calibrated, direct intra-arterial monitoring of blood pressure pro-
vides accurate and continuous data. Additionally, intra-arterial 
catheters provide a convenient way to obtain samples of blood 
for measurements of arterial blood gases and other laboratory 
studies. Despite these advantages, intra-arterial catheters are 
invasive devices and occasionally are associated with serious 
complications.
Noninvasive Measurement of Arterial Blood 
Pressure
Both manual and automated means for the noninvasive determi-
nation of blood pressure use an inflatable sphygmomanometer 
cuff to increase pressure around an extremity, and a means for 
detecting the presence or absence of arterial pulsations. Several 
methods exist for this purpose. The time-honored approach is 
the auscultation of the Korotkoff sounds, which are heard over 
an artery distal to the cuff as the cuff is deflated from a pressure 
higher than systolic pressure to one less than diastolic pressure. 
Systolic pressure is defined as the pressure in the cuff when tap-
ping sounds are first audible. Diastolic pressure is the pressure 
in the cuff when audible pulsations first disappear.
Another means for pulse detection when measuring 
blood pressure noninvasively depends upon the detection of 
oscillations in the pressure within the bladder of the cuff. This 
approach is simple, and unlike auscultation, can be performed 
even in a noisy environment (e.g., a busy emergency room). 
Unfortunately, this approach is neither accurate nor reliable. 
Other methods, however, can be used to reliably detect the reap-
pearance of a pulse distal to the cuff and thereby estimate systolic 
blood pressure. Two excellent and widely available approaches 
for pulse detection are use of a Doppler stethoscope (reappear-
ance of the pulse produces an audible amplified signal) or a pulse 
oximeter (reappearance of the pulse is indicated by flashing of a 
light-emitting diode).
A number of automated devices are capable of repetitively 
measuring blood pressure noninvasively. Some of these devices 
measure pressure oscillations in the inflatable bladder encircl-
ing the extremity to detect arterial pulsations as pressure in the 
cuff is gradually lowered from greater than systolic to less than 
diastolic pressure. Other automated noninvasive devices use 
a piezoelectric crystal positioned over the brachial artery as a 
pulse detector. The accuracy of these devices is variable, and 
often dependent on the size mismatch between the arm circum-
ference and the cuff size.1 If the cuff is too narrow (relative to 
the extremity), the measured pressure will be artifactually ele-
vated. Therefore, the width of the cuff should be approximately 
40% of its circumference.
Another noninvasive approach for measuring blood pres-
sure relies on a technique called photoplethysmography. This 
400
Key Points
1
	 The delivery of modern critical care is predicated on the ability 
to monitor a large number of physiologic variables and formu-
late evidenced-based therapeutic strategies to manage these 
variables. Technological advances in monitoring have at least 
a theoretical risk of exceeding our ability to understand the 
clinical implications of the derived information. This could 
result in the use of monitoring data to make inappropriate 
clinical decisions. Therefore, the implementation of any new 
monitoring technology must take into account the relevance 
and accuracy of the data obtained, the risks to the patient, as 
well as the evidence supporting any intervention directed 
at correcting the detected abnormality.
2
	 The routine use of invasive monitoring devices, specifi-
cally the pulmonary artery catheter, must be questioned in 
light of the available evidence which does not demonstrate 
a clear benefit to its widespread use in various populations 
of critically ill patients. The future of physiologic monitor-
ing will be dominated by the application of noninvasive 
and highly accurate devices which guide evidenced-based 
therapy.
401
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
method is capable of providing continuous information, since 
systolic and diastolic blood pressures are recorded on a beat-
to-beat basis. Photoplethysmography uses the transmission of 
infrared light to estimate the amount of hemoglobin (directly 
related to the volume of blood) in a finger placed under a 
servo-controlled inflatable cuff. A feedback loop controlled by 
a microprocessor continually adjusts the pressure in the cuff 
to maintain the blood volume of the finger constant. Under 
these conditions, the pressure in the cuff reflects the pressure 
in the digital artery. The measurements obtained using photo-
plethysmography generally agree closely with those obtained 
by invasive monitoring of blood pressure.2 However, these 
readings may be less accurate in patients with hypotension or 
hypothermia.
Invasive Monitoring of Arterial Blood Pressure
Direct and continuous monitoring of arterial pressure in criti-
cally ill patients may be performed by using fluid-filled tubing 
to connect an intra-arterial catheter to an external strain-gauge 
transducer. The signal generated by the transducer is electroni-
cally amplified and displayed as a continuous waveform by an 
oscilloscope. Digital values for systolic and diastolic pressure 
also are displayed. Mean pressure, calculated by electronically 
averaging the amplitude of the pressure waveform, also can be 
displayed. The fidelity of the catheter-tubing-transducer system 
is determined by numerous factors, including the compliance 
of the tubing, the surface area of the transducer diaphragm, 
and the compliance of the diaphragm. If the system is under-
damped, then the inertia of the system, which is a function 
of the mass of the fluid in the tubing and the mass of the dia-
phragm, causes overshoot of the points of maximum positive 
and negative displacement of the diaphragm during systole and 
diastole, respectively. Thus, in an underdamped system, systolic 
pressure will be overestimated and diastolic pressure will be 
underestimated. In an overdamped system, displacement of the 
diaphragm fails to track the rapidly changing pressure wave-
form, and systolic pressure will be underestimated and diastolic 
pressure will be overestimated. It is important to note that even 
in an underdamped or over-damped system, mean pressure will 
be accurately recorded, provided the system has been properly 
calibrated. For these reasons, when using direct measurement 
of intra-arterial pressure to monitor patients, clinicians should 
make clinical decisions based primarily on the measured mean 
arterial blood pressure.
The radial artery at the wrist is the site most commonly 
used for intra-arterial pressure monitoring. Other sites include 
the femoral and axillary artery. It is important to recognize, 
however, that measured arterial pressure is determined in part 
by the site where the pressure is monitored. Central (i.e., aortic) 
and peripheral (e.g., radial artery) pressures typically are dif-
ferent as a result of the impedance and inductance of the arte-
rial tree. Systolic pressures typically are higher and diastolic 
pressures are lower in the periphery, whereas mean pressure is 
approximately the same in the aorta and more distal sites.
Distal ischemia is an uncommon complication of intra-
arterial catheterization. The incidence of thrombosis is increased 
when larger-caliber catheters are employed and when catheters 
are left in place for an extended period of time. The incidence of 
thrombosis can be minimized by using a 20-gauge (or smaller) 
catheter in the radial artery and removing the catheter as soon 
as feasible. The risk of distal ischemic injury can be reduced 
by ensuring that adequate collateral flow is present prior to 
catheter insertion. At the wrist, adequate collateral flow can 
be documented by performing a modified version of the Allen 
test, wherein the artery to be cannulated is digitally compressed 
while using a Doppler stethoscope to listen for perfusion in the 
palmar arch vessels.
Another potential complication of intra-arterial monitor-
ing is retrograde embolization of air bubbles or thrombi into 
the intracranial circulation. In order to minimize this risk, care 
should be taken to avoid flushing arterial lines when air is pres-
ent in the system, and only small volumes of fluid (less than 
5 mL) should be employed for this purpose. Catheter-related 
infections can occur with any intravascular monitoring device. 
However, catheter-related bloodstream infection is a relatively 
uncommon complication of intra-arterial lines used for monitor-
ing, occurring in 0.4% to 0.7% of catheterizations.3 The inci-
dence increases with longer duration of arterial catheterization.
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
The electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical activity 
associated with cardiac contraction by detecting voltages on the 
body surface. A standard 3-lead ECG is obtained by placing 
electrodes that correspond to the left arm (LA), right arm (RA), 
and left leg (LL). The limb leads are defined as lead I (LA-RA), 
lead II (LL-RA), and lead III (LL-LA). The ECG waveforms 
can be continuously displayed on a monitor, and the devices can 
be set to sound an alarm if an abnormality of rate or rhythm is 
detected. Continuous ECG monitoring is widely available and 
applied to critically ill and perioperative patients. Monitoring 
of the ECG waveform is essential in patients with acute coro-
nary syndromes or blunt myocardial injury, because dysrhyth-
mias are the most common lethal complication. In patients with 
shock or sepsis, dysrhythmias can occur as a consequence of 
inadequate myocardial oxygen delivery or as a complication of 
vasoactive or inotropic drugs used to support blood pressure and 
cardiac output. Dysrhythmias can be detected by continuously 
monitoring the ECG tracing, and timely intervention may pre-
vent serious complications. With appropriate computing hard-
ware and software, continuous ST-segment analysis also can be 
performed to detect ischemia or infarction.
Additional information can be obtained from a 12-lead 
ECG, which is essential for patients with potential myocardial 
ischemia or to rule out cardiac complications in other acutely 
ill patients. Continuous monitoring of the 12-lead ECG is now 
available and is proving to be beneficial in certain patient popu-
lations. In a study of 185 vascular surgical patients, continuous 
12-lead ECG monitoring was able to detect transient myocar-
dial ischemic episodes in 20.5% of the patients.4 This study 
demonstrated that the precordial lead V4, which is not routinely 
monitored on a standard 3-lead ECG, is the most sensitive for 
detecting perioperative ischemia and infarction. To detect 95% 
of the ischemic episodes, two or more precordial leads were 
necessary. Thus, continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring may pro-
vide greater sensitivity than 3-lead ECG for the detection of 
perioperative myocardial ischemia, and may become standard 
for monitoring high-risk surgical patients.
Currently, there is considerable interest in using comput-
erized approaches to analyze ECG waveforms and patterns to 
uncover hidden information that can be used to predict sudden 
cardiac death or the development of serious dysrhythmias. ECG 
patterns of interest include repetitive changes in the morphol-
ogy of the T-wave [T-wave alternans (TWA)]5and heart rate 
variability.6
402
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Integrated monitoring systems employ software that inte-
grates vital signs to produce a single-parameter index which 
allows early detection of physiologic perturbations. The input vari-
ables include noninvasive measurements of heart rate, respiratory 
rate, blood pressure, blood oxygen saturation via pulse oximetry 
(SpO2), and temperature. The software uses sophisticated algo-
rithms refined in an iterative fashion to develop a probabilistic 
model of normality, previously developed from a representative 
sample patient training set. Variance from these data set are used 
to evaluate the probability that the patient-derived vital signs are 
within the normal range. An abnormal index can occur while no 
single vital sign parameter is outside the range of normal if their 
combined patterns are consistent with known instability patterns. 
Employing such an integrated monitoring system in step-down 
unit patients has been shown to be a sensitive method to detect 
early physiologic abnormalities that may precede hemodynamic 
instability.7
Cardiac Output and Related Parameters
Bedside catheterization of the pulmonary artery was introduced 
into clinical practice in the 1970s. Although the pulmonary 
artery catheter (PAC) initially was used primarily to manage 
patients with cardiogenic shock and other acute cardiac diseases, 
indications for this form of invasive hemodynamic monitoring 
gradually expanded to encompass a wide variety of clinical con-
ditions. Clearly, many clinicians believe that information valu-
able for the management of critically ill patients is afforded by 
having a PAC in place. However, unambiguous data in support 
of this view are scarce, and several studies suggest that bedside 
PAC may not benefit most critically ill patients, and in fact lead 
to some serious complications (see next).
Determinants of Cardiac Performance
Preload.  Starling’s law of the heart states that the force of 
muscle contraction depends on the initial length of the cardiac 
fibers. Using terminology that derives from early experiments 
using isolated cardiac muscle preparations, preload is the stretch 
of ventricular myocardial tissue just prior to the next contrac-
tion. Thus, cardiac preload is determined by end-diastolic vol-
ume (EDV). For the right ventricle, central venous pressure 
(CVP) approximates right ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
(EDP). For the left ventricle, pulmonary artery occlusion pres-
sure (PAOP), which is measured by transiently inflating a bal-
loon at the end of a pressure monitoring catheter positioned in 
a small branch of the pulmonary artery, approximates left ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure. The presence of atrioventricular 
valvular stenosis may alter this relationship.
Clinicians frequently use EDP as a surrogate for EDV, but 
EDP is determined not only by volume but also by the diastolic 
compliance of the ventricular chamber. Ventricular compliance 
is altered by various pathologic conditions and pharmacologic 
agents. Furthermore, the relationship between EDP and true pre-
load is not linear, but rather is exponential.
Afterload.  Afterload is another term derived from in vitro 
experiments using isolated strips of cardiac muscle, and is 
defined as the force resisting fiber shortening once systole begins. 
Several factors comprise the in vivo correlate of ventricular after-
load, including ventricular intracavitary pressure, wall thickness, 
chamber radius, and chamber geometry. Since these factors are 
difficult to assess clinically, afterload is commonly approximated 
by calculating systemic vascular resistance, defined as mean arte-
rial pressure (MAP) divided by cardiac output.
Contractility.  Contractility is defined as the inotropic state 
of the myocardium. Contractility is said to increase when the 
force of ventricular contraction increases at constant preload 
and afterload. Clinically, contractility is difficult to quantify, 
because virtually all of the available measures are dependent to 
a certain degree on preload and afterload. If pressure-volume 
loops are constructed for each cardiac cycle, small changes in 
preload and/or afterload will result in shifts of the point defin-
ing the end of systole. These end-systolic points on the pres-
sure vs. volume diagram describe a straight line, known as the 
end-systolic pressure-volume line. A steeper slope of this line 
indicates greater contractility.
Placement of the Pulmonary Artery Catheter
In its simplest form, the pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) has 
four channels. One channel terminates in a balloon at the tip of 
the catheter. The proximal end of this channel is connected to a 
syringe to permit inflation of the balloon with air (saline should 
never be used). Prior to insertion of the PAC, the integrity of the 
balloon should be verified by inflating it. In order to minimize 
the risk of vascular or ventricular perforation by the relatively 
inflexible catheter, it also is important to verify that the inflated 
balloon extends just beyond the tip of the device. A second 
channel in the catheter contains wires that are connected to a 
thermistor located near the tip of the catheter. At the proximal 
end of the PAC, the wires terminate in a fitting that permits con-
nection to appropriate hardware for the calculation of cardiac 
output using the thermodilution technique (see next). The final 
two channels are used for pressure monitoring and the injection 
of the thermal indicator for determinations of cardiac output. 
One of these channels terminates at the tip of the catheter. The 
other terminates 20 cm proximal to the tip.
Placement of a PAC requires access to the central venous 
circulation. Such access can be obtained at a variety of sites, 
including the antecubital, femoral, jugular, and subclavian 
veins. Percutaneous placement through either the jugular or 
subclavian vein generally is preferred. Right internal jugular 
vein cannulation carries the lowest risk of complications, and 
the path of the catheter from this site into the right atrium is 
straight. In the event of inadvertent arterial puncture, local pres-
sure is significantly more effective in controlling bleeding from 
the carotid artery compared to the subclavian artery. Neverthe-
less, it is more difficult to keep occlusive dressings in place on 
the neck than in the subclavian fossa. Furthermore, the anatomic 
landmarks in the subclavian position are quite constant, even in 
patients with anasarca or massive obesity; the subclavian vein 
always is attached to the deep (concave) surface of the clavicle. 
In contrast, the appropriate landmarks to guide jugular venous 
cannulation are sometimes difficult to discern in obese or very 
edematous patients. However, ultrasonic guidance, which 
should be used routinely, has been shown to facilitate bedside 
jugular venipuncture.8
Cannulation of the vein normally is performed percuta-
neously, using the Seldinger technique. A small-bore needle is 
inserted through the skin and subcutaneous tissue into the vein. 
After documenting return of venous blood, a guidewire with a 
flexible tip is inserted through the needle into the vein and the 
needle is withdrawn. A dilator/introducer sheath is passed over 
the wire, and the wire and the dilator are removed. The proxi-
mal terminus of the distal port of the PAC is connected through 
low-compliance tubing to a strain-gauge transducer, and the 
tubing-catheter system is flushed with fluid. While constantly 
403
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
Table 13-2 
Formulas for calculation of hemodynamic parameters 
that can be derived by using data obtained by pulmo-
nary artery catheterization
QT* (L·min–1·m–2) = QT/BSA, where BSA is body surface  
  area (m2)
SV (mL) = QT/HR, where HR is heart rate (min–1)
SVR (dyne·sec·cm–5) = [(MAP – CVP) × 80] /QT, where  
  MAP is mean arterial pressure (mm Hg)
SVRI (dyne·sec·cm–5m–2) = [(MAP – CVP) × 80] /QT*
PVR (dyne·sec·cm–5) = [(PAP – PAOP) × 80] /QT, where  
  PAP is mean pulmonary artery pressure
PVRI (dyne·sec·cm–5m–2) = [(PAP – PAOP) × 80] /QT*
RVEDV (mL) = SV/RVEF
˙do2(mL·min–1·m–2) = QT* × Cao2 × 10, where Cao2 is  
  arterial oxygen content (mL/dL)
ˉvo2(mL·min–1·m–2) = QT* × (Cao2 – Cˉvo2) × 10, where  
  Cˉvo2 is mixed venous oxygen content (mL/dL)
Cao2 = (1.36 × Hgb × Sao2) + (0.003 + Pao2), where Hgb  
  is hemoglobin concentration (g/dL), Sao2 is fractional  
  arterial hemoglobin saturation, and Pao2 is the partial  
  pressure of oxygen in arterial blood
Cˉvo2  = (1.36 × Hgb × Sˉvo2) + (0.003 + Pˉvo2), where  
  P ˉvo2 is the partial pressure of oxygen in pulmonary  
  arterial (mixed venous) blood
QS/QT = (Cco2 – Ca o2)/ (Cco2 – Cv o2), where Cc o2  
  (mL/dL) is the content of oxygen in pulmonary end  
  capillary blood
Cco2 = (1.36 × Hgb) + (0.003 + Pao2), where Pao2 is the  
  alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
Pao2 = [Fio2 × (PB – PH2O)] – Paco2/RQ, where Fio2  
  is the fractional concentration of inspired oxygen, PB is  
  the barometric pressure (mm Hg), PH2O is the water vapor  
  pressure (usually 47 mm Hg), Paco2 is the partial pressure  
  of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (mm Hg), and RQ is  
  respiratory quotient (usually assumed to be 0.8)
Cˉvo2 = central venous oxygen pressure; CVP = mean central venous 
pressure; ˙do2 = systemic oxygen delivery; PAOP = pulmonary artery 
occlusion (wedge) pressure; PVR = pulmonary vascular resistance; 
PVRI = pulmonary vascular resistance index; QS/QT = fractional  
pulmonary venous admixture (shunt fraction); QT = cardiac output;  
QT* = cardiac output indexed to body surface area (cardiac index); 
RVEDV = right ventricular end-diastolic volume; RVEF = right  
ventricular ejection fraction; SV = stroke volume; SVI = stroke volume 
index; Sˉvo2 = fractional mixed venous (pulmonary artery) hemoglobin 
saturation; SVR = systemic vascular resistance; SVRI = systemic  
vascular resistance index; ˉvo2 = systemic oxygen utilization.
Table 13-1 
Directly Measured and Derived Hemodynamic Data 
Obtainable by Bedside Pulmonary Artery Catheterization
Standard PAC
PAC with  
Additional 
Feature(s)
Derived  
Parameters
CVP
Sˉvo2 (continuous)
SV (or SVI)
PAP
QT or QT* (continuous)
SVR (or SVRI)
PAOP
RVEF
PVR (or PVRI)
Sˉvo2  
(intermittent)
RVEDV
QT or QT*  
(intermittent)
˙do2
ˉvo2
ER
QS/QT
CVP = mean central venous pressure; ˙do2= systemic oxygen delivery; 
ER = systemic oxygen extraction ratio; PAOP = pulmonary artery 
occlusion (wedge) pressure; PAP = pulmonary artery pressure; PVR = 
pulmonary vascular resistance; PVRI = pulmonary vascular resistance 
index; QS/QT = fractional pulmonary venous admixture (shunt fraction); 
QT = cardiac output; QT* = cardiac output indexed to body surface 
area (cardiac index); RVEDV = right ventricular end-diastolic volume; 
RVEF = right ventricular ejection fraction; SV = stroke volume; SVI = 
stroke volume index; Sˉvo2 = fractional mixed venous (pulmonary 
artery) hemoglobin saturation; SVR = systemic vascular resistance; 
SVRI = systemic vascular resistance index; = ˉvo2 systemic oxygen 
utilization.
observing the pressure tracing on an oscilloscope, the PAC 
is advanced with the balloon deflated until respiratory excur-
sions are observed. The balloon is then inflated, and the cath-
eter advanced further (“floated”), while monitoring pressures 
sequentially in the right atrium and right ventricle en route to the 
pulmonary artery. The pressure waveforms for the right atrium, 
right ventricle, and pulmonary artery are each characteristic. 
The catheter is advanced out into the pulmonary artery until a 
damped tracing indicative of the “wedged” position is obtained. 
The balloon is then deflated, taking care to ensure that a normal 
pulmonary arterial tracing is again observed on the monitor; 
leaving the balloon inflated can increase the risk of pulmonary 
infarction or perforation of the pulmonary artery. Unnecessary 
measurements of the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure are 
discouraged as rupture of the pulmonary artery may occur.
Hemodynamic Measurements
Even in its simplest embodiment, the PAC is capable of pro-
viding clinicians with a remarkable amount of information 
about the hemodynamic status of patients. Additional informa-
tion may be obtained if various modifications of the standard 
PAC are employed. By combining data obtained through use 
of the PAC with results obtained by other means (i.e., blood 
hemoglobin concentration and oxyhemoglobin saturation), 
derived estimates of systemic oxygen transport and utilization 
can be calculated. Direct and derived parameters obtainable 
by bedside pulmonary arterial catheterization are summarized 
in Table 13-1. The equations used to calculate the derived 
parameters are summarized in Table 13-2. The approximate 
normal ranges for a number of these hemodynamic parameters 
(in adults) are shown in Table 13-3.
Measurement of Cardiac Output by 
Thermodilution
Before the development of the PAC, determining cardiac output 
(QT) at the bedside required careful measurements of oxygen 
consumption (Fick method) or spectrophotometric determina-
tion of indocyanine green dye dilution curves. Measurements of 
QT using the thermodilution technique are simple and reasonably 
accurate. The measurements can be performed repetitively and 
the principle is straightforward. If a bolus of an indicator is rap-
idly and thoroughly mixed with a moving fluid upstream from 
a detector, then the concentration of the indicator at the detec-
tor will increase sharply and then exponentially diminish back 
404
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Table 13-3 
Approximate normal ranges for selected hemodynamic 
parameters in adults
Parameter
Normal Range
CVP
0–6 mm Hg
Right ventricular systolic 
pressure
20–30 mm Hg
Right ventricular diastolic 
pressure
0–6 mm Hg
PAOP
6–12 mm Hg
Systolic arterial pressure
100–130 mm Hg
Diastolic arterial pressure
60–90 mm Hg
MAP
75–100 mm Hg
QT
4–6 L/min
QT*
2.5–3.5 L·min–1·m–2
SV
40–80 mL
SVR
800–1400 dyne·sec·cm–5
SVRI
1500–2400 dyne·sec·cm–5·m–2
PVR
100–150 dyne·sec·cm–5
PVRI
200–400 dyne·sec·cm–5·m–2
Cao2
16–22 mL/dL
Cvo2
~15 mL 02 dL blood
˙do2
400–660 mL·min–1·m–2
ˉvo2
115–165 mL·min–1·m–2
Cao2 = arterial oxygen content; Cvo2 = central venous oxygen pres-
sure; CVP = mean central venous pressure; = ˙do2 systemic oxygen 
delivery; MAP = mean arterial pressure; PAOP = pulmonary artery 
occlusion (wedge) pressure; PVR = pulmonary vascular resistance; 
PVRI = pulmonary vascular resistance index; QT = cardiac output;  
QT* = cardiac output indexed to body surface area (cardiac index); 
SV = stroke volume; SVI = stroke volume index; SVR = systemic 
vascular resistance; SVRI = systemic vascular resistance index; = ˉvo2 
systemic oxygen utilization.
to zero. The area under the resulting time-concentration curve 
is a function of the volume of indicator injected and the flow 
rate of the moving stream of fluid. Larger volumes of indicator 
result in greater areas under the curve, and faster flow rates of 
the mixing fluid result in smaller areas under the curve. When 
QT is measured by thermodilution, the indicator is heat and the 
detector is a temperature-sensing thermistor at the distal end of 
the PAC. The relationship used for calculating QT is called the 
Stewart-Hamilton equation:
QT = [V × (TB – TI) × K1 × K2] /∫TB(t)dt
where V is the volume of the indicator injected, TB is the tem-
perature of blood (i.e., core body temperature), TI is the tem-
perature of the indicator, K1 is a constant that is the function of 
the specific heats of blood and the indicator, K2 is an empiri-
cally derived constant that accounts for several factors (the dead 
space volume of the catheter, heat lost from the indicator as it 
traverses the catheter, and the injection rate of the indicator), 
and ∫TB(t)dt is the area under the time-temperature curve. In 
clinical practice, the Stewart-Hamilton equation is solved by a 
microprocessor.
Determination of cardiac output by the thermodilution 
method is generally quite accurate, although it tends to system-
atically overestimate QT at low values. Changes in blood tem-
perature and QT during the respiratory cycle can influence the 
measurement. Therefore, results generally should be recorded 
as the mean of two or three determinations obtained at random 
points in the respiratory cycle. Using cold injectate widens the 
difference between TB and TI and thereby increases signal-to-
noise ratio. Nevertheless, most authorities recommend using 
room temperature injectate (normal saline or 5% dextrose in 
water) to minimize errors resulting from warming of the fluid as 
it transferred from its reservoir to a syringe for injection.
Technologic innovations have been introduced that per-
mit continuous measurement of QT by thermodilution. In this 
approach, thermal transients are not generated by injecting a 
bolus of a cold indicator, but rather by heating the blood with a 
tiny filament located on the PAC upstream from the thermistor. 
By correlating the amount of current supplied to the heating 
element with the downstream temperature of the blood, it is pos-
sible to estimate the average blood flow across the filament and 
thereby calculate QT. Based upon the results of several studies, 
continuous determinations of QT using this approach agree well 
with data generated by conventional measurements using bolus 
injections of a cold indicator.9 Information is lacking regarding 
the clinical value of being able to monitor QT continuously.
Mixed Venous Oximetry
The Fick equation can be written as QT = VO2/(Cao2 – CVO2), 
where Cao2 is the content of oxygen in arterial blood and CVO2 is 
the content of oxygen in mixed venous blood. The Fick equation 
can be rearranged as follows: CVO2 = Cao2 – VO2/QT. If the small 
contribution of dissolved oxygen to CVO2 and Cao2 is ignored, 
the rearranged equation can be rewritten as SVO2 = Sao2 – VO2/
(QT × Hgb × 1.36), where SVO2 is the fractional saturation of 
hemoglobin in mixed venous blood, Sao2 is the fractional satura-
tion of hemoglobin in arterial blood, and Hgb is the concentration 
of hemoglobin in blood. Thus it can be seen that SVO2 is a func-
tion of VO2 (i.e., metabolic rate), QT, Sao2, and Hgb. Accordingly, 
subnormal values of SVO2 can be caused by a decrease in QT (due, 
for example, to heart failure or hypovolemia), a decrease in Sao2 
(due, for example, to intrinsic pulmonary disease), a decrease in 
Hgb (i.e., anemia), or an increase in metabolic rate (due, for exam-
ple, to seizures or fever). With a conventional PAC, measurements 
of SVO2 require aspirating a sample of blood from the distal (i.e., 
pulmonary arterial) port of the catheter and injecting the sample 
into a blood gas analyzer. Therefore for practical purposes, mea-
surements of SVO2 can be performed only intermittently.
By adding a fifth channel to the PAC, it has become pos-
sible to monitor SVO2 continuously. The fifth channel contains 
two fiber-optic bundles, which are used to transmit and receive 
light of the appropriate wavelengths to permit measurements 
of hemoglobin saturation by reflectance spectrophotometry. 
Continuous SVO2 devices provide measurements of SVO2 that 
agree quite closely with those obtained by conventional analy-
ses of blood aspirated from the pulmonary artery. Despite the 
theoretical value of being able to monitor SVO2 continuously, 
data are lacking to show that this capability favorably improves 
outcomes. In a prospective, observational study of 3265 patients 
undergoing cardiac surgery with either a standard PAC or a 
PAC with continuous SVO2 monitoring, the oximetric catheter 
was associated with fewer arterial blood gas and thermodilu-
tion cardiac output determinations, but no difference in patient 
405
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
outcome.10 Since pulmonary artery catheters that permit continu-
ous monitoring of SVO2 are more expensive than conventional 
PACs, the routine use of these devices cannot be recommended.
The saturation of oxygen in the right atrium or superior 
vena cava (ScVO2) correlates closely with SVO2 over a wide 
range of conditions,11 although the correlation between ScVO2 
and SVO2 has been questioned under certain conditions (e.g., 
septic shock).12 Since measurement of ScVO2 requires place-
ment of a central venous catheter rather than a PAC, it is some-
what less invasive and easier to carry out. By using a central 
venous catheter equipped to permit fiber-optic monitoring of 
ScVO2, it may be possible to titrate the resuscitation of patients 
with shock using a less invasive device than the PAC.11,13 The 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign international guidelines for the 
management of severe sepsis and septic shock recommends 
that during the first 6 hours of resuscitation, the goals of initial 
resuscitation of sepsis-induced hypoperfusion should include all 
of the following: CVP 8–12 mm Hg, MAP ≥ 65 mm Hg, urine 
output ≥ 0.5 mL/kg/h. ScVO2 of 70% or SVO2of 65%.14
Effect of Pulmonary Artery Catheterization on 
Outcome
Despite initial enthusiasm for using the PAC in the manage-
ment of critically-ill patients, several studies have failed to show 
improved outcomes with their use. Connors and colleagues 
reported results of a major observational study evaluating the 
value of PAC in critically ill patients.15 These researchers com-
pared two groups of patients: those who did and those who did 
not undergo placement of a PAC during their first 24 hours of 
ICU care. The investigators recognized that the value of their 
intended analysis was completely dependent on the robustness 
of their methodology for case-matching, because sicker patients 
(i.e., those at greater risk of mortality based upon the severity 
of their illness) were presumably more likely to undergo pul-
monary artery catheterization. Accordingly, the authors used 
sophisticated statistical methods for generating a cohort of study 
(i.e., PAC) patients, each one having a paired control matched 
carefully for severity of illness. Connors et al concluded that 
placement of a pulmonary artery catheter during the first 24 hours 
of stay in an ICU is associated with a significant increase in 
the risk of mortality, even when statistical methods are used to 
account for severity of illness.15
A number of prospective, randomized controlled trials 
of PAC are summarized in Table 13-4. The study by Pearson 
et al was underpowered with only 226 patients enrolled.16 In 
addition, the attending anesthesiologists were permitted to 
exclude patients from the CVP group at their discretion; thus, 
randomization was compromised. The study by Tuman et al 
was large (1094 patients were enrolled), but different anesthe-
siologists were assigned to the different groups.17 Furthermore, 
39 patients in the CVP group underwent placement of a PAC 
because of hemodynamic complications. All of the individual 
Table 13-4 
Summary of randomized, prospective clinical trials comparing pulmonary artery catheter with central venous pressure 
monitoring
Author
Study Population
Groups
Outcomes
Pearson et al16
“Low risk” patients 
undergoing cardiac 
or vascular surgery
CVP catheter (group 1); 
PAC (group 2); PAC with 
continuous Sˉvo2 readout 
(group 3)
No differences among groups for mortality or length 
of ICU stay; significant differences in costs (group 1 < 
group 2 < group 3)
Tuman et al17
Cardiac surgical 
patients
PAC; CVP
No differences between groups for mortality, length of 
ICU stay, or significant noncardiac complications
Bender et al18
Vascular surgery 
patients
PAC; CVP
No differences between groups for mortality, length of 
ICU stay, or length of hospital stay
Valentine et al19
Aortic surgery 
patients
PAC + hemodynamic 
optimization in ICU night 
before surgery; CVP
No differences between groups for mortality or length of 
ICU stay; significantly higher incidence of postoperative 
complications in PAC group
Sandham et al20
“High risk” major 
surgery
PAC; CVP
No differences between groups for mortality, length of 
ICU stay; increased incidence of pulmonary embolism 
in PAC group
Harvey S, et al21
Medical and surgical 
ICU patients
PAC vs. no PAC, with option 
for alternative CO measuring 
device in non-PAC group
No differences in hospital mortality between the  
2 groups, increased incidence of complications in the 
PAC group
Binanay, et al23
Patients with CHF
PAC vs. no PAC
No difference in hospital mortality between the  
2 groups, increased incidence of adverse events in the 
PAC group
Wheeler, et al24
Patients with ALI
PAC vs. CVC with a fluid 
and inotropic management 
protocol
No difference in ICU or hospital mortality, or incidence 
of organ failure between the 2 groups; increased 
incidence of adverse events in the PAC group
ALI = acute lung injury, CHF = congestive heart failure, CO = cardiac output, CVC = central venous catheter, ICU = intensive care unit, PAC = pul-
monary artery catheter, = Sˉvo2 fractional mixed venous (pulmonary artery) hemoglobin saturation.
406
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
single-institution studies of vascular surgery patients were rela-
tively underpowered, and all excluded at least certain catego-
ries of patients (e.g., those with a history of recent myocardial 
infarction).18,19
In the largest randomized controlled trial of the PAC, 
Sandham et al randomized nearly 2000 American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASAs) class III and IV patients undergoing 
major thoracic, abdominal, or orthopedic surgery to placement 
of a PAC or CVP catheter.20 In the patients assigned to receive 
a PAC, physiologic goal-directed therapy was implemented by 
protocol. There were no differences in mortality at 30 days, 
6 months, or 12 months between the two groups, and ICU length 
of stay was similar. There was a significantly higher rate of pul-
monary emboli in the PAC group (0.9% vs. 0%). This study has 
been criticized because most of the patients enrolled were not in 
the highest risk category.
In the “PAC-Man” trial, a multicenter, randomized trial 
in 65 United Kingdom hospitals, over 1000 ICU patients were 
managed with or without a PAC.21 The specifics of the clinical 
management were then left up to the treating clinicians. There 
was no difference in hospital mortality between the 2 groups 
(with PAC 68% vs. without PAC 66%, p = 0.39). However, a 
9.5% complication rate was associated with the insertion or use 
of the PAC, although none of these complications were fatal. 
Clearly, these were critically ill patients, as noted by the high 
hospital mortality rates. Supporters of the PAC use cite method-
ology problems with this study, such as loose inclusion criteria 
and the lack of a defined treatment protocol.
A meta-analysis of 13 randomized studies of the PAC 
included over 5000 patients was published in 2005.22 A broad 
spectrum of critically ill patients was included in these hetero-
geneous trials, and the hemodynamic goals and treatment strate-
gies varied. While the use of the PAC was associated with an 
increased use of inotropes and vasodilators, there were no differ-
ences in mortality or hospital length of stay between the patients 
managed with a PAC and those managed without a PAC.
The ESCAPE trial (which was one of the studies included 
in the previous meta-analysis)23 evaluated 433 patients with 
severe or recurrent congestive heart failure (CHF) admitted to 
the ICU. Patients were randomized to management by clinical 
assessment and a PAC or clinical assessment without a PAC. 
The goal in both groups was resolution of CHF, with additional 
PAC targets of a pulmonary capillary occlusion pressure of 
15 mm Hg and a right atrial pressure of 8 mm Hg. There was no 
formal treatment protocol, but inotropic support was discouraged. 
Substantial reduction in symptoms, jugular venous pressure, and 
edema was noted in both groups. There was no significant differ-
ence in the primary end point of days alive and out of the hospital 
during the first 6 months, or hospital mortality (PAC 10%; vs. 
without PAC 9%). Adverse events were more common among 
patients in the PAC group (21.9% vs.11.5%; P = 0.04).
Finally, the Fluids and Catheters Treatment Trial (FACTT) 
conducted by the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 
Clinical Trials Network was published in 2006.24 The risks and 
benefits of PAC compared with central venous catheters (CVC) 
were evaluated in 1000 patients with acute lung injury. Patients 
were randomly assigned to receive either a PAC or a CVC to 
guide management for 7 days via an explicit protocol. Patients 
also were randomly assigned to a conservative or liberal fluid 
strategy in a 2 × 2 factorial design (outcomes based on the 
fluid management strategy were published separately). Mortal-
ity during the first 60 days was similar in the PAC and CVC 
groups (27% and 26%, respectively; P= 0.69). The duration 
of mechanical ventilation and ICU length of stay also were not 
influenced by the type of catheter used. The type of catheter 
employed did not affect the incidence of shock, respiratory or 
renal failure, ventilator settings, or requirement for hemodi-
alysis or vasopressors. There was a 1% rate of crossover from 
CVC-guided therapy to PAC-guided therapy. The type of cath-
eter used did not affect the administration of fluids or diuretics, 
and the net fluid balance was similar in the two groups. The 
PAC group had approximately twice as many catheter-related 
adverse events (mainly arrhythmias).
Few subjects in critical care medicine have historically 
generated more emotional responses among experts in the 
field than the use of the PAC. As these studies demonstrate, it 
is not possible to show that therapy directed by use of the PAC 
saves lives when it is evaluated in a large population of 
patients. Certainly, given the available evidence, routine use 
2
of the PAC cannot be justified. Whether selective use of 
the device in a few relatively uncommon clinical situa-
tions is warranted or valuable remains a controversial issue. 
Consequently, a marked decline in the use of the PAC from 
5.66 per 1000 medical admissions in 1993 to 1.99 per 1000 
medical admissions in 2004 has been seen.25 Based upon the 
results and exclusion criteria in these prospective randomized 
trials, reasonable criteria for perioperative monitoring without 
use of a PAC are presented in Table 13-5.
One of the reasons for using a PAC to monitor critically 
ill patients is to optimize cardiac output and systemic oxygen 
delivery. Defining what constitutes the optimum cardiac output, 
however, has proven to be difficult. A number of randomized 
trials evaluating the effect on outcome of goal-directed com-
pared to conventional hemodynamic resuscitation have been 
published. Some studies provide support for the notion that 
interventions designed to achieve supraphysiologic goals for 
DO2, VO2, and QT improve outcome.26,27 However, other pub-
lished studies do not support this view, and a meta-analysis con-
cluded that interventions designed to achieve supraphysiological 
goals for oxygen transport do not significantly reduce mortality 
rates in critically ill patients.28,29 At this time, supraphysiological 
resuscitation of patients in shock cannot be endorsed.
There is no simple explanation for the apparent lack of 
effectiveness of pulmonary artery catheterization, although sev-
eral concurrent possibilities exist. First, even though bedside 
pulmonary artery catheterization is quite safe, the procedure 
Table 13-5 
Suggested criteria for perioperative monitoring without 
use of a pulmonary artery catheter in patients undergo-
ing cardiac or major vascular surgical procedures
No anticipated need for suprarenal or supraceliac aortic 
cross-clamping
No history of myocardial infarction during 3 months prior to 
operation
No history of poorly compensated congestive heart failure
No history of coronary artery bypass graft surgery during  
6 weeks prior to operation
No history of ongoing symptomatic mitral or aortic valvular 
heart disease
No history of ongoing unstable angina pectoris
407
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
is associated with a finite incidence of serious complications, 
including ventricular arrhythmias, catheter-related sepsis, central 
venous thrombosis, pulmonary arterial perforation, and pulmo-
nary embolism.20 The adverse effects of these complications on 
outcome may equal or even outweigh any benefits associated 
with using a PAC to guide therapy. Second, the data generated 
by the PAC may be inaccurate, leading to inappropriate therapeu-
tic interventions. Third, the measurements, even if accurate, may 
often be misinterpreted.29 Furthermore, the current state of under-
standing is primitive when it comes to deciding what is the best 
management for certain hemodynamic disturbances, particularly 
those associated with sepsis or septic shock. Taking all of this into 
consideration, it may be that interventions prompted by measure-
ments obtained with a PAC are actually harmful to patients. As a 
result, the marginal benefit now available by placing a PAC may 
be quite small. Less invasive modalities are available that may 
provide clinically useful hemodynamic information.
It may be true that aggressive hemodynamic resuscitation 
of patients, guided by various forms of monitoring, is valu-
able only during certain critical periods, such as the first few 
hours after presentation with septic shock or during surgery. 
For example, Rivers and colleagues reported that survival of 
patients with septic shock is significantly improved when resus-
citation in the emergency department is guided by a protocol 
that seeks to keep ScVO2 greater than 70%.13 Similarly, a study 
using an ultrasound-based device (see Doppler Ultrasonography 
below) to assess cardiac filling and SV showed that maximizing 
SV intraoperatively results in fewer postoperative complications 
and shorter hospital length of stay.30
Minimally Invasive Alternatives to the 
Pulmonary Artery Catheter
Because of the cost, risks and questionable benefit associated 
with bedside pulmonary artery catheterization, there has been 
interest in the development of practical means for less invasive 
monitoring of hemodynamic parameters. Several approaches 
have been developed, which have achieved variable degrees of 
success. None of these methods render the standard thermodilu-
tion technique of the pulmonary artery catheter obsolete. How-
ever, these strategies may contribute to improvements in the 
hemodynamic monitoring of critically ill patients.
Doppler Ultrasonography.  When ultrasonic sound waves are 
reflected by moving erythrocytes in the bloodstream, the fre-
quency of the reflected signal is increased or decreased, depend-
ing on whether the cells are moving toward or away from the 
ultrasonic source. This change in frequency is called the 
Doppler shift, and its magnitude is determined by the velocity 
of the moving red blood cells. Therefore, measurements of the 
Doppler shift can be used to calculate red blood cell velocity. 
With knowledge of both the cross-sectional area of a vessel and 
the mean red blood cell velocity of the blood flowing through 
it, one can calculate blood flow rate. If the vessel in question is 
the aorta, then QT can be calculated as:
QT = HR × A × ∫V(t)dt
where A is the cross-sectional area of the aorta and ∫V(t)dt is the 
red blood cell velocity integrated over the cardiac cycle.
Two approaches have been developed for using Dop-
pler ultrasonography to estimate QT. The first approach uses 
an ultrasonic transducer, which is positioned manually in 
the suprasternal notch and focused on the root of the aorta. 
Aortic cross-sectional area can be estimated using a nomogram, 
which factors in age, height, and weight, back-calculated if 
an independent measure of QT is available, or by using two-
dimensional transthoracic or transesophageal ultrasonography. 
While this approach is completely noninvasive, it requires a 
highly-skilled operator in order to obtain meaningful results, 
and is laborintensive. Moreover, unless QT measured using 
thermodilution is used to back-calculate aortic diameter, accu-
racy using the suprasternal notch approach is not acceptable. 
Accordingly, this method is useful only for obtaining very 
intermittent estimates of QT, and has not been widely adopted 
by clinicians.
A second more promising, albeit more invasive, approach 
has been introduced. In this method blood flow velocity is con-
tinuously monitored in the descending thoracic aorta using a 
continuous-wave Doppler transducer introduced into the esoph-
agus. The probe is connected to a monitor, which continuously 
displays the blood flow velocity profile in the descending aorta 
as well as the calculated QT. In order to maximize the accuracy 
of the device, the probe position must be adjusted to obtain the 
peak velocity in the aorta. In order to transform blood flow in 
the descending aorta into QT, a correction factor is applied that 
is based on the assumption that only 70% of the flow at the 
root of the aorta is still present in the descending thoracic aorta. 
A meta-analysis of the available data show a good correlation 
between cardiac output estimates obtained by trans-esophageal 
Doppler and PAC in critically-ill patients.31 The ultrasonic 
device also calculates a derived parameter termed flow time 
corrected (FTc), which is the systolic flow time in the descend-
ing aorta corrected for heart rate. FTc is a function of preload, 
contractility, and vascular input impedance. Although it is not 
a pure measure of preload, Doppler-based estimates of SV and 
FTc have been used successfully to guide volume resuscitation 
in high-risk surgical patients undergoing major operations.30
Impedance Cardiography.  The impedance to flow of alternat-
ing electrical current in regions of the body is commonly called 
bioimpedance. In the thorax, changes in the volume and velocity 
of blood in the thoracic aorta lead to detectable changes in bio-
impedance. The first derivative of the oscillating component of 
thoracic bioimpedance (dZ/dt) is linearly related to aortic blood 
flow. On the basis of this relationship, empirically derived for-
mulas have been developed to estimate SV, and subsequently QT, 
noninvasively. This methodology is called impedance cardiog-
raphy. The approach is attractive because it is noninvasive, pro-
vides a continuous readout of QT, and does not require extensive 
training. Despite these advantages, measurements of QT obtained 
by impedance cardiography are not sufficiently reliable to be 
used for clinical decision making and have poor correlation with 
thermodilution.32
Because of the limitations of bioimpedance devices, a 
newer approach for processing the impedance signal was devel-
oped and commercialized. This approach is based on the recog-
nition that the impedance signal has two components: amplitude 
and phase. Whereas the amplitude of the thoracic impedance 
signal is determined by all of the components of the thoracic 
cavity (bone, blood, muscle and other soft tissues), phase shifts 
are determined entirely by pulsatile flow. The vast majority of 
pulsatile flow is related to blood moving within the aorta. There-
fore, the “bioreactance” signal correlates closely with aortic 
flow, and cardiac output determined using this approach agrees 
closely with cardiac output measured using conventional indica-
tor dilution techniques.33
408
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Pulse Contour Analysis.  Another method for determining 
cardiac output is an approach called pulse contour analysis for 
estimating SV on a beat-to-beat basis. The mechanical proper-
ties of the arterial tree and SV determine the shape of the arte-
rial pulse waveform. The pulse contour method of estimating 
QT uses the arterial pressure waveform as an input for a model 
of the systemic circulation in order to determine beat-to-beat 
flow through the circulatory system. The parameters of resis-
tance, compliance, and impedance are initially estimated based 
on the patient’s age and sex, and subsequently can be refined 
by using a reference standard measurement of QT. The refer-
ence standard estimation of QT is obtained periodically using 
the indicator dilution approach by injecting the indicator into a 
central venous catheter and detecting the transient increase in 
indicator concentration in the blood using an arterial catheter. 
In one commercially available embodiment of this approach, 
the lithium ion (Li+) is the indicator used for the periodic cali-
brations of the device. The lithium carbonate indicator can be 
injected into a peripheral vein, and the doses do not exert phar-
macologically relevant effects in adult patients. The Li+ indica-
tor dilution method has shown to be at least as reliable as other 
thermodilution methods over a broad range of CO in a variety of 
patients.33 In another commercially available system, a conven-
tional bolus of cold fluid is used as the indicator for calibration. 
The thermodilution-based calibration requires central venous 
catheterization, although the temperature change is detected in 
a transpulmonary fashion (i.e., in a peripheral artery).
Measurements of QT based on pulse contour monitoring 
using these two approaches are comparable in accuracy to stan-
dard PAC thermodilution methods, but are less invasive since 
transcardiac catheterization is not needed.34 Using on-line pres-
sure waveform analysis, the computerized algorithms can cal-
culate SV, QT, systemic vascular resistance, and an estimate of 
myocardial contractility, (i.e., the rate of rise of the arterial sys-
tolic pressure [dP/dT]). The use of pulse contour analysis has been 
applied using noninvasive photoplethysmographic measurements 
of arterial pressure. However, the accuracy of this technique has 
been questioned and its clinical utility remains to be determined.35
One commercially available device, which can be used for 
estimating cardiac output, does not require external calibration. 
Instead, the relationship between pulse pressure and stroke vol-
ume is determined using a proprietary algorithm that uses bio-
metric data, such as age, gender, and height, as inputs. Although 
this methodology is gaining fairly wide acceptance in critical 
care medicine, reported accuracy (in comparison to “gold stan-
dard” approaches) is not very good.33
Partial Carbon Dioxide Rebreathing.  Partial carbon dioxide 
(CO2) rebreathing uses the Fick principle to estimate QT non-
invasively. By intermittently altering the dead space within the 
ventilator circuit via a rebreathing valve, changes in CO2 pro-
duction (Vco2) and end-tidal CO2 (ETco2) are used to determine 
cardiac output using a modified Fick equation (QT = ΔVco2/
ΔETco2). Commercially available devices use this Fick prin-
ciple to calculate QT using intermittent partial CO2 rebreathing 
through a disposable rebreathing loop. These devices consist of 
a CO2 sensor based on infrared light absorption, an airflow sen-
sor, and a pulse oximeter. Changes in intrapulmonary shunt and 
hemodynamic instability impair the accuracy of QT estimated by 
partial CO2 rebreathing. Continuous in-line pulse oximetry and 
inspired fraction of inspired O2 (Fio2) are used to estimate shunt 
fraction to correct QT.
Some studies of the partial CO2 rebreathing approach sug-
gest that this technique is not as accurate as thermodilution, the 
gold standard for measuring QT.34,36 However, other studies sug-
gest that the partial CO2 rebreathing method for determination 
of QT compares favorably to measurements made using a PAC 
in critically ill patients.37
Transesophageal Echocardiography.  Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE) has made the transition from operat-
ing room to intensive care unit. TEE requires that the patient 
be sedated and usually intubated for airway protection. Using 
this powerful technology, global assessments of LV and RV 
function can be made, including determinations of ventricular 
volume, EF, and QT. Segmental wall motion abnormalities, 
pericardial effusions, and tamponade can be readily identified 
with TEE. Doppler techniques allow estimation of atrial filling 
pressures. The technique is somewhat cumbersome and requires 
considerable training and skill in order to obtain reliable results. 
Recently, a TEE probe has been introduced into practice that is 
small enough in diameter that it can be left in place for as long 
as 72 hours. While only limited data are currently available with 
this probe, it seems like it will be a useful cardiac monitoring 
tool for use in selected, patients with complex problems.
Assessing Preload Responsiveness.  Although pulse con-
tour analysis or partial CO2 rebreathing may be able to provide 
estimates of SV and QT, these approaches alone can offer little 
or no information about the adequacy of preload. Thus, if QT 
is low, some other means must be employed to estimate pre-
load. Many clinicians assess the adequacy of cardiac preload by 
determining CVP or PAOP. However, neither CVP nor PAOP 
correlate well with the true parameter of interest, left ventricular 
end-diastolic volume (LVEDV).38 Extremely high or low CVP 
or PAOP results are informative, but readings in a large middle 
zone (i.e., 5–20 mm Hg) are less useful. Furthermore, changes 
in CVP or PAOP fail to correlate well with changes in stroke 
volume.37,39 Echocardiography can be used to estimate LVEDV, 
but this approach is dependent on the skill and training of the 
individual using it, and isolated measurements of LVEDV fail 
to predict the hemodynamic response to alterations in preload.40
When intrathoracic pressure increases during the appli-
cation of positive airway pressure in mechanically ventilated 
patients, venous return decreases, and as a consequence, left 
ventricular stroke volume (LVSV) also decreases. Therefore, 
pulse pressure variation (PPV) during a positive pressure episode 
can be used to predict the responsiveness of cardiac output to 
changes in preload.39,41 PPV is defined as the difference between 
the maximal pulse pressure and the minimum pulse pressure 
divided by the average of these two pressures. This approach 
has been validated by comparing PPV, CVP, PAOP, and sys-
tolic pressure variation as predictors of preload responsiveness 
in a cohort of critically ill patients. Patients were classified as 
being “preload responsive” if their cardiac index [QT/Body Sur-
face Area (BSA)] increased by at least 15% after rapid infusion 
of a standard volume of intravenous fluid.42 Receiver-operating 
characteristic (ROC) curves demonstrated that PPV was the best 
predictor of preload responsiveness. Although atrial arrhythmias 
can interfere with the usefulness of this technique, PPV remains 
a useful approach for assessing preload responsiveness in most 
patients because of its simplicity and reliability.40
Near-infrared Spectroscopic Measurement of Tissue Hemo-
globin Oxygen Saturation.  Near-infrared spectroscopy 
(NIRS) allows continuous, noninvasive measurement of tissue 
409
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
hemoglobin oxygen saturation (StO2) using near-infrared wave-
lengths of light (700–1000 nm). This technology is based on 
Beer’s law, which states that the transmission of light through 
a solution with a dissolved solute decreases exponentially as 
the concentration of the solute increases. In mammalian tissue, 
three compounds change their absorption pattern when oxygen-
ated: cytochrome aa3, myoglobin, and hemoglobin. Because of 
the distinct absorption spectra of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhe-
moglobin, Beer’s law can be used to detect their relative con-
centrations within tissue. Thus, the relative concentrations of 
the types of hemoglobin can be determined by measuring the 
change in light intensity as it passes through the tissue. Since 
about 20% of blood volume is intra-arterial and the StO2 mea-
surements are taken without regard to systole or diastole, spec-
troscopic measurements are primarily indicative of the venous 
oxyhemoglobin concentration.
NIRS has been evaluated to assess the severity of traumatic 
shock in animal models and in trauma patients. Studies have 
shown that peripheral muscle StO2, as determined by NIRS, is 
as accurate as other end points of resuscitation (i.e., base deficit, 
mixed venous oxygen saturation) in a porcine model of hemor-
rhagic shock.43 Continuously-measured StO2 has been evaluated 
in blunt trauma patients as a predictor of the development of 
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) and mortality.44 
Exactly 383 patients were studied at seven level 1 trauma cen-
ters. StO2was monitored for 24 hours after admission along with 
vital signs and other endpoints of resuscitation, such as base 
deficit (BD). Minimum StO2(using a minimum StO2≤ 75% as a 
cutoff) had a similar sensitivity and specificity in predicting the 
development of MODS as BD ≥ 6 mEq/L. StO2 and BD were 
also comparable in predicting mortality. Thus, NIRS-derived 
muscle StO2 measurements perform similarly to BD in identify-
ing poor perfusion and predicting the development of MODS or 
death after severe torso trauma, yet have the additional advan-
tages of being continuous and noninvasive. Ongoing prospec-
tive studies will help determine the clinical utility of continuous 
monitoring of StO2 in clinical scenarios such as trauma, hemor-
rhagic shock, and sepsis.
Respiratory Monitoring
The ability to monitor various parameters of respiratory func-
tion is of utmost importance in critically ill patients. Many of 
these patients require mechanical ventilation. Monitoring of 
their respiratory physiology is necessary to assess the adequacy 
of oxygenation and ventilation, guide weaning and liberation 
from mechanical ventilation, and detect adverse events associ-
ated with respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation. These 
parameters include gas exchange, neuromuscular activity, respi-
ratory mechanics, and patient effort.
Arterial Blood Gases
Blood gas analysis may provide useful information when car-
ing for patients with respiratory failure. However, even in 
the absence of respiratory failure or the need for mechanical 
ventilation, blood gas determinations also can be valuable to 
detect alterations in acid-base balance due to low QT, sepsis, 
renal failure, severe trauma, medication or drug overdose, or 
altered mental status. Arterial blood can be analyzed for pH, 
Po2, Pco2, HCO3
– concentration and calculated base deficit. 
When indicated, carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin levels 
also can be measured. In recent years, efforts have been made 
to decrease the unnecessary use of arterial blood gas analysis. 
Serial arterial blood gas determinations are not necessary for 
routine weaning from mechanical ventilation in the majority of 
postoperative patients.
Most bedside blood gas analyses still involve removal of an 
aliquot of blood from the patient, although continuous bedside 
arterial blood gas determinations are now possible without sam-
pling via an indwelling arterial catheter that contains a biosensor. 
In studies comparing the accuracy of continuous arterial blood 
gas and pH monitoring with a conventional laboratory blood gas 
analyzer, excellent agreement between the two methods has been 
demonstrated.45 Continuous monitoring can reduce the volume 
of blood loss due to phlebotomy and dramatically decrease the 
time necessary to obtain blood gas results. Continuous monitor-
ing, however, is expensive and is not widely employed.
Determinants of Oxygen Delivery
The primary goal of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems 
is to deliver oxygenated blood to the tissues. DO2 is dependent 
to a greater degree on the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin 
(Hgb) in arterial blood (Sao2) than on the partial pressure of 
oxygen in arterial blood (Pao2). DO2 also is dependent on QT 
and Hgb. Dissolved oxygen in blood, which is proportional to 
the PaO2, makes only a negligible contribution to DO2, as is 
apparent from the equation:
DO2 = QT × [(Hgb × Sao2 × 1.36) + (Pao2 × 0.0031)]
Sao2 in mechanically ventilated patients depends on the 
mean airway pressure, the fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2),and 
SVO2. Thus, when Sao2 is low, the clinician has only a limited 
number of ways to improve this parameter. The clinician can 
increase mean airway pressure by increasing positive-end expi-
ratory pressure (PEEP) or inspiratory time. Fio2 can be increased 
to a maximum of 1.0 by decreasing the amount of room air 
mixed with the oxygen supplied to the ventilator. SVO2 can be 
increased by increasing Hgb or QT or decreasing oxygen utili-
zation (e.g., by administering a muscle relaxant and sedation).
Peak and Plateau Airway Pressure
Airway pressures routinely are monitored in mechanically ven-
tilated patients. The peak airway pressure measured at the end of 
inspiration (Ppeak) is a function of the tidal volume, the resistance 
of the airways, lung/chest wall compliance, and peak inspiratory 
flow. The airway pressure measured at the end of inspiration 
when the inhaled volume is held in the lungs by briefly clos-
ing the expiratory valve is termed the plateau airway pressure 
(Pplateau). As a static parameter, plateau airway pressure is inde-
pendent of the airway resistance and peak airway flow, and is 
related to the lung/chest wall compliance and delivered tidal 
volume. Mechanical ventilators monitor Ppeak with each breath 
and can be set to trigger an alarm if the Ppeak exceeds a prede-
termined threshold. Pplateau is not measured routinely with each 
delivered tidal volume, but rather is measured intermittently by 
setting the ventilator to close the exhalation circuit briefly at the 
end of inspiration and record the airway pressure when airflow 
is zero.
If both Ppeak and Pplateau are increased (and tidal volume is 
not excessive), then the underlying problem is a decrease in 
the compliance in the lung/chest wall unit. Common causes of 
this problem include pneumothorax, hemothorax, lobar atelec-
tasis, pulmonary edema, pneumonia, acute respiratory distress 
410
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
syndrome (ARDS), active contraction of the chest wall or dia-
phragmatic muscles, abdominal distention, and intrinsic PEEP, 
such as occurs in patients with bronchospasm and insufficient 
expiratory times. When Ppeak is increased but Pplateau is relatively 
normal, the primary problem is an increase in airway resis-
tance, such as occurs with bronchospasm, use of a small-caliber 
endotracheal tube, or kinking or obstruction of the endotracheal 
tube. A low Ppeak also should trigger an alarm, as it suggests a 
discontinuity in the airway circuit involving the patient and the 
ventilator.
Ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) is now an estab-
lished clinical entity of great relevance to the care of critically ill 
patients. Excessive airway pressure and tidal volume adversely 
affect pulmonary and possibly systemic responses to critical 
illness. Subjecting the lung parenchyma to excessive pressure, 
known as barotrauma, can result in parenchymal lung injury, 
diffuse alveolar damage similar to ARDS, and pneumothorax, 
and can impair venous return and therefore limit cardiac output. 
Lung-protective ventilation strategies have been developed to 
prevent the development of VILI and improve patient outcomes. 
In a large, multicenter randomized trial of patients with ARDS 
from a variety of etiologies, limiting plateau airway pressure to 
less than 30 cm H2O and tidal volume to less than 6 mL/kg of 
ideal body weight reduced 28-day mortality by 22% relative to 
a ventilator strategy that used a tidal volume of 12 mL/kg.46 For 
this reason, monitoring of plateau pressure and using a low tidal 
volume strategy in patients with ARDS is now the standard of 
care. Recent data also suggest that a lung-protective ventilation 
strategy is associated with improved clinical outcomes in venti-
lated patients without ARDS.47
Pulse Oximetry
The pulse oximeter is a microprocessor-based device that inte-
grates oximetry and plethysmography to provide continuous 
noninvasive monitoring of the oxygen saturation of arterial 
blood (Sao2). It is considered one of the most important and 
useful technologic advances in patient monitoring. Continuous, 
noninvasive monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation is pos-
sible using light-emitting diodes and sensors placed on the skin. 
Pulse oximetry employs two wavelengths of light (i.e., 660 nm 
and 940 nm) to analyze the pulsatile component of blood flow 
between the light source and sensor. Because oxyhemoglobin 
and deoxyhemoglobin have different absorption spectra, differ-
ential absorption of light at these two wavelengths can be used 
to calculate the fraction of oxygen saturation of hemoglobin. 
Under normal circumstances, the contributions of carboxyhe-
moglobin and methemoglobin are minimal. However, if car-
boxyhemoglobin levels are elevated, the pulse oximeter will 
incorrectly interpret carboxyhemoglobin as oxyhemoglobin and 
the arterial saturation displayed will be falsely elevated. When 
the concentration of methemoglobin is markedly increased, the 
Sao2 will be displayed as 85%, regardless of the true arterial 
saturation.48 The accuracy of pulse oximetry begins to decline at 
Sao2 values less than 92%, and tends to be unreliable for values 
less than 85%.49
Several studies have assessed the frequency of arterial 
oxygen desaturation in hospitalized patients and its effect on 
outcome. Monitoring pulse oximetry in surgical patients is asso-
ciated with a reduction in unrecognized deterioration, rescue 
events and transfers to the ICU.50 Because of its clinical rel-
evance, ease of use, noninvasive nature, and cost-effectiveness, 
pulse oximetry has become a routine monitoring strategy in 
patients with respiratory disease, intubated patients, and those 
undergoing surgical intervention under sedation or general anes-
thesia. Pulse oximetry is especially useful in the titration of Fio2 
and PEEP for patients receiving mechanical ventilation, and 
during weaning from mechanical ventilation. The widespread 
use of pulse oximetry has decreased the need for arterial blood 
gas determinations in critically ill patients.
Capnometry
Capnometry is the measurement of carbon dioxide in the airway 
throughout the respiratory cycle. Capnometry is most commonly 
measured by infrared light absorption. CO2 absorbs infrared light 
at a peak wavelength of approximately 4.27 μm. Capnometry 
works by passing infrared light through a sample chamber to a 
detector on the opposite side. More infrared light passing through 
the sample chamber (i.e., less CO2) causes a larger signal in the 
detector relative to the infrared light passing through a reference 
cell. Capnometric determination of the partial pressure of CO2 
in end-tidal exhaled gas (Petco2) is used as a surrogate for the 
partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood (Paco2) during mechani-
cal ventilation. In healthy subjects, Petco2 is about 1 to 5 mm 
Hg less than Paco2.51 Thus, Petco2 can be used to estimate Paco2 
without the need for blood gas determination. However, changes 
in Petco2 may not correlate with changes in Paco2 during a num-
ber of pathologic conditions (see next).
Capnography allows the confirmation of endotracheal intu-
bation and continuous assessment of ventilation, integrity of the 
airway, operation of the ventilator, and cardiopulmonary func-
tion. Capnometers are configured with either an in-line sensor or 
a sidestream sensor. The sidestream systems are lighter and easy 
to use, but the thin tubing that samples the gas from the venti-
lator circuit can become clogged with secretions or condensed 
water, preventing accurate measurements. The in-line devices 
are bulky and heavier, but are less likely to become clogged. 
Continuous monitoring with capnography has become routine 
during surgery under general anesthesia and for some intensive 
care patients. A number of situations can be promptly detected 
with continuous capnography. A sudden reduction in Petco2 
suggests either obstruction of the sampling tubing with water 
or secretions, or a catastrophic event such as loss of the airway, 
airway disconnection or obstruction, ventilator malfunction, or 
a marked decrease in QT. If the airway is connected and pat-
ent and the ventilator is functioning properly, then a sudden 
decrease in Petco2 should prompt efforts to rule out cardiac 
arrest, massive pulmonary embolism, or cardiogenic shock. 
Petco2 can be persistently low during hyperventilation or with 
an increase in dead space such as occurs with pulmonary embo-
lization (even in the absence of a change in QT). Causes of 
an increase in Petco2 include reduced minute ventilation or 
increased metabolic rate.
Renal Monitoring
Urine Output
Bladder catheterization with an indwelling catheter allows the 
monitoring of urine output, usually recorded hourly by the nurs-
ing staff. With a patent Foley catheter, urine output is a gross 
indicator of renal perfusion. The generally accepted normal 
urine output is 0.5 mL/kg per hour for adults and 1 to 2 mL/
kg per hour for neonates and infants. Oliguria may reflect inad-
equate renal artery perfusion due to hypotension, hypovolemia, 
or low QT. Low urine flow also can be a sign of intrinsic renal 
411
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
dysfunction. It is important to recognize that normal urine out-
put does not exclude the possibility of impending renal failure.
Bladder Pressure
The triad of oliguria, elevated peak airway pressures, and 
elevated intra-abdominal pressure is known as the abdominal 
compartment syndrome (ACS). This syndrome, first described 
in patients after repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
is associated with interstitial edema of the abdominal organs, 
resulting in elevated intra-abdominal pressure (IAP). When 
IAP exceeds venous or capillary pressures, perfusion of the 
kidneys and other intra-abdominal viscera is impaired. Oligu-
ria is a cardinal sign. While the diagnosis of ACS is a clinical 
one, measuring IAP is useful to confirm the diagnosis. Ideally, 
a catheter inserted into the peritoneal cavity could measure IAP 
to substantiate the diagnosis. In practice, transurethral bladder 
pressure measurement reflects IAP and is most often used to 
confirm the presence of ACS. After instilling 50 to 100 mL 
of sterile saline into the bladder via a Foley catheter, the tub-
ing is connected to a transducing system to measure bladder 
pressure. Intra-abdominal hypertension is defined as an IAP 
≥ 12 mm Hg recorded on three standard measurements con-
ducted 4 to 6 hours apart, while the diagnosis of ACS is the pres-
ence of an IAP ≥ 20 mm Hg recorded by three measurements 
1 to 6 hours apart.52,60 Less commonly, gastric or inferior vena 
cava pressures can be monitored with appropriate catheters to 
detect elevated intra-abdominal pressures.
Neurologic Monitoring
Intracranial Pressure
Because the brain is rigidly confined within the bony skull, cere-
bral edema or mass lesions increase intracranial pressure (ICP). 
Monitoring of ICP currently is recommended in patients with 
severe traumatic brain injury (TBI), defined as a Glasgow Coma 
Scale (GCS) score less than or equal to 8 with an abnormal CT 
scan, and in patients with severe TBI and a normal CT scan if 
two or more of the following are present: age greater than 40 
years, unilateral or bilateral motor posturing, or systolic blood 
pressure less than 90 mm Hg.53 ICP monitoring also is indicated 
in patients with acute subarachnoid hemorrhage with coma or 
neurologic deterioration, intracranial hemorrhage with intraven-
tricular blood, ischemic middle cerebral artery stroke, fulminant 
hepatic failure with coma and cerebral edema on CT scan, and 
global cerebral ischemia or anoxia with cerebral edema on CT 
scan. The goal of ICP monitoring is to ensure that cerebral per-
fusion pressure (CPP) is adequate to support perfusion of the 
brain. CPP is equal to the difference between MAP and ICP: 
CPP = MAP – ICP.
One type of ICP measuring device, the ventriculostomy 
catheter, consists of a fluid-filled catheter inserted into a cere-
bral ventricle and connected to an external pressure transducer. 
This device permits measurement of ICP, but also allows drain-
age of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as a means to lower ICP and 
sample CSF for laboratory studies. Other devices locate the 
pressure transducer within the central nervous system and are 
used only to monitor ICP. These devices can be placed in the 
intraventricular, parenchymal, subdural, or epidural spaces. 
Ventriculostomy catheters are the accepted standard for moni-
toring ICP in patients with TBI due to their accuracy, ability 
to drain CSF, and low complication rate. The associated com-
plications include infection (5%), hemorrhage (1.1%), catheter 
malfunction or obstruction (6.3%–10.5%), and malposition with 
injury to cerebral tissue.54
The purpose of ICP monitoring is to detect and treat 
abnormal elevations of ICP that may be detrimental to cerebral 
perfusion and function. In TBI patients, ICP >20 mm Hg is asso-
ciated with unfavorable outcomes.55 However, few studies have 
shown that treatment of elevated ICP improves clinical out-
comes in human trauma patients. In a randomized, controlled, 
double-blind trial, Eisenberg and colleagues demonstrated that 
maintaining ICP less than 25 mm Hg in patients without crani-
ectomy and less than 15 mm Hg in patients with craniectomy is 
associated with improved outcome.56 In patients with low CPP, 
therapeutic strategies to correct CPP can be directed at increas-
ing MAP, decreasing ICP, or both. While it has been recom-
mended that CPP be maintained between 50 and 70 mm Hg, 
the evidence to support this recommendation is not overly com-
pelling.57 Furthermore, a retrospective cohort study of patients 
with severe TBI found that ICP/CPP-targeted neuro-intensive 
care was associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation 
and increased therapeutic interventions, without evidence for 
improved outcome in patients who survive beyond 24 hours.58
Electroencephalogram and Evoked Potentials
Electroencephalogram offers the capacity to monitor global 
neurologic electrical activity, while evoked potential monitor-
ing can assess pathways not detected by the conventional EEG. 
Continuous EEG (CEEG) monitoring in the intensive care unit 
(ICU) permits ongoing evaluation of cerebral cortical activity. 
It is especially useful in obtunded and comatose patients. CEEG 
also is useful for monitoring of therapy for status epilepticus 
and detecting early changes associated with cerebral ischemia. 
CEEG can be used to adjust the level of sedation, especially if 
high-dose barbiturate therapy is being used to manage elevated 
ICP. Somatosensory and brain stem evoked potentials are less 
affected by the administration of sedatives than is the EEG. 
Evoked potentials are useful for localizing brain stem lesions 
or proving the absence of such structural lesions in cases of 
metabolic or toxic coma. They also can provide prognostic data 
in posttraumatic coma.
An advance in EEG monitoring is the use of the bispec-
tral index (BIS) to titrate the level of sedative medications. 
While sedative drugs are usually titrated to the clinical neuro-
logic examination, the BIS device has been used in the operat-
ing room to continuously monitor the depth of anesthesia. The 
BIS is an empirical measurement statistically derived from a 
database of over 5000 EEGs.59 The BIS is derived from bifron-
tal EEG recordings and analyzed for burst suppression ratio, 
relative alpha:beta ratio, and bicoherence. Using a multivariate 
regression model, a linear numeric index (BIS) is calculated, 
ranging from 0 (isoelectric EEG) to 100 (fully awake). Its 
use has been associated with lower consumption of anesthet-
ics during surgery and earlier awakening and faster recovery 
from anesthesia.60 The BIS also has been validated as a useful 
approach for monitoring the level of sedation for ICU patients, 
using the revised Sedation-Agitation Scale as a gold standard.61
Transcranial Doppler Ultrasonography
This modality provides a noninvasive method for evaluat-
ing cerebral hemodynamics. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) 
measurements of middle and anterior cerebral artery blood flow 
velocity are useful for the diagnosis of cerebral vasospasm after 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Qureshi et al demonstrated that an 
increase in the middle cerebral artery mean flow velocity as 
412
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
assessed by TCD is an independent predictor of symptomatic 
vasospasm in a prospective study of patients with aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage.62 In addition, while some have pro-
posed using TCD to estimate ICP, studies have shown that TCD 
is not a reliable method for estimating ICP and CPP, and cur-
rently cannot be endorsed for this purpose.63 TCD also is useful 
to confirm the clinical examination for determining brain death 
in patients with confounding factors such as the presence of 
CNS depressants or metabolic encephalopathy.
Jugular Venous Oximetry
When the arterial oxygen content, hemoglobin concentration, 
and the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve are constant, changes 
in jugular venous oxygen saturation (Sjo2) reflect changes in 
the difference between cerebral oxygen delivery and demand. 
Generally, a decrease in Sjo2 reflects cerebral hypoperfusion, 
whereas an increase in Sjo2 indicates the presence of hyperemia. 
Sjo2 monitoring cannot detect decreases in regional cerebral 
blood flow if overall perfusion is normal or above normal. This 
technique requires the placement of a catheter in the jugular 
bulb, usually via the internal jugular vein. Catheters that permit 
intermittent aspiration of jugular venous blood for analysis or 
continuous oximetry catheters are available.
Low Sjo2 is associated with poor outcomes after TBI.64 
Nevertheless, the value of monitoring Sjo2 remains unproven. 
If it is employed, it should not be the sole monitoring technique, 
but rather should be used in conjunction with ICP and CPP 
monitoring. By monitoring ICP, CPP, and Sjo2, early interven-
tion with volume, vasopressors, and hyperventilation has been 
shown to prevent ischemic events in patients with TBI.65
Transcranial Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
Transcranial near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a noninvasive 
continuous monitoring method to determine cerebral oxygen-
ation. It employs technology similar to that of pulse oximetry 
to determine the concentrations of oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin 
with near-infrared light and sensors, and takes advantage of the 
relative transparency of the skull to light in the near-infrared 
region of the spectrum. Continuous monitoring of cerebral per-
fusion via transcranial NIRS may provide a method to detect 
early cerebral ischemia in patients with traumatic brain injury.66 
Nevertheless, this form of monitoring remains largely a research 
tool at the present time.
Brain Tissue Oxygen Tension
While the standard of care for patients with severe TBI includes 
ICP and CPP monitoring, this strategy does not always pre-
vent secondary brain injury. Growing evidence suggests that 
monitoring local brain tissue oxygen tension (PbtO2) may be 
a useful adjunct to ICP monitoring in these patients. Normal 
values for PbtO2 are 20 to 40 mm Hg, and critical levels are 
8 to 10 mm Hg. A recent clinical study sought to determine 
whether the addition of a PbtO2 monitor to guide therapy in 
severe traumatic brain injury was associated with improved 
patient outcomes.67 Twenty-eight patients with severe traumatic 
brain injury (GCS score ≤8) were enrolled in an observational 
study at a level I trauma center. These patients received invasive 
ICP and PbtO2monitoring and were compared with 25 historical 
controls matched for age, injuries, and admission GCS score 
that had undergone ICP monitoring alone. Goals of therapy 
in both groups included maintaining an ICP <20 mm Hg and 
a CPP >60 mm Hg. Among patients with PbtO2 monitoring, 
therapy also was directed at maintaining PbtO2>25 mm Hg. The 
groups had similar mean daily ICP and CPP levels. The mortal-
ity rate in the historical controls treated with standard ICP and 
CPP management was 44%. Mortality was significantly lower 
in the patients who had therapy guided by PbtO2 monitoring in 
addition to ICP and CPP (25%; P<0.05). The benefits of PbtO2 
monitoring may include the early detection of brain tissue isch-
emia despite normal ICP and CPP. In addition, PbtO2-guided 
management may reduce potential adverse effects associated 
with therapies to maintain ICP and CPP.
CONCLUSIONS
Modern intensive care is predicated by the need and ability to 
continuously monitor a wide range of physiologic parameters. 
This capability has dramatically improved the care of critically ill 
patients and advanced the development of the specialty of critical 
care medicine. In some cases, the technological ability to measure 
such variables has surpassed our understanding of the significance 
or the knowledge of the appropriate intervention to ameliorate 
such pathophysiologic changes. In addition, the development 
of less invasive monitoring methods has been promoted by the 
recognition of complications associated with invasive monitor-
ing devices. The future portends the continued development of 
noninvasive monitoring devices along with their application in an 
evidenced-based strategy to guide rational therapy.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
  1.	Bur A, Herkner H, Vlcek M, et al. Factors influencing the accu-
racy of oscillometric blood pressure measurement in critically 
ill patients. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(3):793-799.
  2.	Fischer MO, Avram R, Carjaliu I, et al. Non-invasive continu-
ous arterial pressure and cardiac index monitoring with Nexfin 
after cardiac surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(4):514-521.
  3.	Traore O, Liotier J, Souweine B. Prospective study of arterial 
and central venous catheter colonization and of arterial- and 
central venous catheter-related bacteremia in intensive care 
units. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(6):1276-1280.
  4.	Landesberg G, Mosseri M, Wolf Y, Vesselov Y, Weissman C. 
Perioperative myocardial ischemia and infarction: identifica-
tion by continuous 12-lead electrocardiogram with online ST-
segment monitoring. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(2):264-270.
  5.	Yu H, Pi-Hua F, Yuan W, et al. Prediction of sudden cardiac 
death in patients after acute myocardial infarction using T-wave 
alternans: a prospective study. J Electrocardiol. 2012;45(1): 
60-65.
  6.	Chen WL, Tsai TH, Huang CC, Chen JH, Kuo CD. Heart rate 
variability predicts short-term outcome for successfully resusci-
tated patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 
2009;80(10)1114-1118.
  7.	Hravnak M, Edwards L, Clontz A, et al. Defining the incidence 
of cardiorespiratory instability in patients in step-down units 
using an electronic integrated monitoring system. Arch Intern 
Med. 2008;168(12):1300-1308.
  8.	Hayashi H, Amano M. Does ultrasound imaging before puncture 
facilitate internal jugular vein cannulation? Prospective random-
ized comparison with landmark-guided puncture in ventilated 
patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2002;16(5):572-575.
  9.	Mihm FG, Gettinger A, Hanson CW III, et al. A multicenter 
evaluation of a new continuous cardiac output pulmonary artery 
catheter system. Crit Care Med. 1998;26(8):1346-1350.
10.	London MJ, Moritz TE, Henderson WG, et al. Standard versus 
fiberoptic pulmonary artery catheterization for cardiac surgery 
413
PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENT
CHAPTER 13
in the Department of Veterans Affairs: a prospective, obser-
vational, multicenter analysis. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(4): 
860-870.
11.	Rivers EP, Ander DS, Powell D. Central venous oxygen satura-
tion monitoring in the critically ill patient. Curr Opin Crit Care. 
2001;7(3):204-211.
12.	Varpula M, Karlsson S, Ruokonen E, Pettila V. Mixed venous 
oxygen saturation cannot be estimated by central venous oxy-
gen saturation in septic shock. Intens Care Med. 2006;32(9): 
1336-1343.
13.	Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed 
therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1368-1377.
14.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sepsis 
campaign: international guidelines for management of severe 
sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(2):580-637.
15.	Connors AF Jr., Speroff T, Dawson NV, et al. The effective-
ness of right heart catheterization in the initial care of critically 
ill patients. SUPPORT Investigators. JAMA. 1996;276(11): 
889-897.
16.	Pearson KS, Gomez MN, Moyers JR, Carter JG, Tinker JH. 
A cost/benefit analysis of randomized invasive monitor-
ing for patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 
1989;69(3):336-341.
17.	Tuman KJ, McCarthy RJ, Spiess BD, et al. Effect of pulmonary 
artery catheterization on outcome in patients undergoing coro-
nary artery surgery. Anesthesiology. 1989;70(2):199-206.
18.	Bender JS, Smith-Meek MA, Jones CE. Routine pulmonary 
artery catheterization does not reduce morbidity and mortality 
of elective vascular surgery: results of a prospective, random-
ized trial. Ann Surg. 1997;226(3):229-236.
19.	Valentine RJ, Duke ML, Inman MH, et al. Effectiveness of 
pulmonary artery catheters in aortic surgery: a randomized 
trial. J Vasc Surg. 1998;27(2):203-211; discussion 11-2.
20.	Sandham JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, et al. A randomized, con-
trolled trial of the use of pulmonary-artery catheters in high-
risk surgical patients. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(1):5-14.
21.	Harvey S, Harrison DA, Singer M, et al. Assessment of the 
clinical effectiveness of pulmonary artery catheters in manage-
ment of patients in intensive care (PAC-Man): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366(9484):472-477.
22.	Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al. Impact of the 
pulmonary artery catheter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis 
of randomized clinical trials. JAMA. 2005;294(13):1664-1670.
23.	Binanay C, Califf RM, Hasselblad V, et al. Evaluation study 
of congestive heart failure and pulmonary artery catheteriza-
tion effectiveness: the ESCAPE trial. JAMA. 2005;294(13): 
1625-1633.
24.	National Heart Lung, Blood Institute Acute Respira-
tory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) Clinical Trials Network, 
Wheeler AP, et al. Pulmonary-artery versus central venous 
catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. N Engl J 
Med. 2006;354(21):2213-2224.
25.	Wiener RS, Welch HG. Trends in the use of the pulmo-
nary artery catheter in the United States, 1993-2004. JAMA. 
2007;298(4):423-429.
26.	Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, Waxman K, Lee TS. 
Prospective Trial of Supranormal Values of Survivors as 
Therapeutic Goals in High-Risk Surgical Patients. Chest. 
1988;94(6):1176-1186.
27.	Bishop MH, Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, et al. Prospective, 
randomized trial of survivor values of cardiac index, oxygen 
delivery, and oxygen consumption as resuscitation endpoints 
in severe trauma. J Trauma. 1995;38(5):780-787.
28.	Heyland DK, Cook DJ, King D, Kernerman P, Brun-Buisson 
C. Maximizing oxygen delivery in critically ill patients: a 
methodologic appraisal of the evidence. Crit Care Med. 
1996;24(3):517-524.
29.	Alia I, Esteban A, Gordo F, et al. A randomized and controlled 
trial of the effect of treatment aimed at maximizing oxygen 
delivery in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. Chest. 
1999;115(2):453-461.
30.	Gan TJ, Soppitt A, Maroof M, et al. Goal-directed intraopera-
tive fluid administration reduces length of hospital stay after 
major surgery. Anesthesiology. 2002;97(4):820-826.
31.	Dark PM, Singer M. The validity of trans-esophageal Doppler 
ultrasonography as a measure of cardiac output in critically ill 
adults. Intensive Care Med. 2004;30(11):2060-2066.
32.	Imhoff M, Lehner JH, Lohlein D. Noninvasive whole-body 
electrical bioimpedance cardiac output and invasive thermodi-
lution cardiac output in high-risk surgical patients. Crit Care 
Med. 2000;28(8):2812-2818.
33.	Marik PE. Noninvasive cardiac output monitors: a state-of the-
art review. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013;27(1):121-134.
34.	Mielck F, Buhre W, Hanekop G, et al. Comparison of continu-
ous cardiac output measurements in patients after cardiac sur-
gery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2003;17(2):211-216.
35.	Remmen JJ, Aengevaeren WR, Verheugt FW, et al. Finapres 
arterial pulse wave analysis with Modelflow is not a reliable 
non-invasive method for assessment of cardiac output. Clin Sci 
(Lond). 2002;103(2):143-149.
36.	van Heerden PV, Baker S, Lim SI, Weidman C, Bulsara M. 
Clinical evaluation of the non-invasive cardiac output (NICO) 
monitor in the intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care. 
2000;28(4):427-430.
37.	Odenstedt H, Stenqvist O, Lundin S. Clinical evaluation of a 
partial CO2 rebreathing technique for cardiac output monitoring 
in critically ill patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2002;46(2): 
152-159.
38.	Godje O, Peyerl M, Seebauer T, et al. Central venous pressure, 
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, and intrathoracic blood 
volumes as preload indicators in cardiac surgery patients. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 1998;13(5):533-539.
39.	Pinsky MR, Teboul JL. Assessment of indices of preload and 
volume responsiveness. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2005;11(3): 
235-239.
40.	Gunn SR, Pinsky MR. Implications of arterial pressure varia-
tion in patients in the intensive care unit. Curr Opin Crit Care. 
2001;7(3):212-217.
41.	Mesquida J, Kim HK, Pinsky MR. Effect of tidal volume, 
intrathoracic pressure, and cardiac contractility on variations in 
pulse pressure, stroke volume, and intrathoracic blood volume. 
Intensive Care Med. 2011;37(10):1672-1679.
42.	Michard F, Boussat S, Chemla D, et al. Relation between 
respiratory changes in arterial pulse pressure and fluid respon-
siveness in septic patients with acute circulatory failure. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2000;162(1):134-138.
43.	Crookes BA, Cohn SM, Burton EA, Nelson J, Proctor KG. 
Noninvasive muscle oxygenation to guide fluid resuscitation 
after traumatic shock. Surgery. 2004;135(6):662-670.
44.	Cohn SM, Nathens AB, Moore FA, et al. Tissue oxygen satu-
ration predicts the development of organ dysfunction during 
traumatic shock resuscitation. J Trauma. 2007;62(1):44-54; 
discussion 54-5.
45.	Haller M, Kilger E, Briegel J, Forst H, Peter K. Continuous 
intra-arterial blood gas and pH monitoring in critically ill 
patients with severe respiratory failure: a prospective, criterion 
standard study. Crit Care Med. 1994;22(4):580-587.
46.	Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with tradi-
tional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome. The Acute Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome Network. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(18):1301-1308.
47.	Serpa Neto A, Cardoso SO, Manetta JA, et al. Association between 
use of lung-protective ventilation with lower tidal volumes and 
clinical outcomes among patients without acute respiratory distress 
syndrome: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2012;308(16):1651-1659.
414
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
48.	Tremper KK. Pulse oximetry. Chest. 1989;95(4):713-715.
49.	Shoemaker WC, Belzberg H, Wo CCJ, et al. Multicenter 
study of noninvasive monitoring systems as alternatives to 
invasive monitoring of acutely ill emergency patients. Chest. 
1998;114(6):1643-1652.
50.	Taenzer AH, Pyke JB, McGrath SP, Blike GT. Impact of pulse 
oximetry surveillance on rescue events and intensive care unit 
transfers: a before-and-after concurrence study. Anesthesiology. 
2010;112(2):282-287.
51.	Jubran A, Tobin MJ. Monitoring during mechanical ventilation. 
Clin Chest Med. 1996;17(3):453-473.
52.	Sugrue M. Abdominal compartment syndrome. Curr Opin Crit 
Care. 2005;11(4):333-338.
53.	Brain Trauma F, American Association of Neurological S, 
Congress of Neurological S, et al. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of severe traumatic brain injury. VI. Indications for intra-
cranial pressure monitoring. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24 Suppl: 
1S37-1S44.
54.	Brain Trauma F, American Association of Neurological S, 
Congress of Neurological S, et al. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of severe traumatic brain injury. VII. Intracranial pres-
sure monitoring technology. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24 Suppl: 
1S45-1S54.
55.	Juul N, Morris GF, Marshall SB, Marshall LF. Intracranial 
hypertension and cerebral perfusion pressure: influence on 
neurological deterioration and outcome in severe head injury. 
The Executive Committee of the International Selfotel Trial. J 
Neurosurg. 2000;92(1):1-6.
56.	Eisenberg HM, Frankowski RF, Contant CF, Marshall LF, 
Walker MD. High-dose barbiturate control of elevated intracra-
nial pressure in patients with severe head injury. J Neurosurg. 
1988;69(1):15-23.
57.	Brain Trauma F, American Association of Neurological S, Con-
gress of Neurological S, et al. Guidelines for the management of 
severe traumatic brain injury. IX. Cerebral perfusion thresholds. 
J Neurotrauma. 2007;24 Suppl: 1S59-1S64.
58.	Cremer OL, van Dijk GW, van Wensen E, et al. Effect of 
intracranial pressure monitoring and targeted intensive care on 
functional outcome after severe head injury. Crit Care Med. 
2005;33(10):2207-2213.
59.	Sigl JC, Chamoun NG. An introduction to bispectral analysis for 
the electroencephalogram. J Clin Monit. 1994;10(6):392-404.
60.	Gan TJ, Glass PS, Windsor A, et al. Bispectral index monitor-
ing allows faster emergence and improved recovery from pro-
pofol, alfentanil, and nitrous oxide anesthesia. BIS Utility Study 
Group. Anesthesiology. 1997;87(4):808-815.
61.	Simmons LE, Riker RR, Prato BS, Fraser GL. Assessing seda-
tion during intensive care unit mechanical ventilation with the 
Bispectral Index and the Sedation-Agitation Scale. Crit Care 
Med. 1999;27(8):1499-1504.
62.	Qureshi AI, Sung GY, Razumovsky AY, et al. Early iden-
tification of patients at risk for symptomatic vasospasm 
after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 
2000;28(4):984-990.
63.	Czosnyka M, Matta BF, Smielewski P, Kirkpatrick PJ, Pick-
ard JD. Cerebral perfusion pressure in head-injured patients: a 
noninvasive assessment using transcranial Doppler ultrasonog-
raphy. J Neurosurg. 1998;88(5):802-808.
64.	Feldman Z, Robertson CS. Monitoring of cerebral hemodynam-
ics with jugular bulb catheters. Crit Care Clin. 1997;13(1):51-77.
65.	Vigue B, Ract C, Benayed M, et al. Early SjvO2 monitor-
ing in patients with severe brain trauma. Intens Care Med. 
1999;25(5):445-451.
66.	Murkin JM, Arango M. Near-infrared spectroscopy as an index 
of brain and tissue oxygenation. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103 Suppl: 
1i3-li13.
67.	Stiefel MF, Spiotta A, Gracias VH, et al. Reduced mortality rate 
in patients with severe traumatic brain injury treated with brain 
tissue oxygen monitoring. J Neurosurg. 2005;103(5):805-811.
Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, 
Natural Orifice Transluminal 
Endoscopic Surgery, and Single-
Incision Laparoscopic Surgery
Donn H. Spight, John G. Hunter, and Blair A. Jobe
14
INTRODUCTION
Minimally invasive surgery describes an area of surgery that 
crosses all traditional disciplines, from general surgery to neuro-
surgery. It is not a discipline unto itself, but more a philosophy of 
surgery, a way of thinking. Minimally invasive surgery is a 
means of performing major operations through small inci-
sions, often using miniaturized, high-tech imaging systems, to 
minimize the trauma of surgical exposure. Some believe that the 
term minimal access surgery more accurately describes the small 
incisions generally necessary to gain access to surgical sites in 
high-tech surgery, but John Wickham’s term minimally invasive 
surgery (MIS) is widely used because it describes the paradox 
of postmodern high-tech surgery—small holes, big operations.
Robotic surgery today is practiced using a single platform 
(Intuitive, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) and should better be termed 
computer-enhanced surgery because the term robotics assumes 
autonomous action that is not a feature of the da Vinci robotic 
system. Instead, the da Vinci robot couples an ergonomic work-
station that features stereoptic video imaging and intuitive 
micromanipulators (surgeon side) with a set of arms deliver-
ing specialized laparoscopic instruments enhanced with more 
degrees of freedom than are allowed by laparoscopic surgery 
alone (patient side). A computer between the surgeon side and 
patient side removes surgical tremor and scales motion to allow 
precise microsurgery, which is helpful for microdissection and 
difficult anastomoses.
Single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS), also called 
laparoendoscopic single-site surgery (LESS), is a recent addi-
tion to the armamentarium of the minimally invasive surgeon. 
As ­public awareness has grown, so too has its spread outside of 
larger institutions. SILS challenges the well-established para-
digm of standard laparoscopic surgery by placing multiple trocars 
within the fascia at the umbilicus or through a single multichannel 
trocar at the umbilicus. The manipulation of tightly spaced instru-
ments across the fulcrum of the abdominal wall requires that the 
surgeon either operate in a crossed hands fashion or use special-
ized curved instruments to avoid clashing outside the body while 
working intra-abdominally. The primary advantage of SILS is the 
reduction to one surgical scar. Greater efficacy, safety, and cost 
savings have yet to be fully elucidated in the increasing number of 
procedures that are being attempted in this manner. The advent of 
a robotic SILS platform now enables the computer reassignment 
of the surgeon’s hands, thus eliminating the difficult ergonomic 
challenges making the technique far more accessible.
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) 
is an extension of interventional endoscopy. Using the mouth, 
anus, vagina, and urethra (natural orifices), flexible endoscopes 
are passed through the wall of the esophagus, stomach, colon, blad-
der, or vagina entering the mediastinum, the pleural space, or the 
peritoneal cavity. The advantage of this method of minimal access 
is principally the elimination of the scar associated with laparos-
copy or thoracoscopy. Other advantages have yet to be elucidated, 
including pain reduction, need for hospitalization, and cost savings.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Although the term minimally invasive surgery is relatively 
recent, the history of its component parts is nearly 100 years 
old. What is considered the newest and most popular variety 
Introduction	
415
Historical Background	
415
Physiology and Pathophysiology  
of Minimally Invasive Surgery	
417
Laparoscopy / 417
Thoracoscopy / 419
Extracavitary Minimally Invasive  
Surgery / 419
Anesthesia / 419
The Minimally Invasive Team / 419
Room Setup and the Minimally  
Invasive Suite / 420
Patient Positioning / 420
General Principles of Access / 421
Laparoscopic Access / 421
Access for Subcutaneous and  
Extraperitoneal Surgery / 422
Hand-Assisted Laparoscopic Access / 423
Natural Orifice Transluminal  
Endoscopic Surgery Access / 423
Single-Incision Laparoscopic  
Surgery Access / 423
Port Placement / 424
Imaging Systems / 425
Energy Sources for Endoscopic  
and Endoluminal Surgery / 426
Instrumentation / 429
Robotic Surgery / 429
Endoluminal and Endovascular  
Surgery / 431
Natural Orifice Transluminal  
Endoscopic Surgery / 432
Single-Incision Laparoscopic  
Surgery / 433
Special Considerations	
435
Pediatric Laparoscopy / 435
Laparoscopy during Pregnancy / 435
Minimally Invasive Surgery  
and Cancer Treatment / 436
Considerations in the Elderly and  
Infirm / 436
Cirrhosis and Portal Hypertension / 436
Economics of Minimally Invasive  
Surgery / 436
Education and Skill Acquisition / 437
Telementoring / 437
Innovation and Introduction  
of New Procedures / 437
1
chapter 
of MIS, laparoscopy, is, in fact, the oldest. Primitive lapa-
roscopy, placing a cystoscope within an inflated abdomen, 
was first performed by Kelling in 1901.1 Illumination of the 
abdomen required hot elements at the tip of the scope and 
was dangerous. In the late 1950s, Hopkins described the rod 
lens, a method of transmitting light through a solid quartz rod 
with no heat and little light loss.1 Around the same time, thin 
quartz fibers were discovered to be capable of trapping light 
internally and conducting it around corners, opening the field 
of fiber optics and allowing the rapid development of flex-
ible endoscopes.2,3 In the 1970s, the application of flexible 
endoscopy grew faster than that of rigid endoscopy except in 
a few fields such as gynecology and orthopedics.4 By the mid-
1970s, rigid and flexible endoscopes made a rapid transition 
from diagnostic instruments to therapeutic ones. The explosion 
of video-assisted surgery in the past 20 years was a result of 
the development of compact, high-resolution, charge-coupled 
devices (CCDs) that could be mounted on the internal end of 
flexible endoscopes or on the external end of a Hopkins tele-
scope. Coupled with bright light sources, fiber-optic cables, 
and high-definition video monitors, the videoendoscope has 
changed our understanding of surgical anatomy and reshaped 
surgical practice.
Flexible endoscopic imaging started in the 1960s with 
the first bundling of many quartz fibers into bundles, one for 
illumination and one for imaging. The earliest upper endo-
scopes revolutionized the diagnosis and treatment of gastro-
esophageal reflux and peptic ulcer disease and made possible 
early detection of upper and lower gastrointestinal (GI) cancer 
at a stage that could be cured. The first endoscopic surgical 
procedure was the colonoscopic polypectomy, developed by 
Shinya and Wolfe, two surgeons from New York City. The 
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) invented by 
Gauderer and Ponsky may have been the first NOTES pro-
cedure, reported in 1981.5 Endoscopic pancreatic pseudocyst 
drainage is thought to be the next NOTES procedure devel-
oped; however, there was little energy and money put into the 
development of NOTES until a number of gastroenterologists 
claimed the ability to remove the gallbladder with a flexible 
endoscope, using a transgastric technique. With this pro-
nouncement, the surgical community took notice and seized 
the momentum for NOTES research and development. Today 
most intra-abdominal NOTES procedures remain within the 
realm of research or incorporate a hybrid laparoscopic tech-
nique outside of highly specialized centers. Clinically the 
transvaginal approach has been studied the most extensively. 
Evaluation of 551 female patients from the ­German NOTES 
registry has shown conversion and complication rates simi-
lar to conventional laparoscopic surgery for cholecystectomy 
and appendectomy procedures.6 Endoscopic mucosal resection 
(EMR) of early-stage esophageal and gastric lesions has revo-
lutionized the management of these malignancies. The per-
oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) procedure for achalasia is 
showing clinical efficacy and gaining popularity.
As the race to minimize the size and increase the func-
tionality of laparoscopic instruments progressed, the notion of 
using fewer access points to accomplish the same operations 
resulted in the development of single-incision laparoscopic 
surgery (SILS), synonymously termed laparoendoscopic 
single-site surgery (LESS). Viewed as a progression of lapa-
roscopic surgery, SILS has recently garnered greater enthusi-
asm over its transvisceral NOTES counterpart.7 Currently the 
single-incision technique is used regularly across a wide vari-
ety of surgical areas including general, urologic, gynecologic, 
colorectal, and bariatric surgery.8 Although optical imaging 
produced the majority of MIS procedures, other (traditionally 
radiologic) imaging technologies allowed the development 
of innovative procedures in the 1970s. Fluoroscopic imaging 
allowed the adoption of percutaneous vascular procedures, the 
most revolutionary of which was balloon angioplasty. Balloon-
based procedures spread into all fields of medicine used to 
open up clogged lumens with minimal access. Stents were then 
developed that were used in many disciplines to keep the newly 
ballooned segment open. The culmination of fluoroscopic bal-
loon and stent proficiency is exemplified by the transvenous 
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt and by the aortic stent graft, 
which has nearly replaced open elective abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm repair.
MIS procedures using ultrasound imaging have been lim-
ited to fairly crude exercises, such as fragmenting kidney stones 
and freezing liver tumors, because of the relatively low resolu-
tion of ultrasound devices. Newer, high-resolution ultrasound 
methods with high-frequency crystals may act as a guide while 
performing minimally invasive resections of individual layers 
of the intestinal wall.
Axial imaging, such as computed tomography (CT), has 
allowed the development of an area of MIS that often is not 
recognized because it requires only a CT scanner and a long 
needle. CT-guided drainage of abdominal fluid collections and 
percutaneous biopsy of abnormal tissues are minimally invasive 
416
Key Points
1 	 Minimally invasive surgery describes a philosophical approach 
to surgery in which access trauma is minimized without com-
promising the quality of the surgical procedure.
2 	 The carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum used for laparoscopy 
induces some unique pathophysiologic consequences.
3 	 Robotic surgery has been most valuable in the pelvis for per-
formance of minimally invasive prostatectomy and gyneco-
logic and fertility procedures.
4 	 Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery represents a 
new opportunity to develop truly scar-free surgery.
5 	 Single-incision laparoscopic surgery reduces the amount of 
abdominal wall trauma but presents unique challenges to 
the traditional tenets of laparoscopic ergonomics.
6 	 Laparoscopy during pregnancy is best performed in the 
second trimester and is safe if appropriate monitoring is 
performed.
7 	 Laparoscopic surgery for cancer is also appropriate if good 
tissue handling techniques are maintained.
8 	 Training for laparoscopy requires practice outside of the 
operating room in a simulation laboratory.
417
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
anesthetic agent, the incision (even if small), and the induced 
pneumoperitoneum.
Laparoscopy
The unique feature of laparoscopic surgery is the need to lift 
the abdominal wall from the abdominal organs. Two methods 
have been devised for achieving this.10 The first, used by most 
surgeons, is a pneumoperitoneum. Throughout the early twenti-
eth century, intraperitoneal visualization was achieved by inflat-
ing the abdominal cavity with air, using a sphygmomanometer 
bulb.11 The problem with using air insufflation is that nitrogen 
is poorly soluble in blood and is slowly absorbed across the 
peritoneal surfaces. Air pneumoperitoneum was believed to 
be more painful than nitrous oxide (N2O) pneumoperitoneum, 
but less painful than carbon dioxide (CO2) pneumoperitoneum. 
­Subsequently, CO2 and N2O were used for inflating the 
abdomen. N2O had the advantage of being physiologi-
cally inert and rapidly absorbed. It also provided better anal-
gesia for laparoscopy performed under local anesthesia when 
compared with CO2 or air.12 Despite initial concerns that N2O 
would not suppress combustion, controlled clinical trials have 
established its safety within the peritoneal cavity.13 In addition, 
N2O has been shown to reduce the intraoperative end-tidal CO2 
and minute ventilation required to maintain homeostasis when 
compared to CO2 pneumoperitoneum.13 The effect of N2O on 
tumor biology and the development of port site metastasis are 
unknown. As such, caution should be exercised when perform-
ing laparoscopic cancer surgery with this agent. Finally, the 
safety of N2O pneumoperitoneum in pregnancy has yet to be 
elucidated.
The physiologic effects of CO2 pneumoperitoneum can be 
divided into two areas: (a) gas-specific effects and (b) pressure-
specific effects (Fig. 14-1). CO2 is rapidly absorbed across the 
peritoneal membrane into the circulation. In the circulation, 
CO2 creates a respiratory acidosis by the generation of carbonic 
acid.14 Body buffers, the largest reserve of which lies in bone, 
absorb CO2 (up to 120 L) and minimize the development of 
hypercarbia or respiratory acidosis during brief endoscopic pro-
cedures.14 Once the body buffers are saturated, respiratory aci-
dosis develops rapidly, and the respiratory system assumes the 
burden of keeping up with the absorption of CO2 and its release 
from these buffers.
means of performing procedures that previously required a celi-
otomy. CT-guided percutaneous radiofrequency (RF) ablation 
has emerged as a useful treatment for primary and metastatic 
liver tumors. This procedure also is performed laparoscopically 
under ultrasound guidance.9
A powerful, noninvasive method of imaging that will 
allow the development of the least invasive—and potentially 
noninvasive—surgery is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
MRI is an extremely valuable diagnostic tool, but it is only 
slowly coming to be of therapeutic value. One obstacle to the 
use of MRI for MIS is that image production and refreshment 
of the image as a procedure progresses are slow. Another is that 
all instrumentation must be nonmetallic when working with the 
powerful magnets of an MRI scanner. Moreover, MRI magnets 
are bulky and limit the surgeon’s access to the patient. Open 
magnets have been developed that allow the surgeon to stand 
between two large MRI coils, obtaining access to the portion of 
the patient being scanned. The advantage of MRI, in addition to 
the superb images produced, is that there is no radiation expo-
sure to patient or surgeon. Some neurosurgeons are accumu-
lating experience using MRI to perform frameless stereotactic 
surgery.
Robotic surgery has been dreamed about for some time, 
and many science fiction–like devices have been developed 
over the years to provide mechanical assistance for the surgeon. 
The first computer-assisted robot was designed to accurately 
drill femoral shaft bone for wobble-free placement of hip pros-
theses. Although the concept was appealing, the robot proved 
no better than a skilled orthopedic surgeon and was a good deal 
slower. Following this, the first and only two commercially 
successful robots for laparoscopic surgery were developed 
in California. Computer Motion, founded by Yulun Wang in 
Santa Barbara, used National Science Foundation funds to cre-
ate a mechanical arm, the Aesop robot, which held and moved 
the laparoscope with voice, foot, or hand control. In Northern 
California, a master-slave system first developed for surgery 
on the multinational space station by Philip Green was pur-
chased by Fred Moll and Lonnie Smith, and then reengineered 
with the surgeon in mind to create a remarkably intuitive 
computer-enhanced surgical platform. The company, Intuitive 
Surgical, was aptly named, and their primary product, the da 
Vinci robot, is currently the only major robotic platform on 
the market. Although eschewed by many experienced laparos-
copists, the da Vinci achieved a toehold among many skilled 
surgeons who found that the robot could facilitate MIS proce-
dures that were difficult with standard laparoscopic procedures. 
The latest iteration of the da Vinci platform released in 2009 
features high-definition, three-dimensional vision and a dual-
console capability allowing greater visualization, assistance, 
and instruction capabilities.
PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  
OF MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY
Even with the least invasive of the MIS procedures, physi-
ologic changes occur. Many minimally invasive procedures 
require minimal or no sedation, and there are few adverse con-
sequences to the cardiovascular, endocrinologic, or immuno-
logic systems. The least invasive of such procedures include 
stereotactic biopsy of breast lesions and flexible GI endos-
copy. Minimally invasive procedures that require general 
anesthesia have a greater physiologic impact because of the 
2
Local effects
Peritoneal distention
Vagal reaction
Elevated diaphragm
Altered venous return
Pain
Systemic effects
Hypercarbia
Acidosis
Increased afterload
Increased catecholamines
Myocardial stress
CO2
Figure 14-1.  Carbon dioxide gas insufflated into the peritoneal 
cavity has both local and systemic effects that cause a complex 
set of hemodynamic and metabolic alterations. (Reproduced with 
permission from Hunter JG, ed. Bailliere’s Clinical Gastroenterol-
ogy Laparoscopic Surgery. London/Philadelphia: Bailliere Tindall; 
1993:758. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
418
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
In patients with normal respiratory function, this is not 
difficult; the anesthesiologist increases the ventilatory rate or 
vital capacity on the ventilator. If the respiratory rate required 
exceeds 20 breaths per minute, there may be less efficient gas 
exchange and increasing hypercarbia.15 Conversely, if vital 
capacity is increased substantially, there is a greater opportunity 
for barotrauma and greater respiratory motion–induced disrup-
tion of the upper abdominal operative field. In some situations, 
it is advisable to evacuate the pneumoperitoneum or reduce the 
intra-abdominal pressure to allow time for the anesthesiologist 
to adjust for hypercarbia.16 Although mild respiratory acidosis 
probably is an insignificant problem, more severe respiratory 
acidosis leading to cardiac arrhythmias has been reported.17 
Hypercarbia also causes tachycardia and increased systemic 
vascular resistance, which elevates blood pressure and increases 
myocardial oxygen demand.14,17
The pressure effects of the pneumoperitoneum on cardio-
vascular physiology also have been studied. In the hypovolemic 
individual, excessive pressure on the inferior vena cava and a 
reverse Trendelenburg position with loss of lower extremity 
muscle tone may cause decreased venous return and decreased 
cardiac output.14,18 This is not seen in the normovolemic patient. 
The most common arrhythmia created by laparoscopy is brady-
cardia. A rapid stretch of the peritoneal membrane often causes 
a vagovagal response with bradycardia and, occasionally, hypo-
tension.19 The appropriate management of this event is desuf-
flation of the abdomen, administration of vagolytic agents (e.g., 
atropine), and adequate volume replacement.20
With the increased intra-abdominal pressure compressing 
the inferior vena cava, there is diminished venous return from 
the lower extremities. This has been well documented in the 
patient placed in the reverse Trendelenburg position for upper 
abdominal operations. Venous engorgement and decreased 
venous return promote venous thrombosis.21,22 Many series 
of advanced laparoscopic procedures in which deep venous 
thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis was not used demonstrate the 
frequency of pulmonary embolus. This usually is an avoidable 
complication with the use of sequential compression stockings, 
subcutaneous heparin, or low molecular weight heparin.20,23 In 
short-duration laparoscopic procedures, such as appendectomy, 
hernia repair, or cholecystectomy, the risk of DVT may not be 
sufficient to warrant extensive DVT prophylaxis.
The increased pressure of the pneumoperitoneum is trans-
mitted directly across the paralyzed diaphragm to the thoracic 
cavity, creating increased central venous pressure and increased 
filling pressures of the right and left sides of the heart. If the 
intra-abdominal pressures are kept under 20 mmHg, the car-
diac output usually is well maintained.22–24 The direct effect 
of the pneumoperitoneum on increasing intrathoracic pressure 
increases peak inspiratory pressure, pressure across the chest 
wall, and also, the likelihood of barotrauma. Despite these 
concerns, disruption of blebs and consequent pneumothoraces 
are rare after uncomplicated laparoscopic surgery.24 Pneumo-
thoraces occurring with laparoscopic esophageal surgery may 
be very significant. The pathophysiology and management are 
discussed at the end of this section. Increased intra-abdominal 
pressure decreases renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, 
and urine output. These effects may be mediated by direct 
pressure on the kidney and the renal vein.25,26 The secondary 
effect of decreased renal blood flow is to increase plasma renin 
release, thereby increasing sodium retention. Increased circu-
lating antidiuretic hormone levels also are found during the 
pneumoperitoneum, increasing free water reabsorption in the 
distal tubules.27 Although the effects of the pneumoperitoneum 
on renal blood flow are immediately reversible, the hormonally 
mediated changes such as elevated antidiuretic hormone levels 
decrease urine output for up to 1 hour after the procedure has 
ended. Intraoperative oliguria is common during laparoscopy, 
but the urine output is not a reflection of intravascular volume 
status; intravenous (IV) fluid administration during an uncom-
plicated laparoscopic procedure should not be linked to urine 
output. Because insensible fluid losses through the open abdo-
men are eliminated with laparoscopy, the need for supplemen-
tal fluid during a laparoscopic surgical procedure should only 
keep up with venous pooling in the lower limbs, third-space 
losses into the bowel, and blood loss, which is generally less 
than occurs with an equivalent open operation.
The hemodynamic and metabolic consequences of pneu-
moperitoneum are well tolerated by healthy individuals for a 
prolonged period and by most individuals for at least a short 
period. Difficulties can occur when a patient with compromised 
cardiovascular function is subjected to a long laparoscopic pro-
cedure. It is during these procedures that alternative approaches 
should be considered or insufflation pressure reduced. Alterna-
tive gases that have been suggested for laparoscopy include the 
inert gases helium, neon, and argon. These gases are appealing 
because they cause no metabolic effects, but are poorly soluble in 
blood (unlike CO2 and N2O) and are prone to create gas emboli if 
the gas has direct access to the venous system.22 Gas emboli are 
rare but serious complications of laparoscopic surgery.23,28 They 
should be suspected if hypotension develops during insufflation. 
Diagnosis may be made by listening (with an esophageal stetho-
scope) for the characteristic “mill wheel” murmur. The treatment 
of gas embolism is to place the patient in a left lateral decubitus 
position with the head down to trap the gas in the apex of the 
right ventricle.23 A rapidly placed central venous catheter then 
can be used to aspirate the gas out of the right ventricle.
In some situations, minimally invasive abdominal sur-
gery should be performed without insufflation. This has led to 
the development of an abdominal lift device that can be placed 
through a 10- to 12-mm trocar at the umbilicus.29 These devices 
have the advantage of creating little physiologic derangement, 
but they are bulky and intrusive. The exposure and working room 
offered by lift devices also are inferior to those accomplished by 
pneumoperitoneum. Lifting the anterior abdominal wall reduces 
space available laterally and thereby displaces the bowel medi-
ally and anteriorly into the operative field. A pneumoperitoneum, 
with its well-distributed intra-abdominal pressure, provides bet-
ter exposure. Abdominal lift devices also cause more postop-
erative pain, but they do allow the performance of MIS with 
standard (nonlaparoscopic) surgical instruments.
Endocrine responses to laparoscopic surgery are not 
always intuitive. Serum cortisol levels after laparoscopic opera-
tions are often higher than after the equivalent operation per-
formed through an open incision.30 The greatest difference 
between the endocrine response of open and laparoscopic sur-
gery is the more rapid equilibration of most stress-mediated 
hormone levels after laparoscopic surgery. Immune suppression 
also is less after laparoscopy than after open surgery. There is a 
trend toward more rapid normalization of cytokine levels after 
a laparoscopic procedure than after the equivalent procedure 
performed by celiotomy.31
Transhiatal mobilization of the distal esophagus is com-
monly performed as a component of many laparoscopic upper 
419
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
abdominal procedures. If there is compromise of the mediastinal 
pleura with resultant CO2 pneumothorax, the defect should be 
enlarged so as to prevent a tension pneumothorax. Even with 
such a strategy, tension pneumothorax may develop, as medi-
astinal structures may seal the hole during inspiration, allowing 
the chest to fill during expiration. In addition to enlargement 
of the hole, a thoracostomy tube (chest tube) should be placed 
across the breach into the abdomen with intra-abdominal pres-
sures reduced below 8 mmHg, or a standard chest tube may be 
placed. When a pneumothorax occurs with laparoscopic Nissen 
fundoplication or Heller myotomy, it is preferable to place an 
18-French red rubber catheter with multiple side holes cut out of 
the distal end across the defect. At the end of the procedure, the 
distal end of the tube is pulled out a 10-mm port site (as the port 
is removed), and the pneumothorax is evacuated to a primitive 
water seal using a bowl of sterile water or saline. During laparo-
scopic esophagectomy, it is preferable to leave a standard chest 
tube, as residual intra-abdominal fluid will tend to be siphoned 
through the defect postoperatively, if the tube is removed at the 
end of the case.
Thoracoscopy
The physiology of thoracic MIS (thoracoscopy) is different 
from that of laparoscopy. Because of the bony confines of the 
thorax, it is unnecessary to use positive pressure when working 
in the thorax.32 The disadvantages of positive pressure in the 
chest include decreased venous return, mediastinal shift, and 
the need to keep a firm seal at all trocar sites. Without positive 
pressure, it is necessary to place a double-lumen endotracheal 
tube so that the ipsilateral lung can be deflated when the opera-
tion starts. By collapsing the ipsilateral lung, working space 
within the thorax is obtained. Because insufflation is unneces-
sary in thoracoscopic surgery, it can be beneficial to use stan-
dard instruments via extended port sites in conjunction with 
thoracoscopic instruments. This approach is particularly useful 
when performing advanced procedures such as thoracoscopic 
anatomic pulmonary resection.
Extracavitary Minimally Invasive Surgery
Many MIS procedures create working spaces in extrathoracic 
and extraperitoneal locations. Laparoscopic inguinal ­hernia 
repair usually is performed in the anterior extraperitoneal 
Retzius space.33,34 Laparoscopic nephrectomy often is per-
formed with retroperitoneal laparoscopy. Endoscopic retro-
peritoneal approaches to pancreatic necrosectomy have seen 
some limited use.35 Lower extremity vascular procedures and 
plastic surgical endoscopic procedures require the development 
of working space in unconventional planes, often at the level 
of the fascia, sometimes below the fascia, and occasionally in 
nonanatomic regions.36 Some of these techniques use insuffla-
tion of gas, but many use balloon inflation to develop the space, 
followed by low-pressure gas insufflation or lift devices to 
maintain the space (Fig. 14-2). These techniques produce fewer 
and less severe adverse physiologic consequences than does the 
pneumoperitoneum, but the insufflation of carbon dioxide into 
extraperitoneal locations can spread widely, causing subcutane-
ous emphysema and metabolic acidosis.
Anesthesia
Proper anesthesia management during laparoscopic surgery 
requires a thorough knowledge of the pathophysiology of 
the CO2 pneumoperitoneum.20 The laparoscopic surgeon can 
A
B
C
Figure 14-2.  Balloons are used to create extra-anatomic working 
spaces. In this example (A through C), a balloon is introduced into 
the space between the posterior rectus sheath and the rectus abdom-
inal muscle. The balloon is inflated in the preperitoneal space to 
create working room for extraperitoneal endoscopic hernia repair.
­influence cardiovascular performance by reducing or removing 
the CO2 pneumoperitoneum. Insensible fluid losses are negli-
gible, and therefore, IV fluid administration should not exceed 
that necessary to maintain circulating volume. MIS procedures 
are often outpatient procedures, so short-acting anesthetic agents 
are preferable. Because the factors that require hospitalization 
after laparoscopic procedures include the management of nau-
sea, pain, and urinary retention, the anesthesiologist should 
minimize the use of agents that provoke these conditions and 
maximize the use of medications that prevent such problems. 
Critical to the anesthesia management of these patients is the 
use of nonnarcotic analgesics (e.g., ketorolac) when hemosta-
sis allows it and the liberal use of antiemetic agents, including 
ondansetron and steroids.
The Minimally Invasive Team
From the beginning, the tremendous success of MIS was 
founded on the understanding that a team approach was nec-
essary. The many laparoscopic procedures performed daily 
range from basic to advanced complexity, and require that the 
surgical team have an intimate understanding of the operative 
conduct (Table 14-1). Minimally invasive procedures require 
complicated and fragile equipment that demands constant main-
tenance. In addition, multiple intraoperative adjustments to the 
equipment, camera, insufflator, monitors, and patient/surgeon 
420
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
­position are made during these procedures. As such, a coordi-
nated team approach is mandated to ensure patient safety and 
excellent outcomes. More and more, flexible endoscopes are 
used to guide or provide quality control for laparoscopic pro-
cedures. As NOTES, SILS, and robotic surgery penetrate the 
operative theatre, hybrid procedures (laparoscopy and endos-
copy) and complicated robotics cases will require a nursing staff 
capable of maintaining flexible endoscopes and understanding 
the operation of sophisticated technology.
A typical MIS team may consist of a laparoscopic surgeon 
and an operating room (OR) nurse with an interest in laparo-
scopic and endoscopic surgery. Adding dedicated assistants and 
circulating staff with an intimate knowledge of the equipment 
will add to and enhance the team nucleus. Studies have demon-
strated that having a designated laparoscopic team increases the 
efficiency and safety of laparoscopic surgery, which is trans-
lated into a benefit for patient and hospital.37
Room Setup and the Minimally Invasive Suite
Nearly all MIS, whether using fluoroscopic, ultrasound, or opti-
cal imaging, incorporates a video monitor as a guide. Occasion-
ally, two images are necessary to adequately guide the operation, 
as in procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography, laparoscopic common bile duct exploration, and 
laparoscopic ultrasonography. When two images are necessary, 
the images should be displayed on two adjacent video monitors 
or projected on a single screen with a picture-in-picture effect. 
The video monitor(s) should be set across the operating table 
from the surgeon. The patient should be interposed between 
the surgeon and the video monitor; ideally, the operative field 
also lies between the surgeon and the monitor. In pelviscopic 
surgery, it is best to place the video monitor at the patient’s feet, 
and in laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the monitor is placed at the 
10 o’clock position (relative to the patient) while the surgeon 
stands on the patient’s left at the 4 o’clock position. The insufflat-
ing and patient-monitoring equipment ideally also is placed across 
the table from the surgeon, so that the insufflating pressure and the 
patient’s vital signs and end-tidal CO2 tension can be monitored.
The development of the minimally invasive surgical suite 
has been a tremendous contribution to the field of laparoscopy 
Table 14-1
Laparoscopic surgical procedures
Basic
Advanced
Appendectomy
Nissen 
fundoplication
Lymph node 
dissection
Cholecystectomy Heller myotomy
Robotics
Hernia repair
Gastrectomy
Stereo imaging
Esophagectomy
Telemedicine
Enteral access
Laparoscopy-assisted 
procedures
Bile duct 
exploration
Hepatectomy
Colectomy
Pancreatectomy
Splenectomy
Prostatectomy
Adrenalectomy
Hysterectomy
Nephrectomy
in that it has facilitated the performance of advanced proce-
dures and techniques (Fig. 14-3). By having the core equipment 
(monitors, insufflators, and imaging equipment) located within 
mobile, ceiling-mounted consoles, the surgery team is able to 
accommodate and make small adjustments rapidly and con-
tinuously throughout the procedure. The specifically designed 
minimally invasive surgical suite serves to decrease equipment 
and cable disorganization, ease the movements of operative per-
sonnel around the room, improve ergonomics, and facilitate the 
use of advanced imaging equipment such as laparoscopic ultra-
sound.38 Although having a minimally invasive surgical suite 
available is very useful, it is not essential to successfully carry 
out advanced laparoscopic procedures.
Patient Positioning
Patients usually are placed in the supine position for laparo-
scopic surgery. When the operative field is the gastroesophageal 
junction or the left lobe of the liver, it is easiest to operate from 
between the legs. The legs may be elevated in Allen stirrups 
or abducted on leg boards to achieve this position. When pel-
vic procedures are performed, it usually is necessary to place 
the legs in Allen stirrups to gain access to the perineum. A lat-
eral decubitus position with the table flexed provides the best 
access to the retroperitoneum when performing nephrectomy or 
adrenalectomy. For laparoscopic splenectomy, a 45° tilt of the 
patient provides excellent access to the lesser sac and the lateral 
peritoneal attachments to the spleen. For thoracoscopic surgery, 
the patient is placed in the lateral position with table flexion to 
open the intercostal spaces and the distance between the iliac 
crest and costal margin (Fig. 14-4). Additional consideration 
must be made in robotic operations to position the patient appro-
priately before starting. Clashing of the robotic arms with sur-
rounding equipment or each other can occur if not positioned 
correctly. Once the robot is docked to the patient, the bed cannot 
be moved without undocking.
When the patient’s knees are to be bent for extended peri-
ods or the patient is going to be placed in a reverse Trendelen-
burg position for more than a few minutes, DVT prophylaxis 
should be used. Sequential compression of the lower extremi-
ties during prolonged (>90 minutes) laparoscopic procedures 
increases venous return and provides inhibition of thromboplas-
tin activation.
Figure 14-3.  An example of a typical minimally invasive surgery 
suite. All core equipment is located on easily movable consoles.
421
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
General Principles of Access
The most natural ports of access for MIS and NOTES are the 
anatomic portals of entry and exit. The nares, mouth, urethra, 
and anus are used to access the respiratory, GI, and urinary sys-
tems. The advantage of using these points of access is that no 
incision is required. The disadvantages lie in the long distances 
between the orifice and the region of interest. For NOTES 
procedures, the vagina may serve as another point of access, 
entering the abdomen via the posterior cul-de-sac of the pelvis. 
Similarly, the peritoneal cavity may be reached through the side 
wall of the stomach or colon.
Access to the vascular system may be accomplished under 
local anesthesia by cutting down and exposing the desired 
Figure 14-4.  Proper padding and protection of pressure points 
is an essential consideration in laparoscopic and thoracoscopic 
approaches. In preparation for thoracoscopy, this patient is placed 
in left lateral decubitus position with the table flexed, which serves 
to open the intercostal spaces and increase the distance between the 
iliac crest and the inferior costal margin.
vessel, usually in the groin. Increasingly, vascular access is 
obtained with percutaneous techniques using a small incision, 
a needle, and a guidewire, over which are passed a variety of 
different-sized access devices. This approach, known as the 
Seldinger technique, is most frequently used by general sur-
geons for placement of Hickman catheters, but also is used to 
gain access to the arterial and venous system for performance of 
minimally invasive procedures. Guidewire-assisted, Seldinger-
type techniques also are helpful for gaining access to the gut 
for procedures such as PEG, for gaining access to the biliary 
system through the liver, and for gaining access to the upper 
urinary tract.
In thoracoscopic surgery, the access technique is similar 
to that used for placement of a chest tube. In these procedures, 
general anesthesia and single lung ventilation are essential. A 
small incision is made over the top of a rib and, under direct 
vision, carried down through the pleura. The lung is collapsed, 
and a trocar is inserted across the chest wall to allow access 
with a telescope. Once the lung is completely collapsed, subse-
quent access may be obtained with direct puncture, viewing all 
entry sites through the videoendoscope. Because insufflation 
of the chest is unnecessary, simple ports that keep the small 
incisions open are all that is required to allow repeated access 
to the thorax.
Laparoscopic Access
The requirements for laparoscopy are more involved, because 
the creation of a pneumoperitoneum requires that instruments of 
access (trocars) contain valves to maintain abdominal inflation.
Two methods are used for establishing abdominal access 
during laparoscopic procedures.39,40 The first, direct puncture 
laparoscopy, begins with the elevation of the relaxed abdominal 
wall with two towel clips or a well-placed hand. A small inci-
sion is made in the umbilicus, and a specialized spring-loaded 
(Veress) needle is placed in the abdominal cavity (Fig. 14-5). 
With the Veress needle, two distinct pops are felt as the surgeon 
passes the needle through the abdominal wall fascia and the 
peritoneum. The umbilicus usually is selected as the preferred 
Figure 14-5.  A. Insufflation of the abdomen is accomplished with a Veress needle held at its serrated collar with a thumb and forefinger. 
B. Because the linea alba is fused to the umbilicus, the abdominal wall is grasped with fingers or penetrating towel clip to elevate the abdominal 
wall away from the underlying structures.
422
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
point of access because, in this location, the abdominal wall 
is quite thin, even in obese patients. The abdomen is inflated 
with a pressure-limited insufflator. CO2 gas usually is used, with 
maximal pressures in the range of 14 to 15 mmHg. During the 
process of insufflation, it is essential that the surgeon observe 
the pressure and flow readings on the monitor to confirm an 
intraperitoneal location of the Veress needle tip (Fig. 14-6). 
Laparoscopic surgery can be performed under local anesthesia, 
but general anesthesia is preferable. Under local anesthesia, 
N2O is used as the insufflating agent, and insufflation is stopped 
after 2 L of gas is insufflated or when a pressure of 10 mmHg 
is reached.
After peritoneal insufflation, direct access to the abdomen 
is obtained with a 5- or 10-mm trocar. The critical issues for safe 
direct-puncture laparoscopy include the use of a vented stylet 
for the trocar, or a trocar with a safety shield or dilating tip. The 
trocar must be pointed away from the sacral promontory and 
the great vessels.41 Patient position should be surveyed before 
trocar placement to ensure a proper trajectory. For performance 
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the trocar is angled toward the 
right upper quadrant.
Occasionally, the direct peritoneal access (Hasson) tech-
nique is advisable.42 With this technique, the surgeon makes a 
small incision just below the umbilicus and under direct vision 
locates the abdominal fascia. Two Kocher clamps are placed 
on the fascia, and with curved Mayo scissors, a small incision 
is made through the fascia and underlying peritoneum. A fin-
ger is placed into the abdomen to make sure that there is no 
adherent bowel. A sturdy suture is placed on each side of the 
fascia and secured to the wings of a specialized trocar, which 
is then passed directly into the abdominal cavity (Fig. 14-7). 
Rapid insufflation can make up for some of the time lost with 
the initial dissection. This technique is preferable for the abdo-
men of patients who have undergone previous operations in 
which small bowel may be adherent to the undersurface of the 
abdominal wound. The close adherence of bowel to the perito-
neum in the previously operated abdomen does not eliminate 
the possibility of intestinal injury but should make great vessel 
injury extremely unlikely. Because of the difficulties in visual-
izing the abdominal region immediately adjacent to the primary 
trocar, it is recommended that the telescope be passed through a 
Figure 14-6.  It is essential to be able to interpret the insufflator 
pressure readings and flow rates. These readings indicate proper 
intraperitoneal placement of the Veress needle.
Figure 14-7.  The open laparoscopy technique involves identifica-
tion and incision of the peritoneum, followed by the placement of a 
specialized trocar with a conical sleeve to maintain a gas seal. Spe-
cialized wings on the trocar are attached to sutures placed through 
the fascia to prevent loss of the gas seal.
Linea alba
Peritoneum
Blunt tip Hasson 
trocar
secondary trocar to inspect the site of initial abdominal access.40 
Secondary punctures are made with 5- and 10-mm trocars. For 
safe access to the abdominal cavity, it is critical to visualize all 
sites of trocar entry.41,42 At the completion of the operation, all 
trocars are removed under direct vision, and the insertion sites 
are inspected for bleeding. If bleeding occurs, direct pressure 
with an instrument from another trocar site or balloon tampon-
ade with a Foley catheter placed through the trocar site gener-
ally stops the bleeding within 3 to 5 minutes. When this is not 
successful, a full-thickness abdominal wall suture has been used 
successfully to tamponade trocar site bleeding.
It is generally agreed that 5-mm trocars need no site sutur-
ing. Ten-millimeter trocars placed off the midline and above the 
transverse mesocolon do not require repair. Conversely, if the 
fascia has been dilated to allow the passage of the gallbladder or 
other organ, it should be repaired at the fascial level with inter-
rupted sutures. The port site may be closed with suture deliv-
ery systems similar to crochet needles enabling mass closure of 
the abdominal wall. This is especially helpful in obese patients 
where direct fascial closure may be challenging, through a small 
skin incision. Failure to close lower abdominal trocar sites that 
are 10 mm in diameter or larger can lead to an incarcerated 
hernia.
Access for Subcutaneous and  
Extraperitoneal Surgery
There are two methods for gaining access to nonanatomic 
spaces. For retroperitoneal locations, balloon dissection is effec-
tive. This access technique is appropriate for the extraperitoneal 
repair of inguinal hernias and for retroperitoneal surgery for 
adrenalectomy, nephrectomy, lumbar discectomy, pancreatic 
necrosectomy, or para-aortic lymph node dissection.43,44 The 
initial access to the extraperitoneal space is performed in a way 
similar to direct puncture laparoscopy, except that the last layer 
(the peritoneum) is not traversed. Once the transversalis fascia 
has been punctured, a specialized trocar with a balloon on the 
end is introduced. The balloon is inflated in the extraperitoneal 
space to create a working chamber. The balloon then is deflated 
423
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
and a Hasson trocar is placed. An insufflation pressure of 
10 mmHg usually is adequate to keep the extraperitoneal space 
open for dissection and will limit subcutaneous emphysema. 
Higher gas pressures force CO2 into the soft tissues and may 
contribute to hypercarbia. Extraperitoneal endosurgery provides 
less working space than laparoscopy but eliminates the possibil-
ity of intestinal injury, intestinal adhesion, herniation at the tro-
car sites, and ileus. These issues are important for laparoscopic 
hernia repair because extraperitoneal approaches prevent the 
small bowel from sticking to the prosthetic mesh.34
Subcutaneous surgery has been most widely used in car-
diac, vascular, and plastic surgery.36 In cardiac surgery, subcu-
taneous access has been used for saphenous vein harvesting, and 
in vascular surgery for ligation of subfascial perforating veins 
(Linton procedure). With minimally invasive techniques, the 
entire saphenous vein above the knee may be harvested through 
a single incision (Fig. 14-8).45,46 Once the saphenous vein is 
A
B
Figure 14-8.  A. With two small incisions, virtually the entire 
saphenous vein can be harvested for bypass grafting. B. The lighted 
retractor in the subcutaneous space during saphenous vein harvest 
is seen illuminating the skin. (Reproduced with permission of ­ 
Taylor & Francis, LLC from Jones GE, Eaves FE III, Howell RL, et al. 
Harvest of muscle, nerve, fascia, and vein. In: Bostwick J III, Eaves 
FE III, Nahai F, eds. Endoscopic Plastic Surgery. St Louis: Qual-
ity Medical Publishing, Inc.: Quality Medical Publishing, Inc.; 
1995:542. Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance 
Center, Inc.)
located, a long retractor that holds a 5-mm laparoscope allows 
the coaxial dissection of the vein and coagulation or clipping of 
each side branch. A small incision above the knee also can be 
used to ligate perforating veins in the lower leg.
Subcutaneous access also is used for plastic surgery pro-
cedures.46 Minimally invasive approaches are especially well 
suited to cosmetic surgery, in which attempts are made to hide 
the incision. It is easier to hide several 5-mm incisions than one 
long incision. The technique of blunt dissection along fascial 
planes combined with lighted retractors and endoscope-holding 
retractors is most successful for extensive subcutaneous surgery. 
Some prefer gas insufflation of these soft tissue planes. The pri-
mary disadvantage of soft tissue insufflation is that subcutane-
ous emphysema can be created.
Hand-Assisted Laparoscopic Access
Hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery is thought to combine the 
tactile advantages of open surgery with the minimal access of 
laparoscopy and thoracoscopy. This approach commonly is used 
to assist with difficult cases before conversion to celiotomy is 
necessary. Additionally, hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery is 
used to help surgeons negotiate the steep learning curve associ-
ated with advanced laparoscopic procedures.47 This technology 
uses an entryway for the hand that preserves the pneumoperi-
toneum and enables laparoscopic visualization in combination 
with the use of minimally invasive instruments (Fig. 14-9). For-
mal investigation of this modality has been limited primarily to 
case reports and small series and has focused primarily on solid 
organ and colon surgery.
Intraperitoneal, intrathoracic, and retroperitoneal access 
for robotic surgery adheres to the principles of laparoscopic and 
thoracoscopic access; however, the port size for the primary 
puncture is 12 mm to allow placement of the stereo laparoscope. 
Remaining trocars are 8 mm.
Natural Orifice Transluminal  
Endoscopic Surgery Access
Multiple studies have shown safety in the performance of 
NOTES procedures. Transvaginal, transvesicle, transanal, trans-
colonic, transgastric, and transoral approaches have all been 
attempted with varying success. The ease of decontamination, 
entry, and closure of these structures create variable challenges. 
The transvaginal approach for resection of the uterus has been 
employed for many years by gynecologists and has been modi-
fied by laparoscopists with great success. Extraction of the 
gallbladder, kidney, bladder, large bowel, and stomach can be 
performed via the vagina. The esophagus can be traversed to 
enter the mediastinum. Leaving the orifice or organ of entry with 
an endoscope requires the use of an endoscopic needle knife fol-
lowed by submucosal tunneling or direct puncture and balloon 
dilation (Fig. 14-10). Closure has been performed using endo-
scopic clips or sutures with advanced endoscopic platforms.
Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery Access
There is no standardized approach for SILS, and access tech-
niques vary by surgeon preference. Traditionally, a single skin 
incision is made directly through the umbilical scar ranging from 
1 to 3 cm. Through this single incision, multiple low-profile tro-
cars can be placed separately into the fascia to allow insufflation, 
camera, and working instruments. The advantage of this tech-
nique is that conventional laparoscopic tools can be employed. 
The disadvantage becomes apparent when an extraction site 
424
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 14-9.  This is an example of hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery during left colectomy. The surgeon uses a hand to provide retraction 
and counter tension during mobilization of the colon from its retroperitoneal attachments, as well as during division of the mesocolon. This 
technique is particularly useful in the region of the transverse colon.
Figure 14-10.  Submucosal tunnel technique for transesophageal mediastinoscopy. (Reproduced with permission from Khashab MA, Kalloo 
AN. NOTES: current status and new horizons. Gastroenterology. 2012;142:704-710. © 2012 by the AGA Institute.)
C
D
E
A
B
is needed. A variety of specialized multilumen trocars are 
on the market that can be placed through the umbilical ring48 
(Fig. 14-11A,B). The advantages of these devices include 
faster access, improved safety, minimization of air leaks, and 
platform-derived instrument triangulation. The major disad-
vantage is cost.
Port Placement
Trocars for the surgeon’s left and right hand should be placed 
at least 10 cm apart. For most operations, it is possible to ­orient 
the telescope between these two trocars and slightly back from 
them. The ideal trocar orientation creates an equilateral ­triangle 
425
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
between the surgeon’s right hand, left hand, and the telescope, 
with 10 to 15 cm on each leg. If one imagines the target of 
the operation (e.g., the gallbladder or gastroesophageal junc-
tion) oriented at the apex of a second equilateral triangle built 
on the first, these four points of reference create a diamond 
(Fig. 14-12). The surgeon stands behind the telescope, which pro-
vides optimal ergonomic orientation but frequently requires that a 
camera operator (or mechanical camera holder) reach between the 
surgeon’s hands to guide the telescope. SILS is challenging for 
even the experienced laparoscopist because it violates most of the 
aforementioned ergonomic principles. Having only a single point 
of entry into the abdominal cavity creates an inherently crowded 
port and hand position. The inability to space trocars severely 
limits the ability to triangulate the left and right hand instruments. 
As a result, the surgeon must often work in a crossed hands fash-
ion (Fig. 14-13). Additionally, the axis of the camera view is often 
in line with the working instruments, making visualization dif-
ficult without a deflectable tip laparoscope.
The position of the operating table should permit the sur-
geon to work with both elbows in at the sides, with arms bent 
90° at the elbow.49 It usually is necessary to alter the operating 
table position with left or right tilt with the patient in the Tren-
delenburg or reverse Trendelenburg position, depending on the 
operative field.50,51
Imaging Systems
Two methods of videoendoscopic imaging are widely used. 
Both methods use a camera with a CCD, which is an array of 
photosensitive sensor elements (pixels) that convert the incom-
ing light intensity to an electric charge. The electric charge is 
subsequently converted into a black-and-white image.52
With videoendoscopy, the CCD chip is placed on the inter-
nal end of a long, flexible endoscope. With older ­flexible endo-
scopes, thin quartz fibers are packed together in a bundle, and the 
CCD camera is mounted on the external end of the endoscope. 
Most standard GI endoscopes have the CCD chip at the distal 
Multiple trocars
through single
skin incision 
Single port
accommodates
multiple trocars
A
B
Figure 14-11.  A. Specialized multilumen trocars can facilitate instrument placement. B. For single-incision laparoscopic surgery, multiple 
fascial punctures can be performed via a single skin incision. (Illustration by Corinne Sandone. © 2014 JHU. Reprinted with permission.)
THE DIAMOND OF SUCCESS
"Home plate"
(telescope)
"First base"
(R hand)
"Third base"
(L hand)
"Second base"
(hiatal hernia)
15  cm
Figure 14-12.  The diamond configuration created by placing the 
telescope between the left and the right hand, recessed from the 
target by about 15 cm. The distance between the left and the right 
hand is also ideally 10 to 15 cm. In this “baseball diamond” con-
figuration, the surgical target occupies the second base position.
Figure 14-13.  The single point of abdominal entry for trocars often 
requires that the surgeon work in a crossed hands fashion. (Illustration 
by Corinne Sandone. © 2014 JHU. Reprinted with permission.)
426
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 14-14.  A. The laparoscope tips come in a variety of 
angled configurations. All laparoscopes have a 70° field of view. 
A 30°-angled scope enables the surgeon to view this field at a 30° 
angle to the long axis of the scope.
end, but small, delicate choledochoscopes and nephroscopes are 
equipped with fiber-optic bundles.53 Distally mounted CCD chips 
were developed for laparoscopy as well but remain very expen-
sive and therefore have not become as widely used.
Video cameras come in two basic designs. Nearly all lapa-
roscopic cameras contain a red, green, and blue input, and are 
identical to the color cameras used for television production.52 
An additional feature of many video cameras is digital enhance-
ment. Digital enhancement detects edges, areas where there are 
drastic color or light changes between two adjacent pixels.54 By 
enhancing this difference, the image appears sharper and sur-
gical resolution is improved. New laparoscopic cameras con-
tain a high-definition (HD) chip, which increases the lines of 
resolution from 480 to 1080 lines. To enjoy the benefit of the 
clarity of HD video imaging, HD monitors also are necessary.
Priorities in a video imaging system for MIS are illumina-
tion first, resolution second, and color third. Without the first 
two attributes, video surgery is unsafe. Illumination and resolu-
tion are as dependent on the telescope, light source, and light 
cable as on the video camera used. Imaging for laparoscopy, 
thoracoscopy, and subcutaneous surgery uses a rigid metal 
telescope, usually 30 cm in length. Longer telescopes are avail-
able for obese patients and for reaching the mediastinum and 
deep in the pelvis from a periumbilical entry site. The standard 
telescope contains a series of quartz optical rods and focusing 
lenses.55 Telescopes vary in size from 2 to 12 mm in diameter. 
Because light transmission is dependent on the cross-sectional 
area of the quartz rod, when the diameter of a rod/lens system 
is doubled, the illumination is quadrupled. Little illumination is 
needed in highly reflective, small spaces such as the knee, and a 
very small telescope will suffice. When working in the abdomi-
nal cavity, especially if blood is present, the full illumination of 
a 10-mm telescope usually is necessary.
Rigid telescopes may have a flat or angled end. The flat 
end provides a straight view (0°), and the angled end provides 
an oblique view (30° or 45°).52 Angled telescopes allow greater 
flexibility in viewing a wider operative field through a single 
trocar site (Fig. 14-14A); rotating an angled telescope changes 
the field of view. The use of an angled telescope has distinct 
advantages for most videoendoscopic procedures, particu-
larly in visualizing the common bile duct during laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy or visualizing the posterior esophagus or the 
tip of the spleen during laparoscopic fundoplication. Flexible tip 
laparoscopes offer even greater optical freedom.
Light is delivered to the endoscope through a fiber-optic 
light cable. These light cables are highly inefficient, losing 
>90% of the light delivered from the light source. Extremely 
bright light sources (300 watts) are necessary to provide ade-
quate illumination for laparoscopic surgery.
The quality of the videoendoscopic image is only as good as 
the weakest component in the imaging chain (Fig. 14-15). 
Therefore, it is important to use a video monitor that has a 
­resolution equal to or greater than the camera being used.55 
­Resolution is the ability of the optical system to distinguish 
between line pairs. The larger the number of line pairs per 
millimeter, the sharper and more detailed the image. Most 
high-­resolution monitors have up to 700 horizontal lines. HD 
television can deliver up to eight times more resolution than 
standard monitors; when combined with digital enhancement, 
a very sharp and well-defined image can be achieved.52,55 A 
heads-up display is a high-resolution liquid crystal monitor that 
is built into eyewear worn by the surgeon.56 This technology 
allows the surgeon to view the endoscopic image and opera-
tive field simultaneously. The proposed advantages of heads-
up display include a high-resolution monocular image, which 
affords the surgeon mobility and reduces vertigo and eyestrain. 
However, this technology has not yet been widely adopted.
Interest in three-dimensional (3-D) laparoscopy has waxed 
and waned. 3-D laparoscopy provides the additional depth of 
field that is lost with two-dimensional endosurgery and improves 
performance of novice laparoscopists performing complex tasks 
of dexterity, including suturing and knot tying.57 The advantages 
of 3-D systems are less obvious to experienced laparoscopists. 
Additionally, because 3-D systems require the flickering of two 
similar images, which are resolved with special glasses, the 
images’ edges become fuzzy and resolution is lost. The opti-
cal accommodation necessary to rectify these slightly differing 
images is tiring and may induce headaches when one uses these 
systems for a long period of time. The da Vinci robot uses a spe-
cialized laparoscope with two optical bundles on opposite sides 
of the telescope. A specialized binocular eyepiece receives input 
from two CCD chips, each capturing the image from one of the 
two quartz rod lens systems, thereby creating true 3-D imaging 
without needing to employ active or passive technologies that 
have made 3-D laparoscopy so disappointing.
Single-incision laparoscopy presents new challenges to 
visualization of the operative field. In the traditional laparo-
scope, the light source enters the scope at a 90° angle. That 
position coupled with a bulky scope handle creates crowding in 
an already limited space. Additionally, because the scope and 
instruments enter the abdomen at the same point, an adequate 
perspective is often unobtainable even with a 30° scope. The 
advent of increased length laparoscopes with lighting coming 
from the end and a deflectable tip now allows the surgeon to 
re-create a sense of internal triangulation with little compromise 
externally. The ability to move the shaft of the scope off line 
while maintaining the same image provides a greater degree of 
freedom for the working ports.
Energy Sources for Endoscopic  
and Endoluminal Surgery
Many MIS procedures use conventional energy sources, but the 
benefits of bloodless surgery to maintain optimal visualization 
427
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
have spawned new ways of applying energy. The most common 
energy source is RF electrosurgery using an alternating cur-
rent with a frequency of 500,000 cycles/s (Hz). Tissue ­heating 
­progresses through the well-known phases of coagulation (60°C 
[140°F]), vaporization and desiccation (100°C [212°F]), and car-
bonization (>200°C [392°F]).58
The two most common methods of delivering RF electro-
surgery are with monopolar and bipolar electrodes. With mono-
polar electrosurgery, a remote ground plate on the patient’s leg 
or back receives the flow of electrons that originate at a point 
source, the surgical electrode. A fine-tipped electrode causes a 
high current density at the site of application and rapid tissue 
heating. Monopolar electrosurgery is inexpensive and easy to 
modulate to achieve different tissue effects.59 A short-duration, 
high-voltage discharge of current (coagulation current) provides 
extremely rapid tissue heating. Lower-voltage, higher-wattage 
current (cutting current) is better for tissue desiccation and 
vaporization. When the surgeon desires tissue division with the 
least amount of thermal injury and least coagulation necrosis, a 
cutting current is used.
With bipolar electrosurgery, the electrons flow between 
two adjacent electrodes. The tissue between the two electrodes 
is heated and desiccated. There is little opportunity for tissue 
cutting when bipolar current is used alone, but the ability to 
coapt the electrodes across a vessel provides the best method of 
small-vessel coagulation without thermal injury to adjacent tis-
sues60 (Fig. 14-16). Advanced laparoscopic device manufactur-
ers have leveraged the ability to selectively use bipolar energy 
and combined it with compressive force and a controllable blade 
to create a number of highly functional dissection and vessel-
sealing tools.
To avoid thermal injury to adjacent structures, the lapa-
roscopic field of view must include all uninsulated portions of 
the electrosurgical electrode. In addition, the integrity of the 
Figure 14-15.  The Hopkins rod lens telescope includes a series of optical rods that effectively transmit light to the eyepiece. The video 
camera is placed on the eyepiece to provide the working image. The image is only as clear as the weakest link in the image chain. CCD = 
charge-coupled device. (Reproduced with permission from Prescher et al.52 kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Lamp
Light source
Camera
controller
Camera
objective
lens
Relayed
image
Illumination
light guide
Image formed
by objective lens
Observation
position
Adaption optic
Objective
lens section
Relay
lens section
Eyepiece
lens section
Focus ring
CCD chip
Monitor
Condensor lens
Light guide cable
Figure 14-16.  An example of bipolar coagulation devices. The 
flow of electrons passes from one electrode to the other, and the 
intervening tissue is heated and desiccated.
insulation must be maintained and assured. Capacitive coupling 
occurs when a plastic trocar insulates the abdominal wall from 
the current; in turn, the current is bled off of a metal sleeve or 
laparoscope into the viscera54 (Fig. 14-17A). This may result in 
thermal necrosis and a delayed fecal fistula. Another potential 
mechanism for unrecognized visceral injury may occur with 
the direct coupling of current to the laparoscope and adjacent 
bowel58 (Fig. 14-17B).
Another method of delivering RF electrosurgery is argon 
beam coagulation. This is a type of monopolar electrosurgery in 
which a uniform field of electrons is distributed across a tissue 
surface by the use of a jet of argon gas. The argon gas jet distrib-
utes electrons more evenly across the surface than does spray 
428
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
electrofulguration. This technology has its greatest application 
for coagulation of diffusely bleeding surfaces such as the cut 
edge of liver or spleen. It is of less value in laparoscopic proce-
dures because the increased intra-abdominal pressures created 
by the argon gas jet can increase the chances of a gas embolus. 
It is paramount to vent the ports and closely monitor insufflation 
pressure when using this source of energy within the context of 
laparoscopy.
With endoscopic endoluminal surgery, RF alternating 
current in the form of a monopolar circuit represents the main-
stay for procedures such as snare polypectomy, sphincter-
otomy, lower esophageal sphincter ablation, and biopsy.61,62 
A grounding (return) electrode is necessary for this form of 
energy. ­Bipolar electrocoagulation is used primarily for thermal 
hemostasis. The electrosurgical generator is activated by a foot 
pedal so the endoscopist may keep both hands free during the 
­endoscopic procedure.
Gas, liquid, and solid-state lasers have been available 
for medical application since the mid-1960s.63 The CO2 laser 
(wavelength 10.6 μm) is most appropriately used for cutting 
and superficial ablation of tissues. It is most helpful in locations 
unreachable with a scalpel such as excision of vocal cord granu-
lomas. The CO2 laser beam must be delivered with a series of 
mirrors and is therefore somewhat cumbersome to use. The next 
most popular laser is the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet 
(Nd:YAG) laser. Nd:YAG laser light is 1.064 μm (1064 nm) 
in wavelength. It is in the near-infrared portion of the spectrum 
and, like CO2 laser light, is invisible to the naked eye. A unique 
feature of the Nd:YAG laser is that 1064-nm light is poorly 
absorbed by most tissue pigments and therefore travels deep 
into tissue.64 Deep tissue penetration provides deep tissue heat-
ing (Fig. 14-18). For this reason, the Nd:YAG laser is capable of 
the greatest amount of tissue destruction with a single applica-
tion.63 Such capabilities make it the ideal laser for destruction 
of large fungating tumors of the rectosigmoid, tracheobronchial 
tree, or esophagus. A disadvantage is that the deep tissue heating 
may cause perforation of a hollow viscus.
When it is desirable to coagulate flat lesions in the cecum, 
a different laser should be chosen. The frequency-doubled 
Nd:YAG laser, also known as the KTP laser (potassium thionyl 
phosphate crystal is used to double the Nd:YAG frequency), pro-
vides 532-nm light. This is in the green portion of the spectrum, 
and at this wavelength, selective absorption by red pigments in 
tissue (such as hemangiomas and arteriovenous malformations) 
is optimal. The depth of tissue heating is intermediate, between 
those of the CO2 and the Nd:YAG lasers. Coagulation (without 
vaporization) of superficial vascular lesions can be obtained 
without intestinal perforation.64
Conduction through 
ungrounded telescope
Cannula
Plastic cannula
Telescope
B
Capacitive coupled 
fault condition
Capacitively
coupled energy
to metal
cannula
Plastic collar
over metal
trocar
A
Figure 14-17.  A. Capacitive coupling occurs as a result of high current density bleeding from a port sleeve or laparoscope into adjacent 
bowel. B. Direct coupling occurs when current is transmitted directly from the electrode to a metal instrument or laparoscope, and then into 
adjacent tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Odell.58)
Figure 14-18.  This graph shows the absorption of light by vari-
ous tissue compounds (water, melanin, and oxyhemoglobin) as a 
function of the wavelength of the light. The nadir of the oxyhemo-
globin and melanin curves is close to 1064 nm, the wavelength of 
the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet laser. (Reproduced with 
permission from Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive 
Surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:28.)
Absorption coefficient
Wavelength (nm)
106
105
104
103
102
101
10–1
10–2
1
100
1000   
10,000
UV        Visible            Infared
HbO2
H2O
H2O
1064 nm
M
el
a
n
i
n
 
429
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
In flexible GI endoscopy, the CO2 and Nd:YAG lasers 
have largely been replaced by heater probes and endoluminal 
stents. The heater probe is a metal ball that is heated to a tem-
perature (60–100°C [140°–212°F]) that allows coagulation of 
bleeding lesions without perforation.
Photodynamic therapy is a palliative treatment for obstructing 
cancers of the GI tract.65 Patients are given an IV dose of por-
fimer sodium, which is a photosensitizing agent that is taken up 
by malignant cells. Two days after administration, the drug is 
endoscopically activated using a laser. The activated porfimer 
sodium generates oxygen free radicals, which kill the tumor 
cells. The tumor is later endoscopically débrided. The use of this 
modality for definitive treatment of early cancers is in experi-
mental phases and has yet to become established.
A unique application of laser technology provides 
extremely rapid discharge (<10–6 s) of large amounts of energy 
(>103 volts). These high-energy lasers, of which the pulsed dye 
laser has seen the most clinical use, allow the conversion of light 
energy to mechanical disruptive energy in the form of a shock 
wave. Such energy can be delivered through a quartz fiber, 
and with rapid repetitive discharges, can provide sufficient 
shock-wave energy to fragment kidney stones and gallstones.66 
Shock waves also may be created with miniature electric spark-
plug discharge systems known as electrohydraulic lithotriptors. 
These devices also are inserted through thin probes for ­endoscopic 
application. Lasers have the advantage of pigment selectivity, but 
electrohydraulic lithotriptors are more popular because they are 
substantially less expensive and are more compact.
Methods of producing shock waves or heat with ultrasonic 
energy are also of interest. Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy 
creates focused shock waves that intensify as the focal point of 
the discharge is approached. When the focal point is within the 
body, large amounts of energy are capable of fragmenting stones. 
Slightly different configurations of this energy can be used to 
provide focused internal heating of tissues. Potential applications 
of this technology include the ability to noninvasively produce 
sufficient internal heating to destroy tissue without an incision.
A third means of using ultrasonic energy is to create rap-
idly oscillating instruments that are capable of heating tissue 
with friction; this technology represents a major step forward in 
energy technology.67 An example of its application is the lapa-
roscopic coagulation shears device (Harmonic Scalpel), which 
is capable of coagulating and dividing blood vessels by first 
occluding them and then providing sufficient heat to weld the 
blood vessel walls together and to divide the vessel. This non-
electric method of coagulating and dividing tissue with a mini-
mal amount of collateral damage has facilitated the performance 
of numerous endosurgical procedures.68 It is especially useful 
in the control of bleeding from medium-sized vessels that are 
too big to manage with monopolar electrocautery and require 
bipolar desiccation followed by cutting.
Instrumentation
Hand instruments for MIS usually are duplications of conven-
tional surgical instruments made longer, thinner, and smaller at 
the tip. It is important to remember that when grasping tissue 
with laparoscopic instruments, a greater force is applied over 
a smaller surface area, which increases the risk for perforation 
or injury.69
Certain conventional instruments such as scissors are easy 
to reproduce with a diameter of 3 to 5 mm and a length of 20 to 
45 cm, but other instruments such as forceps and clamps cannot 
provide remote access. Different configurations of graspers were 
developed to replace the various configurations of surgical for-
ceps and clamps. Standard hand instruments are 5 mm in diame-
ter and 30 cm in length, but smaller and shorter hand instruments 
are now available for pediatric surgery, for microlaparoscopic 
surgery, and for arthroscopic procedures.69 A unique laparo-
scopic hand instrument is the monopolar electrical hook. This 
device usually is configured with a suction and irrigation appa-
ratus to eliminate smoke and blood from the operative field. The 
monopolar hook allows tenting of tissue over a bare metal wire 
with subsequent coagulation and division of the tissue.
Instrumentation for NOTES is still evolving, but many 
long micrograspers, microscissors, electrocautery adapters, 
suturing devices, clip appliers, and visceral closure devices 
are in design and application. These instruments often require 
an entirely different endoscopic platform requiring manipula-
tion by a surgeon and assistant to accomplish complex maneu-
vers. Techniques such as mucosotomy, hydrodissection, and 
clip application require specialized training. The sheer size of 
the instrumentation often requires an overtube to allow easy 
exchange throughout the procedure. Instrumentation for SILS 
seeks to restore the surgeon’s ability to triangulate the left and 
right hands through variation in length, mechanical articulation, 
or curved design. Additionally, a lower profile camera head 
helps reduce the instrument crowding that occurs at the single 
point of abdominal entry.
Robotic Surgery
The term robot defines a device that has been programmed 
to perform specific tasks in place of those usually performed 
by people. The devices that have earned the title “surgical 
robots” would be more aptly termed computer-enhanced sur-
gical devices, as they are controlled entirely by the surgeon 
for the purpose of improving performance. The first computer-
assisted surgical device was the laparoscopic camera holder 
(Aesop, Computer Motion, Goleta, CA), which enabled the 
surgeon to maneuver the laparoscope either with a hand con-
trol, foot control, or voice activation. Randomized studies 
with such camera holders demonstrated a reduction in opera-
tive time, steadier image, and a reduction in the number of 
required laparoscope cleanings.70 This device had the advan-
tage of eliminating the need for a human camera holder, which 
served to free valuable OR personnel for other duties. This 
technology has now been eclipsed by simpler systems using 
passive positioning of the camera with a mechanical arm, but 
the benefits of a steadier image and fewer members of the OR 
team remain.
The major revolution in robotic surgery was the develop-
ment of a master-slave surgical platform that returned the wrist 
to laparoscopic surgery and improved manual dexterity by 
developing an ergonomically comfortable work station, with 
3-D imaging, tremor elimination, and scaling of movement 
(e.g., large, gross hand movements can be scaled down to allow 
suturing with microsurgical precision) (Fig. 14-19). The most 
recent iteration of the robotic platform features a second con-
sole slave enabling greater assisting and teaching opportunities. 
The surgeon is physically separated from the operating table, 
and the working arms of the device are placed over the patient 
(Fig. 14-20). An assistant remains at the bedside and changes 
the instruments as needed, providing retraction as needed 
to facilitate the procedure. The robotic platform (da Vinci, 
Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA) was initially greeted with 
430
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 14-19.  Robotic instruments and hand controls. The sur-
geon is in a sitting position, and the arms and wrists are in an ergo-
nomic and relaxed position.
Figure 14-20.  Room setup and position of surgeon and assistant for robotic surgery. (©2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)
some skepticism by expert laparoscopists, as it was difficult 
to prove additional value for operations performed with the 
da Vinci robot. Not only were the operations longer and the 
equipment more expensive, but additional quality could not 
be demonstrated. Two randomized controlled trials compared 
robotic and conventional laparoscopic approaches to Nissen 
fundoplication.71,72 In both of these trials, the operative time 
was longer for robotic surgery, and there was no difference in 
ultimate outcome. Similar results were achieved for laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy.73 Nevertheless, the increased dexter-
ity provided by the da Vinci robot convinced many surgeons 
and health administrators that robotic platforms were worthy 
of investment, for marketing purposes if for no other reason. 
The success story for computer-enhanced surgery with the 
da Vinci started with cardiac surgery and migrated to the 
­pelvis. Mitral valve surgery, performed with right thora-
coscopic access, became one of the more popular procedures 
performed with the robot.74
To date, a myriad of publications have demonstrated suc-
cess performing procedures from thyroidectomies to colec-
tomies with total mesorectal excision. Almost any procedure 
performed laparoscopically has been attempted robotically, 
although true advantage is demonstrated only very sparingly. 
In most cases, increased cost and operative time challenge the 
notion of “better.”
The tidal wave of enthusiasm for robotic surgery came 
when most minimally invasive urologists declared robotic 
prostatectomy to be preferable to laparoscopic and open pros-
tatectomy.75 The great advantage—it would appear—of robotic 
3
431
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
Table 14-2
Modalities and techniques of restoring luminal patency
Modality
Technique
Core out
Photodynamic therapy
Laser
Coagulation
Endoscopic biopsy forceps
Chemical
Ultrasound
Fracture
Ultrasound
Endoscopic biopsy
Balloon
Dilate
Balloon
Bougie
Angioplasty
Endoscope
Bypass
Transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt
Surgical (synthetic or autologous conduit)
Stent
Self-expanding metal stent
Plastic stent
prostatectomy is the ability to visualize and spare the pelvic 
nerves responsible for erectile function. In addition, the cre-
ation of the neocystourethrotomy, following prostatectomy, was 
greatly facilitated by needle holders and graspers with a wrist 
in them. Female pelvic surgery with the da Vinci robot is also 
reaching wide appeal. The magnified imaging provided makes 
this approach ideal for microsurgical tasks such as reanastomo-
sis of the Fallopian tubes.
The final frontier for computer-enhanced surgery is the 
promise of telesurgery, in which the surgeon is a great distance 
from the patient (e.g., combat or space). This application has 
rarely been used, as the safety provided by having the surgeon 
at bedside cannot be sacrificed to prove the concept. However, 
remote laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been performed 
when a team of surgeons located in New York performed a 
cholecystectomy on a patient located in France.76
Endoluminal and Endovascular Surgery
The fields of vascular surgery, interventional radiology, neu-
roradiology, gastroenterology, general surgery, pulmonology, 
and urology all encounter clinical scenarios that require the 
urgent restoration of luminal patency. Based on this need, fun-
damental techniques have been pioneered that are applicable to 
all specialties and virtually every organ system. As a result, all 
minimally invasive surgical procedures, from coronary artery 
angioplasty to palliation of pancreatic malignancy, involve the 
use of access devices, catheters, guidewires, balloon dilators, 
stents, and other devices (e.g., lasers, atherectomy catheters) 
that are capable of opening up the occluded biologic cylinder77 
(Table 14-2). Endoluminal balloon dilators may be inserted 
through an endoscope, or they may be fluoroscopically guided. 
Balloon dilators all have low compliance—that is, the balloons 
do not stretch as the pressure within the balloon is increased. 
The high pressures achievable in the balloon create radial 
expansion of the narrowed vessel or orifice, usually disrupting 
the atherosclerotic plaque, the fibrotic stricture, or the muscular 
band (e.g., esophageal achalasia).78
Once the dilation has been attained, it is frequently ben-
eficial to hold the lumen open with a stent.79 Stenting is particu-
larly valuable in treating malignant lesions and atherosclerotic 
occlusions or aneurysmal disease (Fig. 14-21). Stenting is also 
of value to seal leaky cylinders, including aortic dissections, 
traumatic vascular injuries, leaking GI anastomoses, and fistu-
las. Stenting usually is not applicable for long-term manage-
ment of benign GI strictures except in patients with limited life 
expectancy (Fig. 14-22).79–81
A variety of stents are available that are divided into six 
basic categories: plastic stents, metal stents, drug-eluting stents 
(to decrease fibrovascular hyperplasia), covered metal stents, 
anchored stent grafts, and removable covered plastic stents80 
(Fig. 14-23). Plastic stents came first and are used widely as 
endoprostheses for temporary bypass of obstructions in the bili-
ary or urinary systems. Metal stents generally are delivered over 
a balloon and expanded with the balloon to the desired size. 
These metal stents usually are made of titanium or nitinol and 
are still used in coronary stenting. A chemotherapeutic agent 
Guidewire
Balloon
Sheath
Balloon with stent
Stent expanded
Gu
Guididididew
Ba
Ba
Ba
Ba
Ballllllllo
Sh
She
Balllloon
St
Sten
e t 
Stent in place
Figure 14-21.  The deployment of a metal stent across an ­isolated 
vessel stenosis is illustrated. (Reproduced with permission 
from Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:235.)
432
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 14-22.  This is an esophagram in a patient with severe dys-
phagia secondary to advanced esophageal cancer (A) before and (B) 
after placement of a covered self-expanding metal stent.
Figure 14-23.  Covered self-expanding metal stents. These devices 
can be placed fluoroscopically or endoscopically.
was added to coronary stents several years ago to decrease 
endothelial proliferation. These drug-eluting stents provide 
greater long-term patency but require long-term anticoagula-
tion with antiplatelet agents to prevent thrombosis.82 Coated 
metal stents are use to prevent tissue ingrowth. Ingrowth may 
be an advantage in preventing stent migration, but such tissue 
ingrowth may occlude the lumen and cause obstruction anew. 
This is a particular problem when stents are used for palliation 
of GI malignant growth and may be a problem for the long-
term use of stents in vascular disease. Filling the interstices 
with Silastic or other materials may prevent tumor ingrowth but 
also makes stent migration more likely. In an effort to minimize 
stent migration, stents have been incorporated with hooks and 
barbs at the proximal end of the stent to anchor it to the wall 
of the vessel. Endovascular stenting of aortic aneurysms has 
nearly replaced open surgery for this condition. Lastly, self-
expanding plastic stents have been developed as temporary 
devices to be used in the GI tract to close internal fistulas and 
bridge leaking anastomoses.
Natural Orifice Transluminal  
Endoscopic Surgery
The use of the flexible endoscope to enter the GI, urinary, or 
reproductive tracts and then traverse the wall of the structure 
to enter the peritoneal cavity, the mediastinum, or the chest has 
strong appeal to patients wishing to avoid scars and pain caused 
by abdominal wall trauma. In truth, transluminal surgery 
has been performed in the stomach for a long time, either 
from the inside out (e.g., percutaneous, PEG, and transgastric 
pseudocyst drainage) or from the outside in (e.g., laparoscopic 
assisted intragastric tumor resection). The catalyzing events for 
NOTES were the demonstration that a porcine gallbladder could 
be removed with a flexible endoscope passed through the wall 
of the stomach and then removed through the mouth, and the 
demonstration in a series of 10 human cases from India of the 
ability to perform transgastric appendectomy. Since that time, a 
great deal of money has been invested by endoscopic and MIS 
companies to help surgeons and gastroenterologists explore this 
new territory. Systemic inflammatory markers such as C-reactive 
protein, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin (IL)-1β, and 
IL-6 have been shown to be similar in transgastric and trans-
colonic NOTES when compared to laparoscopy in porcine 
models.83 Concerns about the safety of transluminal access and 
limitations in equipment remain the greatest barriers to expan-
sion. To date, the most headline-grabbing procedures have been 
the transvaginal and transgastric removal of the gallbladder84–86 
(Fig. 14-24). To ensure safety, all human cases thus far have 
involved laparoscopic assistance to aid in retraction and ensure 
adequate closure of the stomach or vagina. To date, thousands of 
transvaginal and transgastric procedures have been performed 
internationally, with two large registries demonstrating nonin-
feriority to conventional laparoscopy.87 The fact that the vast 
majority of these procedures are being done transvaginally cre-
ates an obvious limitation in applicability.
The rapid growth of endoscopic technology catalyzed 
by NOTES has already spun off new technologies capable of 
performing a wide variety of endoscopic surgical procedures 
from EMR, to ablation of Barrett’s esophagus, to creation of 
competent antireflux valves in patients with gastroesophageal 
reflux disease.
POEM has shown promise as a NOTES treatment for 
esophageal achalasia.88 In this procedure, a 1.5- to 2-cm muco-
sotomy is created within the anterior esophagus 10 cm proxi-
mal to the gastroesophageal junction. A submucosal tunnel is 
then created using a combination of electrocautery, hydrodis-
section, and carbon dioxide insufflation. The scope is advanced 
4
433
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14-24.  Transgastric cholecystectomy using natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery technology and one to three laparoscopic 
ports has been performed occasionally in several locations around the world. (Illustration by Jennifer Fairman. © 2007 JHU.  Reprinted with 
permission.)
beyond the gastroesophageal junction, and a circular myot-
omy is performed avoiding disruption of the longitudinal 
fibers. The mucosotomy is then closed using endoscopic clips 
(Fig. 14-25). Over 1000 clinical POEM cases have been per-
formed worldwide. Data from expert NOTES surgeons ­suggest 
that this selective myotomy avoids abdominal trauma and 
minimally disrupts the normal anatomic characteristics of the 
gastroesophageal junction while providing significant relief of 
symptoms.89 Randomized clinical trials and long-term follow-up 
need to be performed to further evaluate efficacy.
Although this application is still considered experimen-
tal, there is little doubt that when equivalent operations can 
be performed with less pain, fewer scars, and less disability, 
patients will flock to it. NOTES procedures are associated with 
an increased mental workload and significant learning curve 
for even experienced surgical endoscopists. Surgeons should 
engage only when they can perform these procedures with the 
safety and efficacy demanded by our profession.
Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery
As a surgical technique, SILS seems to be a natural progression 
from conventional laparoscopic surgery. As surgeons sought 
to reduce the number and size of abdominal wall trocars and 
NOTES procedures necessitated laparoscopic surveillance, the 
idea of a hybridization took off. An incision in the umbilicus, a 
preexisting scar, is thought to be less painful, have fewer wound 
complications, lead to quicker return to activity, and have a bet-
ter cosmetic appearance than conventional laparoscopy. ­Perhaps 
one of the earliest examples of SILS is the application of laparo-
scopic instrumentation to resect lesions in the rectum or sigmoid 
colon. Using the anus as the portal of entry, transanal endo-
scopic microsurgery (TEMS) employs a specialized multichan-
nel trocar to reach lesions located 8 to 18 cm away from the anal 
verge (Fig. 14-26).
More deformable versions of these complex trocars have 
been developed with features to allow insufflation and be ame-
nable to maintaining a seal within the natural orifice of the 
umbilicus (see Fig. 14-11). Ports typically contain three or four 
channels. The latter often affords the ability to place a dedicated 
retractor.
There are many challenges faced by the operating surgeon 
in SILS procedures. These include crowded trocar placement, 
a lack of triangulation of left and right hand instruments, 
frequent crossing or clashing of instruments, limited visu-
alization, and limited retraction ability. These challenges are 
mitigated by surgeon experience and the development of spe-
cialized instruments. Articulating or curved instruments of vary-
ing lengths and an extended length can improve working space. 
5
434
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
A
B
Figure 14-25.  A. Peroral endoscopic esophageal myotomy for the 
treatment of achalasia. B. Serial images showing overtube in sub-
mucosal tunnel, using needle knife to divide circular muscle fibers 
of esophagus, and closure of myotomy with clips. (A. From Inoue 
H, Minami H, Kobayashi Y, et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy 
(POEM) for esophageal achalasia. Endoscopy. 2010;42:265-
271. Thieme. B. From Rieder E, Dunst CM, Kastenmeier AS, et 
al. Development and technique of peroral endoscopic myotomy 
(POEM) for achalasia. Eur Surg. 2011;43/3:140-145. With kind 
permission from Springer Science + Business Media.)
Curved instruments are typically reusable and offer less clutter 
than their more sophisticated counterparts, providing some cost 
reduction (Fig. 14-27). A low-profile HD scope with or without a 
deflectable tip can improve visualization greatly. Even with such 
instrumentation, the learning curve is very steep, particularly 
when the surgeon is forced to work in a cross-handed technique. 
The accomplished SILS surgeon will possess a tool bag of inno-
vative strategies to retract structures like the gallbladder away 
from the operative field. These tricks may range from the use 
of percutaneous needlescopic instruments to the application of 
transfascial sutures. Expert consensus recommendations for effi-
cient SILS are shown in Tables 14-3 and 14-4.8 When performing 
SILS procedures, it is imperative to follow proven tenets of opera-
tive conduct such as visualizing the “critical view” of safety in a 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. As safety should always be the 
paramount concern, the addition of extra trocars or conversion to 
traditional laparoscopy should not be considered a failure.
Contraindications include those true of traditional lapa-
roscopy. Relative contraindications include previous surgery 
and high body mass index (BMI). Patients with a high BMI or 
Figure 14-26.  Transanal endoscopic microsurgery scope. 
(Illustration by Corinne Sandone. © 2014 JHU. Reprinted with 
permission.)
Figure 14-27.  Example of curved instruments used in single-incision 
laparoscopic surgery. (©2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted 
with permission.)
Table 14-3
Expert panel recommendations for accomplishing 
­single-incision laparoscopic surgery efficiently
Multichannel port preferably to be placed intraumbilically, 
but an extraumbilical approach can be used in certain cases
Extra ports should be used where there is a clinical need
When applicable, sutures can be useful for added retraction
Closure should be accomplished using sutures of absorbable 
material placed either continuously or interrupted
Skin should be closed with absorbable sutures or glue
Source: Ahmed I, Cianco F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of single-
incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views. Surg Laparosc 
Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012;22(3):194-199.
435
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
central obesity can pose a challenge because the umbilicus may 
be located far from operative target. Size and morphology of 
the target organ should always be considered when doing SILS.
Many studies have demonstrated equivalency to standard 
laparoscopic procedures regarding intraoperative and postop-
erative complications. However, it is questionable what the full 
benefit of the dramatic reduction in ergonomics and the increase 
in complexity provide beyond an improved cosmetic appearance. 
This is in large part due to the already improved benefits of 
laparoscopic surgery.
A meta-analysis performed by Ahmed and colleagues in 
2010 found the conversion rate from SILS to conventional lapa-
roscopy to be 0% to 24% for cholecystectomies, 0% to 41% 
for appendectomies, and 0% to 33% for nephrectomies.90 The 
most common complications were intra-abdominal abscesses 
and wound infections. The recently released robotics applica-
tion may provide the bridge necessary to bypass the significant 
technical skills learning curve required to operate through a 
single site (Fig. 14-28).
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Pediatric Laparoscopy
The advantages of MIS in children may be more significant 
than in the adult population. MIS in the adolescent is little dif-
ferent from that in the adult, and standard instrumentation and 
­trocar positions usually can be used. However, laparoscopy in 
the infant and young child requires specialized instrumenta-
tion. The instruments are shorter (15–20 cm), and many are 3 
mm in diameter rather than 5 mm. Because the abdomen of the 
child is much smaller than that of the adult, a 5-mm telescope 
provides sufficient illumination for most operations. The devel-
opment of 5-mm clippers and bipolar devices has obviated the 
need for 10-mm trocars in pediatric laparoscopy.91 Because 
Table 14-4
Expert panel recommendations for single-incision lapa-
roscopic surgery equipment and instrumentation
Recommended Equipment/
Instrumentation
Benefit to Surgeon
Slimline instruments with 
low-profile design
Reduces internal and external 
clashing
Varied-length instruments
Reduces extracorporeal 
clashing
Longer instruments
Advantageous for reaching 
the surgical field
Articulating (or prebent) 
instruments
Restore triangulation
Small-diameter, low-profile 
angle scope
Reduces clashing by 
providing additional space
High-definition camera
Achieves high-quality 
images for intraoperative 
visualization
Source: Ahmed I, Cianco F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of single-
incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views. Surg Laparosc 
Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012;22(3):194-199.
the abdominal wall is much thinner in infants, a pneumoperito-
neum pressure of 8 mmHg can provide adequate exposure. DVT 
is rare in children, so prophylaxis against thrombosis probably 
is unnecessary. A wide variety of pediatric surgical procedures 
are frequently performed with MIS access, from pull-through 
procedures for colonic aganglionosis (Hirschsprung’s disease) 
to repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernias.92
Laparoscopy during Pregnancy
Concerns about the safety of laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
or appendectomy in the pregnant patient have been thoroughly 
investigated and are readily managed. Access to the abdo-
men in the pregnant patient should take into consideration the 
height of the uterine fundus, which reaches the umbilicus at 
A
B
Figure 14-28.  A and B. Robotic single-incision surgery platform. 
(©2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)
436
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
20 weeks. In order not to damage the uterus or its blood 
supply, most surgeons feel that the open (Hasson) approach 
should be used in favor of direct puncture laparoscopy. The patient 
should be positioned slightly on the left side to avoid compression 
of the vena cava by the uterus. Because pregnancy poses a risk for 
thromboembolism, sequential compression devices are essential 
for all procedures. Fetal acidosis induced by maternal hyper-
carbia also has been raised as a concern. The arterial pH of the 
fetus follows the pH of the mother linearly; and therefore, fetal 
acidosis may be prevented by avoiding a respiratory acidosis in 
the mother.93 The pneumoperitoneum pressure induced by lapa-
roscopy is not a safety issue either as it has been proved that mid-
pregnancy uterine contractions provide a much greater pressure 
in utero than a pneumoperitoneum of 15 mmHg. More than 100 
cases of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in pregnancy have been 
reported with uniformly good results.94 The operation should be 
performed during the second trimester of pregnancy if possible. 
Protection of the fetus against intraoperative x-rays is impera-
tive. Some believe it advisable to track fetal pulse rates with a 
transvaginal ultrasound probe; however, the significance of fetal 
tachycardia or bradycardia is a bit unclear in the second trimester 
of pregnancy. To be prudent, however, heart rate decelerations 
reversibly associated with pneumoperitoneum creation might sig-
nal the need to convert to open cholecystectomy or appendectomy.
Minimally Invasive Surgery  
and Cancer Treatment
MIS techniques have been used for many decades to provide 
palliation for the patient with an obstructive cancer. Laser 
treatment, intracavitary radiation, stenting, and dilation are 
outpatient techniques that can be used to reestablish the continu-
ity of an obstructed esophagus, bile duct, ureter, or airway. MIS 
techniques also have been used in the staging of cancer. Medias-
tinoscopy is still used occasionally before thoracotomy to assess 
the status of the mediastinal lymph nodes. Laparoscopy also is 
used to assess the liver in patients being evaluated for pancre-
atic, gastric, or hepatic resection. New technology and greater 
surgical skills allow for accurate minimally invasive staging 
of cancer.95 Occasionally, it is appropriate to perform pallia-
tive measures (e.g., laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy to bypass a 
pancreatic cancer) at the time of diagnostic laparoscopy if diag-
nostic findings preclude attempts at curative resection.
Initially controversial, the role of MIS to provide a safe 
curative treatment of cancer has proven to be no different from 
the principles of open surgery. All gross and microscopic 
tumor should be removed (an R0 resection), and an ade-
quate lymphadenectomy should be performed to allow accurate 
staging. Generally, this number has been 10 to 15 lymph nodes, 
although there is still debate as to the value of more extensive 
lymphadenectomy. All of the major abdominal cancer opera-
tions have been performed with laparoscopy. Of the three major 
cancer resections of GI cancer (liver lobe, pancreatic head, and 
esophagus), only esophagectomy is routinely performed by 
a fair number of centers.96,97 Laparoscopic hepatectomy has 
attracted a loyal following, and distal pancreatectomy frequently 
is performed with laparoscopic access. In Japan, laparoscopic-
assisted gastrectomy has become quite popular for early gastric 
cancer, an epidemic in Japan far exceeding that of colon can-
cer in North America and Northern Europe. The most common 
cancer operation performed laparoscopically is segmental col-
ectomy, which has proven itself safe and efficacious in a multi-
center controlled randomized trial.98
Considerations in the Elderly and Infirm
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has made possible the removal 
of a symptomatic gallbladder in many patients previously 
thought to be too elderly or too ill to undergo a laparotomy. 
Older patients are more likely to require conversion to celiot-
omy because of disease chronicity.98
Operations on these patients require close monitoring of 
anesthesia. The intraoperative management of these patients 
may be more difficult with laparoscopic access than with open 
access. The advantage of MIS lies in what happens after the 
operation. Much of the morbidity of surgery in the elderly is 
a result of impaired mobility. In addition, pulmonary compli-
cations, urinary tract sepsis, DVT, pulmonary embolism, con-
gestive heart failure, and myocardial infarction often are the 
result of improper fluid management and decreased mobility. 
By allowing rapid and early mobilization, laparoscopic surgery 
has made possible the safe performance of procedures in the 
elderly and infirm.
Cirrhosis and Portal Hypertension
Patients with hepatic insufficiency pose a significant challenge 
for any type of surgical intervention.99 The ultimate surgical out-
come in this population relates directly to the degree of under-
lying hepatic dysfunction.100 Often, this group of patients has 
minimal reserve, and the stress of an operation will trigger com-
plete hepatic failure or hepatorenal syndrome. These patients 
are at risk for major hemorrhage at all levels, including trocar 
insertion, operative dissection in a field of dilated veins, and 
secondary to an underlying coagulopathy. Additionally, ascitic 
leak from a port site may occur, leading to bacterial peritonitis. 
Therefore, a watertight port site closure should be carried out 
in all patients.
It is essential that the surgeon be aware of the severity of 
hepatic cirrhosis as judged by a Model of End-Stage Liver Dis-
ease (MELD) score or Child’s classification. Additionally, the 
presence of portal hypertension is a relative contraindication to 
laparoscopic surgery until the portal pressures are reduced with 
portal decompression. For example, if a patient has an incarcer-
ated umbilical hernia and ascites, a preoperative paracentesis or 
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt procedure in con-
junction with aggressive diuresis may be considered. Because 
these patients commonly are intravascularly depleted, insuffla-
tion pressures should be reduced to prevent a decrease in cardiac 
output, and minimal amounts of Na+-sparing IV fluids should 
be given.
Economics of Minimally Invasive Surgery
Minimally invasive surgical procedures reduce the costs of sur-
gery most when length of hospital stay can be shortened and 
return to work is quickened. For example, shorter hospital stays 
can be demonstrated in laparoscopic cholecystectomy, Nissen 
fundoplication, splenectomy, and adrenalectomy. Procedures 
such as inguinal herniorrhaphy that are already performed as 
outpatient procedures are less likely to provide cost savings. 
Procedures that still require a 4- to 7-day hospitalization, such 
as laparoscopy-assisted colectomy, are less likely to deliver a 
lower bottom line than their open surgery counterparts. None-
theless, with responsible use of disposable instrumentation and 
a commitment to the most effective use of the inpatient setting, 
most laparoscopic procedures can be made less expensive than 
their conventional equivalents.
7
6
437
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
Education and Skill Acquisition
Historically, surgeons in training (residents, registrars, and fel-
lows) acquired their skills in minimally invasive techniques 
through a series of operative experiences of graded complexity. 
This training occurred on patients. Although such a paradigm 
did not compromise patient safety, learning in the OR is costly. 
In addition, the recent worldwide constraint placed on resident 
work hours makes it attractive to teach laparoscopic skills out-
side of the OR.
Skills labs started at nearly every surgical training center 
in the 1990s with low fidelity box-type trainers. These were 
rudimentary simulated abdominal cavities with a video camera, 
monitor, trocars, laparoscopic instruments, and target models. 
These targets were often as simple as a pegboard and rubber 
rings, or a latex drain to practice suturing and knot tying. Virtual 
reality training devices present a unique opportunity to improve 
and enhance experiential learning in endoscopy and laparoscopy 
for all surgeons. This technology has the advantage of enabling 
objective measurement of psychomotor skills, which can be 
used to determine progress in skill acquisition and, ultimately, 
technical competency.101 Several of these devices have been 
validated as a means of measuring proficiency in skill perfor-
mance. More importantly, training on virtual reality platforms 
has proven to translate to improved operative performance in 
randomized trials.102,103 Currently surgical skills labs are man-
datory for Residency Review Committee credentialing. 
­Successful completion of the Fundamentals of Laparo-
scopic Surgery (FLS) technical and cognitive examination 
became a mandatory prerequisite for the American Board of 
Surgery qualification examination in general surgery in 2010. 
In the future, institutions may require simulator training to the 
expert level as a prerequisite for performance of laparoscopic 
procedures in the OR. The Fundamental of Endoscopic Surgery 
(FES) and Fundamentals of Robotic Surgery (FRS) high stakes 
exams are both on the horizon for future surgical trainees. The 
American College of Surgeons has taken a leadership position 
in accrediting skills labs across the world as American College 
of Surgeons–accredited educational institutes.
Telementoring
In response to the Institute of Medicine’s call for the develop-
ment of unique technologic solutions to deliver health care to 
rural and underserved areas, surgeons are beginning to explore 
the feasibility of telementoring. Teleconsultation or telementoring 
is two-way audio and visual communication between two geo-
graphically separated providers. This communication can take 
place in the office setting or directly in the OR when complex 
scenarios are encountered. Although local communication chan-
nels may limit its performance in rural areas, the technology is 
available and currently is being used, especially in states and 
provinces with large geographically remote populations.103
Innovation and Introduction  
of New Procedures
The revolution in minimally invasive general surgery, which 
occurred in 1990, created ethical challenges for the profession. 
The problem was this: If competence is gained from experience, 
how was the surgeon to climb the competence curve (otherwise 
known as the learning curve) without injuring patients? If it was 
indeed impossible to achieve competence without making mis-
takes along the way, how should one effectively communicate 
this to patients such that they understand the weight of their 
decisions? Even more fundamentally important is determining 
the path that should be followed before one recruits the first 
patient for a new procedure.
Although procedure development is fundamentally dif-
ferent than drug development (i.e., there is great individual 
­variation in the performance of procedures, but no difference 
between one tablet and the next), adherence to a process simi-
lar to that used to develop a new drug is a reasonable path for 
a surgical innovator. At the outset, the surgeon must identify 
the problem that is not solved with current surgical procedures. 
For example, although the removal of a gallbladder through a 
Kocher incision is certainly effective, it creates a great deal of 
disability, pain, and scarification. As a result of those issues, 
many patients with very symptomatic biliary colic delayed 
operation until life-threatening complications occurred. Clearly, 
there was a need for developing a less invasive approach 
(Fig. 14-29).
Once the opportunity has been established, the next step 
involves a search through other disciplines for technologies and 
techniques that might be applied. Again, this is analogous to 
the drug industry, where secondary drug indications have often 
turned out to be more therapeutically important than the primary 
indication for drug development. The third step is in vivo stud-
ies in the most appropriate animal model. These types of studies 
are controversial because of the resistance to animal experimen-
tation, and yet without such studies, many humans would be 
Performance
General anesthesia
sterile technique
Video optics
?
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
?
?
Open surgery
Laparoscopic surgery
Seamless surgery
Progress in Surgery
Figure 14-29.  The progress of general sur-
gery can be reflected by a series of performance 
curves. General anesthesia and sterile technique 
allowed the development of maximally inva-
sive open surgery over the last 125 years. Video 
optics allowed the development of minimally 
invasive surgery over the last 25 years. Nonin-
vasive (seamless) surgery will result when a yet 
undiscovered transformational event allows sur-
gery to occur without an incision, and perhaps 
without anesthesia.
8
438
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
injured or killed during the developmental phase of medical 
drugs, devices, and techniques. These steps often are called the 
preclinical phase of procedure development.
The decision as to when such procedures are ready to 
come out of the lab is a difficult one. Put simply, the procedure 
should be reproducible, provide the desired effect, and not 
have serious side effects. Once these three criteria are reached, 
the time for human application has arrived. Before the surgeon 
discusses the new procedure with patients, it is important to 
achieve full institutional support. Involvement of the medi-
cal board, the chief of the medical staff, and the institutional 
review board is essential before commencing on a new proce-
dure. These bodies are responsible for the use of safe, high-
quality medical practices within their institution, and they will 
demand that great caution and all possible safeguards are in 
place before proceeding.
The dialogue with the patient who is to be first must be thor-
ough, brutally honest, and well documented. The psychology that 
allows a patient to decide to be first is quite interesting, and may, 
under certain circumstances, require psychiatric evaluation. Cer-
tainly if a dying cancer patient has a chance with a new drug, this 
makes sense. Similarly, if the standard surgical procedure has a 
high attendant morbidity and the new procedure offers a substan-
tially better outcome, the decision to be first is understandable. On 
the other hand, when the benefits of the new approach are small 
and the risks are largely unknown, a more complete psychological 
profile may be necessary before proceeding.
For new surgical procedures, it generally is wise to 
assemble the best possible operative team, including a surgeon 
experienced with the old technique, and assistants who have 
participated in the earlier animal work. This initial team of 
experienced physicians and nurses should remain together until 
full competence with the procedure is attained. This may take 
10 procedures, or it may take 50 procedures. The team will 
know that it has achieved competence when the majority of 
procedures take the same length of time and the team is relaxed 
and sure of the flow of the operation. This will complete phase 
I of the procedure development.
In phase II, the efficacy of the procedure is tested in a non-
randomized fashion. Ideally, the outcome of new techniques must 
be as good as or better than the procedure that is being replaced. 
This phase should occur at several medical centers to prove that 
good outcomes are achievable outside of the pioneering institu-
tion. These same requirements may be applied to the introduction 
of new technology into the OR. The value equation requires that 
the additional measurable procedure quality exceeds the additional 
measurable cost to the patient or healthcare system. In phase III, a 
randomized trial pits the new procedure against the old.
Once the competence curve has been climbed, it is appro-
priate for the team to engage in the education of others. Dur-
ing the ascension of the competence curve, other learners in the 
institution (i.e., surgical residents) may not have the opportunity 
to participate in the first case series. Although this may be dif-
ficult for them, the best interest of the patient must be put before 
the education of the resident.
The second stage of learning occurs when the new pro-
cedure has proven its value and a handful of experts exist, but 
the majority of surgeons have not been trained to perform the 
new procedure. In this setting, it is relatively unethical for sur-
geons to forge ahead with a new procedure in humans as if they 
had spent the same amount of time in intensive study that the 
first team did. The fact that one or several surgical teams were 
able to perform an operation does not ensure that all others 
with the same medical degrees can perform the operation with 
equal skill. It behooves the learners to contact the experts and 
request their assistance to ensure an optimal outcome at the 
new center. Although it is important that the learners contact 
the experts, it is equally important that the experts be willing 
to share their experience with their fellow professionals. As 
well, the experts should provide feedback to the learners as to 
whether they feel the learners are equipped to forge ahead on 
their own. If not, further observation and assistance from the 
experts are required. Although this approach may sound obvi-
ous, it is fraught with difficulties. In many situations, ego, com-
petitiveness, and monetary concerns have short-circuited this 
process and led to poor patient outcomes. To a large extent, MIS 
has recovered from the black eye it received early in develop-
ment, when inadequately trained surgeons caused an excessive 
number of significant complications.
If innovative procedures and technologies are to be 
developed and applied without the mistakes of the past, sur-
geons must be honest when they answer these questions: Is this 
procedure safe? Would I consider undergoing this procedure if 
I developed a surgical indication? Is the procedure as good as 
or better than the procedure it is replacing? Do I have the skills 
to apply this procedure safely and with equivalent results to 
the more experienced surgeon? Answering these questions in 
the affirmative should be a professional obligation. A negative 
response should motivate the surgeon to seek an alternative 
procedure or outside assistance before subjecting a patient to 
the new procedure.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Hopkins HH. Optical principles of the endoscope. In: Berci 
G, ed. Endoscopy. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 
1976:3.
2.	Katzir A. Optical fibers in medicine. Sci Am. 1989;260:120.
3.	Hirschowitz BI. A personal history of the fiberscope. Gastro-
enterology. 1979;76:864.
4.	Veritas TF. Coelioscopy: a synthesis of Georg Kelling’s work 
with insufflation, endoscopy, and luft tamponade. In: Litynski 
GS, ed. Highlights in the History of Laparoscopy. Frankfurt/
Main: Barbara Bernert Verlag; 1996:3.
5.	Ponsky JL, Gauderer MW. Percutaneous endoscopic gas-
trostomy: a nonoperative technique for feeding gastrostomy. 
­Gastrointest Endosc. 1981;27:9.
6.	Lehman KS, Ritz JP, Wibmer A, et al. The German registry 
for natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery: the report 
of the first 551 patients. Ann Surg. 2010;252:263-270.
7.	Autorino R, White WM, Gettman MT, et al. Public percep-
tion of “scarless” surgery: a critical analysis of the literature. 
Urology. 2012;80:495-502.
8.	Ahmed I, Cianco F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of sin-
gle-incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views. 
Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012;22(3):194-199.
9.	Wood BJ, Ramkaransingh JR, Fogo T, et al. Percutaneous 
tumor ablation with radiofrequency. Cancer. 2002;94:443.
10.	Smith RS, Fry WR, Tsoi EK, et al. Gasless laparoscopy 
and conventional instruments: the next phase of minimally 
­invasive surgery. Arch Surg. 1993;128:1102.
11.	Litynski GS. Highlights in the History of Laparoscopy. 
Frankfurt/­Main: Barbara Bernert Verlag; 1996:78.
439
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
12.	Hunter JG, Staheli J, Oddsdottir M, et al. Nitrous oxide 
­pneumoperitoneum revisited: is there a risk of combustion? 
Surg Endosc. 1995;9:501.
13.	Tsereteli Z, Terry ML, Bowers S, et al. Prospective random-
ized clinical trial comparing nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide 
pneumoperitoneum for laparoscopic surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 
2002;195:173.
14.	Callery MP, Soper NJ. Physiology of the pneumo-
peritoneum. In: Hunter JG, ed. Baillière’s Clinical 
Gastroenterology:­ ­Laparoscopic Surgery. London/Phila-
delphia: Baillière ­Tindall; 1993:757.
15.	Ho HS, Gunther RA, Wolfe B. Intraperitoneal carbon diox-
ide insufflation and cardiopulmonary functions. Arch Surg. 
1992;127:928.
16.	Wittgen CM, Andrus CH, Fitzgerald S, et al. Analysis of the 
hemodynamic and ventilatory effects of laparoscopic chole-
cystectomy. Arch Surg. 1991;126:997.
17.	Cullen DJ, Eger EI. Cardiovascular effects of carbon dioxide 
in man. Anesthesiology. 1974;41:345.
18.	 Cunningham AJ, Turner J, Rosenbaum S, et al. Transoesophageal 
echocardiographic assessment of haemodynamic function during 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Anaesth. 1993;70:621.
19.	Harris MNE, Plantevin OM, Crowther A, et al. Cardiac 
arrhythmias during anaesthesia for laparoscopy. Br J Anaesth. 
1984;56:1213.
20.	Borten M, Friedman EA. Choice of anaesthesia. In: Laparo-
scopic Complications: Prevention and Management. Toronto: 
BC Decker; 1986:173.
21.	Jorgenson JO, Hanel K, Lalak NJ, et al. Thromboembolic 
complications of laparoscopic cholecystectomy (letter). 
Br Med J. 1993;306:518.
22.	Ho HS, Wolfe BM. The physiology and immunology of endo-
surgery. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosur-
gery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:163.
23.	Sackier JM, Nibhanupudy B. The pneumoperitoneum-­
physiology and complications. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, 
Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-
Livingstone; 1996:155.
24.	Kashtan J, Green JF, Parsons EQ, et al. Hemodynamic 
effects of increased abdominal pressure. J Surg Res. 
1981;30:249.
25.	McDougall EM, Monk TG, Wolf JS Jr, et al. The effect of 
prolonged pneumoperitoneum on renal function in an animal 
model. J Am Coll Surg. 1996;182:317.
26.	Lindberg F, Bergqvist D, Bjorck M, et al. Renal hemodynam-
ics during carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum: an experimental 
study in pigs. Surg Endosc. 2003;17:480.
27.	Hazebroek EJ, de Vos tot Nederveen Cappel R, Gommers D, 
et al. Antidiuretic hormone release during laparoscopic donor 
nephrectomy. Arch Surg. 2002;137:600; discussion 605.
28.	Ostman PL, Pantle-Fisher FH, Fanre EA, et al. Circulatory 
collapse during laparoscopy. J Clin Anesth. 1990;2:129.
29.	Alijani A, Cuschieri A. Abdominal wall lift systems in lapa-
roscopic surgery: gasless and low-pressure systems. Semin 
Laparosc Surg. 2001;8:53.
30.	Ozawa A, Konishi F, Nagai H, et al. Cytokine and hormonal 
responses in laparoscopic-assisted colectomy and conven-
tional open colectomy. Surg Today. 2000;30:107.
31.	Burpee SE, Kurian M, Murakame Y, et al. The metabolic and 
immune response to laparoscopic versus open liver resection. 
Surg Endosc. 2002;16:899.
32.	Gossot D. Access modalities for thoracoscopic surgery. 
In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. 
New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:743.
33.	Memon MA, Cooper NJ, Memon B, et al. Meta-analysis of 
randomized clinical trials comparing open and laparoscopic 
inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2003;90:1479.
34.	Himpens J. Laparoscopic preperitoneal approach to the 
inguinal hernia. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. 
Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 
1996:949.
35.	Horvath KD, Kao LS, Wherry KL, et al. A technique for 
laparoscopic-assisted percutaneous drainage of infected 
pancreatic necrosis and pancreatic abscess. Surg Endosc. 
2001;15:1221.
36.	Eaves FF. Basics of endoscopic plastic surgery. In: Bost-
wick J, Eaves FF, Nahai F, eds. Endoscopic Plastic Surgery. 
St Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1995:59.
37.	Kenyon TA, Lenker MP, Bax TW, et al. Cost and benefit 
of the trained laparoscopic team. A comparative study of 
a designated nursing team vs. a nontrained team. Surg 
Endosc. 1997;11:812.
38.	Herron DM, Gagner M, Kenyon TL, et al. The minimally 
invasive surgical suite enters the 21st century. A discussion of 
critical design elements. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:415.
39.	Byron JW, Markenson G, Miyazawa K. A randomised com-
parison of Veress needle and direct insertion for laparoscopy. 
Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1993;177:259.
40.	Fletcher DR. Laparoscopic access. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, 
Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-
Livingstone; 1996:189.
41.	Hanney RM, Alle KM, Cregan PC. Major vascular injury and 
laparoscopy. Aust N Z J Surg. 1995;65:533.
42.	Catarci M, Carlini M, Gentileschi P, et al. Major and minor 
injuries during the creation of pneumoperitoneum. A multi-
center study on 12,919 cases. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:566.
43.	Siperstein AE, Berber E, Engle KL, et al. Laparoscopic pos-
terior adrenalectomy: technical considerations. Arch Surg. 
2000;135:967.
44.	Vasilev SA, McGonigle KF. Extraperitoneal laparo-
scopic para-aortic lymph node dissection. Gynecol Oncol. 
1996;61:315.
45.	Schurr UP, Lachat ML, Reuthebuch O, et al. Endoscopic 
saphenous vein harvesting for CABG—a randomized prospec-
tive trial. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;50:160.
46.	Lumsden AB, Eaves FF. Vein harvest. In: Bostwick J, Eaves 
FF, Nahai F, eds. Endoscopic Plastic Surgery. St. Louis: Quality 
Medical Publishing; 1995:535.
47.	Targarona EM, Gracia E, Rodriguez M, et al. Hand-assisted 
laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg. 2003;138:138.
48.	Ross S, Rosemurgy A, Albrink M, et al. Consensus state-
ment of the consortium for LESS cholecystectomy. Surg 
Endosc. 2012;26:2711-2716.
49.	Berquer R, Smith WD, Davis S. An ergonomic study of the 
optimum operating table height for laparoscopic surgery. Surg 
Endosc. 2002;16:416.
50.	Berguer R, Smith WD, Chung YH. Performing laparoscopic 
surgery is significantly more stressful for the surgeon than 
open surgery. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:1204.
51.	Emam TA, Hanna G, Cuschieri A. Ergonomic principles of 
task alignment, visual display, and direction of execution of 
laparoscopic bowel suturing. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:267.
52.	Prescher T. Video imaging. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, 
eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 
1996:41.
53.	Margulies DR, Shabot MM. Fiberoptic imaging and measurement. 
In: Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:7.
54.	Wenzl R, Lehner R, Holzer A, et al. Improved laparoscopic 
operating techniques using a digital enhancement video sys-
tem. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 1998;5:175.
55.	Berci G, Paz-Partlow M. Videoendoscopic technology. In: 
Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New 
York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:33.
440
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
56.	Levy ML, Day JD, Albuquerque F, et al. Heads-up intraop-
erative endoscopic imaging: a prospective evaluation of tech-
niques and limitations. Neurosurgery. 1997;40:526.
57.	Taffinder N, Smith SG, Huber J, et al. The effect of a second-
generation 3D endoscope on the laparoscopic precision of nov-
ices and experienced surgeons. Surg Endosc. 1999;13:1087.
58.	Odell RC. Laparoscopic electrosurgery. In: Hunter JG, Sackier 
JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. New York: McGraw-
Hill; 1993:33.
59.	Voyels CR, Tucker RD. Education and engineering solutions 
for potential problems with laparoscopic monopolar electro-
surgery. Am J Surg. 1992;164:57.
60.	Blanc B, d’Ercole C, Gaiato ML, et al. Cause and prevention 
of electrosurgical injuries in laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg. 
1994;179:161.
61.	Tucker RD. Principles of electrosurgery. In: Sivak MV, ed. 
Gastroenterologic Endoscopy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 2000:125.
62.	Barlow DE. Endoscopic application of electrosurgery: a 
review of basic principles. Gastrointest Endosc. 1982;28:73.
63.	Trus TL, Hunter JG. Principles of laser physics and tis-
sue interaction. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. 
Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 
1996:103.
64.	Bass LS, Oz MC, Trokel SL, et al. Alternative lasers for 
endoscopic surgery: comparison of pulsed thulium-holmium-
chromium:YAG with continuous-wave neodymium:YAG 
laser for ablation of colonic mucosa. Lasers Surg Med. 
1991;11:545.
65.	Greenwald BD. Photodynamic therapy for esophageal cancer. 
Chest Surg Clin North Am. 2000;10:625.
66.	Hunter JG, Bruhn E, Godman G, et al. Reflectance spectros-
copy predicts safer wavelengths for pulsed laser lithotripsy of 
gallstones (abstract). Gastrointest Endosc. 1991;37:273.
67.	Amaral JF, Chrostek C. Comparison of the ultrasonically acti-
vated scalpel to electrosurgery and laser for laparoscopic sur-
gery. Surg Endosc. 1993;7:141.
68.	Huscher CG, Liriei MM, Di Paola M, et al. Laparoscopic cho-
lecystectomy by ultrasonic dissection without cystic duct and 
artery ligature. Surg Endosc. 2003;17:442.
69.	Jobe BA, Kenyon T, Hansen PD, et al. Mini-laparoscopy: cur-
rent status, technology and future applications. Minim Invasive 
Ther Allied Technol. 1998;7:201.
70.	Aiono S, Gilbert JM, Soin B, et al. Controlled trial of the intro-
duction of a robotic camera assistant (EndoAssist) for laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1267.
71.	Melvin WS, Needleman BJ, Krause KR, et al. Computer-
enhanced vs. standard laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2002;6:11.
72.	Costi R, Himpens J, Bruyns J, et al. Robotic fundoplication: 
from theoretic advantages to real problems. J Am Coll Surg. 
2003;197:500.
73.	Ruurda JP, Broeders IA, Simmermacher RP, et al. Feasibil-
ity of robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery: an evaluation of 
35 robot-assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Surg 
­Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2002;12:41.
74.	Rodriguez E, Nifong LW, Chu MW, et al. Robotic mitral valve 
repair for anterior leaflet and bileaflet prolapsed. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2008;85:438; discussion 444.
75.	Menon M, Tewari A, Baize B, et al. Prospective comparison of 
radical retropubic prostatectomy and robot-assisted anatomic 
prostatectomy: the Vattikuti Urology Institute experience. 
Urology. 2002;60:864.
76.	Marescaux J, Leroy J, Gagner M, et al. Transatlantic robot-
assisted telesurgery. Nature. 2001;413:379.
77.	Fleischer DE. Stents, cloggology, and esophageal cancer. 
­Gastrointest Endosc. 1996;43:258.
78.	Foutch P, Sivak M. Therapeutic endoscopic balloon dilata-
tion of the extrahepatic biliary ducts. Am J Gastroenterol. 
1985;80:575.
79.	Hoepffner N, Foerster EC, Högemann B, et al. Long-term 
experience in wall stent therapy for malignant choledochoste-
nosis. Endoscopy. 1994;26:597.
80.	Kozarek RA, Ball TJ, Patterson D. Metallic self-expanding 
stent application in the upper gastrointestinal tract: caveats and 
concerns. Gastrointest Endosc. 1992;38:1.
81.	Anderson JR, Sorenson SM, Kruse A, et al. Randomized 
trial of endoscopic endoprosthesis versus operative bypass in 
malignant obstructive jaundice. Gut. 1989;30:1132.
82.	Ruygrok PN, Sim KH, Chan C, et al. Coronary interven-
tion with a heparin-coated stent and aspirin only. J Invasive 
­Cardiol. 2003;15:439.
83.	Hucl T, Benes M, Kocik M, et al. Comparison of inflam-
matory response to transgastric and transcolonic NOTES. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;75(4 Suppl):AB272.
84.	Bessler M, Stevens PD, Milone L, et al. Transvaginal lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy: laparoscopically assisted. Surg 
Endosc. 2008;22:1715.
85.	Marescaux J, Dallemagne B, Perretta S, et al. Surgery 
without scars: report of transluminal cholecystectomy in a 
human being. Arch Surg. 2007;142:823; discussion 826.
86.	Bessler M, Stevens PD, Milone L, et al. Transvaginal lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy: laparoscopically assisted. Surg 
Endosc. 2008;22:1715.
87.	Khashab MA, Kalloo AN. NOTES: current status and new 
horizons. Gastroenterology. 2012;142:704-710.
88.	Inoue H, Minami H, Kobayashi Y, et al. Peroral endoscopic 
myotomy (POEM) for esophageal achalasia. Endoscopy. 
2010;42:265-271.
89.	Kurian AA, Dunst CM, Sharata A, Bhayani NH, Reavis 
KM, Swanstom LL. Peroral endoscopic esophageal myot-
omy: defining the learning curve. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2013;12:S5016-S5107.
90.	Ahmed K, Wang TT, Patel VM, et al. The role of single 
incision laparoscopic surgery in abdominal and pel-
vic surgery: a systematic review. Surg Endosc. 2010;25: 
378-396.
91.	Georgeson KE. Pediatric laparoscopy. In: Toouli JG, Gossot 
D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: 
Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:929.
92.	Holcomb GW. Diagnostic laparoscopy: equipment, tech-
nique, and special concerns in children. In: Holcomb GW, 
ed. Pediatric Endoscopic Surgery. Norwalk: Appleton & 
Lange; 1993:9.
93.	Hunter JG, Swanstrom LL, Thornburg K. Carbon dioxide 
pneumoperitoneum induces fetal acidosis in a pregnant ewe 
model. Surg Endosc. 1995;9:272.
94.	Morrell DG, Mullins JR, Harrison P. Laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy during pregnancy in symptomatic patients. Surgery. 
1992;112:856.
95.	Callery MP, Strasberg SM, Doherty GM, et al. Staging lapa-
roscopy with laparoscopic ultrasonography: optimizing resect-
ability in hepatobiliary and pancreatic malignancy. J Am Coll 
Surg. 1997;185:33.
96.	Luketich JD, Alvelo-Rivera M, Buenaventura PO, et al. Mini-
mally invasive esophagectomy: outcomes in 222 patients. Ann 
Surg. 2003;238:486; discussion 494.
97.	Fleshman J, Sargent DJ, Green E, for the Clinical 
Outcomes of Surgical Therapy Study Group. Laparoscopic 
colectomy for cancer is not inferior to open surgery based 
on 5-year data from the COST Study Group trial. Ann 
Surg. 2007;246:655; discussion 662.
98.	Fried GM, Clas D, Meakins JL. Minimally invasive surgery in 
the elderly patient. Surg Clin North Am. 1994;74:375.
441
Minimally Invasive Surgery
CHAPTER 14
99.	Borman PC, Terblanche J. Subtotal cholecystectomy: for the 
difficult gallbladder in portal hypertension and cholecystitis. 
Surgery. 1985;98:1.
100.	Litwin DWM, Pham Q. Laparoscopic surgery in the compli-
cated patient. In: Eubanks WS, Swanstrom LJ, Soper NJ, eds. 
Mastery of Endoscopic and Laparoscopic Surgery. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2000:57.
101.	Gallagher AG, Smith CD, Bowers SP, et al. Psychomo-
tor skills assessment in practicing surgeons experienced in 
performing advanced laparoscopic procedures. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2003;197:479.
102.	Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, et al. Virtual reality 
training improves operating room performance: results of a 
randomized, double-blinded study. Ann Surg. 2002;236:458; 
discussion 463.
103.	Anvari M. Telesurgery: remote knowledge translation in clini-
cal surgery. World J Surg. 2007;31:1545.
This page intentionally left blank 
Molecular and Genomic Surgery
Xin-Hua Feng, Xia Lin, Juehua Yu, John 
Nemunaitis, and F. Charles Brunicardi
15
Overview of Molecular Cell  
Biology	
443
Basic Concepts of Molecular  
Research / 443
Molecular Approaches to Surgical 
Research / 444
Fundamentals of Molecular  
and Cell Biology	
444
DNA and Heredity / 444
Gene Regulation / 446
Human Genome / 449
Cell Cycle and Apoptosis / 450
Signal Transduction Pathways / 450
Gene Therapy and Molecular Drugs in 
Cancer / 453
Stem Cell Research / 456
The Atomic Theory of Disease / 456
Technologies of Molecular  
and Cell Biology	
456
DNA Cloning / 456
Detection of Nucleic Acids and  
Proteins / 457
Cell Manipulations / 462
Genetic Manipulations / 463
Personalized Genomic Medicine and  
Surgery / 463
OVERVIEW OF MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY
The beginning of modern medicine can be traced back to centu-
ries ago when physicians and scientists began studying human 
anatomy from cadavers in morgues and animal physiology fol-
lowing hunting expeditions. Gradually, from the study of ani-
mals and plants in greater detail and the discovery of microbes, 
scientific principles governing life lead to the emergence of 
the biological sciences. As biological science developed and 
expanded, scientists and physicians began to utilize the princi-
ples of biological sciences to solve challenges of human diseases 
while continuing to explore the fundamentals of life in greater 
detail. With ever-evolving state-of-the-art scientific tools, our 
understanding of how cells, tissues, organs, and entire organ-
isms function, down to the level of molecular and subatomic 
structure, has resulted in modern biology with an enormous 
impact on modern healthcare and the discovery of amazing 
treatments for disease at an exponential pace. Significant prog-
ress has been made in molecular studies of organ development, 
cell signaling, and gene regulation. The advent of recombinant 
DNA technology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques, 
and next-generation genomic sequencing, which resulted in the 
sequencing of the human genome, holds the potential to have a 
transformational influence on healthcare and society this cen-
tury by not only broadening our understanding of the patho-
physiology of disease, but also by bringing about necessary 
changes in personalized medicine.
Today’s practicing surgeons are becoming increasingly 
aware that many modern surgical procedures rely on the infor-
mation gained through molecular research (i.e., personalized 
surgery). Genomic information, such as deleterious BRCA and 
RET proto-oncogene mutations, is being used to help direct 
prophylactic procedures to remove potentially harmful tis-
sues before they do damage to patients. Molecular engineering 
has led to cancer-specific gene therapy that could serve in the 
near future as a more effective adjunct to surgical debulking of 
tumors than radiation or chemotherapy, so surgeons will benefit 
from a clear introduction to how basic biochemical and biologi-
cal principles relate to the developing area of molecular biol-
ogy. This chapter reviews the current information on modern 
molecular biology for the surgical community.
Basic Concepts of Molecular Research
The modern era of molecular biology, which has been mainly 
concerned with how genes govern cell activity, began in 1953 
when James D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick made one of the 
greatest scientific discoveries by deducing the double-helical 
1
structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).1,2 The year 
2003 marked the 50th anniversary of this great discovery. 
In the same year, the Human Genome Project completed with 
sequencing approximately 20,000 to 25,000 genes and 3 billion 
2
base pairs in human DNA.3  Before 1953, one of the most 
mysterious aspects of biology was how genetic material 
was precisely duplicated from one generation to the next. 
Although DNA had been implicated as genetic material, it was 
the base-paired structure of DNA that provided a logical interpre-
tation of how a double helix could “unzip” to make copies of 
itself. This DNA synthesis, termed replication, immediately gave 
rise to the notion that a template was involved in the transfer of 
information between generations, and thus confirmed the suspi-
cion that DNA carried an organism’s hereditary information.
Within cells, DNA is packed tightly into chromosomes. 
One important feature of DNA as genetic material is its abil-
ity to encode important information for all of a cell’s functions 
(Fig. 15-1). Based on the principles of base complementarity, 
scientists also discovered how information in DNA is accurately 
transferred into the protein structure. DNA serves as a template 
for RNA synthesis, termed transcription, including messenger 
RNA (mRNA, or the protein-encoding RNA), ribosomal RNA 
(rRNA), and transfer RNA (tRNA). mRNA carries the informa-
tion from DNA to make proteins, termed translation, with the 
assistance of rRNA and tRNA. Each of these steps is precisely 
controlled in such a way that genes are properly expressed in 
each cell at a specific time and location. In recent years, new 
chapter 
Key Points
1
	 Biological sciences developed drastically in last 60 years 
after the uncovering of DNA structure by Watson and Crick
2
	 The completion of the human genome sequence in 2003 rep-
resents a great milestone in modern science.
3
	 The technology emerging from molecular and cellular biol-
ogy has revolutionized the understanding of disease and will 
radically transform the practice of surgery.
4
	 The use of genetically modified mouse models and cell lines 
using gene therapy and RNA interference therapy has greatly 
contributed to the understanding of the molecular basis for 
human diseases and targeted therapies.
5
	 The sequencing of each individual’s genome has the poten-
tial to improve the predication, prevention, and targeted 
treatment of disease, resulting in personalized medicine and 
surgery.
6
	 The use of functional genomics and modern molecular analy-
ses will facilitate the discovery of actionable genes to guide 
choice of care.
444
classes of noncoding RNAs (ncRNA), for example, microRNA 
(or miRNA), Piwi-interacting RNA (or piRNA), and long inter-
genic noncoding RNA (or lincRNA), have been identified. 
Although the number of ncRNAs encoded in the human genome 
is unknown and a lot of ncRNAs have not been validated for 
their functions, ncRNAs have been associated to regulate gene 
expression through posttranscriptional gene regulation such as 
mRNA degradation or epigenetic regulation such as chromatin 
structure modification and DNA methylation induction.4 Con-
sequently, the differential gene activity in a cell determines its 
actions, properties, and functions.
Molecular Approaches to Surgical Research
Rapid advances in molecular and cellular biology over the past 
half century have revolutionized the understanding of disease 
and will radically transform the practice of surgery. In the 
future, molecular techniques will be increasingly applied to 
surgical disease and will lead to new strategies for the selection 
and implementation of operative therapy. Surgeons should be 
familiar with the fundamental principles of molecular and cel-
lular biology so that emerging scientific breakthroughs can be 
translated into improved care of the surgical patient.
The greatest advances in the field of molecular biology have 
been in the areas of analysis and manipulation of DNA.1 Since 
Watson and Crick’s discovery of DNA structure, an intensive 
effort has been made to unlock the deepest biologic secrets of 
DNA. Among the avalanche of technical advances, one discov-
ery in particular has drastically changed the world of molecu-
lar biology: the uncovering of the enzymatic and microbiologic 
techniques that produce recombinant DNA. Recombinant DNA 
technology involves the enzymatic manipulation of DNA and, 
subsequently, the cloning of DNA. DNA molecules are cloned 
for a variety of purposes including safeguarding DNA samples, 
facilitating sequencing, generating probes, and expressing recom-
binant proteins in one or more host organisms. DNA can be pro-
duced by a number of means, including restricted digestion of 
an existing vector, PCR, and cDNA synthesis. As DNA cloning 
techniques have developed over the last quarter century, research-
ers have moved from studying DNA to studying the functions of 
proteins, and from cell and animal models to molecular thera-
pies in humans. Expression of recombinant proteins provides a 
method for analyzing gene regulation, structure, and function. In 
recent years, the uses for recombinant proteins have expanded to 
include a variety of new applications, including gene therapy and 
biopharmaceuticals. The basic molecular approaches for modern 
surgical research include DNA cloning, cell manipulation, dis-
ease modeling in animals, and clinical trials in human patients.
FUNDAMENTALS OF MOLECULAR AND CELL 
BIOLOGY
DNA and Heredity
DNA forms a right-handed, double-helical structure that is com-
posed of two antiparallel strands of unbranched polymeric deoxy-
ribonucleotides linked by phosphodiester bonds between the 5′ 
carbon of one deoxyribose moiety to the 3′ carbon of the next 
(Fig. 15-2). DNA is composed of four types of deoxyribonucleo-
tides: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). 
The nucleotides are joined together by phosphodiester bonds. In 
the double-helical structure deduced by Watson and Crick, the 
two strands of DNA are complementary to each other. Because 
of size, shape, and chemical composition, A always pairs with T, 
and C with G, through the formation of hydrogen bonds between 
complementary bases that stabilize the double helix.
Recognition of the hereditary transmission of genetic 
information is attributed to the Austrian monk, Gregor Mendel. 
His seminal work, ignored upon publication until its rediscovery 
in 1900, established the laws of segregation and of independent 
Figure 15-1.  The flow of genetic information from DNA to pro-
tein to cell functions. The process of transmission of genetic infor-
mation from DNA to RNA is called transcription, and the process 
of transmission from RNA to protein is called translation. Proteins 
are the essential controlling components for cell structure, cell sig-
naling, and metabolism. Genomics and proteomics are the study of 
the genetic composition of a living organism at the DNA and pro-
tein level, respectively. The study of the relationship between genes 
and their cellular functions is called functional genomics.
Genomics
Proteomics
Functional
genomics
DNA 
RNA
Proteins
Transcription
Translation
Structure
Metabolism
Signaling
Cell functions
445
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
assortment. These two principles established the existence of 
paired elementary units of heredity and defined the statistical 
laws that govern them.5 DNA was isolated in 1869, and a num-
ber of important observations of the inherited basis of certain 
diseases were made in the early part of the twentieth century. 
Although today it appears easy to understand how DNA repli-
cates, before the 1950s, the idea of DNA as the primary genetic 
material was not appreciated. The modern era of molecular biol-
ogy began in 1944 with the demonstration that DNA was the 
substance that carried genetic information. The first experimen-
tal evidence that DNA was genetic material came from simple 
transformation experiments conducted in the 1940s using Strep-
tococcus pneumoniae. One strain of the bacteria could be con-
verted into another by incubating it with DNA from the other, 
just as the treatment of the DNA with deoxyribonuclease would 
inactivate the transforming activity of the DNA. Similarly, in 
the early 1950s, before the discovery of the double-helical struc-
ture of DNA, the entry of viral DNA and not the protein into the 
host bacterium was believed to be necessary to initiate infection 
by the bacterial virus or bacteriophage. Key historical events 
concerning genetics are outlined in Table 15-1.
Figure 15-2.  Schematic representation of a DNA molecule form-
ing a double helix. DNA is made of four types of nucleotides, 
which are linked covalently into a DNA strand. A DNA molecule 
is composed of two DNA strands held together by hydrogen bonds 
between the pair bases. The arrowheads at the ends of the DNA 
strands indicate the polarities of the two strands, which run antipar-
allel to each other in the DNA molecule. The diagram at the bot-
tom left of the figure shows the DNA molecule straightened out. In 
reality, the DNA molecule is twisted into a double helix, of which 
each turn of DNA is made up of 10.4 nucleotide pairs, as shown 
on the right. (Republished with permission of Garland Publishing, 
Inc. from Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology 
of the Cell, 5th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2008. Permission 
conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance Center, Inc.)
Building blocks of DNA
G
T
G
G
C
C
T
A
A
A
5'
3'
3'
5'
A
T
C
G
A
T
G
G
C
C
T
A
G
G
C
T
T
A
3'
5'
5'
3'
5'
3'
G
G
G
C
T
A
DNA strand
C
A
G
G
C
C
T
T
T
A
Sugar
phosphate
Phosphate
Sugar
Base
Double-stranded DNA
DNA double helix
Sugar-phosphate
backbone
Hydrogen-bonded
pairs
+
Nucleotide
Table 15-1 
Historical events in genetics and molecular biology
Year
Investigator
Event
1865
Mendel
Laws of genetics established
1869
Miescher
DNA isolated
1905
Garrod
Human inborn errors of 
metabolism
1913
Sturtevant
Linear map of genes
1927
Muller
X-rays cause inheritable genetic 
damage
1928
Griffith
Transformation discovered
1941
Beadle and Tatum
“One gene, one enzyme” 
concept
1944
Avery, MacLeod, 
McCarty
DNA as material of heredity
1950
McKlintock
Existence of transposons 
confirmed
1953
Watson and Crick
Double-helical structure of 
DNA
1957
Benzer and 
Kornberg
Recombination and DNA 
polymerase
1966
Nirenberg, 
Khorana, Holley
Genetic code determined
1970
Temin and 
Baltimore
Reverse transcriptase
1972
Cohen, Boyer, 
Berg
Recombinant DNA technology
1975
Southern
Transfer of DNA fragments 
from sizing gel to nitrocellulose 
(Southern blot)
1977
Sanger, Maxim, 
Gilbert
DNA sequencing methods
1982
—
GenBank database established
1985
Mullis
Polymerase chain reaction
1986
—
Automated DNA sequencing
1989
Collins
Cystic fibrosis gene identified 
by positional cloning and 
linkage analysis
1990
—
Human Genome Project 
initiated
1997
Roslin Institute
Mammalian cloning (Dolly)
2001
IHGSC and Celera 
Genomics
Draft versions of human 
genome sequence published
2003
—
Human Genome Project 
completed
IHGSC = International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium.
446
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 15-4.  Four major steps in the control of eukaryotic gene expression. Transcriptional and posttranscriptional control determine the level 
of messenger RNA (mRNA) that is available to make a protein, while translational and posttranslational control determine the final outcome 
of functional proteins. Note that posttranscriptional and posttranslational controls consist of several steps.
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
DNA
RNA
transcript
mRNA
mRNA
Protein
Active
protein
mRNA
turnover
Protein
turnover
Transcription
RNA
transport
Transcriptional
control
Posttranscriptional
control
Translational
control
Posttranslational
control
Nuclear envelope
RNA
degradation
Protein
degradation
Posttranslational
modification
Translation
RNA
processing
Figure 15-3.  DNA replication. As the 
nucleotide A only pairs with T, and G with 
C, each strand of DNA can determine the 
nucleotide sequence in its complementary 
strand. In this way, double-helical DNA 
can be copied precisely. (Republished 
with permission of Garland Publishing, 
Inc. from Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, 
et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 
5th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2008. 
Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht 
Clearance Center, Inc.)
G
T
G
G
C
C
T
A
A
A
C
A
G
G
C
C
T
T
T
A
C
A
G
G
C
C
T
T
T
A
G
T
G
G
C
C
T
A
A
A
C
A
G
G
C
C
T
T
T
A
G
T
G
G
C
C
T
A
A
A
S strand
S strand
New S strand
New S strand
Template S strand
Template S strand
5'
3'
3'
5'
5'
5'
5'
5'
3'
3'
3'
Parent DNA double helix (shown flat):
3'
DNA is a template for its own duplication
For cells to pass on the genetic material (DNA) to each 
progeny, the amount of DNA must be doubled. Watson and 
Crick recognized that the complementary base-pair structure 
of DNA implied the existence of a template-like mechanism 
for the copying of genetic material.1 The transfer of DNA 
material from the mother cell to daughter cells takes place 
during somatic cell division (also called mitosis). Before a 
cell divides, DNA must be precisely duplicated. During rep-
lication, the two strands of DNA separate, and each strand 
creates a new complementary strand by precise base-pair 
matching (Fig. 15-3). The two, new, double-stranded DNAs 
carry the same genetic information, which can then be passed 
on to two daughter cells. Proofreading mechanisms ensure 
that the replication process occurs in a highly accurate man-
ner. The fidelity of DNA replication is absolutely crucial to 
maintaining the integrity of the genome from generation to 
generation. However, mistakes can still occur during this pro-
cess, resulting in mutations, which may lead to a change of 
the DNA’s encoded protein and, consequently, a change of 
the cell’s behavior. The reliable dependence of many features 
of modern organisms on subtle changes in genome is linked to 
Mendelian inheritance and also contributes to the processes of 
Darwinian evolution. In addition, massive changes, so-called 
genetic instability, can occur in the genome of somatic cells 
such as cancer cells.
Gene Regulation
Living cells have the necessary machinery to enzymatically 
transcribe DNA into RNA and translate the mRNA into pro-
tein. This machinery accomplishes the two major steps required 
for gene expression in all organisms: transcription and trans-
lation (Fig. 15-4). However, gene regulation is far more com-
plex, particularly in eukaryotic organisms. For example, many 
gene transcripts must be spliced to remove the intervening 
sequences. The sequences that are spliced off are called introns, 
which appear to be useless, but in fact may carry some regula-
tory information. The sequences that are joined together, and are 
eventually translated into protein, are called exons. Additional 
regulation of gene expression includes modification of mRNA, 
control of mRNA stability, and its nuclear export into cytoplasm 
(where it is assembled into ribosomes for translation). After 
mRNA is translated into protein, the levels and functions of the 
proteins can be further regulated posttranslationally. However, 
the following sections will mainly focus on gene regulation at 
transcriptional and translational levels.
Transcription.  Transcription is the enzymatic process of RNA 
synthesis from DNA.6 In bacteria, a single RNA polymerase 
carries out all RNA synthesis, including that of mRNA, rRNA, 
and tRNA. Transcription often is coupled with translation in 
such a way that an mRNA molecule is completely accessible to 
447
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
ribosomes, and bacterial protein synthesis begins on an mRNA 
molecule even while it is still being synthesized. Therefore, a 
discussion of gene regulation with a look at the simpler prokary-
otic system precedes that of the more complex transcription and 
posttranscriptional regulation of eukaryotic genes.
Transcription in Bacteria  Initiation of transcription in pro-
karyotes begins with the recognition of DNA sequences by 
RNA polymerase. First, the bacterial RNA polymerase cata-
lyzes RNA synthesis through loose binding to any region in 
the double-stranded DNA and then through specific binding 
to the promoter region with the assistance of accessory pro-
teins called σ factors (sigma factors). A promoter region is the 
DNA region upstream of the transcription initiation site. RNA 
polymerase binds tightly at the promoter sites and causes the 
double-stranded DNA structure to unwind. Consequently, few 
nucleotides can be base-paired with the DNA template to begin 
transcription. Once transcription begins, the σ factor is released. 
The growing RNA chain may begin to peel off as the chain 
elongates. This occurs in such a way that there are always about 
10 to 12 nucleotides of the growing RNA chains that are base-
paired with the DNA template.
The bacterial promoter contains a region of about 40 bases 
that include two conserved elements called –35 region and –10 
region. The numbering system begins at the initiation site, 
which is designated +1 position, and counts backward (in nega-
tive numbers) on the promoter and forward on the transcribed 
region. Although both regions on different promoters are not 
the same sequences, they are fairly conserved and very similar. 
This conservation provides the accurate and rapid initiation of 
transcription for most bacterial genes. It is also common in bac-
teria that one promoter serves to transcribe a series of clustered 
genes, called an operon. A single transcribed mRNA contains 
a series of coding regions, each of which is later independently 
translated. In this way, the protein products are synthesized 
in a coordinated manner. Most of the time, these proteins are 
involved in the same metabolic pathway, thus demonstrating 
that the control by one operon is an efficient system. After ini-
tiation of transcription, the polymerase moves along the DNA 
to elongate the chain of RNA, although at a certain point, it will 
stop. Each step of RNA synthesis, including initiation, elonga-
tion, and termination, will require the integral functions of RNA 
polymerase as well as the interactions of the polymerase with 
regulatory proteins.
Transcription in Eukaryotes  Transcription mechanisms in 
eukaryotes differ from those in prokaryotes. The unique features 
of eukaryotic transcription are as follows: (a) Three separate 
RNA polymerases are involved in eukaryotes: RNA polymerase 
I transcribes the precursor of 5.8S, 18S, and 28S rRNAs; RNA 
polymerase II synthesizes the precursors of mRNA as well as 
microRNA; and RNA polymerase III makes tRNAs and 5S 
rRNAs. (b) In eukaryotes, the initial transcript is often the pre-
cursor to final mRNAs, tRNAs, and rRNAs. The precursor is 
then modified and/or processed into its final functional form. 
RNA splicing is one type of processing to remove the noncoding 
introns (the region between coding exons) on an mRNA. (c) In 
contrast to bacterial DNA, eukaryotic DNA often is packaged 
with histone and nonhistone proteins into chromatins. Tran-
scription will only occur when the chromatin structure changes 
in such a way that DNA is accessible to the polymerase. (d) 
RNA is made in the nucleus and transported into cytoplasm, 
where translation occurs. Therefore, unlike bacteria, eukaryotes 
undergo uncoupled transcription and translation.
Eukaryotic gene transcription also involves the recogni-
tion and binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter DNA. 
However, the interaction between the polymerase and DNA is 
far more complex in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. Because 
the majority of studies have been focused on the regulation and 
functions of proteins, this chapter primarily focuses on how 
protein-encoding mRNA is made by RNA polymerase II.
Translation.  DNA directs the synthesis of RNA; RNA in turn 
directs the synthesis of proteins. Proteins are variable-length 
polypeptide polymers composed of various combinations of 20 
different amino acids and are the working molecules of the cell. 
The process of decoding information on mRNA to synthesize 
proteins is called translation (see Fig. 15-1). Translation takes 
place in ribosomes composed of rRNA and ribosomal proteins. 
The numerous discoveries made during the 1950s made it easy 
to understand how DNA replication and transcription involve 
base-pairing between DNA and DNA or DNA and RNA. How-
ever, at that time, it was still impossible to comprehend how 
mRNA transfers the information to the protein-synthesizing 
machinery. The genetic information on mRNA is composed of 
arranged sequences of four bases that are transferred to the lin-
ear arrangement of 20 amino acids on a protein. Amino acids 
are characterized by a central carbon unit linked to four side 
chains: an amino group (–NH2), a carboxy group (–COOH), a 
hydrogen, and a variable (–R) group. The amino acid chain is 
assembled via peptide bonds between the amino group of one 
amino acid and the carboxy group of the next. Because of this 
decoding, the information carried on mRNA relies on tRNA. 
Translation involves all three RNAs. The precise transfer of 
information from mRNA to protein is governed by genetic code, 
the set of rules by which codons are translated into an amino 
acid (Table 15-2). A codon, a triplet of three bases, codes for 
one amino acid. In this case, random combinations of the four 
bases form 4 × 4 × 4, or 64 codes. Because 64 codes are more 
than enough for 20 amino acids, most amino acids are coded 
by more than one codon. The start codon is AUG, which also 
corresponds to methionine; therefore, almost all proteins begin 
with this amino acid. The sequence of nucleotide triplets that 
follows the start codon signal is termed the reading frame. The 
codons on mRNA are sequentially recognized by tRNA adaptor 
proteins. Specific enzymes termed aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 
link a specific amino acid to a specific tRNA. The translation of 
mRNA to protein requires the ribosomal complex to move step-
wise along the mRNA until the initiator methionine sequence 
is identified. In concert with various protein initiator factors, 
the methionyl-tRNA is positioned on the mRNA and protein 
synthesis begins. Each new amino acid is added sequentially 
by the appropriate tRNA in conjunction with proteins called 
elongation factors. Protein synthesis proceeds in the amino-to-
carboxy-terminus direction.
The biologic versatility of proteins is astounding. Among 
many other functions, proteins serve as enzymes that catalyze 
critical biochemical reactions, carry signals to and from the 
extracellular environment, and mediate diverse signaling and 
regulatory functions in the intracellular environment. They also 
transport ions and various small molecules across plasma mem-
branes. Proteins make up the key structural components of cells 
and the extracellular matrix and are responsible for cell motility. 
The unique functional properties of proteins are largely deter-
mined by their structure (Fig. 15-5).
Regulation of Gene Expression.  The human organism is made 
up of a myriad of different cell types that, despite their vastly 
448
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
different characteristics, contain the same genetic material. 
This cellular diversity is controlled by the genome and accom-
plished by tight regulation of gene expression. This leads to the 
synthesis and accumulation of different complements of RNA 
and, ultimately, to the proteins found in different cell types. For 
example, muscle and bone express different genes or the same 
genes at different times. Moreover, the choice of which genes 
are expressed in a given cell at a given time depends on sig-
nals received from its environment. There are multiple levels 
at which gene expression can be controlled along the pathway 
from DNA to RNA to protein (see Fig. 15-4). Transcriptional 
control refers to the mechanism for regulating when and how 
often a gene is transcribed. Splicing of the primary RNA tran-
script (RNA processing control) and selection of completed 
mRNAs for nuclear export (RNA transport control) represent 
additional potential regulatory steps. The mRNAs in the cyto-
plasm can be selectively translated by ribosomes (translational 
control) or selectively stabilized or degraded (mRNA degrada-
tion control). Finally, the resulting proteins can undergo selec-
tive activation, inactivation, or compartmentalization (protein 
activity control).
Because a large number of genes are regulated at the tran-
scriptional level, regulation of gene transcripts (i.e., mRNA) 
often is referred to as gene regulation in a narrow definition. 
Each of the steps during transcription is properly regulated in 
eukaryotic cells. Because genes are differentially regulated from 
one another, one gene can be differentially regulated in differ-
ent cell types or at different developmental stages. Therefore, 
gene regulation at the level of transcription is largely context 
Table 15-2 
The genetic code
Second Base in Codon
U
C
A
G
First Base 
in Codon
U
UUU
Phe
[F]
UCU
Ser
[S]
UAU
Tyr
[Y]
UGU
Cys
[C]
U
Third Base 
in Codon
UUC
Phe
[F]
UCC
Ser
[S]
UAC
Tyr
[Y]
UGC
Cys
[C]
C
UUA
Leu
[L]
UCA
Ser
[S]
UAA
STOP
—
UGA
STOP
—
A
UUG
Leu
[L]
UCG
Ser
[S]
UAG
STOP
—
UGG
Trp
[W]
G
C
CUU
Leu
[L]
CCU
Pro
[P]
CAU
His
[H]
CGU
Arg
[R]
U
CUC
Leu
[L]
CCC
Pro
[P]
CAC
His
[H]
CGC
Arg
[R]
C
CUA
Leu
[L]
CCA
Pro
[P]
CAA
Gln
[Q]
CGA
Arg
[R]
A
CUG
Leu
[L]
CCG
Pro
[P]
CAG
Gln
[Q]
CGG
Arg
[R]
G
A
AUU
Ile
[I]
ACU
Thr
[T]
AAU
Asn
[N]
AGU
Ser
[S]
U
AUC
Ile
[I]
ACC
Thr
[T]
AAC
Asn
[N]
AGC
Ser
[S]
C
AUA
Ile
[I]
ACA
Thr
[T]
AAA
Lys
[K]
AGA
Arg
[R]
A
AUG
Met
[M]
ACG
Thr
[T]
AAG
Lys
[K]
AGG
Arg
[R]
G
G
GUU
Val
[V]
GCU
Ala
[A]
GAU
Asp
[D]
GGU
Gly
[G]
U
GUC
Val
[V]
GCC
Ala
[A]
GAC
Asp
[D]
GGC
Gly
[G]
C
GUA
Val
[V]
GCA
Ala
[A]
GAA
Glu
[E]
GGA
Gly
[G]
A
GUG
Val
[V]
GCG
Ala
[A]
GAG
Glu
[E]
GGG
Gly
[G]
G
A = adenine; C = cytosine; G = guanine; U = uracil; Ala = alanine; Arg = arginine; Asn = asparagine; Asp = aspartic acid; Cys = cysteine; Glu = glutamic 
acid; Gln = glutamine; Gly = glycine; His = histidine; Ile = isoleucine; Leu = leucine; Lys = lysine; Met = methionine; Phe = phenylalanine;  
Pro = proline; Ser = serine; Thr = threonine; Trp = tryptophan; Tyr = tyrosine; Val = valine. Letter in [ ] indicates single letter code for amino acid.
Figure 15-5.  Maturation of a functional protein. Although the lin-
ear amino acid sequence of a protein often is shown, the function of 
a protein also is controlled by its correctly folded three-dimensional 
structure. In addition, many proteins also have covalent posttransla-
tional modifications such as phosphorylation or noncovalent bind-
ing to a small molecule or a protein.
Unfolded inactive protein
Folded inactive protein 
Mature inactive protein
Binding protein
Posttranslational
modification
(e.g., phosphorylation)
P
Cofactor binding
449
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
Figure 15-6.  Transcriptional control by RNA polymerase. DNA 
is packaged into a chromatin structure. TATA = the common 
sequence on the promoter recognized by TBP and polymerase II 
holoenzyme; TBP = TATA-binding protein and associated factors; 
TF = hypothetical transcription factor; TFBS = transcription factor 
binding site; ball-shaped structures = nucleosomes. Coactivator or 
corepressor is a factor linking the TF with the Pol II complex.
TF
Coactivator or
Corepressor
Pol II
Holoenzyme
TBP
TBP
TATA
TFBS
dependent. However, there is a common scheme that applies 
to transcription at the molecular level (Fig. 15-6). Each gene 
promoter possesses unique sequences called TATA boxes that 
can be recognized and bound by a large complex containing 
RNA polymerase II, forming the basal transcription machinery. 
Usually located upstream of the TATA box (but sometimes lon-
ger distances) are a number of regulatory sequences referred to 
as enhancers that are recognized by regulatory proteins called 
transcription factors. These transcription factors specifically 
bind to the enhancers, often in response to environmental or 
developmental cues, and cooperate with each other and with 
basal transcription factors to initiate transcription. Regulatory 
sequences that negatively regulate the initiation of transcription 
also are present on the promoter DNA. The transcription fac-
tors that bind to these sites are called repressors, in contrast to 
the activators that activate transcription. The molecular interac-
tions between transcription factors and promoter DNA, as well 
as between the cooperative transcription factors, are highly 
regulated and context-dependent. Specifically, the recruitment 
of transcription factors to the promoter DNA occurs in response 
to physiologic signals. A number of structural motifs in these 
DNA-binding transcription factors facilitate this recognition and 
interaction. These include the helix-turn-helix, the homeodo-
main motif, the zinc finger, the leucine zipper, and the helix-
loop-helix motifs.
Human Genome
Genome is a collective term for all genes present in one organ-
ism. The human genome contains DNA sequences of 3 billion 
base pairs, carried by 23 pairs of chromosomes. The human 
genome has an estimated 25,000 to 30,000 genes, and overall, 
it is 99.9% identical in all people.7,8 Approximately 3 million 
locations where single-base DNA differences exist have been 
identified and termed single nucleotide polymorphisms. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms may be critical determinants of 
human variation in disease susceptibility and responses to envi-
ronmental factors.
The completion of the human genome sequence in 2003 
represented another great milestone in modern science. The 
Human Genome Project created the field of genomics, which 
is the study of genetic material in detail (see Fig. 15-1). The 
medical field is building on the knowledge, resources, and 
technologies emanating from the human genome to further the 
understanding of the relationship of the genes and their muta-
tions to human health and disease. This expansion of genomics 
into human health applications resulted in the field of genomic 
medicine.
The emergence of genomics as a science will transform 
3
the practice of medicine and surgery in this century. This 
breakthrough has allowed scientists the opportunity to 
gain remarkable insights into the lives of humans. Ultimately, 
the goal is to use this information to develop new ways to treat, 
cure, or even prevent the thousands of diseases that afflict 
humankind. In the twenty-first century, work will begin to 
incorporate the information embedded in the human genome 
sequence into surgical practices. By doing so, the genomic 
information can be used for diagnosing and predicting disease 
and disease susceptibility. Diagnostic tests can be designed to 
detect errant genes in patients suspected of having particular 
diseases or of being at risk for developing them. Furthermore, 
exploration into the function of each human gene is now possi-
ble, which will shed light on how faulty genes play a role in 
disease causation. This knowledge also makes possible the 
development of a new generation of therapeutics based on 
genes. Drug design is being revolutionized as researchers create 
new classes of medicines based on a reasoned approach to the 
use of information on gene sequence and protein structure func-
tion rather than the traditional trial-and-error method. Drugs 
targeted to specific sites in the body promise to have fewer side 
effects than many of today’s medicines. Finally, other applica-
tions of genomics will involve the transfer of genes to replace 
defective versions or the use of gene therapy to enhance normal 
functions such as immunity.
Proteomics refers to the study of the structure and expres-
sion of proteins as well as the interactions among proteins 
encoded by a human genome (see Fig. 15-1).9 A number of 
Internet-based repositories for protein sequences exist, includ-
ing Swiss-Prot (http://www.expasy.ch). These databases allow 
comparisons of newly identified proteins with previously char-
acterized sequences to allow prediction of similarities, identifi-
cation of splice variants, and prediction of membrane topology 
and posttranslational modifications. Tools for proteomic profil-
ing include two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, time-of-flight 
mass spectrometry, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, 
and protein microarrays. Structural proteomics aims to describe 
the three-dimensional structure of proteins that is critical to 
understanding function. Functional genomics seeks to assign a 
biochemical, physiologic, cell biologic, and/or developmental 
function to each predicted gene. An ever-increasing arsenal of 
approaches, including transgenic animals, RNA interference 
(RNAi), and various systematic mutational strategies, will allow 
dissection of functions associated with newly discovered genes. 
Although the potential of this field of study is vast, it is in its 
early stages.
It is anticipated that a genomic and proteomic approach to 
human disease will lead to a new understanding of pathogenesis 
that will aid in the development of effective strategies for early 
diagnosis and treatment.10 For example, identification of altered 
protein expression in organs, cells, subcellular structures, or 
protein complexes may lead to development of new biomark-
ers for disease detection. Moreover, improved understanding of 
how protein structure determines function will allow rational 
identification of therapeutic targets, and thereby not only accel-
erate drug development, but also lead to new strategies to evalu-
ate therapeutic efficacy and potential toxicity.9
450
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Cell Cycle and Apoptosis
Every organism is composed of many different cell types at dif-
ferent developmental stages. Some cell types continue to grow, 
while some cells stop growing after a developmental stage or 
resume growth after a break. For example, embryonic stem 
cells grow continuously, while nerve cells and striated muscle 
cells stop dividing after maturation. Cell cycle is the process 
for every cell including DNA replication and protein synthe-
sis, DNA segregation in half, and package DNA and protein in 
two newly formed cells to enable passage of identical genetic 
information from one parental cell to two daughter cells. Thus, 
the cell cycle is the fundamental mechanism to maintain tissue 
homeostasis. A cell cycle comprises four periods: G1 (first gap 
phase before DNA synthesis), S (synthesis phase when DNA 
replication occurs), G2 (the gap phase before mitosis), and 
M (mitosis, the phase when two daughter cells with identical 
DNA are generated) (Fig. 15-7). After a full cycle, the daughter 
cells enter G1 again, and when they receive appropriate signals, 
undergo another cycle, and so on. The machinery that drives 
cell cycle progression is made up of a group of enzymes called 
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Cyclin expression fluctuates 
during the cell cycle, and cyclins are essential for CDK activi-
ties and form complexes with CDK. The cyclin A/CDK1 and 
cyclin B/CDK1 drive the progression for the M phase, while 
cyclin A/CDK2 is the primary S phase complex. Early G1 cyclin 
D/CDK4/6 or late G1 cyclin E/CDK2 controls the G1-S transi-
tion. There also are negative regulators for CDK termed CDK 
inhibitors, which inhibit the assembly or activity of the cyclin-
CDK complex. Expression of cyclins and CDK inhibitors often 
is regulated by developmental and environmental factors.
The cell cycle is connected with signal transduction path-
ways as well as gene expression. Although the S and M phases 
rarely are subjected to changes imposed by extracellular signals, 
the G1 and G2 phases are the primary periods when cells decide 
whether or not to move on to the next phase. During the G1 phase, 
cells receive green- or red-light signals, S phase entry or G1 arrest, 
respectively. Growing cells proliferate only when supplied with 
appropriate mitogenic growth factors. Cells become committed 
to entry of the cell cycle only toward the end of G1. Mitogenic 
signals stimulate the activity of early G1 CDKs (e.g., cyclin D/
CDK4) that inhibit the activity of pRb protein and activate the 
transcription factor called E2F to induce the expression of batter-
ies of genes essential for G1-S progression. Meanwhile, cells also 
receive antiproliferative signals such as those from tumor sup-
pressors. These antiproliferative signals also act in the G1 phase 
to stop cells’ progress into the S phase by inducing CKI produc-
tion. For example, when DNA is damaged, cells will repair the 
damage before entering the S phase. Therefore, G1 contains one 
of the most important checkpoints for cell cycle progression. If 
the analogy is made that CDK is to a cell as an engine is to a car, 
then cyclins and CKI are the gas pedal and brake, respectively. 
Accelerated proliferation or improper cell cycle progression with 
damaged DNA would be disastrous. Genetic gain-of-function 
mutations in oncogenes (that often promote expression or activ-
ity of the cyclin/CDK complex) or loss-of-function mutations in 
tumor suppressor (that stimulate production of CKI) are causal 
factors for malignant transformation.
In addition to cell cycle control, cells use genetically pro-
grammed mechanisms to kill cells. This cellular process, called 
apoptosis or programmed cell death, is essential for the mainte-
nance of tissue homeostasis (Fig. 15-8).
Normal tissues undergo proper apoptosis to remove 
unwanted cells, those that have completed their jobs or have 
been damaged or improperly proliferated. Apoptosis can be 
activated by many physiologic stimuli such as death receptor 
signals (e.g., Fas or cytokine tumor necrosis factor), growth fac-
tor deprivation, DNA damage, and stress signals. Two major 
pathways control the biochemical mechanisms governing apop-
tosis: the death receptor and mitochondrial. However, recent 
advances in apoptosis research suggest an interconnection of 
the two pathways. What is central to the apoptotic machinery 
is the activation of a cascade of proteinases called caspases. 
Similarly to CDK in the cell cycle, activities and expression of 
caspases are well controlled by positive and negative regulators. 
The complex machinery of apoptosis must be tightly controlled. 
Perturbations of this process can cause neoplastic transforma-
tion or other diseases.
Signal Transduction Pathways
Gene expression in a genome is controlled in a temporal and 
spatial manner, at least in part by signaling pathways.11 A sig-
naling pathway generally begins at the cell surface and, after a 
signaling relay by a cascade of intracellular effectors, ends up 
in the nucleus (Fig. 15-9). All cells have the ability to sense 
changes in their external environment. The bioactive substances 
to which cells can respond are many and include proteins, short 
peptides, amino acids, nucleotides/nucleosides, steroids, reti-
noids, fatty acids, and dissolved gases. Some of these substances 
are lipophilic and thereby can cross the plasma membrane by 
diffusion to bind to a specific target protein within the cyto-
plasm (intracellular receptor). Other substances bind directly 
with a transmembrane protein (cell-surface receptor). Binding 
of ligand to receptor initiates a series of biochemical reactions 
(signal transduction) typically involving protein-protein inter-
actions and the transfer of high-energy phosphate groups, lead-
ing to various cellular end responses.
Figure 15-7.  The cell cycle and its control system. M is the mito-
sis phase, when the nucleus and the cytoplasm divide; S is the 
phase when DNA is duplicated; G1 is the gap between M and S; 
G2 is the gap between S and M. A complex of cyclin and cyclin-
dependent kinase (CDK) controls specific events of each phase. 
Without cyclin, CDK is inactive. Different cyclin/CDK complexes 
are shown around the cell cycle. A, B, D, and E stand for cyclin A, 
cyclin B, cyclin D, and cyclin E, respectively.
B/CDK1
A/CDK1
A/CDK2
E/CDK2
D/CDK4
D/CDK6
G1
G2
S
M
Mitosis
DNA replication
451
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
Figure 15-8.  A simplified view of the 
apoptosis pathways. Extracellular death 
receptor pathways include the activation 
of Fas and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) 
receptors, and consequent activation 
of the caspase pathway. Intracellular 
death pathway indicates the release of 
cytochrome c from mitochondria, which 
also triggers the activation of the caspase 
cascade. During apoptosis, cells undergo 
DNA fragmentation and nuclear and cell 
membrane breakdown, and are eventu-
ally digested by other cells.
Nucleus
Death signal
(e.g., TNF or Fas)
Death
receptor
Plasma
membrane
Activation of
caspase cascade
Cytochrome c
release
Death
receptor
signaling
pathway
Mitochondrion
Normal target cell
Apoptotic target cell
Figure 15-9.  Cell-surface and intracellular receptor pathways. 
Extracellular signaling pathway: Most growth factors and other 
hydrophilic signaling molecules are unable to move across the 
plasma membrane and directly activate cell-surface receptors such 
as G-protein–coupled receptors and enzyme-linked receptors. The 
receptor serves as the receiver, and in turn activates the downstream 
signals in the cell. Intracellular signaling pathway: Hormones or other 
diffusible molecules enter the cell and bind to the intracellular recep-
tor in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus. Either extracellular or intracel-
lular signals often reach the nucleus to control gene expression.
Ligand
(e.g., growth factor)
Cell-surface
receptor
Plasma
membrane
Nucleus
Gene
expression
Ligand
(e.g., hormone)
Signaling cascade
Intracellular
receptor
Control and specificity through simple protein-protein 
interactions—referred to as adhesive interactions—is a com-
mon feature of signal transduction pathways in cells.12 Signaling 
also involves catalytic activities of signaling molecules, such 
as protein kinases/phosphatases, that modify the structures of 
key signaling proteins. Upon binding and/or modification by 
upstream signaling molecules, downstream effectors undergo a 
conformational (allosteric) change and, consequently, a change 
in function. The signal that originates at the cell surface and 
is relayed by the cytoplasmic proteins often ultimately reaches 
the transcriptional apparatus in the nucleus. It alters the DNA 
binding and activities of transcription factors that directly turn 
genes on or off in response to the stimuli. Abnormal alterations 
in signaling activities and capacities in otherwise normal cells 
can lead to diseases such as cancer.
Advances in biology in the last two decades have dramati-
cally expanded the view on how cells are wired with signal-
ing pathways. In a given cell, many signaling pathways operate 
simultaneously and crosstalk with one another. A cell gener-
ally may react to a hormonal signal in a variety of ways: (a) by 
changing its metabolite or protein, (b) by generating an electric 
current, or (c) by contracting. Cells continually are subject to 
multiple input signals that simultaneously and sequentially acti-
vate multiple receptor- and non–receptor-mediated signal trans-
duction pathways, which form a signaling network. Although 
the regulators responsible for cell behavior are rapidly identified 
as a result of genomic and proteomic techniques, the specific 
functions of the individual proteins, how they assemble, and the 
networks that control cellular behavior remain to be defined. 
An increased understanding of cell regulatory pathways—and 
how they are disrupted in disease—will likely reveal common 
themes based on protein interaction domains that direct associa-
tions of proteins with other polypeptides, phospholipids, nucleic 
acids, and other regulatory molecules. Advances in the under-
standing of signaling networks will require methods of inves-
tigation that move beyond traditional “linear” approaches into 
452
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
medical informatics and computational biology. The bewilder-
ing biocomplexity of such networks mandates multidisciplinary 
and transdisciplinary research collaboration. The vast amount 
of information that is rapidly emerging from genomic and pro-
teomic data mining will require the development of new model-
ing methodologies within the emerging disciplines of medical 
mathematics and physics.
Signaling pathways often are grouped according to the 
properties of signaling receptors. Many hydrophobic signaling 
molecules are able to diffuse across plasma membranes and 
directly reach specific cytoplasmic targets. Steroid hormones, 
thyroid hormones, retinoids, and vitamin D are examples that 
exert their activity upon binding to structurally related recep-
tor proteins that are members of the nuclear hormone receptor 
superfamily. Ligand binding induces a conformational change 
that enhances transcriptional activity of these receptors. Most 
extracellular signaling molecules interact with transmembrane 
protein receptors that couple ligand binding to intracellular sig-
nals, leading to biologic actions.
There are three major classes of cell-surface recep-
tors: transmitter-gated ion channels, seven-transmembrane 
G-protein–­coupled receptors (GPCRs), and enzyme-linked 
receptors. The superfamily of GPCRs is one of the largest 
families of proteins, representing over 800 genes of the human 
genome. Members of this superfamily share a characteristic 
seven-transmembrane configuration. The ligands for these 
receptors are diverse and include hormones, chemokines, neu-
rotransmitters, proteinases, inflammatory mediators, and even 
sensory signals such as odorants and photons. Most GPCRs 
signal through heterotrimeric G proteins, which are guanine-
nucleotide regulatory complexes. Thus the receptor serves as the 
receiver, the G protein serves as the transducer, and the enzyme 
serves as the effector arm. Enzyme-linked receptors possess an 
extracellular ligand-recognition domain and a cytosolic domain 
that either has intrinsic enzymatic activity or directly links with 
an enzyme. Structurally, these receptors usually have only one 
transmembrane-spanning domain. Of at least five forms of 
enzyme-linked receptors classified by the nature of the enzyme 
activity to which they are coupled, the growth factor recep-
tors such as tyrosine kinase receptor or serine/threonine kinase 
receptors mediate diverse cellular events including cell growth, 
differentiation, metabolism, and survival/apoptosis. Dysregu-
lation (particularly mutations) of these receptors is thought to 
underlie conditions of abnormal cellular proliferation in the con-
text of cancer. The following sections will further review two 
examples of growth factor signaling pathways and their connec-
tion with human diseases.
Insulin Pathway and Diabetes.13  The discovery of insulin 
in the early 1920s is one of the most dramatic events in the 
treatment of human disease. Insulin is a peptide hormone that 
is secreted by the β-cell of the pancreas. Insulin is required 
for the growth and metabolism of most mammalian cells, 
which contain cell-surface insulin receptors (InsR). Insulin 
binding to InsR activates the kinase activity of InsR. InsR 
then adds phosphoryl groups, a process referred to as phos-
phorylation, and subsequently activates its immediate intra-
cellular effector, called insulin receptor substrate (IRS). IRS 
plays a central role in coordinating the signaling of insulin by 
activating distinct signaling pathways, the PI3K-Akt pathway 
and MAPK pathway, both of which possess multiple protein 
kinases that can control transcription, protein synthesis, and 
glycolysis (Fig. 15-10).
The primary physiologic role of insulin is in glucose 
homeostasis, which is accomplished through the stimulation 
of glucose uptake into insulin-sensitive tissues such as fat and 
skeletal muscle. Defects in insulin synthesis/secretion and/
or responsiveness are major causal factors in diabetes, one of 
the leading causes of death and disability in the United States, 
affecting an estimated 16 million Americans. Type 2 diabetes 
accounts for about 90% of all cases of diabetes. Clustering of 
type 2 diabetes in certain families and ethnic populations points 
to a strong genetic background for the disease. More than 90% 
of affected individuals have insulin resistance, which develops 
when the body is no longer able to respond correctly to insu-
lin circulating in the blood. Although relatively little is known 
about the biochemical basis of this metabolic disorder, it is clear 
that the insulin-signaling pathways malfunction in this disease. 
It is also known that genetic mutations in the InsR or IRS cause 
type 2 diabetes, although which one is not certain. The ­majority 
of type 2 diabetes cases may result from defects in downstream-
signaling components in the insulin-signaling pathway. Type 
2 diabetes also is associated with declining β-cell function, 
resulting in reduced insulin secretion; these pathways are under 
intense study. A full understanding of the basis of insulin resis-
tance is crucial for the development of new therapies for type 
2 diabetes. Furthermore, apart from type 2 diabetes, insulin 
resistance is a central feature of several other common human 
disorders, including atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, 
hypertension, and obesity.
Transforming Growth Factor-β (TGF-β) Pathway and 
­Cancers.14  Growth factor signaling controls cell growth, differ-
entiation, and apoptosis. Although insulin and many mitogenic 
Figure 15-10.  Insulin-signaling pathway. Insulin is a peptide 
growth factor that binds to and activates the heterotetrameric recep-
tor complex (InsR). InsR possesses protein tyrosine kinase activity 
and is able to phosphorylate the downstream insulin receptor sub-
strate (IRS). Phosphorylated IRS serves as a scaffold and controls 
the activation of multiple downstream pathways for gene expres-
sion, cell survival, and glucose metabolism. Inactivation of the 
insulin pathway can lead to type 2 diabetes.
Plasma
membrane
Nucleus
Insulin
receptor
(InsR)
Gene
expression
MAPK
cascade
Lipid & glucose
metabolism
Cell
survival
IRS
Insulin
Adaptor
PI3K
453
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
growth factors promote cell proliferation, some growth factors 
and hormones inhibit cell proliferation. TGF-β is one of them. 
The balance between mitogens and TGF-β plays an important 
role in controlling the proper pace of cell cycle progression. The 
growth inhibition function of TGF-β signaling in epithelial cells 
plays a major role in maintaining tissue homeostasis.
The TGF-β superfamily comprises a large number of struc-
turally related growth and differentiation factors that act through 
a receptor complex at the cell surface (Fig. 15-11). The com-
plex consists of transmembrane serine/threonine kinases. The 
receptor signals through activation of heterotrimeric complexes 
of intracellular effectors called SMADs (which are contracted 
from homologous Caenorhabditis elegans Sma and Drosophila 
Mad, two evolutionarily conserved genes for TGF-β signaling). 
Upon phosphorylation by the receptors, SMAD complexes 
translocate into the nucleus, where they bind to gene promoters 
and cooperate with specific transcription factors to regulate the 
expression of genes that control cell proliferation and differen-
tiation. For example, TGF-β strongly induces the transcription 
of a gene called p15INK4B (a type of CKI) and, at the same time, 
reduces the expression of many oncogenes such as c-Myc. The 
outcome of the altered gene expression leads to the inhibition 
of cell cycle progression. Meanwhile, the strength and dura-
tion of TGF-β signaling is fine-tuned by a variety of positive or 
negative modulators, including protein phosphatases. Therefore, 
controlled activation of TGF-β signaling is an intrinsic mecha-
nism for cells to ensure controlled proliferation.
Resistance to TGF-β’s anticancer action is one hall-
mark of human cancer cells. TGF-β receptors and SMADs are 
identified as tumor suppressors. The TGF-β signaling circuit 
can be disrupted in a variety of ways and in different types 
of human tumors. Some lose TGF-β responsiveness through 
downregulation or mutations of their TGF-β receptors. The 
cytoplasmic SMAD4 protein, which transduces signals from 
ligand-activated TGF-β receptors to downstream targets, may 
be eliminated through mutation of its encoding gene. The locus 
encoding cell cycle inhibitor p15INK4B may be deleted. Alterna-
tively, the immediate downstream target of its actions, cyclin-
dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), may become unresponsive to the 
inhibitory actions of p15INK4B because of mutations that block 
p15INK4B binding. The resulting cyclin D/CDK4 complexes con-
stitutively inactivate tumor suppressor pRb by hyperphosphory-
lation. Finally, functional pRb, the end target of this pathway, 
may be lost through mutation of its gene. For example, in pan-
creatic and colorectal cancers, 100% of cells derived from these 
cancers carry genetic defects in the TGF-β signaling pathway. 
Therefore, the antiproliferative pathway converging onto pRb 
and the cell division cycle is, in one way or another, disrupted 
in a majority of human cancer cells. Besides cancer, dysregu-
lation of TGF-β signaling also has been associated with other 
human diseases such as Marfan’s syndrome and thoracic aortic 
aneurysm.
Gene Therapy and Molecular Drugs in Cancer
Modern advances in the use of molecular biology to manipulate 
genomes have greatly contributed to the understanding of the 
molecular basis for how cells live, die, or differentiate. Given 
the fact that human diseases arise from improper changes in the 
genome, the continuous understanding of how the genome func-
tions will make it possible to tailor medicine on an individual 
basis. Although significant hurdles remain, the course toward 
therapeutic application of molecular biology already has been 
mapped out by many proof-of-principle studies in the literature. 
In this section, cancer is used as an example to elaborate some 
therapeutic applications of molecular biology. Modern molecu-
lar medicine includes gene therapy and molecular drugs that 
target genes or gene products that wire human cells.
Cancer is a complex disease, involving uncontrolled 
growth and spread of tumor cells (Fig. 15-12). Cancer develop-
ment depends on the acquisition and selection of specific char-
acteristics that set the tumor cell apart from normal somatic cells. 
Cancer cells have defects in regulatory circuits that govern nor-
mal cell proliferation and homeostasis. Many lines of evidence 
indicate that tumorigenesis in humans is a multistep process and 
that these steps reflect genetic alterations that drive the progres-
sive transformation of normal human cells into highly malignant 
derivatives. The genomes of tumor cells are invariably altered at 
multiple sites, having suffered disruption through lesions as sub-
tle as point mutations and as obvious as changes in chromosome 
complement. A succession of genetic changes, each conferring 
one or another type of growth advantage, leads to the progressive 
conversion of normal human cells into cancer cells.
Cancer research in the past 20 years has generated a rich 
and complex body of knowledge, revealing cancer to be a dis-
ease involving dynamic changes in the genome. The causes 
of cancer include genetic predisposition, environmental influ-
ences, infectious agents, and aging. These transform normal 
cells into cancerous ones by derailing a wide spectrum of regu-
latory pathways including signal transduction pathways, cell 
Figure 15-11.  TGF-β signaling pathway. The TGF-β family has 
at least 29 members encoded in the human genome. They are also 
peptide growth factors. Each member binds to a heterotetrameric 
complex consisting of a distinct set of type I and type II recep-
tors. TGF-β receptors are protein serine/threonine kinases and can 
phosphorylate the downstream substrates called SMAD proteins. 
Phosphorylated SMADs are directly transported into the nucleus, 
where they bind to the DNA and regulate gene expression that is 
responsible for inhibition of cell proliferation. Inactivation of the 
TGF-β pathway through genetic mutations in the TGF-β receptors 
or SMADs is frequent in human cancer, leading to the uncontrolled 
proliferation of cancer cells.
Plasma
membrane
TGF
  receptor
Gene
expression
Nucleus
SMAD
TGF
Anti-
proliferation
β
β
454
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
animal cancer cells: oncogenes, with dominant gain-of-function 
­mutations, and tumor suppressor genes, with recessive loss-­of-
function mutations. In normal cells, oncogenes promote cell 
growth by activating cell cycle progression, whereas tumor 
suppressors counteract oncogenes’ functions. Therefore, the 
balance between oncogenes and tumor suppressors maintains a 
well-controlled state of cell growth.
During the development of most types of human cancer, 
cancer cells can break away from primary tumor masses, invade 
adjacent tissues, and hence travel to distant sites where they 
form new colonies. This spreading process of tumor cells, called 
metastasis, is the cause of 90% of human cancer deaths. Meta-
static cancer cells that enter the bloodstream can reach virtu-
ally all tissues of the body. Bones are one of the most common 
places for these cells to settle and start growing again. Bone 
metastasis is one of the most frequent causes of pain in people 
with cancer. It also can cause bones to break and create other 
symptoms and problems for patients.
The progression in the knowledge of cancer biology 
has been accelerating in recent years. All of the scientific 
knowledge acquired through hard work and discovery has made 
it possible for cancer treatment and prevention. As a result of 
explosive new discoveries, some modern treatments were devel-
oped. The success of these therapies, together with traditional 
treatments such as surgical procedures, is further underscored 
by the fact that in 2002 the cancer rate was reduced in the United 
States. Current approaches to the treatment of cancer involve 
killing cancer cells with toxic chemicals, radiation, or surgery. 
Alternatively, several new biologic- and gene-based therapies are 
aimed at enhancing the body’s natural defenses against invading 
cancers. Understanding the biology of cancer cells has led to 
the development of designer therapies for cancer prevention and 
treatment. Gene therapy, immune system modulation, geneti-
cally engineered antibodies, and molecularly designed chemical 
drugs are all promising fronts in the war against cancer.
Immunotherapy.  The growth of the body is controlled by 
many natural signals through complex signaling pathways. Some 
of these natural agents have been used in cancer treatment and 
have been proven effective for fighting several cancers through 
the clinical trial process. These naturally occurring biologic 
agents, such as interferons, interleukins, and other cytokines, 
can now be produced in the laboratory. These agents, as well as 
the synthetic agents that mimic the natural signals, are given to 
patients to influence the natural immune response agents either 
by directly altering the cancer cell growth or by acting indirectly 
to help healthy cells control the cancer. One of the most exciting 
applications of immunotherapy has come from the identification 
of certain tumor targets called antigens and the aiming of an 
antibody at these targets. This was first used as a means of local-
izing tumors in the body for diagnosis and was more recently 
used to attack cancer cells. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is an exam-
ple of such a drug.17 Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that 
neutralizes the mitogenic activity of cell-surface growth fac-
tor receptor HER-2, which is overexpressed in approximately 
25% of breast cancers. HER-2–overexpressing tumors tend to 
grow faster and generally are more likely to recur than tumors 
that do not overproduce HER-2. Trastuzumab is designed to 
attack cancer cells that overexpress HER-2 by slowing or pre-
venting the growth of these cells, resulting in increased survival 
of HER-2–positive breast cancer patients. Another significant 
example is the administration of interleukin-2 (IL-2) to patients 
with metastatic melanoma or kidney cancer, which has been 
Figure 15-12.  Tumor clonal evolution and metastasis. A tumor 
develops from mutant cells with multiple genetic mutations. 
Through repeated alterations in the genome, mutant epithelial cells 
are able to develop into a cluster of cells (called a tumor clone) 
that proliferates in an uncontrollable fashion. Further changes in the 
tumor cells can transform the tumor cells into a population of cells 
that can enter the blood vessels and repopulate in a new location.
Tumor cells escape from
blood vessel and proliferate
to form metastatic tumors
Blood vessel
Tumor cells break loose
and enter bloodstream
Uncontrolled cell
proliferation
Cell proliferation
Cell proliferation
Cell with multiple
mutations
Cell with two mutations
Mutant epithelial cell
Normal epithelial cell
cycle machinery, or apoptotic pathways.15,16 The early notion 
that cancer was caused by mutations in genes critical for the 
control of cell growth implied that genome stability is impor-
tant for preventing oncogenesis. There are two classes of can-
cer genes in which alteration has been identified in human and 
455
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
shown to mediate the durable regression of metastatic cancer. 
IL-2, a cytokine produced by human helper T lymphocytes, has 
a wide range of immune regulatory effects, including the expan-
sion of lymphocytes following activation by a specific antigen. 
Although IL-2 has no direct impact on cancer cells, the impact 
of IL-2 on cancers in vivo derives from its ability to expand 
lymphocytes with antitumor activity. The expanded lymphocyte 
pool enables recognition of the antigen on cancer cells. Thus, 
the molecular identification of cancer antigens has opened new 
possibilities for the development of effective immunotherapies 
for patients with cancer. Clinical studies using immunization 
with peptides derived from cancer antigens have shown that 
high levels of lymphocytes with antitumor activity can be pro-
duced in cancer-bearing patients. Highly avid antitumor lym-
phocytes can be isolated from immunized patients and grown in 
vitro for use in cell-transfer therapies.
Chemotherapy.  The primary function of anticancer chemicals 
is to block different steps involved in cell growth and replica-
tion. These chemicals often block a critical chemical reaction 
in a signal transduction pathway or during DNA replication or 
gene expression. For example, STI571, also known as Gleevec, 
is one of the first molecularly targeted drugs based on the changes 
that cancer causes in cells.18 STI571 offers promise for the treat-
ment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and may soon surpass 
interferon-γ as the standard treatment for the disease. In CML, 
STI571 is targeted at the Bcr-Abl kinase, an activated oncogene 
product in CML (Fig. 15-13). Bcr-Abl is an overly activated 
­protein kinase resulting from a specific genetic abnormality gen-
erated by chromosomal translocation that is found in the cells of 
patients with CML. STI571-mediated inhibition of Bcr-Abl kinase 
activity not only prevents cell growth of Bcr-Abl–­transformed 
leukemic cells, but also induces apoptosis. Clinically, the drug 
quickly corrects the blood cell abnormalities caused by the leu-
kemia in a majority of patients, achieving a complete disappear-
ance of the leukemic blood cells and the return of normal blood 
cells. ­Additionally, the drug appears to have some effect on other 
­cancers including certain brain tumors and gastrointestinal (GI) 
stromal tumors, a very rare type of stomach cancer.
Gene Therapy.  Gene therapy is an experimental treatment 
that involves genetically altering a patient’s own tumor cells 
or lymphocytes (cells of the immune system, some of which 
can attack cancer cells). For years, the concept of gene therapy 
has held promise as a new, potentially potent weapon to attack 
cancer. Although a rapid progression in the understanding of 
the molecular and clinical aspects of gene therapy has been 
witnessed in the past decade, gene therapy treatment has not yet 
been shown to be superior to standard treatments in humans.
Several problems must be resolved to transform it into a 
clinically relevant form of therapy. The major issues that limit 
its translation to the clinic are improving the selectivity of 
tumor targeting, improving the delivery to the tumor, and the 
enhancement of the transduction rate of the cells of interest. 
In most gene therapy trials for malignant diseases, tumors can 
be accessed and directly injected (in situ gene therapy). The in 
situ gene therapy also offers a better distribution of the vec-
tor virus throughout the tumor. Finally, a combination of gene 
therapy strategies will be more effective than the use of a single 
gene therapy system. An important aspect of effective gene 
therapy involves the choice of appropriate genes for manipula-
tion. Genes that promote the production of messenger chemi-
cals or other immune-active substances can be transferred into 
the patient’s cells. These include genes that inhibit cell cycle 
progression, induce apoptosis, enhance host immunity against 
cancer cells, block the ability of cancer cells to metastasize, and 
cause tumor cells to undergo suicide. Recent development of 
RNAi technology, which uses a loss-of-function approach to 
block gene functions, ensures a new wave of hopes for gene 
therapy. Nonetheless, gene therapy is still experimental and 
is being studied in clinical trials for many different types of 
cancer. The mapping of genes responsible for human cancer 
is likely to provide new targets for gene therapy in the future. 
The preliminary results of gene therapy for cancer are encourag-
ing, and as advancements are made in the understanding of the 
molecular biology of human cancer, the future of this rapidly 
developing field holds great potential for treating cancer.
It is noteworthy that the use of multiple therapeutic meth-
ods has proven more powerful than a single method. The use 
of chemotherapy after surgery to destroy the few remaining 
cancerous cells in the body is called adjuvant therapy. Adju-
vant therapy was first tested and found to be effective in breast 
cancer. It was later adopted for use in other cancers. A major 
discovery in chemotherapy is the advantage of multiple che-
motherapeutic agents (known as combination or cocktail che-
motherapy) over single agents. Some types of fast-growing 
leukemias and lymphomas (tumors involving the cells of the 
bone marrow and lymph nodes) responded extremely well to 
combination chemotherapy, and clinical trials led to gradual 
improvement of the drug combinations used. Many of these 
tumors can be cured today by combination chemotherapy. As 
Figure 15-13.  Mechanism of STI571 as a 
molecular drug. Bcr-Abl is an overly acti-
vated oncogene product resulting from a 
specific genetic abnormality generated by 
chromosomal translocation that is found in 
cells of patients with chronic myeloid leuke-
mia. Bcr-Abl is an activated protein kinase 
and thus requires adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) to phosphorylate substrates, which in 
turn promote cell proliferation. STI571 is a 
small molecule that competes with the ATP-
binding site and thus blocks the transfer of 
phosphoryl group to substrate. PO4 = phos-
phate; Tyr = tyrosine.
Inactive
(In the absence of ATP)
Overly active
Uncontrolled
cell proliferation
Blocked
cell proliferation
Blocked activity
ATP
Substrate
Bcr-Abl
kinase
PO4
Tyr
STI571
Substrate
Bcr-Abl
kinase
Tyr
Substrate
Bcr-Abl
kinase
Tyr
456
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
using early embryos to generate ES cells, but also ensures a 
potentially limitless source of patient-specific stem cells for tis-
sue engineering and regenerative medicine.
The Atomic Theory of Disease22
The staggering advances in anatomy, physiology, and molecu-
lar biology over the past centuries have led us to our current 
state in which the atom is now the anatomy of the twenty-first 
century. As 99% of the body is composed of six elements 
­(oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium, and phosphorus), 
the next great advance in medicine will be bridging the sub-
atomic, molecular, and genomic levels by forming an atomic 
theory of disease, which states that alterations in the composi-
tion of ­subatomic particles are the root cause of disease. The 
atomic theory of disease would include genetic alterations at 
the atomic/subatomic level that are akin to single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), in which alleles for a gene differ on the 
exact nucleotide in a single location, which can change the ulti-
mate protein structure. This can lead to subtle changes in func-
tion or dramatic results that cause pathology. We hypothesize 
that on a subatomic level, there could potentially be polymor-
phisms as well, in which there are subtle changes in the sea of 
subatomic particles. Isotopes, discovered 100 years ago, would 
fall into this category of subatomic polymorphism, as they dif-
fer in the number of neutrons present in the atom. Differences 
in other particles may not change the mass of the atom, but may 
alter some of the characteristics of the atom.
A known example of a change in the subatomic milieu 
of an element leading to a disease process is that of methemo-
globinemia, a disorder characterized by an overabundance of 
methemoglobin. Methemoglobin contains an oxidized form of 
iron (carrying an extra electron), as opposed to the reduced form 
in normal hemoglobin. This results in a shift in the oxygen-
hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left, causing hypoxia. Met-
hemoglobinemia can be congenital, due to a defect in an enzyme 
that normally reduces methemoglobin back to hemoglobin, or 
acquired, caused by breakdown products of drugs that can oxi-
dize hemoglobin. Although there is less than 1% of methemo-
globin normally present in human tissues, affecting local blood 
flow and inflammation through its effects on nitric oxide and 
heme, large quantities can lead to respiratory failure and death.
TECHNOLOGIES OF MOLECULAR AND CELL 
BIOLOGY
DNA Cloning
Since the advent of recombinant DNA technology three decades 
ago, hundreds of thousands of genes have been identified. Recom-
binant DNA technology is the technology that uses advanced 
enzymatic and microbiologic techniques to manipulate DNA.23 
Pure pieces of any DNA can be inserted into bacteriophage DNA 
or other carrier DNA such as plasmids to produce recombinant 
DNA in bacteria. In this way, DNA can be reconstructed, ampli-
fied, and used to manipulate the functions of individual cells or 
even organisms. This technology, often referred to as DNA clon-
ing, is the basis of all other DNA analysis methods. It is only 
with the awesome power of recombinant DNA technology that 
the completion of the Human Genome Project was possible. It 
also has led to the identification of the entire gene complements 
of organisms such as viruses, bacteria, worms, flies, and plants.
Molecular cloning refers to the process of cloning a 
DNA fragment of interest into a DNA vector that ultimately 
cancer cells carry multiple genetic defects, the use of combina-
tion chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and gene therapies may be 
more effective in treating cancers.
Stem Cell Research
Stem cell biology represents a cutting-edge scientific research 
field with potential clinical applications.19 It may have an enor-
mous impact on human health by offering hope for curing human 
diseases such as diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s disease, neuro-
logic degeneration, and congenital heart disease. Stem cells are 
endowed with two remarkable properties (Fig. 15-14). First, 
stem cells can proliferate in an undifferentiated but pluripotent 
state and, as a result, can self-renew. Second, they have the abil-
ity to differentiate into many specialized cell types. There are 
two groups of stem cells: embryonic stem (ES) cells and adult 
stem cells. Human ES cells are derived from early preimplanta-
tion embryos called blastocysts (5 days postfertilization) and 
are capable of generating all differentiated germ layers in the 
body—ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm—and therefore are 
considered pluripotent. Adult stem cells are present in and can 
be isolated from adult tissues. They often are tissue specific and 
only can generate the cell types comprising a particular tissue in 
the body; therefore, they are considered multipotent. However, 
in some cases, they can transdifferentiate into cell types found 
in other tissues, called transdifferentiation. For example, hema-
topoietic stem cells are adult stem cells. They reside in bone 
marrow and are capable of generating all cell types of the blood 
and immune system.
Stem cells can be grown in culture and be induced to dif-
ferentiate into a particular cell type, either in vitro or in vivo. 
With the recent and continually increasing improvement in 
culturing stem cells, scientists are beginning to understand the 
molecular mechanisms of stem cell self-renewal and differentia-
tion in response to environmental cues. It is believed that dis-
covery of the signals that control self-renewal vs. differentiation 
will be extremely important for the therapeutic use of stem cells 
in treating disease. It is possible that success in the study of the 
changes in signal transduction pathways in stem cells will lead 
to the development of therapies to replace diseased or damaged 
cells in the body using stem cell derivatives. Recently, stem 
cell research has been transformed by the discovery from the 
Shinya Yamanaka group and the James Thomsen group, who 
have found that a simple genetic manipulation can reprogram 
adult differentiated cells back into pluripotent stem cells.20,21 
This exciting discovery not only bypasses the ethical issues of 
Figure 15-14.  Stem cells. A stem cell is capable of self-renewal 
(unlimited cell cycle) and differentiation (becoming nondividing 
cells with specialized functions). Differentiating stem cells often 
undergo additional cell divisions before they become fully mature 
cells that carry out specific tissue functions.
Self-renewal
Stem cell
Differentiation
Terminally
differentiated
cell
457
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
is delivered into bacterial or mammalian cells or tissues24,25  
(Fig. 15-15). This represents a very basic technique that is widely 
used in almost all areas of biomedical research. DNA vectors 
often are called plasmids, which are extrachromosomal mole-
cules of DNA that vary in size and can replicate and be transmit-
ted from bacterial cell to cell. Plasmids can be propagated either 
in the cytoplasm or after insertion, as part of the bacterial chro-
mosome in Escherichia coli. The process of molecular cloning 
involves several steps of manipulation of DNA. First, the vector 
plasmid DNA is cleaved with a restriction enzyme to create com-
patible ends with the foreign DNA fragment to be cloned. The 
vector and the DNA fragment are then joined in vitro by a DNA 
ligase. Alternatively, DNA cloning can be simply done through 
the so-called Gateway Technology that allows for the rapid and 
efficient transfer of DNA fragments between different cloning 
vectors while maintaining reading frame and orientation, without 
the use of restriction endonucleases and DNA ligase. The tech-
nology, which is based on the site-specific recombination system 
of bacteriophage l, is simple, fast, robust, and automatable and 
thus compatible for high-throughput DNA cloning.
Finally, the ligation product or the Gateway reaction prod-
uct is introduced into competent host bacteria; this procedure 
is called transformation, which can be done by either calcium/
heat shock or electroporation. Precautions must be taken in 
every step of cloning to generate the desired DNA construct. 
The vector must be correctly prepared to maximize the creation 
of recombinants; for example, it must be enzymatically treated 
to prevent self-ligation. Host bacteria must be made sufficiently 
competent to permit the entry of recombinant plasmids into 
cells. The selection of desired recombinant plasmid-bearing 
E. coli normally is achieved by the property of drug resistance 
conferred by the plasmid vectors. The plasmids encoding mark-
ers provide specific resistance to (i.e., the ability to grow in the 
presence of) antibiotics such as ampicillin, kanamycin, and tet-
racycline. The foreign component in the plasmid vector can be 
a mammalian expression cassette, which can direct expression 
of foreign genes in mammalian cells. The resulting plasmid vec-
tor can be amplified in E. coli to prepare large quantities of 
DNA for its subsequent applications such as transfection, gene 
therapy, transgenics, and knockout mice.
Detection of Nucleic Acids and Proteins
Southern Blot Hybridization.  Southern blotting refers to 
the technique of transferring DNA fragments from an electro-
phoresis gel to a membrane support and the subsequent analy-
sis of the fragments by hybridization with a radioactively or 
chemiluminescently labeled probe (Fig. 15-16).26 Southern 
blotting is named after E. M. Southern, who in 1975 first 
described the technique of DNA analysis. It enables reliable 
and efficient analysis of size-fractionated DNA fragments in 
an immobilized membrane support. Southern blotting is com-
posed of several steps. It normally begins with the digestion of 
the DNA samples with appropriate restriction enzymes, which 
will discriminate wild-type and mutant DNA by size and the 
separation of DNA samples in an agarose gel by electropho-
resis with appropriate DNA size markers, called the DNA 
ladder. The DNA gel is stained with a dye, usually ethidium 
Figure 15-15.  Generation of recombinant DNA. The vector is a circular DNA molecule that is capable of replicating in Escherichia coli cells. 
Insert DNA (often your favorite gene) is ligated to the vector after ends of both DNA are properly treated with restriction enzymes. Ligated 
DNA (i.e., the recombinant plasmid DNA) is then transformed into E. coli cells, where it replicates to produce recombinant progenies. E. coli 
cells carrying the recombinant plasmid can be propagated to yield large quantities of plasmid DNA.
Insert
DNA of interest
Digest with
restriction enzyme
Vector
Ligation
Recombinant
plasmid
Introduce
into E. coli
E. coli containing
recombinant plasmid
Propagation
E. coli containing
recombinant plasmid
Figure 15-16.  Southern blotting. Restriction enzymatic fragments 
of DNA are separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, transferred 
to a membrane filter, and then hybridized to a radioactive probe.
DNA is digested with
restriction enzymes.
DNA fragments are denatured
and separated by gel
electrophoresis.
DNA fragments are transferred
to a membrane filter.
The filter is hybridized with 
a radioactive DNA probe.
DNA fragment that is hybridized 
to the radioactive DNA is detected 
by autoradiography.
Radioactive probe
458
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
bromide, and photographed with a ruler laid alongside the gel 
so that band positions can later be identified on the membrane. 
The DNA gel then is treated so the DNA fragments are dena-
tured (i.e., strand separation). The DNA then is transferred 
onto a nitrocellulose membrane by capillary diffusion or under 
electricity. After immobilization, the DNA can be subjected to 
hybridization analysis, enabling bands with sequence similar-
ity to a radioactively or chemiluminescently labeled probe to 
be identified.
The development of Southern transfer and the associated 
hybridization techniques made it possible for the first time to 
obtain information about the physical organization of single and 
multicopy sequences in complex genomes. The later applica-
tion of Southern blotting hybridization to the study of restriction 
fragment length polymorphisms opened up new possibilities 
such as genetic fingerprinting and prenatal diagnosis of genetic 
diseases.
Northern Blot Hybridization.  Northern blotting refers to the 
technique of size fractionation of RNA in a gel and the transfer-
ring of an RNA sample to a solid support (membrane) in such 
a manner that the relative positions of the RNA molecules are 
maintained. The resulting membrane then is hybridized with a 
labeled probe complementary to the mRNA of interest. Signals 
generated from detection of the membrane can be used to deter-
mine the size and abundance of the target RNA. In principle, 
Northern blot hybridization is similar to Southern blot hybrid-
ization (and hence its name), with the exception that RNA, not 
DNA, is on the membrane. Although reverse-transcriptase PCR 
has been used in many applications (described in the next sec-
tion, Polymerase Chain Reaction), Northern analysis is the only 
method that provides information regarding mRNA size and has 
remained a standard method for detection and quantitation of 
mRNA. The process of Northern hybridization involves several 
steps, as does Southern hybridization, including electrophoresis 
of RNA samples in an agarose-formaldehyde gel, transfer to a 
membrane support, and hybridization to a radioactively labeled 
DNA probe. Data from hybridization allow quantification of 
steady-state mRNA levels and, at the same time, provide infor-
mation related to the presence, size, and integrity of discrete 
mRNA species. Thus, Northern blot analysis, also termed RNA 
gel blot analysis, commonly is used in molecular biology stud-
ies relating to gene expression.
Polymerase Chain Reaction.  PCR is an in vitro method 
for the polymerase-directed amplification of specific DNA 
sequences using two oligonucleotide primers that hybridize 
to opposite strands and flank the region of interest in the tar-
get DNA (Fig. 15-17).27 One cycle of PCR reaction involves 
template denaturation, primer annealing, and the extension of 
the annealed primers by DNA polymerase. Because the primer 
extension products synthesized in one cycle can serve as a 
template in the next, the number of target DNA copies nearly 
doubles at each cycle. Thus, a repeated series of cycles result in 
the exponential accumulation of a specific fragment in which 
the termini are sharply defined by the 5′ ends of the primers. 
The introduction of the thermostable DNA polymerase (e.g., 
Taq polymerase) transforms the PCR into a simple and robust 
reaction. The reaction components (e.g., template, primers, 
Taq polymerase, 2′-deoxynucleoside 5′-triphosphates, and 
buffer) could all be assembled and the amplification reaction 
carried out by simply cycling the temperatures within the reac-
tion tube. The specificity and yield in amplifying a particular 
DNA fragment by PCR reaction are affected by the proper set-
ting of the reaction parameters (e.g., enzyme, primer, and Mg2+ 
concentration, as well as the temperature cycling profile). 
Modifying various PCR parameters to optimize the specificity 
of amplification yields more homogenous products, even in 
rare template reactions.
The emergence of the PCR technique has dramatically 
altered the approach to both fundamental and applied bio-
logic problems. The capability of amplifying a specific DNA 
fragment from a gene or the whole genome greatly advances 
the study of the gene and its function. It is simple, yet robust, 
speedy, and most of all, flexible. As a recombinant DNA tool, 
it underlies almost all of molecular biology. This revolution-
ary technique enabled the modern methods for the isolation of 
genes, construction of a DNA vector, introduction of alterations 
into DNA, and quantitation of gene expression, making it a fun-
damental cornerstone of genetic and molecular analysis.
Immunoblotting and Immunoprecipitation.  Analyses of 
proteins are primarily carried out by antibody-directed immu-
nologic techniques. For example, Western blotting, also called 
immunoblotting, is performed to detect protein levels in a popu-
lation of cells or tissues, whereas immunoprecipitation is used to 
concentrate proteins from a larger pool. Using specific antibod-
ies, microscopic analysis called immunofluorescence and immu-
nohistochemistry is possible for the subcellular localization and 
expression of proteins in cells or tissues, respectively.
Immunoblotting refers to the process of identifying a pro-
tein from a mixture of proteins (Fig. 15-18). It consists of five 
steps: (a) sample preparation; (b) electrophoresis (separation of 
a protein mixture by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis); (c) transfer (the electrophoretic transfer of 
proteins from gel onto membrane support [e.g., nitrocellulose, 
nylon, or polyvinylidene difluoride]); (d) staining (the subse-
quent immunodetection of target proteins with specific anti-
body); and (e) development (colorimetric, chemiluminescent, 
and recently fluorescent visualization of the antibody-­recognized 
protein). Thus, immunoblotting combines the resolution of gel 
electrophoresis with the specificity of immunochemical detec-
tion. Immunoblotting is a powerful tool used to determine a 
number of important characteristics of proteins. For example, 
immunoblotting analysis will determine the presence and the 
quantity of a protein in a given cellular condition and its relative 
molecular weight. Immunoblotting also can be used to determine 
whether posttranslational modification such as phosphorylation 
has occurred on a protein. Importantly, through immunoblotting 
analysis, a comparison of the protein levels and modification 
states in normal vs. diseased tissues is possible.
Immunoprecipitation, another widely used immuno-
chemical technique, is a method that uses antibody to enrich 
a protein of interest and any other proteins that are associated 
with it (Fig. 15-19). The principle of the technique lies in the 
property of a strong and specific affinity between antibodies 
and their antigens to locate and pull down target proteins in 
solution. Once the antibody-antigen (target protein) complexes 
are formed in the solution, they are collected and purified 
using small agarose beads with covalently attached protein A 
or protein G. Both protein A and protein G specifically interact 
with the antibodies, thus forming a large immobilized complex 
of antibody-antigen bound to beads. The purified protein can 
then be analyzed by a number of biochemical methods. When 
immunoprecipitation is combined with immunoblotting, it can 
459
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
be used for the sensitive detection of proteins in low concentra-
tions, which would otherwise be difficult to detect. Moreover, 
combined immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting analysis 
is very efficient in analyzing the protein-protein interactions or 
determining the posttranslational modifications of proteins. In 
addition, immunoprecipitated proteins can be used as prepara-
tive steps for assays such as intrinsic or associated enzymatic 
activities. The success of immunoprecipitation is influenced 
by two major factors: (a) the abundance of the protein in the 
original preparation and (b) the specificity and affinity of the 
antibody for this protein.
Recently, immunoprecipitation is even used to enrich 
modified DNA (for example, 5-methylcytosine) for bisulfite 
sequencing. Besides proteins of interest, specific antibodies can 
also be raised against specially modified DNA. Like the pro-
tein immunoprecipitation, modified DNA can be pulled down, 
taking advantage of the specificity and affinity of antibody to 
antigen.
DNA Microarray.  Now that the human genome sequence is 
completed, the primary focus of biologists is rapidly shifting 
toward gaining an understanding of how genes function. One of 
the interesting findings about the human genome is that there are 
only approximately 25,000 to 30,000 protein-encoding genes. 
However, it is known that genes and their products function in a 
complicated and yet orchestrated fashion and that the surprisingly 
small number of genes from the genome sequence is sufficient to 
Figure 15-17.  Amplification of DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. Knowledge of the DNA sequence to be ampli-
fied is used to design two synthetic DNA oligonucleotides, each complementary to the sequence on one strand of the DNA double helix at 
opposite ends of the region to be amplified. These oligonucleotides serve as primers for in vitro DNA synthesis, which is performed by a 
DNA polymerase, and they determine the segment of the DNA that is amplified. A. PCR starts with a double-stranded DNA, and each cycle 
of the reaction begins with a brief heat treatment to separate the two strands (Step 1). After strand separation, cooling of the DNA in the 
presence of a large excess of the two primer DNA oligonucleotides allows these primers to hybridize to complementary sequences in the two 
DNA strands (Step 2). This mixture is then incubated with DNA polymerase and the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates so that DNA is 
synthesized, starting from the two primers (Step 3). The entire cycle is then begun again by a heat treatment to separate the newly synthesized 
DNA strands. B. As the procedure is performed over and over again, the newly synthesized fragments serve as templates in their turn, and, 
within a few cycles, the predominant DNA is identical to the sequence bracketed by and including the two primers in the original template. 
Of the DNA put into the original reaction, only the sequence bracketed by the two primers is amplified because there are no primers attached 
anywhere else. In the example illustrated in B, three cycles of reaction produce 16 DNA chains, eight of which (boxed in brown) are the same 
length as and correspond exactly to one or the other strand of the original bracketed sequence shown at the far left; the other strands contain 
extra DNA downstream of the original sequence, which is replicated in the first few cycles. After three more cycles, 240 of the 256 DNA 
chains correspond exactly to the original bracketed sequence, and after several more cycles, essentially all of the DNA strands have this unique 
length. (Republished with permission of Garland Publishing, Inc. from Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 
5th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2008. Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance Center, Inc.)
Etc.
Double-stranded
DNA
Heat to
separate
strands
Hybridization 
of primers
+DNA polymerase
+dATP
+dGTP
+dCTP
+dTTP
5'
5'
DNA
from
synthesis
primers
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
First cycle
Separate DNA strands
and add primer
DNA
synthesis
Region of
double-stranded 
DNA to be
amplified
DNA oligonucleotide
primers
Separate DNA strands
and annual primer
DNA
synthesis
Separate DNA strands
and annual primer
DNA
synthesis
First cycle
Producing two double-stranded
DNA molecules
Second cycle
Producing four double-stranded
DNA molecules
Third cycle
Producing eight double-stranded
DNA molecules
A
B
460
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Figure 15-18.  Immunoblotting. Proteins are prepared from cells 
or tissues, separated according to size by sodium dodecyl sulfate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and transferred to a membrane 
filter. Detection of a protein of interest can be done by sequential 
incubation with a primary antibody directed against the protein, 
and then with an enzyme-conjugated secondary antibody that rec-
ognizes the primary antibody. Visualization of the protein is carried 
out by using colorimetric or luminescent substrates for the conju-
gated enzyme.
Cell tissue lysates
• Sample
  preparation
• Gel
  electrophoresis
  Separation of proteins
• Western
  transfer
  Transfer of proteins 
  to membrane
• Immunostaining
  Block membrane
  1°/2° antibody staining
• Development
  Colorimetric/chemi-
 luminescence detection
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
DNA microarray, also called gene chip, DNA chip, and 
gene array, refers to large sets of probes of known sequences 
orderly arranged on a small chip, enabling many hybridiza-
tion reactions to be carried out in parallel in a small device 
(Fig. 15-20).28 Like Southern and Northern hybridization, the 
underlying principle of this technology is the remarkable abil-
ity of nucleic acids to form a duplex between two strands with 
complementary base sequences. DNA microarray provides a 
medium for matching known and unknown DNA samples based 
on base-pairing rules and automating the process of identify-
ing the unknowns. Microarrays require specialized robotics and 
imaging equipment that spot the samples on a glass or nylon 
substrate, carry out the hybridization, and analyze the data 
generated. DNA microarrays containing different sets of genes 
from a variety of organisms are now commercially available, 
allowing biologists to simply purchase the chips and perform 
hybridization and data collection. The massive scale of micro-
array experiments requires the aid of computers. They are used 
during the capturing of the image of the hybridized target, the 
conversion of the image into usable measures of the extent of 
hybridization, and the interpretation of the extent of hybridiza-
tion into a meaningful measure of the amount of the comple-
mentary sequence in the target. Some data-analysis packages 
are available commercially or can be found in the core facility 
of certain institutions.
DNA microarray technology has produced many signifi-
cant results in quite different areas of application. There are 
two major application forms for the technology: identifica-
tion of sequence (gene/gene mutation) in multiple regions of a 
genome and determination of expression level (abundance) of 
large numbers of genes simultaneously. For example, analysis 
of genomic DNA detects amplifications and deletions found 
in human tumors. Differential gene expression analysis also 
has uncovered networks of genes differentially present in can-
cers that cannot be distinguished by conventional means. Sig-
nificantly, recent advancements in next-generation sequencing 
(e.g., Solexa and 454 technology) have demonstrated the preci-
sion and speed to analyze gene expression in any genome.
Next-Generation Sequencing.29,30  The recombinant DNA 
technology greatly impacts the completion of the Human 
Genome Project due to the invention of shotgun sequencing, 
which includes breaking the genome DNA into small pieces 
and randomly cloning those pieces into DNA vectors that are 
easily sequenced. Based on the overlapping sequence of each 
clone, computer analysis can be programmed to map and align 
the DNA sequence that will ultimately cover the whole human 
genome.
Based on shotgun sequencing, as the sequencing technolo-
gies advance, next-generation sequencing has become one of the 
most powerful tools to analyze DNA mutation, to identify epi-
genetic modification, and to profile gene expression or ncRNA 
expression.31 The next-generation sequencing process usually 
includes library construction, sequencing, and data analysis. 
Take the Illumina next-generation sequencing as an example: 
DNA are shared or digested into small pieces and then used to 
generate a DNA library with adapters on both ends of each DNA 
piece. Then, the DNA library is diluted and loaded on a cham-
ber of a slide, called a lane, for cluster amplification. Cycled 
fluorescent deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) are then 
added to the chamber to enable DNA polymerization, resulting 
in different fluorescent emission representing different dNTP 
reading on different clusters, into a microscope. The fluorescent 
make a human being. Nonetheless, with the tens of thousands of 
genes present in the genome, traditional methods in molecular 
biology, which generally work on a one-gene-in-one-experiment 
basis, cannot generate the whole picture of genome function. In 
the past several years, a new technology called DNA microarray 
has attracted tremendous interest among biologists as well as cli-
nicians. This technology promises to monitor the whole genome 
on a single chip so researchers can have a better picture of the 
interactions among thousands of genes simultaneously.
461
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
Figure 15-19.  Immunoprecipitation. Proteins 
prepared from cells or tissues can be enriched 
using an antibody directed against them. The anti-
body is first conjugated to agarose beads and then 
incubated with protein mixture. Due to the spe-
cific high-affinity interaction between antibody 
and its antigen (the protein), the antigen-antibody 
complex can be collected on beads by centrifuga-
tion. The immunoprecipitated protein can then be 
analyzed by immunoblotting. Alternatively, if pro-
teins are radiolabeled in cells or tissues, detection 
of immunoprecipitated proteins can be achieved 
by simple sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis followed by autoradiography.
Enriched YFP & YBPs
Wash
SDS-PAGE
Anti-YFP beads
Anti-YFP conjugated to beads
Your favorite protein (YFP)
YFP-binding proteins (YBPs)
Junk proteins
Figure 15-20.  DNA microarrays. DNA microarrays, also referred 
to as gene chips, have arrayed oligonucleotides or complementary 
DNAs (cDNAs) corresponding to tens or hundreds of distinct genes. 
DNA microarray is used to comparatively analyze gene expression 
in different cells or tissues. Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) extracted 
from different sources are converted into cDNAs, which are then 
labeled with different fluorescent dyes. The two fluorescent cDNA 
probes are mixed and hybridized to the same DNA microarrays. The 
ratio of red to green fluorescence at each spot on the chip represents 
the relative expression of levels of that gene between two different 
cells. In the example shown in the figure, cDNA from cell #1 is 
labeled with red fluorescence and that from cell #2 is labeled with 
green fluorescence. On the microarray, red spots demonstrate that 
the gene in the cell sample #1 is expressed at a higher level than the 
corresponding gene in cell sample #2. The green spots indicate that 
the gene in the cell sample #2 is expressed at a higher level than the 
corresponding gene in the cell sample #1. Yellow spots represent 
equal expression of the gene in both cell samples.
Cell #1
Cell #2
mRNA
cDNA
DNA microarray
DNA microarray data
cDNA
mRNA
462
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
signal is transformed into sequencing data that will be aligned 
and mapped to a standard genome database. The advantages of 
next-generation sequencing include the following: no necessity 
of DNA cloning; fast and cost-effective; and a huge amount of 
data to give a good depth and accuracy of the sequence.
Based on the applications, the most common next-­
generation sequencing technologies for whole-genome sequencing 
are whole-genome DNA sequencing, whole-genome bisulfite 
sequencing (BS-seq), RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), and chro-
matin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing ­(ChIP-seq). 
Whole-genome DNA sequencing is purely to sequence the DNA 
sequence of a genome without any preprocessing of the DNA, 
reflecting any deletions, replications, and mutations within the 
genomic DNA. BS-seq is commonly used to identify DNA 
methylation on the genome (5-methylcytosine [5mC]). The 
process always involves a bisulfite treatment of DNA before 
library construction, during which the unmethylated cytosine 
will be transformed to a uracil, resulting in reading as a thymine 
in data output, whereas 5mC is protected and remains as cyto-
sine in data output. Thus, 5mC and cytosine are distinguished 
by this way. RNA-seq is usually performed to analyze transcrip-
tion for the same purpose as performing a microarray. However, 
RNA-seq is more accurate and provides more information such 
as splicing variants than traditional microarray. Usually, cDNA 
that is reversely transcribed from extracted RNA is used to gen-
erate libraries. Depending on the needs, mRNA and ncRNA can 
be enriched in different protocols for RNA extraction. ChIP-seq 
is always used to map the location of a DNA-binding protein in 
the genome. Prior to library construction, ChIP is performed to 
enrich DNA bound by the protein of interest (POI). First, POI 
and DNA are cross-linked before sonication. Then, a specific 
antibody is used to pull down POI and attached DNA fragments. 
After the protein and DNA are reverse cross-linked, DNA will 
be purified to make the ChIP-seq library.
By using next-generation sequencing technology, any 
potential mutations in a patient will be scrutinized as well as any 
defects in epigenetic modification, which will greatly facilitate 
the diagnosis of patients and personalization of medicine in a 
fast and economic way.
Figure 15-21.  Cell culture and 
transfection. A. Primary cells can be 
isolated from tissues and cultured in 
medium for a limited period of time. 
After genetic manipulations to over-
come the cell aging process, primary 
cells can be immortalized into cell 
lines for long-term culture. B. DNA 
can be introduced into cells to produce 
recombinant gene products or to ana-
lyze the biologic functions of the gene.
Cell
isolation
Primary
culture
Propagation
Tissue
sample
Production of 
recombinant proteins
Analysis of gene function
Transfection
with DNA
A
B
Cell Manipulations
Cell Culture.  Cell culture has become one of the most power-
ful tools in biomedical laboratories, as cultured cells are being 
used in a diversity of biologic fields ranging from biochemistry 
to molecular and cellular biology.32 Through their ability to be 
maintained in vitro, cells can be manipulated by the introduction 
of genes of interest (cell transfection) and be transferred into in 
vivo biologic receivers (cell transplantation) to study the biologic 
effect of the interested genes (Fig. 15-21). In the common labora-
tory settings, cells are cultured either as a monolayer (in which 
cells grow as one layer on culture dishes) or in suspension.
It is important to know the wealth of information concern-
ing cell culturing before attempting the procedure. For example, 
conditions of culture will depend on the cell types to be cultured 
(e.g., origins of the cells such as epithelial or fibroblasts, or pri-
mary vs. immortalized/transformed cells). It is also necessary 
to use cell type-specific culture medium that varies in combina-
tion of growth factors and serum concentrations. If primary cells 
are derived from human patients or animals, some commercial 
resources have a variety of culture media available for testing. 
Generally, cells are manipulated in a sterile hood, and the work-
ing surfaces are wiped with 70% to 80% ethyl alcohol solution. 
Cultured cells are usually maintained in a humidified carbon 
dioxide incubator at 37°C (98.6°F) and need to be examined 
daily under an inverted microscope to check for possible con-
tamination and confluency (the area cells occupy on the dish). 
As a general rule, cells should be fed with fresh medium every 
2 to 3 days and split when they reach confluency. Depending 
on the growth rate of cells, the actual time and number of plates 
required to split cells in two varies from cell line to cell line. 
Splitting a monolayer requires the detachment of cells from 
plates by using a trypsin or collagenase treatment, of which 
concentration and time period vary depending on cell lines. If 
cultured cells grow continuously in suspension, they are split or 
subcultured by dilution.
Because cell lines may change their properties when cul-
tured, it is not possible to maintain cell lines in culture indefi-
nitely. Therefore, it is essential to store cells at various time 
463
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
passages for future use. The common procedure to use is cryo-
preservation. The solution for cryopreservation is usually fetal 
calf serum containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide or glycerol, 
stored in liquid nitrogen (−196°C [−320.8°F]) for years of pres-
ervation. However, the viability and health of cells when thawed 
will decrease over time even in liquid nitrogen.
Cell Transfection.  Cells are cultured for two reasons: to main-
tain and to manipulate them (see Fig. 15-21). The transfer of 
foreign macromolecules, such as nucleic acid, into living cells 
provides an efficient method for studying a variety of cellular 
processes and functions at the molecular level. DNA transfec-
tion has become an important tool for studying the regulation 
and function of genes. The cDNA to be expressed should be 
in a plasmid vector, behind an appropriate promoter working 
in mammalian cells (e.g., the constitutively active cytomegalo-
virus promoter or inducible promoter). Depending on the cell 
type, many ways of introducing DNA into mammalian cells 
have been developed. Commonly used approaches include cal-
cium phosphate, electroporation, liposome-mediated transfec-
tion, the nonliposomal formulation, and the use of viral vectors. 
These methods have shown variable success when attempting 
to transfect a wide variety of cells. Transfection can be per-
formed in the presence or absence of serum. It is suggested to 
test the transfection efficiency of cell lines of interest by compar-
ing transfection with several different approaches. For a detailed 
transfection protocol, it is best to follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions for the particular reagent. General considerations 
for a successful transfection depend on several parameters, such 
as the quality and quantity of DNA and cell culture (type of cell 
and growth phase). To minimize variations in both of these in 
transfection experiments, it is best to use cells that are healthy, 
proliferate well, and are plated at a constant density.
Depending on the transfection method, DNA expression 
can be transient or stable. Using calcium phosphate and lipo-
some-mediated transfection, after DNA is introduced into the 
cells, it is normally maintained epitopically in cells and will be 
diluted while host cells undergo cell division. Therefore, func-
tional assays should be performed 24 to 72 hours after transfec-
tion, also termed transient transfection. In many applications, it 
is important to study the long-term effects of DNA in cells by 
stable transfection. Thus, electroporation and viral vector are 
often used in these situations to enable integration of ectopic 
DNA into the host genome. Stable cell clones can be selected 
when plasmids carry an antibiotic-resistant marker. In the pres-
ence of antibiotics, only those cells that continuously carry the 
antibiotic-resistant marker (after generations of cell division) 
can survive. One application of stable transfection is the gen-
eration of transgenic or knockout mouse models, in which the 
transgene has to be integrated in the mouse genome in the ES 
cells, followed by microinjection of those transgenic ES cells 
into blastocysts to generate chimera mice. Stable cells also can 
be transplanted into host organs to test the effect of transgenic 
cells in vivo.
Genetic Manipulations
Understanding how genes control the growth and differentia-
tion of the mammalian organism has been the most challenging 
topic of modern research. It is essential for us to understand how 
genetic mutations and chemicals lead to the pathologic condi-
tion of human bodies. The knowledge and ability to change the 
genetic program will inevitably make a great impact on society 
and have far-reaching effects on how we think of ourselves.
The mouse has become firmly established as the primary 
experimental model for studying how genes control mammalian 
development. Genetically altered mice are powerful tools to 
study the function and regulation of genes as well as modeling 
4
human diseases.33  The gene function can be studied by 
creating mutant mice through homologous recombination 
(gene knockout). A gene of interest (GOI) also can be intro-
duced into the mouse (transgenic mouse) to study its effect on 
development or diseases. Because mouse models do not pre-
cisely represent human biology, genetic manipulations of human 
somatic or ES cells provide a great means for the understanding 
of the molecular networks in human cells in addition to mouse 
models. In all cases, the gene to be manipulated must first be 
cloned. Gene cloning has been made easy by recombinant DNA 
technology and the availability of human and mouse genomes 
(see the Human Genome section). The following section briefly 
describes the technologies and the principles behind how to 
combine both mouse genetics and human cell culture in explor-
ing gene function and disease mechanisms.
Transgenic Mice.  During the past 20 years, DNA cloning 
and other techniques have allowed the introduction of new 
genetic material into the mouse germline. As early as 1980, 
the first genetic material was successfully introduced into the 
mouse germline by using pronuclear microinjection of DNA 
(Fig. 15-22). These animals, called transgenic, contain for-
eign DNA within their genomes. In simple terms, a transgenic 
mouse is created by the microinjection of ectopic DNA into 
the one-celled mouse embryo to induce integration, allowing 
the efficient introduction of cloned genes into the following 
developing mouse somatic tissues, as well as into the germline.
Figure 15-22.  Transgenic mouse tech-
nology. DNA is microinjected into a pro-
nucleus of a fertilized egg, which is then 
transplanted into a foster mother. The 
microinjected egg develops offspring 
mice. Incorporation of the injected DNA 
into offspring is indicated by the differ-
ent coat color of offspring mice.
DNA
Pronucleus
DNA microinjected into
pronucleus of fertilized egg
Foster mother
carrying
microinjected DNA
Transgenic
mouse
464
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Designs of a Transgene  The transgenic technique has proven to 
be extremely important for basic investigations of gene regula-
tion, creation of animal models of human disease, and genetic 
engineering of livestock. The design of a transgene construct is 
a simple task. Like constructs used in cell transfection, a simple 
transgene construct consists of a protein-encoding gene and a 
promoter that precedes it. The most common applications for 
the use of transgenic mice are similar to those in the cell culture 
system: (a) to study the functions of proteins encoded by the 
transgene, (b) to analyze the tissue-specific and developmental-
stage–specific activity of a gene promoter, and (c) to generate 
reporter lines to facilitate biomedical studies. Examples of the 
first application include overexpression of oncogenes, growth 
factors, hormones, and other key regulatory genes, as well as 
genes of viral origins. Overexpression of the transgene normally 
represents gain-of-function mutations. The tissue distribution or 
expression of a transgene is determined primarily by cis-acting 
promoter enhancer elements within or in the immediate vicin-
ity of the genes themselves. Thus, controlled expression of 
the transgene can be made possible by using an inducible or 
tissue-specific promoter. Furthermore, transgenic mice carry-
ing dominant negative mutations of a regulatory gene also have 
been generated. For example, a truncated growth factor receptor 
that can bind to the ligand, but loses its catalytic activity when 
expressed in mice, can block the growth factor binding to the 
endogenous protein. In this way, the transgenic mice exhibit a 
loss of function of phenotype, possibly resembling the knockout 
of the endogenous gene. The second application of the trans-
genic expression is to analyze the gene promoter of interest. The 
gene promoter of interest normally is fused to a reporter gene 
that encodes β-galactosidase (also called LacZ), luciferase, or 
green fluorescence protein. Chemical staining of LacZ activity 
or detection of chemiluminescence/fluorescence can easily visu-
alize the expression of the reporter gene. The third application 
originates from the second: when the activity of the promoter is 
known, a fluorescent reporter gene (such as GFP) will be driven 
by the tissue-specific promoter, therefore labeling a particular 
type of cells at a particular stage. This application is generally 
used to isolate a special cell type expressing the GFP reporter by 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), as well as lineage-
tracing experiments.
Production of Transgenic Mice  The success of generating 
transgenic mice is largely dependent on the proper quality and 
concentration of the DNA supplied for microinjection. For DNA 
to be microinjected into mouse embryos, it should be linear-
ized by restriction digestion to increase the chance of proper 
transgene integration. Concentration of DNA should be accu-
rately determined. Mice that develop from injected eggs often 
are termed founder mice.
Genotyping of Transgenic Mice  The screening of founder mice 
and the transgenic lines derived from the founders is accom-
plished by determining the integration of the injected gene into 
the genome. This normally is achieved by performing PCR or 
Southern blot analysis with a small amount of DNA extracted 
from the mouse tail. Once a given founder mouse is identified to 
be transgenic, it will be mated to begin establishing a transgenic 
line. Usually, for a given gene, more than one transgenic line is 
generated to assure that the phenotype is due to transgene but not 
to the interruption of the gene where the transgene integrates into.
Analysis of Phenotype of Transgenic Mice  Phenotypes of 
transgenic mice are dictated by both the expression pattern 
and biologic functions of the transgene. Depending on the 
promoter and the transgene, phenotypes can be predictable or 
unpredictable. Elucidation of the functions of the transgene-
encoded protein in vitro often offers some clue to what the pro-
tein might function to do in vivo. When a constitutively active 
promoter is used to drive the expression of transgenes, mice 
should express the gene in every tissue; however, this mouse 
model may not allow the identification and study of the earli-
est events in disease pathogenesis. Ideally, the use of tissue-
specific or inducible promoter allows one to determine if the 
pathogenic protein leads to a reversible or irreversible disease 
process in a cell-autonomous manner. For example, rat insu-
lin promoter can target transgene expression exclusively in the 
β-cells of pancreatic islets. The phenotype of insulin promoter-
mediated transgenic mice is projected to affect the function of 
human β-cells.
Gene Knockout in Mice.  The first recorded knockout mouse 
was created by Mario R. Capecchi, Sir Martin J. Evans, and 
Oliver Smithies in 1989. They were awarded the 2007 Nobel 
Prize in Physiology or Medicine. The isolation and genetic 
manipulation of mouse ES cells represent one of the most 
important milestones for modern genetic technologies.34 Sev-
eral unique properties of ES cells, such as the pluripotency 
to differentiate into all germ layers in an embryo, including 
the germline, make them an efficient vehicle to introduce 
genetic alterations in mice. An important breakthrough from 
this idea is to generate gene-targeted mutation in mice, first 
by introducing the targeting vector into the ES cells, allowing 
selection for successful homologous recombination in a dish, 
then introducing the selected ES clone into the blastocysts, 
and finally recovering animals bearing the mutant allele from 
the germline (Fig. 15-23). This not only makes mouse genet-
ics a powerful approach for addressing important gene func-
tions, but also identifies the mouse as a great system to model 
human disease.
Targeting Vector  The basic concept in building a target vec-
tor to knock out a gene is to use two segments of homologous 
sequence to a GOI that flank a part of the gene essential for 
functions (e.g., the coding region). In the targeting vector, a pos-
itive selectable marker (e.g., the neo gene) is placed between the 
homology arms. Upon the homologous recombination between 
the arms of the vector and the corresponding genomic regions 
of the GOI in ES cells, the positive selectable marker will 
replace the essential segment of the target gene, thus creating 
a null allele. In addition, a negative selectable marker also can 
be used alone or in combination with the positive selectable 
marker, but must be placed outside of the homologous arms to 
enrich for homologous recombination. To create a conditional 
knockout (i.e., gene knockout in a spatiotemporal fashion), site-
specific recombinases such as the popular cre-loxP system are 
used. If the consensus loxP sequences that are recognized by 
cre recombinases are properly designed into targeting loci, con-
trolled expression of the recombinase as a transgene can result 
in the site-specific recombination at the right time and in the 
right place (i.e., cell type or tissue). This method, often referred 
as conditional knockout, is markedly useful to prevent devel-
opmental compensations and to introduce null mutations in the 
adult mouse that would otherwise be lethal. Overall, this cre-
loxP system allows for spatial and temporal control over trans-
gene expression and takes advantage of inducers with minimal 
pleiotropic effects.
465
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
Introduction of the Targeting Vector into ES Cells  ES cell 
lines can be obtained from other investigators or commer-
cial sources or established from blastocyst-stage embryos. To 
maintain ES cells at their full developmental potential, optimal 
growth conditions should be provided in culture. If culture con-
ditions are inappropriate or inadequate, ES cells may acquire 
genetic lesions or alter their gene expression patterns, and 
consequently decrease their pluripotency. Excellent protocols 
are available in public domains or in mouse facilities in most 
­institutions.
To alter the genome of ES cells, the targeting vector DNA 
then is transfected into ES cells. Electroporation is the most 
widely used and the most efficient transfection method for ES 
cells. Similar procedures for stable cell transfection are used for 
Figure 15-23.  Knockout mouse technology. Summary of the procedures used for making gene replacements in mice. In the first step (A), 
an altered version of the gene is introduced into cultured embryonic stem (ES) cells. Only a few rare ES cells will have their corresponding 
normal genes replaced by the altered gene through a homologous recombination event. Although the procedure is often laborious, these rare 
cells can be identified and cultured to produce many descendants, each of which carries an altered gene in place of one of its two normal 
corresponding genes. In the next step of the procedure (B), these altered ES cells are injected into a very early mouse embryo; the cells are 
incorporated into the growing embryo, and a mouse produced by such an embryo will contain some somatic cells that carry the altered gene. 
Some of these mice also will contain germline cells that contain the altered gene. When bred with a normal mouse, some of the progeny of 
these mice will contain the altered gene in all of their cells. If two such mice are in turn bred (not shown), some of the progeny will contain 
two altered genes (one on each chromosome) in all of their cells. If the original gene alteration completely inactivates the function of the gene, 
these mice are known as knockout mice. When such mice are missing genes that function during development, they often die with specific 
defects long before they reach adulthood. These defects are carefully analyzed to help decipher the normal function of the missing gene. 
(Republished with permission of Garland Publishing, Inc. from Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 5th ed. 
New York: Garland Science; 2008. Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance Center, Inc.)
ES cells growing
In tissue culture
Altered version
of target gene
constructed by
genetic engineering
Let each cell
grow to form
a colony
Test for the rare
colony in which
the DNA fragment
has replaced 
one copy of the 
normal gene
ES cells with one copy of target gene
replaced by mutant gene
Inject
ES cells
into
early embryo
Female mouse
Mate and wait
3 days
Isolated
early
embryo
Early embryo partly
formed from
ES cells
Introduce
early embryo into
pseudopregnant
mouse
Somatic cells
of offspring 
tested for
presence of
altered gene, and 
selected mice bred
to test for gene
in germline cells
Transgenic mouse with one copy of target gene
replaced by altered gene in germline
A
B
Birth
Introduce a 
DNA fragment
containing 
altered gene
into many cells
466
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
selecting ES cells that carry the targeting vector. High-quality, 
targeting-vector DNA free of contaminating chemicals is first 
linearized and then electroporated into ES cells. Stable ES cells 
are selected in the presence of a positive selectable antibiotic 
drug. After a certain period of time and depending on the type 
of antibiotics, all sensitive cells die and the resistant cells grow 
into individual colonies of the appropriate size for subcloning 
by picking. It is extremely important to minimize the time dur-
ing which ES cells are in culture between selection and injection 
into blastocysts. Before injecting the ES cells, DNA is prepared 
from ES colonies to screen for positive ES cells that exhibit the 
correct integration or homologous recombination of the target-
ing vector. Positive ES colonies are then expanded and used for 
creation of chimeras.
Creation of the Chimera  A chimeric organism is one in which 
cells originate from more than one embryo source. Here, chi-
meric mice are denoted as those that contain some tissues from 
the ES cells with an altered genome. When these ES cells give 
rise to the lineage of the germ layer, the germ cells carrying the 
altered genome can be passed on to the offspring, thus creating 
the germline transmission from ES cells. There are two methods 
for introducing ES cells into preimplantation-stage embryos: 
injection and aggregation. The injection of embryonic cells 
directly into the cavity of blastocysts is one of the fundamen-
tal methods for generating chimeras, but aggregation chimeras 
also have become an important alternative for transmitting the 
ES cell genome into mice. Since every tissue type of a chimera 
should contain cells from different origins, the mixture of rec-
ognizable markers (e.g., coat color) that are specific for each the 
donor mouse and ES cells can be used to identify chimeric mice. 
However, most experimenters probably use existing mouse core 
facilities already established in some institutions, or contract a 
commercial vendor for the creation of a chimera.
Genotyping and Phenotyping of Knockout Animals  The next 
step is to analyze whether germline transmission of targeted muta-
tion occurs in mice. DNA from a small amount of tissue from off-
spring of the chimera is extracted and subjected to genomic PCR 
or Southern blot DNA hybridization. Positive mice (i.e., those 
with properly integrated targeting vector into the genome) will 
be used for the propagation of more knockout mice for phenotype 
analysis. When the knockout genes are crucial for early embryo-
genesis, mice often die in utero, an occurrence called embryonic 
lethality. When this happens, only the phenotype of the homozy-
gous (both alleles ablated) knockout mouse embryos and the phe-
notype of the heterozygous (only one allele ablated) adult mice 
can be studied. Because most are interested in the phenotype of 
adult mice, in particular when using mice as disease models, it is 
recommended to create the conditional knockout using the cre-
loxP system so that the GOI can be knocked out at will.
To date, more than 5000 genes have been disrupted by 
homologous recombination and transmitted through the germline. 
The phenotypic studies of these mice provide ample information 
on the functions of these genes in growth and differentiation of 
organisms and during development of human diseases.
RNA Interference.  Although gene ablation in animal models 
provides an important means to understand the in vivo func-
tions of GOI, animal models may not adequately represent 
human biology. Alternatively, gene targeting can be used to 
knock out genes in human cells, including human ES cells. Gene 
­targeting in human ES cells by homologous recombination has 
been extremely low efficiency, although there are more new 
­techniques emerging aimed at increasing the targeting effi-
ciency. A number of recent advances have made gene targeting 
in somatic cells as easy as in murine ES cells.33 However, gene 
targeting (knocking out both alleles) in somatic cells is a time-
consuming process.
Development of RNAi technology in the past few years 
has provided a more promising approach to understanding the 
biologic functions of human genes in human cells.35 RNAi is 
an ancient natural mechanism by which small, double-stranded 
RNA (dsRNA) acts as a guide for an enzyme complex that 
destroys complementary RNA and downregulates gene expres-
sion in a sequence-specific manner. Although the mechanism 
by which dsRNA suppresses gene expression is not entirely 
understood, experimental data provide important insights. In 
nonmammalian systems such as Drosophila, it appears that 
longer dsRNA is processed into 21–23 nt dsRNA (called small 
interfering RNA or siRNA) by an enzyme called Dicer contain-
ing RNase III motifs. The siRNA apparently then acts as a guide 
sequence within a multicomponent nuclease complex to target 
complementary mRNA for degradation. Because long dsRNA 
induces a potent antiviral response pathway in mammalian cells, 
short siRNAs are used to perform gene silencing experiments in 
mammalian cells (Fig. 15-24).
For siRNA studies in mammalian cells, researchers have 
used two 21-mer RNAs with 19 complementary nucleotides 
and 3′ terminal noncomplementary dimers of thymidine or uri-
dine. The antisense siRNA strand is fully complementary to 
the mRNA target sequence. Target sequences for an siRNA are 
identified visually or by software.
The target 19 nucleotides should be compared to an appro-
priate genome database to eliminate any sequences with sig-
nificant homology to other genes. Those sequences that appear 
to be specific to the GOI are the potential siRNA target sites. 
A few of these target sites are selected for siRNA design. The 
antisense siRNA strand is the reverse complement of the target 
sequence. The sense strand of the siRNA is the same sequence 
as the target mRNA sequence. A deoxythymidine dimer is rou-
tinely incorporated at the 3′ end of the sense strand siRNA, 
although it is unknown whether this noncomplementary dinu-
cleotide is important for the activity of siRNAs.
There are two ways to introduce siRNA to knock down 
gene expression in human cells:
1.  RNA transfection: siRNA can be made chemically or 
using an in vitro transcription method. Like DNA oligos, 
chemically synthesized siRNA oligos can be commercially 
ordered. However, synthetic siRNA is expensive, and sev-
eral siRNAs may have to be tried before a particular gene is 
successfully silenced. In vitro transcription provides a more 
economic approach. Both short and long RNA can be syn-
thesized using bacteriophage RNA polymerase T7, T3, or 
SP6. In the case of long dsRNAs, RNase such as recombi-
nant Dicers will be used to process the long dsRNA into a 
mixture of 21–23 nt siRNA. siRNA oligos or mixtures can be 
transfected into a few characterized cell lines such as HeLa 
(human cervical carcinoma) and 293T cells (human kidney 
carcinoma). Transfection of siRNA directly into primary 
cells may be difficult.
2.  DNA transfection: Expression vectors for expressing siRNA 
have been made using RNA polymerase III promoters such 
as U6 and H1. These promoters precisely transcribe a hairpin 
structure of dsRNA, which will be processed into siRNA in 
467
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
the cell (see Fig. 15-24). Therefore, properly designed DNA 
oligos corresponding to the desired siRNA will be inserted 
downstream of the U6 or H1 promoter. There are two advan-
tages of the siRNA expression vectors over siRNA oligos. 
First, it is easier to transfect DNA into cells. Second, sta-
ble populations of cells can be generated that maintain the 
long-term silencing of target genes. Furthermore, the siRNA 
expression cassette can be incorporated into a retroviral or 
adenoviral vector to provide a wide spectrum of applications 
in gene therapy.
There has been a fast and fruitful development of RNAi 
tools for in vitro and in vivo use in mammals. These novel 
approaches, together with future developments, will be crucial 
to put RNAi technology to use for effective disease therapy or 
to exert the awesome power of mammalian genetics. Therefore, 
the applications of RNAi to human health are enormous. siRNA 
can be applied as a new tool for sequence-specific regulation of 
gene expression in functional genomics and biomedical studies. 
With the availability of the human genome sequences, RNAi 
approaches hold tremendous promise for unleashing the dor-
mant potential of sequenced genomes.
Practical applications of RNAi will possibly result in new 
therapeutic interventions. In 2002, the concept of using siRNA 
in battling infectious diseases and carcinogenesis was proven 
effective. These include notable successes in blocking repli-
cation of viruses, such as HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepati-
tis C virus, in cultured cells using siRNA targeted at the viral 
genome or the human gene encoding viral receptors. RNAi 
has been shown to antagonize the effects of hepatitis C virus 
in mouse models. In cancers, silencing of oncogenes such as 
c-Myc or Ras can slow down the proliferation rate of cancer 
cells. Finally, siRNA also has potential applications for some 
dominant genetic disorders.
The twenty-first century, already heralded as the “century 
of the gene,” carries great promise for alleviating suffering from 
disease and improving human health. On the whole, completion 
of the human genome blueprint, the promise of gene therapy 
and molecular therapies, and the existence of stem cells have 
captured the imagination of the public and the biomedical com-
munity. Aside from their potential in curing human diseases, 
these emerging technologies also have provoked many politi-
cal, economic, religious, and ethical discussions. As more is 
discerned about the technologic scientific advances, more 
attention must also be paid to concerns for their inherent risks 
and social implications. It is important for surgeons to play a 
leadership role in the emergence of personalized medicine and 
surgery, as surgeons have access to the diseased tissues. Sur-
geons should be establishing collaborations with the genomic 
and molecular scientists to develop genomic biobanks in order 
to study the genome and molecular signaling of the disease tis-
sues that will help with an understanding of the underlying 
cause of an individual’s disease and ultimately lead to effec-
tive, targeted therapies. Surgeons must take this enormous 
opportunity to collaborate with basic and clinical scientists to 
5
develop the field of personalized genomic medicine and 
surgery this century. 
Bifunctional RNAi Technology.36  Over the last 20 years, the 
field has worked to define oncogene and nononcogene addiction, 
discriminate between driver and passenger genes, and appreciate 
the complexity of complex, robust, network interactions. These 
insights have led to a preliminary understanding of therapeuti-
cally relevant sensitivity and resistance pathway signal patterns 
requiring multiple target modulation. However, this knowledge 
has not been effectively or reproducibly clinically translated. 
Clinical response is usually far greater when a combination of 
single-target molecular therapy is administered. However, it 
must also be realized that targeting two or more pathways may 
also increase the toxicity profile, particularly if target specificity 
is limited. When attempted, off-target toxicity has been dem-
onstrated with combination small-molecule therapy. In contrast, 
multitargeting bifunctional short hairpin (bi-shRNA) DNA vec-
tors are designed to limit off-target effect given the high specific-
ity for the genes they are designed to target.
Figure 15-24.  RNA interference in mammalian cells. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) can be produced from a polymerase III–driven expres-
sion vector. Such a vector first synthesizes a 19–29 nt double-stranded (ds)RNA stem and a loop (labeled as shRNA in the figure), and then 
the RNase complex called Dicer processes the hairpin RNA into a small dsRNA (labeled as siRNA in the figure). siRNA can be chemically 
synthesized and directly introduced into the target cell. In the cell, through RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), siRNA recognizes and 
degrades target messenger RNAs (mRNAs).
Pol III
TTTTT
shRNA
siRNA
Dicer
RISC
UU
UU
UU
mRNA
m7G
AAAAAA
mRNA targeted by siRNA
UU
m7G
AAAAAA
mRNA cleaved and degraded
m7G
AAAAAA
468
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS
PART I
Exogenously applied hairpin constructs can be 
designed to be incorporated into cleavage-dependent RISC or 
­cleavage-independent RISC complexes, or both. The concept 
of a bifunctional shRNA37 is to increase knockdown efficiency 
without loss of sequence specificity by engaging both siRNA 
and miRNA-like (i.e., common biogenic pathway but comple-
mentary to target sequence) RISCs, thereby concurrently acti-
vating nucleolytic (Ago2-RISC) and nonnucleolytic (Ago1, 3, 
4 ± Ago2-RISC) processes.38 Each bi-shRNA contains both a 
matched stem sequence to promote Ago2-mediated passenger 
strand cleavage and a second partial mismatched stem sequence 
for cleavage-independent passenger strand departure. Thus, 
functionality of the effectors is set by programmed passenger 
strand guided RISC loading rather than Ago subset distribution 
in the cancer cell. Both component Ago2 and Ago [1, 2, 4 ± 3] 
RNAi moieties are fully complementary to the mRNA target 
sequence. Preliminary data indicate reduced “off-target effects” 
by shRNA compared with target-identical siRNAs. More than 
two mismatches in sequences within the target region drastically 
reduce knockdown effect to undetectable levels (unpublished 
results). The design process involves in silico scanning of the 
entire human mRNA RefSeq database to avoid any potential 
sequence-related “off-target effects.” Published data also indi-
cate persistent susceptibility to shRNA-mediated gene knock-
down despite recent evidence of reduced Dicer expression in 
human cancer cells.39
The first clinical experience with the bi-shRNA platform 
involved the ex vivo knockdown of furin, a Ca2+-dependent, 
nonredundant proprotein convertase that is essential for pro-
teolytic maturational processing of immunosuppressive TGF-β 
isoforms (β1 and β2). An autologous whole-cell cancer vac-
cine, FANG™ (furin-knockdown and GMCSF-augmented),40 
was produced based on a dual function immunosensitization 
principle of augmenting tumor antigen expression, presenta-
tion, and processing via granulocyte-macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor (GMCSF) cytokine transgene expression and 
attenuating secretory immunosuppressive TGF-β. Harvested, 
autologous cancer cells are transfected with the GMCSF/bi-
shRNAfurin (FANG) expression plasmid via electroporation. 
A phase I clinical trial (BB-IND 14205) involving 52 cancer 
patients was recently completed. Results demonstrated better 
than 90% knockdown of the bi-shRNA target, furin, and bet-
ter than 90% knockdown of furin-regulated proteins TGF-β1 
and TGF-β2, thereby confirming the mechanistic expectation 
of this novel RNAi platform. Moreover, predicted extensive 
GMCSF expression verified our ability to successfully con-
struct multi-cassette vectors with good manufacturing practice 
techniques fulfilling Food and Drug Administration require-
ments for clinical testing.
Twenty-seven patients received one or more vaccine dose, 
and 23 patients achieved stable disease as their best response. 
No toxic effect was identified. Median survival of the FANG™-
treated patients from time of procurement was 554 days and 
has not been reached from time of treatment. Expected survival 
of similar patients is historically less than 1 year. Sequential 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISPOT) analysis 
revealed a dramatic and significant increase in immune response 
from baseline to month 4 in half of the FANG™-treated 
patients. Comparison of survival between ELISPOT-positive 
and ELISPOT-negative patients demonstrated a statistically 
significant increase in survival from time of procurement (P = 
.045) and time of treatment (P = .025).
These phase I study results demonstrated mechanism, 
safety, and effectiveness of the bi-shRNA technology and clini-
cal functionality of a multitargeting (dual) DNA expression vec-
tor. Further utilization of bi-shRNAi technology is under way 
clinically (targeting STMN1, a microtubule modulation criti-
cal to cancer program) and preclinically targeting PDX141 (an 
oncogene-like transcription factor for pancreatic embryogenesis 
using nonviral nanoparticle delivery mechanisms).42
Personalized Genomic Medicine and Surgery43
Genes determine our susceptibility to diseases and direct our 
body’s response to medicine. Because an individual’s genes dif-
fer from those of another, the determination of each individual’s 
genome has the potential to improve the predication, prevention, 
and treatment of disease. Sequencing of individual genomes 
holds the key to realize this revolution called personalized 
genomic medicine and surgery. Next-generation sequencing, 
such as Illumina sequencing and 454 pyrosequencing technol-
ogy, is promising to reduce the time and cost so that genome 
sequencing can be affordable within healthcare systems. The 
goal of personalized genomic medicine and surgery is to iden-
tify the gene variations in each individual and to target the spe-
cific gene variations causing the disease by choosing 
personalized treatments that effectively work in association with 
the individual’s genomic profile. The importance of surgeons in 
this transformational field of biomedical science is that surgeons 
have access to the diseased tissues on a daily basis. Surgeons 
should partner with the genomic scientists to develop genomic 
biobanks in order to study the genome of the disease tissues. 
These discovery studies are rapidly leading to the uncovering of 
mutations and SNPs that are the underlying cause of an indi-
vidual’s disease and ultimately lead to targeted therapies. 
Although personalized genomic medicine and surgery holds the 
potential to revolutionize the practice of modern medicine, there 
currently exists a gap between our ability to sequence any given 
individual’s genome and how clinicians can apply this informa-
tion to guide care. There is a rapidly growing list of single genes 
that are currently guiding care, and these genes are listed as type 1 
6
personalized genes. Examples of these genes are BRCA1, 
RET proto-oncogene, and CHD1 mutation, which guide 
potential use of mastectomy, thyroidectomy, and gastrectomy, 
respectively; however, the great challenge before the scientific 
and medical community this century is to learn to use the entire 
genome to guide personalized care.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
	1.	 Watson JD, Crick FH. Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a 
structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature. 1953;171:737.
	2.	 Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the 
Cell. 4th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2002.
	3.	 International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Finish-
ing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature. 
2004;431(7011):931-945.
	4.	 ENCODE Project Consortium, Birney E, Stamatoyannopou-
los JA, et al. Identification and analysis of functional elements 
in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project. 
Nature. 2007;447(7146):799-816.
	5.	 Mendel G. Versuche über Planzen-Hybriden. Verhandlungen des 
naturforschenden Vereines, Abhandlungen. Brünn: 4, 3, 1866.
	6.	 Carey M, Smale ST. Transcriptional Regulation in Eukaryotes. 
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2000.
469
MOLECULAR AND GENOMIC SURGERY
CHAPTER 15
	7.	 Wolfsberg TG, Wetterstrand KA, Guyer MS, et al. A user’s 
guide to the human genome. Nat Genet. 2002;32(Suppl):1-79.
	8.	 U.S. Department of Energy. Genomics and its impact on science 
and society: the human genome project and beyond. Published 
online by Human Genome Management Information System 
(HGMIS). Available at: http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/
Human_Genome/publicat/primer2001/primer11.pdf.
	9.	 Simpson RJ. Proteins and Proteomics. New York: CSHL Press; 
2003.
10.	Hanash S. Disease proteomics. Nature. 2003;422(6928): 
226-232.
11.	Ptashne M, Gann A. Genes & Signals. New York: CSHL Press; 
2002.
12.	Pawson T, Nash P. Assembly of cell regulatory systems through 
protein interaction domains. Science. 2003;300(5618):445-452.
13.	Lizcano JM, Alessi DR. The insulin signalling pathway. Curr 
Biol. 2002;12(7):R236-R238.
14.	Feng X-H, Derynck R. Specificity and versatility in TGF-beta 
signaling through Smads. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2005;21: 
659-693.
15.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 
2000;100(1):57-70.
16.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next gen-
eration. Cell. 2011;144(5):646-674.
17.	McNeil C. Herceptin raises its sights beyond advanced breast 
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90:882.
18.	Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a selec-
tive inhibitor of the Abl tyrosine kinase on the growth of Bcr-
Abl positive cells. Nat Med. 1996;2:561.
19.	Kiessling AA, Anderson SC. Human Embryonic Stem Cells: An 
Introduction to the Science and Therapeutic Potential. Boston: 
Jones & Bartlett Pub; 2003.
20.	Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al. Induction of pluripo-
tent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. 
Cell. 2007;131(5):861-872.
21.	Yu J, Vodyanik MA, Smuga-Otto K, et al. Induced pluripo-
tent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. Science. 
2007;318(5858):1917-1920.
22.	Orcutt S. Subatomic medicine and the atomic theory of disease. 
Transl Med. 2012;2:2.
23.	Cohen SN, Chang AC, Boyer HW, Helling RB. Construction 
of biologically functional bacterial plasmids in vitro. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1973;70(11):3240-3244.
24.	Green MR, Sambrook J. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Man-
ual. 4th ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 
2012.
25.	Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, et al. Current Protocols 
in Molecular Biology. 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 
1995.
26.	Southern EM. Detection of specific sequences among DNA 
fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J Mol Biol. 1975; 
98:503.
27.	Mullis K, Faloona F, Scharf S, et al. Specific enzymatic 
amplification of DNA in vitro: the polymerase chain reac-
tion. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1986;51(0): 
263-273.
28.	Bowtell D, Sambrook J. DNA Microarrays: A Molecular Clon-
ing Manual. 1st ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press; 2002.
29.	Caruccio N. Preparation of next-generation sequencing libraries 
using Nextera™ technology: simultaneous DNA fragmentation 
and adaptor tagging by in vitro transposition. Methods Mol Biol. 
2011;733:241-255.
30.	Pettersson E, Lundeberg J, Ahmadian A. Generations of 
sequencing technologies. Genomics. 2009;93(2):105-111.
31.	Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, et al. Pancreatic cancer 
genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. 
Nature. 2012;491(7424):399-405.
32.	Bonifacino JS, Dasso M, Harford JB, et al. Current Protocols 
in Cell Biology. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2003.
33.	Nagy A. Manipulating the Mouse Embryo: A Laboratory Manual. 
3rd ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2002.
34.	Evans M. Discovering pluripotency: 30 years of mouse embry-
onic stem cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;12(10):680-686.
35.	Steitz JA. In:Hannon GH, ed. RNAi: A Guide to Gene Silencing. 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. RNA. 2004;10(3):350.
36.	Rao DD, Senzer N, Wang Z, et al. Bifunctional short hairpin 
RNA (bi-shRNA): design and pathway to clinical application. 
Methods Mol Biol. 2013;942:259-278.
37.	Rao DD, Maples PB, Senzer N, et al. Enhanced target gene 
knockdown by a bifunctional shRNA: a novel approach of RNA 
interference. Cancer Gene Ther. 2010;17(11):780-791.
38.	MacRae IJ, Zhou K, Li F, et al. Structural basis for double-
stranded RNA processing by dicer. Science. 2006;311(5758): 
195-198.
39.	Senzer N, Rao D, Nemunaitis J. Letter to the editor: does dicer 
expression affect shRNA processing? Gene Regul Syst Bio. 
2009;3:103-104.
40.	Senzer N, Barve M, Kuhn J, et al. Phase I trial of “bi-
shRNAi(furin)/GMCSF DNA/autologous tumor cell” vaccine 
(FANG) in advanced cancer. Mol Ther. 2012;20(3):679-686.
41.	Liu SH, Patel S, Gingras MC, et al. PDX-1: demonstration 
of oncogenic properties in pancreatic cancer. Cancer. 2011; 
117(4):723-733.
42.	Templeton NS, Lasic DD, Frederik PM, et al. Improved DNA: 
liposome complexes for increased systemic delivery and gene 
expression. Nat Biotechnol. 1997;15(7):647-652.
43.	Nemunaitis J, Rao DD, Liu SH, Brunicardi FC. Personalized 
cancer approach: using RNA interference technology. World J 
Surg. 2011;35(8):1700-1714.
This page intentionally left blank 
II
Part 
Specific 
Considerations
This page intentionally left blank 
The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Sajid A. Khan, Jonathan Bank, David H. Song, and 
Eugene A. Choi
16
INTRODUCTION
The skin is a complex organ encompassing the body’s surface 
and continuous with the mucous membranes. Accounting for 
approximately 15% of total body weight, it is the largest organ 
in the human body. Enabled by an array of tissue and cell types, 
intact skin protects the body from external insults. However, the 
skin is also the source of a myriad of pathologies that include 
inflammatory disorders, mechanical and thermal injuries, infec-
tious diseases, and benign and malignant tumors. The intricacies 
of this organ and associated pathologies are reasons the skin 
and subcutaneous tissue remain of great interest and require 
the attention of various surgical disciplines that include plastic 
­surgery, dermatology, general surgery, and surgical oncology.
ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY
Background
Components of epithelial, connective, vascular, muscular, and 
nervous tissue are organized into three histologic layers (epi-
dermis, dermis, and hypodermis), which vary in consistency 
between various body parts (Fig. 16-1). The thickness of each 
layer, distribution of dermal appendages, density and type of 
nerve endings, and melanocyte distribution are just some of the 
variables that differ by location and purpose. The epidermis and 
its appendages are of ectodermal origin, whereas the dermis and 
hypodermis are of mesodermal origin.1
Epidermis
The epidermis consists of stratified epithelium that undergoes 
continuous regeneration. Ninety to ninety-five percent of these 
epithelial cells are ectodermally derived keratinocytes. 
During their differentiation, keratinocytes form flattened, 
anucleate cells that are ­ultimately shed from the skin surface. 
This process results in the formation of distinct cell layers (from 
deep to superficial): ­stratum basale (single cell layer), stratum 
spinosum (5 to 15 cells thick), stratum granulare (1 to 3 cells), 
and stratum corneum (5 to 10 cells), which is further subdivided 
into a deep, compact stratum compactum layer and a more super-
ficial, loose stratum disjunctum layer. In the palmoplantar region, 
an additional layer, the stratum lucidum, can be seen between 
strata granulare and corneum (see Fig. 16-1). Transit time (kera-
tinization) is approximately 30 days. Epidermal thickness differs 
between skin regions, ranging from 50 μm on the eyelids to 1 
mm on the soles. Interventions such as tissue expansion result in 
thickening of the epidermis (and thinning of the dermis).
Epidermal Components
Keratinocytes.  Basal layer keratinocytes are columnar or 
cubical cells with a basophilic cytoplasm and large nucleus, and 
they are aligned with an underlying basement membrane and 
anchored by hemidesmosomes. Melanosomes are positioned 
over the nucleus. The cytoplasm includes bundles of filaments 
comprised of keratin polypeptides; these insert into the des-
mosomes and contribute to the formation of the ­cytoskeleton, 
Introduction	
473
Anatomy and Histology	
473
Background / 473
Epidermis / 473
Epidermal Components / 473
Dermis / 475
Hypodermis (Subcutaneous Fat,  
Panniculus Adiposus) / 476
Inflammatory Conditions	
476
Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 476
Pyoderma Gangrenosum / 476
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis and  
Steven-Johnson Syndrome / 477
Injuries	
477
Radiation-Induced Injuries / 477
Trauma-Induced Injuries / 478
Caustic Injury / 479
Thermal Injury / 480
Pressure Injury / 482
Bioengineered Skin Substitutes	 482
Bacterial Infections of the  
Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue	
483
Uncomplicated Skin Infections / 483
Complicated Skin Infections / 483
Actinomycosis / 484
Viral Infections with Surgical  
Implications	
485
Human Papillomavirus Infections / 485
Cutaneous Manifestations of Human  
Immunodeficiency Virus / 485
Benign Tumors	
485
Hemangioma / 485
Nevi / 485
Cystic Lesions / 486
Keratosis / 486
Soft Tissue Tumors / 486
Neural Tumors / 486
Malignant Tumors	
486
Basal Cell Carcinoma / 486
Squamous Cell Carcinoma / 487
Melanoma / 488
Merkel Cell Carcinoma / 492
Kaposi’s Sarcoma / 492
Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans / 492
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma  
(Undifferentiated Pleomorphic  
Sarcoma and Myxofibrosarcoma) / 493
Angiosarcoma / 493
Extramammary Paget’s Disease / 493
Conclusion	
493
chapter 
1
474
PART II
1
	 The epidermis consists of continually regenerating stratified 
epithelium, and 90% of cells are comprised of ectodermally 
derived keratinocytes.
2
	 Dermal fibers are predominantly made of type I and III col-
lagen in a 4:1 ratio. They are responsible for the mechanical 
resistance of skin.
3
	 Staphylococcus aureus is the most common isolate of all skin 
infections. Impetigo, cellulitis, erysipelas, folliculitis, furun-
cles, and simple abscesses are examples of uncomplicated 
infections, whereas deep-tissue infections, extensive celluli-
tis, necrotizing fasciitis, and myonecrosis are examples of 
complicated infections.
4
	 Hemangiomas arise from benign proliferation of endothelial 
cells surrounding blood-filled cavities. They most commonly 
present after birth, rapidly grow during the first year of life, 
and gradually involute in most cases.
5
	 Basal cell carcinoma represents the most common tumor 
diagnosed in the United States, and the nodular variant is the 
most common subtype.
6
	 Squamous cell carcinoma is the second most common skin 
cancer, and primary treatment modalities are surgical excision 
and Moh’s microsurgery. Cautery and ablation, cryotherapy, 
drug therapy, and radiation therapy are alternative treatments.
7
	 Tumor thickness, ulceration, and mitotic rate are the most 
important prognostic indicators of survival in melanoma. If a 
sentinel node contains metastatic cancer, prognosis is deter-
mined by the number of positive nodes, the primary tumor 
thickness, mitotic rate and ulceration, and the age of the patient.
Key Points
conferring mechanical resistance to the epidermis as a whole. Other 
types of intercellular junctions (including gap and adherens junc-
tions) are present as well. Proliferation occurs at this cell layer. 
Spinosum layer keratinocytes are polygonal, with an eosinophilic 
cytoplasm. Ultrastructurally, they contain coarse bundles of tono-
filaments, cytoplasmic protein found in epithelial cells.
Granular layer keratinocytes are flattened cells, lying par-
allel to the skin surface, with a diameter of 25 μm; they contain 
keratohyalin granules and keratin and lamellar bodies. The latter 
are involved in the process of desquamation and in the forma-
tion of a lipid pericellular coat that acts as a penetration barrier 
against foreign (hydrophilic) substances.
Corneum layer keratinocytes are highly flattened, hexago-
nal, eosinophilic cells, containing mainly keratin matrix, that 
are eventually shed from the skin surface and contribute to the 
skin’s barrier function. The superficial part of eccrine sweat 
glands and hair follicles are considered part of the epidermis as 
well. The epithelial cells comprising these units have separate 
biologic properties with regard to regeneration, differentiation, 
and response to various stimuli. Five to ten percent of epider-
mal cells are nonkeratinocytes, including primarily Langerhans 
cells, melanocytes, and Merkel cells.
Langerhans Cells.  These are mobile, dendritic, antigen- 
presenting cells present in all stratified epithelia that originate 
from bone marrow precursors. These cells are capable of uptak-
ing exogenous antigens (by use of Birbeck granules), processing 
them and presenting them to T cells; they represent 3% to 6% of 
all cells in the epidermis.2
Melanocytes.  Originating from the neural crest, these cells 
migrate into the epidermis where they produce melanin, the main 
natural pigment of the skin. They are distributed regularly among 
basal keratinocytes, at a ratio of 1 melanocyte for every 4 to 
10 keratinocytes. Their density reaches 500 to 2000 cells per 
mm2 of cutaneous surface, with regional variations (maximal 
density on genital skin).
474
Figure 16-1.  Schematic representation of the skin and 
its appendages. Note that the root of the hair follicle may 
extend beneath the dermis into the subcutis.
Hair shaft
Stratum corneum
Pigment ligament
Stratum germinativum
Stratum spinosum
Stratum basale
Arrector pili muscle
Sebaceous gland
Hair follicle
Papilla of hair
Blood and
lymph vessels
Nerve fiber
Sweat
pore
Dermal
papilla
Sensory nerve 
ending for touch
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutis
(hypodermis)
Vein
Artery
Pacinian
corpuscle
Sweat
gland
475
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
Melanin is produced through the enzymatic activity of 
tyrosinase on the substrate tyrosine and is then stored in mela-
nosomes; these are transported along the dendritic processes 
of melanocytes and are eventually transferred to adjacent 
keratinocytes where they form an umbrella-like cap over the 
nucleus, protecting it from the effects of ultraviolet (UV) light. 
Melanocytes express the bcl-2 oncoprotein, S100 protein, and 
vimentin.
Ethnic variations in pigmentation are due to differences in 
activity of melanocytes and distribution of melanosomes within 
the epidermis and not differences in the number of melanocytes.
Merkel Cells.  Merkel cells display both neuroendocrine and epi-
thelial features. They function as mechanoreceptors and synapse 
with dermal sensory axons in the basal layer of the epidermis and 
the epithelial sheath of hair follicles.
Lymphocytes.  The normal human epidermis contains a 
small percentage (<1%) of lymphocytes, present mainly in the 
basal layer. They express predominantly a T-memory/effector 
­phenotype.3
Toker Cells.  These are cells with a clear cytoplasm and are 
located within the nipple epidermis in 10% of both males and 
females. Their role in normal skin and pathology remains poorly 
understood, but they may be precursors of Paget’s cell carcinoma.4
Epidermal Appendages.  These are specialized epithelial 
structures, connected to the surface epidermis but located 
mainly within the dermis and hypodermis. Appendages serve 
functions that include lubrication, sensation, contractility, and 
heat loss.
Sweat Glands.  Sweat glands are tubular exocrine glands, con-
sisting of a secretory coil and an excretory duct. Eccrine sweat 
glands are the main sweat glands in humans, playing a vital 
role in the process of thermoregulation. They are present almost 
everywhere on the skin (except mucous membranes), with a 
maximal density over the palms, soles, axillae, and forehead.
Apocrine sweat glands are less abundant in humans and 
are derived embryologically from the germ cells that produce 
the pilosebaceous follicle and are, therefore, structurally associ-
ated with it. These glands are found in the axillary, anogenital, 
and nipple regions. They consist of a secretory coil that is larger 
and more irregular in shape than that of eccrine glands.
A third type of sweat gland was more recently described 
in the axillary region. The so-called “apoeccrine” glands are 
atrichial glands, opening directly to the skin surface, but their 
secretory coil is similar to that of apocrine glands and they pres-
ent during puberty.5
Pilosebaceous Follicles.  These structures are derived from the 
epithelial germ layer and lie obliquely in the dermis, with their 
deepest part reaching the hypodermis. They are present through-
out the integument, excluding the glabrous skin (palms, soles) 
and portions of the genitalia. Their size and morphology are 
variable (terminal, vellus, lanugo, and intermediary hair). Their 
growth is cyclic and proceeds through three distinct phases of 
uneven duration (anagen, catagen, and telogen) during which 
their histology varies considerably.
Nails.  The nails overlie the dorsal aspect of the distal phalanges 
of the fingers and toes. They consist of three parts: (a) the root, 
covered by the proximal nail fold, continuous with the lateral 
nail folds; (b) the nail plate, comprised of hard keratin; and (c) 
the free edge, overlying the hyponychium, a thickened epider-
mis. The nail lies on the nail bed, a richly vascular ­connective 
tissue containing numerous arteriovenous shunts. The proximal 
part of the nail bed is continuous with the nail matrix, respon-
sible for nail growth and adhesion.
Dermis
Architecture.  The dermis is a compressible, elastic connective 
tissue that supports and protects the epidermis, dermal append-
ages, and neurovascular plexuses. It consists of cells, fibrous 
molecules, and a ground substance. It turns over continuously, 
regulated by mechanisms controlling the synthesis and degrada-
tion of its protein components. The thickness of the dermis var-
ies considerably with the anatomic location (being much thicker 
on the back, palms, and soles than on the eyelids).
The papillary (superficial) dermis forms conic upward 
projections (dermal papillae) alternating with epidermal rete 
ridges, thus increasing the surface of contact between the dermis 
and epidermis and allowing for better adhesion between these 
layers. It contains several cell types (fibroblasts, dermal dendro-
cytes, and mast cells), vessels, and nerve endings. It is made of 
collagen fibers arranged in loose bundles and thin elastic fibers 
stretching perpendicularly to the dermal-epidermal junction. 
In the distal extremities, dermal papillae contain tactile cor-
puscles, specialized nerve endings acting as mechanoreceptors. 
The reticular (deep) dermis is made of coarser collagen bundles, 
tending to lie parallel to the skin surface. The elastic network is 
also thicker in this layer. The reticular dermis contains the deep 
part of cutaneous appendages and vascular and nerve plexuses.
Dermal Fibers.  The majority (>90%) of dermal fibers are 
collagen, predominantly types I and III, which are respon-
sible for the mechanical resistance of the skin. Collagen 
accounts for 98% of the total mass of dry dermis. Collagen 
fibers are arranged in bundles that are loose in the papillary 
dermis and become thicker in the deep dermis. Other collagens 
found in the dermis include type IV collagen (at the dermo-epi-
dermal junction and in the basement membranes of cutaneous 
appendages, vessels, muscles, and nerves) and type VII collagen 
(anchoring fibers of the dermo-epidermal junction).
Elastic fibers are responsible for the retractile properties 
of the skin due to their ability to stretch to twice their resting 
length and return to their baseline shape after the deforming 
force is relieved. In the papillary dermis, they are thin; they 
become thicker in the reticular dermis, where they tend to run 
horizontally. By electron microscopy, elastic fibers show varia-
tions depending on age and the area studied (sun-exposed or 
not). They have irregular contours and are made of a central 
amorphous matrix composed of elastin, an insoluble protein. 
This core is surrounded by a varying number of microfibrils 
made of fibrillin. Reticulin fibers consist biochemically of an 
assembly of thin collagen fibers (types I and III) and fibronectin.
Cells.  Fibroblasts are the fundamental cells of the dermis and 
all connective tissues that synthesize all types of fibers and the 
ground substance. They appear as spindle-shaped or stellate 
cells, containing a well-developed rough endoplasmic reticu-
lum. Myofibroblasts are cells derived from fibroblasts, namely 
during the process of wound healing; they contain myofila-
ments, visible by electron microscopy, and express (smooth) 
muscle actin and more rarely desmin.6
Dermal dendrocytes represent a heterogeneous popula-
tion of mesenchymal dendritic cells, recognizable mainly by 
immunohistochemistry. They are present around capillaries of 
the papillary dermis, around sweat gland coils, and within the 
2
476
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
connective tissue septa of the hypodermis. Dermal dendrocytes 
complement the immunologically functional cells of the epider-
mis. Mast cells are mononuclear cells of bone marrow origin, 
sparsely distributed in the perivascular and periadnexal dermis.
Cutaneous Vasculature.  Excluding the epidermis, which is a 
nonvascular tissue, the skin possesses a rich vascular network 
that largely exceeds the skin metabolic requirements. This net-
work plays a role in thermoregulation, wound healing, immune 
reactions, and blood pressure control. Cutaneous vessels belong 
to the arterial, venous, or lymphatic system; they originate from 
perforating arteries arising from underlying vessels of the mus-
cles and form two distinct horizontal plexuses that communicate 
via vessels traversing the dermis vertically. The deep plexus 
lies close to the dermal-hypodermal junction and provides nutri-
tional arteries to sweat glands and hair follicles. The superficial 
plexus, derived from terminal arterioles, lies at the interface 
between the papillary and reticular dermis and provides a vas-
cular loop to every dermal papilla toward the surface (except in 
the nail bed). This consists of an ascending precapillary arteri-
ole, arterial and venous capillaries forming a hairpin turn, and a 
descending postcapillary venule (these account for the majority 
of vessels in the papillary dermis).7
Cutaneous Enervation.  The skin contains a rich and com-
plex enervation, consisting of an afferent and an efferent limb. 
The afferent limb is responsible for the perception of eternal 
stimuli (touch, pressure, vibration, pain, temperature, itch) via 
a network of sensory myelinated and nonmyelinated fibers, free 
terminal nerve endings, and tactile corpuscles. The efferent limb 
is supported by nonmyelinated fibers of the sympathetic system 
that regulate vasomotricity, sweat secretion, and piloerection.
Hypodermis (Subcutaneous Fat, Panniculus 
Adiposus)
Fatty tissue is the deepest part of the skin, separating it from the 
underlying muscle fascia or the periosteum. It plays an impor-
tant role in thermoregulation, insulation, storage of energy, and 
protection from mechanical injuries.
The main cells of the hypodermis are the adipocytes—
large, rounded cells with a lipid-laden cytoplasm (triglycerides, 
fatty acids) compressing the nucleus against the cell membrane. 
Adipocytes are arranged in primary and secondary lobules, 
the morphology of which varies according to gender and body 
region. These lobules are separated by connective tissue septa 
containing cells (fibroblasts, dendrocytes, mast cells), the deep-
est part of sweat glands, and vessels and nerves contributing to 
the formation of the corresponding dermal plexuses.
INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic inflammatory disease pre-
senting as painful subcutaneous nodules. Patients experience 
appreciable physical, psychological, and economical hardship 
and decreased quality of life when compared to patients who 
suffer from other chronic dermatologic disease such as psoriasis 
and alopecia.8 It is characterized by multiple abscesses, inter-
networking sinus tracts, foul-smelling exudate from draining 
sinuses, inflammation in the dermis, both atrophic and hyper-
trophic scars, ulceration, and infection, which may extend deep 
into the fascia. The diagnosis is made clinically without the 
need for imaging or laboratory tests. Affected sites are axillary, 
­inguinal, perineal, mammary, and inframammary areas corre-
sponding to a “milk-line” distribution.
The current pathophysiologic mechanism is that there is 
follicular occlusion, and not an apocrine disorder as previously 
believed. Hyperandrogenism does not have a proven role in the 
disease; poor hygiene, smoking, alcohol consumption, and bac-
terial involvement are thought to exacerbate rather than initiate 
the disease process.
Treatment varies depending on disease severity and extent. 
The majority of patients with early-stage disease (abscesses with-
out significant scarring) respond to topical or systemic antibiotics 
(clindamycin is first-line therapy). Antiandrogens have an equivo-
cal role in therapy. Application of various anti-inflammatory agents 
has been successful in limited accounts and with questionable 
long-term efficacy. With the goal of ablating hair follicles, 
radiation therapy, radiofrequency ablation, and carbon dioxide 
(CO2) laser ablation have been employed, again with less than 
satisfactory long-term results.9-12
Refractory cases respond best to wide surgical debride-
ment of the affected sites. Recurrence rates tend to be higher 
in the inframammary and inguino-perineal regions, reaching up 
to 50%. Primary wound closure after debridement bears a high 
risk of recurrence and is therefore discouraged. Locoregional 
flaps, split-thickness skin grafting, and healing by secondary 
intention are other alternatives. Skin grafting has a faster heal-
ing rate compared with secondary wound closure. However, the 
cost of having a painful donor site and limb immobilization led 
most patients in one reported study to prefer secondary heal-
ing.13 Topical antimicrobial creams should be used during the 
healing process.
Pyoderma Gangrenosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a relatively uncommon non-
infectious neutrophilic dermatosis. This disease is commonly 
associated with inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthri-
tis, hematologic malignancies, and monoclonal gammopathies. 
Clinically, the condition is characterized by the presence of 
sterile pustules, which progress and ulcerate to variable depths 
and dimensions. The lower extremities are the most commonly 
affected site, although all other parts of the skin can be involved. 
Extracutaneous manifestations include the upper airway, eye, 
genitalia mucosa, lungs, spleen, and muscle. Secondary infec-
tion is common. PG is more common in women and peaks in 
the third to sixth decades of life. Lesion borders are purplish in 
color with erythematous edges. Five clinical types are identi-
fied: ulcerative, pustular, bullous, vegetative, and peristomal. 
Treatment of this condition is centered on treatment of the incit-
ing disease (i.e., management of Crohn’s disease) and often 
includes systemic steroids or calcineurin inhibitors. Treatment 
of PG combines systemic, topical, and surgical modalities. 
Systemic therapy is instituted in widespread and progressing 
cases and revolves around anti-inflammatory medications. Cal-
cineurin inhibitors (inhibitors of T-cell activation) and cortico-
steroids are the mainstay of therapy. Other immunomodulators 
include sulfa drugs (dapsone), clofazimine, thalidomide, col-
chicine, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and mycophenolate 
mofetil. Patients with Crohn’s disease and PG treated with inf-
liximab (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-α inhibitor) and etaner-
cept (TNF-α antagonist) had a marked improvement in their 
PG.14,15 Once ulcers develop, topical antimicrobials should be 
used to decrease the likelihood of secondary infections. Wound 
care should be geared toward debridement of purulent exudate 
477
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
and devitalized tissue, while maintaining a moist environment 
to facilitate healing. Topical calcineurin inhibitors have been 
shown to be useful in peristomal PG.16 Surgical debridement 
should be used concomitantly with systemic therapy, as the sur-
gical insult may trigger further PG. Wound closure can usually 
be achieved with split-thickness skin grafting and temporary 
coverage with allografts or bioengineered skin substitutes.
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis and Steven-
Johnson Syndrome
These inflammatory diseases represent a spectrum of an auto-
immune reaction to stimuli such as drugs that result in struc-
tural defects in the epidermal-dermal junction. The cutaneous 
manifestations of toxic epidermal necrolysis syndrome (TENS) 
follow a prodromal period reminiscent of an upper respiratory 
tract infection.17 A symmetrical macular eruption follows start-
ing from the face and trunk and spreading to the extremities. 
Typically, a Nikolsky sign develops in which lateral pressure 
causes the epidermis to detach from the basal layer. The macular 
eruption evolves into blisters, causing an extensive superficial 
partial-thickness skin injury with exposed dermis (Fig. 16-2). 
The process progresses for 7 to 10 days; re-epithelialization 
occurs over 1 to 3 weeks. Mucosal and ocular surfaces may be 
involved in a similar fashion. Immunosuppressed patients are 
at higher risk.
TENS historically was considered to be the extreme of a 
spectrum, with erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syn-
drome (SJS) being less extensive forms of disease. Currently, 
erythema multiforme is thought to be a separate entity, related 
to herpetic and Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection. TENS 
involves more than 30% total body surface area; between 10% 
and 30% is considered the SJS-TEN overlap syndrome. Progno-
sis is related to the extent of disease and related primarily to sec-
ondary infection and other intensive care unit (ICU)-associated 
morbidity. With modern-day burn and ICU care, the mortality 
has declined significantly.17 The mildest form of the disease is 
SJS, which clinically presents as second-degree burns appear-
ing as erythema and blisters/bullae of the oropharynx, anoderm, 
and torso. Less than 10% of total body surface area is involved 
with this disease. TENS is driven by the same dermo-epidermal 
structural defects but consists of greater than 30% total body 
Figure 16-2.  Blisters on the forearm of a patient several days after 
exposure to vancomycin. Note the clear antishear dressing and the 
dark silver-impregnated antimicrobial dressing (Acticoat™).
surface area. In addition to the aforementioned, it affects the 
mouth, esophagus, small bowel, and colon, resulting in slough-
ing of mucosa that may present as gastrointestinal bleeding and 
intestinal malabsorption.18 It also affects the eyes, genitalia, and 
other mucosal surfaces.
The drugs most commonly associated with TENS-SJS 
include aromatic anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, allopurinol, 
oxicams (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), and nevirap-
ine. The pathophysiology of TENS is not completely under-
stood; current theories involve apoptosis due to Fas-mediated 
mechanisms (a soluble or a membrane-bound protein that 
causes apoptosis upon activation), granulysin (a proapoptotic 
protein that permits cell-mediated cytotoxicity), and reactive 
oxygen species. There appears to be a genetic component, and 
genetic testing before carbamazepine treatment is recommended 
in people of Han Chinese ancestry to exclude carriers of HLA-
B1502.19
The two principles of TENS management include early 
withdrawal of the offending drug and supportive care (i.e., pain 
control, intravenous fluid, electrolyte repletion, prevention of 
skin infections, enteral feeds, and possible respiratory support) 
in a burn unit. Despite drug withdrawal, noxious metabolites 
may persist. Wound care differs between centers and focuses on 
debridement of devitalized tissue and coverage with nonadher-
ent dressings. Temporary skin coverage is sometimes needed 
until re-epithelialization is allowed to progress, reducing the 
probability of skin infections and dehydration. Coverage can 
be achieved with biologic dressing (allograft skin), biosynthetic 
dressings (Biobrane), and antimicrobial dressings (antibiotic or 
silver-impregnated such as Acticoat). A Wood’s lamp exami-
nation every 1 hour should be performed to look for corneal 
sloughing. It should be noted that these diseases should be dis-
tinguished from staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, which 
clinically appears similar but is a result of exotoxins produced 
after staphylococcal infections of nasopharynx or otitis media.
Systemic treatment with steroids has fallen out of favor 
due to increased sepsis rates, prolonged admission, and poten-
tially higher mortality rates. Intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) is thought to be a treatment given the presence of anti-
Fas antibodies within IVIG. The antagonistic antibodies inhibit 
Fas-mediated cell apoptosis.20 However, a high variability exists 
between batches with this regard. There are mixed reports of 
IVIG treatment efficacy. A 2007 meta-analysis of nine IVIG 
trials concluded that high-dose IVIG does, in fact, improve sur-
vival.21 Other treatment protocols include plasmapheresis aimed 
at decreasing cytokine and drug load, cyclosporine, cyclophos-
phamide, and anti–TNF-α antibodies.17
INJURIES
Radiation-Induced Injuries
Radiation-induced injuries can be the result of environmental 
exposure, industrial/occupational applications, and medical eti-
ologies. Surgeons must be aware of the role radiation plays in 
oncologic multidisciplinary care. In addition to radiation treat-
ment for cancers such as lymphoma and head and neck squamous 
cell carcinomas, radiotherapy plays a role in the adjuvant setting 
either before or after surgical resection in diseases such as rectal, 
esophageal, and cervical cancers. Although the newer modalities 
and principles of radiation oncology have allowed for more pre-
cise administration of this therapy with theoretically fewer side 
478
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
effects, there still are complications and clinical entities related 
to the skin (and deeper viscera) that the surgeon needs to be 
attuned to.
The replicating basal keratinocytes, hair follicle stem cells, 
and melanocytes are the most radiosensitive components of the 
skin. Damage to basal keratinocytes and hair follicle cells causes 
an immediate burst of free radicals, irreversible double-stranded 
breaks in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, and inflammation. 
The first dose of radiation destroys a percentage of basal kera-
tinocytes, hindering the regenerative capacity of the epidermis; 
repeated exposures do not allow time for cells to repair.
Acute skin changes are the result of injury to the basal 
epithelium in the radiated region. Within weeks, this manifests 
as erythema, edema, and alopecia. As the cells of the skin and 
subcutaneous tissue undergo repair, permanent hyperpigmenta-
tion is clinically apparent. Histologically, the epidermis appears 
thickened, but the functional integrity is compromised. Severe 
radiation injury results in complete loss of the epidermis with 
persistent edema and fibrinous exudate. Re-epithelialization 
from unaffected wound edges and from recuperating dermal 
adnexa begins within 10 to 14 days of exposure, provided other 
parameters are optimized (nutrition, infection, etc.). Chronic 
changes result from thrombosis and necrosis of capillaries, pre-
senting months to years after the inciting event, ultimately lead-
ing to fibrosis and possible ulcers. Chronic skin changes include 
thinning, hypovascularization, telangiectasia of remaining ves-
sels, ulceration, fibrosis with loss of elasticity, and increased 
susceptibility to trauma and infection. Chronic radiation skin 
injury includes delayed ulcers, fibrosis, and telangiectasias that 
present weeks to years after exposure.
Treatment of minor radiation skin injury consists primarily 
of maintaining the integrity of remaining skin with moisturizers 
until recovery of skin adnexa. Management of severe radiation 
includes surgical excision of damaged tissues as well as control 
of the typically opiate-resistant pain.
Environmental-induced injuries are from UV radiation and 
solar-induced skin toxicity and are the most common forms of 
radiation exposure skin injuries. Radiation reaching the surface 
of the earth contains infrared (700–2500 nm), visible (400–
700 nm), and invisible UV radiation (290–400 nm).22 UVC rays 
are filtered by the ozone layer of the atmosphere. UVB rays 
(290–320 nm) and UVA rays (320–400 nm) reach the earth’s 
surface and have cutaneous effects. UVB radiation reaches the 
earth in relatively low amounts but is highly energetic. UVA 
rays are lower in energy, but are more abundant, constituting 
approximately 95% of UV rays reaching the ground. Seasonal, 
temporal, geo-orbital, and environmental parameters affect solar 
irradiance. Seventy percent of UVB radiation that reaches the 
skin is absorbed by the stratum corneum, 20% reaches deeper 
in the epidermis, and only 10% penetrates the upper part of the 
dermis. UVA rays are more penetrant, with 20% to 30% reach-
ing the deep dermis. The major chromophores are nucleic acids, 
aromatic amino acids, and melanin.
Short-term solar radiation effects include erythema and 
pigmentation. UVB is more effective than UVA in causing 
a dermal inflammatory response resulting in erythema in a 
delayed phenomenon, peaking at 6 to 24 hours (dose and skin 
type dependent). Pigmentation occurs as a result of photo-
oxidation of melanin by UVA. Partial fading occurs rapidly 
within 1 hour after the end of exposure. For higher UVA doses, 
a stable residual pigmentation is observed after the transient 
effect. Neomelanization is characterized by a visible brown 
pigmentation in UV-exposed skin, which represents an increase 
in epidermal melanin content. It becomes visible after about 
72 hours. An acute erythemogenic dose of UVB is necessary 
to induce delayed pigmentation; UVA is less effective in tan-
ning and in radiation protection. UVB pigmentation results in a 
homogeneous tan and UVA protection. However, melanization 
produced by cumulative UVA exposures appears to be longer 
lasting than that acquired with UVB exposures.22
Long-term effects of UV pigmentation can lead to irregu-
lar pigmentation and hyperpigmented areas, melasma, postin-
flammatory pigmentation, and actinic lentigines (sun spots). 
Radiation damage results from an increase in lysozyme activ-
ity, which inhibits the activity of collagenase and elastase and 
prevents the elastic fibers from proteolysis. The collagen fibril 
network is impaired and causes an accumulation of an amor-
phous, elastin-containing material. There is also a loss of colla-
gen and a change in collagen composition (increase in collagen 
III to collagen I ratio). This structural disarrangement manifests 
as a loss of firmness and resilience of skin, leading to an older 
appearance to the skin.
Trauma-Induced Injuries
Mechanical Injury.  Skin injuries may occur as a result of 
penetrating, blunt, and shear forces, or a combination of these. 
Clean lacerations may be closed primarily after irrigation, 
debridement, and exploration. Many surgeons will primarily 
close clean wounds if the injury is treated within 6 hours of the 
inciting event. However, there is no systematic evidence regard-
ing the timing of closure23; practitioners are advised to use their 
judgment. Contaminated or infected wounds should be allowed 
to heal by secondary intention or delayed primary closure.24
Tangential abrasions should be approached similarly to 
burns injuries, with management dependent on the depth of the 
injury incurred. Superficial partial-thickness wounds may be 
left to heal spontaneously while providing topical antimicrobial 
prophylaxis or sterile biologic dressings. Deeper wounds may 
require split-thickness skin grafting to avoid prolonged need for 
dressing changes and hypertrophic scarring that might result 
from a prolonged healing period. Degloved skin may be used 
to provide coverage similar to a skin graft, or as a temporary 
dressing, provided the wound bed has been cleaned.
Bite Wounds.  Accounting for over 4.5 million injuries each 
year, with many more presumably unreported, seemingly innoc-
uous punctures may lead to severe deep-tissue infections if 
unrecognized and not treated appropriately.25
Bite bacteriology is influenced by normal mouth flora, as 
well as the content of the offending animal’s food. Early pre-
sentation bite wounds yield polymicrobial cultures. Common 
aerobic bacterial genera include Pasteurella multocida, Strep-
tococcus, Staphylococcus, Neisseria, and Corynebacterium; 
anaerobic organisms include Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, 
Prevotella, Propionibacterium, Bacteroides, and Peptostrepto-
coccus. Capnocytophaga canimorsus bacteria after a dog bite 
are rare. It appears that immunocompromised patients are most 
susceptible to this type of infection and its complications. Cul-
tures from an infected bite wound that presents late usually will 
grow a single organism type. Bacterial load in dog bites is heav-
ily dependent on the content and timing of the last meal and 
can range between 103 with a dry meal (biscuits) to 107 within 
8 hours of a wet meat meal (Fig. 16-3).26 The bacterial spectrum 
found in cat bites is very similar to that of dog bites, with a 
479
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
slightly higher prevalence of Pasteurella species. Rare infec-
tions acquired from cats have been with Francisella tularensis 
(tularemia) and Yersinia pestis (human plague).
Bacteria colonizing human bites are those present on the 
skin or in the mouth. These include the gram-positive aerobic 
organisms Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, 
and Streptococcus species, and anaerobes including Peptococ-
cus species, Peptostreptococcus species, Bacteroides species, 
and Eikenella corrodens (facultative anaerobe). Antibiotic 
coverage must cover gram-positive and anaerobic organisms. 
A first-generation cephalosporin in combination with penicil-
lin or ampicillin in combination with clavulanic acid provides 
adequate coverage. Clindamycin is an alternative, but additional 
coverage for Eikenella corrodens should be administered.
Most wounds are amenable to standard wound care protocols. 
Irrigation (preferably with sterile saline solution) should be per-
formed, although it will reduce surface bacteria only if done with 
nonpulsatile irrigation. To significantly reduce bacterial load and 
eliminate particulate debris in the wound, pressure irrigation should 
be performed. Eighty percent of wounds presenting to the emer-
gency department have a bacterial load under 105, and superficial 
irrigation will suffice. Larger wounds with signs of infection will 
require pulse irrigation. Rapid quantitative cultures should be used 
to guide treatment in wounds with suspected infection. Human 
bites typically are characterized by higher bacteria load (>105).
In select cases, bite wounds may be closed primarily, 
particularly in areas of aesthetic significance such as the face, 
where secondary intention healing will result in unsightly 
scarring. This approach should follow initial management as 
outlined earlier, along with close follow-up to permit early 
detection of infection.
Rabies in domestic animals in the United States is rare, 
and the majority of cases are contracted from bat bites. In devel-
oping countries, dog bites remain the most common source of 
rabies. Management of this is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Caustic Injury
Between 2.4% and 10.7% of burns are due to chemical expo-
sure27; however, approximately 30% of burn deaths are related 
to chemical burns. Damage from chemical burns is related to the 
concentration, duration, and quantity of acidic or alkaline solution. 
Acidic injuries typically cause a more superficial burn pattern 
due to eschar formation as a result of coagulation necrosis of 
the skin. This limits subsequent tissue penetration. Exother-
mic chemical reactions associated with acid burns may cause 
a combined thermal and chemical injury. Without treatment, 
this injury will result in erythema and ulcers through the sub-
cutaneous tissue. Injuries related to basic fluids result from liq-
uefactive necrosis starting with fat saponification and result in 
longer more sustained injuries causing a deeper pattern of injury 
(Fig. 16-4). Common examples are sodium hydroxide (drain 
decloggers, paint remover) and calcium hydroxide (cement). 
This permits further penetration of the unattached molecules, 
causing further tissue destruction.
The treatment for both types of injuries is based on 
neutralization of the inciting solution and starts with running 
distilled water or saline over the affected skin for at least 
30 minutes for acidic solutions and 2 hours for alkaline injuries. 
It should be noted that neutralizing agents do not offer a sig-
nificant advantage over dilution with water, may delay treat-
ment, and may worsen the injury due to the exothermic reaction 
that may occur. The clinician observes and treats based on the 
degree of presentation. Many cases are successfully managed 
conservatively with topical emollients and oral analgesics, 
and most cases result in edema, erythema, and induration. If 
signs of deep second-degree burns develop, local wound care 
may include debridement, Silvadene, and protective petro-
leum gauze. In severe cases, injury to the underlying vessels, 
bones, muscle, and tendon may occur, and these cases may be 
managed within 24 hours by liposuction through a small cath-
eter and then saline injection. Surgery is indicated for tissue 
necrosis, uncontrolled pain, or deep-tissue damage. Antibiot-
ics should not be administered unless signs of infection are ­ 
present.
Injuries that have specific additional treatments include 
hydrofluoride burns Hydrofluoride is found in air condition-
ing cleaners and petroleum refineries. Treatment of hydrofluo-
ride burns should include topical or locally injected calcium 
­gluconate to bind fluorine ions. Intra-arterial calcium glu-
conate can provide pain relief and preserves arteries from 
necrosis, whereas intravenous (IV) calcium repletes resorbed 
calcium stores. Topical calcium carbonate gel and quaternary 
A
B
Figure 16-3.  A. Dog bite to the face involving the lip and left oral commissure. B. Primary closure following debridement and irrigation. 
Closure was performed due to aesthetic and functional considerations.
480
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­ammonium compounds detoxify fluoride ions. This mitigates 
the leaching of calcium and magnesium ions by the hydroflu-
oric acid from the affected tissues and prevents potentially 
severe hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia that predispose to 
cardiac arrhythmias.
IV fluid extravasation results in yet another type of chem-
ical injury and occurs in 0.1% to 0.7% of all cytotoxic drug 
administrations (Fig. 16-5). The dorsum of the hand is the most 
common location of this type of injury, predisposing expo-
sure of the extensor tendon. There is a higher risk in patients 
receiving chemotherapy, and the risk increases dramatically in 
the pediatric population (11%–58%). Doxorubicin is often 
the offending agent, and its effects are attributable to direct 
toxicity resulting in cellular death, perpetuated by release of 
doxorubicin from cell lysis and failed wound healing. Resul-
tant tissue injury depends on several factors, including solution 
osmolality, tissue toxicity, vasoconstrictive properties, infusion 
pressure, and regional anatomic properties.28 Although most 
extravasations do not culminate in significant injuries, skin 
and subcutaneous damage is more likely in the critically ill and 
neonates. This is due, in part, to the type of infusions employed 
in these patients, the thin skin at the IV site (dorsum of hands 
and feet), fragility of veins, and the relatively poorly perfused 
tissue in these locations. Initial presentation may include ery-
thema, blistering, and pain. The true extent of the injury may be 
beyond the apparent external margins, and this may take days 
to manifest completely (longer in the case of calcium carbonate 
infiltrations). Injury to deeper structures should be excluded. 
Treatment varies from conservative management with limb 
elevation to saline infiltration (for dilution) and aspiration with 
liposuction cannula.28 These methods have been shown to be 
effective only in the early period following extravasation. Cold 
or warm compresses should be avoided because they may add 
a thermal injury ­component to an area in which thermoregula-
tory mechanism are impeded due to vasoconstriction, pressure, 
and inflammation. Surgical intervention includes debridement 
of devitalized tissue and reconstruction with appropriate tech-
nique (i.e., skin substitutes, skin grafting, flaps, or secondary 
intention). Topical antimicrobial therapy is encouraged until 
surgery is possible.
Thermal Injury
Exposure of the skin to thermal extremes disrupts its primary 
function as a barrier to heat loss, evaporation, and microbial 
invasion. The depth and extent of injury are dependent on the 
duration and temperature of the exposure. The pathophysiol-
ogy and management are discussed elsewhere in this book. 
Briefly, the epicenter of the injury undergoes a varying extent 
of necrosis (depending on the exposure), otherwise referred 
to as the zone of coagulation, which is surrounded by the 
zone of stasis, which has marginal perfusion and questionable 
viability.29 This is the area of tissue that is most amenable to 
salvage by appropriate resuscitative and wound management 
techniques, which would theoretically limit the extent of 
injury. The outermost area of skin shows characteristics simi-
lar to other inflamed tissues and has been designated the zone 
of hyperemia. The degree of burn corresponds to histologic 
layers of the affected dermis and correlates with management 
and prognosis pertaining to timeline of healing and magnitude 
of scarring (Fig. 16-6).
Hypothermic skin injury (frostbite) can result from direct 
cellular damage or the secondary effects of microvascular 
Figure 16-4.  Self-inflicted alkali burn with cleaner fluid.
481
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
A
B
C
Figure 16-5.  A. Potassium chloride intravenous infiltrate in a critically ill patient on multiple vasopressors. B. Following operative debride-
ment to paratenon layer. C. Temporary coverage with Integra skin substitute.
thrombosis and subsequent ischemia.30 Freezing of tissue leads 
to intracellular and extracellular ice formation, intracellular 
ice formation, cell dehydration and crenation, local electrolyte 
abnormalities, and disturbances in lipid-protein complexes. 
With rewarming, the ice melts and damaged cells take up water; 
affected capillaries leak fluid into the interstitium. ­Subsequently, 
this edema and concomitant inflammatory process result in 
epidermal blistering and microvasoconstriction, propagating 
further tissue injury. Treatment includes rapid rewarming to 
40 to 42°C, analgesia, debridement of blisters, hydrotherapy, 
elevation, topical antimicrobials, topical antithromboxanes (aloe 
vera), and systemic antiprostaglandins (aspirin).
482
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Pressure Injury
Tissue pressures that exceed the pressure of the microcircula-
tion (30 mmHg) result in tissue ischemia. Frequent or pro-
longed ischemic insults will ultimately result in tissue damage 
(Fig. 16-7). Areas of bony prominence are particularly prone 
to ischemia, the most common areas being ischial tuberos-
ity (28%), trochanter (19%), sacrum (17%), and heel (9%). 
Tissue pressures can measure up to 300 mmHg in the ischial 
region during sitting and 150 mmHg over the sacrum while 
lying supine.31 Muscle is more susceptible than skin to isch-
emic insult due to its relatively high metabolic demand. 
Wounds are staged as follows: stage 1, nonblanching ery-
thema over intact skin; stage 2, partial-thickness injury (epi-
dermis or dermis)—blister or crater; stage 3, full-thickness 
injury extending down to, but not including, fascia and with-
out undermining of adjacent tissue; and stage 4, full-thickness 
skin injury with destruction or necrosis of muscle, bone, ten-
don, or joint capsule.
Management principles for pressure sores should include 
pressure relief (air mattresses and gel cushions for redistribu-
tion of pressure), systemic optimization (particularly nutritional 
support), and wound care.32,33 Goals of surgical intervention 
are drainage of fluid collections, wide debridement of devital-
ized and scarred tissue, excision of pseudobursa, ostectomy of 
involved bones, hemostasis, and tension-free closure of dead 
space with well-vascularized tissue (muscle, musculocutaneous, 
or fasciocutaneous flaps). Stage 2 and 3 ulcers may be left to 
heal secondarily after debridement. Subatmospheric pressure 
wound therapy devices (vacuum-assisted closure) play a role in 
A
B
Figure 16-7.  A. Pressure wound after removal of a poorly padded 
cast. Stage cannot be determined until debridement but is at least a 
grade 2 lesion. B. Decubitus ulcer of the sacral region, stage 4, to 
the tendinous and bone layers.
Figure 16-6.  Scald burn of upper arm, back, and buttock. Pink 
areas are superficial partial-thickness burn, whereas whiter areas 
are deeper burns in the dermis.
wound management by removing excess interstitial fluid, pro-
moting capillary circulation, decreasing bacterial colonization, 
increasing vascularity and granulation tissue formation, and 
contributing to wound size reduction.34
BIOENGINEERED SKIN SUBSTITUTES
Recent work in surgical laboratories has provided surgeons with 
advancements in bioengineered skin substitutes. Different types 
of skin substitutes arise from xenograft, autologous, synthetic, 
and allogeneic sources.35 An example of a xenograft substitute 
is the porcine dermis Permacol (Tissue Sciences Laboratory), 
whereas the cultured keratinocyte Epicel (Genzyme Tissue 
483
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
Repair Corp) grafts represent an autologous substitute. Some 
examples of synthetic skin substitutes include Biobrane (UDL 
Laboratories) and Integra (Integra Life Science Corp). Biobrane 
is a silicon and nylon mesh layer bound with porcine collagen. 
Integra is a two-layered membrane composed of a silicon layer 
to maintain hydration and a porous bovine collagen and chon-
droitin sulfate layer that provides an environment for fibro-
blasts, macrophages, and capillaries to lay down a vascularized 
collagen matrix dermal layer. The more superficial silicon layer 
can be removed, and an autograft can subsequently be applied. 
AlloDerm (Life Cell) is an allogeneic substitute made of acellu-
lar dermal matrix derived from human skin tissue. It provides a 
matrix for revascularization, incorporating into host tissue, and 
provides additional strength. In contrast to Integra, it does not 
provide a dermal matrix to support a skin graft, and thus is not 
often used as a skin substitute. Several other skin substitutes are 
also available.
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN AND 
SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
In 1998, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) categorized 
infections of the skin and skin structures for the purpose of clini-
cal trials. A revision of this categorization in 2010 excluded spe-
cific diagnoses such as bite wounds, decubitus ulcers, diabetic 
foot ulcers, perirectal abscesses, and necrotizing fasciitis. The 
general division into “uncomplicated” and “complicated” skin 
infections can be applied to help guide management.36
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common isolate 
(~44%).37 Other gram-positive bacteria such as Enterococcus 
species (9%), β-hemolytic streptococci (4%), and coagulase-
negative staphylococci (3%) are less common. Gram-negative 
species, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa (11%), Escherichia 
coli (7.2%), and Enterobacter (5%), Klebsiella (4%), and 
Serratia (2%) species, among others, should be considered in 
complicated infections in patients with diabetes, neutro-
penia, and cirrhosis. 
Uncomplicated Skin Infections
Disease processes included in this category are limited to the 
epidermis or its appendages and involve a surface area that is 
less than 75 cm2. Impetigo, cellulitis, erysipelas, folliculitis, 
furuncles, and simple abscesses are included in this category. 
Folliculitis is an infection of a hair follicle that may progress to a 
furuncle or a carbuncle (abscess with multiple draining sinuses). 
Folliculitis and furuncles resolve with adequate hygiene and 
warm soaks.
Minor primary infections, or a secondarily infected lesion, 
should be treated with topical ointments such as 2% mupirocin 
to provide coverage for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA). For an uncomplicated furuncle or carbuncle 
(simple abscess), incision and drainage are sufficient, and 
antibiotics are not warranted. For nonpurulent, uncomplicated 
cellulitis β-hemolytic streptococci coverage is recommended 
(β-lactam such as cephalexin), with MRSA coverage to be 
added if no response is seen within 48 to 72 hours or in the pres-
ence of chills, fevers, expanding erythema, or uncontrolled pain. 
Dual coverage can be achieved with clindamycin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, or the combination of a tetracycline 
and a β-lactam. Purulent cellulitis that does not meet criteria 
for a complicated infection requires MRSA coverage. Need 
for empiric coverage for streptococci is unlikely. Clindamycin, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, and tetracyclines are 
options. The infections can be managed on an outpatient basis 
in the vast majority of cases.
Complicated Skin Infections
Deep-tissue infections (below the dermis), extensive cellulitis, 
necrotizing fasciitis, and myonecrosis are considered compli-
cated skin infections. A thorough history and exam should be 
performed to elicit information (e.g., history of trauma, dia-
betes mellitus, cirrhosis, neutropenia, bites, IV or subcutane-
ous drug abuse) as well as physical findings such as crepitus 
(gas-forming organism), fluctuance (abscess), purpura (sepsis 
in streptococcal infections), bullae (streptococci, Vibrio vul-
nificus), lymphangitis, and signs of a systemic inflammatory 
response. Aspirated fluid from suspected infected collection 
should be cultured. Swabs and aspirates in cellulitis have a low 
yield (10%), whereas tissues cultures may have a higher rate of 
organism recovery (20%–30%). The utility of computed tomog-
raphy (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in diagnosing 
a deep infection is limited and should not delay surgical evalu-
ation and debridement.
Treatment of nonpurulent, complicated cellulitis can begin 
with a β-lactam, with MRSA coverage added if no response 
is observed. Empiric MRSA coverage is warranted in all other 
complicated skin and subcutaneous infections. Vancomycin is 
the mainstay of therapy, although it is inferior to β-lactams for 
methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and has a 
relatively slow onset of efficacy in vitro. Linezolid, daptomy-
cin, tigecycline, and telavancin are other FDA-approved alter-
natives for MRSA treatment. Clindamycin is also approved for 
S. aureus; however, resistance may develop, and diarrhea can 
occur in up to 20% (Clostridium difficile related).
Necrotizing infections can manifest with bullae, skin 
necrosis, pain beyond the margins of erythema, crepitus, gas on 
imaging, hypotension, or other signs of systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome (SIRS). These signs are late findings and are 
frequently absent. Due to substantial morbidity and mortality 
associated with these infections, the index for suspicion should 
be high, and the threshold for surgical exploration should be 
low, particularly in a weakened host, such as diabetic patients, 
the malnourished, alcoholics, neutropenic or functionally neu-
tropenic patients, cirrhotic patients, renal failure patients, and 
individuals with peripheral vascular disease.
Common sites of origin are the genitalia, perineum 
(Fournier’s gangrene), and abdominal wall. Classification is 
based on the anatomic site, the involved tissue planes (e.g., adi-
pose, fascia, muscle), the offending organisms, and the veloc-
ity of the infection. Involvement of the deep fascia (necrotizing 
­fasciitis—deep to the adipose tissue, overlying the muscle) 
results in a rapidly progressing infection with bacteria spread-
ing along low-resistance tissue planes (Fig. 16-8). Necrotizing 
myositis primarily involves the muscle but can spread to sur-
rounding tissue as well.
Three types of necrotizing infections can be distinguished 
based on the organisms involved. Type 1 is the most com-
mon, with a polymicrobial source including gram-positive 
cocci, gram-negative rods, and anaerobes (Bacteroides spe-
cies, ­Clostridium perfringens and septicum), occurring in the 
perineum and trunk of the immunocompromised host. Occa-
sionally an entry site can be identified (incisions, lines, or intes-
tinal perforation), but in 20% to 50% of cases, a risk factor is not 
3
484
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
identified. Type 2 is a less common, monomicrobial infection 
with β-hemolytic streptococci or staphylococci (MRSA rising 
in frequency to 40%). It can be associated with toxic shock and 
occur in a previously healthy host, typically on the trunk or 
extremities, with a history of trauma commonly elicited. Type 3 
A
B
Figure 16-8.  A. Initial presentation of necrotizing soft issue infec-
tion in an obese, diabetic patient. B. Following operative debride-
ment to muscle layer.
is a rare but fulminant subset resulting from a V. vulnificus 
infection of traumatized skin in sea divers.
Laboratory findings are nonspecific. Leukocytosis, low 
calcium, and elevated lactate, creatine kinase, and creatinine 
may be seen. Advanced illness may bring on coagulopathy and 
acidemia. Blood cultures may or may not be positive. A ret-
rospectively developed scoring system, called the Laboratory 
Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) score, which 
includes C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cell (WBC) 
count, hemoglobin, plasma sodium, creatinine, and glucose, can 
be of diagnostic assistance with a high sensitivity and speci-
ficity. Tissue samples will demonstrate necrosis, WBC count 
infiltration, thrombosis, angiitis, and microorganisms.
Management of patients with suspected necrotizing infec-
tions should begin with proper patient triage to an ICU for initial 
evaluation, resuscitation, and treatment. If the diagnosis is clear, 
operative exploration and debridement should not be delayed. 
Broad-spectrum IV antibiotics should be started as soon as pos-
sible, with vancomycin (for MRSA) in addition to clindamy-
cin or linezolid (to inhibit toxin synthesis) and gram-negative 
rod coverage (in the form of a third-generation cephalosporin 
or a quinolone). Surgery is the definitive treatment. Incisions 
should be made over the involved skin, parallel to neurovascular 
bundles, extending to and exposing the deep fascia to assess 
tissue viability. Necrotic tissue will appear dull, gray, and avas-
cular and should be excised. Characteristic “murky dishwater”–
like fluid may be encountered at the affected sites. Borders for 
debridement are where tissue planes cease to readily separate. 
Rapid quantitative tissue cultures (if available) and frozen sec-
tion analysis may help guide the debridement. In Fournier’s 
gangrene, one should aim to preserve the anal sphincter as 
well as the testicles (blood supply is independent of the over-
lying tissue; usually not infected). Revision surgery should be 
planned (“second look”) within 24 to 48 hours. Adjuncts to 
surgery include topical antimicrobial creams, subatmospheric 
pressure wound dressings, and optimization of nutrition. Con-
troversial topics are the role of hyperbaric oxygen (may inhibit 
infection by creating an oxidative burst, with anecdotally fewer 
debridements required and improved survival, but the availabil-
ity is limited) and IVIG (may modulate the immune response to 
streptococcal superantigens). Wound closure is performed once 
bacteriologic, metabolic, and nutritional balances are obtained. 
Mortality ranges from 25% to 40% and is higher in truncal and 
perineal cases.
Actinomycosis
Actinomycosis should be considered in the differential diag-
nosis of any acute, subacute, or chronic cutaneous swelling of 
the head and neck. The cervicofacial form of Actinomycetes 
infection is the most common presentation, typically as an 
acute pyogenic infection in the submandibular or paraman-
dibular area, but infection could be elsewhere in the man-
dibular and maxillary regions. The primary skin infection may 
spread to adjacent structures such as the scalp, orbit, ears, and 
other areas. Oral infection may spread to the hypopharynx, 
larynx, trachea, salivary glands, and sinuses. Actinomyco-
sis can spread beyond boundaries of tissue planes and may 
also mimic chronic osteomyelitis. Treatment consists of a 
combination of penicillin therapy and surgical debridement. 
Debulking and debriding infected tissue arising from sinus 
tracts and abscess cavities inhibit actinomycosis growth in 
most cases.
485
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
VIRAL INFECTIONS WITH SURGICAL 
IMPLICATIONS
Human Papillomavirus Infections
Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are small DNA viruses of 
the papovavirus family. Over 100 different types have been 
described and can be classified as cutaneous or mucosal, 
depending on their tropism. The cutaneous types, HPV-1, -2 and 
-4, cause common warts, whereas HPV-5 and -8 are associated 
with epidermodysplasia verruciformis, an extremely rare auto-
somal recessive genetic disorder of the skin that entails a higher 
risk of malignant transformation. Mucosal types HPV-6 and 
-11 have a low malignant potential; lesions induced by HPV-16 
and -18 have a higher malignancy potential. Regression of HPV 
lesions is frequently an immune-mediated, spontaneous event 
that is exemplified by the persistent and extensive manifestation 
of this virus in the immune-compromised patient.
Cutaneous manifestations of HPV can vary. Common 
warts (verruca vulgaris) are caused by HPV-1, -2 and -4, with a 
prevalence of up to 33% in schoolchildren and 3.5% in adults; 
prevalence is higher in the immunosuppressed patient.38 The 
hands are the most commonly affected sites. Histologically, 
nonspecific findings of hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and 
acanthosis are found, as well as the hallmark koilocytes (clear 
halo around nucleus). Plantar warts occur on the soles of the 
feet, caused by HPV-1 and -4, commonly at pressure points, and 
are characterized by a keratotic plug surrounded by a hyperkera-
totic ring, with black dots (thrombosed capillaries) on the sur-
face. Plane warts occur on the face, dorsum of hands, and shins. 
They are caused by HPV-3 and -10 and tend to be multiple, 
flat-topped lesions with a smooth surface and light brown color. 
They regress spontaneously. Condyloma acuminatum manifests 
as multiple exophytic papillomatous lesions in the anogenital 
area. Sexually transmitted HPV-6 and -11 are responsible for 
90% for genital wart cases, although other types have been 
implicated as well. Giant condyloma acuminatum of Buschke-
Lowenstein is a large exophytic, cauliflower-like tumor and is 
now thought to be a variant of verrucous carcinoma. Epider-
modysplasia verruciformis is a form of primary genetic immu-
nodeficiency, rendering patients susceptible to infections with 
HPV-5 and -8. Recently, a similar clinical picture has been 
described in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and trans-
plant patients.39,40 Epidermodysplasia verruciformis presents 
clinically as multiple flat warts resembling seborrheic keratosis. 
There is a 30% to 50% risk of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 
transformation.
First-line therapy for single or multiple warts includes 
topical preparations of salicylic acid, silver nitrate, and glutaral-
dehyde. If these fail, cryotherapy may be considered. Treatment 
of recalcitrant lesions includes a variety of therapeutic options 
aimed at physically destroying the lesions by electrodessication, 
cryoablation, and pulsed dye laser therapy. Additional modali-
ties such as H2-antagonists and zinc sulfate may have a role in 
augmenting the immune response and reducing recurrence rates.
Cutaneous Manifestations of Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus
Skin involvement may result from HIV infection itself or from 
opportunistic disorders secondary to immune suppression.41 
Primary HIV may manifest as a generalized morbilliform rash. 
Kaposi’s sarcoma may precede the onset of immunosuppression. 
During early stages of HIV infection, nonspecific skin changes 
occur, as well as common disorders with atypical clinical fea-
tures, including recurrent varicella zoster, hyperkeratotic warts, 
and seborrheic dermatitis. Condylomata acuminata and verru-
cae appear early; however, their frequency and severity do not 
change with disease progression.
Cutaneous manifestations during later stages commonly 
include chronic herpes simplex virus and cytomegalovirus 
infections and, to a lesser extent, molluscum contagiosum, 
which is typically treatable with imiquimod.41 Mycobacterial 
infections and mucocutaneous candidiasis also occur. Recurrent 
and persistent mucocutaneous candidiasis is common in patients 
with HIV infection. Bacterial infections such as impetigo and 
folliculitis may be more persistent and widespread.
Malignant lesions such as Kaposi’s sarcoma occur in less 
than 5% of HIV-infected patients in the United States, although 
the worldwide prevalence in acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome (AIDS) patients exceeds 30%. Other cutaneous cancers, 
particularly basal cell cancer, are becoming more common 
than Kaposi’s sarcoma in patients adhering to highly active 
antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Approximately 6% of HIV 
patients will develop a cutaneous malignancy over a 7.5-year 
period.
With regard to general surgical considerations in HIV 
patients, contributing related morbidities such as malnutrition, 
decreased CD4 count, and presence of opportunistic infection 
may result in delayed and attenuated wound healing capacity.42
BENIGN TUMORS
Hemangioma
Hemangiomas result from benign proliferation of endo-
thelial cells that surround blood-filled cavities. Their 
natural history most commonly is presentation soon after birth, 
rapid growth during the first year of life, and gradual involution 
in more than 90% of cases. Occasionally, their rapid growth 
directly interferes with the airway, gastrointestinal tract, or 
musculoskeletal function, and in these select cases, resection is 
indicated before tumor involution. These tumors may consume 
a large proportion of cardiac output, resulting in high-output 
cardiac failure, or may result in a consumptive coagulopathy. In 
both of these cases, resection is also indicated. Systemic pred-
nisone and interferon-α can impede tumor progression. If these 
tumors persist into adolescence leaving a cosmetically undesir-
able telangiectasia, surgical resection may be considered. When 
surgical resection or debulking is considered, upfront selective 
embolization can help with planned resection. Finally, some 
vascular malformations, such as port wine stains of the trigemi-
nal nerve distribution, may prompt the search for a systemic 
syndrome such as Sturge-Weber syndrome.
Nevi
Overgrowth of melanocytic nevus cells may be found in the epi-
dermis (junctional), partially in the dermis (compound), or com-
pletely within the dermis (dermal). They are most commonly 
acquired, and most involute after migration into the dermis. 
Congenital nevi are found in less than 1% of neonates, and when 
characterized as giant congenital nevi, they have up to a 5% 
chance of developing into a malignant melanoma.43,44 The treat-
ment of choice is total excision, and at times, the large wound 
defect requires serial excisions and local tissue expanders.
4
486
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Cystic Lesions
There are three types of cutaneous cysts: epidermal, dermoid, 
and trichilemmal.45 All of these benign entities are comprised 
of epidermis that grows toward the center of the cyst, resulting 
in central accumulation of keratin to form a cyst. All clinically 
appear as a white, creamy substance-containing subcutaneous, 
thin-walled nodule. Epidermal cysts are the most common cuta-
neous cyst and histologically characterized by mature epidermis 
complete with granular layer. Trichilemmal cysts are the second 
most common lesion; they tend to form on the scalp of females, 
have a distinct odor after rupture, histologically lack a granular 
layer, and have an outer layer resembling the root sheath of a 
hair follicle. Dermoid cysts are congenital, found between the 
forehead to nose tip, and contain squamous epithelium, eccrine 
glands, and pilosebaceous units, occasionally developing bone, 
tooth, or nerve tissue. The eyebrow is the most frequent site of 
presentation. These cysts are commonly asymptomatic but can 
become inflamed and infected, thus necessitating incision and 
drainage. After the acute phase subsides, the entire cyst should 
be removed to prevent recurrence.
Keratosis
Actinic Keratosis.  Actinic keratosis is a commonly detected 
abnormal proliferation of intraepidermal keratinocytes primarily 
found in fair-skinned individuals. The general behavior of this 
premalignant lesion is regression, progression, or persistence, 
and their calculated 10-year potential to transform into SCC 
is between 6.1% and 10%. In fact, 60% to 65% of SCCs are 
believed to originate from these precursor lesions.
Seborrheic Keratosis.  These premalignant, light-brown 
lesions with velvet-like texture appear in the sun-exposed skin 
of older individuals. Histologically, the lesions are characterized 
by atypical-appearing keratinocytes, and their natural behavior 
typically is transformation into SCC that rarely metastasizes. 
Treatment options are excision, fluorouracil, cautery and 
destruction, and dermabrasion.46,47 Interestingly, sudden erup-
tions of multiple seborrheic keratosis may be associated with 
other malignancies.
Soft Tissue Tumors
Acrochordons represent hyperplastic cells of the epidermis 
attached to a fibrous connective tissue stalk. They appear on 
the trunk, eyelids, and axilla as pedunculated masses and are 
resected usually for cosmesis.48-50 Dermatofibromas are 1- to 
2-cm, soft, solitary nodules consisting of predominantly nonen-
capsulated whorls of collagen laid down by fibroblasts located 
on the legs and trunks. These fibromas can be managed non-
operatively, but excision is the treatment of choice.48-50 In rare 
cases, basal cell carcinomas may develop within the dermato-
fibromas. Lipomas are the most common subcutaneous neo-
plasm and have no malignant potential.51 This soft and fleshy 
conglomeration of benign adipocytes can be appear almost any-
where on the body, but they are most often found on the trunk 
and commonly undergo rapid growth. Surgical excision can be 
considered for symptomatic or large lesions that compromise 
musculoskeletal function.
Neural Tumors
Benign cutaneous tumors that arise from the nerve sheath are 
collectively referred to as neural tumors. Dermal neurofibro-
mas are benign neoplasms arising from nerve sheath that appear 
as fleshy and nontender sessile or pedunculated masses on the 
skin. They are most often associated with café-au-lait spots and 
Lisch nodules in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) disease, also 
known as von Recklinghausen’s disease.49,50 Neurilemomas 
are discrete nodules consisting of Schwann cells of the periph-
eral nerve sheath, often causing pain along the distribution of 
the nerve, and are treated with simple resection. Granular cell 
tumors are derived from Schwann cells, infiltrate surrounding 
skeletal muscle, and are resected when symptomatic.49,50,52
MALIGNANT TUMORS
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) arises from the basal layer of non-
keratinocytes and represents the most common tumor diagnosed 
in the United States.53,54  Annually it accounts for 25% 
of all diagnosed cancers and 75% of skin cancers.55 The 
primary risk factor for disease development is sun exposure 
(UVB rays more than UVA rays) particularly during adoles-
cence; however, other factors include immune suppression (i.e., 
organ transplant recipients, HIV), chemical exposure, and ion-
izing radiation exposure. BCC can also be a feature of inher-
ited conditions such as xeroderma pigmentosa, unilateral basal 
cell nevus syndrome, and nevoid BCC syndrome.55 The natural 
behavior of BCC is one of local invasion rather than distant 
metastasis. Untreated BCC can result in significant morbidity. 
Thirty percent of cases are found on the nose, and bleeding, 
ulceration, and itching are often part of the clinical presentation.
The most common form of BCC (60%) is the nodular 
variant, characterized by raised, pearly pink papules and occa-
sionally a depressed tumor center with raised borders giving the 
classic “rodent ulcer” appearance. This variant tends to develop 
in sun-exposed areas of individuals over the age of 60. Superfi-
cial BCC accounts for 15% of BCC, is diagnosed at a mean age 
of 57 years, and typically appears on the trunk as a pink or ery-
thematous plaque with a thin pearly border. The infiltrative form 
appears on the head and neck in the late 60s with similar clinical 
appearance to the nodular variant. An important variant to keep 
in mind is the pigmented variant of nodular BCC because this 
may be difficult to differentiate from nodular melanoma. Other 
important subtypes include the morpheaform variant, account-
ing for 3% of cases and characterized by indistinct borders with 
a yellow hue, and fibroepithelioma of Pinkus. Histologic sub-
types of BCC include nodular and micronodular (50%), super-
ficial (15%), and infiltrative.
Treatment options include Moh’s microsurgery, exci-
sional surgery, and cautery and destruction. Moh’s microsur-
gery provides histologic confirmation of excision and maximal 
conservation of tissue, which is important to keep in mind in 
cosmetically sensitive areas such as facial lesions. It has also 
been shown to be cost-effective and associated with low recur-
rence rates (1%).56,57 It is the treatment of choice for mor-
pheaform, poorly delineated, recurrent, and infiltrative BCC, 
particularly facial lesions. Alternative treatment is excisional 
surgery with 4-mm margins with extension into subcutaneous 
tissue, which provides definitive treatment of nonmorpheaform 
lesions <2 cm in diameter. A common approach used by derma-
tologists is cautery and destruction, although it should be kept 
in mind that the results are operator and institution dependent as 
shown by a study showing inferior results for individuals hav-
ing the procedure performed at academic training institutions 
as opposed to experienced private practitioners (local cure 81% 
5
487
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
vs. 94%).58 This option should only be considered in patients 
who are not candidates for the more extensive surgical options 
and for lesions not located in mid-face. Poor surgical candidates 
and patients without recurrent or morpheaform lesions may be 
treated with radiation therapy. Radiation also may be used in 
cases of questionable resection margins or microscopic posi-
tive margins after surgery. The practitioner must be aware of 
the potential consequences of radiation therapy, including poor 
cosmetic outcomes and future cancer risk.
Six to 12 weeks of imiquimod, an FDA-approved drug 
and immune modifier, is an option for small-diameter (<2 cm), 
superficial BCC of the neck, trunk, or extremities, with reported 
histologic clearance rates of 42% to 76%.59-63 Topical fluoroura-
cil is another FDA-approved treatment for superficial BCC, and 
one study of 31 tumors treated daily for 11 weeks showed a 90% 
histologic clearance rate. Lastly, topical photodynamic therapy 
has shown some benefit in treatment as well.
It is critical for each patient to have routine annual follow-
up that includes full-body skin examinations. Sixty-six percent 
of recurrences develop within 3 years, and with a few excep-
tions occurring decades after initial treatment, the remaining 
recur within 5 years of initial treatment.57,64 A second primary 
BCC may develop after treatment and, in 40% of cases, presents 
within the first 3 years after treatment.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
SCC is the second most common skin cancer, accounting for 
approximately 100,000 cases each year and generally 
afflicting individuals of lighter skin color. The primary risk 
factor and driving force for the development of this common 
cancer is UV exposure; however, other risks include environ-
mental factors such as chemical agents, physical agents (ionizing 
radiation), psoralen and UVA (PUVA), HPV-16 and -18 infec-
tions (immunosuppression), and smoking. Chronic nonhealing 
wounds, burn scars, and chronic dermatosis are other risk factors, 
and many darker skin individuals who develop SCC often have 
a history of one these risk factors (Fig. 16-9). Heritable condi-
tions such as xeroderma pigmentosum, epidermolysis bullosa, 
and oculocutaneous albinism are predisposing risk factors.
SCC has in situ variants (including Bowen’s disease and 
erythroplasia of Queyrat in situ lesions of the penis) and inva-
sive variants. In situ disease presents as well-delineated pink 
Figure 16-9.  Squamous cell carcinoma forming in a chronic 
wound.
papules or plaques, and invasive disease presents as slightly 
pink or skin-colored, raised plaques. Bleeding of the lesion with 
minimal trauma is not uncommon, and pain is rare. Most in situ 
cases grow slowly over time and do not progress to invasive dis-
ease, except for Bowen’s disease and erythroplasia of Queyrat 
where the risk of malignant transformation is 3% to 5% and 
10%, respectively.65
The natural history of invasive disease depends on loca-
tion and inherent tumor characteristics. For example, lesions 
associated with chronic inflammation and located at mucocu-
taneous junctions may metastasize in 10% to 30% of cases, 
whereas lesions arising in sun-exposed areas without adverse 
risk factors are less likely to spread and have a better progno-
sis.64 Clinical risk factors for recurrence include presentation 
with neurologic symptoms, immunosuppression, tumor with 
poorly defined borders, and tumor that arises at a site of prior 
radiation. Perineural involvement increases the incidence of 
local recurrence and lymph node metastasis and has a poorer 
survival. Other histologic features indicative of aggressive dis-
ease include poor differentiation, thickness greater than 4 mm, 
and adenoid, adenosquamous, and desmoplastic subtypes.54
Treatment modalities for SCC include cautery and abla-
tion, cryotherapy, drug therapy including imiquimod, surgical 
excision, Moh’s microsurgery, and radiation therapy. However, 
cautery and ablation carry the risk of leaving residual tumor 
behind; in a study of 291 patients with primary in situ lesions 
treated with cautery and ablation, all but two patients recurred.66 
This modality is not recommended in dense hair-bearing regions 
and for tumors extending into subcutaneous tissue.
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice, when feasi-
ble. For lesions less than 2 cm in diameter, wide excision with 
a 4-mm margin for low-grade lesions and a 6-mm margin for 
high-grade lesions is sufficient. Factors rendering tumors high 
risk are size >2 cm in diameter and involvement of subcutane-
ous tissue. Moh’s microsurgery is indicated for lesions at sites 
where cosmesis or function preservation is critical, for poorly 
differentiated tumors, for invasive lesions, and for verrucous 
carcinomas. Lower recurrence rates are seen with this modality 
with primary lesions of the ear or lip, recurrent lesions, prima-
ries with perineural invasion, lesions with diameters >2 cm, and 
poorly differentiated lesions.64,67 It has also found use in nail bed 
lesions and in those arising in a background of osteomyelitis.
When patients are poor surgical candidates, radiation ther-
apy can play a role in primary modality treatment. It may also 
act as an adjunct to surgical treatment in cases of lip carcinoma 
with 30% to 50% involvement, microscopic positive margins, 
perineural histology, underlying tissue invasion, and multiple 
recurrences.55,68
The role of lymph node dissection in the setting of SCC 
is evolving. Regional palpable nodes should be removed along 
with susceptible regional lymph node basins in patients with 
SCC in the setting of chronic wounds. Management of lymph 
node disease involves surgical resection and/or radiation ther-
apy. Patients with parotid disease commonly benefit from a 
superficial or total parotidectomy (with facial nerve preserva-
tion) and adjuvant radiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions). Iso-
lated cervical lymph node involvement without adverse features 
is managed with follow-up surveillance for patients, which 
involves skin and regional lymph node examination every 1 to 
3 months for the first year after treatment, every 2 to 4 months 
for the ensuing year, every 4 to 6 months for the next 3 years, 
and then every 6 to 12 months for the rest of life.54
6
488
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Melanoma
Background.  In 2013, an estimated 76,690 individuals were 
diagnosed with malignant melanoma, accounting for 9480 
deaths.53,69 The incidence of melanoma is rising faster than most 
other solid malignancies, and these numbers likely represent an 
underestimation given the many in situ and thin melanoma cases 
that are underreported. These tumors primarily arise from mela-
nocytes at the epidermal-dermal junction but may also originate 
from mucosal surfaces of the oropharynx, nasopharynx, eyes, 
proximal esophagus, anorectum, and female genitalia. Their 
pathogenesis is not completely understood, but they are believed 
to originate from nests of melanocytes that have undergone dys-
plastic changes.
A well-known environmental risk factor is exposure to solar 
UV radiation. It was recently reported that greater than 10 tanning 
bed sessions by adolescents and young adults increased their rela-
tive risk of developing melanoma by twofold.70 Nonenvironmental 
risk factors include a personal history of melanoma, which is asso-
ciated with a 10-fold increase in risk. Individuals with dysplastic 
nevi have a 10% overall lifetime risk of melanoma, with tumors 
arising from pre-existing nevi or de novo. Dysplastic nevus syn-
drome (B-K mole syndrome) has an autosomal dominant trans-
mission with high penetrance and is associated with a nearly 100% 
lifetime risk in being diagnosed with cutaneous melanoma. Con-
genital nevi increase risk for melanoma proportionally with size; 
giant congenital nevi are associated with a 5% to 8% lifetime risk. 
Five to ten percent of cutaneous melanomas occur in patients with 
a family history of melanoma, and these individuals have an ear-
lier age of disease onset, commonly express dysplastic nevi, and 
more commonly have more than one primary lesion. Melanoma 
development is strongly associated with the p16/CDK4,6/Rb and 
p14ARF/HMD2/p53 tumor suppressor pathways and the RAF-
MEK-ERK and PI3K-Akt oncogenic pathways.71
Pathogenesis and Clinical Presentation.  Melanoma growth 
most commonly starts as a localized, radial growth phase fol-
lowed by a vertical growth phase that determines metastatic 
risk. The subtypes of melanoma include lentigo maligna, super-
ficial spreading, acral lentiginous, mucosal, nodular, polypoid, 
desmoplastic, amelanotic, and soft tissue. The most common 
subtype is superficial spreading, accounting for 70% of cases 
(Fig. 16-10). These melanomas are found anywhere on the body 
Figure 16-11.  Nodular melanoma seen in the leg of a 55-year-old 
male.
Figure 16-10.  Primary cutaneous melanoma seen in the scalp of 
a 61-year-old male.
with the exception of the hands and feet. Nodular melanoma 
accounts for 15% to 30% of melanomas, and this variant is 
unique in that it begins with a vertical growth phase that partly 
accounts for its worse prognosis (Fig. 16-11). Lentigo maligna 
is typically found in older individuals and primarily located in 
the head and neck region. The acral lentiginous variant accounts 
for 29% to 72% of melanomas in dark-skinned individuals, is 
occasionally seen in Caucasians, and is found on palmar, plan-
tar, and subungual surfaces.
Melanoma most commonly manifests as cutaneous dis-
ease, and clinical characteristics include an Asymmetric outline, 
changing irregular Borders, Color variations, Diameter greater 
than 6 mm, and Elevation (ABCDE). Other key clinical charac-
teristics include a pigmented lesion that has enlarged, ulcerated, 
or bled. Amelanotic lesions appear as raised pink, purple, or 
normal-colored skin papules and are often diagnosed late.
Diagnosis and Staging.  Workup should begin with a history 
and physical exam. The entire skin should be checked for syn-
chronous primaries, satellite lesions, and in-transit metastases, 
and all nodal basins should be examined for lymphadenopathy. 
Suspicious lesions should undergo excisional biopsy with 1- to 
2-mm margins; however, tumors that are large or in a cosmeti-
cally or anatomically challenging area can be approached by 
incisional biopsy, including punch biopsy. Tissue specimen 
should include full thickness of the lesion and a small section 
of normal adjacent skin to aid the pathologist in diagnosis. 
Suspicious lymph nodes should undergo fine-needle aspiration 
(FNA).
Melanoma is characterized according to the American 
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) as localized disease (stage 
I and II), regional disease (stage III), or distant metastatic dis-
ease (stage IV). Overall tumor thickness, ulceration, and mitotic 
rate are the most important prognostic indicators of survival.72,73 
If a sentinel node contains metastatic melanoma, the number 
of positive nodes; thickness, mitotic rate, and ulceration of the 
primary tumor; and patient age determine prognosis. With 
clinically positive nodes, the number of positive nodes, 
primary tumor ulceration, and patient age determine prognosis.74 
The site of metastasis is strongly associated with prognosis for 
stage IV disease, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is 
associated with a worse prognosis.75
7
489
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
There is no supporting evidence for chest x-ray or CT in 
the staging of patients unless there is positive regional lymph 
node disease (and even in this case, the indications are not so 
clear).41 However, high-risk melanoma (i.e., T4b), especially of 
the lower extremities, may warrant further imaging to stage with 
modalities such as a positron emission tomography (PET)-CT or 
CT of the pelvis.41 In addition, patients with clinically palpable 
regional lymph nodes are at high risk for distant metastases and 
should receive additional imaging that includes CT of the chest, 
abdomen, and pelvis; whole-body PET-CT; or brain MRI.
The sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) technique for 
melanoma was introduced in 1992 and has become a corner-
stone in the management of melanoma, although its role in 
management continues to be refined. SLNB is a standard stag-
ing procedure to evaluate the regional nodes for patients with 
clinically node-negative malignant melanoma. This technique 
identifies the first draining lymph node from the primary and 
has shown excellent accuracy and significantly less morbidity 
compared to complete resection of nodal basins. The SLNB 
technique involves preoperative lymphoscintigraphy with intra-
dermal injections of technetium-sulfur colloid to delineate lym-
phatic drainage and intraoperative intradermal injection of 1 mL 
of isosulfan or methylene blue dye near the tumor or biopsy site 
(Figs. 16-12 and 16-13). The radioactive tracer-dye combination 
allows the sentinel node to be identified in 98% of cases. An 
incision over the lymph node basin of interest allows nodes to 
be excised and studied with hematoxylin and eosin and immu-
nohistochemistry (S100, HMB45, and MART-1/Melan-A) 
staining (Fig. 16-14). Risks of this technique are uncommon 
but include skin necrosis near the site of injection, anaphylac-
tic shock, lymphedema, surgical site infections, seromas, and 
hematomas.
Surgical Management of the Primary Tumor and Lymph 
Nodes.  The appropriate excision margin is based on primary 
tumor depth. Although there are no randomized trials studying 
margins for melanoma in situ, most surgical oncologists believe 
Figure 16-12.  After injection of radioactive technetium-99–
labeled sulfur colloid tracer at the primary cutaneous melanoma 
site, sentinel lymph node basins are identified. A. Lymphoscin-
tigraphy of 67-year-old male with a malignant melanoma of the 
right heel; sentinel lymph nodes in both the right popliteal fossa 
and inguinal region. B. Lymphoscintigraphy of 52-year-old male 
with a malignant melanoma of the posterior right upper arm; sen-
tinel lymph node in the right axillary region. C. Lymphoscintigra-
phy of 69-year-old male with a facial melanoma; sentinel lymph 
nodes in the submandibular region. ANT = anterior; INJ = injection; 
POST = posterior.
Figure 16-13.  Technique of sentinel lymph 
node biopsy for cutaneous melanoma. After 
injection of radioactive technetium-99–labeled 
sulfur colloid tracer at a lower abdominal wall 
primary cutaneous melanoma site, sentinel 
lymph node basins are identified. (From Ger-
shenwald JE, Ross MI. Sentinel-lymph node 
biopsy for cutaneous melanoma. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:1738-1745. kkjkjdht © 2011 Mas-
sachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with 
­permission.)
Inguinal nodes
A
B
C
FLOW
INJ SITE
Axillary
NODE
ANT
FLOW
POST
Tympho
Melanoma Primary Injection Site
Submanibular Lymph nodes
Popliteal nodes
A
B
Sentinel
lymph node
Injection site
Surgical exposure of sentinel lymph node
Afferent lymphatic
channels
Sentinel
lymph node
Primary melanoma
Sentinel
lymph
node
490
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
that margins of 0.5 to 1.0 cm are sufficient. We believe that 
1.0-cm margins should be obtained in anatomically feasible 
areas given the possibility of an incidental finding of a small 
invasive component in permanent sections. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) trial by Veronesi and colleagues provided 
the first prospective randomized controlled trial guiding appro-
priate margin management.76 In this trial, 612 patients with 
melanoma <2 mm in thickness were randomized to 1- or 3-cm 
margins. The results demonstrated no difference in overall sur-
vival or recurrence-free survival between groups. A trial from 
the Swedish Melanoma Study Group supported the WHO trial. 
The Swedish study examined patients with <2-mm thick mela-
noma who were randomized to 2- or 5-cm margins.77 There was 
no difference in recurrence-free survival (73% vs. 74%; P = .88) 
or overall survival (75% vs. 74%; P = .77) between the groups. 
The Intergroup Melanoma Trial randomized 468 patients with 
intermediate-thickness melanoma (1–4 mm) to 2- or 4-cm mar-
gins of excision.78,79 They did not find a significant difference in 
10-year overall survival (70% vs. 77%; P = .074) or local recur-
rence (2.1% vs. 2.6%) between the two cohorts. A British trial 
suggested that there is a limit to how narrow margins can be for 
melanomas >2 mm thick in showing that 1-cm margins provide 
worse outcomes compared to 3-cm margins.
Tumors <1 mm thick require 1-cm margins, tumors 1 to 
2 mm thick require 1- to 2-cm margins, tumors 2 to 4 mm thick 
require 2-cm margins, and tumors >4 mm thick require 2-cm 
margins, although there are no randomized data to support this 
last point. Technically challenging locations should be treated 
in a similar fashion. For facial and scalp lesions, advancement 
flaps usually suffice for closure, as do wedge resections for 
lesions of the ear helix. When tumors are situated near critical 
structures (e.g., eye, lip), the best should be done to remove the 
primary tumor with adequate margins.
SLNBs are recommended for melanomas 1 to 4 mm 
thick according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Net-
work (NCCN) guideline recommendations.41 The incidence of 
regional lymph node metastasis in <1-mm thick melanomas is 
5% or less. According to the NCCN guidelines, SLNB may be 
considered for thin melanoma with adverse features (i.e., >0.75 
mm, >1 mitosis per mm, ulcerated), and literature that supports 
this approach states that SLNB provides prognostic information 
and is therapeutic for low-volume disease.41,80 For tumors that 
are >4 mm, the incidence of regional lymph node positivity is 
35% to 40% and SLNB may provide prognostic information for 
these thick melanomas.81-83
The role for SLNB is supported by the Multicenter Selec-
tive Lymphadenectomy Trial (MSLT)-1, which looked at 
patients with melanoma 1.5 to 4 mm thick and randomized them 
to SLNB (and completion lymphadenectomy if positive) vs. no 
SLNB (and delayed complete lymphadenectomy for recurrent 
lymph node disease).84 SLNBs provided prognostic information 
but did not affect survival. However, when patients who were 
lymph node positive only were compared, 5-year overall sur-
vival was better if the lymphadenectomy was done at the time 
of a positive sentinel node vs. when it was delayed until the 
patients presented with clinical findings. Completion lymphad-
enectomy is commonly performed for sentinel nodes with meta-
static disease, but it has been shown that most of these nodal 
basins do not have additional disease. Thus, many ­surgeons do 
not perform routine completion lymphadenectomy for positive 
nodes, and data from the MSLT-2 may provide guidance.
Several studies evaluated the indications and benefit 
for extended lymphadenectomy. Three retrospective studies 
showed a 12% to 24% improved 5-year overall survival in 
patients with micrometastasis in elective regional lymphad-
enectomy specimens compared with patients undergoing thera-
peutic lymphadenectomy for clinically palpable disease.85-87 
The last large prospective randomized controlled trial showed 
a trend toward improved survival in patients with intermediate-
thickness (1.5–4 mm) melanomas who underwent immediate 
elective lymphadenectomy as opposed to nodal observation 
(77% vs. 73%; P = .12).88 For patients with clinically evident local 
regional lymphadenopathy, FNA biopsies can confirm meta-
static disease. If metastatic workup including PET-CT excludes 
A
B
Figure 16-14.  Operation of sentinel lymph node biopsy for cutaneous melanoma. After preoperative injection of radioactive technetium-99–
labeled sulfur colloid tracer and intraoperative injection of Lymphazurin blue dye around the primary melanoma excision site, the nodal basin 
of interest is identified. An incision is made directly overlying the lymph node basin in the posterior axillary space. The sentinel lymph nodes 
are identified and excised.
491
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
distant disease, resection of the primary melanoma lesion and a 
completion lymphadenectomy should be performed.
Individuals with face, anterior scalp, and ear prima-
ries who have a positive SLNB should undergo a superficial 
parotidectomy in addition to a modified radical neck dissection. 
Patients with positive sentinel nodes in the inguino-femoral 
nodes should undergo an inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy 
that includes removal of Cloquet’s node. If Cloquet’s node 
is positive or the patient has three or more nodes that contain 
melanoma metastases, this is an indication for an ilio-obdurator 
lymphadenectomy.41
Surgery for Regional and Distant Metastasis.  Nonmeta-
static, in-transit disease should undergo excision to clear mar-
gins when feasible. However, disease not amenable to complete 
excision derives benefit from isolated limb perfusion (ILP) and 
isolated limb infusion (ILI) (Fig. 16-15). These two modali-
ties are used to treat regional disease, and their purpose is to 
administer high doses of chemotherapy, commonly melphalan, 
to an affected limb while avoiding systemic drug toxicity. ILI 
was shown to provide a 31% response rate in one study, while 
hyperthermic ILP provided a 63% complete response rate in an 
independent study.89-92
The most common sites of distant metastasis are the lung 
and liver followed by the brain, gastrointestinal tract, distant 
skin, and subcutaneous tissue. A limited subset of patients with 
small-volume, limited distant metastases to the brain, gastro-
intestinal tract, or distant skin will be cured with resection or 
gamma knife radiation. Liver metastases are better dealt with-
out surgical resection unless they arise from an ocular primary. 
Adjuvant therapy after resection of metastatic lesions is not 
standard of care; however, there are ongoing clinical trials 
addressing whether drugs and vaccines will be beneficial in 
this setting.55 Surgery may provide palliation for patients with 
gastrointestinal obstruction, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and 
nongastrointestinal hemorrhage. Radiotherapy for symptomatic 
bony or brain metastases provides palliation in diffuse disease.
Adjuvant and Palliative Therapies.  Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group (ECOG) Trials 1684, 1690, and 1694 were pro-
spective randomized controlled trials that demonstrated disease-
free survival advantages in patients with melanoma thicker 
than 4 mm with or without lymph node involvement if they 
received adjuvant treatment with high-dose interferon (IFN).93-95 
A European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer 
(EORTC) trial also showed recurrence-free survival benefit 
with pegylated IFN.96 It is important to note that IFN therapy is 
not well tolerated, and the pooled analysis of these trials did not 
show an improvement in overall survival benefit.
Most patients with metastatic melanoma will not be sur-
gical candidates. Although the medical options for metastatic 
melanoma have historically been poor, several recent studies 
have shown promise in drug therapy for metastatic melanoma. 
BRAF inhibitors (sorafenib), anti-PD1 antibodies, CTLA anti-
bodies (ipilimumab), and high-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2) with 
and without vaccines have been shown in randomized studies 
to provide survival benefit in metastatic disease.97-101 Despite the 
excitement of recent drugs, surgery will likely play an adjunct 
role in treating individuals who develop resistance to these 
drugs over time.
Special Circumstances.  Special circumstances of note are 
melanoma in pregnant women, melanoma of unknown prima-
ries, and noncutaneous melanomas (i.e., ocular). The prognosis 
of pregnant patients is similar to women who are not pregnant. 
Extrapolation of studies examining the SLNB technique in preg-
nant women with breast cancer suggests lymphoscintigraphy 
may be done safely during pregnancy without risk to the fetus. 
(Blue dye is contraindicated.) General anesthesia should be 
avoided during the first trimester, and local anesthetics should 
be used at this time. It has been suggested by some that after 
excising the primary tumor during pregnancy, the SLNB may 
be performed after delivery.
Unknown primary melanoma most commonly presents in 
lymph nodes (2% of cases and <5% of metastatic presentation). 
A thorough search for the primary lesion should be sought, 
including eliciting a history about prior skin lesions, skin pro-
cedures (e.g., curettage and electrodesiccation, excision, laser), 
and review of any prior “benign” pathology. The surgeon should 
be aware that melanoma is known to spontaneously regress 
because of an immune response.
Ocular melanoma is the most common noncutaneous 
disease site, and treatment includes photocoagulation, partial 
resection, radiation, or enucleation.102-104 Ocular melanomas 
exclusively metastasize to the liver and not regional lymph 
nodes, and some patients benefit from liver resection. Mela-
noma of the mucous membranes most commonly presents in 
Figure 16-15.  Isolated limb infusion. Sche-
matic of isolated limb infusion of lower 
extremity. (From Testori A, Verhoef C, 
Kroon HM, et al. Treatment of melanoma 
metastasis in a limb by isolated limb perfu-
sion and isolated limb infusion. J Surg Oncol. 
2011;104:397-404. kkjkjdht 2011 John 
Wiley and Sons. Reprinted with permission.)
Overhead heater
Hot air blanket
Venous
catheter
Arterial
catheter
Pneumatic
tourniquet
Pump
chamber
25cc Syringe
Warming
coil
Esmarch
bandage
Drug in
pre-warmed
saline
492
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the oral cavity, oropharynx, nasopharynx, paranasal sinus, anus, 
rectum, and female genitalia. Patients with this presentation 
have a worse prognosis (10% 5-year survival) than individuals 
with cutaneous melanomas. Management should be excision to 
negative margins, and radical resections (i.e., abdominoperi-
neal resection) should be avoided because the role of surgery is 
locoregional control, not cure. Generally speaking, lymph node 
dissection should be avoided because the benefit is unclear.
Merkel Cell Carcinoma
This is a rare and aggressive neuroendocrine tumor of the skin 
most commonly found in white men and diagnosed at a mean 
age of 70 years (Fig. 16-16). Risk factors include UV radiation, 
PUVA, and immunosuppression. Approximately one in three 
cases present on the face, with the remainder occurring on sun-
exposed skin. A rapidly growing, flesh-colored papule or plaque 
characterizes the disease. Regional lymph nodes are involved in 
30% of patients, and 50% will develop systemic disease (skin, 
lymph nodes, liver, lung, bone, brain).105,106 There are no stan-
dardized diagnostic imaging studies for staging, but CT of the 
chest, abdomen, and pelvis and octreotide scans may provide 
useful information when clinically indicated.
After examining the entire skin for other lesions, treat-
ment should begin by evaluating the nodal basins. Patients 
without clinical nodal disease should undergo an SLNB preced-
ing a wide local excision because studies suggest a benefit.107 
In patients with sentinel lymph nodes with metastatic disease, 
completion lymphadenectomy and/or radiation therapy may fol-
low, and in patients with node-negative disease, observation or 
Figure 16-16.  Merkel cell carcinoma seen just above the left knee 
in a 44-year-old female.
radiation therapy should be considered.107 SLNB is ­important 
for staging and treatment, and the literature suggests that it 
predicts recurrence and relapse-free survival. Elective lymph 
node dissection may decrease regional nodal recurrence and 
in-transit metastases. Patients with clinically positive nodes 
should have an FNA to confirm disease. If positive, a metastatic 
staging workup should follow, and if negative, treatment of the 
primary and nodal basin as managed for sentinel lymph node– 
positive disease should be considered. A negative FNA and 
open biopsy-negative disease should be managed by treatment 
of the primary disease alone. Patients with metastatic disease 
should be managed according to consensus from a multidisci-
plinary tumor board.
Important surgical principles for excision of the primary 
lesion are to excise with wide margins down to fascia and com-
plete circumferential and peripheral deep-margin assessment. 
Recommended management for margins is 1- to 3-cm margins, 
and given the rarity of the tumor, there are no randomized trials 
further defining these margins. Moh’s microsurgery may play 
a role to ensure negative margins. Chemotherapy is commonly 
used, but there are no data to support a specific regimen or that 
demonstrate a definitive survival benefit.
Recurrence is common, and one study of 95 patients 
showed a 47% recurrence, with 80% of recurrences occurring 
within 2 years and 96% occurring within 5 years.108,109 Regional 
lymph node disease is common, and 70% of patients will have 
nodal spread within 2 years of disease presentation. Five-year 
overall survival of head and neck disease in surgically treated 
patients is between 40% and 68%.
Kaposi’s Sarcoma
Kaposi’s sarcoma is characterized by the proliferation and 
inflammation of endothelial-derived spindle cell lesions. There 
are five major forms of this angioproliferative disorder: classic 
(Mediterranean), African endemic, HIV-negative men having 
sex with men (MSM)–associated, AIDS-associated, and immu-
nosuppression-associated; they are all driven by the human her-
pesvirus (HHV-8).68 Kaposi’s sarcoma is diagnosed after the 
fifth decade of life and predominantly found on the skin but can 
occur anywhere in the body. In North America, the Kaposi’s 
sarcoma herpes virus is transmitted via sexual and nonsexual 
routes and predominantly affects individuals with compromised 
immune systems such as those with HIV and transplant recipi-
ents on immune-suppressing medications. Clinically, Kaposi’s 
sarcoma appears as multifocal, rubbery blue nodules. Treat-
ment of AIDS-associated Kaposi’s sarcoma is with antiviral 
therapy, and many patients experience a dramatic treatment 
response.110,111 Those individuals who do not respond and have 
limited mucocutaneous disease may benefit from cryotherapy, 
photodynamic therapy, radiation therapy, intralesional injec-
tions, and topical therapy. Surgical biopsy is important for 
disease diagnosis, but given the high local recurrence and the 
fact that Kaposi’s sarcoma represents more of a systemic rather 
than local disease, the benefit of surgery is limited and generally 
should not be pursued except for palliation.
Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans
This rare, low-grade sarcoma of fibroblast origin commonly 
afflicts individuals during their third decade of life. It has low 
distant metastatic potential but behaves aggressively locally 
with finger-like extensions. Tumor depth is the most important 
prognostic variable. Presentation is characteristically a slow-
growing, asymptomatic, violaceous plaque involving the trunk, 
493
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
head, neck, or extremities. Treatment is wide local excision with 
3-cm margins down to deep underlying fascia or Moh’s micro-
surgery in cosmetically sensitive areas where maximum tissue 
preservation will benefit.112 No nodal dissection is needed, and 
both approaches provide similar local control.113 Some clinicians 
have used radiation therapy and biologic agents (imatinib) with 
some success in patients with advanced disease. Local recur-
rence occurs in 50% to 75% of cases, usually within 3 years of 
treatment, and thus, clinical follow-up is important. Recurrent 
tumors should be resected whenever possible.
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma 
(Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma and 
Myxofibrosarcoma)
This uncommon, cutaneous, spindle-cell, soft tissue sarcoma 
occurs in the extremities, head, and neck of elderly patients. 
They present as solitary, soft to firm, skin-colored subcutane-
ous nodules. Complete surgical resection is the treatment of 
choice, and adjuvant radiation therapy provides local control; 
patients with positive margins benefit most from this combina-
tion. Nevertheless, patients undergoing complete gross resection 
will experience recurrence in 30% to 35% of cases.71 Up to 50% 
of patients may present with distant metastasis, and this is a 
contraindication to surgical resection.
Angiosarcoma
Angiosarcoma is an uncommon, aggressive cancer that arises 
from vascular endothelial cells and occurs in four variants, all 
of which have a poor prognosis.114 The head and neck variant 
presents in individuals older than 40 years as an ill-defined red 
patch on the face or scalp, often with satellite lesions and dis-
tant metastasis, and has a median survival of 18 to 28 months. 
Lymphedema-associated angiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves) devel-
ops on an extremity ipsilateral to an axillary lymphadenectomy. 
It appears on the upper, medial arm as a violaceous plaque in 
an individual with nonpitting edema and has a poor survival. 
Radiation-induced angiosarcoma occurs 4 to 25 years after 
radiation therapy for benign (acne) and malignant (i.e., breast 
cancer) conditions. Finally, the epithelioid variant of angiosar-
coma involves the lower extremities and also has a poor prog-
nosis. Surgical excision with wide margins is the treatment of 
choice for localized disease, but the rate of recurrence is high. 
Adjuvant radiation therapy can be considered in a multidisci-
plinary fashion. Cases of extremity disease can be considered 
for amputation. For widely metastatic disease, chemotherapy 
and radiation may provide palliation, but these modalities do not 
prolong overall survival.55
Extramammary Paget’s Disease
This rare adenocarcinoma of apocrine glands arises in perianal 
and axillary regions and in genitalia of men and women.115 
Clinical presentation is that of erythematous or nonpigmented 
plaques with an eczema-like appearance that often persist after 
failed treatment from other therapies. An important character-
istic and one that the surgeon must be acutely aware of is the 
high incidence of concomitant other malignancies with this 
cutaneous disease. Forty percent of cases are associated with 
primary gastrointestinal and genitourinary malignancies, and a 
diligent search should be made after a diagnosis of extramam-
mary Paget’s disease is made. Treatment is surgical resection 
with negative microscopic margins, and adjuvant radiation may 
provide additional locoregional control.
CONCLUSION
The skin is the largest organ in the human body and is com-
posed of three organized layers that are the source of numerous 
pathologies. Recognition and management of cutaneous and 
subcutaneous diseases require an astute clinician to optimize 
clinical outcomes. Improvements in drugs therapies and health-
care practices have helped recovery from skin injuries. Skin and 
subcutaneous diseases are often managed medically, although 
surgery frequently complements treatment. Benign tumors 
are surgical diseases, while malignant tumors are primarily treated 
surgically, and additional modalities including chemotherapy and 
radiation therapy are sometimes required. The management of 
melanoma is at an exciting phase, requiring the coordinated mul-
tidisciplinary care of medical oncologists, surgical oncologists, 
radiation oncologists, dermatopathologists, and plastic and recon-
structive surgeons. The advent of new drug therapies will redefine 
the role of surgery in this disease in the coming years.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Kanitakis J. Anatomy, histology, and immunohistochemistry 
of normal human skin. Eur J Dermatol. 2002;12:390-399; 
quiz 400-401.
2.	Girolomoni G, Caux C, Lebecque S, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, 
Ricciardi-Castagnoli P. Langerhans cells: still a fundamental 
paradigm for studying the immunobiology of dendritic cells. 
Trends Immunol. 2002;23:6-8.
3.	Spetz AL, Strominger J, Groh-Spies V. T cell subsets in nor-
mal human epidermis. Am J Pathol. 1996;149:665-674.
4.	Lundquist K, Kohler S, Rouse RV. Intraepidermal cytokera-
tin 7 expression is not restricted to Paget cells but is also seen 
in Toker cells and Merkel cells. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999;23: 
212-219.
5.	Sato K, Leidal R, Sato F. Morphology and development of 
an apoeccrine sweat gland in human axillae. Am J Physiol. 
1987;252:R166-5180.
6.	Eyden B. The myofibroblast: an assessment of controversial 
issues and a definition useful in diagnosis and research. Ultra-
struct Pathol. 2001;25:39-50.
7.	Braverman IM. The cutaneous microcirculation. J Investig 
Dermatol Symp Proc. 2000;5:3-9.
8.	Alikhan A, Lynch PJ, Eisen DB. Hidradenitis suppurativa: a 
comprehensive review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:539-61; 
quiz 62-63.
9.	Gold M, Bridges TM, Bradshaw VL, Boring M. ALA-PDT 
and blue light therapy for hidradenitis suppurativa. J Drugs 
Dermatol. 2004;3:S32-S35.
10.	Iwasaki J, Marra DE, Fincher EF, Moy RL. Treatment of 
hidradenitis suppurativa with a nonablative radiofrequency 
device. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34:114-117.
11.	Rivard J, Ozog D. Henry Ford Hospital dermatology expe-
rience with Levulan Kerastick and blue light photodynamic 
therapy. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5:556-561.
12.	Strauss RM, Pollock B, Stables GI, Goulden V, Cunliffe WJ. 
Photodynamic therapy using aminolaevulinic acid does not 
lead to clinical improvement in hidradenitis suppurativa. Br J 
Dermatol. 2005;152:803-804.
13.	Morgan WP, Harding KG, Hughes LE. A comparison of 
skin grafting and healing by granulation, following axillary 
excision for hidradenitis suppurativa. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 
1983;65:235-236.
14.	Hommes DW, Oldenburg B, van Bodegraven AA, et al. 
Guidelines for treatment with infliximab for Crohn’s disease. 
Netherlands J Med. 2006;64:219-229.
494
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
15.	Roy DB, Conte ET, Cohen DJ. The treatment of pyoderma 
gangrenosum using etanercept. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2006;54:S128-S134.
16.	Khurrum Baig M, Marquez H, Nogueras JJ, Weiss EG, Wexner 
SD. Topical tacrolimus (FK506) in the treatment of recalcitrant 
parastomal pyoderma gangrenosum associated with Crohn’s 
disease: report of two cases. Colorectal Dis. 2004;6:250-253.
17.	Downey A, Jackson C, Harun N, Cooper A. Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis: review of pathogenesis and management. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2012;66:995-1003.
18.	Gerull R, Nelle M, Schaible T. Toxic epidermal necrolysis 
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome: a review. Crit Care Med. 
2011;39:1521-1532.
19.	Chung WH, Hung SI, Hong HS, et al. Medical genetics: a 
marker for Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Nature. 2004;428:486.
20.	French LE, Trent JT, Kerdel FA. Use of intravenous immu-
noglobulin in toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome: our current understanding. Int Immunopharmacol. 
2006;6:543-549.
21.	Trent J, Halem M, French LE, Kerdel F. Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis and intravenous immunoglobulin: a review. Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2006;25:91-93.
22.	Battie C, Verschoore M. Cutaneous solar ultraviolet exposure 
and clinical aspects of photodamage. Indian J Dermatol Vene-
reol Leprol. 2012;78(Suppl 1):S9-S14.
23.	Eliya MC, Banda GW. Primary closure versus delayed clo-
sure for nonbite traumatic wounds within 24 hours post injury. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;9:CD008574.
24.	Presutti RJ. Bite wounds. Early treatment and prophylaxis 
against infectious complications. Postgrad Med. 1997;101: 
243-244, 246-252, 254.
25.	Abrahamian FM, Goldstein EJ. Microbiology of animal bite 
wound infections. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011;24:231-246.
26.	Robson M, Krizek T, Heggers J. Biology of surgical infection. 
Curr Probl Surg. 1973:1-62.
27.	Hardwicke J, Hunter T, Staruch R, Moiemen N. Chemical 
burns—an historical comparison and review of the literature. 
Burns. 2012;38:383-387.
28.	Kumar RJ, Pegg SP, Kimble RM. Management of extravasa-
tion injuries. ANZ J Surg. 2001;71:285-289.
29.	Frye KE, Luterman A. Thermal Burns. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Mosby, Elsevier; 2010.
30.	Britt LD, Dascombe WH, Rodriguez A. New horizons in man-
agement of hypothermia and frostbite injury. Surg Clin North 
Am. 1991;71:345-370.
31.	Lindan O, Greenway RM, Piazza JM. Pressure distribution 
on the surface of the human body. I. Evaluation in lying and 
sitting positions using a “bed of springs and nails.” Arch Phys 
Medicine Rehabil. 1965;46:378-385.
32.	Lyder CH. Pressure ulcer prevention and management. JAMA. 
2003;289:223-226.
33.	Cannon BC, Cannon JP. Management of pressure ulcers. Am 
J Health Syst Pharm. 2004;61:1895-1905; quiz 1906-1907.
34.	Argenta LC, Morykwas MJ. Vacuum-assisted closure: a new 
method for wound control and treatment: clinical experience. 
Ann Plast Surg. 1997;38:563-576; discussion 577.
35.	Limova M. Active wound coverings: bioengineered skin and 
dermal substitutes. Surg Clin North Am. 2010;90:1237-1255.
36.	Rajan S. Skin and soft-tissue infections: classifying and treat-
ing a spectrum. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012;79:57-66.
37.	Moet GJ, Jones RN, Biedenbach DJ, Stilwell MG, Fritsche 
TR. Contemporary causes of skin and soft tissue infections in 
North America, Latin America, and Europe: report from the 
SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (1998-2004). 
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2007;57:7-13.
38.	Cardoso JC, Calonje E. Cutaneous manifestations of human 
papillomaviruses: a review. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Panon-
ica Adriat. 2011;20:145-154.
39.	Rogers HD, Macgregor JL, Nord KM, et al. Acquired epider-
modysplasia verruciformis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60: 
315-320.
40.	Jacobelli S, Laude H, Carlotti A, et al. Epidermodysplasia 
verruciformis in human immunodeficiency virus-infected 
patients: a marker of human papillomavirus-related disor-
ders not affected by antiretroviral therapy. Arch Dermatol. 
2011;147:590-596.
41.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Melanoma, National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines 
in Oncology, Melanoma, Version 2.2013. Fort Washington, PA: 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2012.
42.	Davis PA, Wastell C. A comparison of biomechanical proper-
ties of excised mature scars from HIV patients and non-HIV 
controls. Am J Surg. 2000;180:217-222.
43.	Krengel S, Hauschild A, Schafer T. Melanoma risk in con-
genital melanocytic naevi: a systematic review. Br J Derma-
tol. 2006;155:1-8.
44.	Schaffer JV. Pigmented lesions in children: when to worry. 
Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007;19:430-440.
45.	Satyaprakash AK, Sheehan DJ, Sangueza OP. Proliferating 
trichilemmal tumors: a review of the literature. Dermatol 
Surg. 2007;33:1102-1108.
46.	Fu W, Cockerell CJ. The actinic (solar) keratosis: a 21st-century 
perspective. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139:66-70.
47.	Robins P, Gupta AK. The use of topical fluorouracil to treat 
actinic keratosis. Cutis. 2002;70:4-7.
48.	Epstein JH. Photocarcinogenesis, skin cancer, and aging. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1983;9:487-502.
49.	Luce EA. Oncologic considerations in nonmelanotic skin can-
cer. Clin Plast Surg. 1995;22:39-50.
50.	Marks R, Kopf AW. Cancer of the skin in the next century. Int 
J Dermatol. 1995;34:445-447.
51.	Mentzel T. Cutaneous lipomatous neoplasms. Semin Diagn 
Pathol. 2001;18:250-257.
52.	Sober AJ, Burstein JM. Precursors to skin cancer. Cancer. 
1995;75:645-650.
53.	Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer statistics, 2010. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2010;60:277-300.
54.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Basal Cell and 
Squamous Cell Skin Cancers, National Comprehensive Can-
cer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Ver-
sion 2.2012. Fort Washington, PA: National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network; 2012.
55.	Reszko A, Wilson LD, Leffell DJ. Devita, Hellman, Rosen-
berg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011.
56.	Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Mohs surgery is the treat-
ment of choice for recurrent (previously treated) basal cell 
carcinoma. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:424-431.
57.	 Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Long-term recurrence rates in 
previously untreated (primary) basal cell carcinoma: implications 
for patient follow-up. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:315-328.
58.	Kopf AW, Bart RS, Schrager D, Lazar M, Popkin GL. Curettage- 
electrodesiccation treatment of basal cell carcinomas. Arch 
Dermatol. 1977;113:439-443.
59.	Geisse J, Caro I, Lindholm J, Golitz L, Stampone P, Owens M. 
Imiquimod 5% cream for the treatment of superficial basal cell 
carcinoma: results from two phase III, randomized, vehicle-
controlled studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;50:722-733.
60.	Marks R, Gebauer K, Shumack S, et al. Imiquimod 5% cream 
in the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: results of a 
multicenter 6-week dose-response trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2001;44:807-813.
61.	Schulze HJ, Cribier B, Requena L, et al. Imiquimod 5% cream 
for the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: results 
from a randomized vehicle-controlled phase III study in 
Europe. Br J Dermatol. 2005;152:939-947.
495
THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
CHAPTER 16
62.	Shumack S, Robinson J, Kossard S, et al. Efficacy of topical 
5% imiquimod cream for the treatment of nodular basal cell 
carcinoma: comparison of dosing regimens. Arch Dermatol. 
2002;138:1165-1171.
63.	Vidal D, Matias-Guiu X, Alomar A. Open study of the effi-
cacy and mechanism of action of topical imiquimod in basal 
cell carcinoma. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2004;29:518-525.
64.	Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL Jr. Prognostic factors for local 
recurrence, metastasis, and survival rates in squamous cell 
carcinoma of the skin, ear, and lip. Implications for treatment 
modality selection. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1992;26:976-990.
65.	Kao GF. Carcinoma arising in Bowen’s disease. Arch Derma-
tol. 1986;122:1124-1126.
66.	Honeycutt WM, Jansen GT. Treatment of squamous cell car-
cinoma of the skin. Arch Dermatol. 1973;108:670-672.
67.	Cassarino DS, Derienzo DP, Barr RJ. Cutaneous squamous 
cell carcinoma: a comprehensive clinicopathologic classifica-
tion. Part one. J Cutan Pathol. 2006;33:191-206.
68.	Ramirez-Amador V, Anaya-Saavedra G, Martinez-Mata G. 
Kaposi’s sarcoma of the head and neck: a review. Oral Oncol. 
2010;46:135-145.
69.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:11-30.
70.	 Cust AE, Armstrong BK, Goumas C, et al. Sunbed use during 
adolescence and early adulthood is associated with increased risk 
of early-onset melanoma. Int J Cancer. 2011;128:2425-2435.
71.	Chudnovsky Y, Khavari PA, Adams AE. Melanoma genetics 
and the development of rational therapeutics. J Clin Invest. 
2005;115:813-824.
72.	Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong SJ, et al. Final version 
of 2009 AJCC melanoma staging and classification. J Clin 
Oncol. 2009;27:6199-6206.
73.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Gershenwald JE, et al. Prognostic fac-
tors analysis of 17,600 melanoma patients: validation of the 
American Joint Committee on Cancer melanoma staging sys-
tem. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3622-3634.
74.	Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong SJ, et al. Multivariate 
analysis of prognostic factors among 2313 patients with stage 
III melanoma: comparison of nodal micrometastases versus 
macrometastases. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:2452-2459.
75.	Weide B, Elsasser M, Buttner P, et al. Serum markers lac-
tate dehydrogenase and S100B predict independently disease 
outcome in melanoma patients with distant metastasis. Br J 
Cancer. 2012;107:422-428.
76.	Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Adamus J, et al. Thin stage I 
primary cutaneous malignant melanoma. Comparison 
of excision with margins of 1 or 3 cm. N Engl J Med. 
1988;318:1159-1162.
77.	Cohn-Cedermark G, Rutqvist LE, Andersson R, et al. Long 
term results of a randomized study by the Swedish Melanoma 
Study Group on 2-cm versus 5-cm resection margins for 
patients with cutaneous melanoma with a tumor thickness of 
0.8–2.0 mm. Cancer. 2000;89:1495-1501.
78.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Smith T, et al. Long-term results of a 
prospective surgical trial comparing 2 cm vs. 4 cm excision 
margins for 740 patients with 1-4 mm melanomas. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2001;8:101-108.
79.	 Balch CM, Urist MM, Karakousis CP, et al. Efficacy of 2-cm 
surgical margins for intermediate-thickness melanomas 
(1–4 mm). Results of a multi-institutional randomized 
surgical trial. Ann Surg. 1993;218:262-267; discussion 267-269.
80.	Wright BE, Scheri RP, Ye X, et al. Importance of sentinel 
lymph node biopsy in patients with thin melanoma. Arch Surg. 
2008;143:892-899; discussion 899-900.
81.	 Ferrone CR, Panageas KS, Busam K, Brady MS, Coit DG. 
Multivariate prognostic model for patients with thick cutaneous 
­melanoma: importance of sentinel lymph node status. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2002;9:637-645.
82.	Gershenwald JE, Mansfield PF, Lee JE, Ross MI. Role for 
lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy in patients 
with thick (> or = 4 mm) primary melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2000;7:160-165.
83.	Gutzmer R, Satzger I, Thoms KM, et al. Sentinel lymph node 
status is the most important prognostic factor for thick (> or = 
4 mm) melanomas. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2008;6:198-203.
84.	Morton DL, Cochran AJ, Thompson JF, et al. Sentinel 
node biopsy for early-stage melanoma: accuracy and mor-
bidity in MSLT-I, an international multicenter trial. Ann 
Surg. 2005;242:302-311; discussion 311-313.
85.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Murad TM, Ingalls AL, Maddox WA. 
A multifactorial analysis of melanoma: III. Prognostic factors 
in melanoma patients with lymph node metastases (stage II). 
Ann Surg. 1981;193:377-388.
86.	Callery C, Cochran AJ, Roe DJ, et al. Factors prognostic for 
survival in patients with malignant melanoma spread to the 
regional lymph nodes. Ann Surg. 1982;196:69-75.
87.	Roses DF, Provet JA, Harris MN, Gumport SL, Dubin N. 
Prognosis of patients with pathologic stage II cutaneous 
malignant melanoma. Ann Surg. 1985;201:103-107.
88.	Balch CM, Soong S, Ross MI, et al. Long-term results of 
a multi-institutional randomized trial comparing prognos-
tic factors and surgical results for intermediate thickness 
melanomas (1.0–4.0 mm). Intergroup Melanoma Surgical 
Trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2000;7:87-97.
89.	Beasley GM, Caudle A, Petersen RP, et al. A multi-institutional 
experience of isolated limb infusion: defining response and 
toxicity in the US. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208:706-715; discus-
sion 715-717.
90.	Boesch CE, Meyer T, Waschke L, et al. Long-term outcome 
of hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion (HILP) in the treat-
ment of locoregionally metastasised malignant melanoma of 
the extremities. Int J Hyperthermia. 2010;26:16-20.
91.	Lens MB, Dawes M. Isolated limb perfusion with melphalan 
in the treatment of malignant melanoma of the extremities: 
a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Lancet 
Oncol. 2003;4:359-364.
92.	Lindner P, Doubrovsky A, Kam PC, Thompson JF. Prognostic 
factors after isolated limb infusion with cytotoxic agents for 
melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2002;9:127-136.
93.	Kirkwood JM, Ibrahim JG, Sondak VK, et al. High- and low-
dose interferon alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma: first analy-
sis of intergroup trial E1690/S9111/C9190. J Clin Oncol. 
2000;18:2444-2458.
94.	Kirkwood JM, Manola J, Ibrahim J, et al. A pooled analysis 
of Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and intergroup trials 
of adjuvant high-dose interferon for melanoma. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2004;10:1670-1677.
95.	Kirkwood JM, Strawderman MH, Ernstoff MS, Smith TJ, 
Borden EC, Blum RH. Interferon alfa-2b adjuvant therapy of 
high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: the Eastern Coopera-
tive Oncology Group Trial EST 1684. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14: 
7-17.
96.	Eggermont AM, Suciu S, Santinami M, et al. Adjuvant ther-
apy with pegylated interferon alfa-2b versus observation alone 
in resected stage III melanoma: final results of EORTC 18991, 
a randomised phase III trial. Lancet. 2008;372:117-126.
97.	Atkins MB, Lotze MT, Dutcher JP, et al. High-dose recombi-
nant interleukin 2 therapy for patients with metastatic mela-
noma: analysis of 270 patients treated between 1985 and 1993. 
J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:2105-2116.
98.	Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved 
­survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E 
mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2507-2516.
99.	Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved ­survival 
with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma.­ 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:711-723.
496
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
100.	Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Topalian SL, et al. Treatment of 
283 consecutive patients with metastatic melanoma or renal 
cell cancer using high-dose bolus interleukin 2. JAMA. 
1994;271:907-913.
101.	Smith FO, Downey SG, Klapper JA, et al. Treatment of meta-
static melanoma using interleukin-2 alone or in conjunction 
with vaccines. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:5610-5618.
102.	Albert DM, Ryan LM, Borden EC. Metastatic ocular and cuta-
neous melanoma: a comparison of patient characteristics and 
prognosis. Arch Ophthalmol. 1996;114:107-108.
103.	Inskip PD, Devesa SS, Fraumeni JF Jr. Trends in the incidence 
of ocular melanoma in the United States, 1974-1998. Cancer 
Causes Control. 2003;14:251-257.
104.	Starr OD, Patel DV, Allen JP, McGhee CN. Iris melanoma: 
pathology, prognosis, and surgical intervention. Clin Exp 
Ophthalmol. 2004;32:294-296.
105.	Akhtar S, Oza KK, Wright J. Merkel cell carcinoma: report 
of 10 cases and review of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2000;43:755-767.
106.	Medina-Franco H, Urist MM, Fiveash J, Heslin MJ, Bland 
KI, Beenken SW. Multimodality treatment of Merkel cell car-
cinoma: case series and literature review of 1024 cases. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2001;8:204-208.
107.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Merkel Cell Car-
cinoma, National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clini-
cal Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Version 1.2012. Fort 
Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 
2012.
108.	Bichakjian CK, Lowe L, Lao CD, et al. Merkel cell carci-
noma: critical review with guidelines for multidisciplinary 
management. Cancer. 2007;110:1-12.
109.	Ott MJ, Tanabe KK, Gadd MA, et al. Multimodality manage-
ment of Merkel cell carcinoma. Arch Surg. 1999;134:388-392; 
discussion 92-93.
110.	Bower M, Weir J, Francis N, et al. The effect of HAART 
in 254 consecutive patients with AIDS-related Kaposi’s 
­sarcoma. AIDS. 2009;23:1701-1706.
111.	Martinez V, Caumes E, Gambotti L, et al. Remission from 
Kaposi’s sarcoma on HAART is associated with suppression 
of HIV replication and is independent of protease inhibitor 
therapy. Br J Cancer. 2006;94:1000-1006.
112.	Fields RC, Hameed M, Qin LX, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma 
protuberans (DFSP): predictors of recurrence and the use of 
systemic therapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:328-336.
113.	Meguerditchian AN, Wang J, Lema B, Kraybill WG, Zeitouni 
NC, Kane JM III. Wide excision or Mohs micrographic sur-
gery for the treatment of primary dermatofibrosarcoma protu-
berans. Am J Clin Oncol. 2010;33:300-303.
114.	Requena L, Sangueza OP. Cutaneous vascular proliferations. 
Part III. Malignant neoplasms, other cutaneous neoplasms 
with significant vascular component, and disorders errone-
ously considered as vascular neoplasms. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1998;38:143-175; quiz 176-178.
115.	Wagner G, Sachse MM. Extramammary Paget disease: clini-
cal appearance, pathogenesis, management. J Dtsch Dermatol 
Ges. 2011;9:448-454.
The Breast
Kelly K. Hunt, John F.R. Robertson, and 
Kirby I. Bland
17
A BRIEF HISTORY OF BREAST CANCER THERAPY
Breast cancer has captured the attention of surgeons through-
out the ages. The Smith Surgical Papyrus (3000–2500 b.c.) is 
the earliest known document to refer to breast cancer. The can-
cer was in a man, but the description encompassed most of the 
common clinical features. In reference to this cancer, the author 
concluded, “There is no treatment.”1 There were few other his-
torical references to breast cancer until the first century. In 
De Medicina, Celsus commented on the value of operations for 
early breast cancer: “None of these may be removed but the 
cacoethes (early cancer), the rest are irritated by every method 
of cure. The more violent the operations are, the more angry 
they grow.”2 In the second century, Galen inscribed his classical 
clinical observation: “We have often seen in the breast a tumor 
A Brief History of Breast Cancer 
Therapy	
497
Embryology and Functional  
Anatomy of the Breast	
499
Embryology / 499
Functional Anatomy / 500
Physiology of the Breast	
503
Breast Development and Function / 503
Pregnancy, Lactation,  
and Senescence / 504
Gynecomastia / 505
Infectious and Inflammatory  
Disorders of the Breast	
506
Bacterial Infection / 506
Mycotic Infections / 506
Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 506
Mondor’s Disease / 507
Common Benign Disorders and  
Diseases of the Breast	
507
Aberrations of Normal Development  
and Involution / 507
Pathology of Nonproliferative  
Disorders / 508
Pathology of Proliferative Disorders  
Without Atypia / 509
Pathology of Atypical Proliferative  
Diseases / 510
Treatment of Selected Benign Breast  
Disorders and Diseases / 510
Risk Factors for Breast Cancer	
511
Hormonal and Nonhormonal  
Risk Factors / 511
Risk Assessment Models / 511
Risk Management / 512
BRCA Mutations / 514
Epidemiology and Natural  
History of Breast Cancer	
517
Epidemiology / 517
Natural History / 518
Histopathology of  
Breast Cancer	
519
Carcinoma In Situ / 519
Invasive Breast Carcinoma / 520
Diagnosis of Breast Cancer	
522
Examination / 523
Imaging Techniques / 523
Breast Biopsy / 529
Breast Cancer Staging  
and Biomarkers	
531
Breast Cancer Staging / 531
Biomarkers / 531
Overview of Breast Cancer  
Therapy	
536
In Situ Breast Cancer (Stage 0) / 537
Early Invasive Breast Cancer  
(Stage I, IIA, or IIB) / 538
Advanced Local-Regional Breast Cancer  
(Stage IIIA or IIIB) / 541
Internal Mammary Lymph Nodes / 543
Distant Metastases (Stage IV) / 543
Local-Regional Recurrence / 543
Breast Cancer Prognosis / 544
Surgical Techniques In  
Breast Cancer Therapy	
544
Excisional Biopsy with Needle  
Localization / 544
Sentinel Lymph Node Dissection / 545
Breast Conservation / 547
Mastectomy and Axillary Dissection / 547
Modified Radical Mastectomy / 548
Reconstruction of the Breast  
and Chest Wall / 549
Nonsurgical Breast Cancer  
Therapies	
550
Radiation Therapy / 550
Chemotherapy Adjuvant / 550
Antiestrogen Therapy / 552
Ablative Endocrine Therapy / 553
Anti–HER-2/neu Therapy / 553
Special Clinical Situations	
554
Axillary Lymph Node Metastases  
in the Setting of an Unknown  
Primary Cancer / 554
Breast Cancer During Pregnancy / 554
Male Breast Cancer / 554
Phyllodes Tumors / 555
Inflammatory Breast Carcinoma / 555
Rare Breast Cancers / 556
exactly resembling the animal the crab. Just as the crab has legs 
on both sides of his body, so in this disease the veins extending 
out from the unnatural growth take the shape of a crab’s legs. 
We have often cured this disease in its early stages, but after it 
has reached a large size, no one has cured it. In all operations 
we attempt to excise the tumor in a circle where it borders on 
the healthy tissue.”3
The galenic system of medicine ascribed cancers to an 
excess of black bile and concluded that excision of a local 
bodily outbreak could not cure the systemic imbalance. Theories 
espoused by Galen dominated medicine until the Renaissance. 
In 1652 Tulp introduced the idea that cancer was contagious 
when he reported an elderly woman and her housemaid who both 
developed breast cancer (N. Tulp, Observationes medicae 1652). 
chapter 
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
This single incidence was accepted as conclusive evidence and 
started an idea which persisted into the 20th century among 
some lay people. The majority of respected surgeons considered 
operative intervention to be a futile and ill-advised endeavor. 
The Renaissance and the wars of the 16th and 17th centuries 
brought developments in surgery, particularly in anatomical 
understanding. However there were no new theories espoused in 
relation to cancer. Beginning with Morgagni, surgical resections 
were more frequently undertaken, including some early attempts 
at mastectomy and axillary dissection. The 17th century saw the 
start of the Age of Enlightenment which lasted until the 19th 
century. In terms of medicine, this resulted in the abandonment 
of Galen’s humoral pathology which was repudiated by Le Dran 
and the subsequent rise in cellular pathology as espoused by 
Virchow. Le Dran stated that breast cancer was a local disease 
that spread by way of lymph vessels to axillary lymph nodes. 
When operating on a woman with breast cancer, he routinely 
removed any enlarged axillary lymph nodes.4
In the 19th century, Moore, of the Middlesex Hospital, 
London, emphasized complete resection of the breast for cancer 
and stated that palpable axillary lymph nodes also should be 
removed.5 In a presentation before the British Medical Asso-
ciation in 1877, Banks supported Moore’s concepts and advo-
cated the resection of axillary lymph nodes even when palpable 
lymphadenopathy was not evident, recognizing that occult 
involvement of axillary lymph nodes was frequently present. In 
1894, Halsted and Meyer reported their operations for treatment 
of breast cancer.6 By demonstrating superior local-regional 
control rates after radical resection, these surgeons established 
radical mastectomy as state-of-the-art treatment for that era. 
498
Key Points
1
	 The breast receives its principal blood supply from perfo-
rating branches of the internal mammary artery, lateral 
branches of the posterior intercostal arteries, and branches 
from the axillary artery, including the highest thoracic, lat-
eral thoracic, and pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial 
artery.
2
	 The axillary lymph nodes usually receive >75% of the lymph 
drainage from the breast, and the rest flows through the 
lymph vessels that accompany the perforating branches of 
the internal mammary artery and enters the parasternal 
(internal mammary) group of lymph nodes.
3
	 Breast development and function are initiated by a variety of 
hormonal stimuli, with the major trophic effects being mod-
ulated by estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin.
4
	 Benign breast disorders and diseases are related to the 
normal processes of reproductive life and to involution, and 
there is a spectrum of breast conditions that ranges from nor-
mal to disorder to disease (aberrations of normal develop-
ment and involution classification).
5
	 To calculate breast cancer risk using the Gail model, a 
woman’s risk factors are translated into an overall risk score 
by multiplying her relative risks from several categories. 
This risk score is then compared with an adjusted population 
risk of breast cancer to determine the woman’s individual 
risk. This model is not appropriate for use in women with a 
known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation or women with lobu-
lar or ductal carcinoma in situ.
6
	 Routine use of screening mammography in women 
≥50 years of age reduces mortality from breast cancer by 
25%. MRI screening is recommended in women with 
BRCA mutations and may be considered in women with 
a greater than 20% to 25% lifetime risk of developing 
breast cancer.
7
	 Core-needle biopsy is the preferred method for diagnosis 
of palpable or nonpalpable breast abnormalities.
8
	 When a diagnosis of breast cancer is made, the surgeon 
should determine the clinical stage, histologic character-
istics, and appropriate biomarker levels before initiating 
local therapy.
9
	 Sentinel node dissection is the preferred method for stag-
ing of the regional lymph nodes in women with clinically 
node-negative invasive breast cancer. Axillary dissection 
may be avoided in women with 1 to 2 positive sentinel 
nodes who are treated with breast conserving surgery, 
whole breast radiation and systemic therapy.
10 	 Local-regional and systemic therapy decisions for an 
individual patient with breast cancer are best made using 
a multidisciplinary treatment approach. The sequencing 
of therapies is dependent on patient and tumor related 
factors including breast cancer subtype.
Halsted and Meyer advocated complete dissection of axillary 
lymph node levels I to III. Both routinely resected the long 
thoracic nerve and the thoracodorsal neurovascular bundle with 
the axillary contents. In 1943, Haagensen and Stout described the 
grave signs of breast cancer, which included: (a) edema of the 
skin of the breast, (b) skin ulceration, (c) chest wall fixation, 
(d) an axillary lymph node >2.5 cm in diameter, and (e) fixed 
axillary lymph nodes. Women with two or more signs had a 42% 
local recurrence rate and only a 2% five-year disease-free sur-
vival rate.7 Based on these findings, they declared that women 
with grave signs were beyond cure by radical surgery. In 1948, 
Patey and Dyson of the Middlesex Hospital, London, advocated 
a modified radical mastectomy for the management of advanced 
operable breast cancer, explaining, “Until an effective general 
agent for treatment of carcinoma of the breast is developed, a 
high proportion of these cases are doomed to die.”8 Their tech-
nique included removal of the breast and axillary lymph nodes 
with preservation of the pectoralis major muscle. They showed 
that removal of the pectoralis minor muscle allowed access to 
and clearance of axillary lymph node levels I to III.
During the 1970s, there was a transition from the Halsted 
radical mastectomy to the modified radical mastectomy as the 
surgical procedure most frequently used by American surgeons 
to treat breast cancer. This transition acknowledged that: (a) fewer 
patients were presenting with advanced local disease with or 
without the grave signs described by Haagensen, (b) extirpa-
tion of the pectoralis major muscle was not essential for local-
regional control in stage I and II breast cancer, and (c) neither 
the modified radical mastectomy nor the Halsted radical mas-
tectomy consistently achieved local-regional control of stage III 
499
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
breast cancer. Radiation therapy was incorporated into the man-
agement of advanced breast cancer and demonstrated improve-
ments in local-regional control. The National Surgical Adjuvant 
Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) conducted a randomized 
trial in the early 1970s to determine the impact of local and 
regional treatments on survival in operable breast cancer. In the 
B-04 trial, 1665 women were enrolled and stratified by clinical 
assessment of the axillary lymph nodes. The clinically node-
negative women were randomized into three treatment groups: 
(a) Halsted radical mastectomy; (b) total mastectomy plus 
radiation therapy; and (c) total mastectomy alone. Clinically 
node-positive women were randomized to Halsted radical mas-
tectomy or total mastectomy plus radiation therapy. This trial 
accrued patients between 1971 and 1974, an era that predated 
widespread availability of effective systemic therapy for breast 
cancer and therefore reflect survival associated with local-
regional therapy alone. There were no differences in survival 
between the three groups of node-negative women or between 
the two groups of node-positive women. These overall survival 
equivalence patterns have persisted at 25 years of follow-up.9
The next major advance in the surgical management of 
breast cancer was the development of breast conserving sur-
gery. Breast conserving surgery and radium treatment was 
first reported by Geoffrey Keynes of St Bartholomew’s Hos-
pital, London in the British Medical Journal in 1937.10 Several 
decades later, the NSABP launched the B-06 trial, a phase III study 
that randomized 1851 patients to total mastectomy, lumpec-
tomy alone, or lumpectomy with breast irradiation. The results 
showed no difference in disease-free, distant disease-free, and 
overall survival among the three groups; however, the omis-
sion of radiation therapy resulted in significantly higher rates 
of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence in those who received 
lumpectomy alone.11 The B-06 trial excluded patients who had 
palpable axillary lymph nodes and those patients randomized to 
breast conserving surgery had frozen sections performed and if 
on frozen section the margins were involved the surgeon pro-
ceeded to perform a mastectomy but the patient was included in 
the analysis as though they had a breast conserving operation. 
Furthermore, in B-06 local in-breast recurrences were regarded 
as “non-events” in terms of disease-free survival. Both NSABP 
B-04 and B-06 trials were taken to refute the Halstedian con-
cept that cancer spread throughout a region of the breast to lym-
phatics and then on to distant sites. Bernard Fisher proposed 
the “alternative hypothesis” that breast cancer was a systemic 
disease at diagnosis and that tumor cells had access to both the 
blood and lymphatic systems and that regional lymph nodes 
were a marker of systemic disease and not a barrier to the dis-
semination of cancer cells. He proposed that host factors were 
important in the development of metastasis and that variations 
in the local-regional approach to breast cancer were not likely 
to substantially impact survival. This idea was dominant for a 
number of years but has been challenged by the Early Breast 
Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group overview analysis which 
reported that “the avoidance of recurrence in a conserved 
breast …. avoids about one breast cancer death over the next 
15 years for every four such recurrences avoided.”12 Indicating 
that not all breast cancer is a systemic disease at presentation.
During the 1970s, clinical trials were initiated to deter-
mine the value of systemic therapy in the postoperative setting 
as an adjuvant to surgery. The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ 
Collaborative Group (EBCTCG) was established in 1985 to 
coordinate the meta-analysis of data from randomized clinical 
trials in order to examine the impact of adjuvant treatments for 
breast cancer on recurrence and mortality. The EBCTCG over-
view has demonstrated that anthracycline containing regimens 
are superior to CMF, and more recently, that the addition of a 
taxane to an anthracycline-based regimen reduces breast cancer 
mortality by one third.11 The overview has also demonstrated 
that tamoxifen is of benefit only in patients with estrogen recep-
tor (ER) positive breast cancer and that tamoxifen may decrease 
mortality from breast cancer by as much as 50%.13 Importantly, 
the EBCTCG data have shown that proportional reduction in 
risk was not significantly affected by standard clinical and 
pathologic factors such as tumor size, ER status, and nodal sta-
tus.14 This underscores the importance of stratification of risk in 
determining adjuvant therapy decisions in order to minimize the 
toxicities of therapies in those unlikely to benefit, yet realize the 
substantial benefits gained in local-regional control and survival 
in those at higher risk.
Many early randomized clinical trials considered all 
patients similarly in terms of treatment viewing breast cancer as 
more of a homogeneous disease. Breast cancer has traditionally 
been defined by pathologic determinants using conventional 
light microscopy and basic histologic techniques. In the 1980s 
immunohistochemistry allowed assessment of the expression 
of individual tumor markers (most commonly proteins) while 
DNA was initially assessed in terms of its ploidy status. Sub-
sequently, breast cancer specimens have been interrogated at 
the level of the DNA by labeling genes of interest and allow-
ing fluorescent dyes to quantify the abundance of a particular 
gene and comparing a large number of genes simultaneously in 
a single breast cancer specimen. Gene expression arrays have 
shown that breast cancers cluster according to their intrinsic 
gene expression patterns into at least five intrinsic subtypes and 
these intrinsic subtypes correlate with breast cancer outcomes.15 
Breast cancers are now classified by molecular subtypes and 
these are being used for risk stratification and decision making 
in terms of local-regional and systemic therapies.
Currently, 50% of American women will consult a sur-
geon regarding breast disease, 25% will undergo breast biopsy 
for diagnosis of an abnormality, and 12% will develop some 
variant of breast cancer. Considerable progress has been made 
in the integration of surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic 
therapy to control local-regional disease, enhance survival, and 
improve the quality of life of breast cancer survivors. Surgeons 
are traditionally the first physician consulted for breast care and 
it is critical for them to be well trained in all aspects of the 
breast from embryologic development, to growth and develop-
ment, and to benign and malignant disease processes. This will 
allow the greatest opportunity to achieve optimal outcomes for 
patients and their families.
EMBRYOLOGY AND FUNCTIONAL  
ANATOMY OF THE BREAST
Embryology
At the fifth or sixth week of fetal development, two ventral 
bands of thickened ectoderm (mammary ridges, milk lines) 
are evident in the embryo.16 In most mammals, paired breasts 
develop along these ridges, which extend from the base of the 
forelimb (future axilla) to the region of the hind limb (inguinal 
area). These ridges are not prominent in the human embryo and 
disappear after a short time, except for small portions that may 
500
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
persist in the pectoral region. Accessory breasts (polymastia) 
or accessory nipples (polythelia) may occur along the milk line 
(Fig. 17-1) when normal regression fails. Each breast develops 
when an ingrowth of ectoderm forms a primary tissue bud in 
the mesenchyme. The primary bud, in turn, initiates the devel-
opment of 15 to 20 secondary buds. Epithelial cords develop 
from the secondary buds and extend into the surrounding mes-
enchyme. Major (lactiferous) ducts develop, which open into a 
shallow mammary pit. During infancy, a proliferation of mes-
enchyme transforms the mammary pit into a nipple. If there is 
failure of a pit to elevate above skin level, an inverted nipple 
results. This congenital malformation occurs in 4% of infants. 
At birth, the breasts are identical in males and females, demon-
strating only the presence of major ducts. Enlargement of the 
breast may be evident and a secretion, historically referred to as 
witch’s milk, may be produced. These transitory events occur in 
response to maternal hormones that cross the placenta.
The breast remains undeveloped in the female until 
puberty, when it enlarges in response to ovarian estrogen and 
progesterone, which initiate proliferation of the epithelial and 
connective tissue elements. However, the breasts remain incom-
pletely developed until pregnancy occurs. Absence of the breast 
(amastia) is rare and results from an arrest in mammary ridge 
development that occurs during the sixth fetal week. Poland’s 
syndrome consists of hypoplasia or complete absence of the 
breast, costal cartilage and rib defects, hypoplasia of the subcu-
taneous tissues of the chest wall, and brachysyndactyly. Breast 
hypoplasia also may be iatrogenically induced before puberty 
by trauma, infection, or radiation therapy. Symmastia is a rare 
anomaly recognized as webbing between the breasts across the 
midline. Accessory nipples (polythelia) occur in <1% of infants 
and may be associated with abnormalities of the urinary tract 
(renal agenesis and cancer), abnormalities of the cardiovascular 
system (conduction disturbances, hypertension, congenital heart 
anomalies), and other conditions (pyloric stenosis, epilepsy, ear 
Figure 17-1.  The mammary milk line (Visual Art: © 2012.The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)
abnormalities, arthrogryposis). Supernumerary breasts may 
occur in any configuration along the mammary milk line but 
most frequently occur between the normal nipple location and 
the symphysis pubis. Turner’s syndrome (ovarian agenesis and 
dysgenesis) and Fleischer’s syndrome (displacement of the nip-
ples and bilateral renal hypoplasia) may have polymastia as a 
component. Accessory axillary breast tissue is uncommon and 
usually is bilateral.
Functional Anatomy
The breast is composed of 15 to 20 lobes (Fig. 17-2), which 
are each composed of several lobules.17 Fibrous bands of con-
nective tissue travel through the breast (Cooper’s suspensory 
ligaments), insert perpendicularly into the dermis, and provide 
structural support. The mature female breast extends from the 
level of the second or third rib to the inframammary fold at 
the sixth or seventh rib. It extends transversely from the lateral 
border of the sternum to the anterior axillary line. The deep or 
posterior surface of the breast rests on the fascia of the pecto-
ralis major, serratus anterior, and external oblique abdominal 
muscles, and the upper extent of the rectus sheath. The retro-
mammary bursa may be identified on the posterior aspect of the 
breast between the investing fascia of the breast and the fascia of 
the pectoralis major muscles. The axillary tail of Spence extends 
laterally across the anterior axillary fold. The upper outer quad-
rant of the breast contains a greater volume of tissue than do the 
other quadrants. The breast has a protuberant conical form. The 
base of the cone is roughly circular, measuring 10 to 12 cm in 
diameter. Considerable variations in the size, contour, and den-
sity of the breast are evident among individuals. The nulliparous 
breast has a hemispheric configuration with distinct flattening 
above the nipple. With the hormonal stimulation that accom-
panies pregnancy and lactation, the breast becomes larger and 
increases in volume and density, whereas with senescence, it 
assumes a flattened, flaccid, and more pendulous configuration 
with decreased volume.
Figure 17-2.  Anatomy of the breast. Tangential and cross-sectional 
(sagittal) views of the breast and associated chest wall. (Reproduced 
with permission from Romrell LJ, Bland KI. Anatomy of the 
breast, axilla, chest wall, and related metastatic sites. In: Bland 
KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management 
of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
501
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
Nipple-Areola Complex.  The epidermis of the nipple-areola 
complex is pigmented and is variably corrugated. During 
puberty, the pigment becomes darker and the nipple assumes 
an elevated configuration. Throughout pregnancy, the areola 
enlarges and pigmentation is further enhanced. The areola con-
tains sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and accessory glands, 
which produce small elevations on the surface of the areola 
(Montgomery’s tubercles). Smooth muscle bundle fibers, which 
lie circumferentially in the dense connective tissue and longi-
tudinally along the major ducts, extend upward into the nipple, 
where they are responsible for the nipple erection that occurs 
with various sensory stimuli. The dermal papilla at the tip of the 
nipple contains numerous sensory nerve endings and Meissner’s 
corpuscles. This rich sensory innervation is of functional impor-
tance, because the sucking of the infant initiates a chain of neu-
rohumoral events that results in milk letdown.
Inactive and Active Breast.  Each lobe of the breast termi-
nates in a major (lactiferous) duct (2–4 mm in diameter), which 
opens through a constricted orifice (0.4–0.7 mm in diameter) 
into the ampulla of the nipple (see Fig. 17-2). Immediately 
below the nipple-areola complex, each major duct has a dilated 
portion (lactiferous sinus), which is lined with stratified squa-
mous epithelium. Major ducts are lined with two layers of 
cuboidal cells, whereas minor ducts are lined with a single layer 
of columnar or cuboidal cells. Myoepithelial cells of ectoder-
mal origin reside between the epithelial cells in the basal lamina 
and contain myofibrils. In the inactive breast, the epithelium is 
sparse and consists primarily of ductal epithelium (Fig. 17-3). 
In the early phase of the menstrual cycle, minor ducts are cord-
like with small lumina. With estrogen stimulation at the time of 
ovulation, alveolar epithelium increases in height, duct lumina 
become more prominent, and some secretions accumulate. 
When the hormonal stimulation decreases, the alveolar epithe-
lium regresses.
With pregnancy, the breast undergoes proliferative and 
developmental maturation. As the breast enlarges in response 
to hormonal stimulation, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and 
Figure 17-3.  Inactive human breast (100x). The epithelium, which 
is primarily ductal, is embedded in loose connective tissue. Dense 
connective tissue surrounds the terminal duct lobular units (TDLU). 
(Photo used with permission of Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant His-
topathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and 
Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
Figure 17-4.  Active human breast: pregnancy and lactation (160x). 
The alveolar epithelium becomes conspicuous during the early pro-
liferative period. The alveolus is surrounded by cellular connective 
tissue. (Photo used with permission of Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consul-
tant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist 
and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
eosinophils accumulate within the connective tissues. The 
minor ducts branch and alveoli develop. Development of the 
alveoli is asymmetric, and variations in the degree of develop-
ment may occur within a single lobule (Fig. 17-4). With par-
turition, enlargement of the breasts occurs via hypertrophy of 
alveolar epithelium and accumulation of secretory products in 
the lumina of the minor ducts. Alveolar epithelium contains 
abundant endoplasmic reticulum, large mitochondria, Golgi 
complexes, and dense lysosomes. Two distinct substances are 
produced by the alveolar epithelium: (a) the protein compo-
nent of milk, which is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum (merocrine secretion); and (b) the lipid component of milk 
(apocrine secretion), which forms as free lipid droplets in the 
cytoplasm. Milk released in the first few days after parturi-
tion is called colostrum and has low lipid content but contains 
considerable quantities of antibodies. The lymphocytes and 
plasma cells that accumulate within the connective tissues of 
the breast are the source of the antibody component. With sub-
sequent reduction in the number of these cells, the production 
of colostrum decreases and lipid-rich milk is released.
Blood Supply, Innervation, and Lymphatics.  The breast 
receives its principal blood supply from: (a) perforating 
branches of the internal mammary artery; (b) lateral branches 
of the posterior intercostal arteries; and (c) branches from the 
axillary artery, including the highest thoracic, lateral thoracic, 
and pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial artery (Fig. 17-5). 
The second, third, and fourth anterior intercostal perfora-
tors and branches of the internal mammary artery arborize 
in the breast as the medial mammary arteries. The lateral tho-
racic artery gives off branches to the serratus anterior, pectoralis 
major and pectoralis minor, and subscapularis muscles. It also 
gives rise to lateral mammary branches. The veins of the breast 
and chest wall follow the course of the arteries, with venous 
drainage being toward the axilla. The three principal groups of 
veins are: (a) perforating branches of the internal thoracic vein, 
(b) perforating branches of the posterior intercostal veins, and 
1
502
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(c) tributaries of the axillary vein. Batson’s vertebral venous 
plexus, which invests the vertebrae and extends from the base 
of the skull to the sacrum, may provide a route for breast can-
cer metastases to the vertebrae, skull, pelvic bones, and central 
nervous system. Lymph vessels generally parallel the course of 
blood vessels.
Lateral cutaneous branches of the third through sixth inter-
costal nerves provide sensory innervation of the breast (lateral 
mammary branches) and of the anterolateral chest wall. These 
branches exit the intercostal spaces between slips of the serratus 
anterior muscle. Cutaneous branches that arise from the cervical 
plexus, specifically the anterior branches of the supraclavicular 
nerve, supply a limited area of skin over the upper portion of 
the breast. The intercostobrachial nerve is the lateral cutane-
ous branch of the second intercostal nerve and may be visual-
ized during surgical dissection of the axilla. Resection of the 
intercostobrachial nerve causes loss of sensation over the medial 
aspect of the upper arm.
The boundaries for lymph drainage of the axilla are not 
well demarcated, and there is considerable variation in the posi-
tion of the axillary lymph nodes. The six axillary lymph node 
groups recognized by surgeons (Figs. 17-6 and 17-7) are: (a) the 
axillary vein group (lateral), which consists of four to six lymph 
nodes that lie medial or posterior to the vein and receive most 
of the lymph drainage from the upper extremity; (b) the external 
mammary group (anterior or pectoral group), which consists of 
five to six lymph nodes that lie along the lower border of the 
pectoralis minor muscle contiguous with the lateral thoracic 
vessels and receive most of the lymph drainage from the lat-
eral aspect of the breast; (c) the scapular group (posterior or 
subscapular), which consists of five to seven lymph nodes that 
lie along the posterior wall of the axilla at the lateral border of 
the scapula contiguous with the subscapular vessels and receive 
lymph drainage principally from the lower posterior neck, the 
posterior trunk, and the posterior shoulder; (d) the central group, 
which consists of three or four sets of lymph nodes that are 
Figure 17-6.  Lymphatic pathways of the breast. Arrows indicate 
the direction of lymph flow. (Visual Art: © 2012. The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)
Figure 17-7.  Axillary lymph node groups. Level I includes lymph 
nodes located lateral to the pectoralis minor muscle; level II includes 
lymph nodes located deep to the pectoralis minor; and level III 
includes lymph nodes located medial to the pectoralis minor. The 
axillary vein with its major tributaries and the supraclavicular 
lymph node group are also illustrated. (Visual Art: © 2012.The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)
Figure 17-5.  Arterial supply to the breast, axilla, and chest wall. 
(Reproduced with permission from Romrell LJ, Bland KI. Anat-
omy of the breast, axilla, chest wall, and related metastatic sites. 
In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive 
Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2009. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
embedded in the fat of the axilla lying immediately posterior to 
the pectoralis minor muscle and receive lymph drainage both 
from the axillary vein, external mammary, and scapular groups 
of lymph nodes, and directly from the breast; (e) the subclavicular 
503
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
group (apical), which consists of six to twelve sets of lymph 
nodes that lie posterior and superior to the upper border of the 
pectoralis minor muscle and receive lymph drainage from all 
of the other groups of axillary lymph nodes; and (f) the inter-
pectoral group (Rotter’s lymph nodes), which consists of one 
to four lymph nodes that are interposed between the pectoralis 
major and pectoralis minor muscles and receive lymph drainage 
directly from the breast. The lymph fluid that passes through 
the interpectoral group of lymph nodes passes directly into the 
central and subclavicular groups.
As indicated in Fig.17-7, the lymph node groups are 
assigned levels according to their anatomic relationship to 
the pectoralis minor muscle. Lymph nodes located lateral to 
or below the lower border of the pectoralis minor muscle are 
referred to as level I lymph nodes, which include the axillary 
vein, external mammary, and scapular groups. Lymph nodes 
located superficial or deep to the pectoralis minor muscle are 
referred to as level II lymph nodes, which include the central and 
interpectoral groups. Lymph nodes located medial to or above 
the upper border of the pectoralis minor muscle are referred to as 
level III lymph nodes, which consist of the subclavicular group. 
The plexus of lymph vessels in the breast arises in the interlobu-
lar connective tissue and in the walls of the lactiferous ducts 
and communicates with the subareolar plexus of lymph vessels. 
Efferent lymph vessels from the breast pass around the lateral 
edge of the pectoralis major muscle and pierce the clavipec-
toral fascia, ending in the external mammary (anterior, pectoral) 
Figure 17-8.  Overview of the neuroendocrine con-
trol of breast development and function. ADH = antid-
iuretic hormone; CRF = corticotropin-releasing factor; 
GRF = growth hormone releasing factor; LH-RH = 
luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone; Oxy = 
oxytocin; TRH = thyrotropin-releasing hormone. 
(Reproduced with permission from Kass R et al. 
Breast physiology: normal and abnormal develop-
ment and function. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, 
eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of 
Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2009. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
GRF
LH-RH
Dopamine
Oxy/ADH
TRH
CRF
-
group of lymph nodes. Some lymph vessels may travel directly 
to the subscapular (posterior, scapular) group of lymph nodes. 
From the upper part of the breast, a few lymph vessels pass 
directly to the subclavicular (apical) group of lymph nodes. The 
axillary lymph nodes usually receive >75% of the lymph drain-
age from the breast. The rest is derived primarily from 
the medial aspect of the breast, flows through the lymph 
vessels that accompany the perforating branches of the internal 
mammary artery, and enters the parasternal (internal mammary) 
group of lymph nodes.
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BREAST
Breast Development and Function
Breast development and function are initiated by a variety of 
hormonal stimuli, including estrogen, progesterone, prolactin, 
oxytocin, thyroid hormone, cortisol, and growth hormone.17,18 
Estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin especially have pro-
found trophic effects that are essential to normal breast 
development and function. Estrogen initiates ductal develop-
ment, whereas progesterone is responsible for differentiation of 
epithelium and for lobular development. Prolactin is the primary 
hormonal stimulus for lactogenesis in late pregnancy and the 
postpartum period. It upregulates hormone receptors and stimu-
lates epithelial development. Figure 17-8 depicts the secre-
tion of neurotrophic hormones from the hypothalamus, which 
2
3
504
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is responsible for regulation of the secretion of the hormones 
that affect the breast tissues. The gonadotropins luteinizing hor-
mone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) regulate 
the release of estrogen and progesterone from the ovaries. In 
turn, the release of LH and FSH from the basophilic cells of the 
anterior pituitary is regulated by the secretion of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. Positive 
and negative feedback effects of circulating estrogen and pro-
gesterone regulate the secretion of LH, FSH, and GnRH. These 
hormones are responsible for the development, function, and 
maintenance of breast tissues (Fig. 17-9A). In the female neo-
nate, circulating estrogen and progesterone levels decrease 
after birth and remain low throughout childhood because of the 
sensitivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to negative feed-
back from these hormones. With the onset of puberty, there is 
a decrease in the sensitivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis 
to negative feedback and an increase in its sensitivity to posi-
tive feedback from estrogen. These physiologic events initiate 
A
B
C
D
Figure 17-9.  The breast at different physi-
ologic stages. The central column contains 
three-dimensional depictions of microscopic 
structures. A. Adolescence. B. Pregnancy. 
C. Lactation. D. Senescence.
an increase in GnRH, FSH, and LH secretion and ultimately an 
increase in estrogen and progesterone secretion by the ovaries, 
leading to establishment of the menstrual cycle. At the begin-
ning of the menstrual cycle, there is an increase in the size and 
density of the breasts, which is followed by engorgement of 
the breast tissues and epithelial proliferation. With the onset of 
menstruation, the breast engorgement subsides and epithelial 
proliferation decreases.
Pregnancy, Lactation, and Senescence
A dramatic increase in circulating ovarian and placental estro-
gens and progestins is evident during pregnancy, which initiates 
striking alterations in the form and substance of the breast (see 
Fig. 17-9B).17-19 The breast enlarges as the ductal and lobular 
epithelium proliferates, the areolar skin darkens, and the acces-
sory areolar glands (Montgomery’s glands) become prominent. 
In the first and second trimesters, the minor ducts branch and 
develop. During the third trimester, fat droplets accumulate in 
505
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
the alveolar epithelium and colostrum fills the alveolar and duc-
tal spaces. In late pregnancy, prolactin stimulates the synthesis 
of milk fats and proteins.
After delivery of the placenta, circulating progesterone 
and estrogen levels decrease, permitting full expression of the 
lactogenic action of prolactin. Milk production and release are 
controlled by neural reflex arcs that originate in nerve endings 
of the nipple-areola complex. Maintenance of lactation requires 
regular stimulation of these neural reflexes, which results in 
prolactin secretion and milk letdown. Oxytocin release results 
from the auditory, visual, and olfactory stimuli associated with 
nursing. Oxytocin initiates contraction of the myoepithelial 
cells, which results in compression of alveoli and expulsion of 
milk into the lactiferous sinuses. After weaning of the infant, 
prolactin and oxytocin release decreases. Dormant milk causes 
increased pressure within the ducts and alveoli, which results in 
atrophy of the epithelium (Fig. 17-9C). With menopause there 
is a decrease in the secretion of estrogen and progesterone by 
the ovaries and involution of the ducts and alveoli of the breast. 
The surrounding fibrous connective tissue increases in density, 
and breast tissues are replaced by adipose tissues (Fig. 17-9D).
Gynecomastia
Gynecomastia refers to an enlarged breast in the male.20 Physi-
ologic gynecomastia usually occurs during three phases of life: 
the neonatal period, adolescence, and senescence. Common to 
each of these phases is an excess of circulating estrogens in 
relation to circulating testosterone. Neonatal gynecomastia is 
caused by the action of placental estrogens on neonatal breast 
tissues, whereas in adolescence, there is an excess of estradiol 
relative to testosterone, and with senescence, the circulating 
testosterone level falls, which results in relative hyperestrin-
ism. In gynecomastia, the ductal structures of the male breast 
enlarge, elongate, and branch with a concomitant increase in 
epithelium. During puberty, the condition often is unilateral 
and typically occurs between ages 12 and 15 years. In contrast, 
senescent gynecomastia is usually bilateral. In the nonobese 
male, breast tissue measuring at least 2 cm in diameter must 
be present before a diagnosis of gynecomastia may be made. 
Mammography and ultrasonography are used to differentiate 
breast tissues. Dominant masses or areas of firmness, irregular-
ity, and asymmetry suggest the possibility of a breast cancer, 
particularly in the older male. Gynecomastia generally does not 
predispose the male breast to cancer. However, the hypoandro-
genic state of Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY), in which gyneco-
mastia is usually evident, is associated with an increased risk 
of breast cancer. Gynecomastia is graded based on the degree 
of breast enlargement, the position of the nipple with reference 
to the inframammary fold and the degree of breast ptosis and 
skin redundancy: Grade 1: mild breast enlargement without skin 
redundancy; Grade IIa: moderate breast enlargement without 
skin redundancy; Grade IIb: moderate breast enlargement 
with skin redundancy; and Grade 3: marked breast enlargement 
with skin redundancy and ptosis.
Table 17-1 identifies the pathophysiologic mechanisms 
that may initiate gynecomastia: estrogen excess states; androgen 
deficiency states; pharmacologic causes; and idiopathic causes. 
Estrogen excess results from an increase in the secretion of 
estradiol by the testicles or by nontesticular tumors, nutritional 
alterations such as protein and fat deprivation, endocrine dis-
orders (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism), and hepatic disease 
(nonalcoholic and alcoholic cirrhosis). Refeeding gynecomastia 
Table 17-1
Pathophysiologic mechanisms of gynecomastia
I.  Estrogen excess states
A.  Gonadal origin
1.  True hermaphroditism
2.  Gonadal stromal (nongerminal) neoplasms of the 
testis
a.  Leydig cell (interstitial)
b.  Sertoli cell
c.  Granulosa-theca cell
3.  Germ cell tumors
a.  Choriocarcinoma
b.  Seminoma, teratoma
c.  Embryonal carcinoma
B.  Nontesticular tumors
1.  Adrenal cortical neoplasms
2.  Lung carcinoma
3.  Hepatocellular carcinoma
C.  Endocrine disorders
D.  Diseases of the liver—nonalcoholic and alcoholic 
cirrhosis
E.  Nutrition alteration states
II.  Androgen deficiency states
A.  Senescence
B.  Hypoandrogenic states (hypogonadism)
1.  Primary testicular failure
a.  Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY)
b.  Reifenstein’s syndrome
c.  Rosewater-Gwinup-Hamwi familial 
gynecomastia
d.  Kallmann syndrome
e.  Kennedy’s disease with associated 
gynecomastia
f.  Eunuchoidal state (congenital anorchia)
g.  Hereditary defects of androgen biosynthesis
h.  Adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency
2.  Secondary testicular failure
a.  Trauma
b.  Orchitis
c.  Cryptorchidism
d.  Irradiation
C.  Renal failure
III.  Pharmacologic causes
IV.  Systemic diseases with idiopathic mechanisms
is related to the resumption of pituitary gonadotropin secretion 
after pituitary shutdown. Androgen deficiency may initiate gyne-
comastia. Concurrently occurring with decreased circulating 
testosterone levels is an elevated level of circulating testosterone-
binding globulin, which results in a reduction of free testoster-
one. This senescent gynecomastia usually occurs in men aged 
50 to 70 years. Hypoandrogenic states can be from primary tes-
ticular failure or secondary testicular failure. Klinefelter’s syn-
drome (XXY) is an example of primary testicular failure which 
is manifested by gynecomastia, hypergonadotropic hypogonad-
ism, and azoospermia. Secondary testicular failure may result 
from trauma, orchitis, and cryptorchidism. Renal failure, regard-
less of cause, also may initiate gynecomastia.
506
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Pharmacologic causes of gynecomastia include drugs 
with estrogenic activity (digitalis, estrogens, anabolic steroids, 
marijuana) or drugs that enhance estrogen synthesis (human 
chorionic gonadotropin). Drugs that inhibit the action or syn-
thesis of testosterone (cimetidine, ketoconazole, phenytoin, spi-
ronolactone, antineoplastic agents, diazepam) also have been 
implicated. Drugs such as reserpine, theophylline, verapamil, 
tricyclic antidepressants, and furosemide induce gynecomastia 
through idiopathic mechanisms.
When gynecomastia is caused by androgen deficiency, 
then testosterone administration may cause regression. When it 
is caused by medications, then these are discontinued if possi-
ble. When endocrine defects are responsible, then these receive 
specific therapy. As soon asgynecomastia is progressive and 
does not respond to other treatments, surgical therapy is con-
sidered. Techniques include local excision, liposuction or sub-
cutaneous mastectomy. Attempts to reverse gynecomastia with 
danazol have been successful, but the androgenic side effects of 
the drug are considerable.
INFECTIOUS AND INFLAMMATORY  
DISORDERS OF THE BREAST
Infections in the postpartum period remain proportionately the 
most common time for breast infections to occur. Infections of 
the breast unrelated to lactation are proportionately less com-
mon, however, are still a relatively common presentation to 
breast specialists. The latter are classified as intrinsic (second-
ary to abnormalities in the breast) or extrinsic (secondary to an 
infection in an adjacent structure, e.g., skin, thoracic cavity) the 
most common being probably periductal mastitis and infected 
sebaceous cyst, respectively.
Bacterial Infection
Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus species are the organ-
isms most frequently recovered from nipple discharge from an 
infected breast.17 Typically breast abscesses are seen in staphy-
lococcal infections and present with point tenderness, erythema, 
and hyperthermia. When these abscesses are related to lactation 
they usually occur within the first few weeks of breastfeeding. 
If there is progression of a staphylococcal infection, this may 
result in subcutaneous, subareolar, interlobular (periductal), and 
retromammary abscesses (unicentric or multicentric). Previ-
ously almost all breast abscesses were treated by operative inci-
sion and drainage but now the initial approach is antibiotics and 
repeated aspiration of the abscess, usually ultrasound guided 
aspiration.21 Operative drainage is now reserved for those cases 
which don’t resolve with repeated aspiration and antibiotic ther-
apy or if there is some other indication for incision and drainage 
(e.g., thinning or necrosis of the overlying skin). Preoperative 
ultrasonography is effective in delineating the required extent of 
the drainage procedure. While staphylococcal infections tend to 
be more localized and may be situated deep in the breast tissues, 
streptococcal infections usually present with diffuse superficial 
involvement. They are treated with local wound care, includ-
ing application of warm compresses, and the administration of 
IV antibiotics (penicillins or cephalosporins). Breast infections 
may be chronic, possibly with recurrent abscess formation. In 
this situation, cultures are performed to identify acid-fast bacilli, 
anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, and fungi. Uncommon organ-
isms may be encountered, and long-term antibiotic therapy may 
be required.
Biopsy of the abscess cavity wall should be considered at 
the time of incision and drainage to rule out underlying breast 
cancer in patients where antibiotics and drainage have been 
ineffective.
Nowadays hospital-acquired puerperal infections of the 
breast are much less common, but nursing women who pres-
ent with milk stasis or noninfectious inflammation may still 
develop this problem. Epidemic puerperal mastitis is initiated 
by highly virulent strains of methicillin-resistant S. aureus that 
are transmitted via the suckling neonate and may result in sub-
stantial morbidity and occasional mortality. Purulent fluid may 
be expressed from the nipple. In this circumstance, breastfeed-
ing is stopped, antibiotics are started, and surgical therapy is 
initiated. Nonepidemic (sporadic) puerperal mastitis refers to 
involvement of the interlobular connective tissue of the breast 
by an infectious process. The patient develops nipple fissuring 
and milk stasis, which initiates a retrograde bacterial infection. 
Emptying of the breast using breast suction pumps shortens the 
duration of symptoms and reduces the incidence of recurrences. 
The addition of antibiotic therapy results in a satisfactory out-
come in >95% of cases.
Zuska’s disease, also called recurrent periductal mastitis, is a 
condition of recurrent retroareolar infections and abscesses.22,23 
Smoking has been implicated as a risk factor for this condition.24,25 
This syndrome is managed symptomatically by antibiotics cou-
pled with incision and drainage as necessary. Attempts to obtain 
durable long-term control by wide débridement of chronically 
infected tissue and/or terminal duct resection have been reported 
and can be curative but equally can be frustrated by postopera-
tive infections.26
Mycotic Infections
Fungal infections of the breast are rare and usually involve blas-
tomycosis or sporotrichosis.27 Intraoral fungi that are inoculated 
into the breast tissue by the suckling infant initiate these infec-
tions, which present as mammary abscesses in close proxim-
ity to the nipple-areola complex. Pus mixed with blood may be 
expressed from sinus tracts. Antifungal agents can be adminis-
tered for the treatment of systemic (noncutaneous) infections. 
This therapy generally eliminates the necessity of surgical inter-
vention, but occasionally drainage of an abscess, or even partial 
mastectomy, may be necessary to eradicate a persistent fungal 
infection. Candida albicans affecting the skin of the breast 
presents as erythematous, scaly lesions of the inframammary 
or axillary folds. Scrapings from the lesions demonstrate fungal 
elements (filaments and binding cells). Therapy involves the 
removal of predisposing factors such as maceration and the topi-
cal application of nystatin.
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Hidradenitis suppurativa of the nipple-areola complex or axilla 
is a chronic inflammatory condition that originates within the 
accessory areolar glands of Montgomery or within the axillary 
sebaceous glands.27 Women with chronic acne are predisposed 
to developing hidradenitis. When located in and about the 
nipple-areola complex, this disease may mimic other chronic 
inflammatory states, Paget’s disease of the nipple, or invasive 
breast cancer. Involvement of the axillary skin is often multifo-
cal and contiguous. Antibiotic therapy with incision and drain-
age of fluctuant areas is appropriate treatment. Excision of the 
involved areas may be required. Large areas of skin loss may 
necessitate coverage with advancement flaps or split-thickness 
skin grafts.
507
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
Mondor’s Disease
Mondor’s disease is a variant of thrombophlebitis that involves 
the superficial veins of the anterior chest wall and breast.28 In 
1939, Mondor described the condition as “string phlebitis,” a 
thrombosed vein presenting as a tender, cord-like structure.29 
Frequently involved veins include the lateral thoracic vein, the 
thoracoepigastric vein, and, less commonly, the superficial epi-
gastric vein. Typically, a woman presents with acute pain in the 
lateral aspect of the breast or the anterior chest wall. A tender, 
firm cord is found to follow the distribution of one of the major 
superficial veins. Rarely, the presentation is bilateral, and most 
women have no evidence of thrombophlebitis in other anatomic 
sites. This benign, self-limited disorder is not indicative of a can-
cer. When the diagnosis is uncertain, or when a mass is present 
near the tender cord, biopsy is indicated. Therapy for Mondor’s 
disease includes the liberal use of anti-inflammatory medica-
tions and application of warm compresses along the symptom-
atic vein. The process usually resolves within 4 to 6 weeks. 
When symptoms persist or are refractory to therapy, excision of 
the involved vein segment may be considered.
COMMON BENIGN DISORDERS  
AND DISEASES OF THE BREAST
Benign breast disorders and diseases encompass a wide range 
of clinical and pathologic entities. Surgeons require an in-depth 
understanding of benign breast disorders and diseases so that 
clear explanations may be given to affected women, appropri-
ate treatment instituted, and unnecessary long-term follow up 
avoided.
Table 17-2 
ANDI classification of benign breast disorders
Normal
Disorder
Disease
Early reproductive years 
(age 15–25 y)
Lobular development
Fibroadenoma
Giant fibroadenoma
Stromal development
Adolescent hypertrophy
Gigantomastia
Nipple eversion
Nipple inversion
Subareolar abscess
Mammary duct fistula
Later reproductive years 
(age 25–40 y)
Cyclical changes of menstruation
Cyclical mastalgia
Incapacitating mastalgia
Nodularity
Epithelial hyperplasia of 
pregnancy
Bloody nipple discharge
Involution (age 35–55 y)
Lobular involution
Macrocysts
—
Sclerosing lesions
Duct involution
  Dilatation
Duct ectasia
Periductal mastitis
  Sclerosis
Nipple retraction
—
Epithelial turnover
Epithelial hyperplasia
Epithelial hyperplasia with atypia
ANDI = aberrations of normal development and involution.
Source:  Reproduced with permission from Hughes LE: Aberrations of normal development and involution (ANDI): A concept of benign breast disorders 
based on pathogenesis. In: Mansel RE, et al, eds. Hughes, Mansel & Webster’s Benign Disorders and Diseases of the Breast. London: Saunders, 2009. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Aberrations of Normal Development  
and Involution
The basic principles underlying the aberrations of normal devel-
opment and involution (ANDI) classification of benign breast 
conditions are the following: (a) benign breast disorders and 
diseases are related to the normal processes of reproductive life 
and to involution; (b) there is a spectrum of breast conditions 
that ranges from normal to disorder to disease; and (c) the ANDI 
classification encompasses all aspects of the breast condition, 
including pathogenesis and the degree of abnormality .30 
The horizontal component of Table 17-2 defines ANDI 
along a spectrum from normal, to mild abnormality (disorder), 
to severe abnormality (disease). The vertical component indi-
cates the period during which the condition develops.
Early Reproductive Years.  Fibroadenomas are seen and 
present symptomatically predominantly in younger women 
aged 15 to 25 years (Fig. 17-10).31 Fibroadenomas usually 
grow to 1 or 2 cm in diameter and then are stable but may 
grow to a larger size. Small fibroadenomas (≤1 cm in size) 
are considered normal, whereas larger fibroadenomas (≤3 cm) 
are disorders and giant fibroadenomas (>3 cm) are disease. 
Similarly, multiple fibroadenomas (more than five lesions in 
one breast) are very uncommon and are considered disease. It 
is noted that with the introduction of mammographic screen-
ing, asymptomatic fibroadenomas are sometimes found in an 
older screened population. The precise etiology of adolescent 
breast hypertrophy is unknown. A spectrum of changes from 
limited to massive stromal hyperplasia (gigantomastia) is seen. 
Nipple inversion is a disorder of development of the major 
4
508
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
ducts, which prevents normal protrusion of the nipple. Mam-
mary duct fistulas arise when nipple inversion predisposes to 
major duct obstruction, leading to recurrent subareolar abscess 
and mammary duct fistula.
Later Reproductive Years.  Cyclical mastalgia and nodular-
ity usually are associated with premenstrual enlargement of the 
breast and are regarded as normal. Cyclical pronounced mastal-
gia and severe painful nodularity are viewed differently than are 
physiologic discomfort and lumpiness. Painful nodularity that 
persists for >1 week of the menstrual cycle is considered a disor-
der. In epithelial hyperplasia of pregnancy, papillary projections 
sometimes give rise to bilateral bloody nipple discharge.
Involution.  Involution of lobular epithelium is dependent 
on the specialized stroma around it. However, an integrated 
involution of breast stroma and epithelium is not always seen, 
and disorders of the process are common. When the stroma 
involutes too quickly, alveoli remain and form microcysts, 
which are precursors of macrocysts. The macrocysts are com-
mon, often subclinical, and do not require specific treatment. 
Sclerosing adenosis is considered a disorder of both the pro-
liferative and the involutional phases of the breast cycle. Duct 
ectasia (dilated ducts) and periductal mastitis are other impor-
tant components of the ANDI classification. Periductal fibro-
sis is a sequela of periductal mastitis and may result in nipple 
retraction. About 60% of women ≥70 years of age exhibit some 
degree of epithelial hyperplasia (Fig. 17-11). Atypical prolif-
erative diseases include ductal and lobular hyperplasia, both of 
which display some features of carcinoma in situ. Women with 
atypical ductal or lobular hyperplasia have a fourfold increase 
in breast cancer risk (Table 17-3).
Pathology of Nonproliferative Disorders
Of paramount importance for the optimal management of 
benign breast disorders and diseases is the histologic differentia-
tion of benign, atypical, and malignant changes.32,33 Determin-
ing the clinical significance of these changes is a problem that 
is compounded by inconsistent nomenclature. The classification 
Figure 17-11.  A. Ductal epithelial hyperplasia. The irregular intra-
cellular spaces and variable cell nuclei distinguish this process from 
carcinoma in situ. B. Lobular hyperplasia. The presence of alveolar 
lumina and incomplete distention distinguish this process from car-
cinoma in situ. (Photos used with permission of Dr. R.L. Hackett.)
Figure 17-10.  Fibroadenoma (40x). These benign tumors are typi-
cally well circumscribed and are comprised of both stromal and 
glandular elements. (Photo used with permission of Dr. Sindhu 
Menon, Consultant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant 
Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospi-
tal, Derby, UK.)
Table  17-3 
Cancer risk associated with benign breast disorders and 
in situ carcinoma of the breast
Abnormality
Relative Risk
Nonproliferative lesions of the 
breast
No increased risk
Sclerosing adenosis
No increased risk
Intraductal papilloma
No increased risk
Florid hyperplasia
1.5 to 2-fold
Atypical lobular hyperplasia
4-fold
Atypical ductal hyperplasia
4-fold
Ductal involvement by cells of 
atypical ductal hyperplasia
7-fold
Lobular carcinoma in situ
10-fold
Ductal carcinoma in situ
10-fold
Source: Modified from Dupont WD, et al: Risk factors for breast cancer 
in women with proliferative breast disease. N Engl J Med 312:146, 1985.
A
B
509
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
system originally developed by Page separates the various types 
of benign breast disorders and diseases into three clinically 
relevant groups: nonproliferative disorders, proliferative dis-
orders without atypia, and proliferative disorders with atypia 
(Table 17-4). Nonproliferative disorders of the breast account 
for 70% of benign breast conditions and carry no increased risk 
for the development of breast cancer. This category includes 
cysts, duct ectasia, periductal mastitis, calcifications, fibroad-
enomas, and related disorders.
Breast macrocysts are an involutional disorder, have a 
high frequency of occurrence, and are often multiple. Duct ecta-
sia is a clinical syndrome characterized by dilated subareolar 
ducts that are palpable and often associated with thick nipple 
discharge. Haagensen regarded duct ectasia as a primary event 
that led to stagnation of secretions, epithelial ulceration, and 
leakage of duct secretions (containing chemically irritating fatty 
acids) into periductal tissue.34 This sequence was thought to pro-
duce a local inflammatory process with periductal fibrosis and 
subsequent nipple retraction. An alternative theory considers 
periductal mastitis to be the primary process, which leads to 
weakening of the ducts and secondary dilatation. It is possible 
that both processes occur and together explain the wide spec-
trum of problems seen, which include nipple discharge, nipple 
retraction, inflammatory masses, and abscesses.
Calcium deposits are frequently encountered in the breast. 
Most are benign and are caused by cellular secretions and 
debris or by trauma and inflammation. Calcifications that are 
associated with cancer include microcalcifications, which vary 
in shape and density and are <0.5 mm in size, and fine, linear 
calcifications, which may show branching. Fibroadenomas have 
abundant stroma with histologically normal cellular elements. 
They show hormonal dependence similar to that of normal 
breast lobules in that they lactate during pregnancy and invo-
lute in the postmenopausal period. Adenomas of the breast are 
well circumscribed and are composed of benign epithelium with 
sparse stroma, which is the histologic feature that differentiates 
them from fibroadenomas. They may be divided into tubular 
adenomas and lactating adenomas. Tubular adenomas are seen 
in young nonpregnant women, whereas lactating adenomas are 
seen during pregnancy or during the postpartum period. Ham-
artomas are discrete breast tumors that are usually 2 to 4 cm in 
Table 17-4 
Classification of benign breast disorders
Nonproliferative disorders of the breast
  Cysts and apocrine metaplasia
  Duct ectasia
  Mild ductal epithelial hyperplasia
  Calcifications
  Fibroadenoma and related lesions
Proliferative breast disorders without atypia
  Sclerosing adenosis
  Radial and complex sclerosing lesions
  Ductal epithelial hyperplasia
  Intraductal papillomas
Atypical proliferative lesions
  Atypical lobular hyperplasia
  Atypical ductal hyperplasia
Source: Modified from Consensus Meeting: Is “fibrocystic disease” of 
the breast precancerous? Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1986;110:171.
diameter, firm, and sharply circumscribed. Adenolipomas con-
sist of sharply circumscribed nodules of fatty tissue that contain 
normal breast lobules and ducts.
Fibrocystic Disease.  The term fibrocystic disease is nonspe-
cific. Too frequently, it is used as a diagnostic term to describe 
symptoms, to rationalize the need for breast biopsy, and to 
explain biopsy results. Synonyms include fibrocystic changes, 
cystic mastopathy, chronic cystic disease, chronic cystic mas-
titis, Schimmelbusch’s disease, mazoplasia, Cooper’s disease, 
Reclus’ disease, and fibroadenomatosis. Fibrocystic disease 
refers to a spectrum of histopathologic changes that are best 
diagnosed and treated specifically.
Pathology of Proliferative Disorders  
Without Atypia
Proliferative breast disorders without atypia include sclerosing 
adenosis, radial scars, complex sclerosing lesions, ductal epithe-
lial hyperplasia, and intraductal papillomas.32,33 Sclerosing ade-
nosis is prevalent during the childbearing and perimenopausal 
years and has no malignant potential. Histologic changes are 
both proliferative (ductal proliferation) and involutional (stro-
mal fibrosis, epithelial regression). Sclerosing adenosis is char-
acterized by distorted breast lobules and usually occurs in the 
context of multiple microcysts, but occasionally presents as a 
palpable mass. Benign calcifications are often associated with 
this disorder. Sclerosing adenosis can be managed by observa-
tion as long as the imaging features and pathologic findings are 
concordant. Central sclerosis and various degrees of epithelial 
proliferation, apocrine metaplasia, and papilloma formation 
characterize radial scars and complex sclerosing lesions of the 
breast. Lesions up to 1 cm in diameter are called radial scars, 
whereas larger lesions are called complex sclerosing lesions. 
Radial scars originate at sites of terminal duct branching where 
the characteristic histologic changes radiate from a central area 
of fibrosis. All of the histologic features of a radial scar are seen 
in the larger complex sclerosing lesions, but there is a greater 
disturbance of structure with papilloma formation, apocrine 
metaplasia, and occasionally sclerosing adenosis. Distinguish-
ing between a radial scar and invasive breast carcinoma can be 
challenging based on core needle biopsy sampling. Often the 
imaging features of a radial scar (which can be quite similar to 
an invasive cancer) will dictate the need for either a vacuum 
assisted biopsy or surgical excision in order to exclude the pos-
sibility of carcinoma.
Mild ductal hyperplasia is characterized by the presence of 
three or four cell layers above the basement membrane. Moder-
ate ductal hyperplasia is characterized by the presence of five 
or more cell layers above the basement membrane. Florid duc-
tal epithelial hyperplasia occupies at least 70% of a minor duct 
lumen. It is found in >20% of breast tissue specimens, is either 
solid or papillary, and is associated with an increased cancer 
risk (see Table 17-3). Intraductal papillomas arise in the major 
ducts, usually in premenopausal women. They generally are 
<0.5 cm in diameter but may be as large as 5 cm. A common 
presenting symptom is nipple discharge, which may be serous 
or bloody. Grossly, intraductal papillomas are pinkish tan, fri-
able, and usually attached to the wall of the involved duct by a 
stalk. They rarely undergo malignant transformation, and their 
presence does not increase a woman’s risk of developing breast 
cancer (unless accompanied by atypia). However, multiple 
intraductal papillomas, which occur in younger women and are 
510
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 17-12.  Lobular carcinoma in situ (100x). There are small 
monomorphic cells which distend the terminal duct lobular unit, 
without necrosis or mitoses. (Photo used with permission of 
Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, 
Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal 
Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
less frequently associated with nipple discharge, are susceptible 
to malignant transformation.
Pathology of Atypical Proliferative Diseases
The atypical proliferative diseases have some of the features of 
carcinoma in situ but either lack a major defining feature of car-
cinoma in situ or have the features in less than fully developed 
form.34 Atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) appears similar to 
low grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) histologically and is 
composed of monotonous round, cuboidal, or polygonal cells 
enclosed by basement membrane with rare mitoses. A lesion 
will be considered to be ADH if it is up to 2 or 3 mm in size but 
would be called DCIS if it is larger than 3 mm. The diagnosis 
can be difficult to establish with core needle biopsy specimen 
alone and most cases will require excisional biopsy specimen 
for classification. Individuals with a diagnosis of ADH are at 
increased risk for development of breast cancer and should be 
counseled appropriately regarding risk reduction strategies.
In 1978, Haagensen et al described lobular neoplasia, a 
spectrum of disorders ranging from atypical lobular hyperplasia 
to lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS).35Atypical lobular hyper-
plasia (ALH) results in minimal distention of lobular units with 
cells that are similar to those seen in LCIS. The diagnosis of 
LCIS is made when small monomorphic cells that distend the 
terminal ductal lobular unit are noted. In cases of LCIS the acini 
are full and distended while the overall lobular architecture is 
maintained (Fig. 17-12). Classic LCIS is not associated with 
a specific mammographic or palpable abnormality but is an 
incidental finding noted on breast biopsy. There is a variant of 
LCIS that has been termed pleomorphic LCIS. In the case of 
pleomorphic LCIS, there can be calcifications or other suspi-
cious mammographic changes that dictate the need for biopsy. 
Classic LCIS is not treated with excision as the patient is at 
risk for developing invasive breast cancer in either breast and 
therefore the patient is counseled regarding appropriate risk 
reduction strategies. Pleomorphic LCIS can be difficult to dis-
tinguish from high-grade DCIS and there are some proponents 
who have suggested that patients with pleomorphic LCIS be 
managed similar to those with DCIS with attention to margins 
and consideration for radiation therapy in the setting of breast 
conserving treatment. The use of immunohistochemical stain-
ing for E-cadherin can help to discriminate between LCIS and 
DCIS. In lobular neoplasias, such as ALH and LCIS, there is a 
lack of E-cadherin expression whereas the majority of ductal 
lesions will demonstrate E-cadherin reactivity.
Treatment of Selected Benign Breast  
Disorders and Diseases
Cysts.  Because needle biopsy of breast masses may produce 
artifacts that make mammography assessment more difficult, 
many multidisciplinary teams prefer to image breast masses 
before performing either fine needle aspiration or core needle 
biopsy.36,37 In practice, however, the first investigation of pal-
pable breast masses may be a needle biopsy, which allows for 
the early diagnosis of cysts. A 21-gauge needle attached to a 
10-mL syringe is placed directly into the mass, which is fixed 
by fingers of the nondominant hand. The volume of a typical 
cyst is 5 to 10 mL, but it may be 75 mL or more. If the fluid 
that is aspirated is not bloodstained, then the cyst is aspirated 
to dryness, the needle is removed, and the fluid is discarded, 
because cytologic examination of such fluid is not cost effec-
tive. After aspiration, the breast is carefully palpated to exclude 
a residual mass. In most cases however imaging has been per-
formed prior to a needle being introduced into the breast and 
indeed the majority of cysts are now aspirated under ultrasound 
guidance. If a mass was noted on initial ultrasound or there is a 
residual mass post-aspiration then a tissue specimen is obtained 
usually by core biopsy. When cystic fluid is bloodstained, fluid 
can be sent for cytologic examination. A simple cyst is rarely of 
concern, but a complex cyst may be the result of an underlying 
malignancy. A pneumocystogram can be obtained by injecting 
air into the cyst and then obtaining a repeat mammogram. When 
this technique is used, the wall of the cyst cavity can be more 
carefully assessed for any irregularities.
Fibroadenomas.  Most fibroadenomas are self-limiting and 
many go undiagnosed, so a more conservative approach is 
reasonable. Careful ultrasound examination with core-needle 
biopsy will provide for an accurate diagnosis. Ultrasonogra-
phy may reveal specific features that are pathognomonic for 
fibroadenoma and in a young woman (e.g., under 25 years) 
where the risk of breast cancer is already very low a core-needle 
biopsy may not be necessary. In patients where biopsy is per-
formed, the patient is counseled concerning the ultrasound 
and biopsy results, and surgical excision of the fibroadenoma 
may be avoided. Cryoablation and ultrasound-guided vacuum 
assisted biopsy are approved treatments for fibroadenomas of 
the breast, especially lesions <3 cm. Larger lesions are often still 
best removed by excision. With short-term follow-up a signifi-
cant percentage of fibroadenomas will decrease in size and will 
no longer be palpable.38 However, many will remain palpable, 
especially those larger than 2 cm.39 Therefore, women should 
be counseled that the options for treatment include surgical 
removal, cryoablation, vacuum assisted biopsy, or observation.
Sclerosing Disorders.  The clinical significance of sclerosing 
adenosis lies in its imitation of cancer. On physical examina-
tion, it may be confused with cancer, by mammography, and at 
gross pathologic examination. Excisional biopsy and histologic 
examination are frequently necessary to exclude the diagnosis 
of cancer. The diagnostic work-up for radial scars and complex 
511
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
sclerosing lesions frequently involves stereotactic biopsy. It 
usually is not possible to differentiate these lesions with cer-
tainty from cancer by mammographic features, so a larger tis-
sue biopsy is recommended either by way of vacuum assisted 
biopsy or an open surgical excisional biopsy. The mammo-
graphic appearance of a radial scar or sclerosing adenosis (mass 
density with spiculated margins) will usually lead to an assess-
ment that the results of a core-needle biopsy specimen showing 
benign disease are discordant with the radiographic findings.
Periductal Mastitis.  Painful and tender masses behind the 
nipple-areola complex are aspirated with a 21-gauge needle 
attached to a 10-mL syringe. Any fluid obtained is submitted 
for culture using a transport medium appropriate for the detec-
tion of anaerobic organisms. In the absence of pus, women 
are started on a combination of metronidazole and dicloxacil-
lin while awaiting the results of culture. Antibiotics are then 
continued based on sensitivity tests. Many cases respond sat-
isfactorily to antibiotics alone, but when considerable puru-
lent material is present, repeated ultrasound guided aspiration 
is performed and ultimately in a proportion of cases surgical 
treatment is required. Unlike puerperal abscesses, a subareolar 
abscess is usually unilocular and often is associated with a sin-
gle duct system. Ultrasound will accurately delineate its extent. 
In those cases which come to surgery, the surgeon may either 
undertake simple drainage with a view toward formal surgery, 
should the problem recur, or proceed with definitive surgery. In 
a woman of childbearing age, simple drainage is preferred, but 
if there is an anaerobic infection, recurrent infection frequently 
develops. Recurrent abscess with fistula is a difficult problem. 
Treatment of periductal fistula was initially recommended to be 
opening up of the fistulous track and allowing it to granulate.40 
This approach may still be used especially if the fistula is recur-
rent after previous attempts at fistulectomy. However, nowa-
days the preferred initial surgical treatment is by fistulectomy 
and primary closure with antibiotic coverage.41 Excision of all 
the major ducts is an alternative option depending on the cir-
cumstances (Table 17-5). When a localized periareolar abscess 
Table 17-5 
Treatment of recurrent subareolar sepsis
Suitable for  
Fistulectomy
Suitable for Total  
Duct Excision
Small abscess localized 
to one segment
Large abscess affecting >50% of 
the areolar circumference
Recurrence involving 
the same segment
Recurrence involving a different 
segment
Mild or no nipple 
inversion
Marked nipple inversion
Patient unconcerned 
about nipple inversion
Patient requests correction of 
nipple inversion
Younger patient
Older patient
No discharge from other 
ducts
Purulent discharge from other 
ducts
No prior fistulectomy
Recurrence after fistulectomy
Source: Modified with permission from Hughes LE: The duct ectasia/
periductal mastitis complex, in Hughes LE, et al (eds): Benign Disorders 
and Diseases of the Breast: Concepts and Clinical Management. London: 
WB Saunders, 2000, p 162. kkjkjdht © Elsevier.
recurs at the previous site and a fistula is present, the preferred 
operation is fistulectomy, which has minimal complications and 
a high degree of success. However, when subareolar sepsis is 
diffuse rather than localized to one segment or when more than 
one fistula is present, total duct excision is the most expeditious 
approach. The first circumstance is seen in young women with 
squamous metaplasia of a single duct, whereas the latter circum-
stance is seen in older women with multiple ectatic ducts. Age is 
not always a reliable guide, however, and fistula excision is the 
preferred initial procedure for localized sepsis irrespective of 
age. Antibiotic therapy is useful for recurrent infection after fis-
tula excision, and a 2- to 4-week course is recommended before 
total duct excision.
Nipple Inversion.  More women request correction of con-
genital nipple inversion than request correction for the nipple 
inversion that occurs secondary to duct ectasia. Although the 
results are usually satisfactory, women seeking correction for 
cosmetic reasons should always be made aware of the surgi-
cal complications of altered nipple sensation, nipple necrosis, 
and postoperative fibrosis with nipple retraction. Because nipple 
inversion is a result of shortening of the subareolar ducts, a com-
plete division of these ducts is necessary for permanent correc-
tion of the disorder.
RISK FACTORS FOR BREAST CANCER
Hormonal and Nonhormonal Risk Factors
Increased exposure to estrogen is associated with an increased 
risk for developing breast cancer, whereas reducing exposure 
is thought to be protective.42-48 Correspondingly, factors that 
increase the number of menstrual cycles, such as early men-
arche, nulliparity, and late menopause, are associated with 
increased risk. Moderate levels of exercise and a longer lacta-
tion period, factors that decrease the total number of menstrual 
cycles, are protective. The terminal differentiation of breast epi-
thelium associated with a full-term pregnancy is also protective, 
so older age at first live birth is associated with an increased 
risk of breast cancer. Finally, there is an association between 
obesity and increased breast cancer risk. Because the major 
source of estrogen in postmenopausal women is the conversion 
of androstenedione to estrone by adipose tissue, obesity is asso-
ciated with a long-term increase in estrogen exposure.
Nonhormonal risk factors include radiation exposure. 
Young women who receive mantle radiation therapy for 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma have a breast cancer risk that is 75 times 
greater than that of age-matched control subjects. Survivors of 
the atomic bomb blasts in Japan during World War II have a 
very high incidence of breast cancer, likely because of somatic 
mutations induced by the radiation exposure. In both circum-
stances, radiation exposure during adolescence, a period of 
active breast development, magnifies the deleterious effect. 
Studies also suggest that the risk of breast cancer increases as 
the amount of alcohol a woman consumes increases.49 Alco-
hol consumption is known to increase serum levels of estradiol. 
Finally, evidence suggests that long-term consumption of foods 
with a high fat content contributes to an increased risk of breast 
cancer by increasing serum estrogen levels.
Risk Assessment Models
The average lifetime risk of breast cancer for newborn U.S. 
females is 12%.50,51 The longer a woman lives without cancer, 
512
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the lower her risk of developing breast cancer. Thus, a woman 
aged 50 years has an 11% lifetime risk of developing breast 
cancer, and a woman aged 70 years has a 7% lifetime risk of 
developing breast cancer. Because risk factors for breast cancer 
interact, evaluating the risk conferred by combinations of risk 
factors is difficult. There are several risk assessment models 
available to predict the risk of breast cancer. From the Breast 
Cancer Detection Demonstration Project, a mammography 
screening program conducted in the 1970s, Gail et al developed 
the model most frequently used in the United States, which 
incorporates age, age at menarche, age at first live birth, the 
number of breast biopsy specimens, any history of atypical 
hyperplasia, and number of first-degree relatives with breast 
cancer.52 It predicts the cumulative risk of breast cancer accord-
ing to decade of life. To calculate breast cancer risk using the 
Gail model, a woman’s risk factors are translated into an overall 
risk score by multiplying her relative risks from several cat-
egories (Table 17-6). This risk score is then compared 
to an adjusted population risk of breast cancer to deter-
mine a woman’s individual or absolute risk. The output is a 
five-year risk and a lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. 
A software program incorporating the Gail model is available 
from the National Cancer Institute at http://bcra.nci.nih.gov/brc. 
This model was recently modified to more accurately assess risk 
in African American women.52,53 The Gail model is the most 
widely used model in the United States. Gail and colleagues 
have also described a revised model that includes body weight 
and mammographic density but excludes age at menarche.54
Claus et al, using data from the Cancer and Steroid Hor-
mone Study, a case-control study of breast cancer, developed 
the other frequently used risk assessment model, which is based 
on assumptions about the prevalence of high-penetrance breast 
cancer susceptibility genes.55 Compared with the Gail model, the 
Claus model incorporates more information about family his-
tory but excludes other risk factors. The Claus model provides 
individual estimates of breast cancer risk according to decade of 
life based on presence of first- and second-degree relatives with 
breast cancer and their age at diagnosis. Risk factors that are 
less consistently associated with breast cancer (diet, use of oral 
contraceptives, lactation) or are rare in the general population 
(radiation exposure) are not included in either the Gail or Claus 
risk assessment model. Other models have been proposed that 
account for mammographic breast density in assessing breast 
cancer risk.54,56
Neither the Gail model nor the Claus model accounts for 
the risk associated with mutations in the breast cancer suscep-
tibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 (described in detail below). 
The BRCAPRO model is a Mendelian model that calculates the 
probability that an individual is a carrier of a mutation in one of 
the breast cancer susceptibility genes based on their family his-
tory of breast and ovarian cancer.57 The probability that an indi-
vidual will develop breast or ovarian cancer is derived from this 
mutation probability based on age-specific incidence curves for 
both mutation carriers and noncarriers.58 Use of the BRCAPRO 
model in the clinic is challenging since it requires input of all 
family history information regarding breast and ovarian cancer. 
The Tyrer-Cuzick model attempts to utilize both family history 
information and individual risk information. It uses the family 
history to calculate the probability that an individual carries a 
mutation in one of the breast cancer susceptibility genes and 
then the risk is adjusted based on personal risk factors, including 
age at menarche, parity, age at first live birth, age at menopause, 
history of atypical hyperplasia or LCIS, height and body mass 
index.59 Once a risk model has been utilized to assess breast 
cancer risk, this must be communicated to the individual and 
put into context with competing risk and medical comorbidities. 
This information can then be used to discuss options that are 
available to the individual for managing risk.
Risk Management
Several important medical decisions may be affected by a 
woman’s underlying risk of developing breast cancer.60-68 These 
decisions include when to use postmenopausal hormone replace-
ment therapy, at what age to begin mammography screening or 
incorporate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) screening, when 
Table 17-6 
Relative risk estimates for the Gail model
Variable
Relative Risk
Age at menarche (years)
  ≥14
  12–13
  <12
Number of biopsy specimens/history of 
benign breast disease, age <50 y
  0
  1
  ≥2
Number of biopsy specimens/history of 
benign breast disease, age ≥50 y
  0
  1
  ≥2
Age at first live birth (years)
  <20 y
    Number of first-degree relatives with 
history of breast cancer
    0
    1
    ≥2
  20–24 y
    Number of first-degree relatives with 
history of breast cancer
    0
    1
    ≥2
  25–29 y
  Number of first-degree relatives with 
history of breast cancer
    0
    1
    ≥2
  ≥30 y
  Number of first-degree relatives with 
history of breast cancer
    0
    1
    ≥2
1.00
1.10
1.21
1.00
1.70
2.88
1.02
1.27
1.62
1.00
2.61
6.80
1.24
2.68
5.78
1.55
2.76
4.91
1.93
2.83
4.17
Source: Modified from Armstrong K, et al: Primary care: Assessing the 
risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 342:564, 2000.
5
513
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
to use tamoxifen to prevent breast cancer, and when to perform 
prophylactic mastectomy to prevent breast cancer. Postmeno-
pausal hormone replacement therapy was widely prescribed in 
the 1980s and 1990s because of its effectiveness in controlling 
the symptoms of estrogen deficiency; namely, vasomotor symp-
toms such as hot flashes, night sweats and their associated sleep 
deprivation, osteoporosis, and cognitive changes. Furthermore, 
these hormone supplements were thought to reduce coronary 
artery disease as well. Use of combined estrogen and proges-
terone became standard for women who had not undergone 
hysterectomy, because unopposed estrogen increases the risk 
of uterine cancer. Concerns of prolonging a woman’s lifetime 
exposure to estrogen, coupled with conflicting data regarding 
the impact of these hormones on cardiovascular health, moti-
vated the implementation of large-scale phase III clinical trials 
to definitively evaluate the risks vs. benefits of postmenopausal 
hormone replacement therapy. The Women’s Health Initiative 
was therefore designed by the National Institutes of Health as 
a series of clinical trials to study the effects of diet, nutritional 
supplements, and hormones on the risk of cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, and bone health in postmenopausal women. Findings 
from primary studies of postmenopausal hormone replacement 
therapy were released in 2002, demonstrating conclusively that 
breast cancer risk is threefold to fourfold higher after >4 years 
of use and there is no significant reduction in coronary artery or 
cerebrovascular risks. The Collaborative Group on Hormonal 
Factors in Breast Cancer combined and re-analyzed data from 
a number of studies totaling 52,705 women with breast can-
cer and 108,411 women without breast cancer. They found an 
increased risk of breast cancer with ever use of estrogen replace-
ment therapy. They also reported increased risk among current 
users but not past users and risk increased with increasing dura-
tion of use of hormone replacement therapy.69 Cheblowski 
et al also reported from the WHI study that estrogen + pro-
gesterone increased the incidence of breast cancer.70 This was 
confirmed by the Million Women study which also showed that 
the increased risk was substantially greater for the combined 
estrogen + progesterone replacement therapy than other types 
of hormone replacement therapy.71
Breast Cancer Screening.  Routine use of screening mam-
mography in women ≥50 years of age has been reported to 
reduce mortality from breast cancer by 25%.72 This reduc-
tion comes at an acceptable economic cost. More recently, 
there has been debate over the potential harms associated with 
breast screening.73 As a result the United Kingdom recently 
established an independent expert panel to review the published 
literature and estimate the benefits and harms associated with 
screening women >50 years in its national screening program.74 
The expert panel estimated that an invitation to breast screening 
delivers about a 20% reduction in breast cancer mortality while 
at the same time the panel estimated that in women invited to 
screening, about 11% of the cancers diagnosed in their lifetime 
constitute over-diagnosis. Despite the overdiagnosis, the panel 
concluded that breast screening confers significant benefit and 
should continue. The use of screening mammography in women 
<50 years of age is more controversial for several reasons: 
(a) breast density is greater and screening mammography is less 
likely to detect early breast cancer (i.e., reduced sensitivity); 
(b) screening mammography results in more false-positive test 
findings (i.e., reduced specificity), which results in unneces-
sary biopsy specimens; and (c) younger women are less likely 
to have breast cancer (i.e., lower incidence), so fewer young 
women will benefit from screening.75,76 In the United States, 
on a population basis, however, the benefits of screening mam-
mography in women between the ages of 40 and 49 years is still 
felt to outweigh the risks; although targeting mammography to 
women at higher risk of breast cancer improves the balance of 
risks and benefits and is the approach some health care systems 
have taken. In one study of women aged 40 to 49 years, an 
abnormal mammography finding was three times more likely 
to be cancer in a woman with a family history of breast cancer 
than in a woman without such a history. Furthermore, as noted 
previously in the section Risk Assessment Models, mounting 
data regarding mammographic breast density demonstrate an 
independent correlation with breast cancer risk. Incorporation of 
breast density measurements into breast cancer risk assessment 
models appears to be a promising strategy for increasing the 
accuracy of these tools. Unfortunately, widespread application 
of these modified models is hampered by inconsistencies in the 
reporting of mammographic density. Ultrasonography can also 
be used for breast cancer screening in women with dense breasts 
but there is no data available that the additional cancers detected 
with this modality reduce mortality from breast cancer.
Current recommendations by the United States Preventive 
Services Task Force are that women undergo biennial mam-
mographic screening between the ages of 50 and 74 years.77 
The American Cancer Society (ACS) continues to recommend 
annual mammography for women beginning at age 40 years to 
continue as long as she is in good health. In addition, a clini-
cal breast examination by a health professional is recommended 
annually. The use of MRI for breast cancer screening is recom-
mended by the ACS for women with a 20% to 25% or greater 
lifetime risk using risk assessment tools based mainly on family 
history, BRCA mutation carriers, those individuals who have 
a family member with a BRCA mutation who have not been 
tested themselves, individuals who received radiation to the 
chest between the ages of 10 to 30 years, and those individuals 
with a history of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Cowden syndrome, 
or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome or those who have a 
first-degree relative with one of these syndromes. MRI is an 
extremely sensitive screening tool that is not limited by the den-
sity of the breast tissue as mammography is, however, its speci-
ficity is moderate leading to more false-positive events and the 
increased need for biopsy.
Chemoprevention.  Tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor 
modulator, was the first drug shown to reduce the incidence of 
breast cancer in healthy women. There have been 4 prospective 
studies published evaluating tamoxifen vs. placebo for reducing 
the incidence of invasive breast cancer for women at increased 
risk. The largest trial was the Breast Cancer Prevention Trial 
(NSABP P-01) which randomly assigned >13,000 women with 
a 5-year Gail relative risk of breast cancer of 1.66% or higher or 
LCIS to receive tamoxifen or placebo. After a mean follow-up 
period of 4 years, the incidence of breast cancer was reduced 
by 49% in the group receiving tamoxifen.60 The decrease was 
evident only in ER-positive breast cancers with no significant 
change in ER-negative tumors. The Royal Marsden Hospital 
Tamoxifen Chemoprevention Trial78, the Italian Tamoxifen 
Prevention Trial79, and the International Breast Cancer Inter-
vention Study I (IBIS-I) trial all80 showed a reduction in ER-
positive breast cancers with the use of tamoxifen compared with 
placebo. There was no effect on mortality; however, the trials 
were not powered to assess either breast cancer mortality or all-
cause mortality events. The adverse events were similar in all 
6
514
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
4 randomized trials including an increased risk of endometrial 
cancer, thromboembolic events, cataract formation, and vaso-
motor disturbances in individuals receiving tamoxifen.
Tamoxifen therapy currently is recommended only for 
women who have a Gail relative risk of 1.66% or higher, who 
are aged 35 to 59, women over the age of 60 or women with a 
diagnosis of LCIS or atypical ductal or lobular hyperplasia. In 
addition, deep vein thrombosis occurs 1.6 times as often, pul-
monary emboli 3.0 times as often, and endometrial cancer 
2.5 times as often in women taking tamoxifen. The increased 
risk for endometrial cancer is restricted to early stage cancers 
in postmenopausal women. Cataract surgery is required almost 
twice as often among women taking tamoxifen. Gail et al sub-
sequently developed a model that accounts for underlying risk 
of breast cancer as well as comorbidities to determine the net 
risk-benefit ratio of tamoxifen use for chemoprevention.81
The NSABP completed a second chemoprevention trial, 
designed to compare tamoxifen and raloxifene for breast cancer 
risk reduction in high-risk postmenopausal women. Raloxifene, 
another selective estrogen receptor modulator, was selected for 
the experimental arm in this follow-up prevention trial because 
its use in managing postmenopausal osteoporosis suggested that 
it might be even more effective at breast cancer risk reduction, 
but without the adverse effects of tamoxifen on the uterus. The 
P-2 trial, the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (known as the 
STAR trial), randomly assigned 19,747 postmenopausal women 
at high-risk for breast cancer to receive either tamoxifen or ral-
oxifene. The initial report of the P-2 trial showed the two agents 
were nearly identical in their ability to reduce breast cancer risk, 
but raloxifene was associated with a more favorable adverse event 
profile.82 An updated analysis revealed that raloxifene maintained 
76% of the efficacy of tamoxifen in prevention of invasive breast 
cancer with a more favorable side effect profile. The risk of devel-
oping endometrial cancer was significantly higher with tamoxifen 
use at longer follow-up.83 Although tamoxifen has been shown to 
reduce the incidence of LCIS and DCIS, raloxifene did not have 
an effect on the frequency of these diagnoses.
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have been shown to be more 
effective than tamoxifen in reducing the incidence of contralat-
eral breast cancers in postmenopausal women receiving AIs for 
adjuvant treatment of invasive breast cancer. The MAP.3 trial 
was the first study to evaluate an AI as a chemopreventive agent 
in postmenopausal women at high risk for breast cancer. The 
trial randomized 4,560 women to exemestane 25 mg daily vs. 
placebo for five years. After a median follow-up of 35 months, 
exemestane was shown to reduce invasive breast cancer inci-
dence by 65%. Side effect profiles demonstrated more grade 2 
or higher arthritis and hot flashes in patients taking exemes-
tane.84 The IBIS II trial has recruited 6,000 patients randomized 
to the non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor, anastrozole, vs. placebo 
with a further randomization to bisphosphonate or not based 
on bone density.85 The trial also had an initial sub-study which 
looked at the effect of the aromatase inhibitor on cognitive func-
tion and reported no adverse effects.86 The American Society of 
Clinical Oncology recently updated recommendations for che-
moprevention in women at increased risk of breast cancer as did 
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Both groups recom-
mend offering tamoxifen to women at increased risk for breast 
cancer or raloxifene to postmenopausal women who are noted 
to be at increased risk.87,88 The discussion with an individual 
patient should include risk assessment and potential risks and 
benefits with each agent.
Risk-reducing Surgery.  A retrospective study of women at 
high risk for breast cancer found that prophylactic mastectomy 
reduced their risk by >90%.62 However, the effects of prophy-
lactic mastectomy on the long-term quality of life are poorly 
quantified. A study involving women who were carriers of a 
breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA) mutation found that 
the benefit of prophylactic mastectomy differed substantially 
according to the breast cancer risk conferred by the mutations. 
For women with an estimated lifetime risk of 40%, prophylactic 
mastectomy added almost 3 years of life, whereas for women 
with an estimated lifetime risk of 85%, prophylactic mastec-
tomy added >5 years of life.66 Domchek et al evaluated a cohort 
of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers who were followed prospectively 
and reported on outcomes with risk-reducing surgery.89 They 
found that risk-reducing mastectomy was highly effective at 
preventing breast cancer in both BRCA1 and 2 mutation carri-
ers. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy was highly effective 
at reducing the incidence of ovarian cancer and breast cancer 
in BRCA mutation carriers and was associated with a reduc-
tion in breast cancer-specific mortality, ovarian cancer-specific 
mortality, and all-cause mortality. While studies of bilateral pro-
phylactic or risk-reducing mastectomy have reported dramatic 
reductions in breast cancer incidence among those without 
known BRCA mutations, there is little data to support a sur-
vival benefit. Another consideration is that while most patients 
are satisfied with their decision to pursue risk-reducing surgery, 
some are dissatisfied with the cosmetic outcomes mostly due to 
reconstructive issues.
BRCA Mutations
BRCA1.  Up to 5% of breast cancers are caused by inheritance 
of germline mutations such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, which 
are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with varying 
degrees of penetrance (Table 17-7).90-96BRCA1 is located on 
chromosome arm 17q, spans a genomic region of approximately 
100 kilobases (kb) of DNA, and contains 22 coding exons for 
1863 amino acids. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 function as tumor-
suppressor genes, and for each gene, loss of both alleles is 
required for the initiation of cancer. Data accumulated since 
the isolation of the BRCA1 gene suggest a role in transcription, 
Table 17-7 
Incidence of sporadic, familial, and hereditary breast 
cancer
Sporadic breast cancer
65%–75%
Familial breast cancer
20%–30%
Hereditary breast cancer
5%–10%
  BRCA1a
45%
  BRCA2
35%
  p53a (Li-Fraumeni syndrome)
1%
  STK11/LKB1a (Peutz-Jeghers syndrome)
<1%
  PTENa (Cowden disease)
<1%
  MSH2/MLH1a (Muir-Torre syndrome)
<1%
  ATMa (Ataxia-telangiectasia)
<1%
  Unknown
20%
aAffected gene.
Source: Adapted from Martin.92
515
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
cell-cycle control, and DNA damage repair pathways. More 
than 500 sequence variations in BRCA1 have been identified. 
It now is known that germline mutations in BRCA1 represent 
a predisposing genetic factor in as many as 45% of heredi-
tary breast cancers and in at least 80% of hereditary ovarian 
cancers. Female mutation carriers have been reported to have 
up to a 85% lifetime risk (for some families) for developing 
breast cancer and up to a 40% lifetime risk for developing ovar-
ian cancer. The initial families reported had high penetrance 
and subsequently the average lifetime risk has been reported 
to lie between 60%–70%. Breast cancer susceptibility in these 
families appears as an autosomal dominant trait with high pen-
etrance. Approximately 50% of children of carriers inherit the 
trait. In general, BRCA1-associated breast cancers are invasive 
ductal carcinomas, are poorly differentiated, are in the majority 
hormone receptor negative and have a triple receptor negative 
(immunohistochemical profile: ER-negative, PR-negative and 
HER-2-negative) or basal phenotype (based on gene expression 
profiling). BRCA1-associated breast cancers have a number of 
distinguishing clinical features, such as an early age of onset 
compared with sporadic cases; a higher prevalence of bilateral 
breast cancer; and the presence of associated cancers in some 
affected individuals, specifically ovarian cancer and possibly 
colon and prostate cancers.
Several founder mutations have been identified in BRCA1. 
The two most common mutations are 185delAG and 5382insC, 
which account for 10% of all the mutations seen in BRCA1. 
These two mutations occur at a 10-fold higher frequency in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish population than in non-Jewish cau-
casians. The carrier frequency of the 185delAG mutation in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish population is 1% and, along with the 
5382insC mutation, accounts for almost all BRCA1 mutations 
in this population. Analysis of germline mutations in Jewish and 
non-Jewish women with early-onset breast cancer indicates that 
20% of Jewish women who develop breast cancer before age 40 
years carry the 185delAG mutation. There are founder BRCA1 
mutations in other populations including, among others, Dutch, 
Polish, Finnish, and Russian populations.97-101
BRCA2.  BRCA2 is located on chromosome arm 13q and spans 
a genomic region of approximately 70 kb of DNA. The 11.2-kb 
coding region contains 26 coding exons.90-96 It encodes a pro-
tein of 3418 amino acids. The BRCA2 gene bears no homology 
to any previously described gene, and the protein contains no 
previously defined functional domains. The biologic function 
of BRCA2 is not well defined, but like BRCA1, it is postulated 
to play a role in DNA damage response pathways. BRCA2 mes-
senger RNA also is expressed at high levels in the late G1 and 
S phases of the cell cycle. The kinetics of BRCA2 protein regu-
lation in the cell cycle is similar to that of BRCA1 protein, which 
suggests that these genes are coregulated. The mutational spec-
trum of BRCA2 is not as well established as that of BRCA1. 
To date, >250 mutations have been found. The breast cancer 
risk for BRCA2 mutation carriers is close to 85%, and the life-
time ovarian cancer risk, while lower than for BRCA1, is still 
estimated to be close to 20%. Breast cancer susceptibility in 
BRCA2 families is an autosomal dominant trait and has a high 
penetrance. Approximately 50% of children of carriers inherit 
the trait. Unlike male carriers of BRCA1 mutations, men with 
germline mutations in BRCA2 have an estimated breast cancer 
risk of 6%, which represents a 100-fold increase over the risk 
in the general male population. BRCA2-associated breast can-
cers are invasive ductal carcinomas, which are more likely to 
be well differentiated and to express hormone receptors than 
are BRCA1-associated breast cancers. BRCA2-associated breast 
cancer has a number of distinguishing clinical features, such as 
an early age of onset compared with sporadic cases, a higher 
prevalence of bilateral breast cancer, and the presence of associ-
ated cancers in some affected individuals, specifically ovarian, 
colon, prostate, pancreatic, gallbladder, bile duct, and stomach 
cancers, as well as melanoma. A number of founder mutations 
have been identified in BRCA2. The 6174delT mutation is found 
in Ashkenazi Jews with a prevalence of 1.2% and accounts for 
60% of ovarian cancer and 30% of early-onset breast cancer 
patients among Ashkenazi women.102 Another BRCA2 founder 
mutation, 999del5, is observed in Icelandic and Finnish popula-
tions while more recently 3036delACAA has been observed in 
a number of Spanish families.103-105
Identification of BRCA Mutation Carriers.  Identifying 
hereditary risk for breast cancer is a four-step process that 
includes: (a) obtaining a complete, multigenerational family 
history, (b) assessing the appropriateness of genetic testing for 
a particular patient, (c) counseling the patient, and (d) inter-
preting the results of testing.106 Genetic testing should not be 
offered in isolation, but only in conjunction with patient educa-
tion and counseling, including referral to a genetic counselor. 
Initial determinations include whether the individual is an 
appropriate candidate for genetic testing and whether genetic 
testing will be informative for personal and clinical decision 
making. A thorough and accurate family history is essential to 
this process, and the maternal and paternal sides of the family 
are both assessed, because 50% of the women with a BRCA 
mutation have inherited the mutation from their fathers. To 
help clinicians advise women about genetic testing, statistically 
based models that determine the probability that an individual 
carries a BRCA mutation have been developed. A method for 
calculating carrier probability which has been demonstrated to 
have acceptable performance (i.e., both in terms of calibration 
and discrimination) such as the Manchester scoring system 
and BODICEA should be used to offer referral to a specialist 
genetic clinic. A hereditary risk of breast cancer is considered 
if a family includes Ashkenazi Jewish heritage; a first-degree 
relative with breast cancer before age 50; a history of ovarian 
cancer at any age in the patient or first- or second-degree rela-
tive with ovarian cancer; breast and ovarian cancer in the same 
individual; two or more first- or second-degree relatives with 
breast cancer at any age; patient or relative with bilateral breast 
cancer; and male breast cancer in a relative at any age.107 The 
threshold for genetic testing is lower in individuals who are 
members of ethnic groups in whom the mutation prevalence 
is increased.
BRCA Mutation Testing.  Appropriate counseling for the 
individual being tested for a BRCA mutation is strongly rec-
ommended, and documentation of informed consent is 
required.106,108 The test that is clinically available for analyzing 
BRCA mutations is gene sequence analysis. In a family with a 
history suggestive of hereditary breast cancer and no previously 
tested member, the most informative strategy is first to test 
an affected family member. This person undergoes complete 
sequence analysis of both the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. If a 
mutation is identified, relatives are usually tested only for that 
specific mutation. An individual of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry 
is tested initially for the three specific mutations that account 
for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in that population. 
516
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
If results of that test are negative, it may then be appropriate to 
fully analyze the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
A positive test result is one that discloses the presence of a 
BRCA mutation that interferes with translation or function of the 
BRCA protein. A woman who carries a deleterious mutation has 
a breast cancer risk of up to 85% (in some families) as well as a 
greatly increased risk of ovarian cancer. A negative test result 
is interpreted according to the individual’s personal and family 
history, especially whether a mutation has been previously iden-
tified in the family, in which case the woman is generally tested 
only for that specific mutation. If the mutation is not present, 
the woman’s risk of breast or ovarian cancer may be no greater 
than that of the general population. In addition, no BRCA muta-
tion can be passed on to the woman’s children. In the absence 
of a previously identified mutation, a negative test result in an 
affected individual generally indicates that a BRCA mutation is 
not responsible for the familial cancer. However, the possibil-
ity remains of an unusual abnormality in one of these genes that 
cannot yet be identified through clinical testing. It also is pos-
sible that the familial cancer is indeed caused by an identifiable 
BRCA mutation but that the individual tested had sporadic cancer, 
a situation known as phenocopy. This is especially possible if 
the individual tested developed breast cancer close to the age of 
onset of the general population (age 60 years or older) rather than 
before age 50 years, as is characteristic of BRCA mutation carri-
ers. Overall, the false-negative rate for BRCA mutation testing is 
<5%. Some test results, especially when a single base-pair change 
(missense mutation) is identified, may be difficult to interpret. 
This is because single base-pair changes do not always result in 
a nonfunctional protein. Thus, missense mutations not located 
within critical functional domains, or those that cause only mini-
mal changes in protein structure, may not be disease associated 
and are usually reported as indeterminate results. In communicat-
ing indeterminate results to women, care must be taken to relay 
the uncertain cancer risk associated with this type of mutation 
and to emphasize that ongoing research might clarify its meaning. 
In addition, testing other family members with breast cancer to 
determine if a genetic variant tracks with their breast cancer may 
provide clarification as to its significance. Indeterminate genetic 
variance currently accounts for 12% of the test results.
Concern has been expressed that the identification of 
hereditary risk for breast cancer may interfere with access to 
affordable health insurance. This concern refers to discrimina-
tion directed against an individual or family based solely on an 
apparent or perceived genetic variation from the normal human 
genotype. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) made it illegal in the United States for 
group health plans to consider genetic information as a preexist-
ing condition or to use it to deny or limit coverage. Most states 
also have passed laws that prevent genetic discrimination in the 
provision of health insurance. In addition, individuals applying 
for health insurance are not required to report whether relatives 
have undergone genetic testing for cancer risk, only whether 
those relatives have actually been diagnosed with cancer. Cur-
rently there is little documented evidence of genetic discrimina-
tion resulting from findings of available genetic tests.
Cancer Prevention for BRCA Mutation Carriers.  Risk man-
agement strategies for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers 
include the following:
1.  Risk-reducing mastectomy and reconstruction
2.  Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy
3.  Intensive surveillance for breast and ovarian cancer
4.  Chemoprevention
Although removal of breast tissue reduces the likelihood 
that BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers will develop breast 
cancer, mastectomy does not remove all breast tissue and women 
continue to be at risk because a germline mutation is present in 
any remaining breast tissue. For postmenopausal BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutation carriers who have not had a mastectomy, it may 
be advisable to avoid hormone replacement therapy, because no 
data exist regarding the effect of the therapy on the penetrance 
of breast cancer susceptibility genes. Because breast cancers in 
BRCA mutation carriers have the same mammographic appear-
ance as breast cancers in noncarriers, a screening mammogram 
is likely to be effective in BRCA mutation carriers, provided it 
is performed and interpreted by an experienced radiologist with 
a high level of suspicion. Present screening recommendations 
for BRCA mutation carriers who do not undergo risk-reducing 
mastectomy include clinical breast examination every 6 months 
and mammography every 12 months beginning at age 25 years, 
because the risk of breast cancer in BRCA mutation carriers 
increases after age 30 years. Recent attention has been focused 
on the use MRI for breast cancer screening in high-risk indi-
viduals and known BRCA mutation carriers. MRI appears to be 
more sensitive at detecting breast cancer in younger women with 
dense breasts.109 However, as noted previously, MRI does lead 
to the detection of benign breast lesions that cannot easily be 
distinguished from malignancy, and these false-positive events 
can result in more interventions, including biopsy specimens. 
The current recommendations from the American Cancer Soci-
ety are for annual MRI in women with a 20% to 25% or greater 
lifetime risk of developing breast cancer, including women with 
a strong family history of breast or ovarian cancer and women 
who were treated for Hodgkin’s disease in their teens or early 
twenties.110 Despite a 49% reduction in the overall incidence of 
breast cancer and a 69% reduction in the incidence of estrogen 
receptor positive tumors in high-risk women taking tamoxifen 
reported in the NSABP P1 trial, there is insufficient evidence to 
recommend the use of tamoxifen uniformly for BRCA1 muta-
tion carriers.60 Cancers arising in BRCA1 mutation carriers are 
usually high grade and are most often hormone receptor nega-
tive. Approximately 66% of BRCA1-associated DCIS lesions 
are estrogen receptor negative, which suggests early acquisition 
of the hormone-independent phenotype. In the NSABP P1 trial 
there was a 62% reduction in the incidence of breast cancer 
in BRCA2 carriers, similar to the overall reduction seen in the 
P1 trial. In contrast, there was no reduction seen in breast cancer 
incidence in BRCA1 carriers who started tamoxifen in P1 age 
35 years or older.111 Tamoxifen appears to be more effective at 
preventing estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers.
The risk of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 muta-
tion carriers ranges from 20% to 40%, which is 10 times higher 
than that in the general population. Risk-reducing salpingo-
oophorectomy is a reasonable prevention option in mutation car-
riers. In women with a documented BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, 
consideration for bilateral risk-reducing salpingo-ophorectomy 
should be between the ages of 35 and 40 years at the completion 
of childbearing. Removing the ovaries reduces the risk of ovar-
ian cancer and breast cancer when performed in premenopausal 
BRCA mutation carriers. Hormone replacement therapy is dis-
cussed with the patient at the time of oophorectomy. The Cancer 
Genetics Studies Consortium recommends yearly transvaginal 
517
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
ultrasound timed to avoid ovulation and annual measurement 
of serum cancer antigen 125 levels beginning at age 25 years 
as the best screening modalities for ovarian carcinoma in BRCA 
mutation carriers who have opted to defer prophylactic surgery.
Other hereditary syndromes associated with an increased 
risk of breast cancer include Cowden disease (PTEN mutations, 
in which cancers of the thyroid, GI tract, and benign skin and 
subcutaneous nodules are also seen), Li-Fraumeni syndrome 
(p53 mutations, also associated with sarcomas, lymphomas, and 
adrenocortical tumors), and syndromes of breast and melanoma.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND NATURAL  
HISTORY OF BREAST CANCER
Epidemiology
Breast cancer is the most common site-specific cancer in women 
and is the leading cause of death from cancer for women aged 
20 to 59 years. It accounts for 29% of all newly diagnosed can-
cers in females and is responsible for 14% of the cancer-related 
deaths in women. It is predicted that approximately 234,580 
breast cancers will be diagnosed in the United States in 2013 and 
that 40,030 individuals will die from breast cancer.112 Breast can-
cer was the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women 
until 1987, when it was surpassed by lung cancer. In the 1970s, 
the probability that a woman in the United States would develop 
breast cancer at some point in her lifetime was estimated at 
1 in 13; in 1980 it was 1 in 11; and in 2004 it was 1 in 8. Cancer 
registries in Connecticut and upper New York State document 
that the age-adjusted incidence of new breast cancer cases had 
steadily increased since the mid-1940s. The incidence in the 
United States, based on data from nine Surveillance, Epidemiol-
ogy, and End Results (SEER) registries, has been decreasing by 
23% per year since 2000. The increase had been approximately 
1% per year from 1973 to 1980, and there was an additional 
increase in incidence of 4% between 1980 and 1987, which 
was characterized by frequent detection of small primary can-
cers. The increase in breast cancer incidence occurred primar-
ily in women ≥55 years and paralleled a marked increase in the 
percentage of older women who had mammograms taken. At 
the same time, incidence rates for regional metastatic disease 
dropped and breast cancer mortality declined. From 1960 to 
1963, 5-year overall survival rates for breast cancer were 63% 
and 46% in white and African American women, respectively, 
whereas the rates for 1981 to 1983 were 78% and 64%, respec-
tively. For 2002 to 2008 rates were 92% and 78%, respectively.
There is a 10-fold variation in breast cancer incidence 
among different countries worldwide. Cyprus and Malta have 
the highest age-adjusted mortality for breast cancer (29.6 per 
100,000 population), whereas Haiti has the lowest (2.0 deaths 
per 100,000 population). The United States has an age-adjusted 
mortality for breast cancer of 19.0 cases per 100,000 population. 
Women living in less-industrialized nations tend to have a lower 
incidence of breast cancer than women living in industrialized 
countries, although Japan is an exception. In the United States, 
Mormons, Seventh Day Adventists, American Indians, Alaska 
natives, Hispanic/Latina Americans, and Japanese and Filipino 
women living in Hawaii have a below-average incidence of 
breast cancer, whereas nuns (due to nulliparity) and Ashkenazi 
Jewish women have an above-average incidence.
The incidence rates of breast cancer increased in most 
countries through the 1990s. Since the estimates for 1990, there 
was an overall increase in incidence rates of approximately 
0.5% annually. It was predicted that there would be approxi-
mately 1.4 million new cases in 2010. The cancer registries in 
China have noted annual increases in incidence of up to 3% to 
4%, and in eastern Asia, increases are similar.
Recent data from the SEER program reveal declines in 
breast cancer incidence over the past decade, and this is widely 
attributed to decreased use of hormone replacement therapy as a 
consequence of the Women’s Health Initiative reports.113
Breast cancer burden has well-defined variations by geog-
raphy, regional lifestyle, and racial or ethnic background.114 In 
general, both breast cancer incidence and mortality are rela-
tively lower among the female populations of Asia and Africa, 
relatively underdeveloped nations, and nations that have not 
adopted the Westernized reproductive and dietary patterns. In 
contrast, European and North American women and women 
from heavily industrialized or westernized countries have a 
substantially higher breast cancer burden. These international 
patterns are mirrored in breast cancer incidence and mortality 
rates observed for the racially, ethnically, and culturally diverse 
population of the United States.115
Although often related, the factors that influence breast 
cancer incidence may differ from those that affect mortality. 
Incidence rates are lower among populations that are heavily 
weighted with women who begin childbearing at young ages 
and who have multiple full-term pregnancies followed by pro-
longed lactation. These are features that characterize many 
underdeveloped nations and also many eastern nations. Breast 
cancer mortality rates should be lower in populations that have a 
lower incidence, but the mortality burden will simultaneously be 
adversely affected by the absence of effective mammographic 
screening programs for early detection and diminished access 
to multidisciplinary cancer treatment programs. These features 
are likely to account for much of the disproportionate mortal-
ity risks that are seen in underdeveloped nations. Similar fac-
tors probably account for differences in breast cancer burden 
observed among the various racial and ethnic groups within 
the United States. Interestingly, breast cancer incidence and 
mortality rates rise among second- and third-generation Asian 
Americans as they adopt Western lifestyles.
Disparities in breast cancer survival among subsets of 
the American population are generating increased publicity 
because they are closely linked to disparities in socioeconomic 
status. Poverty rates and proportions of the population that 
lack health care insurance are two to three times higher among 
minority racial and ethnic groups such as African Americans 
and Hispanic/Latino Americans. These socioeconomic disad-
vantages create barriers to effective breast cancer screening and 
result in delayed breast cancer diagnosis, advanced stage distri-
bution, inadequacies in comprehensive treatment, and ultimately 
increased mortality rates. Furthermore, the rapid growth in the 
Hispanic population is accompanied by increasing problems in 
health education because of linguistic barriers between physi-
cians and recently immigrated, non-English-speaking patients. 
Recent studies also are documenting inequities in the treatments 
delivered to minority breast cancer patients, such as increased 
rates of failure to provide systemic therapy, use of sentinel 
lymph node dissection, and breast reconstruction. Some of the 
treatment delivery disparities are related to inadequately con-
trolled comorbidities (such as hypertension and diabetes), which 
are more prevalent in minority populations. However, some stud-
ies that adjust for these factors report persistent and unexplained 
518
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
unevenness in treatment recommendations. It is clear that breast 
cancer disparities associated with racial or ethnic background 
have a multifactorial cause, and improvements in outcome will 
require correction of many public health problems at both the 
patient and provider levels.
Advances in the ability to characterize breast cancer sub-
types and the genetics of the disease are now provoking specu-
lation regarding possible hereditary influences on breast cancer 
risk that are related to racial or ethnic ancestry.116 These ques-
tions become particularly compelling when one looks at dis-
parities in breast cancer burden between African Americans and 
Caucasians. Lifetime risk of breast cancer is lower for African 
Americans, yet a paradoxically increased breast cancer mortal-
ity risk also is seen. African Americans also have a younger age 
distribution for breast cancer; among women <45 years of age, 
breast cancer incidence is highest among African Americans 
compared to other subsets of the American population. Lastly 
and most provocatively, African American women of all ages 
have notably higher incidence rates for estrogen receptor-
negative tumors. These same patterns of disease are seen in con-
temporary female populations of western, sub-Saharan Africa, 
who are likely to share ancestry with African American women 
as a consequence of the Colonial-era slave trade. Interestingly, 
male breast cancer also is seen with increased frequency among 
both African Americans and Africans.
Natural History
Bloom and colleagues described the natural history of breast 
cancer based on the records of 250 women with untreated 
breast cancers who were cared for on charity wards in the 
Middlesex Hospital, London, between 1805 and 1933. The 
median survival of this population was 2.7 years after initial 
diagnosis (Fig. 17-13).117 The 5- and 10-year survival rates 
Figure 17-13.  Survival of women with untreated breast cancer 
compared with natural survival. (Reproduced with permission 
from Bloom HJG, Richardson WW, Harries EJ. Natural history 
of untreated breast cancer [1803–1933]: Comparison of untreated 
and treated cases according to histological grade of malignancy. 
Br Med J. With permission from BMJ Publishing Group, Ltd.)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
83%
68%
54%
41%
Middlesex  Hospital 1805-1933 (250 cases)
86%
66%
44%
28%
18%
9%
3.6%
2%
0.8%
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19 
 Median 
survival 
2.7 years
 Natural survival
Survival untreated 
cases
Duration of life from onset of symptoms (years)
% Survival
for these women were 18.0% and 3.6%, respectively. Only 
0.8% survived for 15 years or longer. Autopsy data confirmed 
that 95% of these women died of breast cancer, whereas the 
remaining 5% died of other causes. Almost 75% of the women 
developed ulceration of the breast during the course of the 
disease. The longest surviving patient died in the nineteenth 
year after diagnosis.
Primary Breast Cancer.  More than 80% of breast cancers 
show productive fibrosis that involves the epithelial and stromal 
tissues. With growth of the cancer and invasion of the surround-
ing breast tissues, the accompanying desmoplastic response 
entraps and shortens Cooper’s suspensory ligaments to produce 
a characteristic skin retraction. Localized edema (peaud’orange) 
develops when drainage of lymph fluid from the skin is dis-
rupted. With continued growth, cancer cells invade the skin, and 
eventually ulceration occurs. As new areas of skin are invaded, 
small satellite nodules appear near the primary ulceration. The 
size of the primary breast cancer correlates with disease-free 
and overall survival, but there is a close association between 
cancer size and axillary lymph node involvement (Fig. 17-14). 
In general, up to 20% of breast cancer recurrences are local-
regional, >60% are distant, and 20% are both local-regional and 
distant.
Axillary Lymph Node Metastases.  As the size of the pri-
mary breast cancer increases, some cancer cells are shed into 
cellular spaces and transported via the lymphatic network of 
the breast to the regional lymph nodes, especially the axillary 
lymph nodes. Lymph nodes that contain metastatic cancer are 
at first ill-defined and soft but become firm or hard with con-
tinued growth of the metastatic cancer. Eventually the lymph 
nodes adhere to each other and form a conglomerate mass. 
Cancer cells may grow through the lymph node capsule and fix 
to contiguous structures in the axilla, including the chest wall. 
Typically, axillary lymph nodes are involved sequentially from 
the low (level I) to the central (level II) to the apical (level III) 
lymph node groups. Approximately 95% of the women who die 
of breast cancer have distant metastases, and traditionally the 
most important prognostic correlate of disease-free and over-
all survival was axillary lymph node status (see Fig. 17-14A). 
Women with node-negative disease had less than a 30% risk of 
recurrence, compared with as much as a 75% risk for women 
with node-positive disease.
Distant Metastases.  At approximately the twentieth cell dou-
bling, breast cancers acquire their own blood supply (neovas-
cularization). Thereafter, cancer cells may be shed directly into 
the systemic venous blood to seed the pulmonary circulation 
via the axillary and intercostal veins or the vertebral column 
via Batson’s plexus of veins, which courses the length of the 
vertebral column. These cells are scavenged by natural killer 
lymphocytes and macrophages. Successful implantation of met-
astatic foci from breast cancer predictably occurs after the pri-
mary cancer exceeds 0.5 cm in diameter, which corresponds to 
the twenty-seventh cell doubling. For 10 years after initial treat-
ment, distant metastases are the most common cause of death in 
breast cancer patients. For this reason, conclusive results cannot 
be derived from breast cancer trials until at least 5 to 10 years 
have elapsed. Although 60% of the women who develop distant 
metastases will do so within 60 months of treatment, metastases 
may become evident as late as 20 to 30 years after treatment 
of the primary cancer.118 Patients with estrogen receptor nega-
tive breast cancers are proportionately more likely to develop 
519
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
recurrence in the first 3 to 5 years, whereas those with estrogen 
receptor positive tumors have a risk of developing recurrence 
which drops off more slowly beyond 5 years than is seen with 
ER negative tumors.119 Recently a report showed that tumor 
size and nodal status remain powerful predictors of late recur-
rences compared to more recently developed tools such as the 
Figure 17-14.  A. Overall survival for women with breast can-
cer according to axillary lymph node status. The time periods 
are years after radical mastectomy. (Reproduced with permission 
from Valagussa P, et al: Patterns of relapse and survival following 
radical mastectomy. Analysis of 716 consecutive patients. Cancer. 
1978;11:1170. kkjkjdht © American Cancer Society. This mate-
rial is reproduced with permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc., a subsidiary 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) B. Risk of metastases according to 
breast cancer volume and diameter. (Reproduced with permission 
from Koscielny S et al. Breast cancer: Relationship between the size 
of the primary tumour and the probability of metastatic dissemina-
tion. Br J Cancer. 1984;49:709.)
x
x
x
x
xx
xx
x
x
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Diameter (cm)
0.98
0.95
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
Proportion of patients with metastases
10
100
Volume (ml)
2
3
4
5
6
7
6
8
9 10 11
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Percent survivors
315
297
173
636
531
263
177
142
65
321
234
90
92
144
25
N + >3 (183)
N + (381)
N + 1 (198)
N - (335)
Whole series (716)
2
4
10
6
8
Years after mastectomy
A
B
immunohistochemical score (IHC4) and two gene expression 
profile tests (Recurrence Score and PAM50).120 Common sites 
of involvement, in order of frequency, are bone, lung, pleura, 
soft tissues, and liver. Brain metastases are less frequent over-
all although with the advent of adjuvant systemic therapies it 
has been reported that CNS disease may be seen earlier.121,122 
There are also reports of factors which are associated with the 
risk of developing brain metastases.123 For example, they are 
more likely to be seen in patients with triple receptor negative 
breast cancer (ER-negative, PR-negative and HER2-negative) 
or patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who have received 
chemotherapy and HER2-directed therapies.
HISTOPATHOLOGY OF BREAST CANCER
Carcinoma In Situ
Cancer cells are in situ or invasive depending on whether or not 
they invade through the basement membrane.124,125 Broders’s origi-
nal description of in situ breast cancer stressed the absence of 
invasion of cells into the surrounding stroma and their confine-
ment within natural ductal and alveolar boundaries.124 Because 
areas of invasion may be minute, the accurate diagnosis of in 
situ cancer necessitates the analysis of multiple microscopic 
sections to exclude invasion. In 1941, Foote and Stewart pub-
lished a landmark description of LCIS, which distinguished it 
from DCIS.125 In the late 1960s, Gallagher and Martin published 
their study of whole-breast sections and described a stepwise 
progression from benign breast tissue to in situ cancer and 
subsequently to invasive cancer. Before the widespread use 
of mammography, diagnosis of breast cancer was by physical 
examination. At that time, in situ cancers constituted <6% of all 
breast cancers, and LCIS was more frequently diagnosed than 
DCIS by a ratio of >2:1. However, when screening mammog-
raphy became popular, a 14-fold increase in the incidence of in 
situ cancer (45%) was demonstrated, and DCIS was more fre-
quently diagnosed than LCIS by a ratio of >2:1. Table 17-8 lists 
the clinical and pathologic characteristics of DCIS and LCIS. 
Multicentricity refers to the occurrence of a second breast can-
cer outside the breast quadrant of the primary cancer (or at least 
4 cm away), whereas multifocality refers to the occurrence of a 
second cancer within the same breast quadrant as the primary 
cancer (or within 4 cm of it). Multicentricity occurs in 60% to 
90% of women with LCIS, whereas the rate of multicentricity 
for DCIS is reported to be 40% to 80%. LCIS occurs bilaterally 
in 50% to 70% of cases, whereas DCIS occurs bilaterally in 
10% to 20% of cases.
Lobular Carcinoma In Situ.  LCIS originates from the termi-
nal duct lobular units and develops only in the female breast. It 
is characterized by distention and distortion of the terminal duct 
lobular units by cells which are large but maintain a normal 
nuclear: cytoplasmic ratio. Cytoplasmic mucoid globules are 
a distinctive cellular feature. LCIS may be observed in breast 
tissues that contain microcalcifications, but the calcifications 
associated with LCIS typically occur in adjacent tissues. This 
neighborhood calcification is a feature that is unique to LCIS 
and contributes to its diagnosis. The frequency of LCIS in the 
general population cannot be reliably determined because it usu-
ally presents as an incidental finding. The average age at diag-
nosis is 45 years, which is approximately 15 to 25 years younger 
than the age at diagnosis for invasive breast cancer. LCIS has a 
distinct racial predilection, occurring 12 times more frequently 
520
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
in white women than in African American women. Invasive 
breast cancer develops in 25% to 35% of women with LCIS. 
Invasive cancer may develop in either breast, regardless of 
which breast harbored the initial focus of LCIS, and is detected 
synchronously with LCIS in 5% of cases. In women with a his-
tory of LCIS, up to 65% of subsequent invasive cancers are duc-
tal, not lobular, in origin. For these reasons, LCIS is regarded 
as a marker of increased risk for invasive breast cancer rather 
than as an anatomic precursor. Individuals should be counseled 
regarding their risk of developing breast cancer and appropriate 
Table 17-8 
Salient characteristics of in situ ductal (DCIS) and lob-
ular (LCIS) carcinoma of the breast
LCIS
DCIS
Age (years)
44–47
54–58
Incidencea
2%–5%
5%–10%
Clinical signs
None
Mass, pain, nipple 
discharge
Mammographic signs
None
Microcalcifications
Premenopausal
2/3
1/3
Incidence of 
synchronous invasive 
carcinoma
5%
2%–46%
Multicentricity
60%–90%
40%–80%
Bilaterality
50%–70%
10%–20%
Axillary metastasis
1%
1%–2%
Subsequent carcinomas:
  Incidence
25%–35%
25%–70%
  Laterality
Bilateral
Ipsilateral
  Interval to diagnosis
15–20 y
5–10 y
  Histologic type
Ductal
Ductal
aIn biopsy specimens of mammographically detected breast lesions.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Frykberg ER, et al: Current 
concepts on the biology and management of in situ (Tis, stage 0) 
breast carcinoma, in Bland KI, et al (eds): The Breast: Comprehensive 
Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders;1998:1020. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
risk reduction strategies, including observation with screening, 
chemoprevention, and risk-reducing bilateral mastectomy.
Ductal Carcinoma In Situ.  Although DCIS is predominantly 
seen in the female breast, it accounts for 5% of male breast can-
cers. Published series suggest a detection frequency of 7% in all 
biopsy tissue specimens. The term intraductal carcinoma is fre-
quently applied to DCIS, which carries a high risk for progres-
sion to an invasive cancer. Histologically, DCIS is characterized 
by a proliferation of the epithelium that lines the minor ducts, 
resulting in papillary growths within the duct lumina. Early in 
their development, the cancer cells do not show pleomorphism, 
mitoses, or atypia, which leads to difficulty in distinguishing 
early DCIS from benign hyperplasia. The papillary growths 
(papillary growth pattern) eventually coalesce and fill the duct 
lumina so that only scattered, rounded spaces remain between 
the clumps of atypical cancer cells, which show hyperchroma-
sia and loss of polarity (cribriform growth pattern). Eventually 
pleomorphic cancer cells with frequent mitotic figures obliterate 
the lumina and distend the ducts (solid growth pattern). With 
continued growth, these cells outstrip their blood supply and 
become necrotic (comedo growth pattern). Calcium deposition 
occurs in the areas of necrosis and is a common feature seen 
on mammography. DCIS is now frequently classified based on 
nuclear grade and the presence of necrosis (Table 17-9). Based 
on multiple consensus meetings, grading of DCIS has been rec-
ommended. Although there is no universal agreement on clas-
sification, most systems endorse the use of cytologic grade and 
presence or absence of necrosis.126
The risk for invasive breast cancer is increased nearly 
fivefold in women with DCIS.127 The invasive cancers are 
observed in the ipsilateral breast, usually in the same quadrant 
as the DCIS that was originally detected, which suggests that 
DCIS is an anatomic precursor of invasive ductal carcinoma 
(Fig. 17-15A and B).
Invasive Breast Carcinoma
Invasive breast cancers have been described as lobular or duc-
tal in origin.128-131 Early classifications used the term lobular 
to describe invasive cancers that were associated with LCIS, 
whereas all other invasive cancers were referred to as ductal. 
Current histologic classifications recognize special types of 
breast cancers (10% of total cases), which are defined by spe-
cific histologic features. To qualify as a special-type cancer, at 
least 90% of the cancer must contain the defining histologic 
features. About 80% of invasive breast cancers are described as 
Table 17-9
Classification of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
Histologic Subtype
Determining Characteristics
DCIS Grade
Nuclear Grade
Necrosis
Comedo
High
Extensive
High
Intermediatea
Intermediate
Focal or absent
Intermediate
Noncomedob
Low
Absent
Low
aOften a mixture of noncomedo patterns.
bSolid, cribriform, papillary, or focal micropapillary.
Source: Adapted with permission from Connolly JL, et al: Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast: Histologic subtyping 
and clinical significance. PPO Updates 10:1, 1996.
521
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
invasive ductal carcinoma of no special type (NST). These can-
cers generally have a worse prognosis than special-type cancers. 
Foote and Stewart originally proposed the following classifica-
tion for invasive breast cancer125:
1.  Paget’s disease of the nipple
2.  Invasive ductal carcinoma—Adenocarcinoma with produc-
tive fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, NST), 80%
3.  Medullary carcinoma, 4%
4.  Mucinous (colloid) carcinoma, 2%
5.  Papillary carcinoma, 2%
6.  Tubular carcinoma, 2%
7.  Invasive lobular carcinoma, 10%
8.  Rare cancers (adenoid cystic, squamous cell, apocrine)
Paget’s disease of the nipple was described in 1874. It fre-
quently presents as a chronic, eczematous eruption of the nipple, 
which may be subtle but may progress to an ulcerated, weeping 
lesion. Paget’s disease usually is associated with extensive DCIS 
and may be associated with an invasive cancer. A palpable mass 
may or may not be present. A nipple biopsy specimen will show 
a population of cells that are identical to the underlying DCIS 
cells (pagetoid features or pagetoid change). Pathognomonic 
of this cancer is the presence of large, pale, vacuolated cells 
(Paget cells) in the rete pegs of the epithelium. Paget’s disease 
may be confused with superficial spreading melanoma. Differ-
entiation from pagetoid intraepithelial melanoma is based on the 
presence of S-100 antigen immunostaining in melanoma and 
carcinoembryonic antigen immunostaining in Paget’s disease. 
Surgical therapy for Paget’s disease may involve lumpectomy 
or mastectomy, depending on the extent of involvement of the 
nipple-areolar complex and the presence of DCIS or invasive 
cancer in the underlying breast parenchyma.
Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast with productive 
fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, NST) accounts for 80% of breast 
cancers and presents with macroscopic or microscopic axillary 
lymph node metastases in up to 25% of screen-detected cases 
and up to 60% of symptomatic cases. This cancer occurs most 
frequently in perimenopausal or postmenopausal women in the 
Figure 17-15.  Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). A. Craniocaudal mammographic view shows a poorly defined mass containing microcalci-
fications. (Photo used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening. Royal Derby Hospital.) B. 
Histopathologic preparation of the surgical specimen confirms DCIS with necrosis (100x) (Photo used with permission of Dr. Sindhu Menon, 
Consultant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
A
B
fifth to sixth decades of life as a solitary, firm mass. It has poorly 
defined margins and its cut surfaces show a central stellate con-
figuration with chalky white or yellow streaks extending into 
surrounding breast tissues. The cancer cells often are arranged 
in small clusters, and there is a broad spectrum of histologic 
types with variable cellular and nuclear grades (Fig. 17-16A 
and B). In a large patient series from the SEER database, 75% 
of ductal cancers showed estrogen receptor expression.132
Medullary carcinoma is a special-type breast cancer; it 
accounts for 4% of all invasive breast cancers and is a frequent 
phenotype of BRCA1 hereditary breast cancer. Grossly, the can-
cer is soft and hemorrhagic. A rapid increase in size may occur 
secondary to necrosis and hemorrhage. On physical examina-
tion, it is bulky and often positioned deep within the breast. 
Bilaterality is reported in 20% of cases. Medullary carcinoma is 
characterized microscopically by: (a) a dense lymphoreticular 
infiltrate composed predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma 
cells; (b) large pleomorphic nuclei that are poorly differentiated 
and show active mitosis; and (c) a sheet-like growth pattern with 
minimal or absent ductal or alveolar differentiation. Approxi-
mately 50% of these cancers are associated with DCIS, which 
characteristically is present at the periphery of the cancer, and 
<10% demonstrate hormone receptors. In rare circumstances, 
mesenchymal metaplasia or anaplasia is noted. Because of the 
intense lymphocyte response associated with the cancer, benign 
or hyperplastic enlargement of the lymph nodes of the axilla 
may contribute to erroneous clinical staging. Women with this 
cancer have a better 5-year survival rate than those with NST or 
invasive lobular carcinoma.
Mucinous carcinoma (colloid carcinoma), another special-
type breast cancer, accounts for 2% of all invasive breast can-
cers and typically presents in the elderly population as a bulky 
tumor. This cancer is defined by extracellular pools of mucin, 
which surround aggregates of low-grade cancer cells. The cut 
surface of this cancer is glistening and gelatinous in quality. 
Fibrosis is variable, and when abundant it imparts a firm consis-
tency to the cancer. Over 90% of mucinous carcinomas display 
hormone receptors.132 Lymph node metastases occur in 33% 
522
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of cases, and 5- and 10-year survival rates are 73% and 59%, 
respectively. Because of the mucinous component, cancer cells 
may not be evident in all microscopic sections, and analysis 
of multiple sections is essential to confirm the diagnosis of a 
mucinous carcinoma.
Papillary carcinoma is a special-type cancer of the breast 
that accounts for 2% of all invasive breast cancers. It generally 
presents in the seventh decade of life and occurs in a dispropor-
tionate number of nonwhite women. Typically, papillary car-
cinomas are small and rarely attain a size of 3 cm in diameter. 
These cancers are defined by papillae with fibrovascular stalks 
and multilayered epithelium. In a large series from the SEER 
database 87% of papillary cancers have been reported to express 
estrogen receptor.132 McDivitt and colleagues noted that these 
tumors showed a low frequency of axillary lymph node metas-
tases and had 5- and 10-year survival rates similar to those for 
mucinous and tubular carcinoma.133
Tubular carcinoma is another special-type breast can-
cer and accounts for 2% of all invasive breast cancers. It is 
reported in as many as 20% of women whose cancers are 
diagnosed by mammographic screening and usually is diag-
nosed in the perimenopausal or early menopausal periods. 
Under low-power magnification, a haphazard array of small, 
randomly arranged tubular elements is seen. In a large SEER 
database 94% of tubular cancers were reported to express 
estrogen receptor.132 Approximately 10% of women with 
tubular carcinoma or with invasive cribriform carcinoma, a 
special-type cancer closely related to tubular carcinoma, will 
develop axillary lymph node metastases. However, the pres-
ence of metastatic disease in one or two axillary lymph nodes 
does not adversely affect survival. Distant metastases are 
rare in tubular carcinoma and invasive cribriform carcinoma. 
Long-term survival approaches 100%.
Invasive lobular carcinoma accounts for 10% of breast 
cancers. The histopathologic features of this cancer include 
small cells with rounded nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and 
scant cytoplasm (Fig. 17-17). Special stains may confirm the 
presence of intracytoplasmic mucin, which may displace the 
nucleus (signet-ring cell carcinoma). At presentation, invasive 
Figure 17-17.  Lobular carcinoma (100×). Uniform, relatively 
small lobular carcinoma cells are seen arranged in a single-file 
orientation (“Indian file”). (Used with permission of Dr. Sindhu 
Menon, Consultant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant 
Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospi-
tal, Derby, UK.)
A
B
Figure 17-16.  Invasive ductal carcinoma with productive fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, no special type) A. 100x and B. 200x. (Used with 
permission of Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist & Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, 
Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK).
lobular carcinoma varies from clinically inapparent carcinomas 
to those that replace the entire breast with a poorly defined mass. 
It is frequently multifocal, multicentric, and bilateral. Because 
of its insidious growth pattern and subtle mammographic fea-
tures, invasive lobular carcinoma may be difficult to detect. 
Over 90% of lobular cancers express estrogen receptor.132
DIAGNOSIS OF BREAST CANCER
In~30% of cases, the woman discovers a lump in her breast. 
Other less frequent presenting signs and symptoms of breast 
cancer include: (a) breast enlargement or asymmetry; (b) nipple 
changes, retraction, or discharge; (c) ulceration or erythema of the 
523
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
skin of the breast; (d) an axillary mass; and (e) musculoskeletal 
discomfort. However, up to 50% of women presenting with 
breast complaints have no physical signs of breast pathology. 
Breast pain usually is associated with benign disease.
Misdiagnosed breast cancer accounts for the greatest num-
ber of malpractice claims for errors in diagnosis and for the 
largest number of paid claims. Litigation often involves younger 
women, whose physical examination and mammogram may 
be misleading. If a young woman (≤45 years) presents with a 
palpable breast mass and equivocal mammographic findings, 
ultrasound examination and biopsy are used to avoid a delay 
in diagnosis.
Examination
Inspection.  The surgeon inspects the woman’s breast with 
her arms by her side (Fig. 17-18A), with her arms straight up 
in the air (Fig. 17-18B), and with her hands on her hips (with 
and without pectoral muscle contraction).134,135 Symmetry, size, 
and shape of the breast are recorded, as well as any evidence of 
edema (peaud’orange), nipple or skin retraction, or erythema. 
With the arms extended forward and in a sitting position, the 
woman leans forward to accentuate any skin retraction.
Palpation.  As part of the physical examination, the breast is 
carefully palpated. With the patient in the supine position (see 
Fig. 17-18C) the surgeon gently palpates the breasts, making cer-
tain to examine all quadrants of the breast from the sternum later-
ally to the latissimus dorsi muscle and from the clavicle inferiorly 
to the upper rectus sheath. The surgeon performs the examina-
tion with the palmar aspects of the fingers, avoiding a grasping 
or pinching motion. The breast may be cupped or molded in the 
surgeon’s hands to check for retraction. A systematic search for 
lymphadenopathy then is performed. Figure 17-18D shows the 
position of the patient for examination of the axilla. By support-
ing the upper arm and elbow, the surgeon stabilizes the shoul-
der girdle. Using gentle palpation, the surgeon assesses all three 
levels of possible axillary lymphadenopathy. Careful palpation 
Figure 17-18.  Examination of the breast. A. Inspection of the 
breast with arms at sides. B. Inspection of the breast with arms 
raised. C. Palpation of the breast with the patient supine. D. Palpa-
tion of the axilla.
of supraclavicular and parasternal sites also is performed. A dia-
gram of the chest and contiguous lymph node sites is useful for 
recording location, size, consistency, shape, mobility, fixation, 
and other characteristics of any palpable breast mass or lymph-
adenopathy (Fig. 17-19).
Imaging Techniques
Mammography.  Mammography has been used in North 
America since the 1960s, and the techniques used continue to be 
modified and improved to enhance image quality.136-139 Conven-
tional mammography delivers a radiation dose of 0.1 cGy per 
study. By comparison, chest radiography delivers 25% of this 
dose. However, there is no increased breast cancer risk associ-
ated with the radiation dose delivered with screening mammog-
raphy. Screening mammography is used to detect unexpected 
breast cancer in asymptomatic women. In this regard, it supple-
ments history taking and physical examination. With screen-
ing mammography, two views of the breast are obtained, the 
craniocaudal (CC) view (Fig. 17-20A and B) and the mediolat-
eral oblique (MLO) view (Fig. 17-20 C and D). The MLO view 
images the greatest volume of breast tissue, including the upper 
outer quadrant and the axillary tail of Spence. Compared with 
the MLO view, the CC view provides better visualization of the 
medial aspect of the breast and permits greater breast compres-
sion. Diagnostic mammography is used to evaluate women with 
abnormal findings such as a breast mass or nipple discharge. In 
addition to the MLO and CC views, a diagnostic examination 
may use views that better define the nature of any abnormalities, 
such as the 90-degree lateral and spot compression views. The 
90-degree lateral view is used along with the CC view to trian-
gulate the exact location of an abnormality. Spot compression 
may be done in any projection by using a small compression 
device, which is placed directly over a mammographic abnor-
mality that is obscured by overlying tissues (Fig. 17-21C). The 
compression device minimizes motion artifact, improves defi-
nition, separates overlying tissues, and decreases the radiation 
dose needed to penetrate the breast. Magnification techniques 
(×1.5) often are combined with spot compression to better resolve 
Figure 17-19.  A breast examination record. (Reproduced with 
permission from Cliggott Publishing Co.)
524
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 17-20.  A-D. Mammogram of a premenopausal 
breast with a dense fibroglandular pattern. E-H. Mam-
mogram of a postmenopausal breast with a sparse 
fibroglandular pattern. (Photos used with permission of 
Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of 
Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
A
B
C
D
525
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
E
F
G
H
calcifications and the margins of masses. Mammography also is 
used to guide interventional procedures, including needle local-
ization and needle biopsy.
Specific mammographic features that suggest a diagnosis 
of breast cancer include a solid mass with or without stellate 
features, asymmetric thickening of breast tissues, and clustered 
Figure 17-20.  (Continued )
microcalcifications. The presence of fine, stippled calcium in 
and around a suspicious lesion is suggestive of breast cancer 
and occurs in as many as 50% of nonpalpable cancers. These 
microcalcifications are an especially important sign of cancer 
in younger women, in whom it may be the only mammographic 
abnormality. The clinical impetus for screening mammography 
526
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
Figure 17-21.  Mammogram revealing a small, spiculated mass in the right breast A. A small, spiculated mass is seen in the right breast with 
skin tethering (CC view). B. Mass seen on oblique view of the right breast. C. Spot compression mammography view of the cancer seen in 
A and B. The spiculated margins of the cancer are accentuated by compression. (Photos used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consul-
tant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK).
came from the Health Insurance Plan study and the Breast Can-
cer Detection Demonstration Project, which demonstrated a 
33% reduction in mortality for women after72 screening mam-
mography. Mammography was more accurate than clinical 
examination for the detection of early breast cancers, providing 
a true-positive rate of 90%. Only 20% of women with nonpal-
pable cancers had axillary lymph node metastases, compared 
with 50% of women with palpable cancers.140 Current guide-
lines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network sug-
gest that normal-risk women ≥20 years of age should have a 
breast examination at least every 3 years. Starting at age 40 years, 
breast examinations should be performed yearly and a yearly 
mammogram should be taken. The benefits from screening 
mammography in women ≥50 years of age has been noted 
above to be between 20% and 25% reduction in breast cancer 
mortality.72,74 With the increased discussion about the potential 
harms associated with breast screening the United Kingdom 
recently established an independent expert panel to review the 
published literature and estimate the benefits and harms associ-
ated with its national screening program for women >50 years. 
The expert panel estimated that in women invited to screening, 
about 11% of the cancers diagnosed in their lifetime constitute 
over-diagnosis. Despite the over-diagnosis the panel concluded 
that breast screening programs confer significant benefit and 
should continue. The use of screening mammography in women 
<50 years of age is more controversial again for reasons noted 
above: (a) reduced sensitivity; (b) reduced specificity; and 
(c) lower incidence of breast cancer. For the combination of 
these three reasons targeting mammography screening to women 
<50 years at higher risk of breast cancer improves the balance 
of risks and benefits and is the approach some health care sys-
tems have taken. There are now a number of risk assessment 
models—as described earlier in that section—which can be used 
to estimate a younger woman’s risk of developing breast cancer 
to help assess the risks and benefits of regular screening.
Screen film mammography has replaced xeromammogra-
phy because it requires a lower dose of radiation and provides 
similar image quality. Digital mammography was developed to 
allow the observer to manipulate the degree of contrast in the 
image. This is especially useful in women with dense breasts 
and women <50 years of age. Recently, investigators directly 
compared digital vs. screen film mammography in a prospec-
tive (DMIST) trial enrolling over 42,000 women.141 They found 
that digital and screen film mammography had similar accu-
racy; however, digital mammography was more accurate in 
women <50 years of age, women with mammographically dense 
breasts, and premenopausal or perimenopausal women. The use 
of digital breast tomosynthesis with 3D images has been intro-
duced as an alternative to standard 2D mammography imaging 
that is limited by superimposition of breast parenchyma and 
breast density. The STORM trial reported that in 7,292 women 
screened, 3D mammography had a higher cancer detection rate 
and fewer false-positive recalls than the standard 2D imaging.142 
Randomized controlled trials are planned to further study tomo-
synthesis and its role in breast cancer screening.
Ductography.  The primary indication for ductography is 
nipple discharge, particularly when the fluid contains blood. 
Radiopaque contrast media is injected into one or more of the 
major ducts and mammography is performed. A duct is gen-
tly enlarged with a dilator and then a small, blunt cannula is 
inserted under sterile conditions into the nipple ampulla. With 
the patient in a supine position, 0.1 to 0.2 mL of dilute con-
trast media is injected and CC and MLO mammographic views 
527
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
are obtained without compression. Intraductal papillomas are 
seen as small filling defects surrounded by contrast media 
(Fig. 17-22). Cancers may appear as irregular masses or as mul-
tiple intraluminal filling defects.
Ultrasonography.  Second only to mammography in frequency 
of use for breast imaging, ultrasonography is an important method 
of resolving equivocal mammographic findings, defining cystic 
masses, and demonstrating the echogenic qualities of specific 
solid abnormalities. On ultrasound examination, breast cysts 
are well circumscribed, with smooth margins and an echo-free 
center (Fig. 17-23). Benign breast masses usually show smooth 
contours, round or oval shapes, weak internal echoes, and well-
defined anterior and posterior margins (Fig 17-24). Breast cancer 
characteristically has irregular walls (Fig. 17-25) but may have 
smooth margins with acoustic enhancement. Ultrasonography is 
used to guide fine-needle aspiration biopsy, core-needle biopsy, 
and needle localization of breast lesions. Its findings are highly 
reproducible and it has a high patient acceptance rate, but it does 
not reliably detect lesions that are ≤1 cm in diameter. Ultrasonog-
raphy can also be utilized to image the regional lymph nodes in 
patients with breast cancer (Fig. 17-26). The sensitivity of exami-
nation for the status of axillary nodes ranges from 35% to 82% 
and specificity ranges from 73% to 97%. The features of a lymph 
node involved with cancer include cortical thickening, change in 
shape of the node to more circular appearance, size larger than 
10 mm, absence of a fatty hilum and hypoechoic internal echoes.143
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  In the process of evaluating 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as a means of characterizing 
mammographic abnormalities, additional breast lesions have 
been detected. However, in the circumstance of negative find-
ings on both mammography and physical examination, the prob-
ability of a breast cancer being diagnosed by MRI is extremely 
low. There is current interest in the use of MRI to screen the 
Figure 17-22.  Ductogram. Craniocaudal (A) and mediolateral oblique (B) mammographic views demonstrate a mass (arrows) posterior to 
the nipple and outlined by contrast, which also fills the proximal ductal structures. (Photos used with permission of B. Steinbach.)
B
A
breasts of high-risk women and of women with a newly diag-
nosed breast cancer. In the first case, women who have a strong 
family history of breast cancer or who carry known genetic 
mutations require screening at an early age, because mammo-
graphic evaluation is limited due to the increased breast density 
in younger women. In the second case, an MRI study of the 
contralateral breast in women with a known breast cancer has 
shown a contralateral breast cancer in 5.7% of these women 
(Fig. 17-27). MRI can also detect additional tumors in the 
index breast (multifocal or multicentric disease) that may be 
missed on routine breast imaging and this may alter surgical 
decision making (Fig. 17-28). In fact, MRI has been advocated 
by some for routine use in surgical treatment planning based 
on the fact that additional disease can be identified with this 
advanced imaging modality and the extent of disease may be 
more accurately assessed. A randomized trial performed in the 
United Kingdom (COMICE trial) which enrolled 1,623 women 
did not show a decrease in rates of reoperation in those women 
randomized to undergo MRI in addition to mammography and 
ultrasonography (19%) compared to those undergoing standard 
breast imaging without MRI (19%).144 Houssami and colleagues 
performed a meta-analysis including 2 randomized trials and 
7 comparative cohort studies to examine the effect of preop-
erative MRI compared to standard preoperative evaluation on 
surgical outcomes.145 They reported that the use of MRI was 
associated with increased mastectomy rates. This is problematic 
since there is no evidence that the additional disease detected 
by MRI is of clinical or biologic significance, particularly in 
light of the low local-regional failure rates currently reported 
in patients undergoing breast conserving surgery who receive 
whole breast irradiation and systemic therapies.
The use of dedicated breast coils is mandatory in the MRI 
imaging of the breast. A BIRADS lexicon is assigned to each 
examination and an abnormality noted on MRI that is not seen 
528
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
C
A
B
Figure 17-23.  Breast cyst. A. Simple cyst. Ultrasound image of the mass shows it to be anechoic with a well-defined back wall, characteristic 
of a cyst. B. Complex solid and cystic mass. (C) Complex solid and cystic mass characteristic of intracystic papillary tumor. (Photos used with 
permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK).
Figure 17-24.  Ultrasonography images of benign breast tumors. A. Fibroadenoma. B. Intraductal papilloma. (Photos used with permission 
of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
529
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
on mammography requires a focused ultrasound examination 
for further assessment. If the abnormality is not seen on corre-
sponding mammogram or ultrasound then MRI guided biopsy 
is necessary. Some clinical scenarios where MRI may be use-
ful include the evaluation of a patient who presents with nodal 
metastasis from breast cancer without an identifiable primary 
tumor; to assess response to therapy in the setting of neoad-
juvant systemic treatment; to select patients for partial breast 
irradiation techniques; and evaluation of the treated breast for 
tumor recurrence.
Breast Biopsy
Nonpalpable Lesions.  Image-guided breast biopsy specimens 
are frequently required to diagnose nonpalpable lesions.146 Ultra-
sound localization techniques are used when a mass is present, 
whereas stereotactic techniques are used when no mass is present 
(microcalcifications or architectural distortion only). The com-
bination of diagnostic mammography, ultrasound or stereotactic 
A
B
C
D
Figure 17-25.  Ultrasonography images of malignant breast lesions. A. 25 mm irregular mass. B. Ultrasound 30 mm mass anterior to an 
implant. C. Ultrasound breast cancer with calcification. D. Ultrasound 9 mm spiculated mass with attenuation. (Photos used with permission 
of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK).
localization, and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy achieves 
almost 100% accuracy in the preoperative diagnosis of breast can-
cer. However, although FNA biopsy permits cytologic evalua-
tion, core-needle permits the analysis of breast tissue architecture 
and allows the pathologist to determine whether invasive cancer 
is present. This permits the surgeon and patient to discuss the 
specific management of a breast cancer before therapy begins. 
Core-needle biopsy is preferred over open biopsy for nonpal-
pable breast lesions because a single surgical procedure can 
be planned based on the results of the core biopsy. The 
advantages of core-needle biopsy include a low compli-
cation rate, minimal scarring, and a lower cost compared with 
excisional breast biopsy.
Palpable Lesions.  FNA or core biopsy of a palpable breast 
mass can usually be performed in an outpatient setting.147 A 
1.5-in, 22-gauge needle attached to a 10-mL syringe or a 14 gauge 
core biopsy needle is used. For FNA, use of a syringe holder 
7
530
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
Figure 17-26.  Ultrasonography images of lymph nodes. A. Normal axillary lymph node. B. Indeterminate axillary lymph node. C. Malignant 
appearing axillary lymph node. (Photos used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, 
Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
Figure 17-27.  MRI examination revealing contralateral breast cancer in a patient diagnosed with unilateral breast cancer on mammography. 
(Photo used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
531
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
Figure 17-28.  MRI imaging of the breast revealing multifocal tumors not detected with standard breast imaging. (Photo used with permission 
of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
enables the surgeon performing the FNA biopsy to control the 
syringe and needle with one hand while positioning the breast 
mass with the opposite hand. After the needle is placed in the 
mass, suction is applied while the needle is moved back and 
forth within the mass. Once cellular material is seen at the hub 
of the needle, the suction is released and the needle is with-
drawn. The cellular material is then expressed onto microscope 
slides. Both air-dried and 95% ethanol–fixed microscopic sec-
tions are prepared for analysis. When a breast mass is clinically 
and mammographically suspicious, the sensitivity and speci-
ficity of FNA biopsy approaches 100%. Core-needle biopsy of 
palpable breast masses is performed using a 14-gauge needle, 
such as the Tru-Cut needle. Automated devices also are avail-
able. Vacuum assisted core biopsy devices (with 8–10 gauge 
needles) are commonly utilized with image guidance where 
between 4 and 12 samples can be acquired at different posi-
tions within a mass, area of architectural distortion or micro-
calcifications. If the target lesion was microcalcifications, the 
specimen should be radiographed to confirm appropriate sam-
pling. A radiopaque marker should be placed at the site of the 
biopsy to mark the area for future intervention. In some cases 
the entire lesion is removed with the biopsy technique and clip 
placement allows for accurate targeting of the site for surgical 
resection. Tissue specimens are placed in formalin and then 
processed to paraffin blocks. Although the false-negative rate 
for core-needle biopsy specimens is very low, a tissue speci-
men that does not show breast cancer cannot conclusively rule 
out that diagnosis because a sampling error may have occurred. 
The clinical, radiographic, and pathologic findings should be 
in concordance. If the biopsy findings do not concur with 
the clinical and radiographic findings, the multi-disciplinary 
team (including clinician, radiologist, and pathologist) should 
review the findings and decide whether or not to recommend 
an image-guided or open biopsy to be certain that the target 
lesion has been adequately sampled for diagnosis.
BREAST CANCER STAGING AND BIOMARKERS
Breast Cancer Staging
The clinical stage of breast cancer is determined primarily 
through physical examination of the skin, breast tissue, and 
regional lymph nodes (axillary, supraclavicular, and inter-
nal mammary).148 However, clinical determination of axil-
lary lymph node metastases has an accuracy of only 33%. 
Ultrasound (US) is more sensitive than physical examination 
alone in determining axillary lymph node involvement during 
preliminary staging of breast carcinoma. Fine-needle aspira-
tion (FNA) or core biopsy of sonographically indeterminate or 
suspicious lymph nodes can provide a more definitive diagno-
sis than US alone.143,149 Pathologic stage combines the findings 
from pathologic examination of the resected primary breast 
cancer and axillary or other regional lymph nodes. Fisher 
and colleagues found that accurate predictions regarding the 
occurrence of distant metastases were possible after resection 
and pathologic analysis of 10 or more level I and II axillary 
lymph nodes.150 A frequently used staging system is the TNM 
(tumor, nodes, and metastasis) system. The American Joint 
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) has modified the TNM system 
for breast cancer (Tables 17-10 and 17-11).151Koscielny and 
colleagues demonstrated that tumor size correlates with the 
presence of axillary lymph node metastases (see Fig. 17-14B). 
Others have shown an association between tumor size, axillary 
lymph node metastases, and disease-free survival. One of the 
most important predictors of 10- and 20-year survival rates in 
breast cancer is the number of axillary lymph nodes involved 
with metastatic disease. Routine biopsy of internal mammary 
lymph nodes is not generally performed; however, it has been 
reported that in the context of a ‘triple node’ biopsy approach 
either the internal mammary node or a low axillary node when 
positive alone carried the same prognostic weight. When both 
nodes were positive the prognosis declined to the level associ-
ated with apical node positivity. A double node biopsy of the 
low axillary node and either the apical or the internal mam-
mary node gave the same maximum prognostic information 
as a triple node biopsy.152 With the advent of sentinel lymph 
node dissection and the use of preoperative lymphoscintigra-
phy for localization of the sentinel nodes, surgeons have again 
begun to biopsy the internal mammary nodes but in a more 
targeted manner. The 7th edition of the AJCC staging sys-
tem does allow for staging based on findings from the internal 
mammary sentinel nodes.151 Drainage to the internal mam-
mary nodes is more frequent with central and medial quadrant 
cancers. Clinical or pathologic evidence of metastatic spread 
to supraclavicular lymph nodes is no longer considered stage 
IV disease, but routine scalene or supraclavicular lymph node 
biopsy is not indicated.
Biomarkers
Breast cancer biomarkers are of several types. Risk factor bio-
markers are those associated with increased cancer risk.153-157 
These include familial clustering and inherited germline 
abnormalities, proliferative breast disease with atypia, and 
mammographic densities. Exposure biomarkers are a subset of 
532
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 17-10 
TNM staging system for breast cancer
Primary tumor (T)
The T classification of the primary tumor is the same regardless of whether it is based on clinical or pathologic criteria, or both. Size 
should be measured to the nearest millimeter. If the tumor size is slightly less than or greater than a cutoff for a given T classification, it 
is recommended that the size be rounded to the millimeter reading that is closest to the cutoff. For example, a reported size of 1.1 mm 
is reported as 1 mm, or a size of 2.01 cm is reported as 2.0 cm. Designation should be made with the subscript “c” or “p” modifier to 
indicate whether the T classification was determined by clinical (physical examination or radiologic) or pathologic measurements, 
respectively. In general, pathologic determination should take precedence over clinical determination of T size.
TX
T0
Tis
  Tis (DCIS)
  Tis (LCIS)
  Tis (Paget’s)
T1
  T1mi
  T1a
  T1b
  T1c
T2
T3
T4
T4a
T4b
T4c
T4d
Primary tumor cannot be assessed
No evidence of primary tumor
Carcinoma in situ
Ductal carcinoma in situ
Lobular carcinoma in situ
Paget’s disease of the nipple NOT associated with invasive carcinoma and/or carcinoma in situ (DCIS and/
or LCIS) in the underlying breast parenchyma. Carcinomas in the breast parenchyma associated with Paget’s 
disease are categorized based on the size and characteristics of the parenchymal disease, although the presence 
of Paget’s disease should still be noted
Tumor ≤20 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor ≤1 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >1 mm but ≤5 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >5 mm but ≤10 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >10 mm but ≤20 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor >20 mm but ≤5 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >50 mm in greatest dimension
Tumor of any size with direct extension to the chest wall and/or to the skin (ulceration or skin nodules)*
Extension to chest wall, not including only pectoralis muscle adherence/invasion
Ulceration and/or ipsilateral satellite nodules and/or edema (including peaud’orange) of the skin, which do not 
meet the criteria for inflammatory carcinoma
Both T4a and T4b
Inflammatory carcinoma**
*Note: Invasion of the dermis alone does not qualify as T4
**Note: Inflammatory carcinoma is restricted to cases with typical skin changes involving a third or more of the 
skin of the breast. While the histologic presence of invasive carcinoma invading dermal lymphatics is supportive 
of the diagnosis, it is not required, nor is dermal lymphatic invasion without typical clinical findings sufficient 
for a diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer.
Regional lymph nodes—Clinical (N)
NX
N0
N1
N2
N2a
N2b
N3
N3a
N3b
N3c
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., previously removed)
No regional lymph node metastases
Metastases to movable ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph node(s)
Metastases in ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph nodes that are clinically fixed or matted; or in clinically 
detected* ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the absence of clinically evident axillary lymph node metastases
Metastases in ipsilateral level I, II axillary lymph nodes fixed to one another (matted) or to other structures
Metastases only in clinically detected* ipsilateral internal mammary nodes and in the absence of clinically 
evident level I, II axillary lymph node metastases
Metastasis in ipsilateral infraclavicular (level III axillary) lymph node(s) with or without level I, II axillary 
lymph node involvement; or in clinically detected* ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s) with clinically 
evident level I, II axillary lymph node metastases; or metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s) 
with or without axillary or internal mammary lymph node involvement
Metastasis in ipsilateral infraclavicular lymph node(s)
Metastasis in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes(s) and axillary lymph node(s)
Metastasis in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s)
*Notes: “Clinically detected” is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by 
clinical examination and having characteristics highly suspicious for malignancy or a presumed pathologic 
macrometastasis based on fine needle aspiration biopsy with cytologic examination. Confirmation of clinically 
detected metastatic disease by fine needle aspiration without excision biopsy is designated with an (f) suffix, 
e.g., cN3a(f). Excisional biopsy of a lymph node or biopsy of a sentinel node, in the absence of assignment of 
a pT, is classified as a clinical N, e.g., cN1. Information regarding the confirmation of the nodal status will be 
designated in site-specific factors as clinical, fine needle aspiration, core biopsy, or sentinel lymph node biopsy. 
Pathologic classification (pN) is used for excision or sentinel lymph node biopsy only in conjunction with a 
pathologic T assignment.
533
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
Table 17-10 
TNM staging system for breast cancer
Regional lymph nodes—Pathologic (pN)
pNX
pN0b
  pN0(i−)
  pN0(i+)
  pN0(mol−)
  pN0(mol+)
pN1
  pN1mi
  pN1a
  pN1b
  pN1c
pN2
  pN2a
  pN2b
pN3
  pN3a
  pN3b
  pN3c
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., previously removed, or not removed for pathologic study)
No regional lymph node metastasis identified histologically
Note: Isolated tumor cell clusters (ITC) are defined as small clusters of cells not greater than 0.2 mm, or single 
tumor cells, or a cluster of fewer than 200 cells in a single histologic cross-section. ITCs may be detected by 
routine histology or by immunohistochemical (IHC) methods. Nodes containing only ITCs are excluded from 
the total positive node count for purposes of N classification but should be included in the total number of nodes 
evaluated.
No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, negative IHC
Malignant cells in regional lymph node(s) no greater than 0.2 mm (detected by H&E or IHC including ITC)
No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, negative molecular findings [reverse-transcriptase polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR)]
Positive molecular findings (RT-PCR)**, but no regional lymph node metastases detected by histology or IHC
Micrometastases; or metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes; and/or in internal mammary nodes with metastases 
detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected***
Micrometastases (greater than 0.2 mm and/or more than 200 cells, but none greater than 2.0 mm)
Metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes, at least one metastasis greater than 2.0 mm
Metastases in internal mammary nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph 
node biopsy but not clinically detected***
Metastases in 1-3 axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes with micrometastases or 
macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected
Metastases in 4-9 axillary lymph nodes; or in clinically apparent*** internal mammary lymph nodes in the 
absence of axillary lymph node metastases
Metastases in 4-9 axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit greater than 2.0 mm)
Metastases in clinically detected*** internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node 
metastases
Metastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes; or in infraclavicular (level III axillary) lymph nodes; or in 
clinically detected **** ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of one or more positive level I, 
II axillary lymph nodes; or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes with 
micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected***; or 
in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes
Metastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit greater than 2.0 mm); or metastases to 
the infraclavicular (level III axillary lymph) nodes
Metastases in clinically detected**** ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of one or more 
positive axillary lymph nodes; or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes 
with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected***
Metastasis in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes
* Classification is based on axillary lymph node dissection with or without sentinel lymph node biopsy. 
Classification based solely on sentinel lymph node biopsy without subsequent axillary lymph node dissection is 
designated (sn) for “sentinel node,” e.g., pN0(sn).
** RT-PCR: reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction.
*** “Not clinically detected” is defined as not detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or 
not detected by clinical examination.
**** “Clinically detected” is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by 
clinical examination and having characteristics highly suspicious for malignancy or a presumed pathologic 
macrometastasis based on fine needle aspiration biopsy with cytologic examination.
Distant metastasis (M)
M0
cM0(i+)
M1
No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases
No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases, but deposits of molecularly or microscopically 
detected tumor cells in circulating blood, bone marrow, or other nonregional nodal tissue that are no larger than 
0.2 mm in a patient without symptoms or signs of metastases
Distant detectable metastases as determined by classic clinical and radiographic means and/or histologically 
proven larger than 0.2 mm
Source: Reprinted with permission from American Joint Committee on Cancer: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. New York: Springer; 2010:358-361. 
Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source of the material is the AJCC Cancer Stag-
ing Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springerlink.com.
(continued)
534
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
risk factors that include measures of carcinogen exposure such 
as DNA adducts. Surrogate endpoint biomarkers are biologic 
alterations in tissue that occur between cancer initiation and 
development. These biomarkers are used as endpoints in short-
term chemoprevention trials and include histologic changes, 
indices of proliferation, and genetic alterations leading to 
cancer. Prognostic biomarkers provide information regarding 
cancer outcome irrespective of therapy, whereas predictive bio-
markers provide information regarding response to therapy.158 
Candidate prognostic and predictive biomarkers and biologic 
targets for breast cancer include (a) the steroid hormone receptor 
pathway; (b) growth factors and growth factor receptors such as 
Table 17-11 
TNM stage groupings
Stage 0
Tis
N0
M0
Stage IA
T1a
N0
M0
Stage IB
T0
N1mi
M0
T1a
N1mi
M0
Stage IIA
T0
N1b
M0
T1a
N1b
M0
T2
N0
M0
Stage IIB
T2
N1
M0
T3
N0
M0
Stage IIIA
T0
N2
M0
T1a
N2
M0
T2
N2
M0
T3
N1
M0
T3
N2
M0
Stage IIIB
T4
N0
M0
T4
N1
M0
T4
N2
M0
Stage IIIC
Any T
N3
M0
Stage IV
Any T
Any N
M1
aT1 includes T1mi
bT0 and T1 tumors with nodal micrometastases only are excluded from 
Stage IIA and are classified Stage IB
–M0 includes M0(i+).
–The designation pM0 is not valid; any M0 should be clinical.
–If a patient presents with M1 prior to neoadjuvant systemic therapy, 
the stage is considered Stage IV and remains Stage IV regardless of 
response to neoadjuvant therapy.
–Stage designation may be changed if postsurgical imaging studies 
reveal the presence of distant metastases, provided that the studies 
are carried out within 4 months of diagnosis in the absence of disease 
progression and provided that the patient has not received neoadjuvant 
therapy.
–Postneoadjuvant therapy is designated with “yc” or “yp” prefix. 
Of note, no stage group is assigned if there is a complete pathologic 
response (CR) to neoadjuvant therapy, e.g., ypT0ypN0cM0.
Source: Reprinted with permission from American Joint Committee on 
Cancer: AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. New York: Springer; 
2010:360-361. Used with permission of the American Joint Committee 
on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source of the material 
is the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published 
by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springerlink.com.
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2)/neu, epider-
mal growth factor receptor (EGFR), transforming growth fac-
tor, platelet-derived growth factor, and the insulin-like growth 
factor family; (c) indices of proliferation such as proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Ki-67; (d) indices of angio-
genesis such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and 
the angiogenesis index; (e) the mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) signaling pathway; (f) tumor-suppressor genes such as 
p53; (g) the cell cycle, cyclins, and cyclin-dependent kinases; 
(h) the proteasome; (i) the COX-2 enzyme; (j) the peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs); and (k) indices 
of apoptosis and apoptosis modulators such as bcl-2 and the 
bax:bcl-2 ratio.
Steroid Hormone Receptor Pathway.  Hormones play an 
important role in the development and progression of breast 
cancer. Estrogens, estrogen metabolites, and other steroid hor-
mones such as progesterone all have been shown to have an 
effect. Breast cancer risk is related to estrogen exposure over 
time. In postmenopausal women, hormone replacement therapy 
consisting of estrogen plus progesterone increases the risk of 
breast cancer by 26% compared to placebo.70 Patients with hor-
mone receptor-positive tumors survive two to three times longer 
after a diagnosis of metastatic disease than do patients with hor-
mone receptor-negative tumors. Patients with tumors negative 
for both estrogen receptors and progesterone receptors are not 
considered candidates for hormonal therapy. Tumors positive 
for estrogen or progesterone receptors have a higher response 
rate to endocrine therapy than tumors that do not express estro-
gen or progesterone receptors. Tumors positive for both recep-
tors have a response rate of >50%, tumors negative for both 
receptors have a response rate of <10%, and tumors positive for 
one receptor but not the other have an intermediate response rate 
of 33%. The determination of estrogen and progesterone recep-
tor status used to require biochemical evaluation of fresh tumor 
tissue. Today, however, estrogen and progesterone receptor 
status can be measured in archived tissue using immunohisto-
chemical techniques. Hormone receptor status also can be mea-
sured in specimens obtained with fine-needle aspiration biopsy 
or core-needle biopsy, and this can help guide treatment plan-
ning. Testing for estrogen and progesterone receptors should be 
performed on all primary invasive breast cancer specimens. The 
tumor hormone receptor status should be ascertained for both 
premenopausal and postmenopausal patients to identify patients 
who are most likely to benefit from endocrine therapy.
Growth Factor Receptors and Growth Factors.  Overexpres-
sion of EGFR in breast cancer correlates with estrogen receptor–
negative status and with p53 overexpression.159-161 Similarly, 
increased immunohistochemical membrane staining for the 
HER-2/neu growth factor receptor in breast cancer is associated 
with mutated p53, Ki-67 overexpression, and estrogen receptor–
negative status. HER-2/neu is a member of the EGFR family of 
growth factor receptors in which ligand binding results in recep-
tor homodimerization and tyrosine phosphorylation by tyrosine 
kinase domains within the receptor. Tyrosine phosphorylation 
is followed by signal transduction, which results in changes in 
cell behavior. An important property of this family of recep-
tors is that ligand binding to one receptor type also may result 
in heterodimerization between two different receptor types that 
are coexpressed; this leads to transphosphorylation and trans-
activation of both receptors in the complex (transmodulation). 
In this context, the lack of a specific ligand for the HER-2/neu 
535
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
receptor suggests that HER-2/neu may function solely as a core-
ceptor, modulating signaling by other EGFR family members. 
HER-2/neu is both an important prognostic factor and a pre-
dictive factor in breast cancer.162 When overexpressed in breast 
cancer, HER-2/neu promotes enhanced growth and prolifera-
tion, and increases invasive and metastatic capabilities. Clinical 
studies have shown that patients with HER-2/neu–overexpress-
ing breast cancer have poorly differentiated tumors with high 
proliferation rates, positive lymph nodes, decreased hormone 
receptor expression, and an increased risk of recurrence and 
death due to breast cancer.162-166 Routine testing of the primary 
tumor specimen for HER-2/neu expression should be performed 
on all invasive breast cancers. This can be done with immu-
nohistochemical analysis to evaluate for overexpression of the 
cell-surface receptor at the protein level or by using fluorescence 
in situ hybridization to evaluate for gene amplification. Patients 
whose tumors overexpress HER-2/neu are candidates for anti–
HER-2/neu therapy. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a recombinant 
humanized monoclonal antibody directed against HER-2/neu. 
Randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that single-agent 
trastuzumab therapy is an active and well-tolerated option for 
first-line treatment of women with HER-2/neu–overexpressing 
metastatic breast cancer. More recently, adjuvant trials dem-
onstrated that trastuzumab also was highly effective in the 
treatment of women with early-stage breast cancer when used 
in combination with chemotherapy. Patients who received 
trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy had between 
a 40%–50% reduction in the risk of breast cancer recurrence 
and approximately a third reduction in breast cancer mortality 
compared with those who received chemotherapy alone.167-170
Indices of Proliferation.  PCNA is a nuclear protein asso-
ciated with a DNA polymerase whose expression increases in 
phase G1 of the cell cycle, reaches its maximum at the G1/S 
interface, and then decreases through G2.171-174 Immunohisto-
chemical staining for PCNA outlines the proliferating com-
partments in breast tissue. Good correlation is noted between 
PCNA expression and (a) cell-cycle distributions seen on flow 
cytometry based on DNA content, and (b) uptake of bromo-
deoxyuridine and the proliferation-associated Ki-67 antigen. 
Individual proliferation markers are associated with slightly dif-
ferent phases of the cell cycle and are not equivalent. PCNA and 
Ki-67 expression are positively correlated with p53 overexpres-
sion, high S-phase fraction, aneuploidy, high mitotic index, and 
high histologic grade in human breast cancer specimens, and are 
negatively correlated with estrogen receptor content. Ki67 was 
included with three other widely measured breast cancer mark-
ers (ER, PR, and HER2) into a panel of four immunohistochem-
ical makers (IHC4) which together provided similar prognostic 
information to that in the Genomic Health 21 Gene Recurrence 
Score.175 While there has been significant interest in using Ki67 
as a biomarker, and while the IHC4 panel would be much less 
costly than the 21 Gene Recurrence Score there remain issues 
regarding reproducibility across laboratories.
Indices of Angiogenesis.  Angiogenesis is necessary for the 
growth and invasiveness of breast cancer and promotes cancer 
progression through several different mechanisms, including 
delivery of oxygen and nutrients and the secretion of growth-
promoting cytokines by endothelial cells.176,177 VEGF induces 
its effect by binding to transmembrane tyrosine kinase recep-
tors. Overexpression of VEGF in invasive breast cancer is 
correlated with increased microvessel density and recurrence 
in node-negative breast cancer. An angiogenesis index has been 
developed in which microvessel density (CD31 expression) 
is combined with expression of thrombospondin (a negative 
modulator of angiogenesis) and p53 expression. Both VEGF 
expression and the angiogenesis index may have prognostic and 
predictive significance in breast cancer. Antiangiogenesis breast 
cancer therapy is now being studied in human trials. Bevaci-
zumab (a monoclonal antibody to VEGF) was approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in metastatic 
breast cancer in combination with paclitaxel chemotherapy. 
This approval was based on results from a phase III trial by the 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. The group’s E2100 trial 
showed that when bevacizumab was added to paclitaxel che-
motherapy, median progression-free survival increased to 11.3 
months from the 5.8 months seen in patients who received pacli-
taxel alone.178 The results were not reproduced in other trials and 
the indication for the drug was revoked by the FDA in 2011.
Indices of Apoptosis.  Alterations in programmed cell death 
(apoptosis), which may be triggered by p53-dependent or 
p53-independent factors, may be important prognostic and pre-
dictive biomarkers in breast cancer.179-181 Bcl-2 family proteins 
appear to regulate a step in the evolutionarily conserved path-
way for apoptosis, with some members functioning as inhibitors 
of apoptosis and others as promoters of apoptosis. Bcl-2 is the 
only oncogene that acts by inhibiting apoptosis rather than by 
directly increasing cellular proliferation. The death-signal pro-
tein bax is induced by genotoxic stress and growth factor depri-
vation in the presence of wild-type (normal) p53 and/or AP-1/
fos. The bax:bcl-2 ratio and the resulting formation of either 
bax-baxhomodimers, which stimulate apoptosis, or bax–bcl-2 
heterodimers, which inhibit apoptosis, represent an intracellular 
regulatory mechanism with prognostic and predictive implica-
tions. In breast cancer, overexpression of bcl-2 and a decrease 
in the bax:bcl-2 ratio correlate with high histologic grade, the 
presence of axillary lymph node metastases, and reduced dis-
ease-free and overall survival rates. Similarly, decreased bax 
expression correlates with axillary lymph node metastases, a 
poor response to chemotherapy, and decreased overall survival.
The remaining biomarkers and biologic targets listed earlier 
are still in preclinical and clinical trials evaluating their impor-
tance in breast cancer for both prognostic and predictive purposes.
Coexpression of Biomarkers.  Selection of optimal therapy 
for breast cancer requires both an accurate assessment of prog-
nosis and an accurate prediction of response to therapy. The 
breast cancer markers that are most important in determining 
therapy are estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-
2/neu. Clinicians evaluate clinical and pathologic staging and 
the expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and 
HER-2/neu in the primary tumor to assess prognosis and assign 
therapy. Adjuvant! Online (http://www.adjuvantonline.com) is 
one of a number of programs available to clinicians that incor-
porates clinical and pathologic factors for an individual patient 
and calculates risk of recurrence and death due to breast can-
cer and then provides an assessment of the reduction in risk of 
recurrence that would be expected with the use of combination 
chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, or both of these. Adjuvant! 
Online was developed using information from the SEER data-
base, the EBCTCG overview analyses, and results from other 
individual published trials.182 The website is updated and modified 
as new information becomes available. Clinicopathologic 
factors are used to separate breast cancer patients into broad 
536
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
prognostic groups, and treatment decisions are made on this 
basis (Table 17-12). Other indices and programs which are vali-
dated and used include the Nottingham Prognostic Index, and 
PREDICT.183-185 When an approach, which combines prognostic 
factors is used, up to 70% of early breast cancer patients receive 
adjuvant chemotherapy that is either unnecessary or ineffective. 
As described earlier, a wide variety of biomarkers have been 
shown to individually predict prognosis and response to therapy, 
but they do not improve the accuracy of either the assessment of 
prognosis or the prediction of response to therapy.
As knowledge regarding cellular, biochemical, and molecu-
lar biomarkers for breast cancer increases, prognostic indices are 
being developed that combine the predictive power of several 
individual biomarkers with the relevant clinicopathologic factors.
Most recently, technologic advances have led to the ability 
to measure the expression of multiple genes in a tumor sample 
simultaneously. This gene expression profiling can provide 
information about tumor behavior that can be used in determin-
ing prognosis and therapy.186 These high-throughput analyses 
require bioinformatics support that can categorize and analyze 
the immense amount of data that are generated. This allows for a 
detailed stratification of breast cancer patients for assessment of 
prognosis and for prediction of response to therapy. The Onco-
type DX is a 21-gene assay that has been validated in newly 
diagnosed patients with node-negative, estrogen receptor– 
positive breast cancer.187 A recurrence score is generated, and 
those patients with high recurrence scores are found to benefit 
the most from chemotherapy, whereas those with low recur-
rence scores benefit most from endocrine therapy and may not 
require chemotherapy. The 21-gene recurrence score assay has 
been validated to quantify the risk of recurrence in patients 
with ER-positive, node-negative breast cancer and also predicts 
the potential for chemotherapy benefit. Recent data have dem-
onstrated that knowledge of the recurrence score alters treat-
ment recommendations by oncologists and patients likewise 
change their decision to undergo treatment based on results 
of the recurrence score.188 A recently completed clinical trial, 
the Trial Assessing Individualized Options for Treatment for 
breast cancer (TAILORx), randomly assigned patients with an 
Table 17-12 
Traditional prognostic and predictive factors for inva-
sive breast cancer
Tumor Factors
Host Factors
Nodal status
Age
Tumor size
Menopausal status
Histologic/nuclear grade
Family history
Lymphatic/vascular invasion
Previous breast cancer
Pathologic stage
Immunosuppression
Hormone receptor status
Nutrition
DNA content (ploidy, S-phase 
fraction)
Prior chemotherapy
Extent of intraductal component
Prior radiation therapy
HER-2/neu expression
Source: Modified with permission from Beenken SW, et al: Breast can-
cer genetics, in Ellis N (ed): Inherited Cancer Syndromes. New York: 
Springer-Verlag;2003:112. With kind permission of Springer Science + 
Business Media.
intermediate recurrence score to endocrine therapy alone or 
to chemotherapy followed by endocrine therapy. When these 
trial results mature we will learn whether this intermediate risk 
group of patients with hormone receptor positive disease benefit 
from the addition of chemotherapy. The MammaPrint test was 
approved by the FDA for use in patients with newly diagnosed, 
node-negative breast cancer. The MammaPrint test is based on a 
70-gene profile, and although fresh tissue was initially required 
to perform the assay, it has recently been adapted for use in par-
affin-embedded tissue samples. The MINDACT (MicroarrayIn-
Node negative and 1-3 positive lymph node Disease may Avoid 
ChemoTherapy) trial is a phase III randomized trial comparing 
MammaPrint to Adjuvant! Online for selecting node negative 
and node-positive (1-3 nodes) breast cancer patients for adju-
vant chemotherapy. This trial has completed enrollment with 
6,700 patients and will provide important information regarding 
the use of molecular over standard clinic-pathologic predictors 
in clinical practice.
OVERVIEW OF BREAST CANCER THERAPY
Before diagnostic biopsy, the surgeon must consider the pos-
sibility that a suspicious mass or mammographic finding may 
be a breast cancer. Once a diagnosis of breast cancer is made, 
the type of therapy offered to a breast cancer patient is deter-
mined by the stage of the disease, the biologic subtype and 
the general health status of the individual. Laboratory tests and 
imaging studies are performed based on the initial stage as pre-
sented in Table 17-13. Before therapy is initiated, the patient 
and the surgeon must share a clear perspective on the planned 
Table 17-13 
Diagnostic studies for breast cancer patients
Cancer Stage
0
I
II
III
IV
History & physical
X
X
X
X
X
Complete blood count, 
platelet count
X
X
X
Liver function tests and 
alkaline phosphatase level
X
X
X
Chest radiograph
X
X
X
Bilateral diagnostic 
mammograms, ultrasound 
as indicated
X
X
X
X
X
Hormone receptor status
X
X
X
X
X
HER-2/neu expression
X
X
X
X
Bone scan
X
X
Abdominal (without or 
without pelvis) computed 
tomographic scan or 
ultrasound or magnetic 
resonance imaging
X
X
Abdominal imaging and bone scanning are indicated for evaluation of 
symptoms or abnormal laboratory test results at any presenting stage.
Source: Adapted from Carlson RW, et al: Breast cancer, in NCCN Prac-
tice Guidelines in Oncology. Fort Washington, PA: National Compre-
hensive Cancer Network, 2006.
537
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
course of treatment. Before initiating local therapy, the surgeon 
should determine the clinical stage, histologic characteristics, 
and appropriate biomarker levels.
In Situ Breast Cancer (Stage 0)
Both LCIS and DCIS may be difficult to distinguish from 
atypical hyperplasia or from cancers with early inva-
sion.60,189-194 Expert pathologic review is required in all cases. 
Bilateral mammography is performed to determine the extent 
of the in situ cancer and to exclude a second cancer. Because 
LCIS is considered a marker for increased risk rather than an 
inevitable precursor of invasive disease, the current treatment 
options for LCIS include observation, chemoprevention, and 
bilateral total mastectomy. The goal of treatment is to prevent 
or detect at an early stage the invasive cancer that subse-
quently develops in 25% to 35% of these women. There is 
no benefit to excising LCIS, because the disease diffusely 
involves both breasts in many cases and the risk of developing 
invasive cancer is equal for both breasts. The use of tamoxifen 
as a risk reduction strategy should be considered in women 
with a diagnosis of LCIS.
Women with DCIS and evidence of extensive disease 
(>4 cm of disease or disease in more than one quadrant) usu-
ally require mastectomy (Fig. 17-29). For women with limited 
disease, lumpectomy and radiation therapy are generally rec-
ommended. For nonpalpable DCIS, needle localization or other 
image-guided techniques are used to guide the surgical resec-
tion. Specimen mammography is performed to ensure that all 
visible evidence of cancer is excised. Adjuvant tamoxifen ther-
apy is considered for DCIS patients with ER-positive disease. 
A
B
Figure 17-29.  Extensive DCIS seen on mammography. A. Extensive calcifications are seen throughout the breast on this CC view. B. Mag-
nification view of calcifications. Due to the extent of the disease the patient is not a good candidate for breast conserving surgery. (Photos 
used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
The gold standard against which breast conservation therapy 
for DCIS is evaluated is mastectomy. Women treated with 
mastectomy have local recurrence and mortality rates of <2%. 
There is no randomized trial comparing mastectomy vs. breast 
conserving surgery and none of the randomised trials of breast 
conserving surgery with or without radiotherapy for DCIS were 
powered to show a difference in mortality. Women treated with 
lumpectomy and adjuvant radiation therapy have a local recur-
rence rate that is increased compared to mastectomy. About 
45% of these recurrences will be invasive cancer when radia-
tion therapy is not used. The B-17 trial was conducted by the 
NSABP to assess the need for radiation in patients treated with 
breast conserving surgery for DCIS.195 Patients were randomly 
assigned to lumpectomy with radiation or lumpectomy alone 
and after a mean follow-up time of 90 months, rates of both 
ipsilateral noninvasive and invasive recurrences were signifi-
cantly lower in patients who received radiation. However in the 
B-17 trial the margins were not prospectively assessed and it is 
estimated that up to half the patients may have had tumor at the 
margin of resection. The benefit of the addition of radiation over 
breast-conserving surgery alone for DCIS has also been demon-
strated in several other randomized trials where margins were 
prospectively assessed including the European Organization for 
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) protocol 10853; 
the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand DCIS Trial; and 
the Swedish Trial.189,196-198
Despite the data from randomized trials showing a benefit in 
all patient subgroups with the addition of radiation in DCIS there 
has been an interest in trying to define a subset where radiation 
could be avoided in order to minimize the cost and inconvenience 
8
538
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
associated with radiation. In addition, there have been several 
studies published where patients were treated with excision alone 
and never developed invasive breast cancer even at 25 years 
of follow-up. Silverstein and colleagues have been proponents of 
avoiding radiation therapy in selected patients with DCIS who 
have widely negative margins after surgery.193 They reported that 
when greater than 10 mm margins were achieved, there was no 
additional benefit from radiation therapy. When margins were 
between 1- to 10-mm there was a relative risk of local recurrence 
of 1.49, compared to 2.54 for those with margins less than 1 mm. 
These data suggested that appropriately selected patients with 
DCIS might not require postoperative radiation therapy.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) initi-
ated a prospective registry trial (ECOG 5194) to identify those 
patients who could safely undergo breast conserving surgery 
without radiation.199 Eligible patients were those with low or 
intermediate grade DCIS measuring 2.5 cm or less who had 
negative margins of at least 3 mm and those with high grade 
DCIS who had tumors measuring 1 cm or less with a negative 
margin of at least 3 mm. At a median follow-up of 6.2 years, 
patients with low or intermediate grade DCIS had an in-breast 
recurrence rate of 6.1% while those with high grade DCIS 
had a recurrence rate of 15.3%. Approximately 4% of patients 
developed a contralateral breast cancer during follow-up in both 
the low/intermediate and high grade groups. This study identi-
fied an acceptable recurrence rate for those patients with low 
or intermediate grade DCIS treated with excision alone with a 
margin of at least 3 mm. In contrast, patients with high grade 
DCIS had an unacceptably high local recurrence rate.
The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) initiated 
the 9804 trial for patients with “good risk” DCIS and random-
ized them to lumpectomy vs. lumpectomy with whole breast 
irradiation. Eligible patients were those with unicentric, low 
or intermediate grade DCIS measuring 2.5 cm or less with a 
margin of 3 mm or greater. The trial was closed early due to 
slow accrual, however the results for 585 patients were recently 
reported with a median follow-up of 6.46 years.200 The local 
recurrence rate at 5 years was 0.4% for patients randomized to 
receive radiation and 3.2% for those who did not receive radia-
tion. This study has only been reported in abstract form and 
continued follow-up for enrolled patients is planned.
Solin et al utilized samples from the ECOG 5194 trial to 
develop a quantitative multigene RT-PCR assay for predict-
ing recurrence risk in patients with DCIS treated with surgery 
alone.201 They were able to define low, intermediate and high 
risk groups using a DCIS Score. The DCIS Score was able to 
quantify the risk of recurrence in the breast for both DCIS and 
invasive events. This tool will need to be evaluated in additional 
studies but appears to be a promising tool for clinical use. When 
selecting therapy for patients with DCIS, one must consider 
clinical and pathologic factors, including tumor size, grade, 
mammographic appearance, and patient preference. There is no 
single correct surgical treatment and many patients will require 
extensive counseling in order to make a decision regarding sur-
gical therapy. The role of axillary staging in patients with DCIS 
is limited. One consideration is for patients undergoing mastec-
tomy. Since most lesions are currently diagnosed with needle 
core biopsy, there is about a 20% incidence of invasive breast 
cancer on final pathologic assessment of the primary tumor.
Since it is not feasible to perform sentinel node dissection 
after mastectomy, most surgeons will recommend the use of 
sentinel node dissection at the time of mastectomy for DCIS.
Results from the NSABP B-24 trial reported a signifi-
cant reduction in local recurrence after 5 years of tamoxifen 
in women with ER-positive DCIS. Based on this some guide-
lines have advocated that all patients (women with ER-positive 
DCIS without contraindications to tamoxifen therapy) should be 
offered tamoxifen following surgery and radiation therapy for a 
duration of 5 years. The B-24 trial revealed a significant reduc-
tion in recurrence with adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for patients 
with DCIS, however the results were not initially assessed based 
on ER status.202 There were 1,804 women with DCIS random-
ized to lumpectomy and radiation with or without tamoxifen. 
The rate of breast cancer events was significantly lower in those 
who received tamoxifen at a median follow-up of 74 months 
(8.2% vs. 13.4%, P = 0.0009). Subsequently, Allred and col-
leagues evaluated 41% of patients with DCIS in the NSABP 
B-24 trial to determine the effect of tamoxifen based on ER 
status measured in the primary tumor.203 They found that 76% 
of women had DCIS that was ER-positive and these women 
had a greater reduction in ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence 
with tamoxifen than did patients with ER-negative DCIS (11% 
vs. 5.2%, P<0.001). However it should be noted that 15% of 
patients in B-24 had tumor at the resection margins for whom 
tamoxifen could be viewed as treating what by current standard 
would be viewed as inadequate local excision of the primary 
tumor. Five years of tamoxifen is not uniformly prescribed 
across the world as adjuvant therapy following breast conserv-
ing surgery and radiation therapy for DCIS.
Early Invasive Breast Cancer  
(Stage I, IIA, or IIB)
There have been six prospective randomized trials comparing 
breast conserving surgery to mastectomy in early stage breast can-
cer and all have shown equivalent survival rates regardless of the 
surgical treatment type. One caveat however is that the majority 
of studies had a restriction of tumor size; most were either 2 cm 
or 2.5 cm while the NSABP B-06 trial was 4 cm and the NCI trial 
was up to 5 cm. NSABP B-06, which is the largest of all the breast 
conservation trials, compared total mastectomy to lumpectomy 
with or without radiation therapy in the treatment of women with 
stage I and II breast cancer.11,204-210 After 5- and 8-year follow-up 
periods, the disease-free (DFS), distant disease-free, and over-
all survival (OS) rates for lumpectomy with or without radiation 
therapy were similar to those observed after total mastectomy. 
However, the incidence of ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence 
was higher in the group not receiving radiation therapy. These 
findings supported the use of lumpectomy and radiation therapy 
in the treatment of stage I and II breast cancer and this has since 
become the preferred method of treatment for women with early 
stage breast cancer who have unifocal disease and who are not 
known BRCA mutation carriers. Reanalysis of the B-06 study 
results was undertaken after 20 years of follow-up and confirmed 
that there was no difference in disease-free survival rates after 
total mastectomy or after lumpectomy with or without adjuvant 
radiation therapy. The in-breast recurrence rate was substantially 
higher in the lumpectomy alone group (39.2%) compared with the 
lumpectomy plus adjuvant radiation therapy group (14.3%) con-
firming the importance of radiation therapy in the management 
of patients with invasive disease. However it should be noted that 
there were several criteria in the B-06 study. There was a specific 
lymphadenopathy exclusion criteria. Secondly, all patients ran-
domized to breast conserving surgery had a frozen section and if 
the margins were involved they were converted to mastectomy 
539
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
but were included in the analysis as having had a breast conserv-
ing operation (on the basis of intention to treat). Finally, in the 
breast conserving group recurrences in the treated breast were 
considered as a ‘non event’.
Data from all of the randomized trials where breast con-
servation was performed with or without radiation therapy have 
been examined by the EBCTCG.12 At 15 years of follow-up, the 
absolute reduction in mortality with the use of radiation therapy 
after lumpectomy was 5.1% in node-negative patients and 7.1% 
in node-positive patients. These data support the concept that 
the addition of radiation not only improves local control but 
also has an impact on survival. Similar to DCIS, clinicians have 
sought to identify subgroups of patients who may not benefit 
from the addition of radiation therapy, particularly older patients 
who may have a shorter life expectancy due to medical comor-
bidities. Two randomized trials have shown that in selected 
patients with small, low-grade tumors, lumpectomy alone with-
out radiation therapy may be appropriate.211,212 The Cancer and 
Leukemia Group B (CALGB) C9343 trial enrolled women over 
the age of 70 with T1N0 breast cancer and randomized them 
to lumpectomy with or without radiation therapy. All patients 
received adjuvant tamoxifen. Although there were fewer local 
recurrences with radiation (1% vs. 4%, P<0.001), there were no 
differences in DFS and OS. A trial similar to CALGB C9343 
was conducted in Canada where they enrolled women 50 years 
and older and randomized them to lumpectomy with or with-
out radiation. Mean age was 68 years, and 80% of women had 
ER-positive tumors. Again, local recurrence rates were lower 
in women who received radiation (0.6% vs. 7.7%, P<0.001), 
however, at a median follow-up of 5.6 years, there were no dif-
ferences in DFS or OS. These studies suggest that radiation can 
be avoided in early-stage breast cancer patients over the age of 
70 when they are diagnosed with T1, N0, ER-positive breast 
cancer.
Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) is also an 
option for carefully selected patients with DCIS and early-
stage breast cancer. Since the majority of recurrences after 
breast conservation occur in or adjacent to the tumor bed there 
has been interest in limiting the radiation to the area of the 
primary tumor bed with a margin of normal tissue. APBI is 
delivered in an abbreviated fashion (twice daily for 5 days) 
and at a lower total dose compared with the standard course 
of 5 to 6 weeks of radiation (50 Gray with or without a boost) 
in the case of whole breast irradiation. Proponents have sug-
gested that this shortened course of treatment may increase the 
feasibility of breast conservation for some women and may 
improve radiation therapy compliance. The RTOG 04-13/
NSABP B-39 trial is a randomized comparison of whole 
breast irradiation to APBI in women with early stage breast 
cancer. The trial recently completed accrual and it will likely 
be several years before data are mature to report outcomes 
between the two radiation treatment strategies. TARGIT is 
another study which randomized 3,451 patients in 33 centers 
over 10 countries to intraoperative breast irradiation (IORT) or 
external beam radiotherapy (EBRT). The preliminary results 
were reported in 2012—with a median follow-up of 2.4 
years use of IORT had a recurrence rate of 3.3% vs. 1.3% with 
EBRT, a 2% increased recurrence risk. 213
The American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) 
developed guidelines for the use of APBI outside of clinical 
trials based on data reported from published studies.214 The 
ASTRO guidelines describe patients “suitable” for APBI to 
include women 60 years of age or older with a unifocal, T1, 
ER-positive tumor with no lymphovascular invasion, and mar-
gins of at least 2 mm. They describe a group where there is 
uncertainty about the appropriateness of APBI (“cautionary” 
group) to include patients with invasive lobular histology, a 
tumor size of 2.1 cm to 3 cm, ER-negative disease, focal lym-
phovascular invasion, or margins less than 2 mm. Finally, a 
group felt to be “unsuitable” for APBI includes those with T3 
or T4 disease, ER-negative disease, multifocality, multicentric-
ity, extensive LVI, or positive margins.
Currently, mastectomy with axillary staging and breast con-
serving surgery with axillary staging and radiation therapy are 
considered equivalent treatments for patients with stage I and II 
breast cancer. Breast conservation is considered for all patients 
because of the important cosmetic advantages and equivalent sur-
vival outcomes, however, this approach is not advised in women 
who are known BRCA mutation carriers due to the high lifetime 
risk for development of additional breast cancers. Relative contra-
indications to breast conservation therapy include (a) prior radia-
tion therapy to the breast or chest wall, (b) persistently positive 
surgical margins after reexcision, (c) multicentric disease, and 
(d) scleroderma or lupus erythematosus.
For most patients with early-stage disease, reconstruc-
tion can be performed immediately at the time of mastectomy. 
Immediate reconstruction allows for skin-sparing, thus optimiz-
ing cosmetic outcomes. Skin-sparing mastectomy with imme-
diate reconstruction has been popularized over the past decade 
as reports of low local-regional failure rates have been reported 
and reconstructive techniques have advanced. There is a growing 
interest in the use of nipple-areolar sparing mastectomy although 
few reports on the long-term safety of this approach are available 
at this time. Patients who are planned for postmastectomy radia-
tion therapy are not ideal candidates for nipple-sparing mastec-
tomy because of the effects of radiation on the preserved nipple. 
In addition to providing optimal cosmesis from preservation of 
the skin and/or the nipple-areolar complex, immediate recon-
struction allows patients to wake up with a breast mound which 
provides some psychological benefit for the patient. Immediate 
reconstruction is also more economical as both the extirpative 
and reconstructive surgery are combined in one operation.
Immediate reconstruction can be performed using implants 
or autologous tissue; tissue flaps commonly used include the 
transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap, deep inferior 
epigastric perforator flap, and latissimus dorsi flap (with or 
without an implant). If postmastectomy radiation therapy is 
needed, a tissue expander can be placed at the time of mastec-
tomy to save the shape of the breast and reduce the amount of 
skin replacement needed at the time of definitive reconstruction. 
The expander can be deflated at the initiation of radiation ther-
apy to allow for irradiation of the chest wall and regional nodal 
basins. Removal of the tissue expander and definitive recon-
struction, usually with autologous tissue, can proceed 6 months 
to 1 year after completion of radiation therapy.
Axillary lymph node status has traditionally been an 
important determinant in staging and prognosis for women 
with early stage breast cancer. Historically, axillary lymph 
node dissection (ALND) was utilized for axillary staging and 
regional control by removing involved lymph nodes. Random-
ized trials evaluating immediate ALND over ALND performed 
in a delayed fashion once clinically palpable axillary disease 
became evident have not shown any detriment in survival.9,215 
With increased mammographic screening and detection of 
540
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
smaller, node-negative breast cancers, it became clear that rou-
tine use of ALND for axillary staging was not necessary in up 
to 75% percent of women with operable breast cancer present-
ing with a negative axilla at the time of screening. Lymphatic 
mapping and sentinel lymph node (SLN) dissection were ini-
tially developed for assessment of patients with clinically node-
negative melanoma. Given the changing landscape of newly 
diagnosed breast cancer patients with a clinically node-negative 
axilla, surgeons quickly began to explore the utility of SLN 
dissection as a replacement for ALND in axillary staging.
In the early 1990s, David Krag at the University of Ver-
mont began performing SLN dissection with injection of a 
radioisotope in the primary tumor site and localizing the SLN 
node with a handheld gamma probe.216 He was able to identify 
a SLN in 18 of 22 patients examined and the SLN was posi-
tive in all 7 patients with positive lymph nodes. Giuliano and 
colleagues initiated a pilot study in 1991 to examine the use of 
SLN dissection using blue dye in patients with clinically nega-
tive nodes. They reported successful identification of a SLN 
in 114 (65.5%) of 174 patients and in 109 (95.6%), the SLN 
accurately predicted the status of the axillary nodes.217,218 These 
studies along with initial work by Doug Reintgen and Charles 
Cox at the Moffitt Cancer Center and Umberto Veronesi and 
his colleagues at the European Institute of Oncology in Milan 
led the way toward validation of the technique in large single 
institution and multicenter studies.
Following validation of the technique of SLN dissection 
for staging of the axilla by multiple centers, randomized tri-
als were initiated in order to determine if SLN dissection could 
replace ALND in the contemporary management of breast can-
cer patients. The ALMANAC trial randomized 1,031 patients 
with primary operable breast cancer to SLN dissection vs. 
standard axillary surgery. The incidence of lymphedema and 
sensory loss for the SLN group was significantly lower than 
with the standard axillary treatment. At 12 months, drain usage, 
length of hospital stay, and time to resumption of normal day-to-
day activities after surgery were also statistically significantly 
lower in the SLN group.219
The NSABP B-32 trial compared clinically node negative 
patients undergoing SLN dissection followed by ALND with 
patients undergoing SLN dissection with ALND only if a SLN 
was positive for metastatic disease.220 A total of 5,611 patients 
were randomized with a SLN identification rate of 97%, and 
a false-negative rate of 9.7%. A total of 26% of these clini-
cally node-negative patients had a positive SLN. Over 60% of 
patients with positive SLNs had no additional positive lymph 
nodes within the ALND specimen. The B-32 trial and other 
randomized trials demonstrated no difference in DFS, OS, and 
local-regional recurrence rates between patients with negative 
SLNs who had SLN dissection alone compared with those who 
underwent ALND.221,222 Most important, patients who had SLN 
dissection alone were found to have decreased morbidity (arm 
swelling and range of motion) and improved quality of life vs. 
patients who underwent ALND.222,223
The American College of Surgeons Oncology Group 
(ACOSOG) initiated the Z0010 and Z0011 trials in order to evalu-
ate the incidence and prognostic significance of occult metastases 
identified in the bone marrow and SLNs (Z0010) of early-stage 
clinically node-negative patients and to evaluate the utility 
of ALND in patients with clinical T1-2, N0 breast cancer 
with 1 or 2 positive SLNs for patients treated with breast conserv-
ing surgery and whole breast irradiation (WBI) .224,225
The Z0010 study enrolled 5,539 patients with clinical T1-2 
breast cancer planned for breast conserving surgery and WBI.224 
There were 24% of patients who proved to have positive SLNs 
based on standard pathologic assessment and of the negative 
SLNs subjected to immunohistochemical staining for cytokera-
tin, 10.5% proved to have occult metastasis. Of the patients who 
had bone marrow aspiration, 3.0% had immunohistochemically 
detected tumor cells in the bone marrow. Although the presence 
of disease in the bone marrow identified a population at high 
risk for recurrence, neither immunohistochemical detection of 
disease in the SLNs or the bone marrow was statistically signifi-
cant on multivariable analysis with clinicopathologic and treat-
ment factors included. The investigators concluded that routine 
use of immunohistochemistry to detect occult disease in SLNs 
is not warranted.
The Z0011 trial was a companion study to Z0010 and was 
designed to study the role of completion ALND on survival in 
women with positive SLNs. Patients were not eligible if they 
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy or neoadjuvant hormonal 
therapy or if their treatment plan included mastectomy, lumpec-
tomy without radiation, or lumpectomy with APBI. WBI was to 
be administered using standard tangential fields without specific 
treatment of the axilla or additional fields targeting other nodal 
basins. Patients with 1 or 2 positive SLNs were randomized to 
completion ALND or no further surgery. Adjuvant systemic 
therapy recommendations were left to the treating clinicians. 
After median follow-up of 6.3 years, there was no difference 
between patients randomized to ALND and those random-
ized to no further surgery (SLN only) in terms of OS (91.9% 
and 92.5%, respectively; P=0.25) or DFS (82.2% and 83.8%, 
respectively; P=0.14).
The morbidity of SLN dissection alone vs. SLN dissec-
tion with completion ALND has been reported by the ACOSOG 
investigators.226,227 Immediate effects of SLN dissection in the 
Z0010 trial included wound infection in 1%, axillary seroma in 
7.1%, and axillary hematoma in 1.4%.226 At 6 months follow-
ing surgery, axillary paresthesias were noted in 8.6% of patients, 
decreased range of motion in the upper extremity was reported 
in 3.8%, and 6.9% of patients had a change in the arm circum-
ference of >2 cm on the ipsilateral side, which was reported as 
lymphedema. Younger patients were more likely to report pares-
thesias, whereas increasing age and body mass index were more 
predictive of lymphedema. When adverse surgical effects were 
examined in the Z0011 trial, patients undergoing SLN dissection 
with ALND had more wound infections, seromas, and paresthe-
sias than those women undergoing SLN dissection alone. Lymph-
edema at one year after surgery was reported by 13% in the SLN 
plus ALND group but only 2% in the SLN dissection alone group. 
Arm circumference measurements were greater at one  year in 
patients undergoing SLN dissection plus ALND, but the differ-
ence between study groups was not statistically significant.227 
This supports the results published from the ALMANAC trial.
Prior to the publication of ACOSOG Z0011, completion 
ALND was standard of care for patients with positive SLNs. 
Since the reporting of ACOSOG Z0011, the National Com-
prehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines now state that 
there was no OS difference for patients with 1 or 2 positive 
SLNs treated with breast conserving surgery who underwent 
completion ALND vs. those who had no further axillary surgery. 
In addition, the American Society of Breast Surgeons issued a 
consensus statement supporting omission of ALND for patients 
who meet Z0011 criteria.228 The results of ACOSOG Z0011 
9
541
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
have revolutionized management of the axilla and changed 
practice such that selected patients with axillary metastasis can 
now avoid ALND if they have clinical and pathologic features 
similar to those patients enrolled on Z0011. However, there have 
been some concerns raised about the Z0011 study which include 
the fact that the study only recruited about half of the intended 
patients and that there was no standardization of whether or not 
patients received irradiation to the low axilla when the radiation 
oncologist irradiated the breast. These issues have thus far lim-
ited the uptake of the results of Z0011 by some centers.
The International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) 
23-01 trial was similar in design to Z0011 but enrolled only 
patients with micrometastases in the SLNs. Patients with SLN 
micrometastases were randomized to ALND vs. no further sur-
gery. Unlike Z0011, the 23-01 trial did not exclude patients 
treated with mastectomy. Approximately 9% of patients ran-
domized to each study arm underwent mastectomy. The inves-
tigators published the primary and secondary endpoints of the 
trial showing no differences in OS or local-regional recurrence 
between the study arms.229 However, as with the Z0011 trial, 
some concerns have been raised regarding the 23-01 study. For 
example, in the statistics on the primary endpoint, local recur-
rence included contralateral breast cancer and other tumor types 
as events. No hypothesis was presented as to why the differ-
ence in axillary surgery should impact on either of these events. 
Including these events therefore reduced the power of the study 
to show a statistical difference between treatment arms. There 
is also concern that the study appears underpowered to show a 
meaningful difference in overall survival.
Most pathology laboratories perform a more detailed anal-
ysis of the SLN than is routinely done for axillary nodes recov-
ered from a level I and II dissection. This can include examining 
thin sections of the node with step sectioning at multiple levels 
through the paraffin blocks or performing immunohistochemi-
cal staining of the SLN for cytokeratin or a combination of these 
techniques. The results of ACOSOG Z0010 and NSABP B-32 
showed no clinically meaningful difference in survival based on 
detection of occult metastases in the SLNs using immunohis-
tochemical staining and do not support the routine use in SLN 
processing. The type of intraoperative assessment of SLNs also 
varies for different clinicians and pathology laboratories. Some 
centers prefer to use touch preparation cytologic analysis of the 
SLNs, whereas others use frozen-section analysis, and the sen-
sitivity and specificity of these assays vary considerably. The 
GeneSearch Breast Lymph Node Assay is a real-time reverse-
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay that detects breast 
tumor cell metastasis in lymph nodes through the identification 
of the gene expression markers mammaglobin and cytokeratin 19. 
These markers are present in higher levels in breast tissue and 
not in nodal tissue (cell type-specific messenger RNA). The 
GeneSearch assay generates expression data for genes of inter-
est, which are then evaluated against predetermined criteria to 
provide a qualitative (positive/negative) result. The assay is 
designed to detect foci that correspond to metastases which are 
seen with examination by standard hematoxylin and eosin stain-
ing and measure >0.2 mm. The GeneSearch assay results have 
been compared with permanent-section histologic analysis and 
frozen-section analysis of sentinel nodes in a prospective trial, 
and the assay was recently approved by the FDA for the intraop-
erative assessment of sentinel nodes.230 When a positive node is 
identified intraoperatively by touch preparation, frozen-section 
analysis, or GeneSearch assay, the surgeon can proceed with 
immediate ALND. With the findings of ACOSOG Z0011 that 
there is not a survival benefit to the use of ALND in selected 
patients, many surgeons have abandoned the intraoperative 
evaluation of SLNs. There are a number of nomograms and 
predictive models designed to determine which patients with a 
positive SLN are at risk for harboring additional positive non-
SLNs in the axilla. These tools can be helpful in determining the 
likelihood of additional disease in the axilla and may be used 
clinically to counsel patients.231
In patients who present with axillary lymphadenopa-
thy that is confirmed to be metastatic disease on FNA or core 
biopsy, SLN dissection is not necessary and patients can proceed 
directly to ALND or be considered for preoperative systemic 
therapy (see section on Neoadjuvant [Preoperative] Chemo-
therapy under Non-Surgical Breast Cancer Therapies). Initially 
there was controversy about the suitability of SLN dissection in 
women with larger primary tumors (T3) and those treated with 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The American Society of Clini-
cal Oncology has included SLN dissection is its guidelines as 
appropriate for axillary staging in these patients.232 If a SLN 
cannot be identified, then ALND is generally performed for 
appropriate staging. However, this is not universally accepted 
and there are as yet no randomized studies which have assessed 
how a patient with a locally advanced cancer at presentation 
should be treated if their SLN dissection reveals no metastases 
or micrometastases after neoadjuvant therapy.
Adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with early-stage inva-
sive breast cancer is considered for patients with node-positive 
cancers, patients with cancers that are >1 cm, and patients with 
node-negative cancers of >0.5 cm when adverse prognostic 
features are present. Adverse prognostic factors include blood 
vessel or lymph vessel invasion, high nuclear grade, high his-
tologic grade, HER-2/neu overexpression or amplification, and 
negative hormone receptor status. Adjuvant endocrine therapy is 
considered for women with hormone receptor-positive cancers, 
and use of an aromatase inhibitor is recommended if the patient 
is postmenopausal. There remains some debate as to whether 
patients should have 5 years of an aromatase inhibitor or two 
years of tamoxifen followed by 3 years of an aromatase inhibi-
tor (the so called, ‘switch’ regime); the majority of clinicians 
appear to favor 5 years of an aromatase inhibitor, especially 
with increasing risk of recurrence. HER-2/neu status is deter-
mined for all patients with newly diagnosed invasive breast can-
cer and when positive, should be used to guide systemic therapy 
recommendations. Trastuzumab is the only HER-2/neu–targeted 
agent that is currently approved for use in the adjuvant setting. 
The FDA approved trastuzumab in November 2006 for use as 
part of a treatment regimen containing doxorubicin, cyclophos-
phamide, and paclitaxel for treatment of HER-2/neu–positive, 
node-positive breast cancer.167,168 Subsequently, the BCIRG 
006 study reported that giving trastuzumab concurrently with 
docetaxel and carboplatin appeared as effective as giving trastu-
zumab following an anthracycline containing regimen.169,170
Advanced Local-Regional Breast Cancer  
(Stage IIIA or IIIB)
Women with stage IIIA and IIIB breast cancer have advanced 
local-regional breast cancer but have no clinically detected dis-
tant metastases (Fig. 17-30).233 In an effort to provide optimal 
local-regional disease-free survival as well as distant disease-
free survival for these women, surgery is integrated with radia-
tion therapy and chemotherapy (Fig. 17-31). However, it should 
542
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
be noted that most of these patients will already have distant 
metastasis which is often highlighted by radiological evidence 
when bone scans, PET &/or CT scans are performed. Even 
when they are negative, elevated serum tumor markers may 
be another indicator that distant spread has already occurred. 
The paradigm therefore which is appropriate for small screen 
detected cancers where cure can be expected in >90% of 
patients, often by local treatment alone is not the same clinical 
scenario as with locally advanced disease. Indeed, a previous 
A
B
Figure 17-30.  Locally advanced breast cancer. A. Mammography of the right breast reveals a large tumor with enlarged axillary lymph 
nodes. B. Imaging of the left breast is normal. (Photos used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast 
Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
Figure 17-31.  Treatment pathways for stage IIIA and 
stage IIIB breast cancer.
randomized study of neoadjuvant therapy followed by modified 
radical mastectomy, post-operative radiotherapy and endocrine 
therapy vs. primary endocrine therapy followed by sequential 
therapy on progression of disease showed no difference in either 
overall survival or uncontrolled local disease at death.234
Preoperative (also known as neoadjuvant) chemotherapy 
should be considered in the initial management of patients with 
locally advanced stage III breast cancer, especially those with 
estrogen receptor negative tumors. For selected clinically indolent, 
543
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
estrogen receptor positive, locally advanced tumors, primary 
endocrine therapy may be considered, especially if the patient 
has other co-morbid conditions. A series of 195 patients with 
ER-positive locally advanced breast cancer treated by endocrine 
therapy—median age 69 years, median tumor size 6 cm, median 
follow-up 61 months—reported a five year overall survival of 
76%, a breast cancer specific survival of 86%, and a metastasis 
free survival of 77%. The median time to an alternative treat-
ment was 48 months.235 Given that this was a 20-year series, the 
number of such patients is small but should be considered when 
the clinician is discussing treatment options. Surgical therapy for 
women with stage III disease is usually a modified radical mas-
tectomy, followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. Chemother-
apy is used to maximize distant disease-free survival, whereas 
radiation therapy is used to maximize local-regional control and 
disease-free survival. In selected patients with stage IIIA can-
cer, preoperative chemotherapy can reduce the size of the pri-
mary cancer and permit breast-conserving surgery. Investigators 
from the MD Anderson Cancer Center reported that low local-
regional failure rates could be achieved in selected patients with 
stage III disease treated with preoperative chemotherapy fol-
lowed by breast-conserving surgery and radiation.236 The 5-year 
actuarial ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence-free survival rates 
in this study were 95%. They noted that the ipsilateral breast 
tumor recurrence rates increased when patients had clinical N2 
or N3 disease, >2 cm of residual disease in the breast at surgery, 
a pattern of multifocal residual disease in the breast at surgery, 
and lymphovascular space invasion in the primary tumor. This 
study demonstrates that breast-conserving surgery can be used 
for appropriately selected patients with locally advanced breast 
cancer who achieve a good response with preoperative che-
motherapy. However, the Oxford overview of all randomized 
studies of neoadjuvant therapy (vs. adjuvant therapy) reported a 
hazard ratio of 1.5 (i.e., 50% increase) in local recurrence rates. 
A meta-analysis reported a hazard ratio of 1.3.237 These findings 
are important in view of the previous findings that the avoidance 
of recurrence in a conserved breast avoids about one breast 
cancer death over the next 15 years for every four such recur-
rences avoided.12 Furthermore, the German Breast Cancer 
Group recently reported their local recurrence rate in 5,535 
patients in seven studies. With a median of 46 months (range 
1–127) follow-up the local recurrence rates ranged from 7.6% 
to 19.5% for T1-T4 tumors and from 6.4%–17.9% for N0-N3 
tumors treated with neoadjuvant therapy.238 Therefore, this is an 
important issue which needs to be addressed in future locally 
advanced and neoadjuvant studies. For patients with stage IIIA 
disease who experience minimal response to chemotherapy and 
for patients with stage IIIB breast cancer, preoperative chemo-
therapy can decrease the local-regional cancer burden enough 
to permit subsequent modified radical mastectomy to establish 
local-regional control. In both stage IIIA and IIIB disease, sur-
gery is followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. However there 
is a small percentage of patients who experience progression of 
disease during neoadjuvant therapy and therefore the surgeon 
should review patients with the oncologist at regular points dur-
ing the neoadjuvant regimen.
Internal Mammary Lymph Nodes
Metastatic disease to internal mammary lymph nodes may be 
occult, may be evident on chest radiograph or CT scan, or may 
present as a painless parasternal mass with or without skin 
involvement. There is no consensus regarding the need for 
internal mammary lymph node radiation therapy in women who 
are at increased risk for occult involvement (cancers involving 
the medial aspect of the breast, axillary lymph node involve-
ment) but who show no signs of internal mammary lymph node 
involvement. Systemic chemotherapy and radiation therapy are 
indicated in the treatment of grossly involved internal mammary 
lymph nodes.
Distant Metastases (Stage IV)
Treatment for stage IV breast cancer is not curative but may pro-
long survival and enhance a woman’s quality of life.239 Endo-
crine therapies that are associated with minimal toxicity are 
preferred to cytotoxic chemotherapy in estrogen receptor posi-
tive disease. Appropriate candidates for initial endocrine therapy 
include women with hormone receptor-positive cancers who do 
not have immediately life threatening disease (or ‘visceral cri-
sis’). This includes not only women with bone or soft tissue 
metastases but also women with limited visceral metastases. 
Symptoms per se (e.g., breathlessness) are not in themselves an 
indication for chemotherapy. For example, breathlessness due 
to a pleural effusion can be treated with percutaneous drainage 
and if the breathlessness is relieved the patient should be com-
menced on endocrine therapy whereas if the breathlessness is 
due to lymphangitic spread then chemotherapy would be the 
treatment of choice. The same approach should be taken to other 
symptoms such as pain. Systemic chemotherapy is indicated for 
women with hormone receptor-negative cancers, ‘visceral cri-
sis’, and hormone-refractory metastases. Women with stage IV 
breast cancer may develop anatomically localized problems that 
will benefit from individualized surgical or radiation treatment, 
such as brain metastases, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, 
biliary obstruction, ureteral obstruction, impending or existing 
pathologic fracture of a long bone, spinal cord compression, and 
painful bone or soft tissue metastases. Bisphosphonates, which 
may be given in addition to chemotherapy or endocrine therapy, 
should be considered in women with bone metastases. Whether 
to perform surgical resection of the local-regional disease in 
women with stage IV breast cancer has been debated after sev-
eral reports have suggested that women who undergo resection 
of the primary tumor have improved survival over those who do 
not. Khan and associates used the National Cancer Data Base to 
identify patterns of treatment in women with metastatic breast 
cancer and found that those who had surgical resection with 
negative margins had a better prognosis than those women who 
did not have surgical therapy.240 Gnerlich et al reported similar 
findings using the SEER database, and there have been several 
reports subsequent to this study from single institutions that 
have confirmed these findings.241 Some have suggested that the 
finding of improved survival is due to selection bias and that 
local therapy should be reserved for palliation of symptoms. 
A randomized trial is currently underway through ECOG to 
address this question. In the meantime, surgical management of 
patients with stage IV disease should be addressed by obtaining 
multidisciplinary input and by considering the treatment goals 
of each individual patient and the patient’s treating physicians.
Local-Regional Recurrence
Women with local-regional recurrence of breast cancer may 
be separated into two groups: those who have had mastec-
tomy and those who have had lumpectomy. Women treated 
previously with mastectomy undergo surgical resection of 
the local-regional recurrence and appropriate reconstruction. 
544
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Chemotherapy and antiestrogen therapy are considered, and 
adjuvant radiation therapy is given if the chest wall has not pre-
viously received radiation therapy or if the radiation oncologist 
feels that given the time from previous treatment there is scope 
for further radiation therapy, particularly if this is palliative. 
Women treated previously with a breast conservation procedure 
undergo a mastectomy and appropriate reconstruction. Chemo-
therapy and antiestrogen therapy are considered.
Breast Cancer Prognosis
Survival rates for women diagnosed with breast cancer in the 
United States can be obtained from the SEER Program of the 
National Cancer Institute. Data have been collected since 1973 
and is updated at regular intervals. The overall 5-year rela-
tive survival for breast cancer patients from the time period of 
2003–2009 from 18 SEER geographic areas was 89.2%. The 
5-year relative survival by race was reported to be 90.4% for 
white women and 78.7% for black women. The 5-year survival 
rate for patients with localized disease (61% of patients) is 
98.6%; for patients with regional disease (32% of patients), 
84.4%; and for patients with distant metastatic disease (5% 
of patients), 24.3%. Breast cancer survival has significantly 
increased over the past two decades due to improvements in 
screening and local and systemic therapies. Data from the 
American College of Surgeons National Cancer Data Base can 
also be accessed and reports survival based on stage of disease 
at presentation using the AJCC staging system.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES IN  
BREAST CANCER THERAPY
Excisional Biopsy with Needle Localization
Excisional biopsy implies complete removal of a breast lesion 
with a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue. In the past, sur-
geons would obtain prior consent from the patient allowing mas-
tectomy if the initial biopsy results confirmed cancer. Today it is 
A
B
Figure 17-32.  Lesion to be targeted to excisional 
biopsy. A. Craniocaudal view of the left breast 
demonstrating 2 lesions (arrows) to be targeted 
for needle localization and excision. B. Oblique 
view demonstrating target lesions. (Photos used 
with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant 
Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal 
Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
important to consider the options for local therapy (lumpectomy 
vs. mastectomy with or without reconstruction) and the need for 
nodal assessment with SLN dissection. Needle core biopsy is 
the preferred diagnostic method and excisional biopsy should 
be reserved for those cases where the needle biopsy results are 
discordant with the imaging findings or clinical examination 
(Fig. 17-32). In general circumareolar incisions can be used to 
access lesions which are subareolar or within a short distance of 
the nipple-areolar complex. Elsewhere in the breast, incisions 
should be placed which are in the lines of tension in the skin 
that are generally concentric with the nipple-areola complex. In 
the lower half of the breast, the use of radial incisions typically 
provides the best outcome. When the tumor is quite distant from 
the central breast, the biopsy incision can be excised separately 
from the primary mastectomy incision, should a mastectomy be 
required. Radial incisions in the upper half of the breast are not 
recommended because of possible scar contracture resulting in 
displacement of the ipsilateral nipple-areola complex. Similarly, 
curvilinear incisions in the lower half of the breast may displace 
the nipple-areolar complex downward.
After excision of a suspicious breast lesion, the specimen 
should be x-rayed to confirm the lesion has been excised with 
appropriate margins. The biopsy tissue specimen is orientated for 
the pathologist using sutures, clips, or dyes. Additional margins 
(superior, inferior, medial, lateral, superficial, and deep) may 
be taken from the surgical bed if the specimen x-ray shows the 
lesion is close to one or more margins. Some surgeons also take 
additional shavings from the margins as one approach to con-
firm complete excision of the suspicious lesion. Electrocautery or 
absorbable ligatures are used to achieve wound hemostasis. Cos-
mesis may be facilitated by approximation of the surgical defect 
using 3-0 absorbable sutures. A running subcuticular closure of 
the skin using 4-0 or 5-0 absorbable monofilament sutures is per-
formed. Wound drainage is usually not required.
Excisional biopsy with needle localization requires a pre-
operative visit to the mammography suite for placement of a 
545
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
localization wire or a radiolabeled seed that can be detected 
intraoperatively with a handheld probe. The lesion can also be 
targeted by sonography in the imaging suite or in the operating 
room. The lesion to be excised is accurately localized by mam-
mography, and the tip of a thin wire hook is positioned close to 
the lesion (Fig. 17-33). Using the wire hook as a guide, the sur-
geon subsequently excises the suspicious breast lesion while 
removing a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue. Before 
the patient leaves the operating room, specimen radiography is 
performed to confirm complete excision of the suspicious lesion 
(Fig. 17-34).
Sentinel Lymph Node Dissection
Sentinel lymph node (SLN) dissection is primarily used to 
assess the regional lymph nodes in women with early breast can-
cers who are clinically node negative by physical examination 
and imaging studies.242-250 This method also is accurate in 
women with larger tumors (T3 N0), but nearly 75% of 
these women will prove to have axillary lymph node metasta-
ses on histologic examination and wherever possible it is better 
to identify them preoperatively as this will allow a definitive 
procedure for known axillary disease. SLN dissection has also 
been reported to be accurate for staging of the axilla after che-
motherapy in women with clinically node-negative disease at 
initial presentation.251,252 Tan et al in a review and meta-analysis 
of 449 cases of SLN biopsy in clinically lymph node negative 
disease reported a sensitivity of 93% giving a false negative rate 
of 7% with a negative predictive value of 94% and an overall 
accuracy of 95%.253 Clinical situations where SLN dissection 
is not recommended include patients with inflammatory breast 
cancers, those with palpable axillary lymphadenopathy and 
biopsy proven metastasis, DCIS without mastectomy, or prior 
axillary surgery. Although limited data are available, SLN 
Figure 17-33.  Wire localization procedure. Mammographic images of hookwire in place targeting lesions for excision in the left breast 
(A) and the right breast (B). (Photos used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal 
Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
A
B
dissection appears to be safe in pregnancy when performed with 
radioisotope alone.
Evidence from large prospective studies suggests that 
the combination of intraoperative gamma probe detection of 
radioactive colloid and intraoperative visualization of blue dye 
(isosulfan blue dye or methylene blue) is more accurate for 
identification of SLNs than the use of either agent alone. Some 
surgeons use preoperative lymphoscintigraphy, although it is 
not required for identification of the SLNs. On the day before 
surgery, or the day of surgery, the radioactive colloid is injected 
either in the breast parenchyma around the primary tumor or 
prior biopsy site, into the subareolar region, or subdermally in 
proximity to the primary tumor site. With a 25-gauge needle, 
0.5 mCi of 0.2-μm technetium 99m–labeled sulfur colloid is 
injected for same-day surgery or a higher dose of 2.5 mCi of 
technetium-labeled sulfur colloid is administered when the 
isotope is to be injected on the day before surgery. Subdermal 
injections are given in proximity to the cancer site or in the 
subareolar location. Later, in the operating room, 3 to 5 mL of 
blue dye is injected either in the breast parenchyma or in the 
subareolar location. It is not recommended that the blue dye be 
used in a subdermal injection because this can result in tattoo-
ing of the skin (isosulfan blue dye) or skin necrosis (methylene 
blue). For nonpalpable cancers, the injection of the technetium-
labeled sulfur colloid solution can be guided by ultrasound or 
by mammographic guidance. It is helpful for the radiologist to 
mark the skin overlying the breast cancer at the time of needle 
localization using an indelible marker. In women who have 
undergone previous excisional biopsy, the injections are made 
in the breast parenchyma around the biopsy cavity but not into 
the cavity itself. Women are told preoperatively that the isosul-
fan blue dye injection will cause a change in the color of their 
urine and that there is a very small risk of allergic reaction to 
9
546
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
B
A
C
Figure 17-34.  Specimen mammography. Specimen mammograms 
demonstrating excision of targeted (A) density, (B) calcifications, 
and (C) spiculated mass seen on preoperative imaging. (Photos 
used with permission of Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/
Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)
the dye (1 in 10,000). Anaphylactic reactions have been docu-
mented and some groups administer a regimen of antihistamine, 
steroids, and a histamine H-2 receptor antagonist preoperatively 
as a prophylactic regimen to prevent allergic reactions. The use 
of radioactive colloid is safe, and radiation exposure is very low. 
Sentinel node dissection can be performed in pregnancy with 
the radioactive colloid without the use of blue dye.
A hand-held gamma counter is used to transcutaneously 
identify the location of the SLN. This can help to guide place-
ment of the incision. A 3- to 4-cm incision is made in line with 
that used for an axillary dissection, which is a curved transverse 
incision in the lower axilla just below the hairline. After dis-
secting through the subcutaneous tissue, the surgeon dissects 
through the axillary fascia, being mindful to identify blue lym-
phatic channels. Following these channels can lead directly to 
the SLN and limit the amount of dissection through the axillary 
tissues. The gamma probe is used to facilitate the dissection and to 
pinpoint the location of the SLN. As the dissection continues, 
the signal from the probe increases in intensity as the SLN is 
approached. The SLN also is identified by visualization of blue 
dye in the afferent lymph vessel and in the lymph node itself. 
Before the SLN is removed, a 10-second in vivo radioactivity 
count is obtained. After removal of the SLN, a 10-second ex 
vivo radioactive count is obtained, and the node is then sent to 
the pathology laboratory for either permanent- or frozen-section 
analysis. The lowest false-negative rates for SLN dissection 
have been obtained when all blue lymph nodes and all lymph 
nodes with counts >10% of the 10-second ex vivo count of the 
SLN are harvested (“10% rule”). Based on this, the gamma 
counter is used before closing the axillary wound to measure 
residual radioactivity in the surgical bed. A search is made for 
additional SLNs if the counts remain high. This procedure is 
repeated until residual radioactivity in the surgical bed is less 
than 10% of the 10-second ex vivo count of the most radioac-
tive SLN and all blue nodes have been removed. Studies have 
demonstrated that 98% of all positive SLNs will be recovered 
with the removal of four SLNs, therefore it is not necessary to 
remove greater than four SLNs for accurate staging of the axilla.
Results from the NSABP B-32 trial showed that the false-
negative rate for SLN dissection is influenced by tumor loca-
tion, type of diagnostic biopsy, and number of SLNs removed 
at surgery.220 The authors reported that tumors located in the 
lateral breast were more likely to have a false-negative SLN. 
This may be explained by difficulty in discriminating the hot 
spot in the axilla when the radioisotope has been injected at the 
primary tumor site in the lateral breast. Those patients who had 
undergone an excisional biopsy before the SLN procedure were 
significantly more likely to have a false-negative SLN. This 
report further confirms that surgeons should use needle biopsy 
for diagnosis whenever possible and reserve excisional biopsy 
for the rare situations in which needle biopsy findings are non-
diagnostic or discordant. Finally, removal of a larger number 
of SLNs at surgery appears to reduce the false-negative rate. In 
B-32, the false-negative rate was reduced from 17.7% to 10% 
when two SLNs were recovered and to 6.9% when three SLNs 
were removed. Yi and associates reported that the number of 
SLNs that need to be removed for accurate staging is influenced 
by individual patient and primary tumor factors.254
In the B-32 trial, SLNs were identified outside the level 
I and II axillary nodes in 1.4% of cases. This was significantly 
influenced by the site of radioisotope injection. When a subareo-
lar or periareolar injection site was used, there were no instances 
547
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
of SLNs identified outside the level I or II axilla, compared with 
a rate of 20% when a peritumoral injection was used. This sup-
ports the overall concept that the SLN is the first site of drain-
age from the lymphatic vessels of the primary tumor. Although 
many patients will have similar drainage patterns from injec-
tions given at the primary tumor site and at the subareolar 
plexus, some patients will have extra-axillary drainage, either 
alone or in combination with axillary node drainage, and this 
is best assessed with a peritumoral injection of the radioiso-
tope. Kong et al reported that internal mammary node drain-
age on preoperative lymphoscintigraphy was associated with 
worse distant disease-free survival in early-stage breast cancer 
patients.255
Breast Conservation
Breast conservation involves resection of the primary breast 
cancer with a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue, adjuvant 
radiation therapy, and assessment of regional lymph node sta-
tus.256,257 Resection of the primary breast cancer is alternatively 
called segmental mastectomy, lumpectomy, partial mastectomy, 
wide local excision, and tylectomy. For many women with stage 
I or II breast cancer, breast-conserving therapy (BCT) is prefer-
able to total mastectomy because BCT produces survival rates 
equivalent to those after total mastectomy while preserving the 
breast.258 Six prospective randomized trials have shown that 
overall and disease-free survival rates are similar with BCT 
and mastectomy, however three of the studies showed higher 
local-regional failure rates in patients undergoing BCT. In two 
of these studies, there were no clear criteria for histologically 
negative margins.12,256-258 Data from the EBCTCG meta-analysis 
revealed that the addition of radiation reduces recurrence by half 
and improves survival at year 15 by about a sixth.259 When all 
of this information is taken together, BCT is considered to be 
oncologically equivalent to mastectomy.
In addition to being equivalent to mastectomy in terms of 
oncologic safety, BCT appears to offer advantages over mas-
tectomy with regard to quality of life and aesthetic outcomes. 
BCT allows for preservation of breast shape and skin as well as 
preservation of sensation, and provides an overall psychologic 
advantage associated with breast preservation.
Breast conservation surgery is currently the standard treat-
ment for women with stage 0, I, or II invasive breast cancer. 
Women with DCIS require only resection of the primary cancer 
and adjuvant radiation therapy without assessment of regional 
lymph nodes. When a lumpectomy is performed, a curvilinear 
incision lying concentric to the nipple-areola complex is made 
in the skin overlying the breast cancer when the tumor is in the 
upper aspect of the breast. Radial incisions are preferred when 
the tumor is in the lower aspect of the breast. Skin excision is 
not necessary unless there is direct involvement of the overlying 
skin by the primary tumor. The breast cancer is removed with 
an envelope of normal-appearing breast tissue that is adequate 
to achieve a cancer-free margin. Significant controversy exists 
on the appropriate margin width for BCT.260 Specimen x-ray 
should routinely be performed to confirm the lesion has been 
excised and that there appears to be an appropriate margin. 
Specimen orientation is performed by the surgeon. Additional 
margins from the surgical bed are taken as needed to provide a 
histologically negative margin. Requests for determination of 
ER, PR, and HER-2 status are conveyed to the pathologist.
It is the surgeon’s responsibility to ensure complete 
removal of cancer in the breast. Ensuring surgical margins that 
are free of breast cancer will minimize the chances of local 
recurrence and will enhance cure rates. Local recurrence of 
breast cancer after conservation surgery is determined primarily 
by the adequacy of surgical margins. Cancer size and the extent 
of skin excision are not significant factors in this regard. It is 
the practice of many North American and European surgeons 
to undertake re-excision when residual cancer within 2 mm of a 
surgical margin is determined by histopathologic examination. 
If clear margins are not obtainable with re-excision, mastectomy 
is required. SLN is performed before removal of the primary 
breast tumor. When indicated, intraoperative assessment of the 
sentinel node can proceed while the segmental mastectomy is 
being performed.
The use of oncoplastic surgery can be entertained at the 
time of segmental mastectomy or at a later time to improve the 
overall aesthetic outcome. The use of oncoplastic techniques 
range from a simple re-shaping of breast tissue to local tissue 
rearrangement to the use of pedicled flaps or breast reduction 
techniques. The overall goal is to achieve the best possible aes-
thetic result. In determining which patients are candidates for 
oncoplastic breast surgery, several factors should be consid-
ered, including the extent of the resection of breast tissue neces-
sary to achieve negative margins, the location of the primary 
tumor within the breast, and the size of the patient’s breast and 
body habitus. Oncoplastic techniques are of prime consider-
ation when: (a) a significant area of breast skin will need to be 
resected with the specimen to achieve negative margins; (b) a 
large volume of breast parenchyma will be resected resulting in 
a significant defect; (c) the tumor is located between the nipple 
and the inframammary fold, an area often associated with unfa-
vorable cosmetic outcomes; or (d) excision of the tumor and 
closure of the breast may result in malpositioning of the nipple.
Mastectomy and Axillary Dissection
A skin-sparing mastectomy removes all breast tissue, the 
nipple-areola complex, and scars from any prior biopsy pro-
cedures.261,262 There is a recurrence rate of less than 6% to 8%, 
comparable to the long-term recurrence rates reported with stan-
dard mastectomy, when skin-sparing mastectomy is used for 
patients with Tis to T3 cancers. A total (simple) mastectomy 
without skin sparing removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola 
complex, and skin. An extended simple mastectomy removes 
all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, skin, and the level I 
axillary lymph nodes. A modified radical (‘Patey’) mastectomy 
removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, skin, 
and the levels I, II and III axillary lymph nodes: the pectoralis 
minor which was divided and removed by Patey may be simply 
divided, giving improved access to level III nodes, and then left 
in-situ or occasionally the axillary clearance can be performed 
without dividing pectoralis minor. The Halsted radical mastec-
tomy removes all breast tissue and skin, the nipple-areola com-
plex, the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles, and the 
level I, II, and III axillary lymph nodes. The use of systemic 
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy as well as adjuvant radia-
tion therapy for breast cancer have nearly eliminated the need 
for the radical mastectomy.
Nipple-areolar sparing mastectomy has been popularized 
over the last decade especially for risk-reducing mastectomy 
in high risk women. For those patients with a cancer diagno-
sis, many consider the following factors for eligibility: tumor 
located more than 2–3 cm from the border of the areola, smaller 
breast size, minimal ptosis, no prior breast surgeries with 
548
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
periareolar incisions, body mass index less than 40 kg/m2, no 
active tobacco use, no prior breast irradiation, and no evidence 
of collagen vascular disease.
For a variety of biologic, economic, and psychosocial rea-
sons, some women desire mastectomy rather than breast con-
servation. Women who are less concerned about cosmesis may 
view mastectomy as the most expeditious and desirable thera-
peutic option because it avoids the cost and inconvenience of 
radiation therapy. Some women whose primary breast cancers 
cannot be excised with a reasonable cosmetic result or those 
who have extensive microcalcifications are best treated with 
mastectomy. Similarly women with large cancers that occupy 
the subareolar and central portions of the breast and women with 
multicentric primary cancers also undergo mastectomy.
Modified Radical Mastectomy
A modified radical mastectomy preserves the pectoralis major 
muscle with removal of level I, II, and III (apical) axillary lymph 
nodes.261 The operation was first described by David Patey, a 
surgeon at St Bartholomew’s Hospital London, who reported 
a series of cases where he had removed the pectoralis minor 
muscle allowing complete dissection of the level III axillary 
lymph nodes while preserving the pectoralis major and the lateral 
Figure 17-35.  Modified radical mastectomy: eleva-
tion of skin flaps. Skin flaps are 7 to 8 mm in thick-
ness, inclusive of the skin and telasubcutanea. (Visual 
Art: © 2012. The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center.)
Figure 17-36.  Modified radical mastectomy after 
resection of breast tissue. The pectoralis major muscle 
is cleared of its fascia as the overlying breast is elevated. 
The latissimus dorsi muscle is the lateral boundary of the 
dissection. (Visual Art: © 2012.The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center.)
pectoral nerve. A modified radical mastectomy permits preser-
vation of the medial (anterior thoracic) pectoral nerve, which 
courses in the lateral neurovascular bundle of the axilla and usu-
ally penetrates the pectoralis minor to supply the lateral border 
of the pectoralis major. Anatomic boundaries of the modified 
radical mastectomy are the anterior margin of the latissimus 
dorsi muscle laterally, the midline of the sternum medially, the 
subclavius muscle superiorly, and the caudal extension of the 
breast 2 to 3 cm inferior to the inframammary fold inferiorly. 
Skin-flap thickness varies with body habitus but ideally is 7 to 
8 mm inclusive of skin and telasubcutanea (Fig. 17-35). Once 
the skin flaps are fully developed, the fascia of the pectoralis 
major muscle and the overlying breast tissue are elevated off the 
underlying musculature, which allows for the complete removal 
of the breast (Fig. 17-36).
Subsequently, an axillary lymph node dissection is per-
formed. The most lateral extent of the axillary vein is identified 
and the areolar tissue of the lateral axillary space is elevated as 
the vein is cleared on its anterior and inferior surfaces. The areo-
lar tissues at the junction of the axillary vein and the anterior 
edge of the latissimus dorsi muscle, which include the lateral 
and subscapular lymph node groups (level I), are cleared. Care 
is taken to preserve the thoracodorsal neurovascular bundle. 
549
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
The dissection then continues medially with clearance of the 
central axillary lymph node group (level II). The long thoracic 
nerve of Bell is identified and preserved as it travels in the 
investing fascia of the serratus anterior muscle. Every effort is 
made to preserve this nerve, because permanent disability with 
a winged scapula and shoulder weakness will follow denerva-
tion of the serratus anterior muscle. Patey divided the pectoralis 
minor and removed it to allow access right up to the apex of 
the axilla. The pectoralis minor muscle is usually divided at the 
tendinous portion near its insertion onto the coracoid process 
(Fig. 17-37 inset), which allows dissection of the axillary vein 
medially to the costoclavicular (Halsted’s) ligament. Finally, the 
breast and axillary contents are removed from the surgical bed 
and are sent for pathologic assessment. In Patey’s modified radi-
cal mastectomy he removed the pectoralis minor muscle. Many 
surgeons now divide only the tendon of the pectoralis minor 
muscle at its insertion onto the coracoid process while leaving 
the rest of the muscle intact, which still provides good access to 
the apex of the axilla.
Seromas beneath the skin flaps or in the axilla represent 
the most frequent complication of mastectomy and axillary 
lymph node dissection, reportedly occurring in as many as 30% 
of cases. The use of closed-system suction drainage reduces 
the incidence of this complication. Catheters are retained in the 
wound until drainage diminishes to <30 mL per day. Wound 
infections occur infrequently after a mastectomy and the major-
ity are a result of skin-flap necrosis. Cultures of specimens taken 
from the infected wound for aerobic and anaerobic organisms, 
débridement, and antibiotic therapy are effective management. 
Figure 17-37.  Modified radical mastectomy (Patey): axillary lymph node dissection. The dissection proceeds from lateral to medial, with 
complete visualization of the anterior and inferior aspects of the axillary vein. Loose areolar tissue at the junction of the axillary vein and the 
anterior margin of the latissimus dorsi muscle is swept inferomedially inclusive of the lateral (axillary) lymph node group (level I). Care is 
taken to preserve the thoracodorsal artery, vein, and nerve in the deep axillary space. The lateral lymph node group is resected in continuity 
with the subscapular lymph node group (level I) and the external mammary lymph node group (level I). Dissection anterior to the axillary vein 
allows removal of the central lymph node group (level II) and the apical (subclavicular) lymph node group (level III). The superomedial limit 
of this dissection is the clavipectoral fascia (Halsted’s ligament). Inset depicts division of the insertion of the pectoralis minor muscle at the 
coracoid process. The surgeon’s finger shields the underlying brachial plexus. (Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, et al. Modified 
radical mastectomy and total (simple) mastectomy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign 
and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Moderate or severe hemorrhage in the postoperative period 
is rare and is best managed with early wound exploration for 
control of hemorrhage and re-establishment of closed-system 
suction drainage. The incidence of functionally significant 
lymphedema after a modified radical mastectomy is approxi-
mately 20% but can be as high as 50% to 60% when postop-
erative radiation is employed. Extensive axillary lymph node 
dissection, the delivery of radiation therapy, the presence of 
pathologic lymph nodes, and obesity are predisposing factors. 
Patients should be referred to physical therapy at the earliest 
signs of lymphedema to prevent progression to the later stages. 
The use of individually fitted compressive sleeves and complex 
decongestive therapy may be necessary.
Reconstruction of the Breast and Chest Wall
The goals of reconstructive surgery after a mastectomy for breast 
cancer are wound closure and breast reconstruction, which is 
either immediate or delayed.263 In most cases, wound closure 
after mastectomy is accomplished with simple approximation 
of the wound edges. However, if a more radical removal of skin 
and subcutaneous tissue is necessary, a pedicled myocutane-
ous flap from the latissimus dorsi muscle is generally the best 
approach for wound coverage. A skin graft provides functional 
coverage that will tolerate adjuvant radiation therapy; however, 
this is not preferred, because poor graft adherence may delay 
delivery of radiation therapy. Breast reconstruction after risk-
reducing mastectomy or after mastectomy for early-stage breast 
cancer may be performed at the same time as the mastectomy. 
This allows for a skin-sparing mastectomy to be performed, 
550
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
which offers the best overall cosmetic outcomes. Reconstruc-
tion can proceed with an expander/implant reconstruction or 
with autologous tissue such as a pedicled myocutaneous flap 
or a free flap using microvascular techniques. In patients with 
locally advanced breast cancer, reconstruction is often delayed 
until after completion of adjuvant radiation therapy to ensure 
that local-regional control of disease is obtained. The expected 
use of postmastectomy radiotherapy should also be considered 
as a reason for delayed reconstruction as radiotherapy to a 
reconstructed breast has been reported to result in inferior cos-
metic outcomes. Consideration can be made for placement of 
a tissue expander to allow for skin-sparing but this should be 
discussed with the radiation oncologist and other members of 
the treatment team. If chest wall coverage is needed to replace 
a large skin or soft tissue defect, many different types of myo-
cutaneous flaps are employed, but the latissimus dorsi and 
the rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps are most frequently 
used. The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap consists of a skin 
paddle based on the underlying latissimus dorsi muscle, which 
is supplied by the thoracodorsal artery with contributions from 
the posterior intercostal arteries. A transverse rectus abdominis 
myocutaneous (TRAM) flap consists of a skin paddle based on 
the underlying rectus abdominis muscle, which is supplied by 
vessels from the deep inferior epigastric artery. The free TRAM 
flap uses microvascular anastomoses to establish blood supply 
to the flap. When the bony chest wall is involved with cancer, 
resection of a portion of the bony chest wall is indicated. If only 
one or two ribs are resected and soft tissue coverage is pro-
vided, reconstruction of the bony defect is usually not neces-
sary, because scar tissue will stabilize the chest wall. If more 
than two ribs are sacrificed, it is advisable to stabilize the chest 
wall with prosthetic material, which is then covered with soft 
tissue by using a latissimus dorsi or TRAM flap.
NONSURGICAL BREAST CANCER THERAPIES
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy is used for all stages of breast cancer 
depending on whether the patient is undergoing BCT or mas-
tectomy.264-270 Adjuvant radiation for patients with DCIS and 
early-stage breast cancer are described above. Those women 
treated with mastectomy who have cancer at the surgical mar-
gins are at sufficiently high risk for local recurrence to warrant 
the use of adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall postop-
eratively. Women with metastatic disease involving four or 
more axillary lymph nodes and premenopausal women with 
metastatic disease involving one to three lymph nodes also are 
at increased risk for recurrence and are candidates for the use 
of chest wall and supraclavicular lymph node radiation therapy. 
In advanced local-regional breast cancer (stage IIIA or IIIB), 
women are at high risk for recurrent disease after surgical ther-
apy, and adjuvant radiation therapy is used to reduce the risk of 
recurrence. Current recommendations for stages IIIA and IIIB 
breast cancer are: (a) adjuvant radiation therapy to the breast and 
supraclavicular lymph nodes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
and segmental mastectomy with or without axillary lymph node 
dissection, (b) adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall and 
supraclavicular lymph nodes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
and mastectomy with or without axillary lymph node dissec-
tion, and (c) adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall and 
supraclavicular lymph nodes after segmental mastectomy or 
mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection and adjuvant 
chemotherapy.
The use of partial breast irradiation (APBI) for patients 
treated with breast-conserving surgery is also described above. 
APBI can be delivered via brachytherapy, external beam radia-
tion therapy using three-dimensional conformal radiation, or 
intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Although initial results 
are promising in highly selected low-risk populations, APBI 
should be used in the clinical setting only as part of a prospec-
tive trial.
Chemotherapy Adjuvant
Chemotherapy.  The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collabora-
tive Group overview analysis of adjuvant chemotherapy dem-
onstrated reductions in the odds of recurrence and of death in 
women ≤70 years of age with stage I, IIA, or IIB breast can-
cer.118,271-275 For those ≥70 years of age, the lack of definitive 
clinical trial data regarding adjuvant chemotherapy prevented 
definitive recommendations. Adjuvant chemotherapy is of mini-
mal benefit to women with negative nodes and cancers ≤0.5 cm 
in size and is not recommended. Women with negative nodes 
and cancers 0.6 to 1.0 cm are divided into those with a low risk 
of recurrence and those with unfavorable prognostic features 
that portend a higher risk of recurrence and a need for adjuvant 
chemotherapy. Adverse prognostic factors include blood ves-
sel or lymph vessel invasion, high nuclear grade, high histo-
logic grade, HER-2/neu overexpression, and negative hormone 
receptor status. Adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended by the 
NCCN guidelines for women with these unfavorable prognostic 
features. Table 17-14 lists the frequently used chemotherapy 
regimens for breast cancer.
For women with hormone receptor-negative cancers that 
are >1 cm in size, adjuvant chemotherapy is appropriate. How-
ever, women with node-negative hormone receptor–positive 
cancers and T1 tumors are candidates for antiestrogen therapy 
with or without chemotherapy. Assessment of overall risk 
using known prognostic factors or additional testing such as 
the 21-gene recurrence score assay can help to guide decision 
making regarding chemotherapy in patients with node-negative 
ER-positive breast cancer. For special-type cancers (tubular, 
mucinous, medullary, etc), which are usually strongly estro-
gen receptor positive, adjuvant antiestrogen therapy should 
be advised for cancers >1 cm. For women with node-positive 
tumors or with a special-type cancer that is >3 cm, the use of 
chemotherapy is appropriate: those with hormone receptor-
positive tumors should receive antiestrogen therapy.
For stage IIIA breast cancer preoperative chemotherapy 
with an anthracycline-containing or taxane-containing regimen 
followed by either a modified radical mastectomy or segmental 
mastectomy with axillary dissection followed by adjuvant radia-
tion therapy should be considered, especially for estrogen recep-
tor negative disease. While the same regimen may be considered 
for estrogen receptor positive disease it is known that these 
tumors respond less well to chemotherapy with <10% pCR rate 
overall and <3% pCR rate for lobular cancers. Other options 
such as neoadjuvant endocrine therapy followed by local-
regional treatment or in a minority of cases primary endocrine 
therapy may be considered depending on other tumor charac-
teristics and the patient’s co-morbid conditions and preference.
Neoadjuvant (Preoperative) Chemotherapy.  In the early 
1970s, the National Cancer Institute in Milan, Italy, initiated 
551
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
two prospective randomized multimodality clinical trials for 
women with T3 or T4 breast cancer.276 The best results were 
achieved when surgery was interposed between chemotherapy 
courses, with 82% local-regional control and 25% having a 
5-year disease-free survival. The NSABP B-18 trial evaluated 
the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in women with operable 
stage II and III breast cancer.188 Women entered into this study 
were randomly assigned to receive either surgery followed 
by chemotherapy or neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by 
surgery. There was no difference in the 5-year disease-free 
survival rates for the two groups, but after neoadjuvant chemo-
therapy there was an increase in the number of lumpectomies 
performed and a decreased incidence of node positivity. It was 
suggested that neoadjuvant chemotherapy be considered for the 
initial management of breast cancers judged too large for initial 
lumpectomy.
Several prospective clinical trials have evaluated the neo-
adjuvant approach and two meta-analyses have been performed 
each showing that neoadjuvant vs. adjuvant chemotherapy are 
equivalent in terms of OS.237,277 These analyses also evaluated 
local-regional recurrence (LRR) and found that there was an 
increase in LRR rates for patients receiving neoadjuvant che-
motherapy when radiation therapy was used alone without 
surgery after completion of chemotherapy. Mittendorf and col-
leagues evaluated a contemporary series of almost 3000 patients 
treated with breast conserving surgery and radiation therapy who 
received either neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast 
Table 17-14 
Adjuvant chemotherapy regimens for breast cancer
HER-2/neu Negative (Non–
Trastuzumab-Containing 
Regimens)
HER-2/neu Positive 
(Trastuzumab-Containing 
Regimens)
FAC/CAF
AC → T + concurrent 
trastuzumab (T = paclitaxel)
FEC/CEF
Docetaxel + trastuzumab → 
FEC
AC or EC
TCH (docetaxel, carboplatin, 
trastuzumab)
TAC (T = docetaxel)
Chemotherapy followed by 
trastuzumab sequentially
A → CMF
AC → docetaxel + 
trastuzumab
E → CMF
CMF
AC × 4
A → T → C (T = paclitaxel)
FEC → T (T = docetaxel)
TC (T = docetaxel)
A = Adriamycin (doxorubicin); C = cyclophosphamide; E = epirubicin; 
F = 5-fluorouracil; M = methotrexate; T = Taxane (docetaxel or pacli-
taxel); → = followed by. 
Source: Adapted from Carlson RW, et al: Breast cancer, in NCCN Prac-
tice Guidelines in Oncology. Fort Washington, PA: National Compre-
hensive Cancer Network, 2006.
cancer.278 They found that the risk of LRR was driven by biologic 
factors and disease stage and was not impacted by the timing of 
chemotherapy delivery. These data highlight the impor-
tance of the multidisciplinary management of patients 
with breast cancer in achieving the best outcomes.
The use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy offers the oppor-
tunity to observe the response of the intact primary tumor and 
any regional nodal metastases to a specific chemotherapy regi-
men.279 For patients whose tumors remain stable in size or even 
progress with the initial neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen, 
a new regimen may be considered that uses another class of 
agents, although there is no randomized data confirming this 
will improve outcome.
After treatment with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, patients 
are assessed for clinical and pathologic response to the regimen. 
Patients whose tumors achieve a pathologic complete response 
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have been shown to have statisti-
cally improved survival outcomes to those of patients whose 
tumors demonstrate only a partial response, remain stable, or 
progress on treatment. Patients who experience progression of 
disease during neoadjuvant chemotherapy have the poorest sur-
vival.280,281 This means that while patients who achieve a pCR 
will have a better outlook based on their response to neoadju-
vant chemotherapy. Equally other patients will have a poorer 
outlook compared to when they started neoadjuvant therapy 
based on the non-response to treatment. The FDA is now pro-
posing to use the neoadjuvant platform and pathologic response 
rates as a mechanism of accelerated approval for new agents 
although the short term endpoints (i.e., pCR) have not yet been 
shown to correlate with long-term outcomes (i.e., disease free 
survival and overall survival).
Current NCCN recommendations for treatment of operable 
advanced local-regional breast cancer are neoadjuvant chemo-
therapy with an anthracycline-containing or taxane-containing 
regimen or both, followed by mastectomy or lumpectomy with 
axillary lymph node dissection if necessary, followed by adju-
vant radiation therapy. For patients with HER-2-positive breast 
cancer, trastuzumab can be combined with chemotherapy in the 
preoperative setting to increase pathologic complete response 
rates. For inoperable stage IIIA and for stage IIIB breast cancer, 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is used to decrease the local-regional 
cancer burden. This may then permit subsequent modified radi-
cal or radical mastectomy, which is followed by adjuvant radia-
tion therapy.
Nodal Evaluation in Patients Receiving Neoadjuvant 
Chemotherapy  The management of the axilla after neoadju-
vant chemotherapy has not been specifically addressed in ran-
domized trials. Standard practice has been to perform an axillary 
lymph node dissection after chemotherapy or to perform a sen-
tinel lymph node dissection before chemotherapy for nodal 
staging before chemotherapy is initiated. A number of small 
single-institution studies, one multicenter study, and a recent 
meta-analysis have explored the use of SLN dissection at the 
completion of chemotherapy. The published results from these 
studies have demonstrated the feasibility of SLN dissection in 
breast cancer patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Review of 
14 studies with 818 patients showed a false negative rate of 11% 
with an overall accuracy of 94%.251,252,282 Although the issue has 
not been specifically addressed in the published trials, the pres-
ence of suspected or documented axillary metastases at initial 
presentation generally is considered a contraindication to SLN 
10
552
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
dissection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and these patients 
usually undergo axillary lymph node dissection after completion 
of chemotherapy.
Neoadjuvant Endocrine Therapy.  There is little random-
ized data on neoadjuvant endocrine therapy and virtually none 
which reports local recurrence rates. Neoadjuvant endocrine 
therapy has not been based on randomized controlled trials. 
It has most commonly been used in elderly women who were 
deemed poor candidates for surgery or cytotoxic chemother-
apy. As clinicians have gained experience with neoadjuvant 
treatment strategies, it is now clear from examination of predic-
tors of complete pathologic response that ER-positive tumors 
do not shrink in response to chemotherapy as readily as ER-
negative tumors.283 Indeed the pCR rate in estrogen receptor 
negative tumors is approximately three times that of estrogen 
receptor positive tumors. Fisher et al examined the results 
of the NSABP B-14 and B-20 trials and found that, as age 
increased, women obtained less benefit from chemotherapy. 
They recommended that factors194 including tumor estrogen 
receptor concentration, nuclear grade, histologic grade, tumor 
type, and markers of proliferation should be considered in these 
patients before choosing between the use of chemotherapy and 
hormonal therapy. If in fact the tumor is estrogen receptor rich, 
these patients may benefit more from endocrine therapy in the 
neoadjuvant setting than they might if they received standard 
chemotherapy. Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy has been shown 
to shrink tumors, enabling breast-conserving surgery in women 
with hormone receptor-positive disease who otherwise would 
have to be treated with mastectomy although long-term recur-
rence rates have not been reported.284
With the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy or endocrine 
therapy, observation of the response of the intact tumor and/
or nodal metastases to a specific regimen could ultimately help 
to define which patients will benefit from specific therapies in 
the adjuvant setting. In adjuvant trials the primary endpoint is 
typically survival, whereas in neoadjuvant trials the endpoints 
have more often been clinical or pathologic response rates. 
However, with the reported increase in local recurrence and 
the link between local recurrence and survival by the Early 
Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group, surgeons need to 
become more focused on local recurrence as a primary endpoint 
of neoadjuvant therapies. There are a number of clinical trials 
underway comparing neoadjuvant chemotherapy and endocrine 
therapy regimens with pretreatment and posttreatment biopsy 
samples obtained from the primary tumors in all of the partici-
pants. These samples are being subjected to intensive genomic 
and proteomic analyses that may help to define a more person-
alized or individualized approach to breast cancer treatment in 
the future.
Antiestrogen Therapy 
Tamoxifen.  Within the cytosol of breast cancer cells are spe-
cific proteins (receptors) that bind and transfer steroid moieties 
into the cell nucleus to exert specific hormonal effects.274,285-289 
The most widely studied hormone receptors are the estrogen 
receptor and progesterone receptor. Hormone receptors are 
detectable in >90% of well-differentiated ductal and lobular 
invasive cancers. Although the receptor status may remain the 
same between the primary cancer and metastatic disease in the 
same patient in the vast majority of cases, there are instances 
where the status is changed in the metastatic focus and therefore 
biopsy of newly diagnosed metastatic disease should be con-
sidered for assessment of hormone receptor and HER-2 status.
After binding to estrogen receptors in the cytosol, 
tamoxifen blocks the uptake of estrogen by breast tissue. 
Clinical responses to antiestrogen are evident in >60% of 
women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancers but 
in <10% of women with hormone receptor-negative breast 
cancers. A meta-analysis by the Early Breast Cancer Tri-
alists’ Collaborative Group showed that adjuvant therapy 
with tamoxifen for 5 years reduced breast cancer mortality 
by about a third through the first 15 years of follow-up.290 
This mortality benefit continues to be statistically significant 
in the second and third 5-year periods (i.e., years 5–9 and 
10–15) when the patients are no longer receiving endocrine 
treatment—the so called ‘carry-over effect’. The analysis 
also showed a 39% reduction in the risk of cancer in the con-
tralateral breast. The antiestrogens do have defined toxicity, 
including bone pain, hot flashes, nausea, vomiting, and fluid 
retention. Thrombotic events occur in <3% of treated women. 
Cataract surgery is more frequently performed in patients 
receiving tamoxifen. A long-term risk of tamoxifen use is 
endometrial cancer. Tamoxifen therapy usually is discontin-
ued after 5 years although recent data from randomized trials 
suggest a survival benefit for 10 years of tamoxifen therapy 
over 5 years. However, somewhat surprisingly the benefit is 
not seen in the second five years (i.e., years 5–9) while the 
patients are on treatment but only from years 10–15. In high 
risk patients who have received 5 years of adjuvant tamoxi-
fen extended adjuvant therapy with at least 3 years of an 
aromatase inhibitor has been shown to provide a significant 
benefit in terms of disease outcome.291
Tamoxifen therapy is also considered for women with 
DCIS that is found to be estrogen receptor positive on immuno-
histochemical studies. The goals of such therapy are to decrease 
the risk of an ipsilateral recurrence after breast conservation 
therapy for DCIS and to decrease the risk of a primary inva-
sive breast cancer or a contralateral breast cancer event. This 
approach has not been universally accepted.
Aromatase inhibitors.  In postmenopausal women, aromatase 
inhibitors are now considered first-line therapy in the adjuvant 
setting or as a secondary agent after 1 to 2 years of adjuvant 
tamoxifen therapy. The nonsteroidal third generation aromatase 
inhibitors, anastrozole and letrozole, have both been shown to 
result in significantly fewer local and distant recurrences.292,293 
While neither trial on its own has shown a significant survival 
advantage, an overview of all the studies of adjuvant aromatase 
inhibitors has reported a survival advantage to the use of aro-
matase inhibitors The HR is about 0.80 for 5 years of an aroma-
tase inhibitor vs. 5 years of tamoxifen and this is irrespective of 
absolute risk. This has led some to suggest a switch policy—2 
years of tamoxifen followed by 3 years of an aromatase inhibi-
tor—for low risk patients where the absolute benefits may be 
small and the cost of an aromatase inhibitor may be significant 
for some individuals. As aromatase inhibitors come off patent, 
the cost issue should decrease and even for small benefits the 
additional cost of an aromatase inhibitor should become cost-
effective. Whether 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor will be 
better than 5 years is currently the subject of a randomised trial 
by the NSABP (B-42). For patients who have completed 5 years 
of adjuvant endocrine therapy and are 6–20 years from presen-
tation, the question of whether reintroducing endocrine therapy 
553
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
might decrease long term recurrence rates is being addressed by 
the later study which randomizes patients to 5 years of letrozole 
or placebo.
The aromatase inhibitors are less likely than tamoxifen to 
cause endometrial cancer but do lead to changes in bone mineral 
density that may result in osteoporosis and an increased rate of 
fractures in postmenopausal women. The risk of osteoporosis 
can be averted by treatment with bisphosphonates. Joint pains 
are a side effect which affects a significant number of patients.
Node-negative and node-positive breast cancer patients 
whose tumors express hormone receptors should be considered 
for endocrine therapy in the adjuvant setting. Women with 
hormone receptor-positive cancers achieve significant reduc-
tion in risk of recurrence and mortality due to breast cancer 
through the use of endocrine therapies. For women with stage 
IV breast cancer, a third generation non-steroidal aromatase 
inhibitor is the preferred initial therapy. For postmenopausal 
women with prior aromatase inhibitor exposure, recommended 
second-line endocrine therapies include the pure anti-estrogen 
fulvestrant (at the 500-mg dose) or tamoxifen followed by 
progestins, high-dose estrogen, and androgens. For postmeno-
pausal patients who received tamoxifen as prior endocrine 
therapy, subsequent endocrine therapies would be an aroma-
tase inhibitor or fulvestrant (500 mg) followed by progestins, 
high dose estrogens, and androgens. In premenopausal patients 
with stage IV breast cancer either tamoxifen or oophorectomy 
(medical, surgical, or radioablative) could be used alone with 
the other then being added in on progression. An overview 
of four randomized trials suggested combining oophorectomy 
and tamoxifen would be the initial treatment options. If a 
tumor progresses while a premenopausal patient is on ovar-
ian ablation plus tamoxifen then the tamoxifen can be stopped 
and an aromatase inhibitor added to the ovarian ablation. Sub-
sequent therapies if the patient’s tumor is still deemed to be 
potentially hormone responsive can include ovarian ablation 
plus fulvestrant, ovarian ablation plus exemestane, and then 
progestins followed by high dose estrogens. Women whose 
tumors respond to an endocrine therapy with either shrinkage 
of their breast cancer (objective response) or long-term sta-
bilization of disease (stable disease) are together consider to 
represent ‘clinical benefit’ and should receive additional endo-
crine therapy at the time of progression since their chances of 
a further response remain high.294-296 Patients whose tumors 
progress de-novo on an endocrine agent have a low rate of 
clinical benefit (<20%) to subsequent endocrine therapy; the 
choice of endocrine or chemotherapy should be considered 
based on the disease site and extent as well as the patient’s 
general condition and treatment preference.294
Ablative Endocrine Therapy
In the past, oophorectomy, adrenalectomy, and/or hypophy-
sectomy were the primary endocrine modalities used to treat 
metastatic breast cancer, but today they are rarely used. Oopho-
rectomy was used in premenopausal breast cancer patients. In 
contrast, pharmacologic doses of exogenous estrogens were 
given to postmenopausal women with similar recurrences. For 
both groups, the response rates were nearly 30%. Adrenalec-
tomy and hypophysectomy were effective in individuals who 
had previously responded to either oophorectomy or exogenous 
estrogen therapy, and the response to these additional proce-
dures was nearly 30%. Aminoglutethimide blocks enzymatic 
conversion of cholesterol to γ-5-pregnenolone and inhibits the 
conversion of androstenedione to estrogen in peripheral tissues. 
Dose-dependent and transient side effects include ataxia, dizziness, 
and lethargy. After treatment with this agent (medical adrenalec-
tomy), adrenal suppression necessitates glucocorticoid therapy. 
Neither permanent adrenal insufficiency nor acute crises have 
been observed. Because the adrenal glands are the major site 
for production of endogenous estrogens after menopause, treat-
ment with aminoglutethimide has been compared prospectively 
with surgical adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy in postmeno-
pausal women and is equally efficacious.
Anti–HER-2/neu Therapy
The determination of tumor HER-2/neu expression or gene 
amplification for all newly diagnosed patients with breast can-
cer is now recommended.297-300 It is used to assist in the selection 
of adjuvant chemotherapy in both node-negative and node-
positive patients. Patients with HER-2-positive disease appear 
to have better outcomes with anthracycline-based adjuvant 
chemotherapy regimens. Patients with HER-2-positive tumors 
benefit if trastuzumab is added to paclitaxel chemotherapy. 
Cardiotoxicity may develop if trastuzumab is delivered concur-
rently with anthracycline-based chemotherapy.
Trastuzumab was initially approved for the treatment of 
HER-2/neu–positive breast cancer in patients with metastatic 
disease. Once efficacy was demonstrated for patients with 
metastatic disease, the NSABP and the North Central Can-
cer Treatment Group conducted phase III trials evaluating the 
impact of adjuvant trastuzumab therapy in patients with early-
stage breast cancer. After approval from the FDA, these groups 
amended their adjuvant trastuzumab trials (B-31 and N9831, 
respectively), to provide for a joint efficacy analysis. The first 
joint interim efficacy analysis demonstrated an improvement in 
3-year disease-free survival from 75% in the control arm to 87% 
in the trastuzumab arm (hazard ratio = 0.48, P<.0001). There 
was an accompanying 33% reduction in mortality in the patients 
who received trastuzumab (hazard ratio = 0.67, P = 0.015). The 
magnitude of reduction in hazard for disease-free survival 
events crossed prespecified early reporting boundaries, so the 
data-monitoring committees for both groups recommended that 
randomized accrual to the trials be ended, and the results were 
subsequently published.167
Buzdar and colleagues reported the results of a random-
ized neoadjuvant trial of trastuzumab in combination with 
sequential paclitaxel followed by FEC-75 (5-fluorouracil, 
epirubicin, cyclophosphamide) vs. the same chemotherapy 
regimen without trastuzumab in 42 women with early-stage 
operable breast cancer. The pathologic complete response rates 
in this trial increased from 25 to 66.7% when chemotherapy 
was given concurrently with trastuzumab. None of the patients 
receiving the concurrent trastuzumab and FEC regimen devel-
oped symptoms of congestive heart failure. However, given the 
small sample size in this report, the 95% confidence interval 
for developing heart failure was 0% to 14.8%.301 A subsequent 
report which included additional patients treated with concur-
rent chemotherapy and trastuzumab further confirmed the high 
pathologic complete response rates and continued to show that 
cardiac function was preserved.302 This regimen was tested in 
a phase III multicenter trial (ACOSOG Z1041) which recently 
completed accrual.
Several new agents have been approved for the treatment 
of women with metastatic HER-2-positive breast cancers. Lapa-
tinib is a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets both HER-2 
554
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and EGFR. It was approved for use with capecitabine in patients 
with HER-2-positive metastatic disease. Ado-trastuzumab 
(previously known as TDM1) was approved for patients who 
have previously received trastuzumab and a taxane either sepa-
rately or in combination. Ado-trastuzumab binds to the HER-2 
receptor and releases a cytotoxic agent into the cell that leads to 
apoptosis. The FDA has also approved pertuzumab, which also 
targets the HER-2 receptor, in combination with trastuzumab 
and docetaxel for treatment of metastatic HER-2-positive breast 
cancer. There is significant interest in dual targeting of HER-2 
and multiple trials are ongoing in the metastatic and neoad-
jvuant settings.
SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONS
Nipple Discharge
Unilateral Nipple Discharge  Nipple discharge is a finding 
that can be seen in a number of clinical situations. It may be 
suggestive of cancer if it is spontaneous, unilateral, localized 
to a single duct, present in women ≥40 years of age, bloody, 
or associated with a mass. A trigger point on the breast may 
be present so that pressure around the nipple-areolar complex 
induces discharge from a single duct. In this circumstance, 
mammography and ultrasound are indicated for further evalu-
ation. A ductogram also can be useful and is performed by can-
nulating a single discharging duct with a small nylon catheter 
or needle and injecting 1.0 mL of water-soluble contrast solu-
tion. Nipple discharge associated with a cancer may be clear, 
bloody, or serous. Testing for the presence of hemoglobin is 
helpful, but hemoglobin may also be detected when nipple dis-
charge is secondary to an intraductal papilloma or duct ecta-
sia. Definitive diagnosis depends on excisional biopsy of the 
offending duct and any associated mass lesion. A 3.0 lacrimal 
duct probe can be used to identify the duct that requires exci-
sion. Another approach is to inject methylene blue dye within 
the duct after ductography. The nipple must be sealed with 
collodion or a similar material so that the blue dye does not 
discharge through the nipple but remains within the distended 
duct facilitating its localization. Needle localization biopsy is 
performed when there is an associated mass that lies >2.0 to 
3.0 cm from the nipple.
Bilateral Nipple Discharge  Nipple discharge is suggestive of 
a benign condition if it is bilateral and multiductal in origin, 
occurs in women ≤39 years of age, or is milky or blue-green. 
Prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas are responsible for bilat-
eral nipple discharge in <2% of cases. If serum prolactin levels 
are repeatedly elevated, plain radiographs of the sellaturcica are 
indicated and thin section CT scan is required. Optical nerve 
compression, visual field loss, and infertility are associated with 
large pituitary adenomas.
Axillary Lymph Node Metastases in the 
Setting of an Unknown Primary Cancer
A woman who presents with an axillary lymph node metasta-
sis that is consistent with a breast cancer metastasis has a 90% 
probability of harboring an occult breast cancer.303 However, 
axillary lymphadenopathy is the initial presenting sign in only 
1% of breast cancer patients. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy or 
core-needle biopsy can be used to establish the diagnosis when 
an enlarged axillary lymph node is identified. When metastatic 
cancer is found, immunohistochemical analysis may classify 
the cancer as epithelial, melanocytic, or lymphoid in origin. 
The presence of hormone receptors (estrogen or progesterone 
receptors) suggests metastasis from a breast cancer but is not 
diagnostic. The search for a primary cancer includes careful 
examination of the thyroid, breast, and pelvis, including the 
rectum. The breast should be examined with diagnostic mam-
mography, ultrasonography, and MRI to evaluate for an occult 
primary lesion. Further radiologic and laboratory studies should 
include chest radiography and liver function studies. Additional 
imaging of the chest, abdomen, and skeleton may be indicated 
if the extent of nodal involvement is consistent with stage III 
breast cancer. Suspicious findings on mammography, ultra-
sonography, or MRI necessitate breast biopsy. When a breast 
cancer is found, treatment consists of an axillary lymph node 
dissection with a mastectomy or preservation of the breast fol-
lowed by whole-breast radiation therapy. Chemotherapy and 
endocrine therapy should be considered.
Breast Cancer During Pregnancy
Breast cancer occurs in 1 of every 3000 pregnant women, and 
axillary lymph node metastases are present in up to 75% of 
these women.304 The average age of the pregnant woman with 
breast cancer is 34 years. Fewer than 25% of the breast nodules 
developing during pregnancy and lactation will be cancerous. 
Ultrasonography and needle biopsy specimens are used in the 
diagnosis of these nodules. Mammography is rarely indicated 
because of its decreased sensitivity during pregnancy and lac-
tation; however, the fetus can be shielded if mammography is 
needed. Approximately 30% of the benign conditions encoun-
tered will be unique to pregnancy and lactation (galactoceles, 
lobular hyperplasia, lactating adenoma, and mastitis or abscess). 
Once a breast cancer is diagnosed, complete blood count, chest 
radiography (with shielding of the abdomen), and liver function 
studies are performed.
Because of the potential deleterious effects of radiation 
therapy on the fetus, radiation cannot be considered until the 
fetus is delivered. A modified radical mastectomy can be per-
formed during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy, even 
though there is an increased risk of spontaneous abortion after 
first-trimester anesthesia. During the third trimester, lumpec-
tomy with axillary node dissection can be considered if adju-
vant radiation therapy is deferred until after delivery. Lactation 
is suppressed. Chemotherapy administered during the first tri-
mester carries a risk of spontaneous abortion and a 12% risk of 
birth defects. There is no evidence of teratogenicity resulting 
from administration of chemotherapeutic agents in the second 
and third trimesters. For this reason, many clinicians now con-
sider the optimal strategy to be delivery of chemotherapy in the 
second and third trimesters as a neoadjuvant approach, which 
allows local therapy decisions to be made after the delivery of 
the baby. Pregnant women with breast cancer often present at 
a later stage of disease because breast tissue changes that occur 
in the hormone-rich environment of pregnancy obscure early 
cancers. However, pregnant women with breast cancer have a 
prognosis, stage by stage, that is similar to that of nonpregnant 
women with breast cancer.
Male Breast Cancer
Fewer than 1% of all breast cancers occur in men.305,306 The inci-
dence appears to be highest among North Americans and the 
British, in whom breast cancer constitutes as much as 1.5% of 
555
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
all male cancers. Jewish and African American males have the 
highest incidence. Male breast cancer is preceded by gyneco-
mastia in 20% of men. It is associated with radiation exposure, 
estrogen therapy, testicular feminizing syndromes, and Kline-
felter’s syndrome (XXY). Breast cancer is rarely seen in young 
males and has a peak incidence in the sixth decade of life. A 
firm, nontender mass in the male breast requires investigation. 
Skin or chest wall fixation is particularly worrisome.
DCIS makes up <15% of male breast cancer, whereas 
infiltrating ductal carcinoma makes up >85%. Special-type can-
cers, including infiltrating lobular carcinoma, have occasionally 
been reported. Male breast cancer is staged in the same way as 
female breast cancer, and stage by stage, men with breast cancer 
have the same survival rate as women. Overall, men do worse 
because of the more advanced stage of their cancer (stage II, 
III or IV) at the time of diagnosis. The treatment of male breast 
cancer is surgical, with the most common procedure being a 
modified radical mastectomy. SLN dissection has been shown 
to be feasible and accurate for nodal assessment in men present-
ing with a clinically node-negative axilla. Adjuvant radiation 
therapy is appropriate in cases in which there is a high risk for 
local-regional recurrence. Approximately 80% of male breast 
cancers are hormone receptor positive, and adjuvant tamoxifen 
is considered. Systemic chemotherapy is considered for men 
with hormone receptor-negative cancers and for men with large 
primary tumors, multiple positive nodes, and locally advanced 
disease.
Phyllodes Tumors
The nomenclature, presentation, and diagnosis of phyllodes 
tumors (including cystosarcoma phyllodes) have posed many 
problems for surgeons.307 These tumors are classified as benign, 
borderline, or malignant. Borderline tumors have a greater 
potential for local recurrence. 
Mammographic evidence of calcifications and morpho-
logic evidence of necrosis do not distinguish between benign, 
borderline, and malignant phyllodes tumors. Consequently, it 
is difficult to differentiate benign phyllodes tumors from the 
malignant variant and from fibroadenomas. Phyllodes tumors 
are usually sharply demarcated from the surrounding breast 
tissue, which is compressed and distorted. Connective tissue 
composes the bulk of these tumors, which have mixed gelati-
nous, solid, and cystic areas. Cystic areas represent sites of 
infarction and necrosis. These gross alterations give the gross 
cut tumor surface its classical leaf-like (phyllodes) appearance. 
The stroma of a phyllodes tumor generally has greater cellular 
activity than that of a fibroadenoma. After microdissection to 
harvest clusters of stromal cells from fibroadenomas and from 
phyllodes tumors, molecular biology techniques have shown the 
stromal cells of fibroadenomas to be either polyclonal or mono-
clonal (derived from a single progenitor cell), whereas those of 
phyllodes tumors are always monoclonal.
Most malignant phyllodes tumors (Fig. 17-38) contain 
liposarcomatous or rhabdomyosarcomatous elements rather 
than fibrosarcomatous elements. Evaluation of the number of 
mitoses and the presence or absence of invasive foci at the 
tumor margins may help to identify a malignant tumor. Small 
phyllodes tumors are excised with a margin of normal-appearing 
breast tissue. When the diagnosis of a phyllodes tumor with sus-
picious malignant elements is made, reexcision of the biopsy 
specimen site to ensure complete excision of the tumor with 
a 1-cm margin of normal-appearing breast tissue is indicated. 
Large phyllodes tumors may require mastectomy. Axillary dis-
section is not recommended because axillary lymph node metas-
tases rarely occur.
Inflammatory Breast Carcinoma
Inflammatory breast carcinoma (stage IIIB) accounts for <3% of 
breast cancers. This cancer is characterized by the skin changes 
of brawny induration, erythema with a raised edge, and edema 
(peaud’orange).308 Permeation of the dermal lymph vessels by 
cancer cells is seen in skin biopsy specimens. There may be 
an associated breast mass (Fig. 17-39). The clinical differentia-
tion of inflammatory breast cancer may be extremely difficult, 
especially when a locally advanced scirrhous carcinoma invades 
dermal lymph vessels in the skin to produce peaud’orange and 
lymphangitis (Table 17-15). Inflammatory breast cancer also 
may be mistaken for a bacterial infection of the breast. More 
than 75% of women who have inflammatory breast cancer 
present with palpable axillary lymphadenopathy, and distant 
metastases also are frequently present. A positron emission 
A
B
Figure 17-38.  A. Malignant phyllodes tumor (cystosarcoma-
phyllodes). B. Histologic features of a malignant phyllodes tumor 
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×100).
556
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) scan should be 
considered at the time of diagnosis to rule out concurrent meta-
static disease. A report of the SEER program described distant 
metastases at diagnosis in 25% of white women with inflamma-
tory breast carcinoma.
Figure 17-39.  Inflammatory breast carcinoma. Stage IIIB cancer 
of the breast with erythema, skin edema (peaud’orange), nipple 
retraction, and satellite skin nodules.
Table 17-15 
Inflammatory vs. noninflammatory breast cancer
Inflammatory
Noninflammatory
Dermal lymph vessel 
invasion is present with 
or without inflammatory 
changes.
Inflammatory changes are 
present without dermal lymph 
vessel invasion.
Cancer is not sharply 
delineated.
Cancer is better delineated.
Erythema and edema 
frequently involve >33% of 
the skin over the breast.
Erythema is usually confined 
to the lesion, and edema is 
less extensive.
Lymph node involvement is 
present in >75% of cases.
Lymph nodes are involved 
in approximately 50% of the 
cases.
Distant metastases are present 
in 25% of cases.
Distant metastases are less 
common at presentation.
Distant metastases are 
more common at initial 
presentation.
Source: Modified with permission from Chittoor SR, et al: Locally 
advanced breast cancer: Role of medical oncology, in Bland KI, et al 
(eds): The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-
nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998;1281. kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.
Surgery alone and surgery with adjuvant radiation therapy 
have produced disappointing results in women with inflam-
matory breast cancer. However, neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
with ananthracycline-containing regimen may affect dramatic 
regressions in up to 75% of cases. Tumor should be assessed for 
HER-2 and hormone receptors with treatment dictated based on 
receptor status. Modified radical mastectomy is performed after 
demonstrated response to systemic therapy to remove residual 
cancer from the chest wall and axilla. Adjuvant chemotherapy 
may be indicated depending on final pathologic assessment of 
the breast and regional nodes. Finally, the chest wall and the 
supraclavicular, internal mammary, and axillary lymph node 
basins receive adjuvant radiation therapy. This multimodal 
approach results in 5-year survival rates that approach 30%. 
Patients with inflammatory breast cancer should be encouraged 
to participate in clinical trials.
Rare Breast Cancers
Squamous Cell (Epidermoid) Carcinoma.  Squamous 
cell (epidermoid) carcinoma is a rare cancer that arises from 
metaplasia within the duct system and generally is devoid of 
distinctive clinical or radiographic characteristics.309 Regional 
metastases occur in 25% of patients, whereas distant metastases 
are rare.
Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma.  Adenoid cystic carcinoma is very 
rare, accounting for <0.1% of all breast cancers. It is typically 
indistinguishable from adenoid cystic carcinoma arising in sali-
vary tissues. These cancers are generally 1 to 3 cm in diameter 
at presentation and are well circumscribed. Axillary lymph node 
metastases are rare, but deaths from pulmonary metastases have 
been reported.
Apocrine Carcinomas.  Apocrine carcinomas are well-
differentiated cancers that have rounded vesicular nuclei and 
prominent nucleoli. There is a very low mitotic rate and little 
variation in cellular features. However, apocrine carcinomas 
may display an aggressive growth pattern.
Sarcomas.  Sarcomas of the breast are histologically similar 
to soft tissue sarcomas at other anatomic sites. This diverse 
group includes fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, 
liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant schwannoma, rhab-
domyosarcoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma. The 
clinical presentation is typically that of a large, painless breast 
mass with rapid growth. Diagnosis is by core-needle biopsy or by 
open incisional biopsy. Sarcomas are graded based on cellular-
ity, degree of differentiation, nuclear atypia, and mitotic activity. 
Primary treatment is wide local excision, which may necessitate 
mastectomy. Axillary dissection is not indicated unless there is 
biopsy proven lymph node involvement. Angiosarcomas are 
classified as de novo, as postradiation, or as arising in associa-
tion with postmastectomy lymphedema. In 1948, Stewart and 
Treves described lymphangiosarcoma of the upper extremity in 
women with ipsilateral lymphedema after radical mastectomy.310 
Angiosarcoma is now the preferred name. The average interval 
between modified radical or radical mastectomy and the devel-
opment of an angiosarcoma is 7 to 10 years. Sixty percent of 
women developing this cancer have a history of adjuvant radia-
tion therapy. Forequarter amputation may be necessary to palli-
ate the ulcerative complications and advanced lymphedema.
Lymphomas.  Primary lymphomas of the breast are rare, and 
there are two distinct clinicopathologic variants. One type 
occurs in women ≤39 years of age, is frequently bilateral, and 
557
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
has the histologic features of Burkitt’s lymphoma. The second 
type is seen in women ≥40 years of age and is usually of the 
B-cell type. Breast involvement by Hodgkin’s lymphoma has 
been reported. An occult breast lymphoma may be diagnosed 
after detection of palpable axillary lymphadenopathy. Treat-
ment depends on the stage of disease. Lumpectomy or mas-
tectomy may be required. Axillary dissection for staging and 
for clearance of palpable disease is appropriate. Recurrent or 
progressive local-regional disease is best managed by chemo-
therapy and radiation therapy. The prognosis is favorable, with 
5- and 10-year survival rates of 74% and 51%, respectively.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Breasted JH. The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus, University 
of Chicago Press, 1930;405.
2.	Celsus AC. De Medicina (ed Loeb Classical Library Ed). 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1935;131.
3.	Beenken SW. History of the therapy of breast cancer. In: 
Copeland BA, ed. The Breast: Comprehensive Management 
of Benign and Malignant Disorder. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
2004;5.
4.	Le Dran F. Mémoire avec une précis de plusieurs observations 
sur le. Mem Acad Roy Chir Paris. 1757;3:1.
5.	Moore C. On the influence of inadequate operations on the 
theory of cancer. R Med Chir Soc. 1867;1:244.
6.	Halsted WS I. The results of operations for the cure of cancer 
of the breast performed at the Johns Hopkins Hospital from 
June, 1889, to January, 1894. Ann Surg. 1894;20:497-555.
7.	Haagensen CD, Stout AP. Carcinoma of the Breast. II-Criteria 
of Operability. Ann Surg. 1943;118:1032-1051.
8.	Patey DH, Dyson WH. The prognosis of carcinoma of the 
breast in relation to the type of operation performed. Br J 
Cancer. 1948;2:7-13.
9.	Fisher B, Jeong JH, Anderson S, et al. Twenty-five-year 
follow-up of a randomized trial comparing radical mastec-
tomy, total mastectomy, and total mastectomy followed by 
irradiation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:567-75.
10.	Keynes G. Conservative Treatment of Cancer of the Breast. 
Br Med J. 1937;2(3):643-666.
11.	Fisher B, Anderson S, Bryant J, et al. Twenty-year fol-
low-up of a randomized trial comparing total mastec-
tomy, lumpectomy, and lumpectomy plus irradiation for 
the treatment of invasive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2002;347:1233-1241.
12.	Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, et al. Effects of radiotherapy 
and of differences in the extent of surgery for early breast 
cancer on local recurrence and 15-year survival: an over-
view of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;366:2087-2106.
13.	Peto R, Davies C, Godwin J, et al. Comparisons between 
different polychemotherapy regimens for early breast can-
cer: meta-analyses of long-term outcome among 100,000 
women in 123 randomised trials. Lancet. 2012;379:432-444.
14.	Davies C, Godwin J, Gray R, et al. Relevance of breast cancer 
hormone receptors and other factors to the efficacy of adjuvant 
tamoxifen: patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials. 
Lancet. 2011;378:771-784.
15.	Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, et al. Gene expres-
sion patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor sub-
classes with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2001;98:10869-10874.
16.	Bland KI, Romrell LJ. Congenital and acquired disturbances 
of breast development and growth. In: Bland KI, Copeland 
EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of 
Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1998:214.
17.	Lonnerdal B. Nutritional and physiologic significance of 
human milk proteins. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;77:1537S-1543S.
18.	Rosenbloom AL. Breast physiology: normal and abnormal 
development and function. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI eds. 
The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and 
Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:38.
19.	Van de Perre P. Transfer of antibody via mother’s milk. 
Vaccine. 2003;21(24):3374-3376.
20.	Bland KI, Graves TA. Gynecomastia. In: Bland KI, Cope-
land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of 
Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1998:153.
21.	Dixon JM. Outpatient treatment of non-lactational breast 
abscesses. Br J Surg. 1992;79:56-57.
22.	Furlong AJ, al-Nakib L, Knox WF, et al. Periductal inflamma-
tion and cigarette smoke. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;179:417-420.
23.	Zuska JJ, Crile G, Jr., Ayres WW. Fistulas of lactifierous 
ducts. Am J Surg. 1951;81:312-317.
24.	Dixon JM. Infection in surgical practice. In: Taylor EW, 
ed. Breast Surgery. Oxford, Oxford Medical Publications: 
1992;187.
25.	Dixon JM. Preiductal mastitis and duct ectasia: an update. The 
Breast. 1998;7:128-130.
26.	Dixon JM, Kohlhardt SR, Dillon P. Total duct excision. The 
Breast. 1998;7:216-219.
27.	Frykberg ER, Bland KI. Current concepts on the biology and 
management of in situ (Tis, stage 0) breast carcinoma. In: 
Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive 
Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1998:1020.
28.	Camiel MR. Mondor’s disease in the breast. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 1985;152:879-881.
29.	Mondor H. Tronculite sous-cutanée subaiguë de la paroi tho-
racique antero-latérale. Mem Acad Chir Paris. 1939;65:1271.
30.	Hughes LE, Mansel RE, Webster DJ. Aberrations of normal 
development and involution (ANDI): a new perspective on 
pathogenesis and nomenclature of benign breast disorders. 
Lancet. 1987;2:1316-1319.
31.	Archer F, Omar M. The fine structure of fibro adenoma of the 
human breast. J Pathol. 1969;99:113-117.
32.	Page DL, Anderson TJ. Diagnostic Histopathology of the 
Breast. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone;1987.
33.	Page DL, Simpson JF. Benign, high-risk, and premalignant 
lesions of the breast. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-
nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:191.
34.	Haagensen CD. Diseases of the Breast 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders:1986.
35.	Haagensen CD, Lane N, Lattes R, et al. Lobular neoplasia 
(so-called lobular carcinoma in situ) of the breast. Cancer. 
1978;42:737-769.
36.	Gadd MA, Souba WW. Evaluation and treatment of benign 
breast disorders. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-
nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:233.
37.	Marchant DJ. Benign breast disease. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am. 2002;29:1-20.
38.	Nurko J, Mabry CD, Whitworth P, et al. Interim results from 
the FibroAdenoma Cryoablation Treatment Registry. Am J 
Surg. 2005;190:647-651; discussion 651-652.
39.	Dixon JM. Conservative management of fibroadenoma of the 
breast. Br J Surg. 1996;83:1798-1799.
40.	Atkins HJ. Mammillary fistula. Br Med J. 1955;2:1473-1474.
41.	Dixon JM, Thompson AM. Effective surgical treatment for 
mammary duct fistula. Br J Surg. 1991;78:1185-1186.
42.	Bernstein L, Henderson BE, Hanisch R, et al. Physical exer-
cise and reduced risk of breast cancer in young women. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 1994;86:1403-1408.
558
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
43.	Blackburn GL, Copeland T, Khaodhiar L, et al. Diet and 
breast cancer. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2003;12:183-192.
44.	Goss PE, Sierra S. Current perspectives on radiation-induced 
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:338-347.
45.	Hulka BS. Epidemiologic analysis of breast and gynecologic 
cancers. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1997;396:17-29.
46.	Pujol P, Galtier-Dereure F, Bringer J: Obesity and breast can-
cer risk. Hum Reprod. 1997;12(1):116-125.
47.	Singletary SE. Rating the risk factors for breast cancer. Ann 
Surg. 2003;237:474-482.
48.	Wynder EL, Cohen LA, Muscat JE, et al. Breast cancer: 
weighing the evidence for a promoting role of dietary fat. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 1997;89:766-775.
49.	Baan R, Straif K, Grosse Y, et al. Carcinogenicity of alcoholic 
beverages. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:292-293.
50.	Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Sta-
tistics Review, 1975-2010, National Cancer Institute, based on 
November 2012 SEER data submission. Bethesda;2013.
51.	Domchek SM, Eisen A, Calzone K, et al: Application of 
breast cancer risk prediction models in clinical practice. J Clin 
Oncol. 2003;21:593-601.
52.	Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individu-
alized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white 
females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 1989;81:1879-1886.
53.	Edwards BK, Brown ML, Wingo PA, et al. Annual report to 
the nation on the status of cancer, 1975-2002, featuring 
population-based trends in cancer treatment. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2005;97:1407-1427.
54.	Chen J, Pee D, Ayyagari R, et al. Projecting absolute inva-
sive breast cancer risk in white women with a model that 
includes mammographic density. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98: 
1215-1226.
55.	Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. The calculation of breast 
cancer risk for women with a first degree family history of 
ovarian cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1993;28:115-120.
56.	Kerlikowske K, Ichikawa L, Miglioretti DL, et al. Longitudi-
nal measurement of clinical mammographic breast density to 
improve estimation of breast cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2007;99:386-395.
57.	Berry DA, Parmigiani G, Sanchez J, et al. Probability of car-
rying a mutation of breast-ovarian cancer gene BRCA1 based 
on family history. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997;89:227-238.
58.	Parmigiani G, Berry D, Aguilar O. Determining carrier prob-
abilities for breast cancer-susceptibility genes BRCA1 and 
BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:145-158.
59.	Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer prediction model 
incorporating familial and personal risk factors. Stat Med. 
2004;23:1111-1130.
60.	Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen 
for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Sur-
gical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 1998;90:1371-1388.
61.	Grodstein F, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Postmenopausal 
hormone therapy and mortality. N Engl J Med. 1997;336: 
1769-1775.
62.	Hartmann LC, Schaid DJ, Woods JE, et al. Efficacy of bilat-
eral prophylactic mastectomy in women with a family history 
of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:77-84.
63.	Kerlikowske K, Grady D, Rubin SM, et al. Efficacy of 
screening mammography. A meta-analysis. JAMA. 1995;273: 
149-154.
64.	Rowe TC, Chen GL, Hsiang YH, et al. DNA damage by antitu-
mor acridines mediated by mammalian DNA topoisomerase II. 
Cancer Res. 1986;46:2021-2026.
65.	Sakorafas GH. The management of women at high risk for the 
development of breast cancer: risk estimation and preventative 
strategies. Cancer Treat Rev. 2003;29:79-89.
66.	Schrag D, Kuntz KM, Garber JE, et al. Decision analysis—
effects of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy on life 
expectancy among women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 muta-
tions. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1465-1471.
67.	Vogel VG. Management of the high-risk patient. Surg Clin 
North Am. 2003;83:733-751.
68.	Wu K, Brown P. Is low-dose tamoxifen useful for the treat-
ment and prevention of breast cancer? J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2003;95:766-767.
69.	Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative 
reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 52,705 
women with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast 
cancer. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast 
Cancer. Lancet. 1997;350:1047-1059.
70.	Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al. Influence of 
estrogen plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in 
healthy postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initia-
tive Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3243-3253.
71.	Beral V. Breast cancer and hormone-replacement therapy in 
the Million Women Study. Lancet. 2003;362:419-427.
72.	Glasziou P, Houssami N. The evidence base for breast cancer 
screening. Prev Med. 2011;53:100-102.
73.	Olsen O, Gotzsche PC. Cochrane review on screening 
for breast cancer with mammography. Lancet. 2001;358: 
1340-1342.
74.	The benefits and harms of breast cancer screening: an inde-
pendent review. Lancet . 2012;380:1778-1786.
75.	Nystrom L, Andersson I, Bjurstam N, et al. Long-term effects 
of mammography screening: updated overview of the Swedish 
randomised trials. Lancet. 2002;359:909-919.
76.	Moss S, Thomas I, Evans A, et al. Randomised controlled trial 
of mammographic screening in women from age 40: results of 
screening in the first 10 years. Br J Cancer. 2005;92:949-954.
77.	Screening for breast cancer. U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 
2009;151:716-726, W-236.
78.	Powles TJ, Ashley S, Tidy A, et al. Twenty-year follow-up 
of the Royal Marsden randomized, double-blinded tamoxi-
fen breast cancer prevention trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2007;99:283-290.
79.	Veronesi U, Maisonneuve P, Sacchini V, et al. Tamoxifen 
for breast cancer among hysterectomised women. Lancet. 
2002;359:1122-1124.
80.	Cuzick J, Forbes JF, Sestak I, et al. Long-term results of tamox-
ifen prophylaxis for breast cancer–96-month follow-up of the 
randomized IBIS-I trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:272-282.
81.	Gail MH, Costantino JP, Bryant J, et al. Weighing the risks 
and benefits of tamoxifen treatment for preventing breast can-
cer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91:1829-1846.
82.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Effects 
of tamoxifen vs. raloxifene on the risk of developing inva-
sive breast cancer and other disease outcomes: the NSABP 
Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 
2006;295:2727-241.
83.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Update of the 
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Study 
of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 Trial: Preventing 
breast cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010;3:696-706.
84.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Ales-Martinez JE, et al. Exemestane for 
breast-cancer prevention in postmenopausal women. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;364:2381-2391.
85.	Cuzick J. IBIS II: a breast cancer prevention trial in post-
menopausal women using the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole. 
Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2008;8:1377-1385.
86.	Jenkins VA, Ambroisine LM, Atkins L, et al. Effects of anas-
trozole on cognitive performance in postmenopausal women: 
a randomised, double-blind chemoprevention trial (IBIS II). 
Lancet Oncol. 2008;9:953-961.
559
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
87.	Nelson HD, Smith ME, Griffin JC, et al. Use of medica-
tions to reduce risk for primary breast cancer: a systematic 
review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann 
Intern Med. 2013;158:604-614.
88.	Visvanathan K, Hurley P, Bantug E, et al. Use of pharmaco-
logic interventions for breast cancer risk reduction: american 
society of clinical oncology clinical practice guideline. J Clin 
Oncol 2013;31:2942-2962.
89.	Domchek SM, Friebel TM, Singer CF, et al. Association 
of risk-reducing surgery in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation 
carriers with cancer risk and mortality. JAMA. 2010;304: 
967-975.
90.	Ford D, Easton DF, Stratton M, et al. Genetic heterogeneity 
and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 
breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consor-
tium. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:676-689.
91.	Gowen LC, Avrutskaya AV, Latour AM, et al. BRCA1 
required for transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA 
damage. Science. 1998; 281:1009-1012.
92.	Martin AM, Weber BL.Genetic and hormonal risk factors 
in breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1126-1135.
93.	Oddoux C, Struewing JP, Clayton CM, et al. The carrier 
frequency of the BRCA2 6174delT mutation among Ash-
kenazi Jewish individuals is approximately 1%. Nat Genet. 
1996;14:188-190.
94.	Roa BB, Boyd AA, Volcik K, et al. Ashkenazi Jewish popu-
lation frequencies for common mutations in BRCA1 and 
BRCA2. Nat Genet. 1996;14:185-187.
95.	Rosen EM, Fan S, Pestell RG, et al. BRCA1 gene in breast 
cancer. J Cell Physiol. 2003;196:19-41.
96.	Wooster R, Weber BL. Breast and ovarian cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 2003;348:2339-2347.
97.	Petrij-Bosch A, Peelen T, van Vliet M, et al.: BRCA1 genomic 
deletions are major founder mutations in Dutch breast cancer 
patients. Nat Genet. 1997;17:341-345.
98.	Gorski B, Byrski T, Huzarski T, et al. Founder mutations in 
the BRCA1 gene in Polish families with breast-ovarian can-
cer. Am J Hum Genet. 2000;66:1963-1968.
99.	Sarantaus L, Huusko P, Eerola H, et al. Multiple founder 
effects and geographical clustering of BRCA1 and BRCA2 
families in Finland. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000; 8:757-763.
100.	Gayther SA, Harrington P, Russell P, et al. Frequently occur-
ring germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene in ovarian cancer 
families from Russia. Am J Hum Genet. 1997;60:1239-1242.
101.	Szabo CI, King MC. Population genetics of BRCA1 and 
BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet. 1997; 60:1013-1020.
102.	Abeliovich D, Kaduri L, Lerer I, et al. The founder mutations 
185delAG and 5382insC in BRCA1 and 6174delT in BRCA2 
appear in 60% of ovarian cancer and 30% of early-onset breast 
cancer patients among Ashkenazi women. Am J Hum Genet. 
1997;60:505-514.
103.	Johannesdottir G, Gudmundsson J, Bergthorsson JT, et al. 
High prevalence of the 999del5 mutation in Icelandic breast 
and ovarian cancer patients. Cancer Res. 1996;56:3663-3665.
104.	Hakansson S, Johannsson O, Johansson U, et al. Moder-
ate frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ-line mutations 
in Scandinavian familial breast cancer. Am J Hum Genet. 
1997;60:1068-1078.
105.	Infante M, Duran M, Acedo A, et al. The highly prevalent 
BRCA2 mutation c.2808_2811del (3036delACAA) is located 
in a mutational hotspot and has multiple origins. Carcinogen-
esis. 2013.34:2505-2511.
106.	Warner E, Foulkes W, Goodwin P, et al. Prevalence and pen-
etrance of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations in unselected 
Ashkenazi Jewish women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 1999; 91:1241-1247.
107.	Khatcheressian JL, Hurley P, Bantug E, et al. Breast cancer fol-
low-up and management after primary treatment: American 
Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline 
update. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:961-965.
108.	Schneider KA. Genetic counseling for BRCA1/BRCA2 test-
ing. Genet Test. 1997 1:91-98.
109.	Kriege M, Brekelmans CT, Boetes C, et al. Efficacy of MRI 
and mammography for breast-cancer screening in women 
with a familial or genetic predisposition. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351:427-437.
110.	Saslow D, Boetes C, Burke W, et al. American Cancer Soci-
ety guidelines for breast screening with MRI as an adjunct to 
mammography. CA Cancer J Clin. 2007; 57:75-89.
111.	King MC, Wieand S, Hale K, et al. Tamoxifen and breast 
cancer incidence among women with inherited mutations in 
BRCA1 and BRCA2: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and 
Bowel Project (NSABP-P1) Breast Cancer Prevention Trial. 
JAMA . 2001;286:2251-2256.
112.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11-30.
113.	Clarke CA, Glaser SL, Uratsu CS, et al. Recent declines in hor-
mone therapy utilization and breast cancer incidence: clini-
cal and population-based evidence. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24: 
e49-e50.
114.	Ferlay J, al. E. Globocan 2002: Cancer Incidence, Mortality 
and Prevalence Worldwide. Lyon, France:IARC Press; 2004.
115.	Ries LA. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2002, National 
Cancer Institute. Bethesda.
116.	Fregene A, Newman LA. Breast cancer in sub-Saharan Africa: 
how does it relate to breast cancer in African-American 
women? Cancer. 2005;103:1540-1550.
117.	Bloom HJ, Richardson WW, Harries EJ. Natural history of 
untreated breast cancer (1805-1933). Comparison of untreated 
and treated cases according to histological grade of malig-
nancy. Br Med J. 1962;2:213-221.
118.	Tamoxifen for early breast cancer. an overview of the ran-
domised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative 
Group. Lancet. 1998;351:1451-1467.
119.	Saphner T, Tormey DC, Gray R. Annual hazard rates of recur-
rence for breast cancer after primary therapy. J Clin Oncol. 
1996;14:2738-2746.
120.	Sestak I, Dowsett M, Zabaglo L, et al. Factors predicting late 
recurrence for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 2013;105:1504-1511.
121.	Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Cristofanilli M, Strom EA, et al. 
Central nervous system metastases in patients with high-risk 
breast carcinoma after multimodality treatment. Cancer. 2004; 
101:1760-1766.
122.	Carey LA, Ewend MG, Metzger R, et al. Central nervous 
system metastases in women after multimodality therapy 
for high risk breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004; 
88:273-80.
123.	Evans AJ, James JJ, Cornford EJ, et al. Brain metastases from 
breast cancer: identification of a high-risk group. Clin Oncol 
(R Coll Radiol). 2004;16:345-349.
124.	Broders AC. Carcinoma in situ contrasted with benign pen-
etrating epithelium. JAMA 1932;99:1670.
125.	Foote FW, Stewart FW. Lobular carcinoma in situ: A rare 
form of mammary cancer. Am J Pathol. 1941;17:491-496.
126.	Consensus conference on the classification of ductal carci-
noma in situ. Hum Pathol. 1997; 28:1221-1225.
127.	Recht A, Rutgers EJ, Fentiman IS, et al. The fourth EORTC 
DCIS Consensus meeting (Chateau Marquette, Heemskerk, 
The Netherlands, 23-24 January 1998)–conference report. Eur 
J Cancer.1998; 34:1664-1669.
128.	Devitt JE, Barr JR. The clinical recognition of cystic carci-
noma of the breast. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1984;159:130-132.
129.	Gallager HS, Martin JE. The study of mammary carcinoma 
by mammography and whole organ sectioning. Early observa-
tions. Cancer. 1969;23:855-873.
560
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
130.	Seth A, Kitching R, Landberg G, et al. Gene expression pro-
filing of ductal carcinomas in situ and invasive breast tumors. 
Anticancer Res. 2003; 23:2043-2051.
131.	Simpson JF, Wilkinson EJ. Malignant neoplasia of the breast: 
Infiltrating carcinomas. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant 
Diseases. Philadelphia:WB Saunders; 1998:285.
132.	Dunnwald LK, Rossing MA, Li CI. Hormone receptor status, 
tumor characteristics, and prognosis: a prospective cohort of 
breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res. 2007 9:R6.
133.	McDivitt RW, Boyce W, Gersell D. Tubular carcinoma of the 
breast. Clinical and pathological observations concerning 135 
cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1982;6:401-411.
134.	Jatoi I. Screening clinical breast examination. Surg Clin 
North Am. 2003;83:789-801.
135.	Rosato FE, Rosato EL. Examination techniques: Roles of the 
physician and patient evaluating breast diseases. In: Bland KI, 
Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management 
of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia:WB Saun-
ders;1998:615.
136.	Bassett LW. Breast imaging. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, 
eds. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:648.
137.	Fletcher SW, Elmore JG. Clinical practice. Mammographic 
screening for breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;348: 
1672-1680.
138.	Miller AB. Screening and detection. In: Bland KI, Cope-
land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of 
Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1998:625.
139.	Schnall MD. Breast MR imaging. Radiol Clin North Am. 
2003;41:43-50.
140.	Seidman H, Gelb SK, Silverberg E, et al. Survival experience 
in the Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 1987;37:258-290.
141.	Pisano ED, Gatsonis C, Hendrick E, et al. Diagnostic perfor-
mance of digital versus film mammography for breast-cancer 
screening. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1773-1783.
142.	Ciatto S, Houssami N, Bernardi D, et al. Integration of 3D dig-
ital mammography with tomosynthesis for population breast-
cancer screening (STORM): a prospective comparison study. 
Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:70134-70137.
143.	Krishnamurthy S, Sneige N, Bedi DG, et al. Role of ultra-
sound-guided fine-needle aspiration of indeterminate and sus-
picious axillary lymph nodes in the initial staging of breast 
carcinoma. Cancer. 2002;95:982-988.
144.	Turnbull L, Brown S, Harvey I, et al. Comparative effec-
tiveness of MRI in breast cancer (COMICE) trial: a ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;375:563-571.
145.	Houssami N, Turner R, Morrow M. Preoperative magnetic 
resonance imaging in breast cancer: meta-analysis of surgical 
outcomes. Ann Surg. 2013; 257:249-255.
146.	Robinson DS, Sundaram M. Stereotactic imaging and breast 
biopsy. In:  Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Com-
prehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:698.
147.	Wilkinson EJ, Masood S. Cytologic needle samplings of 
the breast: Techniques and end results. In: Bland KI, Cope-
land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of 
Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
1998:705.
148.	Greene FL, Page DL, Fleming ID, eds. Breast. AJCC Cancer 
Staging Manual 6th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag: 2002.
149.	Britton PD, Goud A, Godward S, et al. Use of ultrasound-
guided axillary node core biopsy in staging of early breast 
cancer. Eur Radiol. 2009;19:561-569.
150.	Fisher B, Slack NH. Number of lymph nodes examined and 
the prognosis of breast carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1970.131:79-88.
151.	AJCC Cancer Staging Manual 7th ed. Springer:2010.
152.	Du Toit RS, Locker AP, Ellis IO, et al. Evaluation of the prog-
nostic value of triple node biopsy in early breast cancer. Br J 
Surg. 77:163-167.
153.	Dillon DA. Molecular markers in the diagnosis and staging of 
breast cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2002;12:305-318.
154.	Esteva FJ, Sahin AA, Cristofanilli M, et al. Molecular prog-
nostic factors for breast cancer metastasis and survival. Semin 
Radiat Oncol. 2002;12:319-328.
155.	Haffty BG. Molecular and genetic markers in the local-
regional management of breast cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol. 
2002;12:329-340.
156.	Morabito A, Magnani E, Gion M, et al. Prognostic and predic-
tive indicators in operable breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer. 
2003; 3:381-390.
157.	Rogers CE, Loveday RL, Drew PJ, et al. Molecular prognos-
tic indicators in breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2002;28: 
467-478.
158.	Rampaul R, Ellis IO, Robertson JFR. Prognostic indices in 
breast cancer. In:  Autier BP, Adebamowo C, Anderson BO, et al, 
eds. World Breast Cancer Report, iPRI:2012:323-332.
159.	Athanassiadou PP, Veneti SZ, Kyrkou KA, et al. Presence 
of epidermal growth factor receptor in breast smears of cyst 
fluids: relationship to electrolyte ratios and pH concentration. 
Cancer Detect Prev. 1992;16:113-118.
160.	Tsutsumi Y, Naber SP, DeLellis RA, et al. Neu oncogene pro-
tein and epidermal growth factor receptor are independently 
expressed in benign and malignant breast tissues. Hum Pathol 
1990;21:750-758.
161.	van de Vijver MJ, Peterse JL, Mooi WJ, et al. Neu-protein 
overexpression in breast cancer. Association with comedo-
type ductal carcinoma in situ and limited prognostic value in 
stage II breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:1239-1245.
162.	Slamon DJ, Clark GM, Wong SG, et al. Human breast cancer: 
correlation of relapse and survival with amplification of the 
HER-2/neu oncogene. Science. 1987;235:177-182.
163.	Gusterson BA, Gelber RD, Goldhirsch A, et al. Prognostic 
importance of c-erbB-2 expression in breast cancer. Interna-
tional (Ludwig) Breast Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 
1992; 10:1049-1056.
164.	McCann AH, Dervan PA, O’Regan M, et al. Prognostic sig-
nificance of c-erbB-2 and estrogen receptor status in human 
breast cancer. Cancer Res.1991; 51:3296-3303.
165.	Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, et al. Studies of the 
HER-2/neu proto-oncogene in human breast and ovarian can-
cer. Science. 1989;244:707-712.
166.	Wright C, Angus B, Nicholson S, et al. Expression of c-erbB-2 
oncoprotein: a prognostic indicator in human breast cancer. 
Cancer Res. 1989;49:2087-2090.
167.	Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, et al. Trastuzumab plus 
adjuvant chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive breast 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1673-1684.
168.	Smith I, Procter M, Gelber RD, et al. 2-year follow-up of trastu-
zumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast 
cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;369:29-36.
169.	Slamon D, Eiermann W, Robert N, et al. Adjuvant trastu-
zumab in HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365:1273-1283.
170.	Dahabreh IJ, Linardou H, Siannis F, et al. Trastuzumab in the 
adjuvant treatment of early-stage breast cancer: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Oncologist. 2008;13:620-630.
171.	Monaghan P, Perusinghe NP, Nicholson RI, et al. Growth fac-
tor stimulation of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in 
human breast epithelium in organ culture. Cell Biol Int Rep. 
1991;15:561-570.
172.	Siitonen SM, Isola JJ, Rantala IS, et al. Intratumor variation 
in cell proliferation in breast carcinoma as determined by 
561
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
antiproliferating cell nuclear antigen monoclonal antibody 
and automated image analysis. Am J Clin Pathol. 1993;99: 
226-231.
173.	Tuccari G, Rizzo A, Muscara M, et al. PCNA/cyclin expres-
sion in breast carcinomas: its relationships with Ki-67, ER, 
PgR immunostainings and clinico-pathologic aspects. 
Pathologica.1993; 85:47-55.
174.	van Dierendonck JH, Wijsman JH, Keijzer R, et al. Cell-cycle-
related staining patterns of anti-proliferating cell nuclear anti-
gen monoclonal antibodies. Comparison with BrdUrd labeling 
and Ki-67 staining. Am J Pathol. 1991;138:1165-1172.
175.	Cuzick J, Dowsett M, Pineda S, et al. Prognostic value of a 
combined estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, Ki-67, and 
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 immunohistochem-
ical score and comparison with the Genomic Health recurrence 
score in early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:4273-4278.
176.	Brown LF, Berse B, Jackman RW, et al. Expression of vas-
cular permeability factor (vascular endothelial growth factor) 
and its receptors in breast cancer. Hum Pathol. 26:86-91, 1995
177.	Gasparini G, Toi M, Gion M, et al. Prognostic significance 
of vascular endothelial growth factor protein in node-negative 
breast carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997;89:139-147.
178.	Miller K, Wang M, Gralow J, et al. Paclitaxel plus bevaci-
zumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2666-2676.
179.	Allan DJ, Howell A, Roberts SA, et al. Reduction in apoptosis 
relative to mitosis in histologically normal epithelium accom-
panies fibrocystic change and carcinoma of the premenopausal 
human breast. J Pathol. 1992;167:25-32.
180.	Bargou RC, Daniel PT, Mapara MY, et al. Expression of the 
bcl-2 gene family in normal and malignant breast tissue: low 
bax-alpha expression in tumor cells correlates with resistance 
towards apoptosis. Int J Cancer.1995; 60:854-859.
181.	Binder C, Marx D, Binder L, et al. Expression of Bax in rela-
tion to Bcl-2 and other predictive parameters in breast cancer. 
Ann Oncol. 1996;7:129-133.
182.	Ravdin PM, Siminoff LA, Davis GJ, et al. Computer pro-
gram to assist in making decisions about adjuvant therapy 
for women with early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19: 
980-991.
183.	Blamey RW, Ellis IO, Pinder SE, et al. Survival of invasive 
breast cancer according to the Nottingham Prognostic Index 
in cases diagnosed in 1990-1999. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43: 
1548-1555.
184.	Blamey RW, Pinder SE, Ball GR, et al. Reading the prog-
nosis of the individual with breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 
2007;43:1545-1547.
185.	Wishart GC, Azzato EM, Greenberg DC, et al. PREDICT: 
a new UK prognostic model that predicts survival follow-
ing surgery for invasive breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 
2010;12:R1.
186.	Perou CM, Jeffrey SS, van de Rijn M, et al. Distinctive gene 
expression patterns in human mammary epithelial cells and 
breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:9212-9217.
187.	Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict 
recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast can-
cer. N Engl J Med. 2004:351:2817-2826.
188.	Lo SS, Mumby PB, Norton J, et al. Prospective multicenter 
study of the impact of the 21-gene recurrence score assay on 
medical oncologist and patient adjuvant breast cancer treat-
ment selection. J Clin Oncol. 28:1671-1676.
189.	Julien JP, Bijker N, Fentiman IS, et al. Radiotherapy in breast-
conserving treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ: first results 
of the EORTC randomised phase III trial 10853. EORTC 
Breast Cancer Cooperative Group and EORTC Radiotherapy 
Group. Lancet. 2000;355:528-533.
190.	Lagios MD, Margolin FR, Westdahl PR, et al. Mammographi-
cally detected duct carcinoma in situ. Frequency of local 
recurrence following tylectomy and prognostic effect of 
nuclear grade on local recurrence. Cancer. 1989;63:618-624.
191.	Rosai J. Borderline epithelial lesions of the breast. Am J Surg 
Pathol. 1991;15:209-221.
192.	Schnitt SJ, Connolly JL, Tavassoli FA, et al. Interobserver 
reproducibility in the diagnosis of ductal proliferative 
breast lesions using standardized criteria. Am J Surg Pathol. 
1992;16:1133-1143.
193.	Silverstein MJ, Lagios MD, Groshen S, et al. The influence of 
margin width on local control of ductal carcinoma in situ of 
the breast. N Engl J Med.1999;340:1455-1461.
194.	Tan-Chiu E. The effect of tamoxifen on benign breast dis-
ease: Findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast 
and Bowel Project (NSABP) breast cancer prevention trial 
(BCPT). Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2001; 69:Abstract 7.
195.	Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Lumpectomy and radi-
ation therapy for the treatment of intraductal breast cancer: 
findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel 
Project B-17. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:441-452.
196.	Bijker N, Meijnen P, Peterse JL, et al. Breast-conserving treat-
ment with or without radiotherapy in ductal carcinoma-in-situ: 
ten-year results of European Organisation for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer randomized phase III trial 10853–a study 
by the EORTC Breast Cancer Cooperative Group and EORTC 
Radiotherapy Group. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3381-3387.
197.	Houghton J, George WD, Cuzick J, et al. Radiotherapy 
and tamoxifen in women with completely excised ductal 
carcinoma in situ of the breast in the UK, Australia, and 
New Zealand: randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2003; 
362:95-102.
198.	Emdin SO, Granstrand B, Ringberg A, et al. SweDCIS: Radio-
therapy after sector resection for ductal carcinoma in situ of 
the breast. Results of a randomised trial in a population offered 
mammography screening. Acta Oncol. 2006;45:536-543.
199.	Hughes LL, Wang M, Page DL, et al. Local excision alone 
without irradiation for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast: 
a trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin 
Oncol. 2009;27:5319-5324.
200.	McCormick B. RTOG 9804: A prospective randomized trial 
for “good risk” ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), comparing 
radiation (RT) to observation (OBS). J Clin Oncol 30, 2012.
201.	Solin LJ, Gray R, Baehner FL, et al. A multigene expression 
assay to predict local recurrence risk for ductal carcinoma in 
situ of the breast. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105:701-710.
202.	Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Tamoxifen in treatment 
of intraductal breast cancer: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast 
and Bowel Project B-24 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
1999;353:1993-2000.
203.	Allred DC, Anderson SJ, Paik S, et al. Adjuvant tamoxifen 
reduces subsequent breast cancer in women with estrogen 
receptor-positive ductal carcinoma in situ: a study based on 
NSABP protocol B-24. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1268-1273.
204.	Effects of radiotherapy and surgery in early breast cancer. 
An overview of the randomized trials. Early Breast Cancer 
Trialists’ Collaborative Group. N Engl J Med. 1995;333: 
1444-1455.
205.	Arriagada R, Le MG, Rochard F, et al. Conservative treatment 
versus mastectomy in early breast cancer: patterns of failure 
with 15 years of follow-up data. Institut Gustave-Roussy 
Breast Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:1558-1564.
206.	Cooke T, Reeves J, Lanigan A, et al. HER2 as a prognostic 
and predictive marker for breast cancer. Ann Oncol. 2001;12 
Suppl 1:S23-S28.
207.	Fisher B, Anderson S, Redmond CK, et al. Reanalysis and 
results after 12 years of follow-up in a randomized clinical 
trial comparing total mastectomy with lumpectomy with or 
without irradiation in the treatment of breast cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 1995;333:1456-1461.
562
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
208.	Gump FE, Jicha DL, Ozello L. Ductal carcinoma in situ 
(DCIS): a revised concept. Surgery. 102:790-795.
209.	Paik S, Bryant J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. HER2 and choice of adju-
vant chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer: National Surgi-
cal Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocol B-15. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1991-1998.
210.	Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Mariani L, et al. Twenty-year follow-
up of a randomized study comparing breast-conserving sur-
gery with radical mastectomy for early breast cancer. N Engl 
J Med. 2002;347:1227-1232.
211.	Fyles AW, McCready DR, Manchul LA, et al. Tamoxifen with 
or without breast irradiation in women 50 years of age or older 
with early breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:963-970.
212.	Hughes KS, Schnaper LA, Berry D, et al. Lumpectomy plus 
tamoxifen with or without irradiation in women 70 years of age 
or older with early breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:971-
977.
213.	Vaidya JS, Wenz F, Bulsara M, et al. Targeted intraoperative 
radiotherapy for early breast cancer: TARGIT-A trial- updated 
analysis of local recurrence and first analysis of survival. 
Cancer Res. 2012;72.
214.	Smith BD, Arthur DW, Buchholz TA, et al. Accelerated par-
tial breast irradiation consensus statement from the American 
Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). J Am Coll Surg. 
2009;209:269-277.
215.	Fisher B, Redmond C, Fisher ER, et al. Ten-year results of a 
randomized clinical trial comparing radical mastectomy and 
total mastectomy with or without radiation. N Engl J Med. 
1985;12:674-681.
216.	Krag D, Weaver DL, Alex JC, et al. Surgical resection and 
radiolocalization of the sentinel lymph node in breast cancer 
using a gamma probe. Surg Oncol. 1993;2:335-339.
217.	Giuliano AE, Dale PS, Turner RR, et al. Improved axillary 
staging of breast cancer with sentinel lymphadenectomy. Ann 
Surg. 1995;222:394-399; discussion 399-401.
218.	Giuliano AE, Kirgan DM, Guenther JM, et al. Lymphatic 
mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast cancer. 
Ann Surg. 1994;220:391-398; discussion 398-401.
219.	Mansel RE, Fallowfield L, Kissin M, et al. Randomized mul-
ticenter trial of sentinel node biopsy versus standard axillary 
treatment in operable breast cancer: the ALMANAC Trial. J 
Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:599-609.
220.	Krag DN, Anderson SJ, Julian TB, et al. Technical outcomes 
of sentinel-lymph-node resection and conventional axillary-
lymph-node dissection in patients with clinically node-negative 
breast cancer: results from the NSABP B-32 randomised phase 
III trial. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:881-888.
221.	Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Viale G, et al. A randomized com-
parison of sentinel-node biopsy with routine axillary dissec-
tion in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:546-553.
222.	Veronesi U, Viale G, Paganelli G, et al. Sentinel lymph node 
biopsy in breast cancer: ten-year results of a randomized con-
trolled study. Ann Surg. 2010;251:595-600.
223.	Ashikaga T, Krag DN, Land SR, et al. Morbidity results from 
the NSABP B-32 trial comparing sentinel lymph node dissec-
tion versus axillary dissection. J Surg Oncol. 2010;102:111-118.
224.	Giuliano AE, Hawes D, Ballman KV, et al. Association 
of Occult Metastases in Sentinel Lymph Nodes and Bone 
Marrow With Survival Among Women With Early-Stage 
Invasive Breast Cancer. JAMA. 2011;306:385-393.
225.	Giuliano AE, Hunt KK, Ballman KV, et al. Axillary dissec-
tion vs no axillary dissection in women with invasive breast 
cancer and sentinel node metastasis: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA. 2011;305:569-575.
226.	Wilke LG, McCall LM, Posther KE, et al. Surgical complica-
tions associated with sentinel lymph node biopsy: results from 
a prospective international cooperative group trial. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2006;13:491-500.
227.	Lucci A, McCall LM, Beitsch PD, et al. Surgical complica-
tions associated with sentinel lymph node dissection (SLND) 
plus axillary lymph node dissection compared with SLND 
alone in the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group 
Trial Z0011. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3657-3663.
228.	The American Society of Breast Surgeons position statement 
on management of the axilla in patients with invasive breast 
cancer. Available at http://www.breastsurgeons.org/state-
ments/PDF_Statements/Axillary_Management.pdf. Accessed 
26 February, 2014.
229.	Galimberti V, Cole BF, Zurrida S, et al. Axillary dissection 
versus no axillary dissection in patients with sentinel-node 
micrometastases (IBCSG 23-01): a phase 3 randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:297-305.
230.	Julian TB, Blumencranz P, Deck K, et al. Novel intraop-
erative molecular test for sentinel lymph node metastases in 
patients with early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26: 
3338-3345.
231.	Van Zee KJ, Manasseh DM, Bevilacqua JL, et al. A nomo-
gram for predicting the likelihood of additional nodal metas-
tases in breast cancer patients with a positive sentinel node 
biopsy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:1140-1151.
232.	Lyman GH, Giuliano AE, Somerfield MR, et al. American 
Society of Clinical Oncology guideline recommendations for 
sentinel lymph node biopsy in early-stage breast cancer. J Clin 
Oncol. 2005:23:7703-7720.
233.	Hortobagyi GN, Singletary SE, et al. Treatment of locally 
advanced and inflammatory breast cancer. In: Harris JR, et al. 
eds. Diseases of the Breast. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins: 2000:645.
234.	Willsher PC, Robertson JF, Chan SY, et al. Locally advanced 
breast cancer: early results of a randomised trial of multimodal 
therapy versus initial hormone therapy. Eur J Cancer. 33:45-49.
235.	Mathew J, Agrawal A, Asgeirsson KS, et al. Primary endo-
crine therapy in locally advanced breast cancers–the Notting-
ham experience. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009; 113:403-407.
236.	Chen AM, Meric-Bernstam F, Hunt KK, et al. Breast conser-
vation after neoadjuvant chemotherapy: the MD Anderson 
cancer center experience. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:2303-2312.
237.	Mieog JS, Van Der Hage JA, Van de Velde CJ. Neoadju-
vant chemotherapy for operable breast cancer. Br J Surg. 
2007;94:1189-1200.
238.	Von Minckwitz G, Kaufmann M, Kummel S, et al. PD07-05: 
Local Recurrence Risk in 6377 Patients with Early Breast 
Cancer Receiving Neoadjuvant Anthracycline-Taxane +/- 
Trastuzumab Containing Chemotherapy, ty-Fourth Annual 
CTRC-AACR San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium. San 
Antonio. 2011; Suppl 3.
239.	Favret AM, Carlson RW, Goffinet DR, et al. Locally advanced 
breast cancer: is surgery necessary? Breast J. 2001;7:131-137.
240.	Khan SA, Stewart AK, Morrow M. Does aggressive local 
therapy improve survival in metastatic breast cancer? Surgery. 
2002;132:620-626; discussion 626-627.
241.	Gnerlich J, Jeffe DB, Deshpande AD, et al. Surgical removal 
of the primary tumor increases overall survival in patients with 
metastatic breast cancer: analysis of the 1988-2003 SEER 
data. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:2187-2194.
242.	Bass SS, Lyman GH, McCann CR, et al. Lymphatic Mapping 
and Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy. Breast J. 1999; 5:288-295.
243.	Cox CE, Nguyen K, Gray RJ, et al. Importance of lymphatic 
mapping in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS): why map DCIS? 
Am Surg. 2001;67:513-519; discussion 519-521.
244.	Dupont E, Cox C, Shivers S, et al. Learning curves and breast 
cancer lymphatic mapping: institutional volume index. J Surg 
Res. 2001;97:92-96.
245.	Krag D, Weaver D, Ashikaga T, et al. The sentinel node in 
breast cancer—a multicenter validation study. N Engl J Med. 
1988;339:941-946.
563
The Breast
CHAPTER 17
246.	McMasters KM, Giuliano AE, Ross MI, et al. Sentinel-lymph-
node biopsy for breast cancer—not yet the standard of care. 
N Engl J Med. 1998;339:990-995.
247.	O’Hea BJ, Hill AD, El-Shirbiny AM, et al. Sentinel lymph 
node biopsy in breast cancer: initial experience at Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. J Am Coll Surg. 1998;186: 
423-427.
248.	Souba WW, Bland KI. Indications and techniques for biopsy. 
In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive 
Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1998:802.
249.	Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Galimberti V, et al. Sentinel-node 
biopsy to avoid axillary dissection in breast cancer with clini-
cally negative lymph-nodes. Lancet. 1997;349:1864-1867.
250.	Wilke LG, Giuliano A: Sentinel lymph node biopsy in patients 
with early-stage breast cancer: status of the National Clinical 
Trials. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:901-910.
251.	Xing Y, Foy M, Cox DD, et al. Meta-analysis of sentinel lymph 
node biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy in patients with 
breast cancer. Br J Surg. 2006;93:539-546.
252.	Hunt KK, Yi M, Mittendorf EA, et al. Sentinel lymph node sur-
gery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is accurate and reduces 
theneed for axillary dissection in breast cancer patients. Ann 
Surg. 2009;250:558-566.
253.	Tan VK, Goh BK, Fook-Chong S, et al. The feasibility and 
accuracy of sentinel lymph node biopsy in clinically node-
negative patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast 
cancer—a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Surg Oncol. 
2011;104:97-103.
254.	Yi M, Meric-Bernstam F, Ross MI, et al. How many sentinel 
lymph nodes are enough during sentinel lymph node dissec-
tion for breast cancer? Cancer. 2008; 113:30-37.
255.	Kong AL, Tereffe W, Hunt KK, et al. Impact of Internal Mam-
mary Lymph Node Drainage Identified by Preoperative Lym-
phoscintigraphy on Outcomes in Patients With Stage I to III 
Breast Cancer. Cancer. 2012;118:6287-6296.
256.	Fisher B. Lumpectomy (segmental mastectomy and axillary 
dissection). In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: 
Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Dis-
eases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:917.
257.	Newman LA, Washington TA. New trends in breast conserva-
tion therapy. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:841-883.
258.	NIH consensus conference. Treatment of early-stage breast 
cancer. JAMA. 1991;265:391-395.
259.	Group EBCTC. Effect of radiotherapy after breast-conserving 
surgery on 10-year recurrence and 15-year breast cancer death: 
meta-analysis of individual patient data for 10 801 women in 
17 randomised trials. Lancet. 2011;378:1707-1716.
260.	Houssami N, Macaskill P, Marinovich ML, et al. Meta-analysis 
of the impact of surgical margins on local recurrence in 
women with early-stage invasive breast cancer treated with 
breast-conserving therapy. Eur J Cancer.. 2010;46:3219-3232.
261.	Bland KI, Chang HR. Modified radical mastectomy and total 
(simple) mastectomy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant 
Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:881.
262.	Simmons RM, Adamovich TL. Skin-sparing mastectomy. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:885-899.
263.	McCraw JB, Papp C. Breast reconstruction following mastec-
tomy, In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Com-
prehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:96.
264.	Fortin A, Dagnault A, Larochelle M, et al. Impact of locore-
gional radiotherapy in node-positive patients treated by 
breast-conservative treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2003;56:1013-1022.
265.	Hellman S. Stopping metastases at their source. N Engl J Med. 
1997;337:996-997.
266.	Overgaard M, Hansen PS, Overgaard J, et al. Postoperative 
radiotherapy in high-risk premenopausal women with breast 
cancer who receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Danish Breast 
Cancer Cooperative Group 82b Trial. N Engl J Med. 1997; 
337:949-955.
267.	Overgaard M, Jensen MB, Overgaard J, et al. Postopera-
tive radiotherapy in high-risk postmenopausal breast-cancer 
patients given adjuvant tamoxifen: Danish Breast Cancer 
Cooperative Group DBCG 82c randomised trial. Lancet. 
1999;353:1641-1648.
268.	Ragaz J, Jackson SM, Le N, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and 
chemotherapy in node-positive premenopausal women with 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:956-962.
269.	Recht A, Edge SB. Evidence-based indications for postmastec-
tomy irradiation. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:995-1013.
270.	Recht A, Edge SB, Solin LJ, et al. Postmastectomy radiother-
apy: clinical practice guidelines of the American Society of 
Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1539-1569.
271.	Polychemotherapy for early breast cancer: an overview of the 
randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative 
Group. Lancet. 352:930-942.
272.	Fisher B, Brown AM, Dimitrov NV, et al. Two months of 
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide with and without interval 
reinduction therapy compared with 6 months of cyclophospha-
mide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil in positive-node breast 
cancer patients with tamoxifen-nonresponsive tumors: results 
from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project 
B-15. J Clin Oncol.1990; 8:1483-1496.
273.	Kelleher M, Miles D. 21. The adjuvant treatment of breast 
cancer. Int J Clin Pract. 2003;57:195-199.
274.	Loprinzi CL, Thome SD. Understanding the utility of adju-
vant systemic therapy for primary breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2001;19:972-979.
275.	Wood WC, Budman DR, Korzun AH, et al. Dose and dose 
intensity of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II, node-positive 
breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1253-1259.
276.	Bonadonna G, Bignami P, Buzzoni R, et al. New adjuvant trials 
for resectable breast cancer at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of 
Milan. Recent Results. Cancer Res. 1984;91:210-213.
277.	Mauri D, Pavlidis N, Ioannidis JP. Neoadjuvant versus adju-
vant systemic treatment in breast cancer: a meta-analysis. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:188-194.
278.	Mittendorf EA, Buchholz TA, Tucker SL, et al. Impact of 
chemotherapy sequencing on local-regional failure risk in 
breast cancer patients undergoing breast-conserving therapy. 
Ann Surg. 257:173-179.
279.	Buchholz TA, Hunt KK, Whitman GJ, et al. Neoadjuvant che-
motherapy for breast carcinoma: multidisciplinary consider-
ations of benefits and risks. Cancer. 2003;98:1150-1160.
280.	Kuerer HM, Newman LA, Smith TL, et al. Clinical course of 
breast cancer patients with complete pathologic primary tumor 
and axillary lymph node response to doxorubicin-based neoad-
juvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:460-469.
281.	Caudle AS, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Hunt KK, et al. Predic-
tors of tumor progression during neoajduvant chemotherapy 
in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1821-828.
282.	Mamounas EP, Brown A, Anderson S, et al. Sentinel node 
biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer: 
results from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel 
Project Protocol B-27. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:2694-2702.
283.	Guarneri V, Broglio K, Kau SW, et al. Prognostic value of 
pathologic complete response after primary chemotherapy in 
relation to hormone receptor status and other factors. J Clin 
Oncol. 24:1037-1044.
284.	Ellis MJ, Suman VJ, Hoog J, et al. Randomized Phase II 
Neoadjuvant Comparison Between Letrozole, Anastrozole, 
and Exemestane for Postmenopausal Women With Estro-
gen Receptor-Rich Stage 2 to 3 Breast Cancer: Clinical and 
564
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Biomarker Outcomes and Predictive Value of the Baseline 
PAM50-Based Intrinsic Subtype-ACOSOG Z1031. J Clin 
Oncol. 2011;29:2342-2349.
285.	Baum M, Buzdar A: The current status of aromatase inhibi-
tors in the management of breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 
83:973-994.
286.	Bonneterre J, Thurlimann B, Robertson JF, et al. Anastrozole 
versus tamoxifen as first-line therapy for advanced breast can-
cer in 668 postmenopausal women: results of the Tamoxifen or 
Arimidex Randomized Group Efficacy and Tolerability study. 
J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3748-3757.
287.	Buzdar A, Douma J, Davidson N, et al. Phase III, multicenter, 
double-blind, randomized study of letrozole, an aromatase 
inhibitor, for advanced breast cancer versus megestrol acetate. 
J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3357-3366.
288.	Buzdar AU, Jonat W, Howell A, et al. Anastrozole versus 
megestrol acetate in the treatment of postmenopausal women 
with advanced breast carcinoma: results of a survival update 
based on a combined analysis of data from two mature phase 
III trials. Arimidex Study Group. Cancer. 1998;83:1142-
1152.
289.	Campos SM, Winer EP. Hormonal therapy in postmenopausal 
women with breast cancer. Oncology. 2003;64:289-299.
290.	Group EBCTC. Relevance of breast cancer hormone recep-
tors and other factors to the efficacy of adjuvant tamoxifen: 
patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. 2011; 
6736:60993-60998.
291.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. Randomized trial of letro-
zole following tamoxifen as extended adjuvant therapy in 
receptor-positive breast cancer: updated findings from NCIC 
CTG MA.17. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1262-1271.
292.	Cuzick J, Sestak I, Baum M, et al. Effect of anastrozole 
and tamoxifen as adjuvant treatment for early-stage breast 
cancer: 10-year analysis of the ATAC trial. Lancet Oncol. 
2010;11:1135-1141.
293.	Coates AS, Keshaviah A, Thurlimann B, et al. Five years of 
letrozole compared with tamoxifen as initial adjuvant ther-
apy for postmenopausal women with endocrine-responsive 
early breast cancer: update of study BIG 1-98. J Clin Oncol. 
2007;25:486-492.
294.	Robertson JF, Williams MR, Todd J, et al. Factors predict-
ing the response of patients with advanced breast cancer 
to endocrine (Megace) therapy. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol. 
1989;25:469-475.
295.	Cheung KL, Willsher PC, Pinder SE, et al. Predictors of 
response to second-line endocrine therapy for breast cancer. 
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1997; 45:219-224.
296.	Robertson JF, Willsher PC, Cheung KL, et al. The clinical rel-
evance of static disease (no change) category for 6 months on 
endocrine therapy in patients with breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 
1997;33:1774-1779.
297.	Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). 
Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast 
cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the 
randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;365:1687-1717.
298.	Paik S, Bryant J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. Real-world performance of 
HER2 testing—National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel 
Project experience. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002;94:852-854.
299.	Press MF, Slamon DJ, Flom KJ, et al. Evaluation of HER-2/
neu gene amplification and overexpression: comparison 
of frequently used assay methods in a molecularly char-
acterized cohort of breast cancer specimens. J Clin Oncol. 
2002;20:3095-3105.
300.	Volpi A, De Paola F, Nanni O, et al. Prognostic significance 
of biologic markers in node-negative breast cancer patients: a 
prospective study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 63:181-192.
301.	Buzdar AU, Ibrahim NK, Francis D, et al. Significantly higher 
pathologic complete remission rate after neoadjuvant therapy 
with trastuzumab, paclitaxel, and epirubicin chemotherapy: 
results of a randomized trial in human epidermal growth fac-
tor receptor 2-positive operable breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2005; 23:3676-3685.
302.	Buzdar AU, Valero V, Ibrahim NK, et al. Neoadjuvant ther-
apy with paclitaxel followed by 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and 
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy and concurrent trastuzumab 
in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive operable 
breast cancer: an update of the initial randomized study popu-
lation and data of additional patients treated with the same 
regimen. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:228-233.
303.	Tench DW. The unknown primary presenting with axillary 
lymphadenopathy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant 
Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:1447.
304.	Robinson DS, Sundaram M, et al. Carcinoma of the breast in 
pregnancy and lactation. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant 
Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:1433.
305.	Giordano SH, Buzdar AU, Hortobagyi GN: Breast cancer in 
men. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:678-687.
306.	Wilhelm MC. Cancer of the male breast. In: Bland KI, 
Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management 
of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
ders; 1998:1416.
307.	Khan SA, Badve S. Phyllodes tumors of the breast. Curr Treat 
Options Oncol. 2001;2:139-147.
308.	Chittoor SR, Swain SM. Locally advanced breast cancer: Role 
of medical oncology. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The 
Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant 
Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:1403.
309.	Mies C. Mammary sarcoma and lymphoma. In: Bland KI, 
Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management 
of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
ders;1998:307.
310.	Stewart FW, Treves N. Lymphangiosarcoma in postmas-
tectomy lymphedema; a report of six cases in elephantiasis 
chirurgica. Cancer. 1948;1:64-81.
Disorders of the Head and Neck
Richard O. Wein, Rakesh K. Chandra,  
C. René Leemans, and Randal S. Weber
18
A COMPLEX REGION
The head and neck constitute a complex anatomic region where 
different pathologies may affect an individual’s ability to see, 
smell, hear, speak, obtain nutrition and hydration, or breathe. 
The use of a multidisciplinary approach to many of the disor-
ders in this region is essential in an attempt to achieve the best 
functional results with care. This chapter reviews many of 
the common diagnoses encountered in the field of otolaryngology– 
head and neck surgery—and aims to provide an overview that 
clinicians can use as a foundation for understanding of this region. 
As is the case with every field of surgery, care for patients with 
disorders of the head and neck is constantly changing as issues of 
quality of life and the economics of medicine continue to evolve.
BENIGN CONDITIONS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
Ear Infections
Infections may involve the external, middle, and/or internal ear. 
In each of these scenarios, the infection may follow an acute 
or chronic course and may be associated with both otologic 
and intracranial complications. Otitis externa typically refers 
to infection of the skin of the external auditory canal.1 Acute 
otitis externa is commonly known as swimmer’s ear, because 
moisture that persists within the canal after swimming often 
initiates the process and leads to skin maceration and itching. 
Typically, the patient subsequently traumatizes the canal skin 
by scratching (i.e., with a cotton swab or fingernail), thus erod-
ing the normally protective skin/cerumen barrier. Because the 
environment within the external ear canal is already dark, warm, 
and humid, it then becomes susceptible to rapid microbial pro-
liferation and tissue cellulitis. The most common organism 
responsible is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, although other bacteria 
and fungi may also be implicated. Symptoms and signs of otitis 
externa include itching during the initial phases and pain with 
swelling of the canal soft tissues as the infection progresses. 
Infected, desquamated debris accumulates within the canal. In 
the chronic inflammatory stage of the infection, the pain sub-
sides, but profound itching occurs for prolonged periods with 
gradual thickening of the external canal skin. Standard treatment 
requires removal of debris under otomicroscopy and application 
of appropriate topical antimicrobials, such as neomycin/poly-
myxin or quinolone-containing eardrops, which often include 
topical steroid such as hydrocortisone or dexamethasone to 
nonspecifically decrease pain and swelling. Nonantibiotic anti-
microbial preparations, such as 2% acetic acid, may also have a 
role, particularly for mixed bacterial/fungal infections. For this 
reason, the patient should also be instructed to keep the ear dry. 
Systemic antibiotics are reserved for those with severe infec-
tions, diabetics, and immunosuppressed patients.
Diabetic, elderly, and immunodeficient patients are sus-
ceptible to a condition called malignant otitis externa, a fulmi-
nant necrotizing infection of the otologic soft tissues combined 
with osteomyelitis of the temporal bone. In addition to the previ-
ously mentioned findings, cranial neuropathies may be observed. 
The classic physical finding is granulation tissue along the floor 
of the external auditory canal (EAC). Symptoms include per-
sistent otalgia for longer than 1 month and purulent otorrhea 
for several weeks. These patients require aggressive medi-
cal therapy; including IV antibiotics covering Pseudomonas.2  
Other gram-negative bacteria and fungi are occasionally impli-
cated, necessitating culture-directed therapy in those cases. 
Patients who do not respond to medical management require 
surgical debridement. This condition may progress to involve-
ment of the adjacent skull base and soft tissues, meningitis, 
brain abscess, and death.
In its acute phase, otitis media typically implies a bacterial 
infection of the middle ear. This diagnosis accounts for 25% of 
A Complex Region	
565
Benign Conditions of the  
Head and Neck	
565
Ear Infections / 565
Sinus Inflammatory Disease / 567
Pharyngeal and Adenotonsillar  
Disease / 570
Benign Conditions of the Larynx / 572
Vascular Lesions / 574
Trauma of the Head and Neck	
575
Tumors of the Head and Neck	
578
Etiology and Epidemiology / 578
Anatomy and Histopathology / 579
Carcinogenesis / 580
Second Primary Tumors in the Head 
and Neck / 580
Staging / 580
Upper Aerodigestive Tract / 580
Nose and Paranasal Sinuses / 592
Nasopharynx / 593
Ear and Temporal Bone / 594
Neck / 595
Salivary Gland Tumors / 599
Reconstruction in Head and 
Neck Surgery	
600
Skin Grafts / 600
Local Flaps / 600
Regional Flaps / 600
Free-Tissue Transfer / 601
Tracheostomy	
602
Long-Term Management and 
­Rehabilitation	
602
Palliative Care / 602
Follow-Up Care / 602
chapter 
Key Points
1
	 Patients with obstructive sleep apnea require evaluation to deter-
mine the specific anatomic site(s) of involvement. Long-term car-
diovascular problems are a significant concern in these patients.
2
	 Repair of traumatic soft tissue injuries requires precise 
­re-alignment of anatomic landmarks such as the grey line and 
vermilion border.
3
	 The key principle in the surgical repair of facial fractures is 
immobilization, which may require plates, screws, wires, and/
or intermaxillary fixation.
4
	 Concurrent abuse of tobacco and alcohol are synergistic in 
increasing the risk of developing head and neck cancer
5
	 Monomodality therapy (surgery or radiation) is used for early 
stage (I/II) head and neck cancer, whereas combination 
pediatric antibiotic prescriptions and is the most common bac-
terial infection of childhood. Most cases occur before 2 years 
of age and are secondary to immaturity of the Eustachian tube. 
Contributing factors include upper respiratory viral infection and 
day-care attendance, as well as craniofacial conditions affecting 
Eustachian tube function, such as cleft palate. It is also possible 
that social factors such as day-care attendance and the inappro-
priate prescribing of antibiotics have led to antibiotic resistance.
Classification of the infection as acute is based upon 
the duration of the process being less than 3 weeks. In this 
phase, otalgia and fever are the most common symptoms and 
physical exam reveals a bulging, opaque tympanic membrane 
(Fig. 18-1). The most common organisms responsible are Strep-
tococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Morax-
ella catarrhalis. If the process lasts 3 to 8 weeks, it is deemed 
subacute. Chronic otitis media, lasting more than 8  weeks, 
usually results from an unresolved acute otitis media. About 
20% of patients demonstrate a persistent middle ear effusion 
8 weeks after resolution of the acute phase. Rather than a purely 
infectious process, however, it represents chronic inflam-
mation and hypersecretion by the middle ear mucosa associ-
ated with ­Eustachiantube dysfunction, viruses, allergy, ciliary 
566
Figure 18-1.  Acute otitis media.
Figure 18-2.  Myringotomy and tube.
­dysfunction, and other factors. The bacteriology is variable, but 
often includes those found in acute otitis media and may be 
polymicrobial. The exact role of bacteria in the pathophysiol-
ogy is controversial. The patient experiences otalgia, ear full-
ness, and conductive hearing loss. Physical examination reveals 
a retracted tympanic membrane that may exhibit an opaque 
character or an air-fluid level. Bubbles may be seen behind the 
retracted membrane.
Treatment for uncomplicated otitis media is oral antibiotic 
therapy. However, penicillin resistance of the commonly impli-
cated organisms is rising such that almost 100% of Moraxella, 
50% to 70% of Haemophilus, and up to 40% of pneumococcal 
strains are resistant.3 Beta-lactamase-resistant combinations, 
cephalosporins, and macrolides are often required, although 
amoxicillin and sulfas are still considered first-line drugs. 
Chronic otitis media is frequently treated with myringotomy 
and tube placement (Fig. 18-2). This is indicated for frequent 
acute episodes, chronic effusions persisting beyond 3 months, 
and those associated with significant conductive hearing loss. 
The purpose of this procedure is to remove the effusion and 
provide a route for middle ear ventilation. Tympanic mem-
brane perforation during acute otitis media frequently results in 
resolution of severe pain and provides for drainage of purulent 
­surgery and chemoradiation is utilized with advanced stage 
(III/IV) malignancies.
6
	 Infectious conditions of the head and neck may present with 
life-threatening sequelae such as loss of airway or intracra-
nial extension.
7
	 Disorders of the head and neck can cause significant cos-
metic and functional impairment. The practitioner must be 
empathetic to the effect of these morbidities on quality of 
life.
8
	 Hoarseness, odynophagia, referred otalgia, nonhealing oral 
ulceration and/or cervical lymphadenopathy present for 
>2 weeks duration require consideration for subspecialty 
consultation for evaluation.
567
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
fluid and middle ear ventilation. These perforations will heal 
spontaneously after the infection has resolved in the majority of 
cases. Chronic otitis media, however, may be associated with 
nonhealing tympanic membrane perforations. Patients may have 
persistent otorrhea, which is treated with topical drops. Prepara-
tions containing aminoglycoside are avoided, because this class 
of drugs is toxic to the inner ear. Solutions containing alcohol 
or acetic acid may be irritative or caustic to the middle ear, and 
are also avoided in the setting of a perforation.
Nonhealing perforation requires surgical closure (tympa-
noplasty) after medical treatment of any residual acute infection. 
Chronic inflammation may also be associated with erosion of 
the ossicular chain, which can be reconstructed with ­various 
prostheses or autologous ossicular replacement techniques. 
Cholesteatoma is an epidermoid cyst of the middle ear and/or 
mastoid, which causes bone destruction secondary to its expans-
ile nature and through enzymatic destruction. Cholesteatoma 
develops as a consequence of Eustachian tube dysfunction and 
chronic otitis media secondary to retraction of squamous ele-
ments of the tympanic membrane into the middle ear space. 
Squamous epithelium may also migrate into the middle ear via a 
perforation. Chronic mastoiditis that fails medical management 
or is associated with cholesteatoma is treated by mastoidectomy.
Complications of otitis media may be grouped into two 
categories: intratemporal (otologic) and intracranial.4 Fortu-
nately, complications are rare in the antibiotic era, but mount-
ing antibiotic resistance necessitates an increased awareness 
of these conditions. Intratemporal complications include acute 
coalescent mastoiditis, petrositis, facial nerve paralysis, and 
labyrinthitis. In acute coalescing mastoiditis, destruction of the 
bony lamellae by an acute purulent process results in severe 
pain, fever, and swelling behind the ear. The mastoid air cells 
coalesce into one common space filled with pus. Mastoid infec-
tion may also spread to the petrous apex, causing retro-orbital 
pain and sixth-nerve palsy. These diagnoses are confirmed by 
computed tomographic (CT) scan.
Facial nerve paralysis may also occur secondary to an acute 
inflammatory process in the middle ear or mastoid.5 Intratem-
poral complications are managed by myringotomy tube place-
ment in addition to appropriate IV antibiotics. In acute coalescent 
mastoiditis, and petrositis, mastoidectomy is also performed as 
necessary to drain purulent foci. Labyrinthitis refers to inflam-
mation of the inner ear. Most cases are idiopathic or are second-
ary to viral infections of the endolymphatic space. The patient 
experiences vertigo with sensorineural hearing loss and symp-
toms may smolder over several weeks. Labyrinthitis associated 
with middle ear infection may be serous or suppurative. In the 
former case, bacterial products and/or inflammatory mediators 
transudate into the inner ear via the round window membrane, 
establishing an inflammatory process therein. Total recovery is 
eventually possible after the middle ear is adequately treated. 
Suppurative labyrinthitis, however, is a much more toxic condi-
tion in which the acute purulent bacterial infection extends into 
the inner ear and causes marked destruction of the sensory hair 
cells and neurons of the eighth-nerve ganglion. This condition 
may hallmark impending meningitis and must be treated rapidly. 
The goal of management of inner ear infection, which occurs 
secondary to middle ear infection, is to “sterilize” the middle ear 
space with antibiotics and the placement of a myringotomy tube.
Meningitis is the most common intracranial complica-
tion. Otologic meningitis in children is most commonly associ-
ated with a H. influenzae type B infection. Other intracranial 
complications include epidural abscess, subdural abscess, brain 
abscess, otitic hydrocephalus (pseudotumor), and sigmoid sinus 
thrombophlebitis. In these cases, the otogenic source must be 
urgently treated with antibiotics and myringotomy tube place-
ment. Mastoidectomy and neurosurgical consultation may be 
necessary.
Bell’s palsy, or idiopathic facial paralysis, may be con-
sidered within the spectrum of otologic disease given the facial 
nerve’s course through the temporal bone. This entity is the 
most common etiology of facial nerve paralysis and is clini-
cally distinct from that occurring as a complication of otitis 
media in that the otologic exam is normal. Historically, Bell’s 
palsy was synonymous with “idiopathic” facial paralysis. It is 
now accepted, however, that the majority of these cases repre-
sent a viral neuropathy caused by herpes simplex. Treatment 
includes oral steroids plus antiviral therapy (i.e., valacyclovir). 
Complete recovery is the norm, but does not occur universally, 
and selected cases may benefit from surgical decompression of 
the nerve within its bony canal. Electrophysiologic testing has 
been used to identify those patients in whom surgery might be 
indicated.6 The procedure involves decompression of the nerve 
via exposure in the mastoid and middle cranial fossa. Varicella 
zoster virus may also cause facial nerve paralysis when the virus 
reactivates from dormancy in the nerve. This condition, known 
as Ramsay Hunt syndrome, is characterized by severe otalgia 
followed by the eruption of vesicles of the external ear. Treat-
ment is similar to Bell’s palsy, but full recovery is only seen in 
approximately two-thirds of cases.
Traumatic facial nerve injuries may occur secondary to 
accidental trauma or surgical injury. Iatrogenic facial nerve 
trauma most often occurs during mastoidectomy.7 When the 
facial nerve is injured during an operative procedure, it is 
explored. Injury to >50% of the neural diameter of the facial 
nerve is addressed either with primary re-anastomosis or recon-
structed with the use a nerve graft. Complete recovery of nerve 
function is uncommon in these cases.
Sinus Inflammatory Disease
Sinusitis is a clinical diagnosis based on patient signs and 
symptoms.8 The Task Force on Rhinosinusitis (sponsored by 
the American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck 
Surgery) has established criteria to define “a history consistent 
with sinusitis.” To establish the diagnosis a patient must exhibit 
at least two major factors or one major and two minor factors. 
The classification of sinusitis as acute vs. subacute or chronic 
is primarily based on the time course over which those criteria 
have been met. If signs and symptoms are present for at least 
7 to 10 days, but for less than 4 weeks, the process is designated 
acute sinusitis. Subacute sinusitis is present for 4 to 12 weeks 
and chronic sinusitis is diagnosed when the patient has had signs 
and symptoms for at least 12 weeks. In addition, the diagnosis 
of chronic sinusitis requires some objective demonstration of 
mucosal inflammatory disease. This may be accomplished by 
endoscopic or radiologic examination (i.e., CT scan).
Acute sinusitis typically follows a viral upper respiratory 
infection whereby sinonasal mucosal inflammation results in clo-
sure of the sinus ostium. This results in stasis of secretions, tis-
sue hypoxia, and ciliary dysfunction. These conditions promote 
bacterial proliferation and acute inflammation. The mainstay of 
treatment is the use of antibiotics that are empirically directed 
toward the three most common organisms S. pneumoniae, 
H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis. As with otitis media, antibiotic 
568
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
resistance is a mounting concern. Nosocomial acute sinusitis 
frequently involves Pseudomonas or S. aureus, both of which 
may also exhibit significant antibiotic resistance. Other treat-
ments include topical and systemic decongestants, nasal saline 
spray, topical nasal steroids, and oral steroids in selected cases. 
In the acute setting, surgery is reserved for complications or 
pending complications, which may include extension to the eye 
(orbital cellulitis or abscess) or the intracranial space (menin-
gitis, intracranial abscess). It should also be noted that, strictly 
speaking, a viral upper respiratory infection (common cold) is a 
form of acute sinusitis. The working definition outlined previ-
ously, however, attempts to exclude these cases by requiring 
that symptoms be present for at least 7 to 10 days, by which 
time the common cold should be in a resolution phase. Use of 
this working definition strives to avoid unnecessary antibiotic 
prescriptions and further promotion of resistance.
Chronic sinusitis represents a heterogeneous group of 
patients with multifactorial etiologies contributing to ostial 
obstruction, ciliary dysfunction, and inflammation. Components 
of genetic predisposition, allergy, anatomic obstruction, bacteria, 
fungi, and environmental factors play various roles, depending on 
the individual patient.8 Diagnosis is suspected with clinical signs 
and symptoms persisting for at least 12 weeks. Chronic sinus-
itis may also be associated with the presence of nasal polyps, 
particularly when there is heavy eosinophilic inflammation. 
Mucosal inflammation in nonpolypoid chronic sinusitis is pre-
dominantly mediated by neutrophils, or is mixed in nature.
Nasal endoscopy is a critical element of the diagnosis of 
chronic sinusitis. Anatomic abnormalities, such as septal devia-
tion, nasal polyps, and purulence may be observed (Fig. 18-3 
and 18-4). The finding of purulence or polypoid change by nasal 
endoscopy is supportive of the diagnosis of chronic sinusitis, if 
symptoms persist for at least 12 weeks. In this setting, purulence 
may represent an acute exacerbation of chronic sinusitis. Pus 
found on endoscopic exam may be cultured, and subsequent 
antibiotic therapy can be directed accordingly. Further, the 
spectrum of bacteria found in chronic sinusitis is highly variable 
and includes higher prevalence of polymicrobial infections and 
antibiotic-resistant organisms. Overall, S. aureus, coagulase-
negative staphylococci, gram-negative bacilli, and strepto-
cocci are isolated, in addition to the typical pathogens of acute 
Figure 18-3.  Endoscopic view of purulence within a surgically 
opened maxillary sinus cavity.
Figure 18-4.  Endoscopic image of a nasal polyp.
Figure 18-5.  POC-CT system. All components can be fit within an 
8' × 10' room in an outpatient office setting.
sinusitis. Thus, the increased prevalence of community acquired 
methicillin resistant S. aureus is a mounting concern.9
The diagnosis of chronic sinusitis can be confirmed by 
CT scan, which demonstrates mucosal thickening and/or sinus 
opacification. It should be underscored, however, that CT scan 
is not the positive gold standard because many asymptomatic 
patients will demonstrate findings on a sinus CT scan, and many 
patients with presumed sinusitis will have negative findings. 
CT scan has excellent negative predictive value when per-
formed in the setting of active symptoms. Thus, if a patient com-
plains of sinusitis-like symptoms but has no specific physical 
(endoscopic) findings, and the scan is negative, other diagnoses 
(e.g., allergies, migraines, tension headaches) should be sought. 
This has led to the utility of point-of-care CT (POC-CT) scan 
that can be performed in the physician’s office. POC-CT uti-
lizes cone beam technology10, which acquires the equivalent of 
>100 axial slices in approximately 1 minute at an effective reso-
lution of 0.3 mm or less. The equipment occupies a room of 8' × 
10' and can thus be accommodated in almost any office setting 
(Fig. 18-5). Perhaps most important, the radiation dosing for 
569
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
even the most sophisticated protocol is 0.17 mSv, which is 
<10% the dose of a conventional head CT and equivalent to 
approximately 20 days of background radiation. One theoretical 
shortcoming of this technology is that it does not permit soft tis-
sue imaging. This is seldom a concern in sinonasal evaluation, as 
this is typically undertaken in bone windows. The acquired data 
are immediately formatted into triplanar (axial, sagittal, coro-
nal) reconstructions and is also compatible with devices used 
for intraoperative stereotactic navigation, which can be used 
to confirm relationships between the disease process, medial 
orbital wall, and skull base during surgery (Fig. 18-6 and 18-7). 
Variations of this and other technologies have also been adapted 
for intraoperative use to ensure completeness of resection and 
to update anatomic relationships for further intraoperative 
stereotaxis.Notably, imaging of the temporal bone for evalu-
ation of middle ear structures can be performed via POC-CT 
as well.
Medical management of chronic sinusitis includes a pro-
longed course of oral antibiotics for 3 to 6 weeks, nasal and/or 
oral steroids, and nasal irrigations with saline or antibiotic solu-
tions.8 Underlying allergic disease may be managed with anti-
histamines and possible allergy immunotherapy. Although the 
role of these treatments in resolving chronic sinusitis remains 
questionable, they may be considered in patients with comor-
bid allergic rhinitis or as part of empirical management before 
consideration of surgery. The use of oral steroids may also be 
selected empirically, particularly in patients with comorbid 
chronic airway inflammatory diseases such as nasal polyps, 
allergic rhinitis, or asthma. The decision to use oral steroids 
must be individualized with consideration of the risks and side 
effects of these medications. As yet, there is no ­consensus 
regarding what constitutes a “maximum” course of medical 
therapy that should be attempted before consideration of ­surgery 
for chronic sinusitis. It should be noted that unless there is sus-
picion of neoplasm or pending complication of sinusitis, the 
decision to proceed with surgery is highly individualized. This 
is because surgery for uncomplicated chronic sinusitis is elec-
tive, and patients who “fail” medical management will exhibit 
significant variability in symptoms, physical signs, and CT find-
ings. More aggressive medical and surgical management may be 
necessary in patients with comorbid chronic inflammatory dis-
ease of the airways such as allergic rhinitis, nasal polyposis, and 
asthma. Surgery is typically preformed endoscopically where 
the goals are to remove polyps, enlarge the natural sinus ostia 
(see Fig. 18-3), and to remove chronically infected bone to pro-
mote both ventilation and drainage of the sinus cavities. Inspis-
sated mucin or pus is drained and cultured. Eventual resolution 
of the chronic inflammatory process can be attained with a com-
bination of meticulous surgery and directed medical therapy, 
although the patient must understand that surgery may not alter 
the underlying immunologic pathophysiology. In cases where 
resection of inflammatory tissue and polyps are not required, 
recent trends have also included use of angioplasty-type bal-
loons to dilate sinus ostia. The exact role for this technology is 
unclear, but appears to have promise in outpatient office man-
agement of patients with focal or limited obstructive pathology.
The role of fungi in sinusitis is an area of active investiga-
tion. Fungal sinusitis may take on both noninvasive and invasive 
forms. The noninvasive forms include intracavitary fungal ball 
and allergic fungal sinusitis, both of which occur in immuno-
competent patients. A fungal ball is typically seen in individu-
als with chronic (or recurrent acute) symptoms that are often 
Figure 18-6.  Triplanar imaging revealing proximity to critical structures such as the orbital wall and skull base. This can be used for diagnosis 
of sinus opacification as well as stereotactic intraoperative navigation, where endoscope view (lower right) can be radiologically correlated 
with location in the 3 cardinal planes. This case reflects classic allergic fungal sinusitis where the opacified sinuses are filled with heteroge-
neous whitish material on CT images. Polyps in the ethmoid cavity are seen on the endoscope image.
570
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
subtle and limited to a single sinus. Patients may complain about 
the perception of a foul odor and occasionally report ­expelling 
crusty debris upon nose blowing. Fungus balls represent a 
­significant proportion of isolated sphenoid sinus pathology 
(Fig. 18-7). The most common scenario, however, is surgery 
to remove the debris and re-establish sinus ventilation, which is 
almost always curative.
Classic allergic fungal sinusitis is thought to involve direct 
stimulation of eosinophils by a subset of helper T cells (TH2) 
primed by fungal antigens. Patients often present with chronic 
sinusitis that has been especially refractory to medical manage-
ment. CT scan has characteristic features, and endoscopic evalu-
ation reveals florid polyposis and inspissated mucin containing 
fungal debris and products of eosinophil breakdown. The impli-
cated organisms are usually those of the Dematiaceae family, 
but Aspergillus species are also seen.11 Treatment includes sys-
temic steroids, surgery, and nasal irrigations. Oral antifungal 
therapy is sometimes indicated as well.
Immunocompetent patients may occasionally develop an 
indolent form of invasive fungal sinusitis, but more commonly, 
invasive fungal sinusitis affects immunocompromised patients, 
diabetics, or the elderly.11 Fungal invasion of the microvascu-
lature causes ischemic necrosis and black eschar of the sino-
nasal mucosa. Aspergillus and fungi of the Mucoraceae family 
are often implicated with the latter more common in diabetic 
patients. Treatment requires aggressive surgical debridement 
and IV antifungals, but the prognosis is dismal.12
Pharyngeal and Adenotonsillar Disease
The pharyngeal mucosa contains significant concentrations of 
lymphoid tissue, predisposing this area to reactive inflamma-
tory changes. Lymphoid tissue of various pharyngeal subsites 
forms the so-called Waldeyer’s ring, consisting of the palatine 
tonsils (“the tonsils”), lingual tonsil (lymphoid tissue accumula-
tion within the tongue base), and adenoid. The mucosa of the 
posterior and lateral pharyngeal walls is also rich with lym-
phoid cells. Infection, immune-mediated inflammatory disease, 
or local stressors, such as radiation or acid reflux, may initiate 
lymphoid reactivity and associated symptoms. Chronic or recur-
rent adenotonsillitis and adenotonsillar hypertrophy are the most 
common disorders affecting these structures.
In the vast majority of cases, infectious pharyngitis is viral 
rather than bacterial in origin. Most cases resolve without com-
plication from supportive care and possibly antibiotics. Patients 
with tonsillitis typically present with sore throat, dysphagia, 
and fever. The mucosa is inflamed. Tonsillar exudates and 
cervical adenitis may be seen, especially when the etiology is 
bacterial. If adenoiditis is present, symptoms may be similar to 
those of sinusitis. Objective evaluation of the adenoid requires 
endoscopy and/or radiographic imaging (lateral neck soft-tissue 
X-ray). Tonsillitis and adenoiditis may follow acute, recurrent 
acute, and chronic temporal patterns.
It should be noted, however, that clinical diagnosis often 
is inaccurate for determining whether the process is bacteri-
ally induced. When the patient also has hoarseness, rhinorrhea, 
Figure 18-7.  Sphenoid sinus fungal ball. 
The sinus has been opened revealing cheesy 
material during this intraoperative endo-
scopic view (lower right). The crosshairs 
stereotactically confirm location within the 
sphenoid sinus radiologically in the cardinal 
planes.
571
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
cough, and no evidence of exudates or adenitis, an upper respi-
ratory viral infection can be presumed. When a bacterial cause 
is suspected antibiotics should be initiated to cover the usual 
organisms: group A beta-hemolytic streptococci (Streptococcus 
pyogenes), S. pneumoniae, and group C and G streptococci.13  
H. influenzae and anaerobes also have been implicated. It is 
particularly important to identify group A beta-hemolytic strep-
tococci in pediatric patients to initiate timely antibiotic therapy, 
given the risk of rheumatic fever, which may occur in up to 
3% of cases if antibiotics are not used. Historically, if bacte-
rial pharyngitis was suspected in a child, oropharyngeal swab 
with culture was performed to identify group A beta-hemolytic 
streptococci. Currently, rapid antigen assays are available with 
sensitivity and specificity of approximately 85% and 90%, 
respectively. Some experts advocate culture only when these 
are negative. Unnecessary antibiotic therapy for patients who 
are unlikely to have a bacterial etiology should be avoided, 
given the already mounting antibiotic resistance problem. 
When suspicion for a bacterial process is high, or with positive 
culture/antigen assay results, treatment may include penicillin, 
cephalosporin, or macrolide antibiotics in penicillin-allergic 
patients.
Complications of S. pyogenes pharyngitis may be sys-
temic, including rheumatic fever, poststreptococcal glomerulo-
nephritis, and scarlet fever. The incidence of glomerulonephritis 
is not influenced by antibiotic therapy. Scarlet fever results from 
production of erythrogenic toxins by streptococci. This causes 
a punctate rash, first appearing on the trunk and then spreading 
distally, sparing the palms and soles. The so-called strawberry 
tongue also is seen. Locoregional complications include peri-
tonsillar abscess and, rarely, deep-neck space abscess. Periton-
sillar abscess is typically drained with transoral technique under 
local anesthesia, as is the authors’ practice, but some suggest 
that needle aspiration without incision is sufficient.13 Deep neck 
space abscess, which more commonly is odontogenic in origin, 
usually requires operative incision and drainage via a transcervi-
cal approach.
Candida albicans is the most common fungal organism 
to cause pharyngitis. This organism is a normal component 
of the oral flora, but under conditions of immunosuppression, 
broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy, poor oral hygiene, or vita-
min deficiency, it may become pathogenic. Whitish-cheesy or 
creamy mucosal patches are observed with underlying erythema. 
Diagnosis is easily established by Gram’s stain of this material, 
revealing budding yeast and pseudohyphae. Oral (-azole) and 
topical (nystatin) antifungals are usually effective, and immuno-
suppressed patients may require prophylactic therapy.
Atypical cases of pharyngitis may be caused by Coryne-
bacterium diphtheriae, Bordetella pertussis (whooping cough), 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and secondary syphilis. Diphtheria 
and pertussis are fortunately rare in developed countries as a 
result of pediatric vaccination. Atypical viral causes include 
herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalo-
virus, and HIV are associated with pharyngitis. Systemic EBV 
infection represents clinical mononucleosis, although syphilis, 
cytomegalovirus, and HIV are known to cause mononucleo-
sis-like syndromes. These conditions, particularly EBV, may 
exhibit an exudative pharyngotonsillitis that may be confused 
with a bacterial etiology. Progression of the clinical picture 
reveals lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and hepatitis. Diag-
nosis is established based on the detection of heterophile 
antibodies or atypical lymphocytes in the peripheral blood. 
Occasionally, pharyngeal biopsy specimen or cervical lymph 
node biopsy specimen is required to establish the diagnosis.
Noninfectious causes of pharyngitis must also be consid-
ered. These include mucositis from chemoradiation therapy, 
which may be associated with fungal superinfection. Pharyn-
gitis may also be seen in immune-mediated conditions such 
as erythema multiforme, bullous pemphigoid, and pemphigus 
vulgaris. In addition, reflux is being increasingly identified as a 
cause of both laryngitis and pharyngitis, particularly when the 
symptoms are chronic. A 24-hour pH probe is the gold standard 
diagnostic test, and treatment is usually successful with life-
style modification, although proton pump inhibitors are often 
prescribed.14
Obstructive adenotonsillar hypertrophy may present with 
nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, voice changes, dysphagia, and 
sleep-disordered breathing or OSA depending on the particular 
foci of lymphoid tissue involved.
Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy are indicated for 
chronic or recurrent acute infection and for obstructive hyper-
trophy.15 The American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and 
Neck Surgery Clinical Indicators Compendium suggests tonsil-
lectomy after three or more infections per year despite adequate 
medical therapy. Tonsillectomy has also been advocated in 
children who miss 2 or more weeks of school annually second-
ary to recurrent tonsil infection. Multiple techniques have been 
described, including electrocautery, sharp dissection, laser, and 
radiofrequency ablation. There is no consensus as to the best 
method. In cases of chronic or recurrent infection, surgery is 
considered only after failure of medical therapy. Patients with 
recurrent peritonsillar abscess should undergo tonsillectomy 
when the acute inflammatory changes have resolved. Selected 
cases, however, require tonsillectomy in the acute setting for 
the management of severe inflammation, systemic toxicity, or 
impending airway compromise. Adenoidectomy, in conjunction 
with myringotomy and tube placement, may be beneficial for 
children with chronic or recurrent otitis media.16 This is because 
the adenoid appears to function as a bacterial reservoir that 
seeds the middle ear via the Eustachian tube. Adenoidectomy 
is also the first line of surgical management for children with 
chronic sinusitis. In addition to acting as a bacterial reservoir, 
an obstructive adenoid impairs mucociliary clearance from the 
sinonasal tract into the pharynx.
The primary complications of tonsillectomy include peri-
operative bleeding, airway obstruction, death, and readmission 
for dehydration secondary to postoperative dysphagia.17 Com-
plications of adenoidectomy also include hemorrhage, as well 
as nasopharyngeal stenosis. In both procedures, there is risk 
of velopharyngeal insufficiency. In the latter condition, nasal 
regurgitation of liquids and hypernasal speech are experienced. 
Patients with significant airway obstruction secondary to adeno-
tonsillar hypertrophy are also at risk for postobstructive pul-
monary edema syndrome, once the obstruction is relieved by 
adenotonsillectomy. Overall, bleeding is the most prevalent risk 
and may require a return trip to the operating room for control. 
With the exception of bleeding, which is observed in 3% to 5% 
of patients, most of these complications are rare or self-limiting. 
It deserves special notation that adenotonsillectomy in a child 
with Down syndrome requires attention to the cervical spine. 
Patients with this syndrome may exhibit atlantoaxial instability, 
resulting in cervical spine injury if the neck is extended for the 
procedure. Baseline radiographs, with appropriate orthopedic or 
neurosurgical consultation, are indicated preoperatively.
572
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Sleep disorders represent a continuum from simple snor-
ing to upper airway resistance syndrome to obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA).18 Upper airway resistance syndrome and OSA 
are associated with snoring, excessive daytime somnolence, 
fatigue, and frequent sleep arousals. In OSA, polysom-
nogram demonstrates at least 10 episodes of apnea or 
hypopnea per hour of sleep. The average number of apneas 
and hypopneas per hour can be used to calculate a respiratory 
disturbance index, which, along with oxygen saturation, can be 
used to grade the severity of OSA. These episodes occur as a 
result of collapse of the pharyngeal soft tissues during sleep. In 
adults, it should be noted that in addition to tonsil size, factors 
such as tongue size and body mass index (especially >35 kg/m2) 
are significant predictors of OSA. Other anatomic findings 
associated with OSA include obese neck, retrognathia, low 
hyoid bone, and enlarged soft palate. Surgery should be con-
sidered after failure of more conservative measures, such as 
weight loss, elimination of alcohol use, use of oral appliances 
to open the airway during sleep, and continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP). Recent trends have also included the use of 
oral appliances to prevent base of tongue retro-prolapsed and 
subsequent narrowing of the pharyngeal airway during sleep. 
Oral appliances are useful to avert simple snoring and mild 
OSA, but their role in more advanced cases is unclear. It is 
well accepted that CPAP is much more efficacious than an oral 
appliance, while the latter is associated with improved patient 
compliance. Those failing conservative therapies may elect a 
surgical procedure should be tailored to the particular patient’s 
pattern of obstruction. In children, surgical management typi-
cally involves tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, because 
the disorder is usually caused, at least in part, by hypertrophy 
or collapse of these structures. In any individual patient, the 
anatomy must be carefully evaluated to determine whether the 
site of airway collapse is in the retropalatal region, retrolingual 
area, or both. In adults, uvulopalatoplasty is frequently per-
formed to alleviate soft-palate collapse and is the most com-
mon operation performed for sleep-disordered breathing. The 
goal of this procedure is to remove redundant tissue from the 
uvula and soft palate, along with obstructive tonsillar tissue. 
This can be accomplished with cold steel, laser, and/or cau-
tery. Adults with significant nasal obstruction may benefit from 
adenoidectomy, septoplasty, reduction in size of the inferior 
turbinates, and possibly external nasal surgery. Patients with a 
significant component of retrolingual obstruction may be can-
didates for tongue base reduction, tongue base advancement, or 
hyoid suspension. Additionally, a variety of maxillomandibular 
advancement procedures also have been described to enlarge 
the anterior-posterior dimension of the retrolingual airway. 
Patients with moderate to severe sleep apnea frequently mani-
fest involvement of the tongue base. However, management of 
this subgroup may be difficult, as procedures addressing the 
retrolingual airway can involve difficult recovery, significant 
morbidity, and limited success. These patients often continue 
to require continuous positive airway pressure despite perfor-
mance of multilevel surgical procedures. Patients with severe 
OSA (respiratory disturbance index >40, lowest nocturnal oxy-
gen saturation <70%) and unfavorable anatomy or comorbid 
cardiopulmonary disease may require tracheotomy,19 which 
is the only surgical “cure” for OSA. Tracheotomy should be 
offered in patients with evidence of right heart failure (cor 
­pulmonale), which is a potential sequela of severe OSA or 
undertreated cases of moderate OSA.
Figure 18-8.  Laryngeal granuloma.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, many patients pres-
ent with snoring but fail to exhibit OSA according to polysom-
nographic criteria. These “social snorers” may pursue elective 
procedures that stiffen the uvula and soft palate. This may be 
accomplished by the application of radiofrequency energy or 
cautery to induce submucosal scar, or by palatal implants. Elec-
tive uvulopharyngoplasty may also be a consideration in this 
population.
Benign Conditions of the Larynx
Disorders of voice may affect a wide array of patients with 
respect to age, gender, and socioeconomic status. The princi-
pal symptom of these disorders, at least when a mass lesion 
is present, is hoarseness. Other vocal manifestations include 
hypophonia or aphonia, breathiness, and pitch breaks. Benign 
laryngeal disorders may also be associated with airway obstruc-
tion, dysphagia, and reflux.20 Smoking may also be a risk factor 
for benign disease, but this element of the history should raise 
the index of suspicion for malignancy.
Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) reflects 
involvement of human papillomavirus (HPV) within the mucosal 
epithelium of the upper aerodigestive tract. The larynx is the most 
frequently involved site, and subtypes 6 and 11 are the most often 
implicated. The disorder typically presents in early childhood, 
secondary to viral acquisition during vaginal delivery. Many 
cases resolve after puberty, but the disorder may progress into 
adulthood. Adult-onset RRP typically occurs in the third or fourth 
decade of life, is usually less severe, and is more likely to involve 
extralaryngeal sites of the upper aerodigestive tract. With laryn-
geal involvement, RRP is most likely to present with hoarseness, 
although airway compromise may be observed. The diagnosis 
can be established with office endoscopy. Currently, there is no 
“cure” for RRP. Treatment involves operative microlaryngoscopy 
with excision or laser ablation, and the natural history is eventual 
recurrence. Therefore, surgery has an ongoing role for palliation 
of the disease. Multiple procedures are typically required over 
the patient’s lifetime. Several medical therapies, including intra-
lesional cidofovir injection and oral indole-3-carbinol, are being 
investigated to determine their abilities to retard recurrence. Addi-
tionally, the advent of HPV vaccines has suggested a role for this 
therapy in prevention of RRP.21
Laryngeal granulomas typically occur in the posterior 
larynx on the arytenoid mucosa (Fig. 18-8). These lesions are 
1
573
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
typically secondary to multiple factors,22 including reflux, voice 
abuse, chronic throat clearing, endotracheal intubation, and 
vocal fold paralysis. Effective management requires identifica-
tion of the underlying cause(s). Patients report pain (often with 
swallowing) more commonly than vocal changes. In addition to 
fiber-optic laryngoscopy, work-up may include voice analysis, 
laryngeal electromyography (EMG), and pH probe testing.23 
Treatment is individualized, depending on the contributing fac-
tors identified. First-line modalities that may be used include 
voice rest, voice retraining therapy, and anti-reflux therapy. The 
management of vocal cord paresis/paralysis is discussed later in 
this section. It is notable that the majority of cases demonstrate 
a component of reflux and when maximal medical therapy has 
failed, fundoplication may be indicated. The role of surgical 
excision is somewhat controversial, because it does not address 
the underlying etiology and is frequently associated with recur-
rence. Nonetheless, excision is indicated when carcinoma is 
suspected or when the patient has airway obstruction. Surgery 
may also be indicated in selected cases when a granuloma has 
matured into a fibroepithelial polyp, or when the patient (e.g., 
a performing artist) requires prompt removal for voice restora-
tion. Surgical excision is optimally performed under jet ventila-
tion so as to avoid endotracheal intubation. During surgery, it is 
important to preserve the arytenoid perichondrium to promote 
epithelialization postoperatively.
Edema in the superficial lamina propria of the vocal 
cord is known as polypoid corditis, polypoid laryngitis, pol-
ypoid degeneration of the vocal cord, or Reinke’s edema. The 
superficial lamina propria just underlies the vibratory epithelial 
surface. Edema is thought to arise from injury to the capillar-
ies that exist in this layer, with subsequent extravasation of 
fluid. Patients report progressive development of a rough, low-
pitched voice. Females more commonly present for medical 
attention because the lowered vocal frequency is more evident, 
given the higher fundamental frequency of the female voice. 
The etiology is also multifactorial and may involve smoking, 
laryngopharyngeal reflux, hypothyroidism, and vocal hyper-
function. Most of these patients are heavy smokers and findings 
are typically bilateral.24
Focal, unilateral hemorrhagic vocal cord polyps are more 
common in men. These occur secondary to capillary rupture 
within the mucosa by shearing forces during voice abuse. Use 
of anticoagulant or antiplatelet drugs may be a risk factor. As 
with laryngeal granulomas, treatment of polypoid corditis and 
vocal cord polyps requires addressing the underlying factors. 
Conservative management includes absolute discontinuance of 
smoking, reflux management, and voice therapy. Notably, top-
ical and systemic steroids are ineffective for these conditions. 
For polypoid corditis, elective surgery may be performed 
under microlaryngoscopy to evacuate the gelatinous matrix 
within the superficial lamina propria and trim excess mucosa. 
Focal polyps may be excised superficially under microlaryn-
goscopy. Surgery, particularly for polypoid corditis, will be 
less effective in patients who continue to smoke, although it 
should be noted that because of their heavy smoking history, 
surgery might be necessary to rule out occult malignancy. 
Surgery for polypoid corditis and hemorrhagic polyps may be 
accomplished either with cold steel or by using the carbon 
dioxide (CO2) laser. Postoperative voice therapy is usually 
indicated.
Vocal cord cysts may occur under the laryngeal mucosa, 
particularly in regions containing mucous-secreting glands, such 
Figure 18-9.  Large cyst of vocal cord.
as the supraglottic larynx. Occasionally, they derive from minor 
salivary glands, and congenital cysts may persist as remnants 
of the branchial arch. Cysts may present in a variety of ways 
depending on the size and site of origin (Fig. 18-9). Cysts of the 
vocal cord may be difficult to distinguish from vocal polyps, 
and video stroboscopic laryngoscopy may be necessary to help 
establish the diagnosis. Cysts observed in children can be quite 
large, thus compromising the airway. Lesions of the true vocal 
cord usually present with hoarseness. Treatment again depends 
on the size and site of the cyst. Large cysts of the supraglottic 
larynx are treated by marsupialization with cold steel or a CO2 
laser. Those of the vocal cord itself require careful microsurgi-
cal technique for complete removal of the cyst while preserving 
the overlying mucosa.
Leukoplakia of the vocal fold represents a white patch 
(which cannot be wiped off ) on the mucosal surface, usually 
on the superior surface of the true vocal cord. Rather than a 
diagnosis per se, the term leukoplakia describes a finding on 
laryngoscopic examination. The significance of this finding is 
that it may represent squamous hyperplasia, dysplasia, and/or 
carcinoma. Lesions exhibiting hyperplasia have a 1% to 3% risk 
of progression to malignancy. In contrast, that risk is 10% to 
30% for those demonstrating dysplasia. Furthermore, leukopla-
kia may be observed in association with inflammatory and reac-
tive pathologies, including polyps, nodules, cysts, granulomas, 
and papillomas. The wide, differential diagnosis for leukoplakia 
necessitates sound clinical judgment when selecting lesions that 
require operative direct laryngoscopy with biopsy specimen for 
histopathologic analysis. Features of ulceration and erythropla-
sia are particularly suggestive of possible malignancy. A history 
of smoking and alcohol abuse should also prompt a malignancy 
work-up. In the absence of suspected malignancy, conserva-
tive measures are used for 1 month. These include reduction 
of caffeine and alcohol, which are dehydrating and promote 
laryngopharyngeal reflux, proper hydration, and elimination 
of vocal abuse behaviors. Antireflux therapy, including proton 
pump inhibitors, may be prescribed. Investigational therapies, 
including retinoids, also have been attempted. Any lesions that 
progress, persist, or recur should be considered for excisional 
biopsy specimen.
574
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Unilateral vocal cord paralysis is typically iatrogenic in 
origin,25 following surgery to the thyroid, parathyroid, carotid, 
or cardiothoracic structures. Vocal cord paralysis may also be 
secondary to malignant processes in the lungs, thoracic cavity, 
skull base, or neck. In the pediatric population up to one fourth 
of cases may be neurologic in origin, with Arnold-Chiari mal-
formation being the most common. Overall, the left vocal cord is 
more commonly involved secondary to the longer course of the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) on that side, which extends into 
the thoracic cavity. When anterior approaches to the cervical 
spine are performed, however, the right RLN is at an increased 
risk, because it courses more laterally to the tracheoesophageal 
complex. Neurotoxic medications, trauma, intubation injury, 
and atypical infections are less common causes of vocal cord 
paralysis. The cause remains idiopathic in up to 20% of adults 
and 35% of children. These cases should prompt an imaging 
work-up to examine the course of the vagal/RLN in question: 
from the skull base to the aortic arch on the left, and from skull 
base to the subclavian on the right.
“Idiopathic” left true vocal cord paralysis may be a pre-
senting sign of malignancy involving the lung, thyroid, or 
esophagus. Adults typically present with hoarseness and the 
voice may be breathy if the contralateral vocal cord has not 
compensated to close the glottic valve. If the proximal vagus 
nerve or the superior laryngeal nerve is involved, the patient 
may demonstrate aspiration secondary to diminished supraglot-
tic sensation. Stridor, weak cry, and respiratory distress are seen 
in children, but adults typically do not exhibit signs of airway 
compromise unless paralysis is bilateral. Flexible fiber-optic 
laryngoscopy usually confirms the diagnosis, but laryngeal 
EMG may be necessary to distinguish vocal cord paralysis from 
mechanical fixation secondary to scar tissue or cricoarytenoid 
joint fixation. The position of the paralyzed fold depends on the 
residual innervation, pattern of reinnervation, and the degrees 
of atrophy and fibrosis of the laryngeal musculature. In bilateral 
vocal cord paralysis, the cords are often paralyzed in a para-
median position, creating airway compromise that necessitates 
tracheotomy. Once an airway is secure, vocal cord lateralization 
or arytenoidectomy may be performed electively to provide an 
adequate airway. Treatment of unilateral vocal cord paralysis 
includes speech therapy, which promotes glottic closure to opti-
mize the voice and prevent aspiration. Some patients do well 
with this modality alone.
Surgical treatment to augment or medialize the paralyzed 
vocal fold is performed to provide a surface against which the 
contralateral normal fold may make contact. Injection laryngo-
plasty may be performed under office or operative laryngos-
copy with a variety of autologous (fat, collagen) or alloplastic 
(hydroxyapatite, hyaluronic acid, micronized cadaveric human 
collagen) compounds. Teflon injection is of historical signifi-
cance only secondary to the incidence of severe foreign body 
inflammatory reactions. Injection of the vocal fold increases its 
bulk to optimize closure with the contralateral normal fold. This 
technique also is useful for vocal cord atrophy, which may occur 
with aging. Laryngeal framework surgery involves the implan-
tation of cartilage, hydroxyapatite, Gore-Tex, or silicone under 
the musculomembranous fold via an external approach through 
a window in the thyroid cartilage (Fig. 18-10).26 This may be 
combined with procedures to adduct the vocal process of the 
arytenoids. Laryngeal reinnervation (with the ansa cervicalis to 
the RLN transfer) and pacing have also been attempted with 
various success.
Figure 18-10.  Cross-section of the larynx demonstrating the prin-
ciple of medialization laryngoplasty. An implant is used to push the 
paralyzed vocal cord toward the midline.
Vascular Lesions
Vascular lesions can be broadly classified into two groups: hem-
angiomas and vascular malformations.27 Hemangiomas are the 
most common vascular lesions present in infancy and childhood. 
These lesions are present at birth in up to 30% of cases, but usu-
ally become apparent in the first few weeks of life. The lesions 
proliferate in size over the first year before beginning involu-
tion, which subsequently occurs over the next 2 to 12 years. 
While 40% of cases will resolve completely, the remainder 
will require intervention. Once the proliferative phase has ended, 
the lesion should be observed every 3 months for involution, and 
surgery should be considered for those that have not significantly 
involuted by 3 to 4 years of age. Surgical treatment of proliferat-
ing hemangiomas is reserved for lesions associated with severe 
functional or cosmetic problems, such as those involving the 
nasal tip or periorbital region. Treatment is performed with either 
the flashlamp-pumped pulsed-dye laser (FPDL), the potassium 
titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser, or the neodymium yttrium-alumi-
num garnet (Nd:YAG) laser, repeated every 4 to 6 weeks until 
the lesion disappears. Systemic steroids may be used to halt rap-
idly proliferating lesions until the child reaches 12 to 18 months, 
after which growth should stabilize or involution begin. Subcu-
taneous interferon-α-2a may also be used for this purpose. This 
treatment, however, is associated with neurologic side effects 
and should be used with caution.27,28 There have also been recent 
trends of using propranolol to inhibit hemangioma growth, and 
this practice is gaining popularity in complicated cases.
Vascular malformations, in contrast, are almost always 
present at birth and slowly enlarge without proliferation.29 
These may arise from capillaries, venules, veins, arteriove-
nous channels, and/or lymphatics. Capillary malformations 
usually involve the midline neck or forehead, and may fade 
with age. Venular malformations are also known as port-wine 
stains. These lesions often follow facial dermatomes and usu-
ally thicken with age. Venous malformations are composed of 
ectatic veins within the lips, tongue, or buccal area. These may 
present as purple masses or subcutaneous/submucosal nodules. 
Arteriovenous malformations are rare malformations of arterio-
venous channels that failed to regress during development.
575
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
Lymphatic malformations or lymphangiomas of the head 
and neck usually involve the cervical area, in which case they 
are more commonly macrocystic and well demarcated. Those 
arising above the hyoid bone tend to be microcystic and have an 
infiltrative quality. Lymphangiomas may become secondarily 
infected and may rapidly enlarge, causing airway compromise. 
These lesions may also be associated with feeding difficulties 
and failure to thrive.
Capillary hemangiomas and superficial port-wine stains 
are effectively treated by FPDL. The KTP or Nd:YAG laser is 
used for deeper port-wine stains. Venous malformations may 
be treated with laser, sclerotherapy, and/or surgical excision, 
depending on the depth, size, and location. Superficial lesions are 
treated with the Nd:YAG laser, which has deeper penetration than 
either the FPDL or KTP laser. Deeper venous malformations may 
benefit from Nd:YAG therapy of the superficial component fol-
lowed by meticulous surgical excision of the deeper component. 
Sclerotherapy should be undertaken with extreme caution in the 
head and neck, because the valveless quality of the veins in this 
region introduces significant risk of cavernous sinus thrombosis. 
Arteriovenous malformations require formal surgical resection 
with negative margins. Preoperative angiographic embolization 
is frequently used to facilitate surgery. Microvascular reconstruc-
tion may be necessary, depending on the extent of the resection 
required. Surgical excision is also required for lymphatic mal-
formations, although superficial lesions are sometimes treatable 
with the CO2 laser. This often is difficult for microcystic cases 
given the infiltrative nature. Sclerotherapy with OK-432 is effec-
tive in macrocystic lymphangiomas, and multiple other sclerosing 
agents, including bleomycin, have been explored.30
TRAUMA OF THE HEAD AND NECK
Management of head and neck soft-tissue trauma follows gen-
eral surgical principles, with several salient features. In the acute 
setting, patients should be managed with head-of-bed elevation 
to decrease tissue edema. Most lacerations without significant 
tissue loss can be closed primarily, which is preferred where 
possible. Head and neck soft tissues have the benefit of a robust 
blood supply. Thus, nearly devitalized soft tissues often survive, 
such that any tissue debridement should be very conservative. 
Closure of trapdoor lacerations requires conservative undermin-
ing of surrounding tissue and good approximation of subdermal 
levels prior to epidermal closure. A pressure dressing is also 
applied. These measures are employed to avoid a pincushion 
deformity (Fig. 18-11). Typically, when repairing facial lacera-
tions, subdermal layers are approximated with an absorbable 
3-0 or 4-0 suture such as, Vicryl or polydioxanone, and the 
skin is closed using 5-0 or 6-0 monofilament nylon or Prolene. 
Sutures are removed after 4 to 5 days, but may be removed 
earlier in thin-skinned areas. Systemic antibiotics are reserved 
for through-and-through mucosal lacerations, contaminated 
wounds, bite injuries, and when delayed closure is performed 
(>72 hours). The chosen antibiotic should cover S. aureus. After 
skin injuries, the patient is instructed to avoid sunlight, because 
this can cause pigmentary abnormalities in the abrasion or scar 
line, which matures over a 6- to 12-month period.
Wound closure must be understood in the context of the 
cosmetic and functional anatomic landmarks of the head and 
neck. Management of injuries to the eyelid requires identifi-
cation of the orbicularis oculi, which is closed in a separate 
layer. The gray line (conjunctival margin; Fig. 18-12) must 
Figure 18-11.  Trap door laceration (A) healed with a “pin cush-
ion” deformity (B) soft-tissue layers must be meticulously approxi-
mated (C) to avoid this complication.
Figure 18-12.  Alignment of the gray line is the key step in the 
repair of eyelid lacerations.
576
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
be carefully approximated to avoid lid notching or height mis-
match. Management of lip injuries follows the same principle. 
The orbicularis oris must be closed, and the vermilion bor-
der carefully approximated (Fig. 18-13). Injuries involv-
ing one-fourth the width of the eyelid or one third the width 
of the lip may be closed primarily; otherwise, flap or grafting 
procedures may be required. With laceration of the auricle, key 
structures such as the helical rim and antihelix must be carefully 
aligned. These injuries must be repaired so that the cartilage is 
covered. The principles of auricular repair are predicated on the 
fact that the cartilage has no intrinsic blood supply and is thus 
susceptible to ischemic necrosis following trauma. The suture 
should be passed through the perichondrium, while placement 
through the cartilage itself should be avoided.
Auricular hematomas should be drained promptly, with 
placement of a bolster as a pressure dressing. A pressure dress-
ing is frequently advocated after closure of an ear laceration. It 
also deserves note that the surgeon must avoid the temptation 
to perform aggressive debridement after injuries to the eyelid 
or auricle. Given the rich vascular supply to the face and neck, 
many soft-tissue components that appear devitalized will indeed 
survive.
Most traumatic facial nerve injuries are secondary to tem-
poral bone trauma, which is discussed later in this section. Soft-
tissue injuries occurring in the midface may involve distal facial 
nerve branches. Those injured anterior to a vertical line dropped 
from the lateral cantus do not require repair secondary to col-
lateral innervation in the anterior midface. Posterior to this line, 
the nerve should be repaired, primarily if possible, using 8-0 to 
10-0 monofilament suture to approximate the ­epineurium under 
microscopic visualization. If neural segments are missing, cable 
Figure 18-13.  Approximation of the vermilion border is the key 
step in the repair of lip lacerations.
3%
3%
36%
2%
20%
21%
14%
Figure 18-14.  Sites of common mandible fractures.
grafting is performed using either the greater auricular (provides 
7 to 8 cm) or sural nerve (up to 30 cm) as a donor. Injuries to 
the buccal branch should alert the examiner to a possible parotid 
duct injury. This structure lies along an imaginary line drawn 
from the tragus to the midline upper lip, running along with the 
buccal branch of the facial nerve. The duct should be repaired 
over a 22-gauge stent or marsupialized into the oral cavity.
Facial bone fractures most commonly involve the man-
dible. Fractures most often involve the angle, body, or condyle, 
and in most cases, two or more sites are almost always involved 
(Fig. 18-14). Fractures are described as either favorable or unfa-
vorable, depending on whether or not the masticatory muscu-
lature tends to pull the fracture into reduction or distraction. 
Vertically favorable fractures are brought into reduction by the 
masseter, while horizontally favorable fractures are brought 
into reduction by the pterygoid musculature. The fracture is 
usually evaluated by radiographic exam using a Panorex, but 
specialized plain film views, and occasionally CT scan, are 
necessary in selected cases. Classical management of mandible 
fractures dictated closed reduction and a 4- to 6-week period of 
intermaxillary fixation (IMF) with arch bars applied via circum-
dental wiring. Comminuted, displaced, or unfavorable fractures 
underwent open reduction and wire fixation in addition to IMF. 
Currently, arch bars and IMF are performed to establish occlu-
sion. The fracture is then exposed and reduced, using transoral 
approaches where possible.
Transcervical approaches are required to address fractures 
of the ramus or posterior body, with careful attention given to 
preserving the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve. 
Rigid fixation is then accomplished by the application of plates 
and screws. Selected fractures, such as those of the body, 
benefit from dynamic compression plating, which applies 
pressure toward the fracture line. With rigid fixation, IMF is 
required to establish occlusion, and may not be necessary for 
a full 6 postoperative weeks. This is preferable because IMF 
is associated with gingival and dental disease, as well as with 
significant weight loss and malnutrition, during the fixation 
period. New techniques have included the 4-point fixation tech-
nique, where the maxilla and mandible are held in occlusion 
by wires attached to intraoral cortical bone screws, with two 
screws above and below the occlusal line anteriorly. In eden-
tulous patients, determining the baseline occlusion is of less 
2
3
577
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
significance because dentures may be refashioned once healing 
is complete. If IMF is required to aid in immobilization of the 
fracture in an edentulous patient, interosseous wiring and/or the 
fabrication of custom-made splints is required.
Midface fractures are classically described in three pat-
terns: Le Fort I, II, and III. A full understanding of midface 
structure is first necessary (Fig. 18-15). Three vertical buttresses 
support the midface: the nasofrontal-maxillary, the frontozygo-
maticomaxillary, and pterygomaxillary.31 The five horizontal 
buttresses include the frontal bone, nasal bones, upper alveo-
lus, zygomatic arches, and the infraorbital region. Classical 
signs of midface fractures in general include subconjunctival 
hemorrhage; malocclusion; midface numbness or hypesthesia 
(maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve); facial ecchymoses/
hematoma; ocular signs/symptoms; and mobility of the maxil-
lary complex.
Le Fort I fractures occur transversely across the alveolus, 
above the level of the teeth apices. In a pure Le Fort I fracture, 
the palatal vault is mobile while the nasal pyramid and orbital 
rims are stable. The Le Fort II fracture extends through the naso-
frontal buttress, medial wall of the orbit, across the infraorbital 
rim, and through the zygomaticomaxillary articulation. The 
nasal dorsum, palate, and medial part of the infraorbital rim are 
mobile. The Le Fort III fracture is also known as craniofacial 
disjunction. The frontozygomaticomaxillary, frontomaxillary, 
and frontonasal suture lines are disrupted. The entire face is 
mobile from the cranium. It is convenient to conceptualize com-
plex midface fractures according to these patterns (Fig. 18-16); 
however, in reality, fractures reflect a combination of these three 
types. Also, the fracture pattern may vary between the left and 
right sides of the midface. Lateral blows to the cheek may be 
associated with isolated zygoma fractures. The zygoma is typi-
cally displaced inferiorly and medially with disruption of the 
suture lines between the temporal, frontal, and maxillary bones 
and the zygoma. Disruption of the latter articulation may be 
associated with depression into the maxillary sinus and blood in 
the sinus cavity. Fractures of the midface and/or zygoma may be 
Frontal bar
Lateral
zygomatico-
maxillary
buttresses
Medial nasomaxillary 
buttresses
Figure 18-15.  Major buttresses of the midface.
III
II
I
Figure 18-16.  Classic Le Fort fracture patterns.
Figure 18-17.  Coronal computed tomography demonstrating an 
orbital blowout fracture with herniation of orbital contents into the 
maxillary sinus.
associated with an orbital blowout, whereas the orbital floor is 
disrupted and orbital soft tissues subsequently herniate into the 
maxillary sinus (Fig. 18-17). The mechanism of orbital blowout 
may involve propagation of adjacent fracture lines or may be 
the result of a sudden increase in intraorbital pressure during 
the injury. This may be associated with enophthalmos or entrap-
ment of the inferior oblique muscle. The latter results in diplopia 
upon upward gaze. Entrapment is confirmed by forced duction 
testing, where, under topical or general anesthesia, the muscular 
attachment of the inferior oblique is grasped with forceps and 
manipulated to determine passive ocular mobility. Fractures of 
the midface, zygoma, and orbital floor are best evaluated using 
CT scan, and repair requires a combination of transoral and 
external approaches to achieve at least two points of fixation 
for each fractured segment.32 Significant areas of bone loss can 
be reconstructed with commercially available hydroxyapatite 
578
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
bone cements, an osteoconductive calcium-phosphate matrix. 
Blowout fractures demonstrating significant entrapment or 
enophthalmos are treated by orbital exploration and reinforce-
ment of the floor with mesh or bone grafting.
Temporal bone fractures occur in approximately one fifth 
of skull fractures. As with fractures of the mandible and mid-
face, blunt trauma (from motor vehicle accident or assault) usu-
ally is implicated. Unfortunately, the incidence of temporal bone 
fracture from gunshot wounds to the head is rising. Fractures are 
divided into two patterns (Fig. 18-18), longitudinal and trans-
verse, based on the clinical picture and CT imaging. In practice, 
most fractures are oblique. By classical descriptions, longitudi-
nal fractures constitute 80% and are associated with lateral skull 
trauma. Signs and symptoms include conductive hearing loss, 
ossicular injury, bloody otorrhea, and labyrinthine concussion. 
The facial nerve is injured in approximately 20% of cases. In 
contrast, the transverse pattern constitute only 20% of temporal 
bone fractures and occurs secondary to fronto-occipital trauma. 
The facial nerve is injured in 50% of cases. These injuries fre-
quently involve the otic capsule to cause sensorineural hearing 
loss and loss of vestibular function. Hemotympanum may be 
observed. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak must be suspected 
in temporal bone trauma. This resolves with conservative mea-
sures in most cases. The most significant consideration in the 
management of temporal bone injuries is the status of the facial 
nerve. Delayed or partial paralysis will almost always resolve 
with conservative management. However, immediate paraly-
sis that does not recover within 1 week should be considered 
Figure 18-18.  View of cranial surface of skull base. Longitudinal 
(left) and transverse (right) temporal bone fractures.
for nerve decompression. Electroneurography and EMG have 
been used to help determine which patients with delayed-onset 
complete paralysis will benefit from surgical decompression. 
The finding of >90% degeneration more than 72 hours after 
the onset of complete paralysis is considered an indication for 
surgery.33 Multiple approaches have been described for facial 
nerve decompression, some of which require the sacrifice of 
hearing. These patients may have severe intracranial or vascu-
lar injuries such that the decision to operate must also be made 
in the context of the patient’s overall medical stability. It is of 
paramount importance to protect the eye in patients with facial 
nerve paralysis of any etiology, because absence of an intact 
blink reflex will predispose to corneal drying and abrasion. This 
requires the placement of artificial tears throughout the day with 
lubricant ointment, eye taping, and/or a humidity chamber at 
night.34,35
TUMORS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
When a discussion of neoplasms of the head and neck is ini-
tiated, the conversation frequently focuses on squamous cell 
carcinoma. This is because the majority of malignancies of 
this region are represented by this pathology. The diagnosis 
and treatment of lesions spanning from the lips and oral cav-
ity to the larynx and hypopharynx requires a similar methodic 
approach.
The selection of treatment protocols varies for each site 
within the upper aerodigestive tract. The importance of multi-
disciplinary management cannot be underestimated. Presenta-
tion of cases before a tumor board allowing review of a patient’s 
history, physical examination findings, imaging, and prior 
pathology specimens allows for confirmation of the patient’s 
status. Additionally, it should encourage discussion from mul-
tiple points of view concerning the most appropriate treatment 
options available. Participation in the discussion with represen-
tatives of radiation oncology, medical oncology, surgical oncol-
ogy, oral maxillofacial surgery/dental medicine, along with 
radiologists and pathologists specializing in upper aerodigestive 
tract disorders benefits not only the patient but also represents 
an excellent teaching opportunity for all disciplines.
The development of organ preservation protocol and the 
evolution of free tissue reconstructive techniques are some of 
the most significant advances made within the field during the 
last two decades. The future of the treatment of head and neck 
cancer lies within the field of molecular biology. As more is 
understood about the genetics of cancer, tailoring treatment 
options to a particular tumor mutation has the capacity to maxi-
mize survival while achieving the highest quality of life.
Etiology and Epidemiology
It should come as no surprise that abuse of tobacco and alcohol 
are the most common preventable risk factors associated with the 
development of head and neck cancers. This relationship is 
synergistic rather than additive. Smoking confers a 1.9-fold 
increased risk to males and a threefold increased risk to females 
for developing a head and neck carcinoma, compared to non-
smokers. The risk increases as the number of years smoking 
and number of cigarettes smoked per day increases. Alcohol 
alone confers a 1.7-fold increased risk to males drinking one 
to two drinks per day, compared to nondrinkers. This increased 
risk rises to > threefold for heavy drinkers. Individuals who 
both smoke (two packs per day) and drink (four units of alcohol 
4
579
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
per day) had a 35-fold increased risk for the development of a 
­carcinoma compared to controls.36 Users of smokeless tobacco 
have a four times increased risk of oral cavity carcinoma com-
pared to nonusers.
Tobacco is the leading preventable cause of death in 
the United States and is responsible for one of every five 
deaths.37Approximately one fourth of U.S. adults habitually use 
tobacco products, with recent trends demonstrating an increase 
in the use of tobacco products by women. The evidence sup-
porting the need for head and neck cancer patients to pursue 
smoking cessation after treatment is compelling. In a study by 
Moore, 40% of patients who continued to smoke after defini-
tive treatment for an oral cavity malignancy went on to recur or 
develop a second head and neck malignancy.38 For patients who 
stopped smoking after treatment, only 6% went on to develop 
a recurrence. Induction of specific p53 mutations within upper 
aerodigestive tract tumors has been noted in patients with histo-
ries of tobacco and alcohol use.39,40
When smokers who develop head and neck squamous cell 
carcinomas are compared to nonsmokers, differences between 
the two populations emerge. Koch and associates41 noted that 
nonsmokers were represented by a disproportionate number of 
women and were more frequently at the extremes of age (<30 
or >85 years of age). Tumors from nonsmokers presented more 
frequently in the oral cavity, specifically within the oral tongue, 
buccal mucosa, and alveolar ridge. Smokers presented more 
frequently with tumors of the larynx, hypopharynx, and floor 
of mouth. Former smokers, defined as those individuals who 
had quit >10 years prior, demonstrated a profile more consistent 
with nonsmokers.
In India and Southeast Asia, the product of the areca cat-
echu tree, known as a betel nut, is chewed in a habitual manner 
and acts as a mild stimulant similar to that of coffee. The nut is 
chewed in combination with lime and cured tobacco as a mix-
ture known as a quid. The long-term use of the betel nut quid 
can be destructive to oral mucosa and dentition and is highly 
carcinogenic.42 Another habit associated with oral malignancy is 
that of reverse smoking, where the lighted portion of the tobacco 
product is within the mouth during inhalation. The risk of hard 
palate carcinoma is 47 times greater in reverse smokers com-
pared to nonsmokers.
HPV is an epitheliotropic virus that has been detected to 
various degrees within samples of oral cavity squamous cell car-
cinoma. Infection alone is not considered sufficient for malig-
nant conversion; however, results of multiple studies suggest a 
role of HPV in a subset of head and neck squamous cell carci-
noma. Multiple reports reflect that up to 40% to 60% of current 
diagnoses of tonsillar carcinoma demonstrate evidence of HPV 
types 16 or 18.
Environmental ultraviolet light exposure has been associated 
with the development of lip cancer. The projection of the lower lip, 
as it relates to this solar exposure, has been used to explain why the 
majority of squamous cell carcinomas arise along the vermilion 
border of the lower lip. In addition, pipe smoking also has been 
associated with the development of lip carcinoma. Factors such as 
mechanical irritation, thermal injury, and chemical exposure have 
been described as an explanation for this finding.
Other entities associated with oral malignancy include 
Plummer-Vinson syndrome (achlorhydria, iron-deficiency 
anemia, mucosal atrophy of mouth, pharynx, and esophagus), 
chronic infection with syphilis, and immunocompromised status 
(30-fold increase with renal transplant).
Vermilion
Buccal mucosa
Hard palate
Soft palate
Retromolar trigone
Circumvallate 
papillae
Lower gingiva
Palatine raphe
Palatine tonsil
Figure 18-19.  Oral cavity landmarks.
Although evidence linking HIV infection to squamous cell 
carcinoma of the head and neck is lacking, several AIDS-defining 
malignancies, including Kaposi’s sarcoma, and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma may require the care of an otolaryngologist.
Anatomy and Histopathology
The upper aerodigestive tract is divided into several distinct 
sites that include the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and nasal 
cavity/paranasal sinuses. Within these sites are individual sub-
sites with specific anatomic relationships that affect diagnosis, 
tumor spread, and selection of treatment options. The spread 
of a tumor from one site to another is determined by the course 
of the nerves, blood vessels, lymphatic pathways, and fascial 
planes. The fascial planes serve as barriers to the direct invasion 
of tumor and facilitate the pattern of spread to regional lymph 
nodes.
The oral cavity extends from the vermilion border of the 
lip to the hard-palate/soft-palate junction superiorly, to circum-
vallate papillae inferiorly, and to the anterior tonsillar pillars 
laterally (Fig. 18-19). It is divided into seven subsites: lips, alve-
olar ridges, oral tongue, retromolar trigone, floor of mouth, buc-
cal mucosa, and hard palate. Advanced oral cavity lesions may 
present with mandibular and/or maxillary involvement requiring 
special consideration at the time of resection and reconstruction. 
Regional metastatic spread of lesions of the oral cavity is to the 
lymphatics of the submandibular and the upper jugular region 
(e.g., levels I, II, and III).
The pharynx is divided into three regions: nasopharynx, 
oropharynx, and hypopharynx. The nasopharynx extends from 
the posterior nasal septum and choana to the skull base and 
includes the fossa of Rosenmüller and torus tubarius of the 
Eustachian tubes laterally. The inferior margin of the nasophar-
ynx is the superior surface of the soft palate. The adenoids, typi-
cally involuted in adults, are located with the posterior aspect 
of this site. Given the midline location of the nasopharynx, 
bilateral regional metastatic spread is common in these lesions. 
Lymphadenopathy of the posterior triangle (level V) of the neck 
should provoke consideration for a nasopharyngeal primary.
The major sites within the oropharynx are the tonsillar 
region, base of tongue, soft palate, and posterolateral pharyngeal 
walls. Regional lymphatic drainage for oropharyngeal lesions 
580
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
frequently occurs to the upper and lower cervical lymphatics 
(e.g., levels II, III, IV). Retropharyngeal metastatic lymphatic 
spread may occur with oropharyngeal lesions.
The hypopharynx extends from the vallecula to the lower 
border of the cricoid posterior and lateral to the larynx. The 
subsites of this region include the pyriform fossa, the postcri-
coid space, and posterior pharyngeal wall. Regional lymphatic 
spread is frequently bilateral and to the mid- and lower cervical 
lymph nodes (e.g., levels III, IV).
The larynx is divided into three regions: the supraglot-
tis, glottis, and subglottis. The supraglottic larynx includes the 
epiglottis, false vocal cords, medial surface of the aryepiglot-
tic folds, and the roof of the laryngeal ventricles. The glottis 
includes the true vocal cords, anterior and posterior commis-
sure, and the floor of the laryngeal ventricle. The subglottis 
extends from below the true vocal cords to the cephalic border 
of the cricoid within the airway. The supraglottis has a rich lym-
phatic network, which accounts for the high rate of bilateral 
spread of metastatic disease that is not typically seen with the 
glottis. Glottic and subglottic lesions, in addition to potential 
spread to the cervical chain lymph nodes, may also spread to the 
paralaryngeal and paratracheal lymphatics and require attention 
to prevent lower central neck recurrence.
Carcinogenesis
Development of a tumor represents the loss of cellular signaling 
mechanisms involved in the regulation of growth. Following 
malignant transformation, the processes of replication (mito-
sis), programmed cell death (apoptosis), and the interaction of a 
cell with its surrounding environment are altered. Advances in 
molecular biology have allowed for the identification of many 
of the mutations associated with this transformation.
Overexpression of mutant p53 is associated with carcino-
genesis at multiple sites within the body. Point mutations in p53 
have been reported in up to 45% of head and neck carcinomas. 
Koch et al noted that p53 mutation is a key event in the malig-
nant transformation of >50% of head and neck squamous cell 
carcinomas in smokers.41
Carcinogenesis has long been explained as a two-hit pro-
cess, involving DNA damage and the progression of mutated 
cells through the cell cycle. These two events also are known 
as initiation and promotion. It has been proposed that approxi-
mately 6 to 10 independent genetic mutations are required for 
the development of a malignancy. Overexpression of mito-
genic receptors, loss of tumor-suppressor proteins, expression 
of oncogene-derived proteins that inhibit apoptosis, and over-
expression of proteins that drive the cell cycle can allow for 
unregulated cell growth.
Genetic mutations may occur as a result of environmental 
exposure (e.g., radiation or carcinogen exposure), viral infec-
tion, or spontaneous mutation (deletions, translocations, frame 
shifts). Common genetic alterations, such as loss of heterozy-
gosity at 3p, 4q, and 11q13, and the overall number of chro-
mosomal microsatellite losses are found more frequently in the 
tumors of smokers than in the tumors of nonsmokers.41
Second Primary Tumors in the Head and Neck
Patients diagnosed with a head and neck cancer are predisposed 
to the development of a second tumor within the aerodigestive 
tract. The overall rate of second primary tumors is approxi-
mately 14%. A second primary tumor detected within 6 months 
of the diagnosis of the initial primary lesion is defined as a syn-
chronous neoplasm. The prevalence of synchronous tumors is 
approximately 3% to 4%. The detection of a second primary 
lesion more than 6 months after the initial diagnosis is referred 
to as metachronous tumor. About 80% of second primaries are 
metachronous and at least half of these lesions develop within 2 
years of the diagnosis of the original primary. The incidence and 
site of the second primary tumor vary and depend on the site and 
the inciting factors associated with the initial primary tumor. 
The importance of advocating smoking cessation and address-
ing alcoholism in these patients cannot be overemphasized.
Patients with a primary malignancy of the oral cavity or 
pharynx are most likely to develop a second lesion within the 
cervical esophagus, whereas patients with a carcinoma of the 
larynx are at risk for developing a neoplasm in the lung. As 
such, the presentation of a new-onset dysphagia, unexplained 
weight loss, or chronic cough/hemoptysis must be assessed thor-
oughly in patients with a history of prior treatment for a head 
and neck cancer.
A staging examination is recommended at the initial evalu-
ation of all patients with primary cancers of the upper aerodiges-
tive tract. This may involve a direct laryngoscopy, rigid/flexible 
esophagoscopy, and rigid/flexible bronchoscopy also known 
as “panendoscopy.” Some surgeons argue against the use of 
bronchoscopy because of the low yield of the examination in 
asymptomatic patients with a normal chest X-ray. Additionally, 
barium swallow has been used instead of esophagoscopy as a 
preoperative evaluation.
Staging
Staging for upper aerodigestive tract malignancies is defined 
by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and follows the 
TNM (primary tumor, regional nodal metastases, distant metas-
tasis) staging format43. The T staging criteria for each site varies 
depending upon the relevant anatomy (e.g., vocal cord immo-
bility is seen with T3 lesions). Table 18-1 demonstrates TNM 
staging for oral cavity lesions. The N classification system is 
uniform for all head and neck sites except for the nasopharynx.
Upper Aerodigestive Tract
Lip.  The lips represent a transition from external skin to inter-
nal mucous membrane that occurs at the vermilion border. The 
underlying musculature of the orbicularis oris creates a circum-
ferential ring that allows the mouth to have a sphincter-like 
function. Cancer of the lip is most commonly seen in white men 
from the ages of 50 to 70 years, but can be seen in younger 
patients, particularly those with fair complexions. Risk factors 
include prolonged exposure to sunlight, fair complexion, immu-
nosuppression, and tobacco use.
The majority of lip malignancies are diagnosed on the 
lower lip (88%–98%), followed by the upper lip (2%–7%) and 
oral commissure (1%). The histology of lip cancers is predomi-
nantly squamous cell carcinoma; however, other tumors, such 
as keratoacanthoma, verrucous carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, 
malignant melanoma, minor salivary gland malignancies, and 
tumors of mesenchymal origin (e.g., malignant fibrous histio-
cytoma, leiomyosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma), may also 
present in this location. Basal cell carcinoma presents more fre-
quently on the upper lip than lower.
Clinical findings in lip cancer include an ulcerated lesion on 
the vermilion or cutaneous surface. Careful palpation is impor-
tant in determining the actual size and extent of these lesions. 
581
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
Table 18-1 
TNM staging for oral cavity carcinoma
Primary Tumor
TX
Unable to assess primary tumor
T0
No evidence of primary tumor
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
T1
Tumor is < 2 cm in greatest dimension
T2
Tumor > 2 cm and < 4 cm in greatest dimension
T3
Tumor > 4 cm in greatest dimension
T4 (lip)
Primary tumor invading cortical bone, inferior 
alveolar nerve, floor of mouth, or skin of face  
(e.g., nose or chin)
T4a (oral)
Tumor invades adjacent structures (e.g., cortical bone, 
into deep tongue musculature, maxillary sinus) or skin 
of face
T4b (oral)
Tumor invades masticator space, pterygoid plates, or 
skull base and/or encases the internal carotid artery
Regional lymphadenopathy
NX
Unable to assess regional lymph nodes
N0
No evidence of regional metastasis
N1
Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or 
less in greatest dimension
N2a
Metastasis in single ipsilateral lymph node, >3 cm and 
< 6 cm
N2b
Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, all 
nodes < 6 cm
N2c
Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, 
all nodes < 6 cm
N3
Metastasis in a lymph node > 6 cm in greatest 
dimension
Distant metastases
MX
Unable to assess for distant metastases
M0
No distant metastases
M1
Distant metastases
TMN Staging
Stage 0
Tis
N0
M0
Stage I
T1
N0
M0
Stage II
T2
N0
M0
Stage III
T3
N0
M0
T1-3
N1
M0
Stage IVa
T4a
N0
M0
T4a
N1
M0
T1-4a
N2
M0
Stage IVb
Any T
N3
M0
T4b
Any N
M0
Stage IVc
Any T
Any N
M1
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source of the material is the AJCC 
Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springerlink.com.
582
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The presence of paresthesia in the area adjacent to the lesion 
may indicate mental nerve involvement.
Characteristics of lip primaries that negatively affect prog-
nosis include perineural invasion, involvement of the underlying 
maxilla/mandible, presentation on the upper lip or commissure, 
regional lymphatic metastasis, and age younger than 40 years at 
onset. Lip cancer results in fewer than 200 patient deaths annu-
ally and is stage dependent. Early diagnosis coupled with ade-
quate treatment results in a high likelihood of disease control.
The selection of treatment for any given lip cancer is deter-
mined by the overall health of the patient, size of the primary 
lesion, and the presence of regional metastases. Small primary 
lesions may be treated with surgery or radiation with equal suc-
cess and acceptable cosmetic results. However, surgical exci-
sion with histologic confirmation of tumor-free margins is the 
preferred treatment modality. Lymph node metastasis occurs in 
fewer than 10% of patients with lip cancer (Fig. 18-20). The 
primary echelon of nodes at risk is in the submandibular and 
submental regions. In the presence of clinically evident neck 
metastasis, neck dissection is indicated. The overall 5-year cure 
rate of lip cancer approximates 90% and drops to 50% in the 
presence of neck metastases. Postoperative radiation is admin-
istered to the primary site and neck for patients with close or 
positive margins, lymph node metastases, when tumor thickness 
is >4mm or in the setting of perineural invasion.44
The reconstruction of lip defects after tumor excision 
requires innovative techniques to provide oral competence, 
maintenance of dynamic function, and acceptable cosmesis. 
The typical lip length is 6 to 7 cm. This simple fact is impor-
tant because the reconstructive algorithms available to the head 
and neck surgeon are based on the proportion of lip resected. 
Realignment of the vermilion border during the reconstruction 
and preservation of the oral commissure (when possible) are 
important principles in attempting to attain an acceptable cos-
metic result. Resection with primary closure is possible with 
a defect of up to one third of the lip (Fig. 18-21). When the 
Submandibular
nodes
Submental
nodes
Upper deep
cervical node
Infraparotid 
node
Preauricular
node 
Figure 18-20.  Lymphatics of the lip.
Figure 18-21.  Wedge resection of lower lip squamous cell 
­carcinoma.
resection includes one third to one half of the lip, rectangular 
excisions can be closed using Burow’s triangles in combination 
with advancement flaps and releasing incisions in the mental 
crease.45 Rotational transposition of tissue from the upper lip 
can repair other medium-size defects. For larger defects of up 
to 75%, the Karapandzic flap uses a sensate, neuromuscular flap 
that includes the remaining orbicularis oris muscle, conserving 
its blood supply from branches of the labial artery (Fig. 18-22). 
The lip-switch (Abbe-Estlander) flap or a stair-step advance-
ment technique can be used to repair defects of either the upper 
or lower lip. Microstomia is a potential complication with these 
types of lip reconstruction. For very large defects, Webster or 
Bernard types of repair using lateral nasolabial flaps with buccal 
advancement have also been described.46
Oral Cavity.  As previously mentioned in Anatomy and His-
topathology, the oral cavity is composed of several sites with 
different anatomic relationships. The majority of tumors in the 
oral cavity are squamous cell carcinomas (>90%). Each site is 
briefly reviewed with emphasis placed on anatomy, diagnosis, 
and treatment options.
Oral Tongue.  The oral tongue is a muscular structure with 
overlying nonkeratinizing squamous epithelium. The posterior 
limit of the oral tongue is the circumvallate papillae, whereas its 
ventral portion is contiguous with the anterior floor of mouth. 
The tongue is composed of four intrinsic and four extrinsic 
muscles separated at the midline by the median fibrous septum. 
583
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
Tumors of the tongue begin in the stratified epithelium of the 
surface and eventually invade into the deeper muscular struc-
tures. The tumors may present as ulcerations or as exophytic 
masses (Fig. 18-23).47 The regional lymphatics of the oral 
cavity are to the submandibular space and the upper cervical 
lymph nodes (Fig. 18-24). The lingual nerve and the hypoglos-
sal nerve may be directly invaded by locally extensive tumors 
(Fig. 18-25). Involvement can result in ipsilateral paresthesias 
and deviation of the tongue on protrusion with fasciculations 
and eventual atrophy. Tumors on the tongue may occur on any 
surface, but are most commonly seen on the lateral and ventral 
surfaces.48 Primary tumors of the mesenchymal components of 
the tongue include leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, rhabdomyo-
sarcomas, and neurofibromas.
Surgical treatment of small (T1–T2) primary tumors is 
wide local excision with either primary closure or healing by 
secondary intention. The CO2 laser may be used for excision 
Figure 18-22.  A-C. Karapandzic labiaplasty for lower lip carcinoma.
Figure 18-23.  Oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma.
Figure 18-24.  Primary lymphatics for regional 
spread of oral cavity malignancies.
Subparotid
Periparotid
Submental
Retrovascular
Prevascular
Preglandular
Jugulodigastric
Jugulocarotid
Juguloomohyoid
584
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of early tongue cancers or for ablation of premalignant lesions. 
A partial glossectomy, which removes a significant portion of 
the lateral oral tongue, still permits reasonably effective postop-
erative function. Resection of larger tumors of the tongue that 
invade deeply can result in significant functional impairment. If 
lingual contact with the palate, lip, and teeth is decreased, it will 
result in impaired articulation. The use of soft, pliable fasciocu-
taneous free flaps can provide intraoral bulk and preservation of 
tongue mobility. Prosthetic augmentation can allow for contact 
between the remaining tongue tissue and the palate, improving a 
patient’s ability to speak and swallow. Treatment of the regional 
lymphatics is typically performed with the same modality used 
to address the primary site. When the primary site is addressed 
surgically, modified radical neck dissection (MRND) or selec-
tive neck dissection (SND) is performed. Depth of invasion of 
the primary tumor can direct the need for elective lymph node 
dissection with early stage lesions.49
Floor of Mouth.  The floor of mouth is a mucosal covered 
semilunar area that extends from the anterior tonsillar pillar 
posteriorly to the frenulum anteriorly, and from the inner sur-
face of the mandible to the ventral surface of the oral tongue. 
The ostia of the submaxillary and sublingual glands are con-
tained in the anterior floor of mouth. The muscular floor of 
mouth is composed of the sling-like genioglossus, mylohyoid, 
and hyoglossus muscles, which serve as a barrier to spread of 
disease. Invasion into these muscles can result in decreased 
tongue mobility and poor articulation. Another pathway for 
spread of tumor is along the salivary ducts, which can result in 
direct extension into the sublingual space.
Anterior or lateral extension to the mandibular perios-
teum is of primary importance in the preoperative assessment 
for these lesions. Imaging studies of the mandible, including 
CT scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and Panorex 
radiography, are helpful for ascertaining bone invasion. A 
careful clinical evaluation, which includes bimanual palpa-
tion to assess adherence or fixation to adjacent bone, is also 
essential (Fig. 18-26). The absence of fixation of the lesion to 
the inner mandibular cortex indicates that a mandible-sparing 
procedure is feasible.50 Deep invasion into the intrinsic mus-
culature of the tongue causes fixation and mandates a par-
tial glossectomy in conjunction with resection of the floor of 
mouth. Lesions in the anterior floor of mouth may invade the 
sublingual gland or submandibular duct and require resection 
of either of these structures in continuity with the primary 
lesion. Direct extension of tumors into or through the sublin-
gual space and into the submaxillary space may necessitate 
the need for removal of the primary tumor with the neck dis-
section specimen in continuity.
Figure 18-25.  A and B. Anatomy of the floor of 
mouth and submandibular space. a. = artery; m. = 
muscle; n. = nerve.
A
B
Submandibular gland
Digastric m.
(anterior belly)
Myohyoid m.
Stylopharyngeus,
stylohyoid and
styloglossus mm.
Digastric muscle
(posterior belly)
Styloid 
process
Hypoglossal n.
Middle
constrictor m.
External 
carotid a.
Hyoid bone
Hyoglossus m.
Lingual n.
Deep lingual a.
Dorsal lingual a.
Genioglossus m.
Geniohyoid m.
Sublingual a.
Lingual n.
Hyoid bone
Hypoglossal n.
585
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
The resection of large tumors of the floor of mouth may 
require a lip-splitting incision (Fig. 18-27) and immediate recon-
struction. The goals are to obtain watertight closure to avoid 
a salivary fistula and to avoid tongue tethering to maximize 
mobility. For small mucosal lesions, wide local excision can be 
followed by placement of a split-thickness skin graft over the 
Figure 18-27.  Composite resection specimen of a T4 floor of 
mouth squamous cell carcinoma.
Figure 18-26.  A and B. Differences in 
the transoral resection of a floor of mouth 
and alveolar ridge lesion.
A
B
Incision
Tissue excised
muscular bed. Larger defects that require marginal or ­segmental 
mandibulectomy require complex reconstruction with a fascio-
cutaneous or a vascularized osseous free flap.
Alveolus/Gingiva.  The alveolar mucosa overlies the bone of 
the mandible and maxilla. It extends from the gingivobuccal 
sulcus to the mucosa of the floor of mouth and hard palate. The 
posterior limits are the pterygopalatine arch and the ascend-
ing portion of the ramus of the mandible. Because of the tight 
attachment of the alveolar mucosa to the mandibular and max-
illary periosteum, treatment of lesions of the alveolar mucosa 
frequently requires resection of the underlying bone.
Marginal resection of the mandible can be performed for 
tumors of the alveolar surface that present with minimal bone 
invasion. Although access for such a procedure can be per-
formed by using an anterior mandibulotomy (Fig. 18-28), use 
of transoral and pull-through procedures is preferred if a coro-
nal or sagittal marginal mandibulotomy is performed. For more 
extensive tumors that invade into the medullary cavity, segmen-
tal mandibulectomy is necessary. Preoperative radiographic 
evaluation of the mandible plays an important role in deter-
mining the type of bone resection required. For radiographic 
evaluation of the mandible, Panorex views demonstrate gross 
cortical invasion. MRI is the best modality for demonstrating 
invasion of the medullary cavity of the mandible. Sectional 
CT scanning with bone settings is the optimum modality for 
imaging subtle cortical invasion. Gross bony invasion involve-
ment at the mandibular symphysis negatively impacts locore-
gional control.51
586
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Retromolar Trigone.  The retromolar trigone is represented 
by tissue posterior to the posterior inferior alveolar ridge and 
ascends over the inner surface of the ramus of the mandible. 
Similar to alveolar lesions, early involvement of the mandible 
is common because of the lack of intervening soft tissue in the 
region. The clinical presentation of trismus represents involve-
ment of the muscles of mastication and may indicate spread to the 
skull base. Tumors of the region may extend posteriorly into the 
oropharyngeal anatomy or laterally to invade the mandible. As a 
result, resection of retromolar trigone tumors usually requires a 
marginal or segmental mandibulectomy with a soft-tissue and/
or osseous reconstruction to maximize a patient’s postoperative 
ability for speech and swallowing. Ipsilateral neck dissection is 
performed because of the risk of metastasis to the regional lym-
phatics. Huang and associates demonstrated a 5-year, disease-free 
survival rate for T1 lesions of 76%, which declined to 54% for 
T4 disease. Patients with N0 disease had a 5-year survival rate 
of 69%.52
Buccal Mucosa.  The buccal mucosa includes all of the muco-
sal lining from the inner surface of the lips to the line of attach-
ment of mucosa of the alveolar ridges and pterygomandibular 
raphe. The etiologies of malignancies in the buccal area include 
lichen planus, chronic dental trauma, and the habitual use of 
tobacco and alcohol. Tumors in this area have a propensity to 
spread locally and to metastasize to regional lymphatics. Local 
intraoral spread may necessitate resection of the alveolar ridge 
of the mandible or maxilla. Lymphatic drainage is to the facial 
and the submandibular nodes (level I). Small lesions can be 
excised ­surgically, but more advanced tumors require combined 
surgery and postoperative radiation.53 Deep invasion into the 
Figure 18-28.  Anterior mandibulotomy with mandibular swing to 
approach a posterior lesion.
cheek may require through-and-through resection. Reconstruc-
tion aimed at providing both an internal and external lining may 
be accomplished with a folded fasciocutaneous free flap or a 
combination of pedicled and free tissue techniques.
Palate.  The hard palate is defined as the semilunar area 
between the upper alveolar ridge and the mucous membrane 
covering the palatine process of the maxillary palatine bones. 
It extends from the inner surface of the superior alveolar ridge 
to the posterior edge of the palatine bone. Most squamous cell 
carcinomas of the hard palate are caused by habitual tobacco 
and alcohol use. Chronic irritation from ill-fitting dentures 
also may play a causal role. Inflammatory lesions arising on 
the palate may mimic malignancy and can be differentiated by 
biopsy specimen. Necrotizing sialometaplasia appears on the 
palate as a butterflyshaped ulcer that clinically appears similar 
to a neoplasm. Treatment is symptomatic and biopsy specimen 
confirms its benign nature. Torus palatini are bony outgrowths 
of the midline palate and do not specifically require surgical 
treatment unless symptomatic.
Squamous cell carcinoma and minor salivary gland tumors 
are the most common malignancies of the palate.54 The latter 
include adenoid cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, 
adenocarcinoma, and polymorphous low-grade adenocarci-
noma. Mucosal melanoma may occur on the palate and presents 
as a nonulcerated, pigmented plaque. Kaposi’s sarcoma of the 
palate is the most common intraoral site for this tumor. Tumors 
may present as either an ulcerative, exophytic, or submucosal 
mass. Minor salivary gland tumors tend to arise at the junc-
tion of the hard and soft palate. Direct infiltration of bone leads 
to extension into the floor of the nasal cavity and/or maxillary 
sinus. Squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate is treated 
surgically. Adjuvant radiation is indicated for advanced staged 
tumors. Because the periosteum of the palate can act as a bar-
rier to spread of tumor, mucosal excision may be adequate for 
very superficial lesions. Involvement of the periosteum requires 
removal of a portion of the bony palate. Partial palatectomy of 
infrastructure maxillectomy may be required for larger lesions 
involving the palate or maxillary antrum. Malignancies may 
extend along the greater palatine nerve making biopsy speci-
men important for identifying neurotropic spread. Through-
and-through defects of the palate require a dental prosthesis for 
rehabilitation of swallowing and speech.
Oropharynx.  The oropharynx extends from the soft palate to 
the superior surface of the hyoid bone (or floor of the vallecula) 
and includes the base of tongue, the inferior surface of the soft 
palate and uvula, the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars, 
the glossotonsillar sulci, tonsils, and the lateral and posterior 
pharyngeal walls. Laterally, the borders of this region are the 
pharyngeal constrictors and the medial aspect of the mandible. 
Direct extension of tumors from the oropharynx into these lat-
eral tissues may involve spread into the parapharyngeal space. 
The ascending ramus of the mandible can be involved when 
tumors invade the medial pterygoid muscle.
As was true of the oral cavity, the histology of the majority 
of tumors in this region is squamous cell carcinoma. Although 
less common, minor salivary gland tumors may present as sub-
mucosal masses in the tongue base and soft palate. Additionally, 
the tonsils and tongue base may be the presenting site for a lym-
phoma noted clinically as asymmetrical enlargement.
Oropharyngeal cancer may present as an ulcerative lesion 
or an exophytic mass. Tumor fetor from necrosis is common. 
587
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
A muffled or “hot potato” voice is seen with large tongue base 
tumors. Dysphagia and weight loss are common symptoms. 
Referred otalgia, mediated by the tympanic branches of cranial 
nerve (CN) IX and CN X, is a common complaint. Trismus may 
indicate advanced disease and usually results from involvement 
of the pterygoid musculature. The incidence of regional metas-
tases from cancers of the oropharynx is high. Consequently, 
ipsilateral or bilateral nontender cervical lymphadenopathy is a 
common presenting sign.
The incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carci-
noma has increased significantly over the last three decades. 
The etiology for this rise has been attributed to the HPV-16 
related development of malignancy. HPV infection can induce 
the production of two viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which 
inactivate tumor suppressors p53 and Rb leading to tumor 
promotion. In a prospective clinical trial of patients enrolled 
in the Eastern Cooperative Group (ECOG) trial 2399, Fakhry 
et al reported on the survival benefit seen in oropharyngeal 
cancer patients that were HPV-positive. Patients were treated 
with sequential chemoradiation for advanced stage disease. 
HPV positivity was found in 57% of all oropharyngeal can-
cers in the study. HPV-positive cancers demonstrated a higher 
response rate to induction chemotherapy (82% vs. 55%) 
and improved 2-year survival (95% vs. 62%). Compared to 
patients with HPV-negative tumors, HPV-positive cancers 
presented in younger male patients and were associated with 
a history of higher lifetime number of sexual partners and oral 
sex.55 HPV-associated oropharyngeal carcinoma is consid-
ered to represents a distinct clinicopathologic entity different 
from the traditional squamous cell carcinoma of the head and 
neck associated with the long-term use of tobacco and alcohol 
(Table 18-2). Surprisingly, the rate of distant metastasis is sim-
ilar in HPV-positive and HPV-negative patients indicating sur-
vival benefits are likely from improved locoregional control 
with treatment. Clinical trials are currently being performed 
to assess if therapy can be deintensified in the HPV patient 
population while obtaining the same locoregional and overall 
survival seen with standard treatment options.
Imaging studies are important for adequate staging and 
should assess for extension to the larynx, parapharyngeal space, 
pterygoid musculature, mandible, and nasopharynx. Lymph 
node metastasis from oropharyngeal cancer most commonly 
occurs in the subdigastric area of level II. Metastases also are 
Table 18-2 
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patterns of 
presentation
Variable
HPV-positive
HPV-negative
Typical age
40 – 60 years
over 60 years of 
age
Primary site
tongue base, tonsil
entire UADT
Prognosis with ASD
favorable
poor
Risk factors
oral sex, number 
of partners
habitual tobacco 
and alcohol use
Incidence
increasing
stable, decreasing
(UADT – upper aerodigestive tract, ASD -advanced stage disease)
found in levels III, IV, and V, in addition to the retropharyn-
geal and parapharyngeal lymph nodes. Approximately 50% of 
patients have metastases at the time of presentation and bilateral 
metastases are common from tumors arising in the tongue base 
and soft palate.
The treatment goals for patients with oropharyngeal cancer 
include maximizing survival and preserving function. Manage-
ment of squamous cell cancers of this region includes surgery 
alone, primary radiation alone, surgery with postoperative 
radiation, and combined chemotherapy with radiation therapy.56 
Tumors of the oropharynx tend to be radiosensitive.57 Patients 
with early stage lesions may be candidates for monomodality 
radiation alone. Adequate treatment of the neck is important 
with oropharyngeal squamous cancer because of the high risk of 
regional metastasis. Concomitant chemoradiation is commonly 
utilized in patients with advanced stage (III, IV) oropharyn-
geal carcinoma.58 This approach has been effectively dem-
onstrated to preserve function and is associated with survivorship 
comparable to surgery with postoperative radiation.
In an effort to resect tumors of the oropharynx in a mini-
mally invasive fashion, that might otherwise require a lip- 
splitting mandibulotomy approach with dissection through the 
floor of mouth, the transoral robotic surgical approach utilizing 
the da Vinci Surgical System has been utilized with favorable 
results. Dean et al reported on the use of robot-assisted primary 
and salvage surgery for 36 patients with T1 and T2 tumors of 
the oropharynx compared to traditional open salvage resec-
tion. Patients that underwent robot-assisted surgery had shorter 
lengths of stay and were less likely to be gastrostomy tube or 
tracheostomy dependent at 6 months.59 Of patients undergoing 
primary transoral robotic surgery to tonsillar carcinoma, 93% 
still required some form of postoperative adjuvant therapy.60 
Advocates of the technique believe that initial surgical man-
agement of the oropharynx, a site typically treated with pri-
mary radiation or chemoradiation therapy, allows for a better 
long-term functional result with the potential for decreasing the 
intensity of adjuvant therapy to radiation alone as opposed to 
postoperative chemoradiation. Clinical trials and experience 
with the technique and continue evolve with the focus of use 
directed at early-stage oropharyngeal carcinomas.
Extensive oropharyngeal cancers may require surgical 
resection and postoperative radiotherapy. Lesions that involve 
the mandible require composite resections, such as the classic 
jaw-neck resection or “commando” procedure. Surgical man-
agement of the tongue base may require total glossectomy for 
extensive lesions crossing the anatomic midline. The potential 
need for synchronous performance of total laryngectomy at 
the time of tongue base resection should be explained to the 
patient. Preservation of the larynx after total glossectomy is 
associated with a significant risk of postoperative dysphagia 
and aspiration.61
Swallowing rehabilitation in patients with oropharyngeal 
carcinoma is an important aspect of posttreatment care. For soft 
palate defects, palatal obturators may assist in providing a seal 
between the nasopharynx and the posterior pharyngeal wall. 
Nasal regurgitation of air and liquids can be decreased with use. 
Close cooperation between the head and neck surgeon and the 
maxillofacial prosthodontist is essential to provide patients with 
the optimum prosthetic rehabilitation. Preoperative planning can 
result in the creation of a defect that better tolerates obturation. 
For patients with postglossectomy defects, palatal augmenta-
tion prostheses can provide bulk extending inferiorly from 
5
588
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the palate. The prosthesis decreases the volume of the oral cav-
ity and allows the remaining tongue or soft tissue to articulate 
with the palate. It also facilitates posterior projection of the food 
bolus during the oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing.
Hypopharynx and Cervical Esophagus.  The hypophar-
ynx extends from the vallecula to the lower border of the cri-
coid cartilage and includes the pyriform sinuses, the lateral 
and posterior pharyngeal walls, and the postcricoid region 
(Fig. 18-29). Squamous cancers of the hypopharynx frequently 
present at an advanced stage. Clinical findings are similar to 
those of lower oropharyngeal lesions and include a neck mass, 
muffled or hoarse voice, referred otalgia, dysphagia, and 
weight loss. A common symptom is dysphagia, starting with 
solids and progressing to liquids, leaving patients malnour-
ished at the time of presentation. Invasion of the larynx by 
direct extension can result in vocal cord paralysis and may lead 
to airway compromise.
Routine office examination should include flexible fiber-
optic laryngoscopy to properly assess the extent of tumor. Dur-
ing examination, the patient should be instructed to perform a 
Valsalva maneuver, which will result in passive opening of the 
pyriform sinuses and postcricoid regions, providing improved 
visualization. Decreased laryngeal mobility or fixation may 
indicate invasion of the prevertebral fascia and unresectabil-
ity. Barium swallow can provide information regarding post-
cricoid and upper esophageal extension, potential multifocality 
within the esophagus, and document the presence of aspiration. 
CT and/or MRI imaging should be obtained through the neck 
Hypopharynx
Paraesophageal
nodes
Paratracheal nodes
Thyroid nodes
Figure 18-30.  View of the hypopharynx demonstrating the poten-
tial pathways of spread of tumor and pertinent anatomy.
Epiglottis
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Eustachian
tube orifice
Soft palate
Hyoid bone
Larynx
Hypopharynx
Palatine 
tonsil
Adenoid
Thyroid 
gland
Cricoid
cartilage
Figure 18-29.  Relationship of nasopharynx, oropharynx, and 
hypopharynx.
and upper chest to assess for invasion of the laryngeal frame-
work and to identify for regional metastases, with special atten-
tion given to the paratracheal and upper mediastinal lymph 
nodes (Fig. 18-30). Bilateral metastatic adenopathy in the para-
tracheal chain is common and the majority of patients present 
with nodal disease at the time of diagnosis.
Tumors of the hypopharynx and cervical esophagus are 
associated with poorer survival rates than are other sites in 
the head and neck because of advanced stage and lymph node 
metastasis at presentation. Surgery with postoperative radia-
tion therapy improves locoregional control compared to single-
modality therapy in the treatment of advanced stage tumors.62 
Definitive radiation therapy may be effective for limited 
T1 tumors, whereas concomitant chemoradiation is generally 
used for T2 and T3 tumors.63 Surgical salvage after radiation 
failure has a success rate of less than 50% and can be associated 
with significant wound-healing complications.
Larynx-preserving surgical procedures for tumors of the 
hypopharynx are possible for only a limited number of lesions. 
Tumors of the medial pyriform wall or pharyngo-epiglottic fold 
may be resected with partial laryngopharyngectomy. In this cir-
cumstance, the tumor must not involve the apex of the pyriform 
sinus, vocal cord mobility must be unimpaired, and the patient 
589
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
must have adequate pulmonary reserve. Given the increased risk 
for postoperative aspiration associated with various forms of 
partial laryngectomy, a history significant for pulmonary disease 
is a contraindication for performing the procedures. Because 
the majority of patients with tumors of the hypopharynx pres-
ent with large lesions with significant submucosal spread, total 
laryngectomy often is required to achieve negative resection 
margins. Resection of the primary tumor and surrounding pha-
ryngeal tissue is performed en bloc. Bilateral neck dissection is 
frequently indicated given the elevated risk of nodal metastases 
found with these lesions.
When laryngopharyngectomy is performed for hypopha-
ryngeal tumors the surgical defect is repaired by primary closure 
when possible. Generally, 4 cm or more of pharyngeal mucosa 
is necessary for primary closure to provide an adequate lumen 
for swallowing and to minimize the risk of stricture formation. 
Larger surgical defects require closure with the aid of pedicled 
myocutaneous flaps or microvascular reconstruction with radial 
forearm or jejunal free flap. When total laryngopharyngoesoph-
agectomy is necessary, gastric pull-up is performed.
Cervical esophageal cancer may be managed surgically or 
by concomitant chemoradiation. Preservation of the larynx is pos-
sible if the cricopharyngeus muscle demonstrates limited involve-
ment. Unfortunately, this is not often the case and many patients 
with cervical esophageal cancer require laryngectomy. Total 
esophagectomy is performed because of the tendency for multiple 
primary tumors and skip lesions seen with esophageal cancers.
Despite aggressive treatment strategies, the 5-year survival 
rate for cervical esophageal cancer is less than 20%. Given the 
presence of paratracheal lymphatic spread, surgical treatment for 
tumors of this area must include paratracheal lymph node dissec-
tion, in addition to treatment of the lateral cervical lymphatics.
Larynx.  Laryngeal carcinoma is a diagnosis typically enter-
tained in individuals with prominent smoking histories and the 
complaint of a change in vocal quality (Fig. 18-31). The borders 
of the larynx span from the epiglottis superiorly to the cricoid 
cartilage inferiorly. The lateral limits of the larynx are the ary-
epiglottic folds. The larynx is composed of three regions: the 
supraglottis, the glottis, and the subglottic (Fig. 18-32).
The supraglottic includes the epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, 
arytenoids, and ventricular bands (false vocal folds). The infe-
rior boundary of the supraglottic is a horizontal plane passing 
through the lateral margin of the ventricle. The glottis is com-
posed of the true vocal cords (superior and inferior surfaces) and 
includes the anterior and posterior commissures. The subglottic 
extends from the inferior surface of the glottis to the lower mar-
gin of the cricoid cartilage. The soft-tissue compartments of the 
larynx are separated by fibroelastic membranes, which can act 
as barriers to the spread of cancer. These membranes thicken 
medially to form the false vocal fold and the vocal ligament (the 
true vocal cord).
The supraglottic larynx contains pseudostratified, ciliated 
respiratory epithelium that covers the false vocal cords. The epi-
glottis and the vocal cords are lined by stratified, nonkeratinizing 
squamous epithelium. The subglottic mucosa is pseudostratified, 
ciliated respiratory epithelium. Minor salivary glands are also 
found in the supraglottic and subglottic. Tumor types that arise 
in the larynx are primarily squamous cell carcinoma but also 
include tumors of neuroendocrine origin, squamous papillomas, 
granular cell tumors, and tumors of salivary origin. Several histo-
logic variants of squamous cell carcinoma exist and include ver-
rucous, basaloid squamous cell, adenosquamous, and spindle cell 
carcinoma. Tumors of the laryngeal framework include synovial 
sarcoma, chondroma, and chondrosarcoma.
The normal functions of the larynx are airway patency, 
protection of the tracheobronchial tree during swallowing, 
and phonation. Patients with tumors of the supraglottic larynx 
may present with symptoms of chronic sore throat, dysphonia 
Figure 18-31.  Endoscopic view of a laryngeal squamous carcinoma.
Supraglottis
Glottis
Hyoid bone
Larynx
Subglottis
Cricoid
cartilage
Arytenoid
cartilage
False cord
Vocal cord
Pre-epiglottic
space
Thyroid 
cartilage
Ventricle 
of Morgani
Figure 18-32.  Sagittal view of the larynx with the divisions of the 
supraglottis, glottis, and subglottis demonstrated.
590
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(“hot potato” voice), dysphagia, or a neck mass secondary to 
regional metastasis. Supraglottic tumors may cause vocal cord 
fixation by inferior extension in the paraglottic space or direct 
invasion of the cricoarytenoid joint. Anterior extension of tumors 
arising on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis into the preepi-
glottic space produces a muffled quality to the voice. Referred 
otalgia or odynophagia is encountered with advanced supraglottic 
cancers. Bulky tumors of the supraglottic may result in airway 
compromise. In contrast to most supraglottic lesions, hoarseness 
is an early symptom in patients with tumors of the glottis.64 Air-
way obstruction from a glottic tumor is usually a late symptom 
and is the result of tumor bulk or impaired vocal cord mobility. 
Decreased vocal cord mobility may be caused by direct muscle 
invasion or involvement of the RLN. Fixation of the vocal cord 
indicates invasion into the vocalis muscle, paraglottic space, or 
cricoarytenoid joint. Superficial tumors that are bulky may appear 
to cause cord fixation through mass effect. Subglottic cancers are 
relatively uncommon and typically present with vocal cord paral-
ysis (usually unilateral) and/or airway compromise.
The staging classification for squamous cell cancers of 
the larynx includes assessment of vocal cord mobility as well 
as local tumor extension. Accurate clinical staging of laryngeal 
tumors requires flexible fiber-optic endoscopy in the office 
and direct microlaryngoscopy under general anesthesia. Direct 
laryngoscopy, used to assess the extent of local spread, may 
be combined with esophagoscopy or bronchoscopy to ade-
quately stage the primary tumor and to exclude the presence 
of a synchronous lesion. Key areas to note for tumor extension 
in supraglottic tumors are the vallecula, base of tongue, ven-
tricle, arytenoid, and anterior commissure. For glottic cancers, 
it is important to determine extension to the false cords, anterior 
commissure, arytenoid, and subglottic.
Radiographic imaging by CT and/or MRI provides impor-
tant staging information and is crucial for identifying cartilage 
erosion or invasion and extension into the preepiglottic or para-
glottic spaces. High quality, thin-section images through the 
larynx should be obtained in patients with laryngeal tumors and 
used with clinical assessment to arrive at a final disease pre-
treatment staging. Lymph node metastasis may be defined more 
readily with the use of imaging studies.
Lymphatic drainage of the larynx is distinct for each sub-
site. Two major groups of laryngeal lymphatic pathways exist: 
those that drain areas superior to the ventricle, and those that 
drain areas inferior to it. Supraglottic drainage routes pierce the 
thyrohyoid membrane with the superior laryngeal artery, vein, 
and nerve, and drain mainly to the subdigastric and superior 
jugular nodes.64Those from the glottic and subglottic areas exit 
via the cricothyroid ligament and end in the prelaryngeal node 
(the delphian node), the paratracheal lymph nodes, and the deep 
cervical nodes along the inferior thyroid artery. Limited glottic 
cancers typically do not spread to regional lymphatics (1%–4%). 
However, there is a high incidence of lymphatic spread from 
supraglottic (30%–50%) and subglottic cancers (40%).
When considering treatment for laryngeal tumors, it is useful 
to categorize them as a continuum from early tumors (those with a 
small area of involvement resulting in minimal functional impair-
ment) to advanced tumors (those with significant airway com-
promise and local extension). For example, severe dysplasia and 
carcinoma in situ often can be treated successfully with CO2 laser 
resection or conservative surgical approaches. In contrast, more 
advanced tumors may require partial laryngectomy (Fig. 18-33) or 
even total laryngectomy (Fig. 18-34).65 Further complicating the 
Perichondrium
Unilateral
lesion
Thyroid
cartilage
Figure 18-33.  Example of the resection of a vertical partial laryn-
gectomy for an early stage glottic carcinoma.
Figure 18-34.  Total laryngectomy specimen featuring a locally 
invasive advanced stage glottic squamous carcinoma.
591
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
Figure 18-35.  Pectoralis flap reconstruction of a laryngectomy patient requires soft-tissue augmentation for pharynx closure.
resection. Although using a CO2 laser can provide excellent 
hemostasis and minimize damage to the adjacent uninvolved 
tissue, scarring associated with its use is considered more sig-
nificant than with conventional “cold” techniques. Microflap 
dissection, using a subepithelial infusion of a saline-epinephrine 
solution into Reinke’s space, allows for assessment of depth of 
invasion and the ability to resect the lesion as a single unit. Use 
of an operative microscope aids the precision of such dissec-
tions. Open laryngofissure and cordectomy may be reserved for 
more invasive tumors.
For larger tumors of the glottis with impaired vocal cord 
mobility, a variety of partial resections exist that permit pres-
ervation of reasonable vocal quality. For lesions involving 
the anterior commissure with limited subglottic extension, an 
anterofrontal partial laryngectomy is indicated. For lateralized 
T2 or T3 glottic tumors without cartilage destruction, a vertical 
partial laryngectomy is feasible. In this circumstance, recon-
struction is accomplished by means of a false vocal cord imbri-
cation to simulate a true vocal cord on the side of the resection.
For T3 glottic lesions not involving the preepiglottic space 
or cricoarytenoid joint, a supracricoid laryngectomy with crico-
hyoidopexy or cricohyoidoepiglottopexy (CHEP) are options.65 
The supracricoid laryngectomy technique uses the remaining 
arytenoids as the phonatory structures, which come into apposi-
tion with epiglottic remnant in the CHEP, or with the tongue 
base in the cricohyoidopexy. Oncologic advantages of this pro-
cedure include the complete removal of the paraglottic spaces 
and thyroid cartilage. The supracricoid laryngectomy with 
CHEP is associated with excellent disease control and a high 
rate of tracheostomy decannulation. Favorable deglutition rates 
and a breathy vocal quality are seen postoperatively with this 
procedure. For lesions with involvement of the cricoarytenoid 
joint and/or extension to the level of the cricoid, total laryngec-
tomy is required.
The risk for aspiration is high following certain partial lar-
yngectomies. Patient selection is vital to successful application 
of these techniques. Presurgical pulmonary assessment may be 
necessary. One simple measurement of functional reserve is to 
have the patient climb two flights of stairs. Those able to do so 
without stopping are more likely to be candidates for conserva-
tion surgical procedures.
The approach to the treatment for patients with advanced 
tumors of the larynx and hypopharynx has evolved over time. 
Chemoradiation has demonstrated the ability for comparable 
locoregional disease control and overall survival similar to 
treatment paradigm is the role of radiotherapy, with or without che-
motherapy, with the goal of laryngeal preservation.66
Prognostic factors for patients with cancer of the larynx 
are tumor size, nodal metastasis, perineural invasion, and extra-
capsular spread of disease in cervical lymph nodes. Patient 
comorbidities are important to consider when arriving at a treat-
ment plan for patients with laryngeal cancer.
For severe dysplasia or carcinoma in situ of the vocal cord, 
complete removal of the involved mucosa with microlaryngos-
copy is an effective treatment. Patients with limited involvement 
of the arytenoid or anterior commissure are the best candidates 
for a good posttreatment vocal quality result with this approach. 
Multiple procedures may be necessary to control the disease and 
to prevent progression to an invasive cancer. Close follow-up 
examinations and smoking cessation are mandatory adjuncts of 
therapy. For early stage cancers of the glottis and the supra-
glottis, radiation therapy is equally as effective as surgery in 
controlling disease.
Critical factors in determining the appropriate treatment 
modality are comorbid conditions (chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease, cardiovascular, and renal disease) and tumor 
extension. Voice preservation and maintenance of quality of 
life are key issues and significantly impact therapeutic deci-
sions. The use of radiation therapy for early stage disease of 
the glottis and supraglottis provides excellent disease control 
with reasonable, if not excellent, preservation of vocal quality. 
Partial laryngectomy for small glottic cancers provides excel-
lent tumor control, but vocal quality can vary. For supraglot-
tic cancers without arytenoid or vocal cord extension, standard 
supraglottic laryngectomy results in excellent disease control 
with good voice function. For advanced tumors with extension 
beyond the endolarynx or with cartilage destruction, total laryn-
gectomy followed by postoperative radiation is considered the 
standard of care.67 In this setting, reconstruction by means of a 
pectoralis major flap (Fig. 18-35) or free flap reconstruction is 
required for lesions with pharyngeal extension.
Subglottic cancers, constituting only 1% of laryngeal 
tumors, are typically treated with total laryngectomy. Of note, 
40% of patients with these tumors present with regional adenop-
athy and special attention must be directed to the treatment of 
paratracheal lymph nodes.68
Laryngeal Preservation Techniques.  Superficial cancers 
confined to the true vocal cord can be treated with a variety 
of surgical options. These include endoscopic vocal cord strip-
ping, microflap dissection, partial cordectomy, and CO2 laser 
592
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
open surgical approaches. The Radiation Therapy Oncology 
Group 91-11 trial demonstrated a higher laryngeal preservation 
rate among patients receiving concomitant chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy than in those patients receiving radiation alone or 
sequential chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy.69 A ran-
domized laryngeal preservation trial of neoadjuvant induction 
chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy has yielded sur-
vival rates similar to those of laryngectomy, with the benefit of 
preservation of the larynx in 65% of patients.66 Surgical salvage 
is available in cases of treatment failure or recurrent disease.
Speech and Swallowing Rehabilitation.  Involvement of 
a speech and swallowing therapist is critical in the preopera-
tive counseling and postoperative rehabilitation of patients with 
laryngeal cancer. Speech rehabilitation options after total laryn-
gectomy include esophageal speech, tracheoesophageal punc-
ture, and use of an electrolarynx. Esophageal speech is produced 
by actively swallowing and releasing air from the esophagus 
which results in vibrations of the esophageal walls and pharynx. 
The sounds produced can be articulated into words. The abil-
ity to create esophageal speech depends on the motivation of 
patients and their ability to control the upper esophageal sphinc-
ter, allowing injection and expulsion of air in a controlled fash-
ion. Unfortunately, less than 20% of postlaryngectomy patients 
develop fluent esophageal speech.
A tracheoesophageal puncture is a fistula created between 
the trachea and esophagus that permits placement of a one-way 
valve that allows air from the trachea to enter the upper esopha-
gus. The valve prevents retrograde passage of food or saliva 
into the trachea. Patients that undergo placement of a tracheo-
esophageal puncture have a success rate of >80% in achieving 
functional speech.
For patients unable to develop esophageal speech, the 
electrolarynx creates vibratory sound waves when held against 
the neck or cheek. The vibrations create sound waves that the 
patient articulates into words. A disadvantage of the electro-
larynx is the mechanical quality of the sound produced. This 
device is most useful in the postoperative period before training 
for esophageal speech.
Postoperative swallowing rehabilitation is another impor-
tant task performed by the speech and swallowing team. Patient 
instruction in various swallowing techniques and evaluation 
for the appropriate diet consistency allow a patient to initiate 
oral intake of nutrition while minimizing the risk of aspirating. 
Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy can be performed transnasally 
and provides valuable information to assist in the assessment 
of dysphagia. The oral intake of various consistencies of liq-
uids and solids can be observed with endoscopic assessment of 
laryngeal penetration. A similar assessment may be performed 
with a modified barium swallow allowing the analysis of the 
various phases of swallowing.
Unknown Primary Tumors.  When patients present with cer-
vical nodal metastases without clinical or radiologic evidence 
of an upper aerodigestive tract primary tumor, they are referred 
to as having an unknown primary. Given the difficulty in per-
forming a detailed examination in the clinical setting of the 
base of tongue, the tonsillar fossa, and the nasopharynx, exami-
nation under anesthesia with directed tissue biopsy specimens 
has been advocated. Ipsilateral tonsillectomy, direct laryn-
goscopy with base of tongue and pyriform biopsy specimens, 
examination of the nasopharynx, and bimanual examination 
can allow for identification of a primary site in a portion of 
Angle of 
mandible
Ohngren's
line
Maxillary
sinus
Medial canthus
Figure 18-36.  Example of the Ohngren’s line and the relationship 
to the maxilla.
patients previously considered to have an unknown primary. 
In those individuals in whom a primary site cannot be ascer-
tained, empiric treatment of the mucosal sources of the upper 
aerodigestive tract at risk (from nasopharynx to hypopharynx) 
and the cervical lymphatics with concomitant chemoradiation 
is advocated. For patients with advanced neck disease (N2a or 
greater) or with persistent lymphadenopathy after radiation, a 
postradiation neck dissection may be necessary. For patients in 
whom the primary lesion is identified, a more limited radiation 
treatment field may be used.
Nose and Paranasal Sinuses
The nose and paranasal sinuses are the sites of a great deal of 
infectious and inflammatory pathology. The diagnosis of tumors 
within this region is frequently made after a patient has been 
unsuccessfully treated for recurrent sinusitis and undergoes 
diagnostic imaging. Symptoms associated with sinonasal tumors 
are subtle and insidious. They include chronic nasal obstruc-
tion, facial pain, headache, epistaxis, and facial numbness. As 
such, tumors of the paranasal sinuses frequently present at an 
advanced stage. Orbital invasion can result in proptosis, diplo-
pia, epiphora, and vision loss. Paresthesia within the distribution 
of CN V2 is suggestive of pterygopalatine fossa or skull base 
invasion and is generally a poor prognostic factor. Maxillary 
sinus tumors can present with loose dentition indicating erosion 
of the alveolar and/or palatal bones. Tumors found to arise pos-
terior to Ohngren’s line are associated with a worse prognosis 
than are more anteriorly based lesions (Fig. 18-36).70
A variety of benign tumors arise in the nasal cavity and 
paranasal sinuses and include inverted papillomas, heman-
giomas, hemangiopericytomas, angiofibromas, minor salivary 
tumors, and benign fibrous histiocytomas. Fibro-osseous and 
osseous lesions, such as fibrous dysplasias, ossifying fibromas, 
osteomas, and myxomas, can also arise in this region. Addition-
ally, herniation of intracranial contents into the nasal cavity can 
593
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
occur with the erosion of the anterior skull base with the resul-
tant presentation of a sinonasal mass on clinical examination.
Malignant tumors of the sinuses are predominantly squa-
mous cell carcinomas. Sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma,71 
adenocarcinoma, mucosal melanoma, lymphoma, olfactory neu-
roblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and angiosarcoma are some 
of the other malignancies that have been described. Metasta-
ses from the kidney, breast, lung, and thyroid may also present 
as an intranasal mass. Regional metastasis is uncommon with 
tumors of the paranasal sinuses (14%–16%) and occurs in the 
parapharyngeal, retropharyngeal, and subdigastric nodes of the 
jugular chain.
The diagnosis of an intranasal mass is made with the assis-
tance of a headlight and nasal speculum or nasal endoscopy. 
The site of origin, involved bony structures, and the presence of 
vascularity should be assessed. For paranasal sinus tumors, MRI 
and CT scanning often are complementary studies in determin-
ing orbital and intracranial extension.72 Benign processes fre-
quently present as slow-growing expansile tumors with limited 
erosion of surrounding bone, compared to the lytic destruction 
typically associated with malignancies. Skull base foramen 
should be closely examined for enlargement that may be sug-
gestive of perineural invasion. Examination for cavernous sinus 
extension, cribriform plate erosion, and dural enhancement is 
necessary to assess for resectability and the type of ­surgical 
approach that is possible. A meningocele or encephalocele 
will present as a unilateral pulsatile mass. Biopsy of a unilat-
eral nasal mass should be deferred until imaging studies are 
obtained. An untimely biopsy specimen can result in a CSF leak. 
If hypervascularity is suspected, biopsy should be performed 
under controlled conditions in the operating room.
The standard treatment for malignant tumors of the para-
nasal sinuses is surgical resection with postoperative radiation 
therapy. Tumors arising along the medial wall of the maxil-
lary sinus may be treated by means of a medial maxillectomy. 
The treatment of advanced tumors of the paranasal sinuses 
frequently involves a multispecialty approach. Members of 
this team include the head and neck surgeon, neurosurgeon, 
prosthodontist, ophthalmologist, and reconstructive surgeon. 
Each team member is necessary to facilitate the goal of safe 
and complete tumor removal. For vascular tumors, preoperative 
embolization performed within 24 hours of the planned surgical 
resection may reduce intraoperative hemorrhage.
Prognosis is dependent on tumor location and extension to 
the surrounding anatomy. Infrastructure maxillectomy, which 
includes removal of the hard palate and the lower maxillary 
sinus, is necessary for inferiorly based tumors of the maxillary 
sinus. For tumors in the upper portion of the maxillary sinus, 
complete maxillectomy (including removal of the orbital floor) 
is performed. If there is invasion of the orbital fat, exenteration 
of the orbital contents is required. Removal of the bony floor of 
the orbit and preservation of the globe are possible where there 
is absence of invasion through the orbital periosteum. However, 
reconstruction of the orbital floor to recreate a stable support for 
the orbital contents is essential. Removal of anterior cheek skin 
is indicated when there is tumor extension into the overlying 
subcutaneous fat and dermis.
For tumors involving the ethmoid sinuses, the integrity of 
the cribriform plate is assessed with preoperative imaging. Com-
plete sphenoethmoidectomy or medial maxillectomy may suffice 
if the tumor is localized to the lateral nasal wall. Endoscopic 
resection with the assistance of image-guidance technology is 
gaining increasing acceptance for low-grade resectable lesions 
such as inverted papilloma.
If erosion of the cribriform has occurred, an anterior 
craniofacial resection is the standard operative approach. 
The head and neck surgeon and neurosurgeon work in con-
cert to perform this procedure. The neurosurgeon performs a 
frontal craniotomy for exposure of the anterior cranial fossa 
floor, whereas the head and neck surgeon proceeds through a 
transfacial or endoscopic approach to resect the inferior bony 
attachments. Paranasal sinus malignancies that are deemed 
unresectable are those with bilateral optic nerve involvement, 
massive brain invasion, or carotid encasement.73 Postopera-
tive rehabilitation after orbital exenteration is accomplished 
by soft-tissue reconstruction and placement of a maxillofacial 
prosthesis. Combined treatment with surgery and postopera-
tive radiotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the sinuses 
results in survival superior to either radiation or surgery alone. 
Chemotherapy has a limited application and may be used for 
specific indications. Rhabdomyosarcoma is primarily treated 
with chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy. Surgery is 
reserved for persistent disease after chemoradiation. Sinonasal 
undifferentiated carcinoma is highly aggressive and typically 
is not adequately controlled with standard therapy. Chemo-
therapy in this setting may help to reduce the tumor bulk and 
allow for orbital preservation.
Nasopharynx
The nasopharynx extends in a plane superior to the hard palate 
from the choana, to the posterior nasal cavity, to the posterior 
pharyngeal wall. It includes the fossa of Rosenmüller, the Eusta-
chian tube orifices (torus tubarius), and the site of the adenoid 
pad. Tumors arising in the nasopharynx are usually of squamous 
cell origin and range from lymphoepithelioma to well-differ-
entiated carcinoma. However, the differential diagnosis for 
nasopharyngeal tumors is broad and also includes lymphoma, 
chordoma, chondroma, nasopharyngeal cyst (Tornwaldt’s cyst), 
angiofibroma, minor salivary gland tumor, paraganglioma, rhab-
domyosarcoma, extramedullary plasmacytoma, and sarcoma.
Risk factors for nasopharyngeal carcinoma include area 
of habitation, ethnicity, and tobacco use. There is an increased 
incidence of nasopharyngeal cancer in southern China, Africa, 
Alaska, and in Greenland Eskimos. A strong correlation exists 
between nasopharyngeal cancer and the presence of EBV infec-
tion, such that EBV titers may be used as a means to follow a 
patient’s response to treatment.
Symptoms associated with nasopharyngeal tumors include 
nasal obstruction, posterior (level V) neck mass, epistaxis, head-
ache, serous otitis media with hearing loss, and otalgia. Cra-
nial nerve involvement is indicative of skull base extension and 
advanced disease. Lymphatic spread occurs to the posterior 
cervical, upper jugular, and retropharyngeal nodes. Bilateral 
regional metastatic spread is common. Distant metastasis is 
present in 5% of patients at presentation.
Examination of the nasopharynx is facilitated by the use 
of the flexible or rigid fiber-optic endoscope. Evaluation with 
imaging studies is important for staging and treatment planning. 
CT with contrast is used for determining bone destruction, while 
MRI is used to assess for intracranial and soft-tissue extension. 
Erosion or enlargement of neural foramina (on CT imaging) or 
enhancement of cranial nerves (on MRI) is indicative of perineu-
ral spread of disease and portends a worse prognosis. The status 
of the cavernous sinus and optic chiasm should also be assessed. 
594
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The standard treatment for nasopharyngeal carcinoma is chemo-
radiation. Combination therapy produces superior survival 
rates for nasopharyngeal carcinoma in comparison to radiation 
alone.74 Intracavitary radiation boost with implants to the tumor 
may be included as an adjunct to external beam radiotherapy to 
improve local control of advanced tumors. Surgical treatment 
for nasopharyngeal carcinoma is rarely feasible, but may be 
considered in selected cases as salvage therapy for patients with 
localized recurrences.
For minor salivary gland and low-grade tumors of the naso-
pharynx, resection can be performed via a variety of approaches. 
Lateral rhinotomy or midface degloving approaches can provide 
good access for removal of tumors in the posterior nasal cav-
ity extending into the nasopharynx. Endoscopic removal is also 
possible in selected cases. A variety of surgical approaches also 
exist for more posteriorly located tumors extending to the sphe-
noid and clivus. Transpalatal approaches used in combination 
with transmaxillary and transcervical routes can provide good 
surgical access in addition to providing adequate control of the 
carotid artery. The emergence of endoscopic techniques has pro-
vided a significant advancement in the surgical management of 
lesions in these two sites.
Ear and Temporal Bone
Tumors of the ear and temporal bone are uncommon and 
account for less than 1% of all head and neck malignancies. 
Primary sites include the external ear (pinna), EAC, middle 
ear, mastoid, or petrous portion of the temporal bone. The most 
common histology is squamous cell carcinoma. Minor salivary 
gland tumors, including adenoid cystic carcinoma and adeno-
carcinoma, may also present in this region. The pinna, because 
of its exposure to ultraviolet light, is a common site for basal 
cell and squamous cell carcinoma to arise. Direct extension of 
tumors from the parotid gland and periauricular skin may occur 
in this region. Metastases from distant sites occur primarily to 
the petrous bone and arise in the breast, kidney, lung, and pros-
tate. In the pediatric population, tumors of the temporal bone 
are most commonly soft-tissue sarcomas. For advanced stage 
tumors with extensive temporal bone extension, the complex 
anatomy of the temporal bone makes removal of tumors with 
functional preservation challenging.
The diagnosis of tumors of the ear and temporal bone 
is frequently delayed because the initial presentation of these 
patients is mistaken for benign infectious disease. When patients 
fail to improve with conservative care and symptoms evolve to 
potentially include facial nerve paralysis or worsening hearing 
loss, the need for imaging and biopsy become obvious. Granu-
lation tissue in the EAC or middle ear should be biopsied in 
patients with atypical presentations or histories consistent with 
chronic otologic disease.75The complexity of the temporal bone 
anatomy makes the use of imaging studies of paramount impor-
tance in the staging and treatment of tumors in this region.
Small skin cancers on the helix of the ear can be readily 
treated with simple excision and primary closure. Mohs’ micro-
surgery with frozen section margin control also can be used 
for cancer of the external ear. In lesions that are recurrent or 
invade the underlying perichondrium and cartilage, rapid spread 
through tissue planes can occur. Tumors may extend from the 
cartilaginous external canal to the bony canal and invade the 
parotid, temporomandibular joint, and skull base. For extensive, 
pinna-based lesions, procedures such as auriculectomy may 
be required. Postoperative radiation therapy may be required for 
Subtotal temporal
bone resection
Total temporal
bone resection
Lateral
temporal
bone resection
Figure 18-37.  Examples of resection specimens for lateral tem-
poral bone resection, subtotal temporal bone resection, and total 
temporal bone resection.
advanced skin cancer with positive margins, perineural spread, 
or multiple involved lymph nodes.
Tumors involving the EAC and middle ear may present 
with persistent otorrhea, otalgia, EAC or periauricular mass, 
hearing loss, and facial nerve weakness or paralysis. The patient 
resembles the presentation of an external otitis unresponsive to 
standard medical therapy. Sleeve resections are reserved for 
small superficial tumors involving the cartilaginous external 
canal. Tumors involving the petrous apex or intracranial struc-
tures may present with headache and palsies of CN V and VI. 
The optimal treatment for tumors of the middle ear and bony 
external canal is en bloc resection followed by radiation therapy. 
Management of the regional lymphatics is determined by the 
site and stage of the tumor at presentation. Temporal bone resec-
tions are classified as lateral or subtotal (Fig. 18-37). The lat-
eral temporal bone resection removes the bony and cartilaginous 
canal, tympanic membrane, and ossicles. The subtotal temporal 
bone resection includes the removal of the ear canal, middle ear, 
inner ear, and facial nerve. It is indicated for malignant tumors 
extending into the middle ear.
Postoperative radiation therapy in the treatment of malig-
nancies of the temporal bone usually is indicated and improves 
local control over surgery alone. Five-year survival rates are 
approximately 50% for patients with tumors confined to the 
external canal and decrease with medial tumor extension. Prog-
nosis is poor when tumor involves the petrous apex.76
The purpose of reconstruction after temporal bone resec-
tion is to provide vascularized tissue and bulk to the site of 
resection. Prevention of CSF leak by watertight dural closure 
and prevention of meningitis are important goals of repair. 
Additionally, the reconstruction enables protection of vascular 
structures and the surrounding bone to prepare the patient for 
postoperative radiation therapy. Commonly used reconstruc-
tion methods are regional pedicle myocutaneous flaps (e.g., 
595
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
pectoralis major) and free flaps (e.g., rectus abdominis, radial 
forearm, or latissimus dorsi). The loss of the pinna produces 
significant external deformity; however, a prosthetic ear may 
produce acceptable rehabilitation. When the facial nerve is sac-
rificed, rehabilitation is necessary and includes the use of inter-
position nerve grafts, hypoglossal to facial nerve anastomosis, 
and static or dynamic sling techniques. In patients with poor eye 
closure, taping of the eyelids and the liberal use of eye lubrica-
tion can prevent exposure keratitis. Additionally, tarsorrhaphy, 
lid-shortening procedures, and the use of gold weight implants 
can provide upper eyelid closure and protect the cornea.
Neck
The diagnostic evaluation of a neck mass requires a planned 
approach that does not compromise the effectiveness of future 
treatment options. A neck mass in a 50-year-old smoker/drinker 
with a synchronous oral ulcer is different from cystic neck mass 
in an 18-year-old that enlarges with an upper respiratory infec-
tion. As with all diagnoses, a complete history with full head 
and neck exam, including flexible laryngoscopy, are critical to 
complete evaluation. The differential diagnosis of a neck mass 
is dependent on its location and the patient’s age. In children, 
most neck masses are inflammatory or congenital. However, 
in the adult population, a neck mass >2 cm in diameter has a 
>80% probability of being malignant. Once the physician has 
developed a differential diagnosis, interventions to confirm or 
dispute diagnoses are initiated. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA), 
with or without the assistance of ultrasound or CT guidance, 
can provide valuable information for early treatment planning. 
The use of imaging (CT and/or MRI) is dictated by the patient’s 
clinical presentation. Imaging enables the physician to evalu-
ate the anatomic relationships of the mass to the surrounding 
anatomy of the neck and sharpen the differential. A cystic lesion 
may represent benign pathology such as a branchial cleft cyst; 
however, it may also represent a regional metastasis of a tonsil/
base of tongue squamous cell carcinoma or a papillary thyroid 
carcinoma. In this circumstance, evaluation of these potential 
primary sites can alter the planned operative intervention.
If a variety of diagnoses are still being entertained after 
FNA and imaging, an open biopsy may be necessary. For 
patients with the potential diagnosis of lymphoma, a biopsy sac-
rificing normal anatomical structures is not necessary. Ensuring 
appropriate processing of biopsied materials, sent in saline or in 
formalin, and sparing undue trauma to tissues can decrease the 
need for re-biopsy. Appropriate placement of the incision for an 
open biopsy should be considered if the need for neck dissection 
or composite resection is later required.
Patterns of Lymph Node Metastasis.  The regional lym-
phatic drainage of the neck is divided into seven levels. These 
levels allow for a standardized format for radiologists, surgeons, 
pathologists, and radiation oncologists to communicate con-
cerning specific sites within the neck (Fig. 18-38). The levels 
are defined as the following:
	 	 Level I—the submental and submandibular nodes
	 	 Level Ia—the submental nodes; medial to the anterior belly 
of the digastric muscle bilaterally, symphysis of mandible 
superiorly, and hyoid inferiorly
	 	 Level Ib—the submandibular nodes and gland; posterior to 
the anterior belly of digastric, anterior to the posterior belly 
of digastric, and inferior to the body of the mandible
	 	 Level II—upper jugular chain nodes
I
II
III
VI
IV
V
Figure 18-38.  Levels of the neck denoting lymph node bearing 
regions.
	 	 Level IIa—jugulodigastric nodes; deep to sternocleidomas-
toid (SCM) muscle, anterior to the posterior border of the 
muscle, posterior to the posterior aspect of the posterior 
belly of digastric, superior to the level of the hyoid, inferior 
to spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)
	 	 Level IIb—submuscular recess; superior to spinal acces-
sory nerve to the level of the skull base
	 	 Level III—middle jugular chain nodes; inferior to the 
hyoid, superior to the level of the cricoid, deep to SCM 
muscle from posterior border of the muscle to the strap 
muscles medially
	 	 Level IV—lower jugular chain nodes; inferior to the level 
of the cricoid, superior to the clavicle, deep to SCM muscle 
from posterior border of the muscle to the strap muscles 
medially
	 	 Level V—posterior triangle nodes
	 	 Level Va—lateral to the posterior aspect of the SCM mus-
cle, inferior and medial to splenius capitis and trapezius, 
superior to the spinal accessory nerve
	 	 Level Vb—lateral to the posterior aspect of SCM muscle, 
medial to trapezius, inferior to the spinal accessory nerve, 
superior to the clavicle
	 	 Level VI—anterior compartment nodes; inferior to the 
hyoid, superior to suprasternal notch, medial to the lateral 
extent of the strap muscles bilaterally
	 	 Level VII—paratracheal nodes; inferior to the suprasternal 
notch in the upper mediastinum
Patterns of spread from primary tumor sites in the head and 
neck to cervical lymphatics are well described.77 The location 
and incidence of metastasis vary according to the primary site. 
Primary tumors within the oral cavity and lip metastasize to the 
nodes in levels I, II, and III. Skip metastases may occur with oral 
tongue cancers such that involvement of nodes in level III or IV 
may occur without involvement of higher echelon nodes (levels I 
& II). Tumors arising in the oropharynx, hypopharynx, and lar-
ynx most commonly spread to the lymph nodes of the lateral 
neck in levels II, III, and IV. Isolated level V lymphadenopathy 
596
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is uncommon with oral cavity, pharyngeal, and laryngeal pri-
maries. Malignancies of the nasopharynx and thyroid com-
monly spread to level V nodes in addition to the jugular chain 
nodes. Retropharyngeal lymph nodes are sites for metastasis 
from tumors of the nasopharynx, soft palate, and lateral and 
posterior walls of the oropharynx and hypopharynx. Tumors 
of the hypopharynx, cervical esophagus, and thyroid frequently 
involve the paratracheal nodal compartment, and may extend to 
the lymphatics in the upper mediastinum (level VII). The del-
phian node, a pretracheal lymph node, may become involved by 
advanced tumors of the glottis with subglottic spread.
The philosophy for the treatment of the cervical lymphat-
ics in head and neck cancer has evolved significantly since the 
mid-1970s. The presence of cervical metastasis decreases the 
5-year survival rate in patients with upper aerodigestive malig-
nancies by approximately 50%. As such, adequate treatment of 
the N0 and N+ neck in these patients has always been viewed 
as a priority in an effort to increase disease-free survival rates. 
Traditionally, the gold standard for control of cervical metasta-
sis has been the radical neck dissection (RND) first described 
by Crile. The classic RND removes levels I to V of the cervical 
lymphatics in addition to the SCM, internal jugular vein, and 
the spinal accessory nerve (CN XI). Any modification of the 
RND that preserves nonlymphatic structures (i.e., CN XI, SCM 
muscle, or internal jugular vein) is defined as a modified radi-
cal neck dissection (MRND). A neck dissection that preserves 
lymphatic compartments normally removed as part of a clas-
sic RND is termed a selective neck dissection (SND). Bocca 
and colleagues demonstrated that the MRND, or “functional 
neck dissection,” was equally effective in controlling regional 
metastasis as the RND, in addition to noting that the functional 
results in patients were superior.78 With outcome data support-
ing the use of SND and MRND, these procedures have become 
the preferred alternative for the treatment of cervical metastases 
when indicated.79,80
SND options have become increasingly popular given the 
benefits of improved shoulder function and cosmetic impact 
on neck contour compared to MRND. The principle behind 
preservation of certain nodal groups is that specific primary 
sites preferentially drain their lymphatics in a predictable pat-
tern. Types of SND include the supraomohyoid neck dissec-
tion, the lateral neck dissection, and the posterolateral neck 
dissection.81­ The supraomohyoid dissection, typically used with 
oral ­cavity malignancies, removes lymph nodes in levels I to III ­ 
(­Fig. 18-39). The lateral neck dissection, frequently used for laryn-
geal malignancies, removes those nodes in levels II through IV 
(Fig. 18-40). The posterolateral neck dissection, used with thy-
roid cancer, removes the lymphatics in levels II to V (Fig. 18-41). 
In the clinically negative neck (N0), if the risk for occult metas-
tasis is >20%, elective treatment of the nodes at risk is generally 
advocated. This may be in the form of elective neck irradiation 
or elective neck dissection. An additional role of SND is as a 
staging tool to determine the need for postoperative radiation 
therapy. Regional control after selective dissection has been 
shown to be as effective for controlling regional disease as the 
MRND in the N0 patient. Awareness of the potential for “skip 
metastases,” in particular with lateral oral tongue lesions, may 
require extension of a standard SND to include additional lev-
els for selected lesions.82 The treatment option selected for the 
primary site cancer is a significant factor in determining which 
therapeutic modality will be selected for the treatment of the 
regional lymphatics.
Figure 18-39.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a 
supraomohyoid neck dissection.
Figure 18-40.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a 
lateral neck dissection.
For clinically N+ necks, frequently the surgical treat-
ment of choice is the MRND or RND. SND options have been 
advocated by some authors for treatment of limited N1 disease, 
however, they do not have a role in the treatment of advanced 
N stage disease. When extracapsular spread, perineural invasion, 
597
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
vascular invasion, and the presence of multiple involved lymph 
nodes are noted, surgical management of the neck alone is not 
adequate.83 Adjuvant radiation therapy, and possibly chemora-
diation, is indicated in these cases.
A planned postradiation neck dissection for patients 
undergoing radiation as a primary therapy is another indication 
for the use of neck dissection. In patients with existing advanced 
N stage disease (N2a or greater) or in patients with a partial 
response in the neck to therapy, neck dissection is performed 
6 to 8 weeks after completion of radiation.
Regional metastases that encase the carotid artery or that 
demonstrate fixation of nodes to surrounding structures (e.g., 
prevertebral muscles) decrease 5-year survival rates signifi-
cantly, to the range of 15% to 22%. The associated morbidity 
is high with procedures involving carotid resection (e.g., cere-
brovascular accident and death) and must be weighed carefully 
when deciding if surgery is to be pursued. Surgically debulking 
metastatic disease does not improve survival and is not advo-
cated. Recurrent neck metastasis after comprehensive neck dis-
section or radiation is associated with very poor survival.
Parapharyngeal Space Masses.  The parapharyngeal space 
is a potential space, shaped like an inverted pyramid spanning 
the skull base to the hyoid. The boundaries of the space are 
separated by the styloid process and its associated fascial attach-
ments into the “prestyloid” and “poststyloid” compartments.84 
The contents of the prestyloid space are the parotid, fat, and 
lymph nodes. The poststyloid compartment is composed of 
CN’s IX to XII, the carotid space contents, cervical sympathetic 
chain, fat, and lymph nodes. Tumors in this space can produce 
displacement of the lateral pharyngeal wall medially into the 
oropharynx (Fig. 18-42), dysphagia, cranial nerve dysfunction, 
Horner’s syndrome, or vascular compression.
Figure 18-41.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a 
posterolateral neck dissection.
Of the masses found in the parapharyngeal space, 40% to 
50% of the tumors are of salivary gland origin. Tumors of neu-
rogenic origin such as paragangliomas (glomus vagale, carotid 
body tumor), schwannomas, and neurofibromas are responsible 
for 20% to 25% of parapharyngeal masses. Lymph node metas-
tases and primary lymphoma represent 15% of lesions. With 
this in mind, when reviewing preoperative imaging, one can 
assume that tumors arising anterior to the styloid process are 
most likely of salivary gland origin, whereas those of the post-
styloid compartment are vascular or neurogenic. This is helpful 
in that angiography is not as necessary for prestyloid lesions as 
it may be for vascular poststyloid tumors. If a paraganglioma is 
suspected, a 24-hour urinary catecholamine collection should 
be obtained to allow for optimal premedication for patients with 
functional tumors. Embolization may be considered for vascular 
tumors before surgery in an attempt to decrease intraoperative 
blood loss.
Surgical access to these tumors may require a trans-
mandibular and/or lateral cervical approach. It is inadvisable 
to approach parapharyngeal space tumors transorally without 
Parotid
gland
Stylomandibular
ligament
Figure 18-42.  Parapharyngeal mass—prestyloid with prominent 
oropharyngeal presentation typical of a dumbbell tumor.
598
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­having the necessary exposure and control of the associated vas-
culature that is afforded by these approaches. Some tumors of 
the parapharyngeal space (e.g., dumbbell tumors of deep parotid 
origin) are amenable to removal by a combined transparotid and 
transcervical approach while allowing for dissection and dis-
placement of the facial nerve to assist removal of tumor.
Benign Neck Masses.  A number of benign masses of the 
neck occur that require surgical management. Many of these 
masses are seen in the pediatric population. The differen-
tial diagnosis includes thyroglossal duct cyst, branchial cleft 
cyst, lymphangioma (cystic hygroma), hemangioma, and der-
moid cyst.
Thyroglossal duct cysts represent the vestigial remainder 
of the tract of the descending thyroid gland from the foramen 
cecum, at the tongue base, into the lower anterior neck dur-
ing fetal development. They present as a midline or paramedian 
cystic mass adjacent to the hyoid bone. After an upper respira-
tory infection, the cyst may enlarge or become infected. Surgi-
cal management of a thyroglossal duct cyst requires removal 
of the cyst, the tract, and the central portion of the hyoid bone 
(Sistrunk procedure), as well as a portion of the tongue base up 
to the foramen cecum. Before excision of a thyroglossal duct 
cyst, an imaging study such as ultrasound is performed to iden-
tify if normal thyroid tissue exists in the lower neck, and lab 
assay is performed to assess if the patient is euthyroid.
Congenital branchial cleft remnants are derived from 
the branchial cleft apparatus that persists after fetal develop-
ment. There are several types, numbered according to their cor-
responding embryologic branchial cleft. First branchial cleft 
cysts and sinuses are associated intimately with the EAC and the 
parotid gland. Second and third branchial cleft cysts are found 
along the anterior border of the SCM muscle and can produce 
drainage via a sinus tract to the neck skin (Fig. 18-43). Second-
ary infections can occur, producing enlargement, cellulitis, and 
neck abscess that requires operative drainage. The removal of 
Figure 18-43.  CT scan demonstrating a branchial cleft cyst with operative specimen.
branchial cleft cysts and fistula requires removal of the fistula 
tract to the point of origin to decrease the risk of recurrence. 
The second branchial cleft remnant tract courses between the 
internal and external carotid arteries and proceeds into the ton-
sillar fossa. The third branchial cleft remnant courses posterior 
to the common carotid artery, ending in the pyriform sinus 
region. Cystic metastasis from squamous cell carcinoma of the 
tonsil or tongue base to a cervical lymph node can be confused 
for a branchial cleft cyst in an otherwise asymptomatic patient. 
Dermoid cysts tend to present as midline masses and represent 
trapped epithelium originating from the embryonic closure of 
the midline.
Lymphatic malformations such as lymphangiomas and 
cystic hygromas can be difficult management problems. They 
typically present as mobile, fluid-filled masses. Because of their 
predisposition to track extensively into the surrounding soft tis-
sues, complete removal of these lesions can be challenging. 
Recurrence and re-growth occur with incomplete removal. Cos-
metic deformity and/or nerve injury can result when extensive 
surgical dissection is performed for large lesions. In newborns 
and infants, there is higher associated morbidity when cystic 
hygromas and lymphangiomas become massive, require trache-
ostomy, and involve the deep neck and mediastinum.
Deep Neck Fascial Planes.  The fascial planes of the neck 
provide boundaries that are clinically applicable because they 
determine the pathway of spread of an infection. The deep cervi-
cal fascia is composed of three layers. These are the investing 
(superficial deep), pretracheal, and the prevertebral fascias. The 
superficial layer of the deep cervical fascia forms a cone around 
the neck and spans from skull base and mandible to the clavicle 
and manubrium. This layer surrounds the SCM muscle and cov-
ers the anterior and posterior triangles of the neck. The pre-
tracheal fascia is found within the anterior compartment, deep 
to the strap muscles and surrounds the thyroid gland, trachea, 
and esophagus. This fascia blends laterally to the carotid sheath. 
599
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
Infections in this region may track along the trachea or esopha-
gus into the mediastinum. The prevertebral fascia extends from 
the skull base to the thoracic vertebra and covers the prever-
tebral musculature and cervical spine. If an infection were to 
communicate anteriorly through the prevertebral fascia, it would 
enter the retropharyngeal space. Infectious extension into this 
space is complicated by the fact that this region, located 
posterior to the buccopharyngeal fascia, extends from the 
skull base to the mediastinum.
Salivary Gland Tumors
Tumors of the salivary gland are relatively uncommon and repre-
sent less than 2% of all head and neck neoplasms. The major sali-
vary glands are the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. 
Minor salivary glands are found throughout the submucosa of the 
upper aerodigestive tract with the highest density found within 
the palate. About 85% of salivary gland neoplasms arise within 
the parotid gland (Fig. 18-44). The majority of these neoplasms 
are benign, with the most common histology being pleomorphic 
adenoma (benign mixed tumor). In contrast, approximately 50% 
of tumors arising in the submandibular and sublingual glands are 
malignant. Tumors arising from minor salivary gland tissue carry 
an even higher risk for malignancy (75%).
Salivary gland tumors are usually slow growing and 
well circumscribed. Patients with a mass and findings of rapid 
growth, pain, paresthesias, and facial nerve weakness are at 
increased risk of harboring a malignancy. The facial nerve, 
which separates the superficial and deep lobes of the parotid, 
may be directly involved by tumors in 10% to 15% of patients. 
Additional findings ominous for malignancy include skin inva-
sion and fixation to the mastoid tip. Trismus suggests invasion 
of the masseter or pterygoid muscles.85
Submandibular and sublingual gland tumors present as a 
neck mass or floor of mouth swelling, respectively. Malignant 
tumors of the sublingual or submandibular gland may invade the 
lingual or hypoglossal nerves, causing paresthesias or paralysis.86 
Bimanual examination is important for determining the size of the 
Facial n.
Anterior facial v.
Temporal
branches
Posterior belly
of digastric m.
Cervical
branch
Masseter m.
Zygomatic branch
Parotid duct
Buccal
branch
Mandibular
branch
Figure 18-44.  Example of a tumor in the parotid with the pattern 
of the facial nerve and associated anatomy. m. = muscle; n. = nerve; 
v. = vein.
tumor and possible fixation to the mandible or involvement of the 
tongue.
Minor salivary gland tumors present as painless submu-
cosal masses and are most frequently seen at the junction of the 
hard and soft palate. Minor salivary gland tumors arising in the 
prestyloid parapharyngeal space may produce medial displace-
ment of the lateral oropharyngeal wall and tonsil.
The incidence of metastatic spread to cervical lymphatics 
is variable and depends on the histology, primary site, and stage 
of the tumor. Parotid gland malignancies can metastasize to the 
intra- and periglandular nodes. The next echelon of lymphat-
ics for the parotid is the upper jugular nodal chain. Although 
the risk of lymphatic metastasis is low for most salivary gland 
malignancies, lesions that are considered high grade or that 
demonstrate perineural invasion have a higher propensity for 
regional spread. Tumors arising in patients of advanced age 
also tend to have more aggressive behavior. Initial nodal drain-
age for the submandibular gland is the level Ia and Ib lymph 
nodes and submental nodes followed by the upper and midjug-
ular nodes. Extraglandular extension of tumor and lymph node 
metastases are adverse prognostic factors for submandibular 
gland tumors.
Diagnostic imaging is standard for the evaluation of sali-
vary gland tumors. MRI is the most sensitive study to determine 
soft-tissue extension and involvement of adjacent structures. 
Unfortunately, imaging studies lack the specificity for differen-
tiating benign and malignant neoplasms. Diagnosis of salivary 
gland tumors is frequently aided by the use of FNA. In the hands 
of an experienced cytologist familiar with salivary gland pathol-
ogy, FNA can provide an accurate preoperative diagnosis in 70% 
to 80% of cases. This can help the operative surgeon with treat-
ment planning and patient counseling, but should be viewed in 
the context that a more extensive procedure may be ultimately 
required. The final histopathologic diagnosis is confirmed by 
surgical excision.
Benign and malignant tumors of the salivary glands are 
divided into epithelial, nonepithelial, and metastatic neoplasms. 
Benign epithelial tumors include pleomorphic adenoma (80%), 
monomorphic adenoma, Warthin’s tumor, oncocytoma, or 
sebaceous neoplasm. Nonepithelial benign lesions include 
hemangioma, neural sheath tumor, and lipoma. Treatment of 
benign neoplasms is surgical excision of the affected gland or, 
in the case of the parotid, excision of the superficial lobe with 
facial nerve dissection and preservation. The minimal surgical 
procedure for neoplasms of the parotid is superficial paroti-
dectomy with preservation of the facial nerve. Enucleation 
of the tumor mass is not recommended because of the risk of 
incomplete excision and tumor spillage. Tumor spillage of a 
pleomorphic adenoma during removal can lead to problematic 
recurrences.
Malignant epithelial tumors range in aggressiveness from 
low to high grade. Their behavior depends on tumor histology, 
degree of invasiveness, and the presence of regional metastasis. 
The most common malignant epithelial neoplasm of the salivary 
glands is mucoepidermoid carcinoma. The low-grade mucoepi-
dermoid carcinoma is composed of largely mucin-secreting 
cells, whereas in high-grade tumors, the epidermoid cells pre-
dominate. High-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas resemble 
nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma in their histologic 
features and clinical behavior. Adenoid cystic carcinoma, which 
has a propensity for neural invasion, is the second most common 
malignancy in adults. Skip lesions along nerves are common 
6
600
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and can lead to treatment failures because of the difficulty in 
treating the full extent of invasion. Adenoid cystic carcinomas 
have a high incidence of distant metastasis, but display indolent 
growth. It is not uncommon for patients to experience lengthy 
survival despite the presence of disseminated disease. The most 
common malignancies in the pediatric population are muco-
epidermoid carcinoma and acinic cell carcinoma. For minor 
salivary glands, the most common malignancies are adenoid 
cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and low-grade 
polymorphous adenocarcinoma. Carcinoma ex pleomorphic 
adenoma is an aggressive malignancy that arises from a preex-
isting benign mixed tumor.
The primary treatment of salivary malignancies is surgi-
cal excision. In this setting, basic surgical principles include the 
en bloc removal of the involved gland with preservation of all 
nerves unless directly invaded by tumor. For parotid tumors that 
arise in the lateral lobe, superficial parotidectomy with preserva-
tion of CN VII is indicated. If the tumor extends into the deep 
lobe of the parotid, a total parotidectomy with nerve preserva-
tion is performed. Although malignant tumors may about the 
facial nerve, if a plane of dissection can be developed without 
leaving gross tumor, it is preferable to preserve the nerve. If 
the nerve is encased by tumor (or is noted to be nonfunctional 
preoperatively) and preservation would result leaving gross 
residual disease, nerve sacrifice should be considered.
The removal of submandibular malignancies includes en 
bloc resection of the gland and submental and submandibular 
lymph nodes. Radical resection is indicated with tumors that 
invade the mandible, tongue, or floor of mouth. Therapeutic 
removal of the regional lymphatics is indicated for clinical ade-
nopathy or when the risk of occult regional metastasis exceeds 
20%. High-grade mucoepidermoid carcinomas, for example, 
have a high risk of regional disease and require elective treat-
ment of the regional lymphatics. When gross nerve invasion is 
found (lingual or hypoglossal), sacrifice of the nerve is indicated 
with retrograde frozen section biopsy specimens to determine 
the extent of involvement. If the nerve is invaded at the level 
of the skull base foramina, a surgical clip may be left in place 
to mark the area for inclusion in postoperative radiation fields. 
The presence of skip metastases in the nerve with adenoid cystic 
carcinoma makes recurrence common with this pathology.
Postoperative radiation treatment plays an important role 
in the treatment of salivary malignancies. The presence of 
extraglandular disease, perineural invasion, direct invasion of 
regional structures, regional metastasis, and high-grade histol-
ogy are all indications for radiation treatment.
RECONSTRUCTION IN HEAD AND NECK SURGERY
Defects of soft tissue and bony anatomy of the head and neck 
can occur after oncologic resection. Tumor surgery frequently 
necessitates removal of structures related to speech and swal-
lowing. Loss of sensation and motor function can produce 
dysphagia through impairment of food bolus formation, 
manipulation, and propulsion. Removal of laryngeal, tongue 
base, and hypopharyngeal tumors can lead to impairment in 
airway protective reflexes and predispose to aspiration. Cos-
metic deformities that result from surgery can also significantly 
impact the quality of life of a patient. Current surgical 
management of head and neck tumors requires restora-
tion of form and function through application of contemporary 
reconstruction techniques.
Basic principles of reconstruction include attempting to 
replace resected tissue components (bone, skin, soft tissue) 
with tissue with similar qualities. However, restoring a patient’s 
functional capacity does not always require strict observation of 
this rule. The head and neck reconstructive surgeon must con-
sider a patient’s preoperative comorbidities and anatomy when 
constructing a care plan.
A stepladder analogy has been used to describe the escala-
tion in complexity of reconstructive options in the repair of head 
and neck defects. It is important to remember that the most com-
plex procedure is not always the most appropriate. Progression 
for closure by secondary intention, primary closure, skin grafts, 
local flaps, regional flaps, and free-tissue transfer flaps (free 
flaps) run the gamut of options available. The most appropriate 
reconstructive technique used is based on the medical condition 
of the patient, the location and size of the defect to be repaired, 
and the functional impairment associated with the defect.
Small defects of the skin of the medial canthus, scalp, and 
nose may be allowed to heal by secondary intention with excel-
lent cosmetic and functional results. When considering primary 
closure, the excision should be placed in the lines of relaxed 
skin tension and should attempt to not distort surrounding anat-
omy such as the hairline, eyelids, or lips.
Skin Grafts
Split and full-thickness skin grafts are used in the head and 
neck for a variety of defects. Following oral cavity resections, 
split-thickness grafts can provide adequate reconstruction of the 
mucosal surface if an adequate vascular tissue bed is available 
to support the blood supply needed for graft survival. These 
grafts start to incorporate into the recipient site in approximately 
5 days and do not provide replacement of absent soft-tissue bulk; 
however, they are a simple low morbidity technique for covering 
mucosal defects that allow for monitoring for local recurrence. 
Full-thickness grafts are used on the face when local rotational 
flaps are not available. These grafts have less contracture over 
time than split-thickness grafts. Grafts can be harvested from 
the postauricular or supraclavicular areas to maximize the match 
of skin characteristics. Dermal grafts have been used to provide 
coverage for exposed vessels in the neck, reconstruct mucosal 
defects, and assist in providing soft-tissue bulk.
Local Flaps
Local flaps encompass a large number of mainly random-pattern 
flaps used to reconstruct defects in adjacent areas. It is beyond 
the scope of this chapter to enumerate all of these flaps, but they 
should be designed according to the relaxed skin tension lines of 
the face and neck skin. These lines are tension lines inherent in 
the facial regions and caused in part by the insertions of muscles 
of facial animation. Incisions paralleling the relaxed skin ten-
sion lines that respect the aesthetic subunits of the face heal with 
the least amount of tension and camouflage into a more appeal-
ing cosmetic result. Poorly designed incisions or flaps result in 
widened scars and distortion of important aesthetic units.
Regional Flaps
Regional flaps are those that are available as pedicled transfer 
of soft tissue from areas adjacent to the defect. These flaps have 
an axial blood supply that traverses the flap longitudinally from 
proximal to distal between the fascia and subcutaneous tissue. 
Single-stage reconstruction is possible, and harvest may occur 
simultaneously with the resection of primary disease resulting 
in a decrease in overall operative time.
7
601
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
The deltopectoral fasciocutaneous flap is a medially based 
flap from the anterior chest wall reliant on the perforators of the 
internal mammary artery. Its pliability permits folding, making 
it capable for use with reconstruction of pharyngoesophageal 
defects. A disadvantage is that use of the flap requires a sec-
ond stage detaching the proximal chest component and comple-
tion of insetting approximately 3 to 4 weeks after the original 
­procedure.
Several myocutaneous flaps exist for head and neck recon-
struction. The vascular pedicle of these flaps permits a wide arc 
of rotation, making them ideal for a variety of different recon-
structive needs. The trapezius muscle provides a number of soft-
tissue flaps that can be rotated to reconstruct a number of defects 
in the head and neck. The superior trapezius flap is based on 
paraspinous perforators and is ideal for lateral neck defects. The 
lateral island trapezius flap, based on the transverse cervical and 
dorsal scapular vessels, allows for harvest of a soft-tissue paddle 
below the inferior border of the scapula. This flap is ideal for 
reconstruction of scalp and lateral skull base defects.
The pectoralis myocutaneous flap is based on the pectoral 
branch of the thoracoacromial artery (medial) and the lateral 
thoracic artery (lateral). The latter vessel may be sacrificed to 
increase the arc of rotation. This workhorse flap includes the 
pectoralis major muscle, either alone or with overlying anterior 
chest skin. The pectoralis myocutaneous flap has enjoyed tre-
mendous popularity because of its ease of harvest, the ability to 
tailor its thickness to the defect, and limited donor site morbid-
ity. It can be used for reconstruction of the oropharynx, oral 
cavity, and the hypopharynx and in some cases can be tubed to 
replace cervical esophageal defects. Bulk associated with this 
flap may make certain applications less practical, and this prob-
lem is exacerbated in obese patients. The arc of rotation limits 
the superior extent of this flap to the zygomatic arch externally 
and the superior pole of the tonsil internally.
The latissimus dorsi flap provides a large source of soft 
tissue and has a wide arc of rotation. The flap is based on the 
thoracodorsal vasculature. This flap can be used as a regional 
rotational flap or as a free flap. Lateral decubitus positioning is 
typically required for harvesting this flap, making it less attrac-
tive for simultaneous cancer ablation and reconstruction.
Free-Tissue Transfer
Free-tissue transfer with microvascular anastomosis affords 
the reconstructive surgeon unparalleled ability to replace tissue 
loss with tissues of similar characteristics. There are a num-
ber of donor sites available for various types of flaps, including 
­osteomyocutaneous, myocutaneous, fasciocutaneous, fascial, 
and myo-osseous flaps. The flaps most popular in head and neck 
reconstructive armamentarium are those with ease of harvest 
from a standpoint of patient positioning and those that allow 
for a two-teamed approach for simultaneous flap harvesting and 
oncologic resection.87
The radial forearm fasciocutaneous flap (Fig. 18-45) is a 
hardy flap with constant vascular anatomy and a long vascular 
pedicle, allowing for ease of insetting and choice in anastomotic 
vascular recipient sites. It is pliable and can be reinnervated as 
a sensate flap, making it ideal for repair of oral cavity and oro-
pharyngeal defects. It can be tubed to repair hypopharyngeal 
and upper esophageal defects.88,89
The anterolateral thigh flap, based on the descending 
branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery, has the capacity 
for a large pliable skin paddle with muscle that is capable of 
being tubed and is used to reconstruct similar defects as that of 
the radial forearm flap while providing more tissue bulk.
The fibular osteocutaneous or osteomyocutaneous flap 
allows for one-stage reconstruction of resected mandible. In the 
adult, up to 20 cm of bone can be harvested with a cuff of soleus 
and flexor hallucis longus muscle for additional soft-tissue bulk. 
The donor site defect is well tolerated as long as approximately 
7 cm of bone are retained proximally and distally for knee and 
ankle stability.90
Iliac crest osteocutaneous flaps are also used for the recon-
struction of mandible defects. The natural shape of this donor 
site bone is similar to the mandibular angle. The thick stock of 
bone provided by the iliac crest allows for better vertical recon-
struction of the mandible while spanning a segmental defect. 
However, for lengthy mandibular defects (>10 cm), the fibular 
flap usually is chosen. Additionally, for shorter mandible defects, 
other free flaps, including osseous components such as scapu-
lar and radial forearm flaps, can be used. The scapular flap can 
provide approximately 12 cm of scapula bone and is based on 
Figure 18-45.  Radial forearm free flap before harvest 
from the arm.
602
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the circumflex scapular artery. This flap can be combined with 
parascapular and scapular skin islands and portions of latissimus 
dorsi and serratus anterior muscle. The radial forearm osteocuta-
neous flap can provide a limited quantity of bone with the soft-
tissue component of the flap but is associated with an increased 
risk of donor site fracture.
Large soft-tissue defects can result from trauma, excision of 
skull base tumors, and tumors involving large segments of skin. 
Furthermore, after extensive skull base resections in the anterior 
and lateral skull base, the need for separation of the oropharyngeal 
and sinonasal tracts from the dura requires soft-tissue interposi-
tion between the dura and the contaminated upper aerodigestive 
tract. The rectus abdominis flap, based on the deep inferior epi-
gastric vessels, provides a large amount of soft tissue and is ideal 
for closure of wounds of the lateral skull base and dura.
For reconstruction of defects of the hypopharynx and cer-
vical esophagus, both free flaps and regional pedicled flaps are 
available. The free transfer of a jejunal segment can be per-
formed based on branches of the superior mesenteric artery. 
Other free flaps used in this area include fasciocutaneous 
flaps, such as tubed radial forearm flap. The gastric pull-up is 
a regional flap that is also in use for reconstruction of cervical 
esophageal defects. The stomach is mobilized and pedicled on 
the right gastric and gastroepiploic vessels into the defect via 
tunneling through the thoracic cavity.
TRACHEOSTOMY
Tracheostomy is indicated in the management of patients who 
require prolonged intubation, access for frequent pulmonary 
suctioning, and in those patients with neurologic deficits that 
impair protective airway reflexes. Its use in head and neck sur-
gery is often for the temporary management of the airway in the 
perioperative period. After surgical resection of oral cavity and 
oropharyngeal cancers, edema of the upper aerodigestive tract 
occurs necessitating perioperative tracheostomy to prevent loss 
of the airway.
The avoidance of prolonged orotracheal and nasotracheal 
intubation decreases the risk of laryngeal and subglottic injury 
and potential stenosis, facilitates oral and pulmonary suction-
ing, and decreases patient discomfort. When the tracheostomy 
is no longer needed, the tube is removed and closure of the 
opening usually occurs spontaneously over a 2-week period. 
Complications of tracheostomy include pneumothorax, RLN 
injury, tracheal stenosis, wound infection with large-vessel ero-
sion, and failure to close after decannulation. The use of cri-
cothyroidotomy as an alternative to tracheostomy for patients 
who require prolonged intubation is associated with a higher 
incidence of vocal cord dysfunction and subglottic stenosis. 
When cricothyroidotomy is used in the setting of establishing 
an emergency airway, conversion to a standard tracheostomy 
should be considered if decannulation is not anticipated within 
5 to 7 days.
Placement of a tracheostomy does not obligate a patient 
to loss of speech. When a large cuffed tracheostomy tube is 
in place, expecting a patient to be capable of normal speech 
is impractical. However, after a patient is downsized to an 
uncuffed tracheostomy tube, intermittent finger occlusion or 
Passy-Muir valve placement will allow a patient to commu-
nicate while still using the tracheostomy to bypass the upper 
airway. When a patient no longer has the original indication for 
the tracheostomy and can tolerate capping of the tracheal tube 
for >24 hours, decannulation is considered safe.
LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AND 
REHABILITATION
Palliative Care
For patients with unresectable disease or distant metastases, 
palliative care options exist. Palliative treatment is aimed at 
improving a patient’s symptoms and may include radiation, che-
motherapy, or consultation with a pain specialist. The head and 
neck surgeon has the options of tracheostomy and gastrostomy 
tube placement for patients progressing with worsening airway 
compromise and dysphagia, respectively. Hospice is also an 
option for patients with a limited short-term outlook; hospice 
allows a patient to retain dignity at the time of greatest adversity.
Follow-Up Care
Patients diagnosed and treated for a head and neck tumor require 
follow-up care aimed at monitoring for recurrence and the side 
effects of therapy. For patients undergoing successful treatment 
for malignancies of the upper aerodigestive tract, the Ameri-
can Head and Neck Society advocates for follow-up assessment 
every 1 to 3 months for the first year after treatment, expanding 
to every 2 to 6 months for years 2 to 4, with an annual follow-up 
at 5 years posttreatment and thereafter.91
In addition to a formal head and neck examination, 
patients should be questioned about any emerging symptoms 
related to their primary tumor. New-onset pain, otalgia, and dys-
phagia are some of the problems that may indicate the need to 
evaluate further for recurrence. Worsening dysphagia may 
also be a presenting symptom for a patient developing a 
pharyngeal stricture. Such a patient may require dilatation and/
or placement of a gastrostomy tube for nutrition. Additionally, 
a number of patients who undergo head and neck radiation will 
develop hypothyroidism years after treatment. Patients with 
shoulder dysfunction after surgery should be considered for 
physical therapy consultation to minimize the long-term effects 
of their surgical care. Patients with chronic pain-related issues 
can benefit from consultation with a pain specialist to construct 
a treatment regimen to provide adequate control of long-term 
discomfort. Long-term follow-up with a dentist experienced in 
caring for patients with a history of therapeutic radiation therapy 
is vital if prevention of osteoradionecrosis is to be achieved.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Kaushik V, Malik T, Saeed SR. Interventions for acute otitis 
externa. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20;(1):CD004740.
2.	 Carfrae MJ, Kesser BW. Malignant otitis externa. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am. 2008; 41(3):537-549.
3.	 Sutton D, Derkay CS, Darrow DH, et al: Resistant bacteria in 
the middle ear fluid at the time of tympanostomy tube surgery. 
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2000;109:24.
4.	 Cunningham M, Guardiani E, Kim HJ, et al. Otitis media. 
Future Microbiol. 2012 7(6):733-753.
5.	 Antonelli PJ, Garside JA, Mancuso AA, et al: Computed 
tomography and the diagnosis of coalescent mastoiditis. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1999;120:350.
6.	 Gantz BJ, Rubinstein JT, Gidley P, et al: Surgical management 
of Bell’s palsy. Laryngoscope 1999;109:1177-1188.
7.	 Danner CJ. Facial nerve paralysis.Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 
2008; 41(3):619-632.
8.	 Rosenfeld RM, Andes D, Bhattacharyya N, et al. Clinical 
practice guideline: adult sinusitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 2007;137(3 Suppl):S1-31.
8
603
DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECK
CHAPTER 18
9.	 McCoul ED, Jourdy DN, Schaberg MR, et al. Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus sinusitis in nonhospitalized 
patients: A systematic review of prevalence and treatment out-
comes. Laryngoscope. 2012;122(10):2125-2131.
10.	 Miracle AC, Mukherji SK. Conebeam CT of the head and 
neck, part 2: clinical applications. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
2009;30:1285-1292.
11.	 Ryan MW. Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis.Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am. 2011 44(3):697-710.
12.	 deShazo RD, O’Brien M, Chapin K, et al: A new classification 
and diagnostic criteria for invasive fungal sinusitis. Arch Oto-
laryngol Head Neck Surg. 1997;123:1181-1188.
13.	 Bisno AL, Gerber MA, Gwaltney JM, et al: Diagnosis and 
management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: a practice 
guideline. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis. 1997;25:574-583.
14.	 Thompson LDR, Wenig BM, Kornblut BM: Pharyngitis. In 
Bailey BJ, Calhoun KH, Derkay CS, et al, eds. Head and Neck 
Surgery—Otolaryngology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams and Wilkins; 2001:543.
15.	 Paradise J, Bluestone C, Bachman R, et al. Efficacy of ton-
sillectomy for recurrent throat infections in severely affected 
children. Results of parallel randomized and nonrandomized 
clinical trials. N Engl J Med 1984;310:674-683.
16.	 Gates G, Cooper J, Avery C, et al: Chronic secretory oti-
tis media: effects of surgical management. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol Suppl. 1989;98:2-32.
17.	 Statham MM, Myer CM III. Complications of adenotonsil-
lectomy. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010; 
18(6):539-543.
18.	 Friedman M, Tanyeri H, La Rossa M, et al: Clinical predictors 
of obstructive sleep apnea. Laryngoscope 1999;109:1901-1907.
19.	 Vasu TS, Grewal R, Doghramji K. Obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome and perioperative complications: a systematic review 
of the literature. J Clin Sleep Med. 2012;8(2):199-207.
20.	 Zeitels SM, Casiano RR, Gardner GM, et al: Management 
of common voice problems: committee report. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 2002;126:333.
21.	 Rosen CA, Woodson GE, Thompson JW, et al: Preliminary 
results of the use of indole 3-carbinol for recurrent respiratory 
papillomatosis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1998;118:810-815.
22.	 Gray S, Hammond E, Hanson DF: Benign pathologic responses 
of the larynx. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1995;104:13-18.
23.	 Koufman JA: The otolaryngologic manifestations of gastro-
esophageal reflux disease (GERD); a clinical investigation of 
225 patients using ambulatory 24-hour pH monitoring and an 
experimental investigation of the role of acid and pepsin in the 
development of laryngeal injury. Laryngoscope. 1991; 53:1:1-78.
24.	 Kamargiannis N, Gouveris H, Katsinelos P, et al. Chronic phar-
yngitis is associated with severe acidic laryngopharyngeal reflux 
in patients with Reinke’s edema. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol.  
2011;120(11):722-726.
25.	 Tsikoudas A, Paleri V, El-Badawey MR, et al. Recommenda-
tions on follow-up strategies for idiopathic vocal fold paralysis: 
evidence-based review. J Laryngol Otol. 2012;126(6):570-573.
26.	 Modi VK. Vocal fold injection medialization laryngoplasty. 
Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2012;73:90-94.
27.	 Hochman M, Vural E, Suen J, et al: Contemporary manage-
ment of vascular lesions of the head and neck. Curr Opin Oto-
laryngol Head Neck Surg. 1999;7:161.
28.	 Scherer K, Waner M. Nd:Yag lasers (1064nm) in the treatment 
of venous malformations of the face and neck:challenges and 
benefits. Lasers Med Sci. 2007;22(2):119-26.
29.	 Richter GT, Suen JY. Pediatric extracranial arteriovenous 
malformations. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2011;19(6):455-461.
30.	 Giguere CM, Bauman NM, Smith RJH: New treatment options 
for lymphangioma in infants and children. Ann Otol Rhinol 
Laryngol. 2002;111:1066-1075.
31.	 Manson PN, Clark N, Robertson B, et al. Subunit principles in 
midface fractures: the importance of sagittal buttresses, soft-tissue 
reductions, and sequencing treatment of segmental fractures. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1999;103(4):1287-1306,
32.	 Sharabi SE, Koshy JC, Thornton JF, et al. Facial fractures. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;127(2):25e-34e.
33.	 Coker NJ: Facial electroneurography: analysis of techniques 
and correlation with degenerating motor neurons. Laryngo-
scope. 1992;102:747-759.
34.	 Brodie HA, Thompson TC. Management of complications from 
820 temporal bone fractures. Am J Otol. 1997;18:188-197.
35.	Darrouzet V, Duclos J, Liguoro D: Management of facial 
paralysis resulting from temporal bone fractures: our experi-
ence in 115 cases. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2001;125: 
77-84.
36.	 Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK, Winn DM, et al: Smoking and 
drinking in relation to oral and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res. 
1988;48:3282-3287.
37.	 Rigotti NA: Treatment of tobacco use and dependence. N Engl 
J Med. 2002;346:506.
38.	 Moore C: Cigarette smoking and cancer of the mouth, pharynx 
and larynx. JAMA. 1971;218:553-558.
39.	 Brennan JA, Boyle JO, Koch WM, et al: Association 
between cigarette smoking and mutation of the p53 gene 
in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J 
Med. 1995;332:712-717.
40.	 Boyle JO, Koch W, Hrubin PA, et al: The incidence of p53 
mutations increase with progression of head and neck cancer. 
Cancer Res. 1993;53:4477-4480.
41.	 Koch WM, Lango M, Sewell D, et al: Head and neck cancer in non-
smokers: a distinct clinical and molecular entity. Laryngoscope. 
1999;109:1544-1551.
42.	 Chen YJ, Chang JT, Liao CT, et al. Head and neck cancer in 
the betel quid chewing area: recent advances in molecular car-
cinogenesis. Cancer Sci. 2008;99(8):1507-1514.
43.	 Joint Committee on Cancer: American Joint Committee on 
Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. Chicago: American; 2009.
44.	 Najim M, Cross S, Gebski V, et al. Early-stage squamous 
cell carcinoma of the lip: The Australian experience and the 
benefits of radiotherapy in improving outcome in high-risk 
patients after resection. Head Neck. 2012 Sep 10.doi: 10.1002/
hed.23148. [Epub ahead of print]
45.	 Calhoun K: Reconstruction of small- and medium-sized defects 
of the lower lip. Am J Otolaryngol. 1992;13:16-22.
46.	 Baumann D, Robb G. Lip reconstruction. Semin Plast Surg. 
2008;22(4):269-280.
47.	 Hessel AC, Moreno MA, Hanna EY, et al. Compliance with 
quality assurance measures in patients treated for early oral 
tongue cancer. Cancer. 2010;116(14):3408-3416.
48.	 Huang SF, Kang CJ, Lin CY, et al. Neck treatment of patients 
with early stage oral tongue cancer: comparison between obser-
vation, supraomohyoid dissection, and extended dissection. 
Cancer. 2008;112(5):1066-1075.
49.	 Ganly I, Patel S, Shah J. Early stage squamous cell cancer of 
the oral tongue–clinicopathologic features affecting outcome. 
Cancer. 2012;118(1):101-111.
50.	 Rodgers LW Jr., Stringer SP, Mendenhall WM, et al: Manage-
ment of squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of mouth. Head 
Neck. 1993;15:16-19.
51.	 Overholt SM, Eicher SA, Wolf P, et al: Prognostic factors 
affecting outcome in lower gingival carcinoma. Laryngoscope. 
1996;106:1335-1339.
52.	 Huang CJ, Chao KSC, Tsai J, et al: Cancer of retromolar 
trigone: long-term radiation therapy outcome. Head Neck. 
2001;23:758-763.
53.	 Lubek JE, Dyalram D, Perera EH, Liu X, Ord RA. A retro-
spective analysis of squamous carcinoma of the buccal mucosa: 
an aggressive subsite within the oral cavity. J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg. 2013;71(6):1126-1131.
604
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
54.	 Beckhardt RN, Weber RS, Zane R, et al: Minor salivary gland 
tumors of the palate: clinical and pathologic correlates of out-
come. Laryngoscope. 1995;11:1155-1160.
55.	 Fakhy C, Westra WH, Cmelak A, et al. Improved survival 
of patients with human papillomavirus-postive head and 
neck squamous cell carcinoma in a prospective clinical trial. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100:261-269.
56.	 Lee, HJ, Zelefsky MJ, Kraus DH, et al: Long-term regional 
control after radiation therapy and neck dissection for base of 
tongue carcinoma. Int J Rad Oncology Biol Phys. 1997;38: 
995-1000.
57.	 Peters LJ, Weber RS, Morrison WH, et al: Neck surgery in 
patients with primary oropharyngeal cancer treated by radio-
therapy. Head Neck. 1996;18:552-559.
58.	 Ang KK, Peters LJ, Weber RS, et al: Concomitant boost 
radiotherapy schedules in the treatment of carcinoma of the 
oropharynx and nasopharynx. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1990;19:1339-1345.
59.	 Dean NR, Rosenthal EL, Carroll WR, et al. Robot-assisted 
surgery for primary and recurrent oropharyngeal carcinoma. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;136(4):380-384.
60.	 Weinstein GS, O’Malley BW, Snyder W, et al. Transoral 
robotic surgery: radical tonsillectomy. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 2007;133(12):1220-1226.
61.	 Weber RS, Ohlms L, Bowman J, et al: Functional results after 
total or near total glossectomy with laryngeal preservation. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1991;117:512-515.
62.	 Frank J, Garb J, Kay S, et al: Postoperative radiotherapy 
improves survival in squamous cell carcinoma of the hypophar-
ynx. Am J Surg. 1994;168:476-480.
63.	 Lefebve JL, Chevalier D, Luboinski B, et al: Larynx preserva-
tion in piriform sinus cancer: preliminary results of a European 
organization for research and treatment of cancer phase III trial. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996;88:890-899.
64.	 Hartig G, Truelson J, Weinstein GS. Supraglottic cancer. Head 
Neck. 2000;22:426-434.
65.	 Laccourreye H, Laccourreye O, Weinstein GS, et al: Suprac-
ricoid laryngectomy with cricohyoidoepiglottopexy: a partial 
laryngeal procedure for selected glottic carcinoma. Ann Otol 
Rhinol Laryngol. 1990;99:421-426.
66.	 Wolf GT, Hong WK, Fischer SG, et al: Induction chemo-
therapy plus radiation compared with surgery plus radia-
tion in patients with advanced laryngeal cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 1991;324:1685-1690.
67.	 Medina JE, Khafif A: Early oral feeding following total laryn-
gectomy. Laryngoscope. 2001;111:368-372.
68.	 Weber RS, Marvel J, Smith P, et al: Paratracheal lymph node 
dissection for carcinoma of the larynx, hypopharynx, and cervi-
cal esophagus. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1993;108:11-17.
69.	 Weber RS, Berket BA, Forastiere A, et al: Outcome of sal-
vage total laryngectomy following organ preservation ther-
apy: the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group trial 91-11. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003;129:44-49.
70.	 Lund VJ, Chisholm EJ, Takes RP, et al. Evidence for treat-
ment strategies in sinonasal adenocarcinoma. Head Neck. 2012; 
34(8):1168-1178.
71.	 Reiersen DA, Pahilan ME, Devaiah AK. Meta-analysis 
of treatment outcomes for sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;147(1):7-14.
72.	 Eggesbø HB. Imaging of sinonasal tumours. Cancer Imaging. 
2012;12:136-152.
73.	 Robbins KT, Ferlito A, Silver CE, et al. Contemporary manage-
ment of sinonasal cancer. Head Neck. 2011;33(9):1352-1365.
74.	 Al-Sarraf M, LeBlanc M, Giri PG, et al: Chemoradiotherapy 
vs. radiotherapy in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal 
cancer: Phase III randomized intergroup 0099. J Clin Oncol. 
1998;16:1310-1317.
75.	 Kuhel W, Hume CR, Selesnick SH: Cancer of the external 
auditory canal and temporal bone. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 
1996;29:827-852.
76.	 Morris LG, Mehra S, Shah JP, et al. Predictors of survival and 
recurrence after temporal bone resection for cancer. Head Neck. 
2012; 34(9):1231-1239.
77.	 Wang Y, Ow TJ, Myers JN. Pathways for cervical metastasis 
in malignant neoplasms of the head and neck region. Clin Anat. 
2012;25(1):54-71.
78.	 Bocca E, Pignataro O, Oldino C: Functional neck dissec-
tion: an evaluation and review of 843 cases. Laryngoscope. 
1984;94:942-945.
79.	 Medina JE, Byers RM: Supraomohyoid neck dissection: 
rationale, indications and surgical technique. Head Neck. 
1989;11:111-122.
80.	 Eicher SA, Weber RS: Surgical management of cervical lymph 
node metastases. Curr Opin Oncol. 1996;8:215-220.
81.	 Robbins KT, Atkinson JLD, Byers RM, et al: The use and 
misuse of neck dissection for head and neck cancer. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2001;193:91-102.
82.	 Byers RM, Weber RS, Andrews T, et al: Frequency and thera-
peutic implications of “skip metastases” in the neck from squa-
mous carcinoma of the oral tongue. Head Neck. 1997;19:14-19.
83.	 Strojan P, Ferlito A, Langendijk JA, et al. Indications for radio-
therapy after neck dissection. Head Neck. 2012; 34(1):113-119.
84.	 Eisele DE, Netterville J, Hoffman H, et al: Parapharyngeal 
space masses. Head Neck. 1999;21:154-159.
85.	 Gidley PW, Thompson CR, Roberts DB, et al.The results of 
temporal bone surgery for advanced or recurrent tumors of the 
parotid gland. Laryngoscope. 2011;121(8):1702-1707.
86.	 Weber RS, Byers RM, Petit B, et al: Submandibular gland 
tumors: Adverse histologic factors and therapeutic implica-
tions. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1990;116:1055-1060.
87.	 Blackwell KE, Buchbinder D, Biller HF: Reconstruction of 
massive defects in the head and neck: the role of simultaneous 
distant and regional flaps. Head Neck. 1997;19:620-628.
88.	 Agrawal A, Husein OF, Schuller DE. Esophageal reconstruc-
tion with larynx preservation using forearm-free flap. Laryngo-
scope. 2008;118(10):1750-1752.
89.	 Fujiwara T, Shih HS, Chen CC, et al. Interdigitation of the 
distal anastomosis between tubed fasciocutaneous flap and 
cervical esophagus for stricture prevention. Laryngoscope. 
2011;121(2):289-293.
90.	 Urken ML, Buchbinder D, Costantino PD, et al: Oroman-
dibular reconstruction using microvascular composite flaps: 
report of 210 cases. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
1998;124:46-56.
91.	 The American Society for Head and Neck Surgery and the 
Society of Head and Neck Surgeons: Clinical Practice Guide-
lines for the Diagnosis and Management of Cancer of the Head 
and Neck. 1996. Also see http://www.headandneckcancer.org/
clinicalresources/docs/oralcavity.php.
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum,  
and Pleura
Katie S. Nason, Michael A. Maddaus, and 
James D. Luketich
19
TRACHEA
Anatomy
The trachea is composed of cartilaginous and membranous por-
tions, beginning with the cricoid cartilage, the first complete 
cartilaginous ring of the airway. The cricoid cartilage consists 
of an anterior arch and a posterior broad-based plate. Articulat-
ing with the posterior cricoid plate are the arytenoid cartilages. 
The vocal cords originate from the arytenoid cartilages and then 
attach to the thyroid cartilage. The subglottic space, the nar-
rowest part of the trachea with an internal diameter of approxi-
mately 2 cm, begins at the inferior surface of the vocal cords 
and extends to the first tracheal ring. The remainder of the distal 
trachea is 10.0 to 13.0 cm long, consists of 18 to 22 rings, and 
has an internal diameter of 2.3 cm (Fig. 19-1).1 Bronchoscopi-
cally, the tracheal rings are visible as C-shaped hyaline cartilagi-
nous structures that provide rigidity to the anterior and lateral 
tracheal walls. The open ends of the C-rings are connected by 
the trachealis smooth muscle and encased in a dense band of 
connective tissue called perichondrium. The first tracheal ring 
is attached directly to the cricoid cartilage; there are approxi-
mately two rings for every 1 cm of tracheal length.
The tracheal blood supply, which includes the infe-
rior thyroid, subclavian, supreme intercostal, internal thoracic, 
Trachea	
605
Anatomy / 605
Tracheal Injury / 605
Tracheal Fistulas / 608
Tracheal Neoplasms / 609
Lung	
611
Anatomy / 611
Normal Lung Histology / 612
Preinvasive Lesions / 613
Invasive or Malignant Lesions / 614
Lung Cancer Epidemiology / 617
Screening for Lung Cancer in  
High-Risk Populations / 619
Solitary Pulmonary Nodule / 621
Metastatic Lesions to the Lung / 622
Primary Lung Cancer-Associated Signs 
and Symptoms / 623
Lung Cancer Management / 627
Lung Cancer Treatment / 637
Options for Thoracic Surgical  
Approaches / 645
Postoperative Care / 647
Postoperative Complications / 649
Spontaneous Pneumothorax / 649
Pulmonary Infections / 650
Massive Hemoptysis / 661
End-Stage Lung Disease / 663
Chest Wall	
664
Chest Wall Mass / 664
Benign Chest Wall Neoplasms / 666
Primary Malignant Chest Wall  
Tumors / 666
Other Tumors of the Chest Wall / 669
Chest Wall Reconstruction / 669
Mediastinum	
670
Anatomy and Pathologic Entities / 670
History and Physical Examination / 671
Imaging and Serum Markers / 671
Diagnostic Nonsurgical Biopsies  
of the Mediastinum / 672
Surgical Biopsies and Resection  
of Mediastinal Masses / 673
Mediastinal Neoplasms / 674
Mediastinal Cysts / 679
Mediastinitis / 679
Pleura and Pleural Space	
680
Anatomy / 680
Pleural Effusion / 680
Access and Drainage of Pleural  
Fluid Collections / 680
Malignant Pleural Effusion / 682
Empyema / 682
Chylothorax / 685
Tumors of the Pleura / 687
Acknowledgement	
690
innominate, and superior and middle bronchial arteries, enters 
the airway near the junction of the membranous and carti-
laginous portions (Fig. 19-2). Each arterial branch supplies a 
segment of 1.0 to 2.0 cm, thereby limiting circumferential mobi-
lization to that same distance. The vessels are interconnected 
along the lateral surface of the trachea by an important longitu-
dinal vascular anastomosis that feeds transverse segmental ves-
sels to the soft tissues between the cartilages.
Tracheal Injury
Tracheal injury can result from a variety of causes, includ-
ing inhalation of smoke or toxic fumes, aspiration of liquids 
or solid objects, endotracheal intubation, blunt and penetrating 
trauma, and iatrogenic injury during operative procedures. Early 
diagnosis is critical to avoid subsequent complications, includ-
ing respiratory infection and tracheal stenosis. Management of 
smoke or toxic fume inhalation and liquid aspiration is com-
monly supportive; use of antibiotics, respiratory support, and 
airway clearance with flexible bronchoscopy is dictated by the 
patient’s condition. In rare circumstances, extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation is required if there is associated injury to the 
more distal airways and lung parenchyma.
Despite ubiquitous use of high-volume–low-pressure 
cuffs, overinflation of the endotracheal cuff is the most common 
chapter 
606
Key Points
1
	 Historically, non-small cell cancer (NSCLC) subtypes were 
considered to be a uniform group based on limited under-
standing of the distinct clinical behaviors of the subtypes as 
well as the fact that there were few treatment options avail-
able. With increasing understanding of the molecular biol-
ogy underlying these tumor subtypes, however, the approach 
to diagnosis and management and the terminology used in 
describing these tumors are evolving rapidly. In particular, 
the evaluation and management of adenocarcinoma of the 
lung has shifted dramatically and firm establishment of 
NSCLC cell type prior to chemotherapy for advanced stage 
lung cancer is essential.
2
	 A multidisciplinary approach to evaluation of NSCLC, with 
standardized criteria and terminology for diagnosis in cyto-
logic and small biopsy specimens, and routine molecular 
testing for known mutations, such as EGFR mutations and 
EML4-ALK fusion oncogenes is now recommended for the 
evaluation and management of lung nodules due to major 
advances in targeted therapy. Adequate tissue acquisition at 
the time of diagnostic workup is critical and facilitates 
patient care while minimizing the number of procedures to 
which the patient is subjected.
3
	 The terms bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and mixed subtype 
adenocarcinoma have been eliminated from the classifica-
tion of lung adenocarcinoma as a result of increased under-
standing of important clinical, radiologic, pathologic, and 
genetic differences between mucinous and nonmucinous 
adenocarcinomas, The new classification system delineated 
a stepwise pathologic progression, from AAH to invasive 
adenocarcinoma based on the predominant histologic growth 
patterns.
4
	 Lung cancer continues to be a highly lethal and extremely 
common cancer, with 5-year survival of 16%. Lung cancer 
incidence is second only to the incidence of prostate cancer 
in men and breast cancer in women. Squamous cell carci-
noma and adenocarcinoma of the lung are the most common 
subtypes and are rarely found in the absence of a smoking 
history. Nonsmokers who live with smokers have a 24% 
increased risk of lung cancer compared to nonsmokers who 
do not live with smokers.
5
	 Navigational bronchoscopy is a valuable new tool that can 
be used to obtain tissue diagnosis for intraparenchymal 
lesions or small, peripherally located lesions that have his-
torically been difficult to biopsy with transbronchial or 
transthoracic approaches. It is also a useful tool for tattooing 
the lung lesion for subsequent operative resection and for 
placement of fiducial markers for stereotactic body radia-
tion. This technique should become part of the surgeon’s 
armamentarium for the diagnosis and treatment of lung 
cancer.
6
	 Impaired exchange of carbon monoxide is associated with a 
significant increase in the risk of postoperative pulmonary 
complications, independent of the patient’s smoking history. 
In patients undergoing pulmonary resection, the risk of any 
pulmonary complication increases by 42% for every 10% 
decline in the percent carbon monoxide diffusion capac-
ity (%Dlco), and this measure may be a useful parameter 
in risk stratification of patients for surgery.
7
	 Maximum oxygen consumption (V.o2 max) values pro-
vide important additional information in those patients 
with severely impaired Dlco and forced expiratory vol-
ume in 1 second. Values of <10 mL/kg per minute gener-
ally prohibit any major pulmonary resection, because the 
mortality in patients with these levels is 26% compared 
with only 8.3% in patients whose is ≥10 mL/kg per min-
ute; values of >15 mL/kg per minute generally indicate 
the patient’s ability to tolerate pneumonectomy.
8
	 The assessment of patient risk before thoracic resection 
is based on clinical judgment and data.
9
	 Tumor ablative strategies are viable alternatives to surgi-
cal resection for early stage lung cancer in inoperable 
patients. While premature, ablative techniques may ulti-
mately be shown to have efficacy equivalent to lobec-
tomy for the primary treatment of very small peripheral 
early-stage lung cancers and become primary therapy, 
even in operable patients. Multidisciplinary collaboration 
between thoracic surgery, interventional radiology/pulm-
onology, and radiation oncology is required to ensure 
that development of these ablative techniques occurs 
through properly designed and well-controlled prospec-
tive studies and will ensure that patients receive the best 
available therapy, regardless of whether it is surgical 
resection or ablative therapy.
10
	 Increasing evidence suggests a significant role for gastro-
esophageal reflux disease in the pathogenesis of chronic 
lung diseases such as bronchiectasis and idiopathic pul-
monary fibrosis, and it may also contribute to bronchiol-
itis obliterans syndrome in lung transplant patients.
11
	 Treatment of pulmonary aspergilloma is individualized. 
Asymptomatic patients can be observed without any 
additional therapy. Similarly, mild hemoptysis, which is 
not life-threatening, can be managed with medical ther-
apy, including antifungals and cough suppressant. 
Amphotericin B is the drug of choice, although voricon-
azole has recently been used for treatment of aspergillo-
sis, with fewer side effects and equivalent efficacy. 
Massive hemoptysis had traditionally been an indication 
for urgent or emergent operative intervention. However, 
with the advancement of endovascular techniques, bron-
chial artery embolization in select centers with experi-
ence in these techniques has been effective.
12
	 In patients with malignant pleural effusion, poor expan-
sion of the lung (because of entrapment by tumor or 
adhesions) generally predicts a poor result with pleurode-
sis and is the primary indication for placement of indwell-
ing pleural catheters. These catheters have dramatically 
changed the management of end-stage cancer treatment 
because they substantially shorten the amount of time 
patients spend in the hospital during their final weeks of 
life.
607
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
cause of injury secondary to endotracheal intubation. High cuff 
pressures can cause ischemia of the contiguous airway wall in 
as short as 4 hours. Prolonged overinflation can lead to scarring 
and stenosis; full-thickness injury can result in fistulae between 
the innominate artery anteriorly and the esophagus posteriorly. 
Avoidance requires careful cuff management to keep pressures 
Epiglottis
Aryepiglottic m.
Transverse, oblique
arytenoid mm.
Lateral
cricoarytenoid m.
Posterior
cricoarytenoid m.
Thyroid cartilage
            facet
Recurrent
laryngeal n.
Internal
laryngeal n.
Thyroepiglottic m.
Thyroarytenoid m.
Cricothyroid m.
(cut)
Inferior
thyroid a.
Branch from 
internal thoracic a. 
Superior bronchial a.
Middle bronchial a.
1
Lateral longitudinal
anastomosis
3
2
Figure 19-1.  Anatomy of the larynx and upper trachea. 
m. = muscle; n. = nerve.
Figure 19-2.  Arterial blood supply to the larynx and upper trachea. 
a. = artery.
as low as possible; in circumstances of prolonged ventilatory 
support and high airway pressure, cuff pressure monitoring (to 
maintain pressures <20 mmHg) is advisable.
Historically, clinically significant tracheal stenosis after 
tracheostomy occurred in 3% to 12% of cases, with severe ste-
nosis in 1% to 2%.2 With the use of low-pressure cuffs, the esti-
mated incidence has decreased to 4.9 cases per million patients 
per year.3 Intubation-related risk factors include: prolonged intu-
bation; high tracheostomy through the first tracheal ring or cri-
cothyroid membrane; transverse rather than vertical incision on 
the trachea; oversized tracheostomy tube; prior tracheostomy or 
intubation; and traumatic intubation. Stenosis is also more com-
mon in older patients, in females, after radiation, or after exces-
sive corticosteroid therapy, and in the setting of concomitant 
diseases such as autoimmune disorders, severe reflux disease, 
or obstructive sleep apnea and the setting of severe respiratory 
failure. However, even a properly placed tracheostomy can lead 
to tracheal stenosis because of scarring and local injury. Mild 
ulceration and stenosis are frequently seen after tracheostomy 
removal. Use of the smallest tracheostomy tube possible, rapid 
downsizing, and a vertical tracheal incision minimize the risk 
for posttracheostomy stenosis.
Stridor and dyspnea on exertion are the primary symptoms 
of tracheal stenosis. In the setting of postintubation injury, a 
significant portion of the cartilaginous structural support to the 
airway is destroyed by regional ischemic necrosis; during heal-
ing, a web-like fibrous growth develops and narrows the air-
way (Fig. 19-3). In contrast, stenosis caused by tracheostomy is 
most commonly due to an excess of granulation tissue formation 
around the tracheal stoma site. Time to onset of symptoms after 
extubation or tracheostomy decannulation usually ranges from 
2 to 12 weeks, but symptoms can appear immediately or as long 
608
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
as 1 to 2 years later. Frequently, patients are misdiagnosed as 
having asthma or bronchitis, and treatment for such illnesses can 
persist for some time before the correct diagnosis is discovered. 
Generally, symptom intensity is related to the degree of stenosis 
and to the patient’s underlying pulmonary disease.
Acute Management.  A comprehensive bronchoscopic evalua-
tion is critical in the initial phase of evaluation. Stenosis length, 
location, distance between the vocal cords and proximal steno-
sis, and distance from the distal aspect to the major carina must 
be documented. In patients with severe stenosis and respiratory 
compromise, rigid bronchoscopy can be used to dilate the steno-
sis; this provides immediate relief of the airway obstruction and 
facilitates thorough evaluation of the stenosis. Rarely, if ever, is 
tracheostomy necessary.
Most intubation injuries are located in the upper third of 
the trachea and can be accessed for resection through a col-
lar incision. Resection typically involves 2 to 4 cm of trachea 
for benign stenosis. It is critical to fully resect all inflamed and 
scarred tissue. However, a primary anastomosis can still be per-
formed without undue tension, even if up to one half of the tra-
chea requires resection.2 Ideally, the patient is extubated in the 
operating room or shortly thereafter. For patients in whom tra-
cheal resection is not possible, such as patients with significant 
comorbidities or with an excessively long stenosis, endotracheal 
stenting, typically silicone T-tubes, can provide palliation. Wire 
mesh stents should not be used, given their known propensity 
to erode through the wall of the airway. Balloon dilation, laser 
ablation, and tracheoplasty have also been described, although 
the efficacy is marginal.
Tracheal replacement is evolving as an option for manage-
ment of tracheal stenosis as bioengineering techniques for decel-
lularizing donor trachea have been developed. This removes all 
Figure 19-3.  Diagram of the principal postintubation lesions. A. A circumferential lesion at the cuff site after the use of an endotracheal 
tube. B. Potential lesions after the use of tracheostomy tubes. Anterolateral stenosis can be seen at the stomal level. Circumferential stenosis 
can be seen at the cuff level (lower than with an endotracheal tube). The segment in between is often inflamed and malacotic. C. Damage to 
the subglottic larynx. D. Tracheoesophageal fistula occurring at the level of the tracheostomy cuff; circumferential damage is usual at this 
level. E. Tracheoinnominate artery fistula. (Adapted with permission from Grillo H. Surgical treatment of postintubation tracheal injuries. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1979;78:860. kkjkjdht Elsevier)
antigens against which the recipient immune system might react 
and enables use of the donor trachea scaffolding without risk of 
rejection. Following decellularization, the donor tracheal scaf-
folding is seeded with recipient chondrocytes, to restore tracheal 
rigidity, and with recipient epithelial cells, to recreate the inner 
epithelial lining. Several case reports of successful allogeneic 
tracheal transplantation have been published, but the technique 
continues to be limited to a few highly specialized centers. This 
is due, in part, to the scarcity of donor trachea and the need for 
tissue bioengineering expertise. Current efforts are focused on 
creation of biosynthetic scaffolding that can be used instead of 
donor trachea. This would substantially increase the availability 
of the tracheal replacement material and enable widespread use 
of the technique.
Tracheal Fistulas
Tracheoinnominate Artery Fistula.  Tracheoinnominate 
artery fistula has two main causes: low placement of a trache-
ostomy and hyperinflation of the tracheal cuff. Tracheostomy 
placement should be through the second to fourth tracheal rings 
without reference to the location of the sternal notch. When 
placed below the fourth tracheal ring, the inner curve of the 
tracheostomy cannula will be positioned to exert pressure on 
the posterior aspect of the innominate artery, leading to arterial 
erosion. Similarly, the tracheal cuff, when hyperinflated, will 
cause ischemic injury to the anterior airway and subsequent ero-
sion into the artery. Most cuff-induced fistulas will develop 
within 2 weeks after placement of the tracheostomy.
Clinically, tracheoinnominate artery fistulas present with 
bleeding. A premonitory hemorrhage often occurs and, although 
it is usually not massive, must not be ignored or simply attributed 
to general airway irritation or wound bleeding. With significant 
609
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Figure 19-4.  Steps in the emergency 
management of a tracheoinnominate 
artery fistula.
bleeding, the tracheostomy cuff can be hyperinflated to tempo-
rarily occlude the arterial injury. If such an effort is unsuccess-
ful, the tracheostomy incision should be immediately opened 
widely and a finger inserted to compress the artery against the 
manubrium (Fig. 19-4). The patient can then be orally intubated, 
and the airway suctioned free of blood. Emergent surgical resec-
tion of the involved segment of artery is performed, usually 
without reconstruction.
Tracheoesophageal Fistula.  Tracheoesophageal fistu-
las (TEFs) occur primarily in patients receiving prolonged 
mechanical ventilatory support concomitant with an indwelling 
nasogastric tube.4 Cuff compression of the membranous trachea 
against the nasogastric tube leads to airway and esophageal 
injury and fistula development. Clinically, airway suctioning 
reveals saliva, gastric contents, or tube feedings. Gastric insuf-
flation, secondary to positive pressure ventilation, can occur. 
Bronchoscopy is diagnostic; with the bronchoscope inserted, the 
endotracheal tube is withdrawn and the fistula at the cuff site is 
exposed. Alternatively, esophagoscopy demonstrates the cuff of 
the endotracheal tube in the esophagus.
Treatment, first and foremost, requires removing tubes 
from the esophagus and weaning the patient from the ventilator. 
The cuff of the endotracheal tube should be placed below the 
fistula, avoiding overinflation. To minimize aspiration, a gas-
trostomy tube should be placed for gastric decompression (to 
prevent reflux) and a jejunostomy tube for feeding. If aspira-
tion persists, esophageal diversion with cervical esophagostomy 
can be performed. Once weaned from the ventilator, tracheal 
resection and primary anastomosis, repair of the esophageal 
defect, and interposition of a muscle flap between the trachea 
and esophagus can be performed (Fig. 19-5).5
Tracheal Neoplasms
Although extremely rare, the most common primary tracheal 
neoplasms are squamous cell carcinomas (related to smoking) 
and adenoid cystic carcinomas. Clinically, tracheal tumors pres-
ent with cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, stridor, or symptoms of 
invasion of contiguous structures (such as the recurrent laryn-
geal nerve or the esophagus). The most common radiologic 
finding of tracheal malignancy is tracheal stenosis, but is found 
in only 50% of cases. With tumors other than squamous cell 
carcinomas, symptoms may persist for months because of slow 
tumor growth rates. Stage of presentation is advanced, with 
approximately 50% of patients presenting with stage IV disease. 
1
Cuff
hyperinflation
2
Digital control
3 
Bronchoscopic
compression
Orotracheal tube
ready in place if needed
Orotracheal
tube replacing
tracheostomy
tube
Forward pressure
applied with
bronchoscope
610
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Five-year survival for all tracheal neoplasms is 40% but falls to 
15% for those with stage IV disease.6
Squamous cell carcinomas often present with regional 
lymph node metastases and are frequently unresectable at pre-
sentation. Their biologic behavior is similar to that of squamous 
cell carcinoma of the lung. Adenoid cystic carcinomas, a type of 
salivary gland tumor, are generally slow-growing, spread sub-
mucosally, and tend to infiltrate along nerve sheaths and within 
the tracheal wall. Although indolent in nature, adenoid cystic 
carcinomas are malignant and can spread to regional lymph 
nodes, lung, and bone. Squamous cell carcinoma and adenoid 
cystic carcinomas represent approximately 65% of all tracheal 
neoplasms. The remaining 35% is comprised of small cell car-
cinomas, mucoepidermoid carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, lym-
phomas, and others.7
Therapy.  Evaluation and treatment of patients with tracheal 
tumors should include neck and chest computed tomography 
A
C
B
D
Cricoid
Sternohyoid m.
Esophagus
Figure 19-5.  Single-stage operation for clo-
sure of a tracheoesophageal fistula and tra-
cheal resection. A. The fistula is divided and 
the trachea is transected below the level of 
damage. B. The fistula is closed on the tra-
cheal side in a single layer and the esophageal 
side in a double layer. The damaged trachea 
segment is resected. C. View of completed 
tracheal anastomosis. m. = muscle.
(CT) and rigid bronchoscopy. Rigid bronchoscopy permits gen-
eral assessment of the airway and tumor; it also allows debride-
ment or laser ablation of the tumor to provide relief of dyspnea. 
If the tumor is judged to be completely resectable, primary 
resection and anastomosis is the treatment of choice for these 
tumors (Fig. 19-6). Up to 50% of the length of the trachea can be 
resected with primary anastomosis. In most tracheal resections, 
anterolateral tracheal mobilization and suturing of the chin to 
the sternum for 7 days are done routinely. Use of laryngeal and 
hilar release is determined at the time of surgery, based on the 
surgeon’s judgment of the degree of tension present. For longer 
resections, specialized maneuvers are necessary such as laryn-
geal release and right hilar release to minimize tension on the 
anastomosis.
Postoperative mortality, which occurs in up to 10% of 
patients, is associated with the length of tracheal resection, use 
of laryngeal release, the type of resection, and the histologic 
611
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
type of the cancer. Factors associated with improved long-term 
survival include complete resection and use of radiation as 
adjuvant therapy in the setting of incomplete resection.8 Due to 
their radiosensitivity, radiotherapy is frequently given postop-
eratively after resection of both adenoid cystic carcinomas and 
squamous cell carcinomas.9 A dose of 50 Gy or greater is usual. 
Nodal positivity does not seem to be associated with worse sur-
vival. Survival at 5 and 10 years is much better for adenoid 
cystic (73% and 57%, respectively) than for tracheal cancers 
(47% and 36%, respectively; P < .05). For patients with unre-
sectable tumors, radiation may be given as the primary therapy 
to improve local control, but is rarely curative. For recurrent 
airway compromise, stenting or laser therapies should be con-
sidered part of the treatment algorithm.
LUNG
Anatomy
Segmental Anatomy.  The segmental bronchial and vascular 
anatomy of the lungs allows subsegmental and segmental resec-
tions, if the clinical situation requires it or if lung tissue can be 
preserved10 (Fig. 19-7). Note the continuity of the pulmonary 
parenchyma between adjacent segments of each lobe.
Lymphatic Drainage.  Lymph nodes that drain the lungs are 
divided into two groups according to the tumor-node-metastasis 
(TNM) staging system for lung cancer: the pulmonary lymph 
nodes (N1) and the mediastinal nodes (N2) (Fig. 19-8).
The N1 lymph nodes constitute the following: (a) intra-
pulmonary or segmental nodes that lie at points of division 
High-index of suspicion
(cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis,
stridor and hoarseness)
Complete staging: computed
tomography/PET
scan/mediastinoscopy
Flexible/rigid bronchoscopy
Tumor resectable
Performance status
adequate for surgery
Debridement and/or
laser ablation
Principles of tracheal resection
• May resect up to 50% of tracheal length
• Anterolateral mobilization only
• Suture head in forward flexion for 7 days
• Laryngeal and hilar release as needed
 for relief of tension
Radiotherapy 50 Gy (±chemotherapy)
(primary treatment or postoperatively)
Tumor unresectable
1) Probable grossly positive tracheal
 
resection margin
2) Metastatic disease
3) Length of resection precludes
 
safe reconstruction
4) Invasion of unresectable adjacent
 
organs
Poor performance
status
Figure 19-6.  Algorithm for eval-
uation and treatment of tracheal 
neoplasm. PET = positron emis-
sion tomography.
of segmental bronchi or in the bifurcations of the pulmonary 
artery; (b) lobar nodes that lie along the upper, middle, and 
lower lobe bronchi; (c) interlobar nodes located in the angles 
formed by the main bronchi bifurcating into the lobar bron-
chi; and (d) hilar nodes along the main bronchi. The interlobar 
lymph nodes lie in the depths of the interlobar fissure on each 
side and constitute a lymphatic sump for each lung, referred 
to as the lymphatic sump of Borrie; all of the pulmonary lobes 
of the corresponding lung drain into this group of nodes (Fig. 
19-9). On the right, the nodes of the lymphatic sump lie around 
the bronchus intermedius (bounded above by the right upper 
lobe bronchus and below by the middle lobe and superior seg-
mental bronchi). On the left, the lymphatic sump is confined to 
the interlobar fissure, with the lymph nodes in the angle between 
the lingular and lower lobe bronchi and in apposition to the pul-
monary artery branches.
The N2 lymph nodes consist of four main groups. (a) The 
anterior mediastinal nodes are located in association with the 
upper surface of the pericardium, the phrenic nerves, the liga-
mentum arteriosum, and the left innominate vein. (b) The pos-
terior mediastinal group includes paraesophageal lymph nodes 
within the inferior pulmonary ligament and, more superiorly, 
between the esophagus and trachea near the arch of the azy-
gos vein. (c) The tracheobronchial lymph nodes are made up 
of three subgroups that are located near the bifurcation of the 
trachea. These include the subcarinal nodes, which lie in the 
obtuse angle between the trachea and each main stem bronchus, 
and the nodes that lay anterior to the lower end of the trachea. 
(d) Paratracheal lymph nodes are located in proximity to the 
612
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
trachea in the superior mediastinum. Those on the right side 
form a chain with the tracheobronchial nodes inferiorly and with 
some of the deep cervical nodes above (scalene lymph nodes).
Lymphatic drainage to the mediastinal lymph nodes from 
the right lung is ipsilateral, except for occasional bilateral drain-
age to the superior mediastinum. In contrast, in the left lung, 
particularly the left lower lobe, lymphatic drainage occurs with 
equal frequency to ipsilateral and contralateral superior medi-
astinal nodes.
Normal Lung Histology
The lung can be conveniently viewed as two linked compo-
nents: the tracheobronchial tree (or conducting airways com-
ponent) and the alveolar spaces (or gas exchange component). 
The tracheobronchial tree consists of approximately 23 airway 
divisions to the level of the alveoli. It includes the main bronchi, 
lobar bronchi, segmental bronchi (to designated bronchopulmo-
nary segments), and terminal bronchioles (i.e., the smallest air-
ways still lined by bronchial epithelium and without alveoli). 
The tracheobronchial tree is normally lined by pseudostratified 
ciliated columnar cells and mucous (or goblet) cells, which both 
derive from basal cells (Fig. 19-10). Ciliated cells predominate. 
Goblet cells, which release mucus, can significantly increase in 
number in acute bronchial injury, such as exposure to cigarette 
smoke. The normal bronchial epithelium also contains bron-
chial submucosal glands, which are mixed salivary-type glands 
containing mucous cells, serous cells, and neuroendocrine cells 
called Kulchitsky cells, which are also found within the surface 
epithelium. The bronchial submucosal glands can give rise to 
salivary gland–type tumors, including mucoepidermoid carci-
nomas and adenoid cystic carcinomas.
Two cell types, called type I and type II pneumocytes, 
make up the alveolar epithelium. Type I pneumocytes comprise 
40% of the total number of alveolar epithelial cells, but cover 
95% of the surface area of the alveolar wall. These cells are not 
Right lung and bronchi
Left lung and bronchi
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
1+2
1+2
Segments 
1. Apical
2. Posterior
3. Anterior
4. Lateral
5. Medial
6.   Superior
7.   Medial Basal *
8.   Anterior Basal
9.   Lateral Basal
10. Posterior Basal 
* Medial basal (7) not present in left lung
3p
3a
6
Ao
PA
5
1
2L
Brachiocephalic
artery
2R
4R
Ao
4L
Azygos vein
10R
7
11R
12,13,14R
8R
9R
9L
8L
PA
11L
10L
12,13,14L
Figure 19-7.  Segmental anatomy of the lungs and bronchi.
Figure 19-8.  The location of regional lymph node stations for lung cancer. (Reproduced with permission from Mountain CF, Dresler CM. 
Regional lymph node classification for lung cancer staging. Chest. 1997;111:1718.)
613
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Figure 19-9.  The lymphatic sump of Borrie includes the groups of 
lymph nodes that receive lymphatic drainage from all pulmonary 
lobes of the corresponding lung.
Figure 19-10.  Normal lung histology. A. Pseudostratified ciliated columnar cells and mucous cells normally line the tracheobronchial tree. 
B. A Kulchitsky cell is depicted (arrow).
B
A
capable of regeneration because they have no mitotic potential. 
Type II pneumocytes cover only 3% of the alveolar surface, 
but comprise 60% of the alveolar epithelial cells. In addition, 
clusters of neuroendocrine cells are seen in the alveolar spaces.
Preinvasive Lesions
The term “precancerous” does not mean that an inevitable pro-
gression to invasive carcinoma will occur, but such lesions, 
particularly those with high-grade dysplasia,11,12 do constitute 
a clear marker for potential development of invasive cancer. 
Three precancerous lesions of the respiratory tract are currently 
recognized.
1.		 Squamous dysplasia and carcinoma in situ. Cigarette 
smoke can induce a transformation of the tracheobron-
chial pseudostratified epithelium to metaplastic squamous 
mucosa, with subsequent evolution to dysplasia as cellu-
lar abnormalities accumulate. Dysplastic changes include 
614
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
altered cellular polarity and increased cell size, number 
of cell layers, nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, and number 
of mitoses. Gradations are considered mild, moderate, or 
severe. Carcinoma in situ represents carcinoma still con-
fined by the basement membrane.
2.		 Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH). AAH is a 
lesion smaller than 5.0 mm, comprising epithelial cells 
lining the alveoli that are similar to type II pneumocytes. 
Histologically, AAH is similar to adenocarcinoma in situ; 
it represents the beginning stage of a stepwise evolution to 
adenocarcinoma in situ and then to adenocarcinoma. With 
the availability of thin-section CT, it is possible to detect 
preinvasive adenocarcinoma lesions as early as AAH. 
These lesions can be multiple, are typically small (5 mm or 
less), and have a ground-glass appearance.
3.		 Diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyper-
plasia. This rare lesion represents a diffuse proliferation of 
neuroendocrine cells, but without invasion of the basement 
membrane. It can exist as a diffuse increase in the number of 
single neuroendocrine cells, or as small lesions less than 
5.0 mm in diameter. Lesions over 5.0 mm in size or that 
breach the basement membrane are carcinoid tumors.
Invasive or Malignant Lesions
The pathologic diagnosis of lung cancer is currently based on 
light microscopic criteria and is broadly divided into two main 
groups: non–small cell lung carcinoma and neuroendocrine 
tumors.13 Immunohistochemical staining and electron micros-
copy are used as adjuncts in diagnosis, particularly in the assess-
ment of potential neuroendocrine tumors.
Non–Small Cell Lung Carcinoma.  The term non–small cell 
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) includes many tumor cell types, 
Table 19-1
Difference between invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma and nonmucinous adenocarcinoma in situ/minimally invasive 
adenocarcinoma/lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma
Invasive Mucinous Adenocarcinoma 
(Formerly Mucinous BAC)
Nonmucinous AIS/MIA/LPA 
(Formerly Nonmucinous BAC)
Female
49/84 (58%)52,120–123
101/140 (72%)52,120–123
Smoker
39/87 (45%)52,120–122,124
75/164 (46%)52,120–122,124
Radiographic 
appearance
Majority consolidation; air bronchogram125
Majority ground-glass attenuation23,56,58,103,129–134
Frequent multifocal and multilobar presentation56,125–128
Cell type
Mucin-filled, columnar, and/or goblet50–52,125,135
Type II pneumocyte and/or Clara cell50–52,125,135
Phenotype
  CK7
Mostly positive (~88%)a54,55,136–139
Positive (~98%)a54,55,136–139
  CK20
Positive (~54%)a54,55,136–139
Negative (~5%)a54,55,136–139
  TTF-1
Mostly negative (~17%)1 a54,55,120,137–139
Positive (~67%)a54,55,120,137–139
Genotype
  KRAS mutation
Frequent (~76%)a55,94,121,127,140–144
Some (~13%)a55,121,127,140–144
  EGFR mutation Almost none (~3)a55,121,127,140–142
Frequent (~45%)a55,121,127,140–142
Source: Reproduced with permission from Travis W, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al. International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American 
Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: International multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6:244.
aNumbers represent the percentage of cases that are reported to be positive.
BAC, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; AIS, adenocarcinoma in situ; MIA, minimally invasive adenocarcinoma; LP A, lepidic predominant adenocarci-
noma; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; TTF, thyroid transcription factor.
including large cell, squamous cell, and adenocarcinoma. His-
torically, these subtypes were considered to be a uniform group 
based on limited understanding of the distinct clinical behaviors 
of the subtypes as well as the fact that there were few treatment 
options available. With increasing understanding of the 
molecular biology underlying these tumor subtypes, how-
ever, the approach to diagnosis and management and the termi-
nology used in describing these tumors are evolving rapidly.
Adenocarcinoma.  The incidence of adenocarcinoma has 
increased over the last several decades, and it is now the most 
common lung cancer, accounting for 30% of lung cancers in 
male smokers and 40% of lung cancers in female smokers. 
Adenocarcinoma is the histologic subtype for 80% and 60% of 
lung cancers in nonsmoking females and males, respectively. It 
occurs more frequently in females than in males. It is the most 
frequent histologic subtype in women, patients who are under 
45 years of age, and Asian populations.14
Histologic Subtyping of Adenocarcinoma.  Increasing under-
standing of lung adenocarcinoma, such as important clinical, 
radiologic, pathologic, and genetic differences between 
mucinous and nonmucinous adenocarcinomas, prompted 
multiple changes in the classification system in 2011.15 Based 
on consensus, the international working group proposed a mul-
tidisciplinary approach, with standardized criteria and terminol-
ogy for diagnosis in cytologic and small biopsy specimens, and 
routine molecular testing for known mutations, such as EGFR 
and KRAS mutations (Table 19-1). The new classification sys-
tem delineated a stepwise pathlogic progression, from AAH to 
invasive adenocarcinoma based on the predominant histo-
logic growth patterns; the terms bronchioloalveolar car-
cinoma and mixed subtype adenocarcinoma were eliminated in 
favor of more biologically driven classification (Table 19-2). 
1
2
3
615
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
1.		 Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS). AISs are small (≤3 cm) 
solitary adenocarcinomas that have pure lepidic growth; 
lepidic growth is characterized by tumor growth within 
the alveolar spaces. These lesions are not invasive into the 
stroma, vascular system, or pleura and do not have papil-
lary or micropapillary patterns or intra-alveolar tumor cells. 
They are very rarely mucinous, consisting of type II pneu-
mocytes or Clara cells. These patients are expected to have 
100% disease-specific survival with complete surgical 
resection. On CT scan, AIS can appear as a pure ground-
glass neoplasm, but occasionally will present as part of a 
solid or part-solid nodule. Mucinous AIS is more likely 
to appear solid or to have the appearance of consolida-
tion. As with AAH, the lesions can be single or multiple; 
the ground-glass changes in AIS, however, tend to have a 
higher attenuation compared to AAH.
2.		 Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA). In the same 
size solitary lesion, if less than 5 mm of invasion are noted 
within a predominantly lepidic growth pattern, the lesion 
is termed minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA) to 
indicate a patient group with near 100% survival when the 
lesion is completely resected. This differentiates patients 
with AIS, but recognizes the fact that the presence of inva-
sion becomes prognostically significant when the size of 
the invasive component reaches 5 mm or greater in size.16 
If multiple areas of microscopic invasion are found within 
Table 19-2
New classification system for lung adenocarcinoma
Preinvasive lesions
  Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia
  Adenocarcinoma in situ (≤3 cm formerly BAC)
    Nonmucinous
    Mucinous
    Mixed mucinous/nonmucinous
Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (≤3 cm lepidic 
predominant tumor with ≤5 mm invasion)
  Nonmucinous
  Mucinous
  Mixed mucinous/nonmucinous
Invasive adenocarcinoma
  Lepidic predominant (formerly nonmucinous BAC 
  pattern, with >5 mm invasion)
  Acinar predominant
  Papillary predominant
  Micropapillary predominant
  Solid predominant with mucin production
Variants of invasive adenocarcinoma
  Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous  
  BAC)
  Colloid
  Fetal (low and high grade)
  Enteric
Source: Reproduced with permission from Travis W, Brambilla E, No-
guchi M, et al. International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/
American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: International 
multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac 
Oncol. 2011;6:244.
BAC = bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; IASLC = International Associa-
tion for the Study of Lung Cancer; ATS = American Thoracic Society; 
ERS = European Respiratory Society.
the lepidic growth, the size of the largest invasive area, 
measured in the largest dimension, is used; this area must 
be ≤5 mm to be considered MIA. As with AIS, MIA is very 
rarely mucinous. The invasive component histologically is 
acinar, papillary, micropapillary, and/or solid and shows 
tumor cells infiltrating into the surrounding myofibroblas-
tic stroma. On CT scan, the appearance of MIA is often 
a part-solid nodule (≤5 mm) with a predominant ground-
glass component, but can be highly variable.
3.		 Lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma (LPA). If lym-
phovascular invasion, pleural invasion, tumor necrosis, 
or more than 5 mm of invasion are noted in a lesion that 
has lepidic growth as its predominant component, MIA 
is excluded and the lesion is called lepidic predominant 
adenocarcinoma (LPA), and the size of the invasive com-
ponent is recorded for the T stage.
4.		 Invasive adenocarcinoma. The new classification system 
now recommends classifying invasive adenocarcinoma by 
the most predominant subtype after histologic evaluation of 
the resection specimen. To determine the predominant sub-
type, histologic sections are evaluated and the patterns are 
determined, in 5% increments, throughout the specimen. 
This semiquantitative method encourages the viewer to 
identify and quantify all patterns present, rather than focus-
ing on a single pattern. In the pathology report, the tumor is 
classified by the predominant pattern, with percentages of 
the subtypes also reported (Fig. 19-11).Subtypes include:
a.  Lepidic predominant
b.  Acinar predominant
c.  Papillary predominant
d.  Micropapillary predominant
e.  Solid predominant
	    Adenocarcinoma is often peripherally located and fre-
quently discovered incidentally on routine chest radio-
graphs, unlike squamous cell cancers. When symptoms 
occur, they are due to pleural or chest wall invasion (pleu-
ritic or chest wall pain) or pleural seeding with malignant 
pleural effusion. Invasive adenocarcinoma is usually solid 
by CT scan, but can also be part-solid and even a ground-
glass nodule. Occasionally, a lobar ground-glass opaci-
fication may be present, which is often associated with 
significant respiratory compromise and can be mistaken for 
lobar pneumonia. Bubble-like or cystic lucencies on CT 
scan in small (≤2 cm) adenocarcinomas or extensive asso-
ciated ground-glass components correlate with slow growth 
and well-differentiated tumors and a more favorable prog-
nosis. Intratumoral air bronchograms are usually indicative 
of well-differentiated tumor, whereas spiculations that are 
coarse and thick (≥2 mm) portend vascular invasion and 
nodal metastasis and are associated with decreased survival 
following complete surgical resection. Pleural retraction is 
also a poor prognostic indicator.
5.		 Additional histologic variants include colloid adenocarci-
noma (formerly mucinous cystadenocarcinoma), fetal ade-
nocarcinoma, and enteric adenocarcinoma. Clear cell and 
signet ring cell types are no longer considered to be distinct 
subtypes as they are found in association with most of the 
five dominant histologic patterns (lepidic, acinar, papillary, 
micropapillary, and solid). However, they are still notable, 
as they can signal clinically relevant molecular changes, 
such as the presence of the EML4-ALK fusion gene in solid 
tumors with signet ring features.
616
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 19-11.  Major histologic patterns of invasive adenocarcinoma. A. Lepidic predominant pattern with mostly lepidic growth (right) 
and a smaller area of invasive acinar adenocarcinoma (left). B. Lepidic pattern consists of a proliferation type II pneumocytes and Clara cells 
along the surface alveolar walls. C. Area of invasive acinar adenocarcinoma (same tumor as in A and B). D. Acinar adenocarcinoma consists 
of round to oval-shaped malignant glands invading a fibrous stroma. E. Papillary adenocarcinoma consists of malignant cuboidal to columnar 
tumor cells growing on the surface of fibrovascular cores. F. Micropapillary adenocarcinoma consists of small papillary clusters of glandular 
cells growing within this airspace, most of which do not show fibrovascular cores. G. Solid adenocarcinoma with mucin consisting of sheets 
of tumor cells with abundant cytoplasm and mostly vesicular nuclei with several conspicuous nucleoli. No acinar, papillary, or lepidic pat-
terns are seen, but multiple cells have intracytoplasmic basophilic globules that suggest intracytoplasmic mucin. H. Solid adenocarcinoma 
with mucin. Numerous intracytoplasmic droplets of mucin are highlighted with this diastase-periodic acid Schiff stain. (Reproduced with 
permission from Travis W, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al. International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society: International multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6:244.)
Squamous Cell Carcinoma.  Representing 30% to 40% of 
lung cancers, squamous cell carcinoma is the most frequent 
cancer in men and highly correlated with cigarette smoking. 
They arise primarily in the main, lobar, or first segmental 
bronchi, which are collectively referred to as the central 
airways. Symptoms of airway irritation or obstruction are 
common, and include cough, hemoptysis, wheezing (due to 
high-grade airway obstruction), dyspnea (due to bronchial 
obstruction with or without postobstructive atelectasis), and 
pneumonia (caused by airway obstruction with secretion 
retention and atelectasis).
Occasionally a more peripherally based squamous cell 
carcinoma will develop in a tuberculosis scar or in the wall of 
a bronchiectatic cavity. Histologically, cells develop a pattern 
of clusters with intracellular bridges and keratin pearls. Central 
necrosis is frequent and may lead to the radiographic findings 
617
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
of a cavity (possibly with an air-fluid level). Such cavities may 
become infected, with resultant abscess formation.
Large Cell Carcinoma.  Large cell carcinoma accounts for 10% 
to 20% of lung cancers and may be located centrally or periph-
erally. These tumors have cell diameters of 30 to 50 μm, which 
are often admixed with various other malignant cell types. Large 
cell carcinoma can be confused with a large cell variant of neu-
roendocrine carcinoma, but can be differentiated by special 
immunohistochemical stains.
Salivary Gland–Type Neoplasms.  Salivary-type submucosal 
bronchial glands throughout the tracheobronchial tree can give 
rise to tumors that are histologically identical to those seen in 
the salivary glands. The two most common are adenoid cystic 
carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Both tumors occur 
centrally due to their site of origin. Adenoid cystic carcinoma 
is a slow-growing tumor that is locally and systemically inva-
sive, growing submucosally and infiltrating along perineural 
sheaths. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma consists of squamous and 
mucous cells and is graded as low or high grade, depending on 
the mitotic rate and degree of necrosis.
Neuroendocrine Neoplasms.  Neuroendocrine lung tumors 
are classified into neuroendocrine hyperplasia and three sepa-
rate grades of neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC). Immunohis-
tochemical staining for neuroendocrine markers (including 
chromogranins, synaptophysin, CD57, and neuron-specific 
enolase) is essential to accurately diagnose most tumors.17
Grade I NEC (classic or typical carcinoid) is a low-grade 
NEC; 80% arise in the epithelium of the central airways. It 
occurs primarily in younger patients. Because of the central 
location, it classically presents with hemoptysis, with or without 
airway obstruction and pneumonia. Histologically, tumor cells 
are arranged in cords and clusters with a rich vascular stroma. 
This vascularity can lead to life-threatening hemorrhage with 
even simple bronchoscopic biopsy maneuvers. Regional lymph 
node metastases are seen in 15% of patients, but rarely spread 
systemically or cause death.
Grade II NECs (atypical carcinoid) have a much higher 
malignant potential and, unlike grade I NEC, are etiologically 
linked to cigarette smoking and are more likely to be peripher-
ally located. Histologic findings may include areas of necrosis, 
nuclear pleomorphism, and higher mitotic rates. Lymph node 
metastases are found in 30% to 50% of patients. At diagnosis, 
25% of patients already have remote metastases.
Grade III NEC large cell–type tumors occur primarily 
in heavy smokers and in the mid to peripheral lung fields. 
They are often large with central necrosis and a high mitotic 
rate. Their neuroendocrine nature is revealed by positive 
immunohistochemical staining for at least one neuroendo-
crine marker.
Grade IV NEC (small cell lung carcinoma [SCLC]) is the 
most malignant NEC and accounts for 25% of all lung cancers; 
these NECs often have early, widespread metastases. These 
cancers also arise primarily in the central airways. As with 
squamous cell cancers, symptoms include cough, hemoptysis, 
wheezing (due to high-grade airway obstruction), dyspnea (due 
to bronchial obstruction with or without postobstructive atel-
ectasis), and pneumonia (caused by airway obstruction with 
secretion retention and atelectasis). Evaluation includes expert 
pathology review and comprehensive evaluation for metastatic 
disease. Three groups of grade IV NEC are recognized: pure 
small cell carcinoma (sometimes referred to as oat cell carcinoma), 
small cell carcinoma with a large cell component, and combined 
(mixed) tumors.
Grade IV NECs consist of smaller cells (diameter 10 to 
20 μm) with little cytoplasm and very dark nuclei; they can be 
difficult to distinguish from lymphoproliferative lesions and 
atypical carcinoid tumors. Histologically, a high mitotic rate 
with easily visualized multiple mitoses and areas of extensive 
necrosis are characteristic. Importantly, very small broncho-
scopic biopsies can distinguish NSCLC from SCLC, but crush 
artifact may make NSCLC appear similar to SCLC. If uncer-
tainty exists, special immunohistochemical stains or rebiopsy 
(or both) will be necessary. These tumors are the leading pro-
ducer of paraneoplastic syndromes.
Lung Cancer Epidemiology
Lung cancer is the leading cancer killer and second most fre-
quently diagnosed cancer in the United States, accounting for 
nearly 28% of all cancer deaths—more than cancers of the 
breast, prostate, ovary, and colon and rectum combined 
(Fig. 19-12). In 2008, it was estimated that 1 in 13 men and 
1 in 16 women would develop lung cancer in their lifetime. The 
overall 5-year survival for all patients with lung cancer is 16%, 
making lung cancer the most lethal of the leading four cancers 
(Fig. 19-13A, B) It is encouraging, however, that the average 
annual death rate declined by 2.8% per year for men and 1.1% 
per year for women from 2005 to 2009.18 Unfortunately, most 
patients are still diagnosed at an advanced stage of disease, so 
therapy is rarely curative.
Prognostic markers for lung cancer survival include 
female sex (5-year survival of 18.3% for women vs. 13.8% 
for men), younger age (5-year survival of 22.8% for those <45 
years vs. 13.7% for those >65 years), and white race (5-year sur-
vival of 16.1% for whites vs. 12.2% for blacks). When access to 
advanced medical care is unrestricted, as for the military popu-
lation, the racial difference in survival disappears, suggesting 
that, at least in part, differences in survival may be explained 
by less access to advanced medical care and later diagnosis.19
Risk Factors for Lung Cancer.  Cigarette smoking was impli-
cated as a causal factor in approximately 75% of all lung cancers 
worldwide in 2007. According to the U.S. Surgeon General’s 
report in 2004, 90% of lung cancers in men and nearly 80% in 
women can be attributed to cigarette smoking or secondhand 
cigarette smoke exposure. Two lung cancer types—squamous 
cell and small cell carcinoma—are extraordinarily rare in the 
absence of cigarette smoking. The risk of developing lung can-
cer escalates with the number of cigarettes smoked, the number 
of years of smoking, and the use of unfiltered cigarettes. Con-
versely, the risk of lung cancer declines with smoking cessation, 
but never drops to that of never smokers, regardless of the length 
of abstinence (Table 19-3).20 Radon exposure accounts for the 
vast majority of the remaining cancers. Approximately 25% of 
all lung cancers worldwide and 53% of cancers in women are 
not related to smoking, and most of them (62%) are adenocarci-
nomas. Table 19-4 summarizes the existing data regarding the 
etiology of lung cancer in nonsmokers.21
Nearly 3500 deaths from lung cancer each year are attrib-
utable to secondhand (environmental) smoke exposure, which 
confers an excess risk for lung cancer of 24% when a nonsmoker 
lives with a smoker.22 Risk is conferred by exposure to any 
burning tobacco, including cigars. The amount of secondhand 
exposure from one large cigar is equivalent to the exposure from 
21 cigarettes. As with active smoking, risk of developing lung 
618
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Male
* Excludes basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinoma except urinary bladder.
Female
Male
Estimated New Cases*
Leading New Cancer Cases and Deaths – 2012 Estimates
Estimated Deaths
Female
Prostate
241,740 (29%)
Lung & bronchus
116,470 (14%)
Colon & rectum
73,420 (9%)
Urinary bladder
55,600 (7%)
Melanoma of the skin
44,250 (5%)
Kidney & renal pelvis
40,250 (5%)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
38,160 (4%)
Oral cavity & pharynx
28,540 (3%)
Leukemia
26,830 (3%)
Pancreas
22,090 (3%)
All sites
848,170 (100%)
 Breast
226,870 (29%)
Lung & bronchus
109,690 (14%)
Colon & rectum
70,040 (9%)
Uterine corpus
47,130 (6%)
Thyroid
43,210 (5%)
Melanoma of the skin
32,000 (4%)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
31,970 (4%)
Kidney & renal pelvis
24,520 (3%)
Ovary
22,280 (3%)
Pancreas
21,830 (3%)
All sites
790,740 (100%) 
Lung & bronchus
87,750 (29%)
Prostate
28,170 (9%)
Colon & rectum
26,470 (9%)
Pancreas
18,850 (6%)
Liver & intrahepatic bile duct
13,980(5%)
Leukemia
13,500 (4%)
Esophagus
12,040 (4%)
Urinary bladder
10,510 (3%)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
10,320 (3%)
Kidney & renal pelvis
8,650 (3%)
All sites
301,820 (100%)
Lung & bronchus
72,590 (26%)
Breast
39,510 (14%)
Colon & rectum
25,220 (9%)
Pancreas
18,540 (7%)
Ovary
15,500 (6%)
Leukemia
10,040 (4%)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
8,620 (3%)
Uterine corpus
8,010 (3%)
Liver & intrahepatic bile duct
6,570 (2%)
Brain & other nervous system
5,980 (2%)
All sites
275,370 (100%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
1930
*Per 100,000, age adjusted to the 2000 US standard population.
Note: Due to changes in ICD coding, numerator information has changed over time. Rates for cancer of the liver, lung and bronchus, and colon and rectum are
affected by these coding changes.
Age-adjusted Cancer Death Rates,* Males by Site, US, 1930–2008
1935
1940
1945
1950
Stomach
Rate per 100,000 male population
Leukemia
Liver
Colon & rectum
Prostate
Lung & bronchus
Pancreas
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Figure 19-12.  Leading new cancer cases and deaths: 2012 estimates. *Excludes basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas 
except urinary bladder. (Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10. © 2012 American Cancer Society, Inc.)
Figure 19-13.  Age-adjusted cancer death rates. A. Males by site, United States, 1930 to 2008. B. Females by site, United States, 1930 to 
2008. *Per 100,000, age adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. (Modified with permission from John Wiley and Sons: Siegel R, 
Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10. © 2012 American Cancer Society, Inc.)
619
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
100
80
60
40
20
0
1930
*Per 100,000, age adjusted to the 2000 US standard population. †Uterus cancer death rates are for uterine cervix and uterine corpus combined.
Note: Due to changes in ICD coding, numerator information has changed over time. Rates for cancer of the lung and bronchus, colon and rectum, and
ovary are affected by these coding changes.
Age-adjusted Cancer Death Rates,* Females by Site, US, 1930–2008
1935
Uterus†
Stomach
Ovary
Colon & rectum
Lung & bronchus
Breast
Pancreas
1940
1945
1950
Rate per 100,000 female population
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Figure 19-13.  (Continued)
Table 19-3
Relative risk of lung cancer in smokers
Smoking Category
Relative Risk
Never smoked
1.0
Currently smoke
15.8–16.3
Formerly smoked
  Years of abstinence
  1–9
5.9–19.5
  10–19
2.0–6.1
  >20
1.9–3.7
Source: Adapted from Samet,20 p 673.
cancer increases with longer duration and higher level of 
exposure to environmental tobacco.
Over 7000 chemicals have been identified in tobacco 
smoke, and more than 70 of the compounds are known to be 
carcinogens. The main chemical carcinogens are polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons, which are actively or passively inhaled 
in the tobacco smoke and absorbed; these compounds are acti-
vated by specific enzymes and become mutagenic, bind to mac-
romolecules such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and induce 
genetic mutations. In treating any patient with a previous smoking 
history, it is important to remember that there has been field 
cancerization of the entire aerodigestive tract. The patient’s risk 
is increased for cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, tra-
cheobronchial tree and lung, and esophagus. In examining such 
patients, a detailed history and physical examination of these 
organ systems must be performed.
Other causes of lung cancer include exposure to a num-
ber of industrial compounds, including asbestos, arsenic, and 
chromium compounds. In fact, the combination of asbestos 
and cigarette smoke exposure has a multiplicative effect on 
risk. Pre-existing lung disease confers an increased risk of lung 
cancer—up to 13%—for individuals who have never smoked. 
Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are at 
higher risk for lung cancer than would be predicted based on 
smoking risk alone. Patients with secondary scar formation 
related to a history of tuberculosis also have a higher risk of 
primary lung carcinoma. This increase is thought to be related 
to poor clearance of inhaled carcinogens and/or to the effects of 
chronic inflammation.
Screening for Lung Cancer in  
High-Risk Populations
In 2002, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) was 
launched to determine whether screening with CT in high-risk 
populations would reduce mortality from lung cancer. The study 
randomized 53,353 eligible patients age 55 to 74 years to either 
three annual low-dose helical CT scans (LDCT; aka spiral CT) 
or posteroanterior view chest radiograph. Patients were eligible 
4
620
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 19-4
Summary of selected studies of risk factors for lung cancer in individuals who never smoked
Risk Factor
Risk Estimate (95% CI)
Comments
Reference
Environmental tobacco  
  smoke
1.19 (90% CI: 1.04–1.35)
1.21 (1.13–1.30)
1.22 (1.13–1.33)
1.24 (1.18–1.29)
Meta-analysis of 11 U.S. studies of spousal  
  exposure (females only)
Meta-analysis of 44 case-control studies  
  worldwide of spousal exposure
Meta-analysis of 25 studies worldwide of  
  workplace exposure
Meta-analysis of 22 studies worldwide of  
  workplace exposure
225
226
226
227
Residential radon
8.4% (3.0%–15.8%) per 100 Bq m3 increase 
  in measured radon
11% (0%–28%) per 100 Bq m3
Meta-analysis of 13 European studies
Meta-analysis of 7 North American studies
228
229
Cooking oil vapors
2.12 (1.81–2.47)
Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and  
  Taiwan (females who never smoked)
230
Indoor coal and wood  
  burning
2.66 (1.39–5.07)
1.22 (1.04–1.44)
2.5 (1.5–3.6)
Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and  
  Taiwan (both sexes)
Large case-control study (2861 cases and  
  3118 controls) from Eastern and Central 
Europe (both sexes)
Large case-control study (1205 cases and  
  1541 controls) from Canada (significant  
  for women only)
230
231
232
Genetic factors:  
  family history,  
  CYP1A1 Ile462Val  
  polymorphism,  
  XRCC1 variants
1.51 (1.11–2.06)
2.99 (1.51–5.91)
2.04 (1.17–3.54)
No association
No association overall; reduced risk 0.65  
  (0.46–0.83) with Arg194Trp  
  polymorphism and 0.56 (0.36–0.86)  
  with Arg280His for heavy smokers
Increased risk for never smokers 1.3  
  (1.0–1.8) and decreased risk for heavy  
  smokers 0.5 (0.3–1.0) with Arg299Gln
Meta-analysis of 28 case-control, 17  
  cohort, and 7 twin studies
Meta-analysis of 14 case-control studies of  
  Caucasian never smokers
Meta-analysis of 21 case-control studies  
  of Caucasian and Asian never smokers  
  (significant for Caucasians only)
Meta-analysis of 13 case-control studies
Large case-control study from Europe  
  (2188 cases and 2198 controls)
Large case-control study from the United  
  States (1091 cases and 1240 controls)
233
234
235
236
237
238
Viral factors: HPV 16  
  and 18
10.12 (3.88–26.4) for never smoking  
  women >60 y
Case-control study (141 cases, 60 controls)  
  from Taiwan of never smoking women
239
Bq = becquerels; CI = confidence interval; CYP1A1 = cytochrome P450 enzyme 1A1; HPV = human papilloma virus.
Source: Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF. Lung cancer in never smokers–a different disease. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;7:778 kkjkjdht © 2007.
for the trial if they had a greater than 30 pack-year history of 
cigarette smoking; had smoked within the past 15 years if a 
former smoker; had no prior history of lung cancer; had no his-
tory of other life-threatening cancers in the prior 5 years; did not 
have symptoms suggestive of an undiagnosed lung cancer (such 
as hemoptysis or weight loss); and had not had a chest CT scan 
in the prior 18 months. Accrual to the study was excellent, and 
the primary endpoint of a 20% relative reduction in mortality 
was achieved in 2010. An absolute risk reduction of lung can-
cer death of four per 1000 individuals screened by LDCT was 
realized. Interestingly, all-cause mortality was also reduced by 
nearly 7% in the LDCT group, further emphasizing the impact 
of lung cancer on the mortality of smokers and former smok-
ers.23 An estimated 320 individuals need to be screened to save 
one life from lung cancer. Additional considerations require 
further evaluation before widespread LDCT screening will 
become reality. First, there was a 7% false-positive rate in this 
trial. False-positive scans lead to patient anxiety, invasive test-
ing, and potentially morbid procedures to further evaluate the 
finding. The impact of these issues on patient quality of life and 
cost-effectiveness has yet to be elucidated. It is also critical that 
regulatory guidelines for patient eligibility, frequency of screen-
ing, interpretation of the scans, processes for further evaluation 
and management of positive findings, and dose of radiation are 
621
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
well established and well accepted to ensure the generalizability 
of the results for patients who will be screened in the general 
medical community rather than in the specialized centers that 
performed the trial.
Solitary Pulmonary Nodule
A solitary pulmonary nodule is typically described as a single, 
well-circumscribed, spherical lesion that is 3 cm or less in 
diameter and completely surrounded by normal aerated lung 
parenchyma.24 Lung atelectasis, hilar enlargement, and pleural 
effusion are absent. The majority are detected incidentally on 
chest radiographs (CXRs) or CT scans obtained for some other 
purpose. About 150,000 solitary nodules are found incidentally 
each year. The clinical significance of such a lesion depends on 
whether or not it represents a malignancy.
The differential diagnosis of a solitary pulmonary nodule 
should include a broad variety of congenital, neoplastic, inflam-
matory, vascular, and traumatic disorders. The probability of 
cancer in a solitary pulmonary nodule increases if the patient 
has a history of smoking (50% or higher for smokers compared 
to 20%–40% in never smokers). It is also more likely to be 
A
B
C
D
Figure 19-14.  Spiral computed tomography scan showing normal transverse chest anatomy at four levels. A. At the level of the tracheal 
bifurcation, the aorticopulmonary window can be seen. B. The origin of the left pulmonary artery can be seen at a level 1 cm inferior to A. C. 
The origin and course of the right pulmonary artery can be seen at this next most cephalad level. The left upper lobe bronchus can be seen at 
its origin from the left main bronchus. D. Cardiac chambers and pulmonary veins are seen in the lower thorax. AA = ascending aorta; APW = 
aorticopulmonary window; DA = descending aorta; LA = left ventricle; LMB = left main bronchus; LPA = left pulmonary artery; MPA = 
main pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RPA = right pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior vena cava; T = trachea.
malignant if it is symptomatic or the patient is older, male, or 
has had occupational exposures.
Solitary pulmonary nodules were defined by findings on 
CXR, but with the increased sensitivity of low-dose screening 
CT, up to 50% of solitary lesions are found to be associated with 
multiple (one to six) other, usually subcentimeter, nodules. In 
the Early Lung Cancer Action project, almost 7% of healthy 
volunteers were found to have between one and three nodules 
and 25% had up to six nodules. CT scanning is necessary to 
characterize nodule number, location, size, margin morphol-
ogy, calcification pattern, and growth rate.25 Spiral (helical) CT 
allows continuous scanning as the patient is moved through a 
scanning gantry, allowing the entire thorax to be imaged during 
a single breath hold (Fig. 19-14). Compared to conventional CT, 
this provides a superior image quality, because motion artifacts 
are eliminated, and improves detection of pulmonary nodules 
and central airway abnormalities.26 The shorter acquisition time 
of spiral CT also allows for consistent contrast filling of the 
great vessels, resulting in markedly improved visualization of 
pathologic states and anatomic variation contiguous to vascular 
structures. In addition, three-dimensional spiral CT images can 
622
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
be reconstructed for enhanced visualization of spatial anatomic 
relationships.27 Thin sections (1–2 mm collimation) at 1-cm 
intervals should be used to evaluate pulmonary parenchyma and 
peripheral bronchi. If the goal is to find any pulmonary metas-
tases, thin sections at intervals of 5 to 7 mm collimation are 
recommended. For assessing the trachea and central bronchi, 
collimation of 3 to 5 mm is recommended. Providing accurate 
clinical history and data is of paramount importance to obtain-
ing appropriate imaging.
CT findings characteristic of benign lesions include small 
size, calcification within the nodule, and stability over time. 
Four patterns of benign calcification are common: diffuse, solid, 
central, and laminated or “popcorn.” Granulomatous infections 
such as tuberculosis can demonstrate the first three patterns, 
whereas the popcorn pattern is most common in hamartomas. In 
areas of endemic granulomatous disease, differentiating benign 
versus malignant can be challenging. Infectious granulomas 
arising from a variety of organisms account for 70% to 80% of 
this type of benign solitary nodules; hamartomas are the next 
most common single cause, accounting for about 10%.
CT findings characteristic of malignancy include growth 
over time; increasing density on CT scan (40%–50% of par-
tial solid lesions are malignant compared to only 15% of sub-
centimeter solid or nonsolid nodules); size >3 cm; irregular, 
lobulated, or spiculated edges; and the finding of the corona 
radiata sign (consisting of fine linear strands extending 4–5 mm 
outward and appearing spiculated on radiographs) (Fig. 19-15). 
Calcification that is stippled, amorphous, or eccentric is usually 
associated with cancer.
Growth over time is an important characteristic for dif-
ferentiating benign and malignant lesions. Lung cancers have 
volume-doubling times from 20 to 400 days; lesions with shorter 
doubling times are likely due to infection, and longer doubling 
times suggest benign tumors, but can represent slower-growing 
lung cancer. Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning can 
differentiate benign from malignant nodules28; most lung tumors 
have increased signatures of glucose uptake, as compared with 
healthy tissues and, thus, glucose metabolism can be measured 
using radio-labeled 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Meta-
analysis estimates 97% sensitivity and 78% specificity for pre-
dicting malignancy in a nodule. False-negative results can occur 
(especially in patients who have AIS, MIA, or LPA, carcinoids, 
and tumors <1 cm in diameter), as well as false-positive results 
(because of confusion with other infectious or inflammatory 
processes).
Metastatic Lesions to the Lung
The cause of a new pulmonary nodule(s) in a patient with a 
previous malignancy can be difficult to discern.29 Features sug-
gestive of metastatic disease are multiplicity; smooth, round 
borders on CT scan; and temporal proximity to the original pri-
mary lesion. One must always entertain the possibility that a 
single new lesion is a primary lung cancer. The probability of 
a new primary cancer vs. metastasis in patients presenting with 
solitary lesions depends on the type of initial neoplasm. The 
highest likelihood of a new primary lung cancer is in patients 
with a history of uterine (74%), bladder (89%), lung (92%), and 
head and neck (94%) carcinomas.
Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases has a role in 
properly selected patients.30 The best data regarding outcomes 
of resection of pulmonary metastases come from the Inter-
national Registry of Lung Metastases (IRLM). The registry 
A
B
C
Figure 19-15.  Computed tomography scan images of solitary 
pulmonary nodules. A. The corona radiata sign demonstrated by 
a solitary nodule. Multiple fine striations extend perpendicularly 
from the surface of the nodule like the spokes of a wheel. B. A 
biopsy-proven adenocarcinoma demonstrating spiculation. C. A 
lesion with a scalloped border, an indeterminate finding suggesting 
an intermediate probability for malignancy.
was established in 1991 by 18 thoracic surgery departments 
in Europe, the United States, and Canada, and included data 
on 5206 patients. About 88% of patients underwent complete 
resection. Survival analysis at 5, 10, and 15 years (grouping all 
primary tumor types) was performed (Table 19-5). Multivariate 
analysis showed a better prognosis for patients with germ cell 
tumors, osteosarcomas, a disease-free interval over 36 months, 
and a single metastasis.31 Depicted in Fig. 19-16, survival after 
metastasectomy in a variety of cancers is optimal when metastatic 
623
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
disease is resectable, solitary, and identified 36 or more months 
after initial treatment. When any or all of these optimal charac-
teristics are absent, survival progressively declines.
The general principles of patient selection for metasta-
sectomy are listed in Table 19-6. The technical aim of pulmo-
nary metastasectomy is complete resection of all macroscopic 
tumors. In addition, any involved adjacent structures should be 
resected en bloc (i.e., chest wall, diaphragm, and pericardium). 
Multiple lesions and/or hilar lesions may require lobectomy. 
Pneumonectomy is rarely justified or employed.
Pulmonary metastasectomy can be approached through 
a thoracotomy or via video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) 
techniques. McCormack and colleagues reported their experi-
ence at Memorial Sloan-Kettering in a prospective study of 
18 patients who presented with no more than two pulmonary 
metastatic lesions and underwent VATS resection.32 A thora-
cotomy was performed during the same operation; if palpa-
tion identified any additional lesions, they were resected. The 
study concluded that the probability that a metastatic lesion will 
be missed by VATS excision is 56%. Patients in the Memo-
rial study were evaluated before the advent of spiral CT scan-
ning, however, and it remains controversial whether metastasis 
resection should be performed via VATS. Proponents of VATS 
argue that the resolution of spiral CT scanning is so superior that 
prior studies using standard CT scanners are no longer relevant. 
Indeed, a recent study suggested that only 18% of malignant 
nodules would be missed using a VATS approach in the current 
era while another study from the United Kingdom found equiv-
alent outcomes with regard to missed lesions and pulmonary 
progression comparing open and VATS approaches. To date, 
no prospective study using spiral CT scan has been performed 
to resolve this clinical dilemma.
Primary Lung Cancer-Associated Signs and 
Symptoms
Lung cancer displays one of the most diverse presentation pat-
terns of all human maladies (Table 19-7). The wide range of 
symptoms and signs is related to (a) histologic features, which 
often help determine the anatomic site of origin in the lung; (b) 
the specific tumor location in the lung and its relationship to 
surrounding structures; (c) biologic features and the production 
of a variety of paraneoplastic syndromes; and (d) the presence 
or absence of metastatic disease. Symptoms related to the local 
intrathoracic effect of the primary tumor can be conveniently 
divided into two groups: pulmonary and nonpulmonary thoracic.
Pulmonary Symptoms.  Pulmonary symptoms result from the 
direct effect of the tumor on the bronchus or lung tissue. Symp-
toms (in order of frequency) include cough (secondary to irritation 
Table 19-5
Actuarial survival data from the International Registry 
of Lung Metastases
Survival
Complete  
Resection (%)
Incomplete 
Resection (%)
5 years
36
13
10 years
26
7
15 years
22
—
or compression of a bronchus), dyspnea (usually due to central 
airway obstruction or compression, with or without atelectasis), 
wheezing (with narrowing of a central airway of >50%), hemop-
tysis (typically, blood streaking of mucus that is rarely massive; 
indicates a central airway location), pneumonia (usually due to 
airway obstruction by the tumor), and lung abscess (due to necro-
sis and cavitation, with subsequent infection).
Nonpulmonary Thoracic Symptoms.  Nonpulmonary tho-
racic symptoms result from invasion of the primary tumor 
directly into a contiguous structure (e.g., chest wall, diaphragm, 
pericardium, phrenic nerve, recurrent laryngeal nerve, superior 
vena cava, and esophagus), or from mechanical compression of 
a structure (e.g., esophagus or superior vena cava) by enlarged 
tumor-bearing lymph nodes.
Peripherally located tumors (often adenocarcinomas) 
extending through the visceral pleura lead to irritation or growth 
into the parietal pleura and potentially to continued growth into 
the chest wall structures. Three types of symptoms, depending 
on the extent of chest wall involvement, are possible: (a) pleu-
ritic pain, from noninvasive contact of the parietal pleura with 
inflammatory irritation or direct parietal pleural invasion; (b) 
localized chest wall pain, from deeper invasion and involve-
ment of the rib and/or intercostal muscles; and (c) radicular 
pain, from involvement of the intercostal nerve(s). Radicular 
pain may be mistaken for renal colic in the case of tumors invad-
ing the inferoposterior chest wall.
Other specific nonpulmonary thoracic symptoms include:
1.		 Pancoast’s syndrome. Tumors originating in the supe-
rior sulcus (posterior apex) elicit: apical chest wall and/or 
shoulder pain (from involvement of the first rib and chest 
wall); Horner’s syndrome (unilateral enophthalmos, pto-
sis, miosis, and facial anhidrosis from invasion of the stel-
late sympathetic ganglion); and radicular arm pain (from 
invasion of T1, and occasionally C8, brachial plexus nerve 
roots).
2.		 Phrenic nerve palsy. The phrenic nerve traverses the 
hemithorax along the mediastinum, parallel and posterior 
to the superior vena cava and anterior to the pulmonary 
hilum. Tumors at the medial lung surface or anterior hilum 
can directly invade the nerve; symptoms include shoulder 
pain (referred), hiccups, and dyspnea with exertion because 
of diaphragm paralysis. Radiographically, unilateral dia-
phragm elevation on CXR is present; the diagnosis is con-
firmed by fluoroscopic examination of the diaphragm with 
breathing and sniffing (the “sniff” test).
3.		 Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Recurrent laryngeal 
nerve (RLN) involvement most commonly occurs on the 
left side, given the hilar location of the left RLN as it passes 
under the aortic arch. Paralysis results from: (a) invasion of 
the vagus nerve above the aortic arch by a medially based 
left upper lobe tumor; or (b) direct invasion of the RLN 
by hilar tumor and/or hilar or aortopulmonary lymph node 
metastases. Symptoms include voice change, often referred 
to as hoarseness, but more typically a loss of tone asso-
ciated with a breathy quality, and coughing, particularly 
when drinking liquids.
4.		 Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome. As a result of bulky 
enlargement of involved mediastinal lymph nodes com-
pressing or a medially based right upper lobe tumor invad-
ing the SVC, SVC syndrome symptoms include variable 
degrees of swelling of the head, neck, and arms; headache; 
624
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
All Sites
72
96
120
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
Breast Cancer
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
Osteosarcoma
100
1
2
3
4
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
Colon Cancer
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
Melanoma
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 19-16.  The actuarial survival after metastasectomy is depicted for patients with various tumor types further categorized into four 
groups according to resectability, solitary or multiple, the interval between primary resection and metastesectomy, and a combination of fac-
tors known in our work and in others, as follows: (1) resectable, solitary, and disease-free interval (DFI) greater than or equal to 36 months; 
(2) resectable, solitary, or DFI 36+ months; (3) resectable, multiple metastases, and DFI <36 months; and (4) unresectable. (Reprinted with 
permission from Pastorino, U. (2010). The Development of an International Registry. J Thorac Oncol. 5(6): S196-S197)
625
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
and conjunctival edema. It is seen most commonly with 
NEC grade IV (small cell) lung cancer.
5.		 Pericardial tamponade. Pericardial effusions (benign or 
malignant), associated with increasing levels of dyspnea 
and/or arrhythmias, and pericardial tamponade occur with 
direct pericardial invasion. Diagnosis requires a high index 
of suspicion in the setting of a medially based tumor with 
symptoms of dyspnea and is confirmed by CT scan or 
echocardiography.
6.		 Back pain. Results from direct invasion of a vertebral body 
and is often localized and severe. If the neural foramina are 
involved, radicular pain may also be present.
7.		 Other local symptoms. Dysphagia is usually secondary 
to external esophageal compression by enlarged lymph 
Table 19-6
General principles governing appropriate selection of 
patients for pulmonary metastasectomy
1.  Primary tumor must already be controlled.
2.  Patient must be able to tolerate general anesthesia, 
potential single-lung ventilation, and the planned 
pulmonary resection.
3.  Metastases must be completely resectable based on 
computed tomographic imaging.
4.  There is no evidence of extrapulmonary tumor burden.
5.  Alternative superior therapy must not be available.
Table 19-7
Clinical presentation of lung cancer
Category
Symptom
Cause
Pulmonary 
symptoms
Cough
Bronchus irritation or 
compression
Dyspnea
Airway obstruction or 
compression
Wheezing
>50% airway obstruction
Hemoptysis
Tumor erosion or 
irritation
Pneumonia
Airway obstruction
Nonpulmonary 
thoracic 
symptoms
Pleuritic pain
Parietal pleural irritation 
or invasion
Local chest wall 
pain
Rib and/or muscle 
involvement
Radicular chest 
pain
Intercostal nerve 
involvement
Pancoast’s 
syndrome
Stellate ganglion, chest 
wall, brachial plexus 
involvement
Hoarseness
Recurrent laryngeal 
nerve involvement
Swelling of head 
and arms
Bulky involved 
mediastinal lymph nodes
Medially based right 
upper lobe tumor
nodes involved with metastatic disease, usually with lower 
lobe tumors. Finally, dyspnea, pleural effusion, or referred 
shoulder pain can result from invasion of the diaphragm by 
a tumor at the base of a lower lobe.
Associated Paraneoplastic Syndromes  All lung cancer his-
tologies are capable of producing a variety of paraneoplastic 
syndromes, most often from systemic release of tumor-derived 
biologically active materials (Table 19-8). Paraneoplastic 
Table 19-8
Paraneoplastic syndromes in patients with lung cancer
Endocrine
Hypercalcemia (ectopic parathyroid hormone)
Cushing’s syndrome
Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
Carcinoid syndrome
Gynecomastia
Hypercalcitoninemia
Elevated growth hormone level
Elevated levels of prolactin, follicle-stimulating hormone,  
  luteinizing hormone
Hypoglycemia
Hyperthyroidism
Neurologic
Encephalopathy
Subacute cerebellar degeneration
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Peripheral neuropathy
Polymyositis
Autonomic neuropathy
Eaton-Lambert syndrome
Optic neuritis
Skeletal
Clubbing
Pulmonary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Hematologic
Anemia
Leukemoid reactions
Thrombocytosis
Thrombocytopenia
Eosinophilia
Pure red cell aplasia
Leukoerythroblastosis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Cutaneous
Hyperkeratosis
Dermatomyositis
Acanthosis nigricans
Hyperpigmentation
Erythema gyratum repens
Hypertrichosis lanuginosa acquista
Other
Nephrotic syndrome
Hypouricemia
Secretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide with diarrhea
Hyperamylasemia
Anorexia or cachexia
626
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
syndromes may produce symptoms even before any local symp-
toms are produced by the primary tumor, thereby aiding in early 
diagnosis. Their presence does not influence resectability or 
treatment options. Symptoms often abate with successful treat-
ment; paraneoplastic symptom recurrence may herald tumor 
recurrence. The majority of such syndromes are associated with 
grade IV NEC (small cell carcinoma), including many endocri-
nopathies.
1.		 Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPO). 
Often severely debilitating, symptoms of HPO may ante-
date the diagnosis of cancer by months. Clinically, ankle, 
feet, forearm, and hand tenderness and swelling are charac-
teristic, resulting from periostitis of the fibula, tibia, radius, 
metacarpals, and metatarsals. Clubbing of the digits may 
occur in up to 30% of patients with grade IV NEC (Fig. 
19-17). Plain radiographs show periosteal inflammation 
and elevation, while bone scans demonstrate intense but 
symmetric uptake in the long bones. Aspirin or nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory agents provide temporary relief; 
treatment requires successful surgical or medical tumor 
eradication.
2.		 Hypercalcemia. Up to 10% of patients with lung cancer 
will have hypercalcemia, most often due to metastatic dis-
ease. Ectopic parathyroid hormone secretion by the tumor, 
most often squamous cell carcinoma, is causative in up to 
15%, however, and should be suspected if metastatic bone 
A
B
C
Figure 19-17.  Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy associated with small cell carcinoma. A. Painful clubbing of the fingers. B. Painful 
clubbing of the toes (close-up). C. The arrows point to new bone formation on the femur.
disease is not present. Symptoms of hypercalcemia include 
lethargy, depressed level of consciousness, nausea, vomit-
ing, and dehydration. Most patients have resectable tumors, 
and, following complete resection, the calcium level will 
normalize. Unfortunately, tumor recurrence is extremely 
common and may manifest as recurrent hypercalcemia.
3.		 Hyponatremia. Characterized by confusion, lethargy, and 
possible seizures, hyponatremia can result from the inap-
propriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone from the tumor 
into the systemic circulation (syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]) in 10% to 45% 
of patients with grade IV NEC (small cell). It is diagnosed 
by the presence of hyponatremia, low serum osmolality, 
and high urinary sodium and osmolality. Another cause of 
hyponatremia can be the ectopic secretion of atrial natri-
uretic peptide (ANP).
4.		 Cushing’s syndrome. Autonomous tumor production of 
an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-like molecule 
leads to rapid serum elevation of ACTH and subsequent 
severe hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypergly-
cemia. Symptoms are primarily related to the metabolic 
changes while the physical signs of Cushing’s syndrome 
(e.g., truncal obesity, buffalo hump, striae) are unusual due 
to the rapidity of ACTH elevation. Diagnosis is made by 
demonstrating hypokalemia (<3.0 mmol/L); nonsuppress-
ible elevated plasma cortisol levels that lack the normal 
diurnal variation; elevated blood ACTH levels; or elevated 
627
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids, all of which are not sup-
pressible by administration of exogenous dexamethasone. 
Immunoreactive ACTH is present in nearly all extracts of 
SCLC, and a high percentage of patients with SCLC have 
elevated ACTH levels by radioimmunoassay, yet fewer 
than 5% have symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome.
5.		 Peripheral and central neuropathies. Unlike other para-
neoplastic syndromes, which are usually due to ectopic 
secretion of an active substance, these syndromes are felt 
to be immune mediated. Cancer cells are thought to secrete 
antigens normally expressed only by the nervous system, 
generating antibodies leading either to interference with 
neurologic function or to immune neurologic destruction. 
Up to 16% of lung cancer patients have neuromuscular dis-
ability, and, of these, half have grade IV NEC (small cell) 
and 25% have squamous cell carcinomas. In patients with 
neurologic or muscular symptoms, central nervous system 
(CNS) metastases must be ruled out with CT or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of the head. Other metastatic dis-
ease leading to disability must also be excluded.
6.		 Lambert-Eaton syndrome. This myasthenia-like syn-
drome is caused by tumor secretion of immunoglobulin 
G (IgG) antibodies targeting voltage-gated calcium chan-
nels, which causes a neuromuscular conduction defect by 
decreasing the amount of acetylcholine released from pre-
synaptic sites at the motor end plate. Symptoms, including 
gait abnormalities from proximal muscle weakness and 
impaired coordination, may actually precede radiographic 
evidence of the tumor. Therapy is directed at the primary 
tumor with resection, radiation, and/or chemotherapy. 
Many patients have dramatic improvement after successful 
therapy. For patients with refractory symptoms, treatment 
consists of guanidine hydrochloride, immunosuppressive 
agents such as prednisone and azathioprine, and occa-
sionally plasma exchange. Unlike with myasthenia gravis 
patients, neostigmine is usually ineffective.
Symptoms Associated with Metastatic Lung Cancer.  Lung 
cancer metastasizes most commonly to the CNS, vertebral bod-
ies, bone, liver, adrenal glands, lungs, skin, and soft tissues. 
CNS metastases are present at diagnosis in 10% of patients; 
another 10% to 15% will develop CNS metastases following 
diagnosis. Focal symptoms, including headache, nausea, vom-
iting, seizures, hemiplegia, and dysarthria, are common. Lung 
cancer is the most common cause of spinal cord compression, 
either by primary tumor invasion of an intervertebral foramen 
or direct extension of vertebral metastases. Bony metastases are 
identified in 25% of all patients with lung cancer. They are pri-
marily lytic and produce pain locally; thus any new and local-
ized skeletal symptoms must be evaluated radiographically. 
Liver metastases are most often an incidental finding on CT 
scan. Adrenal metastases are also typically asymptomatic and 
are usually discovered by routine CT scan. They may lead to 
adrenal hypofunction. Skin and soft tissue metastases occur in 
8% of patients dying of lung cancer and generally present as 
painless subcutaneous or intramuscular masses. Occasionally, 
the tumor erodes through the overlying skin, with necrosis and 
creation of a chronic wound; excision may then be necessary for 
both mental and physical palliation.
Nonspecific Cancer-Related Symptoms.  Lung cancer often 
produces a variety of nonspecific symptoms such as anorexia, 
weight loss, fatigue, and malaise. The cause of these symptoms 
is often unclear, but should raise concern about possible meta-
static disease.
Lung Cancer Management
Role of Histologic Diagnosis and Molecular Testing.  Estab-
lishing a clear histologic diagnosis early in the evaluation and 
management of lung cancer is critical to effective treatment. 
Molecular signatures are also key determinants of treatment 
algorithms for adenocarcinoma and will likely become impor-
tant for squamous cell carcinoma as well. Currently, differentia-
tion between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma in 
cytologic specimens or small biopsy specimens is imperative in 
patients with advanced stage disease, as treatment with peme-
trexed or bevacizumab-based chemotherapy is associated with 
improved progression-free survival in patients with adenocar-
cinoma but not squamous cell cancer. Furthermore, life-threat-
ening hemorrhage has occurred in patients with squamous cell 
carcinoma who were treated with bevacizumab. Finally, EGFR 
mutation predicts response to EGFR tumor kinase inhibitors and 
is now recommended as first-line therapy in advanced adeno-
carcinoma. Because adequate tissue is required for histologic 
assessment and molecular testing, each institution should have 
a clear, multidisciplinary approach to patient evaluation, tis-
sue acquisition, tissue handling/processing, and tissue analysis 
(Fig. 19-18). In many cases, tumor morphology differentiates 
adenocarcinoma from the other histologic subtypes. If no clear 
morphology can be identified, then additional testing for one 
immunohistochemistry marker for adenocarcinoma and one for 
squamous cell carcinoma will usually enable differentiation. 
Immunohistochemistry for neuroendocrine markers is reserved 
for lesions exhibiting neuroendocrine morphology. Additional 
molecular testing should be performed on all adenocarcinoma 
specimens for known predictive and prognostic tumor mark-
ers (e.g. EGFR, KRAS, and EML4-ALK fusion gene). Ideally, 
use of tissue sections and cell block material is limited to the 
minimum necessary at each decision point. This emphasizes 
the importance of a multidisciplinary approach; surgeons and 
radiologists must work in direct cooperation with the cytopa-
thologist to ensure that tissue samples are adequate for morpho-
logic diagnosis as well as providing sufficient cellular material 
to enable molecular testing. With adoption of endobronchial and 
endoscopic ultrasound, electromagnetic navigational bronchos-
copy, VATS, and even transthoracic image-guided fine-needle 
and core-needle biopsy, surgeons are increasingly involved in 
the acquisition of diagnostic tissue for primary, metastatic, and 
recurrent intrathoracic disease, and a thorough understanding of 
key issues is necessary to ensure optimal treatment and patient 
outcomes.
Patient Evaluation.  Evaluation prior to treatment encom-
passes three areas: diagnosis and assessment of the primary 
tumor, assessment for metastatic disease, and determination of 
functional status (the patient’s ability to tolerate the prescribed 
treatment regimen). A discrete approach to each area allows the 
surgeon to systematically evaluate the patient, perform accurate 
clinical staging, and enable assessment of the patient’s func-
tional suitability for therapy, including pulmonary resection 
(Table 19-9).
Assessment of the Primary Tumor.  Assessment of the primary 
tumor begins with the history and directed questions regarding 
the presence or absence of pulmonary, nonpulmonary, thoracic, 
and paraneoplastic symptoms. Because patients often present to 
628
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
STEP 1
STEP 2
POSITIVE BIOPSY (FOB,
TBBx, Core, SLBx)
POSITIVE CYTOLOGY
(effusion, aspirate, washings,
brushings)
Histology: Lepidic, papillary, and/or
acinar architecture(s)
Cytology: 3-D arrangements, delicate
foamy/vacuolated (translucent)
cytoplasm,
Fine nuclear chromatin and often
prominent nucleoli
Nuclei are often eccentrically situated
Classic morphology:
ADC
ADC marker
and/or
Mucin +ve;
SQCC
marker –ve
(or weak in
same cells)
NSCLC, favor ADC
NE morphology, large cells,
NE IHC+
No clear ADC or
SQCC morphology:
NSCLC-NOS
NSCLC, favor SQCC
SQCC marker +ve
ADC marker -ve/or
Mucin -ve
Apply ancillary panel of
One SQCC and one ADC marker
+/OR Mucin
IHC –ve and
Mucin -ve
NSCLC NOS
ADC marker or Mucin +ve;
as well as SQCC marker +ve
in different cells
Molecular analysis:
e.g. EGFR mutation†
NSCLC, NOS,
possible
adenosquamous ca
If tumor tissue inadequate for molecular testing,
discuss need for further sampling - back to Step 1
NE morphology, small cells, no
nucleoli, NE IHC+, TTF-1 +/–,
CK+
Keratinization, pearls
and/or intercellular bridges
NSCLC,
?LCNEC
Classic Morphology:
SQCC
SCLC
STEP 3
Figure 19-18.  Algorithm for adenocarcinoma diagnosis in small biopsies and/or cytology. Step 1: When positive biopsies (fiberoptic bronchos-
copy [FOB], transbronchial [TBBx], core, or surgical lung biopsy [SLBx]) or cytology (effusion, aspirate, washings, and brushings) show clear 
adenocarcinoma (ADC) or squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC) morphology, the diagnosis can be firmly established. If there is neuroendocrine 
(NE) morphology, the tumor may be classified as small cell carcinoma (SCLC) or non–small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), probably large cell 
neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) according to standard criteria (+ = positive, – = negative, and ± = positive or negative). If there is no clear 
ADC or SQCC morphology, the tumor is regarded as NSCLC–not otherwise specified (NOS). Step 2: NSCLC-NOS can be further classified 
based on (a) immunohistochemical stains, (b) mucin (DPAS or mucicarmine) stains, or (c) molecular data. If the stains all favor ADC-positive 
ADC marker(s) (i.e., TTF-1 and/or mucin positive) with negative SQCC markers, then the tumor is classified as NSCLC, favor ADC. If SQCC 
markers (i.e., p63 and/or CK5/6) are positive with negative ADC markers, the tumor is classified as NSCLC, favor SQCC. If the ADC and SQCC 
markers are both strongly positive in different populations of tumor cells, the tumor is classified as NSCLC-NOS, with a comment it may repre-
sent adenosquamous carcinoma. If all markers are negative, the tumor is classified as NSCLC-NOS. †EGFR mutation testing should be performed 
in (1) classic ADC, (2) NSCLC, favor ADC, (3) NSCLC-NOS, and (4) NSCLC-NOS, possible adenosquamous carcinoma. In NSCLC-NOS, if 
EGFR mutation is positive, the tumor is more likely to be ADC than SQCC. Step 3: If clinical management requires a more specific diagnosis 
than NSCLC-NOS, additional biopsies may be indicated. CD = cluster designation; CK = cytokeratin; DPAS = diastase-periodic acid Schiff; 
DPAS +ve = periodic-acid Schiff with diastase; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; IHC = immunohistochemistry; NB = of note; TTF-1 = 
thyroid transcription factor-1; –ve = negative; +ve = positive. (Reproduced with permission from Travis W, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al. Inter-
national Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: International multidisciplinary 
classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6:244.
629
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Table 19-9
Evaluation of patients with lung cancer
Primary Tumor
Metastatic Disease
Functional Assessment
History
Pulmonary
Weight loss
Ability to walk up two flights of stairs
Nonpulmonary thoracic
Malaise
Ability to walk on a flat surface 
indefinitely
Paraneoplastic
New bone pain
Neurologic signs or symptoms
Skin lesions
Physical examination
Voice
Supraclavicular node palpation
Accessory muscle usage
Skin examination
Air flow by auscultation
Neurologic examination
Force of cough
Radiographic 
examination
Chest CT
Chest CT, PET
Chest CT: tumor anatomy, atelectasis
Tissue analysis
Bronchoscopy
Bone scan, head MRI, abdominal CT
Quantitative perfusion scan
Transthoracic needle 
aspiration and biopsy
Bronchoscopic lymph node FNA
Endoscopic ultrasound
Mediastinoscopy
Biopsy of suspected metastasis
Other
Thoracoscopy
—
Pulmonary function tests (FEV1, 
Dlco, O2 consumption)
CT = computed tomography; Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FNA = fine-needle aspiration; 
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; O2 = oxygen; PET = positron emission tomography.
the surgeon with a CXR or CT scan demonstrating the lesion, 
the location of the tumor can help direct the clinician in per-
forming the history and physical examination.
If the patient does not already have a chest CT scan, this 
should be performed expeditiously as the next stage in evalu-
ating a new patient. A routine chest CT scan should include 
intravenous contrast material to enable assessment of the pri-
mary tumor, delineation of mediastinal lymph nodes relative to 
normal mediastinal structures, and the tumor’s relationship to 
surrounding and contiguous structures. Recommendations for 
treatment and options for obtaining tissue diagnosis require a 
thorough understanding and assessment of CT findings.
Concern for contiguous invasion of adjacent structures 
often is raised in response to a combination of symptom history, 
location of the primary tumor, and CT imaging. It is common 
to see the primary tumor abutting the chest wall without clear 
radiographic evidence of rib destruction. In this circumstance, a 
history of pain in the area is an accurate guide to the likelihood 
of parietal pleural, rib, or intercostal nerve involvement. Similar 
observations apply to tumors abutting the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve, phrenic nerve, diaphragm, vertebral bodies, and chest 
apex. Thoracotomy should not be denied because of presump-
tive evidence of invasion of the chest wall, vertebral body, or 
mediastinal structures; proof of invasion may require thoracos-
copy or even thoracotomy.
MRI of pulmonary lesions and mediastinal nodes, overall, 
offers no real improvement over CT scanning. It is an excellent 
modality, however, for defining a tumor’s relationship to a major 
vessel, given its excellent imaging of vascular structures. This is 
especially true if the use of iodine contrast material is contra-
indicated. Thus, use of MRI in lung cancer patients is reserved 
for those with contrast allergies or with suspected mediastinal, 
vascular, or vertebral body invasion.
Options for Tissue Acquistion.  The surgeon must have an 
evidence-based algorithm for approaching the diagnosis and 
treatment of a pulmonary nodule and masses (Fig. 19-19).24 
Depending on nodule size, proximity to the bronchial tree, and 
the prevalence of cancer in the population being sampled, bron-
choscopy has 20% to 80% sensitivity for detecting neoplastic 
processes within a pulmonary lesion. Diagnostic tissue from 
bronchoscopy can be obtained by one of four methods:
1.		 Brushings and washings for cytology
2.		 Direct forceps biopsy of a visualized lesion
3.		 Endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration 
(FNA) of an externally compressing lesion without visual-
ized endobronchial tumor
4.		 Transbronchial biopsy with fluoroscopy to guide forceps to 
the lesion or electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy
Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy is a recent 
addition to the surgeon’s armamentarium for transbronchial 
biopsy of peripheral lung lesions. Using electromagnetic 
markers that create a three-dimensional image and align the 
recorded CT images to the patient’s true anatomy, a cath-
eter is advanced transbronchially and brushings, FNA, cup 
biopsy, and washings can be performed. Diagnostic yield 
using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy as an adjunct 
to standard bronchoscopy is reported as high as 80%. The 
630
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
approach can also be used for placement of fiducial markers 
for subsequent stereotactic body radiation therapy and for 
tattooing the perilesional region to guide subsequent video-
assisted thoracoscopic resection. Pneumothorax rates with 
this approach are approximately 1% in larger series and up 
to 3.5% in reports of early experience.
For peripheral lesions (roughly the outer half of the lung), 
transbronchial biopsy is performed first, followed by 
brushings and washings. This improves diagnostic yield 
by disrupting the lesion with the biopsy forceps and mobilizing 
additional cells. For central lesions, direct forceps biopsy by bron-
choscopic visualization is often possible. For central lesions with 
external airway compression but no visible endobronchial lesions, 
endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) is highly accurate and safe for 
Negative
tests
Positive
tests
No
No
New SPN (8mm to 30mm)
identified on CXR or
CT scan
Benign calcification
present or 2-year stability
demonstrated?
Surgical risk acceptable?
Assess clinical
probability of cancer 
Low probability
of cancer
(<5%)
Intermediate
probability of cancer
(>5%–60%)
High probability
of cancer
(>60%)
Establish diagnosis by
biopsy when possible.
Consider XRT or monitor
for symptoms and
palliate as necessary.
Serial high-resolution
CT at 3, 6, 12 and
24 months
Additional testing
• PET imaging, if available
• Contrast-enhanced CT,
 depending on institutional
 expertise
• Transthoracic fine-needle
 aspiration biopsy, if nodule
 is peripherally located
• Bronchoscopy, if air-
 bronchogram present or if
 operator has expertise with
 newer guided techniques 
Video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery:
examination of a frozen
section, followed by
resection if nodule is
malignant
Yes
Yes
No further intervention
required except for
patients with pure ground
glass opacities, in whom
longer annual follow-up
should be considered
Figure 19-19.  Recommended management algorithm for patients with solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) measuring 8 mm to 30 mm in 
diameter. CT = computed tomography; CXR = chest radiograph; PET = positron emission tomography; XRT = radiotherapy. (Reproduced 
with permission from the American College of Chest Physicians from Gould MK, et al. Evaluation of patients with pulmonary nodules: when 
is it lung cancer?: ACCP Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines. (2nd edition) Chest. 2007;132:108S.)
transbronchial biopsies of both the primary tumor (when it abuts 
the central airways) as well as the mediastinal lymph nodes.33
Image-guided transthoracic FNA (ultrasound or CT FNA) 
biopsy can accurately diagnose appropriately selected peripheral 
pulmonary lesions in up to 95% of patients. Three biopsy results 
are possible after image-guided biopsy procedures: malignant, 
a specific benign process, or indeterminate. Because false-
negative rates range from 3% to 29%, further diagnostic efforts 
are warranted in the absence of a specific benign diagnosis (such 
as granulomatous inflammation or hamartoma) because malig-
nancy is not ruled out.34 The primary complication is pneumo-
thorax in as many as 30% of cases. Intrapulmonary bleeding 
occurs, but rarely causes clinically significant hemoptysis or 
respiratory compromise.
5
631
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Some groups advocate use of video-assisted thoracoscopic 
biopsy as the first option for diagnosis, citing superior diagnostic 
accuracy and low surgical risk. With VATS, the nodule can be 
excised with a wedge or segmental resection, if less than 3 cm, 
or a core-needle biopsy can be performed under direct vision for 
larger lesions. VATS can also provide valuable staging informa-
tion, including sampling/dissection of mediastinal lymph nodes 
and assessing whether the primary tumor has invaded a contigu-
ous structure (such as the chest wall or mediastinum). Lesions 
most suitable for VATS are those that are located in the outer 
one third of the lung. The surgeon should avoid direct manipula-
tion of the nodule or violation of the visceral pleura overlying 
the nodule. In addition, the excised nodule must be extracted 
from the chest within a bag to prevent seeding of the chest wall. 
If the patient’s pulmonary reserve is adequate, the surgeon can 
proceed to lobectomy (either VATS or open) after frozen sec-
tion diagnosis.
A thoracotomy is occasionally necessary to diagnose and 
stage a primary tumor. Although this occurs rarely, two circum-
stances may require such an approach: (a) a deep-seated lesion 
that yielded an indeterminate needle biopsy result or that could 
not be biopsied for technical reasons; or (b) inability to deter-
mine invasion of a mediastinal structure by any method short 
of palpation. In the circumstance of a deep-seated lesion with-
out a diagnosis, tissue can be obtained via thoracotomy using 
FNA, core-needle biopsy, or excisional biopsy. Intraoperative 
frozen-section analysis is required; if the open biopsy frozen-
section result is indeterminate, a lobectomy may be necessary 
in extremely rare situations. If a pneumonectomy is required to 
remove the lesion, a tissue diagnosis of cancer must be made 
before proceeding.
Assessment for Metastatic Disease.  Distant metastases are 
found in approximately 40% of patients with newly diagnosed 
lung cancer. The presence of lymph node or systemic metasta-
ses may imply inoperability. As with the primary tumor, assess-
ment for the presence of metastatic disease should begin with 
the history and physical examination, focusing on the presence 
or absence of new bone pain, neurologic symptoms, and new 
skin lesions. In addition, constitutional symptoms (e.g., anorexia, 
malaise, and unintentional weight loss of >5% of body weight) 
suggest either a large tumor burden or the presence of metasta-
ses. Physical examination should focus on the patient’s overall 
appearance, noting any evidence of weight loss such as redun-
dant skin or muscle wasting, and a complete examination of the 
head and neck, including evaluation of cervical and supracla-
vicular lymph nodes and the oropharynx. This is particularly true 
for patients with a significant tobacco history. The skin should 
be thoroughly examined. Routine laboratory studies include 
serum levels of hepatic enzymes (e.g., serum glutamic oxalo-
acetic transaminase and alkaline phosphatase), as well as those 
of serum calcium (to detect bone metastases or the ectopic para-
thyroid syndrome). Elevation of either hepatic enzymes or serum 
calcium levels typically occurs with extensive metastases.
Mediastinal Lymph Nodes.  Chest CT scanning permits assess-
ment of possible metastatic spread to the mediastinal lymph 
nodes. It continues to be the most effective noninvasive method 
available to assess the mediastinal and hilar nodes for enlarge-
ment. However, a positive CT result (i.e., nodal diameter >1.0 cm) 
predicts actual metastatic involvement in only about 70% of 
lung cancer patients. Thus even with enlarged mediastinal 
lymph nodes on a CT scan, up to 30% of such nodes are enlarged 
from noncancerous reactive causes such as inflammation due to 
atelectasis or pneumonia secondary to the tumor. Therefore, no 
patient should be denied an attempt at curative resection just 
because of a positive CT result for mediastinal lymph node 
enlargement. Any CT finding of metastatic nodal involvement 
must be confirmed histologically. The negative predictive value 
of normal-appearing lymph nodes by CT (lymph nodes <1.0 cm) 
is better than the positive predictive value of a suspicious-
appearing lymph node, particularly with small squamous cell 
tumors. With normal-size lymph nodes and a T1 tumor, the 
false-negative rate is less than 10%, leading many surgeons 
to omit mediastinoscopy. However, the false-negative rate 
increases to nearly 30% with centrally located and T3 tumors. 
It has also been demonstrated that T1 adenocarcinomas or large 
cell carcinomas have a higher rate of early micrometastasis. 
Therefore, all such patients should undergo mediastinoscopy.
Mediastinal lymph node staging by PET scanning appears 
to have greater accuracy than CT scanning. PET staging of 
mediastinal lymph nodes has been evaluated in two meta-analyses. 
The overall sensitivity for mediastinal lymph node metastasis 
was 79% (95% confidence interval 76%–82%), with a specific-
ity of 91% (95% CI 89%–93%) and an accuracy of 92% (95% 
CI 90%–94%).35
In comparing PET with CT scans in patients who also 
underwent lymph node biopsies, PET had a sensitivity of 88% 
and a specificity of 91%, whereas CT scanning had a sensitiv-
ity of 63% and a specificity of 76%. Combining CT and PET 
scanning may lead to even greater accuracy.36 In one study of 
CT, PET, and mediastinoscopy in 68 patients with potentially 
operable NSCLC, CT correctly identified the nodal stage in 40 
patients (59%). It understaged the tumor in 12 patients and over-
staged it in 16 patients. PET correctly identified the nodal stage 
in 59 patients (87%). It understaged the tumor in five patients 
and overstaged it in four. For detecting N2 and N3 disease, the 
combination of PET and CT scanning yielded a sensitivity, 
specificity, and accuracy of 93%, 95%, and 94%, respectively. 
CT scan alone yielded 75%, 63%, and 68%, respectively. Stud-
ies examining combined PET-CT consistently show improved 
accuracy compared to PET or CT alone; accuracy for PET-CT 
nodal positivity confirmed by mediastinoscopy is approximately 
75%, with a negative predictive value of approximately 90%. 
Right upper lobe lesions were more likely to have occult N2 dis-
ease than other lobes of the lung.37-40 PET-positive mediastinal 
lymph nodes require histologic verification of node positivity, 
either by EBUS-guided FNA/core-needle biopsy or medias-
tinoscopy, to minimize the risk of undertreatment. Assuming 
node positivity without histologic confirmation relegates the 
patient to, at a minimum, induction chemotherapy. If there is 
a suggestion of N3 disease, the patient would be incorrectly 
staged as having IIIB disease and would not be considered a 
candidate for potentially curative surgical resection.
It is important for surgeons who are managing patients 
with lung cancer to have a clear algorithm for invasive medi-
astinal staging. In general, invasive staging is underused, plac-
ing many patients at risk for over- or understaging and, thus, 
inappropriate treatment. An absolute indication for obtaining a 
tissue diagnosis is mediastinal lymph node enlargement greater 
than 1.0 cm by CT scan. There are several options for invasive 
mediastinal staging:
1.		 Less invasive than mediastinoscopy, EBUS enables image-
guided transtracheal and transbronchial FNA cytologic 
632
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
samples from hilar masses and lymph nodes from level 4R 
and 4L, level 7, level 10, and level 11. A core-needle biopsy 
device recently became available for the EBUS and will 
improve the diagnostic yield when sampling mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy. Rapid onsite pathologic evaluation with 
expert cytopathologist evaluation greatly increases the diag-
nostic accuracy of the procedure; importantly, the intraopera-
tive evaluation will confirm whether the target lesion is being 
sampled and greatly facilitates acquisition of satisfactory 
samples for determining the morphologic diagnosis as well 
as sufficient material for cell block for immunohistochemis-
try and molecular testing. Like mediastinoscopy, EBUS does 
not allow assessment of level 3, 5, or 6 nodal stations.
2.		 Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) can accurately visualize 
mediastinal paratracheal lymph nodes (stations 4R, 7, and 
4L) and other lymph node stations (stations 8 and 9) and is 
able to visualize primary lung lesions contiguous with or 
near the esophagus (see Fig. 19-8). Using FNA or core-needle 
biopsy, samples of lymph nodes or primary lesions can be 
obtained. Diagnostic yield is improved with intraopera-
tive cytologic evaluation, which can be performed with the 
cytopathologist in the operating room. Limitations of EUS 
include the inability to visualize the anterior (pretracheal) 
mediastinum; thus, EUS does not replace mediastinoscopy 
for complete mediastinal nodal staging. However, it may 
not be necessary to perform mediastinoscopy if findings on 
EUS are positive for N2 nodal disease, particularly if more 
than one station is found to harbor metastases.
3.		 Cervical mediastinoscopy provides tissue sampling of all 
paratracheal and subcarinal lymph nodes and permits visual 
determination of the presence of extracapsular extension of 
nodal metastasis (Fig. 19-20). With complex hilar or right 
paratracheal primary tumors, it allows direct biopsies and 
assessment of invasion into the mediastinum. When the 
size of mediastinal lymph nodes is normal, mediastinoscopy 
is generally recommended for centrally located tumors, 
for T2 and T3 primary tumors, and occasionally for T1 
adenocarcinomas or large cell carcinomas (due to their higher 
rate of metastatic spread). Some surgeons perform mediasti-
noscopy in all lung cancer patients because of the poor sur-
vival associated with surgical resection of N2 disease.
	 	 It is important to note that EBUS or EUS can be used for 
initial diagnosis in enlarged lymph nodes, but the predic-
tive value of a negative EBUS in a patient with radio-
graphically suspicious mediastinal disease is not sufficient 
to accurately guide treatment. At the authors’ institutions, 
it is standard to begin mediastinal lymph node staging with 
EBUS-guided FNA of clinically suspicious mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy. If the FNA is negative by intraopera-
tive rapid onsite cytologic evaluation, cervical video medi-
astinoscopy is performed in the same operative setting to 
ensure accurate staging of the mediastinal nodes. However, 
if the FNA is positive, mediastinoscopy is not performed 
and the patient is referred to medical oncology for induction 
chemotherapy; avoiding a pretreatment mediastinoscopy in 
this manner facilitates the safe performance of a postinduc-
tion mediastinoscopy for restaging of the mediastinum in 
patients who respond favorably to induction therapy.
4.		 Left video-assisted thoracoscopic lymph node sampling may 
be needed for patients with left upper lobe tumors who have 
localized regional spread to station 5 and 6 lymph nodes, 
without mediastinal paratracheal involvement (see Fig. 
19-8). If there is a low index of suspicion for nodal metasta-
sis, the patient can be schedule for VATS biopsy and lobec-
tomy under the same anesthesia; the procedure begins by 
sampling the level 5 and 6 nodes for frozen section, and if the 
nodes are negative, the anatomic lung resection is performed. 
If the index of suspicion is high, the VATS biopsy is per-
formed as a separate procedure. Cervical mediastinoscopy 
should precede VATS biopsy, even if patients have normal 
paratracheal lymph nodes. Additional diagnostic evaluation 
of the lymph nodes in station 5 and 6 may be unnecessary 
if the mediastinal lymph nodes are proven to be benign with 
biopsy during cervical mediastinoscopy and the preoperative 
CT scan suggests complete respectability of the tumor. There 
are, however, several indications for prethoracotomy biopsy 
of station 5 and 6 lymph nodes, which are listed in Table 
19-10. It is particularly important to prove that mediastinal 
lymph nodes are pathologically involved and not just radio-
graphically suspicious for nodal metastasis prior to deciding 
that the patient is not a candidate for resection.
Pleural Effusion.  The presence of pleural effusion on radio-
graphic imaging should not be assumed to be malignant. 
Figure 19-20.  Cervical mediastinoscopy. Paratracheal and sub-
carinal lymph node tissues (within the pretracheal space) can be 
sampled using a mediastinoscope introduced through a suprasternal 
skin incision.
Table 19-10
Indications for prethoracotomy biopsy of station 5 and 
6 lymph nodes
1.  Enrollment criteria for induction therapy protocol require 
pathologic confirmation of N2 disease.
2.  Computed tomographic scan shows evidence of bulky 
nodal metastases or extracapsular spread that could 
prevent complete resection.
3.  Tissue diagnosis of a hilar mass or of lymph nodes 
causing recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis is needed.
633
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Pleural effusion may be secondary to atelectasis or consolida-
tion, seen with central tumors, reactive, or secondary to cardiac 
dysfunction. Pleural effusion associated with a peripherally 
based tumor, particularly one that abuts the visceral or pari-
etal pleural surface, does have a higher probability of being 
malignant, which would alter the pathologic stage of the dis-
ease to stage IV by the American Joint Committee on Cancer 
(AJCC) 7th edition TNM staging criteria. If this is the only 
site concerning for metastatic disease, pathologic confirma-
tion is mandatory. Cytology reveals malignant cells in 50% 
of malignant effusions. Thoracoscopy, performed as part of 
a separate staging procedure, often with mediastinoscopy or 
immediately before a planned thoracotomy, may be needed to 
rule out pleural metastases in select patients.
Distant Metastases.  Currently, chest CT and PET are rou-
tine in the evaluation of patients with lung cancer. Integrated 
PET-CT scanners have become standard and have substan-
tially improved accuracy of detection and localization of lymph 
node and distant metastases, as compared with independently 
performed PET and CT scans (Fig. 19-21). This technology 
overcomes the imprecise information on the exact location of 
focal abnormalities seen on PET and has become the standard 
imaging modality for lung cancer. Compared to routine chest 
or abdominal CT and bone scans, PET scanning detects 10% 
to 15% more distant metastases, but should be confirmed with 
MRI and/or biopsies if the patient otherwise has early-stage 
disease. Brain MRI should be performed when the suspicion or 
risk of brain metastases is increased, such as in patients with 
clinical stage III disease. In the absence of neurologic symp-
toms or signs, the probability of a negative head CT scan is 
95%. Liver abnormalities that are not clearly simple cysts or 
hemangiomas and adrenal enlargement, nodules, or masses are 
further evaluated by MRI scanning and, occasionally, by needle 
biopsy. Adrenal adenomas have a high lipid content (secondary 
to steroid production), but metastases and most primary adrenal 
malignancies contain little if any lipid; thus MRI is usually able 
to distinguish the two.
Tumor, Node, and Metastasis: Lung Cancer Staging.  The stag-
ing of any tumor is an attempt to estimate the extent of dis-
ease and determine the patient’s prognosis; in a given patient, 
tumors are typically classified into a clinical stage and a patho-
logic stage. Clinical staging information includes the history and 
physical examination, radiographic test results, and diagnostic 
biopsy information. Therapeutic plans are generated based on 
clinical stage. After surgical resection of the tumor and lymph 
nodes, a postoperative pathologic stage (pTNM) is determined, 
providing further prognostic information.
The staging of solid epithelial tumors is based on the TNM 
staging system. The primary tumor “T” status provides infor-
mation about tumor size and relationship to surrounding struc-
tures; the “N” status provides information about regional lymph 
nodes; and the “M” status provides information about the pres-
ence or absence of metastatic disease. The designation of lymph 
nodes as N1, N2, or N3 requires familiarity with the lymph node 
mapping system41 (see Fig. 19-8). Based on clearly delineated 
anatomic boundaries, accurate and reproducible localization 
of thoracic lymph nodes is possible, which facilitates detailed 
nodal staging for individual patients and standardization of 
nodal assessment between surgeons.
Pathologic staging criteria are based on the predicted sur-
vival relative to each combination of tumor, node, and metasta-
A
B
C
Figure 19-21.  Imaging of non–small cell lung cancer by integrated 
positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) 
scan. A. CT of the chest showing a tumor in the left upper lobe. 
B. PET scan of the chest at the identical cross-sectional level. 
C. Coregistered PET-CT scan clearly showing tumor invasion (con-
firmed intraoperatively). (Reprinted with permission from Lardi-
nois D, Weder W, Hany TF, et al. Staging of non-small–cell lung 
cancer with integrated positron-emission tomography and com-
puted tomography. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2504. kkjkjdht © 
2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.)
sis status. In 2010, the AJCC 7th edition incorporated multiple 
changes into the staging system for NSCLC based on analysis of 
survival predictors from more than 100,000 patients worldwide. 
Table 19-11 shows the clinical and pathologic criteria for each 
634
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 19-11 
American Joint Committee on Cancer Seventh Edition Staging of Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer
CLINICAL 
Extent of disease before 
any treatment
Stage Category Definitions
pathologic  
Extent of disease 
through completion of 
definitive surgery
❑ y clinical–staging 
completed after neoadju-
vant therapy but before 
subsequent surgery
TUMOR SIZE: ———— 
LATERALITY: 
❑ left ❑ right  
❑ bilateral
❑ y pathologic–staging 
completed after neo-
adjuvant therapy AND 
subsequent surgery
❑ TX
❑ TO
❑ Tis
❑ T1
❑ T1a
❑ T1b
❑ T2
❑ T2a
❑ T2b
❑ T3
❑ T4
Primary Tumor (T)
Primary tumor cannot be assessed
No evidence of primary tumor
Tis Carcinoma in situ
Tumor ≤3 cm in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, 
without bronchoscopic evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar 
bronchus (i.e., not in the main bronchus)*
Tumor ≤2 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor > 2 cm but ≤3 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor > 3 cm but ≤7 cm or tumor with any of the following features (T2 
tumors with these features are classified T2a if ≤5 cm)
Involves main bronchus, ≥2 cm distal to the carina
Invades visceral pleura (PL1 or PL2)
Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the 
hilar region but does not involve the entire lung
Tumor > 3 cm but ≤5 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor > 5 cm but ≤7 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor > 7 cm or one that directly invades any of the following: parietal 
pleural (PL3) chest wall (including superior sulcus tumors), diaphragm, 
phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium; or tumor in the main 
bronchus (< 2 cm distal to the carina* but without involvement of the carina; 
or associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of the entire lung or 
separate tumor nodule(s) in the same lobe
Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: mediastinum, heart, 
great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, 
carina, separate tumor nodule(s) in a different ipsilateral lobe
* The uncommon superficial spreading tumor of any size with its invasive 
component limited to the bronchial wall, which may extend proximally to 
the main bronchus, is also classified as T1a.
❑ TX
❑ TO
❑ Tis
❑ T1
❑ T1a
❑ T1b
❑ T2
❑ T2a
❑ T2b
❑ T3
❑ T4
❑ NX
❑ NO
❑ N1
❑ N2
❑ N3
Regional Lymph Nodes (N)
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
No regional lymph node metastasis
Metastasis in ipsilateral peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilar lymph nodes 
and intrapulmonary nodes, including involvement by direct extension
Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal llymph node(s)
Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, contralateral hilar, ipsilateral or 
contralateral scalene, or supraclavicular lymph node(s)
❑ NX
❑ NO
❑ N1
❑ N2
❑ N3
❑ MO
❑ M1
❑ M1a
❑ M1b
Distant Metastasis (M)
No distant metastasis (no pathologic MO; use clinical M to complete stage group)
Distant metastasis
Separate tumor nodule(s) in a contralateral lobe; tumor with pleural nodules 
or malignant pleural (or pericardial) effusion**
Distant metastasis
**Most pleural (and pericardial) effusions with lung cancer are due to tumor. 
In a few patients, however, multiple cytopathologic examinations of pleural 
(pencardial) fluid are negative for tumor, and the fluid is nonbloody and is 
not an exudate. Where these elements and clinical judgement dictate that 
the effusion is not related to the tumor, the effusion should be excluded as a 
staging element and the patient should be classified as MO.
❑ M1
❑ M1a
❑ M1b
635
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Table 19-11 
American Joint Committee on Cancer Seventh Edition Staging of Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer (continued)
Anatomic stage . prognostic groups
CLINICAL
PATHOLOGIC
GROUP
T
N
M
GROUP
T
N
M
❑ Occult
❑ 0
❑ IA
❑ IB
❑ IIA
❑ IIB
❑ IIIA
❑ IIIB
❑ IV
TX
Tis
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T3
T4
T4
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T4
T4
Any T
Any T
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N1
N1
N1
N1
N0
N2
N2
N2
N2
N1
N2
N0
N1
N3
N3
N3
N3
N3
N2
N3
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1a
M1b
❑ Occult
❑ 0
❑ IA
❑ IB
❑ IIA
❑ IIB
❑ IIIA
❑ IIIB
❑ IV
TX
Tis
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T3
T4
T4
T1a
T1b
T2a
T2b
T3
T4
T4
Any T
Any T
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N1
N1
N1
N1
N0
N2
N2
N2
N2
N1
N2
N0
N1
N3
N3
N3
N3
N3
N2
N3
Any N
Any N
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1a
M1b
❑ Stage unknown
❑ Stage unknown
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS (SITE-SPECIFIC FACTORS)
REQUIRED FOR STAGING: None
CLINICALLY SIGNIFICANT:
Pleural/Elastic Layer Invasion (based on H&E and elastic stains) _________
Separate Tumor Nodules ____________________________
General Notes:
For identification of special cases of 
TNM or pTNM classifications, the “m” 
suffix and “y,” “r,” and “a” prefixes 
are used. Although they do not affect 
the stage grouping, they indicate cases 
needing separate analysis.
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source of the material is the AJCC Can-
cer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springerlink.com.
of the TNM descriptors currently used in staging NSCLC and 
the overall stage classifications. In addition to the TNM stage, 
it is recommended that histologic grade, presence or absence of 
pleural/elastic layer invasion, separate tumor nodules, lympho-
vascular invasion, and residual tumor after treatment also be 
recorded into cancer registries to facilitate evaluation of these 
potential predictors in future analysis of staging criteria.
Staging for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is typically 
based on the extent of disease. SCLC presenting with bulky 
locoregional disease confined to the ipsilateral hemithorax, 
with no evidence for distant metastatic disease, is termed “lim-
ited” SCLC. Limited disease must be treatable within a tolerable 
field of radiation. Using AJCC descriptors, this includes any 
T stage, any N stage, without metastatic disease (M0). The 
only exception is when multiple lung nodules are widely spread 
throughout the ipsilateral lung in the same hemithorax; in these 
patients, the size of the involved area would preclude a “safe” 
radiation field. In contrast, in “disseminated” disease, tumor is 
beyond the ipsilateral hemithorax or widely spread within the 
ipsilateral lung and to distant sites. Metastases to the pleura and 
pericardium, with resultant effusions, are considered dissemi-
nated disease. Metastases to brain, bone, bone marrow, and the 
pleural and pericardial spaces are common.
Assessment of Functional Status.  Patients with potentially 
resectable tumors require careful assessment of their func-
tional status and ability to tolerate either lobectomy or pneu-
monectomy. The surgeon should first estimate the likelihood 
636
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of pneumonectomy, lobectomy, or possibly sleeve resection, 
based on the CT images. A sequential process of evaluation then 
unfolds.
A patient’s history is the most important tool for gauging 
risk. Specific questions regarding performance status should be 
routinely asked. If the patient can walk on a flat surface indefi-
nitely, without oxygen and without having to stop and rest sec-
ondary to dyspnea, he will be very likely to tolerate lobectomy. 
If the patient can walk up two flights of stairs (up two standard 
levels), without having to stop and rest secondary to dyspnea, 
she will likely tolerate pneumonectomy. Finally, nearly all 
patients, except those with carbon dioxide (CO2) retention on 
arterial blood gas analysis, will be able to tolerate periods of 
single-lung ventilation and wedge resection.
Current smoking status and sputum production are also 
pertinent. Current smokers and patients with a greater than 
60 pack-year history of smoking have a significantly increased 
risk of postoperative pulmonary complications; heavy smokers 
are 2.5 times more likely to develop pulmonary complications 
and three times more likely to develop pneumonia compared to 
patients with a ≤60 pack-year history (odds ratio [OR] 2.54; 
95% CI 1.28–5.04; P = .0008). Impaired exchange of CO2 is 
also predictive of increased risk, independent of the smoking 
history. For every 10% decline in percent carbon monoxide dif-
fusion capacity (%Dlco), the risk of any pulmonary compli-
cation increased by 42% (OR 1.42; 95% CI 1.16–1.75; 
P = .008).42 Risk reduction requires smoking cessation at 
least 8 weeks preoperatively, a requirement that is often not fea-
sible in a cancer patient. Nevertheless, abstinence for at least 2 
weeks before surgery should be encouraged. Smoking cessation 
on the day of surgery leads to increased sputum production and 
potential secretion retention postoperatively, and some authors 
have reported increased rates of pulmonary complications in 
this group.43 Patients with chronic daily sputum production will 
have more problems postoperatively with retention and atelecta-
sis; they are also at higher risk for pneumonia. Sputum culture, 
antibiotic administration, and bronchodilators may be warranted 
preoperatively.
Pulmonary function studies are routinely performed when 
any resection greater than a wedge resection will be performed. 
Of all the measurements available, the two most valuable are 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and carbon mon-
oxide diffusion capacity (Dlco). General guidelines for the use 
of FEV1 in assessing the patient’s ability to tolerate pulmonary 
resection are as follows: greater than 2.0 L can tolerate pneu-
monectomy, and greater than 1.5 L can tolerate lobectomy. It 
must be emphasized that these are guidelines only. It is also 
important to note that the raw value is often imprecise because 
normal values are reported as “percent predicted” based on cor-
rections made for age, height, and gender. For example, a raw 
FEV1 value of 1.3 L in a 62-year-old, 75-inch male has a percent 
predicted value of 30% (because the normal expected value is 
4.31 L); in a 62-year-old, 62-inch female, the predicted value is 
59% (normal expected value 2.21 L). The male patient is at high 
risk for lobectomy, while the female could potentially tolerate 
pneumonectomy.
To calculate the predicted postoperative value for FEV1 
or Dlco, the percent predicted value of FEV1 or Dlco is mul-
tiplied by the fraction of remaining lung after the proposed sur-
gery. For example, with a planned right upper lobectomy, a total 
of three segments will be removed. Therefore, three of a total 
20 segments will leave the patient with (20 – 3/20) × 100 = 85% 
of their original lung capacity. In the two patients mentioned 
earlier, the man will have a predicted postoperative FEV1 of 
30% × 0.85 = 25%, whereas the woman will have a predicted 
postoperative FEV1 of 50%. Percent predicted value of less than 
50% for either FEV1 or Dlco correlates with risk for postopera-
tive complications, particularly pulmonary complications; the 
risk of complications increases in a stepwise fashion for each 
10% decline. Figure 19-22 shows the relationship between pre-
dicted postoperative Dlco and estimated operative mortality.
Quantitative perfusion scanning is used in select circum-
stances to help estimate the functional contribution of a lobe 
or whole lung. Such perfusion scanning is most useful when 
the impact of a tumor on pulmonary physiology is difficult to 
discern. With complete collapse of a lobe or whole lung, the 
impact is apparent, and perfusion scanning is usually unneces-
sary. Figure 19-23 shows a tumor with significant right main 
stem airway obstruction with associated atelectasis and volume 
loss of the right lung. At presentation, the patient was dyspneic 
with ambulation, and the FEV1 was 1.38 L. Six months prior, 
this patient could walk up two flights of stairs without dyspnea. 
The surgeon can anticipate that the patient will tolerate pneumo-
nectomy because the lung is already not functioning due to main 
stem airway obstruction, and may, in fact, be contributing to a 
shunt. However, with centrally located tumors associated with 
partial obstruction of a lobar or main bronchus or of the pulmo-
nary artery, perfusion scanning may be valuable in predicting 
the postoperative result of resection. For example, if the quan-
titative perfusion to the right lung is measured to be 21% (nor-
mal is 55%) and the patient’s percent predicted FEV1 is 60%, 
the predicted postoperative FEV1 after a right pneumonectomy 
would be 60% × 0.79 = 47%, indicating the ability to tolerate 
pneumonectomy. If the perfusion value is 55%, the predicted 
Percent mortality
ppoDLCO%
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Figure 19-22.  Operative mortality after major pulmonary resec-
tion for non–small cell lung cancer (334 patients) as a function of 
percent predicted postoperative carbon monoxide diffusion capacity 
(ppoDlco%). Solid line indicates logistic regression model; dashed 
lines indicate 95% confidence limits. (Adapted with permission from 
Wang J, Olak K, Ferguson M. Diffusing capacity predicts operative 
mortality but not long-term survival after resection for lung cancer. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:582. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
6
637
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Figure 19-23.  Chest computed tomography scan of an obstructing right main stem lung tumor. Arrow indicates location of right main bron-
chus. The right lung volume is much less than the left lung volume.
postoperative value would be 27%, and pneumonectomy would 
pose a significantly higher risk.
It is not uncommon to encounter patients with significant 
reductions in their percent predicted FEV1 and Dlco whose 
history shows a functional status that is inconsistent with the 
pulmonary function tests. In these circumstances, exercise 
testing that yields maximal oxygen consumption (V.o2 max) 
has emerged as a valuable decision-making technique to help 
patients with abnormal FEV1 and Dlco (Table 19-12). Values 
of less than 10 mL/kg/min are associated with a 26% mortality 
after major pulmonary resection compared to only 8.3% 
with V.o2 max ≥10 mL/kg/min. Values greater than 15 mL/
kg/min generally indicate the patient’s ability to tolerate pneu-
monectomy.
The risk assessment of a patient is an amalgam of clinical 
judgment and data. The risk assessment described earlier must 
be integrated with the experienced clinician’s sense of the 
patient and with the patient’s attitude toward the disease 
and toward life. Figure 19-24 provides a useful algorithm for 
determining suitability for lung resection.44
Lung Cancer Treatment
Grade IV NEC (Small Cell) Lung Carcinoma.  In rare cir-
cumstances where SCLC presents as an isolated lung lesion, 
lobectomy followed by chemotherapy is warranted after sur-
gical mediastinal staging has confirmed the absence of N2 
disease. Often, ultrasound-guided FNA provides a definitive 
positive diagnosis and more invasive approaches are not needed. 
However, less than 5% are stage I, and there is no benefit from 
surgical resection for more advanced-stage disease; treatment is 
chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy depending on 
the extent of disease and the patient performance status.
Early-Stage Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer.  Early-stage disease 
includes T1 and T2 tumors (with or without N1 nodal involve-
ment) and T3 tumors (without N1 nodal involvement). This group 
represents a small but increasing proportion of the total number 
of patients diagnosed with lung cancer each year (approximately 
20% of 101,844 patients from 1989 to 2003).45 Surgical resection 
Table 19-12 
Relation between maximum oxygen consumption (V
.
o2 
max) as determined by preoperative exercise testing 
and perioperative mortality
Study
Deaths/Total
V. o2 max 10–15 mL/kg per minute
  Smith et al196
1/6 (33%)
  Bechard and Wetstein197
0/15 (0%)
  Olsen et al198
1/14 (7.1%)
  Walsh et al199
1/5 (20%)
  Bolliger et al200
2/17 (11.7%)
  Markos et al201
1/11 (9.1%)
  Wang et al202
0/12 (0%)
  Win et al203
2/16 (12.5%)
    Total
8/96 (8.3%)
V. o2 max <10 mL/kg per minute
  Bechard and Wetstein197
2/7 (29%)
  Olsen et al198
3/11 (27%)
  Holden et al204
2/4 (50%)
  Markos et al201
0/5 (0%)
    Total
7/27 (26%)
Source: Reproduced with permission from the American College of 
Chest Physicians from Colice GL, et al: Physiologic evaluation of 
the patient with lung cancer being considered for resectional surgery: 
ACCP Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines. (2nd edition) Chest. 
2007;132:161S.
is the current standard, ideally accomplished by video-assisted 
lobectomy or pneumonectomy, depending on the tumor location.
Despite the term “early-stage,” the overall 5-year survival 
rate for stage I is 65% and only 41% for stage II. Median survival 
7
8
638
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
VO2max > 
15 ml/kg/min
Perform spirometry
Unexplained dyspnea
or diffuse parenchymal
disease on CXR/CT?
Perform CPET
Estimate %ppo
FEV1 and %ppo
DLCO
Increased risk
VO2max 
>15 mL/kg/min
VO2max 
10 to 15 mL/kg/min
VO2max 
<10 mL/kg/min
FEV1 >1.5 L lobectomy
FEV1 >2 L pneumonectomy
FEV1 >80% predicted
FEV1 <1.5 L lobectomy
FEV1 <2 L pneumonectomy
FEV1 <80% predicted
Yes
No
DLCO >80%
predicted
DLCO <80%
predicted
%ppo FEV1 and
%ppo DLCO >40
%ppo FEV1 or
%ppo DLCO <40
%ppo FEV1 <30 or
%ppo FEV1 x
%ppo DLCO <1650
Measure DLCO
Average risk
Increased risk
Figure 19-24.  Algorithm for preoperative evaluation of pulmonary function and reserve prior to resectional lung surgery. CPET = cardiopul-
monary exercise test; CT = computed tomographic scan; CXR = chest radiograph; Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second; %ppo = percent predicted postoperative lung function; V.o2 max = maximum oxygen consumption. (Repro-
duced with permission from the American College of Chest Physicians from Colice GL, et al: Physiologic evaluation of the patient with lung 
cancer being considered for resectional surgery: ACCP Evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines. (2nd edition) Chest. 2007;132:161S.)
639
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
for untreated patients with stage IA NSCLC is 14 months, and 
5-year survival rate is 22%.46 After surgical resection of post-
operative pathologic stage IA disease, 5-year survival is better 
than with no treatment, but still only 67%.41 Survival declines 
with higher stages. Advanced age at diagnosis, male sex, low 
socioeconomic status, nonsurgical treatment, and poor histo-
logic grade are associated with increased mortality risk on mul-
tivariate analysis.45
Depending on tumor size and location, lobectomy, sleeve 
lobectomy, and occasionally pneumonectomy, with mediastinal 
lymph node dissection or sampling, are appropriate for patients 
with clinical early-stage disease. Sleeve resection is performed 
for tumors located at airway bifurcations when an adequate 
bronchial margin cannot be obtained by standard lobectomy. 
Pneumonectomy is rarely performed; primary indications for 
pneumonectomy in early-stage disease include large central 
tumors involving the distal main stem bronchus and inability 
to completely resect involved N1 lymph nodes. The latter cir-
cumstance occurs with bulky adenopathy or with extracapsular 
nodal spread.
Management of Early-Stage Lung Cancer in the High-Risk 
Patient.  Lobectomy may not be an option for some patients 
with early-stage disease, due to poor cardiopulmonary function 
or other comorbid illnesses. The ultimate decision that a patient 
is not operable, both with regard to the ability of the patient 
to tolerate surgery and the likelihood of successful resection, 
should be accepted only after evaluation by an expert surgeon. 
Surgeons with limited expertise, when faced with a complicated 
patient, should refer the patient to a high-volume center for fur-
ther evaluation if they are unable to offer the patient surgical 
resection in their own center.
Rationale for Limited Resection in Early-Stage Lung Cancer.  
Limited resection, defined as segmentectomy or wedge resec-
tion, is a viable option for achieving local control in high-risk 
patients. Historically, limited resection with wedge or segmen-
tectomy has been considered a compromise operation due to 
unacceptably high rates of local recurrence and concerns for 
worse survival.47,48 Subsequent meta-analysis of the literature 
shows that the difference in death rate is likely negligible49 
(Table 19-13). The high rates of local recurrence demonstrated 
by Ginsberg and others, however, remain a significant concern 
and continue to restrict the use of limited resection for early-
stage lung cancer to the high-risk patient.
With the recent publication of a 20% reduction in lung 
cancer mortality with screening CT scans in high-risk popula-
tions, the topic of limited resection is again the subject of inten-
sive review. Studies investigating anatomic segmentectomy (or 
extended wedge resection) with hilar and mediastinal lymph 
node dissection suggest that close attention to the ratio of surgi-
cal margin to tumor diameter and a careful assessment of the 
lymph nodes substantially reduce local recurrence.50-52 Recur-
rence rates were 6.2%, comparable to rates associated with 
lobectomy, when the margin-to-tumor diameter ratio exceeded 1, 
compared to 25% if the margin-to-tumor diameter ratio was less 
than 1.50 In most centers, this requires use of a thoracotomy, 
although increasing experience with VATS in high-volume cen-
ters shows that limited resection is safe and feasible, with periop-
erative adverse outcomes that are comparable to lobectomy.52-55
Rationale for Tumor Ablation in the Management of Primary 
Lung Cancer.  Limited resection, by definition, requires that the 
patient has sufficient cardiopulmonary reserve to undergo 
a general anesthesia and loss of at least one pulmonary seg-
ment. For the high-risk or nonoperable patient, as determined 
by experience pulmonary surgeons, tumor ablation techniques 
have been developed for treatment of early-stage lung cancers.
Current limitations of this approach include the absence 
of nodal staging, lack of tissue for molecular profiling, chemo-
resistance, or sensitivity testing, concerns about definitions of 
locoregional recurrence, and a lack of uniformity across cen-
ters. Surgeons typically define locoregional recurrence as tumor 
growth within the operative field, including resectable lymph 
nodes, whereas local recurrence after ablation is most com-
monly defined as tumor growth within the field of treatment. 
Despite the fact that in-transit or lymph node metastases are 
present in up to 27% of clinically stage I NSCLCs at resection, 
any tumor growth outside the field of ablative treatment is not 
be considered treatment failure.56
Despite these limitations, tumor ablative strategies are 
increasingly proposed as viable alternatives to surgical resec-
tion, even in potentially operable patients.57-62 While premature, 
ablative techniques may ultimately be shown to have efficacy 
equivalent to lobectomy for the primary treatment of very small 
peripheral early-stage lung cancers. Multidisciplinary collabo-
ration between thoracic surgery, interventional radiology/
pulmonology, and radiation oncology is required to ensure that 
development of these ablative techniques occurs through 
properly designed and well-controlled prospective studies 
and will ensure that patients receive the best available therapy, 
regardless of whether it is surgical resection or ablative therapy.
The two most commonly applied ablation techniques are 
radiofrequency ablation and stereotactic body radiotherapy.
1.		 Radiofrequency ablation. Radiofrequency ablation is per-
formed using either monopolar or bipolar delivery of elec-
trical current to electrodes placed within the tumor tissue. 
In lung tumors, the electrodes are typically inserted into 
the tumor mass under CT guidance. An electrical current 
is delivered; the current is converted by means of friction 
into heat, which quickly leads to immediate and irreparable 
tissue destruction in the tissue surrounding the electrode. 
The efficacy of radiofrequency ablation for controlling the 
primary tumor and improving survival in poor operative 
candidates (either due to significant comorbid diseases 
precluding general anesthesia or poor pulmonary function 
excluding lung resection) is safe and feasible for peripheral 
lung nodules. In tumors <3.5 cm, the rate of radiographic 
resolution of tumor is up to 80% and cancer-specific sur-
vival at 2 years was approximately 90%, indicating excel-
lent local control of the primary site.57-59,63 It has become 
the preferred modality for small peripheral tumors over 
standard external-beam radiation in centers where the tech-
nique is available.
	 	   Radiofrequency ablation is an excellent modality for 
the patient at risk for adverse outcomes with pulmonary 
resection or for patients who refuse surgery, and surgeons 
should have an algorithm for determining which patients 
are optimal for this modality.64-69 (see Fig. 19-24). Target 
lesions larger than 5 cm, tumor abutting the hilum, associ-
ated malignant pleural or pericardial effusion, greater than 
three lesions in one lung, and the presence of pulmonary 
hypertension are all contraindications to radiofrequency 
ablation.64 Proximity to a large vessel is a contraindica-
tion not only due to the risk of massive bleeding, but also 
9
640
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 19-13 
Summary of studies comparing limited resection and lobectomy
Study
Study 
Design
Stage
No. of Limited 
Resections
No. of 
Lobectomies
Reasons for Limited 
Resection
Survival  
Difference
Hoffman and Ransdell 
(1980)70
RS
IA
33 (W)
40a
Poor cardiopulmonary 
function and smaller 
lesions
NS
Read et al (1990)71
RS
IA
113 (107 S + 6 W)
131
ND
NS (CSS)
Date et al (1994)72
MPS
IA
16 (6 S + 10 W)
16
Poor pulmonary 
function
Lobectomy better
Warren and Faber 
(1994)48
RS
IA + IB
66 (S)
103
Poor cardiopulmonary 
function and smaller 
lesions
Lobectomy better
Harpole et al (1995)73
RS
IA + IB
75 (W)
193
Poor cardiopulmonary 
function and smaller 
lesions
NS (CSS)
LCSG (1996)47, 74
RCT
IA
122 (82 S + 40 W)
125
Randomization
NS
Kodama et al (1997)75
RS
IA
46b (W)
77
Intentional resection for 
small lesions
NS
Landreneau et al 
(1997)76
RS
IA
102 (W)
117
Poor cardiopulmonary 
function
NS
Pastorino et al (1997)77
RS
IA + IB
53 (S + W)
367
ND
NS
Kwiatkowski et al 
(1998)78
RS
IA + IB
58 (S + W)
186c
ND
Lobectomy better
Okada et al (2001)79
RS
IA ≤2 cm
70 (S)
139
Intentional resection for 
small lesions ≤2 cm
NS
Koike et al (2003)80
RS
IA ≤2 cm
74 (60 S + 14 W)
159
Intentional resection for 
small lesions ≤2 cm
NS
Campione et al (2004)81
RS
IA
21 (S)
100
Poor cardiopulmonary 
function
NS
Keenan et al (2004)82
RS
IA + IB
54 (S)
147
Poor pulmonary 
function
NS
aTumors peripherally located.
bOnly intentional resection.
cIncluding 13 pneumonectomies.
CSS = cancer-specific survival; LCSG = Lung Cancer Study Group; MPS = matched-pair study; ND = not described; NS = not significant; RCT =  
randomized controlled trial; RS = retrospective study; S = segmentectomy; W = wedge resection.
Source: Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd on behalf of Cancer Research UK: Nakamura H, Kawasaki N, Taguchi M, et al. Survival 
following lobectomy vs limited resection for stage I lung cancer: a meta-analysis. Br J Cancer. 2005;92:1033. kkjkjdht © 2005.
because large blood vessels act as a heat sink and lethal cel-
lular temperatures are less likely to be achieved. For these 
patients, stereotactic body radiotherapy may provide local 
tumor control with less risk of major complications. Com-
bination therapy with either external-beam radiation or ste-
reotactic body radiotherapy is also under investigation.
2.		 Stereotactic body radiotherapy. Stereotactic body radio-
therapy applies highly focused, high-intensity, three-
dimensional conformal radiation to the target lesion over 
a few sessions. Tumor motion quantification and image 
guidance technologies have significantly improved the 
delivery of radiation with high levels of precision to the 
target lesion. This accuracy is important because the lung 
is extremely sensitive to radiation injury and the majority 
of patients with early-stage lung cancer who are currently 
considered candidates for ablative therapy have marginal 
lung function; excessive injury to normal surrounding lung 
tissue is not desirable. Importantly, these techniques allow 
the safe delivery of up to 66 Gy of radiation to the target 
tumors without exceeding the maximum-tolerated dose.62,83 
A phase II North American multicenter study recently 
demonstrated the safety and efficacy of this approach in 59 
nonoperable patients.62 Patients with biopsy-proven, node-
negative peripheral NSCLCs less than 5 cm in diameter 
(T1 or T2) were treated with stereotactic body radiotherapy 
after they were deemed inoperable, based on coexisting 
medical conditions, by a thoracic surgeon and/or pulmo-
nologist. Primary tumor control was excellent; at 3 years, 
97.6% were deemed to have primary tumor control by the 
authors and 90.6% had local control. However, it is important 
641
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
to note that primary tumor failure was defined specifically 
as at least a 20% increase in the longest diameter of the 
gross tumor volume by CT scan and evidence of tumor 
viability either by biopsy confirming carcinoma or by dem-
onstration of FDG avidity on PET scan. For viability to be 
confirmed with PET scan, the uptake was required to be of 
similar intensity to the pretreatment staging PET scan. Fail-
ure beyond a 1.5- to 2-cm margin around the primary tumor 
volume was considered local failure. Failure in regional 
node basins was seen in two patients. When compared 
to locoregional control rates of approximately 6.5% with 
limited resection, the 3-year locoregional recurrence was 
higher at 12.8%.
	 	   Patient selection for stereotactic body radiotherapy, 
as with limited resection and radiofrequency ablation, is 
important. Because the radiation field is so precise, patients 
with severe emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease can be safely treated without significant concern 
for worsening lung function. However, patients with cen-
tral tumors near the mediastinum and hilum have increased 
incidence of significant hypoxia, hemoptysis, atelecta-
sis, pneumonitis, and reduced pulmonary function.83 In 
the multicenter trial detailed earlier, treated tumors were 
required to be greater than 2 cm from the proximal bron-
chial tree in all directions (which they defined as the distal 
2 cm of the trachea, carina, and named major lobar bronchi 
up to their first bifurcation).62
Rationale for Chemotherapy in the Management of Early-
Stage NSCLC.  The role of chemotherapy in early-stage (stage 
I and II) NSCLC is evolving, with several prospective phase 
II studies having shown a potential benefit.84,85 Initial concerns 
that induction chemotherapy may result in increased periop-
erative morbidity or mortality appear to be unwarranted, as the 
incidence of perioperative morbidity and mortality is not dif-
ferent between the two groups, except in patients undergoing 
right-sided pneumonectomy after induction chemotherapy.86 As 
shown in Table 19-14, an absolute survival benefit of 4% to 7% 
can be realized using induction for all stages of lung cancer, and 
in situations where use of adjuvant chemotherapy is anticipated, 
induction chemotherapy is an acceptable alternative.
Table 19-14 
Five-year stage-specific survival after induction che-
motherapy followed by surgery
Stage
5-Year  
Survival (%)
Absolute 
Benefit (%)
New 5-Year 
Survival (%)
IA
75
4
79
IB
55
6
61
IIA
50
7
57
IIB
40
7
47
IIIA
15–35
6–7
21–42
IIIB
5–10
3–5
8–15
Source: Reproduced with permission from Burdett SS, Stewart LA, 
Rydzewska L. Chemotherapy and surgery versus surgery alone in non-
small cell lung cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD006157. 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. kkjkjdht Cochrane Collaboration.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines 
currently recommend observation for T1a (≤2 cm) and T1b 
(>2–≤3 cm), node-negative, completely resected NSCLCs 
(T1abN0M0). For patients with larger tumors (T2a tumor >3 cm 
but ≤5 cm; T2b tumor >5 cm but ≤7 cm) that are node-negative, 
it is recommended that chemotherapy be considered in high-risk 
patients, ideally in the setting of a clinical trial. High-risk tumor 
characteristics include poorly differentiated tumors, moderately 
to poorly differentiated lung neuroendocrine tumors, vascular 
invasion, resection limited to wedge resection only, tumors >4 
cm in size, visceral pleural involvement, and when lymph node 
sampling at the time of resection was incomplete (Nx).
Evaluation and Management of Locally Advanced 
NSCLC.  Five-year relative survival in patients with locore-
gional disease is 25%, but there is significant heterogeneity 
within the group. Stage III disease includes patients with small 
tumors that have metastasized to the mediastinal lymph nodes 
as well as large tumors invading unresectable structures or the 
major carina with no nodal metastasis at all. Patients with clini-
cally evident N2 disease (i.e., bulky adenopathy present on CT 
scan or mediastinoscopy, with lymph nodes often replaced by 
tumor) have a 5-year survival rate of 5% to 10% with surgery 
alone. In contrast, patients with microscopic N2 disease discov-
ered incidentally in one lymph node station after surgical resec-
tion have a 5-year survival rate that may be as high as 30%. As 
a result, many surgeons and oncologists differentiate between 
microscopic and bulky N2 lymphadenopathy and the number 
of involved N2 nodal stations in determining whether to pro-
ceed with resection following induction therapy. It is generally 
accepted that surgical resection is appropriate for patients with 
a single-station metastasis with a single lymph node smaller 
than 3 cm, although randomized trials specifically investigating 
resection following induction therapy for patients with single-
station microscopic disease have not yet been performed.
Histologic confirmation of N2 nodal metastases is impera-
tive; false-positive findings on PET scan are unacceptably high, 
and reliance on this modality will lead to significant undertreat-
ment of patients with earlier stage cancers. This is particularly 
true in regions with high incidence of granulomatous diseases. 
When N2 nodes are found, incidentally, to harbor metastasis 
at the time of planned anatomic lung resection, the decision to 
proceed with resection varies depending on surgeon preference; 
it is acceptable to either proceed with anatomic resection and 
mediastinal lymph node sampling/dissection or to stop the pro-
cedure, refer the patient for induction therapy, and re-evaluate 
for resection after induction therapy is completed. When histo-
logically confirmed metastases are found during preoperative 
staging evaluation, patients should be referred for induction 
chemotherapy; patients in whom the mediastinal nodes are ster-
ilized by induction therapy have a better prognosis, and sur-
gical resection is generally warranted as part of a multimodal 
approach. As with preinduction evaluation, histologic confirma-
tion of persistent N2 disease after induction therapy is impera-
tive; patients should not be denied surgical resection following 
induction chemotherapy based on radiographic evidence for N2 
disease because the survival for resected NSCLC is significantly 
better than with definitive chemotherapy.
Surgery in T4 and Stage IV Disease.  Surgery is occasionally 
appropriate for highly selected patients with tumors invading 
the SVC, carinal or vertebral body involvement, or satellite nod-
ules in the same lobe (T3, N0-1, M0) or in T4, N0-1 tumors 
642
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with limited invasion into the mediastinum, heart, great vessels, 
trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, or 
carina through direct extension. Surgery generally does not have 
a role in the care of patients with any tumor with N3 disease or 
T4 tumors with N2 disease. Survival rates remain extremely low 
for these patients. Simlarly, the treatment of patients with stage 
IV disease is chemotherapy. However, on occasion, patients 
with a single site of metastasis are encountered, particularly 
with adenocarcinomas presenting with a solitary brain metasta-
sis. In this highly select group, 5-year survival rates of 10% to 
15% can be achieved with surgical excision of the brain metas-
tasis and the primary tumor, assuming it is early stage.
Surgery for Management of Pancoast’s Tumor.  Carcinoma 
arising in the extreme apex of the chest with associated arm 
and shoulder pain, atrophy of the muscles of the hand, and 
Horner’s syndrome presents a unique challenge to the surgeon. 
Any tumor of the superior sulcus, including tumors without evi-
dence for involvement of the neurovascular bundle, is now com-
monly known as Pancoast’s tumors, after Henry Pancoast who 
described the syndrome in 1932. The designation is reserved for 
tumors involving the parietal pleura or deeper structures overly-
ing the first rib. Chest wall involvement at or below the second 
rib is not a Pancoast’s tumor.74 Treatment is multidisciplinary; 
due to the location of the tumor and involvement of the neu-
rovascular bundle that supplies the ipsilateral extremity, pre-
serving postoperative function of the extremity is critical. For 
Confirm T3–4, N0-1 M0 NSCLC
No evidence for metastatic or N2 nodal disease
Tumor progression or
poor performance status
Definitive
chemoradiotherapy
Metastatic disease or N2
nodal disease
Concurrent induction chemotherapy (Cisplatin/Etoposide)
And radiotherapy: 45 Gy over 5 weeks
CT chest/upper abdomen
MRI/MRA of vessels/brachial
plexus
Mediastinoscopy
Brain CT or MRI and
PET scan
Reassessment performance score, physiologic reserve,
tumor response
Radiographic evaluation: CT scans of the
chest, upper abdomen, and brain. PET scan for metastases
Additional chemotherapy
as tolerated
Assess performance status:
performance score, cardiopulmonary reserve,
renal function and neurologic function
Initial evaluation, biopsy and staging
Thoracotomy, en bloc chest wall resection, lobectomy, chest wall with reconstruction
Tumor stable/regression; good to
excellent performance status
Poor performance status
Good to excellent performance status
Figure 19-25.  Treatment algorithm for Pancoast’s tumors. CT = computed tomography; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; MRI = 
magnetic resonance imaging; NSCLC = non–small cell lung cancer; PET = positron emission tomography.
this reason, resection should only be performed in patients who 
are proven negative for mediastinal lymph node involvement. 
Survival with N2 positive nodes is poor, and the morbidity and 
mortality associated with surgical resection are high. If bulky 
lymphadenopathy is present, EBUS- or EUS-guided FNA/core-
needle biopsy may prove nodal involvement. However, a nega-
tive FNA is not sufficient for proving the absence of mediastinal 
involvement and should be followed by mediastinoscopy to 
ensure accurate and complete evaluation of the mediastinum.
Because Pancoast’s tumors have high rates of local recur-
rence and incomplete resection, induction chemoradiotherapy 
followed by surgery is recommended. This treatment regi-
men was well tolerated in a study performed by the Southwest 
Oncology Group, with 95% of patients completing induction 
treatment. Complete resection was achieved in 76%. Five-year 
survival was 44% overall and 54% when complete resection 
was achieved. Disease progression with this regimen was pre-
dominantly at distant sites, with the brain being the most com-
mon.75 The current treatment algorithm for Pancoast’s tumors is 
presented in Fig. 19-25.
Surgical excision is performed via thoracotomy with en 
bloc resection of the chest wall and vascular structures and ana-
tomic lobectomy. A portion of the lower trunk of the brachial 
plexus and the stellate ganglion are also typically resected. With 
chest wall involvement, en bloc chest wall resection, along with 
lobectomy, is performed, with or without chest wall reconstruction. 
643
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
For small rib resections or those posterior to the scapula, chest 
wall reconstruction is usually unnecessary. Larger defects (two 
rib segments or more) are usually reconstructed with Gore-Tex 
to provide chest wall contour and stability. En bloc resection 
is also used for other locally advanced tumors (T3) with direct 
invasion of the adjacent chest wall, diaphragm, or pericardium. 
If a large portion of the pericardium is removed, reconstruction 
with thin Gore-Tex membrane will be required to prevent car-
diac herniation and venous obstruction.
Preoperative (Induction) Chemotherapy for NSCLC.  The use 
of chemotherapy before anatomic surgical resection has a num-
ber of potential advantages:
1.		 The tumor’s blood supply is still intact, allowing better 
chemotherapy delivery and avoiding tumor cell hypoxia 
(in any residual microscopic tumor remaining postopera-
tively), which would increase radioresistance.
2.		 The primary tumor may be downstaged, enhancing resect-
ability.
3.		 Patients are better able to tolerate chemotherapy before sur-
gery and are more likely to complete the prescribed regi-
men than after surgery.
4.		 It functions as an in vivo test of the primary tumor’s sensi-
tivity to chemotherapy.
5.		 Response to chemotherapy can be monitored and used to 
guide decisions about additional therapy.
6.		 Systemic micrometastases are treated.
7.		 It identifies patients with progressive disease/non-responders 
and spares them a pulmonary resection.
Potential disadvantages include:
1.		 There is a possible increase in the perioperative complica-
tion rate in patients requiring right pneumonectomy after 
induction chemotherapy.
2.		 While the patient is receiving chemotherapy, potentially 
curative resection is delayed; if the patient does not 
respond, this delay could result in tumor spread.
In stage IIIA N2 disease, the response rates to induction 
chemotherapy are high, in the range of 70%. The treatment is 
generally safe, as it does not cause a significant increase in peri-
operative morbidity. Two randomized trials have now compared 
surgery alone for patients with N2 disease to preoperative che-
motherapy followed by surgery. Both trials were stopped before 
complete accrual because of a significant increase in survival 
for the chemotherapy arm. The initially observed survival dif-
ferences have been maintained for up to 3 years and beyond 
(5-year data not shown). Given these results, induction chemo-
therapy with cisplatin-based regimens (two to three cycles) has 
become standard for patients with N2 disease. Table 19-15 sum-
marizes the findings of a systematic review and meta-analysis 
reporting response rates, progression-free survival, and overall 
survival after induction chemotherapy followed by surgical 
resection.
Postoperative (Adjuvant) Chemotherapy for NSCLC.  Postop-
erative adjuvant chemotherapy was previously thought to confer 
no benefit based on multiple prospective randomized trials, in 
part because patients who had undergone thoracotomy and lung 
resection had difficulty tolerating the adjuvant regimens. More 
recently, however, newer, more effective agents have shown 
promise and adjuvant therapy is better tolerated after minimally 
invasive lung resection (i.e., VATS or robotic anatomic resection). 
Targeted therapies, which have been shown to be beneficial in 
advanced-stage lung cancer, are of particular interest.
Any patient with nodal metastasis (N1 or N2) or with T3 
tumors (defined as tumors >7 cm; invading chest wall, dia-
phragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium, 
or main bronchus tumor <2 cm distal to the carina; causing atel-
ectasis or obstructive pneumonitis; or with separate nodules 
in the same lobe of the lung) should receive adjuvant chemo-
therapy if they are able to tolerate the regimens. In the situa-
tion where the margins of resection are positive, re-resection 
is recommended. If not possible, concurrent chemoradiation is 
recommended for macroscopic residual tumor and sequential 
chemoradiation for microscopic residual tumor.
Definitive Nonsurgical Treatment for NSCLC.  Recent 
advances in targeted therapies have changed the management of 
advanced NSCLC from a generalized, platinum-based approach 
to one in which molecular analysis and targeted, personalized 
therapies are now standard of care. It is now mandatory that the 
pathologist clearly differentiate between squamous cell carci-
noma and adenocarcinoma because the therapeutic options are 
different and use of bevacizumab, while beneficial in patients 
with adenocarcinoma, has been found to cause excessive pulmo-
nary hemorrhage in patients with squamous histology. For the 
surgeon, this requirement translates into a much more aggres-
sive approach to tissue diagnosis. At our institution, the cyto-
pathologist provides onsite rapid assessment of the fine-needle 
aspirate to determine whether tumor cells are present and con-
firm that sufficient tumor cells are present to enable molecu-
lar testing. This has increased the number of passes performed 
during an EBUS-guided FNA or during CT-guided aspiration 
of a pulmonary or intrathoracic lesion; typically, an additional 
two passes are made for cell block material after confirming 
the presence of tumor cells in the target area. When insuffi-
cient cells are obtained for molecular testing, despite having a 
diagnosis, additional sampling is warranted; this is mandatory 
in patients with adenocarcinoma and likely to become neces-
sary for other non–small cell histologic types as advances in 
targeted therapies become available for clinical use. Acquiring 
adequate tissue for diagnosis may require mediastinoscopy or 
VATS; close communication between the oncologist, surgeon, 
pathologist, and patient is needed to ensure that the benefits to 
the patient clearly outweigh the risks and that results obtained 
through more aggressive diagnostic measures are needed to 
direct subsequent care.
Once a treatment plan has been devised, two strategies 
for delivery are available. “Sequential” chemoradiation involves 
full-dose systemic chemotherapy (i.e., cisplatin combined with 
a second agent) followed by standard radiotherapy (approxi-
mately 60 Gy). The combination of chemotherapy followed 
by radiation has improved 5-year survival from 6% with radio-
therapy alone to 17%.89 An alternative approach, referred to as 
“concurrent chemoradiation,” administers chemotherapy and 
radiation at the same time. Certain chemotherapeutic agents sen-
sitize tumor cells to radiation and, thus, enhance the radiation 
effect. The advantages of this approach are improved primary 
tumor and locoregional lymph node control and elimination 
of the delay in administering radiotherapy that occurs with 
sequential treatment. A disadvantage, however, is the necessary 
reduction in chemotherapy dosage in order to diminish over-
lapping toxicities; this can potentially lead to undertreatment 
of systemic micrometastases. Randomized trials have shown a 
644
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 19-15 
Selected randomized trials of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for stage III non–small cell lung cancer
Trial  
(Reference)
No. of Patients 
(Stage III)
Chemotherapy
Response 
Rate (%)
pCR (%)
Complete 
Resection
PFS
OS
5-Year Survival
Rosell et al85
60 (60)
Mitomycin
Ifosfamide
Cisplatin
60
4
85%
12 vs. 5 mo (DFS; P = .006)
22 vs. 10 mo (P = .005)
16% vs. 0%
Roth et al90
60 (60)
Cyclophosph
amide
Etoposide
Cisplatin
35
NR
39% vs. 31%
Not reached vs. 9 mo  
(P = .006)
64 vs. 11 mo (P = .008)
56% vs. 15%a
Pass et al91
27 (27)
Etoposide
Cisplatin
62
8
85% vs. 86%
12.7 vs. 5.8 mo (P = .083)
28.7 vs. 15.6 mo (P = .095)
NR
Nagai et al92
62 (62)
Cisplatin
Vindesine
28
0
65% vs. 77%
NR
17 vs. 16 mo (P = .5274)
10% vs. 22%
Gilligan et al93
519 (80)
Platinum basedb
49
4
82% vs. 80%
NR
54 vs. 55 mo (P = .86)
44% vs. 45%
Depierre et al94
355 (167)
Mitomycin
Ifosfamide
Cisplatin
64
11
92% vs. 86%
26.7 vs. 12.9 mo (P = .033)
37 vs. 26 mo (P = .15)
43.9% vs. 35.3%c
Pisters et al95
354 (113)d
Carboplatin
Paclitaxel
41
NR
94% vs. 89%
33 vs. 21 mo (P = .07)
75 vs. 46 mo (P = .19)
50% vs. 43%
Sorensen et al96
90 (NR)
Paclitaxel
Carboplatin
46
0
79% vs. 70%
NR
34.4 vs. 22.5 mo (NS)
36% vs. 24% (NS)
Mattson et al97
274 (274)
Docetaxel
28
NR
77% vs. 76%e
9 vs. 7.6 mo (NS)
14.8 vs. 12.6 mo (NS)
NR
a3-year survival.
bOptions included MVP (mitomycin C, vindesine, and platinum), MIC (mitomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin), NP (cisplatin and vinorelbine), PacCarbo (paclitaxel and carboplatin), GemCis (gemcitabine and cisplatin), 
and DocCarbo (docetaxel and carboplatin).
c4-year survival.
d113 patients (32%) were reported to have stage IIB or IIIA disease.
e22 patients in the chemotherapy arm and 29 patients in the control arm had resectable disease.
DFS = disease-free survival; NR = not recorded; NS = not significant; OS = overall survival; pCR = pathologic complete response; PFS = progression-free survival.
Source: Reproduced with permission from JNCCN—Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
645
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
modest 5-year survival benefit as compared with chemotherapy. 
In a systematic review of 47 trials and six meta-analyses, an 
absolute survival benefit of 4% at 2 years was seen when con-
current platinum-based chemoradiation was given compared to 
sequential radiation.98
Definitive radiotherapy is predominantly used for pal-
liation of symptoms in patients with poor performance status; 
cure rates with radiation as a single modality in patients with 
N2 or N3 disease is less than 7%. Recent improvement has 
been seen with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy 
Open
VATS
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
p<0.001
Figure 19-26.  Pie chart comparison of pain control at 3 weeks 
after lobectomy by standard thoracotomy or video-assisted tho-
racic surgery (VATS). The pie charts show that patients undergo-
ing VATS have significantly less pain (P < .01) as measured by the 
most potent analgesic still required: severe—schedule II narcotic; 
moderate—schedule III or lower narcotic; mild—nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (NSAID) or acetaminophen. (Reproduced with 
permission from Demmy TL, Nwogu C. Is video-assisted thoracic 
surgery lobectomy better? Quality of life considerations. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 2008;85:S719. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Table 19-16 
Special circumstances under which lobectomy by video-assisted thoracic surgery may be preferable
Condition
Examples
Pulmonary compromise
Poor FEV1/Dlco, heavy smoking, sleep apnea, recent pneumonia
Cardiac dysfunction
Congestive heart failure, severe coronary artery disease, recent myocardial infarction, valvular 
disease
Extrathoracic malignancy
Solitary brain metastasis from lung cancer, deep pulmonary metastases requiring lobectomy
Poor physical performance
Performance status equivalent to a Zubrod score of 2 or 3, morbid obesity
Rheumatologic/orthopedic 
condition
Spinal disease, severe rheumatoid arthritis, severe kyphosis, lupus erythematosus, 
osteomyelitis
Advanced age
Age >70 years
Vascular problems
Aneurysm, severe peripheral vascular disease
Recent or impending major 
operation
Urgent abdominal operation, joint replacement requiring use of crutches, need for 
contralateral thoracotomy
Psychological/neurologic 
conditions
Substance abuse, poor command following, pain syndromes
Immunosuppression/ impaired 
wound healing
Recent transplantation, diabetes
Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Demmy TL, Nwogu C. Is video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy better? Quality of life considerations. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2008;85:S719. kkjkjdht © Elsevier. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
and altered fractionation. Such poor results for patients with 
stage III lung cancer reflect the limitations of locoregional 
treatment in a disease where death results from systemic 
metastatic spread.
Options for Thoracic Surgical Approaches
Thoracic surgical approaches have changed over recent years 
with advancements in minimally invasive surgery. A surgeon 
trained in advanced minimally invasive techniques can now 
perform pleural-based, pulmonary and mediastinal procedures 
through multiple thoracoscopic ports without the need for a sub-
stantial, rib-spreading incision. Subjective measures of quality 
of life after VATS, such as pain (Fig. 19-26) and perceived 
functional recovery, consistently and reproducibly favor VATS 
over thoracotomy. Objective measures such as functional sta-
tus as measured by 6-minute walk, return to work, and ability 
to tolerate chemotherapy also favor VATS over thoracotomy. 
Finally, recovery of respiratory function occurs earlier in VATS 
patients. These findings are pronounced in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and in the elderly—populations 
whose quality of life can be dramatically impacted by changes 
in their respiratory symptoms and function, thoracic pain, and 
physical performance. Table 19-16 provides a summary of pop-
ulations that may benefit from VATS approaches.
Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery.  VATS has become 
the recommended approach to diagnosis and treatment of pleu-
ral effusions, recurrent pneumothoraces, lung biopsies, lobec-
tomy or segmental resection, resection of bronchogenic and 
mediastinal cysts, and intrathoracic esophageal mobilization for 
esophagectomy.99 It is also utilized for pneumonectomy in some 
centers of excellence with very high volumes of VATS lung 
resection. VATS is performed via two to four incisions measur-
ing 0.5 to 1.2 cm in length to allow insertion of the thoracoscope 
646
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and instruments. An access incision, typically in the fourth or 
fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line, is used for dis-
section of the hilum during lung resection. The incision location 
varies according to the procedure. With respect to VATS lobec-
tomy, port placement varies according to the lobe being resected 
and is highly variable among surgeons.100 The basic principle is 
to position the ports high enough on the thoracic cage to have 
Dissect
B
A
D
C
E
Retract
Retract
Retract
Retract
Retract
View
View
View
View
Hold
View
Dissect
Figure 19-27.  Selected video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy maneuvers. All the maneuvers are shown with the patient positioned in 
the left lateral decubitus position. The same maneuvers can be performed in mirror image for left-sided work. A. Medial viewing and inferior 
holding of lung to allow dissection through the access incision. Example shows dissection of the apical hilum. B. Medial viewing and access 
holding of lung to allow stapling of hilar structures from below. Example shows division of the apical pulmonary artery trunk to the right upper 
lobe (upper lobe branch of vein divided and reflected away). C. Standard viewing and use of working port to dissect and divide structures 
while lung is retracted through access incision. Example shows use of stapler to divide pulmonary artery to right lower lobe. D. Standard 
viewing and use of working port to retract lung and access incision to dissect structures. This method is commonly used to dissect the pul-
monary artery in the major fissure. Example shows inferior pulmonary vein after the pulmonary ligament was divided using this maneuver. 
E. Standard viewing and use of access incision to deliver stapler to divide fissures. Example shows division of the posterior fissure between 
the right lower lobe and the upper lobe. (Reproduced with permission from Demmy et al.100 kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
access to the hilar structures Endoscopic staplers are used to 
divide the major vascular structures and bronchus (Fig. 19-27).
Open approaches to Thoracic Surgery.  When video-assisted 
thoracoscopic approach is not possible, an open approach, most 
frequently the posterolateral thoracotomy, is used to gain access 
to the intrathoracic space.101,102 The posterolateral thoracotomy 
647
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
incision can be used for most pulmonary resections, esophageal 
operations, and operations in the posterior mediastinum and ver-
tebral column (Fig. 19-28). The anterolateral thoracotomy has 
traditionally been used in trauma victims. This approach allows 
quick entry into the chest with the patient supine. In the face of 
hemodynamic instability, the lateral decubitus position signifi-
cantly compromises control over the patient’s cardiopulmonary 
system and resuscitation efforts, whereas the supine position 
allows the anesthesiologist full access to the patient. A bilat-
eral anterior thoracotomy incision with a transverse sternotomy 
(“clamshell” thoracotomy) is a standard operative approach to 
the heart and mediastinum in certain elective circumstances. It 
is the preferred incision for double-lung transplantation in many 
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
divided
Latissimus dorsi
B
A
D
C
Serratus anterior
5th rib
6th rib
Rhomboid
major
Scapula
retracted
Incision
Trapezius
Figure 19-28.  The posterolateral thoracotomy incision. A. Skin incision from the anterior axillary line to the lower extent of the scapula 
tip. B and C. Division of the latissimus dorsi and shoulder girdle musculature. D. The pleural cavity is entered after dividing the intercostal 
muscles along the lower margin of the interspace, taking care not to injure the neurovascular bundle lying below each rib.
centers. A partial median sternotomy can also be added to an 
anterior thoracotomy (“trap-door” or “hemiclamshell” thoracot-
omy) for access to mediastinal structures. A hypesthetic nipple 
is a frequent complication of this approach. The median sternot-
omy incision allows exposure of anterior mediastinal structures 
and is principally used for cardiac operations. Although the sur-
geon has access to both pleural cavities, incision into the pleural 
cavity can be avoided if entry is unnecessary (Fig. 19-29).
Postoperative Care
Chest Tube Management.  At the conclusion of most thoracic 
operations, the pleural cavity is drained with a chest tube(s). If 
the visceral pleura has not been violated and there is no concern 
648
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
for pneumo- or hemothorax (e.g., after VATS sympathectomy), 
a chest tube is unnecessary. After chest tube placement, the 
lung is re-expanded with positive-pressure ventilation. There 
are two reasons for the use of pleural tubes in this setting: first, 
the tube allows evacuation of air if an air leak is present; sec-
ond, blood and pleural fluid can be drained, thereby preventing 
accumulation within the pleural space that would compromise 
the patient’s respiratory status. The tube is removed when the 
air leak is resolved and when the volume of drainage decreases 
below an acceptable level over 24 hours.
Historically, many surgeons have somewhat arbitrarily 
required less than 150 mL of drainage volume over 24 hours 
prior to removing a chest tube to minimize risk of reaccumu-
lation. The pleural lymphatics, however, can absorb up to 
0.40 mL/kg per hour in a healthy individual, which may be as 
much as 500 mL over a 24-hour period. In fact, studies have 
shown that pleural tubes can be removed after VATS lobectomy 
or thoracotomy with 24-hour drainage volumes as high as 400 
mL, without subsequent development of pleural effusions.103 
It is our current practice to remove chest tubes with 24-hour 
outputs of 400 mL or less after lobectomy or lesser pulmonary 
resections. In settings where normal pleural fluid dynamics have 
been altered, such as malignant pleural effusion, pleural space 
A
B
Thymus
R. atrial
appendage
R. ventricle
Preperitoneal
fat
Diaphragm
L. atrial
appendage
Aortic arch
Innominate v.
Pulmonary a.
Figure 19-29.  The median sternotomy incision. A. Skin incision 
from the suprasternal notch to the xiphoid process. B. Exposure of 
the pleural space. a. = artery; v. = vein.
infections or inflammation, and pleurodesis, strict adherence to 
a volume requirement before tube removal is appropriate (typi-
cally 100–150 mL over 24 hours).
For operations involving lung resection or parenchymal 
injury, suction levels of –20 cm H2O are routinely used to eradi-
cate residual air spaces and to control postoperative parenchy-
mal air leaks for the first 12 to 24 hours. The following day, 
however, the decision to continue suction or place the patient 
to water seal (off suction) must be made. Applying suction to 
an air leak has been shown to prolong the duration of the air 
leak and extend the time frame during which tube thoracos-
tomy is needed.104 The main guidelines for the continued use 
of suction if an air leak is present depend on the expansion of 
the remaining lung as determined by CXR. If the lung is well-
expanded, the chest tube can remain to water seal drainage. If an 
undrained pneumothorax is present on CXR, the chest tube and 
its attached tubing should be examined to ensure that the chest 
tube is patent and the attached tubing is not kinked or mechani-
cally obstructed, such as occurs when the patient is lying on the 
tube. If the tube is a small caliber tube (aka pigtail catheter), it 
should be flushed with sterile saline through a three-way stop-
cock that has been cleaned with alcohol because these tubes 
tend to become clogged with fibrin. These catheters are also 
prone to kinking at the insertion site into the skin. Once the 
surgeon has confirmed that the chest tube is patent, the patient 
is asked to voluntarily cough or perform the Valsalva maneuver. 
This maneuver increases the intrathoracic pressure and will 
push air that is contained within the hemithorax out of the chest 
tube. During the voluntary cough, the fluid level in the water 
seal chamber should move up and down with the cough and 
with deep respiration, reflecting the pleural pressure changes 
occurring with these maneuvers. A stationary fluid level implies 
either a mechanical blockage (e.g., due to external tube com-
pression or to a clot/debris within the tube) or pleurodesis of 
the pleural space. If bubbles pass through the water seal cham-
ber, an air leak is presumed. If the leak is significant enough to 
induce atelectasis or collapse of the lung during use of water 
seal, suction should be used to achieve lung re-expansion.
Pain Control.  Good pain control after intrathoracic procedures 
is critical; it permits the patient to actively clear and manage 
secretions and promotes ambulation and a feeling of well-being. 
The most common techniques of pain management are epidural, 
paravertebral, and intravenous. Epidural catheters are com-
monly used, although we prefer to use paravertebral catheters 
in our center. To maximize efficacy, epidural catheters should 
be inserted at about the T6 level, roughly at the level of the 
scapular tip. Lower placement risks inadequate pain control, and 
higher placement may provoke hand and arm numbness. Typi-
cally, combinations of fentanyl at 0.3 μg/mL with either bupi-
vacaine (0.125%) or ropivacaine (0.1%) are used. Ropivacaine 
has less cardiotoxicity than bupivacaine; thus, the potential for 
refractory complete heart block, in the case of inadvertent intra-
venous injection, is significantly less with ropivacaine. Paraver-
tebral blocks can be placed using the same epidural catheter kit 
2.5 cm lateral to the spinous process at T4 to T6. Combinations 
of narcotic and topical analgesia are then infused as with the 
epidural catheter.
When properly placed, a well-managed epidural can 
provide outstanding pain control without significant systemic 
sedation.105 Thoracic epidurals do not commonly cause urinary 
retention, although a low thoracic epidural may block the sen-
sory fibers to the bladder. Motor function, however, remains 
649
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
intact. In some patients who are having difficulty voiding, it 
may be possible to avoid Foley catheterization by simply 
reminding the patient to void on a regular basis. In male patients 
with voiding difficulty prior to surgery, urinary catheterization 
may be required. In addition, the use of local anesthetics may 
cause sympathetic outflow blockade, leading to vasodilation and 
hypotension often requiring intravenous vasoconstrictors (an 
α-agonist such as phenylephrine) and/or fluid administration. 
In such circumstances, fluid administration for hypotension may 
be undesirable in pulmonary surgery patients, particularly after 
pneumonectomy. Paravertebral catheters provide equivalent 
pain control with less effect on hemodynamics.106
Alternatively, intravenous narcotics via patient-controlled 
analgesia can be used, often in conjunction with ketorolac and 
intravenous Tylenol. Dosing must be titrated to balance the 
degree of pain relief with the degree of sedation. Oversedated 
patients are as ominous as patients without adequate pain con-
trol, because of the significant risk of secretion retention, atelec-
tasis/pneumonia, and pulmonary aspiration. These concerns are 
particularly relevant in elderly patients who should be carefully 
assessed for aspiration risk when ordered for dietary advance-
ment. Proper pain control with intravenous narcotics requires 
a carefully regulated balance between pain relief and sedation; 
maximizing the benefits of pain control while minimizing these 
very real and potentially life-threatening complications.
Whether on epidural, paravertebral, or intravenous pain 
control, the patient is typically transitioned to oral pain medica-
tion on the third or fourth postoperative day. During both the 
parenteral and oral phase of pain management, a standardized 
regimen of stool softeners and laxatives is advisable in order to 
prevent severe constipation.
Respiratory Care.  The best respiratory care is achieved when 
the patient is able to deliver an effective cough to clear secre-
tions and results from the commitment and proper training of 
all involved healthcare providers. The process begins preopera-
tively, with clear instructions on using pillows (or other support 
techniques) over the wound and then applying pressure. Post-
operatively, proper pain control (as outlined earlier) is essential, 
without oversedation. Daily morning rounds should include a 
careful assessment of the patient’s pulmonary status, reminders 
to the patient and family about the importance of coughing and 
deep breathing, including use of adjunctive respiratory equip-
ment if ordered, and mobilization of the patient. Early transition 
to a chair and to ambulation is the best respiratory therapy and 
should be strongly encouraged. When available, physical and/
or cardiopulmonary rehabilitation services are vital additional 
members of the care team.
In patients whose pulmonary function is significantly 
impaired preoperatively, generating an effective cough post-
operatively may be nearly impossible. In this setting, routine 
nasotracheal suctioning can be employed, but is uncomfortable 
for the patient. A better alternative is placement of a percutane-
ous transtracheal suction catheter at the time of surgery. This 
catheter is well-tolerated by most patients and allows regular 
and convenient suctioning.
Postoperative Complications
Postoperative complications after pulmonary resection range 
from minor to life-threatening. Strict attention to volume sta-
tus, early and aggressive pulmonary toilet, and good pain 
control can reduce the risk of most complications, but does 
not completely eliminate them, even in centers of excellence. 
The most devastating complication after pulmonary resection 
is postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema, which occurs in 
1% to 5% of patients undergoing pneumonectomy and more 
often after right compared to left pneumonectomy. Clinically, 
symptoms of respiratory distress manifest hours to days after 
surgery. Radiographically, diffuse interstitial infiltration or 
frank alveolar edema is seen. The pathophysiologic causes are 
related to factors that increase permeability and filtration pres-
sure and decrease lymphatic drainage from the affected lung. 
Judicious use of intravenous fluids perioperatively, including 
use of vasopressors rather than fluid boluses for hypotension 
intraoperatively and postoperatively, is critical to minimizing 
the risk of this syndrome. Treatment consists of ventilatory sup-
port, fluid restriction, and diuretics. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation may be life-saving in centers where this option is 
available. The syndrome reportedly has a nearly 100% mortality 
rate despite aggressive therapy.
Other postoperative complications include air leak and 
bronchopleural fistula. Although these are two very differ-
ent problems, distinguishing between them may be difficult. 
Postoperative air leaks are common after pulmonary resection, 
particularly in patients with emphysematous lung, because the 
fibrosis and destroyed blood supply impairs healing of surface 
injuries. Prolonged air leaks (i.e., those lasting >5 days) may 
be treated by diminishing or discontinuing suction (if used), 
by continuing chest drainage, or by instilling a pleurodesis 
agent, usually doxycycline or talcum powder, which will cause 
pleurodesis of the lung within the chest cavity and minimize the 
possible collapse of the lung due to persistent air leak. This is 
useful only in patients in whom full lung expansion is achieved, 
either with suction or on water seal, as patients with a persistent 
pneumothorax on CXR will not have adequate lung-to-parietal 
pleural apposition to achieve adequate pleurodesis.
If the leak is moderate to large, a high index of suspicion 
for bronchopleural fistula from the resected bronchial stump 
should be maintained, particularly if the patient is immuno-
compromised or had induction chemotherapy and/or radia-
tion therapy. If a bronchopleural fistula is suspected, flexible 
bronchoscopy is performed to evaluate the bronchial stump. 
Management options include continued prolonged chest tube 
drainage, reoperation, and reclosure (with stump reinforcement 
with an intercostal muscle flap or a pedicled serratus muscle 
flap). If the fistula is very small (<4 mm), bronchoscopic fibrin 
glue application has been used successfully to seal the hole in 
some patients. Patients often have concomitant empyema, and 
open drainage may be necessary.
Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Spontaneous pneumothorax is secondary to intrinsic abnormali-
ties of the lung and can be classified as primary and secondary. 
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is defined as a spontaneous 
pneumothorax without underlying lung disease. The most com-
mon cause is rupture of an apical subpleural bleb. The cause 
of these blebs is unknown, but they occur more frequently in 
smokers and males, and they tend to predominate in young 
postadolescent males with a tall thin body habitus. Treatment is 
generally chest tube insertion with water seal. If a leak is present 
and persists for greater than 3 days, thoracoscopic management 
(i.e., bleb resection with pleurodesis by talc or pleural abrasion) 
is performed. Recurrences or complete lung collapse with the 
first episode are generally indications for thoracoscopic inter-
vention.107 Additional indications for intervention on the first 
650
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
episode include occupational hazards such as air travel, deep-sea 
diving, or travel to remote locations. CT findings of multiple 
small bullae or a large bleb are associated with an increased 
risk of recurrent pneumothorax.108 Many surgeons are now using 
screening CT scan to recommend VATS bleb resection with 
pleurodesis for first-episode spontaneous pneumothorax.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the set-
ting of underlying lung disease, such as emphysema (rupture of 
a bleb or bulla), cystic fibrosis, acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome (AIDS), metastatic cancer (especially sarcoma), asthma, 
lung abscess, and occasionally primary lung cancer. Catame-
nial pneumothorax, a rare but interesting cause of spontaneous 
pneumothorax in women in their second and third decades, 
occurs within 72 hours of the onset of menses and is possibil-
ity related to endometriosis. Management of pneumothorax 
in these circumstances is similar to that of primary spontane-
ous pneumothorax in that drainage and lung re-expansion are 
required. Additional therapy, however, is often tied to therapy 
of the specific disease process and may involve lung resection, 
thoracoscopic pleurectomy, or talc pleurodesis.
Pulmonary Infections
Lung Abscess.  A lung abscess is a localized area of pulmonary 
parenchymal necrosis caused by an infectious organism; tissue 
destruction results in a solitary or dominant cavity measuring 
at least 2 cm in diameter. Less often, there may be multiple, 
smaller cavities (<2 cm). In that case, the infection is typically 
referred to as a necrotizing pneumonia. An abscess that is pres-
ent for more than 6 weeks is considered chronic.
Based on the etiology (Table 19-17), lung abscesses are 
further classified as primary or secondary. A primary lung 
abscess occurs, for example, in immunocompromised patients, 
as a result of highly virulent organisms inciting a necrotizing 
pulmonary infection, or in patients who have a predisposition to 
aspirate oropharyngeal or gastrointestinal secretions. A second-
ary lung abscess occurs in patients with an underlying condition 
such as a partial bronchial obstruction, a lung infarct, or adjacent 
suppurative infections (subphrenic or hepatic abscesses).109
Pathogenesis.  Lung abscesses result when necrotizing micro-
organisms infect the lower respiratory tract via inhalation of 
aerosolized particles, aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions, or 
hematogenous spread from distant sites. Direct extension from 
a contiguous site is less frequent. Most primary lung abscesses 
are suppurative bacterial infections secondary to aspiration. 
Risk factors for pulmonary aspiration include advanced age, 
conditions of impaired consciousness, suppressed cough reflex, 
dysfunctional esophageal motility, laryngopharygeal reflux 
disease, and centrally acting neurologic diseases (e.g., stroke). 
At the time of aspiration, the composition of the oropharyn-
geal flora determines the etiologic organisms. With increasing 
use of proton pump inhibitors to suppress acid secretion in the 
stomach, the oropharyngeal flora has shifted and the risk of 
developing bacterial lung infections after an aspiration event has 
increased.110 Secondary lung abscesses occur most often distal 
to an obstructing bronchial carcinoma. Infected cysts or bullae 
are not considered true abscesses.
Microbiology.  Normal oropharyngeal secretions contain many 
more Streptococcus species and more anaerobes (approximately 
1 × 108 organisms/mL) than aerobes (approximately 1 × 107 
organisms/mL). Pneumonia that follows from aspiration, with 
or without abscess development, is typically polymicrobial. 
An average of two to four isolates present in large numbers 
have been cultured from lung abscesses sampled percutane-
ously. Overall, at least 50% of these infections are caused by 
purely anaerobic bacteria, 25% are caused by mixed aerobes 
and anaerobes, and 25% or fewer are caused by aerobes only. 
In nosocomial pneumonia, 60% to 70% of the organisms are 
gram-negative bacteria, including Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, Proteus species, Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, and Eikenella 
corrodens. Immunosuppressed patients may develop abscesses 
because of the usual pathogens as well as less virulent and 
opportunistic organisms such as Salmonella species, Legionella 
species, Pneumocystis carinii, atypical mycobacteria, and fungi.
Clinical Features and Diagnosis.  The typical presentation may 
include productive cough, fever (>38.9°C), chills, leukocyto-
sis (>15,000 cells/mm3), weight loss, fatigue, malaise, pleuritic 
chest pain, and dyspnea. Lung abscesses may also present in a 
more indolent fashion, with weeks to months of cough, mal-
aise, weight loss, low-grade fever, night sweats, leukocytosis, 
and anemia. After aspiration pneumonia, 1 to 2 weeks typically 
elapse before cavitation occurs; 40% to 75% of such patients 
produce putrid, foul-smelling sputum. Severe complications 
Table 19-17 
Causes of lung abscess
I.  Primary
A.  Necrotizing pneumonia
1.  Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, 
Mycobacterium
2.  Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Actinomyces
3.  Entamoeba, Echinococcus
B.  Aspiration pneumonia
1.  Anesthesia
2.  Stroke
3.  Drugs or alcohol
C.  Esophageal disease
1.  Achalasia, Zenker’s diverticulum, 
gastroesophageal reflux
D.  Immunodeficiency
1.  Cancer (and chemotherapy)
2.  Diabetes
3.  Organ transplantation
4.  Steroid therapy
5.  Malnutrition
II.  Secondary
A.  Bronchial obstruction
1.  Neoplasm
2.  Foreign body
B.  Systemic sepsis
1.  Septic pulmonary emboli
2.  Seeding of pulmonary infarct
C.  Complication of pulmonary trauma
1.  Infection of hematoma or contusion
2.  Contaminated foreign body or penetrating injury
D.  Direct extension from extraparenchymal infection
1.  Pleural empyema
2.  Mediastinal, hepatic, subphrenic abscess
Source: Adapted with permission from Rusch VW, et al. Chest wall, 
pleura, and mediastinum. In: Schwartz SI, et al, eds. Principles of Sur-
gery. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1999:735.
651
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
such as massive hemoptysis, endobronchial spread to other 
portions of the lungs, rupture into the pleural space and devel-
opment of pyopneumothorax, or septic shock and respiratory 
failure are rare in the modern antibiotic era. The mortality rate 
is about 5% to 10%, except in the presence of immunosuppres-
sion, where rates range from 9% to 28%.
The CXR is the primary tool for diagnosing a lung abscess 
(Fig. 19-30). Its distinguishing characteristic is a density or mass 
with a relatively thin-walled cavity. An air-fluid level observed 
within the abscess indicates communication with the tracheo-
bronchial tree. CT scan of the chest clarifies the diagnosis when 
CXR is equivocal and identifies endobronchial obstruction and/
or an associated mass and other pathologic anomalies. A cavi-
tating lung carcinoma is frequently mistaken for a lung abscess. 
Differential diagnosis also includes loculated or interlobar 
empyema, infected lung cysts or bullae, tuberculosis, bronchi-
ectasis, fungal infections, and noninfectious inflammatory con-
ditions (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis).
Ideally, the specific etiologic organism is identified before 
antibiotic administration. Bronchoscopy, which is essential to 
rule out endobronchial obstruction due to tumor or foreign body, 
is ideal for obtaining uncontaminated cultures using bronchoal-
veolar lavage. Culture samples can also be obtained by percu-
taneous, transthoracic FNA under ultrasound or CT guidance. 
Routine sputum cultures are often of limited usefulness because 
of contamination with upper respiratory tract flora.
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis, although rare, are par-
ticularly virulent infections associated with lung abscess, and 
diagnosis can be difficult.111 Both frequently masquerade as 
other clinical syndromes; thus, it is important for the surgeon 
to keep these bacteria in mind when considering the differential 
diagnosis for cavitary lung lesions. Actinomyces, a normal oro-
pharyngeal bacterium, causes extensive pulmonary damage as 
the result of aspiration. Actinomycosis lung infection typically 
begins as acute pneumonitis after an aspiration. The symptoms 
mimic pulmonary tuberculosis, including chronic cough, night 
sweats, weight loss, and hemoptysis. Ongoing infection leads 
to chronic inflammation and fibrosis; cavitation occurs due to 
destruction of the pulmonary tissues. Without treatment, the 
infection continues to destroy surrounding structures, which can 
result in fistula formation into the adjacent structures, including 
the adjacent lung, interlobar fissures, pleural space, chest wall, 
and mediastinum. Actinomyces israelii is the most common 
cause of disease among the Actinomyces species. Nocardiosis 
is also a rare opportunistic infection that usually occurs in an 
immunocompromised host (human immunodeficiency virus 
[HIV] or cancer patients) and causes both local and systemic 
suppurative infections. The most common site is pulmonary, 
caused by Nocardia asteroides in 90% of cases; one series, 
however, reported a high prevalence of the particularly virulent 
species, Nocardia farcinica. Similar to actinomycosis, infec-
tion is slowly progressive, with weight loss, fatigue, cough, and 
hemoptysis. An acute pulmonary infection is common, with 
necrotizing pneumonia and cavitation or slowly enlarging pul-
monary nodule(s). In some cases, empyema also develops.
Management of Lung Abscess.  Systemic antibiotics directed 
against the causative organism represent the mainstay of therapy. 
The duration of antimicrobial therapy varies from 3 to 12 weeks 
for necrotizing pneumonia and lung abscess. It is likely best to 
treat until the cavity is resolved or until serial radiographs show 
significant improvement. Parenteral therapy is generally used 
until the patient is afebrile and able to demonstrate consistent 
enteral intake. Oral therapy can then be used to complete the 
course of therapy. For community-acquired infections secondary 
to aspiration, likely pathogens are oropharyngeal streptococci 
and anaerobes. Penicillin G, ampicillin, and amoxicillin are the 
main therapeutic agents, but a β-lactamase inhibitor or metro-
nidazole should be added to cover the increasing prevalence of 
gram-negative anaerobes that produce β-lactamase. Clindamycin 
is also a primary therapeutic agent. For hospital-acquired infec-
tions, Staphylococcus aureus and aerobic gram-negative bacilli 
are common organisms of the oropharyngeal flora. Piperacillin 
or ticarcillin with a β-lactamase inhibitor (or equivalent alterna-
tives) provide better coverage of likely pathogens.
Surgical drainage of lung abscesses is uncommon since 
drainage usually occurs spontaneously via the tracheobron-
chial tree. Indications for intervention are listed in Table 19-18. 
Drainage and resection may be required for actinomycosis and 
nocardiosis; diagnosis is often delayed because the bacteria are 
difficult to culture; invasion of the infection into surrounding 
structures is, therefore, common. Once identified, long-term 
antibiotics (months to years) are typically required along with 
drainage, debridement, and resection as needed. While penicil-
lin derivatives are effective against most Actinomyces species, 
the infections are typically polymicrobial, and broad-spectrum 
parenteral antibiotics may be required. Nocardia species, in 
contrast, are highly variable; specific identification of the infect-
ing species with antibiotic sensitivities is needed to direct appro-
priate therapy. Evaluation for malignant spread, particularly to 
the brain, is also required in the management of nocardiosis, as 
systemic dissemination occurs early and frequently.
External drainage may be accomplished with tube tho-
racostomy, percutaneous drainage, or surgical cavernostomy. 
The choice between tube thoracostomy versus radiographically 
guided catheter placement depends on the treating physician’s 
preference and the availability of interventional radiology. Sur-
gical resection is required in fewer than 10% of lung abscess 
patients. Lobectomy is the preferred intervention for bleeding 
from a lung abscess or pyopneumothorax. An important intra-
operative consideration is to protect the contralateral lung with 
a double-lumen tube, bronchial blocker, or contralateral main 
stem intubation. Surgical treatment has a 90% success rate, with 
an associated mortality of 1% to 13%.
Bronchiectasis.  Bronchiectasis is defined as a pathologic and 
permanent dilation of bronchi with bronchial wall thickening. 
This condition may be localized to certain bronchial segments, 
or it may be diffuse throughout the bronchial tree, typically 
affecting the medium-sized airways. Overall, this is a rare clini-
cal entity in the United States with a prevalence of less than 1 in 
10,000, although the incidence has increased in recent years 
and noncystic fibrosis–related bronchiectasis is now thought to 
affect 27.5 out of every 10,000 persons over age 75.
Pathogenesis.  Development of bronchiectasis can be attributed 
to either congenital or acquired causes. The principal congenital 
diseases that lead to bronchiectasis include cystic fibrosis, pri-
mary ciliary dyskinesia, and immunoglobulin deficiencies (e.g., 
selective IgA deficiency). Congenital causes tend to produce 
a diffuse pattern of bronchial involvement. Acquired causes 
are categorized broadly as infectious and inflammatory. Bron-
chial obstruction from cancer, inhaled objects, extrinsic airway 
compression, or inspissated sputum promotes localized infec-
tion and subsequent medium airway destruction. Diffuse pneu-
monic processes from pathogens including necrotizing bacterial 
652
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 19-30.  Lung abscess resulting from emesis and aspiration after an alcoholic binge. A. Chest x-ray showing an abscess cavity in the 
left upper lobe. B. A coronal tomogram highlights the thin wall of the abscess. C. Healing of the abscess cavity after 4 weeks of antibiotic 
therapy and postural drainage.
B
A
C
653
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
pneumonia, pertussis and measles pneumonia, severe influenza, 
or varicella pneumonia can lead to widespread bronchiectasis. 
Chronic granulomatous disease, immunodeficiency disorders, 
and hypersensitivity disorders can also lead to diffuse bronchi-
ectasis.
Noninfectious causes of bronchiectasis include inhala-
tion of toxic gases such as ammonia, which results in severe 
and destructive airway inflammatory responses. Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, Sjögren’s syndrome, and 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency are some additional examples of 
presumed immunologic disorders that may be accompanied by 
bronchiectasis.
In addition, recent studies have suggested an association 
between chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease, acid suppres-
sion, and nontuberculous mycobacterial infection with bronchi-
ectasis.112,113 This interaction is thought to be related to 
chronic aspiration of colonized gastric secretions in the 
setting of acid suppression; while not proven to be causative, 
these findings suggest a role for gastroesophageal reflux disease 
in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. 
The process shared by all causes of bronchiectasis is 
impairment of airway defenses or deficits in immunologic mech-
anisms, which permit bacterial colonization and chronic infec-
tion. Common organisms include Haemophilus species (55%), 
Pseudomonas species (26%), and Streptococcus pneumoniae 
(12%).114 Both the bacterial organisms and the inflammatory 
cells recruited to thwart the bacteria elaborate proteolytic and 
oxidative molecules, which progressively destroy the muscular 
and elastic components of the airway walls; those components 
are then replaced by fibrous tissue. Thus chronic airway inflam-
mation is the essential pathologic feature of bronchiectasis. The 
dilated airways are usually filled with thick purulent material; 
more distal airways are often occluded by secretions or oblit-
erated by fibrous tissue. Bronchial wall vascularity increases, 
bronchial arteries become hypertrophied, and abnormal anas-
tomoses form between the bronchial and pulmonary arterial 
circulation.
There are three principal types of bronchiectasis, based on 
pathologic morphology: cylindrical—uniformly dilated bronchi; 
varicose—an irregular or beaded pattern of dilated bronchi; and 
saccular (cystic)—peripheral balloon-type bronchial dilation. 
The saccular type is the most common after bronchial obstruc-
tion or infection (Fig. 19-31).
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Typical symptoms 
are a daily persistent cough and purulent sputum production; 
the quantity of daily sputum production (10 mL to >150 mL) 
correlates with disease extent and severity. Other patients 
Table 19-18 
Indications for surgical drainage procedures for lung 
abscesses
1.  Failure of medical therapy
2.  Abscess under tension
3.  Abscess increasing in size during appropriate treatment
4.  Contralateral lung contamination
5.  Abscess >4–6 cm in diameter
6.  Necrotizing infection with multiple abscesses, 
hemoptysis, abscess rupture, or pyopneumothorax
7.  Inability to exclude a cavitating carcinoma
Figure 19-31.  Multiple cystic-type bronchiectatic cavities can be 
seen on a cut section of right lower lobe lung.
may appear asymptomatic or have a dry nonproductive cough 
(“dry bronchiectasis”). These patients are prone to have involve-
ment of the upper lobes. The clinical course is characterized 
by progressive symptoms and respiratory impairment. Increas-
ing resting and exertional dyspnea are the result of progressive 
airway obstruction. Acute exacerbations may be triggered by 
viral or bacterial pathogens. Bleeding attributable to chronically 
inflamed, friable airway mucosa causes increasingly more fre-
quent hemoptysis with disease progression. Massive bleeding 
may result from erosion of the hypertrophied bronchial arteries.
Both mild and severe forms of bronchiectasis are read-
ily demonstrated with chest CT scanning because it provides a 
highly detailed, cross-sectional view of bronchial architecture. 
CXRs, although less sensitive, may reveal characteristic signs 
of bronchiectasis such as lung hyperinflation, bronchiectatic 
cysts, and dilated, thick-walled bronchi forming track-like pat-
terns radiating from the lung hila. Sputum culture may identify 
characteristic pathogens. Sputum acid-fast bacillus smears and 
cultures should be performed to evaluate for the presence of 
nontuberculous mycobacteria, which is common in this setting. 
Spirometry provides an assessment of the severity of airway 
obstruction and can be followed to track the course of disease.
Management of Bronchiectasis.  Standard therapy includes 
optimizing airway clearance, use of bronchodilators to reverse 
any airflow limitation, and correction of reversible underlying 
causes whenever possible.115 Chest physiotherapy based on 
vibration, percussion, and postural drainage is widely accepted, 
although randomized trials demonstrating efficacy are lack-
ing. Acute exacerbations should be treated with a 2- to 3-week 
course of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics tailored to cul-
ture and sensitivity profiles, followed by an oral regimen; this 
will result in a longer-lasting remission.
Macrolide antibiotics have been shown to decrease sputum 
production, inhibit cytokine release, and inhibit neutrophil adhe-
sion and formation of reactive oxygen species. They also inhibit 
migration of Pseudomonas, disrupt biofilm, and prevent release 
of virulence factors.116 While macrolide therapy does appear to 
be efficacious, it is important to remember that macrolides have 
significant activity against nontuberculous mycobacteria, and 
widespread prophylactic use for patients with bronchiectasis 
may lead to multidrug-resistant nontuberculous mycobacterial 
species. It has also been suggested that inhaled antibiotics, such 
10
654
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
as tobramycin and colistin, improve rates of bacterial clearance 
and slow the decline in pulmonary function associated with 
bronchiectasis, but large, randomized trials showing overall 
clinical benefit have not yet been published.117,118
In addition to antibiotics, daily nebulized hypertonic saline 
appears to be effective. A recent randomized crossover study 
comparing lung function and quality of life has shown that 7% 
normal saline, compared to isotonic saline, results in a statisti-
cally significant 15% increase in FEV1 and an 11% increase in 
forced vital capacity (compared to 1.8% and 0.7%, respectively, 
with isotonic saline). Antibiotic use and emergency room utili-
zation were significantly decreased; from this, hypertonic saline 
appears to be a reasonable adjunct to maintaining quality of 
life and decreasing exacerbations by reducing sputum volume, 
improving mucociliary clearance, and slowing the decline in 
lung function.119 Studies supporting mucolytics such as DNase 
and N-acetylcysteine for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis have 
shown either no change or a worsening of pulmonary status and 
require further study in the non-cystic fibrosis population.
Surgical resection of a localized bronchiectatic segment or 
lobe, preserving as much functional lung as possible, may bene-
fit patients with refractory symptoms while on maximal medical 
therapy. Multifocal disease must be excluded before any attempt 
at surgery; any uncorrectable predisposing factor (e.g., ciliary 
dyskinesia) must also be excluded. Patients with end-stage lung 
disease from bronchiectasis may be potential candidates for a 
bilateral lung transplant. Surgical resection is also indicated in 
patients with significant hemoptysis, although bronchial artery 
embolization is the preferred first option. Antireflux surgery 
may also prove beneficial in patients with chronic aspiration, 
but further studies are required. It is particularly important to 
recognize that antireflux surgery in patients with severe under-
lying pulmonary dysfunction has higher risk for perioperative 
adverse outcomes than in the general population. It should 
be undertaken only by very experienced surgeons with direct 
involvement of the pulmonary medicine physicians to minimize 
postoperative pulmonary compromise.
Mycobacterial Infections
Epidemiology.  Tuberculosis is a widespread problem that 
affects nearly one third of the world’s population. Between 8.3 
and 9 million new cases of tuberculosis and 12 million preva-
lent cases (range 10–13 million) were estimated worldwide in 
2011 according to the World Health Organization. Only 10,521 
new cases were reported to the World Health Organization in the 
United States in 2011. HIV infection is the strongest risk factor 
for developing active tuberculosis. The elderly, minorities, and 
recent immigrants are the most common populations to have clin-
ical manifestations of infection, yet no age group, sex, or race is 
exempt from infection. In most large urban centers, reported cases 
of tuberculosis are more numerous among the homeless, prisoners, 
and drug-addicted populations. Immunocompromised patients 
additionally contribute to an increased incidence of tuberculosis 
infection, often developing unusual systemic as well as pulmo-
nary manifestations.120 As compared with past decades, presently 
surgical intervention is required more frequently in patients with 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis organisms (MDRTB) who do not 
respond to medical treatment and in selected patients with nontu-
berculous mycobacterial infections (NTM).
Microbiology.  Mycobacterial species are obligate aerobes. They 
are primarily intracellular parasites with slow rates of growth. 
Their defining characteristic is the property of acid-fastness, 
which is the ability to withstand decolorization by an acid-alcohol 
mixture after being stained. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the 
highly virulent bacillus of this species that produces invasive 
infection among humans, principally pulmonary tuberculosis.121 
Infections with M. tuberculosis are primary when they are the 
first infection in a previously unsensitized host and secondary 
or postprimary when reactivation of a previous infection occurs.
Because of improper application of antimycobacterial 
drugs and multifactorial interactions, MDRTB organisms, 
defined by their resistance to at least two of the first-line anti-
mycobacterial drugs (isoniazid and rifampin), have emerged. It 
is estimated that 1.4% of new tuberculosis cases and 7.6% of 
retreatment cases in the United States in 2011 are from MDRTB 
organisms. In addition, there is another rare variant termed 
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis, which is resistant to 
isoniazid and rifampin, all fluoroquinolones, and at least one of 
the injectable second-line drugs (e.g., capreomycin, amikacin, 
kanamycin). It is estimated that 9% of all MDRTB cases are 
extensively drug resistant.
The more important NTM organisms include Mycobacte-
rium kansasii, M. avium and M. intracellulare complex (MAC), 
and M. fortuitum. The highest incidence of M. kansasii infec-
tion is in midwestern U.S. cities among middle-aged males from 
good socioeconomic surroundings. MAC organisms are impor-
tant infections in elderly and immunocompromised patient 
groups. M. fortuitum infections are common complications of 
underlying severe debilitating disease. None of these organisms 
are as contagious as M. tuberculosis.
Pathogenesis and Pathology.  The main route of transmission 
is via airborne inhalation of viable mycobacteria. Three stages 
of primary infection have been described. In the first stage, 
alveolar macrophages become infected through ingesting the 
bacilli. In the second stage, from days 7 to 21, the patient typi-
cally remains asymptomatic while the bacteria multiply within 
the infected macrophages. The third stage is characterized by 
the onset of cell-mediated immunity (CD4+ helper T cells) and 
delayed-type hypersensitivity. Activated macrophages acquire 
an increased capacity for bacterial killing. Macrophage death 
increases, resulting in the formation of a granuloma, the charac-
teristic lesion found on pathologic examination.
Tuberculous granulomas are composed of blood-derived 
macrophages, degenerating macrophages or epithelioid cells, 
and multinucleated giant cells (fused macrophages with nuclei 
around the periphery; also known as Langerhans cells). The low 
oxygen content of this environment inhibits macrophage func-
tion and bacillary growth, with subsequent central caseation as 
macrophage death occurs. A Ghon complex is a single, small 
lung lesion that is often the only remaining trace of a primary 
infection. The primary infection is usually located in the periph-
eral portion of the middle zone of the lungs.
Reactivation tuberculosis may occur after hydrolytic 
enzymes liquefy the caseum. Typically, the apical and posterior 
segments of the upper lobes and the superior segments of the 
lower lobes are involved. Edema, hemorrhage, and mononuclear 
cell infiltration are also present. The tuberculous cavity may 
become secondarily infected with other bacteria, fungi, or yeasts, 
all of which may contribute to enhanced tissue destruction.
The pathologic changes caused by NTM organisms are 
similar to those produced by M. tuberculosis. M. intracellulare 
complex infections commonly occur, not only in immunocom-
promised patients, but also in patients with previously damaged 
lungs. Caseous necrosis is uncommon and is characterized by 
655
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
clusters of tissue macrophages filled with mycobacteria. It has 
a poor granulomatous response and confinement of immune cell 
infiltration to the interstitium and alveolar walls. Cavitary dis-
ease is infrequent, although nodules may be noted.
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis.  The clinical course of 
infection and the presentation of symptoms are influenced by 
many factors, including the site of primary infection, the stage 
of disease, and the degree of cell-mediated immunity. About 
80% to 90% of tuberculosis patients present with clinical dis-
ease in the lungs. In 85% to 90% of these patients, involution 
and healing occur, leading to a dormant phase that may last a 
lifetime. The only evidence of tuberculosis infection may be a 
positive skin reaction to tuberculin challenge or a Ghon com-
plex observed on CXR. Within the first 2 years of primary infec-
tion, reactivation may occur in up to 10% to 15% of infected 
patients. In 80%, reactivation occurs in the lungs; other reacti-
vation sites include the lymph nodes, pleura, and the musculo-
skeletal system.
After primary infection, pulmonary tuberculosis is fre-
quently asymptomatic. Systemic symptoms of low-grade fever, 
malaise, and weight loss are subtle and may go unnoticed. A 
productive cough may develop, usually after tubercle cavita-
tion. Many radiographic patterns can be identified at this stage, 
including local exudative lesions, local fibrotic lesions, cavita-
tion, bronchial wall involvement, acute tuberculous pneumonia, 
bronchiectasis, bronchostenosis, and tuberculous granulomas. 
Hemoptysis often develops from complications of disease such 
as bronchiectasis or erosion into vascular malformations asso-
ciated with cavitation. Extrapulmonary involvement is due to 
hematogenous or lymphatic spread from pulmonary lesions. 
Virtually any organ can become infected, giving rise to the pro-
tean manifestations of tuberculosis. The pleura, chest wall, and 
mediastinal organs may all be involved. More than one third of 
immunocompromised patients have disseminated disease, with 
hepatomegaly, diarrhea, splenomegaly, and abdominal pain.
The definitive diagnosis of tuberculosis requires identi-
fication of the mycobacterium in a patient’s bodily fluids or 
involved tissues. Skin testing using purified protein derivative 
is important for epidemiologic purposes and can help exclude 
infection in uncomplicated cases. For pulmonary tuberculosis, 
sputum examination is inexpensive and has a high diagnostic 
yield. Bronchoscopy with alveolar lavage may also be a useful 
diagnostic adjunct and has high diagnostic accuracy. Chest CT 
scan can delineate the extent of parenchymal disease.
Management.  Medical therapy is the primary treatment of pul-
monary tuberculosis and is often initiated before a mycobacte-
rial pathogen is definitively identified. Combinations of two or 
more drugs are routinely used in order to minimize resistance, 
which inevitably develops with only single-agent therapy. A 
current treatment algorithm is outlined in Fig. 19-32. Gener-
ally, therapy lasts about 18 months. The overall response rate is 
satisfactory in 70% to 80% of patients with M. kansasii infec-
tion. Surgical intervention is rarely required in the 20% to 30% 
of patients who are not responsive to medical therapy. In con-
trast, pulmonary M. intracellulare complex infections respond 
poorly, even to combinations of four or more drugs, and most of 
the patients will eventually require surgical intervention. Over-
all, sputum conversion is achieved in only 50% to 80% of NTM 
infections, and relapses occur in up to 20% of patients.
In the United States, surgical intervention is most often 
required in order to treat patients with MDRTB organisms 
whose lungs have been destroyed and who have persistent 
thick-walled cavitation.122 The indications for surgery related 
to mycobacterial pulmonary infections are presented in Table 
19-19. The governing principle of mycobacterial surgery is to 
remove all gross disease while preserving any uninvolved lung 
tissue. Scattered nodular disease may be left intact, given its low 
mycobacterial burden. Antimycobacterial medications should 
be given preoperatively (for about 3 months) and continued 
postoperatively for 12 to 24 months. Overall, more than 90% of 
patients who were deemed good surgical candidates are cured 
when appropriate medical and surgical therapy is used.
Pulmonary Fungal Infections.  The incidence of fungal 
infections has increased significantly, with many new opportu-
nistic fungi emerging. This increase is attributed to the growing 
population of immunocompromised patients (e.g., organ trans-
plant recipients, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, HIV 
patients, and young and elderly patients) who are more likely to 
become infected with fungi.123 Clinically significant examples 
include species of Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Candida, and 
Mucor. Other at-risk patient populations include those who 
are malnourished, severely debilitated, or diabetic or who have 
hematologic disorders. Patients receiving high-dose, intensive 
antibiotic therapies are also susceptible. There are, however, 
some fungi that are primary or true pathogens, able to cause 
infections in otherwise healthy patients. Some endemic exam-
ples in the United States include species of Histoplasma, Coc-
cidioides, and Blastomyces.124
Direct identification of the organism in body exudates or 
tissues, preferably as growth in culture, provides definitive diag-
nosis. Serologic testing to identify mycotic-specific antibodies 
may also be useful. Several new classes of antifungal agents 
have proven effective against many life-threatening fungi and 
are less toxic than older agents. In addition, thoracic surgery 
may be a useful therapeutic adjunct for patients with pulmonary 
mycoses.
Aspergillosis.  The genus Aspergillus comprises over 150 spe-
cies and is the most common cause of mortality due to inva-
sive mycoses in the United States. It is typically acute in onset 
and life-threatening and occurs in the setting of neutropenia, 
chronic steroid therapy, or cytotoxic chemotherapy. It can also 
occur in the general intensive care unit population of critically 
ill patients, including patients with underlying chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD), postoperative patients, patients 
with cirrhosis or alcoholism, and postinfluenza patients, with-
out any of these factors present. The species most commonly 
responsible for clinical disease include A. fumigatus, A. flavus, 
A. niger, and A. terreus. Aspergillus is a saprophytic, filamen-
tous fungus with septate hyphae. Spores (2.5–3 μm in diameter) 
are released and easily inhaled by susceptible patients; because 
the spores are microns in size, they are able to reach the distal 
bronchi and alveoli.
Aspergillosis can manifest as one of three clinical syn-
dromes: Aspergillus hypersensitivity lung disease, aspergilloma, 
or invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Overlap occurs between 
these syndromes, depending on the patient’s immune status.125 
Aspergillus hypersensitivity manifests as a productive cough, 
fever, wheezing, pulmonary infiltrates, eosinophilia, and ele-
vation of IgE antibodies to Aspergillus, whereas aspergilloma 
(fungal ball) is a matted sphere of hyphae, fibrin, and inflam-
matory cells that tends to colonize pre-existing intrapulmonary 
cavities. Grossly, aspergilloma appears as a round or oval, friable, 
656
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
INH/RIF
INH/RIF
INH/RIF
INH/RIF
INH/RIF/EMB*/PZA†
0
1
2
3
4
6
9
Time (months)
INH/RPT‡§
INH/RIF
2-month
culture negative
High clinical
suspicion
for active
tuberculosis
2-month
culture positive
Cavitation on CXR
or
positive AFB smear
at 2 months
No cavitation on CXR
and
negative AFB smear
at 2 months
No cavitation
Cavitation
Figure 19-32.  Treatment algorithm for tuberculosis. Patients in whom tuberculosis is proven or strongly suspected should have treatment 
initiated with isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) for the initial 2 months. A repeat smear and cul-
ture should be performed when 2 months of treatment has been completed. If cavities were seen on the initial chest radiograph (CXR) or the 
acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear results are positive at completion of 2 months of treatment, the continuation phase of treatment should consist 
of INH and RIF daily or twice daily for 4 months to complete a total of 6 months of treatment. If cavitation was present on the initial CXR 
and the culture results at the time of completion of 2 months of therapy are positive, the continuation phase should be lengthened to 7 months 
(total of 9 months of treatment). If the patient has HIV infection and the CD4+ cell count is <100/μL, the continuation phase should consist 
of daily or three times weekly INH and RIF. In HIV-uninfected patients with no cavitation on CXR and negative results on AFB smears at 
completion of 2 months of treatment, the continuation phase may consist of either once weekly INH and rifapentine (RPT) or daily or twice 
weekly INH and RIF to complete a total of 6 months of treatment (bottom). For patients receiving INH and RPT whose 2-month culture 
results are positive, treatment should be extended by an additional 3 months (total of 9 months). *EMB may be discontinued when results 
of drug susceptibility testing indicate no drug resistance. †PZA may be discontinued after it has been taken for 2 months (56 doses). ‡RPT 
should not be used in HIV-infected patients with tuberculosis or in patients with extrapulmonary tuberculosis. §Therapy should be extended 
to 9 months if results of 2-month culture are positive. (Reproduced with permission of the American Thoracic Society. kkjkjdht © American 
Thoracic Society.  Blumberg HM, et al. American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society 
of America: Treatment of tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;167:603.)
Table 19-19 
Indications for surgery to treat mycobacterial pulmo-
nary infections
1.  Complications resulting from previous thoracic surgery to 
treat tuberculosis
2.  Failure of optimized medical therapy (e.g., progressive 
disease, lung gangrene, or intracavitary aspergillosis 
superinfection)
3.  Need for tissue acquisition for definitive diagnosis
4.  Complications of pulmonary scarring (e.g., massive 
hemoptysis, cavernomas, bronchiectasis, or 
bronchostenosis)
5.  Extrapulmonary thoracic involvement
6.  Pleural tuberculosis
7.  Nontuberculous mycobacterial infection
gray (or red, brown, or even yellow), necrotic-looking mass 
(Fig. 19-33). This form is the most common presentation of non-
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. The most common symptoms 
are hemoptysis, chronic and productive cough, clubbing, mal-
aise, or weight loss. CXR can suggest the diagnosis by the find-
ing of a crescentic radiolucency above a rounded radiopaque 
lesion (Monad sign).
The natural history varies greatly between patients and, 
therefore, treatment is individualized. Factors associated 
with poor prognosis include severe underlying pul-
monary disease, growth in the number or size of the 
aspergilloma(s) during observation, immunosuppression or 
HIV infection, history of lung transplantation, chronic pulmo-
nary sarcoidosis, and increasing Aspergillus-specific IgG titers. 
Asymptomatic patients can be observed without any additional 
therapy. Antifungals have limited utility due to the poor blood 
supply to the aspergilloma. Amphotericin B is the drug of 
11
657
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
choice, although voriconazole has recently been used for treat-
ment of aspergillosis, with fewer side effects and equivalent 
efficacy. Hemoptysis is a harbinger of erosion of the disease 
into adjacent bronchial arteries and typically requires inter-
vention. In the setting of very mild hemoptysis (e.g., blood-
streaked sputum), cough suppression is warranted while further 
therapeutic evaluation is performed.
Bronchial artery embolization is the first-line therapy for 
massive hemoptysis and may be definitive therapy.126 This is 
particularly important to consider for patients with severely 
impaired pulmonary function who may not have sufficient 
reserve to tolerate even a very small pulmonary resection. 
Operative intervention may be required for recurrent hemoptysis, 
A
C
B
Figure 19-33.  Pulmonary aspergilloma. A. The chest x-ray shows a solid mass within a cavity surrounded by a rim of air between the mass 
and cavity wall (Monad sign, arrows). B. A cut section shows the “fungus ball” occupying an old, fibrotic cavity. C. Histologic stain reveals 
characteristic Aspergillus hyphae invading the wall of the cavity.
particularly after bronchial artery embolization, chronic cough 
with systemic symptoms, progressive infiltrate around the 
mycetoma, and a pulmonary mass of unknown cause.127
When operative intervention is indicated, the surgeon must 
remain cognizant of the goals of the procedure. As this disease 
typically occurs in patients with significantly impaired pulmo-
nary function, attempts should be made to excise all diseased 
tissue with as limited a resection as possible. Once resection is 
completed, the postresection space in the hemithorax should be 
obliterated with a pleural tent, pneumoperitoneum, decortica-
tion of the remaining lung, intrathoracic rotation of a muscle or 
omental flap, or thoracoplasty. Long-term follow-up is neces-
sary, given that the recurrence rate after surgery is about 7%.
658
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis typically affects immu-
nocompromised patients who have dysfunctional cellular immu-
nity, namely defective polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Invasion 
of pulmonary parenchyma and blood vessels by a necrotizing 
bronchopneumonia may be complicated by thrombosis, hemor-
rhage, and then dissemination. Patients present with fever that is 
nonresponsive to antibiotic therapy in the setting of neutropenia. 
They may also have pleuritic chest pain, cough, dyspnea, or 
hemoptysis. Characteristic signs on CT scan include the halo 
sign and cavitary lesions. Treatment with voriconazole must 
be prompt and aggressive, including reversal of neutropenia, 
if there is to be any chance for recovery. Mortality ranges from 
93% to 100% in bone marrow transplant recipients, to approxi-
mately 38% in kidney transplant recipients, although this 
improves to approximately 60% at 12 weeks with voriconazole 
therapy. Several other advances in diagnosis and treatment, 
including CT scans in high-risk populations and development of 
additional triazoles and echinocandins, have improved the early 
identification and response to therapy in this patient population. 
Additional treatment considerations include the use of hema-
topoietic growth factors to minimize the neutropenic period, 
which contributes to uncontrolled disease. Surgical removal 
of the infectious nidus is advocated by some groups because 
medical treatment has such poor outcomes. Treatment continues 
until microbiologic clearance is achieved and clinical signs and 
radiographic imaging indicate resolution of disease. In addition, 
the patient should no longer be immunosuppressed. If continu-
ation of immunosuppressive medications is required, antifungal 
therapy should also continue to prevent recurrence of invasive 
disease.
Cryptococcosis.  Cryptococcosis is a subacute or chronic infec-
tion caused by Cryptococcus neoformans, a round, budding 
yeast (5–20 μm in diameter) that is sometimes surrounded by 
a characteristic wide gelatinous capsule. Cryptococci are typi-
cally present in soil and dust contaminated by pigeon droppings. 
When inhaled, such droppings can cause a nonfatal disease pri-
marily affecting the pulmonary and central nervous systems. 
At present, cryptococcosis is the fourth most common oppor-
tunistic infection in patients with HIV infection, affecting 6% 
to 10% of that population. Four basic pathologic patterns are 
seen in the lungs of infected patients: granulomas; granuloma-
tous pneumonia; diffuse alveolar or interstitial involvement; and 
proliferation of fungi in alveoli and lung vasculature. Symptoms 
are nonspecific, as are the radiographic findings. Cryptococcus 
may be isolated from sputum, bronchial washings, percutaneous 
needle aspiration of the lung, or cerebrospinal fluid. If disease is 
suspected, serum cryptococcal antigen titers should be obtained; 
if positive or if the patient has persistent fever, evidence of pro-
gression, physiologic compromise, or dissemination, treatment 
should be promptly initiated. Multiple antifungal agents are 
effective against C. neoformans, including amphotericin B and 
the azoles. The choice of antifungal and duration of treatment 
depend on the severity of disease. Duration of therapy is longer 
in patients who are immunocompromised.
Candidiasis.  Candida organisms are oval, budding cells (with 
or without mycelial elements) that colonize the oropharynx of 
many healthy individuals. The fungi of this genus are common 
hospital and laboratory contaminants. Usually, Candida albi-
cans causes disease in the oral or bronchial mucosa, among other 
anatomic sites. Other potentially pathogenic Candida species 
include C. tropicalis, C. glabrata, and C. krusei. Historically, 
C. albicans was the most common pathogen to cause invasive 
candidal infection. However, more recent reports suggest that 
other Candida species, particularly C. glabrata and C. krusei, 
are becoming more prevalent and now account for between 40% 
and 50% of all cases. These species are relatively resistant to 
fluconazole, and the shift is likely related to the widespread use 
of this antifungal agent.128
The incidence of Candida infections has increased and is 
no longer confined to immunocompromised patients. Increasing 
incidence of infection has been identified in patients with any 
of the following risk factors: critical illness of long duration; 
use of long-term antibiotics, particularly multiple; indwelling 
urinary or vascular catheter; gastrointestinal perforation; or burn 
wounds.129 With respect to the thorax, such patients commonly 
have candidal pneumonia, pulmonary abscess, esophagitis, and 
mediastinitis. Pulmonary candidal infections typically result in 
an acute or chronic granulomatous reaction. Because Candida 
can invade blood vessel walls and a variety of tissues, systemic 
or disseminated infections can occur, but are less common.
Treatment for candidal infection includes both fungicidal 
and fungistatic agents. The fungicidal medications include 
polyenes (amphotericin B deoxycholate [AmB-D] and various 
lipid-associated amphotericin B preparations) and the echino-
candins (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin). Fun-
gistatic drugs include the triazoles (fluconazole, itraconazole, 
voriconazole, and posaconazole).128 The availability of multiple 
effective therapies allows for specific tailoring of treatment, 
including combination regimens, based on the patient’s ability 
to tolerate associated toxicities, the microbiologic information 
for the specific candidal species, and the route of administra-
tion. While demonstrated efficacy is similar, the triazoles and 
echinocandins appear to have fewer side effects and are better 
tolerated than the other classes of antifungal drugs.
In addition to prompt institution of antifungal therapy, it 
is advisable to remove all central venous catheters. For funge-
mia, an eye examination should be performed. Treatment should 
continue for at least 2 weeks after the last positive blood culture. 
For patients with Candida mediastinitis (which has a mortal-
ity rate of >50%), surgical intervention to debride all infected 
tissues is required, in addition to prolonged administration of 
antifungal drugs.
Mucormycosis.  The Mucor species, rare members of the class 
Zygomycetes, are responsible for rapidly fatal disease in immu-
nocompromised patients. Other disease-causing species of the 
class Zygomycetes include Absidia, Rhizopus, and Mortier-
ella.130 Characteristic of these fungi are nonseptate, branch-
ing hyphae that are difficult to culture. Infection occurs via 
inhalation of spores. Immunocompromised patients, including 
patients with neutropenia, acidosis, diabetes, and hematologic 
malignancy all predispose to clinical susceptibility. In the lungs, 
disease consists of blood vessel invasion, thrombosis, and 
infarction of infected organs. Tissue destruction is significant, 
along with cavitation and abscess formation. Initial treatment 
is to correct underlying risk factors and administer antifungal 
therapies, although the optimal duration and optimal total dose 
are unknown. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are recom-
mended at this time. Surgical resection of any localized disease 
should be performed after initial medical treatment attempts fail.
Primary Fungal Pathogens
Histoplasma capsulatum.  Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimor-
phic fungus existing in mycelial form in soil contaminated by 
659
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
fowl or bat excreta and in yeast form in human hosts. The most 
common of all fungal pulmonary infections, histoplasmosis pri-
marily affects the respiratory system after spores are inhaled. 
It is endemic in the Midwest and Mississippi River Valley of 
the United States, where about 500,000 new cases arise each 
year. In immunocompromised patients, the infection becomes 
systemic and more virulent; because cell-mediated immunity is 
impaired, uninhibited fungal proliferation occurs within pulmo-
nary macrophages and then spreads. Acute forms of the disease 
present as primary or disseminated pulmonary histoplasmosis; 
chronic forms present as pulmonary granulomas (histoplasmo-
mas), chronic cavitary histoplasmosis, mediastinal granulomas, 
fibrosing mediastinitis, or bronchiolithiasis. Histoplasmosis is 
definitively diagnosed by fungal smear, culture, direct biopsy 
of infected tissues, or serologic testing.
The clinical presentation depends on the inoculum size 
and on host factors. Symptoms of acute pulmonary histoplas-
mosis are fever, chills, headache, chest pain, musculoskeletal 
pain, and nonproductive cough. CXRs may be normal or may 
show mediastinal lymphadenopathy and patchy parenchymal 
infiltrates. Most patients improve in a few weeks; mild to mod-
erate disease can be treated with itraconazole. Amphotericin B 
is the treatment of choice if moderate symptoms persist for 2 to 
4 weeks or if the illness is extensive, including dyspnea and 
hypoxia, and if patients are immunosuppressed.131
As the pulmonary infiltrates from acute histoplasmosis 
heal, consolidation into an asymptomatic solitary nodule or 
histoplasmoma may occur and is usually seen incidentally on 
radiographs as a coin-shaped lesion. Central and concentric 
calcification may occur; if so, no further treatment is required. 
Noncalcification of the lesion requires further diagnostic workup 
including chest CT scan, needle biopsy, or surgical excision to 
rule out a malignancy. Figure 19-34 demonstrates the differ-
ences in pathologic findings between infections in normal and 
immunocompromised hosts.132
When lymph nodes and pulmonary granulomas calcify 
over time, pressure atrophy on the bronchial wall may result 
in erosion and migration of the granulomatous mass into the 
bronchus, causing bronchiolithiasis. Typical symptoms include 
cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea. Life-threatening complica-
tions include massive hemoptysis or bronchoesophageal fistula. 
In addition to radiography, bronchoscopy should be performed 
to aid in diagnosis. Definitive treatment requires surgical exci-
sion of the bronchial mass and repair of the airway and contigu-
ous structures. Endobronchial debridement is not advised as this 
can result in massive, fatal bleeding.
Fibrosing mediastinitis is an uncommon manifestation of 
histoplasmosis but can be fatal due to progressive distortion and 
compression of the major vessels and central airways. Diagno-
sis can be difficult and symptoms may be present for extended 
periods, even years, before the diagnosis is made. The differ-
ential diagnosis for the disease process includes granuloma-
tous mediastinitis related to recent infection, malignancy, and 
chronic pulmonary thromboembolism. A trial of itraconazole is 
worthwhile, although it is not proven to be effective. In cases 
where radiographic or physiologic improvement is achieved 
after a trial of 12 week of therapy, continuation of therapy is 
considered for a full 12 months. In the majority of patients, how-
ever, antifungal therapy has not been proven effective. There 
is no role for corticosteroids at this time or for antifibrotics. 
Occasionally, intravascular stents have been helpful for severe 
vascular compromise. Balloon dilatation and endobronchial 
silicone stents may be needed for airway compromise, although 
this should be directed by a surgeon with expertise in mediasti-
nal and airway disease management.
Chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis occurs in about 10% 
of patients who become symptomatic after infection. Most such 
patients have pre-existing lung pathology, particularly emphy-
sema, which becomes colonized. Subsequent pneumonitis and 
necrosis, cavity enlargement, new cavity formation, and pul-
monary dissemination occur. Nonspecific symptoms, such 
as cough, sputum production, fever, weight loss, weakness, 
and hemoptysis are common. Chest radiography may reveal 
intrapulmonary cavitation and scarring. Occasionally, partial 
resolution of the inflammatory changes may be observed. Itra-
conazole provides effective therapy, but must be given for 12 
to 24 months. It is superior to ketoconazole and fluconazole; 
these should only be used if itraconazole is not tolerated. Vori-
conazole and posaconazole have been found to be useful for 
salvage therapy. Serum itraconazole levels should be monitored 
to ensure that the drug is being absorbed. Occasionally, lipid-
associated amphotericin B is necessary for more severe infec-
tions. Surgical excision should be considered in patients with 
adequate pulmonary reserve and localized, thick-walled cavities 
that have been unresponsive to antifungal therapy.
Disseminated histoplasmosis occurs most frequently in 
patients who are severely immunocompromised, such as post-
transplantation patients, patients with HIV, and patients using 
immunosuppressive medications. Presentation ranges from non-
specific signs of fever, weight loss, and malaise, to shock, respi-
ratory distress, and multiorgan failure. Diagnosis can be made 
with a combination of Histoplasma urine antigen, serologic 
assay, and fungal culture and should be suspected in patients 
with the above symptoms in any endemic area, particularly if 
the patient is immunosuppressed.133 Any of the antifungal thera-
pies can be used in treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis. 
Use of amphotericin B has decreased the mortality rate to less 
than 25% in this type of serious infection.
Coccidioides immitis.  Coccidioides immitis is an endemic fun-
gus found in soil and dust of the southwestern United States. 
Agricultural workers, military personnel, and other occupations 
with extensive exposure to soil, especially in areas of endemic 
growth, are at highest risk, as are immunocompromised indi-
viduals.134 Spores (arthroconidia) are inhaled, swell into spher-
ules, and subdivide into endospores, and subsequent infection 
develops. Diagnosis can be achieved through serum analysis 
for anticoccidioidal antibody, spherule identification in tissue, 
or by isolating the fungus in cultures from sputum, other body 
fluid, or tissue.
Inhalation of the fungus causes pulmonary involvement 
in 95% of patients with symptomatic disease. Three main cat-
egories of pulmonary involvement, based on the associated 
signs and symptoms, are possible: primary; complicated; and 
residual pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Primary pulmonary 
coccidioidomycosis occurs in about 40% of people who inhale 
spores. The other 60% will remain asymptomatic and develop 
life-long immunity. The constellation of symptoms of “valley 
fever,” including fever, chills, headache, erythema multiforme, 
erythema nodosum, polyarthralgias, nonproductive cough, and 
chest pain, and a CXR showing hilar and paratracheal adenopa-
thy are highly suggestive of pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. In 
many patients, initial diagnosis is community-acquired pneu-
monia, and it is only when the patient fails to respond to appro-
priate antibiotic therapy that pulmonary coccidioidomycosis 
660
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 19-34.  Pathologic findings of infection in normal and immunocompromised hosts. Histopathologic preparations are shown contrast-
ing acute diffuse pulmonary involvement in a lung segment of a normal host with a probable primary infection (A through D) with pulmonary 
granulomas from an immunocompromised patient who had an opportunistic reinfection with Histoplasma capsulatum (E, F). A. Diffuse inter-
stitial pneumonitis in an adult (normal host) with recent heavy environmental exposure and subsequent development of progressive pulmonary 
disease. There is an inflammatory cell infiltrate primarily involving the interalveolar interstitial spaces but present within many alveolar spaces 
as well. The exudate consists mostly of mononuclear phagocytes, lymphocytes, and occasional plasma cells. Many of the alveolar walls are 
markedly thickened (hematoxylin and eosin stain [H&E], ×50). B. Another area from the same lung as in A showing focal vasculitis with an 
infiltrate of lymphocytes and macrophages (H&E, ×25). C. Relatively large alveolar macrophages packed with single and budding yeasts 2 
to 4 μm in diameter (same lung as in A and B). The basophilic cytoplasm of these yeasts is retracted from their thin outer cell walls, leaving 
halo-like clear areas that can be confused with capsules (H&E, ×500). D. Intracellular and extracellular yeasts, 2 to 4 μm in diameter, some 
of which are single, budding, or in short chains (Gomori methenamine silver stain, ×500). E. Nonnecrotizing (sometimes called epithelioid 
cell or noncaseating) granuloma from a patient who had recently received chemotherapy for a germ cell tumor (different patient than in A 
through D). This lesion consists of a focal collection of macrophages (sometimes referred to as histiocytes or epithelioid cells) plus lympho-
cytes and occasional plasma cells. A few multinucleated macrophages are present. A thin layer of fibroblasts circumscribes the lesion. Yeasts 
of H. capsulatum, probably present within macrophages of this lesion at an earlier stage, were not identified in this granuloma or in any of 
several other nonnecrotizing granulomas within the specimen. Lesions of this type often undergo necrosis to become necrotizing granulomas 
(H&E, ×50). F. Necrotizing (sometimes referred to as caseating) granuloma from the same lung as in E. This lesion has a necrotic center sur-
rounded by macrophages, encapsulating fibroblasts, fibrous connective tissue in the periphery, and scattered lymphocytes. A prominent giant 
cell is present in the lower left of the granuloma (at approximately 8 o’clock). Microorganisms are usually present only in relatively small 
numbers in these types of lesions. They are most frequently detected within the most central necrotic material in these granulomas (H&E, 
×25). (Reproduced with permission from Hage et al.132)
661
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
is considered. The disease is self-limited in the majority of 
patients, and treatment is not required in these cases.
Therapy should be considered for (a) patients with 
impaired cellular immunity; (b) comorbid illnesses that are 
adversely impacted by the infection, including chronic pulmo-
nary dysfunction, renal failure, and congestive heart failure; and 
(c) when symptoms and radiographic findings persist for more 
than 6 to 8 weeks, at which time the disease is considered to be 
persistent coccidioidal pneumonia and occurs in approximately 
1% of patients. Progression to caseous nodules, cavities, and 
calcified, fibrotic, or ossified lesions indicates complicated or 
residual stages of coccidioidomycosis.
There are several relative indications for surgery in pulmo-
nary coccidioidomycosis. A rapidly expanding (>4 cm) cavity 
that is close to the visceral pleura is a high risk for rupture into 
the pleural space and subsequent empyema. Other indications 
for operative intervention include life-threatening hemoptysis; 
hemoptysis that is persistent despite medical therapy; symptom-
atic fungus ball; bronchopleural fistula; cavitary lesions with 
persistent positive sputum; and pulmonary nodules that degen-
erate over time. Finally, any nodule with signs that are concern-
ing for malignancy should undergo further evaluation, including 
biopsy or resection, to determine the underlying etiology.
Diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis is confirmed by histo-
pathologic, mycologic, and serologic evaluation. Extrapulmo-
nary disease may develop in approximately 0.5% of infected 
patients, with involvement of meninges, bones, joints, skin, or 
soft tissues. Immunocompromised patients are especially sus-
ceptible to disseminated coccidioidomycosis, which carries a 
mortality rate over 40%. Treatment options for this disease vary 
depending on the severity of the disease as well as the stage. 
Amphotericin B deoxycholate or the triazoles continue to be 
the primary antifungal medications. If meningeal involvement 
is identified, fluconazole or itraconazole therapy is required for 
the remainder of the patient’s life. Intrathecal amphotericin B 
can also be administered in some cases.
Blastomyces dermatitidis.  Blastomyces dermatitidis is a 
round, single-budding yeast with a characteristic thick, refrac-
tile cell wall. It resides in the soil as a nonmotile spore called 
conidia. Exposure occurs when contaminated soil is disturbed 
and the conidia are aerosolized. The spore is inhaled and 
transforms into a yeast phase at body temperature.135 Infec-
tion is typically self-limited. A small minority of patients will 
develop chronic pulmonary infection or disseminated disease, 
including cutaneous, osteoarticular, and genitourinary involve-
ment. B. dermatitidis has a worldwide distribution; in the United 
States, it is endemic in the central states.136 With chronic infec-
tion, the organism induces a granulomatous and pyogenic reac-
tion with microabscesses and giant cells; caseation, cavitation, 
and fibrosis may also occur. Symptoms are nonspecific and con-
sistent with chronic pneumonia in 60% to 90% of patients. They 
include cough, mucoid sputum production, chest pain, fever, 
malaise, weight loss, and, uncommonly, hemoptysis. In acute 
disease, radiographs are either completely negative or have 
nonspecific findings; in chronic disease, fibronodular lesions 
(with or without cavitation) similar to tuberculosis are noted. 
Pulmonary parenchymal abnormalities in the upper lobe(s) may 
be noted. Mass lesions similar to carcinoma are frequent, 
and lung biopsy is frequently used. Over 50% of patients with 
chronic blastomycosis also have extrapulmonary manifesta-
tions, but less than 10% of patients present with severe clinical 
manifestation.135
Once a patient manifests symptoms of chronic blastomy-
cosis, antifungal treatment is required to achieve resolution. 
Mortality approaches 60% if untreated.135 While controversial, a 
short course of triazole therapy (oral itraconazole 200 mg daily) 
for 6 months is the treatment of choice for most patients with 
mild to moderate forms of the disease. Because itraconazole has 
poor CNS penetration, the most common site of recurrence after 
apparently successful therapy is in the CNS. In the absence of 
therapy, close follow-up is warranted for evidence of progres-
sion to chronic or extrapulmonary disease. Amphotericin B is 
warranted for patients with severe or life-threatening disease, 
CNS involvement, disseminated disease, or extensive lung 
involvement and in immunocompromised patients. After ade-
quate drug therapy, surgical resection of known cavitary lesions 
should be considered because viable organisms are known to 
persist in such lesions.
Massive Hemoptysis
Massive hemoptysis is generally defined as expectoration of 
over 600 mL of blood within a 24-hour period. It is a medi-
cal emergency associated with a mortality rate of 30% to 50%. 
Most clinicians would agree that losing over a liter of blood via 
the airway within 1 day is significant, yet use of an absolute 
volume criterion presents difficulties. First, it is difficult for the 
patient or caregivers to quantify the volume of blood being lost. 
Second, and most relevant, the rate of bleeding necessary to 
incite respiratory compromise is highly dependent on the indi-
vidual’s prior respiratory status. For example, the loss of 100 
mL of blood over 24 hours in a 40-year-old male with normal 
pulmonary function would be of little immediate consequence, 
because his normal cough would ensure his ability to clear the 
blood and secretions. In contrast, the same amount of bleeding 
in a 69-year-old male with severe COPD, chronic bronchitis, 
and an FEV1 of 1.1 L may be life-threatening.
Anatomy.  The lungs have two sources of blood supply: the 
pulmonary and bronchial arterial systems. The pulmonary sys-
tem is a high-compliance, low-pressure system, and the walls of 
the pulmonary arteries are very thin and delicate. The bronchial 
arteries, part of the systemic circulation, have systemic pres-
sures and thick walls; most branches originate from the proxi-
mal thoracic aorta. Most cases of massive hemoptysis involve 
bleeding from the bronchial artery circulation or from the pul-
monary circulation pathologically exposed to the high pres-
sures of the bronchial circulation. In many cases of hemoptysis, 
particularly those due to inflammatory disorders, the bronchial 
arterial tree becomes hyperplastic and tortuous. The systemic 
pressures within these arteries, combined with a disease process 
within the airway and erosion, lead to bleeding.
Causes.  Significant hemoptysis occurs as a result of pulmo-
nary, extrapulmonary, and iatrogenic causes. Table 19-20 
summarizes the most common causes of hemoptysis. Most 
are secondary to inflammatory processes. Aneurysms of the 
pulmonary artery (referred to as Rasmussen’s aneurysm) can 
develop within pulmonary cavities and can result in massive 
bleeding. Hemoptysis due to lung cancer is usually mild, result-
ing in blood-streaked sputum. Massive hemoptysis in patients 
with lung cancer is typically caused by malignant invasion of 
pulmonary artery vessels by large central tumors. Although rare, 
it is often a terminal event.
Management.  Life-threatening hemoptysis is best man-
aged by a multidisciplinary team of intensive care physicians, 
662
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
interventional radiologists, and thoracic surgeons. Treatment 
priorities begin with respiratory stabilization; intubation with 
isolation of the bleeding lung may be required to prevent 
asphyxiation. This can be done with main-stem intubation into 
the nonbleeding lung, endobronchial blockers into the bleed-
ing lung, or double-lumen endotracheal intubation, depending 
on the urgency of the situation and the expertise of the provid-
ers. Once adequate ventilation has been achieved, the bleed-
ing site should be localized; bronchoscopy can often provide 
direct visualization of blood coming from a specific area of the 
tracheobronchial anatomy. Control of the hemorrhage is then 
achieved endobronchially with laser or bronchial occlusion, 
endovascularly with bronchial and/or pulmonary artery emboli-
zation, or surgically with resection of the involved area.137 The 
order of priorities in management is detailed in Table 19-21.
The clinically pragmatic definition of massive hemoptysis 
is a degree of bleeding that threatens respiratory stability. There-
fore, clinical judgment of respiratory compromise is the first 
step in evaluating a patient.138,139 Two scenarios are possible: 
(1) bleeding is significant and persistent, but its rate allows a 
rapid, sequential diagnostic and therapeutic approach, or (2) 
bleeding is so rapid that emergency airway control and therapy 
are necessary.
Table 19-20 
Pulmonary and extrapulmonary causes of massive hemoptysis
Pulmonary
Extrapulmonary
Iatrogenic
Pulmonary parenchymal disease
Bronchitis
Bronchiectasis
Tuberculosis
Lung abscess
Pneumonia
Cavitary fungal infection (e.g., aspergilloma)
Lung parasitic infection (ascariasis, schistosomiasis,  
  paragonimiasis)
Pulmonary neoplasm
Pulmonary infarction or embolism
Trauma
Arteriovenous malformation
Pulmonary vasculitis
Pulmonary endometriosis
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Cystic fibrosis
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Congestive heart failure
Coagulopathy
Mitral stenosis
Medications
Intrapulmonary catheter
Table 19-21 
Treatment priorities in the management of massive 
hemoptysis
1.  Achieve respiratory stabilization and prevent 
asphyxiation.
2.  Localize the bleeding site.
3.  Control the hemorrhage.
4.  Determine the cause.
5.  Definitively prevent recurrence.
Scenario 1: Significant, Persistent, but Nonmassive Bleeding.  
Although bleeding is brisk in scenario 1, the patient may be able 
to maintain clearance of the blood and secretions with his or her 
own respiratory reflexes. Immediate measures are admission to 
an intensive care unit; strict bed rest; Trendelenburg position-
ing with the affected side down (if known); administration of 
humidified oxygen; cough suppression; monitoring of oxygen 
saturation and arterial blood gases; and insertion of large-bore 
intravenous catheters. Strict bed rest with sedation may lead to 
slowing or cessation of bleeding, and the judicious use of intra-
venous narcotics or other relaxants to mildly sedate the patient 
and diminish some of the reflexive airway activity is often nec-
essary. Also recommended are administration of aerosolized 
adrenaline, intravenous antibiotic therapy if needed, and correc-
tion of abnormal blood coagulation study results. Finally, unless 
contraindicated, intravenous vasopressin (20 U over 15 minutes, 
followed by an infusion of 0.2 U/min) can be given.
A CXR is the first test and often proves to be the most 
revealing. Localized lesions may be seen, but the effects of 
blood soiling of other areas of the lungs may predominate, 
obscuring the area of pathology. Chest CT scan provides more 
detail and is nearly always performed if the patient is stable. 
Pathologic areas may be obscured by blood soiling.
Flexible bronchoscopy is the next step in evaluating the 
patient’s condition. Some clinicians argue that rigid bronchos-
copy should always be performed. However, if the patient is 
clinically stable and the ongoing bleeding is not imminently 
threatening, flexible bronchoscopy is appropriate. It allows 
diagnosis of airway abnormalities and will usually permit local-
ization of the bleeding site to either a lobe or even a segment. 
The person performing the bronchoscopy must be prepared with 
excellent suction and must be able to perform saline lavage with 
a dilute solution of epinephrine.
Most cases of massive hemoptysis arise from the bronchial 
arterial tree; therefore, the next therapeutic option frequently is 
selective bronchial arteriography and embolization. Bronchoscopy 
663
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
prior to arteriogram is extremely useful to direct the angiogra-
pher. However, if bronchoscopy fails to localize the bleeding 
site, then bilateral bronchial arteriograms can be performed. 
More recently, use of multidetector CT angiography in patients 
with hemoptysis that is not immediately life-threatening has 
been shown to facilitate endovascular intervention; reformatting 
of the images in multiple projections allows clear delineation of 
the pulmonary vascular anatomy.126 With this approach, abnor-
mal bronchial and nonbronchial arteries can be visualized and 
subsequently targeted for therapeutic arterial embolization.140 
Once the targeted arterial system has been embolized, immedi-
ate control and cessation of the hemoptysis is achieved in more 
than 80% of patients. If bleeding persists after bronchial artery 
embolization, a pulmonary artery source should be suspected 
and a pulmonary angiogram performed at the same setting.
Recurrence is seen in 30% to 60% of cases and is very 
common in the setting of invasive fungal infections such as 
aspergilloma. Recurrence after bronchial artery embolization is 
less common in the setting of malignancy and active tuberculo-
sis but does occur and can ultimately result in patient death.141 
Repeat embolization can be effective and is warranted for ini-
tial management of recurrent hemoptysis, but early surgical 
intervention should be considered, particularly in the setting of 
aspergilloma or other cavitary lesions.126
If respiratory compromise is impending, orotracheal intu-
bation should be performed. After intubation, flexible bronchos-
copy should be performed to clear blood and secretions and to 
attempt localization of the bleeding site. Depending on the pos-
sible causes of the bleeding, bronchial artery embolization or (if 
appropriate) surgery can be considered.
Scenario 2: Significant, Persistent, and Massive Bleeding.  
Life-threatening bleeding requires emergency airway control 
and preparation for potential surgery. Such patients are best 
cared for in an operating room equipped with rigid bronchos-
copy. Immediate orotracheal intubation may be necessary to 
gain control of ventilation and suctioning. However, rapid trans-
port to the operating room with rigid bronchoscopy should be 
facilitated. Rigid bronchoscopy allows adequate suctioning of 
bleeding with visualization of the bleeding site; the nonbleed-
ing side can be cannulated with the rigid scope and the patient 
ventilated. After stabilization, ice-saline lavage of the bleeding 
site can then be performed (up to 1 L in 50-mL aliquots); bleed-
ing stops in up to 90% of patients.142
Alternatively, blockade of the main stem bronchus of the 
affected side can be accomplished with a double-lumen endo-
tracheal tube, with a bronchial blocker, or by intubation of 
the nonaffected side by an uncut standard endotracheal tube. 
Placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube is challeng-
ing in these circumstances, given the bleeding and secretions. 
Proper placement and suctioning may be difficult, and attempts 
could compromise the patient’s ventilation. The best option is to 
place a bronchial blocker in the affected bronchus with inflation. 
Endovascular embolization can be performed to stop the bleed-
ing after control has been achieved with the bronchial blocker. 
The blocker is left in place for 24 hours; after 24 hours, the area 
is re-examined bronchoscopically.
Surgical Intervention.  In most patients, bleeding can be 
stopped, recovery can occur, and plans to definitively treat the 
underlying cause can be made. In scenario 1 (significant, persis-
tent, but nonmassive bleeding), the patient may undergo further 
evaluation as an inpatient or outpatient. A chest CT scan and 
pulmonary function studies should be obtained preoperatively. 
In scenario 2 (patients with significant, persistent, and massive 
bleeding), surgery, if appropriate, will usually be performed 
during the same hospitalization as the rigid bronchoscopy or 
main stem bronchus blockade. In a small number of patients 
(<10%), immediate surgery will be necessary due to the extent 
of bleeding. The bleeding site in these patients is localized using 
rigid bronchoscopy with immediate thoracotomy or sternotomy 
to follow.
Surgical treatment is individualized according to the 
source of bleeding and the patient’s medical condition, prog-
nosis, and pulmonary reserve. General indications for urgent 
surgery are presented in Table 19-22. In patients with significant 
cavitary disease or with fungus balls, the walls of the cavities 
are eroded and necrotic; rebleeding will likely ensue. In addi-
tion, bleeding from cavitary lesions may be due to pulmonary 
artery erosion, which requires surgery for control.
End-Stage Lung Disease
Lung Volume Reduction Surgery.  The ideal patient for lung 
volume reduction surgery (LVRS) has heterogeneous emphy-
sema with apical predominance, meaning the worst emphyse-
matous changes are in the apex (seen on chest CT scan) of the 
lungs. The physiologic lack of function of these areas is dem-
onstrated by quantitative perfusion scan, which shows minimal 
or no perfusion. By surgically excising these nonfunctional 
areas, the volume of the lung is reduced, theoretically restor-
ing respiratory mechanics. Diaphragm position and function are 
improved, and there may be an improvement in the dynamic 
small airway collapse in the remaining lung.
Operative mortality in the initial experience was 16.9%, 
with a 1-year mortality of 23%. In response, the National 
Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT) performed a randomized 
trial of 1218 patients in a noncrossover design to medical vs. 
surgical management after a 10-week pretreatment pulmonary 
rehabilitation program. Subgroup analysis demonstrated that in 
patients with the anatomic changes delineated by Cooper and 
colleagues, LVRS significantly improved exercise capacity, 
lung function, quality of life, and dyspnea compared to medi-
cal therapy. After 2 years, functional improvements began to 
decline toward baseline. Similar parameters in medically treated 
patients steadily decline below baseline. LVRS was associated 
with increased short-term morbidity and mortality and did not 
confer a survival benefit over medical therapy.143
Lung Transplantation.  The most common indications for 
lung transplant are COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
(IPF). Most patients with IPF and older patients with COPD are 
offered a single-lung transplant. Younger COPD patients and 
patients with α1-antitrypsin deficiency and severe hyperinfla-
tion of the native lungs are offered a bilateral-lung transplant. 
Table 19-22 
General indications for urgent operative intervention 
for massive hemoptysis
1.  Presence of a fungus ball
2.  Presence of a lung abscess
3.  Presence of significant cavitary disease
4.  Failure to control the bleeding
664
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Most patients with primary pulmonary hypertension and almost 
all patients with cystic fibrosis are treated with a bilateral-lung 
transplant. A heart-lung transplant is reserved for patients with 
irreversible ventricular failure or uncorrectable congenital car-
diac disease.
Patients with COPD are considered for placement on the 
transplant waiting list when their FEV1 has fallen to below 
25% of its predicted value. Patients with significant pulmonary 
hypertension should be listed earlier. IPF patients should be 
referred when their forced vital capacity has fallen to less than 
60% or their Dlco has fallen to less than 50% of their predicted 
values.
In the past, patients with primary pulmonary hypertension 
and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV symp-
toms were listed for a lung transplant. However, treatment of 
such patients with intravenous prostacyclin and other pulmonary 
vasodilators has now markedly altered that strategy. Virtually all 
patients with primary pulmonary hypertension are now treated 
with intravenous epoprostenol. Several of these patients have 
experienced a marked improvement in their symptoms associ-
ated with a decrease in their pulmonary arterial pressures and an 
increase in exercise capacity. Listing of these patients is deferred 
until they develop NYHA class III or IV symptoms or until their 
mean pulmonary artery pressure rises above 75 mmHg.
Medium-term and bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome 
(BOS)-free survival rates of patients who underwent a lung 
transplant during a recent 5-year period at the University of 
Minnesota are shown in Figs. 19-35 and 19-36. The mortality of 
patients while waiting for transplants is about 10%. In an effort 
to expand the number of lung donors, many transplant groups 
have liberalized their criteria for donor selection. Still, the par-
tial pressure of arterial oxygen (Pao2) should be greater than 
300 mmHg on a fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) of 100%. 
In special circumstances, lungs may be used from donors with 
a smoking history; from donors older than 50 years of age; 
and from donors with positive Gram stains or infiltrates on 
CXR.144,145 The use of two living donors, each donating a single 
lower lobe, is another strategy for increasing the donor pool. 
Recipient outcomes are similar to those with cadaver donors in 
carefully selected patients.
Most of the early mortality after lung transplant is related to 
primary graft failure resulting from a severe ischemia-reperfusion 
injury to the lung(s) (Fig. 19-37). Reperfusion injury is charac-
terized radiographically by interstitial and alveolar edema and 
clinically by hypoxia and ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Donor 
neutrophils and recipient lymphocytes probably play an important 
role in the pathogenesis of reperfusion injury. The most impor-
tant impediment to longer-term survival after a lung transplant is 
the development of BOS, a manifestation of chronic rejection. 
Episodes of acute rejection are the major risk factors for develop-
ing BOS. Other injuries to the lung (including early reperfusion 
injury and chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease) may also 
adversely affect long-term outcomes of patients.146,147
CHEST WALL
Chest Wall Mass
Clinical Approach.  Surgeons confronted with a patient with a 
chest wall mass must be cognizant that their approach to diagnosis 
Survival
1
2
3
Overall survival
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Years posttransplant
Figure 19-35.  The overall survival rate after lung transplantation 
at the University of Minnesota.
Survival
1
2
3
BOS-free survival
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Years posttransplant
Figure 19-36.  The survival rate after lung transplantation in the 
absence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) at the Univer-
sity of Minnesota.
Survival
1
2
3
Primary graft failure
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
No PGF
PGF
Years posttransplant
Figure 19-37.  The survival rate after lung transplantation at the 
University of Minnesota as a function of primary graft failure 
(PGF).
665
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
and treatment has significant impact on the patient’s chances 
for long-term survival. All chest wall tumors should be consid-
ered malignant until proven otherwise. It is critically important 
that the surgeon(s) be mindful of this tenet and well-versed in 
the diagnostic and treatment principles for chest wall malignan-
cies. These tenets must be applied from the initial biopsy, as 
the placement of the incision can impact significantly on the 
successful complete resection and reconstruction of the chest 
wall. Complete resection is imperative if there is any hope for 
cure and/or long-term survival. A general approach is outlined 
in Figs. 19-38 and 19-39.
Patients with chest wall tumors, regardless of etiol-
ogy, typically complain of a slowly enlarging palpable mass 
(50%–70%), chest wall pain (25%–50%), or both. Interestingly, 
growing masses are often not noticed by the patient until they 
suffer a trauma to the area. Pain from a chest wall mass is typi-
cally localized to the area of the tumor; it occurs more often and 
more intensely with malignant tumors, but it can also be present 
in up to one third of patients with benign tumors. With Ewing’s 
sarcoma, fever and malaise may also be present. Benign chest 
wall tumors tend to occur in younger patients (average age 
26 years), whereas malignant tumors tend to be found in older 
patients (average age 40 years). Overall, between 50% and 80% 
of chest wall tumors are malignant.
Evaluation and Management.  Laboratory evaluations are 
useful in assessing chest wall masses for the following:
1.		 Plasmacytoma: Serum protein electrophoresis demon-
strates a single monoclonal spike, which is measuring the 
overproduction of one immunoglobulin from the malignant 
plasma cell clone.
2.		 Osteosarcoma: Alkaline phosphatase levels may be elevated.
3.		 Ewing’s sarcoma: Erythrocyte sedimentation rates may be 
elevated.
Radiography.  CXR may reveal rib destruction, calcification 
within the lesion, and if old films are available, a clue to growth 
rate. CT scanning, however, is necessary to determine the rela-
tionship of the chest wall mass to contiguous structures (e.g., 
mediastinum, lung, soft tissues, and other skeletal elements), 
evaluate for pulmonary metastases, and assess for extraosseous 
bone formation and bone destruction, both typically seen with 
osteosarcoma.
Because MRI provides multiple planes of imaging (coronal, 
sagittal, and oblique), better definition of the relationship between 
tumor and muscle, and tumor and contiguous or nearby neurovas-
cular structures or the spine, it is an important radiographic adjunct 
for preoperative planning. Compared to CT scan alone, MRI may 
further delineate tissue abnormalities, potentially enhancing the 
ability to distinguish benign from malignant sarcoma.
Biopsy.  The first step in the management of all chest wall 
tumors is to obtain a tissue diagnosis. Inappropriate or mis-
guided attempts at tissue diagnosis through casual open biopsy 
techniques have the potential (if the lesion is a sarcoma) to 
seed surrounding tissues and contiguous body cavities (e.g., the 
pleural space) with tumor cells, potentially compromising local 
tumor control and patient survival. Tissue diagnosis is accom-
plished using one of three methods: needle biopsy (typically 
Diagnosis is clear;
a surgical resection is the
primary treatment
Lesion <2.0 cm
Benign Tumors
  Fibrous dysplasia
  Chondroma
  Osteochondroma
  Eosinophilic granuloma
Malignant Tumors
  Chondrosarcoma
Wide surgical excision
CT or MRI or both
Chest wall mass
Figure 19-38.  Systematic approach for evaluating a chest wall 
mass when the clinical scenario is uncomplicated and initial imag-
ing studies suggest a clear diagnosis. CT = computed tomography; 
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
Figure 19-39.  Systematic approach for evaluating a chest wall 
mass for which the diagnosis is not unequivocal. A tissue diagno-
sis is critical for effective management of chest wall masses. CT 
computed tomography; MRI  magnetic resonance imaging; PNET 
primitive neuroectodermal tumor.
Chest wall mass
CT or MRI or both
Diagnosis is NOT clear
Preoperative chemotherapy
Wide surgical excision
Osteosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Nonrhabdomyosarcoma
PNET/ Ewing’s sarcoma
Nonrhabdosarcoma
  Fibrosarcoma
  Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
  Liposarcoma
  Synovial cell sarcoma
  Desmoid
Needle biopsy
or incisional biopsy
666
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
CT-guided FNA or a core biopsy), incisional biopsy, or exci-
sional biopsy in limited and specific situations.
1.		 Needle biopsy: Pathologists experienced with sarcomas 
can accurately diagnose approximately 90% of patients 
using FNA cytology. A needle biopsy (FNA or core) has 
the advantage of avoiding wound and body cavity contami-
nation (a potential complication with an incisional biopsy).
2.		 Incisional biopsy: If a needle biopsy is nondiagnostic, an 
incisional biopsy may be performed, with caveats. First, 
the skin incision must be placed directly over the mass and 
oriented to allow subsequent scar excision; skin flaps and 
drains should be avoided. However, if the surgeon believes 
a hematoma is likely to develop, a drain is useful for limit-
ing soft tissue contamination by tumor cells. At the time of 
definitive surgical resection, the en bloc resection includes 
the biopsy scar and the drain tract along with the tumor.
3.		 Excisional biopsy: Any lesion less than 2.0 cm can be 
excised as long as the resulting wound is small enough to 
close primarily. Otherwise, excisional biopsy is performed 
only when the initial diagnosis (based on radiographic eval-
uation) indicates that the lesion is benign or when the lesion 
has the classic appearance of a chondrosarcoma (in which 
case, definitive surgical resection can be undertaken).
Benign Chest Wall Neoplasms
1.		 Chondroma. Chondromas, seen primarily in children and 
young adults, are one of the more common benign tumors 
of the chest wall. They usually occur at the costochondral 
junction anteriorly and may be confused with costochon-
dritis, except that a painless mass is present. Radiographi-
cally, the lesion is lobulated and radiodense; it may have 
diffuse or focal calcifications; and it may displace the bony 
cortex without penetration. Chondromas may grow to huge 
sizes if left untreated. Treatment is surgical resection with a 
2-cm margin. Large chondromas may harbor well-differen-
tiated chondrosarcoma and should be managed with a 4-cm 
margin to prevent local recurrence.148
2.		 Fibrous dysplasia. As with chondromas, fibrous dysplasia 
most frequently occurs in young adults and may be associ-
ated with trauma. Pain is an infrequent complaint, and the 
lesion is typically located in the posterolateral aspect of the 
rib cage. Radiographically, an expansile mass is present, 
with cortical thinning and no calcification. Local excision 
with a 2-cm margin is curative.
3.		 Osteochondroma. Osteochondromas, often found inci-
dentally as a solitary lesion on radiograph, are the most 
common benign bone tumor. Osteochondromas occur in 
the first two decades of life, and they arise at or near the 
growth plate of bones. Osteochondromas in the thorax arise 
from the rib cortex. They are one of several components 
to the autosomal dominant syndrome, hereditary multiple 
exostoses. When part of this syndrome, osteochondromas 
have a high rate of degeneration into chondrosarcomas. Any 
patient with hereditary multiple exostoses syndrome who 
develops new pain at the site of an osteochondroma or who 
notes gradual growth in the mass over time should be care-
fully evaluated for osteosarcoma. Local excision of a benign 
osteochondroma is sufficient. If malignancy is determined, 
wide excision is performed with a 4-cm margin.
4.		 Eosinophilic granuloma. Eosinophilic granulomas are 
benign osteolytic lesions. Eosinophilic granulomas of the 
ribs can occur as solitary lesions or as part of a more gener-
alized disease process of the lymphoreticular system termed 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). In LCH, the involved 
tissue is infiltrated with large numbers of histiocytes (simi-
lar to Langerhans cells seen in skin and other epithelia), 
which are often organized as granulomas. The cause is 
unknown. Of all LCH bone lesions, 79% are solitary eosino-
philic granulomas, 7% involve multiple eosinophilic granu-
lomas, and 14% belong to other forms of more systemic 
LCH. Isolated single eosinophilic granulomas can occur in 
the ribs or skull, pelvis, mandible, humerus, and other sites. 
They are diagnosed primarily in children between the ages 
of 5 and 15 years. Because of the associated pain and ten-
derness, they may be confused with Ewing’s sarcoma or 
with an inflammatory process such as osteomyelitis. Heal-
ing may occur spontaneously, but the typical treatment is 
limited surgical resection with a 2-cm margin.
5.		 Desmoid tumors. Soft tissue neoplasms arising from fas-
cial or musculoaponeurotic structures, desmoid tumors 
consist of proliferations of benign-appearing fibroblas-
tic cells, abundant collagen, and few mitoses. Desmoid 
tumors possess alterations in the adenomatous polyposis 
coli (APC)/β-catenin pathway. Cyclin D1 dysregulation 
is thought to play a significant role in their pathogenesis.149 
Associations with other diseases and conditions are well 
documented, especially those with similar alterations in 
the APC pathway, such as familial adenomatous polyposis 
(Gardner’s syndrome). Other conditions with increased risk 
of desmoid tumor formation include increased estrogen 
states (pregnancy) and trauma. Surgical incisions (abdomi-
nal and thorax) have been the site of desmoid development, 
either in or near the scar.
	 	   Clinically, patients are usually in the third to fourth 
decade of life and have pain, a chest wall mass, or both. 
The tumor is usually fixed to the chest wall, but not to the 
overlying skin. There are no typical radiographic findings, 
but MRI may delineate muscle or soft tissue infiltration. 
Desmoid tumors do not metastasize, but they have a sig-
nificant propensity to recur locally, with reported rates 
ranging from 5% to 50%, sometimes despite complete ini-
tial resection with histologically negative margins.150 Such 
locally aggressive behavior is secondary to microscopic 
tumor infiltration of muscle and surrounding soft tissues 
and prompts some to consider them a low-grade form of 
fibrosarcoma.
	 	   Because the lesions have low cellularity and poor yield 
with FNA, an open incisional biopsy for lesions over 3 to 4 
cm is often necessary, following the caveats listed earlier (see 
biopsy section). Surgery consists of wide local excision with 
a 2- to 4-cm margin and intraoperative frozen section assess-
ment of resection margins. Typically, chest wall resection, 
including the involved rib(s) and one rib above and below 
the tumor with a 4- to 5-cm margin of rib, is required. A 
margin of less than 1 cm results in much higher local recur-
rence rates. If a major neurovascular structure would have to 
be sacrificed, leading to high morbidity, then a margin of less 
than 1 cm would have to suffice. Survival after wide local 
excision with negative margins is 90% at 10 years.151
Primary Malignant Chest Wall Tumors
Malignant tumors of the chest wall are either metastatic lesions 
from another primary tumor or sarcoma. Soft tissue sarcomas of 
667
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
the chest wall include fibrosarcomas, liposarcomas, malignant 
fibrous histiocytomas (MFHs), rhabdomyosarcomas, angiosar-
comas, and other extremely rare lesions (Fig. 19-40). Despite 
the prevalence of localized disease, soft tissue sarcomas of the 
chest wall have significantly worse survival than similar tumors 
located on the extremities or the head and neck region. The fac-
tors impacting on risk of death from soft tissue sarcomas of the 
chest wall are presented in Table 19-23. All sarcomas have a 
propensity to spread to the lungs.
While many varieties of sarcoma exist, the primary features 
affecting prognosis are histologic grade and responsiveness to 
chemotherapy (Table 19-24). Preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemo-
therapy offers the ability to: (a) assess tumor chemosensitivity by 
the degree of tumor size reduction and microscopic necrosis; (b) 
determine tumor sensitivity to specific chemotherapeutic agents; 
and (c) improve resectability by reducing tumor size. Patients 
whose tumors are responsive to preoperative chemotherapy 
have a much better prognosis than those with a poor response. 
Information about tumor response to chemotherapy, the patient’s 
physiologic state and capacity to receive treatment, and meta-
static disease status is used to determine optimal therapy. The 
initial treatment is either: (a) preoperative chemotherapy (for 
patients with osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, primitive neu-
roectodermal tumor, or Ewing’s sarcoma) followed by surgery 
and postoperative chemotherapy; (b) primary surgical resection 
and reconstruction (for patients with nonmetastatic MFH, fibro-
sarcoma, liposarcoma, or synovial sarcoma); or (c) preopera-
tive chemotherapy followed by surgical resection if indicated in 
patients presenting with metastatic soft tissue sarcomas. Con-
tiguous involvement of underlying lung or other soft tissues or 
the presence of pulmonary metastases does not preclude suc-
cessful surgery. In fact, patients receiving surgical intervention 
have significantly better overall survival. Median survival with 
surgical resection is 25 months compared to 8 months without 
resection Additional prognostic variables that are important for 
long-term survival include tumor size, grade, stage, and nega-
tive re-resection margin.152 With the exception of rhabdomyo-
sarcomas, the primary treatment of these lesions is wide surgical 
resection with 4-cm margins and reconstruction.153
Figure 19-40.  Chest computed tomography scan 
showing a right chest wall tumor (arrow). Tissue 
diagnosis revealed that this mass was a leiomyosar-
coma.
The following is an overview of several chest wall sarcomas.
1.		 Chondrosarcoma. Chondrosarcomas are the most com-
mon primary chest wall malignancy. As with chondro-
mas, they usually arise anteriorly from the costochondral 
arches. CT scan shows a radiolucent lesion often with 
stippled calcifications pathognomonic for chondrosarco-
mas (Fig. 19-41). The involved bony structures are also 
destroyed. Most chondrosarcomas are slow-growing, low-
grade tumors; these often painful masses can reach massive 
proportions.148 For this reason, any lesion in the anterior 
chest wall likely to be a low-grade chondrosarcoma should 
be treated with wide (4-cm) resection after metastatic dis-
ease to the lungs or bones is ruled out. Chondrosarcomas 
are not sensitive to radiation or chemotherapy. Prognosis is 
determined by tumor grade and extent of resection. With a 
low-grade tumor and wide resection, patient survival at 5 to 
10 years can be as high as 60% to 80%.
2.		 Osteosarcoma. While osteosarcomas are the most com-
mon bone malignancy, they represent only 10% to 15% 
of all malignant chest wall tumors.154,155 They primarily 
occur in young adults as rapidly enlarging, painful masses; 
however, osteosarcomas can occur in older patients as well, 
sometimes in association with previous radiation, Paget’s 
disease, or chemotherapy. Radiographically, the typical 
appearance consists of spicules of new periosteal bone for-
mation producing a sunburst appearance. Osteosarcomas 
have a propensity to spread to the lungs, and up to one third 
of patients present with metastatic disease. Osteosarcomas 
are potentially sensitive to chemotherapy. Currently, pre-
operative chemotherapy is common. After chemotherapy, 
complete resection is performed with wide (4-cm) margins, 
followed by reconstruction. In patients presenting with 
lung metastases that are potentially amenable to surgical 
resection, induction chemotherapy may be given, followed 
by surgical resection of the primary tumor and of the pul-
monary metastases. Following surgical treatment of known 
disease, additional maintenance chemotherapy is usually 
recommended.
668
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 19-23 
Cox proportional hazards model for risk of death from soft tissue sarcoma
N
Hazard Ratio
95% CI
P Value
Gender
  Male
  Female
3937
4113
Reference group
0.897
Reference group
0.843–0.955
Reference group
.001
Age
  50 years
  51–70 years
  >70 years
1837
3099
3114
Reference group
1.131
1.538
Reference group
1.026–1.247
1.395–1.697
Reference group
.013
<.001
Race
  Caucasian
  Non-Caucasian
7152
898
Reference group
1.212
Reference group
1.093–1.344
Reference group
<.001
Histologic type
  Fibrosarcoma
  MFH
  Liposarcoma
  LMS/GIST
489
2529
1534
3498
Reference group
1.281
0.894
1.204
Reference group
1.097–1.495
0.759–1.054
1.033–1.403
Reference group
.002
.182
.018
Location
  Head and neck
  Trunk
  Extremity
  Retroperitoneum
576
4054
2474
946
Reference group
1.255
1.003
1.276
Reference group
1.096–1.438
0.875–1.151
1.093–1.489
Reference group
.001
.960
.002
Stage
  Localized
  Regional
  Distant
5006
1724
1320
Reference group
1.575
2.897
Reference group
1.458–1.702
2.660–3.155
Reference group
<.001
<.001
Surgical treatment
  Yes
  No
6754
1296
Reference group
1.562
Reference group
1.443–1.691
Reference group
<.001
Radiation therapy
  Yes
  No
2175
5875
Reference group
1.151
Reference group
1.070–1.239
Reference group
<.001
Chemotherapy
  Yes
  No
1062
6988
Reference group
0.909
Reference group
0.829–0.996
Reference group
.041
CI = confidence interval; GIST = gastrointestinal stromal tumor; LMS = leiomyosarcoma; MFH = malignant fibrous histiocytoma.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gutierrez et al.152 kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Table 19-24 
Classification of sarcomas by therapeutic response
Tumor Type
Chemotherapy  
Sensitivity
Osteosarcoma
+
Rhabdomyosarcoma
+
Primitive neuroectodermal tumor
+
Ewing’s sarcoma
+
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
±
Fibrosarcoma
±
Liposarcoma
±
Synovial sarcoma
±
3.		 Malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Originally thought to 
derive from histiocytes because of the microscopic appear-
ance of cultured tumor cells, these tumors likely originate 
from the fibroblast. MFHs are generally the most common 
soft tissue sarcoma of late adult life, although they are rare 
on the chest wall. The typical age at presentation is between 
age 50 and 70 years. Presentation is pain, with or without a 
palpable mass. Radiographically, a mass is usually evident, 
with destruction of surrounding tissue and bone. Treatment 
is wide resection with a margin of 4 cm or more and recon-
struction. Over two thirds of patients suffer from distant 
metastasis or local recurrence.
4.		 Liposarcoma. Liposarcomas make up 15% of chest wall 
sarcomas. Most liposarcomas are low-grade tumors that 
have a propensity to recur locally, given their infiltrative 
nature. They typically present as a painless mass. Treat-
ment is wide resection and reconstruction. Intraoperative 
669
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
margins should be evaluated (as with all sarcomas) and 
resection continued, if feasible, until margins are nega-
tive. Local recurrence can be treated with re-excision, with 
occasional use of radiotherapy.
5.		 Fibrosarcoma. Often presenting as a large, painful mass, 
these lesions are visible on plain radiograph or CT, with 
surrounding tissue destruction. Treatment is wide local 
excision with intraoperative frozen-section analysis of 
margins, followed by reconstruction. Local and systemic 
recurrence is frequent. Patient survival at 5 years is about 
50% to 60%.
6.		 Rhabdomyosarcoma. Rhabdomyosarcomas are rare tumors 
of the chest wall. Microscopically, they are a spindle cell 
tumor. The diagnosis often depends on immunohistochemi-
cal staining for muscle markers. Rhabdomyosarcomas are 
sensitive to chemotherapy. Treatment consists of preopera-
tive chemotherapy with subsequent surgical resection.
Other Tumors of the Chest Wall
1.		 Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) and 
Ewing’s sarcoma. PNETs (neuroblastomas, ganglioneu-
roblastomas, and ganglioneuromas) derive from primordial 
neural crest cells that migrate from the mantle layer of the 
developing spinal cord. Histologically, PNETs and Ewing’s 
sarcomas are small, round cell tumors; both possess a trans-
location between the long arms of chromosomes 11 and 22 
within their genetic makeup. They also share a consistent 
pattern of proto-oncogene expression and have been found 
to express the product of the MIC2 gene. Ewing’s sarcoma 
occurs in adolescents and young adults who present with 
progressive chest wall pain, but without the presence of a 
mass. Systemic symptoms of malaise and fever are often 
present. Laboratory studies reveal an elevated erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate and mild white blood cell elevation. 
Radiographically, the characteristic onion peel appear-
ance is produced by multiple layers of periosteum in the 
bone formation. Evidence of bony destruction is also com-
mon. The diagnosis can be made by a percutaneous needle 
biopsy or an incisional biopsy.
Figure 19-41.  Chest computed tomography scan showing a right posterior lung tumor. In the appropriate clinical setting, stippled calcifica-
tions (white streaks in right lung mass) are highly indicative of chondrosarcomas.
	 	   These tumors have a strong propensity to metastasize 
to the lungs and skeleton; patient survival rates are thus 
only 50% or less at 3 years. Increasing tumor size is asso-
ciated with decreasing survival. Treatment has improved 
significantly and now consists of multiagent chemotherapy, 
radiation therapy, and surgery. Patients are typically treated 
preoperatively with chemotherapy and re-evaluated with 
radiologic imaging. When residual disease is identified, 
surgical resection and reconstruction are performed fol-
lowed by maintenance chemotherapy.
2.		 Plasmacytoma. Solitary plasmacytomas of the chest wall 
are very rare, with approximately 25 to 30 cases per year in 
the United States.154 The typical presentation is pain with-
out a palpable mass. Plain radiographs show an osteolytic 
lesion in the region of the pain. As with other chest wall 
tumors, a needle biopsy under CT guidance is performed 
for diagnosis. Histologically, the lesion is identical to mul-
tiple myeloma, with sheets of plasma cells. It occurs at an 
average age of 55 years. Evaluation for systemic myeloma 
is performed with bone marrow aspiration, testing of cal-
cium levels, and measurement of urinary Bence Jones 
proteins. If the results of these studies are negative, then 
a solitary plasmacytoma is diagnosed. Surgery is usually 
limited to a biopsy only, which may be excisional.155 Treat-
ment consists of radiation with doses of 4000 to 5000 cGy. 
Up to 75% of patients develop systemic multiple myeloma 
with 10-year survival of approximately 20%.
Chest Wall Reconstruction
The primary determinant of long-term freedom from recurrence 
and overall survival is margin status; therefore, adequate mar-
gins of normal tissue must be included in the en bloc resection. 
En bloc resection should include involved ribs, sternum, supe-
rior sulcus, or spine if necessary; invasion of these structures 
should not be considered a contraindication to surgery in an oth-
erwise fit patient. The resection should include at least one nor-
mal adjacent rib above and below the tumor, with all intervening 
intercostal muscles and pleura. In addition, an en bloc resection 
of overlying chest wall muscles is often necessary, such as of the 
670
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
pectoralis minor or major, serratus anterior, or latissimus dorsi. 
When the periphery of the lung is involved with the neoplasm, 
it is appropriate to resect the adjacent part of the pulmonary 
lobe in continuity (Fig. 19-42). Involvement of the sternum by 
a malignant tumor requires total resection of the sternum with 
the adjacent cartilage. Techniques for postoperative respiratory 
support are now good enough that resection should not be com-
promised because of any concern about the patient’s ability to 
be adequately ventilated in the early postoperative period.
The extent of resection depends on the tumor’s location 
and on any involvement of contiguous structures. Laterally 
based lesions often require simple wide excision, with resec-
tion of any contiguously involved lung, pleura, muscle, or skin. 
Anteriorly based lesions contiguous with the sternum require 
partial sternectomy. Primary malignant tumors of the sternum 
may require complete sternectomy. Posterior lesions involving 
the rib heads over their articulations with the vertebral bodies 
may, depending on the extent of rib involvement, require partial 
en bloc vertebrectomy.
Optimal management of larger tumors includes care-
ful preoperative planning and execution of the surgery by the 
thoracic surgeon and an experienced plastic surgeon, in order 
to ensure optimal physiologic and cosmetic results. With this, 
reconstruction at the same operation can be accomplished.156 
Reconstruction of a large defect in the chest wall requires the use 
of some type of material to prevent lung herniation and to pro-
vide stability for the chest wall (see Fig. 19-42). Mild degrees of 
paradoxical motion are often well tolerated if the area of insta-
bility is relatively small. Historically, a wide variety of materials 
have been used to re-establish chest wall stability, including rib 
autografts, steel struts, acrylic plates, and numerous synthetic 
meshes. The current preference is either a 2-mm polytetrafluo-
roethylene (Gore-Tex) patch or a double-layer polypropylene 
(Marlex) mesh sandwiched with methylmethacrylate. There are 
several properties that make Gore-Tex an excellent material for 
A
B
Figure 19-42.  Principles of reconstruction after resection of a chest wall tumor (osteogenic sarcoma) are shown. A. En bloc resection of the 
involved chest wall, including normal ribs above and below the tumor as well as pulmonary parenchyma, must be performed. The resected 
specimen is shown. B. A prosthesis has been sewn in place. In the lower third of the prosthesis, the line of diaphragm reattachment is seen. 
The skin defect was closed with a myocutaneous flap from the ipsilateral rectus muscle.
use in chest wall reconstruction: (a) it is impervious to fluid, 
which prevents pleural fluid from entering the chest wall and 
minimizes the formation of seromas, which can compromise the 
myocutaneous flap viability and provide a nidus for infection; 
and (b) it provides excellent rigidity and stability when secured 
taut to the surrounding bony structure and, as a result, provides a 
firm platform for myocutaneous flap reconstruction. Except for 
smaller lesions, tissue coverage requires the use of myocutane-
ous flaps (latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, rectus abdominis, 
or pectoralis major muscles).157,158
MEDIASTINUM
Anatomy and Pathologic Entities
The mediastinum can be divided into compartments for classi-
fication of anatomic components and disease processes, which, 
despite substantial overlap, facilitates understanding of general 
concepts of surgical interest. Several classification schemes 
exist, but for the purposes of this chapter, the three-compart-
ment model is used (Fig. 19-43). The anterior compartment lies 
between the sternum and the anterior surface of the heart and 
great vessels. The visceral or middle compartment is located 
between the great vessels and the trachea. As the name implies, 
the posterior compartment lies posterior and includes the para-
vertebral sulci, bilaterally, and the paraesophageal area.
The normal content of the anterior compartment includes 
the thymus gland or its remnant, the internal mammary artery 
and vein, lymph nodes, and fat. The thymus gland is large dur-
ing childhood, occupying the entire anterior mediastinum (Fig. 
19-44) but decreases in both thickness and length after ado-
lescence and takes on a more fatty content, with only residual 
islands of thymic cellular components (Fig. 19-45). The mid-
dle mediastinal compartment contains the pericardium and its 
contents, the ascending and transverse aorta, the superior and 
671
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
inferior venae cavae, the brachiocephalic artery and vein, the 
phrenic and upper vagus nerves, the trachea and main bronchi 
and corresponding lymph nodes, and the central portions of 
the pulmonary arteries and veins. The posterior compartment 
contains the descending aorta, esophagus, thoracic duct, azygos 
and hemiazygos veins, and lymph nodes. Numerous pathologic 
variants may be present in the various compartments, with much 
overlap. Table 19-25 includes the most common pathologic 
entities listed by compartment.159,160
History and Physical Examination
Mediastinal pathology varies significantly by patient age. In 
children, neurogenic tumors of the posterior mediastinum are 
most common, followed by lymphoma, which is usually located 
in the anterior or middle compartment. Thymoma in child-
hood is rare (Table 19-26). In adults, the most common tumors 
include neurogenic tumors of the posterior compartment, benign 
cysts occurring in any compartment, and thymomas of the ante-
rior mediastinum (Table 19-27). In both age groups, about 25% 
Posterior
mediastinum
Anterosuperior
mediastinum
Middle
mediastinum
Figure 19-43.  Anatomic division of the mediastinum.
Thymus
Figure 19-44.  Normal appearance of the thymus 
gland in childhood. Ao = aorta; PA = pulmonary 
artery; VC = vena cava.
of mediastinal tumors are malignant. Pediatric tumors will be 
discussed in Chapter 39.
Up to two thirds of mediastinal tumors in adults are dis-
covered as asymptomatic abnormalities on radiologic studies 
ordered for other problems, particularly now that screening CT 
examinations are more prevalent. When symptomatic, these 
tumors are significantly more likely to be malignant. Charac-
teristics such as size, location, rate of growth, and associated 
inflammation are important factors that correlate with symp-
toms. Large, bulky tumors, expanding cysts, and teratomas 
can cause compression of mediastinal structures, in particular 
the trachea, and lead to cough, dyspnea on exertion, or stridor. 
Chest pain or dyspnea may be reported secondary to associated 
pleural effusions, cardiac tamponade, or phrenic nerve involve-
ment. Occasionally, a mediastinal mass near the aortopulmonary 
window may be identified in a workup for hoarseness because 
of left recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement. The patient in Fig. 
19-46 presented with hoarseness due to nodal compression of 
the left recurrent laryngeal nerve from a primary lung cancer 
with metastases to the level 5 and 6 lymph nodes in the region 
of the aortopulmonary window.
The history and physical examination in conjunction with 
the imaging findings may suggest a specific diagnosis (Table 
19-28). In one recent series, systemic symptoms were present 
in 50% of patients with a mediastinal mass and a lymphopro-
liferative disorder, as compared with only 29% of patients with 
other masses (such as thymic or neurogenic). Laboratory signs 
of inflammation were also noted; the erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate and C-reactive protein levels were elevated and leukocy-
tosis was present in 86% of patients with a lymphoprolifera-
tive disorder, as compared with only 58% of patients with other 
types of mediastinal masses.
Imaging and Serum Markers
Chest CT or MRI is required to fully delineate the anatomy.161 
A contrast-enhanced CT scan enables clear delineation of the 
soft tissue structures from the vasculature and is preferred over 
noncontrast studies. If there is concern for invasion of vas-
cular structures or spinal involvement, MRI is more accurate 
than CT scan and provides important information regarding 
respectability.
672
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 19-45.  Computed tomography scan showing 
the normal appearance of an involuted thymus gland 
in an adult. Note the near-total fatty appearance of the 
gland with only tiny islands of soft tissue scattered 
within it (small arrows).
Table 19-25 
Usual location of the common primary tumors and cysts of the mediastinum
Anterior Compartment
Visceral Compartment
Paravertebral Sulci
Thymoma
Enterogenous cyst
Neurilemoma-schwannoma
Germ cell tumor
Lymphoma
Neurofibroma
Lymphoma
Pleuropericardial cyst
Malignant schwannoma
Lymphangioma
Mediastinal granuloma
Ganglioneuroma
Hemangioma
Lymphoid hamartoma
Ganglioneuroblastoma
Lipoma
Mesothelial cyst
Neuroblastoma
Fibroma
Neuroenteric cyst
Paraganglioma
Fibrosarcoma
Paraganglioma
Pheochromocytoma
Thymic cyst
Pheochromocytoma
Fibrosarcoma
Parathyroid adenoma
Thoracic duct cyst
Lymphoma
Source: Reproduced with permission from Shields TW. The mediastinum and its compartments. In: Shields TW, ed. Mediastinal Surgery. Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger; 1991:5.
If an endocrine origin is suspected, several other imaging 
modalities are available (Table 19-29). Single-photon emission 
CT (SPECT) technology may be used to improve image contrast 
and give information on three-dimensional localization, largely 
replacing conventional two-dimensional nuclear imaging stud-
ies. If a thyroid origin is suspected, a thyroid scan using 131I 
or 123I can identify most intrathoracic goiters and identify the 
extent of functioning thyroid tissue. If indicated, the thyroid 
scan should precede other scans requiring iodine-containing 
contrast agents, because they would subsequently interfere 
with iodine tracer uptake by thyroid tissue. If a pheochromo-
cytoma or neuroblastoma is suspected, the octreotide scan or 
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scans are helpful in diag-
nosis and localization. The sestamibi scan may be useful for 
diagnosing and localizing a mediastinal parathyroid gland. PET 
is useful for distinguishing malignant from benign tumors and 
may help detect distant metastases in some patients. However, 
the role of routine PET imaging for staging surgically resectable 
lesions of the mediastinum has not been established.
The use of serum markers to evaluate a mediastinal mass can 
be invaluable in some patients. For example, nonseminomatous 
and seminomatous germ cell tumors can frequently be diag-
nosed and often distinguished from one another by the levels 
of α-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG). In over 90% of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, 
either the AFP or the hCG level will be elevated. Results are 
close to 100% specific if the level of either AFP or hCG is 
greater than 500 ng/mL. Some centers institute chemotherapy 
based on this result alone, without biopsy confirmation of the 
diagnosis. In contrast, the AFP level in patients with medi-
astinal seminoma is always normal; only 10% will have ele-
vated hCG, which is usually less than 100 ng/mL. Other serum 
markers, such as intact parathyroid hormone level for ectopic 
parathyroid adenomas, may be useful for diagnosing and also 
for intraoperatively confirming complete resection. After suc-
cessful resection of a parathyroid adenoma, this hormone level 
should rapidly normalize.
Diagnostic Nonsurgical Biopsies  
of the Mediastinum
The treatment of up to 60% of patients with anterior medi-
astinal masses is ultimately nonsurgical, so it is essential to 
673
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Table 19-26 
Mediastinal tumors in children
Tumor Type
Percentage 
of Total
Location
Neurogenic tumors
40
Posterior
Lymphomas
18
Anterior/middle
Cysts
18
All
Germ cell tumors
11
Anterior
Mesenchymal tumors
9
All
Thymomas
Rare
Anterior
Source: Reproduced with permission from Silverman NA, Sabiston DC 
Jr. Mediastinal masses. Surg Clin North Am. 1980;60:760. kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.
Table 19-27 
Mediastinal tumors in adults
Tumor Type
Percentage 
of Total
Location
Neurogenic tumors
21
Posterior
Cysts
20
All
Thymomas
19
Anterior
Lymphomas
13
Anterior/middle
Germ cell tumors
11
Anterior
Mesenchymal tumors
7
All
Endocrine tumors
6
Anterior/middle
Source: Data from Shields TW. Primary lesions of the mediastinum 
and their investigation and treatment. In: Shields TW, ed. General 
Thoracic Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
1994:1731.
Figure 19-46.  Computed tomography scan of a patient who pre-
sented with hoarseness due to compression of the left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve caused by mediastinal lymph node metastases to the 
aortopulmonary window area (arrow) from a primary lung cancer.
understand all options for obtaining adequate tissue for a defini-
tive diagnosis using the least invasive approach. CT-guided nee-
dle biopsy, and EUS-guided FNA, and even core-needle biopsy 
(either CT-guided EBUS-guided, or EUS-guided) have proven 
most useful for cytologic and tissue diagnosis of mediastinal 
masses and lymphadenopathy. When FNA and core-needle 
biopsy were combined, the accuracy was 98%, compared to 
79% for each modality independently. In addition, core-needle 
biopsy changed the diagnosis in nine cases that had been missed 
by FNA due to inadequate specimens. Finally, core-needle 
biopsy was better at diagnosis for benign diseases compared 
to FNA. Accessible nodal stations include subcarinal (level 7), 
aortopulmonary (level 5), paraesophageal (level 8), and inferior 
pulmonary ligament (level 9) as well as paratracheal (level 4).162 
Technical expertise in these modalities should be pursued by 
thoracic and general surgeons.
Historically, needle biopsies of anterior mediastinal 
masses were reportedly sensitive and specific for most carcino-
matous tumors, but there were questions regarding accuracy for 
diagnosing lymphomas.163 However, advances in cytopathology 
as well as needle biopsy technology have substantially improved 
diagnostic accuracy such that most centers are reporting yields 
ranging from 75% to 80% for the diagnosis of lymphoma as well. 
To achieve maximal diagnostic yield for mediastinal masses 
suggestive of a lymphoma, it is necessary to obtain multiple 
fine-needle aspirates, preferably with immediate onsite rapid 
cytologic analysis to confirm sampling of the target tissue and 
adequate cellularity. This also facilitates processing of the sam-
ple to ensure that proper studies for lymphoma, including flow 
cytometry, are obtained. If the needle biopsy is inconclusive, 
surgical biopsy can be performed.164,165 If the lesion is accessible 
by CT-guided or EUS-guided core-needle biopsy, intraoperative 
frozen section or immediate cytologic smear of a core biopsy 
can also be performed. Recently, core-needle biopsy with EBUS 
became possible with release of a EBUS-core needle device. 
This addition to the surgeon’s armamentarium will greatly 
facilitate tissue sampling for evaluation of mediastinal masses. 
The authors perform their own endobronchial, endoscopic, and 
CT-guided transbronchial and transthoracic biopsies and, in our 
experience, lack of cellularity in the aspirate is readily apparent. 
In general, plans to proceed with surgical biopsy are made in 
combination with the image-guided aspiration and, as such, are 
performed in the same setting. This enables the authors to avoid 
a more invasive surgical procedure when FNA or core-needle 
biopsy is sufficient without contributing to delays in diagnosis 
by having multiple attempts from multiple providers (such as 
interventional radiology and pulmonology) before involvement 
of the surgeon in the diagnostic workup.
Surgical Biopsies and Resection  
of Mediastinal Masses
For tumors of the mediastinum that are not amenable to an endo-
scopic or CT-guided needle biopsy or that do not yield sufficient 
tissue for diagnosis, a surgical biopsy is indicated. The defini-
tive approach to a surgical biopsy of the anterior mediastinum 
is through a median sternotomy. At the time of sternotomy, if 
the lesion is easily resectable, it should be completely removed. 
Given the invasiveness of the procedure and the inability in 
some patients to obtain a definitive diagnosis by frozen section, 
less invasive procedures are preferable if the lesion is large or 
if the CT scan or history suggests that surgery is not the best 
definitive treatment. Masses in the paratracheal region are eas-
ily biopsied by mediastinoscopy. For tumors of the anterior or 
674
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
posterior mediastinum, a left or right VATS approach often 
allows safe and adequate surgical biopsies. In some patients, an 
anterior mediastinotomy (i.e., Chamberlain procedure) may be 
ideal for an anterior tumor or a tumor with significant paraster-
nal extension. Before a surgical biopsy is pursued, a discussion 
should be held with the pathologist regarding routine histologic 
assessment, special stains and markers, and requirements for 
lymphoma workup.
Surgical resection using minimally invasive approaches, 
including video-assisted and robotic thoracoscopic surgery and 
transcervical, are now routine for the vast majority of middle 
and posterior tumors and for moderate sized (<5 to 6 cm) anterior 
mediastinal tumors.166-169 Outcomes comparing VATS to open 
thymectomy in patients with myasthenia gravis without thy-
moma were prospectively evaluated by Chang and colleagues 
in 2005, and no differences were seen in terms of response to 
therapy and recurrence of symptoms. Pain scores were signifi-
cantly better in the VATS approach.170 These reports and others 
support application of VATS for the majority of anterior medi-
astinal masses.
Table 19-28 
Signs and symptoms suggestive of various diagnoses in the setting of a mediastinal mass
Diagnosis
History and Physical Findings
Compartment Location  
of Mass
Lymphoma
Night sweats, weight loss, fatigue, extrathoracic adenopathy, elevated 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein level, leukocytosis
Any compartment
Thymoma with 
myasthenia gravis
Fluctuating weakness, early fatigue, ptosis, diplopia
Anterior
Mediastinal granuloma
Dyspnea, wheezing, hemoptysis
Visceral (middle)
Germ cell tumor
Male gender, young age, testicular mass, elevated levels of human 
chorionic gonadotropin and/or α-fetoprotein
Anterior
Table 19-29 
Nuclear imaging relevant to the mediastinum
Radiopharmaceutical, 
Radionuclide, or  
Radiochemical
Label
Disease of Interest
Iodine
131I, 123I
Retrosternal goiter, thyroid cancer
Monoclonal antibodies
111In, 99mTc
NSCLC, colon and breast cancer, prostate cancer metastases
Octreotide
111In
Amine precursor uptake decarboxylation tumors: carcinoid, gastrinoma, insulinoma, 
small cell lung cancer, pheochromocytoma, glucagonoma, medullary thyroid 
carcinoma, paraganglioma
Gallium
67Ga
Lymphoma, NSCLC, melanoma
Sestamibi
99mTc
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, nonfunctional papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma, 
Hürthle cell thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid adenoma or carcinoma
Thallium
201Tl
See sestamibi
MIBG
131I, 123I
Pheochromocytoma, neuroblastoma; see also octreotide
Fluorodeoxyglucose
18F
General oncologic imaging, breast and colon cancer, melanoma
MIGB = metaiodobenzylguanidine; NSCLC = non–small cell lung cancer.
Source: Reproduced with permission from McGinnis KM, et al. Markers of the mediastinum. In: Pearson FG, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New 
York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1675. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Other minimally invasive approaches are under study. For 
example, good results have been reported using a cervical inci-
sion with a sternal retractor for thymus removal. The upward 
lift allows the surgeon reasonable access to the anterior medi-
astinum and has proven adequate in some centers for definitive 
resection of the thymus gland for myasthenia gravis.171
For larger anterior mediastinal masses or in centers where 
expertise in thoracoscopy is not available, median sternotomy 
and thoracotomy remain excellent options for resection of ante-
rior mediastinal masses. Occasionally, a lateral thoracotomy 
with sternal extension (hemi-clamshell) provides excellent 
exposure for extensive mediastinal tumors that have a lateral 
component. Most surgeons would agree that if a larger anterior 
mediastinal tumor is seen or malignancy is suspected, a median 
sternotomy with a more radical resection should be performed.
Mediastinal Neoplasms
Thymic Hyperplasia.  Diffuse thymic hyperplasia was first 
described in children after successful chemotherapy for lym-
phoma. It has now been described in adults and is referred to as 
675
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
“rebound thymic hyperplasia.”172 It is most frequently reported 
after chemotherapy for lymphoma or germ cell tumors. Ini-
tially, atrophy of the thymic gland is seen with subsequent 
thymic gland enlargement, which can be dramatic. The usual 
time course for thymic hyperplasia is about 9 months after ces-
sation of chemotherapy (range 2 weeks–12 months). Benign 
hyperplasia must be clearly distinguished from recurrent lym-
phoma or germ cell tumors, which may be difficult since thymic 
hyperplasia is dramatic in some patients; careful follow-up with 
serial CT scans is the minimum requirement. The role of PET 
scanning is unclear. Thymic hyperplasia is a known cause of 
false-positive PET scans; in many patients, CT scan will show 
a triangular soft tissue density in the retrosternal space that has 
a characteristic bilobed anatomic appearance consistent with 
thymus gland.173 In addition, a low standardized uptake value of 
tracer on PET scan suggests a benign tumor.174 Biopsies may be 
required if the clinical index of suspicion is high.
Thymoma.  The most frequently encountered neoplasm of the 
anterior mediastinum in adults (seen most frequently between 
40 and 60 years of age), thymoma is rare in children. Between 
10% and 50% of patients with thymoma will have symptoms 
suggestive of myasthenia gravis or have circulating antibodies 
to acetylcholine receptor, but less than 10% of patients with 
myasthenia gravis have a thymoma. Most patients with thy-
moma are asymptomatic. Thymectomy leads to improvement 
or resolution of symptoms of myasthenia gravis in only about 
25% of patients with thymomas. In contrast, in patients with 
myasthenia gravis and no thymoma, thymectomy results are 
superior: up to 50% of patients have a complete remission and 
90% improve. In 5% of patients with thymomas, other paraneo-
plastic syndromes, including red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobu-
linemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, Cushing’s syndrome, or 
SIADH, may be present. Large thymic tumors may present with 
symptoms related to a mass effect, which may include cough, 
chest pain, dyspnea, or SVC syndrome.
The diagnosis may be suspected based on CT scan and 
history, but imaging alone is not diagnostic. In most centers, the 
diagnosis is made after surgical resection because of the rela-
tive difficulty of obtaining a needle biopsy and the likelihood 
that removal will ultimately be recommended. Biopsy should 
be avoided in cases where imaging is highly suggestive of thy-
moma. In most patients, the distinction between lymphomas 
and thymomas can be made on CT scan, since most lymphomas 
have marked lymphadenopathy and thymomas most frequently 
appear as a solitary encapsulated mass. PET scan may have a 
role in differentiating thymic cancer from thymoma, as thymic 
cancer tends to be very FDG avid.174 In addition, PET scan may 
facilitate identification of low-risk and minimally invasive thy-
moma; a standardized uptake value (SUV) <5 was associated with 
Masaoka stage I or II thymoma, whereas invasive thymoma and 
mediastinal lymphoma were more likely when the SUV was >5.175 
In cases where the diagnosis is unclear, transmediastinal, not 
transpleural, CT-guided FNA biopsy has a diagnostic sensitivity 
of 87% and a specificity of 95% in specialized centers.
The most commonly accepted staging system for thymoma 
is that of Masaoka.176 It is based on the presence or absence of 
gross or microscopic invasion of the capsule and of surrounding 
structures, as well as on the presence or absence of metastases 
(Table 19-30). Histologically, thymomas are characterized by 
a mixture of epithelial cells and mature lymphocytes. Grossly, 
many thymomas remain well encapsulated. Even those with 
capsular invasion often lack histologic features of malignancy; 
they appear cytologically benign and identical to early-stage 
tumors. This lack of classic cellular features of malignancy is 
why most pathologists use the term “thymoma” or “invasive 
thymoma” rather than “malignant thymoma.” Thymic tumors 
with malignant cytologic features are classified separately and 
referred to as “thymic carcinoma.”
The definitive treatment for thymoma is complete surgical 
removal; local recurrence rates and survival vary according to 
stage (Fig. 19-47). In centers with significant experience with 
VATS procedures, thymoma is not a contraindication to VATS 
approach, provided the principles of resection are adhered to, 
such as a complete resection without disrupting the capsule.177 
Otherwise, resection is generally accomplished by median ster-
notomy with extension to hemi-clamshell in more advanced 
cases. Even advanced tumors with local invasion of resectable 
structures such as the pericardium, SVC, or innominate vessels 
should be considered for resection with reconstruction.
A multidisciplinary approach to nonresectable and more 
advanced lesions (stage ≥II) is mandatory to optimize patient 
care. The goal for surgical resection should be complete exci-
sion of the mass with total thymectomy. All contiguous and 
noncontiguous disease is removed at the same setting; this may 
include resection of the pericardium or pleura, adjacent adher-
ent lung, phrenic nerve, major vascular structures, and pleural 
metastasis. Bilateral phrenic nerve resection should be avoided, 
however, due to the major respiratory morbidity associated with 
bilateral paralyzed hemidiaphragms.
The role of adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapies for 
advanced-stage tumors remains unclear. Traditionally, stage II 
Table 19-30 
Masaoka staging system for thymoma
Stage I
Encapsulated tumor with no gross or 
microscopic evidence of capsular invasion
Stage II
Gross capsular invasion or invasion into 
the mediastinal fat or pleura or microscopic 
capsular invasion
Stage III
Gross invasion into the pericardium, great 
vessels, or lung
Stage IVA
Pleural or pericardial dissemination
Stage IVB
Lymphogenous or hematogenous metastasis
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
Proportion surviving
0
20
10
Years
P=.002
Stage I
Stage IV
Stage III
Stage II
Figure 19-47.  Stage-specific survival for thymomas.
676
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
thymomas have been treated by complete surgical resection fol-
lowed by mediastinal radiation, but randomized trials have not 
been done. A recent retrospective review of a single-institution 
series of stage II thymoma patients showed no difference in 
survival or local recurrence after complete surgical resection 
alone, as compared with surgical resection with radiotherapy. 
Advanced thymomas have been shown to respond to platinum-
based chemotherapy and to corticosteroids.178 One summary of 
chemotherapy trials showed an overall response rate of about 
70%. Cisplatin/doxorubicin-based regimens appear to yield the 
best results. The combination radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
for local progression appears to prolong survival in some small 
series.179 Radiation therapy in surgically resected stage III thy-
moma is likely beneficial in extending disease-specific survival; 
a recent analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 
Results (SEER) database identified 476 patients with stage III 
thymoma treated with primary surgery. Postoperative radia-
tion was given to 322 patients with a significant improvement 
in survival (127 months compared to 105 months, P = .038) 
despite the fact that these patients were more likely to have had 
debulking rather than curative resection. In multivariate analy-
sis, disease-specific survival was better in the adjuvant radia-
tion group.180 Therefore, it is imperative that all patients with 
thymomas undergo a thorough evaluation for potential resec-
tion. Current guidelines recommend radiation for patients with 
unresectable thymoma who have failed induction chemotherapy 
or for patients with incompletely resected invasive thymoma or 
thymic cancer. Planning the radiation ports requires input from 
the surgeon; it is important for the surgeon to carefully docu-
ment areas of adherence between the thymoma and adjacent 
structures during the operation, with clips or other radiopaque 
markers placed to guide radiation therapy postoperatively. 
Extracapsular extension and positive surgical margins should 
be noted by the pathologist and correlated anatomically so that 
Figure 19-48.  Massive thymolipoma that was asymp-
tomatic in an 18-year-old female.
the surgeon and radiation oncologist can ensure appropriate 
radiation treatment.
Thymic Carcinoma.  Thymic carcinomas are unequivocally 
malignant at the microscopic level. Suster and Rosai classified 
thymic carcinomas into low-grade and high-grade tumors.181 
Low-grade tumors are well differentiated with squamous cell, 
mucoepidermoid, or basaloid features. High-grade thymic car-
cinomas include those with lymphoepithelial, small cell neu-
roendocrine, sarcomatoid, clear cell, and undifferentiated or 
anaplastic features. Care must be taken to differentiate thymic 
carcinoma from lung cancer metastatic to the thymus gland as 
the histologic features can be similar between the two. Com-
pared with thymomas, they are a more heterogeneous group 
of malignancies with a propensity for early local invasion and 
widespread metastases. Malignant pleural and pericardial effu-
sions occur frequently.
Five-year survival rates are between 30% and 50%. Com-
plete resection is occasionally curative and leads to improved 
survival, but most thymic carcinomas will recur and are refrac-
tory to chemotherapy.178 Management, therefore, depends on 
the completeness of the resection. Postoperative care includes 
radiation therapy, guided by residual gross disease or micro-
scopically positive margins from the resection specimen. 
Chemotherapy may also be given, with carboplatin/paclitaxel 
recommended based on the best response rates with the least 
toxicity in clinical trials. The prognosis of patients with thymic 
cancer remains poor.
Thymolipoma.  Thymolipomas are rare benign tumors that 
may grow to a very large size prior to diagnosis. On CT scan, 
their appearance can be dramatic, with a characteristic fat den-
sity dotted by islands of soft tissue density representing islands 
of thymic tissue (Fig. 19-48). Thymolipomas are generally 
well-encapsulated, soft, and pliable masses that do not invade 
677
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
surrounding structures. Resection is recommended for large 
masses.
Neurogenic Tumors.  Most neurogenic tumors of the medi-
astinum arise from the cells of the nerve sheath, from ganglion 
cells, or from the paraganglionic system (Table 19-31). The 
incidence, cell types, and risk of malignancy strongly correlate 
with patient age. Tumors of nerve sheath origin predominate in 
adults. Most present as asymptomatic incidental findings, and 
most are benign. In children and young adults, tumors of the 
autonomic ganglia predominate, with up to two thirds being 
malignant.182
Nerve Sheath Tumors.  Nerve sheath tumors account for 20% of 
all mediastinal tumors. More than 95% of nerve sheath tumors 
are benign neurilemomas or neurofibromas. Malignant neuro-
sarcomas are much less common.
Neurilemoma.  Neurilemomas, also called schwannomas, arise 
from Schwann cells in intercostal nerves. They are firm, well-
encapsulated, and generally benign. Two characteristic histo-
logic components are referred to as Antoni type A and Antoni 
type B regions. Antoni type A regions contain compact spindle 
cells with twisted nuclei and nuclear palisading. Antoni type B 
regions contain loose and myxoid connective tissue with hap-
hazard cellular arrangement. These characteristics distinguish 
neurilemoma from malignant, fibrosarcomatous tumors, which 
lack encapsulation and have no Antoni features. If routine CT 
scan suggests extension of a neurilemoma into the intervertebral 
foramen, MRI is used to evaluate the extent of this “dumbbell” 
configuration (Fig. 19-49). Such a configuration may lead to 
cord compression and paralysis and requires a more complex 
surgical approach. Resection is recommended; VATS has been 
established as safe and effective for simple and, in experienced 
centers, even the more complex operations.183 It is reasonable 
to follow small, asymptomatic paravertebral tumors in older 
patients or in patients at high risk for surgery. In children, 
ganglioneuroblastomas or neuroblastomas are more common; 
therefore, all neurogenic tumors should be completely resected.
Neurofibroma.  Neurofibromas consist of both nerve sheath and 
nerve cells and account for up to 25% of nerve sheath tumors. 
Up to 40% of patients with mediastinal fibromas have general-
ized neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen’s disease). About 
70% of neurofibromas are benign, but malignant degeneration 
to neurofibrosarcoma occurs in 25% to 30% of patients.184 The 
risk of malignant degeneration increases with advancing age, 
Table 19-31 
Classification of neurogenic tumors of the mediastinum
Tumor Origin
Benign
Malignant
Nerve sheath
Neurilemoma, neurofibroma, melanotic 
schwannoma, granular cell tumor
Neurofibrosarcoma
Ganglion cell
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroblastoma, neuroblastoma
Paraganglionic cell
Chemodectoma, pheochromocytoma
Malignant chemodectoma, malignant 
pheochromocytoma
Source: Reproduced with permission from Bousamra.182 kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Figure 19-49.  Magnetic resonance image of a neurogenic tumor 
with extension into the spinal canal via the foramen, giving a typical 
dumbbell appearance.
678
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
von Recklinghausen’s disease, and exposure to previous radia-
tion. Neurofibrosarcomas carry a poor prognosis because of 
rapid growth and aggressive local invasion along nerve bun-
dles. Complete surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment. 
Adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy does not confer a sig-
nificant benefit, but may be added if complete resection is not 
possible.185 The 5-year survival rate is 53%, but drops to 16% in 
patients with neurofibromatosis or with large tumors (>5 cm).
Ganglion Cell Tumors.  Ganglion cell tumors (ganglioneuro-
mas, ganglioneuroblastomas, and neuroblastomas) arise from 
the sympathetic chain or from the adrenal medulla.
Ganglioneuroma.  Well-differentiated, benign tumors charac-
terized histologically by well-differentiated ganglion cells with 
a background of Schwann cells, these are most often found 
incidentally in asymptomatic young adults. Diarrhea related to 
secretion of a vasoactive intestinal peptide has been described 
in some patients. These tumors have a propensity for intraspinal 
canal extension, although they remain well-encapsulated; com-
plete resection is curative, with a low risk of local recurrence.
Ganglioneuroblastoma.  Ganglioneuroblastomas contain a 
mixture of benign ganglion cells and malignant neuroblasts. 
The distribution of these cells within the tumor is predictive of 
the clinical course. The nodular pattern has a high incidence of 
metastatic disease, whereas the diffuse pattern rarely metasta-
sizes. Gross examination typically reveals encapsulated tumor; 
histologically, there are focal calcifications around regions of 
neuroblasts. Ganglioneuroblastomas arise most frequently in 
infants and children <3 years old. The majority are resectable, 
with 80% 5-year survival.
Neuroblastoma.  Highly malignant, neuroblastomas are the 
most common extracranial solid malignancy of childhood. The 
primary site is intrathoracic malignancy in 14%; extension into 
the spinal canal and osseous invasion is commonly present. 
These thoracic tumors are not as recalcitrant to chemotherapy 
and surgical resection as other chest malignancies; they are 
more likely to be resectable, with less invasion of surrounding 
organs. More than half occur in children under 2 years old; 90% 
arise within the first decade of life, and thus, these malignancies 
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 39.
Paraganglionic Tumors.  Paraganglionic tumors arising in 
the thoracic cavity include chemodectomas and pheochromo-
cytomas. Only 10% of all pheochromocytomas are located in 
an extra-adrenal site. Intrathoracic pheochromocytomas are 
one of the rarest tumors. Approximately 10% of thoracic pheo-
chromocytomas are malignant, a rate similar to that of adre-
nal tumors. The most common thoracic location is within 
the costovertebral sulcus, but paraganglionic tumors also arise 
within the visceral compartment of the mediastinum. These 
catecholamine-producing lesions can lead to life-threatening 
hemodynamic problems, so complete removal is important. 
Diagnosis is generally confirmed by measuring elevated levels 
of urinary catecholamines and their metabolites. Localization 
is by CT scan, aided by MIBG scintigraphy. Preoperative care 
includes α- and β-adrenergic blockade to prevent intraoperative 
malignant hypertension and arrhythmias. These tumors tend to 
be highly vascular and should be approached with care. Chemo-
dectomas are rare tumors that may be located around the aortic 
arch, vagus nerves, or aorticosympathetics. They rarely secrete 
catecholamines and are malignant in up to 30% of patients.
Lymphoma.  Overall, lymphomas are the most common malig-
nancy of the mediastinum. In about 50% of patients who have 
both Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, the mediasti-
num may be the primary site. The anterior compartment is most 
commonly involved, with occasional involvement of the mid-
dle compartment and hilar nodes. The posterior compartment 
is rarely involved. Chemotherapy and/or radiation results in a 
cure rate of up to 90% for patients with early-stage Hodgkin’s 
disease and up to 60% with more advanced stages.
Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors.  Germ cell tumors are 
uncommon neoplasms, with only about 7000 diagnosed each 
year. However, they are the most common malignancy in young 
men 15 to 35 years of age. Most germ cell tumors are gonadal 
in origin; primary mediastinal germ cell tumors comprise less 
than 5% of all germ cell tumors and less than 1% of all medias-
tinal tumors (usually occurring in the anterior compartment). If 
a malignant mediastinal germ cell tumor is found, it is impor-
tant to exclude a gonadal primary tumor. Primary mediastinal 
germ cell tumors (including teratomas, seminomas, and non-
seminomatous malignant germ cell tumors) are a heterogeneous 
group of benign and malignant neoplasms thought to originate 
from primitive pluripotent germ cells “misplaced” in the medi-
astinum during embryonic development. Previously, most 
mediastinal germ cell tumors were thought to be metastatic. 
However, two lines of evidence suggest that many mediasti-
nal germ cell tumors are primary, developing from pluripotent 
primordial germ cells in the mediastinum: (a) several autopsy 
series showed that patients with extragonadal sites of germ 
cell tumors, presumed previously to have originated from the 
gonads, had no evidence of an occult primary tumor or of any 
residual scar of the gonads, even after an exhaustive search; and 
(b) patients treated by surgery or radiation for their mediastinal 
germ cell tumors had long-term survival with no late testicular 
recurrences.186
About one third of all primary mediastinal germ cell 
tumors are seminomatous. Two thirds are nonseminomatous 
tumors or teratomas. Treatment and prognosis vary consider-
ably within these two groups. Mature teratomas are benign and 
can generally be diagnosed by the characteristic CT findings of 
multilocular cystic tumors, encapsulated with combinations of 
fluid, soft tissue, calcium, and/or fat attenuation in the anterior 
compartment. FNA biopsy alone may be diagnostic for semi-
nomas, usually with normal serum markers, including hCG and 
AFP. In 10% of seminomas, hCG levels may be slightly ele-
vated. FNA findings, along with high hCG and AFP levels, can 
accurately diagnose nonseminomatous tumors. If the diagnosis 
remains uncertain after assessment of FNA findings and serum 
marker levels, then core-needle biopsies or surgical biopsies 
may be required. Thoracoscopy is the most frequent diagnostic 
surgical approach.
Seminoma.  Most patients with seminomas have advanced 
disease at the time of diagnosis and present with symptoms of 
local compression, including SVC syndrome, dyspnea, or chest 
discomfort. With advanced disease, the preferred treatment is 
combination cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimens with bleo-
mycin and either etoposide or vinblastine. Complete responses 
have been reported in over 75% of patients treated with these 
regimens. Surgical resection may be curative for small asymp-
tomatic seminomas that are found incidentally with screening 
CT scans. Surgical resection of residual masses after chemo-
therapy may be indicated.
Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors.  Nonseminomatous germ 
cell tumors include embryonal cell carcinomas, choriocarcinomas, 
679
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
endodermal sinus tumors, and mixed types. They are often 
bulky, irregular tumors of the anterior mediastinum with areas 
of low attenuation on CT scan because of necrosis, hemorrhage, 
or cyst formation. Frequently, adjacent structures have been 
involved, with metastases to regional lymph nodes, pleura, and 
lungs. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), AFP, and hCG levels are 
frequently elevated. Chemotherapy is the preferred treatment 
and includes combination therapy with cisplatin, bleomycin, 
and etoposide, followed by surgical resection of residual dis-
ease. With this regimen, survival is 67% at 2 years and 60% at 
5 years. Surgical resection of residual masses is indicated, as it 
may guide further therapy. Up to 20% of residual masses con-
tain additional tumors; in another 40%, mature teratomas; and 
the remaining 40%, fibrotic tissue. It is important to note that 
oxygen toxicity can occur in patients who have been exposed to 
bleomycin; high levels of oxygen supplementation in the peri-
operative setting should be avoided in these patients as respi-
ratory failure and death can ensue.187 Factors independently 
predictive of survival after induction chemotherapy followed 
by resection are elevated serum tumor markers after resection, 
postchemotherapy pathologic findings (complete necrosis vs. 
teratoma), and persistent germ cell or non-germ cell cancer in 
the pathologic specimen.187
Teratoma.  Teratomas are the most common type of mediastinal 
germ cell tumors, accounting for 60% to 70% of mediastinal 
germ cell tumors. They contain two or three embryonic layers 
that may include teeth, skin, and hair (ectodermal), cartilage and 
bone (mesodermal), or bronchial, intestinal, or pancreatic tissue 
(endodermal). Therapy for mature, benign teratomas is surgical 
resection, which confers an excellent prognosis.
Rarely, teratomas may contain a focus of carcinoma; these 
malignant teratomas (or teratocarcinomas) are locally aggres-
sive. Often diagnosed at an unresectable stage, they respond 
poorly to chemotherapy and in a limited manner to radiother-
apy; prognosis is uniformly poor.
Mediastinal Cysts
Benign cysts account for up to 25% of mediastinal masses and 
are the most frequently occurring mass in the middle medias-
tinal compartment. A CT scan showing characteristic features 
of near water density in a typical location is virtually 100% 
diagnostic.188
Pericardial cyst.  Usually asymptomatic and detected inciden-
tally in the right costophrenic angle, pericardial cysts typically 
contain a clear fluid and are lined with a single layer of meso-
thelial cells. For most simple, asymptomatic pericardial cysts, 
observation alone is recommended. Surgical resection or aspira-
tion may be indicated for complex cysts or large symptomatic 
cysts.
Bronchogenic cyst.  Developmental anomalies that occur dur-
ing embryogenesis and occur as an abnormal budding of the 
foregut or tracheobronchial tree, bronchogenic cysts arise most 
often in the mediastinum just posterior to the carina or main 
stem bronchus. Approximately 15% occur within the pulmonary 
parenchyma. Thin-walled and lined with respiratory epithelium, 
they contain a protein-rich mucoid material and varying amounts 
of seromucous glands, smooth muscle, and cartilage. They may 
communicate with the tracheobronchial tree. In adults, over half 
of all bronchogenic cysts are found incidentally during workup 
for an unrelated problem or during screening. The natural his-
tory of an incidentally diagnosed, asymptomatic bronchogenic 
cyst is unknown, but it is clear that many such cysts do not lead 
to clinical problems. In one study of young military personnel, 
78% of all bronchogenic cysts found on routine CXRs were 
asymptomatic. However, in other reports with more compre-
hensive follow-up, up to 67% of adults with incidentally found 
bronchogenic cysts eventually became symptomatic. Symptoms 
include chest pain, cough, dyspnea, and fever. If large (>6 cm) 
or symptomatic, resection is generally recommended since 
serious complications may occur if the cyst becomes larger or 
infected. Complications include airway obstruction, infection, 
rupture, and rarely, malignant transformation.189,190
Traditionally, complete removal of the cyst wall has been 
via posterolateral thoracotomy.191 Resection of infected cysts 
may be quite difficult because of dense adhesions; elective 
removal is often recommended before infection has a chance to 
occur. Thoracoscopic exploration and resection are possible for 
small cysts with minimal adhesions. With increasing experience 
using video-assisted or robotic-assisted thoracoscopy, a greater 
proportion of these lesions are amenable to minimally invasive 
resection.
Enteric cyst.  Most clinicians agree that in contrast to bron-
chogenic cysts, esophageal cysts should be removed, regardless 
of the presence or absence of symptoms. Esophageal cysts have 
a propensity for serious complications secondary to enlarge-
ment, leading to hemorrhage, infection, or perforation. Thus, 
surgical resection is the treatment of choice in both adults and 
children. As with bronchogenic cysts, experienced surgeons are 
approaching enteric cyst resections using minimally invasive 
techniques with great success.
Thymic cyst.  Generally asymptomatic, thymic cysts are often 
discovered incidentally. Simple cysts are of no consequence; 
however, the occasional cystic neoplasm must be ruled out. 
Cystic components occasionally are seen in patients with thy-
moma and Hodgkin’s disease.
Ectopic endocrine glands.  Up to 5% of all mediastinal 
masses are of thyroid origin; most are simple extensions of 
thyroid masses. Usually nontoxic, over 95% can be completely 
resected through a cervical approach. True ectopic thyroid tis-
sue of the mediastinum is rare. About 10% to 20% of abnormal 
parathyroid glands are found in the mediastinum; most can be 
removed during exploration from a cervical incision. In cases 
of true mediastinal parathyroid glands, thoracoscopic or open 
resection may be indicated. Location can generally be pin-
pointed by a combination of CT scan and Sestamibi scans.
Mediastinitis
Acute Mediastinitis.  Acute mediastinitis is a fulminant infec-
tious process that spreads rapidly along the continuous fascial 
planes connecting the cervical and mediastinal compartments. 
Infections originate most commonly from esophageal perfora-
tions, sternal infections, and oropharyngeal or neck infections, 
but a number of less common etiologic factors can lead to this 
deadly process (Table 19-32). Clinical signs and symptoms 
include fever, chest pain, dysphagia, respiratory distress, and 
cervical and upper thoracic subcutaneous crepitus. In severe 
cases, the clinical course can rapidly deteriorate to florid sepsis, 
hemodynamic instability, and death. Thus, a high index of sus-
picion is required in the context of any infection with access to 
the mediastinal compartments.
A chest CT scan illuminates the extent of spread and 
guides selection of the best approach to surgical drainage. Acute 
680
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
mediastinitis is a true surgical emergency; treatment must be 
instituted immediately and aimed at correcting the primary 
problem, such as the esophageal perforation or oropharyngeal 
abscess, and debridement and drainage of the spreading infec-
tious process within the mediastinum, neck, pleura, and other 
tissue planes. Antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, and other sup-
portive measures are also important. Debridement may need to 
be repeated and other planes and cavities explored depending 
on the patient’s clinical status. Blood cell counts and serial CT 
scans may also be required. Persistent sepsis or collections on 
CT scan may require further radical surgical debridement.
Chronic Mediastinitis.  Sclerosing or fibrosing mediastinitis 
results from chronic mediastinal inflammation that originates 
in the lymph nodes, most frequently from granulomatous infec-
tions such as histoplasmosis or tuberculosis. Chronic, low-grade 
inflammation leads to fibrosis and scarring, which can, in some 
patients, result in entrapment and compression of the low-
pressure veins (including the SVC and innominate and azygos 
veins), the esophagus, and pulmonary arteries. There is no defini-
tive treatment. Surgery is indicated only for diagnosis or in spe-
cific patients to relieve airway or esophageal obstruction or to 
Table 19-32 
Etiologic factors in acute mediastinitis
Esophageal perforation
  Iatrogenic
    Balloon dilatation (for achalasia)
    Bougienage (for peptic stricture)
    Esophagoscopy
    Sclerotherapy (for variceal bleeding)
  Spontaneous
    Postemetic (Boerhaave’s syndrome)
  Straining during:
    Elimination
    Weight lifting
  Seizure
    Pregnancy
    Childbirth
  Ingestion of foreign bodies
  Trauma
    Blunt
    Penetrating
  Postsurgical
    Infection
    Anastomotic leak
  Erosion by cancer
Deep sternotomy wound infection
Oropharynx and neck infections
Ludwig’s angina
Quinsy
Retropharyngeal abscess
Cellulitis and suppurative lymphadenitis of the neck
Infections of the lung and pleura
Subphrenic abscess
Rib or vertebral osteomyelitis
Hematogenous or metastatic abscess
Source: Reproduced with permission from Razzuk MA, et al. Infections 
of the mediastinum. In: Pearson FG, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1604. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
achieve vascular reconstruction. Reports of palliative success 
with less invasive procedures (such as dilation and stenting of 
airways, the esophagus, or the SVC) are promising. In one series 
of 22 patients, ketoconazole was effective in controlling progres-
sion. In another series of 71 patients, 30% died during long-term 
follow-up. Chronic mediastinitis is similar to retroperitoneal 
fibrosis, sclerosing cholangitis, and Riedel’s thyroiditis.
PLEURA AND PLEURAL SPACE
Anatomy
Each hemithorax has a mesothelial lining that invaginates at the 
hilum of each lung and continues on to cover each lung. The 
portion lining the bony rib cage, mediastinum, and diaphragm is 
called the parietal pleura, whereas the portion encasing the lung 
is known as the visceral pleura. Between these two surfaces is 
the potential pleural space, which is normally occupied by a thin 
layer of lubricating pleural fluid. A network of somatic, sympa-
thetic, and parasympathetic fibers innervates the parietal pleura. 
Irritation of the parietal surface by inflammation, tumor inva-
sion, trauma, and other processes can lead to a sensation of chest 
wall pain. The visceral pleura have no somatic innervation.192,193
Pleural Effusion
Pleural effusion refers to any significant collection of fluid 
within the pleural space. Normally, between 5 and 10 L of fluid 
enters the pleural space each day by filtration through microves-
sels supplying the parietal pleura (located mainly in the less 
dependent regions of the cavity). The net balance of pressures 
in these capillaries leads to fluid flow from the parietal pleural 
surface into the pleural space, and the net balance of forces in 
the pulmonary circulation leads to absorption through the vis-
ceral pleura. Normally, 15 to 20 mL of pleural fluid is present 
at any given time. Any disturbance in these forces can lead to 
imbalance and accumulation of pleural fluid. Common patho-
logic conditions in North America that lead to pleural effusion 
include congestive heart failure, bacterial pneumonia, malig-
nancy, and pulmonary emboli (Table 19-33).194
Access and Drainage of Pleural  
Fluid Collections
Most patients with pleural effusions of unknown cause should 
undergo thoracentesis with only two exceptions: effusions in the 
setting of congestive heart failure or renal failure or small effu-
sions associated with an improving pneumonia. If the clinical 
history suggests congestive heart failure as a cause, particularly 
in the setting of bilateral effusions, a trial of diuresis may be 
indicated (rather than thoracentesis). Up to 75% of effusions due 
to congestive heart failure resolve within 48 hours with diuresis 
alone. Similarly, thoracentesis can be avoided in patients with 
small effusions associated with resolving pneumonia. These 
patients typically present with cough, fever, leukocytosis, and 
unilateral infiltrate, and the effusion is usually a result of a reac-
tive, parapneumonic process. If the effusion is small and the 
patient responds to antibiotics, a diagnostic thoracentesis may 
be unnecessary. If the effusion is large and compromising respi-
ratory efforts, or if the patient has a persistent white blood cell 
count despite improving signs of pneumonia, an empyema of 
the pleural space must be considered. In these patients, early and 
aggressive drainage with chest tubes is required, possibly with 
surgical intervention.
Once the decision is made to access a pleural effusion, the 
next step is to determine if a sample of the fluid or complete 
681
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
drainage of the pleural space is desired. This step is influenced 
by the clinical history, the type and amount of fluid present, the 
nature of the collection (such as free-flowing or loculated), the 
cause, and the likelihood of recurrence. For small, free-flowing 
effusions, an outpatient diagnostic and/or therapeutic thora-
centesis with a relatively small-bore needle or catheter (14- to 
16-gauge) can be performed (Fig. 19-50). The appearance of the 
fluid is informative: clear straw-colored fluid is often transuda-
tive; turbid or bloody fluid is often exudative.
The site of entry for drainage of a pleural effusion or pneu-
mothorax may be based on the CXR alone if the effusion is 
Table 19-33 
Leading causes of pleural effusion in the United States, based on data from patients undergoing thoracentesis
Cause
Annual Incidence
Transudate
Exudate
Congestive heart failure
500,000
Yes
No
Pneumonia
300,000
No
Yes
Cancer
200,000
No
Yes
Pulmonary embolus
150,000
Sometimes
Sometimes
Viral disease
100,000
No
Yes
Coronary artery bypass surgery
60,000
No
Yes
Cirrhosis with ascites
50,000
Yes
No
Source: Reproduced with permission from Light RW. Pleural effusion. N Engl J Med 2002;346:1971. kkjkjdht © Massachusetts Medical Society. 
All rights reserved. Adapted from Light RW. Approach to the patient. In: Light RW, ed. Pleural Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2007:111.
Figure 19-50.  Techniques for aspiration and drainage of a pleural effusion. A. Needle aspiration. With careful appraisal of the x-ray findings, 
the best interspace is selected, and fluid is aspirated with a needle and syringe. Large volumes of fluid can be removed with a little patience 
and a large-bore needle. B. Chest tube insertion. After careful skin preparation, draping, and administration of local anesthesia, a short skin 
incision is made over the correct interspace. The incision is deepened into the intercostal muscles, and the pleura is penetrated (usually with 
a clamp). When any doubt exists about the status of the pleural space at the site of puncture, the wound is enlarged bluntly to admit a finger, 
which can be swept around the immediately adjacent pleural space to assess the situation and break down any adhesions. The tube is inserted, 
with the tip directed toward the optimal position suggested by the chest x-rays. In general, a high anterior tube is best for air (pneumothorax), 
and a low posterior tube is best for fluid. A 28F to 32F tube is adequate for most situations. A 36F tube is preferred for hemothorax or for a 
viscous empyema. Many surgeons prefer a very small tube (16F–20F) for drainage of simple pneumothorax. C. The tube is connected to a 
water-seal drainage system. Suction is added, if necessary, to expand the lung; it usually will be required in a patient with a substantial air 
leak (bronchopleural fistula).
demonstrated to be free-flowing. For free-flowing effusions, 
a low approach at the eighth or ninth intercostal space in the 
posterior midclavicular line facilitates complete drainage. If the 
effusion is loculated, CT- or ultrasound-guided drainage may 
be indicated. If the goal is complete drainage of nonbloody 
and nonviscous fluid, a small-bore pigtail catheter is inserted 
and connected to a closed drainage system with applied suc-
tion (typically –20 cm H2O). If the fluid is bloody or turbid, a 
larger-diameter drainage tube (such as a 28F chest tube) may 
be required. In general, the smallest-bore drainage catheter 
that will effectively drain the pleural space should be chosen. 
682
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Smaller-diameter catheters significantly decrease the pain asso-
ciated with the placement of chest tubes but are more prone 
to clogging and twisting.195,196 For clinical situations requir-
ing biopsy or for potential interventions such as adhesiolysis 
or pleurodesis, minimally invasive surgery may be indicated, 
using a VATS approach.
Complications of Pleural Drainage.  The most common 
complications of invasive pleural procedures are inadvertent 
injury to adjacent organs, including lung, with air leakage and 
pneumothorax; subdiaphragmatic entry and damage to the 
liver, spleen, or other intra-abdominal viscera; intercostal ves-
sel injury with subsequent bleeding or larger vessel injury; and 
even cardiac puncture. Sometimes bleeding may be the result 
of an underlying coagulopathy or anticoagulant therapy. Other 
technical complications include loss of a catheter, guidewire, 
or fragment in the pleural space and infections. Occasionally, 
rapid drainage of a large effusion can be followed by shortness 
of breath, clinical instability, and a phenomenon referred to as 
postexpansion pulmonary edema. For this reason, it is recom-
mended to drain only up to 1500 mL initially. Most complica-
tions can be avoided by consulting with a clinician experienced 
in pleural drainage techniques.
Pleural Fluid Analysis.  Pleural fluid collections are generally 
classified as transudates and exudates (Table 19-34). Transu-
dates are protein-poor ultrafiltrates of plasma that result from 
alterations in the systemic hydrostatic pressures or colloid 
osmotic pressures (for example, with congestive heart failure 
or cirrhosis). On gross visual inspection, a transudative effusion 
is generally clear or straw-colored. Exudates are protein-rich 
pleural fluid collections that generally result from inflamma-
tion or pleural invasion by tumor. Grossly, they are often turbid, 
bloody, or purulent. Absent trauma, grossly bloody effusions 
are frequently malignant, but may also occur in the setting of a 
pulmonary embolism or pneumonia.
Transudates and exudates can be differentiated using 
Light’s criteria. An effusion is exudative if the pleural fluid-
to-serum ratio of protein is greater than 0.5 and the LDH ratio 
is greater than 0.6 or the absolute pleural LDH level is greater 
than two thirds of the normal upper limit for serum. If criteria 
suggest a transudate, a careful evaluation for congestive heart 
failure, cirrhosis, or conditions associated with transudates is 
undertaken. If criteria suggest an exudate, further diagnostic 
studies may be helpful. If total and differential cell counts reveal 
a predominance of neutrophils (>50% of cells), the effusion is 
likely associated with an acute inflammatory process (such as 
a parapneumonic effusion or empyema, pulmonary embolus, or 
pancreatitis). A predominance of mononuclear cells suggests a 
more chronic inflammatory process (such as cancer or tubercu-
losis). Gram stains and cultures should be obtained if possible, 
with inoculation into culture bottles at the bedside. Pleural fluid 
glucose levels are frequently decreased (<60 mg/dL) with com-
plex parapneumonic effusions or malignant effusions.
A pleural effusion occurring in association with pleuritic 
chest pain, hemoptysis, or dyspnea out of proportion to the size 
of the effusion should raise concern for pulmonary embolism. 
These effusions may be transudative, but if an associated infarct 
near the pleural surface occurs, an exudate may be seen. If a pul-
monary embolism is suspected in a postoperative patient, most 
clinicians would obtain a spiral CT scan. Alternatively, duplex 
ultrasonography of the lower extremities may yield a diagnosis of 
deep vein thrombosis, thereby indicating anticoagulant therapy 
and precluding the need for a specific diagnosis of pulmonary 
embolism. In some patients, a blood test for levels of D-dimer 
may be helpful; if a sensitive D-dimer blood test is negative, 
pulmonary embolism may be ruled out.
Malignant Pleural Effusion
Malignant pleural effusions may occur in association with a 
number of different malignancies, most commonly lung can-
cer, breast cancer, and lymphomas, depending on the patient’s 
age and gender (Tables 19-35 and 19-36).197 Cytologic testing 
should be done on exudative effusions to rule out an associated 
malignancy; accuracy is 70% when associated with adenocar-
cinomas, but is less sensitive for mesotheliomas (<10%), squa-
mous cell carcinomas (20%), or lymphomas (25%–50%). If the 
diagnosis remains uncertain after drainage and fluid analysis, 
thoracoscopy and direct biopsies are indicated.198,199 Malignant 
effusions are exudative and often tinged with blood. An effusion 
in the setting of a malignancy means a more advanced stage; 
mean survival ranges from 3 to 11 months, depending on the 
primary tumor location. Occasionally, effusions associated with 
a bronchogenic NSCLC are benign, and surgical resection may 
still be indicated.
Effusion size and degree of associated dyspnea influ-
ence management. Symptomatic, moderate to large effusions 
should be drained by tunneled indwelling pleural catheter, tube 
thoracostomy (chest tube or pigtail catheter) with subsequent 
instillation of doxycycline as a sclerosing agent, or VATS 
with talc instillation. Management is based on patient prefer-
ence, degree of known or anticipated lung re-expansion, and 
patient tolerance for operative intervention. Lung entrapment by 
tumor or adhesions limits re-expansion and generally predicts 
a poor result with pleurodesis; it is the primary indication for 
placement of indwelling pleural catheters. Patient preference is 
also considered, as is their life expectancy. Tunneled indwell-
ing pleural catheters have dramatically changed the manage-
ment of end-stage cancer treatment because they substantially 
shorten the amount of time patients spend in the hospital during 
their final weeks of life.200  If the lung is expected to 
fully expand and the patient has a longer life expec-
tancy (e.g., malignant effusions in the setting of breast cancer), 
drainage with sclerosis is the preferred option. The choice of 
sclerosant includes mechanical, talc, bleomycin, or doxycycline. 
Success rates range from 60% to 90% and are highest with talc. 
Typically, talc is administered as an aerosolized powder during 
video-assisted thoracoscopy, whereas doxycycline is infused at 
the bedside through a previously placed pigtail catheter or larger 
bore chest tube. Figure. 19-51 presents a decision algorithm for 
the management of malignant pleural effusion.
Empyema
Thoracic empyema is defined by a purulent pleural effusion. 
Patients of all ages can develop empyema, but the frequency 
is increased in older or debilitated patients. Common associ-
ated conditions include a pneumonic process in patients with 
pulmonary disorders and neoplasms, cardiac problems, diabe-
tes mellitus, drug and alcohol abuse, neurologic impairments, 
postthoracotomy problems, and immunologic impairments. The 
mortality of empyema frequently depends on the degree of asso-
ciated comorbid diseases, ranging from as low as 1% to over 
40% in immunocompromised patients.
Pathophysiology.  The most common causes of empyema are 
parapneumonic, but postsurgical or posttraumatic empyema 
12
683
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
is also common (Table 19-37). The spectrum of organisms 
involved in pneumonic processes that progress to empyema is 
changing. Pneumococci and staphylococci continue to be the 
most frequent causative organisms, but gram-negative aerobic 
bacteria and anaerobes are becoming more prevalent. Cases 
involving mycobacteria or fungi are rare. Multiple organisms 
may be found in up to 50% of patients. Cultures may be sterile, 
however, if antibiotics were initiated before the culture or if 
the culture process was not efficient. The choice of antibiotics, 
therefore, is guided by the clinical scenario and not just the 
organisms found on culture. Broad-spectrum coverage may be 
required even when cultures do not grow out an organism or if a 
single organism is grown when the clinical picture is more con-
sistent with a multiorganism process. Common gram-negative 
organisms include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, 
and Enterobacteriaceae. Anaerobic organisms may be fastidi-
ous and difficult to document by culture and are associated with 
periodontal diseases, aspiration syndromes, alcoholism, general 
I.  Transudative pleural effusions
A.  Congestive heart failure
B.  Cirrhosis
C.  Nephrotic syndrome
D.  Superior vena caval obstruction
E.  Fontan procedure
F.  Urinothorax
G.  Peritoneal dialysis
H.  Glomerulonephritis
I.  Myxedema
J.  Cerebrospinal fluid leaks to pleura
K.  Hypoalbuminemia
L.  Pulmonary emboli
M.  Sarcoidosis
II.  Exudative pleural effusions
A.  Neoplastic diseases
1.  Metastatic disease
2.  Mesothelioma
3.  Body cavity lymphoma
4.  Pyothorax-associated lymphoma
B.  Infectious diseases
1.  Tuberculosis
2.  Other bacterial infections
3.  Fungal infections
4.  Parasitic infections
5.  Viral infections
C.  Pulmonary embolization
D.  Gastrointestinal disease
1.  Pancreatic disease
2.  Subphrenic abscess
3.  Intrahepatic abscess
4.  Intrasplenic abscess
5.  Esophageal perforation
6.  After abdominal surgery
7.  Diaphragmatic hernia
8.  Endoscopic variceal sclerosis
9.  After liver transplantation
E.  Heart diseases
1.  After coronary artery bypass graft surgery
2.  Post-cardiac injury (Dressler’s) syndrome
3.  Pericardial disease
F.  Obstetric and gynecologic diseases
1.  Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome
2.  Fetal pleural effusion
3.  Postpartum pleural effusion
4.  Megis’ syndrome
5.  Endometriosis
G.  Collagen vascular diseases
1.  Rheumatoid pleuritis
2.  Systemic lupus erythematosus
3.  Drug-induced lupus
4.  Immunoblastic lymphadenopathy
5.  Sjögren’s syndrome
6.  Familial Mediterranean fever
7.  Churg-Strauss syndrome
8.  Wegener’s granulomatosis
H.  Drug-induced pleural disease
1.  Nitrofurantoin
2.  Dantrolene
3.  Methysergide
4.  Ergot alkaloids
5.  Amiodarone
6.  Interleukin-2
7.  Procarbazine
8.  Methotrexate
9.  Clozapine
I.  Miscellaneous diseases and conditions
1.  Asbestos exposure
2.  After lung transplantation
3.  After bone marrow transplantation
4.  Yellow nail syndrome
5.  Sarcoidosis
6.  Uremia
7.  Trapped lung
8.  Therapeutic radiation exposure
9.  Drowning
10.  Amyloidosis
11.  Milk of calcium pleural effusion
12.  Electrical burns
13.  Extramedullary hematopoiesis
14.  Rupture of mediastinal cyst
15.  Acute respiratory distress syndrome
16.  Whipple’s disease
17.  Iatrogenic pleural effusions
J. Hemothorax
K. Chylothorax
Table 19-34 
Differential diagnosis of pleural effusions
Source: Reproduced with permission from Light RW. Approach to the patient. In: Light RW, ed. Pleural Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 2007:110.
684
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
anesthesia, drug abuse, or other functional associations with 
gastroesophageal reflux.
Organisms gain entry into the pleural cavity through con-
tiguous spread from pneumonia, lung abscess, liver abscess, 
or another, adjacent infectious processes. Organisms may also 
enter the pleural cavity by direct contamination from thora-
centesis, thoracic surgical procedures, esophageal injuries, or 
trauma. As organisms enter the pleural space, an influx of poly-
morphonuclear cells and fluid occurs, with subsequent release 
of inflammatory mediators and toxic oxygen radicals. These 
mechanisms lead to variable degrees of endothelial injury and 
capillary instability. This process overwhelms the normal 
pleural lymphatic drainage. This early effusion is watery and 
free-flowing in the pleural cavity. Thoracentesis at this stage 
yields fluid with a pH typically above 7.3, a glucose level 
greater than 60 mg/dL, and a low LDH level (<500 U/L). At 
this stage, the decision to use antibiotics alone or perform a 
repeat thoracentesis, chest tube drainage, thoracoscopy, or open 
thoracotomy depends on the amount of pleural fluid, its consis-
tency, the clinical status of the patient, the degree of expansion 
of the lung after drainage, and the presence of loculated fluid in 
the pleural space (vs. free-flowing purulent fluid). Early in the 
parapneumonic process, when the purulent fluid is relatively 
Table 19-35 
Primary organ site or neoplasm type in male patients 
with malignant pleural effusions
Primary Site or 
Tumor Type
No. of Male 
Patients
Percentage of 
Male Patients
Lung
140
49.1
Lymphoma/leukemia
60
21.1
Gastrointestinal tract
20
7.0
Genitourinary tract
17
6.0
Melanoma
4
1.4
Miscellaneous less 
common tumors
10
3.5
Primary site unknown
31
10.9
Total
285
100.0
Source: Reproduced with permission from Johnston WW. The malig-
nant pleural effusion: a review of cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 speci-
mens from 472 consecutive patients. Cancer. 1985;56:905.
Table 19-36 
Primary organ site or neoplasm type in female patients 
with malignant pleural effusions
Primary Site or 
Tumor Type
No. of Female 
Patients
Percentage 
of Female 
Patients
Breast
70
37.4
Female genital tract
38
20.3
Lung
28
15.0
Lymphoma
14
8.0
Gastrointestinal tract
8
4.3
Melanoma
6
3.2
Urinary tract
2
1.1
Miscellaneous less 
common tumors
3
1.6
Primary site unknown
17
9.1
Total
187
100.0
Source: Reproduced with permission from Johnston WW. The malig-
nant pleural effusion: a review of cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 speci-
mens from 472 consecutive patients. Cancer. 1985;56:905.
Outpatient referral for management of MPE
Placement of
indwelling pleural
catheter
Loculated
fluid/trapped lung
Free-flowing with full
lung expansion 
Excellent performance
status/long life expectancy
VATS pleurodesis
Poor performance
status/short life expectancy
Placement of indwelling
pleural catheter
Decubitus films and/or CT scan  
Figure 19-51.  Treatment decision algorithm for the management of malignant pleural effusion (MPE). CT = computed tomography; VATS = 
video-assisted thoracic surgery.
685
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
thin, complete drainage with simple large-bore thoracentesis is 
possible. If complete lung expansion is obtained and the pneu-
monic process is responding to antibiotics, no further drainage 
may be necessary. Pleural fluid with a pH lower than 7.2 and 
with a glucose level of less than 40 mg/dL means that a more 
aggressive approach to drainage should be pursued.
The pleural fluid may become thick and loculated over the 
course of hours to days and may be associated with fibrinous 
adhesions (the fibrinopurulent stage). At this stage, chest tube 
insertion with closed-system drainage or drainage with thora-
coscopy may be necessary to remove the fluid and adhesions 
and facilitate complete lung expansion.201 Further progression 
of the inflammatory process leads to the formation of a pleu-
ral peel, which may be flimsy and easy to remove early on. 
However, as the process progresses, a thick pleural rind may 
develop, leaving a trapped lung; complete lung decortication by 
either thoracoscopy or thoracotomy would then be necessary.
The use of intrapleural fibrinolytic therapy for manage-
ment of empyema has been investigated in several large pro-
spective trials. Intrapleural infusion of tissue plasminogen 
activator (t-PA) alone did not improve outcomes, whereas 
combined intrapleural t-PA and DNase was associated with a 
reduction in hospital stay of nearly 7 days, 77% fewer refer-
rals for surgical intervention at 3 months, and more than double 
the reduction in the infected pleural fluid collection by CXR 
imaging.202 In this trial, the medications were given twice daily 
by intrapleural injection; the dose was 5 mg for the DNase and 
10 mg for t-PA. The chest drain was clamped for 1 hour after 
injection and released. This study suggests that the combination 
of fibrinolysis (t-PA) and cleavage of uncoiled DNA by DNase 
reduces fluid viscosity and facilitates pleural clearance.
Management.  If there is a residual space, persistent pleural 
infection is likely to occur. A persistent pleural space may be 
secondary to contracted, but intact, underlying lung; or it may 
be secondary to surgical lung resection. If the space is small 
and well-drained by a chest tube, a conservative approach may 
be possible. This requires leaving the chest tubes in place and 
attached to closed-system drainage until symphysis of the vis-
ceral and parietal surfaces takes place. At this point, the chest 
tubes can be removed from suction; if the residual pleural space 
remains stable, the tubes can be cut and advanced out of the 
chest over the course of several weeks. If the patient is stable, 
tube removal can frequently be done in the outpatient setting, 
guided by the degree of drainage and the size of the residual 
space visualized on serial CT scans. Larger spaces may require 
open thoracotomy and decortication in an attempt to re-expand 
the lung to fill this residual space. If re-expansion has failed 
or appears too high risk, then open drainage, rib resection, and 
prolonged packing may be required, with delayed closure with 
muscle flaps or thoracoplasty.203 Most chronic pleural space 
problems can be avoided by early specialized thoracic surgi-
cal consultation and complete drainage of empyema, allowing 
space obliteration by the reinflated lung.
Chylothorax
Chylothorax develops most commonly after surgical trauma to 
the thoracic duct or a major branch, but may be also associated 
with a number of other conditions (Table 19-38).204 It is gener-
ally unilateral; for example, it may occur after dissection of the 
distal esophagus where the duct lies in close proximity to the 
esophagus as it enters the right chest from its origin in the abdo-
men at the cisterna chyli (Fig. 19-52). If the mediastinal pleura 
are disrupted on both sides, bilateral chylothoraces may occur. 
Left-sided chylothoraces may develop after a left-sided neck 
dissection, especially in the region of the confluence of the sub-
clavian and internal jugular veins. Chylothorax may also follow 
nonsurgical trauma, including penetrating or blunt injuries to the 
chest or neck area, central line placements, and other surgical 
misadventures. It may be seen in association with a variety of 
benign and malignant diseases that generally involve the lym-
phatic system of the mediastinum or neck. Given the significant 
variability of the course of the thoracic duct within the chest, 
some injuries are inevitable.
Pathophysiology.  Most commonly, the thoracic duct origi-
nates in the abdomen from the cisterna chyli, which is located in 
the midline, near the level of the second lumbar vertebra. From 
this origin, the thoracic duct ascends into the chest through the 
aortic hiatus at the level of T10 to T12, and courses just to the 
right of the aorta (see Fig. 19-52). As the thoracic duct courses 
cephalad above the diaphragm, it most commonly remains in 
the right chest, lying just behind the esophagus, between the 
aorta and azygos vein. The duct continues superiorly, lying just 
to the right of the vertebral column. Then, at the fifth or sixth 
thoracic vertebra, it crosses behind the aorta and the aortic arch 
into the left posterior mediastinum and travels superiorly, stay-
ing near the esophagus and mediastinal pleura as it exits the tho-
racic inlet. As it exits the thoracic inlet, it passes to the left, just 
behind the carotid sheath and anterior to the inferior thyroid and 
vertebral bodies. Just medial to the anterior scalene muscle, it 
courses inferiorly and drains into the union of the internal jugu-
lar and subclavian veins. Given the extreme variability in the 
main duct and its branches, accumulation of chyle in the chest 
or flow from penetrating wounds may be seen after a variety of 
traumatic and medical conditions.205
The main function of the duct is to transport fat absorbed 
from the digestive system along with variable amounts of pro-
tein and lymphatic material (Table 19-39). Given the high 
volume of chyle that flows through the thoracic duct, signif-
icant injuries can cause leaks in excess of 2 L per day; if left 
untreated, protein, lymphocyte, and volume depletion can lead 
to serious metabolic effects and death. Thoracentesis is usually 
grossly suggestive, revealing milky, nonpurulent pleural fluid. 
However, if the patient is taking nothing by mouth, the pleural 
Table 19-37 
Pathogenesis of empyema
Contamination from a source contiguous to the pleural space 
(50%–60%)
  Lung
  Mediastinum
  Deep cervical area
  Chest wall and spine
  Subphrenic area
Direct inoculation of the pleural space (30%–40%)
  Minor thoracic interventions
  Postoperative infections
  Penetrating chest injuries
Hematogenous infection of the pleural space from a distant 
site (<1%)
Source: Reproduced with permission from Paris F, et al. Empyema and 
bronchopleural fistula. In: Pearson FG, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1177. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
686
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
fluid may not be grossly abnormal. Laboratory analysis of the 
pleural fluid shows a high lymphocyte count and high triglyc-
eride levels. If the triglyceride level is greater than 110 mg/ 
100 mL, a chylothorax is almost certainly present (a 99% accu-
racy rate). If the triglyceride level is less than 50 mg/mL, there is 
only a 5% chance of chylothorax. In many clinical situations, the 
accumulation of chyle may be slow, because of minimal digestive 
fat flowing through the gastrointestinal tract after major trauma 
or surgery, so the diagnosis may be more difficult to establish.
Management.  The treatment plan for any chylothorax depends 
on its cause, the amount of drainage, and the patient’s clini-
cal status (Fig. 19-53). In general, most patients are treated 
with a short period of chest tube drainage, nothing by mouth 
(NPO) orders, total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and observation. 
Table 19-38 
Etiology of chylothorax
Congenital
  Atresia of thoracic duct
  Thoracic duct-pleural space fistula
  Birth trauma
Traumatic and/or iatrogenic
  Blunt injury
  Penetrating injury
  Surgery
    Cervical
      Excision of lymph nodes
      Radical neck dissection
    Thoracic
      Correction of patent ductus arteriosus
      Correction of coarctation of the aorta
      Vascular procedure involving the origin of the left 
subclavian artery
      Esophagectomy
      Sympathectomy
      Resection of thoracic aneurysm
      Resection of mediastinal tumors
      Left pneumonectomy
    Abdominal
      Sympathectomy
      Radical lymph node dissection
    Diagnostic procedures
      Translumbar arteriography
      Subclavian vein catheterization
      Left-sided heart catheterization
Neoplasms
Infections
  Tuberculous lymphadenitis
  Nonspecific mediastinitis
  Ascending lymphangitis
  Filariasis
Miscellaneous
  Venous thrombosis
    Left subclavian-jugular vein
    Superior vena cava
  Pulmonary lymphangiomatosis
Source: Reproduced with permission from Cohen RG, et al. The pleura. 
In: Sabiston DC, et al, eds. Surgery of the Chest. 6th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 1995. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Thoracic d.
Cisterna chyli
Figure 19-52.  Normal thoracic duct anatomy. The esophagus 
comes into close proximity with the thoracic duct as it enters the 
chest from its origin in the abdomen at the cisterna chyli.
Table 19-39 
Composition of chyle
Component
Amount (per 100 mL)
Total fat
0.4–5 g
  Total cholesterol
65–220 mg
Total protein
2.21–5.9 g
  Albumin
1.1–4.1 g
  Globulin
1.1–3.1 g
  Fibrinogen
16–24 g
Sugars
48–200 g
Electrolytes
Similar to levels in plasma
Cellular elements
  Lymphocytes
400–6800/mm3
  Erythrocytes
50–600/mm3
Antithrombin globulin
>25% of plasma concentration
Prothrombin
>25% of plasma concentration
Fibrinogen
>25% of plasma concentration
Source: Reproduced with permission from Miller.204 kkjkjdht Elsevier.
687
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Chest cavity drainage must be adequate to allow complete lung 
re-expansion. Somatostatin has been advocated by some authors, 
with variable results. If significant chyle drainage (>500 mL per 
day in an adult, >100 mL in an infant) continues despite TPN and 
good lung expansion, early surgical duct ligation or embolization 
is recommended. Ligation can be approached best by right thora-
cotomy, and in some experienced centers, by right VATS. Chy-
lothoraces due to malignant conditions often respond to radiation 
and/or chemotherapy and less commonly require surgical liga-
tion. Significant nutritional and immunologic depletion results 
from untreated chylothorax; associated mortality is in excess of 
50%. With early recognition and aggressive medical management 
as well as early surgical ligation or embolization for persistent 
leaks, the mortality rate of chylothorax is now less than 10%.
Tumors of the Pleura
Malignant mesothelioma is the most common type of tumor of 
the pleura, with approximately 3000 cases per year in the 
United States. Other, less common tumors include benign and 
malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura, lipomas, and cysts.
Malignant Mesothelioma.  The only known risk factor for 
mesothelioma is exposure to asbestos, identified in over 50% 
of cases. Exposure is typically work-related in industries using 
asbestos in the manufacturing process, such as shipbuilding. 
The risk extends to family members who are exposed to the dust 
of the clothing or to the work environment. Asbestos exposure 
and smoking synergistically increase the risk for lung cancer, 
but smoking does not increase risk for malignant mesothelio-
mas. Male predominance is 2:1, and it occurs most commonly 
after the age of 40.
Risk of developing mesothelioma after asbestos exposure 
differs depending on the physical characteristics of the asbes-
tos and similar fibers (either serpentine or amphibole). The 
serpentine fibers are large and curly and are generally not able 
to travel beyond larger airways. However, the narrow, straight 
Radiation
therapy
Medically
unstable
Pleural
peritoneal
shunt
Drainage
persists
(Nonmalignant)
Drainage persists
(>500 ml/d)
Malignant
chylothorax
Thoracentesis
Confirm diagnosis
Medically
stable
Thoracotomy
Chest tube
Conservative management 
NPO
Chest tube to suction
Central hyperalimentation
Wait two weeks*
Drainage decrease
(<250 ml/d)
Continue
one week
Thoracotomy
Duct ligation
Mass ligation
Decortication
Pleurectomy
Drainage
stops
Remove
chest tube 
Figure 19-53.  Algorithm for the manage-
ment of chylothorax. *If high output per-
sists (>500 mL/d), early surgical ligation 
of the thoracic duct may be considered. 
NPO = nothing by mouth.
688
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
amphibole fibers, in particular the crocidolite fibers, may nav-
igate distally into the pulmonary parenchyma and are most 
clearly associated with mesotheliomas. The latency period 
between asbestos exposure and the development of mesothe-
lioma is at least 20 years. The tumor generally is multicentric, 
with multiple pleural-based nodules coalescing to form sheets 
of tumor. This process initially involves the parietal pleura, 
generally with early spread to the visceral surfaces and with a 
variable degree of invasion of surrounding structures. Autopsy 
studies have shown that most patients have distant metasta-
ses, but the natural history of the disease in untreated patients 
culminates in death due to local extension. Other risk factors 
include radiation exposure.
Clinical Presentation.  Most patients present with dyspnea and 
chest pain. Over 90% have a pleural effusion, but thoracentesis 
is diagnostic in less than 10% of patients. Frequently, a thora-
coscopy or open pleural biopsy with special stains is required 
to differentiate mesotheliomas from adenocarcinomas (Table 
19-40). Epithelial subtypes are associated with a more favorable 
prognosis, and long-term survival may be seen in rare patients 
with no treatment. Sarcomatous and mixed tumors share a more 
aggressive course.
Management.  The treatment of malignant mesotheliomas 
remains controversial. Prognosis depends on the stage of the dis-
ease (Table 19-41),206 but most patients present with advanced 
local or distant disease beyond curative potential. Treatment 
options include supportive care only, surgical resection, and 
multimodality approaches (using a combination of surgery, 
chemotherapy, and radiation therapy).207 Palliative approaches, 
such as pleurectomy or talc pleurodesis, may lead to local con-
trol and a modest improvement in short-term survival. Several 
reports of trials of extrapleural pneumonectomy and adjuvant 
chemotherapy and radiation have shown reasonable improve-
ments in survival for patients with early-stage tumors (as com-
pared with historical controls). In one series of 183 patients, 
a subset of 31 patients had favorable prognostic features (i.e., 
epithelial cell type), negative resection margins, and negative 
extrapleural node status. This favorable subset had a 5-year sur-
vival rate of 46%, as compared with 15% for the entire group.208 
In another series, 88 patients with mesotheliomas were stud-
ied prospectively. Adjuvant radiation therapy was given to 54 
patients after extrapleural pneumonectomy; the median survival 
Table 19-40 
Differentiation of mesothelioma from adenocarcinoma
Mesothelioma
Adenocarcinoma
Immunohistochemical 
results
  Carcinoembryonic 
antigen
Negative
Positive
  Vimentin
Positive
Negative
  Low molecular 
weight cytokeratins
Positive
Negative
Electron microscopic 
features
Long, sinuous 
villi
Short, straight 
villi with fuzzy 
glycocalyx
was 17 months. However, in patients with stage I and II disease, 
the median survival was significantly better at 33.0 months.209
Intrapleural therapy has been explored to improve the 
locoregional control of malignant mesotheliomas. In a phase 
II trial, 37 patients underwent pleurectomy with decortication, 
followed by intrapleural and systemic therapy with cisplatin 
and mitomycin C. Their median survival was 17 months, with 
a locoregional recurrence rate of 80%.210 According to another 
study, the addition of hyperthermic intrapleural perfusion seems 
to be pharmacokinetically advantageous; of seven patients, three 
underwent pleurectomy with decortication and received hyper-
thermic cisplatin. Systemic drug concentrations were greater 
after pleurectomy with decortication than after pleuropneumo-
nectomy. The local tissue:perfusate ratio of platinum concentra-
tions tended to be higher after hyperthermic perfusion rather 
than normothermic perfusion.211
Another promising alternative to enhance the local efficacy 
of chemotherapy against malignant mesotheliomas is L-NDDP 
(cis-bis-neodecanoato-trans-R,R-1,2-diaminocyclohexane 
platinum). A phase II trial of L-NDDP enrolled 33 patients to 
receive a thoracoscopic biopsy and a thoracoscopic posttreat-
ment pleural biopsy after each cycle. Of those 33 patients, 14 
(42%) had a complete pathologic response, with three treatment-
related deaths due to infection. Buried residual tumor was 
found at pleural decortications in another two patients who had 
pathologic response.212 These findings are encouraging, but the 
optimal regimen for intrapleural treatment for mesothelioma 
remains to be fully defined.
The authors’ current approach to malignant mesothe-
lioma is based on tumor stage and patient performance status. 
Extrapleural pneumonectomy is recommended, especially for 
epithelial mesotheliomas, early-stage mesotheliomas, and good 
pulmonary function. For more advanced disease, decortication 
with intrapleural chemotherapy is administered, using an insti-
tutional protocol, for patients who are fit for surgery. Whenever 
possible, patients are referred for clinical trials of multimodality 
therapy. For more advanced disease, or if patients have less-
than-optimal pulmonary function or performance status, talc 
pleurodesis or supportive therapy is recommended.
Fibrous Tumors of the Pleura.  Fibrous tumors of the pleura 
are unrelated to asbestos exposure or malignant mesotheliomas. 
They generally occur as a single pedunculated mass arising from 
the visceral pleura but can occasionally arise from the parietal 
pleura. They can grow to be quite large, with most ranging from 
5 to 10 cm and 100 to 400 g in size by the time they are dis-
covered. Architecturally, the most common microscopic feature 
is the “patternless pattern.” This is characterized by randomly 
situated areas of hypercellularity, containing spindle cells with 
bland, vesicular, ovoidal nuclei and scarce cytoplasm, and hypo-
cellularity, with fibrous connective tissue, hemorrhage, myxoid, 
or necrosis. They can also have an hemangiopericytoma-like 
appearance. The neoplastic cells are immunoreactive for CD34 
and CD99 but negative for cytokeratins and desmin. Immuno-
reactivity for Bcl-2 is variably positive.213
They are frequently discovered incidentally on routine 
CXRs, without an associated pleural effusion. They occur with 
equal frequency in males and females and are most common in 
the sixth to seventh decade of life. Fibrous tumors of the pleura 
may be benign or malignant.214 Symptoms such as cough, chest 
pain, and dyspnea occur in 30% to 40% of patients but are found 
in 75% of patients with malignant tumors. Malignant tumors 
689
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
Table 19-41 
International Mesothelioma Interest Group staging system for diffuse malignant pleural mesothelioma
T Tumor
T1
T1a    Tumor limited to the ipsilateral parietal ± mediastinal ± diaphragmatic pleura
No involvement of the visceral pleura
T1b    Tumor involving the ipsilateral parietal ± mediastinal ± diaphragmatic pleura
Tumor also involving the visceral pleura
T2
Tumor involving each of the ipsilateral pleural surfaces (parietal, mediastinal, diaphragmatic, and visceral 
pleurae) with at least one of the following features:
Involvement of diaphragmatic muscle
Extension of tumor from visceral pleura into the underlying pulmonary parenchyma
T3
Describes locally advanced but potentially resectable tumor
Tumor involving all of the ipsilateral pleural surfaces (parietal, mediastinal, diaphragmatic, and visceral pleurae) 
with at least one of the following features:
Involvement of the endothoracic fascia
Extension into the mediastinal fat
Solitary, completely resectable focus of tumor extending into the soft tissues of the chest wall
Nontransmural involvement of the pericardium
T4
Describes locally advanced technically unresectable tumor
Tumor involving all of the ipsilateral pleural surfaces (parietal, mediastinal, diaphragmatic, and visceral pleurae) 
with at least one of the following features:
Diffuse extension or multifocal masses of tumor in the chest wall, with or without associated rib destruction
Direct transdiaphragmatic extension of tumor to the peritoneum
Direct extension of tumor to the contralateral pleura
Direct extension of tumor to mediastinal organs
Direct extension of tumor into the spine
Tumor extending through to the internal surface of the pericardium with or without a pericardial effusion; or 
tumor involving the myocardium
N Lymph Nodes
NX
N0
N1
N2
N3
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
No regional lymph node metastasis
Metastases in the ipsilateral bronchopulmonary or hilar lymph nodes
Metastases in the subcarinal or the ipsilateral mediastinal lymph nodes including the ipsilateral internal 
mammary nodes
Metastases in the contralateral mediastinal, contralateral internal mammary, or ipsilateral or contralateral 
supraclavicular lymph nodes
M Metastases
MX
Presence of distant metastases cannot be assessed
M0
No distant metastases
M1
Distant metastases present
Staging
Stage I
IA	
T1a	
N0	
M0
IB	
T1b	
N0	
M0
Stage II	
T2	
N0	
M0
Stage III	
Any T3	
Any N1	
M0
	
	
Any N2
Stage IV	
Any T4	
Any N3	
Any M1
Source: Reproduced with permission from International Mesothelioma Interest Group. A proposed new international TNM staging system for malignant 
pleural mesothelioma. Chest. 1995;108:1122.
690
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
are differentiated from benign tumors based on high cellularity, 
more than 4 mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields, nuclear 
pleomorphism, tumor necrosis, and hemorrhage. They are more 
likely to arise from the parietal pleura of the chest wall, dia-
phragm, or mediastinum, or in the fissures or invaginating into 
the lung parenchyma. Hypoglycemia, associated pleural effu-
sion, and hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (clubbed 
digits, long bone ossifying periostitis, and arthritis) are associ-
ated with these lesions in approximately 25% of patients. Less 
common are fever and hemoptysis.
Symptoms resolve with surgical resection. Given the well-
circumscribed and often pedunculated nature of fibrous tumors of 
the pleura, all benign lesions and approximately 50% of malignant 
lesions are cured by complete surgical resection.214 Incompletely 
resected malignant tumors may recur locally or metastasize, and 
more than 50% of patients with malignant tumors will die from 
the disease; frequently, they are fatal within 2 to 5 years.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to thank Shannon Wyszomierski for her 
invaluable help in compiling and editing this chapter. The 
authors also express appreciation to their spouses, Chris, Lee, 
and Chris.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Cusimano RJ, Pearson FG. Anatomy, physiology, and embry-
ology of the upper airway. In: Pearson FG, Cooper JD, 
Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002:215.
2.	Grillo HC. Surgical treatment of postintubation tracheal inju-
ries. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1979;78(6):860-875.
3.	Nouraei SA, Ma E, Patel A, et al. Estimating the population 
incidence of adult post-intubation laryngotracheal stenosis. 
Clin Otolaryngol. 2007;32(5):411-412.
4.	Couraud L, Ballester MJ, Delaisement C. Acquired tracheo-
esophageal fistula and its management. Semin Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 1996;8:392.
5.	Mathisen DJ, Grillo HC, Wain JC, et al. Management of 
acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 1991;52:759.
6.	Bhattacharyya N. Contemporary staging and prognosis for 
primary tracheal malignancies: a population-based analysis. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004;131:639-642.
7.	Gaissert HA, Grillo HC, Shadmehr MB, et al. Uncommon pri-
mary tracheal tumors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:268.
8.	Regnard JF, Fourquier P, Levasseur P. Results and prognostic 
factors in resections of primary tracheal tumors: a multicenter 
retrospective study. The French Society of Cardiovascular 
Surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111:808; discus-
sion 813.
9.	Chow DC, Komaki R, Libshitz HI, et al. Treatment of primary 
neoplasms of the trachea. The role of radiation therapy. Can-
cer. 1993;71:2946.
10.	Rice TW. Anatomy of the lung. In: Pearson FG, Cooper JD, 
Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002:427.
11.	Jeremy George P, Banerjee AK, Rea CA, et al. Surveillance 
for the detection of early lung cancer in patients with bronchial 
dysplasia. Thorax. 2007;62:43.
12.	Wang GF, Lai MD, Yang RR, et al. Histological types and 
significance of bronchial epithelial dysplasia. Mod Pathol. 
2006;19:429.
13.	Gould VE, Warren WH. Epithelial tumors of the lung. Chest 
Surg Clin N Am. 2000;10:709-728.
14.	Fu JB, Kau TY. Lung cancer in women: analysis of the 
national Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data-
base. Chest. 2005;127:768-777.
15.	Travis WD, Brambilla E, Riely G. International Asso-
ciation for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic 
Society/European Respiratory Society international multi-
disciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Tho-
rac Oncol. 2011; 6:244-285.
16.	Schmidt L, Myers J. Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and the 
significance of invasion: predicting biologic behavior. Arch 
Pathol Lab Med. 2010;134:1450-1454.
17.	Cerilli LA, Ritter JH, Mills SE, et al. Neuroendocrine neo-
plasms of the lung. Am J Clin Pathol. 2001;116(Suppl):S65.
18.	Jemal A, Simard EP, Dorell C, et al. Annual report to the 
nation on the status of cancer, 1975-2009, featuring the bur-
den and trends in human papillomavirus (HPV)-Associated 
Cancers and HPV vaccination coverage levels. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2013;105:175-201.
19.	Mulligan CR, Meram AD, Proctor CD, et al. Unlimited access 
to care: effect on racial disparity and prognostic factors in lung 
cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006;15:25.
20.	Samet JM. Health benefits of smoking cessation. Clin Chest 
Med. 1991;12:669.
21.	 Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF. Lung cancer in never smokers—a 
different disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;7:778.
22.	Hackshaw AK, Law MR, Wald NJ. The accumulated evi-
dence on lung cancer and environmental tobacco smoke. BMJ. 
1997;315:980.
23.	Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-
cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic 
screening. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:395-409.
24.	Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD, et al. Evaluation of 
patients with pulmonary nodules: when is it lung cancer? 
ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 2nd ed. 
Chest. 2007;132(3 Suppl):108S.
25.	Marten K, Grabbe E. The challenge of the solitary pulmonary 
nodule: diagnostic assessment with multislice spiral CT. Clin 
Imaging. 2003;27:156.
26.	Remy-Jardin M, Remy J, Giraud F, et al. Pulmonary nodules: 
detection with thick-section spiral CT versus conventional CT. 
Radiology. 1993;187:513.
27.	Naidich DP. Helical computed tomography of the thorax: 
clinical applications. Radiol Clin North Am. 1994;32:759.
28.	Stroobants S, Verschakelen J, Vansteenkiste J. Value of FDG-
PET in the management of non-small cell lung cancer. Eur J 
Radiol. 2003;45:49.
29.	Cahan WG, Shah JP, Castro EB. Benign solitary lung lesions 
in patients with cancer. Ann Surg. 1978;187:241.
30.	Davidson RS, Nwogu CE, Brentjens MJ, et al. The surgical 
management of pulmonary metastasis: current concepts. Surg 
Oncol. 2001;10:35.
31.	Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G, et al. Long-term results 
of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5206 
cases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1997;113:37.
32.	McCormack PM, Bains MS, Begg CB, et al. Role of video-
assisted thoracic surgery in the treatment of pulmonary 
metastases: results of a prospective trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1996;62:213; discussion 216.
33.	Rivera MP, Mehta AC. Initial diagnosis of lung cancer: ACCP 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 2nd ed. Chest. 
2007;132(3 Suppl):131S.
34.	Ost D, Fein AM, Feinsilver SH. Clinical practice. The solitary 
pulmonary nodule. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2535.
35.	Toloza EM, Harpole L, McCrory DC. Noninvasive staging of 
non-small cell lung cancer: a review of the current evidence. 
Chest. 2003;123(1 Suppl):137S.
691
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
36.	Goldberg M, Unger M. Lung cancer. Diagnostic tools. Chest 
Surg Clin N Am. 2000;10:763.
37.	Vaz AP, Fernandes G, Souto Moura C, et al. Integrated PET/
CT in non small cell lung cancer staging: clinical and patho-
logical agreement. Rev Port Pneumol. 2012;18:109-114.
38.	Iskender I, Kapicibasi HO. Comparison of integrated positron 
emission tomography/computed tomography and mediasti-
noscopy in mediastinal staging of non-small cell lung cancer: 
analysis of 212 patients. Acta Chir Belg. 2012;112:219-225.
39.	Li X, Zhang H, Xing L, et al. Mediastinal lymph nodes staging 
by 18F-FDG PET/CT for early stage non-small cell lung can-
cer: a multicenter study. Radiother Oncol. 2012;102:246-250.
40.	Lv YL, Yuan DM. Diagnostic performance of integrated 
positron emission tomography/computed tomography for 
mediastinal lymph node staging in non-small cell lung can-
cer: a bivariate systematic review and meta-analysis. J Thorac 
Oncol. 2011;6(8):1350-1358.
41.	Mountain CF, Dresler CM. Regional lymph node classifica-
tion for lung cancer staging. Chest. 1997;111:1718.
42.	Barrera R, Shi W, Amar D, et al. Smoking and timing of ces-
sation: impact on pulmonary complications after thoracotomy. 
Chest. 2005;127:1977.
43.	Nakagawa M, Tanaka H, Tsukuma H, et al. Relationship 
between the duration of the preoperative smoke-free period 
and the incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications 
after pulmonary surgery. Chest. 2001;120:705.
44.	Colice GL, Shafazand S, Griffin JP, et al. Physiologic eval-
uation of the patient with lung cancer being considered for 
resectional surgery: ACCP evidenced-based clinical prac-
tice guidelines. 2nd ed. Chest. 2007;132(3 Suppl):161S.
45.	Ou SH, Zell JA, Ziogas A, et al. Prognostic factors for survival 
of stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer patients: A population-
based analysis of 19,702 stage I patients in the California Can-
cer Registry from 1989 to 2003. Cancer. 2007;110:1532.
46.	Raz DJ, Zell JA, Ou SH, et al. Natural history of stage I non-
small cell lung cancer: implications for early detection. Chest. 
2007;132:193.
47.	Ginsberg RJ, Rubinstein LV. Randomized trial of lobectomy 
versus limited resection for T1 N0 non-small cell lung cancer. 
Lung Cancer Study Group. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60:615.
48.	Warren WH, Faber LP. Segmentectomy versus lobectomy in 
patients with stage I pulmonary carcinoma. Five-year survival 
and patterns of intrathoracic recurrence. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1994;107:1087; discussion 1093.
49.	Nakamura H, Kawasaki N, Taguchi M, et al. Survival follow-
ing lobectomy vs. limited resection for stage I lung cancer: a 
meta-analysis. Br J Cancer. 2005;92:1033-1037.
50.	Schuchert MJ, Pettiford BL, Keeley S, et al. Anatomic segmen-
tectomy in the treatment of stage I non-small cell lung cancer. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84(3), 926-932; discussion 932-923.
51.	Sienel W, Stremmel C, Kirschbaum A, et al. Frequency of 
local recurrence following segmentectomy of stage IA non-
small cell lung cancer is influenced by segment localisation 
and width of resection margins—implications for patient 
selection for segmentectomy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2007;31(3):522-527; discussion 527-528.
52.	Shapiro M, Weiser TS, Wisnivesky JP, Chin C, Arusta-
myan M, Swanson SJ, Thoracoscopic segmentectomy com-
pares favorably with thoracoscopic lobectomy for patients 
with small stage I lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2009;137(6):1388-1393.
53.	Oizumi H, Kanauchi N, Kato H, et al. Total thoracoscopic 
pulmonary segmentectomy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009; 
36(2):374-377; discussion 377.
54.	Schuchert MJ, Pettiford BL, Pennathur A, et al. Anatomic seg-
mentectomy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer: compari-
son of video-assisted thoracic surgery versus open approach. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138(6):1318-1325 e1311.
55.	Watanabe A, Ohori S, Nakashima S, et al. Feasibility of 
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery segmentectomy for 
selected peripheral lung carcinomas. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2009;35(5):775-780; discussion 780.
56.	Fuwa N, Mitsudomi T, Daimon T, et al. Factors involved in 
lymph node metastasis in clinical stage I non-small cell lung 
cancer—from studies of 604 surgical cases. Lung Cancer. 
2007;57(3):311-316.
57.	Fernando HC, De Hoyos A, Landreneau, et al. Radiofre-
quency ablation for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer 
in marginal surgical candidates. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2005;129(3):639-644.
58.	 Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Abbas G, et al. Radiofrequency ablation 
for the treatment of stage I non-small cell lung cancer in high-risk 
patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;134(4):857-864.
59.	 Lencioni R, Crocetti L, Cioni R, et al. Response to radiofrequency 
ablation of pulmonary tumours: a prospective, intention-to-treat, 
multicentre clinical trial (the RAPTURE study). Lancet Oncol. 
2008;9(7):621-628.
60.	Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Yiannoutsos CT, et al. Stereotactic 
body radiation therapy for early-stage non-small-cell lung car-
cinoma: four-year results of a prospective phase II study. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;75(3):677-682.
61.	Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, et al. American Soci-
ety for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) and 
American College of Radiology (ACR) practice guideline for 
the performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(2):326-332.
62.	Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, et al. Stereotactic body 
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer. JAMA. 
2010;303(11):1070-1076.
63.	Simon CJ, Dupuy DE, DiPetrillo TA, et al. Pulmonary radio-
frequency ablation: long-term safety and efficacy in 153 
patients. Radiology. 2007;243(1):268-275.
64.	Abbas G, Pennathur A, Landreneau RJ, Luketich JD. Radio-
frequency and microwave ablation of lung tumors. J Surg 
Oncol. 2009;100(8):645-650.
65.	Lanuti M, Sharma A, Digumarthy SR, et al. Radiofrequency 
ablation for treatment of medically inoperable stage I non-
small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 
137(1):160-166.
66.	Pua BB, Solomon SB. Radiofrequency ablation of primary 
and metastatic lung cancers. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2009; 
30(2):113-124.
67.	Casal RF, Tam AL, Eapen GA. Radiofrequency ablation of 
lung tumors. Clin Chest Med. 2010;31(1):151-163.
68.	Crocetti L, Lencioni R. Radiofrequency ablation of pulmonary 
tumors. Eur J Radiol. 2010;75(1):23-27.
69.	Fernando HC, Schuchert M, Landreneau R, Daly BT. 
Approaching the high-risk patient: sublobar resection, stereo-
tactic body radiation therapy, or radiofrequency ablation. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2010;89(6):S2123-2127.
70.	Hoffmann TH, Ransdell HT: Comparison of lobectomy and 
wedge resection for carcinoma of the lung. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg 79:211, 1980.
71.	Read RC, Yoder G, Schaeffer RC: Survival after conserva-
tive resection for T1 N0 M0 non-small cell lung cancer. Ann 
Thorac Surg 49:391, 1990.
72.	Date H, Andou A, Shimizu N: The value of limited resection 
for “clinical” stage I peripheral non-small cell lung cancer in 
poor-risk patients: comparison of limited resection and lobec-
tomy by a computer-assisted matched study. Tumori 80:422, 
1994.
73.	Harpole DH, Jr., Herndon JE, 2nd, Young WG, Jr., et al: Stage I 
nonsmall cell lung cancer. A multivariate analysis of treatment 
methods and patterns of recurrence. Cancer 76:787, 1995.
74.	Lederle FA: Lobectomy versus limited resection in T1 N0 
lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 62:1249, 1996.
692
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
75.	Kodama K, Doi O, Higashiyama M, et al: Intentional limited 
resection for selected patients with T1 N0 M0 non-small-cell 
lung cancer: A single-institution study. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 114:347, 1997.
76.	Landreneau RJ, Sugarbaker DJ, Mack MJ, et al: Wedge resec-
tion versus lobectomy for stage I (T1 N0 M0) non-small-cell 
lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 113:691, 1997.
77.	Pastorino U, Andreola S, Tagliabue E, et al: Immunocyto-
chemical markers in stage I lung cancer: relevance to progno-
sis. J Clin Oncol 15:2858, 1997.
78.	Kwiatkowski DJ, Harpole DH, Jr., Godleski J, et al: Molecular 
pathologic substaging in 244 stage I non-small-cell lung can-
cer patients: Clinical implications. J Clin Oncol 16:2468,1998.
79.	Okada M, Yoshikawa K, Hatta T, et al: Is segmentectomy 
with lymphnode assessment an alternative to lobectomy for 
non-small cell lung cancer of 2 cm or smaller? Ann Thorac 
Surg 71:956, 2001.
80.	Koike T, Yamato Y, Yoshiya K, et al: Intentional limited pul-
monary resection for peripheral T1 N0 M0 small-sized lung 
cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 125:924, 2003.
81.	Campione A, Ligabue T, Luzzi L, et al: Comparison between 
segmentectomy and larger resection of stage IA non-small cell 
lung carcinoma. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 45:67, 2004.
82.	Keenan RJ, Landreneau RJ, Maley RH, Jr., et al: Segmental 
resection spares pulmonary function in patients with stage I 
lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 78:228. 2004.
83.	Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, et al. Excessive 
toxicity when treating central tumors in a phase II study of 
stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable 
early-stage lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(30):4833-4839.
84.	Pisters KM, Ginsberg RJ, Giroux DJ, et al. Induction chemo-
therapy before surgery for early-stage lung cancer: a novel 
approach. Bimodality Lung Oncology Team. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2000;119:429.
85.	Rosell R, Gomez-Codina J, Camps C, et al. A randomized 
trial comparing preoperative chemotherapy plus surgery with 
surgery alone in patients with non–small-cell lung cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 1994;330:153.
86.	Brouchet L, Bauvin E, Marcheix B, et al. Impact of induction 
treatment on postoperative complications in the treatment of 
non–small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2007;2:626.
87.	Rusch VW. Management of Pancoast tumours. Lancet Oncol. 
2006;7:997.
88.	 Rusch VW, Giroux DJ, Kraut MJ, et al. Induction chemoradia-
tion and surgical resection for superior sulcus non–small-cell lung 
carcinomas: long-term results of Southwest Oncology Group 
Trial 9416 (Intergroup Trial 0160). J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:313.
89.	Dillman RO, Herndon J, Seagren SL, et al. Improved survival 
in stage III non–small-cell lung cancer: seven-year follow-up 
of Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 8433 trial. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 1996;88:1210.
90.	Roth JA, Atkinson EN, Fossella F, et al: Long-term follow-up 
of patients enrolled in a randomized trial comparing periopera-
tive chemotherapy and surgery with surgery alone in resectable 
stage IIIA non–small-cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 21:1, 1998.
91.	Pass HI, Pogrebniak HW, Steinberg SM, et al: Randomized 
trial of neoadjuvant therapy for lung cancer: interim analysis. 
Ann Thorac Surg 53:992, 1992.
92.	Nagai K, Tsuchiya R, Mori T, et al: A randomized trial compar-
ing induction chemotherapy followed by surgery with surgery 
alone for patients with stage IIIA N2 non-small cell lung cancer 
(JCOG 9209). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 125:254, 2003.
93.	Gilligan D, Nicolson M, Smith I, et al: Preoperative chemo-
therapy in patients with resectable non-small cell lung cancer: 
results of the MRC LU22/NVALT 2/EORTC 08012 multicen-
tre randomised trial and update of systematic review. Lancet 
369:1929, 2007.
94.	Depierre A, Milleron B, Moro-Sibilot D, et al: Preoperative 
chemotherapy followed by surgery compared with primary 
surgery in resectable stage I (except T1N0), II, and IIIa non-
small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 20:247, 2002.
95.	 Pisters K, Vallieres E, Bunn PA, Jr., et al: S9900: Surgery alone 
or surgery plus induction (ind) paclitaxel/carboplatin (PC) che-
motherapy in early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): 
Follow-up on a phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 25:7520, 2007.
96.	Sorensen JB, Riska H, Ravn J, et al: Scandinavian phase III 
trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in NSCLC stages IB-IIIA/
T3. ASCO Meeting Abstracts 23:7146, 2005.
97.	Mattson KV, Abratt RP, ten Velde G, et al: Docetaxel as neo-
adjuvant therapy for radically treatable stage III non-small-
cell lung cancer: A multinational randomised phase III study. 
Ann Oncol 14:116, 2003.
98.	Okawara G, Mackay JA, Evans W, et al. Management of 
unresected stage III non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic 
review. J Thorac Oncol. 2006;1:377-393.
99.	Swanson SJ, Herndon JE II, D’Amico TA, et al. Video-
assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy: report of CALGB 
39802—a prospective, multi-institution feasibility study. J 
Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4993.
100.	Demmy TL, James TA, Swanson SJ, et al. Troubleshoot-
ing video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2005;79:1744; discussion 1753.
101.	Fry WA. Thoracic incisions. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 1995; 
5:177-188.
102.	Dewey TM, Mack MJ. Lung cancer. Surgical approaches and 
incisions. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2000;10:803-820.
103.	Cerfolio RJ, Bryant AS. Results of a prospective algorithm to 
remove chest tubes after pulmonary resection with high out-
put. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;135:269.
104.	Cerfolio RJ, Bass C, Katholi CR. Prospective randomized trial 
compares suction versus water seal for air leaks. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2001;71:1613.
105.	Bauer C, Hentz JG, Ducrocq X, et al. Lung function after 
lobectomy: a randomized, double-blinded trial comparing 
thoracic epidural ropivacaine/sufentanil and intravenous 
morphine for patient-controlled analgesia. Anesth Analg. 
2007;105:238.
106.	Casati A, Alessandrini P, Nuzzi M, et al. A prospective, ran-
domized, blinded comparison between continuous thoracic 
paravertebral and epidural infusion of 0.2% ropivacaine after 
lung resection surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2006;23:999.
107.	Inderbitzi RG, Leiser A, Furrer M, et al. Three years’ experi-
ence in video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) for spontane-
ous pneumothorax. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:1410.
108.	Warner BW, Bailey WW, Shipley RT. Value of computed 
tomography of the lung in the management of primary spon-
taneous pneumothorax. Am J Surg. 1991;162:39.
109.	 Mansharamani N, Balachandran D, Delaney D, et al. Lung 
abscess in adults: clinical comparison of immunocompromised 
to non-immunocompromised patients. Respir Med. 2002; 96:178.
110.	Laheij RJ, Sturkenboom MC, Hassing RJ, et al. Risk of com-
munity-acquired pneumonia and use of gastric acid-suppres-
sive drugs. JAMA 2004;292:1955.
111.	Conant EF, Wechsler RJ. Actinomycosis and nocardiosis of 
the lung. J Thorac Imaging. 1992;7:75.
112.	Thomson RM, Armstrong JG, Looke DF. Gastroesophageal 
reflux disease, acid suppression, and Mycobacterium avium 
complex pulmonary disease. Chest. 2007;131:1166.
113.	Koh WJ, Lee JH, Kwon YS, et al. Prevalence of gastroesopha-
geal reflux disease in patients with nontuberculous mycobac-
terial lung disease. Chest. 2007;131:1825.
114.	Angrill J, Agusti C, de Celis R, et al. Bacterial colonisation in 
patients with bronchiectasis: microbiological pattern and risk 
factors. Thorax. 2002;57:15.
115.	Barker AF. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1383.
116.	Ilowite J, Spiegler P, Chawla S. Bronchiectasis: new find-
ings in the pathogenesis and treatment of this disease. Curr 
Opin Infect Dis. 2008;21:163.
693
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and Pleura
CHAPTER 19
117.	Bilton D, Henig N, Morrissey B, et al. Addition of inhaled 
tobramycin to ciprofloxacin for acute exacerbations of Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa infection in adult bronchiectasis. Chest. 
2006;130:1503.
118.	Steinfort DP, Steinfort C. Effect of long-term nebulized colis-
tin on lung function and quality of life in patients with chronic 
bronchial sepsis. Intern Med J. 2007;37:495.
119.	Kellett F, Robert NM. Nebulised 7% hypertonic saline 
improves lung function and quality of life in bronchiectasis. 
Respir Med. 2011;105:1831-1835.
120.	Frieden TR, Sterling TR, Munsiff SS, et al. Tuberculosis. Lan-
cet. 2003;362:887.
121.	Haque AK. The pathology and pathophysiology of mycobac-
terial infections. J Thorac Imaging. 1990;5:8-16.
122.	Iseman MD. Treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. 
N Engl J Med. 1993;329:784.
123.	Kubak BM. Fungal infection in lung transplantation. Transpl 
Infect Dis. 2002;4(Suppl 3):24.
124.	 Wheat LJ, Goldman M, Sarosi G. State-of-the-art review of pul-
monary fungal infections. Semin Respir Infect. 2002; 17:158.
125.	Marr KA, Patterson T, Denning D. Aspergillosis. Pathogene-
sis, clinical manifestations, and therapy. Infect Dis Clin North 
Am. 2002;16:875.
126.	 Chun JY, Belli AM. Immediate and long-term outcomes of 
bronchial and non-bronchial systemic artery embolisation for 
the management of haemoptysis. Eur Radiol. 2010;20:558-565.
127.	Corr P. Management of severe hemoptysis from pulmonary 
aspergilloma using endovascular embolization. Cardiovasc 
Intervent Radiol. 2006;9:807.
128.	Playford EG, Sorrell TC. Optimizing therapy for Candida 
infections. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;28:678.
129.	Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Rex JH, Bennett J, et al. Deeply inva-
sive candidiasis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2002;16:821.
130.	Gonzalez CE, Rinaldi MG, Sugar AM. Zygomycosis. Infect 
Dis Clin North Am. 2002;16:895.
131.	Wheat LJ, Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis. Infect Dis Clin 
North Am. 2003;17:1.
132.	Hage CA, Wheat LJ, Loyd J, et al. Pulmonary histoplasmosis. 
Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008;29:151.
133.	Assi MA, Sandid MS, Baddour LM, et al. Systemic histo-
plasmosis: a 15-year retrospective institutional review of 111 
patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2007;86:162.
134.	Spinello IM, Munoz A, Johnson RH. Pulmonary coccidioido-
mycosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008;29:166.
135.	Pappas PG. Blastomycosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 
2004;25:113.
136.	Bradsher RW, Chapman SW, Pappas PG. Blastomycosis. 
Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2003;17:21.
137.	 Corder R. Hemoptysis. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2003; 21:421.
138.	Conlan AA. Massive hemoptysis—diagnostic and therapeutic 
implications. Surg Annu 1985;17:337.
139.	Cahill BC, Ingbar DH. Massive hemoptysis. Assessment and 
management. Clin Chest Med 1994;15:147.
140.	Noe GD, Jaffe SM, Molan MP. CT and CT angiography in 
massive haemoptysis with emphasis on pre-embolization 
assessment. Clin Radiol. 2011;66:869-875.
141.	Poyanli A, Acunas B, Rozanes I, et al. Endovascular therapy 
in the management of moderate and massive haemoptysis. Br 
J Radiol. 2007;80:331-336.
142.	Conlan AA, Hurwitz SS. Management of massive haemopty-
sis with the rigid bronchoscope and cold saline lavage. Tho-
rax. 1980;35:901.
143.	Russi EW, Bloch KE, Weder W. Lung volume reduction sur-
gery: what can we learn from the National Emphysema Treat-
ment Trial? Eur Respir J. 2003;22:571.
144.	Bhorade SM, Vigneswaran W, McCabe MA, et al. Liberal-
ization of donor criteria may expand the donor pool without 
adverse consequence in lung transplantation. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2000;19:1199.
145.	Pierre AF, Sekine Y, Hutcheon MA, et al. Marginal donor 
lungs: a reassessment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002; 
123:421; discussion 427.
146.	Palmer SM, Miralles AP, Howell DN, et al. Gastroesophageal 
reflux as a reversible cause of allograft dysfunction after lung 
transplantation. Chest. 2000;118:1214.
147.	Dahlberg PS, Prekker ME, Hertz M, et al. Recent trends in 
lung transplantation: the University of Minnesota experience. 
Clin Transpl. 2002;243.
148.	Somers J, Faber LP. Chondroma and chondrosarcoma. Semin 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11:270.
149.	Andino L, Cagle PT, Murer B, et al. Pleuropulmonary des-
moid tumors: immunohistochemical comparison with solitary 
fibrous tumors and assessment of beta-catenin and cyclin D1 
expression. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1503.
150.	 Baliski CR, Temple WJ, Arthur K, et al. Desmoid tumors: a novel 
approach for local control. J Surg Oncol. 2002;80:96.
151.	Abbas AE, Deschamps C, Cassivi SD, et al: Chest-wall des-
moid tumors: results of surgical intervention. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2004;78:1219; discussion 1219.
152.	Gutierrez JC, Perez EA, Franceschi D, et al. Outcomes for 
soft-tissue sarcoma in 8249 cases from a large state cancer 
registry. J Surg Res. 2007;141:105.
153.	 Walsh GL, Davis BM, Swisher SG, et al. A single-institutional, 
multidisciplinary approach to primary sarcomas involving the 
chest wall requiring full-thickness resections. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2001;121:48.
154.	Liptay MJ, Fry WA. Malignant bone tumors of the chest wall. 
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11:278.
155.	Shah AA, D’Amico TA. Primary chest wall tumors. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2010;210:360-366.
156.	Incarbone M, Pastorino U. Surgical treatment of chest wall 
tumors. World J Surg. 2001;25:218.
157.	Deschamps C, Tirnaksiz BM, Darbandi R, et al. Early and 
long-term results of prosthetic chest wall reconstruction. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:588; discussion 591.
158.	Graeber GM. Chest wall resection and reconstruction. Semin 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11:251.
159.	Kirschner PA. Anatomy and surgical access of the mediasti-
num. In: Pearson FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1563.
160.	Strollo DC, Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Jett JR. Primary 
mediastinal tumors. Part II: tumors of the middle and posterior 
mediastinum. Chest. 1997;112:1344.
161.	Takahashi K, Al-Janabi NJ. Computed tomography and mag-
netic resonance imaging of mediastinal tumors. J Magn Reson 
Imaging. 2010;32:1325-1339.
162.	 Storch I, Shah M, Thurer R, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided 
fine-needle aspiration and Tru-Cut biopsy in thoracic lesions: 
when tissue is the issue. Surg Endosc J. 2008;22:86.
163.	Herman SJ, Holub RV, Weisbrod GL, et al. Anterior medias-
tinal masses: utility of transthoracic needle biopsy. Radiology. 
1991;180:167.
164.	Assaad MW, Pantanowitz L. Diagnostic accuracy of image-
guided percutaneous fine needle aspiration biopsy of the 
mediastinum. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007;35:705-709.
165.	 Pedote P, Gaudio F, Moschetta M, et al. CT-guided needle 
biopsy performed with modified coaxial technique in the 
diagnosis of malignant lymphomas. Radiol Med. 2010;115: 
1292-1303.
166.	Demmy TL, Krasna MJ. Multicenter VATS experience with 
mediastinal tumors. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;66:187-192.
167.	Bodner J, Wykypiel H, Greiner A, et al. Early experience with 
robot-assisted surgery for mediastinal masses. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2004;78:259-265.
168.	Yim AP. Video-assisted thoracoscopic resection of anterior 
mediastinal masses. Int Surg. 1996;81:350.
169.	Weksler B, Tavares J. Robot-assisted thymectomy is superior 
to transsternal thymectomy. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:261-266.
694
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
170.	Chang PC, Chou SH, Kao EL, et al. Bilateral video-assisted 
thoracoscopic thymectomy vs. extended transsternal thymec-
tomy in myasthenia gravis: a prospective study. Eur Surg Res. 
2005;37:199-203.
171.	Meyers BF, Cooper JD. Transcervical thymectomy for myas-
thenia gravis. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2001;11:363.
172.	Small EJ, Venook AP, Damon LE. Gallium-avid thymic 
hyperplasia in an adult after chemotherapy for Hodgkin dis-
ease. Cancer. 1993;72:905.
173.	Smith CS, Schoder H. Thymic extension in the superior medi-
astinum in patients with thymic hyperplasia: potential cause 
of false-positive findings on 18F-FDG PET/CT. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol. 2007;188:1716-1721.
174.	Quint LE. PET: other thoracic malignancies. Cancer Imaging. 
2006;6:S82.
175.	Luzzi L, Campione A, Gorla A, et al. Role of fluorine- 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed 
tomography in preoperative assessment of anterior mediasti-
nal masses. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;36:475-479.
176.	Masaoka A, Monden Y, Nakahara K, et al. Follow-up study 
of thymomas with special reference to their clinical stages. 
Cancer. 1981;48:2485.
177.	Pennathur A, Qureshi I, et al. Comparison of surgical tech-
niques for early-stage thymoma: feasibility of minimally 
invasive thymectomy and comparison with open resection. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141:694-701.
178.	Chahinian AP. Chemotherapy of thymomas and thymic carci-
nomas. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2001;11:447.
179.	Blumberg D, Port JL, Weksler B, et al. Thymoma: a multivari-
ate analysis of factors predicting survival. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1995;60:908; discussion 914.
180.	Weksler B, Shende M. The role of adjuvant radiation therapy 
for resected stage III thymoma: a population-based study. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1822-1828; discussion 1828-1829.
181.	Suster S, Rosai J. Thymic carcinoma. A clinicopathologic 
study of 60 cases. Cancer. 1991;67:1025.
182.	Bousamra M. Neurogenic tumors of the mediastinum. In: 
Pearson FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1732.
183.	 Venissac N, Leo F, Hofman P, et al. Mediastinal neuro-
genic tumors and video-assisted thoracoscopy: always the 
right choice? Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2004; 
14:20.
184.	Coleman BG, Arger PH, Dalinka MK, et al. CT of sarcoma-
tous degeneration in neurofibromatosis. AJR Am J Roent-
genol. 1983;140:383.
185.	Ducatman BS, Scheithauer BW, Piepgras DG, et al. Malignant 
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. A clinicopathologic study of 
120 cases. Cancer. 1986;57:2006.
186.	Nichols CR, Saxman S, Williams SD, et al. Primary medi-
astinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. A modern single 
institution experience. Cancer. 1990;65:1641.
187.	Kesler KA, Rieger KM, Hammoud Z, et al. A 25-year sin-
gle institution experience with surgery for primary medias-
tinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;85:371-378.
188.	Rice TW. Benign neoplasms and cysts of the mediastinum. 
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;4:25.
189.	Di Lorenzo M, Collin PP, Vaillancourt R, et al. Bronchogenic 
cysts. J Pediatr Surg. 1989;24:988.
190.	Ribet ME, Copin MC, Gosselin B. Bronchogenic cysts of the 
mediastinum. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;109:1003.
191.	St-Georges R, Deslauriers J, Duranceau A, et al. Clinical spec-
trum of bronchogenic cysts of the mediastinum and lung in the 
adult. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52:6.
192.	Agostoni E. Mechanics of the pleural space. In: Fisherman 
AP, Macklem PT, Mead J, et al, eds. Mechanics of Breathing: 
Handbook of Physiology. vol 3. Bethesda: American Physi-
ological Society; 1986.
193.	Lawrence GH. Considerations of the anatomy and physiology 
of the pleural space. In: Lawrence GH, ed. Problems of the 
Pleural Space. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1983.
194.	Rusch VW. Pleural effusion: benign and malignant. In: Pear-
son FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2002:1157.
195.	Gammie JS, Banks MC, Fuhrman CR, et al. The pigtail cath-
eter for pleural drainage: a less invasive alternative to tube 
thoracostomy. JSLS. 1999;3:57.
196.	Luketich JD, Kiss M, Hershey J, et al. Chest tube insertion: 
a prospective evaluation of pain management. Clin J Pain. 
1998;14:152.
197.	Johnston WW. The malignant pleural effusion. A review of 
cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 specimens from 472 con-
secutive patients. Cancer. 1985;56:905.
198.	Ocana I, Martinez-Vazquez JM, Segura RM, et al. Adenosine 
deaminase in pleural fluids. Test for diagnosis of tuberculous 
pleural effusion. Chest. 1983;84:51.
199.	Lee YC, Rogers JT, Rodriguez RM, et al. Adenosine deami-
nase levels in nontuberculous lymphocytic pleural effusions. 
Chest. 2001;120:356.
200.	Tremblay A, Michaud G. Single-center experience with 250 
tunnelled pleural catheter insertions for malignant pleural 
effusion. Chest. 2006;129:362.
201.	 Light RW. Parapneumonic effusions and empyema. Clin Chest 
Med. 1985;6:55.
202.	Rahman NM, Maskell NA, West A, et al. Intrapleural use of 
tissue plasminogen activator and DNase in pleural infection. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;365:518-526.
203.	Miller JI Jr. The history of surgery of empyema, thoracoplasty, 
Eloesser flap, and muscle flap transposition. Chest Surg Clin 
N Am. 2000;10:45.
204.	Miller JI Jr. Diagnosis and management of chylothorax. Chest 
Surg Clin N Am. 1996;6:139.
205.	Malthaner RA, Inculet RI. The thoracic duct and chylotho-
rax. In: Pearson FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1228.
206.	Rusch VW. A proposed new international TNM staging sys-
tem for malignant pleural mesothelioma. From the Interna-
tional Mesothelioma Interest Group. Chest. 1995;108:1122.
207.	 Khalil MY, Mapa M, Shin HJ, et al. Advances in the manage-
ment of malignant mesothelioma. Curr Oncol Rep. 2003; 5:334.
208.	Sugarbaker DJ, Flores RM, Jaklitsch MT, et al. Resection 
margins, extrapleural nodal status, and cell type determine 
postoperative long-term survival in trimodality therapy of 
malignant pleural mesothelioma: results in 183 patients. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:54; discussion 63.
209.	Rusch VW, Rosenzweig K, Venkatraman E, et al. A phase II 
trial of surgical resection and adjuvant high-dose hemithoracic 
radiation for malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2001;122:788.
210.	Rusch V, Saltz L, Venkatraman E, et al. A phase II trial of 
pleurectomy/decortication followed by intrapleural and sys-
temic chemotherapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin 
Oncol. 1994;12:1156.
211.	Ratto GB, Civalleri D, Esposito M, et al. Pleural space perfu-
sion with cisplatin in the multimodality treatment of malignant 
mesothelioma: a feasibility and pharmacokinetic study. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:759.
212.	Lu C, Perez-Soler R, Piperdi B, et al. Phase II study of a 
liposome-entrapped cisplatin analog (L-NDDP) administered 
intrapleurally and pathologic response rates in patients with 
malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:3495.
213.	 Fletcher CDM, Unni KK, Mertens F. World Health Organization 
Classification of Tumours. Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of 
Soft Tissue and Bone. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2002.
214.	England DM, Hochholzer L, McCarthy MJ. Localized benign 
and malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura. A clinicopatho-
logic review of 223 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1989;13:640.
Congenital Heart Disease
Tara Karamlou, Yasuhiro Kotani, and  
Glen A. Van Arsdell
20
INTRODUCTION
Congenital heart surgery is a dynamic and evolving field. The 
last 20 years have brought about rapid developments in technol-
ogy, emphasis on a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, and 
a more thorough understanding of both the anatomy and patho-
physiology of congenital heart disease, leading to the improved 
care of these challenging patients.
These advancements have created and sustained a para-
digm shift in the field of congenital heart surgery. The traditional 
strategy of initial palliation followed by definitive correc-
tion at a later age, which had pervaded the thinking of most 
surgeons, began to evolve to one emphasizing early repair, even 
in the tiniest patients. Furthermore, some of the defects that were 
virtually uniformly fatal (such as hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome) are now successfully treated with aggressive forms of 
palliation using cardiopulmonary bypass, resulting in outstand-
ing survival for many of these children.
Because the goal in most cases of congenital heart disease 
(CHD) is now early repair, as opposed to subdividing lesions 
into cyanotic or noncyanotic lesions, a more appropriate clas-
sification scheme divides particular defects into three catego-
ries based on the feasibility of achieving this goal: (a) defects 
that have no reasonable palliation and for which repair is the 
only option; (b) defects for which repair is not possible and 
for which palliation is the only option; and (c) defects that can 
either be repaired or palliated in infancy. It bears mentioning 
that all defects in the second category are those in which the 
appropriate anatomic components either are not present, as in 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, or cannot be created from 
existing structures.
DEFECTS WHERE REPAIR IS THE  
ONLY OR BEST OPTION
Atrial Septal Defect
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is defined as an opening in the 
interatrial septum that enables the mixing of blood from the 
­systemic venous and pulmonary venous circulations.
Embryology.  The atrial and ventricular septa form between 
the third and sixth weeks of fetal development. After the 
paired heart tubes fuse into a single tube folded onto itself, 
the distal portion of the tube causes an indentation to form 
in the roof of the common atrium. Near this portion of the 
roof, the septum primum arises and extends into a crescentic 
formation toward the atrioventricular (AV) junction. The gap 
remaining between the septum primum and the developing tis-
sues of the AV junction is called the ostium primum. Before the 
septum primum fuses completely with the endocardial cush-
ions, a series of fenestrations appear in the septum primum that 
coalesce into the ostium secundum. During this coalescence, 
the ­septum secundum grows downward from the roof of the 
atrium, ­parallel to and to the right of the septum primum. The 
septum primum does not fuse, but creates an oblique pathway, 
called the foramen ovale, within the interatrial septum. After 
birth, the increase in left atrial pressure normally closes this 
pathway, obliterating the interatrial connection.
Anatomy.  ASDs can be classified into three different 
types: (a) sinus venosus defects, comprising approximately 
5% to 10% of all ASDs; (b) ostium primum defects, which are 
more correctly described as partial AV canal defects; and (c) 
chapter 
Introduction	
695
Defects Where Repair Is the  
Only or Best Option	
695
Atrial Septal Defect / 695
Aortic Stenosis / 698
Patent Ductus Arteriosus / 702
Aortic Coarctation / 705
Truncus Arteriosus / 706
Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous  
Connection / 707
Cor Triatriatum / 710
Aortopulmonary Window / 711
Defects Requiring Palliation	
712
Tricuspid Atresia / 712
Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome / 716
Defects That May Be  
Palliated or Repaired	
719
Ebstein’s Anomaly / 719
Transposition of the Great Arteries / 720
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle / 721
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with  
Noncommitted Ventricular Septal  
Defect / 722
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with  
Subaortic or Doubly Committed  
Ventricular Septal Defect Without  
Pulmonary Stenosis / 723
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with  
Subaortic or Doubly Committed  
Ventricular Septal Defect with  
Pulmonary Stenosis / 723
Taussig-Bing Syndrome without  
Pulmonary Stenosis / 723
Taussig-Bing Syndrome with Pulmonary 
Stenosis / 723
Tetralogy of Fallot / 724
Ventricular Septal Defect / 726
Atrioventricular Canal Defects / 727
Interrupted Aortic Arch / 729
1
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
ostium secundum defects, which are the most prevalent subtype, 
comprising 80% of all ASDs (Fig. 20-1).1
Pathophysiology.  ASDs result in an increase in pulmonary 
blood flow secondary to left-to-right shunting through the 
defect. The direction of the intracardiac shunt is predomi-
nantly determined by the compliance of the respective ven-
tricles. In utero, the distensibility, or compliance, of the right 
and left ventricles is equal, but postnatally the left ventricle 
(LV) becomes less compliant than the right ventricle (RV). 
This shift occurs because the resistance of the downstream 
vascular beds changes after birth. The pulmonary ­vascular 
resistance falls with the infant’s first breath, decreasing RV 
pressure, whereas the systemic vascular resistance rises 
­dramatically, increasing LV pressure. The increased LV pres-
sure creates a thicker muscle mass, which offers a greater 
resistance to diastolic filling than does the RV; thus, the 
majority of flow through the ASD occurs from left to right. 
The greater volume of blood returning to the right atrium 
causes volume overload in the RV, but because of its lower 
muscle mass and low-resistance output, it easily distends to 
accommodate this load.
The long-term consequences of RV volume overload 
include hypertrophy with elevated RV end-diastolic pres-
sure and a relative pulmonary stenosis across the pulmonary 
valve, because it cannot accommodate the increased RV flow. 
The resistance at the level of the pulmonary valve then con-
tributes a further pressure load on the RV, which accelerates 
RV hypertrophy. Compliance gradually decreases as the right 
ventricular pressure approaches systemic pressure, and the 
696
Key Points
1 	 Congenital heart disease comprises a wide morphologic spec-
trum. In general, lesions can be conceptualized as those that 
can be completely repaired, those that should be palliated, and 
those that can be either repaired or palliated depending on par-
ticular patient and institutional characteristics.
2 	 Percutaneous therapies for congenital heart disease are quickly 
becoming important adjuncts, and in some cases, alternatives, to 
standard surgical therapy. Important examples include percutane-
ous closure of atrial and ventricular septal defects, the hybrid 
approach to hypoplastic left heart syndrome, radiofrequency per-
foration of the pulmonary valve, and percutaneous pulmonary 
valve placement. Further studies are necessary to establish crite-
ria and current benchmarks for the safe integration of these novel 
approaches into the care of patients with congenital heart surgery.
3 	 Patients with critical left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, 
such as neonatal critical aortic stenosis, represent a challeng-
ing population. It is critical that the correct decision (whether 
to pursue a univentricular or biventricular) be made at the ini-
tial operation, as attrition when the incorrect decision is made 
is high. There are several published criteria (Congenital Heart 
Surgeons’ Society critical stenosis calculator) to help surgeons 
decide which strategy to pursue.
4 	 Optimum strategy for repair of total anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection (TAPVC) remains a topic of some conten-
tion. Sutureless repair, formerly reserved for initial restenosis 
after conventional repair, has evolved in many centers to be 
the primary treatment of choice for high-risk patients. 
Defining whether sutureless repair should be considered in 
all patients with TAPVC will require further study.
5 	 A recent prospective, randomized, multi-institutional trial 
sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, the Systemic 
Ventricle Reconstruction (SVR) trial, compared the out-
comes of neonates with hypoplastic left heart syndrome hav-
ing either a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt versus a right 
ventricle-to-pulmonary artery (RV-PA) shunt. The SVR trial 
demonstrated that transplantation-free survival 12 months 
after randomization was higher with the RV-PA shunt than 
with the modified Blalock-Taussig shunt. However, data 
collected over a mean follow-up period of 32 ± 11 months 
showed a nonsignificant difference in ­transplantation-­free 
survival between the two groups.
6 	 Outcomes have improved substantially over time in con-
genital heart surgery, and most complex lesions can be 
operated in early infancy. Neurologic protection, however, 
remains a key issue in the care of neonates undergoing sur-
gery with cardiopulmonary bypass and deep hypothermic 
circulatory arrest. New monitoring devices and periopera-
tive strategies are currently under investigation. Attention 
in the field has shifted currently from analyses of periop-
erative mortality, which for most lesions is under 10%, to 
longer-term outcomes, including quality of life and neuro-
logic function.
Figure 20-1.  The anatomy of atrial septal defects. In the sinus 
venosus type (A), the right upper and middle pulmonary veins fre-
quently drain to the superior vena cava or right atrium. B. Secundum 
defects generally occur as isolated lesions. C. Primum defects are 
part of a more complex lesion and are best considered as incomplete 
atrioventricular septal defects. (Reproduced with permission from 
Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al, eds. ­Surgery: 
Scientific Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2001:1444.)
697
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
size of the ­left-to-right shunt decreases. Patients at this stage 
have a balanced circulation and may deceptively appear less 
­symptomatic.
A minority of patients with ASDs develop progressive 
­pulmonary vascular changes as a result of chronic overcircu-
lation. The increased pulmonary vascular resistance in these 
patients leads to an equalization of left and right ventricular 
pressures, and their ratio of pulmonary (Qp) to systemic flow 
(Qs), Qp:Qs, will approach 1.2 This does not mean, however, that 
there is no intracardiac shunting, only that the ratio between the 
left-to-right component and the right-to-left component is equal.
The ability of the RV to recover normal function is related 
to the duration of chronic overload, because those undergoing 
ASD closure before age 10 years have a better likelihood of 
achieving normal RV function in the postoperative period.3
The physiology of sinus venosus ASDs is similar to that 
discussed earlier, except that these are frequently accompanied 
by anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. This often results 
in significant hemodynamic derangements that accelerate the 
clinical course of these infants.
The same increase in symptoms is true for those with 
ostium primum defects because the associated mitral insuffi-
ciency from the “cleft” mitral valve can lead to more atrial vol-
ume load and increased atrial level shunting.
Diagnosis.  Patients with ASDs may present with few physi-
cal findings. Auscultation may reveal prominence of the first 
heart sound with fixed splitting of the second heart sound. This 
results from the relatively fixed left-to-right shunt throughout all 
phases of the cardiac cycle. A diastolic flow murmur indicating 
increased flow across the tricuspid valve may be discerned, and 
frequently, an ejection flow murmur can be heard across the pul-
monary valve. A right ventricular heave and increased intensity 
of the pulmonary component of the second heart sound indicates 
pulmonary hypertension and possible unrepairability.
Chest radiographs in the patient with an ASD may show 
evidence of increased pulmonary vascularity, with prominent 
hilar markings and cardiomegaly. The electrocardiogram shows 
right axis deviation with an incomplete bundle-branch block. 
When right bundle-branch block is associated with a leftward or 
superior axis, an AV canal defect should be strongly suspected.
Diagnosis is clarified by two-dimensional echocardiogra-
phy, and use of color-flow mapping facilitates an understanding 
of the physiologic derangements created by the defects. Older 
children and adults with unrepaired ASDs may present with 
stroke or systemic embolism from paradoxical embolism or 
atrial arrhythmias from dilation of the right atrium.
Echocardiography also enables the clinician to estimate 
the amount of intracardiac shunting, can demonstrate the degree 
of mitral regurgitation in patients with ostium primum defects, 
and with the addition of microcavitation, can assist in the detec-
tion of sinus venosus defects.
The advent of two-dimensional echocardiography with 
color-flow Doppler has largely obviated the need for cardiac 
catheterization because the exact nature of the ASD can be pre-
cisely defined by echocardiography alone. However, in cases 
where the patient is older than age 40 years, catheterization can 
quantify the degree of pulmonary hypertension present, because 
those with a fixed pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 
12 U/mL are considered inoperable.4 Cardiac catheterization also 
can be useful in that it provides data that enable the calculation 
of Qp and Qs so that the magnitude of the intracardiac shunt can 
be determined. The ratio (Qp:Qs) can then be used to ­determine 
whether closure is indicated in equivocal cases, because a 
Qp:Qs greater than 1.5:1 is generally accepted as the thresh-
old for surgical intervention. Finally, in patients older than age 
40 years, cardiac catheterization can be important to disclose the 
presence of coronary artery disease.
In general, ASDs are closed when patients are between 
4 and 5 years of age. Children of this size can usually be oper-
ated on without the use of blood transfusion and generally 
have excellent outcomes. Patients who are symptomatic may 
require repair earlier, even in infancy. Some surgeons, however, 
advocate routine repair in infants and children, as even smaller 
defects are associated with the risk of paradoxical embolism. In 
a recent review by Reddy and colleagues, 116 neonates weigh-
ing less than 2500 g who underwent repair of simple and com-
plex cardiac defects with the use of cardiopulmonary bypass 
were found to have no intracerebral hemorrhages, no long-term 
neurologic sequelae, and a low operative mortality rate (10%). 
These results correlated with the length of cardiopulmonary 
bypass and the complexity of repair.5 These investigators also 
found an 80% actuarial survival at 1 year and, more importantly, 
that growth following complete repair was equivalent to weight-
matched neonates free from cardiac defects.5
Treatment.  ASDs can be repaired in a facile manner using 
standard cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) techniques through a 
midline sternotomy approach. The details of the repair itself are 
generally straightforward. An oblique atriotomy is made, the 
position of the coronary sinus and all systemic and pulmonary 
veins are determined, and the rim of the defect is completely 
visualized. Closure of ostium secundum defects is accomplished 
either by primary repair or by insertion of a patch that is sutured 
to the rim of the defect. The decision of whether patch closure is 
necessary can be determined by the size and shape of the defect 
as well as by the quality of the edges.
The type of repair used for sinus venosus ASDs associ-
ated with partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection is 
dictated by the location of the anomalous pulmonary veins. If 
the anomalous veins connect to the atria or to the superior vena 
cava caudal to where the cava is crossed by the right pulmo-
nary artery, the ASD can be repaired by inserting a patch, with 
redirection of the pulmonary veins behind the patch to the left 
atrium. Care must be taken with this approach to avoid obstruc-
tion of the pulmonary veins or the superior vena cava, although 
usually the superior vena cava is dilated and provides ample 
room for patch insertion. If the anomalous vein connects to 
the superior vena cava cranial to the right pulmonary artery, 
an alternative technique, the Warden procedure, may be nec-
essary. In this operation, the superior vena cava is transected 
cranial to the connection of the anomalous vein (usually the 
right superior pulmonary vein). The caudal end of the transected 
cava is oversewn. The cranial end of the transected cava is anas-
tomosed to the auricle of the right atrium. Inside the atrium, a 
patch is used to redirect pulmonary venous blood flow to the 
left atrium. In contrast to the repair for a defect where the pul-
monary veins enter the right atrium or the superior vena cava 
below the right pulmonary artery, the patch covers the superior 
vena caval right atrial junction so that blood from the anoma-
lous pulmonary vein that enters the cava is directed to the left 
atrium. Blood returning from the upper body enters the right 
atrium via the anastomosis between the superior vena cava and 
the right atrial appendage.
698
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Results and Complications of Surgical ASD Closure.  
Traditional operative strategies, such as pericardial or synthetic 
patch closure, have been well established, with a low compli-
cation rate and a mortality rate of zero among patients without 
pulmonary hypertension.6 The most frequently reported imme-
diate complications include postpericardiotomy syndrome and 
atrial arrhythmias. Beyond immediate postoperative outcomes, 
long-term outcomes following ­surgical closure (up to 20 years) 
document the low attrition rate and durability of functional 
­status benefit. Importantly, however, atrial arrhythmias are not 
completely mitigated by closure and can occur in 10% to 40% 
of patients, especially in older patients (>40 years) or those with 
pre-existing arrhythmias.7 Kutty and colleagues8 followed 300 
patients from their institution, 152 of whom had surgical closure. 
Late mortality at 10 years was 3%, and functional health status 
had declined in only 15 patients during follow-up. Recently, 
there have been an increasing number of reports regarding 
the results following surgical closure among elderly patients 
(>60 years of age), which demonstrate equivalent survival 
to younger patients, albeit with slightly higher complication 
rates.8-10 Hanninen and ­colleagues11 studied 68 patients between 
68 and 86 years at their institution undergoing either surgical 
(n = 13) or device (n = 54) closure. Although the 23% incidence 
of major complications (including pneumothorax, heart failure, 
and pneumonia) was higher than that recently reported by Mas-
cio et al12 using the Society of Thoracic Surgeons’ Congeni-
tal Database (20%) or a single-institution review by Hopkins 
et al13 (12%), there were no operative deaths among the elderly 
cohort. Moreover, after ASD closure, echocardiographic indi-
ces of right ventricular size and function were significantly 
improved from preoperative values, and functional capacity as 
measured by standardized survey instruments was also signifi-
cantly improved.
New and Future Approaches to Traditional Surgical ASD 
Closure.  Because of the uniformly excellent outcomes with tra-
ditional surgery, attention has shifted to improving the ­cosmetic 
result and minimizing hospital stay and convalescence. Multi-
ple strategies have been described to achieve these aims, includ-
ing the right submammary incision with anterior thoracotomy, 
limited bilateral submammary incision with partial sternal split, 
and limited midline incision with partial sternal split. Some sur-
geons use either video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) in con-
junction with the submammary and transxiphoid approaches to 
facilitate closure within a constricted operative field or totally 
endoscopic repair in selected patients.14-16 Use of robotics has 
also been reported in a small series of 12 adult patients by 
Argenziano and colleagues.15 The morbidity and mortality of all 
of these approaches are comparable to those of the traditional 
median sternotomy; however, each has technical drawbacks. 
Operative precision must be maintained with limited exposure 
in any minimally invasive technique. Extended CPB and aor-
tic cross-clamp times, coupled with increased cost, may limit 
the utility of totally endoscopic or robotic-assisted ASD closure 
except at limited centers. Certain approaches have a specific 
patient population in whom they are applicable. For example, 
the anterolateral thoracotomy should not be employed in prepu-
bescent girls because it will interfere with breast ­development. 
Most totally endoscopic approaches are not feasible in very 
young patients due to the size of the thoracoscopic ports. Despite 
these potential drawbacks, however, in carefully selected 
patients, minimally invasive techniques have ­demonstrated 
benefits. Luo and associates performed a ­prospective random-
ized study comparing ministernotomy (division of the upper 
sternum for aortic and pulmonary lesions and the lower ster-
num for septal lesions) to full sternotomy in 100 consecutive 
patients undergoing repair of septal lesions.16 The patients in 
the ministernotomy group had longer procedure times (by 15 to 
20 minutes), but had less bleeding and shorter hospital stays. 
Consistent with these initiatives, conversion of “low-risk” 
patients undergoing minimally invasive ASD closure to 
an ambulatory population (discharge from hospital within 
24 hours) has recently been described.17
First performed in 1976, transcatheter closure of ASDs 
with the use of various occlusion devices is gaining wide-
spread acceptance.18 Certain types of ASDs, including 
patent foramen ovale, secundum defects, and some 
fenestrated secundum defects, are amenable to device clo-
sure, as long as particular anatomic criteria (e.g., an adequate 
superior and inferior rim for device seating and distance from 
the AV valve) are met. Since the introduction of percutaneous 
closure, there has been a dramatic rise in device closure prev-
alence to the point where device closure has supplanted surgi-
cal therapy as the dominant treatment modality for secundum 
ASD.19 A study from Karamlou et al19 recently found that 
ASD and patent foramen ovale closures per capita increased 
dramatically from 1.08 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 
2.59 per 100,000 population in 2005, an increase of 139%. 
When analyzed by closure type, surgical closure increased by 
only 24% (from 0.86 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 1.07 
per 100,000 in 2005), whereas transcatheter closure increased 
by 3475% (from 0.04 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 1.43 
per 100,000 in 2005). Importantly, this study determined that 
the paradigm shift favoring transcatheter closure has occurred 
mainly due to increased prevalence of closure in adults over 
age 40 years rather than an increase in closure in infants or 
children.
Despite the simplicity of ASD repair, there are a myriad 
of options for patients and physicians who care for patients 
with CHD. The patient population that might benefit from clo-
sure (whether device or surgical) is likely to increase, chal-
lenging current ideas and treatment algorithms that optimize 
outcomes.
Aortic Stenosis
Anatomy and Classification.  The spectrum of aortic valve 
abnormality represents the most common form of CHD, with 
the great majority of patients being asymptomatic until midlife. 
Obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) occurs 
at multiple levels: subvalvular, valvular, and supravalvular 
(Fig. 20-2). The critically stenotic aortic valve in the neonate 
or infant is commonly unicommissural or bicommissural, with 
thickened, dysmorphic, and myxomatous leaflet tissue and a 
reduced cross-sectional area at the valve level. Associated left-
sided lesions are often present. In a review of 32 cases from the 
Children’s Hospital in Boston, 59% had unicommissural valves 
and 40% had bicommissural valves.20 Associated lesions were 
frequent, occurring in 88% of patients, most commonly pat-
ent ductus arteriosus, mitral regurgitation, and hypoplastic LV. 
Endocardial fibroelastosis also is common among infants with 
critical aortic ­stenosis (AS). In this condition, the LV is largely 
nonfunctional, and these patients are not candidates for balloon 
valvotomy, simple valve replacement, or repair, because the LV 
2
699
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
is incapable of supporting the systemic circulation. Often, the 
LV is markedly hypertrophic with a reduced cavity size, but on 
rare occasion, a dilated LV, reminiscent of overt heart failure, 
is encountered.20
Pathophysiology.  The unique intracardiac and extracardiac 
shunts present in fetal life allow even neonates with criti-
cal AS to survive. In utero, left ventricular hypertrophy and 
ischemia cause left atrial hypertension, which reduces the 
right-to-left flow across the foramen ovale. In severe cases, a 
reversal of flow may occur, causing right ventricular volume 
loading. The RV then provides the entire systemic output 
via the patent ductus arteriosus (ductal-dependent systemic 
blood flow). Although cardiac output is maintained, the LV 
suffers continued damage as the intracavitary pressure pre-
cludes adequate coronary perfusion, resulting in LV infarc-
tion and subendocardial fibroelastosis. The presentation of 
the neonate with critical AS is then determined by the mor-
phology of the LV and other left-sided heart structures, the 
degree of left ventricular dysfunction, and the completeness 
of the transition from a parallel circulation to an in-series 
circulation (i.e., on closure of the foramen ovale and the 
­ductus arteriosus). Those infants with mild-to-moderate AS 
in whom LV function is preserved are asymptomatic at birth. 
The only abnormalities may be a systolic ejection murmur 
and electrocardiogram (ECG) evidence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy. However, those neonates with severe AS and 
compromised LV function are unable to provide adequate 
cardiac output at birth and will present in circulatory collapse 
Figure 20-2.  The anatomy of the types of congenital aortic ste-
nosis. A. Valvar aortic stenosis. B. Supravalvar aortic stenosis 
and its repair (insert). C. Tunnel-type subvalvar aortic stenosis. 
D. Membranous subvalvar aortic stenosis. (Reproduced with 
­permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, 
et al, eds. Surgery: Scientific Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. 
­Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:1448.)
once the ductus closes, with dyspnea, tachypnea, irritability, 
narrowed pulse pressure, oliguria, and profound metabolic 
acidosis.7,21 If ductal patency is maintained, systemic perfu-
sion will be provided by the RV via ductal flow, and cyanosis 
may be the only finding.
Diagnosis.  Neonates and infants with severe valvular AS 
may have a relatively nonspecific history of irritability and 
failure to thrive. Angina, if present, is usually manifested by 
episodic, inconsolable crying that coincides with feeding. As 
discussed previously, evidence of poor peripheral perfusion, 
such as extreme pallor, indicates severe LVOT obstruction. 
Differential cyanosis is an uncommon finding, but is present 
when enough antegrade flow occurs only to maintain normal 
upper body perfusion, while a large patent ductus arteriosus 
produces blue discoloration of the abdomen and legs.
Physical findings include a systolic ejection murmur, 
although a quiet murmur may paradoxically indicate a more 
severe condition with reduced cardiac output. A systolic click 
correlates with a valvular etiology of obstruction. As LV 
dysfunction progresses, evidence of congestive heart failure 
occurs.
The chest radiograph is variable but may show dilatation 
of the aortic root, and the ECG often demonstrates LV hypertro-
phy. Echocardiography with Doppler flow is extremely useful 
in establishing the diagnosis, as well as quantifying the trans-
valvular gradient.22 Furthermore, echocardiography can facili-
tate evaluation for the several associated defects that can be 
present in critical neonatal AS, including mitral stenosis, LV 
hypoplasia, LV endocardial fibroelastosis, subaortic stenosis, 
VSD, or coarctation. The presence of any or several of these 
defects has important implications related to treatment options 
for these patients. Although cardiac catheterization is not rou-
tinely performed for diagnostic purposes, it can be invaluable 
as part of the treatment algorithm if the lesion is amenable to 
balloon valvotomy.
Treatment.  The first decision that must be made in the neo-
nate with critical LVOT obstruction is whether the patient is a 
candidate for biventricular or univentricular repair. Central to 
this decision is assessment of the degree of hypoplasia of the 
LV and other left-sided structures. Alsoufi and ­colleagues23 
recently described a rational approach to the neonate 
with critical LVOT obstruction (Fig. 20-3). The infant 
with severe AS requires urgent intervention. Preoperative 
stabilization, however, has dramatically altered the clinical 
algorithm and outcomes for this patient population.19,21 The 
preoperative strategy begins with endotracheal intubation and 
inotropic support. Prostaglandin infusion is initiated to main-
tain ductal patency, and confirmatory studies are performed 
prior to operative intervention.
Therapy is generally indicated in the presence of a trans-
valvular gradient of 50 mmHg with associated symptoms 
including syncope, CHF, or angina, or if a gradient of 50 to 
75 mmHg exists with concomitant ECG evidence of LV strain 
or ischemia. In the critically ill neonate, there may be little 
gradient across the aortic valve because of poor LV function. 
These patients depend on patency of the ductus arteriosus to 
provide systemic perfusion from the RV, and all ductal-depen-
dent patients with critical AS require treatment. However, the 
decision regarding treatment options must be based on a com-
plete understanding of associated defects. For example, in the 
presence of a hypoplastic LV (left ventricular end-diastolic 
3
700
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
volume <20 mL/m2) or a markedly abnormal mitral valve, 
isolated aortic valvotomy should not be performed because 
studies have demonstrated high mortality in this population 
following isolated valvotomy.24
Patients who have an LV capable of providing systemic 
output are candidates for intervention to relieve AS, generally 
through balloon valvotomy. Very rarely, if catheter-based ther-
apy is not an option, relief of valvular AS in infants and children 
can be accomplished with surgical valvotomy using standard 
techniques of CPB and direct exposure to the aortic valve. A 
transverse incision is made in the ascending aorta above the 
sinus of Valsalva, extending close to, but not into, the noncoro-
nary sinus. Exposure is attained with placement of a retractor 
into the right coronary sinus. After inspection of the valve, the 
chosen commissure is incised to within 1 to 2 mm of the aortic 
wall (Fig. 20-4).
Balloon valvotomy performed in the catheterization lab is 
the procedure of choice for reduction of transvalvular gradients 
in symptomatic infants and children. This procedure is an ideal 
palliative option because mortality from surgical valvotomy can 
be high due to the critical nature of these patients’ condition. 
Furthermore, balloon valvotomy provides relief of the valvu-
lar gradient and allows future surgical intervention (which is 
­generally required in most patients when a larger prosthesis can 
be implanted) to be performed on an unscarred chest. An impor-
tant issue when planning aortic valvotomy, whether percuta-
neously or via open surgical technique, is the risk of inducing 
hemodynamically significant aortic regurgitation. Induction of 
more than moderate aortic regurgitation is poorly tolerated in 
Figure 20-3.  Treatment algorithm for neonates and infants with critical left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Patients can be initially 
triaged to either a single or a biventricular approach depending on presenting morphologic, demographic, and institutional factors. VSD 
= ventricular septal defect. (From Alsoufi B, et al. Management options in neonates and infants with critical left ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2007;31:1013. Fig 1. By permission of Oxford University Press.)
Critical left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction in neonate or infant
Heart
transplantation
Arch repair and
VSD closure
Biventricle
Arch hypoplasia/coarctation
Single level
obstruction
Percutaneous balloon
valvuloplasty
Surgical valvotomy
Multi level obstruction
Ross Konno
operation
Intrinsic aortic
valve stenosis
No intrinsic aortic
valve stenosis
Staged
correction
Standard Norwood
Modified Norwood
Hybrid strategy
Ross Konno and
arch repair
No ventricular septal defect
Intrinsic aortic
valve stenosis
Arch reconstruction
± valvotomy/Ross Konno 
No intrinsic aortic
valve stenosis
Arch repair only
Single ventricle
Yasui operation
No arch hypoplasia/coarctation
Ventricular
septal defect
Figure 20-4.  Aortic valvotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass. 
A transverse incision is made in the ascending aorta above the 
sinuses of Valsalva, extending close to, but not into, the noncoro-
nary sinus. Exposure is accomplished with placement of a retrac-
tor into the right coronary sinus. After inspection of the valve, 
the chosen commissure is incised to within 1 to 2 mm of the 
aortic wall. (Reproduced with permission from Doty DB. Cardiac 
Surgery: A Looseleaf Workbook and Update Service. Chicago: 
Year Book; 1986. kkjkjdht Elsevier)
Right coronary 
artery
Ascending 
aorta incised
Left coronary
artery
Commissures
Incised
701
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
the infant with critical AS and may require an urgent procedure 
to replace or repair the aortic valve.
In general, catheter-based balloon valvotomy has sup-
planted open surgical valvotomy. The decision regarding the 
most appropriate method to use depends on several factors, 
including the available medical expertise, the patient’s over-
all status and hemodynamics, and the presence of associated 
­cardiac defects requiring repair.25 Although evidence is emerg-
ing to the contrary, simple valvotomy, whether performed 
using percutaneous or open technique, is generally considered 
a palliative procedure. The goal is to relieve LVOT obstruc-
tion without producing clinically significant regurgitation, in 
order to allow sufficient annular growth for eventual aortic 
valve replacement. The majority of infants who undergo aor-
tic valvotomy will require further intervention on the aortic 
valve within 10 years following initial intervention.26
Valvotomy may result in aortic insufficiency that, while 
not important enough to require intervention in infancy, may 
alone or in combination with AS result in the need for an aortic 
valve replacement. Neonates with severely hypoplastic LVs or 
significant LV endocardial fibroelastosis may not be candidates 
for two-ventricle repair and are treated the same as infants with 
A
B
C
Diseased
aortic valve         
Pulmonary
autograft 
Pulmonary
allograft 
the hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), which is discussed 
later (see later section, Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome).
Many surgeons previously avoided aortic valve replace-
ment for AS in early childhood because the more commonly 
used mechanical valves would be outgrown and require replace-
ment later and the obligatory anticoagulation for mechanical 
valves resulted in a substantial risk for complications. In addi-
tion, mechanical valves had an important incidence of bacterial 
endocarditis or perivalvular leak requiring re-intervention.
The use of allografts and the advent of the Ross procedure 
have largely obviated these issues and made early definitive 
­correction of critical AS a viable option.19,27,28 Donald Ross first 
described transposition of the pulmonary valve into the aortic 
position with allograft reconstruction of the pulmonary outflow 
tract in 1967.27 The result of this operation is a normal trileaf-
let semilunar valve made of a patient’s native tissue with the 
potential for growth to adult size in the aortic position in place 
of the damaged aortic valve (Fig. 20-5). The Ross procedure has 
become a useful option for aortic valve replacement in children, 
because it has improved durability and can be performed with 
acceptable morbidity and mortality rates. The placement of a 
pulmonary conduit, which does not grow and becomes calcified 
Figure 20-5.  A through C. The pulmonary auto-
graft for aortic valve replacement. The aortic 
valve and adjacent aorta are excised, preserving 
buttons of aortic tissue around the coronary ostia. 
The pulmonary valve and main pulmonary artery 
are excised and transferred to the aortic position. 
The coronary buttons are then attached to the 
neoaortic root. A pulmonary allograft is inserted 
to re-establish the right ventricular outflow tract. 
(From Kouchokos NT, Davila-Roman VG, Spray 
TL, et al. Replacement of the aortic root with 
a pulmonary autograft in children and young 
adults with aortic-valve disease. N Engl J Med. 
1994;330:1.)
702
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and stenotic over time, does obligate the patient to reoperation 
to replace the RV-to-pulmonary artery conduit. Karamlou and 
colleagues29 recently reviewed the outcomes and associated risk 
factors for aortic valve replacement in 160 children from the 
Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto. They found that younger 
age, lower operative weight, concomitant performance of aortic 
root replacement or reconstruction, and use of prosthesis type 
other than a pulmonary autograft were significant predictors of 
death, whereas the use of a bioprosthetic or allograft valve type 
and earlier year of operation were identified as significant risk 
factors for repeated aortic valve replacement. Autograft use was 
associated with a blunted progression of the peak prosthetic valve 
gradient and a rapid decrease in the left ventricular end-diastolic 
dimension (Fig. 20-6). In agreement with these findings, Lupi-
netti and Jones28 compared allograft aortic valve replacement 
with the Ross procedure and found a more significant transval-
vular gradient reduction and regression of left ventricular hyper-
trophy in those patients who underwent the Ross procedure. In 
some cases, the pulmonary valve may not be usable because of 
associated defects or congenital absence. These children are not 
candidates for the Ross procedure and are now most frequently 
treated with cryopreserved allografts (cadaveric human aortic 
valves). At times, there may be a size discrepancy between the 
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and the LVOT, espe-
cially in cases of severe critical AS in infancy. For these cases, 
the pulmonary autograft is placed in a manner that also provides 
enlargement of the aortic annulus (Ross/Konno) (Fig. 20-7).
Subvalvular AS occurs beneath the aortic valve and may 
be classified as discrete or tunnel-like (diffuse). A thin, fibro-
muscular diaphragm immediately proximal to the aortic valve 
characterizes discrete subaortic stenosis. This diaphragm typi-
cally extends for 180° or more in a crescentic or circular fashion, 
often attaching to the mitral valve as well as the interventricu-
lar septum.21 The aortic valve itself is usually normal in this 
condition, although the turbulence imparted by the subvalvular 
stenosis may affect leaflet morphology and valve competence.
Diffuse subvalvular AS results in a long, tunnel-like 
obstruction that may extend to the left ventricular apex. In 
some individuals, there may be difficulty in distinguishing 
between hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and diffuse subaor-
tic stenosis. Operation for subvalvular AS is indicated with a 
gradient exceeding 30 mmHg, in the presence of aortic valve 
insufficiency, or when symptoms indicating LVOT obstruction 
are present.30 Given that repair of isolated discrete subaortic 
­stenosis can be done with low rates of morbidity and mortality, 
some surgeons advocate repair in all cases of discrete AS to 
avoid progression of the stenosis and the development of aortic 
insufficiency, although more recent data demonstrates that sub-
aortic resection should be delayed until the LV gradient exceeds 
30 mmHg because most children with an initial LV gradient 
less than 30 mmHg have quiescent disease.31 Diffuse AS is a 
more complex lesion and often requires aortoventriculoplasty 
as previously described. Results are generally excellent, with 
operative mortality less than 5%.32
Supravalvular AS occurs more rarely and also can be clas-
sified into a discrete type, which produces an hourglass defor-
mity of the aorta, and a diffuse form that can involve the entire 
arch and brachiocephalic arteries. The aortic valve leaflets are 
usually normal, but in some cases, the leaflets may adhere to 
the supravalvular stenosis, thereby narrowing the sinuses of 
Valsalva in diastole and restricting coronary artery perfusion. 
In addition, accelerated intimal hyperplastic changes in the 
coronary arteries can be demonstrated in these patients because 
the proximal position of the coronary arteries subjects them to 
abnormally high perfusion pressures.
The signs and symptoms of supravalvular AS are similar 
to other forms of LVOT obstruction. An asymptomatic murmur 
is the presenting manifestation in approximately half of these 
patients. Syncope, poor exercise tolerance, and angina may all 
occur with nearly equal frequency. Supravalvar AS is associated 
with Williams’ syndrome, a constellation of elfin facies, mental 
retardation, and hypercalcemia.33 Following routine evaluation, 
cardiac catheterization should be performed in order to delin-
eate coronary anatomy, as well as to delineate the degree of 
obstruction. A gradient of 50 mmHg or greater is an indication 
for operation. However, the clinician must be cognizant of any 
coexistent lesions, most commonly pulmonic stenosis, which 
may add complexity to the repair.
The localized form of supravalvular AS is treated by 
­creating an inverted Y-shaped aortotomy across the area of 
­stenosis, straddling the right coronary artery. The obstructing 
shelf is then excised and a pantaloon-shaped patch is used to 
close the ­incision.21
The diffuse form of supravalvular stenosis is more vari-
able, and the particular operative approach must be tailored 
to each specific patient’s anatomy. In general, either an aortic 
­endarterectomy with patch augmentation can be performed, or 
if the narrowing extends past the aorta arch, a prosthetic graft 
can be placed between the ascending and descending aorta. 
Operative results for discrete supravalvular AS are generally 
good, with a hospital mortality of less than 1% and an actuarial 
­survival rate exceeding 90% at 20 years.34 In contrast, however, 
the diffuse form is more hazardous to repair and carried a mor-
tality of 15% in a recent series.34,35
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Anatomy.  The ductus arteriosus is derived from the sixth 
aortic arch and normally extends from the main or left pul-
monary artery to the upper descending thoracic aorta, distal to 
the left subclavian artery. In the normal fetal cardiovascular 
Figure 20-6.  Predicted progression of the peak instantaneous pros-
thetic valve gradient after initial aortic valve replacement (AVR) 
stratified by prosthesis type (autograft vs. nonautograft) for a hypo-
thetical patient of 3 years undergoing AVR in 1990. Solid lines 
represent point estimates from a mixed linear regression model 
(surrounded by their 90% confidence intervals in dashed lines). 
AoV = aortic valve. (Reproduced with permission from Karam-
lou T, et al. Outcomes and associated risk factors for aortic valve 
replacement in 160 children: A competing risks analysis. Circula-
tion. 2005;112:3462.)
Years from initial AVR
Peak instantaneous AoV
gradient (mm Hg)
0
2
4
6
8
10
80
60
40
20
0
Autograft
Non-autograft
703
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
system, ductal flow is considerable (approximately 60% of 
the combined ventricular output) and is directed exclusively 
from the pulmonary artery to the aorta.36 In infancy, the length 
of the ductus may vary from 2 to 8 mm, with a diameter of 
4 to 12 mm.
Locally produced and circulating prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) 
and prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) induce active relaxation of the duc-
tal musculature, maintaining maximal patency during the fetal 
period.37 At birth, increased pulmonary blood flow metabo-
lizes these prostaglandin products, and absence of the placenta 
removes an important source of them, resulting in a marked 
decrease in these ductal-relaxing substances. In addition, release 
of histamines, catecholamines, bradykinin, and acetylcholine all 
promote ductal contraction. Despite all of these complex inter-
actions, the rising oxygen tension in the fetal blood is the main 
stimulus causing smooth muscle contraction and ductal closure 
within 10 to 15 hours postnatally.38 Anatomic closure by fibrosis 
produces the ligamentum arteriosum connecting the pulmonary 
artery to the aorta.
Delayed closure of the ductus is termed prolonged patency, 
whereas failure of closure causes persistent patency, which may 
occur as an isolated lesion or in association with more complex 
congenital heart defects. In many of these infants with more 
complex congenital heart defects, either pulmonary or systemic 
perfusion may depend on ductal flow, and these infants may 
decompensate if exogenous PGE is not administered to maintain 
ductal patency.
Natural History.  The incidence of patent ductus arteriosus 
(PDA) is approximately 1 in every 2000 births; however, it 
increases dramatically with increasing prematurity.39 In some 
series, PDAs have been noted in 75% of infants of 28 to 30 weeks 
gestation. Persistent patency occurs more commonly in females, 
with a 2:1 ratio.39
PDA is not a benign entity, although prolonged survival 
has been reported. The estimated death rate for infants with iso-
lated, untreated PDA is approximately 30%.40 The leading cause 
of death is congestive heart failure, with respiratory infection as 
a secondary cause. Endocarditis is more likely to occur with a 
small ductus and is rarely fatal if aggressive antibiotic therapy 
is initiated early.
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  After birth, in 
an otherwise normal cardiovascular system, a PDA results 
in a left-to-right shunt that depends on both the size of the 
­ductal lumen and its total length. As the pulmonary vas-
cular resistance falls 16 to 18 weeks postnatally, the shunt 
will increase, and its flow will ultimately be determined by 
the relative resistances of the pulmonary and systemic 
­circulations.
The hemodynamic consequences of an unrestrictive duc-
tal shunt are left ventricular volume overload with increased 
left atrial and pulmonary artery pressures, and right ventricular 
strain from the augmented afterload. These changes result in 
increased sympathetic discharge, tachycardia, tachypnea, and 
ventricular hypertrophy. The diastolic shunt results in lower aor-
tic diastolic pressure and increases the potential for myocardial 
ischemia and underperfusion of other systemic organs, while the 
increased pulmonary flow leads to increased work of breathing 
and decreased gas exchange. Unrestrictive ductal flow may lead 
to pulmonary hypertension within the first year of life. These 
changes will be significantly attenuated if the size of the ductus 
is only moderate, and completely absent if the ductus is small.
Physical examination of the afflicted infant will reveal evi-
dence of a hyperdynamic circulation with a widened pulse pres-
sure and a hyperactive precordium. Auscultation demonstrates 
a systolic or continuous murmur, often termed a machinery 
­murmur. Cyanosis is not present in uncomplicated isolated PDA.
Figure 20-7.  The Konno-Rastan aortoven-
triculoplasty permits significant enlargement 
of the aortic annulus and subaortic region. A. 
A vertical aortotomy is made to the left of the 
right coronary artery and extended into the 
right ventricular outflow tract. After excis-
ing the aortic valve, the interventricular sep-
tum is incised and an aortic valve prosthesis 
is secured within the enlarged annulus. B. A 
Dacron patch that is attached to the sewing 
ring of the prosthesis closes the interventricular 
septum and the aortotomy. C. A separate peri-
cardial patch closes the right ventriculotomy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Misbach 
GA, Turley K, Ullyot DJ, et al. Left ventricular 
outflow enlargement by the Konno procedure. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1982;84:696. Copy-
right Elsevier.)
A
B
 C    
Prosthetic valve
Vertical
aortotomy
Interventricular
septum incised
Dacron patch
Pericardial patch
704
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The chest radiograph may reveal increased pulmonary 
vascularity or cardiomegaly, and the ECG may show LV strain, 
left atrial enlargement, and possibly RV hypertrophy. Echocar-
diogram with color mapping reliably demonstrates the patency 
of the ductus as well as estimates the shunt size. Cardiac cath-
eterization is necessary only when pulmonary hypertension is 
suspected.
Therapy.  The presence of a persistent PDA is sufficient indica-
tion for closure because of the increased mortality and risk of 
endocarditis.2,4 In older patients with pulmonary hypertension, 
closure may not improve symptoms and is associated with much 
higher mortality.
In premature infants, aggressive intervention with indometh-
acin or ibuprofen to achieve early closure of the PDA is beneficial 
unless contraindications such as necrotizing enterocolitis or renal 
insufficiency are present.41 Term infants, however, are gener-
ally unresponsive to pharmacologic therapy with indomethacin, 
so mechanical closure must be undertaken once the diagnosis is 
established. This can be accomplished either surgically or with 
catheter-based therapy.12,42,43 Currently, transluminal placement of 
various occlusive devices, such as the Rashkind double-umbrella 
device or embolization with ­Gianturco coils, is in widespread 
use.42 However, there are a number of complications inherent with 
the use of percutaneous devices, such as thromboembolism, endo-
carditis, incomplete occlusion, vascular injury, and hemorrhage 
secondary to perforation.43 In addition, these techniques may not 
be applicable in very young infants, because the peripheral vessels 
do not provide adequate access for the delivery devices.
Surgical closure can be achieved via either open or 
video-assisted approaches. The open approach employs a 
posterior ­lateral thoracotomy in the fourth or fifth ­intercostal 
space on the side of the aorta (generally the left). The lung 
is then retracted anteriorly. In the neonate, the PDA is sin-
gly ligated with a surgical clip or permanent suture. In older 
patients, the PDA is triply ligated. Care must be taken to 
avoid the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which courses around 
the PDA. The PDA can also be ligated via a median ster-
notomy; however, this approach is generally reserved for 
patients who have additional cardiac or great vessel lesions 
requiring repair. Occasionally, a short, broad ductus, in 
which the dimension of its width approaches that of its 
length, will be encountered. In this case, division between 
vascular clamps with oversewing of both ends is advisable 
(Fig. 20-8). In extreme cases, the use of CPB to decompress 
the large ductus during ligation is an option.
Video-assisted thoracoscopic occlusion, using metal 
clips, also has been described, although it offers few advantages 
over the standard surgical approach.12 Preterm newborns and 
children may do well with the thoracoscopic technique, while 
older patients (older than age 5 years) and those with smaller 
ducts (<3 mm) do well with coil occlusion. In fact, Moore and 
colleagues recently concluded from their series that coil occlu-
sion is the procedure of choice for ducts smaller than 4 mm.44 
Complete closure rates using catheter-based techniques have 
steadily improved. Comparative studies of cost and outcome 
between open surgery and transcatheter duct closure, however, 
have shown no overwhelming choice between the two modali-
ties. Burke prospectively reviewed coil occlusion and VATS at 
Miami Children’s Hospital and found both options to be effec-
tive and less morbid than traditional thoracotomy.12
Outcomes.  In premature infants, the surgical mortality is very 
low, although the overall hospital death rate is significant as a 
Figure 20-8.  A. Surgeon’s perspective of infant patent ductus arteriosus exposed via a left thoracotomy. B. The pleura over the aortic isth-
mus is incised and mobilized. C and D. Technique of triple ligation. a. = artery; n. = nerve. (From Castaneda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, et al. 
Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1994:208, with permission. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
A
B
C
D
Pulmonary a.
Aorta
Recurrent
laryngeal n.
Vagus n.
Triple ligature
on ductus
Descending
aorta
Isthmus
Patent ductus
Left phrenic
705
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
­consequence of other complications of prematurity. In older 
infants and children, mortality is less than 1%. Bleeding, chylo-
thorax, vocal cord paralysis, and the need for reoperation occur 
infrequently. With the advent of muscle-sparing thoracotomy, 
the risk of subsequent arm dysfunction or breast abnormalities 
is virtually eliminated.45
Aortic Coarctation
Anatomy.  Coarctation of the aorta (COA) is defined as a 
luminal narrowing in the aorta that causes an obstruction to 
blood flow. This narrowing is most commonly located distal 
to the left subclavian artery. The embryologic origin of COA 
is a subject of some controversy. One theory holds that the 
obstructing shelf, which is largely composed of tissue found 
within the ductus, forms as the ductus involutes.46 The other 
theory holds that a diminished aortic isthmus develops sec-
ondary to decreased aortic flow in infants with enhanced duc-
tal circulation.
Extensive collateral circulation develops, predominantly 
involving the intercostals and mammary arteries as a direct 
result of aortic flow obstruction. This translates into the well-
known finding of “rib-notching” on chest radiograph, as well as 
a prominent pulsation underneath the ribs.
Other associated anomalies, such as ventricular septal 
defect, PDA, and ASD, may be seen with COA, but the most 
common is that of a bicuspid aortic valve, which can be demon-
strated in 25% to 42% of cases.47
Pathophysiology.  Infants with COA develop symptoms 
consistent with left ventricular outflow obstruction, including 
pulmonary overcirculation and, later, biventricular failure. In 
addition, proximal systemic hypertension develops as a result 
of mechanical obstruction to ventricular ejection, as well as 
hypoperfusion-induced activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system. Interestingly, hypertension is often persis-
tent after surgical correction despite complete amelioration of 
the mechanical obstruction and pressure gradient.48 It has been 
shown that early surgical correction may prevent the develop-
ment of long-term hypertension, which undoubtedly contributes 
to many of the adverse sequelae of COA, including the develop-
ment of circle of Willis aneurysms, aortic dissection and rupture, 
and an increased incidence of coronary arteriopathy with result-
ing myocardial infarction.49
Diagnosis.  COA is likely to become symptomatic either in the 
newborn period if other anomalies are present or in the late ado-
lescent period with the onset of left ventricular ­failure.
Physical examination will demonstrate a hyperdynamic 
precordium with a harsh murmur localized to the left chest and 
back. Femoral pulses will be dramatically decreased when com-
pared to upper extremity pulses, and differential cyanosis may 
be apparent until ductal closure.
Echocardiography will reliably demonstrate the narrowed 
aortic segment, as well as define the pressure gradient across 
the stenotic segment. In addition, detailed information regard-
ing other associated anomalies can be gleaned. Aortography is 
reserved for those cases in which the echocardiographic find-
ings are equivocal.
Therapy.  The routine management of hemodynamically 
­significant COA in all age groups has traditionally been 
s­urgical. Transcatheter repairs are used with increasing 
­frequency in older patients and those with re-coarctation 
­following surgical repair. Balloon dilatation of native coarcta-
tion in neonates has been recently utilized with poor results. 
The most common surgical techniques in current use are resec-
tion with end-to-end anastomosis or extended end-to-end anas-
tomosis, taking care to remove all residual ductal tissue.50,51 
Extended end-to-end anastomosis may also allow the surgeon 
to treat transverse arch hypoplasia, which is commonly encoun-
tered in infants with aortic coarctation.52,53 The ­subclavian flap 
aortoplasty is another repair, although it is used less frequently 
in the modern era because of the risk of late aneurysm forma-
tion and possible underdevlopment of the left upper extrem-
ity or ischemia.51 In this method, the left subclavian artery is 
transected and brought down over the coarcted segment as a 
vascularized patch. The main benefit of these techniques is 
that they do not involve the use of prosthetic materials, and 
evidence suggests that extended end-to-end anastomosis may 
promote arch growth, especially in infants with the smallest 
initial aortic arch diameters.52
Despite the benefits, however, extended end-to-end anas-
tomosis may not be feasible when there is a long segment of 
coarctation or in the presence of previous surgery, because 
­sufficient mobilization of the aorta above and below the lesion 
may not be possible. In this instance, prosthetic materials, such 
as a patch aortoplasty, in which a prosthetic patch is used to 
enlarge the coarcted segment, or an interposition tube graft must 
be employed.
The most common complications after COA repair are 
late restenosis and aneurysm formation at the repair site.54-56 
Aneurysm formation is particularly common after patch aor-
toplasty when using Dacron material. In a large series of 891 
patients, aneurysms occurred in 5.4% of the total, with 89% 
occurring in the group who received Dacron-patch aortoplasty 
and only 8% occurring in those who received resection with 
primary end-to-end anastomosis.54 A further complication, 
although uncommon, is lower-body paralysis resulting from 
ischemic spinal cord injury during the repair. This dreaded 
outcome complicates 0.5% of all surgical repairs, but its inci-
dence can be lessened with the use of some form of distal 
perfusion, preferably left heart bypass with the use of femo-
ral arterial or distal thoracic aorta for arterial inflow and the 
femoral vein or left atrium for venous return.50 These tech-
niques are generally reserved for older patients with complex 
coarctations that may need ­prolonged aortic cross clamp times 
for repair, often in the setting of large collateral vessels and/
or previous surgery.
Hypertension is also well recognized following repair of 
COA. Bouchart and colleagues reported that in a cohort of 35 
hypertensive adults (mean age, 28 years) undergoing repair, 
despite a satisfactory anatomic outcome, only 23 patients were 
normotensive at a mean follow-up period of 165 months.55 Like-
wise, Bhat and associates reported that in a series of 84 patients 
(mean age at repair, 29 years), 31% remained hypertensive at a 
mean follow-up of 5 years following surgery.56
Although operative repair is still the gold standard, 
treatment of COA by catheter-based intervention has become 
more widespread. Both balloon dilatation and primary stent 
implantation have been used successfully. The most exten-
sive study of the results of balloon angioplasty reported on 
970 procedures: 422 native and 548 recurrent COAs. Mean 
gradient reduction was 74% ± 24% for native and 70% ± 
31% for recurrent COA.57 This demonstrated that catheter-
based therapy could produce equally effective results both in 
706
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
recurrent and in primary COA, a finding with far-reaching 
implications in the new paradigm of multidisciplinary treat-
ment algorithms for CHD. In the ­Valvuloplasty and Angio-
plasty of Congenital Anomalies (VACA) report, higher 
preangioplasty gradient, earlier procedure date, older patient 
age, and the presence of recurrent COA were independent risk 
factors for suboptimal procedural outcome.57
The gradient after balloon dilatation in most series is gener-
ally acceptable. However, there is a significant minority of patients 
(0%–26%) for whom the procedural outcome is suboptimal, with 
a postprocedure gradient of 20 mmHg or greater. These patients 
may be ideal candidates for primary stent placement. Restenosis 
is much less common in children, presumably reflecting the influ-
ence of vessel wall scarring and growth in the pediatric age group.
Deaths from the procedure also are infrequent (<1% of 
cases), and the main major complication is aneurysm formation, 
which occurs in 7% of patients.50 With stent implantation, many 
authors have demonstrated improved resolution of stenosis 
compared with balloon dilatation alone, yet the long-term com-
plications on vessel wall compliance remain largely unknown 
because only mid-term data are widely available.
In summary, children younger than age 6 months with 
native COA should be treated with surgical repair, while those 
requiring intervention at later ages may be ideal candidates for 
balloon dilatation or primary stent implantation.50 Additionally, 
catheter-based therapy should be employed for those cases of 
restenosis following either surgical or primary endovascular 
management.
Truncus Arteriosus
Anatomy.  Truncus arteriosus is a rare anomaly, comprising 
between 1% and 4% of all cases of CHD.58 It is characterized 
by a single great artery that arises from the heart, overrides the 
ventricular septum, and supplies the pulmonary, systemic, and 
coronary circulations.
The two major classification systems are those of ­Collett 
and Edwards, described in 1949, and Van Praagh and Van 
Praagh, described in 1965 (Fig. 20-9).59,60 The Collett and 
Edwards classification focuses mainly on the origin of the pul-
monary arteries from the common arterial trunk, whereas the 
Van Praagh system is based on the presence or absence of a 
VSD, the degree of formation of the aorticopulmonary septum, 
and the status of the aortic arch.
During embryonic life, the truncus arteriosus normally 
begins to separate and spiral into a distinguishable anterior pul-
monary artery and posterior aorta. Persistent truncus, therefore, 
represents an arrest in embryologic development at this stage.61 
Other implicated events include twisting of the dividing trun-
cus because of ventricular looping, subinfundibular atresia, and 
abnormal location of the semilunar valve anlages.62
The neural crest may also play a crucial role in the normal 
formation of the great vessels, as experimental studies in chick 
embryos have shown that ablation of the neural crest results in 
persistent truncus arteriosus.63 The neural crest also develops 
into the pharyngeal pouches that give rise to the thymus and 
parathyroids, which likely explains the prevalent association of 
truncus arteriosus and DiGeorge’s syndrome.64
The annulus of the truncal valve usually straddles the 
ventricular septum in a “balanced” fashion; however, it is not 
unusual for it to be positioned predominantly over the RV, 
which increases the potential for LVOT obstruction follow-
ing surgical repair. In the great majority of cases, the leaflets 
are thickened and deformed, which leads to valvular insuffi-
ciency. There are usually three leaflets (60%), but occasion-
ally a bicuspid (50%) or even a quadricuspid valve (25%) is 
present.65
In truncus arteriosus, the pulmonary trunk bifurcates, with 
the left and right pulmonary arteries forming posteriorly and 
to the left in most cases. The caliber of the pulmonary arterial 
branches is usually normal, with stenosis or diffuse hypoplasia 
occurring in rare instances.
Figure 20-9.  There are similarities between the Collett and Edwards and the Van Praagh classifications of truncus arteriosus. Type I is the 
same as A1. Types II and III are grouped as a single type A2 because they are not significantly distinct embryologically or therapeutically. 
Type A3 denotes unilateral pulmonary artery with collateral supply to the contralateral lung (hemitruncus). Type A4 is truncus associated 
with interrupted aortic arch (13% of all cases of truncus arteriosus). (Reproduced with permission from Fyler DC. Truncus arteriosus. In: 
Fyler DC, ed. Nadas’ Pediatric Cardiology. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 1992:676. kkjkjdht Elsevier. As adapted with permission from 
Hernanz-Schulman M, Fellows KE. Persistent truncus arteriosus: pathologic, diagnostic and therapeutic considerations. Semin Roentgenol. 
1985;20:121. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
I
Collett & Edwards
Van Praagh
II
III
IV
A1
A2
A3
A4
707
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
The coronary arteries may be normal; however, anomalies 
are not unusual and occur in 50% of cases.65,66 Many of these 
are relatively minor, although two variations are of particular 
importance, because they have implications in the conduct of 
operative repair. The first is that the left coronary ostium may 
arise high in the sinus of Valsalva or even from the truncal tis-
sue at the margin of the pulmonary artery tissue. This coronary 
artery can be injured during repair when the pulmonary arter-
ies are removed from the trunk or when the resulting truncal 
defect is closed. The second is that the right coronary artery 
can give rise to an important accessory anterior descending 
artery, which often passes across the RV in the exact location 
where the right ventriculotomy is commonly performed during 
repair.65,66
Physiology and Diagnosis.  The main pathophysiologic con-
sequences of truncus arteriosus are (a) the obligatory mixing of 
systemic and pulmonary venous blood at the level of the ven-
tricular septal defect (VSD) and truncal valve, which leads to 
arterial saturations near 85%, and (b) the presence of a nonre-
strictive left-to-right shunt, which occurs during both systole 
and diastole, the volume of which is determined by the relative 
resistances of the pulmonary and systemic circulations.65 Addi-
tionally, truncal valve stenosis or regurgitation, the presence of 
important LVOT obstruction, and stenosis of pulmonary artery 
branches can further contribute to both pressure- and volume-
loading of the ventricles. The presence of these lesions often 
results in severe heart failure and cardiovascular instability early 
in life. Pulmonary vascular resistance may develop as early as 
6 months of age, leading to poor results with late surgical cor-
rection.
Patients with truncus arteriosus usually present in the 
neonatal period, with signs and symptoms of congestive heart 
failure and mild to moderate cyanosis. A pansystolic mur-
mur may be noted at the left sternal border, and occasionally 
a ­diastolic murmur may be heard in the presence of truncal 
regurgitation.
Chest radiography will be consistent with pulmonary over-
circulation, and a right aortic arch can be appreciated 35% of the 
time. The ECG is usually nonspecific, demonstrating normal 
sinus rhythm with biventricular hypertrophy.
Echocardiography with Doppler color-flow or pulsed 
Doppler is diagnostic and usually provides sufficient informa-
tion to determine the type of truncus arteriosus, the origin of the 
coronary arteries and their proximity to the pulmonary trunk, 
the character of the truncal valves, and the extent of truncal 
insufficiency.65 Cardiac catheterization can be helpful in cases 
where pulmonary hypertension is suspected or to further delin-
eate coronary artery anomalies prior to repair.
The presence of truncus is an indication for surgery. 
Repair should be undertaken in the neonatal period or as soon as 
the diagnosis is established. Eisenmenger’s physiology, which 
is found primarily in older children, is the only absolute contra-
indication to correction.
Repair.  Truncus arteriosus was first managed with pulmonary 
artery banding as described by Armer and colleagues in 1961.67 
However, this technique led to only marginal improvements 
in 1-year survival rates because ventricular failure inevitably 
occurred. In 1967, however, complete repair was accomplished 
by McGoon and his associates based on the experimental work 
of Rastelli, who introduced the idea that an extracardiac valved 
conduit could be used to restore ventricular-to-pulmonary artery 
continuity.68 Over the next 20 years, improved survival rates led 
to ­uniform adoption of complete repair even in the youngest and 
­smallest infants.58,65,69
Surgical correction entails the use of CPB. Repair is 
completed by separation of the pulmonary arteries from the 
aorta, closure of the aortic defect (occasionally with a patch) 
to minimize coronary flow complications, placement of a 
valved cryopreserved allograft or jugular venous valved con-
duit (Contegra) to reconstruct the RVOT, and VSD ­closure. 
Important branch pulmonary arterial stenosis should be 
repaired at the time of complete repair and can usually be 
accomplished with longitudinal allograft patch arterioplasty. 
Severe truncal valve insufficiency occasionally requires trun-
cal valve replacement, which can be accomplished with a 
cryopreserved allograft.70
Results.  The results of complete repair of truncus have steadily 
improved. Ebert reported a 91% survival rate in his series of 77 
patients who were younger than 6 months of age; later reports 
by others confirmed these findings and demonstrated that excel-
lent results could be achieved in even smaller infants with com-
plex-associated defects.11,69
Newer extracardiac conduits also have been developed 
and used with success, which has widened the repertoire of the 
modern congenital heart surgeon and improved outcomes.71 
Severe truncal regurgitation, interrupted aortic arch, coexistent 
coronary anomalies, chromosomal or genetic anomalies, and 
age younger than 100 days are risk factors associated with peri-
operative death and poor outcome.
Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous 
Connection
Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) 
occurs in 1% to 2% of all cardiac malformations and is char-
acterized by abnormal drainage of the pulmonary veins into the 
right heart, whether through connections into the right atrium or 
into its tributaries.72 Accordingly, the only mechanism by which 
oxygenated blood can return to the left heart is through an ASD, 
which is almost uniformly present with TAPVC.
Unique to this lesion is the absence of a definitive form of 
palliation. Thus, TAPVC with concomitant obstruction repre-
sents one of the only true surgical emergencies across the entire 
spectrum of congenital heart surgery.
Anatomy and Embryology.  The lungs develop from an out-
pouching of the foregut, and their venous plexus arises as part 
of the splanchnic venous system. TAPVC arises when the pul-
monary vein evagination from the posterior surface of the left 
atrium fails to fuse with the pulmonary venous plexus surround-
ing the lung buds. In place of the usual connection to the left 
atrium, at least one connection of the pulmonary plexus to the 
splanchnic plexus persists. Accordingly, the pulmonary veins 
drain to the heart through a systemic vein (Fig. 20-10).
Darling and colleagues classified TAPVC according to 
the site or level of connection of the pulmonary veins to the 
systemic venous system73: type I (45%), anomalous connection 
at the supracardiac level; type II (25%), anomalous connection 
at the cardiac level; type III (25%), anomalous connection at 
the infracardiac level; and type IV (5%), anomalous connection 
at multiple levels.74 Within each category, further subdivisions 
can be implemented, depending on whether pulmonary venous 
obstruction exists. Obstruction to pulmonary venous drainage 
708
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is a powerful predictor of adverse natural outcome and occurs 
most frequently with the infracardiac type, especially when the 
pattern of infracardiac connection prevents the ductus venosus 
from bypassing the liver.75
Pathophysiology and Diagnosis.  Because both pulmo-
nary and systemic venous blood returns to the right atrium in 
all forms of TAPVC, a right-to-left intracardiac shunt must be 
present in order for the afflicted infant to survive. This invari-
ably occurs via a nonrestrictive patent foramen ovale. Because 
of this obligatory mixing, cyanosis is usually present, and its 
degree depends on the ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood 
flow. Decreased pulmonary blood flow is a consequence of pul-
monary venous obstruction, the presence of which is unlikely 
if the right ventricular pressure is less than 85% of systemic 
pressure.76
The child with TAPVC may present with severe cyanosis 
and respiratory distress, necessitating urgent surgical interven-
tion if a severe degree of pulmonary venous obstruction is pres-
ent. However, in cases where there is no obstructive component, 
the clinical picture is usually one of pulmonary overcircula-
tion, hepatomegaly, tachycardia, and tachypnea with feeding. 
In a child with serious obstruction, arterial blood gas analysis 
reveals severe hypoxemia (partial pressure of oxygen [Po2] 
<20 mmHg), with metabolic acidosis.77
Chest radiography will show normal heart size with gen-
eralized pulmonary edema. Two-dimensional echocardiography 
is very useful in establishing the diagnosis and also can assess 
ventricular septal position, which may be leftward secondary 
to small left ventricular volumes, as well as estimate the right 
ventricular pressure based on the height of the tricuspid regur-
gitant jet. Echocardiography can usually identify the pulmonary 
venous connections (types I to IV), and it is rarely necessary to 
perform other diagnostic tests.
Cardiac catheterization is not recommended in these 
patients because the osmotic load from the intravenous contrast 
can exacerbate the degree of pulmonary edema.78 When cardiac 
catheterization is performed, equalization of oxygen saturations 
in all four heart chambers is a hallmark finding in this disease 
since the mixed blood returned to the right atrium gets distrib-
uted throughout the heart.
Therapy.  Operative correction of TAPVC requires anastomo-
sis of the common pulmonary venous channel to the left atrium, 
obliteration of the anomalous venous connection, and closure 
of the ASD.77,79
All types of TAPVC are approached through a median ster-
notomy, and many surgeons use deep hypothermic circulatory 
arrest in order to achieve an accurate and widely patent anastomo-
sis. The technique for supracardiac TAPVC includes early division 
of the vertical vein, retraction of the aorta and the superior vena 
cava laterally to expose the posterior aspect of the left atrium and 
the pulmonary venous confluence, and a side-to-side anastomosis 
between a long, horizontal biatrial incision and a longitudinal inci-
sion within the pulmonary venous confluence. The ASD can then 
be closed with an autologous pericardial or synthetic patch.
In patients with TAPVC to the coronary sinus without 
obstruction, a simple unroofing of the coronary sinus can be per-
formed through a single right atriotomy with concomitant closure 
of the ASD. If pulmonary venous obstruction is present, the repair 
should include generous resection of roof of the coronary sinus.77
Repair of infracardiac TAPVC entails ligation of the 
vertical vein at the diaphragm, followed by construction of a 
proximal, patulous longitudinal venotomy. This repair is usually 
performed by “rolling” the heart toward the left, thus exposing 
the left atrium where it usually overlies the descending vertical 
vein (Fig. 20-11).
As originally described by Lacour-Gayet and colleagues 
at the Marie-Lannelongue Hospital, Paris, and Coles and col-
leagues at The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, the suture-
less technique was developed for patients with anastomotic 
stenosis occurring after TAPVC repair.78,79 After determining 
that favorable outcomes were possible using this technique, it 
is currently used in selected patients upon initial presentation of 
TAPVC.79 Incisions are made in the venous confluence. Based 
on the surgeon’s discretion, the incisions are extended into 
both upper and lower pulmonary veins separately if judged to 
be important for an unobstructed pathway. An atriopericardial 
anastomosis is created using the pericardium adjacent to where 
the pulmonary veins enter the pericardium (Fig. 20-12). This 
anastomosis avoids direct contact with the incision site in the 
wall of the pulmonary veins and allows the free egress of 
blood from the lungs to the left atrium.
4
Figure 20-10.  Total anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection results when the primor-
dial pulmonary vein fails to unite with the 
plexus of veins that surround the lung buds 
and is derived from the splanchnic venous 
plexus, including the cardinal veins and 
umbilicovitelline veins. (From Castaneda 
AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, et al. Cardiac 
Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Phila-
delphia: W.B. Saunders; 1994:158, with 
permission. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
After Dodson
Foregut covered by
splanchnic plexus
Right anterior
cardinal vein
Left anterior
cardinal vein
Left lung bud
Left common
cardinal vein
Primordial pulmonary vein
Right common
cardinal vein
Right lung bud
Sinus
venosus
709
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
Figure 20-11.  Operative exposure obtained 
with infradiaphragmatic total anomalous 
pulmonary venous connection, using an 
approach from the right. (From Castaneda 
AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, et al. Cardiac Sur-
gery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders; 1994:161, with permission. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Superior vena cava
Right atrium
Anomalous vertical vein 
Extent of cut
Descending
aorta
Left
pulmonary
artery 
Left
pulmonary
veins
Left atrium
Atrial septum
Right
pulmonary
veins
Inferior vena cava
Right pulmonary artery
Interior edge of foramen ovale
The perioperative care of these infants is crucial because 
episodes of pulmonary hypertension can occur within the first 
48 hours, which contribute significantly to mortality following 
repair.6 Muscle relaxants and narcotics should be administered 
during this period to maintain a constant state of anesthesia. 
Arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) should be 
maintained at 30 mmHg with use of a volume ventilator, and 
the fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) should be increased to 
keep the pulmonary arterial pressure at less than two thirds of 
the systemic pressure.
Results.  Results of TAPVC in infancy have markedly 
improved in recent years, with an operative mortality of 5% or 
Figure 20-12.  Differences between conventional repair of total 
anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) and sutureless 
repair of TAPVC. In the sutureless techniques, there are no sutures 
placed in the fragile veins themselves. Rather, the pericardial flaps 
are used to create a “well” for the pulmonary venous return (bottom 
inset). Early and late extrinsic stenosis are thought to be reduced 
using this latter technique.
Infracardiac
TAPVC
Conventional
Repair
Sutureless
Repair
less in some series.77-80 This improvement is probably multi-
factorial, mainly as a consequence of early noninvasive diag-
nosis and aggressive perioperative management. The routine 
use of echocardiography; improvements in myocardial pro-
tection with specific attention to the RV; creation of a large, 
tension-free anastomosis with maximal use of the venous 
confluence and atrial tissue; use of a sutureless technique in 
selected cases; and prevention of pulmonary hypertensive 
events have likely played a major role in reducing operative 
mortality. The importance of risk factors for early mortal-
ity, such as venous obstruction at presentation, urgency of 
­operative repair, and infradiaphragmatic anatomic type, have 
been debated.79,81
Bando and colleagues82 made the controversial statement 
that both preoperative pulmonary venous obstruction and ana-
tomic type had been neutralized as potential risk factors beyond 
calendar year 1991. Hyde et al80 similarly reported that connec-
tion type was not related to outcome. However, a recent large 
single-institution report of 377 children with TAPVC by the 
author from the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto83 found 
that, although outcomes had improved over time, patient ana-
tomic factors were still important determinants of both survival 
and the need for subsequent reoperation. Risk factors for postre-
pair death were earlier operation year, younger age at repair, 
cardiac connection type, and postoperative pulmonary venous 
obstruction. Risk-adjusted estimated 1-year survival for a patient 
repaired at birth with unfavorable morphology in 2006 was 37% 
(95% confidence interval [CI], 8%–80%) compared with 96% 
(95% CI, 91%–99%) for a patient with favorable morphology 
repaired at age 1 year. Freedom from reoperation was 82% ± 6% at 
11 years after repair, with increased risk associated with mixed 
connection and postoperative pulmonary venous obstruc-
tion (Fig. 20-13). A recent study from the Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, showed a lower incidence of reoperation in 
the sutureless technique compared to conventional ­pulmonary 
710
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­technique employed. Mortality varies between 30% and 45%, 
and alternative catheter interventions do not offer definitive 
solutions.78 Recurrent pulmonary venous obstruction can be 
localized at the site of the pulmonary venous anastomosis 
(extrinsic), which can usually be cured with patch enlarge-
ment or balloon dilatation, or it may be secondary to endo-
cardial thickening of the pulmonary venous ostia frequently 
resulting in diffuse pulmonary venous sclerosis (intrinsic), 
which carries a 66% mortality rate because few good solu-
tions exist.75 More commonly, postrepair left ventricular 
dysfunction can occur as the noncompliant LV suddenly is 
required to handle an increased volume load from redirected 
pulmonary venous return. This can manifest as an increase 
in pulmonary artery pressure but is distinguishable from 
­primary pulmonary hypertension (another possible postop-
erative complication following repair of TAPVC) from the 
elevated left atrial pressure and LV dysfunction along with 
echocardiographic evidence of poor LV contractility. In pul-
monary hypertension, the left atrial pressure may be low, the 
LV may appear “underfilled” (by echocardiography), and the 
RV may appear dilated. In either case, postoperative support 
for a few days with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
may be lifesaving, and TAPVC should be repaired in centers 
that have this capacity.
Some investigators have speculated that preoperative pul-
monary venous obstruction is associated with increased medial 
thickness within the pulmonary vasculature, which may predis-
pose these infants to intrinsic pulmonary venous stenosis despite 
adequate pulmonary venous decompression.80 The majority of 
studies demonstrating that preoperative pulmonary venous 
obstruction is a predictor of subsequent need for reoperation to 
correct recurrent pulmonary venous obstruction lend credence 
to this notion.
Cor Triatriatum
Anatomy.  Cor triatriatum is a rare CHD characterized by the 
presence of a fibromuscular diaphragm that partitions the left 
atrium into two chambers: a superior chamber that receives 
drainage from the pulmonary veins, and an inferior chamber that 
communicates with the mitral valve and the LV (Fig. 20-14). 
An ASD frequently exists between the superior chamber and 
the right atrium, or, more rarely, between the right atrium and 
the inferior chamber.
Pathophysiology and Diagnosis.  Cor triatriatum results 
in obstruction of pulmonary venous return to the left atrium. 
The degree of obstruction is variable and depends on the size 
of fenestrations present in the left atrial membrane, the size 
of the ASD, and the existence of other associated anoma-
lies. If the communication between the superior and inferior 
chambers is less than 3 mm, patients usually are symptomatic 
during the first year of life. The afflicted infant will pres-
ent with the stigmata of low cardiac output and pulmonary 
venous hypertension, as well as congestive heart failure and 
poor feeding.
Physical examination may demonstrate a loud pulmonary 
S2 sound and a right ventricular heave, as well as ­jugular venous 
distention and hepatomegaly. Chest radiography will show 
­cardiomegaly and pulmonary vascular prominence, and the ECG 
will suggest right ventricular hypertrophy. ­Two-dimensional 
echocardiography provides a definitive diagnosis in most cases, 
venous confluence–left atrial anastomosis.84 However, there 
was no statistically significant difference suggesting similar 
results between the strategies.9 Although the sutureless tech-
nique appears to have favorable outcomes at primary repair for 
TAPVC, long-term follow-up is necessary to evaluate the occur-
rence of arrhythmias, such as complete heart block and atrial 
tachycardia, since an incision on the atrial septum and atrial 
wall is more invasive compared to the conventional technique.
The most significant postoperative complication of 
TAPVC repair is pulmonary venous obstruction, which 
occurs 9% to 11% of the time, regardless of the surgical 
Figure 20-13.  a. Risk-adjusted survival from repair improved 
significantly with increasing year of operation, indicating a strong 
era effect. Solid lines are continuous point estimates enclosed by 
dashed 95% confidence limits showing three different solutions to 
the multivariable equation for death after repair. All other predictors 
have been set to mean values to illustrate the favorable influence of 
later operation year on survival after repair. b. Risk-adjusted nomo-
grams show 1-year survival after repair expressed as a function of 
increasing year of operation for two different patients. The top line 
(A) shows the multivariable solution for a patient with favorable 
anatomic characteristics (noncardiac connection without pulmonary 
venous obstruction) undergoing repair at 1 year of age; the bottom 
line (B) shows the solution for a patient with unfavorable charac-
teristics (cardiac connection with pulmonary venous obstruction) 
undergoing operation at birth. The nomograms show that the more 
recent era has improved survival in all patients, especially within 
the last few decades. However, unfavorable anatomic characteris-
tics have not been neutralized as important determinants of postre-
pair survival despite improvements in perioperative care. Numbers 
in parentheses represent parametric estimates of median survival 
at 1 year after repair in 2005. (Reproduced with permission from 
Karamlou T, et al. Factors associated with mortality and reopera-
tion in 377 children with total anomalous pulmonary venous con-
nection. Circulation. 2007;115:1591.)
Year of operation
1952
1963
1974
1985
A) Favorable patient
a
b
B) Unfavorable
patient
(97%)
(37%)
1996
2006
0
20
40
60
80
100
Predicted survival at 1 year
after operation (%)
Years from complete repair
1985
1996
2006
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
% Survival
711
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
with catheterization necessary only when echocardiographic 
evaluation is equivocal.
Therapy.  Operative treatment for cor triatriatum is fairly 
­simple. CPB and cardioplegic arrest are used. A right ­atriotomy 
usually allows access to the left atrial membrane through the 
existing ASD, because it is dilated secondary to communi-
cation with the pulmonary venous chamber. The membrane 
is then excised, taking care not to injure the mitral valve or 
the interatrial septum, and the ASD is closed with a patch. 
­Alternatively, if the right atrium is small, the membrane can be 
exposed through an incision directly into the superior left atrial 
chamber, just anterior to the right pulmonary veins.7,82 Surgical 
results are uniformly excellent for this defect, with survival 
approaching 100%.
The utility of catheter-based intervention for this diagno-
sis remains controversial, although there have been two recent 
reports of successful balloon dilatation.83,85
Aortopulmonary Window
Embryology and Anatomy.  Aortopulmonary window (APW) 
is a rare congenital lesion, occurring in about 0.2% of patients, 
characterized by incomplete development of the septum that 
normally divides the truncus into the aorta and the pulmonary 
artery.86
In the vast majority of cases, APW occurs as a single 
defect of minimal length, which begins a few millimeters 
above the semilunar valves on the left lateral wall of the aorta 
(Fig. 20-15). Coronary artery anomalies, such as aberrant origin 
of the right or left coronary artery from the main pulmonary 
artery, are occasionally present.
Pathophysiology and Diagnosis.  The dominant pathophysi-
ology of APW is that of a large left-to-right shunt with increased 
pulmonary flow and the early development of congestive heart 
failure. Like other lesions with left-to-right flow, the magnitude 
of the shunt is determined by both the size of the defect and the 
pulmonary vascular resistance.
Infants with APW present with frequent respiratory 
tract infections, tachypnea with feeding, and failure to thrive. 
Figure 20-14.  Variants of cor triatriatum 
with imperforate membrane between common 
pulmonary venous chamber (CPVC) and left 
atrium (LA). A. Common chamber draining 
to right atrium directly. B. Common chamber 
draining into systemic venous circulation via 
anomalous vein. RA = right atrium. (Adapted 
with permission from Krabill KA, Lucas RV 
Jr. Abnormal pulmonary venous connec-
tions. In: Emmanouilides GC, ed. Moss and 
Adams’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, 
and Adolescents. 5th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 1995.)
B
A
CPCV
RA
LA
­Cyanosis is usually absent because these infants deteriorate 
prior to the onset of significant pulmonary hypertension. The 
rapid decline with this defect occurs because shunt flow con-
tinues during both phases of the cardiac cycle, which limits 
­systemic perfusion and increases ventricular work.86
The diagnosis of APW begins with the physical exami-
nation, which may demonstrate a systolic flow murmur, a 
hyperdynamic precordium, and bounding peripheral pulses. 
The chest radiograph will show pulmonary overcirculation and 
cardiomegaly, and the ECG will usually demonstrate either left 
ventricular hypertrophy or biventricular hypertrophy. Echocar-
diography can detect the defect and also provide information 
about associated anomalies. Retrograde aortography will con-
firm the diagnosis but is rarely necessary.
Therapy.  All infants with APW require surgical correction 
once the diagnosis is made. Repair is undertaken through 
a median sternotomy and the use of CPB. The pulmonary 
arteries are occluded once the distal aorta is cannulated, 
and a transaortic repair using a prosthetic patch for pulmo-
nary artery closure is then carried out. The coronary ostia 
must be carefully visualized and included on the aortic side 
of the patch. Alternatively, a two-patch technique can be 
used, which may eliminate recurrent fistulas from suture line 
Figure 20-15.  A through C. Classification of aortopulmonary win-
dow. (Reproduced with permission from Mori K, Ando M, Takao A. 
Distal type of aortopulmonary window: report of 4 cases. Br Heart 
J. 1978;40:681. With permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
A
B 
C
712
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
leaks that occasionally occur with the single-patch method 
(Fig. 20-16).86
Results.  Results are generally excellent, with an operative 
mortality in most large series of less than 5%.86-88
DEFECTS REQUIRING PALLIATION
Tricuspid Atresia
Tricuspid atresia occurs in 2% to 3% of patients with CHD and 
is characterized by atresia of the tricuspid valve. This results 
in discontinuity between the right atrium and RV. The RV is 
generally hypoplastic, and left-heart filling is dependent on an 
ASD. Tricuspid atresia is the most common form of the single-
ventricle complex, indicating that there is functionally only one 
ventricular chamber.
Anatomy.  As mentioned, tricuspid atresia results in a lack of 
communication between the right atrium and the RV, and in 
the majority of patients, there is no identifiable valve tissue 
or remnant.89 The right atrium is generally enlarged and mus-
cular, with a fibrofatty floor. An unrestrictive ASD is usually 
present. The LV is often enlarged as it receives both systemic 
and pulmonary blood flow, but the left AV valve is usually 
normal.
The RV, however, is usually severely hypoplastic, and 
there is sometimes a VSD in its trabeculated or infundibular 
portion. In many cases, the interventricular communication 
is a site of obstruction to pulmonary blood flow, but obstruc-
tion may also occur at the level of the outlet valve or in the 
subvalvular infundibulum.90 In most cases, pulmonary blood 
flow is dependent on the presence of a PDA, and there may 
be no flow into the pulmonary circulation except for this 
PDA.
Tricuspid atresia is classified according to the relation-
ship of the great vessels and by the degree of obstruction to 
pulmonary blood flow (Fig. 20-17). Because of the rarity of 
tricuspid atresia with transposed great arteries, we will restrict 
our discussion to tricuspid atresia with normally related great 
vessels.
Pathophysiology.  The main pathophysiology in tricuspid 
atresia is that of a univentricular heart of left ventricular 
morphology. That is, the LV must receive systemic blood 
via the interatrial communication and then distribute it to 
both the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation. 
Unless there is a VSD (as is found in some cases), pulmonary 
flow is dependent on the presence of a PDA. As the ductus 
begins to close shortly after birth, infants become intensely 
­cyanotic. ­Re-establishing ductal patency (with PGE1) 
restores pulmonary blood flow and stabilizes patients for 
surgical ­intervention. Pulmonary hypertension is unusual in 
tricuspid atresia. However, occasional patients have a large 
VSD between the LV and the infundibular portion of the RV 
(just below the pulmonary valve). If there is no obstruction 
at the level of this VSD or at the valve, these infants may 
actually present with heart failure from excessive pulmonary 
blood flow. Regardless of whether these infants are “ductal-­
dependent” for pulmonary blood flow or have pulmonary 
blood flow provided across a VSD, they will be cyanotic 
since the obligatory right-to-left shunt at the atrial level will 
provide complete mixing of systemic and ­pulmonary venous 
Figure 20-16.  Two-patch repair of aor-
topulmonary window. A. The aorta and 
right atrium are cannulated through a 
median sternotomy, and once the patient 
is on cardiopulmonary bypass, the right 
and left pulmonary arteries are occluded 
with snares. The ductus arteriosus (when 
present) can be ligated. The aorta is 
cross-clamped and the heart arrested 
with cardioplegia. The aortopulmonary 
window is then divided, with the left 
coronary ostia being carefully protected. 
B. A piece of previously prepared pul-
monary homograft material is used to 
patch the aortic defect. In older children, 
polytetrafluoroethylene material can be 
safely used. C. Once the aortic portion 
of the defect has been safely repaired, 
the aortic cross-clamp may be removed 
to restore perfusion to the heart. During 
rewarming, the pulmonary portion of the 
defect is repaired using a similar piece of 
homograft or polytetrafluoroethylene. D. 
At the completion of repair, the patient 
is easily weaned from cardiopulmonary 
bypass, and the cannulas are removed. 
This type of repair restores normal anat-
omy, with a reduced likelihood of long-
term fistula formation. (From Gaynor 
et al,88 with permission.)
713
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
return so that the LV ejects a hypoxemic mixture into the 
aorta.
Diagnosis.  The signs and symptoms of tricuspid atresia are 
dependent on the underlying anatomic variant, but most infants 
are cyanotic and hypoxic as a result of decreased pulmonary 
blood flow and the complete mixing at the atrial level. When 
pulmonary blood flow is provided through a VSD, there may be 
a prominent systolic murmur. Tricuspid atresia with pulmonary 
blood flow from a PDA may present with the soft, continuous 
murmur of a PDA in conjunction with cyanosis.
In the minority of patients with tricuspid atresia, symp-
toms of congestive heart failure will predominate. This is often 
related to excessive flow across a VSD. The natural history of 
the muscular VSDs in these infants is that they will close and the 
congestive heart failure will dissipate and transform into cyano-
sis with reduced pulmonary blood flow. Chest radiography will 
show decreased pulmonary vascularity. The ECG is strongly 
suggestive, because uncharacteristic left axis deviation will be 
present, due to underdevelopment of the RV. Two-dimensional 
echocardiography readily confirms the diagnosis and the ana-
tomic subtype.
Treatment.  The treatment for tricuspid atresia in the ­earlier 
era of palliation was aimed at correcting the defect in the 
pulmonary circulation. That is, patients with too much pul-
monary flow received a pulmonary band, and those with insuf-
ficient flow received a systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. 
­Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunts, or Blalock-Taussig (B-T) 
shunts, were first applied to patients with tricuspid atresia in 
the 1940s and 1950s.91 Likewise pulmonary artery banding was 
applied to patients with tricuspid atresia and congestive failure in 
1957. However, despite the initial relief of either cyanosis or con-
gestive heart failure, long-term mortality was high, as the single 
ventricle was left unprotected from either volume or ­pressure 
overload.92
Recognizing the inadequacies of the initial repairs, Glenn 
described the first successful cavopulmonary anastomosis, an 
end-to-side right pulmonary artery-to-superior vena cava shunt 
in 1958, and later modified this to allow flow to both pulmonary 
arteries.93 This end-to-side right pulmonary artery-to-superior 
vena cava anastomosis was known as the bidirectional Glenn, 
and is the first stage to final Fontan repair in widespread use 
today (Fig. 20-18). The Fontan repair was a major advancement 
in the treatment of CHD, as it essentially bypassed the right 
heart and allowed separation of the pulmonary and systemic 
circulations. It was first performed by Fontan in 1971, and con-
sisted of a classic Glenn anastomosis, ASD closure, and direct 
connection of the right atrium to the proximal end of the left 
pulmonary artery using an aortic homograft.94 The main pulmo-
nary artery was ligated, and a homograft valve was inserted into 
the orifice of the inferior vena cava.
Multiple modifications of this initial repair were per-
formed over the next 20 years. One of the most important 
was the description by deLeval and colleagues of the cre-
ation of an interatrial lateral tunnel that allowed the inferior 
vena caval blood to be channeled exclusively to the superior 
vena cava.95 A total cavopulmonary connection could then be 
accomplished by dividing the superior vena cava and suturing 
the superior portion to the upper side of the right pulmonary 
artery and the inferior end to the augmented undersurface 
of the right pulmonary artery. Pulmonary flow then occurs 
passively, in a laminar fashion, driven by the central venous 
pressure. This repair became known as the modified Fontan 
operation.
Another important modification, the fenestrated Fontan 
repair, was introduced in 1988.96 In this procedure, a residual 
20% to 30% right-to-left shunt is either created or left unre-
paired at the time of cavopulmonary connection to help sustain 
systemic output in the face of transient elevations in the pulmo-
nary vascular resistance postoperatively (Fig. 20-19).96
Figure 20-17.  Classification of ­tricuspid 
atresia. Type I, normally related great 
arteries with: IA, pulmonary atresia with 
virtual absence of right ventricle; IB, 
pulmonary stenosis with small ventricu-
lar septal defect; IC, normal pulmonary 
valve, large ventricular septal defect. 
Type II, transposed great arteries with: 
IIA, pulmonary atresia; IIB, pulmonary 
or subpulmonary stenosis; IIC, normal 
or enlarged pulmonary valve and artery 
without subpulmonary stenosis. (Repro-
duced with permission from Tricuspid 
atresia. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, 
eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. 
St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:381.)
714
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 20-18.  Superior vena cava–pulmonary artery 
shunts. A. Classic Glenn shunt. End-to-side right pulmo-
nary artery (RPA)-to-superior vena cava (SVC) anastomo-
sis with ligation of SVC–right atrial junction. B. Method 
of takedown of classic Glenn shunt and creation of total 
cavopulmonary anastomosis during Fontan operation. 
C. Bidirectional Glenn shunt (bidirectional SVC–­
pulmonary artery shunt), end-to-side SVC-to-RPA anasto-
mosis. D. Method of construction of bidirectional Glenn 
shunt, one cannula in the high SVC or innominate vein and 
another cannula in the right atrium connected to a Y-connector. 
(Reproduced with permission from Tricuspid atresia. In: 
Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 
2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:383.)
Figure 20-19.  The fenestrated Fontan proce-
dure. Using a polytetrafluoroethylene patch, a 
tunnel is created in the lateral wall of the right 
atrium to direct inferior vena cava (IVC) flow 
to the superior vena cava (SVC) that is anas-
tomosed to the pulmonary artery (PA). A 4- to 
5-mm fenestration in the baffle diminishes sys-
temic venous pressure and improves cardiac out-
put at the expense of a small decrease in systemic 
arterial oxygen saturation. (Reproduced with 
permission from Kopf GS, Kleinman CS, Hijazi 
ZM, et al. Fenestrated Fontan operation with 
delayed transcatheter closure of atrial septal 
defect: improved results in high-risk patients. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;103:1039. Copy-
right Elsevier.)
Fenestration
SVC
PA
Aorta
PA
IVC
Lateral tunnel
715
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
The last notable variation on the original Fontan repair uses 
an extracardiac prosthetic tube graft, usually 20 mm in diameter, 
as the conduit directing inferior vena cava blood to the pulmo-
nary arteries.95  This technique has the advantages of decreasing 
atrial geometric alterations by avoiding intra-atrial suture lines 
and improving flow dynamics in the systemic venous ­pathway 
by maximizing laminar flow. Several ­investigators have shown 
a decrease in supraventricular arrhythmias, as well as an 
improvement in ventricular function, which may be secondary 
to decreased atrial tension and alleviation of chronic elevations 
in coronary sinus pressure.95,96 The extracardiac Fontan opera-
tion can be completed without the use of CPB in selected cases, 
which may further improve outcomes.97
One potential disadvantage of the extracardiac Fontan 
is that it delays performance of the Fontan in order to allow 
placement of a conduit of sufficient size. Despite these innova-
tive approaches, the current strategy for operative management 
still relies on the idea of palliation. Patients are approached in 
a staged manner, to maximize their physiologic state so that 
they will survive to undergo a Fontan operation. The therapeu-
tic strategy must begin in the neonatal period and should be 
directed toward reducing the patient’s subsequent risk factors 
for a Fontan procedure. Accordingly, small systemic pulmonary 
shunts, which are usually performed through a median sternot-
omy, should be constructed for palliation of ductus-dependent 
univentricular physiology. This can easily be replaced with a 
bidirectional Glenn shunt or hemi-Fontan operation at 6 months 
of life. In non–ductus-dependent univentricular physiology, the 
infant can be managed medically until primary construction of 
a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis becomes feasible. 
This is possible in the majority of cases because the physiologi-
cally elevated pulmonary vascular resistance prevents pulmo-
nary overcirculation during the neonatal period.
Occasionally, if a previous B-T shunt was performed, arte-
rioplasty of the right pulmonary artery may be required to ensure 
adequate size and unobstructed bilateral flow.2 The bidirectional 
Glenn shunt or hemi-Fontan operation effectively avoids recir-
culation of both systemic and pulmonary venous return, thus 
preventing volume overload of the single ventricle and its atten-
dant sequelae.95 Pulmonary artery banding is ­necessary in 10% 
to 15% of patients with markedly increased pulmonary blood 
flow and florid congestive heart failure.
The Fontan is usually performed when the child is between 
2 and 4 years of age, and it is generally successful if the infant 
was staged properly, with a protected single ventricle, and there 
is adequate pulmonary artery growth. The pulmonary vascular 
resistance should be below 4 Wood units, and the ejection frac-
tion should be more than 45% to ensure success.98 In patients 
with high pulmonary artery pressure, fenestration of the atrial 
baffle may be helpful because their pulmonary vascular resis-
tance may preclude adequate cardiac output postoperatively.92,96
Results.  Recent reports of the Fontan procedure for tricuspid 
atresia have been encouraging, with an overall survival of 86% 
and an operative mortality of 2%.8 The main complications fol-
lowing repair are atrial arrhythmias, particularly atrial flutter; 
conduit obstruction requiring reoperation; protein-losing enter-
opathy; and decreased exercise tolerance.
A recent prospective multi-institutional study from the 
Congenital Heart Surgeons Society reported the outcomes 
of 150 neonates with tricuspid atresia and normally related 
great vessels.99 Five-year survival was 86%, and by the age of 
2 years, 89% had undergone cavopulmonary anastomosis, and 
75% of those surviving cavopulmonary anastomosis underwent 
Fontan operation within 3 years. Competing risks methodol-
ogy was used in this study to determine the rates of transition to 
0
20
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Years from diagnosis
1.6
2.0
40
60
80
100
Proportion (%) of patients in each state
BDCPA (2 year prevalence = 90%)
Dead without BDCPA
(2 year prevalence = 5%)
Single-stage Fontan
(2 year prevalence = 1%)
Alive without BDCPA
(2 year prevalence = 4%)
Figure 20-20.  Competing risks depiction of events after diagnosis in 150 patients with tricuspid atresia. All patients began alive and thereafter 
migrated to one of four mutually exclusive end states (death, bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis [BDCPA], single-stage Fontan comple-
tion, or remaining alive without BDCPA) at time-dependent rates defined by the underlying hazard functions. At any point in time, the sum of 
proportions of children in each state is 100%. For example, estimated prevalences after 2 years from diagnosis are as follows: 89% BDCPA, 
6% dead without BDCPA, 4% alive without BDCPA, and 1% single-stage Fontan completion. Solid lines represent parametric point estimates; 
dashed lines enclose 70% confidence intervals; circles with error bars represent nonparametric estimates; numbers in parentheses indicate the 
estimated proportion of patients in each state at 2 years from diagnosis. (From Karamlou et al,99 Fig. 1, with permission. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
716
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­end-states and their associated determinants (Fig. 20-20). Risk 
factors for death without cavopulmonary anastomosis in this 
study included the presence of mitral regurgitation and palliation 
with systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunts not originating from 
the innominate artery. Factors associated with decreased transi-
tion rate to cavopulmonary anastomosis included patient vari-
ables (younger age at admission to a participating institution and 
noncardiac anomalies) and procedural variables (larger systemic-
to-pulmonary arterial shunt diameter and previous palliation).99
Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
HLHS comprises a wide spectrum of cardiac malformations, 
including hypoplasia or atresia of the aortic and mitral valves 
and hypoplasia of the LV and ascending aorta.100 HLHS has 
a reported prevalence of 0.2 per 1000 live births and occurs 
twice as often in boys as in girls. Left untreated, HLHS is invari-
ably fatal and is responsible for 25% of early cardiac deaths in 
neonates.101 However, the recent evolution of palliative surgical 
procedures has dramatically improved the outlook for patients 
with HLHS, and an improved understanding of anatomic and 
physiologic alterations has spurred advances in parallel arenas 
such as intrauterine diagnosis and fetal intervention, echocardio-
graphic imaging, and neonatal critical care.
Anatomy.  As implied by its name, HLHS involves varying 
degrees of underdevelopment of left-sided structures, including 
the LV and the aortic and mitral valves. Thus, HLHS can be 
classified into four anatomic subtypes based on the valvular mor-
phology: (a) aortic and mitral stenosis; (b) aortic and mitral atre-
sia; (c) aortic atresia and mitral stenosis; and (d) AS and mitral 
atresia. Aortic atresia tends to be associated with more severe 
degrees of hypoplasia of the ascending aorta than does AS.
Even in cases without frank aortic atresia, however, the 
aortic arch is generally hypoplastic and, in severe cases, may 
even be interrupted. There is an associated coarctation shelf 
in 80% of patients with HLHS, and the ductus itself is usu-
ally quite large, as is the main pulmonary artery.7 The seg-
mental pulmonary arteries, however, are small, secondary to 
reduced intrauterine pulmonary blood flow, which is itself a 
consequence of the left-sided outflow obstruction. The left 
atrial cavity is generally smaller than normal and is accentu-
ated because of the leftward displacement of the septum pri-
mum. There is almost always an interatrial communication via 
the foramen ovale, which can be large, but more commonly 
restricts right-to-left flow. In rare cases, there is no atrial-level 
communication, which can be lethal for these infants because 
there is no way for pulmonary venous return to cross over to 
the RV.
Associated defects can occur with HLHS, and many of 
them have importance with respect to operative repair. For 
example, if a VSD is present, the LV can retain its normal size 
during development even in the presence of mitral atresia. This 
is because a right-to-left shunt through the defect impels growth 
of the LV.102 This introduces the feasibility of biventricular 
repair for this subset of patients.
Although HLHS undoubtedly results from a complex 
interplay of developmental errors in the early stages of cardio-
genesis, many investigators have hypothesized that the altered 
blood flow is responsible for the structural underdevelopment 
that characterizes HLHS. In other words, if the stimulus for nor-
mal development of the ascending aorta from the primordial 
aortic sac is high-pressure systemic blood flow from the LV 
through the aortic valve, then an atretic or stenotic aortic valve, 
which impedes flow and leads to only low-pressure diastolic 
retrograde flow via the ductus, will change the developmental 
signals and result in hypoplasia of the downstream structures. 
Normal growth and development of the LV and mitral valve 
can be secondarily affected, resulting in hypoplasia or atresia of 
these structures.100
Pathophysiology and Diagnosis.  In HLHS, pulmonary 
venous blood enters the left atrium, but atrial systole cannot 
propel blood across the stenotic or atretic mitral valve into 
the LV. Thus, the blood is shunted across the foramen ovale 
into the right atrium, where it contributes to volume loading 
of the RV. The end result is pulmonary venous hypertension 
from outflow obstruction at the level of the left atrium, as well 
as pulmonary overcirculation and right ventricular failure. As 
the pulmonary vascular resistance falls postnatally, the condi-
tion is exacerbated because right ventricular output is prefer-
entially directed away from the systemic circulation, resulting 
in profound underperfusion of the coronary arteries and the 
vital organs. Closure of the ductus is incompatible with life in 
these neonates.
Neonates with severe HLHS receive all pulmonary, sys-
temic, and coronary blood flow from the RV. Generally, a child 
with HLHS will present with respiratory distress within the first 
day of life, and mild cyanosis may be noted. These infants must 
be rapidly triaged to a tertiary center, and echocardiography 
should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Prostaglandin 
E1 must be administered to maintain ductal patency, and the 
ventilatory settings must be adjusted to avoid excessive oxygen-
ation and increase carbon dioxide tension. These maneuvers will 
maintain pulmonary vascular resistance and promote improved 
systemic perfusion.2,7,100 Cardiac catheterization should gener-
ally be avoided because it is not usually helpful and might result 
in injury to the ductus and compromised renal function second-
ary to the osmotic dye load.
Treatment.  In 1983, Norwood and colleagues described a two-
stage palliative surgical procedure for relief of HLHS103 that was 
later modified to the currently used three-stage method of pallia-
tion.104 Stage 1 palliation, also known as the modified Norwood 
procedure, bypasses the LV by creating a single outflow vessel, 
the neoaorta, which arises from the RV.
The current technique of arch reconstruction involves 
completion of a connection between the pulmonary root, the 
native ascending aorta, and a piece of pulmonary homograft 
used to augment the diminutive native aorta. There are several 
modifications of this anastomosis, most notably the Damus-
Kaye-Stansel (DKS) anastomosis, which involves dividing 
both the aorta and the pulmonary artery at the sinotubular 
junction. The proximal aorta is anastomosed to the proximal 
pulmonary artery, creating a “double-barreled” outlet from the 
heart. This outlet is anastomosed to the distal aorta, which can 
be augmented with homograft material if there is an associated 
coarctation. At the completion of arch reconstruction, a 3.5- or 
4-mm shunt is placed from the innominate artery to the right 
pulmonary artery. The interatrial septum is then widely excised, 
thereby creating a large interatrial communication and prevent-
ing pulmonary venous hypertension (Fig. 20-21).
The DKS connection, as described earlier, might avoid 
postoperative distortion of the tripartite connection in the neo-
aorta, and thus decrease the risk of coronary insufficiency.105 It 
can be used when the aorta is 4 mm or larger. Unfortunately, in 
717
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
Figure 20-21.  Current techniques for first-stage palliation of the hypoplastic left-heart syndrome. A. Incisions used for the procedure, 
incorporating a cuff of arterial wall allograft. The distal divided main pulmonary artery may be closed by direct suture or with a patch. 
B. Dimensions of the cuff of the arterial wall allograft. C. The arterial wall allograft is used to supplement the anastomosis between the proxi-
mal divided main pulmonary artery and the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and proximal descending aorta. D and E. The procedure is completed 
by atrial septectomy and a 3- to 5-mm modified right Blalock shunt. F. When the ascending aorta is particularly small, an alternative procedure 
involves placement of a complete tube of arterial allograft. The tiny ascending aorta may be left in situ, as indicated, or implanted into the 
side of the neoaorta. a. = artery. (From Castaneda AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, et al. Cardiac Surgery of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders; 1994:371, with permission. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
A
B 
C
D
E
F
Homograft
Aorta 
Main pulmonary a.
many infants with HLHS, especially if there is aortic atresia, the 
aorta is diminutive and often less than 2 mm in diameter.
The postoperative management of infants following stage 1 
palliation is complex because favorable outcomes depend on 
establishing a delicate balance between pulmonary and systemic 
perfusion. Recent literature suggests that these infants require 
adequate postoperative cardiac output in order to supply both 
the pulmonary and the systemic circulations and that the use 
of oximetric catheters to monitor mixed venous oxygen satu-
ration (Svo2) aids clinicians in both the selection of inotropic 
agents and in ventilatory management.106 Recent introduction of 
a modification that includes arch reconstruction and placement of 
the shunt between the RV and the pulmonary artery (Sano shunt) 
diminishes the diastolic flow created by the classical B-T shunt 
and may augment coronary perfusion, resulting in improved post-
operative cardiac function. A recent prospective, ­randomized, 
multi-institutional trial sponsored by the National Institutes 
of Health, the Systemic Ventricle Reconstruction (SVR) trial, 
compared the outcomes of neonates having either a modified 
B-T shunt vs. a Sano shunt.107 The SVR trial demonstrated that 
transplantation-free survival 12 months after randomization was 
higher with the Sano shunt than with the modified B-T shunt 
(74% vs. 64%, P = .01). However, the Sano shunt group had 
more unintended interventions (P = .003) and complications 
(P = .002). Right ventricular size and function at the age of 
14 months and the rate of nonfatal serious adverse events at the 
age of 12 months were similar in the two groups. Data collected 
over a mean (± standard deviation) follow-up period of 32 ± 11 
months showed a nonsignificant difference in transplan-
tation-free survival between the two groups (P = .06).107
Although surgical palliation with the Norwood proce-
dure is still the mainstay of therapy for infants with HLHS, 
5
718
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
a combined surgical and percutaneous option (hybrid proce-
dure), which consists of bilateral pulmonary artery banding 
and placement of a ductal stent, has emerged as a promising 
­alternative that obviates the need for CPB in the fragile neona-
tal period.108,109 The hybrid procedure is performed in a “hybrid 
suite,” incorporating both advanced fluoroscopic imaging facili-
ties combined with complete operating room capabilities. A 3- 
or 3.5-mm PTFE tube graft is cut to a width of 3 to 4 mm and 
used as the bands on the branch pulmonary arteries, placed just 
distal to the main pulmonary artery. The ductal stent is then 
positioned in order to cover all ductal tissue and is deployed 
through a purse-string suture in the main pulmonary artery. A 
reverse systemic-to-pulmonary shunt is considered in patients 
with aortic atresia and preductal coarctation to improve coro-
nary perfusion; however, a recent study demonstrated no dif-
ference in survival between those with and without the shunt.110 
The hybrid procedure can also be used as a bridge to heart trans-
plantation in those infants with severe AV valve regurgitation or 
otherwise unsuitable single-ventricle anatomy.
Following stage 1 palliation, the second surgical proce-
dure is the creation of a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt 
or hemi-Fontan, generally at 3 to 6 months of life when the 
pulmonary vascular resistance has decreased to normal levels. 
This is the first step in separating the pulmonary and systemic 
circulations, and it decreases the volume load on the single ven-
tricle. The existing innominate artery-to-pulmonary shunt (or 
RV-to-pulmonary shunt) is eliminated during the same operation 
(Fig. 20-22).
The third stage of surgical palliation, known as the modi-
fied Fontan procedure, completes the separation of the ­systemic 
and pulmonary circulations and is performed between 18 
months and 3 years of age, or when the patient experiences 
increased cyanosis (i.e., has outgrown the capacity to perfuse 
the systemic circulation with adequately oxygenated blood). 
This has traditionally required a lateral tunnel within the right 
atrium to direct blood from the inferior vena cava to the pulmo-
nary artery, allowing further relief of the volume load on the 
RV and providing increased pulmonary blood flow to alleviate 
cyanosis. More recently, many favor using an extracardiac con-
duit (e.g., 20-mm tube graft) to connect the inferior vena cava 
to the pulmonary artery.
Not all patients with HLHS require this three-stage pallia-
tive repair. Some infants afflicted with a milder form of HLHS, 
recently described as hypoplastic left heart complex (HLHC), 
have aortic or mitral hypoplasia without intrinsic valve steno-
sis and antegrade flow in the ascending aorta. In this group, a 
two-ventricle repair can be achieved with reasonable outcome. 
Tchervenkov recently published the results with 12 patients with 
HLHC who underwent biventricular repair at a mean age of 
7 days.106 The operative technique consisted of a ­pulmonary 
homograft patch aortoplasty of the aortic arch and ascending 
aorta and closure of the interatrial and interventricular commu-
nications. The left heart was capable of sustaining systemic per-
fusion in 92% of patients, and early mortality was 15.4%. Four 
patients required reoperations to relieve LVOT obstruction, 
most commonly between 12 and 39 months ­following repair.
Although the Norwood procedure is the most widely 
performed initial operation for HLHS, transplantation can be 
used as a first-line therapy and may be preferred when ana-
tomic or physiologic considerations exist that preclude a 
Figure 20-22.  Technique of a bidirectional 
Glenn shunt. The divided right superior vena cava 
has been anastomosed at the previous site of the 
distal anastomosis of the modified right Blalock 
shunt. The cardiac end of the divided superior 
vena cava may also be anastomosed to the right 
pulmonary artery, with the internal orifice being 
closed with a Gore-Tex patch. (From Castaneda 
AR, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, et al. Cardiac Surgery 
of the Neonate and Infant. Philadelphia: W.B. 
Saunders; 1994:376, with permission. kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.)
Shunt divided
Aorta
Pulmonary
artery
Homograft
patch
719
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
favorable outcome with palliative repair. Significant tricuspid 
regurgitation, intractable pulmonary artery hypertension, or 
progressive right ventricular failure are cases where cardiac 
replacement may be advantageous. Widespread adaptation 
of transplantation as first-line treatment for HLHS has been 
limited by improved Norwood survival rates as the operation 
and pre- and postoperative management of the patient have 
evolved and by limited organ availability. Organ availabil-
ity should be considered prior to electing transplantation, as 
24% of infants died awaiting transplantation in the largest series 
to date.111,112
Results.  Outcomes for HLHS are still significantly worse 
than those for other complex cardiac defects. However, with 
improvements in perioperative care and modifications in 
surgical technique, the survival following the Norwood pro-
cedure now exceeds 80% in experienced centers.100,105,107,109 
The outcome for low-birth-weight infants has improved, but 
low weight still remains a major predictor of adverse sur-
vival, especially when accompanied by additional cardiac 
defects, such as systemic outflow obstruction or extracardiac 
­anomalies.
DEFECTS THAT MAY BE PALLIATED OR 
REPAIRED
Ebstein’s Anomaly
Anatomy.  This is a rare defect, occurring in less than 1% 
of CHD patients. The predominant maldevelopment in this 
lesion is the inferior displacement of the tricuspid valve into 
the RV, although Bove113 and others have emphasized the fact 
that Ebstein’s anomaly is primarily a defect in right ventri-
clar morphology rather than an isolated defect in the tricuspid 
valve. The anterior leaflet is usually attached in its normal 
position to the annulus, but the septal and posterior leaflets are 
displaced toward the ventricle. This effectively divides the RV 
into two parts: the inlet portion (atrialized RV) and the outlet 
portion (true or trabeculated RV). The atrialized RV is usually 
thin and dilated. Similarly, the tricuspid annulus and the right 
atrium are extremely dilated, and the tricuspid valve is usually 
regurgitant with a “sail-like” leaflet. There is commonly an 
ASD present, which results in a right-to-left shunt at the atrial 
level. Occasionally, there is true anatomic pulmonary atresia 
or milder forms of RVOT obstruction.
A Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome type of accessory 
pathway with associated pre-excitation is present in 15% of 
patients.113
Pathophysiology.  Right ventricular dysfunction occurs in 
patients with Ebstein’s anomaly because of two basic mecha-
nisms: the inflow obstruction at the level of the atrialized ven-
tricle, which produces ineffective RV filling and contractile 
dysfunction. Inflow obstruction and tricuspid regurgitation, 
which is exacerbated by progressive annular dilatation, both 
produce ineffective RV filling. Contractile dysfunction of the 
RV is a result of a decrease in the number of myocardial fibers, 
as well as the discordant contraction of the large atrialized 
­portion.
The lack of forward flow at the right ventricular level 
may lead to physiologic or functional pulmonary atresia, and 
the infant is dependent on ductal patency for survival. All 
­systemic venous return must be directed through an ASD to 
the left atrium, where it can be shunted through the ductus for 
gas exchange. However, the left ventricular function is usu-
ally compromised in infants with severe Ebstein’s anomaly 
as well, because the enormous RV and the to-and-fro flow 
within the atrialized RV prevent adequate intracardiac mixing. 
Left ventricular function may also be severely compromised in 
Ebstein’s anomaly because the large RV causes left ventricular 
compression.
Diagnosis.  There is a spectrum of clinical presentation in 
infants with Ebstein’s anomaly that mirrors the anatomic spec-
trum of this anomaly. Some infants with less severe forms may 
present with a mild degree of cyanosis, whereas the onset of 
clinical symptoms in patients surviving childhood is gradual, 
with the average age of diagnosis in the mid-teens.
However, the infant with severe atrialization and pulmo-
nary stenosis will be both cyanotic and acidotic at birth. The 
chest radiograph may demonstrate the classic appearance, which 
consists of a globular “wall-to-wall” heart, similar to that seen 
with pericardial effusion. The ECG may show right bundle-
branch block and right axis deviation. Wolff-Parkinson-White 
(WPW) syndrome, as mentioned earlier, is a common finding in 
these patients. Echocardiography will confirm the diagnosis and 
provide critical information including tricuspid valvular func-
tion, size of the atrialized portion of the RV, degree of pulmo-
nary stenosis, and the atrial size.6,113
The Great Ormond Street Score (GOSE),114 which consists 
of the area of the right atrium plus the area of the atrialized 
­portion of the RV divided by the diastolic area of the remaining 
cardiac chambers, has been proposed as a useful prognostic tool 
to stratify neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly. A score of greater 
than 1 translates into uniformly fatal outcome. Electrophysiol-
ogy study with radiofrequency ablation is indicated in patients 
with evidence of WPW syndrome or in children with a ­history 
of supraventricular tachycardia, undefined wide-complex 
­tachycardia, or syncope.
Treatment.  Surgery is indicated for symptomatic infants and 
for older children and adults with arrhythmias, progressive 
cyanosis, or New York Heart Association class III or IV. How-
ever, the operative repair may be different, depending on the 
patient’s age, because older children usually are candidates for 
a biventricular or one-and-a-half ventricle repair, whereas mod-
erate survival has been reported for neonates, using a procedure 
that converts the anatomy to a single-ventricle physiology, as 
described by Starnes and coworkers.115
The surgical approach in widespread use today for 
patients surviving infancy was described by Danielson and 
colleagues in 1992.6,113,116 This procedure entails excision of 
redundant right atrial tissue and patch closure of any associ-
ated ASD, plication of the atrialized portion of the ventricle 
with obliteration of the aneurysmal cavity, posterior tricuspid 
annuloplasty to narrow the tricuspid annulus, reconstruction 
of the tricuspid valve if the anterior leaflet is satisfactory, or 
replacement of the tricuspid valve if necessary.116 If the tricus-
pid valve is not amenable to reconstruction, valve replacement 
should be considered. Care must be taken when performing 
the posterior annuloplasty, or during the conduct of tricuspid 
valve replacement, to avoid the conduction system, because 
complete heart block can complicate this procedure. In addi-
tion, patients who demonstrated preoperative evidence of 
­pre-excitation should undergo electrophysiologic mapping 
and ablation.
720
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Neonatal Ebstein’s anomaly is a separate entity. Results 
with surgical correction have been poor, and many neonates 
are not candidates for operative repair as previously described. 
Surgical options for the symptomatic neonate include palliative 
procedures, the one-and-a-half ventricle repair, or conversion to 
single-ventricle physiology.1,7,117 Arguably, the most favorable 
outcomes in symptomatic neonatal Ebstein’s anomaly or repair in 
slightly older infants have been achieved using the right ventricu-
lar exclusion premise. This technique, known as the “Starnes” 
procedure,115 uses a fenestrated patch to close the tricuspid valve 
orifice coupled with systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. The 
patch must be fenestrated to allow decompression of the RV in 
instances of anatomic pulmonary atresia. Although Knott-Craig 
and colleagues117 have described tricuspid valve repair for the full 
spectrum of neonates and infants with excellent short- and mid-
term results, these results have not been reproduced in other insti-
tutions.118  The one-and-a-half ventricle repair was first described 
by Billingsly and coworkers as an attempt to achieve a more 
physiologic “pulsatile” pulmonary circulation in patients with a 
hypoplastic or dysplastic RV.119 This is accomplished by divert-
ing the superior vena caval blood directly into the pulmonary 
arterial system by a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt while 
recruiting the RV to propel the inferior vena caval blood directly 
to the pulmonary arteries via the RVOT. Thus the hemodynam-
ics of the one-and-a-half ventricle repair are characterized by 
separate systemic and pulmonary circulations in series. The sys-
temic circulation is fully supported by a systemic ventricle, and 
the pulmonary circulation is supported by both the bidirectional 
Glenn shunt and the hypoplastic (pulmonary) ventricle. Propo-
nents of this approach report a decreased right atrial pressure and 
a decrease in inferior vena cava hypertension, which is theorized 
to be responsible for many of the dreaded complications of the 
Fontan circulation, including protein-losing encephalopathy, 
hepatic congestion, atrial arrhythmias, and systemic ventricular 
failure. In addition, the maintenance of pulsatile pulmonary blood 
flow, as opposed to continuous laminar flow as in the Fontan 
circulation, may be advantageous to the pulmonary microcircula-
tion, although it has not been proven in any studies thus far.119,120 
Certain criteria, most notably an adequate tricuspid valve Z score, 
as well as the absence of severe pulmonary hypertension or con-
comitant defects requiring intricate intracardiac repair, should be 
satisfied prior to electing the one-and-a-half ventricle approach.121 
Patients who do not fulfill these criteria may be approached with 
a two-ventricle repair and atrial fenestration or a Fontan repair.
In the infant with severe Ebstein’s anomaly, initial 
­stabilization with prostaglandin to maintain ductal patency, 
mechanical ventilation, and correction of cyanosis is man-
datory. Metabolic acidosis, if present from compromised 
systemic perfusion, must be aggressively treated with after-
load reduction. Many of these infants will improve over 1 to 
2 weeks as pulmonary vascular resistance falls and they are 
able to improve antegrade flow into the pulmonary circula-
tion through their abnormal RV and tricuspid valve. When 
stabilization and medical palliation fail, surgical management 
remains an option, although its success depends on numerous 
anatomic factors (e.g., adequacy of the tricuspid valve, RV 
and pulmonary outflow tract), and surgery for symptomatic 
neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly carries a high risk. Recently, 
Knott-Craig and associates reported three cases where two-
ventricle repair was undertaken by subtotal closure of the 
ASD, extensive resection of the right atrium, and vertical 
plication of the atrialized chamber.117 Five-year follow-up 
revealed all patients to be asymptomatic and in sinus rhythm 
without medications.
Results.  In the neonatal period, the most common postoperative 
problem, whether after a simple palliative procedure such as a B-T 
shunt or following a more extensive procedure such as attempted 
exclusion of the RV, has been low cardiac output. Supraventricular 
tachycardia also has been problematic postoperatively. Complete 
heart blockage necessitating pacemaker implantation should be 
uncommon if the techniques described to avoid suturing between 
the coronary sinus and the tricuspid annulus are used.
There are few published reports of outcomes, due to the 
rarity of this defect. However, based on the natural history of 
this condition, which is remarkably benign for the majority of 
older patients, the outlook should be excellent for patients who 
have survived ASD closure, plication, and tricuspid annulo-
plasty.7,112,116,117
Transposition of the Great Arteries
Anatomy.  Complete transposition is characterized by connec-
tion of the atria to their appropriate ventricles with inappropriate 
ventriculoarterial connections. Thus, the aorta arises anteriorly 
from the RV, while the pulmonary artery arises posteriorly 
from the LV. Van Praagh and coworkers introduced the term 
D-transposition of the great arteries (D-TGA) to describe this 
defect, whereas L-TGA describes a form of corrected transposi-
tion where there is concomitant AV discordance.122,123
D-TGA requires an obligatory intracardiac mixing of 
blood, which usually occurs at both the atrial and the ventricu-
lar levels or via a patent ductus. Significant coronary anomalies 
occur frequently in patients with D-TGA.7 The most common 
pattern, occurring in 68% of cases, is characterized by the left 
main coronary artery arising from the leftward coronary sinus, 
giving rise to the left anterior descending and circumflex arter-
ies. The most common variant is for the circumflex coronary 
artery to arise as a branch from the right coronary artery instead 
of from the left coronary artery.
Pathophysiology.  D-TGA results in parallel pulmonary 
and systemic circulations, with patient survival dependent on 
intracardiac mixing of blood. After birth, both ventricles are 
relatively noncompliant, and thus, infants initially have higher 
pulmonary flow due to the decreased downstream resistance. 
This causes left atrial enlargement and a left-to-right shunt via 
the patent foramen ovale.
Postnatally, the LV does not hypertrophy because it is not 
subjected to systemic afterload. The lack of normal extrauter-
ine left ventricular maturation has important implications for 
the timing of surgical repair because the LV must be converted 
to the systemic ventricle and be able to function against sys-
temic vascular resistance. If complete repair is done within the 
first few weeks of life, the LV usually adapts easily to systemic 
resistance since it is conditioned to high intrauterine pulmonary 
vascular resistance. After a few weeks of life, the LV that is 
conditioned to the decrease in pulmonary resistance that occurs 
when the lungs inflate after birth may have difficulty adapting 
to systemic vascular resistance without preoperative preparation 
or postoperative support. Novel techniques of LV “preparation” 
using a pulmonary arterial band have been used in cases where 
complete repair has been delayed.
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Infants with 
D-TGA and an intact ventricular septum are usually ­cyanotic 
721
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
at birth, with an arterial Po2 between 25 and 40 mmHg. If 
ductal patency is not maintained, deterioration will be rapid 
with ensuing metabolic acidosis and death. Conversely, 
those infants with a coexisting VSD may be only mildly 
hypoxemic and may come to medical attention after 2 to 
3 weeks, when the falling pulmonary vascular resistance leads 
to symptoms of congestive heart failure.
The ECG will reveal right ventricular hypertrophy, 
and the chest radiograph will reveal the classic egg-shaped 
­configuration. Definitive diagnosis is made by echocardiogra-
phy, which reliably demonstrates ventriculoarterial discordance 
and any associated lesions. Cardiac catheterization is rarely 
necessary, except in infants requiring surgery after the neonatal 
period to assess the suitability of the LV to support the sys-
temic circulation. Limited catheterization, however, is useful for 
performance of atrial septostomy in neonates with inadequate 
intracardiac mixing.
Surgical Repair.  Blalock and Hanlon introduced the first 
operative intervention for D-TGA with the creation of an atrial 
septectomy to enhance intracardiac mixing.124 This initial proce-
dure was feasible in the pre-CPB era, but carried a high mortal-
ity rate. Later, Rashkind and Causo developed a catheter-based 
balloon septostomy, which largely obviated the need for open 
septectomy.42
These early palliative maneuvers, however, met with lim-
ited success, and it was not until the late 1950s, when Senning 
and Mustard developed the first “atrial repair,” that outcomes 
improved. The Senning operation consisted of rerouting venous 
flow at the atrial level by incising and realigning the atrial sep-
tum over the pulmonary veins and using the right atrial free wall 
to create a pulmonary venous baffle (Fig. 20-23).125
Although the Mustard repair was similar, it made use 
of either autologous pericardium or synthetic material to cre-
ate the interatrial baffle.126 These atrial switch procedures 
resulted in a physiologic correction, but not an anatomic one, 
as the systemic circulation is still based on the RV. Still, sur-
vival rose to 95% in most centers by using an early balloon 
septostomy followed by an atrial switch procedure at 3 to 
8 months of age.125,126
Despite the improved early survival rates, long-term 
problems, such as superior vena cava or pulmonary venous 
obstruction, baffle leak, arrhythmias, tricuspid valve regurgita-
tion, and right ventricular failure, prompted the development of 
the arterial switch procedure by Jatene in 1975.127 The arterial 
switch procedure involves the division of the aorta and the pul-
monary artery, posterior translocation of the aorta (LeCompte 
maneuver), mobilization of the coronary arteries, placement of 
a pantaloon-shaped pericardial patch, and proper alignment of 
the coronary arteries on the neoaorta (Fig. 20-24).
The most important consideration is the timing of surgi-
cal repair, because arterial switch should be performed within 
2 weeks after birth, before the LV loses its ability to pump 
against systemic afterload.2,4,7 In patients presenting later than 
2 weeks, the LV can be retrained with preliminary pulmonary 
artery banding and aortopulmonary shunt followed by defini-
tive repair. Alternatively, the unprepared LV can be supported 
following arterial switch with a mechanical assist device for 
a few days while it recovers ability to manage systemic pres-
sures. Echocardiography can be used to assess left ventricular 
performance and guide operative planning in these circum-
stances.
Figure 20-23.  The Senning operation. A. The atrial septum is cut 
near the tricuspid valve, creating a flap attached posteriorly between 
the caval veins. B. The flap of atrial septum is sutured to the anterior 
lip of the orifices of the left pulmonary veins, effectively separat-
ing the pulmonary and systemic venous channels. C. The posterior 
edge of the right atrial incision is sutured to the remnant of the 
atrial septum, diverting the systemic venous channel to the mitral 
valve. D. The anterior edge of the right atrial incision (lengthened 
by short incisions at each corner) is sutured around the cava above 
and below to the lateral edge of the LA incision, completing the 
pulmonary channel and diversion of pulmonary venous blood to the 
tricuspid valve area. (Reproduced with permission from D-Trans-
position of the great arteries. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. 
Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:345.)
The subset of patients who present with D-TGA compli-
cated by LVOT obstruction and VSD may not be suitable for an 
arterial switch operation. The Rastelli operation, first performed 
in 1968, uses placement of an intracardiac baffle to direct left 
ventricular blood to the aorta and an extracardiac valved conduit 
to establish continuity between the RV and the pulmonary artery, 
which has led to successful outcomes in these complex patients.128
Results.  For patients with D-TGA, intact ventricular ­septum, 
and VSD, the arterial switch operation provides excellent long-
term results with a mortality rate of less than 5%. Operative 
risk is increased when unfavorable coronary anatomic configu-
rations are present or when augmentation of the aortic arch is 
required. The most common complication is supravalvular pul-
monary stenosis, occurring 10% of the time, which may require 
reoperation.4,7,129
Results of the Rastelli operation have improved substan-
tially, with an early mortality rate of 5% in a 2001 review.130 
Late mortality rate results were less favorable because conduit 
failure requiring reoperation, pacemaker insertion, or relief of 
LVOT obstruction was frequent.
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle
Anatomy.  Double-outlet RV (DORV) accounts for 5% of 
CHD and exists when both the aorta and pulmonary artery arise 
wholly, or in large part, from the RV. DORV encompasses a 
spectrum of malformations, because the incomplete shift of the 
722
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
aorta toward the LV is often associated with other abnormali-
ties of cardiac development, such as ventricular looping and 
infundibular-truncal spiraling.131 The vast majority of hearts 
exhibiting DORV have a concomitant VSD, which varies in its 
size and spatial association with the great vessels. The VSD is 
usually nonrestrictive and represents the only outflow for the 
LV; its location relative to the great vessels dictates the domi-
nant physiology of DORV, which can be analogous to that of a 
large isolated VSD, tetralogy of Fallot, or D-TGA. Lev et al, in 
1972,132 suggested considering DORV as a spectrum of hearts 
that “pass imperceptibly from tetralogy with VSD with overrid-
ing aorta into double-outlet right ventricle with subaortic VSD.” 
Thus, Lev and colleagues described a classification scheme for 
DORV based on the “commitment” of the VSD to either or both 
great arteries.7,132 The VSD can be subaortic, doubly committed, 
noncommitted, or subpulmonic.
The subaortic type is the most common (50%) and 
occurs when the VSD is located directly beneath the aortic 
annulus. Doubly committed VSD (10%) is present when the 
VSD lies beneath both the aorta and the pulmonary artery, 
which are usually side-by-side in this lesion. The noncom-
mitted VSD (10%–20%) exists when the VSD is remote from 
the great vessels. The subset of DORV hearts with the VSD 
located beneath the pulmonary valve also are classified as the 
Taussig-Bing syndrome.133 This occurs in 30% of cases of 
DORV with VSD, and it occurs when the aorta rotates more 
anteriorly, with the pulmonary artery rotated more posteriorly 
(Fig. 20-25).
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Patients with 
DORV typically present with one of the following three sce-
narios: (a) those with doubly committed or subaortic VSD 
present with congestive heart failure and a high propensity for 
pulmonary hypertension, much like infants with a large single 
VSD; (b) those with a subaortic VSD and pulmonary steno-
sis present with cyanosis and hypoxia, much like infants with 
tetralogy of Fallot; and (c) those with subpulmonic VSD present 
with cyanosis, much like those with D-TGA, because streaming 
directs desaturated systemic venous blood to the aorta and oxy-
genated blood to the pulmonary artery.131 Thus, the three criti-
cal factors influencing the clinical presentation and subsequent 
­management of infants with DORV are the size and loactaion of 
the VSD, the presence or absence of important RVOT obstruc-
tion, and the presence of other anomalies (especially associated 
hypoplasia of left-sided structures sometimes seen with subpul-
monary VSD).
Echocardiography is the mainstay of diagnosis and can 
also provide valuable information regarding the feasibility of 
biventricular repair. Specific anatomic questions that should 
be resolved to assist in surgical planning in addition to those 
mentioned earlier include the coronary anatomy (presence of a 
conal branch or left anterior descending from the right coronary 
coursing across the conus), the presence of additional muscular 
VSDs remote from either great vessel, and the distance between 
the tricuspid and pulmonary valve. Cardiac catheterization is 
rarely necessary in neonates or infants, except to determine the 
degree of pulmonary hypertension and to determine the effects 
of previous palliative procedures on the pulmonary arterial 
anatomy.
Therapy.  The goals of corrective surgery are to relieve 
­pulmonary stenosis, to provide separate and unobstructed out-
flow pathways from each ventricle to the correct great ves-
sel, and to achieve separation of the systemic and ­pulmonary 
­circulations.
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with 
Noncommitted Ventricular Septal Defect
The repair of hearts with DORV and noncommitted VSD can 
be accomplished by constructing an intraventricular tunnel 
connecting the VSD to the aorta, closing the pulmonary artery, 
and placing a valved extracardiac conduit from the RV to the 
­pulmonary artery. In patients without pulmonary stenosis who 
Figure 20-24.  A. The maneuver of Lecompte (posi-
tioning the pulmonary artery anterior to the aorta) is 
shown with aortic cross-clamp repositioning to retract 
the pulmonary artery during the neoaortic reconstruc-
tion. A and B. After the coronary patches are rotated 
for an optimal lie, they are sutured to the linearly 
incised sinuses of Valsalva at the old pulmonary artery 
(neoaorta) (C). (Reproduced with permission from 
Backer CL, Idriss FS, Mavroudis C. Surgical tech-
niques and intraoperative judgments to facilitate the 
arterial switch operation in transposition with intact 
ventricular septum. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. 
Arterial Switch. Cardiac Surgery: State of the Art 
Review. Vol. 5, no. 1. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 
1991:108. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
723
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
have ­intractable congestive failure, a pulmonary artery band 
can be placed in the first 6 months to control pulmonary artery 
overcirculation and prevent the development of pulmonary 
hypertension.
Infants with pulmonary stenosis can be managed with a 
systemic-to-pulmonary shunt followed by biventricular repair 
as described by Belli and colleagues in 1999, or with a modified 
Fontan.134 There is no consensus on the timing of repair, but 
recent literature suggests that repair within the first 6 months 
is associated with better outcome. However, in cases where an 
extracardiac valved conduit is necessary, it is better to delay 
definitive repair until the child is 2 to 3 years of age, because 
this allows placement of a larger ­conduit and possibly reduces 
the number of future obligatory conduit replacements.7,131
Figure 20-25.  The relationship of the ventricular septal defect 
(VSD) to the great arteries in double-outlet right ventricle (DORV). 
A. Subaortic VSD without pulmonary stenosis. B. Subaortic VSD 
with pulmonary stenosis. C. Subpulmonary VSD (Taussig-Bing 
malformation). D. Doubly committed VSD. E. Noncommitted 
(remote) VSD. F. Intact interventricular septum. A = aorta; CS = 
coronary sinus; D = ventricular septal defect; FO = foramen ovale; 
IVC = inferior vena cava; PA = pulmonary artery; RV = right ven-
tricle; SVC = superior vena cava. (Adapted with permission from 
Zamora R, Moller JH, Edwards JE. Double-outlet right ventricle. 
Chest. 1975;68:672.)
A
B 
C
D
E
F
A
PA
SVC
FO
CS
IVC
RV
D
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with Subaortic 
or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal 
Defect Without Pulmonary Stenosis
This group of patients can be treated by creating an intracardiac 
baffle that directs blood from the LV into the aorta. Enlargement 
of the VSD may be necessary to allow ample room for the baf-
fle; this should be done anterosuperiorly to avoid injury to the 
conduction system that normally lies inferoposteriorly along the 
border of the VSD. In addition, other important considerations 
in constructing the LV outflow tunnel include the prominence 
of the conal septum, the attachments of the tricuspid valve to 
the conal septum, and the distance between the tricuspid and 
pulmonary valves. In some instances, unfavorable anatomy may 
preclude placement of an adequate intracardiac baffle, neces-
sitating single ventricle repair.
Double-Outlet Right Ventricle with Subaortic 
or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal 
Defect with Pulmonary Stenosis
Repair of this defect is similar to the above except that concomi-
tant RVOT reconstruction must be performed in addition to the 
intracardiac tunnel. The RVOT augmentation can be accom-
plished with the placement of a transannular patch or with place-
ment of an extracardiac valved conduit when an anomalous left 
anterior descending artery precludes use of a patch.
Taussig-Bing Syndrome without Pulmonary 
Stenosis
These infants are best treated with a balloon septostomy dur-
ing the neonatal period to improve mixing, followed by VSD 
closure baffling LV egress to the pulmonary artery and an arte-
rial switch operation. The Kawashima procedure,135 in which an 
intraventricular tunnel is used to baffle LV egress directly to the 
aorta, may alternatively be used when the aorta is more posterior 
or when there is associated pulmonary stenosis.
Taussig-Bing Syndrome with Pulmonary 
Stenosis
This defect may be treated with a variety of techniques, 
depending on the specific anatomic details and the expertise 
of the treatment team. A Rastelli-type repair, which involves 
construction of an intraventricular tunnel through the existing 
VSD that connects the LV to both great vessels, followed by 
division of the pulmonary artery at its origin and insertion of 
a valved conduit from the RV to the distal pulmonary artery, 
can be performed.136 Alternatively, a Yasui procedure, which 
involves baffling the VSD to the pulmonary artery and cre-
ation of a DKS anastomosis between the pulmonary artery and 
the aorta with patch augmentation, can be accomplished con-
comitant with placement of a RV-pulmonary artery conduit.137
Results.  The results of DORV repairs are generally favor-
able, especially for the tetralogy-type DORV with subaortic 
VSD.138,139 However, more complex types of DORV, including 
noncommitted VSD and Taussig-Bing type, still carry impor-
tant morbidity and mortality.134,138,139 Furthermore, repeated 
interventions for RVOT reconstruction or staged operations 
for patients triaged to single-ventricle pathways pose late haz-
ards for patients surviving initial repair. A recent single-insti-
tution series evaluated 393 patients with DORV.138 The authors 
found that the need for reintervention approached 37% at 
15 years following repair. Arterial switch operation, as opposed 
724
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
to ­Rastelli-type repair, was associated with an increased risk 
of early postrepair mortality, but mitigated against the risk of 
late death. Patients with hypoplastic left-sided structures and 
a nonsubaortic VSD may fare better with a single-ventricle 
repair.
Tetralogy of Fallot
Anatomy.  The original description of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) 
by Ettienne Louis Fallot,140 as the name implies, included four 
abnormalities: a large perimembranous VSD adjacent to the tri-
cuspid valve; an overriding aorta; a variable degree of RVOT 
obstruction, which might include hypoplasia and dysplasia of 
the pulmonary valve as well as obstruction at the subvalvar 
and pulmonary artery level; and right ventricular hypertrophy. 
More recently, the Van Praagh et al141 pointed out that TOF 
could be more correctly termed monology of Fallot, since the 
four components are explained by the malposition of the infun-
dibular septum. When the infundibular septum is displaced 
anteriorly and leftward, the RVOT is narrowed and its ante-
rior displacement results in failure of fusion of the ventricu-
lar septum between the arms of the trabeculo-septo-marginalis 
(Fig. 20-26).
The morphology of TOF is markedly heterogeneous and 
includes an absent pulmonary valve, concomitant AV septal 
defects, and pulmonary atresia with major aortopulmonary col-
laterals. The present discussion will focus only on the so-called 
classic presentation of TOF without coexisting intracardiac 
defects.
Anomalous coronary artery patterns, related to either ori-
gin or distribution, have been described in TOF.142 However, 
the most surgically important coronary anomaly occurs when 
the left anterior descending artery arises as a branch of the right 
coronary artery. This occurs in approximately 3% of cases of 
TOF and may preclude placement of a transannular patch, as 
the left anterior descending coronary artery crosses the RVOT at 
varying distances from the pulmonary valve annulus.143
Figure 20-26.  Pathologic specimen of the heart in a patient with 
tetralogy of Fallot. The four anatomic components comprising 
tetralogy of Fallot can be conceptualized as a monology of Fallot, 
because they can be explained by malposition of the interventricular 
septum. AO = aorta; RV = right ventricle; RVOT = right ventricu-
lar outflow tract; TV = tricuspid valve; VSD = ventricular septal 
defect. (From Van Praagh et al,141 with permission. © Elsevier Ltd.)
Pathophysiology and Clinical Presentation.  The ini-
tial presentation of a child afflicted with TOF depends on 
the degree of RVOT obstruction. Children with cyanosis at 
birth usually have severe pulmonary annular hypoplasia with 
concomitant hypoplasia of the peripheral pulmonary arteries. 
Most children, however, present with mild cyanosis at birth, 
which then progresses as the right ventricular hypertrophy 
further compromises the RVOT. Cyanosis usually becomes 
significant within the first 6 to 12 months of life, and the 
child may develop characteristic “tet” spells, which are peri-
ods of extreme hypoxemia. These spells are characterized 
by decreased pulmonary blood flow and an increase in sys-
temic blood flow. They can be triggered by any stimulus that 
decreases systemic vascular resistance, such as fever, agita-
tion, or vigorous physical activity. Cyanotic spells increase in 
severity and frequency as the child grows, and older patients 
with uncorrected TOF may often squat, which increases 
peripheral vascular resistance and relieves the cyanosis.
Evaluation in the older patient with TOF may demon-
strate clubbing, polycythemia, hemoptysis, or brain abscesses. 
Chest radiography will demonstrate a boot-shaped heart, and 
ECG will show the normal pattern of right ventricular hyper-
trophy. Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis because it 
demonstrates the position and nature of the VSD, defines the 
character of the RVOT obstruction, and often visualizes the 
branch pulmonary arteries and the proximal coronary arter-
ies. Cardiac catheterization is rarely necessary and is actually 
risky in TOF since it can create spasm of the RVOT muscle 
and result in a hypercyanotic episode (tet spell). Occasion-
ally, aortography is necessary to delineate the coronary artery 
anatomy.
Treatment.  John Deanfield144 stated “…long follow-up inevi-
tably means surgery in an earlier era: More recent surgery, at a 
younger age, with better preoperative, operative, and postopera-
tive care, will improve long-term results. Data from the former 
(earlier) era will be overly pessimistic.” This statement is particu-
larly pertinent as surgical correction of TOF has evolved from a 
staged approach of antecedent palliation in infancy followed by 
intracardiac repair to primary repair during the first few months 
of life without prior palliative surgery.
However, systemic-to-pulmonary shunts, generally a B-T 
shunt, may still be preferred with an unstable neonate younger 
than 3 months of age, when an extracardiac conduit is required 
because of an anomalous left anterior descending coronary 
artery, or when pulmonary atresia, significant branch pulmo-
nary artery hypoplasia, or severe noncardiac anomalies coexist 
with TOF.
Traditionally, TOF was repaired through a right ven-
triculotomy, providing excellent exposure for closure of the 
VSD and relief of the RVOT obstruction, but concerns that 
the resultant scar would significantly impair right ventricu-
lar function or lead to lethal arrhythmias led to the develop-
ment of a transatrial approach. Transatrial repair, except in 
cases when the presence of diffuse RVOT hypoplasia requires 
insertion of a transannular patch, is now being increasingly 
advocated by many, although its superiority has not been 
­conclusively demonstrated.145
The operative technique involves the use of CPB. All 
existing systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunts, as well as the 
ductus arteriosus, are ligated. A right atriotomy is then made, 
and the anatomy of the VSD and the RVOT are assessed by 
725
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
retracting the tricuspid valve (Fig. 20-27). The outflow tract 
obstruction is relieved by resecting the offending portion of 
the infundibular septum as well as any muscle trabeculations. 
If necessary, a pulmonary valvotomy or, alternatively, a lon-
gitudinal incision in the main pulmonary artery can be per-
formed to improve exposure. The diameter of the pulmonary 
valve annulus is assessed by inserting Hegar dilators across 
the outflow tract; if the pulmonary artery/aorta diameter is 
less than 0.5, or the estimated RV/LV pressure is greater than 
0.7, a transannular patch is inserted.21 Patch closure of the 
VSD is then accomplished, taking care when placing sutures 
along the posteroinferior portion to avoid the conduction 
­system.
Results.  Operative mortality for primary repair of TOF in 
infancy is less than 5% in most series.4,7,145 Previously reported 
risk factors such as transannular patch insertion or younger age 
at time of repair have been eliminated secondary to improved 
intraoperative and postoperative care. According to the Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database, dis-
charge mortality from 3059 operations from 2002 to 2007 was 
7.5% for initial palliation, 1.3% for primary repair, and 0.9% 
for staged repair, indicating receiving outcomes for patients 
getting primary repair compared to staged repair.146 Neverthe-
less, for neonatal repair, discharge mortality increased to 6.2% 
with palliation and 7.8% with primary repair. This may be partly 
explained by a higher chance of postoperative complications in 
neonates.
A major complication of repaired TOF is the develop-
ment of pulmonary insufficiency, which subjects the RV to 
the adverse effects of acute and chronic volume overload. This 
is especially problematic if residual lesions such as a VSD or 
peripheral pulmonary stenosis exist. Pulmonary valve regur-
gitation after repair of TOF is relatively well tolerated in the 
short term, partly because the hypertrophied RV usually adapts 
to the altered hemodynamic load.147,148 The detrimental effects 
of chronic pulmonary valve regurgitation are, however, numer-
ous, and include progressive right ventricular dilatation and 
failure, tricuspid valve regurgitation, exercise intolerance, 
arrhythmia, and sudden death. Mechanoelectrical interaction, 
by which a dilatated RV provides the substrate for electrical 
instability, might underlie the propensity toward ventricular 
arrhythmia.149 In support of this contention, Gatzoulis and col-
leagues147,149 found that the risk of symptomatic arrhythmia 
was high in patients with marked right ventricular enlargement 
and QRS prolongation on resting ECG of more than 180 ms. 
Karamlou et al have shown that similar structural and hemody-
namic abnormalities, including a larger right atrial volume and 
right ventricular chamber size, are also related to atrial arrhyth-
mias in patients following TOF repair.150 We found that pro-
longation of the QRS duration beyond a threshold of 160 ms 
increased the risk of atrial arrhythmias.150 Together, these data 
show that a similar mechanism could be responsible for both 
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias after repair in TOF patients.
When significant deterioration of ventricular function 
occurs, insertion of a pulmonary valve may be required, 
although this is rarely necessary in infants. Unfortunately, 
there are no universal criteria establishing the timing of 
pulmonary valve replacement, although dilation of the RV, 
prolongation of the QRS duration beyond 180 ms, impor-
tant atrial arrhythmias, and impaired ventricular function are 
widely used.
Figure 20-27.  The anatomy from the perspective of 
the right atrial (RA) approach, shown as if the right atrial 
free wall and tricuspid valve were translucent. The free 
edge of the tricuspid leaflets is shown by dashed lines. 
A. The difference from the right ventricular (RV) perspec-
tive is in the apparent position of the parietal extension. 
From the RA perspective, the surgeon looks beneath this, 
as the parietal extension arches over the right ventricu-
lar outflow tract. B. The same perspective without the 
outline of the tricuspid valve leaflets. The parietal exten-
sion is transected at its origin from the infundibular sep-
tum, dissected up toward the free wall, and amputated at 
the free wall. C. A pledgetted mattress suture is placed 
from the RA side through the base of the commissural 
tissue between septal and tricuspid leaflets and through 
the patch. D. The suturing is continued onto the parietal 
extension and infundibular septum, visualizing and stay-
ing close to the aortic valve leaflets to avoid leaving a hole 
between muscular bands. When working from the RA, it is 
particularly important to stay close to the aortic valve leaf-
lets in the direction of the septum to avoid narrowing the 
RV outflow tract. E. The repair of the ventricular septal 
defect is completed. Note that the suture line is away from 
the bundle of His and its branches, except where it crosses 
the right bundle branch anteroinferiorly. ant. = anterior; 
ML = mitral leaflet; post. = posterior; TV = tricuspid 
valve. (Reproduced with permission from Kouchoukos 
NT, Blackstone EH, et al: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes Cardiac 
Surgery. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2013, p 1384. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Parietal
extension
Amputation
Transection
TV post.
leaflet
TV ant. leaflet
Beginning of 
parietal
extension
Aortic
valve
B
A
C
E
D
Anterior ML
Dotted outline
of TV leaflets
TV septal 
leaflet
Infundibular
septum
726
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Arrhythmias are potentially the most serious late com-
plication following TOF repair. In a multicenter cohort of 793 
patients studied by Gatzoulis et al,149 a steady increase was 
documented in the prevalence of ventricular and atrial tachyar-
rhythmia and sudden cardiac death in the first 5 to 10 years 
after intracardiac repair. Clinical events were reported in 12% 
of patients at 35 years after repair. Prevalence of atrial arrhyth-
mias from other studies, however, ranges from 1% to 11%,147,149 
which is a reflection of the strong time dependence of arrhyth-
mia onset.
Underlying causes of arrhythmia following repair are 
complex and multifactorial, resulting in poorly defined opti-
mum screening and treatment algorithms. Older repair age has 
been associated with an increased frequency of both atrial and 
ventricular arrhythmias. Impaired ventricular function second-
ary to a protracted period of cyanosis before repair might con-
tribute to the propensity for arrhythmia in older patients.
Ventricular Septal Defect
Anatomy.  VSD refers to a hole between the LV and RV. These 
defects are common, comprising 20% to 30% of all cases of CHD, 
and may occur as an isolated lesion or as part of a more complex 
malformation.151 VSDs vary in size from 3 to 4 mm to more than 
3 cm and are classified into four types based on their location 
in the ventricular septum: perimembranous, AV canal, outlet or 
supracristal, and muscular (Fig. 20-28).
Perimembranous VSDs are the most common type requir-
ing surgical intervention, comprising approximately 80% of 
cases.151 These defects involve the membranous septum and 
include the malalignment defects seen in tetralogy of Fallot. 
In rare instances, the anterior and septal leaflets of the tricus-
pid valve adhere to the edges of the perimembranous defect, 
forming a channel between the LV and the right atrium. These 
defects result in a large left-to-right shunt due to the large pres-
sure differential between the two chambers.
AV canal defects, also known as inlet defects, occur when 
part or all of the septum of the AV canal is absent. The VSD 
lies beneath the tricuspid valve and is limited upstream by the 
tricuspid annulus, without intervening muscle.
The supracristal or outlet VSD results from a defect within 
the conal septum. Characteristically, these defects are limited 
upstream by the pulmonary valve and are otherwise surrounded 
by the muscle of the infundibular septum.
Muscular VSDs are the most common type and may lie 
in four locations: anterior, midventricular, posterior, or api-
cal. These are surrounded by muscle and can occur anywhere 
Figure 20-28.  Classic anatomic types of ventricular 
septal defect (VSD). A. Type I (conal, infundibular, 
supracristal, subarterial) VSD. B. Type II or peri-
membranous VSD. C. Type III VSD (atrioventricu-
lar canal type or inlet septum type). D. Type IV VSD 
(single or multiple). (Reproduced with permission 
from Ventricular septal defect. In: Mavroudis C, 
Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. 
St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:70.)
727
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
along the trabecular portion of the septum. The rare “Swiss-
cheese” type of muscular VSD consists of multiple commu-
nications between the RV and LV, complicating operative 
repair.
Pathophysiology and Clinical Presentation.  The size of 
the VSD determines the initial pathophysiology of the dis-
ease. Large VSDs are classified as nonrestrictive and are at 
least equal in diameter to the aortic annulus. These defects 
allow free flow of blood from the LV to the RV, elevating 
right ventricular pressures to the same level as systemic pres-
sure. Consequently, the pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio 
(Qp:Qs) is inversely dependent on the ratio of pulmonary 
vascular resistance to systemic vascular resistance. Nonre-
strictive VSDs produce a large increase in pulmonary blood 
flow, and the afflicted infant will present with symptoms of 
congestive heart failure. However, if untreated, these defects 
will cause pulmonary hypertension with a corresponding 
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance. This will lead to 
a reversal of flow (a right-to-left shunt), which is known as 
Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
Small restrictive VSDs offer significant resistance to the 
passage of blood across the defect, and therefore right ven-
tricular pressure is either normal or only minimally elevated 
and Qp:Qs rarely exceeds 1.5.4,7 These defects are generally 
asymptomatic because there are few physiologic consequences. 
However, there is a long-term risk of endocarditis, because 
endocardial damage from the jet of blood through the defect 
may serve as a possible nidus for colonization.
Diagnosis.  The child with a large VSD will present with severe 
congestive heart failure and frequent respiratory tract infections. 
Children with Eisenmenger’s syndrome may be deceptively 
asymptomatic until frank cyanosis develops.
The chest radiograph will show cardiomegaly and pul-
monary overcirculation, and the ECG will show signs of left 
ventricular or biventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography 
provides definitive diagnosis and can estimate the degree of 
shunting as well as pulmonary arterial pressures. Cardiac cath-
eterization has largely been supplanted by echocardiography, 
except in older children where measurement of pulmonary 
resistance is necessary prior to recommending closure of the 
defect.
Treatment.  VSDs may close or narrow spontaneously, and the 
probability of closure is inversely related to the age at which 
the defect is observed. Thus, infants at 1 month of age have 
an 80% incidence of spontaneous closure, whereas a child at 
12 months of age has only a 25% chance of closure.152 This 
has an important impact on operative decision making, because 
a small or moderate-size VSD may be observed for a period 
of time in the absence of symptoms. Large defects and those 
in severely symptomatic neonates should be repaired during 
infancy to relieve symptoms and because irreversible changes 
in pulmonary vascular resistance may develop during the first 
year of life.
Repair of isolated VSDs requires the use of CPB with 
moderate hypothermia and cardioplegic arrest. The right atrial 
approach is preferable for most defects, except apical muscular 
defects, which often require a right ventriculotomy for adequate 
exposure. Supracristal defects may alternatively be exposed 
via a transverse or longitudinal incision in the RV immedi-
ately beneath the pulmonary valve. ­Regardless of the type 
of defect present, a right atrial approach can be used ­initially 
to inspect the anatomy, as this may be abandoned should it 
offer inadequate exposure for repair. After careful inspection 
of the heart for any associated malformations, a patch repair 
is employed, taking care to avoid the conduction system 
(Fig. 20-29). Routine use of intraoperative transesophageal 
echocardiography should be used to assess for any residual 
defects.
Successful percutaneous device closure of VSDs using 
the Amplatzer muscular VSD was recently described.153 The 
device has demonstrated a 100% closure rate in a small series 
of patients with isolated or residual VSDs, or as a collabora-
tive treatment strategy for the VSD component in more complex 
congenital lesions. Proponents of device closure argue that its 
use can decrease the complexity of surgical repair, avoid reop-
eration for a small residual lesion, or avoid the need for a ven-
triculotomy.
Multiple or “Swiss-cheese” VSDs represent a special 
case, and many cannot be repaired during infancy. In patients 
in whom definitive VSD closure cannot be accomplished, tem-
porary placement of a pulmonary artery band can be employed 
to control pulmonary flow. This allows time for spontaneous 
closure of many of the smaller defects, thus simplifying ­surgical 
repair.
Some centers, however, have advocated early definitive 
repair of the Swiss-cheese septum, by using oversize patches, 
fibrin glue, and combined intraoperative device closure, as 
well as techniques to complete the repair transatrially.154 At 
the ­University of California, San Francisco, 69% of patients 
with multiple VSDs underwent single-stage correction, and 
the repaired group had improved outcome compared with the 
­palliated group.154
Results.  Even in very small infants, closure of VSDs can be 
safely performed with hospital mortality near 0%.4,7,155 The main 
risk factor remains the presence of other associated lesions, 
especially when present in symptomatic neonates with large 
VSDs.
Atrioventricular Canal Defects
Anatomy.  AV canal defects result from failure of fusion of the 
endocardial cushions in the central portion of the heart, causing 
a lesion that involves the atrial and the ventricular septum, as 
well as the anterior mitral and septal tricuspid valve leaflets. 
Defects involving primarily the atrial septum are known as 
partial AV canal defects and frequently occur in conjunction 
with a cleft anterior mitral leaflet. Complete AV canal defects 
have a combined deficiency of the atrial and ventricular sep-
tum associated with a common AV orifice rather than separate 
tricuspid and mitral valves. The common AV valve generally 
has five leaflets, three lateral (free wall) and two bridging 
(septal) leaflets. The defect in the ventricular septum can lie 
either between the two bridging leaflets or beneath them. The 
relationship between the septal defect and the anterior bridging 
leaflet forms the basis of the Rastelli classification for complete 
AV canal defects (Fig. 20-30).156
Pathophysiology and Diagnosis.  Partial AV canal defects, 
in the absence of AV valvular regurgitation, frequently resem-
ble isolated ASDs. Left-to-right shunting predominates as 
long as pulmonary vascular resistance remains low. However, 
40% of patients with partial AV canal defects have moderate-
to-severe valve incompetence, and progressive heart ­failure 
728
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 20-30.  Formation of mitral and tri-
cuspid leaflets and probable embryogenesis 
of partial, intermediate, and complete forms 
of atrioventricular canal defects. A = anterior; 
AB = anterior bridging leaflet; IEC = inferior 
endocardial cushion; LEC = lateral endocar-
dial cushion; P = posterior; PB = posterior 
bridging leaflet; S = septal; SEC = superior 
endocardial cushion. (Reproduced from Feldt 
RH, Porter CJ, Edwards WD, et al. Defects 
of the atrial septum and the atrioventricular 
canal. In: Adams FH, Emmanouilides GC, 
eds. Moss’ Heart Disease in Infants, Children, 
and Adolescents. 4th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 1989. © Mayo Clinic ID 
#: CP1214116B-2. Used with permission of 
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and 
Research.)
Figure 20-29.  A. Right atrial incision and exposure of perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) in the region of the tricuspid antero-
septal commissure. Stay sutures have been placed to slightly evert the atrial wall. Note that initially, the superior edge of this typical peri-
membranous defect is not visible. The atrioventricular node is in the muscular portion of the atrioventricular septum, just on the atrial side of 
the commissure between the tricuspid septal and anterior leaflets. The bundle of His thus penetrates at the posterior angle of the VSD, where 
it is vulnerable to injury. B and C. The repair of the perimembranous VSD is completed with use of a slightly oversized Dacron patch, taking 
care to place stitches 3 to 5 mm away from the edge of the defect itself to avoid injury to the conduction system. (Reproduced with permission 
from Walters HL, Pacifico AD, Kirklin JK: Ventricular septal defects. In: Sabiston DC, Lyerly HK, eds. Textbook of Surgery: The Biologic 
Basis of Modern Surgical Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1997:2014. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Normal mitral and tricuspid
valves
Partial atrioventricular
canal
Intermediate atrioventricular
canal
Complete atrioventricular canal
C
 
e
p
y
T
B
 
e
p
y
T
A
 
e
p
y
T
A
P
A
S
P
A
P
A
P
S
AB
A
P
PB
P
P
A
P
SEC
LEC
IEC
LEC
AB
A
P
PB
P
AB
A
P
PB
P
AB
PB
A
P
P
Embryologic atrioventricular
canal
729
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
occurs early in this patient population.157 Complete AV canal 
defects produce more severe pathophysiologic changes, 
because the large intracardiac communication and significant 
AV valve regurgitation contribute to ventricular volume load-
ing and pulmonary hypertension. Children with complete AV 
canal defects develop signs of congestive heart failure within 
the first few months of life.
Physical examination may reveal a right ventricular heave 
and a systolic murmur. Children may also present with endo-
carditis or paradoxical emboli as a result of the intracardiac 
communication. Chest radiography will be consistent with con-
gestive heart failure, and the ECG demonstrates right ventricular 
hypertrophy with a prolonged PR interval.
Two-dimensional echocardiography with color-flow 
mapping is confirmatory, but cardiac catheterization can be 
employed to define the status of the pulmonary vasculature, 
with a pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 12 Wood 
units indicating inoperability.157
Treatment.  The management of patients with AV canal 
defects can be especially challenging. Timing of operation is 
individualized. Patients with partial defects can be electively 
repaired between 2 and 5 years of age, whereas complete AV 
canal defects should be repaired within the first year of life to 
prevent irreversible changes in the pulmonary circulation. Com-
plete repair in infancy should be accomplished, with palliative 
procedures such as pulmonary artery banding reserved for only 
those infants with other complex lesions or who are too ill to 
tolerate CPB.
The operative technique requires the use of either con-
tinuous hypothermic CPB or, for small infants, deep hypo-
thermic circulatory arrest. The heart is initially approached 
through an oblique right atriotomy, and the anatomy is care-
fully observed. In the case of a partial AV canal, the cleft in 
the mitral valve is repaired with interrupted sutures and the 
ASD is closed with a pericardial patch.148 Complete AV canal 
defects are repaired by patch closure of the VSD, separating 
the common AV valve into tricuspid and mitral components 
and suspending the neovalves from the top of the VSD patch 
and closing the ASD.
Results.  Partial AV canal defects have an excellent outcome, 
with a mortality rate of 0% to 2% in most series.156 Complete 
AV canal defects are associated with a poorer prognosis, with an 
operative mortality of 3% to 13%.
The most frequently encountered postoperative prob-
lems are complete heart block (1%–2%), right bundle-branch 
block (22%), arrhythmias (11%), RVOT obstruction (11%), 
and severe mitral regurgitation (13%–24%).156 The increas-
ing use of intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography 
may positively influence outcomes, as the adequacy of repair 
can be assessed and treated without need for subsequent 
reoperation.156-158
Interrupted Aortic Arch
Anatomy.  Interrupted aortic arch (IAA) is a rare defect, com-
prising approximately 1% of all cases of CHD.7,148 It is defined 
as an absence of luminal continuity between the ascend-
ing and descending aorta and does not occur as an isolated 
defect in most cases, because a VSD or PDA is usually pres-
ent. IAA is classified based on the location of the interruption 
(Fig. 20-31).
RPA
Ao
IA
LC
LS
IA
LC
LS
MPA
LPA
PDA
IA
LC LS
PDA
A
B 
C
Figure 20-31.  Anatomic types of interrupted aortic arch. A. Inter-
ruption distal to the left subclavian artery. B. Interruption between 
the left subclavian and left carotid arteries. C. Interruption between 
the left carotid and innominate arteries. Ao = aorta; IA = innominate 
artery; LPA, MPA, RPA = left, main, and right pulmonary arteries; 
LC = left carotid artery; LS = left subclavian artery; PDA = pat-
ent ductus arteriosus. (Reproduced with permission from Jonas RA. 
Interrupted aortic arch. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric 
Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:184.)
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Infants with IAA 
have ductal-dependent systemic blood flow and will develop 
profound metabolic acidosis and hemodynamic collapse upon 
ductal closure. In the rare instance of failed ductal closure, the 
diagnosis may be missed during infancy, and the child will pres-
ent with symptoms of congestive heart failure from a persistent 
left-to-right shunt.
Once definitive diagnosis is made in infants, usually with 
echocardiography, preparations are made for operative interven-
tion, and prostaglandin E1 is infused to maintain ductal patency 
and correct acidosis. The infant’s hemodynamic status should 
be optimized with mechanical ventilation and inotropic support. 
An effort should be made to increase pulmonary vascular resis-
tance by decreasing the fractional inspired oxygen and avoiding 
hyperventilation, because this will preferentially direct blood 
into the systemic circulation.
Treatment.  Initial strategies for the management of IAA 
involved palliation though a left thoracotomy by using one of 
the arch vessels as a conduit to restore aortic continuity. Pulmo-
nary artery banding can be simultaneously performed to limit 
left-to-right shunting, because it is not feasible to repair the 
VSD or other intracardiac communications with this approach.
However, complete surgical repair in infants with IAA 
is now preferable. The operative technique involves use of a 
median sternotomy and CPB with short periods of circulatory 
arrest. Aortic arch reconstruction can be accomplished with 
either direct anastomosis or patch aortoplasty followed by 
­closure of the VSD.148
In certain cases, the defect will involve hypoplasia of the 
left heart, precluding attempts at definitive repair. These infants 
should be managed with a Norwood procedure followed by a 
Fontan repair.
Results.  Outcomes in infants with IAA have improved 
substantially over the last decades as a result of improved 
perioperative care. Operative mortality is now less than 10% 
in most series.157 Some authors advocate the use of patch 
augmentation of the aorta to ensure adequate relief of LVOT 
obstruction and to diminish anastomotic tension, thus reduc-
ing the subsequent risk of restenosis and tracheobronchial 
compression.7,157,159
730
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Atrial septal 
defect and partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection. 
In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. 
Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2003:716.
2.	Kirklin JW, Pacifico AD, Kirklin JK. The surgical treatment 
of atrioventricular canal defects. In: Arciniegas E, ed. Pediat-
ric Cardiac Surgery. Chicago: Yearbook Medical; 1985:2398.
3.	Peterson GE, Brickner ME, Reimold SC. Transesophageal 
echocardiography: clinical indications and applications. Cir-
culation. 2003;107:2398.
4.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Atrial septal 
defect and partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection. 
In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. 
Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2003:740.
5.	Reddy VM. Cardiac surgery for premature and low birth 
weight neonates. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card 
Surg Annu. 2001;4:271.
6.	Thompson JD, Abuwari EH, Watterson KG, et al. Surgical 
and transcatheter (Amplatzer) closure of atrial septal defect: 
a prospective comparison of results and cost. Heart. 2002;87: 
466-469.
7.	Du ZD, Hijazi ZM, Kleinman CS, et al. Comparison between 
transcatheter and surgical closure of secundum atrial septal 
defect in children and adults: results of a multicenter nonran-
domized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1836-1844.
8.	Kutty S, Hazeem AA, Brown K, et al. Long-term (5-to 
20-year) outcomes after transcatheter or surgical treatment of 
hemodynamically significant isolated secundum atrial septal 
defect. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:1348-1352.
9.	Highes ML, Maskell G, Goh TH, Wilkinson JL. Prospective 
comparison of costs and short term health outcomes of surgi-
cal versus device closure of atrial septal defect in children. 
Heart. 2002;88:67-70.
10.	Murphy JG, Gersh BJ, McGoon MD, et al. Long-term out-
come after surgical repair of isolated atrial septal defect. 
N Engl J Med. 1990;323:1645-1650.
11.	Hanninen M, Kmet A, Taylor DA, et al. Atrial septal defect 
closure in the elderly is associated with excellent quality of 
life, functional improvement, and ventricular remodeling. Can 
J Cardiol. 2011;27:698-704.
12.	Mascio CE, Pasquali SK, Jacobs JP, et al. Outcomes in adult 
congenital heart surgery: Analysis of the Society of ­Thoracic 
Surgeons (STS) Database. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2011;142:1090-1097.
13.	Hopkins RA, Bert AA, Buchholz B, et al. Surgical patch 
closure of atrial septal defects. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77: 
2144-2150.
14.	Liu G, Qiao Y, Zou C, et al. Totally thoracoscopic surgical 
treatment for atrial septal defect: mid-term follow-up results in 
45 consecutive patients. Heart Lung Circ. 2012;S1443-S9506.
15.	Argenziano M, Oz M, Kohmoto T, et al. Totally endoscopic 
atrial septal defect repair with robotic assistance. Circulation. 
2003;108(suppl II):II-191-II-194.
16.	Luo W, Chang C, Chen S. Ministernotomy vs. full sternotomy 
in congenital heart defects: a prospective randomized study. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71:473.
17.	Srivastava AR, Banerjee A, Tempe DK, et al. A comprehen-
sive approach to fast tracking in cardiac surgery: ambula-
tory low-risk open-heart surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2008;33:955-960.
18.	King TD, Mills NL. Secundum atrial septal defects: non-
operative closure during cardiac catheterization. JAMA. 
1976;235:2506.
19.	Karamlou T, Diggs BS, McCrindle BW, Ungerleider RM, 
Welke KF. The rush to atrial septal defect closure: is the 
introduction of percutaneous closure driving utilization? 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:1584-1590.
20.	Zeevi B, Keane JF, Castaneda AR, et al. Neonatal critical val-
vular aortic stenosis. A comparison of surgical and balloon 
dilatation therapy. Circulation. 1989;80:831.
21.	Lupinetti FM, Bove EL. Left ventricular outflow tract obstruc-
tion. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Sur-
gery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:435.
22.	Gupta ML, Lantin-Hermoso MR, Rao PS. What’s new in 
pediatric cardiology. Indian J Pediatr. 2003;70(1):41.
23.	Alsoufi B, Karamlou T, McCrindle BW, Caldarone CA. 
Management options in neonates and infants with critical 
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Eur J Cardiotho-
rac Surg. 2007;31:1013.
24.	Hammon JW Jr., Lupinetti FM, Maples MD, et al: Predictors 
of operative mortality in critical aortic stenosis presenting in 
infancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1988;45:537.
25.	Mosca RS, Iannettoni MD, Schwartz SM, et al. Critical aortic 
stenosis in the neonate: a comparison of balloon valvuloplasty 
and transventricular dilatation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1995;109:147.
26.	Moore P, Egito E, Mowrey H, et al. Midterm results of balloon 
dilatation of congenital aortic stenosis: predictors of success. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1257.
27.	Ross DN. Replacement of aortic and mitral valves with a pul-
monary autograft. Lancet. 1967;57:956.
28.	Jones TK, Lupinetti FM. Comparison of Ross procedures and 
aortic valve allografts in children. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998; 
66:S170.
29.	 Karamlou T, Jang K, Williams WG, et al. Outcomes 
and associated risk factors for aortic valve replacement 
in 160 children: a competing risks analysis. Circulation. 
2005;29:3462-3469.
30.	Marasini M, Zannini L, Ussia GP, et al. Discrete subaortic 
stenosis: incidence, morphology, and surgical impact of 
associated subaortic anomalies. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003; 
75:1763.
31.	Karamlou T, Gurofsky R, Bojcevski A, et al. Prevalence and 
associated risk factors for intervention in 313 children with 
subaortic stenosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:900-906.
32.	Somerville J, Stone S, Ross D. Fate of patients with fixed sub-
aortic stenosis after surgical removal. Br Heart J. 1980;43:629.
33.	Williams JCP, Barratt-Boyes BG, Lowe JB. Supravalvular 
aortic stenosis. Circulation. 1961;24:1311.
34.	van Son JM, Danielson GK, Puga FJ, et al. Supravalvular 
­aortic stenosis: long-term results of surgical treatment. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:103.
35.	Sharma BK, Fujiwara H, Hallman GL, et al. Supravalvular 
aortic stenosis: a 29-year review of surgical experience. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 1991;51:1031.
36.	McElhinney DB, Petrossian E, Tworetzky W, et al. Issues and 
outcomes in the management of supravalvular aortic stenosis. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69:562.
37.	Clyman RI, Mauray F, Roman C, et al. Circulating PGE2 con-
centration and patent ductus arteriosus in fetal and neonatal 
lambs. J Pediatr. 1982;97:455.
38.	McMurphy DM, Heymann MA, Rudolph AM, et al. Devel-
opmental change in constriction of the ductus arteriosus: 
response to oxygen and vasoactive substances in the iso-
lated ductus arteriosus of the fetal lamb. Pediatr Res. 1972; 
6:231.
39.	Mitchell SC, Korones SB, Berendes HW. Congenital heart 
disease in 56,109 births. Incidence and natural history. Circu-
lation. 1971;43:323.
40.	Campbell M. Natural history of persistent ductus arteriosus. 
Br Heart J. 1968;30:4.
731
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
41.	Itabashi K, Ohno T, Nishida H. Indomethacin responsiveness 
of patent ductus arteriosus and renal abnormalities in preterm 
infants treated with indomethacin. J Pediatr. 2003;143:203.
42.	Rashkind WJ, Cuaso CC. Transcatheter closure of patent duc-
tus arteriosus. Pediatr Cardiol. 1979;1:3.
43.	Moore JW, Schneider DJ, Dimeglio D. The duct-occlud 
device: design, clinical results, and future directions. J Interv 
Cardiol. 2001;14:231.
44.	Moore P, Egito E, Mowrey H, et al. Midterm results of balloon 
dilation of congenital aortic stenosis: predictors of success. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1257.
45.	Mavroudis C, Backer CL, Gevitz M. Forty-six years of 
­patent ductus arteriosus division at Children’s Memorial 
Hospital of Chicago. Standards for comparison. Ann 
­Thorac Surg. 1994;220:402.
46.	Elzenga NJ, Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Oppenheimer-Dekker 
A. Coarctation and other obstructive arch anomalies: their rela-
tionship to the ductus arteriosus. Int J Cardiol. 1986;13:289.
47.	Locher JP, Kron IL. Coarctation of the aorta. In: Mavroudis C, 
Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. St. Louis: Mosby; 
1994:167.
48.	Presbitero P, Demaie D, Villani M, et al. Long-term results 
(15–30 years) of surgical repair of coarctation. Br Heart J. 
1987;57:462.
49.	Cohen M, Fuster V, Steele PM, et al. Coarctation of the aorta: 
long-term follow-up and prediction of outcome after surgical 
correction. Circulation. 1989;80:840.
50.	Hornung TS, Benson LN, McLaughlin PR. Interventions for 
aortic coarctation. Cardiol Rev. 2002;10:139.
51.	Waldhausen JA, Nahrwold DL. Repair of coarctation of the 
aorta with a subclavian flap. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1966;51:532.
52.	Karamlou T, Bernasconi A, Jaeggi E, et al. Factors associ-
ated with arch reintervention and growth of the aortic arch 
after coarctation repair in neonates weighing less than 2.5 kg. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;137:1163-1167.
53.	van Heum LW, Wong CM, Speigelhalter DJ, et al. Surgi-
cal treatment of aortic coarctation in infants younger than 
3 months: 1985-1990. Success of extended end-to-end arch 
aortoplasty. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:74-85.
54.	Knyshov GV, Sitar LL, Glagola MD, et al. Aortic aneurysms 
at the site of the repair of coarctation of the aorta: a review of 
48 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;61:935.
55.	Bouchart F, Dubar A, Tabley A, et al. Coarctation of the aorta 
in adults: surgical results and long-term follow-up. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 2000;70:1483.
56.	Bhat MA, Neelakhandran KS, Unnikriahnan M, et al. Fate of 
hypertension after repair of coarctation of the aorta in adults. 
Br J Surg. 2001;88:536.
57.	McCrindle BW, Jones TK, Morrow WR, et al. Acute 
results of balloon angioplasty of native coarctation versus 
recurrent aortic obstruction are equivalent. Valvuloplasty 
and Angioplasty of Congenital Anomalies (VACA) Regis-
try Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28:1810.
58.	Hopkins RA, Wallace RB. Truncus arteriosus. In: Sabiston 
DC, Lyerly HK, eds. Textbook of Surgery: The Biologic Basis 
of Modern Surgical Practice. 15th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. 
Saunders; 1997:2052.
59.	Collett RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus: a clas-
sification according to anatomic subtypes. Surg Clin North 
Am. 1949;29:1245.
60.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S. The anatomy of common aor-
ticopulmonary trunk (truncus arteriosus communis) and its 
embryologic implications: a study of 57 necroscopy cases. 
Am J Cardiol. 1965;16:406.
61.	De la Cruz MV, Pio da Rocha J. An ontogenic theory for the 
explanation of congenital malformations involving the truncus 
and conus. Am Heart J. 1976;51:782.
62.	Manner J. Cardiac looping in the chick embryo: a morpho-
logic review with special reference to terminological and 
biomechanical aspects of the looping process. Anat Rec. 
2000;259:242.
63.	Hutson MR, Kirby ML. Neural crest and cardiovascular 
development: a 20-year perspective. Birth Defects Res Part C 
Embryo Today. 2003;69:2.
64.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Truncus 
arteriosus. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, 
et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:1201.
65.	Mavroudis C, Backer CL. Truncus arteriosus. In: Mavroudis 
C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. St. 
Louis: Mosby; 1994:237.
66.	Chiu IS, Wu SJ, Chen MR, et al. Anatomic relationship of 
the coronary orifice and truncal valve in truncus arteriosus 
and their surgical implication. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;123:350.
67.	Armer RM, De Oliveira PF, Lurie PR. True truncus arteriosus. 
Review of 17 cases and report of surgery in 7 patients. Circu-
lation. 1961;24:878.
68.	McGoon DC, Rastelli GC, Ongley PA. An operation for the 
correction of truncus arteriosus. JAMA. 1968;205:69.
69.	Ebert PA. Truncus arteriosus. In: Glenn WWL, Baue AE, 
Geha AS, eds. Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. 4th ed. 
Norwalk: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1983:731.
70.	Forbess JM, Shah AS, St Louis JD, et al. Cryopreserved 
homografts in the pulmonary position: determinants of dura-
bility. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71:54.
71.	Aupecle B, Serraf A, Belli E, et al. Intermediate follow-up 
of a composite stentless porcine valved conduit of bovine 
pericardium in the pulmonary circulation. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2002;74:127.
72.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Total anom-
alous pulmonary venous connection. In: Kouchoukos NT, 
Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes 
Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 
2003:758.
73.	Darling RC, Rothney WB, Craij JM. Total pulmonary venous 
drainage into the right side of the heart. Lab Invest. 1957;6:44.
74.	Delisle G, Ando M, Calder AL, et al. Total anomalous pul-
monary venous connection: report of 93 autopsied cases with 
emphasis on diagnostic and surgical considerations. Am Heart J. 
1976;91:99.
75.	Michielon G, Di Donato RM, Pasquini L, et al. Total anom-
alous pulmonary venous connection: long-term appraisal 
with evolving technical solutions. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2002;22:184.
76.	Jonas RA, Smolinsky A, Mayer JE, et al. Obstructed pul-
monary venous drainage with total anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection to the coronary sinus. Am J Cardiol. 
1987;59:431.
77.	Austin EH. Disorders of pulmonary venous return. In: Sabis-
ton DC, Lyerly HK, eds. Textbook of Surgery: The Biologi-
cal Basis of Modern Surgical Practice. 15th ed. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders; 1997:2001.
78.	Lacour-Gayet F, Rey C, Planche C. [Pulmonary vein 
­stenosis. Description of a sutureless surgical procedure using 
the pericardium in situ.] Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1996;89(5): 
633-636.
79.	Najm HK, Caldarone CA, Smallhorn J, Coles JG. A 
sutureless technique for the relief of pulmonary vein steno-
sis with the use of in situ pericardium. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1998;115(2):468-470.
80.	Hyde JAJ, Stumper O, Barth MJ, et al. Total anomalous pul-
monary venous connection: outcome of surgical correction 
and management of recurrent venous obstruction. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg. 1999;15:735.
732
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
81.	Korbmacher B, Buttgen S, Schulte HD, et al. Long-term 
results after repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous con-
nection. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;49:101.
82.	Bando K, Turrentine MW, Ensing GJ, et al. Surgical man-
agement of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection. 
Thirty-year trends. Circulation. 1996;95(9 Suppl):II12-II26.
83.	Karamlou T, Gurofsky R, Al Sukhni E, et al. Factors asso-
ciated with mortality and reoperation in 377 children with 
total anomalous pulmonary venous connection. Circulation. 
2007;115:1591-1598.
84.	Salomone G, Tiraboschi R, Bianchi T, et al. Cor triatriatum: 
clinical presentation and operative results. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 1991;101:1088.
85.	Huang TC, Lee CL, Lin CC, et al. Use of an Inoue balloon 
dilatation method for treatment of cor triatriatum stenosis in a 
child. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2002;57:252.
86.	Cooley DA, McNamara DG, Latson JR. Aorticopulmonary 
septal defect: diagnosis and surgical treatment. Surgery. 1957; 
­42:101.
87.	Ohtake S, Mault JR, Lilly MK, et al. Effect of a systemic-
pulmonary artery shunt on myocardial function and perfusion 
in a piglet model. Surg Forum. 1991;42:200.
88.	Gaynor JW, Ungerleider RM. Aortopulmonary window. In: 
Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. 
2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:250.
89.	Scalia D, Russo P, Anderson RH, et al. The surgical anatomy 
of hearts with no direct communication between the right 
atrium and the ventricular mass—so-called tricuspid atresia. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1984;87:743.
90.	Cheung HC, Lincoln C, Anderson RH, et al. Options for 
surgical repair in hearts with univentricular atrioventricular 
connection and subaortic stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1990;100:672.
91.	Trusler GA, Williams WG. Long-term results of shunt proce-
dures for tricuspid atresia. Ann Thorac Surg. 1980;29:312.
92.	Dick M, Gyler DC, Nadas AS. Tricuspid atresia: clinical 
course in 101 patients. Am J Cardiol. 1975;36:327.
93.	Glenn WWL, Patino JF. Circulatory by-pass of the right heart. 
Preliminary observations on the direct delivery of vena caval 
blood into the pulmonary arterial circulation. Azygous vein-
pulmonary artery shunt. Yale J Biol Med. 1954;27:147.
94.	Fontan F, Baudet E. Surgical repair of tricuspid atresia. 
Thorax. 1971;26:240.
95.	deLeval MR, Kilner P, Gerwillig M, et al. Total cavopulmo-
nary connection: a logical alternative to atriopulmonary con-
nection for complex Fontan operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1988;96:682.
96.	Laks H, Haas GS, Pearl JM, et al. The use of an adjust-
able interatrial communication in patients undergoing the 
Fontan and definitive heart procedures [abstract]. Circulation. 
1988;78:357.
97.	Haas GS, Hess H, Black M, et al. Extracardiac conduit Fontan 
procedure: early and intermediate results. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2000;17:648.
98.	Tokunaga S, Kado H, Imoto Y, et al. Total cavopulmonary 
connection with an extracardiac conduit: experience with 100 
patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73:76.
99.	Karamlou T, Ashburn DA, Caldarone CA, Blackstone EH. 
Matching procedure to morphology improves outcome in 
neonates with tricuspid atresia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2005;130:1503-1510.
100.	Bardo DME, Frankel DG, Applegate KE, et al. Hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome. Radiographics. 2001;21:706.
101.	Norwood WI. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 1991;52:688.
102.	Bronshtein M, Zimmer EZ. Early sonographic diagnosis of 
fetal small left heart ventricle with a normal proximal outlet 
tract: a medical dilemma. Prenat Diagn. 1997;17:249.
103.	Norwood WI, Lang P, Hansen DD. Physiologic repair of 
aortic atresia-hypoplastic left heart syndrome. N Engl J Med. 
1983;308:23.
104.	Norwood WI. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 1991;52:688.
105.	Tweddell JS, Hoffan GM, Ghanayem NS, et al. Ventilatory 
control of pulmonary vascular resistance is not necessary to 
achieve a balanced circulation in the postoperative Norwood 
patient. Circulation. 1999;100(18 Suppl):I-671.
106.	Tchervenkov CI. Two-ventricle repair for hypoplastic left 
heart syndrome. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card 
Surg Annu. 2001;4:89.
107.	Ohye RG, Sleeper la, Mahony L, et al. Comparison of shunt 
types in the Norwood procedure for single ventricle lesions. 
N Engl J Med 2010;362:1980-92.
108.	Akintuerk H, Michel-Behnke I, Valeske K, et al. Stenting of 
the arterial duct and banding of the pulmonary arteries: basis 
for combined Norwood Stage I and II repair in hypoplastic left 
heart. Circulation. 2002;105:1099-1103.
109.	Caldarone CA, Benson L, Holtby H, Li J, Redington AN, 
VanArsdell GS. Initial experience with hybrid palliation 
for neonates with single ventricle physiology. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2007;84:1294-1300.
110.	Baba K, Honjo O, Chaturvedi R, et al. “Reverse Blalock-
Taussig shunt”: application in single ventricle hybrid pallia-
tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(2):352-357.
111.	Bailey LL, Gundry SR, Razzouk AJ, et al. Bless the babies: 
115 late survivors of heart transplantation during the first year 
of life. The Loma Linda University Pediatric Heart Transplant 
Group. J Thorac Cardiovas Surg. 1993;105:805.
112.	Gaynor JW, Mahle WT, Cohen MI, et al. Risk factors for mor-
tality after the Norwood procedure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2002;22:88.
113.	Bove EL. Ebstein’s anomaly in the neonate. Am Assoc Thorac 
Surg. 2008 (abstr).
114.	Celermajer DS, Cullen S, Sullivan ID, et al. Outcome in neo-
nates with Ebstein’s anomaly. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19: 
1041-1046.
115.	Starnes VA, Pitlick PT, Bernstein D, et al. Ebstein’s anomaly 
appearing in the neonate. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991; 
101:1082.
116.	Danielson GK, Driscoll DJ, Mair DD, et al. Operative treat-
ment of Ebstein’s anomaly. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992; 
104:1195.
117.	Knott-Craig CJ, Overholt ED, Ward KE, et al. Neonatal 
repair of Ebstein’s anomaly: indications, surgical technique, 
and medium-term follow-up. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000; 
69:1505.
118.	Yetman AT, Freedom RM, McCrindle BW. Outcome in cya-
notic neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly. Am J Cardiol. 1998; 
81:749.
119.	Billingsly AM, Laks H, Boyce SW, et al. Definitive repair in 
patients with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1989;97:746.
120.	Stellin G, Vida VL, Milanesi O, et al. Surgical treatment of 
complex cardiac anomalies: the “one and one half ventricle 
repair.” Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22:435.
121.	Chowdhury UK, Airan B, Sharma R, et al. One and a half 
ventricle repair with pulsatile Glenn: results and guidelines 
for patient selection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71:2000.
122.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S, Vlad P. Anatomic subtypes of 
congenital dextrocardia: diagnostic and embryologic implica-
tions. Am J Cardiol. 1964;13:510.
123.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S. Isolated ventricular inversion: a 
consideration of the morphogenesis, definition, and diagnosis 
of nontransposed and transposed great arteries. Am J Cardiol. 
1966;17:395.
733
Congenital Heart Disease
CHAPTER 20
124.	Blalock A, Hanlon CR. The surgical treatment of complete 
transposition of the aorta and the pulmonary artery. Surg 
Gynecol Obstet. 1950;90:1.
125.	Senning A. Surgical correction of transposition of the great 
vessel. Surgery. 1959;45:966.
126.	Mustard WT, Chute AL, Keith JD. A surgical approach to 
transposition of the great vessels with extracorporeal circuit. 
Surgery. 1954;36:39.
127.	Jatene AD, Fontes VF, Paulista PP, et al. Successful anatomic 
correction of transposition of the great vessels: a preliminary 
report. Arq Bras Cardiol. 1975;28:461.
128.	Rastelli GC. A new approach to the “anatomic” repair of trans-
position of the great arteries. Mayo Clin Proc. 1969;44:1.
129.	Culbert EL, Ashburn DA, Cullen-Dean G, et al. Quality of life 
after repair of transposition of the great arteries. Circulation. 
2003;108:857.
130.	Dearani JA, Danielson GK, Puga FJ, et al. Late results of the 
Rastelli operation for transposition of the great arteries. Semin 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2001;4:3.
131.	Freedom RM, Yoo SJ. Double-outlet right ventricle: pathol-
ogy and angiocardiography. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2000;3:3.
132.	Lev M, Bharati S, Meng CCL, et al. A concept of double out-
let right ventricle. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1972;64:271.
133.	Taussig HB, Bing RJ. Complete transposition of the aorta 
and a levoposition of the pulmonary artery. Am Heart J. 
1949;37:551.
134.	Belli E, Serraf A, Lacour-Gayet F, et al. Double-outlet right 
ventricle with non-committed ventricular septal defect. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 1999;15:747.
135.	Kawashima Y, Matsuda H, Yagihara T, et al. Intraventricular 
repair for Taussig-Bing anomaly. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1993;105:591-596.
136.	Rastelli GC, McGoon DC, Wallace RB. Anatomic correction 
of transposition of the great arteries with ventricular septal 
defect and subpulmonic stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1969;58:545.
137.	Yasui H, Kado H, Nakano E, et al. Primary repair of inter-
rupted aortic arch with severe stenosis in neonates. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1987;93:539-545.
138.	Bradley TJ, Karamlou T, Kulik A, et al. Determinants of 
repair type, reintervention, and mortality in 393 children 
with double-outlet right ventricle. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;134:967-973.
139.	Brown JW, Ruzmetov M, Okada Y, et al. Surgical results in 
patients with double outlet right ventricle: a 20-year experi-
ence. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72:1630.
140.	Fallot A. Contribution a l’anatomie pathologique de la mal-
adie bleue (cyanose cardiaque) [French]. Marseille Med. 
1888;25:77-403.
141.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S, Nebesar RA, et al. Tetralogy of 
Fallot: underdevelopment of the pulmonary infundibulum and 
its sequelae. Am J Cardiol. 1970;26:25-53.
142.	Need LR, Powell AJ, del Nido P, et al: Coronary echocar-
diography in tetralogy of Fallot: diagnostic accuracy, resource 
utilization, and surgical implications over 13 years. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2000;36:1371.
143.	Mahle WT, McBride MG, Paridon SM. Exercise performance 
in tetralogy of Fallot: the impact of primary complete repair in 
infancy. Pediatr Cardiol. 2002;23:224.
144.	Deanfield JE. Adult congenital heart disease with spe-
cial refernce to the data on long-term follow-up of patients 
­surviving to adulthood with or without surgical correction. 
Eur Heart J. 1992;13(Suppl H):111-116.
145.	Alexiou C, Chen Q, Galogavrou M, et al. Repair of tetral-
ogy of Fallot in infancy with a transventricular or a transatrial 
approach. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22:174.
146.	Al Habib HF, Jacobs JP, Mavroudis C, et al. Contemporary 
patterns of management of tetralogy of Fallot: data from the 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons database. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2010;90(3):813-819; discussion 819-820.
147.	Karamlou T, McCrindle BW, Williams WG. Surgery insight: 
late complications following repair of tetralogy of Fallot and 
related surgical strategies for management. Nature Cardio-
vasc Med. 2006;3:611-622.
148.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al: Ventricu-
lar septal defect. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty 
DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:851.
149.	Gatzoulis MA, Till JA, Somerville J, et al. Mechanoelectri-
cal interaction in tetralogy of Fallot. QRS prolongation relates 
to right ventricular size and predicts malignant ventricular 
arrhythmias and sudden death. Circulation. 1995;92:231-237.
150.	Karamlou T, Silber I, Lao R, et al. Outcomes after late reop-
eration in patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot: the impact 
of arrhythmia and arrhythmia surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2006;81:1786-1793.
151.	Turner SW, Hornung T, Hunter S. Closure of ventricular sep-
tal defects: a study of factors influencing spontaneous and 
surgical closure. Cardiol Young. 2002;12:357.
152.	 Waight DJ, Bacha EA, Khahana M, et al. Catheter therapy of 
Swiss cheese ventricular septal defects using the Amplatzer mus-
cular VSD occluder. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2002;55:360.
153.	Seddio F, Reddy VM, McElhinney DB, et al. Multiple ven-
tricular septal defects: how and when should they be repaired? 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117:134.
154.	Tsang VT, Hsia TY, Yates RW, et al. Surgical repair of sup-
posedly multiple defects within the apical part of the muscular 
ventricular septum. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73:58.
155.	Rastelli G, Kirklin JW, Titus JL. Anatomic observations on 
complete form of persistent common atrioventricular canal 
with special reference to atrioventricular valves. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 1966;41:296.
156.	Ungerleider RM. Atrial septal defects, ostium primum defects, 
and atrioventricular canals. In: Sabiston DC, Lyerly HK, eds. 
Textbook of Surgery: The Biologic Basis of Modern Surgical 
Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1997:1993.
157.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Coarcta-
tion of the aorta and interrupted aortic arch. In: Kouchoukos 
NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes 
Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 
2003:1353.
158.	Ungerleider RM, Kisslo JA, Greeley WJ, et al. Intraoperative 
prebypass and postbypass epicardial color flow imaging in the 
repair of atrioventricular septal defects. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1989;98:1146.
159.	Roussin R, Belli E, Lacour-Gayet F, et al. Aortic arch recon-
struction with pulmonary autograft patch aortoplasty. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123:443.
This page intentionally left blank 
Acquired Heart Disease
Shoichi Okada, Jason O. Robertson,  
Lindsey L. Saint, and Ralph J. Damiano, Jr.
21
CARDIAC ASSESSMENT
Clinical Evaluation
As with any other field in medicine, history, and physical exam-
ination form the foundation for the evaluation of a patient with 
acquired heart disease requiring surgical intervention. Obtain-
ing a complete history will help identify comorbid conditions 
and assist in delineating the operative risks and prognosis after 
surgery. Physical examination not only reveals factors that may 
increase the complexity of surgery, such as previous surgery or 
peripheral or cerebral vascular disease. These may influence the 
operative approach but also help guide the choice and sequenc-
ing of diagnostic studies. A complete assessment of the patient 
allows the surgeon to make educated decisions regarding the 
optimal treatment strategy for the patient.
History
Symptoms suggestive of heart disease include: chest discomfort, 
fatigue, edema, dyspnea, palpitations, and syncope. Adequate 
definition of these symptoms calls for a detailed history-taking 
Cardiac Assessment	
735
Clinical Evaluation / 735
History / 735
Physical Examination / 737
Cardiac Risk Assessment in General  
Surgery Patients / 737
Diagnostic Studies / 738
Extracorporeal Perfusion	
740
History / 740
Technique / 740
Adverse Effects / 741
Myocardial Protection / 741
Coronary Artery Disease	
741
History / 741
Etiology and Pathogenesis / 741
Risk Factors and Prevention / 741
Clinical Manifestations / 742
Preoperative Evaluation / 742
Coronary Artery Bypass 
Grafting	
742
Indications / 742
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention vs. 
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting / 742
Summary / 743
Operative Techniques and Results / 743
New Developments / 747
Valvular Heart Disease	
747
General Principles / 747
Surgical Options / 747
Mitral Valve Disease	
751
Mitral Stenosis / 751
Mitral Regurgitation / 753
Mitral Valve Operative Techniques and 
Results / 755
Aortic Valve Disease	
756
Aortic Stenosis / 756
Aortic Insufficiency / 758
Aortic Valve Operative Techniques and 
Results / 761
Tricuspid Valve Disease	
762
Tricuspid Stenosis and 
Insufficiency / 762
Multivalve Disease / 764
Surgical Therapy for the 
Failing Heart	
764
Epidemiology of Heart Failure / 764
Etiology and Pathophysiology / 765
CABG for Ischemic Cardiomyopathy / 765
Secondary Mitral Regurgitation / 765
Left Ventricular Aneurysmorrhaphy and 
Surgical Ventricular Restoration / 766
Mechanical Circulatory Support / 768
Right Ventricular Assist Devices and 
Biventricular Assist Devices / 770
Total Artificial Heart / 770
Surgery for Arryhtmias	
770
Atrial Fibrillation / 771
Surgery for Pericardial Disease	
772
Acute Pericarditis / 772
Relapsing Pericarditis / 773
Chronic Constrictive Pericarditis / 773
Cardiac Neoplasms	
774
Overview and General Clinical 
Features / 774
Myxoma / 775
Other Benign Cardiac Tumors / 776
Malignant Cardiac Tumors / 776
Metastatic Cardiac Tumors / 776
paying particular attention to onset, intensity, radiation, dura-
tion, and exacerbating/alleviating factors. The demands on the 
heart are determined by its loading conditions and metabolic 
state of the body, and symptoms are commonly accentuated with 
physical exertion or postural changes.
Angina pectoris is the hallmark of coronary artery disease 
(CAD), but may occur with other cardiac pathologies which 
results in ischemia from a mismatch between the supply of oxy-
gen by the coronary circulation and the metabolic demand of 
the myocardium. Typically, angina is described as tightness, 
heaviness, or dull pain, most frequently substernal in location, 
lasting for a few minutes. This discomfort may radiate to the left 
arm, neck, mandible, or epigastrium. It is most often provoked 
by activities that increase metabolic demand on the heart such 
as exercise, eating, and states of intense emotion, and is typi-
cally alleviated by rest or use of nitroglycerin. It is important 
to note that a significant number of patients with myocardial 
ischemia, particularly diabetics, females, and the elderly, may 
have “silent” angina or angina equivalents (dyspnea, diaphore-
sis, nausea, or fatigue). The overlap of these features with those 
chapter 
of noncardiac etiologies such as costochondritis, biliary colic, 
gastroesophageal reflux disease, diffuse esophageal spasm, and 
peptic ulcer disease, to name a few, can lead to misdiagnosis.
Heart failure can occur in the left and/or right heart and 
respective symptoms arise from congestion of blood flow owing 
to the inadequacies of the cardiac pump function. Left heart 
failure manifests as dyspnea, usually with exertion. Orthop-
nea suggests worsened pulmonary congestion with increased 
venous return and these patients are not able to lie flat. Ascites, 
peripheral edema, and hepatomegaly reflect congestion in the 
systemic venous circulation and are prominent features of right 
heart failure. Peripheral edema can occur in right heart failure 
secondary to systemic venous congestion, or in left heart failure 
due to salt and fluid retention due to impaired renal perfusion. 
Patients with chronic suboptimal perfusion and oxygenation can 
also have digital clubbing and cyanosis.
It is difficult to implicate cardiac disease based solely on the 
presence of fatigue as it is a very nonspecific symptom. However, 
most cardiac pathologies do result in fatigue or exercise intoler-
ance of some degree. It is important to differentiate fatigue from 
exertional dyspnea which some patients may describe as “fatigue.”
Dyspnea is another common symptom seen in many heart 
diseases. Although generally a late symptom in patients with 
valvular heart disease or cardiomyopathy, it may be a rela-
tively early complaint in some patients, particularly those with 
736
Key Points
1
	 Although advances have been made in percutaneous coro-
nary intervention techniques for coronary artery disease, 
survival is superior with coronary artery bypass grafting in 
patients with left main disease, multivessel disease, and in 
diabetic patients.
2
	 Coronary artery bypass grafting has become increasingly 
safe, and improves late mortality in patients with left main 
or proximal left anterior descending disease, multivessel 
disease, and in patients with diabetes.
3
	 Despite the theoretical advantages, the superiority of off-
pump coronary artery bypass to conventional coronary 
artery bypass grafting has not been clearly established and 
other factors likely dominate the overall outcome for either 
technique.
4
	 Although mechanical valves offer enhanced durability over 
tissue valve prosthesis, they require permanent systemic 
anticoagulation therapy to mitigate the risk of valve throm-
bosis and thromboembolic sequelae, and thus are associated 
with an increased risk of hemorrhagic complications.
5
	 Mitral valve repair is recommended over mitral valve 
replacement in the majority of patients with severe chronic 
mitral regurgitation. The decision to proceed with mitral 
valve repair is based on the skill and experience of the sur-
geon in performing repair, and on the location and type of 
mitral valve disease encountered at the time of operation.
6
	 Although open aortic valve replacement has traditionally 
been the only effective treatment in patients with severe cal-
cific aortic stenosis, transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
is a developing technology that has proven beneficial for the 
treatment of aortic stenosis in seriously ill patients that 
had previously been deemed high risk or inoperable.
7
	 Mechanical circulatory support with newer generation 
continuous flow left ventricular assist devices has proven 
to be durable and effective both in bridging patients to 
transplant and as a means of “destination therapy” for 
patients who are not transplant candidates. Recent results 
for destination therapy have approached those of cardiac 
transplantation.
8
	 Performing a biatrial Cox-Maze lesion set results in free-
dom from atrial fibrillation in approximately 90% of 
patients and is superior to both catheter-ablation and 
more limited lesion sets for patients with persistent atrial 
fibrillation or enlarged left atria. Surgical ablation of 
atrial fibrillation is recommended for patients referred 
with concomitant valvular disease and those who have 
previously failed or are poor candidates for catheter-
based approaches.
9
	 The preferred treatment for pericarditis depends on the 
underlying cause, although the disease typically follows 
a self-limited course and is best managed medically. Sur-
gical pericardiectomy may have a role in treating relaps-
ing pericarditis and, more commonly, chronic constrictive 
pericarditis.
10
	 Myxomas are the most common cardiac tumors, and, 
while benign, they should be promptly excised after diag-
nosis due to the risk of embolization, obstructive compli-
cations, and arrhythmias.
mitral stenosis. As stated previously, dyspnea is also an anginal 
equivalent and may signal a myocardial ischemic episode. Many 
primary pulmonary disorders feature dyspnea as their cardinal 
symptom and should be evaluated simultaneously as the physi-
ology of the heart and lungs are intimately related, and can have 
dramatic influences on each other.
Patients typically describe palpitations as a “skipped beat” 
or “racing heart”. Depending on the clinical context, such as 
occasional premature atrial or ventricular beats in otherwise 
healthy individuals, these may be benign. Clinically significant 
arrhythmias, however, require thorough investigation. Atrial 
fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia and can occur alone 
or with concomitant cardiac pathologies. It results in an irregu-
lar, and at times, rapid heartbeat. Concurrent symptoms such as 
angina or lightheadedness/syncope are particularly worrisome 
for life threatening arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia 
or ventricular fibrillation, particularly in those with preexisting 
heart failure or ischemic heart disease.
Syncope associated with heart disease results from abrupt 
reduction of cerebral perfusion. Many of the potential etiologies 
are serious, including sinus node dysfunction, atrioventricular-
conduction abnormalities, malignant arrhythmias, aortic steno-
sis, and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Any episode 
of syncope warrants a thorough evaluation and search for the 
root cause. 1
737
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
In addition to a thorough inquiry regarding the above 
symptoms, it is important to obtain details about the patients’ 
medical/surgical history, family history, social habits (with 
regards to alcohol and tobacco use), current medications, and 
a focused review of systems, including an assessment of the 
patients’ functional status and frailty. Specific attention should 
be directed to the patients’ comorbidities which not only sheds 
light on the patients’ general health, but also helps delineate the 
risks if the patient were to undergo surgery. A strong family 
history of coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, hyper-
tension, or diabetes is of particular importance as they increase 
the individuals’ risks.
Functional Disability and Angina.  With regard to heart fail-
ure, functional capacity is strongly correlated with mortality. 
The New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classifi-
cation is the most widely used classification system in catego-
rizing patients based on their functional status (Table 21-1). The 
NYHA classification has become a basis by which to assess 
patient characteristics in many studies to compare patient popu-
lations. Although less commonly used, the Canadian Cardio-
vascular Society (CCS) angina classification is also used to 
incorporate anginal symptoms into the functional assessment 
for prognostic value (Table 21-2).
Physical Examination
The physical examination is an invaluable tool in directing 
further diagnostic studies and management of a patient with 
suspected heart disease. The astute clinician will detect subtle 
signs that may further characterize the underlying pathologic 
process.
The general appearance of a patient is important in the 
clinical assessment. A pale, diaphoretic, and obviously uncom-
fortable patient is more likely to be in a clinically critical 
condition than one who is conversing comfortably with an unre-
markable demeanor. In addition to basic vital signs, particular 
attention should be directed to the patients’ mental status and 
skin (color, temperature, diaphoresis) as these may be reflec-
tive of the general adequacy of perfusion. Overall frailty and 
dementia have also been shown to be predictors of operative 
and late mortality.2
Palpation of the precordium may demonstrate deviations 
in the point of maximal impulse indicative of ventricular 
Table 21-1
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional 
classification
Class
Description
I
Physical activity not limited by symptoms: 
fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea.
II
Comfortable at rest. Slight limitation of physical 
activity. Fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea with 
ordinary physical activity.
III
Comfortable at rest. Marked limitation of physical 
activity. Fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea with 
less than ordinary physical activity.
IV
Inability to carry out any physical activity. 
Symptoms may be present at rest and increase 
with activity.
Table 21-2
Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) anginal 
classification
Class
Description
I
Ordinary physical activity (walking, climbing 
stairs) does not cause angina. Angina occurs with 
strenuous, rapid, or prolonged exertion during 
work or recreation.
II
Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Angina 
occurs with climbing stairs rapidly, walking uphill 
in the wind, under emotional stress, in the cold, 
or after meals. Walking more than 2 blocks or 
climbing one flight of stairs causes angina.
III
Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity 
(climbing a flight of stairs or walking 1 to  
2 blocks at a normal pace).
IV
Inability to carry out any physical activity without 
discomfort. Angina may be present at rest.
hypertrophy or parasternal heaves seen in right ventricular over-
load. Auscultation should be performed in a quiet environment 
as critical murmurs, rubs, or gallops may be subtle. Murmurs 
are characterized by their location, timing, quality, and radia-
tion. They are typically secondary to valvular or other structural 
pathology and new findings require further investigation. A rub 
due to pericardial friction is specific and virtually pathogno-
monic for pericarditis. A third heart sound (S3) is generated by 
the rapid filling of a stiff ventricle and can be normal in young 
patients, but when present in older adults, is indicative of dia-
stolic dysfunction and is pathologic. Increased contribution of 
the atrial pump function to ventricular filling may manifest as 
a fourth heart sound (S4) and is also suggestive of ventricular 
dysfunction.
Palpation of peripheral pulses is important not only to assess 
the adequacy of perfusion, but the burden of coronary artery dis-
ease often correlates with the degree of peripheral arterial disease. 
Discovery of carotid stenosis by auscultation for carotid bruits has 
significant implications for operative planning.
Heart disease will frequently have extracardiac manifesta-
tions and examination of the other organ systems should not be 
neglected. Auscultation of the lung fields may reveal rales in 
patients with pulmonary edema. The work of breathing may also 
be assessed simply by observing the patient. Jugular venous dis-
tention and hepatosplenomegaly are seen in right heart failure.
Cardiac Risk Assessment in General  
Surgery Patients
Approximately one half of the mortality in patients undergoing 
noncardiac surgery is due to complications which are cardio-
vascular in origin.3 The American College of Cardiology and 
American Heart Association have formed a joint task force to 
publish a consensus statement on guidelines and recommenda-
tions which was revised in 2007.4 The aim of these guidelines 
is to incorporate surgery-specific risks and patient characteris-
tics to stratify patients in order to guide perioperative decision-
making.
Surgical procedures have been categorized based on cardio-
vascular risk into low and moderate risk, and vascular procedures. 
738
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 21-3
Algorithm set forth by ACC/AHA guidelines for preopera-
tive cardiovascular evaluation before noncardiac surgery 
for patients who are scheduled for nonemergent, non-
low risk surgery, no active cardiac disease, and less than 
3 METs
Number of Risk 
Factors*
Recommendation
0
Proceed with planned surgery.
1–2
Control HR and proceed with planned 
surgery or pursue further testing if it will 
change management.
3–5
Pursue further testing if it will advance 
management.
*Risk factors are: history of ischemic heart disease, history of prior or 
compensated heart failure, history of cerebrovascular disease, diabetes 
mellitus, and renal insufficiency.
Vascular procedures (aortic, peripheral vascular, and other 
major vascular surgery), likely due to both the nature of the 
procedures themselves as well as the associated cardiovascular 
pathology in many of these patients, carries the highest reported 
cardiac risk at more than 5%. Low risk procedures, including 
endoscopic procedures, superficial operations, cataract surgery, 
breast surgery, and ambulatory surgeries have a risk generally 
less than 1%. Intermediate risk procedures are: intraperitoneal 
and intrathoracic surgery, head and neck surgery, orthopedic 
procedures, and prostate surgery.
Patient characteristics can be classified by the status of the 
patients’ cardiac disease, comorbid conditions, and functional 
capacity. Patients are considered to be at major perioperative 
clinical risk if they have one or more of the following active 
cardiac conditions: unstable coronary syndrome, decompen-
sated heart failure, significant arrhythmias, or severe valvular 
heart disease. In these patients, intensive evaluation and treat-
ment prior to surgery (unless emergent) is warranted, even if the 
noncardiac surgery needs to be delayed or cancelled.
If the patient does not have any of the previously men-
tionedactive conditions, and is scheduled for a low risk surgery 
or if they have functional capacity greater than or equal to 4 
metabolic equivalents (or METs), the official recommendation 
is to proceed with the planned operation. The previous guide-
lines contained intermediate and low cardiovascular risk pro-
files, but this has been replaced by cardiovascular risk factors 
in the update. These risk factors are: history of ischemic heart 
disease, history of prior or compensated heart failure, history 
of cerebrovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and renal insuf-
ficiency. Based on the number of present risk factors and the 
surgery-specific risk, the guideline recommends pathways for 
further evaluation and risk management (Table 21-3).
Diagnostic Studies
Electrocardiogram and Chest X-ray.  Electrocardiograms 
(ECGs) and chest X-rays are simple, noninvasive, and inex-
pensive diagnostic studies that are invaluable in the preopera-
tive assessment of patients with cardiac pathology. ECGs can 
be useful in detecting old myocardial infarction, dilation or 
hypertrophy of cardiac chambers, arrhythmias, and conduction 
abnormalities. A stress ECG requires a patient to exercise to a 
target heart rate, and is used to help diagnose ischemic patholo-
gies which may not be evident at rest.
A plain film of the chest can detect pulmonary pathol-
ogy, sequelae of heart failure (e.g., pulmonary edema, cardiac 
enlargement, pleural effusions) as well as hardware from previ-
ous procedures such as, prosthetic valves, sternal wires, pace-
makers, and defibrillators.
Echocardiography.  Echocardiography utilizes reflected 
sound waves to image the heart, and is used widely due to its 
noninvasive nature and low cost. It is the primary diagnostic 
tool used to evaluate structural diseases of the heart, includ-
ing: valvular pathology, septal defects, cardiomyopathies, and 
cardiac masses. Echocardiography is indispensable in assessing 
surgical prosthetics such as valves, leads, or mechanical circu-
latory support devices. These examinations can be performed 
with M-mode imaging (motion along a single line) as well as 
2-D and 3-D imaging depending on the graphical information 
required.
Doppler technology has become a standard addition to 
assess changes in flow patterns across both stenotic and regurgi-
tant valves. Velocity measurements can be obtained to estimate 
pressure gradients across structures using the continuity equa-
tion. A common example would be the estimation of pulmonary 
arterial systolic pressure calculated from the regurgitant tricus-
pid jet profile during right ventricular systole.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) requires no seda-
tion and is generally performed with the patient in a slight left 
lateral decubitus position. Standardized views are obtained with 
the ultrasound probe placed in the apical, parasternal, subcostal, 
and suprasternal positions. The apical four-chamber view is a 
useful window for visualizing all four cardiac chambers simul-
taneously as well as the tricuspid and mitral valves. Other win-
dows can be obtained to assess specific structures such as the 
individual valve anatomy or myocardial wall segments. Dobu-
tamine-stress echocardiography is a study similar in idea to the 
stress ECG which utilizes a pharmacologic agent to assess the 
patient for ischemia or stress-induced valvular abnormalities.
A slightly invasive variant of this technology is trans-
esophageal echocardiography (TEE) which takes advantage 
of the anatomic proximity of the heart to the esophagus. The 
exam is performed using a special endoscope with an ultrasound 
probe mounted on its end which is introduced orally into the 
esophagus under sedation. Posterior structures such as the mitral 
valve and left atrium are particularly well visualized. TEEs are 
frequently used intraoperatively during cardiothoracic surgery 
to assess global cardiac function, integrity of valve repairs and 
replacements, intracavitary thrombus and/or air, and aortic ath-
erosclerosis or dissections which can have significant influences 
on operative strategy.
There are some new additions to the echocardiographic 
armamentarium which capitalize on the strengths of ultrasound 
imaging. Three dimensional TEE is playing an increasing role in 
the preoperative and intraoperative evaluation of patients with 
valvular heart disease and is particularly useful in the valua-
tion of mitral regurgitation. Tissue Doppler imaging is based on 
principles akin to conventional Doppler echocardiography, but 
attention is directed to the myocardium itself as opposed to the 
motion of blood to quantify abnormalities in wall motion. 
Strain imaging with speckle-tracking echocardiography mea-
sures the actual deformation of the myocardium by following 
739
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
inhomogeneities inherent to the myocardium, and is a useful 
measure of myocardial function.
Radionuclide Studies.  Although ECGs are useful, inexpensive, 
and safe, baseline abnormalities in the ECG may limit its diag-
nostic capacity. In particular, ventricular rhythms, bundle-branch 
blocks, left ventricular hypertrophy, drug effects, and baseline 
ST-segment depressions can make stress ECGs uninterpretable. 
In this setting, myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) using radio-
nuclides can be utilized to assess myocardial ischemia.
Thallium 201 (201Tl) was the initial radionuclide used for 
MPI, but due to its long half-life and relatively low photopeak, 
it has largely been replaced by Technetium-99m (sestamibi and 
tetrofosmin) which has more favorable characteristics. In the 
past, planar imaging with three separate two-dimensional views 
of the heart were obtained. Currently, it is more common to 
have the images acquired by single-photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) technology which detects emitted pho-
tons from 180- to 360-degrees around the patients. The signals 
are then processed to reconstruct multiple slices which together 
provide a three-dimensional view. The amount of uptake at both 
rest and stressed states are compared to assess ischemia and 
viability of the myocardium. The distribution of radionuclides 
depend on perfusion and therefore areas which show uptake at 
rest, but not during stress are concerning for ischemia.
Territories that do not show uptake at rest or during stress 
are likely to be nonviable scar. The sensitivity and specificity of 
exercise SPECT are 90% and 70%, respectively.5
The image acquisition may also be gated to a simultane-
ously obtained ECG to assess global ventricular function. The 
endocardial and epicardial borders (as delineated by radionu-
clide uptake) are detected throughout the cardiac cycle and the 
ejection fraction, along with end-systolic and end-diastolic vol-
umes, can be calculated. This study is also useful in revealing 
hypokinetic segments of the myocardium.
One of the most significant weaknesses of SPECT imag-
ing is that it shows regional ischemia well, but does not ade-
quately detect global or “balanced” ischemia which can occur 
with diffuse CAD. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans 
have been used due to its ability to obtain absolute quantita-
tive data on both myocardial perfusion and metabolism. Tracers 
used in PET scans can be divided into those that assess perfu-
sion (Oxygen-15, Nitrogen-13, and Rubidiuim-82) and those 
that assess metabolism (Carbon-11 and Fluorine-18). The speci-
ficity of PET in detecting CAD is better than SPECT at 86% due 
to its superior spatial resolution.6
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) has a wide variety of uses in cardiac imaging depending 
on the pulse sequence and signal weighting. Cine-loop of the 
heart throughout the cardiac cycles can yield information on 
global chamber function and valvular pathologies. The differ-
ential response of normal and ischemic myocardium to certain 
pulse sequences allows imaging of myocardial perfusion using 
MRI. Use of contrast agents such as gadolinium can enhance 
scar tissue and are very useful in viability assessment. Myo-
cardial strain imaging can also be performed using newer tech-
nologies taking advantage of radio-frequency tagging of the 
myocardium which deforms with the tissue and can be followed 
throughout the cardiac cycle.
Cardiac Catheterization.  Cardiac catheterization involves 
access to the cardiac chambers and great vessels with a periph-
erally inserted catheter under fluoroscopic guidance. It is a 
versatile tool used for diagnostic purposes of: cardiac chamber 
pressures, valvular abnormalities, wall motion assessment, and 
coronary artery anatomy. While some of these roles are being 
replaced by less invasive techniques mentioned previously, car-
diac catheterization studies continue to be widely performed and 
is the gold standard for the assessment of coronary artery disease.
A left-heart catheterization is performed by percutane-
ous access of the femoral, or less commonly, the radial artery. 
Under fluoroscopic guidance, the catheter is threaded into the 
aorta where a contrast aortogram may be performed. Coronary 
angiography requires manipulation of this catheter into the coro-
nary ostia where contrast is directly injected. With advancement 
of the catheter retrograde past the aortic valve, left ventricular 
pressures can be obtained. This pressure is used to calculate 
pressure gradients across the aortic valve which becomes par-
ticularly important in the evaluation of aortic stenosis. Again, 
contrast injection will result in a ventriculogram used to esti-
mate ejection fraction and visualize hypokinetic segments of the 
walls. Inappropriate retrograde leakage of contrast may indicate 
insufficiency of the aortic and/or mitral valves.
Right heart catheterization is performed through a periph-
eral vein and the catheter is threaded into the right atrium. Right-
sided pressures and structures are assessed in a similar fashion 
as in the left heart. Extension of the catheter into the pulmonary 
artery allows measurement of the pulmonary artery pressures as 
well as the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (reflecting left 
ventricular end diastolic pressure) with an occlusive balloon.
In addition to these measurements, cardiac output can be 
measured using thermodilution or by the Fick method using 
oxygen saturations of blood sampled from the various locations 
during the procedure.
Coronary angiography provides information on hemody-
namically significant stenoses in the coronary circulation as well 
as an anatomical roadmap for surgeons to planning revasculariza-
tion. (Fig. 21-1A & B) A stenosis is considered to be significant 
if it narrows the lumen of the artery by 70% (or 50% in the case 
of left main coronary artery). There is some variability in the cor-
onary arterial anatomy with the posterior descending artery being 
supplied by the right coronary artery in approximately 80% of 
patients (right dominant), or the left coronary artery in approxi-
mately 15% of patients (left dominant). The remaining patients 
have a codominant circulation where the posterior descending 
artery is supplied by both the right and left coronaries.
An advantage of catheterization is that it offers an oppor-
tunity for interventional therapy of coronary artery disease, 
arrhythmias, valvular abnormalities, and other structural defects 
of the heart. Cardiac catheterization is generally safe, but being 
an invasive procedure, it is associated with complications. Overall 
mortality is 0.11%, and total rate of major complications, includ-
ing: MI, stroke, arrhythmia, vascular injury, contrast reaction, 
hemodynamic instability, and cardiac perforation is usually <2%.7
Cardiac Computed Tomography.  Multislice computed 
tomography (CT) imaging can be used to assess the coronary 
vasculature. The coronary calcium score is an index devel-
oped to quantify the degree of coronary atherosclerotic burden 
by measuring Hounsfield units in a noncontrast cardiac CT. 
Although this technique is quite sensitive for angiographic ste-
noses >50%, it remains fairly nonspecific as calcification often 
precedes significant luminal narrowing.8 CT coronary angiogra-
phy using intravenous contrast is also utilized clinically to assess 
coronary pathology and is particularly useful in the emergency 
room to perform a “triple rule-out” for acute coronary events, 
740
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 21-1.  Cardiac catheterization angiography. A. Stenosis of 
right coronary artery indicated by the arrow. B. Still image of a 
normal left ventriculogram.
asystole and hypothermia. The need for a bloodless operating 
field, while maintaining perfusion of heart and other organs, 
was evident.
John Gibbon’s motivation to develop a means for extra-
corporeal perfusion came from a desire to safely open the 
pulmonary artery in a patient who suffered from a pulmonary 
embolus following cholecystectomy. After numerous experi-
mental iterations, Gibbon’s cardiopulmonary bypass machine 
was first used clinically in 1953 to repair a large atrial septal 
defect in an 18-year-old female.10
Although Gibbon is credited for its invention, the develop-
ment of modern cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a culmina-
tion of the work of many investigators throughout the world. 
The early bubble oxygenators have evolved into the modern 
membrane oxygenators. The search for an ideal biocompatible 
material which minimizes the inflammatory cascade initiated 
by the contact of blood with the circuit components continues 
to this day.
Technique
The basic CPB circuit consists of the venous cannulae, a venous 
reservoir, pump, oxygenator, filter, and the arterial cannula.
Anticoagulation is required during CPB, and 300 to 
400 units/kg of heparin is given to increase the activated clot-
ting time (ACT) to greater than 450 seconds. Once adequate 
anticoagulation is achieved, arterial cannulation is performed 
through a purse-string suture, or through a side graft which is 
sewn on to the native artery. The distal ascending aorta is the 
most common site of cannulation, but there may be concern 
for atheroembolization when the aorta is atherosclerotic. Other 
sites of cannulation include the femoral artery, axillary artery, or 
the distal aortic arch. Venous cannulation is performed through 
purse-string sutures placed on the right atrium either for a single 
cannula or for two separate cannulae extending into the superior 
and inferior vena cava, respectively. Alternatively, the venous 
cannula may be inserted from the femoral vein and advanced 
into the right atrium.
Effective communication between the surgeon, the anes-
thesiologist, and the perfusionist is mandatory for effective 
cardiopulmonary bypass. Once the appropriate cannulations 
and connections are complete, CPB is commenced. Venous 
return is initiated followed by arterial flow while monitoring 
systemic blood pressures. At normothermia, the flow required 
is approximately 2.4 L/min/m2, but with hypothermia, oxygen 
consumption is reduced by 50% for every 10°C drop in temper-
ature, and a flow of only 1L/min/m2 is required at 18°C. Once 
the heart is decompressed and hemodynamics are acceptable, 
ventilation is stopped. The oxygenator is adjusted to maintain 
a PaO2 of 150 mm Hg and normocarbia. Blood can also be 
filtered and returned through vents that are placed in the heart 
or through the cardiotomy suction used to aspirate blood from 
the surgical field.
When the cardiac procedure is complete, the patient is 
rewarmed, the lungs ventilated, and the heart defibrillated if 
needed. The venous return to the CPB machine is gradually 
reduced allowing the heart to fill. The pump is also slowed 
while hemodynamics and global cardiac function are assessed 
with a TEE probe. Inotropic and vasopressor support may be 
used to augment cardiac function and treat hypotension. Once 
CPB has been stopped and stable hemodynamics achieved, the 
cannulae are removed. The heparin anticoagulation is reversed 
with protamine and hemostasis is achieved.11
A
B
pulmonary embolism, and aortic dissection in patients who pres-
ent with undifferentiated chest pain. LV ejection fraction may 
be measured by this technique, and together with the degree of 
coronary stenoses, incremental prognostic value has been dem-
onstrated in addition to routine clinical predictors.9
EXTRACORPOREAL PERFUSION
History
Prior to the development of extracorporeal perfusion, heart sur-
gery was rarely performed and was limited to brief periods of 
741
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Adverse Effects
Cardiopulmonary bypass has a number of deleterious effects 
as various intertwining processes result in derangements in 
hemostasis, systemic inflammatory response, and end-organ 
function.
Anticoagulation prior to the commencement of CPB is 
required as contact of blood with the artificial surfaces of the cir-
cuit can initiate a thrombogenic cascade. Generation of thrombin 
plays a major role in both thrombotic and bleeding phenomena 
during CPB. The endothelium which normally regulates the fine 
balance between procoagulant and anticoagulant pathways is 
perturbed. Fibrinogen is consumed rapidly as thrombin converts 
fibrinogen to fibrin while fibrinolytic mechanisms (initiated by 
the activated endothelium) degrade the fibrin macromolecules. 
Platelets are activated by the converging hemostatic pathways 
and are consumed.
The response of the humoral and cellular immune systems 
partly overlap with the hemostatic pathways. The classic and 
alternative complement pathways are activated by CPB generat-
ing powerful chemotaxic molecules and anaphylatoxins. Mono-
cytes, platelets, and neutrophils are activated releasing acute 
inflammatory mediators and cytokines which persist even after 
conclusion of CPB.12 These inflammatory cells also produce 
reactive oxidants which may have cytotoxic effects.
The large quantity of unfractionated heparin used dur-
ing cardiac surgery predisposes patients to developing hepa-
rin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) with an incidence of 1% 
to 2%. Platelet factor-4 (PF4) is produced by platelets and avidly 
binds to heparin to form a heparin-PF4 complex which can be 
antigenic in some patients binding IgG. The IgG-heparin-PF4 
complex can bind to platelets which causes release of more PF4, 
perpetuating the process. The earliest sign is a sudden drop of 
more than 50% of the platelet count, and HIT can be confirmed 
with an ELISA or serotonin release assay. Of the patients with 
HIT, 20% to 50% of patients develop thromboses in arterial or 
venous beds, designated as heparin induced thrombocytopenia 
and thrombosis (HITT), which can be life-threatening.13
The etiology of end-organ dysfunction resulting from 
extracorporeal circulation can mostly be categorized into one 
of three mechanisms. Although cardiac output and blood pres-
sure are monitored carefully during CPB, they are surrogates for 
regional perfusion and cannot detect end-organ hypoperfusion 
directly. This can be a problem particularly with the cerebral, 
renal, and mesenteric circulations. With manipulation of dis-
eased vessels and dysregulation of the native coagulation sys-
tem, macroscopic and microscopic emboli are a concern despite 
various strategies to minimize this problem. Activated cells and 
circulating cytotoxic products of the immune response may 
cause microvascular injury and edema of other organs mani-
festing as neurocognitive deficits, respiratory failure, and renal 
injury.14
Myocardial Protection
During CPB, pharmacologic agents in cardioplegic solutions 
may be delivered into the coronary circulation to arrest the 
heart allowing for a still operating target and improved myo-
cardial protection. The most common cardioplegia consists of 
potassium-rich solutions that can be mixed with autologous 
blood and are delivered into the coronary circulation. Antegrade 
cardioplegia is delivered into the root of a cross-clamped aorta 
or directly into the individual coronary ostial via specialized 
catheters. A retrograde cardioplegia catheter is a balloon-cuffed 
catheter that is placed through the right atrium into the coro-
nary sinus and is used to perfuse the coronary circulation in the 
opposite direction through the venous circulation. This has the 
advantage of more uniform distribution in patients with diffuse 
coronary artery disease and is not dependent on a competent 
aortic valve for delivery.
There are controversies regarding the method (antegrade 
retrograde vs. both), type (crystalloid vs. blood), temperature 
(cold vs. warm vs. tepid), and interval (continuous vs. inter-
mittent) of cardioplegia delivery. The optimal combination is 
beyond the scope of this text. However, most surgeons in the 
United States favor cold blood potassium cardioplegia.
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
History
The Vineberg operation, one of the initial attempts at surgi-
cal revascularization of the myocardium, was first performed 
in 1950s. This procedure involved implantation of the internal 
thoracic artery directly into the myocardium itself. While some 
patients were relieved of their anginal symptoms, this resulted 
in very little increase in coronary flow and was supplanted by 
methods to restore flow directly. Coronary endarterectomy was 
introduced by Longmire during this time period, but was met 
with high rates of restenosis and occlusion. The use of vein 
patches to repair the arteriotomy sites was described by Sen-
ning in 1961. The first saphenous vein coronary artery bypass 
grafting (CABG) was performed by Sabiston in 1962, but was 
popularized by Favalaro in 1967. In 1968, the internal thoracic 
artery was introduced as a bypass conduit by Green who used it 
to bypass the left anterior descending coronary artery.15
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Atherosclerotic stenoses are the primary mechanism of coronary 
artery disease (CAD). The pathophysiologic process is initiated 
with vascular endothelial injury and is potentiated by inflamma-
tory mechanisms, circulating lipids, toxins, and other vasoactive 
agents in the blood. Macrophages and platelets are attracted to 
this area of endothelial dysfunction inciting a local inflamma-
tory response. During this process, macrophages infiltrate into 
the intimal layers and accumulate cholesterol-containing low-
density lipoproteins. The growth factors secreted promote pro-
liferation of smooth muscle cells within the intima and media of 
the arteries. Together with the accumulation of the lipid-laden 
macrophages, the smooth muscle hyperplasia results in an ath-
eroma and subsequently stenosis of the vessel. These atheromas 
have a fibrous cap which may rupture, exposing the underlying 
cells and extracellular matrix which are very prothrombotic. 
Acute plaque rupture and thrombus formation is thought to be 
the main pathophysiologic mechanism responsible for acute 
coronary syndromes.16-18
Risk Factors and Prevention
Prior to the establishment of modern management strategies, the 
annual mortality rated from ischemic heart disease was quoted 
to be around 4% by the Framingham study. Since then, risk fac-
tor modification along with use of medications, such as aspirin 
and β-blockers, has dramatically improved survival.
The major risk factors of atherosclerosis include: age, cig-
arette smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemias, sedentary lifestyles, 
obesity, and diabetes. Likely due to increased public awareness 
and aggressive medical management, these risk factors (with the 
742
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
exception of glucose intolerance and obesity) have recently 
been on the decline.
Current guidelines outlined in the AHA/ACC consensus 
statement summarizes secondary prevention recommendations. 
Class I recommendations are: smoking cessation and avoidance 
of environmental tobacco exposure, blood pressure control to 
under 140/90 mm Hg (under 130/80 mm Hg in those with diabe-
tes or chronic kidney disease), LDL cholesterol levels less than 
100 mg/dL, aspirin therapy in all patients without contraindica-
tions, BMI target of less than 25 kg/m2, diabetes management 
with target HbA1c <7%, and encouragement of daily aerobic 
exercise routines. Beta-blockers are to be considered in patients 
with LV dysfunction and following MI or ACS. Renin-angio-
gensin-aldosterone system blockade in patients with hyperten-
sion, LV dysfunction, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease should 
also be considered.19
Clinical Manifestations
Patients with CAD may have a spectrum of presentations, 
including angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, ischemic heart 
failure, arrhythmias, and sudden death.
Angina pectoris is the pain or discomfort caused by myo-
cardial ischemia and is typically substernal and may radiate to 
the left upper extremity, left neck, or epigastrium. The variety 
of presentations can make myocardial ischemia difficult to diag-
nose. Characteristics of chest pain that make myocardial isch-
emia less likely include: pleuritic chest pain, pain reproducible 
by movement or palpation, or brief episodes lasting only sec-
onds. Typical angina is relieved by rest and/or use of sublingual 
nitroglycerin. Differential diagnoses to be considered include, 
but are not limited to: musculoskeletal pain, pulmonary disor-
ders, esophageal spasm, pericarditis, aortic dissection, gastro-
esophageal reflux, neuropathic pain, and anxiety.
Myocardial infarction is a serious consequence of CAD 
occurring when ischemia results in myocardial necrosis. This 
may be silent and need not be preceded by angina. Necrosis 
may result in disruption of the myocardial integrity leading to 
devastating conditions such as intracardiac shunts from ventric-
ular septal defects, acute valvular regurgitation from rupture of 
necrotic papillary muscles, and cardiac aneurysms which have 
the catastrophic potential to rupture.
The ischemic insults from CAD may lead to congestive 
heart failure. The initial myocardial damage sets off a cascade 
of responses, both local and systemic. Over time, these changes 
can cause deleterious myocardial loading and abnormal neuro-
humoral responses that result in pathologic remodeling of the 
heart. Heart failure should be suspected in patients who present 
dyspnea, orthopnea, fatigue, and edema.
Arrhythmias may also be a sequela of CAD. Ischemic eti-
ologies should be investigated in patients who present with new 
arrhythmias. CAD may result in arrhythmias following an acute 
MI or as the result of ultrastructural and electrophysiologic 
remodeling secondary to chronic ischemic heart disease. Isch-
emia of the electrical conduction system may be seen as the new 
onset complete or partial atrioventricular conduction blocks.
Preoperative Evaluation
A focused history and physical examination is essential with 
particular attention directed to the signs, symptoms, and clinical 
manifestations mentioned previously. The patient’s functional 
status is of importance not only because it is a component of 
preoperative risk assessment, but also because quality of life 
improvement and symptomatic relief are both goals of surgical 
therapy.
Coronary angiography is the primary diagnostic tool. The 
coronary anatomy and degrees of stenoses are delineated allow-
ing for planning of surgical revascularization.
Noninvasive diagnostic studies, in combination with pro-
vocative maneuvers (exercise or pharmacologic agents) offer 
information regarding the functional significance of ischemic 
disease. A stress ECG is frequently used as a screening tool 
with a high sensitivity. The positive predict value is 90% in 
patients with ST-segment depression >1mm. This test how-
ever, requires patients to achieve a certain elevation in their 
heart rate, and is therefore not suitable for those that cannot 
achieve this goal. Furthermore, baseline ECG abnormalities 
may render it impossible to detect typical ischemic changes 
with stress.
Echocardiography and nuclear imaging may be performed 
under pharmacologic stress (with dobutamine or dipyridamole) to 
assess reversible ischemia and myocardial viability. Technetium-
99m or thallium-201 perfusion scans have an average sensitivity 
and specificity of 90% and 75%, respectively. Stress echocar-
diography has a similar sensitivity and specificity of approxi-
mately 85%.20 These studies also have the ability to assess 
global ventricular function in terms of LV ejection fraction 
which can be used to determine operative risk.
CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING
Indications
A joint committee established by the American College of 
Cardiology and the American Heart Association have pub-
lished guidelines for surgical revascularization (CABG) in 
CAD. The indications, categorized by presentation and angio-
graphic disease burden as well as by treatment intention (sur-
vival improvement and symptom relief), are summarized later 
(Tables 21-4,5,6).21
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention vs. 
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting
In recent years, there have been multiple prospective random-
ized, controlled trials as well as retrospective studies looking at 
the comparative effectiveness of percutaneous coronary inter-
ventions (PCI) and CABG. Some of the representative studies 
are summarized here.
The New York State Study (2005).  A retrospective review 
of 59,314 patients in two of New York’s registry with multi-
vessel (2 or more) coronary disease was performed. Of these, 
37,212 patients received a CABG and the others underwent a 
PCI. After adjusting by means of proportional-hazards methods, 
CABG was associated with higher adjusted rates of long-term 
survival than PCI.22
Stent or Surgery Trial (2008).  An international multicenter 
randomized controlled trial of 988 patients (n = 488 PCI, 
n = 500 CABG) with multivessel CAD was performed to com-
pare revascularization strategies. At 2-year median follow-up, 
the PCI group had significantly higher rates of repeat revascu-
larizations and mortality compared to the CABG group (inci-
dence of nonfatal Q-wave myocardial infarctions were similar 
in both groups). The median follow-up was extended to 6-years, 
and a survival advantage persisted in the CABG group over the 
PCI group.23
743
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Synergy between Percutaneous Coronary Interven-
tion with Taxus and Cardiac Surgery (SYNTAX Trial, 
2009).  Revascularization strategies, CABG vs. PCI, were 
compared in a 1:1 randomized prospective trial of 1800 patients 
with high risk coronary artery disease (left-main or triple-vessel 
disease). Rates of requirement for repeat revascularization and 
major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular events at 12-months 
were lower in the CABG patients (5.9% and 12.4%, respec-
tively) compared to PCI patients (13.5% and 17.8%, respec-
tively). No difference in mortality was seen between the groups 
at 12-months.24
The ACCF and STS Database Collaboration on the Com-
parative Effectiveness of Revascularization Strategies 
(ASCERT Study, 2012).  This study, performed by collabo-
ration of the American College of Cardiology Foundation and 
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, reviewed their respective 
national databases of patients over the age of 65 who had mul-
tivessel coronary disease (excluding those with left main dis-
ease). CABG was performed on 86,244 patients and 103,549 
underwent PCI. There was no difference in adjusted mortality at 
1 year, but there was a significantly lower mortality with CABG 
than PCI at 4 years.25
Summary
PCI technology has improved over time and rates of peripro-
cedural adverse events have decreased significantly. Manage-
ment strategies must be tailored to the individual patient’s 
clinical status and context, but CABG maintains improved 
long-term outcome and remains the standard of care for left-
main and multivessel coronary artery disease.
Operative Techniques and Results
Bypass Conduit Selection.  The most important criterion in 
conduit selection is graft patency. The conduit with the high-
est patency rate (98% at 5 years and 85%–90% at 10 years) 
is the internal thoracic artery which is most commonly left 
attached proximally to the subclavian artery (although occa-
sionally used as a free graft) and anastomosed distally to the 
Table 21-4
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for CABG in CAD to improve survival
Anatomy
Class of Recommendation
Level of Evidence
•  LM
I
B
•  3-vessel +/− proximal LAD
I
B
•  2-vessel + proximal LAD
I
B
•  2-vessel – proximal LAD
IIa – with extensive ischemia 
IIb – without extensive ischemia
B
C
•  Multivessel disease with DM
IIa (CABG preferred over PCI)
B
•  Proximal LAD only
IIa – with LITA for long-term benefit
B
•  1-vessel – proximal LAD
III – Harm
B
•  LV dysfunction
IIa – LVEF 35%–50% 
IIb – LVEF <35% without LM disease
B 
B
•  Survivor of ischemia-mediated VT
I
B
DM = Diabetes mellitus; LITA = Left internal thoracic/mammary artery; LM = Left main coronary artery; LV = left ventricle; VT = ventricular tachycar-
dia. Class of recommendation: I – Benefit far outweighs risks and procedure should be performed; IIa – Benefit outweighs risks and procedure is consid-
ered to be reasonable; IIb – Potential benefits may exceed risks and procedure may be considered; III – Procedure not helpful and may cause harm. Level 
of evidence: A – Strong; multiple supporting randomized controlled trials or meta-analyses, B – Limited; data based on a single randomized trial or non-
randomized trials, C – Very limited; based on expert consensus, case studies or standards of care.
Table 21-5
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for CABG in CAD to improve symptoms
Anatomy Associated Symptoms
Class of Recommendation
Level of 
Evidence
•  Unacceptable angina with presence of ≥1 stenoses amenable to 
revascularization despite medical treatment
I
A
•  Complex 3-vessel CAD +/- proximal LAD involvement
IIa (CABG preferred over PCI)
B
•  Unacceptable angina with presence of ≥1 stenoses amenable to 
revascularization but medical treatment is not possible
IIa
C
•  Previous CABG with ≥1 stenoses associated with ischemia and angina 
despite medical treatment
IIb
C
1
744
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
target coronary artery.26,27 The use of both internal thoracic 
arteries has been shown to increase event-free survival in a 
number of studies.28,29
The greater saphenous vein can be harvested using an open 
or endoscopic technique. In the open technique, the initial inci-
sion is made along the course of the vein on the medial aspect 
of the lower extremity. The vein is harvested with meticulous 
attention directed towards minimizing manipulation of the vein 
itself. The incision may be continuous or bridged in an attempt 
to decrease the size of the incision, but multiple bridged inci-
sions may have the potential risk of increased conduit manipula-
tion during harvest. Endoscopic harvest is performed by making 
a small incision just above and medial to the knee where the 
endoscope is inserted. Side branches are cauterized under endo-
scopic visualization using bipolar electrocautery until dissec-
tion is carried proximally until the required length of vein is 
mobilized. A proximal counterincision is then made to extract 
the venous conduit which is prepared in the standard fashion.
The radial artery is another frequently used conduit. After 
confirmation of ulnar collateral flow to the hand by the clinical 
Allen’s test or a duplex ultrasound study, an incision is made 
from a point just proximal to the radial styloid process ending 
just medial and distal to the biceps tendon on the nondominant 
hand. With lateral retraction of the brachioradialis muscle, the 
radial artery is dissected sharply with care to avoid injury to 
the cutaneous nerves in this area and minimize manipulation 
of the artery itself. This artery can also be harvested using an 
endoscopic technique.
Many studies have looked at the patency rates of the radial 
artery graft in comparison to the saphenous vein graft. Although 
some studies have resulted in equivocal data, general consensus 
favors the use of radial arterial grafts over vein grafts with 5 year 
patency rates of 98% and 86%, respectively.30,31
From a historical perspective, the anterior circulation (left 
main or left anterior descending artery) is generally bypassed 
using the internal thoracic artery and the lateral (circumflex 
artery) or inferior (right coronary artery) territories are bypassed 
using a saphenous vein or radial artery graft. These conduits 
may be combined to form a composite T- or Y-graft, or sewn to 
multiple targets as sequential grafts. Since patency is best with 
arterial grafts, recent data havesuggested that the best long term 
results are achieved with multiple or all-arterial revasculariza-
tion, particularly in patients >70 years of age.32,33 Other conduits 
such as the gastroepiploic arteries, lesser saphenous veins, and 
cephalic veins have been described, but are not widely used and 
will not be discussed here.
Table 21-6
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for CABG in CAD in specific clinical contexts
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of  
Evidence
Emergent CABG following acute MI
•  Failure or inability to perform PCI, anatomy suitable for CABG, persistent ischemia/
hemodynamic instability refractory to nonsurgical therapy
•  Patients undergoing surgical repair of postinfarction complication (e.g.,VSD, papillary or 
free wall rupture)
•  Cardiogenic shock with anatomy suitable for CABG
•  Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmia, ischemic in origin, with 3-vessel disease or >50% 
LM stenosis
•  Multivessel disease, recurrent angina or MI within 48 hrs of STEMI (instead of a more 
delayed strategy)
•  Age >75 with ST-elevation or new left bundle branch block who are suitable for 
revascularization, regardless of time between MI and cardiogenic shock.
•  Persistent angina with only small area of viable myocardium
I
I
I
I
IIa
IIa
III – Harm
B
B
B
C
B
B
C
Survival from sudden cardiac death or sustained VT
•  If thought to be due to significant CAD (amenable to revascularization).
•  If only scar present, and no evidence of ischemia
I
III- Harm
B
C
Patients undergoing concomitant non-coronary cardiac surgery
•  In presence of significant CAD (>50% LM stenosis or >70% stenosis of another major 
coronary artery.
•  LITA graft to significantly narrowed LAD or CABG of moderately diseased  
(>50% stenosis) coronary artery.
I
IIa
C
C
Emergent CABG after failed PCI
•  Ongoing ischemia, threatened occlusion with substantial myocardium at risk, or 
hemodynamic compromise (without coagulopathy or previous sternotomy).
•  Retrieval of foreign bodies (from PCI) or hemodynamic compromise with coagulopathy 
and without previous sternotomy.
•  Absence of ischemia or threatened occlusion
I
IIa
III – Harm
B
C
C
LM = Left Main; VT = ventricular tachycardia.
745
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Figure 21-2.  Coronary artery bypass grafting. A. Intraoperative 
photograph of the distal anastomoses performed between the left 
internal thoracic artery and left anterior descending coronary artery 
with a continuous 8-0 suture. B. Fifteen-year follow-up coronary 
angiogram of a left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descend-
ing coronary artery bypass demonstrating a widely patent free of 
any significant atherosclerotic stenosis. Anastomotic site is shown 
by the arrow.
Conventional Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting.  Tradi-
tionally, CABGs are performed with the patient lying supine 
through a median sternotomy. After the patient is heparinized, 
cardiopulmonary bypass is initiated. The aorta is cross-clamped 
and cardioplegia is delivered. Once adequate myocardial protec-
tion has been achieved, coronary arteriotomies are made and 
distal anastomoses are performed using Prolene suture. (Fig. 
21-2A & B) The proximal anastomoses are then performed 
directly onto the ascending aorta or onto preexisting grafts. It 
is important to note that significant coronary stenoses can cause 
differential distribution of cardioplegia and myocardial protec-
tion. It is therefore recommended to use retrograde cardioplegia 
or to revascularize the area with the most concern for ischemia 
first, and give cardioplegia down the completed graft. The left 
internal thoracic artery to left anterior descending (LAD) graft 
is frequently performed last to avoid kinking or disruption of 
this important bypass. Once all grafts are in place, the patient is 
weaned from bypass. During this time, the heart is monitored 
closely by direct visual inspection, and transesophageal echocar-
diography to detect abnormalities which may signify inadequate 
revascularization or technical problems with the bypasses. Upon 
confirmation of hemostasis, chest tubes are placed, the sternum 
is approximated with sternal wires, and the incisions are closed.
Conventional CABG Results Several early randomized trials 
have shown improved survival in patients who receive a 
CABG as opposed to medical therapy.34-36 A propensity-
matched study identified that CABG greatly benefited patients 
with LV dysfunction and left main stenosis >50% compared 
to medical management.37 The Bypass Angioplasty Revascu-
larization Investigation (BARI) trial demonstrated impressively 
superior results with CABG compared to PCI in terms of 5-year 
cardiac mortality (5.8% vs. 20.6%) in patients with diabetes in 
addition to CAD.38 In a study examining the benefits of CABG 
over medical management for specific CAD distributions, sur-
vival was better in patients with proximal LAD stenoses, regard-
less of the number of diseased vessels.39 In general, these studies 
show survival rates of over 90% at 5 years and approximately 
75% at 10 years following CABG.
The mortality and morbidity of the procedure itself has 
changed over time. Data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
(STS) database accounts for 1,497,254 patients who under-
went a solitary CABG from 2000 to 2009. The mortality rate of 
CABGs have improved significantly from 2.4% in 2000 to 1.9% 
in 2009 despite the relatively constant predicted mortality rate 
of around 2.3%. In parallel with this, postoperative complication 
rates have decreased as: stroke (1.6%–1.2%), bleeding requir-
ing reoperation (2.4%–2.2%), and deep sternal wound infection 
(0.59%–0.37%).40
There are marked improvements in the functional status 
of patients receiving CABG. Patients’ 6-minute walk test dis-
tances were significantly increased 2 years postoperatively com-
pared to their preoperative assessment.41 After 10 years, 54% of 
patients were free of chest pain and 31% were free of dyspnea.42
Off-pump Coronary Artery Bypass.  To avoid the adverse 
consequences of cardiopulmonary bypass, off-pump coronary 
artery bypass (OPCAB) was developed and has been adopted in 
some centers over the past two decades.
With OPCAB the heart is left beating. Performing anas-
tomoses on the beating heart requires the use of myocardial 
stabilization devices which help portions of the epicardial sur-
face to remain relatively immobile while the anastomoses are 
being performed. (Fig. 21-3) Carbon dioxide blower-misters 
are also used to clear blood from the operative site and improve 
visualization.
Apical suction devices are used to aid in exposure, particu-
larly of the lateral and inferior vessels. Many creative maneuvers 
have been developed, including patient repositioning, opening 
the right pleural space to allow for cardiac displacement, and 
creation of a pericardial cradle to minimize compromise of car-
diac function while exposing the various surfaces of the heart. 
A
B
2
746
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Temporary proximal occlusion of the coronary artery being 
grafted is necessary to provide a bloodless target. This occlu-
sion causes temporary ischemia, and if not tolerated, coronary 
shunts can be employed.
OPCAB Results The superiority of OPCAB over on-pump 
CABG remains a controversy despite the large body of 
literature on this topic. A pooled analysis of two random-
ized trials, the Beating Heart Against Cardioplegic Arrest Stud-
ies (BHACAS 1 & 2), is one of several studies that have touted 
lower short term mortality rates with the off-pump compared 
to the on-pump technique.43-45 Other studies, however, have 
demonstrated equivocal or contrary results.46,47 Furthermore, 
the recent prospective and much larger ROOBY (Randomized 
On/Off Bypass) trial showed increased rates of adverse car-
diac events with OPCAB compared to conventional CABG.48 
Despite the initial enthusiasm for the theoretical advantages of 
avoiding cardiopulmonary bypass, consistent benefits in clini-
cal outcome have not been observed. There does seem to be 
a more or less uniform trend towards decreased perioperative 
blood product transfusions with OPCAB compared to on-pump 
CABG. In terms of other measures of early outcome, postop-
erative renal failure, stroke, and acute MI, the superiority of 
OPCAB has been unclear.47,49,50
There have been questions whether the technical challenge 
of sewing on a beating heart leads to increased rates of graft 
occlusion following an OPCAB. The higher cardiac morbid-
ity in the ROOBY trial was associated with decreased 1-year 
angiographic patency rates.48 However, studies with contrast-
ing findings exist, quoting equivalent rates of graft patency for 
OPCAB usage.51,52 The broad variety in results may be sugges-
tive that other factors (e.g.,surgeon skill, technical difficulty, 
patient factors) may be dominating the outcome rather than the 
use or avoidance of cardiopulmonary bypass.53 After almost two 
decades, OPCAB has not been widely adopted and remains less 
than 2% of all CABG procedures in the United States.
Minimally Invasive Direct Coronary Artery Bypass.  As 
an extension of the off-pump coronary revascularization tech-
nique, minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MID-
CAB) has been described. MIDCAB is performed using a left 
anterior mini-thoracotomy through which mobilization of the 
left internal thoracic and direct in situ anastomosis to the left 
Figure 21-3.  Epicardial stabilizing device used during off-pump 
coronary anastomosis. (Reproduced with permission from Estech.)
anterior descending artery (or its diagonal branches) is performed. 
This technique is primarily applicable to single-vessel disease, 
although reports of multivessel revascularizations do exist.
MIDCAB Results  A review of 411 patients undergoing MID-
CAB quotes an operative mortality >1%. In this study, all 
patients received revascularization of the LAD only, regard-
less of the number of diseased vessels. The 3-year mortality in 
patients with single-vessel disease following a MIDCAB was 
3.1%, which was, not surprisingly, lower than those with multi-
vessel disease (8.7%).54
There is an inherent selection bias in retrospective reviews 
comparing MIDCAB to OPCAB or conventional CABG as 
MIDCAB patients tend to have less extensive disease. Because 
of this, there have been multiple randomized controlled trials 
looking at the efficacy of MIDCAB compared to PCI. A meta-
analysis of 5 randomized prospective trials comparing PCI to 
MIDCAB revascularization of isolated proximal left anterior 
descending artery demonstrated comparable results in terms of 
mortality, MI, and repeat revascularization requirement. It is 
worth noting however, that only one of these trials used drug-
eluting stents (DES) in the PCI arm.55 Hong et al showed similar 
efficacy with MIDCAB and DES PCI, and when this study was 
excluded from the meta-analysis, superiority of MIDCAB to 
PCI in regards to mortality, MI, and repeat revascularizations 
was seen.56 Although no further prospective trials have been 
performed to compare DES PCI and MIDCAB in this patient 
cohort, a retrospective review of 186 patients has demonstrated 
significantly higher rates of angina recurrence and major 
adverse cardiac events in the DES PCI group.57
Total Endoscopic Coronary Artery Bypass.  With the advent 
of robotic surgical technology allowing stereoscopic visual-
ization and increased instrument dexterity, total endoscopic 
coronary artery bypass (TECAB) has become possible. In July 
of 2004, the da Vinci robotic surgical system received FDA 
approval for use in coronary anastomoses. Extracorporeal cir-
culation with peripheral cannulation has been used in earlier 
reports, but the development of mechanical stabilizers has pro-
vided the ability to perform the internal thoracic artery harvest 
and coronary anastomosis off-pump with use of the robotic 
arms only. Several studies have looked at the feasibility of 
TECAB, and have shown acceptable results, but this procedure 
has not been adopted by most surgeons due to its steep learning 
curve, longer operative times, and lack of demonstrable clinical 
benefit.58-60
Hybrid Coronary Revascularization.  With the continually 
increasing collaboration between cardiothoracic surgeons and 
interventional cardiologists, hybrid coronary revascularization 
(HCR) combining a minimally invasive surgical technique 
(MIDCAB or TECAB) with PCI has become a reality. This 
capitalizes on a major advantage of both treatments, utilizing 
the durable left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descend-
ing coronary artery bypass while treating other stenoses with 
PCI obviating the need for a large surgical incision or cardiopul-
monary bypass. HCR is not without its downsides as there are 
some concerns with this approach since aggressive anti-platelet 
therapy is required with PCI and may increase the hemorrhagic 
complications of surgical revascularization. A small study 
comparing HCR to OPCAB showed comparable graft patency 
and decreased hospital stay with HCR without an increase in 
complication rates.61 There are, however, some studies that 
have reported increased rates of requirement for re-intervention 
3
747
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
in patients undergoing HCR, and this aspect requires further 
study.62,63 These procedures have not gained widespread accep-
tance and their clinical value remains a matter of debate.
Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization.  Despite the 
advancement of technology and revascularization strategies, 
patients with end-stage coronary artery disease may not be 
amenable to complete revascularization. Transmyocardial laser 
revascularization (TMR) relies on a CO2 or holmium:yttrium-
aluminum-garnet (Ho:YAG) laser to create multiple transmu-
ral channels (1mm in diameter) through the myocardium. The 
initial concept was that these channels would serve as conduits 
for direct perfusion from the ventricle, but evidence suggests 
that the resultant angiogenesis is primarily responsible for the 
improved perfusion. A meta-analysis of seven randomized con-
trolled trials comparing TMR to medical therapy for chronic 
angina have shown higher rates of angina improvement in the 
TMR but was not able to show a difference in mortality between 
the two groups.64
TMR is also being used as an adjunct to CABG in the 
treatment of extensive CAD that is not amenable to surgical 
revascularization alone. In a study looking at the benefits of 
TMR in addition to CABG, Allen et al concluded that TMR 
decreases angina burden when added to CABG in patients who 
cannot be revascularized by CABG alone.65 The current STS 
guidelines support the consideration of TMR in patients with 
ischemic myocardial territories that cannot be revascularized 
by PCI or CABG.66 Because of equivocal late results at most 
centers, this therapeutic strategy has not gained widespread 
acceptance.
New Developments
Regenerative Medicine and Tissue Engineering.  Provoca-
tive investigations are being performed on the level of signaling 
molecules, gene therapy, stem cells, and tissue engineering to 
regenerate or replace damaged tissue in patients with ischemic 
heart disease. Growth factors, such as FGF and VEGF, are 
receiving focused attention due their ability to induce ingrowth 
of new vessels. Although concerns regarding systemic admin-
istration of these pleiotropic signaling molecules exist, early 
placebo-controlled clinical trials have shown some promising 
results with administration of these agents.67,68 Adenoviral trans-
fection of diseased tissue with transgenes for these same growth 
factors has also been attempted with variable results.
Research in tissue engineering has been directed at cre-
ation of vascular conduits that are resistant to atherosclerosis. 
Stem cells have also been infused directly into the site of injury 
or in the generation of new tissue around a biodegradable scaf-
fold. Despite their potential, these technologies are still in their 
infancy and significant progress will be needed before more 
widespread clinical adoption.
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
General Principles
The number of patients referred for the surgical management 
of valvular heart disease has increased substantially in recent 
years, with the percentage of isolated valve procedures per-
formed in the United States increasing from 14% of all cardiac 
operations in 1996, to 22% in 2006.69 In 2012, valve procedures 
represented over 50% of the cases performed at our institution. 
Although congenital and inherited etiologies represent important 
clinical entities, age-associated and acquired conditions still rep-
resent the primary causes of valvular heart disease, and are the 
focus of this section.
The most common screening method for valvular heart 
disease is cardiac auscultation, with murmurs classified based 
primarily on their timing in the cardiac cycle, but also on their 
configuration, location and radiation, pitch, intensity and dura-
tion (Table 21-7).70 Although some systolic murmurs are related 
to normal physiologic increases in blood flow, some may indi-
cate cardiac disease, such as valvular aortic stenosis (AS), that 
are important to diagnose, even when asymptomatic. Diastolic 
and continuous murmurs, on the other hand, are frequently 
pathologic in nature. Dynamic cardiac auscultation provides 
further evidence as to the significance and origin of many mur-
murs (Table 21-8).70
Although auscultation may provide initial evidence to the 
existence of valvular disease, associated signs and symptoms 
may help narrow the diagnosis. Abnormalities in the splitting 
of the heart sounds and additional heart sounds should be noted, 
as should the presence of pulmonary rales. Peripheral pulses 
should be checked for abnormal intensity or timing, and the 
presence of a jugular venous wave should be documented. Addi-
tionally, symptoms of syncope, angina pectoris, heart failure, 
and peripheral thromboembolism are important and may help 
guide diagnosis and management.
Several imaging examinations are also available to aid in 
the diagnosis and classification of various valvular disorders. 
Electrocardiograms (EKGs) are widely available, and may 
provide information regarding ventricular hypertrophy, atrial 
enlargement, arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, prior myo-
cardial infarction, and evidence of active ischemia that would 
prompt further workup. Posteroanterior and lateral chest X-rays 
are also easy to obtain, and may yield information regarding 
cardiac chamber size, pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary and 
systemic venous pressure, and cardiac calcifications. The gold 
standard for the evaluation of valvular heart disease is transtho-
racic echocardiography (TTE).
Although helpful in the noninvasive evaluation of valve 
morphology and function, chamber size, wall thickness, ventric-
ular function, pulmonary and hepatic vein flow, and pulmonary 
artery pressures, TTE may be unnecessary for some patients 
with asymptomatic cardiac murmurs. Current recommendations 
for evaluation via TTE are listed in Table 21-9.70 Specialized 
examinations based on the specific findings of TTE examina-
tions are discussed as appropriate in the following sections.
Regardless of the etiology, valvular heart disease can pro-
duce a myriad of hemodynamic derangements. Left untreated, 
valvular stenosis and insufficiency can produce significant 
pressure and volume overload on the affected cardiac chamber, 
respectively, with mixed disease consequently causing mixed 
pathology. Although the heart can initially compensate for alter-
ations in cardiac physiology, cardiac function eventually dete-
riorates, leading to heart failure, decreasing patient functional 
status, ventricular dysfunction, and eventually death. In order to 
optimize long-term survival, surgery is recommended in various 
forms of valvular heart disease, and in an increasing number of 
elderly and high-risk patients.
Surgical Options
Although valve repair is increasingly indicated, especially in 
patients with aortic, mitral or tricuspid insufficiency, valve 
replacement may be necessary in certain patient populations. 
748
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 21-7
Classification of cardiac murmurs.
Murmur
Condition
Mechanism/Etiology
Systolic murmurs
Holosystolic (pansystolic)
VSD
Flow between chambers that have widely different pressures throughout 
systole
Mid-systolic (systolic 
ejection)
High flow rate, MS, 
MR, TS, TI
Often crescendo-decrescendo in configuration; occur as blood is ejected 
into the left and right ventricular outflow tracts
Early systolic
Early TI, acute MR
Less common
Mid to late systolic
MR, MVP
Soft to moderate high-pitched murmurs at the LV apex; often due to apical 
tethering and malcoaptation of MV leaflets; an associated click indicates 
prolapse of the MV leaflets
Diastolic murmurs
Early high-pitched
AI, PR
Generally decrescendo in configuration; occur when the associated 
ventricular pressure drops sufficiently below that of the outflow tract
Mid-diastolic
MS, TS, PDA*, VSD*, 
ASD*
Due to a relative disproportion between valve orifice size and diastolic 
blood flow volume; seen in normal MV and TV with increased diastolic 
blood flow associated with these conditions*
Presystolic
MS, TS
Occur during the period of ventricular filling that follows atrial contraction 
(i.e.,only occur in sinus rhythm)
Continuous murmurs
Systolic and diastolic
PDA
Uncommon, due to shunts that persist through the end of systole and the 
some or all of diastole
AI = aortic insufficiency; ASD = atrial septal defect; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis. MVP = mitral valve prolapse; PDA = patent ductu-
sarteriosus; PR = pulmonic regurgitation; TI = tricuspid insufficiency; TS = tricuspid stenosis; VSD = ventricular septal defect.
Table 21-8
Hemodynamic alterations in cardiac murmur intensity.
Intervention
Effect
Respiration
Right-sided murmurs increase with inspiration. Left-sided murmurs increase with expiration.
Valsalva maneuver
Most murmurs decrease in length and intensity. The murmur of HCM becomes louder, and the 
murmur of MVP becomes louder and longer.
Exercise
Benign flow murmurs and murmurs caused by stenotic valves become louder with isotonic and 
isometric exercise. The murmurs of MR, VSD, and AI also increase with isometric exercise.
Positional changes
Most murmurs decrease with standing; the murmur of HCM becomes louder, and the murmur of 
MVP becomes louder and longer. Brisk squatting and passive leg raising increases most murmurs; 
the murmurs of HCM and MVP diminish.
Postventricular premature 
beat or atrial fibrillation
Benign flow murmurs and stenosis at the semilunar valves increase in intensity following a 
ventricular premature beat or a long cycle length in atrial fibrillation. Systolic murmurs of 
atrioventricular valve regurgitation do not change.
Pharmacologic interventions
The initial hypotensive phase following inhalation of amyl nitrate decreases the murmurs of MR, 
VSD, and AI, and increases the murmur of AS. The later tachycardic phase following inhalation 
of amyl nitrate increases right-sided murmurs and the murmur of MS. The response in MVP is 
biphasic (softer then louder than control).
Transient arterial occlusion
Transient external compression of the upper extremity increases the murmurs of MR, VSD, and AI.
AI = aortic insufficiency; AS = aortic stenosis; HCM = hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis; MVP = mitral 
valve prolapse; VSD = ventricular septal defect.
749
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
In some cases valve replacement can be accomplished with either 
mechanical or biological prostheses, and the choice of valve 
depends on many patient-specific factors such as age, health sta-
tus, and desire for future pregnancy. Preexisting indications or 
contraindications to anticoagulation therapy also influence the 
choice of mechanical vs. tissue valve prosthesis.
Current options for mechanical valve replacement include 
tilting disc valves and bileaflet valves. Although mechani-
cal valves are highly durable, they require permanent anti-
coagulation therapy to mitigate the otherwise high risk of valve 
thrombosis and thromboembolic sequelae.71 Due to the concor-
dant risk of hemorrhagic complications, patient characteristics 
such as debility, lifestyle, and contraindications to systemic anti-
coagulation therapy may preclude mechanical valve replacement. 
Moreover, young women who are planning future pregnancies 
cannot take warfarin due to its teratogenic potential. Conversely, 
patients with other indications for systemic anticoagulation, such 
as other risk factors for thromboembolism (i.e., atrial fibrilla-
tion), or the existence of a mechanical prosthetic valve already 
in place in another position, may benefit from mechanical valve 
replacement. Additionally, patients with renal failure, on hemo-
dialysis, or with hypercalcemia experience accelerated degen-
eration of bioprosthetic valves, and are thus, recommended to 
receive mechanical prostheses.72 In general, mechanical valve 
replacement is preferred in patients with expected long life spans 
who are acceptable candidates for anticoagulation therapy, in 
order to minimize reoperation and bleeding risks.
The potential to avoid the hazards of serious bleeding 
complications spurred the development of valve prostheses 
using biological materials, which obviate the need for systemic 
anticoagulation therapy. As tissue valves are naturally less 
thrombogenic, the attendant yearly risks of both thromboem-
bolic and anticoagulation-related complications are consider-
ably less than with mechanical valves.73 Consequently, tissue 
valve replacement is generally recommended for patients averse 
to systemic anticoagulation therapy, with potential concerns 
regarding compliance or follow-up while taking anticoagulant 
medications, and in the case of reoperation for a thrombosed 
mechanical valve. However, biological valves are more prone to 
degeneration, especially when implanted in the mitral position, 
in younger patients, and in patients in renal failure, on hemodi-
alysis, or with hypercalcemia.73 Improved manufacturing meth-
ods have made currently available tissue valves more durable 
than previous versions, and valve replacement with a biological 
prosthesis is generally preferred in patients without other indica-
tions for anticoagulation therapy, who are >60 years of age for 
the aortic position, and >70 years of age for the mitral position.
Mechanical Valves.  The first bileaflet valve was introduced in 
1977. Bileaflet valves are comprised of two semicircular leaflets 
which open and close, creating one central and two peripheral 
orifices (Fig. 21-4). Bileaflet mechanical valves have demon-
strated excellent flow characteristics, low risks of late valve-
related complications, including valve failure, and are currently 
the most commonly implanted type of mechanical valve pros-
thesis in the world.72
Although mechanical valves necessitate systemic antico-
agulation, careful monitoring of the International Normalized 
Ratio (INR) reduces the risk of thromboembolic events and 
hemorrhagic complications, and improves overall survival.74 
Patients undergoing mechanical aortic valve replacement gen-
erally have a target INR of 2 to 3 times normal. Patients under-
going mechanical mitral valve replacement frequently have 
increased left atrial size, concomitant atrial fibrillation, and 
are at higher risk for thromboembolism that those undergoing 
mechanical aortic valve replacement, and are thus recommended 
to have a target INR 2.5 to 3.5 times normal. When managed 
appropriately, the yearly thromboembolic and bleeding risks in 
these patients are 1% to 2%, and 0.5% to 2%, respectively.
Tissue Valves.  A xenograft valve is one implanted from 
another species, such as porcine xenograft valves, or manufac-
tured from tissue such as bovine pericardium. A variety of 
Table 21-9
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for echocardiographic examination in patients with cardiac murmurs.
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of 
Evidence
•  Echocardiography is recommended for asymptomatic patients with diastolic murmurs, 
continuous murmurs, holosystolic murmurs, late systolic murmurs, murmurs associated 
with ejection clicks, or murmurs that radiate to the neck or back.
I
C
•  Echocardiography is recommended for patients with heart murmurs and symptoms or signs 
of heart failure, myocardial ischemia or infarction, syncope, thromboembolism, infective 
endocarditis, or other clinical evidence of structural heart disease.
I
C
•  Echocardiography is recommended for asymptomatic patients who have grade 3 or louder 
midpeaking systolic murmurs.
I
C
•  Echocardiography can be useful for the evaluation of asymptomatic patients with murmurs 
associated with other abnormal cardiac physical findings or murmurs associated with an 
abnormal electrocardiogram or chest x-ray.
IIa
C
•  Echocardiography can be useful for patients whose symptoms and/or signs are likely 
noncardiac in origin but in whom a cardiac basis cannot be excluded by standard 
evaluation.
IIa
C
•  Echocardiography is not recommended for patients who have a grade 2 or softer 
midsystolic murmur identified as innocent or functional by an experienced observer.
III – Harm
C
4
750
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
xenograft tissue valves exist, and are primarily differentiated by 
the presence or absence of a mounting stent. Stented valves are 
the most commonly implanted, and the most popular valve in the 
United States is a stented bovine pericardial valve.
The more traditional stented valves are attached to a sew-
ing ring, which decreases the technical complexity of valve 
replacement compared with stentless valves (Fig. 21-5). The 
chief disadvantage of stented tissue valves is a smaller effec-
tive orifice area, which increases the transvalvular gradient. 
This effect is most pronounced in patients with small prosthetic 
Figure 21-4.  St. Jude bileaflet mechanical valve. (Photo repro-
duced with permission of St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN. All 
rights reserved.)
Figure 21-5.  Edwards’ Magna Ease stented porcine bioprosthesis. (Image reproduced with permission of Edwards Lifesciences, LLC, Irvine, CA.)
valve areas, specifically <0.85cm2 valve area per square meter 
body surface area, and may affect symptomatic improvement 
and the hemodynamic response to exercise following surgery.75
Stentless porcine xenograft valves were developed in 
order to minimize the limitations in flow characteristics seen 
in patients with small prosthetic valve areas, and have demon-
strated an increase in effective valve area of approximately 10% 
over stented xenografts of equivalent size.72 They can result in 
improved hemodynamics, both at rest and with exercise.76 The 
absence of a stent and sewing ring both increases the technical 
complexity of valve replacement, and takes advantage of the 
biologic mobility of the aortic valve apparatus. Though results 
with stentless valves seem promising, long-term durability 
remains to be shown, and they have not been widely adopted 
due to the technical complexity associated with implantation.
Homografts.  Homograft valves from human cadavers, also 
known as allografts, have been used for aortic valve replace-
ment since the technique was originally described over 50 years 
ago.77 Since that time, homografts have typically been used 
for aortic and pulmonary valve replacements, and have been 
successfully harvested from brain dead organ donors and the 
explanted hearts of heart transplant patients. Following harvest, 
these valves are sterilized using an antibiotic solution, and sub-
sequently stored in fixative or cryopreserved.
Like other types of tissue valves, the risk of thrombo-
embolic complications with homograft valves is low, and sys-
temic anticoagulation therapy is not required. Additionally, the 
structure of homograft valves is naturally low-profile, allow-
ing for larger effective valve orifices and lower postoperative 
transvalvular gradients compared with stented xenograft valves. 
Additionally, they have been shown to have some advantages in 
patients with endocarditis.78
The major shortcoming of homograft valves is their 
uncertain long-term durability in the face of significant tissue 
degeneration. Within one year of implantation, these valves 
undergo substantial loss of cellular components and subsequent 
751
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
structural compromise, which may ultimately lead to valve fail-
ure.79 Although enhanced preservation techniques significantly 
improve cellular viability, which approach the 15-year viability 
of xenograft valves, the availability of these techniques has lim-
ited the use of homograft tissue valves.
Autografts.  In 1967, Donald Ross described a procedure in 
which the diseased aortic valve is replaced using the patient’s 
native pulmonary valve as an autograft, which is in turn replaced 
with a homograft in the pulmonic position.80 The procedure 
results in minimal transvalvular gradients, and favorable left 
ventricular mechanics, both at rest and during exercise. Known 
as the Ross procedure, this operation is particularly beneficial 
in children, as the pulmonary trunk grows with the child and 
long-term anticoagulation is not required.81
The late results of the Ross procedure are discussed later 
in this chapter. In addition to potential concerns with durability, 
performance of the Ross procedure has also been limited by its 
technical complexity, and the increased surgical risk associated 
with double valve replacement.
Valve Repair.  Valve repair offers several advantages over 
valve replacement, due in large part to the preservation of the 
patient’s native valve and subvalvular apparatus. In the case of 
mitral valve (MV) surgery, preservation of the mitral apparatus 
has been shown to lead to better postoperative left ventricular 
function and survival.82,83 Additionally, as there is no implanted 
prosthesis, the patient avoids the risks of chronic anticoagula-
tion, infection, thromboembolic complications, and prosthetic 
valve failure after surgery.
In the case of MV repair, freedom from reoperation and 
valve-related complications has been excellent in certain patient 
populations, even at 20-year follow-up.84 It has also been dem-
onstrated that patients undergoing MV surgery with moder-
ate functional tricuspid regurgitation (TR) do not experience 
increased perioperative complication rates when a concomitant 
tricuspid valve (TV) repair is performed.85 Midterm results in 
this group are encouraging, with greater than 98% freedom from 
reoperation reported by some groups at 5 years, suggesting fur-
ther indications for valve repair.
Despite its advantages for the patient, valve repair is gen-
erally more technically demanding than valve replacement, and 
may occasionally fail. Both the suitability of the patient for 
valve repair and the skill and expertise of the surgeon perform-
ing the operation are important when considering valve repair 
in the individual patient.
MITRAL VALVE DISEASE
Mitral Stenosis
Etiology.  Acquired mitral stenosis (MS) is most often caused 
by rheumatic fever, with approximately 60% of patients with 
pure MS presenting with a positive clinical history of rheumatic 
heart disease.70 Rarely, other conditions can cause obstruction 
to filling of the left ventricle (LV), mimicking MS. Acquired 
causes of MV obstruction include left atrial myxoma, ball valve 
thrombus, mucopolysaccharidosis, previous chest radiation, and 
severe annular calcification.
Pathology.  Although rheumatic heart disease is associated 
with a transmural pancarditis, pathological fibrosis of the valves 
results primarily from the endocarditic process. The damage 
caused by endocardial inflammation and fibrosis is progres-
sive, causing commissural fusion, subvalvular shortening of the 
chordae tendineae, and calcification of the valve and subvalvu-
lar apparatus.86 The resulting stenotic MV has a funnel-shaped 
apparatus, with a significantly narrowed orifice obliterated by 
interchordal and commissural fusion (Fig. 21-6). The degree of 
mitral stenosis should be determined preoperatively, as these 
pathological features may help determine the timing and type 
of intervention to perform.70
Pathophysiology.  As the normal MV area of 4.0 to 5.0 cm2 
is reduced by the rheumatic process, blood can flow from the 
left atrium to the left ventricle only if it is propelled by an ever-
increasing pressure gradient. The diastolic transmitral gradient, 
which is a function of the square of the transvalvular flow rate 
and the diastolic filling period, is a fundamental expression of 
the severity of MS. When the valve area is reduced to <2.5 cm2, 
patients may begin to experience symptoms when the transmi-
tral gradient is exacerbated by conditions that either increase 
transmitral flow or decrease diastolic filling time, such as exer-
cise, emotional stress, infection, pregnancy, or atrial fibrillation 
with a rapid ventricular response.87 Symptoms may begin to 
occur at rest with the onset of moderate stenosis, defined as a 
cross-sectional area of 1.0 to 1.5 cm2, and any physical exertion 
is typically limited by the time the MV area is <0.8 to 1.0 cm2 
(Table 21-10).70
The progression of symptoms is due to the evolution of 
pathophysiological processes, beginning with an elevation in left 
atrial pressure. The increased left atrial pressure is subsequently 
transmitted to the pulmonary venous system, causing pulmo-
nary edema as the hydrostatic pressure in the vessels exceeds the 
plasma oncotic pressure. Decreased pulmonary venous compli-
ance exacerbates the pulmonary venous hypertension, though a 
concomitant decrease in microvascular permeability may pre-
clude pulmonary edema in the chronic setting.88 Patients may 
also develop pulmonary arterial hypertension, owing to vaso-
constriction, intimal hyperplasia, and medial hypertrophy of the 
pulmonary arterioles in response to the increased pulmonary 
venous pressure. The secondary obstruction to flow caused by 
reactive pulmonary arterial hypertension may serve to protect 
against pulmonary edema, but also exacerbates the intractable 
decrease in cardiac output that develops as stenosis worsens.89
Throughout the process, the left atrium becomes dilated 
and hypertrophied due to increased work in filling the ventricle 
Figure 21-6.  Mitral stenosis. The thickened, fused leaflets of the 
diseased mitral valve are viewed through a left atriotomy. (Image 
courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Edwin 
P. Ewing, Jr.)
752
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
against a fixed obstruction. Atrial fibrillation may develop, 
exacerbating the patient’s symptoms and increasing the risk of 
atrial thrombus and subsequent embolization. Left ventricular 
structure and function are typically preserved, however, owing 
to the protective effect of the stenotic valve.
Clinical Manifestations.  The sudden opening of the thick-
ened, nonpliable valve with left atrial contraction produces an 
opening snap, followed by a diastolic rumble caused by rapid 
entry of blood into the left ventricle. When diastole is complete, 
the MV subsequently closes very rapidly, causing an increased 
first heart sound. The murmur, classically known as the 
auscultatory triad, is best heard at the apex. Associated mitral 
and tricuspid insufficiencies are heard as a pansystolic murmur 
radiating to the axilla, and a systolic murmur at the xiphoid pro-
cess, respectively.
The first clinical signs of MS are those associated with 
pulmonary venous congestion, namely exertional dyspnea, 
decreased exercise capacity, orthopnea, and paroxysmal noctur-
nal dyspnea. Hemoptysis, and pulmonary edema may develop 
as the venous hypertension worsens. Advanced MS can also 
cause pulmonary arterial hypertension and subsequent right 
heart failure, manifested as jugular venous distention, hepato-
megaly, ascites, and lower extremity edema.1
As mentioned previously, atrial fibrillation may develop 
as left atrial pathology worsens, causing atrial stasis and subse-
quent thromboembolism. Patients with MS may initially present 
with signs of arterial embolization, even rarely with angina from 
coronary occlusion.1
Table 21-10
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for the classification of the severity of mitral valve disease in adults
Mitral Stenosis
Indicator
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Mean gradient (mm Hg)*
<5
5–10
>10
Pulmonary artery systolic pressure 
(mm Hg)
<30
30–50
>50
Valve area (cm2)
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
Mitral Regurgitation
Qualitative
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Angiographic grade
1+
2+
3+
Color Doppler jet area
Small, central jet 
(<4 cm2 or <20% 
left atrial area)
More than mild criteria, but 
no severe criteria present
Vena contracta width >0.7 cm with 
large central jet (area >40% of left atrial 
area) or with a wall-impinging jet of any 
size, swirling in left atrium
Doppler vena contracta width (cm)
<0.3
0.3–0.69
≥0.7
Quantitative (cath or echo)
Regurgitant volume (ml per beat)
<30
30–59
≥60
Regurgitant fraction (%)
<30
30–49
≥50
Regurgitant orifice area (cm2)
0.2
0.2–0.39
≥0.4
Additional essential criteria
Left atrial size
Enlarged
Left ventricular size
Enlarged
*Valve gradients are flow dependent and when used as estimates of severity of valve stenosis should be assessed with knowledge of cardiac output or  
forward flow across the valve.
Diagnostic Studies.  All patients with a clinical history and 
physical exam suggestive of MS should undergo EKG and chest 
X-ray. Abnormalities in the EKG may include atrial fibrillation, 
left atrial enlargement, or right-axis deviation. Chest X-ray find-
ings may include enlargement of the left atrium and pulmonary 
artery, creating a double contour behind the right atrial shadow, 
and obliterating the normal concavity between the aorta and left 
ventricle. Findings consistent with pulmonary congestion may 
also be present.1
The diagnostic tool of choice is TTE, which not only con-
firms the diagnosis of MS, but also rules out other causes of 
stenosis and other concomitant myocardial or valvular heart dis-
ease.90 Two-dimensional TTE can be used to calculate the MV 
orifice area and to determine the morphology of the MV appa-
ratus, including leaflet mobility and flexibility, leaflet thickness 
and calcification, subvalvular fusion, and the appearance of the 
commissures. Doppler TTE can also be used in combination 
with various equations to estimate the hemodynamic severity of 
MS in terms of the mean transmitral gradient, the MV area, and 
the pulmonary artery systolic pressure.
In most cases further examinations are not necessary. A 
preoperative TEE is usually unnecessary, unless there is a need 
to rule out left atrial appendage thrombus, the patient is being 
considered for percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy, or the 
preoperative TTE is insufficient for diagnosis. Exercise TTE 
is indicated when resting TTE parameters are discordant with 
symptom severity.91 Routine cardiac angiography should be 
performed prior to valve surgery in patients with evidence of 
753
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
ischemia, decreased LV systolic function, a history of coronary 
artery disease or coronary risk factors, including postmeno-
pausal status and age ≥35 in men and premenopausal women.70
Indications for Operation.  Depending on the severity and 
the morphology of the diseased MV (Table 21-10), balloon val-
vuloplasty, surgical commissurotomy or repair, or MV replace-
ment may be indicated for the treatment of MS (Table 21-11).70
Mitral Regurgitation
Etiology.  The most important cause of MR in the United States 
is myxomatous degenerative disease of the MV, which occurs in 
approximately 2.4% of the population.1 Other important causes 
of MR include rheumatic heart disease, infective endocardi-
tis, ischemic heart disease, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Less 
frequently, MR can be caused by collagen vascular diseases, 
trauma, previous chest radiation, the hypereosinophilic syn-
drome, carcinoid disease, and exposure to certain drugs.70
Pathology.  The MV apparatus consists of the mitral leaflets, 
chordae tendineae, papillary muscles, and mitral annulus, and 
abnormalities in any one of these components has the poten-
tial to cause MR.92 The system for classifying MR proposed by 
Carpentier focuses on the functional anatomic and physiologic 
characteristics of the MV pathology, and proposes three basic 
types of diseased valves based on the motion of the free edge of 
the leaflet relative to the plane of the mitral annulus.93
In Type I MR, valvular insufficiency occurs secondary 
to annular dilatation or leaflet perforation, and normal leaflet 
motion is maintained. Type II MR is seen in patients with mitral 
valve prolapse, and is due to prolapse of often thickened exces-
sive leaflet tissue that gives the valve a “billowing” appearance, 
frequently in addition to ruptured or elongated chordae tendin-
eae causing increased leaflet motion. Type III insufficiency, 
as seen in patients with rheumatic and ischemic heart disease, 
occurs from restricted leaflet motion, either during systole and 
diastole (Type IIIA) or during systole alone (Type IIIB).
Pathophysiology.  The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of 
MR is the retrograde flow of a portion of the LV stroke volume 
into the left atrium during systole due to an incompetent MV or 
dilated MV annulus.
Acute severe MR can result from ruptured chordae ten-
dineae, a ruptured papillary muscle, or infective endocarditis, 
and causes a sudden volume overload on both the left atrium 
and ventricle.70 Although an acute increase in preload provides 
a modest increase in overall stroke volume, the left atrium and 
ventricle are unable to fully accommodate the regurgitant vol-
ume or maintain forward stroke volume in the acute setting due 
to a lack of remodeling.
Chronic MR generally has a more indolent course, with 
increasing volume overload of the left atrium and ventricle as 
the effective valve orifice size becomes larger. The resulting 
increase in left atrial and ventricular volume initially allows 
for an increase in the total stroke volume by Starling’s law and 
accommodation of the regurgitant volume, thus maintaining 
forward cardiac output and alleviating pulmonary congestion 
during the compensatory phase of chronic MR.94 However, as 
the left atrium becomes more dilated, the development of AF 
becomes more likely, disrupting atrioventricular synchrony and 
predisposing to thrombus formation. Additionally, chronic vol-
ume overload may lead to LV contractile dysfunction, result-
ing in impaired ejection and end-systolic volume increases. LV 
dilatation and filling pressure may also worsen throughout the 
progression of MR, reducing cardiac output and causing con-
gestion of the pulmonary vasculature. These changes herald LV 
decompensation and heart failure, and often indicate significant 
irreversible injury to the ventricular myocardium.
Clinical Manifestations.  In cases of acute severe MR, 
patients are often very symptomatic and present with pulmonary 
congestion and reduced forward stroke volume. In very severe 
cases, patients may present with cardiogenic shock.1 Because 
the LV has not remodeled in the acute setting, a hyperdynamic 
apical impulse may not be present in the precordium. The typi-
cal systolic murmur of MR may be holosystolic or absent, with 
a third heart sound and/or diastolic flow murmur being the only 
auscultatory findings.
In cases of chronic MR, patients may remain asymptom-
atic for long periods of time due to the compensatory mecha-
nisms of the remodeled LV. However, once the LV begins to 
fail, patients become increasingly symptomatic from exertional 
dyspnea, decreased exercise capacity, orthopnea, and eventu-
ally pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.1 Physical 
examination may demonstrate displacement of the LV apical 
impulse due to cardiac enlargement from chronic volume over-
load, and a third heart sound or early diastolic flow rumble. 
The characteristic auscultatory findings also include an apical 
systolic murmur which is variably transmitted to the axilla or the 
left sternal border, depending on the location of the pathology. 
As mentioned previously, patients may present with AF due to 
dilatation of the left atrium. Findings consistent with pulmonary 
hypertension frequently indicate late-stage disease.
Diagnostic Studies.  In the setting of acute heart failure, 
TTE should be performed and may demonstrate the anatomi-
cal location and severity of the MV pathology. However, TTE 
may underestimate lesion severity due to inadequate views of 
the color flow jet. In this case, severe MR should be suspected 
if hyperdynamic systolic function of the LV is visualized, and 
TEE may be used to confirm the diagnosis and direct repair 
strategies. 95 In the hemodynamically stable patient, coronary 
angiography should be performed preoperatively in the major-
ity of patients so that myocardial revascularization may be per-
formed in combination with MV surgery if necessary.70
In cases of chronic MR, EKG and chest X-ray are per-
formed to assess rhythm status and the degree of pulmonary 
vascular congestion.70 An initial two-dimensional and Doppler 
TTE should be performed for a baseline estimation of LV and 
left atrial size, LV systolic function, pulmonary artery pressure, 
MV morphology, and MR severity.96 A central color flow jet in 
the setting of a structurally normal MV on TTE suggests func-
tional MR, which may be due to LV dilatation or tethering of the 
posterior leaflet in patients with coronary artery disease. In the 
setting of organic MR, which is suggested by the presence of an 
eccentric color flow jet and morphological abnormalities in the 
MV apparatus on TTE, the presence of calcium in the annulus 
or leaflets, the redundancy of the leaflets, and the anatomy of the 
MV pathology should be assessed. Follow-up TTE is indicated 
on an annual or semiannual basis in patients with asymptomatic 
moderate to severe MR in order to assess changes from baseline 
parameters and direct the timing of surgery. Any abrupt change 
in signs or symptoms in a patient with chronic MR is also an 
indication for TTE examination.70
Additional preoperative studies are variably indicated in 
certain patient populations. Preoperative TEE is indicated in 
patients with poor diagnostic windows on TTE in order to 
754
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 21-11
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for MV surgery in specific clinical contexts
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of  
Evidence
Balloon Valvotomy for Mitral Stenosis
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve 
morphology, without left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR
•  Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS, favorable valve morphology, and 
pulmonary hypertension (PASP >50 mm Hg at rest, >60 mm Hg with exercise), without left 
atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve 
morphology, who are high risk or not candidates for surgery
•  Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS, favorable valve morphology, and new 
onset atrial fibrillation, without left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with MV area >1.5 cm2 if there is evidence of 
hemodynamically significant MS (PASP >60 mm Hg, PAWP ≥25 mm Hg, mean MV gradient 
>15 mm Hg during exercise)
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve 
morphology, as an alternative to surgery
•  Patients with mild MS
•  Patients with moderate to severe MR or left atrial thrombus
I
I
IIa
IIb
IIb
IIb
III – Harm
III – Harm
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Surgery for Mitral Stenosis*
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS when:
Balloon valvotomy is unavailable
Balloon valvotomy is contraindicated due to thrombus or MR
Valve morphology is not favorable for balloon valvotomy
•  Symptomatic patients with moderate to severe MS who also have moderate to severe MR
•  Mildly symptomatic patients (NYHA I, II) with severe MS and severe pulmonary hypertension 
(PASP >60 mm Hg)
•  Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS and recurrent embolic events while 
receiving adequate anticoagulation, when the likelihood of successful MVr is high
•  MVr in the setting of mild MS
•  Closured commissurotomy in the setting of MVr; open commissurotomy should be performed
I
I
IIa
IIb
III – Harm
III – Harm
B
C
C
C
C
C
Surgery for Mitral Regurgitation*
•  Symptomatic patients with acute severe MR
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with chronic severe MR without LV dysfunction 
(LVEF <0.30) and/or end-systolic dimension >55 mm
•  Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR and mild to moderate LV dysfunction (LVEF 
0.30–0.60) and/or end-systolic dimension ≥40 mm
•  Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR and preserved LV function (LVEF >0.60, end-
systolic dimension <40 mm), when the likelihood of successful MVr is >90%
•  Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR, preserved LV function, and 1) New onset atrial 
fibrillation, 2) Pulmonary hypertension (PASP >50 mm Hg at rest, >60 mm Hg with exercise)
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with chronic severe MR due to a primary abnormality of 
the mitral apparatus and severe LV dysfunction (LVEF <0.30, end-systolic dimension  
>55 mm), when the likelihood of successful MVr is high
•  Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with chronic severe MR secondary to severe LV 
dysfunction (LVEF <0.30) who remain symptomatic despite optimal medical management for 
heart failure, including biventricular pacing
•  Asymptomatic patients with MR and preserved LV function (LVEF >0.60, end-systolic 
dimension <40 mm), when the likelihood of successful repair is low
•  Isolated MV surgery in the setting of mild or moderate MR
I
I
I
IIa
IIa
IIa
IIb
III – Harm
III – Harm
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
LV = left ventricular; LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis; MV = mitral valve; MVr = mitral valve 
repair; MVR = mitral valve replacement; NYHA = New York Heart Association; PASP = pulmonary artery systolic pressure; PAWP = pulmonary artery 
wedge pressure; * = mitral valve repair should be performed when possible in this population.
755
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
determine the severity and anatomic basis of MR, and to evalu-
ate LV systolic function.70 Preoperative TEE is also indicated 
in cases when discrepancy exists between a patient’s functional 
status and the severity of MR on TTE, and is helpful for preop-
erative planning when assessing the feasibility of repair in the 
individual patient. Exercise stress-echocardiography may also 
be useful to detect LV systolic dysfunction in well-compensated 
patients, who may not demonstrate a rise in the end-systolic 
dimension of the heart or a drop in ejection fraction on rou-
tine TTE.97 Coronary angiography should be performed prior to 
valve surgery in patients with evidence of ischemia, decreased 
LV systolic function, a history of coronary artery disease or 
coronary risk factors, including postmenopausal status and age 
≥35 in men and premenopausal women.70
Indications for Operation.  Based on the morphology and 
severity of MR (Table 21-10), MV repair, MV replacement with 
preservation of part or all of the mitral apparatus, or MV 
replacement with removal of the mitral apparatus may be 
variably performed for the treatment of MR. As the intraop-
erative findings may dictate MV replacement whenever a MV 
repair is planned, current recommendations are for MV surgery 
in general (Table 21-11).70
Mitral Valve Operative Techniques and Results
Mitral valve surgery is performed on the arrested heart with the 
assistance of cardiopulmonary bypass. Traditionally, a median 
sternotomy incision is used; however, the left atrium can also 
be approached via minimally-invasive incisions, such as a mini-
thoracotomy or a partial sternotomy. The MV is commonly 
exposed through a left atrial incision placed posterior and paral-
lel to the intra-atrial groove, or though a right atriotomy with 
transseptal incision.
Commissurotomy.  Upon opening the left atrium, the MV is 
visualized and the left atrium is examined for thrombus. A nerve 
hook or right-angle clamp is subsequently introduced beneath 
the commissures and used to evaluate the MV apparatus for 
leaflet mobility, commissural fusion, and subvalvular chordal 
abnormalities. The commissure is then carefully incised in a 
slightly anterior direction 2 to 3mm at a time, making sure with 
each extension of the incision that the chordae tendineae remain 
attached to the commissural leaflets. The commissurotomy is 
generally stopped 1 to 2mm from the annulus where the leaf-
let tissue thins, indicating the transition to normal commissural 
tissue. The papillary muscles are subsequently examined and 
incised as necessary in order to maximize the mobility of the 
leaflets.
After the commissurotomy is complete, and the associated 
chordae tendineae and papillary muscles are mobilized, leaflet 
mobility is assessed. The anterior leaflet is grasped with forceps 
and brought through its complete range of motion. If subvalvu-
lar restriction or leaflet rigidity is identified, further division or 
excision of fused chordae and debridement of calcium may be 
necessary. Occasionally, the leaflets can be debrided carefully 
to increase mobility. Valve replacement may be more appropri-
ate if extensive secondary mobilization is required. At the end 
of the procedure, competence of the valve is assessed with injec-
tion of cold saline into the ventricle.
Open surgical commissurotomy has an operative risk 
of <1%, and has been shown to have good long term results, 
with freedom from reoperation as high as 88.5%, 80.3%, and 
78.7% at 10, 20, and 30 years, respectively.98 The incidence of 
postoperative thromboembolic complications is generally <1% 
per patient-year, and the lack of required systemic anticoagula-
tion precludes the development of hemorrhagic complications 
long-term.99
Mitral Valve Replacement.  After exposing the valve, an inci-
sion is made in the anterior mitral leaflet at approximately the 
12 o’clock position, and leaflet tissue is excised as needed. The 
papillary muscles are reattached to the annulus and, if possible, 
the posterior leaflet along with its associated subvalvular struc-
tures are preserved. The annulus is subsequently sized, and an 
appropriate mitral prosthesis is implanted using pledgeted hori-
zontal mattress sutures. The annular sutures may be placed from 
the atrial to the ventricular side, seating the valve intra-annularly, 
or from the ventricular to the atrial side, seating the valve in a 
supra-annular position. When placing the mattress sutures, care 
must be taken to stay within the annular tissue, as excessively 
deep bites may cause injury to critical structures such as the 
circumflex coronary artery posterolaterally, the atrioventricu-
lar node anteromedially, or the aortic valve anterolaterally. The 
sutures are subsequently placed through the sewing ring, and the 
valve prosthesis is lowered onto the annulus, where it is secured 
(Fig. 21-7).
The factors associated with increased operative risk for 
MV replacement include age, left ventricular function, emer-
gent procedure status, NYHA functional status, previous cardiac 
surgery, associated coronary artery disease, and concomitant 
disease in another valve. However, for most patients, MV 
replacement is associated with an operative mortality between 
2% to 6%, and 65% to 70% five-year survival.100,101 Although 
preservation of the mitral apparatus during MV replacement is 
important for subsequent left ventricular function, there appears 
to be no difference between complete and partial preservation 
with respect to 30-day and 5-year mortality.100 Mechanical 
valves are associated with increased durability compared to 
bioprosthetic valves, and have demonstrated a freedom from 
reoperation of 98% vs. 79% at 15 years, respectively.102 Despite 
these findings, the choice of prosthetic valve depends on many 
factors, and should be decided on a patient-by-patient basis.
Mitral Valve Repair.  There are many techniques avail-
able for MV repair that are variably used depending on the 
Figure 21-7.  Mitral valve replacement. A St. Jude bileaflet 
mechanical valve is viewed through a left atriotomy.
5
756
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
intraoperative assessment of valvular pathology. On opening 
the atrium, the endocardium is examined for a jet lesion, a 
roughened area caused by a regurgitant jet striking the wall, in 
order to better localize the area of valvular insufficiency. The 
commissures are examined for evidence of prolapse, fusion, 
and malformation. The subvalvular apparatus and individual 
leaflets are subsequently examined, and areas of prolapse, 
restriction, fibrosis, and calcification are identified. Leaflet 
perforations are generally repaired primarily, or with a peri-
cardial patch. The degree of annular dilation is also noted. 
The basic components of MV repair based on this assessment 
may include resection of the posterior leaflet, chordal short-
ening, chordal transposition, artificial chordal replacement, 
triangular resection of the anterior leaflet, and annuloplasty. 
Recent trends have been toward leaflet preservation.
One of the mainstays of MV repair is triangular resection 
of the posterior leaflet. Excision of the diseased leaflet tissue 
extends down towards but generally not to the mitral annulus. 
After repair has been completed, valvular competency is evalu-
ated by injecting saline into the ventricle with a bulb syringe and 
assessing leaflet mobility and apposition. If focal insufficiency 
is identified in other areas, additional procedures are performed.
The anterior leaflet may be repaired via chordal shorten-
ing, chordal transposition, artificial chordal replacement, and 
triangular resection of the anterior leaflet. Chordal shortening 
has generally been abandoned in favor of chordal replacement. 
During chordal transposition, a resected portion of the posterior 
leaflet with attached chordae is transposed onto the prolapsed 
portion of the anterior leaflet to provide structural support, and 
followed with posterior leaflet repair as described above. The 
procedure of artificial chordal replacement uses polytetrafluoro-
ethylene sutures to attach the papillary muscle to the free edge of 
the prolapsing anterior leaflet. Triangular resection with primary 
repair of the anterior leaflet removes the prolapsing segment of 
the anterior MV leaflet, while preserving adjacent chordal tis-
sue, and may be especially helpful in patients with a ruptured 
chord or large amount of redundant anterior leaflet tissue.
Annular dilation is generally corrected using a MV annu-
loplasty device, such as a ring or partial band, and is known 
to improve the durability of MV repair (Fig. 21-8).103 Several 
devices are available, and include rigid or semirigid rings that 
geometrically remodel the annulus, flexible rings or bands 
that restrict annular dilation while maintaining the physiologic 
sphincter motion of the annulus, and semirigid bands that pro-
vide a combination of annular remodeling and support of physi-
ologic motion.
Another technique known as the “double-orifice” or 
“edge-to-edge” repair was introduced in 1995, and involves 
tacking the free edge of the anterior leaflet to the opposing free 
edge of the posterior leaflet.104 This procedure effectively gives 
the valve a double-orifice “bow tie” configuration, and has been 
used as both a primary repair technique and an adjunct to other 
repair techniques, usually in cases of anterior leaflet pathology, 
or Barlow’s disease. While some groups report excellent late 
results, its use remains controversial.
Due to the variety in operations and etiologies of MV dis-
ease, there is heterogeneity in outcomes following MV repair. In 
general, the operative risk for patients undergoing MV repair is 
generally <1%, and late results across a broad range of patients 
have demonstrated benefits in survival and valve-related com-
plications, such as thromboembolic events, infective endocar-
ditis, and anticoagulation-related hemorrhage, compared to 
Figure 21-8.  Mitral valve repair. The narrow arrow indicates the 
posterior leaflet repair, and the wide arrow indicates the ring annu-
loplasty as viewed through a left atriotomy.
MV replacement.69,84 Patients with MR due to degenerative dis-
ease have especially encouraging outcomes, demonstrating rates 
of survival and freedom from reoperation of >50% and >94% 
at 20 years, respectively.84 Historically, isolated anterior leaflet 
prolapse increased the risk of reoperation five-fold in this popu-
lation. However, increasing experience and the expanded use of 
chordal replacement has greatly improved these results in recent 
series.105 Independent predictors of mortality have included 
higher NYHA class, lower left ventricular ejection fraction, and 
age. Older patients have demonstrated slightly worse outcomes 
overall, with an operative mortality of approximately 4%, and 
a 10-year survival of 54% in patients ≥65 years of age. How-
ever, the superiority of repair over replacement persists even for 
patients >80 years of age.101
Patients with rheumatic disease have also demonstrated 
slightly worse outcomes, with one study showing significantly 
better freedom from operation at 10 years in patients with non-
rheumatic MV disease (88% vs. 73%, p<.005).106 Despite these 
differences in outcomes, MV repair remains the procedure of 
choice for the majority of patients with amenable MV disease.
AORTIC VALVE DISEASE
Aortic Stenosis
Etiology.  The most common cause of adult aortic stenosis 
(AS) is calcification of a normal trileaflet or congenital bicuspid 
aortic valve, particularly in patients >70 years of age. Another 
important cause of AS is rheumatic heart disease, which is par-
ticularly common in developing countries (Fig. 21-9).
Pathology.  Calcific aortic valve disease, also known as 
senile or degenerative disease, is an age-related disorder char-
acterized by lipid accumulation, proliferative and inflamma-
tory changes, upregulation of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
activity, oxidative stress, and infiltration of macrophages and 
757
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
T lymphocytes.107 This process, which closely resembles ath-
erosclerotic vascular calcification, initially results in bone for-
mation within the base of the cusps, reducing leaflet motion. 
Calcification progresses to involve the leaflets, and eventually 
results in obstructive disease, with a reduced effective valve 
area without signs of leaflet fusion.
Pathophysiology.  In general, once moderate AS is present, the 
average rate of progression includes an increase in jet velocity of 
0.3 m/s/year, an increase in mean pressure gradient of 7 mm Hg/
year, and a decrease in valve area of 0.1 cm2/year (Table 21-12).70 
Figure 21-9.  Aortic stenosis. The aorta has been removed to dem-
onstrate the thickened, fused aortic valve leaflets associated with 
rheumatic heart disease. (Image courtesy of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Edwin P. Ewing, Jr.)
Table 21-12
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for the classification of the severity of aortic valve disease in adults
Aortic Stenosis
Indicator
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Jet velocity (m per s)
<30
3.0–4.0
>40
Mean gradient (mm Hg)*
<25
25–40
>4.0
Valve area (cm2)
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
Valve area index (cm2 per m2)
<0.6
Aortic Regurgitation
Qualitative
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Angiographic grade
1+
2+
3–4+
Color Doppler jet width
Central jet, width <25% of 
left ventricular outflow tract
Greater than mild, but no 
signs of severe regurgitation
Central jet, width >65% of 
left ventricular outflow tract
Doppler vena contracta width (cm)
<0.3
0.3–0.6
>0.6
Quantitative (cath or echo)
Regurgitant volume (ml per beat)
<30
30–59
≥60
Regurgitant fraction (%)
<30
30–49
≥50
Regurgitant orifice area (cm2)
<0.1
0.1–0.29
≥0.3
Additional essential criteria
Left ventricular size
Enlarged
*Valve gradients are flow dependent and when used as estimates of severity of valve stenosis should be assessed with knowledge of cardiac output or  
forward flow across the valve.
In most adult patients with AS, obstruction develops gradually 
and includes a long latent period free from symptoms. During 
this time, the left ventricle typically hypertrophies in response 
to systolic pressure overload, and normal intracavitary volume 
is maintained.108 Afterload, which is defined as left ventricular 
systolic wall stress, and thus ejection fraction remain normal early 
in this process, as the increase in myocardial thickness is usu-
ally enough to counter increased intracavitary systolic pressures. 
Patients without a typical hypertrophic response to systolic pres-
sure overload, or with a depressed contractile state of the myocar-
dium, do not follow the common clinical course, but experience 
an early decrease in ejection fraction due to excessively increased 
afterload, without a compensatory response.109
Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy without chamber 
dilatation eventually leads to increased end-diastolic pressures 
and early diastolic dysfunction. Forceful atrial contraction in the 
face of elevated end-diastolic pressures becomes an important 
component of ventricular filling, even as mean left atrial and 
pulmonary venous pressures remain in the normal range. Dis-
orders such as atrial fibrillation that disrupt atrial contraction 
typically lead to clinical deterioration. Although systolic func-
tion is generally preserved long into the natural history of the 
disease, left ventricular decompensation eventually occurs in the 
setting of longstanding increased afterload and is an indication 
for surgery even in the absence of other symptoms.
Although concentric hypertrophy is a compensatory 
mechanism to maintain ejection fraction in the face of high 
intracavitary pressures, the hypertrophied heart becomes 
increasingly vulnerable to ischemic injury. Coronary blood 
flow may become inadequate, despite the absence of epicardial 
coronary artery disease.110 Coronary vasodilation is mitigated 
758
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
by the hypertrophied myocardium, and the hemodynamic stress 
of exercise or tachyarrhythmias can lead to subendocardial 
ischemia and further systolic or diastolic dysfunction. When 
ischemic injuries occur, patients with ventricular hypertrophy 
experience larger infarcts and higher mortality rates than those 
without hypertrophy.111 In some patients, ventricular hyper-
trophy occurs in excess of what is needed to compensate for 
increased intracavitary pressures, creating a high-output state 
that is also associated with increased perioperative morbidity 
and mortality.112
Clinical Manifestations.  The characteristic auscultatory find-
ings of AS include a harsh, crescendo-decrescendo systolic mur-
mur at the right second intercostal space, often with radiation 
to the carotid arteries.1 As the disease progresses, aortic valve 
closure may follow pulmonic valve closure, causing paradoxical 
splitting of the second heart sound. Other physical findings asso-
ciated with AS include an apical impulse commonly described 
as a “prolonged heave,” and the presence of a narrow and sus-
tained peripheral pulse, known as pulsus parvus et tardus.
The classic symptoms of AS are exertional dyspnea, 
angina, and syncope.1 Although many patients are diagnosed 
prior to the onset of symptoms, the most common clinical pre-
sentation in patients with a known diagnosis of AS followed 
prospectively is worsening exertional dyspnea due to a limited 
capacity to increase cardiac output with exercise, and a pro-
gressive rise in end-diastolic pressures leading to pulmonary 
congestion. Angina occurs in over half of patients with AS, and 
is due to the increased oxygen demand of the hypertrophied 
myocardium in the setting of reduced oxygen supply second-
ary to coronary compression. Although some patients may have 
concomitant ischemic disease, angina occurs without significant 
epicardial coronary artery disease in half of all patients with AS. 
Syncope is most common during exertion, as systemic vasodi-
lation in the setting of a fixed cardiac output causes decreased 
cerebral perfusion. However, at times, it may occur at rest sec-
ondary to paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and subsequent loss of 
atrial booster pump function. Late findings of AS include atrial 
fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension, systemic venous hyperten-
sion, and rarely sudden death.
Diagnostic Studies.  Evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy 
is found in approximately 85% of patients with AS on routine 
EKG, though the correlation between the absolute electrocar-
diographic voltages in precordial leads and the severity of AS 
is poor.1 EKG also may demonstrate signs of left atrial enlarge-
ment, and various forms and degrees of atrioventricular or intra-
ventricular block due to calcific infiltration of the conduction 
system. Routine chest X-ray usually demonstrates a normal 
heart size, with rounding of the left ventricular border and apex. 
Cardiac enlargement on chest X-ray is a sign of left ventricular 
failure and cardiomegaly, and is a late finding.
Transthoracic echocardiography is indicated in all patients 
with a systolic murmur graded ≥2/6, a single second heart sound, 
or symptoms characteristic of AS.70 Initial TTE examinations 
are often diagnostic, and provide an assessment of left ventricu-
lar size and function, the degree of left ventricular hypertrophy, 
the degree of valvular calcification, and the presence of other 
associated valvular disease. Doppler evaluation should be per-
formed to define the maximum jet velocity, which is the most 
useful measure for following disease severity and predicting 
clinical outcome.1Additionally, color flow Doppler assesses the 
severity of the stenotic lesion by allowing calculations of the 
mean transvalvular pressure gradient, and effective valve ori-
fice area (Table 21-12).70 Follow-up TTE is variably indicated 
depending on the severity of AS in order to assess changes from 
baseline parameters and direct the timing of surgery: yearly 
for severe AS; every 1 to 2 years for moderate AS; and every 3 to 
5 years for mild AS. Any abrupt change in signs or symptoms in 
a patient with AS is an indication for TTE examination.
Additional preoperative studies may be necessary in some 
patients. Rarely, when TTE images are suboptimal, TEE or 
fluoroscopy may be indicated to assess the degree of valve cal-
cification and effective valve orifice area. As in other patients 
with valvular heart disease, coronary angiography should 
be performed prior to aortic valve surgery in most patients.70 
Since the symptoms of AS oftentimes mimic those of ischemic 
disease, cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography 
may be necessary at the initial evaluation in patients with AS. 
Stress-echocardiography may also be useful in the asymptom-
atic patient with AS in order to elicit exercise-induced symp-
toms, or abnormal blood pressure responses during exertion. It 
is also useful in the evaluation of low-gradient AS in patients 
with depressed LV function.70 However, exercise stress-
echocardiography is contraindicated in patients with ischemic 
heart disease.70 In patients with evidence of aortic root disease 
by TTE, chest computed tomography is useful in evaluating 
aortic dilatation at several anatomic levels, and is necessary for 
clinical decision making and surgical planning.1
Indications for Operation.  Based on the severity of AS and 
the overall physical condition of the patient (Table 21-12), AVR 
may be recommended for the treatment of AS (Table 21-13).70 
In patients with severe calcific AS, AVR is the only effective 
treatment, though controversy exists as to the timing of inter-
vention in asymptomatic patients. Balloon valvotomy creates a 
modest hemodynamic effect and temporary symptom improve-
ment in patients with calcific AS. However, the procedure has 
not been shown to affect long-term outcomes, and is often used 
in high-risk patients in which the contribution of the AS to the 
patients’ symptoms is a matter of debate.113
Aortic Insufficiency
Etiology.  The most common cause of isolated aortic insuffi-
ciency (AI) in patients undergoing AVR is aortic root disease, 
and represents over 50% of such patients in some studies.1 Other 
common causes of AI include congenital abnormalities of the 
aortic valve such as bicuspid aortic valve, calcific degeneration, 
rheumatic disease, infective endocarditis, systemic hyperten-
sion, myxomatous degeneration, dissection of the ascending 
aorta, and Marfan syndrome. Less common causes of AI include 
traumatic injuries to the aortic valve, ankylosing spondylitis, 
syphilitic aortitis, rheumatoid arthritis, osteogenesis imperfecta, 
giant cell aortitis, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Reiter’s syndrome, 
discrete subaortic stenosis, and ventricular septal defects with 
prolapse of an aortic cusp.70 Although most of these lesions 
produce chronic aortic insufficiency, rarely acute severe aortic 
regurgitation can result, often with devastating consequences.
Pathology.  Regardless of its cause, AI produces volume over-
load with dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle, and sub-
sequent dilation of the MV annulus. Depending on the severity 
of AI, the left atrium may undergo dilation and hypertrophy as 
well. Frequently, the regurgitant jet causes endocardial lesions 
at the site of impact on the left ventricular wall.
759
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Table 21-13
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for AV surgery in specific clinical contexts.
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of  
Evidence
Balloon Valvotomy for Aortic Stenosis
•  Bridge to surgery in hemodynamically unstable patients with AS at high risk for AVR
IIb
C
•  Palliation in adult patients with AS, who are not candidates for AVR
IIb
C
•  Alternative to AVR in adult patients with AS
III – Harm
B
Surgery for Aortic Stenosis
•  Symptomatic patients with severe AS
I
B
•  Severe AS in the setting of
  1) Concomitant CABG
  2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgery
  3) LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF <0.50)
I
C
•  Moderate AS in the setting of
  1) Concomitant CABG
  2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgery
IIa
B
•  Asymptomatic patients with severe AS and
  • Abnormal response to exercise
  • High likelihood of rapid progression
  • High likelihood of delay if surgery is withheld until time of symptom onset
  • Expected operative mortality ≤1.0%
IIb
C
•  Mild AS in patients undergoing CABG, when there is high likelihood of rapid progression
IIb
C
•  AVR for prevention of sudden death in asymptomatic patients with AS without any of the 
findings above
III – Harm
B
Surgery for Aortic Insufficiency
•  Symptomatic patients with severe AI
I
B
•  Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe AI in the setting of
  1) Concomitant CABG
  2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgery
  3) LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF ≤0.50)
I
C 
C 
B
•  Asymptomatic patients with severe AI, normal LV systolic function (LVEF >0.50), but 
severe LV dilatation (end-diastolic dimension >75 mm, end-systolic dimension >55 mm)
IIa
B
•  Moderate AI in the setting of
  1) Concomitant CABG
  2) Concomitant surgery on the ascending aorta
IIb
C
•  Asymptomatic patients with severe AI, normal LV systolic function at rest (LVEF >0.50), 
and LV dilatation (end-diastolic dimension ≥70 mm, end-systolic dimension ≥50 mm) in the 
setting of
  1) Progressive LV dilatation
  2) Declining exercise tolerance
  3) Abnormal hemodynamic responses to exercise
IIb
C
•  Asymptomatic patients with mild, moderate, or severe AI and normal LV systolic function 
(LVEF >0.50), when the degree of LV dilatation is not moderate or severe (end-diastolic 
dimension <70 mm, end-systolic dimension <50 mm)
III – Harm
B
AS = aortic stenosis; AVR = aortic valve replacement; CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; LV = left ventricular; LVEF = left ventricular ejection 
fraction; NYHA = New York Heart Association.
Diseases causing AI can be classified as primary disorders 
of the aortic valve leaflets, and/or disorders involving the wall 
of the aortic root. Diseases causing dilation of the ascending 
aorta are a more common indication for AVR due to isolated 
AI, and include disorders such as age-related (degenerative) 
aortic dilation, cystic medial necrosis of the aorta as is seen in 
Marfan syndrome, aortic dilation secondary to bicuspid valves, 
and aortic dissection, to name a few.114 In these disorders, the 
aortic annulus becomes dilated, causing separation of the valve 
leaflets and subsequent AI. The diseased aortic wall may dis-
sect secondarily and further escalate regurgitation across the 
valve, and secondary thickening and shortening of the valve 
760
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
cusps may occur due to undue tension placed on the valvular 
apparatus by the dilated aortic root. As the disease progresses, 
the valves become too small to close the aortic orifice, caus-
ing further aortic insufficiency and exacerbating dilation of the 
ascending aorta.
There are also many primary valvular diseases that cause 
AI, generally in  association with AS. One such disorder is age-
related calcific AS, which causes some degree of AI in up to 
75% of patients.1 Infective endocarditis may involve the aor-
tic valve apparatus and cause AI through direct destruction 
of the valve leaflets, perforation of a leaflet, or formation of 
vegetations that interfere with proper coaptation of the valve 
cusps. Rheumatic disease causes fibrous infiltration of the valve 
cusps and subsequent retraction of the valve leaflets, inhibiting 
apposition of the cusps during diastole and producing a central 
regurgitant jet. Patients with large ventricular septal defects or 
membranous subaortic stenosis may develop progressive AI, 
owing to a Venturi effect that results in prolapse of the aortic 
valve leaflets.
Pathophysiology.  The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of 
AI is the retrograde flow of a portion of the LV stroke volume 
into the left ventricle during diastole, producing left ventricular 
volume overload.
Acute severe AI results most commonly from infective 
endocarditis, acute aortic dissection, or trauma, and causes a 
sudden volume overload on the left ventricle.31 Although an 
acute increase in preload provides a small increase in overall 
stroke volume due to the Starling mechanism, the left ventricle 
is unable to accommodate the large regurgitant volume and 
maintain forward stroke volume in the acute setting due to a 
lack of remodeling. Left ventricular end-diastolic and left atrial 
pressures increase dramatically, as the left ventricle is unable to 
develop compensatory chamber dilation. Although tachycardia 
develops as a compensatory mechanism to maintain forward 
flow, this attempt is often inadequate, and patients frequently 
present in heart failure and even cardiogenic shock. Moreover, 
subendocardial myocardial ischemia frequently develops as a 
result of decreased coronary diastolic perfusion pressures and 
increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, as well as 
increased myocardial oxygen demand due to acute dilation. In 
the setting of a chronic ventricular hypertrophy and preexisting 
diastolic dysfunction, the pressure-volume relationship is even 
more extreme, exacerbating the hemodynamic derangements 
seen in acute AI.
Chronic AI generally has a more indolent course, with 
volume overload of the left ventricle causing compensatory 
increases in left ventricular end-diastolic volume and cham-
ber compliance, and a combination of eccentric and concentric 
hypertrophy.115 Compensatory remodeling of the left ventricle 
allows for accommodation of the regurgitant volume without a 
significant increase in filling pressures, and maintains the pre-
load reserve of the chamber. Eccentric left ventricular hypertro-
phy develops, permitting normal contractile performance across 
the enlarged chamber circumference and subsequent ejection of 
a larger total stroke volume in order to maintain forward flow, 
despite the regurgitant fraction.115,116 However, the enlarged 
chamber size results in an increase in systolic myocardial wall 
stress, and causes further ventricular hypertrophy. As the dis-
ease progresses, recruitment of preload reserve and compensa-
tory hypertrophy maintains ejection fraction within the normal 
range despite elevated afterload, causing many patients to 
remain asymptomatic throughout the compensatory phase. 115,117
Eventually, left ventricular compensatory mechanisms fail 
and systolic dysfunction ensues. As the disease progresses, pre-
load reserve may become exhausted, the hypertrophic response 
may become inadequate, and/or impaired myocardial contrac-
tility may develop so that ejection fraction begins to decline. 
118Although left ventricular systolic dysfunction related to 
excessive afterload is reversible early in the course, irreversible 
damage occurs once chamber enlargement predominates as the 
primary cause of diminished myocardial contractility.
Clinical Manifestations.  In cases of acute severe AI, patients 
are symptomatic and invariably present with compensatory 
tachycardia, often associated with acute pulmonary congestion 
and cardiogenic shock.1 Because the left ventricular and aortic 
pressures often equalize before the end of diastole, the diastolic 
murmur of AI may be short and/or soft. The reduced systolic 
pressure may attenuate the increase in peripheral pulse pressure 
seen in chronic AI, and early closing of the mitral valve due to 
elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressures may diminish 
the intensity of the first heart sound in the acute setting.
In patients with chronic AI, symptoms of heart fail-
ure and myocardial ischemia develop after the compensatory 
phase.1 Patients gradually begin to complain of exertional dys-
pnea, fatigue, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 
often after significant myocardial dysfunction has developed. 
Angina is a common complaint late in the course, especially 
during sleep when heart rate slows and arterial diastolic pressure 
falls. Patients may also experience exertional angina second-
ary to diminished coronary perfusion in the setting of myocar-
dial hypertrophy. Occasionally, the compensatory tachycardia 
that develops with chronic AI will cause palpitations, and the 
increased pulse pressure will cause a sensation of pounding 
in the patient’s head. Peripherally, the widened pulse pressure 
causes a forceful, bounding, and quickly collapsing pulse known 
as Corrigan’s or water-hammer pulses. Premature ventricular 
contractions have been reported to cause particularly troubling 
symptoms, owing to the heave of the volume-loaded left ven-
tricle during the postextrasystolic beat. The classic ausculta-
tory finding associated with AI is a high-pitched decrescendo 
diastolic murmur heard best in the left third intercostal space; 
an associated S3 gallop is often indicative of late disease. The 
Austin Flint murmur has also been described, and is heard as a 
middiastolic rumble at the apex that simulates mitral stenosis, 
and occurs in severe AI when the regurgitant jet impedes mitral 
opening.
Diagnostic Studies.  In the acute setting, TTE should be per-
formed to confirm the presence and severity of aortic regurgita-
tion, the degree of pulmonary hypertension, and the cause of 
valvular dysfunction.70 When aortic dissection is suspected as 
the cause of acute AI, TEE should be performed for diagnosis, 
though chest computed tomography may be substituted if more 
readily available.119,120 Cardiac catheterization, aortography, and 
coronary angiography are rarely indicated, and often delay nec-
essary urgent surgical intervention.
In cases of chronic AI, the EKG frequently demonstrates 
signs consistent with left axis deviation and, late in the course, 
intraventricular conduction defects associated with left ventricu-
lar dysfunction. On chest X-ray, the left ventricle enlarges pre-
dominantly in an inferior and leftward direction, causing marked 
increase in the long axis diameter of the heart, frequently with 
little or no change in the transverse diameter. The chest X-ray 
should be examined for aneurysmal dilation of the aorta.1 An initial 
761
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
TTE should be performed to confirm the diagnosis and sever-
ity of AI, assess the cause of AI (including valve morphology, 
and aortic root size and morphology), and assess the degree of 
left ventricular hypertrophy, volume, and systolic function.70 
Follow-up TTE is indicated on an annual or semiannual basis 
in patients with asymptomatic moderate to severe AI in order to 
assess changes from baseline parameters and direct the timing 
of surgery. Any abrupt change in signs or symptoms in a patient 
with chronic AI is also an indication for TTE examination.
Additional preoperative studies are variably indicated in 
certain patient populations.70 In patients with poor windows on 
TTE, TEE, or magnetic resonance imaging is indicated for ini-
tial and serial assessment of AI severity, and left ventricular vol-
ume and function at rest. In symptomatic patients with chronic 
AI, it is reasonable to proceed directly to TEE or cardiac cath-
eterization if TTE examinations are inadequate. Exercise stress 
testing may be helpful for an assessment of functional capacity 
and symptomatic responses in patients with a history of equivo-
cal symptoms. Coronary angiography should be performed prior 
to valve surgery in most patients.70
Indications for Operation.  Based on the morphology 
and severity of valve dysfunction (Table 21-12), AV repair 
or replacement may be performed for the treatment of AI 
(Table 21-13).70 Although the indications for AV repair and AV 
replacement do not differ, it is recommended that AV repair be 
performed only in those surgical centers that have developed 
the appropriate technical expertise, gained experience in patient 
selection, and demonstrated outcomes equivalent to those of 
valve replacement.
Aortic Valve Operative Techniques and Results
Aortic valve surgery has traditionally been performed through 
a median sternotomy incision with the assistance of cardiopul-
monary bypass and moderate systemic hypothermia. However, 
minimally invasive incisions for aortic valve surgery have been 
introduced, including mini-sternotomy and mini-thoracotomy 
approaches. After the aorta is cross-clamped, cold blood car-
dioplegia is delivered antegrade through the aortic root, and/or 
retrograde through the coronary sinus. A left ventricular vent 
may be inserted through the right superior pulmonary vein to 
help maintain a bloodless field during the procedure, and to aid 
in de-airing at the conclusion of the operation.
Aortic Valve Replacement.  During aortic valve replacement, 
an aortotomy is performed, extending medially from approxi-
mately 1to 2cm above the right coronary artery and inferiorly 
into the noncoronary sinus, and the valve is completely excised. 
The annulus is thoroughly debrided of calcium deposits. After 
the calcium has been removed, the ventricle is copiously irri-
gated with saline. At this point, the annulus is sized and an 
appropriate prosthesis is selected. Pledgeted horizontal mattress 
sutures are then placed into the aortic valve annulus and subse-
quently through the sewing ring of the prosthetic valve, taking 
care to avoid damage to the coronary ostia, the conduction sys-
tem, and the MV apparatus. The annular sutures may be placed 
from below the annulus, seating the valve supra-annularly, or 
from above the annulus for intra-annular placement (Fig. 21-10).
The major components to increased operative risk associ-
ated with surgical AVR include age, body surface area, diabetes, 
renal failure, hypertension, chronic lung disease, peripheral vas-
cular disease, neurologic events, infectious endocarditis, previ-
ous cardiac surgery, myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock, 
NYHA functional status, and pulmonary hypertension. For 
Figure 21-10.  Aortic valve replacement. The stented porcine bio-
prosthesis as viewed through an aortotomy.
most patients, the risk associated with AVR is 1% to 5%, and 
5-year survival has been reported to be >80%, even in patients 
>70 years of age.69,121 The choice of valve is dependent on many 
patient-related factors, and is accompanied by the attendant 
postoperative risks of decreased durability, and thromboembolic 
vs. hemorrhagic complications for biological and mechanical 
valves, respectively.
Aortic Valve Repair.  Although aortic valve replacement is 
performed more commonly, AV repair may be recommended at 
surgical centers with extensive experience, technical expertise, 
and outcomes equivalent to valve replacement. 70
For patients with aortoannular ectasia, AI is due to annu-
lar dilatation and distortion of the sinotubular junction. For 
these patients, competence of the aortic valve can be achieved 
by functionally repairing the annulus in a method analogous 
to homograft implantation. The aneurysmal portion of the aor-
tic root is excised, and the aortic valve is reimplanted inside 
a tubular Dacron graft, with concomitant reimplantation of 
the coronary arteries. Alternatively, the aneurysmal tissue and 
supravalvular tissue can be excised in their entirety, with subse-
quent implantation of the Dacron graft onto the superior aspect 
of the annulus and reimplantation of the coronary arteries.
Valve-sparing root replacement for root and annular sta-
bilization in patients with AI due to aortoannular ectasia has 
led to a more durable outcome than is seen with subcommis-
sural annuloplasty or leaflet-related procedures alone. One 
study demonstrated equivalent overall survival between patients 
undergoing subcommissural annuloplasty or aortic valve repair 
without annuloplasty, and patients undergoing valve-sparing 
root replacement at 6 years. 122 However, patients that under-
went valve-sparing root replacement had higher freedoms 
from reoperation and aortic insufficiency >2+ (100% vs. 90%, 
P=0.03; and 100% vs. 77%, P=0.002, respectively) at midterm 
follow-up.
For patients with AI associated with redundant leaflet tis-
sue, aortic valve repair may be accomplished with free margin 
plication or resuspension of the valve cusps, with or without 
triangular resection of the redundant segment. Excision of the 
762
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
diseased portion of the involved valve cusp improves symmetry 
of the valve leaflets, and annular plication of one or both com-
missures helps to ensure adequate coaptation. Generally, the free 
margins of the excised leaflets are reapproximated primarily, but 
in the absence of adequate cusp tissue, a triangular autologous or 
bovine pericardial patch may be used for cusp restoration.
AV cusp repair with a free margin plication or resuspen-
sion technique has demonstrated encouraging results, both in 
patients with tricuspid and bicuspid aortic valves. Freedom 
from AV reoperation in patients with a tricuspid AV has been 
reported to be 89% to 92% at 10 years, with a freedom from 
recurrent AI >2+ of 80% to 86% at the same time point. In 
patients with bicuspid aortic valves, who generally represent a 
younger cohort of patients, 10-year survival has been reported at 
94% following AV repair, with a freedom from AV reoperation 
of 81% at the same time point. 123
Ross Procedure.  As mentioned previously, the Ross procedure 
involves replacing the diseased AV with the patient’s native 
pulmonary valve as an autograft, which is in turn replaced with 
a homograft in the pulmonic position.80 The autograft may be 
implanted in the aortic position directly with resuspension of the 
valve commissures, or in association with a root replacement, 
which requires reimplantation of the coronary ostia.
The cylinder root replacement technique is most repro-
ducible, and involves transecting the native aorta approximately 
5mm above the sinotubular ridge, with subsequent excision of 
the aortic valve leaflets and supra-annular tissue. The main pul-
monary artery is transected at the bifurcation and the right ven-
tricular outflow tract is incised, allowing the pulmonary valve 
and artery to be removed en bloc from the outflow tract. The 
annulus of the pulmonary autograft is sewn to the native aortic 
annulus with continuous or interrupted sutures, and the coro-
nary ostia are reimplanted into the pulmonary artery graft. The 
pulmonary valve and right ventricular outflow tract are subse-
quently reconstructed using homograft tissue.
The primary benefit of the Ross procedure compared to 
traditional AV surgery is a low risk of thromboembolism with-
out the need for systemic anticoagulation. Although patients 
undergoing the Ross procedure are generally younger, periop-
erative mortality has been reported to be as low as 2.5% in this 
group, with an overall survival of 90% at 18-year follow-up.124 
However, the long-term durability of the procedure is somewhat 
questionable. Although Ross reported a freedom from autograft 
replacement of 75% at 20 years, other groups have reported 
freedom from autograft reoperation and allograft reinterven-
tion of 51% and 82%, respectively, at 18-year follow-up.124,125 
Progressive aortic insufficiency has been described as a cause 
of late failure in these patients, as well as calcification of the 
pulmonary homograft and pulmonary stenosis.
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement.  Transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is relatively new technology 
that has proven beneficial for the treatment of AS in seri-
ously ill patients who are not candidates for conventional 
surgery. The procedure remains the focus of ongoing clinical 
trials, and thus there are no published indications for opera-
tion endorsed by the American College of Cardiology or the 
American Heart Association. However, the Edwards SAPIEN 
heart-valve system that has been used thus far in the TAVR 
experience has been recently approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration for labeled-indications associated with pub-
lished early results.
The Edwards SAPIEN heart-valve system consists of a 
trileaflet bovine pericardial valve with a balloon-expandable 
stainless steel support frame, and can be inserted by either the 
transfemoral, transaortic, or transapical route. The transfemo-
ral route involves performing a standard balloon aortic valvu-
loplasty, followed by transfemoral insertion of either a 22- or 
24-French sheath, depending on the size of the valve selected 
for implantation. The balloon catheter and overlying collapsed 
bioprosthetic heart valve is then advanced across the native aor-
tic valve under fluoroscopy, and deployed during rapid right 
ventricular pacing. If the patient’s peripheral vascular system is 
not amenable to femoral arterial cannulation, the transapical or 
transaortic route is chosen. In the transapical approach, a small 
intercostal incision is performed over the left ventricular apex, 
and a dedicated delivery catheter is inserted through the left 
ventricular apex and across the native aortic valve as described 
above. The transaortic approach is usually done through a min-
isternotomy. Other approaches that have been described include 
transaxillary, transsubclavian, and transcarotid. The particular 
role of each approach in a specific patient still remains to be 
defined, and continues to change as the technology improves.
A large multicenter clinical trial has been performed on 
patients that were judged to be too high risk or inoperable for 
traditional AVR, based on assumed risks of ≥10% to 15% and 
≥50% 30-day mortality, respectively. In patients that had previ-
ously been deemed inoperable, TAVR markedly reduced the 
rate of death from any cause (49.7% vs. 30.7%, P = <0.001), 
the rate of death from cardiovascular causes (41.9% vs. 19.6%, 
p = <.001), and the rate of repeat hospitalization (44.1% vs. 
22.3%, p = <.001) at one year compared with standard medi-
cal therapy.126 Although the rates of neurological events (10.6% 
vs. 4.5%, P = 0.04), major vascular complications (16.8% vs. 
2.2%, P = <.001), and major bleeding events (22.3% vs. 11.2%, 
P = 0.007) were higher in the TAVR group, these patients also 
experienced a significant reduction in symptoms and increased 
functional capacity compared with patients receiving standard 
medical therapy. In patients at high risk for traditional AVR, the 
rate of death from any cause, and from cardiovascular causes, 
was found to be noninferior in the TAVR group, compared with 
the surgical group.127 The rate of major bleeding events was 
higher in the surgical group (19.5% vs. 9.3%, P= <0.001) at 
30 days, and patients in the TAVR group had a significantly 
shorter length of stay in the intensive care unit (3 vs. 5 days, 
P = <0.001), and a shorter index hospitalization (8 vs. 12 days, 
P = <.001). Although more patients in the TAVR group experi-
enced a reduction in symptoms to NYHA class II or lower (P = 
<0.001), they also experienced more neurological events (8.3% 
vs. 4.3%, P = 0.04), and major vascular complications (11.3% 
vs. 3.5%, P = <.001) at one year.
Although it is clear that TAVR represents a distinct set of 
periprocedural risks, it has demonstrated benefits in morbidity 
and mortality, especially in patients deemed inoperable for sur-
gical AVR. Ongoing trials are examining the potential role of 
TAVR in patients with AS at moderate risk for traditional AVR.
TRICUSPID VALVE DISEASE
Tricuspid Stenosis and Insufficiency
Etiology.  Acquired tricuspid valve (TV) disease can be clas-
sified as either organic or functional, and affects approximately 
0.8% of the general population.128 Tricuspid stenosis is almost 
6
763
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
always a result of organic disease, namely rheumatic heart dis-
ease and endocarditis. In the case of rheumatic disease, tricuspid 
stenosis with or without associated insufficiency is invariably 
associated with mitral valve disease. Other less common causes 
of obstruction to right atrial emptying include congenital tri-
cuspid atresia, right atrial tumors, and endomyocardial fibrosis.
Tricuspid insufficiency, on the other hand, is most often a 
functional disease caused by secondary dilation of the tricuspid 
annulus due to pulmonary hypertension and/or right heart fail-
ure. This is most commonly caused by MV disease. Conditions 
such as right ventricular infarction and pulmonic stenosis can 
also lead to increased right ventricular pressures and functional 
tricuspid insufficiency (TI). The less common causes of organic 
TI, with or without associated stenosis, include carcinoid syn-
drome, radiation therapy, trauma such as repeated endomyocar-
dial biopsy specimens, and Marfan syndrome.
Pathology.  The changes associated with tricuspid stenosis 
(TS) closely resemble those associated with MS, including fusion 
of the commissures.128 In the case of rheumatic disease, mixed 
TS and TI may result from fusion and shortening of the chordae 
tendineae, and fusion of the commissures, causing retraction 
of the valve leaflets. The right atrium is frequently dilated and 
thickened in chronic TS, and chronic obstruction to right ven-
tricular filling often produces signs of systemic venous conges-
tion such as hepatomegaly and splenomegaly.1
In most cases of TI, dilation and deformation of the tri-
cuspid annulus is the most prominent feature; the valve leaflets 
oftentimes appear stretched, but are otherwise pliable and nor-
mal in appearance.1 When TI is caused by carcinoid syndrome, 
white fibrous carcinoid plaques are found on the ventricular sur-
faces of the TV, causing the cusps to adhere to the underlying 
right ventricular wall and stenting the valve open.1
Pathophysiology.  The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of 
both TS and severe TI is elevated right atrial pressures, produc-
ing signs of systemic congestion and right heart failure. Severe 
TS is marked by a valve area <1.0 cm2, and severe TI is defined 
as a vena contracta width of >0.7 cm in combination with sys-
tolic flow reversal in the hepatic veins.70 However, in patients 
with TS, a diastolic pressure gradient of only 5 mm Hg, or a TV 
orifice <1.5 cm2, is frequently enough to cause jugular venous 
distention, organomegaly, and peripheral edema. In severe 
cases, cardiac output is compromised, especially during exercise 
when the fixed obstruction prevents an increase in forward flow. 
Patients with severe insufficiency and pulmonary hypertension 
experience similar hemodynamic derangements.
Clinical Manifestations.  Patients with TS and severe TI 
develop symptoms of right heart failure associated with chroni-
cally elevated right atrial pressures.1 The classic clinical signs 
and symptoms of TS and severe TI are jugular venous disten-
tion, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, and lower extremity 
edema. Uncomfortable fluttering in the neck has been reported 
in patients with TV disease, and sensations of throbbing in the 
eyeballs and pulsatile varicose veins have been reported to 
occur, especially in patients with severe TI.
The low cardiac output occasionally associated with TS 
and severe TI can cause fatigue, weakness, and exercise intoler-
ance in these patients. In the absence of pulmonary hypertension, 
dyspnea is not a prominent feature of tricuspid disease. The aus-
cultatory findings associated with TS include a presystolic and 
middiastolic murmur characterized by a tricuspid opening snap 
that increases on inspiration. The lower left parasternal murmur 
of TI may be holosystolic or less than holosystolic, depending 
on the degree of regurgitation, may be associated with a middia-
stolic murmur in severe cases, and may increase on inspiration.
Diagnostic Studies.  In patients with TV disease, chest X-ray 
frequently demonstrates enlargement of the right atrium and 
ventricle. Patients with TS demonstrate an exaggerated a wave 
and a diminished rate of y descent in the jugular venous pulse, 
while patients with TR have abnormal systolic c and v waves.1 
TTE examination should be performed in patients with TV dis-
ease in order to characterize the structure and motion of the TV, 
the size of the tricuspid annulus, and other cardiac abnormali-
ties that may affect TV function.70 In patients with a pulmonary 
artery systolic pressure >55mm Hg, TI commonly occurs in 
the setting of structurally normal valves; however, structural 
derangement of the TV apparatus is frequently present if TI is 
documented with a pulmonary artery systolic pressure <40mm 
Hg. Doppler TTE allows estimations of the severity of TI, the 
right ventricular systolic pressure, and the TV diastolic gradient.
Indications for Operation.  As an isolated lesion, mild or 
moderate TV disease does not require surgical correction. How-
ever, patients with severe TV disease should be considered for 
surgical intervention, especially in the setting of right ventricu-
lar enlargement and impaired systolic function, as this improves 
life expectancy and the development of sequelae such as heart 
failure and atrial fibrillation.128 Depending on the patient’s clini-
cal status and the cause of TV dysfunction, TV repair and TV 
replacement be variably recommended for the treatment of TV 
dysfunction (Table 21-14).70 In patients with TI, the valve can 
usually be repaired with modern techniques.
Operative Techniques and Results.  The TV can be 
approached through a median sternotomy, a right thoracotomy, 
or minimally invasive port-based techniques. Surgery is per-
formed with the assistance of cardiopulmonary bypass and, 
though TV surgery is usually performed on the beating heart, 
a brief period of cardioplegic arrest is rarely needed to allow 
for complete inspection of the interatrial septum, and close any 
defects that may be present.
TV repair may include a suture or ring annuloplasty as well 
as valvuloplasty, and multiple methods have been described.128 
Historically, bicuspidization of the TV was accomplished by a 
figure-of-eight suture plication of the annulus of the posterior 
leaflet; however, this technique has been essentially replaced by 
suture or ring annuloplasty. Suture annuloplasty is generally per-
formed by placing 0 polypropylene pledgeted sutures along the 
base of the anterior and posterior leaflets, partially encircling the 
annulus. Ring annuloplasty can be accomplished by suturing the 
TV annulus to a variety of rigid or semirigid annuloplasty rings, 
which generally have an opening at the level of the anterosep-
tal commissure to avoid passing the anchoring sutures too close 
to the conduction system. Most surgeons favor ring over suture 
annuloplasty. In severe annular dilatation, augmentation of the 
anterior leaflet with autologous pericardium has been used with 
some success. Tricuspid valvuloplasty is infrequently performed 
and may include commissurotomy, triangular leaflet resection, 
primary perforation repair, and traditional leaflet repair tech-
niques such as chordal transfer, shortening, and replacement, 
papillary muscle plication, tricuspid leaflet augmentation, and 
the edge-to-edge repair technique used in MV prolapse.
For patients with functional TV disease, TV repair is gen-
erally preferred to replacement due to favorable results without 
the associated risks of thrombosis and anticoagulation. In the 
764
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
setting of concomitant mitral valve surgery, TV repair has not 
been associated with additional perioperative complications, 
and 5-year freedom from reoperation has been impressive at 
98%.85 However, a subgroup of patients report late failure fol-
lowing TV repair, and this may be worse following suture annu-
loplasty compared with ring annuloplasty.
Prosthetic valve replacement may be necessary due to 
extensive leaflet destruction or marked annular dilatation not 
amenable to repair. In some cases, the valve prosthesis may be 
anchored directly to the leaflet tissue instead of the valve annu-
lus, reducing the risk of injury to the conduction system.128 If this 
technique is used, it should be confirmed that the residual tissue 
does not interfere with the movement of the prosthetic leaflets 
after implantation. Pledgeted sutures should be used, and may be 
placed on the ventricular or atrial side of the annulus.
Outcomes data following TV replacement are difficult to 
interpret, as most reports are in patients with previous TV sur-
gery and/or signs of severe right heart failure. Operative mor-
tality has been over 20% in some studies.128 One study of 
87 patients undergoing TV replacement between 1194 and 2007 
showed an in-hospital mortality of only 1.4%. The choice of 
prosthetic valve is also somewhat controversial. Though bio-
prosthetic valves are more durable in the tricuspid than mitral 
or aortic positions, valve degeneration is an important cause of 
bioprosthetic valve dysfunction at reoperation. The increased 
risk of valve thrombosis seen with mechanical valves, how-
ever, underlines the need for rigorous systemic anticoagulation. 
Even with these precautions, mechanical tricuspid valves are 
associated with an increased risk of hemorrhagic and throm-
botic complications. The choice of valve is usually decided on 
a case-by-case basis and late outcomes have been similar with 
biological and mechanical valves in this position. In general, 
TV replacement may be a reasonable choice in select patients, 
though more data are needed regarding long-term outcomes in 
the modern era.
Multivalve Disease
Pathology involving multiple valves is relatively common, and 
may result from diseases such as rheumatic fever, calcific 
disease, Marfan syndrome, and other connective tissue disor-
ders.1 However, multivalve disease may also be caused by sec-
ondary valvular dysfunction due to a distal valvular lesion, as 
in the case of myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve, 
resulting in pulmonary hypertension, dilation of the tricuspid 
annulus, and functional TI. If the primary pathology is corrected 
early in the disease course, these secondary functional changes 
may resolve without further intervention.
In patients with multivalve disease, the clinical manifesta-
tions may be dependent on the severity of each individual valve 
lesion, but this is not always the case.1 In patients with concomi-
tant mitral and tricuspid dysfunction, the prominent symptoms 
of dyspnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and orthopnea com-
monly associated with MV dysfunction are frequently dimin-
ished by associated TV dysfunction. Symptoms of multivalve 
disease are most commonly masked when valvular abnormali-
ties are of approximately equal severity, highlighting the impor-
tance of careful examination of each valve both preoperatively 
and in the operating room.
Surgery for multivalve disease is associated with a higher 
perioperative mortality than single-valve procedures, and this 
risk is exacerbated by factors such as pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion, age, triple-valve procedures, concomitant coronary artery 
bypass grafting, previous heart surgery, and diabetes.129 Failing 
to recognize significant concomitant valvular dysfunction at the 
time of surgery is also associated with higher perioperative mor-
tality. For this reason, patients suspected of having multivalve 
involvement should undergo full preoperative Doppler TTE or 
TEE evaluation, and heart catheterization.70 In selected patients, 
procedures correcting multivalve disease demonstrate signifi-
cant clinical improvement in symptoms and quality of life, as 
well as acceptable mortality and survival rates.129
SURGICAL THERAPY FOR THE FAILING HEART
Epidemiology of Heart Failure
Heart failure affects approximately 5 million patients in the 
United States, with >550,000 new cases diagnosed annually.130 
Table 21-14
Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for TV surgery in specific clinical contexts.
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of  
Evidence
Surgery for Tricuspid Valve Disease
•  TVr for severe TI in patients with MV disease requiring MV surgery
I
B
•  TVR or annuloplasty for severe symptomatic primary TI
IIa
C
•  TVR for severe TI secondary to diseased/abnormal TV leaflets not amenable to annuloplasty 
or TVr
IIa
C
•  Annuloplasty for less than severe TI in patients undergoing MV surgery in the setting of
  1) Pulmonary hypertension
  2) Tricuspid annular dilatation
IIb
C
•  TVR or annuloplasty is not indicated in asymptomatic patients with TI, a normal MV, and a 
PASP <60 mm Hg
III – Harm
C
•  TVR or annuloplasty is not indicated in patients with mild primary TI
III – Harm
C
MV = mitral valve; PASP = pulmonary artery systolic pressure; TI = tricuspid insufficiency; TV = tricuspid valve; TVr = tricuspid valve repair; TVR = 
tricuspid valve replacement.
765
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
The disorder is the primary reason for 12 to 15 million office 
visits and >1 million hospitalizations each year. Overall 1-year 
mortality is estimated to be around 25%, but this can increase 
to as high as 75% for patients with more advanced heart failure 
(NYHA class IV).131 While heart transplantation remains the 
gold standard for the treatment of end stage disease, an increas-
ing number of patients deteriorate while on the waiting list and 
up to 30% die before transplantation.132 The total direct and 
indirect costs associated with the treatment of heart failure are 
estimated to be $32 billion, and this is projected to increase to 
$70 billion by 2030.133 Advances in the surgical management of 
heart failure over the last decade have pushed surgery for CHF 
into the mainstream. As a result, there is an increasing number 
of patients with late- or end-stage disease who are being consid-
ered for surgical therapies.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
Heart failure can be classified as acute vs. chronic, genetic vs. 
acquired, left-sided vs. right-sided and systolic vs. diastolic 
dysfunction. The underlying causes and treatments for each of 
these vary considerably. In the Framingham Heart Study, coro-
nary artery disease accounted for 67% of heart failure cases, 
valvular heart disease accounted for 10%, and 20% of cases 
were attributable to primary myocardial diseases, of which 
dilated cardiomyopathy predominated.134 In all cases, heart 
failure is a progressive disorder that through complex mecha-
nisms of ventricular remodeling, altered hemodynamics, neu-
rohumoral activation, cytokine overexpression, and vascular 
and endothelial dysfunction either disrupts the ability of the 
myocardium to generate force or results in a loss of function-
ing cardiac myocytes, thereby preventing normal myocardial 
contraction.
CABG for Ischemic Cardiomyopathy
Surgical coronary revascularization is among the most com-
monly performed procedures for CHF. CABG is beneficial as 
it protects from further myocardial infarction and/or malignant 
ventricular arrhythmias. It is most successful when treating 
hibernating as opposed to infarcted myocardium.
While the majority of evidence supporting CABG for 
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy comes from nonran-
domized, retrospective studies, the prospective, randomized, 
multicenter international Surgical Treatment of Ischemic Heart 
Failure (STICH) trial compared CABG with medical therapy to 
medical therapy alone. Entry criteria included an EF ≤35% with 
CAD and anatomy suitable for CABG. No significant difference 
was seen in overall mortality by study completion, but patients 
who underwent CABG did have fewer deaths or hospitaliza-
tions from cardiovascular causes (58% vs. 68%, P<0.001).135,136 
This difference is despite the facts that only 50% of patients had 
myocardial viability testing, that 17% of patients in the medical 
therapy group underwent CABG and that 9% of patients ran-
domized to CABG did not have surgery.
Myocardial viability testing has been shown by multi-
ple studies to be pivotal in identifying patients that will have 
improved outcomes following CABG for ischemic cardiomy-
opathy.137,138 A meta-analysis performed by Allman et al demon-
strated an 80% reduction in mortality in patients who underwent 
revascularization with viable myocardium compared to patients 
who received medical therapy alone (3.2% vs. 16%, p<0.0001). 
Most important, in this analysis CABG had no benefit over med-
ical therapy for patients without viable myocardium. A more 
recent study by Gerber et al prospectively compared CABG 
and medical therapy to medical therapy alone in 114 patients 
with CAD and low EF (24 ± 8) who underwent viability testing 
using delayed-enhancement cardiac MRI.139 That study demon-
strated worse 3-year survival in medically treated patients with 
dysfunctional but viable myocardium than in medically treated 
patients with nonviable myocardium (48% vs. 77%, P = 0.02). 
This corresponded with a 4.56 hazard of death of viable myocar-
dium when medical treatment was selected over full revascular-
ization. In contrast, survival after CABG was not significantly 
different whether myocardium was viable or not (88% vs. 71%, 
P = NS). These studies underscore both the importance of viable 
myocardium as well as the adverse consequences of not offering 
a patient with viability surgical intervention.
Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy are a hetero-
geneous group, and, as with any surgery, appropriate patient 
selection is central to success. In one retrospective study of 
96 patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy (EF ≤25%), age, and 
poor distal vessel quality were predictors of poor outcomes.140 
Mortality in patients with poor vessel quality was 100%, com-
pared with 90% when vessel quality was fair and 10% when it 
was good. Therefore, poor vessel quality should be considered 
a contraindication to surgical revascularization even in the pres-
ence of angina.
LV size and LV dyssynchrony are also risk factors for 
adverse short and intermediate term outcomes. A LV end dia-
stolic dimension of >100 mL/m2 is associated with a signifi-
cantly reduced 5-year survival following CABG (85% vs. 53%, 
p<0.05), as well as worse 5-year freedom from recurrent CHF 
(85% vs. 31%).141 Moreover, LV dyssynchrony has been shown 
to have a significant impact on mortality in patients undergo-
ing moderate to high risk revascularization and may compound 
risk in patients with nonviable myocardium.142 In patients with 
severe preoperative LV dyssynchrony the 30-day mortality 
was 27% vs. 3% in patients without significant dyssynchrony 
(p<0.001). Similar differences were seen with the presence of 
postoperative LV dyssynchrony, and outcomes were worse 
when patients also had fewer segments of viable myocardium.
Secondary Mitral Regurgitation
Secondary mitral regurgitation describes MR that results from 
damage to the left ventricle as a result of either ischemia or 
dilated cardiomyopathy rather than from a problem with the 
valve itself.143 Ischemic MR (IMR) typically results from sys-
tolic restriction of the mitral leaflets due to tethering of the 
subvalvular apparatus. This occurs mainly from regional wall 
motion abnormalities in areas of the LV adjacent to papillary 
muscle attachments. Alterations in the size and shape of the 
mitral annulus and posterior displacement of the posteromedial 
papillary muscle, which occurs primarily after an inferoposterior 
MI, may also contribute. Additionally, functional MR (FMR) 
is caused by LV dilatation and increased sphericity, which 
displace the papillary muscles apically and radially, creating 
lateral forces on the valve that lead to increased retraction of 
the mitral leaflets by the chordae tendineae. LV dyssynchrony 
may also contribute to FMR through poor coordination of the 
contraction of the septum and lateral walls, producing MR that 
may vary in intensity during the cardiac cycle. Functional MR 
is usually referred to as a Carpentier class I/IIIb lesion due to 
the presence of both annular dilatation (Carpentier type I) and 
systolic restriction of the mitral leaflets due to LV dysfunction 
(Carpentier type IIIb). Ultimately, increased regurgitation leads 
766
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
to increased preload, LV wall tension, and LV work load, all 
of which contribute to progressive dysfunction of the LV and 
worsening heart failure.
Several observational and population based studies have 
demonstrated a significant impact of secondary MR on long-
term survival. Following MI, the 5-year survival rate dropped 
significantly from 61% in patients who did not have MR to 
47% and 29% in patients with mild and moderate to severe 
MR, respectively.144 Similarly, in a series of 2,057 patients with 
symptomatic heart failure and a LVEF <40%, the 5-year sur-
vival rate for patients without MR was 54%, and it decreased 
to 40% in patients with moderate to severe secondary MR.145 In 
a cox proportional hazards analysis, increasing severity of MR 
was an independent predictor of decreased survival (HR = 1.23, 
[1.13–1.34], p = 0.0001), and this observation held for patients 
with both ischemic and nonischemic disease etiologies. More-
over, medical therapy and PCI have not reduced the impact of 
IMR on late mortality.146
Although specific recommendations to intervene for 
secondary MR are controversial and have not been rigorously 
defined, guidelines are available (Table 21-15).70,147 Some sur-
geons initially advocated performing only revascularization in 
cases of moderate ischemic MR with the idea that revascular-
izing viable myocardium would lead to improvements in LV 
function and effect reverse remodeling, ultimately contributing 
to a decrease in MR. While several studies have shown that MR 
often persists following revascularization alone, the addition of 
a mitral valve annuloplasty in those studies did not improve 
long-term functional status or survival in patients with ischemic 
MR.148-150 Nevertheless, other studies have shown that the persis-
tence of MR after CABG is associated with a decreased survival 
rate and that CABG alone only has modest effects on reducing 
MR at 1 month follow-up.143 As a result, a growing number of 
centers have elected to repair moderate MR in this patient popu-
lation. Indications for surgery in ischemic MR patients in the 
absence of revascularization options are even less well-defined.
For patients with functional MR, the goal of mitral valve 
surgery is to avoid or postpone transplantation in eligible 
patients, but it should generally not be performed in patients 
Table 21-15
Data guidelines for surgical intervention for secondary mitral regurgitation.
Clinical Setting
Class of  
Recommendation
Level of  
Evidence
Chronic Ischemic MR (ESC Guidelines)
•  Severe MR, LVEF >30%, undergoing CABG
I
C
•  Moderate MR, undergoing CABG, if mitral repair is feasible
IIa
C
•  Severe MR, symptomatic patients, LVEF <30%, candidate for revascularization
IIa
C
•  Severe MR, LVEF >30%, no option for revascularization, refractory to optimal medical 
therapy, low comorbidity
IIb
C
Chronic Functional MR (ESC and ACC/AHA Guidelines)
• Chronic severe MR due to LV dysfunction, EF <30%, persistent NYHA class III-IV, 
symptoms despite optimal medical therapy
IIb
C
MR = mitral regurgitation, ESC = European Society of Cardiology, CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting, LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction,  
LV = left ventricle, ACC = American College of Cardiology, AHA = American Heart Association, NYHA = New York Heart Association.
with end-stage heart failure who present with low EF and lim-
ited myocardial viability. Those patients are often best suited 
by transplantation and/or ventricular assist device implantation.
Mitral valve repair is the procedure of choice when surgery 
is indicated for secondary MR. Currently, recommendations are 
to use a semirigid or rigid annuloplasty ring to downsize the 
mitral annulus.143 There have also been various techniques pro-
posed to correct the papillary muscle displacement, but most 
reports are single center, retrospective and small. Mitral valve 
replacement with preservation of the subvalvular apparatus is 
indicated when repair is not feasible due to severe tethering of 
the leaflets or massive LV dilation.
Outcomes from surgery vary between centers and amongst 
patients in this heterogeneous group. Operative mortality ranges 
between 0% to 9% in most modern series.143 Generally speaking, 
mortality and recurrence rates are higher and long term progno-
sis is worse compared to outcomes for primary MR. Recurrent 
MR is as high as 15% to 30% in some series and 5-year mortal-
ity is between 44% to 48%.143,151,152 Some reductions in left atrial 
dimension and LV reverse remodeling may be achieved.153
Left Ventricular Aneurysmorrhaphy and 
Surgical Ventricular Restoration
Pathophysiology of Ventricular Aneurysms.  A transmural 
infarction of approximately 5% to 10% of the myocardium may 
result in formation of an LV aneurysm as necrotic myocardium 
is replaced by fibrous tissue. This usually occurs 4 to 8 weeks 
following the infarct. In the last decade, prompt revasculariza-
tion of the culprit artery by either surgical or interventional tech-
niques generally results in sparing of the subepicardial muscle 
while the subendocardial muscle remains necrotic.154 Therefore, 
it is not uncommon for the LV wall to show both living myo-
cardium during thallium testing and an akinetic zone on echo-
cardiogram or angiogram. It has been demonstrated that once 
more than 20% of the myocardium is necrosed there is irrevers-
ible progression to ventricular dilation and failure.155 The classic 
aneurysm is a 4 to 6 mm thick scar, which bulges outward in 
paradoxical motion as the LV contracts during systole. More 
than 80% develop in the anteroseptal and apical portions of the 
767
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
left ventricle as a result of left anterior descending artery occlu-
sion. The rest are inferior in location and the result of circumflex 
or right coronary occlusion.
This patient population typically suffers from associated 
ventricular arrhythmias for several reasons. First, electrical dys-
synchrony results from postinfarction remodeling, and triggers 
for ventricular arrhythmias typically occur in the scar border 
zone in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.156,157 Second, 
increased ventricular volume causes high wall stress and stretch, 
and stretch has been shown to be arrhythmogenic.158 Third, LV 
aneurysms represent an independent risk factor for SCD after 
MI.159 Surgical ventricular restoration (SVR) addresses each of 
these issues by removing the anatomic substrate during resec-
tion of the postinfarct scar and/or aneurysm, accomplishing vol-
ume reduction and mechanical resynchronization and relieving 
ischemia through complete revascularization and reduction in 
myocardial wall tension and oxygen demand.
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis.  Symptoms of LV 
aneurysms include angina, CHF, ventricular arrhythmias and 
rarely embolic phenomenon. Rupture is extremely uncommon. 
Patients generally present for coronary artery bypass or during 
evaluation of CHF or arrhythmias. While transthoracic echo-
cardiography gives pertinent information regarding LV func-
tion, size, mitral valve function and the presence of thrombus, 
it is generally accepted that cardiac MRI is the best diagnostic 
modality to accurately identify areas of scar and viable tissue 
and to best define ventricular geometry.155
Surgical Treatment and Results.  In 1985, Vincent Dor 
described a surgical technique called the endoventricular cir-
cular patch plasty that was intended to improve geometric 
reconstruction compared with the standard linear repair in LV 
aneurysm surgery. SVR is a somewhat broader term that arose 
from surgical repair of ventricular aneurysms and has now come 
to be applied to a group of surgical procedures designed to cor-
rect the effects of postinfarction ventricular remodeling. It is 
also sometimes referred to as surgical ventricular remodeling or 
reconstruction, surgical anterior ventricular endocardial recon-
struction (SAVER), or the Dor procedure. SVR is specifically 
intended to reduce the size and sphericity of the LV by exclud-
ing akinetic and dyskinetic areas, most often by using a circular 
patch inserted inside the ventricle on contractile myocardium 
(Fig. 21-11A & B).
Figure 21-11.  Surgical ventricular restoration of a ventricular aneurysm using the Dor Procedure. A. The size and sphericity of the left 
ventricle are reduced by excluding akinetic and dyskinetic areas. B. Most often this is completed using a circular patch inserted inside the 
ventricle on contractile myocardium.
Candidates for SVR are typically patients who have had 
a remote anterior or anteroseptal myocardial infarction, signifi-
cant ventricular enlargement with a significant area of akinetic 
or dyskinetic myocardium, a discrete aneurysm, a clinical pic-
ture consistent with heart failure (LVEF <40%), retained func-
tion of the basilar and lateral portions of the heart and good right 
ventricular function. These patients should also be candidates 
for repair of any other concomitant cardiac disease. Dor cur-
rently emphasizes the importance of complete revascularization 
and repair of any mitral pathology at the time of operative SVR. 
In patients with spontaneous (13%) or inducible (25%) ventric-
ular tachycardia (VT), it is additionally necessary to perform 
nonguided endocardial resection and cryoablation encircling the 
resected area.155
Results with this approach have been good in treating 
both heart failure and its sequelae, such as VT. In Dor’s series 
of 1150 patients, the operative mortality was dependent on the 
EF and ranged from 1% for patients with EF >40% to 13% for 
patients with EF <30%, and the 5-year survival approached 
85%.155 Overall, more than 80% of survivors are either stabi-
lized or improved, and quality of life has been shown to improve 
significantly by 6 months after the Dor procedure.160 This is 
likely due in part to the fact that the Dor procedure restores LV 
geometry, resulting in a mean ejection fraction increase between 
10% to 15%, with significant alleviation of symptoms.155,161-163 
These data are reinforced by the international RESTORE 
group, which examined SVR in a registry of 1198 postinfarc-
tion patients between 1998 and 2003.164 They found that 5-year 
overall freedom from hospital readmission for CHF was 78%. 
Moreover, 67% of patients had preoperative NYHA class III or 
IV symptoms, whereas 85% of patients were NYHA functional 
class I or II postoperatively.
With respect to VT, Dor et al. reported on 106 patients 
with ischemic ventricular arrhythmias that underwent recon-
struction for postinfarction LV aneurysm and visually-directed 
endocardiectomy plus or minus cryoablation and coronary 
revascularization 165. At a mean follow-up of 21.3 months, only 
10.8% of patients had inducible VT and no spontaneous VT was 
documented. Results from similar series have also been excel-
lent,148,163,166 but the efficacy of left ventricular restoration alone 
has been controversial.167,168 Inferior results seen in some series 
have been attributed to failure to perform endocardial resection 
and/or cryoablation at the border of the transitional zone, as well 
768
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
as differences in stimulation protocols and possible inadequate 
volume reduction of the ventricle.
Recently, a large, randomized, multicenter study, the STICH 
trial, has reported the conclusion that adding SVR to reduce ven-
tricular volume to CABG does not improve symptoms or exercise 
tolerance and fails to lower death rate or cardiac rehospitalization 
compared to CABG alone135. While this trial has some shortcom-
ings, it has resulted in a marked decrease in referrals for this pro-
cedure The main problem is that the LV volume was reduced by 
only 19% in the STICH trial, reflecting an inadequate repair as 
determined by the Surgery Therapy Committee, whose “accept-
able STICH procedure” guideline required a 30% reduction at 
the 4-month postoperative cardiac MRI.169 Previous studies have 
reported an average reduction of end-systolic volume index (ESVI) 
of 40% with a range between 30% and 58%, suggesting that the 
STICH SVR procedure may have involved an inadequately small 
LV plication or limited intracavitary reconstruction.169 Moreover, 
this trial enrolled 13% of patients who had never had an MI and 
changed criteria such that enrollment required documented LV 
anterior wall dysfunction rather than demonstration of scar. This 
could have captured patients with hibernating myocardium that 
would recover following CABG alone. Dor subsequently pub-
lished the results of 117 patients who would have been eligible 
for the STICH trial and demonstrated durable improvement in 
left ventricular function.170 However, this was a single-center, 
restrospective experience. Caution should be exercised so as not 
to broadly extrapolate the results of the STICH trial and inappro-
priately deny appropriate patients effective treatment.
Mechanical Circulatory Support
Intra-aortic Balloon Pump.  The intra-aortic balloon pump 
(IABP) is the most commonly used device for mechanical cir-
culatory support, and it may be easily deployed in the catheter-
ization laboratory, in the operating room or at the bedside. The 
device is inserted percutaneously through the femoral artery 
into the thoracic aorta. It is synchronized so that the balloon is 
inflated during diastole and deflated during systole, resulting in 
augmentation of diastolic perfusion of the coronary arteries and 
decreased afterload. Typically, this improves cardiac index and 
decreases both preload and myocardial oxygen consumption.
The indication for use of an IABP is most often cardio-
genic shock during or after cardiac catheterization or cardiac 
surgery. It also is indicated for preoperative stabilization of 
high-risk patients with either severe coronary artery disease, 
LV dysfunction, or refractory, unstable angina. Kang et al have 
reported that risk-adjusted mortality was significantly lower for 
selected high-risk patients undergoing open heart surgery when 
a preoperative IABP was used.171
Generally, an IABP is used for a few days and weaned as 
the patient’s condition improves. Morbidity associated with device 
use is typically minimal; however, in one series of 911 patients 
undergoing CABG who received an IABP, there was a 12% inci-
dence of minor or major vascular complications, including an 
approximately 3% incidence of limb ischemia requiring throm-
boembolectomy. This is the most serious complication of IABP 
placement. To prevent this problem, frequent lower extremity 
neurovascular checks are necessary while an IABP is in place 172.
Ventricular Assist Device Indications and Cannula-
tion.  Patients in need of ventricular assist devices (VADs) 
may have preexisting chronic heart failure, refractory ven-
tricular arrhythmias, or acute heart failure following an MI, 
cardiopulmonary arrest, viral illness, pregnancy, or cardiotomy. 
Device therapy is intended to preserve end-organ perfusion and 
function and may be categorized as short- or long-term support 
for the left heart, the right heart, or both. In general, VADs may 
be used for support while the heart recovers (bridge to recovery, 
BTR), while the patient waits for a heart transplant (bridge to 
transplant, BTT) or as a final option to treat a chronic heart fail-
ure patient who is not a transplant candidate (destination therapy, 
DT). The Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Cir-
culatory Support (INTERMACS) database, a joint effort by the 
NHLBI, FDA, CMS, academia, and industry to prospectively 
track patient outcomes, reported that between January 2009 and 
June 2010 indications for device implantation were BTR (1%), 
BTT (41%), bridge to decision (43%), DT (14%), and rescue 
therapy (0.5%).173 However, the percentage of patients receiving 
a VAD as destination therapy is increasing as results and devices 
improve. In 2011, 38% of patients had a primary device strategy 
of DT, whereas only 23% were considered BTT.
Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) provide support 
for the failing heart by unloading blood from the left ventricle 
and pumping it into the aorta. Cannulas may be inserted into the 
LV apex or the left atrium for inflow into the pump, and return 
is through an arterial cannula or graft sewn to either the ascend-
ing or descending aorta. For right sided devices, inflow drainage 
is most often from a cannula in the right atrium, and blood is 
returned through a graft sewn to the pulmonary artery or right 
ventricular outflow tract.
Left Ventricular Assist Devices.  The first generation 
LVADs were pulsatile devices. They provided adequate support 
for the heart but were limited by their large size and durabil-
ity.174 More recently, continuous-flow LVADs based on rotary 
pump technology have been introduced. These devices are 
smaller, quieter, and durable enough for long term support. The 
two most commonly used devices today are the HeartMate II 
(Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA) and the HeartWare HVAD (Heart-
Ware, Inc., Framingham, MA) (Fig. 21-12A & B, 21-13A & 
B). These devices differ in that the HeartMate II is implanted 
subdiaphragmatically, whereas the smaller HeartWare HVAD 
is implanted within the pericardium. Frequently used short-term 
support devices include the Abiomed BVS 5000 (Abiomed, 
Inc., Danvers, MA) and the CentriMag (Thoratec), which are 
both extracorporeal pumps, as well as the Impella (Abiomed), 
which may be inserted percutaneously. These devices are com-
monly used in either post-MI or postcardiotomy heart failure. 
They have the benefit of faster and easier insertion, making 
them ideal rescue devices and allowing time for patient transfer 
to a tertiary referral center, device weaning, transplantation, or 
transition to a permanent VAD as DT or BTT.
Bridge to Recovery.  The ideal clinical situation would be for 
all LVADs to be temporary with the goal of myocardial recovery. 
However, as noted above, this is rare with only 1% of devices in 
the most recent INTERMACS data placed with intent for bridge 
to recovery.175 The LVAD Working Group Recovery Study, a 
prospective multicenter trial investigating myocardial recovery in 
BTT patients, has shown significant improvements in left ventric-
ular ejection fraction and significant reductions in left ventricular 
end-diastolic diameter following support with continuous flow 
pumps, but myocardial recovery resulting in device explantation 
was still only seen in six patients (9%).176 Current data suggest 
that significant reverse remodeling is more likely to occur in the 
young and those with myocarditis.177
769
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Nevertheless, some encouraging results have been 
reported using a combination of treatment modalities. In a few 
small studies of patients with LVADs inserted for nonischemic 
cardiomyopathy, deliberate and aggressive medical therapy, 
including the β2-agonist clenbuterol resulted in successful 
LVAD explantation in 69% to 73% of patients,178,179 but these 
results have been difficult to replicate. Moreover, early results 
from clinical trials using stem cell therapy to treat patients 
with ischemic cardiomyopathy suggest that stem cells may be 
another adjuvant treatment with potential to aid in myocardial 
recovery.180,181
Bridge to Transplant.  LVADs are used as a bridge to trans-
plant in patients who are candidates for heart transplantation 
but are not predicted to survive the waiting list period due to 
sequelae of cardiac failure, including end-organ dysfunc-
tion, rising pulmonary artery pressures, escalating inotrope 
A
B
Figure 21-12.  The HeartMate II LVAD viewed from the (A) outside and (B) inside. The device is an axial flow, rotary pump that produces 
no pulsatile action. The pump contains a magnet, and the rotor assembly functions by the electromotive force generated by the motor. The 
result is that blood is propelled from the inflow cannula to systemic circulation at flows up to 10 L/min. (Images reprinted with the permis-
sion of Thoratec Corporation.)
A
B
Figure 21-13.  The HeartWare HVAD system. A. Both the device controller and batteries are held in a wearable carrying case and con-
nected to the ventricular assist device through the driveline. B. The main component is a centrifugal blood pump, called the HVAD, which is 
implanted within the pericardium. The only moving part in the device, the impeller, is suspended within the pump using magnets and thrust 
bearings. Similar to the HeartMate II, it can deliver a flow rate of up to 10 L/min. (Images reproduced with permission from HeartWare.)
requirements, malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and risk for 
sudden death. Due to the scarcity of donor organs, the improved 
survival seen with LVAD usage has resulted in more patients 
remaining alive while on the transplantation waiting list. It is 
currently estimated that 35% of patients who go on to receive 
a heart transplant have had a previous LVAD implantation, 
although at more aggressive tertiary care facilities this number 
may be as high as 75% to 90%.131
The HeartMate II pump was evaluated as a BTT in an 
observational, prospective multicenter trial of 133 patients with 
persistent NYHA class IV heart failure despite optimal medical 
management who were status 1A or 1B on the transplant list.182 
At 6 months, 100 patients (75%) had undergone transplantation, 
had cardiac recovery, or continued on mechanical support while 
remaining eligible for transplantation. There were significant 
improvements in both quality of life and functional status with 
770
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
device therapy. At 3 months, 81% of patients were in class I 
or II heart failure. Moreover, complications, including bleeding 
requiring reoperation, stroke, drive-line infection, and need for 
right ventricular assist device support, were significantly less 
frequent than with the previous generation HeartMate XVE.183 
These data led to FDA approval of the HeartMate II as a BTT 
LVAD in 2008, and clinical use of the device increased dra-
matically. More recently, a multicenter, prospective trial com-
pared the HeartWare HVAD to contemporaneously inserted 
devices for use as a BTT.184 This trial demonstrated noninfe-
riority of the HeartWare HVAD, but in contrast to the 2007 
trial, approximately 90% of patients in both groups were trans-
planted, explanted for recovery, or remained alive and eligible 
for transplant with LVAD support at 6 months. Most important, 
data suggest that patients bridged to transplant with an LVAD 
in the current era experience similar short- and long-term post-
transplant survival and complications and do not have a higher 
incidence of allosensitization compared to standard cardiac 
transplant patients 185,186.
Destination Therapy.  The Randomized Evaluation of Mechan-
ical Assistance for Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure 
(REMATCH) trial was conducted to compare the efficacy 
of LVAD insertion against optimal medical management in 
patients with NYHA class IV heart failure. While the pulsatile 
devices used in this trial had high failure rates, poor durability, 
and high associated mortality, there was still a clear survival ben-
efit in patients treated with LVADs. This led to the FDA approval 
of the first LVADs for destination therapy in 2002.174
Subsequent trials have proven the increased efficacy of 
second generation devices for DT. In one such landmark trial, 
patients with advanced heart failure who were ineligible for trans-
plantation were randomized in a 2:1 ratio to either a HeartMate 
II or HeartMate XVE.187 While both groups showed significant 
improvements in functional capacity and quality of life, actuarial 
survival at 2 years was superior for HeartMate II patients (58% vs. 
24%, P=0.008) and adverse event rates were significantly lower. 
These data established the benefit of continuous flow LVADs 
over optimal medical management for end-stage heart failure, and 
led to FDA approval of the HeartMate II for DT in 2010. In certain 
populations, 2-year survival with the HeartMate II is now 80%.175 
Several smaller third generation devices are in various stages of 
development or clinical trials. Some of these devices eliminate the 
drive line by using alternative energy sources, thereby removing a 
significant nidus for device infections. Long-term outcomes with 
these devices are expected to continue to improve, approaching 
that of cardiac transplantation and providing a viable solution to 
organ shortage for many patients.175
Current eligibility criteria for mechanical support as des-
tination therapy include: (a) medically refractory NYHA class III 
or IV heart failure for at least 60 days, (b) peak oxygen con-
sumption <12 ml/kg/min or failure to wean from continuous IV 
inotropes, (c) left ventricular ejection fraction <25%, and (d) pres-
ence of a contraindication for heart transplantation (i.e., age >65 
years, irreversible pulmonary hypertension, chronic renal failure, 
insulin-dependent diabetes with end organ damage, or other clini-
cally significant comorbidities).131 Once a patient has an LVAD 
inserted as DT, close and intensive follow-up by a multidisci-
plinary heart failure team is required in order to optimize medical 
therapy, reduce device-related morbidity and improve survival.
It is also important to keep in mind that while some 
contraindications to transplantation are irreversible, others can 
be modified. As such, approximately 10% of patients implanted 
with an initial strategy of destination therapy become BTT 
patients,131 and in some patients, the LVAD itself facilitates this 
transition. For example, an improvement in mean pulmonary 
vascular resistance was reported following implantation of the 
HeartMate II in patients with end-stage heart failure (2.1 vs. 
 3.6 Woods units, P<0.001).188 These data are also relevant to 
the 43% of patients that receive LVADs as a bridge to decision.
Right Ventricular Assist Devices and 
Biventricular Assist Devices
Most patients who present with advanced heat failure and a 
failing left ventricle also have some degree of right-ventricular 
dysfunction, but the majority of these patients do well with 
only an LVAD. However, implantation of an LVAD may cause 
acute worsening of tricuspid regurgitation and exacerbations of 
right-heart failure through leftward deviation of the intraven-
tricular septum and as a result of the significant volume-loading 
and transfusion requirement that is often necessary to achieve 
adequate flows postoperatively. Overall, approximately 20% of 
HeartMate II BTT patients had persistent right ventricular fail-
ure (RVF) requiring either a subsequent RVAD (6%) or intra-
venous inotropic support for >14 days (14%), and these patients 
had significantly worsened 6 month survival compared to those 
without RVF (71% vs. 89%, P<0.001).189 Typically, mechanical 
right-ventricular support is temporary with intent to wean the 
device, and isolated right-ventricular assist devices are unusual.
Biventricular support is most commonly indicated for 
acute cardiogenic shock after an MI or postcardiotomy heart 
failure. Biventricular support is temporary, although some 
patients may be successfully bridged to transplant or perma-
nent left-sided assist devices. There is currently no destination 
therapy device for biventricular failure.
Total Artificial Heart
The total artificial heart (TAH, SynCardia Systems, Tucson, 
AZ) is currently indicated as a bridge to transplant for patients 
in biventricular failure, particularly for those who are critically 
ill and too large for extracorporeal BiVAD support. Unlike ven-
tricular assist devices, the TAH replaces the entire heart. The 
ventricles of the TAH are implanted orthotopically to the atrial 
cuffs on the ventricular side of the AV groove, and the outflow 
conduits are attached to the great vessels. This approach has the 
benefit of obviating the hemodynamic influence of pulmonary 
hypertension, right heart failure, myocardial or valvular prob-
lems, cardiac arrhythmias, and inotropic agents.190 While this 
device has failed to reach its potential as a replacement for car-
diac transplantation, the TAH has achieved favorable results as 
a BTT with a >70% survival in selected centers.191-193 However, 
at most centers results with the TAH have been suboptimal, and 
it is not frequently used.
SURGERY FOR ARRYHTMIAS
The success of catheter-based ablation and implantable cardio-
verter defibrillators (ICDs) has significantly diminished refer-
rals for the surgical treatment of arrhythmias such as ventricular 
tachycardia, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, atrial flutter, 
and atrioventricular nodal reentry. On the other hand, the intro-
duction of surgical ablation modalities such as radiofrequency 
and cryothermal energy, has simplified the surgical treatment of 
atrial fibrillation (AF) and has led to a dramatic increase the in 
the number of surgical procedures performed annually for AF.194
7
771
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Atrial Fibrillation
Epidemiology of Atrial Fibrillation.  Atrial fibrillation 
remains the most common arrhythmia in the world with an over-
all incidence of 0.4% to 1% that increases to 8% in those older 
than 80 years old.195 The most serious complication of AF is 
thromboembolism with resultant stroke,196 but serious morbidity 
and mortality may also result from hemodynamic compromise 
due to loss of atrial contraction, exacerbations of congestive 
heart failure from atrioventricular asynchrony and tachycardia-
induced cardiomyopathy.
Medical Management.  Most patients are treated medically, but 
the shortcomings of pharmacological management have left an 
important role for interventional therapies. Antiarrhythmic medi-
cations have been limited by modest efficacies and significant 
proarrhythmic and systemic toxicities.197 Conversely, rate control 
strategies leave the patient in AF, do not address the impaired 
hemodynamics or symptoms associated with this arrhythmia, and 
may render subsequent attempts at rhythm control therapies less 
effective for younger patients that may suffer irreversible cardiac 
remodeling due to the prolonged period of time in AF.
Restoration of normal sinus rhythm has several potential 
benefits over other strategies 198-200. These include improvements 
in atrial systolic function, which improves cardiac output and 
often improves symptoms in patients with congestive heart fail-
ure; a lower risk of stroke; possible discontinuation of anticoag-
ulation; and the benefit of potentially reversing atrial structural 
and/or electrical remodeling.
Indications for Surgical Management.  Recent consensus 
guidelines published by the Heart Rhythm Society state that 
surgical ablation for atrial fibrillation is indicated for: (a) all 
symptomatic AF patients undergoing other cardiac surgery; 
(b) selected asymptomatic AF patients undergoing cardiac 
surgery in which the ablation can be performed with minimal 
additional risk; and (c) symptomatic patients with lone AF who 
have failed medical therapy and prefer a surgical approach, 
have failed one or more attempts at catheter ablation, or are 
poor candidates for catheter ablation.195 At our institution, rela-
tive indications for surgical ablation in patients with permanent 
AF that were not included in the consensus statement are: (a) a 
contraindication to long term anticoagulation for patients at high 
risk for stroke (CHADS2 score ≥ 2) and (b) a history of stroke 
while on therapeutic anticoagulation.
The Cox-Maze IV Procedure.  The first successful operation for 
atrial fibrillation, the Cox-Maze procedure, was introduced clini-
cally in 1987 by James Cox. The procedure involved the comple-
tion of a maze-like pattern of surgical incisions across both the 
right and left atrial that were designed to interrupt the multiple 
macroreentrant circuits that were thought to be responsible for 
AF, while still allowing propagation of the sinus impulse, restor-
ing atrioventricular synchrony, and preserving atrial transport 
function. While effective at eliminating AF and reducing the risk 
of thromboembolism, it was not widely performed due to the 
fact that it was technically difficult and significantly prolonged 
time on cardiopulmonary bypass. In 2002, the Cox-Maze IV, 
was introduced. The Cox-Maze IV uses a combination of bipo-
lar radiofrequency (RF) ablation and cryoablation to effectively 
replace the majority of incisions that comprise the Cox-Maze III 
while significantly shortening cross-clamp time and reducing 
operative complexity.
The Cox-Maze IV is performed on cardiopulmonary 
bypass through either a median sternotomy, often in combina-
tion with other cardiac surgery, or a right minithoracotomy.201 In 
most cases, the right atrial lesion set is performed on the beating 
heart, whereas the left atrial lesions are performed during car-
dioplegic arrest (Fig. 21-14).
Results from the Cox-Maze IV procedure have been excel-
lent. A recent, prospective analysis of 100 consecutive lone 
Cox-Maze IV patients demonstrated postoperative free-
dom from AF of 93%, 90%, and 90% at 6, 12, and 24 months, 
respectively, and freedom from AF off antiarrhythmic drugs was 
82%, 82%, and 84% at the same intervals.201 Outcomes are com-
parable when patients undergo concomitant cardiac surgery,202 
and a propensity analysis has shown that results are similar 
between the traditional “cut-and-sew” maze and the Cox-Maze 
IV.203 This procedure is often successful in patients who are poor 
candidates for catheter-based ablation, such as those with large 
left atria and patients with long-standing persistent AF.
The combination of surgical excision of the LAA and res-
toration of normal sinus rhythm after the Cox-Maze procedure 
significantly reduces stroke risk. It is our practice to stop 
warfarin at 3 months postoperatively in patients who are in 
A
B
Figure 21-14.  The Cox-Maze IV Lesion Set. A. The left atrial lesion set is comprised of right and left pulmonary vein isolation, connecting 
lesions between the left and right superior and inferior pulmonary veins, a lesion from the left atrial appendage excision site to the pulmonary 
vein and a lesion to the mitral valve annulus. B. The right atrial lesion set consists of lines of ablation along the superior and inferior vena 
cavae, the free wall of the right atrium and down to the tricuspid valve annulus. (From Weimar T, Bailey MS, Watanabe Y, et al. The Cox-
Maze IV procedure for lone atrial fibrillation: a single center experience in 100 consecutive patients. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2011;31: 
47-54. With kind permission from Springer Science & Business Media.)
8
772
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
normal sinus rhythm and without another indication for antico-
agulation, regardless of CHADS2 score. With this approach, the 
stroke rate following the Cox-Maze procedure off anticoagula-
tion has been remarkably low (annual risk = 0.2%).204 In contrast, 
in one report the annual rate of intracranial hemorrhage in antico-
agulated patients with AF was 0.9% per year, and the overall rate 
of major bleeding complications was 2.3% per year.205
Left Atrial Lesion Sets.  Some surgeons perform more limited 
ablation procedures, such as isolated pulmonary vein isolation 
or lesion sets that are limited to the left side of the heart. This is 
done in order to further reduce the complexity of the procedure 
and takes advantage of the fact that in most patients AF originates 
from the pulmonary veins and posterior left atrium. Although, 
there is seldom justification for limited lesion sets in experienced 
hands.
While there is a high degree of variability in both the tech-
niques and energy sources that have been attempted for left-sided 
atrial lesion sets, these procedures have all incorporated some 
subset of the left atrial lesion set of the Cox-Maze procedure. 
Pulmonary vein isolation is ubiquitously performed, and the 
LAA is often excised. Results differ greatly between series, but 
a meta-analysis of the published literature by Ad and colleagues 
revealed that a biatrial lesion set resulted in a significantly higher 
late freedom from AF compared with a left atrial lesion set alone 
(87% vs. 73%, P = 0.05).206 These results are not surprising, as 
our intraoperative mapping experience with such patients showed 
a distinct region of stable dominant frequency in the left atrium 
only 30% of the time.207 The dominant frequency was located in 
the right atrium 12% of the time and moved during the recording 
period in almost half of all patients. It must also be kept in mind 
that recurrent right atrial flutter is a known complication of per-
forming only the left atrial lesions. When it does occur, atrial flut-
ter can be treated with catheter-based ablation; however, recurrent 
left atrial flutter can be very difficult to ablate.
Pulmonary Vein Isolation.  Pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) 
is an attractive therapeutic option due to the fact that it can be 
performed off of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) through small 
or thoracoscopic incisions. The results of PVI have been vari-
able and highly dependent on patient selection since outcomes 
are consistently worse in patients with longstanding persistent 
AF. In a study from Edgerton et al, only 56% of patients were 
free from AF at 6 months (35% off antiarrhythmic drugs), and 
with concomitant procedures, the success rate of PVI has been 
even lower.208 Several devices are available to close the LAA at 
the time of PVI. These include staplers and epicardial clips that 
can be placed without the need for CPB.
While surgical PVI has had poorer results than a Cox-Maze 
procedure, it has had superior results to catheter-based PVI. The 
Atrial Fibrillation Catheter Ablation Versus Surgical Ablation 
Treatment (FAST) Trial, which was a two center, randomized 
clinical trial, compared catheter-based ablation to thoracoscopic 
PVI in patients with antiarrhythmic drug-refractory AF and either 
left atrial dilatation and hypertension or failed prior catheter-
ablation.209 This study demonstrated that the 12-month freedom 
from AF and antiarrhythmic drugs was 37% for the catheter abla-
tion group and 66% for the PVI group (P = 0.0022).
SURGERY FOR PERICARDIAL DISEASE
Acute Pericarditis
Pericarditis is characterized by infiltration of the cellular and 
fibrous pericardium by inflammatory cells. The exact incidence 
and prevalence of pericarditis is unknown, but it is estimated 
that pericarditis is found in approximately 1% of autopsies and 
accounts for up to 5% of presentations of nonischemic chest 
pain.210,211 The etiologies of acute pericarditis are diverse and 
may result from primary pericardial disorders or occur sec-
ondary to a systemic illness.212 In developed countries, 80% 
to 90% of cases are now considered idiopathic or related to a 
viral pathogen, but nonviral infection, autoimmune diseases, 
myocardial infarction, radiation, malignancy, endocrinopathy, 
myocarditis, aortic dissection, uremia, trauma, pharmacologi-
cal side effects, and previous cardiothoracic surgery must be 
included in the differential diagnosis. The relative incidences of 
peri-infarction pericarditis, which was once common, and post-
cardiac injury syndrome have been dramatically reduced with 
the advent of thrombolytics and coronary angioplasty.212
Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis.  Diagnosis of acute 
pericarditis typically requires the identification of at least two 
of four cardinal features (Table 21-16). The presentation may be 
confused with several more common cardiopulmonary condi-
tions, particularly myocardial infarction, making a careful his-
tory and physical critical. Patients with pericarditis classically 
complain of sudden onset, retrosternal pain that may be pleuritic 
in nature. The pain may also be positional, with alleviation of 
pain when the patient is upright and leaning forward. Pain from 
pericarditis is typically sharp or stabbing, as opposed to the dull 
pain or pressure that is common with angina, and it typically 
does not crescendo. While both conditions cause pain that often 
radiates to the neck, arms, and shoulders, pericarditis pain may 
uniquely radiate to the trapezius ridge due to innervation from 
the phrenic nerve.213,214
The presence of a pericardial friction rub is pathogno-
monic for pericarditis, but it tends to vary in intensity over time 
and may be absent in 15% to 65% of patients.213,215 As such, 
the sensitivity of this physical finding is dependent on the fre-
quency and quality of auscultation. A pericardial friction rub 
is best heard at the left lower sternal border and is typically 
described as a high-pitched scratchy or squeaky sound with a 
triphasic cadence corresponding to the movement of the heart 
during atrial systole, ventricular systole, and early ventricular 
diastole. However, it may be monophasic or biphasic in up to 
50% of patients.
Electrocardiogram (EKG) changes typically progress 
through four stages representing global subepicardial myocar-
ditis and subsequent recovery. Pericarditis patients may have 
concave ST deflections with diffuse changes, spanning the leads 
of multiple coronary artery distributions, but ST segment abnor-
malities are absent in 20% to 40% of patients.216,217 Acute peri-
carditis should not result in the development of infarct patterns, 
such as Q-waves or loss of R-waves, and T-wave inversions 
from pericarditis tend to result later in the disease process after 
the ST segment has returned to baseline.
Table 21-16
Features of acute pericarditis.
• Pleuritic and positional, retrosternal chest pain
• Pericardial friction rub
• EKG changes: diffuse ST elevation and PR depression
• Pericardial effusion
EKG = Electrocardiogram.
773
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Echocardiography is routinely performed in the evaluation 
of acute pericarditis. Its role is primarily to assess for a pericar-
dial effusion.Although, in a patient who can be demonstrated to 
have previously had normal cardiac function, it may be used to 
exclude segmental wall motion abnormalities that may suggest 
ischemia.
The remaining work-up should attempt to determine the 
underlying cause of the pericarditis and should be directed by 
the history and physical. Most inflammatory markers and labo-
ratory tests are nonspecific, but C-reactive protein (CRP) may 
be useful in predicting recurrence risks and in guiding the dura-
tion of anti-inflammatory medications.218 Rarely, other imaging 
modalities, such as CT scanning, pericardial biopsies, or peri-
cardiocentesis may aid in diagnosis.
Treatment.  The preferred treatment depends on the underly-
ing cause of the pericarditis. The disease usually follows a self-
limited and benign course and can be successfully treated 
with a short course of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents (NSAIDs). Some patients may require judicious use of 
steroids or IV antibiotics. In cases of purulent pyogenic pericar-
ditis, surgical exploration and drainage are occasionally neces-
sary. Rarely, accumulation of fluid in the pericardium may lead 
to tamponade, requiring prompt evacuation of the pericardial 
space. While pericardiocentesis will typically suffice, surgical 
drainage may be required for thick, viscous, or clotted fluid or in 
patients with significant scarring from previous surgeries. More 
commonly, surgical intervention is required to manage recur-
rent disease.
Relapsing Pericarditis
As many as one-third of patients with acute pericarditis will 
develop at least one episode of relapse.212 While many of these 
patients can be treated medically during their initial relapse and 
do not experience further episodes, a subset of patients experi-
ence chronic relapsing pericarditis that can significantly impact 
their quality of life. Recurrence may develop either from the 
original etiology or from an autoimmune process that occurs as 
a consequence of damage from the initial episode. Relapsing 
pericarditis normally responds to a longer course of NSAIDS 
± colchicine. While steroids may induce rapid symptomatic 
response, their use should be limited to patients who have mul-
tiple relapses and are unresponsive to first-line agents, as several 
studies have suggested that steroid administration may favor 
relapse.219
Pericardiectomy may be considered a last resort treatment 
in patients with relapsing pericarditis who are severely symp-
tomatic despite optimal medical management, are unable to 
tolerate steroids or have recurrence with tamponade. Evidence 
for this approach is lacking, as few studies have described peri-
cardiectomy in this population.220-222 The largest study and the 
only one to compare surgical treatment with medical manage-
ment for patients with persistent relapsing pericarditis was 
a report of 184 patients from the Mayo Clinic.221 About 58 
patients were identified as having undergone a pericardiectomy 
after failed medical treatment, whereas the remainder were 
treated with medical management only. Compared to medical 
treatment only, pericardiectomy resulted in significantly fewer 
relapses (8.6% vs. 28.6%, P = 0.009) at long term follow-up, 
as well as a nonsignificant trend towards less medication and 
corticosteroid usage. Of note, 80% of patients in the pericardi-
ectomy group who had relapses reported significant improve-
ments in their symptoms and had fewer relapses than before 
pericardiectomy. No perioperative deaths were observed, and 
only 2 patients (3%) had major complications. Hence, at expe-
rienced centers pericardiectomy may be a safe and viable option 
in select patients with relapsing pericarditis.
Chronic Constrictive Pericarditis
Etiology, Pathology, and Pathophysiology.  Constrictive 
pericarditis can occur after any pericardial disease process 
but remains a rare outcome of recurrent pericarditis. It results 
when chronic pericardial scarring and fibrosis cause adhesion 
of the visceral and parietal layers and resultant obliteration of 
the pericardial space. While the pericardium is often grossly 
thickened with either focal or diffuse calcification in chronic 
disease, constriction may occur with normal pericardial thick-
ness in approximately 20% of cases.212,223 In developed nations, 
idiopathic causes and cardiac surgery (accounting for almost 
40% of cases in some series) are the predominant underlying eti-
ologies, followed by mediastinal radiation, pyogenic infections 
(i.e., Staphylococcus), and other miscellaneous causes. Tuber-
culosis is an additional common cause in immunosuppressed 
patients and in developing or underdeveloped countries.
Clinically, pericardial constriction limits diastolic filling 
of the ventricles and mimics right heart failure since the right-
sided chambers are more affected by a rise in filling pressures. 
Subsequent increases in central venous pressure result in the 
progressive development of hepatomegaly, ascites, peripheral 
edema, abdominal pain, dyspnea on exertion, anorexia, and 
nausea (in part due to hepatic and bowel congestion). In many 
patients, these symptoms develop insidiously over a course 
of years. Since many of these symptoms are similar to those 
seen in patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy, the distinc-
tion between the two entities is difficult, but it remains critical 
because the treatment is completely different for restriction. The 
primary difference is that restrictive cardiomyopathy is defined 
by a nondilated ventricle with a rigid myocardium that causes 
a significant decrease in myocardial compliance, which is not 
seen in constrictive pericarditis.
Clinical and Diagnostic Findings.  Classic physical exam 
findings include jugular venous distention with Kussmaul’s 
sign, diminished cardiac apical impulses, peripheral edema, 
ascites, pulsatile liver, a pericardial knock, and, in advanced 
disease, signs of liver dysfunction, such as jaundice or cachexia. 
The “pericardial knock” is an early diastolic sound that reflects 
a sudden impediment to ventricular filling, similar to an S3 but 
of higher pitch.
Several findings are characteristic on noninvasive and 
invasive testing. CVP is often elevated 15 to 20 mm Hg or 
higher. EKG commonly demonstrates nonspecific low voltage 
QRS complexes and isolated repolarization abnormalities. Chest 
X-ray may demonstrate calcification of the pericardium, which 
is highly suggestive of constrictive pericarditis in patients with 
heart failure, but this is present in only 25% of cases.219 Cardiac 
CT or MRI (cMRI) typically demonstrate increased pericardial 
thickness (>4 mm) and calcification, dilation of the inferior vena 
cava, deformed ventricular contours, and flattening or leftward 
shift of the ventricular septum. Pericardial adhesions may also 
be seen on tagged cine MRI studies.
As discussed, it is most important to distinguish peri-
cardial constriction from restrictive cardiomyopathy, which is 
best done with either echocardiography or right heart catheter-
ization. Findings favoring constriction on echocardiography 
include respiratory variation of ventricular septal motion and 
9
774
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
mitral inflow velocity, preserved or increased mitral annulus 
early diastolic filling velocity, and increased hepatic vein flow 
reversal with expiration.212,219 Cardiac catheterization will show 
increased atrial pressures, equalization of end-diastolic pressure 
and early ventricular diastolic filling with a subsequent plateau, 
called the “square-root sign.” Additional findings upon cath-
eterization that would favor constriction include respiratory 
variation in ventricular filling and increased ventricular inter-
dependence, manifest as a discordant change in the total area of 
the LV and RV systolic pressure curve with respiration.
Surgical Treatment.  Transient constrictive pericarditis may 
occur weeks to months after an initial injury and follows a 
self-limiting course of weeks to a few months. These patients 
are best treated with medical therapy alone. They often lack 
calcification of their pericardium, and the degree of late gad-
olinium enhancement of the pericardium on cardiac MRI has 
shown promise in predicting which patients may have resolu-
tion of the process.224 Still, there is no ideal way to distinguish 
these patients from those who will develop chronic constrictive 
pericarditis, which is permanent. Therefore, if a newly diag-
nosed patient is hemodynamically stable, it is recommended 
that conservative management is attempted for two to three 
months prior to performing a pericardiectomy.223 Surgical ther-
apy should not be delayed indefinitely, however, as results are 
improved when the operation is performed earlier in the course 
of the disease. Additional factors that predict adverse long-
term outcomes include older age and prior ionizing radiation, 
as well as cardiopulmonary and renal dysfunction.219 Surgery 
should therefore be approached cautiously in patients with very 
advanced, “end-stage” constrictive pericarditis, patients with 
mixed constrictive-restrictive disease (often from radiation), 
and those with significant myocardial or renal dysfunction, as 
those patients are at increased risk from surgery and may not 
experience improvement of symptoms.
In order to minimize recurrence following pericardiec-
tomy, complete pericardial resection is desirable. This is typi-
cally performed through either a median sternotomy or left 
anterolateral thoracotomy while on cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Radical pericardiectomy involves wide resection of the con-
stricting pericardium from the anterior surface of the heart 
between the phrenic nerves and the diaphragmatic surface. 
Decortication of the right atrium and vena cavae is not univer-
sally performed, but doing so improves the risk of persistent 
disease or relapse.225,226
The extent of myocardial involvement may also affect 
long-term outcomes, and, thus, the depth of decortication is an 
important consideration.225 Even when an adequate pericardi-
ectomy is performed, epicardial sclerosis can cause persistent 
hemodynamic instability or a delayed response to surgery. Scle-
rotic epicardium is often thin and nearly transparent, but in cases 
of severe chronic constrictive pericarditis it can be difficult to 
remove it without injury to the heart.
Surgical Results.  While most patients experience significant 
improvement in their symptoms following pericardiectomy, 
symptomatic relief may take several months. Since there is a 
significant perioperative morbidity and mortality, pericardiec-
tomy is best performed by experienced surgeons at high-volume 
centers. Between 1970 and 1985, the operative mortality was 
reported to be 12%, but a lower mortality of approximately 4% 
to 8% was noted between 1977 and 2006 at several experienced 
centers.223,226-230
Long-term survival is in part determined by etiology of 
the disease. In a report from the Cleveland Clinic, seven-year 
survival rates following pericardiectomy for idiopathic, postsur-
gical, and radiation-induced constrictive pericarditis were 88%, 
66%, and 27%, respectively.227 Results are worst for radiation-
induced disease because ionizing radiation is often associated 
with myocardial injury as well as pericardial disease.
Despite the risks, many patients experience significant 
benefits from surgical treatment. In one large series, 83% of 
patients were reported to be free of symptoms at last follow-
up.230 This is in agreement with other studies that have shown 
a significant improvement in NYHA functional status from 
class III/IV preoperatively to class I/II following pericardiec-
tomy in >95% of patients.226,228-230
CARDIAC NEOPLASMS
Overview and General Clinical Features
Cardiac neoplasms are rare, with an incidence ranging from 
0.001% to 0.3% in autopsy studies and a 0.15% incidence in 
major echocardiographic series.231,232 Benign cardiac tumors 
are most common and account for 75% of primary neoplasms. 
Approximately 50% of benign cardiac tumors are myxomas, 
with the remainder being papillary fibroelastomas, lipomas, 
rhabdomyomas, fibromas, hemangiomas, teratomas, lymph-
angiomas, and others, in order of decreasing frequency. Most 
malignant primary cardiac tumors are sarcomas (angiosarcoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and lipo-
sarcoma), with a small incidence of malignant lymphomas. Met-
astatic cardiac tumors, while still infrequent, have been reported 
to occur 100-fold more often than primary lesions.
Clinical Presentation.  The clinical presentation of cardiac 
neoplasms varies greatly depending on the location of the 
tumor, as well as its size, rate of growth, invasiveness, and fri-
ability. While as many as 10% of patients are asymptomatic, 
most manifest some combination of symptoms from the classic 
triad resulting from blood flow obstruction, tumor embolization, 
and constitutional symptoms.233,234 Systemic manifestations of 
disease include fever, myalgias, chills, night sweats, weight 
loss, and fatigue and occur in up to one-third of patients.
Obstruction of cardiac blood flow accounts for the major-
ity of presenting symptoms.234 When the tumor is located in the 
left atrium, symptoms tend to mimic mitral valve disease with 
dyspnea and pulmonary edema; although more severe presenta-
tions with syncopal episodes, hypotension, and sudden cardiac 
death have been reported from temporary valve orifice occlu-
sion. When the tumor is located in the right atrium, symptoms 
may mimic right heart failure and include hepatomegaly, asci-
tes, and peripheral edema. Outflow tract obstruction is rare but 
may be caused by large ventricular tumors.235
Tumor lysis and embolization may also lead to neurologic 
presentations such as stroke, retinal artery occlusion, or cere-
bral aneurysms, particularly in the case of pedunculated tumors 
and those with frond-like projections.236 Embolic tumor cells are 
able to lodge and penetrate distant vessel walls via subintimal 
growth, which leads to weakening of the arterial wall and sub-
sequent aneurysm formation. This has been documented as late 
as five years out from successful primary myxoma resection.237 
Alternatively, embolic implants may metastasize and create 
space occupying lesions. While rare, myxomatous tumor emboli 
have also been identified in the coronary arteries, common iliac 
and femoral arteries, kidney, spleen, pancreas, and liver.236
775
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Certain clinical features may be helpful in distinguishing 
benign from malignant primary cardiac tumors234 Malignant 
tumors, primarily sarcomas, do not demonstrate a gender pref-
erence and tend to present after the fourth decade of life. They 
are often multifocal within the right atrium, and intramyocardial 
invasion can lead to refractory congestive heart failure, arrhyth-
mias, hemopericardium, and ischemia. Conversely, benign 
tumors, primarily myxomas, are typically unifocal in the left 
atrium, have a 3:1 female preference, and occur in younger 
patients. Arrhythmias and pericardial effusions are very rare in 
this population.
Diagnosis and Characterization of Cardiac Masses.  Trans-
thoracic echocardiography is the mainstay imaging technique 
for the detection of cardiac tumors.234 However, echocardiogra-
phy is limited by dependence on an acoustic window, subopti-
mal visualization of extracardiac extension, and poor soft-tissue 
visualization. Transesophageal echocardiography is generally 
only beneficial for small localized tumors due to its limited 
field of view. Cardiac MRI is therefore the current standard for 
delineating the anatomical extent of the tumor and assessing the 
paracardiac space and great vessels. Advantages of cMRI over 
CT scans include better soft-tissue evaluation without the need 
for iodinated contrast and no exposure to ionizing radiation.
It is important in the initial workup to distinguish a cardiac 
tumor from an intracardiac thrombus, which may be common in 
the atria of patients with AF and can mimic echocardiographic 
features of atrial myxomas. This determination is critical, as an 
atrial thrombus may be expected to resolve with anticoagula-
tion, whereas a tumor requires surgical intervention. Moreover, 
anticoagulation can potentially increase the risk of peripheral 
embolization in patients with cardiac tumors. Delayed enhance-
ment cMRI is the best modality to separate these two entities.
cMRI may show vascularization, areas of necrosis, hemorrhage, 
or calcification in cardiac tumors that are not present in thrombi.
Myxoma
Pathology and Genetics.  Cardiac myxomas are the most 
common cardiac tumor and are characterized by several dis-
tinguishing features. About 75% of the time, they arise 
from the interatrial septum near the fossa ovalis in the 
left atrium.238 Most others will develop in the right atrium, but, 
less commonly, they can arise from valvular surfaces and the 
walls of other cardiac chambers. Macroscopically, these tumors 
are pedunculated with a gelatinous consistency, and the surface 
may be smooth (65%), villous, or friable.233 Size varies greatly 
with these tumors and ranges from 1 to 15 cm in diameter. 
Internally, myxomas are heterogeneous and often contain hem-
orrhage, cysts, necrosis, or calcification. Histologically, these 
tumors contain cells that arise from a multipotent mesenchyme 
and are contained within a mucopolysaccharide stroma.239
While the majority of myxomas occur spontaneously with 
the highest incidence in women aged 40 to 60 years old, approx-
imately 7% of cases are familial as part of Carney complex.233 
Carney complex is an autosomal dominant disorder character-
ized by two or more of the following conditions: atrial and extra-
cardiac myxomas, schwannomas, cutaneous lentiginosis, spotty 
pigmentation, myxoid fibroadenomas of the breast, endocrine 
overactivity (pituitary adenomas or primary adrenal hyperplasia 
with Cushing’s syndrome), and testicular tumors. Compared to 
sporadic myxomas, those that occur as part of Carney complex 
are more commonly found in the right atrium (37% vs. 18%) 
or one of the ventricles (25% vs. 0%), more often multicentric 
(33% vs. 6%) and more likely to recur (20% vs. 3%).238 They 
also present earlier at an average age of 24 years old (range 
4–48 years).
Pathophysiology.  Larger tumors are more likely to be asso-
ciated with cardiovascular symptoms from obstruction, and 
embolic symptoms tend to occur from organized thrombi pres-
ent on friable or villous tumors (Fig. 21-15). The relative fre-
quencies of symptoms was illustrated by a series of 112 patients 
who reported cardiovascular symptoms (67%), most commonly 
resembling mitral valve obstruction; systemic embolization 
(29%); neurologic deficits (20%); and constitutional symptoms 
(34%).233 Similar incidences of symptoms have been reported 
in other large studies.
Treatment.  Cardiac myxomas should be promptly excised 
after diagnosis due to the significant risk of embolization and 
cardiovascular complications, including sudden death. Resec-
tion may be performed through either a median sternotomy or 
a minimally invasive right thoracotomy while on cardiopulmo-
nary bypass. Care is taken not to manipulate the tumor before 
cross clamping of the aorta in order to avoid embolization. Left 
atrial tumors may be approached through a standard left atri-
otomy.240 Exposure of large tumors attached to the interatrial 
septum may be facilitated by an additional parallel incision in 
the right atrium, but this is rarely necessary. An ideal resection 
encompasses both the tumor and a portion of the cardiac wall 
or interatrial septum to which it is attached. In order to prevent 
recurrence, a full thickness excision of the attachment site is 
Figure 21-15.  Massive left atrial myxoma. A. Intraoperative echocardiogram of a large left atrial mass, diagnosed preoperatively as a left 
atrial myxoma. The mass can be seen prolapsing through the mitral valve orifice causing intermittent symptoms of mitral stenosis. B. The 
resected specimen. The neck of the mass that was obstructing the mitral orifice is clearly delineated.
10
776
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
preferred, but partial thickness excisions and cryoablation of the 
base have been performed with good late results.240 The defect 
created in the atrial septum can either be repaired primarily or 
with a small patch. Finally, patients with valvular involvement 
may require additional valvular reconstruction or replacement, 
and rare cases of cardiac autotransplantation (with atrial recon-
struction) or transplantation have been reported as strategies for 
complex cases of recurrent atrial myxoma.241,242
Short- and long-term results following excision are excel-
lent for benign cardiac myxomas. Operative mortality is low, 
and the probability of disease-free survival at 20 years has 
been reported to be as high as 92% for benign, sporadic myxo-
mas.233,240 Risk of recurrence is significantly higher for familial 
cases.
Other Benign Cardiac Tumors
There are several benign cardiac tumors apart from myxomas 
that are infrequent but have distinct pathophysiologic fea-
tures.234 Papillary fibroelastomas are the second most common 
primary cardiac tumor, representing approximately 8% of all 
cases. These tumors typically occur in more elderly patients; 
are small (<1 cm in diameter) sessile, pedunculated masses that 
arise from the mitral or aortic valves; and frequently result in 
embolization. Fibroelastomas can almost always be resected 
with preservation of the native valve leaflets, and cryoablation 
of the valve leaflet after resection can help prevent recurrence. 
Lipomas are encapsulated tumors that usually arise from the 
epicardium and remain asymptomatic in most patients. Heman-
giomas, which may arise from any cardiac structure, including 
the pericardium, account for 2% of benign cardiac tumors, and 
atrioventricular node tumors, which often lead to sudden cardiac 
death from heart block and ventricular fibrillation, are exceed-
ingly rare.
In children, rhabdomyomas are the most common pri-
mary cardiac tumor, whereas fibromas are the most commonly 
resected cardiac tumor. Rhabdomyomas are myocardial hamar-
tomas that are often multicentric in the ventricles. About 50% of 
cases are associated with tuberous sclerosis, and while resection 
is occasionally necessary, most disappear spontaneously. Fibro-
mas are congenital lesions that one-third of the time are found in 
children younger than one-year old. These tumors, conversely, 
are ordinarily solitary lesions found in the inner interventricu-
lar septum, and they may present with heart failure, cyanosis, 
arrhythmias, syncopal episodes, chest pain, or sudden cardiac 
death.
Malignant Cardiac Tumors
Primary cardiac malignancies are very rare, but when they occur 
they tend to have a right-sided predominance and frequently 
demonstrate extracardiac extension and involvement.234,243 
Malignant cardiac tumors include angiosarcoma, osteosarcoma, 
leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and primary 
cardiac lymphomas. Angiosarcomas are aggressive, rapidly 
invading adjacent structures, and 47% to 89% of patients pres-
ent with lung, liver, or brain metastases by the time of diagnosis. 
Leiomyosarcomas are sessile masses with a mucous appearance 
that are typically found in the posterior wall of the left atrium. 
Rhabdomyosarcomas are bulky (>10 cm in diameter) tumors 
that usually occur in children and do not have a predilection 
for any particular chamber. They frequently invade nearby car-
diac structures and are multicentric in 60% of cases. Finally, 
while not as frequent as secondary cardiac lymphomas, primary 
cardiac lymphomas are increasing in frequency due to lympho-
proliferative disorders caused by Epstein-Barr virus in immuno-
suppressed patients. The absence of necrotic foci in lymphomas 
can be used to differentiate these tumors from cardiac sarcomas.
Metastatic Cardiac Tumors
Cardiac metastases have been found in approximately 10% of 
autopsies performed for malignant disease.234 Secondary cardiac 
tumors, unlike primary tumors, are therefore relatively common. 
They may arise from direct extension of mediastinal tumors, 
hematological spread, intracavitary extension from the inferior 
vena cava or lymphatic extension, although the latter is the most 
common mechanism.
While they can occur with most any primary tumor, they 
are generally observed late in the course of disease. Malignant 
melanomas have a high potential for cardiac involvement, but 
other soft tissue tumors such as lung cancer, breast cancer, 
sarcomas, renal carcinoma, esophageal cancer, hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma, and thyroid cancer may all progress to cardiac 
involvement. Cardiac metastases may also develop from leuke-
mia and lymphoma in 25% to 40% of cases.244
Metastatic cardiac tumors are typically found in random 
locations, excluding the valvular tissue where lymphatics are 
absent, and they may be multifocal or diffusely extend along 
the epicardial surface. Signs of malignant cardiac involvement 
in cancer patients include pericardial effusion or tamponade, 
tachyarrhythmias, and heart failure symptoms. Workup is simi-
lar to other cardiac tumors. Treatment is generally with com-
bined chemotherapy and radiation and is rarely effective.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Braunwald E, Bonow RO. Braunwald’s heart disease: a 
textbook of cardiovascular medicine. 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2012.
2.	Lee DH, Buth KJ, Martin BJ, Yip AM, Hirsch GM. Frail 
patients are at increased risk for mortality and prolonged 
institutional care after cardiac surgery. Circulation. 2010;121: 
973-978.
3.	Williams FM, Bergin JD. Cardiac screening before noncardiac 
surgery. Surg Clin North Am. 2009;89:747-762, vii.
4.	Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA, et al. ACC/AHA 
2007 guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and care for noncardiac surgery: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to 
Revise the 2002 Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiovascu-
lar Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery) developed in col-
laboration with the American Society of Echocardiography, 
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm 
Society, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Soci-
ety for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, and Society for 
Vascular Surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:e159-e241.
5.	Badheka AO, Hendel RC. Radionuclide cardiac stress testing. 
Curr Opin Cardiol. 2011;26:370-378.
6.	Bax JJ, Boogers MM, Schuijf JD. Nuclear imaging in heart 
failure. Cardiol Clin. 2009;27:265-276, Table of Contents.
7.	Scanlon PJ, Faxon DP, Audet AM, et al. ACC/AHA guide-
lines for coronary angiography. A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on practice guidelines (Committee on Coronary Angi-
ography). Developed in collaboration with the Society for 
777
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
Cardiac Angiography and Interventions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1999;33:1756-1824.
8.	Berman DS, Hachamovitch R, Shaw LJ, et al. Roles of nuclear 
cardiology, cardiac computed tomography, and cardiac mag-
netic resonance: assessment of patients with suspected coro-
nary artery disease. J Nucl Med. 2006;47:74-82.
9.	Chow BJ, Small G, Yam Y, et al. Incremental prognostic value 
of cardiac computed tomography in coronary artery disease 
using CONFIRM: COroNary computed tomography angiog-
raphy evaluation for clinical outcomes: an InteRnational Mul-
ticenter registry. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:463-472.
10.	Edmunds LH Jr. The evolution of cardiopulmonary bypass: 
lessons to be learned. Perfusion. 2002;17:243-251.
11.	Cohn LH. Cardiac surgery in the adult. 4th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Professional; 2012.
12.	Asimakopoulos G. Systemic inflammation and cardiac sur-
gery: an update. Perfusion. 2001;16:353-360.
13.	Arepally GM, Ortel TL. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. 
Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:77-90.
14.	Murphy GJ, Angelini GD. Side effects of cardiopulmonary 
bypass: what is the reality? J Card Surg. 2004;19:481-488.
15.	Greason KL, Schaff HV. Myocardial revascularization by 
coronary arterial bypass graft: past, present, and future. Curr 
Probl Cardiol. 2011;36:325-368.
16.	Crea F, Liuzzo G. Pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61(1):1-11. 
17.	Fuster V, Badimon L, Badimon JJ, Chesebro JH. The patho-
genesis of coronary artery disease and the acute coronary syn-
dromes (1). N Engl J Med. 1992;326:242-250.
18.	Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK. Progress and chal-
lenges in translating the biology of atherosclerosis. Nature. 
2011;473:317-325.
19.	Smith SC Jr., Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines 
for secondary prevention for patients with coronary and other 
atherosclerotic vascular disease: 2006 update: endorsed by 
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Circulation. 
2006;113:2363-2373.
20.	Gibbons RJ, Chatterjee K, Daley J, et al. ACC/AHA/ACP-
ASIM guidelines for the management of patients with chronic 
stable angina: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines (Committee on Management of Patients With Chronic 
Stable Angina). J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:2092-2197.
21.	Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA 
Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology Founda-
tion/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2011;124:e652-e735.
22.	Hannan EL, Racz MJ, Walford G, et al. Long-term outcomes 
of coronary-artery bypass grafting versus stent implantation. 
N Engl J Med. 2005;352:2174-2183.
23.	Booth J, Clayton T, Pepper J, et al. Randomized, controlled 
trial of coronary artery bypass surgery versus percutaneous 
coronary intervention in patients with multivessel coronary 
artery disease: six-year follow-up from the Stent or Surgery 
Trial (SoS). Circulation. 2008;118:381-388.
24.	Serruys PW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Percutane-
ous coronary intervention versus coronary-artery bypass 
grafting for severe coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:961-972.
25.	Weintraub WS, Grau-Sepulveda MV, Weiss JM, et al. Com-
parative effectiveness of revascularization strategies. N Engl 
J Med. 2012;366:1467-1476.
26.	Tatoulis J, Buxton BF, Fuller JA. Patencies of 2127 arte-
rial to coronary conduits over 15 years. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;77:93-101.
27.	Goldman S, Zadina K, Moritz T, et al. Long-term patency of 
saphenous vein and left internal mammary artery grafts after 
coronary artery bypass surgery: results from a Department 
of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2004;44:2149-2156.
28.	Dorman MJ, Kurlansky PA, Traad EA, Galbut DL, Zucker M, 
Ebra G. Bilateral internal mammary artery grafting enhances 
survival in diabetic patients: a 30-year follow-up of propensity 
score-matched cohorts. Circulation. 2012;126:2935-2942.
29.	Kelly R, Buth KJ, Legare JF. Bilateral internal thoracic artery 
grafting is superior to other forms of multiple arterial grafting 
in providing survival benefit after coronary bypass surgery. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:1408-1415.
30.	Athanasiou T, Saso S, Rao C, et al. Radial artery versus saphe-
nous vein conduits for coronary artery bypass surgery: forty 
years of competition–which conduit offers better patency? 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2011;40:208-220.
31.	Collins P, Webb CM, Chong CF, Moat NE. Radial artery ver-
sus saphenous vein patency randomized trial: five-year angio-
graphic follow-up. Circulation. 2008;117:2859-2864.
32.	Zacharias A, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, Durham SJ, Shah 
AS, Habib RH. Late results of conventional versus all-arterial 
revascularization based on internal thoracic and radial artery 
grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:19-26 e2.
33.	Zacharias A, Habib RH, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, Durham 
SJ, Shah A. Improved survival with radial artery versus vein 
conduits in coronary bypass surgery with left internal thoracic 
artery to left anterior descending artery grafting. Circulation. 
2004;109:1489-1496.
34.	Caracciolo EA, Davis KB, Sopko G, et al. Comparison of sur-
gical and medical group survival in patients with left main 
equivalent coronary artery disease. Long-term CASS experi-
ence. Circulation. 1995;91:2335-2344.
35.	Grover FL, Hammermeister KE, Burchfiel C. Initial report of 
the Veterans Administration Preoperative Risk Assessment 
Study for Cardiac Surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 1990;50:12-26; 
discussion 7-8.
36.	Yusuf S, Zucker D, Peduzzi P, et al. Effect of coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery on survival: overview of 10-year results 
from randomised trials by the Coronary Artery Bypass Graft 
Surgery Trialists Collaboration. Lancet. 1994;344:563-570.
37.	De Lorenzo A, Tura B, Bassan F, Pittella F, Rocha AS. Out-
comes of patients with left main coronary artery disease under-
going medical or surgical treatment: a propensity-matched 
analysis. Coron Artery Dis. 2011;22:585-589.
38.	Influence of diabetes on 5-year mortality and morbidity in a 
randomized trial comparing CABG and PTCA in patients with 
multivessel disease: the Bypass Angioplasty Revasculariza-
tion Investigation (BARI). Circulation. 1997;96:1761-1769.
39.	Jones RH, Kesler K, Phillips HR  III, et al. Long-term 
survival benefits of coronary artery bypass grafting and 
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in patients with coro-
nary artery disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111: 
1013-1025.
40.	ElBardissi AW, Aranki SF, Sheng S, O’Brien SM, Greenberg 
CC, Gammie JS. Trends in isolated coronary artery bypass 
grafting: an analysis of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 
adult cardiac surgery database. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;143:273-281.
41.	Nery RM, Martini MR, Vidor Cda R, et al. Changes in 
functional capacity of patients two years after coronary 
artery bypass grafting surgery. Rev Bras Cir Cardiovasc. 
2010;25:224-228.
42.	Herlitz J, Brandrup-Wognsen G, Caidahl K, et al. Symptoms 
of chest pain and dyspnea and factors associated with chest 
pain and dyspnea 10 years after coronary artery bypass graft-
ing. Am Heart J. 2008;156:580-587.
43.	Angelini GD, Taylor FC, Reeves BC, Ascione R. Early and 
midterm outcome after off-pump and on-pump surgery in 
778
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Beating Heart Against Cardioplegic Arrest Studies (BHACAS 
1 and 2): a pooled analysis of two randomised controlled tri-
als. Lancet. 2002;359:1194-1199.
44.	Lemma MG, Coscioni E, Tritto FP, et al. On-pump versus 
off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery in high-risk patients: 
operative results of a prospective randomized trial (on-off 
study). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143:625-631.
45.	Mack MJ, Brown P, Houser F, et al. On-pump versus off-pump 
coronary artery bypass surgery in a matched sample of women: 
a comparison of outcomes. Circulation. 2004;110:II1-II6.
46.	Hu S, Zheng Z, Yuan X, et al. Increasing long-term major vas-
cular events and resource consumption in patients receiving 
off-pump coronary artery bypass: a single-center prospective 
observational study. Circulation. 2010;121:1800-1808.
47.	Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al. Off-pump or 
on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting at 30 days. N Engl J 
Med. 2012;366:1489-1497.
48.	Hattler B, Messenger JC, Shroyer AL, et al. Off-Pump 
coronary artery bypass surgery is associated with worse 
arterial and saphenous vein graft patency and less effec-
tive revascularization: Results from the Veterans Affairs 
Randomized On/Off Bypass (ROOBY) trial. Circulation 
2012;125:2827-2835.
49.	Hannan EL, Wu C, Smith CR, et al. Off-pump versus on-pump 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: differences in short-term 
outcomes and in long-term mortality and need for subsequent 
revascularization. Circulation. 2007;116:1145-1152.
50.	Hueb W, Lopes NH, Pereira AC, et al. Five-year follow-up 
of a randomized comparison between off-pump and on-pump 
stable multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting. The 
MASS III Trial. Circulation. 2010;122:S48-S52.
51.	Widimsky P, Straka Z, Stros P, et al. One-year coronary 
bypass graft patency: a randomized comparison between 
off-pump and on-pump surgery angiographic results of the 
PRAGUE-4 trial. Circulation. 2004;110:3418-3423.
52.	Puskas JD, Williams WH, O’Donnell R, et al. Off-pump and 
on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting are associated with 
similar graft patency, myocardial ischemia, and freedom from 
reintervention: long-term follow-up of a randomized trial. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2011;91:1836-1842; discussion 1842-1843.
53.	Sellke FW, DiMaio JM, Caplan LR, et al. Comparing on-
pump and off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting: numer-
ous studies but few conclusions: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association council on cardiovascular 
surgery and anesthesia in collaboration with the interdisciplin-
ary working group on quality of care and outcomes research. 
Circulation. 2005;111:2858-2864.
54.	Lichtenberg A, Klima U, Paeschke H, et al. Impact of multi-
vessel coronary artery disease on outcome after isolated mini-
mally invasive bypass grafting of the left anterior descending 
artery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78:487-491.
55.	Hong SJ, Lim DS, Seo HS, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention with drug-eluting stent implantation vs. minimally 
invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB) in patients 
with left anterior descending coronary artery stenosis. Cath-
eter Cardiovasc Interv. 2005;64:75-81.
56.	 Jaffery Z, Kowalski M, Weaver WD, Khanal S. A meta-analysis 
of randomized control trials comparing minimally invasive 
direct coronary bypass grafting versus percutaneous coronary 
intervention for stenosis of the proximal left anterior descend-
ing artery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2007;31:691-697.
57.	Ben-Gal Y, Mohr R, Braunstein R, et al. Revascularization of 
left anterior descending artery with drug-eluting stents: com-
parison with minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass 
surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:2067-2071.
58.	Acharya MN, Ashrafian H, Athanasiou T, Casula R. Is totally 
endoscopic coronary artery bypass safe, feasible and effec-
tive? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2012;15:1040-1046.
59.	Bonatti J, Schachner T, Bonaros N, et al. Effectiveness and 
safety of total endoscopic left internal mammary artery bypass 
graft to the left anterior descending artery. Am J Cardiol. 
2009;104:1684-1688.
60.	Srivastava S, Gadasalli S, Agusala M, et al. Beating heart 
totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2010;89:1873-1879; discussion 1879-1880.
61.	Reicher B, Poston RS, Mehra MR, et al. Simultaneous 
“hybrid” percutaneous coronary intervention and minimally 
invasive surgical bypass grafting: feasibility, safety, and clini-
cal outcomes. Am Heart J. 2008;155:661-667.
62.	Holzhey DM, Jacobs S, Mochalski M, et al. Minimally inva-
sive hybrid coronary artery revascularization. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2008;86:1856-1860.
63.	Katz MR, Van Praet F, de Canniere D, et al. Integrated coro-
nary revascularization: percutaneous coronary intervention 
plus robotic totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass. 
Circulation. 2006;114:I473-I476.
64.	Briones E, Lacalle JR, Marin I. Transmyocardial laser revas-
cularization versus medical therapy for refractory angina. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD003712.
65.	Allen KB, Dowling RD, Schuch DR, et al. Adjunctive 
transmyocardial revascularization: five-year follow-up of a 
prospective, randomized trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78: 
458-465; discussion-65.
66.	Bridges CR, Horvath KA, Nugent WC, et al. The Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series: transmyocardial 
laser revascularization. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:1494-1502.
67.	Henry TD, Annex BH, McKendall GR, et al. The VIVA trial: 
Vascular endothelial growth factor in Ischemia for Vascular 
Angiogenesis. Circulation. 2003;107:1359-1365.
68.	Simons M, Annex BH, Laham RJ, et al. Pharmacological 
treatment of coronary artery disease with recombinant fibro-
blast growth factor-2: double-blind, randomized, controlled 
clinical trial. Circulation. 2002;105:788-793.
69.	O’Brien SM, Shahian DM, Filardo G, et al. The Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons 2008 cardiac surgery risk models: 
part 2–isolated valve surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88: 
S23-S42.
70.	Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, et al. 2008 focused 
update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines 
for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
(Writing Committee to revise the 1998 guidelines for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease). 
Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiolo-
gists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Inter-
ventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;52:e1-e142.
71.	Rosendaal FR. The Scylla and Charybdis of oral anticoagulant 
treatment. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:587-589.
72.	Bloomfield P. Choice of heart valve prosthesis. Heart. 
2002;87:583-589.
73.	Hammermeister K, Sethi GK, Henderson WG, Grover FL, 
Oprian C, Rahimtoola SH. Outcomes 15 years after valve 
replacement with a mechanical versus a bioprosthetic valve: 
final report of the Veterans Affairs randomized trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:1152-1158.
74.	Butchart EG, Payne N, Li HH, Buchan K, Mandana K, 
Grunkemeier GL. Better anticoagulation control improves 
survival after valve replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;123:715-723.
75.	Pibarot P, Dumesnil JG, Jobin J, Cartier P, Honos G, Durand 
LG. Hemodynamic and physical performance during maximal 
exercise in patients with an aortic bioprosthetic valve: com-
parison of stentless versus stented bioprostheses. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1999;34:1609-1617.
779
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
76.	Fries R, Wendler O, Schieffer H, Schafers HJ. Comparative 
rest and exercise hemodynamics of 23-mm stentless ver-
sus 23-mm stented aortic bioprostheses. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2000;69:817-822.
77.	Ross DN. Homograft replacement of the aortic valve. Lancet. 
1962;2:487.
78.	Anguera I, Miro JM, San Roman JA, et al. Periannular com-
plications in infective endocarditis involving prosthetic aortic 
valves. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98:1261-1268.
79.	Vogt F, Kowert A, Beiras-Fernandez A, et al. Pulmonary 
homografts for aortic valve replacement: long-term compari-
son with aortic grafts. Heart Surg Forum. 2011;14:E237-E241.
80.	Ross DN. Replacement of aortic and mitral valves with a pul-
monary autograft. Lancet. 1967;2:956-958.
81.	Gerosa G, McKay R, Davies J, Ross DN. Comparison of the 
aortic homograft and the pulmonary autograft for aortic valve 
or root replacement in children. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1991;102:51-60; discussion-61.
82.	David TE, Uden DE, Strauss HD. The importance of the mitral 
apparatus in left ventricular function after correction of mitral 
regurgitation. Circulation. 1983;68:II76-II82.
83.	Enriquez-Sarano M, Schaff HV, Orszulak TA, Tajik AJ, 
Bailey KR, Frye RL. Valve repair improves the outcome 
of surgery for mitral regurgitation. A multivariate analysis. 
Circulation. 1995;91:1022-1028.
84.	David TE, Armstrong S, McCrindle BW, Manlhiot C. Late 
outcomes of mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation due to 
degenerative disease. Circulation. 2013;127:1485-1492.
85.	Pfannmueller B, Verevkin A, Borger MA, et al. Role of tri-
cuspid valve repair for moderate tricuspid regurgitation during 
minimally invasive mitral valve surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2013;61(5):386-391.
86.	Roberts WC, Perloff JK. Mitral valvular disease. A clinico-
pathologic survey of the conditions causing the mitral valve 
to function abnormally. Ann Intern Med. 1972;77:939-975.
87.	Hugenholtz PG, Ryan TJ, Stein SW, Abelmann WH. The 
spectrum of pure mitral stenosis. Hemodynamic studies in 
relation to clinical disability. Am J Cardiol. 1962;10:773-784.
88.	Snopek G, Pogorzelska H, Rywik TM, Browarek A, Janas 
J, Korewicki J. Usefulness of endothelin-1 concentration in 
capillary blood in patients with mitral stenosis as a predictor 
of regression of pulmonary hypertension after mitral valve 
replacement or valvuloplasty. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:188-189.
89.	Gorlin R. The mechanism of the signs and symptoms of mitral 
valve disease. BrHeart J.1954;16:375-380.
90.	Martin RP, Rakowski H, Kleiman JH, Beaver W, London E, 
Popp RL. Reliability and reproducibility of two dimensional 
echocardiograph measurement of the stenotic mitral valve ori-
fice area. Am J Cardiol. 1979;43:560-568.
91.	Cheriex EC, Pieters FA, Janssen JH, de Swart H, Palmans-
Meulemans A. Value of exercise Doppler-echocardiogra-
phy in patients with mitral stenosis. Int J Cardiol. 1994;45: 
219-226.
92.	Enriquez-Sarano M, Akins CW, Vahanian A. Mitral regurgita-
tion. Lancet. 2009;373:1382-1394.
93.	Carpentier A. Cardiac valve surgery–the “French correction.” 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1983;86:323-337.
94.	Zile MR, Gaasch WH, Carroll JD, Levine HJ. Chronic mitral 
regurgitation: predictive value of preoperative echocardio-
graphic indexes of left ventricular function and wall stress. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3:235-242.
95.	Castello R, Fagan L Jr., Lenzen P, Pearson AC, Labovitz AJ. 
Comparison of transthoracic and transesophageal echocar-
diography for assessment of left-sided valvular regurgitation. 
Am J Cardiol. 1991;68:1677-1680.
96.	Enriquez-Sarano M, Avierinos JF, Messika-Zeitoun D, et al. 
Quantitative determinants of the outcome of asymptomatic 
mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:875-883.
97.	Picano E, Pibarot P, Lancellotti P, Monin JL, Bonow RO. The 
emerging role of exercise testing and stress echocardiography in 
valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:2251-2260.
98.	Reichart DT, Sodian R, Zenker R, Klinner W, Schmitz C, 
Reichart B. Long-term (≤ 50 years) results of patients after 
mitral valve commissurotomy—a single-center experience. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143:S96-S98.
99.	Choudhary SK, Dhareshwar J, Govil A, Airan B, Kumar AS. 
Open mitral commissurotomy in the current era: indications, 
technique, and results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:41-46.
100.	Mohty D, Orszulak TA, Schaff HV, Avierinos JF, Tajik JA, 
Enriquez-Sarano M. Very long-term survival and durability 
of mitral valve repair for mitral valve prolapse. Circulation. 
2001;104:I1-I7.
101.	Vassileva CM, Mishkel G, McNeely C, et al. Long-term sur-
vival of patients undergoing mitral valve repair and replace-
ment: a longitudinal analysis of Medicare fee-for-service 
beneficiaries. Circulation. 2013;127(18):1870-1876.
102.	Khan SS, Trento A, DeRobertis M, et al. Twenty-year com-
parison of tissue and mechanical valve replacement. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122:257-269.
103.	Gillinov AM, Cosgrove DM. Mitral valve repair for degenera-
tive disease. J Heart Valve Dis. 2002;11 Suppl 1:S15-S20.
104.	Fucci C, Sandrelli L, Pardini A, Torracca L, Ferrari M, Alfieri 
O. Improved results with mitral valve repair using new sur-
gical techniques. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1995;9:621-626 
discuss 626-627.
105.	Castillo JG, Anyanwu AC, El-Eshmawi A, Adams DH. All 
anterior and bileaflet mitral valve prolapses are repairable in 
the modern era of reconstructive surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2013. 
106.	Braunberger E, Deloche A, Berrebi A, et al. Very long-term 
results (more than 20 years) of valve repair with carpen-
tier’s techniques in nonrheumatic mitral valve insufficiency. 
Circulation. 2001;104:I8-I11.
107.	O’Brien KD. Pathogenesis of calcific aortic valve disease: a 
disease process comes of age (and a good deal more). Arterio-
scler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006;26:1721-1728.
108.	Murakami T, Hess OM, Gage JE, Grimm J, Krayenbuehl HP. 
Diastolic filling dynamics in patients with aortic stenosis. 
Circulation. 1986;73:1162-1174.
109.	Gunther S, Grossman W. Determinants of ventricular func-
tion in pressure-overload hypertrophy in man. Circulation. 
1979;59:679-688.
110.	Marcus ML, Doty DB, Hiratzka LF, Wright CB, Eastham CL. 
Decreased coronary reserve: a mechanism for angina pectoris 
in patients with aortic stenosis and normal coronary arteries. 
N Engl J Med. 1982;307:1362-1366.
111.	Gaasch WH, Zile MR, Hoshino PK, Weinberg EO, Rhodes 
DR, Apstein CS. Tolerance of the hypertrophic heart to isch-
emia. Studies in compensated and failing dog hearts with pres-
sure overload hypertrophy. Circulation. 1990;81:1644-1653.
112.	Orsinelli DA, Aurigemma GP, Battista S, Krendel S, Gaasch 
WH. Left ventricular hypertrophy and mortality after aortic 
valve replacement for aortic stenosis. A high risk subgroup 
identified by preoperative relative wall thickness. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1993;22:1679-1683.
113.	Khawaja MZ, Sohal M, Valli H, et al. Standalone balloon 
aortic valvuloplasty: indications and outcomes from the UK 
in the transcatheter valve era. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2013;81:366-373.
114.	Roberts WC, Ko JM, Moore TR, Jones WH III. Causes of pure 
aortic regurgitation in patients having isolated aortic valve 
replacement at a single US tertiary hospital (1993 to 2005). 
Circulation. 2006;114:422-429.
115.	Grossman W, Jones D, McLaurin LP. Wall stress and pat-
terns of hypertrophy in the human left ventricle. J Clin Invest. 
1975;56:56-64.
780
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
116.	Ross J Jr., McCullagh WH. Nature of enhanced performance 
of the dilated left ventricle in the dog during chronic volume 
overloading. Circ Res. 1972;30:549-556.
117.	Wisenbaugh T, Spann JF, Carabello BA. Differences in myo-
cardial performance and load between patients with similar 
amounts of chronic aortic versus chronic mitral regurgitation. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3:916-923.
118.	Ross J Jr. Afterload mismatch in aortic and mitral valve dis-
ease: implications for surgical therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1985;5:811-826.
119.	Nienaber CA, von Kodolitsch Y, Nicolas V, et al. The diag-
nosis of thoracic aortic dissection by noninvasive imaging 
procedures. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:1-9.
120.	Smith MD, Cassidy JM, Souther S, et al. Transesophageal 
echocardiography in the diagnosis of traumatic rupture of the 
aorta. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:356-362.
121.	Sasaki Y, Hirai H, Hosono M, et al. Adding coronary artery 
bypass grafting to aortic valve replacement increases opera-
tive mortality for elderly (70 years and older) patients with 
aortic stenosis. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013.
122.	de Kerchove L, Boodhwani M, Glineur D, et al. Valve 
sparing-root replacement http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed?term=Glineur%20D%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true
&cauthor_uid=21955470with the reimplantation technique to 
increase the durability of bicuspid aortic valve repair. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142:1430-1438.
123.	El Khoury G, de Kerchove L. Principles of aortic valve repair. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:S26.
124.	Mokhles MM, Rizopoulos D, Andrinopoulou ER, et al. 
Autograft and pulmonary allograft performance in the sec-
ond post-operative decade after the Ross procedure: insights 
from the Rotterdam Prospective Cohort Study. EurHeart J. 
2012;33:2213-2224
125.	Chambers JC, Somerville J, Stone S, Ross DN. Pulmonary 
autograft procedure for aortic valve disease: long-term results 
of the pioneer series. Circulation. 1997;96:2206-2214.
126.	Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et al. Transcatheter aortic-
valve implantation for aortic stenosis in patients who cannot 
undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1597-1607.
127.	Smith CR, Leon MB, Mack MJ, et al. Transcatheter versus 
surgical aortic-valve replacement in high-risk patients. N Engl J 
Med. 2011;364:2187-2198.
128.	Shinn SH, Schaff HV. Evidence-based surgical manage-
ment of acquired tricuspid valve disease. Nat Rev Cardiol. 
2013;10:190-203.
129.	Galloway AC, Grossi EA, Baumann FG, et al. Multiple valve 
operation for advanced valvular heart disease: results and risk 
factors in 513 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:725-732.
130.	Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. 2009 focused update 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diag-
nosis and Management of Heart Failure in Adults: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines: devel-
oped in collaboration with the International Society for Heart 
and Lung Transplantation. Circulation. 2009;119:e391-e479.
131.	Kilic A, Ailawadi G. Left ventricular assist devices in heart 
failure. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2012;10:649-656.
132.	Harper AM, Rosendale JD. The UNOS OPTN Waiting List 
and Donor Registry: 1988-1996. Clin Transpl. 1996:69-90.
133.	Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and 
stroke statistics—2013 update:areport from the American 
Heart Association. 2012;e6-e245.
134.	Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long-term trends in 
the incidence of and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 
2002;347:1397-1402.
135.	Jones RH, Velazquez EJ, Michler RE, et al. Coronary bypass 
surgery with or without surgical ventricular reconstruction. 
N Engl J Med. 2009;360:1705-1717.
136.	McGee EC Jr., McCarthy PM. Do patients with heart failure 
benefit from coronary artery bypass grafting? Curr Opin 
Cardiol. 2012;27:629-633.
137.	Allman KC, Shaw LJ, Hachamovitch R, Udelson JE. Myo-
cardial viability testing and impact of revascularization on 
prognosis in patients with coronary artery disease and left 
ventricular dysfunction: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2002;39:1151-1158.
138.	Chareonthaitawee P, Gersh BJ, Araoz PA, Gibbons RJ. Revas-
cularization in severe left ventricular dysfunction: the role of 
viability testing. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:567-574.
139.	Gerber BL, Rousseau MF, Ahn SA, et al. Prognostic value of 
myocardial viability by delayed-enhanced magnetic resonance 
in patients with coronary artery disease and low ejection frac-
tion: impact of revascularization therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:825-835.
140.	Langenburg SE, Buchanan SA, Blackbourne LH, et al. Pre-
dicting survival after coronary revascularization for ischemic 
cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60:1193-1196; 
discussion 1196-1197.
141.	Yamaguchi A, Ino T, Adachi H, et al. Left ventricular volume 
predicts postoperative course in patients with ischemic cardio-
myopathy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;65:434-438.
142.	Penicka M, Bartunek J, Lang O, et al. Severe left ventricu-
lar dyssynchrony is associated with poor prognosis in patients 
with moderate systolic heart failure undergoing coronary artery 
bypass grafting. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1315-1323.
143.	Ciarka A, Van de Veire N. Secondary mitral regurgita-
tion: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Heart. 
2011;97:1012-1023.
144.	Grigioni F, Enriquez-Sarano M, Zehr KJ, Bailey KR, Tajik 
AJ. Ischemic mitral regurgitation: long-term outcome and 
prognostic implications with quantitative Doppler assessment. 
Circulation. 2001;103:1759-1764.
145.	Trichon BH, Felker GM, Shaw LK, Cabell CH, O’Connor 
CM. Relation of frequency and severity of mitral regurgita-
tion to survival among patients with left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction and heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91:538-543.
146.	Ellis SG, Whitlow PL, Raymond RE, Schneider JP. Impact of 
mitral regurgitation on long-term survival after percutaneous 
coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:315-318.
147.	Vahanian A, Baumgartner H, Bax J, et al. Guidelines on the 
management of valvular heart disease: The Task Force on the 
Management of Valvular Heart Disease of the European Soci-
ety of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:230-268.
148.	DiDonato M, Sabatier M, Dor V, Buckberg G. Ventricular 
arrhythmias after LV remodelling: surgical ventricular resto-
ration or ICD? Heart Fail Rev. 2004;9:299-306; discussion 
347-351.
149.	Mihaljevic T, Lam BK, Rajeswaran J, et al. Impact of mitral 
valve annuloplasty combined with revascularization in 
patients with functional ischemic mitral regurgitation. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:2191-2201.
150.	Wu AH, Aaronson KD, Bolling SF, Pagani FD, Welch K, 
Koelling TM. Impact of mitral valve annuloplasty on mortal-
ity risk in patients with mitral regurgitation and left ventricular 
systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:381-387.
151.	Acker MA, Bolling S, Shemin R, et al. Mitral valve surgery in 
heart failure: insights from the Acorn Clinical Trial. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;132:568-577:77 e1-e4.
152.	McGee EC, Gillinov AM, Blackstone EH, et al. Recur-
rent mitral regurgitation after annuloplasty for functional 
ischemic mitral regurgitation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;128:916-924.
153.	Bax JJ, Braun J, Somer ST, et al. Restrictive annuloplasty 
and coronary revascularization in ischemic mitral regurgita-
tion results in reverse left ventricular remodeling. Circulation. 
2004;110:II103-II108.
781
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
154.	Bogaert J, Maes A, Van de Werf F, et al. Functional recovery 
of subepicardial myocardial tissue in transmural myocardial 
infarction after successful reperfusion: an important contribu-
tion to the improvement of regional and global left ventricular 
function. Circulation. 1999;99:36-43.
155.	Dor V, Sabatier M, Montiglio F, Civaia F, DiDonato M. 
Endoventricular patch reconstruction of ischemic failing ven-
tricle. A single center with 20 years experience. Advantages 
of magnetic resonance imaging assessment. Heart Fail Rev. 
2004;9:269-286.
156.	Fenoglio JJ Jr. Pham TD, Harken AH, Horowitz LN, Joseph-
son ME, Wit AL. Recurrent sustained ventricular tachycardia: 
structure and ultrastructure of subendocardial regions in which 
tachycardia originates. Circulation. 1983;68:518-533.
157.	Scherlag BJ, el-Sherif N, Hope R, Lazzara R. Characteriza-
tion and localization of ventricular arrhythmias resulting 
from myocardial ischemia and infarction. Circ Res. 1974;35: 
372-383.
158.	Koilpillai C, Quinones MA, Greenberg B, et al. Relation of 
ventricular size and function to heart failure status and ven-
tricular dysrhythmia in patients with severe left ventricular 
dysfunction. Am J Cardiol. 1996;77:606-611.
159.	Hassapoyannes CA, Stuck LM, Hornung CA, Berbin MC, 
Flowers NC. Effect of left ventricular aneurysm on risk of 
sudden and nonsudden cardiac death. Am J Cardiol. 1991;67: 
454-459.
160.	Sartipy U, Albage A, Lindblom D. Improved health-related 
quality of life and functional status after surgical ventricular 
restoration. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:1381-1387.
161.	Isomura T. Surgical left ventricular reconstruction. Gen 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;59:315-325.
162.	Maxey TS, Reece TB, Ellman PI, et al. Coronary artery bypass 
with ventricular restoration is superior to coronary artery 
bypass alone in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:428-434.
163.	Mickleborough LL, Merchant N, Ivanov J, Rao V, Carson S. 
Left ventricular reconstruction: Early and late results. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128:27-37.
164.	Athanasuleas CL, Buckberg GD, Stanley AW, et al. Surgi-
cal ventricular restoration: the RESTORE Group experience. 
Heart Fail Rev. 2004;9:287-297.
165.	Dor V, Sabatier M, Montiglio F, Rossi P, Toso A, Di Donato 
M. Results of nonguided subtotal endocardiectomy associ-
ated with left ventricular reconstruction in patients with isch-
emic ventricular arrhythmias. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1994;107:1301-1307; discussion 1307-1308.
166.	Sartipy U, Albage A, Straat E, Insulander P, Lindblom D. 
Surgery for ventricular tachycardia in patients undergoing left 
ventricular reconstruction by the Dor procedure. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2006;81:65-71.
167.	Matthias Bechtel JF, Tolg R, Graf B, et al. High incidence of 
sudden death late after anterior LV-aneurysm repair. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2004;25:807-811.
168.	O’Neill JO, Starling RC, Khaykin Y, et al. Residual high 
incidence of ventricular arrhythmias after left ventricu-
lar reconstructive surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2005;130:1250-1256.
169.	Buckberg GD, Athanasuleas CL. The STICH trial: mis-
guided conclusions. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138: 
1060-1064e2.
170.	Dor V, Civaia F, Alexandrescu C, Sabatier M, Montiglio 
F. Favorable effects of left ventricular reconstruction in 
patients excluded from the Surgical Treatments for Isch-
emic Heart Failure (STICH) trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2011;141:905-916, 16 e1-e4.
171.	Kang N, Edwards M, Larbalestier R. Preoperative intraaortic 
balloon pumps in high-risk patients undergoing open heart 
surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72:54-57.
172.	Meharwal ZS, Trehan N. Vascular complications of intra-
aortic balloon insertion in patients undergoing coronary reavs-
cularization: analysis of 911 cases. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2002;21:741-747.
173.	Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, et al. Third INTER-
MACS Annual Report: the evolution of destination therapy 
in the United States. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011;30: 
115-123.
174.	Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Long-term use of 
a left ventricular assist device for end-stage heart failure. N 
Engl J Med. 2001;345:1435-1443.
175.	Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, et al. Long-term mechani-
cal circulatory support (destination therapy): on track to com-
pete with heart transplantation? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;144:584-603; discussion 597-598.
176.	Maybaum S, Mancini D, Xydas S, et al. Cardiac improve-
ment during mechanical circulatory support: a prospective 
multicenter study of the LVAD Working Group. Circulation. 
2007;115:2497-2505.
177.	Lamarche Y, Kearns M, Josan K, et al. Successful weaning 
and explantation of the Heartmate II left ventricular assist 
device. Can J Cardiol. 2011;27:358-362.
178.	Birks EJ, George RS, Hedger M, et al. Reversal of severe heart 
failure with a continuous-flow left ventricular assist device 
and pharmacological therapy: a prospective study. Circulation. 
2011;123:381-390.
179.	Birks EJ, Tansley PD, Hardy J, et al. Left ventricular assist 
device and drug therapy for the reversal of heart failure. N Engl 
J Med. 2006;355:1873-1884.
180.	Chugh AR, Beache GM, Loughran JH, et al. Administration 
of cardiac stem cells in patients with ischemic cardiomyopa-
thy: the SCIPIO trial: surgical aspects and interim analysis 
of myocardial function and viability by magnetic resonance. 
Circulation. 2012;126:S54-S64.
181.	Hare JM, Fishman JE, Gerstenblith G, et al. Comparison of 
allogeneic vs. autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells delivered by transendocardial injection in patients 
with ischemic cardiomyopathy: the POSEIDON randomized 
trial. JAMA. 2012;308:2369-2379.
182.	Miller LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, et al. Use of a continuous-
flow device in patients awaiting heart transplantation. N Engl 
J Med. 2007;357:885-896.
183.	Frazier OH, Rose EA, Oz MC, et al. Multicenter clinical eval-
uation of the HeartMate vented electric left ventricular assist 
system in patients awaiting heart transplantation. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122:1186-1195.
184.	Aaronson KD, Slaughter MS, Miller LW, et al. Use of 
an intrapericardial, continuous-flow, centrifugal pump in 
patients awaiting heart transplantation. Circulation. 2012;125: 
3191-3200.
185.	John R, Pagani FD, Naka Y, et al. Post-cardiac transplant 
survival after support with a continuous-flow left ventricu-
lar assist device: impact of duration of left ventricular assist 
device support and other variables. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2010;140:174-181.
186.	Pal JD, Piacentino V, Cuevas AD, et al. Impact of left ven-
tricular assist device bridging on posttransplant outcomes. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2009;88:1457-1461; discussion 1461.
187.	Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, et al. Advanced heart 
failure treated with continuous-flow left ventricular assist 
device. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:2241-2251.
188.	John R, Liao K, Kamdar F, Eckman P, Boyle A, Colvin-
Adams M. Effects on pre- and posttransplant pulmonary 
hemodynamics in patients with continuous-flow left ven-
tricular assist devices. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140: 
447-452.
189.	Kormos RL, Teuteberg JJ, Pagani FD, et al. Right ventricular 
failure in patients with the HeartMate II continuous-flow left 
782
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
ventricular assist device: incidence, risk factors, and effect on 
outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139:1316-1324.
190.	Neragi-Miandoab S. A ventricular assist device as a bridge to 
recovery, decision making, or transplantation in patients with 
advanced cardiac failure. Surg Today. 2012;42:917-926.
191.	Copeland JG, Smith RG, Arabia FA, et al. Cardiac replace-
ment with a total artificial heart as a bridge to transplantation. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;351:859-867.
192.	El-Hamamsy I, Jacques F, Perrault LP, et al. Results follow-
ing implantation of mechanical circulatory support systems: 
the Montreal Heart Institute experience. The Can J Cardiol. 
2009;25:107-110.
193.	Meyer A, Slaughter M. The total artificial heart. Panminerva 
Med. 2011;53:141-154.
194.	Gammie JS, Haddad M, Milford-Beland S, et al. Atrial fibril-
lation correction surgery: lessons from the Society of Tho-
racic Surgeons National Cardiac Database. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;85:909-914.
195.	Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, et al. 2012 HRS/EHRA/
ECAS expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical 
ablation of atrial fibrillation: recommendations for patient 
selection, procedural techniques, patient management and 
follow-up, definitions, endpoints, and research trial design. 
Heart Rhythm 2012;(4):632-696 e21.
196.	Hart RG, Halperin JL. Atrial fibrillation and thromboembo-
lism: a decade of progress in stroke prevention. Ann Intern 
Med. 1999;131:688-695.
197.	Zimetbaum P. Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for atrial fibrilla-
tion. Circulation. 2012;125:381-389.
198.	Corley SD, Epstein AE, DiMarco JP, et al. Relationships 
between sinus rhythm, treatment, and survival in the Atrial 
Fibrillation Follow-Up Investigation of Rhythm Management 
(AFFIRM) Study. Circulation. 2004;109:1509-1513.
199.	Cox JL, Ad N, Palazzo T. Impact of the maze procedure on the 
stroke rate in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 1999;118:833-840.
200.	Feinberg MS, Waggoner AD, Kater KM, Cox JL, Lindsay 
BD, Perez JE. Restoration of atrial function after the maze 
procedure for patients with atrial fibrillation. Assessment by 
Doppler echocardiography. Circulation. 1994;90:II285-II292.
201.	Weimar T, Bailey MS, Watanabe Y, et al. The Cox-maze 
IV procedure for lone atrial fibrillation: a single center 
experience in 100 consecutive patients. J Interv Card 
Electrophysiol. 2011;31:47-54.
202.	Damiano RJ Jr., Schwartz FH, Bailey MS, et al. The Cox maze 
IV procedure: predictors of late recurrence. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2011;141:113-121.
203.	Lall SC, Melby SJ, Voeller RK, et al. The effect of ablation 
technology on surgical outcomes after the Cox-maze pro-
cedure: a propensity analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;133:389-396.
204.	Pet M, Robertson JO, Bailey M, et al. The impact of 
CHADS(2) score on late stroke after the Cox maze procedure. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(1):85-9.
205.	Bleeding during antithrombotic therapy in patients with atrial 
fibrillation. The Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Inves-
tigators. Arch Intern Med. 1996;156:409-416.
206.	Barnett SD, Ad N. Surgical ablation as treatment for the elimi-
nation of atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2006;131:1029-1035.
207.	Schuessler RB, Kay MW, Melby SJ, Branham BH, Boineau 
JP, Damiano RJ Jr. Spatial and temporal stability of the 
dominant frequency of activation in human atrial fibrillation. 
J Electrocardiol. 2006;39:S7-S12.
208.	Edgerton JR, Edgerton ZJ, Weaver T, et al. Minimally inva-
sive pulmonary vein isolation and partial autonomic denerva-
tion for surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2008;86:35-38; discussion 39.
209.	Boersma LV, Castella M, van Boven W, et al. Atrial fibril-
lation catheter ablation versus surgical ablation treatment 
(FAST): a 2-center randomized clinical trial. Circulation. 
2012;125:23-30.
210.	Imazio M, Trinchero R. Clinical management of acute peri-
cardial disease: a review of results and outcomes. Ital Heart 
J. 2004;5:803-817.
211.	Launbjerg J, Fruergaard P, Hesse B, Jorgensen F, Elsborg L, 
Petri A. Long-term risk of death, cardiac events, and recurrent 
chest pain in patients with acute chest pain of different origin. 
Cardiology. 1996;87:60-66.
212.	Dudzinski DM, Mak GS, Hung JW. Pericardial diseases. Curr 
Probl Cardiol. 2012;37:75-118.
213.	Lange RA, Hillis LD. Clinical practice. Acute pericarditis. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2195-2202.
214.	Spodick DH. Acute pericarditis: current concepts and practice. 
JAMA. 2003;289:1150-1153.
215.	Imazio M, Demichelis B, Parrini I, et al. Day-hospital treat-
ment of acute pericarditis: a management program for outpa-
tient therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1042-1046.
216.	Bruce MA, Spodick DH. Atypical electrocardiogram in acute 
pericarditis: characteristics and prevalence. J Electrocardiol. 
1980;13:61-66.
217.	Salisbury AC, Olalla-Gomez C, Rihal CS, et al. Frequency 
and predictors of urgent coronary angiography in patients with 
acute pericarditis. Mayo ClinProc. 2009;84:11-15.
218.	Imazio M, Brucato A, Maestroni S, et al. Prevalence of 
C-reactive protein elevation and time course of normalization 
in acute pericarditis: implications for the diagnosis, therapy, and 
prognosis of pericarditis. Circulation. 2011;123:1092-1097.
219.	Khandaker MH, Espinosa RE, Nishimura RA, et al. Pericar-
dial disease: diagnosis and management. Mayo Clinic Proc. 
2010;85:572-593.
220.	Fowler NO. Recurrent pericarditis. Cardiol Clin. 1990;8: 
621-626.
221.	Khandaker MH, Schaff HV, Greason KL, et al. Pericardiec-
tomy vs. Medical Management in Patients With Relapsing 
Pericarditis. Mayo Clinic Proc. 2012;87:1062-1070.
222.	Tuna IC, Danielson GK. Surgical management of pericardial 
diseases. Cardiol Clin. 1990;8:683-696.
223.	Azam S, Hoit BD. Treatment of pericardial disease. 
Cardiovasc Ther. 2011;29:308-314.
224.	Feng D, Glockner J, Kim K, et al. Cardiac magnetic reso-
nance imaging pericardial late gadolinium enhancement and 
elevated inflammatory markers can predict the reversibility 
of constrictive pericarditis after anti-inflammatory medical 
therapy: a pilot study. Circulation. 2011;124:1830-1837.
225.	Ariyoshi T, Hashizume K, Taniguchi S, et al. Surgical experi-
ence with chronic constrictive pericarditis. Gen Thorac Car-
diovas Surg. 2012;60:796-802.
226.	Chowdhury UK, Subramaniam GK, Kumar AS, et al. Peri-
cardiectomy for constrictive pericarditis: a clinical, echo-
cardiographic, and hemodynamic evaluation of two surgical 
techniques. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:522-529.
227.	Bertog SC, Thambidorai SK, Parakh K, et al. Constrictive 
pericarditis: etiology and cause-specific survival after peri-
cardiectomy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1445-1452.
228.	DeValeria PA, Baumgartner WA, Casale AS, et al. Current 
indications, risks, and outcome after pericardiectomy. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 1991;52:219-224.
229.	Ghavidel AA, Gholampour M, Kyavar M, Mirmesdagh Y, 
Tabatabaie MB. Constrictive pericarditis treated by surgery. 
Tex Heart Inst J. 2012;39:199-205.
230.	Ling LH, Oh JK, Schaff HV, et al. Constrictive pericarditis in 
the modern era: evolving clinical spectrum and impact on out-
come after pericardiectomy. Circulation. 1999;100:1380-1386.
231.	Abushaban L, Denham B, Duff D. 10 year review of cardiac 
tumours in childhood. Br Heart J. 1993;70:166-169.
783
Acquired Heart Disease
CHAPTER 21
232.	Reynen K. Frequency of primary tumors of the heart. Am J 
Cardiol. 1996;77:107.
233.	Pinede L, Duhaut P, Loire R. Clinical presentation of left atrial 
cardiac myxoma. A series of 112 consecutive cases. Medicine. 
2001;80:159-172.
234.	Castillo JG, Silvay G. Characterization and management 
of cardiac tumors. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2010; 
14:6-20.
235.	Kusano KF, Ohe T. Cardiac tumors that cause arrhythmias. 
Card Electrophysiol Rev. 2002;6:174-177.
236.	Lee VH, Connolly HM, Brown RD Jr. Central nervous 
system manifestations of cardiac myxoma. Arch Neurol. 
2007;64:1115-1120.
237.	Jean WC, Walski-Easton SM, Nussbaum ES. Multiple intra-
cranial aneurysms as delayed complications of an atrial myx-
oma: case report. Neurosurgery. 2001;49:200-202; discussion 
202-203.
238.	 Jain D, Maleszewski JJ, Halushka MK. Benign cardiac tumors 
and tumorlike conditions. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2010;14:215-230.
239.	Pucci A, Gagliardotto P, Zanini C, Pansini S, di Summa M, 
Mollo F. Histopathologic and clinical characterization of car-
diac myxoma: review of 53 cases from a single institution. 
Am Heart J. 2000;140:134-138.
240.	Bakaeen FG, Reardon MJ, Coselli JS, et al. Surgical out-
come in 85 patients with primary cardiac tumors. Am J Surg. 
2003;186:641-647; discussion 647.
241.	Gammie JS, Abrishamchian AR, Griffith BP. Cardiac auto-
transplantation and radical bi-atrial resection for recurrent 
atrial myxoma. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:1545-1547.
242.	Goldstein DJ, Oz MC, Michler RE. Radical excisional therapy 
and total cardiac transplantation for recurrent atrial myxoma. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60:1105-1107.
243.	Putnam JB Jr., Sweeney MS, Colon R, Lanza LA, Frazier 
OH, Cooley DA. Primary cardiac sarcomas. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1991;51:906-910.
244.	Neragi-Miandoab S, Kim J, Vlahakes GJ. Malignant tumours 
of the heart: a review of tumour type, diagnosis and therapy. 
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2007;19:748-756.
This page intentionally left blank 
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic 
Dissection
Scott A. LeMaire, Raja R. Gopaldas, and Joseph S. 
Coselli
22
ANATOMY OF THE AORTA
The aorta consists of two major segments—the proximal aorta 
and the distal aorta—whose anatomic characteristics affect both 
the clinical manifestations of disease in these segments and the 
selection of treatment strategies for such disease (Fig. 22-1). 
The proximal aortic segment includes the ascending aorta and 
the transverse aortic arch. The ascending aorta begins at the aor-
tic valve and ends at the origin of the innominate artery. The first 
portion of the ascending aorta is the aortic root, which includes 
the aortic valve annulus and the three sinuses of Valsalva; the 
coronary arteries originate from two of these sinuses. The aortic 
root joins the tubular portion of the ascending aorta at the sino-
tubular ridge. The transverse aortic arch is the area from which 
the brachiocephalic branches arise. The distal aortic segment 
includes the descending thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta. 
The descending thoracic aorta begins distal to the origin of the 
left subclavian artery and extends to the diaphragmatic hiatus, 
where it joins the abdominal aorta. The descending thoracic 
aorta gives rise to multiple bronchial and esophageal branches, 
as well as to the segmental intercostal arteries, which provide 
circulation to the spinal cord.
The volume of blood that flows through the thoracic aorta 
at high pressure is far greater than that found in any other vas-
cular structure. For this reason, any condition that disrupts the 
integrity of the thoracic aorta, such as aortic dissection, aneu-
rysm rupture, or traumatic injury, can have catastrophic conse-
quences.
Historically, open surgical repair of such conditions has 
been an intimidating undertaking associated with significant 
morbidity and mortality. Strategies for protecting the brain and 
spinal cord during such repairs have become critical in pre-
venting devastating complications. In recent years, endovascu-
lar therapy for thoracic aortic disease in selected patients has 
become accepted practice, producing fewer adverse outcomes 
than traditional approaches do.
THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSMS
Aortic aneurysm is defined as a permanent, localized dilata-
tion of the aorta to a diameter that is at least 50% greater than 
is normal at that anatomic level.1 The annual incidence of 
thoracic aortic aneurysms is estimated to be 5.9 per 100,000 
persons.2 The clinical manifestations, methods of treatment, 
and treatment results in patients with aortic aneurysms vary 
according to the cause and the aortic segment involved. 
Causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms include degenerative 
disease of the aortic wall, aortic dissection, aortitis, infec-
tion, and trauma. Aneurysms can be localized to a single 
aortic segment, or they can involve multiple segments. Tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysms, for example, involve both 
the descending thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta. In 
the most extreme cases, the entire aorta is aneurysmal; this 
condition is often called mega-aorta.
Aortic aneurysms can be either “true” or “false.” True 
aneurysms can take two forms: fusiform and saccular. Fusiform 
aneurysms are more common and can be described as symmetri-
cal dilatations of the aorta. Saccular aneurysms are localized 
outpouchings of the aorta. False aneurysms, also called pseu-
doaneurysms, are leaks in the aortic wall that are contained by 
the outer layer of the aorta and/or the periaortic tissue; they are 
caused by disruption of the aortic wall and lead blood to collect 
in pouches of fibrotic tissue.
Aneurysms of the thoracic aorta consistently increase in 
size and eventually progress to cause serious complications. 
These include rupture, which is usually a fatal event. Therefore, 
aggressive treatment is indicated in all but the poorest surgical 
candidates. Small, asymptomatic thoracic aortic aneurysms can 
be followed, especially in high-surgical-risk patients, and can be 
treated surgically later if symptoms or complications develop, or 
if progressive enlargement occurs. Meticulous control of hyper-
tension is the primary medical treatment for patients with small, 
asymptomatic aneurysms.
chapter 
Anatomy of the Aorta	
785
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms	
785
Causes and Pathogenesis / 786
Clinical History / 789
Clinical Manifestations / 789
Diagnostic Evaluation / 789
Treatment / 791
Aortic Dissection	
806
Pathology and Classification / 806
Causes and Clinical History / 809
Clinical Manifestations / 809
Diagnostic Evaluation / 810
Treatment / 812
Outcomes	
816
Repair of Proximal Aortic Aneurysms / 817
Treatment of Acute Ascending Aortic  
Dissection / 819
Repair of Distal Aortic Aneurysms / 819
Treatment of Acute Descending Aortic 
Dissection / 820
Conclusions	
820
Acknowledgments	
820
Part II
Elective resection with graft replacement is indicated in 
asymptomatic patients with an aortic diameter of at least twice 
normal in the involved segment (5–6 cm in most thoracic seg-
ments). Elective repair is contraindicated by extreme operative 
risk due to severe coexisting cardiac or pulmonary disease and 
by other conditions that limit life expectancy, such as malig-
786
Key Points
1 	 Assessing urgency of repair is essential to developing the 
appropriate management plan. Although emergent repair car-
ries greater operative risk than does elective repair, any inap-
propriate delay of repair risks death.
2 	 The clinical progression of an aortic aneurysm is continued 
expansion and eventual rupture. Hence, regular noninvasive 
imaging studies, as part of a lifelong surveillance plan, are 
necessary to ensure long-term patient health. Even small 
asymptomatic aneurysms should be routinely imaged to assess 
overall growth and yearly rate of expansion.
3 	 Endovascular repair devices are approved for the treatment of 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, and some of the newer 
devices are also approved for the treatment of aortic trauma 
and penetrating aortic ulcer.
4 	 Practice guidelines were recently published that have helped to 
standardize the decision-making process and select an appropri-
ate surgical intervention, as well as to standardize the use of 
imaging studies for patients with thoracic aortic disease.
5 	 Ascending aortic aneurysms that are symptomatic or 
>5.5 cm should be repaired. This threshold is lowered for 
patients with connective tissue disorders.
6 	 Surgical repair involves the development of a patient-­
tailored plan based on careful preoperative medical evaluation. 
When appropriate, optimizing a patient’s health status—to 
mitigate existing comorbidities—is important before surgi-
cal intervention.
7 	 The development and use of surgical adjuncts like ante-
grade selective cerebral perfusion and cerebrospinal fluid 
drainage have significantly reduced the morbidity rates tra-
ditionally associated with complex aortic repair.
8 	 Proximal aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition, 
and immediate operative repair is generally indicated, 
although definitive aortic repair may be delayed until after 
severe malperfusion has been treated.
Figure 22-1.  Illustration of normal thoracic aortic anatomy. The 
brachiocephalic vessels arise from the transverse aortic arch and 
are used as anatomic landmarks to define the aortic regions. The 
ascending aorta is proximal to the innominate artery, whereas the 
descending aorta is distal to the left subclavian artery.
nancy. An emergency operation is performed for any patient in 
whom a ruptured aneurysm is suspected.
Patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm often have coexist-
ing aneurysms of other aortic segments. A common cause of 
death after repair of a thoracic aortic aneurysm is rupture of a 
different aortic aneurysm. Therefore, staged repair of multiple 
aortic segments often is necessary. As with any major opera-
tion, careful preoperative evaluation for coexisting disease and 
subsequent medical optimization are important for successful 
surgical treatment.
An alternative to traditional open repair of a descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysm is endovascular stent grafting. Certain 
anatomic criteria need to be satisfied for this treatment option 
to be considered, including the presence of at least a 2-cm land-
ing zone of healthy aortic tissue proximally and distally to the 
aneurysm to be excluded. Although data on long-term outcomes 
are still lacking, endovascular repair of a descending thoracic 
aortic aneurysm has become an accepted practice that produces 
excellent midterm results.
Causes and Pathogenesis
General Considerations.  The normal aorta derives its elastic-
ity and tensile strength from the medial layer, which contains 
approximately 45 to 55 lamellae of elastin, collagen, smooth 
muscle cells, and ground substance. Elastin content is highest 
within the ascending aorta, as would be expected because of 
its compliant nature, and decreases distally into the descending 
and abdominal aorta. Maintenance of the aortic matrix involves 
complex interactions among smooth muscle cells, macrophages, 
proteases, and protease inhibitors. Any alteration in this delicate 
balance can lead to aortic disease.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms have a variety of causes 
(Table 22-1). Although these disparate pathologic processes differ 
in biochemical and histologic terms, they share the final common 
pathway of progressive aortic expansion and eventual rupture.
Hemodynamic factors clearly contribute to the process 
of aortic dilatation. The vicious cycle of increasing diameter 
and increasing wall tension, as characterized by Laplace’s law 
787
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
(tension = pressure × radius), is well established. Turbulent blood 
flow is also recognized as a factor. Poststenotic aortic dilatation, 
for example, occurs in some patients with aortic valve stenosis 
or coarctation of the descending thoracic aorta. Hemodynamic 
derangements, however, are only one piece of a complex puzzle.
Atherosclerosis is commonly cited as a cause of thoracic 
aortic aneurysms. However, although atherosclerotic disease 
often is found in conjunction with aortic aneurysms, the notion 
that atherosclerosis is a distinct cause of aneurysm formation 
has been challenged. In most thoracic aortic aneurysms, ath-
erosclerosis appears to be a coexisting process, rather than the 
underlying cause.
Research into the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms has focused on the molecular mechanisms of aortic wall 
degeneration and dilatation. For example, imbalances between 
proteolytic enzymes (e.g., matrix metalloproteinases) and their 
inhibitors contribute to abdominal aortic aneurysm formation. 
Building on these advances, current investigations are attempting 
to determine whether similar inflammatory and proteolytic mech-
anisms are involved in thoracic aortic disease, in hope of identify-
ing potential molecular targets for pharmacologic therapy.
Nonspecific Medial Degeneration.  Nonspecific medial 
degeneration is the most common cause of thoracic aortic dis-
ease. Histologic findings of mild medial degeneration, includ-
ing fragmentation of elastic fibers and loss of smooth muscle 
cells, are expected in the aging aorta. However, an advanced, 
accelerated form of medial degeneration leads to progressive 
weakening of the aortic wall, aneurysm formation, and eventual 
dissection, rupture, or both. The underlying causes of medial 
degenerative disease remain unknown.
Aortic Dissection.  An aortic dissection usually begins as a 
tear in the inner aortic wall, which initiates a progressive sepa-
ration of the medial layers and creates two channels within the 
aorta. This event profoundly weakens the outer wall. As the 
most common catastrophe involving the aorta, dissection repre-
sents a major, distinct cause of thoracic aortic aneurysms and is 
discussed in detail in the second half of this chapter.
Genetic Disorders.
Marfan Syndrome  Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant 
genetic disorder characterized by a specific connective tissue 
Table 22-1
Causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms
Nonspecific medial degeneration
Aortic dissection
Genetic disorders
  Marfan syndrome
  Loeys-Dietz syndrome
  Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
  Familial aortic aneurysms
  Aneurysms-Osteoarthritis syndrome 
  Congenital bicuspid aortic valve 
  Bovine aortic arch
Poststenotic dilatation
Infection
Aortitis
  Takayasu arteritis
  Giant cell arteritis
  Rheumatoid aortitis
Trauma
defect that leads to aneurysm formation. The phenotype of patients 
with Marfan syndrome typically includes a tall stature, high pal-
ate, joint hypermobility, eye lens disorders, mitral valve prolapse, 
and aortic aneurysms. The aortic wall is weakened by fragmen-
tation of elastic fibers and deposition of extensive amounts of 
mucopolysaccharides (a process previously called cystic medial 
degeneration or cystic medial necrosis). Patients with Marfan 
syndrome have a mutation in the fibrillin gene located on the 
long arm of chromosome 15. The traditionally held view is that 
abnormal fibrillin in the extracellular matrix decreases connective 
tissue strength in the aortic wall and produces abnormal elasticity, 
which predisposes the aorta to dilatation from wall tension caused 
by left ventricular ejection impulses.3 More recent evidence, how-
ever, shows that the abnormal fibrillin causes degeneration of 
the aortic wall matrix by increasing the activity of transforming 
growth factor beta (TGF-β).4 Between 75% and 85% of patients 
with Marfan syndrome have dilatation of the ascending aorta and 
annuloaortic ectasia (dilatation of the aortic sinuses and annulus).5 
Such aortic abnormalities are the most common cause of death 
among patients with Marfan syndrome.6 Marfan syndrome also 
is frequently associated with aortic dissection.
Loeys-Dietz Syndrome  Loeys-Dietz syndrome is phenotypi-
cally distinct from Marfan syndrome. It is characterized as an 
aneurysmal syndrome with widespread systemic involvement. 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome is an aggressive, autosomal dominant 
condition that is distinguished by the triad of arterial tortuosity 
and aneurysms, hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes), and bifid 
uvula or cleft palate. It is caused by heterozygous mutations 
in the genes encoding TGF-β receptors.7,8 Patients with Loeys-
Dietz syndrome—including young children—are at increased 
risk of aortic rupture and aortic dissection; diameter-based 
thresholds of repair tend to be lower for patients with this syn-
drome than for patients with other connective tissue disorders.
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome  Ehlers-Danlos syndrome includes a 
spectrum of inherited connective tissue disorders of collagen 
synthesis. The subtypes represent differing defective steps of 
collagen production. Vascular type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
is characterized by an autosomal dominant defect in type III 
collagen synthesis, which can have life-threatening cardio-
vascular manifestations. Spontaneous arterial rupture, usually 
involving the mesenteric vessels, is the most common cause 
of death in these patients. Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dis-
sections are less commonly associated with Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, but when they do occur, they pose a particularly 
challenging surgical problem because of the reduced integrity 
of the aortic tissue.9 An Ehlers-Danlos variant of periventricu-
lar heterotopia associated with joint and skin hyperextensibil-
ity and aortic dilation has been described as being caused by 
mutations in the gene encoding filamin A (FLNA), an actin-
binding protein that links the smooth muscle cell contractile 
unit to the cell surface.10
Familial Aortic Aneurysms  Families without the heritable con-
nective tissue disorders described earlier also can be affected 
by genetic conditions that cause thoracic aortic aneurysms. In 
fact, it is estimated that at least 20% of patients with thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections have a genetic predisposition 
to them. The involved mutations are characterized by autoso-
mal dominant inheritance with decreased penetrance and vari-
able expression. Thus far, mutations involving the genes for 
TGF-β receptors (TGFβR1 and TGFβR2), TGF-β2, β-myosin 
(MYH11 and MYLK), and α-smooth muscle cell actin (ACTA2) 
788
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
have been identified as causes of familial thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms and dissection.11-13 ACTA2 mutations are present in 
approximately 14% of families with familial thoracic aortic 
aneurysms and dissections.
Aneurysms-Osteoarthritis Syndrome  Aneurysms-osteoarthritis 
syndrome is a recently identified autosomal dominant disorder. 
Patients with this syndrome suffer from aortic and arterial aneu-
rysms, arterial tortuosity, aortic dissection, mild craniofacial 
abnormalities, and early onset osteoarthritis. Aneurysms-osteo-
arthritis syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene encoding 
SMAD3, a transcription factor for TGF-β. Affected patients 
have a high incidence of aortic dissection, which often occurs 
in a mildly dilated aorta (4–4.5 cm) and causes sudden death.14
Congenital Bicuspid Aortic Valve  Bicuspid aortic valve is the 
most common congenital malformation of the heart or great ves-
sels, affecting up to 2% of Americans.15 Compared to patients 
with a normal, trileaflet aortic valve, patients with bicuspid aor-
tic valve have an increased incidence of ascending aortic aneu-
rysm formation and, often, a faster rate of aortic enlargement.16 
The location of the fused leaflet, or raphe, may be predictive of 
aortic dilation and other abnormalities.17 About 50% to 70% of 
adults with bicuspid aortic valve, but without significant valve 
dysfunction, have echocardiographically detectable aortic dil-
atation.18,19 This dilatation usually is limited to the ascending 
aorta and root.20 Dilation occasionally is found in the arch and 
only rarely in the descending or abdominal aorta. In addition, 
aortic dissection occurs 10 times more often in patients with 
bicuspid valves than in the general population.21 Recent findings 
suggest that aneurysms associated with bicuspid aortic valve 
have a fundamentally different pathobiologic cause than aneu-
rysms that occur in patients with trileaflet valves.22
Although the exact mechanism responsible for aneurysm 
formation in patients with bicuspid aortic valve remains unclear, 
evidence suggests that these patients have a congenital connec-
tive tissue abnormality that predisposes the aorta to medial 
degeneration.22-28 For example, fibrillin 1 content is significantly 
lower and matrix metalloproteinase activity is significantly 
higher in the aortic media in patients with bicuspid aortic valve 
than in persons with a normal, tricuspid aortic valve.22-24 Further, 
the process of medial degeneration in patients with bicuspid aor-
tic valve may be exacerbated by the presence of chronic turbu-
lent flow through the deformed valve.
Bovine aortic arch  Bovine aortic arch—a common origin of 
the innominate and left common carotid arteries—has been con-
sidered a normal anatomic variant. Recent studies from Yale 
University have identified a higher prevalence of bovine aor-
tic arch in patients with thoracic aortic disease; an association 
was found between this anomaly and a generalized increase 
in aortic aneurysmal disease (without any predisposition to a 
particular aortic region). However, bovine aortic arch was not 
associated distinctly with bicuspid aortic valve or aortic dissec-
tion, but with a higher mean aortic growth rate: 0.29 cm/year in 
patients with bovine aortic arch, compared with 0.09 cm/year in 
controls. Therefore, bovine aortic arch may be better character-
ized as a precursor of aortic aneurysm than as a simple normal 
anatomic variant.29 Further studies are needed to delineate the 
underlying mechanism for this association.
Infection.  Primary infection of the aortic wall resulting in 
aneurysm formation is rare. Although these lesions are termed 
mycotic aneurysms, the responsible pathogens usually are bac-
teria rather than fungi. Bacterial invasion of the aortic wall may 
result from bacterial endocarditis, endothelial trauma caused by 
an aortic jet lesion, or extension from an infected laminar clot 
within a preexisting aneurysm. The most common causative 
organisms are Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epider-
midis, Salmonella, and Streptococcus.30,31 Unlike most other 
causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms, which generally produce 
fusiform aneurysms, infection often produces saccular aneu-
rysms located in areas of aortic tissue destroyed by the infec-
tious process.
Although syphilis was once the most common cause of 
ascending aortic aneurysms, the advent of effective antibiotic 
therapy has made syphilitic aneurysms a rarity in developed 
nations. In other parts of the world, however, syphilitic aneu-
rysms remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The spi-
rochete Treponema pallidum causes an obliterative endarteritis 
of the vasa vasorum that results in medial ischemia and loss of 
the elastic and muscular elements of the aortic wall. The ascend-
ing aorta and arch are the most commonly involved areas. The 
emergence of HIV infection in the 1980s was associated with 
a substantial increase in the incidence of syphilis in both HIV-­
positive and HIV-negative patients. Because syphilitic aortitis 
often presents 10 to 30 years after the primary infection, the inci-
dence of associated aneurysms may increase in the near future.
Aortitis.  In patients with preexisting degenerative thoracic 
aortic aneurysms, localized transmural inflammation and subse-
quent fibrosis can develop. The dense aortic infiltrate responsible 
for the fibrosis consists of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and giant 
cells. The cause of the intense inflammatory reaction is unknown. 
Although the severe inflammation is a superimposed problem 
rather than a primary cause, its onset within an aneurysm can 
further weaken the aortic wall and precipitate expansion.
Systemic autoimmune disorders also cause thoracic aor-
titis. Aortic Takayasu arteritis generally produces obstructive 
lesions related to severe intimal thickening, but associated 
medial necrosis can lead to aneurysm formation. In patients with 
giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis), granulomatous inflam-
mation may develop that involves the entire thickness of the 
aortic wall, causing intimal thickening and medial destruction. 
Rheumatoid aortitis is an uncommon systemic disease that is 
associated with rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. 
The resulting medial inflammation and fibrosis can affect the 
aortic root, causing annular dilatation, aortic valve regurgitation, 
and ascending aortic aneurysm formation.
Pseudoaneurysms.  Pseudoaneurysms of the thoracic aorta 
usually represent chronic leaks that are contained by surround-
ing tissue and fibrosis. By definition, the wall of a pseudoa-
neurysm is not formed by intact aortic tissue; rather, the wall 
develops from organized thrombus and associated fibrosis. 
Pseudoaneurysms can arise from primary defects in the aortic 
wall (e.g., after trauma or contained aneurysm rupture) or from 
anastomotic or cannulation site leaks that occur after cardiovas-
cular surgery. Anastomotic pseudoaneurysms can be caused by 
technical problems or by deterioration of the native aortic tissue, 
graft material, or suture. Commonly, they occur in patients with 
Marfan syndrome.32 Tissue deterioration usually is related to 
either progressive degenerative disease or infection. Improve-
ments in sutures, graft materials, and surgical techniques have 
decreased the incidence of thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysms. 
Should thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysms occur, they typically 
require expeditious surgical or other intervention because they 
are associated with a high incidence of morbidity and rupture.
789
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
Clinical History
Treatment decisions in cases of thoracic aortic aneurysm are 
guided by our current understanding of the clinical history of 
these aneurysms, which classically is characterized as progres-
sive aortic dilatation and eventual dissection, rupture, or both. 
An analysis by Elefteriades of data from 1600 patients 
with thoracic aortic disease has helped quantify these 
well-recognized risks.33 Average expansion rates were 
0.07 cm/y in ascending aortic aneurysms and 0.19 cm/y in 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. As expected, aortic diam-
eter was a strong predictor of rupture, dissection, and mortality. 
For thoracic aortic aneurysms >6 cm in diameter, annual rates 
of catastrophic complications were 3.6% for rupture, 3.7% for 
dissection, and 10.8% for death. Critical diameters, at which the 
incidence of expected complications significantly increased, 
were 6.0 cm for aneurysms of the ascending aorta and 7.0 cm 
for aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta; the correspond-
ing risks of rupture after reaching these diameters were 31% and 
43%, respectively.34
Certain types of aneurysms have an increased propensity 
for expansion and rupture. For example, aneurysms in patients 
with Marfan or Loeys-Dietz syndrome dilate at an accelerated 
rate and rupture or dissect at smaller diameters than non–connec-
tive tissue disorder-related aneurysms. Before the era of surgical 
treatment for aortic aneurysms, this aggressive form of aortic 
disease resulted in an average life expectancy of 32 years for 
Marfan patients; aortic root complications caused the majority of 
deaths.35 Saccular aneurysms, which commonly are associated 
with aortic infection and typically affect only a discrete small 
section of the aorta, tend to grow more rapidly than fusiform 
aneurysms, which are associated with more widespread degen-
erative changes and generally affect a larger section of the aorta.
One common clinical scenario deserves special attention. 
A moderately dilated ascending aorta (i.e., 4–5 cm) often is 
encountered during aortic valve replacement or coronary artery 
bypass operations. The clinical history of these ectatic ascend-
ing aortas has been defined by several studies. Michel and col-
leagues36 studied patients whose ascending aortic diameters 
were >4 cm at the time of aortic valve replacement; 25% of 
these patients required reoperation for ascending aortic replace-
ment. Prenger and colleagues37 reported that aortic dissection 
occurred in 27% of patients who had aortic diameters of >5 cm 
at the time of aortic valve replacement. Recently, attention has 
been directed toward whether or not a mildly dilated aortic root 
should be replaced in patients with bicuspid aortic valve who are 
undergoing isolated valve replacement, and at what threshold 
to intervene. Although this is a controversial issue, many sur-
geons believe that the tendency toward late aortic dilatation in 
these patients warrants aggressive treatment.38,39 Current practice 
guidelines indicate that such early replacement should be consid-
ered in these patients when the ascending aorta is 4.0 to 4.5 cm.40
Clinical Manifestations
In many patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms, the aneurysm 
is discovered incidentally when imaging studies are performed 
for unrelated reasons. Therefore, patients often are asymptom-
atic at the time of diagnosis. However, thoracic aortic aneurysms 
that initially go undetected eventually create symptoms and 
signs that correspond with the segment of aorta that is involved. 
These aneurysms have a wide variety of manifestations, includ-
ing compression or erosion of adjacent structures, aortic valve 
regurgitation, distal embolism, and rupture.
Local Compression and Erosion.  Initially, aneurysmal 
expansion and impingement on adjacent structures causes mild, 
chronic pain. The most common symptom in patients with 
ascending aortic aneurysms is anterior chest discomfort; the 
pain is frequently precordial in location but may radiate to the 
neck and jaw, mimicking angina. Aneurysms of the ascending 
aorta and transverse aortic arch can cause symptoms related to 
compression of the superior vena cava, the pulmonary artery, 
the airway, or the sternum. Rarely, these aneurysms erode into 
the superior vena cava or right atrium, causing acute high-output 
failure. Expansion of the distal aortic arch can stretch the recur-
rent laryngeal nerve, which results in left vocal cord paralysis 
and hoarseness. Descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal 
aneurysms frequently cause back pain localized between the 
scapulae. When the aneurysm is largest in the region of the 
aortic hiatus, it may cause middle back and epigastric pain. 
Thoracic or lumbar vertebral body erosion typically causes 
severe, chronic back pain; extreme cases can present with spinal 
instability and neurologic deficits from spinal cord compres-
sion. Although mycotic aneurysms have a peculiar propensity 
to destroy vertebral bodies, spinal erosion also occurs with 
degenerative aneurysms. Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms 
may cause various degrees of airway obstruction, manifesting 
as cough, wheezing, stridor, or pneumonitis. Pulmonary or air-
way erosion presents as hemoptysis. Compression and erosion 
of the esophagus cause dysphagia and hematemesis, respec-
tively. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms can cause duodenal 
obstruction or, if they erode through the bowel wall, gastrointes-
tinal bleeding. Jaundice due to compression of the liver or porta 
hepatis is uncommon. Erosion into the inferior vena cava or iliac 
vein presents with an abdominal bruit, widened pulse pressure, 
edema, and heart failure.
Aortic Valve Regurgitation.  Ascending aortic aneurysms can 
cause displacement of the aortic valve commissures and annular 
dilatation. The resulting deformation of the aortic valve leads to 
progressively worsening aortic valve regurgitation. In response 
to the volume overload, the heart remodels and becomes 
increasingly dilated. Patients with this condition may present 
with progressive heart failure, a widened pulse pressure, and a 
diastolic murmur.
Distal Embolization.  Thoracic aortic aneurysms—particu-
larly those involving the descending and thoracoabdominal 
aorta—are commonly lined with friable, atheromatous plaque 
and mural thrombus. This debris may embolize distally, caus-
ing occlusion and thrombosis of the visceral, renal, or lower-
extremity branches.
Rupture.  Patients with ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms 
often experience sudden, severe pain in the anterior chest 
(ascending aorta), upper back or left chest (descending thoracic 
aorta), or left flank or abdomen (thoracoabdominal aorta). When 
ascending aortic aneurysms rupture, they usually bleed into the 
pericardial space, producing acute cardiac tamponade and death. 
Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms rupture into the pleural 
cavity, producing a combination of severe hemorrhagic shock 
and respiratory compromise. External rupture is extremely rare; 
saccular syphilitic aneurysms have been observed to rupture 
externally after eroding through the sternum.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Diagnosis and characterization of thoracic aneurysms require 
imaging studies, which also provide critical information that 
1
790
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
guides the selection of treatment options. Although the best 
choice of imaging technique for the thoracic and thoracoab-
dominal aorta is somewhat institution-specific, varying with the 
availability of imaging equipment and expertise, efforts have 
been made to standardize key elements of image acquisition and 
reporting. Recent practice guidelines40 recommend that aortic 
imaging reports plainly state the location of aortic abnormali-
ties (including calcification and the extent to which abnormali-
ties extend into branch vessels), the maximum external aortic 
diameters (rather than internal, lumen-based diameters), internal 
filling defects, and any evidence of rupture. Whenever possible, 
all results should be compared to those of prior imaging studies.
Plain Radiography.  Plain radiographs of the chest, abdo-
men, or spine often provide enough information to support the 
initial diagnosis of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Ascending aortic 
aneurysms produce a convex shadow to the right of the cardiac 
silhouette. The anterior projection of an ascending aneurysm 
results in the loss of the retrosternal space in the lateral view. An 
aneurysm may be indistinguishable from elongation and tortu-
osity.41 Above all, chest radiographs (CXRs) may appear normal 
in patients with thoracic aortic disease and, thus, cannot exclude 
the diagnosis of aortic aneurysm. Aortic root aneurysms, for 
example, often are hidden within the cardiac silhouette. Plain 
CXRs may reveal convexity in the right superior mediastinum, 
loss of the retrosternal space, or widening of the descending 
thoracic aortic shadow, which may be highlighted by a rim of 
calcification outlining the dilated aneurysmal aortic wall. Aortic 
calcification also may be seen in the upper abdomen on a stan-
dard radiograph made in the anteroposterior or lateral projection 
(Fig. 22-2). Once a thoracic aortic aneurysm is detected on plain 
radiographs, additional studies are required to define the extent 
of aortic involvement.
Echocardiography and Abdominal Ultrasonography.  
Ascending aortic aneurysms are commonly discovered during 
echocardiography in patients presenting with symptoms or signs 
of aortic valve regurgitation. Both transthoracic and transesoph-
ageal echocardiography provide excellent visualization of the 
ascending aorta, including the aortic root.42 Transesophageal 
echocardiography also allows visualization of the descending 
thoracic aorta but is not ideal for evaluating the transverse aortic 
arch (which is obscured by air in the tracheobronchial tree) or 
the upper abdominal aorta. Effective echocardiography requires 
considerable technical skill, both in obtaining adequate images 
and in interpreting them. This imaging modality has the added 
benefit of assessing cardiac function and revealing any other 
abnormalities that may be present. During ultrasound evaluation 
of a suspected infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, if a defini-
tive neck cannot be identified at the level of the renal arteries, 
the possibility of thoracoabdominal aortic involvement should 
be suspected and investigated by using other imaging modali-
ties. Caution should be exercised while interpreting aneurysm 
dimensions from ultrasound imaging because intraluminal mea-
surements are often reported, whereas external measurements 
are usually used in other imaging modalities.
Computed Tomography.  Computed tomographic (CT) scan-
ning is widely available, provides visualization of the entire 
thoracic and abdominal aorta, and permits multiplanar and 
3-dimensional aortic reconstructions. Consequently, CT is 
the most common—and arguably the most useful—imaging 
modality for evaluating thoracic aortic aneurysms.43 In addition 
to establishing the diagnosis, CT provides information about 
Figure 22-2.  Chest radiographs showing a calcified rim (arrows) in the 
aortic wall of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. A. Anteroposterior 
view. B. Lateral view.
791
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
an aneurysm’s location, extent, anatomic anomalies, and rela-
tionship to major branch vessels. CT is particularly useful in 
determining the absolute diameter of the aorta, especially in 
the presence of a laminated clot, and also detects aortic calci-
fication. Contrast-enhanced CT provides information about the 
aortic lumen and can detect mural thrombus, aortic dissection, 
inflammatory periaortic fibrosis, and mediastinal or retroperi-
toneal hematoma due to contained aortic rupture. To increase 
consistency and ensure uniform reporting, current practice 
guidelines suggest that measurements be taken perpen-
dicular to blood flow and at standard anatomic locations40 
(Fig. 22-3); this should reduce the likelihood of erroneous mea-
surements, especially during serial imaging surveillance.
The major disadvantage of contrast-enhanced CT scan-
ning is the possibility of contrast-induced acute renal failure 
in patients who are at risk (e.g., patients with preexisting renal 
Figure 22-3.  Current practice guidelines40 seek to standardize the 
reporting of aortic diameters by indicating key locations of mea-
surement. These include (1) the sinuses of Valsalva, (2) the sinotu-
bular junction, (3) the mid-ascending aorta, (4) the proximal aortic 
arch at the origins of the innominate artery, (5) the mid-aortic arch, 
which is between the left common carotid and left subclavian arter-
ies, (6) the proximal descending thoracic aorta, which begins at the 
isthmus (approximately 2 cm distal to the origins of the left subcla-
vian artery), (7) the mid-descending thoracic artery, (8) the aorta 
at the diaphragm, and (9) the abdominal aorta at the origins of the 
celiac axis. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)
disease or diabetes).44 If possible, surgery is performed ≥1 day 
after contrast administration to allow time to observe renal func-
tion and to permit diuresis of the contrast agent. If renal insuf-
ficiency occurs or is worsened, elective surgery is postponed 
until renal function returns to normal or stabilizes.
Magnetic Resonance Angiography.  Magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA) is becoming widely available and can 
facilitate visualization of the entire aorta. This modality pro-
duces aortic images comparable to those produced by contrast-
enhanced CT but does not necessitate exposure to ionizing 
radiation. In addition, MRA offers excellent visualization of 
branch vessel details, and it is useful in detecting branch vessel 
stenosis.45 However, MRA is limited by high expense and a sus-
ceptibility to artifacts created by ferromagnetic materials, and 
gadolinium—the contrast agent for MRA—may be linked to 
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis and acute renal failure in patients 
with advanced renal insufficiency.46 Furthermore, the MRA 
environment is not appropriate for many critically ill patients, 
and unlike CT imaging, MRA imaging is suboptimal in patients 
with extensive aortic calcification.
Invasive Aortography and Cardiac Catheterization.  
Although catheter-based contrast aortography was previously 
considered the gold standard for evaluating thoracic aortic dis-
ease, cross-sectional imaging (i.e., CT and MRA) has largely 
replaced this modality. Technologic improvements have 
enabled CT and MRA to provide excellent aortic imaging while 
causing less morbidity than catheter-based studies do, so CT and 
MRA are now the primary modes for evaluating thoracic aortic 
disease. Today, the use of invasive aortography in patients with 
thoracic aortic disease is generally limited to those undergoing 
endovascular therapies or when other types of studies are con-
traindicated or have not provided satisfactory results.
Unlike standard aortography, cardiac catheterization con-
tinues to play an important role in diagnosis and preoperative 
planning, especially in patients with ascending aortic involve-
ment. Proximal aortography can reveal not only the status of 
the coronary arteries and left ventricular function but also the 
degree of aortic valve regurgitation, the extent of aortic root 
involvement, coronary ostial displacement, and the relationship 
of the aneurysm to the arch vessels.
The value of the information one can obtain from catheter-
based diagnostic studies should be weighed against the estab-
lished limitations and potential complications of such studies. A 
key limitation of aortography is that it images only the lumen 
and may therefore underrepresent the size of large aneurysms 
that contain laminated thrombus. Manipulation of intraluminal 
catheters can result in embolization of laminated thrombus or ath-
eromatous debris. Proximal aortography carries a 0.6% to 1.2% 
risk of stroke. Other risks include allergic reaction to contrast 
agent, iatrogenic aortic dissection, and bleeding at the arterial 
access site. In addition, the volumes of contrast agent required to 
adequately fill large aneurysms can cause significant renal toxic-
ity. To minimize the risk of contrast nephropathy, patients receive 
periprocedural intravenous (IV) fluids for hydration, mannitol for 
diuresis, and acetylcysteine.47,48 As with contrast-enhanced CT, 
surgery is performed ≥1 day after angiography whenever possible 
to ensure that renal function has stabilized or returned to baseline.
Treatment
Selecting the Appropriate Treatment.  Once a thoracic 
­aortic aneurysm is detected, management begins with patient 
2
792
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
education, particularly if the patient is asymptomatic, because 
aortic disease may progress rapidly and unexpectedly in some 
patients. A detailed medical history is collected, a physical 
examination is performed, and a systematic review of medical 
records is carried out to clearly assess the presence or absence 
of pertinent symptoms and signs, despite any initial denial of 
symptoms by the patient. Signs of genetic diseases such as 
Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome are thoroughly 
reviewed. If clinical criteria are met for such a genetic condi-
tion, confirmatory laboratory tests are conducted. Patients with 
such genetic diseases are best treated in a dedicated aortic clinic 
where they can be appropriately followed up. Surveillance 
imaging and aggressive blood pressure control are the mainstays 
of initial management for asymptomatic patients. When patients 
become symptomatic or their aneurysms grow to meet certain 
size criteria, the patients become surgical candidates.
Although long-term data are still lacking, endovascular 
therapy has become an accepted treatment for thoracic aortic 
aneurysms.49 Its role in treating proximal aortic disease and tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysms remains experimental. None-
theless, endoluminal stenting is approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration for the treatment of isolated descend-
ing thoracic aortic aneurysms, and some newer devices are 
approved for the treatment of blunt aortic injury and penetrating 
aortic ulcer. In practice, however, the off-label application 
of aortic stent grafts is widespread and accounts for well 
over half their use.50 Endovascular approaches may be helpful 
in emergent aneurysm repair, such as for patients with aortic 
rupture.51 Recently, endovascular therapy has evolved to include 
hybrid repairs, which combine open “debranching” techniques 
(to reroute branching vessels) with endovascular aortic repair. 
Despite these advances, for the repair of aneurysms with proxi-
mal aortic involvement and of thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-
rysms, open procedures remain the gold standard and preferred 
approach.
Determination of the Extent and Severity of Disease.  Cross-
sectional imaging with reconstruction is critical when one is 
evaluating a thoracic aneurysm, determining treatment strat-
egy, and planning necessary procedures. Note that, commonly, 
patients with a thoracic aortic aneurysm also have a remote 
aneurysm.2 In such cases, the more threatening lesion usually 
is addressed first. In many patients, staged operative proce-
dures are necessary for complete repair of extensive aneurysms 
involving the ascending aorta, transverse arch, and descending 
thoracic or thoracoabdominal aorta.52 When the descending seg-
ment is not disproportionately large (compared with the proxi-
mal aorta) and is not causing symptoms, the proximal aortic 
repair is carried out first. An important benefit of this approach 
is that it allows treatment of valvular and coronary artery occlu-
sive disease at the first operation.
Proximal aneurysms (proximal to the left subclavian 
artery) usually are addressed via a sternotomy approach. Aneu-
rysms involving the descending thoracic aorta are evaluated 
in terms of criteria (described later) for potential endovascu-
lar repair; those unsuitable for an endovascular approach are 
repaired with open techniques through a left thoracotomy. A CT 
scan can reveal detailed information about aortic calcification 
and luminal thrombus. These details are important in preventing 
embolization during surgical manipulation.
Indications for Operation  Thoracic aortic aneurysms are 
repaired to prevent fatal rupture. Therefore, on the basis of the 
natural history studies and other data, practice guidelines for 
thoracic aortic disease40 recommend elective operation in 
asymptomatic patients when the diameter of an ascending 
aortic aneurysm is >5.5 cm, when the diameter of a descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysm is >6.0 cm, or when the rate of dilata-
tion is >0.5 cm/y. In patients with connective tissue disorders 
such as Marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndromes, the threshold for 
operation is based on a smaller aortic diameter (4.0–5.0 cm for 
the ascending aorta and 5.5 to 6.0 cm for the descending tho-
racic aorta). For women with connective tissue disorders who 
are considering pregnancy, prophylactic aortic root replacement 
is considered because the risk of aortic dissection or rupture 
increases at an aortic diameter of 4.0 cm or greater. For low-
risk patients with chronic aortic dissection, descending ­thoracic 
repair is recommended at an aortic diameter of 5.5 cm or greater. 
For patients undergoing aortic valve replacement or repair, 
smaller ascending aortic aneurysms (>4.5 cm) are consid-
ered for concomitant repair.
The acuity of presentation is a major factor in decisions 
about the timing of surgical intervention. Many patients are 
asymptomatic at the time of presentation, so there is time for 
thorough preoperative evaluation and improvement of their cur-
rent health status, such as through smoking cessation and other 
optimization programs. In contrast, patients who present 
with symptoms may need urgent operation. Symptomatic 
patients are at increased risk of rupture and warrant expedi-
tious evaluation. The onset of new pain in patients with known 
aneurysms is especially concerning, because it may herald sig-
nificant expansion, leakage, or impending rupture. Emergent 
intervention is reserved for patients who present with aneurysm 
rupture or superimposed acute dissection.53
Open Repair vs. Endovascular Repair  As noted earlier, endo-
vascular repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms has become an 
accepted treatment option in selected patients, particularly 
patients with isolated degenerative descending thoracic aortic 
aneurysms; in fact, practice guidelines recommend that endo-
vascular repair be strongly considered for patients with descend-
ing thoracic aneurysm at an aortic diameter of 5.5 cm (which 
is slightly below the 6.0-cm threshold for open repair).40 For 
endovascular repairs to produce optimal outcomes, several ana-
tomic criteria must be met. For one, the proximal and distal neck 
diameters should fall within a range that will allow proper seal-
ing. Also, the proximal and distal landing zones should ideally 
be at least 20 mm long so that an appropriate seal can be made. 
Note that the limiting structures proximally and distally are the 
brachiocephalic vessels and celiac axis, respectively. Another 
anatomic limitation for this therapy relates to vascular access: 
The femoral and iliac arteries have to be wide enough to accom-
modate the large sheaths necessary to deploy the stent grafts, 
although newer devices use a smaller sheath (or are “sheath-
less” self-deployed stent grafts) to accommodate smaller arter-
ies. Tortuosity of the iliac vessels and abdominal aorta can make 
these procedures technically challenging. Occasionally, a “side 
graft” anastomosed to the iliac artery through a retroperitoneal 
incision is used because of poor distal access. When any of these 
anatomic criteria are not met, an open approach is preferable to 
an endovascular approach.
Of note, attempts have been made to extend the use of 
endovascular therapy to aortic arch aneurysms and thoracoab-
dominal aortic aneurysms. Although reports of purely endovas-
cular repair of the aortic arch remain limited, Greenberg and 
colleagues54 have reported their experience with a large series of 
3
4
5
6
793
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
purely endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic repairs. Addition-
ally, there have been numerous reports of small series of off-
label, experimental hybrid procedures that involve debranching 
the aortic arch or the visceral vessels of the abdominal aorta, fol-
lowed by endovascular exclusion of the aneurysm. The majority 
of hybrid approaches involve repairing the aortic arch. In its 
simplest form, hybrid arch repair involves an open bypass from 
the left subclavian to the left common carotid artery, which is 
followed by deliberate coverage of the origins of the left subcla-
vian artery by the stent graft. In its most complex form, hybrid 
arch repair involves rerouting all of the brachiocephalic vessels, 
followed by proximal placement of the stent graft in the ascend-
ing aorta and extending repair distally into the aortic arch and 
descending thoracic aorta.
The patients who theoretically may benefit more from an 
endovascular approach than from traditional open techniques 
are those who are of advanced age or have significant comor-
bidities. For example, the open repair of a descending thoracic 
aortic aneurysm can result in significant pulmonary morbidity. 
Therefore, patients with borderline pulmonary reserve may 
better tolerate an endovascular procedure than standard open 
repair. In contrast, patients with significant intraluminal ath-
eroma may be better served by an open approach because of the 
risk of embolization and stroke posed by catheter manipulation. 
Similarly, patients with connective tissue disorders generally 
are not considered candidates for elective endovascular repair. 
Endovascular repair in patients with connective tissue disorders 
has produced poor results, which are mainly due to progressive 
dilatation, stent graft migration, and endoleak.55
Preoperative Assessment and Preparation.  Given the 
impact of comorbid conditions on perioperative complications, 
a careful preoperative assessment of physiologic reserve is criti-
cal in assessing operative risk. Therefore, most patients undergo 
a thorough evaluation—with emphasis on cardiac, pulmonary, 
and renal function—before undergoing elective surgery.56,57
Cardiac Evaluation  Coronary artery disease is common in 
patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm and is responsible for 
a substantial proportion of early and late postoperative deaths 
in such patients. Similarly, valvular disease and myocardial 
dysfunction have important implications when one is plan-
ning anesthetic management and surgical approaches for 
aortic repair. Transthoracic echocardiography is a satisfac-
tory noninvasive method for evaluating both valvular and 
biventricular function. Dipyridamole-thallium myocardial 
scanning identifies regions of myocardium that have revers-
ible ischemia, and this test is more practical than exercise 
testing in older patients with concomitant lower-extremity 
peripheral vascular disease. Cardiac catheterization and 
coronary arteriography are performed in patients who have 
evidence of coronary disease—as indicated by either the 
patient’s history or the results of noninvasive studies—­ 
or who have a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤30%. If sig-
nificant valvular or coronary artery disease is identified before 
a proximal aortic operation, the disease can be addressed directly 
during the procedure. Patients who have asymptomatic distal 
aortic aneurysms and severe coronary occlusive disease undergo 
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty or surgical revasculariza-
tion before the aneurysmal aortic segment is replaced.
Pulmonary Evaluation  Pulmonary function screening with 
­arterial blood gas measurement and spirometry is routinely per-
formed before thoracic aortic operations. Patients with a forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second of >1.0 L and a partial pressure 
of carbon dioxide of <45 mmHg are considered surgical candi-
dates. In suitable patients, borderline pulmonary function can be 
improved by implementing a regimen that includes smoking cessa-
tion, weight loss, exercise, and treatment of bronchitis for a period 
of 1 to 3 months before surgery. Although surgery is not withheld 
from patients with symptomatic aortic aneurysms and poor pulmo-
nary function, adjustments in operative technique should be made 
to maximize these patients’ chances of recovery. In such patients, 
preserving the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, the phrenic nerves, 
and diaphragmatic function is particularly important.
Renal Evaluation  Renal function is assessed preoperatively by 
measuring serum electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen, and creati-
nine levels. Information about kidney size and perfusion can be 
obtained from the imaging studies used to evaluate the aorta.
Obtaining accurate information about baseline renal func-
tion has important therapeutic and prognostic implications. For 
example, perfusion strategies and perioperative medications 
are adjusted according to renal function. Patients with severely 
impaired renal function frequently require at least temporary 
hemodialysis after surgery. These patients also have a mortal-
ity rate that is significantly higher than normal. Patients with 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms and poor renal function 
secondary to severe proximal renal occlusive disease undergo 
renal artery endarterectomy, stenting, or bypass grafting during 
the aortic repair.
Operative Repair.
Proximal Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Open Repair  Traditional open operations to repair proximal aortic 
aneurysms—which involve the ascending aorta, transverse aor-
tic arch, or both—are performed through a midsternal incision 
and require cardiopulmonary bypass. The best choice of aortic 
replacement technique depends on the extent of the aneurysm 
and the condition of the aortic valve. The spectrum of operations 
(Fig. 22-4) ranges from simple graft replacement of the tubular 
portion of the ascending aorta (Fig. 22-4A) to graft replacement 
of the entire proximal aorta, including the aortic root, and reat-
tachment of the coronary arteries and brachiocephalic branches. 
The options for treating aortic valve disease, repairing aortic 
aneurysms, and maintaining perfusion during repair procedures 
each deserve detailed consideration (Table 22-2).
Aortic Valve Disease and Root Aneurysms  Many patients under-
going proximal aortic operations have aortic valve disease that 
requires concomitant surgical correction. When such disease 
is present and the sinus segment is normal, separate repair or 
replacement of the aortic valve and graft replacement of the 
tubular segment of the ascending aorta are carried out. In such 
cases, mild to moderate valve regurgitation with annular dilata-
tion can be addressed by plicating the annulus with mattress 
sutures placed below each commissure, thereby preserving 
the native valve. In patients with more severe valvular regur-
gitation or with valvular stenosis, the valve is replaced with a 
stented biologic or mechanical prosthesis. Mechanical prosthe-
ses necessitate following a lifelong anticoagulation regimen. 
Separate replacement of the aortic valve and ascending aorta 
is not performed in patients with Marfan syndrome, because 
progressive dilatation of the remaining sinus segment eventually 
leads to complications that necessitate reoperation. Therefore, 
patients with Marfan syndrome or those with annuloaortic ecta-
sia require some form of aortic root replacement.58
794
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
A
E
H
I
J
K
F
G
B
C
D
Figure 22-4.  Illustrations of proximal aortic repairs in which the native aortic root is left intact. A. Graft replacement of the tubular portion 
of the ascending aorta with the aortic arch left intact. B. Hemiarch beveled graft replacement, in which the ascending aorta and a portion 
of the lesser curvature of the aortic arch are replaced. C. A modified hemiarch with additional graft replacement of the innominate artery. 
D. Patch repair of the aortic arch. E. Traditional total arch replacement using an island approach to reattach the brachiocephalic vessels. 
F. The branched graft approach, which replaces the brachiocephalic vessels by following their original anatomic location. G. The elephant 
trunk approach with a concomitant island brachiocephalic artery reattachment. Contemporary Y-graft arch repairs include H. the single 
Y-graft approach, I. the double Y-graft approach, J. the elephant trunk approach with a single Y-graft, and K. the elephant trunk approach 
with a double Y-graft. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)
795
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
In many cases, the aortic root is replaced with a mechani-
cal or biologic graft that has both a valve and an aortic con-
duit. Currently, three graft options are commercially available: 
composite valve grafts, which consist of a bileaflet mechani-
cal valve attached to a polyester tube graft; aortic root homo-
grafts, which are harvested from cadavers and cryopreserved; 
and stentless porcine aortic root grafts.59,60 Another option for 
surgeons is to construct a bioprosthetic composite valve graft 
during the operation by suturing a stented tissue valve to a 
polyester graft tube.
Although select patients may be offered the Ross proce-
dure, in which the patient’s pulmonary artery root is excised and 
placed in the aortic position and then the right ventricular out-
flow tract is reconstructed by using a cryopreserved pulmonary 
homograft, this option is rarely used. This is largely because it 
is a technically demanding procedure, and there are concerns 
about the potential for autograft dilatation in patients with con-
nective tissue disorders.61
An additional option is valve-sparing aortic root replace-
ment, which has evolved substantially during the past decade.62 
The valve-sparing technique that is currently favored is called 
aortic root reimplantation and involves excising the aortic 
sinuses, attaching a prosthetic graft to the patient’s annulus 
(Fig. 22-5), and resuspending the native aortic valve inside 
Table 22-2
Options for open surgical repair of proximal aortic 
­aneurysms
Options for treating aortic valve disease
  Aortic valve annuloplasty (annular plication)
  Aortic valve replacement with mechanical or biologic  
  prosthesis
  Aortic root replacement
    Composite valve graft
    Aortic homograft
    Stentless porcine root
    Pulmonary autograft (Ross procedure)
    Valve-sparing techniques
Options for graft repair of the aortic aneurysm
  Patch aortoplasty
  Ascending replacement only
  Beveled hemiarch replacement
  Total arch replacement with reattachment of  
  brachiocephalic branches
  Total arch replacement with bypass grafts to the 
brachiocephalic branches (Y-graft approaches)
  Elephant trunk technique with island reattachment
  Elephant trunk technique with Y-graft approach
Perfusion options
  Standard cardiopulmonary bypass
  Profound hypothermic circulatory arrest without adjuncts
  Hypothermic circulatory arrest with adjuncts
    Retrograde cerebral perfusion
     Antegrade cerebral perfusion
      Balloon perfusion catheters
      Right axillary artery cannulation
      Innominate artery cannulation
    Combined antegrade and retrograde cerebral perfusion
the graft. The superior hemodynamics of the native valve and 
the avoidance of anticoagulation are major advantages of the 
valve-sparing approach. Long-term results in carefully selected 
patients have been excellent.63 Although the durability of this 
procedure in patients with either Marfan syndrome or ­bicuspid 
aortic valve has been questioned, reports suggest that long-
term durability is possible for patients with Marfan syndrome 
who undergo the procedure at experienced centers.64,65 Further, 
acceptable midterm outcomes have been reported for patients 
with bicuspid aortic valve.66 Patients who have structural leaf-
let deterioration or excessive annular dilatation are typically 
deemed unsuitable for valve-sparing repair.
Regardless of the type of conduit used, aortic root 
replacement requires reattaching the coronary arteries to open-
ings in the graft. In the original procedure described by Bentall 
and De Bono,67 this was accomplished by suturing the intact 
aortic wall surrounding each coronary artery to the openings 
in the graft. The aortic wall was then wrapped around the graft 
to establish hemostasis. However, this technique frequently 
produced leaks at the coronary reattachment sites that eventu-
ally led to pseudoaneurysm formation. The Cabrol modifica-
tion, in which a separate, small tube graft is sutured to the 
coronary ostia and the main aortic graft, achieves tension-free 
coronary anastomoses and reduces the risk of pseudoaneurysm 
formation.68 Kouchoukos’s button modification of the Bentall 
procedure is currently the most widely used technique.69 The 
aneurysmal aorta is excised, and buttons of aortic wall are left 
surrounding both coronary arteries, which are then mobilized 
and sutured to the aortic graft (Fig. 22-6). The coronary suture 
lines may be reinforced with polytetrafluoroethylene felt or 
pericardium to enhance hemostasis. When the coronary arter-
ies cannot be mobilized adequately because of extremely large 
aneurysms or scarring from previous surgery, the Cabrol tech-
nique or a related modification can be used. Another option, 
originally described by Zubiate and Kay,70 is the construction 
of bypass grafts by using interposition saphenous vein or syn-
thetic grafts.
Aortic Arch Aneurysms  Several options are also available for 
handling aneurysms that extend into the transverse aortic arch 
(Fig. 22-4). The surgical approach depends on the extent of 
involvement and the need for cardiac and cerebral protection. 
Saccular aneurysms that arise from the lesser curvature of the 
distal transverse arch and that encompass <50% of the aortic 
circumference can be treated by patch graft aortoplasty. For 
fusiform aneurysms, when the distal portion of the arch is a 
reasonable size, a single, beveled replacement of the lower cur-
vature (hemiarch) is performed. More extensive arch aneurysms 
require total replacement involving a distal anastomosis to the 
proximal descending thoracic aorta and separate reattachment 
of the brachiocephalic branches. The brachiocephalic vessels 
are reattached to one or more openings made in the graft, or 
if these vessels are aneurysmal, they are replaced with sepa-
rate, smaller grafts. Recently, Y-graft approaches to aortic arch 
repair have been introduced71 that essentially debranch the 
brachiocephalic vessels and move them forward. This permits 
the distal anastomosis to be brought forward and aids in hemo-
stasis. When the aneurysm involves the entire arch and extends 
into the descending thoracic aorta, it is approached by using 
Borst’s elephant trunk technique of staged total arch replace-
ment.72 The distal anastomosis may be constructed by using 
a collared graft to accommodate any discrepancy in aortic 
diameter73 and is performed such that a portion of the graft is 
796
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
Figure 22-5.  Illustration of our current valve-sparing procedure for replacing the aortic root and ascending aorta for treatment of A. aortic 
root aneurysm. B. The ascending aorta is opened after cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest are established and the distal ascending 
aorta is clamped. The diseased aortic tissue (including the sinuses of Valsalva) is excised. Buttons of surrounding tissue are used to mobi-
lize the origins of the coronary arteries. C. A synthetic graft is sewn to the distal ascending aorta with continuous suture. D. After the distal 
anastomosis is completed, six sutures reinforced with Teflon pledgets are placed in the plane immediately below the aortic valve annulus. 
E. The subannular sutures are placed through the base of a synthetic aortic root graft, which is then is parachuted down around the valve. 
F. After the root graft is cut to an appropriate length, the valve commissures and leaflets are positioned within the graft. The annular sutures 
are then tied. G. Each of the three commissures is then secured near the top of the graft. H. The supra-annular aortic tissue is sewn to the graft 
in continuous fashion. I. The button surrounding the origin of the left main coronary artery is sewn to an opening cut in the root graft. J. The 
two aortic grafts are sewn together with continuous suture. K. The button surrounding the origin of the right coronary artery is sewn to an 
opening cut in the root graft. L. The completed valve-sparing aortic root replacement and graft repair of the ascending aorta is shown. (Used 
with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)
A
E
I
J
K
L
F
G
H
B
C
D
left suspended within the proximal descending thoracic aorta 
(Fig. 22-7). During a subsequent operation, this “trunk” is used 
to facilitate repair of the descending thoracic aorta through a 
thoracotomy incision. This technique permits access to the dis-
tal portion of the graft during the second operation without the 
need for dissection around the distal transverse aortic arch; this 
reduces the risk of injuring the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
esophagus, and pulmonary artery if an open approach is used at 
the second stage. As described in the section on hybrid repair of 
arch aneurysms (see later), the elephant trunk can be completed 
797
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
Figure 22-6.  Illustration of a modified Bentall procedure for 
replacing the aortic root and ascending aorta. The aortic valve and 
entire ascending aorta, including the sinuses of Valsalva, have been 
replaced by a mechanical composite valve graft. The coronary arter-
ies with buttons of surrounding aortic tissue have been mobilized 
and are being reattached to openings in the aortic graft.
by using a hybrid endovascular approach (Fig. 22-8) in certain 
settings.
Cardiopulmonary Bypass Perfusion Strategies  Like the operations 
themselves, perfusion strategies used during proximal aortic 
surgery depend on the extent of the repair. Aneurysms that are 
isolated to the ascending segment can be replaced by using 
standard cardiopulmonary bypass and distal ascending aortic 
clamping. This provides constant perfusion of the brain and 
other vital organs during the repair. Aneurysms involving the 
transverse aortic arch, however, cannot be clamped during the 
repair, which necessitates the temporary withdrawal of car-
diopulmonary bypass support; this is called circulatory arrest. 
To protect the brain and other vital organs during the circula-
tory arrest period, hypothermia must be initiated before pump 
flow is stopped. However, hypothermia is not without risk, and 
coagulopathy is associated with deep levels of hypothermia 
(below 20°C), which have been traditionally used in open arch 
repair. Recently, more moderate levels of hypothermia (often 
between 22°C and 24°C) have been introduced that appear to 
decrease risks associated with deep hypothermia while still 
providing sufficient brain protection. Nonetheless, although 
brief periods of circulatory arrest generally are well toler-
ated, even this recently modified technique continues to have 
substantial limitations; as the duration of circulatory arrest 
increases, the well-recognized risks of brain injury and death 
increase dramatically. Additionally, some authors have raised 
the concern that reducing the degree of hypothermia narrows 
the safety margin that deep hypothermia provides, because 
it increases the risk of ischemic complications involving the 
spinal cord, kidneys, and other organs that now receive less 
hypothermic protection.74
Because of the inherent complexity of aortic arch repairs 
and their general tendency to require longer periods of hypo-
thermic circulatory arrest, two cerebral perfusion strategies—
retrograde cerebral perfusion (RCP) and antegrade cerebral 
perfusion (ACP)—were developed to supplement this process 
by delivering cold, oxygenated blood to the brain and further 
reduce the risks associated with repair. Retrograde cerebral 
perfusion involves directing blood from the cardiopulmonary 
bypass circuit into the brain through the superior vena cava.75 
However, RCP is thought to be less beneficial than ACP,76 and 
although it may be helpful in the retrograde flushing of air and 
debris from the arch, most centers have stopped using RCP.
In contrast, ACP delivers blood directly into the brachio-
cephalic arteries to maintain cerebral flow. Although its use was 
cumbersome in the past, contemporary ACP techniques (Fig. 
22-9) have been simplified and commonly involve cannulating 
either the right axillary artery or the innominate artery and sub-
sequent connection to the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit.77,78 
Often, a small section of graft is used as a conduit to ease can-
nulation, but there remains a small procedure-related risk of 
brachial plexus or vascular injury. Upon initiation, cold blood 
is delivered into the brain via the right common carotid artery. 
Note that, with this technique, blood flow to the left side of the 
brain requires an intact circle of Willis.
Methods to help determine the adequacy of unilateral 
ACP to deliver cerebral cross-circulation include preoperative 
imaging and intraoperative monitoring. Our preferred method 
of intraoperative monitoring is brain near-infrared spectroscopy 
(NIRS), which measures cerebral oxygenation. If NIRS moni-
toring indicates inadequate perfusion, an additional perfusion 
catheter can be inserted into the left common carotid artery to 
provide blood flow to the left side of the brain. Because of the 
use of more moderate levels of hypothermia, some groups sup-
plement ACP with additional perfusion strategies that provide 
flow to the descending aorta during arch repair.79,80
Endovascular Repair  Experience with purely endovascular 
treatment of proximal aortic disease remains limited and only 
investigational. The unique anatomy of the aortic arch and the 
need for uninterrupted cerebral perfusion pose difficult chal-
lenges. There are reports of the use of “homemade” grafts 
to exclude arch aneurysms; however, these grafts are highly 
experimental at this time. For example, in 1999, Inoue and 
colleagues81 reported placing a triple-branched stent graft in a 
patient with an aneurysm of the aortic arch. The three brachio-
cephalic branches were positioned by placing percutaneous 
wires in the right brachial, left carotid, and left brachial arter-
ies. The patient underwent two subsequent procedures: surgi-
cal repair of a right brachial pseudoaneurysm and placement of 
a distal stent graft extension to control a major perigraft leak. 
Since then, efforts to employ endovascular techniques in the 
treatment of the proximal aorta have been essentially limited 
to the use of approved devices for off-label indications, such 
as the exclusion of pseudoaneurysms in the ascending aorta.
Hybrid Repair  Unlike purely endovascular approaches, hybrid 
repairs of the aortic arch have entered the mainstream clinical 
798
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
A
D
F
G
E
C
B
Figure 22-7.  Illustration of a contemporary Y-graft approach to total arch replacement for aortic arch aneurysm. A. The proximal portions 
of the brachiocephalic arteries are exposed. B. The first two branches of the graft are sewn end-to-end to the transected left subclavian and 
left common carotid arteries. The proximal ends of the transected brachiocephalic arteries are ligated. C. A balloon-tipped perfusion cannula 
is placed inside the double Y-graft and used to deliver antegrade cerebral perfusion. After systemic circulatory arrest is initiated, the innomi-
nate artery is clamped, transected, and sewn to the distal end of the main graft. D. The proximal aspect of the Y-graft is clamped. This directs 
flow from the axillary artery to all three brachiocephalic arteries. The arch is then replaced with a collared elephant trunk graft. E. The distal 
anastomosis between the elephant trunk graft and the aorta is created between the innominate and left common carotid arteries. The collared 
graft accommodates any discrepancy in aortic diameter. F. The aortic graft is clamped, and a second limb from the arterial inflow tubing of 
the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit is used to deliver systemic perfusion through a side-branch of the arch graft while the proximal portion 
of the ascending aorta is replaced. Once the proximal aortic anastomosis is completed, the main trunk of the double Y-graft is cut to an 
appropriate length, and the beveled end is then sewn to an oval opening created in the right anterolateral aspect of the ascending aortic graft, 
which completes the repair G. (Adapted from LeMaire et al,73 Fig. 2. Used with permission. kkjkjdht The Society of Thoracic Surgeons.) 
arena, although they remain controversial. Hybrid arch repairs 
involve some form of “debranching” of the brachiocephalic 
vessels (which are not unlike Y-graft approaches), followed 
by endovascular exclusion of some or all of the aortic arch 
(Fig. 22-10). Although this technique has many variants, they 
often involve sewing a branched graft to the proximal ascend-
ing aorta with the use of a partial aortic clamp. The branches 
of the graft are then sewn to the arch vessels. Once the arch 
is “debranched,” the arch aneurysm can be excluded with 
an endograft. Commonly, a zone 0 approach (Fig. 22-11) is 
undertaken, in which the proximal end of the endograft lies 
between the ascending aorta and the origins of the innomi-
nate artery. Other hybrid approaches aim to extend repair 
into the distal arch and descending thoracic aorta (see later). 
The arguments for using a hybrid approach to treat aortic 
arch aneurysms include the elimination of cardiopulmonary 
bypass, circulatory arrest, and cardiac ischemia, although in 
practice, these adjuncts are frequently used during hybrid 
proximal aortic repairs.82
It is not yet clear whether hybrid repairs are as durable as 
traditional ones because little mid- or long-term data have been 
published, and no large-scale studies have compared hybrid and 
traditional repairs. Procedure-related risks include the risk of 
embolization and stroke due to wire and device manipulation 
within the aortic arch (this risk appears to be greatest in zone 0 
repairs83), retrograde acute aortic dissection,84 type I endoleak,85 
799
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
A
B
C
Figure 22-8.  Illustration of Borst’s elephant trunk technique using a contemporary Y-graft approach. A. Stage 1: The proximal repair 
includes replacing the ascending aorta and entire arch, with Y-graft reattachment of the brachiocephalic vessels. The distal anastomosis is 
facilitated by using a collared elephant trunk graft to accommodate the larger diameter of the distal aorta. A section of the graft is left sus-
pended within the proximal descending thoracic aorta. B. Stage 2: The distal repair uses the floating “trunk” for the proximal anastomosis. 
C. An alternate “hybrid” approach may be used in patients with less extensive distal aortic disease. Endovascular stent grafts are placed within 
the elephant trunk to complete the repair. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)
Figure 22-9.  Illustration of a contemporary technique for delivering antegrade cerebral perfusion during aortic arch repair. A. A graft sewn 
to the right axillary artery is used to return oxygenated blood from the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit. B. After adequate hypothermia is 
established, the innominate artery is occluded with a tourniquet (inset) so that flow is diverted to the right common carotid artery, which 
maintains cerebral circulation. (Images adapted from Gravlee GP, Davis RF, Stammers AH, et al, eds. Cardiopulmonary Bypass: Principles 
and Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2008, Chap. 32, Fig. 1A,B. kkjkjdht Wolters Kluwer Health.)
and paraplegia.24 Some centers have begun to replace a small 
section of the ascending aorta such that the endograft does not 
land in native aortic tissue, because this may reduce the risk of 
iatrogenic dissection.84 In a recent expert consensus document, 
the recommendation was to limit direct stenting of the aortic 
arch to patients who fall into the high surgical risk ­category. 
These are patients with significant comorbidities such as chronic 
pulmonary disease.86
Distal Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Open Repair  In patients with descending thoracic or thoracoabdom-
inal aortic aneurysms, several aspects of treatment—including 
800
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
A
B
C
Undeployed
endograft
5-French
sheath
Stiff
guidewire
Marked pigtail
catheter
Delivery
sheath
Figure 22-10.  Illustration of a hybrid arch repair. A. A distal arch aneurysm, which extends into the proximal aspect of the descending 
thoracic aorta, is shown. B. The brachiocephalic vessels are debranched onto a double Y-graft, and a separate graft is used as a conduit for 
antegrade endovascular deployment of the stent-graft. C. The completed repair. The proximal landing zone of the endograft is within zone 0. 
(Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)
Right common
carotid artery
Innominate
artery
Left common
carotid artery
Left subclavian
artery
Landing Zone Classifications
Figure 22-11.  Illustration of the Criado landing zones, which 
are used to describe aortic anatomy during thoracic endovascu-
lar repair. The arch is the short segment that includes the origins 
of the three brachiocephalic arteries—the innominate artery, the 
left common carotid artery, and the left subclavian artery. Zone 0 
includes the ascending aorta and the origin of the innominate artery. 
Zone 1 includes the origin of the left common carotid artery. Zone 
2 includes the left subclavian artery origin. Zone 3 is a short section 
of the aorta that comprises the 2 cm immediately distal to the origin of 
the left subclavian artery, and Zone 4 begins where Zone 3 ends. (Used 
with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)
801
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
preoperative risk assessment, anesthetic management, choice 
of incision, and use of protective adjuncts—are dictated by the 
overall extent of aortic involvement. By definition, descending 
­thoracic aortic aneurysms involve the portion of the aorta between 
the left subclavian artery and the diaphragm. Thoracoabdominal 
aneurysms can involve the entire thoracoabdominal aorta, from the 
origin of the left subclavian artery to the aortic bifurcation. Surgi-
cal repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms is categorized by 
the extent of aortic replacement according to the Crawford clas-
sification scheme (Fig. 22-12). Extent I thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysm repairs involve most of the descending thoracic aorta, 
usually beginning near the left subclavian artery, and extend down 
into the suprarenal abdominal aorta. Extent II repairs also begin 
near the left subclavian artery but extend distally into the infrarenal 
abdominal aorta, and they often reach the aortic bifurcation. Extent 
III repairs extend from the lower descending thoracic aorta (below 
the sixth rib) and into the abdomen. Extent IV repairs begin at the 
diaphragmatic hiatus and often involve the entire abdominal aorta.
Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms are repaired through 
a left thoracotomy. In patients with thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysms, the thoracotomy is extended across the costal mar-
gin and into the abdomen. Use of a double-lumen endobronchial 
tube allows selective ventilation of the right lung and deflation 
of the left lung. Transperitoneal exposure of the thoracoabdomi-
nal aorta is achieved by performing medial visceral rotation and 
circumferential division of the diaphragm. During a period of 
aortic clamping, the diseased segment is replaced with a polyes-
ter tube graft. Important branch arteries—including intercostal 
arteries and the celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal arteries—
are reattached to openings made in the side of the graft. Visceral 
and renal artery occlusive disease is commonly encountered 
during aneurysm repair; options for correcting branch vessel 
stenosis include endarterectomy, direct arterial stenting, and 
bypass grafting.
Clamping the descending thoracic aorta causes ischemia 
of the spinal cord and abdominal viscera. Clinically signifi-
cant manifestations of hepatic, pancreatic, and bowel ischemia 
are relatively uncommon. However, both acute renal failure 
and spinal cord injury resulting in paraplegia or paraparesis 
remain major causes of morbidity and mortality after these 
Figure 22-12.  Illustration of the Crawford classification of thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair based on the extent of aortic 
replacement. (Reproduced with permission from Coselli et al,232 
Fig. 1. kkjkjdht The Society of Thoracic Surgeons.)
operations. Therefore, several aspects of the operation are 
devoted to minimizing spinal and renal ischemia (Table 22-3). 
Our multimodal approach to spinal cord protection includes 
expeditious repair to minimize aortic clamping time, mod-
erate systemic heparinization (1.0 mg/kg) to prevent small-
vessel thrombosis, mild permissive hypothermia (32°C–34°C 
[89.6°–93.2°F] nasopharyngeal temperature), and reattachment 
of segmental intercostal and lumbar arteries. As the aorta is 
replaced from proximal to distal, the aortic clamp is moved 
sequentially to lower positions along the graft to restore per-
fusion to newly reattached branch vessels. During extensive 
thoracoabdominal aortic repairs (i.e., Crawford extent I and II 
repairs), cerebrospinal fluid drainage is used. The ben-
efits of this adjunct, which improves spinal perfusion by 
reducing cerebrospinal fluid pressure, have been confirmed 
in a prospective, randomized trial performed by our group.87 
Motor evoked potentials are used by some groups to monitor 
the spinal cord throughout the operation.88,89 Left heart bypass, 
which provides perfusion of the distal aorta and its branches 
during the clamping period, is also used during extensive tho-
racoabdominal aortic repairs.90-92 Because left heart bypass 
unloads the heart, it is also useful in patients with poor car-
diac reserve. Balloon perfusion cannulas connected to the left 
heart bypass circuit can be used to deliver blood directly to 
the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery during their reat-
tachment. The potential benefits of reducing hepatic and bowel 
ischemia include reduced risks of postoperative coagulopathy 
and bacterial translocation, respectively. Whenever possible, 
renal protection is achieved by perfusing the kidneys with 
cold (4°C [39.2°F]) crystalloid. In a randomized clinical trial, 
reduced kidney temperature was found to be associated with 
renal protection, and the use of cold crystalloid independently 
predicted preserved renal function.93
Hypothermic circulatory arrest can also be used during 
descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aortic repairs.94 
At our center, the primary indication for this approach is the 
inability to clamp the aorta because of rupture, extremely large 
aneurysm size, or extension of the aneurysm into the distal 
transverse aortic arch, or because a prior endovascular repair 
hinders clamping.55
As discussed previously, complete repair of extensive 
aneurysms involving the ascending aorta, transverse arch, and 
Table 22-3
Current strategy for spinal cord and visceral protection 
during repair of distal thoracic aortic aneurysms
All extents
•  Permissive mild hypothermia (32°C–34°C, 
nasopharyngeal)
•  Moderate heparinization (1 mg/kg)
•  Aggressive reattachment of segmental arteries, especially 
between T8 and L1
•  Sequential aortic clamping when possible
•  Perfusion of renal arteries with 4°C crystalloid solution 
when possible
Crawford extent I and II thoracoabdominal repairs
•  Cerebrospinal fluid drainage
•  Left heart bypass during proximal anastomosis
•  Selective perfusion of celiac axis and superior mesenteric 
artery during intercostal and visceral anastomoses
7
802
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
Figure 22-13.  Illustration of the reversed elephant trunk technique using a traditional “island” approach to total aortic arch replacement. 
A. Stage 1: The distal aorta is repaired through a left thoracoabdominal approach. The aneurysm is opened after the aorta is clamped between 
the left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery, which is also clamped. Before the proximal anastomosis is performed, the end 
of the graft is partly invaginated to leave a “trunk” for the subsequent repair. Proximal intercostal arteries are oversewn. B. After the proximal 
suture line is completed, the clamps are repositioned to restore blood flow to the left subclavian artery. The repair is completed by reattaching 
patent intercostal arteries to an opening in the side of the graft and creating a beveled distal anastomosis at the level of the visceral branches. 
C. Stage 2: The proximal aorta is repaired through a median sternotomy. The aortic arch is opened under hypothermic circulatory arrest. The 
“trunk” is pulled out and used to replace the aortic arch and ascending aorta. This eliminates the need for a new distal anastomosis and simpli-
fies the procedure. Circulatory arrest and operative time, along with their attendant risks, are reduced. D. The completed two-stage repair of 
the entire thoracic aorta. (Reproduced with permission from Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Carter SA, et al: The reversed elephant trunk technique 
used for treatment of complex aneurysms of the entire thoracic aorta. Ann Thorac Surg 2005; 80:2166, Figs. 2, 3, 7, and 8. kkjkjdht The 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons.)
descending thoracic aorta generally requires staged operations. In 
such procedures, when the descending or thoracoabdominal com-
ponent is symptomatic (e.g., causes back pain or has ruptured) 
or is disproportionately large (compared with the ascending 
aorta), the distal segment is treated during the initial operation, 
and repair of the ascending aorta and transverse aortic arch is 
performed as a second procedure. A reversed elephant trunk 
repair, in which a portion of the proximal end of the aortic graft 
is inverted down into the lumen, can be performed during the first 
operation; this technique facilitates the second-stage repair of the 
ascending aorta and transverse aortic arch (Fig. 22-13).95
Although spinal cord ischemia and renal failure receive 
the most attention, several other complications warrant con-
sideration. The most common complication of extensive 
repairs is pulmonary dysfunction. With aneurysms adjacent 
to the left subclavian artery, the vagus and left recurrent 
laryngeal nerves are often adherent to the aortic wall and 
thus are susceptible to injury. Vocal cord paralysis should be 
803
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
­suspected in patients who have postoperative hoarseness, and 
the presence of nerve damage should be confirmed by endo-
scopic examination. Vocal cord paralysis can be treated effec-
tively by direct cord medialization (type 1 thyroplasty). Injury 
to the esophagus during the proximal anastomosis can have 
catastrophic consequences. Carefully separating the proximal 
descending thoracic aorta from the underlying esophagus 
before performing the proximal anastomosis minimizes the 
risk of a secondary aortoesophageal fistula. In patients who 
have previously undergone coronary artery bypass with a left 
internal thoracic artery graft, clamping proximal to the left 
subclavian artery can precipitate severe myocardial ischemia 
and cardiac arrest. When the need to clamp at this location is 
anticipated in these patients, a left common carotid to sub-
clavian bypass is performed to prevent cardiac complications 
(Fig. 22-14).96
Endovascular Repair
Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms  Stent graft repair of 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms has become an accepted 
treatment option for selected patients.86 Although aortic repair 
with a self-fixing endoprosthesis was reported by Volodos97 
in the mid-1980s, it was the report by Parodi and associates98 
of using endovascular stent grafting to repair abdominal aortic 
aneurysms that helped popularize this approach. Only 3 years 
after this seminal report was published, Dake and colleagues99 
reported performing endovascular descending thoracic aortic 
repair with “homemade” stent grafts in 13 patients.
Although endografting was initially approved to treat 
degenerative descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, recently 
some newer devices have been approved for use in blunt aortic 
injury, as well as for penetrating aortic ulcers (see Penetrating 
Aortic Ulcer discussed later). However, in practice, off-label use 
of stent-grafts is exceedingly common, and they are frequently 
used in patients with aortic dissection or ruptured aneurysm. 
Although the use of stent-grafts in cases of aortic infection is not 
ideal, patients with fistula or mycotic aneurysm may be treated 
endovascularly as a bridge to open repair. Reporting standards 
to uniformly describe the endovascular repair process have been 
recently introduced,100 as have guidelines for the use of endovas-
cular repair in thoracic aortic disease.40
In elderly patients with severe comorbidity and patients 
who have undergone previous complex thoracic aortic proce-
dures, endovascular repair is a particularly attractive alterna-
tive to standard surgical procedures. The patients tend to have a 
lower incidence of intraoperative complications, a shorter length 
of stay, and a higher likelihood of being discharged to home 
than those who undergo open repair.49 As mentioned previously, 
appropriate patient selection depends on specific measurements 
taken from preoperative CT angiograms.
To protect patients against spinal cord ischemia during 
these endovascular repairs, many surgeons use cerebrospinal 
Figure 22-14.  Illustration of a thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair in a patient with a patent left 
internal thoracic artery–to–left anterior descending 
coronary artery graft. The proximal anastomosis is 
being performed while the aorta is clamped between 
the left common carotid and subclavian arteries. Myo-
cardial perfusion is maintained through the carotid-
subclavian bypass graft. (Reproduced with permission 
from Jones et al,96 Fig. 2. kkjkjdht The Society of 
­Thoracic Surgeons.)
804
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
fluid drainage. The first step in the repair procedure is to obtain 
appropriate vascular access for the insertion of the thoracic 
stent graft. If the femoral artery will not accommodate the nec-
essary sheath, then an iliac artery is exposed. A graft can be 
sewn to the iliac artery in an end-to-side fashion to facilitate 
the deployment of the endograft. After 5000 to 10,000 units of 
heparin are administered, a guidewire and the delivery sheath 
are typically inserted into the access artery under fluoroscopic 
guidance; recently, sheathless stent-grafts have been intro-
duced, which are less bulky. The endograft is then advanced 
into the aorta and suitably positioned. Note that the best view 
of the distal arch and descending thoracic aorta is usually in 
the left anterior oblique position at an angle of approximately 
40 to 50 degrees. The device is then deployed, and the proxi-
mal and distal ends are expanded by using a balloon catheter 
(“ballooned”), which optimizes the seal between the device 
and the aortic wall at this landing zone. An aortogram is then 
taken to rule out any endoleak, and protamine is administered.
Although it is not uncommon to cover the left subcla-
vian artery with the endograft to lengthen the proximal landing 
zone,101 findings suggest that the risk of spinal cord complica-
tions is heightened when the subclavian artery is covered and 
not revascularized, presumably because of a loss of collateral 
circulation to the spinal cord.102 To prevent this complication, a 
carotid-to-subclavian bypass can be easily constructed to main-
tain vertebral artery blood flow and minimize neurologic injury 
(Fig. 22-15).103,104 In addition, new generations of stent grafts 
are being designed with side branches that can be placed within 
the left subclavian artery. This feature is particularly attractive if 
the proximal neck is short or if the patient has a patent left inter-
nal thoracic artery–to–left anterior descending coronary artery 
bypass. Because a significant number of patients have coexisting 
coronary artery disease, care must be taken to avoid left subcla-
vian artery occlusion in patients with previous coronary surgery 
unless a carotid-to-subclavian bypass has been performed.
Elephant Trunk Completion  In select patients, elephant trunk com-
pletion repairs may be done endovascularly (Fig. 22-8C), rather 
than by an open approach through a thoracotomy.105 Recall that 
an elephant trunk is used when an aortic aneurysm extends from 
the distal arch to the descending thoracic aorta. An endograft 
can be deployed at the time of elephant trunk construction or 
during a separate, subsequent procedure.84,106 When the stent is 
deployed in a retrograde manner in such a second-stage proce-
dure, the procedure is facilitated by placing radiopaque markers 
at the end of the elephant trunk during the first-stage procedure. 
This allows the distal end of the trunk to be identified via fluo-
roscopy. A guidewire can then be manipulated into the trunk 
and advanced into the ascending aorta to stabilize it during stent 
deployment. Note that advancing a wire in ­retrograde fashion 
from the femoral artery into the ­elephant trunk can be challeng-
ing. Occasionally, the wire must be advanced in an antegrade 
fashion from a brachial artery. Variations of this approach 
include the frozen elephant trunk, but this technique is most 
commonly used in patients with extensive aortic dissection (see 
Acute Dissection discussed later).
Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms  Although endovascular tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair remains experimental, 
it has been shown to be feasible in a few specialized centers. 
Endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs are 
quite complex, because at least one of the visceral arteries is 
incorporated into the repair. The number of visceral branches 
that need to be addressed varies with the extent of aortic cover-
age.107 The types of stent grafts used include fenestrated grafts, 
reinforced fenestrated grafts, branched or cuffed grafts, modular 
combinations of grafts, and multilayer stents.108 Graft fenestra-
tions and branch vessels are typically aligned by using inflatable 
angioplasty balloons. Procedure time is not insignificant, nor 
is the amount of contrast medium required to obtain the highly 
detailed images needed to plan these procedures. In addition, 
some of the stent grafts used in endovascular thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair are custom-made in advance and thus 
may take several weeks to obtain; therefore, their use is limited 
to cases of elective repair.84 In efforts to hasten repair and uti-
lize off-the-shelf devices, parallel graft approaches, which use 
a combination of large- and small-diameter stents, have been 
reported.109 And, although some centers now propose distal cov-
erage of the celiac axis110 for extent I thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysm repairs, this potentially risky approach is not widely 
used.
It should be noted that, like open thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysm repair, endovascular repair carries risks of paraplegia, 
renal failure, stroke, and death, despite the apparent benefits 
of its being a less invasive procedure. Notably, reports from 
centers experienced in endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic 
repair primarily describe limited extent IV repairs.54 For the near 
future, endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair 
should be considered investigational.
Hybrid Repair  As discussed previously, hybrid aortic repairs are 
extremely heterogeneous. For extensive distal aortic repairs, 
approaches such as the hybrid elephant trunk (described 
­previously) are not feasible because the aneurysm extends 
beyond the visceral arteries. However, extensive hybrid thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair111,112 may be a life-saving 
option in patients at high surgical risk, such as those who have 
limited physiologic reserve, are of advanced age, or have sig-
nificant comorbidities. Hybrid procedures use open surgical 
techniques to reroute blood supply to the visceral arteries so 
that their aortic origins can be covered by stent grafts without 
causing visceral ischemia (see Fig. 22-16). Endovascular meth-
ods are then used (either as part of the same procedure or at 
a later stage) to repair the aortic aneurysm, often with simple 
tube stent grafts; such devices are more readily available than 
the customized, modular stent grafts deployed in strictly endo-
vascular repairs. Overall, results for hybrid thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair have been somewhat disappointing.113 
However, a few centers report acceptable outcomes in high-risk 
patients, particularly when a staged hybrid approach is used.114
Postoperative Considerations
Open Procedures  Aortic anastomoses are often extremely 
fragile during the early postoperative period. Even brief epi-
sodes of postoperative hypertension can disrupt suture lines 
and precipitate severe bleeding or pseudoaneurysm forma-
tion. Therefore, during the initial 24 to 48 hours, meticulous 
blood pressure control is maintained to protect the integrity 
of the anastomoses. Generally, we liberally use IV vasoactive 
agents to keep the mean arterial blood pressure between 80 and 
90 mmHg. In patients with extremely friable aortic tissue, such 
as those with Marfan syndrome, we lower the target range to 
between 70 and 80 mmHg. It is a delicate balancing act, 
because one must be mindful of spinal cord perfusion and 
avoid periods of relative hypotension while maintaining these 
low pressures.
805
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
Figure 22-15.  Illustration of a hybrid repair of the proximal descending thoracic aorta. A. The preoperative representation of the aneurysm 
shows that establishing a 2-cm proximal landing zone for a stent graft will require covering the origin of the left subclavian artery. B. Through 
a supraclavicular approach, a bypass from the left common carotid artery to the left subclavian artery is performed to reroute circulation and 
create a landing zone for the stent graft. After the bypass is completed, the left subclavian artery is ligated proximal to the graft. C. In the 
completed zone 2 hybrid repair, the aneurysm has been excluded successfully by a stent graft that covers the origin of the left subclavian 
artery, and blood flow to the left vertebral artery and arm is preserved by the bypass graft. (Reproduced with permission from Bozinovski 
et al,103 Figs. 9, 10, and 11. kkjkjdht The Society of Thoracic Surgeons.)
Vertebral
artery
Subclavian
artery
Phrenic
nerve
Anterior scalene
muscle (divided)
Internal thoracic
artery
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle (divided)
Common
carotid artery
Vagus
nerve
A
B
C
Endovascular Procedures  As experience with descending 
thoracic aortic stent grafts continues to accumulate, so too do 
reports of both early and late complications.55,115,116 Many of 
these ­complications are directly related to manipulation of the 
delivery system within the iliac arteries and aorta.117 Patients 
with small, calcified, tortuous iliofemoral arteries are at particu-
larly high risk for life-threatening iliac artery rupture. Although 
aortic rupture appears to be rare during thoracic stent graft pro-
cedures, acute iatrogenic retrograde dissection into the ­aortic arch 
and ascending aorta is a relatively common and life-threatening 
806
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
complication that requires emergency repair of the ascend-
ing aorta and aortic arch via sternotomy and cardiopulmonary 
bypass. There are many reports of this complication, and it 
appears most common in off-label applications55 such as hybrid 
arch approaches84 and the treatment of descending thoracic aortic 
dissection.118  Retrograde proximal dissection converts a local-
ized descending thoracic aortic aneurysm into an acute problem 
involving the entire thoracic aorta. Of note, retrograde aortic 
dissection may also occur several months after initial repair.119
Another significant complication of descending thoracic 
aortic stent grafting is endoleak. An endoleak occurs when there 
is a persistent flow of blood (visible on radiologic ­imaging) into 
the aneurysm sac, and it may occur during the initial proce-
Figure 22-16.  Illustration of a hybrid approach—which combines 
open and endovascular techniques—for repair of an extensive aortic 
aneurysm. Debranching the arch and thoracoabdominal segments 
allows the use of a series of endovascular stent grafts to exclude 
the entire aneurysm.
dure or develop over time. Although endoleaks are a relatively 
­common complication,120 they are not benign, because they 
lead to continual pressurization of the sac, which can cause 
expansion or even rupture. These complications are catego-
rized (Table 22-4) according to the site of the leak.100 Although 
all endoleaks may progress such that they can be considered 
life-threatening, type I and type III endoleaks generally neces-
sitate early and aggressive intervention. Recently published 
reporting guidelines aid standardized reporting.100
Other complications include stent graft misdeployment, 
device migration, endograft kinking, and stent-graft infection, 
including fistula. Although not all complications related to stent 
grafts are fatal, endovascular repairs should be performed by 
expert teams qualified to address the variety of problems that may 
arise; some patients may need to have these devices removed and 
replaced with polyester grafts.55,115,116 Complications of endovas-
cular repair are relatively common, so regularly scheduled radio-
logic imaging surveillance is of the utmost importance.
AORTIC DISSECTION
Pathology and Classification
Aortic dissection, the most common catastrophic event involv-
ing the aorta, is a progressive separation of the aortic wall lay-
ers that usually occurs after a tear forms in the intima and inner 
media. As the separation of the layers of the media propagates, 
at least two channels form (Fig. 22-17): the original lumen, 
which remains lined by the intima and which is called the true 
lumen, and the newly formed channel within the layers of the 
media, which is called the false lumen. The dissecting mem-
brane separates the true and false lumens. Additional tears in 
the dissecting membrane that allow communication between 
Table 22-4
Classification of and common treatment strategies for 
endoleak
Type I
•  Incomplete seal between stent graft and aorta at the 
proximal landing site (Type Ia), the distal landing site 
(Type Ib), or branch module, fenestration, or plug (Type Ic)
•  Early reintervention to improve seal or conversion to open 
surgery
Type II
•  Retrograde perfusion of sac from excluded collateral 
arteries
•  Surveillance; as-needed occlusion with percutaneous or 
other interventions
Type III
•  Incomplete seal between overlapping stent graft or module 
(Type IIIa), or tear in graft fabric (Type IIIb)
•  Early reintervention to cover gap or tear or conversion to 
open surgery
Type IV
•  Perfusion of sac due to porosity of material
•  Surveillance; as-needed reintervention to reline stent graft
Type V
•  Expansion of sac with no identifiable source
•  Surveillance; as-needed reintervention to reline stent graft
807
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
the two channels are called reentry sites. Although the sepa-
ration of layers primarily progresses distally along the length 
of the aorta, it can also proceed in a proximal direction; this 
process often is referred to as proximal extension or retrograde 
dissection.
The extensive disruption of the aortic wall has severe 
anatomic consequences (Fig. 22-18). First, the outer wall of 
the false lumen is extremely thin, inflamed, and fragile, which 
makes it prone to expansion or rupture in the face of ongoing 
hemodynamic stress. Second, the expanding false lumen can 
compress the true lumen and cause malperfusion syndrome by 
interfering with blood flow in the aorta or any of its branch ves-
sels, including the coronary, carotid, intercostal, visceral, renal, 
and iliac arteries. Finally, when the separation of layers occurs 
within the aortic root, the aortic valve commissures can become 
unhinged, which results in acute valvular regurgitation. The 
clinical consequences of each of these sequelae are addressed 
in detail in the section on clinical manifestations.
Dissection vs. Aneurysm.  The relationship between dissec-
tion and aneurysmal disease requires clarification. Dissection 
and aneurysm are separate entities, although they often coexist 
and are mutual risk factors. In most cases, dissection occurs in 
patients without aneurysms. The subsequent progressive dilata-
tion of the weakened outer aortic wall results in an aneurysm. 
On the other hand, in patients with degenerative aneurysms, 
the ongoing deterioration of the aortic wall can lead to a super-
imposed dissection. The overused term dissecting aneurysm 
should be reserved for this specific situation.
Classification.  For management purposes, aortic dissections 
are classified according to their location and chronicity. Improve-
ments in imaging have increasingly revealed variants of aortic 
dissection that probably represent different forms along the 
­spectrum of this condition.
Normal aorta
Aortic dissection
Intramural hematoma
Penetrating aortic ulcer
Figure 22-17.  Illustration of longitudinal sections of the aortic wall and lumen. Blood flows freely downstream in normal aortic tissue. In 
classic aortic dissection, blood entering the media through a tear creates a false channel in the wall. Intramural hematomas arise when hemor-
rhage from the vasa vasorum causes blood to collect within the media; the intima is intact. Penetrating aortic ulcers are deep atherosclerotic 
lesions that burrow into the aortic wall and allow blood to enter the media. In each of these conditions, the outer aortic wall is severely 
weakened and prone to rupture.
Location  To guide treatment, dissections are categorized 
according to their anatomic location and extent. The two tra-
ditional classification schemes that remain in common use 
are the DeBakey and the Stanford classification systems 
(Fig. 22-19).121,122 In their current forms, both of these schemes 
describe the segments of aorta that are involved in the dissec-
tion, rather than the site of the initial intimal tear. The main 
drawback of the Stanford classification system is that it does 
not distinguish between patients with isolated ascending aor-
tic dissection and patients with dissection involving the entire 
aorta. Both types of patients would be classified as having type 
A dissections, despite the fact that their treatment, follow-up, 
and prognosis are substantially different.
Additional classification schemas include that by Borst 
and associates,123 in which the ascending and descending aorta 
are considered independently; the recent modification of the 
DeBakey classification by Tsagakis et al,124 which extends type 
II dissection into the aortic arch; and the Penn modification of 
the Stanford classification,125,126 which expands the classifica-
tion to include the presence of tissue and global malperfusion. 
These modifications may help to better streamline the primary 
surgical intervention; patients with isolated proximal aortic dis-
section usually undergo emergent operation, as do patients with 
both proximal and distal aortic dissection. Patients with isolated 
distal aortic dissection are typically treated medically, unless 
complications requiring surgery develop. Additionally, these 
changes are reflective of a shift in some aortic centers from the 
more traditional approach that is primarily focused on emergent 
surgical repair of the ascending aorta toward one that, in select 
patients, additionally treats distal dissection entry points with 
off-label endovascular therapy.127
Chronicity  Aortic dissection also is categorized according to 
the time elapsed since the initial tear. Dissection is considered 
808
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
Figure 22-18.  Illustration of the potential ana-
tomic consequences of aortic dissection, with 
a mapped diagram of affected regions (inset). 
A. Ascending aortic rupture and cardiac tam-
ponade. B. Disruption of coronary blood flow. 
C. Injury to the aortic valve causing regurgita-
tion. D, E, and F. Compromised blood flow to 
branch vessels, causing ischemic complications. 
(Images adapted from Creager MA, Dzau VS, 
Loscalzo J, eds. Vascular Medicine. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 2006. kkjkjdht © Saunders/
Elsevier, 2006. Fig. 35-1.)
acute within the first 14 days after the initial tear; after 14 days, 
the dissection is considered chronic. Although arbitrary, the dis-
tinction between acute and chronic dissections has important 
implications, not only for decision-making about perioperative 
management strategies and operative techniques, but also for 
evaluating surgical results. Figure 22-20 provides an algorithm 
for the management of acute aortic dissection. In light of the 
importance of acuity, Borst and associates123 have proposed 
a third phase—termed subacute—to describe the transition 
between the acute and chronic phases. The subacute period 
encompasses days 15 through 60 after the initial tear. Although 
this is past the traditional 14-day acute phase, patients with sub-
acute dissection continue to have extremely fragile aortic tis-
sue, which may complicate operative treatment and increase the 
risks associated with surgery.
Variants  As noted earlier, advancements in noninvasive 
imaging of the aorta have revealed variants of aortic dissection 
(see Fig. 22-17). The recently introduced term acute aortic 
­syndrome encompasses classic aortic dissection and its vari-
ants. Other aortic syndromes, which were once thought to be 
rare, include intramural hematoma (IMH) and penetrating 
aortic ulcer (PAU). Although the issue is somewhat controver-
sial, the current consensus is that, in most cases, these variants 
of dissection should be treated identically to classic dissection.
An IMH is a collection of blood within the aortic wall, 
without an intimal tear, that is believed to be due to rupture of 
the vasa vasorum within the media. The accumulation of blood 
can result in a secondary intimal tear that ultimately leads to 
a dissection.128 Because IMH and aortic dissection represent a 
continuum, it is possible that IMH is seen less frequently than 
aortic dissection because IMH rapidly progresses to true dissec-
tion. The prevalence of IMH among patients with acute aortic 
syndromes is approximately 6%, and 16% progress to full dis-
section.129 An IMH can be classified according to its location 
(i.e., ascending or descending) and should be treated analogously 
to classic dissection.130
809
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
A PAU is essentially a disrupted atherosclerotic plaque 
that projects into the aortic wall and is associated with surround-
ing hematoma. Eventually, the ulcer can penetrate the aortic 
wall, which leads to dissection or rupture. The rate of disease 
progression is higher than that of IMH alone.131
Causes and Clinical History
Aortic dissection is a lethal condition with a reported incidence of 
3.5 per 100,000 in the United States.132 Without appropriate mod-
ern medical or surgical treatment, most patients (approximately 
90%) die within 3 months of dissection, mostly from rupture.133,134
Although several risk factors for aortic dissection have 
been identified, the specific causes remain unknown. Ultimately, 
any condition that weakens the aortic wall increases the risk of 
aortic dissection. Common general cardiovascular risk factors, 
such as smoking, hypertension, atherosclerosis, and hypercho-
lesterolemia, are associated with aortic dissection. Patients with 
connective tissue disorders, aortitis, bicuspid aortic valve, or 
preexisting medial degenerative disease are at risk for dissec-
tion, especially if they already have a thoracic aortic aneurysm.21 
Aortic injury during cardiac catheterization, surgery, or endo-
vascular aortic repair is a common cause of iatrogenic dissec-
tion. Other conditions that are associated with aortic dissection 
include cocaine and amphetamine abuse,135 as well as severe 
emotional stress or extreme physical exertion such as during 
weightlifting.136 Advances in the understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms behind abdominal aortic aneurysms have prompted 
similar investigations of thoracic aortic dissection.137-139
Clinical Manifestations
The onset of dissection often is associated with severe chest 
or back pain, classically described as “tearing,” that migrates 
­distally as the dissection progresses along the length of the 
aorta. The location of the pain often indicates which aortic 
segments are involved. Pain in the anterior chest suggests 
involvement of the ascending aorta, whereas pain in the back 
and abdomen generally indicates involvement of the descend-
ing and thoracoabdominal aorta. Additional clinical sequelae 
of acute aortic dissection vary substantially and are best 
considered in terms of the dissection’s potential anatomic 
manifestations at each level of the aorta (see Fig. 22-18 and 
Table 22-5). Thus, potential complications of dissection of the 
aorta (and involved secondary arteries) may include cardiac 
ischemia (coronary artery) or tamponade, stroke (brachioce-
phalic arteries), paraplegia or paraparesis (intercostal arteries), 
mesenteric ischemia (superior mesenteric artery), kidney fail-
ure (renal arteries), and limb ischemia or loss of motor function 
(brachial or femoral arteries).
Ascending aortic dissection can directly injure the aortic 
valve, causing regurgitation. The severity of the regurgitation 
varies with the degree of commissural disruption, which ranges 
from partial separation of only one commissure, producing mild 
valvular regurgitation, to full separation of all three commis-
sures and complete prolapse of the valve into the left ventricle, 
producing severe acute heart failure. Patients with acute aortic 
valve regurgitation may report worsening dyspnea.
Ascending dissections also can extend into the coronary 
arteries or shear the coronary ostia off of the true lumen, caus-
ing acute coronary occlusion; when this occurs, it most often 
involves the right coronary artery. The sudden disruption of 
coronary blood flow can cause a myocardial infarction. This 
presentation of acute myocardial ischemia can mask the pres-
ence of aortic dissection, which results in delayed diagnosis and 
treatment.140
Figure 22-19.  Illustration of the clas-
sification schemes for aortic dissec-
tion based on which portions of the 
aorta are involved. Dissection can be 
confined to the ascending aorta (left) 
or descending aorta (middle), or it can 
involve the entire aorta (right). (Repro-
duced with permission from Creager 
MA, Dzau VS, Loscalzo J, eds. Vascu-
lar Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
ders; 2006. kkjkjdht © Saunders/
Elsevier, 2006, Fig. 35-2).
810
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
The thin and inflamed outer wall of a dissected ascend-
ing aorta often produces a serosanguineous pericardial effusion 
that can accumulate and cause tamponade. Suggestive signs 
include jugular venous distention, muffled heart tones, pulsus 
paradoxus, and low-voltage electrocardiogram (ECG) tracings. 
Free rupture into the pericardial space produces rapid tampon-
ade and is generally fatal.
As the dissection progresses, any branch vessel from the 
aorta can become involved, which results in compromised blood 
flow and ischemic complications (i.e., malperfusion). Therefore, 
depending on which arteries are involved, the dissection can 
produce acute stroke, paraplegia, hepatic failure, bowel infarc-
tion, renal failure, or a threatened ischemic limb.
Contrast-enhanced 
CT scan
Transfer to operating
room, intubation,
diagnostic TEE
Suspected acute
dissection
Aortic dissection?
Ascending aortic
dissection (Stanford A or
DeBakey I or II)?
Secondary diagnostic
study (MRA, TEE, or
aortography)
Emergency operation
Emergency operation
Transfer to intensive care
for further stabilization
and diagnostic work-up
Transfer to intensive care unit
for blood pressure control,
anti-impulse therapy 
 Emergency endovascular
(fenestration, stent) or
open intervention
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Further diagnostic
work-up
Hemodynamically
stable?
Anti-impulse therapy
(beta blockers),
blood pressure control
Aortic dissection?
Complicated descending
aortic dissection 
(malperfusion, rupture)?
Management of acute aortic dissection
Ascending aortic
dissection (Stanford A or
DeBakey I or II)?
Figure 22-20.  Algorithm used to facilitate decisions regarding treatment of acute aortic dissection. CT = computed tomography; MRA = 
magnetic resonance angiography; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Because of the variations in severity and the wide variety of 
potential clinical manifestations, the diagnosis of acute aortic 
dissection can be challenging.141-143 Only 3 out of every 100,000 
patients who present to an emergency department with acute 
chest, back, or abdominal pain are eventually diagnosed with 
aortic dissection. Not surprisingly, diagnostic delays are com-
mon; delays beyond 24 hours after hospitalization occur in up 
to 39% of cases. Unfortunately, delays in diagnosis lead to 
delays in treatment, which can have disastrous consequences. 
The European Society of Cardiology Task Force on Aortic Dis-
section stated, “The main challenge in managing acute aortic 
dissection is to suspect and thus diagnose the disease as early 
811
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
as possible.”141 A recent study by the International Registry 
of Acute Aortic Dissection examined the reasons for delayed 
diagnosis and found that diagnosis lagged in women, as well 
as in patients with atypical symptoms, such as fever or mild 
pain (rather than severe pain).140 A high index of suspicion is 
critical, particularly in younger, atypical patients, who may have 
connective tissue disorders or other, less common risk factors.
Most patients with acute aortic dissection (80%–90%) 
experience severe pain in the chest, back, or abdomen.141-143 
The pain usually occurs suddenly, has a sharp or tearing qual-
ity, and often migrates distally as the dissection progresses 
along the aorta. For classification purposes (acute vs. subacute 
vs. chronic), the onset of pain is generally considered to repre-
sent the beginning of the dissection process. Most of the other 
common symptoms either are nonspecific or are caused by the 
secondary manifestations of dissection.
A discrepancy between the extremities in pulse, blood 
pressure, or both is the classic physical finding in patients with 
aortic dissection. It often occurs because of changes in flow in 
Table 22-5
Anatomic complications of aortic dissection and their 
associated symptoms and signs
Anatomic Manifestation
Symptoms and Signs
Aortic valve insufficiency
Dyspnea
Murmur
Pulmonary rales
Shock
Coronary malperfusion
Chest pain with  
  characteristics of angina
Nausea/vomiting
Shock
Ischemic changes on  
  electrocardiogram
Elevated cardiac enzymes
Pericardial tamponade
Dyspnea
Jugular venous distension
Pulsus paradoxus
Muffled cardiac tones
Shock
Low-voltage 
electrocardiogram
Subclavian or iliofemoral  
  artery malperfusion
Cold, painful extremity
Extremity sensory and motor  
  deficits
Peripheral pulse deficit
Carotid artery malperfusion
Syncope
Focal neurologic deficit  
  (transient or persistent)
Carotid pulse deficit
Coma
Spinal malperfusion
Paraplegia
Incontinence
Mesenteric malperfusion
Nausea/vomiting
Abdominal pain
Renal malperfusion
Oliguria or anuria
Hematuria
the true and false lumens, and it does not necessarily indicate 
extension into an extremity branch vessel. Involvement of the 
aortic arch often creates differences between the right and left 
arms, whereas descending aortic dissection often causes dif-
ferences between the upper and lower extremities. Like symp-
toms, most of the physical signs after dissection are related to 
the secondary manifestations and therefore vary considerably 
(Table 22-5). For example, signs of stroke or a threatened isch-
emic limb may dominate the physical findings in patients with 
carotid or iliac malperfusion, respectively.
Unfortunately, laboratory studies are of little help in diag-
nosing acute aortic dissection. There has been continued inter-
est in using D-dimer level to aid in making this diagnosis.144 
Several reports indicate that D-dimer is an extremely sensitive 
indicator of acute aortic dissection; elevated levels are found in 
approximately 97% of affected patients.145 Tests that are com-
monly used to detect acute coronary events—including ECG 
and tests for serum markers of myocardial injury—deserve spe-
cial consideration and need to be interpreted carefully. Normal 
ECGs and serum marker levels in patients with acute chest pain 
should raise suspicion about the possibility of aortic dissection. 
It is important to remember that ECG changes and elevated 
serum marker levels associated with myocardial infarction do 
not exclude the diagnosis of aortic dissection, because dissec-
tion can cause coronary malperfusion. Of note, abnormal ECGs 
have recently been shown to delay the diagnosis of aortic dissec-
tion, and the possibility of aortic dissection should not be pre-
maturely ruled out.140,146 Similarly, although CXRs may show a 
widened mediastinum or abnormal aortic contour, up to 16% of 
patients with dissection have a normal-appearing CXR.142 The 
value of the CXR for detecting aortic dissection is limited, with 
a sensitivity of 67% and a specificity of 86%.147
Once the diagnosis of dissection is considered, the tho-
racic aorta should be imaged with CT, MRA, or echocardiogra-
phy. The accuracy of these noninvasive imaging tests has all but 
eliminated the need for diagnostic aortography in most patients 
with suspected aortic dissection. Currently, the diagnosis of aor-
tic dissection is usually established with contrast-enhanced CT, 
which has a sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 87%, and, 
acquires images swiftly.148 The classic ­diagnostic feature is a 
double-lumen aorta (Fig. 22-21). In addition, CT scans provide 
essential information about the segments of the aorta involved; 
the acuity of the dissection; aortic dilatation, including the pres-
ence of preexisting degenerative aneurysms; and the develop-
ment of threatening sequelae, including pericardial effusion, 
early aortic rupture, and branch vessel compromise. Although 
MRA also provides excellent imaging (with both a sensitiv-
ity and specificity of 98%), the MR suite is not well suited for 
critically ill patients. In patients who cannot undergo contrast-
enhanced CT or MRA, transthoracic echocardiography can be 
used to establish the diagnosis.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is excellent for 
detecting dissection, aneurysm, and IMH in the ascending aorta. 
In appropriate hands, TEE has a demonstrated sensitivity and 
specificity as high as 98% and 95%, respectively.149 Furthermore, 
TEE offers important information about ventricular function and 
aortic valve competency. Finally, TEE is the diagnostic modal-
ity of choice for hemodynamically unstable patients in whom 
the diagnosis of ascending dissection is suspected; ideally, these 
patients should be taken to the operating room, where the TEE 
can be performed and, if the TEE is confirmatory, surgery can 
be started immediately.
812
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
In selected patients with ascending aortic dissection (i.e., 
those who have evidence of preexisting coronary artery dis-
ease), coronary angiography can be considered before surgery. 
Specific relative indications in these patients include a history of 
angina or myocardial infarction, a recent myocardial perfusion 
study with abnormal results, previous coronary artery bypass 
or angioplasty, and acute ischemic changes on ECG. Contrain-
dications include hemodynamic instability, aortic rupture, and 
pericardial effusion.150 In our practice, patients with acute aortic 
dissections rarely undergo coronary angiography. However, all 
patients presenting for elective repair of chronic ascending dis-
sections have diagnostic coronary angiograms taken.
Of note, when malperfusion of the renal, visceral, or 
lower extremity arteries develops, the patient is usually treated 
in an angiography suite or hybrid operating room.127 Although 
the dissection usually is diagnosed on CT scan, these patients 
also undergo aortography, during which the mechanism of the 
malperfusion is ascertained and, if possible, corrected. Hence, 
catheter-based aortography may be obsolete as a diagnostic test 
for dissection, but it remains beneficial for patients with malp-
erfusion.
Treatment
Initial Assessment and Management.  Regardless of the 
location of the dissection, the initial treatment is the same for 
all patients with suspected or confirmed acute aortic dissection 
(see Fig. 22-20). Furthermore, because of the potential for rup-
ture before the diagnosis is confirmed, aggressive pharmaco-
logic management is started once there is clinical suspicion of 
dissection, and this treatment is continued during the diagnostic 
evaluation. The goals of pharmacologic treatment are to stabi-
lize the dissection and prevent rupture.
Patients are monitored closely in an intensive care unit. 
Indwelling radial arterial catheters are used to monitor blood 
pressure and optimize titration of antihypertensive agents. In 
cases of limb malperfusion, blood pressures in the affected limb 
can underrepresent the central aortic pressure; therefore, blood 
pressure is measured in the arm with the better pulse. Central 
venous catheters ensure reliable IV access for delivering vaso-
active medications. Pulmonary artery catheters are reserved for 
patients with severe cardiopulmonary dysfunction.
In addition to confirming the diagnosis of dissection and 
defining its acuity and extent, the initial evaluation focuses on 
determining whether any of several life-threatening compli-
cations are present. Particular attention is paid to changes in 
neurologic status, peripheral pulses, and urine output. Serial 
laboratory studies—including arterial blood gas concentrations, 
complete blood cell count, prothrombin and partial thrombo-
plastin times, and serum levels of electrolytes, creatinine, blood 
urea nitrogen, and liver enzymes—are useful for detecting organ 
ischemia and optimizing management.
The initial management strategy, commonly described 
as anti-impulse therapy or blood pressure control, focuses on 
reducing aortic wall stress, the force of left ventricular ejec-
tion, chronotropy, and the rate of change in blood pressure (dP/
dT). Reductions in dP/dT are achieved by lowering both car-
diac contractility and blood pressure. The drugs initially used 
to accomplish these goals include IV beta-adrenergic blockers, 
direct vasodilators, calcium channel blockers, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors. These agents are used to achieve 
a heart rate between 60 and 80 bpm, a systolic blood pressure 
between 100 and 110 mmHg, and a mean arterial blood pres-
sure between 60 and 75 mmHg. These hemodynamic targets are 
maintained as long as urine output remains adequate and neuro-
logic function is not impaired. Achieving adequate pain control 
with IV opiates, such as morphine and fentanyl, is important for 
maintaining acceptable blood pressure control.
Beta antagonists are administered to all patients with acute 
aortic dissections unless there are strong contraindications, such as 
severe heart failure, bradyarrhythmia, high-grade ­atrioventricular 
Figure 22-21.  Computed tomographic scans showing that the aorta has been separated into two channels—the true (T) and false (F) lumens—
in two patients with different phases of aortic dissection. A. An acute DeBakey type I aortic dissection. The dissecting membrane appears 
wavy (arrows) in the early phase of dissection. Here, the true lumen of the proximal aorta can be seen to be extensively compressed. This may 
lead to malperfusion of the heart. B. A chronic DeBakey type III aortic dissection. In the chronic phase, the membrane appears straighter and 
less mobile (arrow) because it has stabilized over time. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)
813
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
conduction block, or bronchospastic disease. Esmolol can be 
useful in patients with bronchospastic disease because it is a 
cardioselective, ultrafast-acting agent with a short half-life. 
Labetalol, which causes both nonselective beta blockade and 
postsynaptic alpha1-blockade, reduces systemic vascular resis-
tance without impairing cardiac output. Doses of beta antag-
onists are titrated to achieve a heart rate of 60 to 80 bpm. In 
patients who cannot receive beta antagonists, calcium channel 
blockers such as diltiazem are an effective alternative. Nitro-
prusside, a direct vasodilator, can be administered once beta 
blockade is adequate. When used alone, however, nitroprusside 
can cause reflex increases in heart rate and contractility, elevated 
dP/dT, and progression of aortic dissection. Enalapril and other 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are useful in patients 
with renal malperfusion. These drugs inhibit renin release, which 
may improve renal blood flow.
Treatment of Ascending Aortic Dissection
Acute Dissection  Because of the risk of aortic rupture, acute 
ascending aortic dissection is usually considered an absolute 
indication for emergency surgical repair. However, specific 
patient groups may benefit from nonoperative management 
or delayed operation.151 Delayed repair should be considered 
for patients who (a) present with severe acute stroke or 
mesenteric ischemia, (b) are elderly and have substantial 
comorbidity, (c) are in stable condition and may benefit from 
transfer to specialized centers, or (d) have undergone a cardiac 
operation in the remote past. Regarding the last group, it is 
important that the previous operation not be too recent; dissec-
tions that occur during the first 3 weeks after cardiac surgery 
pose a high risk of rupture and tamponade, and such dissections 
warrant early operation.152
In the absence of the circumstances listed earlier, most 
patients with acute ascending aortic dissection undergo emer-
gent graft replacement of the ascending aorta. Operative repair 
is similar to that for aneurysm of the transverse aortic arch 
(described previously) because hypothermic circulatory arrest 
is commonly used regardless of the extent of repair. Immedi-
ately before the operation begins, intraoperative TEE is com-
monly performed to further assess baseline myocardial and 
valvular function and, if necessary, to confirm the diagnosis. 
The operation is performed via a median sternotomy with 
cardiopulmonary bypass and hypothermic circulatory arrest 
(Fig. 22-22). In preparation for circulatory arrest, cannulas are 
placed in the right axillary artery (to provide arterial inflow) 
and in the right atrium (to provide venous drainage).77 After 
an appropriate level of cooling has been achieved (usually 
between 22°C and 24°C), cardiopulmonary bypass is stopped, 
and the ascending aorta is opened. The innominate artery is 
then occluded with a clamp or snare, and flow from the axil-
lary artery cannula is used to provide ACP. A separate perfu-
sion catheter can be placed in the left common carotid artery to 
ensure perfusion of the left side of the brain. This strategy of 
performing the distal anastomosis during a brief period of cir-
culatory arrest, often termed open distal anastomosis, obviates 
the need to place a clamp across the fragile aorta, avoiding 
further aortic damage. Also, it allows the surgeon to carefully 
inspect the aortic arch for intimal tears. Traditionally, the 
entire arch is replaced only if a primary intimal tear is located 
in the arch or if the arch is aneurysmal; most ­commonly, 
repair is limited to replacement of the entire ascending aorta 
or to a beveled “hemiarch” repair.153 Conservative repair has 
been shown to increase the likelihood of early survival.154 The 
distal aortic cuff is prepared by tacking the inner and outer 
walls together and using surgical adhesive to obliterate the 
false lumen and strengthen the tissue. A polyester tube graft 
is sutured to the distal aortic cuff. The anastomosis between 
the graft and the aorta is fashioned so that blood flow will be 
directed into the true lumen; this often alleviates any distal 
malperfusion problems that were present preoperatively. After 
the distal anastomosis is reinforced with additional adhesive, 
the graft is de-aired and clamped, full cardiopulmonary bypass 
is resumed, rewarming is initiated, and the proximal portion 
of the repair is started. In the absence of annuloaortic ectasia 
or connective tissue disorders—which generally necessitate 
aortic root replacement—aortic valve regurgitation can be 
corrected by resuspending the commissures onto the outer 
aortic wall.155 The proximal aortic cuff is prepared with tack-
ing sutures and surgical adhesive before the proximal aortic 
anastomosis is performed.
In the majority of patients who undergo surgical repair of 
acute ascending dissection, the dissection persists distal to the 
site of the operative repair; the residually dissected aorta, which 
generally includes at least a portion of the transverse aortic arch 
as well as a large portion of the distal aorta, is susceptible to dil-
atation over time. Extensive dilatation of the arch or distal aorta 
develops in 25% to 40% of survivors156,157 and often necessitates 
further aortic repair. Additionally, long-term survival after acute 
proximal aortic dissection is generally poor, and rupture of the 
dilated distal aorta is a common cause of late death in these 
patients.154,156-158
The challenges that survivors of acute proximal aortic dis-
section commonly face over time have led to the development 
of alternate acute dissection strategies such as total arch replace-
ment159 and hybrid arch strategies to extend proximal aortic 
repair into the distal aorta. The goal of hybrid arch approaches 
in acute dissection is to thrombose the residual false lumen by 
compressing it with the radial force that is exerted by a stent-
graft placed in the true lumen, thereby facilitating remodeling 
and preventing late aneurysm formation.160 However, in such 
repairs, the compressed false lumen may continue to be perfused 
in a retrograde fashion.
In Europe, Japan, and elsewhere, one-piece hybrid prosthe-
ses are now available that incorporate a polyester graft for the 
proximal repair and a stent-graft component for the descending 
aorta. These devices are deployed in an antegrade fashion after 
the arch has been resected; this procedure is termed a “frozen 
elephant trunk” repair.161 In the United States, such devices are 
unavailable, so this repair is commonly done by concomitantly 
deploying a commercially available stent-graft in an antegrade 
fashion after fully or partly162 replacing the ascending aorta and 
aortic arch. In some variations of this off-label approach, the 
stent-graft is directly sutured to the distal aspect of the proximal 
open repair, whereas in others, there may be a gap of native tis-
sue between the open and endovascular repair. Although this 
technique appears to be extensively used outside the United 
States, and with early and midterm success,160,163-165 only a few 
U.S. reports describe its use.162,166,167 Emerging reports describe 
an enhanced risk of spinal cord ischemia, a risk that is not usu-
ally associated with open arch repair. This is probably due to the 
extensive coverage of the intercostal vessels by the stent-graft. 
Uncertainties in the frozen elephant trunk procedure need to be 
addressed before it becomes a standard recommendation for this 
subset of patients.168
8
814
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
Figure 22-22.  Illustration of proximal aortic repair for acute ascending aortic dissection. A. This repair requires a median sternotomy and 
cardiopulmonary bypass. The ascending aorta is opened during hypothermic circulatory arrest, while antegrade cerebral perfusion is deliv-
ered via an axillary artery graft (see Fig. 22-8). B. The dissecting membrane is removed to expose the true lumen. C. Surgical adhesive is 
used to obliterate the false lumen and strengthen the aorta for the distal anastomosis. A 30-mL balloon catheter is placed in the true lumen 
to compress the distal false lumen; this helps keep the adhesive (which strengthens the repair) within the proximal false lumen and prevents 
distal embolization of the adhesive through re-entry sites. A moist gauze sponge is placed in the true lumen to prevent the adhesive from 
running into the brachiocephalic vessels. D. An open distal anastomosis prevents clamp injury of the arch tissue and allows inspection of 
the arch lumen. A balloon perfusion catheter in the left common carotid artery ensures antegrade perfusion of the left cerebral circulation. If 
the origin of the dissection (i.e., intimal tear or disruption) does not extensively involve the greater curvature of the aortic arch, and if there 
is no evidence of a preexisting arch aneurysm, a beveled, hemi-arch repair is carried out, preserving most of the greater curvature of the 
arch. The aorta is transected, beginning at the greater curvature immediately proximal to the origin of the innominate artery and extending 
distally toward the lesser curvature to the level of the left subclavian artery. Consequently, most of the transverse aortic arch, except for the 
dorsal segment containing the brachiocephalic arteries, is removed. An appropriately sized, sealed (with collagen or gelatin) Dacron tube 
graft is selected, and the beveled distal anastomosis is made with continuous 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament suture. E. After the anastomosis is 
covered with additional adhesive and cardiopulmonary bypass is resumed, the aortic valve is assessed. Disrupted commissures are resus-
pended with pledgeted mattress sutures to restore valvular competence. F. The aorta is generally transected at the sinotubular junction, and 
adhesive is used to obliterate the false lumen within the proximal aortic stump. A moist gauze sponge is placed within the true lumen to 
prevent the adhesive from injuring the aortic valve leaflets or entering the coronary artery ostia. G. After the adhesive has set, the proximal 
anastomosis is carried out at the sinotubular junction, incorporating the distal margin of the commissures. (Reproduced with permission 
from Creager MA, Dzau VS, Loscalzo J, eds. Vascular Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006. kkjkjdht © Saunders/Elsevier, 2006, 
Fig. 35-3A–G.)
815
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
Chronic Dissection  Occasionally, patients with ascending aor-
tic dissection present for repair in the chronic phase. In most 
respects, the operation is similar to that for acute dissection 
repair. One notable difference is that the tissue is stronger in 
chronic dissection than in acute dissection, which makes sutur-
ing safer. In addition, the false lumen is not obliterated at the 
distal anastomosis; instead, the dissecting membrane is fenes-
trated into the arch to ensure perfusion of both lumens and to 
prevent postoperative malperfusion complications. Unlike 
operations for acute dissection, operations for chronic dissec-
tion are often aggressive repairs that extend into the arch and 
root, because the tissues are much less fragile.
Treatment of Descending Aortic Dissection
Nonoperative Management  Nonoperative, pharmacologic 
management of acute descending aortic dissection results in 
lower morbidity and mortality rates than traditional surgical 
treatment does.142 The most common causes of death during 
nonoperative treatment are aortic rupture and end-organ malp-
erfusion. Therefore, patients are continually reassessed for new 
complications. At least two serial CT scans—usually obtained 
on day 2 or 3 and on day 8 or 9 of treatment—are compared with 
the initial scan to rule out significant aortic expansion.
Once the patient’s condition has been stabilized, pharma-
cologic management is gradually shifted from IV to oral medi-
cations. Oral therapy, which usually includes a beta antagonist, 
is initiated when systolic pressure is consistently between 100 
and 110 mmHg and the neurologic, renal, and cardiovascular 
systems are stable. Many patients can be discharged after their 
blood pressure is well controlled with oral agents and after serial 
CT scans confirm the absence of aortic expansion.
Long-term pharmacologic therapy is important for patients 
with chronic aortic dissection. Beta blockers remain the drugs 
of choice.169 In a 20-year follow-up study, DeBakey and col-
leagues170 found that inadequate blood pressure control was 
associated with late aneurysm formation. Aneurysms developed 
in only 17% of patients with “good” blood pressure control, 
compared with 45% of patients with “poor” control.
Aggressive imaging follow-up is recommended for all 
patients with chronic aortic dissection.171 Both contrast-enhanced 
CT and MRA scans provide excellent aortic imaging and facili-
tate serial comparisons to detect progressive aortic expansion. The 
first surveillance scan is obtained approximately 6 weeks after the 
onset of dissection. Subsequent scans are obtained at least every 
3 months for the first year, every 6 months for the second year, and 
annually thereafter. Scans are obtained more frequently in high-
risk patients, such as those with Marfan syndrome, and in those 
in whom significant aortic expansion is detected. For patients 
who have undergone graft repair of descending aortic dissection, 
annual CT or MRA scans are also obtained to detect false aneu-
rysm formation or dilatation of unrepaired segments of aorta. Early 
detection of worrisome changes allows timely, elective interven-
tion before rupture or other complications develop; rupture of the 
distal aorta is relatively common in patients with chronic aortic 
dissection and often results in death.158
Indications for Surgery  In the acute phase, surgery has been 
traditionally reserved for patients who experience complica-
tions.172 In general terms, such intervention is intended to pre-
vent or repair ruptures and relieve life-threatening ischemic 
manifestations.
During the acute phase of a dissection, the specific indica-
tions for operative intervention include aortic rupture, increasing 
periaortic or pleural fluid volume, rapidly expanding aortic 
diameter, uncontrolled hypertension, and persistent pain despite 
adequate medical therapy. Aortic rupture may be contained by 
nearby tissues (such as a localized periaortic hematoma detected 
on imaging studies) or it may be free and uncontained (pre-
senting as a hemothorax, hemoperitoneum, or massive retro-
peritoneal hematoma accompanied by shock). Acute dissection 
superimposed on a preexisting aneurysm is considered a life-
threatening condition and is therefore another indication for 
operation. Finally, patients who have a history of noncompli-
ance with medical therapy may ultimately benefit more from 
surgical treatment if they are otherwise reasonable operative 
candidates.
Acute malperfusion syndromes also warrant intervention. 
In the recent past, visceral and renal malperfusion were consid-
ered indications for operation. Percutaneous interventions, how-
ever, have largely replaced open surgery for treatment of these 
complications. When the endovascular approach is unavailable 
or unsuccessful, surgical options can be used.
In the chronic phase, the indications for operative interven-
tion for aortic dissections are similar to those for degenerative 
thoracic aortic aneurysms, although a slightly lower threshold 
of repair is now recommended. Guidelines for thoracic aortic 
disease40 recommend elective operation in otherwise healthy 
patients when the affected segment has reached a diameter of 
5.5 cm, especially in patients with connective tissue disorders. 
Rapid aortic enlargement (>1 cm per year) and other factors that 
increase the likelihood of aortic rupture may also be considered.
Endovascular Treatment
Malperfusion Syndrome  Endovascular therapy is routinely used 
in patients with descending aortic dissection complicated by vis-
ceral malperfusion.173 Abdominal malperfusion syndrome often 
is fatal; prompt identification of visceral ischemia and expedited 
treatment to restore hepatic, gastrointestinal, and renal perfu-
sion are imperative for a positive outcome. As described in a 
later section, several open surgical techniques can be used to 
re-establish blood flow to compromised organs. However, in 
acute cases, open surgery is associated with poor outcomes. 
Therefore, endovascular intervention is the preferred initial 
approach in such cases. In one endovascular technique known 
as endovascular fenestration, a balloon is used to create a tear 
in the dissection flap, which allows blood to flow in both the 
true and false lumens. This technique can be used when a vis-
ceral branch is being supplied by an underperfused true or false 
lumen. Placement of a stent graft in the true lumen of the aorta 
can resolve a “dynamic” malperfusion. Occasionally, a small 
stent must be placed directly in the lumen of a visceral or renal 
artery because the dissection has propagated into the branch, 
resulting in “static” malperfusion at the origin.
Iliofemoral malperfusion causing limb-threatening leg 
ischemia also can be treated via an endovascular approach. 
However, direct surgical revascularization—usually by placing 
a femoral-to-femoral arterial bypass graft—is a better option 
whenever the endovascular procedure cannot be performed 
expeditiously.
Acute Dissection  Although surgery has been traditionally recom-
mended for patients with complicated acute descending aortic 
dissection, many centers have shifted toward using endovascu-
lar stent grafts as the preferred approach in these cases,174 even 
though this is an off-label application of stent grafts. Evidence 
suggests that emergent endovascular repair in patients with true 
816
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
lumen collapse and complications such rupture or dynamic mal-
perfusion may be lifesaving in these difficult-to-treat patients. 
However, these patients remain at risk of further complication or 
future reintervention. Although endovascular repair in patients 
with connective tissue disorder is generally not recommended, 
this technique may be used as a bridge to later definitive repair 
in such life-threatening circumstances.
Less convincing is the evidence in support of using endo-
vascular stent grafts to treat uncomplicated acute descending dis-
section. The goal of this treatment strategy is to use the stent graft 
to cover the intimal tear, seal the entry site of the dissection, and 
eventually cause thrombosis of the false lumen to aid in aortic 
remodeling and reduce late aortic expansion. However, whether 
this approach is more effective than conventional nonoperative 
management remains controversial. Moreover, inadvertent retro-
grade perfusion or pressurization of the endovascularly repaired 
aortic section is still a risk; therefore, at this time, the use of endo-
grafts in patients with uncomplicated, classic dissection remains 
investigational.175,176 Such procedures take place in a hybrid oper-
ating room, where access to the true lumen is gained through the 
femoral arteries. An aortogram is taken, and the intimal tear is 
identified. Note that the diameter of the true lumen is measured 
on both the aortogram and a preoperative contrast-enhanced CT 
scan. A stent graft approximately 10% wider in diameter than the 
true lumen is selected for these cases. Unlike stents deployed to 
treat most descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, stents deployed 
to treat descending aortic dissections must not be ballooned, 
because ballooning can cause a new intimal tear, retrograde dis-
section into the ascending aorta, or even aortic rupture.
Chronic Dissection  Endovascular treatment of chronic descend-
ing aortic dissection is also controversial and remains under 
investigation.174,177 These dissections are particularly challeng-
ing because the relative rigidity of the dissecting membrane 
and the presence of multiple re-entry sites make it difficult to 
exclude the false lumen. Furthermore, interfering with false 
lumen perfusion may cause ischemic complications, such as 
bowel infarction or renal failure. Until the safety and effective-
ness of endovascular repair for this condition have been dem-
onstrated, patients with chronic descending aortic dissection 
should be treated with conventional nonoperative management 
until indications for open surgical repair develop.
Penetrating Aortic Ulcer  Unlike patients with classic descending 
aortic dissection, those with PAUs appear to be very well suited 
for endovascular intervention. Covering the focal ulceration 
with a stent graft has been shown to be an effective treatment.178 
In a recent study by Patel and colleagues,179 endovascular repair 
of PAU was associated with better early outcomes than open 
repair. However, when PAU was associated with adjacent 
hematoma within the aortic wall, rates of subsequent reinter-
vention were increased.
Open Repair
Acute Dissection  In patients with acute aortic dissection, sur-
gical repair of the descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal 
aorta is traditionally associated with high morbidity and mor-
tality.142 Therefore, the primary goals of surgery are to prevent 
fatal rupture and to restore branch vessel perfusion.172 A lim-
ited graft repair of the life-threatening aortic lesion achieves 
these goals while minimizing risks. Because the most com-
mon site of rupture in descending aortic dissection is in the 
­proximal third of the descending thoracic aorta, the upper 
half of the descending thoracic aorta is usually repaired. The 
­distal half also may be replaced if it exceeds 4 cm in diameter. 
Graft replacement of the entire thoracoabdominal aorta is not 
attempted in such cases unless a large coexisting aneurysm 
mandates this radical approach. Similarly, the repair is not 
extended into the aortic arch unless the arch is aneurysmal, 
even if the primary tear is located there. Patients with chronic 
dissection who require emergency repair because of acute pain 
or rupture also undergo limited graft replacement of the symp-
tomatic segment.
Because repairing acute dissections entails an increased 
risk of paraplegia, adjuncts that provide spinal cord protection, 
such as cerebrospinal fluid drainage and left heart bypass, are 
used liberally during such repairs,180 even if the repair is con-
fined to the upper descending thoracic aorta. Proximal control 
usually is obtained between the left common carotid and left 
subclavian arteries; any mediastinal hematoma near the proxi-
mal descending thoracic aorta is avoided until proximal control 
is established. After the aorta is opened, the dissecting membrane 
is excised from the section undergoing graft replacement. The 
proximal and distal anastomoses use all layers of the aortic wall, 
thereby excluding the false lumen in the suture lines and direct-
ing all blood flow into the true lumen. Although the relative 
lack of mural thrombus ensures the presence of multiple patent 
intercostal arteries, extreme tissue fragility may preclude their 
­reattachment.
Malperfusion Syndrome  Lower-extremity ischemia is commonly 
addressed with surgical extra-anatomic revascularization tech-
niques, such as femoral-to-femoral bypass grafting. In patients 
with abdominal organ ischemia, flow to the compromised bed 
must be re-established swiftly. When an endovascular approach 
is unavailable or unsuccessful, open surgery is necessary. 
Although they are considered second-line therapies, multiple 
techniques are available, including graft replacement of the 
aorta (with flow redirected into the true lumen), open aortic 
fenestration, and visceral or renal artery bypass.
Chronic Dissection  A more aggressive replacement usually is 
performed during elective aortic repairs in patients with chronic 
dissection. In many regards, the operative approach used in these 
patients is identical to that used for descending thoracic and tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysms, as described in the first half 
of this chapter (Fig. 22-23). One key difference is the need to 
excise as much dissecting membrane as possible to clearly iden-
tify the true and false lumens and to locate all important branch 
vessels. When the dissection extends into the visceral or renal 
arteries, the membrane can be fenestrated, or the false lumen 
can be obliterated with sutures or intraluminal stents. Asymmet-
ric expansion of the false lumen can create wide separation of 
the renal arteries. This problem is addressed by reattaching the 
mobilized left renal artery to a separate opening in the graft or by 
performing a left renal artery bypass with a side graft. Wedges of 
dissecting membrane also are excised from the aorta adjacent to 
the proximal and distal anastomoses, which allows blood to flow 
through both true and false lumens. When placing the proximal 
clamp is not technically feasible, hypothermic circulatory arrest 
can be used to facilitate the proximal portion of the repair.
OUTCOMES
Improvements in anesthesia, surgical techniques, and periopera-
tive care have led to substantial improvements in outcome after 
thoracic aortic aneurysm repair. When performed in specialized 
centers, these operations are associated with excellent survival 
817
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
Left heart
bypass
circuit
Cold renal
perfusion
system
False
lumen
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 22-23.  Illustration of distal aortic repair of a chronic dissection. A. Thoracoabdominal incision. B. Extent II thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysm resulting from chronic aortic dissection. The patient has previously undergone composite valve graft replacement of the aortic root 
and ascending aorta. After left heart bypass is initiated, the proximal portion of the aneurysm is isolated by placing clamps on the left sub-
clavian artery, between the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries, and across the middle descending thoracic aorta. C. The isolated 
segment of aorta is opened by using electrocautery. D. The dissecting membrane is excised, and bleeding intercostal arteries are oversewn. 
The aorta is prepared for proximal anastomosis by transecting it distal to the proximal clamp and separating this portion from the esophagus 
(not shown). E. The proximal anastomosis between the aorta and an appropriately sized Dacron graft is completed with continuous polypro-
pylene suture. F. After left heart bypass has been stopped and the distal aortic cannula has been removed, the proximal clamp is repositioned 
onto the graft, the other two clamps are removed, and the remainder of the aneurysm is opened. G. The rest of the dissecting membrane is 
excised, and the openings to the celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal arteries are identified. H. Selective visceral perfusion with oxygenated 
blood from the bypass circuit is delivered through balloon perfusion catheters placed in the celiac and superior mesenteric arterial ostia. Cold 
crystalloid is delivered to the renal arteries. The critical intercostal arteries are reattached to an opening cut in the graft. I. To minimize spinal 
cord ischemia, the proximal clamp is repositioned distal to the intercostal reattachment site. A second oval opening is fashioned in the graft 
adjacent to the visceral vessels. Selective perfusion of the visceral arteries continues during their reattachment to the graft. A separate anas-
tomosis is often required to reattach the left renal artery. J. After the balloon perfusion catheters are removed and the visceral anastomosis is 
completed, the clamp is again moved distally, restoring blood flow to the celiac, renal, and superior mesenteric arteries. The final anastomosis 
is created between the graft and the distal aorta. (Reproduced with permission from Creager MA, Dzau VS, Loscalzo J, eds. Vascular Medicine. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006. kkjkjdht © Saunders/Elsevier, 2006, Fig. 35-8A–J.)
rates and acceptable morbidity rates. The interpretation of out-
comes data is complicated by site-specific variables, such as 
the number of years reported and whether data are taken from 
single-practice centers or from pooled, multicenter, or national 
registries, and by patient-specific variables, such as type of 
enrollment, urgency and extent of repair, concomitant proce-
dures performed, and the presence of preexisting risk factors 
such as advanced age, previous cardiovascular repair, disease of 
any system or organ, or connective tissue disorder.
Repair of Proximal Aortic Aneurysms
Risks associated with the open repair of the proximal aorta vary 
by extent of repair and are greatest for repairs involving total 
arch replacement. All varieties of aortic root replacement have 
shown acceptable early mortality rates and few complications. 
Two groups with 20 and 27 years’ experience with compos-
ite valve graft replacement reported early mortality rates of 
5.6% and 1.9%, respectively; the more recent repairs had bet-
ter outcomes.181,182 Early mortality rates for stentless ­porcine 
818
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
tissue root replacements are also low, ranging from 3.6% to 
6.0%.183-187 Early mortality rates for contemporary valve-sparing 
approaches to aortic root replacement are quite low (1%–2%) in 
experienced centers.66,188,189 Late survival rates after valve-spar-
ing root procedures range from 97% to 99% at 5 years66,188,189 
and approach 94% at 10 years.66
Repairs incorporating the ascending aorta and aortic arch 
have acceptable outcomes; risk increases with patient-specific 
factors such as severe atherosclerosis190 or as larger sections of 
the aortic arch are incorporated into the repair.191,192 A revised 
surgical strategy—such as the use of hypothermic circula-
tory arrest—is often needed to avoid clamping atherosclerotic 
sections in the “porcelain” aorta. In Zingone and colleagues’ 
series190 of 64 patients who underwent replacement of athero-
sclerotic ascending aorta, hypothermic circulatory arrest was 
used in 61 patients (95%). Even though these patients had sub-
stantial comorbidity and 83% underwent concomitant cardiac 
repairs, acceptable rates of early mortality (11%) and stroke 
(6%) were obtained. Other studies indicate that the enhanced 
risk of neurocognitive disturbances in ascending repairs using 
circulatory arrest are not offset by lower rates of early mor-
tality.193,194 Regarding extended proximal repair, reported early 
mortality rates after traditional stage 1 elephant trunk repairs 
(primarily using island reattachment strategies) range from 
2.3% to 13.9%.195-199
Contemporary mortality rates for extensive proximal 
aortic repair have improved as new strategies and modified 
adjuncts have been adopted. For example, by adopting contem-
porary approaches, we have reduced early mortality for stage 
1 elephant trunk repairs from 12% to 2% in our patients.73,196 
Similarly, in a report by Kazui and colleagues200 covering 
20 years of experience and 472 consecutive patients who under-
went aortic arch repair with selective ACP, operative mortality 
was 16.0% for early repairs and 4.1% for more recent repairs. 
Other contemporary reports of the use of techniques such as 
moderate hypothermia and Y-graft approaches201-204 indicate 
similarly improved outcomes; early mortality ranges from 1% 
to 7%, stroke rates range from 1% to 6%, and no cases of para-
plegia are reported. Although paraplegia has traditionally been 
an unusual and infrequent complication of aortic arch repair, it 
has been reported as a complication of “long” elephant trunk 
approaches205 and frozen elephant trunk approaches.206
Because of the heterogeneity of hybrid arch approaches 
and the tendency to use these approaches in high-risk patients, 
results of hybrid arch repair are difficult to interpret. A meta-
analysis conducted by Koullias and Wheatley82 of data from 
Figure 22-23.  (Continued)
819
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
15 studies with 463 patients found an average 30-day mortality 
rate of 8.3%; stroke, 4.4%; paraplegia, 3.9%; and endoleak, 
9.2%. Of note, relatively few repairs (30%) were performed 
“off-pump,” and the majority of repairs used cardiopulmonary 
bypass or hypothermic circulatory arrest. Additionally, several 
reports of small series (ranging from 33 to 66 patients) have 
documented a substantial risk of acute retrograde aortic dissec-
tion during hybrid arch repairs; rates range from 3.0% to 7.5%, 
and these patients face significant mortality risk (ranging from 
33% to 100%) should this occur.85,207-209
Treatment of Acute Ascending Aortic 
Dissection
The International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) 
provides the most comprehensive data on contemporary out-
comes in patients with acute aortic dissection. This registry 
was established in 1996 and has accumulated data from >3000 
patients treated for acute aortic dissection at 30 centers in 
11 countries. A recent IRAD analysis of data from 776 patients 
who underwent surgical repair of acute ascending aortic dissection 
revealed an in-hospital mortality rate of 23.8%.210  The investiga-
tors identified several preoperative predictors of early mortality, 
including age >70 years, previous cardiac surgery, hypotension or 
shock at presentation, abrupt onset of symptoms, migrating pain, 
cardiac tamponade, preoperative renal failure, pulse deficit, and 
evidence of myocardial ischemia or infarction on ECG.210,211 The 
German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection (GERAADA) has 
collected data on more than 2500 patients from 52 centers since 
2006. In a report of 1436 patients with acute proximal dissection 
that was surgically repaired using hypothermic circulatory arrest 
with or without unilateral and bilateral ACP, the early mortality 
rates ranged from 13.9% to 19.4%; the 628 patients with unilat-
eral ACP had the lowest rate of early death.212
Repair of Distal Aortic Aneurysms
Endovascular Repair of Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneu-
rysms.  In the earliest series of endovascular repairs of descend-
ing thoracic aortic aneurysms, mortality and morbidity were 
difficult to assess. Most of the reported series were small and 
included a large proportion of high-risk patients with substan-
tial comorbidity. For example, in the Stanford experience with 
“first-generation” stent grafts in 103 patients with descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysms, the operative mortality rate was 9%, 
the stroke rate was 7%, the paraplegia/paraparesis rate was 3%, 
and actuarial survival was only 73 ± 5% at 2 years. However, 
62 patients (60%) were not considered candidates for thoracot-
omy and open surgical repair; as expected, this group experienced 
the majority of the morbidity and mortality.213 In a follow-up 
series, the Stanford group reported survival rates of 74% at 
1 year and 31% at 5 years after stent grafting in patients who 
were deemed not to be surgical candidates; in contrast, survival 
rates were 93% at 1 year and 78% at 5 years (P<0.001) after 
stent grafting in patients who were deemed reasonable candi-
dates for conventional open repair.214 This study also found a 
30% incidence of late aortic complications, which stresses the 
necessity for appropriate follow-up.
Evidence from pivotal, nonrandomized trials that com-
pared patients who underwent endograft exclusion with his-
torical or concurrent patients who underwent open repair215-217 
shows that the stent graft groups had significantly less morbid-
ity and early mortality than the open repair groups, although 
in two of the trials, a nonsignificant between-group difference 
was observed in the rate of stroke.215,217 Available 5-year com-
parative data show that the two groups differed significantly 
in their aneurysm-related mortality rates (2.8% for endovascu-
lar patients and 11.7% for open repair patients) but not in their 
rates of all-cause mortality (which were 32% and 31%, respec-
tively).218 Additional pivotal trial 5-year outcomes219 indicate 
the growing disparity between aneurysm-related (96.1%) and 
all-cause survival (58.5%) in patients with endovascular repair, 
leading some to comment on the possible futility of repair in 
many patients.174
Although the feasibility of endovascular treatment of 
chronic descending thoracic aortic dissection has been shown in 
small series,148,220 the efficacy of such repairs has not been estab-
lished. The eagerly anticipated initial outcomes of the INSTEAD 
trial (INvestigation of STEnt grafts in patients with type B Aor-
tic Dissection), which involves 136 patients with uncomplicated 
chronic descending aortic dissection, show no survival benefit of 
stent grafting over standard medical antihypertensive therapy in 
the first 2 years after randomization.221 However, it appears that 
the extended study may find a survival advantage at 5 years.174 
Likewise, the ADSORB (A Prospective Randomized Trial in 
Acute Uncomplicated Type B Dissections) trial222 is currently 
underway, and once complete, it may help elucidate whether 
endovascular repair in patients with uncomplicated descending 
dissection provides an advantage over standard medical antihy-
pertensive therapy as pertains to its study endpoints—thrombo-
sis of the false lumen, aortic enlargement, and aortic rupture. 
Thus, at present, the use of stent grafts to treat chronic descend-
ing aortic dissection should be considered experimental.
Open Repair of Descending Thoracic and Thoracoabdomi-
nal Aortic Aneurysms.  Contemporary results of open repairs of 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, including those performed 
in select patients with chronic dissection, indicate that early mor-
tality rates range from 4.1% to 8.0%, renal failure rates range from 
to 4.2% to 7.5%, and paraplegia rates range from 2.3% to 5.7%; 
stroke rates are generally lower, ranging from 1.8% to 2.1%.223-225 
In our series, although the risk of paraplegia increased with the 
extent of repair, the risk of mortality was greatest for those under-
going repair of the proximal two thirds of the descending aorta.223 
As expected, stroke rates after distal aortic repairs were highest 
when the clamp site was near the left subclavian artery.
Several studies have compared endovascular and surgical 
approaches to descending thoracic aortic repair. Some studies 
found no significant differences in rates of early death, stroke, 
and paraplegia,217,226,227 whereas others found that surgical 
patients had higher rates of early mortality (27%)228 and para-
plegia (14%).215 However, a recent study of Medicare patients 
showed that the early survival advantage associated with stent 
grafts is soon lost in the majority of patients.229
Contemporary series of open thoracoabdominal aortic 
repairs show acceptable survival. Reported outcome rates range 
from 5% to 12% for early mortality, 3.8% to 9.5% for paraple-
gia, 1.7% to 5.2% for stroke, and 6% to 12% for renal compli-
cations.230-234 Many of these series summarize 10 to 20 years of 
surgical experience,231-234 although some present a shorter but 
more contemporary experience.230 Even for complex thoracoab-
dominal aortic repairs, such as stage 2 elephant trunk repairs, sev-
eral centers report acceptable early mortality rates ranging from 
0% to 10%.195-199 Worse outcomes are also ­documented, as in a 
statewide, nonfederal analysis of data from 1010 patients whose 
early mortality rate was 25%. Of note, 40% of these patients 
820
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
were treated at centers averaging only one thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair per year.235 Cowan and colleagues,236 
who examined the influence of familiarity with the procedure 
on rates of mortality and morbidity after thoracoabdominal aor-
tic aneurysm repair, reported that patients treated at low-volume 
centers fared less well. Replacing the entire thoracoabdominal 
aorta (i.e., performing an extent II repair) carries the highest risk 
of death, bleeding, renal failure, and paraplegia.92,231,232 Early 
survival has been estimated at 79% at 2 years,237 and midterm 
survival has been estimated at 63% at 5 years.234
Treatment of Acute Descending Aortic 
Dissection
Nonoperative Management.  The in-hospital mortality rate is 
nearly 10% for patients with acute descending aortic dissection 
who receive nonoperative treatment142; however, when IRAD 
stratified patients according to clinical presentation, the mortal-
ity rate for patients with uncomplicated dissection was less than 
4%, whereas the mortality rate for patients with complicated dis-
section was more than 20%.142,238 The primary causes of death 
during nonoperative management are rupture, malperfusion, and 
cardiac failure. Risk factors associated with treatment failure—
defined as death or need for surgery—include an enlarged aorta, 
persistent hypertension despite maximal treatment, oliguria, and 
peripheral ischemia. Among patients who receive nonoperative 
treatment for descending aortic dissection and who survive the 
acute period, approximately 90% remain alive 1 year later, and 
approximately 76% are alive 3 years later.239
Endovascular Treatment.  For malperfusion of the visceral or 
renal arteries, an endovascular approach is ideal. The Stanford 
group reported a 93% technical success rate for endovascular 
reperfusion of an ischemic bed.240 Their experience with the use 
of first-generation stents to treat acute complicated descending 
dissections was also encouraging: Complete thrombosis of the 
false lumen occurred in 79% of patients. The early mortality rate 
was 16%, comparable to that associated with open techniques.241 
A meta-analysis of observational studies of endovascular stent-
ing, which included 248 patients with acute descending aortic 
dissection, found a 30-day mortality rate of 9.8%.242 Compared 
with early mortality rates obtained from IRAD data,142 this 
rate is substantially lower than the rate associated with open 
surgical treatment but is similar to the rate achieved with non-
operative management. However, patients with complicated 
acute descending dissection remain susceptible to late events; 
at 1 year, survival is approximately 70%, and reintervention is 
needed in about 10% of survivors.243
Open Repair.  We recently reported our contemporary experi-
ence with 32 patients with acute complicated descending aortic 
dissection, including 7 patients (22%) with aortic rupture. Com-
plexities included dangerously large aneurysms in the majority 
of patients (69%), which implied either rapid expansion or an 
aneurysm superimposed on the dissection. Malperfusion was 
present in one patient; this patient had an open fenestration pro-
cedure. A substantial number of patients (n = 7, 22%) had con-
nective tissue disorders. The operative mortality rate was 6% 
overall.244 There were 3 cases of permanent spinal cord com-
plications (10%), 1 stroke (3%), and 2 cases of permanent renal 
failure (6%). In recent multicenter studies by IRAD, investiga-
tors found a 29% in-hospital mortality rate among 70 patients 
with acute dissection who underwent open surgical replacement 
of the descending thoracic aorta238 and a 22% in-hospital mor-
tality rate among 18 patients who underwent open fenestration 
procedures. Another study found that, of patients who survived 
surgical treatment of acute descending aortic dissection, approx-
imately 96% were alive at 1 year and approximately 83% were 
alive at 3 years after the procedure,239 which is substantially bet-
ter than 1-year survival after endovascular repair in acute com-
plicated distal dissection.239,243
CONCLUSIONS
Aortic aneurysm may present as localized or extensive dis-
ease. The availability and development of adjuncts and endo-
vascular techniques have supported the constant evolution of 
surgical strategies to tackle these complex problems. Repair 
strategies range from isolated, totally endovascular aortic repair 
for descending thoracic aneurysms to extensive total aortic 
and staged replacements with a combination of both open and 
endovascular techniques. Regardless of the difficulty of accu-
rately assessing the risks associated with aortic repair, surgical 
repair of the thoracoabdominal aorta clearly remains the most 
challenging aortic repair in terms of mortality and morbidity. 
Accordingly, replacing the entire thoracoabdominal aorta (i.e., 
performing an extent II repair) carries the highest risk of death, 
renal failure, and paraplegia.89,221,226
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Susan Y. Green, MPH, and Stephen 
N. Palmer, PhD, ELS, for editorial assistance; Scott A. Weldon, 
MA, CMI, and Carol P. Larson, CMI, for creating the illustra-
tions; and Kapil Sharma, MD, for his substantial contributions 
to the chapter published in the 9th edition of the textbook, on 
which this updated chapter was based.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Johnston KW, Rutherford RB, Tilson MD, et al. Suggested 
standards for reporting on arterial aneurysms. Subcom-
mittee on Reporting Standards for Arterial Aneurysms, 
Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting Standards, Society for 
Vascular Surgery and North American Chapter, Interna-
tional Society for Cardiovascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 
1991;13(3):452-458.
2.	Bickerstaff LK, Pairolero PC, Hollier LH, et al. Thoracic 
aortic aneurysms: a population-based study. Surgery. 1982; 
92(6):1103-1108.
3.	Segura AM, Luna RE, Horiba K, et al. Immunohistochemistry 
of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and aortic valves of patients with Marfan’s 
syndrome. Circulation. 1998;98(19 Suppl):II331-II337.
4.	Neptune ER, Frischmeyer PA, Arking DE, et al. Dysregula-
tion of TGF-β activation contributes to pathogenesis in Mar-
fan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2003;33(3):407-411.
5.	Marsalese DL, Moodie DS, Vacante M, et al. Marfan’s syn-
drome: natural history and long-term follow-up of cardiovas-
cular involvement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989;14(2):422-428.
6.	Adams JN, Trent RJ. Aortic complications of Marfan’s syn-
drome. Lancet. 1998;352(9142):1722-1723.
7.	LeMaire SA, Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Severe aortic and 
arterial aneurysms associated with a TGFBR2 mutation. Nat 
Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2007;4(3):167-171.
8.	Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes 
caused by mutations in the TGF-β receptor. N Engl J Med. 
2006;355(8):788-798.
821
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
9.	Oderich GS, Panneton JM, Bower TC, et al. The spectrum, 
management and clinical outcome of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
type IV: a 30-year experience. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42(1):98-106.
10.	Sheen VL, Jansen A, Chen MH, et al. Filamin A mutations 
cause periventricular heterotopia with Ehlers-Danlos syn-
drome. Neurology. 2005;64(2):254-262.
11.	Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause 
familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections associated 
with mild systemic features of Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 
2012;44(8):916-921.
12.	Guo DC, Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations in smooth 
muscle alpha-actin (ACTA2) lead to thoracic aortic aneurysms 
and dissections. Nat Genet. 2007;39(12):1488-1493.
13.	Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, Papke CL, et al. MYH11 mutations 
result in a distinct vascular pathology driven by ­insulin-like 
growth factor 1 and angiotensin II. Hum Mol Genet. 
2007;16(20):2453-2462.
14.	van de Laar IM, Oldenburg RA, Pals G, et al. Mutations 
in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aortic aneurysms 
and dissections with early-onset osteoarthritis. Nat Genet. 
2011;43(2):121-126.
15.	Hoffman JI, Kaplan S. The incidence of congenital heart dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39(12):1890-1900.
16.	Keane MG, Wiegers SE, Plappert T, et al. Bicuspid aortic 
valves are associated with aortic dilatation out of proportion 
to coexistent valvular lesions. Circulation. 2000;102(19 Suppl 
3):III35-III39.
17.	Jassal DS, Bhagirath KM, Tam JW, et al. Association of bicus-
pid aortic valve morphology and aortic root dimensions: a sub-
study of the aortic stenosis progression observation measuring 
effects of rosuvastatin (ASTRONOMER) study. Echocardiog-
raphy. 2010;27(2):174-179.
18.	Cecconi M, Manfrin M, Moraca A, et al. Aortic dimensions in 
patients with bicuspid aortic valve without significant valve 
dysfunction. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95(2):292-294.
19.	Nistri S, Sorbo MD, Marin M, et al. Aortic root dilatation in 
young men with normally functioning bicuspid aortic valves. 
Heart. 1999;82(1):19-22.
20.	Sabet HY, Edwards WD, Tazelaar HD, Daly RC. Congenitally 
bicuspid aortic valves: a surgical pathology study of 542 cases 
(1991 through 1996) and a literature review of 2,715 addi-
tional cases. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999;74(1):14-26.
21.	Larson EW, Edwards WD. Risk factors for aortic dissection: 
a necropsy study of 161 cases. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53(6): 
849-855.
22.	LeMaire SA, Wang X, Wilks JA, et al. Matrix metalloprotein-
ases in ascending aortic aneurysms: bicuspid versus trileaflet 
aortic valves. J Surg Res. 2005;123(1):40-48.
23.	Fedak PW, de Sa MP, Verma S, et al. Vascular matrix remod-
eling in patients with bicuspid aortic valve malformations: 
implications for aortic dilatation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2003;126(3):797-806.
24.	Koullias GJ, Korkolis DP, Ravichandran P, et al. Tissue 
microarray detection of matrix metalloproteinases, in dis-
eased tricuspid and bicuspid aortic valves with or without 
pathology of the ascending aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2004;26(6):1098-1103.
25.	Martin LJ, Ramachandran V, Cripe LH, et al. Evidence in 
favor of linkage to human chromosomal regions 18q, 5q, and 
13q for bicuspid aortic valve and associated cardiovascular 
malformations. Hum Genet. 2007;121(2):275-284.
26.	McKellar SH, Tester DJ, Yagubyan M, et al. Novel NOTCH1 
mutations in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease and 
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007; 
134(2):290-296.
27.	Wessels MW, Berger RM, Frohn-Mulder IM, et al. Autosomal 
dominant inheritance of left ventricular outflow tract obstruc-
tion. Am J Med Genet. 2005;134A(2):171-179.
28.	Yasuda H, Nakatani S, Stugaard M, et al. Failure to pre-
vent progressive dilation of ascending aorta by aortic valve 
replacement in patients with bicuspid aortic valve: compari-
son with tricuspid aortic valve. Circulation. 2003;108 Suppl 1: 
II291-II294.
29.	Hornick M, Moomiaie R, Mojibian H, et al. ’Bovine’ aortic 
arch—a marker for thoracic aortic disease. Cardiology. 2012; 
123(2):116-124.
30.	Brown SL, Busuttil RW, Baker JD, et al. Bacteriologic and 
surgical determinants of survival in patients with mycotic 
aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 1984;1(4):541-547.
31.	Johnson JR, Ledgerwood AM, Lucas CE. Mycotic aneurysm: 
new concepts in therapy. Arch Surg. 1983;118(5):577-582.
32.	Schwill S, LeMaire SA, Green SY, Bakaeen FG, Coselli JS. 
Endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysms and 
patch aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(4):1034-1037.
33.	Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: indications for surgery, and surgical versus nonsur-
gical risks. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(5):S1877-1880.
34.	Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly rupture or 
dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple predic-
tion based on size. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(1):17-27.
35.	Murdoch JL, Walker BA, Halpern BL, Kuzma JW, McKusick 
VA. Life expectancy and causes of death in the Marfan syn-
drome. N Engl J Med. 1972;286(15):804-808.
36.	Michel PL, Acar J, Chomette G, Iung B. Degenerative aortic 
regurgitation. Eur Heart J. 1991;12(8):875-882.
37.	Prenger K, Pieters F, Cheriex E. Aortic dissection after aortic 
valve replacement: incidence and consequences for strategy. J 
Card Surg. 1994;9(5):495-498.
38.	Bonow RO. Bicuspid aortic valves and dilated aortas: a criti-
cal review of the ACC/AHA practice guidelines recommenda-
tions. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102(1):111-114.
39.	 Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late aortic events 
after an isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic 
valve stenosis with concomitant ascending aortic dilation. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42(5):832-837; discussion 837-838.
40.	 Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/
AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines 
for the diagnosis and management of patients with thoracic 
aortic disease: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke 
Association, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 
2010;121(13):e266-e369.
41.	Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms. 
Circulation. 2005;111(6):816-828.
42.	Wiet SP, Pearce WH, McCarthy WJ, et al. Utility of trans-
esophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of disease of the 
thoracic aorta. J Vasc Surg. 1994;20(4):613-620.
43.	Fillinger MF. Imaging of the thoracic and thoracoabdominal 
aorta. Semin Vasc Surg. 2000;13(4):247-263.
44.	Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Radiocontrast-induced acute 
renal failure. J Intensive Care Med. 2005;20(2):63-75.
45.	Danias P, Eldeman R, Manning W. Magnetic resonance angi-
ography of the great vessels and the coronary arteries. In: 
Pohost GM, ed. Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease. Phila-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:449.
46.	Ergun I, Keven K, Uruc I, et al. The safety of gadolinium in 
patients with stage 3 and 4 renal failure. Nephrol Dial Trans-
plant. 2006;21(3):697-700.
47.	Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, et al. Prevention of contrast-­
induced nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291(19):2328-2334.
822
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
48.	Tepel M, van der Giet M, Schwarzfeld C, et al. Prevention of 
radiographic-contrast-agent-induced reductions in renal func-
tion by acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(3):180-184.
49.	Gopaldas RR, Huh J, Dao TK, et al. Superior nationwide 
outcomes of endovascular versus open repair for isolated 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysm in 11,669 patients. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(5):1001-1010.
50.	Walker KL, Shuster JJ, Martin TD, et al. Practice patterns for 
thoracic aneurysms in the stent graft era: health care system 
implications. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(6):1833-1839.
51.	Gopaldas RR, Dao TK, LeMaire SA, Huh J, Coselli JS. 
Endovascular versus open repair of ruptured descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysms: a nationwide risk-adjusted study 
of 923 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142(5): 
1010-1018.
52.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Buket S. Marfan syndrome: the vari-
ability and outcome of operative management. J Vasc Surg. 
1995;21(3):432-443.
53.	LeMaire SA, Rice DC, Schmittling ZC, Coselli JS. Emergency 
surgery for thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms with acute pre-
sentation. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(6):1171-1178.
54.	Greenberg R, Eagleton M, Mastracci T. Branched endografts 
for thoracoabdominal aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2010;140(6 Suppl):S171-S178.
55.	LeMaire SA, Green SY, Kim JH, et al. Thoracic or thoracoab-
dominal approaches to endovascular device removal and open 
aortic repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93(3):726-732; discus-
sion 733.
56.	LeMaire SA, Miller CC III, Conklin LD, Schmittling ZC, 
Coselli JS. Estimating group mortality and paraplegia rates after 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2003;75(2):508-513.
57.	LeMaire SA, Miller CC III, Conklin LD, et al. A new pre-
dictive model for adverse outcomes after elective thoracoab-
dominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001; 
71(4):1233-1238.
58.	Gott VL, Cameron DE, Alejo DE, et al. Aortic root replace-
ment in 271 Marfan patients: a 24-year experience. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2002;73(2):438-443.
59.	Carrel TP, Berdat P, Englberger L, et al. Aortic root replace-
ment with a new stentless aortic valve xenograft conduit: pre-
liminary hemodynamic and clinical results. J Heart Valve Dis. 
2003;12(6):752-757.
60.	Deleuze PH, Fromes Y, Khoury W, et al. Eight-year results 
of Freestyle stentless bioprosthesis in the aortic position: a 
single-center study of 500 patients. J Heart Valve Dis. 2006; 
15(2):247-252.
61.	Oury JH. Clinical aspects of the Ross procedure: indica-
tions and contraindications. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1996;8(4):328-335.
62.	Fazel SS, David TE. Aortic valve-sparing operations for aor-
tic root and ascending aortic aneurysms. Curr Opin Cardiol. 
2007;22(6):497-503.
63.	David TE, Ivanov J, Armstrong S, Feindel CM, Webb GD. 
Aortic valve-sparing operations in patients with aneurysms 
of the aortic root or ascending aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002; 
74(5):S1758-S1761.
64.	David TE, Armstrong S, Maganti M, Colman J, Bradley 
TJ. Long-term results of aortic valve-sparing operations in 
patients with Marfan syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2009;138(4):859-864; discussion 863-864.
65.	Kallenbach K, Baraki H, Khaladj N, et al. Aortic valve-sparing 
operation in Marfan syndrome: what do we know after a 
decade? Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S764-768.
66.	Kvitting JP, Kari FA, Fischbein MP, et al. David valve-sparing 
aortic root replacement: equivalent mid-term outcome for 
different valve types with or without connective tissue 
­disorder. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(1):117-126, 
127.e1-127.e5; discussion 126-127.
67.	Bentall H, De Bono A. A technique for complete replacement 
of the ascending aorta. Thorax. 1968;23(4):338-339.
68.	Cabrol C, Pavie A, Gandjbakhch I, et al. Complete replace-
ment of the ascending aorta with reimplantation of the coro-
nary arteries: new surgical approach. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1981;81(2):309-315.
69.	Kouchoukos NT, Wareing TH, Murphy SF, Perrillo JB. 
­Sixteen-year experience with aortic root replacement: results 
of 172 operations. Ann Surg. 1991;214(3):308-318.
70.	Zubiate P, Kay JH. Surgical treatment of aneurysm of the 
ascending aorta with aortic insufficiency and marked dis-
placement of the coronary ostia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1976;71(3):415-421.
71.	Spielvogel D, Etz CD, Silovitz D, Lansman SL, Griepp RB. 
Aortic arch replacement with a trifurcated graft. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 2007;83(2):S791-S795.
72.	Borst HG, Frank G, Schaps D. Treatment of extensive aortic 
aneurysms by a new multiple-stage approach. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 1988;95(1):11-13.
73.	 LeMaire SA, Price MD, Parenti JL, et al. Early outcomes after 
aortic arch replacement by using the Y-graft technique. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2011;91(3):700-707; discussion 707-708.
74.	Svensson LG. Antegrade perfusion during suspended anima-
tion? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;124(6):1068-1070.
75.	Ueda Y, Miki S, Kusuhara K, et al. Surgical treatment of aneu-
rysm or dissection involving the ascending aorta and aortic 
arch, utilizing circulatory arrest and retrograde cerebral perfu-
sion. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 1990;31(5):553-558.
76.	Sundt TM III, Orszulak TA, Cook DJ, Schaff HV. Improv-
ing results of open arch replacement. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;86(3):787-796; discussion 796.
77.	Wong DR, Coselli JS, Palmero L, et al. Axillary artery can-
nulation in surgery for acute or subacute ascending aortic dis-
sections. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(3):731-737.
78.	Preventza O, Bakaeen FG, Stephens EH, et al. Innominate 
artery cannulation: An alternative to femoral or axillary cannu-
lation for arterial inflow in proximal aortic surgery. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(3 Suppl):S191-S196.
79.	Della Corte A, Scardone M, Romano G, et al. Aortic arch sur-
gery: Thoracoabdominal perfusion during antegrade cerebral 
perfusion may reduce postoperative morbidity. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2006;81(4):1358-1364.
80.	Panos A, Myers PO, Kalangos A. Novel technique for aor-
tic arch surgery under mild hypothermia. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;85(1):347-348.
81.	Inoue K, Hosokawa H, Iwase T, et al. Aortic arch reconstruc-
tion by transluminally placed endovascular branched stent 
graft. Circulation. 1999;100(19 Suppl):II316-321.
82.	Koullias GJ, Wheatley GH III. State-of-the-art of hybrid pro-
cedures for the aortic arch: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2010;90(2):689-697.
83.	Melissano G, Tshomba Y, Bertoglio L, Rinaldi E, Chiesa R. 
Analysis of stroke after TEVAR involving the aortic arch. Eur 
J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012;43(3):269-275.
84.	Andersen ND, Williams JB, Hanna JM, et al. Results with an 
algorithmic approach to hybrid repair of the aortic arch. J Vasc 
Surg. 2013;57(3):655-667.
85.	Lotfi S, Clough RE, Ali T, et al. Hybrid repair of complex 
thoracic aortic arch pathology: long-term outcomes of extra-
anatomic bypass grafting of the supra-aortic trunk. Cardiovasc 
Intervent Radiol. 2013;36(1):46-55.
86.	Svensson LG, Kouchoukos NT, Miller DC, et al. Expert con-
sensus document on the treatment of descending thoracic aor-
tic disease using endovascular stent-grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2008;85(1 Suppl):S1-S41.
87.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Köksoy C, Schmittling ZC, Curl-
ing PE. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage reduces paraplegia 
after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: results of a 
randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(4):631-639.
823
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
88.	Jacobs MJ, Mess W, Mochtar B, et al. The value of motor 
evoked potentials in reducing paraplegia during thoracoab-
dominal aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(2):239-246.
89.	van Dongen EP, Schepens MA, Morshuis WJ, et al. Tho-
racic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: use of 
evoked potential monitoring in 118 patients. J Vasc Surg. 
2001;34(6):1035-1040.
90.	Coselli JS. The use of left heart bypass in the repair of thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysms: current techniques and results. 
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;15(4):326-332.
91.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA. Left heart bypass reduces paraplegia 
rates after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 1999;67(6):1931-1934.
92.	Safi HJ, Miller CC, III, Huynh TT, et al. Distal aortic perfusion 
and cerebrospinal fluid drainage for thoracoabdominal and 
descending thoracic aortic repair: ten years of organ protec-
tion. Ann Surg. 2003;238(3):372-380.
93.	Köksoy C, LeMaire SA, Curling PE, et al. Renal perfusion 
during thoracoabdominal aortic operations: cold crystal-
loid is superior to normothermic blood. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2002;73(3):730-738.
94.	Kouchoukos NT, Masetti P, Rokkas CK, Murphy SF. Hypo-
thermic cardiopulmonary bypass and circulatory arrest for 
operations on the descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal 
aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(5):S1885-S1887.
95.	Coselli JS, Oberwalder P. Successful repair of mega aorta 
using reversed elephant trunk procedure. J Vasc Surg. 1998; 
27(1):183-188.
96.	Jones MM, Akay M, Murariu D, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS. Safe 
aortic arch clamping in patients with patent internal thoracic 
artery grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(4):e31-e32.
97.	Volodos NL, Shekhanin VE, Karpovich IP, Troian VI, Gur’ev 
Iu A. [A self-fixing synthetic blood vessel endoprosthesis]. 
Vestn Khir Im I I Grek. 1986;137(11):123-125.
98.	Parodi JC, Palmaz JC, Barone HD. Transfemoral intraluminal 
graft implantation for abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc 
Surg. 1991;5(6):491-499.
99.	Dake MD, Miller DC, Semba CP, et al. Transluminal place-
ment of endovascular stent-grafts for the treatment of descend-
ing thoracic aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(26): 
1729-1734.
100.	Fillinger MF, Greenberg RK, McKinsey JF, Chaikof 
EL, Society for Vascular Surgery Ad Hoc Committee on 
TEVAR Reporting Standards. Reporting standards for 
thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). J Vasc Surg. 
2010;52(4):1022-1033, 11033e.1-1033e.5.
101.	Riesenman PJ, Farber MA, Mendes RR, et al. Coverage of 
the left subclavian artery during thoracic endovascular aortic 
repair. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(1):90-94.
102.	Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic complications 
associated with endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pathol-
ogy: incidence and risk factors. A study from the European 
Collaborators on Stent/Graft Techniques for Aortic Aneu-
rysm Repair (EUROSTAR) registry. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(6): 
1103-1110.
103.	 Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA, Weldon SA, Coselli JS. Hybrid 
repairs of the distal aortic arch and proximal descending thoracic 
aorta. Op Tech Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;12(3):167-177.
104.	Woo EY, Bavaria JE, Pochettino A, et al. Techniques for pre-
serving vertebral artery perfusion during thoracic aortic stent 
grafting requiring aortic arch landing. Vasc Endovascular 
Surg. 2006;40(5):367-373.
105.	Fann JI, Dake MD, Semba CP, et al. Endovascular stent-graft-
ing after arch aneurysm repair using the “elephant trunk”. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 1995;60(4):1102-1105.
106.	Lin PH, Dardik A, Coselli JS. A simple technique to facilitate 
antegrade thoracic endograft deployment using a hybrid ele-
phant trunk procedure under hypothermic circulatory arrest. 
J Endovasc Ther. 2007;14(5):669-671.
107.	Greenberg RK, West K, Pfaff K, et al. Beyond the aortic bifur-
cation: branched endovascular grafts for thoracoabdominal 
and aortoiliac aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(5):879-886.
108.	Greenberg RK, Qureshi M. Fenestrated and branched devices 
in the pipeline. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(4 Suppl):15S-21S.
109.	Moulakakis KG, Mylonas SN, Avgerinos E, et al. The chim-
ney graft technique for preserving visceral vessels during 
endovascular treatment of aortic pathologies. J Vasc Surg. 
2012;55(5):1497-1503.
110.	Mehta M, Darling RC III, Taggert JB, et al. Outcomes of planned 
celiac artery coverage during TEVAR. J Vasc Surg. 2010; 
52(5):1153-1158.
111.	Black SA, Wolfe JH, Clark M, et al. Complex thoracoabdom-
inal aortic aneurysms: endovascular exclusion with visceral 
revascularization. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(6):1081-1089.
112.	Zhou W, Reardon M, Peden EK, Lin PH, Lumsden AB. 
Hybrid approach to complex thoracic aortic aneurysms in 
high-risk patients: surgical challenges and clinical outcomes. 
J Vasc Surg. 2006;44(4):688-693.
113.	Patel R, Conrad MF, Paruchuri V, et al. Thoracoabdominal 
aneurysm repair: hybrid versus open repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009; 
50(1):15-22.
114.	 Hughes GC, Barfield ME, Shah AA, et al. Staged total abdomi-
nal debranching and thoracic endovascular aortic repair for tho-
racoabdominal aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56(3):621-629.
115.	Geisbusch P, Hoffmann S, Kotelis D, et al. Reinterventions 
during midterm follow-up after endovascular treatment of tho-
racic aortic disease. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(6):1528-1533.
116.	Dumfarth J, Michel M, Schmidli J, et al. Mechanisms of fail-
ure and outcome of secondary surgical interventions after tho-
racic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). Ann Thorac Surg. 
2011;91(4):1141-1146.
117.	 Modine T, Lions C, Destrieux-Garnier L, et al. Iatrogenic iliac 
artery rupture and type A dissection after endovascular repair of 
type B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(1):317-319.
118.	Dong Z, Fu W, Wang Y, et al. Stent graft-induced new entry 
after endovascular repair for Stanford type B aortic dissection. 
J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(6):1450-1457.
119.	 Tshomba Y, Bertoglio L, Marone EM, et al. Retrograde type A 
dissection after endovascular repair of a “zone 0” nondissecting 
aortic arch aneurysm. Ann Vasc Surg. 2010;24(7):952 .e1-952.e7
120.	Desai ND, Pochettino A, Szeto WY, et al. Thoracic endovascu-
lar aortic repair: evolution of therapy, patterns of use, and results 
in a 10-year experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011; 
142(3):587-594.
121.	Daily PO, Trueblood HW, Stinson EB, Wuerflein RD, Shum-
way NE. Management of acute aortic dissections. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 1970;10(3):237-247.
122.	DeBakey ME, Henly WS, Cooley DA, et al. Surgical manage-
ment of dissecting aneurysms of the aorta. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 1965;49:130-149.
123.	Borst HG, Heinemann MK, Stone CD. Surgical Treatment of 
Aortic Dissection. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.
124.	Tsagakis K, Tossios P, Kamler M, et al. The DeBakey classifi-
cation exactly reflects late outcome and re-intervention prob-
ability in acute aortic dissection with a slightly modified type 
II definition. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40(5):1078-1084.
125.	Augoustides JG, Geirsson A, Szeto WY, et al. Observational 
study of mortality risk stratification by ischemic presentation 
in patients with acute type A aortic dissection: the Penn classi-
fication. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2009;6(2):140-146.
126.	Augoustides JG, Szeto WY, Woo EY, et al. The complica-
tions of uncomplicated acute type-B dissection: the introduc-
tion of the Penn classification. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2012;26(6):1139-1144.
127.	Tsagakis K, Konorza T, Dohle DS, et al. Hybrid operating 
room concept for combined diagnostics, intervention and 
surgery in acute type A dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2013;43(2):397-404.
824
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
128.	Nienaber CA, Sievers HH. Intramural hematoma in acute aor-
tic syndrome: more than one variant of dissection? Circula-
tion. 2002;106(3):284-285.
129.	Evangelista A, Mukherjee D, Mehta RH, et al. Acute intramu-
ral hematoma of the aorta: a mystery in evolution. Circulation. 
2005;111(8):1063-1070.
130.	Maraj R, Rerkpattanapipat P, Jacobs LE, Makornwattana P, 
Kotler MN. Meta-analysis of 143 reported cases of aortic 
intramural hematoma. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86(6):664-668.
131.	Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic 
intramural hematoma with and without penetrating atheroscle-
rotic ulcer: a clinical and radiological analysis. Circulation. 
2002;106(3):342-348.
132.	Clouse WD, Hallett JW Jr., Schaff HV, et al. Acute aortic 
dissection: population-based incidence compared with degen-
erative aortic aneurysm rupture. Mayo Clin Proc. 2004; 
79(2):176-180.
133.	Anagnostopoulos CE, Prabhakar MJ, Kittle CF. Aortic dis-
sections and dissecting aneurysms. Am J Cardiol. 1972;30(3): 
263-273.
134.	Hirst AE Jr., Johns VJ Jr., Kime SW Jr. Dissecting aneurysm 
of the aorta: a review of 505 cases. Medicine (Baltimore). 
1958;37(3):217-279.
135.	 Daniel JC, Huynh TT, Zhou W, et al. Acute aortic dissection 
associated with use of cocaine. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(3):427-433.
136.	Hatzaras IS, Bible JE, Koullias GJ, et al. Role of exertion or 
emotion as inciting events for acute aortic dissection. Am J 
Cardiol. 2007;100(9):1470-1472.
137.	Wang X, LeMaire SA, Chen L, et al. Decreased expression 
of fibulin-5 correlates with reduced elastin in thoracic aortic 
dissection. Surgery. 2005;138(2):352-359.
138.	Wang X, LeMaire SA, Chen L, et al. Increased collagen depo-
sition and elevated expression of connective tissue growth 
factor in human thoracic aortic dissection. Circulation. 
2006;114(1 Suppl):I200-205.
139.	Shen YH, Zhang L, Ren P, et al. AKT2 confers protec-
tion against aortic aneurysms and dissections. Circ Res. 
2013;112(4):618-632.
140.	Harris KM, Strauss CE, Eagle KA, et al. Correlates of delayed 
recognition and treatment of acute type A aortic dissection: 
the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). 
Circulation. 2011;124(18):1911-1918.
141.	 Erbel R, Alfonso F, Boileau C, et al. Diagnosis and manage-
ment of aortic dissection. Eur Heart J. 2001;22(18):1642-1681.
142.	Hagan PG, Nienaber CA, Isselbacher EM, et al. The Inter-
national Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD): new 
insights into an old disease. JAMA. 2000;283(7):897-903.
143.	Klompas M. Does this patient have an acute thoracic aortic 
dissection? JAMA. 2002;287(17):2262-2272.
144.	Shimony A, Filion KB, Mottillo S, Dourian T, Eisenberg MJ. 
Meta-analysis of usefulness of D-dimer to diagnose acute aor-
tic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107(8):1227-1234.
145.	Sodeck G, Domanovits H, Schillinger M, et al. D-dimer in 
ruling out acute aortic dissection: a systematic review and pro-
spective cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2007;28(24):3067-3075.
146.	Rapezzi C, Longhi S, Graziosi M, et al. Risk factors for diag-
nostic delay in acute aortic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2008; 
102(10):1399-1406.
147.	von Kodolitsch Y, Nienaber CA, Dieckmann C, et al. Chest radi-
ography for the diagnosis of acute aortic syndrome. Am J Med. 
2004;116(2):73-77.
148.	Nienaber CA, von Kodolitsch Y, Nicolas V, et al. The diag-
nosis of thoracic aortic dissection by noninvasive imaging 
procedures. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(1):1-9.
149.	Keren A, Kim CB, Hu BS, et al. Accuracy of biplane and mul-
tiplane transesophageal echocardiography in diagnosis of typi-
cal acute aortic dissection and intramural hematoma. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1996;28(3):627-636.
150.	Miller JS, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS. Evaluating aortic dis-
section: when is coronary angiography indicated? Heart. 
2000;83(6):615-616.
151.	Scholl FG, Coady MA, Davies R, et al. Interval or permanent 
nonoperative management of acute type A aortic dissection. 
Arch Surg. 1999;134(4):402-405.
152.	Gillinov AM, Lytle BW, Kaplon RJ, et al. Dissection of the 
ascending aorta after previous cardiac surgery: differences in 
presentation and management. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1999;117(2):252-260.
153.	Kirsch M, Soustelle C, Houel R, Hillion ML, Loisance D. Risk 
factor analysis for proximal and distal reoperations after sur-
gery for acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2002;123(2):318-325.
154.	Crawford ES, Kirklin JW, Naftel DC, et al. Surgery for acute 
dissection of ascending aorta. Should the arch be included? 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;104(1):46-59.
155.	Westaby S, Saito S, Katsumata T. Acute type A dissection: 
conservative methods provide consistently low mortality. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2002;73(3):707-713.
156.	Geirsson A, Bavaria JE, Swarr D, et al. Fate of the residual 
distal and proximal aorta after acute type A dissection repair 
using a contemporary surgical reconstruction algorithm. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2007;84(6):1955-1964.
157.	Malvindi PG, van Putte BP, Sonker U, et al. Reoperation after 
acute type A aortic dissection repair: a series of 104 patients. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(3):922-927.
158.	Glower DD, Speier RH, White WD, et al. Management and 
long-term outcome of aortic dissection. Ann Surg. 1991; 
214(1):31-41.
159.	Kazui T, Washiyama N, Muhammad BA, et al. Extended 
total arch replacement for acute type A aortic dissection: 
experience with seventy patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2000;119(3):558-565.
160.	Hoffman A, Damberg AL, Schalte G, et al. Thoracic stent 
graft sizing for frozen elephant trunk repair in acute type A 
dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(4):964-969.
161.	Karck M, Chavan A, Khaladj N, et al. The frozen elephant 
trunk technique for the treatment of extensive thoracic aortic 
aneurysms: operative results and follow-up. Eur J Cardiotho-
rac Surg. 2005;28(2):286-290; discussion 290.
162.	Roselli EE, Rafael A, Soltesz EG, Canale L, Lytle BW. 
Simplified frozen elephant trunk repair for acute DeBakey 
type I dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145 
(3 Suppl):S197-S201.
163.	Gorlitzer M, Weiss G, Meinhart J, et al. Fate of the false 
lumen after combined surgical and endovascular repair treat-
ing Stanford type A aortic dissections. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2010;89(3):794-799.
164.	Di Bartolomeo R, Di Marco L, Armaro A, et al. Treatment 
of complex disease of the thoracic aorta: the frozen elephant 
trunk technique with the E-vita open prosthesis. Eur J Cardio-
thorac Surg. 2009;35(4):671-675; discussion 675-676.
165.	Uchida N, Katayama A, Tamura K, et al. Long-term 
results of the frozen elephant trunk technique for extended 
­aortic arch disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;37(6): 
1338-1345.
166.	Lima B, Roselli EE, Soltesz EG, et al. Modified and “reverse” 
frozen elephant trunk repairs for extensive disease and compli-
cations after stent grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93(1):103-
109; discussion 109.
167.	Roselli EE, Soltesz EG, Mastracci T, Svensson LG, Lytle 
BW. Antegrade delivery of stent grafts to treat complex 
thoracic aortic disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(2): 
539-546.
168.	Kouchoukos NT. Frozen elephant trunk technique for exten-
sive chronic thoracic aortic dissection: is it the final answer? 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92(5):1557-1558.
825
Thoracic Aneurysms and Aortic Dissection
CHAPTER 22
169.	Genoni M, Paul M, Jenni R, et al. Chronic beta-blocker 
therapy improves outcome and reduces treatment costs in 
chronic type B aortic dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2001;19(5):606-610.
170.	DeBakey ME, McCollum CH, Crawford ES, et al. Dissection 
and dissecting aneurysms of the aorta: twenty-year follow-up 
of five hundred twenty-seven patients treated surgically. Sur-
gery. 1982;92(6):1118-1134.
171.	Fann JI, Smith JA, Miller DC, et al. Surgical management 
of aortic dissection during a 30-year period. Circulation. 
1995;92(9 Suppl):II113-II121.
172.	Elefteriades JA, Hartleroad J, Gusberg RJ, et al. Long-term 
experience with descending aortic dissection: the complication-­
specific approach. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;53(1):11-20.
173.	Barnes DM, Williams DM, Dasika NL, et al. A single-center 
experience treating renal malperfusion after aortic dissection 
with central aortic fenestration and renal artery stenting. J 
Vasc Surg. 2008;47(5):903-910.
174.	Miller DC. Through the looking glass: The first 20 years 
of thoracic aortic stent-grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;145(3 Suppl):S142-S148.
175.	Hughes GC, Andersen ND, McCann RL. Management of 
acute type B aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;145(3 Suppl):S202-S207.
176.	Kusagawa H, Shimono T, Ishida M, et al. Changes in false 
lumen after transluminal stent-graft placement in aortic 
­dissections: six years’ experience. Circulation. 2005;111(22): 
2951-2957.
177.	Nienaber CA, Rousseau H, Eggebrecht H, et al. Random-
ized comparison of strategies for type B aortic dissection: 
the INvestigation of STEnt Grafts in Aortic Dissection 
(INSTEAD) trial. Circulation. 2009;120(25):2519-2528.
178.	Demers P, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Stent-graft repair of 
penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers in the descending thoracic 
aorta: mid-term results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(1):81-86.
179.	Patel HJ, Sood V, Williams DM, et al. Late outcomes with 
repair of penetrating thoracic aortic ulcers: the merits of 
an endovascular approach. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(2): 
516-522; discussion 522-523.
180.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, de Figueiredo LP, Kirby RP. Paraple-
gia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: is dissec-
tion a risk factor? Ann Thorac Surg. 1997;63(1):28-35.
181.	Aomi S, Nakajima M, Nonoyama M, et al. Aortic root replace-
ment using composite valve graft in patients with aortic valve 
disease and aneurysm of the ascending aorta: twenty years’ 
experience of late results. Artif Organs. 2002;26(5):467-473.
182.	Kindo M, Billaud P, Gerelli S, et al. Twenty-seven-year expe-
rience with composite valve graft replacement of the aortic 
root. J Heart Valve Dis. 2007;16(4):370-377.
183.	David TE, Mohr FW, Bavaria JE, et al. Initial experience 
with the Toronto Root bioprosthesis. J Heart Valve Dis. 
2004;13(2):248-251.
184.	Gleason TG, David TE, Coselli JS, Hammon JW Jr., Bavaria 
JE. St. Jude Medical Toronto biologic aortic root prosthe-
sis: early FDA phase II IDE study results. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;78(3):786-793.
185.	Kincaid EH, Cordell AR, Hammon JW, Adair SM, Kon ND. 
Coronary insufficiency after stentless aortic root replacement: 
risk factors and solutions. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(3): 
964-968.
186.	 Kon ND, Cordell AR, Adair SM, Dobbins JE, Kitzman DW. 
Aortic root replacement with the freestyle stentless porcine aor-
tic root bioprosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;67(6):1609-1615.
187.	Melina G, De Robertis F, Gaer JA, et al. Mid-term pattern 
of survival, hemodynamic performance and rate of complica-
tions after Medtronic Freestyle versus homograft full aortic 
root replacement: results from a prospective randomized trial. 
J Heart Valve Dis. 2004;13(6):972-975.
188.	Badiu CC, Eichinger W, Bleiziffer S, et al. Should root 
replacement with aortic valve-sparing be offered to patients 
with bicuspid valves or severe aortic regurgitation? Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg. 2010;38(5):515-522.
189.	David TE, Maganti M, Armstrong S. Aortic root aneurysm: 
principles of repair and long-term follow-up. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2010;140(6 Suppl):S14-S19; discussion S45-S51.
190.	Zingone B, Gatti G, Spina A, et al. Current role and ­outcomes 
of ascending aortic replacement for severe nonaneurys-
mal aortic atherosclerosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(2): 
429-434.
191.	Achneck HE, Rizzo JA, Tranquilli M, Elefteriades JA. Safety 
of thoracic aortic surgery in the present era. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;84(4):1180-1185.
192.	Estrera AL, Miller CC III, Madisetty J, et al. Ascending and 
transverse aortic arch repair: the impact of glomerular filtra-
tion rate on mortality. Ann Surg. 2008;247(3):524-529.
193.	Fleck TM, Czerny M, Hutschala D, et al. The incidence 
of transient neurologic dysfunction after ascending aor-
tic replacement with circulatory arrest. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2003;76(4):1198-1202.
194.	 Immer FF, Barmettler H, Berdat PA, et al. Effects of deep hypo-
thermic circulatory arrest on outcome after resection of ascend-
ing aortic aneurysm. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(2):422-425.
195.	Heinemann MK, Buehner B, Jurmann MJ, Borst HG. Use of 
the “elephant trunk technique” in aortic surgery. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 1995;60(1):2-6.
196.	LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Coselli JS. The elephant trunk tech-
nique for staged repair of complex aneurysms of the entire 
thoracic aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81(5):1561-1569.
197.	Safi HJ, Miller CC III, Estrera AL, et al. Staged repair of 
extensive aortic aneurysms: long-term experience with the 
elephant trunk technique. Ann Surg. 2004;240(4):677-684.
198.	Sundt TM, Moon MR, DeOliviera N, et al. Contemporary 
results of total aortic arch replacement. J Card Surg. 2004; 
19(3):235-239.
199.	Svensson LG, Kim KH, Blackstone EH, et al. Elephant trunk 
procedure: newer indications and uses. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;78(1):109-116.
200.	Kazui T, Yamashita K, Washiyama N, et al. Aortic arch 
replacement using selective cerebral perfusion. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2007;83(2):S796-S798; discussion S824-S831.
201.	Bischoff MS, Brenner RM, Scheumann J, et al. Long-term 
outcome after aortic arch replacement with a trifurcated graft. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(6 Suppl):S71-76; dis-
cussion S86-S91.
202.	Iba Y, Minatoya K, Matsuda H, et al. Contemporary open aor-
tic arch repair with selective cerebral perfusion in the era of 
endovascular aortic repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013; 
145(3 Suppl):S72-S77.
203.	Thomas M, Li Z, Cook DJ, Greason KL, Sundt TM. Contem-
porary results of open aortic arch surgery. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2012;144(4):838-844.
204.	Urbanski PP, Lenos A, Bougioukakis P, et al. Mild-to-
moderate hypothermia in aortic arch surgery using circula-
tory arrest: a change of paradigm? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2012;41(1):185-191.
205.	Kondoh H, Taniguchi K, Funatsu T, et al. Total arch replace-
ment with long elephant trunk anastomosed at the base of the 
innominate artery: a single-centre longitudinal experience. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42(5):840-848; discussion 848.
206.	Flores J, Kunihara T, Shiiya N, et al. Extensive deployment 
of the stented elephant trunk is associated with an increased 
risk of spinal cord injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2006;131(2):336-342.
207.	Antoniou GA, Mireskandari M, Bicknell CD, et al. Hybrid 
repair of the aortic arch in patients with extensive aortic 
­disease. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2010;40(6):715-721.
826
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
Part II
208.	Geisbusch P, Kotelis D, Muller-Eschner M, Hyhlik-Durr A, 
Bockler D. Complications after aortic arch hybrid repair. J 
Vasc Surg. 2011;53(4):935-941.
209.	Czerny M, Weigang E, Sodeck G, et al. Targeting landing 
zone 0 by total arch rerouting and TEVAR: midterm results 
of a transcontinental registry. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(1): 
84-89.
210.	Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, Nienaber CA, et al. Role of age in 
acute type A aortic dissection outcome: report from the Inter-
national Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(4):784-789.
211.	Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk models 
to predict surgical mortality in acute type A aortic dissection: 
the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection score. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(1):55-61.
212.	Kruger T, Weigang E, Hoffmann I, et al. Cerebral protection 
during surgery for acute aortic dissection type A: results of the 
German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection Type A (GER-
AADA). Circulation. 2011;124(4):434-443.
213.	Dake MD, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. The “first genera-
tion” of endovascular stent-grafts for patients with aneurysms 
of the descending thoracic aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1998;116(5):689-703.
214.	Demers P, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Midterm results of 
endovascular repair of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms 
with first-generation stent grafts. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;127(3):664-673.
215.	Bavaria JE, Appoo JJ, Makaroun MS, et al. Endovascular stent 
grafting versus open surgical repair of descending thoracic 
aortic aneurysms in low-risk patients: a multicenter compara-
tive trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133(2):369-377.
216.	Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal results of the 
Medtronic Vascular Talent Thoracic Stent Graft System: the 
VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48(3):546-554.
217.	Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. International 
controlled clinical trial of thoracic endovascular aneurysm 
repair with the Zenith TX2 endovascular graft: 1-year results. 
J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(2):247-257.
218.	Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, Cambria RP. 
Five-year results of endovascular treatment with the Gore 
TAG device compared with open repair of thoracic aortic 
aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(5):912-918.
219.	Foley PJ, Criado FJ, Farber MA, et al. Results with the Tal-
ent thoracic stent graft in the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2012;56(5):1214-1221 1221.e1.
220.	Czerny M, Zimpfer D, Rodler S, et al. Endovascular stent-
graft placement of aneurysms involving the descending aorta 
originating from chronic type B dissections. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;83(5):1635-1639.
221.	Nienaber CA. Results from the INSTEAD trial. Paper 
presented at: Sixth Annual International Symposium on 
Advances in Understanding Aortic Diseases; Sept 30-Oct 1, 
2005; ­Berlin, Germany.
222.	Brunkwall J, Lammer J, Verhoeven E, Taylor P. ADSORB: 
a study on the efficacy of endovascular grafting in uncom-
plicated acute dissection of the descending aorta. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2012;44(1):31-36.
223.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Conklin LD, Adams GJ. Left heart 
bypass during descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair 
does not reduce the incidence of paraplegia. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;77(4):1298-1303.
224.	Chiesa R, Tshomba Y, Civilini E, et al. Open repair of 
descending thoracic aneurysms. HSR Proc Intensive Care 
Cardiovasc Anesth. 2010;2(3):177-190.
225.	Estrera AL, Miller CC, III, Chen EP, et al. Descending tho-
racic aortic aneurysm repair: 12-year experience using distal 
aortic perfusion and cerebrospinal fluid drainage. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2005;80(4):1290-1296.
226.	Dick F, Hinder D, Immer FF, et al. Outcome and quality of life 
after surgical and endovascular treatment of descending aortic 
lesions. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85(5):1605-1612.
227.	Stone DH, Brewster DC, Kwolek CJ, et al. Stent-graft versus 
open-surgical repair of the thoracic aorta: mid-term results. 
 J Vasc Surg. 2006;44(6):1188-1197.
228.	Brandt M, Hussel K, Walluscheck KP, et al. Stent-graft repair 
versus open surgery for the descending aorta: a case-control 
study. J Endovasc Ther. 2004;11(5):535-538.
229.	Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after open 
versus endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair in an 
observational study of the Medicare population. Circulation. 
2011;124(24):2661-2669.
230.	LeMaire SA, Price MD, Green SY, Zarda S, Coselli JS. 
Results of open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;1(3):286-292.
231.	Chiesa R, Melissano G, Civilini E, et al. Ten years expe-
rience of thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm 
surgical repair: lessons learned. Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18(5): 
514-520.
232.	Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical repair of 
2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;83(2):S862-S864.
233.	Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Davison JK, Cambria RP. Tho-
racoabdominal aneurysm repair: a 20-year perspective. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S856-S861.
234.	Schepens MA, Kelder JC, Morshuis WJ, et al. Long-term 
­follow-up after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S851-S855.
235.	Rigberg DA, McGory ML, Zingmond DS, et al. Thirty-day 
mortality statistics underestimate the risk of repair of thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysms: a statewide experience. J Vasc 
Surg. 2006;43(2):217-222.
236.	Cowan JA Jr., Dimick JB, Henke PK, et al. Surgical treatment 
of intact thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in the United 
States: hospital and surgeon volume-related outcomes. J Vasc 
Surg. 2003;37(6):1169-1174.
237.	Wong DR, Parenti JL, Green SY, et al. Open repair of thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm in the modern surgical era: con-
temporary outcomes in 509 patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2011; 
212(4):569-579; discussion 579-581.
238.	Trimarchi S, Tolenaar JL, Tsai TT, et al. Influence of clini-
cal presentation on the outcome of acute B aortic dissec-
tion: evidences from IRAD. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 
2012;53(2):161-168.
239.	Tsai TT, Fattori R, Trimarchi S, et al. Long-term survival 
in patients presenting with type B acute aortic dissection: 
insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dis-
section. Circulation. 2006;114(21):2226-2231.
240.	Slonim SM, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Percutaneous bal-
loon fenestration and stenting for life-threatening ischemic 
complications in patients with acute aortic dissection. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117(6):1118-1126.
241.	Dake MD, Kato N, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular stent-
graft placement for the treatment of acute aortic dissection. N 
Engl J Med. 1999;340(20):1546-1552.
242.	Eggebrecht H, Nienaber CA, Neuhauser M, et al. Endovascu-
lar stent-graft placement in aortic dissection: a meta-analysis. 
Eur Heart J. 2006;27(4):489-498.
243.	White RA, Miller DC, Criado FJ, et al. Report on the results 
of thoracic endovascular aortic repair for acute, complicated, 
type B aortic dissection at 30 days and 1 year from a multidis-
ciplinary subcommittee of the Society for Vascular Surgery 
Outcomes Committee. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(4):1082-1090.
244.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA. Acute type B dissections: open sur-
gical options. In: Eskandari MK, Pearce WH, Yao JST, eds. 
Current Vascular Surgery 2012. Shelton: People’s Medical 
Publishing House-USA; 2013:351-362.
Arterial Disease
Peter H. Lin, Mun Jye Poi, Jesus Matos, 
Panagiotis Kougias, Carlos Bechara, and 
Changyi Chen
23
General Approach to the  
Vascular Patient	
828
The Vascular History / 828
The Vascular Physical Examination / 829
Noninvasive Diagnostic Evaluation of the 
Vascular Patient / 829
Radiologic Evaluation of the Vascular 
Patient / 830
Preoperative Cardiac Evaluation / 833
Basic Principles of Endovascular 
Therapy	
834
Needles and Access / 834
Guidewires / 835
Hemostatic Sheaths / 835
Catheters / 835
Angioplasty Balloons / 835
Stents / 836
Stent Grafts / 836
Carotid Artery Disease	
837
Epidemiology and Etiology of Carotid 
Occlusive Disease / 837
Clinical Manifestations of Cerebral 
Ischemia / 838
Diagnostic Evaluation / 839
Treatment of Carotid Occlusive  
Disease / 841
Carotid Endarterectomy versus  
Angioplasty and Stenting / 842
Surgical Techniques of Carotid  
Endarterectomy / 843
Techniques of Carotid Angioplasty  
and Stenting / 845
Nonatherosclerotic Disease of  
the Carotid Artery / 847
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm	
850
Causes and Risk Factors / 850
Natural History of Aortic Aneurysm / 850
Clinical Manifestations / 851
Relevant Anatomy / 851
Diagnostic Evaluation / 852
Surgical Repair of Abdominal  
Aortic Aneurysm / 852
Endovascular Repair of Abdominal  
Aortic Aneurysm / 853
Results from Clinical Studies Comparing 
Endovascular versus Open Repair / 857
Classification and Management of 
Endoleak / 858
Mesenteric Artery Disease	
859
Anatomy and Pathophysiology / 860
Types of Mesenteric Artery  
Occlusive Disease / 860
Clinical Manifestations / 861
Diagnostic Evaluation / 861
Surgical Repair / 863
Endovascular Treatment / 864
Clinical Results of Interventions  
for Mesenteric Ischemia / 865
Renal Artery Disease	
866
Etiology / 866
Clinical Manifestations / 867
Diagnostic Evaluation / 867
Treatment Indications / 869
Surgical Reconstruction / 869
Clinical Results of Surgical Repair / 870
Endovascular Treatment / 870
Clinical Results of Endovascular  
Interventions / 871
Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease	
872
Diagnostic Evaluation / 872
Differential Diagnosis / 872
Collateral Arterial Network / 873
Disease Classification / 873
General Treatment Considerations / 875
Surgical Reconstruction  
of Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease / 876
Complications of Surgical Aortoiliac 
Reconstruction / 878
Endovascular Treatment  
for Aortic Disease / 879
Endovascular Treatment for Iliac  
Artery Disease / 879
Complications of Endovascular  
Aortoiliac Interventions / 880
Clinical Results Comparing Surgical and 
Endovascular Treatment of Aortoiliac 
Disease / 880
Lower Extremity Arterial  
Occlusive Disease	
881
Epidemiology / 882
Diagnostic Evaluation / 882
Differential Diagnosis / 882
Lower Extremity Occlusive  
Disease Classification / 883
Etiology of Acute Limb Ischemia / 885
Clinical Manifestations of Acute  
Limb Ischemia / 886
Treatment Considerations for  
Acute Limb Ischemia / 887
Endovascular Treatment / 887
Surgical Treatment / 887
Complications Related to Treatment for 
Acute Limb Ischemia / 888
Clinical Manifestations of  
Chronic Limb Ischemia / 889
Treatment Considerations for  
Chronic Limb Ischemia / 890
Endovascular Treatment / 891
Complications of Endovascular  
Interventions / 896
Surgical Treatment for Chronic Limb  
Ischemia due to Femoropopliteal  
Disease / 897
Complications of Surgical  
Reconstruction / 898
Choice of Conduit for Infrainguinal  
Bypass Grafting / 898
Clinical Results of Surgical  
and Endovascular Interventions  
for Femoropopliteal Occlusive  
Disease / 899
Nonatherosclerotic Disorders  
of Blood Vessels	
900
Giant Cell Arteritis  
(Temporal Arteritis) / 901
Takayasu’s Arteritis / 901
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome / 901
Marfan’s Syndrome / 902
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum / 902
Kawasaki’s Disease / 902
Inflammatory Arteritis  
and Vasculitis / 902
Behçet’s Disease / 903
Polyarteritis Nodosa / 903
Radiation-Induced Arteritis / 903
Raynaud’s Syndrome / 904
Fibromuscular Dysplasia / 904
Nonatherosclerotic Disease Affecting  
the Popliteal Artery Disease / 905
Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangiitis  
Obliterans) / 906
chapter 
GENERAL APPROACH TO THE  
VASCULAR PATIENT
Since the vascular system involves every organ system in our 
body, the symptoms of vascular disease are as varied as those 
encountered in any medical specialty. Lack of adequate blood 
supply to target organs typically presents with pain; for exam-
ple, calf pain with lower extremity claudication, postprandial 
abdominal pain from mesenteric ischemia, and arm pain with 
axillo-subclavian arterial occlusion. In contrast, stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack (TIA) are the presenting symptoms from 
middle cerebral embolization as a consequence of a stenosed 
internal carotid artery. The pain syndrome of arterial disease 
is usually divided clinically into acute and chronic types, with 
all shades of severity between the two extremes. Sudden onset 
of pain can indicate complete occlusion of a critical vessel, 
leading to more severe pain and critical ischemia in the target 
organ, resulting in lower limb gangrene or intestinal infarction. 
Chronic pain results from a slower, more progressive atheroscle-
rotic occlusion, which can be totally or partially compensated by 
developing collateral vessels. Acute on chronic is another pain 
pattern in which a patient most likely has an underlying arterial 
stenosis that suddenly occludes; for example, the patient with 
a history of calf claudication who now presents with sudden, 
severe acute limb-threatening ischemia. The clinician should 
always try to understand and relate the clinical manifestations 
to the underlying pathologic process.
The Vascular History
Appropriate history should be focused based on the present-
ing symptoms related to the vascular system (Table 23-1). Of 
particular importance in the previous medical history is noting 
prior vascular interventions (endovascular or open surgical), and 
all vascular patients should have inquiry made about their prior 
cardiac history and current cardiac symptoms. Approximately 
30% of vascular patients will be diabetic. A history of prior and 
current smoking status should be noted.
828
Key Points
1
	 Carotid intervention as a preventive strategy should be per-
formed in patients with 50% or greater symptomatic internal 
carotid artery stenosis and those with 80% or greater asymp-
tomatic internal carotid artery stenosis. Carotid intervention 
for asymptomatic stenosis between 60% and 79% remains 
controversial and is a function of an operator’s stroke rate. The 
choice of intervention—carotid endarterectomy versus carotid 
stenting—remains controversial; currently, carotid endarterec-
tomy appears to be associated with lower stroke rate, whereas 
carotid stenting is more suitable under certain anatomic or 
physiologic conditions.
2
	 Abdominal aortic aneurysms should be repaired when the risk 
of rupture, determined mainly by aneurysm size, exceeds the 
risk of death due to perioperative complications or concurrent 
illness. Endovascular repair is associated with less periopera-
tive morbidity and mortality compared to open reconstruction 
and is preferred for high-risk patients who meet specific ana-
tomic criteria.
3
	 Symptomatic mesenteric ischemia should be treated to 
improve quality of life and prevent bowel infarction. Oper-
ative treatment—bypass—is superior to endovascular 
intervention, although changes in wire and stent technol-
ogy have improved the results of mesenteric stenting in 
recent series.
4
	 Aortoiliac occlusive disease can be treated with either 
endovascular means or open reconstruction, depending on 
patient risk stratification, occlusion characteristics, and 
symptomatology.
5
	 Claudication is a marker of extensive atherosclerosis and is 
mainly managed with risk factor modification and pharma-
cotherapy. Only 5% of patients with claudication will need 
intervention because of disabling extremity pain. The 
5-year mortality of a patient with claudication approaches 
30%. Patients with rest pain or tissue loss need expeditious 
evaluation and vascular reconstruction to ameliorate the 
severe extremity pain and prevent limb loss.
The patient with carotid disease in most cases is com-
pletely asymptomatic, having been referred based on the find-
ing of a cervical bruit or duplex finding of stenosis. Symptoms 
of carotid territory TIAs include transient monocular blindness 
(amaurosis), contralateral weakness or numbness, and dys-
phasia. Symptoms persisting longer than 24 hours constitute 
a stroke. In contrast, the patient with chronic mesenteric isch-
emia is likely to present with postprandial abdominal pain and 
weight loss. The patient fears eating because of the pain, avoids 
food, and loses weight. It is very unlikely that a patient with 
abdominal pain who has not lost weight has chronic mesenteric 
ischemia.
The patient with lower extremity pain on ambulation has 
intermittent claudication that occurs in certain muscle groups; 
for example, calf pain upon exercise usually reflects superficial 
femoral artery disease, while pain in the buttocks reflects iliac 
disease. In most cases, the pain manifests in one muscle group 
below the level of the affected artery, occurs only with exercise, 
and is relieved with rest only to recur at the same location, hence 
the term “window gazer’s disease.” Rest pain (a manifestation 
of severe underlying occlusive disease) is constant and occurs 
in the foot (not the muscle groups), typically at the metatarso-
phalangeal junction, and is relieved by dependency. Often the 
Table 23-1
Pertinent elements in vascular history
•  History of stroke or transient ischemic attack
•  History of coronary artery disease, including previous 
myocardial infarction and angina
•  History of peripheral arterial disease
•  History of diabetes
•  History of hypertension
•  History of tobacco use
•  History of hyperlipidemia
829
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
829
patient is prompted to sleep with their foot hanging off one side 
of the bed to increase the hydrostatic pressure.
The Vascular Physical Examination
Specific vascular examination should include abdominal aortic 
palpation, carotid artery examination, and pulse examination 
of the lower extremity (femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, and 
dorsalis pedis arteries). The abdomen should be palpated for 
an abdominal aortic aneurysm, detected as an expansile pulse 
above the level of the umbilicus. It should also be examined for 
the presence of bruits. Because the aorta typically divides at the 
level of the umbilicus, an aortic aneurysm is most frequently 
palpable in the epigastrium. In thin individuals, a normal aortic 
pulsation is palpable, while in obese patients, even large aor-
tic aneurysms may not be detectable. Suspicion of a clinically 
enlarged aorta should lead to the performance of an ultrasound 
scan for a more accurate definition of aortic diameter.
The carotids should be auscultated for the presence of 
bruits, although there is a higher correlation with coronary 
artery disease than underlying carotid stenosis. A bruit at the 
angle of the mandible is a significant finding, leading to follow-
up duplex scanning. The differential diagnosis is a transmitted 
murmur from a sclerotic or stenotic aortic valve. The carotid is 
palpable deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle in the neck. 
Palpation, however, should be gentle and rarely yields clinically 
useful information.
Upper extremity examination is necessary when an arte-
riovenous graft is to be inserted in patients who have symptoms 
of arm pain with exercise. Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) can 
result in occlusion or aneurysm formation of the subclavian 
artery. Distal embolization is a manifestation of TOS; conse-
quently, the fingers should be examined for signs of ischemia 
and ulceration. The axillary artery enters the limb below the 
middle of the clavicle, where it can be palpated in thin patients. 
It is usually easily palpable in the axilla and medial upper arm. 
The brachial artery is most easily located at the antecubital fossa 
immediately medial to the biceps tendon. The radial artery is 
palpable at the wrist anterior to the radius.
For lower extremity vascular examination, the femoral 
pulse is usually palpable midway between the anterior supe-
rior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle. The popliteal artery is 
palpated in the popliteal fossa with the knee flexed to 45° and 
the foot supported on the examination table to relax the calf 
muscles. Palpation of the popliteal artery is a bimanual tech-
nique. Both thumbs are placed on the tibial tuberosity anteriorly 
and the fingers are placed into the popliteal fossa between the 
two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. The popliteal artery is 
palpated by compressing it against the posterior aspect of the 
tibia just below the knee. The posterior tibial pulse is detected 
by palpation 2 cm posterior to the medial malleolus. The dorsa-
lis pedis is detected 1 cm lateral to the hallucis longus extensor 
tendon, which dorsiflexes the great toe and is clearly visible on 
the dorsum of the foot. Pulses can be graded using either the 
traditional four-point scale or the basic two-point scale system 
(Table 23-2). The foot should also be carefully examined for 
pallor on elevation and rubor on dependency, as these findings 
are indicative of chronic ischemia. Note should also be made 
of nail changes and loss of hair. Ulceration and other findings 
specific to disease states are described in relevant sections later 
in this chapter.
After reconstructive vascular surgery, the graft may be 
available for examination, depending on its type and course. 
The in situ lower extremity graft runs in the subcutaneous fat 
and can be palpated along most of its length. A change in pulse 
quality, aneurysmal enlargement, or a new bruit should be care-
fully noted. Axillofemoral grafts, femoral-to-femoral grafts, 
and arteriovenous access grafts can usually be easily palpated 
as well.
Noninvasive Diagnostic Evaluation of the 
Vascular Patient
Ankle-Brachial Index.  There is increasing interest in the use 
of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) to evaluate patients at risk 
for cardiovascular events. An ABI less than 0.9 correlates with 
increased risk of myocardial infarction and indicates significant, 
although perhaps asymptomatic, underlying peripheral vascular 
disease. The ABI is determined in the following ways. Blood 
pressure is measured in both upper extremities using the high-
est systolic blood pressure as the denominator for the ABI. The 
ankle pressure is determined by placing a blood pressure cuff 
above the ankle and measuring the return to flow of the posterior 
tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries using a pencil Doppler probe 
over each artery. The ratio of the systolic pressure in each ves-
sel divided by the highest arm systolic pressure can be used to 
express the ABI in both the posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis 
arteries (Fig. 23-1). Normal is more than 1. Patients with clau-
dication typically have an ABI in the 0.5 to 0.7 range, and those 
with rest pain are in the 0.3 to 0.5 range. Those with gangrene 
have an ABI of less than 0.3. These ranges can vary depending 
on the degree of compressibility of the vessel. The test is less 
reliable in patients with heavily calcified vessels. Due to non-
compressibility, some patients, such as diabetics and those with 
end-stage renal disease, may have ABI ≥1.40 and require addi-
tional noninvasive diagnostic testing to evaluate for peripheral 
artery disease. Alternative tests include toe-brachial pressures, 
pulse volume recordings, transcutaneous oxygen measurements, 
or vascular imaging (duplex ultrasound).
Segmental Limb Pressures.  By placing serial blood pressure 
cuffs down the lower extremity and then measuring the pres-
sure with a Doppler probe as flow returns to the artery below the 
cuff, it is possible to determine segmental pressures down the 
leg. This data can then be used to infer the level of the occlu-
sion. The systolic pressure at each level is expressed as a ratio, 
with the highest systolic pressure in the upper extremities as 
the denominator. Normal segmental pressures commonly show 
high thigh pressures 20 mmHg or greater in comparison to the 
brachial artery pressures. The low thigh pressure should be 
equivalent to brachial pressures. Subsequent pressures should 
fall by no more than 10 mmHg at each level. A pressure gradient 
of 20 mmHg between two subsequent levels is usually indica-
tive of occlusive disease at that level. The most frequently used 
Table 23-2
Grading scales for peripheral pulses
Traditional Scale
Basic Scale
4+
Normal
2+
Normal
3+
Slightly reduced
1+
Diminished
2+
Markedly reduced
0
Absent
1+
Barely palpable
830
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
index is the ratio of the ankle pressure to the brachial pressure, 
the ABI. Normally, the ABI is greater than 1.0, and a value 
of less than 0.9 indicates some degree of arterial obstruction 
and has been shown to be correlated with an increased risk of 
coronary heart disease.1 Limitations of relying on segmental 
limb pressures include: (a) missing isolated moderate stenoses 
(usually iliac) that produce little or no pressure gradient at rest; 
(b) falsely elevated pressures in patients with diabetes and end-
stage renal disease; and (c) the inability to differentiate between 
stenosis and occlusion.2 Patients with diabetes and end-stage 
renal disease have calcified vessels that are difficult to com-
press, thus rendering this method inaccurate, due to recording 
of falsely elevated pressure readings. Noncompressible arter-
ies yield ankle systolic pressures ≥250 mmHg and ABIs >1.40. 
In this situation, absolute toe and ankle pressures can be 
measured to gauge critical limb ischemia. Ankle pressures 
less than 50 mmHg or toe pressures less than 30 mmHg are 
indicative of critical limb ischemia. The toe pressure is normally 
30 mmHg less than the ankle pressure, and a toe-brachial index 
(TBI) <0.70 is abnormal. False-positive results with the TBI are 
unusual. The main limitation of this technique is that it may be 
impossible to measure pressures in the first and second toes due 
to pre-existing ulceration.
Figure 23-1.  Calculating the ankle-brachial index (ABI).
Right ABI = ratio of
Higher of the right ankle systolic pressures (posterior tibial or dorsalis pedis)
Higher arm systolic pressure (left or right arm)
Left ABI = ratio of
Higher of the left ankle systolic pressures (posterior tibial or dorsalis pedis)
Higher arm systolic pressure (left or right arm)
Pulse Volume Recording.  In patients with noncompressible 
vessels, segmental plethysmography can be used to determine 
underlying arterial occlusive disease. Cuffs placed at different 
levels on the leg detect changes in blood volume and produce a 
pulse volume recording (PVR) when connected to a plethysmo-
graph (Fig. 23-2). To obtain accurate PVR waveforms, the cuff 
is inflated to 60 to 65 mmHg, so as to detect volume changes 
without causing arterial occlusion. Pulse volume tracings are 
suggestive of proximal disease if the upstroke of the pulse is 
not brisk, the peak of the wave tracing is rounded, and there is 
disappearance of the dicrotic notch.
Although isolated segmental limb pressures and PVR mea-
surements are 85% accurate when compared with angiography 
in detecting and localizing significant atherosclerotic lesions, 
when used in combination, accuracy approaches 95%.3 For this 
reason, it is suggested that these two diagnostic modalities be 
used in combination when evaluating peripheral artery disease.
Radiologic Evaluation of the Vascular Patient
Ultrasound.  Ultrasound examinations are relatively time 
consuming, require experienced technicians, and may not 
visualize all arterial segments. Doppler waveform analysis 
can suggest atherosclerotic occlusive disease if the waveforms 
in the insonated arteries are biphasic, monophasic, or asym-
metrical. B-mode ultrasonography provides black and white, 
real-time images. B-mode ultrasonography does not evaluate 
blood flow; thus, it cannot differentiate between fresh thrombus 
and flowing blood, which have the same echogenicity. Calci-
fication in atherosclerotic plaques will cause acoustic shadow-
ing. B-mode ultrasound probes cannot be sterilized. Use of the 
B-mode probe intraoperatively requires a sterile covering and 
gel to maintain an acoustic interface. Experience is needed to 
obtain and interpret images accurately. Duplex ultrasonogra-
phy entails performance of B-mode imaging, spectral Doppler 
scanning, and color-flow duplex scanning. The caveat to per-
formance of duplex ultrasonography is meticulous technique by 
a certified vascular ultrasound technician, so that the appropri-
ate 60° Doppler angle is maintained during insonation with the 
ultrasound probe. Alteration of this angle can markedly alter 
waveform appearance and subsequent interpretation of veloc-
ity measurements. Direct imaging of intra-abdominal vessels 
with duplex ultrasound is less reliable because of the difficulty 
in visualizing the vessels through overlying bowel. These dis-
advantages currently limit the applicability of duplex scanning 
in the evaluation of aortoiliac and infrapopliteal disease. In a 
recent study, duplex ultrasonography had lower sensitivity in 
the calculation of infrapopliteal vessel stenosis in comparison 
to conventional digital subtraction or computed tomography 
angiography.4 Few surgeons rely solely on duplex ultrasonog-
raphy for preoperative planning in lower extremity revascu-
larizations; but with experience, lower extremity arteries can 
be insonated to determine anatomy, and the functional signifi-
cance of lesions can be determined by calculation of degree 
of stenosis from velocity ratios. Duplex scanning is unable to 
evaluate recently implanted polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
and polyester (Dacron) grafts because they contain air, which 
prevents ultrasound penetration.
Computed Tomography Angiography.  Computed tomogra-
phy angiography (CTA) is a noninvasive, contrast-dependent 
method for imaging the arterial system. It depends on intrave-
nous infusion of iodine-based contrast agents. The patient is 
advanced through a rotating gantry, which images serial transverse 
831
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Femoral
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
Sup.
femoral
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
Popliteal
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
Posterior
tibial
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
Dorsalis
pedis
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.75
Femoral
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
Popliteal
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
Posterior
tibial
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
Dorsalis
pedis
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
Sup.
femoral
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.25
0.00
149
Brachial
0.66
U. thigh
L. thigh
Calf
Ankle-PT
Ankle-DP
Toe
0.77
0.74
1.01
1.05
1.01
1.05
0.70
0.73
0.66
0.62
0.59
Indexes
144
Right
Left
Doppler waveforms
1 sec/div
157
150
157
109
105
99
PT 98
DT 92
PT 151
DT 111
114
88
Figure 23-2.  Typical report of peripheral vascular study with arterial segmental pressure measurement plus Doppler evaluation of the lower 
extremity.
832
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
slices. The contrast-filled vessels can be extracted from the 
slices and rendered in three-dimensional format (Fig. 23-3). The 
extracted images can also be rotated and viewed from several 
different directions during postacquisition image processing. 
This technology has been advanced as a consequence of aortic 
endografting. CTA provides images for postprocessing that can 
be used to display the aneurysm in a format that demonstrates 
thrombus, calcium, lumen, and the outer wall, and allows “fit-
ting” of a proposed endograft into the aneurysm (Fig. 23-4). 
CTA is increasingly being used to image the carotid bifurcation, 
and as computing power increases, the speed of image acquisi-
tion and resolution will continue to increase. The major limita-
tions of multidetector CTA are use of contrast and presence of 
artifacts caused by calcification and stents. CTA can overesti-
mate the degree of in-stent stenosis, while heavy calcification 
can limit the diagnostic accuracy of the method by causing a 
“blooming artifact.”5 The artifacts can be overcome with altera-
tion in image acquisition technique. There are no randomized 
trials to document the superiority of multidetector CTA over tra-
ditional angiography, but there is emerging evidence to support 
the claim that multidetector CTA has sensitivity, specificity, and 
accuracy that rival invasive angiography.5
Magnetic Resonance Angiography.  Magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA) has the advantage of not requiring iodin-
ated contrast agents to provide vessel opacification (Fig. 23-5). 
Gadolinium is used as a contrast agent for MRA studies, and 
because it is generally not nephrotoxic, it can be used in patients 
with elevated creatinine. MRA is contraindicated in patients 
with pacemakers, defibrillators, spinal cord stimulators, intrace-
rebral shunts, cochlear implants, and cranial clips. Patients with 
claustrophobia may require sedation to be able to complete the 
test. The presence of metallic stents causes artifacts and signal 
drop-out; however, these can be dealt with using alternations in 
image acquisition and processing. Nitinol stents produce mini-
mal artifact.6 Compared to other modalities, MRA is relatively 
slow and expensive. However, due to its noninvasive nature and 
decreased nephrotoxicity, MRA is being used more frequently 
for imaging vasculature in various anatomic distributions.
Diagnostic Angiography.  Diagnostic angiography is consid-
ered the gold standard in vascular imaging. In many centers, its 
use is rapidly decreasing due to the development of noninva-
sive imaging modalities such as duplex arterial mapping, CTA, 
and MRA. Nevertheless, contrast angiography still remains in 
A 
 
 
 
             B
Figure 23-3.  A multidetector computed tomography angiography with three-dimensional reconstruction of the iliofemoral arterial circulation 
in two patients with lower leg claudication. A. A 50-year-old male with an occluded right superficial femoral artery (single long arrow) with 
reconstituted superficial femoral artery at the level of mid-thigh. Arterial calcifications (single short arrows) are present in the bilateral distal 
superficial femoral arteries. B. A 53-year-old male with occluded right common iliac artery (double arrows).
Figure 23-4.  Three-dimensional computed tomog-
raphy angiogram of an abdominal aortic aneurysm 
that displays various aneurysm components including 
thrombus, aortic calcification, blood circulation, and 
aneurysm wall.
833
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
widespread use. The essential aspects of angiography are vascu-
lar access and catheter placement in the vascular bed that requires 
examination. The imaging system and the contrast agent are used 
to opacify the target vessel. Although in the past this function has 
largely been delegated to the interventional radiology service, 
an increasing number of surgeons are performing this procedure 
and following the diagnostic imaging with immediate surgical 
or endovascular intervention. There are several considerations 
when relying on angiography for imaging.
Approximately 70% of atherosclerotic plaques occur in an 
eccentric location within the blood vessel; therefore, images can 
be misleading when trying to evaluate stenoses because angiog-
raphy is limited to a uniplanar “lumenogram.” With increased 
use of intravascular stent deployment, it has also been noted 
that assessment of stent apposition and stent position in rela-
tion to surrounding branches may be inaccurate. Furthermore, 
angiography exposes the patient to the risks of both ionizing 
radiation and intravascular contrast. Nevertheless, contrast angi-
ography remains the most common invasive method of vascular 
investigation for both diagnostic and therapeutic intervention. 
The angiogram usually provides the final information needed to 
decide whether or not to proceed with operation or endovascular 
interventions.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) offers some advan-
tages over conventional cut-film angiography such as excellent 
visualization despite use of lower volumes of contrast media. In 
particular, when multilevel occlusive lesions limit the amount of 
contrast reaching distal vessels, supplemental use of digital sub-
traction angiographic techniques may enhance visualization and 
definition of anatomy. Intra-arterial DSA uses a portable, axially 
rotatable imaging device that can obtain views from different 
angles. DSA also allows for real-time video replay (Fig. 23-6). 
An entire extremity can be filmed with DSA using repeated 
injections of small amounts of contrast agent to obtain sequen-
tial angiographic images, the so-called pulse-chase technique.
Preoperative Cardiac Evaluation
The most important and most controversial aspect of preopera-
tive evaluation in patients with atherosclerotic disease requiring 
surgical intervention is the detection and subsequent manage-
ment of associated coronary artery disease.7 Several studies 
Figure 23-5.  Magnetic resonance angiogram of aortic arch and 
carotid arteries. This study can provide a three-dimensional analysis 
of vascular structure such as aortic arch branches and carotid and 
vertebral arteries.
Figure 23-6.  Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) provides 
excellent visualization of intravascular circulation with intra-
arterial contrast administration. As depicted in this DSA study, 
multilevel lesions are demonstrated, which include a focal left iliac 
artery stenosis (large arrow), right superficial femoral occlusion 
(curved arrows), left superficial femoral stenosis (small arrow), and 
multiple tibial artery stenoses (arrowheads).
834
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
have documented the existence of significant coronary artery 
disease in 40% to 50% or more of patients requiring peripheral 
vascular reconstructive procedures, 10% to 20% of whom may 
be relatively asymptomatic largely because of their inability to 
exercise.8 Myocardial infarction is responsible for the major-
ity of both early and late postoperative deaths. Most available 
screening methods lack sensitivity and specificity to predict 
postoperative cardiac complications. There have been conflict-
ing reports regarding the utility of preoperative dipyridamole-
thallium nuclear imaging or dobutamine-echocardiography to 
stratify vascular patients in terms of perioperative cardiac mor-
bidity and mortality. In nearly half of patients, thallium imaging 
proves to be unnecessary because cardiac risk can be predicted 
by clinical information alone.7 Even with coronary angiography, 
it is difficult to relate anatomic findings to functional signifi-
cance and, hence, surgical risk. There are no data confirming 
that percutaneous coronary interventions or surgical revascu-
larization prior to vascular surgical procedures impact mortality 
or incidence of myocardial infarctions. In fact, coronary angi-
ography is associated with its own inherent risks, and patients 
undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting or coronary percuta-
neous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) before needed aortoiliac 
reconstructions are subjected to the risks and complications of 
both procedures.
The Coronary Artery Revascularization Prophylaxis 
(CARP) trial showed that coronary revascularization in patients 
with peripheral vascular disease and significant coronary artery 
disease, who are considered high risk for perioperative com-
plications, did not reduce overall mortality or perioperative 
myocardial infarction.9 Additionally, patients who underwent 
prophylactic coronary revascularization had significant delays 
prior to undergoing their vascular procedure and increased limb 
morbidity compared to patients who did not. Studies do sup-
port improvement in cardiovascular and overall prognosis with 
medical optimization of patients. Therefore, use of perioperative 
β-blockade, as well as use of antiplatelet medication, statins, 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, is encouraged in 
vascular patients.10,11
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ENDOVASCULAR THERAPY
Cardiovascular disease remains a major cause of mortality in 
the developed world since the beginning of the twenty-first 
century. Although surgical revascularization has played a pre-
dominant role in the management of patients with vascular 
disease, the modern treatment paradigms have evolved signifi-
cantly with increased emphasis of catheter-based percutaneous 
interventions over the past two decades. The increasing role of 
this minimally invasive vascular intervention is fueled by vari-
ous factors, including rapid advances in imaging technology, 
reduced morbidity and mortality in endovascular interventions, 
and faster convalescence following percutaneous therapy when 
compared to traditional operations. There is little doubt that with 
continued device development and refined image-guided tech-
nology, endovascular intervention will provide improved clini-
cal outcomes and play an even greater role in the treatment of 
vascular disease.
The technique of percutaneous access for both the diagnos-
tic and therapeutic management of vascular disease has resulted 
in tremendous changes in the practice of several subspecialties, 
including interventional radiology, invasive cardiology, and 
vascular surgery. The development of catheter and endoscopic 
instrumentation allows the vascular surgeon to operate via an 
intra- or extraluminal route. Endovascular techniques are now 
able to treat the full spectrum of vascular pathology, including 
stenoses and occlusions resulting from several etiologies, aneu-
rysmal pathology, and traumatic lesions. Many of these proce-
dures have only recently been developed and, as such, have not 
been investigated in a manner that would enable an accurate 
comparison with the more traditional methods of open surgi-
cal intervention. Long-term follow-up for these procedures is 
frequently lacking; however, because of the potential to treat 
patients with decreased mortality and morbidity, endovascular 
skills and techniques are being adopted into mainstream vascu-
lar surgery.
Needles and Access
Needles are used to achieve percutaneous vascular access. The 
size of the needle will be dictated by the diameter of the guide-
wire used. Most often, an 18-gauge needle is used, as it will 
accept a 0.035-inch guidewire. A 21-gauge micropuncture nee-
dle will accept a 0.018-inch guidewire. The most popular access 
needle is the Seldinger needle, which can be used for single- and 
double-wall puncture techniques.
Femoral arterial puncture is the most common site for 
access. The common femoral artery (CFA) is punctured over the 
medial third of the femoral head, which is landmarked using flu-
oroscopy. The single-wall puncture technique requires a sharp, 
beveled needle tip and no central stylet. The anterior wall of the 
vessel is punctured with the bevel of the needle pointing up, and 
pulsatile back-bleeding indicates an intraluminal position. This 
method is most useful for graft punctures, patients with abnor-
mal clotting profiles, or if thrombolytic therapy is anticipated. 
Once the needle assumes an intraluminal position, verified by 
pulsatile back-bleeding, the guidewire may be advanced. This is 
always passed gently and under fluoroscopic guidance to avoid 
subintimal dissection or plaque disruption. Double-wall puncture 
techniques are performed with a blunt needle that has a remov-
able inner cannula. The introducer needle punctures both walls of 
the artery and is withdrawn until bleeding is obtained to confirm 
intraluminal position prior to advancing a guidewire. There can 
be troublesome bleeding from the posterior arterial wall punc-
ture; therefore, single puncture techniques are preferred.
Retrograde femoral access is the most common arterial 
access technique (Fig. 23-7). The advantages of this technique 
include the size and fixed position of the CFA, as well as the 
relative ease of compression against the femoral head at the end 
of the procedure. Care should be taken to avoid puncturing the 
external iliac artery above the inguinal ligament because this 
can result in retroperitoneal hemorrhage secondary to ineffec-
tive compression of the puncture site. Likewise, puncturing too 
low, at or below the CFA bifurcation, can result in thrombosis 
or pseudoaneurysm formation of the superficial femoral artery 
(SFA) or profunda femoris artery (PFA). Antegrade femoral 
access is more difficult than retrograde femoral access, and 
there is a greater tendency to puncture the SFA, but it is invalu-
able when the aortic bifurcation cannot be traversed or when 
devices are not long enough to reach a lesion from a contra-
lateral femoral access approach. Occasionally, when the distal 
aorta or bilateral iliac arteries are inaccessible because of the 
extent of atherosclerotic lesions, scarring, or presence of bypass 
conduits, the brachial artery must be used to obtain access for 
diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. The left brachial artery 
is punctured because this avoids the origin of the carotid artery 
835
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
and thus decreases the risk of catheter-related emboli to the 
brain. The artery is accessed with a micropuncture needle just 
proximal to the antecubital crease. The use of brachial access is 
associated with a higher risk of thrombosis and nerve injuries 
than femoral access.
Guidewires
Guidewires are used to introduce, position, and exchange cath-
eters. A guidewire generally has a flexible and stiff end. In 
general, only the flexible end of the guidewire is placed in the 
vessel. All guidewires are composed of a stiff inner core and an 
outer tightly coiled spring that allows a catheter to track over the 
guidewire. There are five essential characteristics of guidewires: 
size, length, stiffness, coating, and tip configuration.
Guidewires come in different maximum transverse diam-
eters, ranging from 0.011 to 0.038 inches. For most aortoiliac 
procedures, a 0.035-inch wire is most commonly used, whereas 
the smaller diameter 0.018-inch guidewires are reserved for 
selective small vessel angiography such as infrageniculate or 
carotid lesions. In addition to diameter size, guidewires come in 
varying lengths, usually ranging from 180 to 260 cm in length. 
Increasing the length of the wire always makes it more difficult 
to handle and increases the risk of contamination. While per-
forming a procedure, it is important to maintain the guidewire 
across the lesion until the completion arteriogram has been 
satisfactorily completed.
The stiffness of the guidewire is also an important charac-
teristic. Stiff wires allow for passage of large aortic stent graft 
devices without kinking. They are also useful when trying to 
perform sheath or catheter exchanges around a tortuous artery. 
An example of a stiff guidewire is the Amplatz wire. Hydro-
philic coated guidewires, such as the Glidewire, have become 
invaluable tools for assisting in difficult catheterizations. The 
coating is primed by bathing the guidewire in saline solution. 
The slippery nature of this guidewire along with its torque 
capability significantly facilitate in difficult catheterizations. 
Figure 23-7.  A. Antegrade femoral artery access. The needle is 
inserted just below the inguinal ligament in the common femoral 
artery whereby the guidewire is inserted in the ipsilateral super-
ficial femoral artery. B. Brachial artery approach. The needle is 
inserted in a retrograde fashion in the brachial artery just above 
the antecubital fossa, whereby the guidewire is next inserted in the 
brachial artery.
Guidewires also come in various tip configurations. Angled tip 
wires like the angled Glidewire can be steered to manipulate a 
catheter across a tight stenosis or to select a specific branch of 
a vessel. The Rosen wire has a soft curled end, which makes it 
ideal for renal artery stenting. The soft curl of this wire prevents 
it from perforating small renal branch vessels.
Hemostatic Sheaths
The hemostatic sheath is a device through which endovascular 
procedures are performed. The sheath acts to protect the vessel 
from injury as wires and catheters are introduced (Fig. 23-8). 
A one-way valve prevents bleeding through the sheath, and a 
side-port allows contrast or heparin flushes to be administered 
during the procedure. Sheaths are sized by their inner diameter. 
The most commonly used sheaths for percutaneous access have 
a 5- to 9-French inner diameter, but with open surgical exposure 
of the CFA, sheaths as large as 26 French can be introduced. 
Sheaths also vary in length, and long sheaths are available so 
that interventions remote from the site of arterial access can be 
performed.
Catheters
A wide variety of catheters exist that differ primarily in the con-
figuration of the tip. The multiple shapes permit access to ves-
sels of varying dimensions and angulations. Catheters are used 
to perform angiography and protect the passage of balloons and 
stents, and can be used to direct the guidewire through tight 
stenoses or tortuous vessels.
Angioplasty Balloons
Angioplasty balloons differ primarily in their length and diam-
eter, as well as the length of the catheter shaft. As balloon tech-
nology has advanced, lower profiles have been manufactured 
(i.e., the size that the balloon assumes upon deflation). Balloons 
are used to perform angioplasty on vascular stenoses, to deploy 
stents, and to assist with additional expansion after insertion of 
self-expanding stents (Fig. 23-9). Besides length and diameter, 
Figure 23-8.  All percutaneous endovascular procedures are per-
formed through an introducer sheath (large arrow), which pro-
vides an access conduit from skin to intravascular compartment. 
The sheath also acts to protect the vessel from injury as guidewires 
(small arrows) and catheters are introduced.
836
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
operators need to be familiar with several other balloon char-
acteristics. Noncompliant and low-compliance balloons tend to 
be inflated to their preset diameter and offer greater dilating 
force at the site of stenosis. Low-compliance balloons are the 
mainstay for peripheral intervention. Lower profile balloons 
are less likely to get caught during passage through stents and 
are easier to pull out of sheaths. Under fluoroscopic guidance, 
balloon inflation is performed until the waist of the atheroscle-
rotic lesion disappears and the balloon is at the full profile. 
The duration of balloon inflation and pressures used for the 
angioplasty depend on the indication for the intervention and 
the location and characteristics of the lesion being treated. Fre-
quently, several inflations are required to achieve a full profile 
of the balloon. Occasionally, a lower profile balloon is needed 
to predilate the tight stenosis so that the selected balloon cath-
eter can cross the lesion. After inflation, most balloons do not 
regain their preinflation diameter and assume a larger profile. 
Trackability, pushability, and crossability of the balloon should 
all be considered when choosing a particular balloon. Lastly, 
shoulder length is an important characteristic to consider when 
selecting a balloon because of the potential to cause injury dur-
ing performance of PTA in adjacent arterial segments. There is 
always risk of causing dissection or rupture during PTA; thus 
a completion angiogram is performed while the wire is still in 
place. Leaving the wire in place provides access for repeating 
the procedure, placing a stent or stent graft if warranted.
Stents
Vascular stents are commonly used after an inadequate angio-
plasty with dissection or elastic recoil of an arterial stenosis. 
They serve to buttress collapsible vessels and help prevent 
atherosclerotic restenosis. Appropriate indications for primary 
stenting of a lesion without an initial trial of angioplasty alone 
are evolving in manners that are dependent on the extent and 
site of the lesion. Stents are manufactured from a variety of met-
als including stainless steel, tantalum, cobalt-based alloy, and 
nitinol. Vascular stents are classified into two basic categories: 
balloon-expandable stents and self-expanding stents.
Self-expanding stents (Fig. 23-10) are deployed by 
retracting a restraining sheath and usually consist of Elgiloy 
(a cobalt, chromium, nickel alloy) or nitinol (a shape memory 
alloy composed of nickel and titanium), the latter of which 
will contract and assume a heat-treated shape above a transi-
tion temperature that depends on the composition of the alloy. 
Self-expanding stents will expand to a final diameter that is 
determined by stent geometry, hoop strength, and vessel size. 
The self-expanding stent is mounted on a central shaft and is 
placed inside an outer sheath. It relies on a mechanical spring-
like action to achieve expansion. With deployment of these 
stents, there is some degree of foreshortening that has to be 
taken into account when choosing the area of deployment. 
In this way, self-expanding stents are more difficult to place 
with absolute precision. There are several advantages related 
to self-expanding stents. Self-expanding stents generally come 
in longer lengths than balloon-expandable stents and are there-
fore used to treat long and tortuous lesions. Their ability to 
continually expand after delivery allows them to accommodate 
adjacent vessels of different size. This makes these stents ideal 
for placement in the internal carotid artery. These stents are 
always oversized by 1 to 2 mm relative to the largest diam-
eter of normal vessel adjacent to the lesion in order to prevent 
immediate migration.
Balloon-expandable stents are usually composed of stain-
less steel, mounted on an angioplasty balloon, and deployed by 
balloon inflation (Fig. 23-11). They can be manually placed on 
a chosen balloon catheter or obtained premounted on a balloon 
catheter. The capacity of a balloon-expandable stent to shorten 
in length during deployment depends on both stent geometry 
and the final diameter to which the balloon is expanded. These 
stents are more rigid and are associated with a shorter time to 
complete endothelialization. They are often of limited flexibility 
and have a higher degree of crush resistance when compared to 
self-expanding stents. This makes them ideal for short-segment 
lesions, especially those that involve the ostia such as proximal 
common iliac or renal artery stenosis.
The most exciting area of development in stents is the 
evolution of drug-eluting stents (DES). These stents are usu-
ally composed of nitinol and have various anti-inflammatory 
drugs bonded to them. Over time, the stents release the drug 
into the surrounding arterial wall and help prevent resteno-
sis. Numerous randomized controlled trials have proven their 
benefit in coronary arteries.12 Clinical studies have similarly 
proved early efficacy of DES in the treatment of peripheral 
arterial disease.13,14
Stent Grafts
The combination of a metal stent covered with fabric gave birth 
to the first stent grafts. Covered stents have been designed 
Figure 23-9.  A. An artery with luminal 
narrowing caused by plaque. B. A balloon 
angioplasty catheter is positioned within the 
diseased artery, which is inflated to enlarge the 
intravascular channel. C. The plaque is com-
pressed with widened flow lumen as the result 
of balloon angioplasty.
837
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Figure 23-10.  Self-expanding stents are made of tempered 
stainless steel or nitinol, an alloy of nickel and titanium, and are 
restrained when folded inside a delivery catheter. After being 
released from the restraining catheter, the self-expanding stents will 
expand to a final diameter that is determined by stent geometry, 
hoop strength, and vessel size.
Figure 23-11.  In a balloon-expandable stent, the stent is pre-
mounted on a balloon catheter. The balloon stretches the stent 
members beyond their elastic limit. The stent is deployed by full 
balloon expansion. This type of stent has a higher degree of crush 
resistance when compared to self-expanding stents, which is ideal 
for short-segment calcified ostial lesions.
with either a surrounding PTFE or polyester fabric and have 
been used predominantly for treatment of traumatic vascular 
lesions, including arterial disruption and arteriovenous fistu-
las (Fig. 23-12). However, these devices may well find a grow-
ing role in treatment of iliac or femoral arterial occlusive disease 
as well as popliteal aneurysms.
Endovascular aneurysm repair using the concept of stent 
grafts was initiated by Parodi in 1991.15 Since that time, a large 
number of endografts have been inserted under the auspice 
of clinical trials initially and now as Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA)–approved devices. Current available FDA-
approved devices include the following: (a) AneuRx device 
(Medtronic/AVE, Santa Rosa, CA); (b) Gore Excluder device 
(WL Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ); (c) Endologix Pow-
erlink device (Endologix Inc., Irvine, CA); (d) Zenith device 
(Cook Inc., Bloomington, IN); (e) Talent device (Medtronic/
AVE, Santa Rosa, CA); and (f) Endurant device (Medtronic/
AVE, Santa Rosa, CA) for the treatment of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms. All of these devices require that patients have an 
infrarenal aneurysm with at least a 15-mm proximal aortic neck 
below the renal arteries and not greater than 60° of angula-
tion. For those patients with associated common iliac artery 
aneurysmal disease, endovascular treatment can be achieved 
by initial coil embolization of the ipsilateral hypogastric artery 
with extension of the endovascular device into the external iliac 
artery. Newer generation endografts, including devices such as 
AFX Endovascular AAA System (Endologix Inc., Irvine, CA), 
Aorfix Flexible Stent (Lombard Medical Inc., Framingham, 
MA), and Ovation Prime Stent (TriVascular Inc., Santa Rosa, 
CA), are designed to overcome previous challenges of difficult 
anatomy by incorporating more flexible stents and lower pro-
file delivery systems. Clinical trials are under way with devices 
that will expand indications to aneurysms involving the vis-
ceral segment of the abdominal aorta. The FDA has similarly 
approved several thoracic endograft devices for the treatment 
of descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. Early studies have 
demonstrated short-term efficacy of thoracic aortic devices in 
the treatment of traumatic aortic transections and aortic dis-
sections.16-18 More experience with these devices exists in both 
Europe and Asia, and trials are under way in the United States 
with several devices.
CAROTID ARTERY DISEASE
Atherosclerotic occlusive plaque is by far the most common 
pathology seen in the carotid artery bifurcation. Thirty percent to 
60% of all ischemic strokes are related to atherosclerotic carotid 
bifurcation occlusive disease. In the following section, we first 
focus our discussion on the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and 
management, including medical therapy, surgical carotid end-
arterectomy, and stenting, of atherosclerotic carotid occlusive 
disease. In the second part of the section, we provide a review 
on other less common nonatherosclerotic diseases involving the 
extracranial carotid artery, including kink and coil, fibromuscu-
lar dysplasia, arterial dissection, aneurysm, radiation arteritis, 
Takayasu’s arteritis, and carotid body tumor.
Epidemiology and Etiology of Carotid 
Occlusive Disease
Approximately 700,000 Americans suffer a new or recurrent 
stroke each year.19 Eighty-five percent of all strokes are ischemic, 
and 15% are hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic strokes are caused by 
head trauma or spontaneous disruption of intracerebral blood 
838
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
vessels. Ischemic strokes are due to hypoperfusion from arterial 
occlusion or, less commonly, to decreased flow resulting from 
proximal arterial stenosis and poor collateral network. Com-
mon causes of ischemic strokes are cardiogenic emboli in 35%, 
carotid artery disease in 30%, lacunar in 10%, miscellaneous in 
10%, and idiopathic in 15%.19 The term cerebrovascular acci-
dent is often used interchangeably to refer to an ischemic stroke. 
A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is defined as a temporary 
focal cerebral or retinal hypoperfusion state that resolves spon-
taneously within 24 hours after its onset. However, the majority 
of TIAs resolve within minutes, and longer lasting neurologic 
deficits more likely represent a stroke. Recently, the term brain 
attack has been coined to refer to an acute stroke or TIA, denot-
ing the condition as a medical emergency requiring immediate 
attention, similar to a heart attack.
Stroke due to carotid bifurcation occlusive disease is usu-
ally caused by atheroemboli (Fig. 23-13). The carotid bifurca-
tion is an area of low flow velocity and low shear stress. As the 
blood circulates through the carotid bifurcation, there is separa-
tion of flow into the low-resistance internal carotid artery and 
the high-resistance external carotid artery. Characteristically, 
atherosclerotic plaque forms in the outer wall opposite to the 
flow divider (Fig. 23-14). Atherosclerotic plaque formation is 
complex, beginning with intimal injury, platelet deposition, 
smooth muscle cell proliferation, and fibroplasia, and leading 
to subsequent luminal narrowing. With increasing degree of ste-
nosis in the internal carotid artery, flow becomes more turbu-
lent, and the risk of atheroembolization escalates. The severity 
of stenosis is commonly divided into three categories accord-
ing to the luminal diameter reduction: mild (<50%), moderate 
(50%–69%), and severe (70%–99%). Severe carotid stenosis is 
a strong predictor for stroke.20 In turn, a prior history of neuro-
logic symptoms (TIA or stroke) is an important determinant for 
recurrent ipsilateral stroke. The risk factors for the development 
of carotid artery bifurcation disease are similar to those causing 
atherosclerotic occlusive disease in other vascular beds. Increas-
ing age, male gender, hypertension, tobacco smoking, diabetes 
mellitus, homocysteinemia, and hyperlipidemia are well-known 
predisposing factors for the development of atherosclerotic 
occlusive disease.
Clinical Manifestations of Cerebral Ischemia
TIA is a focal loss of neurologic function, lasting for less 
than 24 hours. Crescendo TIAs refer to a syndrome comprising 
Figure 23-12.  A stent graft is a metal 
stent covered with fabric that is com-
monly used for aneurysm exclusion.
Internal
carotid
artery
Emboli
Ulcer
Plaque
Common
carotid
artery
External
carotid
artery
Superior
thyroid
artery
repeated TIAs within a short period of time that is characterized 
by complete neurologic recovery in between. At a minimum, 
the term should probably be reserved for those with either daily 
events or multiple resolving attacks within 24 hours. Hemody-
namic TIAs represent focal cerebral events that are aggravated 
by exercise or hemodynamic stress and typically occur after 
short bursts of physical activity, postprandially, or after get-
ting out of a hot bath. It is implied that these are due to severe 
Figure 23-13.  Stroke due to carotid bifurcation occlusive disease 
is usually caused by atheroemboli arising from the internal carotid 
artery, which provides the majority of blood flow to the cerebral 
hemisphere. With increasing degree of stenosis in the carotid artery, 
flow becomes more turbulent, and the risk of atheroembolization 
escalates.
839
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
extracranial disease and poor intracranial collateral recruitment. 
Reversible ischemic neurologic deficits refer to ischemic focal 
neurologic symptoms lasting longer than 24 hours but resolv-
ing within 3 weeks. When a neurologic deficit lasts longer than 
3 weeks, it is considered a completed stroke. Stroke in evolution 
refers to progressive worsening of the neurologic deficit, either 
linearly over a 24-hour period or interspersed with transient 
periods of stabilization and/or partial clinical improvement.
Patients who suffer cerebrovascular accidents typically 
present with three categories of symptoms including ocular 
symptoms, sensory/motor deficit, and/or higher cortical dys-
function. The common ocular symptoms associated with extra-
cranial carotid artery occlusive disease include amaurosis fugax 
and presence of Hollenhorst plaques. Amaurosis fugax, com-
monly referred to as transient monocular blindness, is a tempo-
rary loss of vision in one eye that patients typically describe as 
a window shutter coming down or grey shedding of the vision. 
This partial blindness usually lasts for a few minutes and then 
resolves. Most of these phenomena (>90%) are due to embolic 
occlusion of the main artery or the upper or lower divisions. 
Monocular blindness progressing over a 20-minute period sug-
gests a migrainous etiology. Occasionally, the patient will recall 
no visual symptoms while the optician notes a yellowish plaque 
within the retinal vessels, which is also known as Hollenhorst 
plaque. These plaques are frequently derived from cholesterol 
embolization from the carotid bifurcation and warrant further 
investigation. Additionally, several ocular symptoms may be 
caused by microembolization from extracranial carotid dis-
eases including monocular visual loss due to retinal artery or 
optic nerve ischemia, the ocular ischemia syndrome, and visual 
field deficits secondary to cortical infarction and ischemia of 
the optic tracts. Typical motor and/or sensory symptoms asso-
ciated with cerebrovascular accidents are lateralized or focal 
neurologic deficits. Ischemic events tend to have an abrupt 
onset, with the severity of the insult being apparent from the 
onset and not usually associated with seizures or paresthesia. In 
B
A
Sectional view
Low
shear
region
High shear
region
Figure 23-14.  A. The carotid bifurcation is an 
area of low flow velocity and low shear stress. 
As the blood circulates through the carotid 
bifurcation, there is separation of flow into the 
low-resistance internal carotid artery and the 
high-resistance external carotid artery. B. The 
carotid atherosclerotic plaque typically forms 
in the outer wall opposite to the flow divider 
due in part to the effect of the low shear stress 
region, which also creates a transient reversal 
of flow during the cardiac cycle.
contrast, they represent loss or diminution of neurologic func-
tion. Furthermore, motor or sensory deficits can be unilateral or 
bilateral, with the upper and lower limbs being variably affected 
depending on the site of the cerebral lesion. The combination of 
a motor and sensory deficit in the same body territory is sug-
gestive of a cortical thromboembolic event as opposed to lacu-
nar lesions secondary to small vessel disease of the penetrating 
arterioles. However, a small proportion of the latter may present 
with a sensorimotor stroke secondary to small vessel occlusion 
within the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Pure sensory 
and pure motor strokes and those strokes where the weakness 
affects one limb only or does not involve the face are more 
typically seen with lacunar as opposed to cortical infarction. 
A number of higher cortical functions, including speech and 
language disturbances, can be affected by thromboembolic phe-
nomena from the carotid artery, with the most important clinical 
example for the dominant hemisphere being dysphasia or apha-
sia and visuospatial neglect being an example of nondominant 
hemisphere injury.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Duplex ultrasonography is the most widely used screening 
tool to evaluate for atherosclerotic plaque and stenosis of the 
extracranial carotid artery. It is also commonly used to monitor 
patients serially for progression of disease or after intervention 
(carotid endarterectomy or angioplasty). Duplex ultrasound of 
the carotid artery combines B-mode gray scale imaging and 
Doppler waveform analysis. Characterization of the carotid 
plaque on gray scale imaging provides useful information about 
its composition. However, there are currently no universal rec-
ommendations that can be made based solely on the sonographic 
appearance of the plaque. On the other hand, criteria have been 
developed and well refined for grading the degree of carotid ste-
nosis based primarily on Doppler-derived velocity waveforms.
The external carotid artery has a high-resistance flow pat-
tern with a sharp systolic peak and a small amount of flow in 
840
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
diastole. In contrast, a normal internal carotid artery will have 
a low-resistance flow pattern with a broad systolic peak and a 
large amount of flow during diastole. The flow pattern in the 
common carotid artery resembles that in the internal carotid 
artery, as 80% of the flow is directed to the internal carotid 
artery, with waveforms that have broad systolic peaks and mod-
erate amount of flow during diastole. Conventionally, velocity 
measurements are recorded in the common, external, carotid 
bulb, and the proximal, mid, and distal portions of the internal 
carotid artery. Characteristically, the peak systolic velocity is 
increased at the site of the vessel stenosis. The end-diastolic 
velocity is increased with greater degree of stenosis. In addition, 
stenosis of the internal carotid artery can lead to color shifts with 
color mosaics indicating a poststenotic turbulence. Dampening 
of the Doppler velocity waveforms is typically seen in areas 
distal to severe carotid stenosis where blood flow is reduced. It 
is well known that occlusion of the ipsilateral internal carotid 
artery can lead to a “falsely” elevated velocity on the contralat-
eral side due to an increase in compensatory blood flow. In the 
presence of a high-grade stenosis or occlusion of the internal 
carotid artery, the ipsilateral common carotid artery displays 
high flow resistance waveforms, similar to those seen in the 
external carotid artery. If there is a significant stenosis in the 
proximal common carotid artery, its waveforms may be damp-
ened with low velocities.
The Doppler grading systems of carotid stenosis were 
initially established by comparison to angiographic findings of 
disease. Studies have shown variability in the measurements 
of the duplex properties by different laboratories, as well as 
heterogeneity in the patient population, study design, and 
techniques. One the most commonly used classifications was 
established at the University of Washington School of Medi-
cine in Seattle. Diameter reduction of 50% to 79% is defined 
by peak systolic velocity greater than 125 cm/s with extensive 
spectral broadening. For stenosis in the range of 80% to 99%, 
the peak systolic velocity is greater than 125 cm/s, and peak 
diastolic velocity is greater than 140 cm/s. The ratio of internal 
carotid to common carotid artery peak systolic velocity has 
also been part of various ultrasound diagnostic classifications. 
A ratio greater than 4 is a great predictor of angiographic ste-
nosis of 70% to 99%. A multispecialty consensus panel has 
developed a set of criteria for grading carotid stenosis by 
duplex examination (Table 23-3).21
Table 23-3
Carotid duplex ultrasound criteria for grading internal carotid artery stenosis
Degree of Stenosis (%)
ICA PSV (cm/s)
ICA/CCA PSV Ratio
ICA EDV (cm/s)
Plaque Estimate (%)a
Normal
<125
<2.0
<40
None
<50
<125
<2.0
<40
<50
50–69
125–230
2.0–4.0
40–100
≥50
≥70 to less than near 
occlusion
>230
>4.0
>100
≥50
Near occlusion
High, low, or not detected
Variable
Variable
Visible
Total occlusion
Not detected
Not applicable
Not detected
Visible, no lumen
aPlaque estimate (diameter reduction) with gray scale and color Doppler ultrasound.
CCA = common carotid artery; EDV = end-diastolic velocity; ICA = internal carotid artery; PSV = peak systolic velocity.
MRA is increasingly being used to evaluate for athero-
sclerotic carotid occlusive disease and intracranial circulation. 
MRA is noninvasive and does not require iodinated contrast 
agents. MRA uses phase contrast or time-of-flight, with either 
two-dimensional or three-dimensional data sets for greater accu-
racy. Three-dimensional contrast-enhanced MRA allows data 
to be obtained in coronal and sagittal planes with improved 
image qualities due to shorter study time. In addition, the new 
MRA techniques allow for better reformation of images in 
various planes to allow better grading of stenosis. There have 
been numerous studies comparing the sensitivity and specific-
ity of MRA imaging for carotid disease to duplex and selective 
contrast angiography.22 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 
the brain is essential in the assessment of acute stroke patients. 
MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging can differentiate areas 
of acute ischemia, areas still at risk for ischemia (penumbra), 
and chronic cerebral ischemic changes. However, computed 
tomography (CT) imaging remains the most expeditious test in 
the evaluation of acute stroke patients to rule out intracerebral 
hemorrhage. Recently, multidetector CTA has gained increasing 
popularity in the evaluation of carotid disease.23 This imaging 
modality can provide volume rendering, which allows rotation 
of the object with accurate anatomic structures from all angles 
(Fig. 23-15). The advantages of CTA over MRA include faster 
data acquisition time and better spatial resolution. However, 
grading of carotid stenosis by CTA requires further validation 
at the time of this writing before it can be widely applied.
Historically, DSA has been the gold standard test to evalu-
ate the extra- and intracranial circulation (Fig. 23-16). This is 
an invasive procedure, typically performed via a transfemoral 
puncture, and involves selective imaging of the carotid and ver-
tebral arteries using iodinated contrast. The risk of stroke during 
cerebral angiography is generally reported at approximately 1% 
and is typically due to atheroembolization related to wire and 
catheter manipulation in the arch aorta or proximal branch ves-
sels. Over the last few decades, however, the incidence of neu-
rologic complications following angiography has been reduced, 
due to the use of improved guidewires and catheters, better reso-
lution digital imaging, and increased experience. Local access 
complications of angiography are infrequent and include devel-
opment of hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, distal embolization, 
and acute vessel thrombosis. Currently, selective angiography 
is particularly used for patients with suspected intracranial 
841
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
disease and for patients in whom percutaneous revasculariza-
tion is considered. The techniques of carotid angioplasty and 
stenting for carotid bifurcation occlusive disease are described 
in detail later in this chapter. We generally use CTA or MRA to 
get information about the aortic arch anatomy and presence of 
concomitant intracranial disease and collateral pathway in plan-
ning our strategy for carotid stenting or endarterectomy.
Treatment of Carotid Occlusive Disease
Conventionally, patients with carotid bifurcation occlusive 
disease are divided into two broad categories: patients without 
prior history of ipsilateral stroke or TIA (asymptomatic) and 
those with prior or current ipsilateral neurologic symptoms 
B
A
Figure 23-15.  A. Carotid computed 
tomography angiography is a valuable 
imaging modality that can provide a 
three-dimensional image reconstruction 
with high image resolution. A carotid 
artery occlusion is noted in the internal 
carotid artery B. The entire segment of 
extracranial carotid artery is visualized 
from the thoracic compartment to the 
base of skull.
Figure 23-16.  A carotid angiogram reveals an ulcerated carotid 
plaque (arrow) in the proximal internal carotid artery, which also 
resulted in a high-grade internal carotid artery stenosis.
(symptomatic). It is estimated that 15% of all strokes are pre-
ceded by a TIA. The 90-day risk of a stroke in a patient present-
ing with a TIA is 3% to 17%.19 According to the Cardiovascular 
Health Study, a longitudinal population-based study of coronary 
artery disease and stroke in men and women, the prevalence of 
TIA in men was 2.7% for ages of 65 and 69 and 3.6% for ages 
75 to 79; the prevalence in women was 1.4% and 4.1%, respec-
tively.24 There have been several studies reporting on the effec-
tiveness of stroke prevention with medical treatment and carotid 
endarterectomy for symptomatic patients with moderate to 
severe carotid stenosis. Early and chronic aspirin therapy 
has been shown to reduce stroke recurrence rate in several large 
clinical trials.25 
Symptomatic Carotid Stenosis.  Currently, most stroke 
neurologists prescribe both aspirin and clopidogrel for sec-
ondary stroke prevention in patients who have experienced a 
TIA or stroke.19 In patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis, 
the degree of stenosis appears to be the most important pre-
dictor in determining risk for an ipsilateral stroke. The risk 
of a recurrent ipsilateral stroke in patients with severe carotid 
stenosis approaches 40%. Two large multicenter randomized 
clinical trials, the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST) and 
the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy 
Trial (NASCET), have both shown a significant risk reduction 
in stroke for patients with symptomatic high-grade stenosis 
(70%–99%) undergoing carotid endarterectomy when compared 
to medical therapy alone.26,27 There has been much discussion 
regarding the different methodology used in the measurement 
of carotid stenosis and calculation of the life-table data between 
the two studies, yet they both studies had similar results.28 Find-
ings of these two landmark trials have also been reanalyzed in 
many subsequent publications. The main conclusions of the tri-
als remain validated and widely acknowledged. Briefly, the 
NASCET study showed that for high-grade carotid stenosis, the 
cumulative risk of ipsilateral stroke was 26% in the medically 
treated group and 9% in the surgically treated group at 2 years. 
For patients with moderate carotid artery stenosis (50%–69%), 
the benefit of carotid endarterectomy is less but still favorable 
when compared to medical treatment alone; the 5-year fatal or 
nonfatal ipsilateral stroke rate was 16% in the surgically treated 
group versus 22% in the medically treated group.29 The risk 
of stroke was similar for the remaining group of symptomatic 
patients with less than 50% carotid stenosis, whether they had 
1
842
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
endarterectomy or medical treatment alone. The ECST reported 
similar stroke risk reduction for patients with severe symptom-
atic carotid stenosis and no benefit in patients with mild steno-
sis, when carotid endarterectomy was performed versus medical 
therapy.27
The optimal timing of carotid intervention after acute 
stroke, however, remains debatable. Earlier studies showed an 
increased rate of postoperative stroke exacerbation and conver-
sion of a bland to hemorrhagic infarction when carotid endarter-
ectomy was carried out within 5 to 6 weeks after acute stroke. 
The dismal outcome reported in the early experience was likely 
related to poor patient selection. The rate of stroke recurrence is 
not insignificant during the interval period and may be reduced 
with early intervention for symptomatic carotid stenosis. Con-
temporary series have demonstrated acceptable low rates of 
perioperative complications in patients undergoing carotid end-
arterectomy within 4 weeks after acute stroke.29 In a recent ret-
rospective series, carotid artery stenting when performed early 
(<2 weeks) after the acute stroke was associated with higher 
mortality than when delayed (>2 weeks).30
Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis.  Whereas there is univer-
sal agreement that carotid revascularization (endarterectomy or 
stenting) is effective in secondary stroke prevention for patients 
with symptomatic moderate and severe carotid stenosis, the 
management of asymptomatic patients remains an important 
controversy to be resolved. Generally, the detection of carotid 
stenosis in asymptomatic patients is related to the presence of a 
cervical bruit or based on screening duplex ultrasound findings. 
In one of the earlier observational studies, the authors showed 
that the annual occurrence rate of neurologic symptoms was 4% 
in a cohort of 167 patients with asymptomatic cervical bruits 
followed prospectively by serial carotid duplex scan.31 The 
mean annual rate of carotid stenosis progression to a greater 
than 50% stenosis was 8%. The presence of or progression to 
a greater than 80% stenosis correlated highly with either the 
development of a total occlusion of the internal carotid artery or 
new symptoms. The major risk factors associated with disease 
progression were cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, and age. 
This study supported the contention that it is prudent to fol-
low a conservative course in the management of asymptomatic 
patients presenting with a cervical bruit.
One of the first randomized clinical trials on the treatment 
of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis was the Asymptomatic 
Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS), which evaluated the 
benefits of medical management with antiplatelet therapy versus 
carotid endarterectomy.32 Over a 5-year period, the risk of ipsi-
lateral stroke in individuals with a carotid artery stenosis greater 
than 60% was 5.1% in the surgical arm. On the other hand, the 
risk of ipsilateral stroke in patients treated with medical man-
agement was 11%. Carotid endarterectomy produced a relative 
risk reduction of 53% over medical management alone. The 
results of a larger randomized trial from Europe, the Asymptom-
atic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST), recently confirmed similar 
beneficial stroke risk reduction for patients with asymptomatic, 
greater than 70% carotid stenosis undergoing endarterectomy 
versus medical therapy.33 An important point derived from this 
latter trial was that even with improved medical therapy, includ-
ing the addition of statin drugs and clopidogrel, medical therapy 
was still inferior to endarterectomy in the primary stroke pre-
vention for patients with high-grade carotid artery stenosis. It is 
generally agreed that asymptomatic patients with severe carotid 
stenosis (80%–99%) are at significantly increased risk for 
stroke and stand to benefit from either surgical or endovascular 
revascularization. However, revascularization for asymptom-
atic patients with a less severe degree of stenosis (60%–79%) 
remains controversial.
Carotid Endarterectomy versus  
Angioplasty and Stenting
Currently, the argument is no longer whether medical therapy 
alone is inferior to surgical endarterectomy in stroke preven-
tion for severe carotid stenosis. Rather, the debate now revolves 
around whether carotid angioplasty and stenting produce the 
same benefits demonstrated by carotid endarterectomy. Since 
carotid artery stenting was approved by the FDA for clinical 
application in 2004, this percutaneous procedure has become a 
treatment alternative in patients who are deemed “high risk” for 
endarterectomy (Table 23-4). In contrast to many endovascular 
peripheral arterial interventions, percutaneous carotid stent-
ing represents a much more challenging procedure, because 
it requires complex catheter-based skills using the 0.014-inch 
guidewire system and distal protection device. Moreover, cur-
rent carotid stent devices predominantly use the monorail guide-
wire system, which requires more technical agility compared 
with the over-the-wire catheter system that is routinely used in 
peripheral interventions. This percutaneous intervention often 
Table 23-4
Conditions qualifying patients as high surgical risk for carotid endarterectomy
Anatomic Factors
Physiologic Factors
•  High carotid bifurcation (above C2 vertebral body)
•  Age ≥80 years
•  Left ventricular ejection fraction ≤30%
•  Low common carotid artery (below clavicle)
•  Contralateral carotid occlusion
•  Restenosis of ipsilateral prior carotid endarterectomy
•  Previous neck irradiation
•  New York Heart Association class III/IV congestive heart failure
•  Unstable angina: Canadian Cardiovascular Society class III/IV  
angina pectoris
•  Recent myocardial infarction
•  Prior radical neck dissection
•  Contralateral laryngeal nerve palsy
•  Presence of tracheostomy
•  Clinically significant cardiac disease (congestive heart failure, 
abnormal stress test, or need for coronary revascularization)
•  Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
•  End-stage renal disease on dialysis
843
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
requires balloon angioplasty and stent placement through a 
long carotid guiding sheath via a groin approach. Poor techni-
cal skills can result in devastating treatment complications such 
as stroke, which can occur in part due to plaque embolization 
during the balloon angioplasty and stenting of the carotid artery. 
Because of these various procedural components that require 
high technical proficiency, many early clinical investigations 
of carotid artery stenting, which included physicians with little 
or no carotid stenting experience, resulted in alarmingly poor 
clinical outcomes. A recent Cochrane review noted that, before 
2006, a total of 1269 patients had been studied in five random-
ized controlled trials comparing percutaneous carotid inter-
vention and surgical carotid reconstruction.34 Taken together, 
these trials revealed that carotid artery stenting had a greater 
procedural risk of stroke and death when compared to carotid 
endarterectomy (odds ratio, 1.33; 95% confidence interval, 0.86 
to 2.04). Additionally, a greater incidence of carotid restenosis 
was noted in the stenting group than the endarterectomy cohorts.
However, the constant improvement of endovascular 
devices, procedural techniques, and adjunctive pharmacologic 
therapy will likely improve the treatment success of percutane-
ous carotid intervention. Critical appraisals of several prospective 
randomized trials comparing the efficacy of carotid stenting ver-
sus endarterectomy are available for review.35 Two recently pub-
lished randomized controlled trial, the Carotid Revascularization 
Endarterectomy Versus Stent Trial (CREST) and the International 
Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS) have reported somewhat differing 
results.36 CREST compared the efficacy of carotid endarterec-
tomy and carotid stenting in both symptomatic and asymptom-
atic patients.37 Primary end points included 30-day periprocedural 
composite death, stroke, myocardial infarction, or any ipsilateral 
stroke up to 4 years. CREST investigators reported no difference 
between stenting (5.2%) and endarterectomy (4.5%) in terms of 
primary end point. When each variable was independently ana-
lyzed, there was a higher rate of stroke in the stenting group at 
30 days (4.1% vs. 2.3%) and a higher rate of myocardial infarction 
in the endarterectomy group (2.3% vs. 1.1%). The ICSS was a 
multicenter, international, randomized controlled trial comparing 
carotid stenting versus endarterectomy in patients with symptom-
atic carotid stenosis.38 The risk of stroke, death, and myocardial 
infarction in the stenting group (8.5%) was significantly higher 
than in the surgical arm (5.2%). The finding that carotid endar-
terectomy is safer than carotid stenting is also supported by the 
results of an MRI substudy, which showed significantly more 
new lesions by diffusion-weighted imaging in the carotid stent-
ing than the carotid endarterectomy patients.
All available randomized studies have provided some 
answers and raised some questions. Some ongoing clinical tri-
als will undoubtedly provide more insights on the efficacy of 
carotid stenting in the near future. Currently, the Society for 
Vascular Surgeons recommends carotid endarterectomy as first-
line treatment for most symptomatic patients with stenosis of 
50% to 99% and asymptomatic patients with stenosis of 60% 
to 99%.39 The perioperative risk of stroke and death in asymp-
tomatic patients must be below 3% to ensure benefit for the 
patient. Carotid artery stenting should be reserved for symptom-
atic patients with stenosis of 50% to 99% at high risk for carotid 
endarterectomy for anatomic or medical reasons. Carotid artery 
stenting is not recommended for asymptomatic patients at this 
time. Asymptomatic patients at high risk for intervention or with 
a life expectancy of less than 3 years should be considered for 
medical management as the first-line therapy.
Surgical Techniques of Carotid Endarterectomy
Although carotid endarterectomy is one of the earliest vas-
cular operations ever described and its techniques have been 
perfected in the last two decades, surgeons continue to debate 
many aspects of this procedure. For instance, there is no uni-
versal agreement with regard to the best anesthetic of choice, 
the best intraoperative cerebral monitoring, whether to “rou-
tinely” shunt, open versus eversion endarterectomy, and patch 
versus primary closure. Various anesthetic options are avail-
able for patient undergoing carotid endarterectomy including 
general, local, and regional anesthesia. Typically the anesthesia 
of choice depends on the preference of the surgeon, anesthe-
siologist, and patient. However, depending on the anesthetic 
given, the surgeon must decide whether intraoperative cerebral 
monitoring is necessary or intra-arterial carotid shunting will be 
used. In general, if the patient is awake, then his or her abilities 
to respond to commands during carotid clamp period determine 
the adequacy of collateral flow to the ipsilateral hemisphere. 
On the other hand, intraoperative electroencephalogram (EEG) 
or transcranial power Doppler (TCD) has been used to moni-
tor for adequacy of cerebral perfusion during the clamp period 
for patients undergoing surgery under general anesthesia. Focal 
ipsilateral decreases in amplitudes and slowing of EEG waves 
are indicative of cerebral ischemia. Similarly, a decrease to less 
than 50% of baseline velocity in the ipsilateral middle cerebral 
artery is a sign of cerebral ischemia. For patients with poor col-
lateral flow exhibiting signs of cerebral ischemia, intra-arterial 
carotid shunting with removal of the clamp will restore cerebral 
flow for the remaining part of the surgery. Stump pressures have 
been used to determine the need for intra-arterial carotid shunt-
ing. Some surgeons prefer to shunt all patients on a routine basis 
and do not use intraoperative cerebral monitoring.
The patient’s neck is slightly hyperextended and turned to 
the contralateral side, with a roll placed between the shoulder 
blades. An oblique incision is made along the anterior border of 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle centered on top of the carotid 
bifurcation (Fig. 23-17). The platysma is divided completely. 
Typically tributaries of the anterior jugular vein are ligated and 
Figure 23-17.  To perform carotid endarterectomy, the patient’s 
neck is slightly hyperextended and turned to the contralateral side. 
An oblique incision is made along the anterior border of the ster-
nocleidomastoid muscle centered on top of the carotid bifurcation.
844
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
divided. The dissection is carried medial to the sternocleido-
mastoid. The superior belly of the omohyoid muscle is usually 
encountered just anterior to the common carotid artery. This 
muscle can be divided. The carotid fascia is incised, and the 
common carotid artery is exposed. The common carotid artery 
is mobilized cephalad toward the bifurcation. The dissection of 
the carotid bifurcation can cause reactive bradycardia related to 
stimulation of the carotid body. This reflex can be blunted with 
injection of lidocaine 1% into the carotid body or reversed with 
administration of intravenous atropine. A useful landmark in the 
dissection of the carotid bifurcation is the common facial vein. 
This vein can be ligated and divided. Frequently the 12th cranial 
nerve (hypoglossal nerve) traverses the carotid bifurcation just 
behind the common facial vein. The external carotid artery is 
mobilized just enough to get a clamp across. Often, a branch 
of the external carotid artery crossing to the sternocleidomas-
toid can be divided to allow further cephalad mobilization of 
the internal carotid artery. For high bifurcation, division of the 
posterior belly of the digastric muscle is helpful in establishing 
distal exposure of the internal carotid artery.
Intravenous heparin sulfate (1 mg/kg) is routinely admin-
istered just prior to carotid clamping. The internal carotid artery 
is clamped first using a soft noncrushing vascular clamp to 
prevent distal embolization. The external and common carotid 
arteries are clamped subsequently. A longitudinal arteriotomy 
is made in the distal common carotid artery and extended into 
the bulb and past the occlusive plaque into the normal part of 
the internal carotid artery. Endarterectomy is carried out to 
remove the occlusive plaque (Fig. 23-18). If necessary, a tem-
porary shunt can be inserted from the common carotid artery 
to the internal carotid artery to maintain continuous antegrade 
cerebral blood flow (Fig. 23-19). Typically, a plane is teased 
Figure 23-18.  A. During carotid endarterectomy, vascular clamps 
are applied in the common carotid, external carotid, and internal 
carotid arteries. Carotid plaque is elevated from the carotid lumen. 
B. Carotid plaque is removed, and the arteriotomy is closed either 
primarily or with a patch angioplasty.
Figure 23-19.  A temporary carotid shunt is inserted from the com-
mon carotid artery (long arrow) to the internal carotid artery (short 
arrow) during carotid endarterectomy to provide continuous ante-
grade cerebral blood flow.
out from the vessel wall, and the entire plaque is elevated and 
removed. The distal transition line in the internal carotid artery 
where the plaque had been removed must be examined care-
fully and should be smooth. Tacking sutures are placed when an 
intimal flap remains in this transition to ensure no obstruction 
to flow (Fig. 23-20). The occlusive plaque is usually removed 
from the origin of the external carotid artery using the ever-
sion technique. The endarterectomized surface is then irrigated 
and any debris removed. A patch (autogenous saphenous vein, 
synthetic such as polyester, PTFE, or biologic material) is sewn 
to close the arteriotomy (Fig. 23-21). Whether patch closure is 
necessary in all patients and which patch is the best remain con-
troversial. However, most surgeons agree that patch closure is 
indicated particularly for the small vessel (<7 mm). The ever-
sion technique has also been advocated for removing the plaque 
from the internal carotid artery. In the eversion technique, the 
internal carotid artery is transected at the bulb, the edges of the 
divided vessel are everted, and the occluding plaque is “peeled” 
Figure 23-20.  The distal transition line (left side of the picture) 
in the internal carotid artery where the plaque had been removed 
must be examined carefully and should be smooth. Tacking sutures 
(arrows) are placed when an intimal flap remains in this transition 
to ensure no obstruction to flow.
845
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
off the vessel wall. The purported advantages of the eversion 
technique are no need for patch closure and a clear visualization 
of the distal transition area. Reported series have not shown a 
clear superiority of one technique over the others.40 Surgeons 
will likely continue to use the technique of their choice. Just 
prior to completion of the anastomosis to close the arteriotomy, 
we thoroughly flush the vessels of any potential debris. When 
the arteriotomy is closed, flow is restored to the external carotid 
artery first and to the internal carotid artery second. Intravenous 
protamine sulfate can be given to reverse the effect of heparin 
anticoagulation following carotid endarterectomy. The wound 
is closed in layers. After surgery, the patient’s neurologic con-
dition is asserted in the operating room prior to transfer to the 
recovery area.
Complications of Carotid Endarterectomy.  Most patients 
tolerate carotid endarterectomy very well and typically are dis-
charged home within 24 hours after surgery. Complications 
after endarterectomy are infrequent but can be potentially life-
threatening or disabling. Acute ipsilateral stroke is a dreaded 
complication following carotid endarterectomy. Cerebral isch-
emia can be due to either intraoperative or postoperative events. 
Embolizations from the occlusive plaque or prolonged cerebral 
ischemia are potential causes of intraoperative stroke. The most 
common cause of postoperative stroke is due to embolization. 
Less frequently, acute carotid artery occlusion can cause acute 
postoperative stroke. This is usually due to carotid artery throm-
bosis related to closure of the arteriotomy, an occluding inti-
mal flap, or distal carotid dissection. When patients experience 
acute symptoms of neurologic ischemia after endarterectomy, 
immediate intervention may be indicated. Carotid duplex scan 
can be done expeditiously to assess patency of the extracranial 
internal carotid artery. Re-exploration is mandated for acute 
carotid artery occlusion. Cerebral angiography can be useful if 
intracranial revascularization is considered.
Local complications related to surgery include excessive 
bleeding and cranial nerve palsies. Postoperative hematoma in 
the neck after carotid endarterectomy can lead to devastating 
airway compromise. Any expanding hematoma should be evac-
uated and active bleeding stopped. Securing an airway is critical 
and can be extremely difficult in patients with large postopera-
tive neck hematoma. The reported incidence of postoperative 
cranial nerve palsies after carotid endarterectomy varies from 
1% to 30%.41 Well-recognized injuries involve the marginal 
mandibular, vagus, hypoglossal, superior laryngeal, and recur-
rent laryngeal nerves. Often these are traction injuries but can 
also be due to severance of the respective nerves.
B
A
Figure 23-21.  A. An autologous or synthetic patch can be used to close the carotid arteriotomy incision, which maintains the luminal patency. 
B. A completion closure of carotid endarterectomy incision using a synthetic patch.
Techniques of Carotid Angioplasty  
and Stenting
Percutaneous carotid artery stenting has become an accepted 
alternative treatment in the management of patients with carotid 
bifurcation disease (Fig. 23-22). The perceived advantages of 
percutaneous carotid revascularization are related to the mini-
mal invasiveness of the procedure compared to surgery. There 
are anatomic conditions based on angiographic evaluation in 
which carotid artery stenting should be avoided due to increased 
procedure-related risks (Table 23-5). In preparation for carotid 
stenting, the patient should be given oral clopidogrel 3 days 
prior to the intervention if the patient was not already taking the 
drug. The procedure is done in either the operating room with 
angiographic capabilities or in a dedicated angiography room. 
The patient is placed in the supine position. The patient’s blood 
pressure and cardiac rhythm are closely monitored.
To gain access to the carotid artery, a retrograde trans-
femoral approach is most commonly used as the access site for 
carotid intervention. Using the Seldinger technique, we insert a 
diagnostic 5- or 6-French sheath in the CFA. A diagnostic arch 
aortogram is obtained. The carotid artery to be treated is then 
selected using a 5-French diagnostic catheter, and contrast is 
injected to show the carotid anatomy. It is important to assess 
the contralateral carotid artery, vertebrobasilar, and intracranial 
circulation if these are not known based on the preoperative 
noninvasive studies. Once the decision is made to proceed with 
carotid artery stenting, with the tip of the diagnostic catheter 
still in the common carotid artery, a 0.035-inch, 260-cm long 
stiff guidewire is placed in the ipsilateral external carotid artery. 
Anticoagulation with intravenous bivalirudin bolus (0.75 mg/kg) 
followed by an infusion rate of 2.5 mg/kg/h for the remainder 
of the procedure is routinely administered. Next the diagnostic 
catheter is withdrawn and a 90-cm, 6-French guiding sheath is 
advanced into the common carotid artery over the stiff glide 
wire. It is critical not to advance the sheath beyond the occlu-
sive plaque in the carotid bulb. The stiff wire is then removed, 
and preparation is made to deploy the distal embolic protection 
device (EPD). Several distal EPDs are available (Table 23-6). 
The EPD device is carefully deployed beyond the target lesion. 
With regard to the carotid stents, there are several stents that 
have received approval from the FDA and are commercially 
available for carotid revascularization (Table 23-7). All current 
carotid stents use the rapid-exchange monorail 0.014-inch plat-
form. The size selection is typically based on the size of com-
mon carotid artery. Predilatation using a 4-mm balloon may be 
necessary to allow passage of the stent delivery catheter. Once 
846
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the stent is deployed across the occlusive plaque, postdilatation 
is usually performed using a ≤5.5-mm balloon. It is noteworthy 
that balloon dilation of the carotid bulb may lead to immediate 
bradycardia due to stimulation of the glossopharyngeal nerve. 
The EPD is then retrieved and the procedure is completed with 
removal of the sheath from the femoral artery. The puncture 
site is closed using available closure device or with manual 
compression. Throughout the procedure, the patient’s neuro-
logic function is closely monitored. The bivalirudin infusion is 
stopped and the patient is kept on clopidogrel (75 mg daily) for 
at least 1 month and aspirin indefinitely.
Complications of Carotid Stenting.  Although there have 
been no randomized trials comparing carotid stenting with and 
without EPD, the availability of EPDs appears to have reduced 
the risk of distal embolization and stroke. The results of the vari-
ous clinical trials and registries of carotid stenting have been 
reported and compared. It is well known that distal embolization 
as detected by TCD is much more frequent with carotid stenting 
even with EPD, when compared with carotid endarterectomy. 
B
A
Figure 23-22.  A. Carotid angiogram 
demonstrating a high-grade stenosis of 
the left internal carotid artery. B. Com-
pletion angiogram demonstrating a sat-
isfactory result following a carotid stent 
placement.
Table 23-5
Unfavorable carotid angiographic appearance in which 
carotid stenting should be avoided
•  Extensive carotid calcification
•  Polypoid or globular carotid lesions
•  Severe tortuosity of the common carotid artery
•  Long-segment stenoses (>2 cm in length)
•  Carotid artery occlusion
•  Severe intraluminal thrombus (angiographic defects)
•  Extensive middle cerebral artery atherosclerosis
However, the clinical significance of the distal embolization 
detected by TCD is not clear because most are asymptomatic. 
Acute carotid stent thrombosis is rare. The incidence of in-stent 
carotid restenosis is not well known but is estimated at 10% to 
30%. Duplex surveillance shows elevated peak systolic velocities 
within the stent after carotid stenting not infrequently. However, 
velocity criteria are being formulated to determine the severity of 
in-stent restenosis after carotid stenting by ultrasound duplex.42 
It appears that systolic velocities exceeding 300 to 400 cm/s 
would represent >70% to 80% restenosis. Bradycardia and 
hypotension occur in up to 20% of patients undergoing carotid 
stenting.43 Systemic administration of atropine is usually effec-
tive in reversing the bradycardia. Other technical complications 
Table 23-6
Commonly used embolic protection devices (EPDs)
Mechanism
Name of EPD
Pore Size 
(mm)
Distal balloon  
  occlusion
PercuSurge Guard Wire, 
  Export catheter (Medtronic)
NA
Distal filter
Angioguard (Cordis)
Accunet (Abbott)
Emboshield (Abbott)
FilterWire (Boston Scientific)
SpiderRx (EV3)
100 
150
140
110
<100
Flow reversala
Parodi Neuro Protection 
(Gore)
NA
aClinical trial (EMPIRE) in United States.
NA = not applicable.
847
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
of carotid stenting are infrequent and include carotid artery dis-
section and access site complications, such as groin hematoma, 
femoral artery pseudoaneurysm, distal embolization, and acute 
femoral artery thrombosis.
Nonatherosclerotic Disease of  
the Carotid Artery
Carotid Coil and Kink.  A carotid coil consists of an excessive 
elongation of the internal carotid artery producing tortuosity of 
the vessel (Fig. 23-23). Embryologically, the carotid artery is 
Table 23-7
Currently approved carotid stents in the United States
Name of Stent
Manufacturer
Cell Design
Tapered Stent
Delivery System  
Size (French)
Acculink
Abbott
Open
Yes
6
Exact
Abbott
Closed
Yes
6
NexStent
Boston Scientific
Closed
Self-tapering
5
Protégé RX
EV3
Open
Yes
6
Precise RX
Cordis
Open
No
6
Exponent
Medtronic
Open
No
6
Figure 23-23.  Excessive elongation of the carotid artery can result 
in carotid kinking (arrow), which can compromise cerebral blood 
flow and lead to cerebral ischemia.
derived from the third aortic arch and dorsal aortic root and is 
uncoiled as the heart and great vessels descend into the medi-
astinum. In children, carotid coils appear to be congenital in 
origin. In contrast, elongation and kinking of the carotid artery 
in adults are associated with the loss of elasticity and an abrupt 
angulation of the vessel. Kinking is more common in women 
than men. Cerebral ischemic symptoms caused by kinks of the 
carotid artery are similar to those from atherosclerotic carotid 
lesions but are more likely due to due to cerebral hypoperfusion 
than embolic episodes. Classically, sudden head rotation, flex-
ion, or extension can accentuate the kink and provoke ischemic 
symptoms. Most carotid kinks and coils are found incidentally 
on carotid duplex scan. However, interpretation of the Doppler 
frequency shifts and spectral analysis in tortuous carotid arter-
ies can be difficult because of the uncertain angle of insonation. 
Cerebral angiography, with multiple views taken in neck flex-
ion, extension, and rotation, is useful in the determination of the 
clinical significance of kinks and coils.
Fibromuscular Dysplasia.  Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) 
usually involves medium-sized arteries that are long and have 
few branches (Fig. 23-24). Women in the fourth or fifth decade 
of life are more commonly affected than men. Hormonal effects 
on the vessel wall are thought to play a role in the pathogenesis 
of FMD. FMD of the carotid artery is commonly bilateral, and 
in about 20% of patients, the vertebral artery is also involved.44 
An intracranial saccular aneurysm of the carotid siphon or mid-
dle cerebral artery can be identified in up to 50% of the patients 
with FMD. Four histologic types of FMD have been described 
in the literature. The most common type is medial fibroplasia, 
which may present as a focal stenosis or multiple lesions with 
intervening aneurysmal outpouchings. The disease involves the 
media with the smooth muscle being replaced by fibrous con-
nective tissue. Commonly, mural dilations and microaneurysms 
can be seen with this type of FMD. Medial hyperplasia is a rare 
type of FMD, with the media demonstrating excessive amounts 
of smooth muscle. Intimal fibroplasia accounts for 5% of all 
cases and occurs equally in both sexes. The media and adven-
titia remain normal, and there is accumulation of subendothe-
lial mesenchymal cells with a loose matrix of connective tissue 
causing a focal stenosis in adults. Finally, premedial dyspla-
sia represents a type of FMD with elastic tissue accumulating 
between the media and adventitia. FMD can also involve the 
renal and external iliac arteries. It is estimated that approxi-
mately 40% of patients with FMD present with a TIA due to 
embolization of platelet aggregates.44 DSA demonstrates the 
848
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
characteristic “string of beads” pattern, which represents alter-
nating segments of stenosis and dilatation. The string of beads 
can also be shown noninvasively by CTA or MRA. FMD should 
be suspected when an increased velocity is detected across a 
stenotic segment without associated atherosclerotic changes on 
carotid duplex ultrasound. Antiplatelet medication is the gener-
ally accepted therapy for asymptomatic lesions. Endovascular 
treatment is recommended for patients with documented lateral-
izing symptoms. Surgical correction is rarely indicated.
Carotid Artery Dissection.  Dissection of the carotid artery 
accounts for approximately 20% of strokes in patients younger 
than 45 years of age. The etiology and pathogenesis of sponta-
neous carotid artery dissection remain incompletely understood. 
Arterial dissection involves hemorrhage within the media, which 
can extend into the subadventitial and subintimal layers. When 
the dissection extends into the subadventitial space, there is an 
increased risk of aneurysm formation. Subintimal dissections 
can lead to intramural clot or thrombosis. Traumatic dissection 
is typically a result of hyperextension of the neck during blunt 
trauma, neck manipulation, strangulation, or penetrating injuries 
to the neck. Even in supposedly spontaneous cases, a history of 
preceding unrecognized minor neck trauma is not uncommon. 
Connective disorders, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Mar-
fan’s syndrome, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, or FMD, may pre-
dispose to carotid artery dissection. Iatrogenic dissections can 
also occur due to catheter manipulation or balloon angioplasty.
Figure 23-24.  A carotid fibromuscular dysplasia with typical 
characteristics of multiple stenoses with intervening aneurysmal 
outpouching dilatations. The disease involves the media, with the 
smooth muscle being replaced by fibrous connective tissue.
Typical clinical features of carotid artery dissection 
include unilateral neck pain, headache, and ipsilateral Horner’s 
syndrome in up to 50% of patients, followed by manifestations 
of the cerebral or ocular ischemia and cranial nerve palsies. 
Neurologic deficits can result either because of hemodynamic 
failure (caused by luminal stenosis) or by an artery-to-artery 
thromboembolism. The ischemia may cause TIAs or infarctions, 
or both. Catheter angiography has been the method of choice to 
diagnose arterial dissections, but with the advent of duplex ultra-
sonography, MRI/MRA, and CTA, most dissections can now be 
diagnosed using noninvasive imaging modalities (Fig. 23-25). 
The dissection typically starts in the internal carotid artery distal 
to the bulb. Uncommonly, the dissection can start in the com-
mon carotid artery or is an extension of a more proximal aortic 
dissection. Medical therapy has been the accepted primary treat-
ment of symptomatic of carotid artery dissection. Anticoagula-
tion (heparin and warfarin) and antiplatelet therapy have been 
commonly used, although there have not been any randomized 
studies to evaluate their effectiveness. The prognosis depends 
on the severity of neurologic deficit but is generally good in 
extracranial dissections. The recurrence rate is low. Therapeutic 
interventions have been reserved for recurrent TIAs or strokes 
or failure of medical treatment. Endovascular options include 
intra-arterial stenting, coiling of associated pseudoaneurysms, 
or, more recently, deployment of covered stents.
Carotid Artery Aneurysms.  Carotid artery aneurysms are 
rare, encountered in less than 1% of all carotid operations 
(Fig. 23-26). The true carotid artery aneurysm is generally due 
to atherosclerosis or medial degeneration. The carotid bulb is 
involved in most carotid aneurysms, and bilaterality is present 
in 12% of the patients. Patients typically present with a pul-
satile neck mass. The available data suggest that, untreated, 
these aneurysms lead to neurologic symptoms from emboliza-
tion. Thrombosis and rupture of the carotid aneurysm are rare. 
Pseudoaneurysms of the carotid artery can result from injury 
or infection. Mycotic aneurysms often involved syphilis in the 
past, but are now more commonly associated with peritonsil-
lar abscesses caused by Staphylococcus aureus infection. FMD 
and spontaneous dissection of the carotid artery can lead to the 
formation of true aneurysms or pseudoaneurysms. Whereas con-
ventional surgery has been the primary mode of treatment in the 
past, carotid aneurysms are currently being treated more com-
monly using endovascular approaches.45
Figure 23-25.  Carotid ultrasound reveals a patient with a carotid 
artery dissection in which carotid flow is separated in the true flow 
lumen (long arrow) from the false lumen (short arrow).
849
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Carotid Body Tumor.  The carotid body originates from the 
third branchial arch and from neuro-ectodermal derived neural 
crest lineage. The normal carotid body is located in the adven-
titia or periadventitial tissue at the bifurcation of the common 
carotid artery (Fig. 23-27). The gland is innervated by the glos-
sopharyngeal nerve. Its blood supply is derived predominantly 
from the external carotid artery but can also come from the ver-
tebral artery. Carotid body tumor is a rare lesion of the neuroen-
docrine system. Other glands of neural crest origin are seen in 
the neck, parapharyngeal spaces, mediastinum, retroperitoneum, 
A 
 
 
 
        B  
 
 
                   C
Figure 23-26.  A. An anteroposterior angiogram of the neck revealing a carotid artery aneurysm. B. A lateral projection of the carotid artery 
aneurysm. C. Following endovascular placement, the carotid artery aneurysm is successfully excluded.
and adrenal medulla. Tumors involving these structures have 
been referred to as paraganglioma, glomus tumor, or chemo-
dectoma. Approximately 5% to 7% of carotid body tumors are 
malignant. Although chronic hypoxemia has been invoked as a 
stimulus for hyperplasia of carotid body, approximately 35% of 
carotid body tumors are hereditary. The risk of malignancy is 
greatest in young patients with familial tumors.
Symptoms related to the endocrine products of the carotid 
body tumor are rare. Patients usually present between the fifth 
and seventh decades of life with an asymptomatic lateral neck 
A 
 
 
 
 
      B
Figure 23-27.  A. A carotid body 
tumor (arrow) located adjacent to the 
carotid bulb. B. Following periad-
ventitial dissection, the carotid body 
tumor is removed.
850
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
mass. The diagnosis of carotid body tumor requires confir-
mation on imaging studies. Carotid duplex scan can localize 
the tumor to the carotid bifurcation, but CT or MRI is usually 
required to further delineate the relationship of the tumor to the 
adjacent structures. Classically, a carotid body tumor will widen 
the carotid bifurcation. The Shamblin classification describes 
the tumor extent: I, tumor is less than 5 cm and relatively free 
of vessel involvement; II, tumor is intimately involved but does 
not encase the vessel wall; and III, tumor is intramural and 
encases the carotid vessels and adjacent nerves.46 With good-
resolution CT and MRI, arteriography is usually not required. 
However, arteriography can provide an assessment of the vessel 
invasion and intracranial circulation and allows for preoperative 
embolization of the feeder vessels, which has been reported to 
reduce intraoperative blood loss. Surgical resection is the rec-
ommended treatment for suspected carotid body tumor.
Carotid Trauma.  Blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck can 
cause injury to the carotid artery. Notwithstanding the massive 
bleeding from carotid artery transection, injury to the carotid 
artery can result in carotid dissection, thrombosis, or pseudoa-
neurysm formation. Carotid duplex ultrasound can be useful to 
locate the site of injury in the cervical segment of the carotid 
artery. Spiral CTA has become the modality of choice to detect 
extracranial carotid artery injury. Confirmation of carotid injury 
by contrast cerebral angiography remains the gold standard 
diagnostic test. Injuries to the cervical segment of the common 
and internal carotid arteries can be repaired surgically. Acute 
carotid artery thrombosis is usually treated medically with anti-
coagulation if the patient is asymptomatic. Revascularization 
should be considered for patients presenting with ongoing cere-
bral ischemia related to carotid artery thrombosis. Traumatic 
carotid artery dissection can cause cerebral ischemia due to 
thromboembolization, decreased flow, or thrombosis. Com-
monly, the dissection involves the distal portion of the cervi-
cal and petrous segment of the internal carotid artery. Medical 
management with antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy is usu-
ally adequate for uncomplicated traumatic carotid dissection. 
In patients with pseudoaneurysms of the carotid artery that are 
located in a segment that is out of surgical reach, the use of 
selective coil embolization of the pseudoaneurysm or exclu-
sion of the pseudoaneurysm by a covered stent graft has been 
reported. Bare metal stent has been used with success in the 
treatment of traumatic carotid artery dissection.
ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSM
Despite more than 50,000 patients undergoing elective repair 
of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) each year in the United 
States, approximately 15,000 patients die annually as a result of 
ruptured aneurysm, making it the 10th leading cause of death in 
men in this country.47 The incidence appears to be increasing, 
and this is due in part to improvements in diagnostic imaging 
and, more importantly, a growing elderly population. With early 
diagnosis and timely intervention, aneurysm rupture–related 
death is largely preventable. Conventional treatment of an AAA 
involves replacing the aneurysmal segment of the aorta with a 
prosthetic graft, with the operation performed through a large 
abdominal incision. Techniques for this open abdominal surgery 
have been refined, adapted, and extensively studied by vascular 
surgeons over the past four decades. Despite a well-documented 
low perioperative mortality rate of 2% to 3% in large academic 
institutions, the thought of undergoing an open abdominal aortic 
operation often provokes a sense of anxiety in many patients 
due in part to the postoperative pain associated with the large 
abdominal incision as well as the long recovery time needed 
before the patient can return to normal physical activity.
The most common location of aortic aneurysms is the 
infrarenal aorta. Endovascular stent graft placement represents 
a revolutionary and minimally invasive treatment for infrarenal 
AAAs that only requires 1 to 2 days of hospitalization, and the 
patient can return to normal physical activity within 1 week. The 
concept of using an endoluminal device in the management of 
vascular disease was first proposed by Dotter and colleagues, 
who successfully treated a patient with iliac occlusion using 
transluminal angioplasty in 1964.48 Nearly two decades later, 
Parodi and colleagues reported the first successful endovascu-
lar repair of AAA using a stent graft device.15 Since then, a 
variety of stent graft technologies have been developed to treat 
AAA. The rapid innovation of this new treatment modality has 
undoubtedly captured the attention of patients with aortic aneu-
rysms as well as physicians who practice endovascular therapy. 
Physicians in general should be knowledgeable regarding avail-
able treatment options of AAA in order to provide adequate 
evaluation and education to patients and their families. The pur-
pose of this section is to outline the treatment options for AAAs, 
including conventional repair and endovascular approach. 
Advantages and potential complications of these treatments will 
also be addressed.
Causes and Risk Factors
The pathogenesis of aneurysmal disease of the aorta is com-
plex and multifactorial. A degenerative process in the aortic 
wall is the most common cause of AAA development.49 Matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP), proteolytic enzymes, are found 
abundantly in the wall of AAA. Atherosclerotic disease, age, 
male sex, smoking history, family history, hypertension, coro-
nary artery disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
are associated with the development of AAA.50,51 Diabetes and 
black race have negative association with AAA.50 Other less 
common causes include inflammation, infection, and connective 
tissue disease. Inflammatory AAA accounts for 5% to 10% of all 
AAAs.52 In contrast to atherosclerotic AAA, the inflammatory 
variant is characterized pathologically by marked thickening 
of the aneurysm wall, fibrosis of the adjacent retroperitoneum, 
and rigid adherence of the adjacent structures to the anterior 
aneurysm wall.53 Male sex and smoking are even stronger risk 
factors in inflammatory AAA.54 Smoking cessation is the first 
step of medical therapy, followed by surgical repair. Infectious 
or mycotic AAA is rare but is associated with high mortality.55 
Patients with connective tissue disorders such as Marfan’s syn-
drome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome tend to have more exten-
sive and larger aneurysms at a younger age.56
Natural History of Aortic Aneurysm
The natural history of an AAA is to expand and rupture. AAA 
exhibits a “staccato” pattern of growth, where periods of relative 
quiescence may alternate with expansion. Therefore, although 
an individual pattern of growth cannot be predicted, average 
aggregate growth is approximately 3 to 4 mm/year. There is 
some evidence to suggest that larger aneurysms may expand 
faster than smaller aneurysms, but there is significant overlap 
between the ranges of growth rates at each strata of size.
Rupture risk appears to be directly related to aneurysm 
size as predicted by Laplace’s Law. Although more sophisticated 
851
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
methods of assessing rupture risk based on finite element analy-
sis of wall stress are under active investigation, maximum trans-
verse diameter remains the standard method of risk assessment 
for aneurysm rupture. In the past, AAA rupture risk has been 
overestimated. More recently, two landmark studies have served 
to better define the natural history of AAA.57,58 Based on best 
available evidence, the annualized risk of rupture is given in 
Table 23-8. The rupture risk is quite low below 5.5 cm and 
begins to rise exponentially thereafter. This size can serve 
as an appropriate threshold for recommending elective repair 
provided one’s surgical mortality is below 5%. For each size 
strata, however, women appear to be at higher risk for rupture 
than men, and a lower threshold of 4.5 to 5.0 cm may be reason-
able in good-risk patients. Although data are less compelling, a 
pattern of rapid expansion of >0.5 cm within 6 months can be 
considered a relative indication for elective repair. Aneurysms 
that fall below these indications may safely be followed with 
CT or ultrasound at 6-month intervals, with long-term outcomes 
equivalent to earlier surgical repair. Interestingly, in the Aneu-
rysm Detection and Management (ADAM) study, 80% of all 
AAAs that were followed in this manner eventually came to 
repair within 5 years.58
Unless symptomatic or ruptured, AAA repair is a pro-
phylactic repair. The rationale for recommending repair is 
predicated on the assumption that the risk of aneurysm rupture 
exceeds the combined risk of death from all other causes such 
as cardiopulmonary disease and cancer. On the other hand, our 
limitation in predicting timing and cause of death is underscored 
by the observation that over 25% of patients who were deemed 
unfit for surgical repair because of their comorbidities died from 
rupture of their aneurysms within 5 years.
Clinical Manifestations
Most AAAs are asymptomatic and are usually found inciden-
tally during workup for chronic back pain or kidney stones. 
Physical examination is neither sensitive nor specific except 
in thin patients. Large aneurysms may be missed in the obese, 
while normal aortic pulsations may be mistaken for an aneurysm 
in thin individuals. Rarely patients present with back pain and/or 
abdominal pain with a tender pulsatile mass. Patients with these 
symptoms must be treated as a rupture until proven otherwise. 
If the patient is hemodynamically stable and the aneurysm is 
intact on a CT scan, the patient is admitted for blood pressure 
control with intravenous antihypertensive agents and undergoes 
repair usually within 12 to 24 hours or at least during the same 
hospitalization. In contrast, patients who are hemodynamically 
Table 23-8
Annualized risk of rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) based on size
Description
Diameter of Aorta (cm)
Estimated Annual Risk of 
Rupture (%)
Estimated 5-Year Risk of 
Rupture (%)a
Normal aorta
2–3
0
0 (unless AAA develops)
Small AAA
4–5
1
5–10
Moderate AAA
5–6
2–5
30–40
Large AAA
6–7
3–10
>50
Very large AAA
>7
>10
Approaching 100
aThe estimated 5-year risk is more than five times the estimated annual risk because over that 5 years, the AAA, if left untreated, will continue to grow in size.
unstable with a history of acute back pain and/or syncope and a 
known unrepaired AAA or a pulsatile abdominal mass should 
be immediately taken to the operating room with a presumed 
diagnosis of a ruptured AAA.
Overall mortality of AAA rupture is 71% to 77%, which 
includes all out-of-hospital and in-hospital deaths, as compared 
with 2% to 6% for elective open surgical repair.59 Nearly half 
of all patients with ruptured AAA will die before reaching the 
hospital. For the remainder, surgical mortality is 45% to 50% 
and has not substantially changed in the last 30 years.
Relevant Anatomy
An AAA is defined as a pathologic focal dilation of the aorta 
that is greater than 30 mm or 1.5 times the adjacent diameter 
of the normal aorta (Fig. 23-28). Male aortas tend to be larger 
Figure 23-28.  An operative view of an infrarenal aortic aneurysm.
2
852
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
than female aortas, and there is generalized growth of the aortic 
diameter with each decade of life. Ninety percent of AAAs are 
infrarenal in location and have a fusiform morphology. There 
is a higher predilection for juxtarenal and suprarenal AAAs in 
women compared with men. Concomitant common iliac and/or 
hypogastric artery aneurysms can be found in 20% to 25% of 
patients. Although the etiology of most aortic aneurysms is ath-
erosclerotic, clinically significant peripheral occlusive disease is 
unusual and present in less than 10% of all cases.
Although extravascular anatomy is important for open 
surgical repair of AAA, intravascular anatomy and aortoiliac 
morphology are important for endovascular repair. Pertinent 
anatomic dimensions include the diameter of the proximal non-
dilated infrarenal aortic neck, which can range from 18 to 30 mm; 
common iliac artery, which can range from 8 to 16 mm; and 
external iliac arteries, which can range from 6 to 10 mm. Mor-
phologically, the aortic neck can manifest complex angulation 
above and below the renal arteries due to combination of elon-
gation and anterolateral displacement by the posterior bulge of 
the aneurysmal aorta. Furthermore, the shape of the proximal 
neck is rarely tubular, but often is conical, reverse conical, or 
barrel-shaped. Distally, the iliac arteries can have severe tortu-
osity with multiple compound turns. Although significant from 
hemodynamic standpoint, severe iliac calcifications combined 
with extreme tortuosity can pose a formidable challenge during 
endovascular repair.
Diagnostic Evaluation
Preoperative evaluation should include routine history and 
physical exam with particular attention to (a) any symptoms 
referable to the aneurysm, which may impact the timing of 
repair; (b) history of pelvic surgery or radiation, in the event 
retroperitoneal exposure is required or interruption of hypogas-
tric circulation is planned; (c) claudication suggestive of sig-
nificant iliac occlusive disease; (d) lower extremity bypass or 
other femoral reconstructive procedures; and (e) chronic renal 
insufficiency or contrast allergy.
Cross-sectional imaging is required for definitive evalu-
ation of AAA. Although ultrasound is safe, widely available, 
relatively accurate, and inexpensive and thus the screening 
modality of choice, CT scan remains the gold standard for deter-
mination of anatomic eligibility for endovascular repair. Size 
of AAA may differ up to 1 cm between CT and ultrasound, 
and during longitudinal follow-up, comparisons should be made 
between identical modalities. With modern multirow detector 
scanners, a timed-bolus intravenous contrast-enhanced, 2.5- to 
3.0-mm slice spiral CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis can 
be performed in less than 30 seconds with a single breath hold. 
Extremely high-resolution images are obtained with submilli-
meter spatial resolution (Fig. 23-29). Proper window level and 
width (brightness and contrast) are important for discrimination 
among aortic wall, calcific plaque, thrombus, and lumen. The 
only major drawback to CT is the risk of contrast nephropathy 
in diabetics and in patients with renal insufficiency.
The spiral technique further affords the ability for three-
dimensional reconstruction. Three-dimensional reconstructions 
can yield important morphologic information that is critical to 
endovascular therapy. Using third-party software, these images 
can be viewed and manipulated on one’s desktop computer, and 
so-called “center-line” (transverse slices perpendicular to the 
central flow lumen of the aorta) diameter and length measure-
ments obtained. Conventional angiography has a minimal role 
in the current management of AAA. Angiography is invasive 
with an increased risk of complications. Indications for angiog-
raphy are isolated to concomitant iliac occlusive disease (pres-
ent in <10% of patients with AAA) and unusual renovascular 
anatomy.
Surgical Repair of Abdominal  
Aortic Aneurysm
General anesthesia is necessary when performing a conventional 
open AAA repair. While a retroperitoneal incision is a well-
accepted surgical approach, a midline transabdominal incision 
remains the more common approach for open aortic aneurysm 
operation. Since the abdominal incision can lead to significant 
pain and discomfort, an epidural catheter can be placed prior to 
the operation for postoperative analgesic infusion to provide pain 
control. Once the abdominal cavity is opened, the small intes-
tines and transverse colon are retracted to expose the retroperito-
neum overlying the AAA. The retroperitoneum is next divided, 
followed by isolation of both proximal and distal segments of 
the AAA. Intravenous heparin (100 IU/kg) is given followed 
by clamping of the proximal and distal segments of the aneu-
rysm. The aneurysm sac is open next, and a prosthetic graft is 
used to reconstruct the aorta. If the aneurysm only involves the 
abdominal aorta, a tube graft can be used to replace the aorta 
(Fig. 23-30). If the aneurysm extends distally to the iliac arteries, 
a prosthetic bifurcated graft is used for either an aorto-bi-iliac or 
aorto-bi-femoral bypass reconstruction (Fig. 23-31). The overly-
ing aneurysm sac and the retroperitoneum are closed to cover the 
prosthetic bypass graft to minimize potential bowel contact to the 
graft. Small and large intestines are returned to the abdominal 
cavity followed by the closure of the abdominal fascia and skin.
Advantages and Risks of Open Abdominal Aortic Aneu-
rysm Repair.  The main advantage of a conventional open 
repair is that the AAA is permanently eliminated because it is 
entirely replaced by a prosthetic aortic graft. The risk of aneurysm 
Figure 23-29.  High resolution of image displaying an aortic aneu-
rysm (arrow) can be achieved with multidetector computed tomog-
raphy angiography.
853
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
recurrence or delayed rupture no longer exists. As a result, long-
term imaging surveillance is not needed with these patients. In 
contrast, the long-term efficacy of endovascular repair remains 
unclear. Consequently, long-term imaging surveillance is critical 
to ensure that the aortic aneurysm remains properly sealed by 
the stent graft. Other potential advantages of open repair include 
direct assessment of the circulatory integrity of the colon. If signs 
of colonic ischemia become evident after aortic bypass grafting, a 
concomitant mesenteric artery bypass can be performed to revas-
cularize the colonic circulation. In addition, open repair permits 
the surgeons to explore for other abdominal pathologies, such as 
gastrointestinal tumors, liver mass, or cholelithiasis.
As for the risks associated with open repair, cardiac com-
plications, in the form of either myocardial infarction or arrhyth-
mias, remain the most common morbidity, with an incidence 
between 2% and 6%.60 Another significant complication is 
renal failure or transient renal insufficiency as a result of peri-
operative hypotension, atheromatous embolization, inadvertent 
injury to the ureter, preoperative contrast-induced nephropathy, 
or suprarenal aortic clamping. Although the incidence of renal 
failure is less than 2% in elective aneurysm repair, it can occur 
in more than 20% of patients after repair of a ruptured AAA.60
Ischemic colitis is a devastating potential complication 
after open repair. The likelihood of such a complication is 
highest in those who had a prior colon resection and undergo 
repair of a ruptured AAA, due to the loss of collateral blood 
supply to the rectosigmoid colon. It is estimated that 5% of 
patients who undergo elective aneurysm repair will develop 
A
B
Figure 23-30.  A. Schematic depiction of an aortic tube graft used to repair an aortic aneurysm. B. Intraoperative image of an aortic tube 
graft reconstruction.
partial-thickness ischemic colitis but without significant clini-
cal sequelae.61 However, if the partial-thickness ischemia pro-
gresses to full-thickness gangrene and peritonitis, mortality can 
be as high as 90%.61
The incidence of prosthetic graft infection ranges between 
1% and 4% after open repair.61 It is more common in those who 
undergo repair of a ruptured AAA. If the prosthetic graft is not 
fully covered by the aneurysm sac or retroperitoneum, intestinal 
adhesion with subsequent bowel erosion may occur, resulting 
in an aortoenteric fistula. The predominant sign of such a com-
plication is massive hematemesis, and it typically occurs years 
after the operation. Despite these potential complications, how-
ever, the majority of patients who undergo successful elective 
open repair have an uneventful recovery.
Endovascular Repair of Abdominal  
Aortic Aneurysm
Over a decade has passed since the first report of human implan-
tation of a homemade stent graft for endovascular repair of an 
AAA by Parodi in 1991.3 Several prospective clinical trials 
across different devices and analysis of large Medicare adminis-
trative databases and meta-analyses of published literature have 
consistently demonstrated significantly decreased operative 
time, blood loss, hospital length of stay, and overall periopera-
tive morbidity and mortality of endovascular repair compared 
with open surgical repair. For patients who are at increased risk 
for surgery because of age or comorbidity, endovascular repair 
is a superior minimally invasive alternative.
854
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The principle of endovascular repair of AAA involves the 
implantation of an aortic stent graft that is fixed proximally and 
distally to nonaneurysmal aortoiliac segment and thereby endo-
luminally excluding the aneurysm from the aortic circulation 
(Fig. 23-32). Unlike open surgical repair, the aneurysm sac is not 
Figure 23-31.  Intraoperative view of a bifurcated graft used to 
repair an aortic aneurysm.
resected, which is subjected for potential aneurysm expansion or 
even rupture. Importantly, aortic branches, such as lumbar arter-
ies or the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), are occluded, which 
can lead to persistent aneurysm pressurization and aneurysm 
expansion. Currently, the following nine devices are available 
for elective repair of intact infrarenal AAA: AneuRx device 
(Medtronic/AVE, Santa Rosa, CA), Gore Excluder device 
(WL Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ), Endologix Powerlink 
device (Endologix Inc., Irvine, CA), Zenith device (Cook Inc., 
Bloomington, IN), Talent device (Medtronic/AVE, Santa Rosa, 
CA), Endurant device (Medtronic/AVE, Santa Rosa, CA), AFX 
Endovascular AAA System (Endologix Inc., Irvine, CA), Aor-
fix Flexible Stent (Lombard Medical Inc., Framingham, MA), 
and Ovation Prime Stent (TriVascular Inc., Santa Rosa, CA). 
Despite some differences in physical appearance, mechanical 
properties, and materials, they will be discussed collectively for 
this chapter. Most of these devices are modular devices consist-
ing of a primary device or main body and one or two iliac limbs 
that insert into the main body to complete the repair. Depend-
ing on the device, there are varying degrees of flexibility in 
the choice of iliac limbs that can be matched to the main body, 
which can impact the customizability for a particular anatomy.
A severe limitation of the endovascular repair devices is 
the need for adequate proximal neck to achieve a durable seal-
ing zone. Several techniques have been proposed to overcome 
this limitation. These include fenestrated or branched endografts 
and the “chimney,” “snorkel,” and “periscope” techniques. The 
fenestrated stent grafts rely on precise alignment between the 
fenestration and the corresponding visceral artery.62 Mul-
tiple clinical trials using customized fenestrated stent graft for 
the treatment of short-necked and juxtarenal aortic aneurysm 
repair have shown promising short- and mid-term results.63,64 
However, restricted access to these investigational devices and 
the delays due to device customization limit the current use of 
these devices to a few centers. Alternatively, some centers have 
reported good results with intraoperative surgeon-modified 
endograft to create fenestrations for the treatment of complex 
aortic aneurysms in high-risk patients.65 Further development 
B
A
Figure 23-32.  A. An aortogram dem-
onstrating a large infrarenal abdominal 
aortic aneurysm. B. Following endovas-
cular stent graft implantation, the aortic 
aneurysm is successfully excluded.
855
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
of the fenestrated techniques also opens the way for endovascu-
lar treatment of suprarenal and thoracoabdominal aneurysm.66 
Recently, an “off-the-shelf” Zenith Fenestrated AAA endo-
vascular graft has been approved by the FDA. This device has 
fenestrations or scallops in the graft material to allow the proxi-
mal edge of the stent graft to be placed above the renal arteries 
while still permitting blood flow to vessels accommodated by 
the fenestrations or scallops. The “chimney” technique involves 
placing renal or mesenteric stents parallel to the aortic stent graft 
to preserve blood flow in the visceral aortic branches.67 This 
technique has been suggested as a rescue procedure for visceral 
arteries that have been covered by the stent graft during endo-
vascular repair.68 The review of literature showed that open sur-
gery remains a safe and effective treatment option for good-risk 
patients with juxtarenal aortic aneurysm.69 Fenestrated endo-
vascular repair is associated with low mortality and compares 
favorably with open surgery in terms of morbidity, especially 
renal function impairment and cardiac complications.69 The 
“chimney” technique demonstrated feasibility, but because of 
the limited number of reports and the lack of long-term data, it 
should be considered only in acute poor surgical risk patients 
and in case of unintentional visceral artery coverage or elective 
poor surgical cases for fenestrated endovascular repair.69
Patient Selection for Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm 
Repair.  Anatomic eligibility for endovascular repair is mainly 
based on three areas: the proximal aortic neck, common iliac 
arteries, and external iliac and common femoral arteries, which 
relate to the proximal and distal landing zones or fixation sites 
and the access vessels, respectively. The requirements for the 
proximal aortic neck are a diameter of 18 to 28 mm and a mini-
mum length of 15 mm (Table 23-9). Usually, multiple measure-
ments of the diameter are taken along the length of the neck 
to assess its shape. All diameter measurements are mid-wall to 
mid-wall of the vessel. Secondary considerations include mural 
calcifications (<50% circumference), luminal thrombus (<50% 
circumference), and angulation (<45°). Presence of a significant 
amount of any one of these secondary features in combination 
with a relatively short proximal neck may compromise success-
ful short- and long-term fixation of the stent graft and exclusion 
of the aneurysm. The usual distal landing zone is the common 
iliac artery. The external iliac artery may serve as an alternate 
site when the ipsilateral common iliac artery is aneurysmal or 
Table 23-9
Ideal characteristics of an aneurysm for endovascular 
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Neck length (mm)
>15
Neck diameter (mm)
>18, <32
Aortic Neck angle (degrees)
<60
Neck mural calcification  
(% circumference)
<50
Neck luminal thrombus  
(% circumference)
<50
Common iliac artery diameter (mm)
Between 8 and 20
Common iliac artery length (mm)
>20
External iliac artery diameter (mm)
>7
ectatic. The treatable diameters of common iliac arteries range 
from 8 to 20 mm, and there should be at least 20 mm of patent 
artery of uniform diameter to allow adequate fixation. Finally, 
at least one of two common femoral and external iliac arteries 
must be at least 7 mm in diameter in order to safely introduce 
the main delivery sheath. Slightly smaller iliac diameters may 
be tolerated depending on the specific device and in the absence 
of severe tortuosity and calcific disease. Difficult access is one 
of the main causes of increased procedural time and intraopera-
tive complications. Using these criteria, approximately 60% of 
all AAAs are anatomic candidates for endovascular repair.
The next step in the preoperative planning is device selec-
tion. Typically, the proximal diameter of the main device is 
oversized by 10% to 20% of the nominal diameter of the aor-
tic neck. Distally, the iliac limbs are oversized by 1 to 4 mm 
depending on the individual device’s instructions for use. The 
biggest challenge to proper device selection remains determin-
ing the optimal length from the renal arteries to the hypogastric 
arteries. Despite availability of sophisticated three-dimensional 
reconstructions, the exact path that a device will take from the 
proximal aortic neck to the distal iliac arteries is difficult to pre-
dict. It is dependent on a host of factors related to the mechanical 
properties of the stent graft and the morphology of the aortoiliac 
flow lumen. “Plumb-line” measurements of axial CT images 
can be quite inaccurate, typically grossly underestimating the 
length, whereas center-line measurements usually overestimate 
the length. Angiographic measurements using a marker catheter 
are invasive, require contrast and radiation exposure, and are 
also inaccurate because they fail to account for the stiffness of 
the stent graft. The consequences of not choosing the correct 
length of the device include inadvertent coverage of the hypo-
gastric artery if too long and the need for additional devices if 
too short.
Advantages and Risks of Endovascular Repair.  The obvi-
ous advantage of an endovascular AAA repair is its minimally 
invasive nature. Typically, patients who undergo this procedure 
stay in the hospital for only 1 to 3 days, in contrast to the 5- to 
10-day stay required after conventional open surgical repair. In 
our institution, patients who have had an endovascular repair are 
routinely transferred to a general vascular ward from the post-
anesthesia recovery unit, avoiding admission to a more costly 
intensive care unit.
Because an abdominal incision is not necessary in endo-
vascular repair, the procedure is particularly beneficial in 
patients with severe pulmonary disease, such as chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease or emphysema. Patients can sustain ade-
quate breathing in the postoperative period, avoiding respiratory 
complications or prolonged mechanical ventilation. Because 
the abdominal cavity has not been entered, the risk of gastro-
intestinal complications, such as ileus, ventral hernia, or bowel 
obstruction due to intestinal adhesion, is also greatly reduced. 
Moreover, regional or epidural anesthesia can be used, avoid-
ing the risks associated with general anesthesia in patients with 
severe cardiopulmonary dysfunction.
Despite its many advantages, endovascular repair does 
have potential complications. Since the stent graft device is 
attached endoluminally within the abdominal aorta, an endoleak 
due to incomplete stent graft exclusion of the aneurysm can 
occur. With this type of leak, blood flow persists outside the 
lumen of the endoluminal graft but within an aneurysm sac. A 
meta-analysis of 1118 patients who underwent successful endo-
vascular repair found an endoleak incidence of 24%.70 Although 
856
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
a small endoleak usually poses little clinical significance 
because it will typically become thrombosed spontaneously, a 
large or persistent endoleak may lead to continuous aneurysm 
perfusion and ultimately to aneurysm rupture. The rupture rate 
following an endovascular AAA repair has been reported to be 
less than 0.8%.71
Stent graft iliac limb dysfunction resulting in thrombosis 
has been reported following endovascular repair.18,70 One pos-
sible cause is aneurysm remodeling, resulting in a shortening 
in the aortic length, which can cause the stent graft to kink. 
Alternatively, progression of an underlying iliac atheroscle-
rotic lesion may cause compression of the iliac limb and ulti-
mately result in graft-limb occlusion. Treatment options include 
thrombolysis or graft thrombectomy to determine the underly-
ing cause and possibly additional stent graft placement. Renal 
artery occlusion may occur due to improper stent graft position-
ing or migration.18,60,70 Graft limb separation or dislocation has 
also been reported.18,60,70
In patients with AAA and concurrent iliac artery aneu-
rysms who undergo preoperative coil embolization of the inter-
nal iliac artery, 20% to 45% experience symptoms of pelvic 
ischemia.72 These symptoms may include buttock claudication, 
impotence, gluteal skin sloughing, and colonic ischemia. Other 
complications pertaining to endovascular repair relate to the 
access site and include groin hematoma and wound infection. 
Occasionally, the stent graft device can malfunction by either 
failing to deploy or dislodging during the deployment proce-
dure.18,71 If the device cannot be salvaged or rescued endolumi-
nally, open surgical repair of the aneurysm may be necessary.
Technical Considerations of Endovascular Aortic Aneu-
rysm Repair.  Although endovascular AAA repair may be 
performed in any venue with appropriate digital fluoroscopic 
imaging capability, due to the need for absolute sterility and 
aseptic technique, it is most safely performed in a surgical suite. 
The patient is prepped and draped just as in open AAA repair. 
Patients with renal insufficiency should be started on periopera-
tive oral N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) and sodium bicarbonate 
infusion to reduce the risk of contrast nephropathy. A variety 
of anesthetic options may be used. Regional anesthesia may 
be appropriate for patients with pulmonary disease. There are 
reports of success with local anesthetics alone, as the incisions 
are typically smaller than a typical open inguinal hernia repair.73
Bilateral transverse oblique incisions are made just below 
the inguinal ligament to expose approximately 2 to 3 cm of CFA 
and obtain proximal control. Special attention is paid to avoid 
the groin crease to decrease the risk of wound complications. 
Some have advocated a completely percutaneous access using 
the “pre-close” technique with the Perclose suture-mediated 
vascular closure device (Abbott Perclose, Redwood City, CA). 
Review of reported series on this technique suggest a technical 
success rate of 95% for medium-size sheaths ranging from 12 to 
16 French, and 75% success for 18- to 24-French sizes.
Transfemoral access is obtained using standard Seldinger 
technique. Initial soft-tipped starter guidewires are exchanged 
for stiff guidewires that are advanced to the thoracic arch. Intra-
venous heparin at 80 IU/kg are administered, and the activated 
clotting time is maintained at 200 to 250 seconds. These guide-
wires provide the necessary support for the subsequent introduc-
tion of the large-diameter delivery catheters and devices. In the 
absence of special anatomic considerations, the primary device 
is inserted through the right side and the contralateral iliac limb 
is inserted through the left side. After administration of heparin, 
the delivery catheter or the introducer sheath is advanced to the 
L1-L2 vertebral space, which typically marks the location of 
the renal arteries. An angiographic catheter is advanced from 
the contralateral femoral artery to the same level.
A road-mapping aortogram is obtained to localize the 
renal arteries. The primary device is rotated to the desired ori-
entation and deployed immediate below the lowest renal artery 
(Fig. 23-33). The angiographic catheter is replaced with a direc-
tional catheter and an angled guidewire, and the opening for the 
contralateral limb on the main device is cannulated. Intrastent 
passage of the guidewire is confirmed, and the angled guidewire 
is replaced with a stiff guidewire. The contralateral iliac limb 
is inserted into the docking opening of the primary device and 
deployed. A completion angiogram is performed looking for 
patency of the renal and hypogastric arteries, the device limbs, 
proximal and distal fixation, and endoleak. Adjunctive interven-
tions including additional devices, balloons, and bare stents are 
performed as needed. The procedure is concluded with routine 
repairs of the femoral arteries and closure of the groin incisions. 
The patients recover in the recovery room for 2 to 4 hours and 
admitted to the general care floor. Although in the past, patients 
A
D
C
B
Figure 23-33.  A. During an endovascular aortic aneurysm repair, 
the main endograft device is inserted through a femoral artery 
approach. B. The device is deployed in the aorta just below the 
renal arteries. C. A contralateral iliac endograft device is inserted 
through a contralateral gate opening, which is next deployed. D. 
Completion of deployment of the endograft device should fully 
exclude an aortic aneurysm while preserving flow of the renal and 
hypogastric arteries.
857
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
were admitted to the intensive care unit, this is rarely needed. 
Most patients can be started on a regular diet that evening and 
discharged the next morning.
Surveillance Following Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm 
Repair.  Life-long follow-up is essential to the long-term suc-
cess after endovascular AAA repair. Indeed, one may go so far 
as to say that absence of appropriate follow-up is tantamount 
to not having had a repair at all. A triple-phase (noncontrast, 
contrast, and delayed) spiral CT scan and a four-view (antero-
posterior, lateral, and two obliques) abdominal x-ray should 
be obtained within the first month. Subsequent imaging can be 
obtained at 6-month intervals in the first 1 to 2 years and yearly 
thereafter. After the first 6 months, patients who cannot travel 
easily may obtain their studies locally and submit them for 
review. The CT scan is for detection of endoleaks, subtle proxi-
mal migrations, and changes in aneurysm size. The abdominal 
x-ray gives a “birds-eye” view of the overall morphology of the 
stent graft. Subtle changes in conformation of the iliac limbs 
relative to each other and/or the spine can provide early signs 
of impending component separation or loss of fixation. Further, 
stent fractures and/or suture breaks that can compromise long-
term device integrity can sometimes only be detected on a plain 
film and not on a CT scan.
Results from Clinical Studies Comparing 
Endovascular versus Open Repair
The primary success rate after endovascular repair of AAA has 
been reported to be as high as 95%.18,59 The less invasive nature 
of this procedure is appealing to many physicians and patients. 
In addition, virtually all reports indicate a decreased blood loss, 
transfusion requirements, and length of intensive care unit and 
hospital stay for endovascular repair of AAAs compared with 
the standard surgical approach.18,59,74 With the advent of bifur-
cated grafts and improved delivery systems in the future, the 
only real limitation will be cost. When evaluating the literature 
for results from clinical series, it is important to look at a com-
parison of endoluminal versus open repair and device-specific 
outcome and cost analysis studies.
Early reports on results with endovascular repair were 
often flawed due to selection biases. This is because from its 
inception, endovascular repair has been used mostly in patients 
who are at higher risk for open repair. At the same time, only 
patients with favorable anatomy including less tortuosity and 
the presence of a suitable infrarenal neck were considered for 
endovascular repair. Randomization is also difficult because 
most patients who anatomically qualify for endovascular repair 
would withdraw from the study if randomized to open repair. 
Consequently, there are very few randomized controlled tri-
als that have compared outcomes in patients with similar risk 
factors and anatomy who are eligible for both types of repair. 
Two such European trials have recently published short-term 
outcome data that are unbiased in design.
The DREAM trial is a multicenter randomized trial that 
compared open versus endovascular repair among a group of 
345 patients at 28 European centers using multiple different 
devices including Gore, AneuRx, and Zenith.75 Patients were 
included only if they were considered to be candidates for both 
types of repairs. The operative mortality rate was 4.6% in the 
operative group versus 1.2% in the endoluminal group at 30 days. 
When looking at the combined rate of operative mortality 
and severe complications, there was an incidence of 9.8% in 
the open repair group versus 4.7% in the endoluminal group. 
The difference here was largely due to the higher frequency of 
pulmonary complications seen in the open group. There was a 
higher incidence of graft-related complications in the endolu-
minal group. There was no difference in the nonvascular local 
complication rate among the two groups. The Endovascular 
Repair-1 (EVAR-1) trial is also a multicenter randomized trial 
that compared open to endoluminal repair.74 This study was con-
ducted on 1082 patients at 34 centers in the United Kingdom 
using all available devices. Short-term mortality at 30 days was 
4.7% in the open group and 1.7% in the endoluminal group. 
The in-hospital mortality rate was also increased in the open 
when compared to the endoluminal group (6.2% vs. 2.1%). 
As expected, the secondary intervention rate was higher in the 
endoluminal group (9.8% vs. 5.8%). Complication rates were 
not reported in the EVAR-1 trial. Criticisms can be applied to 
both of these trials. Patients had to be eligible for either type of 
repair in order to be included in the study. Consequently, these 
findings cannot be generalized to patients who are too sick to 
undergo open surgery or to patients whose anatomy precludes 
them from undergoing endovascular repair.
The Open Versus Endovascular Repair (OVER) Veter-
ans Affairs Cooperative Study Group randomly assigned 881 
patients with asymptomatic AAAs who were candidates for both 
procedures to either endovascular repair (n = 444) or open repair 
(n = 437) and followed them for up to 9 years.76 Reduction in 
perioperative mortality with endovascular repair was sustained 
at 3 years but not thereafter. There was no difference in pri-
mary outcome of all-cause mortality. Endovascular repair and 
open repair resulted in similar long-term survival. Six aneurysm 
ruptures were confirmed in the endovascular repair group ver-
sus none in the open repair group. Rupture after endovascular 
repair remains a concern. A significant interaction was observed 
between age and type of treatment. Endovascular repair led to 
increased long-term survival among younger patients but not 
among older patients, for whom a greater benefit from the endo-
vascular approach had been expected.
Device-Specific Outcome.  Matsumura and associates com-
pared endoluminal versus open repair using the Excluder 
device.77 In their review, they demonstrated a 30-day mortal-
ity rate of 1% along with endoleak rates of 17% and 20% at 
1- and 2-year intervals, respectively.77 The limb narrowing, 
limb migration, and trunk migration were all 1% at 2 years. 
There were no deployment failures or early conversions. There 
was an annual 7% reintervention rate. Aneurysm growth was 
demonstrated in 14% of patients at 2 years. The Zenith device 
by Cook has been studied by Greenberg and associates, who 
compared standard surgical repair with endoluminal repair in 
low-risk patients and endoluminal repair in high-risk patients.78 
They reported a 30-day mortality rate of 3.5%, which was equal 
to the open group. The endoleak rates were 7.4% and 5.4% at 
1- and 2-year intervals, respectively. There was a 5.3% migra-
tion of 5 mm at 1 year. Freedom from rupture was 100% in the 
low-risk group and 98.9% in the high-risk endoluminal group at 
2 years. Experience with the AneuRx device has been reported 
by Zarins.79 In this 4-year review, they found a 30-day mortal-
ity rate of 2.8%. Endoleak rate at 4 years was 13.9%, aneurysm 
enlargement was 11.5%, and stent graft migration was 9.5%. 
Freedom from rupture was noted to be 98.4% at 4 years. Criado 
and associates have reported on their 1- year experience with 
the Talent LPS device by Medtronic.80 They report a 30-day 
mortality rate of 0.8%. Endoleak rate was 10%. Three deploy-
ment failures were noted, and freedom from rupture was 100%. 
858
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Aneurysm growth and migration rates were divided into three 
different neck size groups. Patients with a wide neck (>26 mm) 
had a 3% growth and migration rate. Narrow-neck patients 
(<26 mm) had a 1% growth rate and a 2% migration neck. 
Interestingly, short-neck patients (<15 mm) had no aneurysm 
growths and a 2% migration rate.
Cost Analysis.  The current climate of cost containment and 
limited reimbursement for healthcare services mandates a criti-
cal analysis of the economic impact of any new medical technol-
ogy on the market. The in-hospital costs for both endovascular 
and open repair include graft cost, operating room fees, radiol-
ogy, pharmacy, ancillary care, intensive care unit charges, and 
floor charges. Despite the improved morbidity and mortality 
rates, several early studies have reported no cost benefit with 
the application of endovascular repair.81,82 The limiting factor 
appears to be the cost of the device. Despite commercialization 
of endovascular repair, the device costs are still in the range 
of $5000 to $6000 with no signs of abating. A recent report 
by Angle and associated further corroborates previous stud-
ies.83 In their review, despite decreased hospital and intensive 
care unit stays and utilization of pharmacy and respiratory ser-
vices, cost of endovascular repair was 1.74 times greater than 
the standard surgical approach. In addition, these cost analysis 
studies are centered on in-hospital costs and do not even begin 
to address secondary costs such as postoperative surveillance 
that is required with endovascular repair. In the OVER trial, 
endovascular repair was found to be a cost-effective alternative 
to open repair in the U.S. Veterans Affairs healthcare system 
for at least the first 2 years.84 The primary outcomes were mean 
total healthcare cost per life-year and per quality-adjusted life-
year. There were no differences found in survival, quality of 
life, and costs after 2 years between the endovascular and the 
open group. Although graft costs were higher in the endovas-
cular group, length of stay was shorter, resulting in lower cost 
of AAA repair hospitalization in the endovascular group. Costs 
remained lower after 2 years in the endovascular group, but the 
difference was no longer significant.
Classification and Management of Endoleak
An endoleak is an extravasation of contrast outside the stent 
graft and within the aneurysm sac (Fig. 23-34). It can be pres-
ent in up to 20% to 30% of all endovascular AAA repairs in 
the early postoperative period.85 In general, over half of these 
endoleaks will resolve spontaneously during the first 6 months, 
resulting in a 10% incidence of chronic endoleaks in all cases 
Type I endoleak                Type II endoleak                 Type III endoleak                  Type IV endoleak
Figure 23-34.  The four types of 
endoleak include the following: type 
I endoleak = attachment site leak; 
type II endoleak = side branch leak 
caused by lumbar or side branches; 
type III endoleak = endograft junc-
tional leak due to overlapping device 
components; and type IV endoleak = 
endograft fabric or porosity leak.
Figure 23-35.  A computed tomography scan demonstrating an 
endoleak (small arrow) as evidenced by contrast flow outside the 
aortic endograft (long arrow).
beyond the first year of follow-up. Endoleaks can be detected 
using conventional angiography, contrast CT (Fig. 23-35), 
MRA, and color-flow duplex ultrasound. Although there is no 
recognized gold standard, in practice, angiography is consid-
ered the least sensitive but most specific for characterizing the 
source of the endoleak, whereas the CT scan is the most sensi-
tive but least specific. Widespread availability and reliability 
that is relatively independent of technique have made the CT 
scan the de facto standard imaging modality for postoperative 
surveillance. Conversely, routine use of duplex ultrasound and 
MRA has been limited by the lack of proper equipment and 
local expertise. On the other hand, investigational techniques 
such as time-resolved MRA may provide greater sensitivity and 
specificity than either angiography or CT in the future.
Four types of endoleaks have been described (Table 23-10). 
Type I endoleak refers to fixation-related leaks that occur at the 
proximal or distal attachment sites. These represent less than 5% 
of all endoleaks and are seen as an early blush of contrast into 
the aneurysm sac from the proximal or distal ends of the device 
during completion angiography.85,86 Although seen as marker of 
poor patient selection or inadequate repair, over 80% of these 
leaks spontaneously seal in the first 6 months. Persistent type I 
endoleaks, on the other hand, require prompt treatment. Type II 
859
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
endoleak refers to retrograde flow originating from a lumbar, 
inferior mesenteric, accessory renal, or hypogastric artery. They 
are the most common type of endoleak, accounting for 20% to 
30% of all cases, and about half resolve spontaneously. On angi-
ography, they are seen as a late filling of the aneurysm sac from 
a branch vessel(s). Type II endoleaks carry a relatively benign 
natural history and do not merit intervention unless associated 
with aneurysm growth. Type III endoleaks refer to failure of 
device integrity or component separation from modular sys-
tems. If detected intraoperatively or in the early perioperative 
period, it is usually from inadequate overlap between two stent 
grafts, whereas in the late period, the endoleak may be from a 
fabric tear or junctional separation from conformational changes 
of the aneurysm. Regardless of the etiology or timing, these 
should be promptly repaired. Finally, type IV endoleak refers 
to the diffuse, early blush seen during completion angiography 
due to graft porosity and/or suture holes of some Dacron-based 
devices. It does not have any clinical significance and usually 
cannot be seen after 48 hours and heparin reversal. Endoleaks 
that are initially considered type IV but persist become type III 
endoleaks by definition, because this indicates a more signifi-
cant material defect than simple porosity or a suture hole.
Endotension Following Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm 
Repair.  In approximately 5% of cases after an apparently suc-
cessful endovascular repair, the aneurysm continues to grow 
without any demonstrable endoleak.87 This phenomenon has 
been described as endotension. Although it was initially thought 
that an endoleak was really present but simply not detected, case 
have been reported where the aneurysm has been surgically 
opened and the contents were completely devoid of any blood 
and no extravasation could be found. The mechanism of con-
tinued pressurization of the aneurysm sac following successful 
exclusion from the arterial circulation remains unsolved at this 
time. One putative mechanism has been linked to a transuda-
tive process related to certain expanded PTFE graft materials.88 
More importantly, however, the natural history of these enlarg-
ing aneurysms without endoleaks is unknown, but to date, there 
has been no evidence to suggest that they carry an increased risk 
of rupture. Conservatively speaking, until further long-term data 
become available, if the patient is a suitable surgical risk, elec-
tive open conversion should be considered.
Secondary Interventions Following Endovascular Aortic 
Aneurysm Repair.  There is approximately 10% to 15% per 
year risk of secondary interventions following endovascular 
AAA repair.18,78,89 These procedures are critical in the long-term 
Table 23-10
Endoleak classification
Classification
Description
Type I endoleak
Attachment site leak
Type II endoleak
Side branch leak caused by lumbar or 
inferior mesenteric arteries
Type III endoleak
Junctional leak (of overlapping 
endograft components) and graft 
fabric defect
Type IV endoleak
Endograft fabric porosity leak
success of the primary procedure in prevention of aneurysm rup-
ture and aneurysm-related death. These secondary procedures, 
in order of frequency, include proximal or distal extender place-
ment for migrations, highly selective or translumbar emboliza-
tion for type II endoleaks, direct surgical or laparoscopic branch 
vessel ligations, bridging cuffs for component separations, and 
late open surgical conversions.
Multiple large series have reported that an annual rupture 
rate of approximately 1% to 1.5% per year after endovascular 
repair.18,78,89 The EUROSTAR registry reports a rupture rate of 
2.3% over 15.4 months in patients with an endoleak, compared 
with 0.3% in those without.90 Various causes of late ruptures 
have been reported in the literature, although presence of a per-
sistent endoleak with aneurysm enlargement remains a com-
mon culprit for this complication. It has been shown that even 
successfully excluded aneurysms can lead to the development 
of attachment-site leaks and device failure, caused in part by 
aneurysm remodeling resulting in stent migration or kinking.91 
Mehta and colleagues reported that 63% of delayed AAA rup-
tures after endovascular repair were caused by type I endoleaks 
with endograft migration, 11% by type I without migration, 
19% by type II, and the rest of unknown type.92
Treatment of rupture may be open conversion or endo-
vascular stent graft placement. May and associates reported a 
mortality rate of 43% in those patients who underwent open 
conversion.93 Emergent endovascular repair should be consid-
ered in these patients since it is potentially much faster and less 
likely to cause physiologic stress than open conversion. Several 
reports have shown that endovascular repair can be performed 
successfully in patients previously treated with endoluminal 
prostheses.94,95
MESENTERIC ARTERY DISEASE
Vascular occlusive disease of the mesenteric vessels is a rela-
tively uncommon but potentially devastating condition that gen-
erally presents in patients over 60 years of age, is three times 
more frequent in women, and has been recognized as an entity 
since 1936.96 The incidence of such a disease is low and repre-
sents 2% of the revascularization operations for atheromatous 
lesions. The most common cause of mesenteric ischemia is 
atherosclerotic vascular disease. Autopsy studies have dem-
onstrated splanchnic atherosclerosis in 35% to 70% of cases.97 
Other etiologies exist and include FMD, panarteritis nodosa, 
arteritis, and celiac artery compression from a median arcuate 
ligament, but they are unusual and have an incidence of one in 
nine compared with that of atherosclerosis.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia is related to a lack of blood 
supply in the splanchnic region and is caused by disease in one 
or more visceral arteries: the celiac trunk, the superior mesen-
teric artery, and the IMA. Mesenteric ischemia is thought to 
occur when two of the three visceral vessels are affected with 
severe stenosis or occlusion; however, in as many as 9% of 
cases, only a single vessel is involved (SMA in 5% and celiac 
trunk in 4% of cases).98 This disease process may evolve in a 
chronic fashion, as in the case of progressive luminal oblitera-
tion due to atherosclerosis. On the other hand, mesenteric isch-
emia can occur suddenly, as in the case of thromboembolism. 
Despite recent progress in perioperative management and bet-
ter understanding of pathophysiology, mesenteric ischemia is 
considered one of the most catastrophic vascular disorders with 
mortality rates ranging from 50% to 75%. Delays in diagnosis 
860
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and treatment are the main contributing factors in its high mor-
tality. It is estimated that mesenteric ischemia accounts for 1 in 
every 1000 hospital admissions in this country. The prevalence 
is rising due in part to the increased awareness of this disease, 
the advanced age of the population, and the significant comor-
bidity of these elderly patients. Early recognition and prompt 
treatment before the onset of irreversible intestinal ischemia are 
essential to improve the outcome.
Anatomy and Pathophysiology
Mesenteric arterial circulation is remarkable for its rich collat-
eral network. Three main mesenteric arteries provide the arterial 
perfusion to the gastrointestinal system: the celiac artery (CA), 
the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and the IMA. In gen-
eral, the CA provides arterial circulation to the foregut (distal 
esophagus to duodenum), hepatobiliary system, and spleen; the 
SMA supplies the midgut (jejunum to mid-colon); and the IMA 
supplies the hindgut (mid-colon to rectum). The CA and SMA 
arise from the ventral surface of the infradiaphragmatic supra-
renal abdominal aorta, whereas the IMA originates from the left 
lateral portion of the infrarenal aorta. These anatomic origins 
in relation to the aorta are important when a mesenteric angio-
gram is performed to determine the luminal patency. In order to 
fully visualize the origins of the CA and SMA, it is necessary to 
perform both an anteroposterior and a lateral projection of the 
aorta since most arterial occlusive lesions occur in the proximal 
segments of these mesenteric trunks.
Because of the abundant collateral flow between these 
mesenteric arteries, progressive diminution of flow in one or 
even two of the main mesenteric trunks is usually tolerated, 
provided that uninvolved mesenteric branches can enlarge over 
time to provide sufficient compensatory collateral flow. In con-
trast, acute occlusion of a main mesenteric trunk may result in 
profound ischemia due to lack of sufficient collateral flow. Col-
lateral networks between the CA and the SMA exist primarily 
through the superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arter-
ies. The IMA may provide collateral arterial flow to the SMA 
through the marginal artery of Drummond, the arc of Riolan, 
and other unnamed retroperitoneal collateral vessels termed 
meandering mesenteric arteries (Fig. 23-36). Lastly, collateral 
visceral vessels may provide important arterial flow to the IMA 
and the hindgut through the hypogastric arteries and the hemor-
rhoidal arterial network.
Regulation of mesenteric blood flow is largely modulated 
by both hormonal and neural stimuli, which characteristically 
regulate systemic blood flow. In addition, the mesenteric cir-
culation responds to the gastrointestinal contents. Hormonal 
regulation is mediated by splanchnic vasodilators, such as nitric 
oxide, glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide. Certain 
intrinsic vasoconstrictors, such as vasopressin, can diminish the 
mesenteric blood flow. On the other hand, neural regulation is 
provided by the extensive visceral autonomic innervation.
Clinical manifestation of mesenteric ischemia is pre-
dominantly postprandial abdominal pain, which signifies that 
the increased oxygen demand of digestion is not met by the 
gastrointestinal collateral circulation. The postprandial pain fre-
quently occurs in the mid-abdomen, suggesting that the diver-
sion of blood flow from the SMA to supply the stomach impairs 
perfusion to the small bowel. This leads to transient anaerobic 
metabolism and acidosis. Persistent or profound mesenteric 
ischemia will lead to mucosal compromise with release of intra-
cellular contents and by-products of anaerobic metabolism to 
Figure 23-36.  An aortogram showing a prominent collateral ves-
sel, which is the arc of Riolan (arrow) in a patient with an inferior 
mesenteric artery (IMA) occlusion. This vessel network provides 
collateral flow between the superior mesenteric artery and IMA.
the splanchnic and systemic circulation. Injured bowel mucosa 
allows unimpeded influx of toxic substances from the bowel 
lumen with systemic consequences. If full-thickness necrosis 
occurs in the bowel wall, intestinal perforation ensues, which 
will lead to peritonitis. Concomitant atherosclerotic disease in 
cardiac or systemic circulation frequently compounds the diag-
nostic and therapeutic complexity of mesenteric ischemia.
Types of Mesenteric Artery Occlusive Disease
There are three major mechanisms of visceral ischemia involv-
ing the mesenteric arteries: (a) acute mesenteric ischemia, which 
can be either embolic or thrombotic in origin; (b) chronic mes-
enteric ischemia; and (c) nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia. 
Despite the variability of these syndromes, a common anatomic 
pathology is involved in these processes. The superior mesen-
teric artery (SMA) is the most commonly involved vessel in 
acute mesenteric ischemia. Acute thrombosis occurs in patients 
with underlying mesenteric atherosclerosis, which typically 
involves the origin of the mesenteric arteries while sparing the 
collateral branches. In acute embolic mesenteric ischemia, the 
emboli typically originate from a cardiac source and frequently 
occur in patients with atrial fibrillation or following myocar-
dial infarction (Figs. 23-37 and 23-38). Nonocclusive mesen-
teric ischemia is characterized by a low flow state in otherwise 
normal mesenteric arteries and most frequently occurs in criti-
cally ill patients on vasopressors. Finally, chronic mesenteric 
ischemia is a functional consequence of a long-standing ath-
erosclerotic process that typically involves at least two of the 
three main mesenteric vessels. The gradual development of the 
occlusive process allows the development of collateral ves-
sels that prevent the manifestations of acute ischemia, but are 
not sufficient to meet the high postprandial intestinal oxygen 
requirements, giving rise to the classical symptoms of postpran-
dial abdominal pain and the resultant food fear.
861
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Several less common syndromes of visceral ischemia 
involving the mesenteric arteries can also cause serious debili-
tation. Chronic mesenteric ischemic symptoms can occur due 
to extrinsic compression of the celiac artery by the diaphragm, 
which is termed median arcuate ligament syndrome or celiac 
artery compression syndrome. Acute visceral ischemia may 
occur following an aortic operation, due to ligation of the IMA 
in the absence of adequate collateral vessels. Furthermore, 
acute visceral ischemia may develop in aortic dissection, which 
involves the mesenteric arteries, or after coarctation repair. 
Finally, other unusual causes of ischemia include mesenteric 
arteritis, radiation arteritis, and cholesterol emboli.
Figure 23-37.  An anteroposterior view of a selective superior 
mesenteric artery angiogram shows an abrupt cutoff of the middle 
colic artery, which was caused by emboli (arrow) due to atrial 
fibrillation.
Figure 23-38.  A lateral mesenteric angiogram showing an abrupt 
cutoff of the proximal superior mesenteric artery (SMA), which is 
consistent with SMA embolism (arrow).
Clinical Manifestations
Abdominal pain out of proportion to physical findings is the 
classic presentation in patients with acute mesenteric ischemia 
and occurs following an embolic or thrombotic ischemic event 
of the SMA. Other manifestations include sudden onset of 
abdominal cramps in patients with underlying cardiac or ath-
erosclerotic disease, often associated with bloody diarrhea, as 
a result of mucosal sloughing secondary to ischemia. Fever, 
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distention are some common 
but nonspecific manifestations. Diffuse abdominal tenderness, 
rebound, and rigidity are late signs and usually indicate bowel 
infarction and necrosis.
Clinical manifestations of chronic mesenteric ischemia are 
more subtle due to the extensive collateral development. How-
ever, when intestinal blood flow is unable to meet the physio-
logic gastrointestinal demands, mesenteric insufficiency ensues. 
The classical symptoms include postprandial abdominal pain, 
food fear, and weight loss. Persistent nausea and occasionally 
diarrhea may coexist. Diagnosis remains challenging, and most 
of the patients will undergo an extensive and expensive gastro-
intestinal tract workup for the above symptoms prior to referral 
to a vascular service.
The typical patient who develops nonocclusive mesenteric 
ischemia is an elderly patient who has multiple comorbidities, 
such as congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction 
with cardiogenic shock, hypovolemic or hemorrhagic shock, 
sepsis, pancreatitis, and administration of digitalis or vasocon-
strictor agents such as epinephrine. Abdominal pain is only 
present in approximately 70% of these patients. When present, 
the pain is usually severe but may vary in location, character, 
and intensity. In the absence of abdominal pain, progressive 
abdominal distention with acidosis may be an early sign of isch-
emia and impending bowel infarction.
Abdominal pain due to narrowing of the origin of the CA 
may occur as a result of extrinsic compression or impingement 
by the median arcuate ligament (Fig. 23-39). This condition is 
known as celiac artery compression syndrome or median arcuate 
ligament syndrome. Angiographically, there is CA compression 
that augments with deep expiration and poststenotic dilatation. 
The celiac artery compression syndrome has been implicated 
in some variants of chronic mesenteric ischemia. Most patients 
are young females between 20 and 40 years of age. Abdominal 
symptoms are nonspecific, but the pain is localized in the upper 
abdomen, which may be precipitated by meals.
Diagnostic Evaluation
The differential diagnosis of acute mesenteric ischemia includes 
other causes of severe abdominal pain of acute onset, such as 
perforated viscus, intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, cholecys-
titis, and nephrolithiasis. Laboratory evaluation is neither sensi-
tive nor specific in distinguishing these various diagnoses. In 
the setting of mesenteric ischemia, complete blood count may 
reveal hemoconcentration and leukocytosis. Metabolic acidosis 
develops as a result of anaerobic metabolism. Elevated serum 
amylase may indicate a diagnosis of pancreatitis but is also com-
mon in the setting of intestinal infarction. Finally, increased lac-
tate levels, hyperkalemia, and azotemia may occur in the late 
stages of mesenteric ischemia.
Plain abdominal radiographs may provide helpful infor-
mation to exclude other causes of abdominal pain such as intes-
tinal obstruction, perforation, or volvulus, which may exhibit 
symptoms mimicking intestinal ischemia. Pneumoperitoneum, 
862
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
pneumatosis intestinalis, and gas in the portal vein may indicate 
infarcted bowel. In contrast, radiographic appearance of an ady-
namic ileus with a gasless abdomen is the most common finding 
in patients with acute mesenteric ischemia.
Upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, or barium radiogra-
phy does not provide any useful information when evaluating 
acute mesenteric ischemia. Moreover, barium enema is con-
traindicated if the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia is being 
considered. The intraluminal barium can obscure accurate visu-
alization of mesenteric circulation during angiography. In addi-
tion, intraperitoneal leakage of barium can occur in the setting 
of intestinal perforation, which can lead to added therapeutic 
challenges during mesenteric revascularization.
Diagnosis of chronic mesenteric ischemia can be more 
challenging. Usually prior to the evaluation by a vascular ser-
vice, the patients have undergone an extensive workup for the 
symptoms of chronic abdominal pain, weight loss, and anorexia. 
Rarely, the vascular surgeon is the first to encounter a patient 
with the above symptoms. In this situation, it is advisable to 
Figure 23-39.  A lateral projection of the magnetic resonance angi-
ography of the aorta showing a chronic compression of the celiac 
artery by the median arcuate ligament (arrow).
keep in mind that mesenteric ischemia is a rare entity and that a 
full diagnostic workup that should include CT scan of the abdo-
men and evaluation by gastroenterologist should be performed. 
Mesenteric occlusive disease may coexist with malignancy, and 
symptoms of mesenteric vessel stenosis may be the result of 
extrinsic compression by a tumor.
Duplex ultrasonography is a valuable noninvasive means 
of assessing the patency of the mesenteric vessels. Moneta and 
associates evaluated the use of duplex ultrasound in the diag-
nosis of mesenteric occlusive disease in a blinded prospective 
study.99,100 A peak systolic velocity in the SMA >275 cm/s dem-
onstrated a sensitivity of 92%, specificity of 96%, and overall 
accuracy of 96% for detecting >70% stenosis. The same authors 
found sensitivity and specificity of 87% and 82%, respectively, 
with an accuracy of 82% in predicting >70% celiac trunk ste-
nosis. Duplex has been successfully used for follow-up after 
open surgical reconstruction or endovascular treatment of the 
mesenteric vessels to assess recurrence of the disease. Finally, 
spiral CT with three-dimensional reconstruction (Fig. 23-40) 
and MRA (Fig. 23-41) have been promising in providing clear 
radiographic assessment of the mesenteric vessels.
The definitive diagnosis of mesenteric vascular disease is 
made by biplanar mesenteric arteriography, which should be 
performed promptly in any patient with suspected mesenteric 
occlusion. It typically shows occlusion or near-occlusion of the 
CA and SMA at or near their origins from the aorta. In most 
Figure 23-40.  Computed tomography angiogram of the abdomen 
with three-dimensional reconstruction provides a clear view of the 
celiac artery, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and inferior mes-
enteric artery (IMA).
863
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
cases, the IMA has been previously occluded secondary to dif-
fuse infrarenal aortic atherosclerosis. The differentiation of the 
different types of mesenteric arterial occlusion may be sug-
gested with biplanar mesenteric arteriogram. Mesenteric emboli 
typically lodge at the orifice of the middle colic artery, which 
creates a “meniscus sign” with an abrupt cutoff of a normal 
proximal SMA several centimeters from its origin on the aorta. 
Mesenteric thrombosis, in contrast, occurs at the most proximal 
SMA, which tapers off at 1 to 2 cm from its origin. In the case 
of chronic mesenteric occlusion, the appearance of collateral 
circulation is typically present. Nonocclusive mesenteric isch-
emia produces an arteriographic image of segmental mesenteric 
vasospasm with a relatively normal-appearing main SMA trunk 
(Fig. 23-42).
Figure 23-41.  A cross-sectional view of a magnetic resonance 
angiogram provides a clear view of the luminal patency of the supe-
rior mesenteric artery.
Figure 23-42.  Mesenteric arteriogram showing nonocclusive mes-
enteric ischemia as evidenced by diffuse spasm of intestinal arcades 
with poor filling of intramural vessels.
Mesenteric arteriography can also play a therapeutic role. 
Once the diagnosis of nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia is 
made on the arteriogram, an infusion catheter can be placed at 
the SMA orifice, and vasodilating agents, such as papaverine, 
can be administered intra-arterially. The papaverine infusion 
may be continued postoperatively to treat persistent vasospasm, 
a common occurrence following mesenteric reperfusion. Trans-
catheter thrombolytic therapy has little role in the management 
of thrombotic mesenteric occlusion. Although thrombolytic 
agents may transiently recannulate the occluded vessels, the 
underlying occlusive lesions require definitive treatment. Fur-
thermore, thrombolytic therapy typically requires a prolonged 
period of time to restore perfusion, during which the intestinal 
viability will be difficult to assess.
A word of caution would be appropriate here regarding 
patients with typical history of chronic intestinal angina who 
present with an acute abdomen and classical findings of peri-
toneal irritation. Arteriography is the gold standard for the 
diagnosis of mesenteric occlusive disease; however, it can be a 
time-consuming diagnostic modality. In this group of patients, 
immediate exploration for assessment of intestinal viability and 
vascular reconstruction is the best choice.
Surgical Repair
Acute Embolic Mesenteric Ischemia.  Initial management of 
patients with acute mesenteric ischemia includes fluid resus-
citation and systemic anticoagulation with heparin to prevent 
further thrombus propagation. Significant metabolic acidosis 
not responding to fluid resuscitation should be corrected with 
sodium bicarbonate. A central venous catheter, peripheral arte-
rial catheter, and Foley catheter should be placed for hemody-
namic status monitoring. Appropriate antibiotics are given prior 
to surgical exploration. The operative management of acute 
mesenteric ischemia is dictated by the cause of the occlusion. 
It is helpful to obtain a preoperative mesenteric arteriogram to 
confirm the diagnosis and to plan appropriate treatment options. 
However, the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia frequently can-
not be established prior to surgical exploration, and therefore, 
patients in a moribund condition with acute abdominal symp-
toms should undergo immediate surgical exploration, avoiding 
the delay required to perform an arteriogram.
The primary goal of surgical treatment in embolic mes-
enteric ischemia is to restore arterial perfusion with removal of 
the embolus from the vessel. The abdomen is explored through 
a midline incision, which often reveals variable degrees of 
intestinal ischemia from the mid-jejunum to the ascending or 
transverse colon. The transverse colon is lifted superiorly, and 
the small intestine is reflected toward the right upper quad-
rant. The SMA is approached at the root of the small bowel 
mesentery, usually as it emerges from beneath the pancreas 
to cross over the junction of the third and fourth portions of 
the duodenum. Alternatively, the SMA can be approached by 
incising the retroperitoneum lateral to the fourth portion of the 
duodenum, which is rotated medially to expose the SMA. Once 
the proximal SMA is identified and controlled with vascular 
clamps, a transverse arteriotomy is made to extract the embolus, 
using standard balloon embolectomy catheters. In the event the 
embolus has lodged more distally, exposure of the distal SMA 
may be obtained in the root of the small bowel mesentery by 
isolating individual jejunal and ileal branches to allow a more 
comprehensive thromboembolectomy. Following the restora-
tion of SMA flow, an assessment of intestinal viability must be 
864
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
made, and nonviable bowel must be resected. Several methods 
have been described to evaluate the viability of the intestine, 
which include intraoperative intravenous fluorescein injection 
and inspection with a Wood’s lamp, and Doppler assessment of 
antimesenteric intestinal arterial pulsations. A second-look pro-
cedure should be considered in many patients and is performed 
24 to 48 hours following embolectomy. The goal of the proce-
dure is reassessment of the extent of bowel viability, which may 
not be obvious immediately following the initial embolectomy. 
If nonviable intestine is evident in the second-look procedure, 
additional bowel resections should be performed at that time.
Acute Thrombotic Mesenteric Ischemia.  Thrombotic mes-
enteric ischemia usually involves a severely atherosclerotic 
vessel, typically the proximal CA and SMA. Therefore, these 
patients require a reconstructive procedure to the SMA to bypass 
the proximal occlusive lesion and restore adequate mesenteric 
flow. The saphenous vein is the graft material of choice, and 
prosthetic materials should be avoided in patients with nonviable 
bowel, due to the risk of bacterial contamination if resection of 
necrotic intestine is performed. The bypass graft may originate 
from either the aorta or iliac artery. Advantages from using the 
supraceliac infradiaphragmatic aorta as opposed to the infrarenal 
aorta as the inflow vessel include a smoother graft configuration 
with less chance of kinking and the absence of atherosclerotic 
disease in the supraceliac aortic segment. Exposure of the supra-
celiac aorta is technically more challenging and time consuming 
than that of the iliac artery, which unless calcified is an appropri-
ate inflow. Patency rates are similar regardless of inflow vessel 
choice.101
Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia.  The therapeutic goal in 
patients with chronic mesenteric ischemia is to revascularize 
mesenteric circulation and prevent the development of bowel 
infarction. Mesenteric occlusive disease can be treated suc-
cessfully by either transaortic endarterectomy or mesenteric 
artery bypass. Transaortic endarterectomy is indicated for 
ostial lesions of patent CA and SMA. A left medial rota-
tion is performed, and the aorta and the mesenteric branches 
are exposed. A lateral aortotomy is performed encompassing 
both the CA and SMA orifices. The visceral arteries must be 
adequately mobilized so that the termination site of endarterec-
tomy can be visualized. Otherwise, an intimal flap may develop, 
which can lead to early thrombosis or distal embolization.
For occlusive lesions located 1 to 2 cm distal to the mes-
enteric origin, mesenteric artery bypass should be performed. 
Multiple mesenteric arteries are typically involved in chronic 
mesenteric ischemia, and both the CA and SMA should be 
revascularized whenever possible. In general, bypass grafting 
may be performed either antegrade from the supraceliac aorta 
or retrograde from either the infrarenal aorta or iliac artery. 
Both autogenous saphenous vein grafts and prosthetic grafts 
have been used with satisfactory and equivalent success. An 
antegrade bypass also can be performed using a small-caliber 
bifurcated graft from the supraceliac aorta to both the CA and 
SMA, which yields an excellent long-term result.101
Celiac Artery Compression Syndrome.  The decision to 
intervene in patients with CA compression syndrome should be 
based on both an appropriate symptom complex and the find-
ing of celiac artery compression in the absence of other find-
ings to explain the symptoms. The treatment goal is to release 
the ligamentous structure that compresses the proximal CA 
and to correct any persistent stricture by bypass grafting. Some 
surgeons advocate careful celiac plexus sympathectomy in addi-
tion to arcuate ligament decompression to ensure good treat-
ment outcome.102 The patient should be cautioned that relief 
of the celiac compression cannot be guaranteed to relieve the 
symptoms. In a number of reports on endovascular management 
of chronic mesenteric ischemia, the presence of CA compres-
sion syndrome has been identified as a major factor of techni-
cal failure and recurrence. Therefore, angioplasty and stenting 
should not be undertaken if extrinsic compression of the CA by 
the median arcuate ligament is suspected based on preoperative 
imaging studies. Open surgical treatment should be performed 
instead.103,104 A recent review of laparoscopic and open median 
arcuate ligament release cases in the literature by Jimenez and 
colleagues showed both approaches to be effective in symptom 
relief (85%), with no difference in late symptom recurrence rate 
(6.8% in the open group and 5.7% in the laparoscopic group).105
Endovascular Treatment
Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia.  Endovascular treatment of 
mesenteric artery stenosis or short segment occlusion by bal-
loon dilatation or stent placement represents a less invasive 
therapeutic alternative to open surgical intervention, particu-
larly in patients whose medical comorbidities place them at a 
high operative risk category. Endovascular therapy is also suited 
in patients with recurrent disease or anastomotic stenosis fol-
lowing previous open mesenteric revascularization. Prophy-
lactic mesenteric revascularization is rarely performed in the 
asymptomatic patient undergoing an aortic procedure for other 
indications.106 However, the natural history of untreated chronic 
mesenteric ischemia may justify revascularization in some mini-
mally symptomatic or asymptomatic patients if the operative 
risks are acceptable, since the first clinical presentation may be 
acute intestinal ischemia in as many as 50% of the patients, with 
a mortality rate that ranges from 15% to 70%.106 This is particu-
larly true when the SMA is involved. Mesenteric angioplasty 
and stenting is particularly suitable for this patient subgroup 
given its low morbidity and mortality. Because of the limited 
experience with stent use in mesenteric vessels, appropriate 
indications for primary stent placement have not been clearly 
defined. Guidelines generally include calcified ostial stenoses, 
high-grade eccentric stenoses, chronic occlusions, and signifi-
cant residual stenosis >30% or the presence of dissection after 
angioplasty. Restenosis after PTA is also an indication for stent 
placement.107
Acute Mesenteric Ischemia.  Catheter-directed thrombo-
lytic therapy is a potentially useful treatment modality for acute 
mesenteric ischemia, which can be initiated with intra-arterial 
delivery of thrombolytic agent into the mesenteric thrombus 
at the time of diagnostic angiography. Various thrombolytic 
medications, including urokinase (Abbokinase; Abbott Labo-
ratory, North Chicago, IL) or recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator (Activase; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA), have 
been reported to be successful in a small series of case reports. 
Catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy has a higher probabil-
ity of restoring mesenteric blood flow success when performed 
within 12 hours of symptom onset. Successful resolution of 
a mesenteric thrombus will facilitate the identification of the 
underlying mesenteric occlusive disease process. As a result, 
subsequent operative mesenteric revascularization or mesen-
teric balloon angioplasty and stenting may be performed 
3
865
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
electively to correct the mesenteric stenosis. There are two main 
drawbacks with regard to thrombolytic therapy in mesenteric 
ischemia. Percutaneous catheter-directed thrombolysis does not 
allow the possibility to inspect the potentially ischemic intes-
tine following restoration of the mesenteric flow. Additionally, 
a prolonged period of time may be necessary in order to achieve 
successful catheter-directed thrombolysis, due in part to serial 
angiographic surveillance to document thrombus resolution. An 
incomplete or unsuccessful thrombolysis may lead to delayed 
operative revascularization, which may further necessitate 
bowel resection for irreversible intestinal necrosis. Therefore, 
catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy for acute mesenteric 
ischemia should only be considered in selected patients under a 
closely scrutinized clinical protocol.
Nonocclusive Mesenteric Ischemia.  The treatment of non-
occlusive mesenteric ischemia is primarily pharmacologic with 
selective mesenteric arterial catheterization followed by infu-
sion of vasodilatory agents, such as tolazoline or papaverine. 
Once the diagnosis is made on the mesenteric arteriography (see 
Fig. 23-42), intra-arterial papaverine is given at a dose of 30 to 
60 mg/h. This must be coupled with the cessation of other vaso-
constricting agents. Concomitant intravenous heparin should be 
administered to prevent thrombosis in the cannulated vessels. 
Treatment strategy thereafter is dependent on the patient’s clini-
cal response to the vasodilator therapy. If abdominal symptoms 
improve, mesenteric arteriography should be repeated to docu-
ment the resolution of vasospasm. The patient’s hemodynamic 
status must be carefully monitored during papaverine infusion 
as significant hypotension can develop in the event that the infu-
sion catheter migrates into the aorta, which can lead to systemic 
circulation of papaverine. Surgical exploration is indicated if the 
patient develops signs of continued bowel ischemia or infarction 
as evidenced by rebound tenderness or involuntary guarding. 
In these circumstances, papaverine infusion should be contin-
ued intraoperatively and postoperatively. The operating room 
should be kept as warm as possible, and warm irrigation fluid 
and laparotomy pads should be used to prevent further intestinal 
vasoconstriction during exploration.
Techniques of Endovascular Interventions.  To perform 
endovascular mesenteric revascularization, intraluminal 
access is performed via a femoral or brachial artery approach. 
Once an introducer sheath is placed in the femoral artery, an 
anteroposterior and lateral aortogram just below the level of 
the diaphragm is obtained with a pigtail catheter to identify 
the origin of the CA and SMA. Initial catheterization of the 
mesenteric artery can be performed using a variety of selec-
tive angled catheters, which include the RDC, Cobra-2, Sim-
mons I (Boston Scientific/Meditech, Natick, MA), or SOS 
Omni catheter (Angiodynamics, Queensbury, NY). Once the 
mesenteric artery is cannulated, systemic heparin (5000 IU) is 
administered intravenously. A selective mesenteric angiogram 
is then performed to identify the diseased segment, which is 
followed by the placement of a 0.035-inch or less traumatic 
0.014- to 0.018-inch guidewire to cross the stenotic lesion. 
Once the guidewire is placed across the stenosis, the catheter 
is carefully advanced over the guidewire across the lesion. In 
the event that the mesenteric artery is severely angulated as 
it arises from the aorta, a second stiffer guidewire (Amplatz 
or Rosen Guidewire, Boston Scientific) may be exchanged 
through the catheter to facilitate the placement of a 6-French 
guiding sheath (Pinnacle, Boston Scientific).
With the image intensifier angled in a lateral position 
to fully visualize the proximal mesenteric segment, a balloon 
angioplasty is advanced over the guidewire through the guiding 
sheath and positioned across the stenosis. The balloon diameter 
should be chosen based on the vessel size of the adjacent nor-
mal mesenteric vessel. Once balloon angioplasty is completed, a 
postangioplasty angiogram is necessary to document the proce-
dural result. Radiographic evidence of either residual stenosis or 
mesenteric artery dissection constitutes suboptimal angioplasty 
results that warrants mesenteric stent placement. Moreover, ath-
erosclerotic involvement of the proximal mesenteric artery or 
vessel orifice should be treated with balloon-expandable stent 
placement. These stents can be placed over a low-profile 0.014- 
or 0.018-inch guidewire system. It is preferable to deliver the 
balloon-mounted stent through a guiding sheath, which is posi-
tioned just proximal to the mesenteric orifice while the balloon-
mounted stent is advanced across the stenosis. The stent is next 
deployed by expanding the angioplasty balloon to its designated 
inflation pressure. The balloon is then deflated and carefully 
withdrawn through the guiding sheath.
Completion angiogram is performed by hand injecting a 
small volume of contrast though the guiding sheath. It is critical 
to maintain the guidewire access until satisfactory completion 
angiogram is obtained. If the completion angiogram reveals sub-
optimal radiographic results, such as residual stenosis or dissec-
tion, additional catheter-based intervention can be performed 
through the same guidewire. These interventions may include 
repeat balloon angioplasty for residual stenosis or additional 
stent placement for mesenteric artery dissection. During the 
procedure, intra-arterial infusion of papaverine or nitroglycer-
ine can be used to decrease vasospasm. Administration of anti-
platelet agents is also recommended for at least 6 months or 
even indefinitely if other risk factors of cardiovascular disease 
are present.
Complications of Endovascular Treatment.  Complica-
tions are not common and rarely become life threatening. These 
include access site thrombosis, hematomas, and infection. Dis-
section can occur during PTA and is managed with placement 
of a stent. Balloon-mounted stents are preferred over the self-
expanding ones because of the higher radial force and the more 
precise placement. Distal embolization has also been reported, 
but it never resulted in acute intestinal ischemia, likely due to 
the rich network of collaterals already developed.108
Clinical Results of Interventions  
for Mesenteric Ischemia
The first successful percutaneous angioplasty of the SMA was 
reported in 1980.109 Since 1995, multiple series and scattered 
case reports have reported results from endovascular manage-
ment of mesenteric occlusive disease.101,108 A literature review 
by AbuRahma and colleagues in 2003 showed that endovascu-
lar intervention had an overall technical success rate of 91%, 
early and late pain relief rates of 84% and 71%, respectively, 
and 30-day morbidity and mortality rates of 16.4% and 4.3%, 
respectively. The average patency was 63% during an average 
26-month follow-up.108
In our review of the literature from published series since 
1995, restenosis developed in 22% of patients during 24.5 
months of average follow-up.101 The long-term clinical relief 
without reintervention was 82%. Among the patients who 
experienced a technical failure, 15 were ultimately diagnosed 
866
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with median arcuate ligament syndrome and underwent suc-
cessful surgical treatment, an observation that emphasizes the 
need for careful patient selection. Interestingly, the addition of 
selective stenting after PTA that was started in 1998, while it 
slightly increases the technical success rate, is not correlated 
with any substantial overall clinical benefit or improved long-
term patency rates.
In contrast to endovascular treatment, open surgical tech-
niques have achieved an immediate clinical success rate that 
approaches 100%, a surgical mortality rate of 0% to 17%, and 
an operative morbidity rate that ranges from 19% to 54% in a 
number of different series.101,104,106 AbuRahma and colleagues 
reported their experience of endovascular interventions of 
22 patients with symptomatic mesenteric ischemia due to either 
SMA or CA stenosis.108 They noted an excellent initial technical 
and clinical success rates, which were 96% (23 of 24 patients) 
and 95% (21 of 22 patients), respectively, with no periopera-
tive mortality or major morbidity. During a mean follow-up 
of 26 months (range, 1–54 months), the primary late clinical 
success rate was 61%, and freedom from recurrent stenosis was 
30%. The freedom from recurrent stenosis rates at 1, 2, 3, and 
4 years were 65%, 47%, 39%, and 13%, respectively. The 
authors concluded that mesenteric stenting, which provides 
excellent early results, is associated with a relative high inci-
dence of late restenosis.108
Several studies have attempted to compare the endovas-
cular with the standard open surgical approach.110,111 The results 
of the open surgery appear to be more durable, but it tends to 
be associated with higher morbidity and mortality rates and an 
overall longer hospital stay. In one study that compared the clin-
ical outcome of open revascularization with percutaneous stent-
ing for patients with chronic mesenteric ischemia, 28 patients 
underwent endovascular treatment and 85 patients underwent 
open mesenteric bypass grafting.111 With both patient cohorts 
having similar baseline comorbidities and symptom duration, 
there was no difference in early in-hospital complication or 
mortality rates. Moreover, both groups had similar 3-year cumu-
lative recurrent stenosis and mortality rates. However, patients 
treated with mesenteric stenting had a significantly higher inci-
dence of recurrent symptoms. The authors concluded that opera-
tive mesenteric revascularization should be offered to patients 
with low surgical risk.111
Based on the above results one could argue that mesen-
teric angioplasty and stenting demonstrate an inferior technical 
and clinical success rate. Long-term patency rates appear to also 
be superior with the open technique. There is a general con-
sensus, however, that the endovascular approach is associated 
with lower morbidity and mortality rates and is therefore more 
suitable for high-risk patients. One should also keep in mind 
that practices representing standard of care for stent placement 
today were absent in the early era of endovascular experience. 
These include perioperative heparinization and short-term anti-
platelet therapy, use of stents with higher radial force, routine 
use of postoperative surveillance with arterial duplex and early 
reintervention to prevent a high-grade stenosis from progressing 
to occlusion, and placement of drug-eluting stents. One such 
example is a recent nonrandomized study to compare the out-
comes of mesenteric angioplasty using covered stents or bare 
metal stents in patients undergoing primary or reintervention 
for chronic mesenteric ischemia. The study showed that covered 
stents are associated with less restenosis (18% vs. 47%), symp-
tom recurrence (18% vs. 50%), and reintervention (9% vs. 44%) 
at 24 months and better primary patency at 3 years (92% vs. 
52%) than bare metal stents in the primary intervention group.112 
Similar results were found in the reintervention group as well.
RENAL ARTERY DISEASE
Obstructive lesions of the renal artery can produce hypertension, 
resulting in a condition known as renovascular hypertension, 
which is the most common form of hypertension amenable to 
therapeutic intervention, and affects 5% to 10% of all hyperten-
sive patients in the United States.113 Patients with renovascular 
hypertension are at an increased risk for irreversible end-organ 
dysfunction, including permanent kidney damage, if inadequate 
pharmacologic therapies are used to control the blood pressure. 
The majority of patients with renal artery obstructive disease 
have vascular lesions of either atherosclerotic disease or fibro-
dysplasia involving the renal arteries. The proximal portion of 
the renal artery represents the most common location for the 
development of atherosclerotic disease. It is well established 
that renal artery intervention, either by surgical or endovascular 
revascularization, provides an effective treatment for controlling 
renovascular hypertension as well as preserving renal function. 
The decision for intervention is complex and needs to consider 
a variety of anatomic, physiologic, and clinical features, unique 
for the individual patient.
Etiology
Approximately 80% of all renal artery occlusive lesions are 
caused by atherosclerosis, which typically involves a short seg-
ment of the renal artery ostia and represents spillover disease 
from a severely atheromatous aorta (Fig. 23-43).114 Atheroscle-
rotic lesions are bilateral in two thirds of patients. Individuals 
with this disease commonly present during the sixth decade of 
life. Men are affected twice as frequently as women. Atheroscle-
rotic lesions in other territories such as the coronary, mesenteric, 
cerebrovascular, and peripheral arterial circulation are common. 
When a unilateral lesion is present, the disease process equally 
affects the right and left renal arteries.115
The second most common cause of renal artery stenosis is 
FMD, which accounts for 20% of cases and is most frequently 
encountered in young, often multiparous women.116 FMD of 
Figure 23-43.  Occlusive disease of the renal artery typically 
involves the renal ostium (arrow) as a spillover plaque extension 
from aortic atherosclerosis.
867
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
the renal artery represents a heterogeneous group of lesions that 
can produce histopathologic changes in the intima, media, or 
adventitia. The most common variety consists of medial fibro-
plasia, in which thickened fibromuscular ridges alternate with 
attenuated media producing the classic angiographic “string of 
beads” appearance (Figs. 23-44 and 23-45). The cause of medial 
fibroplasia remains unclear. Most common theories involve a 
modification of arterial smooth muscle cells in response to 
Figure 23-44.  Abdominal aortogram reveals a left renal artery 
fibromuscular dysplasia (arrows) with a characteristic “string of 
beads” appearance.
Figure 23-45.  Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal 
aorta reveals the presence of a left renal artery fibromuscular dys-
plasia (arrows).
estrogenic stimuli during the reproductive years, unusual trac-
tion forces on affected vessels, and mural ischemia from impair-
ment of vasa vasorum blood flow.116 Fibromuscular hyperplasia 
usually affects the distal two thirds of the main renal artery, 
and the right renal artery is affected more frequently than the 
left. Other less common causes of renal artery stenosis include 
renal artery aneurysm (compressing the adjacent normal renal 
artery), arteriovenous malformations, neurofibromatosis, renal 
artery dissections, renal artery trauma, Takayasu’s arteritis, and 
renal arteriovenous fistula.
Clinical Manifestations
Renovascular hypertension is the most common sequela of renal 
artery occlusive disease. Its prevalence varies from 2% in patients 
with diastolic blood pressure greater than 100 mmHg to almost 
30% in those with diastolic blood pressure over 125 mmHg.114 
Clinical features that may indicate the presence of renovascular 
hypertension include the following: (a) systolic and diastolic 
upper abdominal bruits; (b) diastolic hypertension of greater 
than 115 mmHg; (c) rapid onset of hypertension after the age 
of 50 years; (d) a sudden worsening of mild to moderate essen-
tial hypertension; (e) hypertension that is difficult to control with 
three or more antihypertensives; (f) development of renal insuf-
ficiency after angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors; and (g) 
development of hypertension during childhood.
All patients with significant hypertension, especially ele-
vated diastolic blood pressure, must be considered as suspect 
for renovascular disease. Young adults with hypertension have a 
great deal to gain by avoiding lifelong treatment if renovascular 
hypertension is diagnosed and corrected. Appropriate diagnostic 
studies and intervention must be timely instituted to detect the 
possibility of renovascular hypertension in patients with pri-
mary hypertension who present for clinical evaluation.
Diagnostic Evaluation
The diagnostic requisites for renovascular hypertension include 
both hypertension and renal artery stenosis. Impairment of the 
renal function may coexist, although the occurrence of renal 
insufficiency prior to the development of hypertension is uncom-
mon. Nearly all diagnostic studies for renovascular hypertension 
evaluate either the anatomic stenosis or renal parenchymal dys-
function attributed to the stenosis. The following section pro-
vides an overview of the strengths and limitations of the most 
common tests used in the diagnostic evaluation of the patient 
with suspected renovascular hypertension prior to intervention.
Captopril renal scanning is a functional study that assesses 
renal perfusion before and after administration of the angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor captopril. Captopril inhibits the 
secretion of angiotensin II. Through this mechanism, it reduces 
the efferent arteriole vasoconstriction and, as a result, the glo-
merular filtration rate (GFR). The test consists of a baseline 
renal scan and a second renal scan after captopril administra-
tion. A positive result indicates that captopril administration (a) 
increases the time to peak activity to more than 11 minutes or 
(b) the GFR ratio between sides increases to greater than 1.5:1 
compared to a normal baseline scan. Significant parenchymal 
disease limits the reliability of this study.
Renal artery duplex ultrasonography is a noninvasive test 
of assessing renal artery stenosis both by visualization of the 
vessel and measurement of the effect of stenosis on blood flow 
velocity and waveforms. The presence of a severe renal artery 
stenosis correlates with peak systolic velocities of greater than 
868
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
180 cm/s and the ratio of these velocities to those in the aorta of 
greater than 3.5 (Table 23-11). Renal artery duplex is a techni-
cally demanding exam, requiring a substantial amount of opera-
tor expertise. In addition, the presence of bowel gas and obesity 
make the exam difficult to perform and interpret. However, in 
experienced hands and with appropriate patient selection, it can 
be a high-yield exam and is typically the initial screening test for 
patients with suspected renal artery occlusive disease.
Selective catheterization of the renal vein via a femoral 
vein approach for assessing renin activity is a more invasive test 
of detecting the physiologic sequelae of renal artery stenosis. If 
unilateral disease is present, the affected kidney should secrete 
high levels of renin while the contralateral kidney should have 
low renin production. A ratio between the two kidneys, or the 
renal vein renin ratio (RVRR), of greater than 1.5 is indicative 
of functionally important renovascular hypertension, and it also 
predicts a favorable response from renovascular revasculariza-
tion. Since this study assesses the ratio between the two kidneys, 
it is not useful in patients with bilateral disease because both 
kidneys may secrete abnormally elevated renin levels.
The renal:systemic renin index (RSRI) is calculated by 
subtracting systemic renin activity from individual renal vein 
renin activity and dividing the remainder by systemic renin 
activity. This value represents the contribution of each kidney 
to renin production. In the absence of renal artery stenosis, the 
renal vein renin activity from each kidney is typically 24% or 
0.24 higher than the systemic level. As the result, the total of 
both kidneys’ renin activity is usually 48% greater than the sys-
temic activity, a value that represents a steady state of renal 
renin activity. The RSRI of the affected kidney in patients with 
renovascular hypertension is greater than 0.24. In the case of 
unilateral renal artery stenosis with normal contralateral kid-
ney, the increase in ipsilateral renin release is normally balanced 
by suppression of the contralateral kidney renin production, 
which results in a drop in its RSRI to less than 0.24. Bilateral 
renal artery disease may negate the contralateral compensatory 
response, and the autonomous release of renin from both dis-
eased kidneys may result in the sum of the individual RSRIs 
to be considerably greater than 0.48. The prognostic value of 
RSRI remains limited in that approximately 10% of patients 
with favorable clinical response following renovascular revas-
cularization do not exhibit contralateral renin suppression. As 
a result, the use of RSRI must be applied with caution in the 
management of patients with renovascular hypertension.
MRA with intravenous gadolinium contrast enhancement 
has been increasingly used for renal artery imaging because of its 
ability to provide high-resolution images (Figs. 23-46 and 23-47) 
Table 23-11
Renal duplex diagnostic criteria
Renal Artery Diameter 
Reduction
Renal Artery 
PSV
RAR
Normal
<180 cm/s
<3.5
<60%
≥180 cm/s
<3.5
≥60%
≥180 cm/s
≥3.5
Occlusion
No signal
No signal
PSV = peak systolic velocity; RAR = renal-to-aortic ratio.
while using a minimally nephrotoxic agent. Flow void may be 
inaccurately interpreted as occlusion or stenosis in MRA. There-
fore, unless the quality of the image analysis software is superior, 
MRA should be interpreted with caution and used in conjunction 
with other modalities prior to making plans for operative or endo-
vascular treatment.
Figure 23-46.  Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal 
aorta reveals bilateral normal renal arteries.
Figure 23-47.  Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal 
aorta reveals bilateral ostial renal artery stenosis (arrows).
869
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
DSA remains the gold standard to assess renal artery 
occlusive disease. A flush aortogram is performed first so that 
any accessory renal arteries can be detected and the origins of 
all the renal arteries are adequately displayed. The presence of 
collateral vessels circumventing a renal artery stenosis strongly 
supports the hemodynamic importance of the stenosis. A pres-
sure gradient of 10 mmHg or greater is necessary for collateral 
vessel development, which is also associated with activation of 
the renin-angiotensin cascade.
Treatment Indications
The therapeutic goals in patients with renovascular disease 
include: (a) improved blood pressure control, in order to prevent 
end-organ damage on systems such as the cerebral, coronary, 
pulmonary, and peripheral circulations; and (b) preservation and 
possibly improvement of the renal function (Table 23-12).
The indications for endovascular treatment for renal artery 
occlusive disease include 70% or greater stenosis of one or both 
renal arteries and at least one of the following clinical criteria:
•	 	 Inability to adequately control hypertension despite appro-
priate antihypertensive regimen.
•	 	 Chronic renal insufficiency related to bilateral renal 
artery occlusive disease or stenosis to a solitary func-
tioning kidney.
•	 	 Dialysis-dependent renal failure in a patient with renal 
artery stenosis but without another definite cause of end-
stage renal disease.
•	 	 Recurrent congestive heart failure or flash pulmonary 
edema not attributable to active coronary ischemia.
Prior to 1990, the most common treatment modality in 
patients with renal artery occlusive disease is surgical revascu-
larization, with either renal artery bypass grafting or renal artery 
endarterectomy. The advancement of endovascular therapy in 
the past decade has led to various minimally invasive treatment 
Table 23-12
Indications for renal artery revascularization
Angiography Criteria
•  Documented renal artery stenosis (>70% diameter 
reduction)
•  Fibromuscular dysplasia lesion
•  Pressure gradient >20 mmHg
•  Affected/unaffected kidney renin ratio >1.5 to 1
Clinical Criteria
•  Refractory or rapidly progressive hypertension
•  Hypertension associated with flash pulmonary edema 
without coronary artery disease
•  Rapidly progressive deterioration in renal function
•  Intolerance to antihypertensive medications
•  Chronic renal insufficiency related to bilateral renal artery 
occlusive disease or stenosis to a solitary functioning 
kidney
•  Dialysis-dependent renal failure in a patient with renal 
artery stenosis but without another definite cause of end-
stage renal disease
•  Recurrent congestive heart failure or flash pulmonary 
edema not attributable to active coronary ischemia
strategies such as renal artery balloon angioplasty or stenting to 
control hypertension or to preserve renal function.
Surgical Reconstruction
The typical approach for surgical renal artery revasculariza-
tion involves a midline xiphoid-to-pubis incision. The posterior 
peritoneum is incised, and the duodenum is mobilized to the 
right, starting at the ligament of Treitz. The left renal hilum 
can be exposed by extending the retroperitoneal dissection to 
the left along the avascular plane along the inferior border of 
the pancreas. Mobilization of the left renal vein is essential in 
these cases and can be achieved by dividing the gonadal, ilio-
lumbar, and adrenal veins. The proximal portion of the right 
renal artery can be exposed through the base of the mesentery 
by retraction of the left renal vein cephalad and the vena cava 
to the right. Accessing the most distal portion of the right renal 
artery requires a Kocher maneuver and duodenal mobiliza-
tion. Another approach useful for treating bilateral renal artery 
lesions involves mobilization of the entire small bowel and the 
right colon, with a dissection that starts at the ligament of Treitz 
and proceeds toward the cecum and then along the line of Todd 
in the right paracolic gutter. Simultaneous dissection along the 
inferior border of the pancreas provides additional visualization 
of the left renal artery. Finally, division of the diaphragmatic 
crura that encircle the suprarenal aorta may sometimes be neces-
sary to achieve suprarenal clamping.
Types of Surgical Reconstruction.  Aortorenal bypass is 
the most frequently performed reconstruction of ostial occlu-
sive renal artery disease. After proximal and distal control is 
obtained, an elliptical segment of the aorta is excised, and the 
proximal anastomosis is performed in end-to-side fashion. 
Autologous vein is the preferred conduit. If the vein is not suit-
able, then prosthetic material can be used. An end-to-end anas-
tomosis is then performed between the conduit of choice and 
the renal artery using either a 6-0 or 7-0 polypropylene suture. 
The length of the arteriotomy needs to be at least three times the 
diameter of the renal artery to prevent anastomotic restenosis. In 
the event that the surgeon plans to perform a side-to-side anasto-
mosis between the conduit and the renal artery, this is performed 
first, and the aortic anastomosis follows.
Endarterectomy, either transrenal or transaortic, is an alter-
native to bypass for short ostial lesions or in patients with mul-
tiple renal arteries. The transrenal endarterectomy is performed 
with a transverse longitudinal incision on the aorta that extends 
into the diseased renal artery. After plaque removal, the arteri-
otomy is closed with a prosthetic patch. Transaortic endarterec-
tomy is well suited for patients with multiple renal arteries and 
short ostial lesions. The aorta is opened longitudinally and aortic 
sleeve endarterectomy is performed, followed by eversion end-
arterectomy of the renal arteries. Adequate mobilization of the 
renal arteries is essential for a safe and complete endarterectomy.
Hepatorenal and splenorenal bypass are alternative options 
of revascularization for patients who might not tolerate aortic 
clamping or for those with calcified aorta that precludes ade-
quate control. For hepatorenal bypass, a right subcostal inci-
sion is used, and the hepatic artery is exposed with an incision 
in the lesser omentum. A Kocher maneuver is performed, the 
right renal vein is identified and mobilized, and the right renal 
artery is identified and controlled posteriorly to the vein. Greater 
saphenous vein is the conduit of choice. The anastomosis is per-
formed end-to-side with the common hepatic artery, and end-
to-end with the renal artery anterior to the inferior vena cava. 
870
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The splenorenal bypass is performed via a left subcostal inci-
sion. The splenic artery is mobilized from the lesser sac, brought 
through a retropancreatic plane, and anastomosed end-to-end to 
the renal artery.
Reimplantation of the renal artery is an attractive option 
of reconstruction in children or in adults with ostial lesions. A 
redundant renal artery is a prerequisite for the procedure. After 
mobilization, the artery is transected and spatulated, eversion 
endarterectomy is performed if necessary, and an end-to-side 
anastomosis with the aorta is created.
Clinical Results of Surgical Repair
Results reflect the need for performance of renal artery bypass 
in high-volume and experienced centers. In a review from a 
large tertiary center, 92% of the patients with nonatherosclerotic 
vascular disease had improvement in hypertension, but only 
43% were completely cured and taken off antihypertensives.117 
Patients younger than age 45 fair better, with a cure rate of 68% 
and improvement rate of 32%. In patients with atherosclerotic 
renal artery disease, the cure rate was even smaller (12%), and 
the overall response to hypertension rate was 85%. The opera-
tive mortality rates were 3.1% and 0% in the atherosclerotic and 
nonatherosclerotic groups, respectively.
Renal function improvement occurs within the first week 
of the operation in approximately two thirds of patients. A pro-
gressive decrease in the GFR is seen after this initial improve-
ment, but the rate of decrease is less compared with patients 
who did not respond at all to operative intervention. Up to three 
quarters of patients were permanently removed from dialysis in 
a large series.118 Favorable response of renal function to revas-
cularization improves overall survival.
Endovascular Treatment
Endovascular treatment of renal artery occlusive disease was 
first introduced by Grüntzig who successfully dilated a renal 
artery stenosis using a balloon catheter technique. This tech-
nique requires passage of a guidewire under fluoroscopic control 
typically from a femoral artery approach to across the stenosis 
in the renal artery. A balloon dilating catheter is passed over 
the guidewire and positioned within the area of stenosis and 
inflated to produce a controlled disruption of the arterial wall. 
Alternatively, a balloon-mounted expandable stent can be used 
to primarily dilate the renal artery stenosis. Completion angiog-
raphy is usually performed to assess the immediate results. The 
technical aspect of an endovascular renal artery revasculariza-
tion is discussed below.
Techniques of Renal Artery Angioplasty and Stenting.  
Access to the renal artery for endovascular intervention is typi-
cally performed via a femoral artery approach, although a bra-
chial artery approach can be considered in the event of severe 
aortoiliac occlusive disease, aortoiliac aneurysm, or severe cau-
dal renal artery angulation. Once an introducer sheath is placed 
in the femoral artery, an aortogram is performed with a pigtail 
catheter placed in the suprarenal aorta. Additional oblique views 
are frequently necessary to more precisely visualize the orifice 
of the stenosed renal artery and thoroughly assess the presence 
of accessory renal arteries. Noniodinated contrast agents, such 
as carbon dioxide and gadolinium, can be used in endovascular 
renal intervention in patients with renal dysfunction or history 
of allergic reaction.
After systemic heparinization, catheterization of the renal 
artery can be performed using a variety of selective angled 
catheters, including the RDC, Cobra-2, Simmons I, or SOS 
Omni catheter. A selective renal angiogram is then performed 
to confirm position, and the lesion is crossed with either 0.035-
inch or a 0.018- to 0.014-inch guidewires. It is important to 
maintain the distal wire position without movement in the ter-
tiary renal branches during guiding sheath placement to reduce 
the possibility of parenchymal perforation and spasm. A guiding 
sheath or a guiding catheter is then advanced at the orifice of the 
renal artery and provides a secure access for balloon and stent 
deployment.
Balloon angioplasty is performed with a balloon sized to 
the diameter of the normal renal artery adjacent to the stenosis. 
Choosing a balloon with diameter 4 mm is a reasonable first 
choice. The luminal diameter of the renal artery can be further 
assessed by comparing it to the fully inflated balloon. Such a 
comparison may provide a reference guide to determine whether 
renal artery dilatation with a larger diameter angioplasty balloon 
is necessary.
Once balloon angioplasty of the renal artery is completed, 
an angiogram is performed to document the procedural result. 
Radiographic evidence of either residual stenosis or renal artery 
dissection constitutes suboptimal angioplasty results, which 
warrants an immediate renal artery stent placement. Moreover, 
atherosclerotic involvement of the very proximal renal artery 
that involves the vessel orifice typically requires stent place-
ment. A balloon-expandable stent is typically used and is posi-
tioned in such a way that it protrudes into the aorta by 1 to 2 mm. 
The size of the stent is determined by the size of the renal artery, 
taking into account a desirable 10% to 20% oversizing. After 
the stent deployment, the angiogram is repeated, and upon a 
satisfactory result, the devices are withdrawn. It is critical to 
maintain the guidewire access across the renal lesion until 
satisfactory completion angiogram is obtained. Spasm of the 
branches of the renal artery will usually respond to nitroglycerin 
100 to 200 μg administered through the guiding sheath directly 
into the renal artery.
While endovascular therapy of renal artery occlusive 
disease is considerably less invasive than conventional renal 
artery bypass operation, complications relating to this treatment 
modality can occur. In a study in which Guzman and colleagues 
compared the complications following renal artery angioplasty 
and surgical revascularization, the authors noted that major 
complication rates following endovascular and surgical treat-
ment were 17%, and 31 %, respectively.119 In contrast, signifi-
cantly greater minor complications were associated with the 
endovascular cohort, with a minor complication rate of 48% 
compared with 7% in the surgical group.119 In a prospective 
randomized study that compared the clinical outcome of renal 
artery balloon angioplasty versus stenting for renal ostial ath-
erosclerotic lesion, comparable complications rates were found 
in the two groups (39% vs. 43%, respectively). However, the 
incidence of restenosis at 6 months was significantly higher in 
the balloon angioplasty cohort than the stenting group (48% vs. 
14%, respectively). This study underscores the clinical superior-
ity of renal stenting compared to renal balloon angioplasty alone 
in patients with ostial stenosis.120
Deterioration in renal function, albeit transient, is a com-
mon complication following endovascular renal artery inter-
vention. This is most likely the combined result of the use of 
iodinated contrast and the occurrence of renal parenchymal 
embolism due to wire and catheter manipulation. In most cases, 
this is a temporary problem, as supportive care with adequate 
871
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
fluid hydration is sufficient to reverse the renal dysfunction. 
However, transient hemodialysis may become necessary in 
approximately 1% of patients. Other complications include vas-
cular access complications (bleeding, hematoma, femoral nerve 
injury, arteriovenous fistula, and pseudoaneurysm), target ves-
sel dissection, perinephric hematoma, early postoperative renal 
artery thrombosis, and extremity atheroembolism from throm-
bus in the aorta or the iliac arteries.
Clinical Results of Endovascular Interventions
Percutaneous Transluminal Balloon Angioplasty.  FMD of 
the renal artery is the most common treatment indication for 
percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty. Patients with 
symptomatic FMD such as hypertension or renal insufficiency 
usually respond well to renal artery balloon angioplasty alone.121 
In contrast, balloon angioplasty generally is not an effective 
treatment for patients with renal artery stenosis or proximal 
occlusive disease of the renal artery, due to the high incidence 
of restenosis with balloon angioplasty alone. In the latter group 
of patients, primary stent placement is the preferred endovas-
cular treatment. The long-term benefit of renal artery balloon 
angioplasty in patients with FMD was reported by Surowiec 
and colleagues.121 They followed 14 patients who underwent 19 
interventions on 18 renal artery segments. The technical success 
rate of balloon angioplasty for FMD was 95%. Primary patency 
rates were 81%, 69%, 69%, and 69% at 2, 4, 6, and 8 years, 
respectively. Assisted primary patency rates were 87%, 87%, 
87%, and 87% at 2, 4, 6, and 8 years, respectively. The resteno-
sis rate was 25% at 8 years. Clinical benefit, as defined by either 
improved or cured hypertension, was found in 79% of patients 
overall, with two thirds of patients having maintained this ben-
efit at 8 years. The authors concluded that balloon angioplasty 
is highly effective in symptomatic FMD with excellent durable 
functional benefits.121
The utility of balloon angioplasty alone in the treatment 
of renovascular hypertension appears to be limited. van Jaars-
veld and associates performed a prospective study in which 
patients with renal artery stenosis were randomized to either 
drug therapy or balloon angioplasty treatment.122 A total of 
106 patients with 50% diameter stenosis or greater plus hyper-
tension or renal insufficiency were randomized in the study. 
At 3 months, there was no difference in the degree to which 
blood pressure was controlled between the two groups. How-
ever, the degree and dose of antihypertensive medications were 
slightly lowered in the balloon angioplasty group. The above 
advantage of the angioplasty group completely disappeared at 
12 months, making the authors conclude that in the treatment 
of patients with hypertension and renal artery stenosis, percu-
taneous transluminal balloon angioplasty alone offers minimal 
advantage over antihypertensive drug therapy.
Renal Artery Stenting.  Endovascular stent placement is the 
treatment of choice for patients with symptomatic or high-grade 
renal artery occlusive disease (Fig. 23-48) This is due in part to 
the high incidence of restenosis with balloon angioplasty alone, 
particularly in the setting of ostial stenosis. Renal artery stenting 
is also indicated for renal artery dissection caused by balloon 
angioplasty or other catheter-based interventions. Numerous 
studies have clearly demonstrated the clinical efficacy of renal 
artery stenting when compared to balloon angioplasty alone in 
patients with high-grade renal artery stenosis.
White and colleagues conducted a study to evaluate the 
role of renal artery stenting in patients with poorly controlled 
hypertension and renal artery lesions that did not respond well 
to balloon angioplasty alone.123 The technical success of the pro-
cedure was 99%. The mean blood pressure values were 173 ± 
25/88 ± 17 mmHg prior to stent implantation and 146 ± 20/77 ± 
12 mmHg 6 months after renal artery stenting (P <0.01). Angio-
graphic follow-up with 67 patients (mean 8.7 ± 5 months) dem-
onstrated that restenosis, as defined by 50% or greater luminal 
narrowing, occurred in 15 patients (19%). The study concluded 
that renal artery stenting is a highly effective treatment for 
renovascular hypertension, with a low angiographic restenosis 
rate. In another similar study, Blum and colleagues prospec-
tively performed renal artery stenting in 68 patients (74 lesions) 
with ostial renal artery stenosis and suboptimal balloon angio-
plasty.124 Patients were followed for a mean of 27 months with 
measurements of blood pressure and serum creatinine, duplex 
sonography, and intra-arterial angiography. Five-year patency 
was 84.5% (mean follow-up, 27 months). Restenosis occurred 
in 8 of 74 arteries (11%), but after reintervention, the second-
ary 5-year patency rate was 92.4%. Hypertension was cured or 
improved in 78% of patients. The authors concluded that primary 
B
A
Figure 23-48.  Renal artery stent-
ing. A. Focal lesion in the renal artery 
(arrow). B. Poststenting angiogram 
reveals a satisfactory result following a 
renal artery stenting placement (arrow).
872
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
stent placement is an effective treatment for renal artery stenosis 
involving the ostium.
The clinical utility of renal artery stenting in renal func-
tion preservation was analyzed by several studies, which mea-
sured serial serum creatinine levels to determine the response of 
renal function following endovascular intervention.125 In a study 
reported by Harden and colleagues who performed 33 renal artery 
stenting procedures in 32 patients with renal insufficiency, they 
noted that renal function improved or stabilized in 22 patients 
(69%).126 In a similar study, Watson and associates evaluated 
the effect of renal artery stenting on renal function by compar-
ing the slopes of the regression lines derived from the reciprocal 
of serum creatinine versus time.125 A total of 61 renal stenting 
procedures were performed in 33 patients, and the authors found 
that after stent placement, the slopes of the reciprocal of the 
serum creatinine (1/Scr) were positive in 18 patients and less 
negative in 7 patients. The study concluded that in patients with 
chronic renal insufficiency due to obstructive renal artery steno-
sis, renal artery stenting is effective in improving or stabilizing 
renal function.
The clinical outcome of several large clinical stud-
ies of renal artery stenting in the treatment of renovascular 
hypertension or chronic renal insufficiency is shown in Table 
23-13.123,124,126-132 These studies uniformly demonstrated an 
excellent technical success rate with low incidence of reste-
nosis or procedural-related complications. A similar analysis 
was reported by Leertouwer and colleagues who performed a 
meta-analysis of 14 studies comparing patients with renal arte-
rial stent placement to those who underwent balloon angioplasty 
alone for renal arterial stenosis.133 The study found that stent 
placement proved highly successful, with an initial technical 
success of 98%. The overall cure rate for hypertension was 20%, 
whereas hypertension was improved in 49%. Renal function 
improved in 30% of patients and stabilized in 38% of patients. 
The restenosis rate at follow-up of 6 to 29 months was 17%. 
Renal stenting resulted in a higher technical success rate and 
a lower restenosis rate when compared to balloon angioplasty 
alone.
AORTOILIAC OCCLUSIVE DISEASE
The distal abdominal aorta and the iliac arteries are common 
sites affected by atherosclerosis. The symptoms and natural 
history of the atherosclerotic process affecting the aortoiliac 
arterial segment are influenced by the disease distribution and 
extent. Atherosclerotic plaques may cause clinical symptoms by 
restricting blood flow due to luminal obstruction or by embo-
lizing atherosclerotic debris to the lower extremity circulation. 
If the aortoiliac plaques reach sufficient mass and impinge on 
the arterial lumen, obstruction of blood flow to lower extremi-
ties occurs. Various risk factors exist that can lead to the devel-
opment of aortoiliac occlusive disease. Recognition of these 
factors and understanding of this disease entity will enable phy-
sicians to prescribe the appropriate treatment strategy, which 
may alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life.
Diagnostic Evaluation
On clinical examination patients often have weakened femoral 
pulses and a reduced ABI. Verification of iliac occlusive disease 
is usually made by color duplex scanning, which reveals either 
a peak systolic velocity ratio ≥2.5 at the site of stenosis and or a 
monophasic waveform. Noninvasive tests such as pulse volume 
recordings (PVRs) of the lower extremity with estimation of the 
thigh-brachial pressure index may be suggestive of aortoiliac dis-
ease. MRA and multidetector CTA are increasingly being used 
to determine the extent and type of obstruction. DSA offers the 
interventionalist the benefit of making a diagnosis and the option 
of performing an endovascular treatment in a single session. 
Angiography provides important information regarding distal 
arterial runoff vessels as well as the patency of the PFA. Presence 
of pelvic and groin collaterals is important to provide crucial col-
lateral flow in maintaining lower limb viability. It must be empha-
sized, however, that patients should be subjected to angiography 
only if their symptoms warrant surgical intervention.
Differential Diagnosis
Degenerative hip or spine disease, lumbar disk herniation, 
spinal stenosis, diabetic neuropathy, and other neuromuscular 
Table 23-13
Clinical outcome of renal artery stent placement in the treatment of renovascular hypertension and renal insufficiency
Author
Year
Patient 
No.
Technical 
Success (%)
Renal  
Insufficiency (%)
Renovascular 
Hypertension (%)
Complica-
tion (%)
Restenosis 
(%)
Follow-Up 
(months)
Stable
Improved Cured
Improved
Iannone130
1996
63
99
10
45
36
4
35
13
14
Harden126
1997
32
100
6
34
34
N/A
N/A
3
13
Blum124
1997
68
100
27
N/A
N/A
16
62
0
11
White123
1997
100
99
6
N/A
20
N/A
N/A
2
19
Shannon132
1998
21
100
9
29
43
N/A
N/A
9
0
Rundback131
1998
45
94
17
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
9
25
Dorros128
1998
163
100
48
N/A
N/A
3
51
11
N/A
Henry129
1999
210
99
25
N/A
29
19
61
3
9
Bush127
2001
73
89
20
21
38
13
61
12
16
N/A = not applicable.
873
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
problems can produce symptoms that may be mistaken for vas-
cular claudication. Such cases can be distinguished from true 
claudication by the fact that the discomfort from neuromuscular 
problems is often relieved by sitting or lying down, as opposed 
to cessation of ambulation. In addition, complaints that are 
experienced upon standing suggest nonvascular causes. When 
confusion persists, the use of noninvasive vascular laboratory 
testing modalities, including treadmill exercise, can help estab-
lish the diagnosis.
Collateral Arterial Network
The principal collateral pathways in severe aortoiliac artery 
occlusive disease or chronic aortic occlusion that may provide 
blood flow distal to the aortoiliac lesion include: (a) the superior 
mesenteric artery to the distal IMA via its superior hemorrhoidal 
branch to the middle and inferior hemorrhoidals to the internal 
iliac artery (39%); (b) the lumbar arteries to the superior gluteal 
artery to the internal iliac system (37%); (c) the lumbar arteries 
to the lateral and deep circumflex arteries to the CFA (12%); 
and (d) Winslow’s pathway from the subclavian to the superior 
epigastric artery to the inferior epigastric artery to the external 
iliac arteries at the groin (Fig. 23-49). In general, treatment indi-
cations for aortoiliac artery occlusive disease include disabling 
claudication, ischemic rest pain, nonhealing lower extremity tis-
sue wound, and lower extremity microembolization that arises 
from aortoiliac lesions.
Disease Classification
Based on the atherosclerotic disease pattern, aortoiliac occlusive 
disease can be classified into three types (Fig. 23-50). Type I 
aortoiliac disease, which occurs in 5% to 10% of patients, is 
confined to the distal abdominal aorta and common iliac vessels 
(Fig. 23-51). Due to the localized nature of this type of aortic 
Figure 23-49.  Pertinent collateral pathways are developed in the 
event of chronic severe aortoiliac occlusive disease. As illustrated 
in this multidetector computed tomography angiography, these col-
laterals include epigastric arteries (large white arrows), an enlarged 
inferior mesenteric artery (arrowhead), and enlarged lumbar arter-
ies (black arrows).
obstruction and formation of collateral blood flow around the 
occluded segment, limb-threatening symptoms are rare in the 
absence of more distal disease (Fig. 23-52). This type of aor-
toiliac occlusive disease occurs in a relatively younger group 
of patients (in their mid-50s), compared with patients who have 
more femoropopliteal disease. Patients with a type I disease pat-
tern have a lower incidence of hypertension and diabetes, but a 
Type I
Type II
Type III
Figure 23-50.  Aortoiliac disease can be classified into three types. 
Type I represents focal disease affecting the distal aorta and proxi-
mal common iliac artery. Type II represents diffuse aortoiliac dis-
ease above the inguinal ligament. Type III represents multisegment 
occlusive diseases involving aortoiliac and infrainguinal arterial 
vessels.
Figure 23-51.  Type I aortoiliac disease is confined to the distal 
abdominal aorta (long arrow) or proximal common iliac arteries. 
Due to the localized nature of this type of aortic obstruction and 
formation of collateral blood flow around the occluded segment 
(short arrows), limb-threatening symptoms are rare in the absence 
of more distal disease.
874
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
significant frequency of abnormal blood lipid levels, particu-
larly type IV hyperlipoproteinemia. Symptoms typically consist 
of bilateral thigh or buttock claudication and fatigue. Men report 
diminished penile tumescence and may have complete loss of 
erectile function. These symptoms in the absence of femoral 
pulses constitute Leriche’s syndrome. Rest pain is unusual with 
isolated aortoiliac disease unless distal disease coexists. Occa-
sionally patients report a prolonged history of thigh and buttock 
claudication that recently becomes more severe. It is likely that 
this group has underlying aortoiliac disease that has progressed 
to acute occlusion of the terminal aorta. Others may present with 
“trash foot,” which represents microembolization into the distal 
vascular bed (Fig. 23-53). Type II aortoiliac disease represents 
a more diffuse atherosclerotic progression that involves pre-
Figure 23-52.  A. Multidetector computed 
tomography angiography of the aortoiliac artery 
circulation in a 63-year-old male with but-
tock claudication. B. Three-dimensional image 
reconstruction shows intra-arterial calcification 
of the aorta (large arrow) and right common 
iliac artery (small arrow). This is consistent with 
type I aortoiliac occlusive disease.
dominately the abdominal aorta with disease extension into the 
common iliac artery. This disease pattern affects approximately 
25% patients with aortoiliac occlusive disease. Type III aor-
toiliac occlusive disease, which affects approximately 65% of 
patients with aortoiliac occlusive disease, is widespread disease 
that is seen above and below the inguinal ligament (Fig. 23-54). 
Patients with “multilevel” disease are older, more commonly 
male (with a male-to-female ratio of 6:1), and much more likely 
to have diabetes, hypertension, and associated atherosclerotic 
disease involving cerebral, coronary, and visceral arteries. Pro-
gression of the occlusive process is more likely in these patients 
than in those with localized aortoiliac disease. For these reasons, 
most patients with a type III pattern tend to present with symp-
toms of advanced ischemia and require revascularization for 
Figure 23-53.  Atherosclerotic disease involv-
ing the aortoiliac segment can result in microem-
bolization of the lower leg circulation, resulting 
in trash foot or digital gangrene of toes.
875
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
limb salvage rather than for claudication. These patients have 
a decreased 10-year life expectancy when compared to patients 
with localized aortoiliac disease.
The most commonly used classification system of iliac 
lesions has been set forth by the TransAtlantic Inter-Society 
Consensus (TASC) group with recommended treatment options. 
This lesion classification categorizes the extent of atheroscle-
rosis and has suggested a therapeutic approach based on this 
classification (Table 23-14 and Fig. 23-55).2 According to this 
consensus document, endovascular therapy is the treatment of 
choice for type A lesions, and surgery is the treatment of choice 
for type D lesions. Endovascular treatment is the preferred treat-
ment for type B lesions, and surgery is the preferred treatment 
for good-risk patients with type C lesions. In comparison to 
the 2000 TASC document, the commission has not only made 
allowances for treatment of more extensive lesions, but also 
takes into account the continuing evolution of endovascular 
technology and the skills of individual interventionalists when 
stating that the patient’s comorbidities, fully informed patient 
preference, and the local operator’s long-term success rates 
must be considered when making treatment decisions for type 
B and type C lesions.2,134
General Treatment Considerations
There is no effective medical therapy for the management of 
aortoiliac disease, but control of risk factors may help slow pro-
gression of atherosclerosis. Patients should have hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus controlled. They should 
be advised to stop smoking. Most patients are empirically 
placed on antiplatelet therapy. A graduated exercise program 
Figure 23-54.  Type III aortoiliac occlusive disease is a multilevel 
disease pattern that affects the aortoiliac segment as well as infrain-
guinal femoropopliteal vessels. Most patients with this disease pat-
tern tend to present with symptoms of advanced ischemia and require 
revascularization for limb salvage rather than for claudication.
Table 23-14
TASC classification of aortoiliac occlusive lesions
Type A lesions
•  Unilateral or bilateral stenoses of CIA
•  Unilateral or bilateral single short (≤3 cm) stenosis of EIA
Type B lesions
•  Short (≤3 cm) stenosis of infrarenal aorta
•  Unilateral CIA occlusion
•  Single or multiple stenosis totaling 3–10 cm involving the 
EIA not extending into the CFA
•  Unilateral EIA occlusion not involving the origins of 
internal iliac artery or CFA
Type C lesions
•  Bilateral CIA occlusions
•  Bilateral EIA stenoses 3–10 cm long not extending into the 
CFA
•  Unilateral EIA stenosis extending into the CFA
•  Unilateral EIA occlusion that involves the origins of 
internal iliac artery and/or CFA
•  Heavily calcified unilateral EIA occlusion with or without 
involvement of origins of internal iliac artery and/or CFA
Type D lesions
•  Infrarenal aortoiliac occlusion
•  Diffuse disease involving the aorta and both iliac arteries 
requiring treatment
•  Diffuse multiple stenoses involving the unilateral CIA, 
EIA, and CFA
•  Unilateral occlusions of both CIA and EIA
•  Bilateral occlusions of EIA
•  Iliac stenoses in patients with AAA requiring treatment 
and not amenable to endograft placement or other lesions 
requiring open aortic or iliac surgery
AAA = abdominal aortic aneurysm; CFA = common femoral artery; 
CIA = common iliac artery; EIA = external iliac artery.
Type A lesions
Type B lesions
Type D lesions
Type C lesions
Figure 23-55.  Schematic depiction of the TransAtlantic Inter-
Society Consensus classification of aortoiliac occlusive lesions.
may improve walking efficiency, endothelial function, and 
metabolic adaptations in skeletal muscle, but, there is usually 
minimal improvement in patients with aortoiliac disease who 
are treated with these measures. Failure to respond to exer-
cise and/or drug therapy should prompt consideration for limb 
876
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
revascularization. Patients with buttock claudication and 
reduced or absent femoral pulses who fail to respond to exer-
cise and drug therapy should be considered for revasculariza-
tion because they are less likely than patients with more distal 
lesions to improve without concomitant surgical or endovascu-
lar intervention.
Surgical Reconstruction of Aortoiliac  
Occlusive Disease
Aortobifemoral Bypass.  Surgical options for treatment of 
aortoiliac occlusive diseases consist of various configurations of 
aortobifemoral bypass grafting, various types of extra-anatomic 
bypass grafts, and aortoiliac endarterectomy. The proce-
dure performed is determined by several factors, including 
anatomic distribution of the disease, clinical condition of the 
patient, and personal preference of the surgeon.
In most cases, aortobifemoral bypass is performed because 
patients usually have disease in both iliac systems. Although 
one side may be more severely affected than the other, pro-
gression does occur, and bilateral bypass does not complicate 
the procedure or add to the physiologic stress of the operation. 
Aortobifemoral bypass reliably relieves symptoms, has excel-
lent long-term patency (approximately 70%–80% at 10 years), 
and can be completed with a tolerable perioperative mortality 
(2%–3%).135
Technical Considerations for Aortobifemoral Bypass.  Both 
femoral arteries are initially exposed to ensure that they are ade-
quate for the distal anastomoses. The abdomen is then opened 
in the midline, the small intestine is retracted to the right, and 
the posterior peritoneum overlying the aorta is incised. A retro-
peritoneal approach may be selected as an alternative in certain 
situations. This approach involves making a left flank incision 
and displacing the peritoneum and its contents to the right. Such 
an approach is contraindicated if the right renal artery is acutely 
occluded, since visualization from the left flank is very poor. 
Tunneling of a graft to the right femoral artery is also more 
difficult from a retroperitoneal approach, but can be achieved. 
The retroperitoneal approach has been reputed to be better toler-
ated than midline laparotomy for patients with multiple previ-
ous abdominal operations and with severe pulmonary disease. 
Further proposed advantages of the retroperitoneal approach 
include less gastrointestinal disturbance, decreased third space 
fluid losses, and ease with which the pararenal aorta can be 
accessed. There are randomized reports, however, that support 
and refute the superiority of this approach. A collagen-impreg-
nated, knitted Dacron graft is used to perform the proximal 
aortic anastomosis, which can then be made in either an end-to-
end or end-to-side fashion using 3-0 polypropylene suture. The 
proximal anastomosis should be made as close as possible to the 
renal arteries to decrease the incidence of restenosis from pro-
gression of the atherosclerotic occlusive process in the future.
An end-to-end proximal aortic anastomosis is necessary 
in patients with an aortic aneurysm or complete aortic occlu-
sion extending up to the renal arteries (Fig. 23-56). Although in 
theory the end-to-end configuration allows for less turbulence 
and less chance of competitive flow with still patent host iliac 
vessels, there have not been consistent results to substantiate 
differences in patency between end-to-end and end-to-side 
grafts. Relative indications for an end-to-side proximal aortic 
anastomosis include the presence of large aberrant renal arter-
ies, an unusually large IMA with poor back-bleeding suggesting 
inadequate collateralization, and/or occlusive disease involv-
ing bilateral external iliac arteries. Under such circumstances, 
end-to-end bypass from the proximal aorta to the femoral level 
devascularizes the pelvic region because there is no antegrade or 
retrograde flow in the occluded external iliac arteries to supply 
the hypogastric arteries. As a result of the pelvic devasculariza-
tion, there is an increased incidence of impotence, postoperative 
colon ischemia, buttock ischemia, and paraplegia secondary to 
spinal cord ischemia despite the presence of excellent femoral 
and distal pulses.
An end-to-side proximal aortic anastomosis can be associ-
ated with certain disadvantages, which include the potential for 
distal embolization when applying a partially occlusive aortic 
clamp (Fig. 23-57). Furthermore, the distal aorta often pro-
ceeds to total occlusion after an end-to-side anastomosis. There 
may also be a higher incidence of aortoenteric fistula follow-
ing construction of end-to-side proximal anastomoses because 
the anterior projection makes subsequent tissue coverage and 
reperitonealization of the graft more difficult. The limbs of the 
Figure 23-56.  In an end-to-end proximal aortic anastomosis, the 
aorta is divided in half. The proximal end of the aorta is anasto-
mosed to the end of a prosthetic graft, while the distal divided aortic 
stump is oversewn.
Figure 23-57.  In an end-to-side aortic anastomosis, the end of a 
prosthetic graft is connected to the side of an aortic incision.
4
877
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
graft are tunneled through the retroperitoneum to the groin, 
where an end-to-side anastomosis is fashioned between the graft 
and the bifurcation of the CFA using 5-0 polypropylene suture. 
Endarterectomy or patch angioplasty of the profunda femo-
ris may be required concurrently. Once the anastomoses have 
been fashioned and the graft thoroughly flushed, the clamps are 
removed and the surgeon carefully controls the degree of aortic 
occlusion until full flow is re-established. During this period, the 
patient must be carefully monitored for hypotension. Declamp-
ing hypotension is a complication of sudden restoration of aortic 
flow, particularly following prolonged occlusion. Once flow has 
been re-established, the peritoneum is carefully reapproximated 
over the prosthesis to prevent fistulization into the intestine.
Despite the presence of multilevel disease in most patients, 
a properly performed aortobifemoral operation can provide 
arterial inflow and alleviate claudication symptoms in 70% to 
80% of patients; however, 10% to 15% of patients will require 
simultaneous outflow reconstruction to address distal ischemia 
and facilitate limb salvage. The advantage of concomitant distal 
revascularization is avoidance of reoperation in a scarred groin. 
As a rule, if the profunda femoris can accept a 4-mm probe and 
if a No. 3 Fogarty embolectomy catheter can be passed distally 
for 20 cm or more, the PFA will be sufficient for outflow, and 
concomitant distal revascularization is not necessary.
Aortic Endarterectomy.  Aortoiliac endarterectomy is rarely 
performed because it is associated with greater blood loss and 
greater sexual dysfunction and is more difficult to perform. 
Long-term patency is comparable with aortobifemoral graft-
ing, and thus it remains a reasonable option in cases in which 
the risk of infection of a graft is excessive, because it involves 
no prosthetic tissue. Aortoiliac endarterectomy was useful 
when disease was localized to either the aorta or common iliac 
arteries; however, at present, aortoiliac PTA, stents, and other 
catheter-based therapies have become first-line treatment in this 
scenario. Endarterectomy should not be performed if the aorta 
is aneurysmal because of continued aneurysmal degeneration of 
the endarterectomized segment. If there is total occlusion of the 
aorta to the level of the renal arteries, aortic transection several 
centimeters below the renal arteries with thrombectomy of the 
aortic cuff followed by graft insertion is easier and more expe-
ditious when compared to endarterectomy. Involvement of the 
external iliac artery makes aortic endarterectomy more difficult 
to complete because of decreased vessel diameter, increased 
length, and exposure issues. The ability to establish an appro-
priate endarterectomy plane is compromised due to the muscu-
lar and inherently adherent nature of the media in this location. 
There is a higher incidence of early thrombosis and late failure 
with extended aortoiliofemoral endarterectomy when compared 
to bypass grafting as a result of recurrent stenosis.
Axillofemoral Bypass.  An axillofemoral bypass is an extra-
anatomic reconstruction that derives arterial inflow from 
the axillary artery to the femoral artery. This is a treatment 
option for patients with medical comorbidities that prohibit an 
abdominal vascular reconstruction. It may be performed under 
local anesthesia and is used for limb salvage. Extra-anatomic 
bypasses have lower patency when compared to aortobifemo-
ral and, therefore, are seldom recommended for claudication. 
Before performing this operation, the surgeon should check 
pulses and blood pressure in both arms to ensure that there is 
no obvious disease affecting flow through the axillary system. 
Angiography of the axillosubclavian vasculature is not necessary, 
but can be helpful if performed at the time of aortography. The 
axillary artery is exposed below the clavicle, and a 6- to 8-mm 
externally reinforced PTFE graft is tunneled subcutaneously 
down the lateral chest wall and lateral abdomen to the groin. It 
is anastomosed ipsilaterally at the CFA bifurcation into the SFA 
and PFA. A femorofemoral crossover graft using a 6- to 8-mm 
externally reinforced PTFE graft is then used to revascularize 
the opposite extremity if necessary. Reported patency rates over 
5 years vary from 30% to 80%.136 Paradoxically, although it is a 
less complex procedure than aortofemoral grafting, the mortal-
ity rate is higher (10%), reflecting the compromised medical 
status of these patients.136
Iliofemoral Bypass.  One option for patients with unilateral 
occlusion of the distal common iliac or external iliac arteries is 
iliofemoral grafting (Fig. 23-58). Long-term patency is compa-
rable to aortounifemoral bypass, and because the procedure can 
be performed using a retroperitoneal approach without clamping 
the aorta, the perioperative mortality is less.136
Femorofemoral Bypass.  A femorofemoral bypass is another 
option for patients with unilateral stenosis or occlusion of the 
common or external iliac artery who have rest pain, tissue loss, 
or intractable claudication. The primary (assisted) patency at 5 
years is reported to be 60% to 70%, and although this is inferior 
when compared to aortofemoral bypass, there are physiologic 
benefits, especially for patients with multiple comorbidities 
because it is not necessary to cross-clamp the aorta.137 There are 
no studies supporting the superiority of unsupported or exter-
nally supported PTFE over Dacron for choice of conduit. The 
fear of the recipient extremity stealing blood from the extremity 
ipsilateral to the donor limb is not realized unless the donor iliac 
artery and donor outflow arteries are diseased.137 Depending on 
the skills of the interventionalist or surgeon, many iliac lesions 
classified as TASC B, C, or D can now be addressed using an 
endovascular approach, thus obviating the need to perform a 
femorofemoral bypass. Additionally, femorofemoral bypass can 
be used as an adjuvant procedure after iliac inflow has been 
optimized with endovascular methods.
B
A
Figure 23-58.  A. Skin markings showing the incisions of an ilio-
femoral bypass. B. A prosthetic bypass graft is used for an iliofemo-
ral artery bypass in which the proximal anastomosis is connected to 
the common iliac artery (long arrow) while the distal anastomosis is 
connected to the common femoral artery (short arrow).
878
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Obturator Bypass.  An obturator bypass is used to reconstruct 
arterial anatomy in patients with groin sepsis resulting from prior 
prosthetic grafting, intra-arterial drug abuse, groin neoplasm, or 
damage from prior groin irradiation. This bypass can originate 
from the common iliac artery, external iliac artery, or unin-
volved limb of an aortobifemoral bypass. A conduit of Dacron, 
PTFE, or autologous vein is tunneled through the anteromedial 
portion of the obturator membrane to the distal SFA or popliteal 
artery. The obturator membrane must be divided sharply so as 
avoid injury to adjacent structures, and care must be taken to 
identify the obturator artery and nerve that pass posterolater-
ally. After the bypass is completed and the wounds isolated, the 
infected area is entered, the involved arteries are débrided to 
healthy tissue, and vascularized muscle flaps are mobilized to 
cover the ligated ends.138 There have been varied results in terms 
of patency and limb salvage for obturator bypass. Some authors 
have reported 57% 5-year patency and 77% 5-year limb salvage 
rates, whereas others have shown a high rate of reinfection and 
low patency requiring reintervention.138,139
Thoracofemoral Bypass.  The indications for thoracofemoral 
bypass are (a) multiple prior surgeries with a failed infrarenal 
aortic reconstruction and (b) infected aortic prosthesis. This 
procedure is more physiologically demanding than other 
extra-anatomic reconstructions because the patient must not 
only tolerate clamping the descending thoracic aorta but also 
performance of a left thoracotomy. The graft is tunneled to the 
left CFA from the left thorax posterior to the left kidney in the 
anterior axillary line using a small incision in the periphery of 
the diaphragm and an incision in the left inguinal ligament to 
gain access to the extraperitoneal space from below. The right 
limb is tunneled in the space of Retzius in an attempt to decrease 
kinking that is more likely to occur with subcutaneous, supra-
pubic tunneling. Thoracofemoral bypass has long-term patency 
comparable to aortofemoral bypass.
Complications of Surgical Aortoiliac 
Reconstruction
With current surgical techniques and conduits, early postopera-
tive hemorrhage is unusual and occurs in 1% to 2%. It is usually 
the result of technical oversight or coagulation abnormality.140 
Acute limb ischemia occurring after aortoiliac surgery may 
be the result of acute thrombosis or distal thromboembolism. 
The surgeon can prevent thromboembolic events by (a) avoid-
ing excessive manipulation of the aorta, (b) ensuring adequate 
systemic heparinization, (c) judicious placement of vascular 
clamps, and (d) thorough flushing prior to restoring blood flow. 
Acute thrombosis of an aortofemoral graft limb in the early 
perioperative period occurs in 1% to 3% of patients.140 Throm-
bectomy of the graft limb is performed through a transverse 
opening in the hood of the graft at the femoral anastomosis. 
With this approach it is possible to inspect the interior of the 
anastomosis and pass embolectomy catheters distally to clear 
the superficial femoral and profunda arteries. Various complica-
tions may be encountered following aortoiliac or aortobifemoral 
reconstruction (Table 23-15).
Intestinal ischemia following aortic reconstruction occurs 
in approximately 2% of cases; however, with colonoscopy 
mucosal ischemia, which is a milder form, is seen more fre-
quently. The surgeon can identify patients who require con-
comitant revascularization of the IMA, hypogastric arteries, or 
mesenteric arteries by examining the preoperative arteriogram 
for the presence of associated occlusive lesions in the celiac 
axis, the superior mesenteric arteries, or both. Likewise, patients 
with a patent and enlarged IMA or a history of prior colonic 
resections will benefit from IMA reimplantation.
In a comprehensive review of 747 patients who had aor-
toiliac operations for occlusive disease, secondary operations 
for late complications such as reocclusion, pseudoaneurysms, 
and infection were necessary in 21% over a 22-year period.141 
The most frequent late complication is graft thrombosis. Limb 
occlusion occurs in 5% to 10% of patients within 5 years of 
the index operation and in 15% to 30% of patients ≥10 years 
after the index operation.140,141 Anastomotic pseudoaneurysms 
occur in 1% and 5% of femoral anastomoses in patients with 
aortofemoral grafts.142 Predisposing factors to pseudoaneurysm 
formation include progression of degenerative changes within 
the host artery, excessive tension at the anastomosis, and 
infection.142 Due to the associated risks of thrombosis, distal 
embolization, infection, and rupture, anastomotic aneurysms 
should be repaired expeditiously.
Infection following aortoiliac reconstruction is a devastat-
ing complication that occurs in 1% of cases. Femoral anastomo-
ses of aortofemoral reconstructions and axillofemoral bypasses 
are prone to infection.141,142 Use of prophylactic antibiotics and 
meticulous surgical technique are vital in preventing contamina-
tion of the graft at the time of implantation. If infection appears 
localized to a single groin, graft preservation and local measures 
such as antibiotic irrigation, aggressive debridement, and soft 
tissue coverage with rotational muscle flaps may prove success-
ful. Most patients with infected aortoiliofemoral reconstructions 
usually require graft excision and revascularization via remote 
uncontaminated routes or the use of in situ replacement to clear 
the infective process and maintain limb viability. Aortoenteric 
Table 23-15
Perioperative complications of aortobifemoral bypass 
grafting
Medical Complications
•  Perioperative myocardial infarction
•  Respiratory failure
•  Ischemia-induced renal failure
•  Bleeding from intravenous heparinization
•  Stroke
Procedure-Related Complications
Early
•  Declamping shock
•  Graft thrombosis
•  Retroperitoneal bleeding
•  Groin hematoma
•  Bowel ischemia/infarction
•  Peripheral embolization
•  Erectile dysfunction
•  Lymphatic leak
•  Chylous ascites
•  Paraplegia
Late
•  Graft infection
•  Anastomotic pseudoaneurysm
•  Aortoenteric fistula
•  Aortourinary fistula
•  Graft thrombosis
879
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
fistula and associated gastrointestinal hemorrhage are devastat-
ing complications, with a 50% incidence of death or limb loss. 
The incidence of aortoenteric fistula formation appears to be 
higher after an end-to-side proximal anastomosis, because it 
is more difficult to cover the prosthesis with viable tissue and 
avoid contact with the gastrointestinal tract with this configu-
ration.141,142 Treatment of aortoenteric fistula requires resection 
of all prosthetic material, closure of the infrarenal abdominal 
aorta, repair of the gastrointestinal tract, and revascularization 
by means of an extra-anatomic graft.
Endovascular Treatment for Aortic Disease
Although aortofemoral bypass surgery has excellent long-term 
patency and can be performed with low mortality rates, there 
are patients who are unable to withstand the physiologic stress 
of longer open procedures performed under general anesthe-
sia, which require aortic cross-clamping and which are associ-
ated with greater blood loss. These patients are more suited to 
endovascular interventions despite the decreased durability and 
requirement for more frequent reinterventions.
Focal Aortic Stenosis.  The endovascular technique used to 
treat infrarenal aortic stenoses is similar to that used for iliac 
artery disease. Bilateral CFA access is established followed by 
insertion of a 10-French sheath. The lesion is crossed using a 
hydrophilic wire and a supporting selective catheter and then 
changed for a stiffer guidewire. A self-expanding nitinol stent or 
a balloon-expandable stent mounted on a larger-caliber angio-
plasty balloon is implanted followed by adequate postdilation. 
At the physician’s discretion, “kissing” stents, simultaneous 
bilateral proximal iliac stents, are deployed if the lesion is in the 
distal aorta in the proximity of the aortic bifurcation. The role of 
covered stents such as cuffs made for endoluminal AAA repair 
has not been rigorously studied. The aortic diameter should be 
sized with a calibrated catheter during the angiography or by 
preintervention CT scanning to avoid undersizing. Balloon size 
will range from 12 to 18 mm in most cases. A single stent is 
generally sufficient in most cases. Large Palmaz-type stents 
mounted on XXL balloons (Meditech, Westwood, MA) have 
been successfully used and may be inflated up to 25 mm in 
diameter if needed. Newer self-expanding stents have also been 
used. Concentric aortic stenosis may encroach upon the IMA, 
and coverage of this vessel may be unavoidable. Care should 
be taken to use low inflation pressures (5 mmHg) to minimize 
the risk of aortic rupture. Patient complaints of back or abdomi-
nal pain during balloon inflation should be taken seriously as 
they may suggest impending rupture. In case of a calcified 
small-caliber, hypoplastic aorta (≤12 mm, typically in female 
patients), it is recommend to use smaller diameter stents. To 
achieve clinical improvement, these patients can be recanalized 
to an aortic diameter of 8 or 9 mm. Distal embolization is one of 
the potential complications of endovascular treatment for aortic 
stenoses. Full heparinization, meticulous technique during wire 
and catheter manipulations, and primary stenting reduce the risk 
of this complication. Since calcified aortic stenoses are prone to 
rupture during dilation, it is recommended to be cognizant of the 
extent of the calcification with preoperative CT scans. In case 
of aortic rupture, as long as wire access has been maintained, 
an occlusion balloon can be inflated proximal to the disrupted 
segment to achieve hemostasis, and the rupture can be covered 
with a stent graft or repaired with open surgery.
Occlusive Lesions of the Aortic Bifurcation.  Occlusive 
lesions are treated with the kissing balloon technique to avoid 
dislodging aortic plaque. Two angioplasty balloons of equal 
size are positioned across the ostia of the common iliac arteries, 
using a retrograde approach, and inflated. Simultaneous bal-
loon dilatation at the origins of both common iliac arteries is 
advocated, even in the presence of unilateral lesion, to protect 
the contralateral common iliac artery from dissection or plaque 
embolization. Calcified lesions that typically occur at the aor-
tic bifurcation are not amenable to balloon dilatation and fre-
quently require that a distal aortic reconstruction be performed 
using “kissing stents.” Fears that the proximal ends of the 
stents that extend into the distal aorta will become a nidus for 
thrombus formation or cause hemolysis have not been realized. 
The results are difficult to interpret because these bifurcation 
lesions are usually included in studies with iliac artery lesions. 
Patency rates for aortic bifurcation PTA range from 76% to 92% at 
3 years.143 The largest series reported to date includes 79 patients 
with aortic bifurcation lesions. The cumulative clinical success 
rate at a mean of 4 years was 93%.144 In more recent years, stents 
have been used to reconstruct the aortic bifurcation.145 The kiss-
ing stent technique is well-suited for orificial lesions. Technical 
success with kissing stents at the aortic bifurcation has been 
reported to be 95% to 100%.145 In the largest series reported, the 
primary patency at 3 years was 79%.146
Endovascular Treatment for Iliac  
Artery Disease
Percutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty.  PTA is most use-
ful in the treatment of isolated iliac stenoses of less than 4 cm in 
length. When used for stenoses rather than occlusion, a 2-year 
patency of 86% can be achieved.147 The complication rate is 
approximately 2%, consisting of distal embolization, medial 
dissection, and acute thrombosis.
Technical Considerations for Iliac Interventions.  Crossing a 
high-grade stenosis or occlusion can be challenging in the iliac 
arteries. It is vital to image the lesion well because multiple 
views and use of the image intensifier will frequently uncover 
the anatomic reason for the difficulty. Frequently, the difficulty 
is the result of vessel tortuosity that cannot be appreciated on 
the original view. Use of an angled hydrophilic guidewire and 
an angled catheter can provide steering and add extra support 
for the wire trying to cross the lesion. Patience, persistence, and 
periodic reimaging will facilitate the crossing of a lesion in the 
great majority of cases. Guidewire traversal must be achieved 
for performance of endovascular iliac intervention. Over 90% 
of iliac occlusions can be passed with simple guidewire tech-
niques. The preferred approach for recanalizing a common 
iliac artery occlusion is retrograde passage of devices from an 
ipsilateral CFA puncture because, in this manner, distance to 
the lesion is short and access is straighter. A stenosis is nor-
mally crossed using a combination of a soft-tip 0.035-inch 
guidewire (i.e., Bentson-type wire) or hydrophilic wire and a 
5-French straight or selective catheter. One of the hazards of 
retrograde recanalization is that the guidewire stays in a sub-
intimal location and cannot be redirected into the true lumen 
at the aortic bifurcation. There are several approaches that can 
be used to achieve re-entry of total chronic occlusions. Special-
ized catheters allow passage of a needle and guidewire across 
the intima distal to the occlusion. Intravascular ultrasound can 
be used for true lumen re-entry under fluoroscopic guidance. 
Another method of achieving true lumen re-entry involves 
performing the recanalization from an antegrade contralateral 
880
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
CFA approach. A 4-French Berenstein catheter (Cordis Corp., 
Miami Lakes, FL) is used to probe the occlusion. The lesion 
can be crossed in most instances (5%–20% failure rate) with a 
hydrophilic guidewire or occasionally with its stiffer back end. 
As soon as the guidewire has crossed the obstruction and lies 
within the ipsilateral external iliac artery lumen, it is snared and 
partially pulled out of the ipsilateral CFA. A short catheter is 
then inserted in a retrograde fashion over the wire end into the 
abdominal aorta proximal to the lesion. The hydrophilic guide-
wire is then exchanged for a stiffer Amplatz (Boston Scientific, 
Natick, MA) guidewire to facilitate iliac stenting.
Obtaining arterial access when there are absent femoral 
pulsations is aided by the use of ultrasound guidance and “road-
map” imaging software, which is available on modern angio-
graphic equipment. When the lesion is successfully crossed, 
balloons of an appropriate size and length are selected for the 
angioplasty. Most common iliac arteries will accommodate 8- to 
10-mm diameter balloons, whereas most external iliac arteries 
will accommodate 6- to 8-mm diameter balloons. Inflation is 
performed with caution, especially if there is heavy calcifica-
tion, and should be guided by patient discomfort, pressure gauge 
readings, and changes in balloon outline.
If guidewire traversal is straightforward, consideration 
should be given to the presence of an acute thrombosis that may 
benefit from catheter-directed thrombolysis. If guidewire tra-
versal is challenging, it is unlikely that catheter-directed throm-
bolysis will be beneficial. Investigators have found that routine 
thrombolysis and balloon dilation of occluded arteries prior to 
stent placement are associated with an increased incidence of 
distal embolic events.148 Stents should be placed after inade-
quate angioplasty. Stents are warranted when there is a greater 
than 30% residual stenosis, when there is a flow-limiting dissec-
tion, or when there is a pressure gradient of ≥5 mmHg across 
the treated segment.149 Placement of stents can precipitate distal 
embolization in up to 10%, especially if lesions are friable and 
vulnerable to manipulation. Routine primary stent placement is 
not recommended because it has not been found to be superior 
to selective stenting in terms of outcomes or cost.150
Primary Stenting versus Selective Stenting in Iliac 
Arteries.  Primary stenting rather than selective stenting should 
be considered for longer iliac lesions and for all TASC C and 
D lesions. The primary patency rates at 1, 2, and 3 years were 
96%, 90%, and 72%, respectively, for longer lesions (>5 cm) 
that were primarily stented versus 46%, 46%, and 28%, respec-
tively, with selective stenting.150 Primary stenting is generally 
advocated for chronic iliac artery occlusions, recurrent stenosis 
after previous iliac PTA, and complex stenoses with eccentric, 
calcified, ulcerated plaques or plaques with spontaneous dis-
section. All of these lesions are prone to distal embolization 
during manipulation of wires and angioplasty balloons. Distal 
embolization with isolated PTA is not common for uncompli-
cated lesions, but can occur in up to 24% of cases, when treating 
ulcerated plaques, aortoiliac bifurcation lesions, or iliac occlu-
sions.150 It is believed that direct stent placement without pre-
dilation significantly reduces the risk of distal embolization by 
trapping potentially embologenic material between the arterial 
wall and the stent mesh. While PTA has demonstrated excel-
lent results in focal stenoses of the abdominal aorta and iliacs, 
primary stenting in these locations is safe, improves patency 
rates, reduces the degree of restenosis when compared with PTA 
alone, and decreases the risk of distal embolization. Additional 
potential advantages of direct stenting include shorter proce-
dural time and less radiation exposure. The Dutch Iliac Stent 
Trial has provided evidence that refutes the superiority of pri-
mary stenting over angioplasty alone.151 Most interventionalists 
continue to perform angioplasty first and stent selectively for 
inadequate results. The approach to aortoiliac stenting is intui-
tive. Individual judgment and experience are important in the 
decision-making process, and there are lesions with unstable 
morphology such as long occlusions, ulceration, and dissection 
that warrant primary stenting.
Stent Graft Placement for Aortoiliac Interventions.  Stent 
grafts have been used to treat complex iliac lesions in an attempt 
to exclude these sources of embolization. A recent report sug-
gested that the use of stent grafts was beneficial for TASC C 
and D lesions.152 Bosiers and colleagues published a series of 
91 limbs with diseased iliacs that they treated with 107 stent 
grafts. They reported successful deployment in all patients with-
out distal embolization or vessel rupture and a primary patency 
rate of 91.1% at 1 year.153 The authors commented about their 
concerns of causing embolization during placement of the stent 
grafts and recommended that once an occlusion was traversed 
with the guidewire, to gently predilate with a 5-mm balloon, 
followed by smooth stent graft insertion into the newly created 
channel. The role of stent grafts in aortoiliac occlusive disease 
has not been fully elucidated yet.
Complications of Endovascular  
Aortoiliac Interventions
Iliac artery angioplasty is associated with a 2% to 4% major 
complication rate and 4% to 15% minor complication rate. 
Many of these minor complications are related to the arterial 
puncture site. The most frequent complications relate to access 
site cannulation. Hemorrhage can range from the more common 
access site hematoma to the rarer retroperitoneal and intraperi-
toneal hemorrhage. Distal embolization occurs in 2% to 10% 
of iliac PTA and stenting procedures.140 Percutaneous catheter 
aspiration should be the initial treatment for calf vessel embo-
lization, but, for larger emboli, such as those that lodge in the 
profunda femoris or common femoral arteries, surgical embo-
lectomy may be required because the embolic material contains 
atherosclerotic plaque, which is not amenable to transcatheter 
aspiration or catheter-directed thrombolysis. The incidence of 
pseudoaneurysm formation at the puncture site is 0.5%. The 
treatment of choice for pseudoaneurysms >2 cm in diameter 
is percutaneous thrombin injection under ultrasound guidance. 
Arterial rupture may complicate the procedure in 0.3% of cases. 
Tamponade of the ruptured artery with an occlusion balloon 
should be performed, and a covered stent should be placed. In 
case of failure, surgical treatment is required.
Clinical Results Comparing Surgical and 
Endovascular Treatment of Aortoiliac Disease
The mortality risk of aortobifemoral bypass in patients with iso-
lated, localized aortoiliac disease is relatively low, whereas for 
patients with concomitant atherosclerosis in coronary, carotid, 
and visceral vessels, mortality and morbidity are higher. For 
this reason, the cumulative long-term survival rate for patients 
receiving aortoiliac reconstruction remains 10 to 15 years less 
than anticipated for a normal age- and sex-matched popu-
lation. Twenty-five percent to 30% of patients with con-
comitant atherosclerosis in other vascular distributions are dead 
within 5 years, and 50% to 60% will have died by 10 years.142 
5
881
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Compared with conventional aortobifemoral bypass, com-
mon iliac angioplasty was shown to have a 10% to 20% lower 
overall patency rate. It should be noted that these results were 
reported in early trials that used older generations of endovascu-
lar equipment. With continued progress and newer angioplasty 
balloons and stenting practices, more comparable outcomes are 
being reported. Review of the literature confirms that there is 
an 85% to 90% graft patency rate at 5 years and a 70% to 75% 
graft patency rate at 10 years after aortobifemoral reconstruc-
tion.154 Due in part to factors including continued refinements 
in anesthetic management, intraoperative monitoring, and post-
operative intensive care, low perioperative mortality rates for 
aortobifemoral bypass can be achieved commonly in today’s 
clinical practice. The most recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of 5358 patients who underwent direct open bypass or 
endovascular treatment for aortoiliac occlusive disease demon-
strated superior durability for open bypass, although with longer 
length of stay and increased risk for complications and mor-
tality, when compared to the endovascular approach.155 In this 
study, poor preoperative runoff was greater in the open bypass 
group (50.0% vs. 24.6%). Mean length of hospital stay was 13 days 
for open bypass versus 4 days for endovascular treatment pro-
cedures. The open bypass group experienced more complica-
tions (18.0% vs. 13.4%) and greater 30-day mortality (2.6% vs. 
0.7%). At 1, 3, and 5 years, pooled primary patency rates were 
greater in the open bypass group (94.8% vs. 86.0%, 86.0% vs. 
80.0%, and 82.7% vs. 71.4%, respectively); the same was true 
for secondary patency (95.7% vs. 90.0%, 91.5 vs. 86.5%, and 
91.0% vs. 82.5%, respectively).
Despite its lower long-term success, common iliac angio-
plasty is a useful procedure in patients with focal disease and 
mild symptoms in whom a major surgical revascularization is 
not justified. Angioplasty of the iliac vessels can be a useful 
adjunct to distal surgical bypass as well, increasing the success 
of distal revascularization and eliminating the risks associ-
ated with aortoiliac bypass. Thus, with long-term patency less 
than, but comparable to, open surgical bypass, and with more 
favorable morbidity rates, iliac angioplasty has become a well-
accepted modality of treatment for iliac occlusive disease. Ideal 
iliac angioplasty lesions are nonocclusive and short. Patency 
after intervention is better when lesions occur in larger diameter 
vessels, when stenoses rather than occlusions are treated, when 
runoff vessels are patent, and when the indication for interven-
tion is lifestyle-limiting claudication rather than critical limb 
ischemia.
Becker and colleagues estimated a 5-year patency rate of 
72% in an analysis of 2697 cases of iliac angioplasty and noted 
a better patency (79%) in claudicants.156 Less favorable results 
are obtained with long stenoses, external iliac stenoses, and tan-
dem lesions. The reported technical and initial clinical success 
of balloon angioplasty in iliac artery stenoses exceeds 90% in 
most series, and the 5-year patency rates range from 54% to 
92%.157 The reported technical and initial clinical success of bal-
loon angioplasty in iliac artery occlusions ranges from 78% to 
98%, and the 3-year patency rates range from 48% to 85%.157
Factors reported to affect the patency of aortoiliac endovas-
cular interventions adversely include quality of runoff vessels, 
severity of ischemia, and length of diseased segments treated. 
Likewise as vessel diameter and flow rates change, so do suc-
cess rates after angioplasty. It was reported in the literature that 
location of the lesion at the external iliac artery adversely affects 
both primary and assisted-primary patency. Following angioplasty 
of the common iliac artery, patency rates were 81% and 52% 
at 1 and 6 years, respectively; whereas, after external iliac 
artery angioplasty, they were 74% and 48% at 1 and 4 years, 
respectively.158 Although some literature supports location of 
the lesion in the external iliac artery as a factor that adversely 
affects both primary and assisted-primary patency, this has not 
been a universal finding.158 Female patients are also reported to 
have lower patency rates than males following iliac PTA, with 
or without stent placement in the external iliac artery.159
Stenting of the iliac arteries provides a durable and curative 
treatment, with a 3-year patency rate of 41% to 92% for stenosis 
and a 3-year patency rate of 64% to 85% and 4-year patency 
rate of 54% to 78% for occlusions.157 A meta-analysis of 2116 
patients by Bosch and Hunink showed that aortoiliac stenting 
resulted in a 39% improvement in long-term patency compared 
to balloon angioplasty, despite the fact that complication rates 
and 30-day mortality rates did not differ significantly.160 Park 
and colleagues presented long-term follow-up results in a cohort 
of patients with all four TASC types of iliac lesions. The authors 
presented primary patency rates of 87%, 83%, 61%, and 49% at 
3, 5, 7, and 10 years, respectively, after the index intervention.161 
Leville and colleagues achieved primary and secondary patency 
rates of 76% and 90%, respectively, after 3 years, in a cohort of 
patients who received stents for iliac occlusions.162 The authors 
postulated that endovascular treatment for iliac occlusive dis-
ease should be extended to type C and D lesions, because they 
observed no detectable differences between the four TASC clas-
sifications in terms of primary and secondary patency rates.162 
They concluded that presence of TASC C and D lesions should 
not preclude endovascular treatment and believe that endovas-
cular attempts should be exhausted before open surgical repair 
of iliac occlusions is attempted because of the decreased periop-
erative morbidity and good midterm durability.
Not all results have been in favor of stenting, and at 
present, universal primary stenting cannot be recommended. 
Although stents are often used to improve the outcome of PTA, 
there is no general consensus that stenting should be mandatory 
in all iliac lesions. Complex, ulcerated iliac lesions with high 
embologenic potential or recanalized chronic iliac occlusions 
may be an exception. In the Dutch Iliac Stent Trial, primary 
stenting did not prove to be superior to iliac angioplasty and 
selective stenting. The researchers in this prospective random-
ized multicenter study concluded that balloon angioplasty with 
selective stenting had comparable 2-year patency rates with pri-
mary stenting (77% and 78%, respectively). It must be noted, 
however, that it was necessary to stent 43% of the patients in 
the PTA treatment group due to unsatisfactory angioplasty 
results.151 The 5-year outcomes between the two groups were 
also similar, with 82% and 80% of the treated iliac segments 
remaining free of the need for new revascularization procedures 
after a mean follow-up of 5.6 ± 1.3 years.151
LOWER EXTREMITY ARTERIAL  
OCCLUSIVE DISEASE
The symptoms of lower extremity occlusive disease are classi-
fied into two large categories: acute limb ischemia (ALI) and 
chronic limb ischemia (CLI). Ninety percent of acute ischemia 
cases are either thrombotic or embolic. Frequently, sudden onset 
of limb-threatening ischemia may be the result of acute exac-
erbation of the pre-existing atherosclerotic disease. Chronic 
ischemia is largely due to atherosclerotic changes of the lower 
882
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
extremity that manifest from asymptomatic to limb-threatening 
gangrene. As the population ages, the prevalence of chronic 
occlusive disease of the lower extremity is increasing, and it 
significantly influences lifestyle, morbidity, and mortality. In 
addition, multiple comorbid conditions increase risks of surgical 
procedures. Endovascular interventions become an important 
alternative in treating lower extremity occlusive disease. How-
ever, despite rapidly evolving endovascular technology, lower 
extremity endovascular intervention continues to be one of the 
most controversial areas of endovascular therapy.
Epidemiology
In a detailed review of the literature, McDaniel and Cronenwett 
concluded that claudication occurred in 1.8% of patients under 
60 years of age, 3.7% of patients between 60 and 70 years of 
age, and 5.2% of patients over 70 years of age.163 Leng and his 
colleagues scanned 784 subjects using ultrasound in a random 
sample of men and women age 56 to 77 years. Of the subjects 
who were scanned, 64% demonstrated atherosclerotic plaque.164 
However, a large number of patients had occlusive disease with-
out significant symptoms. In a study by Schroll and Munck, 
only 19% of patients with peripheral vascular disease were 
symptomatic.165 Using ABIs, Stoffers and colleagues scanned 
3171 individuals between the ages of 45 and 75 and identified 
that 6.9% of patients had ABIs <0.95, only 22% of whom had 
symptoms.166 In addition, they demonstrated that concomitant 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases were three to four 
times higher among the group with asymptomatic peripheral 
vascular diseases than those without peripheral vascular disease. 
Furthermore, they confirmed that 68% of all peripheral arterial 
obstructive diseases were unknown to the primary care physi-
cian, and this group mainly represented less advanced cases of 
atherosclerosis. However, among patients with an ABI ratio 
<0.75, 42% were unknown to the primary physicians.
Diagnostic Evaluation
The diagnosis of lower extremity occlusive disease is often 
made based on a focused history and physical examination and 
confirmed by the imaging studies. A well-performed physi-
cal examination often reveals the site of lesions by detecting 
changes in pulses, temperature, and appearances. The bedside 
ABIs using blood pressure cuff also aid in diagnosis. Various 
clinical signs and symptoms are useful to differentiate condi-
tions of viable, threatened, and irreversible limb ischemia 
caused by arterial insufficiency (Table 23-16).
Noninvasive studies are important in documenting the 
severity of occlusive disease objectively. Ultrasound Dopplers 
measuring ABIs and segmental pressures are widely used in 
North America and Europe. Normal ABI is greater than 1.0. In 
patients with claudication, ABIs decrease to 0.5 to 0.9 and to 
even lower levels in patients with rest pain or tissue loss.167 Seg-
mental pressures are helpful in identifying the level of involve-
ment. Decrease in segmental pressure between two segments 
indicates significant disease. Ultrasound duplex scans are used 
to identify the site of lesion by revealing flow disturbance and 
velocity changes. A meta-analysis of 71 studies by Koelemay 
and associates confirmed that duplex scanning is accurate for 
assessing arterial occlusive disease in patients suffering from 
claudication or critical ischemia with a accumulative sensitivity 
of 80% and specificity of over 95%.168 Adding an ultrasound 
contrast agent further increases the sensitivity and specificity of 
ultrasound technology.169 Other noninvasive imaging technolo-
gies, such as MRA and CTA, are rapidly evolving and gaining 
popularity in the diagnosis of lower extremity occlusive disease 
(Figs. 23-59 and 23-60).
Contrast angiography remains the gold standard imaging 
study. Using contrast angiography, interventionists can locate 
and size the anatomic significant lesions and measure the pres-
sure gradient across the lesion, as well as plan for potential inter-
vention. Angiography is, however, semi-invasive and should be 
confined to patients for whom surgical or percutaneous inter-
vention is contemplated. Patients with borderline renal function 
may need to have alternate contrast agents, such as gadolinium 
or carbon dioxide, to avoid contrast-induced nephrotoxicity.
Differential Diagnosis
Arterial insufficiency frequently leads to muscle ischemic pain 
involving the lower extremity muscles, particularly during exer-
cise. Intermittent claudication is pain affecting the calf and, less 
commonly, the thigh and buttock that is induced by exercise and 
relieved by rest. Symptom severity varies from mild to severe. 
Intermittent claudication occurs as a result of muscle ischemia 
during exercise caused by obstruction to arterial flow. Regarding 
the differential diagnosis of intermittent claudication, there are 
a variety of neurologic, musculoskeletal, and venous conditions 
that may produce symptoms of calf pain (Table 23-17). Addi-
tionally, various nonatherosclerotic conditions can also cause 
symptoms consistent with intermittent lower extremity claudi-
cation (Table 23-18). Nocturnal calf muscle spasms or night 
cramps are not indicative of arterial disease. They are common 
but are difficult to diagnose with certainty. Foot ulceration is not 
always the result of arterial insufficiency. Ischemic ulcers occur 
on the toes or lateral side of the foot and are painful. By com-
parison, venous ulcers, which are also common, occur above the 
Table 23-16
Signs and symptoms of acute limb ischemia
Description
Category
Viable
Threatened
Irreversible
Clinical description
Not immediately threatened
Salvageable if promptly treated Major tissue loss, amputation 
unavoidable
Capillary return
Intact
Intact, slow
Absent (marbling)
Muscle weakness
None
Mild, partial
Profound, paralysis (rigor)
Sensory loss
None
Mild, incomplete
Profound anesthetic
Arteriovenous Doppler finding
Audible
Inaudible or audible
Inaudible
883
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
medial malleolus, usually in an area with the skin changes of 
lipodermatosclerosis, and cause mild discomfort. Neuropathic 
ulcers are usually found on weight-bearing surfaces, have thick 
calluses, and are pain free. Ulcers may be the result of more than 
one etiology. Rest pain must be distinguished from peripheral 
neuropathy, which is prevalent in diabetic patients. Patients with 
diabetic neuropathy tend to have decreased vibration and posi-
tion sense and decreased reflexes. Spinal stenosis causes pain 
that is exacerbated with standing and back extension.
Lower Extremity Occlusive Disease 
Classification
Lower extremity occlusive disease may range from exhibiting 
no symptoms to limb-threatening gangrene. There are two major 
classifications developed based on the clinical presentations.
The Fontaine classification uses four stages: Fontaine I is the 
stage when patients are asymptomatic; Fontaine II is when they 
have mild (IIa) or severe (IIb) claudication; Fontaine III is when 
they have ischemic rest pain; and Fontaine IV is when patients suf-
fer tissue loss, such as ulceration or gangrene (Table 23-19).170
The Rutherford classification has four grades (0–III) and 
seven categories (0–6). Asymptomatic patients are classified 
Figure 23-59.  High-resolution computed tomography angiogra-
phy of a patient with normal right lower extremity arterial circu-
lation. Distal occlusive disease is noted in the left tibial arteries 
(arrow).
into category 0; claudicants are stratified into grade I and 
divided into three categories based on the severity of the symp-
toms; patients with rest pain belong to grade II and category 4; 
and patients with tissue loss are classified into grade III and 
categories 5 and 6 based on the significance of the tissue loss.2 
These clinical classifications help to establish uniform standards 
in evaluating and reporting the results of diagnostic measure-
ments and therapeutic interventions (Table 23-19).
The most clinically useful classification of lower extrem-
ity atherosclerotic disease should be based on the morphologic 
character of the lesions. The TASC taskforce published 
a guideline separating lower extremity arterial diseases into 
B
A
Figure 23-60.  Multidetector computed tomography angiography 
of a patient with an (A) infrapopliteal arterial circulation and (B) 
pedal arterial circulation. The high spatial resolution and image 
quality of these images shows three patent infrapopliteal runoff 
vessels and patent pedal vessels at the foot level.
884
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 23-17
Differential diagnosis of intermittent claudication
Condition
Location of Pain 
or Discomfort
Characteristic  
Discomfort
Onset Relative  
to Exercise
Effect of Rest
Effect of Body  
Position
Other Characteristics
Intermittent claudication (calf)
Calf muscles
Cramping pain
After same degree of 
exercise
Quickly relieved
None
Reproducible
Chronic compartment 
syndrome
Calf muscles
Tight, bursting pain
After much exercise 
(e.g., jogging)
Subsides very 
slowly
Relief speeded by 
elevation
Typically heavy-muscled 
athletes
Venous claudication
Entire leg, but 
usually worse in 
thigh and groin
Tight, bursting pain
After walking
Subsides slowly
Relief speeded by 
elevation
History of iliofemoral deep 
venous thrombosis, signs of 
venous congestion, edema
Nerve root compression  
(e.g., herniated disk)
Radiates down leg, 
usually posteriorly
Sharp lancinating pain
Soon, if not 
immediately after 
onset
Not quickly 
relieved (also often 
present at rest)
Relief may be aided by 
adjusting back position
History of back problems
Symptomatic Baker’s cyst
Behind knee, down 
calf
Swelling, soreness, 
tenderness
With exercise
Present at rest
None
Not intermittent
Intermittent claudication  
(hip, thigh, buttock)
Hip, thigh, buttocks Aching discomfort, 
weakness
After same degree of 
exercise
Quickly relieved
None
Reproducible
Hip arthritis
Hip, thigh, buttocks Aching discomfort
After variable degree 
of exercise
Not quickly 
relieved (and may 
be present at rest)
More comfortable sitting, 
weight taken off legs
Variable, may relate to activity 
level, weather changes
Spinal cord compression
Hip, thigh, 
buttocks (follows 
dermatome)
Weakness more than 
pain
After walking or 
standing for same 
length of time
Relieved by 
stopping only if 
position changed
Relief by lumbar 
spine flexion (sitting 
or stooping forward) 
pressure
Frequent history of back 
problems, provoked by 
increased intra-abdominal 
pressure
Intermittent claudication (foot)
Foot, arch
Severe deep pain and 
numbness
After same degree of 
exercise
Quickly relieved
None
Reproducible
Arthritic, inflammatory process Foot, arch
Aching pain
After variable degree 
of exercise
Not quickly 
relieved (and may 
be present at rest)
May be relieved by not 
bearing weight
Variable, may relate to activity 
level
885
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Table 23-18
Nonatherosclerotic causes of intermittent claudication
•  Aortic coarctation
•  Arterial fibrodysplasia
•  Iliac syndrome of the cyclist
•  Peripheral emboli
•  Persistent sciatic artery
•  Popliteal aneurysm
•  Popliteal cyst
•  Popliteal entrapment
•  Primary vascular tumors
•  Pseudoxanthoma elasticum
•  Remote trauma or radiation injury
•  Takayasu’s disease
•  Thromboangiitis obliterans
femoropopliteal and infrapopliteal lesions (Table 23-20). This 
guideline is particularly useful in determining intervention strat-
egies based on the disease classifications. Based on the guide-
line, femoropopliteal lesions are divided into four types: A, B, 
C, and D. Type A lesions are single focal lesions less than 3 cm 
in length and do not involve the origins of the SFA or the distal 
popliteal artery. Type B lesions are single lesions 3 to 5 cm in 
length not involving the distal popliteal artery or multiple or 
heavily calcified lesions less than 3 cm in length. Type C lesions 
are multiple stenoses or occlusions greater than 15 cm in length 
or recurrent stenoses or occlusions that need treatment after two 
endovascular interventions. Type D lesions are those with com-
plete occlusion of CFA, SFA, or popliteal artery.2
In a similar fashion, infrapopliteal arterial diseases are 
classified into four types based on TASC guideline (Fig. 23-61). 
Type A lesions are single lesions less than 1 cm in length not 
involving the trifurcation. Type B lesions are multiple lesions 
less than 1 cm in length or single lesions shorter than 1 cm 
involving the trifurcation. Type C lesions are lesions that exten-
sively involve trifurcation or 1- to 4-cm stenotic or 1- to 2-cm 
occlusive lesions. Type D lesions are occlusions longer than 2 
cm or diffuse lesions.2
Table 23-19
Classification of peripheral arterial disease based on the Fontaine and Rutherford classifications
Fontaine Classification
Rutherford Classification
Stage
Clinical
Grade
Category
Clinical
I
Asymptomatic
0
0
Asymptomatic
IIa
Mild claudication
I
1
Mild claudication
IIb
Moderate to severe 
claudication
I
2
Moderate claudication
I
3
Severe claudication
III
Ischemic rest pain
II
4
Ischemic rest pain
IV
Ulceration or gangrene
III
5
Minor tissue loss
III
6
Major tissue loss
Etiology of Acute Limb Ischemia
ALI is defined as sudden loss of limb perfusion, and the term 
is applicable up to 2 weeks after an initiating event. While the 
instances of acute leg ischemia caused by emboli have decreased 
due to more effective treatment of rheumatic fever and atrial 
fibrillation, the incidence of thrombotic acute leg ischemia has 
increased. Even with the extensive use of newer endovascular 
techniques including thrombolysis, most published series report 
a 10% to 30% 30-day amputation rate.2 The short-term mortality 
of patients presenting with acute ischemia is 15% to 20%. The 
most common etiologies of ALI include embolism, native vessel 
thrombosis, reconstruction thrombosis, trauma, and complica-
tions of peripheral aneurysm. Most cases of lower extremity 
ALI are the result of thrombosis of a prosthetic conduit. This 
stems from increased use of prosthetic conduits to address CLI.
Presenting symptoms in ALI are pain and loss of sensory 
or motor function. The abruptness and time of onset of the 
pain, its location and intensity, and change in severity over 
time should all be taken into consideration. The duration and 
intensity of the pain and presence of motor or sensory changes 
are very important in clinical decision making and urgency 
of revascularization. Thrombolysis may be less effective for 
thrombosis of ≥2 weeks in duration compared with acute 
thrombosis.171
Arterial Embolism.  The heart is the most common source of 
distal emboli, which accounts for more than 90% of peripheral 
arterial embolic events. Atrial fibrillation is the most common 
source. Sudden cardioversion results in the dilated noncon-
tractile atrial appendage regaining contractile activity, which 
can dislodge the contained thrombus. Other cardiac sources 
include mural thrombus overlying a myocardial infarction or 
thrombus forming within a dilated left ventricular aneurysm. 
Mural thrombi can also develop within a ventricle dilated by 
cardiomyopathy. Emboli that arise from a ventricular aneurysm 
or from a dilated cardiomyopathy can be very large and can 
lodge at the aortic bifurcation (saddle embolus), thus rendering 
both legs ischemic. Diseased valves are another source of distal 
embolization. Historically, this occurred as a result of rheumatic 
heart disease. Currently, subacute endocarditis and acute bacte-
rial endocarditis are the more common causes. Infected emboli 
can seed the recipient vessel wall, creating mycotic aneurysms.
886
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
An electrocardiogram (ECG) will diagnose atrial fibril-
lation. A transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiogram 
should be performed looking for a cardiac source. It is impor-
tant to seek other sources of the embolus using CT scanning 
of the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta. More unusual 
sources include mural thrombus from an aortic aneurysm, and 
occasionally, idiopathic arterial-to-arterial thrombus occurs, 
Table 23-20
TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus classification of 
femoral popliteal occlusive lesions
Type A lesions
•  Single stenosis ≤10 cm in length
•  Single occlusion ≤5 cm in length
Type B lesions
•  Multiple lesions (stenoses or occlusions), each ≤5 cm
•  Single stenosis or occlusion ≤15 cm not involving the 
infrageniculate popliteal artery
•  Single or multiple lesions in the absence of continuous 
tibial vessels to improve inflow for a distal bypass
•  Heavily calcified occlusion ≤5 cm in length
•  Single popliteal stenosis
Type C lesions
•  Multiple stenoses or occlusions totaling >15 cm with or 
without heavy calcification
•  Recurrent stenoses or occlusions that need treatment after 
two endovascular interventions
Type D lesions
•  Chronic total occlusions of CFA or SFA (>20 cm, 
involving the popliteal artery)
•  Chronic total occlusion of popliteal artery and proximal 
trifurcation vessels
CFA = common femoral artery; SFA = superficial femoral artery.
Type A lesions
Type B lesions
Type C lesions
Type D lesions
Figure 23-61.  Schematic depiction of TransAtlantic Inter-Society 
Consensus classification of femoral popliteal occlusive lesions.
usually from thrombus that has formed in an atherosclerotic 
aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta. The presence of mobile 
plaque on transesophageal echocardiography is suggestive of 
this source.
Paradoxical embolus occurs when a patient has a patent 
foramen ovale and an embolus from a deep venous thrombosis 
crosses through the atrial defect into the left side of the heart and 
passes into the peripheral circulation. This is diagnosed using a 
bubble echocardiography, in which air bubbles introduced into 
the venous circulation can be seen traversing the septal defect.
Arterial Thrombosis.  Thrombosis can occur in native arteries 
and in arterial reconstructions. Patients with thrombosed arte-
rial segments often have an underlying atherosclerotic lesion at 
the site of thrombosis or aneurysmal degeneration with mural 
thrombosis. It is important to obtain a history, determine risk 
factors for atherosclerosis and hypercoagulable status, and 
examine the contralateral extremity for circulatory problems. 
Patients with thrombosis of prior arterial reconstructions have 
limb incisions from previous surgery, and graft occlusion can be 
confirmed with duplex imaging.
Clinical Manifestations of Acute  
Limb Ischemia
Acute lower extremity ischemia manifests with the “five Ps”: 
pain, pallor, paresthesias, paralysis, and pulselessness, to which 
some add a sixth “P”—poikilothermia or “perishing cold.” Pain 
is the usual symptom that causes a patient to present to the 
emergency room. The most common location for an embolus to 
lodge in the leg is at the common femoral bifurcation. Typically 
a patient will complain of foot and calf pain. Pulses are absent, 
and there may be diminution of sensation. Inability to move 
the affected muscle group is a sign of very severe ischemia and 
necessitates urgent revascularization. During evaluation of the 
affected extremity, it is important to compare findings with the 
contralateral limb. Clinical evaluation is extremely important in 
determining the etiology and location of the obstruction. One of 
the most important pieces of information to obtain is whether the 
patient has had prior vascular procedures or if there is a history 
of lower extremity claudication. Either of these features suggests 
pre-existing vascular disease, renders revascularization more 
complicated, and usually mandates angiography to permit surgi-
cal planning. On the contrary, in a patient with no history sugges-
tive of prior vascular disease, the etiology is most likely embolic, 
and simple thrombectomy is more likely to be successful.
Absent bilateral femoral pulses in a patient with bilateral 
lower extremity ischemia is most likely due to saddle embolus 
to the aortic bifurcation. A palpable femoral pulse and absent 
popliteal and distal pulses may either be due to distal common 
femoral embolus (the pulse being palpable above the level of 
occlusion) or embolus to the superficial femoral or popliteal 
arteries. Typically, emboli lodge at arterial bifurcations where 
they are trapped due to sudden reductions in arterial diameter. 
A popliteal trifurcation embolus will present with calf ischemia 
and absent pedal pulses, possibly with a popliteal pulse present. 
The finding of palpable contralateral pulses and the absence of 
ipsilateral pulses in the acutely ischemic leg are suggestive of 
an embolus, irrespective of presence of Doppler signals. Arteri-
ography is not mandatory in patients without antecedent history 
suggestive of vascular disease; nevertheless, all patients should 
be positioned on the operating room table in such a way that 
fluoroscopic access to the entire inflow and outflow tract is pos-
sible if necessary.
887
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
The main question to be answered by the history and phys-
ical examination is the severity of the ALI, which is the major 
consideration in early management decisions. Patients with ALI 
should be evaluated in a fashion that considers the severity and 
duration of ischemia at the time of presentation. Ideally, all 
patients with acute ischemia should be investigated with imag-
ing, especially if there is an antecedent vascular reconstruction; 
however, the clinical condition and access to resources must 
guide further investigations.2 Unnecessary delays can result in 
amputation. Arteriography, if it can be performed in a timely 
fashion, is an excellent modality for localizing obstructions and 
deciding which type of intervention (endovascular, embolec-
tomy, or bypass) patients will benefit more from. One of the 
goals of treatment for ALI is to prevent thrombus propagation; 
therefore, expedient anticoagulation with heparin is indicated as 
soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
Treatment Considerations for  
Acute Limb Ischemia
In the absence of any significant contraindication, the patient 
with an ischemic lower extremity should be immediately anti-
coagulated. This will prevent propagation of the clot into unaf-
fected vascular beds. Intravenous fluid should be started and a 
Foley catheter inserted to monitor urine output. Baseline labs 
should be obtained and creatinine levels noted. A hypercoagula-
ble workup should be performed prior to initiation of heparin if 
there is sufficient suspicion. According to results from random-
ized trials, there is no clear superiority for thrombolysis over 
surgery in terms of 30-day limb salvage or mortality. Access to 
each treatment option is a major issue in the decision-making 
process, as time is often critical. National registry data from the 
United States reveal that surgery is used three- to five-fold more 
frequently than thrombolysis. Three randomized studies have 
investigated the role of catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy 
in the treatment of ALI.172
Endovascular Treatment
The potential to reduce mortality and morbidity while achiev-
ing limb salvage is the impetus that makes thrombolysis pref-
erable to open surgery as first-line treatment in patients with 
ALI (class I and IIa). Advantages of thrombolytic therapy over 
balloon embolectomy include the reduced endothelial trauma 
and potential for more gradual and complete clot lysis in branch 
vessels usually too small to access by embolectomy balloons. 
It is hoped that the more gradual clot dissolution with throm-
bolysis may decrease the incidence of reperfusion injury that is 
encountered after open surgical procedures where rapid return 
of blood flow may precipitate compartment syndrome. Skeletal 
muscle tissue appears to be most vulnerable to ischemia. Patho-
physiologic studies reveal that irreversible damage to muscle 
tissue starts after 3 hours of ischemia and is nearly complete at 
6 hours. Progressive microvascular damage appears to follow 
rather than precede skeletal muscle tissue damage. The more 
severe the cellular damage, the greater are the microvascu-
lar changes. When the musculature and microvasculature are 
severely damaged, amputation rather than attempts at revascu-
larization may be the most prudent course to prevent wash-out 
of toxic by-product from the ischemic limb into the systemic 
circulation. The mortality rate associated with reperfusion syn-
drome is high, because of the development of concomitant adult 
respiratory distress syndrome, shock, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, and renal failure.
Patients with small-vessel occlusion are poor candidates 
for surgery because they lack distal target vessels to use for 
bypass. These patients should be offered a trial of thromboly-
sis, unless they have contraindications to thrombolysis or their 
ischemia is so severe that the time needed to achieve adequate 
lysis is considered too long. The major contraindications of 
thrombolysis are recent stroke, intracranial primary malignancy, 
brain metastases, or intracranial surgical intervention. Relative 
contraindications for performance of thrombolysis include renal 
insufficiency, allergy to contrast material, cardiac thrombus, 
diabetic retinopathy, coagulopathy, and recent arterial puncture 
or surgery (Table 23-21).
Advances in clot removal techniques with percutaneous 
mechanical thrombectomy and thromboaspiration may extend 
the applicability of this intervention to patients with more 
advanced degrees of ALI (class IIb) and contraindications to 
thrombolysis. Several thrombectomy devices have received 
FDA approval for acute lower extremity arterial thrombosis. 
The utility of these thrombectomy devices is that they can be 
used as standalone therapy when there are contraindications 
for thrombolytic therapy. Additionally, these thrombectomy 
devices can be used in conjunction with thrombolytic agents, 
for pharmacomechanical thrombectomy, to enhance clot lysis 
and to limit the doses and time required for thrombolysis.173,174
Surgical Treatment
Embolectomy.  When a decision is made to proceed with 
open surgical intervention, the abdomen, contralateral groin, 
and entire lower extremity are prepped in the field. The groin 
is opened through a vertical incision, exposing the CFA and 
its bifurcation. Frequently, the location of the embolus at the 
femoral bifurcation is readily apparent by the presence of a pal-
pable proximal femoral pulse, which disappears distally. The 
artery is clamped and opened transversely over the bifurcation. 
Table 23-21
Contraindications to thrombolytic therapy
Absolute contraindications
Established cerebrovascular events (including transient  
  ischemic attack) within last 2 months
Active bleeding diathesis
Recent (<10 days) gastrointestinal bleeding
Neurosurgery (intracranial or spinal) within last 3 months
Intracranial trauma within last 3 months
Intracranial malignancy or metastasis
Relative major contraindications
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation within last 10 days
Major nonvascular surgery or trauma within last 10 days
Uncontrolled hypertension (>180 mmHg systolic or  
  >110 mmHg diastolic)
Puncture of noncompressible vessel
Intracranial tumor
Recent eye surgery
Minor contraindications
Hepatic failure, particularly with coagulopathy
Bacterial endocarditis
Pregnancy
Diabetic hemorrhagic retinopathy
888
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Thrombus is extracted by passing a Fogarty balloon embolec-
tomy catheter. Good back-bleeding and antegrade bleeding 
suggest that the entire clot has been removed. Embolic mate-
rial often forms a cast of the vessel and is sent for culture and 
histologic examination. Completion angiography is advisable to 
ascertain the adequacy of clot removal. The artery is then closed 
and the patient fully anticoagulated.
When an embolus lodges in the popliteal artery, in most 
cases it can be extracted via a femoral incision using the tech-
niques previously described. A femoral approach is preferred 
because the larger diameter of the femoral artery results in 
decreased likelihood of arterial compromise when the arte-
riotomy is closed. The disadvantage with using the femoral 
approach for embolectomy is the greater difficulty involved in 
directing the embolectomy catheter into each of the infrapopli-
teal arteries. Use of fluoroscopic imaging and an over-the-wire 
thrombectomy catheter can overcome this problem. Alterna-
tively, use of a separate incision to expose the popliteal bifurca-
tion may be necessary to achieve a complete thrombectomy.
A more complex situation arises when a patient has 
antecedent peripheral vascular disease and in situ thrombosis 
develops on top of pre-existing atheroma because, frequently, 
embolectomy catheters will not pass through these occlusions. 
Similarly, when a bypass graft fails, it is usually due to progres-
sion of atheroma proximal or distal to the graft anastomoses or 
to intrinsic stenoses that develop within a vein graft. In these 
scenarios, expeditious angiography is useful to determine the 
extent of the occlusion, to search for inflow and distal outflow 
vessels, and to decide whether thrombolysis or surgery will be 
the better intervention. Although the surgeon’s preference tends 
to dictate the approach selected, the decision is based on the 
presence or absence of good target vessels and availability of 
a suitable bypass conduit. If there are good distal vessels and 
the saphenous vein is suitable, surgical bypass is recommended, 
because it is fast, durable, and reliable. In the absence of a good 
distal target and saphenous vein, or in a patient at high risk for 
surgery, lysis is recommended.
Bypass Graft Thrombectomy.  Bypass thrombectomy is more 
likely to succeed with prosthetic bypasses. Bypass graft revision 
or replacement is more appropriate for acute vein graft failures 
because they are less likely to respond to thrombolysis and 
require some type of revision, such as valve lysis, interposition, 
or extension. Thrombectomy of autogenous grafts is prone to 
failure unless an anatomic cause for failure such as a retained 
valve or unligated side branch is found and corrected. The per-
formance of a fasciotomy to circumvent reperfusion injury/ 
compartment syndrome is an important consideration.
Complications Related to Treatment for Acute 
Limb Ischemia
Adverse events related to catheter-directed thrombolysis are 
primarily related to bleeding complications. The overall risk 
of hemorrhagic stroke from a thrombolysis procedure has been 
reported to be 1% to 2.3%, with 50% of hemorrhagic compli-
cations occurring during the thrombolytic procedure.175 Hema-
toma at the vascular puncture site has been reported in 12% 
to 17% of cases. Gastrointestinal bleeding is reported in 5% 
to 10% of cases. Hematuria following thrombolysis is uncom-
mon and should prompt a search for urinary tumors. Hemor-
rhage requiring transfusion can occur in approximately 25% 
of patients undergoing thrombolysis.167,172 Lytic agents are 
absolutely contraindicated in patients with intracranial surgery, 
intracranial hemorrhage within the last 3 months, or any active 
bleeding. Most bleeding complications occur at the arterial 
puncture sites, but concealed retroperitoneal bleeding is pos-
sible. The most feared complication that patients can sustain is 
intracerebral hemorrhage. Older patients may be more suscep-
tible to this complication, and thus many interventionalists are 
extremely reticent to use thrombolysis in patients older than 
80 years of age.
Patients who are treated for acute ischemia are susceptible 
to two major complications following revascularization: reper-
fusion and compartment syndromes. Other procedure-related 
complications include arterial rethrombosis, recurrent emboli-
zation, and arterial injuries secondary to the balloon catheter 
manipulations.
Reperfusion of the ischemic limb is variable in its physi-
ologic effects and directly relates to the severity and extent 
of the ischemia. Patients with a saddle embolus of the aortic 
bifurcation and severely ischemic limbs may develop the full-
blown “reperfusion syndrome,” whereas patients with minimal 
muscle ischemia who are reperfused in a timely fashion essen-
tially develop no effects. Many patients with ALI have severe 
underlying cardiac disease and are unable to tolerate even short 
ischemic periods. Complications occurring after revasculariza-
tion of the lower extremity and causes of recurrent thrombosis 
are listed in Table 23-22.
Compartment syndrome occurs after prolonged ischemia 
is followed by reperfusion. The capillaries leak fluid into the 
interstitial space in the muscles, which are enclosed within a 
nondistensible fascial envelope. When the pressure inside the 
compartment exceeds the capillary perfusion pressure, nutri-
ent flow ceases and progressive ischemia occurs, even in the 
presence of peripheral pulses. Consequently, every patient who 
has sustained an ischemic event and is reperfused is monitored 
for compartment syndrome, which is characterized by exces-
sive pain in the compartment, pain on passive stretching of the 
compartment, and sensory loss due to nerve compression of the 
nerves coursing though the compartment (Table 23-23 and Fig. 
23-62). The most commonly affected compartment is the ante-
rior compartment in the leg. Numbness in the web space between 
the first and second toes is diagnostic due to compression of 
the deep peroneal nerve. Compartment pressure is measured by 
inserting an arterial line into the compartment and recording 
the pressure. Although controversial, pressures greater than 20 
mmHg are an indication for fasciotomy. Compartment pressures 
are relieved in the leg by medial and lateral incisions. Through 
Table 23-22
Complications of arterial revascularization
Compartment syndrome
Ischemic neuropathy
Muscle necrosis
Recurrent thrombosis
Lower leg swelling
Reperfusion syndrome
  Hypotension
  Hyperkalemia
  Myoglobinuria
  Renal failure
889
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
the medial incision, long openings are then made in the fascia 
of the superficial and deep posterior compartments. Through 
the lateral incision, the anterior and peroneal compartments are 
opened. Both skin and fascial incisions should be of adequate 
length to ensure full compartment decompression. Laboratory 
evidence of rhabdomyolysis is seen in 20% of cases. The myo-
globin from damaged muscle precipitates in kidney tubules and 
causes acute tubular necrosis. Alkalinization of urine increases 
the solubility of myoglobin, thus preventing it from crystallizing 
in the tubules. In addition to alkalinization, therapy consists of 
forced saline diuresis and removal of the source of dead muscle 
that is releasing the myoglobin.
Clinical Manifestations of  
Chronic Limb Ischemia
The term CLI is reserved for patients with objectively proven 
arterial occlusive disease and symptoms lasting for more than 
2 weeks. Symptoms include rest pain and tissue loss, such as 
Table 23-23
Fascial compartments of the lower leg
Anterior Compartment
Lateral Compartment
Superficial Posterior 
Compartment
Deep Posterior  
Compartment
Muscles
Tibialis anterior
Extensor digitorum longus
Peroneus tertius
Extensor hallucis longus
Extensor digitorum brevis
Extensor hallucis brevis
Peroneus longus
Peroneus brevis
Gastrocnemius
Plantaris
Soleus
Tibialis posterior
Flexor digitorum longus
Flexor hallucis longus
Artery
Anterior tibial artery
Anterior and posterior tibial 
branches of the popliteal artery
Posterior tibial artery
Peroneal artery
Nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Superficial peroneal nerve
Tibial nerve
Tibia
   Anterior
compartment
Lateral
compartment
Fibula
Deep posterior
compartment
Superficial posterior
     compartment
Figure 23-62.  Schematic illustration of fascial compartments of 
the lower extremity.
ulceration or gangrene (Table 23-24). The diagnosis should 
be corroborated with noninvasive diagnostic tests, such as the 
ABI, toe pressures, and transcutaneous oxygen measurements. 
Ischemic rest pain most commonly occurs below an ankle pres-
sure of 50 mmHg or a toe pressure less than 30 mmHg.2 Ulcers 
are not always of an ischemic etiology (Table 23-25). In many 
instances, there are other etiologic factors (traumatic, venous, or 
neuropathic) that are contributory, but it is underlying peripheral 
arterial disease that may be responsible for delayed or absent 
healing (Fig. 23-63). Healing of ulcers requires an inflamma-
tory response and greater perfusion than is required to support 
intact skin and underlying tissues. As a result, the ankle and toe 
pressure levels needed for healing are higher than the pressures 
seen with ischemic rest pain. For patients with ulcers or gan-
grene, the presence of CLI is suggested by an ankle pressure less 
than 70 mmHg or a toe systolic pressure less than 50 mmHg.2 
It is important to understand that there is no definite consensus 
regarding the vascular hemodynamic parameters required to 
make the diagnosis of CLI.
One of the most common sites for occlusive disease is in 
the distal SFA as it passes deep through the adductor canal. It 
may be that the entrapment by the adductor hiatus prevents the 
compensatory dilation that occurs in atherosclerotic vessels. 
Stenoses, which develop here, progress to occlusion of the dis-
tal third of the SFA (Fig. 23-64). When distal SFA occlusion 
develops slowly, it may be totally asymptomatic because of 
development of collaterals from the proximal SFA, or the PFA 
can bypass the occlusion and reconstitute the popliteal artery. 
Symptom development is a function of the extent of occlusion, 
adequacy of collaterals, and the activity level of the patients.
Presenting symptoms of femoropopliteal occlusive dis-
ease are broadly classified into two types: limb-threatening 
and non–limb-threatening ischemia. Claudication is non–limb-
threatening, while rest pain, ulceration, and gangrene are limb-
threatening and warrant urgent intervention. Occlusive disease 
of the femoral artery may be isolated or occur in conjunction 
with multilevel disease that involves both the aortoiliac segment 
and the tibial vessels. Symptoms in patients with multilevel dis-
ease are more severe than in those with single-level disease. Pain 
from isolated SFA and popliteal occlusion typically manifests as 
calf claudication. Cramping pain develops in the calf on ambu-
lation, occurs at a reproducible distance, and is relieved by rest. 
Activities such as climbing stairs or going uphill also exacerbate 
the pain. Many patients report worsening symptoms during cold 
890
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
weather. It is important to evaluate whether the symptoms are 
progressive or static. In greater than 70% of patients, the disease 
is stable, particularly with risk factor modification.
Progression of the underlying atherosclerotic process 
is more likely to occur in patients with diabetes, those who 
continue to smoke, and those who fail to modify their athero-
sclerotic risk factors. In comparison, rest pain is constant, and 
usually occurs in the forefoot across the metatarsophalangeal 
joint. It is worse at night and requires placing the foot in a 
Table 23-24
Clinical categories of chronic limb ischemia
Grade
Category
Clinical Description
Objective Criteria
0
0
Asymptomatic—no hemodynamically 
significant occlusive disease
Normal treadmill or reactive hyperemia test
1
Mild claudication
Able to complete treadmill exercisea; AP after exercise 
>50 mmHg but at least 20 mmHg lower than resting value
I
2
Moderate claudication
Between categories 1 and 3
3
Severe claudication
Cannot complete standard treadmill exercisea and AP after 
exercise <50 mmHg
IIb
4
Ischemic rest pain
Resting AP <40 mmHg, flat or barely pulsatile ankle or 
metatarsal PVR; TP <30 mmHg
IIIb
5
Minor tissue loss—nonhealing ulcer, focal 
gangrene with diffuse pedal ischemia
Resting AP <60 mmHg, ankle or metatarsal PVR flat or 
barely pulsatile; TP <40 mmHg
6
Major tissue loss—extending above TM 
level, functional foot no longer salvageable
Same as category 5
aFive minutes at 2 miles per hour on a 12% incline of treadmill exercise.
bGrades II and III, categories 4, 5, and 6, are encompassed by the term chronic critical ischemia.
AP = ankle pressure; PVR = pulse volume recording; TM = transmetatarsal; TP = toe pressure.
Table 23-25
Symptoms and signs of neuropathic ulcer versus isch-
emic ulcer
Neuropathic Ulcer
Ischemic Ulcer
Painless
Painful
Normal pulses
Absent pulses
Regular margins, typically 
punched-out appearance
Irregular margin
Often located on plantar 
surface of foot
Commonly located on toes, 
glabrous margins
Presence of calluses
Calluses absent or infrequent
Loss of sensation, reflexes, 
and vibration
Variable sensory findings
Increased in blood flow 
(arteriovenous shunting)
Decreased in blood flow
Dilated veins
Collapsed veins
Dry, warm foot
Cold foot
Bony deformities
No bony deformities
Red or hyperemic in 
appearance
Pale and cyanotic in 
appearance
dependent position to improve symptoms. Patients may report 
that they either sleep in a chair or hang the foot off the side of 
the bed. The pain is severe and relentless, even with narcot-
ics. Ischemic ulceration most commonly involves the toes. Any 
toe can be affected. Occasionally ulcers develop on the dor-
sum of the foot. Ulceration can occur in atypical positions in an 
ischemic foot from trauma such as friction from poorly fitting 
shoes. Injury to a foot with borderline ischemia can convert an 
otherwise stable situation into one that is limb-threatening. The 
initial development of gangrene commonly involves the digits. 
As with all vascular patients, it is important to evaluate their 
risk factors, intercurrent cardiac diseases, and any prior vascular 
interventions.
Treatment Considerations for  
Chronic Limb Ischemia
Patients with vascular diseases frequently have complicated 
medical comorbidities. Careful patient evaluation and selection 
should be performed for any peripheral arterial vascular proce-
dure. The fundamental principle is to assess not only the surgical 
risk from the peripheral arterial system but also the global nature 
of the atherosclerotic process. Full cardiac evaluations are often 
necessary due to the high incidence of concomitant atheroscle-
rotic coronary artery disease, resulting in a high risk for ischemic 
events. Hertzer and associates reviewed coronary angiogra-
phies on 1000 patients undergoing elective vascular procedure 
and identified 25% of concomitant correctable coronary artery 
disease including 21% in patients undergoing elective periph-
eral vascular intervention.8 Conte and associates analyzed their 
20-year experience in 1642 open lower extremity reconstructive 
surgeries and concluded that patients requiring lower extremity 
reconstruction presented an increasingly complex medical and 
surgical challenge compared with the previous decade in a ter-
tiary practice setting.176 With aging of the population, a growing 
number of vascular patients have prohibitive medical cormobidi-
ties and are deemed high-risk for open surgical repair. Endovas-
cular intervention provides an attractive alternative.
891
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
As for open surgical repair, the clinical indications for 
endovascular intervention of lower extremity peripheral arte-
rial diseases include lifestyle-limiting claudication, ischemic 
rest pain, and tissue loss or gangrene. Importantly, endovascu-
lar procedures should be performed by a competent vascular 
interventionist who understands the vascular disease process 
and is familiar with a variety of endovascular techniques. In 
addition, certain lesions may not be amendable to endovas-
cular treatment or may be associated with poor outcomes, 
such as long segment occlusion, heavily calcified lesion, 
orifice lesion, or lesions that cannot be traversed by a guide-
wire. Proper selection of patients and techniques is critical in 
achieving good long-term outcome.
B
A
Figure 23-63.  A. A neuropathic ulcer is characterized by a punched-out appearance with loss of sensation in the surrounding skin. The foot 
may be warm to touch, and pulses may be present in the distal pedal arteries. B. An ischemic ulcer is characterized by a gangrenous skin 
change in the foot or toes. The foot is usually cold to touch with absent pedal pulses. The foot is painful to touch with decreased distal capil-
lary refills.
Figure 23-64.  Computed tomography angiogram of a patient with 
an occluded left superficial femoral artery (single long arrow) with 
reconstituted superficial femoral artery at the level of mid-thigh. 
Diffuse arterial calcifications (double small arrows) are noted in 
the mid and distal left superficial femoral arteries.
Endovascular intervention for lower extremity occlusive 
disease is continuously evolving. Success and patency rates of 
endovascular intervention are closely related to the anatomic and 
morphologic characteristics of the treated lesions. The TASC 
work group made recommendations on the intervention strate-
gies of lower extremity arterial diseases based on the morpho-
logic characteristics. Based on TASC guidelines, endovascular 
treatment is recommended for type A lesions, open surgery is 
recommended for type D lesions, and no recommendations were 
made for types B and C lesions. However, with rapid advance-
ment in endovascular technologies, there are increased numbers 
of lesions amendable to endovascular interventions.
There is less literature support for infrapopliteal endo-
vascular intervention due to higher complication and lower 
success rates. The treatment is restricted for patients with limb-
threatening ischemia who lack surgical alternatives. However, 
with further advancement of endovascular technology and 
the development of new devices, endovascular intervention is 
becoming an integral part of treatment (Table 23-26). By itself 
or combined with open technique, percutaneous intervention 
plays an important role in therapeutic options for lower extrem-
ity occlusive disease. As described by TASC guidelines, four 
criteria should be measured to evaluate the clinical success of 
the treatment: improvement in walking distance, symptomatic 
improvement, quality of life, and overall graft patency. These 
criteria should all be carefully weighed and evaluated for each 
individual prior to endovascular therapy.
Endovascular Treatment
Technical Considerations.  A sterile field is required in 
either an operating room or an angiography suite with image 
capability. The most common and safest access site is CFA 
via either a retrograde or an antegrade approach. For diagnos-
tic angiography, arterial access should be contralateral to the 
symptomatic sides. For therapeutic procedures, location of the 
lesion and the anatomic structures of the arterial tree deter-
mine the puncture site. To avoid puncturing the iliac artery or 
SFA, the femoral head is located under the fluoroscopy and 
used as the guide for the level of needle entry. In addition, 
there are several useful techniques to help access a pulseless 
CFA including ultrasound-guided puncture, using a micro-
puncture kit, and targeting calcification in a calcified vessel. 
The antegrade approach may be challenging, particularly in 
obese patients. Meticulous technique is crucial in preventing 
892
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
complications, and a bony landmark can be used as guidance 
to ensure CFA puncture.
Traversing the lesion with a wire is the most critical part 
of the procedure. Typically, 0.035-inch guidewires are used for 
femoropopliteal lesions, and 0.014- or 0.018-inch guidewires 
are used for infrapopliteal access. Hydrophilic-coated wires, 
such as Glidewires, are useful in navigating through tight ste-
nosis or occlusion. An angled-tip wire with a torque device may 
be helpful in crossing an eccentric lesion, and a shaped selec-
tive catheter is frequently used in helping manipulating the wire 
across the lesion. The soft and floppy end of the wire is care-
fully advanced crossing the lesion under fluoroscopy, and gentle 
force is applied while manipulating the wire. Once the lesion 
us traversed, one needs to pay particular attention on the tip of 
the wire to ensure a secure wire access and avoid vessel wall 
perforation or dissection.
Once the access to the diseased vessel is secured and the 
wire has successfully traversed the lesion, several treatment 
modalities can be used either alone or in conjunction with oth-
ers, including angioplasty, stent or stent graft placement, and 
atherectomy. The available angioplasty techniques are balloon 
angioplasty, cryoplasty, subintimal angioplasty, and cutting bal-
loon; the most commonly used atherectomy techniques include 
percutaneous atherectomy catheter and laser atherectomy device.
Systemic anticoagulation should be maintained routinely 
during lower extremity arterial interventions to minimize the 
risk of pericatheter thrombosis. Unfractionated heparin is the 
most commonly used agent, administered using a weight-
based formula. We typically use 80 to 100 mg/kg initial bolus 
for therapeutic procedure to achieve an activated clotting time 
above 250 seconds upon catheter insertion and administer a 
Table 23-26
Summary of endovascular treatment strategies using device-based infrapopliteal intervention
Intervention
Advantages
Disadvantages
Angioplasty
•  Easy to use
•  Broad range of applications
•  Failure in long lesions, calcified lesions, and 
disease at multiple levels
Balloon-expandable 
stent
•  Overcomes arterial recoil from angioplasty
•  Useful in treatment of flow-limiting dissection
•  Crushability can lead to restenosis
•  Poor distal runoff can result in stent thrombosis
•  Limited data
Self-expanding 
stent
•  Vessel conformability and wall apposition prevent 
kinking and crushing of stent
•  Limited sizes
•  Limited data; multicenter trials under way
Bioabsorbable stent
•  Overcomes arterial recoil from angioplasty
•  Absorbed long term to prevent risk of stent thrombosis
•  Limited data; multicenter trials under way
Cryoplasty
•  Reduces the risk of flow-limiting dissection, therefore 
reducing the need for stent implantation
•  Short-term results of a multicenter trial are 
promising; however, long-term data are limited
Cutting balloon
•  Useful in anastomotic segments of bypass grafts and 
in-stent restenosis where “watermelon seeding” can 
prevent adequate expansion of plaque
•  Limited data
Mechanical 
atherectomy
•  Allows for debulking of plaque without the need for 
stent implantation in most cases
•  Allows for removal of plaque for histologic analysis
•  Limited use in areas of heavy calcification
•  No large, randomized, prospective trial 
comparing this technique to angioplasty and 
stenting
Laser
•  Useful in acute thrombotic and chronic total 
occlusions
•  Minimal data in infrapopliteal arteries
•  Need adjunctive treatment with angioplasty, 
stenting, or atherectomy
subsequent 1000 units for each additional hour of the procedure. 
Newer agents, such as low molecular weight heparin, platelet 
IIb/IIIa inhibitors, direct thrombin inhibitors, or recombinant 
hirudin, have been available and can be used either alone or 
in conjunction with heparin particularly in patients sensitive 
to unfractionated heparin. After the procedure, all patients 
are placed on antiplatelet therapy, such as aspirin. Additional 
antiplatelet agents, such as clopidogrel (Plavix), are given to 
selected patients with stent placement for at least 6 weeks after 
lower extremity interventions unless otherwise contraindicated.
Percutaneous Transluminal Balloon Angioplasty.  After 
the lesion is crossed with a wire, an appropriated balloon angio-
plasty catheter is selected and tracked along the wire to traverse 
the lesion. The length of the selected catheter should be slightly 
longer than the lesion, and the diameter should be equal to the 
adjacent normal vessel. The balloon tends to be approximately 
10% to 20% oversized. The radiopaque markers of the balloon 
catheter are placed so that they will straddle the lesion. Then, 
the balloon is inflated with saline and contrast mixture to allow 
visualization of the insufflation process under the fluoroscopy 
(Fig. 23-65). The patient may experience mild pain, which is 
not uncommon. However, severe pain can be indicative of ves-
sel rupture, dissection, or other complications. An angiography 
is crucial in confirming the intraluminal location of the catheter 
and absence of contrast extravasation. The inflation is continued 
until the waist of the atherosclerotic lesion is disappeared and 
the balloon is at the full profile. Frequently, several inflations 
are required to achieve a full profile of the balloon (Fig. 23-66). 
Occasionally, a lower profile balloon is needed to predilate the 
tight stenosis so that the selected balloon catheter can cross the 
lesion.
893
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
Besides length and diameter, the operators need to be 
familiar with several balloon characters. Noncompliant and low-
compliant balloons tend to be inflated to their preset diameter 
and offer greater dilating force at the site of stenosis. Low-
compliant balloons are the mainstay for peripheral intervention. 
A balloon with a low profile is used to minimize complications 
at the entry site and for crossing the tight lesions. Upon inflation, 
most balloons do not rewrap to their preinflation diameter and 
assume larger profiles. Furthermore, trackability, pushability, and 
Figure 23-65.  A. Angiogram demonstrating a focal stenosis in the superficial femoral artery (arrow). B. This lesion was treated with a bal-
loon angioplasty catheter that inflated a dilating balloon and expanded the flow lumen. C. Completion angiogram demonstrating satisfactory 
radiographic result.
Figure 23-66.  A. Angiogram demonstrating a segmental occlusion in the distal superficial femoral artery (single arrow). B. This lesion was 
treated with cryoplasty, which lowered the balloon catheter temperature to a temporary freezing state during the balloon angioplasty procedure 
(double arrows). C. Completion angiogram demonstrated satisfactory result with no evidence of vessel dissection.
crossability of the balloon should be considered when choosing 
a particular type of balloon. Lastly, shoulder length is an impor-
tant characteristic when performing PTA to avoid injury to the 
adjacent arterial segments. After PTA, a completion angiogram 
is performed while the wire is still in place. Leaving the wire in 
place provides access for repeating the procedure if the result is 
unsatisfactory.
PTA is an established and effective therapy for select 
patients with lower extremity occlusive diseases. Studies have 
894
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
shown that PTA of femoropopliteal segment achieved over 90% 
technical success rate and 38% to 58% 5-year primary patency 
rates.177-179 However, efficacy of PTA is highly dependent on 
anatomic selection and patient condition.134 PTA of lesions lon-
ger than 7 to 10 cm offers limited patency, whereas PTA of 
shorter lesions, such as those less than 3 cm, has fairly good 
results. Lofberg and associates performed 127 femoropop-
liteal PTA procedures and reported a primary 5-year success 
rate of 12% in limbs with occlusion longer than 5 cm versus 
32% in limbs with occlusion less than 5 cm in length.180 Occlu-
sive lesions have much worse initial technical success rates 
than stenotic lesions. Concentric lesions respond better to PTA 
than eccentric lesions, and heavy calcifications have a negative 
impact on success rates. A meta-analysis by Hunink and associ-
ates showed that adjusted 5-year primary patencies after angio-
plasty of femoropopliteal lesions varied from 12% to 68%, with 
the best results being for patients with claudication and stenotic 
lesions.179 Distal runoff is another powerful predictor of long-
term success. Johnston analyzed 254 consecutive patients who 
underwent femoral and popliteal PTA and reported a 5-year 
patency rate of 53% for stenotic lesions and 36% for occlusive 
lesions in patients with good runoff versus a 5-year patency 
rate of 31% for stenotic lesions and 16% for occlusive lesions 
in patients with poor runoff.178 Literature reviews showed that 
5-year patency rates varied from 27% to 67% based on runoff 
status.179
Due to limited success with infrapopliteal PTA, the indi-
cation for infrapopliteal PTA is stringent and reserved for limb 
salvage. Current patency rates from infrapopliteal PTA can be 
improved further by proper patient selection, ensuring straight-
line flow to the foot in at least one tibial vessel, and close patient 
surveillance for early reintervention. Possible future advances, 
including the use of drug-eluting stents, cutting balloons, and 
atherectomy devices, are being investigated to improve clini-
cal outcomes following endovascular interventions on the tibial 
arteries. Varty and associates reported a 1-year limb salvage 
rate of 77% in patients with critical ischemia who underwent 
infrapopliteal PTA.181 In patients with favorable anatomies, the 
2-year limb salvage rate after infrapopliteal PTA is expected to 
exceed 80%.
Subintimal Angioplasty.  The technique of subintimal angio-
plasty was first described in 1987 when successful establish-
ment of flow was made by accidental creation of a subintimal 
channel during treatment of a long popliteal artery occlusion. 
Subintimal angioplasty is recommended for chronic occlusion, 
long segment of lesion, and heavily calcified lesions. In addi-
tion, this technique is applicable for vessels with diffuse dis-
ease and for vessels that had previously failed an intraluminal 
approach, when it is difficult to negotiate the wire across the 
entire diseased segment without dissection.
The principle of this technique is to bypass the occlusion 
by deliberately creating a subintimal dissection plan commenc-
ing proximal to the lesion and continuing in the subintimal 
space before break back into the true lumen distal to the lesion. 
The occluded lumen is recanalized through the subintimal plan. 
Subintimal angioplasty can be performed through either an ipsi-
lateral antegrade or contralateral retrograde approach using the 
CFA approach. If selecting contralateral CFA puncture, a long 
guiding sheath is placed across the aortic bifurcation to provide 
access for the femoropopliteal and infrapopliteal vessels. The 
subintimal dissection is initiated at the origin of an occlusion 
by directing the tip of an angled guide wire, usually an angled 
hydrophilic wire, such as a Glidewire. A supporting catheter 
is used to guide the tip of the guidewire away from the impor-
tant collaterals. When the wire is advanced, a loop is naturally 
formed at the tip of the guidewire. Once the subintimal plan is 
entered, the wire tends to move freely in dissection space. Sub-
intimal location of the wire and the catheter can be confirmed 
by injecting a small amount of diluted contrast. At this point, 
the wire and the catheter are then advanced along the subintimal 
plan until the occlusion segment is passed. A loss of resistance 
is often encountered as the guidewire re-enters the true lumen 
distal to the occlusion. Recanalization is confirmed by advanc-
ing the catheter over the guidewire beyond the point of re-entry 
and obtaining an angiogram. This is followed by a balloon 
angioplasty. To confirm the patency following balloon dilata-
tion, a completion angiogram is performed prior to withdraw-
ing the catheter and wire. If flow is impaired, repeat balloon 
dilatation may be necessary. Frequently, a stent is required to 
maintain a patent lumen and treat residual stenosis if more than 
30% luminal reduction is confirmed on completion angiogram.
Multiple studies have demonstrated the efficacy of subin-
timal angioplasty. Bolia and colleagues reported their extensive 
experiences on subintimal angioplasty for treating long-segment 
occlusions of infrainguinal vessels.182,183 They achieved a techni-
cal success rate of over 80% for both femoropopliteal and tibial 
arteries. One-year patency rates varied from 53% for infrapopli-
teal vessels to 71% for femoropopliteal segments. Limb salvage 
rates reached over 80% at 12 months. They also reported that 
the factors influencing patency are smoking, number of runoff 
vessels, and occlusion length. Studies by other groups showed 
similar results.184,185 Treiman and colleagues treated 25 patients 
with 6- to 18-cm femoropopliteal occlusion and achieved a 
technical success rate of 92% and a 13-month primary patency 
rate of 92%,185 whereas Lipsitz and associates reported a techni-
cal success rate of 87% in 39 treated patients and a 12-month 
cumulative patency rate of 74%.184 In addition, Ingle and asso-
ciates reported a technical success rate of 87% in 67 patients 
with femoropopliteal lesions and a 36-month limb salvage rate 
of 94%.186 As demonstrated herein, although technical success 
rates are similar in most series, the patency rates vary widely 
in different studies. Patient selection, anatomic character, and 
lesion locations may account for the wide range of outcomes.
Stent Placement.  Although suggested by Dotter during the 
late 1960s, the use of an endoluminal stent was not pursued until 
the limitations of PTA were widely recognized. There are sev-
eral situations where stent placement is appealing. The primary 
indication is the potential salvage of an unacceptable angio-
plasty result. Stent placement is typically used when residual 
stenosis after PTA is 30% or greater. An endoluminal stent is 
also used for dissection, perforation, and other PTA complica-
tions. Primary stent placement has become a viable alternative 
for treating ulcerative lesions that may potentially be the source 
for embolization. Primary stent is also used to treat occlusive 
lesions that have a tendency for reocclusion and distal emboliza-
tion after PTA. In addition, an endoluminal stent is potentially 
beneficial for early restenosis after PTA. Drug-eluting stents are 
currently under investigation in the United States and may be 
promising in decreasing restenosis rates.
Although technical success rates are high, published series 
on femoropopliteal artery stents show that patency rates are 
comparable to PTA alone, with primary patency rates varying 
from 18% to 72% at 3 years.134,187 Gray and associates stented 
58 limbs after suboptimal PTA for long SFA lesions and 
895
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
demonstrated a 1-year primary patency rate of 22%.188 How-
ever, Mewissen treated 137 limbs using self-expanding SMART 
nitinol stents in patients with TASC A, B, and C femoropopli-
teal lesions and reported a 1-year primary patency of 76% and 
a 24-month primary patency rate of 60%.189 Appropriate patient 
selection and the anatomic characteristics of the lesions are cru-
cial in the success of treatment outcomes. Additionally, stent 
characteristics may contribute to the patency rate.
Several clinical studies have demonstrated the significant 
improvements of the new generation of nitinol stents for the 
SFA lesions: the German Multicenter Experience, the Mewis-
sen trial, the BLASTER Trial, and the SIROCCO trial.190 The 
German Multicenter Experience was a retrospective review of 
111 SFA stenting procedures and predicted that the 6-month 
patency rate for SMART stents was 82% versus 37% for the 
Wallstent. The BLASTER (Bilateral Lower Arterial Stenting 
Employing Reopro) Trial evaluated the feasibility of using 
nitinol stents with and without intravenous abciximab for the 
treatment of femoral artery disease, and the preliminary results 
showed a 1-year clinical patency rate of 83%.191
Furthermore, the drug-eluting stent, which proved effec-
tive in decreasing restenosis in coronary intervention, may 
offer another promising alternative in lower extremity diseases. 
The drug released over a period of time interferes with smooth 
muscle cell proliferation, the main cellular element and source 
of extracellular matrix–producing restenosis. The first drug-
eluting stent clinical trial used Cordis Cypher SMART stents 
coated with sirolimus (SIROCCO trial).192 The SIROCCO 
results showed binary in-lesion restenosis rates of 0% in the 
sirolimus-eluting group versus 23.5% in the noneluting group 
at 6-month follow-up angiography. The PaRADISE (Preventing 
Amputations Using Drug-Eluting Stents) Trial investigated the 
efficacy and safety of using balloon-expandable drug-eluting 
stents to prevent amputations in patients with below-the-knee 
critical limb ischemia.13 One hundred six patients (118 limbs) 
were treated with drug-eluting stents in this prospective, non-
randomized trial. There were 228 drug-eluting stents implanted 
(83% Cypher [Cordis, Johnson & Johnson, Warren, NJ], 17% 
Taxus [Boston Scientific, Maple Grove, MN]). The average 
length treated was 60 mm. The 3-year cumulative incidence of 
amputation was 6%, the survival rate was 71%, and the ampu-
tation-free survival rate was 68%. Only 12% of patients who 
died had a preceding major amputation. Rutherford category, 
age, creatinine level, and dialysis were predictors of death but 
not amputation. Target limb revascularization occurred in 15% 
of patients.
Stent Graft.  The concept of endobypass using stent graft in 
treating atherosclerotic SFA disease has been entertained. A 
stent graft is placed percutaneously across a long segment or 
multiple segments of lesions and is used to create a femoro-
popliteal bypass. Theoretically, endobypass has the potential 
of being as successful as surgical bypass graft by relining the 
vessel wall in its anatomic position without the negative impact 
of anastomosis. Stent grafts can be divided into two categories: 
unsupported and fully supported. The unsupported grafts consist 
of segments of bypass graft, such as PTFE, with an expandable 
stent at one or both ends. The unsupported grafts are flexible 
with a low profile, but prone to external compression. The sup-
ported stent grafts consist of a metallic skeleton covered with 
graft fabric. The presence of a dense metal skeleton promotes 
an extensive inflammatory response and increases the risk of 
thrombosis. There is no FDA-approved stent graft for peripheral 
intervention. However, Viabahn (WL Gore & Associates, Flag-
staff, AZ) is the most commonly used device in the United 
States and is composed of an ultra-thin PTFE graft externally 
supported by self-expanding nitinol meshwork. The Viabahn 
device has a specific delivery mechanism by pulling back the 
attached string, which results in proximal-to-distal delivery of 
the endoprosthesis.
Although it is an intriguing concept, data on endobypass 
results are limited, and the graft thrombosis rate is high. Addi-
tionally, covering major collateral vessels can potentially jeop-
ardize the viability of the limb if stent graft occlusion occurs. 
Bauermeister treated 35 patients with Hemobahn and reported a 
28.6% occlusion rate at an average 7-month follow-up.193 Kedora 
and colleagues recently conducted a prospective, randomized 
study comparing covered PTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent 
grafts with prosthetic above-the-knee femoropopliteal bypass. 
Fifty limbs were randomized into each group. Primary patency 
at 1 year was approximately 74% for both cohorts, with a mean 
follow-up of 18 months. The covered nitinol/PTFE stent graft 
in the SFA had a 1-year patency comparable to surgical bypass, 
with a significantly shorter hospital stay (0.9 vs. 3.1 days).194 A 
recent randomized prospective study comparing the treatment of 
SFA occlusive disease percutaneously with an expanded PTFE 
(ePTFE)/nitinol self-expanding stent graft (stent graft) versus 
surgical femoral to above-knee popliteal artery bypass with 
synthetic graft material showed no difference between the two 
groups with respect to primary or secondary patency rates at 48 
months.195 Mean total lesion length of the treated arterial seg-
ment in the stent graft group was 25.6 cm. The stent graft group 
demonstrated a primary patency of 72%, 63%, 63%, and 59% 
with a secondary patency of 83%, 74%, 74%, and 74% at 12, 24, 
36, and 48 months, respectively. The surgical femoral-popliteal 
group demonstrated a primary patency of 76%, 63%, 63%, and 
58% with a secondary patency of 86%, 76%, 76%, and 71% at 
12, 24, 36, and 48 months, respectively. The authors concluded 
that ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft placement can be 
offered as an alternative to treatment of the SFA segment for 
revascularization when prosthetic bypass is being considered or 
when autologous conduit is unavailable.
Atherectomy.  The basic principle of atherectomy is to remove 
the atheroma from obstructed arterial vessels. The currently 
available atherectomy devices can be generally categorized 
into directional, nondirectional, orbital, and rotational types 
based on their mecahnism. A few examples of FDA-approved 
atherectomy devices are Simpson AtheroCath (DVI, Redwood 
City, CA), Transluminal Extraction Catheter (Interventional 
Technologies, San Diego, CA), Thoratec recanalization arterial 
catheter (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA), Auth Rotablator (Heart 
Technologies, Redmond, WA), SilverHawk system (FoxHollow 
Technologies, Redwood City, CA), Jetstream atherectomy sys-
tem (Bayer, Indianola, PA), Diamondback 360° orbital atherec-
tomy device (Cardiovascular Systems, Inc., St. Paul, MN), and 
Rotablator system (Boston Scientific Corporation, Natick, MA). 
These devices either cut and remove or pulverize the atheroma 
plaques.
The Simpson AtheroCath has a directional cutting ele-
ment that is exposed to one third of the circumference of the 
arterial wall. The atheroma protruding into the window is 
excised and pushed into the collection chamber. The Translu-
minal Extraction Catheter has an over-the-wire nondirectional 
cutter mounted on the distal end of a torque tube. The excised 
atheroma is simultaneously removed by aspiration through the 
896
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
torque tube. The Thoratec recanalization arterial catheter is a 
nondirectional, noncoaxial, atheroablative device. The rotating 
cam tip pulverizes the atheromatous lesion into minute particles. 
The Auth Rotablator is a nondirectional, coaxial, atheroablative 
device with a metal burr embedded with fine diamond chips. 
SilverHawk device is a monorail catheter designed to overcome 
the drawbacks of a directional atherectomy catheter. The work-
ing end consists of a hinged housing unit containing a carbide 
cutting blade. The blade is activated from the motor drive unit, 
and the catheter is then advanced through the length of the 
lesion. Once each pass is completed, the cutter then packs the 
tissue into the distal end of the nosecone to maximize collec-
tion capacity. The SilverHawk can then either be removed or 
torqued to treat a different quadrant in the same lesion or other 
lesions. Jetstream atherectomy system is a rotating, aspirating 
catheter with tip sizes of 1.6 and 1.8 mm for tibial arteries, and 
an expandable catheter with a tip size ranging from 2.1 to 3.4 
mm for active removal of atherosclerotic debris and thrombus. 
The Diamondback 360° orbital atherectomy device uses a drive 
shaft with an eccentrically mounted, diamond-coated crown 
to create an orbital spin. As the speed of the crown increases 
from centrifugal force, it sands wider spaces, thereby provid-
ing variability in its working range. It can create a lumen that 
is >1.75 times the crossing profile depending on the size of the 
grit and the eccentricity of the offset. The greater the speed of 
the crown, the larger is the arc of debulking and, ultimately, 
the resultant lumen size. A constant flow of saline solution is 
delivered by a roller pump that lubricates the device and helps 
to flush the debris. The Rotablator system high-speed rotational 
device uses calcium ablation to achieve larger lumens. It has 
been used for more than 20 years to treat challenging, calcified 
coronary artery disease. The diamond-coated burr is designed 
to preferentially engage calcium and modify lesion compliance.
Despite the promising early technical and clinical success, 
the mid- and long-term results have been disappointing due to 
high incidence of restenosis. A multicenter clinical registry of 
plaque atherectomy in patients with femoropopliteal occlusive 
disease showed potential clinical efficacy of this technology, as 
the 6- and 12-month rates of survival free of target lesion revas-
cularization were 90% and 80%, respectively.196 Importantly, 
nearly three quarters (73%) of patients treated with plaque exci-
sion modality did not require adjunctive endovascular therapy 
as infrainguinal stenting was necessary in only 6.3% of lesions. 
Results from the TALON registry support the role of plaque exci-
sion in selected patients with lower extremity arterial disease.196
Recent technologic advances have made it possible to 
increase the spectrum of treatable peripheral arterial lesions 
with high acute procedure success rates. Recently presented data 
from multiple registries have shown some promising results in 
terms of short-term primary patency rates and freedom from 
unplanned major amputation.197,198 Randomized clinical tri-
als are expected and can hopefully provide conclusions on the 
effectiveness of these procedures.
Laser Atherectomy.  Since laser atherectomy was reported in 
the 1960s, a variety of innovative approaches have been devel-
oped trying to overcome the limitation of laser angioplasty. 
Recent developments in Excimer laser technology have led to 
increased optimism regarding the ability to safely deliver laser 
energy. Excimer laser atherectomy approved by the FDA for 
peripheral artery intervention employs precision laser energy 
control (shallow tissue penetration) and safer wavelengths 
(ultraviolet as opposed to the infrared spectra in older laser 
technology), which decrease perforation and thermal injury to 
the treated vessels.
A laser atherectomy catheter, with diameters varying from 
0.9 to 2.5 mm, is tracked over the guidewire to the desired tar-
get. Once activated, the Excimer laser uses ultraviolet energy to 
ablate the lesion and create a nonthrombogenic arterial lumen. 
This lumen is further dilated by an angioplasty balloon. Because 
the Excimer laser can potentially reduce the rate of distal embo-
lization by evaporating the lesion, it may be used as an adjunct 
tool for ostial lesions and lesions that can be traversed by a wire 
but not an angioplasty balloon catheter.
Several studies regarding the use of Excimer laser ather-
ectomy combined with balloon angioplasty on lower extremity 
occlusive disease have shown promising clinical outcomes.199,200 
The Peripheral Excimer Laser Angioplasty (PELA) trial 
involved 318 patients with chronic SFA occlusion and achieved 
a technical success rate of 83.2%, a 1-year primary patency 
rate of 33.6%, and an assisted-primary patency rate of 65%.200 
Steinkamp and his colleagues treated 127 patients with long-
segment popliteal artery occlusion using laser atherectomy fol-
lowed by balloon angioplasty and reported a 3-year primary 
patency rate of 22%.201 A multicenter clinical trial, the Laser 
Angioplasty for Critical Limb Ischemia (LACI) trial, supports 
the efficacy of this treatment modality in selected patients, with 
6-month primary patency and clinical improvement rates of 
33% and 89%, respectively.199 The technology and devices con-
tinue to evolve. With the Turbo- Booster and Turbo-Tandem 
technologies (Spectranetics Corporation, Colorado Springs, 
CO), the efficacy of plaque reduction was reported to be sig-
nificantly improved in the CliRpath Excimer Laser System 
to Enlarge Lumen Openings (CELLO) study.202 The CELLO 
study was a single-arm, prospective registry trial conducted 
at 17 investigational sites in the United States to evaluate the 
safety and efficacy of a modified laser catheter designed for 
the endovascular treatment of peripheral artery disease affecting 
the SFA and proximal popliteal artery. Laser ablation reduced 
percent diameter stenosis from 77% to 21% after adjunctive 
therapy with balloon angioplasty or balloon angioplasty with 
stenting; 12.3% patients did not receive postlaser adjunctive 
therapy. Patency rates were 59% and 54% at 6 and 12 months, 
respectively. Target lesion revascularization was not required 
in 76.9% of CELLO participants within the 1-year follow-up.
Complications of Endovascular Interventions
Angioplasty-Related Complications.  Complications related 
to PTA vary widely and include dissection, rupture, emboliza-
tion, pseudoaneurysms, restenosis, hematoma, and acute occlu-
sion secondary to thrombosis, vasospasm, or intimal injury. Clark 
and associates analyzed the data from 205 patients in the SCVIR 
Transluminal Angioplasty and Revascularization (STAR) 
registry and reported a complication rate of 7.3% for patients 
undergoing femoropopliteal angioplasty.203 Minor complications 
accounted for 75% of the cases, including distal emboli (41.7%), 
puncture site hematomas (41.7%), contained vessel rupture 
(8.3%), and vagal reactions (8.3%). In another study, Axisa 
and colleagues reported an overall rate of significant complica-
tions for patients undergoing PTA of the lower extremities of 
4.2%, including retroperitoneal bleeding (0.2%), false aneurysm 
(0.2%), ALI (1.5%), and vessel perforation (1.7%).204
Complications limiting the application of subintimal 
angioplasty are parallel to those of PTA. A study investigat-
ing the use of subintimal angioplasty in 65 patients with 
897
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
SFA occlusion found that complications developed in 15% of 
patients.205 These complications included significant stenosis 
(44%), SFA rupture (6%), distal embolization (3%), retroperi-
toneal hemorrhage (1.5%), and pseudoaneurysm (1.5%). Addi-
tional complications reported included perforation, thrombosis, 
dissection, and extensions beyond the planned re-entry site.206 
Importantly, damage to significant collateral vessels may occur 
in 1% to 1.5% of patient who undergo subintimal angioplasty. If 
a successful channel is not achieved in this situation, the patient 
may have a compromised distal circulation that necessitates dis-
tal bypass. Cryoplasty is a modified form of angioplasty, and 
long-term results on lower extremity intervention are not yet 
available. Fava and associates treated 15 patients with femo-
ropopliteal disease and had a 13% complication rate involving 
guidewire dissection and PTA-induced dissection of a tandem 
lesion remote to the cryoplasty zone.207
Endoluminal Stent– and Stent Graft–Related Complica-
tions.  In addition to the aforementioned complications with 
angioplasty, endoluminal stent is associated with the risk of 
stent fraction and deformity. The adductor canal has nonlami-
nar flow dynamics, especially with walking. The forces exerted 
on the SFA include torsion, compression, extension, and flex-
ion. These forces exert significant stress on the SFA and stents. 
In addition, the lower extremity is subject to external trauma, 
which further increases the risk of stent deformity and fracture 
(Fig. 23-67). The SIROCCO study showed that stent fracture, 
although not associated with clinical symptoms, occurs in 
18.2% of the procedures involving both drug-eluting stents and 
control stents.192
Stent grafts may present additional complication of cover-
ing important collaterals, which results in compromised distal 
circulation. A prospective study evaluating Hemobahn stent 
grafts in the treatment of femoropopliteal arterial occlusions 
demonstrated a 23% immediate complication rate including 
distal embolization (7.7%), groin hematoma (13.5%), and arte-
riovenous fistula (1.9%).208
Atherectomy-Related Complications.  Overall complication 
rates associated with atherectomy range from 15.4% to 42.8%, 
including spasm, thrombosis, dissection, perforation, distal 
emboli, no reflow, and hematoma.209,210 Jahnke and associates 
conducted a prospective study evaluating high-speed rotational 
atherectomy in 15 patients with infrapopliteal occlusive disease. 
They yielded a 94% technical success rate, but success was 
complicated by vessel rupture (5%), distal embolization (5%), 
and arterial spasm (5%).208 Although Excimer laser atherectomy 
reduces embolic events by evaporating the lesion, embolization 
still remain a problematic complication. Studies show that distal 
embolic events occur in 3% to 4% of procedures, and perfora-
tion occurs in 2.2% to 4.3% of cases.200,201 Other complications 
compromising laser atherectomy therapy include acute reocclu-
sion, vasospasm, direct vessel injury, and dissection.
Surgical Treatment for Chronic Limb Ischemia 
due to Femoropopliteal Disease
Endarterectomy.  Endarterectomy has a limited, albeit impor-
tant role in lower extremity occlusive disease. It is most fre-
quently used when there is disease in the CFA or involving the 
PFA. In this procedure, the surgeon opens the diseased segment 
longitudinally and develops a cleavage plane within the media 
that is developed proximally and distally. This permits the inner 
layer containing the atheroma to be excised. Great care must be 
taken at the distal end of the endarterectomy to either ensure a 
smooth transition or tack down the distal endpoint to prevent 
the flow from elevating a potentially occlusive atheromatous 
flap. Currently, there is essentially no role for long open endar-
terectomy in the treatment of SFA stenoses or occlusions. The 
high incidence of restenosis is what limits utility of endarterec-
tomy in this location. Short-segment stenoses are more appro-
priately treated with balloon angioplasty. Endarterectomy using 
a catheter-based approach (e.g., Moll endarterectomy device) 
supplemented with stent grafting or stenting across the endpoint 
of the endarterectomy is currently being re-evaluated; however, 
no long-term data are available.
Bypass Grafting.  Bypass grafting remains the primary interven-
tion for lower extremity occlusive disease. The type of bypass and 
the type of conduit are important variables to consider. Patients 
with occlusive disease limited to the SFA, who have at least 4 cm 
Figure 23-67.  Due to various geometric forces, including torsion, 
compression, extension, and flexion, exerted on the superficial fem-
oral artery (SFA), stent fracture (arrows) is a known complication 
following SFA stent placement.
898
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(ideally 10 cm) of normal popliteal artery reconstituted above the 
knee joint, and with at least one continuous vessel to the foot 
can be treated with an above-knee femoropopliteal bypass graft. 
Despite the fact that in this above-knee location, the differential 
patencies between prosthetic (PTFE) and vein graft are compa-
rable, undoubtedly, it remains ideal to use a saphenous vein as the 
bypass conduit if possible. Saving the vein for future coronary 
artery bypass or distal leg bypass grafting has been shown to be a 
flawed argument. One must also consider that the consequences 
to the vascular outflow after a thrombosed prosthetic are worse 
than after a thrombosed vein graft.
When the disease extends to involve the popliteal artery or 
the tibial vessels, the surgeon must select an appropriate outflow 
vessel to perform a bypass. Suitable outflow vessels are defined 
as uninterrupted flow channels beyond the anastomosis into the 
foot. Listed in order of descending preference, they are as follows: 
above-knee popliteal artery, below-knee popliteal artery, posterior 
tibial artery, anterior tibial artery, and peroneal artery. In patients 
with diabetes, it is frequently the peroneal artery that is spared. 
Although it has no direct flow into the foot, collateralization to the 
posterior tibial and anterior tibial arteries makes it an appropriate 
outflow vessel. There is no objective evidence to preferentially 
select tibial over peroneal arteries if they are vessels of equal cali-
ber and quality. The dorsalis pedis, which is the continuation of the 
anterior tibial in the foot, is frequently spared from atherosclerotic 
disease and can be used as a target for distal bypasses. Patency is 
affected by the length of the bypass (longer bypasses have reduced 
patency), quality of the recipient artery, extent of runoff to the 
foot, and quality of the conduit (saphenous vein/graft). Five-year 
assisted patency rate for infrapopliteal venous bypasses is 60%. 
Venous conduits have also been shown to be suitable for bypasses 
to plantar arteries. In this location, venous conduits have a 3-year 
limb salvage rate of 84% and a 3-year secondary patency rate 
of 74%.2 A meta-analysis suggests unsatisfactory results when 
PTFE-coated grafts are used to bypass to infrapopliteal arteries. In 
this location, prosthetic grafts have a 5-year primary patency rate 
of 30.5%.211 Additionally, due to distal embolization and compro-
mise of outflow vessels, prosthetic graft occlusion may have more 
severe consequences than vein graft occlusion.211
Two techniques are used for distal bypass grafting: 
reversed saphenous vein grafting and in situ saphenous vein 
grafting. There is no difference in outcomes (patency or limb 
salvage) between these techniques.2 In the former, the vein is 
excised in its entirety from the leg using open or endoscopic 
vein harvest, reversed to render the valves nonfunctional, and 
tunneled from the CFA inflow to the distal target vessels. End-
to-side anastomoses are then created.
Several adjunctive techniques have been used to try and 
improve the patency of bypass grafts to tibial arteries. Cre-
ation of an arteriovenous fistula at the distal anastomosis is one 
option, but it has not been shown to improve patency.212 Another 
method involves creating varying configurations of vein cuffs 
or patches at the distal anastomosis in an attempt to streamline 
the flow and to reduce the likelihood of neointimal hyperplasia. 
Results with this approach are more promising, especially when 
done to improve patency of a below-the-knee prosthetic; how-
ever, there are no definitive comparative trials that support the 
superiority of one configuration over another.
Amputation.  Primary amputation is defined as an amputation 
that is performed without a prior attempt at surgical or endovas-
cular revascularization. It is rarely necessary in patients who, as 
a result of neglect, present with class III ALI. Primary ampu-
tation may play a role in patients with critical limb ischemia 
who are deemed nonambulatory because of knee contractures, 
debilitating strokes, or dementia.
Complications of Surgical Reconstruction
Vein Graft Stenoses.  Fifteen percent of vein grafts will 
develop intrinsic stenoses within the first 18 months follow-
ing implantation. Consequently, patients with vein grafts 
were entered into duplex surveillance protocols (scans every 
3 months) to detect elevated (>300 cm/s) or abnormally low 
(<45 cm/s) graft velocities early. Stenoses greater than 50%, 
especially if associated with changes in ABI, should be repaired 
to prevent graft thrombosis. Repair usually entails patch angio-
plasty or short-segment venous interposition, but PTA/stenting 
is an option for short, focal lesions. Grafts with stenoses that 
are identified and repaired prior to thrombosis have assisted-
primary patency identical to primary patency, whereas a throm-
bosed autogenous bypass has limited longevity resulting from 
ischemic injury to the vein wall. Secondary patency is mark-
edly inferior to primary assisted patency. The recommenda-
tion for routine duplex ultrasound surveillance of autogenous 
infrainguinal bypasses was recently brought into question by 
a randomized controlled trial that demonstrated no cost benefit 
or quality-of-life improvement in patients with femoropopliteal 
venous bypasses after 18 months.213 Many surgeons continue 
with programs of vein graft surveillance, as has been suggested 
in older trials, awaiting further confirmation of the findings from 
the more recent study. When intervening in a failing infraingui-
nal bypass, the original indication for surgery is an important 
consideration. Limb salvage rates for occluded grafts are better 
if the indication for the original bypass was claudication rather 
than rest pain or tissue loss. An acutely occluded infrainguinal 
graft (≤30 postoperative days) has a 25% limb salvage rate.214
Limb Swelling.  Limb swelling is common following revascu-
larization and usually returns to baseline within 2 to 3 months. 
The etiology is multifactorial with lymphatic interruption, inter-
stitial edema, and disruption of venous drainage all contributing. 
Limb swelling tends to worsen with repeat revascularization 
(see Table 23-22).
Wound Infection.  Since the most common inflow vessel for 
distal bypass is the CFA, groin infection is common and occurs 
in 7% of cases.215 When an autogenous conduit such as the 
saphenous vein is used, most infections can be managed with 
local wound care because the infection involves the subcutane-
ous tissue or skin rather than infection of the actual vein. When 
a prosthetic graft has been used, management of graft infection 
is a major undertaking. Infection of a lower extremity prosthetic 
bypass graft is associated with a significant amputation rate 
because of the tendency for graft thrombosis and anastomotic 
disruption. Prosthetic graft infections cannot be eradicated with 
antibiotics and mandate graft excision and complex revascular-
ization using a vein if available.
Choice of Conduit for Infrainguinal  
Bypass Grafting
Autogenous Vein.  The autogenous vein is superior to pros-
thetic conduits for all infrainguinal bypasses, even in the 
above-knee position. This preference is applicable not only 
for the initial bypass but also for reoperative cases. For long 
bypasses, the ipsilateral great saphenous vein, contralateral great 
899
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
saphenous vein, small saphenous vein, arm vein, and spliced 
vein are used in decreasing order of preference. If only a short 
segment of vein is missing, the SFA can be endarterectomized 
and the proximal anastomosis performed distally to decrease 
the length of the conduit and to avoid harvesting and splicing 
additional vein. When the great saphenous vein is not available 
and a relatively short bypass is necessary, the arm vein or small 
saphenous vein is effective. The small saphenous vein is of 
particular utility when a posterior approach is used. If a longer 
bypass with vein is necessary, the arm vein is preferable because 
it is less awkward to harvest. Another conduit alternative is to 
harvest the upper arm basilic, median cubital, and cephalic veins 
in continuity, while incising valves in the basilic segment and 
using the cephalic segment in reversed configuration to provide 
a relatively long, unspliced autogenous conduit.216
Cryopreserved Grafts.  Cryopreserved grafts are usually 
cadaveric arteries or veins that have been subjected to rate-
controlled freezing with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and other 
cryopreservants. Cryopreserved vein grafts are more expensive 
than prosthetic grafts and are more prone to failure. The endo-
thelial lining is lost as part of the freezing process, making these 
grafts prone to early thrombosis. Cryopreserved grafts are also 
prone to aneurysmal degeneration. Despite the fact that these 
grafts have not performed as well as prosthetic bypasses and 
autogenous vein bypasses in clinical practice, they can still play 
a role when revascularization is required following removal of 
infected prosthetic bypass grafts, especially when the autog-
enous vein is unavailable to create a new bypass through clean 
tissue planes.217
Human Umbilical Vein.  Human umbilical vein (HUV) is less 
commonly used than PTFE because it is thicker and more cum-
bersome to handle and because of concerns about aneurysmal 
degeneration. HUV allografts are stabilized with glutaraldehyde 
and do not have viable cells or antigenic reactivity. These grafts 
have poor handling characteristics and require extra care when 
suturing because of an outer Dacron mesh wrapping that is used 
to decrease aneurysmal degeneration. Dardik and colleagues 
have reported favorable results after using HUV and an adjunc-
tive distal arteriovenous fistula.218 One trial comparing HUV 
with PTFE and saphenous vein showed that HUV was better 
than PTFE but worse than saphenous vein in terms of 5-year 
patency in the above-knee location.219 In a systematic review, 
HUV appears to perform better than cryopreserved veins.220
Prosthetic Conduits and Adjunctive Modifications.  If a 
vein is truly unavailable, PTFE or Dacron is the best option for 
above-knee bypass. The addition of rings to PTFE did not con-
fer benefit in a single prospective, randomized clinical trial.221 
For infrageniculate prosthetic bypasses, use of a vein patch, 
cuff, or other venous anastomotic modification can improve 
patency (52% patency at 2 years for PTFE with vein cuff vs. 
29% for PTFE with no cuff) and also improve limb salvage 
(84% vs. 62%).222
Although prosthetic grafts are quickly available, easy 
to handle, and do not require extensive dissection to harvest, 
their propensity to undergo thrombosis and develop neointimal 
hyperplasia makes them a less favorable alternative when com-
pared to vein. In a recent review of vein and prosthetic above-
knee femoropopliteal bypasses, the 5-year primary patency rates 
were reported to be 74% and 39%, respectively.223 Outcomes 
were even worse for below-knee prosthetic bypasses. Unfortu-
nately, the use of autologous venous conduits is not possible in 
as many as 30% of patients. The great saphenous vein may be 
unsuitable because of small size and poor quality or unavailable 
due to prior harvest.
Methods to improve prosthetic graft performance have 
consisted of altering the geometry at the distal anastomosis to 
get the benefit obtained with vein cuffs (Distaflo; Bard Periph-
eral Vascular, Tempe, AZ) and covalently bonding agents onto 
the luminal surface with anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, and 
antiproliferative characteristics (Propaten; Gore, Flagstaff, AZ). 
One randomized trial that compared precuffed PTFE versus 
PTFE with a vein cuff enrolled 104 patients at 10 centers. Of 89 
patients, 47 were randomized to precuffed PTFE bypasses and 
44 were randomized to bypasses with a vein cuff. At 1 and 2 
years, primary patency rates were 52% and 49% in the precuffed 
group and 62% and 44% in the vein cuffed group, respectively. 
At 1 and 2 years, the limb salvage rates were 72% and 65% in 
the precuffed group and 75% and 62% in the vein cuffed group, 
respectively. Although numbers are small and follow-up short, 
the midterm analysis revealed that Distaflo precuffed grafts 
and PTFE grafts with vein cuff had similar results. The authors 
concluded that a precuffed graft was a reasonable alternative 
for infragenicular reconstruction in the absence of saphenous 
vein.224 Other authors have been less optimistic and question 
whether there is any benefit derived from geometrically altering 
prosthetic conduits.225
Another approach for improving outcomes when using 
prosthetic for bypass grafts involves bonding anticoagulants to 
the conduit. The Gore Propaten graft has heparin bonded onto 
the luminal surface of the PTFE graft using Carmeda BioAc-
tive Surface (CBAS) technology, which immobilizes the hepa-
rin molecule with a single covalent bond that does not alter its 
anticoagulant properties.226 The heparin binding does not alter 
the microstructure and handling characteristics of the PTFE. A 
prospective, randomized trial by Devine and colleagues sug-
gested that heparin-bonded Dacron or PTFE was superior to 
plain PTFE for above-knee popliteal bypasses. The 3-year pri-
mary patency rate for the heparin-bonded grafts was 55% com-
pared with 42% for PTFE (P <0.044). Both of these patency 
rates are inferior to great saphenous vein grafts; however, if the 
improved results with heparin bonding continue to be substan-
tiated, then heparin-bonded prosthetic grafts will become the 
preferred conduit for above-knee bypass in the absence of suit-
able vein.227 A recent review of available studies with this graft 
showed an 80% 1-year patency rate for below-knee bypasses.228 
Randomized controlled clinical trials with more patients and 
longer follow-up are necessary to validate whether the Propaten 
vascular graft is superior to other prosthetics and whether it is 
comparable to autogenous vein for below-knee interventions.
Clinical Results of Surgical and Endovascular 
Interventions for Femoropopliteal Occlusive 
Disease
Balloon angioplasty of the femoropopliteal vessels has not 
enjoyed the degree of success seen with iliac angioplasty. 
Patency in this region is dependent on whether the patient pres-
ents with claudication versus limb-threatening ischemia, the sta-
tus of the distal runoff vessels, and lesion morphology.2 Initial 
technical success for femoropopliteal angioplasty is seen in 80% 
to 90% of cases, with failure to cross a lesion occurring in 7% of 
stenoses and 18% of occlusive lesions. Studies have shown that 
PTA of the femoropopliteal segment achieved a greater than 
90% technical success rate and had a 38% to 58% 5-year primary 
900
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
patency rate.177,178 PTA of lesions longer than 7 to 10 cm results 
in compromised patency, whereas PTA of shorter lesions (<3 
cm) gives fairly good results. Lofberg and colleagues performed 
127 femoropopliteal PTA procedures and reported a primary 
patency rate at 5-year follow-up of 12% in limbs with occlusion 
longer than 5 cm versus 32% in limbs with occlusion less than 
5 cm in length.180 Occlusive lesions have much worse initial 
technical success rates than stenotic lesions. Concentric lesions 
respond better to PTA than eccentric lesions, and heavy calcifi-
cations have a negative impact on success rates. Distal runoff is 
another powerful predictor of long-term success.
Johnston analyzed 254 consecutive patients who under-
went femoropopliteal PTA and reported a 5-year patency rate 
of 53% for stenotic lesions and 36% for occlusive lesions in 
patients with good runoff versus a 5-year patency rate of 31% 
for stenotic lesions and 16% for occlusive lesions in patients 
with poor runoff.178 A meta-analysis by Hunink and colleagues 
showed that adjusted 5-year primary patencies after angioplasty 
of femoropopliteal lesions varied from 12% to 68%, with the 
best results occurring in patients with claudication and stenotic 
lesions.179 Although the initial technical success is better for 
stenoses than occlusions, long-term patency rates for stenoses 
and short occlusions have been variable, and there have been 
conflicting results regarding the efficacy of stent use. Early pub-
lished series that examined efficacy of femoropopliteal artery 
stents showed patency rates that were comparable to standalone 
PTA, with primary patency rates varying from 18% to 72% at 
3 years.187 Patient selection and the anatomic character of the 
lesions may play important roles in the outcomes. Additionally, 
stent characteristics may contribute to the patency rate. Several 
recent clinical studies have demonstrated significant improve-
ments in patency when the newer generations of nitinol stents 
are used to treat SFA lesions.189,229
Mewissen treated 137 lower limbs in 122 patients with 
CLI, secondary to TASC A (n = 12) or TASC B or C (n = 125) 
lesions in the SFA. Patients were treated with Cordis SMART 
self-expanding nitinol stents. Binary restenosis (>50%) was mea-
sured by standard duplex velocity criteria at various postinter-
vention intervals. Primary stent patency, defined as absence of 
binary restenosis in this study, was calculated by life-table meth-
ods from the time of intervention. The mean lesion length was 
12.2 cm (range, 4–28 cm). The technical success was 98%. Mean 
follow-up was 302 days. The primary stent patency rates were 
92%, 76%, 66%, and 60% at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months, respec-
tively.189 Ferreira and colleagues treated 59 patients who had 74 
femoropopliteal lesions (60% TASC D) with Zilver nitinol self-
expanding stents (Cook, Bloomington, IN). Mean recanalization 
length was 19 cm (range, 3–53 cm). Mean follow-up time was 
2.4 years (range, 3 days–4.8 years). Kaplan-Meier estimates for 
primary patency rates were 90%, 78%, 74%, 69%, and 69% at 1, 
2, 3, 4, and 4.8 years, respectively.230
There is general agreement that for suboptimal PTA 
of an SFA lesion, stent placement is indicated, but a recent 
randomized trial by Schillinger and associates suggests that 
primary stenting results in lower restenosis rates than PTA 
and selective stenting. Restenosis rates at 2 years were 45.7% 
versus 69.2% in favor of primary stenting compared with 
PTA and optional secondary stenting using an intent-to-treat 
analysis (P = 0.031). Consistently, stenting, both primary and 
selective, was superior to standalone PTA with respect to the 
occurrence of restenosis (49.2% vs. 74.3%; P = 0.028) by a 
treatment-received analysis.231
Nitinol bare metal stents that are designed specifically for 
below-knee interventions are showing very encouraging results. 
Bosiers and colleagues reported their 12-month results using the 
commercially available non–drug-eluting Xpert (Abbott Vascular, 
Santa Clara, CA) nitinol stent system in below-knee arterial 
interventions.232 They had a 12-month primary patency rate of 
76.3% and a limb salvage rate of 95.9%. They followed patients 
for 12 months and performed angiography with quantitative 
vessel analysis on the 73% of patients available. Angiography 
revealed a binary restenosis rate (>50%) of only 20.5%, which is 
comparable to well-accepted coronary drug-eluting stent study 
outcomes. The authors attributed this optimal performance to 
the maintenance of flow dynamics because the stent was spe-
cifically designed for use in small vessels.232 Kickuth and col-
leagues also have obtained good results using the Xpert stent. 
After stent placement, the primary cumulative patency rate at 
6 months for the study group of 35 patients was 82%. The sus-
tained clinical improvement rate as evidenced by improved ABI 
was 80%, and freedom from major amputation was 100% at 
the 6-month follow-up. The rate of major complications was 
17%.233
Wolf and colleagues published a multicenter, prospec-
tive randomized trial comparing PTA with bypass in 263 men 
who had iliac, femoral, or popliteal artery obstruction.234 In 56 
patients, cumulative 1-year primary patency rate was 43% after 
PTA and 82% after bypass surgery, demonstrating that for long 
SFA stenoses or occlusions, surgery is better than PTA. Another 
recent randomized study (BASIL trial) of 452 patients with CLI 
demonstrated no difference in amputation-free survival at 6 months 
between surgery and PTA/stenting. The authors commented 
that surgery was somewhat more expensive and recommended 
that endovascular intervention should be used as first-line ther-
apy especially in medically unfit patients. They did conclude 
that at the 2-year follow-up, healthy patients without medical 
comorbidities derived greater benefit from surgery because it 
was associated with decreased need for reintervention and had 
a decreased hazard ratio in terms of all-cause mortality.235 The 
recently published randomized prospective study comparing 
the treatment of SFA occlusive disease percutaneously with an 
ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft versus surgical femo-
ral to above-knee popliteal artery bypass with synthetic graft 
material showed no difference between the two groups with 
respect to primary or secondary patency rate at 48 months.195 
This finding suggests that ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent 
graft placement can be offered as an alternative to treatment of 
the SFA segment for revascularization when prosthetic bypass 
is being considered or when autologous conduit is unavailable. 
Using the 2000 TASC definitions and a Markov state transi-
tion model decision analysis, Nolan and colleagues showed that 
PTA/stenting surpasses bypass efficacy for TASC C lesions if 
PTA/stenting primary patency is >32% at 5 years, patient age 
is >80 years, and/or greater saphenous vein bypass operative 
mortality is >6%.134,236
NONATHEROSCLEROTIC DISORDERS  
OF BLOOD VESSELS
The majority of cases of peripheral vascular disease that are 
seen by vascular surgeons are attributable to underlying athero-
sclerosis. Nonatherosclerotic disease states that result in arterial 
pathology are less commonly encountered, but are nonetheless 
important, as they are potentially treatable lesions that may 
901
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
mimic atherosclerotic lesions and result in vascular insuffi-
ciency (see Table 23-18). A thorough knowledge of these rare 
disease states is important for the practicing vascular surgeon 
in order to both make medical recommendations and provide 
appropriate surgical treatment.
Giant Cell Arteritis (Temporal Arteritis)
Giant cell arteritis is also known as temporal arteritis, which is 
a systemic chronic inflammatory vascular disease with many 
characteristics similar to those of Takayasu’s disease. The his-
tologic and pathologic changes and laboratory findings are simi-
lar. Patients tend to be white women over the age of 50 years, 
with a high incidence in Scandinavia and women of Northern 
European descent. Genetic factors may play a role in disease 
pathogenesis, with a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variant 
having been identified. Differences exist between Takayasu’s 
and giant cell arteritis in terms of presentation, disease location, 
and therapeutic efficacy. The inflammatory process typically 
involves the aorta and its extracranial branches, of which the 
superficial temporal artery is specifically affected.
The clinical syndrome begins with a prodromal phase of 
constitutional symptoms, including headache, fever, malaise, 
and myalgias. The patients may be initially diagnosed with 
coexisting polymyalgia rheumatica; an HLA-related associa-
tion may exist between the two diseases. As a result of vascular 
narrowing and end-organ ischemia, complications may occur 
such as visual alterations, including blindness and mural weak-
ness, resulting in acute aortic dissection that may be devastating. 
Ischemic optic neuritis resulting in partial or complete blindness 
occurs in up to 40% of patients and is considered a medical 
emergency. Cerebral symptoms occur when the disease process 
extends to the carotid arteries. Jaw claudication and temporal 
artery tenderness may be experienced. Aortic lesions are usually 
asymptomatic until later stages and consist of thoracic aneu-
rysms and aortic dissections.
The diagnostic gold standard is a temporal artery biopsy, 
which will show the classic histologic findings of multinucle-
ated giant cells with a dense perivascular inflammatory infiltrate. 
Treatment regimens are centered on corticosteroids, and giant 
cell arteritis tends to rapidly respond. Remission rates are high, 
and treatment tends to have a beneficial and preventative effect 
on the development of subsequent vascular complications.
Takayasu’s Arteritis
Takayasu’s arteritis is a rare but well-recognized chronic inflam-
matory arteritis affecting large vessels, predominantly the aorta 
and its main branches (Table 23-27).237 Chronic vessel inflam-
mation leads to wall thickening, fibrosis, stenosis, and throm-
bus formation. Symptoms are related to end-organ ischemia. 
The acute inflammation can destroy the arterial media and lead 
to aneurysm formation. This rare autoimmune disease occurs 
predominantly in women between the ages of 10 and 40 years 
who are of Asian descent. Genetic studies have demonstrated a 
high frequency of HLA haplotypes in patients from Japan and 
Mexico, suggesting increased susceptibility to developing the 
disease in patients with certain alleles. However, these associa-
tions have not been seen in North America. Vascular inflamma-
tion leads to arterial wall thickening, stenosis, and eventually, 
fibrosis and thrombus formation. The pathologic changes pro-
duce stenosis, dilation, aneurysm formation, and/or occlusion.
The clinical course of Takayasu’s arteritis begins with 
a “prepulseless” phase in which the patient demonstrates 
constitutional symptoms. These include fever, anorexia, weight 
loss, general malaise, arthralgias, and malnutrition. As the 
inflammation progresses and stenoses develop, more char-
acteristic features of the disease become evident. During the 
chronic phase, the disease is inactive or “burned out.” It is dur-
ing this latter stage that patients most frequently present with 
bruits and vascular insufficiency according to the arterial bed 
involved. Laboratory data may show elevations in erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and white blood cell 
count, or conversely, anemia may predominate. Characteristic 
clinical features during the second phase vary according to the 
involved vascular bed and include hypertension reflecting renal 
artery stenosis, retinopathy, aortic regurgitation, cerebrovascu-
lar symptoms, angina and congestive heart failure, abdominal 
pain or gastrointestinal bleeding, pulmonary hypertension, or 
extremity claudication.
The gold standard for diagnosis remains angiography 
showing narrowing or occlusion of the entire aorta or its pri-
mary branches, or focal or segmental changes in large arteries in 
the upper or lower extremities. Six types of Takayasu’s arteritis 
exist and are graded in terms of severity: type I, affecting the 
aorta and arch vessels; type IIa, affecting the ascending aorta, 
aortic arch, and branches; type IIb, affecting the ascending aorta, 
aortic arch and branches, and thoracic descending aorta; type 
III, affecting the thoracic descending aorta, abdominal aorta, 
and/or renal arteries; type IV, affecting the abdominal aorta and/
or renal arteries; and type V, with combined features of types 
IIb and IV.237
Treatment consists of steroid therapy initially, with cyto-
toxic agents used in patients who do not achieve remission. 
Surgical treatment is performed only in advanced stages, and 
bypass needs to be delayed during active phases of inflam-
mation. There is no role for endarterectomy, and synthetic or 
autogenous bypass grafts need to be placed onto disease-free 
segments of vessels. For focal lesions, there have been reports 
of success with angioplasty.208-210
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is one of the more significant inherit-
able disorders affecting the connective tissue, along with Mar-
fan’s syndrome. This syndrome represents a heterogenous group 
of connective tissue disorders (types I through IV) that were 
first described in 1682 by van Meekeren.238 It is an autosomal 
Table 23-27
Angiographic classification of Takayasu’s arteritis
Type
Vessel Involvement
Type I
Branches from the aortic arch
Type IIa
Ascending aorta, aortic arch and its branches
Type IIb
Ascending aorta, aortic arch and its branches, 
thoracic descending aorta
Type III
Thoracic descending aorta, abdominal aorta, 
and/or renal arteries
Type IV
Abdominal aorta and/or renal arteries
Type V
Combined features of types IIb and IV
Involvement of the coronary or pulmonary arteries is designated as C (+) 
or P (+), respectively.
902
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
dominant disorder affecting approximately 1 in 5000 persons 
that is characterized by skin elasticity, joint hypermobility, tis-
sue fragility, multiple ecchymoses, and subcutaneous pseudotu-
mors. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a disorder of fibrillar collagen 
metabolism with identifiable, specific defects that have been 
found in the collagen biosynthetic pathway that produce clini-
cally distinct forms of this disease. Ten different phenotypes 
have been described, each with variable modes of inheritance 
and biochemical defects. Of the four basic types of collagen 
found in the body, the predominant type in blood vessels is type 
III. Within the vessel wall, type III collagen contributes to struc-
tural integrity and tensile strength and plays a role in platelet 
aggregation and thrombus formation.
Of the three types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome that have 
arterial complications, type IV represents 5% of cases and is the 
one most likely to be seen by a vascular surgeon. These patients 
synthesize abnormal type III collagen (mutation COL3A1) and 
represent 5% of all cases.238 Affected individuals do not show 
the typical skin and joint manifestations, and thus typically pres-
ent for diagnosis when a major vascular catastrophe occurs. In 
a review of 36 patients with this disorder, Cikrit and colleagues 
reported a 44% mortality rate from major hemorrhage prior to 
any surgical intervention.239 In the 20 patients who underwent 
29 vascular procedures, there was a 29% mortality rate. Arterial 
rupture, aneurysm formation, and acute aortic dissection may 
occur in any major artery, with the most frequent site of rupture 
being the abdominal cavity. Repair is problematic because the 
vessel wall is soft and sutures pull through the fragile tissue. 
Ligation may be the only option in many circumstances.
Marfan’s Syndrome
Another heterogeneous heritable disorder of connective tissue, 
Marfan’s syndrome is characterized by abnormal musculo-
skeletal, ocular, and cardiovascular features first described by 
Antoine Marfan in 1896.240 The inborn error of metabolism in 
this syndrome has been localized to the long arm of chromo-
some 15 (15q21.3). Defects occur in fibrillin, a basic protein in 
the microfibrillar apparatus that serves as a backbone for elas-
tin, which is one of the main extracellular structural proteins in 
blood vessels. This is an autosomal dominant gene with high 
penetrance; however, approximately 15% to 20% of cases are 
secondary to new spontaneous mutations.240
Classic recognizable features of Marfan’s syndrome 
include tall stature, long limbs (dolichostenomelia), long fingers 
(arachnodactyly), joint hyperextensibility, chest wall deformi-
ties, and scoliosis. Ocular manifestations are flattened corneas, 
lens subluxation, and myopia. Ninety-five percent of patients 
have cardiovascular involvement, which may include ascend-
ing aortic dilatation, mitral valve prolapse, valvular regurgita-
tion, and aortic dissection. Skin, central nervous system, and 
pulmonary features may be present as well. Aortic root dilata-
tion will generally occur in all patients. This may not be evident 
on standard chest radiograph until dilatation has resulted in an 
ascending aortic aneurysm, aortic valve regurgitation, or dis-
section. Left untreated, the cardiovascular complications are 
devastating and reduce the life expectancy to about 40 years 
for men and slightly higher for women. Death is usually attrib-
utable to life-threatening complications of aortic regurgitation, 
dissection, and rupture after the ascending aorta has dilated to 
6 cm or more.
Aggressive medical management with β-adrenergic block-
ing agents and other blood pressure–lowering regimens is 
crucial to treatment. Surgical intervention entails replacement 
of the aortic root with a composite valve graft (e.g., Bentall 
procedure).241 Prophylactic operative repair is indicated for an 
aneurysm greater than 5.5 cm, with an acceptable perioperative 
mortality of less than 5%.
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is a rare inherited disorder of con-
nective tissue that is characterized by an unbalanced elastic 
fiber metabolism and synthesis, resulting in fragmentation and 
calcification of the fibers. Clinical manifestations occur in the 
skin, ocular, gastrointestinal, and cardiovascular systems.242 
Characteristic skin lesions are seen in the axilla, antecubital and 
popliteal fossae, and groin. The yellow, xanthoma-like pap-
ules occur in redundant folds of skin and are said to resemble 
plucked chicken skin. The inheritance pattern includes both 
autosomal dominant and recessive types and has a prevalence 
of 1 in 160,000 individuals.183 The ATP-binding cassette sub-
family C member 6 (ABCC6) gene has been demonstrated to be 
responsible, and 43 mutations have been identified, all of which 
lead to calcification of the internal elastic laminae of medium-
sized vessel walls.242
Cardiovascular features are common and include prema-
ture coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, renovas-
cular hypertension, diminished peripheral pulses, and restrictive 
cardiomyopathy. Symptom onset typically occurs in the second 
decade of life, with onset at an average age of 13 years. Patients 
should be counseled to reduce potential contributing factors for 
atherosclerosis such as tobacco use and high cholesterol levels. 
Calcium intake should be restricted in adolescents, as a positive 
correlation has been found between disease severity and cal-
cium intake.242 Surgical management involves standard vascular 
techniques, with the exception that arterial conduits should not 
be employed in cardiac bypass.
Kawasaki’s Disease
Kawasaki’s disease was first described in 1967, as a mucocu-
taneous lymph node syndrome occurring in young children. In 
most studies, more than half the patients are younger than 2 
years of age, with a higher prevalence in boys.243 Although orig-
inally described in Japan, the disease is found worldwide. An 
infectious agent may be causative; however, no specific agent 
has been identified. Immune activation with the contribution of 
cytokines, elastases, growth factors, and metalloproteinases is 
believed to be a mechanism for inflammation and aneurysm for-
mation. Coronary artery aneurysms, the hallmark of the disease, 
histologically demonstrate a panarteritis with fibrinoid necrosis. 
Coronary arteriography may show occlusions, recanalization, 
and localized stenosis, in addition to multiple aneurysms. A 
variety of constitutional symptoms and signs resulting from sys-
temic vasculitis are present in the acute phase of the illness.243
Medical therapy for Kawasaki’s disease clearly decreases 
the manifestations of coronary artery involvement. Intravenous 
gamma globulin and aspirin therapy are most successful if 
begun within the first 10 days of illness. Up to 20% of untreated 
patients will develop coronary arterial lesions.243 A long-term, 
low-dose aspirin therapy regimen is usually recommended.
Inflammatory Arteritis and Vasculitis
Chronic inflammatory arteritis and vasculitis (i.e., inflammatory 
changes within veins as well as arteries) include a spectrum of 
disease processes caused by immunologic mechanisms. These 
terms signify a necrotizing transmural inflammation of the 
903
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
vessel wall associated with antigen-antibody immune complex 
deposition within the endothelium. These conditions show pro-
nounced cellular infiltration in the adventitia, thickened intimal 
fibrosis, and organized thrombus.204 These disease processes 
may clinically mimic atherosclerosis, and most are treated by 
corticosteroid therapy or chemotherapeutic agents. Even so, it 
is important to recognize distinguishing characteristics of each 
disease in order to establish the course of treatment and long-
term prognosis. A classification system of systemic vasculitis by 
vessel size is shown in Table 23-28.
Behçet’s Disease
Behçet’s disease is a rare syndrome characterized by oral and 
genital ulcerations and ocular inflammation, affecting males 
in Japan and the Mediterranean. An HLA linkage has been 
found, indicating a genetic component to the etiology. Vascular 
involvement is seen in 7% to 38% of patients and is localized 
to the abdominal aorta, femoral artery, and pulmonary artery.213 
Vascular lesions may also include venous complications such 
as deep venous thrombosis or superficial thrombophlebitis. 
Arterial aneurysmal degeneration can occur; however, this is an 
uncommon, albeit potentially devastating, complication. Mul-
tiple true aneurysms and pseudoaneurysms may develop, and 
rupture of an aortic aneurysm is the major cause of death in 
patients with Behçet’s disease.244
Histologically, degeneration of the vasa vasorum with 
surrounding perivascular lymphocyte infiltration is seen, 
along with thickening of the elastic laminae around the tunica 
media.215 Aneurysm formation is believed to be associated with 
a loss of the nutrient flow and elastic component of the vessels, 
leading to progressive dilatation. Multiple aneurysms are rela-
tively common, with a reported occurrence of 36% in affected 
Japanese patients.244 Furthermore, pseudoaneurysm formation 
after surgical bypass is common at anastomotic suture lines due 
to the vascular wall fragility and medial destruction. Systemic 
therapy with corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents 
may diminish symptoms related to the inflammatory process; 
however, they have no effect on the rate of disease progression 
and arterial degeneration.244
Polyarteritis Nodosa
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is another systemic inflammatory 
disease process, which is characterized by a necrotizing inflam-
mation of medium-sized or small arteries that spares the small-
est blood vessels (i.e., arterioles and capillaries). This disease 
predominantly affects men over women by a 2:1 ratio. PAN 
develops subacutely, with constitutional symptoms that last 
for weeks to months. Intermittent, low-grade fevers, malaise, 
weight loss, and myalgias are common presenting symptoms. 
As medium-sized vessels lie within the deep dermis, cutane-
ous manifestations occur in the form of livedo reticularis, nod-
ules, ulcerations, and digital ischemia.218 Skin biopsies of these 
lesions may be sufficient for diagnosis. Inflammation may be 
seen histologically, with pleomorphic cellular infiltrates and 
segmental transmural necrosis leading to aneurysm formation.
Neuritis from nerve infarction occurs in 60% of patients, 
and gastrointestinal complications occur in up to 50%.245 Addi-
tionally, renal involvement is found in 40% and manifests as 
microaneurysms within the kidney or segmental infarctions. 
Cardiac disease is a rare finding except at autopsy, where thick-
ened, diseased coronary arteries may be seen, as well as patchy 
myocardial necrosis. Patients may succumb to renal failure, 
intestinal hemorrhage, or perforation. End-organ ischemia from 
vascular occlusion or aneurysm rupture can be disastrous com-
plications with high mortality rates. The mainstay of treatment 
is steroid and cytotoxic agent therapy. Up to 50% of patients 
with active PAN will experience remission with high dosing.245
Radiation-Induced Arteritis
Radiation-induced arteritis results from progressive stenosis due 
to endothelial damage that leads to cellular proliferation and 
fibrosis. These are well-described complications of combined 
irradiation and chemotherapy for the treatment of head and neck 
malignancy. Arterial lesions are known complications of radia-
tion and are similar to those found in atherosclerotic occlusive 
disease. A history of therapeutic irradiation to the neck can 
complicate the management of carotid artery occlusive disease. 
Radiation-induced damage to blood vessels has been well 
studied. The small capillaries and sinusoids are most susceptible 
to radiation effects, as endothelial cells are the most radiosensi-
tive cells. The radiation effects on the medium- and large-sized 
arteries include myointimal proliferation, with or without lipid 
deposits, and thrombosis. Characteristically, irregular spindle-
shaped cells are seen replacing the normal endothelial cells in 
the healing phase. Occlusive lesions develop in the irradiated 
carotid arteries and are either the result of vessel wall fibrosis 
or, more commonly, due to accelerated atherosclerosis. Neuro-
logic complications related to radiation-induced carotid artery 
disease are similar to those due to nonirradiated atherosclerotic 
occlusive disease.
Rupture of the carotid artery has been reported following 
neck irradiation and is likely related to local wound compli-
cation and superimposed infection. The diagnosis of radiation 
arteritis is based on the clinical history and confirmation of the 
occlusive lesion by duplex ultrasound, MRA, CTA, or sub-
traction angiography. Irradiated lesions can be confined to the 
irradiated segment of the internal carotid artery with the remain-
ing part of the vessel spared of disease. Characteristically, the 
radiation-induced atherosclerotic lesion does not involve the 
carotid bulb, unlike the nonradiated atherosclerotic lesions. 
The indications for intervention in radiation-induced carotid 
lesions are the same as previously discussed for atherosclerotic 
carotid occlusive lesions. However, asymptomatic irradiated 
carotid artery lesions should be considered for intervention 
because they can be more prone to progression and develop-
ment of neurologic complications. Endovascular treatment with 
carotid angioplasty/stenting has become the treatment of choice 
for radiation-induced lesions, although surgical endarterectomy 
Table 23-28
Classification of vasculitis based on vessel involvement
Large-Vessel Vasculitis
  Takayasu’s arteritis
  Giant cell arteritis
  Behçet’s disease
Medium-Vessel Vasculitis
  Polyarteritis nodosa
  Kawasaki’s disease
  Buerger’s disease
Small-Vessel Vasculitis
  Hypersensitivity angiitis
904
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and bypass have been shown to be safe. The rate of recurrent 
stenosis is higher in radiation-induced carotid lesions, whether 
stented or surgically treated.
Raynaud’s Syndrome
First described in 1862 by Maurice Reynaud, the term Rayn-
aud’s syndrome applies to a heterogeneous symptom array asso-
ciated with peripheral vasospasm, more commonly occurring in 
the upper extremities. The characteristically intermittent vaso-
spasm classically follows exposure to various stimuli, includ-
ing cold temperatures, tobacco, or emotional stress. Formerly, a 
distinction was made between Raynaud’s “disease” and Rayn-
aud’s “phenomenon” for describing a benign disease occurring 
in isolation or a more severe disease secondary to another under-
lying disorder, respectively. However, many patients develop 
collagen vascular disorders at some point after the onset of vaso-
spastic symptoms; progression to a connective tissue disorder 
ranges from 11% to 65% in reported series.246, 247 Therefore, the 
term Raynaud’s syndrome is now used to encompass both the 
primary and secondary conditions.
Characteristic color changes occur in response to the 
arteriolar vasospasm, ranging from intense pallor to cyanosis 
to redness as the vasospasm occurs. The digital vessels then 
relax, eventually leading to reactive hyperemia. The majority 
of patients are young women less than 40 years of age. Up to 
70% to 90% of reported patients are women, although many 
patients with only mild symptoms may never present for treat-
ment. Geographic regions with cooler, damp climates such as 
the Pacific Northwest and Scandinavian countries have a higher 
reported prevalence of the syndrome. Certain occupational 
groups, such as those who use vibrating tools, may be more 
predisposed to Raynaud’s syndrome or digital ischemia. The 
exact pathophysiologic mechanism behind the development 
of such severe vasospasm remains elusive, and much attention 
has focused on increased levels of α2-adrenergic receptors and 
their hypersensitivity in patients with Raynaud’s syndrome, as 
well as abnormalities in the thermoregulatory response, which 
is governed by the sympathetic nervous system.246
The diagnosis of severe vasospasm may be made using 
noninvasive measurements in the vascular laboratory. Angiog-
raphy is usually reserved for those who have digital ulceration 
and in whom an embolic or obstructive cause is believed to be 
present and potentially surgically correctable. Different changes 
in digital blood pressure will occur in patients with Raynaud’s 
syndrome. Normal individuals will show only a slight decrease 
in digital blood pressure in response to external cold stimuli, 
whereas those with Raynaud’s syndrome will show a similar 
curve until a critical temperature is reached.246 It is at this point 
that arterial closure acutely occurs.
There is no cure for Raynaud’s syndrome; thus all treat-
ments mainly palliate symptoms and decrease the severity and 
perhaps frequency of attacks. Conservative measures predomi-
nate, including the wearing of gloves, use of electric or chemi-
cally activated hand warmers, avoiding occupational exposure 
to vibratory tools, abstinence from tobacco, and relocating to 
a warmer, dryer climate. The majority (90%) of patients will 
respond to avoidance of cold and other stimuli. The remaining 
10% of patients with more persistent or severe syndromes can 
be treated with a variety of vasodilatory drugs, albeit with only 
a 30% to 60% response rate. Calcium channel–blocking agents 
such as diltiazem and nifedipine are the drugs of choice. The 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine has been shown 
to reduce the frequency and duration of vasospastic episodes.246 
Intravenous infusions of prostaglandins have been reserved for 
nonresponders with severe symptoms.
Surgical therapy is limited to debridement of digital ulcer-
ations and amputation of gangrenous digits, which are rare 
complications. Upper extremity sympathectomy may provide 
relief in 60% to 70% of patients; however, the results are short-
lived with a gradual recurrence of symptoms in 60% of patients 
within 10 years.246,247
Fibromuscular Dysplasia
FMD is a vasculopathy of uncertain etiology that is characterized 
by segmental arterial involvement. Histologically, fibrous tissue 
proliferation, smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, and elastic fiber 
destruction alternate with mural thinning.248 The characteristic 
beaded appearance of FMD is due to areas of medial thinning 
alternating with areas of stenosis. The most commonly affected 
are medium-sized arteries, including the internal carotid, renal, 
vertebral, subclavian, mesenteric, and iliac arteries. The internal 
carotid artery is the second most common site of involvement 
after the renal arteries. FMD occurs most frequently in women 
(90%) and is recognized at approximately 55 years of age. Only 
10% of patients with FMD will have complications attributable 
to the disease.248 Pathologically, FMD is a heterogenous group 
of four distinct types of lesions that are subgrouped based on the 
predominant site of involvement within the vessel wall. Of the 
four types (medial fibroplasia, intimal fibroplasia, medial hyper-
plasia, and perimedial dysplasia), medial fibroplasia is the most 
common pathologic type, affecting the internal carotid artery 
(ICA) and the renal artery, and occurring in 85% of reported 
cases.248
The two main clinical syndromes associated with FMD 
are TIAs from disease in the internal carotid artery and hyper-
tension from renal artery involvement. Symptoms produced 
by FMD are generally secondary to associated arterial steno-
sis and are clinically indistinguishable from those caused by 
atherosclerotic disease. Often, asymptomatic disease is found 
incidentally on conventional angiographic studies being per-
formed for other reasons. Within the internal carotid artery, 
FMD lesions tend to be located higher in the extracranial seg-
ment than with atherosclerotic lesions and may not be readily 
demonstrated by duplex scan.
Clinically, symptoms are due to encroachment on the ves-
sel lumen and a reduction in flow. Additionally, thrombi may 
form in areas of mural dilatation from a stagnation of flow, lead-
ing to distal embolization. Surgical treatment has been favored 
for symptomatic patients with angiographically proven disease. 
Due to the distal location of FMD lesions in the extracranial 
carotid artery, resection and repair are not usually feasible. 
Instead, graduated luminal dilatation under direct vision has 
been used successfully in patients, with antiplatelet therapy 
continued postoperatively. PTA has been used effectively in 
patients with FMD-induced hypertension. Several series have 
documented a high technical success rate, with recurrence rates 
of 8% to 23% at more than 1 year.249 However, the therapeutic 
effect of blood pressure control may continue to be observed 
despite restenosis. Surgical reconstruction of the renal arteries 
for FMD has good long-term results and is recommended for 
recurrent lesions after angioplasty.249 Open balloon angioplasty 
of the ICA has been described, which allows for precise fluo-
roscopic guidance, rather than blind dilatation with calibrated 
metal probes, and back-bleeding after dilatation to eliminate 
905
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
cerebral embolization.247 Distal neuroprotective devices may 
allow this procedure to be performed completely percutane-
ously, by lessening the threat of cerebral emboli.
Nonatherosclerotic Disease Affecting the 
Popliteal Artery Disease
There are three distinct nonatherosclerotic disease entities that 
may result in lower extremity claudication that predominantly 
occur in 40- to 50-year-old men. Adventitial cystic disease, pop-
liteal artery entrapment syndrome, and Buerger’s disease should 
be considered in any young patients presenting with intermittent 
claudication.
Adventitial Cystic Disease of the Popliteal Artery.  The 
first successful operative repair of popliteal artery occlusion 
caused by a cyst arising from the adventitia was reported in 
1954 by Ejrup and Hierton.250 Adventitial cystic disease is a 
rare arterial condition occurring at an incidence of 0.1%, usu-
ally in the popliteal artery. This disease affects men in a ratio of 
approximately 5:1 and appears predominantly in the fourth and 
fifth decades. The incidence is approximately 1 in 1200 cases 
of claudication or 1 in 1000 peripheral arteriograms.250 The 
predominance of reported cases is found in Japan and Europe. 
However, this disease may affect other vascular sites, such as 
the femoral, external iliac, radial, ulnar, and brachial arteries. 
Besides claudication as a symptom, this diagnosis should be 
considered in young patients who have a mass in a nonaxial ves-
sel in proximity to a related joint. These synovial-like, mucin-
filled cysts reside in the subadventitial layer of the vessel wall 
and have a similar macroscopic appearance to ganglion cysts. 
Despite this similarity and suggestion of a joint origin for these 
lesions, histochemical markers have failed to link the cystic lin-
ing to synovium.
Patients presenting at a young age with bilateral lower 
extremity claudication and minimal risk factors for atheroma 
formation should be evaluated for adventitial cystic disease, 
as well as the other two nonatherosclerotic vascular lesions 
described here. Because of luminal encroachment and com-
pression, peripheral pulses may be present in the limb when 
extended, but then can disappear during knee joint flexion. 
Noninvasive studies may suggest arterial stenosis with ele-
vated velocities. Color-flow duplex scanning followed by 
T2-weighted MRI now appears to be the best diagnostic choice. 
Angiography will demonstrate a smooth, well-defined, crescent-
shaped filling defect, the classic “scimitar” sign.250 There may 
be associated calcification in the cyst wall and no other evidence 
of atherosclerotic occlusive disease.
Various therapeutic methods have been described for the 
treatment of adventitial cystic disease. The recommended treat-
ments are excision of the cyst with the cystic wall, enucleation, 
or simple aspiration when the artery is stenotic. Retention of 
the cystic lining leads to continued secretion of the cystic fluid 
and recurrent lesions. In 30% of patients who have an occluded 
artery, resection of the affected artery, followed by an interposi-
tion graft using autogenous saphenous vein, is recommended.
Popliteal Artery Entrapment Syndrome.  Love and col-
leagues first coined the term popliteal artery entrapment in 
1965 to describe a syndrome combining muscular involvement 
with arterial ischemia occurring behind the knee, with the suc-
cessful surgical repair having taken place 6 years earlier.251 
This is a rare disorder with an estimated prevalence of 0.16% 
that occurs with a male-to-female ratio of 15:1. Five types of 
anatomic entrapment have been defined, according to the posi-
tion of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle, abnormal 
muscle slips or tendinous bands, or the course of the popliteal 
artery itself (Table 23-29). Concomitant popliteal vein impinge-
ment occurs in up to 30% of cases. Twenty-five percent of cases 
are bilateral.
The typical patient presents with swelling and claudica-
tion of isolated calf muscle groups following vigorous physi-
cal activity. Various differential diagnoses must be considered 
when encountering patients with symptoms and signs sugges-
tive of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (Table 23-30). In 
a large series of 240 patients, the median age for surgical treat-
ment was 28.5 years.251 Noninvasive studies with ABIs should 
be performed with the knee extended and the foot in a neutral, 
forced plantar, and dorsiflexed position. A drop in pressure 
of 50% or greater or dampening of the plethysmographic 
waveforms in plantar or dorsiflexion is a classic finding. 
Table 23-29
Classification of popliteal entrapment syndrome
Type
Description
I
Popliteal artery is displaced medially around a 
normal medial head of the gastrocnemius
II
Medial head of gastrocnemius, which arises lateral 
to popliteal artery
III
Popliteal artery is compressed by an accessory slip 
of muscle from medial head of gastrocnemius
IV
Entrapment by a deeper popliteus muscle
V
Any of the above plus popliteal vein entrapment
VI
Functional entrapment
Table 23-30
Differential diagnosis for popliteal entrapment 
syndrome
Vascular Etiologies
Atherosclerosis
Buerger’s disease
Trauma
Popliteal aneurysm
Adventitial cystic disease
Extrinsic compression
Cardiac embolism
Deep vein thrombosis
Venous entrapment
Musculoskeletal Etiologies
Gastrocnemius or soleus strain
Periostitis
Compartment syndrome
Stress fractures
Tibialis posterior tendonitis
Muscular anomalies
General Neurologic Etiologies
Spinal stenosis
906
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Contraction of the gastrocnemius should compress the entrapped 
popliteal artery. The sudden onset of signs and symptoms of 
acute ischemia with absent distal pulses is consistent with pop-
liteal artery occlusion secondary to entrapment. Other condi-
tions resulting from entrapment are thrombus formation with 
distal emboli or popliteal aneurysmal degeneration. Although 
CT and MRI have been employed, angiography remains the 
most widely used test. Angiography performed with the foot in 
a neutral position may demonstrate classical medial deviation 
of the popliteal artery or normal anatomic positioning. Coex-
isting abnormalities may include stenosis, luminal irregularity, 
delayed flow, aneurysm, or complete occlusion. Diagnostic 
accuracy is increased with the use of ankle stress view-active 
plantar flexion and passive dorsiflexion.
The treatment of popliteal artery entrapment consists of 
surgical decompression of the impinged artery with possible 
arterial reconstruction. Division of the anomalous musculoten-
dinous insertion site with or without saphenous vein interposi-
tion grafting to bypass the damaged arterial segment has been 
described to be the procedure of choice. The natural history of 
entrapment is progressive arterial degeneration leading to com-
plete arterial thrombosis. In such instances, thrombolytic ther-
apy is needed with subsequent release of the functional arterial 
impairment. Lysis will improve distal runoff and may improve 
limb-salvage and bypass patency rates.
Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangiitis 
Obliterans)
Buerger’s disease, also known as thromboangiitis obliterans, is a 
progressive nonatherosclerotic segmental inflammatory disease 
that most often affects small- and medium-sized arteries, veins, 
and nerves of the upper and lower extremities.252 The clinical 
and pathologic findings of this disease entity were published in 
1908 by Leo Buerger in a description of 11 amputated limbs.252 
The typical age range for occurrence is 20 to 50 years, and the 
disorder is more frequently found in males who smoke. The 
upper extremities may be involved, and a migratory superficial 
phlebitis may be present in up to 16% of patients, thus indicating 
a systemic inflammatory response. In young adults presenting to 
the Mayo Clinic (1953–1981) with lower limb ischemia, Buerg-
er’s disease was diagnosed in 24%.252 Conversely, the diagnosis 
was made in 9% of patients with ischemic finger ulcerations. 
The cause of thromboangiitis obliterans is unknown; however, 
use of or exposure to tobacco is essential to both the diagnosis 
and progression of the disease.
Pathologically, thrombosis occurs in small- to medium-
sized arteries and veins with associated dense polymorphonu-
clear leukocyte aggregation, microabscesses, and multinucleated 
giant cells. The chronic phase of the disease shows a decrease 
in the hypercellularity and frequent recanalization of the vessel 
lumen. End-stage lesions demonstrate organized thrombus and 
blood vessel fibrosis. Although the disease is common in Asia, 
North American males do not appear to have any particular pre-
disposition, as the diagnosis is made in less than 1% of patients 
with severe limb ischemia.
Buerger’s disease typically presents in young male smok-
ers, with symptoms beginning prior to age 40. Patients initially 
present with foot, leg, arm, or hand claudication, which may be 
mistaken for joint or neuromuscular problems. Progression of 
the disease leads to calf claudication and eventually ischemic 
rest pain and ulcerations on the toes, feet, or fingers. A complete 
history should exclude diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or autoimmune 
disease as possible etiologies for the occlusive lesions. Because 
it is likely that multiple limbs are involved, angiography should 
be performed of all four limbs. Even if symptoms are not yet 
present in a limb, angiographic findings may be demonstrated. 
Characteristic angiographic findings show disease confinement 
to the distal circulation, usually infrapopliteal and distal to the 
brachial artery. The occlusions are segmental and show “skip” 
lesions with extensive collateralization, the so-called “cork-
screw collaterals.”
The treatment of thromboangiitis obliterans revolves 
around strict smoking cessation. In patients who are able to 
abstain, disease remission is impressive and amputation avoid-
ance is increased. In the experience reported from the Oregon 
Health Sciences Center, no disease progression with associated 
tissue loss occurred after discontinuation of tobacco. The role of 
surgical intervention is minimal in Buerger’s disease, as there is 
often no acceptable target vessel for bypass. Furthermore, autog-
enous vein conduits are limited secondary to coexisting migra-
tory thrombophlebitis. Mills and associates reported their results 
of 31% limb loss in 26 patients over 15 years, thus authenti-
cating the virulence of Buerger’s disease involving the lower 
extremities.252 In addition, others have described a significant 
discrepancy in limb loss in patients who continued to smoke 
versus those who discontinued tobacco use (67% vs. 35%).
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Hooi JD, Stoffers HE, Kester AD, van RJ, Knottnerus JA. 
Peripheral arterial occlusive disease: prognostic value of 
signs, symptoms, and the ankle-brachial pressure index. Med 
Decis Making. 2002;22:99-107.
2.	 Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-society consen-
sus for the management of peripheral arterial disease (TASC II). 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2007;33(Suppl 1):S1-S75.
3.	 Jones DN, Rutherford RB. Peripheral vascular assessment and 
its role in predicting wound healing potential. Clin Podiatr 
Med Surg. 1991;8:909-921.
4.	 Favaretto E, Pili C, Amato A, et al. Analysis of agreement 
between duplex ultrasound scanning and arteriography in 
patients with lower limb artery disease. J Cardiovasc Med 
(Hagerstown). 2007;8:337-341.
5.	 Jakobs TF, Wintersperger BJ, Becker CR. MDCT imag-
ing of peripheral arterial disease. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 
2004;25:145-155.
6.	 Maintz D, Kugel H, Schellhammer F, Landwehr P. In vitro 
evaluation of intravascular stent artifacts in three-dimensional 
MR angiography. Invest Radiol. 2001;36:218-224.
7.	 Eagle KA, Coley CM, Newell JB, et al. Combining clini-
cal and thallium data optimizes preoperative assessment of 
cardiac risk before major vascular surgery. Ann Intern Med. 
1989;110:859-866.
8.	 Hertzer NR, Beven EG, Young JR, et al. Coronary artery dis-
ease in peripheral vascular patients. A classification of 1000 
coronary angiograms and results of surgical management. Ann 
Surg. 1984;199:223-233.
9.	 McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Predictors and out-
comes of a perioperative myocardial infarction following elec-
tive vascular surgery in patients with documented coronary 
artery disease: results of the CARP trial. Eur Heart J. 2008; 
29:394-401.
10.	Brady AR, Gibbs JS, Greenhalgh RM, Powell JT, Sydes MR. 
Perioperative beta-blockade (pobble) for patients undergoing 
infrarenal vascular surgery: Results of a randomized double-
blind controlled trial. J Vasc Surg. 2005;41:602-609.
907
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
11.	Daumerie G, Fleisher LA. Perioperative beta-blocker and 
statin therapy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2008;21:60-65.
12.	Austin D, Pell JP, Oldroyd KG. Drug-eluting stents: a review 
of current evidence on clinical effectiveness and late compli-
cations. Scott Med J. 2008;53:16-24.
13.	Feiring AJ, Krahn M, Nelson L, Wesolowski A, Eastwood D, 
Szabo A. Preventing leg amputations in critical limb ischemia 
with below-the-knee drug-eluting stents: the paradise (pre-
venting amputations using drug eluting stents) trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55:1580-1589.
14.	Katsanos K, Spiliopoulos S, Diamantopoulos A, Karnabati-
dis D, Sabharwal T, Siablis D. Systematic review of infrap-
opliteal drug-eluting stents: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2013;36: 
645-658.
15.	Parodi JC, Marin ML, Veith FJ. Transfemoral, endovascular 
stented graft repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. Arch 
Surg. 1995;130:549-552.
16.	Criado FJ, Fairman RM, Becker GJ. Talent LPS AAA 
stent graft: results of a pivotal clinical trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2003;37:709-715.
17.	Tanquilut EM, Ouriel K. Current outcomes in endovascular 
repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Cardiovasc Surg. 2003; 
44:503-509.
18.	Zarins CK, White RA, Moll FL, et al. The aneurx stent graft: 
four-year results and worldwide experience 2000. J Vasc 
Surg. 2001;33:S135-S145.
19.	 Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM. Stroke. Lancet. 
2008;371:1612-1623.
20.	Chaer RA, DeRubertis B, Patel S, Lin SC, Kent CK, Faries 
PL. Current management of extracranial carotid artery dis-
ease. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2006;1:293-301.
21.	Grant EG, Benson CB, Moneta GL, et al. Carotid artery ste-
nosis: grayscale and Doppler ultrasound diagnosis—Society 
of Radiologists in Ultrasound Consensus Conference. Ultra-
sound Q. 2003;19:190-198.
22.	Wardlaw JM, Chappell FM, Stevenson M, et al. Accurate, 
practical and cost-effective assessment of carotid stenosis in 
the uk. Health Technol Assess. 2006;10:iii-iv, ix-x, 1-182.
23.	Saba L, Mallarini G. Mdcta of carotid plaque degree of steno-
sis: evaluation of interobserver agreement. AJR Am J Roent-
genol. 2008;190:W41-W46.
24.	Price TR, Psaty B, O’Leary D, Burke G, Gardin J. Assessment 
of cerebrovascular disease in the cardiovascular health study. 
Ann Epidemiol. 1993;3:504-507.
25.	Chen ZM, Sandercock P, Pan HC, et al. Indications for early 
aspirin use in acute ischemic stroke: a combined analysis 
of 40,000 randomized patients from the Chinese Acute Stroke 
Trial and the International Stroke Trial. On behalf of the CAST 
and IST Collaborative Groups. Stroke. 2000;31:1240-1249.
26.	Kita MW. Carotid endarterectomy in symptomatic carotid 
stenosis: NASCET comparative results at 30 months of 
follow-up. J Insur Med. 1992;24:42-46.
27.	Warlow CP. Symptomatic patients: the European Carotid 
Surgery Trial (ECST). J Mal Vasc. 1993;18:198-201.
28.	Strandness DE, Eikelboom BC. Carotid artery stenosis—
where do we go from here? Eur J Ultrasound. 1998;7(Suppl 
3):S17-S26.
29.	Rothwell PM, Eliasziw M, Gutnikov SA, et al. Analy-
sis of pooled data from the randomised controlled trials of 
endarterectomy for symptomatic carotid stenosis. Lancet. 
2003;361:107-116.
30.	Topakian R, Strasak AM, Sonnberger M, et al. Timing of 
stenting of symptomatic carotid stenosis is predictive of 
30-day outcome. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14:672-678.
31.	Roederer GO, Langlois YE, Jager KA, et al. The natural his-
tory of carotid arterial disease in asymptomatic patients with 
cervical bruits. Stroke. 1984;15:605-613.
32.	Fisher M, Martin A, Cosgrove M, Norris JW. The NASCET-
ACAS Plaque Project. North American Symptomatic Carotid 
Endarterectomy Trial. Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis 
Study. Stroke. 1993;24:I24-I25; discussion I31-I22.
33.	Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, et al. Prevention of dis-
abling and fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy 
in patients without recent neurological symptoms: randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;363:1491-1502.
34.	Coward LJ, Featherstone RL, Brown MM. Safety and efficacy 
of endovascular treatment of carotid artery stenosis compared 
with carotid endarterectomy: a Cochrane systematic review of 
the randomized evidence. Stroke. 2005;36:905-911.
35.	Lin PH, Barshes NR, Annambhotla S, Huynh TT. Prospec-
tive randomized trials of carotid artery stenting versus carotid 
endarterectomy: an appraisal of the current literature. Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2008;42:5-11.
36.	Berkefeld J, Chaturvedi S. The International Carotid Stent-
ing Study and the North American Carotid Revascularization 
Endarterectomy Versus Stenting Trial: fueling the debate 
about carotid artery stenting. Stroke. 2010;41:2714-2715.
37.	Brott TG, Hobson RW 2nd, Howard G, et al. Stenting ver-
sus endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery stenosis. N 
Engl J Med. 2010;363:11-23.
38.	Bonati LH, Jongen LM, Haller S, et al. New ischaemic brain 
lesions on MRI after stenting or endarterectomy for symptom-
atic carotid stenosis: a substudy of the International Carotid 
Stenting Study (ICSS). Lancet Neurol. 2010;9:353-362.
39.	Ricotta JJ, Aburahma A, Ascher E, et al. Updated society for 
vascular surgery guidelines for management of extracranial 
carotid disease. J Vasc Surg. 2011;54:e1-31.
40.	Crawford RS, Chung TK, Hodgman T, Pedraza JD, Corey 
M, Cambria RP. Restenosis after eversion vs. patch closure 
carotid endarterectomy. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:41-48.
41.	Organ N, Walker PJ, Jenkins J, Foster W, Jenkins J. 15 
year experience of carotid endarterectomy at the Royal 
Brisbane and Women’s Hospital: outcomes and changing 
trends in management. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008;35: 
273-279.
42.	Zhou W, Felkai DD, Evans M, et al. Ultrasound criteria for 
severe in-stent restenosis following carotid artery stenting. J 
Vasc Surg. 2008;47:74-80.
43.	Lin PH, Zhou W, Kougias P, El Sayed HF, Barshes NR, 
Huynh TT. Factors associated with hypotension and brady-
cardia after carotid angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 
2007;46:846-853; discussion 853-844.
44.	Plouin PF, Perdu J, La Batide-Alanore A, Boutouyrie P, 
Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Jeunemaitre X. Fibromuscular dys-
plasia. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007;2:28.
45.	Zhou W, Lin PH, Bush RL, et al. Carotid artery aneurysm: 
evolution of management over two decades. J Vasc Surg. 2006; 
43:493-496; discussion 497.
46.	Athanasiou A, Liappis CD, Rapidis AD, Fassolis A, Stavri-
anos SD, Kokkalis G. Carotid body tumor: review of the 
literature and report of a case with a rare sensorineural symp-
tomatology. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007;65:1388-1393.
47.	Hoornweg LL, Storm-Versloot MN, Ubbink DT, Koelemay 
MJ, Legemate DA, Balm R. Meta analysis on mortality of 
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc 
Surg. 2008;35:558-570.
48.	Dotter CT, Judkins MP, Rosch J. Transluminal angioplasty 
in arteriosclerotic obstruction of the lower extremities. Med 
Times. 1969;97:95-108
49.	Nordon IM, Hinchliffe RJ, Holt PJ, Loftus IM, Thompson 
MM. Review of current theories for abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm pathogenesis. Vascular. 2009;17:253-263.
50.	Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al. The aneurysm 
detection and management study screening program: vali-
dation cohort and final results. Aneurysm Detection and 
908
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Management Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Investiga-
tors. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:1425-1430.
51.	Kent KC, Zwolak RM, Egorova NN, et al. Analysis of risk 
factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm in a cohort of more than 
3 million individuals. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52:539-548.
52.	Hellmann DB, Grand DJ, Freischlag JA. Inflammatory 
abdominal aortic aneurysm. JAMA. 2007;297:395-400.
53.	Walker DI, Bloor K, Williams G, Gillie I. Inflammatory aneu-
rysms of the abdominal aorta. Br J Surg. 1972;59:609-614.
54.	Pennell RC, Hollier LH, Lie JT, et al. Inflammatory abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysms: a thirty-year review. J Vasc Surg. 1985; 
2:859-869.
55.	Oderich GS, Panneton JM, Bower TC, et al. Infected aortic 
aneurysms: aggressive presentation, complicated early out-
come, but durable results. J Vasc Surg. 2001;34:900-908.
56.	Takayama T, Yamanouchi D. Aneurysmal disease: the 
abdominal aorta. Surg Clin North Am. 2013;93:877-891, viii.
57.	Fleming C, Whitlock EP, Beil TL, Lederle FA. Screening for 
abdominal aortic aneurysm: a best-evidence systematic review 
for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 
2005;142:203-211.
58.	 Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al. Yield of repeated 
screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm after a 4-year interval. 
Aneurysm Detection and Management Veterans Affairs Cooper-
ative Study Investigators. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:1117-1121.
59.	Ouriel K. Endovascular therapies: an update on aortic aneu-
rysm repair and carotid endarterectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 
2002;195:549-552.
60.	Humphreys WV, Byrne J, James W. Elective abdominal aortic 
aneurysm operations—the results of a single surgeon series of 
243 consecutive operations from a district general hospital. 
Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2000;82:64-68.
61.	Hausegger KA, Schedlbauer P, Deutschmann HA, Tiesen-
hausen K. Complications in endoluminal repair of abdominal 
aortic aneurysms. Eur J Radiol. 2001;39:22-33.
62.	Stanley BM, Semmens JB, Lawrence-Brown MM, Goodman 
MA, Hartley DE. Fenestration in endovascular grafts for aor-
tic aneurysm repair: new horizons for preserving blood flow 
in branch vessels. J Endovasc Ther. 2001;8:16-24.
63.	Greenberg RK, Sternbergh WC III, Makaroun M, et al. 
Intermediate results of a united states multicenter trial of 
fenestrated endograft repair for juxtarenal abdominal aortic 
aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50:730-737, e731.
64.	Verhoeven EL, Vourliotakis G, Bos WT, et al. Fenestrated 
stent grafting for short-necked and juxtarenal abdominal aor-
tic aneurysm: an 8-year single-centre experience. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2010;39:529-536.
65.	Ricotta JJ II, Tsilimparis N. Surgeon-modified fenestrated-
branched stent grafts to treat emergently ruptured and symp-
tomatic complex aortic aneurysms in high-risk patients. J Vasc 
Surg. 2012;56:1535-1542.
66.	Verhoeven EL, Tielliu IF, Ferreira M, Zipfel B, Adam DJ. 
Thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysm branched repair. J Car-
diovasc Surg. 2010;51:149-155.
67.	Donas KP, Torsello G, Austermann M, Schwindt A, Troisi N, 
Pitoulias GA. Use of abdominal chimney grafts is feasible and 
safe: short-term results. J Endovasc Ther. 2010;17:589-593.
68.	Ohrlander T, Sonesson B, Ivancev K, Resch T, Dias N, Malina M. 
The chimney graft: a technique for preserving or rescuing 
aortic branch vessels in stent-graft sealing zones. J Endovasc 
Ther. 2008;15:427-432.
69.	Katsargyris A, Oikonomou K, Klonaris C, Topel I, Verho-
even EL. Comparison of outcomes with open, fenestrated, and 
chimney graft repair of juxtarenal aneurysms: are we ready for 
a paradigm shift? J Endovasc Ther. 2013;20:159-169.
70.	Magennis R, Joekes E, Martin J, White D, McWilliams RG. 
Complications following endovascular abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm repair. Br J Radiol. 2002;75:700-707.
71.	Zarins CK, White RA, Fogarty TJ. Aneurysm rupture after 
endovascular repair using the aneurx stent graft. J Vasc Surg. 
2000;31:960-970.
72.	Lin PH, Bush RL, Chaikof EL, et al. A prospective evaluation 
of hypogastric artery embolization in endovascular aortoiliac 
aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2002;36:500-506.
73.	Bush RL, Lin PH, Reddy PP, et al. Epidural analgesia in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease under-
going transperitoneal abdominal aortic aneurysmorraphy—
a multi-institutional analysis. Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;11: 
179-184.
74.	Greenhalgh RM, Brown LC, Kwong GP, Powell JT, 
Thompson SG. Comparison of endovascular aneurysm 
repair with open repair in patients with abdominal aor-
tic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1), 30-day operative mortality 
results: randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364: 
843-848.
75.	Prinssen M, Verhoeven EL, Buth J, et al. A randomized 
trial comparing conventional and endovascular repair of 
abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 2004;351: 
1607-1618.
76.	Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Long-term 
comparison of endovascular and open repair of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1988-1997.
77.	Matsumura JS, Brewster DC, Makaroun MS, Naftel DC. A 
multicenter controlled clinical trial of open versus endovas-
cular treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 
2003;37:262-271.
78.	Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, Sternbergh WC III, Fearnot NE. 
Zenith AAA endovascular graft: intermediate-term results of 
the US multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 2004;39:1209-1218.
79.	Zarins CK. The U.S. aneurx clinical trial: 6-year clinical 
update 2002. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:904-908.
80.	Criado FJ, Clark NS, McKendrick C, Longway J, Domer 
GS. Update on the Talent LPS AAA stent graft: results with 
“enhanced talent.” Semin Vasc Surg. 2003;16:158-165.
81.	Bertges DJ, Zwolak RM, Deaton DH, et al. Current hospital 
costs and medicare reimbursement for endovascular abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:272-279.
82.	Seiwert AJ, Wolfe J, Whalen RC, Pigott JP, Kritpracha B, 
Beebe HG. Cost comparison of aortic aneurysm endograft 
exclusion versus open surgical repair. Am J Surg. 1999;178: 
117-120.
83.	Angle N, Dorafshar AH, Moore WS, et al. Open versus endo-
vascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms: what does 
each really cost? Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18:612-618.
84.	Lederle FA, Stroupe KT, Open Versus Endovascular Repair 
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group. Cost-effective-
ness at two years in the VA Open Versus Endovascular Repair 
Trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012;44:543-548.
85.	Baum RA, Stavropoulos SW, Fairman RM, Carpenter JP. 
Endoleaks after endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14:1111-1117.
86.	Buth J, Harris PL, Van Marrewijk C, Fransen G. Endoleaks 
during follow-up after endovascular repair of abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. Are they all dangerous? J Cardiovasc Surg. 2003; 
44:559-566.
87.	Dubenec SR, White GH, Pasenau J, Tzilalis V, Choy E, 
Erdelez L. Endotension. A review of current views on patho-
physiology and treatment. J Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;44: 
553-557.
88.	Lin PH, Bush RL, Katzman JB, et al. Delayed aortic aneurysm 
enlargement due to endotension after endovascular abdominal 
aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38:840-842.
89.	Criado FJ, Wilson EP, Fairman RM, Abul-Khoudoud O, Wel-
lons E. Update on the Talent aortic stent-graft: a preliminary 
report from United States phase I and II trials. J Vasc Surg. 
2001;33:S146-S149.
909
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
90.	Harris PL, Vallabhaneni SR, Desgranges P, Becquemin JP, 
van Marrewijk C, Laheij RJ. Incidence and risk factors of late 
rupture, conversion, and death after endovascular repair of 
infrarenal aortic aneurysms: the Eurostar experience. Euro-
pean Collaborators on Stent/Graft Techniques for Aortic 
Aneurysm Repair. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32:739-749.
91.	Krohg-Sorensen K, Brekke M, Drolsum A, Kvernebo K. 
Periprosthetic leak and rupture after endovascular repair of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm: the significance of device design 
for long-term results. J Vasc Surg. 1999;29:1152-1158.
92.	Mehta M, Paty PS, Roddy SP, et al. Treatment options for 
delayed AAA rupture following endovascular repair. J Vasc 
Surg. 2011;53:14-20.
93.	May J, White GH, Yu W, et al. Endoluminal repair of abdom-
inal aortic aneurysms: strengths and weaknesses of various 
prostheses observed in a 4.5-year experience. J Endovasc 
Surg. 1997;4:147-151.
94.	Kougias P, Lin PH, Dardik A, Lee WA, El Sayed HF, Zhou 
W. Successful treatment of endotension and aneurysm sac 
enlargement with endovascular stent graft reinforcement. J 
Vasc Surg. 2007;46:124-127.
95.	Teufelsbauer H, Prusa AM, Prager M, et al. Endovascular 
treatment of a multimorbid patient with late AAA rupture after 
stent-graft placement: 1-year follow-up. J Endovasc Ther. 
2002;9:896-900.
96.	Yasuhara H. Acute mesenteric ischemia: the challenge of gas-
troenterology. Surg Today. 2005;35:185-195.
97.	Zelenock GB, Graham LM, Whitehouse WM Jr, et al. 
Splanchnic arteriosclerotic disease and intestinal angina. Arch 
Surg. 1980;115:497-501.
98.	Karwowski J, Arko F. Surgical management of mesenteric 
ischemia. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2004;7:151-154.
99.	Moneta GL, Lee RW, Yeager RA, Taylor LM Jr, Porter JM. 
Mesenteric duplex scanning: a blinded prospective study. J 
Vasc Surg. 1993;17:79-84; discussion 85-76.
100.	Mitchell EL, Moneta GL. Mesenteric duplex scanning. Per-
spect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther. 2006;18:175-183.
101.	Kougias P, El Sayed HF, Zhou W, Lin PH. Management of 
chronic mesenteric ischemia. The role of endovascular ther-
apy. J Endovasc Ther. 2007;14:395-405.
102.	Sultan S, Hynes N, Elsafty N, Tawfick W. Eight years experi-
ence in the management of median arcuate ligament syndrome 
by decompression, celiac ganglion sympathectomy, and selec-
tive revascularization. Vasc Endovasc Surgery. 2013 Aug 13.
103.	Gloviczki P, Duncan AA. Treatment of celiac artery compres-
sion syndrome: does it really exist? Perspect Vasc Surg Endo-
vasc Ther. 2007;19:259-263.
104.	Kougias P, Lau D, El Sayed HF, Zhou W, Huynh TT, Lin PH. 
Determinants of mortality and treatment outcome following 
surgical interventions for acute mesenteric ischemia. J Vasc 
Surg. 2007;46:467-474.
105.	Jimenez JC, Harlander-Locke M, Dutson EP. Open and lapa-
roscopic treatment of median arcuate ligament syndrome. J Vasc 
Surg. 2012;56:869-873.
106.	Park WM, Cherry KJ Jr, Chua HK, et al. Current results of 
open revascularization for chronic mesenteric ischemia: a 
standard for comparison. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35:853-859.
107.	Silva JA, White CJ, Collins TJ, et al. Endovascular therapy 
for chronic mesenteric ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47: 
944-950.
108.	AbuRahma AF, Stone PA, Bates MC, Welch CA. Angio-
plasty/stenting of the superior mesenteric artery and celiac 
trunk: early and late outcomes. J Endovasc Ther. 2003;10: 
1046-1053.
109.	Furrer J, Gruntzig A, Kugelmeier J, Goebel N. Treatment of 
abdominal angina with percutaneous dilatation of an arteria 
mesenterica superior stenosis. Preliminary communication. 
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 1980;3:43-44.
110.	Atkins MD, Kwolek CJ, LaMuraglia GM, Brewster DC, 
Chung TK, Cambria RP. Surgical revascularization versus 
endovascular therapy for chronic mesenteric ischemia: a com-
parative experience. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45:1162-1171.
111.	Kasirajan K, O’Hara PJ, Gray BH, et al. Chronic mesenteric 
ischemia: open surgery versus percutaneous angioplasty and 
stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33:63-71.
112.	Oderich GS, Erdoes LS, Lesar C, et al. Comparison of cov-
ered stents versus bare metal stents for treatment of chronic 
atherosclerotic mesenteric arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 
2013;58:1316.
113.	Textor SC. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis: overtreated 
but underrated? J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19:656-659.
114.	Klassen PS, Svetkey LP. Diagnosis and management of reno-
vascular hypertension. Cardiol Rev. 2000;8:17-29.
115.	Chade AR, Rodriguez-Porcel M, Grande JP, et al. Distinct 
renal injury in early atherosclerosis and renovascular disease. 
Circulation. 2002;106:1165-1171.
116.	Vuong PN, Desoutter P, Mickley V, et al. Fibromuscular dys-
plasia of the renal artery responsible for renovascular hyper-
tension: a histological presentation based on a series of 102 
patients. Vasa. 2004;33:13-18.
117.	Cherr GS, Hansen KJ, Craven TE, et al. Surgical manage-
ment of atherosclerotic renovascular disease. J Vasc Surg. 
2002;35:236-245.
118.	Hansen KJ, Cherr GS, Craven TE, et al. Management of 
ischemic nephropathy: dialysis-free survival after surgical 
repair. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32:472-481; discussion 481-472.
119.	Guzman RP, Zierler RE, Isaacson JA, Bergelin RO, Strand-
ness DE Jr. Renal atrophy and arterial stenosis. A prospec-
tive study with duplex ultrasound. Hypertension. 1994;23: 
346-350.
120.	van de Ven PJ, Kaatee R, Beutler JJ, et al. Arterial stenting 
and balloon angioplasty in ostial atherosclerotic renovascular 
disease: a randomised trial. Lancet. 1999;353:282-286.
121.	Surowiec SM, Sivamurthy N, Rhodes JM, et al. Percutane-
ous therapy for renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia. Ann Vasc 
Surg. 2003;17:650-655.
122.	van Jaarsveld BC, Krijnen P. Prospective studies of diagno-
sis and intervention: the Dutch experience. Semin Nephrol. 
2000;20:463-473.
123.	White CJ, Ramee SR, Collins TJ, Jenkins JS, Escobar A, 
Shaw D. Renal artery stent placement: utility in lesions dif-
ficult to treat with balloon angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1997;30:1445-1450.
124.	Blum U, Krumme B, Flugel P, et al. Treatment of ostial renal-
artery stenoses with vascular endoprostheses after unsuccess-
ful balloon angioplasty. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:459-465.
125.	Watson PS, Hadjipetrou P, Cox SV, Piemonte TC, Eisenhauer 
AC. Effect of renal artery stenting on renal function and size 
in patients with atherosclerotic renovascular disease. Circula-
tion. 2000;102:1671-1677.
126.	Harden PN, MacLeod MJ, Rodger RS, et al. Effect of renal-
artery stenting on progression of renovascular renal failure. 
Lancet. 1997;349:1133-1136.
127.	Bush RL, Najibi S, MacDonald MJ, et al. Endovascular revas-
cularization of renal artery stenosis: technical and clinical 
results. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33:1041-1049.
128.	Dorros G, Jaff M, Mathiak L, et al. Four-year follow-up of 
Palmaz-Schatz stent revascularization as treatment for athero-
sclerotic renal artery stenosis. Circulation. 1998;98:642-647.
129.	Henry M, Amor M, Henry I, et al. Stents in the treatment of 
renal artery stenosis: long-term follow-up. J Endovasc Surg. 
1999;6:42-51.
130.	Iannone LA, Underwood PL, Nath A, Tannenbaum MA, 
Ghali MG, Clevenger LD. Effect of primary balloon expand-
able renal artery stents on long-term patency, renal function, 
and blood pressure in hypertensive and renal insufficient 
910
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
patients with renal artery stenosis. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 
1996;37:243-250.
131.	Rundback JH, Gray RJ, Rozenblit G, et al. Renal artery stent 
placement for the management of ischemic nephropathy. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 1998;9:413-420.
132.	Shannon HM, Gillespie IN, Moss JG. Salvage of the solitary 
kidney by insertion of a renal artery stent. AJR Am J Roent-
genol. 1998;171:217-222.
133.	Leertouwer TC, Gussenhoven EJ, Bosch JL, et al. Stent place-
ment for renal arterial stenosis: where do we stand? A meta-
analysis. Radiology. 2000;216:78-85.
134.	Dormandy JA, Rutherford RB. Management of peripheral 
arterial disease (PAD). TASC Working Group. Trans-
atlantic Inter-Society Concensus (TASC). J Vasc Surg. 
2000;31:S1-S296.
135.	Ameli FM. Aortobifemoral bypass—an enduring operation. 
Can J Surg. 1992;35:237-241.
136.	Martin D, Katz SG. Axillofemoral bypass for aortoiliac occlu-
sive disease. Am J Surg. 2000;180:100-103.
137.	Criado E, Burnham SJ, Tinsley EA Jr, Johnson G Jr, Keagy 
BA. Femorofemoral bypass graft: analysis of patency 
and factors influencing long-term outcome. J Vasc Surg. 
1993;18:495-504.
138.	Patel A, Taylor SM, Langan EM III, et al. Obturator bypass: 
a classic approach for the treatment of contemporary groin 
infection. Am Surg. 2002;68:653-658; discussion 658-659.
139.	Sautner T, Niederle B, Herbst F, et al. The value of obturator 
canal bypass. A review. Arch Surg. 1994;129:718-722.
140.	Brewster DC, Cambria RP, Darling RC, et al. Long-term 
results of combined iliac balloon angioplasty and distal sur-
gical revascularization. Ann Surg. 1989;210:324-330; discus-
sion 331.
141.	van den Akker PJ, van Schilfgaarde R, Brand R, van Bockel 
JH, Terpstra JL. Long term success of aortoiliac operation 
for arteriosclerotic obstructive disease. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1992;174:485-496.
142.	Szilagyi DE, Elliott JP Jr, Smith RF, Reddy DJ, McPharlin M. 
A thirty-year survey of the reconstructive surgical treatment of 
aortoiliac occlusive disease. J Vasc Surg. 1986;3:421-436.
143.	Sagic D, Grujicic S, Peric M, Popovic Z, Radevic B, Bojic M. 
“Kissing-balloon” technique for abdominal aorta angioplasty. 
Initial results and long term outcome. Int Angiol. 1995;14: 
364-367.
144.	Insall RL, Loose HW, Chamberlain J. Long-term results of 
double-balloon percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the 
aorta and iliac arteries. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1993;7:31-36.
145.	Mendelsohn FO, Santos RM, Crowley JJ, et al. Kissing stents 
in the aortic bifurcation. Am Heart J. 1998;136:600-605.
146.	Haulon S, Mounier-Vehier C, Gaxotte V, et al. Percutaneous 
reconstruction of the aortoiliac bifurcation with the “kiss-
ing stents” technique: long-term follow-up in 106 patients. 
J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9:363-368.
147.	Palmaz JC, Laborde JC, Rivera FJ, Encarnacion CE, Lutz JD, 
Moss JG. Stenting of the iliac arteries with the Palmaz stent: 
experience from a multicenter trial. Cardiovasc Intervent 
Radiol. 1992;15:291-297.
148.	Sapoval MR, Long AL, Pagny JY, et al. Outcome of percu-
taneous intervention in iliac artery stents. Radiology. 1996; 
198:481-486.
149.	Uberoi R, Tsetis D. Standards for the endovascular manage-
ment of aortic occlusive disease. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 
2007;30:814-819.
150.	Mousa AY, Beauford RB, Flores L, Faries PL, Patel P, Fogler 
R. Endovascular treatment of iliac occlusive disease: review 
and update. Vascular. 2007;15:5-11.
151.	Tetteroo E, van der Graaf Y, Bosch JL, et al. Randomised 
comparison of primary stent placement versus primary angio-
plasty followed by selective stent placement in patients with 
iliac-artery occlusive disease. Dutch Iliac Stent Trial Study 
Group. Lancet. 1998;351:1153-1159.
152.	Piffaretti G, Tozzi M, Lomazzi C, et al. Mid-term results of 
endovascular reconstruction for aorto-iliac obstructive dis-
ease. Int Angiol. 2007;26:18-25.
153.	Bosiers M, Iyer V, Deloose K, Verbist J, Peeters P. Flemish 
experience using the Advanta v12 stent-graft for the treat-
ment of iliac artery occlusive disease. J Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;48:7-12.
154.	Harris RA, Hardman DT, Fisher C, Lane R, Appleberg M. 
Aortic reconstructive surgery for limb ischaemia: immediate 
and long-term follow-up to provide a standard for endovascu-
lar procedures. Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;6:256-261.
155.	Indes JE, Pfaff MJ, Farrokhyar F, et al. Clinical outcomes of 
5358 patients undergoing direct open bypass or endovascular 
treatment for aortoiliac occlusive disease: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Endovasc Ther. 2013;20:443-455.
156.	Becker GJ, Cikrit DF, Lalka SG, et al. Early experience with 
the Palmaz stent in human iliac angioplasty. Indiana Med. 
1989;82:286-292.
157.	Tsetis D, Uberoi R. Quality improvement guidelines for endo-
vascular treatment of iliac artery occlusive disease. Cardio-
vasc Intervent Radiol. 2008;31:238-245.
158.	Powell RJ, Fillinger M, Bettmann M, et al. The durability of 
endovascular treatment of multisegment iliac occlusive dis-
ease. J Vasc Surg. 2000;31:1178-1184.
159.	Timaran CH, Stevens SL, Grandas OH, Freeman MB, Gold-
man MH. Influence of hormone replacement therapy on the 
outcome of iliac angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2001; 
33:S85-S92.
160.	Bosch JL, Hunink MG. Meta-analysis of the results of per-
cutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stent placement for 
aortoiliac occlusive disease. Radiology. 1997;204:87-96.
161.	Park KB, Do YS, Kim JH, et al. Stent placement for chronic 
iliac arterial occlusive disease: the results of 10 years expe-
rience in a single institution. Korean J Radiol. 2005;6: 
256-266.
162.	Leville CD, Kashyap VS, Clair DG, et al. Endovascular man-
agement of iliac artery occlusions: extending treatment to 
Transatlantic Inter-Society Consensus Class C and D patients. 
J Vasc Surg. 2006;43:32-39.
163.	McDaniel MD, Cronenwett JL. Basic data related to the 
natural history of intermittent claudication. Ann Vasc Surg. 
1989;3:273-277.
164.	Leng GC, Papacosta O, Whincup P, et al. Femoral athero-
sclerosis in an older British population: prevalence and risk 
factors. Atherosclerosis. 2000;152:167-174.
165.	Schroll M, Munck O. Estimation of peripheral arteriosclerotic 
disease by ankle blood pressure measurements in a popula-
tion study of 60-year-old men and women. J Chronic Dis. 
1981;34:261-269.
166.	Stoffers HE, Rinkens PE, Kester AD, Kaiser V, Knottnerus JA. 
The prevalence of asymptomatic and unrecognized peripheral 
arterial occlusive disease. Int J Epidemiol. 1996;25:282-290.
167.	Ouriel K. Peripheral arterial disease. Lancet. 2001;358: 
1257-1264.
168.	Koelemay MJ, den Hartog D, Prins MH, Kromhout JG, Lege-
mate DA, Jacobs MJ. Diagnosis of arterial disease of the 
lower extremities with duplex ultrasonography. Br J Surg. 
1996;83:404-409.
169.	Eiberg JP, Hansen MA, Jensen F, Rasmussen JB, Schro-
eder TV. Ultrasound contrast-agent improves imaging of 
lower limb occlusive disease. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2003;25:23-28.
170.	Nehler MR, McDermott MM, Treat-Jacobson D, Chetter I, 
Regensteiner JG. Functional outcomes and quality of life in 
peripheral arterial disease: current status. Vasc Med. 2003; 
8:115-126.
911
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
171.	Ouriel K. The use of glycoprotein IIB/IIIA antagonists in 
peripheral arterial occlusion. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2001; 
4:107-110.
172.	Ouriel K. Current status of thrombolysis for peripheral arterial 
occlusive disease. Ann Vasc Surg. 2002;16:797-804.
173.	Lin PH, Barshes NR, Annambhotla S, Kougias P, Huynh TT. 
Advances in endovascular interventions for deep vein throm-
bosis. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2008;5:153-166.
174.	Lin PH, Zhou W, Dardik A, et al. Catheter-direct thrombolysis 
versus pharmacomechanical thrombectomy for treatment of 
symptomatic lower extremity deep venous thrombosis. Am J 
Surg. 2006;192:782-788.
175.	Ouriel K. Comparison of surgical and thrombolytic treatment 
of peripheral arterial disease. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2002; 
3(Suppl 2):S7-16.
176.	Conte MS, Belkin M, Upchurch GR, Mannick JA, Whitte-
more AD, Donaldson MC. Impact of increasing comorbidity 
on infrainguinal reconstruction: a 20-year perspective. Ann 
Surg. 2001;233:445-452.
177.	Hunink MG, Donaldson MC, Meyerovitz MF, et al. Risks and 
benefits of femoropopliteal percutaneous balloon angioplasty. 
J Vasc Surg. 1993;17:183-192.
178.	Johnston KW. Femoral and popliteal arteries: reanalysis of 
results of balloon angioplasty. Radiology. 1992;183:767-771.
179.	Hunink MG, Wong JB, Donaldson MC, Meyerovitz MF, 
Harrington DP. Patency results of percutaneous and surgical 
revascularization for femoropopliteal arterial disease. Med 
Decis Making. 1994;14:71-81.
180.	Lofberg AM, Karacagil S, Ljungman C, et al. Percutaneous 
transluminal angioplasty of the femoropopliteal arteries in 
limbs with chronic critical lower limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 
2001;34:114-121.
181.	Varty K, Bolia A, Naylor AR, Bell PR, London NJ. Infrap-
opliteal percutaneous transluminal angioplasty: a safe and 
successful procedure. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 1995;9: 
341-345.
182.	Bolia A, Sayers RD, Thompson MM, Bell PR. Subintimal 
and intraluminal recanalisation of occluded crural arteries by 
percutaneous balloon angioplasty. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1994;8: 
214-219.
183.	London NJ, Srinivasan R, Naylor AR, et al. Subintimal angio-
plasty of femoropopliteal artery occlusions: the long-term 
results. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1994;8:148-155.
184.	Lipsitz EC, Ohki T, Veith FJ, et al. Does subintimal angio-
plasty have a role in the treatment of severe lower extremity 
ischemia? J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:386-391.
185.	Treiman GS, Whiting JH, Treiman RL, McNamara RM, 
Ashrafi A. Treatment of limb-threatening ischemia with per-
cutaneous intentional extraluminal recanalization: a prelimi-
nary evaluation. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38:29-35.
186.	Ingle H, Nasim A, Bolia A, et al. Subintimal angioplasty of 
isolated infragenicular vessels in lower limb ischemia: long-
term results. J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9:411-416.
187.	Becquemin JP, Favre JP, Marzelle J, Nemoz C, Corsin C, 
Leizorovicz A. Systematic versus selective stent placement 
after superficial femoral artery balloon angioplasty: a mul-
ticenter prospective randomized study. J Vasc Surg. 2003; 
37:487-494.
188.	Gray BH, Sullivan TM, Childs MB, Young JR, Olin JW. High 
incidence of restenosis/reocclusion of stents in the percuta-
neous treatment of long-segment superficial femoral artery 
disease after suboptimal angioplasty. J Vasc Surg. 1997; 
25:74-83.
189.	Mewissen MW. Self-expanding nitinol stents in the femoro-
popliteal segment: technique and mid-term results. Tech Vasc 
Interv Radiol. 2004;7:2-5.
190.	Laird JR. Interventional options in SFA. Endovasc Today. 
2004:9-12.
191.	Ansel GM, Silver MJ, Botti CF Jr, et al. Functional and clini-
cal outcomes of nitinol stenting with and without abciximab 
for complex superficial femoral artery disease: a randomized 
trial. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2006;67:288-297.
192.	Duda SH, Poerner TC, Wiesinger B, et al. Drug-eluting stents: 
potential applications for peripheral arterial occlusive disease. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14:291-301.
193.	Bauermeister G. Endovascular stent-grafting in the treatment 
of superficial femoral artery occlusive disease. J Endovasc 
Ther. 2001;8:315-320.
194.	Kedora J, Hohmann S, Garrett W, Munschaur C, Theune B, 
Gable D. Randomized comparison of percutaneous Viabahn 
stent grafts vs prosthetic femoral-popliteal bypass in the treat-
ment of superficial femoral arterial occlusive disease. J Vasc 
Surg. 2007;45:10-16; discussion 16.
195.	McQuade K, Gable D, Pearl G, Theune B, Black S. Four-year 
randomized prospective comparison of percutaneous ePTFE/
nitinol self-expanding stent graft versus prosthetic femoral-
popliteal bypass in the treatment of superficial femoral artery 
occlusive disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52:584-590; discussion 
590-581, 591, e581-591, e587.
196.	Ramaiah V, Gammon R, Kiesz S, et al. Midterm outcomes 
from the Talon Registry: treating peripherals with silverhawk: 
outcomes collection. J Endovasc Ther. 2006;13:592-602.
197.	Shammas NW, Lam R, Mustapha J, et al. Comparison of 
orbital atherectomy plus balloon angioplasty vs. balloon 
angioplasty alone in patients with critical limb ischemia: 
results of the Calcium 360 randomized pilot trial. J Endovasc 
Ther. 2012;19:480-488.
198.	Franzone A, Ferrone M, Carotenuto G, et al. The role of ather-
ectomy in the treatment of lower extremity peripheral artery 
disease. BMC Surg. 2012;12(Suppl 1):S13.
199.	Laird JR Jr, Reiser C, Biamino G, Zeller T. Excimer laser 
assisted angioplasty for the treatment of critical limb ischemia. 
J Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;45:239-248.
200.	Scheinert D, Laird JR Jr, Schroder M, Steinkamp H, Balzer 
JO, Biamino G. Excimer laser-assisted recanalization of long, 
chronic superficial femoral artery occlusions. J Endovasc 
Ther. 2001;8:156-166.
201.	Steinkamp HJ, Rademaker J, Wissgott C, et al. Percutane-
ous transluminal laser angioplasty versus balloon dilation for 
treatment of popliteal artery occlusions. J Endovasc Ther. 
2002;9:882-888.
202.	Dave RM, Patlola R, Kollmeyer K, et al. Excimer laser recana-
lization of femoropopliteal lesions and 1-year patency: results 
of the Cello Registry. J Endovasc Ther. 2009;16:665-675.
203.	Clark TW, Groffsky JL, Soulen MC. Predictors of long-term 
patency after femoropopliteal angioplasty: results from the 
Star Registry. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2001;12:923-933.
204.	Axisa B, Fishwick G, Bolia A, et al. Complications follow-
ing peripheral angioplasty. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2002;84: 
39-42.
205.	Yilmaz S, Sindel T, Yegin A, Luleci E. Subintimal angio-
plasty of long superficial femoral artery occlusions. J Vasc 
Interv Radiol. 2003;14:997-1010.
206.	Desgranges P, Boufi M, Lapeyre M, et al. Subintimal angio-
plasty: feasible and durable. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2004; 
28:138-141.
207.	Fava M, Loyola S, Polydorou A, Papapavlou P, Mendiz O, 
Joye JD. Cryoplasty for femoropopliteal arterial disease: late 
angiographic results of initial human experience. J Vasc Interv 
Radiol. 2004;15:1239-1243.
208.	Jahnke T, Andresen R, Muller-Hulsbeck S, et al. Hemobahn 
stent-grafts for treatment of femoropopliteal arterial obstruc-
tions: midterm results of a prospective trial. J Vasc Interv 
Radiol. 2003;14:41-51.
209.	Grubnic S, Heenan SD, Buckenham TM, Belli AM. Evalu-
ation of the pullback atherectomy catheter in the treatment 
912
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of lower limb vascular disease. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 
1996;19:152-159.
210.	Savader SJ, Venbrux AC, Mitchell SE, et al. Percutaneous 
transluminal atherectomy of the superficial femoral and pop-
liteal arteries: long-term results in 48 patients. Cardiovasc 
Intervent Radiol. 1994;17:312-318.
211.	Albers M, Battistella VM, Romiti M, Rodrigues AA, Pereira 
CA. Meta-analysis of polytetrafluoroethylene bypass grafts to 
infrapopliteal arteries. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:1263-1269.
212.	Hamsho A, Nott D, Harris PL. Prospective randomised trial of 
distal arteriovenous fistula as an adjunct to femoro-infrapopli-
teal ptfe bypass. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 1999;17:197-201.
213.	Davies AH, Hawdon AJ, Sydes MR, Thompson SG. Is duplex 
surveillance of value after leg vein bypass grafting? Princi-
pal results of the Vein Graft Surveillance Randomised Trial 
(VGST). Circulation. 2005;112:1985-1991.
214.	Baldwin ZK, Pearce BJ, Curi MA, et al. Limb salvage after 
infrainguinal bypass graft failure. J Vasc Surg. 2004;39: 
951-957.
215.	Stone PA, Flaherty SK, Aburahma AF, et al. Factors affect-
ing perioperative mortality and wound-related complications 
following major lower extremity amputations. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2006;20:209-216.
216.	Holzenbein TJ, Pomposelli FB Jr, Miller A, et al. The upper 
arm basilic-cephalic loop for distal bypass grafting: technical 
considerations and follow-up. J Vasc Surg. 1995;21:586-592.
217.	Dosluoglu HH, Kittredge J, Cherr GS. Use of cryopreserved 
femoral vein for in situ replacement of infected femorofemo-
ral prosthetic artery bypass. Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008;42: 
74-78.
218.	Dardik H, Wengerter K, Qin F, et al. Comparative decades 
of experience with glutaraldehyde-tanned human umbilical 
cord vein graft for lower limb revascularization: an analysis 
of 1275 cases. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35:64-71.
219.	Johnson WC, Lee KK. A comparative evaluation of polytet-
rafluoroethylene, umbilical vein, and saphenous vein bypass 
grafts for femoral-popliteal above-knee revascularization: 
a prospective randomized Department of Veterans Affairs 
Cooperative Study. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32:268-277.
220.	Fahner PJ, Idu MM, van Gulik TM, Legemate DA. System-
atic review of preservation methods and clinical outcome 
of infrainguinal vascular allografts. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44: 
518-524.
221.	Gupta SK, Veith FJ, Kram HB, Wengerter KR. Prospective, 
randomized comparison of ringed and nonringed polytetra-
fluoroethylene femoropopliteal bypass grafts: a preliminary 
report. J Vasc Surg. 1991;13:163-172.
222.	Stonebridge PA, Prescott RJ, Ruckley CV. Randomized trial 
comparing infrainguinal polytetrafluoroethylene bypass graft-
ing with and without vein interposition cuff at the distal anas-
tomosis. The Joint Vascular Research Group. J Vasc Surg. 
1997;26:543-550.
223.	Klinkert P, van Dijk PJ, Breslau PJ. Polytetrafluoroethylene 
femorotibial bypass grafting: 5-year patency and limb salvage. 
Ann Vasc Surg. 2003;17:486-491.
224.	Panneton JM, Hollier LH, Hofer JM. Multicenter random-
ized prospective trial comparing a pre-cuffed polytetrafluo-
roethylene graft to a vein cuffed polytetrafluoroethylene graft 
for infragenicular arterial bypass. Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18: 
199-206.
225.	Bellosta R, Luzzani L, Carugati C, Melloni C, Sarcina A. 
Which distal anastomosis should be used in PTFE femoro-
tibial bypass? J Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;46:499-503.
226.	Begovac PC, Thomson RC, Fisher JL, Hughson A, Gallha-
gen A. Improvements in Gore-Tex vascular graft performance 
by Carmeda bioactive surface heparin immobilization. Eur J 
Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2003;25:432-437.
227.	Devine C, Hons B, McCollum C. Heparin-bonded dacron or 
polytetrafluoroethylene for femoropopliteal bypass grafting: a 
multicenter trial. J Vascular Surg. 2001;33:533-539.
228.	Walluscheck KP, Bierkandt S, Brandt M, Cremer J. Infrain-
guinal ePTFE vascular graft with bioactive surface heparin 
bonding. First clinical results. J Cardiovasc Surg. 2005; 
46:425-430.
229.	Duda SH, Bosiers M, Lammer J, et al. Drug-eluting and bare 
nitinol stents for the treatment of atherosclerotic lesions in the 
superficial femoral artery: long-term results from the Sirocco 
trial. J Endovasc Ther. 2006;13:701-710.
230.	Ferreira M, Lanziotti L, Monteiro M, et al. Superficial femoral 
artery recanalization with self-expanding nitinol stents: long-
term follow-up results. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2007;34: 
702-708.
231.	Schillinger M, Sabeti S, Dick P, et al. Sustained benefit at 
2 years of primary femoropopliteal stenting compared with 
balloon angioplasty with optional stenting. Circulation. 2007; 
115:2745-2749.
232.	Bosiers M, Deloose K, Verbist J, Peeters P. Nitinol stenting 
for treatment of ’’below-the-knee’’ critical limb ischemia: 
1-year angiographic outcome after Xpert stent implantation. 
J Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;48:455-461.
233.	Kickuth R, Keo HH, Triller J, Ludwig K, Do DD. Initial 
clinical experience with the 4-F self-expanding xpert stent 
system for infrapopliteal treatment of patients with severe 
claudication and critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 
2007;18:703-708.
234.	Wolf GL, Wilson SE, Cross AP, Deupree RH, Stason WB. 
Surgery or balloon angioplasty for peripheral vascular disease: 
a randomized clinical trial. Principal Investigators and Their 
Associates of Veterans Administration Cooperative Study 
Number 199. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 1993;4:639-648.
235.	Adam DJ, Beard JD, Cleveland T, et al. Bypass versus angio-
plasty in severe ischaemia of the leg (basil): multicentre, ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1925-1934.
236.	Nolan B, Finlayson S, Tosteson A, Powell R, Cronenwett J. 
The treatment of disabling intermittent claudication in patients 
with superficial femoral artery occlusive disease—decision 
analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45:1179-1184.
237.	Maffei S, Di Renzo M, Bova G, Auteri A, Pasqui AL. Takaya-
su’s arteritis: a review of the literature. Intern Emerg Med. 
2006;1:105-112.
238.	Baxter BT. Heritable diseases of the blood vessels. Cardio-
vasc Pathol. 2005;14:185-188.
239.	 Cikrit DF, Glover JR, Dalsing MC, Silver D. The Ehlers-Danlos 
specter revisited. Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2002;36:213-217.
240.	Ho NC, Tran JR, Bektas A. Marfan’s syndrome. Lancet. 
2005;366:1978-1981.
241.	Davies JE, Sundt TM. Surgery insight: the dilated ascending 
aorta—indications for surgical intervention. Nat Clin Pract 
Cardiovasc Med. 2007;4:330-339.
242.	Chassaing N, Martin L, Calvas P, Le Bert M, Hovnanian A. 
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a clinical, pathophysiological, 
and genetic update including 11 novel ABCC6 mutations. 
J Med Genet. 2005;42:881-892.
243.	Yeung RS. Pathogenesis and treatment of Kawasaki’s disease. 
Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2005;17:617-623.
244.	Krause I, Weinberger A. Behcet’s disease. Curr Opin Rheu-
matol. 2008;20:82-87.
245.	Pettigrew HD, Teuber SS, Gershwin ME. Polyarteritis nodosa. 
Compr Ther. 2007;33:144-149.
246.	Herrick AL. Pathogenesis of Raynaud’s phenomenon. Rheu-
matology (Oxford). 2005;44:587-596.
247.	Stoyneva Z, Lyapina M, Tzvetkov D, Vodenicharov E. Cur-
rent pathophysiological views on vibration-induced Rayn-
aud’s phenomenon. Cardiovasc Res. 2003;57:615-624.
913
Arterial Disease
CHAPTER 23
248.	Das CJ, Neyaz Z, Thapa P, Sharma S, Vashist S. Fibromus-
cular dysplasia of the renal arteries: a radiological review. Int 
Urol Nephrol. 2007;39:233-238.
249.	Gray BH. Intervention for renal artery stenosis: endovascular 
and surgical roles. J Hypertens Suppl. 2005;23:S23-S29.
250.	Pannone A, Di Cesare F, Bartolucci R, Maritati G, Luc-
chetti G, Rabitti G. Cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal 
artery. A case report and review of the literature. Chir Ital. 
2008;60:153-158.
251.	 di Marzo L, Cavallaro A. Popliteal vascular entrapment. World J 
Surg. 2005;29(Suppl 1):S43-S45.
252.	Paraskevas KI, Liapis CD, Briana DD, Mikhailidis DP. 
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease): searching for 
a therapeutic strategy. Angiology. 2007;58:75-84.
This page intentionally left blank 
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
Jason P. Jundt, Timothy K. Liem, 
and Gregory L. Moneta
24
VENOUS ANATOMY
Veins are part of a dynamic and complex system that returns 
low-nutrient deoxygenated blood to the heart. Venous blood 
flow is dependent on multiple factors such as gravity, venous 
valves, the cardiac and respiratory cycles, blood volume, and the 
calf muscle pump. Alterations in the intricate balance of these 
factors can result in venous pathology.
Structure of Veins
Veins are thin-walled, highly distensible, and collapsible. Their 
structure specifically supports the primary functions of veins 
to transport blood toward the heart and serve as a reservoir to 
prevent intravascular volume overload.
The venous intima is composed of a nonthrombogenic 
endothelium with an underlying basement membrane and an 
elastic lamina. The endothelium produces endothelium-derived 
relaxing factors such as nitric oxide and prostacyclin, which 
help maintain a nonthrombogenic surface through inhibition 
of platelet aggregation and promotion of platelet disaggrega-
tion.1 Circumferential rings of elastic tissue and smooth muscle 
located in the media of the vein allow for changes in vein cali-
ber with minimal changes in venous pressure. The adventitia is 
most prominent in large veins and consists of collagen, elastic 
fibers, and fibroblasts. When a vein is maximally distended, its 
diameter may be several times greater than that in the supine 
position.
In the axial veins, unidirectional blood flow is achieved 
with multiple venous valves. The inferior vena cava (IVC), 
common iliac veins, portal venous system, and cranial sinuses 
are valveless. In the axial veins, valves are more numerous 
distally in the extremities than proximally. Each valve consists 
of two thin cusps of a fine connective tissue skeleton covered 
by endothelium. Venous valves close in response to cephalad-
to-caudal blood flow at a velocity of at least 30 cm/s.2
Lower Extremity Veins
Lower extremity veins are divided into superficial, deep, and 
perforating veins. The superficial venous system lies above the 
uppermost fascial layer of the leg and thigh and consists of the 
great saphenous vein (GSV) and small saphenous vein (SSV) 
and their tributaries. The GSV originates from the dorsal pedal 
venous arch and courses cephalad, anterior to the medial mal-
leolus, entering the common femoral vein approximately 4 cm 
inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. The saphenous nerve 
accompanies the GSV medially from the ankle to the level of 
the knee and supplies cutaneous sensation to the medial leg 
and ankle. The SSV originates laterally from the dorsal pedal 
venous arch and courses cephalad in the posterior calf. Most 
often, it penetrates the popliteal fossa, between the medial and 
lateral heads of the gastrocnemius muscle, to join the popli-
teal vein. The termination of the SSV may be quite variable, 
however, with a proximal extension of the SSV (the vein of 
Giacomini) frequently connecting with the deep femoral vein 
or GSV. The sural nerve accompanies the SSV laterally along 
its course and supplies cutaneous sensation to the lateral mal-
leolar region.
The deep veins follow the course of major arteries in the 
extremities. In the lower leg, paired veins parallel the course 
of the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal arteries, to 
join behind the knee forming the popliteal vein. Venous bridges 
connect the paired veins in the lower leg. The popliteal vein 
continues through the adductor hiatus to become the femoral 
vein. In the proximal thigh, the femoral vein joins with the deep 
femoral vein to form the common femoral vein, becoming the 
external iliac vein at the inguinal ligament.
Multiple perforator veins traverse the deep fascia to 
connect the superficial and deep venous systems. Potentially 
clinically important perforator veins are the Cockett and Boyd 
perforators. The Cockett perforator veins drain the medial 
chapter 
Venous Anatomy	
915
Structure of Veins / 915
Lower Extremity Veins / 915
Upper Extremity Veins / 916
Evaluation of the Venous System	916
Clinical Evaluation / 916
Venous Thromboembolism	
918
Epidemiology / 918
Risk Factors / 918
Diagnosis / 919
Treatment / 921
Prophylaxis / 925
Other Venous Thrombotic  
Disorders	
927
Superficial Vein Thrombophlebitis / 927
Upper Extremity Vein Thrombosis / 928
Mesenteric Vein Thrombosis / 929
Varicose Veins	
929
Chronic Venous Insufficiency	
930
Evaluation of Venous Insufficiency / 930
Nonoperative Treatment of Chronic  
Venous Insufficiency / 931
Surgical/Interventional Treatment of 
Chronic Venous Insufficiency / 933
Lymphedema	
934
Pathophysiology / 934
Clinical Diagnosis / 934
Radiologic Diagnosis / 935
Management / 935
Summary	
936
UNIT II
PART II
lower leg and are relatively constant. They connect the poste-
rior arch vein (a tributary to the GSV) and the posterior tibial 
vein. They may become varicose or incompetent in venous 
insufficiency states. The Boyd perforator veins connect the 
GSV to the deep veins approximately 10 cm below the knee 
and 1 to 2 cm medial to the tibia.
Venous sinuses are thin-walled, large veins located within 
the substance of the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles. These 
sinuses are valveless and are linked by valved, small venous 
channels that prevent reflux. A large amount of blood can be 
stored in the venous sinuses. With each contraction of the calf 
muscle bed, blood is pumped out through the venous channels 
into the main conduit veins to return to the heart.
Upper Extremity Veins
As in the lower extremity, there are deep and superficial veins 
in the upper extremity. Deep veins of the upper extremity are 
paired and follow the named arteries in the arm. Superficial 
veins of the upper extremity are the cephalic and basilic veins 
and their tributaries. The cephalic vein originates at the lateral 
wrist and courses over the ventral surface of the forearm. In 
the upper arm, the cephalic vein terminates in the infracla-
vicular fossa, piercing the clavipectoral fascia to empty into 
the axillary vein. The basilic vein runs medially along the 
forearm and penetrates the deep fascia as it courses past the 
elbow in the upper arm. It then joins with the deep brachial 
veins to become the axillary vein. The median cubital vein 
joins the cephalic and the basilic veins on the ventral surface 
of the elbow.
The axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein at the lat-
eral border of the first rib. At the medial border of the scalenus 
anterior muscle, the subclavian vein joins with the internal jugu-
lar vein to become the brachiocephalic vein, with the subclavian 
vein coursing anterior to the scalenus anterior muscle. The left 
and right brachiocephalic veins join to become the superior vena 
cava, which empties into the right atrium.
916
Key Points
1 	 Thrombolytic therapy, surgical thrombectomy, and placement 
of inferior vena cava filters are adjunctive treatments that may 
be indicated in patients with extensive and complicated venous 
thromboembolism.
2 	 Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism are 
frequent complications after major abdominal and orthopedic 
procedures. The risk is further increased in patients with 
malignancy and a history of venous thromboembolism. 
Options for DVT prophylaxis include intermittent pneumatic 
compression, use of graduated compression stockings, and 
administration of low-dose unfractionated heparin, low molec-
ular weight heparin, fondaparinux, and vitamin K antagonists. 
However, prophylaxis should be stratified based on the 
patient's level of risk.
3 	 In patients with established DVT, unfractionated heparin, low 
molecular weight heparin, and fondaparinux are options for 
initial antithrombotic therapy. The duration and type of long-
term anticoagulation should be stratified based on the ­provoked 
or unprovoked nature of the DVT, the location of the DVT, 
previous occurrence of DVT, and presence of concomitant 
malignancy.
4 	 Saphenous vein stripping, endovenous laser treatment, and 
radiofrequency ablation are effective therapies for patients 
with saphenous vein valvular insufficiency. Concomitant 
varicose veins may be managed with compression therapy, 
sclerotherapy (for smaller varices), and phlebectomy.
5 	 The mainstay of treatment for chronic venous insufficiency 
is compression therapy. Sclerotherapy, perforator vein liga-
tion, and venous reconstruction may be indicated in 
patients in whom conservative management fails.
6 	 Lymphedema is categorized as primary (with early or 
delayed onset) or secondary. The goals of treatment are to 
minimize edema and prevent infection. Lymphatic mas-
sage, sequential pneumatic compression, use of compres-
sion garments, and limb elevation are effective forms of 
therapy.
EVALUATION OF THE VENOUS SYSTEM
Clinical Evaluation
Evaluation of the venous system begins with a detailed history 
and physical examination. Risk factors for acute and chronic 
venous disease are identified. They include increased age, his-
tory of venous thromboembolism (VTE), malignancy, trauma 
and spinal cord injury, hospitalization and immobilization, 
obesity, nephrotic syndrome, pregnancy and the recently post-
partum state, oral contraceptive use or hormone replacement 
therapy, varicose veins, and hypercoagulable states, as well 
as the postoperative state. Venous pathology is often, but not 
always, associated with visible or palpable signs that can be 
identified during the physical examination. There is variation 
among individuals in the prominence of superficial veins when 
the person is standing (Fig. 24-1). The superficial veins of a 
Figure 24-1.  Varicose vein demonstrating evidence of chronic 
venous insufficiency.
917
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
lean athletic person, even when normal, will appear large and 
easily visualized, but these veins will be far less obvious in the 
obese individual. Possible signs of superficial venous abnormal-
ities are listed in Table 24-1. The deep veins cannot be directly 
assessed clinically, and abnormalities within them can only be 
inferred indirectly from changes found on clinical examination.
Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) may lead to character-
istic changes in the skin and subcutaneous tissues in the affected 
limb. CVI results from incompetence of venous valves, venous 
obstruction, or both. Most CVI involves venous reflux, and 
severe CVI often reflects a combination of reflux and venous 
obstruction. It is important to remember that although CVI 
originates with abnormalities of the veins, the target organ of 
CVI is the skin, and the underlying physiologic and biochemical 
mechanisms leading to the cutaneous abnormalities associated 
with CVI are poorly understood. A typical leg affected by CVI 
will be edematous, with edema increasing over the course of the 
day. The leg may also be indurated and pigmented with eczema 
and dermatitis. These changes are associated with excessive 
proteinaceous capillary exudate and deposition of a pericapil-
lary fibrin cuff that may limit nutritional exchange. In addition, 
an increase in white blood cell trapping within the skin microcir-
culation in CVI patients may lead to microvascular congestion 
and thrombosis. Subsequently, white blood cells may migrate 
into the interstitium and release necrotizing lysosomal enzymes, 
potentially leading to tissue destruction and eventual ulceration.
Fibrosis can eventually develop from impaired nutrition, 
chronic inflammation, and fat necrosis (lipodermatosclerosis). 
Hemosiderin deposition due to the extravasation of red cells 
and subsequent lysis in the skin contributes to the characteris-
tic pigmentation of chronic venous disease (Fig. 24-2). Ulcer-
ation can develop with longstanding venous hypertension and 
is associated with alterations in microcirculatory and cutaneous 
lymphatic anatomy and function. The most common location of 
venous ulceration is approximately 3 cm proximal to the medial 
malleolus (Fig. 24-3).
Trendelenburg’s test is a clinical test, historically important 
but now rarely used, that can help determine whether incompe-
tent valves are present and in which of the three venous systems 
(superficial, deep, or perforator) the valves are abnormal. There 
are two components to this test. First, with the patient supine, the 
leg is elevated 45° to empty the veins, and the GSV is occluded 
with the examiner’s hand or with a rubber tourniquet. With the 
GSV still occluded, the patient stands and the superficial veins 
are observed for blood filling. The compression on the GSV is 
released and the superficial veins are observed for filling with 
blood. A negative result, indicating no clinically relevant venous 
reflux, is the gradual filling of the veins from arterial inflow. A 
positive result is the sudden filling of veins with standing while 
the GSV remains occluded indicating incompetent perforator 
Table 24-1
Possible signs of superficial venous abnormalities
Tortuosity
Varicosity
Venous saccule
Distended subdermal venules (corona phlebectatica)
Distended intradermal venules (spider angiomata)
Warmth, erythema, tenderness (superficial thrombophlebitis)
Figure 24-2.  Characteristic hyperpigmentation of chronic venous 
insufficiency.
Figure 24-3.  Venous ulceration located proximal to the medial 
malleolus.
918
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
DVT and 12% of PE cases within 1 month of diagnosis.5 Not 
only does VTE pose a veritable threat to life, but it also places 
patients at higher risk for recurrence and post-VTE sequelae 
such as pulmonary hypertension and postthrombotic syndrome, 
with 4% and up to 30% incidence, respectively.8-10
Risk Factors
Three conditions, first described by Rudolf Virchow in 1862, 
contribute to VTE formation: stasis of blood flow, endothelial 
damage, and hypercoagulability. Of these risk factors, relative 
hypercoagulability appears most important in most cases of 
spontaneous VTE, or so-called idiopathic VTE, whereas stasis 
and endothelial damage likely play a greater role in secondary 
VTE, or so-called provoked VTE, occurring in association with 
transient risk factors such as immobilization, surgical proce-
dures, and trauma. Identifiable risk factors for VTE generally 
relate to one of the conditions described by Virchow. Often 
more than one risk factor is present. Specific risk factors for 
VTE are listed in Table 24-2.
The more common acquired VTE risk factors include 
older age (>40 years), hospitalization and immobilization, hor-
mone replacement and oral contraceptive therapy, pregnancy 
and the recently postpartum state, prior VTE, malignancy, major 
surgery, obesity, nephrotic syndrome, trauma and spinal cord 
injury, long-haul travel (>6 hours), varicose veins, antiphos-
pholipid syndrome, myeloproliferative disorders, and polycy-
themia. Heritable risk factors include male sex, factor V Leiden 
and deep veins. The GSV valves are incompetent if the second 
component of the test yields a positive result. Interpretation of 
the findings of Trendelenburg’s test is subjective, and therefore, 
it has largely been supplanted by the more objective noninvasive 
vascular laboratory tests to localize sites of venous reflux.
Noninvasive Evaluation.  Before the development of vascu-
lar ultrasound, noninvasive techniques to evaluate the venous 
system were based on plethysmographic techniques. Although 
a variety of plethysmographic techniques are used in the evalua-
tion of both acute and chronic venous disease, they are all based 
on the detection of volume changes in the limb in response to 
blood flow.
Duplex ultrasonography (DUS) augmented by color 
flow imaging is now the most important noninvasive diagnos-
tic method in the evaluation of the venous system. DUS has 
become standard for the detection of infrainguinal deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT), with near 100% sensitivity and specific-
ity in symptomatic patients.3 It is also the preferred method of 
evaluation for upper extremity venous thrombosis and is useful 
in the evaluation of CVI by documenting the presence of val-
vular reflux and venous obstruction. Overlying bowel gas and 
large body habitus make DUS less applicable to evaluation of 
intra-abdominal veins. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) 
and computed tomography (CT) venography are noninvasive 
techniques for evaluation of pelvic and intra-abdominal veins.
Invasive Evaluation.  Improved accuracy of noninvasive 
techniques for diagnostic purposes has made the use of invasive 
procedures more selective. Both venography and intravascular 
ultrasound (IVUS) are used as adjuncts to percutaneous or open 
surgical treatment of venous disorders. When planning endo-
vascular or open surgical treatment, venography may be used to 
identify areas of obstruction in infrainguinal, intra-abdominal, 
and upper extremity veins as well as reflux in intra-abdominal 
and infrainguinal veins. IVUS, with access generally via the 
common femoral vein, is used primarily to assess for occlusive 
lesions of the iliac veins and appears more sensitive than venog-
raphy in detecting iliac vein obstruction.
Complications of venography include pain, thrombosis, 
or hematoma at the puncture site. Pain is lower with nonionic 
low-osmolality contrast media than with conventional contrast 
agents (with 18% vs. 44% of patients experiencing discomfort, 
respectively).4 Systemic effects of iodinated contrast media 
include allergic reaction and risk of renal failure. Postvenog-
raphy venous thrombosis occurs distal to the venous puncture 
site in 1% to 9% of patients undergoing venography secondary 
to intimal damage from the intravenous (IV) contrast agent.4 
Complications of IVUS are primarily related to the access site.
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
Epidemiology
Despite increased awareness and use of prophylactic modalities, 
DVT and pulmonary embolism (PE), or VTE, remain important 
preventable sources of morbidity and mortality, especially in the 
surgical patient. The incidence of VTE is approximately 100 per 
100,000 people per year in the general population, with 20% of 
the diagnoses made within 3 months of a surgical procedure. Of 
the symptomatic patients, one third will present with PE and two 
thirds with DVT.5,6 The estimated number of cases of VTE may 
well be over 600,000 per year in the United States, making it a 
major U.S. health problem.7 Furthermore, death occurs in 6% of 
Table 24-2
Risk factors for venous thromboembolism
Acquired
  Advanced age
  Hospitalization/immobilization
  Hormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptive use
  Pregnancy and puerperium
  Prior venous thromboembolism
  Malignancy
  Major surgery
  Obesity
  Nephrotic syndrome
  Trauma or spinal cord injury
  Long-haul travel (>6 hours)
  Varicose veins
  Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
  Myeloproliferative disease
  Polycythemia
Inherited
  Factor V Leiden
  Prothrombin 20210A
  Antithrombin deficiency
  Protein C deficiency
  Protein S deficiency
  Factor XI elevation
  Dysfibrinogenemia
Mixed Etiology
  Homocysteinemia
  Factor VII, VIII, IX, XI elevation
  Hyperfibrinogenemia
  Activated protein C resistance without factor V Leiden
919
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
mutation; prothrombin 20210A gene variant; antithrombin, pro-
tein C, and protein S deficiencies; and dysfibrinogenemias. In 
some patients, the cause of the thrombophilia may have both 
a heritable and an acquired component. These mixed causes 
include homocysteinemia; factor VII, VIII, IX, and XI eleva-
tion; hyperfibrinogenemia; and activated protein C resistance 
in the absence of factor V Leiden.11 There may be a synergistic 
effect when particular multiple inherited and acquired risk fac-
tors are present in the same patient.
Other patient-specific factors associated with venous 
thrombosis include the traditional cardiovascular risk factors 
of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. VTE is more com-
mon in whites and African Americans than Asians and Native 
Americans.12,13 Certain gene variants (single nucleotide poly-
morphisms) are also associated with a mildly increased risk for 
VTE, and their presence may interact with other risk factors to 
increase the overall risk for venous thrombosis.14
Anatomic factors may also contribute to development of 
DVT. At the site where the right iliac artery crosses over the 
left iliac vein, the left iliac vein may become chronically nar-
rowed predisposing to iliofemoral venous thrombosis, so-called 
May-Thurner syndrome. External compression of major veins 
by masses of various types can also lead to venous thrombosis.
Many cases of VTE are potentially preventable. Accord-
ingly, in current clinical practice, preoperative VTE risk assess-
ment is becoming increasingly common to identify patients at 
moderate and high risk. Scoring systems have been developed that 
take into account the number of VTE risk factors in an individual 
patient. These risk stratification scores, such as the Rogers score15 
and Caprini score,16 provide individual patient risk stratification 
and recommendations for prophylactic anticoagulation. The ninth 
edition of the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) 
Guidelines for Prevention of VTE in ­Non-Orthopedic Surgical 
Patients acknowledges both the Rogers and Caprini scores and 
provides recommendations for VTE prophylaxis (Table 24-3). 
Orthopedic surgical patients are generally excluded from risk 
assessment scores because of the disproportionately increased 
risk of VTE in orthopedic surgery compared with the general and 
abdominopelvic surgery population.
Diagnosis
Clinical Evaluation.  Early in the course of DVT development, 
venous thrombosis is thought to begin in an area of relative 
stasis, such as a soleal sinus vein or immediately downstream 
of the cusps of a venous valve in the axial calf veins. Isolated 
proximal DVT without tibial vein thrombosis is unusual. Early 
in the course of a DVT, there may be no or few clinical findings 
such as pain or swelling. Even extensive DVT may sometimes 
be present without signs or symptoms. History and physical 
examination are therefore unreliable in the diagnosis of DVT. In 
addition, symptoms and signs generally associated with DVT, 
such as extremity pain and/or swelling, are nonspecific. In large 
studies, DVT has been found by venography or DUS in ≤50% 
of patients in whom it was clinically suspected.17,18 Objective 
studies are therefore required to confirm a diagnosis of VTE or 
to exclude the presence of VTE.
Clinical symptoms may worsen as DVT propagates and 
involves the major proximal deep veins. Extensive DVT of the 
major axial deep venous channels of the lower extremity with 
relative sparing of collateral veins causes a condition called 
phlegmasia cerulea dolens (Fig. 24-4). This condition is char-
acterized by pain and pitting edema with associated cyanosis. 
When the thrombosis extends to the collateral veins, massive 
fluid sequestration and more significant edema ensue, resulting 
in a condition known as phlegmasia alba dolens.19 The affected 
extremity in phlegmasia alba dolens is extremely painful and 
edematous and pale secondary to arterial insufficiency from 
dramatically elevated below lower knee compartment pressures. 
Both phlegmasia cerulean dolens and phlegmasia alba dolens can 
be complicated by venous gangrene and the need for amputation.
Table 24-3
Thromboembolism risk and recommended thromboprophylaxis in surgical patients
Level of Risk
Approximate DVT Risk without 
­Thromboprophylaxis (%)
Suggested Thromboprophylaxis 
Options
Very low risk
  General or abdominopelvic surgery
<0.5% (Rogers score <7; Caprini score 0)
No specific thromboprophylaxis
Early ambulation
Low risk
  General or abdominopelvic surgery
~1.5% (Rogers score 7–10; Caprini  
score 1–2)
Mechanical prophylaxis
Moderate risk
  General or abdominopelvic surgery
~3.0% (Rogers score >10; Caprini score 3–4)
LMWH (at recommended doses), LDUH, 
or mechanical prophylaxis
High bleeding risk
Mechanical prophylaxis
High risk
  General or abdominopelvic surgery
~6% (Caprini score ≥5)
LMWH (at recommended doses), 
fondaparinux and mechanical prophylaxis
High bleeding risk
  General or abdominopelvic surgery 
for cancer
Mechanical thromboprophylaxis
Extended-duration LMWH (4 weeks)
DVT = deep vein thrombosis; INR = international normalized ratio; LDUH = low-dose unfractionated heparin; LMWH = low molecular weight heparin; 
VTE = venous thromboembolism.
Source: Summary of recommendations from Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, et al. Prevention of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: antithrombotic 
therapy and prevention of thrombosis: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 9th ed. Chest. 2012;141:227S. 
Reproduced with permission from the American College of Chest Physicians.
920
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
From the common femoral through the popliteal vein, the 
primary method of detecting DVT with ultrasound is demon-
stration of the lack of compressibility of the vein with probe 
pressure on B-mode imaging. Normally, in transverse section, 
the vein walls should coapt with pressure. Lack of coaptation 
indicates thrombus. Calf vein thrombi are often best detected 
by abnormalities in color flow imaging.
The examination begins at the ankle and continues 
proximally to the groin. Each vein is visualized, and the 
flow signal is assessed with distal and proximal compres-
sion. Lower extremity DVT can be diagnosed by any of 
the following DUS findings: lack of spontaneous flow 
(Fig. 24-6), inability to compress the vein (Fig. 24-7), absence 
of color filling of the lumen by color flow DUS, loss of respi-
ratory flow variation, and venous distention. Again, lack of 
venous compression on B-mode imaging is the primary diag-
nostic variable. Several studies comparing B-mode ultrasound 
to venography for the detection of femoropopliteal DVT in 
patients clinically suspected to have DVT report sensitivities 
of >91% and specificities of >97%.20,21 The ability of DUS to 
assess isolated calf vein DVT varies greatly, with sensitivi-
ties ranging from 50% to 93% and specificities approaching 
100%.22,23
Vascular Lab and Radiologic Evaluation
Duplex Ultrasound  DUS is now the most commonly performed 
test for the detection of infrainguinal DVT, both above and 
below the knee, and has a sensitivity and specificity of >95% 
in symptomatic patients.3 DUS refers to the combination of 
real-time B-mode ultrasound with pulsed Doppler capability. 
For VTE detection, color flow imaging is an extremely useful 
adjunct in the evaluation of possible calf vein DVT and eval-
uation of intra-abdominal veins. DUS provides the ability to 
noninvasively visualize venous anatomy, detect occluded and 
partially occluded venous segments, and demonstrate physi-
ologic flow characteristics using a mobile self-contained device.
In the supine patient, normal lower extremity venous flow 
is phasic (Fig. 24-5), decreasing with inspiration in response 
to increased intra-abdominal pressure with the descent of the 
diaphragm and then increasing with expiration as the diaphragm 
rises and intra-abdominal pressure decreases. When the patient 
is upright, the decrease in intra-abdominal pressure with expira-
tion cannot overcome the hydrostatic column of pressure exist-
ing between the right atrium and the calf. Muscular contractions 
of the calf, along with the one-way venous valves, are then 
required to promote venous return to the heart. Flow also can 
be increased by leg elevation or compression and decreased by 
sudden elevation of intra-abdominal ­pressure (Valsalva maneu-
ver). In a venous DUS examination performed with the patient 
supine, spontaneous flow, variation of flow with respiration, 
and response of flow to Valsalva maneuver are all assessed. 
Figure 24-4.  Phlegmasia cerulea dolens of the left leg. Note the 
bluish discoloration.
Figure 24-5.  Duplex ultrasound scan of a normal femoral vein 
with phasic flow signals.
Figure 24-6.  Duplex ultrasound of a femoral vein containing 
thrombus demonstrating no flow within the femoral vein.
No compression
Compression
R  FVP
R  FVP
Figure 24-7.  B-mode ultrasound of the femoral vein in cross-section. 
The femoral vein does not collapse with external compression 
(arrows).
921
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
study result virtually excludes the presence of DVT. In a study 
of 160 patients with a normal venogram followed for 3 months, 
only two patients (1.3%) subsequently developed DVT and no 
patients experienced symptoms of PE.26 Venography is not rou-
tinely used in clinical practice due to invasiveness and com-
plication risk. It is still, however, frequently used in research 
studies evaluating DVT prophylaxis.
Treatment
Once the diagnosis of VTE has been made, antithrombotic ther-
apy should be initiated promptly. If clinical suspicion for VTE 
is high, it may be prudent to start treatment while the diagnosis 
is objectively confirmed. The goals of VTE treatment are the 
prevention of mortality and morbidity associated with PE and 
the prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome (PTS). Treatment 
regimens may include antithrombotic therapy, temporary or per-
manent vena cava filter placement, catheter-directed or sys-
temic thrombolytic therapy, and operative thrombectomy. 
Antithrombotic Therapy.  Most often, antithrombotic therapy 
for VTE is initiated with IV or subcutaneous (SC) unfractionated 
heparin or SC low molecular weight heparin. Fondaparinux, a 
synthetic pentasaccharide, is sometimes also used as an alterna-
tive to heparin to initiate therapy. An oral vitamin K antago-
nist, usually sodium warfarin, is begun shortly after initiation of 
IV or SC therapy. Either SC or IV therapy is continued until 
effective oral anticoagulation with warfarin is achieved as indi-
cated by an international normalized ratio (INR) ≥2 for 24 hours. 
A minimum of 5 days of heparin or fondaparinux therapy is rec-
ommended.27 Recently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has also approved alternative oral ­anticoagulants 
for both treatment and prophylaxis for VTE. 
Unfractionated heparin (UFH) binds to antithrombin via 
a specific 18-saccharide sequence. This increases antithrombin 
activity over 1000-fold. The antithrombin-heparin complex 
primarily inhibits factor IIa (thrombin) and factor Xa and, to 
a lesser degree, factors IXa, XIa, and XIIa of the coagulation 
cascade. In addition, UFH also binds to tissue factor pathway 
inhibitor, which inhibits the conversion of factor X to Xa, 
and factor IX to IXa. Finally, UFH catalyzes the inhibition of 
thrombin by heparin cofactor II via a mechanism independent 
of ­antithrombin.
UFH therapy is most commonly administered with an ini-
tial IV bolus of 80 units/kg. Weight-based UFH dosages have 
been shown to be more effective than standard fixed boluses 
in rapidly achieving therapeutic levels.28 The initial bolus is 
followed by a continuous IV drip at 18 units/kg per hour. The 
half-life of IV UFH ranges from 45 to 90 minutes and is dose 
dependent. The level of antithrombotic therapy should be moni-
tored every 6 hours using the activated partial thromboplastin 
time (aPTT), with the goal range of 1.5 to 2.5 times control 
values. This should correspond with plasma heparin anti-Xa 
activity levels of 0.3 to 0.7 IU/mL.
Initial anticoagulation with UFH may also be administered 
SC, although this route is less commonly used. Adjusted-dose 
therapeutic SC UFH is initiated with 17,500 units, followed 
by 250 units/kg twice daily, and dosing is adjusted to an aPTT 
goal range similar to that for IV UFH. Fixed-dose unmonitored 
SC UFH is started with a bolus of 333 units/kg, followed by 
250 units/kg twice daily.29
Hemorrhage is the primary complication of UFH ther-
apy. The rate of major hemorrhage (fatal, intracranial, retro-
peritoneal, or requiring transfusion of >2 units of packed red 
Impedance Plethysmography  Impedance plethysmography 
(IPG) was the primary noninvasive method of diagnosing DVT 
before the widespread use of DUS but is infrequently used today. 
Changes in electrical resistance resulting from lower extremity 
blood volume changes are quantified. IPG is less accurate than 
DUS for the detection of proximal DVT, with 83% sensitivity 
in symptomatic patients. It is a poor detector of calf vein DVT.24
Iodine-125 Fibrinogen Uptake  Iodine-125 fibrinogen uptake 
(FUT) is a seldom used technique that involves IV adminis-
tration of radioactive fibrinogen and monitoring for increased 
uptake in fibrin clots. An increase of 20% or more in one area 
of a limb indicates an area of thrombus. FUT can detect DVT 
in the calf, but high background radiation from the pelvis and 
the urinary tract limits its ability to detect proximal DVT. It 
also cannot be used in an extremity that has recently undergone 
surgery or has active inflammation. In a prospective study, FUT 
had a sensitivity of 73% and specificity of 71% for identification 
of DVT in a group of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.25 
Currently, FUT is primarily a research tool of historic interest.
Venography  Venography is the gold standard to which other 
diagnostic modalities are compared. A small catheter is placed 
in a dorsal foot vein with injection of a radiopaque contrast 
agent. Radiographs are obtained in at least two projections. 
A positive study result is failure to fill the deep system with 
passage of the contrast medium into the superficial system or 
demonstration of discrete filling defects (Fig. 24-8). A normal 
1
Figure 24-8.  Venogram showing a filling defect in the popliteal 
vein (arrows).
2
922
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
blood cells) is approximately 5% in hospitalized patients under-
going UFH therapy (1% in medical patients and 8% in surgical 
patients).29 For patients with UFH-related bleeding complica-
tions, cessation of UFH is required, and anticoagulation may 
be reversed with protamine sulfate. Protamine sulfate binds to 
UFH and forms an inactive salt compound. Each milligram of 
protamine neutralizes 90 to 115 units of heparin, and the dos-
age should not exceed 50 mg IV over any 10-minute period. 
Side effects of protamine sulfate include hypotension, pul-
monary edema, and anaphylaxis. Patients with prior exposure 
to protamine-containing insulin (NPH) and patients with allergy 
to fish may have an increased risk of hypersensitivity, although 
no direct relationship has been established. Protamine adminis-
tration should be terminated if any side effects occur.
In addition to hemorrhage, heparin also has unique com-
plications. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) results 
from heparin-associated antiplatelet antibodies (HAAbs) 
directed against platelet factor 4 complexed with heparin.30 HIT 
occurs in 1% to 5% of patients being treated with heparin.31,32 In 
patients with repeat heparin exposure (such as vascular surgery 
patients), the incidence of HAAbs may be as high as 21%.33 HIT 
occurs most frequently in the second week of therapy and may 
lead to disastrous venous or arterial thrombotic complications. 
Therefore, platelet counts should be monitored periodically in 
patients receiving continuous heparin therapy.
HIT is diagnosed based on previous exposure to heparin, 
platelet count less than 100,000, and/or platelet count decline of 
50% following exposure. All heparin must be stopped and alter-
native anticoagulation initiated immediately to avoid thrombotic 
complications, which may approach 50% over the subsequent 
30 days in affected individuals.34
Another complication of prolonged high-dose heparin 
therapy is osteopenia. Heparin-induced osteopenia results from 
impairment of bone formation and enhancement of bone resorp-
tion by heparin.
Low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) are derived 
from the depolymerization of porcine UFH. Like UFH, 
LMWHs bind to antithrombin via a specific pentasaccharide 
sequence to expose an active site for the neutralization of fac-
tor Xa. However, LMWHs have fewer additional saccharide 
units. This results in less inactivation of thrombin (factor IIa). 
In comparison to UFH, LMWHs have increased bioavailability 
(>90% after SC injection), longer half-lives (approximately 4 to 
6 hours), and more predictable elimination rates.
Most patients treated with weight-based once- or twice-
daily SC LMWH injections do not require laboratory monitoring 
for anticoagulant effect, a distinct advantage over continuous IV 
infusions of UFH. Patients who do require monitoring include 
those with significant renal insufficiency, pediatric patients, 
obese patients greater than 120 kg, and pregnant patients. Moni-
toring may be performed using anti-Xa activity assays. The ther-
apeutic anti-Xa goal range depends on the type of LMWH and 
the frequency of dosing. There are numerous LMWHs avail-
able, and the various preparations differ in their anti-Xa and 
anti-IIa activities. Treatment dosing for one LMWH therefore 
cannot be extrapolated for use with another. The anticoagulant 
effect of LMWHs may be partially reversed (approximately 
60%) with protamine sulfate.
Numerous well-designed trials comparing SC LMWH 
with IV and SC UFH for the treatment of DVT have been 
critically evaluated in several meta-analyses and demonstrate a 
decrease in thrombotic complications, bleeding, and mortality 
with LMWHs.35-37 LMWHs also are associated with a decreased 
rate of HAAb formation and HIT (<2%) compared with UFH 
(at least in prophylactic doses).29 However, patients with estab-
lished HIT also should not receive LMWHs because there is 
cross-reactivity between the drugs.38
A major benefit of LMWHs is that it allows outpatient 
treatment of VTE.39,40 In a randomized study comparing IV UFH 
and the LMWH nadroparin calcium,39 there was no significant 
difference in recurrent thromboembolism (8.6% for UFH vs. 
6.9% for LMWH) or major bleeding complications (2.0% for 
UFH vs. 0.5% for LMWH). There was, however, a 67% reduc-
tion in mean days in the hospital for the LMWH group.
Fondaparinux currently is a synthetic pentasaccharide that 
has been approved by the FDA for the initial treatment of DVT 
and PE. Its five-polysaccharide sequence binds and activates 
antithrombin, causing specific inhibition of factor Xa. In two 
large noninferiority trials, fondaparinux was compared with the 
LMWH enoxaparin for the initial treatment of DVT and with IV 
UFH for the initial treatment of PE.41,42 The rates of recurrent 
VTE ranged from 3.8% to 5%, with rates of major bleeding of 
2% to 2.6%, for all treatment arms. The drug is administered 
SC once daily with a weight-based dosing protocol: 5 mg, 7.5 mg, 
or 10 mg for patients weighing <50 kg, 50 to 100 kg, or >100 kg, 
respectively. The half-life of fondaparinux is approximately 
17 hours in patients with normal renal function. There are rare 
case reports of fondaparinux-induced thrombocytopenia.43
Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) include recombinant 
hirudin, argatroban, and bivalirudin. These antithrombotic 
agents bind to thrombin, inhibiting the conversion of fibrinogen 
to fibrin as well as thrombin-induced platelet activation. These 
actions are independent of antithrombin. The DTIs should be 
reserved for (a) patients in whom there is a high clinical suspi-
cion or confirmation of HIT, and (b) patients who have a his-
tory of HIT or test positive for heparin-associated antibodies. In 
patients with established HIT, DTIs should be administered for 
at least 7 days, or until the platelet count normalizes. Warfarin 
may then be introduced slowly, overlapping therapy with a DTI 
for at least 5 days.44
Bivalirudin is approved primarily for patients with or 
without HIT who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention 
and is rarely used outside of that setting.
Commercially available hirudin is manufactured using 
recombinant DNA technology. It is indicated for the prophy-
laxis and treatment of patients with HIT. In patients with normal 
renal function, recombinant hirudin is administered as an IV 
bolus dose of 0.4 mg/kg, followed by a continuous IV infu-
sion of 0.15 mg/kg per hour. The half-life ranges from 30 to 
60 minutes. The aPTT is monitored, starting approximately 
4 hours after initiation of therapy, and dosage is adjusted to 
maintain an aPTT of 1.5 to 2.5 times the laboratory normal 
value. The less commonly used ecarin clotting time is an alter-
native method of monitoring. Recombinant hirudin is elimi-
nated via renal excretion, so dosage adjustments are required in 
patients with renal insufficiency.
Argatroban is indicated for the prophylaxis and treatment 
of thrombosis in HIT. It also is approved for patients with, or 
at risk for, HIT undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. 
Antithrombotic prophylaxis and therapy are initiated with a con-
tinuous IV infusion of 2 μg/kg per minute, without the need 
for a bolus. The half-life ranges from 39 to 51 minutes, and the 
dosage is adjusted to maintain an aPTT of 1.5 to 3 times normal. 
Large initial boluses and higher rates of continuous infusion 
923
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
are reserved for patients with coronary artery thrombosis and 
myocardial infarction. In these patients, therapy is monitored 
using the activated clotting time. Argatroban is metabolized and 
excreted by the liver; therefore, dosage adjustments are needed 
in patients with hepatic impairment. There is no reversal agent 
for argatroban.
Vitamin K antagonists, which include warfarin and other 
coumarin derivatives, are the mainstay of long-term anti-
thrombotic therapy in patients with VTE. Warfarin inhibits the 
γ-carboxylation of vitamin K–dependent procoagulants (factors 
II, VII, IX, and X) and anticoagulants (proteins C and S), result-
ing in formation of less functional proteins. Warfarin usually 
requires several days to achieve full effect because normal cir-
culating coagulation proteins must first undergo their normal 
degradation. Factors X and II have the longest half-lives, in the 
range of 36 and 72 hours, respectively. A steady-state concen-
tration of warfarin is usually not reached for 4 to 5 days.
Warfarin therapy is monitored by measuring the INR, cal-
culated using the following equation:
INR = (patient prothrombin time/laboratory normal  
prothrombin time)ISI
where ISI is the international sensitivity index. The ISI describes 
the strength of the thromboplastin that is added to activate the 
extrinsic coagulation pathway. The therapeutic target INR range 
is usually 2.0 to 3.0, but the response to warfarin is variable and 
depends on liver function, diet, age, and concomitant medica-
tions. In patients receiving anticoagulation therapy without con-
comitant thrombolysis or venous thrombectomy, the vitamin K 
antagonist may be started on the same day as the initial paren-
teral anticoagulant, usually at doses ranging from 5 to 10 mg. 
Smaller initial doses may be needed in older and malnourished 
patients, in those with liver disease or congestive heart failure, 
and in those who have recently undergone major surgery.45
The recommended duration of warfarin antithrombotic 
therapy is stratified based on whether the DVT was provoked 
or unprovoked, whether it was the first or a recurrent episode, 
where the DVT is located, and whether malignancy or 
thrombophilia is present. Current ACCP recommendations 
for duration of warfarin therapy are summarized in Table 24-4. 
In patients with proximal DVT, several randomized clini-
cal trials have demonstrated that shorter-term antithrombotic 
therapy (4 to 6 weeks) is associated with a higher rate of VTE 
recurrence than 3 to 6 months of anticoagulation.46-48 In these 
trials, most of the patients with transient risk factors had a low 
rate of recurrent VTE, and most recurrences were in patients 
with continuing risk factors. The ACCP recommendation, there-
fore, is that 3 months of anticoagulation are sufficient to prevent 
recurrent VTE in patients with DVT occurring around the time 
of a transient risk factor (e.g., hospitalization, orthopedic or 
major general surgery).
In contrast to patients with thrombosis related to transient 
risk factors, patients with idiopathic VTE are much more likely 
to develop recurrence (rates as high as 40% at 10 years). In this 
latter group of patients, numerous clinical trials have compared 
3 to 6 months of anticoagulation therapy with extended-­duration 
warfarin therapy, both at low intensity (INR of 1.5 to 2.0) and at 
conventional intensity (INR of 2.0 to 3.0).49-51 In patients with 
idiopathic DVT, extended-duration antithrombotic therapy is 
associated with a relative reduction in the rate of recurrent VTE 
by 75% to >90%. In addition, conventional-intensity ­warfarin 
reduces the risk even further compared with low-­intensity 
Table 24-4
Summary of American College of Chest Physicians 
recommendations regarding duration of long-term 
antithrombotic therapy for deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Clinical Subgroup
Antithrombotic  
Treatment Duration
First episode DVT/transient  
  risk/surgery
VKA or LMWH for 3 months
First episode DVT/ 
  unprovoked
VKA or LMWH for 3 months
Consider for long-term  
  therapy if:
  •  Proximal DVT
  •  Minimal bleeding risk
  •  Stable coagulation 
monitoring
Distal DVT/unprovoked
  • Symptomatic
  • Asymptomatic and 
no risk factors for 
progression
VKA for 3 months
Serial imaging in 2 weeks, if  
  progression VKA for  
  3 months
Second episode DVT/ 
  unprovoked
DVT and cancer
VKA for extended therapy
LMWH for extended therapy 
  over VKA
LMWH = low molecular weight heparin; VKA = vitamin K antagonist.
Source: Summary of recommendations from Kearon C, Akl EA, Com-
erota AJ, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: antithrombotic 
therapy and prevention of thrombosis: American College of Chest 
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 9th ed. Chest. 
2012;141:e495S. Reproduced with permission from the American 
College of Chest Physicians.
­warfarin (0.7 events per 100 person-years vs. 1.9 events per 
100 person-years) without an increase in bleeding complications.52
In patients with VTE in association with a hypercoagu-
lable condition, the optimal duration of anticoagulation therapy 
is influenced more by the clinical circumstances at the time of 
the VTE (idiopathic vs. secondary) than by the actual presence 
or absence of the more common thrombophilic conditions. In 
patients with VTE related to malignancy, increasing evidence 
suggests that longer-term therapy with LMWH (up to 6 months) 
is associated with a lower VTE recurrence than treatment using 
conventional vitamin K antagonists.53,54 The primary complica-
tion of warfarin therapy is hemorrhage, and the risk is related 
to the magnitude of INR prolongation. Depending on the INR 
and the presence of bleeding, warfarin anticoagulation may 
be reversed by (a) omitting or decreasing subsequent dosages, 
(b) administering oral or parenteral vitamin K, or (c) administer-
ing fresh-frozen plasma, prothrombin complex concentrate, or 
recombinant factor VIIa.45
Warfarin therapy rarely may be associated with the devel-
opment of skin necrosis and limb gangrene. These conditions 
occur more commonly in women (4:1), and the most commonly 
affected areas are the breast, buttocks, and thighs. This com-
plication, which usually occurs in the first days of therapy, is 
occasionally, but not exclusively, associated with protein C or S 
deficiency and malignancy. Patients who require continued anti-
coagulation may restart low-dose warfarin (2 mg) while receiving 
3
924
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
concomitant therapeutic heparin. The warfarin dosage is then 
gradually increased over a 1- to 2-week period.45
Systemic and Catheter-Directed Thrombolysis.  Patients 
with extensive proximal, iliofemoral DVT may benefit from 
systemic thrombolysis or catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT). 
CDT appears to be more effective (see later in chapter) and 
potentially reduces acute congestive lower extremity symp-
toms more rapidly than anticoagulation alone and decreases the 
development of PTS.
Several thrombolytic agents are available, including strep-
tokinase, urokinase, alteplase (recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator), reteplase, and tenecteplase. All share the ability to 
convert plasminogen to plasmin, which leads to the degrada-
tion of fibrin. They differ with regard to their half-lives, their 
potential for inducing fibrinogenolysis (generalized lytic state), 
their potential for antigenicity, and their FDA-approved indica-
tions for use.
Streptokinase is purified from β-hemolytic Streptococcus 
and is approved for the treatment of acute myocardial infarc-
tion, PE, DVT, arterial thromboembolism, and occluded central 
lines and arteriovenous shunts. It is not specific for fibrin-bound 
plasminogen, however, and its use is limited by its significant 
rates of antigenicity. Fevers and shivering occur in 1% to 4% 
of patients.
Urokinase is derived from human neonatal kidney cells 
grown in tissue culture. Currently, it is only approved for lysis 
of massive PE or PE associated with unstable hemodynamics.
Alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase all are recombinant 
variants of tissue plasminogen activator. Alteplase is indicated 
for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction, acute ischemic 
stroke, and acute massive PE. However, it often is used for CDT 
of DVT. Reteplase and tenecteplase are indicated only for the 
treatment of acute myocardial infarction.
Systemic thrombolysis was evaluated in numerous older 
prospective and randomized clinical trials, and its efficacy 
was summarized in a recent Cochrane Review.55 In 12 stud-
ies involving over 700 patients, systemic thrombolysis was 
associated with significantly more clot lysis (relative risk [RR] 
0.24 to 0.37) and significantly less PTS (RR 0.66). However, 
venous function was not significantly improved. In addition, 
more bleeding complications occurred (RR 1.73).
In an effort to minimize bleeding complications and 
increase efficacy, CDT techniques were developed for the 
treatment of symptomatic primarily iliofemoral DVT. With 
catheter-directed therapy, venous access may be achieved 
through percutaneous catheterization of the ipsilateral popli-
teal vein, retrograde catheterization through the contralateral 
femoral vein, or retrograde cannulation from the internal jugu-
lar vein. Multi-side-hole infusion catheters, with or without 
infusion wires, are used to deliver the lytic agent directly into 
the thrombus. Lytic agents may be administered alone or, now 
more commonly, in combination with catheter-based methods 
to physically break up the clot—so-called pharmacomechanical 
thrombolysis.
The efficacy of CDT for the treatment of symptomatic 
iliofemoral DVT has been reported in a large multicenter ran-
domized control trial. Two-hundred and nine patients with 
proximal DVT were assigned to conventional anticoagulant 
therapy versus conventional anticoagulant therapy plus CDT. 
In the CDT group, placement of a venous stent was permitted 
for any identified iliac vein stenotic lesion. At 6 months, iliac 
vein patency was significantly improved in the thrombolysis 
group (65.9% vs. 47.4%). At 2 years, in the CDT group, there 
was an absolute risk reduction of nearly 15% for development 
of PTS, translating to a number needed to treat of seven patients 
to prevent one case of PTS.56
Inferior Vena Caval Filters.  Since the introduction of the 
Kimray-Greenfield filter in the United States in 1973, numerous 
vena caval filters have been developed. Although the designs 
are variable, they all prevent pulmonary emboli, while allowing 
continuation of venous blood flow through the IVC. Early filters 
were placed surgically through the femoral vein. Currently, less 
invasive techniques allow percutaneous filter placement through 
a femoral vein, internal jugular vein, or small peripheral vein 
under fluoroscopic or ultrasound guidance.
Placement of an IVC filter is indicated for patients who 
have manifestations of lower extremity VTE and absolute 
contraindications to anticoagulation, those that have a bleed-
ing complication from anticoagulation therapy of acute VTE, 
or those who develop recurrent DVT or PE despite adequate 
anticoagulation therapy and for patients with severe pulmonary 
hypertension.
When possible, therapy should be continued in patients 
with vena cava filters. The duration of anticoagulation is deter-
mined by the underlying VTE and not by the presence of the 
IVC filter itself. Practically speaking, however, many patients 
who require an IVC filter for recurrent VTE are the same ones 
who would benefit most from indefinite anticoagulation. In 
patients who are not able to receive anticoagulants due to recent 
surgery or trauma, the clinician should continually reassess if 
anticoagulation may be started safely at a later date.
Placement of permanent IVC filters has been evaluated as 
an adjunct to routine anticoagulation in patients with proximal 
DVT.57 Routine IVC filter placement has not been shown to 
prolong early or late survival in patients with proximal DVT but 
did decrease the rate of PE (hazard ratio, 0.22; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.05–0.90), however; an increased rate of recurrent 
DVT was seen in patients with IVC filters (hazard ratio, 1.87; 
95% confidence interval, 1.10–3.20).
IVC filters are associated with acute and late complica-
tions. Acute complications include thrombosis or bleeding at the 
insertion site and misplacement of the filter. Late complications 
include thrombosis of the IVC, DVT, breaking, migration, or 
erosion of the filter through the IVC (Fig. 24-9). The rate of fatal 
complications is <0.12%.58
In some patients, the need for an IVC filter may be self-
limited. Such patients can be treated with so-called removable 
IVC filters. Depending on the device, removable IVC filters are 
potentially removable by percutaneous endovascular techniques 
for up to several months after their initial implantation assuming 
the filter is no longer required and does not have large amounts 
of trapped thrombi. All temporary IVC filters are approved for 
permanent implantation, and many so-called temporary filters 
end up as permanent devices with all the potential complications 
of permanent IVC filters.
Operative Venous Thrombectomy.  In patients with acute 
iliofemoral DVT, surgical therapy is generally reserved for 
patients who worsen with anticoagulation therapy and those 
with phlegmasia cerulea dolens and impending venous gan-
grene. If the patient has phlegmasia cerulea dolens, a fasciotomy 
of the calf compartments is first performed. In iliofemoral DVT, 
a longitudinal venotomy is made in the common femoral vein 
and a venous balloon embolectomy catheter is passed through 
925
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
venous segment was 80% at 5 years and 56% at 10 years. More 
than 90% of patients had minimal or no symptoms of PTS. 
There were 12 (16%) early thrombectomy failures. Patients 
were required to wear compression stockings for at least 1 year 
after thrombectomy.61
Survival rates for surgical pulmonary embolectomy have 
improved over the past 20 years with the addition of cardio-
pulmonary bypass. Emergency pulmonary embolectomy for 
acute PE is rarely indicated. Patients with preterminal massive 
PE (Fig. 24-10) for whom thrombolysis has failed or who have 
contraindications to thrombolytics may be candidates for this 
procedure. Open pulmonary artery embolectomy is performed 
through a posterolateral thoracotomy with direct visualization 
of the pulmonary arteries. Mortality rates range between 20% 
and 40%.62-64
Percutaneous catheter-based techniques for removal 
of a PE involve mechanical thrombus fragmentation or 
embolectomy using suction devices. Mechanical clot frag-
mentation is followed by CDT. Results of catheter-based 
fragmentation are based on small case series. In a study in 
which a fragmentation device was used in 10 patients with 
acute massive PE, fragmentation was successful in 7 patients 
with a mortality rate of 20%.65 Transvenous catheter pulmo-
nary suction embolectomy has also been performed for acute 
massive PE with a reported 76% successful extraction rate 
and a 30-day survival of 70%.66
Prophylaxis
Patients who undergo major general surgical, gynecologic, 
urologic, and neurosurgical procedures without thrombopro-
phylaxis have a significant incidence of perioperative DVT. 
An estimated one third of the 150,000 to 200,000 VTE-related 
deaths per year in the United States occur following surgery.67 
The goal of prophylaxis is to reduce the mortality and morbidity 
associated with VTE. The first manifestation of VTE may be a 
life-threatening PE (Fig. 24-11), and as indicated earlier, clinical 
evaluation to detect DVT before PE is unreliable.
Effective methods of VTE prophylaxis involve the use 
of one or more pharmacologic or mechanical modalities. 
­Currently available pharmacologic agents include low-dose 
UFH, LMWH, synthetic pentasaccharides, and vitamin K 
antagonists. Mechanical methods include intermittent pneu-
matic compression (IPC) and graduated compression stockings. 
the thrombus into the IVC and pulled back several times until 
no further thrombus can be extracted. The distal thrombus in the 
leg is removed by manual pressure beginning in the foot. This 
is accomplished by application of a tight rubber elastic wrap 
beginning at the foot and extending to the thigh. If the thrombus 
in the femoral vein is old and cannot be extracted, the vein may 
be ligated. For a thrombus that extends into the IVC, the IVC is 
exposed transperitoneally and controlled below the renal veins. 
The IVC is opened and the thrombus is removed by gentle mas-
sage. An intraoperative completion venogram determines if any 
residual thrombus or stenosis is present. If a residual iliac vein 
stenosis is present, intraoperative angioplasty and stenting can 
be performed. In most cases, an arteriovenous fistula is then 
created by anastomosing the great saphenous vein (GSV) end 
to side with the superficial femoral artery in an effort to main-
tain patency of the thrombectomized iliofemoral venous seg-
ment. Heparin is administered postoperatively for several days. 
Warfarin anticoagulation is maintained for at least 6 months 
after thrombectomy. Complications of iliofemoral thrombec-
tomy include PE in up to 20% of patients59 and death in <1% 
of patients.60
One study followed 77 limbs for a mean of 8.5 years after 
thrombectomy for acute iliofemoral DVT. In limbs with success-
ful thrombectomy, valvular competence in the thrombectomized 
Figure 24-9.  Preoperative computed tomography imaging and 
intraoperative photo demonstrating erosion of IVC filter through 
the IVC wall.
A
B
Figure 24-10.  Autopsy specimen showing a massive pulmonary 
embolism.
926
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
There is insufficient evidence to consider aspirin alone as 
adequate DVT prophylaxis. Methods of prophylaxis vary with 
regard to efficacy, and the 2012 ACCP Clinical Practice Guide-
lines stratify their uses according to the patient’s level of VTE 
risk, bleeding risk, and the values and preferences of individual 
patients (see Table 24-3).
Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Nonorthopedic 
Surgery.  The risk for VTE associated with a surgical procedure 
depends on the type of operation, type of anesthesia, duration 
of surgery, and other risk factors, such as patient age, presence 
of cancer, prior VTE, obesity, presence of infection, and known 
thrombophilic disorders. VTE risk can be stratified according 
to the previously mentioned risk assessment models, the Cap-
rini score and Rogers score. These risk assessment models are 
included in the prophylaxis guidelines for nonorthopedic sur-
gery (Tables 24-5 and 24-6). A composite score is created using 
assigned values for each risk factor. The cumulative score for 
each patient is then used to predict thrombosis risk and provide 
recommendations regarding VTE prophylaxis.
Patients at very low risk (<0.5%; Rogers score <7; Caprini 
score 0) who undergo general or abdominopelvic procedures do 
not require pharmacologic or mechanical prophylaxis; however, 
early ambulation is required. Patients at low risk (<1.5%; Rogers 
score 7–10; Caprini score 1–2) should receive mechanical pro-
phylaxis. Patients at moderate risk (3%; Rogers score >10; Cap-
rini score 3–4) should receive LMWH at recommended doses, 
low-dose UFH, or mechanical prophylaxis. Patients at high risk 
(6%; Caprini score ≥5) should receive LMWH at recommended 
doses or low-dose UFH and mechanical prophylaxis. Throm-
boprophylaxis should continue until discharge, except in select 
high-risk patients with malignancy in whom extended-duration 
prophylaxis (up to 4–6 weeks) may be beneficial. Patients with 
significant risk for bleeding should receive mechanical prophy-
laxis until this risk subsides.67
Overall, low-dose UFH and LMWH reduce the risk for 
symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE by 60% to 70%. The risks 
for bleeding differ, depending on the dosage. Lower dosages 
of LMWH appear to be associated with less bleeding risk than 
Figure 24-11.  Computed tomography angiogram showing mul-
tiple pulmonary embolisms (arrows) (Used with permission from 
Dr. Scott Ambruster.)
Table 24-5
Risk assessment model from the Patient Safety in 
­Surgery Study
Risk Factor
Risk Score Points
Operation type other than endocrine
  Respiratory and hernia
  Thoracoabdominal aneurysm,  
  embolectomy/thrombectomy,  
  venous reconstruction and  
  endovascular repair
  Aneurysm
  Mouth, palate
  Stomach, intestines
  Integument
  Hernia
9
7
4
4
4
3
2
ASA, physical status classification
  3,4, or 5
  2
  Female sex
2
1
1
Work RVU
  >17
  10–17
3
2
Two points for each of these 
conditions
  Disseminated cancer
  Chemotherapy for malignancy 
  within 30 days of operation
  Preoperative serum sodium 
  >145 mmol/L
  Transfusion >4 units packed RBCs 
  in 72 hours before operation
  Ventilator dependent
2
One point for each of these  
conditions
  Wound class (clean/contaminated)
  Preoperative hematocrit ≤38%
  Preoperative bilirubin >1 mg/dL
  Dyspnea
  Albumin ≤3.5 mg/dL
  Emergency
1
Zero points for each of these 
conditions
  ASA physical class of 1
  Work RVU <10
  Male sex
0
ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists; RBCs = red blood cells; 
RVU = relative value unit.
Source: Adapted with permission from Rogers SO Jr, Kilaru RK, 
Hosokawa P, et al. Multivariable predictors of postoperative venous 
thromboembolic events after general and vascular surgery: results from 
the patient safety in surgery study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:1211. 
­kkjkjdht © American College of Surgeons.
low-dose UFH, but the latter produces less bleeding risk than 
higher prophylactic dosages of LMWH.68 Other advantages of 
LMWH include once-daily dosing protocols and a lower rate of 
heparin-associated antibody formation.
927
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
Table 24-6
Caprini risk assessment model
1 Point
2 Points
3 Points
5 Points
Age 41–60
Age 61–74
Age ≥75
Stroke (<1 month)
Minor surgery
Arthroscopic surgery
History of VTE
Elective arthroplasty
BMI >25 kg/m2
Major open surgery  
(>45 minutes)
Family history of VTE
Hip, pelvis, or leg fracture
Swollen legs
Laparoscopic surgery  
(>45 minutes)
Factor V Leiden
Acute spinal cord injury  
(<1 month)
Varicose veins
Malignancy
Prothrombin 20210A
Pregnancy or postpartum
Confined to bed (>72 hours)
Lupus anticoagulant
History of unexplained or 
recurrent spontaneous abortion
Immobilizing plaster cast
Anticardiolipin antibody
Oral contraceptives of 
hormone replacement
Central venous access
Elevated serum homocysteine
Sepsis (<1 month)
Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia
Serious lung disease, including 
pneumonia (<1 month)
Other congenital or acquired 
thrombophilia
Abnormal pulmonary function 
test
Acute myocardial infarction
Congestive heart failure
History of inflammatory bowel 
disease
Medical patient at bed rest
BMI = body mass index; VTE = venous thromboembolism.
Source: Adapted with permission from Bahl V, Hu HM, Henke PK, Wakefield TW, Campbell DA Jr, Caprini JA. A validation study of retrospective ve-
nous thromboembolism risk scoring method. Ann Surg. 2010;251:344. kkjkjdht Wolters Kluwer Health.
Fondaparinux has been compared with the LMWH dalte-
parin in patients who undergo high-risk major abdominal sur-
gery. It also has been compared with IPC alone in patients 
undergoing non–high-risk abdominal surgery.69,70 Fondaparinux 
demonstrated rates of VTE prevention, bleeding complications, 
and mortality similar to those of LMWH. It was more beneficial 
than IPC alone in reducing VTE but with a higher rate of bleed-
ing (1.6% vs. 0.2%).
Prophylactic insertion of IVC filters has been suggested 
for VTE prophylaxis in high-risk trauma patients, bariatric 
surgical patients, and some patients with malignancy who 
have contraindications for LMWH therapy.71 A 5-year study 
of prophylactic IVC filter placement in 132 trauma patients 
at high risk of PE (head injury, spinal cord injury, pelvic or 
long bone fractures) reported a 0% incidence of symptom-
atic PE in patients with a correctly positioned IVC filter.72 In 
47 patients with a malpositioned IVC filter (strut malposition or 
filter tilt), there was a 6.3% incidence of symptomatic PE with 
three deaths. DVT occurred at the insertion site in 3.1% of the 
patients. IVC patency was 97.1% at 3 years.
Fatal and nonfatal PE can still occur in patients with vena 
cava interruption. As noted earlier, long-term complications 
associated with permanent IVC filters include IVC thrombo-
sis and DVT. Currently, the ACCP recommends IVC filters be 
placed only if a proximal DVT is present and anticoagulation 
therapy is contraindicated. IVC filter insertion is not recom-
mended for primary prophylaxis.67
Removable IVC filters may be placed in patients with 
a temporarily increased risk of PE.73 The best patient groups 
for retrievable filter placement may include young trauma 
patients with transient immobility, patients undergoing surgi-
cal procedures associated with a high risk of PE, and patients 
with hypercoagulable states who cannot receive anticoagulation 
therapy for a short period of time. Careful follow-up is required 
to assure all potentially removable filters are in fact removed.
OTHER VENOUS THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Superficial Vein Thrombophlebitis
Superficial vein thrombophlebitis (SVT) most commonly 
occurs in varicose veins but can occur in normal veins. When 
SVT recurs at variable sites in normal superficial veins, throm-
bophlebitis migrans, it may signify a hidden visceral malig-
nancy or a systemic disorder such as a blood dyscrasia and/
or a collagen vascular disease. SVT also frequently occurs as 
a complication of indwelling catheters, with or without associ-
ated extravasation of injected material. Upper extremity vein 
928
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of all patients with ASVT. In the primary form, no clear cause 
for the thrombosis is readily identifiable at initial evaluation. 
Patients with primary ASVT often give a history of performing 
prolonged, repetitive motion activities, which results in damage 
to the subclavian vein, usually where it passes between the head 
of the clavicle and the first rib in association with the subclavius 
muscle. This condition is also known as venous thoracic outlet 
syndrome, effort thrombosis, and Paget-Schroetter syndrome. 
Secondary ASVT is more common and is associated with an 
easily identified cause such as an indwelling catheter or a hyper-
coagulable state. Over 30% of patients with tunneled subclavian 
vein access devices develop ASVT.80
A patient with ASVT may be asymptomatic or may pres-
ent with varying degrees of upper extremity edema, tenderness, 
and conspicuous superficial venous enlargement. DUS can be 
performed initially to confirm the diagnosis, but limitations 
to the exam by the clavicle and collateralization can lead to a 
false-negative study. Venography is recommended when there 
is nonconcordance between the duplex study and clinical suspi-
cion. Anticoagulation therapy should be initiated once ASVT is 
diagnosed to prevent PE and decrease symptoms.
Treatment of patients with primary upper extremity 
venous thrombosis is controversial because the natural history 
of the disease may vary from minimal to no symptoms to sig-
nificant symptoms with vigorous upper extremity activities. In 
recent years, patients presenting with acute symptomatic pri-
mary ASVT are often considered candidates for CDT therapy 
with the goal of minimizing long-term symptoms of venous 
congestion. Venography is performed through a catheter placed 
using an ultrasound-guided percutaneous basilic vein approach 
to document the extent of the thrombus (Fig. 24-13). A guide-
wire is traversed through the thrombus, and a catheter is placed 
within the thrombus. Typically, tissue plasminogen activator 
is administered through a multi–side-hole infusion catheter. 
Various catheter-based mechanical techniques may also be 
employed to speed thrombus removal. Heparin is administered 
concurrently with the thrombolytic infusion. After completion 
thrombosis has been reported to occur in 38% of patients with 
peripherally inserted central catheters; 57% of these developed 
in the cephalic vein (Fig. 24-12).74 Suppurative SVT may occur 
in veins with indwelling catheters and may be associated with 
generalized sepsis.
Clinical signs of SVT include redness, warmth, and tender-
ness along the distribution of the affected veins, often associated 
with a palpable cord. Patients with suppurative SVT may have 
fever and leukocytosis. DUS should be performed in patients 
with signs and symptoms of acute SVT to confirm the diagnosis 
and to determine if any associated DVT is present. Concomitant 
lower extremity DVT may be present in 5% to 40% of patients 
with SVT; most occur in patients with greater saphenous vein 
SVT within 1 cm of the saphenofemoral junction. A follow-
up DUS should be performed in 5 to 7 days in patients with 
SVT in the proximal GSV but without deep vein involvement. 
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with SVT involving the 
proximal GSV experience progression to deep venous involve-
ment within 1 week.75,76
Treatment of SVT is quite variable. A Cochrane Review 
reported that LMWHs and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs both reduce the rate of SVT extension or recurrence. 
Topical medications appear to improve local symptoms. Sur-
gical treatment, combined with the use of graduated compres-
sion stockings, is associated with a lower rate of VTE and SVT 
progression.77 The treatment is individualized and depends on 
the location of the thrombus and the severity of symptoms. In 
patients with SVT not within 1 cm of the saphenofemoral junc-
tion, treatment consists of compression and administration of an 
anti-inflammatory medication such as indomethacin. In patients 
with suppurative SVT, antibiotics and removal of any existing 
indwelling catheters are mandatory. Excision of the vein may 
be necessary but is usually reserved for patients with systemic 
symptoms or when excision of the involved vein is straight-
forward. If the SVT extends proximally to within 1 cm of the 
saphenofemoral junction, extension into the common femoral 
vein is more likely to occur. In these patients, anticoagulation 
therapy for 6 weeks and GSV ligation appear equally effective in 
preventing thrombus extension into the deep venous system.78,79
Upper Extremity Vein Thrombosis
Axillary-subclavian venous thrombosis (ASVT) is classified 
into two forms. Primary ASVT occurs in only a small minority 
Figure 24-12.  Duplex ultrasound of a brachial vein containing 
thrombus and percutaneously inserted central catheter (PICC).
Figure 24-13.  Upper extremity venogram showing stenosis of the 
right subclavian vein (arrow).
929
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
of thrombolytic therapy, a follow-up venogram is obtained. 
Correctable anatomic abnormalities may then be considered for 
treatment. Adjuvant procedures after thrombolytic therapy may 
include cervical or first rib resection for thoracic outlet abnor-
malities, surgical venous reconstruction, and balloon angio-
plasty of residual venous stenosis.81
Mesenteric Vein Thrombosis
Five to 15% of cases of acute mesenteric ischemia occur as a 
result of mesenteric vein thrombosis (MVT). Mortality rates in 
patients with MVT may approach 50%.82 The usual presenting 
symptom is nonspecific abdominal pain and distention, often 
accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.83 Peritoneal 
signs, suggesting intestinal infarction, are present in fewer than 
half of MVT patients. MVT is more common in patients with a 
hypercoagulable states, malignancy, and cirrhosis. MVT occurs 
as a rare complication of laparoscopic surgery.83,84
Most cases of MVT are diagnosed with contrast-enhanced 
CT scanning or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the 
course of an evaluation for abdominal pain. The sensitivity and 
specificity for CT and MRI approach 100% and 98%, respec-
tively.85 Ultrasound can also be used and has reported sensitivity 
and specificity of 93% and 99%, respectively.
Patients with MVT are treated with fluid resuscitation, 
heparin anticoagulation, and bowel rest. Once the patient’s 
­clinical status improves, oral intake can be carefully started. The 
patient is transitioned to oral anticoagulation over 3 to 4 days 
and, depending on the etiology of the MVT, continued for 3 to 
6 months or indefinitely. Most patients with MVT can be treated 
nonoperatively, but urgent laparotomy is indicated in patients 
with peritoneal findings. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are admin-
istered perioperatively. Operative findings consist of edema 
and cyanotic discoloration of the mesentery and bowel wall. In 
more advanced cases, thrombus involves the distal mesenteric 
veins. The arterial supply to the involved bowel is usually intact. 
Nonviable bowel is resected, and primary anastomosis can be 
performed. If the viability of the remaining bowel is in question, 
a second-look operation is performed within 24 to 48 hours.
VARICOSE VEINS
Varicose veins are common and are present in at least 10% of 
the general population.86 The findings of varicose veins may 
include dilated and tortuous veins, telangiectasias, and fine 
reticular varicosities. Risk factors for varicose veins include 
obesity, female sex, inactivity, and family history.87 Varicose 
veins can be classified as primary or secondary. Primary vari-
cose veins result from intrinsic abnormalities of the venous wall, 
whereas secondary varicose veins are associated with deep and/
or superficial venous insufficiency.
Patients with varicose veins may complain of unsightly 
appearance, aching, heaviness, pruritus, and early fatigue of the 
affected leg. These symptoms worsen with prolonged standing 
and sitting and are relieved by elevation of the leg above the 
level of the heart. A mild amount of edema is often present. 
More severe signs include thrombophlebitis, hyperpigmenta-
tion, lipodermatosclerosis, ulceration, and bleeding from attenu-
ated vein clusters.
An important component of treatment for patients with 
varicose veins is the use of elastic compression stockings. 
Patients may be prescribed elastic stockings with compres-
sion ranging from 20 to 30, 30 to 40, or even 40 to 50 mmHg. 
Stockings range in length from knee high to waist high, and 
they should cover the symptomatic varices. Elastic compres-
sion provides sufficient relief of symptoms in many symptom-
atic patients.
Cosmetic concerns may lead to intervention. Addition-
ally, interventions are warranted in patients whose symptoms 
worsen or are unrelieved despite compression therapy or who 
have lipodermatosclerosis or venous ulcer. Randomized tri-
als of symptomatic patients with varicose veins have demon-
strated improved quality of life with interventional treatment. 
Interventional management includes injection sclerotherapy, 
surgical therapy, or a combination of both techniques. Injection 
sclerotherapy alone can be successful in varicose veins <3 mm 
in diameter and in telangiectatic vessels. Sclerotherapy acts by 
destroying the venous endothelium. Sclerosing agents include 
hypertonic saline, sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and polidocanol. 
Concentrations of 11.7% to 23.4% hypertonic saline, 0.125% 
to 0.250% sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and 0.5% polidocanol are 
used for telangiectasias. Larger varicose veins require higher 
concentrations: 23.4% hypertonic saline, 0.50% to 1% sodium 
tetradecyl sulfate, and 0.75% to 1.0% polidocanol.83 Elastic ban-
dages are wrapped around the leg after injection and worn con-
tinuously for 3 to 5 days to produce apposition of the inflamed 
vein walls and prevent thrombus formation. After the bandages 
are removed, elastic compression stockings should be worn 
for a minimum of 2 weeks. Complications from sclerotherapy 
include allergic reaction, local hyperpigmentation, thrombo-
phlebitis, DVT, and possible skin necrosis.
Patients with symptomatic GSV or SSV reflux may be 
treated with endovenous ablation techniques or surgical removal 
of the affected vein. Endovenous laser and radiofrequency abla-
tion (RFA) techniques have gained in popularity in the past sev-
eral years. Such techniques are generally associated with 
more rapid postprocedure recovery than traditional open 
surgical stripping of the GSV. 
With either endoluminal technique, the distal thigh or 
proximal calf GSV is punctured with a 21-gauge needle under 
ultrasound guidance. A sheath is placed over a guidewire, and 
the laser fiber or RFA catheter is advanced until it is near to, 
but not at, the saphenofemoral junction. Tumescent anesthetic 
is administered around the GSV, and the vein is treated as the 
catheter is withdrawn. Endovenous laser treatment and RFA 
result in durable ablation of the GSV, with rates of varicose vein 
recurrence and clinical severity scores comparable to those seen 
with open surgery.88,89 Risks of endovenous ablation include 
DVT, ecchymosis, and saphenous nerve injury.
Saphenous vein ligation and stripping is still the more 
commonly performed procedure worldwide, and it may be the 
preferred therapy for patients with GSVs of very large diam-
eter (>2 cm). Surgical removal of the GSV usually is performed 
via small incisions placed medially in the groin and just below 
the knee. The GSV is removed using a blunt tip catheter or an 
invagination pin stripper. Complications associated with GSV 
stripping include ecchymosis, lymphocele formation, DVT, 
infection, and saphenous nerve injury. GSV stripping is associ-
ated with a lower rate of recurrence of varicose veins and a bet-
ter quality of life than saphenofemoral junction ligation alone.
Larger varicose veins are best treated by surgical excision 
using the “stab avulsion” technique. Stab avulsions are per-
formed by making 2-mm incisions directly over branch vari-
cosities, and the varicosity is dissected from the surrounding 
subcutaneous tissue as far proximally and distally as possible 
4
930
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
through the small incisions (Fig. 24-14). In most cases the vein 
is simply avulsed with no attempt at ligation. Bleeding is easily 
controlled with leg elevation, manual compression, and prepro-
cedure tumescent anesthesia.
CHRONIC VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY
Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) affects an estimated 
600,000 people in the United States.90 Patients complain of leg 
fatigue, discomfort, and heaviness. Signs of CVI may include 
varicose veins, pigmentation, lipodermatosclerosis, and venous 
ulceration. Importantly, severe CVI is not necessarily associ-
ated with varicose veins. Chronic venous ulcers carry significant 
negative physical, financial, and psychological implications. A 
quality-of-life study reported that 65% of patients with chronic 
leg ulcers had severe pain, 81% had decreased mobility, and 
100% experienced a negative impact of their disease on their 
work capacity.91 The socioeconomic impact of chronic venous 
leg ulcers is staggering, with an estimated 2 million workdays 
lost per year.92 The annual healthcare cost in the United States 
to treat CVI is estimated at $1 billion.93
CVI can be primary or secondary. Primary CVI results 
from intrinsic abnormalities of the vein wall, whereas second-
ary CVI, so-called postthrombotic syndrome (PTS), occurs as a 
result of DVT. The signs and symptoms of CVI can be therefore 
be attributed to venous reflux, venous obstruction, calf muscle 
pump dysfunction, or a combination of these factors, as well 
as loss of venous wall elasticity.94 In the majority of patients 
with CVI, the most important factor appears to be venous reflux. 
Venous reflux results from abnormalities of the venous valve. 
Primary valvular reflux or incompetence is diagnosed when 
there is no known underlying cause of valvular dysfunction. 
Secondary valvular reflux is diagnosed when an identifiable 
cause is present. The most frequent secondary cause is DVT.
Evaluation of Venous Insufficiency
Early diagnostic studies to evaluate CVI required invasive mea-
surements of ambulatory venous pressure (AVP) and venous 
recovery time (VRT). To measure AVP and VRT, a needle 
is inserted into a dorsal foot vein and connected to a pressure 
transducer. The patient is asked to perform 10 tiptoe exercises. 
Initially there is often a slight upward deflection of pressure 
with the onset of exercise followed by a decline in pressure 
with each subsequent tiptoe maneuver. After approximately 
10 tiptoes, the measured pressure stabilizes and reflects a bal-
ance of venous inflow and outflow. The pressure at this point 
Figure 24-14.  Removal of varicose veins via stab avulsions.
is the AVP, which is measured in millimeters of mercury. The 
patient is then asked to stop exercising to allow the vein to fill 
with return of the venous pressure to baseline. The time required 
for the venous pressure to return from the AVP level to 90% of 
baseline pressure is referred to as the VRT. Elevations of AVP 
indicate venous hypertension. The magnitude of AVP reflects 
the severity of CVI. There is an 80% incidence of venous ulcer-
ation in patients with an AVP of >80 mmHg.95
Plethysmography.  Noninvasive plethysmography has been 
used to evaluate CVI. Venous photoplethysmography indirectly 
evaluates venous function through the use of infrared light. A 
light-emitting diode is placed just above the medial malleolus, 
and the patient then performs a series of tiptoe maneuvers. Pho-
toplethysmography provides a measurement of VRT. In limbs 
with CVI, VRT is shortened compared with that in a normal 
limb. AVP and VRT are only measures of the overall venous 
function of a lower extremity venous system. They cannot local-
ize the site of reflux or evaluate the function of the calf pump.
Air plethysmography is a theoretically attractive but 
not widely used method to assess calf pump function, venous 
reflux, and overall lower extremity venous function.96 An air-
filled plastic pressure bladder is placed on the calf to detect 
volume changes in the leg during a standard set of maneuvers. 
The patient is first supine and then the leg is elevated and the 
minimum volume of venous blood recorded. The patient is 
then asked to assume an upright position with the examined leg 
non-weight bearing. The venous volume of the examined leg 
is determined when the volume curve flattens. The venous fill-
ing index (VFI), a measure of reflux, is calculated by dividing 
the maximum venous volume by the time required to achieve 
maximum venous volume. Next, the patient performs a single 
tiptoe maneuver, and the ejection fraction (EF) is determined. 
The EF is the volume change between the recorded volume 
before and after the tiptoe maneuver and is a measure of calf 
pump function. At this point, the veins of the leg are allowed to 
refill. The patient then performs 10 tiptoe maneuvers, and the 
residual volume fraction is calculated by dividing the venous 
volume in the leg after 10 tiptoe exercises by the venous volume 
present before the exercises. The residual volume fraction is 
a reflection of overall venous function. Theoretically, patients 
with increased VFIs and normal EFs (indicating the presence of 
reflux with normal calf pump function) would benefit from anti-
reflux surgery, whereas patients with normal VFIs and dimin-
ished EFs would not.
Venous Duplex Ultrasound.  Venous DUS has become the 
gold standard for evaluation of venous function largely sup-
planting venographic and plethysmographic techniques. The 
principle advantage of DUS is that it can be used to evalu-
ate reflux in individual venous segments targeting abnormal 
areas for treatment. The examination has been validated when 
performed with the patient in the standing position and the 
examined leg non-weight bearing. Pneumatic pressure cuffs 
of appropriate size are placed around the thigh, calf, and fore-
foot. The ultrasound transducer is positioned over the venous 
segment to be examined, just proximal to the pneumatic cuff 
(Fig. 24-15). The cuff is then inflated to a standard pressure for 
3 seconds and then rapidly deflated. Ninety-five percent of normal 
venous valves close within 0.5 second.97 The presence of reflux 
for >0.5 second is considered abnormal. Typically, the common 
femoral, femoral, popliteal, and posterior tibial veins, as well as 
the GSV and SSV, are evaluated in a complete examination.
931
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
Nonoperative Treatment of Chronic  
Venous Insufficiency
Compression Therapy.  Compression therapy is the mainstay 
of CVI management. Compression can be achieved using a vari-
ety of techniques, including elastic compression stockings, 
paste gauze boots (Unna’s boots), multilayer elastic wraps 
or dressings (Fig. 24-16), and pneumatic compression devices. 
Nonelastic compression bandages generally achieve higher and 
more prolonged degrees of compression than elastic compres-
sion bandages. The exact mechanism by which compression 
therapy can improve CVI remains uncertain. An improvement 
in skin and subcutaneous tissue microcirculatory hemodynamics 
as well as a direct effect on subcutaneous pressure have been 
hypothesized as the mechanisms of efficacy of compression 
therapy.98 Additionally, compression therapy has demonstrated 
quantifiable differences in ulcer healing with decreases in 
matrix metalloproteins and inflammatory cytokines.99,100 Clini-
cally, routine use of elastic and nonelastic bandages reduces 
lower extremity edema in patients with CVI. In addition, supine 
perimalleolar subcutaneous pressure has been demonstrated to 
increase with elastic compression.101 With edema reduction, 
cutaneous metabolism may improve due to enhanced diffusion 
of oxygen and other nutrients to the cellular elements of skin 
and subcutaneous tissues. Increases in subcutaneous tissue 
Figure 24-15.  Evaluation of a patient with chronic venous insuf-
ficiency with duplex ultrasonography.
Figure 24-16.  Multilayered dressing for treatment of chronic 
venous insufficiency.
pressure with elastic compression bandages may counteract 
transcapillary Starling forces, which favor leakage of fluid out 
of the capillary.
Before the initiation of therapy for CVI, patients must be 
educated about their chronic disease and the need to comply 
with their treatment plan to heal ulcers and prevent recurrence. 
A definitive diagnosis of venous ulceration must be made before 
treatment is initiated. A detailed history should be obtained from 
a patient presenting with lower extremity ulcerations, includ-
ing medications used and associated medical conditions that 
may promote lower extremity ulceration. Arterial insufficiency 
is assessed by physical examination or noninvasive studies. In 
addition, systemic conditions that affect wound healing and leg 
edema, such as diabetes mellitus, immunosuppression, mal-
nutrition, and congestive heart failure, should be improved as 
much as possible.
Compression therapy is most commonly achieved with 
graduated elastic compression stockings. Elastic compression 
stockings are available in various compositions, strengths, and 
lengths, and can be customized for a particular patient. The ben-
efits of elastic compression stocking therapy for the treatment of 
CVI and healing of ulcerations have been well documented.102-105 
In a retrospective study involving 113 venous ulcer patients,103 
the use of below-knee, 30- to 40-mmHg elastic compression 
stockings, after edema and cellulitis were first resolved if pres-
ent, resulted in 93% healing. Complete ulcer healing occurred 
in 99 of 102 patients (97%) who were compliant with stock-
ing use vs. 6 of 11 patients (55%) who were noncompliant 
(P < .0001). The mean time to ulcer healing was 5 months. The 
rate of ulcer recurrence was lower in patients who were compli-
ant with their compression therapy. By life table analysis, ulcer 
recurrence was 29% at 5 years for compliant patients and 100% 
at 3 years for noncompliant patients.
In addition to promoting ulcer healing, elastic compres-
sion therapy can also improve quality of life in patients with 
CVI. In one prospective study,106 112 patients with CVI docu-
mented by DUS were administered a questionnaire to quantify 
the symptoms of swelling, pain, skin discoloration, cosmesis, 
activity tolerance, depression, and sleep alterations. Patients 
were treated with 30- to 40-mmHg elastic compression stock-
ings. There were overall improvements in symptom severity 
scores at 1 month after initiation of treatment. Further improve-
ments were noted at 16 months after treatment.
Patient compliance with compression therapy is crucial in 
treating CVI and especially venous leg ulcers. Many patients 
are initially intolerant of compression in areas of hypersensitiv-
ity adjacent to an active ulcer or at sites of previously healed 
ulcers. They may also have difficulty applying elastic stockings. 
To improve compliance, patients should be instructed to wear 
their stockings initially only as long as it is easily tolerated and 
then gradually to increase the amount of time the stockings are 
worn. Alternatively, patients can be fitted with lower-strength 
stockings initially followed by introduction of higher-strength 
stockings over a period of several weeks. Many commercially 
available devices, such as silk inner toe liners, adjustable elas-
tic compression with Velcro, stockings with zippered sides 
(Fig. 24-17), and metal fitting aids (Fig. 24-18), are available to 
assist patients in applying elastic stockings. However, despite 
all these available adjuncts, many patients remain noncompliant 
with elastic compression therapy.
Another method of compression was developed by the 
German dermatologist Paul Gerson Unna. Unna’s boot has 
5
932
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 24-17.  Elastic compression device with Velcro to facilitate 
treatment of chronic venous insufficiency.
Figure 24-18.  Metal fitting aid to assist in placement of elastic 
compression stockings.
been used for many years to treat venous ulcers and is available 
in many versions. A typical Unna’s boot consists of a three-
layer dressing and requires application by trained personnel. A 
rolled gauze bandage impregnated with calamine, zinc oxide, 
glycerin, sorbitol, gelatin, and magnesium aluminum silicate 
is first applied with graded compression from the forefoot to 
just below the knee. The next layer consists of a 4-in-wide 
continuous gauze dressing followed by an outer layer of elas-
tic wrap, also applied with graded compression. The bandage 
becomes stiff after drying, and the rigidity may aid in prevent-
ing edema formation. Unna’s boot is changed weekly or sooner 
if the patient experiences significant drainage and soiling of the 
dressing.
Once applied, Unna’s boot requires minimal patient 
involvement and provides continuous compression and topical 
therapy. However, Unna’s boot has several disadvantages. It 
is bulky and can be uncomfortable, which may affect patient 
compliance. In addition, the ulcer cannot be monitored after the 
boot is applied, the technique is labor intensive, and the degree 
of compression provided is operator dependent. Occasionally, 
patients may also develop contact dermatitis to the components 
of Unna’s boot.
The efficacy of Unna’s dressing has been studied. A ret-
rospective 15-year survey encompassing 998 patients with one 
or more venous ulcers treated weekly with Unna’s dressing107 
reported that 73% of ulcers healed in patients who returned 
for more than one treatment. The median time to healing for 
individual ulcers was 9 weeks. Unna’s dressing has been com-
pared to other forms of treatment. A randomized, prospective 
study108 comparing Unna’s boot to polyurethane foam dressing 
in 36 patients with venous ulcers demonstrated superior healing 
over 12 months in patients treated with Unna’s boot (94.7% vs. 
41.2%).108 A recent Cochrane Review of 39 randomized con-
trolled trials demonstrated that compression increases ulcer 
healing rates compared with no compression, multicomponent 
systems are more effective than single-component systems, 
and multicomponent systems that include an elastic bandage 
are more effective than those composed mainly of inelastic 
­constituents.109
Other forms of compression dressing available to treat 
CVI include multilayered dressings and legging orthoses. The 
purported advantages of multilayered dressings include main-
tenance of compression for a longer period of time, more even 
distribution of compression, and better absorption of wound 
exudates. However, the efficacy of multilayered dressings 
depends on the wrapping technique of healthcare personnel. A 
commercially available legging orthosis consisting of multiple 
adjustable loop-and-hook closure compression bands provides 
compression similar to that of Unna’s boot and can be applied 
daily by the patient.110
Skin Substitutes.  Several types of skin substitutes are com-
mercially available or under clinical study in the United States.92 
Bioengineered skin ranges in composition from acellular skin 
substitutes to partial living skin substitutes. Their mechanism 
of action in healing venous ulcers is uncertain; however, they 
may serve as delivery vehicles for various growth factors and 
cytokines important in wound healing.
Apligraf is a commercially available bilayered living skin 
construct that closely approximates human skin for use in the 
treatment of venous ulcers. It contains a protective stratum 
corneum and a keratinocyte-containing epidermis overlying a 
dermis consisting of dermal fibroblasts in a collagen matrix.111 
933
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
Apligraf is between 0.5 mm and 1.0 mm thick and is supplied 
as a disk of living tissue on an agarose gel nutrient medium. It 
must be used within 5 days of release from the manufacturer111 
(Fig. 24-19). The disk is easily handled and applied and con-
forms to irregularly contoured ulcer beds.
A prospective randomized study comparing multilayer 
compression therapy alone to treatment with Apligraf in addi-
tion to multilayered compression therapy has been performed 
to assess the efficacy of Apligraf in the treatment of venous 
ulcers.105 More patients treated with Apligraf had ulcer healing 
at 6 months (63% vs. 49%, P = .02). The median time to com-
plete ulcer closure was significantly shorter in patients treated 
with Apligraf (61 days vs. 181 days, P = .003). The ulcers that 
showed the greatest benefit with the living skin construct were 
ones that were large and deep (>1000 mm2) or were longstand-
ing (>6 months). No evidence of rejection or sensitization has 
been reported in response to Apligraf application.
Surgical/Interventional Treatment of Chronic 
Venous Insufficiency
Perforator Vein Ligation.  Incompetence of the perforating 
veins connecting the superficial and deep venous systems of 
the lower extremities has been implicated in the development 
of venous ulcers. The classic open technique described by 
­Linton in 1938 for perforator vein ligation has a high incidence 
of wound complications and has largely been abandoned.112 A 
minimally invasive technique termed subfascial endoscopic 
perforator vein surgery (SEPS) evolved with improvement of 
endoscopic equipment.
DUS is performed preoperatively in patients undergoing 
SEPS to document deep venous competence and to identify per-
forating veins in the posterior compartment. The patient is posi-
tioned on the operating table with the affected leg elevated at 
45° to 60°. An Esmarch bandage and a thigh tourniquet are used 
to exsanguinate the limb. The knee is then flexed, and two small 
incisions are made in the proximal medial leg away from areas 
of maximal induration at the ankle. Laparoscopic trocars are 
then positioned, and the subfascial dissection is performed with 
a combination of blunt and sharp dissection. Carbon dioxide is 
then used to insufflate the subfascial space. The thigh tourni-
quet is inflated to prevent air embolism. The perforators are then 
identified and doubly clipped and divided. After completion of 
Figure 24-19.  Apligraf skin graft material supplied as a disk on an 
agarose gel nutrient medium.
the procedure, the leg is wrapped in a compression bandage for 
5 days postoperatively.
The efficacy of SEPS as a stand-alone procedure in treat-
ment of venous insufficiency is controversial and unproven. In 
a report from a large North American registry of 146 patients 
undergoing SEPS113 (Fig. 24-20), healing was achieved in 88% 
of ulcers (75 of 85) at 1 year. Adjunctive procedures, primarily 
superficial vein stripping, were performed in 72% of patients. 
Ulcer recurrence was predicted to be 16% at 1 year and 28% at 
2 years by life table analysis. These results are similar to those 
achieved in some studies with compression therapy alone. A 
review of several studies from 2003 to 2011 demonstrated, when 
taken in aggregate, that 2059 limbs with 896 ulcers underwent 
SEPS and concomitant saphenous vein ablation (70%) with a 0% 
to 16% complication rate and achieved ulcer healing in 90% of 
patients.114 There has been a multicenter, prospective, European 
trial performed in patients with venous ulcers to evaluate the effi-
cacy of SEPS. Post hoc analysis suggested possible benefit for 
SEPS in certain categories of patients with venous ulcer. Overall, 
however, primary analysis of the study’s end points indicated no 
advantage to SEPS in addition to superficial venous surgery and 
compression in the healing of venous ulcers.115 The technique 
appears to have fallen out of favor in most institutions.
Superficial Venous Surgery.  Currently it is accepted that 
superficial venous surgery in addition to compression therapy 
has a role in the treatment of patients with venous ulcer. The 
ESCHAR trial was a randomized prospective trial performed 
in the United Kingdom to evaluate the combination of super-
ficial venous surgery and compression vs. compression alone 
in the treatment of venous ulcer. Superficial venous surgery 
had no additive effect to compression alone in the healing of a 
venous ulcer but significantly reduced venous ulcer recurrence 
at 4 years. Based on the results of this trial, it is reasonable to 
offer ablation or removal of the GSV in addition to compression 
therapy in patients with abnormal saphenous veins and signs 
and/or symptoms of severe CVI.116
Deep Venous Valvular Reconstruction.  In the absence of 
significant deep vein valvular incompetence, saphenous vein 
stripping and possibly perforator vein ligation can be effective 
in the treatment of CVI. However, in patients with a combi-
nation of superficial and deep vein valvular incompetence, the 
addition of deep vein valvular reconstruction theoretically may 
Figure 24-20.  Trocar placement for subfascial endoscopic perfo-
rator vein surgery. (Used with permission of Dr. Pankaj Patel.)
934
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
improve ulcer healing.117 Numerous techniques of deep vein 
valve correction have been reported. These techniques consist 
of repair of existing valves, transplant of venous segments from 
the arm, transposition of an incompetent vein onto an adjacent 
competent vein, and implantation of cryopreserved vein seg-
ments including competent valves.
Successful long-term outcomes of 60% to 80% have been 
reported for venous valve reconstructions by internal suture 
repair.117,118 However, among patients who initially had ulcer-
ation, 40% to 50% still had persistence or recurrence of ulcers 
in the long term.115,116
Valve transplantation involves replacement of a segment 
of incompetent femoral vein or popliteal vein with a segment 
of axillary or brachial vein with competent valves. Early results 
are similar to those for venous valve reconstruction.117,118 How-
ever, in the long term, the transplanted venous segments tend 
to develop incompetence, intimal hyperplasia, and cusp sinus 
thrombosis with long-term outcomes that are poorer than those 
for venous valve reconstructions. The outcomes for venous 
transposition are similar to those for valve transplantation.
Currently, reconstruction techniques for deep venous 
insufficiency and associated CVI are rarely performed.
Venous Stenting.  Currently there is great interest in the role 
of venous stents in the treatment of CVI. Stenotic lesions of the 
iliac veins, primarily documented with IVUS, are being reported 
in a very high percentage of patients with edema, lipodermato-
sclerosis, or ulceration secondary to venous disease. It appears 
possible to place percutaneous stents in the iliac veins with near 
100% technical success and excellent patency of the stent out to 
4 years. Retrospective case series suggest favorable effects on 
ulcer healing, symptoms of CVI, and quality of life in patients 
with CVI. The role of venous stenting as a favorable indepen-
dent procedure in the treatment of patients with CVI remains an 
area of active investigation.119
LYMPHEDEMA
Pathophysiology
Lymphedema is extremity swelling that results from a reduction 
in lymphatic transport and accumulation of lymph within the 
interstitial space. It is caused by anatomic and or physiologic 
abnormalities such as lymphatic hypoplasia, functional insuf-
ficiency, or absence of lymphatic valves.
The original classification system, described by Allen, 
is based on the cause of the lymphedema. Primary lymph-
edema is further subdivided into congenital lymphedema, 
lymphedema praecox, and lymphedema tarda. Congenital 
lymphedema may involve a single lower extremity, multiple 
limbs, the genitalia, or the face. The edema typically develops 
before 2 years of age and may be associated with specific hered-
itary syndromes (Turner syndrome, Milroy syndrome, Klippel-
Trénaunay-Weber syndrome). Lymphedema praecox is the most 
common form of primary lymphedema, accounting for 94% of 
cases. Lymphedema praecox is far more common in women, 
with the gender ratio favoring women 10:1. The onset is during 
childhood or the teenage years, and the swelling involves the 
foot and calf. Lymphedema tarda is uncommon, accounting for 
<10% of cases of primary lymphedema. The onset of edema is 
after 35 years of age.
Secondary lymphedema is far more common than primary 
lymphedema. Secondary lymphedema develops as a result of 
lymphatic obstruction or disruption. Axillary node dissection 
leading to lymphedema of the arm is the most common cause 
of secondary lymphedema in the United States. Other causes 
of secondary lymphedema include radiation therapy, trauma, 
infection, and malignancy. Globally, filariasis (an infection 
caused by Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia 
timori) and environmental exposure to minerals in volcanic soil 
resulting in podoconiosis in barefoot populations are the most 
common causes of secondary lymphedema.
Clinical Diagnosis
In most patients, the diagnosis of lymphedema can be made 
based on the history and physical examination alone. Patients 
commonly complain of heaviness and fatigue in the affected 
extremity. The limb size increases throughout the day and 
decreases to some extent over the course of the night when the 
patient is recumbent. The limb, however, never completely nor-
malizes. In the lower extremity, the swelling classically involves 
the dorsum of the foot, and the toes have a squared-off appear-
ance. In advanced cases, hyperkeratosis of the skin develops, 
and fluid weeps from lymph-filled vesicles (Fig. 24-21).
Recurrent cellulitis is a common complication of lymph-
edema. Repeated infection results in further lymphatic damage, 
worsening existing disease. The clinical presentation of cellu-
litis ranges from subtle erythema and worsening of edema to a 
rapidly progressive soft tissue infection with systemic toxicity.
Many medical conditions can cause edema. If the symptoms 
are mild, distinguishing lymphedema from other causes of leg 
swelling can be difficult. Venous insufficiency is often confused 
with lymphedema. However, patients with advanced venous insuf-
ficiency typically have lipodermatosclerosis in the gaiter region, 
skin ulceration, and/or varicose veins. Bilateral pitting edema is 
Figure 24-21.  Patient with severe longstanding lymphedema.
6
935
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
typically associated with congestive heart failure, renal failure, 
or a hypoproteinemic state.
Radiologic Diagnosis
Duplex Ultrasound.  When a patient is evaluated for edema, it 
is often difficult to distinguish the early stages of lymphedema 
from venous insufficiency. DUS of the venous system can 
determine if there is concomitant venous thrombosis or venous 
reflux, perhaps contributing to extremity edema. The diagnostic 
modalities discussed in the following sections have limited use 
in clinical practice. They are invasive and tedious and rarely 
change the management of a patient with lymphedema. Most 
physicians rely on the patient’s history and physical examina-
tion alone to make the diagnosis of lymphedema.
Lymphoscintigraphy.  Lymphoscintigraphy has become the 
most commonly used diagnostic test to identify lymphatic 
abnormalities. It has largely replaced lymphangiography. A 
radiolabeled sulfur colloid (technetium 99m sulfur colloid) is 
injected into the subdermal, interdigital region of the affected 
limb. The lymphatic transport is monitored with a whole-body 
gamma camera, and major lymphatics and nodes can be visual-
ized (Fig. 24-22). In normal individuals, tracer activity may be 
detected in the inguinal region within 15 to 60 minutes. Within 
3 hours, uptake should be present in the pelvic and abdominal 
lymph nodes. In patients with lymphedema, various patterns 
may be seen on lymphoscintigraphy. There may be delayed 
or absent transport to the inguinal nodes. Increased cutaneous 
Figure 24-22.  Lymphoscintigraphy of the lower extremity.
collaterals may be seen with obstruction of the primary axial 
channels. There may be localized regions of reduced uptake in 
patients with prior node dissection or radiation therapy.
Lymphangiography.  Radiologic lymphangiography is per-
formed by first visualizing the lymphatics by injecting colored 
dye into the hand or foot. The visualized lymphatic segment is 
exposed through a small incision and cannulated with a 27- to 
30-gauge needle. An oil-based dye is then injected slowly into the 
lymphatics over several hours. The lymphatic channels and nodes 
are then visualized with traditional radiographs (Figs. 24-23 and 
24-24). Lymphangiography is reserved for patients with lym-
phangiectasia or lymphatic fistulas, and patients who are being 
considered for microvascular reconstruction.
Management
An important aspect of the management of lymphedema is 
patient understanding that there is no cure for lymphedema. 
The primary goals of treatment are to minimize swelling and 
to prevent recurrent infections. Controlling the chronic limb 
swelling can improve discomfort, heaviness, and tightness, and 
potentially reduce the progression of disease.120
Compression Garments.  Graded compression stockings 
are widely used in the treatment of lymphedema. The stock-
ings reduce the amount of swelling in the involved extrem-
ity by decreasing edema accumulation while the extremity is 
dependent. When worn daily, compression stockings have been 
associated with long-term maintenance of reduced limb circum-
ference.121 They may also protect the tissues against chronically 
elevated intrinsic pressures, which lead to thickening of the skin 
and subcutaneous tissue.122 Compression stockings also offer a 
degree of protection against external trauma that may lead to 
cellulitis.
The amount of compression required for control-
ling lymphedema ranges from 20 to 60 mmHg and varies 
Figure 24-23.  Normal lymphangiogram of the pelvis.
936
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
among patients. The stockings can be custom made or prefabri-
cated and are available in above- and below-knee lengths. The 
stockings should be worn during waking hours. The garments 
should be replaced approximately every 6 months when they 
lose elasticity.
Bedrest and Leg Elevation.  Elevation is an important aspect 
of controlling lower extremity swelling and is often the first 
recommended intervention. However, continuous elevation 
throughout the day can interfere with quality of life more than 
lymphedema itself. Elevation is an adjunct to lymphedema ther-
apy but is not the mainstay of treatment.
Intermittent Pneumatic Compression Therapy.  The use of 
IPC with a single-chamber or multichamber pump temporar-
ily reduces edema and provides another adjunct to the use of 
compression stockings. These devices have been shown to be 
effective in reducing limb volume; however, use of compres-
sion stockings is necessary to maintain the volume reduction 
when the patient is no longer supine because fluid transport is 
not associated with the transport of macromolecules (proteins) 
from the tissue. Typically, IPC is used for 4 to 6 hours per day 
at home when the patient is supine with pressure ranges between 
30 and 60 mmHg demonstrated to be most effective.123
Lymphatic Massage.  Manual lymphatic drainage is a form 
of massage developed by Vodder124 that is directed at reduc-
ing edema. In combination with the use of compression stock-
ings, manual lymphatic drainage is associated with a long-term 
reduction in edema and fewer infections per patient per year.125
Antibiotic Therapy.  Patients with lymphedema are at increased 
risk of developing cellulitis in the affected extremity due to micro-
scopic breakdown in the skin barrier either secondary to swelling 
or unrecognized and untreated tinea pedis. Recurrent infection can 
damage the lymphatics, aggravating the edema and increasing the 
risk for subsequent infection. Staphylococcus and β-hemolytic 
Figure 24-24.  Normal lymphangiogram of the thigh and lower leg.
Streptococcus are the most common organisms causing soft tis-
sue infection. Aggressive antibiotic therapy and elevation with 
compression are recommended at the earliest signs or symptoms 
of cellulitis. The drug of choice is penicillin or a cephalosporin 
active against Streptococcus for 5 days. In patients with recurrent 
lymphedema despite methods to reduced edema, treatment with 
monthly intramuscular injections of benzathine penicillin 1.2 MU, 
twice-daily erythromycin 250 mg, or penicillin V 1 g daily has 
proven effective at suppression.126
Surgery.  A variety of surgical procedures have been devised 
for the treatment of lymphedema. Surgical treatment involves 
either excision of extra tissue127 or anastomosis of a lymphatic 
vessel to another lymphatic or vein.128 In excisional procedures, 
part or all of the edematous tissue is removed. This does not 
improve lymphatic drainage but debulks redundant tissue. The 
microsurgical procedures involve the creation of a lymphati-
colymphatic or lymphaticovenous anastomosis, which theo-
retically improves lymphatic drainage. No long-term follow-up 
data are available for these interventions, and therefore opera-
tive therapy for lymphedema is not well accepted worldwide. 
Furthermore, operative intervention can further obliterate lym-
phatic channels, worsening the edema.129
SUMMARY
Lymphedema is a chronic condition caused by ineffective 
lymphatic transport, which results in edema and skin damage. 
Lymphedema is not curable, but the symptoms and long-term 
effects can be controlled with a combination of elastic com-
pression stockings, limb elevation, pneumatic compression, and 
massage. Controlling the edema protects the skin and potentially 
prevents cellulitis.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Moncada S, Radomski MW, Palmer RM. Endothelium-
derived relaxing factor. Identification as nitric oxide and role 
in the control of vascular tone and platelet function. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 1988;37:2495.
2.	van Bemmelen PS, Beach K, Bedford G, et al. The mecha-
nism of venous valve closure. Its relationship to the velocity 
of reverse flow. Arch Surg. 1990;125:617.
3.	Moneta GL, Strandness DE Jr. Basic data concerning nonin-
vasive vascular testing. Ann Vasc Surg. 1989;3:190.
4.	Bettman MA, Robbins A, Braun SD, et al. Contrast venogra-
phy of the leg: diagnostic efficacy, tolerance, and complica-
tion rates with ionic and nonionic contrast media. Radiology. 
1987;165:113.
5.	White R. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism. 
Circulation. 2003;107:I4-8.
6.	Spyropoulos AC, Hussein M, Lin J, et al. Rates of symptom-
atic venous thromboembolism in US surgical patients: a ret-
rospective administrative database. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 
2009;28:458.
7.	Heit JA, Cohen AT, Anderson FA. Estimated annual number 
of incident and recurrent, non-fatal and fatal venous thrombo-
embolism (VTE) events in the US. Blood. 2005;106: 910.
8.	Pengo V, Lensing AWA, Prins MH, et al. Incidence of chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary 
embolism. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2257.
9.	Kahn SR, Ginsberg JS. The post-thrombotic syndrome: 
current knowledge, controversies and directions for future 
research. Blood Rev. 2002;16:155.
937
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
heparin or unfractionated heparin. N Engl J Med. 1995; 
332:1330.
32.	Warkentin TE, Kelton JG. Heparin and platelets. Hematol 
Oncol Clin North Am. 1990;4:243.
33.	Calaitges JG, Liem TK, Spadone D, et al. The role of heparin-
associated antiplatelet antibodies in the outcome of arterial 
reconstruction. J Vasc Surg. 1999;29:779.
34.	Warkentin TE, Kelton JG. A 14-year study of heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia. Am J Med. 1996;101:502.
35.	Gould MK, Dembitzer AD, Doyle RL, et al. Low-molecular-
weight heparins compared with unfractionated heparin for 
treatment of acute deep venous thrombosis: a meta-analysis of 
randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 1999;130:800.
36.	Dolovich LR, Ginsberg JS, Douketis JD, et al. A meta-analysis 
comparing low-molecular-weight heparins with unfractionated 
heparin in the treatment of venous thromboembolism: exam-
ining some unanswered questions regarding location of treat-
ment, product type, and dosing frequency. Arch Intern Med. 
2000;160:181.
37.	Van Dongen CJJ, van der Belt AGM, Prins MH, et al. Fixed 
dose subcutaneous low molecular weight heparins versus 
adjusted dose unfractionated heparin for venous thromboem-
bolism. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD001100.
38.	Kikta MJ, Keller MP, Humphrey PW, et al. Can low molecular 
weight heparins and heparinoids be safely given to patients 
with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia syndrome? Surgery. 
1993;114:705.
39.	Koopman MM, Prandoni P, Piovella F, et al. Treatment of 
venous thrombosis with intravenous unfractionated heparin 
administered in the hospital as compared with subcutaneous 
low-molecular-weight heparin administered at home. The 
Tasman Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:682.
40.	Levine M, Gent M, Hirsh J, et al. A comparison of low-
molecular-weight heparin administered primarily at home 
with unfractionated heparin administered in the hospi-
tal for proximal deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334:677.
41.	Büller HR, Davidson BL, Decousus H, et al. Fondaparinux 
or enoxaparin for the initial treatment of symptomatic deep 
venous thrombosis: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2004;140:867.
42.	The Matisse Investigators. Subcutaneous fondaparinux versus 
intravenous unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of 
pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1695.
43.	Warkentin TE, Maurer BT, Aster RH. Heparin-induced throm-
bocytopenia associated with fondaparinux. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:2653.
44.	Kelton JG. The pathophysiology of heparin-induced thrombo-
cytopenia: biological basis for treatment. Chest. 2005;127:9.
45.	Holbrook A, Schulman S, Witt DM, et al. Evidence based 
management of anticoagulant therapy. American College of 
Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 
9th ed. Chest. 2012;114:152S.
46.	Schulman S, Rhedin A-S, Lindmarker P, et al. A comparison 
of six weeks with six months of oral anticoagulant therapy 
after a first episode of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J 
Med. 1995;332:1661.
47.	Research Committee of the British Thoracic Society. Optimal 
duration of anticoagulation for deep vein thrombosis and pul-
monary embolism. Lancet. 1992;340:873.
48.	Levine MN, Hirsh J, Gent M, et al. Optimal duration of oral 
anticoagulant therapy: a randomized trial comparing four 
weeks with three months of warfarin in patients with proximal 
deep vein thrombosis. Thromb Haemost. 1995;74:606.
49.	Kearon C, Gent M, Hirsh J, et al. A comparison of three 
months of anticoagulation with extended anticoagulation for 
a first episode of idiopathic venous thromboembolism. N Engl 
J Med. 1999;340:901.
10.	Mohr DN, Silverstein MD, Heit JA, et al. The venous sta-
sis syndrome after deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary 
embolism: a population-based study. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2000;75:1249.
11.	Rosendaal FR. Risk factors for venous thrombotic disease. 
Thromb Haemost. 1999;82:610.
12.	Ageno W, Becattini C, Brighton T, et al. Cardiovascular risk fac-
tors and venous thromboembolism: a meta-analysis. Circulation. 
2008;117:93.
13.	White R, Zhou H, Romano P. Incidence of idiopathic deep 
venous thrombosis and secondary thromboembolism among 
ethnic groups in California. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:737.
14.	Bezemer ID, Bare LA, Doggen CJM, et al. Gene variants asso-
ciated with deep vein thrombosis. JAMA. 2008;299:106.
15.	Rogers SO Jr, Kilaru RK, Hosokawa P, et al. Multivariable 
predictors of postoperative venous thromboembolic events 
after general and vascular surgery: results from the patient 
safety in surgery study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:1211.
16.	Bahl V, Hu HM, Henke PK, Wakefield TW, Campbell DA Jr, 
Caprini JA. A validation study of retrospective venous throm-
boembolism risk scoring method. Ann Surg. 2010;251:344.
17.	Markel A, Manzo RA, Bergelin RO, et al. Pattern and dis-
tribution of thrombi in acute venous thrombosis. Arch Surg. 
1992;127:305.
18.	Nicolaides AN, Kakkar VV, Field ES, et al. The origin of 
deep vein thrombosis: a venographic study. Br J Radiol. 
1971;44:653.
19.	Brockman SK, Vasko JS. The pathologic physiology of phleg-
masia cerulea dolens. Surgery. 1966;59:997.
20.	Lensing AW, Prandoni P, Brandjes D, et al. Detection of deep-
vein thrombosis by real-time B-mode ultrasonography. N Engl 
J Med. 1989;320:342.
21.	O’Leary DH, Kane RA, Chase BM. A prospective study of 
the efficacy of B-scan sonography in the detection of deep 
venous thrombosis in the lower extremities. J Clin Ultrasound. 
1988;16:1.
22.	Mussurakis S, Papaioannou S, Voros D, et al. Compression 
ultrasonography as a reliable imaging monitor in deep venous 
thrombosis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;171:233.
23.	Habscheid W, Hohmann M, Wilhelm T, et al. Real-time ultra-
sound in the diagnosis of acute deep venous thrombosis of the 
lower extremity. Angiology. 1990;41:599.
24.	Comerota AJ, Katz ML, Grossi RJ, et al. The comparative 
value of noninvasive testing for diagnosis and surveillance of 
deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg. 1988;7:40.
25.	Gomes AS, Webber MM, Buffkin D. Contrast venography vs. 
radionuclide venography: a study of discrepancies and their 
possible significance. Radiology. 1982;142:719.
26.	Hull R, Hirsh J, Sackett DL, et al. Clinical validity of a nega-
tive venogram in patients with clinically suspected venous 
thrombosis. Circulation. 1981;64:622.
27.	Kearon C, Akl E, Comerota A, et al. Antithrombotic ther-
apy for venous thromboembolic disease: antithrombotic 
therapy and prevention of thrombosis. American College of 
Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guide-
lines (9th edition). Chest. 2012;141:419S.
28.	Raschke RA, Reilly BM, Guidry JR, et al. The weight-based 
heparin dosing nomogram compared with a standard care 
nomogram. A randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 
1993;119:874.
29.	Hylek EM, Regan S, Henault LE, et al. Challenges to the effec-
tive use of unfractionated heparin in the hospitalized manage-
ment of acute thrombosis. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:621.
30.	Amiral J, Bridey F, Dreyfus M, et al. Platelet factor 4 com-
plexed to heparin is the target for antibodies generated in hepa-
rin-induced thrombocytopenia. Thromb Haemost. 1992;68:95.
31.	 Warkentin TE, Levine MN, Hirsh J, et al. Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia in patients treated with low-molecular-weight 
938
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
50.	Agnelli G, Prandoni P, Santamaria MG, et al. Three months 
versus one year of oral anticoagulant therapy for idiopathic 
deep venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:165.
51.	Ridker PM, Goldhaber SZ, Danielson E, et al. Long-term, 
low-intensity warfarin therapy for the prevention of recurrent 
venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1425.
52.	Kearon C, Ginsber JS, Kovacs MJ, et al. Comparison of 
low-intensity warfarin therapy with conventional-intensity 
­warfarin therapy for long-term prevention of recurrent venous 
thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:631.
53.	Lee AYY, Levine MN, Baker RI, et al. Low-molecular-weight 
heparin versus a coumarin for the prevention of recurrent 
venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 2003;349:146.
54.	Akl EA, Barba M, Rohilla S, et al. Anticoagulation for the 
long term treatment of venous thromboembolism in patients 
with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;2:CD006650.
55.	Watson LI, Armon MP. Thrombolysis for treatment of 
acute deep vein thrombosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2004;4:CD002783.
56.	Enden T, Klow NE, Sandvik L, et al. Long-term outcome 
after additional catheter-directed thrombolysis versus stan-
dard treatment for acute iliofemoral deep vein thrombosis 
(the CaVenT study): a randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 
2012;379:31.
57.	Decousus H, Leizorovicz A, Parent F, et al. A clinical trial of 
vena caval filters in the prevention of pulmonary embolism in 
patients with proximal deep-vein thrombosis. Prévention du 
Risque d’Embolie Pulmonaire par Interruption Cave Study 
Group. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:409.
58.	Becker DM, Philbrick JT, Selby JB. Inferior vena cava fil-
ters. Indications, safety, effectiveness. Arch Intern Med. 
1992;152:1985.
59.	Plate G, Ohlin P, Eklof B. Pulmonary embolism in acute ilio-
femoral venous thrombosis. Br J Surg. 1985;72:912.
60.	Eklof B, Kistner RL, Masuda EM. Surgical treatment of 
acute iliofemoral deep venous thrombosis. In: Gloviczki P, 
Yao JST, eds. Handbook of Venous Disorders. New York: 
Arnold; 2001:202.
61.	Juhan CM, Alimi YS, Barthelemy PJ, et al. Late results of 
iliofemoral venous thrombectomy. J Vasc Surg. 1997;25:417.
62.	Schmid C, Zietlow S, Wagner TO, et al. Fulminant pulmo-
nary embolism: symptoms, diagnostics, operative technique, 
and results. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52:1102.
63.	Kieny R, Charpentier A, Kieny MT. What is the place of pul-
monary embolectomy today? J Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;32:549.
64.	Gulba DC, Schmid C, Borst HG, et al. Medical compared with 
surgical treatment for massive pulmonary embolism. Lancet. 
1994;343:576.
65.	Schmitz-Rode T, Janssens U, Schild HH, et al. Fragmentation 
of massive pulmonary embolism using a pigtail rotation cath-
eter. Chest. 1998;114:1427.
66.	Greenfield LJ, Proctor MC, Williams DM, et al. Long-term 
experience with transvenous catheter pulmonary embolec-
tomy. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18:450.
67.	Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, et al. Prevention 
of venous thromboembolism in nonorthopedic surgical 
patients. American College of Chest Physicians Evidence- 
Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 9th ed. Chest. 2012; 
141:227S.
68.	Mismetti P, Laporte S, Darmon JY, et al. Meta-analysis of low 
molecular weight heparin in the prevention of venous throm-
boembolism in general surgery. Br J Surg. 2001;88:913.
69.	Agnelli G, Bergqvist D, Cohen AT, et al. Randomized clinical 
trial of postoperative fondaparinux versus perioperative dalte-
parin for prevention of venous thromboembolism in high-risk 
abdominal surgery. Br J Surg. 2005;92:1212.
70.	Turpie AG, Bauer KA, Caprini JA, et al. Fondaparinux com-
bined with intermittent pneumatic compression versus inter-
mittent pneumatic compression alone for prevention of venous 
thromboembolism after abdominal surgery: a randomized, 
double-blind comparison. J Thromb Haemost. 2007;5:1854.
71.	Rogers FB, Shackford SR, Ricci MA, et al. Routine prophylac-
tic vena cava filter insertion in severely injured trauma patients 
decreases the incidence of pulmonary embolism. J Am Coll 
Surg. 1995;180:641.
72.	Rogers FB, Strindberg G, Shackford SR, et al. Five-year 
follow-up of prophylactic vena cava filters in high-risk trauma 
patients. Arch Surg. 1998;133:406.
73.	Millward SF, Oliva VL, Bell SD, et al. Gunther tulip retriev-
able vena cava filter: results from the Registry of the Canadian 
Interventional Radiology Association. J Vasc Intervent Radiol. 
2001;12:1053.
74.	Allen AW, Megargell JL, Brown DB, et al. Venous thrombosis 
associated with the placement of peripherally inserted central 
catheters. J Vasc Intervent Radiol. 2000;11:1309.
75.	Chengelis DL, Bendick PJ, Glover JL, et al. Progression of 
superficial venous thrombosis to deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc 
Surg. 1996;24:745.
76.	Lutter KS, Kerr TM, Roedersheimer LR, et al. Superficial 
thrombophlebitis diagnosed by duplex scanning. Surgery. 
1991;110:42.
77.	Di Nisio M, Wichers IM, Middeldorp S. Treatment of superfi-
cial thrombophlebitis of the leg. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2007;2:CD004982.
78.	Lohr JM, McDevitt DT, Lutter KS, et al. Operative manage-
ment of greater saphenous thrombophlebitis involving the 
saphenofemoral junction. Am J Surg. 1992;164:269.
79.	Ascer E, Lorensen E, Pollina RM, et al. Preliminary results of 
a nonoperative approach to saphenofemoral junction thrombo-
phlebitis. J Vasc Surg. 1995;22:616.
80.	Horne MK III, May DJ, Alexander HR, et al. Venographic 
surveillance of tunneled venous access devices in adult oncol-
ogy patients. Ann Surg Oncol. 1995;2:174.
81.	Landry GL, Liem TK. Endovascular management of Paget-
Schroetter syndrome. Vascular. 2007;15:290.
82.	Rhee RY, Gloviczki P, Jost C, et al. Acute mesenteric venous 
thrombosis. In: Gloviczki P, Yao JST, eds. Handbook of 
Venous Disorders. New York: Arnold; 2001:244.
83.	Morasch MD, Ebaugh JL, Chiou AC, et al. Mesenteric 
venous thrombosis: a changing clinical entity. J Vasc Surg. 
2001;34:680.
84.	James AW, Rabl C, Westphalen AC, et al. Portomesenteric 
venous thrombosis after laparoscopic surgery: a systematic 
literature review. Arch Surg. 2009;144:520.
85.	Bach AM, Hann LE, Brown KT, et al. Portal vein evaluation 
with US: comparison to angiography combined with CT arte-
rial portography. Radiology. 1996;201:149.
86.	Burkitt DP. Varicose veins, deep vein thrombosis, and haem-
orrhoids: epidemiology and suggested aetiology. Br Med J. 
1972;2:556.
87.	Brand FN, Dannenberg AL, Abbott RD, et al. The epidemiol-
ogy of varicose veins: the Framingham Study. Am J Prev Med. 
1988;4:96.
88.	Lurie F, Creton D, Eklof B, et al. Prospective randomized 
study of endovenous radiofrequency obliteration (closure) ver-
sus ligation and vein stripping (EVOLVeS): two-year follow-
up. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2005;29:67.
89.	Darwood RJ, Theivacumar N, Dellagrammaticas D, et al. 
Randomized clinical trial comparing endovenous laser abla-
tion with surgery for the treatment of primary great saphenous 
varicose veins. Br J Surg. 2008;95:294.
90.	Falanga V. Venous ulceration. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 
1993;19:764.
939
Venous and Lymphatic Disease
CHAPTER 24
91.	Phillips T, Stanton B, Provan A, et al. A study of the impact of 
leg ulcers on quality of life: financial, social, and psychologic 
implications. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;31:49.
92.	Skin Substitute Consensus Development Panel. Nonoperative 
management of venous ulcers: evolving role of skin substi-
tutes. Vasc Surg. 1999;33:197.
93.	Abenhaim L, Kurz X. The VEINES study (VEnous Insuffi-
ciency Epidemiologic and Economic Study): an international 
cohort study on chronic venous disorders of the leg. VEINES 
Group. Angiology. 1997;48:59.
94.	Clarke H, Smith SR, Vasdekis SN, et al. Role of venous 
elasticity in the development of varicose veins. Br J Surg. 
1989;76:577.
95.	Nicolaides AN, Hussein MK, Szendro G, et al. The relation of 
venous ulceration with ambulatory venous pressure measure-
ments. J Vasc Surg. 1993;17:414.
96.	Christopoulos DG, Nicolaides AN, Szendro G, et al. Air-­
plethysmography and the effect of elastic compression on 
venous hemodynamics of the leg. J Vasc Surg. 1987;5:148.
97.	van Bemmelen PS, Bedford G, Beach K, et al. Quantitative 
segmental evaluation of venous valvular reflux with duplex 
ultrasound scanning. J Vasc Surg. 1989;10:425.
98.	Nehler MR, Porter JM. The lower extremity venous system. 
Part II: the pathophysiology of chronic venous insufficiency. 
Perspect Vasc Surg. 1992;5:81.
99.	Beidler SK, Douillet CD, Berndt DF, et al. Multiplexed analy-
sis of matrix metalloproteinases in leg ulcer tissue of patients 
with chronic venous insufficiency before and after compres-
sion therapy. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16:642.
100.	Beidler SK, Douillet CD, Berndt DF, et al. Inflammatory cyto-
kine levels in chronic venous insufficiency ulcer tissue before 
and after compression therapy. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1013.
101.	Nehler MR, Moneta GL, Woodard DM, et al. Perimalleolar 
subcutaneous tissue pressure effects of elastic compression 
stockings. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18:783.
102.	Dinn E. Treatment of venous ulceration by injection sclero-
therapy and compression hosiery: a 5-year study. Phlebology. 
1992;7:23.
103.	Mayberry JC, Moneta GL, Taylor LM Jr, et al. Fifteen-year 
results of ambulatory compression therapy for chronic venous 
ulcers. Surgery. 1991;109:575.
104.	Falanga V, Margolis D, Alvarez O, et al. Rapid healing of 
venous ulcers and lack of clinical rejection with an allergenic 
cultured human skin equivalent. Human Skin Equivalent 
Investigators Group. Arch Dermatol. 1998;134:293.
105.	Phillips TJ. New skin for old: developments in biologi-
cal skin substitutes [editorial; comment]. Arch Dermatol. 
1998;134:344.
106.	Motykie GD, Caprini JA, Arcelus JI, et al. Evaluation of 
therapeutic compression stockings in the treatment of chronic 
venous insufficiency. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:116.
107.	Lippmann HI, Fishman LM, Farrar RH, et al. Edema control 
in the management of disabling chronic venous insufficiency. 
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1994;75:436.
108.	Rubin JR, Alexander J, Plecha EJ, et al. Unna’s boot vs. poly-
urethane foam dressings for the treatment of venous ulceration. 
A randomized prospective study. Arch Surg. 1990;125:489.
109.	O’Meara S, Cullum NA, Nelson EA. Compression for venous 
leg ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;1:CD000265.
110.	Vernick SH, Shapiro D, Shaw FD. Legging orthosis for 
venous and lymphatic insufficiency. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 
1987;68:459.
111.	Sibbald RG. Apligraf living skin equivalent for healing venous 
and chronic wounds. J Cutan Med Surg. 1998;3(Suppl 1): 
S124.
112.	Linton R. The communicating veins of the lower leg and the 
operative technique for their ligation. Ann Surg. 1938;107:582.
113.	Gloviczki P, Bergan JJ, Rhodes JM, et al. Mid-term results 
of endoscopic perforator vein interruption for chronic 
venous insufficiency: lessons learned from the North 
American Subfascial Endoscopic Perforator Surgery reg-
istry. The North American Study Group. J Vasc Surg. 
1999;29:489.
114.	Vashist MG, Malik V, Singhal N. Role of subfascial endo-
scopic perforator surgery (SEPS) in management of perfora-
tor incompetence in varicose veins: a prospective randomized 
study. India J Surg. DOI 10.1007/s12262-012-0675-5.
115.	van Gent WB, Hop WC, van Praag MC, et al. Conservative 
versus surgical treatment of venous leg ulcers: a prospective 
randomized, multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44:563.
116.	Gohel MS, Barwell JR, Taylor M, et al. Long term results of 
compression therapy alone versus compression plus surgery in 
chronic venous ulceration (ESCHAR): randomized controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2007;335:83.
117.	Sottiurai VS. Surgical correction of recurrent venous ulcer. 
J Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;32:104.
118.	Raju S, Fredericks R. Valve reconstruction procedures for 
nonobstructive venous insufficiency: rationale, techniques, 
and results in 107 procedures with two- to eight-year follow-
up. J Vasc Surg. 1988;7:301.
119.	Raju S, Darcey R, Neglen P. Unexpected major role for venous 
stenting in deep reflux disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51:401.
120.	Masuda EM, Kistner RL. Long-term results of venous valve 
reconstruction: a four- to twenty-one-year follow-up. J Vasc 
Surg. 1994;19:391.
121.	Rockson SG, Miller LT, Senie R, et al. American Cancer Soci-
ety Lymphedema Workshop. Workgroup III: diagnosis and 
management of lymphedema. Cancer. 1998;83:2882.
122.	Yasuhara H, Shigematsu H, Muto T. A study of the advan-
tages of elastic stockings for leg lymphedema. Int Angiol. 
1996;15:272.
123.	Feldman JL, Stout NL, Wanchai A, et al. Intermittent pneu-
matic compression therapy: a systematic review. Lymphology. 
2012;45:13.
124.	Vodder E. Le Drainage Lymphatique, une Novelle Méthode 
Thérapeutique. Paris: Santé pour tous; 1936.
125.	Ko DS, Lerner R, Klose G, et al. Effective treatment of lymph-
edema of the extremities. Arch Surg. 1998;133:452.
126.	Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Practice guide-
lines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue 
infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41:1373.
127.	Miller TA, Wyatt LE, Rudkin GH. Staged skin and subcutane-
ous excision for lymphedema: a favorable report of long-term 
results. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:1486.
128.	Baumeister RG, Siuda S. Treatment of lymphedema by micro-
surgical lymphatic grafting: what is proved? Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 1990;85:64.
129.	Bernas MJ, Witte CL, Witte MH. The diagnosis and treatment 
of peripheral lymphedema: draft revision of the 1995 Con-
sensus Document of the International Society of Lymphology 
Executive Committee for discussion at the September 3–7, 
2001, XVIII International Congress of Lymphology in Genoa, 
Italy. Lymphology. 2001;34:84.
This page intentionally left blank 
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic 
Hernia
Blair A. Jobe, John G. Hunter, and David I. Watson
25
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The esophagus is a muscular tube that starts as the continuation 
of the pharynx and ends as the cardia of the stomach. When 
the head is in a normal anatomic position, the transition from 
pharynx to esophagus occurs at the lower border of the sixth 
cervical vertebra. Topographically this corresponds to the cri-
coid cartilage anteriorly and the palpable transverse process of 
the sixth cervical vertebra laterally (Fig. 25-1). The esophagus 
is firmly attached at its upper end to the cricoid cartilage and at 
Surgical Anatomy	
941
Physiology	
947
Swallowing Mechanism / 947
Physiologic Reflux / 949
Assessment of Esophageal  
Function	
950
Tests to Detect Structural  
Abnormalities / 950
Tests to Detect Functional  
Abnormalities / 953
Video- and Cineradiography / 955
Tests to Detect Increased Exposure  
to Gastric Juice / 961
Tests of Duodenogastric Function / 963
Gastroesophageal Reflux  
Disease	
964
The Human Antireflux Mechanism and  
the Pathophysiology of Gastroesopha-
geal Reflux Disease / 965
Complications Associated with  
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease / 967
Metaplastic (Barrett’s Esophagus) and 
Neoplastic (Adenocarcinoma)  
Complications / 969
Respiratory Complications / 969
Surgical Therapy for Gastroesophageal  
Reflux Disease / 972
Primary Antireflux Repairs / 974
Giant Diaphragmatic (Hiatal)  
Hernias	
980
Incidence and Etiology / 980
Clinical Manifestations / 981
Diagnosis / 982
Pathophysiology / 982
Treatment / 982
Diaphragmatic Repair / 983
The Short Esophagus and PEH / 983
Results / 984
Schatzki’s Ring	
984
Scleroderma	
984
Eosinophilic Esophagitis / 985
Symptoms / 986
Signs / 986
Pathology / 986
Treatment / 986
Motility Disorders of the  
Pharynx and Esophagus	
986
Clinical Manifestations / 986
Motility Disorders of the Pharynx and 
Upper Esophagus – Transit  
Dysphagia / 987
Motility Disorders of the Esophageal Body 
and Lower Esophageal Sphincter / 990
Operations for Esophageal Motor  
Disorders and Diverticula	
995
Long Esophageal Myotomy for Motor  
Disorders of the Esophageal Body / 995
Myotomy of the Lower Esophageal 
Sphincter (Heller Myotomy) / 997
Open Esophageal Myotomy / 1000
Laparoscopic Cardiomyotomy / 1000
Per Oral Endoscopic Myotomy  
(POEM) / 1000
Outcome Assessment of the  
Therapy for Achalasia / 1000
Esophageal Resection for  
End-Stage Motor Disorders of the 
Esophagus / 1003
Carcinoma of the Esophagus	
1003
Clinical Manifestations / 1003
General Approach to Esophageal  
Cancer / 1004
Staging of Esophageal Cancer / 1004
Clinical Approach to Carcinoma of the 
Esophagus and Cardia / 1005
Palliation of Esophageal Cancer / 1008
Surgical Treatment / 1009
Comparative Studies of Esophagectomy 
Technique / 1011
Alternative Therapies	
1012
Sarcoma of the Esophagus	
1014
Benign Tumors and Cysts	
1017
Leiomyoma / 1017
Esophageal Cyst / 1018
Esophageal Perforation	
1018
Diagnosis / 1018
Management / 1018
Mallory-Weiss Syndrome	
1020
Caustic Injury	
1020
Pathology / 1020
Clinical Manifestations / 1021
Treatment / 1021
Acquired Fistula	
1023
Techniques of Esophageal  
Reconstruction	
1024
Partial Esophageal Resection / 1024
Reconstruction after Total  
Esophagectomy / 1024
Composite Reconstruction / 1025
Vagal Sparing Esophagectomy with Colon 
Interposition / 1025
chapter 
its lower end to the diaphragm; during swallowing, the proxi-
mal points of fixation move craniad the distance of one cervical 
vertebral body.
The esophagus lies in the midline, with a deviation to the 
left in the lower portion of the neck and upper portion of the 
thorax, and returns to the midline in the midportion of the thorax 
near the bifurcation of the trachea (Fig. 25-2). In the lower por-
tion of the thorax, the esophagus again deviates to the left and 
anteriorly to pass through the diaphragmatic hiatus.
Three normal areas of esophageal narrowing are evident 
on the barium esophagogram or during esophagoscopy. The 
uppermost narrowing is located at the entrance into the esopha-
gus and is caused by the cricopharyngeal muscle. Its luminal 
diameter is 1.5 cm, and it is the narrowest point of the esopha-
gus. The middle narrowing is due to an indentation of the ante-
rior and left lateral esophageal wall caused by the crossing of 
the left main stem bronchus and aortic arch. The luminal diam-
eter at this point is 1.6 cm. The lowermost narrowing is at the 
hiatus of the diaphragm and is caused by the gastroesophageal 
942
Key Point
1
	 Benign esophageal disease is common and is best evaluated 
with thorough physiologic testing (high resolution esophageal 
motility, 24 hour ambulatory pH measurement, and/or esopha-
geal impedance testing) and anatomic testing (esophagoscopy, 
video esophagography, and/or CT scanning).
2
	 GERD is the most common disease of the gastrointestinal tract 
for which patients seek medical therapy. When GERD symp-
toms (heartburn, regurgitation, chest pain, and/or supraesoph-
ageal symptoms) are troublesome despite adequately dosed 
PPI, surgical correction may be indicated.
3
	 Barrett’s esophagus is the transformation of the distal esopha-
geal epithelium from squamous to a specialized columnar epi-
thelium capable of further neoplastic progression. The 
detection of Barrett’s esophagus on endoscopy and biopsy 
increases the future risk of cancer by >40x compared to indi-
viduals without Barrett’s esophagus.
4
	 Giant hiatal hernia, otherwise known as paraesophageal 
hernia, should be repaired when symptomatic or associated 
with iron deficiency anemia. Laparoscopic hiatal hernia 
repair with fundoplication is the most common approach to 
repair.
5
	 Achalasia is the most common primary esophageal motor 
disorder. It is characterized by an absence of peristalsis and 
a hypertensive nonrelaxing lower esophageal sphincter. It 
is best treated with laparoscopic Heller myotomy and par-
tial fundoplication.
6
	 Most esophageal cancer presents with dysphagia, at which 
time it has invaded the muscularis of the esophagus and is 
often associated with lymph node metastases. The pre-
ferred treatment at this stage is multimodality therapy with 
chemoradiation therapy followed by open or minimally 
invasive esophagectomy.
a
b
c
d
e
A  
B
sphincter mechanism. The luminal diameter at this point varies 
somewhat, depending on the distention of the esophagus by the 
passage of food, but has been measured at 1.6 to 1.9 cm. These 
normal constrictions tend to hold up swallowed foreign objects, 
and the overlying mucosa is subject to injury by swallowed cor-
rosive liquids due to their slow passage through these areas.
Figure 25-3 shows the average distance in centimeters 
measured during endoscopic examination between the incisor 
teeth and the cricopharyngeus, aortic arch, and cardia of the 
stomach. Manometrically, the length of the esophagus between 
Figure 25-1.  A. Topographic rela-
tionships of the cervical esophagus: 
(a) hyoid bone, (b) thyroid cartilage, 
(c) cricoid cartilage, (d) thyroid 
gland, (e) sternoclavicular. B. Lat-
eral radio-graphic appearance with 
landmarks identified as labeled in 
A. The location of C6 is also included 
(f). (Reproduced with permission 
from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: 
Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, 
in Shields TW (ed): General Tho-
racic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 77.)
943
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
the lower border of the cricopharyngeus and upper border of the 
lower sphincter varies according to the height of the individual.
The pharyngeal musculature consists of three broad, flat, 
overlapping fan-shaped constrictors (Fig. 25-4). The opening of 
the esophagus is collared by the cricopharyngeal muscle, which 
A
B
Figure 25-2.  Barium esophagogram. A. Posterior-anterior view. White arrow shows deviation to left. Black arrow shows return to midline. 
B. Lateral view. Black arrow shows anterior deviation. (Reproduced with permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of 
the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 77.)
Pharynx
24–26cm
Upper sphincter
(C6)
40cm
38cm
Lower sphincter
(T11)
15cm
14cm
Aortic arch
(T4)
25cm 
23cm
Incisor teeth
Figure 25-3.  Important clinical endoscopic measurements of the 
esophagus in adults. (Reproduced with permission from Rothberg 
M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields 
TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & 
Febiger, 1989, p 78.)
 Superior pharyngeal 
constrictor m.
Middle pharyngeal
 constrictor m.
Inferior pharyngeal
 constrictor m.
Cricopharyngeus m.
Esophagus
B
A
Figure 25-4.  External muscles of the pharynx. A. Posterolateral 
view. B. Posterior view. Dotted line represents usual site of myot-
omy. (Reproduced with permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester 
TR: Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General 
Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 78.)
944
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
arises from both sides of the cricoid cartilage of the larynx and 
forms a continuous transverse muscle band without an interrup-
tion by a median raphe. The fibers of this muscle blend insepa-
rably with those of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor above and 
the inner circular muscle fibers of the esophagus below. Some 
investigators believe that the cricopharyngeus is part of the infe-
rior constrictor; that is, that the inferior constrictor has two parts, 
an upper or retrothyroid portion having diagonal fibers, and a 
lower or retrocricoid portion having transverse fibers. Keith 
in 1910 showed that these two parts of the same muscle serve 
totally different functions. The retrocricoid portion serves as the 
upper sphincter of the esophagus and relaxes when the retrothy-
roid portion contracts, to force the swallowed bolus from the 
pharynx into the esophagus.
The cervical portion of the esophagus is approximately 
5 cm long and descends between the trachea and the vertebral 
column, from the level of the sixth cervical vertebra to the 
level of the interspace between the first and second thoracic 
vertebrae posteriorly, or the level of the suprasternal notch 
anteriorly. The recurrent laryngeal nerves lie in the right and 
left grooves between the trachea and the esophagus. The left 
recurrent nerve lies somewhat closer to the esophagus than the 
right, owing to the slight deviation of the esophagus to the left, 
and the more lateral course of the right recurrent nerve around 
the right subclavian artery. Laterally, on the left and right sides 
of the cervical esophagus are the carotid sheaths and the lobes 
of the thyroid gland.
The thoracic portion of the esophagus is approximately 
20 cm long. It starts at the thoracic inlet. In the upper portion of 
the thorax, it is in intimate relationship with the posterior wall 
of the trachea and the prevertebral fascia. Just above the tracheal 
bifurcation, the esophagus passes to the right of the aorta. This 
anatomic positioning can cause a notch indentation in its left 
lateral wall on a barium swallow radiogram. Immediately below 
this notch, the esophagus crosses both the bifurcation of the tra-
chea and the left main stem bronchus, owing to the slight devia-
tion of the terminal portion of the trachea to the right by the 
aorta (Fig. 25-5). From there down, the esophagus passes over 
the posterior surface of the subcarinal lymph nodes (LNs), and 
A
Thymus
Pericardium
Superior vena cava
Tracheal carina
Right main stem
bronchus
Esophagus
Ascending aorta
Left main stem bronchus
Bottom of aortic arch
Descending
aorta
IV
B
a
e
b
d
c
then descends over the pericardium of the left atrium to reach 
the diaphragmatic hiatus (Fig. 25-6). From the bifurcation of 
the trachea downward, both the vagal nerves and the esophageal 
nerve plexus lie on the muscular wall of the esophagus.
Dorsally, the thoracic esophagus follows the curvature of 
the spine and remains in close contact with the vertebral bod-
ies. From the eighth thoracic vertebra downward, the esophagus 
moves vertically away from the spine to pass through the hiatus 
of the diaphragm. The thoracic duct passes through the hiatus 
of the diaphragm on the anterior surface of the vertebral column 
behind the aorta and under the right crus. In the thorax, the tho-
racic duct lies dorsal to the esophagus between the azygos vein 
on the right and the descending thoracic aorta on the left.
The abdominal portion of the esophagus is approximately 
2 cm long and includes a portion of the lower esophageal 
sphincter (LES). It starts as the esophagus passes through the 
diaphragmatic hiatus and is surrounded by the phrenoesopha-
geal membrane, a fibroelastic ligament arising from the subdia-
phragmatic fascia as a continuation of the transversalis fascia 
lining the abdomen (Fig. 25-7). The upper leaf of the membrane 
attaches itself in a circumferential fashion around the esopha-
gus, about 1 to 2 cm above the level of the hiatus. These fibers 
blend in with the elastic-containing adventitia of the abdominal 
esophagus and the cardia of the stomach. This portion of the 
esophagus is subjected to the positive-pressure environment of 
the abdomen.
The musculature of the esophagus can be divided into an 
outer longitudinal and an inner circular layer. The upper 2 to 6 cm 
of the esophagus contains only striated muscle fibers. From 
then on, smooth muscle fibers gradually become more abun-
dant. Most clinically significant esophageal motility disorders 
involve only the smooth muscle in the lower two- thirds of the 
esophagus. When a surgical esophageal myotomy is indicated, 
the incision needs to extend only this distance.
The longitudinal muscle fibers originate from a crico-
esophageal tendon arising from the dorsal upper edge of the 
anteriorly located cricoid cartilage. The two bundles of muscle 
diverge and meet in the midline on the posterior wall of the 
esophagus about 3 cm below the cricoid (see Fig. 25-4). 
Figure 25-5.  A. Cross-section of the thorax at the level of the tracheal bifurcation. B. Computed tomographic scan at same level viewed 
from above: (a) ascending aorta, (b) descending aorta, (c) tracheal carina, (d) esophagus, (e) pulmonary artery. (Reproduced with permission 
from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 81.)
945
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
From this point on, the entire circumference of the esophagus is 
covered by a layer of longitudinal muscle fibers. This configura-
tion of the longitudinal muscle fibers around the most proximal 
part of the esophagus leaves a V-shaped area in the posterior 
wall covered only with circular muscle fibers. Contraction of 
the longitudinal muscle fibers shortens the esophagus. The cir-
cular muscle layer of the esophagus is thicker than the outer 
longitudinal layer. In situ, the geometry of the circular muscle 
is helical and makes the peristalsis of the esophagus assume 
a worm-like drive, as opposed to segmental and sequential 
squeezing. As a consequence, severe motor abnormalities of 
the esophagus assume a corkscrew-like pattern on the barium 
swallow radiogram.
The cervical portion of the esophagus receives its main 
blood supply from the inferior thyroid artery. The thoracic por-
tion receives its blood supply from the bronchial arteries, with 
75% of individuals having one right-sided and two left-sided 
branches. Two esophageal branches arise directly from the aorta. 
B
A
Pericardium
Right ventricle
Right atrium
Pericardium
Pleura
VII
Pleura
Aorta
Esophagus
Left atrium
Left ventricle
f
d
e
c
a
b
g
Figure 25-6.  A. Cross-section of the thorax at the midleft atrial level. B. Computed tomographic scan at same level viewed from above: (a) aorta, 
(b) esophagus, (c) left atrium, (d) right atrium, (e) left ventricle, (f) right ventricle, (g) pulmonary vein. (Reproduced with permission from 
Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea 
& Febiger, 1989, p 82.)
Phreno-esophageal membrane
(Ascending leaf)
Parietal
peritoneum
Visceral
peritoneum
Diaphragm
Para-esophageal fat pad
Phreno-esophageal membrane
(Descending leaf)
Figure 25-7.  Attachments and structure of the phrenoesophageal 
membrane. Transversalis fascia lies just above the parietal perito-
neum. (Reproduced with permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester 
TR: Surgical anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General 
Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 83.)
The abdominal portion of the esophagus receives its blood sup-
ply from the ascending branch of the left gastric artery and from 
inferior phrenic arteries (Fig. 25-8). On entering the wall of the 
esophagus, the arteries assume a T-shaped division to form a 
longitudinal plexus, giving rise to an intramural vascular net-
work in the muscular and submucosal layers. As a consequence, 
the esophagus can be mobilized from the stomach to the level 
of the aortic arch without fear of devascularization and isch-
emic necrosis. Caution should be exercised as to the extent 
Left gastric artery
Right bronchial
artery         
Inferior thyroid
 artery
Superior left
bronchial artery
Inferior left
bronchial artery
Aortic esophageal
arteries
Ascending branches of
Left gastric artery   
Esophageal branch
Figure 25-8.  Arterial blood supply of the esophagus. (Reproduced 
with permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical 
anatomy of the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic 
Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 84.)
946
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of esophageal mobilization in patients who have had a previ-
ous thyroidectomy with ligation of the inferior thyroid arteries 
proximal to the origin of the esophageal branches.
Blood from the capillaries of the esophagus flows into 
a submucosal venous plexus, and then into a periesophageal 
venous plexus from which the esophageal veins originate. In the 
cervical region, the esophageal veins empty into the inferior thy-
roid vein; in the thoracic region, they empty into the bronchial, 
azygos, or hemiazygos veins; and in the abdominal region, 
they empty into the coronary vein (Fig. 25-9). The submucosal 
venous networks of the esophagus and stomach are in continuity 
with each other, and, in patients with portal venous obstruction, 
this communication functions as a collateral pathway for portal 
blood to enter the superior vena cava via the azygos vein.
The parasympathetic innervation of the pharynx and 
esophagus is provided mainly by the vagus nerves. The con-
strictor muscles of the pharynx receive branches from the 
pharyngeal plexus, which is on the posterior lateral surface of 
the middle constrictor muscle, and is formed by pharyngeal 
branches of the vagus nerves with a small contribution from cra-
nial nerves IX and XI (Fig. 25-10). The cricopharyngeal sphinc-
ter and the cervical portion of the esophagus receive branches 
from both recurrent laryngeal nerves, which originate from the 
vagus nerves—the right recurrent nerve at the lower margin of 
the subclavian artery and the left at the lower margin of the 
aortic arch. They are slung dorsally around these vessels and 
ascend in the groove between the esophagus and trachea, giving 
branches to each. Damage to these nerves interferes not only 
with the function of the vocal cords, but also with the function 
of the cricopharyngeal sphincter and the motility of the cervical 
esophagus, predisposing the individual to pulmonary aspiration 
on swallowing.
Afferent visceral sensory pain fibers from the esophagus 
end without synapse in the first four segments of the thoracic 
spinal cord, using a combination of sympathetic and vagal 
Inferior thyroid veins
Accessory azygous vein
Hemiazygous vein
Short
       gastric
  veins
Splenic vein
Superior mesenteric
 vein                   
Portal vein 
Coronary vein  
Azygous vein  
Figure 25-9.  Venous drainage of the esophagus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of 
the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 85.)
Left vagus nerve
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Thoracic chain
Left or anterior
vagal trunk
Right or posterior 
vagal trunk
Anterior esophageal
plexus
Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Right vagus nerve
Recurrent 
laryngeal
nerves
Figure 25-10.  Innervation of the esophagus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Surgical anatomy of 
the esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic Surgery, 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 85.)
pathways. These pathways are also occupied by afferent vis-
ceral sensory fibers from the heart; hence, both organs have 
similar symptomatology.
The lymphatics located in the submucosa of the esopha-
gus are so dense and interconnected that they constitute a single 
plexus (Fig. 25-11). There are more lymph vessels than blood 
Internal jugular
nodes
Paratracheal
nodes
Subcarinal nodes
Inferior paraesophageal
nodes
Parahiatal nodes    
Splenic artery
nodes
Celiac artery nodes
  Hepatic artery
  nodes
Left gastric artery nodes
Pulmonary hilar
nodes
Superior
paraesophageal nodes
Figure 25-11.  Lymphatic drainage of the esophagus. (Reproduced 
with permission from DeMeester TR, Barlow AP: Surgery and cur-
rent management for cancer of the esophagus and cardia: Part I. 
Curr Probl Surg 25:498, 1988. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
947
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
capillaries in the submucosa. Lymph flow in the submucosal 
plexus runs in a longitudinal direction, and, on injection of a 
contrast medium, the longitudinal spread is seen to be about six 
times that of the transverse spread. In the upper two-thirds of 
the esophagus, the lymphatic flow is mostly cephalad, and, in 
the lower third, caudad. In the thoracic portion of the esophagus, 
the submucosal lymph plexus extends over a long distance in 
a longitudinal direction before penetrating the muscle layer to 
enter lymph vessels in the adventitia. As a consequence of this 
nonsegmental lymph drainage, a primary tumor can extend for 
a considerable length superiorly or inferiorly in the submucosal 
plexus. Consequently, free tumor cells can follow the submu-
cosal lymphatic plexus in either direction for a long distance 
before they pass through the muscularis and on into the regional 
LNs. The cervical esophagus has more direct segmental lymph 
drainage into the regional nodes, and, as a result, lesions in this 
portion of the esophagus have less submucosal extension and a 
more regionalized lymphatic spread.
The efferent lymphatics from the cervical esophagus drain 
into the paratracheal and deep cervical LNs, and those from the 
upper thoracic esophagus empty mainly into the paratracheal 
LNs. Efferent lymphatics from the lower thoracic esophagus 
drain into the subcarinal nodes and nodes in the inferior pulmo-
nary ligaments. The superior gastric nodes receive lymph not 
only from the abdominal portion of the esophagus, but also from 
the adjacent lower thoracic segment.
PHYSIOLOGY
Swallowing Mechanism
The act of alimentation requires the passage of food and drink 
from the mouth into the stomach. One-third of this distance con-
sists of the mouth and hypopharynx, and two-thirds is made up 
by the esophagus. To comprehend the mechanics of alimenta-
tion, it is useful to visualize the gullet as a mechanical model 
in which the tongue and pharynx function as a piston pump 
with three valves, and the body of the esophagus and cardia 
function as a worm-drive pump with a single valve. The three 
valves in the pharyngeal cylinder are the soft palate, epiglottis, 
and cricopharyngeus. The valve of the esophageal pump is the 
LES. Failure of the valves or the pumps leads to abnormali-
ties in swallowing—that is, difficulty in food propulsion from 
mouth to stomach—or regurgitation of gastric contents into the 
esophagus or pharynx.
Food is taken into the mouth in a variety of bite sizes, 
where it is broken up, mixed with saliva, and lubricated. Once 
initiated, swallowing is entirely a reflex act. When food is 
ready for swallowing, the tongue, acting like a piston, moves 
the bolus into the posterior oropharynx and forces it into the 
hypopharynx (Fig. 25-12). Concomitantly with the posterior 
movement of the tongue, the soft palate is elevated, thereby 
closing the passage between the oropharynx and nasopharynx. 
This partitioning prevents pressure generated in the oropharynx 
from being dissipated through the nose. When the soft palate is 
paralyzed, for example, after a cerebrovascular accident, food 
is commonly regurgitated into the nasopharynx. During swal-
lowing, the hyoid bone moves upward and anteriorly, elevating 
the larynx and opening the retrolaryngeal space, bringing the 
epiglottis under the tongue (see Fig. 25-12). The backward tilt 
of the epiglottis covers the opening of the larynx to prevent aspi-
ration. The entire pharyngeal part of swallowing occurs within 
1.5 seconds.
1. Elevation of tongue
2. Posterior movement of tongue
3. Elevation of soft palate
4. Elevation of hyoid
5. Elevation of larynx
6. Tilting of epiglottis
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 25-12.  Sequence of events during the oropharyngeal phase 
of swallowing. (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, 
Stein HJ, Fuchs KH: Physiologic diagnostic studies, in Zuidema 
GD, Orringer MB (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary 
Tract, 3rd ed., Vol. I. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1991, p 95. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
During swallowing, the pressure in the hypopharynx rises 
abruptly, to at least 60 mmHg, due to the backward movement 
of the tongue and contraction of the posterior pharyngeal con-
strictors. A sizable pressure difference develops between the 
hypopharyngeal pressure and the less-than-atmospheric mid-
esophageal or intrathoracic pressure (Fig. 25-13). This pressure 
gradient speeds the movement of food from the hypopharynx 
Pressure (mm Hg)
% Esophagus length
100
–10 –5
0
5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
80
60
Upright position
40
20
0
DES
G
E
C
P
Air
Figure 25-13.  Resting pressure profile of the foregut showing the 
pressure differential between the atmospheric pharyngeal pressure 
(P) and the less-than-atmospheric midesophageal pressure (E) and 
greater-than-atmospheric intragastric pressure (G), with the inter-
posed high pressure zones of the cricopharyngeus (C) and distal 
esophageal sphincter (DES). The necessity for relaxation of the cri-
copharyngeus and DES pressure to move a bolus into the stomach 
is apparent. Esophageal work occurs when a bolus is pushed from 
the midesophageal area (E), with a pressure less than atmospheric, 
into the stomach, which has a pressure greater than atmospheric (G). 
(Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: 
Foregut motor disorders and their surgical management. Med Clin 
North Am 65:1237, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
948
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
into the esophagus when the cricopharyngeus or upper esopha-
geal sphincter relaxes. The bolus is both propelled by peristaltic 
contraction of the posterior pharyngeal constrictors and sucked 
into the thoracic esophagus. Critical to receiving the bolus is 
the compliance of the cervical esophagus; when compliance is 
lost due to muscle pathology, dysphagia can result. The upper 
esophageal sphincter closes within 0.5 second of the initiation 
of the swallow, with the immediate closing pressure reach-
ing approximately twice the resting level of 30 mmHg. The 
postrelaxation contraction continues down the esophagus as a 
peristaltic wave (Fig. 25-14). The high closing pressure and the 
initiation of the peristaltic wave prevents reflux of the bolus 
from the esophagus back into the pharynx. After the peristaltic 
wave has passed farther down the esophagus, the pressure in the 
upper esophageal sphincter returns to its resting level.
Swallowing can be started at will, or it can be reflexively 
elicited by the stimulation of areas in the mouth and pharynx, 
among them the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars or the 
posterior lateral walls of the hypopharynx. The afferent sen-
sory nerves of the pharynx are the glossopharyngeal nerves 
and the superior laryngeal branches of the vagus nerves. Once 
aroused by stimuli entering via these nerves, the swallowing 
center in the medulla coordinates the complete act of swallow-
ing by discharging impulses through cranial nerves V, VII, X, 
XI, and XII, as well as the motor neurons of C1 to C3. Dis-
charges through these nerves occur in a rather specific pattern 
and last for approximately 0.5 second. Little is known about the 
organization of the swallowing center, except that it can trigger 
swallowing after a variety of different inputs, but the response 
is always a rigidly ordered pattern of outflow. Following a 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
mm
Hg
Swallow
Seconds
0
10
20
30
40
50
Seconds
Seconds
0
10
20
30
40
50
Seconds
0
10
20
30
40
50
Seconds
0
10
20
30
40
50
Stomach
High pressure zone
Esophageal body
Cricopharyngeus
Pharynx
Figure 25-14.  Intraluminal esophageal pressures in response 
to swallowing. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, 
DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical man-
agement. Med Clin North Am 65:1238, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
cerebrovascular accident, this coordinated outflow may be 
altered, causing mild to severe abnormalities of swallowing. In 
more severe injury, swallowing can be grossly disrupted, lead-
ing to repetitive aspiration.
The striated muscles of the cricopharyngeus and the upper 
one-third of the esophagus are activated by efferent motor fibers 
distributed through the vagus nerve and its recurrent laryngeal 
branches. The integrity of innervation is required for the crico-
pharyngeus to relax in coordination with the pharyngeal con-
traction, and resume its resting tone once a bolus has entered 
the upper esophagus. Operative damage to the innervation can 
interfere with laryngeal, cricopharyngeal, and upper esophageal 
function, and predispose the patient to aspiration.
The pharyngeal activity in swallowing initiates the 
esophageal phase. The body of the esophagus functions as a 
worm-drive propulsive pump due to the helical arrangement of 
its circular muscles, and is responsible for transferring a bolus 
of food into the stomach. The esophageal phases of swallow-
ing represents esophageal work done during alimentation, in 
that food is moved into the stomach from a negative-pressure 
environment of –6 mm Hg intrathoracic pressure, to a positive-
pressure environment of 6 mm Hg intra-abdominal pressure, 
or over a gradient of 12 mm Hg (see Fig. 25-13). Effective and 
coordinated smooth muscle function in the lower one- third of 
the esophagus is therefore important in pumping the food across 
this gradient.
The peristaltic wave generates an occlusive pressure vary-
ing from 30 to 120 mmHg (see Fig. 25-14). The wave rises to a 
peak in 1 second, lasts at the peak for about 0.5 second, and then 
subsides in about 1.5 seconds. The whole course of the rise and 
fall of occlusive pressure may occupy one point in the esopha-
gus for 3 to 5 seconds. The peak of a primary peristaltic contrac-
tion initiated by a swallow (primary peristalsis) moves down 
the esophagus at 2 to 4 cm/s and reaches the distal esophagus 
about 9 seconds after swallowing starts. Consecutive swallows 
produce similar primary peristaltic waves, but when the act of 
swallowing is rapidly repeated, the esophagus remains relaxed 
and the peristaltic wave occurs only after the last movement of 
the pharynx. Progress of the wave in the esophagus is caused by 
sequential activation of its muscles, initiated by efferent vagal 
nerve fibers arising in the swallowing center.
Continuity of the esophageal muscle is not necessary for 
sequential activation if the nerves are intact. If the muscles, but 
not the nerves, are cut across, the pressure wave begins dis-
tally below the cut as it dies out at the proximal end above the 
cut. This allows a sleeve resection of the esophagus to be done 
without destroying its normal function. Afferent impulses from 
receptors within the esophageal wall are not essential for prog-
ress of the coordinated wave. Afferent nerves, however, do go 
to the swallowing center from the esophagus, because, if the 
esophagus is distended at any point, a contractual wave begins 
with a forceful closure of the upper esophageal sphincter and 
sweeps down the esophagus. This secondary contraction occurs 
without any movements of the mouth or pharynx. Secondary 
peristalsis can occur as an independent local reflex to clear the 
esophagus of ingested material left behind after the passage of 
the primary wave. Current studies suggest that secondary peri-
stalsis is not as common as once thought.
Despite the powerful occlusive pressure, the propulsive 
force of the esophagus is relatively feeble. If a subject attempts 
to swallow a bolus attached by a string to a counterweight, 
the maximum weight that can be overcome is 5 to 10 g. 
949
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Orderly contractions of the muscular wall and anchoring of the 
esophagus at its inferior end are necessary for efficient aboral 
propulsion to occur. Loss of the inferior anchor, as occurs with 
a large hiatal hernia, can lead to inefficient propulsion.
The LES provides a pressure barrier between the esopha-
gus and stomach and acts as the valve on the worm-drive pump 
of the esophageal body. Although an anatomically distinct LES 
has been difficult to identify, microdissection studies show that, 
in humans, the sphincter-like function is related to the archi-
tecture of the muscle fibers at the junction of the esophageal 
tube with the gastric pouch (Fig. 25-15). The sphincter actively 
remains closed to prevent reflux of gastric contents into the 
esophagus and opens by a relaxation that coincides with a pha-
ryngeal swallow (see Fig. 25-14). The LES pressure returns to 
its resting level after the peristaltic wave has passed through the 
esophagus. Consequently, reflux of gastric juice that may occur 
through the open valve during a swallow is cleared back into 
the stomach.
If the pharyngeal swallow does not initiate a peristaltic con-
traction, then the coincident relaxation of the LES is unguarded 
and reflux of gastric juice can occur. This may be an explanation 
for the observation of spontaneous lower esophageal relaxation, 
thought by some to be a causative factor in gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (GERD). The power of the worm-drive pump of 
the esophageal body is insufficient to force open a valve that 
does not relax. In dogs, a bilateral cervical parasympathetic 
Gastro-esophageal
muscular ring
Oblique
fibers
Greater curvature
wall thickness
Lesser curvature
wall thickness
Anterior wall thickness
Phreno-
esophageal
membrane
Semi-circular
fibers
50-
0-
20-
-50
-0 mm
-20
-50
-0 mm
-20
Figure 25-15.  Wall thickness and orientation of fibers on micro-
dissection of the cardia. At the junction of the esophageal tube 
and gastric pouch, there is an oblique muscular ring composed of 
an increased muscle mass inside the inner muscular layer. On the 
lesser curve side of the cardia, the muscle fibers of the inner layer 
are oriented transversely and form semicircular muscle clasps. On 
the greater curve side of the cardia, these muscle fibers form oblique 
loops that encircle the distal end of the cardia and gastric fundus. 
Both the semicircular muscle clasps and the oblique fibers of the 
fundus contract in a circular manner to close the cardia. (Repro-
duced with permission from DeMeester TR, Skinner DB: Evalu-
ation of esophageal function and disease, in Glenn WWL (ed): 
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, 4th ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1983, p 461.)
blockade abolishes the relaxation of the LES that occurs with 
pharyngeal swallowing or distention of the esophagus. Conse-
quently, vagal function appears to be important in coordinating 
the relaxation of the LES with esophageal contraction.
The antireflux mechanism in human beings is composed 
of three components: a mechanically effective LES, efficient 
esophageal clearance, and an adequately functioning gastric 
reservoir. A defect of any one of these three components can 
lead to increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice and the 
development of mucosal injury.
Physiologic Reflux
On 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring, healthy individuals have 
occasional episodes of gastroesophageal reflux. This physi-
ologic reflux is more common when awake and in the upright 
position than during sleep in the supine position. When reflux 
of gastric juice occurs, normal subjects rapidly clear the acid 
gastric juice from the esophagus regardless of their position.
There are several explanations for the observation that 
physiologic reflux in normal subjects is more common when 
they are awake and in the upright position than during sleep in 
the supine position. First, reflux episodes occur in healthy vol-
unteers primarily during transient losses of the gastroesophageal 
barrier, which may be due to a relaxation of the LES or intra-
gastric pressure overcoming sphincter pressure. Gastric juice 
can also reflux when a swallow-induced relaxation of the LES 
is not protected by an oncoming peristaltic wave. The average 
frequency of these “unguarded moments” or of transient losses 
of the gastroesophageal barrier is far less while asleep and in 
the supine position than while awake and in the upright posi-
tion. Consequently, there are fewer opportunities for reflux to 
occur in the supine position. Second, in the upright position, 
there is a 12-mmHg pressure gradient between the resting, posi-
tive intra-abdominal pressure measured in the stomach and the 
most negative intrathoracic pressure measured in the esophagus 
at midthoracic level. This gradient favors the flow of gastric 
juice up into the thoracic esophagus when upright. The gradi-
ent diminishes in the supine position. Third, the LES pressure 
in normal subjects is significantly higher in the supine posi-
tion than in the upright position. This is due to the apposition 
of the hydrostatic pressure of the abdomen to the abdominal 
portion of the sphincter when supine. In the upright position, 
the abdominal pressure surrounding the sphincter is negative 
compared with atmospheric pressure, and, as expected, the 
abdominal pressure gradually increases the more caudally it is 
measured. This pressure gradient tends to move the gastric con-
tents toward the cardia and encourages the occurrence of reflux 
into the esophagus when the individual is upright. In contrast, 
in the supine position, the gastroesophageal pressure gradient 
diminishes, and the abdominal hydrostatic pressure under the 
diaphragm increases, causing an increase in sphincter pressure 
and a more competent cardia.
The LES has intrinsic myogenic tone, which is modu-
lated by neural and hormonal mechanisms. Alpha-adrenergic 
neurotransmitters or beta blockers stimulate the LES, and alpha 
blockers and beta stimulants decrease its pressure. It is not clear 
to what extent cholinergic nerve activity controls LES pressure. 
The vagus nerve carries both excitatory and inhibitory fibers to 
the esophagus and sphincter. The hormones gastrin and motilin 
have been shown to increase LES pressure; and cholecystokinin, 
estrogen, glucagon, progesterone, somatostatin, and secretin 
decrease LES pressure. The peptides bombesin, l-enkephalin, 
950
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and substance P increase LES pressure; and calcitonin gene-
related peptide, gastric inhibitory peptide, neuropeptide Y, and 
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide decrease LES pressure. Some 
pharmacologic agents such as antacids, cholinergics, agonists, 
domperidone, metoclopramide, and prostaglandin F2 are known 
to increase LES pressure; and anticholinergics, barbiturates, cal-
cium channel blockers, caffeine, diazepam, dopamine, meperi-
dine, prostaglandin E1 and E2, and theophylline decrease LES 
pressure. Peppermint, chocolate, coffee, ethanol, and fat are all 
associated with decreased LES pressure and may be responsible 
for esophageal symptoms after a sumptuous meal.
ASSESSMENT OF ESOPHAGEAL FUNCTION
A thorough understanding of the patient’s underlying anatomic 
and functional deficits before making therapeutic decisions is 
fundamental to the successful treatment of esophageal disease. 
The diagnostic tests, as presently used, may be divided into four 
broad groups: (a) tests to detect structural abnormalities of 
the esophagus; (b) tests to detect functional abnormalities 
of the esophagus; (c) tests to detect increased esophageal expo-
sure to gastric juice; and (d) tests of duodenogastric function as 
they relate to esophageal disease.
Tests to Detect Structural Abnormalities
Endoscopic Evaluation.  The first diagnostic test in patients 
with suspected esophageal disease is usually upper gastrointesti-
nal endoscopy. This allows assessment and biopsy of the mucosa 
of the stomach and the esophagus, as well as the diagnosis and 
assessment of obstructing lesions in the upper gastrointestinal 
tract. In any patient complaining of dysphagia, esophagoscopy 
is indicated, even in the face of a normal radiographic study.
For the initial endoscopic assessment, the flexible fiber-
optic esophagoscope is the instrument of choice because of its 
technical ease, patient acceptance, and the ability to simultane-
ously assess the stomach and duodenum. Rigid endoscopy is 
now only rarely required, mainly for the disimpaction of dif-
ficult foreign bodies impacted in the esophagus.
When GERD is the suspected diagnosis, particular atten-
tion should be paid to detecting the presence of esophagitis and 
Barrett’s columnar-lined esophagus (CLE). When endoscopic 
esophagitis is seen, severity and the length of esophagitis 
involved are recorded. Many different grading systems have 
been proposed. In a commonly used system, Grade I esopha-
gitis is defined as small, circular, nonconfluent erosions (Fig. 
25-16). Grade II esophagitis is defined by the presence of linear 
erosions lined with granulation tissue that bleeds easily when 
touched. Grade III esophagitis represents a more advanced 
stage, in which the linear erosions coalesce into circumferen-
tial loss of the epithelium and the mucosa may take a “cobble-
stone” appearance. Grade IV esophagitis is the presence of a 
stricture. Its severity can be assessed by the ease of passing a 
36F endoscope. When a stricture is observed, the severity of the 
esophagitis above it should be recorded. The absence of esopha-
gitis above a stricture suggests a chemical-induced injury or a 
neoplasm as a cause. The latter should always be considered and 
is ruled out only by evaluation of a tissue biopsy of adequate 
size. It should be remembered that gastroesophageal reflux is 
not always associated with visible mucosal abnormalities, and 
patients can experience significant reflux symptoms, despite an 
apparently normal endoscopy examination.
Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a condition in which the tubu-
lar esophagus is lined with columnar epithelium, as opposed to 
the normal squamous epithelium (Fig. 25-16). Histologically, it 
appears as intestinal metaplasia (IM). It is suspected at endos-
copy when there is difficulty in visualizing the squamocolum-
nar junction at its normal location, and by the appearance of 
a redder, more luxuriant mucosa than is normally seen in the 
lower esophagus. Its presence is confirmed by biopsy. Multiple 
biopsy specimens should be taken in a cephalad direction to 
determine the level at which the junction of Barrett’s epithe-
lium with normal squamous mucosa occurs. BE is susceptible 
to ulceration, bleeding, stricture formation, and, most important, 
malignant degeneration. The earliest sign of the latter is high 
grade dysplasia or intramucosal adenocarcinoma (Fig. 25-16). 
These dysplastic changes have a patchy distribution, so a mini-
mum of four biopsy samples spaced 2 cm apart should be taken 
from the Barrett’s-lined portion of the esophagus. Changes seen 
in one biopsy are significant. Nishimaki has determined that the 
tumors occur in an area of specialized columnar epithelium near 
the squamocolumnar junction in 85% of patients, and within 
2 cm of the squamocolumnar junction in virtually all patients. 
Particular attention should be focused on this area in patients 
suspected of harboring a carcinoma.
Abnormalities of the gastroesophageal flap valve can be 
visualized by retroflexion of the endoscope. Hill has graded the 
appearance of the gastroesophageal valve from I to IV according 
to the degree of unfolding or deterioration of the normal valve 
architecture (Fig. 25-17). The appearance of the valve correlates 
with the presence of increased esophageal acid exposure, occur-
ring predominantly in patients with Grade III and IV valves.
A hiatal hernia is endoscopically confirmed by finding a 
pouch lined with gastric rugal folds lying 2 cm or more above 
the margins of the diaphragmatic crura, identified by having the 
patient sniff. A hernia is best demonstrated with the stomach 
fully insufflated and the gastroesophageal junction observed 
with a retroflexed endoscope. A prominent sliding hiatal hernia 
frequently is associated with increased esophageal exposure to 
gastric juice. When a paraesophageal hernia (PEH) is observed, 
particular attention is taken to exclude a gastric (Cameron’s) 
ulcer or gastritis within the pouch. The intragastric retroflex or 
J maneuver is important in evaluating the full circumference of 
the mucosal lining of the herniated stomach.
When an esophageal diverticulum is seen, it should 
be carefully explored with the flexible endoscope to exclude 
ulceration or neoplasia. When a submucosal mass is identified, 
biopsy specimens are usually not performed. At the time of sur-
gical resection, a submucosal leiomyoma or reduplication cyst 
can generally be dissected away from the intact mucosa, but if 
a biopsy sample is taken, the mucosa may become fixed to the 
underlying abnormality. This complicates the surgical dissec-
tion by increasing the risk of mucosal perforation. Endoscopic 
ultrasound provides a better method for evaluating these lesions.
Radiographic Evaluation.  Barium swallow evaluation is 
undertaken selectively to assess anatomy and motility. The 
anatomy of large hiatal hernias are more clearly demonstated 
by contrast radiology than endoscopy, and the presence of coor-
dinated esophageal peristalsis can be determined by observing 
several individual swallows of barium traversing the entire 
length of the organ, with the patient in the horizontal position. 
Hiatal hernias are best demonstrated with the patient prone 
because the increased intra-abdominal pressure produced in this 
1
951
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
position promotes displacement of the esophagogastric junction 
above the diaphragm. To detect lower esophageal narrowing, 
such as rings and strictures, fully distended views of the esopha-
gogastric region are crucial. The density of the barium used to 
study the esophagus can potentially affect the accuracy of the 
examination. Esophageal disorders shown clearly by a full-col-
umn technique include circumferential carcinomas, peptic stric-
tures, large esophageal ulcers, and hiatal hernias. A small hiatal 
hernia is usually not associated with significant symptoms or 
illness, and its presence is an irrelevant finding unless the hiatal 
hernia is large (Fig. 25-18), or the hernia is of the paraesopha-
geal variety. Lesions extrinsic but adjacent to the esophagus can 
be reliably detected by the full-column technique if they contact 
the distended esophageal wall. Conversely, a number of impor-
tant disorders may go undetected if this is the sole technique 
used to examine the esophagus. These include small esophageal 
A
C
D
B
Figure 25-16.  Complications of reflux disease as seen on endoscopy. A. Linear erosions of grade II esophagitis. B. Uncomplicated Barrett’s 
mucosa. C. High Grade dysplasia in Barrett’s mucosa, D. Early adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett’s mucosa.
neoplasms, mild esophagitis, and esophageal varices. Thus, the 
full-column technique should be supplemented with mucosal 
relief or double-contrast films to enhance detection of these 
smaller or more subtle lesions.
Motion-recording techniques greatly aid in evaluating 
functional disorders of the pharyngoesophageal and esophageal 
phases of swallowing. The technique and indications for cine- 
and videoradiography will be discussed in the section entitled 
Video- and Cineradiography, as they are more useful to evalu-
ate function and seldom used to detect structural abnormalities.
The radiographic assessment of the esophagus is not com-
plete unless the entire stomach and duodenum have been exam-
ined. A gastric or duodenal ulcer, partially obstructing gastric 
neoplasm, or scarred duodenum and pylorus may contribute sig-
nificantly to symptoms otherwise attributable to an esophageal 
abnormality.
952
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
B
A
C
Figure 25-17.  A. Grade I flap valve appearance. Note the ridge of tissue that is closely approximated to the shaft of the retroflexed endo-
scope. It extends 3–4 cm along the lesser curve. B. Grade II flap valve appearance. The ridge is slightly less well defined than in grade I and 
it opens rarely with respiration and closes promptly. C. Grade III flap valve appearance. The ridge is barely present, and there is often failure 
to close around the endoscope. It is nearly always accompanied by a hiatal hernia. D. Grade IV flap valve appearance. There is no muscular 
ridge at all. The gastroesophageal valve stays open all the time, and squamous epithelium can often be seen from the retroflexed position. A 
hiatal hernia is always present. (Reproduced with permission from Hill LD, Kozarek RA, et al.: The gastroesophageal flap valve. In vitro and 
in vivo observations. Gastrointest Endosc. 44:541, 1996. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
953
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
When a patient’s complaints include dysphagia and no 
obstructing lesion is seen on the barium swallow, it is useful to 
have the patient swallow a barium-impregnated marshmallow, a 
barium-soaked piece of bread, or a hamburger mixed with bar-
ium. This test may bring out a functional disturbance in esopha-
geal transport that can be missed when liquid barium is used.
Tests to Detect Functional Abnormalities
In many patients with symptoms of an esophageal disorder, 
standard radiographic and endoscopic evaluation fails to dem-
onstrate a structural abnormality. In these situations, esophageal 
function tests are necessary to identify a functional disorder.
Stationary Manometry.  Esophageal manometry is a widely 
used technique to examine the motor function of the esophagus 
and its sphincters. Manometry is indicated whenever a motor 
D
Figure 25-17.  (Continued )
Figure 25-18.  Radiogram of an intrathoracic stomach. This is the end 
stage of a large hiatal hernia, regardless of its initial classification.
abnormality of the esophagus is suspected on the basis of com-
plaints of dysphagia, odynophagia, or noncardiac chest pain, 
and the barium swallow or endoscopy does not show a clear 
structural abnormality. Esophageal manometry is particularly 
necessary to confirm the diagnosis of specific primary esopha-
geal motility disorders (i.e., achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm 
[DES], nutcracker esophagus, and hypertensive LES). It also 
identifies nonspecific esophageal motility abnormalities and 
motility disorders secondary to systemic disease such as sclero-
derma, dermatomyositis, polymyositis, or mixed connective tis-
sue disease. In patients with symptomatic GERD, manometry 
of the esophageal body can identify a mechanically defective 
LES, and evaluate the adequacy of esophageal peristalsis and 
contraction amplitude. Manometry has become an essential 
tool in the preoperative evaluation of patients before antireflux 
surgery, guiding selection of the appropriate procedure based 
upon the patient’s underlying esophageal function, and exclud-
ing patients with achalasia who can be misdiagnosed with gas-
troesophageal reflux when clinical and endoscopic parameters 
alone are used for diagnosis.
Esophageal manometry is performed using electronic, 
pressure-sensitive transducers located within the catheter, or 
water-perfused catheters with lateral side holes attached to 
transducers outside the body. The traditional catheter consists 
of a train of five pressure transducers or five or more water-per-
fused tubes bound together. The transducers or lateral openings 
are placed at 5-cm intervals from the tip and oriented radially at 
72° from each other around the circumference of the catheter. 
A special catheter assembly consisting of four lateral openings 
at the same level, oriented at 90° to each other, is of special 
use in measuring the three-dimensional vector volume of the 
LES. Other specially designed catheters can be used to assess 
the upper sphincter.
As the pressure-sensitive station is brought across the gas-
troesophageal junction (GEJ), a rise in pressure above the gas-
tric baseline signals the beginning of the LES. The respiratory 
inversion point is identified when the positive excursions that 
occur in the abdominal cavity with breathing change to negative 
deflections in the thorax. The respiratory inversion point serves 
as a reference point at which the amplitude of LES pressure 
and the length of the sphincter exposed to abdominal pressure 
954
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
are measured. As the pressure-sensitive station is withdrawn 
into the body of the esophagus, the upper border of the LES is 
identified by the drop in pressure to the esophageal baseline. 
From these measurements, the pressure, abdominal length, and 
overall length of the sphincter are determined (Fig. 25-19). To 
account for the asymmetry of the sphincter (Fig. 25-20), the 
pressure profile is repeated with each of the five radially ori-
ented transducers, and the average values for sphincter pressure 
above gastric baseline, overall sphincter length, and abdominal 
length of the sphincter are calculated.
Table 25-1 shows the values for these parameters in 50 nor-
mal volunteers without subjective or objective evidence of a 
foregut disorder. The level at which a deficiency in the mechan-
ics of the LES occurs was defined by comparing the frequency 
RIP = Respiratory inversion point
RIP
43
42
41
40
39
38
37 cm.
Overall length
Pressure
10 sec.
Esophageal
baseline
pressure
Abdominal length
Gastric
baseline
pressure
Figure 25-19.  Manometric pressure profile of the lower esopha-
geal sphincter. The distances are measured from the nares. (Repro-
duced with permission from: Zaninotto G, DeMeester TR, et al.: 
The lower esophageal sphincter in health and disease. Am J Surg. 
155:105, 1988. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
LA
LP
L
P
A
RP
R
RA
25
0
50
Figure 25-20.  Radial configuration of the lower esophageal 
sphincter. A = anterior; L = left; LA = left anterior; LP = left pos-
terior; P = posterior; R = right; RA = right anterior; RP = right 
posterior. (Reproduced with permission from Winans CS: Mano-
metric asymmetry of the lower esophageal high pressure zone. 
Dig Dis Sci 22:348, 1977. With kind permission from Springer 
Science+Business Media.)
Table 25-1
Normal manometric values of the distal esophageal 
sphincter, n = 50
Median
Percentile
2.5
97.5
Pressure (mmHg)
13
5.8
27.7
Overall  
length (cm)
3.6
2.1
5.6
Abdominal  
length (cm)
2
0.9
4.7
Mean
Mean – 2 SD Mean + 2 SD
Pressure (mmHg)
13.8 ± 4.6 4.6
23.0
Overall length (cm) 3.7 ± 0.8
2.1
5.3
Abdominal  
length (cm)
2.2 ± 0.8
0.6
3.8
SD = standard deviation.
Source: Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, et al.: Gastro-
esophageal reflux disease, in Moody FG, Carey LC, et al. (eds): Surgical 
Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1990,  
p 89. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
distribution of these values in the 50 healthy volunteers with 
a population of similarly studied patients with symptoms of 
GERD. The presence of increased esophageal exposure to gas-
tric juice was documented by 24-hour esophageal pH monitor-
ing. Based on these studies, a mechanically defective sphincter 
is identified by having one or more of the following character-
istics: an average LES pressure of <6 mmHg, an average length 
exposed to the positive-pressure environment in the abdomen 
of 1 cm or less, and/or an average overall sphincter length of 
2 cm or less. Compared with the normal volunteers, these values 
are below the 2.5 percentile for sphincter pressure and overall 
length and for abdominal length.
To assess the relaxation and postrelaxation contraction of 
the LES, a pressure transducer is positioned within the high-
pressure zone, with the distal transducer located in the stomach 
and the proximal transducer within the esophageal body. Ten 
wet swallows (5 mL water each) are performed. The normal 
pressure of the LES should drop to the level of gastric pressure 
during each wet swallow.
The function of the esophageal body is assessed with the 
five pressure transducers located in the esophagus. The stan-
dard procedure is to locate the most proximal pressure trans-
ducer 1 cm below the well-defined cricopharyngeal sphincter, 
allowing a pressure response throughout the whole esophagus 
to be obtained on one swallow. Ten wet swallows are recorded. 
Amplitude, duration, and morphology of contractions following 
each swallow are calculated at all recorded levels of the esopha-
geal body. The delay between the onset and peak of esophageal 
contractions at the various levels of the esophagus is used to 
calculate the speed of wave propagation. The relationship of 
the esophageal contractions following a swallow is classified as 
peristaltic or simultaneous. The data are used to identify motor 
disorders of the esophagus.
955
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
The position, length, and pressure of the cricopharyngeal 
sphincter are assessed with a stationary pull-through technique 
similar to that used for the LES. The manometric catheter is 
withdrawn in 0.5-cm intervals from the upper esophagus 
through the upper esophageal sphincter region into the pharynx. 
The relaxation of the upper esophageal sphincter is studied by 
straddling the eight pressure transducers across the sphincter so 
that some are in the pharynx and some are in the upper esopha-
gus. High-speed graphic recordings (50 mm/s) are necessary 
to obtain an assessment of the coordination of cricopharyngeal 
relaxation with hypopharyngeal contraction. It has been difficult 
to consistently demonstrate a motility abnormality in patients 
with pharyngoesophageal disorders.
High-Resolution Manometry.  Esophageal manometry was 
introduced into clinical practice in the 1970s and, until recently, 
has changed little. In 1991, Ray Clouse introduced the concept 
of improving conventional manometry by increasing the number 
of recording sites and adding a three-dimensional assessment. 
This “high-resolution manometry” is a variant of the conven-
tional manometry in which multiple, circumferential recording 
sites are used, in essence creating a “map” of the esophagus and 
its sphincters. High-resolution catheters contain 36 miniaturized 
pressure sensors positioned every centimeter along the length of 
the catheter. The vast amount of data generated by these sensors 
is then processed and presented in traditional linear plots or as 
a visually enhanced spatiotemporal video tracing that is readily 
interpreted (Fig. 25-21).
Simultaneous acquisition of data for the upper esophageal 
sphincter, esophageal body, LES, and gastric pressure mini-
mizes the movement artifacts and study time associated with 
conventional esophageal manometry. Powerful, computer-
based, and easy-to-use tools give unprecedented data analysis 
capability. This technology significantly enhances esophageal 
diagnostics, bringing it into the realm of “image” based stud-
ies. High-resolution manometry may allow the identification 
of focal motor abnormalities previously overlooked. It has 
enhanced the ability to predict bolus propagation and increased 
sensitivity in the measurement of pressure gradients.
Esophageal Impedance.  New technology recently introduced 
into the clinical realm allows measurement of esophageal func-
tion and gastroesophageal reflux in a way that has heretofore not 
been possible. An intraluminal electrical impedance catheter has 
recently been developed for the measurement of GI function. 
Impedance is the ratio of voltage to current, and is a measure 
of the electrical conductivity of a hollow organ and its contents. 
Intraluminal electrical impedance is inversely proportional to 
the electrical conductivity of the luminal contents and the cross-
sectional area of the lumen. Air has a very low electrical con-
ductivity and, therefore, high impedance. Saliva and food cause 
an impedance decrease because of their increased conductivity. 
Luminal dilatation results in a decrease in impedance, whereas 
luminal contraction yields an impedance increase. Investigators 
have established the impedance waveform characteristics that 
define esophageal bolus transport. This allows for the char-
acterization of both esophageal function, via quantification of 
bolus transport, and gastroesophageal reflux (Fig. 25-22). The 
probe measures impedance between adjacent electrodes, with 
measuring segments located at 2, 4, 6, 8, 14, and 16 cm from 
the distal tip. An extremely low electric current of 0.00025 μW 
is transmitted across the electrodes at a frequency of 1 to 2 kHz 
and is limited to 8 μA. This is below the stimulation threshold 
for nerves and muscles, and is three orders of magnitude below 
the threshold of cardiac stimulation. A standard pH electrode is 
located 5 cm from the distal tip, so that the acidic or nonacidic 
nature of refluxate can be correlated with the number of reflux 
events.
Esophageal impedance has been validated as an appropri-
ate method for the evaluation of GI function and is becoming 
increasingly used for the diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. It 
has been compared to cineradiography showing that impedance 
waves correspond well with actual bolus transport illustrated by 
radiography. Bolus entry, transit, and exit can be clearly iden-
tified by impedance changes in the corresponding measuring 
segments. Preliminary studies comparing standard esophageal 
manometry with impedance measurements in healthy volunteers 
have been performed, and have validated the ability of esopha-
geal impedance to correlate with peristaltic wave progression 
and bolus length. Clinical investigators are beginning to exam-
ine and validate impedance measurement in the evaluation of 
esophageal and small intestinal pathophysiology.
It is increasingly recognized that 24-hour pH monitor-
ing as the historical gold standard for diagnosing and quanti-
fying gastroesophageal reflux has significant limitations. With 
24-hour ambulatory pH testing, reflux is defined as a drop in 
the pH below 4, which effectively “blinds” the test to reflux 
occurring at higher pH values. Furthermore, in patients with 
persistent symptoms on proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy, 
pH monitoring has limited use as it can only detect abnormal 
acid reflux (pH <4), the occurrence of which has been altered 
by the antisecretory medication. Given that PPI antisecretory 
therapy is highly effective in neutralizing gastric acid, the ques-
tion of whether persistent symptoms are a result of persistent 
acid reflux, nonacid reflux, or are not reflux related becomes a 
key issue in surgical decision making. Until recently, this dif-
ferentiation could not be made. A reliable method for detect-
ing both acid and nonacid reflux has potential to define these 
populations of patients and thus improve patient selection for 
antireflux surgery. The recent introduction of multichannel 
intraluminal impedance technology allows the measurement 
of both acid and nonacid reflux, with potential to significantly 
enhance diagnostic accuracy.
Using this technology, Balaji and colleagues showed that 
most gastroesophageal reflux remains despite acid suppression. 
Impedance pH may be particularly useful in evaluating patients 
with persistent symptoms despite PPI treatment, patients with 
respiratory symptoms, and postoperative patients who are hav-
ing symptoms that are elusive to diagnosis.
Esophageal Transit Scintigraphy.  The esophageal transit of 
a 10-mL water bolus containing technetium-99m (99mTc) sulfur 
colloid can be recorded with a gamma camera. Using this tech-
nique, delayed bolus transit has been shown in patients with 
a variety of esophageal motor disorders, including achalasia, 
scleroderma, DES, and nutcracker esophagus.
Video- and Cineradiography
High-speed cinematic or video recording of radiographic stud-
ies allows re-evaluation by reviewing the studies at various 
speeds. This technique is more useful than manometry in the 
evaluation of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing. Observa-
tions suggesting oropharyngeal or cricopharyngeal dysfunction 
include misdirection of barium into the trachea or nasopharynx, 
prominence of the cricopharyngeal muscle, a Zenker’s divertic-
ulum, a narrow pharyngoesophageal segment, and stasis of the 
956
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
UES
19.0
LES
41.8
40.3
43.7
Gastric 46.2
PIP
42.3
Esophagus
Pharynx
Stomach
Figure 25-21A.  Normal high-resolution manometry motility study. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; 
blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.
957
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Esophagus
Stomach
Pharynx
UES
20.8
LES
41.9
PIP
41.8
41.3
42.7
Gastric 50.3
Figure 25-21B.  High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with mechanically defective lower esophageal sphincter. Note the 
absence of lower esophageal sphincter tone. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower 
esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.
958
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Esophagus
Pharynx
UES
18.7
40.9
44.6
Gastric 47.5
LES
42.2
PIP
42.3
Stomach
Figure 25-21C.  High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with deficient esophageal body peristalsis. Note the very weak peri-
stalsis in the lower two-thirds of the esophagus. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower 
esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.
959
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Esophagus
UES
18.0
Gastric 48.5
42.7
45.7
LES
43.8
PIP
44.1
Stomach
Pharynx
Figure 25-21D.  High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with achalasia. Note the complete absence of esophageal body peristal-
sis, and the lack of relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; 
blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.
960
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Gastric 51.7
45.6
Pharynx
Esophagus
LES
47.4
PIP
47.1
UES
20.3
49.7 Stomach
Figure 25-21E.  High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with diffuse esophageal spasm. Note the very high amplitude con-
tractions in the esophageal body Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal 
sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.
961
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
contrast medium in the valleculae or hypopharyngeal recesses 
(Fig. 25-23). These findings are usually not specific, but rather 
common manifestations of neuromuscular disorders affecting 
the pharyngoesophageal area. Studies using liquid barium, bar-
ium-impregnated solids, or radiopaque pills aid the evaluation 
of normal and abnormal motility in the esophageal body. Loss 
of the normal stripping wave or segmentation of the barium col-
umn with the patient in the recumbent position correlates with 
pH site
Impedence site
17cm
15cm
9cm
7cm
5cm
Distance above LES
Distance above LES
5cm
LES
3cm
Figure 25-22.  Esophageal impedance probe measures electrical 
resistance between evenly spaced electrodes. LES = lower esopha-
geal sphincter.
abnormal motility of the esophageal body. In addition, struc-
tural abnormalities such as small diverticula, webs, and minimal 
extrinsic impressions of the esophagus may be recognized only 
with motion-recording techniques. The simultaneous comput-
erized capture of videofluoroscopic images and manometric 
tracings is now available, and is referred to as manofluorog-
raphy. Manofluorographic studies allow precise correlation 
of the anatomic events, such as opening of the upper esopha-
geal sphincter, with manometric observations, such as sphincter 
relaxation. Manofluorography, although not widely available, 
is presently the best means available to evaluate complex func-
tional abnormalities.
Tests to Detect Increased Exposure  
to Gastric Juice
24-Hour Ambulatory pH Monitoring.  The most direct 
method of measuring increased esophageal exposure to gastric 
juice is by an indwelling pH electrode, or, more recently, via a 
radiotelemetric pH monitoring capsule that can be clipped to the 
esophageal mucosa. The latter consists of an antimony pH elec-
trode fitted inside a small, capsule-shaped device accompanied 
by a battery and electronics that allow 48-hour monitoring and 
transmission of the pH data via transcutaneous radio telemetry 
to a waist-mounted data logger. The device can be introduced 
either transorally or transnasally, and clipped to the esophageal 
mucosa using endoscopic fastening techniques. It passes spon-
taneously within 1 to 2 weeks. Prolonged monitoring of esoph-
ageal pH is performed by placing the pH probe or telemetry 
capsule 5 cm above the manometrically measured upper border 
of the distal sphincter for 24 hours. It measures the actual time 
the esophageal mucosa is exposed to gastric juice, measures the 
B
A
Figure 25-23.  Esophagograms from a patient with cricopharyngeal achalasia. A. Anteroposterior film showing retention of the contrast 
medium at the level of the vallecula and piriform recesses, with no barium passing into the esophagus. B. Lateral film, taken opposite the 
C5–C6 vertebrae, showing posterior indentation of the cricopharyngeus, retention in the hypopharynx, and tracheal aspiration. (Reproduced 
with permission from Lafontaine E: Pharyngeal dysphagia, in DeMeester TR, Matthews H (eds): International Trends in General Thoracic 
Surgery, Vol. 3. Benign Esophageal Disease. St. Louis: Mosby, 1987, p 345. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
962
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
ability of the esophagus to clear refluxed acid, and correlates 
esophageal acid exposure with the patient’s symptoms. A 24- to 
48-hour period is necessary so that measurements can be made 
over one or two complete circadian cycles. This allows measur-
ing the effect of physiologic activity, such as eating or sleeping, 
on the reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus (Fig. 25-24).
The 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring should not be con-
sidered a test for reflux, but rather a measurement of the esopha-
geal exposure to gastric juice. The measurement is expressed by 
the time the esophageal pH was below a given threshold during 
the 24-hour period. This single assessment, although concise, 
does not reflect how the exposure has occurred; that is, did it 
occur in a few long episodes or several short episodes? Conse-
quently, two other assessments are necessary: the frequency of 
the reflux episodes and their duration.
The units used to express esophageal exposure to gastric 
juice are: (a) cumulative time the esophageal pH is below a cho-
sen threshold, expressed as the percentage of the total, upright, 
and supine monitored time; (b) frequency of reflux episodes 
below a chosen threshold, expressed as number of episodes 
per 24 hours; and (c) duration of the episodes, expressed as the 
number of episodes >5 minutes per 24 hours, and the time in 
minutes of the longest episode recorded. Table 25-2 shows the 
normal values for these components of the 24-hour record at the 
whole-number pH threshold derived from 50 normal asymptom-
atic subjects. The upper limits of normal were established at the 
ninety-fifth percentile. Most centers use pH 4 as the threshold.
The components’ 24-hour pH record are then combined 
into one expression of the overall esophageal acid exposure 
below a pH threshold; the pH score is calculated by using the 
mp
mp
pH
8
6
4
2
mp
pH
8
6
4
2
pH
8
6
4
2
sp
06:00
00:00
22:00
02:00
04:00
22:00
16:00
14:00
18:00
20:00
14:00
08:00
06:00
10:00
12:00
Figure 25-24.  Strip chart display of a 24-hour esophageal pH 
monitoring study in a patient with increased esophageal acid expo-
sure. mp = meal period; sp = supine period. (Reproduced with 
permission from DeMeester TR, Stein HJ, Fuchs KH: Physiologic 
diagnostic studies, in Zuidema GD, Orringer MB (eds): Shackel-
ford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed, Vol. I. Philadelphia: 
W.B. Saunders, 1991, p 119. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Table 25-2
Normal values for esophageal exposure to pH <4 (n = 50)
Component
Mean
SD
95%
Total time
1.51
1.36
4.45
Upright time
2.34
2.34
8.42
Supine time
0.63
1.0
3.45
No. of episodes
19.00
12.76
46.90
No. >5 min
0.84
1.18
3.45
Longest episode
6.74
7.85
19.80
SD = standard deviation.
Source: Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, et al.: Gastro-
esophageal reflux disease, in Moody FG, Carey LC, et al. (eds): Surgical 
Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1990, 
p 68. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
standard deviation (SD) of the mean of each of the six compo-
nents measured in the 50 normal subjects as a weighting factor. 
By accepting an abstract zero level two SDs below the mean, 
the data measured in normal subjects could be treated as though 
they had a normal distribution. Thus, any measured patient value 
could be referenced to this zero point, and, in turn, be awarded 
points based on whether it was below or above the normal mean 
value for that component, according to this formula:
Component score
Po
value
mean
SD
 
int
=
−
+1
The upper limits of normal for the composite score for 
each whole-number pH threshold are shown in Table 25-3.
The detection of increased esophageal exposure to acid 
gastric juice is more dependable than the detection of increased 
exposure to alkaline gastric juice. The latter is suggested by an 
increased alkaline exposure time above pH 7 or 8. Increased 
Table 25-3
Normal composite score for various pH thresholds: 
upper level of normal value
pH Threshold
95th Percentile
<1
14.2
<2
17.37
<3
14.10
<4
14.72
<5
15.76
<6
12.76
>7
14.90
>8
8.50
Source: Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, et al.: Gastro-
esophageal reflux disease, in Moody FG, Carey LC, et al. (eds): Surgical 
Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1990,  
p 69. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
963
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
exposure in this pH range can be caused by abnormal calibration of 
the pH recorder; dental infection, which increases salivary pH; 
esophageal obstruction, which results in static pools of saliva 
with an increase in pH secondary to bacterial overgrowth; or 
regurgitation of alkaline gastric juice into the esophagus. Using 
a properly calibrated probe, in the absence of dental infections 
or esophageal obstruction, the percentage of time the pH is mea-
sured above 7 correlates with the concentration of bile acids 
continuously aspirated over a 24-hour period.
When done in a test population with an equal distribution 
of normal healthy subjects and patients with the classic reflux 
symptoms and a defective sphincter, 24-hour esophageal pH 
monitoring had a sensitivity and specificity of 96%. (Sensitiv-
ity is the ability to detect a disease when known to be present; 
specificity is the ability to exclude the disease when known to be 
absent.) This gave a predictive value of a positive and negative 
test of 96%, and an overall accuracy of 96%. Based on these 
studies and extensive clinical experience, 24-hour esophageal 
pH monitoring has emerged as the gold standard for the diag-
nosis of GERD.
Catheter-based, 24-hour, ambulatory, esophageal pH 
monitoring does have a significant drawback of the physical 
presence of a transnasal catheter that must be worn for 24 hours. 
Although most doctors ask patients to go about their normal 
activities of daily living, many do not comply due to embarrass-
ment about the catheter or from discomfort. The recent devel-
opment of a wireless capsule, which can be implanted in the 
esophagus and record pH data for 48 hours, has significantly 
changed patient satisfaction with the procedure.
The Bravo pH Capsule (Medtronics, Minneapolis, MN) 
measures pH levels in the esophagus and transmits continuous 
esophageal pH readings to a receiver worn on the patient’s belt 
or waistband (Fig. 25-27). Symptoms that the patient experi-
ence are recorded in a diary and/or by pressing buttons on the 
receiver unit. Generally, 48 hours of pH data are measured with 
this probe. A recent study has shown that the addition of a sec-
ond day of pH monitoring increased the sensitivity of pH mea-
surement by 22%. The capsule eventually detaches and passes 
through the digestive tract in 5 to 7 days.
Radiographic Detection of Gastroesophageal Reflux.  The 
definition of radiographic gastroesophageal reflux varies 
depending on whether reflux is spontaneous or induced by 
various maneuvers. In only about 40% of patients with clas-
sic symptoms of GERD is spontaneous reflux (i.e., reflux of 
barium from the stomach into the esophagus with the patient in 
the upright position) observed by the radiologist. In most 
patients who show spontaneous reflux on radiography, the 
diagnosis of increased esophageal acid exposure is confirmed 
by 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring. Therefore, the radio-
graphic demonstration of spontaneous regurgitation of barium 
into the esophagus in the upright position is a reliable indicator 
that reflux is present. However, failure to see this does not indi-
cate the absence of disease, and for this reason this test is rarely 
relied on for clinical diagnosis.
Tests of Duodenogastric Function
Esophageal disorders are frequently associated with abnormali-
ties of duodenogastric function. Abnormalities of the gastric res-
ervoir or increased gastric acid secretion can be responsible for 
increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice. Reflux of alka-
line duodenal juice, including bile salts, pancreatic enzymes, 
and bicarbonate, is thought to have a role in the pathogenesis of 
esophagitis and complicated Barrett’s esophagus. Furthermore, 
functional disorders of the esophagus are often not confined to 
the esophagus alone, but are associated with functional disor-
ders of the rest of the foregut (i.e., stomach and duodenum). 
Tests of duodenogastric function that are helpful to investigate 
esophageal symptoms include gastric emptying studies, gastric 
acid analysis, and cholescintigraphy (for the diagnosis of patho-
logic duodenogastric reflux). The single test of 24-hour gastric 
pH monitoring can be used to identify gastric hypersecretion 
and imply the presence of duodenogastric reflux and delayed 
gastric emptying.
Gastric Emptying.  Gastric emptying studies are performed 
with radionuclide-labeled meals. Emptying of solids and liquids 
can be assessed simultaneously when both phases are marked 
with different tracers. After ingestion of a labeled standard 
meal, gamma camera images of the stomach are obtained at 
5- to 15-minute intervals for 1.5 to 2 hours. After correction for 
decay, the counts in the gastric area are plotted as the percentage 
of total counts at the start of the imaging. The resulting emptying 
curve can be compared with data obtained in normal volunteers. 
In general, normal subjects will empty 59% of a meal within 
90 minutes. Although delayed gastric emptying is often associ-
ated with gastroesophageal reflux, in general delayed emptying 
does not correlate with a poorer clinical outcome after antireflux 
surgery, and it should not be considered a contraindication to 
surgical treatment.
24-Hour Gastric pH Monitoring.  Monitoring is performed 
over a complete circadian cycle with a pH electrode placed 5 cm 
below the manometrically located LES. The patient is fully 
ambulatory during the test and is encouraged to perform normal 
daily activity. The gastric pH profile is assessed separately for 
the meal, postprandial period, and fasting period. The latter is 
divided into the time spent upright and supine.
The interpretation of continuous gastric pH recordings is 
more difficult than that of esophageal pH recordings. This is 
because the gastric pH environment is determined by a com-
plex interplay of acid secretion; mucus secretion; ingested 
food; swallowed saliva; regurgitated duodenal, pancreatic, 
and biliary secretions; and the effectiveness of the mixing and 
evacuation of the chyme. Using 24-hour gastric pH monitoring 
to evaluate the gastric secretory state is based on studies that 
have shown that a good correlation exists between increased 
basal acid output on standard gastric acid analysis, and a left 
shift on the frequency distribution graph of gastric pH record-
ings during the supine fasting period. The evaluation of gastric 
emptying by 24-hour gastric pH monitoring is based on studies 
demonstrating a good correlation between the emptying of a 
solid meal and the duration of the postprandial plateau and 
decline phase of the gastric pH record.
Using 24-hour gastric pH monitoring to evaluate duodeno-
gastric reflux is based on the observation that reflux of alkaline 
duodenal juice into the stomach can alkalinize the gastric pH 
environment. The measurement is not straightforward because 
of the effect of meals, and reduction in acid secretion can result 
in changes in gastric pH that mimic alkaline reflux episodes. 
To overcome this problem, computerized measurements of the 
number and height of alkalinizing peaks, the baseline pH, the 
postprandial pH plateau, and the pattern of pH decline from the 
plateau can be used to identify the probability of duodenogas-
tric reflux. The results are presented as an overall score that 
indicates the likelihood of pathologic duodenogastric reflux. 
2
964
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Initial data indicate that this approach has a higher sensitivity 
and specificity for the diagnosis of pathologic duodenogastric 
reflux than scintigraphic methods do.
Combined 24-hour esophageal and gastric pH monitor-
ing can identify excessive alkaline duodenogastric and alkaline 
gastroesophageal reflux in symptomatic patients. The combined 
tracings can often identify simultaneous gastric and esophageal 
alkalinization, suggesting a duodenal origin for the esophageal 
alkaline exposure (Fig. 25-25).
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
GERD was not recognized as a significant clinical problem 
until the mid-1930s and was not identified as a precipitating 
cause for esophagitis until after World War II. In the early 
twenty-first century, it has grown to be a very common problem 
and now accounts for a majority of esophageal pathology. It 
is recognized as a chronic disease, and when medical therapy 
is required, it is often lifelong treatment. Recent efforts at the 
development of various endoscopic antireflux interventions, 
although innovative, have not been successful in consistently 
controlling gastroesophageal reflux. Antireflux surgery is an 
effective and long-term therapy and is the only treatment that 
is able to restore the gastroesophageal barrier. Despite the com-
mon prevalence of GERD, it can be one of the most challeng-
ing diagnostic and therapeutic problems in clinical medicine. 
2
10:00
12:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
4
7
pH
2
18:00
20:00
22:00
00:00
02:00
4
7
2
02:00
04:00
06:00
08:00
10:00
4
7
pH probe
Combined 24-hour
gastric and esophageal
pH monitoring
5 cm
above
5 cm
below
B
A
Figure 25-25.  A. Combined esophageal and gastric pH monitoring showing position of probes in relation to the lower esophageal sphincter. 
B. Combined ambulatory esophageal (upper tracing) and gastric (lower tracing) pH monitoring showing duodenogastric reflux (arrows) with 
propagation of the alkaline juice into the esophagus of a patient with complicated Barrett’s esophagus. The gastric tracing (lower) is taken 
from a probe lying 5 cm below the upper esophageal sphincter. The esophageal tracing (upper) is taken from a probe lying 5 cm above the 
lower esophageal sphincter. Note that in only a small proportion of time does duodenogastric reflux move the pH of the esophagus above the 
threshold of 7, causing the iceberg effect. (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, Stein HJ, Fuchs KH: Physiologic diagnostic 
studies, in Zuidema GD, Orringer MB (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed., Vol. I. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 
1991, p 123. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
A contributing factor to this is the lack of a universally accepted 
definition of the disease.
The most simplistic approach is to define the disease by 
its symptoms. However, symptoms thought to be indicative of 
GERD, such as heartburn or acid regurgitation, are very com-
mon in the general population and many individuals consider 
them to be normal and do not seek medical attention. Even when 
excessive, these symptoms are not specific for gastroesophageal 
reflux. They can be caused by other diseases such as achalasia, 
DES, esophageal carcinoma, pyloric stenosis, cholelithiasis, 
gastritis, gastric or duodenal ulcer, and coronary artery disease.
A thorough, structured evaluation of the patient’s symp-
toms is essential before any therapy, particularly any form of 
esophageal surgery. The presence and severity of both typical 
symptoms of heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia, and atyp-
ical symptoms of cough, hoarseness, chest pain, asthma, and 
aspiration should be discussed with the patient in detail. Many 
of these atypical symptoms may not be esophageal related and 
hence will not improve and may even worsen with antireflux 
surgery.
Heartburn is generally defined as a substernal burning-
type discomfort, beginning in the epigastrium and radiating 
upward. It is often aggravated by meals, spicy or fatty foods, 
chocolate, alcohol, and coffee and can be worse in the supine 
position. It is commonly, although not universally, relieved by 
antacid or antisecretory medications. Epidemiologic studies 
965
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
have shown that heartburn occurs monthly in as many as 40% 
to 50% of the Western population. The occurrence of heartburn 
at night and its effect on quality of life have recently been high-
lighted by a Gallup poll conducted by the American Gastroen-
terologic Society (Table 25-4).
Regurgitation, the effortless return of acid or bitter gastric 
contents into the chest, pharynx, or mouth, is highly suggestive 
of foregut pathology. It is often particularly severe at night when 
supine or when bending over and can be secondary to either an 
incompetent or obstructed GEJ. With the later, as in achalasia, 
the regurgitant is often bland, as if food was put into a blender. 
When questioned, most patients can distinguish the two. It is the 
regurgitation of gastric contents that may result in associated 
pulmonary symptoms, including cough, hoarseness, asthma, 
and recurrent pneumonia. Bronchospasm can be precipitated by 
esophageal acidification and cough by either acid stimulation or 
distention of the esophagus.
Dysphagia, or difficulty swallowing, is a relatively non-
specific term but arguably the most specific symptom of foregut 
disease. It can be a sign of underlying malignancy and should 
be aggressively investigated until a diagnosis is established. 
Dysphagia refers to the sensation of difficulty in the passage 
of food from the mouth to the stomach and can be divided into 
oropharyngeal and esophageal etiologies. Oropharyngeal dys-
phagia is characterized by difficulty transferring food out of the 
mouth into the esophagus, nasal regurgitation, and/or aspiration. 
Esophageal dysphagia refers to the sensation of food sticking in 
the lower chest or epigastrium. This may or may not be accom-
panied by pain (odynophagia) that will be relieved by the pas-
sage of the bolus.
Chest pain, although commonly and appropriately attrib-
uted to cardiac disease, is frequently secondary to esophageal 
pathology as well. As early as 1982, DeMeester and associates 
showed that nearly 50% of patients with severe chest pain, nor-
mal cardiac function, and normal coronary arteriograms had 
positive 24-hour pH studies, implicating gastroesophageal reflux 
as the underlying etiology. Exercise-induced gastroesophageal 
reflux is well known to occur, and may result in exertional chest 
pain similar to angina. It can be quite difficult, if not impossible, 
to distinguish between the two etiologies, particularly on clini-
cal grounds alone. Nevens and colleagues evaluated the ability 
of experienced cardiologists to differentiate pain of cardiac vs. 
esophageal origin. Of 248 patients initially seen by cardiolo-
gists, 185 were thought to have typical angina and 63 atypical 
chest pain. Forty eight (26%) of those thought to have classic 
angina had normal coronary angiograms and 16 of the 63 with 
atypical pain had abnormal angiogram. Thus, the cardiologists’ 
Table 25-4
American Gastroenterologic Association Gallup poll on 
nighttime gastroesophageal reflux disease symptoms
•  50 million Americans have nighttime heartburn at least 1/wk
•  80% of heartburn sufferers had nocturnal symptoms—65% 
both day & night
•  63% report that it affects their ability to sleep and impacts 
their work the next day
•  72% are on prescription medications
•  Nearly half (45%) report that current remedies do not 
relieve all symptoms
clinical impression was wrong 25% of the time. Finally, Pope 
and associates investigated the ultimate diagnosis in 10,689 
patients presenting to an emergency room with acute chest pain. 
Approximately 17% were found to have acute ischemia, 6% sta-
ble angina, 21% other cardiac causes, and 55% had noncardiac 
causes. They concluded that the majority of people presenting to 
the emergency room with chest pain do not have an underlying 
cardiac etiology for their symptoms. Chest pain precipitated by 
meals, occurring at night while supine, nonradiating, respon-
sive to antacid medication, or accompanied by other symptoms 
suggesting esophageal disease such as dysphagia or regurgita-
tion should trigger the thought of possible esophageal origin. 
Further, the distinction between heartburn and chest pain is also 
difficult and largely dependent upon the individual patient. One 
person’s heartburn is another’s chest pain.
The precise mechanisms accounting for the generation of 
symptoms secondary to esophageal pathology remain unclear. 
Considerable insight has been acquired, however. Investiga-
tions into the effect of luminal content, esophageal distention 
and muscular function, neural pathways, and brain localization 
have provided a basic understanding of the stimuli responsible 
for symptom generation. It is also clear that the visceroneural 
pathways of the foregut are complexly intertwined with that of 
the tracheobronchial tree and heart. This fact accounts for the 
common overlap of clinical presentations with diverse disease 
processes in upper GI, cardiac, and pulmonary systems.
The Human Antireflux Mechanism and the 
Pathophysiology of Gastroesophageal  
Reflux Disease
There is a high-pressure zone located at the esophagogastric 
junction in humans. Although this is typically referred to as the 
lower esophageal “sphincter,” there are no distinct anatomical 
landmarks which define its beginning and end. Architecturally 
speaking, there is a specialized thickening in this region that is 
made up of the collar sling musculature and the clasp fibers. 
The collar sling is located on the greater curvature side of the 
junction, and the clasp fibers are located on the lesser curvature 
side. These muscles remain in tonic opposition until the act of 
swallowing, whereupon receptive relaxation occurs allowing 
passage of a food bolus into the stomach. In addition, the LES 
will also open when the gastric fundus is distended with gas and 
liquid, thus resulting in an unfolding of the valve and enabling 
venting of gas (a belch). Whether physiologic or pathologic, 
the common denominator for most episodes of gastroesophageal 
reflux is the loss of the high-pressure zone and thus, a decrease 
in the resistance it imparts to the retrograde flow of gastric juice 
into the esophageal body. The primary cause of GERD is sec-
ondary to the permanent attenuation of the collar sling muscula-
ture, with a resultant opening of the gastric cardia and loss of the 
high-pressure zone as measured with esophageal manometry.
The Lower Esophageal Sphincter.  As defined by esophageal 
manometry, there are three characteristics of the LES that work 
in unison to maintain its barrier function. These characteristics 
include the resting LES pressure, its overall length, and the 
intra-abdominal length that is exposed to the positive pressure 
environment of the abdomen (Table 25-5). The resistance to 
gastroesophageal reflux is a function of both the resting LES 
pressure and length over which this pressure is exerted. Thus, as 
the sphincter becomes shorter, a higher pressure will be required 
in order to prevent a given amount of reflux (Fig. 25-26). 
966
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Much like the neck of a balloon as it is inflated, as the stom-
ach fills and distends, sphincter length decreases. Therefore, if 
the overall length of the sphincter is permanently short from 
repeated distention of the fundus secondary to large volume 
meals, then with minimal episodes of gastric distention and 
pressure, there will be insufficient sphincter length for the bar-
rier to remain competent, and reflux will occur.
A third characteristic of the LES that impacts its ability to 
prevent reflux is its position about the diaphragm. It is important 
that a portion of the total length of the LES be exposed to the 
effects of an intra-abdominal pressure. That is, during periods of 
elevated intra-abdominal pressure, the resistance of the barrier 
would be overcome if pressure were not applied equally to both 
the LES and stomach simultaneously. Thus, in the presence of 
a hiatal hernia, the sphincter resides entirely within the chest 
cavity and cannot respond to an increase in intra-abdominal 
pressure because the pinch valve mechanism is lost and gastro-
esophageal reflux is more liable to occur.
Therefore, a permanently defective sphincter is defined by 
one or more of the following characteristics: An LES with a 
mean resting pressure of less than 6 mmHg, an overall sphinc-
ter length of <2 cm, and intra-abdominal sphincter length of 
<1 cm. Compared to normal subjects without GERD these val-
ues are below the 2.5 percentile for each parameter. The most 
common cause of a defective sphincter is an inadequate abdomi-
nal length.
Once the sphincter is permanently defective, this condi-
tion is irreversible, and although esophageal mucosal injury may 
Table 25-5
Normal manometric values of the distal esophageal 
sphincter, n = 50
Parameter
Median 
Value
2.5th  
Percentile
97.5th  
Percentile
Pressure (mmHg)
13
5.8
27.7
Overall length (cm)
3.6
2.1
5.6
Abdominal  
length (cm)
2
0.9
4.7
LES length (cm)
LES pressure (mm Hg)
6
0
0
1
2
Competent
Incompetent
3
4
5
12
18
24
Figure 25-26.  As the esophageal sphincter becomes shorter, 
increased pressure is necessary to maintain competence. LES = 
lower esophageal sphincter.
be healed with antisecretory medication, reflux will continue 
to occur. Additionally, the presence of a defective LES may 
be associated with reduced esophageal body function and thus 
decrease clearance times of refluxed material. In addition, with 
the progressive loss of effective esophageal clearance the patient 
may be predisposed to severe mucosal injury, volume regurgita-
tion, aspiration, and pulmonary failure. Reflux may occur in the 
face of a normal LES resting pressure. This condition is usually 
due to a functional problem of gastric emptying or excessive 
air swallowing. These conditions may lead to gastric disten-
tion, increased intra-gastric pressure, a resultant shortening or 
unfolding of the LES, and subsequent reflux. The mechanism 
by which gastric distention contributes to LES unfolding pro-
vides a mechanical explanation for “transient LES relaxation.” 
It is thought that with repeated gastric distention secondary to 
large meal volume or chronic air swallowing, there is repeated 
unfolding of the LES and subsequent attenuation of the collar 
sling musculature. It is at this point that the physiologic and nor-
mal mechanism of gastric venting is replaced with pathologic 
and severe postprandial reflux disease. In addition, patients with 
GERD will increase the frequency of swallowing in an effort to 
neutralize the refluxed acid with their saliva (pH 7.0). This phe-
nomenon leads to increased air swallowing and further gastric 
distention thus, compounding the problem. Therefore GERD 
may have its origins in the stomach secondary to gastric disten-
tion due to overeating, and this may be further compounded 
by the ingestion of fatty meals, which result in delayed gastric 
emptying.
Relationship Between Hiatal Hernia and Gastroesopha-
geal Reflux Disease.  As the collar sling musculature and 
clasp fibers become attenuated with repeated gastric distention, 
the esophagogastric junction begins to assume an “upside down 
funnel” appearance, with progressive opening of the acute angle 
of His. This in turn may result in attenuation and stretching of 
the phrenoesophageal ligament, with subsequent enlargement of 
the hiatal opening and axial herniation. There is a high degree 
of correlation between reflux threshold and the degree of hiatal 
herniation (Fig. 25-27).
Yield pressure (mmHg)
0
4
No hernia
< 3 cm hernia
3 cm hernia
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
Figure 25-27.  Yield pressure of the lower esophageal sphincter 
decreases as hiatal hernia size increases.
967
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
It is believed that the source of postprandial esophageal 
acid exposure results from a “pocket of acid” at the esophageal 
gastric junction that is unaffected by the buffering action of the 
meal. This same process is thought to occur in patients with 
endoscopy-negative dyspepsia and normal conventional esopha-
geal pH monitoring at a location of 5 cm proximal to the upper 
boarder of the LES.
Summary.  It is believed that GERD has its origins within the 
stomach. Distention of the fundus occurs because of overeat-
ing and delayed gastric emptying secondary to a high-fat diet. 
The resultant distention causes “unrolling” of the sphincter by 
the expanding fundus, and this subsequently exposes the squa-
mous epithelium in the region of the distal LES to gastric juice. 
Repeated exposure results in inflammation and the develop-
ment of columnar epithelium at the cardia. This is the initial 
step of the development of carditis and explains why in early 
disease esophagitis is mild and commonly limited to the very 
distal aspect of the esophagus. The patient attempts to com-
pensate for this by increased swallowing, allowing the saliva 
to neutralize the refluxed gastric juice and thus, alleviate the 
discomfort induced by the reflux event. The increased swallow-
ing results in aerophagia, bloating, and belching. This in turn 
creates a viscous cycle of increased gastric distention and thus 
further exposure and repetitive injury to the distal esophagus. 
The development of carditis explains the complaint of epigas-
tric pain often experienced by patients with early reflux dis-
ease. Additionally this process can lead to a fibrotic mucosal 
ring located at the squamocolumnar junction, which is termed 
a “Schatzki ring,” and may result in dysphagia. This inflamma-
tory process may extend into muscularis propria and thus result 
in a progressive loss in the length and pressure of the LES. This 
explanation for the pathophysiology of GERD is supported by 
the observation that severe esophagitis is almost always associ-
ated with a defective LES.
Complications Associated with 
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
The complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease may result 
from the direct injurious effects of gastric fluid on the mucosa, 
larynx, or respiratory epithelium. Complications due to repeti-
tive reflux are esophagitis, stricture, and BE; repetitive aspira-
tion may lead to progressive pulmonary fibrosis. The severity of 
the complications is directly related to the prevalence of a struc-
turally defective sphincter (Table 25-6). The observation that a 
structurally defective sphincter occurs in 42% of patients with-
out complications (most of whom have one or two components 
failed) suggests that disease may be confined to the sphincter 
due to compensation by a vigorously contracting esophageal 
body. Eventually, all three components of the sphincter fail, 
allowing unrestricted reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus 
and overwhelming its normal clearance mechanisms. This leads 
to esophageal mucosal injury with progressive deterioration of 
esophageal contractility, as is commonly seen in patients with 
strictures and BE. The loss of esophageal clearance increases 
the potential for regurgitation into the pharynx with aspiration.
The potential injurious components that reflux into the 
esophagus include gastric secretions such as acid and pepsin, 
as well as biliary and pancreatic secretions that regurgitate from 
the duodenum into the stomach. There is a considerable body of 
experimental evidence to indicate that maximal epithelial injury 
occurs during exposure to bile salts combined with acid and 
pepsin. These studies have shown that acid alone does minimal 
damage to the esophageal mucosa, but the combination of acid 
and pepsin is highly deleterious. Similarly, the reflux of duode-
nal juice alone does little damage to the mucosa, although the 
combination of duodenal juice and gastric acid is particularly 
noxious.
Experimental animal studies have shown that the reflux 
of duodenal contents into the esophagus enhances inflamma-
tion, increases the prevalence of Barrett’s esophagus, and results 
in the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma. The com-
ponent of duodenal juice thought to be most damaging is bile 
acids. For bile acids to injure mucosal cells, it is necessary that 
they be both soluble and un-ionized, so that the un-ionized, non-
polar form may enter mucosal cells. Before the entry of bile into 
the GI tract, 98% of bile acids are conjugated with either taurine 
or glycine in a ratio of about 3:1. Conjugation increases the sol-
ubility and ionization of bile acids by lowering their pKa. At the 
normal duodenal pH of approximately 7, over 90% of bile salts 
are in solution and completely ionized. At pH ranges from 2 to 
7, there is a mixture of the ionized salt and the lipophilic, non-
ionized acid. Acidification of bile to below pH 2 results in an 
irreversible bile acid precipitation. Consequently, under normal 
physiologic conditions, bile acids precipitate and are of mini-
mal consequence when an acid gastric environment exists. On 
the other hand, in a more alkaline gastric environment, such as 
occurs with excessive duodenogastric reflux and after acid sup-
pression therapy or vagotomy and partial or total gastrectomy, 
bile salts remain in solution, are partially dissociated, and when 
refluxed into the esophagus can cause severe mucosal injury 
by crossing the cell membrane and damaging the mitochondria.
Complications of gastroesophageal reflux such as esopha-
gitis, stricture, and Barrett’s metaplasia occur in the presence 
of two predisposing factors: a mechanically defective LES and 
an increased esophageal exposure to fluid containing duodenal 
content which includes bile and pancreatic juice. The duodenal 
origin of esophageal contents in patients with an increased expo-
sure to a pH >7 has previously been confirmed by esophageal 
Table 25-6
Complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease: 
150 consecutive cases with proven gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (24-hour esophageal pH monitoring 
endoscopy, and motility)
Complication
No.
Structurally 
Normal  
Sphincter (%)
Structurally 
Defective 
Sphincter (%)
None
59
58
42
Erosive 
esophagitis
47
23
77a
Stricture
19
11
89
Barrett's 
esophagus
25
0
100
Total
150
aGrade more severe with defective cardia.
Source: Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, et al.: Gastro-
esophageal reflux disease, in Moody FG, Carey LC, et al. (eds): Surgical 
Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago: Year Book Medical, 1990,  
p 81. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
968
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
aspiration studies (Fig. 25-28). Studies have clarified and 
expanded these observations by measuring esophageal biliru-
bin exposure over a 24-hour period as a marker for the presence 
of duodenal juice. Direct measurement of esophageal bilirubin 
exposure as a marker for duodenal juice has shown that 58% 
of patients with GERD have increased esophageal exposure to 
duodenal juice, and that this exposure occurs most commonly 
when the esophageal pH is between 4 and 7 (Fig. 25-29). These 
earlier studies have been confirmed by other studies which mea-
sure volume reflux using impedance technology.
The fact that the combination of refluxed gastric and 
duodenal juice is more noxious to the esophageal mucosa than 
gastric juice alone may explain the repeated observation that 
25% of patients with reflux esophagitis develop recurrent and/
or progressive mucosal damage, often despite medical ther-
apy (Fig. 25-30). A potential reason is that acid suppression 
therapy is unable to consistently maintain the pH of refluxed 
gastric and duodenal juice above the range of 6. Lapses into 
pH ranges from 2 to 6 encourage the formation of undissoci-
ated, nonpolarized, soluble bile acids, which are capable of 
penetrating the cell wall and injuring mucosal cells. To ensure 
that bile acids remain completely ionized in their polarized 
form, and thus unable to penetrate the cell, requires that the pH 
of the refluxed material be maintained above 7, 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, for the patient’s lifetime. In practice, this would 
not only be impractical but likely impossible, unless very high 
doses of medications were used. The use of lesser doses would 
allow esophageal mucosal damage to occur while the patient 
was relatively asymptomatic. Antireflux operative procedures 
re-establish the barrier between stomach and esophagus, pro-
tecting the esophagus from damage in patients with mixed gas-
troesophageal reflux.
If reflux of gastric juice is allowed to persist and sustained 
or repetitive esophageal injury occurs, two sequelae can result. 
First, a luminal stricture can develop from submucosal and 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1
2
3
pH
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
18:00
Time
06:00
Bile acid conc. umol/l
0
Figure 25-28.  Sample bile acid concentration and esophageal pH 
plotted against time to obtain detailed profiles; in this case showing 
both significant bile acid (vertical bars) and acid (linear plot) reflux. 
(Reproduced with permission from Nehra D, Watt P, Pye JK, et 
al.: Automated oesophageal reflux sampler: A new device used to 
monitor bile acid reflux in patients with gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. J Med Engr Tech 21:1, 1997.)
70
Prevalence
%
Gastric reflux
(n = 22)
Mixed reflux
(n = 31)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
A
20
15
10
5
0
% Time
pH
<4
B
pH
4–7
pH
>7
Figure 25-29.  A. Prevalence of reflux types in 53 patients with 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. B. Esophageal luminal pH during 
bilirubin exposure. (Reproduced with permission from Kauer WK, 
Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al.: Mixed reflux of gastric juice is 
more harmful to the esophagus than gastric juice alone: The need 
for surgical therapy reemphasized. Ann Surg. 222:525, 1995.)
100
Prevalence of patients with increased bilirubin
80
60
40
20
0
Normal
subjects
n = 25
No mucosal
injury
n = 16
Erosive
esophagitis
n = 10
Barrett’s
esophagus
n = 27
Figure 25-30.  Prevalence of abnormal esophageal bilirubin expo-
sure in healthy subjects and in patients with gastroesophageal reflux 
disease with varied degrees of mucosal injury. (*P<.03 vs all other 
groups, **P <.03 vs. healthy subjects.) (Reproduced with permis-
sion from Kauer WK, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al.: Mixed reflux 
of gastric juice is more harmful to the esophagus than gastric juice 
alone: The need for surgical therapy reemphasized. Ann Surg. 
222:525, 1995.)
969
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
eventually intramural fibrosis. Second, the tubular esophagus 
may become replaced with columnar epithelium. The columnar 
epithelium is resistant to acid and is associated with the alle-
viation of the complaint of heartburn. This columnar epithe-
lium often becomes intestinalized, identified histologically by 
the presence of goblet cells. This specialized IM is currently 
required for the diagnosis of BE. Endoscopically, BE can be 
quiescent or associated with complications of esophagitis, 
stricture, Barrett’s ulceration, and dysplasia. The complica-
tions associated with BE may be due to the continuous irritation 
from refluxed duodenogastric juice. This continued injury is pH 
dependent and may be modified by medical therapy. The inci-
dence of metaplastic Barrett’s epithelium becoming dysplastic 
and progressing to adenocarcinoma is approximately 0.2% to 
0.5% per year.
An esophageal stricture can be associated with severe 
esophagitis or BE. In the latter situation, it occurs at the site 
of maximal inflammatory injury (i.e., the columnar-squamous 
epithelial interface). As the columnar epithelium advances into 
the area of inflammation, the inflammation extends higher into 
the proximal esophagus, and the site of the stricture moves pro-
gressively up the esophagus. Patients who have a stricture in 
the absence of Barrett’s esophagus should have the presence of 
gastroesophageal reflux documented before the presence of the 
stricture is ascribed to reflux esophagitis. In patients with nor-
mal acid exposure, the stricture may be due to cancer or a drug-
induced chemical injury, the latter resulting from the lodgment of 
a capsule or tablet in the distal esophagus. In such patients, dila-
tion usually corrects the problem of dysphagia. Heartburn, which 
may have occurred only because of the chemical injury, need not 
be treated. It is also possible for drug-induced injuries to occur in 
patients who have underlying esophagitis and a distal esophageal 
stricture secondary to gastroesophageal reflux. In this situation, 
a long, string-like stricture progressively develops as a result of 
repetitive caustic injury from capsule or tablet lodgment on top 
of an initial reflux stricture. These strictures are often resistant 
to dilation. The incidence of this problem has lessened since the 
introduction of proton pump inhibitor medication.
Metaplastic (Barrett’s Esophagus) and 
Neoplastic (Adenocarcinoma) Complications
The condition whereby the tubular esophagus is lined with 
columnar epithelium rather than squamous epithelium was 
first described by Norman Barrett in 1950. He incorrectly 
believed it to be congenital in origin. It is now realized that 
it is an acquired abnormality, occurs in 10% to 15% of patients 
with GERD, and represents the end stage of the natural history 
of this disease. It is also distinctly different from the congeni-
tal condition in which islands of gastric fundic epithelium are 
found in the upper half of the esophagus.
The definition of BE has evolved considerably over the 
past decade. Traditionally, BE was identified by the presence 
of columnar mucosa extending at least 3 cm into the esophagus. 
It is now recognized that the specialized, intestinal-type epithe-
lium found in the Barrett’s mucosa is the only tissue predisposed 
to malignant degeneration. Consequently, the diagnosis of BE is 
presently made given any length of endoscopically identifiable 
columnar mucosa that proves, on biopsy, to show IM. Although 
long segments of columnar mucosa without IM do occur, they 
are uncommon and might be congenital in origin.
The hallmark of IM is the presence of intestinal goblet 
cells. There is a high prevalence of biopsy-demonstrated IM at 
the cardia, on the gastric side of the squamocolumnar junction, 
in the absence of endoscopic evidence of a CLE. Evidence is 
accumulating that these patches of what appears to be Barrett’s 
in the cardia have a similar malignant potential as in the longer 
segments, and are precursors for carcinoma of the cardia.
The long-term relief of symptoms remains the primary 
reason for performing antireflux surgery in patients with BE. 
Healing of esophageal mucosal injury and the prevention of dis-
ease progression are important secondary goals. In this regard, 
patients with BE are no different than the broader population 
of patients with gastroesophageal reflux. They should be con-
sidered for antireflux surgery when patient data suggest severe 
disease or predict the need for long-term medical management. 
Most patients with BE are symptomatic. Although it has been 
argued that some patients with BE may not have symptoms, 
careful history taking will reveal the presence of symptoms in 
most, if not all, patients.
Patients with BE have a spectrum of disease ranging from 
visually identifiable but short segments, to long segments of 
classic BE. In general, however, they represent a relatively 
severe stage of gastroesophageal reflux, usually with markedly 
increased esophageal acid exposure, deficient LES characteris-
tics, poor esophageal body function, and a high prevalence of 
duodenogastroesophageal reflux. Gastric hypersecretion occurs 
in 44% of patients. Most will require long-term PPI therapy for 
relief of symptoms and control of coexistent esophageal muco-
sal injury. Given such profound deficits in esophageal physi-
ology, antireflux surgery is an excellent means of long-term 
control of reflux symptoms for most patients with BE.
The typical complications in BE include ulceration in the 
columnar-lined segment, stricture formation, and a dysplasia-
cancer sequence. Barrett’s ulceration is unlike the erosive 
ulceration of reflux esophagitis in that it more closely resem-
bles peptic ulceration in the stomach or duodenum, and has the 
same propensity to bleed, penetrate, or perforate. Fortunately 
this complication occurs very rarely. The strictures found in BE 
occur at the squamocolumnar junction, and are typically higher 
than peptic strictures in the absence of BE. Ulceration and stric-
ture in association with BE were commonly reported before 
1975, but, with the advent of potent acid suppression medica-
tion, they have become less common. In contrast, the compli-
cation of adenocarcinoma developing in Barrett’s mucosa has 
become more common. Adenocarcinoma developing in Barrett’s 
mucosa was considered a rare tumor before 1975. Today, it 
occurs at approximately 0.2% to 0.5% per year of follow-up, 
which represents a risk 40 times that of the general popula-
tion. Most, if not all, cases of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus 
arise in Barrett’s epithelium (Fig. 25-31). About one-third of all 
patients with BE present with malignancy.
The long-term risk of progression to dysplasia and ade-
nocarcinoma, although not the driving force behind the deci-
sion to perform antireflux surgery, is a significant concern for 
both patient and physician. Although to date, there have been 
no prospective randomized studies documenting that antireflux 
surgery has an effect on the risk of progression to dysplasia and 
carcinoma, complete control of reflux of gastric juice into the 
esophagus is clearly a desirable goal.
Respiratory Complications
A significant proportion of patients with GERD will have 
associated respiratory symptoms. These patients may have 
laryngopharyngeal reflux-type symptoms, adult-onset asthma, 
3
970
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
or even idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These symptoms and 
organ injury may occur in isolation or in conjunction with typi-
cal reflux symptoms such as heartburn and regurgitation. Sev-
eral studies have demonstrated that up to 50% of patients with 
asthma have either endoscopically evident esophagitis or abnor-
mal distal esophageal acid exposure. These findings support a 
causal relationship between GERD and aerodigestive symptoms 
and complications in a proportion of patients.
Etiology of Reflux-Induced Respiratory Symptoms.  There 
are two mechanisms that have been proposed as the cause of 
reflux-induced respiratory symptoms. The reflux theory sug-
gests that these symptoms are the direct result of laryngopha-
ryngeal exposure and aspiration of gastric contents. The reflex 
theory suggests that the vagal-mediated afferent fibers result 
in bronchoconstriction during episodes of distal esophageal 
acidification. The evidence supporting a mechanism of direct 
exposure to the aerodigestive system is based in clinical studies 
that have documented a strong correlation between idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis and hiatal hernia. In addition, the presence 
of GERD was demonstrated to be highly associated with several 
pulmonary diseases in a recent Department of Veteran Affairs 
multivariate analysis. Next, with ambulatory pH testing, acid 
A
B
Figure 25-31.  Photomicrographs. A. Barrett’s epithelium with severe dysplasia. (×200.) Note nuclear irregularity, stratification, and loss of 
polarity. B. Barrett’s epithelium with intramucosal carcinoma. (×66.) Note malignant cells in the mucosa (upper arrow), but not invading the 
muscularis mucosae (bottomarrow). (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, Stein HJ, Fuchs KH: Physiologic diagnostic stud-
ies, in Zuidema GD, Orringer MB (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed, Vol. I. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1991, 
p 113. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
exposure within the proximal esophagus is more frequently 
identified in patients with gastroesophageal reflux and respi-
ratory symptoms than in patients who have gastroesophageal 
reflux symptoms alone. These findings are supported by scinti-
graphic studies, which have demonstrated aspiration of ingested 
radioisotope in patients with both gastroesophageal reflux and 
pulmonary symptoms. In animal studies, tracheal instillation 
of acid has been demonstrated to profoundly increase airway 
resistance. Finally, in patients who have undergone multichan-
nel intraluminal impedance testing with a catheter configured 
to detect laryngopharyngeal reflux, a correlation between proxi-
mal fluid movement and laryngopharyngeal symptoms, such as 
cough, can be demonstrated.
The reflex mechanism is supported by the bronchocon-
striction that occurs with the infusion of acid into the distal 
esophagus. There is a shared embryologic origin of the tracheo-
esophageal tract and vagus nerve, and this reflex is thought to be 
an afferent fiber–mediated reflex that protects the aerodigestive 
system from the aspiration of refluxate. In patients with respira-
tory symptoms and documented gastroesophageal reflux with-
out proximal esophageal acid exposure, pulmonary symptoms 
will often times significantly improve or completely resolve 
971
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
after undergoing laparoscopic fundoplication. It is likely that 
both of the proposed mechanisms work simultaneously to cause 
these symptoms in the face of GERD.
The most difficult clinical challenge in formulating a treat-
ment plan for reflux-associated respiratory symptoms resides 
in establishing the diagnosis. Although the diagnosis made be 
straightforward in patients with predominately typical reflux 
symptoms and secondary respiratory complaints, a substan-
tial number of patients will have respiratory symptoms that 
dominate the clinical scenario. Typical gastroesophageal reflux 
symptoms, such as heartburn and regurgitation, may often be 
completely absent only to be uncovered with objective esopha-
geal physiology testing. Traditionally, the diagnosis of reflux-
induced respiratory injury is established using ambulatory dual 
probe pH monitoring, with one probe positioned within the dis-
tal esophagus and the other at a proximal location. Proximal 
probe positioning has included multiple locations such as the 
trachea, pharynx, and proximal esophagus. Although ambu-
latory esophageal pH monitoring allows a direct correlation 
between esophageal acidification and respiratory symptoms, 
sensitivity of this testing modality is poor, and the temporal rela-
tionship between laryngeal or pulmonary symptoms and reflux 
events is complex. In addition, as the refluxed gastric fluid trav-
els proximally, it may be neutralized by saliva and therefore 
go undetected with pH monitoring. Impedance testing may also 
be used to detect the movement of fluid throughout the entire 
esophageal column regardless of pH content.
Treatment.  Once the diagnosis is established, treatment may 
be initiated with either PPI therapy or antireflux surgery. A trial 
of high-dose PPI therapy may help establish the facts that reflux 
is partly or completely responsible for the respiratory symp-
toms. It is important to note that the persistence of symptoms in 
the face of aggressive PPI treatment does not necessarily rule 
out reflux as a possible cofactor or sole etiology.
Although there is probably some elements of a placebo 
effect, relief of respiratory symptoms can be anticipated in up 
to 50% of patients with reflux-induced asthma treated with anti-
secretory medications. However, when examined objectively, 
<15% of patients can be expected to have improvement in their 
pulmonary function with medical therapy. In properly selected 
patients, antireflux surgery improves respiratory symptoms 
in nearly 90% of children and 70% of adults with asthma and 
reflux disease. Improvements in pulmonary function can be 
demonstrated in around 30% of patients. Uncontrolled studies 
of the two forms of therapy (PPI and surgery) and the evidence 
from the two randomized controlled trials of medical vs. sur-
gical therapy indicate that surgical valve reconstruction is the 
most effective therapy for reflux-induced asthma. The superi-
ority of the surgery over PPI is most noticeable in the supine 
position, which corresponds with the nadir of PPI blood levels 
and resultant acid breakthrough and is the time in the circadian 
cycle when asthma symptoms are at their worst.
In asthmatic patients with an esophageal motility disorder, 
performing an antireflux operation will not prevent the regur-
gitation and possible aspiration of swallowed liquid or food 
“upstream” to the valve reconstruction. It is critical that esopha-
geal body function be considered prior to surgical intervention 
in this patient population.
Medical Therapy for Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease.  With 
the widespread availability of over-the-counter antisecretory 
medications, most patients with mild or moderate symptoms 
will carry self-medication. When initially identified with mild 
symptoms of uncomplicated GERD, patients can be placed on 
12 weeks of simple antacids before diagnostic testing is initi-
ated. This approach may successfully and completely resolve 
the symptoms. Patients should be counseled to elevate the head 
of the bed; avoid tight-fitting clothing; eat small, frequent meals; 
avoid eating the nighttime meal immediately prior to bedtime; 
and avoid alcohol, coffee, chocolate, and peppermint, which 
are known to reduce resting LES pressure and may aggravate 
symptoms.
Used in combination with simple antacids, alginic acid 
may augment the relief of symptoms by creating a physical bar-
rier to reflux, as well as by acid reduction. Alginic acid reacts 
with sodium bicarbonate in the presence of saliva to form a 
highly viscous solution that floats like a raft on the surface of 
the gastric contents. When reflux occurs, this protective layer 
is refluxed into the esophagus, and acts as a protective barrier 
against the noxious gastric contents. Medications to promote 
gastric emptying, such as metoclopramide or domperidone, are 
beneficial in early disease, but of little value in more severe 
disease.
In patients with persistent symptoms, the mainstay of 
medical therapy is acid suppression. High-dosage regimens of 
hydrogen potassium PPIs, such as omeprazole (up to 40 mg/d), 
can reduce gastric acidity by as much as 80% to 90%. This usu-
ally heals mild esophagitis. In severe esophagitis, healing may 
occur in only one-half of the patients. In patients who reflux 
a combination of gastric and duodenal juice, acid-suppression 
therapy may give relief of symptoms, while still allowing mixed 
reflux to occur. This can allow persistent mucosal damage in an 
asymptomatic patient. Unfortunately, within 6 months of dis-
continuation of any form of medical therapy for GERD, 80% of 
patients have a recurrence of symptoms.
Once initiated, most patients with GERD will require life-
long treatment with PPIs, both to relieve symptoms and con-
trol any coexistent esophagitis or stricture. Although control of 
symptoms has historically served as the endpoint of therapy, the 
wisdom of this approach has recently been questioned, particu-
larly in patients with BE. Evidence suggesting that reflux con-
trol may prevent the development of adenocarcinoma and lead 
to regression of dysplastic and nondysplastic Barrett’s segments 
has led many to consider control of reflux, and not symptom 
control, a better therapeutic endpoint. However, this hypothesis 
remains controversial. It should be noted that complete control 
of reflux using PPIs can be difficult, as has been highlighted by 
studies of acid breakthrough while on PPI therapy, and of per-
sistent reflux following antireflux surgery. Castell, Triadafilo-
poulos, and others have shown that 40% to 80% of patients with 
BE continue to have abnormal esophageal acid exposure despite 
up to 20 mg twice daily of PPIs. Ablation trials have shown that 
mean doses of 56 mg of omeprazole were necessary to normal-
ize 24-hour esophageal pH studies. It is likely that antireflux 
surgery results in more reproducible and reliable elimination of 
reflux of both acid and duodenal contents, although long-term 
outcome studies suggest that as many as 25% of postfundopli-
cation patients will have persistent pathologic esophageal acid 
exposure confirmed by positive 24-hour pH studies.
Suggested Therapeutic Approach.  Traditionally a stepwise 
approach is used for the treatment of GERD. First-line therapy 
entails antisecretory medication, usually PPIs, in most patients. 
Failure of medication, or the immediate return of symptoms 
after stopping treatment, suggests either that the patient may 
972
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
have relatively severe disease or a non-GERD cause for his 
or her symptoms. Endoscopic examination at this stage of 
the patient’s evaluation is recommended and will provide the 
opportunity to assess the degree of mucosal injury and presence 
of BE. Treatment options for these patients entails either long 
term PPI use vs. antireflux surgery. Laparoscopic antireflux sur-
gery in these patients achieves long-term control of symptoms 
in 85% to 90%. The measurement of esophageal acid exposure 
via 24-hour pH should be undertaken when patients are consid-
ered for surgery. The status of the LES and esophageal body 
function with esophageal manometry should also be performed 
at this stage. These studies will serve to establish the diagnosis 
and assess esophageal body dysfunction.
Surgical Therapy for Gastroesophageal  
Reflux Disease
Selection of Patients for Surgery.  Studies of the natural 
history of GERD indicate that most patients have a relatively 
benign form of the disease that is responsive to lifestyle changes 
and dietary and medical therapy, and do not need surgical treat-
ment. Approximately 25% to 50% of the patients with GERD 
have persistent or progressive disease, and it is this patient 
population that is best suited to surgical therapy. In the past, the 
presence of esophagitis and a structurally defective LES were 
the primary indications for surgical treatment, and many inter-
nists and surgeons were reluctant to recommend operative pro-
cedures in their absence. However, one should not be deterred 
from considering antireflux surgery in a symptomatic patient 
with or without esophagitis or a defective sphincter, provided 
the disease process has been objectively documented by 24-hour 
pH monitoring. This is particularly true in patients who have 
become dependent upon therapy with PPIs, or require increas-
ing doses to control their symptoms. It is important to note that 
a good response to medical therapy in this group of patients 
predicts an excellent outcome following antireflux surgery.
In general, the key indications for antireflux surgery are 
(a) objectively proven gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 
(b) typical symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (heartburn 
and/or regurgitation) despite adequate medical management, or 
(c) a younger patient unwilling to take lifelong medication. In 
addition, a structurally defective LES can also predict which 
patients are more likely to fail with medical therapy. Patients 
with normal sphincter pressures tend to remain well controlled 
with medical therapy, whereas patients with a structurally defec-
tive LES may not respond as well to medical therapy, and often 
develop recurrent symptoms within 1 to 2 years of beginning 
therapy. Such patients should be considered for an antireflux 
operation, regardless of the presence or absence of endoscopic 
esophagitis.
Young patients with documented reflux disease with or 
without a defective LES are also excellent candidates for anti-
reflux surgery. They usually will require long-term medical 
therapy for control of their symptoms, and some will go on to 
develop complications of the disease. An analysis of the cost of 
therapy based on data from the Veterans Administration Coop-
erative trial indicates that surgery has a cost advantage over 
medical therapy in patients <49 years of age.
Severe endoscopic esophagitis in a symptomatic patient 
with a structurally defective LES is also an indication for early 
surgical therapy. These patients are prone to breakthrough of 
their symptoms while receiving medical therapy. Symptoms and 
mucosal injury can be controlled in such patients, but careful 
monitoring is required, and increasing dosages of PPIs are nec-
essary. In everyday clinical practice, however, such treatment 
can be both difficult and impractical, and, in such cases, antire-
flux surgery can be considered early, especially if PPI therapy 
is problematic.
The development of a stricture in a patient represents a 
failure of medical therapy, and is also an indication for a sur-
gical antireflux procedure. In addition, strictures are often 
associated with a structurally defective sphincter and loss of 
esophageal contractility. Before proceeding with surgical treat-
ment, malignancy and a drug-related etiology of the stricture 
should be excluded, and the stricture progressively dilated up 
to a 50 to 60F bougie. When the stricture is fully dilated, the 
relief of dysphagia is evaluated and esophageal manometry is 
performed to determine the adequacy of peristalsis in the distal 
esophagus. If dysphagia is relieved and the amplitude of esopha-
geal contractions is adequate, an antireflux procedure should be 
performed; if there is a global loss of esophageal contractility, 
caution should be exercised in performing an antireflux proce-
dure with a complete fundoplication, and a partial fundoplica-
tion should be considered.
Barrett’s CLE is commonly associated with a severe struc-
tural defect of the LES and often poor contractility of the esoph-
ageal body. Patients with BE are at risk of the development of 
an adenocarcinoma. Whilst surgeons would like to think that an 
antireflux procedure can reduce the risk of progression to can-
cer, the evidence supporting this is relatively weak, and for now 
Barrett’s esophagus should be considered to be evidence that the 
patient has gastroesophageal reflux, and progression to antire-
flux surgery is indicated for the treatment of reflux symptoms, 
not cancer progression. If, however, high grade dysplasia or 
intramucosal carcinoma is found on mucosal biopsy specimens, 
treatment should then be directed at the BE and the lesion, using 
either evaluation endoscopic ablation, endoscopic resection or 
esophageal resection.
The majority of patients requiring treatment for reflux 
have a relatively mild form of disease and will respond to antise-
cretory medications. Patients with more severe forms of disease, 
particularly those who develop persistent or progressive disease, 
should be considered for definitive therapy. Laparoscopic fun-
doplication will provide a long-term cure in the majority of 
these patients, with minimal discomfort and an early return to 
normal activity.
Preoperative Evaluation.  Before proceeding with an antire-
flux operation, several factors should be evaluated. The clinical 
symptoms should be consistent with the diagnosis of gastro-
esophageal reflux. Patients presenting with the typical symp-
toms of heartburn and/or regurgitation which have responded, 
at least partly, to PPI therapy, will generally do well following 
surgery, whereas patients with atypical symptoms have a less 
predictable response. Reflux should also be objectively con-
firmed by either the presence of ulcerative esophagitis or an 
abnormal 24 hour pH study.
The propulsive force of the body of the esophagus should 
be evaluated by esophageal manometry to determine if it has 
sufficient power to propel a bolus of food through a newly 
reconstructed valve. Patients with normal peristaltic contrac-
tions can be considered for a 360° Nissen fundoplication or a 
partial fundoplication, depending on patient and surgeon pref-
erences. When peristalsis is absent a partial fundoplication is 
probably the procedure of choice, but only if achalasia has been 
ruled out.
973
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Hiatal anatomy should also be assessed. In patients with 
smaller hiatal hernias endoscopy evaluation usually provides 
sufficient information. However, when patients present with a 
very large hiatus hernia or for revision surgery after previous 
antireflux surgery, contrast radiology provides better anatomical 
information. The concept of anatomic shortening of the esopha-
gus is controversial, with divergent opinions held about how 
common this problem is. Believers claim that anatomic short-
ening of the esophagus compromises the ability of the surgeon 
to perform an adequate repair without tension, and that this can 
lead to an increased incidence of breakdown or thoracic dis-
placement of the repair. Some of those that hold this view claim 
that esophageal shortening is present when a barium swallow 
X-ray identifies a sliding hiatal hernia that will not reduce in 
the upright position, or that measures more than 5 cm in length 
at endoscopy. When identified these surgeons usually undertake 
add a gastroplasty to the antireflux procedure. Others claim that 
esophageal shortening is overdiagnosed and rarely seen, and 
that the morbidity of adding a gastroplasty outweighs any ben-
efits. These surgeons would recommend a standard antireflux 
procedure in all patients undergoing primary surgery.
Principles of Surgical Therapy.  The primary goal of anti-
reflux surgery is to safely create a new antireflux valve at the 
gastroesophageal junction, while preserving the patient’s abil-
ity to swallow normally and to belch to relieve gaseous disten-
tion. Regardless of the choice of the procedure, this goal can 
be achieved if attention is paid to some basic principles when 
reconstructing the antireflux mechanism. First, the operation 
should create a flap valve which prevents regurgitation of gas-
tric contents into the esophagus. This will result in an increase in 
the pressure of the distal esophageal sphincter region. Following 
a Nissen fundoplication the expected increase is to a level twice 
the resting gastric pressure (i.e., 12 mmHg for a gastric pressure 
of 6 mmHg). The extent of the pressure rise is often less fol-
lowing a partial fundoplication, although with all types of fun-
doplication the length of the reconstructed valve should be at 
least 3 cm. This not only augments sphincter characteristics in 
patients in whom they are reduced before surgery, but prevents 
unfolding of a normal sphincter in response to gastric disten-
tion (Fig. 25-32). Preoperative and postoperative esophageal 
manometry measurements have shown that the resting sphinc-
ter pressure and the overall sphincter length can be surgically 
augmented over preoperative values, and that the change in the 
former is a function of the degree of gastric wrap around the 
esophagus (Fig. 25-33). However, the aim of any fundoplication 
Distention
Figure 25-32.  A graphic illustration of the shortening of the lower 
esophageal sphincter that occurs as the sphincter is “taken up” by 
the cardia as the stomach distends.
0
5
10
15
∆ P mmHg 
20
240
Degree of wrap
Y = 4.63 + .023 (x)
P < .01
Belsey
Hill
N=15
Nissen
N=15
N=15
360
Figure 25-33.  The relationship between the augmentation of 
sphincter pressure over preoperative pressure (ΔP) and the degree 
of gastric fundic wrap in three different antireflux procedures. 
(Reproduced with permission from O’Sullivan GC, et al.: Interac-
tion of lower esophageal pressure and length of sphincter in the 
abdomen as detriments of gastroesophageal competence. Am J 
Surg. 143:43, 1982. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
is to create a loose wrap, and to maintain the position of the 
gastric fundus close to the distal intra-abdominal esophagus, 
in a flap valve arrangement. The efficacy of this relies on the 
close relationship between the fundus and the esophagus, not the 
“tightness” of the wrap.
Second, the operation should place an adequate length of 
the distal esophageal sphincter in the positive-pressure environ-
ment of the abdomen by a method that ensures its response to 
changes in intra-abdominal pressure. The permanent restoration 
of 2 or more cm of abdominal esophagus ensures the preserva-
tion of the relationship between the fundus and the esophagus. 
All of the popular antireflux procedures increase the length of 
the sphincter exposed to abdominal pressure by an average of 
at least 1 cm.
Third, the operation should allow the reconstructed car-
dia to relax on deglutition. In normal swallowing, a vagally 
mediated relaxation of the distal esophageal sphincter and the 
gastric fundus occurs. The relaxation lasts for approximately 
10 seconds and is followed by a rapid recovery to the former 
tonicity. To ensure relaxation of the sphincter, three factors are 
important: (a) Only the fundus of the stomach should be used 
to buttress the sphincter, because it is known to relax in con-
cert with the sphincter; (b) the gastric wrap should be properly 
placed around the sphincter and not incorporate a portion of 
the stomach or be placed around the stomach itself, because 
the body of the stomach does not relax with swallowing; and 
(c) damage to the vagal nerves during dissection of the thoracic 
esophagus should be avoided because it may result in failure of 
the sphincter to relax.
Fourth, the fundoplication should not increase the resis-
tance of the relaxed sphincter to a level that exceeds the peri-
staltic power of the body of the esophagus. The resistance of the 
relaxed sphincter depends on the degree, length, and diameter of 
the gastric fundic wrap, and on the variation in intra-abdominal 
pressure. A 360° gastric wrap should be no longer than 2 cm and 
constructed over a large (50 to 60F) bougie. This will ensure 
that the relaxed sphincter will have an adequate diameter with 
974
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
minimal resistance. A bougie is not necessary when construct-
ing a partial wrap.
Fifth, the operation should ensure that the fundoplication 
can be placed in the abdomen without undue tension, and main-
tained there by approximating the crura of the diaphragm above 
the repair. Leaving the fundoplication in the thorax converts a 
sliding hernia into a PEH, with all the complications associ-
ated with that condition. Maintaining the repair in the abdomen 
under tension predisposes to an increased incidence of recur-
rence. How common this problem is encountered is disputed, 
with some surgeons advocating lengthening the esophagus by 
gastroplasty and constructing a partial fundoplication, and oth-
ers claiming that this issue is now rarely encountered.
Procedure Selection.  A laparoscopic approach is now used 
routinely in all patients undergoing primary antireflux surgery. 
Some surgeons advocate the use of a single antireflux procedure 
for all patients, whereas others advocate a tailored approach. 
Advocates of the laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication as the 
procedure of choice for a primary antireflux repair would gen-
erally apply this procedure in all patients with normal or near 
normal esophageal motility, and reserve a partial fundoplica-
tion for use in individuals with poor esophageal body motility. 
Others, based on the good longer term outcomes now reported 
following partial fundoplication procedures, advocate the rou-
tine application of a partial fundoplication procedure, thereby 
avoiding any concerns about constructing a fundoplication in 
individuals with poor esophageal motility.
Experience and randomized studies have shown that both 
the Nissen fundoplication and various partial fundoplication 
procedures are all effective and durable antireflux repairs, and 
generate an excellent outcome in approximately 90% of patients 
at longer term follow-up.
Primary Antireflux Repairs
Nissen Fundoplication.  The most common antireflux proce-
dure is the Nissen fundoplication. In the past this procedure has 
been performed through an open abdominal or a chest incision, 
but with the development of laparoscopic approaches primary 
antireflux surgery is now routinely undertaken using the laparo-
scope. Rudolph Nissen described this procedure as a 360° fun-
doplication around the lower esophagus for a distance of 4 to 
5 cm, without division of the short gastric blood vessels. 
Although this provided good control of reflux, it was associated 
with a number of side effects that have encouraged modifica-
tions of the procedure as originally described. These include 
using only the gastric fundus to envelop the esophagus in a fash-
ion analogous to a Witzel jejunostomy, sizing the fundoplication 
with a large (50 to 60F) bougie, limiting the length of the fun-
doplication to 1 to 2 cm, and dividing the short gastric vessels. 
The essential elements necessary for the performance of a trans-
abdominal fundoplication are common to both the laparoscopic 
and open procedures and include the following:
1.	 Hiatal dissection and preservation of both vagi along their 
entire length
2.	 Circumferential esophageal mobilization
3.	 Hiatal closure, usually posterior to the esophagus
4.	 Creation of a short and floppy fundoplication over an esoph-
ageal dilator
In addition, many surgeons also routinely divide the 
short gastric blood vessels, although this step is not universally 
 L 
 R 
Figure 25-34.  Patient positioning and trocar placement for lap-
aroscopic antireflux surgery. The patient is placed with the head 
elevated approximately 30° in the modified lithotomy position. 
The surgeon stands between the patient’s legs, and the procedure is 
completed using five abdominal access ports.
applied, and the results of several randomized trials have failed 
to show that this step yields any benefit.
The laparoscopic approach to fundoplication has now 
replaced the open abdominal Nissen fundoplication as the pro-
cedure of choice. Five ports are usually used (Fig. 25-34), and 
dissection is begun by incising the gastrohepatic omentum above 
and below the hepatic branch of the anterior vagus nerve, which 
is usually preserved. The circumference of the diaphragmatic 
hiatus is dissected and the esophagus is mobilized by careful dis-
section of the anterior and posterior soft tissues within the hiatus. 
The esophagus is held anterior and to the left and the hiatal pillars 
are approximated with interrupted non-absorbable sutures, start-
ing posteriorly and working anteriorly. A tension-free fundopli-
cation should be constructed. This can usually be achieved either 
with or without division of the short gastric blood vessels, accord-
ing to surgeon preference. If the vessels are divided, the upper 
one third of the greater curvature is mobilized by sequentially 
dissecting and divided these vessels, commencing distally and 
working proximally. Following complete fundal mobilization, 
975
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Figure 25-35.  A. Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication is performed with a five-trocar technique. B. The liver retractor is affixed to a mechani-
cal arm to hold it in place throughout the operation. C. After division of the gastrohepatic omentum above the hepatic branch of the vagus (pars 
flaccida), the surgeon places a blunt atraumatic grasper beneath the phrenoesophageal ligament. D. After completion of the crural closure, 
an atraumatic grasper is placed right to left behind the gastroesophageal junction. The grasper is withdrawn, pulling the posterior aspect of 
the gastric fundus behind the esophagus. E. Once the suture positions are chosen, the first stitch (2-0 silk, 20 cm long) is introduced through 
the 10-mm trocar, and the needle is passed first through the left limb of the fundus, then the esophagus (2.5 cm above the gastroesophageal 
junction), then through the right limb of the fundus. F. Final position of the fundoplication. (Illustration continued on next page.)
the posterior wall of the fundus is brought behind the esophagus 
to the right side, and the anterior wall of the fundus is brought 
anterior to the esophagus. The fundic lips are manipulated to 
allow the fundus to envelop the esophagus without twisting. 
A 50 to 60F bougie is passed to properly size the fundoplication, 
and it is sutured using non-absorbable sutures. Some surgeons 
use a single U-stitch of 2-0 polypropylene buttressed with felt 
pledgets (Fig. 25-35), and others use 2-4 interrupted sutures.
Posterior Partial Fundoplication.  Partial fundoplications 
were developed as an alternative to the Nissen procedure in 
an attempt to minimize the risk of postfundoplication side 
effects, such as dysphagia, inability to belch, and flatulence. 
The commonest approach has been a posterior partial or Toupet 
fundoplication. Some surgeons use this type of procedure for 
all patients presenting for antireflux surgery, whereas others 
apply a tailored approach in which a partial fundoplication is 
976
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
constructed in patients with impaired esophageal motility, in 
which the propulsive force of the esophagus is thought to be 
insufficient to overcome the outflow obstruction of a complete 
fundoplication. The Toupet posterior partial fundoplication con-
sists of a 270° gastric fundoplication around the distal 4 cm of 
esophagus (Fig. 25-36). It is usually stabilized by anchoring the 
wrap posteriorly to the hiatal rim.
Anterior Partial Fundoplication.  An alternative approach to 
partial fundoplication is to construct an anterior partial fundopli-
cation. Following posterior hiatal repair, the anterior fundus is 
rolled over the front of the esophagus and sutured to the hiatal 
Figure 25-35.  (Continued )
Figure 25-36.  Completed laparoscopic posterior partial (Toupet) 
fundoplication. The fundoplication does not cover the anterior sur-
face of the esophagus, and is stabilized by suturing the fundus to 
the side of the esophagus, and posteriorly to the right hiatal pillar.
rim and the esophageal wall. Division of the short gastric ves-
sels is never needed when constructing this type of fundopli-
cation. Various degrees of anterior partial fundoplication have 
been described—90°, 120°, 180°. The anterior 180° partial fun-
doplication (Fig. 25-37) provides a more robust fundoplication 
and achieves an excellent longer term outcome in approximately 
90% of patients at follow-up of at least 10 years. With this pro-
cedure the fundus and esophagus are sutured to the right side 
of the hiatal rim to create a flap valve at the gastroesophageal 
junction, and to stabilize a 3-4 cm length of intra-abdominal 
esophagus.
Figure 25-37.  Completed laparoscopic anterior 1800 partial fundo-
plication. The fundoplication fully covers the anterior surface of the 
esophagus, and is stabilized by suturing the fundus to the right side 
of the esophagus, and to the right hiatal pillar. Unlike the Nissen 
procedure, the fundus is not pulled behind the esophagus.
977
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Collis Gastroplasty.  When a shortened esophagus is encoun-
tered, many surgeons choose to add an esophageal lengthening 
procedure before fundoplication, to reduce the tension on the 
gastro-esophageal junction, believing this will minimize the risk 
of failure due to postoperative hiatus hernia. The commonest 
approach to this is the Collis gastroplasty. This entails using a 
stapler to divide the cardia and upper stomach, parallel to the 
lesser curvature of the stomach, thereby creating a gastric tube 
in continuity with the esophagus, and effectively lengthening the 
esophagus by several centimeters. Laparoscopic techniques for 
Collis gastroplasty have been described (Fig. 25-38). Follow-
ing gastroplasty a fundoplication is constructed, with the high-
est suture is placed on the native esophagus when constructing 
a Nissen fundoplication.Not all surgeons choose to undertake 
a Collis procedure, however, as there is controversy about the 
Figure 25-38.  A. After removal of the fat pad and release of tension on the Penrose drain, the gastroesophageal junction (GES) retracts to 
the level of the hiatus. The interior end of the staple line is marked 2/5 cm below the angle of His. B. The first horizontal firing of the stapler 
occurs by maximally articulating the stapler to the left, aiming toward the previously marked spot adjacent to the dilator. C. The vertical staple 
line is created by a single firing of the GIA placed parallel and flush against the 48F dilator. D. The highest Nissen fundoplication suture is 
placed on the native esophagus, and the second suture tucks in the apex of the staple line.
actual incidence of the shortened esophagus and widely diver-
gent views are held about how often this problem is encoun-
tered. In addition, some surgeons have questioned the wisdom 
of creating an amotile tube of gastric wall, which can secrete 
acid, and then placing a Nissen fundoplication below this.
Outcome after Fundoplication.  Studies of long-term out-
come following both open and laparoscopic fundoplication 
document the ability of laparoscopic fundoplication to relieve 
typical reflux symptoms (heartburn, regurgitation, and dys-
phagia) in more than 90% of patients at follow-up intervals 
averaging 2 to 3 years and 80% to 90% of patients 5 years or 
more following surgery. This includes evidence-based reviews 
of antireflux surgery, prospective randomized trials compar-
ing antireflux surgery to PPI therapy and open to laparoscopic 
978
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
fundoplication and analysis of U.S. national trends in use and 
outcomes. Postoperative pH studies indicate that more than 
90% of patients will normalize their pH tracings. The results 
of laparoscopic fundoplication compare favorably with those of 
the “modern” era of open fundoplication. They also indicate the 
less predictable outcome of atypical reflux symptoms (cough, 
asthma, laryngitis) after surgery, being relieved in only two-
thirds of patients.
The goal of surgical treatment for GERD is to relieve the 
symptoms of reflux by re-establishing the gastroesophageal 
barrier. The challenge is to accomplish this without inducing 
dysphagia or other untoward side effects. Dysphagia, existing 
before surgery, usually improves following laparoscopic fun-
doplication. Temporary dysphagia is common after surgery and 
generally resolves within 3 months, but can take up to 12 months 
in some individuals, and dysphagia sufficient to require ongoing 
dietary modification persists in up to 5% of individuals following 
Nissen fundoplication. Other side effects common to antireflux 
surgery include the inability to belch and vomit and increased 
flatulence. Most patients cannot vomit through an intact wrap, 
though this is rarely clinically relevant. Most patients are unable 
to belch gas from the stomach in the first 3 to 6 months after 
fundoplication, but 80%-90% regain the ability to belch nor-
mally beyond the first 12 months follow-up. Hyperflatulence is 
a common and noticeable problem, likely related to increased air 
swallowing that is present in most patients with reflux disease, 
aggravated by the inability to belch in some patients.
Randomized Controlled Trials Addressing  
Surgical Technique
Division of the Short Gastric Blood Vessels  Originally, 
Nissen’s description of a total fundoplication entailed a 360° 
fundoplication during which the short gastric blood vessels 
were left intact. However, with reports of troublesome post-
operative dysphagia division of these vessels, to achieve full 
fundal mobilization and thereby ensure a loose fundoplication, 
was promoted and has entered common practice. The evidence 
supporting dividing these vessels has been based on the out-
comes from uncontrolled case series of patients undergoing 
Nissen fundoplication either with vs. without division of the 
short gastric vessels. However, the results from these studies 
have been conflicting with different proponents reporting good 
results irrespective of whether these vessels have been divided 
or not. To address this issue 6 randomized trials which enrolled 
a total of 438 patients have been reported. None of these trials 
demonstrated any differences for the postoperative dysphagia 
or recurrent gastro-esophageal reflux. However, in the 3 largest 
of the 6 trials an increased incidence of flatulence and bloating 
symptoms, as well as greater difficulty with belching, was seen 
in patients in whom the short gastric vessels were divided.
A recent meta-analysis from Engstrom et al, generated 
by combining the raw data from Australian and Swedish tri-
als, evaluated a larger cohort of 201 patients, with 12 years 
follow-up in 170, and also confirmed equivalent reflux control, 
but more abdominal bloating after division of the short gastric 
vessels. Overall, these trials fail to support the belief that divid-
ing the short gastric vessels improves any outcome following 
Nissen fundoplication. The trials actually suggest that dividing 
the vessels increases the complexity of the procedure, and leads 
to a poorer outcome due to the increase in bloating symptoms.
Nissen vs. Posterior Partial Fundoplication  Eleven ran-
domized trials have compared Nissen vs. posterior partial 
fundoplication. Some of the trials were relatively small and 
underpowered, so contribute little to the pool of evidence as 
they are either small or underpowered, and failed to show 
significant outcome differences. The larger trials, however, 
have consistently demonstrated equivalent reflux control, but 
a reduced incidence of wind related side-effects (flatulence, 
bloating, and inability to belch) following posterior partial 
fundoplication procedures, although less dysphagia following 
a posterior fundoplication was only demonstrated in 2 of the 
11 trials. Lundell et al reported the outcomes of Nissen vs. Tou-
pet partial fundoplication in a trial which enrolled 137 patients 
with reported follow-up to 18 years. Reflux control and dys-
phagia symptoms were similar, but flatulence was commoner 
after Nissen fundoplication at some medium-term follow-up 
time points and revision surgery was more common following 
Nissen fundoplication, mainly to correct postoperative parao-
esophageal herniation. At 18 years follow-up, success rates of 
more than 80% were reported for both procedures, as well as no 
significant differences in the incidence of side effects. The data 
from this trial suggested that the mechanical side effects fol-
lowing Nissen fundoplication progressively improve with very 
long term follow-up. Strate et al reported 2 year follow-up in 
a trial that enrolled 200 patients. Approximately 85% of each 
group was satisfied with the clinical outcome, but dysphagia 
was significantly more common following Nissen fundoplica-
tion (19 vs. 8 patients).
Other trials (Guérin et al–140 patients, Booth et al–127, 
Khan et al–121, Shaw et al–100) also report similar reflux con-
trol within the first few years of follow-up. Only Booth et al. 
demonstrated less dysphagia following posterior fundoplication. 
Subgroup analysis in 3 trials (Booth, Shaw, Zornig) did not reveal 
differences between patients with vs. without poor preoperative 
oesophageal motility. Overall these trials suggest that some side-
effects, mainly wind-related issues, are less common following 
posterior partial fundoplication. However, the hypothesis that 
dysphagia is less of a problem following posterior partial fundo-
plication has only been substantiated in 2 of 11 trials.
Nissen vs. Anterior Fundoplication  Six trials have evaluated 
Nissen vs. anterior partial fundoplication variants. Four have 
assessed Nissen vs. anterior 180° partial fundoplication (Watson 
et al–107 patients, Baigrie et al–161, Cao et al–100, Raue et al– 
64). These trials all demonstrated equivalent reflux control, but 
less dysphagia and less wind-related side effects after anterior 
180° partial fundoplication at up to 5 years follow-up. Only the 
study from Watson et al has reported follow-up to 10 years, 
and at late follow-up in their trial there were no significant out-
come differences for the 2 procedures, with equivalent control 
of reflux, and no differences for side effects due to a progressive 
decline in dysphagia as follow-up extended beyond 5 years.
Two trials compared laparoscopic anterior 90° partial 
fundoplication vs. Nissen fundoplication (Watson et al–112 
patients, Spence et al–79). In both of these trials side-effects 
were less common following anterior 90° fundoplication, but 
this was offset by a slightly higher incidence of recurrent reflux 
at up to 5 years follow-up. Satisfaction with the overall outcome 
was similar for both fundoplication variants.
Anterior vs. posterior partial fundoplication  Two random-
ized trials have directly compared anterior vs. posterior par-
tial fundoplication. Hagedorn et al randomized 95 patients to 
undergo either Toupet vs. anterior 120° partial fundoplication, 
and Khan et al enrolled 103 patients to anterior 180° vs. 
979
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
posterior partial fundoplication. Both studies demonstrated bet-
ter reflux control, offset by more side effects following posterior 
partial fundoplication. The anterior 120° partial fundoplication 
performed by Hagedorn et al was similar to the anterior 90° 
variant described above. However, the outcomes following this 
procedure were much worse in this trial than the outcomes in 
other studies, with the average exposure time to acid (pH <4%–
5.6%) following anterior fundoplication in their study unusu-
ally high compared to other studies. Khan et al only reported 6 
months follow-up and longer term outcomes are awaited before 
drawing firm conclusions. The overall results from all 8 trials 
which included an anterior fundoplication variant suggests that 
this type of fundoplication achieves satisfactory reflux control, 
with less dysphagia and other side-effects, yielding a good over-
all outcome. However, the reduced incidence of troublesome 
side-effects is traded off against a higher risk of recurrent reflux.
Outcome of Antireflux Surgery in Patients with Barrett’s 
Esophagus.  Few studies have focused on the alleviation of 
symptoms after antireflux surgery in patients with BE (Table 
25-7). Those that are available document excellent to good 
results in 72% to 95% of patients at 5 years following surgery. 
Several non-randomized studies have compared medical and 
surgical therapy and report better outcomes after antireflux sur-
gery. Parrilla and colleagues reported the only randomized trial 
to evaluate this issue. They enrolled 101 patients over 18 years 
(1982 to 2000), and median follow-up was 6 years. Medical 
therapy consisted of 20 mg of omeprazole (PPI) twice daily 
since 1992 in all medically treated patients, and surgical ther-
apy consisted of an open Nissen fundoplication. The symptom-
atic outcome in the two groups was nearly identical, although 
esophagitis and/or stricture persisted in 20% of the medically 
treated patients, compared to only 3% to 7% of patients follow-
ing antireflux surgery. About 15 % of patients had abnormal 
acid exposure after surgery. Although pH data were not rou-
tinely collected in patients on PPI therapy, in the subgroup of 
12 patients that did have 24-hour monitoring on treatment, 3 of 
12 (25%) had persistently high esophageal acid exposure, and 
most (75%) had persistently high bilirubin exposure.
The common belief that Barrett’s epithelium cannot be 
reversed by antireflux surgery is may not be correct. Within the 
control arm of a randomized trial of ablation vs. surveillance, 
Bright and associates identified approximately 50% regression 
in the length of Barrett’s esophagus in 20 patients within the 
control arm of a randomized trial of ablation vs. surveillance.
Current data indicate that patients with BE should 
remain in an endoscopic surveillance program following 
antireflux surgery. Biopsy specimens should be reviewed by 
a pathologist with expertise in the field. If low-grade dyspla-
sia is confirmed, biopsy specimens should be repeated after 
12 weeks of high-dose acid suppression therapy. If high-grade 
dysplasia or intramucosal cancer is evident on more than one 
biopsy specimen, then treatment is escalated. Treatment options 
include endoscopic mucosal resection, endoscopic ablation of 
the BE, or esophageal resection. Esophageal resection is advis-
able when an invasive cancer (stage T1b or deeper) is present, 
or for multifocal long segment BE in younger and fit patients in 
whom endoscopic treatments are unlikely to be adequate. Endo-
scopic mucosal resection allows smaller intramucosal tumors to 
be removed with clear pathology margins, and it can be used as 
a “big biopsy” to obtain better pathological staging, and even 
to excise shorter segments of BE in a piecemeal fashion. Abla-
tion, commonly using radiofrequency ablation, has been shown 
at short term follow-up in a randomized trial to reduce the rate 
of progression from high grade dysplasia to invasive cancer 
by approximately 50%. However, following any endoscopic 
treatment patients need to continue with close endoscopic sur-
veillance as recurrence can occur and the longer term outcome 
following these treatments remains uncertain. Early detection 
and treatment have been shown to decrease the mortality rate 
from esophageal cancer in these patients.
If the dysplasia is reported as lower grade or indeterminant, 
then inflammatory change that is often confused with dysplasia 
should be suppressed by a course of acid suppression therapy 
in high doses for 2 to 3 months, followed by rebiopsy of the 
Barrett’s segment.
Reoperation for Failed Antireflux Repairs.  Failure of an 
antireflux procedure occurs when, after the repair, the patient is 
unable to swallow normally, experiences upper abdominal dis-
comfort during and after meals, or has recurrence or persistence 
of reflux symptoms. The assessment of these symptoms and the 
selection of patients who need further surgery are challenging 
problems. Functional assessment of patients who have recur-
rent, persistent, or emergent new symptoms following a primary 
antireflux repair is critical to identifying the cause of the failure. 
Analysis of patients requiring reoperation after a previous anti-
reflux procedure shows that placement of the wrap around the 
stomach is the most frequent cause for failure after open proce-
dures, while herniation of the repair into the chest is the most 
frequent cause of failure after a laparoscopic procedure. Partial 
or complete breakdown of the fundoplication and construction 
of a too-tight a fundoplication or over narrowing the esophageal 
hiatus occurs with both open and closed procedures.
Table 25-7
Symptomatic outcome of surgical therapy for Barrett's esophagus
Author
Year
No. of Patients
% Excellent to Good 
Response
Mean Follow-Up, 
Years
Starnes
1984
8
75
2
Williamson
1990
37
92
3
DeMeester
1990
35
77
3
McDonald
1996
113
82.2
6.5
Ortiz
1996
32
90.6
5
980
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Patients who have recurrence of heartburn and regurgitation 
without dysphagia and have good esophageal motility are most 
amenable to reoperation, and can be expected to have an excellent 
outcome. When dysphagia is the cause of failure, the situation can 
be more difficult to manage. If the dysphagia occurred immedi-
ately following the repair, it is usually due to a technical failure, 
most commonly a misplaced fundoplication around the upper 
stomach, or over-narrowing of the esophageal diaphragmatic 
hiatus and reoperation is usually satisfactory. When dysphagia 
is associated with poor motility and multiple previous repairs, 
further revision fundoplication is unlikely to be successful and in 
otherwise fit patients it is appropriate to seriously consider esoph-
ageal resection. With each reoperation the esophagus is damaged 
further, and the chances of preserving function become less. Also, 
blood supply is reduced, and ischemic necrosis of the esophagus 
can occur after several previous mobilizations.
GIANT DIAPHRAGMATIC (HIATAL) HERNIAS
With the advent of clinical radiology, it became evident that 
a diaphragmatic hernia was a relatively common abnormality 
and was not always accompanied by symptoms. Three types of 
B
A
esophageal hiatal hernia were identified: (a) the sliding hernia, 
type I, characterized by an upward dislocation of the cardia in 
the posterior mediastinum (Fig. 25-39A); (b) the rolling or PEH, 
type II, characterized by an upward dislocation of the gastric 
fundus alongside a normally positioned cardia (Fig. 25-39B); 
and (c) the combined sliding-rolling or mixed hernia, type 
III, characterized by an upward dislocation of both the cardia 
and the gastric fundus (Fig. 25-39C). The end stage of type I 
and type II hernias occurs when the whole stomach migrates 
up into the chest by rotating 180° around its longitudinal axis, 
with the cardia and pylorus as fixed points. In this situation the 
abnormality is usually referred to as an intrathoracic stomach 
(Fig. 25-39D). In some taxonomies, a type IV hiatal hernia is 
declared when an additional organ, usually the colon, herniates 
as well. Type II-IV hiatal hernias are also referred to as para-
esophageal hernia (PEH), as a portion of the stomach is situated 
adjacent to the esophagus, above the gastroesophageal junction.
Incidence and Etiology
The true incidence of a hiatal hernia is difficult to determine 
because of the absence of symptoms in a large number of patients 
who are subsequently shown to have a hernia. When radiographic 
Figure 25-39.  A. Radiogram of a type I (sliding) hiatal hernia. B. Radiogram of a type II (rolling or paraesophageal) hernia. C. Radiogram 
of a type III (combined sliding-rolling or mixed) hernia. D. Radiogram of an intrathoracic stomach. This is the end stage of a large hiatal 
hernia regardless of its initial classification. Note that the stomach has rotated 180° around its longitudinal axis, with the cardia and pylorus as 
fixed points. (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, Bonavina L: Paraesophageal hiatal hernia, in Nyhus LM, Condon RE (eds): 
Hernia, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1989, p 684.)
981
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
examinations are done in response to GI symptoms, the incidence 
of a sliding hiatal hernia is seven times higher than that of a PEH. 
The PEH is also known as the giant hiatal hernia. Over time the 
pressure gradient between the abdomen and chest enlarges 
the hiatal hernia. In many cases the type 1 sliding hernia will 
evolve into a type III mixed hernia. Type II hernias are quite rare. 
The age distribution of patients with PEHs is significantly differ-
ent from that observed in sliding hiatal hernias. The median age 
of the former is 61 years old; of the latter, 48 years old. PEHs are 
more likely to occur in women by a ratio of 4:1.
Structural deterioration of the phrenoesophageal mem-
brane over time may explain the higher incidence of hiatal her-
nias in the older age group. These changes involve thinning of 
the upper fascial layer of the phrenoesophageal membrane (i.e., 
the supradiaphragmatic continuation of the endothoracic fascia) 
and loss of elasticity in the lower fascial layer (i.e., the infra-
diaphragmatic continuation of the transversalis fascia). Conse-
quently, the phrenoesophageal membrane yields to stretching in 
the cranial direction due to the persistent intra-abdominal pres-
sure and the tug of esophageal shortening on swallowing. Inter-
estingly, the stretching and thinning occurs more anteriorly and 
posteriorly, with fixation of the left crus of the diaphragm to the 
stomach at the 3 o’clock position, as viewed from the foot. This 
creates an anterior and posterior hernia sac, the latter of which is 
often filled with epiphrenic and retroperitoneal fat. These obser-
vations point to the conclusion that the development of a hiatal 
hernia is an age-related phenomenon secondary to repetitive 
upward stretching of the phrenoesophageal membrane.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical presentation of a giant hiatal (paraesophageal) 
hernia differs from that of a sliding hernia. There is usually a 
C
D
Figure 25-39.  (Continued )
higher prevalence of symptoms of dysphagia and postprandial 
fullness with PEHs, but the typical symptoms of heartburn and 
regurgitation present in sliding hiatal hernias can also occur. 
Both are caused by gastroesophageal reflux secondary to an 
underlying mechanical deficiency of the cardia. The symptoms 
of dysphagia and postprandial fullness in patients with a PEH 
are explained by the compression of the adjacent esophagus by 
a distended cardia, or twisting of the GEJ by the torsion of the 
stomach that occurs as it becomes progressively displaced in 
the chest. The postprandial fullness or retrosternal chest pain 
is a thought to be a result of distension of the stomach with 
gas or food in the hiatal hernia. Many patients with sliding her-
nias and reflux symptoms will lose the reflux symptoms when 
the hernia evolves into the paraesophageal variety. This can be 
explained by the re-creation of the cardiophrenic angle when the 
stomach herniates alongside the GEJ or becomes twisted in the 
sac. Repair of the hernia without addressing the reflux can cre-
ate extremely bothersome heartburn. Respiratory complications 
are frequently associated with a PEH, and consist of dyspnea 
and recurrent pneumonia from aspiration. New research demon-
strates that the cause of dyspnea in the presence of a giant PEH 
is more likely to be left atrial compression, decreasing cardiac 
output, than a restrictive pulmonary effect, as has been hypoth-
esized for many years.
Approximately one third of patients with a PEH are found 
to be anemic, which is due to recurrent bleeding from ulceration 
of the gastric mucosa in the herniated portion of the stomach, 
even if ulcerations are not detected at the time of endoscopy. 
The association of anemia and PEH is best proven by fixing 
the hernia. Anemia is corrected in >90% of patients with this 
condition. With time, more and more stomach migrates into the 
chest and can cause intermittent foregut obstruction due to the 
982
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
rotation that has occurred. In contrast, many patients with PEH 
are asymptomatic or complain of minor symptoms. However, 
the presence of a PEH can be life threatening in that the hernia 
can lead to sudden catastrophic events, such as excessive bleed-
ing or volvulus with acute gastric obstruction or infarction. With 
mild dilatation of the stomach, the gastric blood supply can be 
markedly reduced, causing gastric ischemia, ulceration, perfora-
tion, and sepsis. The probability of incarceration/strangulation is 
not well known, although recent studies suggest that the lifetime 
risk is less than 5%, making this concern an insufficient concern 
for routine repair of the asymptomatic PEH.
The symptoms of sliding hiatal hernias are usually due 
to functional abnormalities associated with gastroesophageal 
reflux and include heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. 
These patients have a mechanically defective LES, giving rise 
to the reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus and the symp-
toms of heartburn and regurgitation. The symptom of dysphagia 
occurs from the presence of mucosal edema, Schatzki’s ring, 
stricture, or the inability to organize peristaltic activity in the 
body of the esophagus as a consequence of the disease.
There is a group of patients with sliding hiatal hernias 
not associated with reflux disease who have dysphagia with-
out any obvious endoscopic or manometric explanation. Video 
barium radiograms have shown that the cause of dysphagia 
in these patients is an obstruction of the swallowed bolus by 
diaphragmatic impingement on the herniated stomach. Mano-
metrically, this is reflected by a double-humped high-pressure 
zone at the GEJ. The first pressure rise is due to diaphragmatic 
impingement on the herniated stomach, and the second to the 
true distal esophageal sphincter. These patients usually have a 
mechanically competent sphincter, but the impingement of the 
diaphragm on the stomach can result in propelling the contents 
of the supradiaphragmatic portion of the stomach up into the 
esophagus and pharynx, resulting in complaints of pharyngeal 
regurgitation and aspiration. Consequently, this abnormality is 
often confused with typical GERD. Surgical reduction of the 
hernia results in relief of the dysphagia in 91% of patients.
Diagnosis
A chest X ray with the patient in the upright position can diag-
nose a hiatal hernia if it shows an air-fluid level behind the car-
diac shadow. This is usually caused by a PEH or an intrathoracic 
stomach. The accuracy of the upper GI barium study in detect-
ing a paraesophageal hiatal hernia is greater than for a sliding 
hernia because the latter can often spontaneously reduce. The 
paraesophageal hiatal hernia is a permanent herniation of the 
stomach into the thoracic cavity, so a barium swallow provides 
the diagnosis in virtually every case. Attention should be focused 
on the position of the GEJ, when seen, to differentiate it from a 
type II hernia (see Fig. 25-39B and C). Fiber-optic esophagos-
copy is useful in the diagnosis and classification of a hiatal hernia 
because the scope can be retroflexed. In this position, a sliding 
hiatal hernia can be identified by noting a gastric pouch lined 
with rugal folds extending above the impression caused by the 
crura of the diaphragm, or measuring at least 2 cm between the 
crura, identified by having the patient sniff, and the squamoco-
lumnar junction on withdrawal of the scope (Fig. 25-40). A PEH 
is identified on retroversion of the scope by noting a separate 
orifice adjacent to the GEJ into which gastric rugal folds ascend. 
A sliding-rolling or mixed hernia can be identified by noting a 
gastric pouch lined with rugal folds above the diaphragm, with 
the GEJ entering about midway up the side of the pouch.
Pathophysiology
Physiologic testing with 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring 
has shown increased esophageal exposure to acid gastric juice 
in 60% of the patients with a paraesophageal hiatal hernia, 
compared with the observed 71% incidence in patients with a 
sliding hiatal hernia. It is now recognized that paraesophageal 
hiatal hernia can be associated with pathologic gastroesophageal 
reflux.
Physiologic studies have also shown that the competency 
of the cardia depends on an interrelationship between distal 
esophageal sphincter pressure, the length of the sphincter that is 
exposed to the positive-pressure environment of the abdomen, 
and the overall length of the sphincter. A deficiency in any one 
of these manometric characteristics of the sphincter is associated 
with incompetency of the cardia regardless of whether a hernia 
is present. Patients with a PEH who have an incompetent cardia 
have been shown to have a distal esophageal sphincter with nor-
mal pressure, but a shortened overall length and displacement 
outside the positive-pressure environment of the abdomen. One 
might expect esophageal body function to be diminished with 
the esophagus “accordioned” up into the chest. Surprisingly, 
esophageal peristalsis in patients with PEH is normal in 88%.
Treatment
The treatment of paraesophageal hiatal hernia is largely surgi-
cal. Controversial aspects include: (a) indications for repair, 
(b) diaphragmatic repair, (c) role of fundoplication, and (d) exis-
tence and treatment of the short esophagus.
Indications and Surgical Approach.  The presence of a para-
esophageal hiatal hernia has traditionally been considered an 
indication for surgical repair. This recommendation is largely 
Figure 25-40.  Endoscopic view through a retroflexed fiber-optic 
gastroscope showing the shaft of the scope (arrow) coming down 
through a sliding hernia. Note the gastric rugal folds extending 
above the impression caused by the crura of the diaphragm. (Repro-
duced with permission from DeMeester TR, Bonavina L: Parae-
sophageal hiatal hernia, in Nyhus LM, Condon RE (eds): Hernia, 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1989, p 689.)
983
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
based upon two clinical observations. First, retrospective 
studies have shown a significant incidence of catastrophic, 
life-threatening complications of bleeding, infarction, and per-
foration in patients being followed with known paraesophageal 
herniation. Second, emergency repair carries a high mortality. In 
the classic report of Skinner and Belsey, six of 21 patients with 
a PEH, treated medically because of minimal symptoms, died 
from the complications of strangulation, perforation, exsangui-
nating hemorrhage, or acute dilatation of the herniated intratho-
racic stomach. For the most part, these catastrophes occurred 
without warning. Others have reported similar findings.
Recent studies suggest that catastrophic complications 
may be somewhat less common. Allen and colleagues fol-
lowed 23 patients for a median of 78 months with only four 
patients progressively worsening. There was a single mortality 
secondary to aspiration that occurred during a barium swallow 
examination to investigate progressive symptoms. Although 
emergency repairs had a median hospital stay of 48 days com-
pared to a stay of 9 days in those having elective repair, there 
were only three cases of gastric strangulation in 735 patient-
years of follow-up.
If surgery is delayed and repair is done on an emergency 
basis, operative mortality is high, compared to <1% for an elec-
tive repair. With this in mind, patients with a PEH are generally 
counseled to have elective repair of their hernia, particularly if 
they are symptomatic. Watchful waiting of asymptomatic PEHs 
may be an acceptable option.
The surgical approach to repair of a paraesophageal hiatal 
hernia may be either transabdominal (laparoscopic or open) or 
transthoracic. Each has its advantages and disadvantages. 
A transthoracic approach facilitates complete esophageal 
mobilization but is rarely used because the access trauma and 
postoperative pain are significantly greater than a laparoscopic 
approach.
The transabdominal approach facilitates reduction of the 
volvulus that is often associated with PEHs. Although some 
degree of esophageal mobilization can be accomplished tran-
shiatally, complete mobilization to the aortic arch is difficult or 
impossible without risk of injury to the vagal nerves.
Laparoscopic repair of PEH would appear to have become 
the standard approach. Laparoscopic repair of a pure type II, or 
mixed type III PEH is an order of magnitude more difficult than 
a standard laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. Most would rec-
ommend that these procedures are best avoided until the surgeon 
has accumulated considerable experience with laparoscopic 
antireflux surgery. There are several reasons for this. First, the 
vertical and horizontal volvulus of the stomach often associated 
with PEHs makes identification of the anatomy, in particular 
the location of the esophagus, difficult. Second, dissection of a 
large PEH sac may result in significant bleeding if the surgeon 
deviates from the correct plane of dissection between the peri-
toneal sac and the endothoracic fascia. Finally, redundant tissue 
present at the GEJ following dissection of the sac frustrates the 
creation of a fundoplication. This tissue, which includes the epi-
phrenic fat pad and hernia sac should be removed at the time of 
PEH repair. Mindful of these difficulties, and given appropriate 
experience, patients with PEH may be approached laparoscopi-
cally, with expectation of success in the majority.
Diaphragmatic Repair
It has been shown that PEH repair has a relatively high incidence 
of recurrence (10%–40%) when the crura is closed primarily 
with permanent suture. Techniques to reduce hernia recurrence 
continue to evolve. Most surgeons believe that recurrence may 
be reduced with the use of synthetic or biologic mesh to rein-
force the standard crural closure. Randomized controlled stud-
ies have demonstrated a reduction in PEH recurrence rate when 
mesh was used. Nonabsorbable synthetic mesh must be used 
carefully and not in a keyhole fashion at the hiatus because of 
a potential risk of esophagus or gastric erosion and mesh infec-
tion. Biologic mesh (acellular porcine dermis, acellular human 
dermis, porcine small intestinal submucosa) has become more 
widely used, but these meshes are significantly more expensive 
than synthetic mesh and the only randomized study support-
ing biologic mesh usage failed to demonstrate superiority over 
suture alone, after 5 years of rigorous follow up.
Role of Fundoplication in Giant Hiatal Hernia 
Repair.  Controversy remains as to whether to perform an anti-
reflux procedure at all, in selected cases only, or in all patients. 
The case against an antireflux procedure rests on the frequency 
of significant postoperative complications secondary to the 
fundoplication, as well as the slightly longer operative time 
and increased cost that additional surgery entails. Most advo-
cate the routine addition of an antireflux procedure following 
repair of the hernia defect. There are several reasons for this. 
Physiologic testing with 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring has 
shown increased esophageal exposure to acid gastric juice in 
60% to 70% of patients with a paraesophageal hiatal hernia, 
nearly identical to the observed 71% incidence in patients with 
a sliding hiatal hernia. Furthermore, there is no relation between 
the symptoms experienced by the patient with a PEH and the 
competency of the cardia. Finally, dissection of the gastro-
esophageal esophagus may lead to postoperative reflux despite 
a negative preoperative pH score.
The Short Esophagus and PEH
Giant PEH can be associated with a short esophagus in up to 
5% to 20% of patients as a result of chronic cephalad displace-
ment of the GEJ. The presence of a short esophagus increases 
the difficulty of laparoscopic PEH repair. Approximately 10% 
to 20% of surgical failures with PEH repair is due to the lack 
of recognition of a short esophagus. Preoperative results of bar-
ium swallow and esophagogastroduodenoscopy may provide 
an indication of short esophagus, but no combination of preop-
erative clinical variables reliably predict the presence of short 
esophagus, defined as the failure to achieve 2.5 cm of intra-
abdominal esophagus with standard mediastinal dissection tech-
niques. Hence, the diagnosis of this entity continues to be made 
definitively only in the operating room. Collis gastroplasty 
achieves esophageal lengthening by creation of a neoesophagus 
using the gastric cardia. The totally laparoscopic approach to the 
short esophagus has evolved from a method using an end-to-end 
anastomosis circular stapler to the current approach that uses a 
linear stapler creating a stapled wedge gastroplasty. Elements of 
importance in fashioning the fundoplication after Collis gastro-
plasty include placement of the initial suture of the fundoplica-
tion on the esophagus, immediately above the GEJ to ensure 
that acid-secreting (gastric) mucosa does not reside above the 
fundoplication. A second element that ensures safety and avoids 
wrap deformation is to place the gastric portion of the staple line 
against the neoesophagus, such that the tip of the gastric staple 
line sits adjacent to the middle suture of the fundoplication on 
the right side of the esophagus.
4
984
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Results
Most outcome studies report relief of symptoms following sur-
gical repair of PEHs in more than 90% of patients. The current 
literature suggests that laparoscopic repair of a paraesophageal 
hiatal hernia can be successful. Most authors report symptom-
atic improvement in 80% to 90% of patients, and <10% to 15% 
prevalence of recurrent symptomatic hernia. However, the 
problem of recurrent asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic 
hernia following PEH repair, open or laparoscopic, is becom-
ing increasingly appreciated. Recurrent hiatal hernia is the most 
common cause of anatomic failure following laparoscopic 
Nissen fundoplication done for GERD (5%–10%), but this risk 
is compounded for the giant hernia where radiologic recurrence 
is detected in 25% to 40% of patients. It appears that optimal 
results with open or laparoscopic giant hiatal hernia repair should 
include options for mesh buttressing of hiatal closure and selec-
tive esophageal lengthening with one of the many techniques 
developed for the creation of a Collis gastroplasty. Despite this 
high incidence of radiologic recurrence, and the surgical pursuit 
of a remedy, it must be reinforced that asymptomatic recurrent 
hernia, like primary PEH, do not need to be repaired. The risk of 
incarceration, strangulation, or obstruction is minimal.
SCHATZKI’S RING
Schatzki’s ring is a thin submucosal circumferential ring in the 
lower esophagus at the squamocolumnar junction, often associ-
ated with a hiatal hernia. Its significance and pathogenesis are 
unclear (Fig. 25-41). The ring was first noted by Templeton, 
but Schatzki and Gary defined it as a distinct entity in 1953. Its 
prevalence varies from 0.2% to 14% in the general population, 
depending on the technique of diagnosis and the criteria used. 
Stiennon believed the ring to be a pleat of mucosa formed by 
infolding of redundant esophageal mucosa due to shortening of 
Figure 25-41.  Barium esophagogram showing Schatzki’s ring 
(i.e., a thin circumferential ring in the distal esophagus at the squa-
mocolumnar junction). Below the ring is a hiatal hernia.
the esophagus. Others believe the ring to be congenital, and still 
others suggest it is an early stricture resulting from inflamma-
tion of the esophageal mucosa caused by chronic reflux.
Schatzki’s ring is a distinct clinical entity having different 
symptoms, upper GI function studies, and response to treatment 
compared with patients with a hiatal hernia, but without a ring. 
Twenty-four-hour esophageal pH monitoring has shown that 
patients with a Schatzki’s ring have a lower incidence of reflux 
than hiatal hernia controls. They also have better LES function. 
This, together with the presence of a ring, could represent a pro-
tective mechanism to prevent gastroesophageal reflux.
Symptoms associated with Schatzki’s ring are brief epi-
sodes of dysphagia during hurried ingestion of solid foods. Its 
treatment has varied from dilation alone to dilation with antire-
flux measures, antireflux procedure alone, incision, and even 
excision of the ring. Little is known about the natural progres-
sion of Schatzki’s rings. Using radiologic techniques, Chen 
and colleagues showed progressive stenosis of rings in 59% 
of patients, whereas Schatzki found that the rings decreased in 
diameter in 29% of patients and remained unchanged in the rest.
Symptoms in patients with a ring are caused more by the 
presence of the ring than by gastroesophageal reflux. Most 
patients with a ring but without proven reflux respond to one 
dilation, while most patients with proven reflux require repeated 
dilations. In this regard, the majority of Schatzki’s ring patients 
without proven reflux have a history of ingestion of drugs 
known to be damaging to the esophageal mucosa. Bonavina and 
associates have suggested drug-induced injury as the cause of 
stenosis in patients with a ring, but without a history of reflux. 
Because rings also occur in patients with proven reflux, it is 
likely that gastroesophageal reflux also plays a part. This is sup-
ported by the fact that there is less drug ingestion in the history 
of these patients. Schatzki’s ring is probably an acquired lesion 
that can lead to stenosis from chemical-induced injury by pill 
lodgment in the distal esophagus, or from reflux-induced injury 
to the lower esophageal mucosa.
The best form of treatment of a symptomatic Schatzki’s 
ring in patients who do not have reflux consists of esophageal 
dilation for relief of the obstructive symptoms. In patients with 
a ring who have proven reflux and a mechanically defective 
sphincter, an antireflux procedure is necessary to obtain relief 
and avoid repeated dilation.
SCLERODERMA
Scleroderma is a systemic disease accompanied by esophageal 
abnormalities in approximately 80% of patients. In most, the 
disease follows a prolonged course. Renal involvement occurs 
in a small percentage of patients and signals a poor prognosis. 
The onset of the disease is usually in the third or fourth decade 
of life, occurring twice as frequently in women as in men.
Small vessel inflammation appears to be an initiating 
event, with subsequent perivascular deposition of normal col-
lagen, which may lead to vascular compromise. In the GI tract, 
the predominant feature is smooth muscle atrophy. Whether 
the atrophy in the esophageal musculature is a primary effect 
or occurs secondary to a neurogenic disorder is unknown. The 
results of pharmacologic and hormonal manipulation, with 
agents that act either indirectly via neural mechanisms or directly 
on the muscle, suggest that scleroderma is a primary neurogenic 
disorder. Methacholine, which acts directly on smooth muscle 
receptors, causes a similar increase in LES pressure in normal 
985
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
controls and in patients with scleroderma. Edrophonium, a cho-
linesterase inhibitor that enhances the effect of acetylcholine 
when given to patients with scleroderma, causes an increase in 
LES pressure that is less marked in these patients than in normal 
controls, suggesting a neurogenic rather than myogenic etiol-
ogy. Muscle ischemia due to perivascular compression has been 
suggested as a possible mechanism for the motility abnormality 
in scleroderma. Others have observed that in the early stage of 
the disease, the manometric abnormalities may be reversed by 
reserpine, an agent that depletes catecholamines from the adren-
ergic system. This suggests that, in early scleroderma, an adren-
ergic overactivity may be present that causes a parasympathetic 
inhibition, supporting a neurogenic mechanism for the disease. 
In advanced disease manifested by smooth muscle atrophy and 
collagen deposition, reserpine no longer produces this reversal. 
Consequently, from a clinical perspective, the patient can be 
described as having a poor esophageal pump and a poor valve.
The diagnosis of scleroderma can be made manometri-
cally by the observation of normal peristalsis in the proximal 
striated esophagus, with absent peristalsis in the distal smooth 
muscle portion (Fig. 25-42). The LES pressure is progressively 
weakened as the disease advances. Because many of the sys-
temic sequelae of the disease may be nondiagnostic, the motil-
ity pattern is frequently used as a specific diagnostic indicator. 
Gastroesophageal reflux commonly occurs in patients with 
scleroderma, because they have both hypotensive sphincters 
and poor esophageal clearance. This combined defect can lead 
to severe esophagitis and stricture formation. The typical barium 
swallow shows a dilated, barium-filled esophagus, stomach, and 
duodenum, or a hiatal hernia with distal esophageal stricture and 
proximal dilatation (Fig. 25-43).
Traditionally, esophageal symptoms have been treated 
with PPIs, antacids, elevation of the head of the bed, and 
multiple dilations for strictures, with generally unsatisfactory 
results. The degree of esophagitis is usually severe and may lead 
to marked esophageal shortening as well as stricture. Sclero-
derma patients have frequently had numerous dilations before 
they are referred to the surgeon. The surgical management is 
somewhat controversial, but the majority of opinion suggests 
that a partial fundoplication (anterior or posterior) performed 
laparoscopically is the procedure of choice. The need for a par-
tial fundoplication is dictated by the likelihood of severe dys-
phagia if a total fundoplication is performed in the presence of 
aperistalsis. Esophageal shortening may require a Collis gas-
troplasty in combination with a partial fundoplication. Surgery 
reduces esophageal acid exposure, but does not return it to nor-
mal because of the poor clearance function of the body of the 
esophagus. Only 50% of the patients have a good-to-excellent 
result. If the esophagitis is severe, or there has been a previous 
failed antireflux procedure and the disease is associated with 
delayed gastric emptying, a gastric resection with Roux-en-Y 
gastrojejunostomy has proved the best option.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE) was first described in 1977, but has 
become well known only in the last two decades. The condition 
Scleroderma
mm Hg
35 –
0
Esophagus
25 cm
Esophagus
30 cm
Esophagus
35 cm
S
S S
S
35 –
0
0
35 –
Figure 25-42.  Esophageal motility record in a patient with sclero-
derma showing aperistalsis in the distal two thirds of the esophageal 
body with peristalsis in the proximal portion. (Reproduced with 
permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disor-
ders and their surgical management. Med Clin North Am. 65:1252, 
1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Figure 25-43.  Barium esophagogram of a patient with scleroderma 
and stricture. Note the markedly dilated esophagus and retained 
food material. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, 
DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical man-
agement. Med Clin North Am. 65:1253, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
986
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is characterized by a constellation of symptoms, endoscopic 
and radiologic findings, and distinctive pathology. The etiol-
ogy of eosinophilic esophagitis is not entirely known but its 
similarities, immunologically, to asthma suggest that it is a form 
of “allergic esophagitis.”
Symptoms
The presentation of eosinophilic esophagitis is chest pain, (often 
postprandial) and dysphagia. Dysphagia may occur with liquids 
or solids, but solid food dysphagia is most common. Because 
dysphagia and chest pain are characteristic of GERD, EE is 
often confused with GERD; however, EE does not respond to 
proton pump inhibitors. The evaluation of the patient with EE 
and dysphagia and chest pain with esophagram and endoscopy 
usually reveals the diagnosis.
Signs
A barium swallow should be the first test obtained in the patient 
with dysphagia. EE has a characteristic finding often called the 
“ringed esophagus” or the “feline esophagus,” as the esophageal 
rings are felt to look like the stripes on a housecat (Fig. 25-44). 
The endoscopic appearance of EE is also characteristic, and also 
appears as a series of rings (Fig. 25-45).
Pathology
Endoscopic biopsy specimens should be taken when eosino-
philic esophagus is suspected. To make the diagnosis of EE, the 
pathologist should see a minimum of 15 eosinophils per high 
powered field, usually at the base of the epithelium (Fig. 25-46).
Treatment
The treatment of EE is largely symptomatic and includes testing 
for food allergies, and elimination of identified items from the 
diet. Second line therapy includes inhaled or ingested cortico-
steroids, as would be used to treat asthma. If dysphagia is not 
relieved with steroids, it may be necessary to dilate the esopha-
gus. Because of the length of esophageal involvement, rigid 
dilators (Maloney or Savary) are often used. Great care must be 
exercised, as the inflamed EE is quite friable. The mucosal tears 
easily, and esophageal perforation (full thickness laceration) has 
been reported with EE dilation.
Figure 25-44.  The esophagus on the left shows a 
stacking of rings, demonstrating eosinophilic esopha-
gus. The esophagus on the right is a normal barium 
swallow.
Figure 25-45.  The endoscopic appearance of eosinophilic esopha-
gitis is characteristically a series of stacked mucosal rings.
MOTILITY DISORDERS OF THE PHARYNX  
AND ESOPHAGUS
Clinical Manifestations
Dysphagia (i.e., difficulty in swallowing) is the primary symp-
tom of esophageal motor disorders. Its perception by the patient 
is a balance between the severity of the underlying abnormality 
causing the dysphagia, and the adjustment made by the patient 
in altering eating habits. Consequently, any complaint of dys-
phagia must include an assessment of the patient’s dietary his-
tory. It must be known whether the patient experiences pain, 
chokes, or vomits with eating; whether the patient requires liq-
uids with the meal, is the last to finish, or is forced to interrupt 
or avoid a social meal; and whether he or she has been admitted 
to the hospital for food impaction. These assessments, plus an 
evaluation of the patient’s nutritional status, help to determine 
how severe the dysphagia is and judge the need for surgical 
987
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
intervention, rather than more conservative methods of treating 
dysphagia.
Motility Disorders of the Pharynx and  
Upper Esophagus – Transit Dysphagia
Disorders of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing result from 
a discoordination of the neuromuscular events involved in 
chewing, initiation of swallowing, and propulsion of the mate-
rial from the oropharynx into the cervical esophagus. They 
can be categorized into one or a combination of the following 
abnormalities: (a) inadequate oropharyngeal bolus transport; 
(b) inability to pressurize the pharynx; (c) inability to elevate 
the larynx; (d) discoordination of pharyngeal contraction and 
cricopharyngeal relaxation; and (e) decreased compliance of 
the pharyngoesophageal segment secondary to neuromuscular 
disease. The latter may result in incomplete relaxation of the 
cricopharyngeus and cervical esophagus during swallowing. 
Taken together, these disorders are termed transit dysphagia 
by many
Transit dysphagia is usually congenital or results from 
acquired disease involving the central and peripheral nervous 
system. This includes cerebrovascular accidents, brain stem 
tumors, poliomyelitis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, 
pseudobulbar palsy, peripheral neuropathy, and operative dam-
age to the cranial nerves involved in swallowing. Pure muscular 
diseases such as radiation-induced myopathy, dermatomyositis, 
myotonic dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis are less common 
causes. Rarely, extrinsic compression of the cervical esophagus 
by thyromegaly, lymphadenopathy, or hyperostosis of the cervi-
cal spine can cause transit dysphagia.
Diagnostic Assessment of the Cricopharyngeal Segment. 
Transit dysphagia difficult to assess with standard manometric 
techniques because of the rapidity of the oropharyngeal phase 
of swallowing, the elevation of the larynx, and the asymmetry of 
the cricopharyngeus. Video- or cineradiography is currently the 
most objective test to evaluate oropharyngeal bolus transport, 
pharyngeal compression, relaxation of the pharyngoesophageal 
Figure 25-46.  A cluster of eosinophils are visualized in the esophageal epithelium in a patient with EE.
segment, and the dynamics of airway protection during swal-
lowing. It readily identifies a diverticulum (Fig. 25-47), stasis 
of the contrast medium in the valleculae, a cricopharyngeal bar, 
and/or narrowing of the pharyngoesophageal segment. These 
are anatomic manifestations of neuromuscular disease, and 
result from the loss of muscle compliance in portions of the 
pharynx and esophagus composed of skeletal muscle.
Careful analysis of video- or cineradiographic studies 
combined with manometry using specially designed catheters 
can identify the cause of a pharyngoesophageal dysfunction in 
A
B
Figure 25-47.  A. Zenker’s diverticulum, initially discovered 15 years 
ago and left untreated. B. Note its marked enlargement and evi-
dence of laryngeal inlet aspiration on recent esophagogram. (Repro-
duced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut 
motor disorders and their surgical management. Med Clin North 
Am. 65:1257, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
988
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
most situations (Fig. 25-48). Motility studies may demonstrate 
inadequate pharyngeal pressurization, insufficient or lack of cri-
copharyngeal relaxation, marked discoordination of pharyngeal 
pressurization, cricopharyngeal relaxation and cervical esopha-
geal contraction, or a hypopharyngeal bolus pressure suggest-
ing decreased compliance of the skeletal portion of the cervical 
esophagus.
In many patients with cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 
including those with Zenker’s diverticulum, it has been difficult 
to consistently demonstrate a motility abnormality or discoor-
dination of pharyngoesophageal events. The abnormality most 
apt to be present is a loss of compliance in the pharyngoesopha-
geal segment manifested by an increased bolus pressure. Cook 
and colleagues have demonstrated an increased resistance to the 
Time 0
Peak pharyngeal
pressure
Atmospheric
pressure
A
B
Bolus pressure
initial
Maximum residual
(MaxR)
contraction
B0
final
Minimum Residual
(MinR)
Subatomic pressure
Figure 25-48.  A. Schematic drawing of a pharyngeal pressure 
wave indicating the presence of the bolus pressure. B. Schematic 
drawing of the manometric recording typically seen during crico-
pharyngeal sphincter relaxation.
Swallow volume
0
10
Pharyngeal shoulder
pressure mm Hg
Controls
Zenker’s
20
30
40
5
10
15
20
200
150
100
UES area mm2
50
0
5
10
15
20
Zenker’s
Controls
Figure 25-49.  Pharyngeal shoulder pressures and diameter 
of the pharyngoesophageal segment in controls and patients 
with Zenker’s diverticulum. UES = upper esophageal 
sphincter. (Data from Cook IJ, et al.: Zenker’s diverticu-
lum: Evidence for a restrictive cricopharyngeal myopathy. 
Gastroenterology. 96:A98, 1989.)
movement of a bolus through what appears on manometry to be 
a completely relaxed cricopharyngeal sphincter. Using simulta-
neous manometry and videofluoroscopy, they showed that, in 
these patients, the cricopharyngeus is only partially relaxed; that 
is, the sphincter is relaxed enough to allow a drop of its pressure 
to esophageal baseline on manometry, but insufficiently relaxed 
to allow unimpaired passage of the bolus into the esophagus. 
This incomplete relaxation is due to a loss of compliance of the 
muscle in the pharyngoesophageal segment, and may be associ-
ated with a cricopharyngeal bar or Zenker’s diverticulum. This 
decreased compliance of the cricopharyngeal sphincter can be 
recognized on esophageal manometry by a “shoulder” on the 
pharyngeal pressure wave, the amplitude of which correlates 
directly with the degree of outflow obstruction (Fig. 25-49). 
Increasing the diameter of this noncompliant segment reduces 
the resistance imposed on the passage of a bolus. Consequently, 
patients with low pharyngeal pressure (i.e., poor piston function 
of the pharynx), or patients with increased resistance of the pha-
ryngocervical esophageal segment from loss of skeletal muscle 
compliance, are improved by a cricopharyngeal myotomy. 
This enlarges the pharyngoesophageal segment and reduces 
outflow resistance. Esophageal muscle biopsy specimens from 
patients with Zenker’s diverticulum have shown histologic 
evidence of the restrictive myopathy in the cricophayngeous 
muscle. These findings correlate well with the observation of 
a decreased compliance of the upper esophagus demonstrated 
by videoradiography and the findings on detailed manometric 
studies of the pharynx and cervical esophagus. They suggest 
that the diverticulum develops as a consequence of the outflow 
resistance to bolus transport through the noncompliant muscle 
of the pharyngoesophageal segment.
The requirements for a successful pharyngoesophageal 
myotomy are: (a) adequate oropharyngeal bolus transport; 
(b) the presence of an intact swallowing reflex; (c) reason-
able coordination of pharyngeal pressurization with cricopha-
ryngeal relaxation; and (d) a cricopharyngeal bar, Zenker’s 
diverticulum, or a narrowed pharyngoesophageal segment on 
videoesophagogram and/or the presence of excessive pharyn-
goesophageal shoulder pressure on motility study.
Zenker’s Diverticulum.  In the past, the most common recog-
nized sign of cricopharyngeal dysfunction was the presence of a 
Zenker’s diverticulum, originally described by Ludlow in 1769. 
The eponym resulted from Zenker’s classic clinicopathologic 
descriptions of 34 cases published in 1878. Pharyngoesophageal 
diverticula have been reported to occur in 1 of 1000 routine 
barium examinations, and classically occur in elderly, white 
males. Zenker’s diverticula tend to enlarge progressively with 
989
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
time due to the decreased compliance of the skeletal portion of 
the cervical esophagus that occurs with aging.
Presenting symptoms include dysphagia associated with 
the spontaneous regurgitation of undigested, bland material, 
often interrupting eating, or drinking. On occasion, the dyspha-
gia can be severe enough to cause debilitation and significant 
weight loss. Chronic aspiration and repetitive respiratory infec-
tion are common associated complaints. Once suspected, the 
diagnosis is established by a barium swallow. Endoscopy is 
usually difficult in the presence of a cricopharyngeal diverticu-
lum, and potentially dangerous, owing to obstruction of the true 
esophageal lumen by the diverticulum and the attendant risk of 
diverticular perforation.
Cricopharyngeal Myotomy.  The low morbidity and mor-
tality associated with cricopharyngeal and upper esophageal 
myotomy have encouraged a liberal approach toward its use for 
almost any problem in the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing. 
This attitude has resulted in an overall success rate in the relief 
of symptoms of only 64%. When patients are selected for sur-
gery using radiographic or motility markers of disease, a much 
higher proportion will benefit. Two methods of cricopharyngo-
esophageal myotomy are in common use, one using traditional 
surgical approaches, and one using rigid laryngoscopy and a 
linear cutting stapler.
Open Cricopharyngeal Myotomy, Diverticulopexy, and 
Diverticulectomy.  The myotomy can be performed under 
local or general anesthesia through an incision along the ante-
rior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. The pharynx 
and cervical esophagus are exposed by retracting the sternoclei-
domastoid muscle and carotid sheath laterally, and the thyroid, 
trachea, and larynx medially (Fig. 25-50). When a pharyngo-
esophageal diverticulum is present, localization of the pharyn-
goesophageal segment is easy. The diverticulum is carefully 
freed from the overlying areolar tissue to expose its neck, just 
below the inferior pharyngeal constrictor and above the crico-
pharyngeus muscle. It can be difficult to identify the cricopha-
ryngeus muscle in the absence of a diverticulum. A benefit of 
local anesthesia is that the patient can swallow and demonstrate 
an area of persistent narrowing at the pharyngoesophageal junc-
tion. Furthermore, before closing the incision, gelatin can be 
fed to the patient to ascertain whether the symptoms have been 
relieved, and to inspect the opening of the previously narrowed 
mm Hg
40–
0
10
20
30
40
0
Hypopharynx
Cricopharyngeus
Figure 25-50.  Cross-section of the neck at 
the level of the thyroid isthmus that shows 
the surgical approach to the hypopharynx 
and cervical esophagus. (Reproduced with 
permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: 
Foregut motor disorders and their surgical 
management. Med Clin North Am. 65:1257, 
1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
pharyngoesophageal segment. Under general anesthesia, and in 
the absence of a diverticulum, the placement of a nasogastric 
tube to the level of the manometrically determined cricopha-
ryngeal sphincter helps in localization of the structures. The 
myotomy is extended cephalad by dividing 1 to 2 cm of inferior 
constrictor muscle of the pharynx, and caudad by dividing the 
cricopharyngeal muscle and the cervical esophagus for a length 
of 4 to 5 cm. The cervical wound is closed only when all oozing 
of blood has ceased, because a hematoma after this procedure 
is common, and is often associated with temporary dysphagia 
while the hematoma absorbs. Oral alimentation is started the 
day after surgery. The patient is usually discharged on the first 
or second postoperative day.
If a diverticulum is present and is large enough to persist 
after a myotomy, it may be sutured in the inverted position to 
the prevertebral fascia using a permanent suture (i.e., diverticu-
lopexy) (Fig. 25-51). If the diverticulum is excessively large so 
that it would be redundant if suspended, or if its walls are thick-
ened, a diverticulectomy should be performed. This is best per-
formed under general anesthesia by placing a Maloney dilator 
(48F) in the esophagus, after controlling the neck of the diver-
ticulum and after myotomy. A linear stapler is placed across the 
neck of the diverticulum and the diverticulum is excised distal to 
the staple line. The security of this staple line and effectiveness 
of the myotomy may be tested before hospital discharge with a 
water soluble contrast esophagogram. Postoperative complica-
tions include fistula formation, abscess, hematoma, recurrent 
nerve paralysis, difficulties in phonation, and Horner’s syn-
drome. The incidence of the first two can be reduced by per-
forming a diverticulopexy rather than diverticulectomy.
Endoscopic Cricopharyngotomy.  Endoscopic stapled crico-
pharyngotomy and diverticulotomy recently has been described. 
This procedure is most effective for larger diverticula (>2 cm), 
and may be impossible to perform for the small diverticulum. 
The procedure uses a specialized “diverticuloscope” with two 
retractable valves passed into the hypopharynx. The lips of the 
diverticuloscope are positioned so that one lip lies in the esopha-
geal lumen and the other in the diverticular lumen. The valves 
of the diverticuloscope are retracted appropriately so as to visu-
alize the septum interposed between the diverticulum and the 
esophagus. An endoscopic linear stapler is introduced into the 
diverticuloscope and positioned against the common septum with 
990
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the anvil in the diverticulum and the cartridge in the esopha-
geal lumen. Firing of the stapler divides the common septum 
between the posterior esophageal and the diverticular wall over 
a length of 30 mm, placing three rows of staples on each side. 
More than one stapler application may be needed, depending on 
the size of the diverticulum (Fig. 25-52). The patient is allowed 
to resume liquid feeds immediately, and is usually discharged 
the day after surgery. Complications are rare and may include 
perforation at the apex of the diverticulum, and failure to relieve 
dysphagia resulting from incomplete myotomy. The former 
complication can usually be treated with antibiotics, but may 
rarely require neck drainage.
Recurrence of a Zenker’s diverticulum may occur with 
long follow-up, and is more common after diverticulectomy 
without myotomy, presumably due to persistence of the under-
lying loss of compliance of the cervical esophagus when a 
myotomy is not performed. After endoscopic cricopharyngot-
omy lateral residual “pouches” may be seen on radiographs, but 
are rarely responsible for residual or recurrent symptoms if the 
myotomy has been complete.
Postoperative motility studies have shown that the peak 
pharyngeal pressure generated on swallowing is not affected, 
the resting cricopharyngeal pressure is reduced but not elimi-
nated, and the cricopharyngeal sphincter length is shortened. 
Consequently, after myotomy, there is protection against esoph-
agopharyngeal regurgitation.
Motility Disorders of the Esophageal Body and 
Lower Esophageal Sphincter
Disorders of the esophageal phase of swallowing result from 
abnormalities in the propulsive pump action of the esophageal 
Prevertebral
         fascia 
Myotomy
Zenker’s
diverticulum
Figure 25-51.  Posterior of the anatomy 
of the pharynx and cervical esophagus 
showing pharyngoesophageal myotomy 
and pexing of the diverticulum to the 
prevertebral fascia.
body or the relaxation of the LES. These disorders result from 
either primary esophageal abnormalities, or from generalized 
neural, muscular, or collagen vascular disease (Table 25-8). 
The use of standard and high-resolution esophageal manometry 
techniques has allowed specific primary esophageal motility 
disorders to be identified out of a pool of nonspecific motil-
ity abnormalities. Primary esophageal motor disorders include 
achalasia, DES, nutcracker esophagus, and the hypertensive 
LES. The manometric characteristics of these disorders are 
shown in Table 25-9.
The boundaries between the primary esophageal motor 
disorders are vague, and intermediate types exist, some of which 
may combine more than one type of motility pattern. These 
findings indicate that esophageal motility disorders should be 
looked at as a spectrum of abnormalities that reflects various 
stages of destruction of esophageal motor function.
Achalasia.  The best known and best understood primary motil-
ity disorder of the esophagus is achalasia, with an incidence of 
six per 100,000 population per year. Although complete absence 
of peristalsis in the esophageal body has been proposed as the 
major abnormality, present evidence indicates achalasia is 
a primary disorder of the LES. This is based on 24-hour 
outpatient esophageal motility monitoring, which shows that, 
even in advanced disease, up to 5% of contractions can be peri-
staltic. Simultaneous esophageal waves develop as a result of 
the increased resistance to esophageal emptying caused by the 
Figure 25-52.  The technique for transoral cricopharyngotomy and 
Zenker’s diverticulotomy.
Table 25-8
Esophageal motility disorders
Primary esophageal motility disorders
Achalasia, “vigorous” achalasia
Diffuse and segmental esophageal spasm
Nutcracker esophagus
Hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter
Nonspecific esophageal motility disorders
Secondary esophageal motility disorders
Collagen vascular diseases: progressive systemic sclerosis,  
  polymyositis and dermatomyositis, mixed connective  
  tissue disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, etc.
Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction
Neuromuscular diseases
Endocrine and metastatic disorders
5
991
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
nonrelaxing LES. This conclusion is supported by experimental 
studies in which a band placed loosely around the GEJ in experi-
mental models did not change sphincter pressures, but resulted 
in impaired relaxation of the LES and outflow resistance. This 
led to a markedly increased frequency of simultaneous wave-
forms and a decrease in contraction amplitude. The changes 
were associated with radiographic dilation of the esophagus 
and were reversible after removal of the band. Observations in 
patients with pseudoachalasia due to tumor infiltration, a tight 
stricture in the distal esophagus, or an antireflux procedure that 
is too tight also provide evidence that dysfunction of the esopha-
geal body can be caused by the increased outflow obstruction of 
a nonrelaxing LES. The observation that esophageal peristalsis 
can return in patients with classic achalasia following dilation 
or myotomy provides further support that achalasia is a primary 
disease of the LES.
The pathogenesis of achalasia is presumed to be a neuro-
genic degeneration, which is either idiopathic or due to infec-
tion. In experimental animals, the disease has been reproduced 
by destruction of the nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal motor 
nucleus of the vagus nerve. In patients with the disease, degen-
erative changes have been shown in the vagus nerve and in 
the ganglia in the myenteric plexus of the esophagus itself. 
Table 25-9
Manometric characteristics of the primary esophageal 
motility disorders
Achalasia
Incomplete lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxation  
  (<75% relaxation)
Aperistalsis in the esophageal body
Elevated LES pressure ≤26 mmHg
Increased intraesophageal baseline pressures relative to  
  gastric baseline
Diffuse esophageal spasm (DES)
Simultaneous (nonperistaltic contractions) (>20% of wet  
  swallows)
Repetitive and multipeaked contractions
Spontaneous contractions
Intermittent normal peristalsis
Contractions may be of increased amplitude and duration
Nutcracker esophagus
Mean peristaltic amplitude (10 wet swallows) in distal  
  esophagus ≥180 mmHg
Increased mean duration of contractions (>7.0 s)
Normal peristaltic sequence
Hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter
Elevated LES pressure (≥26 mmHg)
Normal LES relaxation
Normal peristalsis in the esophageal body
Ineffective esophageal motility disorders
Decreased or absent amplitude of esophageal peristalsis  
  (<30 mmHg)
Increased number of nontransmitted contractions
Source: Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, et al.: Physio-
logic diagnostic studies, in Zuidema GD, Orringer MB (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed, Vol. I. Philadelphia: W.B. 
Saunders, 1991, p 115. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
This degeneration results in hypertension of the LES, a failure 
of the sphincter to relax on swallowing, elevation of intralumi-
nal esophageal pressure, esophageal dilatation, and a subsequent 
loss of progressive peristalsis in the body of the esophagus. The 
esophageal dilatation results from the combination of a nonre-
laxing sphincter, which causes a functional retention of ingested 
material in the esophagus, and elevation of intraluminal pres-
sure from repetitive pharyngeal air swallowing (Fig. 25-53). 
With time, the functional disorder results in anatomic altera-
tions seen on radiographic studies, such as a dilated esophagus 
with a tapering, “bird’s beak”-like narrowing of the distal end 
(Fig. 25-54). There is usually an air-fluid level in the esophagus 
from the retained food and saliva, the height of which reflects 
the degree of resistance imposed by the nonrelaxing sphincter. 
As the disease progresses, the esophagus becomes massively 
dilated and tortuous.
A subgroup of patients with otherwise typical features of 
classic achalasia has simultaneous contractions of their esopha-
geal body that can be of high amplitude. This manometric pat-
tern has been termed vigorous achalasia, and chest pain episodes 
A
3
4
140
120
100
80
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
5
6
*
60
45
35
25
15
9
–5
–15
–25
–35
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
60
40
20
0
–20
–22
100 mm Hg
10 mins
10 secs
100 mm Hg
B
3
*
4
*
150
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
150
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
5
*
150
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
6
*
145
125
105
100
85
65
45
5
–15
Press
Press
Press
Press
Meal
Figure 25-53.  Pressurization of esophagus: Ambulatory motility 
tracing of a patient with achalasia. A. Before esophageal myotomy. 
B. After esophageal myotomy. The tracings have been compressed 
to exaggerate the motility spikes and baseline elevations. Note the 
rise in esophageal baseline pressure during a meal represented by 
the rise off the baseline to the left of panel A. No such rise occurs 
postmyotomy (panel B).
992
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
are a common finding in these patients. Since the development 
of high resolution esophageal manometry technology, the term 
vigorous achalasia has been replaced with Chicago type 3 
achalasia, Differentiation of type 3 achalasia from DES can be 
difficult. In both diseases, videoradiographic examination may 
show a corkscrew deformity of the esophagus and diverticulum 
formation.
Diffuse and Segmental Esophageal Spasm.  DES is charac-
terized by substernal chest pain and/or dysphagia. DES differs 
from classic achalasia in that it is primarily a disease of the 
esophageal body, produces a lesser degree of dysphagia, causes 
more chest pain, and has less effect on the patient’s general con-
dition. Nonetheless, it is impossible to differentiate achalasia 
from DES on the basis of symptoms alone. Esophagogram and 
esophageal manometry are required to distinguish these two 
entities. True symptomatic DES is a rare condition, occurring 
about five times less frequently than achalasia.
The causation and neuromuscular pathophysiology of 
DES are unclear. The basic motor abnormality is rapid wave 
progression down the esophagus secondary to an abnormality in 
the latency gradient. Hypertrophy of the muscular layer of the 
esophageal wall and degeneration of the esophageal branches 
of the vagus nerve have been observed in this disease, although 
these are not constant findings. Manometric abnormalities in 
DES may be present over the total length of the esophageal 
body, but usually are confined to the distal two thirds. In seg-
mental esophageal spasm, the manometric abnormalities are 
confined to a short segment of the esophagus.
Figure 25-54.  Barium esophagogram showing a markedly dilated 
esophagus and characteristic “bird's beak” in achalasia. (Repro-
duced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut 
motor disorders and their surgical management. Med Clin North 
Am. 65:1244, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
The classic manometric findings in these patients are 
characterized by the frequent occurrence of simultaneous wave-
forms and multipeaked esophageal contractions, which may be 
of abnormally high amplitude or long duration. Key to the diag-
nosis of DES is that there remain some peristaltic waveforms in 
excess of those seen in achalasia. A criterion of 30% or more 
peristaltic waveforms out of 10 wet swallows has been used to 
differentiate DES from vigorous achalasia. However, this figure 
is arbitrary and often debated.
The LES in patients with DES usually shows a normal 
resting pressure and relaxation on swallowing. A hypertensive 
sphincter with poor relaxation may also be present. In patients 
with advanced disease, the radiographic appearance of tertiary 
contractions appears helical, and has been termed corkscrew 
esophagus or pseudodiverticulosis (Fig. 25-55). Patients with 
segmental or diffuse esophageal spasm can compartmentalize 
the esophagus and develop an epiphrenic or midesophageal 
diverticulum between two areas of high pressure occurring 
simultaneously (Fig. 25-56).
Nutcracker Esophagus.  The disorder, termed nutcracker or 
supersqueezeresophagus, was recognized in the late 1970s. 
Other terms used to describe this entity are hypertensive peri-
stalsis or high-amplitude peristaltic contractions. It is the most 
common of the primary esophageal motility disorders. By 
definition the so-called nutcracker esophagus is a manomet-
ric abnormality in patients who are characterized by peristal-
tic esophageal contractions with peak amplitudes greater than 
two SDs above the normal values in individual laboratories. 
Contraction amplitudes in these patients can easily be above 
400 mmHg. At the lower end of peak pressure, it is unclear 
whether nutcracker esophagus causes any symptoms. In fact, 
Figure 25-55.  Barium esophagogram of patient with diffuse 
spasm showing the corkscrew deformity.
993
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
chest pain symptoms in nutcracker esophagus patients may 
be related to GERD rather than intraluminal hypertension. 
Treatment in these patients should be aimed at the treatment 
of GERD. At the high end (peak pressures >300 mmHg) chest 
pain may be the result of the nutcracker physiology, as treatment 
directed at reducing intraluminal pressure is more effective than 
when used for those with lower peak pressures.
Hypertensive Lower Esophageal Sphincter.  Hypertensive 
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) in patients with chest pain or 
dysphagia was first described as a separate entity by Code and 
associates. This disorder is characterized by an elevated basal 
pressure of the LES with normal relaxation and normal propul-
sion in the esophageal body. About one-half of these patients, 
however, have associated motility disorders of the esophageal 
body, particularly hypertensive peristalsis and simultaneous 
waveforms. In the remainder, the disorder exists as an isolated 
abnormality. Dysphagia in these patients may be caused by a 
lack of compliance of the sphincter, even in its relaxed state. 
Myotomy of the LES may be indicated in patients not respond-
ing to medical therapy or dilation. When the symptom contribu-
tion of the hypertensive sphincter is in doubt, it is possible to 
inject the LES with botulinum toxin, endoscopically. If symp-
toms are relieved (temporarily) with this technique, then it is 
likely that myotomy will provide more permanent benefit.
Secondary Esophageal Motility Disorders.  Connective 
tissue disease, particularly scleroderma and the CREST 
syndrome, exhibits severe esophageal motility disorders. 
Figure 25-56.  Barium esophagogram showing a high epiphrenic 
diverticulum in a patient with diffuse esophageal spasm. (Repro-
duced with permission from DeMeester TR, Stein HJ: Surgery for 
esophageal motor disorders, in Castell DO (ed): The Esophagus. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1992, p 415.)
Additionally, patients treated as infants for esophageal atresia 
will often develop secondary motility disorders manifest later in 
life. Symptoms of these disorders are heartburn and dysphagia. 
The latter may be a result of a peptic stricture rather than the 
esophageal dysmotility. An esophageal motility study will usu-
ally show severely reduced or absent peristalsis with severely 
reduced or absent LES pressure. The role of antireflux surgery 
under these conditions is controversial, but, if performed, should 
be limited to partial fundoplication, as full (Nissen) fundoplica-
tion may result in severe dysphagia.
Nonspecific Esophageal Motor Disorders and Ineffec-
tive Esophageal Motility.  Many patients complaining of 
dysphagia or chest pain of noncardiac origin demonstrate a 
variety of wave patterns and contraction amplitudes on esopha-
geal manometry that are clearly out of the normal range, but 
do not meet the criteria of a primary esophageal motility dis-
order. Esophageal motility in these patients frequently shows 
an increased number of multipeaked or repetitive contractions, 
contractions of prolonged duration, nontransmitted contrac-
tions, an interruption of a peristaltic wave at various levels of 
the esophagus, or contractions of low amplitude. These motility 
abnormalities have been termed nonspecific esophageal motility 
disorders. Their significance in the causation of chest pain or 
dysphagia is still unclear. Surgery plays no role in the treatment 
of these disorders unless there is an associated diverticulum.
A clear distinction between primary esophageal motility 
disorders and nonspecific esophageal motility disorders is often 
not possible. Patients diagnosed as having nonspecific esopha-
geal motility abnormalities on repeated studies will occasion-
ally show abnormalities consistent with nutcracker esophagus. 
Similarly, progression from a nonspecific esophageal motility 
disorder to classic DES has been demonstrated. Therefore, 
the finding of a nonspecific esophageal motility disorder may 
represent only a manometric marker of an intermittent, more 
severe esophageal motor abnormality. Combined ambulatory 
24-hour esophageal pH and motility monitoring has shown that 
an increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice is common in 
patients diagnosed as having a nonspecific esophageal motility 
disorder. In some situations, the motor abnormalities may be 
induced by the irritation of refluxed gastric juice; in other situ-
ations, it may be a primary event unrelated to the presence of 
reflux. High-amplitude peristalsis (nutcracker esophagus) and 
low-amplitude peristalsis (ineffective esophageal motility) are 
frequently associated with GERD.
Diverticula of the Esophageal Body.  Diverticula of the 
esophagus may be characterized by their location in the esopha-
gus (proximal, mid-, or distal esophagus), or by the nature of 
concomitant pathology. Diverticula associated with motor dis-
orders are termed pulsion diverticula and those associated with 
inflammatory conditions are termed traction diverticula. Pulsion 
diverticula occur most commonly with nonspecific motility dis-
orders, but can occur with all of the primary motility disorders. 
In the latter situation, the motility disorder is usually diagnosed 
before the development of the diverticulum. When associated 
with achalasia, the development of a diverticulum may tempo-
rarily alleviate the symptom of dysphagia by becoming a recep-
tacle for ingested food, and substitute the symptom of dysphagia 
for postprandial pain and regurgitation of undigested food. If a 
motility abnormality of the esophageal body or LES cannot be 
identified, a traction or congenital cause for the diverticulum 
should be considered.
994
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Because development in radiology preceded develop-
ment in motility monitoring, diverticula of the esophagus were 
considered historically to be a primary abnormality, the cause, 
rather than the consequence, of motility disorders. Conse-
quently, earlier texts focused on them as specific entities based 
upon their location.
Epiphrenic diverticula arise from the terminal third of 
the thoracic esophagus and are usually found adjacent to the 
diaphragm. They have been associated with distal esophageal 
muscular hypertrophy, esophageal motility abnormalities, and 
increased luminal pressure. They are “pulsion” diverticula, and 
are associated with diffuse spasm, achalasia, or nonspecific 
motor abnormalities in the body of the esophagus.
Whether the diverticulum should be surgically resected or 
suspended depends on its size and proximity to the vertebral 
body. When diverticula are associated with esophageal motility 
disorders, esophageal myotomy from the proximal extent of the 
diverticulum to the stomach should be combined with diver-
ticulectomy. If diverticulectomy alone is performed, one can 
expect a high incidence of suture line rupture due to the same 
intraluminal pressure that initially gave rise to the diverticulum. 
If the diverticulum is suspended to the prevertebral fascia of 
the thoracic vertebra, a myotomy is begun at the neck of the 
diverticulum and extended across the LES. If the diverticulum is 
excised by dividing the neck, the muscle is closed over the exci-
sion site and a myotomy is performed on the opposite esopha-
geal wall, starting just above the level of the diverticulum or at 
the proximal extent of the spastic segment of the esophagus if 
high resolution motility is used. If complete, the myotomy will 
cross the LES, reducing distal esophageal peak pressure, and 
will increase the likelihood that dysphagia will be replaced with 
GERD symptoms. Increasingly, partial fundoplication (anterior 
or posterior) is performed after LES myotomy to decrease the 
frequency of disabling GERD developing after myotomy and 
diverticulectomy. When a large diverticulum is associated with 
a hiatal hernia, then hiatal hernia repair is added. All these pro-
cedures may be performed with traditional or minimally inva-
sive techniques.
Midesophageal or traction diverticula were first described 
in the nineteenth century (Fig. 25-57). At that time, they were 
frequently noted in patients who had mediastinal LN involve-
ment with tuberculosis. It was theorized that adhesions formed 
between the inflamed mediastinal nodes and the esophagus. By 
contraction, the adhesions exerted traction on the esophageal 
wall and led to a localized diverticulum (Fig. 25-58). This theory 
was based on the findings of early dissections, where adhesions 
between diverticula and LNs were commonly found. Other con-
ditions associated with mediastinal lymphadenopathy, such as 
pulmonary fungal infections (e.g., aspergillosis), lymphoma, or 
sarcoid, may create traction esophageal diverticula after success-
ful treatment. Rarely, when no underlying inflammatory pathol-
ogy is identified, a motility disorder may be identified.
Most midesophageal diverticula are asymptomatic and 
incidentally discovered during investigation for nonesophageal 
complaints. In such patients, the radiologic abnormality may 
be ignored. Patients with symptoms of dysphagia, regurgita-
tion, chest pain, or aspiration, in whom a diverticulum is dis-
covered, should be thoroughly investigated for an esophageal 
motor abnormality. Occasionally, a patient will present with a 
bronchoesophageal fistula manifested by a chronic cough on 
ingestion of meals. The diverticulum in such patients is most 
likely to have an inflammatory etiology.
Figure 25-57.  Barium esophagogram showing a midesophageal 
diverticulum. Despite the anatomic distortion, the patient was 
asymptomatic. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, 
DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical man-
agement. Med Clin North Am. 65:1255, 1981. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Inflamed
nodes
Traction diverticulum
Figure 25-58.  Illustration of the pathophysiology of midesopha-
geal diverticulum showing traction on the esophageal wall from 
adhesions to inflamed subcarinal lymph nodes.
The indication for surgical intervention is dictated by 
the degree of symptomatic disability. Usually, midesophageal 
diverticula can be suspended due to their proximity to the spine. 
If a motor abnormality is documented, a myotomy should be 
performed as described for an epiphrenic diverticulum.
995
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
OPERATIONS FOR ESOPHAGEAL MOTOR 
DISORDERS AND DIVERTICULA
Long Esophageal Myotomy for Motor  
Disorders of the Esophageal Body
A long esophageal myotomy is indicated for dysphagia caused 
by any motor disorder characterized by segmental or general-
ized simultaneous waveforms in a patient whose symptoms are 
not relieved by medical therapy. Such disorders include diffuse 
and segmental esophageal spasm, vigorous or Type 3 achala-
sia, and nonspecific motility disorders associated with a mid- or 
epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum. However, the decision to 
operate must be made by a balanced evaluation of the patient’s 
symptoms, diet, lifestyle adjustments, and nutritional status, 
with the most important factor being the possibility of improv-
ing the patient’s swallowing disability. The symptom of chest 
pain alone is not an indication for a surgical procedure.
The identification of patients with symptoms of dyspha-
gia and chest pain who might benefit from a surgical myotomy 
is difficult. Ambulatory motility studies have shown that when 
the prevalence of “effective contractions” (i.e., peristaltic wave-
forms consisting of contractions with an amplitude above 
30 mmHg) drops below 50% during meals, the patient is likely 
to experience dysphagia (Fig. 25-59). This would suggest that 
relief from the symptom can be expected with an improvement 
of esophageal contraction amplitude or amelioration of nonperi-
staltic waveforms. Prokinetic agents may increase esophageal 
contraction amplitude, but do not alter the prevalence of simul-
taneous waveforms. Patients in whom the efficacy of esophageal 
propulsion is severely compromised because of a high preva-
lence of simultaneous waveforms usually receive little benefit 
from medical therapy. In these patients, a surgical myotomy of 
the esophageal body can improve the patients’ dysphagia, pro-
vided the loss of contraction amplitude in the remaining peri-
staltic waveforms, caused by the myotomy, has less effect on 
swallowing function than the presence of the excessive simul-
taneous contractions. This situation is reached when the preva-
lence of effective waveforms during meals drops below 30%, 
(i.e., 70% of esophageal waveforms are ineffective).
In patients selected for surgery, preoperative high resolu-
tion manometry is essential to determine the proximal extent of 
the esophageal myotomy. Most surgeons extend the myotomy 
distally across the LES to reduce outflow resistance. Conse-
quently, some form of antireflux protection is needed to avoid 
gastroesophageal reflux if there has been extensive dissection of 
the cardia. In this situation, most authors prefer a partial, rather 
than a full, fundoplication, in order not to add back-resistance 
that will further interfere with the ability of the myotomized 
esophagus to empty (Fig. 25-60). If the symptoms of reflux are 
present preoperatively, 24-hour pH monitoring is required to 
confirm its presence.
The procedure may be performed either open or via thora-
coscopy. The open technique is performed through a left thora-
cotomy in the sixth intercostal space (Fig. 25-61). An incision 
is made in the posterior mediastinal pleura over the esopha-
gus, and the left lateral wall of the esophagus is exposed. The 
esophagus is not circumferentially dissected unless necessary. 
A 2-cm incision is made into the abdomen through the parietal 
peritoneum at the midportion of the left crus. A tongue of gas-
tric fundus is pulled into the chest. This exposes the GEJ and 
its associated fat pad. The latter is excised to give a clear view 
of the junction. A myotomy is performed through all muscle 
layers, extending distally over the stomach 1 to 2 cm below the 
GEJ, and proximally on the esophagus over the distance of the 
manometric abnormality. The muscle layer is dissected from the 
mucosa laterally for a distance of 1 cm. Care is taken to divide 
all minute muscle bands, particularly in the area of the GEJ. The 
gastric fundic tongue is sutured to the margins of the myotomy 
over a distance of 3 to 4 cm and replaced into the abdomen. This 
maintains separation of the muscle and acts as a partial fundo-
plication to prevent reflux.
If an epiphrenic diverticulum is present, it is excised by 
dividing the neck with a stapler sized for the thickness of the 
diverticulum (2.0- to 4.8-mm staple leg length) followed by a 
closure of the muscle over the staple line, when possible. The 
myotomy is then performed on the opposite esophageal wall. If 
a midesophageal diverticulum is present, the myotomy is made 
so that it includes the muscle around the neck, and the diver-
ticulum is suspended by attaching it to the paravertebral fascia 
of the thoracic vertebra above the level of the diverticular neck. 
Before performing any operation for an esophageal diverticulum, 
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
Normal volunteers
Pat, no dysphagia
Pat, dysphagia
0%
Figure 25-59.  Prevalence of effective contractions, (i.e., peristaltic 
contractions with an amplitude >30 mm Hg) during meal periods in 
individual normal volunteers, patients (Pat) without dysphagia, and 
patients with nonobstructive dysphagia.
100%
% Symptomatic
10 cm
5 cm
0 cm
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Pre Rx
17
N
Eso. diameter
% Retention
0–24
mo
17
25–48
mo
16
49–72
mo
14
73–120
mo
12
Figure 25-60.  Esophageal (Eso.) diameter, dysphagia, and esoph-
ageal retention in patients with achalasia treated with myotomy 
and Nissen fundoplication, 10 years after treatment (Rx). (Based 
on Topart P, et al.: Long-term effect of total fundoplication on the 
myotomized esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg. 54:1046, 1992.)
996
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 25-61.  Technique of long myotomy: A. Exposure of the lower esophagus through the left sixth intercostal space and incision of the 
mediastinal pleura in preparation for surgical myotomy. B. Location of a 2-cm incision made through the phrenoesophageal membrane into 
the abdomen along the midlateral border of the left crus. C. Retraction of tongue of gastric fundus into the chest through the previously made 
incision. D. Removal of the gastroesophageal fat pad to expose the gastroesophageal junction. E. A myotomy down to the mucosa is started 
on the esophageal body. F. Completed myotomy extending over the stomach for 1 cm. G. Reconstruction of the cardia after a myotomy, 
illustrating the position of the sutures used to stitch the gastric fundic flap to the margins of the myotomy. H. Reconstruction of the cardia 
after a myotomy, illustrating the intra-abdominal position of the gastric tongue covering the distal 4 cm of the myotomy.
997
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
it is wise to endoscope the patient to wash all food and other 
debris from the diverticulum.
The results of myotomy for motor disorders of the esopha-
geal body have improved in parallel with the improved preop-
erative diagnosis afforded by manometry. Previous published 
series report between 40% and 92% improvement of symptoms, 
but interpretation is difficult due to the small number of patients 
involved and the varying criteria for diagnosis of the primary 
motor abnormality. When myotomy is accurately done, 93% of 
the patients have effective palliation of dysphagia after a mean 
follow-up of 5 years, and 89% would have the procedure again, 
if it was necessary. Most patients gain or maintain rather than 
lose weight after the operation. Postoperative motility studies 
show that the myotomy reduces the amplitude of esophageal 
contractions to near zero and eliminates simultaneous peristal-
tic waves. If the benefit of obliterating the simultaneous waves 
exceeds the adverse effect on bolus propulsion caused by the 
loss of peristaltic waveforms, the patient’s dysphagia is likely 
to be improved by the procedure. If not, the patient is likely to 
continue to complain of dysphagia and to have little improve-
ment as a result of the operation.
The thoracoscopic technique may be performed through 
the left or right chest. There has been little experience gained 
with doing adequate operations (as described previously with 
the open exposure) through left thoracoscopy, so most surgeons 
will combine a right thoracoscopic long myotomy with an 
abdominal approach for Heller myotomy and partial fundopli-
cation. These two procedures may be done at the same setting, 
by double positioning the patient, or they may be done at two 
operations. If this is the case, it is best to do the abdominal com-
ponent first, as the esophageal outflow obstruction is the source 
of most of the symptoms. Performing abdominal myotomy (and 
diverticulectomy, if present) may be all that is required.
A new procedure, peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) 
allows a long myotomy to be performed from the lumen of the 
esophagus with an endoscope. This procedure is attractive for–
at a minimum- those with Type 3 achalasia (vigorous achalasia) 
where it is necessary to divide esophagogastric circular muscle 
on both sides of the diaphragm to the extent that might not be 
possible with laparoscopy or thoracoscopy alone. The POEM 
Figure 25-61.  (Continued )
procedure is started by opening the esophageal mucosa several 
centimeters above the spastic segment with a needle–knife elec-
trosurgery device passed through an endoscope. A long submu-
cosal plane is developed with the endoscope, down to and below 
the LES. The circular muscle of the LES and the esophagus is 
divided with endoscopic electrosurgery all the way back until 
normal (nonspastic) esophagus is reached. The submucosal 
entry site in the esophagus is then closed with endoscopic clips. 
While the results of POEM are still accumulating, the procedure 
is attractive because it is extremely minimally invasive, and can 
be done as an outpatient.
Epiphrenic diverticula cannot be treated with POEM and 
are most frequently addressed with laparoscopic access, in 
combination with a laparoscopic division of the LES (Heller 
myotomy) (Fig. 25-62). If the diverticulum can be completely 
mobilized through the hiatus, it may be safely excised from 
below. The neck of the diverticulum is transected with a GIA 
stapler after passage of a 48F dilator. Not infrequently, the 
diverticulum is sufficiently large that access to the neck of the 
diverticulum across the hiatus is quite difficult. Additionally, 
the inflammatory reaction to the diverticulum may further make 
the transhiatal dissection difficult. Under these circumstances, it 
is safer to perform the diverticulectomy through a right thoraco-
scopic approach either at the time of the initial procedure or at a 
later date, depending upon the frailty of the patient. Following 
diverticulectomy, it is critical that the esophageal staple line be 
treated with a great deal of care. Closure of the muscle over the 
staple line is preferable. Additionally, the patient is kept NPO or 
on clear liquids for 5 to 7 days and a contrast study is obtained 
before advancing to a full liquid or “mushy food” diet. Solid 
foods are withheld for 2 weeks to decrease the likelihood of 
staple line leak. Buttressing or sealing the staple line with fibrin 
glue is also an attractive option.
Myotomy of the Lower Esophageal  
Sphincter (Heller Myotomy)
Second only to reflux disease, achalasia is the most com-
mon functional disorder of the esophagus to require surgical 
intervention. The goal of treatment is to relieve the functional 
outflow obstruction secondary to the loss of relaxation and 
998
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
compliance of the LES. This requires disrupting the LES mus-
cle. When performed adequately (i.e., reducing sphincter pres-
sure to <10 mmHg), and done early in the course of disease, 
LES myotomy results in symptomatic improvement with the 
occasional return of esophageal peristalsis. Reduction in LES 
resistance can be accomplished intraluminally by hydrostatic 
balloon dilation, which ruptures the sphincter muscle, by botu-
linum toxin injection, or by a surgical myotomy that cuts the 
sphincter. The difference between these three methods appears 
to be the greater likelihood of reducing sphincter pressure to 
<10 mmHg by surgical myotomy compared with hydrostatic 
balloon dilation. However, patients whose sphincter pressure 
has been reduced by hydrostatic balloon dilation to <10 mmHg 
have an outcome similar to those after surgical myotomy 
(Fig. 25-63). Botulinum toxin injection may achieve similar 
Figure 25-62.  A. Epiphrenic diverticula are situated above the lower esophageal sphincter on right side of esophagus. B. Stapler amputates 
neck of diverticulum. C. Muscle reapproximated over staple line, and Heller myotomy is performed.
results, but has a longer duration of action that may be measured 
in weeks or months, rather than years. Botulinum toxin injec-
tion may best be used as a diagnostic tool, when it is not clear 
whether a hypertensive LES is the primary cause of dysphagia. 
Responsiveness to botulinum toxin injection may predict a good 
response to Heller myotomy.
The therapeutic decisions regarding the treatment of 
patients with achalasia center on four issues. The first issue is 
the question of whether newly diagnosed patients should be 
treated with pneumatic dilation or a surgical myotomy. Long-
term follow-up studies have shown that pneumatic dilation 
achieves adequate relief of dysphagia and pharyngeal regurgi-
tation in 50% to 60% of patients (Fig. 25-64). Close follow-
up is required, and if dilation fails, myotomy is indicated. For 
those patients who have a dilated and tortuous esophagus or 
999
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
an associated hiatal hernia, balloon dilation is dangerous and 
surgery is the better option. The outcome of the one controlled 
randomized study (38 patients) comparing the two modes of 
therapy suggests that surgical myotomy as a primary treatment 
gives better long-term results. Several randomized trials com-
paring laparoscopic cardiomyotomy with balloon dilation or 
botulinum toxin injection have favored the surgical approach 
as well. Although it has been reported that a myotomy after 
previous balloon dilation is more difficult, this has not been the 
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
12
24
26
LES < 10 mm Hg
0.53
0.23
LES > 10 mm Hg
48
Months
% in remission
60
72
84
96
Figure 25-63.  Prevalence of clinical remission in 122 patients 
stratified according to postdilatation lower esophageal sphincter 
(LES) pressures greater than or <10 mmHg. (Reproduced with per-
mission from Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al.: Individual pre-
diction of response to pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia. 
Dig Dis Sci 41:2138, 1996. With kind permission from Springer 
Science+Business Media.)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
%
30
20
10
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Years
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Pneumatic dilatation n=122
Pneumatic dilatation n=54
Myotomy + antireflux n=22
Myotomy n=65
Myotomy n=81
Figure 25-64.  Summary of long-term studies reporting the propor-
tion of patients with complete relief or minimal dysphagia (Stage 
0–1) stratified according to type of treatment. (Data reproduced 
from: Ellis FH Jr.: Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: A 22-year 
experience. Br J Surg. 80:882, 1993; Goulbourne IA, Walbaum PR: 
Long-term results of Heller’s operation for achalasia. J Royal Coll 
Surg. 30:101, 1985; Malthaner RA, Todd TR, Miller L, et al.: Long-
term results in surgically managed esophageal achalasia. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 58:1343, 1994; Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al.: 
Individual prediction of response to pneumatic dilation in patients 
with achalasia. Dig Dis Sci. 41:2135, 1996; Eckardt V, Aignherr 
C, Bernhard G: Predictors of outcome in patients with achalasia 
treated by pneumatic dilation. Gastroenterology. 103:1732, 1992.)
experience of these authors unless the cardia has been ruptured 
in a sawtooth manner. In this situation, operative intervention, 
either immediately or after healing has occurred, can be dif-
ficult. Similarly, myotomy after botulinum toxin injection has 
reported to be more difficult, but this is largely a function of the 
submucosal inflammatory response, which may be a bit unpre-
dictable, and is most intense in the first 6 to 12 weeks after injec-
tion. It is important to wait at least 3 months after botulinum 
toxin injection to perform cardiomyotomy to minimize the risk 
of encountering dense inflammation.
The second issue is the question of whether a surgical 
myotomy should be performed through the abdomen or the 
chest. Myotomy of the LES can be accomplished via either an 
abdominal or thoracic approach. In the absence of a previous 
upper abdominal surgery, most surgeons prefer the abdominal 
approach to LES myotomy as laparoscopy results in less pain 
and a shorter length of stay than thoracoscopy. In addition, it is 
a bit easier to ensure a long gastric myotomy when the approach 
is transabdominal.
The third issue—and one that has been long debated—is 
the question of whether an antireflux procedure should be added 
to a surgical myotomy. Excellent results have been reported fol-
lowing meticulously performed myotomy without an antireflux 
component. Retrospective studies, with long-term follow-up of 
large cohorts of patients undergoing Heller myotomy demon-
strated that, after 10 years, more than 50% of patients had reflux 
symptoms without a fundoplication. In a recent randomized clin-
ical trial, 7% of patients undergoing Dor fundoplication follow-
ing LES myotomy had abnormal 24-hour pH probes, and 42% 
of patients with a myotomy only had abnormal reflux profiles. 
If an antireflux procedure is used as an adjunct to esophageal 
myotomy, a complete 360° fundoplication should be avoided. 
Rather, a 270° Belsey fundoplication, a Toupet posterior 180° 
fundoplication, or a Dor anterior 180° fundoplication should be 
used to avoid the long-term esophageal dysfunction secondary 
to the outflow obstruction afforded by the fundoplication itself.
The fourth issue centers on whether or not a cure of this 
disease is achievable. Long-term follow-up studies after surgical 
myotomy have shown that late deterioration in results occurs 
after this procedure, regardless of whether an antireflux pro-
cedure is done, and also after balloon dilation, even when the 
sphincter pressure is reduced to below 10 mm Hg. It may be that, 
even though a myotomy or balloon rupture of the LES muscle 
reduces the outflow obstruction at the cardia, the underlying 
motor disorder in the body of the esophagus persists and dete-
riorates further with the passage of time, leading to increased 
impairment of esophageal emptying. The earlier an effective 
reduction in outflow resistance can be accomplished, the better 
the outcome will be, and the more likely some esophageal body 
function can be restored.
In performing a surgical myotomy of the LES, there are 
four important principles: (a) complete division of all circular 
and collar-sling muscle fibers, (b) adequate distal myotomy to 
reduce outflow resistance, (c) “undermining” of the muscularis 
to allow wide separation of the esophageal muscle, and (d) pre-
vention of postoperative reflux. In the past, the drawback of a 
surgical myotomy was the need for an open procedure, which 
often deterred patients from choosing the best treatment option 
for achalasia. With the advent of minimally invasive surgi-
cal techniques two decades ago, laparoscopic cardiomyotomy 
(Heller myotomy) has become the treatment of choice for most 
patients with achalasia.
1000
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Open Esophageal Myotomy
Open techniques of distal esophageal myotomy are rarely used 
outside reoperations. In fact, primary procedures can almost 
always be successfully completed via laparoscopy. A modified 
Heller myotomy can be performed through a left thoracotomy 
incision in the sixth intercostal space along the upper border 
of the seventh rib. The esophagus and a tongue of gastric fun-
dus are exposed as described for a long myotomy. A myotomy 
through all muscle layers is performed, extending distally over 
the stomach to 1 to 2 cm below the junction, and proximally 
on the esophagus for 4 to 5 cm. The cardia is reconstructed 
by suturing the tongue of gastric fundus to the margins of the 
myotomy, to prevent rehealing of the myotomy site, and to pro-
vide reflux protection in the area of the divided sphincter. If an 
extensive dissection of the cardia has been done, a more for-
mal Belsey repair is performed. The tongue of gastric fundus is 
allowed to retract into the abdomen. Traditionally, nasogastric 
drainage is maintained for 6 days to prevent distention of the 
stomach during healing. An oral diet is resumed on the seventh 
day, after a barium swallow study shows unobstructed passage 
of the bolus into the stomach without extravasation.
In a randomized, long-term follow-up by Csendes and 
colleagues of 81 patients treated for achalasia, either by force-
ful dilation or by surgical myotomy, myotomy was associated 
with a significant increase in the diameter at the GEJ and a 
decrease in the diameter at the middle third of the esophagus on 
follow-up radiographic studies. There was a greater reduction in 
sphincter pressure and improvement in the amplitude of esopha-
geal contractions after myotomy. After dilation, 13% of patients 
regained some peristalsis, compared with 28% after surgery. 
These findings were shown to persist over a 5-year follow-up 
period, at which time 95% of those treated with surgical myot-
omy were doing well. Of those who were treated with dilation, 
only 54% were doing well, while 16% required redilation, and 
22% eventually required surgical myotomy to obtain relief.
If simultaneous esophageal contractions are associated 
with the sphincter abnormality, the so-called vigorous achala-
sia, then the myotomy should extend over the distance of the 
abnormal motility as mapped by the preoperative motility study. 
Failure to do this will result in continuing dysphagia and a dis-
satisfied patient. The best objective evaluation of improvement 
in the patient following either balloon dilation or myotomy 
is a scintigraphic measurement of esophageal emptying time. 
A good therapeutic response improves esophageal emptying 
toward normal. However, some degree of dysphagia may per-
sist despite improved esophageal emptying, due to disturbances 
in esophageal body function. When an antireflux procedure is 
added to the myotomy, it should be a partial fundoplication. A 
360° fundoplication is associated with progressive retention of 
swallowed food, regurgitation, and aspiration to a degree that 
exceeds the patient’s preoperative symptoms.
Laparoscopic Cardiomyotomy
More commonly known as a laparoscopic Heller myotomy, after 
Ernst Heller, a German surgeon who described a “double myot-
omy” in 1913, the laparoscopic approach is similar to the Nissen 
fundoplication in terms of the trocar placement and exposure 
and dissection of the esophageal hiatus (Fig. 25-65). The proce-
dure begins by division of the short gastric vessels in prepara-
tion for fundoplication. Exposure of the GEJ via removal of the 
gastroesophageal fat pad follows. The anterior vagus nerve is 
swept right laterally along with the fat pad. Once completed, 
the GEJ and distal 4 to 5 cm of esophagus should be bared of 
any overlying tissue, and generally follows dissection of the 
GEJ. A distal esophageal myotomy is performed. It is generally 
easiest to begin the myotomy 1 to 2 cm above the GEJ, in an 
area above that of previous botulinum toxin injections or bal-
loon dilation. Either scissors or a hook-type electrocautery can 
be used to initiate the incision in the longitudinal and circular 
muscle. Distally, the myotomy is carried across the GEJ and 
onto the proximal stomach for approximately 2 to 3 cm. After 
completion, the muscle edges are separated bluntly from the 
esophageal mucosa for approximately 50% of the esophageal 
circumference. An antireflux procedure follows completion of 
the myotomy. Either an anterior hemifundoplication augment-
ing the angle of His (Dor) or posterior partial fundoplication 
(Toupet) can be performed. The Dor type fundoplication is 
slightly easier to perform, and does not require disruption of 
the normal posterior gastroesophageal attachments (a theoretical 
advantage in preventing postoperative reflux).
Per Oral Endoscopic Myotomy (POEM)
The POEM procedure was developed in Japan. It is the ultimate 
minimally invasive myotomy as it requires no incisions through 
the skin. With the POEM procedure a very effective myotomy 
is performed entirely from the lumen of the esophagus. The 
POEM procedure is started by opening the esophageal mucosa 
10 cm above the lower esophageal sphincter with a needle–knife 
electrosurgery device passed through an endoscope. A long 
submucosal plane is developed with the endoscope, down to 
and below the LES. The circular muscle of the LES, above and 
below the gastroesophageal junction is divided with endoscopic 
electrosurgery. The submucosal entry site in the esophagus is 
then closed with endoscopic clips. While the results of POEM 
are still accumulating, the procedure is attractive because it is 
extremely minimally invasive, and can be done as an outpatient. 
The major downside of POEM is that an effective antireflux 
valve cannot be created, exposing the patient to a 40%–50% risk 
of GERD post procedure.
Outcome Assessment of the  
Therapy for Achalasia
Critical analysis of the results of therapy for motor disorders 
of the esophagus requires objective measurement. The use of 
symptoms alone as an endpoint to evaluate therapy for achalasia 
may be misleading. The propensity for patients to unconsciously 
modify their diet to avoid difficulty swallowing is underesti-
mated, making an assessment of results based on symptoms 
unreliable. Insufficient reduction in outflow resistance may 
allow progressive esophageal dilation to develop slowly, giv-
ing the impression of improvement because the volume of food 
able to be ingested with comfort increases. A variety of objec-
tive measurements may be used to assess success, including 
LES pressure, esophageal baseline pressure, and scintigraphic 
assessment of esophageal emptying time. Esophageal baseline 
pressure is usually negative compared to gastric pressure. Given 
that the goal of therapy is to eliminate the outflow resistance 
of a nonrelaxing sphincter, measurement of improvements in 
esophageal baseline pressure and scintigraphic transit time may 
be better indicators of success, but are rarely reported.
Eckardt and associates investigated whether the outcome 
of pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia could be pre-
dicted on the basis of objective measurements. Postdilation LES 
pressure was the most valuable measurement for predicting 
1001
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
long-term clinical response. A postdilatation sphincter pressure 
<10 mmHg predicted a good response. Approximately 50% 
of the patients studied had postdilatation sphincter pressures 
between 10 and 20 mmHg, with a 2-year remission rate of 71%. 
More important, 16 of 46 patients were left with a postdilatation 
sphincter pressure of >20 mmHg, and had an unacceptable out-
come. Overall, only 30% of patients dilated remained in symp-
tomatic remission at 5 years.
Bonavina and colleagues reported good to excellent results 
with transabdominal myotomy and Dor fundoplication in 94% 
of patients after a mean follow-up of 5.4 years. No operative 
mortality occurred in either of these series, attesting to the 
safety of the procedure. Malthaner and Pearson reported the 
long-term clinical results in 35 patients with achalasia, hav-
ing a minimum follow-up of 10 years (Table 25-10). Twenty-
two of these patients underwent primary esophageal myotomy 
and Belsey hemifundoplication at the Toronto General Hospi-
tal. Excellent to good results were noted in 95% of patients at 
1 year, declining to 68%, 69%, and 67% at 10, 15, and 20 years, 
respectively. Two patients underwent early reoperation for an 
incomplete myotomy, and three underwent an esophagectomy 
for progressive disease. They concluded that there was a 
Figure 25-65.  A. Longitudinal muscle is divided. B. Mechanical disruption of lower esophageal sphincter muscle fibers. C. Myotomy must 
be carried across gastroesophageal junction. D. Gastric extension should equal 2 to 3 cm. E. Anterior (Dor) fundoplication is sutured to the 
diaphragmatic arch. F. Posterior (Toupet) fundoplication is sutured to cut edges of myotomy. EG jct = esophagogastric junction. (Illustration 
continued on next page.)
deterioration of the initially good results after surgical myotomy 
and hiatal repair for achalasia, which is due to late complica-
tions of gastroesophageal reflux.
Ellis reported his lifetime experience with transthoracic 
short esophageal myotomy without an antireflux procedure. One 
hundred seventy-nine patients were analyzed at a mean follow-
up of 9 years, ranging from 6 months to 20 years. Overall, 89% 
of patients were improved at the 9-year mark. He also observed 
that the level of improvement deteriorated with time, with excel-
lent results (patients continuing to be symptom free) decreasing 
from 54% at 10 years to 32% at 20 years. He concluded that a 
short transthoracic myotomy without an antireflux procedure 
provides excellent long-term relief of dysphagia, and, contrary 
to Malthaner and Pearson’s experience, does not result in com-
plications of gastroesophageal reflux. Both studies document 
nearly identical results 10 to 15 years following the procedure, 
and both report deterioration over time, probably due to progres-
sion of the underlying disease. The addition of an antireflux 
procedure if the operation is performed transthoracically has no 
significant effect on the outcome.
The outcome of laparoscopic myotomy and hemifun-
doplication has been well documented. Two reports of over 
1002
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 25-65.  (Continued )
Table 25-10
Reasons for failure of esophageal myotomy
Reason
Author, Procedure (n)
Ellis, Myotomy Only  
(n = 81)
Goulbourne, Myotomy  
Only (n = 65)
Malthaner, Myotomy + 
Antireflux (n = 22)
Reflux
4%
5%
18%
Inadequate myotomy
2%
—
9%
Megaesophagus
2%
—
—
Poor emptying
4%
3%
—
Persistent chest pain
1%
—
—
Source: Data from Malthaner RA, et al.: Long-term results in surgically managed esophageal achalasia. Ann Thorac Surg 58:1343, 1994; Ellis FH Jr.: 
Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: A 22-year experience. Br J Surg 80:882, 1993; and Goulbourne IA, et al.: Long-term results of Heller's operation for 
achalasia. J R Coll Surg Edinb. 30:101, 1985.
1003
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
100 patients have documented relief of dysphagia in 93% of 
patients. Richter and coworkers reviewed published reports to 
date, including 254 patients with an average success rate of 93% 
at 2.5 years. Conversion to an open procedure occurs in 0% to 
5% of patients. Complications are uncommon, occurring in 
<5% of patients. Intraoperative complications consist largely of 
mucosal perforation, and have been more likely to occur after 
botulinum toxin injection. The incidence of objective reflux dis-
ease as evidenced by abnormal acid exposure is <10%.
A number of randomized clinical trials in the past decade 
have compared the outcomes of laparoscopic Heller myotomy 
to pneumatic dilation and to botulinum toxin injection. In each 
of these trials, laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fun-
doplication was superior to the alternative treatment. Lastly, a 
randomized clinical trial examining the need for fundoplica-
tion following Heller myotomy demonstrated a great deal more 
reflux in patients without fundoplication, and no better swallow-
ing in the Heller-only group. The best treatment for achalasia 
is a laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication. 
The role of POEM in the management of classic (nonspastic) 
achalasia is yet to be established.
Esophageal Resection for End-Stage  
Motor Disorders of the Esophagus
Patients with dysphagia and long-standing benign disease, 
whose esophageal function has been destroyed by the disease 
process or multiple previous surgical procedures, are best man-
aged by esophagectomy. Fibrosis of the esophagus and cardia 
can result in weak contractions and failure of the distal esopha-
geal sphincter to relax. The loss of esophageal contractions can 
result in the stasis of food, esophageal dilatation, regurgitation, 
and aspiration. The presence of these abnormalities signals 
end-stage motor disease. In these situations esophageal replace-
ment is usually required to establish normal alimentation. 
Before proceeding with esophageal resection for patients with 
end-stage benign disease, the choice of the organ to substitute 
for the esophagus (i.e., stomach, jejunum, or colon) should be 
considered. The choice of replacement is affected by a num-
ber of factors, as described later in the section on Techniques 
of Esophageal Reconstruction. If minimally invasive esopha-
gectomy is to be performed, thoracoscopic dissection should 
be combined with abdominal dissection. Attempts at MIS tran-
shiatal esophagectomy for the massively dilated esophagus may 
result in large volume bleeding from mediastinal vessels that 
become enlarged with esophageal dilation, and must be directly 
controlled for hemostasis to be adequate, and the operation to 
be safe.
CARCINOMA OF THE ESOPHAGUS
Squamous carcinoma accounts for the majority of esophageal 
carcinomas worldwide. Its incidence is highly variable, rang-
ing from approximately 20 per 100,000 in the United States 
and Britain, to 160 per 100,000 in certain parts of South Africa 
and the Honan Province of China, and even 540 per 100,000 in 
the Guriev district of Kazakhstan. The environmental factors 
responsible for these localized high-incidence areas have not 
been conclusively identified, though additives to local food-
stuffs (nitroso compounds in pickled vegetables and smoked 
meats) and mineral deficiencies (zinc and molybdenum) have 
been suggested. In Western societies, smoking and alcohol 
consumption are strongly linked with squamous carcinoma. 
Other definite associations link squamous carcinoma with long-
standing achalasia, lye strictures, tylosis (an autosomal domi-
nant disorder characterized by hyperkeratosis of the palms and 
soles), and human papillomavirus.
Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, once an unusual malig-
nancy, is diagnosed with increasing frequency (Fig. 25-66), and 
now accounts for more than 50% of esophageal cancer in most 
Western countries. The shift in the epidemiology of esophageal 
cancer from predominantly squamous carcinoma seen in asso-
ciation with smoking and alcohol, to adenocarcinoma in the 
setting of BE, is one of the most dramatic changes that have 
occurred in the history of human neoplasia. Although esopha-
geal carcinoma is a relatively uncommon malignancy, its prev-
alence is exploding, largely secondary to the well-established 
association between gastroesophageal reflux, BE, and esopha-
geal adenocarcinoma. Once a nearly uniformly lethal disease, 
survival has improved slightly because of advances in the 
understanding of its molecular biology, screening and surveil-
lance practices, improved staging, minimally invasive surgical 
techniques, and neoadjuvant therapy.
Furthermore, the clinical picture of esophageal adenocar-
cinoma is changing. It now occurs not only considerably more 
frequently, but in younger patients, and is often detected at 
an earlier stage. These facts support rethinking the traditional 
approach of assuming palliation is appropriate in all patients. 
The historical focus on palliation of dysphagia in an elderly 
patient with comorbidities should change when dealing with 
a young patient with dependent children and a productive life 
ahead. The potential for cure becomes of paramount importance.
The gross appearance resembles that of squamous cell car-
cinoma. Microscopically, adenocarcinoma almost always origi-
nates in Barrett’s mucosa, and resembles gastric cancer. Rarely, 
it arises in the submucosal glands, and forms intramural growths 
that resemble the mucoepidermal and adenoid cystic carcinomas 
of the salivary glands.
The most important etiologic factor in the development 
of primary adenocarcinoma of the esophagus is a metaplastic 
columnar-lined or Barrett’s esophagus, which occurs in approxi-
mately 10% to 15% of patients with GERD. When studied pro-
spectively, the incidence of adenocarcinoma in a patient with 
BE is one in 100 to 200 patient-years of follow-up (i.e., for 
every 100 patients with BE followed for 1 year, one will develop 
adenocarcinoma). Although this risk appears to be small, it is 
at least 40 to 60 times that expected for a similar population 
without BE. This risk is similar to the risk for developing lung 
cancer in a person with a 20-pack-per-year history of smoking. 
Endoscopic surveillance for patients with BE is recommended 
for two reasons: (a) at present there is no reliable evidence that 
medical therapy removes the risk of neoplastic transformation, 
and (b) malignancy in BE is curable if detected at an early stage.
Clinical Manifestations
Esophageal cancer generally presents with dysphagia, although 
increasing numbers of relatively asymptomatic patients are 
now identified on surveillance endoscopy, or present with 
nonspecific upper GI symptoms and undergo screen-
ing endoscopy. Extension of the primary tumor into the 
tracheobronchial tree can occur primarily with squamous cell 
carcinoma and can cause stridor, tracheoesophageal fistula and 
resultant coughing, choking, and aspiration pneumonia. Rarely, 
severe bleeding from the primary tumor or from erosion into 
the aorta or pulmonary vessels occurs. Either vocal cord may 
6
1004
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
U.S. esophageal cancer incidence
1985
1993
1997
2001
2005
Incidence per 100,000
0
25
20
15
10
5
1989
NCI esophageal cancer research investment
$21.8M
$21.7M
$21.6M
 s
r
allo
d
 f
o
 s
n
oilli
M
illi
B
o
 s
n
o
lo
d
 f
s
r
al
Fiscal year
0
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
4
3
2
1
Esophageal cancer funding 
Total NCI budget 
$22.3M
$4.8B
$4.7B
$4.7B
$4.6B
$4.8B
$22.7M
U.S. esophageal cancer mortality
Mortality per 100,000
1985
1993
1997
2001
2005
0
25
20
15
10
5
White males
Overall rate
African American males
White females
African American females
1989
Figure 25-66.  Incidence and mortality rate trends for esophageal 
cancer. NCI = National Cancer Institute. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from the National Cancer Institute. Last updated September, 
2008.)
be invaded, causing paralysis, but most commonly, paralysis is 
caused by invasion of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve by the 
primary tumor or LN metastasis. Systemic organ metastases are 
usually manifested by jaundice or bone pain. The situation is 
different in high-incidence areas where screening is practiced. 
In these communities, the most prominent early symptom is 
pain on swallowing rough or dry food. In patients that present 
with back pain at the time of esophageal cancer diagnosis, there 
is usually distant metastasis or celiac encasement.
Dysphagia usually presents late in the natural history of 
the disease, because the lack of a serosal layer on the esopha-
gus allows the smooth muscle to dilate with ease. As a result, 
the dysphagia becomes severe enough for the patient to seek 
medical advice only when more than 60% of the esophageal 
circumference is infiltrated with cancer. Consequently, the dis-
ease is usually advanced if symptoms herald its presence. Tra-
cheoesophageal fistula may be present in some patients on their 
first visit to the hospital, and more than 40% will have evidence 
of distant metastases. With tumors of the cardia, anorexia and 
weight loss usually precede the onset of dysphagia. The physical 
signs of esophageal tumors are those associated with the pres-
ence of distant metastases.
General Approach to Esophageal Cancer
Therapy of esophageal cancer is dictated by the stage of the can-
cer at the time of diagnosis. Put simply, one needs to determine 
if the disease is confined to the esophagus, (T1–T2, N0), locally 
advanced (T1–3, N1), or disseminated (any T, any N, M1). If 
cancer is confined to the esophagus, removal of the tumor with 
adjacent lymph nodes may be curative. Very early tumors con-
fined to the mucosa (T in situ, T1a, intramucosal cancer) may be 
addressed with endoscopic treatment. When the tumor is locally 
aggressive, modern therapy dictates a multimodality approach 
in a surgically fit patient. Multimodality therapy is either che-
motherapy followed by surgery or radiation and chemotherapy 
followed by surgery. When given before surgery, these treat-
ments are referred to as neoadjuvant or induction therapy. For 
disseminated cancer, treatment is aimed at palliation of symp-
toms. If the patient has dysphagia, as many do, the most rapid 
form of palliation is the endoscopic placement of an expandable 
esophageal stent. For palliation of GEJ cancer, radiation may be 
the first choice, as stents placed across the GEJ create a great 
deal of gastroesophageal reflux.
Staging of Esophageal Cancer
Choosing the best therapy for an individual patient requires 
accurate staging. Staging starts with the history and physical. 
LN disease remote from the tumor, particularly in the cervi-
cal region, may be palpable on neck examination and generally 
indicates cancer dissemination. This is often referred to as M1a 
disease, indicating that these patients should not be treated with 
therapy directed toward locally advanced cancer. Other meta-
static LNs are rarely palpable but are equally ominous, espe-
cially the umbilical LN in GEJ cancer.
Computed tomographic (CT) scanning of the chest, abdo-
men, and pelvis provides information on local invasion of the 
primary cancer, LN involvement, or disseminated disease. The 
most common sites of esophageal cancer metastases are lung, 
liver, and peritoneal surfaces, including the omentum and small 
bowel mesentery. If masses are identified that are not charac-
teristic for cancer or are in a location that precludes resec-
tion with the cancer specimen, positron emission tomography 
1005
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
(PET) scanning may be able to tell whether the masses are meta-
bolically active (likely to be cancer) or not. A PET active focus 
corresponding to a mass on CT scan outside of the field of esoph-
ageal resection should be biopsied before resection is performed.
The introduction of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has 
made it possible to identify patients who are potentially curable 
before surgical therapy. Using an endoscope, the depth of the 
wall penetration by the tumor and the presence of LN metasta-
ses can be determined with 80% accuracy. A curative resection 
should be encouraged if EUS indicates that the tumor has not 
invaded adjacent organs (T4b), and/or fewer than six enlarged 
LNs are imaged. Thoracoscopic and laparoscopic staging of 
esophageal cancer may add benefit when the nature of enlarged 
LNs remote from the cancer cannot be determined, or when 
advanced imaging systems (PET and high-resolution spiral CT) 
are not available.
Occasionally, diagnostic laparoscopy and jejunostomy 
tube placement may precede induction chemoradiation in the 
patient with severe dysphagia and weight loss from a locally 
advanced cancer. In summary, esophageal cancer is diagnosed 
with endoscopic biopsy and is staged with CT scanning of the 
chest and abdomen, EUS, and PET scan for all patients with 
CT or EUS evidence of advanced disease (T2 or greater, N1-2 
or NX). Experience with esophageal resection in patients with 
early stage disease has identified characteristics of esophageal 
cancer that are associated with improved survival. A number of 
studies suggest that only metastasis to LNs and tumor penetra-
tion of the esophageal wall have a significant and independent 
influence on prognosis. Factors known to be important in the 
survival of patients with advanced disease, such as cell type, 
degree of cellular differentiation, or location of tumor in the 
esophagus, have no effect on survival of patients who have 
undergone resection for early disease. Studies also showed that 
patients having five or fewer LN metastases have a better out-
come. Using these data, Skinner developed the wall penetration, 
LN, and distant organ metastases system for staging.
The wall penetration, LN, and distant organ metastases 
system differed somewhat from the previous efforts to develop 
a satisfactory staging criteria for carcinoma of the esophagus. 
Most surgeons agreed that the 1983 tumor, nodes, and metas-
tasis system left much to be desired. In the third edition of the 
manual for Staging of Cancer of the American Joint Commit-
tee on Cancer (AJCC) in 1988, an effort was made to provide 
a finer discrimination between stages than had been contained 
in the previous edition in 1983. In 2010, further refinements of 
the staging system of esophageal cancer were approved by the 
AJCC, recognizing the difference in survival afforded by resec-
tion of limited LN disease adjacent to the tumor, compared to 
multilevel LN disease and positive LNs remote from the pri-
mary. Table 25-11 shows the AJCC definitions for the primary 
tumor, lymph nodes, distant metastasis, and overall staging 
schema for both squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.
Clinical Approach to Carcinoma  
of the Esophagus and Cardia
The selection of a curative vs. a palliative operation for cancer of 
the esophagus is based on the location of the tumor, the patient’s 
age and health, the extent of the disease, and preoperative stag-
ing. Figure 25-67 shows an algorithm of the clinical decisions 
important in the selection of curative or palliative therapy.
Tumor Location.  The selection of surgical therapy for patients 
with carcinoma of the esophagus depends not only on the anatomic 
stage of the disease and an assessment of the swallowing capacity 
of the patient, but also on the location of the primary tumor.
It is estimated that 8% of the primary malignant tumors of 
the esophagus occur in the cervical portion (Fig. 25-68). They 
are almost always squamous cell cancer, with a rare adenocar-
cinoma arising from a congenital inlet patch of columnar lining. 
These tumors, particularly those in the postcricoid area, repre-
sent a separate pathologic entity for two reasons: (a) They are 
more common in females and appear to be a unique entity in 
this regard; and (b) The efferent lymphatics from the cervical 
esophagus drain completely differently from those of the tho-
racic esophagus. The latter drain directly into the paratracheal 
and deep cervical or internal jugular LNs with minimal flow in a 
longitudinal direction. Except in advanced disease, it is unusual 
for intrathoracic LNs to be involved.
Cervical esophageal cancer is frequently unresectable 
because of early invasion of the larynx, great vessels, or trachea. 
Radical surgery, including esophagolaryngectomy may occa-
sionally be performed for these lesions, but the ensuing mor-
bidity makes this a less than desirable approach in the face of 
uncertain cure. Thus, for most patients with cervical esophageal 
cancer, stereotactic radiation with concomitant chemotherapy is 
the most desirable treatment.
Tumors that arise within the middle third of the esophagus 
are squamous carcinomas most commonly and are frequently 
associated with LN metastasis, which are usually in the tho-
rax but may be in the neck or abdomen, and may skip areas 
in between. Although it is generally felt that individuals with 
midthoracic cancer and abdominal LN metastases are incurable 
with surgery, there are some emerging data that suggest that 
cervical LN metastases, if isolated, can be resected with ben-
efit. Generally, T1 and T2 cancers without LN metastases are 
treated with resection only, but there is more and more data to 
suggest that LN involvement or transmural cancer (T3) warrants 
treatment with neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy followed by 
resection. Although some surgeons prefer a transhiatal esoph-
agectomy for all tumor locations, most surgeons believe that 
resection of midesophageal cancer should be performed under 
direct vision with either thoracoscopy (video-assisted thoracic 
surgery [VATS]) or with thoracotomy.
Tumors of the lower esophagus and cardia are usually 
adenocarcinomas. Unless preoperative and intraoperative stag-
ing clearly demonstrate an incurable lesion, resection in conti-
nuity with a LN dissection should be performed. Because of the 
propensity of GI tumors to spread for long distances submuco-
sally, long lengths of grossly normal GI tract should be resected 
The longitudinal lymph flow in the esophagus can result in skip 
areas, with small foci of tumor above the primary lesion, which 
underscores the importance of a wide resection of esophageal 
tumors. Wong has shown that local recurrence at the anastomo-
sis can be prevented by obtaining a 10-cm margin of normal 
esophagus above the tumor. Anatomic studies have also shown 
that there is no submucosal lymphatic barrier between the 
esophagus and the stomach at the cardia, and Wong has shown 
that 50% of the local recurrences in patients with esophageal 
cancer who are resected for cure occur in the intrathoracic stom-
ach along the line of the gastric resection. Considering that the 
length of the esophagus ranges from 17 to 25 cm, and the length 
of the lesser curvature of the stomach is approximately 12 cm, a 
curative resection requires a cervical division of the esophagus 
and a >50% proximal gastrectomy in most patients with carci-
noma of the distal esophagus or cardia.
1006
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 25-11
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Staging Schema for Esophageal Cancer
TX
T0
Tis
T1
T1a
T1b
T2
T3
T4
T4a
T4b
NX
N0
N1
N2
N3
M0
M1
Primary tumor cannot be assessed.
No evidence of primary tumor.
High-grade dysplasia.
Tumor invades lamina propria, muscularis mucosae, or submucosa.
Tumor invades lamina propria or muscularis mucosae.
Tumor invades submucosa.
Tumor invades muscularis propria.
Tumor invades adventitia.
Tumor invades adjacent structures.
Resectable tumor invading pleura, pericardium, or diaphragm.
Unresectable tumor invading other adjacent structures, such as aorta, vertebral body, trachea, etc.
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed.
No regional lymph node metastasis.
Metastases in 1–2 regional lymph nodes.
Metastases in 3–6 regional lymph nodes.
Metastases in ≥7 regional lymph nodes.
No distant metastasis.
Distant metastasis.
Squamous Cell Carcinomab
Stage
T
N
M
Grade
Tumor Locationc
0
Tis (HGD)
N0
M0
1, X
Any
IA
T1
N0
M0
1, X
Any
IB
T1
N0
M0
2–3
Any
T2–3
N0
M0
1, X
Lower, X
IIA
T2–3
N0
M0
1, X
Upper, middle
T2–3
N0
M0
2–3
Lower, X
IIB
T2–3
N0
M0
2–3
Upper, middle
T1–2
N1
M0
Any
Any
IIIA
T1–2
N2
M0
Any
Any
T3
N1
M0
Any
Any
T4a
N0
M0
Any
Any
IIIB
T3
N2
M0
Any
Any
IIIC
T4a
N1–2
M0
Any
Any
T4b
Any
M0
Any
Any
Any
N3
M0
Any
Any
IV
Any
Any
M1
Any
Any
Adenocarcinoma
Stage
T
N
M
Grade
0
Tis (HGD)
N0
M0
1, X
IA
T1
N0
M0
1–2, X
IB
T1
N0
M0
3
T2
N0
M0
1–2, X
IIA
T2
N0
M0
3
IIB
T3
N0
M0
Any
T1–2
N1
M0
Any
IIIA
T1–2
N2
M0
Any
T3
N1
M0
Any
T4a
N0
M0
Any
IIIB
T3
N2
M0
Any
IIIC
T4a
N1–2
M0
Any
T4b
Any
M0
Any
Any
N3
M0
Any
IV
Any
Any
M1
Any
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source of the material is the AJCC  
Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springerlink.com.
1007
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Age.  Resection for cure of carcinoma of the esophagus in a 
patient older than 80 years is rarely indicated, because of the 
additional operative risk and the shorter life expectancy. Despite 
this general guideline, octogenarians with a high performance 
status and excellent cardio-pulmonary reserve may be consid-
ered candidates for esophagectomy and recent case series have 
*Could include combined Rx and chemo neoadjuvant therapy
prior to resection to increase resectability and potential
survival in patients 75 or under.
Curative en
bloc resection
Intraoperative
staging
Age
Physiologic
fitness
Clinical staging
Endoscopic
ultrasound
Palliation
75 years
Palliation
 FEV1 
1.25
 Ejection fraction 
40%
Palliation
Recurrent nerve paralysis
Horner's syndrome
Persistent spinal pain
Paralysis of diaphragm
Fistula formation
Malignant pleural effusion
Endoscopic tumor length 
9 cm
Abnormal esophageal axis
Multiple enlarged nodes or distant
organ metastasis on CT
More than 20% weight loss
Loss of appetite (relative)
Palliation
Transmural tumors 
    with 
4 enlarged nodes
Palliation
Unresectable primary
Cavitary spread
Distant metastasis
Extension through mediastinal wall
Multiple gross lymph node metastases
Microscopic nodal metastasis at margins of
the en bloc dissection
Palliative symptoms
Dysphagia
Obstruction
Pain of ulceration
Bleeding
Infection
Anxiety
Requirements for
   palliative transhiatal
   resection*
   - Free of distant organ
         metastases
   - Complete excision of
         primary tumor possible
Nonsurgical
palliation
Figure 25-67.  Algorithm for the evaluation of esophageal cancer patients to select the proper therapy: curative en bloc resection, palliative 
transhiatal resection, or nonsurgical palliation. CT = computed tomography; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second. (Reproduced with 
permission from DeMeester TR: Esophageal carcinoma: Current controversies. Sem Surg Oncol. 13:217, 1997.)
Location
Incidence
Cervical
Upper
thoracic
Middle
thoracic
Lower
thoracic
Cardia
8%
3%
32%
25%
32%
Figure 25-68.  Incidence of carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia 
based on tumor location.
established its success in highly selected patients. It is in this 
group of patients that the lesser physiologic impact of minimally 
invasive surgery may reduce the morbidity and mortality associ-
ated with open two- or three-field esophagectomy.
Cardiopulmonary Reserve.  Patients undergoing esophageal 
resection should have sufficient cardiopulmonary reserve to 
tolerate the proposed procedure. The respiratory function is 
best assessed with the forced expiratory volume in 1 second, 
which ideally should be 2 L or more. Any patient with a forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second of <1.25 L is a poor candidate 
for thoracotomy, because he or she has a 40% risk of dying 
from respiratory insufficiency within 4 years. In patients with 
poor pulmonary reserve, the transhiatal esophagectomy should 
be considered, as the pulmonary morbidity of this operation is 
less than is seen following thoracotomy. Clinical evaluation 
and electrocardiogram are not sufficient indicators of cardiac 
reserve. Echocardiography and dipyridamole thallium imaging 
provide accurate information on wall motion, ejection fraction, 
and myocardial blood flow. A defect on thallium imaging may 
require further evaluation with preoperative coronary angiog-
raphy. A resting ejection fraction of <40%, particularly if there 
is no increase with exercise, is an ominous sign. In the absence 
of invasive testing, observed stair-climbing is an economical 
(albeit not quantitative) method of assessing cardiopulmonary 
reserve. Most individuals who can climb three flights of stairs 
without stopping will do well with two-field open esophagec-
tomy, especially if an epidural catheter is used for postoperative 
pain relief.
Nutritional Status.  The factor most predictive of postopera-
tive complication is the nutritional status of the patient. Profound 
weight loss, more than 20 lb, associated with hypoalbuminemia 
(albumin <3.5 g/dL) is associated with a much higher rate of 
complications and mortality than patients who enter curative 
1008
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
surgery in better nutritional condition. Because malnourished 
patients generally have locally advanced esophageal cancer, if 
not metastatic disease, one should consider the placement of a 
feeding tube before the beginning of induction chemoradiation 
therapy. Although mild amounts of dysphagia are improved by 
induction chemoradiation therapy, more pronounced dysphagia 
and associated malnutrition should be addressed before the ini-
tiation of chemoradiation. A laparoscopic jejunostomy tube can 
be placed prior to induction therapy or at the time of esophagec-
tomy. There are emerging data that 5 days’ pretreatment with 
immune-enhancing nutrition, rich in fish oils, decreases cardiac 
and other complications, following esophagectomy.
Clinical Staging.  Clinical factors that indicate an advanced 
stage of carcinoma and exclude surgery with curative intent are 
recurrent nerve paralysis, Horner’s syndrome, persistent spinal 
pain, paralysis of the diaphragm, fistula formation, and malig-
nant pleural effusion. Factors that make surgical cure unlikely 
include a tumor >8 cm in length, abnormal axis of the esophagus 
on a barium radiogram, more than four enlarged LNs on CT, a 
weight loss more than 20%, and loss of appetite. Studies indi-
cate that there are several favorable parameters associated with 
tumors <4 cm in length, there are fewer with tumors between 
4 and 8 cm, and there are no favorable criteria for tumors >8 cm 
in length. Consequently, the finding of a tumor >8 cm in length 
should exclude curative resection; the finding of a smaller tumor 
should encourage an aggressive approach.
Preoperative Staging with Advanced Imaging.  For years, 
clinical staging, contrast radiography, endoscopy, and CT scan-
ning formed the backbone of esophageal cancer staging. More 
recently, preoperative decision making is guided by endoscopic 
ultrasonography and PET scanning.
EUS provides the most reliable method of determining 
depth of cancer invasion. In the absence of enlarged LNs, the 
degree of wall invasion dictates surgical therapy. If a small 
focus of esophageal cancer is confined to the mucosa, endo-
scopic mucosal resection (EMR) is a preferable option. If the 
tumor invades in to the submucosa, without visible lymph node 
involvement, most individuals would suggest esophagectomy 
with LN dissection, as positive nodes can be found in 20% to 
25% of those with cancer limited to the mucosa and submucosa. 
If EUS demonstrates spread through the wall of the esophagus, 
especially if LNs are enlarged, then induction chemoradiation 
therapy (neoadjuvant therapy) should be strongly considered. 
Lastly, when the EUS demonstrates invasion of the trachea, 
bronchus, aorta, or spine, then surgical resection is rarely indi-
cated. If there is invasion into the pleura (T4a), then surgical 
resection can be considered in the absence of a malignant effu-
sion. Thus, it can be seen that the therapy of esophageal cancer 
is largely driven by the findings of an endoscopic ultrasonog-
raphy. It is difficult to provide modern treatment of esophageal 
cancer without access to this modality.
PET scanning, usually combined with an axial CT 
scan (CTPET), usually is performed on patients with locally 
advanced cancer or questionable lesions on CT scan to deter-
mine whether metastases are present. The PET scan uses the 
injection of radiolabeled deoxyglucose, which is taken up in 
metabolically active tissues such as cancer. PET-positive areas 
must be correlated with the CT scan findings to assess the sig-
nificance of “hot spots.” CTPET scanning has been especially 
useful before the initiation of chemoradiation therapy. An early 
response to chemoradiotherapy, by PET scan, improves the 
prognosis whether or not resection is ultimately performed. 
Conversely, if a PET-avid tumor shows no change in metabolic 
activity after 2 weeks of induction chemoradiation therapy, it 
is unlikely that further chemo- or radiation therapy will be of 
any benefit. These patients have a worse prognosis, and may be 
referred for resection or palliation without incurring the morbid-
ity or expense of a full course of chemo- and radiation therapy.
Palliation of Esophageal Cancer
Palliation of esophageal cancer is indicated for individuals with 
metastatic esophageal cancer or cancer invading adjacent organs 
(T4b) who are unable to swallow, or individuals with fistulae 
into the tracheobronchial tree. Aortic esophageal fistulas are 
extremely rare and nearly 100% lethal. Dysphagia as a result of 
esophageal cancer can be graded from Grade I, eating normally, 
to grade VI, unable to swallow saliva (Table 25-12). Grades I–III 
often can be managed with radiation therapy, usually in combi-
nation with chemotherapy. When surgical resection is not antici-
pated in the future, this is termed definitive chemoradiation 
therapy and usually is palliative. Radiation dose is increased 
from 45 Gy to 60 Gy administered over 8 weeks, rather than the 
4 weeks given for chemoradiation induction therapy. In 20% of 
patients, a complete response to chemoradiation therapy will not 
only palliate the symptoms, but leave the patient with undetect-
able cancer of the esophagus. Although some of these patients 
are truly cured, cancer will recur in many either locally or sys-
temically 1 to 5 years following definitive chemoradiation. In 
a few patients, definitive chemoradiation will be successful in 
all sites but the esophagus. After a 12-month wait from initial 
treatment and no other sites of tumor detectable except the 
esophagus, some of these patients may be candidates for sal-
vage esophagectomy.
For individuals with dysphagia grades IV and higher, addi-
tional treatment generally is necessary. The mainstay of therapy 
is in-dwelling esophageal stents. Covered removable stents may 
be used to seal fistulae or when stent removal becomes desir-
able in the future. When large, locally invasive tumors or meta-
static esophageal cancer precludes any future hope of resection, 
uncovered expandable metal stents are the treatment of choice. 
The major limitations to stenting exist in cancers at the GEJ. A 
stent placed across the GEJ will result in severe gastroesophageal 
Table 25-12
Functional grades of dysphagia
Grade
Definition
Incidence at 
Diagnosis (%)
I
Eating normally
11
II
Requires liquids with meals
21
III
Able to take semisolids but 
unable to take any solid food
30
IV
Able to take liquids only
40
V
Unable to take liquids, but able 
to swallow saliva
7
VI
Unable to swallow saliva
12
Source: Modified with permission from Takita H, et al.: Squamous cell 
carcinoma of the esophagus: A study of 153 cases. J Surg Oncol 9:547, 
1977.
1009
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
reflux and heartburn that can be quite disabling. In cancers at 
this level, radiation therapy alone may be preferable. If feeding 
access is desirable, a laparoscopic jejunostomy is usually the 
procedure of choice.
Surgical Treatment
The surgical treatment of esophageal cancer is dependent upon 
the location of the cancer, the depth of invasion, LN metasta-
ses, the fitness of the patient for operation, and the culture and 
beliefs of the individuals and institutions in which the treatment 
is performed. In an ideal world, there would be a single, stage-
specific method of treating esophageal cancer, because the evi-
dence would be unassailable and noncontroversial. Randomized 
clinical trials and meta-analyses would prove beyond a shadow 
of a doubt the value of surgery vs. nonoperative therapy and 
would dictate the type and extent of surgery that would opti-
mally balance immediate morbidity and mortality with duration 
and quality of life conferred by the procedure and the periopera-
tive management of the esophagectomy patient. Despite many 
noble attempts to establish this high level of evidence, many 
questions relating to the appropriate therapy of esophageal 
cancer remain controversial. About the only area of complete 
agreement is that esophagectomy should not be performed if 
an R0 resection is not possible. In other words, if the surgeon 
does not believe he or she can remove all LNs invaded by can-
cer and provide a tumor-free radial margin and esophagus and 
stomach margins that are tumor free, then a resection should not 
be performed.
Mucosally Based Cancer.  In patients with BE, and especially 
those with high-grade dysplasia, subcentimeter nodules are fre-
quently discovered. Nodules should be resected in entirety, as 
they often harbor adenocarcinoma. Five years ago, such resec-
tion was performed with a transhiatal esophagectomy, but more 
recently EMR offers another method for removing intramucosal 
cancer. In this clinical situation, EMR is typically combined with 
EUS to rule out more invasive disease. EUS however, is unable 
to differentiate between cancer that is confined to the mucosa 
(T1a) and that which invades the submucosa (T1b). Tumors 
invading the submucosa are not amenable to endoscopic muco-
sal resection because of the high-frequency (20%–25%) concur-
rent finding of positive LNs, which cannot be removed without 
esophagectomy. On the other hand, intramucosal cancers have 
little risk of spreading to regional LNs. The current approach 
used involves performing EMR on all nodules identified in a 
field of Barrett’s esophagus and then T staging is performed by 
histologic analysis. This approach dictates the need for future 
therapy such as esophagectomy.
For this reason, small intramucosal carcinomas may be 
removed with EMR in the following manner: The area beneath 
the nodule is infiltrated with saline through a sclerotherapy 
needle. A specialized suction cap is mounted on the end of the 
endoscope and the nodule is drawn up into the cap, follow-
ing which a snare is applied to resect the tissue. Alternatively, 
a rubber band can be delivered and the snare can be used to 
resect above the level of the rubber band. This specimen is then 
removed and sent to pathology. As long as the tumor is found 
to be confined to the mucosa and all margins are negative, the 
resection is complete. A positive margin or involvement of the 
submucosa warrants esophagectomy. Most importantly, these 
patients are at high risk for developing small nodular carcino-
mas elsewhere in their Barrett’s segment, and routine surveil-
lance on a 3- to 6-month basis must be continued indefinitely. 
Alternatively, one can consider radiofrequency ablation of the 
remainder of the high-grade dysplasia after careful surveillance 
biopsy specimens demonstrate no further sign of cancer. This 
approach to the early esophageal cancer should not be used 
when there is any suspicion of mediastinal or abdominal lymph-
adenopathy. Although it is currently rare that EMR provides 
definitive therapy of small nodular esophageal cancers, this may 
become more of the norm as greater surveillance reveals earlier 
cancers, and proficiency of the technique by surgeons and gas-
troenterologists increases.
Minimally Invasive Transhiatal Esophagectomy.  Mini-
mally invasive transhiatal esophagectomy is an increasingly 
popular procedure; however, the number of these operations 
performed around the world remains small. Mini-invasive sur-
gery (MIS) transhiatal esophagectomy was first performed by 
Aureo DePaula in Brazil and has been modified and adopted by 
many individuals around the world. This operation combines 
the advantages of transhiatal esophagectomy at minimizing 
pulmonary complications with the advantages of laparoscopy 
(less pain, quicker rehabilitation). Several variations of MIS 
transhiatal esophagectomy have been developed. For the earli-
est lesions, such as high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal carci-
noma, a vagal sparing procedure can be entertained. In such a 
procedure, the vagal trunks are separated from the esophagus 
at the level of the diaphragm and the lesser curvature dissec-
tion of the stomach allows the vagus and left gastric pedicle to 
remain intact. Clearly, this dissection, which hugs the stomach 
and esophagus, provides no LN staging and is thus inadequate 
for all high-grade dysplasia and intramucosal cancer.
MIS transhiatal esophagectomy is usually performed 
through five or six small incisions in the upper abdomen and 
a transverse cervical incision for removing the specimen and 
performing the cervical esophagogastrostomy. To remove 
the esophagus from the posterior mediastinum, especially the 
area behind the pulmonary vessels and the tracheal bifurca-
tion, which cannot be visualized even with a long laparoscope 
placed in the posterior mediastinum, it is preferred to use a vein 
stripping “inversion” technique (Fig. 25-69A). The details of 
this operation are too lengthy to include in this text, but include 
the laparoscopic creation of a neo-esophagus (gastric conduit) 
along the greater curvature of the stomach using the right gas-
troepiploic artery as the primary vascular pedicle. The conduit 
can be created through a mini-laparotomy or laparoscopically. 
A Kocher maneuver releases the duodenum, and a pyloroplasty 
may be performed (optional). Retrograde esophageal stripping is 
performed by dividing the esophagus below the GEJ and sliding 
a vein stripper from the neck down into the abdomen followed 
by an inversion of the esophagus in the posterior mediastinum 
and removal through the neck (Fig. 25-69B). This technique 
is reserved for patients with high-grade dysplasia. For small 
cancers at the GEJ, the esophagus can be stripped in an ante-
grade fashion by sliding the vein stripper down from the cervical 
incision and out the tail of the lesser curvature (Fig. 25-69C). 
The tail of the lesser curvature is pulled out a port site high 
in the epigastrium while the esophagus is inverted into itself. 
For GEJ cancers, a wide celiac access LN dissection, splenic 
artery, hepatic artery, and posterior mediastinal LN dissection 
can be performed as well or better than through a laparotomy. 
The gastric conduit is pulled up to the neck with a chest tube and 
anastomosed to the cervical esophagus in an end-to-side fashion 
using a surgical stapler or with a handsewn anastomosis. Com-
plications of this technique are primarily limited to leak from the 
1010
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 25-69.  A. Laparoscopic retrograde inversion. B. Laparo-
scopic antegrade inversion. A silk suture holds the tunnel after the 
esophagus is removed. C. The esophageal conduit is returned to 
the neck after passing a chest tube down the tunnel and suturing the 
conduit to the chest tube.
esophagogastric anastomosis, which is self-limited and usually 
heals within 1 to 3 weeks, spontaneously.
Open Transhiatal Esophagectomy.  Transhiatal esophagec-
tomy, also known as blunt esophagectomy or esophagectomy 
without a thoracotomy, was first performed in 1933 by a British 
surgeon, but was popularized in the last quarter of the twenti-
eth century by Mark Orringer from the University of Michigan. 
Although this operation may violate many of the principles of 
cancer resection, including extended radical LN dissection this 
operation has performed as well as any of the more radical pro-
cedures in randomized trials, and in large database analyses. 
With transhiatal esophagectomy, the elements of dissection 
are similar to that described in the section entitled Minimally 
Invasive Transhiatal Esophagectomy, including the creation of 
the gastric tube and the posterior mediastinal dissection through 
the hiatus. Because this dissection is performed with the finger-
tips rather than under direct vision with surgical instruments, 
it requires an enlargement of the diaphragmatic hiatus. The 
lower mediastinal LN basins can be resected as can the upper 
abdominal LNs, making this an attractive option for GEJ can-
cers. The mediastinal LNs above the inferior pulmonary vein are 
not removed with this technique, but rarely result in a point of 
isolated cancer recurrence.
Of all procedures for esophageal cancer, this operation is 
the quickest to perform in experienced hands and lies in an inter-
mediate position between minimally invasive esophagectomy 
and the Ivor Lewis procedure with respect to complications and 
recovery.
Minimally Invasive Two- and Three-Field Esophagectomy.  
After a rocky start, minimally invasive esophagectomy using a 
thoracic dissection through VATS has become reasonably popu-
lar. In general, this operation is performed with an anastomosis 
created in the neck (three-field), but may be performed with the 
anastomosis stapled in the high thorax (two-field). Both proce-
dures will be described.
With a minimally invasive three-field esophagectomy, the 
patient is placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Double 
lumen intubation is required. Videoscopic access to the thorax 
is obtained in the midaxillary line in the ninth intercostal space 
and an angled telescope illuminates the chest superiorly. A mini- 
thoracotomy at about the sixth intercostal space anteriorly allows 
introduction of conventional surgical instruments, and a high 
trocar allows retraction of the lung away from the esophagus. 
In a three-field approach, the esophagus is dissected along its 
length to include division of the azygos vein and harvesting of 
the LNs in the upper, middle, and lower posterior mediastinum. 
Hilar, and posterior mediastinal nodes are all removed and sent 
with the specimen or individually. The thoracic duct is divided 
at the level of the diaphragm and removed with the specimen.
Following complete intrathoracic dissection, the patient is 
placed in the supine position and five laparoscopic ports are 
placed as with the MIS transhiatal esophagectomy. The abdomi-
nal portions of the operation are identical to those described 
previously in the section entitled Minimally Invasive Transhia-
tal Esophagectomy, and the gastric conduit is then sewn to the 
tip of the fully mobilized GEJ and lesser curvature sleeve. A 
feeding tube is placed and the pyloroplasty may be performed 
laparoscopically. A transverse cervical incision and dissection 
between the sternocleidomastoid and the anterior strap muscles 
allows access to the cervical esophagus. Great care is made 
to avoid stretching the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The esophagus 
1011
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
and proximal stomach is then pulled up into the neck with 
the gastric conduit following. Cervical anastomosis is then 
performed.
The MIS transthoracic two-field esophagectomy is slightly 
different. In this operation, the abdominal portions of the opera-
tion are done first, including placement of the feeding tube, the 
creation of the conduit, and the sewing of the tip of the conduit 
to the fully dissected GEJ. The patient is then rolled into the left 
lateral decubitus position and, through right thoracoscopy, the 
esophagus is dissected and divided 10 cm above the tumor. Once 
freed, the specimen is pulled out through the mini-thoracotomy 
and an end-to-end anastomosis stapler is introduced through the 
high corner of the gastric conduit and out a stab wound along 
the greater curvature. The anvil of the stapler is placed in the 
proximal esophagus and held with a purse-string, the stapler 
is docked, the anastomosis is created, and a gastrotomy is then 
closed with another firing of the GIA stapler. The three-field 
esophagectomy has the advantage of placing the anastomosis in 
the neck where leakage is unlikely to create a severe systemic 
consequence. On the other hand, placement of the anastomosis 
in the high chest minimizes the risks of injury to structures in 
the neck, particularly the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Although 
the leak of the intrathoracic anastomosis may be more likely to 
bear septic consequences, the incidence of leak is diminished. 
Other complications of this approach relate to pulmonary and 
cardiac status. In many series, the most common complication 
is pneumonia, the second is atrial fibrillation, and the third is 
anastomotic leak.
Ivor Lewis (En Bloc) Esophagectomy.  The theory behind 
radical transthoracic esophagectomy is that greater removal of 
LNs and periesophageal tissues diminishes the chance of a posi-
tive radial margin and LN recurrence. Although there are no ran-
domized data demonstrating this to be superior to other forms of 
esophagectomy, there are many retrospective data demonstrat-
ing improved survival with greater numbers of LNs harvested. 
A recent study from Sloan-Kettering demonstrates a direct rela-
tionship between the number of negative nodes harvested and 
long-term survival. Although such a survival advantage may be 
related to the completeness of resection, extended radical resec-
tions may also be a surrogate for experienced surgeons working 
in great institutions. As a time-honored operation, there is no 
doubt that en bloc esophagectomy is the standard to which less 
radical techniques must be compared.
Generally, this operation is started in the abdomen with 
an upper midline laparotomy and extensive LN dissection in 
and about the celiac access and its branches, extending into the 
porta hepatis and along the splenic artery to the tail of the pan-
creas. All LNs are removed en bloc with the lesser curvature of 
the stomach. Unless the tumor extends into the stomach, recon-
struction is performed with a greater curvature gastric tube. For 
GEJ cancers extending significantly into the gastric cardia or 
fundus, the proximal stomach is removed and reconstruction is 
performed with an isoperistaltic section of left colon between 
the upper esophagus and the remnant stomach, or the colon is 
connected to a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum, if total gastrectomy 
is necessary. In the majority of cases, colon interposition is 
unnecessary, and a gastric conduit is used.
Following closure of the abdominal incision, the patient is 
placed in the left lateral decubitus position and an anterolateral 
thoracotomy is performed through the sixth intercostal space. 
The azygos vein is divided and the posterior mediastinum is 
entirely cleaned out to include the thoracic duct, all periaor-
tic tissues, and all tissue in the upper mediastinum along the 
course of the current laryngeal nerves and in the peribronchial, 
hilar, and tracheal LN stations. The proximal stomach is pulled 
up into the thorax where a conduit is created (if not performed 
previously) and a handsewn or stapled anastomosis is made 
between the upper thoracic esophagus and the gastric conduit 
or transverse colon. Chest tubes are placed, and the patient is 
taken to the intensive care unit.
Because this is the most radical of dissections, complica-
tions are most common, including pneumonia, respiratory fail-
ure, atrial fibrillation, chylothorax, anastomotic leak, conduit 
necrosis, gastrocutaneous fistula, and, if dissection is too near 
the recurrent laryngeal nerves, hoarseness will occur with an 
increased risk of aspiration. Tracheobronchial injury resulting 
in fistulas between the bronchus and conduit may also occur, 
however rarely. Although this procedure and three-field esoph-
agectomy are fraught with the highest complication rate, the 
long-term outcome of this procedure provides the greatest sur-
vival in many single-center series and retrospective reviews.
Three-Field Open Esophagectomy.  Three-field open esoph-
agectomy is very similar to a minimally invasive three-field 
except that all access is through open incisions. This proce-
dure is preferred by certain Japanese surgeons and LN counts 
achieved through this kind of operation may run from 45 to 
60 LNs. Most Western surgeons question the benefit of such 
radical surgery when it is hard to define a survival advantage. 
Nonetheless, high intrathoracic cancers probably deserve such 
an aggressive approach if cure is the goal.
Salvage Esophagectomy.  Salvage esophagectomy is the 
nomenclature applied to esophagectomy performed after fail-
ure of definitive radiation and chemotherapy. The most frequent 
scenario is one in which distant disease (bone, lung, brain, or 
wide LN metastases) renders the patient nonoperable at initial 
presentation. Then, systemic chemotherapy, usually with radia-
tion of the primary tumor, destroys all foci of metastasis, as 
demonstrated by CT and CT-PET, but the primary remains 
present and symptomatic. Following a period of observation, to 
make sure no new disease will become evident, salvage esopha-
gectomy is performed, usually with an open two-field approach. 
Surprisingly, the cure rate of salvage esophagectomy is not 
inconsequential. One in four patients undergoing this operation 
will be disease free 5 years later, despite the presence of residual 
cancer in the operative specimen. Because of the dense scarring 
created by radiation treatment, this procedure is the most techni-
cally challenging of all esophagectomy techniques.
Comparative Studies of Esophagectomy 
Technique
Transthoracic vs. Transhiatal Esophagectomy.  There has 
been a great debate as to whether en bloc esophagectomy will 
provide a greater long-term benefit and cure rate in esophageal 
cancer than transhiatal esophagectomy. In a recent 7-year follow-
up of a Dutch study addressing GEJ and lower esophageal 
cancers, there does not appear to be any benefit to the more 
extensive dissection despite higher morbidity and mortality. In 
a subgroup analysis of those with one to eight positive LNs, 
it did appear that the en bloc transthoracic resection may add 
to longevity. In another large database analysis of the Surveil-
lance, Epidemiology, and End Results database, transthoracic 
and transhiatal esophagectomy were compared. In this study, 
1012
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the transhiatal esophagectomy had a greater long-term survival, 
but, when adjusted by cancer stage, this survival benefit disap-
peared. The mortality and morbidity after transhiatal esopha-
gectomy appeared to be less. Suffice it to say that this debate 
over the best procedure for esophagectomy remains an open 
question.
The role of the minimally invasive surgical procedures for 
a cancer cure will require further study and longer follow-up. 
It would appear from preliminary analysis that the transhiatal 
esophagectomy, like its open cousin, may be performed with 
less morbidity and mortality than the VATS procedure. Long-
term survival analyses will require careful follow-up for at least 
5 to 10 years after cancer treatment. A recent European multi-
center randomized trial comparing open and minimally invasive 
approaches revealed a highly significant reduction in pulmo-
nary complications in the patients who underwent the minimally 
invasive approach. There was no difference in procedure-related 
mortality between the approaches.
Alternative Therapies
Radiation Therapy.  Primary treatment with radiation ther-
apy does not produce results comparable with those obtained 
with surgery. Currently, the use of radiotherapy is restricted 
to patients who are not candidates for surgery, and is usually 
combined with chemotherapy. Radiation alone is used for pal-
liation of dysphagia but the benefit is short lived, lasting only 
2 to 3 months. Furthermore, the length and course of treatment 
are difficult to justify in patients with a limited life expectancy. 
Radiation is effective in patients who have hemorrhage from 
the primary tumor.
Adjuvant Chemotherapy.  The proposal to use adjuvant che-
motherapy in the treatment of esophageal cancer began when it 
became evident that most patients develop postoperative sys-
temic metastasis without local recurrence. This observation led 
to the hypothesis that undetected systemic micrometastasis had 
been present at the time of diagnosis, and, if effective systemic 
therapy was added to local regional therapy, survival should 
improve.
Recently, this hypothesis has been supported by the obser-
vation of epithelial tumor cells in the bone marrow in 37% of 
patients with esophageal cancer who were resected for cure. 
These patients had a greater prevalence of relapse at 9 months 
after surgery compared to those patients without such cells. 
Such studies emphasize that hematogenous dissemination of 
viable malignant cells occurs early in the disease, and that sys-
temic chemotherapy may be helpful if the cells are sensitive to 
the agent. On the other hand, systemic chemotherapy may be a 
hindrance, because of its immunosuppressive properties, if the 
cells are resistant. Unfortunately, current technology is not able 
to test tumor cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs. This 
requires that the choice of drugs be made solely on the basis of 
their clinical effectiveness against grossly similar tumors.
The decision to use preoperative rather than postopera-
tive chemotherapy was based on the ineffectiveness of chemo-
therapeutic agents when used after surgery, and animal studies 
suggesting that agents given before surgery were more effec-
tive. The claim that patients who receive chemotherapy before 
resection are less likely to develop resistance to the drugs is 
unsupported by hard evidence. The claim that drug delivery is 
enhanced because blood flow is more robust before patients 
undergo surgical dissection is similarly flawed, due to the fact 
that if enough blood reaches the operative site to heal the wound 
or anastomosis, then the flow should be sufficient to deliver che-
motherapeutic drugs. There are, however, data supporting the 
claim that preoperative chemotherapy in patients with esopha-
geal carcinoma can, if effective, facilitate surgical resection by 
reducing the size of the tumor. This is particularly beneficial in 
the case of squamous cell tumors above the level of the carina. 
Reducing the size of the tumor may provide a safer margin 
between the tumor and the trachea, and allow an anastomosis to 
a tumor-free cervical esophagus just below the cricopharyngeus. 
Involved margin at this level usually requires a laryngectomy to 
prevent subsequent local recurrence.
Preoperative Chemotherapy.  Eight randomized prospec-
tive studies of neoadjuvant chemotherapy vs. surgery alone 
have demonstrated mixed results. For adenocarcinomas of the 
distal esophagus and proximal stomach, preoperative neoadju-
vant 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin chemotherapy has been 
shown to provide a survival advantage over surgery alone in a 
well-powered study from the United Kingdom (MRC trial). This 
trial is one of the few to include enough patients (800) to detect 
small differences. The trial had a 10% absolute survival benefit 
at 2 years for the neoadjuvant chemotherapy group. In a second 
trial from the United Kingdom (MAGIC trial) of distal esopha-
geal and proximal gastric adenocarcinomas, the use of epirubi-
cin in combination with cisplatin and 5-FU also demonstrated a 
survival advantage for the induction chemotherapy arm with 
4 years median follow-up. As a result of these two trials, stan-
dard treatment of locally advanced adenocarcinoma in Europe 
calls for neoadjuvant chemotherapy with one of these two regi-
mens. Most failures are due to distant metastatic disease, under-
scoring the need for improved systemic therapy. Postoperative 
septic and respiratory complications may be more common in 
patients receiving chemotherapy.
Preoperative Combination Chemo- and Radiotherapy.  
Preoperative chemoradiotherapy using cisplatin and 5-FU in 
combination with radiotherapy has been reported by several 
investigators to be beneficial in both adenocarcinoma and squa-
mous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. There have been 10 
randomized prospective studies (Table 25-13). A recent meta-
analysis of these trials demonstrates a 13% survival advantage 
for neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy, which is more pro-
nounced for patients with adenocarcinoma than for those with 
squamous carcinoma (Table 25-14). It was also observed that 
the benefit for chemotherapy alone (7%) was not as dramatic as 
for chemoradiotherapy used in the neoadjuvant setting. Addi-
tionally, other work has demonstrated the importance of obtain-
ing an R0 (tumor-free) resection as the most important variable 
determining long-term survival. Although there are not direct, 
randomized comparisons between chemotherapy and chemora-
diation therapy, it appears that the addition of radiation may 
improve local response of the tumor, and may allow a greater 
opportunity for the surgeon to obtain an R0 resection.
The timing of surgery after chemoradiation induction is 
generally felt to be optimal between 6 and 8 weeks following 
the completion of induction therapy. Earlier than this time, 
active inflammation may make the resection hazardous, and the 
patients have not had time to recover fully from the chemoradia-
tion. After 8 weeks, edema in the periesophageal tissue starts to 
turn to scar tissue, making dissection more difficult.
With chemoradiation, the complete response rates for ade-
nocarcinoma range from 17% to 24% (Table 25-15). No tumor 
1013
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Table 25-13
Randomized trials of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy vs. surgery, or neoadjuvant chemotherapy vs. surgery
Year 
Activated
Treatment  
Schedule  
(Radiotherapy)
Treatment Schedule  
(Chemotherapy)
Concurrent 
or  
Sequential
Tumor Type
Sample 
Size
Median 
Follow-
Up (Mo)
Chemoradiotherapy
1983
35 Gy, 1.75 Gy/
fraction over 4 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 
bleomycin 5 mg/m2 d 1–5
Sequential
SCC
78
18a
1986
40 Gy, 2 Gy/
fraction over 4 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 days 1–4
Concurrent
SCC
69
12a
1988
20 Gy, 2 Gy/
fraction over 12 d
Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 600 mg/m2 d 2–5, 22–25
Sequential
SCC
86
12a
1989
45 Gy, 1.5 Gy/
fraction over 3 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 
5-fluorouracil 300 mg/m2 d 1–21; 
vinblastine 1 mg/m2 d 1–4
Concurrent
SCC and 
adenocarcinoma
100
98
1989
37 Gy, 3.7 Gy/
fraction over 2 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 0–2
Sequential
SCC
293
55
1990
40 Gy, 2.7 Gy/
fraction over 3 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 75 mg/m2 d 7; 
5-fluorouracil 15 mg/kg d 1–5
Concurrent
Adenocarcinoma 113
24
1990
40 Gy, 2.7 Gy/
fraction over 3 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 75 mg/m2 d 7; 
5-fluorouracil 15 mg/kg d 1–5
Concurrent
SCC
61
10
1994
35 Gy, 2.3 Gy/
fraction over 3 wk
One cycle: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 800 mg/m2 d 2–5
Concurrent
SCC and 
adenocarcinoma
256
65
2006
50.4 Gy, 1.8 Gy/
fraction over 5.6 wk
Two cycles: cisplatin 60 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 3–5
Concurrent
SCC and 
adenocarcinoma
56
60
1999
45.6 Gy, 1.2 Gy/
fraction over 28 d
Two cycles: cisplatin 60 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 3–5
Concurrent
SCC
101
25
Chemotherapy
1982
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 120 mg/m2 d 1; 
vindesine 3 mg/m2 d 1, 8; bleomycin 
10 U/m2 d 3–6
—
SCC
39
20
1983
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 
bleomycin 5 mg/m2 d 1–5
—
SCC
106
18a
1988c
—
Three cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5
—
SCC
46
75
1988
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 
bleomycin 10 mg/m2 d 3–8; vinblastine 
3 mg/m2 d 1, 8
—
SCC
46
17a
1989
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5
—
SCC
147
17
1990
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; 
etoposide 200 mg/m2 d 1–5
—
SCC
160
19a
1990
—
Three cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 days 1–5
—
SCC and adeno-
carcinoma
467
56
1992
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5
—
SCC
96
24
1992
—
Two cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; 
5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–4
—
SCC and adeno-
carcinoma
802
37
aEstimated as median survival.
bUnpublished thesis.
cYear of activation not reported, but imputed.
dOnly available as an abstract.
SCC = squamous cell carcinoma.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gebski V, et al. for the Australasian Gastro-Intestinal Trials Group (eds): Survival benefits from neoadjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: A meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol 8:226, 2007. Table 1, p 228. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1014
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 25-14
Results of the meta-analysis applied to effects of preoperative chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy on 2-y survival 
for patients with various levels of risk
Risk Group
2-y Survival Rate (%)
Expected 2-y Mortality
Control (%)
Treateda (%)
ARR (%)
NNT
Chemoradiotherapy
High
20
80
64.8
15.2
7
Medium
35
65
52.7
12.3
8
Low
50
50
40.5
9.5
10
Chemotherapy
High
20
80
72.0
12.0
8
Medium
35
65
58.5
6.5
15
Low
50
50
45.0
5.0
20
aBased on a 19% relative mortality reduction for those receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy and a 10% relative mortality reduction for those receiving 
chemotherapy.
ARR = absolute risk reduction; NNT = number needed to treat to prevent one death.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gebski V, et al. for the Australasian Gastro-Intestinal Trials Group (eds): Survival benefits from neoadjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: A meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol 8:226, 2007. Table 2, p 231. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
is detected in the specimen after esophagectomy. Patients dem-
onstrating a complete response to chemoradiation have a better 
survival rate than those without complete response, but distant 
failure remains common.
At present, the strongest predictors of outcome of 
patients with esophageal cancer are the anatomic extent 
of the tumor at diagnosis and the completeness of tumor 
removal by surgical resection. After incomplete resection of 
an esophageal cancer, the 5-year survival rates are 0% to 5%. 
In contrast, after complete resection, independent of stage of 
disease, 5-year survival ranges from 15% to 40%, according 
to selection criteria and stage distribution. The importance of 
early recognition and adequate surgical resection cannot be 
overemphasized. Figure 25-70 is a global algorithm for the 
management of esophageal carcinoma.
SARCOMA OF THE ESOPHAGUS
Sarcomas and carcinosarcomas are rare neoplasms, account-
ing for approximately 0.1% to 1.5% of all esophageal tumors. 
They present with the symptom of dysphagia, which does not 
differ from the dysphagia associated with the more common 
epithelial carcinoma. Tumors located within the cervical or 
high thoracic esophagus can cause symptoms of pulmonary 
aspiration secondary to esophageal obstruction. Large tumors 
originating at the level of the tracheal bifurcation can produce 
symptoms of airway obstruction and syncope by direct com-
pression of the tracheobronchial tree and heart (Fig. 25-71). 
The duration of dysphagia and age of the patients affected 
with these tumors are similar to those with carcinoma of the 
esophagus.
Table 25-15
Results of neoadjuvant therapy in adenocarcinoma of the esophagus
Institution
Year
No. of Patients
Regimen
Complete Pathologic 
Response (%)
Survival
M. D. Anderson
1990
35
P, E, 5-FU
3
42% at 3 y
SLMC
1992
18
P, 5-FU, RT
17
40% at 3 y
Vanderbilt
1993
39
P, E, 5-FU, RT
19
47% at 4 y
Michigan
1993
21
P, VBL, 5-FU, RT
24
34% at 5 y
MGH
1994
16
P, 5-FU
0
42% at 4 y
MGH
1994
22
E, A, P
5
58% at 2 y
A = doxorubicin; E = etoposide; 5-FU = 5-fluorouracil; MGH = Massachusetts General Hospital; P = cisplatin; RT = radiation therapy; SLMC = St. Louis 
University Medical Center; VBL = vinblastine.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Wright CD, et al.: Evolution of treatment strategies for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal 
junction. Ann Thorac Surg 58:1574, 1994. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1015
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
A barium swallow usually shows a large polypoid intralu-
minal esophageal mass, causing partial obstruction and dilata-
tion of the esophagus proximal to the tumor (Fig. 25-72). The 
smooth polypoid nature of the lesion, although not diagnostic, 
is distinctive enough to suggest the presence of a sarcoma rather 
than the more common ulcerating, stenosing carcinoma.
Esophagoscopy commonly shows an intraluminal necrotic 
mass. When biopsy is attempted, it is important to remove the 
necrotic tissue until bleeding is seen on the tumor’s surface. 
When this is not done, the biopsy specimen will show only tis-
sue necrosis. Even when viable tumor is obtained on biopsy, 
it has been these authors’ experience that it cannot be defini-
tively identified as carcinoma, sarcoma, or carcinosarcoma on 
the basis of the histology of the portion biopsied. Biopsy results 
cannot be totally relied on to identify the presence of sarcoma, 
and it is often the polypoid nature of the lesion that arouses sus-
picion that it may be something other than carcinoma.
Polypoid sarcomas of the esophagus, in contrast to infil-
trating carcinomas, remain superficial to the muscularis propria 
and are less likely to metastasize to regional LNs. In one series 
of 14 patients, local extension or tumor metastasis would have 
prevented a potentially curative resection in only five. Thus, the 
presence of a large polypoid tumor should not deter the surgeon 
from resecting the lesion.
Sarcomatous lesions of the esophagus can be divided into 
epidermoid carcinomas with spindle cell features, such as car-
cinosarcoma, and true sarcomas that arise from mesenchymal 
tissue, such as leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and rhabdo-
myosarcoma. Based on current histologic criteria for diagno-
sis, fibrosarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma of the esophagus are 
extremely rare lesions.
Surgical resection of polypoid sarcoma of the esophagus 
is the treatment of choice, because radiation therapy has little 
success and the tumors remain superficial, with local invasion 
or distant metastases occurring late in the course of the disease. 
As with carcinoma, the absence of both wall penetration and 
LN metastases is necessary for curative treatment, and surgi-
cal resection is consequently responsible for the majority of the 
Barium swallow, endoscopy
Tumor staging
(CT chest and abdomen,
endoscopic ultrasonography)
Late disease or
significant comorbidity
- Distant organ metastasis
- Imminent cardiac pulmonary
 or hepatic failure
Severe debility
Advanced disease
Supportive care
Curative
en bloc resection
Palliative surgery
Local recurrence
No metastases
Complete excision
possible
Unresectable proximal
or bleeding tumor
Laser ablative therapy
Stent
Airway fistula or
unresectable primary
tumor or local
recurrence
Chemotherapy
Early disease
Tumor suspected not
to be through the wall and/or less than
8 lymph nodes involved
Through the wall and multiple
lymph node metastasis
Advanced disease
Chemoradiation
Preoperative chemoradiation 
followed by en bloc resection
Clinical evaluation
Treatment failure or
recurrence
Distant metastasis
No local recurrence
Figure 25-70.  Suggested global algorithm for the management of carcinoma of the esophagus. CT = computed tomography.
1016
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
Figure 25-71.  A. Computed tomographic scan of a leiomyosarcoma (black arrow) that caused compression of the heart and symptoms of 
syncope. B. Surgical specimen of leiomyosarcoma shown in A with a pedunculated luminal lesion (white arrow) and a large extraesophageal 
component (black arrow). There was no evidence of lymph node metastasis at the time of operation.
A
B
Figure 25-72.  A. Barium swallow showing a large polypoid intraluminal esophageal mass causing partial obstruction and dilation of the 
proximal esophagus. B. Operative specimen showing 9-cm polypoid leiomyoblastoma.
1017
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
reported 5-year survivals. Resection also provides an excellent 
means of palliating the patient’s symptoms. The surgical tech-
nique for resection and the subsequent restoration of the GI con-
tinuity is similar to that described for carcinoma.
In these authors’ experience, four of the eight patients with 
carcinosarcoma survived for 5 years or longer. Even though 
this number is small, it suggests that resection produces better 
results in epithelial carcinoma with spindle cell features than 
in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Similarly, with 
leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus, the same scattered reports 
exist with little information on survival. Of seven patients with 
leiomyosarcoma, two died from their disease—one in 3 months 
and the other 4 years and 7 months after resection. The other 
five patients were reported to have survived more than 5 years.
It is difficult to evaluate the benefits of resection for leio-
myoblastoma of the esophagus, due to the small number of 
reported patients with tumors in this location. Most leiomyo-
blastomas occur in the stomach, and 38% of these patients suc-
cumb to the cancer in 3 years. Fifty-five percent of patients 
with extragastric leiomyoblastoma also die from the disease, 
within an average of 3 years. Consequently, leiomyoblastoma 
should be considered a malignant lesion and apt to behave like 
a leiomyosarcoma. The presence of nuclear hyperchromatism, 
increased mitotic figures (more than one per high-power field), 
tumor size larger than 10 cm, and clinical symptoms of longer 
than 6 months’ duration are associated with a poor prognosis.
BENIGN TUMORS AND CYSTS
Benign tumors and cysts of the esophagus are relatively uncom-
mon. From the perspectives of both the clinician and the pathol-
ogist, benign tumors may be divided into those that are within 
the muscular wall and those that are within the lumen of the 
esophagus.
Intramural lesions are either solid tumors or cysts, and the 
vast majority are leiomyomas. They are made up of varying por-
tions of smooth muscle and fibrous tissue. Fibromas, myomas, 
fibromyomas, and lipomyomas are closely related and occur 
rarely. Other histologic types of solid intramural tumors have 
been described, such as lipomas, neurofibromas, hemangiomas, 
osteochondromas, granular cell myoblastomas, and glomus 
tumors, but they are medical curiosities.
Intraluminal lesions are polypoid or pedunculated growths 
that usually originate in the submucosa, develop mainly into the 
lumen, and are covered with normal stratified squamous epi-
thelium. The majority of these tumors are composed of fibrous 
tissue of varying degrees of compactness with a rich vascular 
supply. Some are loose and myxoid (e.g., myxoma and myxo-
fibroma), some are more collagenous (e.g., fibroma), and some 
contain adipose tissue (e.g., fibrolipoma). These different types 
of tumor are frequently collectively designated fibrovascular 
polyps, or simply as polyps. Pedunculated intraluminal tumors 
should be removed. If the lesion is not too large, endoscopic 
removal with a snare is feasible.
Leiomyoma
Leiomyomas constitute more than 50% of benign esophageal 
tumors. The average age at presentation is 38, which is in sharp 
contrast to that seen with esophageal carcinoma. Leiomyomas 
are twice as common in males. Because they originate in smooth 
muscle, 90% are located in the lower two thirds of the esopha-
gus. They are usually solitary, but multiple tumors have been 
found on occasion. They vary greatly in size and shape. Actually 
tumors as small as 1 cm in diameter and as large as 10 lb have 
been removed.
Typically, leiomyomas are oval. During their growth, they 
remain intramural, having the bulk of their mass protruding 
toward the outer wall of the esophagus. The overlying mucosa is 
freely movable and normal in appearance. Dysphagia and pain 
are the most common complaints, the two symptoms occurring 
more frequently together than separately. Bleeding directly 
related to the tumor is rare, and when hematemesis or melena 
occurs in a patient with an esophageal leiomyoma, other causes 
should be investigated.
A barium swallow is the most useful method to demon-
strate a leiomyoma of the esophagus (Fig. 25-73). In profile, the 
tumor appears as a smooth, semilunar, or crescent-shaped filling 
defect that moves with swallowing, is sharply demarcated, and 
is covered and surrounded by normal mucosa. Esophagoscopy 
should be performed to exclude the reported observation of a 
coexistence with carcinoma. The freely movable mass, which 
bulges into the lumen, should not be biopsied because of an 
increased chance of mucosal perforation at the time of surgical 
enucleation. Endoscopic ultrasound is also a useful adjunct in 
the workup of leiomyoma and provides detail related to the ana-
tomic extent and relationship to surrounding structures.
Despite their slow growth and limited potential for malig-
nant degeneration, leiomyomas should be removed unless there 
are specific contraindications. The majority can be removed by 
simple enucleation. If, during removal, the mucosa is inadver-
tently entered, the defect can be repaired primarily. After tumor 
removal, the outer esophageal wall should be reconstructed by 
closure of the muscle layer. The location of the lesion and the 
extent of surgery required will dictate the approach. Lesions of 
the proximal and middle esophagus require a right thoracotomy, 
whereas distal esophageal lesions require a left thoracotomy. 
Videothoracoscopic and laparoscopic approaches are now fre-
quently used. The mortality rate associated with enucleation 
is low, and success in relieving the dysphagia is near 100%. 
Figure 25-73.  Barium esophagogram showing a classical, smooth, 
contoured, punched-out defect of a leiomyoma.
1018
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Large lesions or those involving the GEJ may require esopha-
geal resection.
Esophageal Cyst
Cysts may be congenital or acquired. Congenital cysts are 
lined wholly or partly by columnar ciliated epithelium of the 
respiratory type, by glandular epithelium of the gastric type, by 
squamous epithelium, or by transitional epithelium. In some, 
epithelial lining cells may be absent. Confusion over the embry-
ologic origin of congenital cysts has led to a variety of names, 
such as enteric, bronchogenic, duplication, and mediastinal 
cysts. Acquired retention cysts also occur, probably as a result 
of obstruction of the excretory ducts of the esophageal glands.
Enteric and bronchogenic cysts are the most common, and 
arise as a result of developmental abnormalities during the for-
mation and differentiation of the lower respiratory tract, esoph-
agus, and stomach from the foregut. During its embryologic 
development, the esophagus is lined successively with simple 
columnar, pseudostratified ciliated columnar, and, finally, strati-
fied squamous epithelium. This sequence probably accounts for 
the fact that the lining epithelium may be any or a combination 
of these; the presence of cilia does not necessarily indicate a 
respiratory origin.
Cysts vary in size from small to very large, and are usually 
located intramurally in the middle- to lower-third of the esopha-
gus. Their symptoms are similar to those of a leiomyoma. The 
diagnosis similarly depends on radiographic, endoscopic, and 
endosonographic findings. Surgical excision by enucleation is 
the preferred treatment. During removal, a fistulous tract con-
necting the cysts to the airways should be sought, particularly in 
patients who have had repetitive bronchopulmonary infections.
ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
Perforation of the esophagus constitutes a true emergency. It 
most commonly occurs following diagnostic or therapeutic pro-
cedures. Spontaneous perforation, referred to as Boerhaave’s 
syndrome, accounts for only 15% of cases of esophageal per-
foration, foreign bodies for 14%, and trauma for 10%. Pain is 
a striking and consistent symptom and strongly suggests that 
an esophageal rupture has occurred, particularly if located in 
the cervical area following instrumentation of the esophagus, 
or substernally in a patient with a history of resisting vomiting. 
If subcutaneous emphysema is present, the diagnosis is almost 
certain.
Spontaneous rupture of the esophagus is associated with a 
high mortality rate because of the delay in recognition and treat-
ment. Although there usually is a history of resisting vomiting, 
in a small number of patients, the injury occurs silently, without 
any antecedent history. When the chest radiogram of a patient 
with an esophageal perforation shows air or an effusion in the 
pleural space, the condition is often misdiagnosed as a pneumo-
thorax or pancreatitis. An elevated pleural amylase caused by 
the extrusion of saliva through the perforation may fix the diag-
nosis of pancreatitis in the mind of an unwary physician. If the 
chest radiogram is normal, a mistaken diagnosis of myocardial 
infarction or dissecting aneurysm is often made.
Spontaneous rupture usually occurs into the left pleu-
ral cavity or just above the GEJ. About 50% of patients have 
concomitant GERD, suggesting that minimal resistance to the 
transmission of abdominal pressure into the thoracic esophagus 
is a factor in the pathophysiology of the lesion. During vomiting, 
high peaks of intragastric pressure can be recorded, frequently 
exceeding 200 mmHg, but because extragastric pressure 
remains almost equal to intragastric pressure, stretching of the 
gastric wall is minimal. The amount of pressure transmitted to 
the esophagus varies considerably, depending on the position 
of the GEJ. When it is in the abdomen and exposed to intra-
abdominal pressure, the pressure transmitted to the esophagus 
is much less than when it is exposed to the negative thoracic 
pressure. In the latter situation, the pressure in the lower esoph-
agus will frequently equal intragastric pressure if the glottis 
remains closed. Cadaver studies have shown that when this 
pressure exceeds 150 mmHg, rupture of the esophagus is apt to 
occur. When a hiatal hernia is present and the sphincter remains 
exposed to abdominal pressure, the lesion produced is usually a 
Mallory-Weiss mucosal tear, and bleeding rather than perfora-
tion is the problem. This is due to the stretching of the supra-
diaphragmatic portion of the gastric wall. In this situation, the 
hernia sac represents an extension of the abdominal cavity, and 
the GEJ remains exposed to abdominal pressure.
Diagnosis
Abnormalities on the chest radiogram can be variable and should 
not be depended upon to make the diagnosis. This is because the 
abnormalities are dependent on three factors: (a) the time inter-
val between the perforation and the radiographic examination, 
(b) the site of perforation, and (c) the integrity of the mediastinal 
pleura. Mediastinal emphysema, a strong indicator of perfora-
tion, takes at least 1 hour to be demonstrated, and is present in 
only 40% of patients. Mediastinal widening secondary to edema 
may not occur for several hours. The site of perforation also can 
influence the radiographic findings. In cervical perforation, cer-
vical emphysema is common and mediastinal emphysema rare; 
the converse is true for thoracic perforations. Frequently, air 
will be visible in the erector spinae muscles on a neck radio-
gram before it can be palpated or seen on a chest radiogram 
(Fig. 25-74). The integrity of the mediastinal pleura influences 
the radiographic abnormality in that rupture of the pleura results 
in a pneumothorax, a finding that is seen in 77% of patients. In 
two thirds of patients, the perforation is on the left side; in one 
fifth, it is on the right side; and in one tenth, it is bilateral. If 
pleural integrity is maintained, mediastinal emphysema (rather 
than a pneumothorax) appears rapidly. A pleural effusion sec-
ondary to inflammation of the mediastinum occurs late. In 9% 
of patients, the chest radiogram is normal.
The diagnosis is confirmed with a contrast esophagram, 
which will demonstrate extravasation in 90% of patients. The 
use of a water-soluble medium such as Gastrografin is preferred. 
Of concern is that there is a 10% false-negative rate. This may 
be due to obtaining the radiographic study with the patient in 
the upright position. When the patient is upright, the passage of 
water-soluble contrast material can be too rapid to demonstrate 
a small perforation. The studies should be done with the patient 
in the right lateral decubitus position (Fig. 25-75). In this, the 
contrast material fills the entire length of the esophagus, allow-
ing the actual site of perforation and its interconnecting cavities 
to be visualized in almost all patients.
Management
The key to optimum management is early diagnosis. The most 
favorable outcome is obtained following primary closure of the 
perforation within 24 hours, resulting in 80% to 90% survival. 
Figure 25-76 is an operative photograph taken through a left 
1019
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
thoracotomy of an esophageal rupture following a pneumatic 
dilation for achalasia. The most common location for the injury 
is the left lateral wall of the esophagus, just above the GEJ. 
To get adequate exposure of the injury, a dissection similar to 
that described for esophageal myotomy is performed. A flap 
of stomach is pulled up and the soiled fat pad at the GEJ is 
removed. The edges of the injury are trimmed and closed pri-
marily (Fig. 25-77). The closure is reinforced with the use of a 
pleural patch or construction of a Nissen fundoplication.
Mortality associated with immediate closure varies 
between 8% and 20%. After 24 hours, survival decreases to 
<50%, and is not influenced by the type of operative therapy 
(i.e., drainage alone or drainage plus closure of the perfora-
tion). If the time delay before closing a perforation approaches 
24 hours and the tissues are inflamed, division of the cardia 
and resection of the diseased portion of the esophagus are rec-
ommended. The remainder of the esophagus is mobilized, and 
as much normal esophagus as possible is saved and brought 
out as an end cervical esophagostomy. In some situations, the 
retained esophagus may be so long that it loops down into the 
chest. The contaminated mediastinum is drained and a feeding 
jejunostomy tube is inserted. The recovery from sepsis is often 
immediate, dramatic, and reflected by a marked improvement in 
the patient’s condition over a 24-hour period. On recovery from 
the sepsis, the patient is discharged and returns on a subsequent 
date for reconstruction with a substernal colon interposition. 
Failure to apply this aggressive therapy can result in a mortal-
ity rate in excess of 50% in patients in whom the diagnosis has 
been delayed.
Nonoperative management of esophageal perforation has 
been advocated in select situations. The choice of conserva-
tive therapy requires skillful judgment and necessitates care-
ful radiographic examination of the esophagus. This course of 
management usually follows an injury occurring during dila-
tion of esophageal strictures or pneumatic dilations of achalasia. 
Conservative management should not be used in patients who 
have free perforations into the pleural space. Cameron proposed 
three criteria for the nonoperative management of esophageal 
perforation: (a) the esophagram must show the perforation to 
be contained within the mediastinum and drain well back into 
the esophagus (Fig. 25-78), (b) symptoms should be mild, 
and (c) there should be minimal evidence of clinical sepsis. If 
these conditions are met, it is reasonable to treat the patient with 
Figure 25-74.  Chest radiogram showing air in the deep muscles 
of the neck following perforation of the esophagus (arrow). This 
is often the earliest sign of perforation and can be present without 
evidence of air in the mediastinum.
Figure 25-75.  Radiographic study of a patient with a perforation 
of the esophagus using water-soluble contrast material. The patient 
is placed in the lateral decubitus position with the left side up to 
allow complete filling of the esophagus and demonstration of the 
defect.
Figure 25-76.  Left thoracotomy in a patient with an esophageal 
rupture at the gastroesophageal junction following forceful dila-
tion of the lower esophagus for achalasia (the surgical clamp is on 
the stomach, and the Penrose drain encircles the esophagus). The 
injury consists of a mucosal perforation and extensive splitting of 
the esophageal muscle from just below the Penrose drain to the 
stomach.
1020
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
hyperalimentation, antibiotics, and cimetidine to decrease acid 
secretion and diminish pepsin activity. Oral intake is resumed in 
7 to 14 days, dependent on subsequent radiographic examinations.
MALLORY-WEISS SYNDROME
In 1929, Mallory and Weiss described four patients with acute 
upper GI bleeding who were found at autopsy to have mucosal 
tears at the GEJ. This syndrome, characterized by acute upper 
GI bleeding following vomiting, is considered to be the cause 
of up to 15% of all severe upper GI bleeds. The mechanism is 
similar to spontaneous esophageal perforation: an acute increase 
in intra-abdominal pressure against a closed glottis in a patient 
with a hiatal hernia.
Mallory-Weiss tears are characterized by arterial bleeding, 
which may be massive. Vomiting is not an obligatory factor, 
as there may be other causes of an acute increase in intra-
abdominal pressure, such as paroxysmal coughing, seizures, 
and retching. The diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion, 
particularly in the patient who develops upper GI bleeding 
following prolonged vomiting or retching. Upper endoscopy 
confirms the suspicion by identifying one or more longitudinal 
fissures in the mucosa of the herniated stomach as the source 
of bleeding.
In the majority of patients, the bleeding will stop sponta-
neously with nonoperative management. In addition to blood 
replacement, the stomach should be decompressed and anti-
emetics administered, as a distended stomach and continued 
vomiting aggravate further bleeding. A Sengstaken-Blakemore 
tube will not stop the bleeding, as the pressure in the balloon is 
not sufficient to overcome arterial pressure. Endoscopic injec-
tion of epinephrine may be therapeutic if bleeding does not 
stop spontaneously. Only occasionally will surgery be required 
to stop blood loss. The procedure consists of laparotomy and 
high gastrotomy with oversewing of the linear tear. Mortality is 
uncommon, and recurrence is rare.
CAUSTIC INJURY
Accidental caustic lesions occur mainly in children, and, in gen-
eral, rather small quantities of caustics are taken. In adults or 
teenagers, the swallowing of caustic liquids is usually deliber-
ate, during a suicide attempt, and greater quantities are swal-
lowed. Alkalis are more frequently swallowed accidentally than 
acids, because strong acids cause an immediate burning pain in 
the mouth.
Pathology
The swallowing of caustic substances causes an acute and a 
chronic injury. During the acute phase, care focuses on con-
trolling the immediate tissue injury and the potential for per-
foration. During the chronic phase, the focus is on treatment 
Figure 25-77.  The technique of closure of an esophageal perfora-
tion through a left thoracotomy. A. A tongue of stomach is pulled 
up through the esophageal hiatus, and the gastroesophageal fat pad 
is removed; the edges of the mucosal injury are trimmed and closed 
using interrupted modified Gambee stitches. B. Reinforcement of 
the closure with a parietal pleural patch.
Figure 25-78.  Barium esophagogram showing a stricture and a 
contained perforation following dilation. The injury meets Cam-
eron criteria: It is contained within the mediastinum and drawn 
back into the esophagus, the patient had mild symptoms, and there 
was no evidence of clinical sepsis. Nonoperative management was 
successful.
1021
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
of strictures and disturbances in pharyngeal swallowing. In the 
acute phase, the degree and extent of the lesion are dependent 
on several factors: the nature of the caustic substance, its con-
centration, the quantity swallowed, and the time the substance 
is in contact with the tissues.
Acids and alkalis affect tissue in different ways. Alkalis 
dissolve tissue, and therefore penetrate more deeply, while acids 
cause a coagulative necrosis that limits their penetration. Ani-
mal experiments have shown that there is a correlation between 
the depth of the lesion and the concentration of sodium hydrox-
ide solution. When a solution of 3.8% comes into contact with 
the esophagus for 10 seconds, it causes necrosis of the mucosa 
and the submucosa, but spares the muscular layer. A concentra-
tion of 22.5% penetrates the whole esophageal wall and into the 
periesophageal tissues. Cleansing products can contain up to 
90% sodium hydroxide. The strength of esophageal contractions 
varies according to the level of the esophagus, being weakest 
at the striated muscle–smooth muscle interface. Consequently, 
clearance from this area may be somewhat slower, allowing 
caustic substances to remain in contact with the mucosa lon-
ger. This explains why the esophagus is preferentially and more 
severely affected at this level than in the lower portions.
The lesions caused by lye injury occur in three phases. 
First is the acute necrotic phase, lasting 1 to 4 days after injury. 
During this period, coagulation of intracellular proteins results 
in cell necrosis, and the living tissue surrounding the area of 
necrosis develops an intense inflammatory reaction. Second 
is the ulceration and granulation phase, starting 3 to 5 days 
after injury. During this period, the superficial necrotic tissue 
sloughs, leaving an ulcerated, acutely inflamed base, and granu-
lation tissue fills the defect left by the sloughed mucosa. This 
phase lasts 10 to 12 days, and it is during this period that the 
esophagus is the weakest. Third is the phase of cicatrization and 
scarring, which begins the third week following injury. During 
this period, the previously formed connective tissue begins to 
contract, resulting in narrowing of the esophagus. Adhesions 
between granulating areas occur, resulting in pockets and bands. 
It is during this period that efforts must be made to reduce stric-
ture formation.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical picture of an esophageal burn is determined by the 
degree and extent of the lesion. In the initial phase, complaints 
consist of pain in the mouth and substernal region, hypersali-
vation, pain on swallowing, and dysphagia. The presence of 
fever is strongly correlated with the presence of an esophageal 
lesion. Bleeding can occur, and frequently, the patient vomits. 
These initial complaints disappear during the quiescent period 
of ulceration and granulation. During the cicatrization and scar-
ring phase, the complaint of dysphagia reappears and is due to 
fibrosis and retraction, resulting in narrowing of the esopha-
gus. Of the patients who develop strictures, 60% do so within 1 
month, and 80% within 2 months. If dysphagia does not develop 
within 8 months, it is unlikely that a stricture will occur. Serious 
systemic reactions such as hypovolemia and acidosis resulting 
in renal damage can occur in cases in which the burns have 
been caused by strong acids. Respiratory complications such 
as laryngospasm, laryngoedema, and occasionally pulmonary 
edema can occur, especially when strong acids are aspirated.
Inspection of the oral cavity and pharynx can indicate that 
caustic substances were swallowed, but does not reveal that the 
esophagus has been burned. Conversely, esophageal burns can 
be present without apparent oral injuries. Because of this poor 
correlation, early esophagoscopy is advocated to establish the 
presence of an esophageal injury. To lessen the chance of perfo-
ration, the scope should not be introduced beyond the proximal 
esophageal lesion. The degree of injury can be graded according 
to the criteria listed in Table 25-16. Even if the esophagoscopy 
is normal, strictures may appear later. Radiographic examina-
tion is not a reliable means to identify the presence of early 
esophageal injury, but is important in later follow-up to identify 
strictures. The most common locations of caustic injuries are 
shown in Table 25-17.
Treatment
Treatment of a caustic lesion of the esophagus is directed toward 
management of both the immediate and late consequences of 
the injury. The immediate treatment consists of limiting the 
burn by administering neutralizing agents. To be effective, this 
must be done within the first hour. Lye or other alkali can be 
neutralized with half-strength vinegar, lemon juice, or orange 
juice. Acid can be neutralized with milk, egg white, or antac-
ids. Sodium bicarbonate is not used because it generates carbon 
dioxide, which might increase the danger of perforation. Emet-
ics are contraindicated, because vomiting renews the contact of 
the caustic substance with the esophagus and can contribute to 
perforation if too forceful. Hypovolemia is corrected and broad-
spectrum antibiotics are administered to lessen the inflamma-
tory reaction and prevent infectious complications. If necessary, 
a feeding jejunostomy tube is inserted to provide nutrition. Oral 
feeding can be started when the dysphagia of the initial phase 
has regressed.
Table 25-16
Endoscopic grading of corrosive esophageal and 
gastric burns
First degree: Mucosal hyperemia and edema
Second degree: Limited hemorrhage, exudate ulceration,  
  and pseudomembrane formation
Third degree: Sloughing of mucosa, deep ulcers, massive  
  hemorrhage, complete obstruction of lumen by edema,  
  charring, and perforation
Table 25-17
Location of caustic injury (n = 62)
Pharynx
10%
Esophagus
70%
  Upper
15%
  Middle
65%
  Lower
2%
  Whole
18%
Stomach
20%
  Antral
91%
  Whole
9%
Both stomach and esophagus
14%
1022
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
In the past, surgeons waited until the appearance of a stric-
ture before starting treatment. Currently, dilations are started 
the first day after the injury, with the aim of preserving the 
esophageal lumen by removing the adhesions that occurred in 
the injured segments. However, this approach is controversial 
in that dilations can traumatize the esophagus, causing bleed-
ing, and perforation, and there are data indicating that exces-
sive dilations cause increased fibrosis secondary to the added 
trauma. The use of steroids to limit fibrosis has been shown to 
be effective in animals, but their effectiveness in human beings 
has not been established.
Extensive necrosis of the esophagus frequently leads to 
perforation, and is best managed by resection. When there is 
extensive gastric involvement, the esophagus is nearly always 
necrotic or severely burned, and total gastrectomy and near-total 
esophagectomy are necessary. The presence of air in the esopha-
geal wall is a sign of muscle necrosis and impending perforation 
and is a strong indication for esophagectomy.
Management of acute injury is summarized in the algo-
rithm in Fig. 25-79. Some authors have advocated the use of an 
intraluminal esophageal stent (Fig. 25-80) in patients who are 
operated on and found to have no evidence of extensive esopha-
gogastric necrosis. In these patients, a biopsy of the posterior 
gastric wall should be performed to exclude occult injury. If, 
histologically, there is a question of viability, a second-look 
operation should be done within 36 hours. If a stent is inserted, 
it should be kept in position for 21 days, and removed after a 
satisfactory barium esophagogram. Esophagoscopy should be 
done, and, if strictures are present, dilations initiated.
Once the acute phase has passed, attention is turned to 
the prevention and management of strictures. Both antegrade 
dilation with a Hurst or Maloney bougie and retrograde dila-
tion with a Tucker bougie have been satisfactory. In a series 
of 1079 patients, early dilations started during the acute phase 
gave excellent results in 78%, good results in 13%, and poor 
results in 2%. During the treatment 55 patients died. In contrast, 
of 333 patients whose strictures were dilated when they became 
symptomatic, only 21% had excellent results, 46% good, and 
6% poor, with three dying during the process. The length of time 
the surgeon should persist with dilation before consideration of 
esophageal resection is problematic. An adequate lumen should 
be re-established within 6 months to 1 year, with progressively 
longer intervals between dilations. If, during the course of treat-
ment, an adequate lumen cannot be established or maintained 
(i.e., smaller bougies must be used), operative intervention 
should be considered. Surgical intervention is indicated when 
there is (a) complete stenosis in which all attempts from above 
and below have failed to establish a lumen, (b) marked irregu-
larity and pocketing on barium swallow, (c) the development of 
a severe periesophageal reaction or mediastinitis with dilatation, 
(d) a fistula, (e) the inability to dilate or maintain the lumen 
above a 40F bougie, or (f) a patient who is unwilling or unable 
to undergo prolonged periods of dilation.
The variety of abnormalities seen requires that creativity 
be used when considering esophageal reconstruction. Skin tube 
Ingestion of caustic agent
Observation
24–48 hours
Exploratory
laparotomy
- Second look
at 36 hours
- Intraluminal
 esophageal
 stent
- Posterior
 gastric
 wall biopsy
- Jejunostomy
1° burn
2° & 3° burn
- Esophagogastric
 resection
- Cervical
 esophagostomy
- Jejunostomy
- Resection of
 adjacent
 involved
 organs
Full thickness
necrosis
of esophagus
and stomach
Viable
esophagus
and
stomach
Questionable
esophagus
and
stomach 
Esophagoscopy
(Within 12 hours)
Figure 25-79.  Algorithm summarizing the management of acute 
caustic injury.
Figure 25-80.  The use of an esophageal stent to prevent stricture. 
The stent is constructed from a chest tube and placed in the esopha-
gus at the time of an exploratory laparotomy. A Penrose drain is 
placed over the distal end as a flap valve to prevent reflux. The stent 
is supported at its upper end by attaching it to a suction catheter 
that is secured to the nares. Continuous suction removes saliva and 
mucus trapped in the pharynx and upper esophagus.
1023
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
esophagoplasties are now used much less frequently than they 
were in the past, and are mainly of historical interest. Currently, 
the stomach, jejunum, and colon are the organs used to replace 
the esophagus, through either the posterior mediastinum or the 
retrosternal route. A retrosternal route is chosen when there has 
been a previous esophagectomy or there is extensive fibrosis in 
the posterior mediastinum. When all factors are considered, the 
order of preference for an esophageal substitute is (a) colon, (b) 
stomach, and (c) jejunum. Free jejunal grafts based on the supe-
rior thyroid artery have provided excellent results. Whatever 
method is selected, it must be emphasized that these procedures 
cannot be taken lightly; minor errors of judgment or technique 
may lead to serious or even fatal complications.
Critical in the planning of the operation is the selection of 
cervical esophagus, pyriform sinus, or posterior pharynx as the 
site for proximal anastomosis. The site of the upper anastomosis 
depends on the extent of the pharyngeal and cervical esophageal 
damage encountered. When the cervical esophagus is destroyed 
and a pyriform sinus remains open the anastomosis can be made 
to the hypopharynx (Fig. 25-81). When the pyriform sinuses are 
completely stenosed, a transglottic approach is used to perform 
an anastomosis to the posterior oropharyngeal wall (Fig. 25-82). 
This allows excision of supraglottic strictures and elevation and 
anterior tilting of the larynx. In both of these situations, the 
patient must relearn to swallow. Recovery is long and difficult 
and may require several endoscopic dilations, and often reop-
erations. Sleeve resections of short strictures are not successful 
because the extent of damage to the wall of the esophagus can 
be greater than realized, and almost invariably the anastomosis 
is carried out in a diseased area.
The management of a bypassed damaged esophagus after 
injury is problematic. If the esophagus is left in place, ulceration 
from gastroesophageal reflux or the development of carcinoma 
must be considered. The extensive dissection necessary to 
remove the esophagus, particularly in the presence of marked 
periesophagitis, is associated with significant morbidity. Leav-
ing the esophagus in place preserves the function of the vagus 
nerves, and, in turn, the function of the stomach. On the other 
hand, leaving a damaged esophagus in place can result in mul-
tiple blind sacs and subsequent development of mediastinal 
abscesses years later. Most experienced surgeons recommend 
that the esophagus be removed unless the operative risk is 
unduly high.
ACQUIRED FISTULA
The esophagus lies in close contact with the membranous por-
tion of the trachea and left bronchus, predisposing to the for-
mation of fistula to these structures. Most acquired esophageal 
fistulas are to the tracheobronchial tree, and secondary to either 
esophageal or pulmonary malignancy. Traumatic fistulas and 
those associated with esophageal diverticula account for the 
remainder. Fistulas associated with traction diverticula are usu-
ally due to mediastinal inflammatory disease, and traumatic 
fistulas usually occur secondary to penetrating wounds, lye 
ingestion, or iatrogenic injury.
These fistulas are characterized by paroxysmal coughing fol-
lowing the ingestion of liquids, and by recurrent or chronic pulmo-
nary infections. The onset of cough immediately after swallowing 
suggests aspiration, whereas a brief delay (30–60 seconds) 
suggests a fistula.
Spontaneous closure is rare, owing to the presence of 
malignancy or a recurrent infectious process. Surgical treat-
ment of benign fistulas consists of division of the fistulous tract, 
resection of irreversibly damaged lung tissue, and closure of the 
esophageal defect. To prevent recurrence, a pleural flap should 
be interposed. Treatment of malignant fistulas is difficult, par-
ticularly in the presence of prior irradiation. Generally, only pal-
liative treatment is indicated. This can best be done by using a 
Figure 25-81.  Anastomosis of the bowel to a preserved pyri-
form sinus. To identify the site, a finger is inserted into the free 
pyriform sinus through a suprahyoid incision (dotted line). This 
requires removing the lateral inferior portion of the thyroid carti-
lage as shown in cross-section. (Reproduced with permission from 
Tran Ba Huy P, Celerier M: Management of severe caustic stenosis 
of the hypopharynx and esophagus by ileocolic transposition via 
suprahyoid or transepiglottic approach. Analysis of 18 cases. Ann 
Surg. 207:439, 1988.)
Figure 25-82.  Anastomosis of the bowel to the posterior orophar-
ynx. The anastomosis is done through an inverted trapezoid inci-
sion above the thyroid cartilage (dotted line). A triangle-shaped 
piece of the upper half of the cartilage is resected. Closure of the 
oropharynx is done so that the larynx is pulled up (sagittal sec-
tion). (Reproduced with permission from Tran Ba Huy P, Celerier 
M: Management of severe caustic stenosis of the hypopharynx and 
esophagus by ileocolic transposition via suprahyoid or transepi-
glottic approach. Analysis of 18 cases. Ann Surg. 207:439, 1988.)
1024
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
specially designed esophageal endoprosthesis that bridges and 
occludes the fistula, allowing the patient to eat. A salivary tube 
is also a good option for proximal esophageal fistulas. This tube 
has a proximal “lip” that rests on the cricopharyngeal muscle 
and thereby directs the saliva into the tube and past the fistula. 
Rarely, esophageal diversion, coupled with placement of a feed-
ing jejunostomy, can be used as a last resort.
TECHNIQUES OF ESOPHAGEAL RECONSTRUCTION
Options for esophageal substitution include gastric advance-
ment, colonic interposition, and either jejunal free transfer or 
advancement into the chest. Rarely, combinations of these grafts 
will be the only possible option. The indications for esopha-
geal resection and substitution include malignant and end-stage 
benign disease. The latter includes reflux- or drug-induced 
stricture formation that cannot be dilated without damage to the 
esophagus, a dilated and tortuous esophagus secondary to severe 
motility disorders, lye-induced strictures, and multiple previous 
antireflux procedures. The choice of esophageal substitution has 
significant impact upon the technical difficulty of the procedure, 
and influences the long-term outcome.
Partial Esophageal Resection
Distal benign lesions, with preserved proximal esophageal func-
tion, are best treated with the interposition of a segment of prox-
imal jejunum into the chest and primary anastomosis. A jejunal 
interposition can reach to the inferior border of the pulmonary 
hilum with ease, but the architecture of its blood supply rarely 
allows the use of the jejunum proximal to this point. Because 
the anastomosis is within the chest, a thoracotomy is necessary.
The jejunum is a dynamic graft and contributes to bolus 
transport, whereas the stomach and colon function more as 
a conduit. The stomach is a poor choice in this circumstance 
because of the propensity for the reflux of gastric contents into 
the proximal remaining esophagus following an intrathoracic 
Figure 25-83.  A. The portion of the thoracic inlet to be resected to provide space for a free jejunal graft and access to the internal mammary 
artery (shaded area). B. Cross-section showing the space available after resection of the sternoclavicular joint and one- half of the manubrium. 
[Reproduced with permission from Rothberg M, DeMeester TR: Exposure of the cervical esophagus, in Shields TW (ed): General Thoracic 
Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1989, p 419.]
esophagogastrostomy. It is now well recognized that this 
occurs, and can lead to incapacitating symptoms and esopha-
geal destruction in some patients. Short segments of colon, on 
the other hand, lack significant motility and have a propensity 
for the development of esophagitis proximal to the anastomosis.
Replacement of the cervical portion of the esophagus, 
while preserving the distal portion, is occasionally indicated in 
cervical esophageal or head and neck malignancy, and follow-
ing the ingestion of lye. Free transfer of a portion of jejunum 
to the neck has become a viable option and is successful in 
the majority of cases. Revascularization is achieved via use 
of the internal mammary artery and the internal mammary or 
innominate vein. Removal of the sternoclavicular joint aids 
in performing the vascular and distal esophageal anastomosis 
(Fig. 25-83).
Reconstruction after Total Esophagectomy
Neither the intrathoracic stomach nor the intrathoracic colon 
functions as well as the native esophagus after an esophagogas-
trectomy. The choice between these organs will be influenced 
by several factors, such as the adequacy of their blood supply 
and the length of resected esophagus that they are capable of 
bridging. If the stomach shows evidence of disease, or has been 
contracted or reduced by previous gastric surgery, the length 
available for esophageal replacement may not be adequate. The 
presence of diverticular disease, unrecognized carcinoma, or 
colitis prohibits the use of the colon. The blood supply of the 
colon is more affected by vascular disease than the blood supply 
of the stomach, which may prevent its use. Of the two, the colon 
provides the longest graft. The stomach can usually reach to the 
neck if the amount of lesser curvature resected does not interfere 
with the blood supply to the fundus. Gastric interposition has the 
advantage that only one anastomosis is required. On the other 
hand, there is greater potential for aspiration of gastric juice or 
stricture of the cervical anastomosis from chronic reflux when 
stomach is used for replacement.
1025
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Following an esophagogastrectomy, patients may have 
discomfort during or shortly after eating. The most common 
symptom is a postprandial pressure sensation or a feeling of 
being full, which probably results from the loss of the gastric 
reservoir. This symptom is less common when the colon is used 
as an esophageal substitute, probably because the distal third of 
the stomach is retained in the abdomen and the interposed colon 
provides an additional reservoir function.
King and Hölscher have reported a 40% and 50% incidence 
of dysphagia after re-establishing GI continuity with the stom-
ach following esophagogastrectomy. This incidence is similar to 
Orringer’s results after using the stomach to replace the esopha-
gus in patients with benign disease. More than one-half of the 
patients experienced dysphagia postoperatively; two-thirds of 
this group required postoperative dilation and one-fourth had 
persistent dysphagia and required home dilation. In contrast, 
dysphagia is uncommon and the need for dilation is rare follow-
ing a colonic interposition. Isolauri reported on 248 patients with 
colonic interpositions and noted a 24% incidence of dysphagia 
12 months after the operation. When it occurred, the most com-
mon cause was recurrent mediastinal tumor. The high incidence 
of dysphagia with the use of the stomach is probably related to 
the esophagogastric anastomosis in the neck and the resulting 
difficulty of passing a swallowed bolus.
Another consequence of the transposition of the stomach 
into the chest is the development of postoperative duodenogastric 
reflux, probably due to pyloric denervation, and adding a pyloro-
plasty may worsen this problem. Following gastric advancement, 
the pylorus lies at the level of the esophageal hiatus, and a distinct 
pressure differential develops between the intrathoracic gastric 
and intra-abdominal duodenal lumina. Unless the pyloric valve is 
extremely efficient, the pressure differential will encourage reflux 
of duodenal contents into the stomach. Duodenogastric reflux 
is less likely to occur following colonic interposition, because 
there is sufficient intra-abdominal colon to be compressed by the 
abdominal pressure, and the pylorus and duodenum remain in 
their normal intra-abdominal position.
Although there is general acceptance of the concept that 
an esophagogastric anastomosis in the neck results in less post-
operative esophagitis and stricture than one at a lower level, 
reflux esophagitis following a cervical anastomosis does occur, 
albeit at a lower rate than when the anastomosis is at a lower 
level. Most patients undergo cervical esophagogastrostomy for 
malignancy; thus the long-term sequelae of an esophagogastric 
anastomosis in the neck are not of concern. However, patients 
who have had a cervical esophagogastrostomy for benign dis-
ease may develop problems associated with the anastomosis 
in the fourth or fifth postoperative year that are severe enough 
to require anastomotic revision. This is less likely in patients 
who have had a colonic interposition for esophageal replace-
ment. Consequently, in patients who have a benign process or 
a potentially curable carcinoma of the esophagus or cardia, a 
colonic interposition is used to obviate the late problems associ-
ated with a cervical esophagogastrostomy. Colonic interposition 
for esophageal substitution is a more complex procedure than 
gastric advancement, with the potential for greater perioperative 
morbidity, particularly in inexperienced hands.
Composite Reconstruction
Occasionally, a combination of colon, jejunum, and stomach 
is the only reconstructive option available. This situation may 
arise when there has been previous gastric or colonic resection, 
when dysphagia has recurred after a previous esophageal resec-
tion, or following postoperative complications such as ischemia 
of an esophageal substitute. Although not ideal, combinations 
of colon, jejunum, and stomach used to restore GI continuity 
function surprisingly well, and allow alimentary reconstruction 
in an otherwise impossible situation.
Vagal Sparing Esophagectomy with  
Colon Interposition
Traditional esophagectomy typically results in bilateral vagot-
omy and its attendant consequences. It is likely that symptoms 
such as dumping, diarrhea, early satiety, and weight loss seen in 
15% to 20% of patients postesophagectomy are at least in part, 
if not completely, due to vagal interruption. The technique of 
vagal sparing esophagectomy with colon interposition has been 
described in an effort to avoid the morbidities associated with 
standard esophagectomy.
Through an upper midline abdominal incision, the right 
and left vagal nerves are identified, circled with a tape, and 
retracted to the right. A limited, highly selective proximal gas-
tric vagotomy is performed along the cephalad 4 cm of the lesser 
curvature. The stomach is divided with an Endo-GIA stapler just 
below the GEJ. The colon is prepared to provide an interposed 
segment as previously described. A neck incision is made along 
the anterior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle, and 
the strap muscles are exposed. The omohyoid muscle is divided 
at its pulley, and the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles are 
divided at their manubrial insertion. The left carotid sheath is 
retracted laterally and the thyroid and trachea medially. The left 
inferior thyroid artery is ligated laterally as it passes under the 
left common carotid artery. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve is 
identified and protected. The esophagus is dissected circumfer-
entially in an inferior direction, from the left neck to the apex 
of the right chest, to avoid injury to the right recurrent laryngeal 
nerve. The esophagus is divided at the level of the thoracic inlet, 
leaving about 3 to 4 cm of cervical esophagus. The proximal 
esophagus is retracted anteriorly and to the right with the use of 
two sutures to keep saliva and oral contents from contaminating 
the neck wound.
Returning to the abdomen, the proximal staple line of the 
gastric division is opened and the esophagus is flushed with 
povidone-iodine solution. A vein stripper is passed up the 
esophagus into the neck wound. The distal portion of the esoph-
agus in the neck is secured tightly around the stripping cable 
with “endoloops” and an umbilical tape for a trailer. The tip of 
the stripper is exchanged for a mushroom head, and the stripper 
is pulled back into the abdomen, inverting the esophagus as it 
transverses the posterior mediastinum. This maneuver strips the 
branches of the esophageal plexus off the longitudinal muscle 
of the esophagus, preserving the esophageal plexus along with 
the proximal vagal nerves and the distal vagal nerve trunks. In 
patients with end-stage achalasia, only the mucosa is secured 
around the stripping cable, so that it alone is stripped and the 
dilated muscular wall of the esophagus, with its enriched blood 
supply, remains. The resulting mediastinal tunnel, or in the case 
of achalasia the muscular tube, is dilated with a Foley cath-
eter containing 90 mL of fluid in the balloon. The previously 
prepared interposed portion of the transverse colon is passed 
behind the stomach and up through the mediastinal tunnel 
into the neck. An end-to-end anastomosis is performed to 
the cervical esophagus using a single layer technique. The 
colon is pulled taut and secured to the left crus with four or 
1026
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
five interrupted sutures. Five centimeters below the crura, an 
opening is made in the mesentery adjacent to the colon along its 
mesenteric border, through which an Endo-GIA stapler is passed 
and the colon is divided. The proximal end, which is the distal 
end of the interposed colon, is anastomosed high on the posterior 
fundic wall of the stomach, using a triangular stapling anastomotic 
technique. This is done by stapling longitudinally the stomach and 
colon together with a 75-mm Endo-GIA stapler, spreading the base 
of the incision apart, and closing it with a T-55 stapler. Colonic 
continuity is re-established by bringing the proximal right colon to 
the distal staple line in the left colon and performing an end-to-end 
anastomosis using a double layer technique.
Although conceptually appealing, preservation of vagal 
nerve integrity or the gastric reservoir function after vagal spar-
ing esophagectomy only recently has been validated. Banki and 
associates compared patients undergoing vagal sparing esopha-
gectomy to those with conventional esophagectomy and colon 
or gastric interposition. This study showed that vagal sparing 
esophagectomy preserved gastric secretion, gastric emptying, 
meal capacity, and body mass index, compared to esophagogas-
trectomy with colon interposition or standard esophagectomy 
with gastric pull-up. Vagal sparing esophagectomy patients 
functioned, for the most part, similarly to normal subjects, 
allowing them to eat a normal meal, free of dumping or diar-
rhea. These results indicate that the vagal sparing esophagec-
tomy procedure does indeed preserve the vagal nerves, and may 
be considered in the treatment of benign and early malignant 
lesions requiring esophagectomy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
General References
Balaji B, Peters JH: Minimally invasive surgery for esophageal 
motor disorders. Surg Clin North Am 82:763, 2002.
Bremner CG, DeMeester TR, Bremner RM: Esophageal Motility 
Testing Made Easy. St. Louis: Quality Medical Publishing, 2001.
Castel DW, Richter J (eds): The Esophagus. Boston: Little, 
Brown & Co., 1999.
DeMeester SR, Peters JH, DeMeester TR: Barrett’s esophagus. 
Curr Probl Surg 38:549, 2001.
Demeester SR (ed): Barrett’s esophagus. Problems in General Sur-
gery, Vol. 18, no. 2. Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2001.
DeMeester TR, Peters JH, Bremner CG, et al.: Biology of gastro-
esophageal reflux disease; pathophysiology relating to medical 
and surgical treatment. Annu Rev Med 50:469, 1999.
Hunter JG, Pellagrini CA: Surgery of the esophagus. Surg Clin 
North Am 77:959, 1997.
McFadyen BV, Arregui ME, Eubanks S, et al.: Laparoscopic Sur-
gery of the Abdomen. New York: Springer, 2003.
Surgical Anatomy
Daffner RH, Halber MD, Postlethwait RW, et al.: CT of the esopha-
gus. II. Carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 133:1051, 1979.
Gray SW, Rowe JS Jr., Skandalakis JE: Surgical anatomy of the 
gastroesophageal junction. Am Surg 45:575, 1979.
Liebermann-Meffert D: The pharyngoesophageal segment: Anat-
omy and innervation. Dis Esophagus 8:242, 1995.
Liebermann-Meffert D, Siewert JR: Arterial anatomy of the esoph-
agus: A review of the literature with brief comments on clinical 
aspects. Gullet 2:3, 1992.
Liebermann-Meffert DM, Meier R, Siewert JR: Vascular anat-
omy of the gastric tube used for esophageal reconstruction. 
Ann Thorac Surg 54:1110, 1992.
Liebermann-Meffert DM, Walbrun B, Hiebert CA, et al.: Recurrent 
and superior laryngeal nerves: A new look with implications for 
the esophageal surgeon. Ann Thorac Surg 67:217, 1999.
Physiology
Barlow AP, DeMeester TR, et al.: The significance of the gastric 
secretory state in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg 
124:937, 1989.
DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, et al.: The relationship of a hia-
tal hernia to the function of the body of the esophagus and 
the gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
82:547, 1981.
Helm JF, Dodds WJ, et al.: Effect of esophageal emptying and 
saliva on clearance of acid from the esophagus. N Engl J 
Med 310:284, 1984.
Joelsson BE, DeMeester TR, et al.: The role of the esophageal body 
in the antireflux mechanism. Surgery 92:417, 1982.
Johnson LF, DeMeester TR: Evaluation of elevation of the head of 
the bed, bethanechol, and antacid foam tablets on gastroesopha-
geal reflux. Dig Dis Sci 26:673, 1981.
Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ: Effect of peristaltic dysfunc-
tion on esophageal volume clearance. Gastroenterology 94: 
73, 1988.
McCallum RW, Berkowitz DM, Lerner E: Gastric emptying 
in patients with gastroesophageal reflux. Gastroenterology 
80:285, 1981.
Mittal RK, Lange RC, McCallum RW: Identification and mecha-
nism of delayed esophageal acid clearance in subjects with hia-
tus hernia. Gastroenterology 92:130, 1987.
Rao SSC, Madipalli RS, Mujica VR, et al.: Effects of age and gen-
der on esophageal biomechanical properties and sensation. Am 
J Gastroenterol 98:1688, 2003.
Tseng D, Rizvi AZ, Fennerty MB, et al.: Forty-eight-hour pH moni-
toring increases sensitivity in detecting abnormal esophageal 
acid exposure. J Gastrointest Surg 9:1043; discussion 1051, 
2005.
Zaninotto G, DeMeester TR, Schwizer W, et al.: The lower esopha-
geal sphincter in health and disease. Am J Surg 155:104, 1988.
Assessment of Esophageal Function
Adamek RJ, Wegener M, et al.: Long-term esophageal manometry 
in healthy subjects: Evaluation of normal values and influence 
of age. Dig Dis Sci 39:2069, 1994.
Barish CF, Castell DO, Richter JE: Graded esophageal balloon dis-
tention: A new provocative test for non-cardiac chest pain. Dig 
Dis Sci 31:1292, 1986.
Battle WS, Nyhus LM, Bombeck CT: Gastroesophageal reflux: 
Diagnosis and treatment. Ann Surg 177:560, 1973.
Bechi P: Fiberoptic measurement of “alkaline” gastroesophageal 
reflux: Technical aspects and clinical indications. Dis Esophagus 
131, 1994.
Bernstein IM, Baker CA: A clinical test for esophagitis. Gastroen-
terology 34:760, 1958.
DeMeester TR, Johnson LF, et al.: Patterns of gastroesophageal 
reflux in health and disease. Ann Surg 184:459, 1976.
DeMeester TR, Wang CI, et al.: Technique, indications and clinical 
use of 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 79:656, 1980.
Dodds WJ: Current concepts of esophageal motor function: Clini-
cal implications for radiology. AJR Am J Roentgenol 128:549, 
1977.
Fein M, Fuchs KH, Bohrer T, et al.: Fiberoptic technique for 
24-hour bile reflux monitoring. Standards and normal values 
for gastric monitoring. Dig Dis Sci 41:216, 1996.
Fuchs KH, DeMeester TR, Albertucci M: Specificity and sensitiv-
ity of objective diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease. 
Surgery 102:575, 1987.
1027
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Iascone C, DeMeester TR, et al.: Barrett’s esophagus: Functional 
assessment, proposed pathogenesis, and surgical therapy. Arch 
Surg 118:543, 1983.
Johnson LF, DeMeester TR: Development of 24-hour intra-
esophageal pH monitoring composite scoring. J Clin Gas-
troenterol 8:52, 1986.
Johnson LF, DeMeester TR: Twenty-four-hour pH monitoring of 
the distal esophagus: A quantitative measure of gastroesopha-
geal reflux. Am J Gastroenterol 62:325, 1974.
Kauer WK, Burdiles P, Ireland A, et al.: Does duodenal juice reflux 
into the esophagus in patients with complicated GERD? Evalu-
ation of a fiberoptic sensor for bilirubin. Am J Surg 169:98, 
1995.
Kramer P, Hollander W: Comparison of experimental esophageal 
pain with clinical pain of angina pectoris and esophageal dis-
ease. Gastroenterology 29:719, 1955.
Pandolfino JE, Richter JE, Ours T, et al.: Ambulatory esophageal 
pH monitoring using a wireless system. Am J Gastroenterol 
98:740, 2003.
Reid BJ, Weinstein WM, et al.: Endoscopic biopsy can detect 
high-grade dysplasia or early adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s 
esophagus without grossly recognizable neoplastic lesions. 
Gastroenterology 94:81, 1988.
Schwizer W, Hinder RA, DeMeester TR: Does delayed gastric 
emptying contribute to gastroesophageal reflux disease? Am J 
Surg 157:74, 1989.
Stein HJ, DeMeester TR, et al.: Three-dimensional imaging of the 
LES in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Ann Surg 214:374, 
1991.
Tutuian R, Vela MF, Balaji NS, et al.: Esophageal function test-
ing with combined multichannel intraluminal impedance and 
manometry; multicenter study in healthy volunteers. Clin Gas-
troenterol Hepatol 1:174, 2003.
Wickremesinghe PC, Bayrit PQ, et al.: Quantitative evaluation of 
bile diversion surgery utilizing 99mTc HIDA scintigraphy. 
Gastroenterology 84:354, 1983.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Allison PR: Hiatus hernia: A 20 year retrospective survey. Ann 
Surg 178:273, 1973.
Allison PR: Peptic ulcer of the esophagus. J Thorac Surg 15:308, 
1946.
Allison PR: Reflux esophagitis, sliding hiatus hernia and the anat-
omy of repair. Surg Gynecol Obstet 92:419, 1951.
Barlow AP, DeMeester TR, et al.: The significance of the gastric 
secretory state in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg 
124:937, 1989.
Bonavina L, DeMeester TR, et al.: Drug-induced esophageal stric-
tures. Ann Surg 206:173, 1987.
Bremner RM, DeMeester TR, Crookes PF, et al.: The effect of 
symptoms and non-specific motility abnormalities on surgical 
therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg 107:1244, 1994.
Castell DO: Nocturnal acid breakthrough in perspective: Let’s not 
throw out the baby with the bathwater. Am J Gastroenterol 
98:517, 2003.
Chandrasoma P, Barrett N: So close, yet 50 years from the truth. 
J Gastrointest Surg 3:7, 1999.
Clark GW, Ireland AP, Peters JH, et al.: Short segments of 
Barrett’s esophagus: A prevalent complication of gastro-
esophageal reflux disease with malignant potential. J Gas-
trointest Surg 1:113, 1997.
DeMeester SR, Campos GM, DeMeester TR, et al.: The impact of 
an antireflux procedure on intestinal metaplasia of the cardia. 
Ann Surg 228:547; 1998.
DeMeester TR, Bonavina L, Albertucci M: Nissen fundoplication 
for gastroesophageal reflux disease: Evaluation of primary 
repair in 100 consecutive patients. Ann Surg 204:9, 1986.
DeMeester TR, Bonavina L, et al.: Chronic respiratory symptoms 
and occult gastroesophageal reflux. Ann Surg 211:337, 1990.
DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR: Columnar mucosa and intestinal 
metaplasia of the esophagus: Fifty years of controversy. Ann 
Surg 231:303, 2000.
DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, et al.: Indications, surgical tech-
nique, and long-term functional results of colon interposition 
or bypass. Ann Surg 208:460, 1988.
Desai KM, Klingensmith ME, Winslow ER, et al.: Symptomatic 
outcomes of laparoscopic antireflux surgery in patients eligible 
for endoluminal therapies. Surg Endosc 16:1669, 2002.
Donahue PE, Samelson S, et al.: The floppy Nissen fundoplication: 
Effective long-term control of pathologic reflux. Arch Surg 
120:663, 1985.
Farrell TM, Richardson WS, Halkar R, et al.: Nissen fundoplica-
tion improves gastric motility in patients with delayed gastric 
emptying. Surg Endosc 15:271, 2001.
Farrell TM, Richardson WS, Trus TL, et al.: Response of atypi-
cal symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux antireflux surgery. 
Br J Surg 88:1649, 2001.
Farrell TM, Smith CD, Metreveli RE, et al.: Fundoplication pro-
vides effective and durable symptom relief in patients with 
Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Surg 178:18, 1999.
Fass R: Epidemiology and pathophysiology of symptomatic 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J Gastroenterol 98:S2, 
2003.
Fiorucci S, Santucci L, et al.: Gastric acidity and gastroesophageal 
reflux patterns in patients with esophagitis. Gastroenterology 
103:855, 1992.
Fletcher J, Wirz A, Young J, et al.: Unbuffered highly acidic gastric 
juice exists at the gastroesophageal junction after a meal. 
Gastroenterology 121:775, 2001.
Fuchs KH, DeMeester TR, et al.: Computerized identification of 
pathologic duodenogastric reflux using 24-hour gastric pH 
monitoring. Ann Surg 213:13, 1991.
Gerson LB, Shetler K, Triadafilopoulos G: Prevalence of Barrett’s 
esophagus in asymptomatic individuals. Gastroenterology 
123:461, 2002.
Gillen P, Keeling P, et al.: Implication of duodenogastric reflux in 
the pathogenesis of Barrett’s oesophagus. Br J Surg 75:540, 
1988.
Graham DY: The changing epidemiology of GERD: Geography 
and Helicobacter pylori.Am J Gastroenterol 98:1462, 2003.
Gurski RR, Peters JH, Hagen JA, et al.: Barrett’s esophagus 
can and does regress following antireflux surgery: A study of 
prevalence and predictive features. J Am Coll Surg 196:706, 
2003.
Henderson RD, Henderson RF, Marryatt GV: Surgical management 
of 100 consecutive esophageal strictures. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 99:1, 1990.
Hill LD, Kozarek RA, et al.: The gastroesophageal flap valve. In 
vitro and in vivo observations. GastroeintestEndosc 44:541, 
1996.
Hinder RA, Stein HJ, Bremner CG, et al.: Relationship of a satisfac-
tory outcome to normalization of delayed gastric emptying after 
Nissen fundoplication. Ann Surg 210:458, 1989.
Hirota WK, Loughney TM, Lazas DJ, et al.: Specialized intestinal 
metaplasia, dysplasia and cancer of the esophagus and esopha-
gogastric junction: Prevalence and clinical data. Gastroenterology 
116:277, 1999.
Hofstetter WA, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al.: Long term out-
come of antireflux surgery in patients with Barrett’s esopha-
gus. Ann Surg 234:532, 2001.
Ireland AP, Clark GWB, et al.: Barrett’s esophagus: The signifi-
cance of p53 in clinical practice. Ann Surg 225:17, 1997.
Isolauri J, Luostarinen M, et al.: Long-term comparison of antire-
flux surgery versus conservative therapy for reflux esophagitis. 
Ann Surg 225:295, 1997.
1028
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Jamieson JR, Hinder RA, et al.: Analysis of 32 patients with Schatzki’s 
ring. Am J Surg 158:563, 1989.
Johnson WE, Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, et al.: Outcome of respira-
tory symptoms after antireflux surgery on patients with gastro-
esophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg 131:489, 1996.
Kahrilas PJ: Diagnosis of symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease. Am J Gastroenterol 98:S15, 2003.
Kahrilas PJ: Radiofrequency therapy of the lower esophageal 
sphincter for treatment of GERD. Gastrointest Endosc 57:723; 
2003.
Kaul BK, DeMeester TR, et al.: The cause of dysphagia in uncom-
plicated sliding hiatal hernia and its relief by hiatal herniorrha-
phy: A roentgenographic, manometric, and clinical study. Ann 
Surg 211:406, 1990.
Khaitan L, Ray WA, Holzman MD, et al.: Health care utilization 
after medical and surgical therapy for gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. Arch Surg 138:1356, 2003.
Labenz J, Tillenburg B, et al.. Helicobacter pylori augments the 
pH-increasing effect of omeprazole in patients with duodenal 
ulcer. Gastroenterology 110:725, 1996.
Lin KM, Ueda RK, et al.: Etiology and importance of alkaline 
esophageal reflux. Am J Surg 162:553, 1991.
Little AG, Ferguson MK, Skinner DB: Reoperation for failed anti-
reflux operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 91:511, 1986.
Liu JY, Finlayson SRG, Laycock WS, et al.: Determining the 
appropriate threshold for referral to surgery for gastroesopha-
geal reflux disease. Surgery 133:5, 2003.
Lundell L, Miettinen P, Myrvold HE, et al.: Long-term manage-
ment of gastrooesophageal reflux disease with omeprazole 
or open antireflux surgery: Results of a prospective random-
ized trial. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 12:879, 2000.
Marshall RE, Anggiansah A, Owen WJ: Bile in the esophagus: 
Clinical relevance and ambulatory detection. Br J Surg 84:21, 
1997.
Morgenthal CB, Shane MD, Stival A, et al.: The durability of lapa-
roscopic Nissen fundoplication: 11-year outcomes. J Gastroin-
test Surg 11:693, 2007.
Narayani RI, Burton MP, Young GS: Utility of esophageal biopsy 
in the diagnosis of non-erosive reflux disease. Dis Esophagus 
16:187, 2003.
Nissen R: Eine einfache operation zur beeinflussung der refluxo-
esophagitis. Schweiz Med Wochenschr 86:590, 1956.
Nissen R: Gastropexy and fundoplication in surgical treatment of 
hiatus hernia. Am J Dig Dis 6:954, 1961.
Oberg S, Johansson H, Wenner J, et al.: Endoscopic surveillance of 
columnar lined esophagus: Frequency of intestinal metaplasia 
detection and impact of antireflux surgery. Ann Surg 234:619, 
2001.
Orlando RC: The pathogenesis of gastroesophageal reflux disease: 
The relationship between epithelial defense, dysmotility, and 
acid exposure. Am J Gastroenterol 92:3S, 1997.
Orringer MB, Skinner DB, Belsey RHR: Long-term results of the 
Mark IV operation for hiatal hernia and analyses of recurrences 
and their treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 63:25, 1972.
Parrilla P, Martinez de Haro LF, Ortiz A, et al.: Long term results of 
a randomized prospective study comparing medical and surgi-
cal treatment in Barrett’s esophagus. Ann Surg 237:291, 2003.
Patti MG, Debas HT, et al.: Esophageal manometry and 24-hour pH 
monitoring in the diagnosis of pulmonary aspiration secondary 
to gastroesophageal reflux. Am J Surg 163:401, 1992.
Pearson FG, Cooper JD, et al.: Gastroplasty and fundoplication 
for complex reflux problems. Ann Surg 206:473, 1987.
Pelligrini CA, DeMeester TR, et al.: Gastroesophageal reflux and 
pulmonary aspiration: Incidence, functional abnormality, and 
results of surgical therapy. Surgery 86:110, 1979.
Peters JH, Heimbucher J, Incarbone R, et al.: Clinical and physi-
ologic comparison of laparoscopic and open Nissen fundoplica-
tion. J Am Coll Surg 180:385, 1995.
Provenzale D, Kemp JA, et al.: A guide for surveillance of patients 
with Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol 89:670, 1994.
Richter JE: Long-term management of gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease and its complications. Am J Gastroenterol 92:30S, 1997.
Romagnuolo J, Meier MA, Sadowski DC: Medical or surgical ther-
apy for erosive reflux esophagitis: Cost utility analysis using a 
Markov model. Ann Surg 236:191, 2002.
Schwizer W, Hinder RA, DeMeester TR: Does delayed gastric 
emptying contribute to gastroesophageal reflux disease? Am J 
Surg 157:74, 1989.
Shaker R, Castell DO, Schoenfeld PS, et al.: Nighttime heartburn 
is an underappreciated clinical problem that impacts sleep and 
daytime function: The results of a Gallup survey conducted on 
behalf of the American Gastroenterologic Association. Am J 
Gastroenterol 98:1487, 2003.
Siewert JR, Isolauri J, Feussuer M: Reoperation following failed 
fundoplication. World J Surg 13:791, 1989.
Smith CD, McClusky DA, Rajhad MA, et al.: When fundoplica-
tion fails: Redo? Ann Surg 241:861, 2005.
Sontag SJ, O’Connell S, Khandelwal S, et al.: Asthmatics with 
gastroesophageal reflux: Long term results of a randomized 
trial of medical and surgical antireflux therapies. Am J 
Gastroenterol 98:987, 2003.
Spechler SJ, Department of Veterans Affairs Gastroesophageal 
Reflux Disease Study Group: Comparison of medical and sur-
gical therapy for complicated gastroesophageal reflux disease 
in veterans. N Engl J Med 326:786, 1992.
Spechler SJ, Lee E, Ahmen D: Long term outcome of medical and 
surgical therapies for gastroesophageal reflux disease: Follow-
up of a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 285:2331, 2001.
Spivak H, Farrell TM, Trus TL, et al.: Laparoscopic fundoplication 
for dysphagia and peptic esophageal stricture. J Gastrointest 
Surg 2:555, 1998.
Stein HJ, Barlow AP, et al.: Complications of gastroesophageal 
reflux disease: Role of the LES, esophageal acid and acid/
alkaline exposure, and duodenogastric reflux. Ann Surg 
216:35, 1992.
Stein HJ, Bremner RM, et al.: Effect of Nissen fundoplication on 
esophageal motor function. Arch Surg 127:788, 1992.
Terry M, Smith CD, Branum GD, et al.: Outcomes of laparoscopic 
fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux disease and para-
esophageal hernia: Experience with 1000 consecutive cases. 
Surg Endosc 15:691, 2001.
Terry ML, Vernon A, Hunter JG: Stapled-wedge Collis gastroplasty 
for the shortened esophagus. Am J Surg 188:195, 2004.
Trus TL, Laycock WS, Waring JP, et al.: Improvement in qual-
ity of life measures after laparoscopic antireflux surgery. 
Ann Surg 229:331, 1999.
Tseng D, Rizvi AZ, Fennerty MB, et al.: Forty-eight-hour pH moni-
toring increases sensitivity in detecting abnormal esophageal 
acid exposure. J Gastrointest Surg 9:1043, 2005.
Van Den Boom G, Go PM, et al.: Cost effectiveness of medical 
versus surgical treatment in patients with severe or refractory 
gastroesophageal reflux disease in the Netherlands. Scand J 
Gastroenterol 31:1, 1996.
Watson DI, Baigrie RJ, Jamieson GG: A learning curve for laparo-
scopic fundoplication. Definable, avoidable, or a waste of time? 
Ann Surg 224:198, 1996.
Wattchow DA, Jamieson GG, et al.: Distribution of peptide-
containing nerve fibers in the gastric musculature of patients 
undergoing surgery for gastroesophageal reflux. Ann Surg 
290:153, 1992.
Weston AP, Krmpotich P, et al.: Short segment Barrett’s esopha-
gus: Clinical and histological features, associated endoscopic 
findings, and association with gastric intestinal metaplasia. Am 
J Gastroenterol 91:981, 1996.
Williamson WA, Ellis FH Jr., et al.: Effect of antireflux operation 
on Barrett’s mucosa. Ann Thorac Surg 49:537, 1990.
1029
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Wright TA: High-grade dysplasia in Barrett’s oesophagus. Br J 
Surg 84:760, 1997.
Zaninotto G, DeMeester TR, et al.: Esophageal function in 
patients with reflux-induced strictures and its relevance to 
surgical treatment. Ann Thorac Surg 47:362, 1989.
Diaphragmatic Hernias
Bombeck TC, Dillard DH, Nyhus LM: Muscular anatomy of the 
gastroesophageal junction and role of the phrenoesophageal 
ligament. Ann Surg 164:643, 1966.
Casbella F, Sinanan M, et al.: Systematic use of gastric fundopli-
cation in laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernias. Am J 
Surg 171:485, 1996.
Dalgaard JB: Volvulus of the stomach. Acta Chir Scand 103:131, 1952.
DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, et al.: The relationship of a hia-
tal hernia to the function of the body of the esophagus and 
the gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
82:547, 1981.
Eliska O: Phreno-oesophageal membrane and its role in the devel-
opment of hiatal hernia. Acta Anat 86:137, 1973.
Frantzides CT, Madan AK, Carlson MA, et al.: A prospective, ran-
domized trial of laparoscopic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
patch repair vs simple cruroplasty for large hiatal hernia. Arch 
Surg 137:649, 2002.
Fuller CB, Hagen JA, et al.: The role of fundoplication in the treat-
ment of type II paraesophageal hernia. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 111:655, 1996.
Gangopadhyay N, Perrone JM, Soper NJ, et al.: Outcomes of lapa-
roscopic paraesophageal hernia repair in elderly and high-risk 
patients. Surgery. 140:491; discussion 498, 2006. Epub 2006 
Sep 6.
Granderath FA, Schweiger UM, Kamolz T, et al.: Laparoscopic 
Nissen fundoplication with prosthetic hiatal closure reduces 
postoperative intrathoracic wrap herniation: Preliminary results 
of a prospective randomized functional and clinical study. Arch 
Surg 140:40, 2005.
Hashemi M, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al.: Laparoscopic repair 
of large type III hiatal hernia: Objective follow-up reveals high 
recurrence rate. J Am Coll Surg 190:539, 2000.
Kahrilas PJ, Wu S, et al.: Attenuation of esophageal shorten-
ing during peristalsis with hiatus hernia. Gastroenterology 
109:1818, 1995.
Kleitsch WP: Embryology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
I. Esophageal hiatus hernia. Arch Surg 76:868, 1958.
Mattar SG, Bowers SP, Galloway KD, et al.: Long-term outcome 
of laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia. Surg Endosc 
16:745, 2002.
Menguy R: Surgical management of large paraesophageal hernia 
with complete intrathoracic stomach. World J Surg 12:415, 1988.
Myers GA, Harms BA, et al.: Management of paraesophageal 
hernia with a selective approach to antireflux surgery. Am J 
Surg 170:375, 1995.
Oddsdottir M, Franco AL, Laycock WS, et al.: Laparoscopic repair 
of paraesophageal hernia: New access, old technique. Surg 
Endosc 9:164, 1995.
Oelschlager BK, Pellegrini CA, Hunter J, et al.: Biologic pros-
thesis reduces recurrence after laparoscopic paraesophageal 
hernia repair: A multicenter, prospective, randomized trial. 
Ann Surg 244:481, 2006.
Patti MG, Goldberg HI, et al.: Hiatal hernia size affects LES 
function, esophageal acid exposure, and the degree of muco-
sal injury. Am J Surg 171:182, 1996.
Pierre AF, Luketich JD, Fernando HC, et al.: Results of laparo-
scopic repair of giant paraesophageal hernias: 200 consecutive 
patients. Ann Thorac Surg 74:1909, 2002.
Skinner DB, Belsey RH: Surgical management of esophageal reflux 
and hiatus hernia: Long-term results with 1030 patients. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg 53:33, 1967.
Stylopoulos N, Gazelle GS, Ratner DW: Paraesophageal hernias: 
Operation or observation. Ann Surg 236:492, 2002.
Trus TL, Bax T, Richardson WS, et al.: Complications of lapa-
roscopic paraesophageal hernia repair. J Gastrointest Surg 
1:221; discussion 228, 1997.
Wo JM, Branum GD, Hunter JG, et al.: Clinical features of 
type III (mixed) paraesophageal hernia. Am J Gastroenterol 
91:914, 1996.
Miscellaneous Esophageal Lesions
Burdick JS, Venu RP, Hogan WJ: Cutting the defiant lower esopha-
geal ring. Gastrointest Endosc 39:616, 1993.
Burt M, Diehl W, et al.: Malignant esophagorespiratory fistula: 
Management options and survival. Ann Thorac Surg 52:1222, 
1991.
Chen MYM, Ott DJ, Donati DL: Correlation of lower esophageal 
mucosal ring and LES pressure. Dig Dis Sci 39:766, 1994.
D’Haens G, Rutgeerts P, et al.: The natural history of esophageal 
Crohn’s disease. Three patterns of evolution. Gastrointest 
Endosc 40:296, 1994.
Eckhardt VF, Kanzler G, Willems D: Single dilation of symptom-
atic Schatzki rings. A prospective evaluation of its effective-
ness. Dig Dis Sci 37:577, 1992.
Klein HA, Wald A, et al.: Comparative studies of esophageal func-
tion in systemic sclerosis. Gastroenterology 102:1551, 1992.
Mathisen DJ, Grillo HC, et al.: Management of acquired nonmalig-
nant tracheoesophageal fistula. Ann Thorac Surg 52:759, 1991.
Poirier NC, Taillefer R, et al.: Antireflux operations in patients with 
scleroderma. Ann Thorac Surg 58:66, 1994.
Soudah HC, Hasler WL, Owyang C: Effect of octreotide on intes-
tinal motility and bacterial overgrowth in scleroderma. N Engl 
J Med 325:1461, 1991.
Toskes PP: Hope for the treatment of intestinal scleroderma (Letter 
to the Editor). N Engl J Med 325:1508, 1991.
Wilcox CM, Straub RF: Prospective endoscopic characterization 
of cytomegalovirus esophagitis in AIDS. Gastrointest Endosc 
40:481, 1994.
Motility Disorders of the Pharynx  
and Esophagus
Achem SR, Crittenden J, et al.: Long-term clinical and manometric 
follow-up of patients with nonspecific esophageal motor disor-
ders. Am J Gastroenterol 87:825, 1992.
Andreollo NA, Earlam RJ: Heller’s myotomy for achalasia: Is 
an added antireflux procedure necessary? Br J Surg 74:765, 
1987.
Anselmino M, Perdikis G, et al.: Heller myotomy is superior to dila-
tation for the treatment of early achalasia. Arch Surg 132:233, 
1997.
Bianco A, Cagossi M, et al.: Appearance of esophageal peristalsis 
in treated idiopathic achalasia. Dig Dis Sci 90:978, 1986.
Bonavina L, Nosadinia A, et al.: Primary treatment of esopha-
geal achalasia: Long-term results of myotomy and Dor fun-
doplication. Arch Surg 127:222, 1992.
Chen LQ, Chughtau T, Sideris L, et al.: Long term effects of myot-
omy and partial fundoplication for esophageal achalasia. Dis 
Esophagus 15:171, 2002.
Code CF, Schlegel JF, et al.: Hypertensive gastroesophageal 
sphincter. Mayo Clin Proc 35:391, 1960.
Cook IJ, Blumbergs P, et al.: Structural abnormalities of the cri-
copharyngeus muscle in patients with pharyngeal (Zenker’s) 
diverticulum. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 7:556, 1992.
Cook IJ, Gabb M, et al.: Pharyngeal (Zenker’s) diverticulum is a 
disorder of upper esophageal sphincter opening. Gastroenterol-
ogy 103:1229, 1992.
Csendes A, Braghetto I, et al.: Late results of a prospective ran-
domized study comparing forceful dilatation and oesoph-
agomyotomy in patients with achalasia. Gut 30:299, 1989.
1030
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, et al.: Indications, surgical tech-
nique, and long-term functional results of colon interposition 
or bypass. Ann Surg 208:460, 1988.
DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, et al.: The relationship of a hiatal her-
nia to the function of the body of the esophagus and the gastro-
esophageal junction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 82:547, 1981.
Eckardt V, Aignherr C, Bernhard G: Predictors of outcome in 
patients with achalasia treated by pneumatic dilation. 
Gastroenterology 103:1732, 1992.
Ekberg O, Wahlgren L: Dysfunction of pharyngeal swallowing: A 
cineradiographic investigation in 854 dysphagial patients. Acta 
Radiol Diagn 26:389, 1985.
Ellis FH: Long esophagomyotomy for diffuse esophageal spasm 
and related disorders: An historical overview. Dis Esophagus 
11:210; 1998.
Ellis FH Jr.: Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: A 22-year experi-
ence. Br J Surg 80:882, 1993.
Evander A, Little AG, et al.: Diverticula of the mid and lower 
esophagus. World J Surg 10:820, 1986.
Ferguson TB, Woodbury JD, Roper CL: Giant muscular hypertro-
phy of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg 8:209, 1969.
Foker JE, Ring WE, Varco RL: Technique of jejunal interposition 
for esophageal replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 83:928, 
1982.
Gutschow CA, Hamoir M, Rombaux P, et al.: Management of pha-
ryngoesophageal (Zenker’s) diverticulum: Which technique? 
Ann Thorac Surg 74:1677, 2002.
Hirano I, Tatum RP, Shi G, et al.: Manometric heterogeneity in 
patients with idiopathic achalasia. Gastroenterology 120:789, 
2001.
Jeansonne LO, White BC, Pilger KE, et al.: Ten-year follow-up of 
laparoscopic Heller myotomy for achalasia shows durability. 
Surg Endosc 21:1498, 2007. Epub 2007 Jul 11.
Jobe BA, Kim CY, Minjarez RC, et al.: Simplifying minimally inva-
sive transhiatal esophagectomy with the inversion approach: 
Lessons learned from the first 20 cases.: Arch Surg 141:857; 
discussion 865, 2006.
Kahrilas PJ, Logemann JA, et al.: Pharyngeal clearance during 
swallowing: A combined manometric and videofluoroscopic 
study. Gastroenterology 103:128, 1992.
Kostic S, Kjellin A, Ruth M, et al.: Pneumatic dilation or laparo-
scopic cardiomyotomy in the management of newly diagnosed 
idiopathic achalasia. Results of a randomized controlled trial. 
World J Surg 31:470, 2007.
Lam HG, Dekker W, et al.: Acute noncardiac chest pain in a coro-
nary care unit. Gastroenterology 102:453, 1992.
Mellow MH: Return of esophageal peristalsis in idiopathic achala-
sia. Gastroenterology 70:1148, 1976.
Meshkinpour H, Haghighat P, et al.: Quality of life among patients 
treated for achalasia. Dig Dis Sci 41:352, 1996.
Migliore M, Payne H, et al.: Pathophysiologic basis for operation 
on Zenker’s diverticulum. Ann Thorac Surg 57:1616, 1994.
Moser G, Vacariu-Granser GV, et al.: High incidence of esophageal 
motor disorders in consecutive patients with globus sensation. 
Gastroenterology 101:1512, 1991.
Moses PL, Ellis LM, Anees MR, et al.: Antineural antibodies in 
idiopathic achalasia and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Gut 
52:629, 2003.
Nehra D, Lord RV, DeMeester TR, et al.: Physiologic basis for 
the treatment of epiphrenic diverticulum. Ann Surg 235:346, 
2002.
Oelschlager BK, Chang L, Pellegrini CA: Improved outcome 
after extended gastric myotomy for achalasia. Arch Surg 
138:490, 2003.
O’Rourke RW, Seltman AK, Chang EY, et al.: A model for gas-
tric banding in the treatment of morbid obesity: The effect of 
chronic partial gastric outlet obstruction on esophageal physiol-
ogy. Ann Surg 244:723, 2006.
Patti MG, Fisichella PM, Peretta S, et al.: Impact of minimally 
invasive surgery on the treatment of esophageal achalasia: A 
decade of change. J Am Coll Surg 196:698, 2003.
Pellegrini C, Wetter LA, et al.: Thoracoscopic esophagomyotomy: 
Initial experience with a new approach for the treatment of 
achalasia. Ann Surg 216:291, 1992.
Peters JH: An antireflux procedure is critical to the long-term out-
come of esophageal myotomy for achalasia. J Gastrointest Surg 
5:17, 2001.
Peters JH, Kauer WK, Ireland AP, et al.: Esophageal resection with 
colon interposition for end-stage achalasia. Arch Surg 130:632, 
1995.
Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al.: Individual prediction of 
response to pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia. Dig 
Dis Sci 41:2135, 1996.
Richards WO, Torquati A, Holzman MD, et al.: Heller myotomy 
versus Heller myotomy with Dor fundoplication for acha-
lasia: A prospective randomized double-blind clinical trial. 
Ann Surg 240:405; discussion 412, 2004.
Shoenut J, Duerksen D: A prospective assessment of gastroesoph-
ageal reflux before and after treatment of achalasia patients: 
Pneumatic dilation versus transthoracic limited myotomy. Am 
J Gastroenterol 92:1109, 1997.
Spechler S, Castell DO: Classification of oesophageal motility 
abnormalities. Gut 49:145, 2001.
Streitz JM Jr., Glick ME, Ellis FH Jr.: Selective use of myotomy 
for treatment of epiphrenic diverticula: Manometric and clinical 
analysis. Arch Surg 127:585, 1992.
Vaezi MF, Baker ME, Achkar E, et al.: Timed barium oesopho-
gram: Better predictor of long term success after pneumatic 
dilation in achalasia than symptom assessment. Gut 50:765, 
2002.
Verne G, Sallustio JE, et al.: Anti-myenteric neuronal antibodies 
in patients with achalasia: A prospective study. Dig Dis Sci 
42:307, 1997.
Williams RB, Grehan MJ, Andre J, et al.: Biomechanics, diagnosis, 
and treatment outcome in inflammatory myopathy presenting as 
oropharyngeal dysphagia. Gut 52:471, 2003.
Zaninotto G, Annese V, Costantini M, et al.: Randomized con-
trolled trial of botulinum toxin versus laparoscopic Heller 
myotomy for esophageal achalasia. Ann Surg 239:364, 
2004.
Zhao X, Pasricha PJ: Botulinum toxin for spastic GI disorders: A 
systematic review. Gastrointest Endosc 57:219, 2003.
Carcinoma of the Esophagus
Akiyama H: Surgery for carcinoma of the esophagus. Curr Probl 
Surg 17:53, 1980.
Akiyama H, Tsurumaru M: Radical lymph node dissection for 
cancer of the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg 220:364, 1994.
Altorki N, Skinner D: Should en-bloc esophagectomy be the stan-
dard of care for esophageal carcinoma? Ann Surg 234:581, 
2001.
Badwe RA, Sharma V, Bhansali MS, et al.: The quality of swal-
lowing for patients with operable esophageal carcinoma: A 
randomized trial comparing surgery with radiotherapy. Cancer 
85:763, 1999.
Baker JW Jr., Schechter GL: Management of paraesophageal can-
cer by blunt resection without thoracotomy and reconstruction 
with stomach. Ann Surg 203:491, 1986.
Biere SS, van Berge Henegouwen MI, Maas KW, et al.: Minimally 
invasive open oesophagectomy for patient with oesophageal 
cancer: a multicenter, open-label, randomized controlled trial. 
Lancet 19:1887, 2012.
Blazeby JM, Williams MH, et al.: Quality of life measurement in 
patients with oesophageal cancer. Gut 37:505, 1995.
Borrie J: Sarcoma of esophagus: Surgical treatment. J Thorac Surg 
37:413, 1959.
1031
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Cameron AJ, Ott BJ, Payne WS: The incidence of adenocarci-
noma in columnar-lined (Barrett’s) esophagus. N Engl J Med 
313:857, 1985.
Chang AC, Ji H, Birkmeyer NJ, et al.: Outcomes after transhiatal 
and transthoracic esophagectomy for cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 
85:424, 2008.
Chang EY, Morris CD, Seltman AK, et al.: The effect of antire-
flux surgery on esophageal carcinogenesis in patients with 
Barrett’s esophagus: A systematic review. Ann Surg 246:11, 
2007.
Clark GWB, Peters JH, Hagen JA, et al.: Nodal metastases and 
recurrence patterns after en-bloc esophagectomy for adenocar-
cinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 58:646, 1994.
Clark GW, Smyrk TC, et al.: Is Barrett’s metaplasia the source of 
adenocarcinomas of the cardia? Arch Surg 129:609, 1994.
Collin CF, Spiro RH: Carcinoma of the cervical esophagus: Chang-
ing therapeutic trends. Am J Surg 148:460, 1984.
Corley DA, Kerlikowske K, Verma R, et al.: Protective association 
of aspirin/NSAIDs and esophageal cancer: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 124:47, 2003.
Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al.: Perioperative 
chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastro-
esophageal cancer. N Engl J Med 6;355:11, 2006.
Dallal HJ, Smith GD, Grieve DC, et al.: A randomized trial of 
thermal ablative therapy versus expandable metal stents in the 
palliative treatment of patients with esophageal carcinoma. 
Gastrointest Endosc 54:549, 2001.
DeMeester TR, Skinner DB: Polypoid sarcomas of the esophagus. 
Ann Thorac Surg 20:405, 1975.
Duhaylongsod FG, Wolfe WG: Barrett’s esophagus and adeno-
carcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 102:36, 1991.
Ell C, May A, Gossner L, et al.: Endoscopic mucosal resection of 
early cancer and high grade dysplasia in Barrett’s esophagus. 
Gastroenterology 118:670, 2001.
Ellis FH, Heatley GJ, Krosna MJ, et al.: Esophagogastrectomy for 
carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia: A comparison of find-
ings and results after standard resection in three consecutive 8 
year time intervals, using improved staging criteria. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg 113:836, 1997.
Frenken M: Best palliation in esophageal cancer; surgery, stenting, 
radiation, or what? Dis Esophagus 14:120, 2001.
Fujita H, Kakegawa T, et al.: Mortality and morbidity rates, post-
operative course, quality of life, and prognosis after extended 
radical lymphadenectomy for esophageal cancer. Ann Surg 
222:654, 1995.
Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers BM, et al.: Survival benefits 
from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy 
in oesophageal carcinoma: A meta-analysis. Lancet 8:226, 
2007.
Greenstein AJ, Litle VR, Swanson SJ, et al.: Effect of the number of 
lymph nodes sampled on postoperative survival of lymph node-
negative esophageal cancer. Cancer 112:1239, 2008.
Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, Peters JH, et al.: Curative resec-
tion for esophageal adenocarcinoma analysis of 100 en bloc 
esophagectomies. Ann Surg 234:520, 2001.
Hofstetter W, Swisher SG, Correa AM: Treatment outcomes of 
resected esophageal cancer. Ann Surg 236:376, 2002.
Hulscher JB, Van Sandick JW, de Boer AG, et al.: Extended 
transthoracic resection compared with limited transhiatal 
resection for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. N Engl J 
Med 347:1662, 2002.
Iijima K, Henrey E, Moriya A, et al.: Dietary nitrate generates 
potentially mutagenic concentrations of nitric oxide at the gas-
troesophageal junction. Gastroenterology 122:1248, 2002.
Ikeda M, Natsugoe S, Ueno S, et al.: Significant host and tumor 
related factors for predicting prognosis in patients with esopha-
geal carcinoma. Ann Surg 238:197, 2003.
Jankowski JA, Wight NA, Meltzer SJ, et al.: Molecular evolution 
of the metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence in the 
esophagus. Am J Pathol 154:965, 1999.
Jobe BA, Kim CY, Minjarez RC, et al.: Simplifying minimally inva-
sive transhiatal esophagectomy with the inversion approach: 
Lessons learned from the first 20 cases. Arch Surg 141:857; 
discussion 865.
Johansson J, DeMeester TR, Hoger JA, et al.: En bloc is superior 
to transhiatal esophagectomy for T3 N1 adenocarcinoma of the 
distal esophagus and GE junction. Arch Surg 139:627, 2004.
Kaklamanos IG, Walker GR, Ferry K, et al.: Neoadjuvant treatment 
for resectable cancer of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal 
junction: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann 
Surg Oncol 10:754, 2003.
Kelsen DP, Winter KA, Gunderson LL, et al.: Long-term results 
of RTOG trial 8911 (USA Intergroup 113): A random assign-
ment trial comparison of chemotherapy followed by surgery 
compared with surgery alone for esophageal cancer. J Clin 
Oncol 25:3719, 2007.
Krasna MJ, Reed CE, Nedzwiecki D, et al.: CALBG 9380: A pro-
spective trial of the feasibility of thoracoscopy/laparoscopy in 
staging esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 71:1073, 2001.
Kirby JD: Quality of life after esophagectomy: The patients’ per-
spective. Dis Esophagus 12:168, 1999.
Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Lindgren A, et al.: Symptomatic gas-
troesophageal reflux as a risk factor for esophageal adeno-
carcinoma. N Engl J Med 340:825, 1999.
Lavin P, Hajdu SI, Foote FW Jr.: Gastric and extragastric leiomyo-
blastomas. Cancer 29:305, 1972.
Law SYK, Fok M, Wong J: Pattern of recurrence after oesophageal 
resection for cancer: Clinical implications. Br J Surg 83:107, 1996.
Law SYK, Fok M, et al.: A comparison of outcomes after resec-
tion for squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of the 
esophagus and cardia. Surg Gynecol Obstet 175:107, 1992.
Law S, Kwong DL, Kwok KF, et al.: Improvement in treatment 
results and long term survival of patients with esophageal 
cancer: Impact of chemoradiation and change in treatment 
strategy. Ann Surg 238:339, 2003.
Lerut T, Coosemans W, et al.: Surgical treatment of Barrett’s carci-
noma. Correlations between morphologic findings and progno-
sis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 107:1059, 1994.
Leuketich JD, Alvelo-Rivera M, Buenaventura PO, et al.: Mini-
mally invasive esophagectomy: Outcomes in 222 patients. 
Ann Surg 238:486, 2003.
Levine DS, Reid BJ: Endoscopic diagnosis of esophageal neo-
plasms. Gastrointest Clin North Am 2:395, 1992.
Lewis I: The surgical treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus 
with special reference to a new operation for the growths of the 
middle third. Br J Surg 34:18, 1946.
Logan A: The surgical treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus and 
cardia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 46:150, 1963.
Manner H, May A, Pech O, et al.: Early Barrett’s carcinoma with 
“low-risk” submucosal invasion: Long-term results of endo-
scopic resection with a curative intent. Am J Gastroenterol 
103:2589, 2008. Epub 2008 Sep 10.
McCort JJ: Esophageal carcinosarcoma and pseudosarcoma. 
Radiology 102:519, 1972.
Medical Research Council Oesophageal Working Party: Surgical 
resection with or without preoperative chemotherapy in oesopha-
geal cancer: A randomized controlled trial. Lancet 359:1727, 2002.
Naunheim KS, Petruska PJ, et al.: Preoperative chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy for esophageal carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 103:887, 1992.
Nicks R: Colonic replacement of the esophagus. Br J Surg 54:124, 
1967.
Nigro JJ, Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, et al.: Occult esophageal ade-
nocarcinoma: Extent of disease and implications for effective 
therapy. Ann Surg 230:433, 1999.
1032
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Omloo JM, Lagarde SM, Hulscher JB, et al.: Extended transtho-
racic resection compared with limited transhiatal resection for 
adenocarcinoma of the mid/distal esophagus: Five year sur-
vival of a randomized clinical trial. Ann Surg 246:992, 2007.
Orringer MB, Marshall B, Iannettoni MD: Transhiatal esophagec-
tomy: Clinical experience and refinements. Ann Surg 230:392, 
1999.
Orringer MB, Marshall B, Chang AC, et al.: Two thousand tran-
shiatal esophagectomies: changing trends, lessons learned. 
Ann Surg 246:363; discussion 372, 2007.
Ott K, Herrmann K, Lordick F, et al.: Early metabolic response 
evaluation by fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emis-
sion tomography allows in vivo testing of chemosensitivity in 
gastric cancer: long-term results of a prospective study. Clin 
Cancer Res 14:2012, 2008.
Pacifico RJ, Wang KK, Wongkeesong LM, et al.: Combined endo-
scopic mucosal resection and photodynamic therapy versus 
esophagectomy for management of early adenocarcinoma of 
the esophagus. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 1:252, 2003.
Pera M, Cameron AJ, et al.: Increasing incidence of adenocarci-
noma of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction. Gastro-
enterology 104:510, 1993.
Pera M, Trastek VF, et al.: Barrett’s esophagus with high-grade 
dysplasia: An indication for esophagectomy? Ann Thorac Surg 
54:199, 1992.
Pera M, Trastek VF, et al.: Influence of pancreatic and biliary reflux 
on the development of esophageal carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 
55:1386, 1993.
Peters JH, Clark GWB, et al.: Outcome of adenocarcinoma aris-
ing in Barrett’s esophagus in endoscopically surveyed and 
non-surveyed patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 108:813, 
1994.
Peters JH, Hoeft SF, et al.: Selection of patients for curative or 
palliative resection of esophageal cancer based on preoperative 
endoscopic ultrasound. Arch Surg 129:534, 1994.
Peters JH: Surgical treatment of esophageal adenocarcinoma: Con-
cepts in evolution. J Gastrointest Surg 6:518, 2002.
Rasanen JV, Sihvo EIT, Knuuti J, et al.: Prospective analysis of 
accuracy of proton emission tomography, computed tomogra-
phy and endoscopic ultrasonography in staging of adenocarci-
noma of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction. Ann Surg 
Oncol 10:954, 2003.
Ravitch M: A Century of Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1981, 
p 56.
Reed CE: Comparison of different treatments for unresectable 
esophageal cancer. World J Surg 19:828, 1995.
Reid BJ, Weinstein WM, et al.: Endoscopic biopsy can detect 
high-grade dysplasia or early adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s 
esophagus without grossly recognizable neoplastic lesions. 
Gastroenterology 94:81, 1988.
Ribeiro U Jr., Posner MC, et al.: Risk factors for squamous cell 
carcinoma of the oesophagus. Br J Surg 83:1174, 1996.
Rice TW, Boyce GA, et al.: Esophageal ultrasound and the preop-
erative staging of carcinoma of the esophagus. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg 101:536, 1991.
Rice TW, Rusch VW, Ishwaran H, et al.: Cancer of the esophagus 
and esophagogastric junction: data drien staging for the seventh 
edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Interna-
tional Union Against Cancer Cancer Staging Manuals. Cancer 
15:3763, 2010.
Robertson CS, Mayberry JF, Nicholson JA: Value of endoscopic 
surveillance in the detection of neoplastic changes in Barrett’s 
esophagus. Br J Surg 75:760, 1988.
Rösch T, Lorenz R, et al.: Endosonographic diagnosis of submu-
cosal upper gastrointestinal tract tumors. Scand J Gastroenterol 
27:1, 1992.
Rosenberg JC, Budev H, et al.: Analysis of adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s 
esophagus utilizing a staging system. Cancer 55:1353, 1985.
Ruol A, Portale G, Castoro C, et al.: Effects of neoadjuvant ther-
apy on perioperative morbidity in elderly patients undergo-
ing esophagectomy for esophageal cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 
14:3243, 2007.
Skinner DB, Dowlatshahi KD, DeMeester TR: Potentially curable 
carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer 50:2571, 1982.
Skinner DB, Ferguson MK, Little AG: Selection of operation for 
esophageal cancer based on staging. Ann Surg 204:391, 1986.
Smithers BM, Cullinan M, Thomas JM, et al.: Dis Esophagus 
20:471, 2007.
Sonnenberg A, Fennerty MB: Medical decision analysis of chemo-
prevention against esophageal adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterol-
ogy 124:1758, 2003.
Streitz JM Jr., Ellis FH Jr., et al.: Adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s 
esophagus. Ann Surg 213:122, 1991.
Turnbull AD, Rosen P, et al.: Primary malignant tumors of the 
esophagus other than typical epidermoid carcinoma. Ann 
Thorac Surg 15:463, 1973.
Urschel JD, Ashiku S, Thurer R, et al.: Salvage or planned 
esophagectomy after chemoradiation for locally advanced 
esophageal cancer: A review. Dis Esophagus 16:60, 2003.
Vigneswaran WT, Trastek VK, et al.: Extended esophagectomy in 
the management of carcinoma of the upper thoracic esophagus. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 107:901, 1994.
Walsh TN, Noonan N, et al.: A comparison of multimodal therapy 
and surgery for esophageal adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 
335:462, 1996.
Watson WP, Pool L: Cancer of the cervical esophagus. Surgery 
23:893, 1948.
Benign Tumors and Cysts
Bardini R, Segalin A, et al.: Videothoracoscopic enucleation of 
esophageal leiomyoma. Am Thorac Surg 54:576, 1992.
Bonavina L, Segalin A, et al.: Surgical therapy of esophageal leio-
myoma. J Am Coll Surg 181:257, 1995.
Esophageal Perforation
Brewer LA III, Carter R, et al.: Options in the management of per-
forations of the esophagus. Am J Surg 152:62, 1986.
Bufkin BL, Miller JI Jr., Mansour KA: Esophageal perforation. 
Emphasis on management. Ann Thorac Surg 61:1447, 1996.
Chang C-H, Lin PJ, et al.: One-stage operation for treatment after 
delayed diagnosis of thoracic esophageal perforation. Ann 
Thorac Surg 53:617, 1992.
Engum SA, Grosfeld JL, et al.: Improved survival in children with 
esophageal perforation. Arch Surg 131:604, 1996.
Gouge TH, Depan HJ, Spencer FC: Experience with the Grillo 
pleural wrap procedure in 18 patients with perforation of 
the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg 209:612, 1989.
Jones WG II, Ginsberg RJ: Esophageal perforation: A continuing 
challenge. Ann Thorac Surg 53:534, 1992.
Pate JW, Walker WA, et al.: Spontaneous rupture of the esophagus: 
A 30-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg 47:689, 1989.
Reeder LB, DeFilippi VJ, Ferguson MK: Current results of therapy 
for esophageal perforation. Am J Surg 169:615, 1995.
Salo JA, Isolauri JO, et al.: Management of delayed esophageal 
perforation with mediastinal sepsis. Esophagectomy or pri-
mary repair? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 106:1088, 1993.
Sawyer R, Phillips C, Vakil N: Short- and long-term outcome of 
esophageal perforation. Gastrointest Endosc 41:130, 1995.
Segalin A, Bonavina L, et al.: Endoscopic management of invet-
erate esophageal perforations and leaks. Surg Endosc 10:928, 
1996.
Weiman DS, Walker WA, et al.: Noniatrogenic esophageal trauma. 
Ann Thorac Surg 59:845, 1995.
Whyte RI, Iannettoni MD, Orringer MB: Intrathoracic esophageal 
perforation. The merit of primary repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 109:140, 1995.
1033
Esophagus and Diaphragmatic Hernia
CHAPTER 25
Caustic Injury
Anderson KD, Rouse TM, Randolph JG: A controlled trial of cor-
ticosteroids in children with corrosive injury of the esophagus. 
N Engl J Med 323:637, 1990.
Ferguson MK, Migliore M, et al.: Early evaluation and therapy for 
caustic esophageal injury. Am J Surg 157:116, 1989.
Lahoti D, Broor SL, et al.: Corrosive esophageal strictures. Pre-
dictors of response to endoscopic dilation. Gastrointest Endosc 
41:196, 1995.
Popovici Z: About reconstruction of the pharynx with colon in 
extensive corrosive strictures. Kurume MedJ 36:41, 1989.
Sugawa C, Lucas CE: Caustic injury of the upper gastrointesti-
nal tract in adults: A clinical and endoscopic study. Surgery 
106:802, 1989.
Wu M-H, Lai W-W: Surgical management of extensive corrosive inju-
ries of the alimentary tract. Surg Gynecol Obstet 177:12, 1993.
Zargar SA, Kochhar R, et al.: The role of fiberoptic endoscopy in 
the management of corrosive ingestion and modified endoscopic 
classification of burns. Gastrointest Endosc 37:165, 1991.
Techniques of Esophageal Reconstruction
Akiyama H: Esophageal reconstruction. Entire stomach as esopha-
geal substitute. Dis Esophagus 8:7, 1995.
Banki F, Mason RJ, DeMeester SR, et al.: Vagal sparing esopha-
gectomy: A more physiologic alternative. Ann Surg 236:324, 
2002.
Burt M, Scott A, et al.: Erythromycin stimulates gastric emptying 
after esophagectomy with gastric replacement. A randomized 
clinical trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 111:649, 1996.
Cheng W, Heitmiller RF, Jones BJ: Subacute ischemia of the colon 
esophageal interposition. Ann Thorac Surg 57:899, 1994.
DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, et al.: Indications, surgical tech-
nique, and long-term functional results of colon interposi-
tion or bypass. Ann Surg 208:460, 1988.
DeMeester TR, Kauer WK: Esophageal reconstruction. The colon 
as an esophageal substitute. Dis Esophagus 8:20, 1995.
Dexter SPL, Martin IG, McMahon MJ: Radical thoracoscopic 
esophagectomy for cancer. Surg Endosc 10:147, 1996.
Ellis FH Jr., Gibb SP: Esophageal reconstruction for complex benign 
esophageal disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 99:192, 1990.
Finley RJ, Lamy A, et al.: Gastrointestinal function following 
esophagectomy for malignancy. Am J Surg 169:471, 1995.
Fok M, Cheng SW, Wong J: Pyloroplasty versus no drainage in gas-
tric replacement of the esophagus. Am J Surg 162:447, 1991.
Gossot D, Cattan P, Fritsch S: Can the morbidity of esophagec-
tomy be reduced by the thoracoscopic approach? Surg Endosc 
9:1113, 1995.
Honkoop P, Siersema PD, et al.: Benign anastomotic strictures 
after transhiatal esophagectomy and cervical esophagogastros-
tomy. Risk factors and management. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
111:1141, 1996.
Liebermann-Meffert DMI, Meier R, Siewert JR: Vascular anat-
omy of the gastric tube used for esophageal reconstruction. 
Ann Thorac Surg 54:1110, 1992.
Maier G, Jehle EC, Becker HD: Functional outcome following 
oesophagectomy for oesophageal cancer. A prospective mano-
metric study. Dis Esophagus 8:64, 1995.
Naunheim KS, Hanosh J, et al.: Esophagectomy in the septuagenar-
ian. Ann Thorac Surg 56:880, 1993.
Nishihra T, Oe H, et al.: Esophageal reconstruction. Reconstruction 
of the thoracic esophagus with jejunal pedicled segments for 
cancer of the thoracic esophagus. Dis Esophagus 8:30, 1995.
Peters JH, Kronson J, Bremner CG, et al.: Arterial anatomic con-
siderations in colon interposition for esophageal replacement. 
Arch Surg 130:858, 1995.
Stark SP, Romberg MS, et al.: Transhiatal versus transthoracic 
esophagectomy for adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and 
cardia. Am J Surg 172:478, 1996.
Valverde A, Hay JM, Fingerhut A, et al.: Manual versus mechani-
cal esophagogastric anastomosis after resection for carcinoma. 
A controlled trial. French Associations for Surgical Research. 
Surgery 120:476, 1996.
Watson T, DeMeester TR, Kauer WK, et al.: Esophagectomy for 
end stage benign esophageal disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
115:1241, 1998.
Wu M-H, Lai W-W: Esophageal reconstruction for esophageal 
strictures or resection after corrosive injury. Ann Thorac Surg 
53:798, 1992.
This page intentionally left blank 
Stomach
Yuko Kitagawa and Daniel T. Dempsey
26
The stomach is a remarkable organ with important digestive, 
nutritional, and endocrine functions. The stomach stores and 
facilitates the digestion and absorption of ingested food, and it 
helps regulate appetite. Treatable diseases of the stomach are 
common, and it is accessible and relatively forgiving. Thus, 
the stomach is a favorite therapeutic target. To provide intel-
ligent diagnosis and treatment, the physician and surgeon must 
understand gastric anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiol-
ogy. This includes a sound understanding of the mechanical, 
secretory, and endocrine processes through which the stomach 
accomplishes its important functions; and a familiarity with 
the common benign and malignant gastric disorders of clinical 
significance. The surgeon must also understand the indications, 
complications, and outcomes of procedures utilized to treat dis-
eases of the stomach. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance 
the reader’s current understanding and familiarity with these 
concepts and topics. Some important milestones in the history 
of gastric surgery1–6 are listed in Table 26-1.
ANATOMY
Anatomic Relationships and Gross Morphology
The stomach is readily recognizable as the asymmetrical, pear-
shaped, most proximal abdominal organ of the digestive tract 
(Fig. 26-1).7 The part of the stomach attached to the esopha-
gus is called the cardia. Just proximal to the cardia at the gas-
troesophageal (GE) junction is the anatomically indistinct but 
physiologically demonstrable lower esophageal sphincter. 
At the distal end, the readily apparent pyloric sphincter con-
nects the stomach to the proximal duodenum. The stomach is 
relatively fixed at these points, but the large midportion is quite 
mobile with the shorter lesser curvature on the right and the 
longer greater curvature on the left.
The superior-most part of the stomach is the distensible 
fundus, bounded superiorly by the diaphragm and laterally by 
the spleen. The angle of His is where the fundus meets the left 
side of the GE junction. Generally, the inferior extent of the 
Anatomy	
1035
Anatomic Relationships and Gross  
Morphology / 1035
Arterial and Venous Blood Supply / 1037
Lymphatic Drainage / 1038
Innervation / 1038
Histology / 1039
Physiology	
1041
Acid Secretion / 1041
Pepsinogen Secretion / 1044
Intrinsic Factor / 1044
Gastric Mucosal Barrier / 1044
Gastric Hormones / 1045
Gastric Motility and Emptying / 1047
Diagnosis of Gastric Disease	
1050
Signs and Symptoms / 1050
Diagnostic Tests / 1050
Peptic Ulcer Disease	
1053
Pathophysiology and Etiology / 1053
Clinical Manifestations / 1059
Diagnosis / 1059
Complications / 1059
Medical Treatment of Peptic  
Ulcer Disease / 1061
Surgical Treatment of Peptic Ulcer  
Disease / 1061
Bleeding Peptic Ulcer / 1064
Operation for Bleeding  
Peptic Ulcer / 1065
Perforated Peptic Ulcer / 1068
Obstructing Peptic Ulcer / 1068
Intractable or Nonhealing  
Peptic Ulcer / 1069
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome / 1071
Gastritis and Stress Ulcer	
1073
Pathogenesis and Prevention / 1073
Malignant Neoplasms  
of the Stomach	
1074
Adenocarcinoma / 1074
Gastric Lymphoma / 1084
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor / 1084
Gastric Carcinoid Tumors / 1085
Benign Gastric Neoplasms	
1086
Leiomyoma / 1086
Lipoma / 1087
Gastric Motility Disorders / 1087
Massive Upper Gastrointestinal  
Bleeding / 1087
Isolated Gastric Varices / 1088
Hypertrophic Gastropathy  
(Ménétrier’s Disease) / 1088
Watermelon Stomach (Gastric Antral  
Vascular Ectasia) / 1088
Dieulafoy’s Lesion / 1089
Bezoars/Diverticula / 1089
Foreign Bodies / 1089
Mallory-Weiss Syndrome / 1090
Volvulus / 1090
Gastrostomy	
1090
Postgastrectomy Problems	
1090
Dumping Syndrome / 1090
Diarrhea / 1093
Gastric Stasis / 1093
Bile Reflux Gastritis  
and Esophagitis / 1093
Roux Syndrome / 1094
Gallstones / 1094
Weight Loss / 1094
Anemia / 1094
Bone Disease / 1094
Laparoscopic Gastric  
Operations	
1095
chapter 
1036
Key Points
1
	 Any patient admitted to a hospital because of peptic ulcer dis-
ease should be considered for lifelong acid suppression.
2
	 Lifelong acid suppressive medication may be equivalent to 
surgical vagotomy in preventing recurrent peptic ulcer or ulcer 
complications.
3
	 Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy should be avoided unless more 
than half of the stomach has been removed. Otherwise marginal 
ulceration and/or gastric stasis (Roux syndrome) may become 
problematic.
4
	 Gastric resection for peptic ulcer should be avoided in the 
asthenic or high-risk patient, if possible.
5
	 Many patients with locally advanced gastric cancer (T2b, 
T3, T4) are cured by an oncologically sound operation that 
includes wide margins and adequate lymphadenectomy.
6
	 Most patients with primary gastric lymphoma can be 
treated without gastric resection.
7
	 Gastric carcinoids should usually be removed either endo-
scopically or surgically. The surgeon should treat gastric 
carcinoid without hypergastrinemia (type III) as if it were 
malignant.
Table 26-1 
Historic milestones in gastric surgery
Date
Event
Date
Event
350 b.c. – 
201 a.d.
1363
1586
1600–1700
1688
1737
1833
1869
1875
1879
1880
1880
1881
1884
1885
Existence of gastric ulceration was 
acknowledged by Diocles of Carystos (350 
b.c.), Celsus, and Galen (131–201 a.d.).
Guy de Chauliac describes closure of 
gastric wound.
Marcellus Donatus of Mantua describes 
gastric ulcer at autopsy.
Reports of surgeons cutting stomach to 
remove foreign bodies.
Muralto describes duodenal ulcer at 
autopsy.
Morgagni describes both gastric and 
duodenal ulcer at autopsy.
William Beaumont reports data recorded 
during his care of Alexis St. Martin who 
developed a gastric fistula from a left 
upper quadrant musket wound.
Maury reportedly performs feeding 
gastrostomy to palliate esophageal 
stricture following consultation with 
Samuel D. Gross.
Sidney Jones in London publishes the first 
successful gastrostomy for feeding.
Paen performed distal gastrectomy and 
gastroduodenostomy. The patient died  
5 d later.
Rydygier resected a distal gastric cancer, 
and the patient died 12 h later.
Billroth resects distal gastric cancer and 
performs gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I).  
Patient Therese Heller recovers and 
survives 4 mo.
Anton Wolfler performs loop 
gastrojejunostomy to palliate an 
obstructing distal gastric cancer.
Rydygier reports an unsuccessful 
gastrojejunostomy for benign gastric outlet 
obstruction.
Billroth performs a successful distal 
gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy 
(Billroth II) for gastric cancer.
1886
1888
1892
1902
1891–1913
1920–1950
1943
1952
1953
1955
1957
1980–2000
1990–
current
1995–
current
2000–
current
Heineke performs pyloroplasty.
Mikulicz performs similar operation.
Jaboulay describes bypassing the intact pylorus with 
gastroduodenostomy.
Finney from Baltimore describes pyloroplasty 
technique.
Different techniques of gastrostomy are described by 
Witzel (1891), Stamm (1894), and Janeway (1913).
Subtotal gastrectomy grows popular as an operation for 
peptic ulcer. Von Haberer and Finsterer proponents.
Dragstedt and Owen describe transthoracic truncal 
vagotomy to treat peptic ulcer disease. By the early 
1950s, it is well recognized that some patients 
developed gastric stasis after this procedure, and 
transabdominal truncal vagotomy and drainage 
(pyloroplasty or gastrojejunostomy) become a standard 
ulcer operation.
Farmer and Smithwick describe good results with 
truncal vagotomy and hemigastrectomy for peptic ulcer.
Edwards and Herrington (Nashville) describe truncal 
vagotomy and antrectomy for peptic ulcer.
Zollinger and Ellison describe the eponymous 
syndrome.
Griffith and Harkins (Seattle) describe parietal cell 
vagotomy (highly selective vagotomy) for the elective 
treatment of peptic ulcer disease.
Japanese surgeons and other surgical groups 
from East Asia demonstrate that more aggressive 
lymphadenectomy may improve survival in patients 
with gastric cancer.
Evolving role of laparoscopic techniques in the 
treatment of surgical gastric disease.
Dramatic increase in bariatric operations.
Development of natural orifice translumenal endoscopic 
surgery.
1037
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
fundus is considered to be the horizontal plane of the GE junc-
tion, where the body (corpus) of the stomach begins. The body 
of the stomach contains most of the parietal (oxyntic) cells, 
some of which are also present in the cardia and fundus. At the 
angularis, incisura the lesser curvature turns rather abruptly to 
the right, marking the anatomic beginning of the antrum, which 
comprises the distal 25% to 30% of the stomach.
The organs that commonly abut the stomach are the liver, 
colon, spleen, pancreas, and occasionally the kidney (Fig. 26-2). 
The left lateral segment of the liver usually covers a large part 
of the anterior stomach. Inferiorly, the stomach is attached to the 
transverse colon by the gastrocolic omentum. The lesser curva-
ture is tethered to the liver by the hepatogastric ligament, also 
referred to as the lesser omentum or pars flaccida. Posterior to 
the stomach is the lesser omental bursa and the pancreas.
Arterial and Venous Blood Supply
The stomach is the most richly vascularized portion of the ali-
mentary tube with ample blood flow and a dense intramural 
vascular anastomotic network. The large majority of the gastric 
blood supply is from the celiac axis via four named arteries 
(Fig. 26-3). The left and right gastric arteries form an anasto-
motic arcade along the lesser curvature, and the right and left 
gastroepiploic arteries form an arcade along the greater gastric 
curvature. The consistently largest artery to the stomach is the 
left gastric artery, which usually arises directly from the celiac 
trunk and divides into an ascending and descending branch 
along the lesser gastric curvature. Approximately 20% of the 
time, the left gastric artery supplies an aberrant vessel that trav-
els in the gastrohepatic ligament (lesser omentum) to the left 
side of the liver. Rarely, this is the only arterial blood supply to 
this part of the liver, and inadvertent ligation may lead to clini-
cally significant hepatic ischemia in this unusual circumstance. 
The more common smaller aberrant left hepatic artery may be 
ligated without significant consequences.
The second largest artery to the stomach is the right gas-
troepiploic artery, which arises consistently from the gastro-
duodenal artery behind the first portion of the duodenum. The 
left gastroepiploic artery arises from the splenic artery, and, 
together with the right gastroepiploic artery, forms the rich gas-
troepiploic arcade along the greater curvature. The right gastric 
artery usually arises from the hepatic artery near the pylorus and 
hepatoduodenal ligament, and runs proximally along the distal 
stomach. In the fundus along the proximal greater curvature, the 
short gastric arteries and veins arise from the splenic circulation. 
There also may be additional vascular branches to the proximal 
stomach from the phrenic and splenic circulation.
The veins draining the stomach generally parallel the 
arteries. The left gastric (coronary vein) and right gastric veins 
usually drain into the portal vein, though occasionally the coro-
nary vein drains into the splenic vein. The right gastroepiploic 
vein drains into the superior mesenteric vein near the inferior 
border of the pancreatic neck, and the left gastroepiploic vein 
drains into the splenic vein.
The richness of the gastric blood supply and the exten-
siveness of the anastomotic connections have some important 
clinical implications, such as: a) At least two of the four named 
gastric arteries may be occluded or ligated with impunity. This is 
Figure 26-1.  Anatomic regions of the stomach. [Reproduced with 
permission from Mercer DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A: Anatomy and 
physiology of the stomach, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 3. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Body
Fundus
Esophagus
Cardia
Pylorus
Duodenum
Pyloric antrum
  Lesser
curvature
 Greater
curvature
Liver (left lobe)         Celiac trunk
(splenic, gastric, hepatic)
Gastrohepatic
    omentum
    Stomach
(posterior wall)
Spleen
Pancreas
Transverse
    colon
Lesser omental
        space
Gastrocolic 
  ligament
Right kidney
Hepatoduodenal
      ligament
Gallbladder
T
 
lic
t
Figure 26-2.  Anatomic relationships of the 
stomach. [Reproduced with permission from 
Mercer DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A: Anatomy and 
physiology of the stomach, in Zuidema GD, Yeo 
CJ (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimen-
tary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2002, p 3. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
1038
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
done routinely when the stomach is mobilized and pedicled on 
the right gastric and right gastroepiploic vessels to reach into 
the neck as an esophageal replacement (see Chapter 25) or dur-
ing sleeve gastrectomy for weight loss when the gastroepiploic 
arcade is interrupted distally and resected (see Chapter 27), 
b) Following radical subtotal gastrectomy during which the 
right and left gastric arteries and both gastroepiploic arteries are 
all ligated, the gastric remnant is adequately supplied by short 
gastric arteries as long as the splenic artery is patent and intact; 
c) Angiographic control of gastric bleeding from deep ulcer or 
tumor often requires embolization of more than one feeding 
artery; d) Because of the rich venous interconnections in the 
stomach, a distal splenorenal shunt, which connects the distal 
end of the divided splenic vein to the side of the left renal vein, 
can effectively decompress esophagogastric varices in patients 
with portal hypertension.8,9
Lymphatic Drainage
Generally speaking, the gastric lymphatics parallel the blood 
vessels (Fig. 26-4).10 The cardia and medial half of the corpus 
commonly drain to nodes along the left gastric and celiac axis. 
The lesser curvature side of the antrum usually drains to the 
right gastric and pyloric nodes, while the greater curvature half 
of the distal stomach drains to the nodes along the right gas-
troepiploic chain. The proximal greater curvature side of the 
stomach usually drains into nodes along the left gastroepiploic 
or splenic hilum. The nodes along both the greater and lesser 
curvature commonly drain into the celiac nodal basin. There is a 
rich anastomotic network of lymphatics that drain the stomach, 
often in a somewhat unpredictable fashion. Thus, a tumor aris-
ing in the distal stomach may give rise to positive lymph nodes 
in the splenic hilum. The rich intramural plexus of lymphatics 
and veins accounts for the fact that there can be microscopic 
Stomach
Celiac a.
Short gastric
    arteries
(vasa brevia)
Spleen
Descending colon
Pancreas
Duodenum
Transverse colon
Pylorus
Sup. pancreatic
   duodenal a.
Abdominal
    Aorta
Inferior pancreatic
     duodenal a.
Hepatic a.
Left gastric a.
Branches
to greater
omentum
Splenic a. & v.
L. gastroepiploic a.
    Sup. 
mesenteric
   a. & v.
    Inferior 
mesenteric a.
Ileocolic a.
Jejunum
evidence of malignant cells in the gastric wall at a resection 
margin that is several centimeters away from palpable malig-
nant tumor. It also helps explain the not infrequent finding of 
positive lymph nodes which may be many centimeters away 
from the primary tumor, with closer nodes that remain negative.
Extensive and meticulous lymphadenectomy is considered 
by many surgeons to be an important part of the operation for 
gastric cancer. Surgeons and pathologists have numbered the 
primary and secondary lymph node groups to which the stom-
ach drains (see Fig. 26-4).11,12
Innervation13
The vagus nerves provide the extrinsic parasympathetic innerva-
tion to the stomach, and acetylcholine is the most important neu-
rotransmitter. From the vagal nucleus in the floor of the fourth 
cerebral ventricle, the vagus traverses the neck in the carotid 
sheath and enters the mediastinum, where it gives off the recur-
rent laryngeal nerve and divides into several branches around 
the esophagus. These branches come together again above the 
esophageal hiatus and form the left (anterior) and right (poste-
rior) vagal trunks (mnemonic LARP). Near the GE junction the 
anterior vagus sends a branch (or branches) to the liver in the 
gastrohepatic ligament, and continues along the lesser curvature 
as the anterior nerve of Latarjet (Fig. 26-5). Similarly, the pos-
terior vagus sends branches to the celiac plexus and continues 
along the posterior lesser curvature. The nerves of Latarjet 
send segmental branches to the body of the stomach before they 
terminate near the angularis incisura as the “crow’s foot,” send-
ing branches to the antropyloric region. There may be additional 
branches to the distal stomach and pylorus that travel near the 
right gastric and/or gastroepiploic arteries. In 50% of patients, 
there are more than two vagal nerves at the esophageal hiatus. 
The branch that the posterior vagus sends to the posterior fundus 
Figure 26-3.  Arterial blood supply to the 
stomach. a. = artery; v. = vein. [Reproduced 
with permission from Mercer DW, Liu TH, 
Castaneda A: Anatomy and physiology of 
the stomach, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): 
Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary 
Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2002, p 3. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
1039
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
is termed the criminal nerve of Grassi. This branch typically 
arises above the esophageal hiatus and is easily missed during 
truncal or highly selective vagotomy (HSV). Vagal fibers origi-
nating in the brain synapse with neurons in Auerbach’s myen-
teric plexus and Meissner’s submucosal plexus. In the stomach 
the vagus nerves affect secretion (including acid), motor func-
tion, and mucosal bloodflow and cytoprotection. They also play 
a role in appetite control and perhaps even mucosal immunity 
and inflammation. Most of the axons contained in the vagal 
trunks are afferent (i.e., carrying stimuli from the viscera to the 
brain).
The extrinsic sympathetic nerve supply to the stomach 
originates at spinal levels T5 through T10 and travels in the 
2
1
5
3
4a
4b
6
12
8
9
7
10
11
Figure 26-4.  Lymph node stations draining the stomach according to the Japanese Research Society for Gastric Cancer. Stations 3 to 6 are 
commonly removed with D1 gastrectomy. Stations 1, 2, and 7 to 12 are commonly removed with D2 gastrectomy. [Reproduced with permis-
sion from Hermanek P, et al (eds): TNM Atlas: Illustrated Guide to the TNM/pTNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 4th ed. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 1997, p 82–83. Used with the permission of the International Union Against Cancer (UICC), Geneva, Switzerland.]
splanchnic nerves to the celiac ganglion. Postganglionic sympa-
thetic nerves then travel from the celiac ganglion to the stomach 
along the blood vessels.
Neurons in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses consti-
tute the intrinsic nervous system of the stomach. There may be 
more intrinsic gastric neurons than extrinsic neurons, but their 
function is poorly understood.
It is obviously an oversimplification (and incorrect) to 
think exclusively of the vagus as the cholinergic system and 
the sympathetic system as the adrenergic system of innerva-
tion. Although acetylcholine is an important neurotransmitter 
mediating vagal function, and epinephrine is important in the 
sympathetic nerves, both systems (as well as the intrinsic 
neurons) have various and diverse neurotransmitters, includ-
ing cholinergic, adrenergic, and peptidergic (e.g., substance P 
and somatostatin).
Histology
There are four distinct layers of the gastric wall: mucosa, sub-
mucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa (Fig. 26-6).7 The inner 
layer of the stomach is the mucosa, which is lined with colum-
nar epithelial cells of various types. Beneath the basement mem-
brane of the epithelial cells is the lamina propria, which contains 
connective tissue, blood vessels, nerve fibers, and inflamma-
tory cells. Beneath the lamina propria is a thin muscle layer 
called the muscularis mucosa, the deep boundary of the mucosal 
layer of the gut. The epithelium, lamina propria, and muscularis 
mucosa constitute the mucosa (Fig. 26-7).14 The epithelium of 
the gastric mucosa is columnar glandular. A scanning electron 
micrograph shows a smooth mucosal carpet punctuated by the 
openings of the gastric glands. The gastric glands are lined with 
different types of epithelial cells, depending upon their loca-
tion in the stomach (Fig. 26-8, Table 26-2).15,16 There are also 
endocrine cells present in the gastric glands. Progenitor cells at 
the base of the glands differentiate and replenish sloughed cells 
on a regular basis. Throughout the stomach, the carpet consists 
primarily of mucus-secreting surface epithelial cells (SECs) that 
Right vagus n.
Hepatic br. left vagus
Celiac br. rt. vagus
Nerve of Laterjet
Pyloric br.
Left vagus n.
Figure 26-5.  Vagal innervation of the stomach. br. = branch; n. = 
nerve; rt. = right. [Reproduced with permission from Anatomy and 
physiology of the stomach, in Menguy R: Surgery of Peptic Ulcer. 
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1976, p 8. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
1040
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Surface epithelium
Gastric pits
Lymphoid nodule
Lamina propria mucosa
Submucosa
Smooth muscle layers
Serosa
Muscularis mucosae
Figure 26-6.  Layers of the gastric wall. [Reproduced with permis-
sion from The esophagus and stomach, in Fawcett DW: Bloom and 
Fawcett’s Textbook of Histology, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
1986, p 625. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Figure 26-7.  Gastric mucosa. (Reproduced with permission from Bloom W, Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology,  10th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 1975, p 639.)
extend down into the gland pits for variable distances. These 
cells also secrete bicarbonate and play an important role in 
protecting the stomach from injury due to acid, pepsin, and/
or ingested irritants. In fact, all epithelial cells of the stomach 
(except the endocrine cells) contain carbonic anhydrase and are 
capable of producing bicarbonate.
In the cardia, the gastric glands are branched and secrete 
primarily mucus and bicarbonate, but not much acid. In the 
fundus and body, the glands are more tubular and the pits are 
deep. Parietal and chief cells are common in these glands 
(Fig. 26-9). Histamine-secreting enterochromaffin-like (ECL) 
cells and somatostatin-secreting D cells are also found. Pari-
etal cells secrete acid and intrinsic factor into the gastric lumen, 
and bicarbonate into the intercellular space. They have a char-
acteristic ultrastructural appearance with secretory canaliculi 
(deep invaginations of the surface membrane), and cytoplas-
mic tubulovesicles containing the acid-producing apparatus H+/
K+-ATPase (proton pump) (see Fig. 26-9). There are numerous 
mitochondria; in fact the parietal cell is the most mitochon-
dria rich cell in the body. When the parietal cell is stimulated, 
1041
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Surface mucous cells
Parietal cells
Mucous neck cells
Argentaffin cell
Chief cells
Gastric pit
Isthmus
Neck
Base
Figure 26-8.  Mammalian gastric gland from the body of the stom-
ach. [Reproduced with permission from Ito S, Winchester RJ: The 
fine structure of the gastric mucosa in the bat. J Cell Biol 16:541, 
1963. kkjkjdht © 1963 The Rockefeller University Press. doi: 
10.1083/jcb.16.3.541.]
the cytoplasmic tubulovesicles fuse with the membrane of the 
secretory canaliculus; when acid production ceases, the pro-
cess is reversed. Arguably, parietal cells produce the only truly 
essential substance made by the stomach (i.e., intrinsic factor). 
Parietal cells tend to occupy the midportion of the gastric glands 
found in the corpus of the stomach.
Chief cells (also called zymogenic cells) secrete pepsino-
gen I, which is maximally activated at a pH of 2.5. They tend to 
be clustered toward the base of the gastric glands and have a low 
columnar shape. Ultrastructurally, chief cells have the character-
istics of protein-synthesizing cells: basal granular endoplasmic 
reticulum, supranuclear Golgi apparatus, and apical zymogen 
granules (Fig. 26-10). When stimulated, the chief cells produce 
two immunologically distinct proenzyme forms of pepsinogen: 
predominantly pepsinogen I and some pepsinogen II, most of 
which is produced by SECs. These proenzymes are activated in 
an acidic luminal environment.
In the antrum, the gastric glands are again more branched 
and shallow, parietal cells are rare, and gastrin-secreting G cells 
and somatostatin-secreting D cells are present. A variety of 
hormone-secreting cells are present in various proportions 
throughout the gastric mucosa (Fig. 26-11).17 Histologic analy-
sis suggests that in the normal stomach, 13% of the epithelial 
cells are oxyntic (parietal) cells, 44% are chief (zymogenic) 
cells, 40% are mucous cells, and 3% are endocrine cells. In gen-
eral, the antrum produces gastrin but not acid, and the proximal 
stomach produces acid but not gastrin. The border between the 
corpus and antrum migrates proximally with age (especially on 
the lesser curvature side of the stomach).
Deep to the muscularis mucosa is the submucosa, which 
is rich in branching blood vessels, lymphatics, collagen, vari-
ous inflammatory cells, and nerve fibers and ganglion cells of 
Meissner’s autonomic submucosal plexus. The collagen-rich 
submucosa gives strength to GI anastomoses. The mucosa and 
submucosa are folded into the grossly visible gastric rugae, 
which tend to flatten out as the stomach becomes distended.
Below the submucosa is the thick muscularis propria (also 
referred to as the muscularis externa), which consists of an 
incomplete inner oblique layer, a complete middle circular layer 
(continuous with the esophageal circular muscle and the circular 
muscle of the pylorus), and a complete outer longitudinal layer 
(continuous with the longitudinal layer of the esophagus and 
duodenum). Within the muscularis propria is the rich network of 
autonomic ganglia and nerves that make up Auerbach’s myen-
teric plexus. Specialized pacemaker cells, the interstitial cells of 
Cajal (ICC), also are present.
The outer layer of the stomach is the serosa, also known as 
the visceral peritoneum. This layer provides significant tensile 
strength to gastric anastomoses. When tumors originating in the 
mucosa penetrate and breach the serosa, microscopic or gross 
peritoneal metastases are common, presumably from shedding 
of tumor cells that would not have occurred if the serosa had not 
been penetrated. In this way, the serosa may be thought of as an 
outer envelope of the stomach.
PHYSIOLOGY
The stomach stores food and facilitates digestion through a 
variety of secretory and motor functions. Important secretory 
functions include the production of acid, pepsin, intrinsic factor, 
mucus, and a variety of GI hormones. Important motor func-
tions include food storage (receptive relaxation and accommo-
dation), grinding and mixing, controlled emptying of ingested 
food, and periodic interprandial “housekeeping.”
Acid Secretion
Hydrochloric acid in the stomach hastens both the physical and 
(with pepsin) the biochemical breakdown of ingested food. In 
an acidic environment, pepsin and acid facilitate proteolysis. 
Gastric acid also inhibits the proliferation of ingested patho-
gens, which protects against both infectious gastroenteritis and 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Long-term acid suppression 
with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) has been associated with an 
increased risk of community acquired Clostridium difficile coli-
tis and other gastroenteritis, presumably because of the absence 
of this protective germicidal barrier.18,19
Parietal Cell.  The parietal cell is stimulated to secrete acid 
(Fig. 26-12) when one or more of three membrane receptor types 
is stimulated by acetylcholine (from vagal nerve fibers), gastrin 
(from D cells), or histamine (from ECL cells).7,20,21 The enzyme 
H+/K+-ATPase is the proton pump. It is stored within the intracel-
lular tubulovesicles and is the final common pathway for gastric 
1042
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
acid secretion. When the parietal cell is stimulated, there is a 
cytoskeletal rearrangement and fusion of the tubulovesicles with 
the apical membrane of the secretory canaliculus. The heterodi-
mer assembly of the enzyme subunits into the microvilli of the 
secretory canaliculus results in acid secretion, with extracellular 
potassium being exchanged for cytosolic hydrogen. Although 
electro-neutral, this is an energy requiring process because the 
hydrogen is secreted against a gradient of at least 1 million-fold, 
which explains why the parietal cell is packed with energy pro-
ducing mitochondria. During acid production, potassium and 
Table 26-2 
Epithelial cells of the stomach
Cell Type
Distinctive Ultrastructural Features
Major Functions
Surface-foveolar 
mucous cells
Apical stippled granules up to 1 μm in diameter
Production of neutral glycoprotein and bicarbonate 
to form a gel on the gastric luminal surface; 
neutralization of hydrochloric acida
Mucous neck cell
Heterogeneous granules 1–2 μm in diameter dispersed 
throughout the cytoplasm
Progenitor cell for all other gastric epithelial cells; 
glycoprotein production; production of pepsinogens 
I and II
Oxyntic (parietal) 
cell
Surface membrane invaginations (canaliculi); 
tubulovesicle structures; numerous mitochondria
Production of hydrochloric acid; production of 
intrinsic factor; production of bicarbonate
Chief cell
Moderately dense apical granules up to 2 μm in 
diameter; prominent supranuclear Golgi apparatus; 
extensive basolateral granular endoplasmic reticulum
Production of pepsinogens I and II, and of lipase
Cardiopyloric 
mucous cell
Mixture of granules like those in mucous neck and 
chief cells; extensive basolateral granular endoplasmic 
reticulum
Production of glycoprotein; production of 
pepsinogen II
Endocrine cells
See Figure 26-11
aBicarbonate is probably produced by other gastric epithelial cells in addition to surface-foveolar mucous cells.
Source: From Antonioli et al,16 with permission.
SC
M
TV
Figure 26-9.  Ultrastructural features of the parietal (oxyntic) 
cell. SC = secretory canaliculus; M = mitochondria; TV = tubulo-
vesicle. [Reproduced with permission from Antonioli DA, Madara 
JL: Functional anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, in Ming S-C, 
Goldman H (eds): Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1998, p 13.]
ZG
GA
GER
Figure 26-10.  Ultrastructural features of the chief (zymogenic) 
cell. GA = Golgi apparatus; GER = granular endoplasmic reticu-
lum; ZG = zymogen granule. [Reproduced with permission from 
Antonioli DA, Madara JL: Functional anatomy of the gastrointes-
tinal tract, in Ming S-C, Goldman H (eds): Pathology of the Gas-
trointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1998, 
p 13.]
chloride are also secreted into the apical secretory canaliculus 
through separate channels, providing potassium to exchange for 
H+ via the H+/K+-ATPase, and chloride to accompany the secreted 
hydrogen. At the basolateral membrane, the combined activity of 
various cotransporters and ion exchangers accomplishes intracel-
lular pH regulation and electrolyte homeostasis.20
The normal human stomach contains approximately 1 billion 
parietal cells, and total gastric acid production is proportional to 
parietal cell mass. The potent acid-suppressing PPI drugs irrevers-
ibly interfere with the function of the H+/K+-ATPase molecule. 
1043
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
These agents must be incorporated into the activated enzyme to 
be effective, and thus work best when taken before or during a 
meal (when the parietal cell is stimulated). When PPI therapy 
is stopped, acid secretory capability gradually returns (within 
days) as new H+/K+-ATPase is synthesized.
Gastrin, acetylcholine, and histamine stimulate the parietal 
cell to secrete hydrochloric acid (see Fig. 26-12). Gastrin binds 
to type B cholecystokinin (CCK) receptors, and acetylcholine 
binds to M3 muscarinic receptors. Both stimulate phospholi-
pase C via a G-protein–linked mechanism leading to increased 
production of inositol trisphosphate from membrane bound 
phospholipids. Inositol trisphosphate stimulates the release of 
calcium from intracellular stores, which leads to activation of 
Oxyntic mucosa
Other
3%
D
19%
G
49%
EC
29%
Other
14%
D
26%
EC
25%
ECL
35%
Pyloric mucosa
Figure 26-11.  Endocrine cells of the stomach—proportion by 
site. D = d cell (somatostatin); EC = enterochromaffin cell; ECL = 
enterochromaffin-like cell (histamine); G = g cell (gastrin). [Repro-
duced with permission from Feldman M: Gastric secretion, in Feld-
man M, et al (eds):Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and 
Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002, p 715. Copy-
right Elsevier.]
Adenylate cyclase
ATP
Histamine
Interstitium
Lumen
Somatostatin
Gi protein
Gs protein
IP3
PIP2
Ca++
K+ channel
K+
Cl- - channel
Cl-
H+
K+
CCK8 receptor
M3 receptor
H+/K+-ATPase
Gs protein
Activation of
other kinases
cAMP
Activates
protein kinases
Gastrin
Acetylcholine
PLC
Somatostatin
receptor
H2 receptor
Gs protein
Figure 26-12.  Control of acid secre-
tion in the parietal cell. ATP = adenosine 
triphosphate; cAMP = cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate; CCK = cholecysto-
kinin; H2 = histamine 2; IP3 = inositol 
trisphosphate; PIP2 = phosphatidylino-
sitol 4,5-bisphosphate; PLC = phospho-
lipase C. [Reproduced with permission 
from Mercer DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A: 
Anatomy and physiology of the stomach, 
in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackel-
ford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 
5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2002, p 3. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
protein kinases and activation of H+/K+-ATPase. Histamine 
binds to the histamine 2 (H2) receptor, which stimulates adenyl-
atecyclase, also via a G-protein–linked mechanism. Activation 
of adenylatecyclase results in an increase in intracellular cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate which activates protein kinases, 
leading to increased levels of phosphoproteins and activation of 
the proton pump. Somatostatin from mucosal D cells binds to 
membrane receptors and inhibits the activation of adenylatecy-
clase through an inhibitory G protein.
Physiologic Acid Secretion.  Food ingestion is the physi-
ologic stimulus for acid secretion (Fig. 26-13). The acid secre-
tory response that occurs after a meal is traditionally described 
in three phases: cephalic, gastric, and intestinal.22,23 The cephalic 
or vagal phase begins with the thought, sight, smell, and/or taste 
of food. These stimuli activate several cortical and hypotha-
lamic sites (e.g., tractus solitarius, dorsal motor nucleus, and 
dorsal vagal complex), and signals are transmitted to the stom-
ach by the vagal nerves. Acetylcholine is released, leading to 
stimulation of ECL cells and parietal cells. Although the acid 
secreted per unit of time in the cephalic phase is greater than 
in the other two phases, the cephalic phase is shorter. Thus, 
the cephalic phase accounts for no more than 30% of total acid 
secretion in response to a meal. Sham feeding (chewing and 
spitting) stimulates gastric acid secretion only via the cephalic 
phase, and results in acid secretion that is about half of that seen 
in response to IV pentagastrin or histamine.
When food reaches the stomach, the gastric phase of 
acid secretion begins. This phase lasts until the stomach is 
empty, and accounts for about 60% of the total acid secretion 
in response to a meal. The gastric phase of acid secretion has 
several components. Amino acids and small peptides directly 
stimulate antral G cells to secrete gastrin, which is carried in the 
bloodstream to the parietal cells and stimulates acid secretion in 
an endocrine fashion. In addition, proximal gastric distention 
1044
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
stimulates acid secretion via a vagovagal reflex arc, which is 
abolished by truncal or HSV. Antral distention also stimulates 
antral gastrin secretion. Acetylcholine stimulates gastrin release 
and gastrin stimulates histamine release from ECL cells.
The intestinal phase of gastric secretion is poorly under-
stood. It is thought to be mediated by a hormone released 
from the proximal small bowel mucosa in response to luminal 
chyme. This phase starts when gastric emptying of ingested 
food begins, and continues as long as nutrients remain in the 
proximal small intestine. It accounts for about 10% of meal-
induced acid secretion.
Interprandial basal acid secretion is 2 to 5 mEq hydrochlo-
ric acid per hour, about 10% of maximal acid output (MAO), 
and it is greater at night. Basal acid secretion probably contrib-
utes to the relatively low bacterial counts found in the stomach. 
Basal acid secretion is reduced 75% to 90% by vagotomy or H2 
receptor blockade.
The pivotal role that ECL cells play in the regulation of 
gastric acid secretion is emphasized in Fig. 26-13. A large part 
of the acid stimulatory effects of both acetylcholine and gastrin 
are mediated by histamine released from mucosal ECL cells. 
H2 receptor knockout mice do not secrete acid in response to 
gastrin.20 This explains why the histamine 2 receptor antago-
nists (H2RAs) are such effective inhibitors of acid secretion, 
even though histamine is only one of three parietal cell stimu-
lants. The mucosal D cell, which releases somatostatin, is also 
an important regulator of acid secretion. Somatostatin inhibits 
histamine release from ECL cells and gastrin release from antral 
G cells. The function of D cells is inhibited by Helicobacter 
pylori infection, and this leads to an exaggerated acid secretory 
response (see section Helicobacter pylori Infection).
Meal
Vagus
D-cell
ECL
cell
Parietal cell
Gastrin
Somatostatin
Histamine
+
+
+
+
–
–
+
+
+
+
Acetylcholine
G-cell
Figure 26-13.  Physiologic control of acid secretion. ECL = 
enterochromaffin-like. [Reproduced with permission from Mercer 
DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A: Anatomy and physiology of the stom-
ach, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the 
Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002, 
p 3. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Pepsinogen Secretion
The most potent physiologic stimulus for pepsinogen secre-
tion from chief cells is food ingestion; acetylcholine is the most 
important mediator. Somatostatin inhibits pepsinogen secre-
tion. Pepsinogen I is produced by chief cells in acid producing 
glands, whereas pepsinogen II is produced by SECs in both acid 
producing and gastrin producing (i.e., antral) glands. Pepsino-
gen is cleaved to the active pepsin enzyme in an acidic environ-
ment and is maximally active at pH 2.5, and inactive at pH >5, 
although pepsinogen II may be activated over a wider pH range 
than pepsinogen I. Pepsin catalyzes the hydrolysis of proteins 
and is denatured at alkaline pH.
Intrinsic Factor
Activated parietal cells secrete intrinsic factor in addition to 
hydrochloric acid. Presumably the stimulants are similar, but 
acid secretion and intrinsic factor secretion may not be linked. 
Intrinsic factor binds to luminal vitamin B12, and the complex is 
absorbed in the terminal ileum via mucosal receptors. Vitamin B12 
deficiency can be life threatening, and patients with total gas-
trectomy or pernicious anemia (i.e., patients with no parietal 
cells) require B12 supplementation by a nonenteric route. Some 
patients develop vitamin B12 deficiency following gastric 
bypass, presumably because there is insufficient intrinsic factor 
present in the small proximal gastric pouch and oral B12 intake 
may be decreased. Under normal conditions, a significant excess 
of intrinsic factor is secreted, and acid-suppressive medication 
does not appear to inhibit intrinsic factor production and release.
Gastric Mucosal Barrier
The stomach’s durable resistance to autodigestion by caustic 
hydrochloric acid and active pepsin is intriguing. Some of the 
important elements of gastric barrier function and cytoprotection 
are listed in Table 26-3.24,25 When these defenses break down, 
ulceration occurs. A variety of factors are important in maintain-
ing an intact gastric mucosal layer. The mucus and bicarbonate 
secreted by SECs form an unstirred mucous gel with a favorable 
pH gradient. Cell membranes and tight junctions prevent hydrogen 
Table 26-3 
Important components and mediators of mucosal 
defenses in the stomach
Components
Mucous barrier
Bicarbonate secretion
Epithelial barrier
  Hydrophobic phospholipids
  Tight junctions
  Restitution
Microcirculation (reactive hyperemia)
Afferent sensory neurons
Mediators
Prostaglandins
Nitric oxide
Epidermal growth factor
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Hepatocyte growth factor
Histamine
Gastrin-releasing peptide
1045
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
ions from gaining access to the interstitial space. Hydrogen ions 
that do break through are buffered by the alkaline tide created 
by basolateral bicarbonate secretion from stimulated parietal 
cells. Any sloughed or denuded SECs are rapidly replaced by 
migration of adjacent cells, a process known as restitution. 
Mucosal blood flow plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy 
mucosa, providing nutrients and oxygen for the cellular func-
tions involved in cytoprotection. “Back-diffused” hydrogen is 
buffered and rapidly removed by the rich blood supply. When 
“barrier breakers” such as bile or aspirin lead to increased back-
diffusion of hydrogen ions from the lumen into the lamina pro-
pria and submucosa, there is a protective increase in mucosal 
blood flow. If this protective response is blocked, gross ulcer-
ation can occur. Important mediators of these protective mecha-
nisms include prostaglandins, nitric oxide, intrinsic nerves, and 
peptides (e.g., calcitonin gene-related peptide, gastrin-releasing 
peptide [GRP], gastrin, and heat shock proteins). Sucralfate acts 
locally to enhance mucosal defenses. Protective reflexes involve 
afferent sensory neurons, and can be blocked by the application 
of topical anesthetics to the gastric mucosa, or the experimental 
destruction of the afferent sensory nerves. In addition to these 
local defenses, there are important protective factors in saliva, 
duodenal secretions, and pancreatic or biliary secretions.
Gastric Hormones13,26
Gastrin.  Gastrin is produced by antral G cells and is the major 
hormonal stimulant of acid secretion during the gastric phase. 
A variety of molecular forms exist: big gastrin (34 amino acids; 
G34), little gastrin (17 amino acids; G17), and mini-gastrin (14 amino 
acids; G14). The large majority of gastrin released by the human 
antrum is G17. The biologically active pentapeptide sequence at 
the C-terminal end of gastrin is identical to that of CCK. Lumi-
nal peptides and amino acids are the most potent stimulants of 
gastrin release, and luminal acid is the most potent inhibitor of 
gastrin secretion. The latter effect is predominantly mediated 
in a paracrine fashion by somatostatin released from antral D 
cells. Gastrin-stimulated acid secretion is significantly blocked 
by H2 antagonists, suggesting that the principal mediator of 
gastrin-stimulated acid production is histamine from mucosal 
ECL cells (see Fig. 26-13). In fact, chronic hypergastrinemia 
is associated with hyperplasia of gastric ECL cells and, rarely, 
gastric carcinoid. Gastrin is trophic to gastric parietal cells and 
to other GI mucosal cells. Important causes of hypergastrinemia 
include pernicious anemia, acid-suppressive medication, gastri-
noma, retained antrum following distal gastrectomy and Billroth 
II surgery, and vagotomy.
Somatostatin.  Somatostatin is produced by D cells located 
throughout the gastric mucosa. The predominant form in 
humans is somatostatin 14, though somatostatin 28 is present 
as well. The major stimulus for somatostatin release is antral 
acidification; acetylcholine from vagal nerve fibers inhibits its 
release. Somatostatin inhibits acid secretion from parietal cells 
and gastrin release from G cells. It also decreases histamine 
release from ECL cells. The proximity of the D cells to these 
target cells suggests that the primary effect of somatostatin is 
mediated in a paracrine fashion, but an endocrine (i.e., blood-
stream) effect also is possible.
Gastrin-Releasing Peptide.  GRP is the mammalian equiva-
lent of bombesin, a hormone discovered more than two decades 
ago in an extract of skin from a frog. In the antrum, GRP stimu-
lates both gastrin and somatostatin release by binding to receptors 
on the G and D cells. There are nerve terminals ending near the 
mucosa in the gastric body and antrum, which are rich in GRP 
immunoreactivity. When GRP is given peripherally, it stimu-
lates acid secretion, but when it is given centrally into the cere-
bral ventricles of animals, it inhibits acid secretion, apparently 
via a pathway involving the sympathetic nervous system. GRP 
is a mediator of gastroprotective increased mucosal blood flow 
in response to luminal irritants.
Leptin.  Leptin is a protein primarily synthesized in adipocytes. 
It is also made by chief cells in the stomach, the main source of 
leptin in the GI tract.26 Leptin works at least in part via vagally 
mediated pathways to decrease food intake in animals. Not sur-
prisingly, leptin, a satiety signal hormone, and ghrelin, a hunger 
signal hormone, are both primarily synthesized in the stomach, 
an organ increasingly recognized as central to the mechanisms 
of appetite control.26,27
Ghrelin.  Ghrelin is a small peptide described in 1999 that is 
produced primarily in the stomach.28 Ghrelin is a potent secreta-
gogue of pituitary growth hormone (but not adrenocorticotropic 
hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, 
prolactin, or thyroid-stimulating hormone). Ghrelin appears 
to be an orexigenic regulator of appetite (i.e., when ghrelin 
is elevated, appetite is stimulated, and when it is suppressed, 
appetite is suppressed). Resection of the primary source of 
this hormone (i.e., the stomach) may partly account for the 
anorexia and weight loss seen in some patients following gas-
tric resection including sleeve gastrectomy (Fig. 26-14).29 The 
gastric bypass operation, a very effective treatment for morbid 
obesity, has been shown by some investigators to be associ-
ated with suppression of plasma ghrelin levels (and appetite) in 
humans (Fig. 26-15A).30,31
300
200
Plasma ghrelin (fmol/ml)
100
Normal
controls
Gastrectomized
patients
0
*
Figure 26-14.  Ghrelin levels are decreased after gastrectomy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Ariyasu H, Takaya K, Tagami 
T, et al: Stomach is a major source of circulating ghrelin, and feed-
ing state determines plasma ghrelin-like immunoreactivity levels in 
humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 86:4753, 2001.)
1046
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Plasma ghrelin level (pg/ml)
Detection 
limit
Time
6 a.m.
8 a.m.
10 a.m.
noon
2 p.m.
4 p.m.
6 p.m.
8 p.m.
10 p.m.
0
80
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
A
1200
P = 0.06
P = 0.15
P = 0.16
P = 0.13
P = 0.01
P = 0.03
P = 0.01
P = 0.03
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Pre
Ghrelin (pg/ml)
Ghrelin (pg/ml)
3
Time (months)
Time (months)
6
12
Pre
3
6
12
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
B
Figure 26-15.  A and B. Ghrelin 
secretion after bariatric surgery. Some 
investigators have suggested that ghre-
lin secretion is dramatically decreased 
after gastric bypass. Other groups have 
shown statistically insignificant changes 
in ghrelin levels after gastric bypass, 
(RYGBP) but significant decreases 
after sleeve gastrectomy (SG). A: green 
= gastric bypass; blue = obese controls; 
red = normal weight controls; B: blue = 
fasting; pink = postprandial. B. Top = 
RYGBP; B bottom = SG. (Fig. 26-15A 
reproduced with permission from Cum-
mings DE, et al: Plasma ghrelin levels 
after diet-induced weight loss or gastric 
bypass surgery. N Engl J Med 346:1623, 
2002. kkjkjdht ©2002 Massachusetts 
Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
Fig. 26-15B reproduced with permission 
from Karamanakos SN, et al: Weight 
loss, appetite suppression, and changes 
in fasting and postprandial ghrelin and 
peptide-YY levels after Roux-en-Y gas-
tric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: A 
prospective, double blind study. Ann 
Surg 247:401, 2008.)
1047
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Other groups have failed to show a significant decrease 
in ghrelin levels following gastric bypass but have found such 
decreases following sleeve gastrectomy, another effective 
weight loss operation (Fig. 26-15B).31 Possibly subtle differ-
ences in operative technique, patient selection, and/or experi-
mental conditions account for the findings that multiple studies 
have reported disparate results on the effect of bariatric surgery 
on ghrelin levels in obese patients. Obviously appetite control 
is complex with redundant and overlapping orexigenic and 
anorexigenic pathways and signals.26,27
Gastric Motility and Emptying
Gastric motor function has several purposes.13,32,33,34 Interpran-
dial motor activity clears the stomach of undigested debris, 
sloughed cells, and mucus. When feeding begins, the stomach 
relaxes to accommodate the meal. Regulated motor activity then 
breaks down the food into small particles and controls the output 
into the duodenum. The stomach accomplishes these functions 
by coordinated smooth muscle relaxation and contraction of the 
various gastric segments (proximal, distal, and pyloric). Smooth 
muscle myoelectric potentials are translated into muscular activ-
ity, which is modulated by extrinsic and intrinsic innervation 
and hormones. The mechanisms by which gastric distention is 
translated into a neurohormonal satiety signal have only been 
partially elucidated.26,27
Intrinsic Gastric Innervation.  The extrinsic parasympathetic 
and sympathetic gastric innervation was discussed previously 
under Innervation. The intrinsic innervation consists of ganglia 
and nerves that constitute the enteric nervous system (Fig. 26-16).35 
There are a variety of neurotransmitters, which are generally 
grouped as excitatory (augment muscular activity) and inhibi-
tory (decrease muscular activity). Important excitatory neu-
rotransmitters include acetylcholine, the tachykinins, substance 
P, and neurokinin A. Important inhibitory neurotransmitters 
include nitric oxide (NO) and vasoactive intestinal peptide 
(VIP). Serotonin has been shown to modulate both contraction 
and relaxation. A variety of other molecules affect motility, 
including GRP, histamine, neuropeptide Y, norepinephrine, and 
endogenous opioids.
Parasympathetic
  (vagal) nerve
Mesentery
Perivascular
  sympathic
    nerve
Muscularis externa
    (longitudinal)
Muscularis externa
       (circular)
Subepethelial
     plexus
Muscularis
  mucosa
Submucosa
Villus Intestinal
  lumen
Deep muscularis
        plexus
Serosa
Tertiary 
branch
Secondary
   branch
Ganglion
Submucosal 
     plexus
Myenteric
   plexus
Figure 26-16.  Enteric nervous system. 
[Reproduced with permission from Chial 
HJ, Camilleri M: Motility disorders of the 
stomach and small intestine, in Friedman 
SL, McQuaid KR, Grendell JH (eds): Cur-
rent Diagnosis and Treatment in Gastroen-
terology, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2003, p 355. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-
Hill Companies, Inc.]
Specialized cells in the muscularis propria also are impor-
tant modulators of GI motility. These cells, called interstitial 
cells of Cajal, are distinguishable histologically from neurons 
and myocytes, and appear to amplify both cholinergic excit-
atory and nitrergic inhibitory input to the smooth muscle of the 
stomach and intestine.36 They are thought to be the cell of origin 
for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) which are the most 
common mesenchymal neoplasm in the GI tract.
Segmental Gastric Motility.  13,36,37 In general, the proximal 
stomach serves a short-term food storage function and helps 
regulate basal intragastric tone, and the distal stomach mixes 
and grinds the food. The pylorus helps the latter process when 
closed, facilitating retropulsion of the solid food bolus back into 
the body of the stomach for additional breakdown. The pylorus 
opens intermittently to allow metered emptying of liquids and 
small solid particles into the duodenum.
Most of the motor activity of the proximal stomach con-
sists of slow tonic contractions and relaxations, lasting up to 
5 minutes. This activity is the main determinant of basal intra-
gastric pressure, an important determinant of liquid emptying. 
Rapid phasic contractions may be superimposed on the slower 
tonic motor activity. When food is ingested, intragastric pres-
sure falls as the proximal stomach relaxes. This proximal relax-
ation is mediated by two important vagovagal reflexes: receptive 
relaxation and gastric accommodation. Receptive relaxation 
refers to the reduction in proximal gastric tone associated with 
the act of swallowing. This occurs before the food reaches the 
stomach, and can be reproduced by mechanical stimulation of 
the pharynx or esophagus. Gastric accommodation refers to the 
proximal gastric relaxation associated with distention of the 
stomach. Accommodation is mediated through stretch receptors 
in the gastric wall and does not require esophageal or pharyn-
geal stimulation. Because both of these reflexes are mediated 
by afferent and efferent vagal fibers, they are significantly 
altered by truncal and highly selective vagotomy. Both these 
operations result in decreased gastric compliance, shifting the 
volume/pressure curve to the left. That is, interference with 
normal receptive relaxation and/or accommodation results in 
decreased gastric compliance, such that for any given amount of 
1048
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
food or liquid ingested, the intragastric pressure is greater. This 
may increase the rate of liquid emptying, perhaps contributing 
to dumping symptoms after vagotomy.
NO and VIP are the principal mediators of proximal gas-
tric relaxation. But a variety of other agents increase proximal 
gastric relaxation and compliance, including dopamine, gastrin, 
CCK, secretin, GRP, and glucagon. Proximal gastric tone also 
is decreased by duodenal distention, colonic distention, and ileal 
perfusion with glucose (ileal brake).
The distal stomach breaks up solid food and is the main 
determinant of gastric emptying of solids. Slow waves of 
myoelectric depolarization sweep down the distal stomach at 
a rate of about three per minute. These waves originate from 
the proximal gastric pacemaker, high on the greater curvature. 
The pacing cells may be interstitial cells of Cajal, which have 
been shown to have a similar function in the small intestine and 
colon. Most of these myoelectric waves are below the thresh-
old for smooth muscle contraction in the quiescent state, and 
thus are associated with negligible changes in pressure. Neural 
and/or hormonal input, which increases the plateau phase of the 
action potential, can trigger muscle contraction, resulting in a 
peristaltic wave associated with the electrical slow wave, and of 
the same frequency (three per minute) (Fig. 26-17). It is possible 
Intracellular
recording
Tension
Quiescent
Stimulated
0 mv
0 
5 g 
-70 
1
1
2
2
Figure 26-17.  The relationship between intracellular electrical activity and muscle cell contraction. Note that contractile activity is always 
associated with electrical activity, but the converse is not so. During mechanical quiescence, there are regular depolarizations that do not reach 
threshold. In the stimulated state, the threshold for contraction is reached, and motor activity is demonstrable. [Reproduced with permission 
from Kim CH: Electrical activity of the stomach: clinical implications. Mayo Clin Proc. 61:205, 1986.]
Antrum
Proximal duodenum
Distal duodenum
Jejunum
1 min
100 mm   Hg
100 mm   Hg
100 mm   Hg
100 mm   Hg
Phase II
Phase III
Phase IV
Phase I
Figure 26-18.  Migrating motor complex, the 
fasting pattern of GI activity. During phase III of 
the migrating motor complex, effective peristal-
tic waves progress from the stomach to the dis-
tal small intestine. [Reproduced with permission 
from Rees WDW, et al: Human interdigestive and 
postprandial gastrointestinal motor and gastroin-
testinal hormone patterns. Dig Dis Sci. 27(4):321, 
1982. kkjkjdht 1982, with kind permission of 
Springer Science + Business Media.]
that implantable gastric pacemakers benefit some patients with 
gastroparesis by favorably impacting this myoelectric coupling.
During fasting, distal gastric motor activity is controlled 
by the migrating motor complex (MMC), the “gastrointesti-
nal housekeeper” (Fig. 26-18). The purported function of the 
MMC is to sweep along any undigested food, debris, sloughed 
cells, and mucus after the fed phase of digestion is complete. 
The MMC lasts approximately 100 minutes (longer at night, 
shorter during daytime) and is divided into four phases. Phase I 
(about half the length of the entire cycle) is a period of relative 
motor inactivity. High-amplitude muscular contractions do not 
occur in phase I of the MMC. Phase II (about 25% of the entire 
MMC cycle) consists of some irregular, high-amplitude, gener-
ally nonpropulsive contractions. Phase III, a period of intense, 
regular, (about three per minute) propulsive contractions, only 
lasts about 5 to 10 minutes. Most phase III complexes of the GI 
MMC begin in the stomach, and the frequency approximates 
that of the myoelectric gastric slow wave. Phase IV is a transi-
tion period.
Neurohormonal control of the MMC is poorly understood, 
but it appears that different phases are regulated by different 
mechanisms. For example, vagotomy abolishes phase II of the 
gastric MMC but has little influence on phase III that persists 
1049
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
even in the autotransplanted stomach, totally devoid of extrinsic 
neural input. This suggests that phase III is regulated by intrinsic 
nerves and/or hormones. Indeed, the initiation of phase III of the 
MMC in the distal stomach corresponds temporally to elevation 
in serum levels of motilin, a hormone produced in the duode-
nal mucosa. Resection of the duodenum abolishes distal gastric 
phase III in dogs, and resection of the duodenum in humans 
(e.g., with pancreaticoduodenectomy, the Whipple procedure) 
commonly results in early postoperative delayed gastric empty-
ing. There are clearly motilin receptors on antral smooth muscle 
and nerves. Other modulators of gastric MMC activity include 
NO, endogenous opioids, intrinsic cholinergic and adrenergic 
nerves, and duodenal pH.
Feeding abolishes the MMC and leads to the fed motor 
pattern. The fed motor pattern of gastric activity starts within 
10 minutes of food ingestion and persists until all the food has 
left the stomach. The neurohormonal initiator of this change 
is unknown, but CCK and the vagus appear to play some role: 
Sham feeding transiently induces antral motor activity resem-
bling the fed motor pattern, and this is blocked by the CCK 
receptor antagonist loxiglumide. Gastric motility during the fed 
pattern resembles phase II of the MMC, with irregular but con-
tinuous phasic contractions of the distal stomach. During the fed 
state, about half of the myoelectric slow waves are associated 
with strong distal gastric contractions. Some are prograde and 
some are retrograde, serving to mix and grind the solid compo-
nents of the meal. The magnitude of gastric contractions and 
the duration of the pattern are influenced by the consistency and 
composition of the meal.
The pylorus functions as an effective regulator of gastric 
emptying and an effective barrier to duodenogastric reflux. 
Bypass, transection, or resection of the pylorus may lead to 
uncontrolled gastric emptying of food and the dumping syn-
drome (see Postgastrectomy Problems). Pyloric dysfunction 
or disruption may also result in uncontrolled entry of duode-
nal contents into the stomach. Perfusion of the duodenum with 
lipids, glucose, amino acids, hypertonic saline, or hydrochloric 
acid results in closure of the pylorus and decreased transpylo-
ric flow. Ileal perfusion with fat has the same effect. A variety 
of neurohumoral pathways are involved with these physiologic 
responses, and there is evidence that different pathways may be 
involved for different stimuli.
The pylorus is readily apparent grossly as a thick ring of 
muscle and connective tissue. The density of nerve tissue in 
the pyloric smooth muscle is several folds higher than in the 
antrum, with increased numbers of neurons staining positive for 
substance P, neuropeptide Y, VIP, and galanin. Interstitial cells 
of Cajal are is more closely associated with pyloric myocytes, 
and the myoelectric slow wave of the pylorus has the same fre-
quency as that seen in the distal stomach. The motor activity 
of the pylorus is both tonic and phasic. During phase III of the 
MMC, the pylorus is open as gastric contents are swept into the 
duodenum. During the fed phase, the pylorus is closed most 
of the time. It relaxes intermittently, usually in synchronization 
with lower-amplitude, minor antral contractions. The higher-
amplitude, more major antral contractions are usually met with 
a closed pylorus, facilitating retropulsion and further grinding 
of food.
Modulation of pyloric motor activity is complex. There 
is evidence of both inhibitory and excitatory vagal pathways. 
Some contractile vagal effects are mediated by opioid pathways, 
because they are blocked by naloxone. Electrical stimulation of 
the duodenum causes the pylorus to contract, whereas electrical 
stimulation of the antrum causes pyloric relaxation. Nitric oxide 
is an important mediator of pyloric relaxation. Other molecules 
that may play a physiologic role in controlling pyloric smooth 
muscle include serotonin, VIP, prostaglandin E1, and galanin 
(pyloric relaxation); and histamine, CCK, and secretin (pyloric 
contraction).
Gastric Emptying.13  The control of gastric emptying is com-
plex. In general, liquid emptying is faster than solid emptying. 
Osmolarity, acidity, caloric content, nutrient composition, and 
particle size are important modulators of gastric emptying. 
Stimulation of duodenal osmoreceptors, glucoreceptors, and 
pH receptors clearly inhibits gastric emptying by a variety of 
neurohumoral mechanisms. CCK has been consistently shown 
to inhibit gastric emptying at physiologic doses (Fig. 26-19). 
Recently, it has been noted that the anorexigenic hormone 
leptin, secreted by fat and gastric mucosa, inhibits gastric emp-
tying, perhaps through the same pathway as CCK (which also 
has properties of a satiety hormone). The orexigenic hormone 
ghrelin has the opposite effect.
Liquid Emptying.  The gastric emptying of water or isotonic 
saline follows first-order kinetics, with a half emptying time 
around 12 minutes. Thus, if one drinks 200 mL of water, about 
100 mL enters the duodenum by 12 minutes, whereas if one 
drinks 400 mL of water, about 200 mL enters the duodenum by 
12 minutes. This emptying pattern of liquids is modified consid-
erably as the caloric density, osmolarity, and nutrient composi-
tion of the liquid changes (Fig. 26-20). Up to an osmolarity of 
about 1 M, liquid emptying occurs at a rate of about 200 kcal 
per hour. Duodenal osmoreceptors and hormones (e.g., secretin 
and VIP) are important modulators of liquid gastric emptying. 
Generally, liquid emptying is delayed in the supine position.
Traditionally, liquid emptying has been attributed to 
the activity of the proximal stomach, but it is probably more 
complicated than previously thought. Clearly, receptive relax-
ation and gastric accommodation play a role in gastric empty-
ing of liquids. Patients with a denervated (e.g., vagotomized), 
CCK (µg/kg)
0.25
Low-fat diet
Hight-fat diet
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.5
1.0
2.0
% Suppression of gastric emptying
Figure 26-19.  Cholecystokinin (CCK) inhibits gastric emptying. 
[Reproduced with permission from Covasa M, Ritter RC: Adapta-
tion to high-fat diet reduces inhibition of gastric emptying by CCK 
and intestinal oleate. Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative Comp 
Physiol 278:R166, 2000.]
1050
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
resected, or plicated (e.g., fundoplication) proximal stomach 
have decreased gastric compliance and may show accelerated 
gastric emptying of liquids.
Some observations suggest an active role for the distal 
stomach in liquid emptying. For instance even if the proximal 
intragastric pressure is lower than duodenal pressure, normal 
gastric emptying of liquids can occur. Also, diabetic patients 
may have normal proximal gastric motor function and pro-
foundly delayed gastric emptying of liquids. Indeed, antral 
contractile activity does correlate with liquid gastric emptying, 
and this distal gastric activity appears to vary with the nutrient 
composition and caloric content of the liquid meal. Depend-
ing on the circumstances, distal gastric motor activity can pro-
mote or inhibit gastric emptying of liquids. Distal gastrectomy 
and pyloric stenting both obviously interfere with distal gastric 
motor activity, and both accelerate the initial rapid phase of liq-
uid gastric emptying.
Solid Emptying.  Normally, the half-time of solid gastric 
emptying is less than 2 hours. Unlike liquids, which display an 
initial rapid phase followed by a slower linear phase of empty-
ing, solids have an initial lag phase during which little empty-
ing of solids occurs. It is during this phase that much of the 
grinding and mixing occurs. A linear emptying phase follows, 
during which the smaller particles are metered out to the duode-
num. Solid gastric emptying is a function of meal particle size, 
caloric content, and composition (especially fat). When liquids 
and solids are ingested together, the liquids empty first. Solids 
are stored in the fundus and delivered to the distal stomach at 
constant rates for grinding. Liquids also are sequestered in the 
fundus, but they appear to be readily delivered to the distal 
stomach for early emptying. The larger the solid component of 
the meal, the slower the liquid emptying. Patients bothered by 
700
600
500
400
300
100
200
0
Residual gastric volume (ml)
Time (min)
80
60
40
20
0
Figure 26-20.  Nutrient composition and caloric density affect 
liquid gastric emptying. Glucose solution (purple circles), the least 
calorically dense, emptied the fastest. Other more calorically dense 
solutions, such as milk protein (green triangles) and peptide hydro-
lysates (red circles and blue triangles), emptied slower. [Reproduced 
with permission from Calbet JA, MacLean DA: Role of caloric con-
tent on gastric emptying in humans. J Physiol. 498:533, 1997.]
dumping syndrome are advised to limit the amount of liquid 
consumed with the solid meal, taking advantage of this effect. 
Three prokinetic agents are commonly used to treat delayed 
gastric emptying. Typical doses and mechanism of action are 
shown in Table 26-4.
DIAGNOSIS OF GASTRIC DISEASE
Signs and Symptoms
The most common symptoms of gastric disease are pain, weight 
loss, early satiety, and anorexia. Nausea, vomiting, bloating, and 
anemia also are frequent complaints. Several of these symptoms 
(pain, bloating, nausea, and early satiety) are often described by 
physicians as dyspepsia, synonymous with the common non-
medical term indigestion. Common causes of dyspepsia include 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and disorders of the 
stomach, gallbladder, and pancreas. Although none of the above 
symptoms alone is specific for gastric disease, when elicited 
in the context of a careful history and physical examination, 
they point to a differential diagnosis, which can be refined with 
certain tests.
Diagnostic Tests
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy.  Patients with one or more of 
the alarm symptoms listed in Table 26-5 should undergo expedi-
tious upper endoscopy. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is 
a safe and accurate outpatient procedure performed under con-
scious sedation.38 Smaller flexible scopes with excellent optics 
and a working channel are easily passed transnasally in the 
unsedated patient. Following an 8-hour fast, the flexible scope 
is advanced under direct vision into the esophagus, stomach, 
and duodenum. The fundus and GE junction are inspected by 
retroflexing the scope. To rule out cancer with a high degree of 
accuracy, all patients with gastric ulcer diagnosed on upper GI 
series or found at EGD should have multiple biopsy specimens 
of the base and rim of the lesion. Brush cytology also should 
Table 26-4 
Drugs that accelerate gastric emptying
Agent
Typical Adult 
Dose
Mechanism of 
Action
Metoclopramide
10 mg PO qid
Dopamine antagonist
Erythromycin
250 mg PO qid
Motilin agonist
Domperidone
10 mg PO qid
Dopamine antagonist
Table 26-5 
Alarm symptoms that indicate the need for upper 
endoscopy
Weight loss
Recurrent vomiting
Dysphagia
Bleeding
Anemia
1051
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
be considered. Gastritis should be biopsied both for histologic 
examination and for a tissue urease test to rule out the presence 
of H. pylori. If Helicobacter infection is detected, it should prob-
ably be treated because of the etiologic association with peptic 
ulcers, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), and gastric 
cancer. The most serious complications of EGD are perforation 
(which is rare, but can occur anywhere from the cervical esoph-
agus to the duodenum), aspiration, and respiratory depression 
from excessive sedation. Although EGD is a more sensitive test 
than double-contrast upper GI series, these modalities should 
be considered complementary rather than mutually exclusive.
Radiologic Tests.  Plain abdominal X-rays may be helpful 
in the diagnosis of gastric perforation (pneumoperitoneum) or 
delayed gastric emptying (large air-fluid level).
Double-contrast upper GI series may be better than EGD 
at elucidating gastric diverticula, fistula, tortuosity, stricture 
location, and size of hiatal hernia. Although there are radiologic 
characteristics of ulcers that suggest the presence or absence 
of malignancy, gastric ulcers always require adequate biopsy.
Computed Tomographic Scanning and Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging.  Usually, significant gastric disease can be diagnosed 
without these sophisticated imaging studies. However, one or 
the other should be part of the routine staging work-up for most 
patients with a malignant gastric tumor. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) may prove clinically useful as a quantitative 
test for gastric emptying, and may even hold some promise 
for the analysis of myoelectric derangements in patients with 
gastroparesis. Virtual gastroscopy using multi detector CT 
scan or MRI is not yet widely used but these techniques may 
prove useful for screening and staging of gastric disease.39–41 
(Fig. 26-21).
Arteriography may be helpful in the occasional poor-risk 
patient with exsanguinating gastric hemorrhage, or in the patient 
with occult gastric bleeding.
Endoscopic Ultrasound.  Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) 
is useful in the evaluation and management of some gastric 
lesions.42–44 Local staging of gastric adenocarcinoma with EUS 
is quite accurate, and this modality can be used to plan therapy. 
At some centers, patients with transmural and/or node positive 
adenocarcinoma of the stomach are considered for preoperative 
(neoadjuvant) chemoradiation therapy. EUS is the best way to 
clinically stage these patients locoregionally. Suspicious nodes 
can be sampled with EUS-guided endoscopic needle biopsy. 
Malignant tumors that are confined to the mucosa on EUS may 
be amenable to endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). EUS 
also can be used to assess tumor response to chemotherapy. 
Submucosal masses are commonly discovered during routine 
EGD. Large submucosal masses should be resected because of 
the risk of malignancy, but observation may be appropriate for 
some small submucosal masses (e.g., lipoma or small GIST). 
There are endoscopic characteristics of benign and malignant 
mesenchymal tumors, and thus, EUS can provide reassurance, 
but no guarantee, that small lesions under observation are prob-
ably benign. Submucosal varices also can be assessed by EUS.
Gastric Secretory Analysis.  Analysis of gastric acid output 
requires gastric intubation, and it is performed infrequently 
nowadays. This test may be useful in the evaluation of patients 
with hypergastrinemia, including the Zollinger-Ellison syn-
drome (ZES), patients with refractory ulcer or GERD, and 
patients with recurrent ulcer after operation. Historically, gastric 
analysis was performed most commonly to test for the adequacy 
of vagotomy in postoperative patients with recurrent or persis-
tent ulcer. Now this can be done by assessing peripheral pan-
creatic polypeptide levels in response to sham feeding.45 A 50% 
increase in pancreatic polypeptide within 30 minutes of sham 
feeding suggests vagal integrity.
Normal basal acid output (BAO) is greater than 5 mEq/h. 
MAO is the average of the two final stimulated 15-minute peri-
ods and is usually 10 to 15 mEq/h. Peak acid output is defined 
as the highest of the four stimulated periods. Patients with a 
gastrinoma commonly have a high BAO, often above 30 mEq/h, 
but consistently above 15 mEq/h unless there has been previous 
vagotomy or gastric resection. In patients with gastrinoma, the 
ratio of BAO to MAO exceeds 0.6. Normal acid output in the 
patient prescribed acid-suppressive medication usually means 
that the patient is noncompliant. To assess acid-secretory capac-
ity in the absence of medication effect, H2 blockers and PPIs 
should be withheld before gastric analysis.
Scintigraphy.  The standard scintigraphic evaluation of gastric 
emptying involves the ingestion of a test meal with one or two 
isotopes, and scanning the patient under a gamma camera. A 
curve for liquid and solid emptying is plotted, and the half-time 
calculated. Normal standards exist for each facility. Duodeno-
gastric reflux can be quantitated by the IV administration of 
hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA scan), which is con-
centrated and excreted by the liver into the duodenum. Software 
allows a semiquantitative assessment of how much of the iso-
tope refluxes into the stomach. Positron emission tomography 
(PET) scan or CT/PET scan may be useful in staging certain 
patients with gastric malignancy.
Tests for Helicobacter pylori.  A variety of tests can help the 
clinician to determine whether the patient has active H. pylori 
infection.46 The predictive value (positive and negative) of any 
of these tests when used as a screening tool depends on the 
prevalence of H. pylori infection in the screened population. A 
positive test is quite accurate in predicting H. pylori infection, 
but a negative test is characteristically unreliable. Thus, in the 
appropriate clinical setting, treatment for H. pylori should be 
initiated on the basis of a positive test, but not necessarily with-
held if the test is negative. Because of the association between 
H. pylori infection and gastric lymphoma and carcinoma, many 
clinicians recommend treating Helicobacter infection when the 
diagnosis is made.
A positive serologic test is presumptive evidence of active 
infection if the patient has never been treated for H. pylori. His-
tologic examination of an antral mucosal biopsy using special 
stains is the gold standard test. Other sensitive tests include 
commercially available rapid urease tests, which assay for 
the presence of urease in mucosal biopsy specimens (strong 
presumptive evidence of infection). Urease is an omnipresent 
enzyme in H. pylori strains that colonize the gastric mucosa. 
The labeled carbon-13 urea breath test has become the standard 
test to confirm eradication of H. pylori following appropriate 
treatment.47 In this test, the patient ingests urea labeled with 
nonradioactive 13 C. The labeled urea is acted upon by the urease 
present in the H. pylori and converted into ammonia and carbon 
dioxide. The radiolabeled carbon dioxide is excreted from the 
lungs and can be detected in the expired air (Fig. 26-22). It also 
can be detected in a blood sample. The fecal antigen test also 
is quite sensitive and specific for active H. pylori infection and 
may prove more practical in confirming a cure.
1052
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 26-21.  Conventional double-contrast barium study (A) shows a focal protruding mass (arrow) on the gastric fundus. Axial computed 
tomographic scan (B) also shows a protruding polyp (arrow). The three dimensional computed tomographic gastrographic images in the 
transparent (C) and virtual endoscopic (D) modes show an elevated lesion on the gastric fundus (arrows). Photograph of the total gastrectomy 
specimen (E) shows a well-demarcated polypoid mass (arrow); this lesion was confirmed as early gastric carcinoma type I on microscopic 
examination (not shown). (Reproduced with permission from Shin KS, et al: Three-dimensional MDCT gastrography compared with axial 
CT for the detection of early gastric cancer. J Comput Assist Tomogr 31:741, 2007.)
1053
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Antroduodenal Motility Testing and Electrogastrography. 
Antroduodenal motility testing and electrogastrography (EGG) 
are performed in specialized centers and may be useful in the 
evaluation of the patient with anomalous epigastric symptoms. 
EGG consists of the transcutaneous recording of gastric myo-
electric activity. Antroduodenal motility testing is done with a 
tube placed transnasally or transorally into the distal duodenum. 
There are pressure-recording sensors extending from the stom-
ach to the distal duodenum. The combination of these two tests 
together with scintigraphy provides a thorough assessment of 
gastric motility.
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
Peptic ulcers are focal defects in the gastric or duodenal mucosa 
that extend into the submucosa or deeper. They may be acute 
or chronic and, ultimately, are caused by an imbalance between 
mucosal defenses and acid/peptic injury (Fig. 26-23).48,49 Peptic 
ulcer remains a common outpatient diagnosis, but the number 
of physician visits, hospital admissions, and elective operations 
for PUD has decreased steadily and dramatically over the past 
three decades. Interestingly, the start of these trends all predated 
the use of H2 receptor blockers, or proton pump inhibitors, fiber-
optic endoscopy, and highly selective vagotomy. However, the 
incidence of emergency surgery and the death rate associated 
with peptic ulcers has not decreased nearly so dramatically. 
[13C] urea
13CO2 (µmol)
Positive breath
urea test
Urease
Blood
Hours
1
2
13CO2 in breath
NH2
NH2
2NH3
+
CO2
H2O + 13C = 0
Negative breath
urea test
Figure 26-22.  Labeled urea breath test to 
detect Helicobacter infection. (Reproduced 
with permission from Walsh JH, Peterson 
WL: The treatment of Helicobacter pylori 
infection in the management of peptic ulcer 
disease. N Engl J Med 333:984, 1995. 
kkjkjdht ©1995 Massachusetts Medical 
Society. All rights reserved.)
Acid
Pepsin
NSAIDs
H. pylori
Aggression
Defense
Repair
Bicarbonate
Blood flow
Mucus
Cell junctions
Apical resistance
Restitution
Mucoid cap
Proliferation
Growth factors
Figure 26-23.  Balance of aggressive and defensive factors in 
the gastric mucosa. (Reproduced with permission from Mertz HR, 
Walsh JH: Peptic ulcer pathophysiology. Med Clin North Am 
75:799, 1991. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
These epidemiologic changes probably represent the net effect 
of several factors, including (beneficially) decreased prevalence 
of H. pylori infection, better medical therapy, and increased out-
patient management; and (detrimentally) the use of NSAIDs and 
aspirin (with and without ulcer prophylaxis) in an aging popula-
tion with multiple risk factors.
PUD is one of the most common GI disorders in the United 
States with a prevalence of about 2%, and a lifetime cumulative 
prevalence of about 10%, peaking around age 70 years.50 The 
costs of PUD, including lost work time and productivity, are 
estimated to be above $8 billion per year in the United States. In 
1998, approximately 1.5% of all Medicare hospital costs were 
spent treating PUD, and the crude mortality rate for peptic ulcer 
was 1.7 per 100,000 individuals. Using the National Inpatient 
Sample, it can be estimated that the mortality rate in patients 
hospitalized in 2006 with duodenal ulcer was 3.7% compared to 
2.1% for gastric ulcer.51 Recent studies have shown an increase 
in the rates of hospitalization and mortality in elderly patients 
for the peptic ulcer complications of bleeding and perforation. 
This may be due in part to the increasingly common use of 
NSAIDs and aspirin in this elderly cohort, many of whom also 
have H. pylori infection.
Pathophysiology and Etiology
A variety of factors may contribute to the development of PUD. 
Although it is now recognized that the large majority of duode-
nal and gastric ulcers are caused by H. pylori infection and/or 
NSAID use17,52 (Fig. 26-24), the final common pathway to ulcer 
formation is acid-peptic injury of the gastroduodenal mucosal 
barrier. Thus, the adage “no acid, no ulcer” remains true. Acid 
suppression heals both duodenal and gastric ulcers and prevents 
recurrence. In general H. pylori predisposes to ulceration, both 
by acid hypersecretion and by compromise of mucosal defense 
mechanisms. NSAID use causes ulcers predominantly by com-
promise of mucosal defenses. Duodenal ulcer was traditionally 
viewed as a disease of increased acid-peptic action on the duo-
denal mucosa, whereas gastric ulcer was viewed as a disease 
of weakened mucosal defenses. An increased understanding of 
peptic ulcer pathophysiology has blurred this overly simplistic 
distinction. Clearly, weakened mucosal defenses play a role in 
both duodenal and gastric ulcers and acid hypersecretion may 
1054
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
result in a duodenal or gastric ulcer in the setting of normal 
mucosal defenses.
Elimination of H. pylori infection or NSAID use is 
important for optimal ulcer healing, and perhaps is even more 
important in preventing ulcer recurrence and/or complications. 
A variety of other diseases are known to cause peptic ulcer, 
including ZES (gastrinoma), antral G-cell hyperfunction and/
or hyperplasia, systemic mastocytosis, trauma, burns, and 
major physiologic stress. Other causative agents include drugs 
(all NSAIDs, aspirin, and cocaine), smoking, and psychologic 
stress. In the United States, probably more than 90% of serious 
peptic ulcer complications can be attributed to H. pylori infec-
tion, NSAID use, and/or cigarette smoking.
Helicobacter pylori Infection.  With specialized flagella 
and a rich supply of urease, H. pylori is uniquely equipped for 
survival in the hostile environment of the stomach.53–55 About 
50% of the world’s population is infected with H. pylori, a 
major cause of chronic gastritis. The same sequence of inflam-
mation to metaplasia to dysplasia to carcinoma, that is well 
known to occur in the esophagus from reflux-induced inflam-
mation (and in the colon from inflammatory bowel disease), 
is now increasingly well recognized to occur in the stomach 
with Helicobacter-induced gastritis. The influence of prolonged 
acid suppression with PPIs or H2RAs on these esophagogastric 
processes is largely unknown. Helicobacter also clearly has an 
etiologic role in the development of gastric lymphoma.
The organism possesses the enzyme urease, which con-
verts urea into ammonia and bicarbonate, thus creating an envi-
ronment around the bacteria that buffers the acid secreted by 
the stomach. The ammonia is damaging to the surface epithelial 
cells. Mutant strains of H. pylori that do not produce urease 
are unable to colonize the stomach. The organism lives in the 
mucus layer atop the gastric SECs, and some attach to these 
cells (Fig. 26-25).53,54 Apparently Helicobacter strains that lack 
flagella are unable to navigate through the unstirred mucus layer 
to get to the apical membrane of the SEC for attachment, and are 
nonpathogenic. One of the mechanisms by which Helicobacter 
causes gastric injury may be through a disturbance in gastric 
acid secretion. This is due, in part, to the inhibitory effect that H. 
pylori exerts on antral D cells that secrete somatostatin, a potent 
inhibitor of antral G-cell gastrin production. H. pylori infection 
is associated with decreased levels of somatostatin, decreased 
Conditions associated with peptic ulcer
NSAID
use
None known
Z.E., other
H. pylori
infection
NSAID
use
None known
Z.E., other
H. pylori
infection
Duodenal
Gastric
Figure 26-24.  “Causes” of peptic ulcer 
disease. Z.E. = Zollinger-Ellison syn-
drome. [Reproduced with permission 
from Spechler SJ: Peptic ulcer disease 
and its complications, in Feldman M (ed ): 
Sleisinger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal 
and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 747. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Figure 26-25.  Helicobacter pylori closely adherent to the cell mem-
brane (top), and spiral-shaped H. pylori attached to epithelial surface 
and surrounding microvilli (bottom). In the image on the bottom, the 
bacterial flagella can be seen arising from the upper pole of the bacte-
rium. (From Parsonnet J: Clinician-discoverers—Marshall, Warren, 
and H. pylori. N Engl J Med 353:2421, 2005. Photomicrographs 
courtesy of Manuel Amieva, Stanford University.)
1055
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
somatostatin messenger RNA production, and fewer soma-
tostatin-producing D cells. These effects are probably mediated 
by H. pylori–induced local alkalinization of the antrum (antral 
acidification is the most potent antagonist to antral gastrin secre-
tion), and H. pylori–mediated increases in other local mediators 
and cytokines. The result is hypergastrinemia and acid hyper-
secretion (Fig. 26-26).49 This hypergastrinemia presumably 
leads to the parietal cell hyperplasia seen in many patients with 
duodenal ulcer. The acid hypersecretion and the antral gastritis 
are thought to lead to antral epithelial metaplasia in the postpy-
loric duodenum. This duodenal metaplasia allows H. pylori to 
colonize the duodenal mucosa and, in these patients, the risk of 
developing a duodenal ulcer increases 50-fold. When H. pylori 
colonizes the duodenum, there is a significant decrease in acid-
stimulated duodenal bicarbonate release. When H. pylori infec-
tion is successfully treated, acid secretory physiology tends to 
normalize. Other mechanisms whereby H. pylori can induce 
gastroduodenal mucosal injury include the production of toxins 
(vacA and cagA), local elaboration of cytokines (particularly 
interleukin-8) by infected mucosa, recruitment of inflamma-
tory cells and release of inflammatory mediators, recruitment 
and activation of local immune factors, and increased apopto-
sis (Fig. 26-27).54,55 The net effect is a weakening of mucosal 
defenses.The mechanism by which the helicobacter organism 
avoids recognition and destruction by the mucosal immune sys-
tem is a topic of interest and active research.56
The evidence supporting the central role of H. pylori in 
the pathophysiology of PUD is strong. Patients with H. pylori 
infection and antral gastritis are three and one-half times more 
likely to develop PUD than patients without H. pylori infec-
tion. Up to 90% of patients with duodenal ulcers, and 70% to 
90% of patients with gastric ulcers, have H. pylori infection. It 
is clear from multiple randomized prospective studies that cur-
ing H. pylori infection dramatically alters the natural history of 
PUD, decreasing the recurrent ulcer rate from more than 75% 
in patients treated with a course of acid-suppressive therapy alone 
(in whom H. pylori is not eradicated) to less than 20% in patients 
treated with a course of antibacterial therapy (Fig. 26-28).57
Obviously, other factors are involved in the etiology of 
PUD because many patients colonized with H. pylori do not get 
Multiple factors (smoking, age
at acquisition of infection)
Somatostain/ gastrin
dysregulation
Acquisition of H. pylori
Duodenum ulceration
Increased acid
secretion
Gastric metaplasia
in duodenum
Duodenum bicarbonate secretion
Inflammation (Duodenitis)
Chronic H. pylori
infection in stomach
H. pylori colonization in duodenum
Figure 26-26.  Model of Helico-
bacter effects on duodenal ulcer 
pathogenesis. (Reproduced with per-
mission from Peek RM Jr., Blaser 
MJ: Pathophysiology of Helicobacter 
pylori-induced gastritis and peptic 
ulcer disease. Am J Med 102:200, 
1997. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
peptic ulcer disease, and many patients with peptic ulcer disease 
do not have H. pylori infection. These observations notwith-
standing, it is clear from a variety of well-designed laboratory, 
clinical, and epidemiologic studies that H. pylori is indubitably 
an important factor in the development and recurrence of PUD. 
H. pylori also plays an etiologic role in gastric cancer and 
lymphoma.54
Acid Secretion and Peptic Ulcer.  A variety of abnormalities 
related to mucosal acid exposure have been described in patients 
with duodenal ulcer (Fig. 26-29).58 Although duodenal ulcer 
patients as a group have a higher mean BAO and mean MAO 
compared to normal controls, many duodenal ulcer patients 
have basal and peak acid outputs in the normal range, and there 
is no correlation between acid secretion and the severity of the 
ulcer disease. As a group, duodenal ulcer patients produce more 
acid than normal controls in response to any known acid secre-
tory stimulus. Although they usually have normal fasting serum 
gastrin levels, DU patients often produce more gastric acid at 
any given dose of gastrin than controls. Considering that many 
duodenal ulcer patients do produce excessive gastric acid, it 
has been argued that a “normal” fasting gastrin level in these 
patients is inappropriately high, and that there is an impaired 
feedback mechanism, especially in light of the apparently 
increased sensitivity of the parietal cell mass to gastrin. Many of 
these long-standing observations now seem reasonable in light 
of recently gained understanding of the perturbations in acid 
and gastrin secretion associated with H. pylori infection. Some 
patients with duodenal ulcer also have increased rates of gastric 
emptying that deliver an increased acid load per unit of time to 
the duodenum. Finally, the buffering capacity of the duodenum 
in many patients with duodenal ulcer is compromised due to 
decreased duodenal bicarbonate secretion.
In patients with gastric ulcer, acid secretion is variable. 
Currently, five types of gastric ulcer are described, although the 
original Johnson classification contained three types (Fig. 26-30).59 
The most common, Johnson type I gastric ulcer, is typically 
located near the angularis incisura on the lesser curvature, 
close to the border between antral and corpus mucosa. Patients 
with type I gastric ulcer usually have normal or decreased 
1056
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
acid secretion. Type II gastric ulcer is associated with active 
or quiescent duodenal ulcer disease, and type III gastric ulcer is 
prepyloric ulcer disease. Both type II and type III gastric ulcers 
are associated with normal or increased gastric acid secretion. 
Type IV gastric ulcers occur near the GE junction, and acid 
cag+
H. pylori
strain
cag-PAI-
encoded
secretory
apparatus
Multiple adhesions:
BabA (binds to
lewis B), AIpA,
AlpB, HopZ
Phospholipase
A2
Alterations
in mucous
glycoproteins
Gastric
epithelial
cell
Flagella
Mucus
Actin
polymerization
CagA
phosphorylation
VacA
Apoptosis
Disruption of 
epithelial
barrier
Fas
expression
Urease
LPS
Porins
Interleukin-8
CagA
Macrophage
Interleukin-12
Th 1 cell
Th 2 cell
B cell
Cytokine-induced
changes in 
gastric physiology
Th 0 cell
ICAM and VCAM
expression
PMN recruitment
Interleukin-8
Chemotactic
interleukin-8 gradient
on proteoglycan
scaffolding
Neutrophil
T cell
B cell
Blood vessel
NF-κ B
              AP-1              
GRO-α
ENA-78
T-cell and B-cell
extravasation
INF-γ   
TNF-α
Interleukin-1β
MHC II, B7-1,
and B7-2
expression
Anti-
H+/K+-ATPase
antibodies
Figure 26-27.  Pathogen-host interactions in the pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori infection. ICAM = intercellular adhesion molecule-1; 
IFN-γ = interferon-γ; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; NF-κB = nuclear factor κB; PAI = pathogenicity island; PMN = polymorphonuclear neu-
trophil; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor alpha; VCAM = vascular cell adhesion molecule. (Reproduced with permission from Suerbaum 
S, Michetti P: Helicobacter pylori infection. N Engl J Med 347:1175, 2002. kkjkjdht ©2002 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights 
reserved.)
secretion is normal or below normal. Type V gastric ulcers are 
medication induced and may occur anywhere in the stomach. 
Patients with gastric ulcers may have weak mucosal defenses 
that permit an abnormal amount of injurious acid back-diffusion 
into the mucosa. Duodenogastric reflux may play a role in 
1057
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
weakening the gastric mucosal defenses, and a variety of com-
ponents in duodenal juice, including bile, lysolecithin, and pan-
creatic juice, have been shown to cause injury and inflammation 
in the gastric mucosa. NSAIDs and aspirin have similar effects. 
Although chronic gastric ulcer usually is associated with sur-
rounding gastritis, it is unproven that the latter leads to the former.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Duodenal ulcer
recurrence
Gastric ulcer
recurrence
Ranitidine +
antibiotics
Ranitidine alone
Figure 26-28.  Helicobacter treatment dramatically decreases the 
recurrence rate of duodenal and gastric ulcer. (Data from Graham 
DY, Lew GM, Klein PD, et al: Effect of treatment of Helicobacter 
pylori infection on the long-term recurrence of gastric or duodenal 
ulcer. A randomized controlled study. Ann Intern Med 116:705, 
1992.)
25
50
75
100
0
Approximate % of DU patients
Pathophysiologic abnormalities in DU
vary in frequency
Nocturnal acid secretion
pH inhibition of gastrin release
Gastric emptying
Pentagastrin-stimulated MAO
Daytime acid secretion
Duodenal acid load
Duodenal HCO3 secretion
Figure 26-29.  Frequency of physiologic abnormalities 
in patients with duodenal ulcer (DU). HCO3 = bicarbon-
ate; MAO = maximal acid output. [Reproduced with per-
mission from Del Valle J, Chey WD, Scheiman JM: Acid 
peptic disorders, in Yamada T, et al (eds): Textbook of 
Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins, 2003, p 1321.]
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Peptic Ulcer 
Disease.  Chronic use of NSAIDs (including aspirin) increases 
the risk of peptic ulcer disease about 5-fold and upper GI 
bleeding about 4-fold.60,61 Complications of PUD (specifically 
hemorrhage and perforation) are much more common in patients 
I
II
III
IV
V
NSAID-induced
Acid hypersecretion
Figure 26-30.  Modified Johnson classification for gastric ulcer. 
I. Lesser curve, incisura. II. Body of stomach, incisura + duodenal 
ulcer (active or healed). III. Prepyloric. IV. High on lesser curve, 
near gastroesophageal junction. V. Medication-induced (NSAID/
acetylsalicylic acid), anywhere in stomach. [Reproduced with per-
mission from Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC: Benign gastric ulcer, in 
Cameron JL (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Mosby Elsevier, 2008, p 81. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
1058
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
taking NSAIDs. More than half of patients who present with 
peptic ulcer hemorrhage or perforation report the recent use 
of NSAIDs, including aspirin. Many of these patients remain 
asymptomatic until they develop these life-threatening 
complications.
The overall risk of significant serious adverse GI events in 
patients taking NSAIDs is more than three times that of controls 
(Table 26-6). This risk increases to five times in patients more 
than age 60 years old. In elderly patients taking NSAIDs, the 
likelihood that they will require an operation related to a GI com-
plication is 10 times that of the control group, and the risk that 
they will die from a GI cause is about four and one-half times 
higher. This problem is put into perspective when one realizes 
that approximately 20 million patients in the United States take 
NSAIDs on a regular basis; probably more regularly take aspi-
rin. Persons who take NSAIDs also have a higher hospitaliza-
tion rate for serious GI events than those who do not.
Factors that clearly put patients at increased risk for 
NSAID-induced GI complications include age >60, prior GI 
event, high NSAID dose, concurrent steroid intake, and concur-
rent anticoagulant intake. ANY patient taking NSAIDs or aspi-
rin who has one or more of these risk factors should receive 
concomitant acid suppressive medication62 (Table 26-7). High 
dose H2 blockers have been shown to be less effective than 
PPIs in preventing GI complications in these high risk patients 
on antiplatelet therapy, but clearly they are better than no acid 
suppression.
Smoking, Stress, and Other Factors.  Epidemiologic studies 
suggest that smokers are about twice as likely to develop PUD 
as nonsmokers. Smoking increases gastric acid secretion and 
duodenogastric reflux. Smoking decreases both gastroduodenal 
Table 26-6 
Hospitalization rates for GI events with and without NSAID use in selected large populations
Annualized Incidenceb
Therapies Used
Clinical Upper GI Eventsc
Complicated Upper GI Eventsd
Studya
NSAID Control
Study Drugs
Control
Study Drug
Control
Study Drug
MUCOSA
NSAIDs  
(n = 4439)
Misoprostol 200 μg qid + 
NSAID (n = 4404)
3.1%
1.6%
1.5%
0.7%
CLASS
Ibuprofen 800 mg tid, 
diclofenac 75 mg bid  
(n = 3987)
Celecoxib 400 mg bid  
(n = 3995)
3.5%
2.1%
1.5%
0.8%
(No aspirine: 
2.9%)
1.4%
1.3%
0.4%
VIGOR
Naproxen 500 mg bid 
(n = 4047)
Rofecoxib 50 mg qd  
(n = 4029)
4.5%
2.1%
1.4%
0.6%
aMUCOSA and VIGOR trials included only rheumatoid arthritis patients; CLASS trial included osteoarthritis (73%) and rheumatoid arthritis (27%).
bIncidence for MUCOSA trial represents doubling of results provided at 6 months (although median follow-up was <6 months). Incidences for VIGOR and 
CLASS trials represent rates per 100 patient-years, although VIGOR median follow-up was 9 months and CLASS data include only the first 6 months of 
the study.
cIncludes perforations, obstructions, bleeding, and uncomplicated ulcers discovered on clinically indicated work-up.
dIncludes perforation, obstruction, bleeding (documented due to ulcer or erosions in MUCOSA and CLASS; major bleeding in VIGOR).
e21% of patients in CLASS study were taking low-dose aspirin.
Note: All differences between controls and study drugs were significant except clinical upper GI events in overall CLASS study (P = .09).
Source: Reproduced with permission from Laine L: Approaches to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use in the high-risk patient. Gastroenterology 
120:594, 2001. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Table 26-7 
Patients taking NSAIDs or aspirin need concomitant 
acid suppressing medication if any of the following 
risk factors is present
• Age over 60
• History of acid/peptic disease
• Concurrent steroid intake
• Concurrent anticoagulant intake
• High-dose NSAID or acetylsalicylic acid
prostaglandin production and pancreaticoduodenal bicarbon-
ate production. These observations may be related, and any 
or all could explain the observed association between smoking 
and PUD.
Although difficult to measure, both physiologic and psy-
chologic stress undoubtedly play a role in the development of 
peptic ulcer in some patients. In 1842, Curling described duo-
denal ulcer and/or duodenitis in burn patients. Decades later, 
Cushing described the appearance of acute peptic ulceration in 
patients with head trauma (Cushing’s ulcer). Even the ancients 
recognized the undeniable links between PUD and stress. 
Patients still present with ulcer complications (bleeding, per-
foration, and obstruction) that are seemingly exacerbated by 
stressful life events. The use of crack cocaine has been linked to 
juxtapyloric peptic ulcers with a propensity to perforate. Alco-
hol is commonly mentioned as a risk factor for PUD, but con-
firmatory data are lacking.
1059
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Clinical Manifestations
More than 90% of patients with PUD complain of abdominal 
pain. The pain is typically nonradiating, burning in quality, and 
located in the epigastrium. The mechanism of the pain is unclear. 
Patients with duodenal ulcer often experience pain 2 to 3 hours 
after a meal and at night. Two thirds of patients with duodenal 
ulcers will complain of pain that awakens them from sleep. The 
pain of gastric ulcer more commonly occurs with eating and is 
less likely to awaken the patient at night. A history of PUD, use 
of NSAIDs, over-the-counter antacids, or antisecretory drugs is 
suggestive of the diagnosis. Other signs and symptoms include 
nausea, bloating, weight loss, stool positive for occult blood, 
and anemia. Duodenal ulcer is about twice as common in men 
compared to women, but the incidence of gastric ulcer is similar 
in men and women. On average, gastric ulcer patients are older 
than duodenal ulcer patients, and the incidence is increasing in 
the elderly, perhaps because of increasing NSAID and aspirin.
Diagnosis
In the young patient with dyspepsia and/or epigastric pain, it 
may be appropriate to initiate empirical PPI therapy for PUD 
without confirmatory testing. In such cases, it is prudent to 
discuss with the patient the small possibility of an alternative 
diagnosis, including malignancy, even if symptoms improve 
with the initiation of therapy. All patients more than 45 years 
old with the above symptoms should have an upper endoscopy, 
and all patients, regardless of age, should have this study if any 
alarm symptoms (see Table 26-5) are present. A double-contrast 
upper GI X-ray study may be useful. Once an ulcer has been 
confirmed endoscopically or radiologically, obvious possible 
causes (Helicobacter, NSAIDs, gastrinoma, cancer) should 
always be considered. All gastric ulcers should be adequately 
biopsied, and any sites of gastritis should be biopsied to rule out 
H. pylori, and for histologic evaluation. Additional testing for 
H. pylori may be indicated. It is not unreasonable to test all pep-
tic ulcer patients for H. pylori (Table 26-8) 63A baseline serum 
gastrin level is appropriate to rule out gastrinoma.
Table 26-8 
Indications for diagnosis and treatment of Helicobacter 
pylori
Established
  •  Active peptic ulcer disease (gastric or duodenal ulcer)
  •  Confirmed history of peptic ulcer disease (not 
previously treated for H. pylori)
  •  Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma 
(low grade)
  •  After endoscopic resection of early gastric cancer
  •  Uninvestigated dyspepsia (depending on H. pylori 
prevalence)
Controversial
  •  Nonulcer dyspepsia
  •  Gastroesophageal reflux disease
  •  Persons using NSAIDs
  •  Unexplained iron deficiency anemia
  •  Populations at higher risk for gastric cancer
Source: Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers, Ltd. Chey 
WD, Wong BCY.63 Practice Parameters Committee of the American 
College of Gastroenterology. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102:1808. 
kkjkjdht © 2007.
Complications
The three most common complications of PUD, in decreas-
ing order of frequency, are bleeding, perforation, and obstruc-
tion.51,52,64 Most peptic ulcer–related deaths in the United States 
are due to bleeding. Bleeding peptic ulcers are by far the most 
common cause of upper GI bleeding in patients admitted to 
hospital (Fig. 26-31).65 Patients with a bleeding peptic ulcer 
typically present with melena and/or hematemesis. Nasogas-
tric aspiration is usually confirmatory of the upper GI bleed-
ing. Abdominal pain is quite uncommon. Shock may be present, 
necessitating aggressive resuscitation and blood transfusion. 
Early endoscopy is important to diagnose the cause of the bleed-
ing and to assess the need for hemostatic therapy.
Three-fourths of the patients who come to the hospital 
with bleeding peptic ulcer will stop bleeding if given acid sup-
pression and nothing by mouth. However, one fourth will con-
tinue to bleed or will rebleed after an initial quiescent period, 
and virtually all the mortalities (and all the operations for 
bleeding) occur in this group. This group can be fairly well 
delineated based on clinical factors related to the magnitude 
of the hemorrhage, comorbidities, age, and endoscopic find-
ings. Shock, hematemesis, transfusion requirement exceed-
ing four units in 24 hours, and certain endoscopic stigmata 
(active bleeding or visible vessel) define this high-risk group. 
Two widely used risk stratification tools have proven use-
ful in predicting rebleeding and death: the Blatchford and 
Rockall scores (Table 26-9).66 High-risk patients benefit from 
endoscopic therapy to stop the bleeding. The most common 
endoscopic hemostatic modalities used are injection with epi-
nephrine, and electrocautery. In a case with exposed vessel, 
mechanical hemostasis using a clip is useful to control the 
bleeding.66A Persistent bleeding or rebleeding after endoscopic 
therapy is an indication for operation, although repeat endo-
scopic treatment has been successful in treating rebleeding. 
Elderly patients and patients with multiple comorbidities do 
not tolerate repeated episodes of hemodynamically significant 
hemorrhage, and may benefit from early elective operation 
after initially successful endoscopic treatment, especially if 
they have a high-risk ulcer.
Planned surgery under controlled circumstances often 
yields better outcomes than emergent surgery. Deep bleeding 
ulcers on the posterior duodenal bulb or lesser gastric curvature 
are high-risk lesions, because they often erode large arteries not 
amenable to nonoperative treatment, and early operation should 
be considered.
Peptic ulcer
40%
24%
6%
4%
6%
5%
10%
5%
No obvious cause
Other
Neoplasm
Erosive disease
Mallory-Weiss syndrome Oesophagitis Varices
Figure 26-31.  Causes of upper GI bleeding. (Reproduced with 
permission from Dallal HJ, Palmer KR: Clinical Review: Upper 
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. BMJ 323:1115, 2001. With permis-
sion from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
1060
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 26-9 
Risk-stratification tools for upper gastrointestinal hemorrhagea
A. Blatchford Score
At Presentation
Points
Systolic blood pressure
  100–109 mmHg
1
  90–99 mmHg
2
  <90 mmHg
3
Blood urea nitrogen
  6.5–7.9 mmol/L
2
  8.0–9.9 mmol/L
3
  10.0–24.9 mmol/L
4
  ≥25 mmol/L
6
Hemoglobin for men
  12.0–12.9 g/dL
1
  10.0–11.9 g/dL
3
  <10.0 g/dL
6
Hemoglobin for women
  10.0–11.9 g/dL
1
  <10.0 g/dL
6
Other variables at presentation
  Pulse ≥100 beats/min
1
  Melena
1
  Syncope
2
  Hepatic disease
2
  Cardiac failure
2
B. Rockall Score
Variable
Points
Age
  <60 y
  60–79 y
  ≥80 y
0
1
2
Shock
  Heart rate >100 beats/min
  Systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg
1
2
Coexisting illness
  Ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, other major 
illness
  Renal failure, hepatic failure, metastatic cancer
2
3
Endoscopic diagnosis
  No lesions observed, Mallory-Weiss syndrome
  Peptic ulcer, erosive disease, esophagitis
  Cancer of the upper GI tract
0
1
2
Endoscopic stigmata of recent hemorrhage
  Clean base ulcer, flat pigmented spot
  Blood in upper GI tract, active bleeding, visible vessel, clot
0
2
aPanel A shows the values used in the Blatchford risk-stratification score, which ranges from 0 to 23, with higher scores indicating higher risk. Panel B 
shows the Rockall score, with point values assigned for each of three clinical variables (age and the presence of shock and coexisting illnesses) and two 
endoscopic variables (diagnosis and stigmata of recent hemorrhage). The complete Rockall score ranges from 0 to 11, with higher scores indicating higher 
risk. Patients with a clinical Rockall score (Age + Shock + Coexisting illness) of 0 or a complete Rockall score of 2 or less are considered to be at low risk 
for rebleeding or death.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gralnek IM et al: Management of acute bleeding from peptic ulcer. N Engl J Med. 359:928, 2008. kkjkjdht 
©2008 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
Complete 
Rockall 
Score
Clinical  
Rockall  
Score
1061
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Perforated peptic ulcer usually presents as an acute abdo-
men. The patient can often give the exact time of onset of the 
excruciating abdominal pain. Initially, a chemical peritoni-
tis develops from the gastric and/or duodenal secretions, but 
within hours a bacterial peritonitis supervenes. The patient is in 
obvious distress, and the abdominal examination shows perito-
neal signs. Usually, marked involuntary guarding and rebound 
tenderness is evoked by a gentle examination. Upright chest 
X-ray shows free air in about 80% of patients (Fig. 26-32). 
Once the diagnosis has been made, the patient is given analge-
sia and antibiotics, resuscitated with isotonic fluid, and taken 
to the operating room. Fluid sequestration into the third space 
of the inflamed peritoneum can be impressive, so preoperative 
fluid resuscitation is mandatory. Sometimes, the perforation has 
sealed spontaneously by the time of presentation, and surgery 
can be avoided if the patient is doing well. Nonoperative man-
agement is appropriate only if there is objective evidence that 
the leak has sealed (i.e., radiologic contrast study), and in the 
absence of clinical peritonitis.
Gastric outlet obstruction occurs in no more than 5% of 
patients with PUD. It is usually due to duodenal or prepyloric 
ulcer disease, and may be acute (from inflammatory swelling 
and peristaltic dysfunction) or chronic (from cicatrix). Patients 
typically present with nonbilious vomiting and may have a 
profound hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. 
Pain or discomfort is common. Weight loss may be promi-
nent, depending on the duration of symptoms. A succussion 
splash may be audible with stethoscope placed in the epigas-
trium. Initial treatment is nasogastric suction, IV hydration and 
electrolyte repletion, and acid suppression. The diagnosis is 
confirmed by endoscopy. Most patients admitted to the hospi-
tal nowadays with obstructing ulcer disease require interven-
tion, either balloon dilation or operation. Cancer must be ruled 
out because most patients who present with the symptoms of 
gastric outlet obstruction will have a pancreatic, gastric, or 
duodenal malignancy.
Medical Treatment of Peptic Ulcer Disease
PPIs are the mainstay of medical therapy for PUD, but high dose 
H2RAs and sucralfate are also quite effective. Patients hospital-
ized for ulcer complications should receive PPI by continuous 
Figure 26-32.  Pneumoperitoneum on upright chest X-ray in 
patient with perforated ulcer.
IV infusion and, when discharged, should be considered for life-
long PPIs unless the definitive cause is eliminated or a defini-
tive operation performed. Peptic ulcer patients should 
stop smoking and avoid alcohol and NSAIDs (including 
aspirin). Patients who require NSAIDs or aspirin to treat other 
medical conditions should always take concomitant PPIs or high 
dose H2 receptor blockers. If H. pylori infection is documented, 
it should be treated with one of several acceptable regimens 
(Table 26-10).63 Infectious disease consultation may be helpful 
in the compliant, symptomatic patient with persistent H. pylori 
infection following treatment, or another regimen could be tried 
(e.g., quadruple therapy). If initial H. pylori testing is negative 
and ulcer symptoms persist, an empirical trial of anti-H. pylori 
therapy is reasonable since false-negative H. pylori tests are 
common. Generally, acid suppression can be stopped after 3 
months if the ulcerogenic stimulus (usually H. pylori, NSAIDs, 
or aspirin) has been removed. However, long-term maintenance 
PPI therapy should be considered in all patients admitted to hos-
pital with ulcer complications, all high-risk patients on NSAIDs 
or aspirin (the elderly or debilitated), and all patients with a 
history of recurrent ulcer or bleeding. Consideration should 
also be given to maintenance PPI therapy in refractory smokers 
with a history of peptic ulcer. Sucralfate acts locally on muco-
sal defects and is well tolerated, and occasionally is useful as a 
supplement to acid suppression.
Surgical Treatment of Peptic Ulcer Disease
The indications for surgery in PUD are bleeding, perforation, 
obstruction, and intractability or nonhealing.67,68 Gastric cancer 
must always be considered in patients with gastric ulcer or gas-
tric outlet obstruction.
Today, most patients undergoing operation for PUD have 
simple oversewing of a bleeding ulcer or simple patch of a per-
forated ulcer.51 Simultaneous performance of vagotomy 
either truncal or highly selective is increasingly uncommon, 
Table 26-10 
Treatment regimens for Helicobacter pylori
Medications/Dose/Frequency
Duration
PPI + clarithromycin 500 mg bid +  
amoxicillin 1000 mg bid
10–14 d
PPI + clarithromycin 500 bid +  
metronidazole 500 bid
10–14 d
PPI + amoxicillin 1000 mg bid, then
5 d
PPI + clarithromycin 500 mg bid +  
tinidazole 500 mg bid
5 d
Salvage regimens for patients who fail one of the above 
initial regimens:
  Bismuth subsalicylate 525 mg qid + 
metronidazole 250 mg qid +  
tetracycline 500 mg qid + PPI
10–14 d
  PPI + amoxicillin 1000 mg bid + 
levofloxacin 500 mg daily
10 d
PPI = proton pump inhibitor.
Source: Data from Chey et al.63
1
2
1062
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
probably due to surgeon unfamiliarity with the procedure and 
reliance on postoperative PPIs to decrease acid secretion.
Unfortunately, the data from many excellent randomized 
clinical trials evaluating elective operation for peptic ulcer over 
the last several decades may be irrelevant to most patients pre-
senting for ulcer surgery today.67 The large majority of these 
excellent studies were done in the pre-PPI, pre-Helicobacter, 
pre-NSAID era, and focused on elective operation for intracta-
ble disease, an unusual indication for operation nowadays. Thus, 
today’s surgeon should take great care in applying this literature 
to inform surgical decision making.
Traditionally, the vast majority of peptic ulcers were 
treated by a variant of one of the three basic operations: parietal 
cell vagotomy also called highly selective vagotomy or proxi-
mal gastric vagotomy (HSV), vagotomy and drainage (V+D), 
and vagotomy and distal gastrectomy. Recurrence rates were 
lowest but morbidity highest with the latter procedure, while the 
opposite was true for HSV (Table 26-11).67–69
HSV severs the vagal nerve supply to the proximal two 
thirds of the stomach, where essentially all the parietal cells 
are located, and preserves the vagal innervation to the antrum 
and pylorus, and the remaining abdominal viscera (Fig. 26-33). 
Thus, the operation decreases total gastric acid secretion by 
about 75%, and GI side effects are rare. Elective HSV has 
largely been supplanted by long-term PPI treatment, but the 
operation, which has a learning curve, may still be useful in 
the patient (elective or emergent) who is noncompliant with, 
intolerant of, or cannot afford medical treatment. Historically, 
HSV has not performed particularly well for type II (gastric and 
duodenal) and III (prepyloric) gastric ulcer, perhaps because of 
hypergastrinemia caused by gastric outlet obstruction and per-
sistent antral stasis. The Taylor procedure consists of a posterior 
truncal vagotomy and anterior seromyotomy (but anterior HSV 
is probably equivalent), and is an attractive and simple alterna-
tive to HSV with similar results.
Table 26-11 
Clinical results of surgery for duodenal ulcer
Parietal 
Cell  
Vagotomy
Truncal  
Vagotomy and 
Pyloroplasty
Truncal 
Vagotomy and 
Antrectomy
Operative  
mortality  
rate (%)
0
<1
1
Ulcer  
recurrence 
rate (%)
5–15
5–15
<2
Dumping (%)
  Mild
<5
10
10–15
  Severe
0
1
1–2
Diarrhea (%)
  Mild
<5
25
20
  Severe
0
2
1–2
Source: Modified from Mulholland et al, 68 with permission. kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.
6–8cm    
7cm
Figure 26-33.  Highly selective vagotomy. [Reproduced with per-
mission from Zinner MJ et al (eds): Maingot’s Abdominal Opera-
tions, 10th ed., Vol. I. Stamford, Connecticut: Appleton & Lange, 
1997, p 987. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.]
Truncal vagotomy and pyloroplasty, and truncal vagot-
omy and gastrojejunostomy are the paradigmatic vagotomy 
and drainage procedures. HSV may be substituted for truncal 
vagotomy. The advantage of V + D is that it can be performed 
safely and quickly by the experienced surgeon. The main dis-
advantages are the side effect profile (10% of patients have 
significant dumping and/or diarrhea). During truncal vagotomy 
(Fig. 26-34), care must be taken not to perforate the esophagus, 
a potentially lethal complication. Intraoperative frozen sec-
tion confirmation of at least two vagal trunks is prudent; addi-
tional vagal trunks are common. Unlike HSV, V + D is widely 
accepted as a successful definitive operation for complicated 
PUD. It has been described as a useful part of the operative 
treatment for bleeding duodenal and gastric ulcer, perforated 
duodenal and gastric ulcer, and obstructing duodenal and gastric 
(type II and III) ulcer. When applied to gastric ulcer, the ulcer 
should be excised or biopsied.
Truncal vagotomy denervates the antropyloric mecha-
nism, and therefore, some sort of procedure is necessary to 
ablate or bypass the pylorus. Gastrojejunostomy is a good 
choice in patients with gastric outlet obstruction or a severely 
diseased proximal duodenum. The anastomosis is done between 
the proximal jejunum and the most dependent portion of the 
greater gastric curvature, in either an antecolic or retrocolic 
fashion (Fig. 26-35). Marginal ulceration is a potential com-
plication. Pyloroplasty is useful in patients who require a 
pyloroduodenotomy to deal with the ulcer complication (e.g., 
posterior bleeding duodenal ulcer), in those with limited or 
focal scarring in the pyloric region, or when gastrojejunos-
tomy is technically difficult. The most commonly performed 
1063
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
pyloroplasty is the Heineke-Mikulicz type (Fig. 26-36). Other 
occasionally useful techniques include the Finney (Fig. 26-37) 
and the Jaboulay pyloroplasties (Fig. 26-38). These more 
extensive pyloroplasty techniques may make subsequent distal 
gastric resection more difficult and/or hazardous.
Although vagotomy and antrectomy (V + A) is associ-
ated with a very low ulcer recurrence rate and is applicable to 
many patients with complicated PUD (e.g., bleeding duodenal 
and gastric ulcer, obstructing peptic ulcer, nonhealing gastric 
ulcer, and recurrent ulcer), V + A has a higher operative mor-
tality risk (compared with HSV or V + D), and is irreversible. 
Following antrectomy, GI continuity may be reestablished with 
a Billroth I gastroduodenostomy (Fig. 26-39) or a Billroth II 
loop gastrojejunostomy (Fig. 26-40). Since antrectomy routinely 
leaves a 60% to 70% gastric remnant, routine reconstruction as a 
Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy should be avoided (Fig. 26-41). 
Resected segment
Resected segment
Celiac branch
Hepatic branch
Figure 26-34.  Truncal vagotomy. [Reproduced with permission 
from Zollinger RM Jr., Zollinger RM Sr. (eds): Zollinger’s Atlas of 
Surgical Operations, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003, p 45. 
kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.]
Figure 26-35.  Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy. Note 
mesocolon sutured to stomach (b, c, d). [Reproduced 
with permission from Vagotomy and drainage, in 
Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackleford’s Surgery 
of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 129. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Suture reinforcing 
the angle
Mesocolon
b
c
d
S t o m a c h
J e j u n u m
Although the Roux-en-Y operation is an excellent procedure for 
keeping duodenal contents out of the stomach and esophagus, in 
the presence of a large gastric remnant, this reconstruction will 
predispose to marginal ulceration and/or gastric stasis.
V + A should be avoided in hemodynamically unstable 
patients, and in patients with extensive inflammation and/or 
scarring of the proximal duodenum, because secure anastomo-
sis (Billroth I) or duodenal closure (Billroth II) may be difficult.
Distal gastrectomy without vagotomy (usually about a 
50% gastrectomy to include the ulcer) has traditionally been 
the procedure of choice for type I gastric ulcer. The addition of 
vagotomy should be considered for type II and III gastric ulcers 
(because the pathophysiology is more analogous to duodenal 
ulcer), or if the patient is believed to be at increased risk for 
recurrent ulcer, or perhaps even if Billroth II reconstruction is 
contemplated (to decrease the chance of marginal ulcer). Subto-
tal gastrectomy (75% distal gastrectomy) without vagotomy is 
rarely used to treat PUD today, although it was the most popular 
ulcer operation at the middle of the last century.
Pylorus preserving gastrectomy (PPG) was first reported 
as a surgical option for gastric ulcer which could minimize 
both dumping and duodenogastric reflux. Though not widely 
adopted for this indication, in some centers PPG is considered 
a good minimally invasive surgical option for early gastric 
cancer.69A,69B
Choice of Operation for Peptic Ulcer.  The choice of opera-
tion for the individual patient with PUD depends on a variety of 
factors, including the type of ulcer (duodenal, gastric, recurrent, 
or marginal), the indication for operation, and the condition of the 
patient, among others. Other important considerations are intra-
abdominal factors (duodenal scarring/inflammation, adhesions, 
or difficult exposure), the ulcer diathesis status of the patient, 
the surgeon’s experience and personal preference, whether 
H. pylori infection is present, the need for NSAID therapy, pre-
vious treatment, and the likelihood of future compliance with 
treatment. Table 26-12 shows the surgical options for managing 
various aspects of PUD. In general, resective procedures have a 
lower ulcer recurrence rate, but a higher operative morbidity and 
mortality rate (see Table 26-11) compared to nonresective ulcer 
operations. Because ulcer recurrence often is related to H. pylori 
1064
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and/or NSAIDs, it is usually managed adequately without reop-
eration. Thus, gastric resection to minimize recurrence in duode-
nal ulcer disease is often not justified today; resection for gastric 
ulcer remains the standard because of the risk of cancer. Clearly, 
the modern trend in peptic ulcer operation could be described as 
“less is more.”70,71 Vagotomy as a component of emergency ulcer 
operation is increasingly uncommon.
Bleeding Peptic Ulcer
Bleeding is the most common cause of ulcer-related death, but 
most patients admitted to hospital with bleeding gastric or duode-
nal ulcer today will not require an operation. In many hospitals, 
operation for ulcer perforation is much more common than oper-
ation for bleeding ulcer. The success of endoscopic treatment 
and medical therapy in treating and preventing bleeding PUD 
Mucosa
Pylorus
Antrum
Gambee stitch
C
B
D
A
Figure 26-36.  A through D. Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty. [Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ (ed): Atlas of Gastric Surgery. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1992, p 17. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
has resulted in the selection of a small subgroup of high-risk 
patients for today’s surgeon. It is likely that patients currently 
coming to operation for bleeding PUD are at higher risk for a 
poor outcome than ever before. The surgical options for treat-
ing bleeding PUD include suture ligation of the bleeder; suture 
ligation and definitive nonresective ulcer operation (HSV or V + 
D); and gastric resection (usually, including vagotomy and ulcer 
excision). Gastric ulcer requires biopsy if not resected.
The management of bleeding peptic ulcer is summarized 
in the algorithm provided in Fig. 26-42. All patients admitted to 
hospital with bleeding peptic ulcer should be adequately resus-
citated and started on continuous IV PPI.72 Seventy-five per-
cent of patients will stop bleeding with these measures alone, 
but 25% will continue to bleed or will rebleed in hospital. It 
is important to identify this high-risk group early with clinical 
1065
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
and endoscopic parameters because, essentially, all the deaths 
from bleeding ulcer occur in this group. Surgical consultation 
is mandatory, and endoscopic hemostatic therapy (cautery, epi-
nephrine injection, clipping) is indicated and usually successful 
in these high-risk patients.73,74 Indications for operation include 
massive hemorrhage unresponsive to endoscopic control, and 
transfusion requirement of more than four to six units of blood, 
despite attempts at endoscopic control. Lack of availability of a 
therapeutic endoscopist, recurrent hemorrhage after one or more 
attempts at endoscopic control, lack of availability of blood for 
transfusion, repeat hospitalization for bleeding ulcer, and con-
current indications for surgery such as perforation or obstruction, 
are also indications for surgery. Patients with massive bleeding 
from high-risk lesions (e.g., posterior duodenal ulcer with erosion 
 
 
S
t
o
m
a
c
h
 
 
S
t
o
m
.
A
B 
D
C
 Approximation suture   
Pylorus
Inverted
incision
Gall
bladder
Duodenum
Connell
through & through
suture (1st ant. tier)
Duod.
Cushing
seromuscular
suture (2nd ant. tier)
Posterior
through &
through suture
Figure 26-37.  A through D. Finney pyloroplasty. ant. = anterior; Duod. = duodenum; Stom. = stomach. [Reproduced with permission from 
Sawyers JL: Vagotomy and pyloroplasty, in Zuidema GD (ed): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
1996, p 150. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
of gastroduodenalartery, or lesser curvature gastric ulcer with 
erosion of left gastric artery or branch) should be considered 
for early operation. Early operation should also be considered 
in patients more than 60 years of age, those presenting in shock, 
those requiring more than four units of blood in 24 hours or eight 
units of blood in 48 hours, those with rebleeding, and those with 
ulcers >2 cm in diameter. The mortality rate for surgery for 
bleeding peptic ulcer is around 20%. Angiography and emboli-
zation may be useful in some patients.
Operation for Bleeding Peptic Ulcer (Fig. 26-43)
The two operations most commonly used for bleeding duodenal 
ulcer are oversewing of the ulcer usually without vagotomy,70 
or V + A. Oversewing alone results in a higher rebleeding rate 
1066
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
but a lower operative mortality rate. When the mortality for 
reoperation for rebleeding is considered, the overall mortal-
ity is probably comparable for the two approaches. Patients 
who are in shock or medically unstable should not have gastric 
resection.
An initial pyloromyotomy incision allows access to the 
bleeding posterior duodenal ulcer, and an expeditious Kocher 
maneuver allows the surgeon to control the hemorrhage with the 
left hand if necessary. Heavy suture material on a stout needle 
is used to place figure-of-eight sutures or a U-stitch to secure 
the bleeding vessel at the base of the posterior duodenal ulcer. 
Multiple sutures are usually necessary. Once the surgeon is 
 
 
S
t
o
m
a
c
h
 
 
S
t
o
m
.
A
B 
D
C
Pylorus
Inverted
incision
Gall
bladder
Duodenum
Connell
through & through
suture (1st ant. tier)
Duod.
Cushing
seromuscular
suture (2nd ant. tier)
Posterior
through &
through suture
Figure 26-38.  A through D. Jaboulay pyloroplasty. ant. = anterior; Duod. = duodenum; Stom. = stomach. [Reproduced with permission 
from Sawyers JL: Vagotomy and pyloroplasty, in Zuidema GD (ed): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 1996, p 150. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
unequivocally convinced that hemostasis is secure, a pyloro-
plasty can be performed. If the patient is stable, vagotomy may 
be considered if the surgeon is experienced and the vagotomy 
straightforward. If the patient is not a high operative risk and 
V + A is selected, smaller duodenal ulcers are resected with the 
specimen; larger bleeding duodenal ulcers must often be left 
behind in the duodenal stump. In this situation, suture hemo-
stasis must be attained and a secure duodenal closure accom-
plished. The anterior wall of the open duodenum can be sutured 
to either the proximal or distal lip of the posterior ulcer once 
the bleeding vessel has been sutured. The duodenal closure can 
be buttressed with omentum and the duodenum should be 
1067
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Figure 26-39.  A though C. Billroth I gastroduodenostomy. [Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ (ed): Atlas of Gastric Surgery. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1992, p 35. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Figure 26-40.  A through D. Billroth II antecolic gastrojejunostomy. [Reproduced with permission from Soybel DI, Zinner MJ: Stomach 
and duodenum: Operative procedures, in Zinner MJ et al (eds): Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 10th ed., Vol. I. Stamford, Connecticut: 
Appleton & Lange, 1997, p 1112. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.]
1068
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
50 to 60 cm
Figure 26-41.  Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy. [Reproduced with 
permission from Ritchie WP Jr.: Benign diseases of the stomach 
and duodenum, in Ritchie WP, Steele G, Dean RH (eds): General 
Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1995, p 117.]
Table 26-12 
Surgical options in the treatment of duodenal and 
gastric ulcer
Indication
Duodenal
Gastric
Bleeding
1. Oversewa
2. Oversew, V + D
3. V + A
1. Oversew and biopsya
2. Oversew, biopsy, V + D
3. Distal gastrectomyb
Perforation
1. Patcha
2. Patch, HSV
3. Patch, V + D
1. Biopsy and patcha
2. Wedge excision, V + D
3. Distal gastrectomyb
Obstruction
1. HSV + GJ
2. V + A
1. Biopsy; HSV + GJ
2. Distal gastrectomyb
Intractability/
nonhealing
1. HSVb
2. V + D
3. V + A
1. HSV and wedge 
excision
2. Distal gastrectomy
aUnless the patient is in shock or moribund, a definitive procedure 
should be considered.
bOperation of choice in low-risk patient.
GJ = gastrojejunostomy; HSV = highly selective vagotomy; V + A = 
vagotomy and antrectomy; V + D = vagotomy and drainage.
decompressed, either with a lateral duodenostomy or retrograde 
tube via the proximal jejunum or nasogastric  tube secured with 
tip well into afferent limb. Right upper quadrant closed suction 
peritoneal drainage is important. Use of a feeding jejunostomy 
is also considered. A Billroth II anastomosis reestablishes gas-
trointestinal continuity.
The initial management of bleeding gastric ulcers and 
the indications for operation are similar to those for bleeding 
duodenal ulcer. These lesions tend to occur in older and/or 
medically complicated patients, and this fact may increase the 
operative risk. However, experience shows that planned surgery 
in a resuscitated patient results in a better operative survival rate 
than emergent operation in a patient who has rebled and is in 
shock. Distal gastric resection to include the bleeding ulcer is 
the procedure of choice for bleeding gastric ulcer. Second best 
is V + D with oversewing and biopsy of the ulcer to rule out 
cancer. Oversewing of the bleeder followed by long-term acid 
suppression is a reasonable alternative in high-risk or unstable 
patients.
Perforated Peptic Ulcer (Fig. 26-44)
Perforation is the second most common complication of peptic 
ulcer but nowadays a more common indication for operation 
than bleeding. As with bleeding ulcer, NSAID and/or aspirin 
use have been inextricably linked with perforated PUD, espe-
cially in the elderly population.61 Surgery is almost always indi-
cated for ulcer perforation, although occasionally nonsurgical 
treatment can be used in the stable patient without peritonitis 
in whom radiologic studies document a sealed perforation. 
Patients with acute perforation and GI blood loss (either chronic 
or acute) should be suspected of having a second ulcer or a 
GI cancer.
The options for surgical treatment of perforated duodenal 
ulcer are simple patch closure, patch closure and HSV, or patch 
closure and V + D. Simple patch closure, currently the most 
commonly performed operation for perforated peptic ulcer, 
should be done in patients with hemodynamic instability and/
or exudative peritonitis signifying a perforation >24 hours old. 
In stable patients without longstanding perforation, the addition 
of HSV may be considered. However, in the United States and 
Western Europe, there is clearly a trend away from definitive 
operation for perforated duodenal ulcer, probably because of 
the ready availability of PPI, and surgeon unfamiliarity with 
definitive operation in this setting.51,70
In the stable patient without multiple operative risk fac-
tors, perforated gastric ulcers are best treated by distal gastric 
resection. Vagotomy is usually added for type II and III gastric 
ulcers. Patch closure with biopsy; or local excision and closure; 
or biopsy, closure, truncal vagotomy, and drainage are alter-
native operations in the unstable or high-risk patient, or in the 
patient with a perforation in an inopportune location. All perfo-
rated gastric ulcers, even those in the prepyloric position, should 
be biopsied if they are not removed at surgery.
Obstructing Peptic Ulcer
Acute ulcers associated with obstruction due to edema and/or 
motor dysfunction may respond to intensive antisecretory ther-
apy and nasogastric suction. But most patients with significant 
obstruction from chronic ulceration will require some sort of 
more substantial intervention. Endoscopic balloon dilation can 
often transiently improve obstructive symptoms, but many of 
these patients ultimately fail and come to operation.75
1069
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
The standard operation for obstructing PUD is vagotomy 
and antrectomy. Alternatively vagotomy and gastrojejunostomy 
should be considered if a difficult duodenal stump is anticipated 
with resection. HSV and gastrojejunostomy may be compara-
ble to V+A for obstructing ulcer disease,76 and sometimes has 
appeal because it can be done laparoscopically, and because 
it does not complicate future resection, if needed. However, 
potentially curable gastric or duodenal cancers can be missed 
with this approach.
Intractable or Nonhealing Peptic Ulcer
Intractability should be an unusual indication for peptic ulcer 
operation nowadays. The patient referred for surgical evaluation 
Hospital admission
Bleeding peptic ulcer
Bleeding recurs
in hospital
O.R.
20% high risk
80% Low risk
Bleeding stops
Discharge
Bleeding recurs
Bleeding persists
>4 PRBC transfused/24h
Deep ulcer eroding big vessel
Hemodynamic instability
Hemostatic Rx unavailable
Endoscopic hemostatic Rx
Consult surgeon
Resuscitate
Continuous IV PPI drip
EGD
Lifelong PPI
Test + Rx H. pylori
Avoid NSAIDs/ASA if possible
Yes
Shock?
No
Yes
Transfusion?
No
Yes
Active bleeding on EGD?
No
Yes
Visible vessel on EGD?
No
Yes
Abnormal PT, PTT, or platelets?
No
Figure 26-42.  Algorithm for the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcer. ASA = acetylsalicylic acid; EGD = esophagogastroduodenoscopy; 
O.R. = operating room; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; PRBC = unit of packed red blood cells; PT = prothrombin time; PTT = partial throm-
boplastin time; Rx = treatment.
because of intractable PUD should raise red flags for the sur-
geon: Maybe the patient has a missed cancer; maybe the patient 
is noncompliant (not taking prescribed PPI, still taking NSAIDs, 
still smoking); maybe the patient has Helicobacter despite the 
presence of a negative test or previous treatment. Because 
acid secretion can be totally blocked and H. pylori eradicated 
with modern medication, the question remains: “Why does the 
patient have a persistent ulcer diathesis?” The surgeon should 
review the differential diagnosis of nonhealing ulcer before any 
consideration of operative treatment (Table 26-13).
Surgical treatment should be considered in patients with 
nonhealing or intractable PUD who have multiple recurrences, 
large ulcers (>2 cm), complications (obstruction, perforation, or 
1070
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Operation for bleeding peptic ulcer
Yes
Yes
No
Gastric ulcer
Duodenal ulcer
Type 1,2,3
Distal gastrectomy**
Hemodynamically unstable?
Or
High operative risk?
Csendes proc
Pauchet proc
Kelling-Madlener proc
(see text)
*Add lifelong PPI
**Add TV for type 2 + 3
Oversew + TV/D
Oversew + TV/A
BMI < 21? or
difficult duodenum?
Type 4
Rebleed
Rebleed
Duodenal ulcer*
Gastric ulcer*
1) Bx and oversew
2) Wedge resection
Oversew
No
Figure 26-43.  Algorithm for operation for bleeding peptic ulcer. BMI = body mass index; Bx = biopsy; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; 
proc = procedure; TV = truncal vagotomy; TV/A = truncal vagotomy and antrectomy; TV/D = truncal vagotomy and drainage.
Figure 26-44.  Algorithm for operation for perforated peptic ulcer. ASA = acetylsalicylic acid; BMI = body mass index; Bx = biopsy; 
HSV = highly selective vagotomy; Hx = history; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; Rx = treatment; TV/D = truncal vagotomy and drainage.
Operation for Perforated Peptic Ulcer
Yes
Patch + HSV,
or
Patch + TV/D
Wedge resection and TV/D or HSV
Or
Distal gastrectomy including perforation***
 Duodenal ulcer* 
 Gastric ulcer* 
Patch
Bx +  Patch
Or
Wedge resection
Chronic ulcer HX?
Or
Perforation on RX?
Or
NSAIDs/ASA necessary?
 Gastric ulcer* 
 Duodenal ulcer* 
Hemodynamically unstable?
Or
High operative risk?
Or
Perforation >24 hours
 * In all patients, test and treat for H. pylori, and if vagotomy not performed (most patients today)
  consider lifelong PPI.
 ** Avoid truncal vagotomy and avoid gastrectomy if BMI<21
 *** Consider adding vagotomy for type II and type III gastric ulcer
No
No
Yes**
1071
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
hemorrhage), or suspected malignancy. Definitive opera-
tion, particularly gastric resection, should be considered 
most cautiously in the thin or marginally nourished individual.
It is important that the surgeon not fall into the trap of per-
forming a large, irreversible operation on these patients, based 
on the unproven theory that if all other methods have failed to 
heal the ulcer, a large operation is required. Although there is a 
large quantity of very good data in the surgical literature sug-
gesting that the large majority of patients do well after the larger 
elective ulcer operations, these data may not be particularly rel-
evant to the modern patient.67 Candidates for ulcer operation 
today are different than those of 30 to 50 years ago. One might 
argue that current medical care has healed the minor ulcers, and 
that patients presenting with true intractability or nonhealing 
will be more difficult to treat and are likely to have chronic 
problems after a major ulcer operation.
If surgery is necessary, a lesser operation may be preferable. 
It is prudent to avoid truncal vagotomy and/or distal gastrectomy 
Table 26-13 
Differential diagnosis of intractability or nonhealing 
peptic ulcer disease
Cancer
  Gastric
  Pancreatic
  Duodenal
Persistent Helicobacter pylori infection
  Tests may be false-negative
  Consider empiric treatment
Noncompliant patient
  Failure to take prescribed medication
  Surreptitious use of NSAIDs
Motility disorder
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
as the initial elective operation for intractable peptic ulcer in the 
thin or asthenic patient. Alternatives for intractable duodenal 
ulcer include HSV with or without gastrojejunostomy (revers-
ible drainage operation). In patients with nonhealing gastric ulcer, 
wedge resection with HSV should be considered in thin or frail 
patients. Otherwise, distal gastrectomy (to include the ulcer) is 
recommended. It is unnecessary to add a vagotomy in patients 
with type I or type IV (juxta-esophageal) gastric ulcers because 
they are usually associated with acid hyposecretion. Type IV gas-
tric ulcers may be difficult to resect as part of a distal gastrectomy, 
and a variety of surgical techniques have been described to treat 
these more proximal lesions (Fig. 26-45).
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome77–79
ZES is caused by the uncontrolled secretion of abnormal 
amounts of gastrin by a duodenal or pancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumor (i.e., gastrinoma). Most cases (80%) are sporadic, but 
20% are inherited. The inherited or familial form of gastrinoma 
is associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN 
I), which consists of parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreatic (or 
duodenal) tumors. Gastrinoma is the most common pancreatic 
tumor in patients with MEN I. Patients with MEN I usually have 
multiple gastrinoma tumors, and surgical cure is less common; 
sporadic gastrinomas are more often solitary and are more often 
amenable to surgical cure. Currently, about 50% to 60% of gas-
trinomas are malignant, with lymph node, liver, or other distant 
metastases at operation. Five-year survival in patients present-
ing with metastatic disease is approximately 40%. The larger the 
primary gastrinoma, the higher the likelihood of metastatic dis-
ease. More than 90% of patients with sporadically, completely 
resected gastrinoma will be cured.
The most common symptoms of ZES are epigastric pain, 
GERD, and diarrhea. More than 90% of patients with gastri-
noma have peptic ulcer. Most ulcers are in the typical location 
(proximal duodenum), but atypical ulcer location (distal duo-
denum, jejunum, or multiple ulcers) should prompt an evalu-
ation for gastrinoma. Gastrinoma also should be considered in 
Ulcer excision
Antrectomy
Pauchet procedure
Kelling-Madlener
procedure
Subtotal gastrectomy
Roux-en-Y esophagogastrojejunostomy
Csendes procedure
Figure 26-45.  Operations for gastric ulcer. 
[Reproduced with permission from Seymour 
NE: Operations for peptic ulcer and their com-
plications, in Feldman M, Sharschmidt BF, 
Sleisenger MH (eds): Gastrointestinal and Liver 
Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, 
p 702. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
4
1072
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the differential diagnosis of recurrent or refractory peptic ulcer, 
secretory diarrhea, gastric rugal hypertrophy, esophagitis with 
stricture, bleeding or perforated ulcer, familial ulcer, peptic 
ulcer with hypercalcemia, and gastric carcinoid. The majority 
of patients with ZES have been symptomatic for several years 
before definitive diagnosis and, in general, patients with ZES 
and MEN1 are diagnosed in their 20s and 30s, while those with 
sporadic ZES more typically are diagnosed in their 40s and 50s.
ZES is an important part of the differential diagnosis of 
hypergastrinemia (Fig. 26-46). All patients with gastrinoma 
have an elevated gastrin level, and hypergastrinemia in the pres-
ence of elevated BAO strongly suggests gastrinoma. Patients 
with gastrinoma usually have a BAO >15 mEq/h or >5 mEq/h if 
they have had a previous procedure for peptic ulcer. Acid secre-
tory medications should be held for several days before gastrin 
measurement, because acid suppression may falsely elevate gas-
trin levels. Causes of hypergastrinemia can be divided into those 
associated with hyperacidity and those associated with hypo-
acidity (see Fig. 26-46). The diagnosis of ZES is confirmed by 
Elevated serum gastrin
(off PPI + H2RA)
Measure BAO and gastric pH
Secretin stimulation test
BAO > 10 mEq/h
pH <2
BAO low pH >2
Previous GI surgery
•  Vagotomy?
•  Massive SB resection
Atrophic
gastritis
Pernicious
anemia
Renal insuff
No
Yes
Confirm with EGD/Bx
test/treat H. pylori
give B12
Significant elevation in serum
gastrin in response to IV secretin?
G-cell +/or ECL
cell hyperplasia
Loop GJ with antral
alkalinization
Takedown GJ
Or
TV and A
Consider TV
+ antrectomy
Retained antrum on
“duodenal stump”
Resect retained antrum
Or
Convert B2 to B1
Antral
stasis
S/P  
gastrectomy B2
Confirm with EGD + Bx
Consider resection
Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome
Octreotide scan
R/O MEN-1
Figure 26-46.  Algorithm for diagnosis and management of hypergastrinemia. BAO = basal acid output; B1 = Billroth 1; B2 = Billroth 2; 
Bx = biopsy; ECL = enterochromaffin-like; EGD = esophagogastroduodenoscopy; GJ = gastrojejunostomy; H2RA = histamine 2 receptor 
antagonist; insuff = insufficiency; MEN1 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type I; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; R/O = rule out; SB = small 
bowel; S/P = status post; TV = truncal vagotomy; TV and A = truncal vagotomy and antrectomy.
the secretin stimulation test. An IV bolus of secretin (2 U/kg) is 
given and gastrin levels are checked before and after injection. 
An increase in serum gastrin of 200 pg/mL or greater suggests 
the presence of gastrinoma. Patients with gastrinoma should 
have serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels determined 
to rule out MEN1 and, if present, parathyroidectomy should be 
considered before resection of gastrinoma.
About 80% of primary tumors are found in the gastrinoma 
triangle (Fig. 26-47), and many tumors are small (<1 cm), mak-
ing preoperative localization difficult. Transabdominal ultra-
sound is quite specific, but not very sensitive. CT will detect 
most lesions >2 cm in size and MRI is comparable. EUS is more 
sensitive than these other noninvasive imaging tests, but it still 
misses many of the smaller lesions, and may confuse normal 
lymph nodes for gastrinomas. Currently, the preoperative imag-
ing study of choice for gastrinoma is somatostatin receptor scin-
tigraphy (the octreotide scan). When the pretest probability of 
gastrinoma is high, the sensitivity and specificity of this modality 
approach 100%. Gastrinoma cells contain type II somatostatin 
1073
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
receptors that bind the indium-labeled somatostatin analogue 
(octreotide) with high affinity, making imaging with a gamma 
camera possible (Fig. 26-48). Currently, angiographic localiza-
tion studies are infrequently performed for gastrinoma. Both 
diagnostic angiography and transhepatic selective venous sam-
pling of the portal system have been supplanted by selective 
arterial secretin infusion, which helps to localize the tumor as 
inside or outside the gastrinoma triangle.
In this test, an arterial catheter is selectively placed in a 
named vessel supplying the pancreas (e.g., gastroduodenal or 
splenic), and a venous catheter is placed in a hepatic vein. Secre-
tin is injected into the visceral artery and gastrin is sampled in 
the hepatic vein. A significant elevation in hepatic venous gas-
trin indicates that the tumor is supplied by the injected artery. 
This test should be performed if pancreaticoduodenectomy is 
contemplated. Probably the most important means of locating 
gastrinomas is intraoperative exploration.
All patients with sporadic (nonfamilial) gastrinoma 
should be considered for surgical resection and possible cure.
The lesions should be located in 90% of patients, and the large 
majority is cured by extirpation of the gastrinoma(s). A thorough 
intraoperative exploration of the gastrinoma triangle and pan-
creas is essential, but other sites (i.e., liver, stomach, small 
bowel, mesentery, and pelvis) should be evaluated as part of a 
thorough intra-abdominal evaluation to find the primary tumor, 
which is usually solitary and often in the duodenal wall. The 
duodenum and pancreas should be extensively mobilized and 
intraoperative ultrasound should be used. Intraoperative EGD 
with transillumination may be considered. If the tumor can 
not be located, generous longitudinal duodenotomy with 
Figure 26-47.  Gastrinoma triangle. [Reproduced with permission 
from Ritchie WP Jr.: Benign diseases of the stomach and duode-
num, in Ritchie WP, Steele G, Dean RH (eds): General Surgery. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1995, p 128.]
Figure 26-48.  Positive octreotide scan in patient with gastrinoma. 
(Reproduced with permission from Alan Maurer, MD.)
inspection and palpation of the duodenal wall is performed. 
Lymph nodes from the portal, peripancreatic, and celiac drain-
age basins should be sampled. Ablation or resection of hepatic 
metastases should be considered.
The management of gastrinoma in patients with MEN I is 
controversial because the patients are often not cured by opera-
tion, and the tumors tend to be small and multiple. If the tumor 
can be imaged preoperatively, operation by an experienced gas-
trinoma surgeon is reasonable.
Acid hypersecretion in patients with gastrinoma can 
always be managed with high-dose PPIs. Highly selective 
vagotomy may make management easier in some patients and 
should be considered in those with surgically untreatable or 
unresectable gastrinoma. Gastrectomy for ZES is no longer 
indicated.
GASTRITIS AND STRESS ULCER
Pathogenesis and Prevention
Gastritis is mucosal inflammation. The gross endoscopic diag-
nosis of gastritis correlates poorly with histologic findings, and 
is thus relatively useless as a diagnosis without confirmatory 
biopsy. Additionally, there is poor correlation between symp-
toms and histologic gastritis. The most common cause of gastritis 
is H. pylori. Other causes of gastritis include alcohol, NSAIDs, 
Crohn’s disease, tuberculosis, and bile reflux (primary or second-
ary). These agents cause injury by a variety of different mecha-
nisms. In general, the infectious and inflammatory causes result in 
immune cell infiltration and cytokine production which damage 
mucosal cells. The chemical agents (alcohol, aspirin, and bile)
generally work to disrupt the mucosal barrier, allowing mucosal 
damage by back diffusion of luminal hydrogen ions.
1074
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Stress gastritis is a peculiar entity that has all but disap-
peared from the clinical (if not endoscopic) lexicon, largely due 
to better critical care and acid suppression or cytoprotective 
agents (e.g., sucralfate) in the intensive care unit (ICU). Stress 
gastritis and stress ulcer are probably due to inadequate gastric 
mucosal blood flow during periods of intense physiologic stress. 
Adequate mucosal blood flow is important to maintain the 
mucosal barrier, and to buffer any back-diffused hydrogen ions. 
When blood flow is inadequate, these processes fail and muco-
sal breakdown occurs. Modern intensive care, with emphasis 
on adequate tissue perfusion and oxygenation, has undoubtedly 
decreased the severity of gastric mucosal injury seen in the ICU 
today. Although it is still common to see small mucosal ero-
sions when performing upper endoscopy in the ICU, it is rare 
for these lesions to coalesce into the larger bleeding erosions 
that plagued the ICU patient 30 to 50 years ago. The rationale 
for routine acid suppression in the ICU, supported by excellent 
data from clinical trials and the laboratory, is that less mucosal 
injury will be caused in the potentially weakened gastric mucosa 
if there is less luminal acid.80,81 There are some studies suggest-
ing that routine acid suppression leads to overgrowth of gastric 
bacteria, which increases the incidence and/or severity of aspi-
ration pneumonia in the ICU. Nevertheless, acid suppression, 
particularly in the severely ill patient, remains an important part 
of clinical pathways in most ICUs.82 In the extraordinarily rare 
patient requiring operation today for hemorrhagic stress gastri-
tis, the surgical options include V + D with oversewing of the 
major bleeding lesions, or near total gastrectomy. Angiographic 
embolization and endoscopic hemostatic treatment should be 
considered as well.
MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS OF THE STOMACH
The three most common primary malignant gastric neoplasms 
are adenocarcinoma (95%), lymphoma (4%), and malignant 
GIST (1%) (Table 26-14). Other rare primary malignancies 
Table 26-14 
Frequency of gastric tumors
Tumor Type
No. of Cases
Percent
Malignant tumors
4199
93.0
  Carcinoma
3970
87.9
  Lymphoma
136
3.0
  Leiomyosarcoma
77
1.7
  Carcinoid
11
0.3
  Others
5
0.1
Benign tumors
315
7.0
  Polyp
140
3.1
  Leiomyoma
92
2.0
  Inflammatory lesions
30
0.7
  Heterotopic pancreas
20
0.4
  Others
33
0.8
Source: Modified with permission from Ming S-C (ed): Tumors of the 
Esophagus and Stomach, AFIP Atlas of Tumor Pathology, Second  
Series, Fascicle 7. Washington DC: American Registry of Pathology, 
1973, p 82, Table VI.
include carcinoid, angiosarcoma, carcinosarcoma, and squa-
mous cell carcinoma. Occasionally the stomach is the site of 
hematogenous metastasis from other sites (e.g., melanoma 
or breast). More commonly, malignant tumors from adjacent 
organs invade the stomach by direct extension (e.g., colon or 
pancreas) or by peritoneal seeding (e.g., ovary).
Adenocarcinoma
Epidemiology.  Globally, gastric cancer is the fourth most 
common cancer type and the second leading cause of cancer 
death. Over the past several decades, there has been a dramatic 
decrease in the gastric cancer incidence and death rate in most 
Western industrialized countries (Fig. 26-49). This decrease has 
been largely in the so-called intestinal form rather than in the 
diffuse form of gastric cancer. In Asia and Eastern Europe, gas-
tric cancer remains a leading cause of cancer death. In 2012 in 
the United States, there were approximately 21,320 new cases 
of stomach cancer (13,020 in men and 8300 in women), and 
10,540 deaths from this disease (6190 men and 4350 women.83 
The estimated 5-year survival rate is 27%, up from about 15% 
in 1975.
In general, gastric cancer is a disease of the elderly, and it 
is twice as common in blacks as in whites. In younger patients, 
tumors are more often of the diffuse variety and tend to be large, 
aggressive, and more poorly differentiated, sometimes infiltrat-
ing the entire stomach (linitis plastic). Gastric cancer has a 
higher incidence in groups of lower socioeconomic status.
Etiology.  Gastric cancer is more common in patients with per-
nicious anemia, blood group A, or a family history of gastric 
cancer. When patients migrate from a high-incidence region to 
a low-incidence region, the risk of gastric cancer decreases in 
the subsequent generations born in the new region. This strongly 
suggests an environmental influence on the development of gas-
tric cancer. Environmental factors appear to be more related eti-
ologically to the intestinal form of gastric cancer than the more 
aggressive diffuse form. The commonly accepted risk factors 
for gastric cancer are listed in Table 26-15.
Diet and Drugs  Typically, a starchy diet high in pickled, salted, 
or smoked food is found in many regions of high gastric cancer 
risk. Dietary nitrates have been impugned as a possible cause of 
gastric cancer. Gastric bacteria (more common in the achlorhy-
dric stomach of patients with atrophic gastritis, a risk factor for 
gastric cancer) convert nitrate into nitrite, a proven carcinogen. 
A diet high in fresh fruits and vegetables and rich in vitamin C 
and E has been shown to decrease the population’s risk of gas-
tric cancer. The reduced consumption of nitrate-rich preserved 
foods seen with the growth of refrigeration has been suggested as 
a cause of the dramatic decrease in gastric cancer seen in North 
America and Western Europe over the last century. Tobacco use 
probably increases the risk of stomach cancer, and alcohol use 
probably has no effect. Regular aspirin use may be protective.
Helicobacter pylori 54,84  The risk of gastric cancer in patients 
with chronic H. pylori infection is increased about threefold. 
Compared to uninfected patients, patients with a history of 
gastric ulcer are more likely to develop gastric cancer (inci-
dence ratio 1.8, 95% confidence interval 1.6–2.0), and patients 
with a history of duodenal ulcer are at decreased risk for gas-
tric cancer (incidence ratio 0.6, 95% confidence interval 0.4–
0.7). As diagrammed in Fig. 26-50, this may be due to the 
fact that some patients develop antral-predominant disease 
(predisposing to duodenal ulcer and somehow protecting against 
1075
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
gastric cancer), while other patients develop corpus-predom-
inant gastritis, resulting in hypochlorhydria and somehow 
predisposing to gastric ulcer and gastric cancer.85 The theo-
retical sequence for development of gastric adenocarcinoma 
is diagrammed in Fig. 26-51.54,85 Recently, it has been dem-
onstrated that bone marrow-derived stem cells play a key role 
in the pathogenesis of gastric adenocarcinoma in patients with 
chronic H. pylori infection.54 However, it must be recognized 
that gastric adenocarcinoma is a multifactorial disease. Not all 
patients with gastric cancer have H. pylori, and there are some 
geographic areas with a high prevalence of chronic H. pylori infec-
tion and a low prevalence of gastric cancer (the “African enigma”). 
United States (1991)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Australia (1992)
Canada (1992)
France (1992)
Sweden (1992)
Greece (1993)
Mexico (1992)
Hong Kong (1993)
Finland (1993)
United Kingdom (1992)
Germany (1993)
Spain (1991)
Mauritius (1993)
Austria (1993)
Czech Republic (1993)
Italy (1991)
Singapore (1992)
Poland (1993)
Portugal (1993)
Hungary (1993)
Japan (1993)
China, Rural (1992)
Russian Federation (1993)
Costa Rica (1991)
Age-standardized death rates for stomach cancer per 100,00 population
Female
Male
Figure 26-49.  Death rates for gastric 
cancer in different countries. [Repro-
duced with permission from Ming S-C, 
Hirota T: Malignant epithelial tumors 
of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman 
H (eds): Pathology of the Gastrointes-
tinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams 
& Wilkins, 1998, p 607.]
Table 26-15 
Factors increasing or decreasing the risk of gastric cancer
Increase risk
  Family history
  Diet (high in nitrates, salt, fat)
  Familial polyposis
  Gastric adenomas
  Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
  Helicobacter pylori infection
    Atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia
  Previous gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy (>10 y ago)
  Tobacco use
  Ménétrier’s disease
Decrease risk
  Aspirin
  Diet (high fresh fruit and vegetable intake)
  Vitamin C
Finally, H. pylori-infected patients seem to be at decreased 
risk for the development of adenocarcinoma of the distal 
esophagus and cardia region.86 Perhaps the corporeal gastritis 
decreases acid secretion, creating a less damaging refluxate 
and thus reducing the risk for Barrett’s esophagus, the precur-
sor lesion for these tumors.
Epstein-Barr Virus  About 10% of gastric adenocarcinomas 
carry the EBV virus. Recently it has been suggested that EBV 
infection is a rather late step in gastric carcinogenesis, since 
EBV transcripts are present in cancer cells but not in the meta-
plastic cells of precursor epithelium.87
Genetic Factors  A variety of genetic abnormalities have been 
described in gastric cancer (Table 26-16). Most gastric cancers 
are aneuploid. The most common genetic abnormalities in spo-
radic gastric cancer affect the p53 and COX-2 genes. Over two 
thirds of gastric cancers have deletion or suppression of the 
important tumor-suppressor gene p53. Additionally, approxi-
mately the same proportion have overexpression of COX-2. In 
the colon, tumors with upregulation of this gene have suppressed 
apoptosis, more angiogenesis, and higher metastatic potential. 
Gastric tumors that overexpress COX-2 are more aggressive 
tumors. Recently, a germline mutation in the CDH1 gene encod-
ing E-cadherin was shown to be associated with hereditary dif-
fuse gastric cancer. Prophylactic total gastrectomy should be 
considered in patients with these mutations.88
Recently the role of microRNA abnormalities in gastric 
cancer have received attention. These are small short sequence 
molecules (18 to 25 nucleotides) which inhibit the translation or 
promote the degradation of messenger RNA with complemen-
tary sequences. MicroRNAs are important regulators of gene 
expression, and abnormalities in microRNA have been identi-
fied in gastric cancer which effect the cell cycle, apoptosis, and 
cellular invasiveness and/or metastatic potential.89 It is likely 
1076
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
microRNA will have increasing diagnostic, therapeutic, and 
prognostic significance in gastric cancer as well as other tumors.
Premalignant Conditions of the Stomach  Figure 26-52 shows 
the prevalence of some premalignant conditions associated with 
the development of early gastric cancer in a series of 1900 cases 
from Tokyo. By far the most common precancerous lesion is 
atrophic gastritis. There is a growing appreciation of the impor-
tant influence of the chronic inflammatory milieu on the genome 
of mucosal cells. Chronic inflammation leads to both genetic 
and epigenetic changes in mucosal cells which in the stomach 
leads to the development of gastritis associated cancer.90
Polyps  Benign gastric polyps are classified as neoplastic (ade-
noma and fundic gland polyps) or nonneoplastic (hyperplastic 
polyp, inflammatory polyp, hamartomatous polyp).90A In gen-
eral, inflammatory and hamartomatous polyps have little or no 
malignant potential. Fundic gland polyps, commonly seen in 
patients on long term proton pump inhibitor therapy, are not pre-
malignant but in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, 
dysplasia in these lesions is not uncommon. Hyperplastic pol-
yps usually occur in the setting of chronic inflammation. Large 
hyperplastic polyps (>2cm) may harbor dysplasia or carcinoma 
in situ, and gastric cancer may develop remote from the hyper-
plastic polyp in an area of associated chronic inflammation. 
Gastric adenomas are premalignant, similar to colon adenomas. 
Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) have a high 
prevalence of gastric adenomatous polyps (about 50%), and are 
Host: low acid secretor
Host: high acid secretor
Cancer
DU
Normal
corpus
Antral
gastrin
Impaired
corpus
function
Antral
gastrin
Corpus
gastritis
Antral
gastritis
Minimal
corpus
gastritis
Predominant
antral
gastritis
Acid
Acid
Figure 26-50.  Helicobacter and gastritis, and the 
pathogenesis of duodenal ulcer (DU) or gastric 
cancer. [Reproduced with permission from Leung 
WK, Ng EKW, Sung JJY: Tumors of the stomach, in 
Yamada T, et al (eds): Textbook of Gastroenterol-
ogy, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & 
Wilkins, 2003, p 1416.]
Normal
Dysplasia
Cancer
Intestinal metaplasia
Atrophic gastritis
Chronic superficial gastritis
H. pylori
Diet low in vitamin C, E
High-salt diet
Figure 26-51.  Gastric carcinogenesis. [Reproduced 
with permission from Leung WK, Ng EKW, Sung JJY: 
Tumors of the stomach, in Yamada T, et al (eds): Text-
book of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
pincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003, p 1416.]
1077
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Table 26-16 
Genetic abnormalities in gastric cancer
Abnormalities
Gene
Approximate 
Frequency %
Deletion/suppression
p53
FHIT
APC
DCC
E-cadherin
60–70
60
50
50
<5
Amplification/
overexpression
COX-2
HGF/SF
VEGF
c-met
AIB-1
β-catenin
k-sam
ras
c-erb B-2
70
60
50
45
40
25
20
10–15
5–7
Microsatellite instability
25–40
DNA aneuploidy
60–75
Source: Reproduced with permission from Koh TJ, Wang TC: Tumors 
of the stomach, in Feldman M et al (eds): Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gas-
trointestinal and Liver Diseases, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1900 Cases
Precancerous
lesion
Number of cases
Hyperplastic
polyp
Adenoma
Chronic ulcer
Atrophic
gastritis
Verrucous
gastritis
Stomach
remnant
Aberrant
pancreas
10
47
13
1802
26
2
0
Total 1900
0.53
2.47
0.68
94.84
1.37
0.11
0
100
N.C.C.H., Tokyo April 1988
%
Figure 26-52.  Precancerous lesions of the stomach. [Reproduced 
with permission from Ming S-C, Hirota T: Malignant epithelial 
tumors of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman H (eds): Pathol-
ogy of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1998, p 607.]
10 times more likely to develop adenocarcinoma of the stomach 
than the general population.91 Screening EGD is indicated in 
these families. Patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer may also be at risk for gastric cancer.92
Gastric polyps greater than 1cm should be removed to 
confirm the diagnosis and to eliminate any risk of malignant 
degeneration. Patients with gastric adenomatous polyps and 
FAP should have periodic upper endoscopy, which may also 
be considered in selected patients with hyperplastic polyps and 
chronic gastric inflammation.
Atrophic Gastritis  Chronic atrophic gastritis (Fig. 26-53) is by 
far the most common precursor for gastric cancer, particularly 
the intestinal subtype (see Fig. 26-52). The prevalence of atro-
phic gastritis is higher in older age groups, but it is also com-
mon in younger people in areas with a high incidence of gastric 
cancer. In many patients, it is likely that H. pylori is involved 
in the pathogenesis of atrophic gastritis. Correa described three 
distinct patterns of chronic atrophic gastritis: autoimmune 
(involves the acid-secreting proximal stomach), hypersecretory 
(involving the distal stomach), and environmental (involving 
multiple random areas at the junction of the oxyntic and antral 
mucosa).84
Intestinal Metaplasia  Gastric carcinoma often occurs in an 
area of intestinal metaplasia. Furthermore, an individual’s risk of 
gastric cancer is proportional to the extent of intestinal metapla-
sia of the gastric mucosa. These observations strongly suggest 
that intestinal metaplasia is a precursor lesion to gastric cancer. 
There are different pathologic subtypes of intestinal metaplasia 
in the stomach, based upon the histologic and biochemical char-
acteristics of the changed mucosal glands. In the complete type 
of intestinal metaplasia, the glands are completely lined with 
goblet cells and intestinal absorptive cells (Fig. 26-54). These 
cells are indistinguishable histologically and biochemically 
from their small bowel counterparts, and are not seen in the 
normal stomach. There is evidence that eradication of H. pylori 
infection leads to significant regression of intestinal metaplasia 
and improvement in atrophic gastritis. Therefore, treatment of 
H. pylori infection is a reasonable recommendation for patients 
with these pathologic diagnoses and H. pylori infection.
Figure 26-53.  Chronic atrophic gastritis. (Reproduced with per-
mission from http://www.epathologies.)
1078
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Benign Gastric Ulcer  Although once considered a premalignant 
condition, it is likely that the older literature was confounded 
by mistakenly labeling inadequately biopsied ulcers and heal-
ing ulcers as “benign,” when, in fact, they were malignant to 
begin with. It is now generally recognized that all gastric ulcers 
are cancer until proven otherwise with adequate biopsy and 
follow-up. Even today, carcinomas are occasionally found when 
adequately biopsied “benign” ulcers are resected for nonheal-
ing. It is more than likely that the factors previously discussed 
are more significant etiologically in the development of gastric 
cancer than the history of a benign gastric ulcer.
Gastric Remnant Cancer  It has long been recognized that stom-
ach cancer can develop in the gastric remnant, usually years fol-
lowing distal gastrectomy for PUD. The risk is controversial, 
but the phenomenon is real. Most tumors develop >10 years fol-
lowing the initial operation, and they usually arise in an area of 
chronic gastritis, metaplasia, and dysplasia. This is often near the 
stoma, but many of these tumors are quite large at presentation, 
and are equally divided between intestinal and diffuse subtypes. 
Most cases have been reported following Billroth II gastroen-
terostomy, but there also have been cases following Billroth I 
gastroduodenostomy. Whether simple loop gastrojejunostomy 
increases a patient’s risk of gastric cancer, and whether a Roux-
en-Y anastomosis following gastric resection lowers their risk of 
gastric cancer is unknown. Stage for stage, the prognosis for gas-
tric stump cancer is similar to proximal gastric cancer.93
Other Premalignant States  A mutated E-cadherin gene is 
associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Prophylactic 
total gastrectomy should be considered.88 Obviously, a myriad 
of genetic and environmental factors will affect members of the 
same family, and up to 10% of gastric cancer cases appear to 
be familial without a clear-cut genetic diagnosis. First-degree 
relatives of patients with gastric cancer have a two- to threefold 
increased risk of developing the disease. Patients with hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer have a 10% risk of developing 
gastric cancer, predominantly the intestinal subtype. The mucous 
cell hyperplasia of Ménétrier’s disease is generally considered to 
carry a 5% to 10% risk of adenocarcinoma. Periodic surveillance 
EGD is prudent in all the above conditions. The glandular 
hyperplasia associated with gastrinoma is not premalignant, but 
ECL hyperplasia and/or carcinoid tumors can occur.
Figure 26-54.  Complete intestinal metaplasia of the stomach. Note 
intestinal type crypts lined with goblet cells and intestinal absorp-
tive cells. [Reproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Hirota T: 
Malignant epithelial tumors of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman 
H (eds): Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1998, p 607.]
Pathology
Dysplasia  It is generally accepted that gastric dysplasia is the 
universal precursor to gastric adenocarcinoma. Patients with 
severe dysplasia should be considered for gastric resection if the 
abnormality is widespread or multifocal, or EMR if the severe 
dysplasia is localized. Patients with mild dysplasia should be 
followed with endoscopic biopsy surveillance, and Helicobacter 
eradication.
Early Gastric Cancer  Early gastric cancer is defined as adeno-
carcinoma limited to the mucosa and submucosa of the stom-
ach, regardless of lymph node status. The entity is common in 
the Orient, where gastric cancer is a common cause of cancer 
death, and where aggressive surveillance programs have there-
fore been established. Approximately 10% of patients with early 
gastric cancer will have lymph node metastases. There are sev-
eral types and subtypes of early gastric cancer (Table 26-17 and 
Fig. 26-55). Approximately 70% of early gastric cancers are 
well differentiated, and 30% are poorly differentiated. The over-
all cure rate with adequate gastric resection and lymphad-
enectomy is 95%. In some Japanese centers, 50% of the 
gastric cancers treated are early gastric cancer. In the United 
States, less than 20% of resected gastric adenocarcinomas are 
early gastric cancer. Small intramucosal lesions can be treated 
with EMR.94
Gross Morphology and Histologic Subtypes  There are four 
gross forms of gastric cancer: polypoid, fungating, ulcerative, 
and scirrhous. In the first two, the bulk of the tumor mass is 
intraluminal. Polypoid tumors are not ulcerated; fungating 
tumors are elevated intraluminally, but also ulcerated. In the 
latter two gross subtypes, the bulk of the tumor mass is in the 
wall of the stomach. Ulcerative tumors are self-descriptive; 
scirrhous tumors infiltrate the entire thickness of the stomach 
and cover a very large surface area. Scirrhous tumors (linitis 
plastica) have a particularly poor prognosis, and commonly 
involve the entire stomach. Although these latter lesions may 
be technically resectable with total gastrectomy, it is common 
for both the esophageal and duodenal margins of resection to 
show microscopic evidence of tumor infiltration, and death from 
recurrent disease within 6 months is common. Palliative chemo-
therapy may prolong median survival94A.
Table 26-17 
Macroscopic types of superficial gastric cancer
Type 0-I 
(protruding)*
Polypoid tumors
Type 0-II 
(superficial)
Tumors with or without minimal elevation 
or depression relative to the surrounding 
mucosa.
  Type 0-IIa
Slightly elevated tumors. (superficial 
elevated)
  Type 0-IIb
Tumors without elevation or depression. 
(superficial flat)
  Type 0-IIc
Slightly depressed tumors. (superficial 
depressed) 
Type 0-III 
(excavated)
Tumors with deep depression
*Tumors with less than 3-mm elevation are usually classified as –IIa, 
with more elevated tumors being classified as 0-I.
5
1079
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
The location of the primary tumor in the stomach is impor-
tant in planning the operation. Several decades ago, the large 
majority of gastric cancers were in the distal stomach. Recently, 
there has been a proximal migration of tumors, so that currently, 
the distribution is closer to 40% distal, 30% middle, and 30% 
proximal.
Histology  The most important prognostic indicators in gastric 
cancer are both histologic: lymph node involvement and depth 
of tumor invasion. Tumor grade (degree of differentiation: well, 
moderately, or poorly) is also important prognostically.
There are several histologic classifications of gastric can-
cer. The World Health Organization recognizes several histologic 
types (Table 26-18). The Japanese classification is similar but 
more detailed. The commonly used Lauren classification separates 
gastric cancers into intestinal type (53%), diffuse type (33%), and 
unclassified (14%). The intestinal type is associated with chronic 
atrophic gastritis, severe intestinal metaplasia, and dysplasia, and 
tends to be less aggressive than the diffuse type. The diffuse type 
of gastric cancer is more likely to be poorly differentiated and is 
associated with younger patients and proximal tumors. The Ming 
classification also is useful and easy to remember, with only two 
types—expanding (67%) and infiltrative (33%).
Recently, the significance of human epidermal growth 
factor receptor-2 (HER2) was reported in patients with gastric 
cancer. In breast cancer, overexpression of HER2 has been 
reported in 15% to 25% and is well recognized as one of the 
unfavorable prognostic factors. However, the development of 
molecular targeted agents such as trastuzumab has improved 
the survival of HER2 positive patients. Likewise, recently in 
Type IIa
Type I
Type IIB
Type IIc
Type III
Excavated
Depressed
Flat
Elevated
Protruded
Figure 26-55.  Pathologic types of early gastric cancer. [Repro-
duced with permission from Fenoglio-Preiser CM et al: Pathologic 
and phenotypic features of gastric cancer. Semin Oncol. 23(3):292, 
1996. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Table 26-18 
World Health Organization histologic typing of gastric 
cancer
Adenocarcinoma
  Papillary adenocarcinoma
  Tubular adenocarcinoma
  Mucinous adenocarcinoma
  Signet-ring cell carcinoma
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Small cell carcinoma
Undifferentiated carcinoma
Others
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Hirota T: Malig-
nant epithelial tumors of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman H (eds): 
Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1998.
gastric cancer, HER2 overexpression has been reported in 13% 
to 30% of patients. According to the result of large clinical trial, 
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of HER2 has become the 
important examination for recurrent or metastatic gastric cancer 
to decide the treatment strategy.94B
Pathologic Staging  Ultimately, prognosis is related to patho-
logic stage. The most widespread system for staging of gas-
tric cancer is the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system 
based on depth of tumor invasion, extent of lymph node metas-
tases, and presence of distant metastases. This system was 
developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and the 
International Union Against Cancer, and has under gone several 
modifications since it was originally conceived (Table 26-19).
Clinical Manifestations.  Most patients who are diagnosed 
with gastric cancer in the United States have advanced stage III 
or IV disease at the time of diagnosis. The most common symp-
toms are weight loss and decreased food intake due to anorexia 
and early satiety. Abdominal pain (usually not severe and often 
ignored) also is common. Other symptoms include nausea, 
vomiting, and bloating. Acute GI bleeding is somewhat unusual 
(5%), but chronic occult blood loss is common and manifests as 
iron deficiency anemia and heme-positive stool. Dysphagia is 
common if the tumor involves the cardia of the stomach. Para-
neoplastic syndromes such as Trousseau’s syndrome (thrombo-
phlebitis), acanthosis nigricans (hyperpigmentation of the axilla 
and groin), or peripheral neuropathy are rarely present.
Physical examination typically is normal. Other than signs 
of weight loss, specific physical findings usually indicate incur-
ability. A focused examination in a patient in whom gastric can-
cer is a likely part of the differential diagnosis should include 
an examination of the neck, chest, abdomen, rectum, and pelvis. 
Cervical, supraclavicular (on the left referred to as Virchow’s 
node), and axillary lymph nodes may be enlarged, and today 
can be sampled in the office with fine-needle aspiration cytol-
ogy. There may be a metastatic pleural effusion, or aspiration 
pneumonitis in a patient with vomiting and/or obstruction. An 
abdominal mass could indicate a large (usually T4 incurable) 
primary tumor, liver metastases, or carcinomatosis (including 
Krukenberg’s tumor of the ovary). A palpable umbilical nodule 
(Sister Joseph’s nodule) is pathognomonic of advanced disease, 
or there may be evidence on exam of malignant ascites. Rec-
tal exam may reveal heme-positive stool and hard nodularity 
1080
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 26-19 
TNM classification of tumors of the stomach
T: Primary tumor
T0
Tis
T1
T1a
T1b
T2
T3
T4
T4a
T4b
No evidence of primary tumor
Carcinoma in situ; intraepithelial tumor without 
invasion of the lamina propria, high-grade 
dysplasia
Tumor invades lamina propria, muscularis 
mucosae, or submucosa
Tumor invades lamina propria or muscularis 
mucosae
Tumor invades submucosa
Tumor invades muscularispropria
Tumor invades subserosa
Tumor perforates serosa or invades adjacent 
structures
Tumor perforates serosa
Tumor invades adjacent structures
N: Regional lymph nodes
N0
N1
N2
N3
N3a
N3b
No regional lymph-node metastasis
Metastasis in 1 to 2 regional lymph nodes
Metastasis in 3 to 6 regional lymph nodes
Metastasis in 7 or more regional lymph nodes
Metastasis in 7 to 15 regional lymph nodes
Metastasis in 16 or more regional lymph nodes
M: Distant metastasis
M0
No distant metastasis
M1
Distant metastasis
Stage grouping
Stage
T
N
M
Stage 0
Tis
N0
M0
Stage IA
T1
N0
M0
Stage IB
T2
N0
M0
T1
N1
M0
Stage IIA
T3
N0
M0
T2
N1
M0
T1
N2
M0
Stage IIB
T4a
N0
M0
T3
N1
M0
T2
N2
M0
T1
N3
M0
Stage IIIA
T4a
N1
M0
T3
N2
M0
T2
N3
M0
Stage IIIC
T4a
N3
M0
T4b
N2, 3
M0
Stage IV
AnyT
AnyN
M1
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Commission on 
Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is 
the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by 
Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.
extraluminally and anteriorly, indicating so-called drop metas-
tases, or rectal shelf of Blumer in the pouch of Douglas.
Diagnostic Evaluation.  Distinguishing between peptic ulcer 
and gastric cancer on clinical grounds alone is usually impos-
sible. Patients over the age of 45 years old who have new-onset 
dyspepsia, as well as all patients with dyspepsia and alarm symp-
toms (weight loss, recurrent vomiting, dysphagia, evidence of GI 
bleeding, or anemia) or with a family history of gastric cancer 
should have prompt upper endoscopy and biopsy if a mucosal 
lesion is noted. Essentially, all patients in whom gastric cancer 
is part of the differential diagnosis should have endoscopy and 
biopsy. If suspicion for cancer is high and the biopsy is negative, 
the patient should be re-endoscoped and more aggressively biop-
sied. In some patients with gastric tumors, upper GI series can be 
helpful in planning treatment. Although a good double-contrast 
barium upper GI examination is sensitive for gastric tumors (up to 
75% sensitive), in most centers, endoscopy has become the gold 
standard for the diagnosis of gastric malignancy.
In addition, recent advances in endoscopy have contributed 
to the earlier diagnosis of gastric cancer. Magnifying endoscopy 
with narrow-band imaging (NBI) has undergone technological 
improvements and can observe the microvascular architecture 
of the mucosa and microsurface pattern of the lesion. Magnify-
ing endoscopy with NBI has been reported to be accurate and 
reliable in the diagnosis of early gastric cancer.94C Furthermore, 
endocytoscopy, a technique allowing microscopic visualization 
of the mucosal surface, has been developed and has the poten-
tial for pathological diagnosis.94D Another diagnostic innovation 
is virtual endoscopy which is an imaging examination of the 
gastrointestinal tract reconstructed by multidetector-row com-
puted tomography. The image of virtual endoscopy is now quite 
similar to that of upper endoscopy. In the near future, this novel 
technology may play a role in the screening of the stomach.
Preoperative staging of gastric cancer is best accomplished 
with abdominal/pelvic CT scanning with IV and oral contrast. 
MRI is probably comparable. The best way to stage the tumor 
locally is via EUS, which gives fairly accurate (80%) information 
about the depth of tumor penetration into the gastric wall, and 
can usually show enlarged (>5 mm) perigastric and celiac lymph 
nodes. In some centers, if the tumor is transmural (T3) or involves 
lymph nodes (enlarged nodes can usually be needled under endo-
scopic ultrasound guidance), preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemo-
therapy is given. However, there are limitations to tumor staging 
with EUS. It largely is operator dependent and may underestimate 
lymph node involvement because normal-sized nodes (<5 mm) 
can harbor metastases. EUS is most accurate in distinguishing 
early gastric cancer (T1) from more advanced tumors.
Positron Emission Tomography Scanning  Whole-body PET 
scanning uses the principle that tumor cells preferentially 
accumulate positron-emitting 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose. This 
modality is most useful in the evaluation of distant metastasis 
in gastric cancer but can also be useful in locoregional staging. 
PET scan is accurate when combined with spiral CT (PET-CT)95 
and should be considered before major surgery in patients with 
particularly high-risk tumors or multiple medical comorbidities.
Staging Laparoscopy and Peritoneal Cytology  To some 
extent, the usefulness of these modalities depends on the indi-
vidual patient’s situation as well as the treatment philosophy 
of the cancer team. The fundamental question is “will it make 
a difference to this patient’s management?” Patients with gas-
tric cancer who undergo R0 resection (i.e., no gross residual 
1081
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
disease) and are found to have positive peritoneal cytology (no 
gross carcinomatosis) have a much worse prognosis than the 
cytology negative group (median survival 14.8 months vs. 98.5 
months).96 It is controversial how much this information adds 
prognostically to that of pathologic staging (TNM). Whether 
this poor prognosis can be improved postresection with 
aggressive adjuvant treatment (systemic, or local intraperito-
neal hyperthermic chemotherapy) is unknown. Unfortunately, 
it is also unclear how much these patients benefit from gastric 
resection. Currently peritoneal cytology information is unlikely 
to change the treatment of patients with gastric cancer, and 
most patients without detectable distant metastases will have 
(and should have) gastric resection regardless of the peritoneal 
cytology results. A quick laparoscopic examination can occa-
sionally reveal small peritoneal implants or liver metastases that 
were not detected on preoperative imaging studies and, in some 
patients (e.g., high risk for surgery or impressive carcinomato-
sis), this will change the operative plan and avoid a major but 
futile surgical procedure. Laparoscopy may be most useful in 
patients with proximal tumors or with adenopathy on spiral CT 
scan.97 An extensive laparoscopic staging procedure, although 
quite accurate, has not been widely adopted.
Treatment.  Surgical resection is the only curative treatment 
for gastric cancer98,99 and most patients with clinically resect-
able locoregional disease should have gastric resection. Obvious 
exceptions include patients who cannot tolerate an abdominal 
operation, and patients with overwhelming metastatic disease.
The goal of curative surgical treatment is resection of all 
tumor (i.e., R0 resection). Thus, all margins (proximal, distal, 
and radial) should be negative and an adequate lymphadenec-
tomy performed. Generally, the surgeon strives for a grossly 
negative margin of at least 5 cm. Some gastric tumors, particu-
larly the diffuse variety, are quite infiltrative and tumor cells 
can extend well beyond the tumor mass; thus, gross margins 
beyond 5 cm may be desirable. Frozen section confirmation of 
negative margins is important when performing operation for 
cure, but it is less important in patients with nodal metastases 
beyond the N1 nodal basin. It should be strongly emphasized 
that many patients with positive lymph nodes are cured by 
adequate surgery. It should also be stressed that often lymph 
nodes that appear to be grossly involved with tumor turn out to 
be benign or reactive on pathologic examination. More than 
15 resected lymph nodes are required for adequate staging.100 
Therapeutic nihilism should be avoided and, in the low-risk 
patient, an aggressive attempt to resect all tumor should be 
made. The primary tumor may be resected en bloc with adja-
cent involved organs (e.g., distal pancreas, transverse colon, or 
spleen) during the course of curative gastrectomy. Palliative 
gastrectomy may be indicated in some patients with obviously 
incurable disease, but most patients presenting with stage IV 
gastric cancer can be managed without major operation.99,101
Extent of Gastrectomy  The standard operation for gastric can-
cer is radical subtotal gastrectomy. Unless required for R0 resec-
tion, total gastrectomy confers no additional survival benefit and 
may have adverse nutritional or quality-of-life consequences, 
and higher peri-operative morbidity and mortality.98,99 Subtotal 
gastric resection typically entails ligation of the left and right 
gastric and gastroepiploic arteries at the origin, as well as the 
en bloc removal of the distal 75% of the stomach, including the 
pylorus and 2 cm of duodenum, the greater and lesser omentum, 
and all associated lymphatic tissue (Fig. 26-56). Reconstruction 
Gastroepiploic
vs.
A
B
Duodenum
Transverse 
colon
Tumor
Liver
Stomach
Stomach
Jejunum
Transverse
 colon
Pancreas
Figure 26-56.  A and B. Radical subtotal gastrectomy. vs. = vessels. 
[Reproduced with permission from Daly JM, Cady B, Low DW 
(eds): Atlas of Surgical Oncology. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 
1993, p 231. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
is usually by Billroth II gastrojejunostomy, but if a small gastric 
remnant is left, a Roux-en-Y reconstruction is considered. In 
East Asia especially in Japan, Billroth-I gastroduodenostomy 
was usually performed after distal gastrectomy. Billroth-I gas-
troduodenostomy consists of one anastomosis (which is usually 
straightforward and keeps the duodenum in the food stream). In 
the United States, traditional surgical teaching eschews gastro-
duodenostomy following gastric cancer resection because of the 
possibility of anastomotic recurrence and obstruction. The oper-
ative mortality is around 2% to 5%. Radical subtotal gastrec-
tomy is generally deemed to be an adequate cancer operation in 
most Western countries, provided that tumor-free margins are 
obtained, >15 lymph nodes are removed, and all gross tumor is 
resected. In the absence of involvement by direct extension, the 
spleen and pancreatic tail are not removed.
Total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy 
may be required for R0 resection (Fig. 26-57), and may be the 
best operation for patients with proximal gastric adenocarcinoma. 
The construction of a jejunal pouch can be beneficial nutrition-
ally, particularly for those patients with a good prognosis.102 
1082
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Proximal subtotal gastric resection, a technically feasible alter-
native to total gastrectomy for some proximal gastric tumors, 
requires an esophagogastrostomy to a vagotomized distal gastric 
remnant, and the functional outcome is poor. Pyloroplasty in this 
setting virtually guarantees bile esophagitis, and if the pylorus 
is left intact, gastric emptying may be problematic. An isoperi-
staltic jejunal interosition (Henley loop) between the esophagus 
and antrum could be considered an alternative reconstruction, 
but, all things considered, total gastrectomy usually results in 
superior functional, if not oncologic, results for most patients 
with proximal gastric cancer.
Extent of Lymphadenectomy  According to the 3rd edition of 
Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma, lymph node sta-
tions are numbered by anatomical definition. Lymph node stations 
from 1 to 12, and 14V are classified as regional lymph nodes 
and metastasis of any other lymph node is classified as distant 
metastasis (M1) (see Fig. 26-4). According to the type of gas-
trectomy, the definition of extent of lymphadectomy is different. 
D1 lymphadenectomy in distal gastrectomy requires the dissec-
tion of the stations 1, 3, 4sb, 4d, 5, 6, 7. Furthermore, addi-
tional resection of stations 8a, 9, 11p and 12a is needed for D2 
lymphadenectomy. D1 lymphadenectomy in total gastrectomy 
requires dissection of stations 1 through 7 and in D2, from 8a 
to 12a too. The operation described above (radical subtotal gas-
trectomy in the Extent of Gastrectomy section), which is by far 
the most commonly performed procedure in the United States 
for gastric cancer, is called a D1 resection because it removes 
the tumor and the perigastric D1 nodes. The standard opera-
tion for gastric cancer in Asia and specialized U.S. centers is 
60 cm
Figure 26-57.  Reconstruction after total gastrectomy. Jejunal 
pouch (not shown here) should be considered. [Reproduced with 
permission from Zinner MJ (ed): Atlas of Gastric Surgery. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone, 1992, p 167. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
the D2 gastrectomy, which involves a more extensive lymph-
adenectomy (removal of the D1 and D2 nodes). In addition to 
the tissue removed in a D1 resection, the standard D2 gastrec-
tomy removes the peritoneal layer over the anterior mesocolon 
and selectively over the pancreas, along with nodes along the 
hepatic and splenic arteries, and the crural nodes. Splenectomy 
and distal pancreatectomy are not routinely performed, because 
this clearly has been shown to increase the morbidity of the 
operation. The purported survival advantage of D2 gastrec-
tomy in gastric cancer is shown in Table 26-20, which shows 
the 5-year survival rates for gastric cancer stratified by patho-
logic stage for the United States and Japan. Unfortunately, the 
randomized prospective trials that have been performed have 
not confirmed this survival advantage, but the morbidity and 
mortality in the D2 group was higher (Table 26-21).103,104,104A 
This was mostly attributable to the splenectomy and distal pan-
createctomy, which are no longer routinely done as part of the 
D2 gastrectomy in the United States. However, since D2 lymph-
adenectomy in total gastrectomy requires the dissection of sta-
tion 10 which is splenic hilar lymph node as described above, 
splenectomy is recommended to fulfill the criteria of D2. In 
Japan, pancreas-preserving splenectomy is generally performed 
to avoid the severe postoperative complications such as pan-
creas fistula in patients with advanced upper gastric cancer who 
underwent total gastrectomy. Some experts have argued that the 
D2 operation is simply a better staging procedure, and that the 
apparent improved survival with this more extensive dissection 
is simply an epiphenomenon of improved pathologic staging. 
This stage shift suggests that many patients in the U.S. series 
treated with D1 gastrectomy really had metastatic nodes at the 
D2 level that went unresected and undetected. Therefore, in the 
U.S. series, there were patients classified as stage I, who, if they 
had undergone a D2 gastrectomy, would be classified as stage 
II; and there were patients classified as stage II, who, if they 
had undergone a D2 gastrectomy, would be classified as stage 
III. The stage I survival in the United States would then actually 
be closer to the (more accurately staged) stage II survival in 
Japan, because this group includes some patients who really are 
stage II, but the nodes were not found in the D1 resection. All 
experts would agree that to avoid understaging of gastric cancer, 
a minimum of 15 nodes should be resected with the gastrectomy 
specimen. Despite the lack of strong data from RCTs supporting 
a survival advantage of D2 gastrectomy for gastric cancer, this 
Table 26-20 
Gastric cancer 5-year survival and operative mortality 
in the USA and Japan
Maruyama 
(Japan), 
1971–1985
American 
College of 
Surgeons, 
1982–1987
Memorial Sloan 
Kettering, 
1985–1994
No. patients
3176
18,365
675
Stage I
91%
50%
84%
Stage II
72%
29%
61%
Stage III
44%
13%
29%
Stage IV
9%
3%
25%
Operative 
mortality
1%
7%
3%
1083
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
has become standard practice in Asia and has been adopted by 
an increasing number of large Western centers. Reasons for this 
are safety of operation in experienced hands as well as data from 
observational studies and subgroup analysis of RCTs suggesting 
a survival benefit.104B
Chemotherapy and Radiation for Gastric Cancer  In general, 
the actuarial 5-year survival for resected gastric adenocarci-
noma stages I, II, and III is about 75%, 50%, and 25%, respec-
tively. Because most surgical patients have stage II disease or 
greater, it is common to refer gastric cancer patients postopera-
tively to a medical and/or radiation oncologist. Unfortunately, 
the existing data suggest that the incremental survival benefit 
attendant to adjuvant treatment is marginal, particularly in those 
patients who have had an adequate resection.98,99 In one pro-
spective randomized study, adjuvant treatment with chemo-
therapy (5-fluorouracil and leucovorin) and radiation (4500 
cGy) has demonstrated a survival benefit in resected patients 
with stage II and III adenocarcinoma of the stomach.105 Unfor-
tunately, only 10% of patients entered in the study actually had 
D2 gastrectomy, and most (54%) had less than an adequate 
D1 gastrectomy. Because adequacy of lymphadenectomy has 
clearly been shown to impact survival, particularly in patients 
with stage III gastric cancer,99,100 it has been suggested that the 
benefits of adjuvant chemoradiation shown in this study would 
be vitiated by an adequate operation. Recent clinical trials sug-
gest the potential importance of adjuvant chemotherapy after 
D2 lymphadenectomy in patients with advanced gastric cancer. 
These trials compared surgery alone and surgery plus adjuvant 
chemotherapy including oral fluoropyrimidines for curatively 
resected advanced gastric cancer. After D2 lymphadenectomy, 
the benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy has also been established 
and further improvement in prognosis is expected.105A,105B A 
recently published study from the Japan Clinical Oncology 
Group showed a 69% overall 5-year survival rate in patients 
with clinically curable T2b, T3, and T4 gastric cancer, treated 
with D2 gastrectomy alone (no chemotherapy).106 There was 
no incremental benefit from para-aortic lymph node dissection. 
There is no indication for the routine use of radiation alone in 
(D3) the adjuvant setting, but in certain patients, it can be effec-
tive palliation for bleeding or pain. Although the prognosis of 
metastatic or recurrent gastric cancer is poor, systemic chemo-
therapy provides a significant survival benefit over the best sup-
portive care.106A Agents that have shown activity against gastric 
cancer include 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), cisplatin, doxorubicin, 
methotrexate, taxanes, and camptothecin. Until recently, 5-FU 
based chemotherapy especially in combination with platinums 
played a key role in the treatment for the unresectable gastric 
Table 26-21 
Randomized trials comparing D1 and D2 gastrectomy for gastric cancer
Authors
Number of 
Patients
Type of Surgery
Postoperative  
Complications (%)
Postoperative 
Mortality (%)
5-Year Survival (%)
Bonenkamp et al
711
D1
25
4
45
D2
43
10
47
Cuschieri et al
400
D1
28
6.5
35
D2
46
13
33
Source: Data from Bonenkamp JJ, Hermans J, Sasako M, et al: Extended lymph node dissection for gastric cancer. N Engl J Med 340:908, 1999; and  
Cuschieri A, Fayers P, Fielding J, et al: Postoperative morbidity and mortality after D1 and D2 resections for gastric cancer: Preliminary results of the 
MRC randomized controlled surgical trial. The Surgical Cooperative Group. Lancet. 347:995, 1996.
cancer as well as several types of cancer, such as colon and lung. 
In the 1990s, the introduction of novel anticancer agents such 
as camptothecin, taxanes, third-generation platinums, and new 
oral fluoropyrimidines, improved the prognosis of unresectable 
gastric cancer. Recently, although the risk of the toxicities is 
increased, triple combination chemotherapy is associated with 
better prognosis than double agent therapy. In the United States, 
triple chemotherapy consists of 5-FU, cisplatin and docetaxel 
and is now recognized as a standard first-line regimen. In 
Europe, triple therapy is more often epirubicin, cisplatin, and 
5-FU. Sometimes 5-FU may be replaced by capecitabine which 
is an oral fluoropyrimidine, and cisplatin can be replaced by 
oxaliplatin which does not require hydration, respectively. Neo-
adjuvant treatment of gastric adenocarcinoma is being evalu-
ated, particularly in patients with clinical T3 or N1 disease.
It is likely that targeted molecular agents will have an 
increasing role in treating gastric cancer. Recently, Trastuzumab, 
a humanized molecular antibody reactive against the extracel-
lular domain of HER2, increased the effectiveness of cytotoxic 
chemotherapy in patients with advanced gastric cancer.94B Other 
large trials are ongoing. Determination of HER2 gene amplifica-
tion status may have prognostic significance.106B
Endoscopic Resection106C  It has been demonstrated initially at 
numerous East Asian centers that some patients with early gas-
tric cancer can be adequately treated by an endoscopic mucosal 
resection (EMR). EMR is a minimally invasive procedure that 
provides curative resection and has dramatically changed the 
treatment of early gastric cancer. EMR is indicated for patients in 
whom the probability of lymph node metastasis is low. Accord-
ing to the Japanese treatment guidelines for gastric cancer, EMR 
is a standard treatment for differentiated mucosal gastric cancer 
measuring less than 2 cm and without signs of ulceration, which 
has almost no risk of lymph node metastasis. En bloc resection 
is required to evaluate the surgical margin for confirmation of 
curative resection. Furthermore, the development of endoscopic 
submucosal dissection (ESD) allows en bloc resection of larger 
tumors. Therefore, the indications for endoscopic treatment of 
patients with gastric cancer may be broadened. New indications 
for minimally invasive treatment will require evaluation before 
implementation. Small tumors (<3 cm) confined to the mucosa 
have an extremely low chance of lymph node metastasis (3%), 
which approaches the operative mortality rate for gastrectomy. If 
the resected specimen demonstrates no ulceration, no penetration 
of the muscularis mucosae, no lymphatic invasion, and size <3 
cm, then the risk of lymph node metastases is less than 1%. Thus, 
some patients with early gastric cancer might be better treated 
with the endoscopic technique. Currently, this should be limited 
1084
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
to patients with tumors <2 cm in size that are node negative and 
confined to the mucosa on EUS, in the absence of other gastricle-
sions. The addition of laparoscopic lymph node sampling may be 
considered in selected patients.
Prognosis.  The 5-year survival for gastric adenocarcinoma has 
increased from 15% to 22% in the United States over the past 
25 years. Survival is dependent on pathologic stage (TNM stage) 
and degree of tumor differentiation. Other important prognostic 
factors are sex, age, primary gastric tumor site, tumor size, and 
tumor depth.
Palliative gastrectomy may be indicated in some patients 
with obviously incurable disease, but most patients presenting 
with stage IV gastric cancer can be managed without major 
operation.99,101
Screening for Gastric Cancer.  In Japan, it clearly has been 
shown that patients participating in gastric cancer screening pro-
grams have a significantly decreased risk of dying from gastric 
cancer. Thus, screening is effective in a high-risk population. 
Screening the general population in the United States (a low-
risk country) does not make sense, but patients clearly at risk 
for gastric cancer probably should have periodic endoscopy and 
biopsy. This includes patients with familial adenomatous polyp-
osis, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, gastric adeno-
mas, Ménétrier’s disease, intestinal metaplasia or dysplasia, and 
remote gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy.
Gastric Lymphoma
Gastric lymphomas generally account for about 4% of gastric 
malignancies. Over half of patients with non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma have involvement of the GI tract. The stomach is the most 
common site of primary GI lymphoma, and over 95% are non-
Hodgkin’s type. Most are B-cell type, thought to arise in mucosa 
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), although most high-grade 
gastric lymphomas are without any characteristics of the low-
grade MALT neoplasm.107 About half of gastric lymphomas are 
histologically low grade, and about half are high grade. Interest-
ingly, the normal stomach is relatively devoid of lymphoid tissue. 
However, in the setting of chronic gastritis, the stomach acquires 
MALT, which can undergo malignant degeneration. Again, H. 
pylori is thought to be the culprit. In populations with a high inci-
dence of gastric lymphoma, there is a high incidence of H. pylori 
infection; patients with gastric lymphoma also usually have H. 
pylori infection.107A
Low-grade MALT lymphoma, essentially a monoclonal 
proliferation of B cells, presumably arises from a background of 
chronic gastritis associated with H. pylori. These relatively innoc-
uous tumors then undergo degeneration to high-grade lymphoma, 
which is the usual variety seen by the surgeon. Remarkably, 
when the H. pylori is eradicated and the gastritis improves, the 
low-grade MALT lymphoma often disappears. Thus, low-grade 
MALT lymphoma is not a surgical lesion. Careful follow-up is 
necessary particularly in those lesions with a t(11:18) transloca-
tion, thought to be a risk factor for a more aggressive MALT 
lesion. If low-grade lymphoma persists after H. pylori eradication, 
radiation should be considered for disease clinically confined to 
the stomach (stage I), while chemotherapy with or without radia-
tion is used for more advanced lesions (Fig. 26-58).
Patients with high-grade gastric lymphoma require aggres-
sive oncologic treatment for cure and present with many of the 
same symptoms as gastric cancer patients. However, systemic 
symptoms such as fever, weight loss, and night sweats occur in 
about 50% of patients with gastric lymphoma. The tumors may 
bleed and/or obstruct. Lymphadenopathy and/or organomegaly 
suggest systemic disease. Diagnosis is by endoscopy and biopsy. 
Much of the tumor may be submucosal, and an assiduous attempt 
at biopsy is necessary. Primary lymphoma is usually nodular with 
enlarged gastric folds. A diffusely infiltrative process akin to lini-
tis plastica is more suggestive of secondary gastric involvement 
by lymphoma. A diligent search for extragastric disease is neces-
sary before the diagnosis of localized primary gastric lymphoma 
is made. This includes EUS; CT scanning of the chest, abdomen, 
and pelvis; and bone marrow biopsy. Most patients with high-
grade gastric lymphoma are currently treated with chemotherapy 
and radiation, without surgical resection. Treatment-related 
perforation or bleeding is unusual but recognized. For dis-
ease limited to the stomach and regional nodes, radical subtotal 
D2 gastrectomy may be performed, especially for bulky tumors 
with bleeding and/or obstruction. Palliative gastrectomy for 
tumor complications also has a role. Certainly, a multidisciplinary 
team should be involved with the treatment plan for patients with 
primary gastric lymphoma.
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor
GISTs arise from interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) and are distinct 
from leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma, which arise from smooth 
muscle.108,109 Prognosis in patients with GIST tumors depends 
mostly on tumor size and mitotic count, and metastasis, when it 
occurs, is typically by the hematogenous route. Any lesion >1 cm 
can behave in a malignant fashion and may recur. Thus, all GISTs 
are best resected along with a margin of normal tissue. Almost 
all GISTs (and almost no smooth muscle tumors) express c-KIT 
(CD117) or the related PDGF receptor A, as well as CD34; almost 
all smooth muscle tumors (and almost no GISTs) express actin 
and desmin. These markers can often be detected on specimens 
obtained by fine-needle aspiration110 and are useful in differentiat-
ing between GIST and smooth muscle tumor histopathologically. 
Lesions that are definitively leiomyoma by current histopathologic 
criteria are adequately treated by enucleation. Lesions that are 
definitively GIST or leiomyosarcoma are best treated by resection 
with negative margins. Most equivocal lesions should be resected 
provided that the patient is a reasonable operative risk.
Two-thirds of all GISTs occur in the stomach. Epithelial 
cell stromal GIST is the most common cell type arising in the 
stomach, and cellular spindle type is the next most common. 
The glomus tumor type is seen only in the stomach.
GISTs are submucosal tumors that are slow growing. 
Smaller lesions are usually found incidentally, although they 
occasionally may ulcerate and cause impressive bleeding. 
Larger lesions generally produce symptoms of weight loss, 
abdominal pain, fullness, early satiety, and bleeding. An abdom-
inal mass may be palpable. Metastasis is by the hematogenous 
route, often to liver and/or lung, although positive lymph nodes 
are occasionally seen in resected specimens.
Diagnosis is by endoscopy and biopsy, although the inter-
pretation of the latter may be problematic. EUS may be help-
ful, but symptomatic tumors and tumors >1 cm in size should 
be removed. Metastatic work-up entails CT of the chest, abdo-
men, and pelvis (chest X-ray may suffice in lieu of CT of the 
chest). Most gastric GISTs occur in the body of the stomach, 
but they also can occur in the fundus or antrum. They are almost 
always solitary. Wedge resection with clear margins is adequate 
surgical treatment. True invasion of adjacent structures by the 
primary tumor is evidence of malignancy. If safe, en bloc resec-
tion of involved surrounding organs is appropriate to remove all 
tumor when the primary is large and invasive. Five-year survival 
6
1085
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
following resection for GIST is about 50%. Most patients with 
low-grade lesions are cured (80% 5-year survival), but most 
patients with high-grade lesions are not (30% 5-year survival).
According to the tumor size and mitotic count,110A the risk 
of aggressive behavior was classified into four groups. Very low 
risk was defined as <2 cm and <5/50 HPF (high-power field) 
and low risk was defined as 2 to 5cm and <5/50 cm. Interme-
diate risk was defined as <5 cm and 6 to 10/50 HPF or 5 to 
10cm and >5/50 HPF. And high risk was defined as >5 cm and 
>5/50HPF, >10cm with any mitotic rate or >10/50/ HPF with 
any size. It was known that the risk of recurrence differs by the 
primary site of the tumor. Recently, new classification based on 
tumor location, size, and mitotic rate has been used to evaluate 
the risk of recurrence and metastasis.110B
GISTs are usually positive for the protooncogene, c-kit, a 
characteristic shared with the ICC. Imatinib (Gleevec), a chemo-
therapeutic agent that blocks the activity of the tyrosine kinase 
product of c-kit, yields excellent results in many patients with 
metastatic or unresectable GIST. Up to 50% of treated patients 
develop resistance to imatinib by 2 years, and several newer 
agents show promise for patients with refractory disease. The 
efficacy of imatinib as adjuvant therapy for high risk patients 
has been demonstrated in large clinical trials.110C,110D Accord-
ing to the NCCN guidelines for soft tissue sarcoma (version 
2, 2012), the administration of imatinib was recommended in 
high risk groups as an adjuvant therapy.110E An algorithm for the 
treatment of patients with GIST is shown in Fig. 26-59.
Gastric Carcinoid Tumors111–113
Compared to midgut and hindgut locations, carcinoid tumors 
of the stomach are rather unusual. Gastric carcinoids comprise 
about 1% of all carcinoid tumors and less than 2% of gastric 
neoplasms. They arise from gastric enterochromaffin-like 
(ECL) cells and some have malignant potential. The apparent 
Low-grade (indolent) MALT
Lymphoma persists
Stage II
Chemo** + XRT*
Stage I
XRT*
*XRT: external beam radiation therapy, approximately 30 Gy with 10 Gy boost
**Chemo: chemotherapy regimens include chlorambucil, fludarabinel,
and cyclosphosphamide, vincristine, prednisone (COP) +/– rituximab
Close follow-up
No residual disease
Residual disease
Further chemotherapy
*Chemo: chemotherapy regimen usually cyclophosphamide,
doxorobicin, vincristine, prednisone (CHOP) +/– rituximab
**XRT: external beam radiation, approximately 30 Gy with 10 Gy boost
Follow-up
Lymphoma regression
High-grade (aggressive)
Surgery
Stage IV
Chemo* +/– XRT**
Stage I, II, III
Chemo* + XRT**
Stage III or IV
Lymph node involvement
t(11:18) translocation
Confined to gastric wall
No t(11:18) translocation
H. pylori eradication therapy
and chemo** +/– XRT*
H. pylori eradication therapy
Re-evaluate at 3–6 months
H. pylori eradication therapy
Re-evaluate at 12 months
Figure 26-58.  Algorithm for the treatment of gastric lymphoma. MALT = mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. (Reproduced with permission 
from Yoon SS, Coit DG, Portlock CS, et al: The diminishing role of surgery in the treatment of gastric lymphoma. Ann Surg 240:28, 2004.)
1086
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
incidence of gastric carcinoids is increasing, perhaps related to 
the more common use of upper endoscopy and/or the increas-
ing use of acid suppressive medication. The latter may cause 
hypergastrinemia, and gastrin has a recognized trophic effect on 
gastric ECL cells. Gastric carcinoid is equivalent to neuroendo-
crine tumor (NET) or well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor/
carcinoma according to WHO classification.
Gastric carcinoids are classified into one of three differ-
ent types. Type I is the most common type of gastric carcinoid, 
accounting for about 75% of patients. Type I carcinoids occur in 
patients with chronic hypergastrinemia secondary to pernicious 
anemia or chronic atrophic gastritis. These lesions occur more 
frequently in women, are often multiple and small, and have low 
malignant potential (<5% metastasize). The role of long-term 
acid suppression with resultant hypergastrinemia in the patho-
genesis of type I gastric carcinoids is unclear.
Type II gastric carcinoids are associated with MEN1 and 
ZES. These lesions also tend to be small and multiple, but have 
a somewhat higher malignant potential than type I lesions (10% 
metastasize). Type II gastric carcinoids are more strongly asso-
ciated with MEN1; they are quite uncommon in patients with 
sporadic ZES without MEN1. Gastric acid hypersecretion, hyper-
gastrinemia, and gastric carcinoid imply gastrinoma until proven 
otherwise.
Type III gastric carcinoids are sporadic tumors. They are 
most often solitary (usually >2 cm) and occur more commonly 
in men. They are not associated with hypergastrinemia and 
biopsy shows a heterogeneous cell population. Most patients 
have nodal or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis, and 
some present with symptoms of carcinoid syndrome.
Primary localized disease
Recurrent or metastatic disease
Resectable
Surgery
postop imatinib
Imatinib
Consider resection of primary
with minimal metastatic disease
especially when symptomatic
Imatinib
Continue imatinib
Still unresectable
* If all gross disease or all
imatinib-resistant disease
is treatable
RFA = radiofrequency ablation
Surgery*
Embolization*
RFA*
Sunitinib
Other new agents
Diffuse
progression
Focal
progression
Response/
stable disease
Unresectable or resection
requiring extensive surgery
or risk of organ dysfunction
Figure 26-59.  Algorithm for the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumor. (Reproduced with permission from Gold JS, DeMatteo RP: 
Combined surgical and molecular therapy: The gastrointestinal stromal tumor model. Ann Surg 244:176, 2006.)
Gastric carcinoids are usually diagnosed with endoscopy and 
biopsy. Some tumors are submucosal and may be quite small. They 
are often confused with heterotopic pancreas or small leiomyomas. 
Biopsy may be difficult because of the submucosal location, and 
EUS can be helpful in defining the size and depth of the lesion. 
Plasma chromogranin A levels are elevated in patients with gastric 
carcinoid. CT scan and octreotide scan are useful for staging.
Gastric carcinoids should be resected. Small lesions confined 
to the mucosa (typically type I or type II lesions) may be treated 
endoscopically with EMR if there are only a few lesions (<5) 
and if margins are histologically negative. Careful follow-up 
is necessary. Larger lesions should be removed by D1 or D2 gastrec-
tomy. Survival is excellent for node-negative patients (>90% 5-year 
survival); node-positive patients have a 50% 5-year survival. Gastri-
noma should be resected if located in patients with type II carcinoid. 
The 5-year survival for patients with type I gastric carcinoid is close 
to 100%; for patients with type III lesions, the 5-year survival is 
less than 50%. Somatostatin analogue treatment is useful in con-
trolling the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome but apparently does 
not prolong survival in patients with metastatic gastric carcinoid. 
Surgical debulking may have a role in selected patients with meta-
static disease. Because somatostatin has an antiproliferative effect 
on gastric ECL cells, there may be a possible primary treatment role 
for octreotide in poor-risk surgical patients with gastric carcinoid.
BENIGN GASTRIC NEOPLASMS
Leiomyoma
The typical leiomyoma is submucosal and firm. If ulcerated, it has 
an umbilicated appearance and may bleed. Histologically, these 
7
1087
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
lesions appear to be of smooth muscle origin. Lesions <2 cm are 
usually asymptomatic and benign. Larger lesions have greater 
malignant potential and a greater likelihood to cause symptoms 
such as bleeding, obstruction, or pain. Asymptomatic lesions 
<2 cm may be carefully observed or enucleated if fine-needle 
aspiration and immune markers confirm smooth muscle tumor; 
larger lesions and symptomatic lesions should be removed by 
wedge resection (often possible laparoscopically). When lesions 
thought to be leiomyoma are observed rather than resected, the 
patient should be made aware of their presence and the small pos-
sibility for malignancy.
Lipoma
Lipomas are benign submucosal fatty tumors that are usually 
asymptomatic, found incidentally on upper GI series or EGD. 
Endoscopically, they have a characteristic appearance; there 
also is a characteristic appearance on EUS. Excision is unnec-
essary unless the patient is symptomatic.
Gastric Motility Disorders
Gastric motility disorders include delayed gastric emptying 
(gastroparesis), rapid gastric emptying, and motor and sensory 
abnormalities (e.g., functional dyspepsia). Surgically relevant 
secondary disorders of gastric motility (e.g., dumping, gastric 
stasis, and Roux syndrome) are discussed under Postgastrec-
tomy Problems. Gastroparesis is the most surgically relevant 
primary disorder of gastric motility.114,115
Most patients with primary gastroparesis present with 
nausea, vomiting, bloating, early satiety, and/or abdominal 
pain. Eighty percent of these patients are women; some are 
diabetic. Postprandial vomiting significantly complicates the 
management of blood glucose in the latter group, predispos-
ing to hypoglycemia following preprandial insulin. In patients 
with gastroparesis, it is important to rule out mechanical gastric 
outlet obstruction, and small-bowel obstruction. An upper GI 
series may suggest slow gastric emptying and relative atony, 
or it may be normal. EGD may show bezoars or retained food 
but is frequently normal. Gastric emptying scintigraphy shows 
delayed solid emptying, and often delayed liquid emptying. 
Gastroparesis can be a manifestation of a variety of problems 
(Table 26-22). Medical treatment includes promotility agents, 
antiemetics, and, perhaps, botulinum injection into the pylorus.
If the diabetic gastroparetic patient is not a candidate for 
pancreas transplant, both gastrostomy (for decompression) and 
jejunostomy tubes (for feeding and prevention of hypoglycemia) 
can be effective. Other surgical options include implantation of 
a gastric pacemaker, and gastric resection.115A Generally, gastric 
resection should be done only after other therapeutic options 
have been exhausted.
Massive Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Although there have been arbitrary definitions of “massive” 
upper GI bleeding put forth, perhaps the most practical defini-
tion in the current era would be acute bleeding proximal to the 
ligament of Treitz, which requires blood transfusion. In multiple 
series, the stomach and proximal duodenum is by far the most 
common source of pathology associated with this diagnosis.65,116 
The most common causes of acute GI bleeding in emergency 
room or hospitalized patients are peptic ulcer, gastritis, Mallory-
Weiss syndrome, and esophagogastric varices. Less common 
causes include benign or malignant neoplasm, angiodysplasia, 
Dieulafoy’s lesion, portal gastropathy, Ménétrier’s disease, and 
watermelon stomach. Arterioenteric fistula should always be 
considered in the patient who has an aortic graft or who has 
undergone repair of a visceral artery aneurysm.
The most important issues in the early hospital management of 
patients with acute upper GI bleeding are resuscitation and risk strati-
fication. Large-bore IV access and Foley catheterization is accom-
plished, and nasogastric intubation is considered. Risk stratification 
is essentially accomplished by answering the following questions:
a.		 What is the magnitude and acuity of the hemorrhage? 
Hypotension, tachycardia, oliguria, low hematocrit, pal-
lor, altered mentation, and/or hematemesis suggest a large 
blood loss that has occurred over a short period of time. 
This is a high-risk situation.
b.		 Does the patient have significant chronic disease, particularly 
lung, liver, kidney, and/or heart disease, which compromises 
physiologic reserve? If yes, this is a high-risk situation.
c.		 Is the patient anticoagulated, or immunosuppressed? If yes, 
this is a high-risk situation.
d.		 On endoscopy, is the patient bleeding from varices, or is 
there active bleeding, or is there a visible vessel, or is there 
a deep ulcer overlying a large vessel (e.g., posterior duode-
nal ulcer overlying the gastroduodenal artery)? Could the 
patient be bleeding from an Arterio enteric fistula? If yes, 
this is a high-risk situation.
Table 26-22 
Etiology of gastroparesis
Idiopathic
Endocrine or metabolic
  Diabetes mellitus
  Thyroid disease
  Renal insufficiency
After gastric surgery
  After resection
  After vagotomy
Central nervous system disorders
  Brain stem lesions
  Parkinson’s disease
Peripheral neuromuscular disorders
  Myotonia dystrophica
  Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Connective tissue disorders
  Scleroderma
  Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Infiltrative disorders
  Lymphoma
  Amyloidosis
Diffuse gastrointestinal motility disorder
  Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
Medication-induced
Electrolyte imbalance
  Potassium, calcium, magnesium
Miscellaneous conditions
  Infections (especially viral)
  Paraneoplastic syndrome
  Ischemic conditions
  Gastric ulcer
Source: Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Park-
man HP et al. Gastroduodenal motility and dysmotility: An update on 
techniques available for evaluation. Am J Gastroenterol. 1995;90:869. 
kkjkjdht © 1995.
1088
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
If judged to be low risk, most patients will stop bleeding 
with supportive treatment and IV PPI. Selected patients may 
be discharged from the emergency room and managed on an 
outpatient basis.
If the patient is judged to be high risk based on one or 
more of the questions previously listed, then the following 
should be done immediately:
1.		 Type and cross-match for transfusion of blood products.
2.		 Admit to ICU or monitored bed in specialized unit.
3.		 Consult surgeon.
4.		 Consult gastroenterologist.
5.		 Start continuous infusion of PPI.
6.		 Perform upper endoscopy within 12 hours, after resuscita-
tion and correction of coagulopathy. Endoscopic hemosta-
sis should be considered in most high-risk patients with 
acute upper GI bleeding.
Although the surgeon should be involved early in the hos-
pital course of all high-risk patients with acute upper GI bleed-
ing, most of these patients will be adequately managed without 
operation. Mucosal lesions can usually be controlled with endo-
scopic hemotherapy and medical management. Occasionally, 
arteriography can be helpful.117 Operation for bleeding ulcer is 
discussed previously (see Operation for Bleeding Peptic Ulcer 
and Fig. 26-43).
Isolated Gastric Varices
Isolated gastric varices are those that occur in the absence of 
esophageal varices and are classified as type I (fundic) or type II 
(distal to fundus including proximal duodenum).118 The pres-
ence of isolated gastric varices is usually associated with portal 
hyper-tension or splenic vein thrombosis. Although there is a 
significant bleeding risk from isolated gastric varices on long-
term follow-up, there is no indication for the routine application 
of prophylactic measures.
Patients with acute upper GI bleeding from isolated gas-
tric varices should be considered high risk. Although data are 
limited, octreotide and/or vasopressin infusion may decease 
bleeding, if tolerated. Balloon tamponade with a Sengstaken-
Blakemore tube may provide temporary control of exsanguinat-
ing hemorrhage from type isolated gastric varices, but if this is 
used, endotracheal intubation for airway protection is prudent. 
Endoscopic treatment with sclerotherapy or varix ligation is 
less successful than in esophageal varices, but should be con-
sidered. Interventional radiology should be consulted and bal-
loon occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration considered. 
A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt may be useful 
if there is nonsegmental portal hypertension. If the patient has 
splenic vein thrombosis and left-sided (sinistral) or segmental 
portal hypertension, splenectomy is quite effective in control-
ling bleeding from isolated gastric varices. The operative mor-
tality is 5%. Liver transplantation should always be considered 
in the cirrhotic patient.
Hypertrophic Gastropathy  
(Ménétrier’s Disease)
There are two clinical syndromes characterized by epithelial 
hyperplasia and giant gastric folds: ZES and Ménétrier’s dis-
ease. The latter is characteristically associated with protein-
losing gastropathy and hypochlorhydria. There are large rugal 
folds in the proximal stomach, and the antrum is usually spared. 
Mucosal biopsy shows diffuse hyperplasia of the surface 
mucus-secreting cells and usually decreased parietal cells 
(Fig. 26-60). It has recently been suggested that Ménétrier’s dis-
ease is caused by local overexpression of transforming growth 
factor alpha in the gastric mucosa, which stimulates the epi-
dermal growth factor receptor, a receptor tyrosine kinase, on 
gastric SECs. This results in the selective expansion of surface 
mucous cells in the gastric body and fundus. A few patients 
with this unusual disease have been successfully treated with the 
epidermal growth factor receptor blocking monoclonal antibody 
cetuximab.119
Most patients with Ménétrier’s disease are middle-aged 
men who present with epigastric pain, weight loss, diarrhea, 
and hypoproteinemia. There may be an increased risk of gastric 
cancer. Sometimes, the disease regresses spontaneously. Gastric 
resection may be indicated for bleeding, severe hypoprotein-
emia, or cancer.
Watermelon Stomach (Gastric Antral  
Vascular Ectasia)
The parallel red stripes atop the mucosal folds of the distal stom-
ach give this rare entity its sobriquet. Histologically, gastric antral 
vascular ectasia (GAVE) is characterized by dilated mucosal 
blood vessels that often contain thrombi, in the lamina propria. 
Mucosal fibromuscular hyperplasia and hyalinization often are 
present (Fig. 26-61). The histologic appearance can resemble 
portal hypertensive gastropathy, but the latter usually affects the 
proximal stomach, whereas watermelon stomach predominantly 
affects the distal stomach. Beta blockers and nitrates, useful in the 
treatment of portal hypertensive gastropathy, are ineffective in 
patients with gastric antral vascular ectasia. Patients with GAVE 
are usually elderly women with chronic GI blood loss requiring 
transfusion. Most have an associated autoimmune connective tis-
sue disorder, and at least 25% have chronic liver disease. Non-
surgical treatment options include estrogen and progesterone, and 
endoscopic treatment with the neodymium yttrium-aluminum 
garnet (Nd:YAG) laser or argon plasma coagulator.120 Antrec-
tomy may be required to control blood loss, and this operation 
is quite effective but carries increased morbidity in this elderly 
patient group. Patients with portal hyper-tension and antral vas-
cular ectasia should be considered for transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt (TIPSS).
Figure 26-60.  Mucosal biopsy in Ménétrier’s disease. [Repro-
duced with permission from Goldman H: Mucosal hypertrophy and 
hyperplasia of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman H (eds): Pathol-
ogy of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1998, p 577.]
1089
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Dieulafoy’s Lesion
Dieulafoy’s lesion is a congenital arteriovenous malformation 
characterized by an unusually large tortuous submucosal artery. 
If this artery is eroded, impressive pulsatile bleeding may occur. 
To the endoscopist or surgeon, this appears as a stream of arte-
rial blood emanating from what appears grossly to be a normal 
gastric mucosa. The lesion typically occurs in middle-aged or 
elderly men and may be more common in patients with liver dis-
ease.121 Patients typically present with upper GI bleeding, which 
may be intermittent, and endoscopy can miss the lesion if it 
is not actively bleeding. Treatment options include endoscopic 
hemostatic therapy, angiographic embolization, or operation. At 
surgery, the lesion may be oversewn or resected.
Bezoars/Diverticula
Bezoars are concretions of indigestible matter that accumulate in 
the stomach. Trichobezoars, composed of hair, occur most com-
monly in young women who swallow their hair (Fig. 26-62). Phy-
tobezoars are composed of vegetable matter and, in the United 
States, are usually seen in association with gastroparesis or gastric 
outlet obstruction. They also are associated with persimmon inges-
tion. Most commonly, bezoars produce obstructive symptoms, but 
they may cause ulceration and bleeding. Diagnosis is suggested by 
upper GI series and confirmed by endoscopy. Treatment options 
include enzyme therapy (papain, cellulase, or acetylcysteine), 
endoscopic disruption and removal, or surgical removal.
Gastric diverticula are usually solitary and may be congeni-
tal or acquired. Congenital diverticula are true diverticula and 
contain a full coat of muscularis propria, whereas acquired diver-
ticula (perhaps caused by pulsion) usually have a negligible outer 
muscle layer. Most gastric diverticula occur in the posterior cardia 
or fundus (Fig. 26-63) and are usually asymptomatic. However, 
they can become inflamed and may produce pain or bleeding. 
Perforation is rare. Asymptomatic diverticula do not require treat-
ment, but symptomatic lesions should be removed. This can often 
be done laparoscopically.
Foreign Bodies
Ingested foreign bodies are usually asymptomatic. Removal 
of sharp or large objects should be considered. This can usu-
ally be done endoscopically, with an overtube technique. 
Figure 26-61.  Gastric antral vascular ectasia (watermelon stom-
ach). [Reproduced with permission from Goldman H: Mucosal 
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the stomach, in Ming S-C, Goldman 
H (eds): Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: 
Williams & Wilkins, 1998, p 577.]
Figure 26-62.  Trichobezoar forming cast of stomach and duode-
num; removed from 15-year-old girl. [Reproduced with permission 
from DeBakey M, Ochsner A: Bezoars and concretions. Surgery 
4:934, 1938. kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Figure 26-63.  Gastric diverticulum. [Reproduced with permission 
from Ellis H: Diverticula, volvulus, superior mesenteric artery syn-
drome, and foreign bodies, in Schwartz SL, Ellis H, Husser WC 
(eds): Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 9th ed. East Norwalk, 
Connecticut: Appleton & Lange, 1989, p 577. kkjkjdht © The 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.]
1090
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Recognized dangers include aspiration of the foreign body 
during removal, and rupture of drug-containing bags in “body 
packers.” Both complications can be fatal. Surgical removal is 
recommended in body packers, and in patients with large jag-
ged objects. Corrosive objects (e.g., watch batteries) should be 
removed promptly.
Mallory-Weiss Syndrome
The Mallory-Weiss lesion is a longitudinal tear in the mucosa of 
the GE junction.122 It is presumably caused by forceful vomiting 
and/or retching, and is commonly seen in alcoholics. It presents 
with upper GI bleeding, often with hematemesis. Endoscopy con-
firms the diagnosis and may be useful in controlling the bleeding, 
but 90% of patients stop bleeding spontaneously. Other options 
to control the bleeding include balloon tamponade, angiographic 
embolization, or selective infusion of vasopressin, systemic vaso-
pressin, and operation. Surgical treatment consists of oversewing 
the bleeding lesion through a long gastrostomy.
Volvulus
Gastric volvulus is a twist of the stomach that usually occurs in 
association with a large hiatal hernia. It also can occur in patients 
with an unusually mobile stomach without hiatal hernia. Typi-
cally, the stomach twists along its long axis (organoaxial vol-
vulus), and the greater curvature flips up (Fig. 26-64C). If the 
stomach twists around the transverse axis, it is called mesentero-
axial rotation (Fig. 26-64A and Fig. 26-64B). Often, volvulus 
is a chronic condition that can be surprisingly asymptomatic. 
In these instances, expectant nonoperative management is typi-
cally advised, especially in the elderly. The risk of strangulation 
and infarction has been overestimated in asymptomatic patients. 
Symptomatic patients should be considered for operation, espe-
cially if the symptoms are severe and/or progressive. Patients 
may present with symptoms of pain and pressure related to the 
intermittently distending and poorly emptying twisted stomach. 
Pressure on the lung may produce dyspnea, pressure on the peri-
cardium may produce palpitations, and pressure on the esopha-
gus may produce dysphagia. Symptoms are often relieved with 
vomiting or passage of a nasogastric tube. Gastric infarction is 
a surgical emergency, and the patient can be moribund. Gastric 
necrosis may be extensive or focal. With or without gastropexy, 
elective operation for gastric volvulus usually involves reduction 
of the stomach and repair of hiatal hernia. Gastropexy alone may 
be considered for high-risk patients since it can nearly always be 
performed laparoscopically and may be surprisingly effective in 
relieving mechanical symptoms.
GASTROSTOMY
A gastrostomy is performed either for alimentation or for 
gastric drainage/decompression. Gastrostomy may be done 
percutaneously, laparoscopically, or via open technique.123,124 
Currently, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy is the most 
common method used. The open techniques include the 
Stamm method (Fig. 26-65), the Witzel method (Fig. 26-66), 
and the Janeway method (Fig. 26-67). The last method is 
meant to create a permanent stoma that can be intubated as 
needed, but does not drain spontaneously. The Janeway gas-
trostomy is more complicated than the other open techniques, 
and is rarely necessary. By far the most common surgical 
technique is the Stamm gastrostomy, which can be performed 
open or laparoscopically.
Complications of gastrostomy include infection, dis-
lodgment, leakage with peritonitis, and aspiration pneumonia. 
Although gastrostomy tubes usually do prevent tense gastric dil-
atation, they may not adequately drain the stomach, especially 
when the patient is bedridden.
POSTGASTRECTOMY PROBLEMS125,126
Dumping Syndrome
Dumping is a phenomenon caused by the destruction or bypass 
of the pyloric sphincter.127 However, other factors undoubtedly 
play a role because dumping can occur after operations that 
Figure 26-64.  A through C. Gastric 
volvulus. [Reproduced with permis-
sion from Buchanan J: Volvulus of 
the stomach. Br J Surg. 18:99, 1930. 
© British Journal of Surgery Soci-
ety, Ltd. Permission is granted by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
BJSS, Ltd.]
A
B
C
Figure 26-65.  Stamm gastrostomy. [Reproduced with permission 
from Tatum RP, Joehl RJ: Intubation of the stomach and small 
intestine, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery 
of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2002, p 46.]
1091
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
preserve the pylorus, such as parietal cell vagotomy. The appro-
priate stimulus can provoke dumping symptoms, even in some 
patients who have not undergone surgery. Clinically significant 
dumping occurs in 5% to 10% of patients after pyloroplasty, 
pyloromyotomy, or distal gastrectomy, and consists of a constel-
lation of postprandial symptoms ranging in severity from annoy-
ing to disabling. The symptoms are thought to be the result of 
the abrupt delivery of a hyperosmolar load into the small bowel 
due to ablation of the pylorus or decreased gastric compliance.
Typically, 15 to 30 minutes after a meal, the patient becomes 
diaphoretic, weak, light-headed, and tachycardic. These symp-
toms may be ameliorated by recumbence or saline infusion. 
Crampy abdominal pain is not uncommon and diarrhea often 
follows. This is referred to as early dumping, and should be 
distinguished from postprandial (reactive) hypoglycemia, also 
called late dumping, which usually occurs later (2–3 hours fol-
lowing a meal), and is relieved by the administration of sugar. 
A variety of hormonal aberrations have been observed in early 
dumping, including increased VIP, CCK, neurotensin, periph-
eral hormone peptide YY, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone, and 
decreased atrial natriuretic peptide. Late dumping is associated 
with hypoglycemia and hyperinsulinemia.
The medical therapy for the dumping syndrome consists 
of dietary management and somatostatin analogue (octreotide). 
Often, symptoms improve if the patient avoids liquids during 
meals. Hyperosmolar liquids (e.g., milk shakes) may be particu-
larly troublesome. There is some evidence that adding dietary 
fiber compounds at mealtime may improve the syndrome. If 
dietary manipulation fails, the patient is started on octreotide, 
100 μg subcutaneously twice daily. This can be increased 
up to 500 μg twice daily if necessary. The long-acting depot 
octreotide preparation is useful. Octreotide not only ameliorates 
the abnormal hormonal pattern seen in patients with dumping 
symptoms, but also promotes restoration of a fasting motility 
pattern in the small intestine (i.e., restoration of the MMC). The 
α-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose may be particularly helpful in 
ameliorating the symptoms of late dumping.
Only a very small percentage of patients with dumping symp-
toms ultimately require surgery. Most patients improve with time 
(months and even years), dietary management, and medication. 
Figure 26-66.  A through F. Witzel gastrostomy. [Reproduced with permission from Tatum RP, Joehl RJ: Intubation of the stomach and small 
intestine, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002, p 46.]
1092
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Therefore, the surgeon should not rush to reoperate on the 
patient with dumping symptoms. Multidisciplinary nonsurgi-
cal management must be optimized first. Before reoperation, a 
period of inhospital observation is useful to define the severity 
of the patient’s symptoms, and patient compliance with pre-
scribed dietary and medical therapy.
The results of remedial operation for dumping are variable 
and unpredictable. There are a variety of surgical approaches, 
none of which work consistently well. Additionally, there is not 
a great deal of experience reported in the literature with any of 
these methods. Long-term follow-up is rare. Patients with dis-
abling refractory dumping after gastrojejunostomy can be con-
sidered for simple takedown of this anastomosis provided that 
the pyloric channel is open endoscopically. The reversed intesti-
nal segment is rarely used today—and rightly so. This operation 
interposes a 10-cm reversed segment of intestine between the 
stomach and the proximal small bowel. This slows gastric emp-
tying, but often leads to obstruction, requiring reoperation. Iso-
peristaltic interposition (Henley loop) has not been successful in 
ameliorating severe dumping over the long term. The Roux-en-Y 
gastrojejunostomy is associated with delayed gastric emptying, 
probably on the basis of disordered motility in the Roux limb. 
Taking advantage of this disordered physiology, surgeons have 
used this operation successfully in the management of the dump-
ing syndrome. Although this is probably the procedure of choice 
in the small group of patients requiring operation for severe 
dumping following gastric resection, gastric stasis may result, 
particularly if a large gastric remnant is left. In the presence of 
significant gastric acid secretion, marginal ulceration is com-
mon after both jejunal interposition and Roux-en-Y procedures; 
thus concomitant vagotomy and hemigastrectomy should be 
considered. The theoretical possibility of treating postpyloroplasty 
dumping with a Roux-en-Y to the proximal duodenum (the duo-
denal switch, a potentially reversible operation) has not yet been 
reported (Fig. 26-68). Because pyloric ablation seems to be the 
dominant factor in the etiology of dumping, it is not surprising 
that conversion of Billroth II to Billroth I anastomosis has not 
been successful in the treatment of dumping.
B
A
C
D
Gastrostomy
flap outlined
Flap incision
deepened into
stomach       
Connell suture
Flap hinged 
at greater 
curvature
Connell suture
Figure 26-67.  A through D. Janeway gas-
trostomy. [Reproduced with permission from 
Tatum RP, Joehl RJ: Intubation of the stom-
ach and small intestine, in Zuidema GD, Yeo 
CJ (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Ali-
mentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 46.]
Figure 26-68.  Duodenal switch operation. [Reproduced with 
permission from Hinder RA: Duodenal switch: A new form of 
pancreaticobiliary diversion. Surg Clin North Am. 72:487, 1992. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
1093
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
Diarrhea
Diarrhea following gastric surgery may be the result of truncal 
vagotomy, dumping, or malabsorption. Truncal vagotomy is 
associated with clinically significant diarrhea in 5% to 10% of 
patients. It occurs soon after surgery and usually is not associ-
ated with other symptoms, a fact that helps to distinguish it from 
dumping. The diarrhea may be a daily occurrence, or there may 
be significant periods of relatively normal bowel function. The 
symptoms tend to improve over the months and years after the 
index operation. The cause of postvagotomy diarrhea is unclear. 
Possible mechanisms include intestinal dysmotility and accel-
erated transit, bile acid malabsorption, rapid gastric emptying, 
and bacterial overgrowth. The latter problem is facilitated by 
decreased gastric acid secretion and (even small) blind loops. 
Although bacterial overgrowth can be confirmed with the hydro-
gen breath test, a simpler test is an empirical trial of oral anti-
biotics. Some patients with postvagotomy diarrhea respond to 
cholestyramine, while in others codeine or loperamide may be 
useful. Octreotide should also be tried. Another theoretical cause 
of diarrhea following gastric surgery is fat malabsorption due to 
acid inactivation of pancreatic enzymes or poorly coordinated 
mixing of food and digestive juices. This can be confirmed with 
a qualitative test for fecal fat and treated with acid suppression. 
Postvagotomy diarrhea usually does not respond to treatment 
with pancreatic enzymes. In the rare patient who is debilitated 
by postvagotomy diarrhea unresponsive to medical management, 
operation might be considered but outcomes can be problematic. 
The operation of choice is probably a 10-cm reversed jejunal 
interposition placed in continuity 100 cm distal to the ligament 
of Treitz. Another option is the onlay antiperistaltic distal ileal 
graft. Both operations can cause obstructive symptoms and/or 
bacterial overgrowth.127B
Gastric Stasis128,129
Gastric stasis following surgery on the stomach may be due to 
a problem with gastric motor function or caused by an obstruc-
tion. The gastric motility abnormality could have been preexist-
ing and unrecognized by the operating surgeon. Alternatively, 
it may be secondary to deliberate or unintentional vagotomy, 
or resection of the dominant gastric pacemaker. An obstruction 
may be mechanical (e.g., anastomotic stricture, efferent limb 
kink from adhesions or constricting mesocolon, or a proximal 
small-bowel obstruction) or functional (e.g., retrograde peristal-
sis in a Roux limb). Gastric stasis presents with vomiting (often 
of undigested food), bloating, epigastric pain, and weight loss.
The evaluation of a patient with suspected postoperative 
gastric stasis includes EGD, upper GI and small bowel series, 
gastric emptying scan, and gastric motor testing. Endoscopy 
shows gastritis and retained food or bezoar. The anastomosis 
and efferent limb should be evaluated for stricture or narrow-
ing. A dilated efferent limb suggests chronic stasis, either from 
a motor abnormality (e.g., Roux syndrome) or mechanical small 
bowel obstruction (e.g., chronic adhesion). If the problem is 
thought to be primarily a disorder of intrinsic motor function, 
newer techniques such as EGG and GI manometry should be 
considered, but chronic distal mechanical obstruction may result 
in disordered motility in the proximal organ confounding inter-
pretation.
Once mechanical obstruction has been ruled out, medi-
cal treatment is successful in most cases of motor dysfunction 
following previous gastric surgery. This consists of dietary 
modification and promotility agents. Intermittent oral antibiotic 
therapy may be helpful in treating bacterial overgrowth, with its 
attendant symptoms of bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea.
Gastroparesis following V + D may be treated with subtotal 
gastrectomy but simple loop gastrojejunoctomy (GJ) should be 
tried if previous drainage was pyloroplasty. Billroth II anastomo-
sis with Braun enteroenterostomy may be preferable to Roux-en-
Y reconstruction after subtotal gastrectomy for gastric stasis but 
bile reflux can still occur. Regeneration of gastric stasis is often 
associated with persistent emptying problems that may subse-
quently require near-total or total gastrectomy, a nutritionally 
unattractive option. Delayed gastric emptying following ulcer 
surgery (V + D or V + A) may represent an anastomotic stricture 
(often due to recurrent ulcer), or proximal small bowel obstruc-
tion. The latter should be dealt with at reoperation. Recurrent 
ulcer usually responds to medical therapy with PPI and absti-
nence from NSAIDs, aspirin, and smoking. Endoscopic dilation 
is occasionally helpful. Gastroparesis following subtotal gastric 
resection is best treated with near-total (95%) or total gastric 
resection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. If total gastrectomy 
is performed, a jejunal reservoir should be fashioned. Gastric 
pacing is promising, but it has not achieved widespread clinical 
usefulness in the treatment of postoperative gastric atony.
Bile Reflux Gastritis and Esophagitis
Most patients who have undergone ablation or resection of the 
pylorus have bile in the stomach on endoscopic examination, 
along with some degree of gross or microscopic gastric inflam-
mation. Therefore, attributing postoperative symptoms to bile 
reflux is problematic because most asymptomatic patients have 
bile reflux as well. However, it is generally accepted that a small 
subset of patients have bile reflux gastritis, and present with nau-
sea, bilious vomiting, and epigastric pain, and quantitative evi-
dence of excess enterogastric reflux. Curiously, symptoms often 
develop months or years after the index operation. The differen-
tial diagnosis includes afferent or efferent loop obstruction, gas-
tric stasis, and small-bowel obstruction. Plain abdominal X-rays, 
upper endoscopy, upper GI series, abdominal CT scan, and gas-
tric emptying scans are helpful in evaluating these possibilities.
Dysfunction of the cardia is one of the causes of bile reflux 
esophagitis in patients after gastrectomy, Proximal subtotal gas-
trectomy with esophagoantral anastomosis should be avoided, 
and if limited resection of the GE junction is performed, the 
pylorus should be left intact.
Bile reflux may be quantified with gastric analysis or 
esophageal impedance testing or with scintigraphy (bile reflux 
scan). Typically, enterogastric reflux is greatest after Billroth II 
gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy, and least after vagotomy and 
pyloroplasty, with Billroth I gastrectomy giving intermediate 
values. Patients who are well into the abnormal range of bile 
reflux may be considered for remedial surgery if symptoms are 
severe. Remedial surgery will eliminate the bile from the vomi-
tus and may improve the patient’s pain, but it is quite unusual 
to render these patients completely asymptomatic, especially if 
they are narcotic dependent.
Bile reflux gastritis after distal gastric resection may be 
treated by one of the following options: Roux-en-Y gastro 
jejunostomy; interposition of a 40-cm isoperistaltic jejunal loop 
between the gastric remnant and the duodenum (Henley loop); 
Billroth II gastro jejunostomy with Braun enteroenterostomy; 
total gastrectomy with Roux esophagojejunostomy. To avoid 
bile reflux into the stomach or the esophagus the Roux limb 
should be at least 45 cm long (preferably 60 cm). The Braun 
1094
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
enteroenterostomy should be placed a similar distance from 
the stomach. Excessively long limbs may be associated with 
obstruction or malabsorption. All operations can result in mar-
ginal ulceration on the jejunal side of the gastrojejunostomy, and 
thus are combined with a generous distal gastrectomy. If this has 
already been done at a previous operation, the Roux or Braun 
operations may be attractively simple. Whether truncal vagot-
omy is necessary is controversial in the current era of excellent 
acid-suppressing medications. The benefits of decreased acid 
secretion following vagotomy may be outweighed by problems 
with vagotomy-associated dysmotility in the gastric remnant. 
The Roux operation may be associated with an increased risk 
of emptying problems compared to the other two options, but 
controlled data are lacking. Patients with debilitating bile reflux 
after gastrojejunostomy can be considered for simple takedown 
of this anastomosis provided that the pyloric channel is open.
Primary bile reflux gastritis (i.e., no previous operation) 
is rare, and may be treated with the duodenal switch operation, 
essentially an end-to-end Roux-en-Y to the proximal duodenum 
(see Fig. 26-68). The Achilles’ heel of this operation is, not sur-
prisingly, marginal ulceration. Thus, it should be combined with 
highly selective vagotomy, and/or long term acid suppressive 
medication.
Roux Syndrome
A subset of patients who have had distal gastrectomy and Roux-
en-Y gastrojejunostomy will have great difficulty with gastric 
emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction. These 
patients present with vomiting, epigastric pain, and weight loss. 
This clinical scenario has been labeled the Roux syndrome. 
Endoscopy may show retained food or bezoars, dilation of the 
gastric remnant, and/or dilation of the Roux limb. Anastomotic 
inflammation and stricture from marginal ulceration is a con-
founding finding. An upper GI series confirms these findings 
and may show delayed gastric emptying. This is better quanti-
fied by a gastric emptying scan, which always shows delayed 
solid emptying, and may show delayed liquid emptying as well.
GI motility testing shows abnormal motility in the Roux 
limb, with propulsive activity toward, rather than away from, 
the stomach.130 Gastric motility also may be abnormal. Pre-
sumably, the disordered motility in the Roux limb occurs in all 
patients with this operation. Why only a subset develops the 
Roux syndrome is unclear. Perhaps those patients with disor-
dered gastric motility are at most risk. The disorder seems to 
be more common in patients with a generous gastric remnant. 
Truncal vagotomy also has been implicated.
Medical treatment consists of promotility agents. Surgi-
cal treatment consists of paring down the gastric remnant. Care 
should be taken to preserve adequate blood supply to the new 
gastric pouch. If the left gastric artery is intact, a vertically ori-
ented lesser curvature based pouch (similar to gastric bypass) 
with excision of the fundus can be considered. If gastric motility 
is severely disordered, 95% gastrectomy or total gastrectomy 
should be done. The Roux limb should be resected if it is dilated 
and flaccid, unless doing so puts the patient at risk for short 
bowel problems.
Gallstones
Gallstone formation following gastric surgery generally is 
thought to be secondary to vagal denervation of the gallblad-
der with attendant gallbladder dysmotility and stasis. Although 
prophylactic cholecystectomy is not justified with most gas-
tric surgery, it should be considered if the gallbladder appears 
abnormal, especially if subsequent cholecystectomy is likely to 
be difficult. If preoperative evaluation reveals sludge or gall-
stones, or if intraoperative evaluation reveals stones, incidental 
cholecystectomy should be considered if it appears straightfor-
ward and the gastric operation has gone well.
Weight Loss
Weight loss is common in patients who have had a vagotomy 
and/or gastric resection. The degree of weight loss tends to 
parallel the magnitude of the operation. It may be insignificant 
in the large person, or devastating in the asthenic female. The 
surgeon should always consider the possible nutritional conse-
quences before performing a gastric resection for benign disease 
in a thin patient. The causes of weight loss after gastric surgery 
generally fall into one of two categories: altered dietary intake 
or malabsorption. If a stool stain for fecal fat is negative, it is 
likely that decreased caloric intake is the cause. This is the most 
common cause of weight loss after gastric surgery, and may 
be due to small stomach syndrome, postoperative gastroparesis, 
anorexia due to loss of ghrelin, or self-imposed dietary modifi-
cation because of dumping and/or diarrhea. Consultation with 
an experienced dietitian may prove invaluable.
Anemia
Iron absorption takes place primarily in the proximal GI tract, 
and is facilitated by an acidic environment. Intrinsic factor, 
essential for the enteric absorption of vitamin B12, is made by 
the parietal cells of the stomach. Vitamin B12 bioavailability also 
is facilitated by an acidic environment.
With this as background, it is easy to understand why 
patients who have had a gastric operation are at risk for anemia. 
Anemia is the most common metabolic side effect in patients 
who have had a gastric bypass for morbid obesity. It also occurs 
in up to one third of patients who have had a vagotomy and/or 
gastric resection. Iron deficiency is the most common cause, 
but vitamin B12 or folate deficiency also occurs, even in patients 
who have not had total gastrectomy. Of course, patients who 
have had a total gastrectomy will all develop B12 deficiency 
without parenteral vitamin B12. Gastric bypass patients should 
be given oral iron supplements, and monitored for iron, B12, and 
folate deficiency. Patients who have had a vagotomy and/or gas-
trectomy should be similarly monitored with periodic determi-
nation of hematocrit, red blood cell indices, iron and transferrin 
levels, B12, and folate levels. Marginal nutrient status should be 
corrected with oral and/or parenteral supplementation.
Bone Disease
Gastric surgery sometimes disturbs calcium and vitamin D 
metabolism. Calcium absorption occurs primarily in the duo-
denum, which is bypassed with gastrojejunostomy. Fat mal-
absorption may occur because of blind loop syndrome and 
bacterial overgrowth, or because of inefficient mixing of food 
and digestive enzymes. This can significantly affect the absorp-
tion of vitamin D, a fat-soluble vitamin. Both abnormalities of 
calcium and vitamin D metabolism can contribute to metabolic 
bone disease in patients following gastric surgery. The problems 
usually manifest as pain and/or fractures years after the index 
operation. Musculoskeletal symptoms should prompt a study 
of bone density. Dietary supplementation of calcium and vitamin 
D may be useful in preventing these complications. Routine 
skeletal monitoring of patients at high-risk (e.g., elderly males 
and females and postmenopausal females) may prove useful 
1095
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
in identifying skeletal deterioration that may be stopped with 
appropriate treatment.
LAPAROSCOPIC GASTRIC OPERATIONS
The most common laparoscopic gastric operations performed 
today are for GERD and obesity (see Chapter 27, The Surgi-
cal Management of Obesity). However, all of the gastric opera-
tions described here can be performed with minimally invasive 
techniques.131 Some are technically difficult (e.g., partial or 
total gastric resection) or are of debatable merit. The operations 
described in this chapter that lend themselves most readily to 
minimally invasive techniques are highly selective vagotomy, 
vagotomy and gastrojejunostomy, and gastrostomy. Laparo-
scopic wedge resection often is possible for GI stromal tumors, 
lipomas, or gastric diverticula. Combined endoscopic and lapa-
roscopic techniques occasionally are useful. Robotic gastric 
operations have been described, but have not yet been widely 
adopted.132 Recently laparoscopic resection has been applied 
increasingly to patients with gastric cancer133 with promising 
early results. Advances of laparoscopic instruments particularly 
energy sources have rendered extended lymph node dissection, 
including suprapancreatic lymph node dissection feasible. The 
ratio of D2 lymph node dissection has been increased gradually 
due to these advances and surgeon’s experiences. Laparoscopy 
surgery has been widely performed in reconstruction in which 
the intestine is pulled out of the body through a small laparot-
omy wound.133A Recently, based on the improvement in anas-
tomosis devices, pure laparoscopic surgery has also been used 
in which a series of procedures (lymphadenectomy, resection, 
and reconstruction) is completely performed intra-abdominally. 
Finally, diagnostic laparoscopy may prevent a futile laparotomy 
in some patients with gastric cancer.
While transgastric appendectomy and transgastric pancre-
atic necrosectomy appears safe and effective in selected patients 
in experienced centers, 134,135 the role of transgastric natural ori-
fice endoscopic surgery has yet to be defined.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Beaumont W: Experiments and Observations on the Gastric 
Juice and the Physiology of Digestion. Plattsburgh: PP Allen, 
1833.
2.	 Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD. Gastric surgery, in The 
Rise of Surgery. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1978.
3.	 Herrington JL: Historical aspects of gastric surgery, in Scott 
HW Jr., Sawyers JL (eds): Surgery of the Stomach, Duodenum, 
and Small Intestine, 2nd ed. Boston: Blackwell, 1992.
4.	 Dragstedt LR. Vagotomy for the gastroduodenal ulcer. Ann 
Surg. 1945;122:973-989.
5.	 Zollinger RM, Ellison EH. Primary peptic ulcerations of the 
jejunum associated with islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Ann 
Surg. 1955;142:709-728.
6.	 Flora ED, Wilson TG, Martin IJ, et al. A review of natural 
orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) for intra-
abdominal surgery: experimental models, techniques, and 
applicability to the clinical setting. Ann Surg. 2008;247: 
583-602.
7.	 Mercer DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A. Anatomy and physiology 
of the stomach, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed, Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 3.
8.	 Warren WD, Zeppa R, Fomon JJ. Selective trans-splenic 
decompression of gastroesophageal varices by distal spleno-
renal shunt. Ann Surg. 1967;166:437-455. 
9.	 Orringer MB, Marshall B, Chang AC, et al. Two thousand 
transhiatal esophagectomies: changing trends, lessons learned. 
Ann Surg. 2007; 246:363-372.
10.	 Leung WK, et al: Tumors of the stomach, in Yamada T, et al 
(eds): Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003, p 1416.
11.	Japanese Gastric Cancer Association.Japanese classifications 
of gastric carcinoma: 3rd English edition. Gastric Cancer. 
2011;14: 101-112.
12.	Jansen EPM, Boot H, Verheij M, van de Velde CJ. Opti-
mal locoregional treatment in gastric cancer. J ClinOncol. 
2005:23:4509-4517.
13.	Johnson LR, (ed). Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract 
5th ed, Elsevier, 2012.
14.	 Fawcett DW, Jensh R, in. Bloom and Fawcett: Concise Histol-
ogy, 2nd ed Oxford University Press, London.
15.	Ashley SW, Evoy D, Daly JM.Stomach, in Schwartz SI (ed): 
Principles of Surgery, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999, 
p 1181.
16.	Antonioli DA, Madara JL. Functional anatomy of the gastro-
intestinal tract, in Ming S-C, Goldman H (eds): Pathology of 
the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins, 1998, p 13.
17.	Feldman M: Gastric secretion, in Feldman M (ed). Sleisenger 
and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002, p 715.
18.	Loo VG, Bourgault AM, Poirier, L, et al. Host and pathogen 
factors for Clostridium Difficile infection and colonization. N 
Engl J Med. 2011; 365:1693-1703.
19.	Canani RB, Terrin G. Gastric acidity inhibitors and the risk 
of intestinal infections. Current Opinion in Gastroenterology 
2010; 26:31-35.
20.	Kopic S, Murek M, Geibel JP: Revisiting the parietal cell. Am 
J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010;298: C1-C10.
21.	Wolfe MM, Soll AH. The physiology of gastric acid secretion. 
N Engl J Med. 1988;319:1707-1715.
22.	Lloyd KCK, Debas HT. Hormonal and neural regulation of 
gastric acid secretion, in Johnson LR (ed): Physiology of the 
Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd ed. New York: Raven, 1993.
23.	 Del Valle J, Todisco A. Gastric secretion, in Yamada T, et al 
(eds): Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003, p 266.
24.	Wallace JL. Prostaglandins, NSAIDs, and gastric mucosal 
protection: why doesn’t the stomach digest itself? Physiol Rev. 
2008; 88:1547-1565.
25.	Choi SR, Lee SA, Kim YJ, et al. Role of heat shock proteins in 
gastric inflammation and ulcer healing. JPhysiol Pharmacol. 
2009;60: 5-17.
26.	Cummings DE, Overduin J. Gastrointestinal regulation of 
food intake. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:13-23.
27.	Badman MK, Flier JS. The gut and energy balance: visceral 
allies in the obesity wars. Science. 2005;307:1909-1914.
28.	Murray CD, Kamm MA, Bloom SR, et al. Ghrelin for the 
gastroenterologist: history and potential. Gastroenterology. 
2003;125:1492-1502.
29.	Ariyasu H, Takaya K, Tagami T, et al. Stomach is a major 
source of circulating ghrelin, and feeding state determines 
plasma ghrelin-like immuno reactivity levels in humans. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2001; 86:4753-4758.
30.	Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, et al. Plasma ghrelin 
levels after diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery. 
N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1623-1630.
31.	Karamanakos SN, Vagenas K, Kalfarentzos F, et al. Weight 
loss, appetite suppression, and changes in fasting and post-
prandial ghrelin and peptide-YY levels after Roux-en-Y 
1096
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: a prospective, double 
blind study. Ann Surg. 2008;247:401.
32.	Sanjeevi A. Gastric motility. CurrOpinGastroenterol. 2007; 
23:625.
33.	Parkman HP, Jones MP. Tests of gastric neuromuscular func-
tion. Gastroenterology. 2009; 136:1526-1543.
34.	Hasler WL: Physiology of gastric motility and gastric emptying, 
in Yamada T, et al (eds): Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003,p 195.
35.	Chial HJ, Camilleri M: Motility disorders of the stomach and 
small intestine, in Friedman SL, McQuaid KR, Grendell JH 
(eds): Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Gastroenterology, 
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003, p 355.
36.	Sanders KM, Koh SD, Ro S, Ward SM: Regulation of gas-
trointestinal motility—insights from smooth muscle biology. 
Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology. 2012; 
9:633-645.
37.	Deloose E, Janssen P, Depoortere I, Tack J: The migrating 
motor complex—control mechanisms and its role in health 
and disease. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatol-
ogy. 2012; 9:271-285.
38.	Marks JM, Ponsky JL: Diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy 
of the stomach and small bowel, in Yeo CJ, et al (eds): 
Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 6th ed. Phila-
delphia: Saunders, 2007.
39.	Furukawa K, Miyahara R, Itoh A, et al. Diagnosis of the inva-
sion depth of gastric cancer using MDCT with virtual gastros-
copy: comparison with staging with endoscopic ultrasound. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197:867-875.
40.	Chen CY, Hsu JS, Wu DC, et al. Gastric cancer: preopera-
tive local staging with 3D multidetector row CT—correla-
tion with surgical and histopathologic results. Radiology. 
2007;242:472-482.
41.	Shin KS, Kim SH, Han JK, et al. Three-dimensional MDCT 
gastrography compared with axial CT for the detection of early 
gastric cancer. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2007;31:741-749.
42.	Caddy GR, Chen RY. Current clinical applications of endo-
scopic ultrasound. ANZ J Surg 77:101-111.
43.	Power DG, Schattner MA, Gerdes H, et al. Endoscopic ultra-
sound can improve the selection for laparoscopy in patients with 
localized gastric cancer. J Am Coll Surg 2009;208:173-178.
44.	Jones DB. Role of endoscopic ultrasound in staging upper gas-
trointestinal cancers. ANZ J Surg. 2007;77:166-172.
45.	Balaji NS, Crookes PF, Banki F, et al. A safe and noninva-
sive test for vagal integrity revisited. Arch Surg. 2002;137: 
954-958.
46.	Vaira D, Gatta L, Ricci C, Miglioli M. Review article: diagno-
sis of Helicobacter pylori infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2002;16:105-113.
47.	Walsh JH, Peterson WL.The treatment of Helicobacter pylori 
infection in the management of peptic ulcer disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1995;333:984-991.
48.	Holle GE: Pathophysiology and modern treatment of ulcer 
disease. Int J Mol Med. 2010;25:483-491.
49.	Leong RW: Differences in peptic ulcer between the East and 
the West. GastroenterolClinNorth America. 2009;38:363-379.
50.	Brock J, Sauaia A, Ahnen D, et al: Process of care and out-
comes for elderly patients hospitalized with peptic ulcer 
disease: results from a quality improvement project. JAMA. 
286:1985-1993.
51.	Yang YR, Richter JE, Dempsey DT. Trends and outcomes of 
hospitalizations for peptic ulcer disease in the United States 
1993-2006. Annals of Surgery. 2010; 251:51-58.
52.	Spechler SJ. Peptic ulcer disease and its complications, in 
Feldman M (ed): Sleisinger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal 
and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002.
53.	Blaser MJ, Atherton JC. Helicobacter pylori persistence: biol-
ogy and disease. J Clin Invest. 2004;113:321-333.
54.	Fox JG, Wang TC: Inflammation, atrophy, and gastric 
cancer. J ClinInvest. 2007;117:60.
55.	McColl KE. Clinical practice. Helicobacter pylori infection. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1597-1604.
56.	Bedoui S, Kupz A, Wijberg OL, et al. Different bacte-
rial pathogens, different strategies, yet the aim is the same: 
evasion of intestinal dendritic cell recognition. J Immunol. 
2010;184:2237-2242.
57.	Graham DY, Lew GM, Klein PD, et al. Effect of treatment of 
Helicobacter pylori infection on the long-term recurrence of 
gastric or duodenal ulcer: arandomized controlled study. Ann 
Intern Med. 1992;116:705-708.
58.	Del Valle J, Chey WD, Scheiman JM. Acid peptic disorders, 
in Yamada T, et al (eds): Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003, p 
1321.
59.	Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC. Benign gastric ulcer, in Cameron 
JL (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: 
Mosby Elsevier, 2008, p 81.
60.	 Laine L. Approaches to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use 
in the high-risk patient. Gastroenterology. 2001;120:594-606.
61.	Lanas A. A review of the gastrointestinal safety data—a gas-
troenterologist’s perspective. Rheumatology. 2010;49:ii3-ii10.
62.	Abraham NS, Hlatky MA, Antman EM, et al: ACCF/ACG/
AHA Expert consensus document on the concomitant use of 
proton pump inhibitors and thienopyridines: a focused update 
of the ACCF/ACG/AHA 2008 consensus document on reduc-
ing the gastrointestinal risks of antiplatet therapy and NSAID 
use. Circulation. 2010;122:2619-2633.
63.	Chey WD, Wong BCY, Practice Parameters Committee of the 
American College of Gastroenterology. American College of 
Gastroenterology guideline on the management of Helicobacter 
pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102:1808-1825.
64.	Blatchford O, Murray WR. A risk score to predict need for 
treatment for upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Lancet. 
2000;356:1318-1321.
65.	Dallal HJ, Palmer KR. ABC of the upper gastrointestinal tract: 
Upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. BMJ. 2001;323:1115-
1117.
66.	Gralnek IM, Barkun AN, Bardou M. Management of acute 
bleeding from peptic ulcer. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:928.
66A.  Lo CC, Hsu PI, Lo GH, et al. Comparison of hemostatic effi-
cacy for epinephrine injection alone and injection combined 
with hemoclip therapy in treating high-risk bleeding ulcers. 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. 2006;63:767-773.
67.	Harbison SP, Dempsey DT. Peptic ulcer disease. Curr 
Probl Surg. 2005;42:346.
68.	Mulholland MW, Debas HT. Chronic duodenal and gastric 
ulcer. Surg Clin North Am. 1987;67:489.
69.	Tavakkolizadeh A, Ashley SW. Operations for peptic ulcer, in 
Yeo CJ, et al (eds): Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary 
Tract, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2007, p 791.
69A.  Maki T, Shiratoti T, Hatafuku T, et al. Pyrolus-preserving 
gastrectomy as an improved operation for gastric ulcer. Sur-
gery. 1967; 61: 838-842.
69B.  Morita S, Katai H, Saka T, et al. Outcome of pyrolus-preserv-
ing gastrectomy for early gastric cancer. Br J Surg. 2008;95: 
1131-1135.
70.	Gilliam AD, Speake WJ, Lobo DN, et al. Current practice of 
emergency vagotomy and Helicobacter pylori eradication for 
complicated peptic ulcer in the United Kingdom. Br J Surg. 
2003;90:88-90.
71.	Reuben BC, Neumayer LA. Variations reported in surgi-
cal practice for bleeding duodenal ulcers. Am J Surg. 2006; 
192:e42-e45.
72.	Lau JYW, Sung JJY, Lee KKC, et al. Effect of intravenous 
omeprazole on recurrent bleeding after endoscopic treatment 
of bleeding peptic ulcers. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:310-316.
1097
Stomach
CHAPTER 26
73.	Lau JY, Sung JJ, Lam YH, et al. Endoscopic retreatment com-
pared with surgery in patients with recurrent bleeding after 
initial endoscopic control of bleeding ulcers. N Engl J Med. 
1999;340:751-756.
74.	Kahi CJ, Jensen DM, Sung JJ, et al. Endoscopic therapy ver-
sus medical therapy for bleeding peptic ulcer with adherent 
clot: a meta-analysis. Gastroenterology. 2005;129:855-862.
75.	Yusuf TE, Brugge WR. Endoscopic therapy of benign pyloric 
stenosis and gastric outlet obstruction. Curr Opin Gastroen-
terol. 2006;22:570-573.
76.	Csendes A, Maluenda F, Braghetto I, et al. Prospective ran-
domized study comparing three surgical techniques for the 
treatment of gastric outlet obstruction secondary to duodenal 
ulcer. Am J Surg. 1993;166:45-49.
77.	Fendrich V, Langer P, Waldmann J, et al. Management of spo-
radic and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gastrinomas. 
Br J Surg. 2007;94:1331-1341.
78.	Dolan JP, Norton JA: Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome, in Yeo CJ, 
et al (eds). Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier, 2007, p 862.
79.	Orlando LA, Lenard L, Orlando RC: Chronic hypergas-
trinemia: causes and consequences. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52: 
2482-2489.
80.	Ying L, Harris A, Ying M, et al. Prophylaxis for stress-related 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Cochrane Upper Gastrointestinal 
and Pancreatic Diseases Group Cochrane Database of Sys-
tematic Reviews. 3, 2008.
81.	Alhazzani W, Alenezi F, Jaeschke RZ, et al. Proton pump 
inhibitors versus histamine 2 receptor antagonists for stress 
ulcer prophylaxis in critically ill patients: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Critical Care Medicine. 2013;41: 693-705.
82.	Marik PE, Vasu T, Hirani A, et al: Stress ulcer prophylaxis in 
the new millennium: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Crit Care Med. 2010;38: 2222-2228.
83.	Siegel R, Naishadham, D, Jermal A. Cancer statistics 2012. 
CaCancer J Clin. 2012;62: 10-29.
84.	Correa P, Houghton J. Carcinogenesis of Helicobacter pylori. 
Gastroenterology. 2007;133:659-672.
85.	Leung WK, Ng EKW, Sung JJY.Tumors of the stomach, in 
Yamada T, et al (eds): Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003.
86.	McColl KE, Watabe H, Derakhshan MH. Role of gastric atro-
phy in mediating negative association between Helicobacter 
pylori infection and reflux oesophagitis, Barrett’s oesophagus 
and oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Gut. 2008;57:721.
87.	ZurHausen A, van Rees BP, van Beek J, et al. Epstein-Barr 
virus in gastric carcinomas and gastric stump carcinomas: alate 
event in gastric carcinogenesis. J ClinPathol. 2004;57:487-491.
88.	Norton JA, Ham CM, Dam JV, et al. CDH1 truncating muta-
tions in the E-cadherin gene: an indication for total gastrec-
tomy to treat hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Ann Surg. 
2007;245:873.
89.	Song JH, Meltzer SJ. MicroRNAs in the pathogenesis, diagno-
sis, and treatment of gastroesophageal cancers. Gastroenterol-
ogy. 2012;143:35-47.
90.	Chiba T, Marusawa H, Ushijima T. Inflammation associated 
cancer development in digestive organs—mechanisms and 
roles for genetic and epigenetic modulation. Gastroenterol-
ogy. 2012;143:550-563.
90A.  Park DY, Lauwers GY.Gastric polyps—classification and 
management. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008;132:633-640.
91.	Shimoyama S, Aoki F, Kawahara M, et al. Early gastric cancer 
development in a familial adenomatous polyposis patient. Dig 
Dis Sci. 2004;49:260-265.
92.	Gylling A, Abdel-Rahman WM, Juhola M, et al. Is gastric 
cancer part of the tumour spectrum of hereditary non-polyposis 
colorectal cancer? A molecular genetic study. Gut. 2007; 
56:926-933.
93.	Schaefer N, Sinning C, Standop J, et al. Treatment and prog-
nosis of gastric stump carcinoma in comparison with primary 
proximal gastric cancer. Am J Surg. 2007;194:63-67.
94.	Ono H. Early gastric cancer: diagnosis, pathology, treatment 
techniques, and treatment outcomes. Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2006;18:863-866.
94A.  Pyrhonen S, Kuitunen T, Nyandoto P, Kouri M. Randomised 
comparison of fluorouracil, epidoxorubicin, and methotrex-
ate (FEMTX) plus supportive care with supportive care alone 
in patients with non-resectable gastric cancer. Br J Cancer. 
1995;71: 587-591.
94B.  Bang YJ, Van Cutsem E, Feyereislova A, et al. Transtuzumab 
in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy 
alone for treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or 
gastroesophageal junction cancer (TOGA): a phase 3 open 
label randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;376:687-697.
94C.  Li HY, Dai J, Xue HB, et al. Application of magnifying 
endoscopy with narrow band imaging in diagnosing gastric 
lesions: a prospective study. Gastrointestinal Endosc. 2012; 
76:1124-1132.
94D.  Neumann H, Fuchs FS, Vieth M, et al: Review article—in 
vivo imaging by endocytoscopy. Alimentary Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics. 2011;33:1183-1193.
95.	Chen J, Cheong JH, Yun MJ, et al. Improvement in preopera-
tive staging of gastric adenocarcinoma with positron emission 
tomography. Cancer. 2005;103:2383-2390,2005.
96.	Wong J, Coit D. Detection of gastric cancer peritoneal metas-
tases by peritoneal lavage: current limitations and future per-
spectives. Surgery. 2012;152:1-4.
97.	Sarela AI, Lefkowitz R, Brennan MF, et al. Selection of 
patients with gastric adenocarcinoma for laparoscopic stag-
ing. Am J Surg. 2006;191:134-138.
98.	Dicken BJ, Bigam DL, Cass C, et al: Gastric adenocar-
cinoma: Review and considerations for future directions. 
Ann Surg. 2005;241:27-39.
99.	Cho CS, Brennan MF.Gastric adenocarcinoma, in Cameron JL 
(ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 
2008.
100.	Karpeh MS, Leon L, Klimstra D, Brennan MF. Lymph node 
staging in gastric cancer: is location more important than 
number? An analysis of 1038 patients. Ann Surg. 2000; 232: 
362-371.
101.	Saidi RF, ReMine SG, Dudrick PS, et al. Is there a role for 
palliative gastrectomy in patients with stage IV gastric cancer? 
World J Surg. 2006;30:21-27.
102.	Fein M, Fuchs KH, Thalheimer A, et al. Long-term benefits 
of Roux-en-Y pouch reconstruction after total gastrectomy: A 
randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2008;247:759.
103.	 Bonenkamp JJ, Hermans J, Sasako M, et al. Extended lymph 
node dissection for gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999; 340:908.
104.	Cuschieri A, Fayers P, Fielding J, et al. Postoperative morbid-
ity and mortality after D1 and D2 resections for gastric cancer: 
preliminary results of the MRC randomised controlled surgical 
trial. The Surgical Cooperative Group. Lancet. 1996;347:995.
104A.  de Bree E, Charalampakis V, Melissas J, Tsiftsis D. The 
extent of lymph node dissection for gastric cancer: a critical 
appraisal. J Surgi Oncol. 2010;102(6):552-562.
104B.  Vallbohmer D, Oh DS, Peters JH: The role of lymphadenec-
tomy  in surgical treatment of esophageal and gastric cancer. 
Current Problems in Surgery. 2012;49:471-515.
105.	Macdonald JS, Smalley SR, Benedetti J, et al. Chemoradio-
therapy after surgery compared with surgery alone for adeno-
carcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction. N Engl 
J Med. 2001;345:725-730.
105A.  Sasako M, et al. Five-year outcomes of a randomized phase 
III trial comparing adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 versus 
surgery alone in stage II or III gastric cancer. J ClinOncol. 
2011;29: 4387-4393.
1098
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
105B.  Bang YJ, Kim YW, Yang HK, et al. Adjuvant capecitabine 
and oxaliplatin for gastric cancer after D2 gastrectomy 
(CLASSIC): a phase 3 open-label, randomized controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2012;379: 315-321.
106.	Sasako M, Sano T, Yamamoto S, et al. D2 lymphadenectomy 
alone or with para-aortic nodal dissection for gastric cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2008;359:453-462.
106A.  VanCutsem E, Moiseyenko VM, Tjulandin S, et al: Phase 
III study of docetaxel and cisplatin plus fluorouracil com-
pared with cisplatin and fluorouracil as first-line chemo-
therapy for advanced gastric cancer: areport of the V325 
study group. J ClinOncol. 2006;24: 4991-4997.
106B.  Gomez-Martin C, Garralda E, Echerri MJ; HER2/neu test-
ing for anti-HER2 based therapies in patients with unresect-
able and/or metastatic gastric cancer. J Clin Path. 2012;65: 
751-757.
106C.  Baptista V, Singh A, Wassef W. Early gastric cancer: an 
update on endoscopic management. Current Opinion in 
Gastroenterology. 2012;28(6):629-635.
107.	Yoon SS, Coit DG, Portlock CS, et al.The diminishing role 
of surgery in the treatment of gastric lymphoma. Ann Surg. 
2004;240:28-37.
107A.  Farinha P, Gascoyne RD: Helicobacter pylori and MALT 
lymphoma. Gastroenterology. 2005;128: 1579-1605.
108.	Gold JS, DeMatteo RP. Combined surgical and molecular 
therapy: The gastrointestinal stromal tumor model. Ann 
Surg. 2006;244:176-184.
109.	Rubin BP, Heinrich MC, Corless CL. Gastrointestinal stromal 
tumour. Lancet. 2007;369:1731-1741.
110.	Stelow EB, Murad FM, Debol SM, et al. A limited immu-
nocytochemical panel for the distinction of subepithelial gas-
trointestinal mesenchymal neoplasms sampled by endoscopic 
ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration. Am J ClinPathol. 
2008;129:219-225.
110A.  Fletcher CD, et al. Diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors: a consensus approach. Hum Pathol. 2002;33: 
459-464.
110B.  Miettinen M, et al: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: Pathol-
ogy and prognosis at different sites. Semin Diagn Pathol. 
2006;23:70-83.
110C.  DeMatteo RP, Ballman KV, Antonescu CR, et al: Adju-
vant imatinib mesylate after resection of localised, primary 
gastrointestinal stromal tumor: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:1097-1104.
110D.  von Mehren M, et al: Soft tissue sarcoma, version 2:  fea-
tured updates to the NCCN guidelines. J Natl Compr Canc 
Netw. 2012;10(8):951-960.
111.	Raut CP, Kulke MH, Glickman JN, et al. Carcinoid tumors. 
Curr Probl Surg. 2006;43:383-450.
112.	Modlin IM, Kidd M, Latich I, et al. Current status of gastroin-
testinal carcinoids. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:1717-1751.
113.	Mulkeen A, Cha C. Gastric carcinoid. CurrOpinOncol. 
2005;17:1-6.
114.	Parkman HP, Hasler WL, Fisher RS. American Gastroen-
terological Association technical review on the diagnosis 
and treatment of gastroparesis. Gastroenterology. 2004;127: 
1592-1622.
115.	Yin J, Chen JD. Implantable gastric electrical stimulation: 
Ready for prime time? Gastroenterology. 2008;134:665-667.
115A.  Zehetner J, Ravari F, Ayazi S, et al. Minimally invasive 
surgical approach for the treatment of gastroparesis. Surgi-
cal Endoscopy. 2013;27(1):61-66.
116.	Cappell MS, Friedel D. Initial management of acute upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding-from initial evaluation to gastroin-
testinal endoscopy. Med Clin North Am. 2008; 92:491-509.
117.	Dempsey DT, Burke DR, Reilly RS, et al. Angiography in 
poor-risk patients with massive nonvariceal upper gastroin-
testinal bleeding. Am J Surg. 159:282-286.
118.	Zaman A. Portal hypertension related bleeding-management 
of difficult cases. Clin Liver Dis. 2006;10:353-370.
119.	Coffey RJ, Washington MK, Corless CL, et al. Ménétrier dis-
ease and gastrointestinal stromal tumors: hyperproliferative-
disorders of the stomach. J Clin Invest. 2007;117:70.
120.	Sebastian S, O’Morain CA, Buckley MJ. Current therapeutic 
options for gastric antral vascular ectasia. Aliment Pharmacol-
Ther. 2003; 18:157-165.
121.	Akhras J, Patel P, Tobi M. Dieulafoy’s lesion-like bleeding: 
an under-recognized cause of upper gastrointestinal hemor-
rhage in patients with advanced liver disease. Dig Dis Sci. 
2007; 52:722-726.
122.	Harbison SP, Dempsey DT. Mallory-Weiss syndrome, in 
Cameron JL (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadel-
phia: Mosby, 2008.
123.	Schrag SP, Sharma R, Jaik NP, et al. Complications related 
to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes. A 
comprehensive clinical review. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 
2007;16:407-418.
124.	McClave SA. Critical care nutrition: getting involved as a 
gastrointestinal endoscopist. J ClinGastroenterol. 2006;40: 
870-890.
125.	Dempsey DT. Reoperative gastric surgery and postgastrec-
tomy syndromes, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 161.
126.	Meilahn JE, Dempsey DT. Postgastrectomy problems: Reme-
dial operations and therapy, in Cameron JL (ed): Current Sur-
gical Therapy, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Mosby, 2004.
127.	Ukleja A: Dumping syndrome: pathophysiology and treat-
ment. NutrClinPract. 2005; 20:517-525.
127A.  Cuschieri A: Postvagotomy diarrhea: is there a place for 
surgical management? Gut. 1990; 31:245-246.
128.	Forster-Barthell AW, Murr MM, Nitecki S, et al. Near-total 
completion gastrectomy for severe postvagotomy gastric sta-
sis: analysis of early and long-term results in 62 patients. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 1999;3:15-21.
129.	Jones MP, Maganti K. A systematic review of surgical therapy 
for gastroparesis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:2122-2129.
130.	Van der Milje HC, Kleibeuker JH, Limburg AJ, et al. Mano-
metric and scintigraphic studies of the relation between 
motility disturbances in the Roux limb and the Roux-en-Y 
syndrome. Am J Surg. 1993;166:11-17.
131.	Farrell TM, Hunter JG. Laparoscopic surgery of the stomach 
and duodenum, in Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed., Vol. II. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2002, p 202.
132.	Anderson C, Ellenhorn J, HellanM, Pigazzi A. Pilot series of 
robot-assisted laparoscopic assisted subtotal gastrectomy with 
extended lymphadenectomy for gastric cancer. Surg Endosc. 
2007;21:1662-1666.
133.	Lee J, Kim W. Clinical experience of 528 laparoscopic gas-
trectomies on gastric cancer in a single institution. Surgery. 
2013;153(5):611-618.
133A.  Zeng YK, Yang ZL, Peng JS, et al. Laparoscopy-Assisted 
versus open distal gastrectomy for early gastric cancer. 
Annals of Surgery. 2012;256: 39-52.
134.	Kaehler G, Schoenberg MB, Kienle P, Post S, Magdeburg R. 
Transgastric appendicectomy. Br J Surg. 2013;100(7):911.
135.	Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al. Dutch 
Pancreatitis Study Group. Endoscopic transgastric vs surgical 
necrosectomy for infected necrotizing pancreatitis: a random-
ized trial. JAMA 2012;307:1053-1061.
The Surgical Management of 
Obesity
Philip R. Schauer and Bruce Schirmer
27
INTRODUCTION
The surgical treatment of obesity has evolved to focus more spe-
cifically on the treatment of medical comorbidities associated 
with obesity than simply obesity itself. While bariatric surgery 
remains the overriding name of the field, the importance of treat-
ment of the metabolic aspects of obesity has caused the primary 
society of surgeons treating these problems to rename the soci-
ety the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery 
(ASMBS). The nomenclature reflects the new emphasis of treat-
ing the metabolic consequences of obesity surgically. For the 
first time in the history of bariatric surgery, considerable effort 
is being devoted to scientifically study the physiologic mecha-
nisms that help promote weight loss and, more importantly, res-
olution of comorbid medical problems associated with obesity.
Other major changes in the field of bariatric surgery in 
the United States since the last edition of this text include the 
introduction and rapid adoption worldwide of the laparoscopic 
sleeve gastrectomy and the simultaneous decreasing popularity 
of the laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding procedure.
The bariatric surgery community also has focused on 
improvement of outcomes and treatment for patients. The Cen-
ters of Excellence (COE) concept is an obvious example in the 
United States, but internationally, greater attention to outcomes 
and optimal results has been uniform. Improved outcomes have 
been documented in the literature, as have notable prospective 
randomized trials of medical versus surgical therapy. In the 
United States, a very recent study has challenged the concept 
that improved outcomes arise in COEs, citing data that Medicare 
patients had similar complication rates after surgery before and 
after the institution of a policy of surgery approval only at COEs.1
Introduction	
1099
The Disease of Obesity	
1100
Prevalence and Contributing Factors / 1101
Concurrent Medical and Social  
Problems / 1101
Prognosis / 1101
Medical Management	
1101
Overview of Bariatric Surgery	
1102
Evolution of Bariatric Surgery / 1103
The Bariatric Revolution / 1103
Indications / 1104
Contraindications / 1104
Preoperative Issues	
1105
Patient Selection / 1105
Preoperative Preparation / 1105
Anesthesiology Issues / 1106
Bariatric Surgical Procedures	
1107
Laparoscopic versus Open  
Procedures / 1107
Postoperative Follow-Up / 1107
Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric  
Banding / 1108
Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric  
Bypass / 1112
Open Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass / 1118
Biliopancreatic Diversion and  
Duodenal Switch / 1119
Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy / 1121
Special Issues Relating to  
the Bariatric Patient	
1125
Bariatric Procedures in Adolescent  
and Elderly Patients / 1125
The Female Patient: Pregnancy and  
Gynecologic Issues in the Bariatric  
Surgery Patient / 1126
Metabolic Surgery / 1126
Resolution of Other Comorbid  
Medical Problems / 1128
Plastic Surgery after Weight Loss / 1129
Endoscopic, Electric, and Other  
Experimental Procedures / 1129
chapter 
Extension of the indication for metabolic surgery to 
patients with class 1 obesity (body mass index, 30–35 kg/m2) 
has been another development during the past few years.2 The 
regulatory and scientific communities have been more willing 
to acknowledge the efficacy of metabolic surgery for treating 
comorbid medical problems, such as diabetes, than have the 
payors. Insurance coverage for appropriately qualified patients 
remains one of the biggest barriers to the access of appropriate 
care for patients suffering from morbid obesity.
Acknowledgement of morbid obesity as a disease has 
recently been adopted by the American Medical Association.3 
This comes years after the recognition by the Centers for Medi-
care and Medicaid Services (CMS) of obesity as a disease,4 a 
reversal of the usual situation in which medical organizations 
are ahead of payors in recognition of such issues. Despite CMS 
recognition, regional administrators of CMS still raise unneces-
sary barriers and make access to care for morbidly obese patients 
difficult. Long waiting periods, denials for arbitrary issues, and 
mandatory 6- to 12-month “diet” plans with no requirement for 
actually losing weight continue to dominate the landscape of 
the patient seeking metabolic and bariatric surgery. What is also 
becoming as big an issue for other patients who have had bariat-
ric surgery is denial of subsequent coverage for any emergency 
complications of the original operation if the patient’s new 
insurance plan does not cover bariatric surgery. Although the 
new Affordable Care Act will potentially eliminate the inability 
to obtain insurance because of pre-existing conditions, there is 
no guarantee that patients who have had bariatric surgery will 
be afforded the same rights to payment for emergent and needed 
surgery should a subsequent complication arise.
The merger of the COE systems of the ASMBS and the 
American College of Surgeons (ACS) has been a major posi-
tive event in recent years as well. Thanks to the leadership of 
Robin Blackwell, M.D., ASMBS President from 2011 to 2012, 
supported by the ASMBS Executive Council, the ASMBS took 
the initiative to merge with the ACS to create a single uniform 
system acceptable to both groups and clearly more authoritative 
due to its singular position. The ACS, to its credit, provided 
large fiscal and human resources to support the merger and 
adoption of a single COE system. Since the merger, the incorpo-
ration of virtually all the centers in the two systems has occurred 
under one new system. Outcomes, as reported for review by the 
oversight committee, are better than ever. Our patients have thus 
been well served.
THE DISEASE OF OBESITY
Obesity is the second leading cause of preventable death in the 
United States, currently outdone only by smoking. However, 
obesity as a separate disease entity is still underappreciated and 
certainly misunderstood. The fact that the American Medical 
Association waited until the summer of 2013 to acknowledge 
obesity as a disease entity illustrates this statement.
Obesity is a disease and is likely multifactorial in its ori-
gin. We may come to a simpler and direct understanding of 
its pathogenesis in the future with increased understanding of 
molecular genetics, but for now, it remains a complex issue. The 
components of the disease likely include a combination of envi-
ronmental and genetic factors. The recent rapid rise in the inci-
dence of obesity in less than a generational time suggests that 
genetic etiologies alone cannot be responsible for the disease. 
Nevertheless, the numerous factors contributing to the disease 
increase the difficulty in understanding its causes.
The degrees of obesity are defined by body mass index 
(BMI = weight [kg]/height [m]2), which correlates body weight 
with height. Controversy exists as to the most accurate system by 
1100
Key Points
1 	 Surgical therapy is the only effective and proven therapy for 
patients with severe obesity (body mass index >40 kg/m2). 
Bariatric operations prolong survival and resolve comorbid 
medical conditions associated with severe obesity.
2 	 During the years 1999 to 2003, called the Bariatric Revolution 
in the United States, the availability of a laparoscopic approach 
for bariatric operations caused major changes in the field, 
including a massive increase in the number of procedures per-
formed as well as an increased publc and professional awareness 
and understanding of the field.
3 	 Bariatric operations involve either restriction of caloric 
intake or malabsorption of nutrients, or both. Long-term 
follow-up is essential before the merits of an operation can 
be confirmed.
4 	 Patients who develop a bowel obstruction after laparoscopic 
gastric bypass require surgical and not conservative therapy 
due to the high incidence of internal hernias and the potential 
for bowel infarction.
5 	 Malabsorptive operations are highly effective in producing 
durable weight loss but have considerable nutritional side 
effects. Patients undergoing such procedures require complete 
follow-up and must take appropriate nutritional supplements.
6 	 The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is the most commonly per-
formed bariatric procedure, whereas the sleeve gastrec-
tomy is the most rapidly increasing procedure worldwide.
7 	 All bariatric operations are tools that serve to allow the 
patient to lose weight, become healthier, and improve their 
quality of life. These changes are only maintained long-
term if the patient permanently adopts the new eating pat-
terns and exercise habits that are taught and expected in the 
early year(s) after surgery.
8 	 Bariatric surgery is also metabolic surgery, treating the var-
ied metabolic consequences of the comorbid diseases aris-
ing from severe obesity. Some operations are particularly 
effective treatments for such metabolic consequences, such 
as gastric bypass for type 2 diabetes.
which to classify obesity. BMI has its inaccuracies, especially for 
the heavily muscled individual who may weigh more but have a 
low amount of body fat. However, BMI is the clinically easiest 
system to use, employing the simply measured parameters of 
height and weight. The World Health Organization classifica-
tion of obesity is given in Table 27-1. It should be noted that 
for Asian populations, classifications remain the same as the 
international classification, but the public health action points 
for interventions are set at 23, 27.5, 32.5, and 37.5 kg/m2.
Table 27-1
World Health Organization classification of obesity by 
body mass index (BMI)*
BMI (kg/m2)
Classification
Principal cut-off 
points
Cut-off points 
for Asians*
Normal range
18.5–24.9
18.5–22.9
23.0–24.9
Pre-obese
25.0–29.9
25.0–27.4
27.5–29.9
Obese class I
30.0–34.9
30.0–32.4
32.5–34.9
Obese class II
35.0–39.9
35.0–37.4
37.5–39.9
Obese class III
≥40.0
≥40.0
*For Asian populations, classifications remain the same as the interna-
tional classification, but that public health action points for interven-
tions are set at 23, 27.5, 32.5 and 37.5 kg/m2 204. 
Source: Adapted from the World Health Organization (WHO) 2000205.
1101
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Prevalence and Contributing Factors
Severe obesity is reaching epidemic proportions in the United 
States and dramatically increasing throughout the rest of the 
world. Since 1960, surveys of the prevalence of obesity have 
been conducted every decade by the National Center for Health 
Statistics. Data on obesity statistics have been updated annu-
ally since 1985. The latest figures for obesity incidence in the 
United States are that 35.7% of U.S. adults are obese (class 1 
or higher).5
Genetic and environmental factors contribute to the devel-
opment of obesity. While children of parents of normal weight 
have a 10% chance of becoming obese, the children of two 
obese parents have an 80% to 90% chance of developing obe-
sity by adulthood. The weight of adopted children correlates 
strongly with the weight of their birth parents. Furthermore, 
concordance rates for obesity in monozygotic twins are doubled 
compared to others.6 Diet and culture are important factors as 
well; these environmental factors contribute significantly to the 
epidemic of obesity in the United States since the rapid increase 
in obesity during the past two decades cannot be explained by 
any genetic etiology.
Other factors appear to contribute significantly to severe 
obesity. Intermittent or consistent excessive caloric intake 
occurs. The lack of satiety, on a consistent or intermittent 
basis, appears to be strongly correlated to such episodes of 
excessive caloric ingestion. As yet, the physiologic basis for 
the explanation of such lack of satiety is not understood. Other 
factors commonly suggested to play a role in the disease of 
obesity include decreased energy expenditure from reduced 
metabolic activity, reduction in the thermogenic response to 
meals, an abnormally high set-point for body weight, or a 
decrease in the loss of heat energy. Another factor that may 
influence absorption of ingested food is intraluminal bacterial 
composition of the intestinal tract. Studies have documented 
a difference in the composition of the intestinal flora of obese 
versus normal-weight individuals.7
Obese individuals have excessive adipose cells, both in 
size and number. The number of such cells often is determined 
early in life; adult-onset obesity is largely a product of increase 
in adipose cell size. Weight gain results from increase in both 
adipose cell size and number. Adipose tissue may be deposited 
in large quantities in the subcutaneous layer of the abdominal 
wall or the viscera. Males tend to have central visceral fat distri-
bution, whereas females more often have a peripheral or gluteal 
fat distribution. Central or visceral fat distribution is associated 
with metabolic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and the 
metabolic syndrome.8
Concurrent Medical and Social Problems
The severely obese patient often presents with chronic weight-
related problems, detailed below. However, the single most 
difficult aspect of the disease of severe obesity for those suf-
fering from it is the discrimination they face from the rest of 
the population with respect to social stigmatization. This preju-
dice against obesity remains the last unlegislated discrimina-
tion in existence. Obese individuals are routinely discriminated 
against in terms of employment. Public facilities often do not 
allow them to participate in activities. Examples include the size 
of airline seats and bathrooms, the availability of appropriate 
clothing options, and the size of automobile cabins. Severely 
obese individuals are thought of by much of the public as being 
lazy or gluttonous and lacking self-discipline. They often endure 
not only discrimination and prejudice, but outright ridicule and 
disrespect. Consequently, the stigma of severe obesity has 
a major impact on social function and emotional well-being. 
Thus, psychological disorders such as depression are found in 
an extraordinarily high incidence in this population versus the 
general public. Poor self-image is almost universal among obese 
individuals.
Significant comorbidities, defined as medical problems 
associated with or caused by obesity, are numerous. The most 
prevalent and acknowledged of these include degenerative joint 
disease, low back pain, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), cholelithiasis, type 
2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypercholesterolemia, asthma, 
hypoventilation syndrome of obesity, fatal cardiac arrhythmias, 
right-sided heart failure, migraine headaches, pseudotumor 
cerebri, venous stasis ulcers, deep venous thrombosis, fungal 
skin rashes, skin abscesses, stress urinary incontinence, infer-
tility, dysmenorrhea, depression, abdominal wall hernias, and 
an increased incidence of various cancers such as those of the 
uterus, breast, colon, and prostate.9
Prognosis
Obesity has a profound effect on overall health and life expec-
tancy, largely secondary to weight-related comorbidities. It 
is estimated that a severely obese male at age 21 will live 12 
years less and a woman 9 years less than a nonobese individual. 
The incidence of severe obesity in the population is compara-
ble for females below and above the age of 50 years, whereas 
for men, it is decreased above age 50. This is due to the fact 
that the severely obese man often is dead of comorbid medi-
cal conditions, especially cardiac arrhythmias and coronary 
artery disease, by age 50. A study carried out by the Veterans 
Administration showed a 12-fold increase in mortality among 
200 morbidly obese men age 25 to 34 years and a six-fold 
increase in mortality among those age 35 to 44 years over a 
7-year follow-up period.10 Decreased quality of life also results 
due to severe obesity. Most patients seeking surgical treatment 
of severe obesity do so because of the medical issues they face 
from comorbid conditions or the decreased quality of life they 
are experiencing as a result of severe obesity. Bariatric surgery 
can significantly prolong the lifespan of a severely obese 
individual, as well as improve the quality of that life.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
Medical treatment for severe obesity is aimed at reducing body 
weight with a combination of decreased caloric intake and 
accompanying increases in energy expended from moderate 
exercise. This method of weight loss is the safest possible and 
may work well for obese individuals who have modest amounts 
of weight to lose to regain normal body weight or return to being 
simply overweight instead of obese. However, for the severely 
obese individual, who usually must lose at least 75 or more 
pounds to achieve elimination of obesity, this daunting task 
is extremely difficult. The success rate for the severely obese 
patient population that tries dieting and exercise as a means of 
losing enough weight to no longer be obese and maintaining that 
weight loss is only approximately 3%.
Although the success rate is limited with diet and exercise 
alone, all severely obese individuals are asked to attempt this 
route of weight loss prior to undertaking any surgical therapy. 
1
1102
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
There are two main reasons for this. The first is to allow those 
who can achieve such weight loss through the safest possible 
means to do so. The second, and by far the most practical, is to 
have the severely obese individual begin to appreciate and prac-
tice the lifestyle changes that must ultimately become routine 
for them once weight loss is achieved, by whatever means. Thus 
the dieting and exercise of conservative weight loss plans are 
important preparation for the incorporation of such habits into 
the patient’s lifestyle postoperatively after bariatric surgery. The 
adjustment of the patient’s lifestyle to include these measures is 
the key to long-term success with any bariatric operation. Fail-
ure to do so usually results in regain of weight and sacrifice of 
any health benefits initially gained by the immediate postopera-
tive weight loss.
The treatment of severe obesity should be initiated with 
simple lifestyle changes, including moderate reduction of 
caloric intake and beginning an exercise plan. Walking is the 
most common choice for this patient population, who may be 
unable to perform extremely vigorous exercise initially. Medi-
cal comorbidities must be identified and treated. Usually the 
patient’s primary care physician will have already accomplished 
this, but we do at times identify bariatric-related comorbidities 
on initial history and physical examination in our clinic.
The severely obese patient will usually have been given 
dietary counseling by his or her primary care physician and 
often placed on a medically supervised diet. Most patients also 
have attempted commercially sponsored diets and diet plans. 
Success following these is not uncommon, but sustained weight 
loss for more than a year after stopping the program is uncom-
mon. While primary care physicians usually do an outstanding 
job of identifying and treating comorbid medical problems, their 
offices usually do not have the related support staff in terms 
of nutritionists and psychologists, who are often very helpful 
in providing services to the severely obese patient undergoing 
significant lifestyle changes.
Lifestyle changes of diet, exercise, and behavior modi-
fication constitute the first tier of therapy for obesity. Dietary 
restriction and exercise can each independently create a 
caloric deficit. A daily energy deficit of 500 kcal/d, result-
ing in a weekly deficit of 3500 kcal, results in the loss of 
1 lb of fat weekly. It has been shown that low-calorie diets 
(800–1500 kcal/d) are as effective as very-low-calorie diets at 
1 year, but result in a lower rate of nutritional deficiencies.11 
Such diets may produce an average of 8% body weight loss 
over a 6-month period. Longer follow-up shows recidivism. 
Physical activity of a moderate daily nature can produce a 2% 
to 3% body weight loss.12
A behavioral modification program, which provides desir-
able rewards for meeting short-term dietary or exercise require-
ments, was shown in combination with diet and exercise to 
produce as much as a 10% weight loss at 6 months in one study. 
This weight loss was only sustained in 60% of patients at 40 
weeks,13 and at 1 year, the average sustained weight loss was 
decreased to 8.6%.14
Dietary, exercise, or behavior modification therapy is 
appropriate treatment for patients who are overweight (BMI 
<30 kg/m2) and highly recommended for patients with a BMI 
between 30 and 35 kg/m2. Most of the studies looking at dietary 
therapy do not include a patient population that is largely obese 
(BMI >30 kg/m2). Dietary therapy can be effective in producing 
improvements in comorbid conditions such as diabetes melli-
tus, with weight loss of 2.3% to 3.7% influencing the disease.15 
Thus, lifestyle changes can be effective in improving the health 
of the nonobese, but less so for the obese population.
Pharmacologic therapy is also an option for patients 
attempting to lose weight. Unfortunately, the number of effec-
tive pharmacologic agents is small compared to the number of 
products sold with allegations that they will promote or support 
weight loss. Pharmacotherapy is normally used only after life-
style changes and dietary therapies have failed. It is used either 
as primary therapy alone or in conjunction with simultaneous 
diet and exercise therapy.
Orlistat inhibits gastric and pancreatic lipase enzymes 
that promote lipid absorption in the intestine.16 It produces 
a weight loss of between 6% and 10% of body weight after 
1 year, but cessation of the drug usually results in prompt 
regain of lost weight.16 Pharmacotherapy is recommended as 
an adjunctive or supplementary therapy to lifestyle changes 
including diet and exercise or behavioral therapy by the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) consensus guidelines 
for treatment of obesity.17 Two new medications have been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) within 
the past few years for weight loss. Qsymia, a combination of 
phentermine and topiramate, produced a 5% weight loss in 
over 70% of patients after 1 year.18 Lorcaserin (Belviq), a cen-
tral serotonin agonist, produced a 5% weight loss in 47% of 
patients taking the medication.19
Since medical therapies are almost uniformly ineffective 
long-term for patients with severe obesity, the severely obese 
patient tends to continue to gain weight over time. The num-
ber and strength of prescribed medications slowly increase as 
the medical comorbidities become increasingly worse. Unfor-
tunately, for the majority of severely obese patients, this pro-
cess continues unabated until death results eventually from the 
comorbidities. Until recently, less than 1% of severely obese 
patients underwent surgical treatment for obesity annually. 
That number has now increased, but still is not over 2% of 
individuals. Even accounting for patients referred for surgery 
and felt to be poor candidates, it is likely that less than 5% of 
patients with severe obesity are referred on an annual basis. 
Part of this issue may be patient aversion to surgical therapy. 
Primary care physician awareness, patient reticence, and eco-
nomic concerns about potentially losing employment due to 
time off required for surgery or its complications have been the 
primary reasons cited for the lack of increased performance of 
bariatric and metabolic surgery. Lack of insurance coverage by 
many patients is also a primary reason for not seeking surgi-
cal therapy for the medical problems associated with severe 
obesity. Disincentives posed by insurance companies, such as 
required dietary periods that clearly have no scientific or clini-
cal basis of merit, are still used to discourage patients from pur-
suing surgical therapy. The lack of efficacy and potential harm 
to patients of such policies has been clearly demonstrated in 
the literature.20,21
OVERVIEW OF BARIATRIC SURGERY
Bariatric operations produce weight loss through at least two 
mechanisms and probably many more that are not known. The 
most common is restriction of intake. Malabsorption of ingested 
food is the second mechanism. Restrictive operations may 
include no or only a modest malabsorptive component. Mal-
absorptive operations may have some restrictive component, 
but it is secondary to the malabsorptive aspect of the operation. 
1103
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Table 27-2 describes the common currently performed opera-
tions listed by mechanism of action.
This chapter focuses on the operations listed in Table 27-2, 
whether they are done via a laparoscopic or an open incision 
approach. Any other procedures to produce weight loss are 
so infrequently done that they will not be discussed in detail. 
Vertical banded gastroplasty (VBG), although still one of the 
approved operations for the surgical treatment of severe obesity 
based on the NIH Consensus Conference of 1991,22 is now so 
infrequently performed and has such poor long-term follow-up 
results23 that it is of historic interest only.
Evolution of Bariatric Surgery
During the 1950s, operations were first performed to treat severe 
hyperlipidemia with associated obesity.24 These were ileocolic 
bypass operations to limit absorption and were associated with 
severe nutritional complications and liver failure postopera-
tively. The jejunoileal bypass was then devised and popularized 
in the mid-1970s.25 It was also a malabsorptive operation, but 
bypassed only a portion of the small intestine. Complications 
after this procedure included severe diarrhea, electrolyte dis-
turbances, protein-calorie malnutrition, renal stones, and liver 
failure.
In 1969, Mason and Ito performed the first gastric bypass, 
describing a loop of jejunum connected to a transverse proximal 
gastric pouch.26 Bile reflux esophagitis was severe postopera-
tively, causing Griffin and colleagues to describe the Roux-en-Y 
modification of the gastric bypass in 1977.27 The gastric pouch 
was altered from transverse to vertical using the upper lesser 
curvature as well.
During the 1970s, the dismal failure of the jejunoileal 
bypass resulted in a very bad reputation in general for bariatric 
surgery among general surgeons who had performed the proce-
dure or cared for patients suffering from its complications. The 
reputation was not enhanced by the many variations of gastric 
stapling that then became common during the 1970s and early 
1980s. Such operations often consisted of a few rows of sta-
ples partially across the upper stomach for restrictive purposes. 
Since the procedure was easily done, some surgeons performed 
it in prolific numbers. Staple breakdown predictably occurred 
months to years later, with subsequent weight regain. These pro-
cedures added to the string of failures of bariatric operations.28
In 1980, Mason29 first performed the VBG, which was a 
restrictive procedure using a stapled proximal gastric pouch of 
the upper lesser curvature of the stomach with a restrictive band 
for its outlet to the rest of the stomach. This operation produced 
excellent initial weight loss (50% of excess weight or more) 
Table 27-2
Types of commonly performed bariatric operations by 
mechanism of action
Primarily Restrictive
Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB)
Sleeve gastrectomy (SG)
Primarily Malabsorptive
Biliopancreatic diversion (BPD)
Duodenal switch (DS)
Combination
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB)
with low morbidity and mortality. It rapidly became the most 
commonly performed bariatric operation in the United States 
during the 1980s. However, by the early 1990s, it became clear 
that patients who underwent VBG tended to adopt a diet of high-
calorie liquids and regained weight.30 A significant incidence of 
stenosis at the band was also a problem.31 Long-term weight loss 
was poor,23 and by the 1990s in the United States, Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass (RYGB) became the procedure of choice for bariatric 
surgery.
In Italy, in the meantime, Scopinaro had developed and 
popularized the biliopancreatic diversion (BPD) in the early 
1980s.32 This procedure, described in more detail later, has been, 
along with its modification to include duodenal switch (DS),33 
the only major malabsorptive operation to enjoy long-term suc-
cess. BPD and DS are both still used by a fairly select few sur-
geons throughout the world and have traditionally represented 
and continue to represent less than 5% of operations performed 
in the United States.
Fixed banding of the stomach, besides the VBG, was also 
described by other surgeons in the 1980s and 1990s. Kuzmak is 
credited with describing the fixed gastric band procedure, which 
later led to the development of the adjustable gastric banding 
operation.34
The laparoscopic alternative to bariatric surgery became 
available in the 1990s. Belachew performed the first laparo-
scopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) operation in 1994.35 
Wittgrove and Clark performed the first laparoscopic RYGB 
the same year.36 Since the former operation is technically much 
easier than the latter, it was not surprising that it became very 
popular and frequently performed in Europe and Australia dur-
ing the late 1990s. In 2001, LAGB was approved for use in 
the United States. Its popularity increased annually until 2009, 
but since then, it has decreased in popularity. Sleeve gastrec-
tomy (SG) has enjoyed a rapid increase in popularity both in 
the United States and internationally since 2008. Buchwald and 
Oien37 have recently described the international trends in the 
performance of bariatric operations.
The Bariatric Revolution
The Bariatric Revolution is a term applied to the 5-year stretch 
from 1998 to 2003 during which the number of gastric bypass 
operations performed in the United States, membership in 
ASMBS, and public recognition and interest and professional 
respect for the field dramatically increased. Few medical cen-
ters in the United States offered a laparoscopic approach to 
bariatric surgery prior to 1998. Several centers, most nota-
bly Schauer and colleagues at Pittsburgh, then began 
numerous programs to teach many bariatric surgeons 
the procedure. Simultaneous improvement in the laparoscopic 
instruments for bariatric procedures combined with these pro-
grams to allow the performance of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass (LRYGB) in numerous centers over the next 
few years. The field then literally exploded in terms of growth 
in the United States. Figure 27-1 illustrates the volume of 
LRYGBs performed during the years prior to and during the 
Bariatric Revolution. Operative procedures increased nearly 
eight-fold. Membership in the American Society for Bariatric 
Surgery (the name of the ASMBS at that time) tripled dur-
ing these years. The number of minimally invasive fellow-
ships offered to graduating residents, most of whom included 
bariatric surgical procedures as a major component of the 
case load, increased from about 25 to 125 during these years. 
2
1104
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­Public recognition of the procedure markedly increased due to 
public figures in the media undergoing bariatric surgery. The 
widespread availability of the Internet to prospective patients 
allowed much more information to be relayed. Patients who 
had or were contemplating surgery were able to communicate 
via the Internet. Videos of bariatric operations became avail-
able via several media outlets including television and the 
Internet. Many U.S. surgical departments that had previously 
shunned the field of bariatric surgery recruited bariatric sur-
geons and established programs. Hospitals without programs 
recruited surgeons so they could offer the service. Bariatric 
surgery presentations at national surgical meetings became 
common instead of rare.
Indications
The indications for performing bariatric surgery remain as 
described in the NIH Consensus Conference of 1991.22 The only 
major difference is the procedures that are now recognized as 
standard procedures. These were defined by the CMS in 2005 as 
those listed in Table 27-2, with the exception of SG. SG did not 
receive approval until 2012, when after a controversial initial 
rejection of coverage, the CMS decided to allow coverage based 
on the discretion of regional carriers. The standard and some-
what conservative indications for performing bariatric surgery 
are summarized in Table 27-3.
Contraindications
Of all the reasons a patient who desires bariatric surgery cannot 
have an operation, insurance coverage, or lack thereof, is the 
most common reason. This factor, however, is normally beyond 
surgeon control. Assuming the patient does have coverage or 
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
Gastric bypass
2004
Figure 27-1.  Number of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass operations per-
formed in the United States by year. (Data from the Nationwide 
Inpatient Sample Database.)
Table 27-3
Indications for bariatric surgery
Patient must have:
  1. Body mass index ≥40 kg/m2 with or without comorbid 
medical conditions associated with obesity
  2. Body mass index 35–40 kg/m2 with comorbid medical 
conditions
In addition, it is expected that the patient:
  3. Has failed attempt at medically supervised diet
  4. Be psychiatrically stable
financial means to qualify for surgery, then application of the 
NIH criteria is the next consideration. Once a patient qualifies 
according to those criteria, then consideration of medical, social, 
and psychological issues can determine reasons to avoid surgi-
cal therapy.
The NIH criteria do not set limits for age, and surgeon 
opinion on this issue varies widely. Surgeons have variable 
practice patterns as to performance of surgery in the older 
patient. The philosophy for age restriction is two-fold: A large 
number of younger patients are interested in and eligible for 
bariatric surgery, and there is a greater likelihood that a longer 
period of postoperative benefit in terms of improved quality of 
life and longevity will occur with a younger patient population. 
Alternatively, older patients are more likely to have debilitating 
comorbid conditions and thus have immediate benefit in quality 
of life but not necessarily enhanced longevity.
Medical issues that preclude patients from being good 
surgical candidates include American Society of Anesthesiolo-
gists class IV disease of a nature that makes surgical therapy 
extraordinarily high risk. Psychological instability or the inabil-
ity to understand the implications of the proposed operation and 
what changes will result from it in terms of the patient’s life-
style are also contraindications. Known and documented drug 
or alcohol addiction is a contraindication to surgery. Smoking 
is a relative contraindication, and requirement of cessation of 
smoking varies by surgical practice. A poorly controlled eat-
ing disorder, especially bulimia, is also a contraindication to 
surgery. Nonambulatory status is a relative contraindication to 
surgery, especially if the obesity is so severe that the patient 
cannot normally do self-care or would not likely be able to 
do so after surgery. Such patients have excessive morbidity in 
our experience, and placement in care facilities postoperatively 
after recovery from surgery is often impossible due to their size 
and limitations of physical ability. Although hard to determine 
on a single visit, an accumulation of evidence that suggests the 
patient views the operation as a “magic bullet” for which they 
must only show up and after which they will not be required to 
make any substantive changes in eating or lifestyle is a poten-
tial valid reason to deny surgery. Finally, lack of sufficient 
social support, an extremely poor or unsupportive home envi-
ronment, or hostile spouse or relatives can be contraindications 
to surgical care, since such supportive environmental factors 
are important to optimize outcomes once discharged from the 
hospital. Table 27-4 summarizes potential contraindications for 
surgery.
Table 27-4
Potential contraindications for bariatric surgery
1. Severe medical disease making anesthesia or surgery 
prohibitively risky (American Society of Anesthesiologists 
class IV)
2. Mentally incompetent to understand procedure
3. Inability or unwillingness to change lifestyle 
postoperatively
4. Drug, alcohol, or other addiction
5. Active problem of bulimia or other eating disorder
6. Psychologically unstable
7. Nonambulatory status
8. Unsupportive home environment
1105
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
PREOPERATIVE ISSUES
Patient Selection
Patient selection for surgery should be based on a multidisci-
plinary team evaluation. The patient has usually been screened 
by his or her primary care physician prior to referral, with major 
medical issues addressed prior to referral. Qualification by NIH 
criteria and availability of insurance coverage can be handled 
by office administrators to document and confirm prior to the 
first appointment.
The preoperative assessment of the patient for bariatric 
surgery must include input from the nutritionist as an important 
independent evaluation. Careful assessment of the patient’s eat-
ing habits, knowledge, self-awareness, and insight are impor-
tant. An estimation of the patient’s motivation to change eating 
habits is important. The nutritionist should have at least one 
assessment session with the patient and an educational session 
preoperatively once the decision to proceed with surgery has 
been determined. The operation to be performed requires spe-
cific nutritional counseling and education.
Psychological assessment is required by most insurance 
carriers. One major benefit of the psychological assessment is 
to determine the patient’s understanding of the operation and 
whether he or she has a realistic understanding of the changes 
that are needed in lifestyle for optimal outcomes. The psycholo-
gist or psychiatrist often may diagnose previously unappreciated 
depression, which is prevalent in nearly 40% of our preoperative 
patients when carefully screened. Its treatment is felt to improve 
postoperative outcomes.
Most of the patients referred for surgery who have been 
screened for qualification by NIH standards will be appropriate 
candidates for bariatric surgery. Some will decide against the 
procedure after thorough educational and counseling sessions. 
Such sessions are imperative for improving outcomes. Provid-
ing both written detailed information and a verbal presentation 
by the multidisciplinary team to educate patients preoperatively 
regarding bariatric surgical procedures and expected outcomes 
and potential complications is recommended. Informed and 
prepared patients will likely be much more compliant with 
perioperative and postoperative requested behavioral and eat-
ing changes. Some patients who decide against the procedure 
will return in the future after their obesity comorbidities worsen. 
Reevaluation for continued appropriateness as a good surgical 
candidate is equally indicated at such time.
Preoperative Preparation
Preoperatively, current comorbid and other medical problems 
and their optimal therapy are confirmed. Potentially undiag-
nosed medical problems are sought. Screening for “hidden” 
diseases such as coronary artery disease in those patients over 
age 50 is important. For such patients, or those with known car-
diovascular disease, a preoperative cardiology consultation is 
recommended. Such consultation usually then involves electro-
cardiogram (ECG), echocardiogram, and stress test, with the 
results of these at times suggesting need for cardiac catheteriza-
tion. Another condition often underdiagnosed preoperatively in 
the severely obese patient population is obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA). The Epworth Sleepiness Scale, a standard set of ques-
tions evaluating daytime sleepiness, is often used as a screening 
tool for OSA.38 Many institutions are routinely employing it for 
all surgical patients, given the recognition that OSA increases 
postoperative morbidity after all operations. Patients who give 
a history of loud snoring, morning tiredness on waking, and 
falling asleep easily while driving or sitting likely have OSA. 
A diagnostic sleep study is indicated for these individuals. One 
report suggests that the incidence of sleep apnea in severely 
obese patients, when all are routinely subjected to sleep studies, 
may approach 80%.39 Once diagnosed with sleep apnea, patients 
should use their positive airway pressure appliance as treatment. 
Use of this system in the immediate postoperative period is 
especially important to prevent episodes of hypoxia and poten-
tially resulting cardiac arrhythmias. Asthma and hypoventilation 
syndrome of obesity are other significant pulmonary diseases 
often requiring preoperative management. Hypoventilation syn-
drome of obesity is defined as resting arterial partial pressure 
of oxygen less than 55 mmHg and partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide greater than 47 mmHg, with accompanying pulmonary 
hypertension and polycythemia. Pulmonary consultation is indi-
cated for patients with hypoventilation syndrome. Postoperative 
intensive care unit hospitalization, rarely used after bariatric sur-
gery, may be indicated for these patients.
For patients with active GERD on medication, a preopera-
tive screening upper endoscopy to rule out Barrett’s esophagus 
and to rule out intrinsic lesions of the stomach or duodenum 
is recommended. This is especially true for patients planning 
LRYGB, where the distal stomach and duodenum will be pre-
cluded from easy inspection postoperatively. Several studies 
have documented the considerable incidence of preoperative 
pathology on flexible upper endoscopy for this patient popu-
lation, as well as a small but not insignificant incidence of 
pathology resulting in alteration of the originally planned sur-
gical procedure.40,41 At Virginia, our experience was that such 
pathology was present in 4.6% of examinations.42 The presence 
of a hiatal hernia detected on preoperative esophagogastroduo-
denoscopy will alert the surgeon for the need to perform intra-
operative repair.
Patients who are on anticoagulation medication for pros-
thetic cardiac valves or history of recent venous thromboembo-
lism must have their anticoagulation managed perioperatively. 
Options include total cessation of oral warfarin therapy 5 days 
prior to surgery, bridging this time with subcutaneous low-
molecular-weight heparin, or, more rarely, preoperative admis-
sion for intravenous heparin anticoagulation, which is then 
stopped 6 hours prior to surgery.
Patients with a strong history of previous venous throm-
boembolism or who are felt to have multiple risk factors for 
postoperative venous thromboembolism are potential candidates 
for preoperative placement of a temporary inferior vena cava 
filter. Such filters are placed the day prior to surgery by our 
interventional radiology colleagues and removed 3 to 6 weeks 
postoperatively. However, a report on a large experience of col-
lected hospitals has shown this procedure has potential compli-
cations and morbidity, which may outweigh its use in all but the 
most high-risk patients.43
Some surgeons routinely perform screening ultrasound of 
the abdomen for patients planning to undergo LRYGB with an 
intact gallbladder to rule out the potential presence of gallstones. 
Should gallstones be discovered, simultaneous laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy is one option, whereas deferring until after 
weight loss is another reasonable option. Recent analysis of our 
experience with simultaneous cholecystectomy at the University 
of Virginia has shown the average increase in operative time to 
be approximately 30 minutes for both LRYGB and RYGB with 
no increase in hospitalization or morbidity.44 An earlier study at 
1106
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Pittsburgh did demonstrate an increased length of hospitaliza-
tion for patients having simultaneous cholecystectomy.45 When 
a patient does not have gallstones on preoperative ultrasound, 
use of prophylactic ursodiol in a dose of 300 mg twice a day 
will decrease the incidence of gallstone formation after RYGB 
to approximately 4%.46 Controversy currently exists as to the 
proper role of simultaneous laparoscopic cholecystectomy at the 
time of LAGB. The conservative approach is to not perform 
such an operation, given the small potential for gallbladder bile 
spillage resulting in an infection of the prosthesis. However, 
some reports have shown that this risk may be very low.47
Another value of a preoperative ultrasound of the abdomen 
is the assessment of liver size and composition. An ultrasound 
that reveals a large fatty liver in a patient planning to undergo 
either LAGB or LRYGB should alert the surgeon to the high 
potential for technical difficulty in liver retraction and expo-
sure. We have converted to an open incision and even deferred 
persisting with the operation altogether when confronted with 
an excessively large or a tremendously large liver, respectively. 
Knowledge of this prior to surgery allows the patient to follow 
a low-calorie diet to shrink the liver preoperatively.
Some surgeons require patients to follow a low-calorie 
diet in the immediate preoperative period, requiring weight loss 
prior to proceeding with surgery. Some data exist indicating that 
preoperative weight loss by patients may improve outcomes.48 
Such studies suffer from the fact that the patients who are most 
compliant and lose weight preoperatively may be the most com-
pliant postoperatively, accounting for the improved outcomes. 
Preoperative weight loss is not necessary to achieve good out-
comes from surgery. Requiring preoperative weight loss raises 
the dilemma of whether patients who do not achieve weight loss 
should be then denied the benefit of surgical therapy.
Another controversial area is the requirement for cessation 
of smoking by patients prior to undergoing surgery. Some sur-
geons make this an absolute requirement, while others do not. 
Certainly the risk of marginal ulcer after RYGB, which is more 
difficult to treat and has a higher recurrence rate in smokers,49 
should be considered as a factor in whether to offer the smoking 
patient this operation.
Other preparation for bariatric surgery includes the per-
formance of a baseline arterial blood gas measurement. This is 
especially important in any patients with significant pulmonary 
disease or hypoventilation syndrome of obesity, since a baseline 
value of “normal” for the patient must be appreciated if ventila-
tor management postoperatively is necessary.
Baseline evaluation of thyroid function is indicated pre-
operatively, since hypothyroidism is not uncommon in this 
patient population. Serum chemistries, liver function tests, and 
usual screening blood tests are done. Blood tests to determine 
baseline nutritional parameters are not uncommonly abnormal 
for low iron and vitamin D levels. The former finding is com-
mon in the menstruating female population, obese or not, while 
the latter has been reported for the population in general but 
especially for the obese patient population.50 The necessity to 
treat low vitamin D levels preoperatively is unclear in terms 
of its influence on clinical outcomes. However, the primary 
reason to correct low vitamin D is improved long-term bone 
disease health.
Preoperative education is important to reemphasize impor-
tant points of likely events of the perioperative period, expected 
postoperative course, and instructions for postoperative activ-
ity and diet. Expectations for patients include ambulation on 
the day of surgery, following postoperative dietary instructions, 
taking recommended vitamin and mineral supplements, and fol-
lowing a regular exercise plan.
Anesthesiology Issues
A preoperative anesthesiology assessment is indicated for all 
patients undergoing bariatric surgery. This assessment confirms 
the optimal assessment and management of ongoing comorbid 
medical problems. It also includes the aforementioned cardio-
pulmonary evaluation to determine any underlying pathology 
that requires preoperative treatment to decrease perioperative 
morbidity from cardiopulmonary complications.
It is important that the anesthesiologist be experienced 
in performing general anesthesia management for the bariatric 
patient. There is no question that the consistent participation of 
a few selected and experienced anesthesiologists who specialize 
in the care of the bariatric patient will minimize morbidity of 
surgical outcomes. Perioperative and intraoperative communi-
cation between the anesthesiology team and the surgical team 
is particularly important during bariatric operations to facilitate 
the smooth flow of the operation and avoid complications from 
the procedure.
Two major difficulties that the anesthesiologist faces when 
performing a general anesthetic for the severely obese patient 
are vascular access and airway management. Both are signifi-
cantly more difficult in the obese patient population than the 
normal-weight population. Central venous access is at times the 
only available route for establishment of a reliable intravenous 
access. Access to both arms during the procedure is standard in 
our operating rooms; this allows for additional larger bore intra-
venous access should an episode of intra-abdominal hemorrhage 
occur. Jugular cannulation is often very difficult due to neck 
adipose tissue. However, ultrasound guidance can facilitate this 
procedure. Subclavian access is performed when other central 
access routes are not feasible.
Management of the severely obese patient airway is often 
a major challenge for the anesthesiologist and must be done 
well to avoid potentially significant morbidity. Videotelescopic 
intubation systems are successfully used in some institutions to 
manage difficult airway intubation. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy is 
more commonly used for the difficult airway should standard 
laryngoscopy provide an inadequate view. For the most difficult 
class IV or even class III airways, a fiberoptic guided intuba-
tion is used. Experience is key in performing smooth intuba-
tion of this patient population. Significant preoxygenation for 
3 minutes or longer prior to intubation is used for the severely 
obese patient to provide a longer safe duration for intubation 
should difficulties be encountered. However, desaturation must 
be immediately addressed with reestablishment of oxygenated 
ventilation because this patient group does not tolerate any pro-
longed desaturation without potential adverse cardiopulmonary 
consequences.
The anesthesiologist must be adept at understanding and 
managing alterations in cardiopulmonary function from the use 
of a pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic bariatric proce-
dures. These alterations include the effects of carbon dioxide 
absorption on required minute ventilation, the potential for 
bradyarrhythmias, and the potential for decreased systemic 
pH with longer procedures in patients with preexisting cardio-
pulmonary disease. Arterial monitoring of the latter group of 
patients may be necessary by the anesthesiology team, and a 
radial arterial line is standard for such patients.51
1107
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Drug pharmacokinetics differ in severely obese patients 
as well. Changes in volume of distribution include smaller-
than-normal fraction of total body water, greater adipose tissue 
content, altered protein binding, and increased blood volume. 
Possible changes in renal function and hepatic function must be 
considered when administering drugs.
Specific anesthetic drug metabolic alterations in the 
severely obese include a larger volume distribution of thiopen-
tone, resulting in a prolonged effect of the drug.
Calculation of the dosage should be done by lean body 
weight. Benzodiazepines also exhibit a prolonged elimination 
phase, causing persistence of their effects. Increased pseudo-
cholinesterase activity is present in the severely obese patient, 
requiring increased dosages of pancuronium. Enflurane metab-
olism is increased over the average-sized person, requiring a 
lower dosage of this agent.
BARIATRIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES
Laparoscopic versus Open Procedures
The procedures in this section will be described using a lapa-
roscopic approach as the default or typical approach. RYGB, 
BPD, and DS may still be performed by some surgeons using 
an open approach, but this has now become the exception. 
Minimization of the morbidity of the open incision, especially 
incisional hernias and wound complications, as well as earlier 
hospital discharge and lower 30-day complication rates have all 
been clearly shown to favor using a laparoscopic approach when 
feasible.52-54 In addition, the logical assumption that avoiding the 
major tissue trauma associated with a lengthy abdominal wall 
incision is beneficial to patient recovery has been confirmed. 
Most importantly, patient interest in bariatric surgery increased 
dramatically once a laparoscopic approach was available for 
these procedures, especially RYGB.55 In the twenty-first cen-
tury, most prospective bariatric patients are informed enough 
about the options for surgery that they seek out a surgeon who 
does laparoscopic bariatric surgery.
When an open surgical approach is used for any of these 
procedures, an upper midline incision is the most commonly 
used approach. Some surgeons have had excellent success with 
a left subcostal incision for performing RYGB.56 Mechanical 
retractors afford additional exposure for open surgery and are 
indicated. Wound closure for midline incisions usually is per-
formed using heavy monofilament suture for the midline fascia, 
but surgeon preferences vary. Any concerning drainage from a 
postoperative open surgical incision line requires opening of the 
wound in that area and confirmation that a more severe deep-
seated fascial tissue infection does not exist.
Laparoscopic surgery requires a basic core set of knowl-
edge and skills that have now become a standard part of surgical 
training. Successful completion of the Fundamentals of Laparo-
scopic Surgery (FLS) unit developed by the Society of Ameri-
can Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES)57 is 
now mandatory for all surgical residents in the United States.
Laparoscopy begins with the safe creation of a pneumo-
peritoneum, often a difficult step in the bariatric patient. We have 
found the use of a tracheostomy hook inserted through a trocar-
sized incision to elevate the fascia in the left subcostal region 
to be of great assistance in facilitating the insertion of a Veress 
needle into an appropriate location for pneumoperitoneum cre-
ation. In general, the use of a Hasson approach for creating a 
pneumoperitoneum in the bariatric population is limited by the 
thick body wall. In the patient with an extremely thick body wall, 
extra long trocar ports can be used for laparoscopic surgery.
The pneumoperitoneum pressure that is used when per-
forming bariatric surgical procedures is generally in the 15 to 18 
mmHg range. A high-flow insufflator is mandatory to maintain 
the pneumoperitoneum for adequate and safe visualization. An 
angled telescope is quite helpful. Instrumentation for perform-
ing laparoscopic bariatric surgery has dramatically improved in 
the past 15 years and continues to improve. We now favor using 
certain laparoscopic instruments, such as the staplers and har-
monic scalpel, even if conversion to an open approach occurs.
Conversion to an open incision is appropriate in circum-
stances where patient safety would potentially be compromised 
by persisting with a laparoscopic approach. Table 27-5 lists 
appropriate reasons for conversion to an open incision as well 
as consideration for beginning with open surgery if certain con-
ditions are known, such as an existing large upper abdominal 
incisional hernia or known severe intra-abdominal adhesions. 
Conversion to an open incision should not be viewed as a failure 
by the surgeon, nor should such an attitude bias the surgeon in 
favor of persisting with a laparoscopic approach if the opera-
tion is not progressing or if a complication is worsening when it 
could be corrected more quickly using an open approach. Patient 
safety is the gold standard for determining the timing and appro-
priateness of conversion. Usually, if conversion is needed, it is 
best to do so as early in the course of the operation as possible.
Postoperative Follow-Up
Short-term follow-up is defined as follow-up of up to 2 years. 
Unfortunately, even in the best of practices in the United States, 
because of the lack of a centralized health system or registry, 
1-year follow-up of 90% or greater is a laudable achievement 
and rarely reported in most case series. Recommendations for 
bariatric centers wishing to be COEs are that 75% of patients 
are followed for 5 years with restrictive operations, and 90% 
are followed if they have malabsorptive operations. Those rec-
ommendations, however, are based on having a system that 
attempts maximum possible follow-up that should yield such 
results. Although a system may be in place that generates multi-
ple attempts at having the patient return for postoperative check-
ups, without patient compliance, all such systems are fallible.
The goals of short-term follow-up are to maximize care of 
the patient in the postoperative period; assist in adjustment to 
Table 27-5
Indications for conversion from laparoscopic to open 
surgery
1. Failure to establish an adequate pneumoperitoneum
2. Hemodynamic adverse reaction to pneumoperitoneum
3. Intra-abdominal adhesions precluding safe access or 
presenting excessive difficulty to access abdomen
4. Hepatomegaly such that retraction is not feasible or, even 
with retraction, organ visualization is obscured
5. Intraoperative complications such as hemorrhage that are 
best managed with an open approach
6. Exceedingly thick body wall precluding adequate trocar 
access or manipulation
7. Existing large upper abdominal wall hernia that optimally 
can be repaired simultaneously using the same incision
1108
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
new eating, exercise, and lifestyle patterns; be on the alert for 
and treat postoperative complications; and recommend mea-
sures to limit such complications. Objective data that should 
be obtained after all bariatric operations include weight loss, 
change in BMI, resolution or improvement in medical comor-
bidities, and any adverse events or complications that occur. 
Optimally, assessment of quality of life can help gauge effi-
cacy as well, with the Short Form-36 (SF36) questionnaire 
being one standard, frequently used example. Short-term fol-
low-up data do give a good reflection of the safety of the pro-
cedure, but only an estimate of the efficacy regarding weight 
loss and effect on resolution of medical comorbidities.
Medium-term follow-up is defined as that from 2 to 5 
years. Medium- and long-term follow-up, defined as greater 
than 5 years, are the only means by which the true long-
term efficacy of bariatric surgical operations can be 
assessed. Operations that initially appear quite promising, such 
as the VBG or even the jejunoileal bypass, were shown with 
long- and medium-term follow-up, respectively, to have signifi-
cant deficiencies in efficacy for the VBG23 and safety25 for the 
jejunoileal bypass. Other stapled gastroplasties similarly did not 
demonstrate efficacy on medium-term follow-up.25
Unfortunately, to date, there has been no conventional 
method of reporting outcomes after bariatric surgery. The 
ideal publication includes quantitation of number of patients, a 
description of the operative technique, incidence of conversion 
to open if applicable, number of patients included in ­follow-up 
data per year, percentage of patients lost to follow-up, weight 
loss usually expressed as percentage of excess weight, initial 
and subsequent BMI, complications, mortality, resolution 
of medical comorbidities, and any quality of life data. Few 
publications have met these criteria. There are also only a 
few studies in which a prospective randomized comparison 
either between bariatric surgery and medical management or 
between different bariatric surgical operations or approaches 
(laparoscopic vs. open) have been performed. Improvement 
in study design and more complete data in future publications 
are indicated.
A multidisciplinary team approach to follow-up is as 
essential, if not more so, postoperatively than preoperatively. 
Regular counseling sessions with the nutritionist are always 
helpful. Psychological support should be available as needed to 
assist the patient in adjustment to major life changes. All pro-
grams should offer a frequent support group forum for patients 
to discuss issues on a less formal basis and receive encourage-
ment from other patients as well as staff.
Experience of performing bariatric surgery for several 
decades between the co-authors has led us to conclude that 
whatever the operation performed, its long-term success is only 
achieved by patients if they embrace the eating and lifestyle 
changes the operation allows them to adopt. Continuation of 
exercise as part of the daily lifestyle is associated with a high 
incidence of preservation of weight loss. Diligence to avoid 
snacking and returning to other poor eating habits is also impor-
tant. The majority of patients do embrace the metamorphosis 
their bariatric operation produces such that they maintain their 
new eating, lifestyle, and exercise habits to the benefit of their 
continued improved health, self-image, and well-being.
Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric Banding
Background.  LAGB involves placement of an inflatable sili-
cone band around the proximal stomach. The band is attached 
3
to a reservoir ­system that allows adjustment of the tightness 
of the band. This reservoir system is accessed through a sub-
cutaneously placed port, similar in concept to ports used for 
chemotherapy via central venous catheters. Figure 27-2 shows 
the LAGB apparatus in place.
Two major types of bands have been used for this pro-
cedure. The original Lap-Band, most recently marketed by 
Apollo Endosurgery, has been used most frequently. The Swed-
ish Band, now remarketed as the Realize Band by Ethicon, is 
slightly wider than the Lap-Band.58 The port systems have dif-
ferences as to profile and methods of attachment to the fascia.
Technique.  Port placement for LAGB has varied among surgeons. 
Figure 27-2 shows a common configuration used. Usually some 
combination of two ports for the surgeon’s hands, one or two 
for the assistant, a port for the telescope, and a liver retractor 
site are needed.
With the patient placed in reverse Trendelenburg posi-
tion, the procedure begins with division of the peritoneum at 
the angle of His and then division of the gastrohepatic ligament 
in its avascular area (the pars flaccida) to expose the base of 
the right crus of the diaphragm. If a hiatal hernia is present, it 
must be repaired at this point, using a standard posterior esopha-
geal dissection to expose the crura and perform suture repair. 
A grasper (Lap-Band) or specially devised instrument (Realize 
Band) is inserted along the base of the anterior surface of the 
diaphragmatic crura, from right to left, emerging at the angle of 
Figure 27-2.  Laparoscopic adjustable band overall scheme. (From 
Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. 
New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland 
Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All 
rights reserved.)
1109
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Figure 27-3.  Grasper being passed through under stomach to grasp 
tubing during placement. (From Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally 
Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2007. 
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical 
Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
His in the area of the divided peritoneum (Fig. 27-3). The device 
is then used to pull the band underneath the posterior surface of 
the gastroesophageal junction. This technique, by passing the 
band through some fibrous tissue in this plane, serves to anchor 
the band more securely posteriorly. During the initial years of 
band placement, a retrogastric location of the posterior half of 
the band in the free space of the lesser sac caused an unaccept-
ably high incidence of slippage and prolapse of the band. The 
adoption of the pars flaccida technique decreased the incidence 
of such slippage.59
Once the band is passed around the proximal stomach, it 
is locked into its ring configuration through its own self-locking 
mechanism. This involves the tubing end being passed through 
the orifice of the buckle for the Lap-Band and the suture on the 
end of the flanged end of the band site being passed through for 
the Realize Band. Once the band is securely locked in place, 
the buckle portion of the band is located on the lesser curvature 
of the stomach (Fig. 27-4A,B). Now the anterior surface of the 
fundus and proximal stomach is imbricated over the band using 
several sutures (Fig. 27-5).
A
Figure 27-4.  A. Lap-Band in place around stomach. (From Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: 
Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography ©  2005-2009. All rights reserved. 
B. Realize (Swedish) Band around stomach.
1110
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The tubing of the band system is brought out through the 
desired site for placement of the port portion of the system. Usu-
ally this is a trocar site near the upper abdomen or xiphoid region 
to place the port most superficially such that it can be palpated 
postoperatively. The port is secured to the anterior abdominal 
wall fascia. Access to the port for subsequent addition of fluid 
to the band system is percutaneously achieved using a Huber or 
noncutting type needle. The band is initially placed empty of 
fluid in most circumstances.
Patient Selection and Preparation.  Most LAGB procedures 
are done on an outpatient basis. Technically the operation is 
not as difficult as the other operations described later. Because 
the gastrointestinal tract is not violated, the relative risk of the 
procedure is lower than most other bariatric operations, making 
this procedure more amenable to offer to older, more medically 
ill, or higher risk patient populations. However, efficacy of the 
operation in the superobese (BMI >50 kg/m2) is less impressive, 
with average BMI remaining over 40 kg/m2 after 5 to 8 years 
of follow-up.60 It has been our impression that optimal results 
occur with this operation in a patient population who is moti-
vated, needs to lose less than 50 kg to achieve a BMI less than 
30 kg/m2, is willing and able to exercise regularly, is amenable 
to changing eating patterns as recommended, and is within a 
geographically close enough area for ease of follow-up. Patients 
who are impatient to lose weight, immobile, unable or unwill-
ing to exercise, or confirmed “grazers” or “nibblers” on high-
calorie sweets who expect to be able to continue their dietary 
habits without great alteration are not good candidates for this 
operation. Similarly, patients who have had previous upper gas-
tric surgery, such as a Nissen fundoplication, are relatively poor 
candidates for LAGB due to the potential tissue compromise in 
taking down the wrap to place the band.
Important points of preoperative preparation specific to 
the procedure include being nil per os (NPO), receiving pre-
operative appropriate venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, 
appropriate broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, and having 
appropriate intravenous access and monitoring. An orogastric 
tube is inserted into the stomach. These preoperative measures 
are recommended in all the procedures described later as well.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up.  The majority of LAGB 
procedures are performed on an outpatient basis. Insurance 
requirement and pre-existing medical issues are usually the 
only reason for overnight hospitalization. Diet instructions, 
wound care, pain medications, and instructions on time sched-
ule of resuming other preoperative medications should all be 
explained to the patient as well as to a family member (who 
has not just undergone general anesthesia) prior to discharge. 
Arrangements for a postoperative follow-up visit, phone num-
bers to call for emergencies, and indications to call should all 
be explained as well.
The first postoperative evaluation after LAGB generally 
occurs 2 to 3 weeks after surgery. By this time, patients have 
begun to tire of the blenderized diet recommended, are often 
eager to return to work if they have not done so, and are amena-
ble to discussions of an exercise plan and diet progression plan. 
Wounds are assessed, as are medical problems, oral intake, and 
adherence to diet. Since LAGB does not preclude absorption 
of any specific nutrients, we only recommend a multivitamin 
for patients whose preoperative lab values are normal. Use of 
ursodiol (300 mg twice a day) for gallstone prophylaxis after 
LAGB is variable from surgeon to surgeon. Weight loss after 
LAGB often does not occur as rapidly as after gastric bypass, 
and data regarding gallstone formation after LAGB are lack-
ing. However, rapid weight loss after LAGB will occur in some 
patients justifying prophylaxis with ursodiol.
Band adjustments and postoperative support group ses-
sions are extremely important for good outcomes after LAGB.61 
Band adjustments are paramount as part of the operation. The 
actual performance of the LAGB procedure is really only a 
small part of the care of the patient. Frequent postoperative 
visits, band adjustments as necessary, and participation in an 
appropriate exercise program are all important for postoperative 
success for these patients. Recommendations for timing of band 
adjustments vary from practice to practice. In general, there is 
agreement that losing less than 2 lb per week is an indication to 
increase the restriction of the band by adding fluid. Patients who 
can easily eat most solid foods and have little satiety and a fairly 
pronounced appetite need additional restriction from the band.
Band fills usually are accomplished in the outpatient clinic 
setting. Occasionally fluoroscopic radiology is needed to assist 
in accessing the port, based on the depth of the port from the 
skin and its ease of palpation. Experience by the person doing 
the band fill is an important factor in increasing the percentage 
Figure 27-5.  Stomach imbricated 
over band.
1111
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
of patients able to be accessed in clinic without radiology assis-
tance. A careful record should be maintained of the amount of 
fluid in each patient’s band. Some surgeons will withdraw all 
the fluid at each fill, reinserting the desired amount. Many will 
just add additional fluid as indicated. The amount of fluid added 
is based on hunger, weight loss, and ability to eat meat or bread. 
Figure 27-6 shows an in-office algorithm adjustment scheme 
used by Ren and colleagues at New York University.62 Ideally, 
adjustments are performed over approximately a 2-year period 
after surgery. However, changing life and clinical circumstances 
can require adjustments at any time thereafter.
An optimal situation for LAGB success is a program 
whose patients all live within an easy drive of the center, will 
and do participate in frequently available support groups and use 
exercise facilities supplied by the program, have access to band 
adjustment visits as needed, and are carefully selected for appro-
priateness and motivation for the procedure preoperatively.
Outcomes.  Medium- to long-term (8-year follow-up) out-
comes have been reported for LAGB from Weiner et al.63 At 
5 and 7 years after LAGB, an average of published studies in 
the literature showed that patients lost 60% and 58% of excess 
weight, respectively.64 Resolution of comorbidities after LAGB 
has been reported as overall very good, with hypertension 
resolving in 55% at 1 year,64 observed sleep apnea decreasing 
from 33% to 2%,65 GERD improving in over 50% of cases,66 
and asthma,67 depression,68 and quality of life69 improving for 
patients after LAGB. Dixon and colleagues70 published a land-
mark article describing the vastly superior results of managing 
patients with diabetes using LAGB versus optimal medical 
management. Resolution of diabetes was 13% in the medical 
group versus 73% in the surgical group after a 2-year follow-up.
Large institutional series of LAGB results have been 
published from centers in Europe and Australia, with good 
results71,72 for the Lap-Band. Similarly excellent results have 
been published for the Swedish adjustable band.73 Buchwald 
and colleagues74 performed a meta-analysis of all bariatric 
surgical papers published from 1990 to 2003. Overall mortal-
ity for LAGB was given as 0.1%. Table 27-6 shows the data 
from this paper and another meta-analysis75 for weight loss, 
No adjustment
Add 0.5 mL
Add 0.5 mL
Add 1.0 mL
No adjustment
Add 0.25 mL
Add 0.5 mL
Add 0.25 mL
Can still eat
chicken,
steak, or
bread?
Can still eat
chicken,
steak, or
bread?
Can still eat
chicken,
steak, or
bread?
Can eat
chicken,
steak, or
bread?
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
3rd post-op visit/
follow-up
2nd post-op visit
6th week follow-up
1st post-op visit
4th post-op visit/
follow-up >3 months
Weight
loss?
Weight
loss?
Weight
loss?
Weight
loss?
Adjustment
(How much?)
Adjustment
(How much?)
Adjustment
(How much?)
Adjustment
(How much?)
Hungry?
Hungry?
Hungry?
Hungry?
Add 0.5 mL
Add 1.0 mL
Add 0.5 mL
No adjustment
No adjustment
Add 0.25 mL
Add 0.1 mL
Add 0.25 mL
RTC
4–6 weeks
RTC
4–6 weeks
RTC
4–6 weeks
RTC
4–6 weeks
Figure 27-6.  Algorithm for postoperative band adjustment. RTC = return to clinic. (Reproduced with permission from Ren CJ. Laparoscopic 
adjustable gastric banding: postoperative management and nutritional evaluation. In: Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric 
Surgery. 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2007:200. With kind permission of Springer Science + Business Media.)
1112
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
morbidity, and mortality for LAGB compared with RYGB and 
the malabsorptive procedures. Table 27-7 also shows data also 
from Buchwald and colleagues74 regarding the percentage of 
resolution of four major comorbidities associated with obesity 
after the most common types of bariatric operations, including 
LAGB.
Specific complications that may occur after LAGB include 
prolapse, slippage, erosion, and port and tubing complications. 
In addition, just plain failure to lose weight is more commonly 
seen with this procedure than with other common bariatric pro-
cedures.
Prolapse is perhaps the most common emergent compli-
cation that requires reoperation after LAGB. The incidence of 
reoperation is generally around 3%. Postoperative vomiting pre-
disposes to this problem. The lower stomach is pushed upward 
and trapped within the lumen of the band. Typical patient symp-
toms include immediate dysphagia, vomiting, and inability to 
take oral food or liquid. Either anterior or posterior prolapse may 
occur.76 The initial evaluation for prolapse involves obtaining a 
plain film radiograph. If the band is in a horizontal position, pro-
lapse must be strongly suspected. This orientation differs from 
the normal angulation of the band in the 1 to 2 o’clock and 7 to 
8 o’clock positions of the two ends of the band on plain radio-
graph. Initial treatment for a prolapse is to remove all the fluid 
from the system. This often allows reduction of the prolapse and 
resolution of symptoms. If symptoms resolve, the necessity of 
performing an upper gastrointestinal series is lessened. If they 
do not, an upper gastrointestinal series is indicated, and if pro-
lapse persists, then reoperation laparoscopically to reduce the 
prolapse and resuture the band in place is indicated.
Slippage has been greatly reduced by the pars flaccida 
technique, and operative need for repair now occurs in about 
3% of cases in most series of short-term follow-up. Longer-
term follow-up rates may show higher rates of prolapse. In our 
Table 27-6
Outcomes for bariatric operations
LAGB
RYGB
BPD/DS
% Excess weight loss
47.5
61.6
70.1
% Mortality
0.1
0.5
1.1
% Morbidity
10–25
13–38
27–33
% Nutritional morbidity
0–10
15–25
40–77
Source: Buchwald and colleagues.74
Table 27-7
Effect of bariatric surgery on comorbid medical 
­conditions
Condition
% Resolved
% Improved
Diabetes
76.8
85.4
Hypertension
61.7
78.5
Sleep apnea
83.6
85.7
Hyperlipidemia
70.0
96.9
Source: Buchwald and colleagues.74
experience, a symptom-related need for band deflation, with 
suspected prolapse, occurs in 10% of patients.
Band erosion is uncommon, reported in 1% to 2% of 
most series. The patient usually becomes ill but not floridly ill, 
developing either a port site infection or systemic fever and a 
low-grade abdominal inflammatory sepsis. Endoscopy can be 
diagnostic. The presence of otherwise unexplained free air on 
computed tomography (CT) scan should alert the surgeon to this 
diagnosis as well. Laparoscopic removal of the band is indicated, 
with repair of any gastric perforation. Often the perforation is 
already sealed by an inflammatory process, but if not, appropri-
ate management of a gastric perforation must be followed.76
Port and tubing problems occur in approximately 5% of 
patients undergoing LAGB. These require revision of the port/
tubing system due to perforation, leaking, or kinking of the tub-
ing or turning of the port such that access to the surface of the 
port for adding fluid is precluded. Usually a procedure under 
local anesthesia is all that is required to repair or realign the 
tubing or port.
The incidence of band removal for patient dissatisfaction 
or lack of weight loss is difficult to assess, since this number is 
increasing annually at a not small rate. The figure also is likely 
related to patient follow-up and may be artificially low if the 
patient seeks a second surgeon to remove a band. The true inci-
dence probably varies widely. Angrisani et al77 reported a 40.9% 
incidence of band removal after 10-year follow-up.
One of the positive outcomes of LAGB is the safety of 
the procedure. While complications are not rare, most of them 
involve non–life-threatening events. Nutritional complications 
are uncommon and easily treated. Based on worldwide data, the 
results appear to be optimal in those practices and centers where 
continued optimal follow-up and encouragement of appropriate 
behavioral lifestyle changes occur.
The Lap-Band also has its limitations, which may be the 
cause of its reduced popularity. It is often ineffective in pro-
ducing adequate weight loss. Restriction of high-caloric liq-
uids, easily digested snacks, and other foods that tend to negate 
dietary efforts is not adequately achieved with the Lap-Band. 
Patients must have enough willpower to avoid such foods. If 
weight loss remains poor, patient frustration and dissatisfac-
tion increase as time passes postoperatively. In centers where 
suboptimal conditions exist for support and follow-up, the rate 
of band failure in terms of poor overall weight loss is signifi-
cant. Reports in the literature tend to only include patients who 
still have their bands in place and exclude patients who have 
had bands removed for failure to lose weight. While the latter 
group of patients probably varies widely from center to center, 
the trend in many centers to now perform more LRYGB or SG 
and less LAGB than 5 years ago suggests that LAGB outcomes 
may rest as much on the postoperative support setting as the 
operation itself. Centers should reassess their ability to provide 
optimal follow-up and should do so if possible for optimal long-
term results after LAGB.
Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass
Background.  LRYGB was first described in 1994,25 but by 
1998, only a few centers had accumulated any significant experi-
ence with the procedure. The University of Pittsburgh was one of 
those centers, with Schauer and colleagues performing the pro-
cedure, and instituted a large number of training courses from 
1998 to 2001, which trained many of the bariatric surgeons who 
adopted the laparoscopic approach. By 2003, over 130,000 gastric 
1113
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
bypasses were done in the United States, with more than half of 
them being done laparoscopically. Currently over 90% of gastric 
bypass operations nationally are performed laparoscopically.
Figure 27-7 depicts the configuration of the LRYGB. The 
major feature of the operation is a proximal gastric pouch of 
small size (often <20 mL) that is totally separated from the distal 
stomach. A Roux limb of proximal jejunum is brought up and 
anastomosed to the pouch. The pathway of that limb can be ante-
rior to the colon and stomach, posterior to both, or posterior to 
the colon and anterior to the stomach. The length of the biliopan-
creatic limb from the ligament of Treitz to the distal enteroenter-
ostomy is 20 to 50 cm, and the length of the Roux limb is 75 to 
150 cm. Longer Roux limb lengths are performed but considered 
to have more malabsorption than the standard gastric bypass.
Experience has resolved several controversies about gas-
tric bypass, but others are still debated. It is clear that creating 
the proximal gastric pouch by totally dividing it from the distal 
stomach is superior to simply stapling the stomach, since the 
latter is associated with a high incidence of staple breakdown.78 
The size of the proximal gastric pouch must be small to create 
adequate restriction and should be based on the lesser curvature 
of the stomach to prevent dilation over time. Length of the Roux 
limb is associated with higher short-term weight loss for longer 
length limbs,79 but this difference becomes less on long-term 
follow-up.80 Some surgeons doing LRYGB will create a longer 
Figure 27-7.  Configuration of laparoscopic gastric bypass. (From 
Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st 
ed. New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleve-
land Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. 
All rights reserved.)
(150 cm) Roux limb for patients with a BMI over 60 or even 
50 kg/m2. Antecolic position of the Roux limb is associated with 
a lower incidence of internal hernias leading to obstruction in 
most series with short-term follow-up.81 However, reports with 
longer follow-up suggest later internal hernia incidence may 
increase with an antecolic approach.82 Despite the plethora of 
enthusiasm for reoperative endoscopic narrowing of the gastro-
jejunostomy opening,83-85 good long-term data do not yet exist 
to confirm that size of the gastrojejunostomy can be related to 
weight loss. The gastrojejunal anastomosis can be constructed 
in a variety of ways. Smaller diameter circular staplers are asso-
ciated with a higher incidence of postoperative stenosis, and 
linear stapling is associated with a lower incidence of stenosis 
compared to circular stapling.86,87
Technique.  The operation generally is performed using five 
ports plus a liver retractor. Both the surgeon, who stands on the 
patient’s right, and the first assistant, who stands on the patient’s 
left, have two ports for instruments. The telescope requires a 
port, usually in the supraumbilical region. The assistant’s ports 
are in the left subcostal and flank areas, while the surgeon may 
have both ports in the right upper quadrant (Cleveland approach) 
or one on each side of the camera (Virginia approach, Fig. 27-8). 
Division of the proximal jejunum at 40 to 50 cm distal to the 
ligament of Treitz is performed with the linear stapler, using the 
Figure 27-8.  Port scheme for laparoscopic gastric bypass. (From 
Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. 
New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland 
Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights 
reserved.)
5mm
5mm
12mm
12mm
5mm
5mm
1114
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
white stapler cartridge. Further division of the mesentery at that 
location is performed either with the stapler or harmonic scalpel, 
such that adequate mobilization of the Roux limb is achieved. 
A Penrose drain or suture is sutured to the proximal Roux limb 
(Fig. 27-9) for identification and facilitation of advancement to 
the gastric pouch.
The length of the Roux limb (usually 100–150 cm) to be 
created is now measured. A jejunojejunostomy is then created 
to the proximal end of the biliopancreatic limb at the above-
determined location along the Roux limb. A side-to-side stapled 
anastomosis is performed (Fig. 27-10). Either single- or double-
fired staple technique (the latter using a stapler fired in each 
direction) is used. The stapler defect is optimally closed with 
sutures but can be closed with a stapler if great care is taken 
not to narrow the lumen of the alimentary tract at this location. 
Once the stapler defect is closed, the mesenteric defect is then 
also closed with running permanent suture.
Passage of the Roux limb toward the stomach is now per-
formed. If an antecolic route is to be used, the end of the Roux 
limb is brought up so as to confirm its ability to reach the stom-
ach. If a retrocolic route is to be used, a defect is made in the 
transverse colon mesentery just to the left and slightly above the 
ligament of Treitz. The Penrose drain and the proximal end of 
the Roux limb are placed into the retrogastric space (Fig. 27-11).
The left lobe of the liver is now retracted using any one 
of several retractor types. The patient is moved to a reverse 
Trendelenburg position. The harmonic scalpel divides the peri-
toneum in the area of the angle of His. Then it is used to open 
an area along the lesser curvature of the stomach approximately 
3 cm down from the gastroesophageal junction. Another 
approach for creating access to the lesser curvature of the stom-
ach is to use a white or gray load (vascular load) of the sta-
pler and divide the lesser curvature vessels up to the surface of 
the stomach. Then a blue load of the stapler is fired one time 
transversely from the lesser curvature side partially across the 
stomach, followed by multiple subsequent firings of the stapler 
upward in the direction of the angle of His, to completely separate 
the proximal gastric pouch from the remainder of the stomach 
(Fig. 27-12). Use of an Ewald tube passed by the anesthesiolo-
gist and maneuvered to lie against the lesser curvature of the 
proximal stomach can help calibrate the pouch size.
Once the pouch is created, the Roux limb is brought up to 
the proximal gastric pouch. For the linear stapled anastomosis, 
the proximal end of the Roux limb is aligned with the distal gas-
tric pouch end, and the sides of the organs are sutured together to 
maintain their side-by-side position. A blue load of the stapler is 
introduced through a gastrotomy and an enterotomy for the two 
legs of the stapler, and the anastomosis is created (Fig. 27-13). 
Figure 27-9.  Creating Roux limb during 
laparoscopic gastric bypass.
Figure 27-10.  Enteroenterostomy of lapa-
roscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
1115
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
The stapler defect is closed with sutures and often reinforced with 
a second layer of sutures. At this point, the gastrojejunostomy is 
tested for security by using either methylene blue injected under 
pressure through the Ewald tube or a flexible upper endoscopy 
intraoperatively to test for air leakage from the anastomosis. The 
latter technique has been shown to decrease the incidence and 
seriousness of anastomotic leaks postoperatively.88 The final step 
of the operation involves suture closure of all mesenteric defects 
using permanent suture.
Circular anastomosis for the gastrojejunostomy is accom-
plished through placement of the anvil of the stapler through the 
anterior wall of the proximal gastric pouch. This is accomplished 
by pulling the anvil transorally via an endoscopically placed 
Figure 27-11.  Passage of Roux limb. (From Schauer PR, et al, eds. 
Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: Springer; 
2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Med-
ical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
Figure 27-12.  Creation of gastric pouch for laparoscopic Roux-en-
Y gastric bypass. (From Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive 
Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with 
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photogra-
phy © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
3
2
1
Figure 27-13.  Gastrojejunostomy in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass. (From Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive 
Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with 
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photogra-
phy © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
guidewire (Fig. 27-14), making a gastrotomy in the pouch that 
is later closed, or making a gastrotomy in the lower stomach 
before completing gastric division to create the pouch, allowing 
the anvil to be placed into the lumen of the stomach and then 
be brought through the anterior stomach in an area that is sub-
sequently included in the proximal gastric pouch (Fig. 27-15).
Hand-sewn gastrojejunostomy is usually created using 
two layers of absorbable suture to anastomose an approximately 
1-cm gastrotomy and enterotomy.
Patient Selection and Preparation.  LRYGB is an appro-
priate operation for consideration for most patients eligible 
for bariatric surgery. Relative contraindications to LRYGB 
include previous gastric surgery, previous antireflux surgery, 
severe iron deficiency anemia, distal gastric or duodenal lesions 
that require ongoing future surveillance, and Barrett’s esopha-
gus with severe dysplasia. Contraindications to a laparoscopic 
approach to RYGB should cause the surgeon to choose an open 
RYGB or other open procedure instead.
Preoperative flexible upper endoscopy is indicated in all 
patients contemplating undergoing RYGB to rule out lesions 
of the stomach or duodenum noted earlier.42 Preoperative low-
calorie diet for patients with hepatomegaly can decrease liver 
size and thus improve the chances of completing the operation 
laparoscopically. We use a mechanical bowel prep to decrease 
bowel weight and the chance of an inadvertent tear with han-
dling using the laparoscopic graspers.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up.  LRYGB patients are 
usually hospitalized for 2 to 3 days. Major concerns on the night 
of surgery include adequate analgesia, adequate fluid resusci-
tation to provide adequate urine output, and early ambulation. 
We still routinely employ a postoperative oral contrast study 
1116
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
on the first postoperative day. Numerous studies have advo-
cated abandoning this practice due to its lack of accuracy and 
cost-effectiveness.89,90 The study’s value to us has been to alert 
us to edema or stenosis of the enteroenterostomy or any other 
obstructive pattern of the proximal bowel. Obstruction of the 
enteroenterostomy or beyond can result in distal gastric dilata-
tion over just a period of several hours, which, if untreated, can 
cause distal gastric staple line rupture with fatal consequences.
Figure 27-14.  Oral passage of EEA 
circular stapler to create gastroje-
junostomy for laparoscopic Roux-
en-Y gastric bypass. (From Schauer 
PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive 
Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: 
Springer; 2007. Reprinted with per-
mission, Cleveland Clinic Center 
for Medical Art & Photography 
©  2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
Figure 27-15.  Transgastric passage of circular EEA stapler to create 
gastrojejuostomy for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. (Repro-
duced with permission from Schneider BE, et al. Circular stapled 
transabdominal technique. In: Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally 
Invasive Bariatric Surgery. 1st ed. New York: Springer; 2007:248. 
With kind permission of Springer Science + Business Media.)
Aside from early ambulation, postoperative prophylaxis 
against venous thromboembolism includes compression shoes 
and low-molecular-weight subcutaneous heparin. Discharge on 
a blenderized diet is standard for our practice.
Diet advancement occurs after the first clinic visit, usually 
approximately 3 weeks after surgery. At that time, an exercise 
plan is initiated if not already started.
Patients on insulin for type 2 diabetes and on antihyper-
tensive medications should be monitored to determine whether 
reduction of their medication is indicated. Subsequent follow-up 
visits are usually scheduled for 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year 
after surgery, and then annually thereafter. The focus of later 
postoperative visits is documentation of outcomes and testing 
for postoperative nutritional deficiencies.
Outcomes.  Patients undergoing LRYGB usually lose between 
60% and 70% of excess body weight during the first year after 
surgery. This has held true since the earliest large series of this 
operation was reported.91 Resolution of comorbidities varies, but 
is over 90% for GERD and venous stasis ulcers and over 80% 
for patients with type 2 diabetes of less than 5 years in duration. 
Hyperlipidemias are almost always improved and resolve totally in 
about 70% of cases. Hypertension resolves in 50% to 65% of cases 
(see Table 27-7). Even superobese patients who do not achieve 
an ultimate BMI of less than 35 kg/m2 can experience significant 
improvements in comorbidities after LRYGB or open RYGB.92
Mortality after LRYGB is now consistently less than 0.5% 
in most large reported series. Recent data from centers applying 
to be centers of bariatric surgery excellence showed a mortality 
rate of approximately 0.3% overall. The Bariatric Surgery Cen-
ter Network (BSCN) of the ACS database showed a mortality 
of 0.14% at 30 days.93
Overall morbidity after LRYGB has been acceptably low. 
In the BOLD database of the ASMBS, it was 14.87% for 30,864 
gastric bypass procedures.94 In the BSCN database, the 30-day 
1117
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
morbidity rate was 5.91% for 14,491 LRYGB procedures.93 
LRYGB avoids most wound and incisional hernia problems. 
Complications that do occur include a 0.3% incidence of anas-
tomotic leak,95 0.33% incidence of venous thromboembolism,96 
a 3% to 5% incidence of wound infections or problems,93 a 3% 
to 15% incidence of marginal ulcers,97 an approximately 7% 
incidence of bowel obstruction,98 a 4% incidence of postopera-
tive transfusion,99 and a 1% to 19% incidence of anastomotic 
stenosis,87 based on the type of anastomosis created.
Postoperative nutritional complications after LRYGB 
include a 66% incidence of iron deficiency, a 5% incidence 
of iron deficiency anemia, a 50% incidence of vitamin B12 
­deficiency,100 and an at least 15% incidence of vitamin D defi-
ciency,101 which usually is present preoperatively.
Several complications that are specific to LRYGB must be 
emphasized. One of the most important is small bowel obstruc-
tion. This complication must be treated differently than in the 
average general surgery patient, whose complication is usually 
from adhesions and often will resolve with conservative, non-
operative therapy. Patients who have had LRYGB who present 
with obstructive symptoms generally require surgical therapy 
on an emergent basis (Table 27-8). This is because the 
etiology of the bowel obstruction after LRYGB is often an 
internal hernia from inadequate or nonclosure of the mesenteric 
defects by the surgeon at the time of operation. Thus, treatment 
for these patients differs from most patients with small bowel 
obstruction. One of the most important points of this chapter 
is to emphasize to general surgeons to be aware of the need to 
emergently operate on patients after LRYGB who present with 
Table 27-8
Complications for which laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass patients require urgent surgical intervention
Small bowel obstruction
Early postoperative vomiting with obstructive picture
Early postoperative hematemesis with obstructive picture
Intestinal leak
Bleeding
small bowel obstruction. Currently, centers that perform small 
bowel transplantation are seeing patient referral for that proce-
dure after small bowel obstruction after LRYGB, where patients 
developed infarction of most of the bowel from an internal her-
nia and have short gut syndrome.102 Other patients, for whom 
surgery is delayed and the bowel infarcts, do not survive. When 
the surgeon does encounter bowel obstruction after LRYGB, 
he or she can expect to see proximally dilated bowel. Cutoff of 
passage of contrast on CT scan at the enteroenterostomy is par-
ticularly suggestive of this diagnosis (Fig. 27-16). The surgical 
treatment of this particular problem can, if addressed early in 
the course of the obstruction, be treated laparoscopically. The 
surgeon must place a trocar for the telescope low enough in 
the abdomen to adequately survey most of the small intestine. 
The cecum and terminal ileum are identified, and the bowel is 
followed retrograde from the terminal ileum to determine the 
anatomy. Often much of the small bowel is herniated through 
a mesenteric defect, and only this technique allows the surgeon 
to reliably identify the bowel and decompress it appropriately. 
If the bowel is viable, suturing the mesenteric defect is all that 
is needed for treatment. It should be emphasized that either an 
antecolic or retrocolic placement of the Roux limb can result 
in this complication, as internal hernias can arise from either 
approach.
Marginal ulcers are another complication relatively spe-
cific to RYGB, either LRYGB or open RYGB. The patient 
presents with pain in the epigastric region that is not altered by 
eating. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is medical with 
proton pump inhibitors, which are effective in 90% of cases. 
Only those with a gastrogastric fistula to the distal stomach, 
severe stenosis of the lumen of the gastrojejunostomy, or acute 
perforation require surgical therapy.
Stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy has been remarkably 
reduced by the use of a linear stapling technique in our experi-
ence.86 Stenosis symptoms usually appear from 6 to 12 weeks 
postoperatively, but less commonly can occur later. Diagnosis is 
by upper endoscopy. Treatment is balloon dilatation. Resolution 
normally occurs with one or two treatments. Less than 10% of 
patients require reoperation, and those are almost always associ-
ated with concurrent marginal ulcers.103
Figure 27-16.  Obstruction of con-
trast at enteroenterostomy with small 
bowel obstruction from internal her-
nia after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gas-
tric bypass.
4
1118
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
In the immediate postoperative period, anastomotic leak is 
the single most feared complication after RYGB, either open or 
laparoscopic. Careful vigilance and a high index of suspicion for 
this problem are the only appropriate approach, since its presen-
tation may be insidious and the patient’s demise, if untreated, 
sudden and complete. Tachycardia, tachypnea, fever, and oli-
guria are the most common symptoms that arouse suspicion 
for this problem. The treatment is surgical except in rare cir-
cumstances where a drain is already in place, no hemodynamic 
or clinical deterioration is present, and the leak is contained.104 
Usual surgical treatment involves repair as feasible, drainage, 
and creation of a reliable feeding access through a distal Stamm 
gastrostomy.
In the first few hours or day after surgery, hematemesis 
indicates bleeding from the gastrojejunostomy unless proven 
otherwise. The dangers to the patient include aspiration, life-
threatening hemorrhage, or more commonly intraluminal 
hematoma of the Roux limb and enteroenterostomy, which then 
causes an obstruction of the biliopancreatic limb leading to dis-
tal gastric staple line rupture. In fact, any obstructive symptoms 
in the first few weeks after surgery or any signs of obstruction 
of the biliopancreatic limb on postoperative swallow studies due 
to stenosis of the enteroenterostomy require immediate surgical 
intervention to prevent rupture of the distal gastric staple line. 
Some reports show that percutaneous decompression of the dis-
tal stomach can ameliorate the danger.105 Alternatively, opera-
tive therapy to decompress the stomach and treat the obstructive 
problem is also a reasonable option.
Overall, LRYGB has the significant advantages over open 
RYGB of avoiding incisional hernias and severe wound infec-
tions. Table 27-9 shows the data on these problems, comparing 
outcomes for laparoscopic versus open procedures at the Uni-
versity of Virginia. Compared with other bariatric surgical pro-
cedures, the LRYGB offers a reliable and powerful operation to 
allow the severely obese patient to lose weight. Although more 
reliable and greater, this weight loss does come at a slightly 
higher complication rate compared with LAGB and SG. How-
ever, these complication rates, as well as mortality, have been 
steadily decreasing for LRYGB in the past decade.
Open Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass
Background.  As described earlier in the chapter, Mason and 
Itoh26 first described gastric bypass, and Griffin and colleagues27 
first described its Roux limb modification. It has been the most 
time-tested and proven of all bariatric operations. The procedure 
is now done virtually the same as LRYGB, with the only dif-
ference being the access route to perform it. Experienced bar-
iatric surgeons who do not perform laparoscopic surgery still 
perform this operation with excellent overall outcomes,56 but 
their numbers are diminishing. RYGB was the most popular 
operation performed in the United States in the 1990s, but is 
now far exceeded by LRYGB and LAGB in terms of volume 
due to the preference of patients to undergo a laparoscopic 
rather than open procedure. However, for the patient for whom 
a laparoscopic approach fails, RYGB must be an operation that 
the bariatric surgeon can perform with skill.
Technique.  RYGB is performed essentially the same as 
LRYGB. Some surgeons who use an open approach prefer to 
perform creation of the gastric pouch as the first part of the 
procedure, but in essence, the net procedure is the same. Access 
for open RYGB is usually through an upper midline incision, 
although a left subcostal incision has been reported to furnish 
adequate access as well. Closure of the midline wound is per-
formed using a running monofilament suture. Subcutaneous 
tissues are thoroughly irrigated, and skin is closed with a skin 
stapler.
Patient Selection and Preparation.  Patient selection is 
essentially the same as for LRYGB, since the operation is the 
same. Extraordinarily large patients or those with multiple pre-
vious abdominal operations, particularly previous gastric sur-
gery, left colectomy, and splenectomy, often require an open 
incision to perform RYGB. Abdominal wall thickness and 
liver size are other factors that may require an open incision 
approach. Patients who have an existing large midline incisional 
hernia are also candidates for an open approach.
Preparation for open RYGB is identical to LRYGB.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up.  The postoperative care 
of the patient undergoing open RYGB is very similar to that 
of the patient undergoing LRYGB. Larger volumes of fluid 
resuscitation and often more narcotic analgesics are required 
the day of surgery and often the next as well. Greater attention 
must be paid to the incision site for potential infection, since 
an inadequately treated wound infection in these patients can 
extend easily to the fascial level and cause significant tissue 
loss before it is fully diagnosed. The perioperative care of open 
RYGB patients is usually more intense, often because such 
patients are very large, and concurrently have severe comor-
bidities, making them higher risk overall for complications of 
all types. It is interesting, though, that since the era of LRYGB, 
Table 27-9
Outcomes for laparoscopic versus open Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (University of Virginia 1994–2004)
Characteristics
LRYGB
ORYGB
P Value
Preoperative body mass index (kg/m2)
50.9 ± 0.3
57.5 ± 0.5
<.001
Number of comorbidities
2.7 ± 0.1
3.6 ± 0.1
<.001
30-day mortality
2 (0.3%)
6 (1.7%)
<.02
Overall complications
111 (14.5 %)
208 (57.3%)
<.001
Reoperation
67 (8.8%)
150 (41.3%)
<.001
Incisional hernia
13 (1.7%)
123 (33.9%)
<.001
Wound infection
14 (1.8%)
27 (7.4%)
<.001
LRYGB = laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass; ORYGB = open Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
1119
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
patients who still undergo open RYGB (usually due to intraop-
erative conversion) in our practice often are discharged within 
1 day of the laparoscopic patients. Our overall length of stay has 
decreased for RYGB patients based on postoperative pathways 
geared toward LRYGB.
Postoperative follow-up visits are similar to those of 
LRYGB patients, with the first visit being timed to appropri-
ately remove skin staples. Other visits, follow-up schedule, and 
blood testing are identical to LRYGB.
Outcomes.  The weight loss statistics and patterns for RYGB 
are comparable to those of LRYGB, as would be expected. Post-
operative deaths are slightly higher for RYGB, but this is almost 
certainly due to the patient population, which is often among the 
most severely medically compromised preoperatively. Flum and 
Dellinger106 showed that for a patient population on Medicare 
insurance, and hence largely disabled, RYGB had an across-the-
board mortality rate of 2.0%. This rate is considerably higher 
than the 0.3% to 0.4% incidence that was reported for programs 
applying at that time as bariatric COEs and is in large part due 
to the patient population. Interestingly, in the report by Flum 
and Dellinger, surgeons with the most experience had a mortal-
ity rate of less than 1.0% for this patient population, suggesting 
that surgeon experience and patient selection by experienced 
surgeons influence mortality for RYGB.
One of the most important population studies showing 
the benefit of bariatric surgery was done in patients undergoing 
RYGB. Christou and colleagues107 showed a lower incidence 
of mortality (0.68% vs. 6.17%) in the 5-year follow-up of over 
1000 patients undergoing RYGB versus over 5000 severely 
obese individuals who did not have surgery. This was a reduc-
tion of 89% in the death rate.
The incidence of postoperative complications for RYGB is 
higher than that of LRYGB, due largely to increased morbidity 
from incisional hernias and other wound-related problems (see 
Table 27-9). Other than incisional hernias, the long-term results 
of patients undergoing RYGB are similar to those undergoing 
LRYGB, including nutritional issues, weight loss, and overall 
resolution of comorbidities.
Biliopancreatic Diversion and Duodenal Switch
Background.  BPD was first described by, and remains cham-
pioned by, Scopinaro in Italy.32 The operation, which is shown 
in Fig. 27-17, involves resection of the distal half to two-thirds 
of the stomach and creation of an alimentary tract of the most 
distal 200 cm of ileum, which is anastomosed to the stomach. 
The biliopancreatic limb is anastomosed to the alimentary tract 
either 75 or 100 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, depending 
on the protein content of the patient’s diet. This operation met 
with limited international popularity, due to the technical diffi-
culty to perform it combined with the significant percentage of 
nutritional complications that arise postoperatively. However, 
the procedure did develop a devoted following among a few 
bariatric surgeons.
One complication that plagued the BPD was the develop-
ment of a high incidence of marginal ulcers postoperatively. 
Hess and Hess33 and Marceau and colleagues108 separately 
described the adaptation of the DS operation, originally pro-
posed by DeMeester and colleagues109 for treatment of bile 
reflux gastritis, to replace the gastric portion of the BPD. This 
new procedure was originally called BPD with DS. For ease 
of description, we now simply use the term duodenal switch 
(DS) to describe this procedure. It is illustrated in Fig. 27-18. 
Figure 27-17.  Diagram of biliopancreatic diversion. (From 
Schauer PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st 
ed. New York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleve-
land Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. 
All rights reserved.)
Figure 27-18.  Diagram of duodenal switch. (From Schauer PR, 
et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: 
Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center 
for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
1120
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­Currently BPD and DS represent together less than 3% of bar-
iatric operations performed in the United States, and this rate 
could be as low as 1% to 2%. The lack of a significant number 
of surgeons offering the operation, especially via a laparoscopic 
approach, probably has a great deal to do with that statistic. BPD 
and DS are, however, recognized as standard bariatric opera-
tions and approved for coverage by most insurance companies 
at this time.
Technique.  The technique for BPD will be described for the 
open approach, but the laparoscopic approach essentially repro-
duces what is done with the open approach, using different 
access. Laparoscopic BPD and DS are very technically chal-
lenging operations, perhaps another contributing factor to the 
relatively low numbers of surgeons offering these operations.110
The BPD operation begins with performance of a distal 
subtotal gastrectomy. A residual 200-mL gastric pouch is cre-
ated for superobese patients, or a slightly larger pouch is created 
for patients with a BMI under 50 kg/m2. The terminal ileum is 
identified and divided 250 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. 
The distal end of that divided ileum is then anastomosed to the 
stomach, creating a 2- to 3-cm stoma. The proximal end of the 
ileum is then anastomosed side-to-side to the terminal ileum 
approximately 100 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. Some 
surgeons perform the anastomosis only 50 cm proximal to the 
valve, but in these patients, the likelihood of good protein intake 
postoperatively should be high. Prophylactic cholecystectomy is 
performed due to the high incidence of gallstone formation with 
the malabsorption of bile salts.
The DS procedure differs from the BPD only in the proxi-
mal gut portion of the operation. Instead of a distal gastrectomy, 
resection of all the stomach except for a narrow lesser curvature 
tube of the stomach is performed. The diameter of this tube is 
calibrated with a dilator and, if limited to a 32- to 40-French 
diameter, produces the optimal amount of weight loss while still 
allowing adequate oral intake. The duodenum is now divided in 
its first portion, leaving an approximately 2-cm length of duo-
denum intact beyond the pylorus. This end of the duodenum is 
then anastomosed to the distal 250 cm of ileum. This anastomo-
sis is often done in an end-to-end fashion with a circular stapler. 
It is the most difficult portion of the DS procedure, and leak 
rates are slightly higher than with other anastomoses. The distal 
bowel configuration and cholecystectomy are similar to BPD.
Patient Selection and Preparation.  Patients who undergo 
either BPD or DS must be prepared for the consequences of 
a malabsorptive operation. Frequent and large-quantity bowel 
movement after any large amount of oral intake is common. 
Patients who have this procedure must be willing to accept fre-
quent, voluminous bowel movements and will also usually mod-
ify their eating pattern to restrict intake if access to a bathroom 
will prove difficult. Patients who undergo either operation must 
agree to close follow-up preferably by the surgeon. Internists 
and family physicians may not appreciate the issues related to 
protein-calorie malabsorption if they occur and treat the patients 
instead for congestive heart failure. Disastrous results may then 
occur. Patients must also have the financial means to afford the 
large number of vitamin and mineral supplements that must be 
taken to avoid nutritional problems in this patient population.
Given the increased incidence of postoperative nutritional 
and other complications relative to any of the restrictive opera-
tions, BPD and DS usually are recommended only for patients 
who have superobesity or for whom it is reasonable to believe 
they will not succeed with the diet and exercise requirements 
that form the basis for long-term success with restrictive opera-
tions. Patients who have failed a restrictive operation and 
are considering reoperation are candidates for these pro-
cedures.
Contraindications to the procedure include geographic 
distance from the surgeon, lack of financial means to afford 
supplements, and preexisting calcium, iron, or other nutrient 
deficiencies.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up.  Patients undergoing 
BPD or DS must be followed closely and with absolute com-
pleteness for nutritional issues long term. Postoperatively, BPD 
and DS patients face the same potential complications as seen 
after RYGB. Anastomotic leaks, pulmonary compromise and 
complications, gastrointestinal bleeding, anastomotic stenosis 
or obstruction, and infections are all potential concerns dur-
ing the index hospitalization. The long gastric staple line and 
the duodenoileostomy of the DS and the duodenal stump and 
gastroileostomy of the BPD are all areas of anatomic concern 
postoperatively. Distal anastomotic problems can occur with 
either procedure as well. Thorough preoperative and postop-
erative counseling by a nutritionist versed in the operation and 
potential nutritional deficiencies is essential. Vitamin and min-
eral supplements must be taken regularly on follow-up, includ-
ing oral supplements for iron, calcium, and vitamin B12 and 
a multivitamin. Fat-soluble vitamins must be supplemented in 
parenteral form. Careful monitoring of protein intake and serum 
albumin is necessary. More frequent follow-up than with RYGB 
is needed; checkups at 2-month intervals for the first year and 
semi-annual or more frequent visits thereafter are appropriate.
Outcomes.  Weight loss results with BPD or DS are both excel-
lent and comparable. They also are very durable. One 18-year 
follow-up study after BPD showed a mean excess weight loss 
of 70% persisting for that duration of time.111
Although most of the results of BPD or DS are after open 
operations, one report of laparoscopic DS showed that for 
40 patients with an average BMI of 60 kg/m2 the mean hospital 
stay was 4 days, average operation room time was 3.5 hours, 
and mean excess weight loss at 9 months was 58%.112
Buchwald and colleagues74 showed that the average weight 
loss after BPD and DS in the literature was over 70%, with mor-
tality rate of 1.1%, complication rate of 27% to 33%, and nutri-
tional complication rate of 40% to 77% (see Table 27-6).
Complications that occur after the BPD include those seen 
after RYGB, where intestinal anastomoses and gastric division 
create potential problems. Scopinaro and colleagues111 reported 
obstruction in 1.2%, wound infections in a similar rate, and 
marginal ulcer in 2.8% of patients. However, others found the 
incidence of marginal ulcer to be higher after BPD, causing 
the adoption of the DS. Preservation of the pylorus drastically 
reduces the significant incidence of dumping (poorly quanti-
tated in most series) after BPD. The duodenoileostomy of DS 
also has a very low rate of stomal ulcer, unlike the gastroileos-
tomy of BPD.
Nutritional complications are by far the most frequent and 
concerning after both of these operations, particularly on long-
term follow up. Scopinaro and colleagues111 reported a protein 
malnutrition rate of 7%, iron deficiency anemia rate of less 
than 5%, and bone demineralization at 5 years of 53%. Other 
problems that may arise include alopecia from inadequate pro-
tein absorption, night blindness from a lack of vitamin A, and 
5
1121
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
­gallstones if the gallbladder is not removed. However, of all 
these nutritional complications, protein-calorie malnutrition is 
the most severe and life-threatening. When it is diagnosed, the 
treatment is parenteral nutrition. Two episodes of required par-
enteral nutrition are usually considered adequate indication to 
lengthen the “common channel” of ileum—the ileum between 
the ileoileostomy of the biliopancreatic limb to the alimen-
tary tract and the ileocecal valve. The amount that the surgeon 
should lengthen it is poorly documented, but most surgeons will 
favor making it long enough to be certain to avoid recurrence of 
the problem, such as doubling the length of the common chan-
nel, even if it decreases weight loss somewhat.
It cannot be emphasized enough that patients who undergo 
either BPD or DS should be impressed with the fact that lifetime 
nutritional supplements and lifetime follow-up are essential to 
preserve good health after these operations.
Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy
Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy has taken the bariatric surgical 
scene by storm over the past 5 to 10 years. It is rapidly increasing 
in popularity, and by the time this book is published, it may be, in 
some countries and areas, the most popular bariatric and metabolic 
operation performed. Its rapid rise in popularity coupled with good 
initial results suggest that it will be a major component of patient 
care for the treatment of morbid obesity and its comorbid medical 
problems for years to come in the future.
Since sleeve gastrectomy is performed almost exclusively 
using a laparoscopic approach, the remainder of this text will 
use the simple term sleeve gastrectomy (SG) to describe the 
procedure, with the understanding that it is routinely performed 
using a laparoscopic approach. SG had its origins in the early 
days of laparoscopic bariatric surgery. The procedure represents 
the gastric portion of the DS procedure.33 Ren and colleagues112 
reported an initial experience of performing DS using a laparo-
scopic approach that had relatively higher mortality than seen 
with gastric bypass or other treatment options being performed 
laparoscopically. This was in part due to the fact that patients 
selected to receive DS often were significantly larger and had 
more numerous and more severe comorbid medical problems. 
Gagner began to perform the gastric resection portion of the 
DS operation as a first-stage procedure. After patients had lost 
weight, the malabsorptive component of the procedure was then 
performed. However, many of the patients had such good results 
after the first stage of the procedure that they refused to proceed 
to the second portion.113 Thus, the concept of performing SG as 
a primary procedure was born.
Until 2009, SG was considered an “experimental” proce-
dure by insurance carriers. That year, the ASMBS reviewed the 
data on the procedure and published a statement in January of 
2010 recognizing the procedure had adequate data and results 
to support its use as a primary bariatric operation for carefully 
selected patients.114 Shortly thereafter, SG received a desig-
nated Common Procedural Terminology (CPT) code. Since that 
time, insurance carriers have recognized the procedure as being 
appropriate for treating severe obesity and its comorbid prob-
lems. The final carrier, Medicare and Medicaid in the United 
States, issued a statement in April 2012 that left the determi-
nation of coverage of this procedure to the regional insurance 
carriers administering Medicare. This happened only after a 
hearing to determine coverage in which a great deal of data was 
presented in favor of the procedure. The initial conclusion of 
that panel was that SG should be reimbursed if performed in the 
setting of a prospective randomized trial. However, subsequent 
public opinion and data caused CMS to revise its decision to 
allow regional carriers to determine coverage.
SG has the advantage of being a technically easier oper-
ation to perform than gastric bypass, while achieving better 
efficacy in treating comorbid medical problems and producing 
superior weight loss than LAGB. Once the results of the proce-
dure began to be published, understood, and accepted, its 
popularity rose dramatically. In the United States, the inci-
dence of performing SG has risen rapidly since 2008, as shown in 
Fig. 27-19. The incidence of SG is increasing at a rate that 
suggests that within the next 2 years it may pass LRYGB as 
the most popular bariatric operation performed in the United 
States.
Throughout the rest of the world, the popularity of SG has 
also risen dramatically in the past 5 to 8 years. In Asia, where 
there is a high incidence of gastric cancer in countries such as 
Japan, SG makes more sense anatomically as an appropriate 
treatment for severe obesity. In India, where the high incidence 
of diabetes in the obese population makes metabolic and bariat-
ric surgery a desirable option, SG has gained popularity once 
its effectiveness in treating diabetes was shown. Figure 27-20 
shows the trend in performance of several bariatric operations in 
Asia from 2003 to 2011, during which the totals of those proce-
dures from surgeons surveyed increased over 500%.37 This rise 
in bariatric and metabolic surgery was comparable to the same 
increase in percentage of cases performed seen in the United 
States from 1998 to 2003. In Europe, the past few years have 
seen a clear trend away from performing LAGB and a higher 
incidence of performing both SG and LRYGB.37
Figure 27-19.  National U.S. Bariatric Volume Percent-
age by Procedure Type. (Reproduced with permission 
from Buchwald H, Oien DM: Metabolic/bariatric sur-
gery worldwide 2011. Obes Surg. 2013;23:427. With 
kind permission of Springer Science+Business Media.)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
2006
2008
National US Bariatric Volume Percentage by Procedure Type
2012
Lap RYGB
Open RYGB
Lap Band
Sleeve
6
1122
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Indications.  Patient selection for SG is comparable to that 
for other bariatric and metabolic operations with a few notable 
exceptions. SG was originally introduced as the first of a two-
stage operative treatment for patients with super obesity (BMI 
>60 kg/m2).115 It remains an effective first- or second-stage 
treatment for such patients. Whether a second stage is indicated 
depends on the effectiveness of the SG. SG has been shown 
to be safe and effective in adolescent obese patients.116 It has 
also been shown to be an acceptable procedure for the elderly 
obese patient.117 SG effectively treats most of the comorbid 
medical problems associated with obesity. The one exception is 
GERD. Patients with GERD experience less resolution of their 
symptoms after SG than do patients with LAGB, even when 
the LABG patients lost less weight overall.93 Patients who have 
longstanding severe GERD may not be good candidates for SG. 
Barrett’s esophagus is considered a relative contraindication for 
performing SG, since the potential for future esophagectomy 
and the need for an available intact stomach for reconstruction 
outweigh the potential advantages of the procedure.
Technique.  The patient is positioned supine, with foot sup-
port to allow reverse Trendelenburg positioning. The surgeon 
stands to the patient’s right along with the camera driver, while 
the assistant stands to the patient’s left. Port placement may 
vary from institution to institution, but our recommended port 
placement is shown in Fig. 27-21. The 15-mm port, helpful for 
removal of the stomach, is located in either the camera (just 
to the patient’s left of the umbilicus) or surgeon’s right hand 
(right upper quadrant near the midline) location. The other of 
these ports is a 12-mm port. The assistant has two 5-mm ports 
available in the left upper quadrant laterally, and the surgeon’s 
left hand port is a 5-mm port more lateral and superior in the 
right upper quadrant. A liver retractor is placed in the epigastric 
region. This can be a Nathanson or T-Boone retractor.
The operation begins by devascularizing the greater curva-
ture of the stomach, beginning 3 to 5 cm proximal to the pylorus. 
The harmonic scalpel works nicely to perform this tissue divi-
sion. The division of all vessels adjacent to the greater curvature 
is continued up to the left crus of the diaphragm. A complete 
mobilization of the fundus in this area and division of posterior 
TRENDS: 2003 to 2008 to 2011
ASIA/PACIFIC
Percentage of Procedures
80.4%
82.5%
32.6%
0.0%
4.1%
55.1%
8.4%
9.1%
9.6%
3.9%
0.0%
0.5%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2003
2008
2011
Adjustable
Gastric Banding
Sleeve
Gastrectomy
Roux-en-Y
Gastric Bypass
Biliopancreatic
Diversion/Duodenal
Switch
Figure 27-20.  Asia/Pacific 
Bariatric Volume Percentage by 
Procedure Type. (Reproduced 
with permission from Buchwald 
H, Oien DM: Metabolic/bar-
iatric surgery worldwide 2011. 
Obes Surg. 2013;23:427. With 
kind permission of Springer 
Science+Business Media.)
Figure 27-21.  Port scheme for Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.
fibrous attachments to the antrum and body of the stomach are 
then performed such that the stomach is attached solely by the 
lesser curvature blood supply and the pyloric and esophageal 
regions. Stapled division of the stomach now follows. The first 
firing of the stapler occurs from the point of devascularization of 
the greater curvature at an angle pointing toward a point about 
2 cm lateral to the incisura. The antrum of the stomach is at its 
thickest here, and so it is important to be certain the stapler load 
used is sufficiently large enough to allow good approximation 
and closure of the divided stomach. We have favored use of 
the black load (2.5-mm staple height) in all males with a BMI 
over 45 kg/m2, females with a BMI over 55 kg/m2, or anyone 
whose stomach looks particularly thick. A green load (staple 
height of 2 mm when closed) is used for less thick stomachs or 
smaller individuals. We continue the use of this color load for 
the first two firings, which takes the gastric division to past the 
incisura. After the first staple firing, some surgeons will engage 
the anesthesiologist to pass a 32- to 36-French bougie and posi-
tion it along the lesser curvature of the stomach. This bougie 
then serves as a guide for further gastric division. Alternatively, 
some surgeons will insert the endoscope instead of the bougie 
as a guide for gastric division. It can also be used to test for air 
1123
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
leaks, bleeding, or obstruction as it is withdrawn after gastric 
division. Dividing the stomach adjacent to the bougie or endo-
scope will produce the desired diameter of the gastric sleeve. 
It is most important not to narrow the stomach lumen at the 
incisura. During the second and third firing of the stapler to 
divide the stomach, it is critical to confirm by visualization of 
both the anterior and posterior surfaces of the stomach that the 
incisura area is not narrowed. By the third firing of the stapler, 
usually the angle of the gastric division is now pointed directly 
toward the angle of His, parallel to the bougie (Fig. 27-22). At 
this point, changing staple loads to lower staple height is advis-
able. We usually switch to gold then blue staple loads as we 
progress proximally in dividing the stomach. It is essential that 
with each firing of the stapler, adequate time (10–20 seconds) is 
allowed for tissue compression to allow optimal staple closure 
and security of the divided tissue.
Once the stomach is completely divided up to the angle 
of His, the staple line is inspected for hemostasis and integ-
rity. Some surgeons will reinforce the staple line with a but-
tress material, while others will invaginate the staple line with 
a running serosa to serosa suture. Some surgeons will exchange 
the bougie at this point for a 32-French Ewald tube and per-
form a methylene blue leak test. Alternatively, if an endoscope 
is used, it is withdrawn with insufflation, and the staple line is 
inspected for air leaks while submerged in saline. The speci-
men is removed through the 15-mm trocar site, usually with 
only slight enlargement of the site. Figure 27-23 shows the com-
pleted operation.
Controversy still exists as to the optimal size of the bougie 
used during the procedure. One summary of the literature shows 
that the stenosis rate is lower if a 40-French bougie is used, and 
the leak rate may also be lower without compromising weight 
loss.118 However, individual institutional experiences with 
smaller-sized bougies have shown the potential for exception-
ally good weight loss and no increased incidence of stenosis.119 
Another controversial area is that of staple line reinforcement 
Figure 27-22.  Performing sleeve gastrectomy. (From Schauer 
PR, et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New 
York: Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic 
Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights 
reserved.)
Figure 27-23.  Completed sleeve gastrectomy. (From Schauer PR, 
et al, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery, 1st ed. New York: 
Springer; 2007. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center 
for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All rights reserved.)
with staple buttressing material. Some surgeons advocate rou-
tine staple line reinforcement, whereas others advocate none. 
Still others advocate oversewing of the staple line in areas of 
bleeding or in selected cases that show a predilection for bleed-
ing intraoperatively. Other experts advocate routine oversewing 
of the entire staple line.120 At this time, there is no preponder-
ance of data to support one approach as being superior to others.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up.  SG usually is performed 
with an overnight stay of 2 nights after surgery. Longer hos-
pitalizations are indicated for patients with more severe medi-
cal problems. Absence of signs of bleeding and a documented 
intact staple line with good gastric emptying are required prior 
to discharge. Routine Gastrografin swallow on the first day 
after surgery is used by many surgeons, but its efficacy and 
cost-effectiveness have yet to be clearly documented. Follow-
up is similar to that after LRYGB. Few nutritional complica-
tions occur unless the patient has difficulty taking in enough 
nutrients or protein or vitamins due to edema or tightness of 
the sleeve lumen. Most surgeons advocate routine vitamin B12. 
Iron supplementation may be required as well since iron in the 
diet is usually drastically restricted by elimination of many 
foods rich in iron. It is unclear whether the same need for vita-
min D supplementation seen after LRYGB is also needed after 
SG, since there is a high incidence of low 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D levels preoperatively in patients undergoing SG.121 Routine 
multivitamins are usually prescribed to avert any potential other 
shortages from dietary vagaries.
The other aspect of weight loss that must be considered in 
the nutritional aspects of postoperative care and follow-up after 
SG is that patients are at risk of losing significant lean body 
1124
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
mass while they are also losing weight. Damms-Machado and 
colleagues121 showed that SG patients’ lean body mass decreased 
from 74.8 kg to 62.3 kg at 1 year after SG. This emphasizes the 
need for high protein content in the postoperative diet of SG 
patients to maintain lean body mass.
Outcomes and Complications.  Reports in the literature of the 
success and excellent weight loss after SG have been accumu-
lating since 2006.122,123 The first very large series from a single 
institution reported 750 patients undergoing SG as a primary 
weight loss procedure. Five-year follow-up of some patients 
was available, and a hospital stay averaging 1.7 days, a major 
complication rate under 5%, an operative time under 80 min-
utes, and no conversions or mortality were reported.124
Brethauer and colleagues125 published an excellent review 
of the early data on SG through 2009. For the collected number 
of patients treated with SG (2750 patients), the excess weight 
loss rate was 55.4%. Studies with 5-year follow-up for SG are 
not yet common. One highly successful series was recently 
reported by Rawlins and colleagues119 for 49 patients followed 
for 5 years after SG with an average weight loss of 86% of 
excess weight and a decrease in average BMI from 65 to 35 kg/m2. 
One of the longest follow-up studies for SG by Eid and col-
leagues126 demonstrated an average excess weight loss of 48% 
and BMI decrease from 66 to 46 kg/m2 in 74 superobese patients 
with 6- to 8-year follow-up.
Prospective randomized trials comparing SG with other 
procedures have shown that SG is superior to LAGB for excess 
weight loss at 3 years (66% vs. 48%).127 One study reported 
that SG achieved a superior excess weight loss compared with 
LRYGB (69.7% vs. 60.5%) at 1 year after surgery. This study 
also found greater appetite suppression and a lower serum ghre-
lin level for SG.128
SG has been included in the results of large databases 
showing outcomes after bariatric surgery. Data from the ACS 
BSCN showed that SG was positioned between LAGB and 
LRYGB for efficacy of weight loss and resolution of comorbid 
medical problems and for morbidity and mortality.93
As noted earlier, controversy exists as to whether the use 
of buttress materials with the stapling of the stomach improves 
outcomes. The overall bleeding rate for the staple line after 
SG is generally cited as about 2% in collected series.125 There 
have been no studies that have shown a definitive decrease 
in this bleeding rate with the use of buttress materials; how-
ever, a panel of experts has voiced support for a decreased 
incidence of bleeding from the staple line if buttress material 
is used.120
Measures to prevent staple line leakage are similarly con-
troversial with respect to buttress materials and other measures. 
It is certain that appropriate stapling technique in dividing the 
stomach is important. Using an adequately high staple height 
for the tissue to be divided and allowing an adequate amount of 
time for tissue decompression within the stapler jaws before fir-
ing are essential to minimize the likelihood of a staple line leak. 
Failure to perform gastric division appropriately in this fashion 
will lead to an early staple line leak after surgery. Whether but-
tress materials do decrease the leak rate with SG is very con-
troversial. One meta-analysis did show that there is evidence 
to suggest buttress materials may decrease this rate.129 Other 
prospective randomized studies have failed to show a benefit 
of buttress materials.130 To date, the literature has not clearly 
shown a benefit for using buttress materials in terms of leak 
prevention.
Perhaps the major factor that is different in SG than other 
gastric stapling procedures is that SG creates a high-pressure 
gastric tube. This increased intraluminal pressure places the 
staple line at risk for leakage. If there is a relative obstruction 
or stenosis of the sleeve, which most often may occur at the 
incisura due to narrowing there during formation of the sleeve, 
pressure above the level of the obstruction will be even more 
elevated and create an increased risk for staple line leak. Leaks 
of the proximal staple line are the most frequent type seen after 
SG and often are felt to be related to increased intraluminal pres-
sure distally. They may also be related to stapling too close to 
the angle of His, with resultant instability of the tissue directly 
adjacent to the esophagus in this area. It is important not to sta-
ple too close to the angle of His during the final stapling division 
portion of the stomach so as to not further weaken the staple 
line in this area. Proximal staple line leaks may also present as 
late leaks. Late leaks are generally felt to be those that occur 6 
weeks or longer after surgery. Late leaks are rare in other bar-
iatric procedures, but are seen with SG. The increased pressure 
of the system may be a reason SG is associated with late leaks. 
Confirmation and treatment of stenosis symptoms early after SG 
may prevent such leaks.
Distal staple line leaks are different than proximal staple 
line leaks, and are usually associated with earlier presentation 
and related to mechanical failure of the staple line to securely 
approximate the thicker distal gastric tissue. These leaks are 
more amenable to successful repair with a reoperation, whereas 
proximal leaks may not improve with oversewing at a reopera-
tion unless the mechanics of the relative distal obstruction and 
high intraluminal pressure of the sleeve are also treated. Endo-
scopic intervention to dilate stenotic areas as well may be bene-
ficial in the setting of a stenosis with or without a proximal leak. 
Care must be taken by the endoscopist to not excessively dilate 
the tract beyond the original size of the bougie used. Another 
factor that may influence stenosis at the incisura is that there 
may be a relative twisting of the stomach at this location, with 
the antrum being partially twisted away from the upper por-
tion of the sleeve. Endoscopic treatment can help straighten and 
markedly alleviate the obstruction in such cases. Thus relatively 
early endoscopic intervention is appropriate in the patient with 
a stenosis at the incisura. One study has shown that endoscopic 
dilation is usually successful in treating stenosis after SG, with 
a mean of 1.6 dilatations being done an average of 48 days post-
operatively.131
The patient with the proximal gastric staple line leak due 
to mechanical factors may experience a persistence of the leak 
for months. Such cases are now only recently being published 
and discussed in the literature. It is unclear how long one should 
optimally treat such a leak conservatively with the likelihood it 
will close. Reports of such leaks persisting for multiple months 
postoperatively exist. Our own experience has been that even-
tual closure of such a leak is possible even 4 months postopera-
tively. However, longer duration leaks are less likely to close. 
Some experts have now advocated conversion of the patient 
with a longstanding leak after SG to a RYGB to provide a low-
pressure anastomosis above the site of the stenosis. Similarly, 
persistent stenosis of the sleeve despite conservative therapy 
and endoscopic dilatation also is an indication for conversion 
to LRYGB.
Physiology of Weight Loss.  SG is a fairly simple technical 
operation, amenable to performance by many surgeons. The 
results of the operation for weight loss have been excellent 
1125
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
and dramatic. However, the mechanisms of the resolution of 
comorbidities, such as diabetes, are still not totally clear. While 
weight loss alone may provide the majority of the physiologic 
changes that improve comorbid problems such as diabetes 
and hypertension, it is also possible that other factors may be 
involved. Certainly SG, through gastric resection, eliminates 
much of the ghrelin-producing portion of the stomach. The reso-
lution of type 2 diabetes after SG is remarkable, although not 
as good as that seen after RYGB. The reasons for this are as yet 
unclear, since lap RYGB has been shown to have independent 
factors influencing glucose metabolism separate from weight 
loss alone. The hormonal and peptidergic changes produced 
by SG in terms of appetite suppression, glucose metabolism, 
and other metabolic pathways have yet to be clarified. A recent 
hypothesis summarized by Ed Mason132 is that the rapid empty-
ing of the stomach after SG creates a similar exaggerated release 
of GLP-1 as seen after LRYGB, and this results in the improved 
carbohydrate metabolism and improvement of type 2 diabetes 
seen after SG, as after LRYGB.133
There is some concern among the bariatric surgical com-
munity that SG, because it is technically not that difficult, could 
become a procedure performed by surgeons without a full sup-
port system and follow-up mechanism for bariatric patients. The 
bariatric surgery community feels strongly that this procedure 
should remain a procedure done within the confines of the COE 
framework. This will ensure optimal patient outcomes.
SPECIAL ISSUES RELATING TO THE BARIATRIC 
PATIENT
Bariatric Procedures in Adolescent and Elderly 
Patients
The incidence of obesity in the U.S. population has risen dramat-
ically during the past two decades. This increase has included 
children and adolescents as well. The incidence of obesity (BMI 
>30 kg/m2) is estimated to exceed 25% in the adolescent popula-
tion. Factors felt to contribute to this include decreased partici-
pation in physical sports and activities, increased time playing 
computer and screen games, and increased consumption of fast 
food and processed foods.
Obese adolescents have a high likelihood of being obese 
adults. In one study, 75% of adolescents above the 85th per-
centile were obese as adults.134 The social stigmatization of the 
severely obese adolescent is often brutal. Comorbid medical 
problems may already be present in severely obese adolescents, 
including hypertension and type 2 diabetes. The overwhelm-
ing likelihood of a severely obese adolescent facing a lifetime 
of severe obesity as an adult also implies that an average of 
12 years of life for males and 9 years of life for females will be 
lost due to this medical problem.
The major controversy with regard to adolescents under-
going bariatric surgery includes the general aversion of sub-
jecting an adolescent to surgery as well as the concern of the 
secondary side effects of bariatric surgery on remaining growth 
and development. Clearly the younger the patient, the more rel-
evant the latter concern becomes.
The literature to date on the results of outcomes from bar-
iatric surgery on adolescents is generally quite favorable. How-
ever, it is still limited. Sugerman and colleagues135 reported 
on results for 33 adolescents, 30 of whom had RYGB (mostly 
open RYGB). There were two late deaths at 2 and 6 years of 
follow-up unrelated to surgery. There were 20 early and late 
complications, including six incisional hernias and five wound 
infections. Significant weight loss was maintained in the major-
ity of patients for up to 14 years after surgery. Most comor-
bidities resolved at 1 year after surgery. Self-image was greatly 
enhanced and social stigmatization greatly decreased. Capella 
and Capella136 reported on 19 adolescent patients treated with a 
modified version of open RYGB in which a vertical band was 
added to the pouch. After an average 5.5-year follow-up, aver-
age BMI for the group was 28 kg/m2. No deaths occurred, but 
two patients required revisional surgery. No mortality or mor-
bidity was reported, and all comorbidities resolved. Abu-Abeid 
and colleagues137 treated 11 adolescents with LAGB. No late 
complications occurred, and after a 4-year follow-up, BMI aver-
age went from 46.4 to 32.1 kg/m2.
A meta-analysis involving 131 adolescents undergoing 
bariatric surgery demonstrated a 17.8 to 22.3 kg/m2 decrease in 
BMI after RYGB.138 They also observed improvement of hyper-
tension in more than half the patients and sleep apnea resolution 
in all 131 patients. There were four mortalities in this cohort, but 
only one of them was potentially associated with the procedure 
(Clostridium difficile colitis 9 months after operation). Morbid-
ity in the adolescent literature ranges from 0% to 38% and tends 
to be minor in most cases. The most common complication in the 
meta-analysis was nutrient deficiencies. The weight of the evi-
dence supports adolescent bariatric surgery as a safe and effec-
tive treatment of severe obesity in adolescents. The ASMBS 
pediatric guidelines suggest using BMI criteria similar to the 
adult population but with some modifications to comorbidity 
thresholds.139 They recommend considering surgery in patients 
with a BMI of 35 kg/m2 or greater with major comorbidities 
(e.g., type 2 diabetes, severe nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 
OSA) or a BMI of 40 kg/m2 or greater with minor comorbidities 
(e.g., hypertension, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance).
The elderly patient population certainly suffers from 
severe obesity. However, data on the effect of nonsurgical ther-
apies in treating this patient population are lacking. Similarly, 
it is likely that the patient who becomes obese late in life has 
a significantly different prognosis than the individual who has 
been severely obese and does manage to survive to an older age 
despite the resulting comorbidities.
There has been an increasing tendency to offer bariatric 
surgery to patients over the age of 60. Studies have documented 
that this patient population can have the same good outcomes 
and resolution of comorbidities as younger patients.140 Nehoda 
and colleagues141 reported equally excellent results for LAGB in 
patients over age 50 compared with those under age 50. Excess 
weight loss of 68%, reoperation rate of 10%, and 97% improve-
ment in comorbidities were reported for this age group. A recent 
retrospective review of 42 carefully selected bariatric surgery 
patients over 70 years old looked at the outcomes up to 1 year 
after surgery. Of these patients, 22 patients (52.4%) underwent 
laparoscopic gastric banding, 12 patients (28.6%) underwent 
laparoscopic SG, and 8 patients (19%) underwent LRYGB. 
They safely achieved a mean weight loss of 47.7% with no mor-
tality and modest improvement in obesity-associated comor-
bidities.142 SG for elderly patients is also gaining popularity. In 
35 patients ≥60 years of age, Soto and colleagues143 demon-
strated greater than 60% excess weight loss at 48 months with 
low morbidity (8.4%) and no mortality with SG.
Although these data show that in selected older patients 
excellent results can be obtained, surgeons must be cautious to 
1126
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
determine which patients have been severely obese for decades 
and therefore have essentially end-stage organ function in many 
cases as a result of the comorbid medical conditions that have 
been present for decades. Flum and Dellinger106 showed that 
the older patient population, especially those few patients older 
than age 70 undergoing bariatric surgery, did have an increased 
incidence of mortality and morbidity after RYGB.
The concept that bariatric surgery confers an improved 
quality of life, a longer life, and a life without as many asso-
ciated medical problems leads to the logical conclusion that 
the benefits of an operation will be more fully realized in the 
younger patient. This philosophy, in view of the large 
number of unserved patients, does justify age limits for 
individual surgeon practices. While some surgeons do have such 
limits, patients near or just over the age limit are often reviewed 
on an individual basis to determine their appropriateness for 
surgery. However, some surgeons will base their decision on 
“physiologic” age rather than chronologic age because many 
elderly patients may be reasonably low risk for major compli-
cations. Accumulation of data may also change these limits in 
the future.
The Female Patient: Pregnancy and 
Gynecologic Issues in the Bariatric Surgery 
Patient
Hormonal levels in female patients are related to body weight. 
Obesity alters the levels of estrogen and progesterone available 
for normal ovulation, resulting in abnormal ovulation patterns, 
amenorrhea, and difficulty conceiving. Should an obese woman 
become pregnant, the increased chances of gestational diabetes 
and hypertension make the pregnancy high risk. Macrosomia 
is increased. There is a two- to three-fold increase in the rate 
of cesarean sections, with more complications. Fetal mortality 
does not appear to be changed when maternal weight gain is 
limited.144 With obesity, there is an increased risk for breast and 
endometrial cancer in the postpartum mother.
Infertility compounds the difficulties of the obese woman 
who wishes to have an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. 
The same hormonal alterations that cause an increased inci-
dence of cancer (i.e., increased circulating estrogen levels) also 
cause infertility. If a severely obese woman becomes pregnant, 
the pregnancy management is made more difficult by the body 
habitus and the need for more frequent ultrasounds as opposed 
to physical examination, which yields limited information.
Women who become pregnant soon after undergoing bar-
iatric surgery can be at risk due to the ongoing weight loss pro-
duced by the operation. However, if the pregnancy is quickly 
recognized and appropriately managed, patients after bariatric 
surgery may actually have a better prognosis than if they had not 
had surgery. Wittgrove and colleagues145 showed that patients 
who had undergone RYGB had a decreased incidence of diabe-
tes, macrosomia, and cesarean section than those who had not 
had surgery. However, iron replacement was cited as a criti-
cal need for these pregnant women. Despite these good results, 
there are issues for the female patient who undergoes RYGB 
and becomes pregnant during the rapid weight loss phase after 
surgery. Special attention is needed to assure adequate intake of 
vitamins and essential nutrients during what otherwise would be 
a period of rapid weight loss. Although no clear consensus exists 
regarding management of pregnancy after bariatric surgery, 
Beard and colleagues146 provide the following sound advice: (a) 
promotion of reliable contraception for 12 to 18 months after 
surgery; (b) close nutritional and weight monitoring during and 
after pregnancy; (c) supplementation to include daily prenatal 
vitamin, folate 400 μg, iron 50 to 100 mg, calcium 1000 mg, 
and protein 60 g; and (d) collaboration with high-risk obstetrical 
colleagues as needed.
Patients who become pregnant after LAGB would seem to 
have even less likelihood of significant risk to their pregnancy, 
since the band can be adjusted to allow more food intake dur-
ing the pregnancy but similarly limit weight gain to a healthy 
amount. Dixon and colleagues147 wrote that morbidly obese 
women do have higher risks during pregnancy, but LAGB allows 
weight loss, which reduces such risk. The adjustability of the 
band provides a potential advantage for the pregnant woman.
Weight loss after bariatric surgery can correct the high 
incidence of gynecologic problems that may exist as a result 
of severe obesity. Deitel and colleagues148 found menstrual 
irregularities in over 40% of patients preoperatively, which 
became normal in over 95% of patients postoperatively. Infer-
tility problems were present preoperatively in 29% of patients, 
and medical problems were frequent during previous pregnan-
cies including hypertension in 26.7%, preeclampsia in 12.8%, 
diabetes in 7%, and deep vein thrombosis in 7%. These prob-
lems were virtually eliminated after weight loss. Stress urinary 
incontinence in the female patients in that study decreased from 
61.2% to 11.6% after bariatric surgery.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is another common 
hormonal dysfunction associated with severe obesity. It is asso-
ciated with obesity, infertility, hyperandrogenism, dyslipidemia, 
anovulation, insulin resistance, and abnormal menses.149 Bariatric 
surgery improves not only metabolic disease but also menstrual 
irregularity, hirsutism, and infertility associated with PCOS.150,151
Stress urinary incontinence is a frequent problem of the 
severely obese woman, which must be specifically solicited on 
history. The increased intra-abdominal pressure from severe 
obesity contributes to the high incidence of this problem in the 
severely obese population. Obesity may also alter the neuromus-
cular function of the genitourinary tract, contributing to inconti-
nence. Studies have confirmed the increased incidence of obesity 
in patients with both true stress incontinence and detrusor insta-
bility.152 Weight loss alone relieves symptoms in many patients 
with obesity. A recent study involving 72 patients who had bariat-
ric surgery (90% RYGB) showed a nearly 50% reduction in prev-
alence and severity of urinary incontinence after surgery based 
on objective urodynamic testing.153 A significant improvement in 
subjective quality of life and sexual function was also achieved.
Metabolic Surgery
Advances in the role of metabolic surgery to treat type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus (T2DM) and increases in the understanding of how 
surgery improves or resolves T2DM continue to represent the 
single most prominent change in the field of bariatric surgery 
since the last edition of this text. Nearly all international 
bariatric surgery societies have added “metabolic” to their 
name, including the American Society for Metabolic and Bar-
iatric Surgery (ASMBS), which was formerly the American 
Society for Bariatric Surgery (ASBS). International meetings 
on the topic of bariatric surgery and its effects on diabetes have 
convened during the last 5 years to establish new guidelines 
regarding indications for metabolic surgery for T2DM as well 
as research priorities.154 The entire field of bariatric surgery is 
now much more focused on the metabolic effects and benefits 
of bariatric surgery.
7
8
1127
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Although many comorbidities are improved by bariatric 
surgery and its resultant weight loss, the metabolic diseases 
that are most particularly affected are T2DM and the hyper-
lipidemias and metabolic syndrome. Hypertension and cardio-
vascular disease are also improved indirectly through metabolic 
benefits as well as directly through weight loss effects.
Type 2 Diabetes.  There has been a dramatic increase in the 
potential application of surgical therapy to treat T2DM. Much of 
this stems from the original observations of surgeons perform-
ing RYGB concerning the improvement or near resolution of 
T2DM well before patients who had undergone the operation 
had achieved maximum weight loss. Pories and colleagues155 
championed these observations in a landmark paper that con-
firmed RYGB as an effective treatment for T2DM, resolving 
the condition in 85% of patients who had developed it within 
the 5 years prior to surgery. MacDonald and colleagues,156 also 
from the same institution, showed that treatment with RYGB of 
patients with T2DM resulted in longer life span. Schauer and 
colleagues157 showed that improvement in T2DM after LRYGB 
is comparable to that seen in Pories’ original work, with fasting 
insulin levels and glycosylated hemoglobin levels returned to 
normal levels in 83% of patients and markedly improved in 17% 
of patients. RYGB has been shown to decrease overall long-
term mortality related to diabetes in several large population 
studies.158,159
These results and studies, as well as the observation that 
T2DM resolved quickly after RYGB, led to the general belief 
that there is an important contribution of the enteric hormonal 
component of glucose metabolism influencing the disease. 
Rubino and Marescaux160 reported the resolution of diabetes in 
the obese rat model with surgical diversion of the food stream 
from the duodenum and proximal jejunum. Reversal of the 
operation led to return of the disease state. The extension of 
the findings of Rubino and Marescaux to humans has occurred; 
a duodenojejunal exclusion operation has been performed and 
shows initial safety and efficacy in a small group of patients.161 
Although the majority of patients who have T2DM are obese, 
approximately 10% of patients with T2DM are not obese, and 
these data from Brazil may confirm that the resolution of the 
disease through enteric diversion is not based on associated 
weight loss.162
Surgical therapy that does produce weight loss without 
diversion of the enteric stream also can be quite effective in 
resolving T2DM. Dixon and colleagues70 reported, in the first 
randomized controlled trial comparing surgical versus medical 
treatment of diabetes, that 73% of patients undergoing LAGB 
and followed for 2 years achieved resolution of T2DM versus 
13% of medically treated patients in the control group. An 
accompanying editorial to Dixon’s article advocated that the 
treatment for diabetes be reshaped to include consideration of 
surgical therapy as an option for patients, especially severely 
obese patients.163
Despite these data in the literature, there has been resis-
tance from endocrinologists and internists specializing in the 
medical treatment of diabetes to accept the use of surgical 
therapy as an optimal treatment for the disease.164 One major 
criticism pertaining to the quality of outcome studies for dia-
betes surgery has been that except for the Dixon study, none 
have been randomized controlled trials. In the last few years, 
­however, three additional randomized controlled trials have 
been published in high-impact medical journals. Schauer 
and colleagues (n = 150) showed superior glycemic control 
(defined as hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c] <6% with or without 
medications) after RYGB (42%) and SG (37%) compared to 
intense medical therapy (12%) at 1 year (P < .001) in patients 
with mild to moderate obesity (BMI 27–43 kg/m2) and poorly 
controlled T2DM (average HbA1c 9%).165 Gastric bypass and 
SG resulted in greater improvement in other cardiovascular risk 
factors such as BMI, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein, and 
C-reactive protein compared with intense medical therapy. The 
surgical patients also significantly reduced their dependency 
on diabetes medications, while medical patients had increased 
dependency on diabetes medications. Mingrone and colleagues 
(n = 60) demonstrated that diabetes remission rates (HbA1c 
<6.5% without medications) were superior after BPD (95%) and 
RYGB (75%) compared to conventional medical therapy (0%) 
at 2 years (P < .001) in patients with severe obesity (average 
BMI 45 kg/m2) and poorly controlled T2DM (average HbA1c 
9%).166 Ikramuddin and colleagues (n = 120) found that RYGB 
(49%) was superior (P < .001) to intense medical therapy (19%) 
in achieving the American Diabetes Association goal of therapy 
(HbA1c <7%, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol <100 mg/dL, 
systolic blood pressure <130 mmHg) in patients with obesity 
(BMI 30 to 40 kg/m2) and poorly controlled T2DM (average 
HbA1c 9.6%).167 All four randomized controlled trials to date 
have shown that surgery in the short term (1–2 years) was well 
tolerated, with few major complications (two serious cases of 
sepsis), no cardiovascular events, and no operative mortality, 
and that surgery resulted in both superior glycemic control and 
greater improvements in cardiovascular risk factors compared 
to medical treatment alone.
Adoption of metabolic surgery by endocrinologists, inter-
nists, and primary care physicians as a treatment of T2DM has 
gradually increased over the last 5 years. The Diabetes Surgery 
Summit in 2007 published the first consensus guidelines for the 
use and study of metabolic surgery.154 Since 2009, the Ameri-
can Diabetes Association has included bariatric surgery in their 
position statement on standards of medical care in T2DM. The 
guideline indicates that “bariatric surgery should be considered 
for adults with BMI ≥35 kg/m2 and T2DM, especially if the dia-
betes is difficult to control with lifestyle and pharmacological 
therapy.”168 In 2011, the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) 
released its position statement on the role of surgery and other 
gastrointestinal interventions in the management of T2DM.169 
At this time, the IDF guidelines are the most useful summaries, 
from the evidence available, for healthcare providers who man-
age patients with T2DM. The IDF guidelines are the first to 
recommend that metabolic surgery be considered for patients 
with a BMI as low as 30 kg/m2 if they are not in good glycemic 
control on optimal medical therapy.
Metabolic Syndrome.  The metabolic syndrome is character-
ized by central obesity, glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, and 
hypertension. This is a common finding in patients with severe 
obesity, occurring in 52% of individuals in one report.170 All 
the associated metabolic problems of the metabolic syndrome 
respond to surgical therapy to produce weight loss. Basic scien-
tists attribute the occurrence of this associated array of diseases 
to an enhanced inflammatory state in the body resulting from 
the increased production of cytokines by the adipocyte. These 
cytokines in turn produce a mild inflammatory reaction that pro-
motes the production of these diseases.
Diabetes and glucose tolerance are effectively treated by 
bariatric operations as discussed earlier. These operations also are 
effective in treating the other components of metabolic ­syndrome. 
1128
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
RYGB produced a 98% resolution of the metabolic syndrome in 
patients 1 year after surgery.171
Dyslipidemias improve in over 70% of patients undergo-
ing RYGB. Improvement is 100% and resolution is greater than 
90% after any of the malabsorptive operations (see Table 27-7). 
Overall lipid profiles are improved, and the degree to which this 
occurs is in part related to exercise levels of the individual as 
well as genetic components of the disease.
Cardiovascular Disease.  Hypertension, a component of the 
metabolic syndrome, is one of the cardiovascular diseases that 
are increased in the setting of obesity. Elevated arterial pres-
sure in patients with obesity-related hypertension is associated 
with increased cardiac output and total peripheral resistance. 
The elevated output is related to expanded intravascular volume 
that increases cardiopulmonary volume, venous return, and left 
ventricular preload; the elevated pressure and total peripheral 
resistance increase afterload. This dual ventricular overload 
promotes a dimorphic, concentric, and eccentric hypertrophy in 
response to the volume and pressure overload. Increased myo-
cardial oxygen demand results from the elevated tension in the 
left ventricular wall, reflecting its increased diameter and pres-
sure, and provides a physiologic rationale for the greater poten-
tial of coronary arterial insufficiency and cardiac failure. There 
is greater renal blood flow and lower renal vascular resistance in 
patients with obesity-related hypertension at any level of arterial 
pressure. This may be offset by an increased renal filtration frac-
tion that may favor protein deposition and glomerulosclerosis.170
Weight loss results in decreased intravascular volume, 
decreased cardiac output, and decreased arterial pressure. These 
manifestations occur after all the various bariatric operations 
that produce weight loss.
Heart failure also is increased in the setting of severe 
obesity. Much of the risk is secondary to the processes men-
tioned earlier, which produce hypertension and cardiac hyper-
trophy. Hypertension and obesity have significant independent 
associations with left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiac wall 
thickness. Obesity is particularly strongly associated with left 
ventricular internal diameter.172
Much data now exists regarding the effect of bariatric sur-
gery on cardiovascular disease. A recent systematic review of 
long-term cardiovascular risk factor reduction after bariatric sur-
gery involved 73 studies and 19,543 subjects with a mean age of 
42 years; 76% of subjects were female, and 44%, 24%, and 44% 
had a baseline hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia, respec-
tively.173 At a mean follow-up of 57.8 months, the average excess 
weight loss for all bariatric procedures was 54%, and remission/
improvement was 63% for hypertension, 73% for T2DM, and 65% 
for hyperlipidemia. Echocardiographic results from 713 subjects 
showed statistically significant improvements in left ventricular 
mass, E/A ratio, and isovolumic relaxation time postoperatively.
Thus far, there are no long-term randomized controlled trials 
comparing bariatric surgery with nonsurgical medical treatment 
of obesity that evaluate cardiovascular endpoints and mortality. 
However, 12 cohort-matched studies comparing bariatric sur-
gery with nonsurgical controls have recently been reviewed.174 
Collectively, all but two of these studies support a reduced car-
diovascular event rate and all-cause mortality rate conferred by 
bariatric surgery. Of these studies, the Swedish Obesity Subjects 
(SOS) study has the longest outcomes follow-up at a median of 
14.7 years.158 Cardiovascular mortality in the surgical group was 
significantly lower than for control subjects (adjusted hazard ratio, 
0.47; 95% confidence interval, 0.29–0.76; P = .002) despite the 
greater prevalence of smoking and higher baseline weights and 
blood pressures in the surgical cohort. The SOS study has formed 
the basis of much of our current understanding of medium- and 
long-term outcomes after bariatric surgery despite the fact that the 
majority of their surgical cohort received vertical-banded gastro-
plasty (>70%), a gastric volume reduction procedure that is now 
rarely performed in the United States.
Resolution of Other Comorbid Medical 
Problems
Bariatric surgery can produce resolution of many, if not all, of 
the comorbid medical problems associated with obesity and 
present at the time of surgery. This is true to some extent for all 
bariatric procedures, although some are more efficient at revers-
ing specific comorbid problems than others.
GERD is symptomatically present in approximately half 
of patients with severe obesity and has been objectively proven 
to be present in 21%.92 Unfortunately, obese patients with 
GERD have a higher chance of failing to obtain symptomatic 
relief from standard antireflux surgery. The recurrence of symp-
toms is higher, likely due to a higher incidence of wrap hernia-
tion into the mediastinum and other mechanical failure of the 
fundoplication, which in turn is likely affected by the increased 
intra-abdominal pressure of the obese condition. The patient 
with a BMI over 35 kg/m2 who has GERD has a better chance 
of elimination of symptoms by undergoing LRYGB, which is 
>90% effective in the elimination of GERD.175 LRYGB creates 
such a small gastric pouch that it has a very limited volume 
for acid production. LAGB improves GERD but to a consider-
ably lesser extent than RYGB. A recent prospective analysis 
of 558 consecutive laparoscopic SG (n = 200) and LRYGB 
(n = 358) patients demonstrated significantly improved sub-
jective GERD symptoms in the bypass cohort when compared 
to the SG patients at 1 year (P < .001).176 In fact, some studies 
suggest that SG can increase GERD symptoms postoperatively. 
Zhang and colleagues177 reported new reflux seen on upper gas-
trointestinal series in 18% of their 28 patients after SG.
OSA is a disturbance of sleep associated with obesity. It 
is a measurable problem, quantitated by polysomnography. In 
one recent study of 349 patients considering bariatric surgery 
who were referred and tested, only 17% had no sleep apnea, 
whereas 32% had mild, 18% moderate, and 33% severe sleep 
apnea.178 At a mean time of 11 months after RYGB, the mean 
Respiratory Disturbance Index for all patients decreased from 
51 to 15 (P < 0.01). Of 83 patients using continuous positive 
airway pressure or bilevel positive airway pressure preopera-
tively, only 31 still required it, and they had decreased setting 
requirements. A recent systematic review of 13,900 patients 
(69 studies) showed significant improvement or resolution of 
sleep apnea in more than 75% of bariatric surgery patients.179 
Comparison of outcomes between procedures demonstrated the 
most benefit with BPD and gastric bypass and the least with 
LAGB. However, a recent randomized control trial comparing 
the effect of medical and surgical weight loss (LAGB) on sleep 
apnea found no significant difference in apnea events despite 
major differences in weight loss. The findings suggested that 
much of the improvement achieved was in the mild to moderate 
weight loss range, with little benefit of further weight loss.180
Another pulmonary symptom that commonly occurs in 
severely obese patients is asthma. Dixon and colleagues181 studied 
23 asthmatic patients who underwent bariatric surgery and found a 
significant improvement in asthma control (e.g., forced expiratory 
1129
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity), asthma-related quality of 
life, and responsiveness to methacholine. Boulet and colleagues182 
found similar results in their cohort of 12 patients with asthma who 
experienced significant weight loss after bariatric surgery.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a metaboli-
cally related problem associated with obesity. The disease is a 
spectrum of liver abnormalities including steatosis, steatohepati-
tis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis of the liver. It is estimated that 20% of 
U.S. adults have NAFLD, largely because of the high incidence 
of obesity. NAFLD is present in an estimated 85% of patients 
with severe obesity.183 Due to the high incidence of this disease, 
some authorities have advocated routine liver biopsy at the time 
of bariatric operations. However, since the treatment of the 
disease is weight loss, patients with mild forms of the disease 
need no further treatment or follow-up. Biopsy reports showing 
any degree of fibrosis should be further followed up by a hepa-
tologist. Weight loss after RYGB decreases metabolic disease, 
hepatic steatosis, inflammation, and in some cases even fibro-
sis.184 Although further research is needed to accurately assess 
the role of bariatric surgery as a potential treatment for NAFLD, 
there are numerous reports that support its use. A recent system-
atic review of the available literature found many retrospective 
and prospective observational cohort studies, but no randomized 
control trials or case-control series.185 There did appear to be sig-
nificant histologic regression of NAFLD in most of these stud-
ies; however, steatohepatitis and fibrosis were also observed in 
rare cases postoperatively. In one prospective study with before 
and after liver biopsies, residual steatohepatitis did not appear 
to be associated with the various bariatric approaches; rather, it 
was related to higher baseline BMI, degree of previous steatosis/
fibrosis, NAFLD activity score, ballooning, degree of inflamma-
tion, and insulin resistance.186 The role of bariatric surgery in the 
treatment in NAFLD remains to be seen.
Musculoskeletal problems, especially degenerative joint 
disease and low back pain, are among the most common com-
plaints and associated comorbid problems of the severely obese 
population. Quantitation of their severity, however, is often 
difficult, making resolution or improvement equally difficult. 
Symptoms often resolve and usually improve in patients who 
experience significant weight loss. This is likely a combined 
effect of the direct lessened work load as well as some second-
ary resolution of the inflammatory process of the joints brought 
on directly and indirectly by obesity. A prospective cohort of 50 
obese females age 20 to 74 years were followed for 1 year after 
RYGB using the timed-get-up-and-go (TGUG) and health sur-
vey Short Form-36 (SF-36).187 The results showed a significant 
improvement in musculoskeletal function and likely enhanced 
ability to progress in rehabilitation. Patients with osteoarthritis 
of the neck, shoulder, spine, hip, knee, ankle, wrist, and hand 
have been shown to have improved or resolved joint pain after 
bariatric surgery. Reduction in BMI values of 6.2 to 14.7 kg/m2 
has corresponded with back and knee pain resolution in 5% to 
100% of patients, whereas pain severity was reduced in 31% to 
94% of patients depending on the joint and study.188
Plastic Surgery after Weight Loss
Patients who have undergone bariatric surgery are often left with 
large amounts of hanging skin or rolls of skin and subcutaneous 
tissue as a result of the weight loss. Additional problems include 
skin rashes; maceration under folds in the pannus, thighs, and 
breasts; body odor; and poorly fitting clothes. Excess skin can 
be a limiting factor in exercise and sexual activity.
Many patients desire to be rid of the extra skin and its 
associated problems. The major problem they face, however, in 
accomplishing this is obtaining insurance approval for surgical 
removal of the excess skin. Most insurance companies consider 
this “cosmetic” surgery and will not authorize coverage. A few, 
with appropriate documentation of the conditions and problems 
from excess skin, do provide coverage for surgery. Plastic sur-
geons who are experienced in abdominoplasty and body con-
touring can offer these patients an excellent surgical treatment 
for the problems of excessive skin.
Reconstructive surgery requires careful preoperative plan-
ning and is based on the patient’s deformities and priorities. 
Excess tissue of the lower torso is the most common deformed 
area for which patients undergo surgical intervention. A standard 
abdominoplasty to remove this excessive tissue is performed. 
More radical body contouring can include a circumferential 
abdominoplasty and lower body lift.189 This procedure involves 
excision of tissue from the buttocks and lateral thighs, with 
skin undermining down the thighs. Circumferential abdomino-
plasty removes redundant skin of the lower abdomen, flattens 
the abdomen, and incorporates the lower body lift. It requires 
central undermining to the xiphoid and minimal lateral under-
mining of the superior flap. The central abdominal fascia often 
requires imbrication. If simultaneous abdominal hernia repair 
is performed, this performs the function of fascial imbrication 
by creating a repair with some degree of fascial tension. The 
closure of the superior flap to the inferior skin edge incorporates 
lateral tension to narrow the waist and advance the anterolateral 
thighs. Medial thighplasty also may be needed for patients with 
significant excess medial thigh skin. This is done transversely.
Excess skin redundancy distal to the mid-thighs requires 
long vertical medial excision of skin. Mid-back and epigas-
tric rolls, along with sagging breasts, are corrected with an 
upper body lift. The upper body lift is a reverse abdomino-
plasty, removal of mid-torso excessive skin, and reshaping of 
the breasts. For highly selected individuals, and with a well-
organized team, a single-stage total body lift, which includes 
a circumferential abdominoplasty, lower body lift, medial 
thighplasty, an upper body lift, and breast reshaping, can be 
performed safely in under 8 hours (Figs. 27-24 and 27-25).190 
While many bariatric surgery programs do not have the accom-
panying volume, experience, and interest to offer such an exten-
sive single-stage operation, most programs do offer availability 
of plastic surgery expertise for abdominoplasty and removal of 
excess skin of the extremities as separate procedures. Increasing 
numbers of patients undergoing bariatric surgery have provided 
an increased flow of patients requesting such services, which in 
turn should lead to improved outcomes with increasing experi-
ence for surgeons performing these procedures. One matched 
control study suggests that plastic surgery after bariatric surgery 
may actually improve long-term weight loss.191
Endoscopic, Electric, and Other Experimental 
Procedures
Bariatric surgery has been a field of constant succession of pro-
cedures in an attempt to improve safety, minimize invasiveness, 
and offer better outcomes. Recent experimental procedures in 
electrical stimulation of the stomach and vagus nerves have 
been performed to produce weight loss.
The implantable gastric stimulation device, initially mar-
keted by Trasneuronix, Inc., in the early part of the twenty-
first century, was a dual-lead implantable gastric electrical 
1130
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 27-24.  Preoperative frontal, right lateral, and left anterior oblique views of a 36-year-old, 150-lb, 5’6” woman who lost 120 lb 2 years 
after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y bypass procedure. She desired a one-stage total body lift and bilateral brachioplasties, which were performed in 
the manner described in the text. (Courtesy of Dennis Hurwitz, MD, Clinical Professor of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh.)
Figure 27-25.  Frontal, right lateral, and left anterior oblique views 6 weeks after surgery for the woman in Fig. 27-24. The scars indicate 
the circumferential abdominoplasty, lower body lift, upper body lift, breast reshaping, and autoaugmentation through a keyhole pattern and 
bilateral brachioplasties. All redundant skin has been removed, leaving well-positioned scars and feminine features. (Courtesy of Dennis 
Hurwitz, MD, Clinical Professor of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh.)
­stimulator that theoretically interfered with the stomach’s 
innate myoelectric pattern, causing decreased gastric emptying 
and nausea. A mean excess weight loss of 23% was reported at 
16-month follow-up for the second U.S. trial.192 Longer-term 
follow-up for the first European study showed a 25% excess 
weight loss in 91 patients over a 2-year follow-up.193 The 
disappointing aspect of this treatment is that a significant num-
ber of the patients lose little weight, whereas a smaller group 
seem to respond well to the treatment. The ability to select 
patients who will respond remains a challenge for this technol-
ogy, which is still in the status of only a proposed potential 
operation for weight loss.
1131
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
Vagal stimulation/blockade has recently been proposed as 
a means of stimulating the neural input to the stomach to achieve 
decrease in appetite, early satiety, at times nausea, and weight 
loss. Data to date have been sparse and very preliminary in 
showing any merits of the potential efficacy of this approach.194
Endoscopic procedures to decrease gastric pouch size and 
to limit gastrojejunostomy anastomotic size are currently being 
performed at several medical centers.84,195 These are currently 
reoperative procedures, not initial procedures for weight loss. 
Long-term weight loss of significant magnitude has yet to be 
demonstrated by these revisional endoscopic procedures.
Intragastric balloon placement has resurfaced on the bariat-
ric scene in the past few years. The Garren-Edwards bubble of 
the late 1980s era196 was prone to migration and bowel obstruc-
tion, which led to its early demise. Now this concept has resur-
faced as a short-term bridge to weight loss to be followed by 
a more definitive procedure. While there may be some limited 
application of this device for such purposes,197 its ability to pro-
duce durable weight loss is unproven. It may have potential use 
only as a preliminary procedure prior to a more definitive one.
Prototype procedures undergoing trial include one that 
uses an endoscopically placed sleeve to limit absorption. A small 
randomized control study out of the Netherlands compared an 
endoscopically placed intraluminal sleeve extending from the 
duodenum to the jejunum (EndoBarrier) to a diet modification 
control group.198 They successfully placed 26 devices, but were 
unable to do so in 4 cases. Four implants had to be removed 
before the end of the study due to migration, obstruction, and 
continuous epigastric pain. Mean weight loss at 3 months was 
19.0% in the study group and 6.9% in the control group. HbA1c 
was significantly improved after EndoBarrier placement in 
seven of eight patients with T2DM. An FDA trial is currently 
under way to determine the long-term safety and efficacy of this 
experimental gastrointestinal liner.
The eventual ability to endoscopically create a stapled or 
sutured gastric pouch and hence a completely endoscopically per-
formed restrictive operation is being envisioned. While these pro-
posed procedures speak to the energy and innovation of today’s 
bariatric surgery community, their implementation into clinical 
practice has yet to occur. Endoscopic procedures and devices such 
as the transoral gastroplasty (TOGA) and the transoral endoscopic 
restrictive implant system (TERIS) did not initially achieve suffi-
cient weight loss to satisfy FDA requirements and thus have been 
withheld from further development at this time.199,200
Other investigational procedures under development 
and performed laparoscopically include the duodenal-jejunal 
bypass and ileal transposition. These procedures are intended 
to improve T2DM without intentional weight loss.201,202 Gas-
tric plication is also a new laparoscopic procedure intended to 
mimic results of SG but without requiring stapling or stomach 
removal.203 Further studies with long-term safety and efficacy 
data are required before these investigational procedures can be 
considered for routine clinical use.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Dimick JB, Nicholas LH, Ryan AM, et al. Bariatric surgery 
complications before vs. after implementation of a national 
policy restricting coverage to centers of excellence. JAMA. 
2013;309:792-799.
2.	Shimizu H, Timratana P, Schauer PR, Rogula T. Review of 
metabolic surgery for type 2 diabetes in patients with a BMI < 
35 kg/m2. J Obes. 2012;2012:147256.
3.	Hellmich N. Medical group recognizes obesity as a disease. 
USA TODAY, June 19, 2013.
4.	Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare 
National Coverage Determinations Manual Chapter 1, Part 2, 
Section 100.1. Available at: http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-
and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/ncd103c1_
part2.pdf. Accessed November 24, 2013.
5.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Adult obesity 
facts. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.
html. Accessed November 24, 2013.
6.	Stunkard AJ, Foch TT, Hrubec Z. A twin study of human obe-
sity. JAMA. 1986;256:51-54.
7.	Sweeney TM, Morton JM. The human gut micobiome: a 
review of the effect of obesity and surgically induced weight 
loss. JAMA Surg. 2013;148:563-569.
8.	Timar O, Sestier F, Levy E. Metabolic syndrome X: a review. 
Can J Cardiol. 2000;16:779-789.
9.	Garfinkel L. Overweight and cancer. Ann Intern Med. 
1985;103:1034-1036.
10.	Dreick EJ, Bale GS, Seltzer F, et al. Excessive mortality and 
causes of death in morbidly obese men. JAMA. 1980;243: 
443-445.
11.	Wadden TA, Foster GD, Letizia KA. One-year behavioral 
treatment of obesity: comparison of moderate and severe 
caloric restriction and the effects of weight maintenance ther-
apy. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1994;62:165-171.
12.	Wood PD, Stefanick ML, Dreon DM, et al. Changes in plasma 
lipids and lipoproteins in overweight men during weight loss 
through dieting as compared with exercise. N Engl J Med. 
1988;319:1173-1179.
13.	Wing RR. Behavioral strategies to improve long-term weight 
loss and maintenance. Med Health RI. 1999;82:123.
14.	Miller WC, Koxeja DM, Hamilton EJ. A meta-analysis of the 
past 25 years of weight loss research using diet, exercise or 
diet plus exercise intervention. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 
1987;21:941-947.
15.	Eriksson KF, Lindgarde F. Prevention of type 2 (non-insulin-
dependent) diabetes by diet and physical exercise. The 6-year 
Malmo feasibility study. Diabetologia. 1991;34:891-898.
16.	Scheen AJ, Ernest P. New antiobesity agents in type 2 diabe-
tes. Overview of clinical trials with sibutramine and orlistat. 
Diabetes Metab. 2002;28:437-445.
17.	Bray GA. Drug treatment of obesity. Rev Endocr Metab Dis-
ord. 2001;2:403-418.
18.	Gadde KM, Allison DB, Ryan DH, et al. Effects of low-dose, 
controlled-release, phentermine plus on weight and associated 
comorbidities in overweight and obese adults (CONQUER): 
a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 
2011;377:134-152.
19.	Fidler MC, Sanchez M, Raether B, et al. A one-year random-
ized trial of lorcaserin for weight loss in obese and over-
weight adults: the BLOSSOM trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:3067-3077.
20.	Harnisch MC, Portenier DD, Pryor AD, et al. Preoperative 
weight gain does not predict failure of weight loss or co-mor-
bidity resolution of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for 
morbid obesity. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2008;4:445-450.
21.	Cassie S, Menezes C, Birch DW, et al. Effect of preoperative 
weight loss in bariatric surgical patients: a systematic review. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7:760-767.
22.	National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference. Gastro-
intestinal surgery for severe obesity. Consensus Development 
Conference Panel. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115:956-961.
23.	Balsinger BM, Poggio JL, Mai J, et al. Ten and more years 
after vertical banded gastroplasty as primary operation for 
morbid obesity. J Gastrointest Surg. 2000;4:598-605.
24.	Kremen AJ, Linner JH, Nelson CH. An experimental evalua-
tion of the nutritional importance of proximal and distal small 
intestine. Ann Surg. 1954;140:439-448.
1132
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
25.	Deitel M. Overview of operations for morbid obesity. World J 
Surg. 1998;22:913-918.
26.	Mason EE, Ito C. Gastric bypass in obesity. Surg Clin N Am. 
1969;47:1345-1351.
27.	Griffin WO, Young VL, Stevenson CC. A prospective com-
parison of gastric and jejunoileal bypass procedures for mor-
bid obesity. Ann Surg. 1977;186:500-509.
28.	Mason EE, Doherty C, Cullen JJ, et al. Vertical gastroplasty: 
evolution of vertical banded gastroplasty. World J Surg. 
1998;22:919-924.
29.	Mason EE. Vertical banded gastroplasty for obesity. Arch 
Surg. 1982;117:701-706.
30.	Brolin RE, Robertson LB, Kenler HA, et al. Weight loss and 
dietary intake after vertical banded gastroplasty and Roux-en-
Y gastric bypass. Ann Surg. 1994;220;782-790.
31.	Waaddegaarde P, Clemesen T, Jess P. Vertical gastric banding 
for morbid obesity: a long-term follow-up study. Eur J Surg. 
2002;168:220-222.
32.	Scopinaro N, Gianetta E, Civalleri D, et al. Bilio-pancreatic 
bypass for obesity: II. Initial experience in man. Br J Surg. 
1979;66:618-620.
33.	Hess DS, Hess DW. Biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal 
switch. Obes Surg. 1998;8:267-282.
34.	Kuzmak LI. A review of seven years experience with silicone 
gastric banding. Obes Surg. 1991;1:403-408.
35.	Belachew M, Legrand MJ, Defechereux TH, et al. Lapa-
roscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding in the treat-
ment of morbid obesity. A preliminary report. Surg Endosc. 
1994;8:1354-1356.
36.	Wittgrove AC, Clark WG, Tremblay LJ. Laparoscopic gas-
tric bypass, Roux en-Y: preliminary report of five cases. Obes 
Surg. 1994;4:353-357.
37.	Buchwald H, Oien DM. Metabolic/bariatric surgery world-
wide 2011. Obes Surg. 2013;23:427-436.
38.	Sil A, Barr G. Assessment of predictive ability of Epworth 
scoring in screening of patients with sleep apnoea. J Laryngol 
Otol. 2012;126:372-379.
39.	O’Keefe T, Patterson EJ. Evidence supporting routine polysom-
nography before bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2004;14:23-26.
40.	Sharaf RN, Weinshel EH, Bini EJ, et al. Endoscopy plays an 
important preoperative role in bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 
2004;14:1367-1372.
41.	Verset D, Houben J-J, Gay F, et al. The place of upper gastro-
intestinal tract endoscopy before and after vertical banded gas-
troplasty for morbid obesity. Dig Dis Sci. 1997;42:2333-2337.
42.	Schirmer B, Erenoglu C, Miller A. Flexible endoscopy in 
the management of patients undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass. Obes Surg. 2002;12:634-638.
43.	Birkmeyer NJ, Finks JF, English WJ, et al. Risks and benefits 
of prophylactic inferior vena cava filters in patients undergo-
ing bariatric surgery. J Hosp Med. 2013;8:173-177.
44.	Kim JJ, Schirmer B. Safety and efficacy of simultaneous cho-
lecystectomy at the time of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg 
Obes Relat Dis. 2009;5:48-53.
45.	Hamad GG, Ikramuddin S, Gourash WF, Schauer PR. Elec-
tive cholecystectomy during laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass. Is it worth the wait? Obes Surg. 2003;13:76-81.
46.	Sugerman HJ, Brewer WH, Shiffman ML, et al. A multicenter, 
placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind prospective trial 
of prophylactic ursodiol for the prevention of gallstone forma-
tion following gastric-bypass-induced rapid weight loss. Am J 
Surg. 1995;169:91-97.
47.	De Waelel B, Lauwers M, Van Nieuwenhove Y, Delvaux G. 
Outpatient laparoscopic gastric banding: initial experience. 
Obes Surg. 2004;14:1108-1110.
48.	 Collins J, McCloskey C, Titchner R, et al. Preoperative weight 
loss in high-risk superobese bariatric patients: a computed tomog-
raphy-based analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7:480-485.
49.	Patel RA, Brolin RE, Gandhi A. Revisional operations for 
marginal ulcer after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes 
Relat Dis. 2009;5:317-322.
50.	Buffington C, Walker B, Cowan GS Jr, et al. Vitamin D defi-
ciency in the morbidly obese. Obes Surg. 1993;3:421-424.
51.	Bogdonoff DL, Schirmer B. Laparoscopic surgery. In: Stone 
DJ, Bogdonoff DL, Leisure GS, Mathes DD, Spiekermann BF, 
eds. Perioperative Care: Anesthesia, Medicine and Surgery. 
1st ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1998:547-558.
52.	Nguyen NT, Goldman C, Rosenquist CJ, et al. Laparoscopic 
versus open gastric bypass: a randomized study of outcomes, 
quality of life, and costs. Ann Surg. 2001;234:279-289.
53.	Hutter M, Randall S, Khuri SF, et al. Laparoscopic versus 
open gastric bypass for morbid obesity. A multicenter, pro-
spective, risk-adjusted analysis from the National Surgical 
Quality Improvement Program. Ann Surg. 2006;243:657-666.
54.	Lujan JA, Frutos MD, Hernandez Q, et al. Laparoscopic versus 
open gastric bypass in the treatment of morbid obesity. Ann 
Surg. 2004;239:433-437.
55.	Schirmer B. Laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc. 
2006;20(Suppl):S450-S455.
56.	Jones KB Jr, Affram JD, Benotti PM, et al. Open versus lapa-
roscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: a comparative study of 
over 25,000 open cases and the major laparoscopic bariatric 
reported series. Obes Surg. 2006;16:721-727.
57.	Swanstrom LL, Fried GM, Hoffman KI, et al. Beta test results 
of a new system assessing competence in laparoscopic sur-
gery. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:62-69.
58.	Wright TA, Kow L, Wilson T, et al. Early results of laparo-
scopic Swedish adjustable gastric banding for morbid obesity. 
Br J Surg. 2000;87:362-373.
59.	Dargent J. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding: lessons 
from the first 500 patients in a single institution. Obes Surg. 
1999;9:446-452.
60.	Favretti F, Segato G, DeLuca M, Busetto L. Laparoscopic 
adjustable gastric banding: revisional surgery. In: Schauer PR, 
Schirmer BD, Brethauer SA, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric 
Surgery. New York: Springer; 2007:213-230.
61.	Weichman K, Ren C, Kurian M, et al. The effectiveness of 
adjustable gastric banding: a retrospective 6-year U.S. follow-
up study. Surg Endosc. 2011;25:397-403.
62.	Ren C. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding: postopera-
tive management and nutritional evaluation. In: Schauer PR, 
Schirmer BD, Brethauer SA, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric 
Surgery. New York: Springer; 2007:200.
63.	Weiner R, Blanco-Engert R, Weiner S, et al. Outcome after 
laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding–8 years experience. 
Obes Surg. 2003;13:427-434.
64.	Dixon JB, O’Brien PE. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric band-
ing: outcomes. In: Schauer PR, Schirmer BD, Brethauer 
SA, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery. New York: 
Springer; 2007:189-196.
65.	Dixon JB, Schachter LM, O’Brien PE. Predicting sleep apnea 
and excessive day sleepiness in the severely obese: indicators 
for polysomnography. Chest. 2003;123:1134-1141.
66.	Angrisani L, Iovino P, Lorenzo M, et al. Treatment of morbid 
obesity and gastroesophageal reflux with hiatal hernia by Lap-
Band. Obes Surg. 1999;9:396-398.
67.	Dixon JB, Chapma L, O’Brie PE. Marked improvement in 
asthma after Lap-Band surgery for morbid obesity. Obes Surg. 
1999;9:15-21.
68.	Dixon JB, Dixon ME, O’Brien PE. Depression in association 
with severe obesity: changes in weight loss. Arch Intern Med. 
2003;163:2058-2065.
69.	Schok M, Geenen R, van Antwerpen T, et al. Quality of life 
after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding for severe obe-
sity: postoperative and retrospective preoperative evaluations. 
Obes Surg. 2000;10:502-508.
1133
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
70.	Dixon JB, O’Brien PE, Playfair J, et al. Adjustable gastric 
banding and conventional therapy for type 2 diabetes. A 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299:316-323.
71.	Favretti F, Cadiere GB, Segato G, et al. Laparoscopic band-
ing: selection and technique in 830 patients. Obes Surg. 
2002;12:385-390.
72.	Dixon JB, O’Brien PE. Changes in comorbidities and improve-
ments in quality of life after LAP-BAND placement. Am J 
Surg. 2002;184:S51-S54.
73.	Ceelen W, Walder J, Cardon A, et al. Surgical treatment of 
severe obesity with a low-pressure adjustable gastric band. 
Experimental data and clinical results in 625 patients. Ann 
Surg. 2003;237:10-16.
74.	Buchwald H, Avidor Y, Braunwald E, et al. Bariatric 
surgery. A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2004;292:1724-1737.
75.	 Maggard MA, Shugarman LR, Suttorp M, et al. Meta-analysis: 
surgical treatment of obesity. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142:547-559.
76.	Allen JW, Lagardere AO. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric 
banding: complications. In: Schauer PR, Schirmer BD, Breth-
auer SA, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery. New 
York: Springer; 2007:205-212.
77.	Angrisani L, Cutolo PP, Formisano G, et al. Laparoscopic 
adjustable gastric banding versus Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: 
10-year results of a prospective, randomized trial. Surg Obes 
Relat Dis. 2013;9:405-416.
78.	MacLean LD, Rhode BM, Nohr CW. Late outcome of isolated 
gastric bypass. Ann Surg. 2000;231:524-528.
79.	Brolin RE. Long-limb gastric bypass in the super-obese. A 
prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 1992;215:387-395.
80.	Choba PS, Flancbaum L. The effect of Roux limb lengths on 
outcome after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: a prospective ran-
domized clinical trial. Obes Surg. 2002;12:540-545.
81.	Champion JK, Williams M. Small bowel obstruction and inter-
nal hernias after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Obes 
Surg. 2003;13:596-600.
82.	Carmody B, DeMaria EJ, Jamal M, et al. Internal hernia after 
laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2005;1:543-548.
83.	Schweitzer M. Endoscopic intraluminal suture placation 
of the gastric pouch and stoma in postoperative Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass patients. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 
2004;14:223-226.
84.	Thompson CC. Perioral endoscopic reduction of dilated gas-
trojejunal anastomosis following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: a 
possible new option for patients with weight regain. Surg Obes 
Relat Dis. 2005;1:223.
85.	Mikami D, Needleman B, Narula V, et al. Natural orifice sur-
gery: initial U.S. experience utilizing the StomaphyX device 
to reduce gastric pouches after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg 
Endosc. 2010;24:223-228.
86.	Schirmer BD, Lee SK, Northup CJ, et al. Gastrojejunal anas-
tomosis stenosis is lower using linear rather than circular sta-
pling during Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Presented at SAGES 
2006 Scientific session, April 2006.
87.	Gonzalez R, Lin E, Venkatesh KR, et al. Gastrojejunostomy 
during laparoscopic gastric bypass: analysis of 3 techniques. 
Arch Surg. 2003;138:181-184.
88.	Sekhar N, Torquati A, Lufti R, Richards WO. Endoscopic 
evaluation of the gastrojejunostomy in laparoscopic gastric 
bypass. A series of 340 patients without postoperative leak. 
Surg Endosc. 2006;20:199-201.
89.	Singh R, Fisher BL. Sensitivity and specificity of postop-
erative upper GI series following gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 
2003;13:73-75.
90.	Ganci-Cerrud G, Herrera MF. Role of radiologic contrast stud-
ies in the early postoperative period after bariatric surgery. 
Obes Surg. 1999;9:532-534.
91.	Schauer PR, Ikramuddin S, Gourash W, et al. Outcomes 
after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbid 
obesity. Ann Surg. 2000;232:515-529.
92.	Bennett JC, Wang H, Schirmer BD, Northup CJ. Quality of 
life and resolution of comorbidities in super-obese patients 
remaining morbidly obese after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2007;3:387-391.
93.	Hutter MM, Schirmer BD, Jones DB, et al. First report of 
the American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Center 
Network: laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy has morbidity and 
effectiveness positioned between the band and the bypass. Ann 
Surg. 2011;254:410-422.
94.	DeMaria EJ, Pate V, Warthen M, Winegar DA. Baseline data 
from American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery-
designated Bariatric Surgery Centers of Excellence using the 
Bariatric Outcomes Longitudinal Database. Surg Obes Relat 
Dis. 2010;6:347-355.
95.	Masoomi H, Kim H, Reavis K, et al. Analysis of factors pre-
dictive of gastrointestinal tract leak in laparoscopic and open 
gastric bypass. Arch Surg. 2011;146:1048-1051.
96.	Finks JF, English WJ, Carlin AM, et al. Predicting risk for 
venous thromboembolism with bariatric surgery: results from 
the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Ann Surg. 
2012;255:1100-1104.
97.	Gumbs AA, Duffy AJ, Bell RL. Incidence and management of 
marginal ulceration after laparoscopic Roux-Y gastric bypass. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2006;2:460-463.
98.	Parakh S, Soto E, Merola S. Diagnosis and management of 
internal hernias after laparoscopic gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 
2007;17:1498-1502.
99.	Nguyen NT, Rivers R, Wolfe BM. Early gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage after laparoscopic gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 
2003;13:62-65.
100.	Aarts EO, van Wagenhingen B, Janssen IM, Berends FJ. 
Prevalence of anemia and related deficiencies in the first year 
following laparoscopic gastric bypass for morbid obesity. J 
Obes. 2012;2012:193705.
101.	Clements RH, Yellumahanthi K, Wesley M, et al. Hyperpara-
thyroidism and vitamin D deficiency after laparoscopic gastric 
bypass. Am Surg. 2008;74:469-475.
102.	McBride CL, Petersen A, Sudan D, Thompson J. Short bowel 
syndrome following bariatric surgical procedures. Am J Surg. 
2006;192:828-832.
103.	Vance PL, de Lange EE, Shaffer HA Jr, Schirmer B. Gas-
tric outlet obstruction following surgery for morbid obesity: 
effect of fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation. Radiology. 
2002;222:70-72.
104.	Thodiyil PA, Yenumula P, Rogula T, et al. Selective non-
operative management of leaks after gastric bypass: les-
sons learned from 2675 consecutive patients. Ann Surg. 
2008;248:782-792.
105.	Hamoui N, Crookes PF, Kaufman HS. Percutaneous gastric 
drainage as a treatment for small bowel obstruction after gas-
tric bypass. Obes Surg. 2007;17:1411-1412.
106.	Flum DR, Dellinger EP. Impact of gastric bypass operation 
on survival: a population-based analysis. J Am Coll Surg. 
2004;199:543-551.
107.	Christou NV, Sampalis JS, Liberman M, et al. Surgery 
decreases long-term mortality, morbidity, and health care 
use in morbidly obese patients. Ann Surg. 2004;240:416-424.
108.	Marceau P, Hould FS, Simard S, et al. Biliopancreatic diver-
sion with a duodenal switch. World J Surg. 1998; 22:947-954.
109.	DeMeester TR, Fuchs KH, Ball CS, et al. Experimental 
and clinical results with proximal end-to-end duodenojeju-
nostomy for pathologic duodenogastric reflux. Ann Surg. 
1987;206:414-426.
110.	Sudan R, Bennett KM, Jacobs DO, Sudan DL. Multifactorial 
analysis of the learning curve for robotic-assisted laparoscopic 
1134
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. Ann Surg. 
2012;255:940-945.
111.	Scopinaro N, Scopinaro N, Gianetta E, Adami GF, et al. Bil-
iopancreatic diversion for obesity at eighteen years. Surgery. 
1996;119:261-268.
112.	Ren CJ, Patterson E, Gagner M. Early results of laparoscopic 
biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch: a case series 
of 40 consecutive patients. Obes Surg. 2000;10:514-524.
113.	Gumbs AA, Gagner M, Dakin G, Pomp A. Sleeve gastrectomy 
for morbid obesity. Obes Surg. 2007;17:962-969.
114.	Clinical Issues Committee of the American Society for Meta-
bolic and Bariatric Surgery. Updated position statement on 
sleeve gastrectomy as a bariatric procedure. Surg Obes Relat 
Dis. 2010;6:1-5.
115.	Almogy G, Crookes PF, Anthone GJ. Longitudinal gastrec-
tomy as a treatment for the high-risk super-obese patient. Obes 
Surg. 2004;14:492-497.
116.	Boza C, Viscido G, Salinas J, et al. Laparoscopic sleeve gas-
trectomy in obese adolescents: results in 51 patients. Surg 
Obes Rel Dis. 2012;8:133-139.
117.	Ramirez A, Roy M, Hidalgo JE, et al. Outcomes of bariat-
ric surgery in patients > 70 years old. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2012;8:458-462.
118.	Parikh M, Issa R, McCrillis A, et al. Surgical strategies that 
may decrease leak after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 9991 cases. Ann Surg. 
2013;257:231-237.
119.	Rawlins L, Rawlins MP, Brown CC, Schumacher DL. Sleeve 
gastrectomy: 5-year outcomes of a single institution. Surg 
Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9:21-25.
120.	Rosenthal R, International Sleeve Gastrectomy Expert Panel, 
Diaz AA, et al. International Sleeve Gastrectomy Expert Panel 
Consensus Statement: best practice guidelines based on expe-
rience of > 12,000 cases. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8:8-19.
121.	Damms-Machado A, Friedrich A, Kramer KM, et al. Pre- 
and postoperative nutritional deficiencies in obese patients 
undergoing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Obes Surg. 
2012;22:881-889.
122.	Cottam D, Qureshi FG, Mattar SG, et al. Laparoscopic sleeve 
gastrectomy as an initial weight-loss procedure for high-risk 
patients with morbid obesity. Surg Endosc. 2006;20:859-863.
123.	Baltasar A, Serra C, Perez N, et al. Laparoscopic sleeve gas-
trectomy: a multi-purpose bariatric operation. Obes Surg. 
2005;15:1124-1128.
124.	Lee CM, Cirangle PT, Jossart GH. Laparoscopic vertical 
sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity: a report of a five-year 
experience with 750 patients. Presented at 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, San 
Diego, CA, May 19, 2008.
125.	Brethauer SA, Hammel JP, Schauer PR. Systematic review of 
sleeve gastrectomy as staging and primary bariatric procedure. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2009;5:469-475.
126.	Eid GM, Brethauer S, Mattar SG, Titchner RL, Gourash W, 
Schauer PR. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for super obese 
patients: forty-eight percent excess weight loss after 6 to 8 
years with 93% follow-up. Ann Surg. 2012;256:262-265.
127.	Himpens J, Dapri G, Cadiere GB. A prospective randomized 
study between laparoscopic gastric banding and laparoscopic 
isolated sleeve gastrectomy: results after 1 and 3 years. Obes 
Surg. 2006;16:1450-1456.
128.	Karamanakos SN, Vagenas K, Kalfarentzos F, Alexandrides 
TK. Weight loss, appetite suppression, and changes in fasting 
and postprandial ghrelin and peptide-YY levels after Roux-
en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: a prospective, 
double blind study. Ann Surg. 2008;247:401-407.
129.	Choi YY, Bae J, Hur KY, et al. Reinforcing the staple line dur-
ing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: does it have advantages? 
A meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2012;22:1206-1213.
130.	Albanopoulos K, Alevizos L, Flessas J, et al. Reinforcing the 
staple line during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: prospec-
tive randomized clinical study comparing two different tech-
niques. Preliminary results. Obes Surg. 2012;22:42-46.
131.	 Parikh A, Alley JB, Peterson RM, et al. Management options for 
symptomatic stenosis after laparoscopic vertical sleeve gastrec-
tomy in the morbidly obese. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:738-746.
132.	Martinez T. Ed Mason at Large—July 2012. Bariatric Times, 
July 2012.
133.	Falken Y, Hellstrom PM, Holst JJ, et al. Changes in glucose 
homeostasis after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery at day 
three, two months, and one year after surgery: role of gut pep-
tides. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:2227-2235.
134.	Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS, et al. Predicting obesity in 
young adulthood from childhood and parental obesity. N Engl 
J Med. 1997;337:869-873.
135.	Sugerman HJ, Sugerman EL, DeMaria EJ, et al. Bariatric 
surgery for severely obese adolescents. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2003;7:102-107.
136.	Capella JF, Capella RF. Bariatric surgery in adolescence. Is 
this the best age to operate? Obes Surg. 2003;13:826-832.
137.	Abu-Abeid S, Gavert N, Klausner JM, Szold A. Bariatric sur-
gery in adolescence. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1379-1382.
138.	Treadwell JR, Sun F, Schoelles K. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis of bariatric surgery for pediatric obesity. Ann 
Surg. 2008;248:763-776.
139.	Michalsky M, Reichard K, Inge T, Pratt J, Lenders C, Ameri-
can Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. ASMBS 
pediatric committee best practice guidelines. Surg Obes Relat 
Dis. 2012;8:1-7.
140.	Rossner S. Obesity in the elderly—a future matter of concern? 
Obes Rev. 2001;2:183-1188.
141.	Nehoda H, Hourmont K, Sauper T, et al. Laparoscopic gastric 
banding in older patients. Arch Surg. 2001;136:1171-1176.
142.	Ramirez A, Roy M, Hidalgo JE, Szomstein S, Rosenthal RJ. 
Outcomes of bariatric surgery in patients >70 years old. Surg 
Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8:458-462.
143.	Soto FC, Gari V, de la Garza JR, Szomstein S, Rosenthal RJ. 
Sleeve gastrectomy in the elderly: a safe and effective pro-
cedure with minimal morbidity and mortality. Obes Surg. 
2013;23:1445-1449.
144.	 Bongain A, Isnard V, Gillet JY. Obesity in obstetrics and gyn-
aecology. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1998;77:217-228.
145.	Wittgrove AC, Jester L, Wittgrove P, Clark GW. Pregnancy 
following gastric bypass for morbid obesity. Obes Surg. 
1998;8:461-465.
146.	Beard JH, Bell RL, Duffy AJ. Reproductive considerations 
and pregnancy after bariatric surgery: current evidence and 
recommendations. Obes Surg. 2008;18:1023-1027.
147.	Dixon JB, Dixon ME, O’Brien PE. Pregnancy after Lap-Band 
surgery: management of the band to achieve healthy weight 
outcomes. Obes Surg. 2001;11:59-65.
148.	Deitel M, Stone E, Kassam HA, et al. Gynecologic-obstetric 
changes after loss of massive excess weight following bariat-
ric surgery. J Am Coll Nutr. 1988;7:147-153.
149.	Gonzalez CA, Hernandez MI, Mendoza R, et al. Polycystic 
ovarian disease: clinical and biochemical expression J Ginecol 
Obstet Mex. 2003;71:253.
150.	Eid GM, Cottam DR, Schauer PR, et al. Effective treatment of 
polycystic ovarian syndrome with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. 
SOARD. 2005;1:77-80.
151.	Jamal M, Gunay Y, Capper A, Eid A, Heitshusen D, Samuel 
I. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass ameliorates polycystic ovary syn-
drome and dramatically improves conception rates: a 9-year 
analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8:440-444.
152.	Subak LL, Johnson C, Whitcomb E, et al. Does weight loss 
improve incontinence in moderately obese women? Int Uro-
gynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2002;13:40-43.
1135
The Surgical Management of Obesity
CHAPTER 27
153.	Romero Talamas H, Aminian A, Batayyah E, et al. Compre-
hensive evaluation of the effect of bariatric surgery on pelvic 
floor disorders. Presented at ASMBS 2013.
154.	Rubino F, Kaplan L, Schauer PR, Cummings DE. The Diabe-
tes Surgery Summit consensus conference: recommendations 
for the evaluation and use of gastrointestinal surgery to treat 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Surg. 2010;251:399-405.
155.	Hickey MS, Pories WJ, MacDonald KG Jr, et al. A new para-
digm for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Could it be a disease of the 
foregut? Ann Surg. 1998;227:637-643.
156.	MacDonald KG Jr, Long SD, Swanson MS, et al. The gas-
tric bypass operation reduces the progression and mortality of 
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Gastrointest Surg. 
1997;1:213-220.
157.	Schauer PR, Burguera B, Ikramuddin S, et al. Effect of 
laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass on type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Ann Surg. 2003;238:467-485.
158.	Sjostrom L, Narbro K, Sjostron CD, et al. Effects of bariat-
ric surgery on mortality in Swedish obese subjects. N Engl 
J Med. 2007;357:741-752.
159.	 Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. Long-term mortality 
after gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:753-761.
160.	Rubino F, Marescaux J. Effect of duodenal-jejunal exclu-
sion in a nonobese animal model of type 2 diabetes: a new 
perspective for an old disease. Ann Surg. 2004;239:1-11.
161.	Tarnoff M, Rodriguez L, Escalona A, et al. Open label, 
prospective, randomized controlled trial of an endoscopic 
duodenal-jejunal bypass sleeve versus low calorie diet for 
pre-operative weight loss in bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc. 
2009;23:650-656.
162.	Cohen RV, Schiavon CA, Pinheiro JS, et al. Duodenal-jejunal 
bypass for treatment of type 2 diabetes in patients with body 
mass index of 22-34 kg/m2: a report of two cases. Surg Obes 
Relat Dis. 2007;3:195-197.
163.	Cummings DE, Flum DR. Gastrointestinal surgery as a treat-
ment for diabetes. JAMA. 2008;299:341-343.
164.	Dixon JB, Pories WJ, O’Brien PE, et al. Surgery as an effec-
tive early intervention for diabesity: why the reluctance? Dia-
betes Care. 2005;28:472-474.
165.	Schauer PR, Kashyap SR, Wolski K, et al. Bariatric surgery 
versus intensive medical therapy in obese patients with dia-
betes. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1567-1576.
166.	Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al. Bariatric sur-
gery versus conventional medical therapy for type 2 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1577-1585.
167.	Ikramuddin S, Korner J, Lee W, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
vs intensive medical management for the control of type 2 dia-
betes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia: the Diabetes Surgery 
Study randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;309:2240-2249.
168.	American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in 
diabetes—2009. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(Suppl 1):S13-S61.
169.	Dixon JB, Zimmet P, Alberti KG, et al. Bariatric surgery: an 
IDF statement for obese type 2 diabetes. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2011;7:433-447.
170.	Frohlich ED. Obesity and hypertension. Hemodynamic 
aspects. Ann Epidemiol. 1991;1:287-293.
171.	 Lee W-J, Huang, M-T, Wang W, et al. Effects of obesity surgery 
on the metabolic syndrome. Arch Surg. 2004;139:1088-1092.
172.	Lauer MS, Anderson KM, Levy D. Separate and joint influ-
ences of obesity and mild hypertension on left ventricular 
mass and geometry: the Framingham Heart Study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1992;19:130-134.
173.	Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Agarwal S, Schauer PR, Young JB. 
Bariatric surgery and cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic 
review. Heart. 2012;98:1763-1777.
174.	Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Schauer PR, Young JB. Surgical 
management of obesity and the relationship to cardiovascular 
disease. Circulation. 2013;127:945-959.
175.	Frezza EE, Ikramuddin S, Gourash W, et al. Symptomatic 
improvement in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) fol-
lowing laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Endosc. 
2002;16:1027-1031.
176.	Zhang N, Maffei A, Cerabona T, Pahuja A, Omana J, Kaul 
A. Reduction in obesity-related comorbidities: is gas-
tric bypass better than sleeve gastrectomy? Surg Endosc. 
2013;27:1273-1280.
177.	Zhang N, Maffei A, Cerabona T, Pahuja A, Omana J, Kaul A. 
Gastroesophageal reflux after sleeve gastrectomy in morbidly 
obese patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7:709-713.
178.	Haines KL, Nelson LG, Gonzalez R, et al. Objective evidence 
that bariatric surgery improves obesity-related obstructive 
sleep apnea. Surgery. 2007;141:354-358.
179.	Sarkhosh Switzer NJ, El-Hadi M, Birch DW, Shi X, Karmali 
S. The impact of bariatric surgery on obstructive sleep apnea: 
a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2013;23:414-423.
180.	Dixon JB, Schachter LM, O’Brien PE, et al. Surgical vs. 
conventional therapy for weight loss treatment of obstruc-
tive sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2012;308:1142-1149.
181.	Dixon AE, Pratley RE, Forgione PM, et al. Effects of obe-
sity and bariatric surgery on airway hyperresponsiveness, 
asthma control and inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2011;128:508-515.
182.	Boulet LP, Turcotte H, Martin J, Poirier P. Effect of bariatric 
surgery on airway response and lung function in obese sub-
jects with asthma. Respir Med. 2012;106:651-660.
183.	Beymer C, Kowdley KV, Larson A, et al. Prevalence and pre-
dictors of asymptomatic liver disease in patients undergoing 
gastric bypass surgery. Arch Surg. 2003;138:1240-1244.
184.	 Mattar SG, Velcu LM, Rebinovitz M, et al. Surgically-induced 
weight loss significantly improves nonalcoholic fatty liver dis-
ease and the metabolic syndrome. Ann Surg. 2005;242:610-620.
185.	Rabl C, Campos G. The impact of bariatric surgery on nonalco-
holic steatohepatitis (review). Semin Liver Dis. 2012;32:80-91.
186.	 Mathurin P, Hollebecque A, Arnalsteen L, et al. Prospective 
study of the long-term effects of bariatric surgery in patients 
without advanced disease. Gastroenterology. 2009;137:532-540.
187.	Iossi MF, Konstantakos EK, Teel DD II, et al. Musculoskeletal 
function following bariatric surgery. Obesity. 2013;21:1104-
1110.
188.	Vincent HK, Heywood K, Connelly J, Hurley RW. Weight 
loss and obesity in the treatment and prevention of osteoar-
thritis. PM R. 2012;4(5 Suppl):S59-S67.
189.	Hurwitz DJ. Body contouring surgery in the bariatric surgi-
cal patient. In: Operative Techniques in Plastic Surgery and 
Reconstructive Surgery. New York: Elsevier; 2002:87
190.	Hurwitz DJ. Single-staged total body lift after massive weight 
loss. Ann Plast Surg. 2004;52:435-441.
191.	Balagué N, Combescure C, Huber O, Pittet-Cuénod B, 
Modarressi A. Plastic surgery improves long-term weight 
control after bariatric surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132: 
826-833.
192.	Shikora SA. Implantable gastric stimulation for weight loss. J 
Gastrointest Surg. 2004;8:408-412.
193.	Miller K, Hoeller E, Aigner F. The implantable gastric stim-
ulator for obesity: an update of the European Experience in 
the LOSS (Laparoscopic Obesity Stimulation Survey) Study. 
Treat Endocrinol. 2006;5:53-58.
194.	Toouli J, Kow L, Kulseng B, et al. Vagal blocking for obe-
sity control (VBLOCTM): ongoing comparison of weight loss 
with two generations of an active, implantable medical device. 
Presented at 25th Annual Meeting of the ASMBS, Washing-
ton, DC, June 19, 2008.
195.	Thompson CC, Slattery J, Bundga ME, Lautz DB. Peroral 
endoscopic reduction of dilated gastrojejunal anastomo-
sis after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: a possible new option 
1136
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
for patients with weight regain. Surg Endosc. 2006;20: 
1744-1748.
196.	Garren L. Garren gastric bubble. Bariatr Surg. 1985;3:14-15.
197.	Genco A, Brui T, Doldi SB, et al. BioEnterics intragastric bal-
loon: the Italian experience with 2515 patients. Obes Surg. 
2005;15:1161-1164.
198.	Schouten R, Rijs CS, Bouvy ND, et al. A multicenter, ran-
domized efficacy study of the EndoBarrier Gastrointestinal 
Liner for presurgical weight loss prior to bariatric surgery. 
Ann Surg. 2010;251:236-243.
199.	Familiari P, Costamagna G, Bléro D, et al. Transoral gastro-
plasty for morbid obesity: a multicenter trial with a 1-year 
outcome. Gastrointest Endosc. 2011;74:1248-1258.
200.	Stimac D, Majanovic SK. The position of endoscopic pro-
cedures in the treatment of obesity. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 
2013;8:238-246.
201.	Cohen R, Caravatto PP, Correa JL, et al. Glycemic control 
after stomach-sparing duodenal-jejunal bypass surgery in dia-
betic patients with low body mass index. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2012;8:375-380.
202.	Gaitonde S, Kohli R, Seeley R. The role of the gut hormone 
GLP-1 in the metabolic improvements caused by ileal trans-
position. J Surg Res. 2012;178:33-39.
203.	 Niazi M, Maleki AR, Talebpour M. Short-term outcomes of 
laparoscopic gastric plication in morbidly obese patients: impor-
tance of postoperative follow-up. Obes Surg. 2013;23:87-92.
204.	 WHO. Appropriate body mass index for Asian populations and 
its implications for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet 
2004; 363: 157–163.
205.	 WHO. Obestiy: preventing and managing the global epidemic. 
Report of a WHO consultation. World Health Organ Tech Rep 
Ser 2000; 894: 1–253.
Small Intestine
Ali Tavakkoli, Stanley W. Ashley, and  
Michael J. Zinner
28
INTRODUCTION
The small intestine is the raison d’être of the gastrointestinal 
tract as it is the principle site of nutrient digestion and absorp-
tion.1 The small intestine is also the body’s largest reservoir of 
immunologically active and hormone-producing cells and hence 
can be conceptualized as the largest organ of the immune and 
endocrine systems, respectively. It achieves this diversity of 
action through unique anatomic features, which provide it 
with a massive surface area, a diversity of cell types, and a 
complex neural network to coordinate these functions. 
Despite its size and importance, diseases of the small 
intestine are relatively infrequent and present diagnostic and 
therapeutic challenges. Treatments for common conditions such 
as postoperative ileus are hardly more effective than those used 
at the dawn of the last century. Mortality rates associated with 
acute mesenteric ischemia have not improved during the past 
50 years.
Despite introduction of novel imaging techniques such as 
capsule endoscopy and double balloon endoscopy, diagnostic 
tests lack sufficient predictive power to definitively guide clini-
cal decision making for individual patients. Furthermore, few 
high-quality, controlled data on the efficacy of surgical thera-
pies for small bowel diseases are available.
Therefore, sound clinical judgment and a thorough under-
standing of anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology remain 
essential to the care of patients with intestinal disorders.
GROSS ANATOMY
The small intestine is a tubular structure that extends from the 
pylorus to the cecum. The estimated length of this structure 
varies depending on whether radiologic, surgical, or autopsy 
measurements are made. In the living, it is thought to mea-
sure 4 to 6 m.2 The small intestine consists of three segments 
lying in series: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. 
Introduction	
1137
Gross Anatomy	
1137
Histology	
1138
Development	
1139
Physiology	
1140
Digestion and Absorption / 1140
Barrier and Immune Function / 1143
Motility / 1144
Endocrine Function / 1145
Intestinal Adaptation / 1145
Small Bowel Obstruction	
1146
Epidemiology / 1146
Pathophysiology / 1147
Clinical Presentation / 1147
Diagnosis / 1147
Therapy / 1149
Outcomes / 1151
Prevention / 1151
Ileus and Other Disorders  
of Intestinal Motility	
1151
Pathophysiology / 1151
Clinical Presentation / 1152
Diagnosis / 1152
Therapy / 1152
Crohn’s Disease	
1153
Pathophysiology / 1153
Clinical Presentation / 1154
Diagnosis / 1154
Therapy / 1155
Outcomes / 1157
Intestinal Fistulas	
1157
Pathophysiology / 1158
Clinical Presentation / 1158
Diagnosis / 1158
Therapy / 1158
Outcomes / 1158
Small Bowel Neoplasms	
1159
Pathophysiology / 1159
Clinical Presentation / 1160
Diagnosis / 1161
Therapy / 1161
Outcomes / 1162
Radiation Enteritis	
1162
Pathophysiology / 1162
Clinical Presentation / 1162
Diagnosis / 1162
Therapy / 1163
Outcomes / 1163
Prevention / 1163
Meckel’s Diverticulum	
1163
Pathophysiology / 1164
Clinical Presentation / 1164
Diagnosis / 1164
Therapy / 1164
Acquired Diverticula	
1165
Pathophysiology / 1165
Clinical Presentation / 1166
Diagnosis / 1167
Therapy / 1167
Mesenteric Ischemia	
1167
Miscellaneous Conditions	
1167
Obscure Gastrointestinal Bleeding / 1167
Small Bowel Perforation / 1168
Chylous Ascites / 1169
Intussusception / 1170
Pneumatosis Intestinalis / 1170
Short Bowel Syndrome	
1171
Pathophysiology / 1171
Therapy / 1171
Outcomes / 1172
1
chapter 
1138
The ­duodenum, the most proximal segment, lies in the retroperi-
toneum immediately adjacent to the head and inferior border of 
the body of the pancreas. The duodenum is demarcated from the 
stomach by the pylorus and from the jejunum by the ligament of 
Treitz. The jejunum and ileum lie within the peritoneal cavity 
and are tethered to the retroperitoneum by a broad-based mes-
entery. No distinct anatomic landmark demarcates the jejunum 
from the ileum; the proximal 40% of the jejunoileal segment 
is arbitrarily defined as the jejunum and the distal 60% as the 
ileum. The ileum is demarcated from the cecum by the ileocecal 
valve.
The small intestine contains internal mucosal folds known 
as plicae circulares or valvulae conniventes that are visible 
upon gross inspection. These folds are also visible radiographi-
cally and help in the distinction between small intestine and 
colon, which does not contain them, on abdominal radiographs. 
These folds are more prominent in the proximal intestine than in 
the distal small intestine. Other features evident on gross inspec-
tion that are more characteristic of the proximal than distal small 
intestine include larger circumference, thicker wall, less fatty 
mesentery, and longer vasa recta (Fig. 28-1). Gross examina-
tion of the small-intestinal mucosa also reveals aggregates of 
lymphoid follicles. Those follicles, located in the ileum, are the 
most prominent and are designated Peyer’s patches.
Most of the duodenum derives its arterial blood from 
branches of both the celiac and the superior mesenteric arteries. 
The distal duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum derive their 
arterial blood from the superior mesenteric artery. Their venous 
drainage occurs via the superior mesenteric vein. Lymph drain-
age occurs through lymphatic vessels coursing parallel to corre-
sponding arteries. This lymph drains through mesenteric lymph 
nodes to the cisterna chyli, then through the thoracic duct, and 
ultimately into the left subclavian vein. The parasympathetic 
and sympathetic innervation of the small intestine is derived 
from the vagus and splanchnic nerves, respectively.
HISTOLOGY
The wall of the small intestine consists of four distinct layers: 
mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa (Fig. 28-2).
The mucosa is the innermost layer, and it consists of three 
layers: epithelium, lamina propria, and muscularis mucosae. 
The epithelium is exposed to the intestinal lumen and is the 
surface through which absorption from and secretion into the 
lumen occurs. The lamina propria is located immediately exter-
nal to the epithelium and consists of connective tissue and a het-
erogeneous population of cells. It is demarcated from the more 
external submucosa by the muscularis mucosae, a thin sheet of 
smooth muscle cells.
The mucosa is organized into villi and crypts (crypts of 
Lieberkuhn). Villi are finger-like projections of epithelium and 
underlying lamina propria that contain blood and lymphatic 
(lacteals) vessels that extend into the intestinal lumen. Intestinal, 
epithelial cellular proliferation is confined to the crypts, each of 
which carries 250 to 300 cells. All epithelial cells in each crypt 
are derived from an unknown number of multipotent stem cells 
located at or near the crypt’s base. Our understanding of these 
crypt cells is rapidly expanding. It appears that there are two 
subgroups of intestinal stem cells, with specific cell markers. 
Bmi1-positive cells are usually quiescent, radiation-resistant 
cells that are induced by injury, whereas LGR5-positive cells 
facilitate homeostatic vs. injury-induced regeneration and are 
radiation sensitive.3
The stem cells can differentiate along one of four path-
ways that ultimately yield enterocytes and goblet, enteroen-
docrine, and Paneth cells. With the exception of Paneth cells, 
these lineages complete their terminal differentiation during an 
upward migration from each crypt to adjacent villi. The jour-
ney from the crypt to the villus tip is completed in 2 to 5 days 
and terminates with cells being removed by apoptosis and/or 
exfoliation. Thus, the small-intestinal epithelium undergoes 
1138
Key Points
1 	 The small intestine performs a diverse set of functions.
2 	 Small bowel obstruction is one of the most common surgical 
diagnoses.
3 	 Most cases of small bowel obstruction are due to adhesions from 
previous surgery and resolve with conservative management.
4 	 Tumors and malignancies of the small bowel are rare and dif-
ficult to diagnose.
5 	 Small bowel may be the source of gastrointestinal bleeding, 
which may be difficult to diagnose.
6 	 If following surgical resection, less than 200 cm of small 
bowel remains, patients are at risk of developing short 
bowel syndrome.
Jejunum
lleum
Figure 28-1.  Gross features of jejunum 
contrasted with those of ileum. Relative to 
the ileum, the jejunum has a larger diam-
eter, a thicker wall, more prominent plicae 
circulares, a less fatty mesentery, and lon-
ger vasa recta.
1139
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
continuous renewal, making it one of the body’s most dynamic 
tissues. The high cellular turnover rate contributes to mucosal 
resiliency but also makes the intestine uniquely susceptible to 
certain forms of injury such as that induced by radiation and 
chemotherapy.
Enterocytes are the predominant absorptive cell of the 
intestinal epithelium. Their apical (lumen-facing) cell mem-
brane contains specialized digestive enzymes, transporter 
mechanisms, and microvilli that are estimated to increase the 
absorptive surface area of the small intestine by up to 40-fold. 
Goblet cells produce mucin believed to play a role in mucosal 
defense against pathogens. Enteroendocrine cells are charac-
terized by secretory granules containing regulatory agents and 
are discussed in greater detail later in the Endocrine Function 
section. Paneth cells are located at the base of the crypt and 
contain secretory granules containing growth factors, digestive 
enzymes, and antimicrobial peptides. In addition, the intestinal 
epithelium contains M cells and intraepithelial lymphocytes. 
These two components of the immune system are discussed 
later.
The submucosa consists of dense connective tissue and 
a heterogeneous population of cells, including leukocytes and 
fibroblasts. The submucosa also contains an extensive network 
of vascular and lymphatic vessels, nerve fibers, and ganglion 
cells of the submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus.
The muscularis propria consists of an outer, longitudinally 
oriented layer and an inner, circularly oriented layer of smooth 
muscle fibers. Located at the interface between these two layers 
are ganglion cells of the myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus.
The serosa consists of a single layer of mesothelial cells 
and is a component of the visceral peritoneum.
DEVELOPMENT
The first recognizable precursor of the small intestine is the 
embryonic gut tube, formed from the endoderm during the 
fourth week of gestation. The gut tube is divided into forgut, 
midgut, and hindgut. Other than duodenum, which is a for-
gut structure, the rest of the small intestine is derived from 
the midgut. The gut tube initially communicates with the yolk 
sac; however, the communication between these two structures 
narrows by the sixth week to form the vitelline duct. The yolk 
sac and vitelline duct usually undergo obliteration by the end 
of ­gestation. Incomplete obliteration of the vitelline duct results 
in the spectrum of defects associated with Meckel’s diverticulum.
Also during the fourth week of gestation, the mesoderm 
of the embryo splits. The portion of mesoderm that adheres to 
the endoderm forms the visceral peritoneum, while the portion 
that adheres to the ectoderm forms the parietal peritoneum. This 
mesodermal division results in the formation of a coelomic cav-
ity that is the precursor of the peritoneal cavity.
At approximately the fifth week of gestation, the bowel 
begins to lengthen to an extent greater than that which can be 
accommodated by the developing abdominal cavity, resulting 
in the extracoelomic herniation of the developing bowel. The 
bowel continues to lengthen during the subsequent weeks and 
is retracted back into the abdominal cavity during the tenth 
week of gestation. Subsequently, the duodenum becomes 
a retroperitoneal structure. Coincident with extrusion and 
retraction, the bowel undergoes a 270° counterclockwise 
rotation relative to the posterior abdominal wall. This rota-
tion accounts for the usual locations of the cecum in the right 
lower quadrant and the duodenojejunal junction to the left of 
midline (Fig. 28-3).
The celiac and superior mesenteric arteries and veins are 
derived from the vitelline vascular system, which in turn is 
derived from blood vessels formed within the splanchnopleuric 
mesoderm during the third week of gestation. Neurons found in 
the small intestine are derived from neural crest cells that begin 
to migrate away from the neural tube during the third week of 
gestation. These neural crest cells enter the mesenchyme of the 
primitive foregut and subsequently migrate to the remainder of 
the bowel.
During the sixth week of gestation, the lumen of the devel-
oping bowel becomes obliterated as bowel epithelial prolifera-
tion accelerates. Vacuoles form within the bowel substance 
during the subsequent weeks and coalesce to form the intestinal 
lumen by the ninth week of gestation. Errors in this recanaliza-
tion may account for defects such as intestinal webs and steno-
ses. Most intestinal atresias, however, are believed to be related 
to ischemic episodes occurring after organogenesis has been 
completed rather than to errors in recanalization.
During the ninth week of gestation, the intestinal epithe-
lium develops intestine-specific features such as crypt-villus 
architecture. Organogenesis is complete by approximately the 
twelfth week of gestation.
4. Mucosa
Circular layer
Longitudinal
layer
2. Muscularis propria
Subserous layer
1. Serosa
Vascular network,
longisection of villus
Simple columnar epithelium
with mucous cells
Lamina propria,
smooth muscle cells, blood vessels
Central lymph capillary (lacteal)
Muscularis mucosae
3. Submucosa
4
3
2
1
Opening of crypts (of Lieberkühn)
Figure 28-2.  Layers of wall of the 
small intestine. The individual layers 
and their prominent features are repre-
sented schematically.
1140
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
PHYSIOLOGY
Digestion and Absorption
The intestinal epithelium is the interface through which absorp-
tion and secretion occur. It has features characteristic of absorp-
tive epithelia in general including epithelial cells with cellular 
membranes possessing distinct apical (luminal) and basolateral 
(serosal) domains demarcated by intercellular tight junctions 
and an asymmetric distribution of transmembrane transporter 
mechanisms that promotes vectorial transport of solutes across 
the epithelium.
Solutes can traverse the epithelium by active or passive 
transport. Passive transport of solutes occurs through diffu-
sion or convection and is driven by existing electrochemical 
gradients. Active transport is the energy-dependent net transfer 
of solutes in the absence of or against an electrochemical 
­gradient.
Active transport occurs through transcellular pathways 
(through the cell), whereas passive transport can occur through 
either transcellular or paracellular pathways (between cells 
through the tight junctions). Transcellular transport requires 
solutes to traverse the cell membranes through specialized 
membrane proteins, such as channels, carriers, and pumps. The 
molecular characterization of transporter proteins is evolving 
rapidly, with different transporter families, each containing many 
individual genes encoding specific transporters, now identified. 
Similarly, understanding of the paracellular pathway is evolving. 
In contrast to what was once believed, it is becoming apparent 
that paracellular permeability is substrate-specific, dynamic, 
and subject to regulation by specific tight junction proteins.
Water and Electrolyte Absorption and Secretion.  Eight 
to nine L of fluid enters the small intestine daily. Most of this 
volume consists of salivary, gastric, biliary, pancreatic, and 
intestinal secretions. Under normal conditions, the small intes-
tine absorbs over 80% of this fluid, leaving approximately 
1.5 L that enters the colon (Fig. 28-4). Small-intestinal absorp-
tion and secretion are tightly regulated; derangements in water 
and electrolyte homeostasis characteristic of many of the disor-
ders discussed in this chapter play an important role in contrib-
uting to their associated clinical features.
Figure 28-3.  Developmental rotation of the 
intestine. A. During the fifth week of gesta-
tion, the developing intestine herniates out 
of the coelomic cavity and begins to undergo 
a counterclockwise rotation about the axis 
of the superior mesenteric artery. B and C. 
Intestinal rotation continues, as the develop-
ing transverse colon passes anterior to the 
developing duodenum. D. Final positions of 
the small intestine and colon resulting from a 
270° counterclockwise rotation of the devel-
oping intestine and its return into the abdomi-
nal cavity.
Stomach
Duodenum
Proximal limb of prim.
intestinal loop
Vitelline 
duct
Distal limb of prim.
 intestinal loop
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Stomach
Transverse 
colon
Cecal 
bud
Vitelline 
duct
Ascending 
colon
Jejunoileal 
loops
A
C
Duodenum
Cecal bud
Transverse 
colon
Small intestine
Hepatic 
flexture
Appendix
Transverse
colon
Descending 
colon
Sigmoid
colon
Cecum
B
D
Figure 28-4.  Small intestinal fluid fluxes. Typical quantities (in 
volume per day) of fluid entering and leaving the small intestinal 
lumen in a healthy adult are shown.
• Oral intake 2000 mL
• Saliva 1500 mL
• Gastric secretions 2500
• Bile 500 mL
• Pancreatic 
  secretions 1500 mL
• Small intestinal 
  secretions 1000 mL
• Small intestinal
  absorption 7500 mL
•1500 mL to colon
Gut epithelia have two pathways for water transport: 
(a) the paracellular route, which involves transport through the 
spaces between cells, and (b) the transcellular route, through 
apical and basolateral cell membranes. Although most water 
absorption was thought to occur through the paracellular path-
way, it is now well documented that most intestinal water trans-
port occurs through the transcellular pathway.4 The specific 
transport mechanisms mediating this transcellular transport are 
not completely characterized and may involve passive diffusion 
through the phospholipid bilayer, cotransport with other ions 
and nutrients, or diffusion through water channels called aqua-
porins. Many different types of aquaporins have been identified; 
1141
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
however, their contribution to overall intestinal water absorp-
tion appears to be relatively minor.5
The prevailing model for intestinal epithelial Na+ absorp-
tion is shown in Fig. 28-5. Activity of the Na+/K+ ATPase 
enzyme, which is located in the basolateral membrane and 
exchanges three intracellular Na+ for every two extracellular 
K+ in an energy-dependent process, generates the electrochemi-
cal gradient that drives the transport of Na+ from the intestinal 
lumen into the cytoplasm of enterocytes. Na+ ions traverse the 
apical membrane through several distinct transporter mecha-
nisms including nutrient-coupled sodium transport (e.g., 
sodium glucose cotransporter-1 [SGLT1]), sodium channels, 
and sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs). Absorbed Na+ ions 
are then extruded from enterocytes through the Na+/K+ ATPase 
located in the basolateral membrane. Similar mechanistic mod-
els that account for the transport of other common ions such as 
K+ and HCO3
– also exist.
Substantial heterogeneity, with respect to both crypt-villus 
and craniocaudal axes, exists for intestinal epithelial transport 
mechanisms. This spatial distribution pattern is consistent with 
a model in which absorptive function resides primarily in the 
villus and secretory function in the crypt.
Intestinal absorption and secretion are subject to modu-
lation under physiologic and pathophysiologic conditions by a 
wide array of hormonal, neural, and immune regulatory media-
tors (Table 28-1).
Carbohydrate Digestion and Absorption.  Approximately 
45% of energy consumption in the average Western diet con-
sists of carbohydrates, approximately one half of which is in the 
form of starch (linear or branched polymers of glucose) derived 
from cereals and plants. Other major sources of dietary carbo-
hydrates include sugars derived from milk (lactose), fruits and 
vegetables (fructose, glucose, and sucrose), or purified from 
sugar cane or beets (sucrose). Processed foods contain a vari-
ety of sugars including fructose, oligosaccharides, and polysac-
charides. Glycogen derived from meat contributes only a small 
fraction of dietary carbohydrate.
Figure 28-5.  Model of transepithelial sodium (Na+) absorption. 
Na+ traverses the apical membrane of enterocytes through a vari-
ety mechanisms, including nutrient-coupled Na+ transport, Na+/H+ 
exchange, and Na+ channels. Activity of the Na+/K+ ATPase located 
on the basolateral membrane generates the electrochemical gradient 
that provides the driving force for Na+ absorption.
LUMEN –
BLOOD +
Na+
Glucose
Na+
K+
Na+
Na+
H+
Table 28-1
Regulation of intestinal absorption and secretion
Agents that stimulate absorption or inhibit secretion of water
  Aldosterone
  Glucocorticoids
  Angiotensin
  Norepineprhine
  Epinephrine
  Dopamine
  Somatostatin
  Neuropeptide Y
  Peptide YY
  Enkephalin
Agents that simulate secretion or inhibit absorption of water
  Secretin
  Bradykinin
  Prostaglandins
  Acetylcholine
  Atrial natriuretic factor
  Vasopressin
  Vasoactive intestinal peptide
  Bombesin
  Substance P
  Serotonin
  Neurotensin
  Histamine
Pancreatic amylase is the major enzyme of starch diges-
tion, although salivary amylase initiates the process. The ter-
minal products of amylase-mediated starch digestion are 
oligosaccharides, maltotriose, maltose, and α-limit dextrins 
(Fig. 28-6). These products, as well as the major disaccharides 
in the diet (sucrose and lactose), are unable to undergo absorp-
tion in this form. They must first undergo hydrolytic cleavage 
into their constituent monosaccharides; these hydrolytic reac-
tions are catalyzed by specific brush border membrane hydro-
lases that are expressed most abundantly in the villi of the 
duodenum and jejunum. The three major monosaccharides that 
represent the terminal products of carbohydrate digestion are 
glucose, galactose, and fructose.
Under physiologic conditions, most of these sugars are 
absorbed through the epithelium via the transcellular route. 
Glucose and galactose are transported through the enterocyte 
brush border membrane via intestinal Na+-glucose cotrans-
porter, SGLT1 (Fig. 28-7). Fructose is transported through the 
brush border membrane by facilitated diffusion via GLUT5 
(a member of the facilitative glucose transporter family). All 
three monosaccharides are extruded through the basolateral 
membrane by facilitated diffusion using GLUT2 and GLUT5 
transporters. Extruded monosaccharides diffuse into venules 
and ultimately enter the portal venous system.
There is evidence of overexpression of hexose transport-
ers, specifically SGLT1, in disease states such as diabetes.6 
­Several approaches aimed at downregulation of intestinal 
­glucose transporter are being investigated as a novel therapy for 
disease states such as diabetes and obesity.7
Protein Digestion and Absorption.  Ten to fifteen percent of 
energy consumption in the average Western diet consists of pro-
teins. In addition to dietary proteins, approximately one half of 
the protein load that enters the small intestine is derived from 
1142
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
endogenous sources including salivary and gastrointestinal 
secretions and desquamated intestinal epithelial cells. Protein 
digestion begins in the stomach with action of pepsins. This is 
not, however, an essential step, since surgical patients who are 
acholorhydric or who have lost part or all their stomach are still 
able to successfully digest proteins. Digestion continues in the 
duodenum with the actions of a variety of pancreatic peptidases. 
Glucose, galactose, fructose
Absorption
Dietary starch
Salivary amylase
Pancreatic amylase
Brush-border hydrolases
Oligosaccharides
Maltotriose
Maltose
a-limit dextrans
Sucrose and Lactose
Figure 28-6.  Carbohydrate digestion. Dietary carbohydrates, 
including starch and the disaccharides sucrose and lactose, must 
undergo hydrolysis into constituent monosaccharides glucose, 
galactose, and fructose before being absorbed by the intestinal epi-
thelium. These hydrolytic reactions are catalyzed by salivary and 
pancreatic amylase and by enterocyte brush border hydrolases.
LUMEN
Tight junction
Tight junction
BLOOD 
SGLT1
GLUT5
GLUT5
GLUT2
Fructose
Fructose
GLUT5
GLUT5
G
Na+
Glucose
Galactose
Glucose
Galactose
Na+
G
G
Figure 28-7.  Hexose transporters. Glucose and galactose enter 
the enterocyte through secondary active transport via the sodium-
glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) located on the apical (brush border) 
membrane. Fructose enters through facilitated diffusion via glu-
cose transporter 5 (GLUT5). Glucose and galactose are extruded 
basolaterally through facilitated diffusion via glucose transporter 2 
(GLUT2). Fructose is extruded basolaterally via GLUT5.
These enzymes are secreted as inactive proenzymes. This is in 
contrast to pancreatic amylase and lipase, which are secreted 
in their active forms. In response to the presence of bile acids, 
enterokinase is liberated from the intestinal brush border mem-
brane to catalyze the conversion of trypsinogen to active tryp-
sin; trypsin in turn activates itself and other proteases. The final 
products of intraluminal protein digestion consist of neutral and 
basic amino acids and peptides two to six amino acids in length 
(Fig. 28-8). Additional digestion occurs through the actions of 
peptidases that exist in the enterocyte brush border and cyto-
plasm. Epithelial absorption occurs for both single amino acids 
and di- or tripeptides via specific membrane-bound transporters. 
Absorbed amino acids and peptides then enter the portal venous 
circulation.
Of all amino acids, glutamine appears to be a unique, 
major source of energy for enterocytes. Active glutamine uptake 
into enterocytes occurs through both apical and basolateral 
transport mechanisms.
Fat Digestion and Absorption.  Approximately 40% of the 
average Western diet consists of fat. Over 95% of dietary fat is 
in the form of long-chain triglycerides; the remainder includes 
phospholipids such as lecithin, fatty acids, cholesterol, and fat-
soluble vitamins. Over 94% of the ingested fats are absorbed in 
the proximal jejunum.
Since fats are normally water insoluble, key to success-
ful digestion of ingested fats is solubalization of them into an 
emulsion by the mechanical actions of mastication and antral 
peristalsis. Although lipolysis of triglycerides to form fatty 
acids and monoglyciderides is initiated in the stomach by gastric 
lipase, its principal site is the proximal intestine, where pancre-
atic lipase is the catalyst (Fig. 28-9).
Dipeptides + Tripeptides + Amino acids
Absorption
Dietary proteins
Polypeptides
Amino acids
Trypsin
Chymotrypsin
Elastase
Carboxypeptidase A
Carboxypeptidase B
Oligopeptides
Brush-border
peptidases
Amino acids
+
+
Pepsin
Figure 28-8.  Protein digestion. Dietary proteins must undergo 
hydrolysis into constituent single amino acids and di- and tripep-
tides before being absorbed by the intestinal epithelium. These 
hydrolytic reactions are catalyzed by pancreatic peptidases (e.g., 
trypsin) and by enterocyte brush border peptidases.
1143
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
Bile acids act as detergents that help in solubalization of 
the lipolysis by forming mixed micelles. These micelles are 
polymolecular aggregates with a hydrophobic core of fat and a 
hydrophilic surface that act as shuttles, delivering the products 
of lipolysis to the enterocyte brush border membrane, where 
they are absorbed. The bile salts, however, remain in the bowel 
lumen and travel to the terminal ileum, where they are actively 
resorbed. They enter the portal circulation and are resecreted 
into bile, thus completing the enterohepatic circulation.
Dissociation of lipids from the micelles occurs in a thin 
layer of water (50–500 μm thick) with an acidic microenvi-
ronment immediately adjacent to the brush border called the 
unstirred water layer. Most lipids are absorbed in the proxi-
mal jejunum, whereas bile salts are absorbed in the distal ileum 
through an active process. Fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs) 
are a family of proteins located on the brush border membrane, 
facilitating diffusion of long-chain fatty acids across the brush 
border membrane. Cholesterol crosses the brush border mem-
brane through an active process that is yet to be completely 
characterized. Within the enterocytes, triglycerides are resyn-
thesized and incorporated into chylomicrons that are secreted 
into the intestinal lymphatics and ultimately enter the thoracic 
duct. In these chylomicrons, lipoproteins serve a detergent-like 
role similar to that served by bile salts in the mixed micelles.
The steps described above are required for the digestion 
and absorption of triglycerides containing long-chain fatty 
acids. However, triglycerides containing short- and medium-
chain fatty acids are more hydrophilic and are absorbed without 
undergoing intraluminal hydrolysis, micellular solubilization, 
mucosal re-esterification, and chylomicron formation. Instead, 
they are directly absorbed and enter the portal venous ­circulation 
Figure 28-9.  Fat digestion. Long-chain triglycerides, which consti-
tute the majority of dietary fats, must undergo lipolysis into constitu-
ent log-chain fatty acids and monoglycerides before being absorbed 
by the intestinal epithelium. These reactions are catalyzed by gastric 
and pancreatic lipases. The products of lipolysis are transported in 
the form of mixed micelles to enterocytes, where they are resyn-
thesized into triglycerides, which are then packaged in the form of 
chylomicrons that are secreted into the intestinal lymph (chyle). 
Triglycerides composed of short- and medium-chain fatty acids are 
absorbed by the intestinal epithelium directly, without undergoing 
lipolysis, and are secreted into the portal venous circulation.
Dietary long-chain
triglycerides
Short- & medium-chain
triglycerides
Long-chain fatty acids
and monoglycerides
Triglycerides
Resynthesized
in enterocytes
Gastric lipase
Pancreatic lipase
Chyle (lymphatics)
Portal venous blood
Absorbed
Absorbed
rather than the lymphatics. This information provides the ratio-
nale for administering nutritional supplements containing 
medium-chain triglycerides to patients with gastrointestinal dis-
eases associated with impaired digestion and/or malabsorption 
of long-chain triglycerides.
Vitamin and Mineral Absorption.  Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) 
malabsorption can result from a variety of surgical manipula-
tions. The vitamin is initially bound by saliva-derived R pro-
tein. In the duodenum, R protein is hydrolyzed by pancreatic 
enzymes, allowing free cobalamin to bind to gastric parietal 
cell–derived intrinsic factor. The cobalamin-intrinsic factor 
complex is able to escape hydrolysis by pancreatic enzymes, 
allowing it to reach the terminal ileum, which expresses spe-
cific receptors for intrinsic factor. Subsequent events in cobala-
min absorption are poorly characterized, but the intact complex 
probably enters enterocytes through translocation. Because each 
of these steps is necessary for cobalamin assimilation, gastric 
resection, gastric bypass, and ileal resection can each result in 
vitamin B12 insufficiency.
Other water-soluble vitamins for which specific carrier-
mediated transport processes have been characterized include 
ascorbic acid, folate, thiamine, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, and 
biotin. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, and E appear to be absorbed 
through passive diffusion. Vitamin K appears to be absorbed 
through both passive diffusion and carrier-mediated uptake.
Calcium is absorbed through both transcellular transport 
and paracellular diffusion. The duodenum is the major site for 
transcellular transport; paracellular transport occurs throughout 
the small intestine. A key step in transcellular calcium transport 
is mediated by calbindin, a calcium-binding protein located in 
the cytoplasm of enterocytes. Regulation of calbindin synthesis 
is the principle mechanism by which vitamin D regulates intes-
tinal calcium absorption. Abnormal calcium levels are increas-
ingly seen in surgical patients who have undergone a gastric 
bypass. Although usual calcium supplementation is often in the 
form of calcium carbonate, which is cheap, in such patients with 
low acid exposure, calcium citrate is a better formulation for 
supplemental therapy.
Iron and magnesium are each absorbed through both tran-
scellular and paracellular routes. A divalent metal transporter 
capable of transporting Fe2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Co2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, 
and Pb2+ that has recently been localized to the intestinal brush 
border may account for at least a portion of the transcellular 
absorption of these ions.8
Barrier and Immune Function
Although the intestinal epithelium allows for the efficient 
absorption of dietary nutrients, it must discriminate between 
pathogens and harmless antigens such as food proteins and com-
mensal bacteria, and it must resist invasion by pathogens. Fac-
tors contributing to epithelial defense include immunoglobulin 
A (IgA), mucins, and the relative impermeability of the brush 
border membrane and tight junctions to macromolecules and 
bacteria. Recently described factors likely to play important 
roles in intestinal mucosal defense include antimicrobial pep-
tides such as the defensins.9 The intestinal component of the 
immune system, known as the gut-associated lymphoid tissue 
(GALT), contains over 70% of the body’s immune cells.
The GALT is conceptually divided into inductive and 
effector sites.10 Inductive sites include Peyer’s patches, 
mesenteric lymph nodes, and smaller isolated lymphoid 
­follicles scattered throughout the small intestine (Fig. 28-10). 
1144
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Peyer’s patches are macroscopic aggregates of B-cell follicles 
and intervening T-cell areas found in the lamina propria of the 
small intestine, primarily the distal ileum. Overlying Peyer’s 
patches are a specialized epithelium containing microfold (M) 
cells. These cells possess an apical membrane with microfolds 
rather than microvilli, which is characteristic of most intesti-
nal epithelial cells. Using transepithelial vesicular transport, 
M cells transfer microbes to underlying professional antigen-
presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells. Dendritic cells, 
in addition, may sample luminal antigens directly through their 
dendrite-like processes that extend through epithelial tight 
junctions. APCs interact with and prime naïve lymphocytes, 
which then exit through the draining lymphatics to enter the 
mesenteric lymph nodes where they undergo differentiation. 
These lymphocytes then migrate into the systemic circulation 
via the thoracic duct and ultimately accumulate in the intesti-
nal mucosa at effector sites. Alternative induction mechanisms, 
such as antigen presentation within mesenteric lymph nodes, 
are also likely to exist.
Effector lymphocytes are distributed into distinct compart-
ments. IgA-producing plasma cells are derived from B cells and 
are located in the lamina propria. CD4+ T cells are also located 
in the lamina propria. CD8+ T cells migrate preferentially to 
the epithelium, but are also found in the lamina propria. These 
T cells are central to immune regulation; in addition, the CD8+ 
T cells have potent cytotoxic (CTL) activity. IgA is transported 
through the intestinal epithelial cells into the lumen, where it 
exists in the form of a dimer complexed with a secretory com-
ponent. This configuration renders IgA resistant to proteolysis 
by digestive enzymes. IgA is believed to both help prevent the 
entry of microbes through the epithelium and to promote excre-
tion of antigens or microbes that have already penetrated into 
the lamina propria.
It has been increasingly recognized that the gastrointes-
tinal tract is colonized with many bacteria that are essential 
for health. Communication between the microbiota and the 
host defense allows for protective immune responses against 
pathogens while preventing adverse inflammatory responses 
to harmless commensal microbes, which could lead to chronic 
Intestinal lumen
Peyer’s patch
Lamina propria
FAE
SED
DC
GC
IgA
Plasma
cell
M cell
B
Villus
T
T
Figure 28-10.  Gut-associated lymphoid tis-
sue. Select components of the gut-associated 
lymphoid tissue (GALT) are schematically 
represented. Peyer’s patches consist of a spe-
cialized follicle-associated epithelium (FAE) 
containing M cells, a subepithelial dome 
(SED) rich in dendritic cells, and B-cell 
follicle-containing germinal centers (GC). 
Plasma cells in the lamina propria produce 
immunoglobulin A (IgA), which is trans-
ported to the intestinal lumen where it serves 
as the first line of defense against pathogens. 
Other components of GALT include isolated 
lymphoid follicles, mesenteric lymph nodes, 
and regulatory and effector lymphocytes.
inflammatory disorders such as celiac disease and Crohn’s 
disease.11
Motility
Myocytes of the intestinal muscle layers are electrically and 
mechanically coordinated in the form of syncytia. Contractions 
of the muscularis propria are responsible for small-intestinal 
peristalsis. Contraction of the outer longitudinal muscle layer 
results in bowel shortening; contraction of the inner circular 
layer results in luminal narrowing. Contractions of the muscu-
laris mucosa contribute to mucosal or villus motility, but not to 
peristalsis.
Several distinctive patterns of muscularis propria activ-
ity have been observed to occur in the small intestine. These 
patterns include ascending excitation and descending inhibition 
in which muscular contraction occurs proximal to a stimulus, 
such as the presence of a bolus of ingested food, and muscular 
relaxation occurs distal to the stimulus (Fig. 28-11). These two 
EMN
SN
IMN
Proximal
Distal
Figure 28-11.  Ascending excitation and descending inhibition. 
The presence of a food bolus within the intestinal lumen is sensed 
by a sensory neuron (SN) that relays signals to (a) excitatory motor 
neurons (EMN) that have projections to intestinal muscle cells 
located proximal to the food bolus and (b) inhibitory motor neurons 
(IMN) that have projections to intestinal muscle cells located distal 
to the food bolus. This stereotypical motor reflex is controlled by 
the enteric nervous system and occurs in the absence of extraintes-
tinal innervations. It contributes to peristalsis.
1145
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
reflexes are present even in the absence of any extrinsic innerva-
tion to the small intestine and contribute to peristalsis when they 
are propagated in a coordinated fashion along the length of the 
intestine. The fed or postprandial pattern begins within 10 to 
20 minutes of meal ingestion and abates 4 to 6 hours afterward. 
Rhythmic segmentations or pressure waves traveling only short 
distances also are observed. This segmenting pattern is hypothe-
sized to assist in mixing intraluminal contents and in facilitating 
their contact with the absorptive mucosal surface. The fasting 
pattern or interdigestive motor cycle (IDMC) consists of three 
phases. Phase I is characterized by motor quiescence, phase II 
by seemingly disorganized pressure waves occurring at submax-
imal rates, and phase III by sustained pressure waves occurring 
at maximal rates. This pattern is hypothesized to expel residual 
debris and bacteria from the small intestine. The median dura-
tion of the IDMC ranges from 90 to 120 minutes. At any given 
time, different portions of the small intestine can be in different 
phases of the IDMC.
The regulatory mechanisms driving small-intestinal motil-
ity consist of both pacemakers intrinsic to the small intestine and 
external neurohumoral modulatory signals. The interstitial cells 
of Cajal are pleomorphic mesenchymal cells located within the 
muscularis propria of the intestine that generate the electrical 
slow wave (basic electrical rhythm or pacesetter potential) that 
plays a pacemaker role in setting the fundamental rhythmicity 
of small-intestinal contractions. The frequency of the slow wave 
varies along the longitudinal axis of the intestine: it ranges from 
12 waves per minute in the duodenum to 7 waves per minute in 
the distal ileum. Smooth muscle contraction occurs only when 
an electrical action potential (spike burst) is superimposed on 
the slow wave. Thus, the slow wave determines the maximum 
frequency of contractions; however, not every slow wave is 
associated with a contraction.
This intrinsic contractile mechanism is subject to neural 
and hormonal regulation. The enteric nervous system (ENS) 
provides both inhibitory and excitatory stimuli. The predomi-
nant excitatory transmitters are acetylcholine and substance P, 
and the inhibitory transmitters include nitric oxide, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide, and adenosine triphosphate. In general, the 
sympathetic motor supply is inhibitory to the ENS; therefore, 
increased sympathetic input into the intestine leads to decreased 
intestinal smooth muscle activity. The parasympathetic motor 
supply is more complex, with projections to both inhibitory and 
excitatory ENS motor neurons. Correspondingly, the effects of 
parasympathetic inputs into intestinal motility are more difficult 
to predict.
Endocrine Function
Endocrinology as a discipline was born with the discovery 
of secretin, an intestinal regulatory peptide that was the first 
hormone to be identified. Our improving understanding of the 
physiology of the small intestine has lead to identification of 
many additional intestinal-derived hormones that make this the 
largest hormone-producing organ in the body. Over 30 peptide 
hormone genes have been identified as being expressed in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Because of differential posttranscriptional 
and posttranslational processing, over 100 distinct regulatory 
peptides are produced. In addition, monoamines, such as hista-
mine and dopamine, and eicosanoids with hormone-like activi-
ties are produced in the intestine.
“Gut hormones” were previously conceptualized as pep-
tides produced by the enteroendocrine cells of the intestinal 
mucosa that are released into the systemic circulation to reach 
receptors in target sites in the gastrointestinal tract. Now it is 
clear that “gut hormone” genes are widely expressed through-
out the body, not only in endocrine cells, but also in central 
and peripheral neurons. The products of these genes are general 
intercellular messengers that can act as endocrine, paracrine, 
autocrine, or neurocrine mediators. Thus, they may act as true 
blood-borne hormones as well as through local effects.
There are notable homology patterns among individual 
regulatory peptides found in the gastrointestinal tract. Based on 
these homologies, approximately one half of the known regula-
tory peptides can be classified into families.12 For example, the 
secretin family includes secretin, glucagon, and glucagon-like 
peptides, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide, vasoac-
tive intestinal polypeptide, peptide histidine isoleucine, growth 
­hormone–releasing hormone, and pituitary adenylyl cyclase–
activating peptide. Other peptide families include those named 
for insulin, epidermal growth factor, gastrin, pancreatic poly-
peptide, tachykinin, and somatostatin.
Receptor subtype multiplicity and cell-specific expres-
sion patterns for these receptor subtypes that are characteristic 
of these regulatory mediators make definition of their actions 
complex. Detailed description of these actions is beyond the 
scope of this chapter; however, examples of regulatory pep-
tides produced by enteroendocrine cells of the small-intestinal 
epithelium and their most commonly ascribed functions are 
summarized in Table 28-2. Some of these peptides, or their 
analogues, are used in routine clinical practice. For example, 
therapeutic applications of octreotide, a long-acting analogue of 
somatostatin, include the amelioration of symptoms associated 
with neuroendocrine tumors (e.g., carcinoid syndrome), post-
gastrectomy dumping syndrome, enterocutaneous fistulas, and 
the initial treatment of acute hemorrhage due to esophageal vari-
ces. The gastrin secretory response to secretin administration 
forms the basis for the standard test used to establish the diag-
nosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Cholecystokinin is used 
in evaluations of gallbladder ejection fraction, a parameter that 
may have utility in patients who have symptoms of biliary colic 
but are not found to have gallstones. Of the peptides listed in 
Table 28-2, glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) has been identified 
as a specific and potent intestinotrophic hormone and is cur-
rently under clinical evaluation as an intestinotrophic agent in 
patients suffering from the short bowel syndrome, as discussed 
in the later Short Bowel Syndrome section.
Intestinal Adaptation
The small intestine has the capacity to adapt in response to vary-
ing demands imposed by physiologic and pathologic conditions. 
Of particular relevance to many of the diseases discussed in this 
chapter is the adaptation that occurs in the remnant intestine fol-
lowing surgical resection of a large portion of the small intestine 
(massive small bowel resection). Postresection intestinal adapta-
tion has been studied extensively using animal models. Within a 
few hours after bowel resection, the remnant small intestine dis-
plays evidence of epithelial cellular hyperplasia. With additional 
time, villi lengthen, intestinal absorptive surface area increases, 
and digestive and absorptive functions improve. Postresection 
intestinal adaptation in human patients is less well studied, but 
seems to follow similar steps as those seen in experimental mod-
els, and takes 1 to 2 years to complete.13
The mechanisms responsible for inducing postresec-
tion intestinal adaptation are under active investigation. 
1146
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
obstructions are commonly due to extrinsic compression or 
invasion by advanced malignancies arising in organs other 
than the small bowel; few are due to primary small bowel 
tumors. The most commonly encountered etiologies of small 
bowel obstruction are summarized in Table 28-3. Although 
congenital abnormalities capable of causing small bowel 
obstruction usually become evident during childhood, 
they sometimes elude detection and are diagnosed for the 
first time in adult patients presenting with abdominal symp-
toms. For example, intestinal malrotation and mid-gut volvu-
lus should not be forgotten when considering the differential 
Several classes of effectors that stimulate intestinal growth 
include specific nutrients, peptide hormones and growth factors, 
pancreatic secretions, and some cytokines. Nutritional compo-
nents with intestinal growth-stimulating effects include fiber, 
fatty acids, triglycerides, glutamine, polyamines, and lectins.
Postresection adaptation serves to compensate for the 
function of intestine that has been resected. Jejunal resection 
is generally better tolerated, as ileum shows better capacity to 
compensate. However, the magnitude of this response is limited. 
If enough small intestine is resected, a devastating condition 
known as the short bowel syndrome results. This condition is 
discussed in the Short Bowel Syndrome section at the end of 
this chapter.
SMALL BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
Epidemiology
Mechanical small bowel obstruction is the most frequently 
encountered surgical disorder of the small intestine. 
Although a wide range of etiologies for this condition 
exists, the obstructing lesion can be conceptualized according 
to its anatomic relationship to the intestinal wall as:
1.  Intraluminal (e.g., foreign bodies, gallstones, or meconium)
2.  Intramural (e.g., tumors, Crohn’s disease–associated inflam-
matory strictures)
3.  Extrinsic (e.g., adhesions, hernias, or carcinomatosis)
Intra-abdominal adhesions related to prior abdominal sur-
gery account for up to 75% of cases of small bowel obstruction. 
Over 300,000 patients are estimated to undergo surgery 
to treat adhesion-induced small bowel obstruction in the 
United States annually. A 20-year trend analysis between 1988 
and 2007 has documented no decrease in this rate during this 
time period, highlighting the ongoing problem with this “old” 
disease.14
Less prevalent etiologies for small bowel obstruction 
include hernias, malignant bowel obstruction, and Crohn’s 
disease. The frequency with which obstruction related to 
these conditions is encountered varies according to the patient 
population and practice setting. Cancer-related small bowel 
Table 28-2
Representative regulatory peptides produced in the small intestine
Hormone
Sourcea
Actions
Somatostatin
D cell
Inhibits gastrointestinal secretion, motility, and splanchnic perfusion
Secretin
S cell
Stimulates exocrine pancreatic secretion, stimulates intestinal secretion
Cholecystokinin
I cell
Simulates pancreatic exocrine secretion, simulates gallbladder emptying, inhibits sphincter of 
Oddi contraction
Motilin
M cell
Simulates intestinal motility
Peptide YY
L cell
Inhibits intestinal motility and secretion
Glucagon-like 
peptide 2
L cell
Stimulates intestinal epithelial proliferation 
Neurotensin
N cell
Stimulates pancreatic and biliary secretion, inhibits small bowel motility, stimulates intestinal 
mucosal growth
aThis table indicates which enteroendocrine cell types located in the intestinal epithelium produce these peptides. These peptides 
are also widely expressed in nonintestinal tissues.
3
4
2
Table 28-3
Small bowel obstruction: common etiologies
Adhesions
Neoplasms
    Primary small bowel neoplasms
    Secondary small bowel cancer (e.g., melanoma-derived 
metastasis)
    Local invasion by intra-abdominal malignancy (e.g., 
desmoid tumors)
    Carcinomatosis
Hernias
    External (e.g., inguinal and femoral)
    Internal (e.g., following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
surgery)
Crohn’s disease
Volvulus
Intussusception
Radiation-induced stricture
Postischemic stricture
Foreign body
Gallstone ileus
Diverticulitis
Meckel’s diverticulum
Hematoma
Congenital abnormalities (e.g., webs, duplications, and 
malrotation)
1147
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
diagnosis of adult patients with acute or chronic symptoms of 
small bowel obstruction, especially those without a history of 
prior abdominal surgery. A rare etiology of obstruction is the 
superior mesenteric artery syndrome, characterized by com-
pression of the third portion of the duodenum by the superior 
mesenteric artery as it crosses over this portion of the duode-
num. This condition should be considered in young asthenic 
individuals who have chronic symptoms suggestive of proxi-
mal small bowel obstruction.
Pathophysiology
With onset of obstruction, gas and fluid accumulate within the 
intestinal lumen proximal to the site of obstruction. The intes-
tinal activity increases in an effort to overcome the obstruc-
tion, accounting for the colicky pain and the diarrhea that 
some experience even in the presence of complete bowel 
obstruction. Most of the gas that accumulates originates from 
swallowed air, although some is produced within the intes-
tine. The fluid consists of swallowed liquids and gastrointes-
tinal secretions (obstruction stimulates intestinal epithelial 
water secretion). With ongoing gas and fluid accumulation, 
the bowel distends and intraluminal and intramural pressures 
rise. The intestinal motility is eventually reduced with fewer  
contractions. With obstruction, the luminal flora of the small 
bowel, which is usually sterile, changes, and a variety of organ-
isms have been cultured from the contents. Translocation of 
these bacteria to regional lymph nodes has been demonstrated, 
although the significance of this process is not well understood. 
If the intramural pressure becomes high enough, intestinal micro-
vascular perfusion is impaired, leading to intestinal ischemia 
and, ultimately, necrosis. This condition is termed strangulated 
bowel obstruction.
With partial small bowel obstruction, only a portion of the 
intestinal lumen is occluded, allowing passage of some gas and 
fluid. The progression of pathophysiologic events described ear-
lier tends to occur more slowly than with complete small bowel 
obstruction, and development of strangulation is less likely.
A particularly dangerous form of bowel obstruction 
is closed-loop obstruction in which a segment of intestine is 
obstructed both proximally and distally (e.g., with volvulus). In 
such cases, the accumulating gas and fluid cannot escape either 
proximally or distally from the obstructed segment, leading to 
a rapid rise in luminal pressure and a rapid progression to 
­strangulation.
Clinical Presentation
The symptoms of small bowel obstruction are colicky abdomi-
nal pain, nausea, vomiting, and obstipation. Vomiting is a more 
prominent symptom with proximal obstructions than distal. 
The character of vomitus is important because with bacterial 
overgrowth, the vomitus is more feculent, suggesting a more 
established obstruction. Continued passage of flatus and/or stool 
beyond 6 to 12 hours after onset of symptoms is characteristic 
of partial rather than complete obstruction. The signs of small 
bowel obstruction include abdominal distention, which is most 
pronounced if the site of obstruction is in the distal ileum and 
may be absent if the site of obstruction is in the proximal small 
intestine. Bowel sounds may be hyperactive initially, but in 
late stages of bowel obstruction, minimal bowel sounds may be 
heard. Laboratory findings reflect intravascular volume deple-
tion and consist of hemoconcentration and electrolyte abnor-
malities. Mild leukocytosis is common.
Features of strangulated obstruction include abdominal 
pain often disproportionate to the degree of abdominal findings, 
suggestive of intestinal ischemia. Patients often have tachycar-
dia, localized abdominal tenderness, fever, marked leukocyto-
sis, and acidosis. Any of these findings should alert the clinician 
to the possibility of strangulation and need for early surgical 
intervention.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic evaluation should focus on the following goals: 
(a) distinguish mechanical obstruction from ileus, (b) determine 
the etiology of the obstruction, (c) discriminate partial from 
complete obstruction, and (d) discriminate simple from stran-
gulating obstruction.
Important elements to obtain on history include prior 
abdominal operations (suggesting the presence of adhesions) 
and the presence of abdominal disorders (e.g., intra-abdominal 
cancer or inflammatory bowel disease) that may provide 
insights into the etiology of obstruction. Upon examination, a 
meticulous search for hernias (particularly in the inguinal and 
femoral regions) should be conducted.
The diagnosis of small bowel obstruction is usually con-
firmed with radiographic examination. The abdominal series 
consists of (a) a radiograph of the abdomen with the patient 
in a supine position, (b) a radiograph of the abdomen with the 
patient in an upright position, and (c) a radiograph of the chest 
with the patient in an upright position. The finding most specific 
for small bowel obstruction is the triad of dilated small bowel 
loops (>3 cm in diameter), air-fluid levels seen on upright films, 
and a paucity of air in the colon. The sensitivity of abdominal 
radiographs in the detection of small bowel obstruction ranges 
70% to 80%.15 Specificity is low, because ileus and colonic 
obstruction can be associated with findings that mimic those 
observed with small bowel obstruction. False-negative findings 
on radiographs can result when the site of obstruction is located 
in the proximal small bowel and when the bowel lumen is filled 
with fluid but no gas, thereby preventing visualization of air-
fluid levels or bowel distention. The latter situation is associ-
ated with closed-loop obstruction. Despite these limitations, 
abdominal radiographs remain an important study in patients 
with suspected small bowel obstruction because of their wide-
spread availability and low cost (Fig. 28-12).
Computed tomography (CT) scanning is 80% to 90% sen-
sitive and 70% to 90% specific in the detection of small bowel 
obstruction.15 The findings of small bowel obstruction include 
a discrete transition zone with dilation of bowel proximally, 
decompression of bowel distally, intraluminal contrast that does 
not pass beyond the transition zone, and a colon containing lit-
tle gas or fluid (Figs. 28-13 and 28-14). CT scanning may also 
provide evidence for the presence of closed-loop obstruction 
and strangulation. Closed-loop obstruction is suggested by the 
presence of a U-shaped or C-shaped dilated bowel loop associ-
ated with a radial distribution of mesenteric vessels converging 
toward a torsion point. Strangulation is suggested by thicken-
ing of the bowel wall, pneumatosis intestinalis (air in the bowel 
wall), portal venous gas, mesenteric haziness, and poor uptake 
of intravenous contrast into the wall of the affected bowel 
(Fig. 28-15). CT scanning also offers a global evaluation of the 
abdomen and may therefore reveal the etiology of obstruction. 
This feature is important in the acute setting when intestinal 
obstruction represents only one of many diagnoses in patients 
presenting with acute abdominal conditions.
1148
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The CT scan is usually performed after administration of 
oral water-soluble contrast or diluted barium. The water-soluble 
contrast has been shown to have prognostic and therapeu-
tic value too. Several studies and a subsequent meta-analysis 
have shown that appearance of the contrast in the colon within 
24 hours is predictive of nonsurgical resolution of bowel 
obstruction.16 Although use of oral contrast did not alter the rate 
of surgical intervention, it did reduce the overall length of hos-
pital stay in those presenting with small bowel obstruction.
A limitation of CT scanning is its low sensitivity (<50%) 
in the detection of low-grade or partial small bowel obstruction. 
A subtle transition zone may be difficult to identify in the axial 
images obtained during CT scanning. In such cases, ­contrast 
Figure 28-12.  Small bowel obstruction. Plain radiographs (A) supine, which show dilated loops of small bowel in the right upper quadrant, 
and (B) erect, which confirm the presence of air-fluid level in the loops of small bowel as well as the stomach, consistent with small bowel 
obstruction.
Figure 28-13.  Small bowel obstruction. A computed tomography 
scan of a patient presenting with signs and symptoms of bowel 
obstruction. Image shows grossly dilated loops of small bowel, with 
decompressed terminal ileum (I) and ascending colon (C), suggest-
ing a complete distal small bowel obstruction. At laparotomy, adhe-
sive bands from a previous surgery were identified and divided.
Figure 28-14.  Chronic partial small bowel obstruction. This 
patient presented with a several-month history of chronic abdomi-
nal pain and intermittent vomiting. The coronal computed tomogra-
phy image shows grossly dilated loops of proximal small bowel on 
the left side (wide arrow), with decompressed loops of small bowel 
on the right side (narrow arrow). The dilated segment shows evi-
dence of feculization of bowel contents, consistent with the chronic 
nature of the obstruction. Patient’s vomitus had characteristic fecu-
lent smell and quality. At exploratory laparotomy, adhesive band 
were identified and divided.
examinations of the small bowel, either small bowel series 
(small bowel follow-through) or enteroclysis, can be help-
ful. For standard small bowel series, contrast is swallowed or 
instilled into the stomach through a nasogastric tube. Abdomi-
nal radiographs are then taken serially as the contrast travels 
distally in the intestine. Although barium can be used, water-
soluble contrast agents, such as Gastrografin, should be used if 
the possibility of intestinal perforation exists. These examina-
tions are more labor-intensive and less rapidly performed than 
1149
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
CT ­scanning but may offer greater sensitivity in the detection 
of luminal and mural etiologies of obstruction, such as primary 
intestinal tumors. For enteroclysis, 200 to 250 mL of barium 
followed by 1 to 2 L of a solution of methylcellulose in water 
are instilled into the proximal jejunum via a long nasoenteric 
catheter. The double-contrast technique used in enteroclysis 
permits a better assessment of mucosal surface and detection of 
relatively small lesions, even through overlapping small bowel 
loops. Enteroclysis is rarely performed in the acute setting but 
offers greater sensitivity than small bowel series in the detec-
tion of lesions that may be causing partial small bowel obstruc-
tion. Recently, CT enteroclysis has been used and reported to be 
superior to plain x-ray small bowel contrast studies.
Therapy
Small bowel obstruction is usually associated with a marked 
depletion of intravascular volume due to decreased oral intake, 
vomiting, and sequestration of fluid in bowel lumen and wall. 
Therefore, fluid resuscitation is integral to treatment. Isotonic 
fluid should be given intravenously, and an indwelling bladder 
catheter may be placed to monitor urine output. Central venous 
or pulmonary artery catheter monitoring may be necessary to 
assist with fluid management in patients with underlying cardiac 
disease and severe dehydration. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are 
given by some because of concerns that bacterial translocation 
may occur in the setting of small bowel obstruction; however, 
there are no data to support this approach.
The stomach should be continuously evacuated of air and 
fluid using a nasogastric (NG) tube. Effective gastric decom-
pression decreases nausea, distention, and the risk of vomiting 
and aspiration. Longer nasoenteric tubes, with tips placed into 
the jejunum or ileum, were favored in the past but are rarely 
used today, as they are associated with higher complication 
rates than NG tubes, with no proven greater efficacy in several 
studies.
The standard therapy for complete small bowel obstruction 
has generally been expeditious surgery, with the dictum that “the 
sun should never rise and set on a complete bowel obstruction.” 
Figure 28-15.  Intestinal pneumatosis. This computed tomography 
scan shows intestinal pneumatosis (arrow). The cause of this radio-
logic finding was intestinal ischemia. Patient was taken emergently 
to the operating room and underwent resection of an infarcted seg-
ment of small bowel.
Recently, however, some have advocated nonoperative 
approaches in management of these patients, provided closed-
loop obstruction is ruled out and there is no evidence of intes-
tinal ischemia. Such patients need to be observed closely and 
undergo serial exams. The rationale for those favoring early 
surgical intervention is to minimize the risk for bowel strangu-
lation, which is associated with an increased risk for morbidity 
and mortality. Clinical signs and currently available laboratory 
tests and imaging studies do not reliably permit the distinction 
between patients with simple obstruction and those with stran-
gulated obstruction prior to the onset of irreversible ischemia. 
Therefore, the goal is to operate before the onset of irreversible 
ischemia. Others note, however, that a period of observation and 
nasogastric decompression, provided no tachycardia, tender-
ness, or an increase in white cell count is noted, are appropriate 
(see Fig. 28-16 for a proposed management algorithm).
However, conservative therapy, in the form of NG decom-
pression and fluid resuscitation, is commonly recommended in 
the initial recommendation for:
1.  Partial small bowel obstruction
2.  Obstruction occurring in the early postoperative period
3.  Intestinal obstruction due to Crohn’s disease
4.  Carcinomatosis
In partial obstruction, progression to strangulation is 
unlikely to occur, and an attempt at nonoperative resolution is 
warranted. Nonoperative management has been documented to 
be successful in 65% to 81% of patients with partial small bowel 
obstruction. Of those successfully treated nonoperatively, only 
5% to 15% have been reported to have symptoms that were 
not substantially improved within 48 hours after initiation of 
therapy.17 Therefore, most patients with partial small bowel 
obstruction whose symptoms do not improve within 48 hours 
after initiation of nonoperative therapy should undergo surgery. 
In a recent study, using the National Inpatient Sample, this 
principle was further highlighted. The authors concluded that 
a 2-day limit of watchful waiting before surgery is not associ-
ated with an increase in mortality or postoperative morbidity, 
although inpatient costs were higher.18
Patients undergoing nonoperative therapy should be 
closely monitored for signs suggestive of peritonitis, the devel-
opment of which would mandate urgent surgery. As stated 
before, the administration of hypertonic water-soluble contrast 
agents, such as Gastrografin used in upper gastrointestinal (GI) 
and small bowel follow-through examinations, causes a shift of 
fluid into the intestinal lumen, thereby increasing the pressure 
gradient across the site of obstruction. This effect may accel-
erate resolution of partial small bowel obstruction; however, 
there is less evidence that administration of water-soluble con-
trast agents increases the probability that an episode of bowel 
obstruction will be successfully managed nonoperatively.16
Obstruction presenting in the early postoperative period 
has been reported to occur in 0.7% patients undergoing laparot-
omy.19 Patients undergoing pelvic surgery, especially colorectal 
procedures, have the greatest risk for developing early postop-
erative small bowel obstruction. The presence of obstruction 
should be considered if symptoms of intestinal obstruction 
occur after the initial return of bowel function or if bowel func-
tion fails to return within the expected 3 to 5 days after abdomi-
nal surgery. Plain radiographs may demonstrate dilated loops of 
small intestine with air-fluid levels but are interpreted as normal 
1150
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
or nonspecific in up to a third of patients with early postopera-
tive obstruction. CT scanning or a small bowel series is often 
required to make the diagnosis. Obstruction that occurs in the 
early postoperative period is usually partial and only rarely is 
associated with strangulation. Therefore, a period of extended 
nonoperative therapy (2–3 weeks) consisting of bowel rest, 
hydration, and total parental nutrition (TPN) administration is 
usually warranted. However, if complete obstruction is demon-
strated or if signs suggestive of peritonitis are detected, expedi-
tious reoperation should be undertaken without delay.
Crohn’s disease as a cause of small bowel obstruction is 
discussed in more detail later in the Crohn’s Disease section.
Twenty-five to thirty-three percent of patients with a his-
tory of cancer who present with small bowel obstruction have 
adhesions as the etiology of their obstruction and therefore should 
not be denied appropriate therapy.20 Even in cases in which the 
obstruction is related to recurrent malignancy, palliative resection 
or bypass can be performed. Patients with obvious carcinomatosis 
pose a difficult challenge, given their limited prognosis. Manage-
ment must be tailored to an individual patient’s prognosis and 
desires, and relief of the obstruction may be best achieved by a 
bypass procedure, avoiding a potentially difficult bowel resection.
The operative procedure performed for small bowel 
obstruction varies according to the etiology of the obstruc-
tion. For example, adhesions are lysed, tumors are resected, 
and hernias are reduced and repaired. Regardless of the etiol-
ogy, the affected intestine should be examined, and nonviable 
bowel resected. Criteria suggesting viability are normal color, 
peristalsis, and marginal arterial pulsations. Usually, visual 
inspection alone is adequate in judging viability. In borderline 
cases, a Doppler probe may be used to check for pulsatile flow 
to the bowel, and arterial perfusion can be verified by visual-
izing intravenously administered fluorescein dye in the bowel 
wall under ultraviolet illumination. However, neither technique 
has been found to be superior to clinical judgment. In general, 
if the patient is hemodynamically stable, short lengths of bowel 
of questionable viability should be resected and primary anas-
tomosis of the remaining intestine performed. However, if the 
viability of a large proportion of the intestine is in question, a 
concerted effort to preserve intestinal tissue should be made. In 
such situations, the bowel of uncertain viability should be left 
intact and the patient re-explored in 24 to 48 hours in a “second-
look” operation. At that time, definitive resection of nonviable 
bowel is completed.
Successful laparoscopic surgery for bowel obstruction is 
being reported with greater frequency.22,23 Those who undergo 
successful laparoscopic procedure have a quicker recovery, 
less complications, and lower costs. Since distended loops of 
bowel can interfere with adequate visualization, early cases of 
proximal small bowel obstruction that are likely due to a single 
Adhesive small bowel obstruction
Continue conservative management
Duration dependant on etiology
and surgeon choice
Operating room for exploration
Continue management
close monitoring
Operating room
for exploration
Operating room for exploration
Partial bowel obstruction
Complete bowel obstruction
No
No
No
Signs and symptoms of strangulation and intestinal ischemia?
Develop signs or symptoms
of intestinal ischemia?
NPO
IVF
NG tube
Frequent, serial abdominal exam
NPO
IVF
NG tube if needed
Serial abdominal exam
Develop signs or symptoms
of intestinal ischemia?
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Improving after 24 hours of
conservative management?
Figure 28-16.  Management algorithm of small bowel obstruction. IVF = intravenous fluid; NG = nasogastric; NPO = nothing by mouth.
1151
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
­adhesive band are best suited for this approach. Presence of 
bowel distention and multiple adhesions can cause these proce-
dures to be difficult and potentially hazardous. Conversion rate 
to open surgery is between 17% and 33%.21-23
Outcomes
Prognosis is related to the etiology of obstruction. The majority 
of patients who are treated conservatively for adhesive small 
bowel obstruction do not require future readmissions; less than 
20% of such patients will have a readmission over the subse-
quent 5 years with another episode of bowel obstruction.23
The perioperative mortality rate associated with surgery 
for nonstrangulating small bowel obstruction is less than 5%, 
with most deaths occurring in elderly patients with significant 
comorbidities. Mortality rates associated with surgery for stran-
gulating obstruction range from 8% to 25%.
Considering the frequency of small bowel obstruction and 
the varied degree of clinical severity and presentation, there is 
often no consistency as to whether the patient is admitted to the 
medical or surgical service, and further variability in whether 
and when surgery is consulted. Recent studies have shown that a 
standard hospital-wide policy can help improve care of patients 
with bowel obstruction, reducing their time to surgery and short-
ening their length of hospital stay.24
Prevention
With adhesive small bowel obstruction representing a large 
therapeutic burden, prevention of postoperative adhesions has 
become an area of great interest. Good surgical technique, 
careful handling of tissue, and minimal use and exposure of 
peritoneum to foreign bodies form the cornerstone of adhe-
sion prevention. These measures alone are often inadequate. In 
patients undergoing colorectal or pelvic surgery, hospital read-
mission rates of greater than 30% over the subsequent 10 years 
have been reported for adhesive small bowel obstruction.25
Use of laparoscopic surgery, when possible, has been 
strongly promoted. A recent study using the Swedish Inpatient 
Register has shown that, compared to laparoscopy, open surgery 
is associated with a four-fold increase in risk of small bowel 
obstruction within 5 years of the index procedure even after 
accounting for other risk factors such as age, comorbidity, and 
previous abdominal surgery.26
In those undergoing open surgery, several strategies for 
adhesion prevention have been tried; however, the only therapy 
that has shown some success has been the use of hyaluronan-
based agents, such as Seprafilm. The use of this barrier has been 
clearly shown to reduce the incidence of postoperative bowel 
adhesions; however, its effect in actually reducing the incidence 
of small bowel obstruction remains less well defined.27 The use 
of these products is often left to the discretion of the surgeon and 
the clinical context. Wrapping of an intestinal anastomosis with 
the material may be associated with increased leak rates and is 
generally discouraged.28
ILEUS AND OTHER DISORDERS OF INTESTINAL 
MOTILITY
Ileus and intestinal pseudo-obstruction designate clinical syn-
dromes caused by impaired intestinal motility and are character-
ized by symptoms and signs of intestinal obstruction in the absence 
of a lesion-causing mechanical obstruction. Ileus is a major 
cause of morbidity in hospitalized patients. Postoperative ileus is 
the most frequently implicated cause of delayed discharge fol-
lowing abdominal operations; its economic impact has been 
estimated to be between $750 million and $1 billion annually in 
the United States.29
Ileus is a temporary motility disorder that is reversed with 
time as the inciting factor is corrected. In contrast, chronic intes-
tinal pseudo-obstruction comprises a spectrum of specific disor-
ders associated with irreversible intestinal dysmotility.
Pathophysiology
Numerous factors capable of impairing intestinal motility, and 
thus inciting ileus, have been described (Table 28-4). The most 
frequently encountered factors are abdominal operations, infec-
tion and inflammation, electrolyte abnormalities, and drugs.
Following most abdominal operations or injuries, the 
motility of the GI tract is transiently impaired. Among the pro-
posed mechanisms responsible for this dysmotility are surgi-
cal stress-induced sympathetic reflexes, inflammatory response 
mediator release, and anesthetic/analgesic side effects, each 
of which can inhibit intestinal motility.30 The return of normal 
motility generally follows a characteristic temporal sequence, 
with small-intestinal motility returning to normal within the 
first 24 hours after laparotomy and gastric and colonic motil-
ity returning to normal by 48 hours and 3 to 5 days, respec-
tively. Because small bowel motility is returned before colonic 
and gastric motility, listening for bowel sounds is not a reliable 
indicator that ileus has fully resolved. Functional evidence of 
coordinated GI motility in the form of passing flatus or a bowel 
movement is a more useful indicator. Resolution of ileus may be 
delayed in the presence of other factors capable of inciting ileus 
such as the presence of intra-abdominal abscesses or electrolyte 
abnormalities.
Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction can be caused by 
a large number of specific abnormalities affecting intestinal 
Table 28-4
Ileus: common etiologies
Abdominal surgery
Infection
  Sepsis
  Intra-abdominal abscess
  Peritonitis
  Pneumonia
Electrolyte abnormalities
  Hypokalemia
  Hypomagnesemia
  Hypermagnesemia
  Hyponatremia
Medications
  Anticholinergics
  Opiates
  Phenothiazines
  Calcium channel blockers
  Tricyclic antidepressants
Hypothyroidism
Ureteral colic
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage
Spinal cord injury
Myocardial infarction
Mesenteric ischemia
1152
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
TABLE 28-5
Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction: etiologies
Primary Causes
  Familial types
      Familial visceral myopathies (types I, II, and III)
      Familial visceral neuropathies (types I and II)
      Childhood visceral myopathies (types I and II)
  Sporadic types
      Visceral myopathies
      Visceral neuropathies
Secondary Causes
  Smooth muscle disorders
      Collagen vascular diseases (e.g., scleroderma)
      Muscular dystrophies (e.g., myotonic dystrophy)
      Amyloidosis
  Neurologic disorders
      Chagas disease, Parkinson’s disease, spinal cord 
injury
  Endocrine disorders
      Diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism
  Miscellaneous disorders
      Radiation enteritis
  Pharmacologic causes
      E.g., phenothiazines and tricyclic antidepressants
  Viral infections
smooth muscle, the myenteric plexus, or the extraintestinal 
nervous system (Table 28-5). Visceral myopathies constitute 
a group of diseases characterized by degeneration and fibro-
sis of the intestinal muscularis propria. Visceral neuropathies 
encompass a variety of degenerative disorders of the myenteric 
and submucosal plexuses. Both sporadic and familial forms of 
visceral myopathies and neuropathies exist. Systemic disorders 
involving the smooth muscle, such as progressive systemic 
sclerosis and progressive muscular dystrophy, and neurologic 
diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease, can also be complicated 
by chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. In addition, viral 
infections, such as those associated with cytomegalovirus and 
Epstein-Barr virus, can cause intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Clinical Presentation
The clinical presentation of ileus resembles that of small bowel 
obstruction. Inability to tolerate liquids and solids by mouth, 
nausea, and lack of flatus or bowel movements are the most com-
mon symptoms. Vomiting and abdominal distension may occur. 
Bowel sounds are characteristically diminished or absent, in con-
trast to the hyperactive bowel sounds that usually accompany 
mechanical small bowel obstruction. The clinical manifestations 
of chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction include variable degrees 
of nausea and vomiting and abdominal pain and distention.
Diagnosis
Routine postoperative ileus should be expected and requires 
no diagnostic evaluation. If ileus persists beyond 3 to 5 days 
postoperatively or occurs in the absence of abdominal surgery, 
diagnostic evaluation to detect specific underlying factors capa-
ble of inciting ileus and to rule out the presence of mechanical 
obstruction is warranted.
Patient medication lists should be reviewed for the pres-
ence of drugs, especially opiates, known to be associated with 
impaired intestinal motility. Measurement of serum electrolytes 
may demonstrate electrolyte abnormalities commonly associ-
ated with ileus. Abdominal radiographs are often obtained, but 
the distinction between ileus and mechanical obstruction may be 
difficult based on this test alone. In the postoperative setting, CT 
scanning is the test of choice because it can demonstrate the pres-
ence of an intra-abdominal abscess or other evidence of peritoneal 
sepsis that may be causing ileus and can exclude the presence 
of complete mechanical obstruction. Distinction of postoperative 
ileus from early postoperative obstruction can be difficult but is 
helpful in developing the appropriate management plan.
The diagnosis of chronic pseudo-obstruction is suggested 
by clinical features and confirmed by radiographic and mano-
metric studies. Diagnostic laparotomy or laparoscopy with 
full-thickness biopsy of the small intestine may be required to 
establish the specific underlying cause.
Therapy
The management of ileus consists of limiting oral intake and 
correcting the underlying inciting factor. If vomiting or abdom-
inal distention is prominent, the stomach should be decom-
pressed using a nasogastric tube. Fluid and electrolytes should 
be administered intravenously until ileus resolves. If the dura-
tion of ileus is prolonged, TPN may be required.
Given the frequency of postoperative ileus and its financial 
impact, a large number of investigations have been conducted to 
define strategies to reduce its duration. Although often recom-
mended, the use of early ambulation and routine nasogastric 
intubation has not been demonstrated to be associated with ear-
lier resolution of postoperative ileus. There is some evidence that 
early postoperative feeding protocols and are generally well toler-
ated, reduce postoperative ileus, and can result in a shorter hos-
pital stay.31 The administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs such as ketorolac and concomitant reductions in opioid 
dosing have been shown to reduce the duration of ileus in most 
studies. Similarly, the use of perioperative thoracic epidural 
anesthesia/analgesia with regimens containing local anesthetics 
combined with limitation or elimination of systemically admin-
istered opioids has been shown to reduce duration of postop-
erative ileus, although they have not reduced the overall length 
of hospital stay.32 Interestingly, recent data have suggested that 
limiting intra- and postoperative fluid administration can also 
result in reduction of postoperative ileus and shortened hospital 
stay.33 Table 28-6 summarizes some of the measures used to 
minimize postoperative ileus.
Most other pharmacologic agents, including prokinetic 
agents, are associated with efficacy-toxicity profiles that are 
Table 28-6
Measures to reduce postoperative ileus
Intraoperative measures
    Minimize handling of the bowel
    Laparoscopic approach, if possible
    Avoid excessive intraoperative fluid administration
Postoperative measures
    Early enteral feeding
    Epidural anesthesia, if indicated
    Avoid excessive intravenous fluid administration
    Correct electrolyte abnormalities
    Consider mu-opioid antagonists
1153
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
too unfavorable to warrant routine use. Recently, administra-
tion of alvimopan, a novel peripherally active mu-opioid recep-
tor antagonist with limited oral absorption, has been shown to 
reduce duration of postoperative ileus, hospital stay, and rate 
of readmissions in several prospective, randomized, placebo-
controlled trials and a subsequent meta-analysis.34 However, 
any cost savings associated with the use of this drug outside of 
a clinical trial have been debated.35
Surgical interest in minimizing postoperative ileus has 
led to exploration of other potential avenues. Experiments in 
rodents have shown reduced postoperative ileus with enteral 
administration of lipid-rich nutrition, which is believed to work 
through a CCK-dependent vagovagal reflex.36
Therapy of patients with chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction focuses on palliation of symptoms as well as fluid, 
electrolyte, and nutritional management. Surgery should be 
avoided if at all possible. No standard therapies are curative or 
delay the natural history of any of the specific disorders caus-
ing intestinal pseudo-obstruction. Prokinetic agents, such as 
metoclopramide and erythromycin, are associated with poor 
efficacy. Cisapride has been associated with palliation of symp-
toms; however, because of cardiac toxicity and reported deaths, 
this agent is restricted to compassionate use in the United States.
Patients with refractory disease may require strict limita-
tion of oral intake and long-term TPN administration. Despite 
these measures, some patients will continue to have severe 
abdominal pain or such copious intestinal secretions that 
vomiting and fluid and electrolyte losses remain substantial. 
These patients may require a decompressive gastrostomy or 
an extended small bowel resection to remove abnormal intes-
tine. Small-intestinal transplantation has been applied in these 
patients with increasing frequency; the ultimate role of this 
modality remains to be defined.
CROHN’S DISEASE
Crohn’s disease is a chronic, idiopathic transmural inflamma-
tory disease with a propensity to affect the distal ileum, although 
any part of the alimentary tract can be involved. Estimates of 
the incidence of Crohn’s disease in the United States have 
ranged from 3.6 to 8.8 per 100,000, with recent studies sug-
gesting a prevalence of about 200 cases per 100,000.37 A dra-
matic increase in incidence in the United States was observed 
to occur from the mid-1950s though the early 1970s. Incidence 
rates have been stable since the 1980s. Substantial regional 
variations in incidence have been observed, with the highest 
incidences reported to exist in northern latitudes. The incidence 
of Crohn’s disease varies among ethnic groups within the same 
geographic region. For example, members of Eastern European 
Ashkenazi Jewish population are at two- to four-fold higher risk 
of developing Crohn’s disease than members of other popula-
tions living in the same location. In countries such as China, 
the prevalence of Crohn’s disease is estimated at 1.38 cases per 
100,000, substantially below that seen in the West, but the rates 
have been on a rapid increase recently.38
Most studies suggest that Crohn’s disease is slightly more 
prevalent in females than in males. The mean age at which 
patients are diagnosed with Crohn’s disease falls in the third 
decade of life years, with a second smaller peak in the sixth 
decade of life, giving it a bimodal distribution. However, the 
age at diagnosis can range from early childhood through the 
entire lifespan.
Both genetic and environmental factors appear to influ-
ence the risk for developing Crohn’s disease. The relative risk 
among first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn’s disease 
is 14 to 15 times higher than that of the general population. 
Approximately one in five patients with Crohn’s disease will 
report having at least one affected relative. The concordance 
rate among monozygotic twins is as high as 67%; however, 
Crohn’s disease is not associated with simple Mendelian inheri-
tance patterns. Although there is a tendency within families for 
either ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease to be present exclu-
sively, mixed kindreds also occur, suggesting the presence of 
some shared genetic traits as a basis for both diseases.
Higher socioeconomic status is associated with an 
increased risk of Crohn’s disease. Most studies have found 
breastfeeding to be protective against the development of 
Crohn’s disease. Crohn’s disease is more prevalent among 
smokers. Furthermore, smoking is associated with the increased 
risk for both the need for surgery and the risk of relapse after 
surgery for Crohn’s disease.
Pathophysiology
Crohn’s disease is characterized by sustained inflammation. 
Whether this inflammation represents an appropriate response 
to a yet unrecognized pathogen or an inappropriate response to 
a normally innocuous stimulus is unknown. Various hypotheses 
on the roles of environmental and genetic factors in the patho-
genesis of Crohn’s disease have been proposed. Many infec-
tious agents have been suggested to be the causative organism 
of Crohn’s disease. Candidate organisms have included chla-
mydia, Listeria monocytogenes, Pseudomonas species, reovirus, 
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis, and many others. There is no 
conclusive evidence that any of these organisms is the causative 
agent. Studies using animal models suggest that in a genetically 
susceptible host, nonpathogenic, commensal enteric flora are 
sufficient to induce a chronic inflammatory response resembling 
that associated with Crohn’s disease. In these models, the sus-
tained intestinal inflammation is the result of either abnormal 
epithelial barrier function or immune dysregulation. Poor bar-
rier function is hypothesized to permit inappropriate exposure 
of lamina propria lymphocytes to antigenic stimuli derived from 
the intestinal lumen. In addition, a variety of defects in immune 
regulatory mechanisms (e.g., overresponsiveness of mucosal 
T cells to enteric flora-derived antigens) can lead to defective 
immune tolerance and sustained inflammation.
Specific genetic defects associated with Crohn’s disease 
in human patients are beginning to be defined. For example, 
the presence of a locus on chromosome 16 (the so-called IBD1 
locus) has been linked to Crohn’s disease. The IBD1 locus has 
been identified as the NOD2 gene. Persons with allelic variants 
on both chromosomes have a 40-fold relative risk of Crohn’s 
disease compared to those without variant NOD2 genes. The 
relevance of this gene to the pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease is 
biologically plausible, as the protein product of the NOD2 gene 
mediates the innate immune response to microbial pathogens. 
Other putative IBD loci have been identified on other chromo-
somes (IBD2 on chromosome 12q and IBD3 on chromosome 6) 
and are under investigation.
Although the pathologic hallmark of Crohn’s disease is 
focal, transmural inflammation of the intestine, a spectrum of 
pathologic lesions can be present. The earliest lesion character-
istic of Crohn’s disease is the aphthous ulcer. These superficial 
ulcers are up to 3 mm in diameter and are surrounded by a halo 
1154
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of erythema. In the small intestine, aphthous ulcers typically 
arise over lymphoid aggregates. Granulomas are highly charac-
teristic of Crohn’s disease and are reported to be present in up to 
70% of intestinal specimens obtained during surgical resection. 
These granulomas are noncaseating and can be found in both 
areas of active disease and apparently normal intestine, in any 
layer of the bowel wall, and in mesenteric lymph nodes.
As disease progresses, aphthae coalesce into larger, 
­stellate-shaped ulcers. Linear or serpiginous ulcers may form 
when multiple ulcers fuse in a direction parallel to the longitu-
dinal axis of the intestine. With transverse coalescence of ulcers, 
a cobblestoned appearance of the mucosa may arise.
With advanced disease, inflammation can be transmural. 
Serosal involvement results in adhesion of the inflamed bowel 
to other loops of bowel or other adjacent organs. Transmural 
inflammation can also result in fibrosis with stricture formation, 
intra-abdominal abscesses, fistulas, and, rarely, free perforation. 
Inflammation in Crohn’s disease can affect discontinuous por-
tions of intestine—so-called “skip lesions” that are separated by 
intervening normal-appearing intestine.
A feature of Crohn’s disease that is grossly evident and 
helpful in identifying affected segments of intestine during sur-
gery is the presence of fat wrapping, which represents encroach-
ment of mesenteric fat onto the serosal surface of the bowel 
(Fig. 28-17). This finding is virtually pathognomonic of Crohn’s 
disease. The presence of fat wrapping correlates well with the 
presence of underlying acute and chronic inflammation.
Features that allow for differentiation between Crohn’s dis-
ease of the colon and ulcerative colitis include the layers of the 
bowel wall affected (inflammation in ulcerative colitis is limited 
to the mucosa and submucosa but may involve the full thickness 
of the bowel wall in Crohn’s disease) and the longitudinal extent 
of inflammation (inflammation is continuous and characteristi-
cally affects the rectum in ulcerative colitis but may be discon-
tinuous and spare the rectum in Crohn’s disease). In the absence 
of full expression of features of advanced disease, Crohn’s colitis 
can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from ulcerative colitis. 
It is also important to remember that although ulcerative colitis 
is a disease of the colon, it can be associated with inflammatory 
changes in the distal ileum (backwash ileitis).
Figure 28-17.  Crohn’s disease. This intraoperative photograph 
demonstrates encroachment of mesenteric fat onto the serosal sur-
face of the intestine (“fat wrapping”) that is characteristic of intes-
tinal segments affected by active Crohn’s’ disease.
Clinical Presentation
The most common symptoms of Crohn’s disease are abdominal 
pain, diarrhea, and weight loss. However, the clinical features 
are highly variable among individual patients and depend on 
which segment(s) of the GI tract is (are) predominantly affected, 
the intensity of inflammation, and the presence or absence of 
specific complications. Patients with Crohn’s disease can be 
classified by their predominant clinical manifestation as hav-
ing primarily (a) fibrostenotic disease, (b) fistulizing disease, or 
(c) aggressive inflammatory disease. There is substantial 
overlap among these disease patterns in individual patients, 
­however. The onset of symptoms is insidious, and once present, 
their severity follows a waxing and waning course. Constitutional 
symptoms, particularly weight loss and fever, or growth retarda-
tion in children, may also be prominent and are occasionally the 
sole presenting features of Crohn’s disease.
The disease affects the small bowel in 80% of cases and 
the colon alone in 20%. In those with small bowel disease, 
the majority have ileocecal disease. The small bowel alone is 
affected in 15% to 30% of patients. Isolated perineal and ano-
rectal disease occurs in 5% to 10% of affected patients. Uncom-
mon sites of involvement include the esophagus, stomach, and 
duodenum.
An estimated one fourth of all patients with Crohn’s dis-
ease will have an extraintestinal manifestation of their disease. 
One fourth of those affected will have more than one manifesta-
tion. Many of these complications are common to both Crohn’s 
disease and ulcerative colitis, although as a whole, they are more 
prevalent among patients with Crohn’s disease than those with 
ulcerative colitis. The most common extraintestinal manifesta-
tions are listed in Table 28-7. The clinical severity of some of 
these manifestations, such as erythema nodosum and peripheral 
arthritis, are correlated with the severity of intestinal inflamma-
tion. The severity of other manifestations, such as pyoderma 
gangrenosum and ankylosing spondylitis, bear no apparent rela-
tionship to the severity of intestinal inflammation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is usually established with endoscopic findings 
in a patient with a compatible clinical history. The diagnosis 
should be considered in those presenting with acute or chronic 
abdominal pain, especially when localized to the right lower 
quadrant, chronic diarrhea, evidence of intestinal inflammation 
on radiography or endoscopy, the discovery of a bowel stricture 
or fistula arising from the bowel, and evidence of inflamma-
tion or granulomas on intestinal histology. Disorders associ-
ated with clinical presentations that resemble those of Crohn’s 
disease include ulcerative colitis, functional bowel disorders 
such as irritable bowel syndrome, mesenteric ischemia, colla-
gen vascular diseases, carcinoma and lymphoma, diverticular 
disease, and infectious enteritides. These infectious enteritides 
are most frequently diagnosed in immunocompromised patients 
but can also occur in patients with normal immune function. 
Acute ileitis caused by Campylobacter and Yersinia species 
can be difficult to distinguish from that caused by an acute 
presentation of Crohn’s disease. Typhoid enteritis caused by 
Salmonella typhosa can lead to overt intestinal bleeding and 
perforation, most often affecting the terminal ileum. The dis-
tal ileum and cecum are the most common sites of intestinal 
involvement by infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
This condition can result in intestinal inflammation, strictures, 
and fistula formation, similar to those seen in Crohn’s disease. 
1155
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause intestinal ulcers, bleeding, 
and perforation.
No single symptom, sign, or diagnostic test establishes 
the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. Instead, the diagnosis is based 
on a complete assessment of the clinical presentation with con-
firmatory findings derived from radiographic, endoscopic, and 
in most cases pathologic tests. Colonoscopy with intubation 
of terminal ileum is the main diagnostic tool and can reveal 
focal ulcerations adjacent to areas of normal-appearing mucosa 
along with polypoid mucosal changes that give a “cobblestone 
appearance.” Skip areas of involvement are typical, with seg-
ments of normal-appearing bowel interrupted by large areas 
of obvious disease; this pattern is different from the continu-
ous involvement in ulcerative colitis. Pseudopolyps, as seen in 
ulcerative colitis, are also often present. Contrast examinations 
of the small bowel and colon may reveal strictures or networks 
of ulcers and fissures. CT scanning may reveal intra-abdominal 
abscesses and is useful in acute presentations to rule out the 
presence of other intra-abdominal disorders. Esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy (EGD) is done for disease of the proximal ali-
mentary tract. Because Crohn’s disease often affects the small 
bowel, which is difficult to image, capsule endoscopy has been 
increasingly used to make this diagnosis (Fig. 28-18).39
Several antibodies have also been identified in patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease, which may have diagnostic 
value. The most commonly tested antibodies are antineutro-
phil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) and anti-Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae antibody (ASCA). ASCA +/pANCA– is associated 
with a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, while ASCA–/pANCA+ 
correlates with ulcerative colitis. Although these antibody tests 
Table 28-7
Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s disease
Dermatologic
  Erythema nodosum
  Pyoderma gangrenosum
Rheumatologic
  Peripheral arthritis
  Ankylosing spondylitis
  Sacroiliitis
Ocular
  Conjunctivitis
  Uveitis/iritis
  Episcleritis
Hepatobiliary
  Hepatic steatosis
  Cholelithiasis
  Primary sclerosing cholangitis
  Pericholangitis
Urologic
  Nephrolithiasis
  Ureteral obstruction
Miscellaneous
  Thromboembolic disease
  Vasculitis
  Osteoporosis
  Endocarditis, myocarditis, pleuropericarditis
  Interstitial lung disease
  Amyloidosis
  Pancreatitis
Figure 28-18.  Crohn’s disease. This image was captured by a 
wireless capsule endoscope as it was traveling through the small 
intestine. It demonstrates a superficial ulceration in the small 
bowel consistent with Crohn’s disease. (Used with permission from 
Dr. Anne C. Travis, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
are commercially available, their widespread use has been ham-
pered by low test sensitivities.
Because of the insidious, and often nonspecific, presenta-
tion, the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is typically made only 
after symptoms have been present for several years. However, 
in acute presentations, the diagnosis is sometimes made intraop-
eratively or during surgical evaluation. The initial manifestation 
of Crohn’s disease can consist of right lower quadrant abdomi-
nal mimicking the presentation of acute appendicitis. In patients 
with this presentation, Crohn’s disease can be discovered for the 
first time during laparotomy or laparoscopy performed for pre-
sumed appendicitis. In some patients, the initial manifestation 
of Crohn’s disease is an acute abdomen related to small bowel 
obstruction, intra-abdominal abscess, or free intestinal perfora-
tion. In other patients, perianal abscesses and fistulas requir-
ing surgical therapy may be the first manifestation of Crohn’s 
disease.
Therapy
Because no curative therapies are available for Crohn’s dis-
ease, the goal of treatment is to palliate symptoms rather than 
to achieve cure. Medical therapy is used to induce and maintain 
disease remission. Surgery is reserved for specific indications 
described later. In addition nutritional support in the form of 
aggressive enteral regimens or, if necessary, parenteral nutrition 
is used to manage the malnutrition that is common in patients 
with Crohn’s disease.
Medical Therapy.  Pharmacologic agents used to treat Crohn’s 
disease include antibiotics, aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, 
and immunomodulators. Antibiotics have an adjunctive role 
in the treatment of infectious complications associated with 
Crohn’s disease. They are also used to treat patients with 
­perianal disease, enterocutaneous fistulas, and active colonic 
disease.
1156
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Most studies have shown oral 5-aminosalicylic acid 
(5-ASA) drugs (e.g., mesalamine) to be superior to placebo in 
inducing disease remission. Their efficacy in the maintenance 
of remission is less clear. Aminosalicylates are associated with 
minimal toxicity and are available in a variety of formulations 
that allow for their delivery to specific regions of the alimentary 
tract. In Crohn’s disease, sulfasalazine, the parent compound of 
5-ASA and widely used in ulcerative colitis, has been shown to 
be less effective than 5-ASA.
Orally administered glucocorticoids are used to treat 
patients with mildly to moderately severe disease that does not 
respond to aminosalicylates. Patients with severe active disease 
usually require intravenous administration of glucocorticoids. 
Although glucocorticoids are effective in inducing remission, 
they are ineffective in preventing relapse, and their adverse 
effect profile makes long-term use hazardous. Therefore, they 
should be tapered once remission is achieved. Some patients 
are unable to undergo glucocorticoid tapering without suffer-
ing recurrence of symptoms. Such patients are said to have 
steroid dependence. In these patients, along with those who do 
not respond to steroids at all (steroid resistant), use of immune 
modulators should be considered.
The thiopurine antimetabolites azathioprine and its active 
metabolite, 6-mercaptopurine, have demonstrated efficacy in 
inducing remission, in maintaining remission, and in allow-
ing for glucocorticoid tapering in glucocorticoid-dependent 
patients. A response to these medications is usually observed in 
3 to 6 months. There is also some evidence that they decrease 
the risk of relapse after intestinal resection for Crohn’s disease. 
These agents are relatively safe but can induce bone marrow 
suppression and promote infectious complications. For patients 
who do not respond to the thiopurines, methotrexate is an alter-
native that is usually given intramuscularly before switching to 
an oral form after achieving symptomatic control. There is little 
role for cyclosporine in Crohn’s disease; its efficacy/toxicity 
profile in this disease is poor.
The successful introduction of infliximab (Remicade), an 
anti–tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) antibody, heralded the 
era of biologic therapies for inflammatory bowel disease. Inf-
liximab is a chimeric monoclonal anti-TNFα antibody that has 
been shown to have efficacy in inducing remission and in pro-
moting closure of enterocutaneous fistulae. It is generally used 
for patients resistant to standard therapy, in order to help taper 
steroid dosage. Infliximab is generally well tolerated but should 
not be used in patients with ongoing septic processes, such as 
undrained intra-abdominal abscesses. Whereas infliximab is a 
mouse-human chimeric antibody, the newer drugs in this group 
include adalimumab (Humira), which is a fully human antibody. 
Antibodies against other targets in this inflammatory pathway 
have also been developed and are in various stages of clini-
cal evaluation. Recent studies have shown that these biologic 
therapies can be used safely after surgery for Crohn’s disease. 
In a randomized study of 24 patients, those receiving infliximab 
starting 4 weeks after ileal resection had improved endoscopic 
and histologic scores at 1-year follow-up compared to those 
receiving placebo.40
For patients with perianal disease, antibiotic therapy with 
metronidazole or ciprofloxacin is the primary step. Two to 
4 weeks of therapy is needed before improvements are seen, and 
often long-term therapy is required to prevent relapse. In cases 
of relapse, azathioprine can be considered. In patients with fis-
tulas, infliximab and azathioprine are drugs of choice.
Table 28-8
Indications for surgical intervention in Crohn’s disease
Acute onset of severe disease:
  Crohn’s colitis +/- toxic megacolon (rare)
Failure of medical therapy:
  Persistent symptoms despite long-term steroid use
  Recurrence of symptoms when high-dose steroids are  
  tapered
  Drug-induced complications (Cushing’s disease,  
  hypertension)
Development of disease complications:
  Obstruction
  Perforation
  Complicated fistulas
  Hemorrhage
  Malignancy risk
Surgical Therapy.  Fifty to seventy percent of patients with 
Crohn’s disease will ultimately require at least one surgical 
intervention for their disease.41,42 Surgery is generally reserved 
for patients whose disease is unresponsive to aggressive medical 
therapy or who develop complications of their disease (Table 28-8). 
Failure of medical management may be the indication for sur-
gery if symptoms persist despite aggressive therapy for several 
months or if symptoms recur whenever aggressive therapy is 
tapered. Surgery should be considered if medication-induced 
complications arise, specifically corticosteroid-related compli-
cations, such as cushingoid features, cataracts, glaucoma, sys-
temic hypertension, compression fractures, or aseptic necrosis 
of the femoral head. Growth retardation constitutes an indica-
tion for surgery in 30% of children with Crohn’s disease.
One of the most common indications for surgical inter-
vention is intestinal obstruction. Abscesses and fistulas are fre-
quently encountered during operations performed for intestinal 
obstruction in these patients, but are rarely the only indication 
for surgery. Most abscesses are amenable to percutaneous drain-
age, and fistulas, unless associated with symptoms or metabolic 
derangements, do not require surgical intervention. Less com-
mon complications that require surgical intervention are acute 
GI hemorrhage, perforations, and development of cancer.
Although most commonly, surgery for Crohn’s disease is 
planned, an uncommon, but not rare, scenario is the intraop-
erative discovery of inflammation limited to the terminal ileum 
during operations performed for presumed appendicitis. This 
scenario can result from an acute presentation of Crohn’s dis-
ease or from acute ileitis caused by bacteria such as Yersinia or 
Campylobacter. Both conditions should be treated medically; 
ileal resection is not generally indicated. However, the appen-
dix, even if normal appearing, should be removed (unless the 
cecum is inflamed, increasing the potential morbidity of this 
procedure) in order to eliminate appendicitis from the differen-
tial diagnosis of abdominal pain in these patients, particularly 
those with Crohn’s disease who may be destined to have recur-
ring symptoms.
When the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is known and 
surgery planned, thorough examination of the entire intestine 
should be performed. The presence of active disease is sug-
gested by thickening of the bowel wall, narrowing of the lumen, 
serosal inflammation and coverage by creeping fat, and thicken-
ing of the mesentery. Skip lesions are present in approximately 
1157
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
20% of cases and should be sought. The length of uninvolved 
small intestine should be noted.
Segmental intestinal resection of grossly evident disease 
followed by primary anastomosis is the usual procedure of 
choice. Microscopic evidence of Crohn’s disease at the resec-
tion margins does not compromise a safe anastomosis, and 
frozen-section analysis of resection margins is unnecessary. In 
a randomized prospective trial, the effects of achieving 2-cm 
resection margins beyond grossly evident disease were com-
pared with achieving 12-cm resection margins.43 There were no 
evident differences with respect to clinical recurrence rates or 
anastomotic recurrences. Recurrence rates were similar whether 
margins were histologically free of or involved with Crohn’s 
disease. An area of controversy in surgical management of 
Crohn’s disease has been the ideal anastomotic technique for 
the bowel after intestinal resection. This issue was addressed 
in a randomized study of 139 patients undergoing an ileo-
colic resection for Crohn’s disease, with a mean follow-up of 
11.9 months. There were no differences in endoscopic or symp-
tomatic disease recurrence between the groups reconstructed 
using end-to-end sutured (2-0 PDS) anastomosis vs. those with 
side-to-side staples anastomosis.44
An alternative to segmental resection for obstructing 
lesions is stricturoplasty (Fig. 28-19). This technique allows 
for preservation of intestinal surface area and is especially well 
suited to patients with extensive disease and fibrotic strictures 
who may have undergone previous resection and are at risk for 
developing short bowel syndrome. In this technique, the bowel 
Figure 28-19.  Stricturoplasty. The wall of the strictured bowel is 
incised longitudinally. Reconstruction is performed by closing the 
defect transversely in a manner similar to the Heinecke-Mickulicz 
pyloroplasty for short strictures (A), or the Finney pyloroplasty for 
longer strictures (B).
A
B
is opened longitudinally to expose the lumen. Any intralumi-
nal ulcerations should be biopsied to rule out the presence of 
neoplasia. Depending on the length of the stricture, the recon-
struction can be fashioned in a manner similar to the Heinecke-
Mickulicz pyloroplasty (for strictures <12 cm in length) or the 
Finney pyloroplasty (for longer strictures as much as 25 cm in 
length). For longer strictures, variations on the standard stric-
turoplasty, namely the side-to-side isoperistaltic enteroenteros-
tomy, have been advocated and used for strictures with mean 
lengths of 50 cm.45 Stricturoplasty sites should be marked with 
metallic clips to facilitate their identification on radiographs 
and during subsequent operations. Stricturoplasty is associated 
with recurrence rates that are no different from those associ-
ated with segmental resection. Because the affected bowel is 
left in situ rather than resected, there is the potential for cancer 
developing at the stricturoplasty site. However, as data on this 
complication are limited to anecdotes, this risk remains a theo-
retical one. Stricturoplasty is contraindicated in patients with 
intra-abdominal abscesses or intestinal fistulas. The presence 
of a solitary stricture relatively close to a segment for which 
resection is planned is a relative contraindication. In general, 
stricturoplasty is performed in cases where single or multiple 
strictures are identified in diffusely involved segments of bowel 
or where previous resections have been performed and mainte-
nance of intestinal length is of great importance.
Intestinal bypass procedures are sometimes required in the 
presence of intramesenteric abscesses or if the diseased bowel is 
coalesced in the form of a dense inflammatory mass, making its 
mobilization unsafe. Bypass procedures (gastrojejunostomy) are 
also used in the presence of duodenal strictures, for which stric-
turoplasty and segmental resection can be technically difficult.
Since the 1990s, laparoscopic surgical techniques have 
been applied to patients with Crohn’s disease. The inflammatory 
changes associated with Crohn’s disease such as thickened and 
foreshortened mesentery, obliterated tissue planes, and friable 
tissues with engorged vasculature can make the laparoscopic 
approach challenging. Randomized studies and a meta-analysis 
have confirmed that laparoscopic surgery for Crohn’s disease is 
associated with less postoperative pain, shorter duration of ileus, 
and a shorter hospital stay. The rates of disease recurrence were 
similar between the two groups.46
Outcomes
Overall complication rates following surgery for Crohn’s dis-
ease range from 15% to 30%. Wound infections, postoperative 
intra-abdominal abscesses, and anastomotic leaks account for 
most of these complications.
Most patients whose disease is resected eventually develop 
recurrence. If recurrence is defined endoscopically, 70% recur 
within 1 year of a bowel resection and 85% by 3 years.47 Clini-
cal recurrence, defined as the return of symptoms confirmed 
as being due to Crohn’s disease, affects 60% of patients by 
5 years and 94% by 15 years after intestinal resection. Reopera-
tion becomes necessary in approximately one third of patients 
by 5 years after the initial operation, with a median time to reop-
eration of 7 to 10 years.48
INTESTINAL FISTULAS
A fistula is defined as an abnormal communication between two 
epithelialized surfaces. The communication occurs between two 
parts of the GI tract or adjacent organs in an internal fistula  
(e.g., enterocolonic fistula or colovesicular fistula). An external 
1158
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
fistula (e.g., enterocutaneous fistula or rectovaginal fistula) 
involves the skin or another external surface epithelium. Entero-
cutaneous fistulas that drain less than 200 mL of fluid per day 
are known as low-output fistulas, whereas those that drain more 
than 500 mL of fluid per day are known as high-output fistulas.
Over 80% of enterocutaneous fistulas represent iatrogenic 
complications that occur as the result of enterotomies or intes-
tinal anastomotic dehiscences. Fistulas that arise spontaneously 
without antecedent iatrogenic injury are usually manifestations 
of progression of underlying Crohn’s disease or cancer.
Pathophysiology
The manifestations of fistulas depend on which structures are 
involved. Low-resistance enteroenteric fistulas, which allow 
luminal contents to bypass a significant proportion of the small 
intestine, may result in clinically significant malabsorption. 
Enterovesicular fistulas often cause recurrent urinary tract infec-
tions. The drainage emanating from enterocutaneous fistulas are 
irritating to the skin and cause excoriation. The loss of enteric 
luminal contents, particularly from high-output fistulas originat-
ing from the proximal small intestine, results in dehydration, 
electrolyte abnormalities, and malnutrition.
Fistulas have the potential to close spontaneously. Factors 
inhibiting spontaneous closure, however, include malnutrition, 
sepsis, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, radiation, obstruc-
tion of the intestine distal to the origin of the fistula, foreign 
bodies, high output, short fistulous tract (<2 cm) and epitheli-
alization of the fistula tract (Table 28-9).
Clinical Presentation
Iatrogenic enterocutaneous fistulas usually become clinically 
evident between the fifth and tenth postoperative days. Fever, 
leukocytosis, prolonged ileus, abdominal tenderness, and wound 
infection are the initial signs. The diagnosis becomes obvious 
when drainage of enteric material through the abdominal wound 
or through existing drains occurs. These fistulas are often asso-
ciated with intra-abdominal abscesses.
Diagnosis
CT scanning following the administration of enteral contrast is 
the most useful initial test. Leakage of contrast material from 
the intestinal lumen can be observed. Intra-abdominal abscesses 
Table 28-9
Factors negatively impacting enteric fistula closure
Patient factors
  Poor nutrition
  Medications such as steroids
Etiologic factors
  Malignant fistula
  Fistula related to Crohn’s disease
  Fistula in radiated fields
Fistula site
  Gastric
  Duodenal
Local factors
  Persistence of local inflammation and sepsis
  Presence of a foreign body (e.g., meshes or sutures)
  Epithelialization of fistula tract
  Fistula tract <2 cm
  Distal obstruction to the fistula site
should be sought and drained percutaneously. If the anatomy 
of the fistula is not clear on CT scanning, a small bowel series 
or enteroclysis examination can be obtained to demonstrate the 
fistula’s site of origin in the bowel. This study is also useful to 
rule out the presence of intestinal obstruction distal to the site 
of origin. Occasionally, contrast administered into the intestine 
does not demonstrate the fistula tract. A fistulogram, in which 
contrast is injected under pressure through a catheter placed per-
cutaneously into the fistula tract, may offer greater sensitivity in 
localizing the fistula origin.
Therapy
The treatment of enterocutaneous fistulas should proceed 
through an orderly sequence of steps.49
1.  Stabilization. Fluid and electrolyte resuscitation is begun. 
Nutrition is provided, usually through the parenteral route 
initially. Sepsis is controlled with antibiotics and drainage of 
abscesses. The skin is protected from the fistula effluent with 
ostomy appliances or fistula drains.
2.  Investigation. The anatomy of the fistula is defined using the 
studies described earlier.
3.  Decision. The available treatment options are considered, 
and a timeline for conservative measures is determined.
4.  Definitive management. This entails the surgical procedure 
and requires appropriate preoperative planning and surgical 
experience.
5.  Rehabilitation.
The overall objective is to increase the probability of spon-
taneous closure. Nutrition and time are the key components 
of this approach. Most patients will require TPN; however, a 
trial of oral or enteral nutrition should be attempted in patients 
with low-output fistulas originating from the distal intestine. 
The somatostatin analogue octreotide is a useful adjunct, par-
ticularly in patients with high-output fistulas; its administration 
reduces the volume of fistula output, thereby facilitating fluid 
and electrolyte management. Further, octreotide may acceler-
ate the rate at which fistulas close; however, its administration 
has not clearly been demonstrated to increase the probability of 
spontaneous closure.
Timing of Surgical Intervention.  Most surgeons would pur-
sue 2 to 3 months of conservative therapy before considering 
surgical intervention. This approach is based on evidence that 
90% of fistulas that are going to close do so within 5 weeks and 
also that surgical intervention after this time period is associated 
with better outcomes and lower morbidity.50
If the fistula fails to resolve during this period, surgery 
may be required during which the fistula tract, together with 
the segment of intestine from which it originates, should be 
resected. Simple closure of the opening in the intestine from 
which the fistula originates is associated with high recurrence 
rates. Patients with intestinal fistulas typically have extensive 
and dense intra-abdominal adhesions. As a result, operations 
performed for nonhealing fistulas can present formidable chal-
lenges. Successful applications of alternative therapies to close 
intestinal fistulas such as the use of biologic sealants have been 
reported. The indications for their use remain to be defined.
Outcomes
Over 50% of intestinal fistulas close spontaneously. A useful 
mnemonic designates factors that inhibit spontaneous closure of 
1159
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
intestinal fistulas: “FRIEND” (Foreign body within the fistula 
tract, Radiation enteritis, Infection/Inflammation at the fistula 
origin, Epithelialization of the fistula tract, Neoplasm at the fis-
tula origin, Distal obstruction of the intestine) (Table 28-10).
In a recent 23-year old retrospective review of 153 cases of 
enterocutaneous fistulas that were treated surgically, the major-
ity of fistulas were found to originate from the small bowel and 
be iatrogenic in nature, with patients having undergone five 
or more previous abdominal surgeries. Operative repair was 
associated with a 30-day mortality of approximately 4% and a 
1-year mortality of 15%. Morbidity was over 80%. First attempt 
at surgical repair was successful in 70% of cases, with an over-
all closure rate of 84% and some patients requiring up to three 
attempts at surgical repair. The authors identified closure of 
the abdominal fascia as an important factor in reducing rates of 
refistulization and postoperative mortality.51 In another similar 
study, fistula recurrence rates of 30% were again documented 
and were independently associated with high-output fistulas and 
the type of surgical treatment: operations not involving resec-
tion of the fistula had a much higher rate of recurrence.52
SMALL BOWEL NEOPLASMS
Adenomas are the most common benign neoplasm of the small 
intestine. Other benign tumors include fibromas, lipomas, hem-
angiomas, lymphangiomas, and neurofibromas. The prevalence 
of small bowel tumors identified at autopsy is 0.2% to 0.3%, 
which is significantly higher than the rate of operation for 
small bowel tumors. This suggests that the majority of small 
bowel tumors are asymptomatic. These lesions are most fre-
quently encountered in the duodenum as incidental findings 
during esophagogastroduodenoscopic (EGD) examinations 
(Fig. 28-20). The reported prevalence of duodenal polyps, as 
detected during EGD performed for other reasons, ranges from 
0.3% to 4.6%.53
Benign neoplasms account for 30% to 50% of small bowel 
tumors and include adenomas, lipomas, hamartomas, and hem-
angiomas. Primary small bowel cancers are rare, with an esti-
mated incidence of 5300 cases per year in the United States.54 
Among small bowel cancers, adenocarcinomas comprise 35% 
to 50% of all cases, carcinoid tumors comprise 20% to 40%, 
and lymphomas comprise approximately 10% to 15%. In a ret-
rospective review of a large U.S. database (Surveillance, Epi-
demiology, and End Results) between 1992 and 2006, of a total 
of 10,945 small intestine cancers, 4315 were neuroendocrine 
in origin, 3412 were carcinomas, 2023 were lymphomas, and 
1084 were sarcomas.55 GI stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most 
common mesenchymal tumors arising in the small intestine and 
Table 28-10
Features of small-intestinal malignancies
Tumor Type
Cell of Origin
Frequencya
Predominant Site
Adenocarcinoma
Epithelial cell
35%–50%
Duodenum
Carcinoid
Enterochromaffin cell
20%–40%
Ileum
Lymphoma
Lymphocyte
10%–15%
Ileum
GIST
?Interstitial cell of Cajal
10%–15%
—
aFrequencies given as percentages of small intestinal malignancies comprised by each of the tumor types. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) display 
no regional variation in prevalence within the small intestine.
Figure 28-20.  Duodenal polyp. This polyp was incidentally 
encountered during esophagogastroduodenoscopy. It was biopsied 
and found to be an adenoma.
comprise the vast majority of tumors that were formerly clas-
sified as leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, and smooth muscle 
tumors of the intestine. The small intestine is frequently affected 
by metastases from or local invasion by cancers originating at 
other sites. Melanoma, in particular, is associated with a propen-
sity for metastasis to the small intestine.
Most patients with small-intestinal cancers are in their 
fifth or sixth decade of life. Reported risk factors for developing 
small-intestinal cancers include consumption of red meat, inges-
tion of smoked or cured foods, Crohn’s disease, celiac sprue, 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), familial 
adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
Pathophysiology
The small intestine contains over 90% of the mucosal surface 
area of the GI tract, but only 1.1% to 2.4% of all GI malig-
nancies. Proposed explanations for the low frequency of small-
intestinal neoplasms include (a) dilution of environmental 
carcinogens in the liquid chyme present in the small-intestinal 
lumen, (b) rapid transit of chyme, limiting the contact time 
between carcinogens and the intestinal mucosa, (c) a relatively 
1160
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
low concentration of bacteria in small-intestinal chyme and, 
therefore, a relatively low concentration of carcinogenic prod-
ucts of bacterial metabolism, (d) mucosal protection by secre-
tory IgA and hydrolases such as benzpyrene hydroxylase that 
may render carcinogens less active, and (e) efficient epithelial 
cellular apoptotic mechanisms that serve to eliminate clones 
harboring genetic mutations.
Recent advances have begun to clarify the molecular 
pathogenesis of small-intestinal adenocarcinomas and GISTs; 
there has been less progress with respect to the pathogenesis 
of the other small-intestinal malignancies (see Table 28-10). 
Small-intestinal adenocarcinomas are believed to arise from 
pre-existing adenomas through a sequential accumulation of 
genetic abnormalities in a model similar to that described for 
the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Adenomas are histologi-
cally classified as tubular, villous, and tubulovillous. Tubular 
adenomas have the least aggressive features. Villous adenomas 
have the most aggressive features and tend to be large, sessile, 
and located in the second portion of the duodenum. Malignant 
degeneration has been reported to be present in up to 45% of 
villous adenomas by the time of diagnosis. Patients with FAP 
have a nearly 100% cumulative lifetime risk of developing duo-
denal adenomas that have the potential to undergo malignant 
transformation. The risk of duodenal cancer in these patients 
is over 100-fold that in the general population. Indeed, duode-
nal cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death among 
patients with FAP who have undergone colectomy. Patients 
with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome develop hamartomatous polyps; 
however, these polyps can contain adenomatous foci that can 
undergo malignant transformation (Fig. 28-21).
A defining feature of GISTs is their gain-of-function 
mutation of proto-oncogene KIT, a receptor tyrosine kinase. 
Pathologic KIT signal transduction is believed to be a cen-
tral event in GIST pathogenesis. The majority of GISTs have 
Figure 28-21.  Small bowel polyp in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. 
This image was captured by a wireless capsule endoscope as it was 
traveling through the small intestine. (Used with permission from 
Dr. Anne C. Travis, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
activating mutations in the c-kit protooncogene, which cause 
KIT to become constitutively activated, presumably leading to 
persistence of cellular growth or survival signals. Because the 
interstitial cells of Cajal normally express KIT, these cells have 
been implicated as the cell of origin for GISTs. KIT expression 
is assessed by staining the tissues for CD117 antigen, which is 
part of the KIT receptor, and present in 95% of GISTs.
Clinical Presentation
Most small-intestinal neoplasms are asymptomatic until they 
become large. Partial small bowel obstruction, with associ-
ated symptoms of crampy abdominal pain and distention, nau-
sea, and vomiting, is the most common mode of presentation. 
Obstruction can be the result of either luminal narrowing by the 
tumor itself or intussusception, with the tumor serving as the 
lead point. Hemorrhage, usually indolent, is the second most 
common mode of presentation.
Physical examination may be unrevealing. Up to 25% of 
patients with small-intestinal malignancies are reported to have 
a palpable abdominal mass. Findings of intestinal obstruction 
are reported to be present in 25% of patients. Fecal occult blood 
test may be positive. Jaundice secondary to biliary obstruction 
or hepatic metastasis may be present. Cachexia, hepatomegaly, 
and ascites may be present with advanced disease.
Although the clinical presentation is usually not specific 
for tumor type, some general comments are appropriate. Adeno-
carcinomas, as well as adenomas (from which most are believed 
to arise), are most commonly found in the duodenum, except in 
patients with Crohn’s disease, in whom most are found in the 
ileum. Lesions in the periampullary location can cause obstruc-
tive jaundice or pancreatitis. Adenocarcinomas located in the 
duodenum tend to be diagnosed earlier in their progression than 
those located in the jejunum or ileum, which are rarely diagnosed 
prior to the onset of locally advanced or metastatic disease.
Carcinoid tumors of the small intestine are also usually 
diagnosed after the development of metastatic disease. These 
tumors are associated with a more aggressive behavior than 
the more common appendiceal carcinoid tumors. Approxi-
mately 25% to 50% of patients with carcinoid tumor–derived 
liver metastases will develop manifestations of the carcinoid 
syndrome. These manifestations include diarrhea, flushing, 
hypotension, tachycardia, and fibrosis of the endocardium and 
valves of the right heart. Candidate tumor-derived mediators 
of the carcinoid syndrome such as serotonin, bradykinin, and 
substance P undergo nearly complete metabolism during first 
passage through the liver. As a result, symptoms of carcinoid 
syndrome are rare in the absence of liver metastases.
Lymphoma may involve the small intestine primarily or 
as a manifestation of disseminated systemic disease. Primary 
small-intestinal lymphomas are most commonly located in the 
ileum, which contains the highest concentration of lymphoid 
tissue in the intestine. Although partial small bowel obstruction 
is the most common mode of presentation, 10% of patients with 
small-intestinal lymphoma present with bowel perforation.
Sixty to seventy percent of GISTs are located in the stom-
ach. The small intestine is the second most common site, con-
taining 25% to 35% of GISTs. There appears to be no regional 
variation in the prevalence of GISTs within the small intestine. 
GISTs have a greater propensity to be associated with overt hem-
orrhage than the other small-intestinal malignancies (Fig. 28-22).
Metastatic tumors involving the small intestine can induce 
intestinal obstruction and bleeding.
1161
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
Diagnosis
Because of the absent or nonspecific symptoms associated 
with most small-intestinal neoplasms, these lesions are rarely 
diagnosed preoperatively. Laboratory tests are nonspecific, 
with the exception of elevated serum 5-hydroxyindole acetic 
acid (5-HIAA) levels in patients with the carcinoid syndrome. 
Elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels are associated 
with small-intestinal adenocarcinomas, but only in the presence 
of liver metastases.
Contrast radiography of the small intestine may demon-
strate benign and malignant lesions. Enteroclysis is reported to 
have a sensitivity of over 90% in the detection of small bowel 
tumors and is the test of choice, particularly for tumors located 
in the distal small bowel. Upper GI with small bowel follow-
through examinations have reported sensitivities ranging from 
only 30% to 44%.55 CT scanning has low sensitivity for detect-
ing mucosal or intramural lesions but can demonstrate large 
tumors and is useful in the staging of intestinal malignancies. 
Tumors associated with significant bleeding can be localized 
with angiography or radioisotope-tagged red blood cell (RBC) 
scans.
Tumors located in the duodenum can be visualized and 
biopsied on EGD. In addition, endoscopic ultrasonography 
(EUS) can offer additional information such as the layers of 
the intestinal wall involved by the lesion. Occasionally, the dis-
tal ileum can be successfully visualized during colonoscopy. 
Intraoperative enteroscopy can be used to directly visualize 
small-intestinal tumors beyond the reach of standard endoscopic 
techniques. Recently, capsule endoscopy and double-balloon 
endoscopy have been used to evaluate small bowel.
Therapy
Benign neoplasms of the small intestine that are symptomatic 
should be surgically resected or removed endoscopically, if fea-
sible. Tumors located in the duodenum, including asymptomatic 
lesions incidentally found during EGD, can pose the great-
est therapeutic challenges. These lesions should be biopsied; 
symptomatic tumors and adenomas, because of their malignant 
potential, should be removed. In general, duodenal tumors less 
than 1 cm in diameter are amenable to endoscopic polypectomy. 
Lesions greater than 2 cm in diameter are technically difficult 
to remove endoscopically and may need to be removed surgi-
cally. Surgical options include transduodenal polypectomy and 
segmental duodenal resection. Tumors located in the second 
portion of the duodenum near the ampulla of Vater may require 
pancreaticoduodenectomy. EUS may offer utility for duode-
nal tumors ranging in size between 1 and 2 cm in diameter, 
Figure 28-22.  Jejunal gastrointestinal (GI) stro-
mal tumor (GIST). This patient presented with 
overt obscure GI bleeding and was found to have a 
7-cm jejunal GIST. The picture represents the lapa-
roscopic view of the mass (black arrow), arising 
from the antimesenteric side of the small bowel (∗). 
He underwent a successful laparoscopic resection.
with those limited to the mucosa being amenable to endoscopic 
­polypectomy. Recent studies have shown that endoscopic resec-
tion of biopsy-proven benign duodenal periampullary adenomas 
leads to equivalent efficacy to surgery but with lower morbid-
ity. Adenomas can recur; therefore, surveillance endoscopy is 
required after these procedures.56
Duodenal adenomas occurring in the setting of FAP require 
an especially aggressive approach to management. Patients with 
FAP should undergo screening EGD starting sometime during 
their second or third decade of life. Adenomas detected should 
be removed endoscopically, if possible, followed by surveillance 
endoscopy in 6 months and yearly thereafter, in the absence of 
recurrence. If surgery is required, pancreaticoduodenectomy is 
generally necessary because adenomas in patients with FAP 
tend to be multiple and sessile, with a predilection for the peri-
ampullary region. Further, localized resections are complicated 
by high recurrence rates. Given the potential for recurrences in 
the duodenal remnant following pylorus-preserving pancreati-
coduodenectomy, there is rationale for recommending the appli-
cation of standard pancreaticoduodenectomy in these patients. 
However, recurrences have been reported even following this 
procedure; therefore, continuing surveillance is necessary. For 
most adenocarcinomas of the duodenum, except those in the 
third or fourth portion of the duodenum where a local resection 
could be considered, pancreaticoduodenectomy is required.
The surgical therapy of jejunal and ileal malignancies usu-
ally consists of wide local resection of the intestine harboring 
the lesion. For adenocarcinomas, a wide excision of correspond-
ing mesentery is done to achieve regional lymphadenectomy, 
as is done for adenocarcinomas of the colon. In the presence 
of locally advanced or metastatic disease, palliative intestinal 
resection or bypass is performed. Chemotherapy has no proven 
efficacy in the adjuvant or palliative treatment of small-intestinal 
adenocarcinomas.
The goal of surgical therapy for carcinoids is resection of 
all visible disease. Localized small-intestinal carcinoid tumors 
should be treated with segmental intestinal resection and 
regional lymphadenectomy. Nodal metastases are unusual with 
tumors less than 1 cm in diameter but are present with 75% to 
90% of tumors larger than 3 cm in diameter. In approximately 
30% of cases, multiple small-intestinal carcinoid tumors are 
present. Therefore, the entire small intestine should be exam-
ined before planning extent of resection. In the presence of 
metastatic disease, tumor debulking should be conducted as it 
can be associated with long-term survival and amelioration of 
symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome. Response rates of 30% to 
50% have been reported with chemotherapy regimens based on 
1162
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
agents such as doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, and streptozocin. 
However, none of these regimens is associated with a clearly 
demonstrable impact on the natural history of disease. Octreo-
tide is the most effective pharmacologic agent for management 
of symptoms of carcinoid syndrome.
Localized small-intestinal lymphoma should be treated 
with segmental resection of the involved intestine and adjacent 
mesentery. If the small intestine is diffusely affected by lym-
phoma, chemotherapy rather than surgical resection should be 
the primary therapy. The value to adjuvant chemotherapy after 
resection of localized lymphoma is controversial.
Small-intestinal GISTs should be treated with segmental 
intestinal resection. If the diagnosis is known prior to resec-
tion, wide lymphadenectomy can be avoided as GISTs are rarely 
associated with lymph node metastases. GISTs are resistant to 
conventional chemotherapy agents. Imatinib (Gleevec) is a tyro-
sine kinase inhibitor with potent activity against the tyrosine 
kinase KIT and is used in those with metastatic disease. Clini-
cal trials have shown that 80% of patients with unresectable or 
metastatic GISTs derive clinical benefit from the administra-
tion of imatinib, with 50% to 60% having objective evidence of 
reduction in tumor volume.57 Imatinib has shown great promise 
as a neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy of GISTs. Studies have 
emphasized the potential for development of tumor resistance to 
this agent. In this setting, an alternative tyrosine kinas inhibitor, 
sunitinib, has been used with good results.57
Metastatic cancers affecting the small intestine that are 
symptomatic should be treated with palliative resection or 
bypass except in the most advanced cases. Systemic therapy 
may be offered if effective chemotherapy exists for the primary 
cancer.
Outcomes
Complete resection of duodenal adenocarcinomas is associ-
ated with postoperative 5-year survival rates ranging from 50% 
to 60%. Complete resection of adenocarcinomas located in 
the jejunum or ileum is associated with 5-year survival rates 
of 20% to 30%.58 Five-year survival rates of 75% to 95% fol-
lowing resection of localized small-intestinal carcinoid tumors 
have been reported. In the presence of carcinoid tumor–derived 
liver metastases, 5-year survival rates of 19% to 54% have been 
reported. The overall 5-year survival rate for patients diagnosed 
with intestinal lymphoma ranges from 20% to 40%. For patients 
with localized lymphoma amenable to surgical resection, the 
5-year survival rate is 60%.
The recurrence rate after resection of GISTs averages 
35%. The 5-year survival rate after surgical resection has been 
reported to range from 35% to 60%. Both tumor size and mitotic 
index are independently correlated with prognosis. Low-grade 
tumors (mitotic index <10 per high-power field) measuring less 
than 5 cm in diameter are associated with excellent prognosis.
RADIATION ENTERITIS
Radiation therapy is a component of multimodality therapy for 
many intra-abdominal and pelvic cancers such as those of the 
cervix, endometrium, ovary, bladder, prostate, and rectum. An 
undesired side effect of radiation therapy is radiation-induced 
injury to the small intestine, which can present clinically as 
two distinct syndromes: acute and chronic radiation enteritis. 
Acute radiation enteritis is a transient condition that occurs in 
approximately 75% of patients undergoing radiation therapy for 
abdominal and pelvic cancers. Chronic radiation is enteritis is 
inexorable and develops in approximately 5% to15% of these 
patients.
Pathophysiology
Radiation induces cellular injury directly and through the gen-
eration of free radicals. The principal mechanism of radiation-
induced cell death is believed to be apoptosis resulting from free 
radical–induced breaks in double-stranded DNA. Because radi-
ation has its greatest impact on rapidly proliferating cells, the 
small-intestinal epithelium is acutely susceptible to radiation-
induced injury. Pathologic correlates of this acute injury include 
villus blunting and a dense infiltrate of leukocytes and plasma 
cells within the crypts. With severe cases, mucosal sloughing, 
ulceration, and hemorrhage are observed. The intensity of injury 
is related to the dose of radiation administered, with most cases 
occurring in patients who have received at least 4500 cGy. Risk 
factors for acute radiation enteritis include conditions that may 
limit splanchnic perfusion such as hypertension, diabetes melli-
tus, coronary artery disease, and restricted mobility of the small 
intestine due to adhesions. Injury is potentiated by concomitant 
administration of chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin, 
5-fluorouracil, dactinomycin, and methotrexate that act as radia-
tion sensitizers. Because of the intestinal epithelium’s capac-
ity for regeneration, the mucosal injury that is characteristic of 
acute radiation enteritis resolves after the cessation of radiation 
therapy.
In contrast, chronic radiation enteritis is characterized by 
a progressive occlusive vasculitis that leads to chronic ischemia 
and fibrosis that affects all layers of the intestinal wall, rather 
than the mucosa alone. These changes can lead to strictures, 
abscesses, and fistulas, which are responsible for the clinical 
manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis.
Clinical Presentation
The most common manifestations of acute radiation enteritis 
are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and crampy abdominal pain. 
Symptoms are generally transient and subside after the discon-
tinuation of radiation therapy. Because the diagnosis is usually 
obvious, given the clinical context, no specific diagnostic tests 
are required. However, if patients develop signs suggestive of 
peritonitis, CT scanning should be performed to rule out the 
presence of other conditions capable of causing acute abdominal 
syndromes.
The clinical manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis 
usually become evident within 2 years of radiation adminis-
tration, although they can begin as early as several months or 
as late as decades afterward. The most common clinical pre-
sentation is one of partial small bowel obstruction, with nausea, 
vomiting, intermittent abdominal distention, crampy abdominal 
pain, and weight loss being the most common symptoms. The 
terminal ileum is the most frequently affected segment. Other 
manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis include complete 
bowel obstruction, acute or chronic intestinal hemorrhage, and 
abscess or fistula formation.
Diagnosis
Evaluation of patients suspected of having chronic radiation 
enteritis should include review of the records of their radiation 
treatments for information on total radiation dose administered, 
fractionation, and volume of treatment. Areas that received 
high doses should be noted, as lesions subsequently found in 
imaging studies usually localize to areas that had received high 
1163
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
radiation doses. Enteroclysis is the most accurate imaging test 
for diagnosing chronic radiation enteritis, with reported sen-
sitivities and specificities of over 90% (Fig. 28-23). CT scan 
findings are neither very sensitive nor specific for chronic radi-
ation enteritis. However, CT scanning should be obtained to 
rule out the presence of recurrent cancer since its clinical mani-
festations may overlap with those of chronic radiation enteritis.
Therapy
Most cases of acute radiation enteritis are self-limited. Support-
ive therapy, including the administration of antiemetics, is usu-
ally sufficient. Patients with diarrhea-induced dehydration may 
require hospital admission and parenteral fluid administration. 
Rarely are symptoms severe enough to necessitate reduction in 
or cessation of radiation therapy.
In contrast, the treatment of chronic radiation enteritis 
represents a formidable challenge. Surgery for this condition 
is difficult, is associated with high morbidity rates, and should 
be avoided in the absence of specific indications such as high-
grade obstruction, perforation, hemorrhage, intra-abdominal 
abscesses, and fistulas. The goal of surgery is limited resection 
of diseased intestine with primary anastomosis between healthy 
bowel segments. However, the characteristically diffuse nature 
of fibrosis and dense adhesions among bowel segments can 
make limited resection difficult to achieve. Further, it is diffi-
cult to distinguish between normal and irradiated intestine intra-
operatively by either gross inspection or even frozen section 
analysis. This distinction is important as anastomoses between 
irradiated segments of intestine have been associated with leak 
Figure 28-23.  Radiation enteritis. This contrast radiograph reveals 
widely separated loops of small bowel with luminal narrowing, loss 
of mucosal folds, and ulceration. This patient had received radiation 
therapy for a pelvic malignancy 8 years before this examination.
rates as high as 50%.59 If limited resection is not achievable, an 
intestinal bypass procedure may be an option, except in cases 
for which hemorrhage is the surgical indication. There remain 
cases in which resections extensive enough to cause short bowel 
syndrome are unavoidable. This condition is discussed in detail 
later in the Short Bowel Syndrome section.
Outcomes
Acute radiation injury to the intestine is self-limited; its sever-
ity is not correlated with the probability of chronic radiation 
enteritis developing. Surgery for chronic radiation enteritis is 
associated with high morbidity rates and reported mortality rates 
averaging 10%.
Prevention
In view of significant morbidity associated with radiation enteri-
tis, groups have studied possible measures to reduce or prevent 
such side effects. Keeping radiation exposure to below 5000 cGy 
is associated with minimal long-term side effects and recom-
mended where clinically possible.
Multi-beam radiation techniques to minimize the area of 
maximal radiation exposure and tilt tables to move the bowel 
out of the pelvis during radiation are increasingly used. Few 
small studies have suggested that oral sulfasalazine may help 
reduce the incidence of acute radiation-induced enteritis.60
In patients undergoing pelvic surgery who are likely to 
require postoperative radiation therapy, surgical techniques that 
keep the small bowel out of the pelvis have been recommended. 
These measures include use of absorbable mesh sling to sepa-
rate the pelvis from the true abdominal cavity and prevent the 
small bowel from being exposed to pelvic radiation.61
MECKEL’S DIVERTICULUM
Meckel’s diverticulum is the most prevalent congenital anom-
aly of the GI tract, affecting approximately 2% of the general 
population. Meckel’s diverticula are designated true diverticula 
because their walls contain all of the layers found in normal 
small intestine. Their location varies among individual patients, 
but they are usually found in the ileum within 100 cm of the ileo-
cecal valve (Fig. 28-24). Approximately 60% of Meckel’s diver-
ticula contain heterotopic mucosa, of which over 60% consist of 
Figure 28-24.  Meckel’s diverticulum. This intraoperative photograph 
shows Meckel’s diverticulum in ileum that has been eviscerated.
1164
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
gastric mucosa. Pancreatic acini are the next most common; oth-
ers include Brunner’s glands, pancreatic islets, colonic mucosa, 
endometriosis, and hepatobiliary tissues. A useful, although 
crude, mnemonic describing Meckel’s diverticula is the “rule of 
two’s”: 2% prevalence, 2:1 male predominance, location 2 feet 
proximal to the ileocecal valve in adults, and half of those who 
are symptomatic are under 2 years of age.
Pathophysiology
During the eighth week of gestation, the omphalomesenteric 
(vitelline) duct normally undergoes obliteration. Failure or 
incomplete vitelline duct obliteration results in a spectrum of 
abnormalities, the most common of which is Meckel’s divertic-
ulum. Other abnormalities include omphalomesenteric fistula, 
enterocyst, and a fibrous band connecting the intestine to the 
umbilicus. A remnant of the left vitelline artery can persist to 
form a mesodiverticular band tethering a Meckel’s diverticulum 
to the ileal mesentery.
Bleeding associated with Meckel’s diverticulum is usu-
ally the result of ileal mucosal ulceration that occurs adjacent to 
acid-producing, heterotopic gastric mucosa located within the 
diverticulum. Intestinal obstruction associated with Meckel’s 
diverticulum can result from several mechanisms:
1.  Volvulus of the intestine around the fibrous band attaching 
the diverticulum to the umbilicus
2.  Entrapment of intestine by a mesodiverticular band (Fig. 28-25)
3.  Intussusception with the diverticulum acting as a lead point
4.  Stricture secondary to chronic diverticulitis
Meckel’s diverticula can be found in inguinal or femo-
ral hernia sacs (known as Littre’s hernia). These hernias, when 
incarcerated, can cause intestinal obstruction.
Clinical Presentation
Meckel’s diverticula are asymptomatic unless associated com-
plications arise. The lifetime incidence rate of complications 
arising in patients with Meckel’s diverticula has been estimated 
to be approximately 4% to 6%.62,63 Although initial data had 
suggested that the risk of developing a complication related to 
Meckel’s diverticulum decreases with age, this has been now 
been questioned. In a population-based review at Olmsted 
County, MN, Cullen and colleagues showed that the risk of 
developing Meckel’s-related complications does not change 
with age.63
The most common presentations associated with symp-
tomatic Meckel’s diverticula are bleeding, intestinal obstruction, 
and diverticulitis. Bleeding is the most common presentation in 
children with Meckel’s diverticula, representing over 50% of 
Meckel’s diverticulum–related complications among patients 
less than 18 years of age. Bleeding associated with Meckel’s 
diverticula is rare among patients older than 30 years of age.
Intestinal obstruction is the most common presentation in 
adults with Meckel’s diverticula. Diverticulitis, present in 20% 
of patients with symptomatic Meckel’s diverticula, is associated 
with a clinical syndrome that is indistinguishable from acute 
appendicitis. Neoplasms, most commonly carcinoid tumors, are 
present in 0.5% to 3.2% of symptomatic Meckel’s diverticula 
that are resected.56
Diagnosis
Most Meckel’s diverticula are discovered incidentally on radio-
graphic imaging, during endoscopy, or at the time of surgery. 
In the absence of bleeding, Meckel’s diverticula rarely are diag-
nosed prior to the time of surgical intervention. For those pre-
senting with symptoms suggestive of a Meckel’s diverticulum, 
confirmatory imaging can be challenging. The sensitivity of CT 
scanning for the detection of Meckel’s diverticula is too low to 
be clinically useful. Enteroclysis is associated with an accuracy 
of 75% but is usually not applicable during acute presentations 
of complications related to Meckel’s diverticula. Radionuclide 
scans (99mTc-pertechnetate) can be helpful in the diagnosis of 
Meckel’s diverticulum; however, this test is positive only when 
the diverticulum contains associated ectopic gastric mucosa 
that is capable of uptake of the tracer (Fig. 28-26). The accu-
racy of radionuclide scanning is reported to be 90% in pediatric 
patients but less than 50% in adults. Angiography can localize 
the site of bleeding during acute hemorrhage related to Meckel’s 
­diverticula.
Therapy
The surgical treatment of symptomatic Meckel’s diverticula 
should consist of diverticulectomy with removal of associated 
bands connecting the diverticulum to the abdominal wall or 
intestinal mesentery. If the indication for diverticulectomy is 
bleeding, segmental resection of ileum that includes both the 
diverticulum and the adjacent ileal peptic ulcer should be per-
formed. Segmental ileal resection may also be necessary if the 
diverticulum contains a tumor or if the base of the diverticulum 
is inflamed or perforated.
Figure 28-25.  A. Meckel’s diverticulum with 
mesodiverticular band. B. One mechanism by 
which Meckel’s diverticula can cause small 
bowel obstruction is entrapment of the intestine 
by a mesodiverticular band.
1165
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
The management of incidentally found (asymptomatic) 
Meckel’s diverticula is controversial. Until recently, most 
authors recommended against prophylactic removal of asymp-
tomatic Meckel’s diverticula, given the low lifetime incidence 
of complications. More recently, greater enthusiasm for prophy-
lactic diverticulectomy has appeared in the literature.63 Propo-
nents of this approach cite the minimal morbidity associated 
with removing Meckel’s diverticula and the possibility that 
previous estimates of the lifetime incidence of complications 
related to Meckel’s diverticula may be erroneously low. Other 
authors have advocated a selective approach, with a recommen-
dation to remove diverticula attached by bands and those with 
narrow bases, on the assumption that these diverticula are more 
likely to develop complications. No controlled data supporting 
or refuting these recommendations exist.
ACQUIRED DIVERTICULA
Acquired diverticula are designated false diverticula because 
their walls consist of mucosa and submucosa but lack a com-
plete muscularis. Acquired diverticula are more common in the 
duodenum and tend to be located near the ampulla; such diverticula 
are known as periampullary, juxtapapillary, or perivaterian 
­diverticula. Approximately 75% of juxtapapillary diverticula 
arise on the medial wall of the duodenum. Acquired diverticula 
in the jejunum or ileum are known as jejunoileal diverticula. 
Eighty percent of jejunoileal diverticula are localized to the 
jejunum, 15% to the ileum, and 5% to both jejunum and ileum. 
Diverticula in the jejunum tend to be large and accompanied by 
multiple other diverticula, whereas those in the ileum tend to be 
small and solitary.
The prevalence of duodenal diverticula, as detected on 
upper GI examinations (Fig. 28-27), has been reported to range 
from 0.16% to 6%.64 Their prevalence, as detected during endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiography (ERCP) examinations, has 
been reported to range from 5% to 27%. A 23% prevalence rate 
has been reported in an autopsy series. The prevalence of duo-
denal diverticula increases with age; they are rare in patients 
under the age of 40 years. The mean age of diagnosis ranges 
from 56 to 76 years.
The prevalence of jejunoileal diverticula (Fig. 28-28) has 
been estimated to range from 1% to 5%.65 Their prevalence 
increases with age; most patients diagnosed with these diver-
ticula are in the sixth and seventh decades of life.
Pathophysiology
The pathogenesis of acquired diverticula is hypothesized to be 
related to acquired abnormalities of intestinal smooth muscle 
or dysregulated motility, leading to herniation of mucosa and 
submucosa through weakened areas of muscularis.
Figure 28-26.  Meckel’s diverticulum with ectopic gastric tissue. The diagnosis was made in this patient using 99mTc-pertechnetate scintig-
raphy. The study revealed an abnormal focus of radiotracer accumulation in the right lower quadrant (arrow).
1166
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Acquired diverticula can be associated with bacterial 
overgrowth, leading to vitamin B12 deficiency, megaloblastic 
anemia, malabsorption, and steatorrhea. Periampullary duode-
nal diverticula have been described to become distended with 
intraluminal debris and to compress the common bile duct or 
pancreatic duct, thus causing obstructive jaundice or pancre-
atitis, respectively. Jejunoileal diverticula can also cause intes-
tinal obstruction through intussusception or compression of 
adjacent bowel.
Figure 28-27.  Duodenal diverticulum. This contrast 
radiograph demonstrates a duodenal diverticulum 
(arrows) that extends medially into the substance of 
the head of the pancreas.
Figure 28-28.  Jejunoileal diverticula. This picture demonstrates incidental jejunal diverticula identified during a laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy. The diverticula are typically located on the mesenteric aspect of the jejunum. Resection was not indicated because the diverticula were 
asymptomatic.
Clinical Presentation
Acquired diverticula are asymptomatic unless associated compli-
cations arise. Such complications are estimated to occur in 6% to 
10% of patients with acquired diverticula and include intestinal 
obstruction, diverticulitis, hemorrhage, perforation, and malab-
sorption. Periampullary duodenal diverticula may be associated 
with choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, recurrent pancreatitis, and 
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. However, a clear link between 
the presence of the diverticula and the development of these 
1167
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
­conditions has not been demonstrated. Symptoms such as inter-
mittent abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhea, and constipation are 
reported to be present in 10% to 30% of patients with jejunoileal 
diverticula. The relationship between these symptoms and the 
presence of diverticula is similarly unclear.
Diagnosis
Most acquired diverticula are discovered incidentally on radio-
graphic imaging, during endoscopy, or at the time of surgery. 
On ultrasound and CT scanning, duodenal diverticula may 
be mistaken for pancreatic pseudocysts and fluid collections, 
biliary cysts, and periampullary neoplasms. These lesions can 
be missed on endoscopy, particularly with forward-viewing 
endoscopes, and are best diagnosed on upper GI radiographs. 
Enteroclysis is the most sensitive test for detecting jejunoileal 
diverticula.
Therapy
Asymptomatic acquired diverticula should be left alone. Bacte-
rial overgrowth associated with acquired diverticula is treated 
with antibiotics. Other complications, such as bleeding and 
diverticulitis, are treated with segmental intestinal resection for 
diverticula located in the jejunum or ileum.
Bleeding and obstruction related to lateral duodenal diver-
ticula are generally treated with diverticulectomy alone. These 
procedures can be technically difficult for medial duodenal 
diverticula that penetrate into the substance of the pancreas. 
Complications related to these medial duodenal diverticula 
should be managed nonoperatively, if possible, using endos-
copy. In emergent situations, bleeding related to medial duo-
denal diverticula can be controlled using a lateral duodenotomy 
and oversewing of the bleeding vessel. Similarly, perforation 
can be managed with wide drainage rather than complex sur-
gery. Whether diverticulectomy should be done in patients with 
biliary or pancreatic symptoms is controversial and is not rou-
tinely recommended.58
MESENTERIC ISCHEMIA
Mesenteric ischemia can present as one of two distinct clinical 
syndromes: acute mesenteric ischemia and chronic mesenteric 
ischemia.
Four distinct pathophysiologic mechanisms can lead to 
acute mesenteric ischemia:
1.  Arterial embolus
2.  Arterial thrombosis
3.  Vasospasm (also known as nonocclusive mesenteric isch-
emia [NOMI])
4.  Venous thrombosis
Embolus is the most common cause of acute mesen-
teric ischemia and is responsible for over 50% of cases. The 
embolic source is usually in the heart, most often the left atrial 
or ventricular thrombi or valvular lesions. Indeed, up to 95% of 
patients with acute mesenteric ischemia due to emboli will have 
a documented history of cardiac disease. Embolism to the supe-
rior mesenteric artery accounts for 50% of cases; most of these 
emboli become wedged and cause occlusion at branch points 
in the mid to distal superior mesenteric artery, usually distal to 
the origin of the middle colic artery. In contrast, acute occlu-
sions due to thrombosis tend to occur in the proximal mesen-
teric arteries, near their origins. Acute thrombosis is usually 
superimposed on pre-existing atherosclerotic lesions at these 
sites. NOMI is the result of vasospasm and is usually diagnosed 
in critically ill patients receiving vasopressor agents.
Mesenteric venous thrombosis accounts for 5% to 15% 
of cases of acute mesenteric ischemia and involves the supe-
rior mesenteric vein in 95% of cases.66 The inferior mesenteric 
vein is only rarely involved. Mesenteric venous thrombosis is 
classified as primary if no etiologic factor is identifiable or as 
secondary if an etiologic factor, such as heritable or acquired 
coagulation disorders, is identified.
Regardless of the pathophysiologic mechanism, acute 
mesenteric ischemia can lead to intestinal mucosal sloughing 
within 3 hours of onset and full-thickness intestinal infarction 
by 6 hours.
In contrast, chronic mesenteric ischemia develops insidi-
ously, allowing for development of collateral circulation, and, 
therefore, rarely leads to intestinal infarction. Chronic mesen-
teric arterial ischemia results from atherosclerotic lesions in 
the main splanchnic arteries (celiac, superior mesenteric, and 
inferior mesenteric arteries). In most patients with symptoms 
attributable to chronic mesenteric ischemia, at least two of these 
arteries are either occluded or severely stenosed. A chronic 
form of mesenteric venous thrombosis can involve the portal or 
splenic veins and may lead to portal hypertension, with result-
ing esophagogastric varices, splenomegaly, and hypersplenism.
Severe abdominal pain, out of proportion to the degree of 
tenderness on examination, is the hallmark of acute mesenteric 
ischemia, regardless of the pathophysiologic mechanism. The pain 
is typically perceived to be colicky and most severe in the mid-
abdomen. Associated symptoms can include nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea. Physical findings are characteristically absent early in the 
course of ischemia. With the onset of bowel infarction, abdominal 
distension, peritonitis, and passage of bloody stools occur.
Chronic mesenteric ischemia presents insidiously. Post-
prandial abdominal pain is the most prevalent symptom, produc-
ing a characteristic aversion to food (“food fear”) and weight 
loss. These patients are often thought to have a malignancy and 
suffer a prolonged period of symptoms before the correct diag-
nosis is made.
Most patients with chronic mesenteric venous thrombosis 
are asymptomatic because of the presence of extensive collat-
eral venous drainage routes; this condition is usually discovered 
as an incidental finding on imaging studies. However, some 
patients with chronic mesenteric venous thrombosis present 
with bleeding from esophagogastric varices.
The diagnosis and management of these disorders, which 
are of primary vascular origin, are discussed in the section on 
mesenteric artery occlusive disease in the chapter on arterial 
disease.
MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
Obscure Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Up to 90% of lesions responsible for GI bleeding are within 
the reach EGD and colonoscopy. Obscure GI bleeding refers to 
GI bleeding for which no source has been identified by routine 
endoscopic studies (EGD and colonoscopy). Overt GI bleeding 
refers to the presence of hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia. In 
contrast, occult GI bleeding occurs in the absence of overt bleed-
ing and is identified on laboratory tests (e.g., iron-­deficiency 
anemia) or examination of the stool (e.g., positive guaiac test). 
Obscure GI bleeding is occult in 20% of cases.67
1168
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Obscure bleeding can be frustrating for both the patient 
and the clinician, and this is particularly true for obscure-overt 
bleeding, which cannot be localized despite aggressive diagnos-
tic measures. One study from a tertiary referral center reported 
that the typical patient with obscure-overt bleeding had suf-
fered intermittent episodes of hemorrhage for 26 months, had 
undergone up to 20 diagnostic tests, and had received an aver-
age of 20 units of blood before reaching a diagnosis.68 Most 
of the small bowel is beyond the reach of these examinations 
and, hence, contains most lesions responsible for obscure 
GI bleeding. Small-intestinal angiodysplasias account for 
approximately 75% of cases in adults, and neoplasms account 
for approximately 10%. Meckel’s diverticulum is the most com-
mon etiology of obscure GI bleeding in children. Other etiolo-
gies of obscure GI bleeding include Crohn’s disease, infectious 
enteritides, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-
induced ulcers and erosions, vasculitis, ischemia, varices, diver-
ticula, and intussusception.
The diagnostic evaluation of patients with obscure GI 
bleeding should be tailored to the severity of bleeding and to the 
availability of technology and expertise. Enteroscopy is playing 
an increasingly important role. Several endoscopic techniques 
for visualizing the small intestine are available: push enteros-
copy, Sonde enteroscopy, intraoperative enteroscopy, double-
balloon endoscopy, and wireless capsule enteroscopy.
Push enteroscopy entails advancing a long endoscope 
(such as a pediatric or adult colonoscope or a specialized instru-
ment) beyond the ligament of Treitz into the proximal jejunum. 
This procedure can allow for visualization of approximately 
60 cm of the proximal jejunum. Diagnostic yield in patients 
with obscure GI bleeding ranges from 3% to 65%. In addition to 
diagnosis, push enteroscopy allows for cauterization of ­bleeding 
sites.
In Sonde enteroscopy, a long, thin fiberoptic instrument is 
propelled through the intestine by peristalsis following inflation 
of a balloon at the instrument’s tip. Visualization is done dur-
ing instrument withdrawal; approximately 50% to 75% of the 
small-intestinal mucosa can be examined. However, this instru-
ment lacks biopsy or therapeutic capability. Further, it lacks tip 
deflection capability, limiting complete mucosal visualization, 
and has therefore been abandoned in favor of capsule endos-
copy.
Wireless capsule enteroscopy relies on a radiotelemetry 
capsule enteroscope that is small enough to swallow and has 
no external wires, fiberoptic bundles, or cables. While the 
capsule is being propelled through the intestine by peristalsis, 
video images are transmitted using radiotelemetry to an array of 
detectors attached to the patient’s body. These detectors capture 
the images and permit continuous triangulation of the capsule 
location in the abdomen, facilitating the localization of lesions 
detected. The entire system is portable, allowing the patient to 
be ambulatory during the entire examination. Capsule endos-
copy is an excellent tool in the patient who is hemodynami-
cally stable but continues to bleed. This technique has reported 
success rates as high as 90% in identifying a small bowel 
pathology. Although many studies have shown an improved 
diagnostic yield for small bowel lesions with capsule endos-
copy, the impact of this new imaging modality on actual patient 
outcomes was not studied until recently. In a randomized study 
of patients with obscure GI bleeding, evaluation with capsule 
endoscopy vs. small bowel contrast study had a much higher 
diagnostic yield (30% vs. 7%, respectively); however, this 
did not translate into an improvement in outcomes. The rates 
of rebleeding, hospitalization, need for blood transfusion, and 
therapeutic interventions were similar between the two arms.
The inability to perform biopsies or carry out any thera-
peutic interventions of capsule endoscope likely prevents the 
improved diagnostic yield of the test from translating into 
improved patient outcomes and highlights the continuing chal-
lenge with evaluation of the small bowel.69
For patients in whom bleeding from an obscure GI source 
has apparently stopped, push enteroscopy or capsule enteros-
copy is a reasonable initial study. If these examinations do not 
reveal a potential source of bleeding, then enteroclysis should 
be performed. Standard small bowel follow-through examina-
tions are associated with a low diagnostic yield in this setting 
and should be avoided. If still no diagnosis has been made, a 
“watch-and-wait” approach is reasonable, although angiography 
should be considered if the prior episode of bleeding was overt. 
Angiography can reveal angiodysplasia and vascular tumors in 
the small intestine even in the absence of ongoing bleeding.
For persistent mild bleeding from an obscure GI source, 
push and capsule enteroscopy can be used. If these examinations 
are nondiagnostic, then 99m Tc-labeled RBC scanning should be 
performed and, if positive, followed by angiography to local-
ize the source of bleeding. 99m Tc-pertechnetate scintigraphy to 
diagnose Meckel’s diverticulum should be considered, although 
its yield in patients older than 40 years of age is extremely low. 
Patients who remain undiagnosed but continue to bleed and 
those with recurrent episodic bleeding significant enough to 
require blood transfusions should then undergo exploration with 
intraoperative enteroscopy.
Patients with persistent severe bleeding from an obscure 
source should undergo angiography to help localize the bleeding 
source. Therapy can be tailored based on the source. Push enter-
oscopy can also be attempted, but capsule enteroscopy is too 
slow to be applicable in this setting. If these examinations fail 
to localize the source of bleeding, exploratory laparoscopy or 
laparotomy with intraoperative enteroscopy is indicated. Intra-
operative enteroscopy can be done during either laparotomy or 
laparoscopy. An endoscope (usually a colonoscope) is inserted 
into the small bowel through peroral intubation or through an 
enterotomy made in the small bowel or cecum. The endoscope 
is advanced by successively telescoping short segments of intes-
tine onto the end to the instrument. In addition to the endoscopic 
image, the transilluminated bowel should be examined exter-
nally with the operating room lights dimmed, as this maneuver 
may facilitate the identification of angiodysplasias. Identified 
lesions should be marked with a suture placed on the serosal 
surface of the bowel; these lesions can be resected after com-
pletion of endoscopy. Examination should be performed during 
instrument insertion rather than withdrawal because instrument-
induced mucosal trauma can be confused with angiodysplasias.
Fig. 28-29 provides a diagnostic and management algo-
rithm for patients with obscure GI bleeding.
Small Bowel Perforation
Prior to the 1980s, duodenal perforation due to peptic ulcer dis-
ease was the most common form of small bowel perforation. 
Today, iatrogenic injury incurred during GI endoscopy is the 
most common cause of small bowel perforation. Other etiologies 
of small bowel perforation include infections (especially tuber-
culosis, typhoid, and CMV), Crohn’s disease, ischemia, drugs 
(e.g., potassium- and NSAID-induced ulcers), radiation-induced 
5
1169
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
injury, Meckel’s and acquired diverticula, neoplasms (especially 
lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, and melanoma), and foreign bodies.
Among iatrogenic injuries, duodenal perforation dur-
ing ERCP with endoscopic sphincterotomy (ES) is the most 
common. This complication occurs in 0.3% to 2.1% of cases. 
Patients who have undergone Billroth II gastrectomy are at 
increased risk of duodenal perforations as well as free jejunal 
perforations during ERCP. Although ERCP-related duodenal 
perforations can result in a free perforation, most are retroperi-
toneal. Manifestations of such contained duodenal perforations 
following ERCP can resemble those of ERCP-induced pancre-
atitis, including hyperamylasemia.
CT scanning is the most sensitive test for diagnosing duo-
denal perforations; positive findings include pneumoperitoneum 
for free perforations, but more commonly retroperitoneal air, 
contrast extravasation, and paraduodenal fluid collections. If all 
patients undergoing a therapeutic ERCP are imaged with a CT 
scan following the procedure, up to 30% will have evidence of 
air in the retroperitoneum, but the majority are asymptomatic. 
These patients do not require any specific therapy.70
True cases of retroperitoneal perforations of the duode-
num can be managed nonoperatively, in the absence of progres-
sion and sepsis. However, intraperitoneal duodenal perforations 
require surgical repair with pyloric exclusion and gastrojejunos-
tomy or tube duodenostomy. Iatrogenic small bowel perfora-
tion incurred during endoscopy, if immediately recognized, can 
sometimes be repaired using endoscopic techniques.
Perforation of the jejunum and ileum occurs into the peri-
toneal cavity and usually causes overt symptoms and signs, such 
as abdominal pain, tenderness, and distention accompanied by 
fever and tachycardia. Plain abdominal radiographs may reveal 
free intraperitoneal air if intraperitoneal perforation has occurred. 
If perforation is suspected but not clinically obvious, CT scan-
ning should be performed. Jejunal and ileal perforations require 
surgical repair or segmental resection.
Chylous Ascites
Chylous ascites refers to the accumulation of triglyceride-rich 
peritoneal fluid with a milky or creamy appearance, caused 
by the presence of intestinal lymph in the peritoneal cavity. 
­Chylomicrons, produced by the intestine and secreted into lymph 
during the absorption of long-chain fatty acids, account for the 
characteristic appearance and triglyceride content of chyle.
The most common etiologies of chylous ascites in Western 
countries are abdominal malignancies and cirrhosis. In Eastern 
and developing countries, infectious etiologies, such as tuber-
culosis and filariasis, account for most cases. Chylous ascites 
can also develop as a complication of abdominal and thoracic 
operations and trauma. Operations particularly associated with 
this complication include abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, 
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, inferior vena cava resec-
tion, and liver transplantation. Other etiologies of chylous asci-
tes include congenital lymphatic abnormalities (e.g., primary 
lymphatic hypoplasia), radiation, pancreatitis, and right-sided 
heart failure.
Three mechanisms have been postulated to cause chylous 
ascites: (a) exudation of chyle from dilated lymphatics on the 
wall of the bowel and in the mesentery caused by obstruction 
of lymphatic vessels at the base of the mesentery or the cisterna 
chili (e.g., by malignancies); (b) direct leakage of chyle through 
Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
Rule out upper and lower GI
bleeding;
EGD and colonoscopy
Minor bleeding
(intermittent)
Major bleeding
(persistent)
Initiate appropriate
therapy
Repeat EGD/
Colonoscopy if
rebleeds
Treat source eg.
small bowel
resection
Localize bleeding:
Serial clamping or intraoperative
enteroscopy followed by resection
Positive
Positive
Negative
Unstable
Stable
Tagged
RBC scan
Negative
and
patient stable
Source of
bleeding identified
Source
uncertain
Angiography
and treatment
Operating
room
Small bowel
series
Enteroclysis
Enteroscopy
Capsule
endoscopy
Figure 28-29.  Diagnostic and management algorithm for obscure gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. EGD = esophagogastroduodenoscopy; 
RBC = red blood cell.
1170
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
a lymphoperitoneal fistula (e.g., those that develop as a result of 
trauma or surgery); and (c) exudation of chyle through the wall 
of dilated retroperitoneal lymphatic vessels (e.g., in congenital 
lymphangiectasia or thoracic duct obstruction).
Patients with chylous ascites develop abdominal distention 
over a period of weeks to months. Postoperative chylous ascites 
can present acutely during the first postoperative week. Delayed 
presentations following surgery can occur if the mechanism of 
ascites formation is adhesion-induced lymphatic obstruction 
rather than lymphatic vessel disruption. Dyspnea may result if 
abdominal distention is severe enough.
Paracentesis is the most important diagnostic test. Chyle 
typically has a cloudy and turbid appearance; however, it may 
be clear in fasting patients (such as those in the immediate 
postoperative period). Fluid triglyceride concentrations above 
110 mg/dL are diagnostic. CT scanning may be useful in identi-
fying pathologic intra-abdominal lymph nodes and masses and 
in identifying extent and localization of fluid. Lymphangiogra-
phy and lymphoscintigraphy may help localize lymph leaks and 
obstruction; this information is particularly useful for surgical 
planning.
There are few data on optimal management of patients 
with chylous ascites. The general approach is to focus on evalu-
ating and treating the underlying causes, especially for patients 
with infectious, inflammatory, or hemodynamic etiologies for 
this condition.
Most patients respond to administration of a high-protein 
and low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglycerides. 
This regimen is designed to minimize chyle production and 
flow. Medium-chain triglycerides are absorbed by the intestinal 
epithelium and are transported to liver through the portal vein; 
they do not contribute to chylomicron formation.
Patients who do not respond to this approach should be 
fasted and placed on TPN. Octreotide can further decrease 
lymph flow. Paracentesis is indicated for respiratory difficul-
ties related to abdominal distention. Overall, two thirds of 
patients will respond to conservative therapy. However, one 
third of patients will require surgical therapy for chylous asci-
tes. In general, postoperative and trauma-related cases that fail 
to respond to initial nonoperative therapy are best managed by 
surgical repair. Lymphatic leaks are localized and repaired with 
fine nonabsorbable sutures. If extravasation of chyle is localized 
to the periphery of the small bowel mesentery, then a limited 
small bowel resection can be performed instead. For patients 
who are poor surgical candidates and do not respond to pro-
longed conservative therapy, peritoneovenous shunting may be 
an option. However, these shunts are associated with high rates 
of complications, including sepsis and disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation. Because of the viscosity of chyle, these shunts 
are associated with a high occlusion rate.
Intussusception
Intussusception refers to a condition where one segment of the 
intestine becomes drawn in to the lumen of the proximal seg-
ment of the bowel. It is usually seen in the pediatric population, 
where the cecum intussuscepts into the ileum (ileocolic intus-
susception). In children, it is often an idiopathic condition and 
treated nonsurgically by radiologic reduction.
Adult intussusceptions are far less common and usually 
have a distinct pathologic lead point, which can be malignant 
in up to one half of cases.71 They commonly present with a his-
tory of intermittent abdominal pain and signs and symptoms 
of bowel obstruction. CT scan is the investigation of choice, 
where a “target sign” may be seen (Fig. 28-30). Treatment is 
surgical resection of the involved segment and the lead point, 
which needs to undergo pathologic evaluation to rule out an 
underlying malignancy.
With increasing use of CT imaging, target signs are some-
times seen on CT scans of patients who do not have a clinical 
presentation indicative of bowel obstruction. In such cases, the 
finding is of little clinical significance and is probably related 
to normal peristalsis.
In patients who have undergone a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
surgery, an atypical form of intussusception has been increasingly 
described. In these cases, the proximal bowel is drawn in to the 
lumen of the distal bowel (retrograde intussusception). These 
intussusceptions are usually not associated with a lead point and 
may represent a motility disorder of the bowel following the 
Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Surgical reductions without resection 
have been successfully reported in these patients.72
Pneumatosis Intestinalis
Pneumatosis intestinalis indicates the presence of gas within the 
bowel wall. It may affect any region of the GI tract, but is most 
Figure 28-30.  Small bowel intussusception. Panel A demonstrate the target sign seen on computed tomography scans in patients with small 
bowel intussusception (arrow). Panel B demonstrates the distal bowel clearly within the lumen of the proximal bowel (arrow).
1171
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
commonly seen in the jejunum. Pneumatosis intestinalis is not 
a disease but merely a sign that can be idiopathic or associated 
with many intestinal or nonintestinal disorders such as obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease and asthma. Most cases of pneumatosis 
intestinalis are secondary to an identifiable cause, and 15% are 
idiopathic. The pathogenesis of pneumatosis intestinalis is not 
fully understood.
The surgical interest in this finding is the association of it 
with bowel ischemia and infarction, both of which necessitate 
emergent surgical intervention (see Fig. 28-15). Thus, patients 
with this radiologic finding need to be fully evaluated and moni-
tored closely to rule out such intra-abdominal catastrophes.
SHORT BOWEL SYNDROME
Intestinal resection is performed for many of the diseases dis-
cussed in this chapter and generally is associated with minimal 
morbidity. However, when extent of resection is great enough, 
a devastating condition known as short bowel syndrome may 
result. Short bowel syndrome has been arbitrarily defined as the 
presence of less than 200 cm of residual small bowel in adult 
patients.73 A functional definition, in which insufficient 
intestinal absorptive capacity results in the clinical mani-
festations of diarrhea, dehydration, and malnutrition, is more 
broadly applicable.
In adults, the most common etiologies of short bowel syn-
drome are acute mesenteric ischemia, malignancy, and Crohn’s 
disease. Seventy-five percent of cases result from resection of a 
large amount of small bowel at a single operation. Twenty-five 
percent of cases result from the cumulative effects of multiple 
operations during which small intestine is resected. This latter 
pattern is typical of patients with Crohn’s disease who develop 
short bowel syndrome; the former is typical of patients with 
acute mesenteric ischemia who develop intestinal infarction. In 
pediatric patients, intestinal atresias, volvulus, and necrotizing 
enterocolitis are the most common etiologies of short bowel 
syndrome.
The prevalence of short bowel syndrome is hard to esti-
mate. The most recent available data on chronic home total TPN 
administration were obtained in 1992. At that time, approxi-
mately 40,000 patients were receiving TPN chronically at home. 
The most prevalent indication for TPN among these patients 
was short bowel syndrome; however, this estimate does not 
include patients with short bowel syndrome not receiving TPN 
at home. It also fails to include those who have been weaned 
off of TPN.74
Pathophysiology
Resection of less than 50% of the small intestine is generally 
well tolerated. However, clinically significant malabsorption 
occurs when greater than 50% to 80% of the small intestine 
has been resected. Among adult patients who lack a functional 
colon, lifelong TPN dependence is likely to persist if there 
is less than 100 cm of residual small intestine. Among adult 
patients who have an intact and functional colon, lifelong TPN 
dependence is likely to persist if there is less than 60 cm of 
residual small intestine. Among infants with short bowel syn-
drome, weaning from TPN dependence has been achieved with 
as little as 10 cm of residual small intestine.
Residual bowel length is not the only factor predictive 
of achieving independence from TPN (enteral autonomy), 
however. Other determinants of the severity of malabsorption 
Table 28-11
Risk factors for development of short bowel syndrome 
after massive small bowel resection
Small bowel length <200 cm
Absence of ileocecal valve
Absence of colon
Diseased remaining bowel (e.g., Crohn’s disease)
Ileal resection
include the presence or absence of an intact colon, as indicated 
earlier. The colon has the capacity to absorb large fluid and 
electrolyte loads. In addition, the colon can play an important, 
albeit small, role in nutrient assimilation by absorbing short-
chain fatty acids. Second, an intact ileocecal valve is believed to 
be associated with decreased malabsorption. The ileocecal valve 
delays transit of chyme from the small intestine into the colon, 
thereby prolonging the contact time between nutrients and the 
small-intestinal absorptive mucosa. Third, healthy, rather than 
diseased, residual small intestine is associated with decreased 
severity of malabsorption. Fourth, resection of jejunum is better 
tolerated than resection of ileum, as the capacity for bile salt and 
vitamin B12 absorption is specific to the ileum (Table 28-11).
During the first 1 to 2 years following massive small bowel 
resection, the remaining intestine undergoes compensatory 
adaptation, as discussed earlier. Clinically, the period of adap-
tation is associated with reductions in volume and frequency of 
bowel movements, increases in the capacity for enteral nutrient 
assimilation, and reductions in TPN requirements. As this pro-
cess completes, some patients are successfully weaned off TPN. 
Understanding the mechanisms mediating intestinal adaptation 
may suggest strategies for enhancing adaptation in patients with 
short bowel syndrome who are unable to achieve independence 
from TPN. To date, the phenomenon of intestinal adaptation in 
patients remains poorly understood.13
Malabsorption in patients who have undergone massive 
small bowel resection is exacerbated by a characteristic hyper-
gastrinemia-associated gastric acid hypersecretion that persists 
for 1 to 2 years postoperatively. The increased acid load deliv-
ered to the duodenum inhibits absorption by a variety of mecha-
nisms, including the inhibition of digestive enzymes, most of 
which function optimally under alkaline conditions.
Therapy
Medical Therapy.  For patients having undergone massive 
small bowel resection, the initial treatment priorities include 
management of the primary condition precipitating the intestinal 
resection and the repletion of fluid and electrolytes lost in the 
severe diarrhea that characteristically occurs. Most patients will 
require TPN, at least initially. Enteral nutrition should be gradu-
ally introduced, once ileus has resolved. High-dose ­histamine-2 
receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors should be admin-
istered to reduce gastric acid secretion. Antimotility agents, 
such as loperamide hydrochloride or diphenoxylate, may be 
administered to delay small-intestinal transit. Octreotide can be 
administered to reduce the volume of GI secretions, although in 
animal models, its use is associated with an inhibition of intes-
tinal adaptation.
During the period of adaptation, generally lasting 1 to 
2 years postoperatively, TPN and enteral nutrition are titrated 
6
1172
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
in an attempt to allow for independence from TPN. Patients 
who remain dependent on TPN face substantial TPN-associated 
morbidities including catheter sepsis, venous thrombosis, liver 
and kidney failure, and osteoporosis. Liver failure is a signifi-
cant source of morbidity and often leads to liver transplantation 
(always in combination with small bowel transplantation). Due 
to these complications, patients with short bowel syndrome on 
TPN have a reduced life expectancy, with 5-year survival rates 
of 50% to 75%. Costs associated with chronic TPN administra-
tion are estimated to be as high as $150,000 per patient annually. 
Because of these problems, alternative therapies for short bowel 
syndrome are under investigation.
Nontransplant Surgical Therapy.  Among patients with sto-
mas, restoration of intestinal continuity should be performed 
whenever possible to capitalize on the absorptive capacity of 
all residual intestine. Other forms of nontransplant surgery 
designed to improve intestinal absorption are associated with 
unclear efficacy and/or substantial morbidities and therefore 
should not be applied routinely.
The goal of these operations is to increase nutrient and 
fluid absorption by either slowing intestinal transit or increasing 
intestinal length. Operations designed to slow intestinal transit 
include segmental reversal of the small bowel, interposition of 
a segment of colon between segments of small bowel, construc-
tion of small-intestinal valves, and electrical pacing of the small 
intestine. Reported experience with these procedures is limited 
to case reports or series of a few cases. Objective evidence of 
increased absorption is lacking; further, these procedures are 
frequently associated with intestinal obstruction.
The intestinal lengthening operation that has the longest 
history is the longitudinal intestinal lengthening and tailoring 
(LILT) procedure, first described by Bianchi in 1980.75 The pro-
cedure entails separation of the dual vasculature of the small 
intestine, followed by longitudinal division of the bowel with 
subsequent isoperistaltic end-to-end anastomosis. This proce-
dure has the potential to double the length of small intestine to 
which it is applied. This procedure has generally been used for 
pediatric patients with dilated residual small bowel.
An alternative surgical approach to lengthening the small 
bowel is the serial transverse enteroplasty procedure (STEP). 
This procedure is designed to accomplish lengthening of dilated 
small intestine without the need for separating its dual vascula-
ture (Fig. 28-31). A recent report from an international registry 
of 111 patients showed that 47% of patients achieved enteral 
autonomy at a median follow-up of 21 months.76
Intestinal Transplantation.  This complex procedure is being 
increasingly performed to treat patients with short bowel syn-
drome. Approximately 1850 patients worldwide had undergone 
this procedure by 2009.77 The currently accepted indication for 
intestinal transplantation is the presence of life-threatening com-
plications attributable to intestinal failure and/or long-term TPN 
therapy. Specific complications for which intestinal transplan-
tation is indicated include (a) impending or overt liver failure, 
(b) thrombosis of major central veins, (c) frequent episodes 
of catheter-related sepsis, and (d) frequent episodes of severe 
dehydration.
Of the transplants involving the intestine, 37% were intes-
tine-alone transplants, 30% included intestine + liver + pan-
creas, and 24% were intestine + liver.77
Isolated intestinal transplantation is used for patients with 
intestinal failure who have no significant liver disease or failure 
of other organs. Combined intestine/liver transplantation is used 
for patients with both intestinal and liver failure. Multivisceral 
transplantation has been used for patients with giant desmoid 
tumors involving the vascular supply of the liver and pancreas 
as well as that of the intestine, for diffuse GI motility distur-
bances, and for diffuse splanchnic thrombosis.
Nearly 80% of survivors have full intestinal graft function 
with no need for TPN. However, morbidities associated with 
intestinal transplantation are substantial and include acute and 
chronic rejection, CMV infection, and posttransplant lymphop-
roliferative disease.
Alternative Therapies.  Pharmacologic and biologic thera-
pies designed to expand intestinal mucosal surface area or to 
enhance the efficiency of intestinal absorption are beginning to 
undergo clinical evaluation. Promising regimens include GLP-2 
and the combination of glutamine and growth hormone with a 
modified, high-carbohydrate diet.
Outcomes
Approximately 50% to 70% of patients with short bowel 
syndrome who initially require TPN are ultimately able to 
Figure 28-31.  This figure depicts the 
serial transverse enteroplasty (STEP) 
procedure. Lengthening of dilated 
small intestine is accomplished by 
serial applications of an intestinal 
stapling device, with firings oriented 
perpendicular to the long axis of the 
intestine. (Used with permission from 
Patrick Javid, MD, and Tom Jaksic, 
MD, Department of Surgery, Chil-
dren’s Hospital, Boston, MA).
1173
Small Intestine
CHAPTER 28
achieve independence from TPN.73 Prognosis for achiev-
ing enteral autonomy is better among pediatric patients than 
among adults.
Information on survival among patients with short bowel 
syndrome is limited. In a recently reported study of 124 adults 
with short bowel syndrome due to nonmalignant etiologies, the 
survival rates at 2 and 5 years of follow-up were 86% and 45%, 
respectively.78 Patients with end-enterostomies and those hav-
ing less than 50 cm of residual small intestine had significantly 
worse survivals than those without these features.
No randomized trials comparing intestinal transplantation 
to chronic TPN administration among patients with short bowel 
syndrome have been reported. One-, 5-, and 10-year graft sur-
vival rates of intestine-alone recipients were 80%, 44%, and 
26%; whereas the rates for intestine + liver and intestine + liver 
+ pancreas were 62%, 45%, and 36% and 69%, 48%, and 33%, 
respectively.77
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
  1.	 Tavakkolizadeh A, Whang EE, Ashley SW, Zinner MJ. Small 
intestine. In: Brunicardi F, Andersen D, Billiar T, et al, eds. 
Principles of Surgery. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
2004:28-1.
  2.	 McMinn RMH. Last’s Anatomy: Regional and Applied. 
9th ed. Singapore: Churchill Livingstone; 1994:337.
  3.	 Yan KS, Chia LA, Li X, et al. The intestinal stem cell markers 
Bmi1 and Lgr5 identify two functionally distinct populations. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:466.
  4.	 Thomson ABR, Keelan M, Thiesen A, et al. Small bowel 
review: normal physiology part 2. Dig Dis Sci. 2001;46:2588.
  5.	 Laforenza U. Water channel proteins in the gastrointestinal 
tract. Mol Aspects Med. 2012;33:642.
  6.	 Dyer J, Wood IS, Palejwala A, Ellis A, Shirazi-Beechy SP. 
Expression of monosaccharide transporters in intestine of dia-
betic humans. Am J Physiol. 2002;282:G241.
  7.	 Powell DR, DaCosta CM, Gay J, et al. Improved glycemic 
control in mice lacking Sglt1 and Sglt2. Am J Physiol Endo-
crinol Metab. 2013;304:E117.
  8.	 Rolfs A, Hediger MA. Intestinal metal ion absorption: an 
update. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2001;17:177.
  9.	 Nagler-Anderson C. Man the barrier! Strategic defenses in the 
intestinal mucosa. Nat Rev Immunol. 2001;1:59.
10.	 Mowat AM. Anatomical basis of tolerance and immunity to 
intestinal antigens. Nat Rev Immunol. 2003;3:331.
11.	 Jarchum I, Pamer EG. Regulation of innate and adaptive 
immunity by the commensal microbiota. Curr Opin Immunol. 
2011;23:353.
12.	 Rehfeld JF. The new biology of gastrointestinal hormones. 
Physiol Rev. 1998;78:1087.
13.	 Tavakkolizadeh A, Whang EE. Understanding and augmenting 
human intestinal adaptation: a call for more clinical research. 
JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2002;26:251.
14.	 Scott FI, Osterman MT, Mahmoud NN, Lewis JD. Secular 
trends in small-bowel obstruction and adhesiolysis in the 
United States: 1988-2007. Am J Surg. 2012;204:315.
15.	 Maglinte DD, Heitkamp DE, Howard TJ. Current concepts 
in imaging of small bowel obstruction. Radiol Clin N Am. 
2003;41:263.
16.	 Abbas S, Bissett IP, Parry BR. Oral water soluble contrast 
for the management of adhesive small bowel obstruction. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;3:CD004651.
17.	 Brolin RE, Krasna MJ, Mast BA. Use of tubes and radiographs 
in the management of small bowel obstruction. Ann Surg. 
1987;206:126.
18.	 Chu DI, Gainsbury ML, Howard LA, Stucchi AF, Becker JM. 
Early versus late adhesiolysis for adhesive-related intestinal 
obstruction: a nationwide analysis of inpatient outcomes. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17:288.
19.	 Stewart RM, Page CP, Brender J, et al. The incidence and risk 
of early postoperative small bowel obstruction: a cohort study. 
Am J Surg. 1987;154:643.
20.	 Krouse RS, McCahill LE, Easson A, et al. When the sun 
can set on an unoperated bowel obstruction: manage-
ment of malignant bowel obstruction. J Am Coll Surg. 
2002;195:117.
21.	 Mancini GJ, Petroski GF, Lin WC, Sporn E, Miedema BW, 
Thaler K. Nationwide impact of laparoscopic lysis of adhe-
sions in the management of intestinal obstruction in the US. 
J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207:520.
22.	 Ghosheh B, Salameh JR. Laparoscopic approach to acute 
small bowel obstruction: review of 1061 cases. Surg Endosc. 
2007;21:1945.
23.	 Foster NM, McGory ML, Zingmond DS, Ko CY. Small 
bowel obstruction: a population-based appraisal. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2006;203:170.
24.	 Wahl WL, Wong SL, Sonnenday CJ, et al. Implementation of 
a small bowel obstruction guideline improves hospital effi-
ciency. Surgery. 2012;152:626.
25.	 Ellis H, Moran BJ, Thompson JN, et al. Adhesion-related 
hospital readmissions after abdominal and pelvic surgery: a 
retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 1999;353:1476.
26.	 Angenete E, Jacobsson A, Gellerstedt M, Haglind E. Effect of 
laparoscopy on the risk of small-bowel obstruction: a popula-
tion-based register study. Arch Surg. 2012;147:359.
27.	 Fazio VW, Cohen Z, Fleshman JW, et al. Reduction in adhe-
sive small-bowel obstruction by Seprafilm adhesion barrier 
after intestinal resection. Dis Colon Rectum. 2006;49:1.
28.	 Kumar S, Wong PF, Leaper DJ. Intra-peritoneal prophylac-
tic agents for preventing adhesions and adhesive intestinal 
obstruction after non-gynaecological abdominal surgery. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;CD005080.
29.	 Lucky A, Livingsdtone E, Tache Y. Mechanisms and treat-
ment of postoperative ileus. Arch Surg. 2003;138:206.
30.	 Doorly MG, Senagore AJ. Pathogenesis and clinical and eco-
nomic consequences of postoperative ileus. Surg Clin North 
Am. 2012;92:259.
31.	 Charoenkwan K, Phillipson G, Vutyavanich T. Early versus 
delayed oral fluids and food for reducing complication after 
major abdominal gynecological surgery. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2007;4:CD004508.
32.	 Gendall KA, Kennedy RR, Watson AJ, Frizelle FA. The effect 
of epidural analgesia on postoperative outcome after colorectal 
surgery. Colorectal Dis. 2007;9:584.
33.	 Noblett SE, Snowden CP, Shenton BK, Horgan AF. Random-
ized clinical trial assessing the effect of Doppler-optimized 
fluid management on outcome after elective colorectal resec-
tion. Br J Surg. 2006;93:1069.
34.	 Tan EK, Cornish J, Darzi AW, Tekkis PP. Meta-analysis: alvi-
mopan vs. placebo in the treatment of post-operative ileus. Ali-
ment Pharmacol Ther. 2007;25:47.
35.	 Gaines SL, Giroux K, Thomas S, Gregory JS. Real world 
efficacy of alvimopan on elective bowel resection patients: an 
analysis of statistical versus clinical significance. Am J Surg. 
2012;203:308.
36.	 Lubbers T, Luyer MD, de Haan JJ, Hadfoune M, Buurman 
WA, Greve JW. Lipid-rich enteral nutrition reduces postopera-
tive ileus in rats via activation of cholecystokinin-receptors. 
Ann Surg. 2009;249:481.
37.	 Loftus EV Jr, Schoenfeld P, Sandborn WJ. The epidemiol-
ogy and natural history of Crohn’s disease in population-based 
patient cohorts from North America: a systematic review. Ali-
ment Pharmacol Ther. 2002;16:51.
1174
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
38.	 Zheng JJ, Zhu XS, Huangfu Z, Gao ZX, Guo ZR, Wang Z. 
Crohn’s disease in mainland China: a systematic analysis of 
50 years of research. Chin J Dig Dis. 2005;6:175.
39.	 Nikolaaus S, Schreiber S. Diagnosis of inflammatory bowel 
disease. Gastroenterology. 2007;133:1670.
40.	 Regueiro M, Schraut W, Baidoo L, et al. Infliximab prevents 
Crohn’s disease recurrence after ileal resection. Gastroenterol-
ogy. 2009;136:441.
41.	 Gardiner KR, Dasari BV. Operative management of small 
bowel Crohn’s disease. Surg Clin North Am. 2007;87:587.
42.	 Solberg IC, Vatn MH, Hoie O, et al. Clinical course of Crohn’s 
disease: result of a Norwegian population-based ten-year fol-
low up study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;5:1430.
43.	 Fazio VW, Marchetti F, Church JM, et al. Effect of resection 
margins on the recurrence of Crohn’s disease of the small 
bowel. Ann Surg. 1996;224:563.
44.	 McLeod RS, Wolff BG, Ross S, Parkes R, McKenzie 
M. Recurrence of Crohn’s disease after ileocolic resection 
is not affected by anastomotic type: results of a multicenter, 
randomized, controlled trial. Dis Colon Rectum. 2009;52:919.
45.	 Michelassi F, Upadhyay GA. Side-to-side isoperistaltic stric-
tureplasty in the treatment of extensive Crohn’s disease. J Surg 
Res. 2004;117:71.
46.	 Tan JJ, Tjandra JJ. Laparoscopic surgery for Crohn’s disease: 
a meta-analysis. Dis colon Rectum. 2007;50:576.
47.	 Delaney CP, Fazio VW. Crohn’s disease of the small bowel. 
Surg Clin N Am. 2001;81:137.
48.	 Penner RM, Madsen KL, Fedorak RN. Postoperative Crohn’s 
disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2005;11:765.
49.	 Evenson AR, Shrikhande G, Fischer JE. Abdominal abscess 
and enteric fistula. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Main-
got’s Abdominal Operations. 11th ed. New York: McGraw 
Hill; 2007:184.
50.	 Fazio VW, Coutsoftides T, Steiger E. Factors influencing the 
outcome of treatment of small bowel cutaneous fistula. World 
J Surg. 1983;7:481.
51.	 Owen RM, Love TP, Perez SD, et al. Definitive surgical treat-
ment of enterocutaneous fistula: outcomes of a 23-year experi-
ence. Arch Surg. 2012;15:1.
52.	 Martinez JL, Luque-de-Leon E, Ballinas-Oseguera G, Mendez 
JD, Juarez-Oropeza MA, Roman-Ramos R. Factors predictive 
of recurrence and mortality after surgical repair of enterocuta-
neous fistula. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012;16:156.
53.	 Jepsen JM, Persson M, Jakobsen NO, et al. Prospective study 
of prevalence and endoscopic and histopathologic characteris-
tics of duodenal polyps in patients submitted to upper endos-
copy. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1994;29:483.
54.	 Jemal A, Murray T, Sammuels A, et al. Cancer statistics, 2003. 
CA Cancer J Clin. 2003;53:5.
55.	 Qubaiah O, Devesa SS, Platz CE, Huycke MM, Dores GM. 
Small intestinal cancer: a population-based study of incidence 
and survival patterns in the United States, 1992 to 2006. Can-
cer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1908.
56.	 Ceppa EP, Burbridge RA, Rialon KL, et al. Endoscopic versus 
surgical ampullectomy: an algorithm to treat disease of the 
ampulla of Vater. Ann Surg. 2013;257:315.
57.	 Judson I, Demetri G. Advances in the treatment of gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumors. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:S20.
58.	 Agrawal S, McCarron EC, Gibbs JF, Nava HR, Wilding 
GE, Rajput A. Surgical management and outcome in pri-
mary adenocarcinoma of the small bowel. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2007;14:2263.
59.	 Girvent M, Carlson GL, Anderson I, et al. Intestinal failure 
after surgery for complicated radiation enteritis. Ann R Coll 
Surg Engl. 2000;82:198.
60.	 Kiliç D, Egehan I, Ozenirler S, Dursun A. Double-blinded, 
randomized, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of sulphasalazine in preventing acute gastrointes-
tinal complications due to radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol. 
2000;57:125.
61.	 Waddell BE, Lee RJ, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Weber TK, 
Petrelli NJ. Absorbable mesh sling prevents radiation-induced 
bowel injury during “sandwich” chemoradiation for rectal can-
cer. Arch Surg. 2000;135:1212.
62.	 Yahchouchy EK, Marano AF, Etienne JC, et al. Meckel’s 
diverticulum. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192:654.
63.	 Cullen JJ, Kelly KA, Moir CR, et al. Surgical management of 
Meckel’s diverticulum. An epidemiologic, population-based 
study. Ann Surg. 1994;220:564.
64.	 Lobo DN, Balfour TW, Iftikhar SY, et al. Periampullary diver-
ticula and pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Surg. 1999;86:588.
65.	 Chow DC, Babaian M, Taubin HL. Jejunoileal diverticula. 
Gastroenterologist. 1997;5:78.
66.	 Kumar S, Sarr MG, Kamath PS. Mesenteric venous thrombo-
sis. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1683.
67.	 Gralnek IM. Obscure-overt gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastro-
enterology. 2005;128:1424.
68.	 Szold A, Katz LB, Lewis BS. Surgical approach to occult gas-
trointestinal bleeding. Am J Surg. 1992;163:90.
69.	 Laine L, Sahota A, Shah A. Does capsule endoscopy improve 
outcomes in obscure gastrointestinal bleeding? Randomized 
trial versus dedicated small bowel radiography. Gastroenterol-
ogy. 2010;138:1673.
70.	 Genzlinger JL, McPhee MS, Fisher JK, et al. Significance 
of retroperitoneal air after endoscopic retrograde cholangio-
pancreatography with sphincterotomy. Am J Gastroenterol. 
1999;94:1267.
71.	 Varban O, Ardestani A, Azagury D, et al. Contemporary 
management of adult intussusception: who needs a resection? 
World J Surg. 2013;37:1872.
72.	 Varban O, Ardestani A, Azagury D, et al. Resection or reduc-
tion? The dilemma of managing retrograde intussuscep-
tion after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2013;9:725.
73.	 Buchman AL, Solapio J, Fryer J. AGA technical review on 
short bowel syndrome and intestinal transplantation. Gastro-
enterology. 2003;124:1111.
74.	 Thompson JS, Langnas AN. Surgical approaches to improving 
intestinal function in the short-bowel syndrome. Arch Surg. 
1999;134:706.
75.	 Bianchi A. Intestinal loop lengthening: a technique for increas-
ing small-intestinal length. J Pediatr Surg. 1980;15:145.
76.	 Jones BA, Hull MA, Potanos KM, et al. Report of 111 consec-
utive patients enrolled in the International Serial Transverse 
Enteroplasty (STEP) data registry: a retrospective observa-
tional study. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216:438.
77.	 Cai J. Intestine and multivisceral transplantation in the United 
States: a report of 20-year national registry data (1990-2009). 
Clin Transpl. 2009;83.
78.	 Messing B, Crenn P, Beau P, et al. Long-term survival and 
parenteral nutrition dependence in adult patients with short 
bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 1999;117:1043.
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
Kelli M. Bullard Dunn and David A. Rothenberger
29
EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY
Embryology
The embryonic gastrointestinal tract begins developing during 
the fourth week of gestation. The primitive gut is derived from 
the endoderm and divided into three segments: foregut, midgut, 
and hindgut. Both midgut and hindgut contribute to the colon, 
rectum, and anus.
The midgut develops into the small intestine, ascending 
colon, and proximal transverse colon, and receives blood supply 
from the superior mesenteric artery. During the sixth week of 
gestation, the midgut herniates out of the abdominal cavity, and 
then rotates 270° counterclockwise around the superior mesen-
teric artery to return to its final position inside the abdominal 
cavity during the tenth week of gestation. The hindgut develops 
into the distal transverse colon, descending colon, rectum, and 
Embryology and Anatomy	
1175
Embryology / 1175
Anatomy / 1176
Congenital Anomalies / 1179
Normal Physiology / 1179
Fluid and Electrolyte Exchanges / 1179
Short-Chain Fatty Acids / 1179
Colonic Microflora and Intestinal  
Gas / 1179
Motility, Defecation, and  
Continence / 1180
Clinical Evaluation	
1180
Clinical Assessment / 1180
Endoscopy / 1180
Imaging / 1181
Physiologic and Pelvic Floor  
Investigations / 1181
Laboratory Studies / 1182
Evaluation of Common Symptoms / 1183
General Surgical Considerations	1185
Resections / 1185
Anastomoses / 1189
Ostomies and Preoperative Stoma  
Planning / 1191
Functional Results / 1193
Anesthesia Considerations / 1194
Operative Preliminaries / 1194
Inflammatory Bowel Disease	
1195
General Considerations / 1195
Ulcerative Colitis / 1197
Crohn’s Disease / 1198
Indeterminate Colitis / 1201
Diverticular Disease	
1201
Inflammatory Complications  
(Diverticulitis) / 1201
Hemorrhage / 1203
Giant Colonic Diverticulum / 1203
Right-Sided Diverticula / 1203
Adenocarcinoma and Polyps	
1203
Incidence / 1203
Epidemiology (Risk Factors) / 1203
Pathogenesis of Colorectal  
Cancer / 1204
Polyps / 1205
Inherited Colorectal Carcinoma / 1206
Prevention: Screening and  
Surveillance / 1208
Routes of Spread and Natural  
History / 1209
Staging and Preoperative Evaluation / 
1209
Therapy for Colonic Carcinoma / 1212
Therapy for Rectal Carcinoma / 1213
Follow-Up and Surveillance / 1215
Treatment of Recurrent Colorectal  
Carcinoma / 1215
Minimally Invasive Techniques For  
Resection / 1216
Other Neoplasms	
1216
Rare Colorectal Tumors / 1216
Retrorectal/Presacral Tumors / 1217
Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors / 1217
Other Benign Colorectal  
Conditions	
1218
Rectal Prolapse and Solitary  
Rectal Ulcer Syndrome / 1218
Volvulus / 1219
Megacolon / 1220
Colonic Pseudo-obstruction  
(Ogilvie’s Syndrome) / 1221
Ischemic Colitis / 1221
Infectious Colitis / 1222
Anorectal Diseases	
1222
Hemorrhoids / 1222
Anal Fissure / 1225
Anorectal Sepsis and Cryptoglandular 
Abscess / 1227
Perianal Abscess / 1228
Ischiorectal Abscess / 1228
Intersphincteric Abscess / 1228
Supralevator Abscess / 1229
Perianal Sepsis in the  
Immunocompromised Patient / 1229
Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infection  
of the Perineum / 1229
Fistula In Ano / 1229
Rectovaginal Fistula / 1231
Perianal Dermatitis / 1231
Sexually Transmitted Diseases / 1232
Pilonidal Disease / 1233
Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 1233
Trauma	
1233
Penetrating Colorectal Injury / 1233
Blunt Colorectal Injury / 1234
Iatrogenic Injury / 1234
Anal Sphincter Injury and  
Incontinence / 1235
Foreign Body / 1235
The Immunocompromised  
Patient	
1235
Human Immunodeficiency Virus / 1235
Immunosuppression for  
Transplantation	
1236
The Neutropenic Patient	
1236
chapter 
proximal anus, all of which receive their blood supply from the 
inferior mesenteric artery. During the sixth week of gestation, 
the distal-most end of the hindgut, the cloaca, is divided by the 
urorectal septum into the urogenital sinus and the rectum.
The distal anal canal is derived from ectoderm and receives 
its blood supply from the internal pudendal artery. The dentate 
line divides the endodermal hindgut from the ectodermal distal 
anal canal.
Anatomy
The large intestine extends from the ileocecal valve to the anus. 
It is divided anatomically and functionally into the colon, rectum, 
and anal canal. The wall of the colon and rectum comprise five 
distinct layers: mucosa, submucosa, inner circular muscle, outer 
longitudinal muscle, and serosa. In the colon, the outer longitu-
dinal muscle is separated into three teniae coli, which converge 
proximally at the appendix and distally at the rectum, where the 
outer longitudinal muscle layer is circumferential. In the distal 
rectum, the inner smooth muscle layer coalesces to form the 
internal anal sphincter. The intraperitoneal colon and proximal 
one-third of the rectum are covered by serosa; the mid and lower 
rectum lack serosa.
Colon Landmarks.  The colon begins at the junction of the ter-
minal ileum and cecum and extends 3 to 5 feet to the rectum. 
The rectosigmoid junction is found at approximately the level 
of the sacral promontory and is arbitrarily described as the point 
at which the three teniae coli coalesce to form the outer longi-
tudinal smooth muscle layer of the rectum. The cecum is the 
widest diameter portion of the colon (normally 7.5–8.5 cm) and 
has the thinnest muscular wall. As a result, the cecum is most 
vulnerable to perforation and least vulnerable to obstruction. 
The ascending colon is usually fixed to the retroperitoneum. 
The hepatic flexure marks the transition to the transverse colon. 
1176
Key Points
1
	 Resection principles: The mesenteric clearance technique 
dictates the extent of resection and is determined by the 
nature of the primary pathology, the intent of resection, the 
location of the lesion, and the condition of the mesentery.
2
	 Function after resection: Bowel function is often compro-
mised after colorectal resection, especially after low anterior 
resection. For this reason, it is important to obtain a history 
of prior anorectal trauma and/or incontinence before consid-
ering a low anastomosis.
3
	 Ostomies: Preoperative marking for a planned stoma is critical 
for a patient’s quality of life. Ideally, a stoma should be 
located within the rectus muscle, in a location where the 
patient can easily see and manipulate the appliance, and away 
from previous scars, bony prominences, or abdominal creases.
4
	 Inflammatory bowel disease: Both Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis are associated with an increased risk of 
colorectal carcinoma. Risk depends on the amount of colon 
involved and the duration of disease.
5
	 Pathogenesis of colorectal cancer: A variety of mutations 
have been identified in colorectal cancer. Mutations may 
cause activation of oncogenes (K-ras) and/or inactivation of 
tumor suppressor genes (adenomatous polyposis coli 
[APC], deleted in colorectal carcinoma [DCC], p53).
6
	 Minimally invasive resection: Laparoscopy and HAL 
have been shown to be both safe and efficacious for 
colorectal resection.
7
	 Anal epidermoid carcinoma: Unlike rectal adenocarci-
noma, anal epidermoid carcinoma is treated primarily 
with chemoradiation. Surgery is reserved for patients 
with persistent or recurrent disease.
8
	 Rectal prolapse: Rectal prolapse occurs most commonly in 
elderly women. Transabdominal repair (rectopexy with or 
without resection) offers more durability than perineal 
proctosigmoidectomy, but carries greater operative risk.
9
	 Hemorrhoids: Hemorrhoids are cushions of submucosal 
tissue containing venules, arterioles, and smooth muscle 
fiber. They are thought to play a role in maintaining 
continence. Resection is only indicated for refractory 
symptoms.
10
	 Fistula in ano: Treatment of fistula in ano depends on the 
location of the fistula, amount of anal sphincter involved 
in the fistula, and the underlying disease process.
The intraperitoneal transverse colon is relatively mobile, but 
is tethered by the gastrocolic ligament and colonic mesentery. 
The greater omentum is attached to the anterior/superior edge 
of the transverse colon. These attachments explain the charac-
teristic triangular appearance of the transverse colon observed 
during colonoscopy. The splenic flexure marks the transition 
from the transverse colon to the descending colon. The attach-
ments between the splenic flexure and the spleen (the lienocolic 
ligament) can be short and dense, making mobilization of this 
flexure during colectomy challenging. The descending colon is 
relatively fixed to the retroperitoneum. The sigmoid colon is the 
narrowest part of the large intestine and is extremely mobile. 
Although the sigmoid colon is usually located in the left lower 
quadrant, redundancy and mobility can result in a portion of the 
sigmoid colon residing in the right lower quadrant. This mobil-
ity explains why volvulus is most common in the sigmoid colon 
and why diseases affecting the sigmoid colon, such as diverticu-
litis, may occasionally present as right-sided abdominal pain. 
The narrow caliber of the sigmoid colon makes this segment of 
the large intestine the most vulnerable to obstruction.
Colon Vascular Supply.  The arterial supply to the colon is 
highly variable (Fig. 29-1). In general, the superior mesenteric 
artery branches into the ileocolic artery (absent in up to 20% 
of people), which supplies blood flow to the terminal ileum and 
proximal ascending colon; the right colic artery, which supplies 
the ascending colon; and the middle colic artery, which supplies 
the transverse colon. The inferior mesenteric artery branches 
into the left colic artery, which supplies the descending colon; 
several sigmoidal branches, which supply the sigmoid colon; 
and the superior rectal artery, which supplies the proximal 
rectum. The terminal branches of each artery form anastomoses 
with the terminal branches of the adjacent artery and communicate 
1177
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
via the marginal artery of Drummond. This arcade is complete 
in only 15% to 20% of people.
Except for the inferior mesenteric vein, the veins of the 
colon parallel their corresponding arteries and bear the same 
terminology (Fig. 29-2). The inferior mesenteric vein ascends 
in the retroperitoneal plane over the psoas muscle and continues 
posterior to the pancreas to join the splenic vein. During a col-
ectomy, this vein is often mobilized independently and ligated 
at the inferior edge of the pancreas.
Colon Lymphatic Drainage.  The lymphatic drainage of the 
colon originates in a network of lymphatics in the muscu-
laris mucosa. Lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes follow the 
Middle
colic a.
Right
colic a.
Left
colic a.
Ileocolic a.
Superior
mesenteric a.
Superior
rectal a.
Sigmoidal a.
Inferior
mesenteric a.
Figure 29-1.  Arterial blood supply to the colon. a. = artery.
Inferior
mesenteric v.
Middle
colic v.
Right
colic v.
Superior
mesenteric v.
Portal v.
Left
colic v.
Sigmoidal v.
Superior
rectal v.
Ileocolic v.
Figure 29-2.  Venous drainage of the colon. v. = vein. (Reproduced 
with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M, eds. 
Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1459.)
regional arteries. Lymph nodes are found on the bowel wall 
(epicolic), along the inner margin of the bowel adjacent to the 
arterial arcades (paracolic), around the named mesenteric ves-
sels (intermediate), and at the origin of the superior and inferior 
mesenteric arteries (main). The sentinel lymph nodes are the 
first one to four lymph nodes to drain a specific segment of the 
colon and are thought to be the first site of metastasis in colon 
cancer. The utility of sentinel lymph node dissection and analy-
sis in colon cancer remains controversial.
Colon Nerve Supply.  The colon is innervated by both sym-
pathetic (inhibitory) and parasympathetic (stimulatory) nerves, 
which parallel the course of the arteries. Sympathetic nerves 
arise from T6-T12 and L1-L3. The parasympathetic innervation 
to the right and transverse colon is from the vagus nerve; the 
parasympathetic nerves to the left colon arise from sacral nerves 
S2-S4 to form the nervi erigentes.
Anorectal Landmarks.  The rectum is approximately 12 to 
15 cm in length. Three distinct submucosal folds, the valves of 
Houston, extend into the rectal lumen. Posteriorly, the presecral 
fascia separates the rectum from the presacral venous plexus 
and the pelvic nerves. At S4, the rectosacral fascia (Waldeyer’s 
fascia) extends forward and downward and attaches to the fas-
cia propria at the anorectal junction. Anteriorly, Denonvil-
liers’ fascia separates the rectum from the prostate and seminal 
vesicles in men and from the vagina in women. The lateral liga-
ments support the lower rectum.
The anatomic anal canal extends from the dentate or 
pectinate line to the anal verge. The dentate or pectinate line 
marks the transition point between columnar rectal mucosa and 
squamous anoderm. The anal transition zone includes mucosa 
proximal to the dentate line that shares histologic characteristics 
of columnar, cuboidal, and squamous epithelium. Although the 
anal transition zone was long thought to extend only 1 to 2 cm proxi-
mal to the dentate line, it is known that the proximal extent of 
this zone is highly variable and can be as far as 15 cm proximal to 
1178
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the dentate line. The dentate line is surrounded by longitudinal 
mucosal folds, known as the columns of Morgagni, into which 
the anal crypts empty. These crypts are the source of crypto-
glandular abscesses (Fig. 29-3). In contrast to the anatomic anal 
canal, the surgical anal canal begins at the anorectal junction 
and terminates at the anal verge. The surgical anal canal mea-
sures 2 to 4 cm in length and is generally longer in men than 
in women. It begins at the anorectal junction and terminates at 
the anal verge.
In the distal rectum, the inner smooth muscle is thickened 
and comprises the internal anal sphincter that is surrounded by the 
subcutaneous, superficial, and deep external sphincter. The deep 
external anal sphincter is an extension of the puborectalis muscle. 
The puborectalis, iliococcygeus, and pubococcygeus muscles form 
the levator ani muscle of the pelvic floor (Fig. 29-4).
Anorectal Vascular Supply.  The superior rectal artery arises 
from the terminal branch of the inferior mesenteric artery and 
Anal
canal
Column of Morgagni
Dentate line
Anal crypt
Anal gland
Anoderm
Transition
zone
Figure 29-3.  The lining of the anal canal. (From Goldberg SM, Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds. Essentials of Anorectal Surgery. Philadelphia: 
J.B. Lippincott Company; 1980:4. Reproduced with permission from Stanley M. Goldberg, MD.)
supplies the upper rectum. The middle rectal artery arises from 
the internal iliac; the presence and size of these arteries are 
highly variable. The inferior rectal artery arises from the inter-
nal pudendal artery, which is a branch of the internal iliac artery. 
A rich network of collaterals connects the terminal arterioles of 
each of these arteries, thus making the rectum relatively resis-
tant to ischemia (Fig. 29-5).
The venous drainage of the rectum parallels the arterial 
supply. The superior rectal vein drains into the portal system via 
the inferior mesenteric vein. The middle rectal vein drains into 
the internal iliac vein. The inferior rectal vein drains into the 
internal pudendal vein, and subsequently into the internal iliac 
vein. A submucosal plexus deep to the columns of Morgagni 
forms the hemorrhoidal plexus and drains into all three veins.
Anorectal Lymphatic Drainage.  Lymphatic drainage of the 
rectum parallels the vascular supply. Lymphatic channels in the 
upper and middle rectum drain superiorly into the inferior 
Deep external sphincter
and puborectalis mm.
Conjoined
longitudinal m.
Superficial external
sphincter m.
Subcutaneous external
sphincter m.
Valve of Houston
Internal rectal
plexus
Muscularis 
submucosa ani m.
Transverse septum
of ischiorectal fossa
External rectal
plexus
Internal
sphincter m.
Figure 29-4.  The distal rectum and anal canal. m. = muscle.
1179
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
mesenteric lymph nodes. Lymphatic channels in the lower rec-
tum drain both superiorly into the inferior mesenteric lymph 
nodes and laterally into the internal iliac lymph nodes. The anal 
canal has a more complex pattern of lymphatic drainage. Proxi-
mal to the dentate line, lymph drains into both the inferior mes-
enteric lymph nodes and the internal iliac lymph nodes. Distal to 
the dentate line, lymph primarily drains into the inguinal lymph 
nodes, but can also drain into the inferior mesenteric lymph 
nodes and internal iliac lymph nodes.
Anorectal Nerve Supply.  Both sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic nerves innervate the anorectum. Sympathetic nerve 
fibers are derived from L1-L3 and join the preaortic plexus. 
The preaortic nerve fibers then extend below the aorta to form 
the hypogastric plexus, which subsequently joins the para-
sympathetic fibers to form the pelvic plexus. Parasympathetic 
nerve fibers are known as the nervi erigentes and originate from 
S2-S4. These fibers join the sympathetic fibers to form the pel-
vic plexus. Sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers then supply 
the anorectum and adjacent urogenital organs.
The internal anal sphincter is innervated by sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nerve fibers; both types of fibers inhibit 
sphincter contraction. The external anal sphincter and puborec-
talis muscles are innervated by the inferior rectal branch of the 
internal pudendal nerve. The levator ani receives innervation 
from both the internal pudendal nerve and direct branches of S3 
to S5. Sensory innervation to the anal canal is provided by the 
inferior rectal branch of the pudendal nerve. While the rectum 
is relatively insensate, the anal canal below the dentate line is 
sensate.
Congenital Anomalies
Perturbation of the embryologic development of the midgut and 
hindgut may result in anatomic abnormalities of the colon, 
rectum, and anus. Failure of the midgut to rotate and return to 
the abdominal cavity during the tenth week of gestation results in 
varying degrees of intestinal malrotation and colonic nonfixation. 
Failure of canalization of the primitive gut can result in colonic 
duplication. Incomplete descent of the urogenital septum may 
result in imperforate anus and associated fistulas to the genitouri-
nary tract. Many infants with congenital anomalies of the hindgut 
have associated abnormalities in the genitourinary tract.
Internal
iliac artery
Superior
rectal artery
Middle
rectal artery
Inferior
rectal artery
Inferior
mesenteric artery
Middle
sacral artery
Levator
ani muscle
Figure 29-5.  Arterial supply to the rectum and anal canal.
NORMAL PHYSIOLOGY
Fluid and Electrolyte Exchanges
Water, Sodium, Potassium, Chloride, Bicarbonate, and 
Ammonia.  The colon is a major site for water absorption and 
electrolyte exchange. Under normal circumstances, approxi-
mately 90% of the water contained in ileal fluid is absorbed 
in the colon (1000–2000 mL/d), but up to 5000 mL of fluid 
can be absorbed daily. Sodium is absorbed actively via sodium-
potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase. The colon can absorb up to 400 mEq 
of sodium per day. Water accompanies the transported sodium 
and is absorbed passively along an osmotic gradient. Potassium 
is actively secreted into the colonic lumen and absorbed by 
passive diffusion. Chloride is absorbed actively via a chloride-
bicarbonate exchange.
Bacterial degradation of protein and urea produces 
ammonia. Ammonia is subsequently absorbed and transported 
to the liver. Absorption of ammonia depends in part on intra-
luminal pH. A decrease in colonic bacteria (e.g., due to broad-
spectrum antibiotic use) and/or a decrease in intraluminal pH 
(e.g., due to lactulose administration) will decrease ammonia 
absorption.
Short-Chain Fatty Acids
Short-chain fatty acids (acetate, butyrate, and propionate) are 
produced by bacterial fermentation of dietary carbohydrates. 
Short-chain fatty acids are an important source of energy for 
the colonic mucosa, and metabolism by colonocytes provides 
energy for processes such as active transport of sodium. Lack 
of a dietary source for production of short-chain fatty acids, or 
diversion of the fecal stream by an ileostomy or colostomy, may 
result in mucosal atrophy and inflammation, the latter termed 
“diversion colitis.”
Colonic Microflora and Intestinal Gas
Approximately 30% of fecal dry weight is composed of bac-
teria (1011–1012 bacteria/g of feces). Anaerobes are the pre-
dominant class of microorganism, and Bacteroides species 
are the most common (1011–1012 organisms/mL). Escherichia 
coli are the most numerous aerobes (108–1010 organisms/mL). 
Endogenous microflora are crucial for the breakdown of car-
bohydrates and proteins in the colon and participate in the 
metabolism of bilirubin, bile acids, estrogen, and cholesterol. 
Colonic bacteria also are necessary for production of vitamin 
K. Endogenous bacteria also are thought to suppress the emer-
gence of pathogenic microorganisms, such as Clostridium 
difficile, a phenomenon termed “colonization resistance.” 
However, the high bacterial load of the large intestine may 
contribute to sepsis in critically ill patients and may contribute 
to intra-abdominal sepsis, abscess, and wound infection fol-
lowing colectomy.
Intestinal gas arises from swallowed air, diffusion from 
the blood, and intraluminal production. Nitrogen, oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, hydrogen, and methane are the major components of 
intestinal gas. Nitrogen and oxygen are largely derived from 
swallowed air. Carbon dioxide is produced by the reaction of 
bicarbonate and hydrogen ions and by the digestion of triglyc-
erides to fatty acids. Hydrogen and methane are produced by 
colonic bacteria. The production of methane is highly variable. 
The gastrointestinal tract usually contains between 100 and 
200 mL of gas, and 400 to 1200 mL/d are released as flatus, 
depending on the type of food ingested.
1180
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Motility, Defecation, and Continence
Motility.  Unlike the small intestine, the large intestine does not 
demonstrate cyclic motor activity characteristic of the migra-
tory motor complex. Instead, the colon displays intermittent 
contractions of either low or high amplitude. Low-amplitude, 
short-duration contractions occur in bursts and appear to move 
the colonic contents both antegrade and retrograde. It is thought 
that these bursts of motor activity delay colonic transit and thus 
increase the time available for absorption of water and exchange 
of electrolytes. High-amplitude contractions occur in a more 
coordinated fashion and create “mass movements.” Bursts of 
“rectal motor complexes” also have been described. In general, 
cholinergic activation increases colonic motility.
Defecation.  Defecation is a complex, coordinated mechanism 
involving colonic mass movement, increased intra-abdominal 
and rectal pressure, and relaxation of the pelvic floor. Disten-
tion of the rectum causes a reflex relaxation of the internal 
anal sphincter (the rectoanal inhibitory reflex) that allows the 
contents to make contact with the anal canal. This “sampling 
reflex” allows the sensory epithelium to distinguish solid stool 
from liquid stool and gas. If defecation does not occur, the rec-
tum relaxes and the urge to defecate passes (accommodation 
response). Defecation proceeds by coordination of increasing 
intra-abdominal pressure via the Valsalva maneuver, increased 
rectal contraction, relaxation of the puborectalis muscle, and 
opening of the anal canal.
Continence.  The maintenance of fecal continence is at least 
as complex as the mechanism of defecation. Continence 
requires adequate rectal wall compliance to accommodate the 
fecal bolus, appropriate neurogenic control of the pelvic floor 
and sphincter mechanism, and functional internal and exter-
nal sphincter muscles. At rest, the puborectalis muscle creates 
a “sling” around the distal rectum, forming a relatively acute 
angle that distributes intra-abdominal forces onto the pelvic 
floor. With defecation, this angle straightens, allowing down-
ward force to be applied along the axis of the rectum and anal 
canal. The internal and external sphincters are tonically active 
at rest. The internal sphincter is responsible for most of the rest-
ing, involuntary sphincter tone (resting pressure). The external 
sphincter is responsible for most of the voluntary sphincter tone 
(squeeze pressure). Branches of the pudendal nerve innervate 
both the internal and external sphincter. Finally, the hemor-
rhoidal cushions may contribute to continence by mechanically 
blocking the anal canal. Thus, impaired continence may result 
from poor rectal compliance, injury to the internal and/or exter-
nal sphincter or puborectalis, or nerve damage or neuropathy.
CLINICAL EVALUATION
Clinical Assessment
Obtaining a complete history and performing a physical exami-
nation are the starting points for evaluating any patient with 
suspected disease of the colon, rectum, or anus. Special atten-
tion should be paid to the patient’s past medical and surgical 
history to detect underlying conditions that might contribute to 
a gastrointestinal problem. If patients have had prior intestinal 
surgery, it is essential that one understand the resultant gastroin-
testinal anatomy. A history of anorectal surgery may be critical 
for patients with either abdominal or anorectal complaints. 
The obstetrical history in women is essential to detect occult 
pelvic floor and/or anal sphincter damage. Identifying a family 
history of colorectal disease, especially inflammatory bowel 
disease, polyps, and colorectal cancer, is crucial. In addition to 
a family history of colorectal disease, a history of other malig-
nancies may suggest the presence of a genetic syndrome. Medi-
cation use must be detailed as many drugs cause gastrointestinal 
symptoms. Before recommending operative intervention, the 
adequacy of medical treatment must be ascertained. In addition 
to examining the abdomen, visual inspection of the anus and 
perineum and careful digital rectal exam are essential.
Endoscopy
Anoscopy.  The anoscope is a useful instrument for examina-
tion of the anal canal. Anoscopes are made in a variety of sizes 
and measure approximately 8 cm in length. A larger anoscope 
provides better exposure for anal procedures such as rubber 
band ligation or sclerotherapy of hemorrhoids. The anoscope, 
with obturator in place, should be adequately lubricated and 
gently inserted into the anal canal. The obturator is withdrawn, 
inspection of the visualized anal canal is done, and the anoscope 
should then be withdrawn. It is rotated 90° and reinserted to 
allow visualization of all four quadrants of the canal. If the 
patient complains of severe perianal pain and cannot tolerate 
a digital rectal examination, anoscopy should not be attempted 
without anesthesia.
Proctoscopy.  The rigid proctoscope is useful for examination 
of the rectum and distal sigmoid colon and is occasionally used 
therapeutically. The standard proctoscope is 25 cm in length 
and available in various diameters. Most often, a 15- or 19-mm 
diameter proctoscope is used for diagnostic examinations. The 
large (25-mm diameter) proctoscope is useful for procedures 
such as polypectomy, electrocoagulation, or detorsion of a 
sigmoid volvulus. A smaller “pediatric” proctoscope (11-mm 
diameter) is better tolerated by patients with anal stricture. Suc-
tion is necessary for an adequate proctoscopic examination.
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy and Colonoscopy.  Video or fiber-
optic flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy provide excel-
lent visualization of the colon and rectum. Sigmoidoscopes 
measure 60 cm in length. Full depth of insertion may allow 
visualization as high as the splenic flexure, although the mobil-
ity and redundancy of the sigmoid colon often limit the extent 
of the examination. Partial preparation with enemas is usually 
adequate for sigmoidoscopy, and most patients can tolerate 
this procedure without sedation. Colonoscopes measure 100 to 
160 cm in length and are capable of examining the entire colon 
and terminal ileum. A complete oral bowel preparation is usu-
ally necessary for colonoscopy, and the duration and discomfort 
of the procedure usually require conscious sedation. Both sig-
moidoscopy and colonoscopy can be used diagnostically and 
therapeutically. Electrocautery should generally not be used in 
the absence of a complete bowel preparation because of the risk 
of explosion of intestinal methane or hydrogen gases. Diag-
nostic colonoscopes possess a single channel through which 
instruments such as snares, biopsy forceps, or electrocautery 
can be passed; this channel also provides suction and irriga-
tion capability. Therapeutic colonoscopes possess two channels 
to allow simultaneous suction/irrigation and the use of snares, 
biopsy forceps, or electrocautery.
Capsule Endoscopy.  Capsule endoscopy is an emerging tech-
nology that uses a small ingestible camera. After swallowing the 
camera, images of the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract are 
captured, transmitted by radiofrequency to a belt-held receiver, 
1181
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
and then downloaded to a computer for viewing and analysis. 
Capsule endoscopy largely has been used to detect small bowel 
lesions. However, it has been suggested that this technique might 
also be useful for diagnosing colorectal disease, although util-
ity in the evaluation of colorectal disease remains unproven.1-5 
Finally, recent advances in the development of maneuverable 
capsules may improve the sensitivity of this procedure.5
Imaging
Plain X-Rays and Contrast Studies.  Despite advanced radio-
logic techniques, plain X-rays and contrast studies continue to 
play an important role in the evaluation of patients with sus-
pected colon and rectal diseases. Plain X-rays of the abdomen 
(supine, upright, and diaphragmatic views) are useful for detect-
ing free intra-abdominal air, bowel gas patterns suggestive of 
small or large bowel obstruction, and volvulus. Contrast studies 
are useful for evaluating obstructive symptoms, delineating fis-
tulous tracts, and diagnosing small perforations or anastomotic 
leaks. Although Gastrografin cannot provide the mucosal detail 
provided by barium, this water-soluble contrast agent is rec-
ommended if perforation or leak is suspected. Double-contrast 
barium enema (use of barium followed by the insufflation of air 
into the colon) has been reported to be 70% to 90% sensitive 
for the detection of mass lesions greater than 1 cm in diameter.6 
Detection of small lesions can be extremely difficult, especially 
in a patient with extensive diverticulosis. For this reason, a colo-
noscopy is preferred for evaluating nonobstructing mass lesions 
in the colon. Double-contrast barium enema has been used as a 
back-up examination if colonoscopy is incomplete.
Computed Tomography.  Computed tomography (CT) com-
monly is employed in the evaluation of patients with abdominal 
complaints. Its utility is primarily in the detection of extralu-
minal disease, such as intra-abdominal abscesses and pericolic 
inflammation, and in staging colorectal carcinoma, because of 
its sensitivity in detection of hepatic metastases.7
Extravasation of oral or rectal contrast may also confirm 
the diagnosis of perforation or anastomotic leak. Nonspecific 
findings such as bowel wall thickening or mesenteric strand-
ing may suggest inflammatory bowel disease, enteritis/colitis, 
or ischemia. A standard CT scan is relatively insensitive for the 
detection of intraluminal lesions; however, improved CT tech-
nology is increasing the ability to assess bulky rectal tumors and 
perirectal adenopathy.
Computed Tomography Colonography.  CT colonography 
(virtual colonoscopy) is a radiologic technique that is designed 
to overcome some of the limitations of traditional CT scanning. 
This technology uses helical CT and three-dimensional recon-
struction to detect intraluminal colonic lesions. Oral bowel 
preparation, oral and rectal contrast, and colon insufflation 
have been used to maximize sensitivity. Experience with this 
technology has shown a sensitivity and specificity for detecting 
1 cm or larger polyps of 85% to 90% in most studies, making 
it comparable to traditional colonoscopy. The addition of “fecal 
tagging” agents that create a distinct difference in appearance 
between stool and mucosa during imaging studies holds promise 
for increasing accuracy and possibly decreasing the need for 
mechanical bowel preparation.8
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  The main use of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) in colorectal disorders is in evaluation 
of pelvic lesions. MRI is more sensitive than CT for detecting 
bony involvement or pelvic sidewall extension of rectal tumors. 
MRI accurately determines the extent of spread of rectal cancer 
into the adjacent mesorectum and can reliably predict difficulty 
achieving radial margin clearance of a rectal cancer by sur-
gery alone. When the radial margin is threatened, neoadjuvant 
chemoradiation is generally indicated. MRI also can be helpful 
in the detection and delineation of complex fistulas in ano. The 
use of an endorectal coil may increase sensitivity.
Positron Emission Tomography.  Positron emission tomography 
(PET) is used for imaging tissues with high levels of anaerobic 
glycolysis, such as malignant tumors.6 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
(FDG) is injected as a tracer; metabolism of this molecule then 
results in positron emission. PET has been used as an adjunct 
to CT in the staging of colorectal cancer and may prove useful 
in discriminating recurrent cancer from fibrosis. By combin-
ing PET and CT technology (PET/CT), anatomic correlation 
between regions of high isotope accumulation (“hot spots”) 
on PET and abnormalities on CT can be determined. PET/CT 
increasingly is used to diagnose recurrent and/or metastatic 
colorectal cancer. However, the efficacy and utility of this tech-
nology remains unproven.
Angiography.  Angiography is occasionally used for the detec-
tion of bleeding within the colon or small bowel. To visual-
ize hemorrhage angiographically, bleeding must be relatively 
brisk (approximately 0.5 to 1.0 mL per minute). If extravasa-
tion of contrast is identified, infusion of vasopressin or angio-
graphic embolization can be therapeutic. If surgical resection is 
required, the angiographic catheter can be left in place to assist 
with identification of the bleeding site intraoperatively.
CT and magnetic resonance angiography are also useful 
for assessing patency of visceral vessels. This technique uses 
three-dimensional reconstruction to detect vascular lesions. If an 
abnormality is found, more traditional techniques (angiography, 
surgery) may then be used to further define and/or correct the 
problem.
Endorectal and Endoanal Ultrasound.  Endorectal ultra-
sound is primarily used to evaluate the depth of invasion of 
neoplastic lesions in the rectum. The normal rectal wall appears 
as a five-layer structure (Fig. 29-6). Ultrasound can reliably dif-
ferentiate most benign polyps from invasive tumors based on 
the integrity of the submucosal layer. Ultrasound can also dif-
ferentiate superficial T1-T2 from deeper T3-T4 tumors. Overall, 
the accuracy of ultrasound in detecting depth of mural invasion 
ranges between 81% and 94%.9 This modality also can detect 
enlarged perirectal lymph nodes, which may suggest nodal 
metastases; accuracy of detection of pathologically positive 
lymph nodes is 58% to 83%. Ultrasound may also prove useful 
for early detection of local recurrence after surgery.
Endoanal ultrasound is used to evaluate the layers of the 
anal canal. Internal anal sphincter, external anal sphincter, and 
puborectalis muscle can be differentiated. Endoanal ultrasound 
is particularly useful for detecting sphincter defects and for out-
lining complex anal fistulas.
Physiologic and Pelvic Floor Investigations
Anorectal physiologic testing uses a variety of techniques to 
investigate the function of the pelvic floor. These techniques are 
useful in the evaluation of patients with incontinence, constipa-
tion, rectal prolapse, obstructed defecation, and other disorders 
of the pelvic floor.
Manometry.  Anorectal manometry is performed by placing a 
pressure-sensitive catheter in the lower rectum. The catheter is 
1182
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
then withdrawn through the anal canal and pressures recorded. 
A balloon attached to the tip of the catheter also can be used 
to test anorectal sensation. The resting pressure in the anal 
canal reflects the function of the internal anal sphincter (nor-
mal, 40–80 mmHg), whereas the squeeze pressure, defined as 
the maximum voluntary contraction pressure minus the resting 
pressure, reflects function of the external anal sphincter (nor-
mal, 40–80 mmHg above resting pressure). The high-pressure 
zone estimates the length of the anal canal (normal, 2.0–4.0 cm). 
The rectoanal inhibitory reflex can be detected by inflating a 
balloon in the distal rectum; absence of this reflex is character-
istic of Hirschsprung’s disease.
Neurophysiology.  Neurophysiologic testing assesses func-
tion of the pudendal nerves and recruitment of puborectalis 
muscle fibers. Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency mea-
sures the speed of transmission of a nerve impulse through the 
Mucosal surface
Mucosa/Muscularis mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis propria
Serosa/Perirectal fat
A
B
Figure 29-6.  A. Schematic of the layers of the rectal wall observed 
on endorectal ultrasonography. B. Normal endorectal ultrasonography. 
(A. Used with permission of Charles O. Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, 
MN.)
distal pudendal nerve fibers (normal, 1.8–2.2 ms); prolonged 
latency suggests the presence of neuropathy. Electromyographic 
(EMG) recruitment assesses the contraction and relaxation of 
the puborectalis muscle during attempted defecation. Normally, 
recruitment increases when a patient is instructed to “squeeze” 
and decreases when a patient is instructed to “push.” Inappro-
priate recruitment is an indication of paradoxical contraction 
(nonrelaxation of the puborectalis). Needle EMG has been used 
to map both the pudendal nerves and the anatomy of the internal 
and external sphincters. However, this examination is painful 
and poorly tolerated by most patients. Needle EMG has largely 
been replaced by pudendal nerve motor latency testing to assess 
pudendal nerve function and endoanal ultrasound to map the 
sphincters.
Rectal Evacuation Studies.  Rectal evacuation studies include 
the balloon expulsion test and video defecography. Balloon 
expulsion assesses a patient’s ability to expel an intrarectal balloon. 
Video defecography provides a more detailed assessment of 
defecation. In this test, barium paste is placed in the rectum, 
and defecation is then recorded fluoroscopically. Defecography 
is used to differentiate nonrelaxation of the puborectalis, 
obstructed defecation, increased perineal descent, rectal pro-
lapse and intussusception, rectocele, and enterocele. The addi-
tion of vaginal contrast and intraperitoneal contrast is useful in 
delineating complex disorders of the pelvic floor.
Laboratory Studies
Fecal Occult Blood Testing.  Fecal occult blood testing 
(FOBT) has been used as a screening test for colonic neoplasms 
in asymptomatic, average-risk individuals. The efficacy of this 
test is based on serial testing because the majority of colorectal 
malignancies will bleed intermittently. FOBT has been a nonspe-
cific test for peroxidase contained in hemoglobin; consequently, 
occult bleeding from any gastrointestinal source will produce a 
positive result. Similarly, many foods (red meat, some fruits and 
vegetables, and vitamin C) will produce a false-positive result. 
Increased specificity is now possible by using immunochemical 
FOBT. These tests rely on monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies 
to react with the intact globin portion of human hemoglobin and 
are more specific for identifying occult bleeding from the colon 
or rectum. Any positive FOBT mandates further investigation, 
usually by colonoscopy.
Stool Studies.  Stool studies are often helpful in evaluating the 
etiology of diarrhea. Wet-mount examination reveals the pres-
ence of fecal leukocytes, which may suggest colonic inflamma-
tion or the presence of an invasive organism such as invasive 
E. coli or Shigella species. Stool cultures can detect pathogenic 
bacteria, ova, and/or parasites. C. difficile colitis is diagnosed 
by detecting bacterial toxin in the stool.10 Steatorrhea may be 
diagnosed by adding Sudan red stain to a stool sample.
Serum Tests.  Specific laboratory tests that should be per-
formed will be dictated by the clinical scenario. Preoperative 
studies generally include a complete blood count and electrolyte 
panel. The addition of coagulation studies, liver function tests, 
and blood typing/cross-matching depends on the patient’s medi-
cal condition and the proposed surgical procedure.
Tumor Markers.  Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) may be 
elevated in 60% to 90% of patients with colorectal cancer. 
Despite this, CEA is not an effective screening tool for this 
malignancy. Many practitioners follow serial CEA levels after 
curative-intent surgery in order to detect early recurrence of 
1183
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
colorectal cancer. However, this tumor marker is nonspecific, 
and no survival benefit has yet been proven. It is also important 
to note that CEA may be mildly elevated in patients who smoke 
tobacco. Other biochemical markers (ornithine decarboxylase, 
urokinase) have been proposed, but none has yet proven sensi-
tive or specific for detection, staging, or predicting prognosis of 
colorectal carcinoma.11
Genetic Testing.  Although familial colorectal cancer syn-
dromes, such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and 
hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) are rare, infor-
mation about the specific genetic abnormalities underlying these 
disorders has led to significant interest in the role of genetic 
testing for colorectal cancer.12
Tests for mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli 
(APC) gene responsible for FAP and in mismatch repair 
genes responsible for HNPCC are commercially available and 
extremely accurate in families with known mutations. However, 
in the absence of an identified mutation, a negative result is 
uninformative. For individuals from high-risk families without an 
identified mutation, increased surveillance is recommended.13 
Although many of these mutations are also present in sporadic 
colorectal cancer, the accuracy of genetic testing in average-risk 
individuals is considerably lower, and these tests are not recom-
mended for screening. Because of the potential psychosocial 
implications of genetic testing, it is strongly recommended that 
professional genetic counselors be involved in the care of any 
patient considering these tests.
Evaluation of Common Symptoms
Pain
Abdominal Pain.  Abdominal pain is a nonspecific symptom 
with myriad causes. Abdominal pain related to the colon and 
rectum can result from obstruction (either inflammatory or neo-
plastic), inflammation, perforation, or ischemia. Plain X-rays 
and judicious use of contrast studies and/or a CT scan can often 
confirm the diagnosis. Gentle retrograde contrast studies (Gastro-
grafin enema) may be useful in delineating the degree of colonic 
obstruction. Sigmoidoscopy and/or colonoscopy performed by 
an experienced endoscopist can assist in the diagnosis of isch-
emic colitis, infectious colitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. 
However, if perforation or near complete obstruction is suspected, 
colonoscopy and/or sigmoidoscopy are generally contraindicated. 
Evaluation and treatment of abdominal pain from a colorectal 
source should follow the usual surgical principles of a thorough 
history and physical examination, appropriate diagnostic tests, 
resuscitation, and appropriately timed surgical intervention.
Pelvic Pain.  Pelvic pain can originate from the distal colon and 
rectum or from adjacent urogenital structures. Tenesmus may 
result from proctitis or from a rectal or retrorectal mass. Cyclical 
pain associated with menses, especially when accompanied by 
rectal bleeding, suggests a diagnosis of endometriosis. Pelvic 
inflammatory disease also can produce significant abdominal 
and pelvic pain. The extension of a peridiverticular abscess or 
periappendiceal abscess into the pelvis may also cause pain. CT 
scan and/or MRI may be useful in differentiating these diseases. 
Proctoscopy (if tolerated) also can be helpful. Occasionally, 
laparoscopy will yield a diagnosis.
Anorectal Pain.  Anorectal pain is most often secondary to an 
anal fissure, perirectal abscess and/or fistula, or a thrombosed 
hemorrhoid. Physical examination can usually differentiate these 
conditions. Other, less common causes of anorectal pain include 
anal canal neoplasms, perianal skin infection, and dermatologic 
conditions. Proctalgia fugax results from levator spasm and may 
present without any other anorectal findings. Physical exam is 
critical in evaluating patients with anorectal pain. If a patient 
is too tender to examine in the office, an examination under 
anesthesia is necessary. MRI or other imaging studies may be 
helpful in select cases where the etiology of pain is elusive.
Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding.  The first goal in evaluating 
and treating a patient with gastrointestinal hemorrhage is adequate 
resuscitation. The principles of ensuring a patent airway, support-
ing ventilation, and optimizing hemodynamic parameters apply, 
and coagulopathy and/or thrombocytopenia should be corrected. 
The second goal is to identify the source of hemorrhage. Because 
the most common source of gastrointestinal hemorrhage is esoph-
ageal, gastric, or duodenal, nasogastric aspiration should always 
be performed; return of bile suggests that the source of bleeding is 
distal to the ligament of Treitz. If aspiration reveals blood or non-
bile secretions, or if symptoms suggest an upper intestinal source, 
esophagogastroduodenoscopy is performed. Anoscopy and/or 
limited proctoscopy can identify hemorrhoidal bleeding. A tech-
netium-99 (99mTc)-tagged red blood cell (RBC) scan is extremely 
sensitive and is able to detect as little as 0.1 mL/h of bleeding; 
however, localization is imprecise. If the 99mTc-tagged RBC scan 
is positive, angiography can then be both diagnostic and poten-
tially therapeutic. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, a rapid 
bowel preparation (over 4–6 hours) can be performed to allow 
colonoscopy. Colonoscopy may identify the cause of the bleed-
ing, and cautery or injection of epinephrine into the bleeding site 
may be used to control hemorrhage. Colectomy may be required 
if bleeding persists despite these interventions. Intraoperative 
colonoscopy and/or enteroscopy may assist in localizing bleed-
ing. If colectomy is required, a segmental resection is preferred if 
the bleeding source can be localized. “Blind” subtotal colectomy 
may very rarely be required in a patient who is hemodynami-
cally unstable with ongoing colonic hemorrhage of an unknown 
source. In this setting, just prior to proceeding with a “blind” 
subtotal colectomy, it is crucial to irrigate the rectosigmoid and 
re-examine the mucosa of the anal canal and rectum by anoscopy 
and proctoscopy to ensure the source of ongoing bleeding is not 
distal to the planned resection margin (Fig. 29-7).
Occult blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract may mani-
fest as iron-deficiency anemia or may be detected with FOBT. 
Because colon neoplasms bleed intermittently and rarely pres-
ent with rapid hemorrhage, the presence of occult fecal blood 
should always prompt a colonoscopy. Unexplained iron-deficiency 
anemia is also an indication for colonoscopy.
Hematochezia is commonly caused by hemorrhoids or 
a fissure. Sharp, knife-like pain and bright red rectal bleed-
ing with bowel movements suggest the diagnosis of fissure. 
Painless, bright red rectal bleeding with bowel movements is 
often secondary to a friable internal hemorrhoid that is easily 
detected by anoscopy. In the absence of a painful, obvious fis-
sure, any patient with rectal bleeding should undergo a careful 
digital rectal examination, anoscopy, and proctosigmoidoscopy. 
Failure to diagnose a source in the distal anorectum should 
prompt colonoscopy.
Constipation and Obstructed Defecation.  Constipation is an 
extremely common complaint, affecting more than 4 million 
people in the United States. Despite the prevalence of this 
problem, there is lack of agreement about an appropriate defini-
tion of constipation. Patients may describe infrequent bowel 
1184
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
movements, hard stools, or excessive straining. A careful his-
tory of these symptoms often clarifies the nature of the problem.
Constipation has many causes. Underlying metabolic, 
pharmacologic, endocrine, psychological, and neurologic 
causes often contribute to the problem. A stricture or mass 
lesion should be excluded by colonoscopy, barium enema, or 
CT colonography. After these causes have been excluded, eval-
uation focuses on differentiating slow-transit constipation from 
outlet obstruction. Transit studies, in which radiopaque markers 
are swallowed and then followed radiographically, are useful for 
diagnosing slow-transit constipation. Anorectal manometry and 
EMG can detect nonrelaxation of the puborectalis, which con-
tributes to outlet obstruction. The absence of an anorectal inhibi-
tory reflex suggests Hirschsprung’s disease and may prompt a 
rectal mucosal biopsy. Defecography can identify rectal pro-
lapse, intussusception, rectocele, or enterocele.
Medical management is the mainstay of therapy for consti-
pation and includes fiber, increased fluid intake, and laxatives. 
Outlet obstruction from nonrelaxation of the puborectalis often 
responds to biofeedback.14 Surgery to correct rectocele and rec-
tal prolapse has a variable effect on symptoms of constipation 
but can be successful in selected patients. Subtotal colectomy is 
considered only for patients with severe slow-transit constipation 
Massive life-threatening bleeding
Positive
Rebleeding
Rebleeding
Moderate bleeding
continued
Bleeding stopped or slowed down
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Fail
Fail
or
Acute colonic bleeding
Volume resuscitation
plus blood transfusion
NG aspirate
negative
NG aspirate
positive
Proctoscopy
Rule out anorectal bleeding
Gastroduodenoscopy
+ endoscopic treatment
Elective colonoscopy
Mesenteric arteriography
Mesenteric arteriography
Urgent colonoscopy
99MTc RBC scintigraphy
Colonoscopic treatment
or explore, segmental
resection
Endoscopic
treatment
Vasopressin
or emboli
Vasopressin
or emboli
Explore, intraoperative
endoscopy
Explore, intraoperative
endoscopy
Explore, intraoperative
endoscopy
Explore, intraoperative
endoscopy
Observe
Segmental
resection
Total
colectomy
Total
colectomy
Total
colectomy
Total
colectomy
Segmental
resection
Segmental
resection
Segmental
resection
Segmental
resection
Segmental
resection
Segmental
resection
See moderate bleeding
or massive bleeding
Figure 29-7.  Algorithm for treatment of colorectal hemorrhage. NG = nasogastric; 99mTc = technetium-99; RBC = red blood cell. 
(Reproduced with permission of Taylor & Francis, LLC from Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds. Principles and Practice of Surgery for the 
Colon, Rectum, and Anus. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1999:1279. Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance Center, 
Inc.)
(colonic inertia) refractory to maximal medical interventions. 
While this operation almost always increases bowel movement 
frequency, complaints of diarrhea, incontinence, and abdominal 
pain are not infrequent, and patients should be carefully selected 
and counseled.15
Diarrhea and Irritable Bowel Syndrome.  Diarrhea is also 
a common complaint and is usually a self-limited symptom of 
infectious gastroenteritis. If diarrhea is chronic or is accompa-
nied by bleeding or abdominal pain, further investigation is 
warranted. Bloody diarrhea and pain are characteristic of colitis; 
etiology can be an infection (invasive E. coli, Shigella, Salmo-
nella, Campylobacter, Entamoeba histolytica, or C. difficile), 
inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s coli-
tis), or ischemia. Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-
nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in 
diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, 
if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-
toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is 
contraindicated.
Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-
tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-
tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic 
1185
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors 
(vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], 
somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. 
Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collag-
enous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal 
abnormality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, 
and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in 
differentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the 
colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.
Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-
stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, 
bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no 
underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other 
disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-
ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate 
symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.
Incontinence.  The incidence of fecal incontinence has been 
estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individuals per 1000 people older 
than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occa-
sional leakage of gas and liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. 
The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, 
and diarrhea is often contributory. In general, causes of inconti-
nence can be classified as neurogenic or anatomic. Neurogenic 
causes include diseases of the central nervous system and spi-
nal cord along with pudendal nerve injury. Anatomic causes 
include congenital abnormalities, procidentia (rectal prolapse), 
overflow incontinence secondary to impaction or an obstruct-
ing neoplasm, and trauma. The most common traumatic cause 
of incontinence is injury to the anal sphincter during vaginal 
delivery. Other causes include anorectal surgery, impalement, 
and pelvic fracture.
After a thorough medical evaluation to detect underly-
ing conditions that might contribute to incontinence, evalua-
tion focuses on assessment of the anal sphincter and pudendal 
nerves. Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency testing may 
detect neuropathy. Anal manometry can detect low resting and 
squeeze pressures. Physical examination and defecography can 
detect rectal prolapse. Endoanal ultrasound is invaluable in 
diagnosing sphincter defects (Fig. 29-8).
Therapy depends on the underlying abnormality. Diarrhea 
should be treated medically (fiber, antidiarrheal agents). 
Even in the absence of frank diarrhea, the addition of dietary 
fiber may improve continence. Some patients may respond to 
biofeedback. Many patients with a sphincter defect are candi-
dates for an overlapping sphincteroplasty. Innovative technolo-
gies such as sacral nerve stimulation and the artificial bowel 
sphincter are proving useful in patients who fail other interven-
tions.16 The delivery of radiofrequency energy to the anal canal 
(the Secca procedure) appears to be safe and effective in early 
studies.17 Injectable bulking agents are also gaining popular-
ity, but long-term efficacy has not yet been proven.18 Finally, a 
stoma can provide relief for severely incontinent patients who 
have failed or are not candidates for other interventions.19
GENERAL SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Colorectal resections are performed for a wide variety of condi-
tions, including neoplasms (benign and malignant), inflamma-
tory bowel diseases, and other benign conditions. Although the 
indication and urgency for surgery will alter some of the tech-
nical details, the operative principles of colorectal resections, 
anastomoses, and use of ostomies are well established.
A
B
Figure 29-8.  A. Endoanal ultrasonography showing the normal 
layers of the anal canal. B. Endoanal ultrasonography with anterior 
sphincter defect from birthing injury. EAS = external anal sphincter; 
IAS = internal anal sphincter. (Both images used with permission 
of Charles O. Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, MN.)
Resections
The mesenteric clearance technique dictates the extent of 
colonic resection and is determined by the nature of the primary 
pathology (malignant or benign), the intent of the resection 
(curative or palliative), the precise location(s) of the primary 
pathology, and the condition of the mesentery (thin and soft 
or thick and indurated). In general, a proximal mesenteric 
ligation will eliminate the blood supply to a greater length 
of colon and require a more extensive “colectomy.” Curative 
resection of a colorectal cancer is usually best accomplished 
by performing a proximal mesenteric vessel ligation and radi-
cal mesenteric clearance of the lymphatic drainage basin of the 
tumor site (Fig. 29-9). Resection of a benign process does not 
require wide mesenteric clearance.
Emergency Resection.  Emergency resection may be required 
because of obstruction, perforation, or hemorrhage. In this set-
ting, the bowel is almost always unprepared and the patient may 
1
1186
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
be unstable. The surgical principles described earlier apply, and 
an attempt should be made to resect the involved segment along 
with its lymphovascular supply. If the resection involves the 
right colon or proximal transverse colon (right or extended right 
colectomy), a primary ileocolonic anastomosis can usually be 
performed safely as long as the remaining bowel appears healthy 
and the patient is stable. For left-sided tumors, the traditional 
B
A
D
C
F
E
Figure 29-9.  Extent of resection for carcinoma of the colon. A. Cecal cancer. B. Hepatic flexure cancer. C. Transverse colon cancer. 
D. Splenic flexure cancer. E. Descending colon cancer. F. Sigmoid colon cancer.
approach has involved resection of the involved bowel and end 
colostomy, with or without a mucus fistula. However, there is 
an increasing body of data to suggest that a primary anasto-
mosis without a bowel preparation or with an on-table lavage, 
with or without a diverting ileostomy, may be equally safe in 
this setting. If the proximal colon appears unhealthy (vascular 
compromise, serosal tears, perforation), a subtotal colectomy can 
1187
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
be performed with a small bowel to rectosigmoid anastomosis. 
Resection and diversion (ileostomy or colostomy) remain safe 
and appropriate if the bowel appears compromised or if the 
patient is unstable, malnourished, or immunosuppressed.
Minimally Invasive Techniques of Resection.  With 
advances in minimally invasive technology, many procedures 
that previously have required laparotomy can now be performed 
laparoscopically,20,21 with hand-assisted laparoscopy (HAL), or 
robotically. Potential advantages of minimally invasive sur-
gery include improved cosmetic result, decreased postopera-
tive pain, and earlier return of bowel function. Moreover, some 
experimental data suggest that minimally invasive operations 
have less immunosuppressive impact on the patient and thus 
might improve postoperative outcome and even long-term 
survival. To date, most studies have demonstrated equiva-
lence between laparoscopic, HAL, and open resection in terms 
of extent of resection. Return of bowel function and length of 
hospital stay are highly variable. Long-term outcome has yet to 
be determined; however, short-term quality of life appears to 
be improved by laparoscopy.22,23 The most recent advances in 
minimally invasive surgery involve use of robotics and telema-
nipulation in which the surgeon operates from a console remote 
from the patient. These procedures have been rapidly gaining 
in popularity, especially for pelvic and rectal resections. Early 
studies suggest equivalence between robotic resections and 
laparoscopic/HAL resections.24
In addition, some proponents have suggested that robotic 
procedures may be easier to learn (a shorter “learning curve”) 
and that robotic surgery may be ergonomically better for the 
operating surgeon. Nevertheless, long-term superiority, or even 
equivalence, has yet to be demonstrated, and these advanced 
technologies are likely to be associated with significant cost.
Colectomy.  A variety of terms are used to describe different 
types of colectomy (Fig. 29-10).
Ileocolic Resection.  An ileocolic resection describes a lim-
ited resection of the terminal ileum, cecum, and appendix. It is 
used to remove disease involving these segments of the intestine 
(e.g., ileocecal Crohn’s disease) and benign lesions or incur-
able cancers arising in the terminal ileum, cecum, and, occa-
sionally, the appendix. If curable malignancy is suspected, more 
radical resections, such as a right hemicolectomy, are gener-
ally indicated. The ileocolic vessels are ligated and divided. A 
variable length of small intestine may be resected depending on 
the disease process. A primary anastomosis is created between 
the distal small bowel and the ascending colon. It is technically 
difficult to perform an anastomosis at or just proximal to the 
ileocecal valve; therefore, if the most distal ileum needs to be 
resected, the cecum is generally also removed.
Right Colectomy.  A right colectomy is used to remove lesions 
or disease in the right colon and is oncologically the most appro-
priate operation for curative intent resection of proximal colon 
carcinoma. The ileocolic vessels, right colic vessels, and right 
branches of the middle colic vessels are ligated and divided. 
Approximately 10 cm of terminal ileum are usually included in 
the resection. A primary ileal-transverse colon anastomosis is 
almost always possible.
Extended Right Colectomy.  An extended right colectomy 
may be used for curative intent resection of lesions located at the 
hepatic flexure or proximal transverse colon. A standard right col-
ectomy is extended to include ligation of the middle colic vessels 
at their base. The right colon and proximal transverse colon are 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
Figure 29-10.  Terminology of types of colorectal resections: 
A→C Ileocecectomy; + A + B→D Ascending colectomy; + A + 
B→F Right hemicolectomy; + A + B→G Extended right hemi-
colectomy; + E + F→G + H Transverse colectomy; G→I Left 
hemicolectomy; F→I Extended left hemicolectomy; J + K Sigmoid 
colectomy; + A + B→J Subtotal colectomy; + A + B→K Total 
colectomy; + A + B→L Total proctocolectomy. (Reproduced with 
permission from Fielding LP, Goldberg SM, eds. Rob & Smith’s 
Operative: Surgery of the Colon, Rectum, and Anus. London: Elsevier 
Science Ltd; 1993:349.)
resected, and a primary anastomosis is created between the dis-
tal ileum and distal transverse colon. Such an anastomosis relies 
on the marginal artery of Drummond. If the blood supply to the 
distal transverse colon is questionable, the resection is extended 
distally beyond the splenic flexure to well-perfused descending 
colon where the ileocolic anastomosis can be performed safely.
Transverse Colectomy.  Lesions in the mid and distal trans-
verse colon may be resected by ligating the middle colic vessels 
and resecting the transverse colon, followed by a colocolonic 
anastomosis. However, an extended right colectomy with an 
anastomosis between the terminal ileum and descending colon 
may be a safer anastomosis with an equivalent functional result.
Left Colectomy.  For lesions or disease states confined to the 
distal transverse colon, splenic flexure, or descending colon, a 
left colectomy is performed. The left branches of the middle 
colic vessels, the left colic vessels, and the first branches of 
the sigmoid vessels are ligated. A colocolonic anastomosis can 
usually be performed.
Extended Left Colectomy.  An extended left colectomy is an 
option for removing lesions in the distal transverse colon. In this 
operation, the left colectomy is extended proximally to include 
the right branches of the middle colic vessels.
Sigmoid Colectomy.  Lesions in the sigmoid colon require 
ligation and division of the sigmoid branches of the inferior 
mesenteric artery. In general, the entire sigmoid colon should be 
1188
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
resected to the level of the peritoneal reflection and an anasto-
mosis created between the descending colon and upper rectum. 
Full mobilization of the splenic flexure is often required to cre-
ate a tension-free anastomosis.
Total and Subtotal Colectomy.  Total or subtotal colectomy is 
occasionally required for patients with fulminant colitis, attenu-
ated FAP, or synchronous colon carcinomas. In this procedure, 
the ileocolic vessels, right colic vessels, middle colic vessels, 
and left colic vessels are ligated and divided. The superior rectal 
vessels are preserved. If it is desired to preserve the sigmoid, 
the distal sigmoid vessels are left intact, and an anastomosis is 
created between the ileum and distal sigmoid colon (subtotal 
colectomy with ileosigmoid anastomosis). If the sigmoid is to 
be resected, the sigmoidal vessels are ligated and divided, and 
the ileum is anastomosed to the upper rectum (total abdominal 
colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis). If an anastomosis is 
contraindicated, an end ileostomy is created, and the remain-
ing sigmoid or rectum is managed either as a mucus fistula or a 
Hartmann’s pouch.
Proctocolectomy
Total Proctocolectomy.  In this procedure, the entire colon, 
rectum, and anus are removed and the ileum is brought to the 
skin as a Brooke ileostomy.
Restorative Proctocolectomy (Ileal Pouch–Anal 
Anastomosis).  The entire colon and rectum are resected, but 
the anal sphincter muscles and a variable portion of the dis-
tal anal canal are preserved. Bowel continuity is restored by 
anastomosis of an ileal reservoir to the anal canal. The original 
technique included a transanal mucosectomy and hand-sewn 
ileoanal anastomosis. Proponents of this technique argue that 
mucosectomy guarantees removal of all of the diseased mucosa, 
including the anal transition zone, and therefore decreases the 
risk of ongoing disease, dysplasia, and carcinoma.25 Opponents 
cite the increased risk of incontinence after mucosectomy and 
argue that even meticulous technique invariably leaves behind 
mucosal “islands” that are subsequently hidden under the anas-
tomosis. Moreover, the “double-staple” technique using the 
circular stapling devices is considerably simpler than mucosec-
tomy and a hand-sewn anastomosis and may be associated with 
a better functional outcome (Fig. 29-11).26-29 Regardless of the 
anastomotic technique, many surgeons recommend that patients 
undergo annual surveillance of the anastomosis and/or anal tran-
sition zone by digital rectal exam and anoscopy or proctoscopy.
The neorectum is made by anastomosis of the terminal 
ileum aligned in a “J,” “S,” or “W” configuration. Because 
functional outcomes are similar and because the J-pouch is the 
simplest to construct, it has become the most used configura-
tion. With increasing experience in laparoscopic and robotic 
colectomy, some centers have begun performing total procto-
colectomy with ileal pouch–anal reconstruction using minimally 
invasive surgical techniques.20 Most surgeons perform a proxi-
mal ileostomy to divert succus from the newly created pouch 
in an attempt to minimize the consequences of leak and sepsis, 
especially in patients who are malnourished or immunosup-
pressed (Fig. 29-12). The ileostomy is then closed 6 to 12 weeks 
later, after a contrast study confirms the integrity of the pouch. 
In low-risk patients, however, there are reports of successful 
creation of an ileoanal pouch without a diverting stoma.
Anterior Resection.  Anterior resection is the general term 
used to describe resection of the rectum from an abdominal 
approach to the pelvis with no need for a perineal, sacral, or 
A
C
B
Figure 29-11.  After a total colectomy and resection of the rectum 
(A), the anal canal with a short cuff of transitional mucosa and 
sphincter muscles is preserved (B). An ileal J-pouch has been con-
structed and is anastomosed to the anal canal using a double-staple 
technique (C). (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers 
LF, Mulholland M, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1527.)
other incision. Three types of anterior resection have been 
described.
High Anterior Resection.  A high anterior resection is the 
term used to describe resection of the distal sigmoid colon and 
upper rectum and is the appropriate operation for benign lesions 
and disease at the rectosigmoid junction such as diverticulitis. 
The upper rectum is mobilized, but the pelvic peritoneum is not 
divided and the rectum is not mobilized fully from the concav-
ity of the sacrum. The inferior mesenteric artery is ligated at 
its base, and the inferior mesenteric vein, which follows a dif-
ferent course than the artery, is ligated separately. A primary 
anastomosis (usually end-to-end) between the colon and rectal 
stump with a short cuff of peritoneum surrounding its anterior 
two thirds generally can be performed.
Low Anterior Resection.  A low anterior resection is used to 
remove lesions in the upper and mid rectum. The rectosigmoid 
is mobilized, the pelvic peritoneum is opened, and the inferior 
mesenteric artery is ligated and divided either at its origin from 
the aorta or just distal to the takeoff of the left colic artery. The 
rectum is mobilized from the sacrum by sharp dissection under 
direct view within the endopelvic fascial plane. The dissec-
tion may be performed distally to the anorectal ring, extend-
ing posteriorly through the rectosacral fascia to the coccyx and 
1189
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
anteriorly through Denonvilliers’ fascia to the vagina in women 
or the seminal vesicles and prostate in men. The rectum and 
accompanying mesorectum are divided at the appropriate level, 
depending on the nature of the lesion. A low rectal anastomosis 
usually requires mobilization of the splenic flexure and ligation 
and division of the inferior mesenteric vein just inferior to the 
pancreas. Circular stapling devices have greatly facilitated the 
conduct and improved the safety of the colon to extraperitoneal 
rectal anastomosis.
Extended Low Anterior Resection.  An extended low anterior 
resection is necessary to remove lesions located in the distal rec-
tum, but several centimeters above the sphincter. The rectum is 
fully mobilized to the level of the levator ani muscle just as for 
a low anterior resection, but the anterior dissection is extended 
along the rectovaginal septum in women and distal to the semi-
nal vesicles and prostate in men. After resection at this level, a 
coloanal anastomosis can be created using one of a variety of 
techniques. An end-to-end stapled or hand-sewn anastomosis 
has traditionally been the procedure of choice. However, the 
functional consequences of a “straight” anastomosis have led 
to consideration for creation of a colon J-pouch or transverse 
coloplasty to increase the capacity of the neorectal reservoir.30 
Figure 29-12.  Ileal S-pouch anal anastomosis with temporary loop 
ileostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, 
Mulholland M, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1533.)
Because the risk of an anastomotic leak and subsequent sepsis 
is higher when an anastomosis is created in the distal rectum or 
anal canal, creation of a temporary ileostomy should be consid-
ered in this setting.
Although an anastomosis may be technically feasible very 
low in the rectum or anal canal, it is important to note that post-
operative function may be poor. Because the descending colon 
lacks the distensibility of the rectum, the reservoir function may 
be compromised. Pelvic radiation, prior anorectal surgery, and 
obstetrical trauma may cause unsuspected sphincter damage. 
Finally, a very low anastomosis may involve and compromise 
the upper sphincter. Creation of a colon J-pouch or transverse 
coloplasty may improve function, but few long-term studies 
have addressed this issue.30,31
A history of sphincter damage or any degree of inconti-
nence is a relative contraindication for a coloanal anastomosis. 
In such patients, an end colostomy may be a more satisfac-
tory option.
Hartmann’s Procedure and Mucus Fistula.  Hartmann’s pro-
cedure refers to a colon or rectal resection without an anastomo-
sis in which a colostomy or ileostomy is created and the distal 
colon or rectum is left as a blind pouch. The term is typically 
used when the left or sigmoid colon is resected and the closed 
off rectum is left in the pelvis. If the distal colon is long enough 
to reach the abdominal wall, a mucus fistula can be created by 
opening the defunctioned bowel and suturing the open lumen 
to the skin.
Abdominoperineal Resection.  An abdominoperineal 
resection (APR) involves removal of the entire rectum, anal 
canal, and anus with construction of a permanent colostomy 
from the descending or sigmoid colon. The abdominal-pel-
vic portion of this operation proceeds in the same fashion as 
described for an extended low anterior resection. The perineal 
dissection can be performed with the patient in lithotomy posi-
tion (often by a second surgeon) or in the prone position after 
closure of the abdomen and creation of the colostomy. For can-
cer, the perineal dissection is designed to excise the anal canal 
with a wide circumferential margin including a cylindrical cuff 
of the levator muscle. Primary wound closure is usually suc-
cessful, but a large perineal defect, especially if preoperative 
radiation has been used, may require a vascularized flap clo-
sure in some patients. For benign disease, proctectomy may 
be performed using an intersphincteric dissection between the 
internal and external sphincters. This approach minimizes the 
perineal wound, making it easier to close because the levator 
muscle remains intact.
Anastomoses
Anastomoses may be created between two segments of bowel in 
a multitude of ways. The geometry of the anastomosis may be 
end-to-end, end-to-side, side-to-end, or side-to-side. The anas-
tomotic technique may be hand-sewn or stapled (Fig. 29-13). 
The submucosal layer of the intestine provides the strength of 
the bowel wall and must be incorporated in the anastomosis to 
assure healing. The choice of anastomosis depends on the opera-
tive anatomy and surgeon preference. Although many surgeons 
advocate one method over another, none has been proven to 
be superior. Accurate approximation of two well-vascularized, 
healthy limbs of bowel without tension in a normotensive, well-
nourished patient almost always results in a good outcome. 
Anastomoses at highest risk of leak or stricture are those that are 
in the distal rectal or anal canal, involve irradiated or diseased 
2
1190
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
intestine including perforation with peritoneal soilage, or are 
performed in malnourished, immunosuppressed, or ill patients.
Anastomotic Configuration
End-to-End.  An end-to-end anastomosis can be performed 
when two segments of bowel are roughly the same caliber. This 
technique is most often employed in rectal resections, but may 
be used for colocolostomy or small bowel anastomoses.
End-to-Side.  An end-to-side configuration is useful when one 
limb of bowel is larger than the other. This most commonly 
occurs in the setting of chronic obstruction.
Side-to-End.  A side-to-end anastomosis is used when the 
proximal bowel is of smaller caliber than the distal bowel. Ileo-
rectal anastomoses commonly make use of this configuration. 
Figure 29-13.  A. Sutured end-to-end colocolic anastomosis. B. Sutured end-to-side ileocolic anastomosis. C. Stapled side-to-side, functional 
end-to-end ileocolic anastomosis. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery: A 
Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1473, 1475, and 1479.)
A side-to-end anastomosis may have a less tenuous blood sup-
ply than an end-to-end anastomosis.
Side-to-Side.  A side-to-side anastomosis allows a large, well-
vascularized connection to be created on the antimesenteric side 
of two segments of intestine. This technique is commonly used 
in ileocolic and small bowel anastomoses.
Anastomotic Technique
Hand-Sutured Technique.  Any of the configurations described 
earlier may be created using a hand-sutured or stapled technique. 
Hand-sutured anastomoses may be single layer, using either 
running or interrupted stitches, or double layer. A double-layer 
anastomosis usually consists of a continuous inner layer and an 
interrupted outer layer. Suture material may be either permanent 
1191
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
or absorbable. After distal rectal or anal canal resection, a trans-
anal, hand-sewn coloanal anastomosis may be necessary to 
restore bowel continuity. This can be done in conjunction with 
an anal canal mucosectomy to allow the anastomosis to be cre-
ated at the dentate line.
Stapled Techniques.  Linear cutting/stapling devices are used 
to divide the bowel and to create side-to-side anastomoses. 
The anastomosis may be reinforced with interrupted sutures if 
desired. Circular cutting/stapling devices can create end-to-end, 
end-to-side, or side-to-end anastomoses. These instruments are 
particularly useful for creating low rectal or anal canal anas-
tomoses where the anatomy of the pelvis makes a hand-sewn 
anastomosis technically difficult or impossible.
Following resection of the colorectum, a stapled end-to-
end colorectal, coloanal canal, or ileal pouch–anal canal anasto-
mosis may be created by one of two techniques. With the open 
purse-string technique, the distal rectal stump purse-string is 
placed by hand, and the assembled circular stapler is inserted 
into the anus and guided up to the rectal purse-string. The sta-
pler is opened, and the distal purse-string is tied. A purse-string 
is placed in the distal end of the proximal colon; the proximal 
A
B
D
C
E
Figure 29-14.  Technique of end-to-end colorectal anastomosis using a circular stapler. A. The patient is in modified lithotomy position. B. After 
resection of the rectosigmoid and placement of purse-string sutures proximally and distally, the stapler is inserted into the anal canal and 
opened. C. Rectal purse-string suture is tied to secure the rectal stump to the rod of the stapler, and the colonic purse-string is tied to secure the 
colon to the anvil of the stapler. D. The stapler is closed and fired. E. The stapler is removed, leaving a circular stapled end-to-end anastomosis.
colon is placed over the anvil and the purse-string tightened. 
The stapler is closed and fired (Fig. 29-14). With the alternative 
double-staple technique, the distal rectum or anal canal is closed 
with a transverse staple line. The circular stapler is inserted 
through the anus without its anvil until the cartridge effaces the 
transverse staple line. The stapler is opened, causing the trocar 
to perforate through the rectal stump adjacent to the transverse 
staple line. The anastomosis in then completed as described ear-
lier (see Fig. 29-11). After firing and removing the stapler, the 
resulting anastomotic rings should be inspected to ensure that 
they are intact. A gap in an anastomotic ring suggests that the 
circular staple line is incomplete and the anastomosis should be 
reinforced with suture circumferentially, if technically feasible. 
A temporary proximal ileostomy may be indicated as well. Most 
surgeons will also leak test an anastomosis by instilling water 
or saline into the pelvis and insufflating the rectum with air via 
a proctoscope or alternatively instilling methylene blue or beta-
dine into the rectum to look for extravasation.
Ostomies and Preoperative Stoma Planning
Depending on the clinical situation, a stoma may be temporary 
or permanent. It may be end-on or a loop. However, regardless 
1192
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of the indication for a stoma, placement and construction are 
crucial for function.
The preoperative preparation of a patient who is expected 
to require a stoma should include a consultation with an enter-
ostomal therapy (ET) nurse. ET nurses are specially trained and 
credentialed by the Wound, Ostomy and Continence Nurses 
Society. Preoperative planning includes counseling, education, 
and stoma siting. Postoperatively, the ET nurse assists with local 
skin care and pouching. Other considerations in stoma planning 
include evaluation of other medical conditions that may impact 
on a patient’s ability to manage a stoma (e.g., eyesight, manual 
dexterity).
Preoperative stoma siting is crucial for a patient’s postoper-
ative function and quality of life. A poorly placed stoma can result 
in leakage and skin breakdown. Ideally, a stoma should 
be placed in a location that the patient can easily see and 
manipulate, within the rectus muscle, and below the belt line (see 
Fig. 29-15). Because the abdominal landmarks in a supine, anes-
thetized patient may be dramatically different from those in an 
awake, standing, or sitting patient, the stoma site should always 
be marked with a tattoo, skin scratch, or permanent marker preop-
eratively, if possible. In an emergency operation where the stoma 
site has not been marked, an attempt should be made to place a 
stoma within the rectus muscle and away from both the costal 
margin and iliac crest. In emergencies, placement high on the 
abdominal wall is preferred to a low-lying site.
For all stomas, a circular skin incision is created and the 
subcutaneous tissue dissected to the level of the anterior rectus 
sheath. The anterior rectus sheath is incised in a cruciate fash-
ion, the muscle fibers separated bluntly, and the posterior sheath 
identified and incised. Care should be taken to avoid injuring 
and causing bleeding from the inferior epigastric artery and 
Figure 29-15.  Marking of an ideal site for ileostomy. (Repro-
duced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M, 
eds. Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1273.)
Figure 29-16.  Brooke ileostomy. A. Four sutures incorporating 
the cut end of the ileum, the seromuscular layer at the level of the 
anterior rectus fascia, and the subcuticular edge of the skin are 
placed at 90° to each other. B. The sutures are tied to produce sto-
mal eversion, and (C) simple sutures from the cut edge of the bowel 
to the subcuticular tissue complete the maturation of the ileostomy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland 
M, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996:1278.)
vein. The size of the defect depends on the size of the bowel 
used to create the stoma, but should be as small as possible with-
out compromising the intestinal blood supply (usually the width 
of two to three fingers). The bowel is then brought through the 
defect and secured with sutures. The abdominal incision is usu-
ally closed and dressed prior to maturing the stoma to avoid 
contaminating the wound. In order to make appliance use easier, 
a protruding nipple is fashioned by everting the bowel. Three 
or four interrupted absorbable sutures are placed through the 
edge of the bowel, then through the serosa, approximately 2 cm 
proximal to the edge, and then through the dermis (Brooke 
technique). After the stoma is everted, the mucocutaneous 
junction is sutured circumferentially with interrupted absorb-
able suture (Fig. 29-16).
Ileostomy
Temporary Ileostomy.  A temporary ileostomy is often used 
to “protect” an anastomosis that is at risk for leakage (low 
in the rectum, in an irradiated field, in an immunocompro-
mised or malnourished patient, and during some emergency 
operations). In this setting, the stoma is often constructed as 
a loop ileostomy (see Fig. 29-12). A segment of distal ileum 
is brought through the defect in the abdominal wall as a loop. 
An enterotomy is created and the stoma matured as described 
earlier. The loop may be secured with or without an underly-
ing rod. A divided loop may also be created by firing a linear 
cutting/stapler across the distal limb of the loop flush with the 
skin followed by maturation of the proximal limb of the loop. 
Midline
incision
Stoma site
Lateral edge
of rectus sheath
Waistline
Hipline
3
1193
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
This technique prevents incomplete diversion that occasion-
ally occurs with a loop ileostomy.
The advantage of a loop or divided loop ileostomy is that 
subsequent closure can often be accomplished without a formal 
laparotomy. An elliptical incision is created around the stoma 
and the bowel gently dissected free of the subcutaneous tissues 
and fascia. A hand-sewn or stapled anastomosis can then be 
created and the intestine returned to the peritoneal cavity. This 
avoids a long laparotomy incision and generally is well tolerated. 
The timing of ileostomy closure should take into account anas-
tomotic healing as well as the patient’s overall condition. A 
flexible endoscopy exam and a contrast enema (Gastrografin) 
are recommended prior to closure to ensure that the anastomo-
sis has not leaked and is patent. A patient’s nutritional status 
should be optimized. In cancer patients receiving adjuvant 
chemotherapy, ileostomy closure should be delayed until the 
chemotherapy is completed.
Permanent Ileostomy.  A permanent ileostomy is some-
times required after total proctocolectomy or in patients with 
obstruction. An end ileostomy is the preferred configuration for 
a permanent ileostomy because a symmetric protruding nipple 
can be fashioned more easily than with a loop ileostomy (see 
Fig. 29-16). The end of the small intestine is brought through 
the abdominal wall defect and matured. Stitches are often used 
to secure the bowel to the posterior fascia.
Complications of Ileostomy.  Stoma necrosis may occur in 
the early postoperative period and is usually caused by skel-
etonizing the distal small bowel and/or creating an overly tight 
fascial defect. Limited mucosal necrosis above the fascia may 
be treated expectantly, but necrosis below the level of the fascia 
requires surgical revision. Stoma retraction may occur early or 
late and may be exacerbated by obesity. Local revision may 
be necessary. The creation of an ileostomy bypasses the fluid-
absorbing capability of the colon, and dehydration with fluid 
and electrolyte abnormalities is not uncommon. Ideally, ileos-
tomy output should be maintained at less than 1500 mL/d to 
avoid this problem. Bulk agents and opioids (Lomotil, Imodium, 
tincture of opium) are useful. The somatostatin analogue, 
octreotide, has been used with varying success in this setting. 
Skin irritation can also occur, especially if the stoma appliance 
fits poorly. Skin-protecting agents and custom pouches can help 
to solve this problem. Obstruction may occur intra-abdominally 
or at the site where the stoma exits the fascia. Parastomal hernia 
is less common after an ileostomy than after a colostomy but can 
cause poor appliance fitting, pain, obstruction, or strangulation. 
In general, symptomatic parastomal hernias should be repaired. 
A variety of techniques to repair these hernias have been 
described, including local repair (either with or without mesh), 
laparoscopic repair, and stoma resiting. Prolapse is a rare, late 
complication and is often associated with a parastomal hernia.
Colostomy.  Most colostomies are created as end colostomies 
rather than loop colostomies (Fig. 29-17). The bulkiness of the 
colon makes a loop colostomy awkward for use of an appliance, 
and prolapse is more likely with this configuration. Most colos-
tomies are created on the left side of the colon. An abdominal 
wall defect is created and the end of the colon mobilized through 
it. Because a protruding stoma is considerably easier to pouch, 
colostomies should also be matured in a Brooke fashion. The 
distal bowel may be brought through the abdominal wall as a 
mucus fistula or left intra-abdominally as a Hartmann’s pouch. 
Tacking the distal end of the colon to the abdominal wall or 
Figure 29-17.  Intraperitoneal end colostomy.
tagging it with permanent suture can make identification of the 
stump easier if the colostomy is closed at a later date. Closure 
of an end colostomy has traditionally required a laparotomy, but 
increasingly minimally invasive techniques have been adopted. 
The stoma is dissected free of the abdominal wall and the distal 
bowel identified. An end-to-end anastomosis is then created.
Complications of Colostomy.  Colostomy necrosis may occur 
in the early postoperative period and results from an impaired 
vascular supply (skeletonization of the distal colon or a tight fas-
cial defect). Like ileostomy necrosis, limited suprafascial necro-
sis may be followed expectantly, but necrosis below the fascia 
requires surgery. Retraction may also occur but is less problem-
atic with a colostomy than with an ileostomy because the stool 
is less irritating to the skin than succus entericus. Obstruction 
is unusual, but may also occur. Parastomal hernia is the most 
common late complication of a colostomy and requires repair 
if it is symptomatic. Prolapse occurs rarely, but is more com-
mon with a loop colostomy. Interestingly, it is almost always 
the efferent limb of the loop that prolapses. Dehydration is rare 
after colostomy, and skin irritation is less common than with 
ileostomy.
Functional Results
Function following segmental colonic resection and primary 
anastomosis is generally excellent. A small percentage of 
patients following subtotal or total colectomy and ileosigmoid 
or ileorectal anastomosis may experience diarrhea and bowel 
frequency. This is especially true if the patient is elderly, if sig-
nificant length of small bowel has been resected, and if residual 
proctocolitis is poorly controlled. In general, the more distal the 
anastomosis, the greater is the risk of troublesome diarrhea and 
frequency. However, some patients develop significant diarrhea 
after right colectomy due to malabsorption of bile acids; in these 
cases, bile acid binding resins (e.g., cholestyramine) sometimes 
can be helpful.
Function following anterior resection is highly dependent 
on the level of anastomosis, the use of pre- or postoperative 
pelvic radiation, and underlying sphincter function. Following 
low anterior or extended low anterior resection, some surgeons 
1194
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
prefer to construct a short (5-cm) colon J-pouch to anastomose 
to the distal rectum or anal canal or, alternatively, a transverse 
coloplasty to increase the capacity of the neorectum. The res-
ervoirs are thought to lessen urgency, frequency, and inconti-
nence, but some patients have difficulty initiating defecation, 
and long-term superiority over a “straight” anastomosis has yet 
to be proven. In addition, these reservoirs can be technically dif-
ficult, especially in an obese male with a narrow pelvis.
The physical and psychological problems associated with 
a permanent Brooke ileostomy led to development of the con-
tinent Kock pouch ileostomy. Unfortunately, complications, 
especially complications related to valve slippage, are common. 
Despite variations of technique designed to improve the func-
tion of the continent ileostomy, most surgeons have abandoned 
this operation and instead perform restorative proctocolectomy 
with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis.
Although ileal pouch–anal reconstruction is anatomically 
appealing, functional outcome is far from perfect.6,25 Patients 
should be counseled to expect 8 to 10 bowel movements per day. 
Up to 50% have some degree of nocturnal incontinence. Pouchi-
tis occurs in nearly 50% of patients who undergo the operation 
for chronic ulcerative colitis, and small bowel obstruction is not 
uncommon. Other less common complications include difficul-
ties with pouch evacuation, pouch-anal and/or pouch-vaginal 
fistula, and anal stricture. Pouch failure rate averages 5% to 
10%. Patients who are subsequently diagnosed with Crohn’s 
disease have a considerably higher pouch failure rate (approxi-
mately 50%), whereas patients with indeterminate colitis have a 
lower pouch failure rate (15%–20%). Despite these drawbacks, 
the vast majority of patients are satisfied and prefer ileal pouch–
anal reconstruction to permanent ileostomy.
Pouchitis is an inflammatory condition that affects both 
ileoanal pouches and continent ileostomy reservoirs. The inci-
dence of pouchitis ranges from 30% to 55%. Symptoms include 
increased diarrhea, hematochezia, abdominal pain, fever, and 
malaise. Diagnosis is made endoscopically with biopsies. Dif-
ferential diagnosis includes infection and undiagnosed Crohn’s 
disease. The etiology of pouchitis is unknown. Some believe 
pouchitis results from fecal stasis within the pouch, but empty-
ing studies are not confirmatory. Antibiotics (metronidazole ± 
ciprofloxacin) are the mainstays of therapy, and most patients 
will respond rapidly to either oral preparations or enemas.32,33 
Some patients develop chronic pouchitis that necessitates ongo-
ing suppressive antibiotic therapy. Salicylate and corticosteroid 
enemas have also been used with some success. Reintroduction 
of normal flora by ingestion of probiotics and/or an elemental 
diet have been suggested as a possible treatment in refractory 
cases. Occasionally, pouch excision is necessary to control the 
symptoms of chronic pouchitis.
Anesthesia Considerations
Local Anesthesia.  Many anorectal procedures can be per-
formed with local anesthetic alone. Intravenous sedation is often 
provided to calm the patient. Injection of 0.5% lidocaine (short 
acting) and 0.25% bupivacaine (long acting) into the perianal 
skin, sphincter, and area around the pudendal nerves usually 
provides an adequate block. The addition of dilute epinephrine 
decreases bleeding and prolongs the anesthetic effect.
Regional Anesthesia.  Epidural, spinal, and caudal anesthetics 
can be used for anorectal procedures and transanal resections. 
In patients with severe medical comorbidity, regional anesthe-
sia may occasionally be used for laparotomy and colectomy. 
Postoperative epidural anesthesia provides excellent pain relief 
and improves pulmonary function.
General Anesthesia.  General anesthesia is required for the 
vast majority of intra-abdominal procedures. Patients should 
undergo a thorough preoperative cardiovascular evaluation. In 
patients with significant comorbid disease, an anesthesia con-
sultation may be appropriate.
Positioning.  Most abdominal colectomies can be performed 
in the supine position. Anterior resection and APR require 
lithotomy positioning to facilitate the pelvic dissection and 
mobilization of the splenic flexure. Adequate padding should 
be provided for the patient’s sacrum, and care should be taken 
to avoid stirrup pressure on the peroneal nerves.
Anorectal procedures may be performed in lithotomy 
or in the prone jackknife position. Some surgeons prefer the 
prone jackknife position because exposure may be better, espe-
cially for anterior lesions. Distal posterior lesions can usually 
be accessed from either position, but more proximal posterior 
lesions are better accessed in the prone position.
Operative Preliminaries
Bowel Preparation.  The rationale for bowel preparation is 
that decreasing the bacterial load in the colon and rectum will 
decrease the incidence of postoperative infection. Mechanical 
bowel preparation uses cathartics to rid the colon of solid stool 
the night before surgery.28,29 The most commonly used regimens 
include polyethylene glycol (PEG) solutions or magnesium 
citrate. PEG solutions require patients to drink a large volume 
of fluid and may cause bloating and nausea. Magnesium citrate 
solutions are generally better tolerated but are more likely to 
cause fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Both are equally 
efficacious in bowel cleansing. Preparatory formulations have 
been recently introduced in tablet form in an attempt to improve 
tolerance. However, these methods of bowel cleansing require 
ingestion of 40 or more tablets with water over several hours. 
To date, these formulations have not been proven to be supe-
rior to the more traditional products.34 Antibiotic prophylaxis 
also is recommended. The addition of oral antibiotics to the 
preoperative mechanical bowel preparation has been thought to 
decrease postoperative infection by further decreasing the bacte-
rial load of the colon. However, the regimens used (neomycin, 
erythromycin, or metronidazole) frequently caused gastroin-
testinal upset that interfered with the mechanical preparation, 
and many surgeons have abandoned oral antibiotic prophylaxis. 
Nevertheless, a recent analysis of the Surgical Care Improve-
ment Project-1 (SCIP-1) suggests that oral antibiotics do reduce 
postoperative wound infection, especially if a mechanical bowel 
preparation is not used.35
Prospective randomized trials are needed to better under-
stand the role of oral antibiotic prophylaxis in colorectal surgery. 
In contrast, longstanding, convincing data support the efficacy of 
parenteral antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of surgery. Broad-
spectrum parenteral antibiotic(s) with activity against aerobic 
and anaerobic enteric pathogens should be administered just 
prior to the skin incision and redosed as needed depending on 
the length of the operation. There is no proven benefit to using 
antibiotics postoperatively after an uncomplicated colectomy.
Despite widespread use of mechanical bowel prepara-
tion, the necessity of bowel cleansing prior to colectomy has 
been questioned. European surgeons in particular have advo-
cated abandoning this practice. Arguments against mechanical 
1195
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
bowel preparation include dehydration and electrolyte abnor-
malities that often result from bowel cleansing, as well as the 
risk of spillage of liquid stool left over from the “prep.” Argu-
ments in favor of mechanical bowel preparation included easier 
manipulation of an “empty” colon (especially in minimally 
invasive procedures) and avoidance of a “stool column” above 
an anastomosis, especially in the pelvis. Interestingly, a recent 
meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials suggested that 
mechanical bowel preparation does not prevent surgical site 
infection and should be abandoned in clinical practice.36
Ureteral Stents.  Ureteral stents may be useful for identify-
ing the ureters intraoperatively and are placed via cystoscopy 
after the induction of general anesthesia and removed at the 
end of the operation. Stents can be invaluable during reopera-
tive pelvic surgery or when there is significant retroperitoneal 
inflammation (such as complicated diverticulitis), as well as in 
obese patients. Lighted stents may be helpful in laparoscopic 
and robotic resections. Patients often have transient hematuria 
postoperatively, but major complications are rare.
Multidisciplinary Teams.  Patients with complex colorectal 
disease often benefit from a multidisciplinary approach to their 
care. Patients with pelvic floor disorders (especially inconti-
nence) often require evaluation by both a colorectal surgeon 
and a urologist or urogynecologist. Preoperative evaluation of 
cancer patients by a medical oncologist and/or radiation oncolo-
gist is crucial for planning either neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. 
Intraoperatively, complex pelvic resections often require the 
involvement of not only a colorectal surgeon but also a urolo-
gist, gynecologic oncologist, neurosurgeon, and/or plastic sur-
geon. Radiation oncologists should be involved in the operation 
if brachytherapy catheters are to be placed for intracavitary radi-
ation or if intraoperative radiation therapy is planned. Rarely, 
psychiatric disorders may manifest as colorectal problems 
(especially functional disorders and chronic pain), and involve-
ment of a psychiatrist or psychologist may be beneficial.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
General Considerations
Epidemiology.  Inflammatory bowel disease includes ulcer-
ative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and indeterminate colitis. Ulcer-
ative colitis occurs in 8 to 15 people per 100,000 in the United 
States and Northern Europe. The incidence is considerably lower 
in Asia, Africa, and South America, and among the nonwhite 
population in the United States. Ulcerative colitis incidence 
peaks during the third decade of life and again in the seventh 
decade of life. The incidence of Crohn’s disease is slightly lower, 
1 to 5 people per 100,000. Crohn’s disease also affects North-
ern European and white populations disproportionately. Crohn’s 
disease has a similar bimodal incidence, with most cases occur-
ring between ages 15 to 30 years and ages 55 to 60 years. In 
15% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease, differentiation 
between ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s colitis is impossible; these 
patients are classified as having indeterminate colitis.
Etiology.  Many different etiologies for inflammatory bowel 
disease have been proposed, but none are proven. The consistent 
geographic differences in incidence suggest an environmental 
factor such as diet or infection. Alcohol and oral contraceptive 
use have also been implicated. Smoking has been implicated in 
the etiology and exacerbation of Crohn’s disease in particular. 
Family history may play a role because 10% to 30% of patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease report a family member with 
the same disease.37,38 Other theories focus on an autoimmune 
mechanism and/or a defect in the intestinal immune system. 
While there is general agreement that interaction among the 
immune system, the mucosal barrier of the gut, and a variety of 
infectious agents is involved in the pathogenesis of inflamma-
tory bowel disease, the mechanism(s) by which these interac-
tions produce disease is poorly understood. Bacteria, such as 
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis and Listeria monocytogenes, 
and viruses, such as paramyxovirus and measles virus, have 
been suggested as etiologic agents in Crohn’s disease. A defect 
in the gut mucosal barrier, which increases exposure to intra-
luminal bacteria, toxins, or proinflammatory substances, also 
has been suggested. Finally, as noted earlier, an autoimmune 
mechanism has been postulated. Although there is no clear evi-
dence linking an immunologic disorder to inflammatory bowel 
disease, the similarity of many of the extraintestinal manifesta-
tions to rheumatologic disorders has made this theory attractive. 
Regardless of the underlying cause of either ulcerative colitis or 
Crohn’s disease, both disorders are characterized by intestinal 
inflammation, and medical therapy is largely based on reducing 
inflammation.
Pathology and Differential Diagnosis.  Although ulcerative 
colitis and Crohn’s colitis share many pathologic and clinical 
similarities, these conditions may be differentiated in 85% of 
patients. Ulcerative colitis is a mucosal process in which the 
colonic mucosa and submucosa are infiltrated with inflamma-
tory cells. The mucosa may be atrophic, and crypt abscesses 
are common. Endoscopically, the mucosa is frequently friable 
and may possess multiple inflammatory pseudopolyps. In long-
standing ulcerative colitis, the colon may be foreshortened and 
the mucosa replaced by scar. In quiescent ulcerative colitis, 
the colonic mucosa may appear normal both endoscopically 
and microscopically. Ulcerative colitis may affect the rectum 
(proctitis), rectum and sigmoid colon (proctosigmoiditis), rec-
tum and left colon (left-sided colitis), or the rectum and entire 
colon (pancolitis). Ulcerative colitis does not involve the small 
intestine, but the terminal ileum may demonstrate inflammatory 
changes (“backwash ileitis”). A key feature of ulcerative colitis 
is the continuous involvement of the rectum and colon; rectal 
sparing or skip lesions suggest a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. 
Symptoms are related to the degree of mucosal inflammation 
and the extent of colitis. Patients typically complain of bloody 
diarrhea and crampy abdominal pain. Proctitis may produce 
tenesmus. Severe abdominal pain and fever raise the concern 
of fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon. Physical findings are 
nonspecific and range from minimal abdominal tenderness and 
distention to frank peritonitis. In the nonemergent setting, the 
diagnosis is typically made by colonoscopy and mucosal biopsy.
In contrast to ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease is a trans-
mural inflammatory process that can affect any part of the gas-
trointestinal tract from mouth to anus. Mucosal ulcerations, an 
inflammatory cell infiltrate, and noncaseating granulomas are 
characteristic pathologic findings. Chronic inflammation may 
ultimately result in fibrosis, strictures, and fistulas in either the 
colon or small intestine. The endoscopic appearance of Crohn’s 
colitis is characterized by deep serpiginous ulcers and a 
“cobblestone” appearance. Skip lesions and rectal sparing are 
common. Symptoms of Crohn’s disease depend on the sever-
ity of inflammation and/or fibrosis and the location of inflam-
mation in the gastrointestinal tract. Acute inflammation may 
1196
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
produce diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, and fever. Strictures 
may produce symptoms of obstruction. Weight loss is common, 
both because of obstruction and from protein loss. Perianal 
Crohn’s disease may present with pain, swelling, and drainage 
from fistulas or abscesses. Physical findings are also related to 
the site and severity of disease.
In 15% of patients with colitis from inflammatory bowel 
disease, differentiation of ulcerative colitis from Crohn’s colitis 
is impossible either grossly or microscopically (indeterminate 
colitis). These patients typically present with symptoms similar 
to ulcerative colitis. Endoscopic and pathologic findings usually 
include features common to both diseases. Increasingly, sero-
logic markers have been employed to differentiate ulcerative 
colitis from Crohn’s disease. The anti-Saccharomyces cerevi-
siae antibody (ASCA) and perinuclear anticytoplasmic antibody 
(pANCA) may be useful in differentiating these two processes 
but require prospective study.39
Further differential diagnoses include infectious colitides, 
especially Campylobacter jejuni, Entamoeba histolytica, C. diffi-
cile, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Salmonella, and Shigella species.
Extraintestinal Manifestations.  The liver is a common site 
of extracolonic disease in inflammatory bowel disease. Fatty 
infiltration of the liver is present in 40% to 50% of patients, and 
cirrhosis is found in 2% to 5%. Fatty infiltration may be reversed 
by medical or surgical treatment of colonic disease, but cirrhosis 
is irreversible. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a progressive 
disease characterized by intra- and extrahepatic bile duct stric-
tures. Forty percent to 60% of patients with primary sclerosing 
cholangitis have ulcerative colitis. Colectomy will not reverse 
this disease, and the only effective therapy is liver transplan-
tation.40 Pericholangitis is also associated with inflammatory 
bowel disease and may be diagnosed with a liver biopsy. Bile 
duct carcinoma is a rare complication of long-standing inflam-
matory bowel disease. Patients who develop bile duct carcinoma 
in the presence of inflammatory bowel disease are, on average, 
20 years younger than other patients with bile duct carcinoma.
Arthritis also is a common extracolonic manifesta-
tion of inflammatory bowel disease, and the incidence is 20 
times greater than in the general population. Arthritis usually 
improves with treatment of the colonic disease. Sacroiliitis and 
ankylosing spondylitis are associated with inflammatory bowel 
disease, although the relationship is poorly understood. Medical 
and surgical treatment of the colonic disease does not impact 
symptoms.
Erythema nodosum is seen in 5% to 15% of patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease and usually coincides with clinical 
disease activity. Women are affected three to four times more 
frequently than men. The characteristic lesions are raised, red, 
and predominantly on the lower legs. Pyoderma gangrenosum 
is an uncommon but serious condition that occurs almost exclu-
sively in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. The lesion 
begins as an erythematous plaque, papule, or bleb, usually 
located on the pretibial region of the leg and occasionally near 
a stoma. The lesions progress and ulcerate, leading to a painful, 
necrotic wound. Pyoderma gangrenosum may respond to resec-
tion of the affected bowel in some patients. In others, this disor-
der is unaffected by treatment of the underlying bowel disease.
Up to 10% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease 
will develop ocular lesions. These include uveitis, iritis, episcle-
ritis, and conjunctivitis. They usually develop during an acute 
exacerbation of the inflammatory bowel disease. The etiology 
is unknown.
Principles of Nonoperative Management.  Medical therapy 
for inflammatory bowel disease focuses on decreasing inflam-
mation and alleviating symptoms, and many of the agents used 
are the same for both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. In 
general, mild to moderate flares may be treated in the outpatient 
setting. More severe signs and symptoms mandate hospitalization. 
Pancolitis generally requires more aggressive therapy than lim-
ited disease. Because ulcerative proctitis and proctosigmoiditis 
are limited to the distal large intestine, topical therapy with 
salicylate and/or corticosteroid suppositories and enemas can 
be extremely effective. Systemic therapy is rarely required in 
these patients.
Salicylates.  Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine), 5-acetyl salicylic 
acid (5-ASA), and related compounds are first-line agents in 
the medical treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory bowel 
disease. These compounds decrease inflammation by inhibition 
of cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase in the gut mucosa. They 
require direct contact with affected mucosa for efficacy. Mul-
tiple preparations are available for administration to different 
sites in the small intestine and colon (sulfasalazine, mesalamine 
[Pentasa, Asacol, Rowasa]).
Antibiotics.  Antibiotics are often used to decrease the intra-
luminal bacterial load in Crohn’s disease. Metronidazole has 
been reported to improve Crohn’s colitis and perianal disease, 
but the evidence is weak. Fluoroquinolones may also be effec-
tive in some cases. In the absence of fulminant colitis or toxic 
megacolon, antibiotics are not used to treat ulcerative colitis.
Corticosteroids.  Corticosteroids (either oral or parenteral) are a 
key component of treatment for an acute exacerbation of either 
ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease. Corticosteroids are nonspe-
cific inhibitors of the immune system, and 75% to 90% of patients 
will improve with the administration of these drugs. However, 
corticosteroids have a number of serious side effects, and use of 
these agents should be limited to the shortest course possible. In 
addition, corticosteroids should be used judiciously in children 
because of the potential adverse effect on growth. Failure to wean 
corticosteroids is a relative indication for surgery.
Because of the systemic effects of corticosteroids, an 
effort has been made to develop drugs that act locally and 
have limited systemic absorption. Agents such as budesonide, 
beclomethasone dipropionate, and tixocortol pivalate undergo 
rapid hepatic degradation that significantly decreases systemic 
toxicity. Budesonide is available as an oral preparation. Corti-
costeroid enemas provide effective local therapy for proctitis 
and proctosigmoiditis and have fewer side effects than systemic 
corticosteroids.
Immunomodulating Agents.  Azathioprine and 6-mercatopu-
rine (6-MP) are antimetabolite drugs that interfere with nucleic 
acid synthesis and thus decrease proliferation of inflammatory 
cells. These agents are useful for treating ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn’s disease in patients who have failed salicylate therapy 
or who are dependent on, or refractory to, corticosteroids. It 
is important to note, however, that the onset of action of these 
drugs takes 6 to 12 weeks, and concomitant use of corticoste-
roids almost always is required.37
Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive agent that inter-
feres with T-lymphocyte function. While cyclosporine is not 
routinely used to treat inflammatory bowel disease, up to 80% 
of patients with an acute flare of ulcerative colitis will improve 
with its use. However, the majority of these patients will ulti-
mately require colectomy. Cyclosporine is also occasionally 
1197
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
used to treat exacerbations of Crohn’s disease, and approxi-
mately two-thirds of patients will note some improvement. 
Improvement is generally apparent within 2 weeks of beginning 
cyclosporine therapy. Long-term use of cyclosporine is limited 
by its significant toxicities (e.g., nephrotoxicity, hirsutism, gum 
hypertrophy).
Methotrexate is a folate antagonist that also has been used 
to treat inflammatory bowel disease. Although the efficacy of 
this agent is unproven, there are reports that more than 50% of 
patients will improve with administration of this drug.41
Biologic Agents.  In an effort to improve treatment for steroid-
refractory inflammatory bowel disease, a new class of agents 
has been developed based on inhibition of tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-α). Intravenous infusion of these agents decreases 
inflammation systemically. Infliximab is a monoclonal antibody 
directed against TNF-α and was the first biologic agent used to 
treat Crohn’s disease. More than 50% of patients with moderate 
to severe Crohn’s disease will improve with infliximab therapy.42 
This agent also has been useful in treating patients with perianal 
Crohn’s disease. Recurrence is common, however; and many 
patients require infusions on a bimonthly basis. Newer anti-
TNF-α agents, such as adalimumab and certolizumab pegol, 
also show promise in treating Crohn’s disease.43
The use of anti-TNF-α agents for the treatment of ulcer-
ative colitis has been less well studied, but there are reports of 
efficacy in this setting, and adalimumab has been approved for 
treatment of steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis in Europe.44,45 
Interestingly, anti-TNF-α therapy may also be beneficial in 
treating the extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory 
bowel disease in some patients.40
Nutrition.  Patients with inflammatory bowel disease are often 
malnourished. Abdominal pain and obstructive symptoms may 
decrease oral intake. Diarrhea can cause significant protein loss. 
Ongoing inflammation produces a catabolic physiologic state. 
Parenteral nutrition should be strongly considered early in the 
course of therapy for either Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis. 
The nutritional status of the patient also should be considered 
when planning operative intervention, and nutritional param-
eters such as serum albumin, prealbumin, and transferrin should 
be assessed. In extremely malnourished patients, especially 
those who are also being treated with corticosteroids, creation 
of a stoma is often safer than a primary anastomosis.
Ulcerative Colitis
Ulcerative colitis is a dynamic disease characterized by remis-
sions and exacerbations. The clinical spectrum ranges from 
an inactive or quiescent phase to low-grade active disease 
to fulminant disease. The onset of ulcerative colitis may be 
insidious, with minimal bloody stools, or the onset can be 
abrupt, with severe diarrhea and bleeding, tenesmus, abdomi-
nal pain, and fever. The severity of symptoms depends on 
the degree and extent of inflammation. Although anemia is 
common, massive hemorrhage is rare. Physical findings are 
often nonspecific.
The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis is almost always made 
endoscopically. Because the rectum is invariably involved, 
proctoscopy may be adequate to establish the diagnosis. The 
earliest manifestation is mucosal edema, which results in a loss 
of the normal vascular pattern. In more advanced disease, char-
acteristic findings include mucosal friability and ulceration. Pus 
and mucus may also be present. While mucosal biopsy is often 
diagnostic in the chronic phase of ulcerative colitis, biopsy in 
the acute phase will often reveal only nonspecific inflammation. 
Evaluation with colonoscopy or barium enema during an acute 
flare is contraindicated because of the risk of perforation.
Barium enema has been used to diagnose chronic ulcer-
ative colitis and to determine the extent of disease. However, 
this modality is less sensitive than colonoscopy and may not 
detect early disease. In long-standing ulcerative colitis, the 
colon is foreshortened and lacks haustral markings (“lead pipe” 
colon). Because the inflammation in ulcerative colitis is purely 
mucosal, strictures are highly uncommon. Any stricture diag-
nosed in a patient with ulcerative colitis must be presumed to 
be malignant until proven otherwise.
Indications for Surgery.  Indications for surgery in ulcer-
ative colitis may be emergent or elective. Emergency surgery is 
required for patients with massive life-threatening hemorrhage, 
toxic megacolon, or fulminant colitis who fail to respond rap-
idly to medical therapy. Patients with signs and symptoms of 
fulminant colitis should be treated aggressively with bowel rest, 
hydration, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral corticoste-
roids. Colonoscopy and barium enema are contraindicated, and 
antidiarrheal agents should be avoided. Deterioration in clinical 
condition or failure to improve within 24 to 48 hours mandates 
surgery.
Indications for elective surgery include intractability 
despite maximal medical therapy and high-risk development of 
major complications of medical therapy such as aseptic necrosis 
of joints secondary to chronic steroid use. Elective surgery also 
is indicated in patients at significant risk of developing colorec-
tal carcinoma. The risk of malignancy increases with pancolonic 
disease and the duration of symptoms and is approximately 
2% after 10 years, 8% after 20 years, and 18% after 30 years. 
Unlike sporadic colorectal cancers, carcinoma developing in the 
context of ulcerative colitis is more likely to arise from areas 
of flat dysplasia and may be difficult to diagnose at an early 
stage. For this reason, it is recommended that patients with long-
standing ulcerative colitis undergo colonoscopic surveillance 
with multiple (40–50), random biopsies to identify dysplasia 
before invasive malignancy develops. However, the adequacy 
of this type of screening is controversial. Recently, magnify-
ing chromoendoscopy has been used to improve sensitivity.46,47 
This technique uses topical dyes that are applied to the colonic 
mucosa at the time of endoscopy (Lugol’s solution, methylene 
blue, indigo carmine, and others). These dyes highlight contrast 
between normal and dysplastic epithelium, allowing more pre-
cise biopsy of suspicious areas. Surveillance is recommended 
annually after 8 years in patients with pancolitis, and annually 
after 15 years in patients with left-sided colitis. Although low-
grade dysplasia was long thought to represent minimal risk, 
more recent studies show that invasive cancer may be present 
in up to 20% of patients with low-grade dysplasia. For this rea-
son, any patient with dysplasia should be advised to undergo 
proctocolectomy. Controversy exists over whether prophylac-
tic proctocolectomy should be recommended for patients who 
have had chronic ulcerative colitis for greater than 10 years in 
the absence of dysplasia. Proponents of this approach note that 
surveillance colonoscopy with multiple biopsies samples only 
a small fraction of the colonic mucosa, and dysplasia and carci-
noma are often missed. Opponents cite the relatively low risk of 
progression to carcinoma (approximately 2.4%) if all biopsies 
lack dysplasia. Neither approach has been shown definitively to 
decrease mortality from colorectal cancer.
1198
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Operative Management
Emergent Operation.  In a patient with fulminant colitis or toxic 
megacolon, total abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy (with 
or without a mucus fistula), rather than total proctocolectomy, is 
recommended. Although the rectum is invariably diseased, most 
patients improve dramatically after an abdominal colectomy, 
and this operation avoids a difficult and time-consuming pel-
vic dissection in a critically ill patient. Rarely, a loop ileostomy 
and decompressing colostomy may be necessary if the patient 
is too unstable to withstand colectomy. Definitive surgery may 
then be undertaken at a later date once the patient has recovered. 
Complex techniques, such as an ileal pouch–anal reconstruction, 
generally are contraindicated in the emergent setting. However, 
massive hemorrhage that includes bleeding from the rectum may 
necessitate proctectomy and creation of either a permanent ileos-
tomy or an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis.
Elective Operation.  Elective resection for ulcerative colitis 
usually is performed for refractory inflammation and/or the 
risk of malignancy (dysplasia). Because of the risk of ongo-
ing inflammation, the risk of malignancy, and the availability 
of restorative proctocolectomy, most surgeons recommend 
operations that include resection of the rectum. Total procto-
colectomy with end ileostomy has been the “gold standard” for 
treating patients with chronic ulcerative colitis. This operation 
removes the entire affected intestine and avoids the functional 
disturbances associated with ileal pouch–anal reconstruction. 
Most patients function well physically and psychologically after 
this operation. Total proctocolectomy with continent ileostomy 
(Kock’s pouch) was developed to improve function and quality 
of life after total proctocolectomy, but morbidity is significant, 
and restorative proctocolectomy is generally preferred today. 
Since its introduction in 1980, restorative proctocolectomy 
with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis has become the procedure 
of choice for most patients who require total proctocolectomy 
but wish to avoid a permanent ileostomy (see Figs. 29-11 and 
29-12).6 Abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis may 
be appropriate for a patient with indeterminate colitis and rectal 
sparing.
Crohn’s Disease
Similar to ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease is characterized by 
exacerbations and remissions. Crohn’s disease, however, may 
affect any portion of the intestinal tract, from mouth to anus. 
Diagnosis may be made by colonoscopy or esophagogastroduo-
denoscopy or by barium small bowel study or enema, depending 
on which part of the intestine is most affected. The presence of 
skip lesions is key in differentiating Crohn’s colitis from ulcer-
ative colitis, and rectal sparing occurs in approximately 40% of 
patients. The most common site of involvement of Crohn’s disease 
is the terminal ileum and cecum (ileocolic Crohn’s disease), 
followed by the small bowel, and then by the colon and rectum. 
Perianal and anal canal Crohn’s disease manifest by complex 
anal fistulae and/or abscesses, anal ulcers, and large skin tags 
may be the initial site of presentation in up to 4% of cases.
Indications for Surgery.  Because Crohn’s disease can affect 
any part of the gastrointestinal tract, the therapeutic rationale is 
fundamentally different from that of ulcerative colitis. Ulcer-
ative colitis may be cured by removal of the affected intesti-
nal segment (the colon and rectum). In Crohn’s disease, it is 
impossible to remove all the at-risk intestine; therefore, surgical 
therapy is reserved for complications of the disease.
Crohn’s disease may present as an acute inflammatory 
process or as a chronic fibrotic process. During the acute inflam-
matory phase, patients may present with intestinal inflamma-
tion complicated by fistulae and/or intra-abdominal abscesses. 
Maximal medical therapy should be instituted, including anti-
inflammatory medications, bowel rest, and antibiotics. Parenteral 
nutrition should be considered if the patient is malnourished. 
Most intra-abdominal abscesses can be drained percutaneously 
with the use of CT scan guidance. Although the majority of 
these patients will ultimately require surgery to remove the dis-
eased segment of bowel, these interventions allow the patient’s 
condition to stabilize, nutrition to be optimized, and inflamma-
tion to decrease prior to embarking on a surgical resection. Once 
an operation is undertaken, fistulae generally require resection 
of the segment of bowel with active Crohn’s disease; the sec-
ondary sites of the fistula are often otherwise normal and do not 
generally require resection after division of the fistula. Simple 
closure of the secondary fistula site usually suffices.
Chronic fibrosis may result in strictures in any part of the 
gastrointestinal tract. Because the fibrotic process is gradual, 
free perforation proximal to the obstructing stricture is rare. 
Chronic strictures almost never improve with medical therapy. 
Optimal timing for surgery should take into account the patient’s 
underlying medical and nutritional status.
Strictures may be treated with resection or stricturoplasty. 
Distal ileal strictures are sometimes amenable to colonoscopic 
balloon dilatation.
Once an operation is undertaken for Crohn’s disease, sev-
eral principles should guide intraoperative decision making. In 
general, a laparotomy for Crohn’s disease should be performed 
through a midline incision because of the possible need for 
a stoma. Laparoscopy is also increasingly used in this setting. 
Because many patients with Crohn’s disease often will require 
multiple operations, the length of bowel removed should be mini-
mized. Bowel should be resected to an area with grossly normal 
margins; frozen sections are not necessary. Finally, a primary 
anastomosis may be created safely if the patient is medically 
stable, nutritionally replete, and taking few immunosuppressive 
medications. Creation of a stoma should be strongly considered 
in any patient who is hemodynamically unstable, septic, malnour-
ished, or receiving high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and 
among patients with extensive intra-abdominal contamination.
Ileocolic and Small Bowel Crohn’s Disease.  The terminal 
ileum and cecum are involved in Crohn’s disease in up to 41% 
of patients; the small intestine is involved in up to 35% of 
patients. The most common indications for surgery are inter-
nal fistula or abscess (30%–38% of patients) and obstruction 
(35%–37% of patients). Psoas abscess may result from ileo-
colic Crohn’s disease. Sepsis should be controlled with per-
cutaneous drainage of abscess(es) and antibiotics, if possible. 
Parenteral nutrition may be necessary in patients with chronic 
obstruction. The extent of resection depends on the amount of 
involved intestine. Short segments of inflamed small intestine 
and right colon should be resected and a primary anastomosis 
created if the patient is stable, nutrition is adequate, and immu-
nosuppression is minimal. Isolated chronic strictures should 
also be resected. In patients with multiple fibrotic strictures 
that would require extensive small bowel resection, strictu-
roplasty is a safe and effective alternative to resection. Short 
strictures are amenable to a transverse stricturoplasty, while 
longer strictures may be treated with a side-to-side small 
bowel anastomosis (Fig. 29-18).
1199
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Risk of recurrence after resection for ileocolic and small 
bowel Crohn’s disease is high. More than 50% of patients will 
experience a recurrence within 10 years, and the majority of 
these will require a second operation.
Crohn’s Colitis.  Crohn’s disease of the large intestine may 
present as fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon. In this set-
ting, treatment is identical to treatment of fulminant colitis and 
toxic megacolon secondary to ulcerative colitis. Resuscitation 
and medical therapy with bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics, and parenteral corticosteroids should be instituted. If the 
patient’s condition worsens or fails to rapidly improve, total 
abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy is recommended. An 
elective proctectomy may be required if the patient has refrac-
tory Crohn’s proctitis. Alternatively, if the rectum is spared, an 
ileorectal anastomosis may be appropriate once the patient has 
recovered.
Other indications for surgery in chronic Crohn’s colitis are 
intractability, complications of medical therapy, and risk of or 
development of malignancy. Unlike ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s 
colitis may be segmental, and rectal sparing is often observed. 
A segmental colectomy may be appropriate if the remaining 
colon and/or rectum appear normal. An isolated colonic stricture 
may also be treated by segmental colectomy. Although it was 
long thought that Crohn’s disease did not increase the risk of 
Figure 29-18.  Alternative stricturoplasty techniques. A. A short stricture is opened along the antimesenteric surface of the bowel wall. B. The 
enterotomy is closed transversely. C. A long stricture is opened along the antimesenteric surface of the bowel wall. D. The bowel is folded 
into an inverted “U.” E. A side-to-side anastomosis is made. (Reproduced with permission from Corman ML. Colon & Rectal Surgery. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1989:832.)
1200
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
colorectal carcinoma, it is now recognized that Crohn’s colitis 
(especially pancolitis) carries nearly the same risk for cancer as 
ulcerative colitis. Annual surveillance colonoscopy with 
multiple biopsies is recommended for patients with long-
standing Crohn’s colitis (>7 years in duration). As in ulcerative 
colitis, dysplasia is an indication for total proctocolectomy. Ileal 
pouch–anal reconstruction is not recommended in these patients 
because of the risk for development of Crohn’s disease within 
the pouch and the high risk of complications, such as fistula, 
abscess, stricture, pouch dysfunction, and pouch failure.
Anal and Perianal Crohn’s Disease.  Anal and perianal mani-
festations of Crohn’s disease are very common and occur in 
35% of all patients with Crohn’s disease. Isolated anal Crohn’s 
disease is uncommon, affecting only 3% to 4% of patients. 
Detection of anal Crohn’s disease, therefore, should prompt 
evaluation of the remainder of the gastrointestinal tract.
The most common perianal lesions in Crohn’s disease 
are skin tags that are minimally symptomatic. Fissures are also 
common. Typically, a fissure from Crohn’s disease is partic-
ularly deep or broad and perhaps better described as an anal 
ulcer. These fissures are often multiple and located in a lateral 
position rather than anterior or posterior midline as seen in an 
idiopathic fissure in ano. A classic-appearing fissure in ano 
located laterally should raise the suspicion of Crohn’s disease. 
Perianal abscess and fistulas are common and can be particu-
larly challenging. Fistulas tend to be complex and often have 
multiple tracts (Fig. 29-19). Hemorrhoids are not more common 
in patients with Crohn’s disease than in the general population, 
although many patients tend to attribute any anal or perianal 
symptom to “hemorrhoids.”
Treatment of anal and perianal Crohn’s disease focuses on 
alleviation of symptoms. Perianal skin irritation from diarrhea 
often responds to medical therapy directed at small bowel or 
colonic disease. In general, skin tags and hemorrhoids should 
not be excised unless they are extremely symptomatic because 
of the risk of creating chronic, nonhealing wounds. Fissures 
may respond to local or systemic therapy; sphincterotomy 
is relatively contraindicated because of the risk of creating a 
chronic, nonhealing wound and because of the increased risk of 
incontinence in a patient with diarrhea from underlying colitis 
or small bowel disease. Anal ulcers associated with Crohn’s dis-
ease are usually not very painful unless there is an underlying 
abscess. Thus, in patients with significant anal pain, an exami-
nation under anesthesia is indicated to exclude an underlying 
abscess or fistula and to assess the rectal mucosa. In the absence 
of active Crohn’s proctitis, one can proceed cautiously with a 
partial internal sphincterotomy if the examination under anes-
thesia reveals a classic-appearing posterior or anterior fissure 
and anal stenosis.
Recurrent abscess(es) or complex anal fistulae should raise 
the possibility of Crohn’s disease. Treatment focuses on control 
of infection, delineation of complex anatomy, treatment of under-
lying mucosal disease, and sphincter preservation. Abscesses 
often can be drained locally, and mushroom catheters are use-
ful for maintaining drainage. Endoanal ultrasound and pelvic 
MRI are useful for mapping complex fistulous tracts. Liberal 
use of setons can control many fistulas and avoid division of 
the sphincter. Many patients with anal Crohn’s disease func-
tion well with multiple setons left in place for years. Endoanal 
advancement flaps may be considered for definitive therapy if 
the rectal mucosa is uninvolved but will not heal due to rectal 
Figure 29-19.  Photograph of a patient with multiple perianal 
fistulas secondary to Crohn’s disease. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from Hamilton SR, Borson BC. Crohn’s disease: Pathology. 
In: Berk JE, ed. Bockus Gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 1985:2229, Fig. 127-5. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
inflammation. In 10% to 15% of cases, intractable perianal sep-
sis requires proctectomy.
Rectovaginal fistula can be a particularly difficult problem 
in these patients. A rectal or vaginal mucosal advancement flap 
may be used if the rectal mucosa appears healthy and scarring 
of the rectovaginal septum is minimal. Occasionally, proctec-
tomy is the best option for women with highly symptomatic 
rectovaginal fistulae. Although proximal diversion is often 
employed to protect complex perianal reconstruction, there is 
no evidence that diversion alone increases healing of anal and 
perianal Crohn’s disease.
Medical treatment of underlying proctitis with salicylate 
and/or corticosteroid enemas may be helpful; however, control 
of infection is the primary goal of therapy. Metronidazole has 
been used with some success in this setting. Anti-TNF-α agents 
(infliximab and adalimumab) have shown some efficacy in heal-
ing chronic fistulas secondary to Crohn’s disease. The success 
of these agents has led to a concerted effort to identify other 
immunomodulators that might prove useful. Proinflammatory 
cytokines such as interleukin-12 and interferon-γ are potential 
targets. Inhibition of immune cell migration has also been sug-
gested as an approach.48 However, it is of paramount importance 
to drain any and all abscesses before initiating immunosuppres-
sive therapy such as corticosteroids or anti-TNF-α monoclonal 
antibodies.
4
1201
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Indeterminate Colitis
Approximately 15% of patients with inflammatory bowel dis-
ease manifest clinical and pathologic characteristics of both 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Endoscopy, barium 
enema, and biopsy may be unable to differentiate ulcerative 
colitis from Crohn’s colitis in this setting. The indications for 
surgery are the same as those for ulcerative colitis: intracta-
bility, complications of medical therapy, and risk of or devel-
opment of malignancy. In the setting of indeterminate colitis 
in a patient who prefers a sphincter-sparing operation, a total 
abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy may be the best initial 
procedure. Pathologic examination of the entire colon may then 
allow a more accurate diagnosis. If the diagnosis suggests ulcer-
ative colitis, an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis procedure can be 
performed. If the diagnosis remains in question, the safest surgi-
cal option is completion proctectomy with end ileostomy (simi-
lar to Crohn’s colitis). Ileal pouch–anal reconstruction may also 
be considered with the understanding that the pouch failure rate 
is between 15% and 20%.
DIVERTICULAR DISEASE
Diverticular disease is a clinical term used to describe the pres-
ence of symptomatic diverticula. Diverticulosis refers to the 
presence of diverticula without inflammation. Diverticulitis 
refers to inflammation and infection associated with diverticula. 
The majority of colonic diverticula are false diverticula in which 
the mucosa and muscularis mucosa have herniated through the 
colonic wall. These diverticula occur between the teniae coli, at 
points where the main blood vessels penetrate the colonic wall 
(presumably creating an area of relative weakness in the colonic 
muscle). They are thought to be pulsion diverticula resulting 
from high intraluminal pressure. Diverticular bleeding can be 
massive but usually is self-limited. True diverticula, which 
comprise all layers of the bowel wall, are rare and are usually 
congenital in origin.
Diverticulosis is extremely common in the United States 
and Europe. It is estimated that half of the population older than 
age 50 years has colonic diverticula. The sigmoid colon is the 
most common site of diverticulosis (Fig. 29-20). Diverticulosis 
is thought to be an acquired disorder, but the etiology is poorly 
understood. The most accepted theory is that a lack of dietary 
fiber results in smaller stool volume, requiring high intraluminal 
pressure and high colonic wall tension for propulsion. Chronic 
contraction then results in muscular hypertrophy and develop-
ment of the process of segmentation in which the colon acts like 
separate segments instead of functioning as a continuous tube. 
As segmentation progresses, the high pressures are directed radi-
ally toward the colon wall rather than to development of propul-
sive waves that move stool distally. The high radial pressures 
directed against the bowel wall create pulsion diverticula. A loss 
of tensile strength and a decrease in elasticity of the bowel wall 
with age have also been proposed etiologies. Although none of 
these theories has been proven, a high-fiber diet does appear to 
decrease the incidence of diverticulosis. Although diverticulosis 
is common, most cases are asymptomatic, and complications 
occur in the minority of people with this condition.
Inflammatory Complications (Diverticulitis)
Diverticulitis refers to inflammation and infection associated 
with a diverticulum and is estimated to occur in 10% to 25% 
of people with diverticulosis. Peridiverticular and pericolic 
Figure 29-20.  Diverticulosis of sigmoid colon on barium enema. 
(Reproduced with permission from Nivatvongs S, Becker ER. 
Colon, rectum, and anal canal. In: James EC, Corry RJ, Perry JCF 
Jr, eds. Basic Surgical Practice. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 
1987. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
infection results from a perforation (either macroscopic or 
microscopic) of a diverticulum, which leads to contamination, 
inflammation, and infection. The spectrum of disease ranges 
from mild, uncomplicated diverticulitis that can be treated in the 
outpatient setting, to free perforation and diffuse peritonitis that 
requires emergency laparotomy. Most patients present with left-
sided abdominal pain, with or without fever, and leukocytosis. 
A mass may be present. Plain radiographs are useful for detect-
ing free intra-abdominal air. CT scan is extremely useful for 
defining pericolic inflammation, phlegmon, or abscess. Contrast 
enemas and/or endoscopy are relatively contraindicated because 
of the risk of perforation. The differential diagnosis includes 
malignancy, ischemic colitis, infectious colitis, and inflamma-
tory bowel disease.
Uncomplicated Diverticulitis.  Uncomplicated diverticulitis is 
characterized by left lower quadrant pain and tenderness. CT 
findings include pericolic soft tissue stranding, colonic wall 
thickening, and/or phlegmon. Most patients with uncompli-
cated diverticulitis will respond to outpatient therapy with 
broad-spectrum oral antibiotics and a low-residue diet. Antibi-
otics should be continued for 7 to 10 days. About 10% to 20% 
of patients with more severe pain, tenderness, fever, and leu-
kocytosis are treated in the hospital with parenteral antibiotics 
and bowel rest. Most patients improve within 48 to 72 hours. 
Failure to improve may suggest abscess formation. CT can be 
extremely useful in this setting, and many pericolic abscesses 
can be drained percutaneously (see below). Deterioration in a 
patient’s clinical condition and the development of peritonitis 
are indications for laparotomy.
Most patients with uncomplicated diverticulitis will 
recover without surgery, and 50% to 70% will have no further 
1202
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
episodes.49 It has long been believed that the risk of compli-
cations increases with recurrent disease. For this reason, elec-
tive sigmoid colectomy has often been recommended after 
the second episode of diverticulitis, especially if the patient 
has required hospitalization. Resection has often been recom-
mended after the first episode in very young patients and is often 
recommended after the first episode of complicated diverticulitis. 
These general guidelines have been questioned in recent years, 
and more recent studies suggest that the risk of complications 
and/or need for emergent resection does not increase with recur-
rent disease.49,50
Many surgeons now will not advise colectomy even 
after two documented episodes of diverticulitis assuming the 
patient is completely asymptomatic and that carcinoma has been 
excluded by colonoscopy. Immunosuppressed patients are gen-
erally still advised to undergo colectomy after a single episode 
of documented diverticulitis. Medical comorbidities should be 
considered when evaluating a patient for elective resection, and 
the risks of recurrent disease should be weighed against the risks 
of the operation. Because colon carcinoma may present in an 
identical fashion to diverticulitis (either complicated or uncom-
plicated), all patients must be evaluated for malignancy after 
resolution of the acute episode. Colonoscopy is recommended 
4 to 6 weeks after recovery. Inability to exclude malignancy is 
another indication for resection.
In the elective setting, a sigmoid colectomy with a primary 
anastomosis is the procedure of choice. The resection should 
always be extended to the rectum distally because the risk of 
recurrence is high if a segment of sigmoid colon is retained. 
The proximal extent of the resection should include all thick-
ened or inflamed bowel; however, resection of all diverticula is 
unnecessary. Increasingly, laparoscopy is being used for elec-
tive sigmoid colectomy for diverticular disease.
Complicated Diverticulitis.  Complicated diverticulitis 
includes diverticulitis with abscess, obstruction, diffuse peri-
tonitis (free perforation), or fistulas between the colon and 
adjacent structures. Colovesical, colovaginal, and coloenteric 
fistulas are long-term sequelae of complicated diverticulitis. 
The Hinchey staging system is often used to describe the 
severity of complicated diverticulitis: Stage I includes colonic 
inflammation with an associated pericolic abscess; stage II 
includes colonic inflammation with a retroperitoneal or pelvic 
abscess; stage III is associated with purulent peritonitis; and 
stage IV is associated with fecal peritonitis. Treatment depends 
on the patient’s overall clinical condition and the degree of 
peritoneal contamination and infection. Small abscesses (<2 cm 
in diameter) may be treated with parenteral antibiotics. Larger 
abscesses are best treated with CT-guided percutaneous drain-
age (Fig. 29-21) and antibiotics. Many of these patients will 
ultimately require resection, but percutaneous drainage may 
allow a one-stage, elective procedure and may obviate the need 
for colectomy if full recovery follows the drainage.
Urgent or emergent laparotomy may be required if an 
abscess is inaccessible to percutaneous drainage, if the patient’s 
condition deteriorates or fails to improve, or if the patient pres-
ents with free intra-abdominal air or peritonitis. In almost all 
cases, an attempt should be made to resect the affected seg-
ment of bowel. Patients with small, localized pericolic or pel-
vic abscesses (Hinchey stages I and II) may be candidates for 
a sigmoid colectomy with a primary anastomosis (a one-stage 
operation).45 Among patients with larger abscesses, peritoneal 
soiling, or peritonitis, sigmoid colectomy with end colostomy 
and Hartmann’s pouch is the most commonly used procedure.46 
Success also has been reported after sigmoid colectomy, pri-
mary anastomosis, with or without on-table lavage, and proxi-
mal diversion (loop ileostomy). This option may be appropriate 
in stable patients and offers the great advantage that the subse-
quent operation to restore bowel continuity is simpler than is 
takedown of a Hartmann’s pouch. The presence of inflammation 
and phlegmon may increase the risk of ureteral damage during 
mobilization of the sigmoid colon, and preoperative placement 
of ureteral catheters can be invaluable. In extremely unstable 
patients, or in the presence of such severe inflammation that 
resection would harm adjacent organs, proximal diversion 
and local drainage have been employed. However, this approach 
is generally avoided because of high morbidity and mortality 
B
A
Figure 29-21.  A. Computed tomography scan demonstrating pelvic abscess from perforated diverticular disease. B. Posterolateral computed 
tomography–guided drainage of abdominal abscess from perforated diverticular disease. (Both images used with permission of Charles O. 
Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, MN.)
1203
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
rates, along with the requirement for multiple operations. 
More recently, several studies have suggested that laparoscopic 
lavage and drainage without bowel resection may be safe and 
effective even in the presence of free perforation. Nevertheless, 
this approach remains controversial and will require additional 
prospective trials before it can be recommended under most cir-
cumstances.
Obstructive symptoms occur in approximately 67% of 
patients who develop acute diverticulitis, and complete obstruc-
tion occurs in 10%. Patients with incomplete obstruction often 
respond to fluid resuscitation, nasogastric suction, and gentle, low-
volume water or Gastrografin enemas. Relief of obstruction allows 
full bowel preparation and elective resection. A high-volume 
oral bowel preparation is contraindicated in the presence of 
obstructive symptoms. Obstruction that does not rapidly respond 
to medical management mandates laparotomy. Sigmoid colec-
tomy with end colostomy is the safest procedure to perform in this 
setting. However, colectomy and primary anastomosis, with or 
without on-table lavage (depending on extent of fecal load in the 
proximal colon), and proximal diversion may be appropriate if the 
patient is stable and the proximal and distal bowel appear healthy.
Approximately 5% of patients with complicated diverticu-
litis develop fistulas between the colon and an adjacent organ. 
Colovesical fistulas are most common, followed by colovagi-
nal and coloenteric fistulas. Colocutaneous fistulas are a rare 
complication of diverticulitis. Two key points in the evaluation 
of fistulas are to define the anatomy of the fistula and exclude 
other diagnoses. Contrast enema and/or small bowel studies 
are extremely useful in defining the course of the fistula. CT 
scan can identify associated abscesses or masses. The differ-
ential diagnosis includes malignancy, Crohn’s disease, and 
radiation-induced fistulas. While Crohn’s disease and radiation 
injury may be suspected based on the patient’s medical history, 
colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy usually is required to rule out 
malignancy. In addition, in a patient who has received radia-
tion therapy, a fistula must be considered to be recurrent cancer 
until proven otherwise. Once the anatomy of the fistula has been 
defined and other diagnoses excluded, operative management 
should include resection of the affected segment of the colon 
involved with diverticulitis (usually with a primary anastomosis) 
and simple repair of the secondarily involved organ. Suspicion 
of carcinoma may mandate a wider, en bloc resection.
Hemorrhage
Bleeding from a diverticulum results from erosion of the peridi-
verticular arteriole and may result in massive hemorrhage. Most 
significant lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage occurs in elderly 
patients in whom both diverticulosis and angiodysplasia are 
common. Consequently, the exact bleeding source may be dif-
ficult to identify. Fortunately, in 80% of patients, bleeding stops 
spontaneously. Clinical management should focus on resuscita-
tion and localization of the bleeding site as described for lower 
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Colonoscopy may occasionally 
identify a bleeding diverticulum that may then be treated with 
epinephrine injection or cautery. Angiography may be diagnos-
tic and therapeutic in this setting. In the rare instance in which 
diverticular hemorrhage persists or recurs, laparotomy and seg-
mental colectomy may be required.
Giant Colonic Diverticulum
Giant colonic diverticula are extremely rare. Most occur on 
the antimesenteric side of the sigmoid colon. Patients may be 
asymptomatic or may present with vague abdominal complaints 
such as pain, nausea, or constipation. Plain radiographs may 
suggest the diagnosis. Barium enema is usually diagnostic. 
Complications of a giant diverticulum include perforation, 
obstruction, and volvulus. Resection of the involved colon and 
diverticulum is recommended.
Right-Sided Diverticula
The cecum and ascending colon infrequently are involved in 
diverticulosis coli. Even more uncommon is a true solitary 
diverticulum, which contains all layers of the bowel wall and 
is thought to be congenital in origin. Right-sided diverticula 
occur more often in younger patients than do left-sided diver-
ticula and are more common in people of Asian descent than in 
other populations. Most patients with right-sided diverticula are 
asymptomatic. However, diverticulitis does occur occasionally. 
Because patients are young and present with right lower quad-
rant pain, they are often thought to suffer from acute appendici-
tis, and the diagnosis of right-sided diverticulitis is subsequently 
made in the operating room. If there is a single large diverticu-
lum and minimal inflammation, a diverticulectomy may be 
performed, but an ileocecal resection is usually the preferred 
operation in this setting. Hemorrhage rarely occurs and should 
be treated in the same fashion as hemorrhage from a left-sided 
diverticulum.
ADENOCARCINOMA AND POLYPS
Incidence
Colorectal carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the 
gastrointestinal tract. Over 140,000 new cases are diagnosed 
annually in the United States, and more than 50,000 patients 
die of this disease each year, making colorectal cancer the third 
most lethal cancer in the United States.51
The incidence is similar in men and women and has 
remained fairly constant over the past 20 years; however, the 
widespread adoption of current national screening programs is 
gradually decreasing the incidence of this common and lethal 
disease. Early detection and improvements in medical and surgi-
cal care are thought to be responsible for the decreasing mortal-
ity of colorectal cancer observed in recent years.
Epidemiology (Risk Factors)
Identification of risk factors for development of colorectal 
cancer is essential to establish screening and surveillance pro-
grams in appropriately targeted populations.
Aging.  Aging is the dominant risk factor for colorectal cancer, 
with incidence rising steadily after age 50 years. More than 90% 
of cases diagnosed are in people older than age 50 years. This 
is the rationale for initiating screening tests of asymptomatic 
patients at average risk of developing colorectal cancer at age 
50 years. However, individuals of any age can develop colorec-
tal cancer, so symptoms such as a significant change in bowel 
habits, rectal bleeding, melena, unexplained anemia, or weight 
loss require a thorough evaluation.
Hereditary Risk Factors.  Approximately 80% of colorectal 
cancers occur sporadically, while 20% arise in patients with 
a known family history of colorectal cancer. Advances in the 
understanding of these familial disorders have led to interest in 
early diagnosis using genetic testing. Because of the medical, 
legal, and ethical considerations that are involved in this type 
1204
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of testing, all patients should be offered genetic counseling if a 
familial syndrome is suspected.
Environmental and Dietary Factors.  The observation that 
colorectal carcinoma occurs more commonly in populations that 
consume diets high in animal fat and low in fiber has led to the 
hypothesis that dietary factors contribute to carcinogenesis. A 
diet high in saturated or polyunsaturated fats increases risk of 
colorectal cancer, while a diet high in oleic acid (olive oil, coco-
nut oil, fish oil) does not increase risk. Animal studies suggest 
that fats may be directly toxic to the colonic mucosa and thus 
may induce early malignant changes. In contrast, a diet high in 
vegetable fiber appears to be protective. A correlation between 
alcohol intake and incidence of colorectal carcinoma has also 
been suggested. Ingestion of calcium, selenium, vitamins A, C, 
and E, carotenoids, and plant phenols may decrease the risk of 
developing colorectal cancer. Obesity and sedentary lifestyle 
dramatically increase cancer-related mortality in a number of 
malignancies, including colorectal carcinoma. This knowl-
edge is the basis for primary prevention strategies to eliminate 
colorectal cancer by altering diet and lifestyle.52
Inflammatory Bowel Disease.  Patients with long-standing 
colitis from inflammatory bowel disease are at increased risk 
for the development of colorectal cancer. It is hypothesized 
that chronic inflammation predisposes the mucosa to malignant 
changes, and there is some evidence that degree of inflamma-
tion influences risk. In general, the duration and extent of colitis 
correlate with risk. Other factors thought to increase risk include 
the presence of primary sclerosing cholangitis and family his-
tory of colorectal cancer.
Other Risk Factors.  Cigarette smoking is associated with an 
increased risk of colonic adenomas, especially after more than 
35 years of use. Patients with ureterosigmoidostomy are also 
at increased risk for both adenoma and carcinoma formation.53
Acromegaly, which is associated with increased levels 
of circulating human growth hormone and insulin-like growth 
factor-1, increases risk as well. Pelvic irradiation may increase 
the risk of developing rectal carcinoma. However, it is unclear 
whether this represents a direct effect of radiation damage or is 
instead a correlation between the development of rectal cancer 
and a history of another pelvic malignancy; for example among 
patients who develop prostate cancer and are treated with radia-
tion, the risk of rectal cancer increases significantly.54
Pathogenesis of Colorectal Cancer
Genetic Defects.  Over the past two decades, an intense 
research effort has focused on elucidating the genetic defects 
and molecular abnormalities associated with the development 
and progression of colorectal adenomas and carcinoma. Muta-
tions may cause activation of oncogenes (K-ras) and/or inacti-
vation of tumor suppressor genes (APC, deleted in colorectal 
carcinoma [DCC], p53). Colorectal carcinoma is thought 
to develop from adenomatous polyps by accumulation of 
these mutations in what has come to be known as the adenoma-
carcinoma sequence (Fig. 29-22).
Defects in the APC gene were first described in patients 
with FAP. By investigating these families, characteristic muta-
tions in the APC gene were identified. They are now known to 
be present in 80% of sporadic colorectal cancers as well.
The APC gene is a tumor suppressor gene. Mutations 
in both alleles are necessary to initiate polyp formation. The 
majority of mutations are premature stop codons, which result in 
a truncated APC protein. In FAP, the site of mutation correlates 
with the clinical severity of the disease. For example, mutations 
in either the 3′ or 5′ end of the gene result in attenuated forms 
of FAP (AFAP), whereas mutations in the center of the gene 
result in more virulent disease. Thus, knowledge of the specific 
mutation in a family may help guide clinical decision making.
APC inactivation alone does not result in a carcinoma. 
Instead, this mutation sets the stage for the accumulation of 
genetic damage that results in malignancy. Additional mutations 
may include activation or inactivation of a variety of genes.
One of the most commonly involved genes in colorectal 
cancer is K-ras. K-ras, a signaling molecule in the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway, is classified as a proto-
oncogene because mutation of only one allele will perturb the 
cell cycle. The K-ras gene product is a G-protein involved in 
intracellular signal transduction. When active, K-ras binds gua-
nosine triphosphate (GTP); hydrolysis of GTP to guanosine 
diphosphate (GDP) then inactivates the G-protein. Mutation of 
K-ras results in an inability to hydrolyze GTP, thus leaving the 
G-protein permanently in the active form. It is thought that this 
then leads to uncontrolled cell division. Other EGFR signaling 
molecules such as BRAF have also been implicated in colorec-
tal cancer pathogenesis and progression, and ongoing research 
is focusing on elucidating their roles in this disease.
Another common mutation occurs in the MYH gene on 
chromosome 1p.55,56 MYH is a base excision repair gene, and 
biallelic deletion results in changes in other downstream mol-
ecules. Since its discovery, MYH mutations have been associ-
ated with an AFAP phenotype in addition to sporadic cancers.55 
Unlike APC gene mutations that are expressed in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, the requirement for biallelic mutation in MYH 
results in an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
The tumor suppressor gene p53 has been well character-
ized in a number of malignancies. The p53 protein appears 
Normal
epithelium
Dysplastic
epithelium
Early
adenoma
Intermediate
adenoma
Late
adenoma
Carcinoma
Metastasis
APC
K-RAS
DCC/DPC4/JV18?
p53
Other changes
Figure 29-22.  Schematic showing progression from normal colonic epithelium to carcinoma of the colon.
5
1205
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
to be crucial for initiating apoptosis in cells with irreparable 
genetic damage. Mutations in p53 are present in 75% of 
colorectal cancers.
Deletion of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and ten-
sin homolog (PTEN) appears to be involved in a number of 
hamartomatous polyposis syndromes. Deletions in PTEN have 
been identified in juvenile polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 
Cowden’s syndrome, and PTEN hamartoma syndrome, in addi-
tion to multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIB.12
Genetic Pathways.  The mutations involved in colorectal 
cancer pathogenesis and progression are now recognized to 
accumulate via one of three major genetic pathways: the loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH; chromosomal instability) pathway, the 
microsatellite instability (MSI) pathway, and the CpG island 
methylation (CIMP; serrated methylated) pathway.
The Loss of Heterozygosity Pathway.  The LOH pathway 
is characterized by chromosomal deletions and tumor aneu-
ploidy. Eighty percent of colorectal carcinomas appear to arise 
from mutations in the LOH pathway. This pathway was first 
described in patients with FAP in whom mutations of the APC 
gene were found to be inherited.
Another example of LOH occurs in the region of chromo-
some 18q. This region has been found to be deleted in up to 
70% of colorectal cancers. Two tumor suppressor genes, DCC 
and SMAD4, are located in this region, and as such, deletion of 
18q may result in the loss of one or both of these genes. DCC 
is a tumor suppressor gene, and loss of both alleles is required 
for malignant degeneration. The main role of this molecule 
appears to be in the central nervous system, where it is involved 
in neural differentiation and axonal migration. This observa-
tion has led to the hypothesis that DCC may be involved in 
differentiation and cellular adhesion in colorectal cancer, but 
this theory remains unproven.57 DCC mutations are present in 
more than 70% of colorectal carcinomas and may negatively 
impact prognosis. SMAD4 functions in the signaling cascade of 
transforming growth factor beta and beta-catenin (also a down-
stream effector of the APC gene). Loss of either of these genes 
is thought to promote cancer progression.
The Microsatellite Instability Pathway.  Many of the remain-
ing colorectal carcinomas are thought to arise from mutations in 
the MSI pathway, which is characterized by errors in mismatch 
repair during DNA replication. These errors in mismatch repair 
were first described in HNPCC (Lynch’s syndrome), but are 
now recognized to be present in many sporadic tumors as well. 
A number of genes have been identified that appear to be cru-
cial for recognizing and repairing DNA replication errors. These 
mismatch repair genes include MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, PMS2, 
and MSH6/GTBP. A mutation in one of these genes predis-
poses a cell to mutations, which may occur in proto-oncogenes 
or tumor suppressor genes. Accumulation of these errors then 
leads to genomic instability and ultimately to carcinogenesis.
Microsatellites are regions of the genome in which short 
base-pair segments are repeated several times, regions that are 
particularly prone to replication error. Consequently, a mutation 
in a mismatch repair gene produces variable lengths of these 
repetitive sequences, a finding that has been described as MSI.
Tumors associated with MSI appear to have different bio-
logic characteristics than do tumors that result from the LOH 
pathway. Tumors with MSI are more likely to be in the right 
colon and possess diploid DNA and are associated with a better 
prognosis than tumors that arise from the LOH pathway that are 
microsatellite stable. Tumors arising from the LOH pathway 
tend to occur in the more distal colon, often have chromosomal 
aneuploidy, and are associated with a poorer prognosis.
CpG Island Methylation Pathway.  In the recently described 
CIMP pathway, genes do not accumulate mutations (deletions 
or insertions of bases), but instead are activated or inactivated by 
methylation. This process has been called epigenetic alteration to 
differentiate it from the more traditional genetic alterations or true 
mutations. In normal cells, methylation is critical for regulation of 
gene expression. In cancer, aberrant methylation (either hyper- or 
hypomethylation), usually of a promoter region, results in abnor-
mal activation or inactivation of genes. This gene silencing or, 
alternatively, activation results in a phenotype similar to that pres-
ent with a true gene mutation. This pathway has also been called 
the serrated methylated pathway because of the observation that 
serrated polyps often harbor aberrant methylation in contrast to 
adenomatous polyps that are more often associated with muta-
tions in the APC gene (LOH pathway).58
Although these classifications are useful for understanding 
the mechanisms underlying carcinogenesis, they are not mutu-
ally exclusive. For example, a mismatch repair gene may be 
inactivated by methylation. Errors in mismatch repair may then 
allow mutations to inactivate a tumor suppressor gene. In addi-
tion, there is considerable interest in targeting molecules in each 
of these pathways in order to design better anticancer agents. 
Finally, ongoing research is focusing on the utility of molecular 
profiling in predicting prognosis and/or response to treatment.
Polyps
It is now well accepted that the majority of colorectal carcino-
mas evolve from adenomatous polyps; this sequence of events is 
the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Polyp is a nonspecific clini-
cal term that describes any projection from the surface of the 
intestinal mucosa regardless of its histologic nature. Colorectal 
polyps may be classified as neoplastic (tubular adenoma, 
villous adenoma, tubulovillous adenomas, serrated adenomas/
polyps), hyperplastic, hamartomatous (juvenile, Peutz-Jeghers, 
Cronkite-Canada), or inflammatory (pseudopolyp, benign 
lymphoid polyp).
Neoplastic Polyps.  Adenomatous polyps are common, occur-
ring in up to 25% of the population older than 50 years of age 
in the United States. By definition, these lesions are dysplas-
tic. The risk of malignant degeneration is related to both the 
size and type of polyp. Tubular adenomas are associated with 
malignancy in only 5% of cases, whereas villous adenomas 
may harbor cancer in up to 40%. Tubulovillous adenomas are at 
intermediate risk (22%). Invasive carcinomas are rare in polyps 
smaller than 1 cm; the incidence increases with size. The risk of 
carcinoma in a polyp larger than 2 cm is 35% to 50%. Although 
most neoplastic polyps do not evolve to cancer, most colorectal 
cancers originate as a polyp. It is this fact that forms the basis for 
secondary prevention strategies to eliminate colorectal cancer 
by targeting the neoplastic polyp for removal before malignancy 
develops.
Polyps may be pedunculated or sessile. Most pedun-
culated polyps are amenable to colonoscopic snare excision. 
Removal of sessile polyps is often more challenging. Special 
colonoscopic techniques, including saline lift, piecemeal snare 
excision, and endoscopic mucosal resection facilitate success-
ful removal of many sessile polyps. For rectal sessile polyps, 
transanal operative excision is preferred because it produces an 
1206
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
intact, single pathology specimen that can be used to determine 
the need for further therapy. Interpretation of the precise depth 
of invasion of a cancer arising in a sessile polyp after piecemeal 
excision is often impossible. The site of sessile polypectomies 
should be marked by injection of India ink to guide follow-up 
colonoscopy sessions to ensure that the polyp has been com-
pletely removed and to facilitate identification of the involved 
bowel segment should operative resection be necessary. Col-
ectomy is reserved for cases in which colonoscopic removal is 
impossible, such as large, flat lesions, or if a focus of invasive 
cancer is confirmed in the specimen.
Complications of polypectomy include perforation and 
bleeding. A small perforation (microperforation) in a fully pre-
pared, stable patient may be managed with bowel rest, broad-
spectrum antibiotics, and close observation. Signs of sepsis, 
peritonitis, or deterioration in clinical condition are indica-
tions for laparotomy. Bleeding may occur immediately after 
polypectomy or may be delayed. The bleeding will usually stop 
spontaneously, but colonoscopy may be required to resnare a 
bleeding stalk or cauterize the lesion. Occasionally angiography 
and infusion of vasopressin may be necessary. Rarely, colec-
tomy is required.
Hyperplastic Polyps.  Hyperplastic polyps are extremely 
common in the colon. These polyps are usually small (<5 mm) 
and show histologic characteristics of hyperplasia without any 
dysplasia. They are not considered premalignant, but cannot be 
distinguished from adenomatous polyps colonoscopically and 
are therefore often removed. In contrast, large hyperplastic 
polyps (>2 cm) may have a slight risk of malignant degenera-
tion. Moreover, large polyps may harbor foci of adenomatous 
tissue and dysplasia. Hyperplastic polyposis is a rare disorder in 
which multiple large hyperplastic polyps occur in young adults. 
These patients are at slightly increased risk for the development 
of colorectal cancer.
Serrated Polyps.  Serrated polyps are a recently recognized, 
histologically distinct group of neoplastic polyps. These lesions 
were long thought to be similar to hyperplastic polyps with 
minimal malignant potential. However, it has become clear that 
some of these polyps will develop into invasive cancers. In addi-
tion, a familial serrated polyposis syndrome has recently been 
described. Serrated polyps should be treated like adenomatous 
polyps.59
Hamartomatous Polyps (Juvenile Polyps).  In contrast to 
adenomatous and serrated polyps, hamartomatous polyps (juve-
nile polyps) usually are not premalignant. These lesions are the 
characteristic polyps of childhood but may occur at any age. 
Bleeding is a common symptom, and intussusception and/or 
obstruction may occur. Because the gross appearance of these 
polyps is identical to adenomatous polyps, these lesions should 
also be treated by polypectomy. In contrast to adenomatous pol-
yposis syndromes, these conditions are often associated with 
mutation in PTEN.
Familial juvenile polyposis is an autosomal dominant dis-
order in which patients develop hundreds of polyps in the colon 
and rectum. Unlike solitary juvenile polyps, these lesions may 
degenerate into adenomas and eventually carcinoma. Annual 
screening should begin between the ages of 10 and 12 years. 
Treatment is surgical and depends in part on the degree of rectal 
involvement. If the rectum is relatively spared, a total abdomi-
nal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis may be performed 
with subsequent close surveillance of the retained rectum. If the 
rectum is carpeted with polyps, total proctocolectomy is the 
more appropriate operation. These patients are candidates for 
ileal pouch–anal reconstruction to avoid a permanent stoma.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is characterized by polyposis 
of the small intestine and, to a lesser extent, polyposis of the 
colon and rectum. Characteristic melanin spots are often noted 
on the buccal mucosa and lips of these patients. The polyps of 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are generally considered to be hamar-
tomas and are not thought to be at significant risk for malignant 
degeneration. However, carcinoma may occasionally develop. 
Because the entire length of the gastrointestinal tract may be 
affected, surgery is reserved for symptoms such as obstruction 
or bleeding or for patients in whom polyps develop adenoma-
tous features. Screening consists of a baseline colonoscopy and 
upper endoscopy at age 20 years, followed by annual flexible 
sigmoidoscopy thereafter.
Cronkite-Canada syndrome is a disorder in which patients 
develop gastrointestinal polyposis in association with alopecia, 
cutaneous pigmentation, and atrophy of the fingernails and 
toenails. Diarrhea is a prominent symptom, and vomiting, malab-
sorption, and protein-losing enteropathy may occur. Most patients 
die of this disease despite maximal medical therapy, and surgery 
is reserved for complications of polyposis such as obstruction.
Cowden’s syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder 
with hamartomas of all three embryonal cell layers. Facial trich-
ilemmomas, breast cancer, thyroid disease, and gastrointestinal 
polyps are typical of the syndrome. Patients should be screened 
for cancers. Treatment is otherwise based on symptoms.
Inflammatory Polyps (Pseudopolyps).  Inflammatory 
polyps occur most commonly in the context of inflammatory 
bowel disease, but may also occur after amebic colitis, ischemic 
colitis, and schistosomal colitis. These lesions are not premalig-
nant, but they cannot be distinguished from adenomatous polyps 
based on gross appearance and therefore should be removed. 
Microscopic examination shows islands of normal, regenerat-
ing mucosa (the polyp) surrounded by areas of mucosal loss. 
Polyposis may be extensive, especially in patients with severe 
colitis, and may mimic FAP.
Inherited Colorectal Carcinoma
Many of the genetic defects originally described in hereditary 
cancers have subsequently been found in sporadic tumors. 
Although the majority of colorectal cancer is sporadic, several 
hereditary syndromes provide paradigms for the study of this 
disease. Insight gained from studying inherited colorectal cancer 
syndromes has led to better understanding of the genetics of 
colorectal carcinoma.
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.  This rare autosomal 
dominant condition accounts for only about 1% of all colorec-
tal adenocarcinomas. Nevertheless, this syndrome has provided 
tremendous insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying 
colorectal carcinogenesis. The genetic abnormality in FAP is 
a mutation in the APC gene, located on chromosome 5q. Of 
patients with FAP, APC mutation testing is positive in 75% of 
cases. While most patients with FAP will have a known family 
history of the disease, up to 25% present without other affected 
family members. Clinically, patients develop hundreds to thou-
sands of adenomatous polyps shortly after puberty. The lifetime 
risk of colorectal cancer in FAP patients approaches 100% by 
age 50 years.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy of first-degree relatives of FAP 
patients beginning at age 10 to 15 years has been the traditional 
1207
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
mainstay of screening. Today, following genetic counseling, 
APC gene testing may be used to screen family members, pro-
viding an APC mutation has been identified. If APC testing is 
positive in a relative of a patient with a known APC mutation, 
annual flexible sigmoidoscopy beginning at age 10 to 15 years 
is done until polyps are identified. If APC testing is negative, 
the relative can be screened starting at age 50 years per average-
risk guidelines. If APC testing is refused or unavailable, or if a 
mutation cannot be identified, annual flexible sigmoidoscopy 
beginning at age 10 to 15 years is performed until age 24 years. 
Screening flexible sigmoidoscopy is then done every 2 years 
until age 34 years, every 3 years until age 44 years, and then 
every 3 to 5 years.
FAP patients are also at risk for the development of adeno-
mas anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the 
duodenum. Periampullary carcinoma is a particular concern. 
Upper endoscopy is therefore recommended for surveillance 
every 1 to 3 years beginning at age 25 to 30 years.
Once the diagnosis of FAP has been made and polyps are 
developing, treatment is surgical. Four factors affect the choice 
of operation: age of the patient; presence and severity of symp-
toms; extent of rectal polyposis; and presence and location of 
cancer or desmoid tumors. Three operative procedures can be 
considered: total proctocolectomy with an end (Brooke) ileos-
tomy; total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis; 
and restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anas-
tomosis with or without a temporary ileostomy. Most patients 
elect to have an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis in the absence of 
a distal rectal cancer, a mesenteric desmoid tumor that prevents 
the ileum from reaching the anus, or poor sphincter function. 
Mucosectomy has been advocated in patients with FAP under-
going ileal pouch–anal anastomosis because of the risk of neo-
plasia in the anal transition zone, but the requirement for this 
procedure remains controversial. Although patient satisfaction 
with this procedure remains high, function may not be ideal, and 
up to 50% of patients experience some degree of incontinence. 
Total abdominal colectomy with an ileorectal anastomosis is 
also an option in these patients, but requires vigilant surveil-
lance of the retained rectum for development of rectal cancer. 
There is increasing data suggesting that the administration of 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors (celecoxib, sulindac) may 
slow or prevent the development of polyps.60
FAP may be associated with extraintestinal manifesta-
tions such as congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigmented 
epithelium, desmoid tumors, epidermoid cysts, mandibular 
osteomas (Gardner’s syndrome), and central nervous system 
tumors (Turcot’s syndrome). Desmoid tumors in particular, can 
make surgical management difficult and are a source of major 
morbidity and mortality in these patients. Desmoid tumors are 
often hormone responsive, and growth may be inhibited in some 
patients with tamoxifen. COX-2 inhibitors and nonsteroidal, 
anti-inflammatory drugs may also be beneficial in this setting.
Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis.  AFAP is a 
recognized variant of FAP. Patients present later in life with 
fewer polyps (usually 10–100) predominantly located in the 
right colon, when compared to classic FAP. Colorectal carci-
noma develops in more than 50% of these patients, but occurs 
later (average age, 55 years). Patients are also at risk for duo-
denal polyposis. However, in contrast to FAP, APC gene muta-
tions are present in only about 30% of patients with AFAP. 
When present, these mutations are expressed in an autosomal 
dominant pattern.
Mutations in MYH also result in the AFAP phenotype but 
are expressed in an autosomal recessive pattern. It has been sug-
gested that MYH mutations may be responsible for AFAP in 
patients who do not have a detectable APC gene mutation.61
Genetic testing is often offered to patients with suspected 
AFAP. When positive, genetic counseling and testing may be 
used to screen at-risk family members. If the family mutation is 
unknown, screening colonoscopy is recommended beginning at 
age 13 to 15 years, then every 4 years to age 28 years, and then 
every 3 years. These patients are often candidates for a total 
abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis because the 
limited polyposis in the rectum can usually be treated by colo-
noscopic snare excision.62,63 Prophylaxis with COX-2 inhibitors 
also may be appropriate. Because of the more subtle pheno-
type in these patients, it is important to rule out other familial 
syndromes such as HNPCC (Lynch’s syndrome) and the more 
common familial colorectal cancer.
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer (Lynch’s 
Syndrome).  HNPCC (Lynch’s syndrome) is more common 
than FAP, but is still extremely rare (1%–3% of all colon can-
cers). The genetic defects associated with HNPCC arise from 
errors in mismatch repair, the phenotypic result being MSI. 
HNPCC is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is 
characterized by the development of colorectal carcinoma at 
an early age (average age, 40–45 years). Approximately 70% 
of affected individuals will develop colorectal cancer. Can-
cers appear in the proximal colon more often than in sporadic 
colorectal cancer and have a better prognosis regardless of stage. 
The risk of synchronous or metachronous colorectal carcinoma 
is 40%. HNPCC may also be associated with extracolonic 
malignancies, including endometrial carcinoma, which is most 
common, and ovarian, pancreas, stomach, small bowel, biliary, 
and urinary tract carcinomas. The diagnosis of HNPCC is made 
based on family history. The Amsterdam criteria for clinical 
diagnosis of HNPCC are three affected relatives with histologi-
cally verified adenocarcinoma of the large bowel (one must be 
a first-degree relative of one of the others) in two successive 
generations of a family with one patient diagnosed before age 50 
years. The presence of other HNPCC-related carcinomas should 
raise the suspicion of this syndrome. In a patient with an estab-
lished diagnosis of colorectal cancer, tumor testing for presence 
of mismatch repair gene products (immunohistochemistry) and/
or MSI can sometimes serve as screening for this syndrome.64,65
HNPCC results from mutations in mismatch repair genes, 
and like FAP, specific mutations are associated with different 
phenotypes. For example, mutations in PMS2 or MSH6 result in 
a more attenuated form of HNPCC when compared to mutations 
in other genes. MSH6 inactivation also appears to be associated 
with a higher risk for endometrial cancer. Further significance 
of these specific mutations remains to be determined.
Screening colonoscopy is recommended annually for at-
risk patients beginning at either age 20 to 25 years or 10 years 
younger than the youngest age at diagnosis in the family, which-
ever comes first.66 Because of the high risk of endometrial carci-
noma, transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial aspiration biopsy 
is also recommended annually after age 25 to 35 years. Because 
there is a 40% risk of developing a second colon cancer, total 
colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is recommended once 
adenomas or a colon carcinoma is diagnosed. Annual proctos-
copy is necessary because the risk of developing rectal cancer 
remains high. Similarly, prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral 
1208
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
salpingo-oophorectomy should be considered in women who 
have completed childbearing.
Familial Colorectal Cancer.  Nonsyndromic familial colorec-
tal cancer accounts for 10% to 15% of patients with colorec-
tal cancer. The lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer 
increases with a family history of the disease. The lifetime risk 
of colorectal cancer in a patient with no family history of this 
disease (average-risk population) is approximately 6%, but rises 
to 12% if one first-degree relative is affected and to 35% if two 
first-degree relatives are affected. Age of onset also impacts risk, 
and a diagnosis before the age of 50 years is associated with a 
higher incidence in family members. Screening colonoscopy is 
recommended every 5 years beginning at age 40 years or begin-
ning 10 years before the age of the earliest diagnosed patient in 
the pedigree. While there are no specific genetic abnormalities 
that are associated with familial colorectal cancer, any of the 
defects found in either the LOH pathway or MSI pathway may 
be present in these patients.
Prevention: Screening and Surveillance
Because the majority of colorectal cancers are thought to arise 
from adenomatous polyps, preventive measures focus on identi-
fication and removal of these premalignant lesions. In addition, 
many cancers are asymptomatic, and screening may detect these 
tumors at an early and curable stage (Table 29-1). Although 
screening for colorectal cancer decreases the incidence of 
cancer and cancer-related mortality, the optimal method of 
screening remains controversial. Screening guidelines are meant 
for asymptomatic patients.61,66-68 Any patient with a gastrointes-
tinal complaint (bleeding, change in bowel habits, pain, etc.) 
requires a complete evaluation, usually by colonoscopy.
Fecal Occult Blood Testing.  FOBT is known to reduce 
colorectal cancer mortality by 33% and metastatic disease by 
50%. However, FOBT is relatively insensitive, missing up to 
50% of cancers and the majority of adenomas. Its specificity 
is low because 90% of patients with positive tests do not have 
colorectal cancer. Compliance with annual testing is low and 
costs are significant if one includes the colonoscopy examina-
tions done to evaluate patients with positive FOBT. Nonethe-
less, the direct evidence that FOBT screening is efficacious and 
decreases both the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer 
is so strong that national guidelines recommend annual FOBT 
screening for asymptomatic, average-risk Americans older than 
50 years of age as one of several accepted strategies. Newer 
immunohistochemical methods for detecting human globin may 
prove to be more sensitive and specific.69 A positive FOBT test 
should be followed by colonoscopy.
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy.  Screening by flexible sigmoidos-
copy every 5 years may lead to a 60% to 70% reduction in mor-
tality from colorectal cancer, chiefly by identifying high-risk 
individuals with adenomas. However, it is important to recog-
nize that lesions in the proximal colon cannot be identified, and 
for this reason, flexible sigmoidoscopy has often been paired 
with air-contrast barium enema to detect transverse and right 
colon lesions. Patients found to have a polyp, cancer, or other 
lesion on flexible sigmoidoscopy will require colonoscopy.70
Fecal Occult Blood Testing and Flexible Sigmoidoscopy.  
Several trials have shown that FOBT screening is least effec-
tive at detecting rectosigmoid cancers.69,71 This is precisely the 
area screened by flexible sigmoidoscopy; thus, the combination 
of the two tests has been suggested as a reasonable screening 
Table 29-1 
Advantages and disadvantages of screening modalities for asymptomatic individuals
Advantages
Disadvantages
Fecal occult blood testing
Ease of use and noninvasive
Low cost
Good sensitivity with repeat testing
May not detect most polyps
Low specificity
Colonoscopy required for positive result
Poor compliance with serial testing
Sigmoidoscopy
Examines colon most at risk
Very sensitive for polyp detection in left colon
Does not require full bowel preparation 
  (enemas only)
Invasive
Uncomfortable
Slight risk of perforation or bleeding
May miss proximal lesions
Colonoscopy required if polyp identified
Colonoscopy
Examines entire colon
Highly sensitive and specific
Therapeutic
Most invasive
Uncomfortable and requires sedation
Requires bowel preparation
Risk of perforation or bleeding
Costly
Double-contrast barium enema
Examines entire colon
Good sensitivity for polyps >1 cm
Examines entire colon
Requires bowel preparation
Less sensitivity for polyps <1 cm
May miss lesions in the sigmoid colon
Colonoscopy required for positive result
Computed tomography colonography 
(virtual colonoscopy)
Noninvasive
Sensitivity may be as good as colonoscopy
Requires bowel preparation
Insensitive for small polyps
Minimal experience and data
Colonoscopy required for positive result
1209
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
strategy. Winawer and colleagues, in a study of 12,479 subjects, 
showed that the combination of FOBT annually with flexible 
sigmoidoscopy every 5 years resulted in lower mortality from 
colorectal cancer and better survival in patients with colorectal 
cancer.72 Such data led to the American Cancer Society recom-
mendations that one of the acceptable screening regimens for 
average-risk Americans is the combination of FOBT annually 
and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years; this combination 
was preferred over either test alone. The addition of air-contrast 
barium enema to assess the proximal colon may improve sen-
sitivity as well.
Colonoscopy.  Colonoscopy is currently the most accurate and 
most complete method for examining the large bowel. This proce-
dure is highly sensitive for detecting even small polyps (<1 cm) 
and allows biopsy, polypectomy, control of hemorrhage, and 
dilation of strictures. However, colonoscopy does require 
mechanical bowel preparation, and the discomfort associated 
with the procedure requires conscious sedation in most patients. 
Colonoscopy is also considerably more expensive than other 
screening modalities and requires a well-trained endoscopist. 
The risk of a major complication after colonoscopy (perforation 
and hemorrhage) is extremely low (0.2%–0.3%). Nevertheless, 
deaths have been reported.
Air-Contrast Barium Enema.  Air-contrast barium enema is also 
highly sensitive for detecting polyps greater than 1 cm in diameter 
(90% sensitivity). Unfortunately, there are no studies proving its 
efficacy for screening large populations. Accuracy is greatest in 
the proximal colon but may be compromised in the sigmoid colon 
if there is significant diverticulosis. The major disadvantages of 
barium enema are the need for mechanical bowel preparation and 
the requirement for colonoscopy if a lesion is discovered.
Computed Tomography Colonography (Virtual Colonos-
copy).  Advances in imaging technology have created a num-
ber of less invasive, but highly accurate tools for screening. CT 
colonography makes use of helical CT technology and three-
dimensional reconstruction to image the intraluminal colon. A 
present, patients require a mechanical bowel preparation. The 
colon is then insufflated with air, a spiral CT is performed, and 
both two-dimensional and three-dimensional images are gener-
ated. In the hands of a qualified radiologist, sensitivity appears 
to be as good as colonoscopy for colorectal cancers and polyps 
greater than 1 cm in size.73 Colonoscopy is required if a lesion 
is identified. CT colonography is also useful for imaging the 
proximal colon in cases of obstruction or if a colonoscopy can-
not be completed. Limitations of this technique include false-
positive results from retained stool, diverticular disease, haustral 
folds, motion artifacts, and an inability to detect flat adenomas.
Guidelines for Screening.  Current American Cancer Society 
guidelines advocate screening for the average-risk population 
(asymptomatic, no family history of colorectal carcinoma, no 
personal history of polyps or colorectal carcinoma, no famil-
ial syndrome) beginning at age 50 years. Recommended pro-
cedures include yearly FOBT, flexible sigmoidoscopy every 
5 years, FOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy in combination, 
air-contrast barium enema every 5 years, or colonoscopy every 
10 years.66 Patients with other risk factors should be screened 
earlier and more frequently (Table 29-2).
Routes of Spread and Natural History
Carcinoma of the colon and rectum arises in the mucosa. The 
tumor subsequently invades the bowel wall and eventually 
adjacent tissues and other viscera. Tumors may become bulky 
and circumferential, leading to colon obstruction. Local exten-
sion (especially in the rectum) may occasionally cause obstruc-
tion of other organs such as the ureter.
Regional lymph node involvement is the most common 
form of spread of colorectal carcinoma and usually precedes 
distant metastasis or the development of carcinomatosis. The 
likelihood of nodal metastasis increases with tumor size, poorly 
differentiated histology, lymphovascular invasion, and depth 
of invasion. The T stage (depth of invasion) is the single most 
significant predictor of lymph node spread. Carcinoma in situ 
(Tis) in which there is no penetration of the muscularis mucosa 
(basement membrane) has also been called high-grade dyspla-
sia and should carry no risk of lymph node metastasis. Small 
lesions confined to the bowel wall (T1 and T2) are associated 
with lymph node metastasis in 5% to 20% of cases, whereas 
larger tumors that invade through the bowel wall or into adja-
cent organs (T3 and T4) are likely to have lymph node metas-
tasis in more than 50% of cases. The number of lymph nodes 
with metastases correlates with the presence of distant disease 
and inversely with survival. Four or more involved lymph nodes 
predict a poor prognosis. In colon cancer, lymphatic spread usu-
ally follows the major venous outflow from the involved seg-
ment of the colon. Lymphatic spread from the rectum follows 
two routes. In the upper rectum, drainage ascends along the 
superior rectal vessels to the inferior mesenteric nodes. In the 
lower rectum, lymphatic drainage may course along the middle 
rectal vessels. Nodal spread along the inferior rectal vessels to 
the internal iliac nodes or groin is rare unless the tumor involves 
the anal canal or the proximal lymphatics are blocked with 
tumor (Fig. 29-23).
The most common site of distant metastasis from colorec-
tal cancer is the liver. These metastases arise from hematog-
enous spread via the portal venous system. Like lymph node 
metastasis, the risk of hepatic metastasis increases with tumor 
size and tumor grade. However, even small tumors may pro-
duce distant metastasis. The lung is also a site of hematogenous 
spread, but this rarely occurs in isolation. Carcinomatosis 
(diffuse peritoneal metastases) occurs by peritoneal seeding and 
has a dismal prognosis.
Staging and Preoperative Evaluation
Clinical Presentation.  Symptoms of colon and rectal cancers 
are nonspecific and generally develop when the cancer is locally 
advanced. The classic first symptoms are a change in bowel 
habits and rectal bleeding. Abdominal pain, bloating, and other 
signs of obstruction typically occur with larger tumors and sug-
gest more advanced disease. Because of the caliber of the bowel 
and the consistency of the stool, left-sided tumors are more 
likely to cause obstruction than are right-sided tumors. Rectal 
tumors may cause bleeding, tenesmus, and pain. Alternatively, 
patients may be asymptomatic and/or present with unexplained 
anemia, weight loss, or poor appetite.
Staging.  Colorectal cancer staging is based on tumor depth 
and the presence or absence of nodal or distant metastases. 
Older staging systems, such as the Dukes’ Classification and its 
Astler-Coller modification, have been replaced by the tumor-
node-metastasis (TNM) staging system (Table 29-3).74 Stage I 
disease includes adenocarcinomas that are invasive through the 
muscularis mucosa but are confined to the submucosa (T1) or 
the muscularis propria (T2) in the absence of nodal metastases. 
Stage II disease consists of tumors that invade through the 
1210
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
bowel wall into the subserosa or nonperitonealized pericolic or 
perirectal tissues (T3) or into other organs or tissues or through 
the visceral peritoneum (T4) without nodal metastases. Stage III 
disease includes any T stage with nodal metastases, and stage IV 
disease denotes distant metastases.
The preoperative evaluation usually identifies stage IV 
disease. In colon cancer, differentiating stages I, II, and III 
depends on examination of the resected specimen. In rectal 
cancer, endorectal ultrasound or MRI may predict the stage 
(ultrasound stage, uTxNx) preoperatively, but the final determi-
nation depends on pathologic examination of the resected tumor 
and adjacent lymph nodes (pathologic stage, pTxNx). Disease 
stage correlates with 5-year survival. Patients with stages I and 
II disease can expect excellent survival rates. The presence of 
nodal metastases (stage III) decreases survival (Table 29-4). 
The 5-year survival rate with stage IV disease is less than 16%. 
However, in well-selected patients, metastasectomy, especially 
of isolated liver or lung lesions, can result in cure. In rectal can-
cer, staging has been further refined, and outcomes suggest that 
subgroups of patients within each stage may have very differ-
ent prognoses (Table 29-5). If the mesorectum around a rectal 
cancer is involved or threatened (only 1–2 mm of clearance), 
there is a very high likelihood of local recurrence and a poor 
Table 29-2 
Screening guidelines for colorectal cancer
Population
Initial Age
Recommended Screening Test
Average risk
50 y
Annual FOBT or
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y or
Annual FOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y or
Air-contrast barium enema every 5 y or
Colonoscopy every 10 y
Adenomatous polyps
50 y
Colonoscopy at first detection; then colonoscopy in 3 y
If no further polyps, colonoscopy every 5 y
If polyps, colonoscopy every 3 y
Annual colonoscopy for >5 adenomas
Colorectal cancer
At diagnosis
Pretreatment colonoscopy; then at 12 mo after curative resection; 
then colonoscopy after 3 y; then colonoscopy every 5 y, if no new 
lesions
Ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s 
colitis
At diagnosis; then after 8 y 
for pancolitis, after 15 y for 
left-sided colitis
Colonoscopy with multiple biopsies every 1–2 y
FAP
10–12 y
Annual flexible sigmoidoscopy
Upper endoscopy every 1–3 y after polyps appear
Attenuated FAP
20 y
Annual flexible sigmoidoscopy
Upper endoscopy every 1–3 y after polyps appear
HNPCC
20–25 y
Colonoscopy every 1–2 y
Endometrial aspiration biopsy every 1–2 y
Familial colorectal cancer 
first-degree relative
40 y or 10 y before the age of 
the youngest affected relative
Colonoscopy every 5 y
Increase frequency if multiple family members are affected, 
especially before 50 y
FAP = familial adenomatous polyposis; FOBT = fecal occult blood testing; HNPCC = hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
Sources: Data adapted from Smith et al,6 Pignone et al,68 and Levin et al.67
Inferior
mesenteric a.
Superior
rectal a.
Middle
rectal a.
Inferior
rectal a.
Common 
iliac a.
Figure 29-23.  Lymphatic drainage of the rectum. a. = artery.
1211
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Table 29-3 
TNM staging of colorectal carcinoma
Definition
Tumor stage (T)
TX
Cannot be assessed
T0
No evidence of cancer
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
T1
Tumor invades submucosa
T2
Tumor invades muscularis propria
T3
Tumor invades through muscularis propria 
into subserosa or into nonperitonealized 
pericolic or perirectal tissues
T4
Tumor directly invades other organs or tissues 
or perforates the visceral peritoneum of 
specimen
Nodal stage (N)
NX
Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0
No lymph node metastasis
N1
Metastasis to one to three pericolic or 
perirectal lymph nodes
N2
Metastasis to four or more pericolic or 
perirectal lymph nodes
N3
Metastasis to any lymph node along a major 
named vascular trunk
Distant metastasis (M)
MX
Presence of distant metastasis cannot be 
assessed
M0
No distant metastasis
M1
Distant metastasis present
TNM = tumor-node-metastasis.
Source: Used with the permission of the American Joint Committee on 
Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is 
the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by 
Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.
Table 29-4 
TNM staging of colorectal carcinoma and 5-year 
survival
Stage
TNM
5-Y Survival (%)
I
T1–2, N0
93.2
IIa
T3, N0
84.7
IIb
T4, N0
72.2
IIIa
T1–2, N1
83.4
IIIb
T3, N1
64.1
IIIc
T3, N2 or T4, N1–2
44.3
IV
Tany, Nany, M1
8.1
TNM = tumor-node-metastasis.
Source: Data from O’Connell et al.75
Table 29-5 
American Joint Committee on Cancer staging
TNM
Stage
Local  
Recurrence (%)
Survival  
(%)
T1–2 N0
I
<5
90
T3 N0
IIA
8
74
T4 N0
IIB
15
65
T1–2 N1
IIIA
6
81
T1–2 N2
IIIB
8
69
T3 N1
IIIB
11
61
T3 N2
IIIC
15
48
T4 N1–2
IIIC
19–22
36
TNM = tumor-node-metastasis.
Source: From Gunderson et al.76 kkjkjdht Elsevier.
prognosis. This circumferential or radial margin is probably 
best assessed preoperatively by MRI. Although nodal involve-
ment is the single most important prognostic factor in colorectal 
carcinoma, tumor characteristics, such as degree of differentia-
tion, mucinous or signet-ring cell histology, vascular invasion, 
and DNA aneuploidy, also adversely affect prognosis. Molecu-
lar profiling is currently being studied in an effort to further 
improve prognostic indicators.
Preoperative Evaluation.  Once a colon or rectal carcinoma 
has been diagnosed, a staging evaluation should be undertaken. 
The colon must be evaluated for synchronous tumors, usually 
by colonoscopy. Synchronous disease will be present in up to 
5% of patients. For rectal cancers, digital rectal examination and 
rigid or flexible proctoscopy with biopsy should be performed 
to assess tumor size, location, morphology, histology, and fixa-
tion. Endorectal ultrasound or MRI can be invaluable in stag-
ing rectal cancer and is used to classify the ultrasound T and N 
stage of rectal cancers (Fig. 29-24). A chest/abdominal/pelvic 
Figure 29-24.  Endorectal ultrasonography showing a T3 rectal 
carcinoma. The dotted line is being used to measure the diameter 
of the lesion. (Used with permission of Charles O. Finne III, MD, 
Minneapolis, MN.)
1212
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
CT scan should be obtained to evaluate for distant metastases. 
Pelvic CT scan, and sometimes MRI, can be useful in large 
rectal tumors and in recurrent disease to determine the extent 
of local invasion. Among patients with obstructive symptoms, 
a water-soluble contrast study (Gastrografin enema) may be 
useful for delineating the degree of obstruction. It is important 
to avoid mechanical bowel preparation (for either colonos-
copy or surgery) in a patient who appears to be obstructed. 
PET scan may be useful in evaluating lesions seen on CT scan 
and in patients in whom a risky or highly morbid operation 
is planned (pelvic exenteration, sacrectomy). Preoperative 
CEA is often obtained and may be useful for postoperative 
follow-up.
Therapy for Colonic Carcinoma
Principles of Resection.  The objective in treatment of car-
cinoma of the colon is to remove the primary tumor along 
with its lymphovascular supply. Because the lymphatics of 
the colon accompany the main arterial supply, the length of 
bowel resected depends on which vessels are supplying the 
segment involved with the cancer. Any adjacent organ or tis-
sue, such as the omentum, that has been invaded should be 
resected en bloc with the tumor. If all of the tumor cannot 
be removed, a palliative procedure should be considered, 
although it important to note that “debulking” is rarely effec-
tive in colorectal adenocarcinoma.
The presence of synchronous cancers or adenomas or a 
strong family history of colorectal neoplasms suggests that the 
entire colon is at risk for carcinoma (often called a field defect), 
and a subtotal or total colectomy should be considered. Meta-
chronous tumors (a second primary colon cancer) identified 
during follow-up studies should be treated similarly. However, 
the surgeon must be aware of which mesenteric vessels have 
been ligated at the initial colectomy because that may influence 
the choice of procedure.
The number of lymph nodes recovered in the surgi-
cal specimen has long served as a proxy for the oncologic 
adequacy of resection. A number of studies previously have 
suggested that a minimum of 12 lymph nodes in the resected 
specimen are necessary for adequate staging. In addition, 
patients in whom more nodes are harvested have better long-
term outcome.76,77 As such, a 12-node minimum has been sug-
gested as an appropriate benchmark for assessing quality of 
care. However, several investigators recently have called this 
into question, noting that the number of lymph nodes exam-
ined does not correlate with staging, use of adjuvant che-
motherapy, or patient survival.70 Others have suggested that 
the number of negative lymph nodes and/or the lymph node 
ratio (positive lymph nodes to total lymph nodes) may further 
improve staging.78-80
If unexpected metastatic disease is encountered at the 
time of a laparotomy, the decision about whether to proceed 
with resection of the primary tumor depends on the volume 
of distant disease, location and size of the primary tumor, the 
operation required to remove the primary tumor, and the opera-
tive approach. If the metastatic disease is low volume (isolated 
or potentially resectable liver lesions) and the resection of the 
primary tumor is straightforward (segmental abdominal colec-
tomy), it is probably reasonable to proceed with resection. On 
the other hand, if the metastatic disease is high volume (carci-
nomatosis), especially if the primary tumor is minimally symp-
tomatic, the operation should be aborted in order to facilitate 
early systemic chemotherapy. Some centers favor starting the 
operation with a diagnostic laparoscopy in cases where risk of 
discovering metastasis is high in order to minimize the magni-
tude of the operation should surgery be aborted. With recent 
advances in chemotherapy, many of these patients will never 
develop a complication from the primary tumor requiring surgi-
cal intervention.81
Other palliative approaches include a bypass or proximal 
stoma for obstructing lesions.
Stage-Specific Therapy
Stage 0 (Tis, N0, M0).  Polyps containing carcinoma in situ 
(high-grade dysplasia) carry no risk of lymph node metastasis. 
However, the presence of high-grade dysplasia increases the 
risk of finding an invasive carcinoma within the polyp. For this 
reason, these polyps should be excised completely, and patho-
logic margins should be free of dysplasia. Most pedunculated 
polyps and many sessile polyps may be completely removed 
endoscopically. These patients should be followed with frequent 
colonoscopy to ensure that the polyp has not recurred and that 
an invasive carcinoma has not developed. In cases where the 
polyp cannot be removed entirely, a segmental resection is rec-
ommended.
Stage I: The Malignant Polyp (T1, N0, M0).  Occasionally 
a polyp that was thought to be benign will be found to harbor 
invasive carcinoma after polypectomy. Treatment of a malig-
nant polyp is based on the risk of local recurrence and the risk 
of lymph node metastasis.64 The risk of lymph node metastases 
depends primarily on the depth of invasion. Invasive carcinoma 
in the head of a pedunculated polyp with no stalk involvement 
carries a low risk of metastasis (<1%) and may be completely 
resected endoscopically. However, lymphovascular invasion, 
poorly differentiated histology, or tumor within 1 mm of the 
resection margin greatly increases the risk of local recurrence 
and metastatic spread. Segmental colectomy is then indicated. 
Invasive carcinoma arising in a sessile polyp extends into the 
submucosa and is usually best treated with segmental colectomy 
(Fig. 29-25).
Stages I and II: Localized Colon Carcinoma (T1-3, N0, 
M0).  The majority of patients with stages I and II colon cancer 
will be cured with surgical resection. Few patients with com-
pletely resected stage I disease will develop either local or dis-
tant recurrence, and adjuvant chemotherapy does not improve 
Pedunculated polyp
Invasive ca
Sessile polyp
Stalk
Neck
Muscularis
mucosa
Figure 29-25.  Levels of invasive carcinoma in pedunculated and 
sessile polyps. ca = carcinoma.
1213
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
survival in these patients. However, up to 46% of patients with 
completely resected stage II disease will ultimately die from 
colon cancer. For this reason, adjuvant chemotherapy has been 
suggested for selected patients with stage II disease (young 
patients, tumors with “high-risk” histologic findings). It remains 
controversial as to whether chemotherapy improves survival 
rates in these patients. Molecular profiling holds promise for 
improving patient selection in these early cancers.
Stage III: Lymph Node Metastasis (Tany, N1, M0).  Patients 
with lymph node involvement are at significant risk for both local 
and distant recurrence, and adjuvant chemotherapy has been 
recommended routinely in these patients. 5-Fluorouracil–based 
regimens (with leucovorin) and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) reduce 
recurrences and improve survival in this patient population.69 It 
is important to note, however, that a subgroup of patients with 
stage III disease will do well without chemotherapy. MSI status 
in particular predicts good prognosis. Subset analysis from the 
CRYSTAL trial has shown that patients with MSI-high stage III 
disease do not benefit from 5-fluorouracil–based chemotherapy. 
Molecular profiling, therefore, may be helpful in determining 
which stage III patients can safely avoid systemic chemotherapy.82
Stage IV: Distant Metastasis (Tany, Nany, M1).  Survival 
is extremely limited in stage IV colon carcinoma. However, 
unlike many other malignancies, highly selected patients with 
isolated, resectable metastases may benefit from resection 
(metastasectomy). The most common site of metastasis is the 
liver. Of patients with systemic disease, approximately 15% will 
have metastases limited to the liver. Of these, 20% are poten-
tially resectable for cure. Survival is improved in these patients 
(20% –40% 5-year survival) when compared to patients who do 
not undergo resection. Hepatic resection of synchronous metas-
tases from colorectal carcinoma may be performed as a com-
bined procedure or in two stages. All patients require adjuvant 
chemotherapy. The second most common site of metastasis is 
the lung, occurring in approximately 20% of patients with 
colorectal carcinoma. Although very few of these patients will 
be potentially resectable, among those who are (about 1%–2% 
of all colorectal cancer patients), long-term survival benefit is 
approximately 30% to 40%.83 There are limited reports of suc-
cessful resection of metastases in other sites (ovary and retro-
peritoneum are most common).
The remainder of patients with stage IV disease cannot be 
cured surgically, and therefore, the focus of treatment should 
be palliation.84 Methods such as colonic stenting for obstruct-
ing lesions of the left colon also provide good palliation. More 
limited surgical intervention such as a diverting stoma or bypass 
procedure may be appropriate in patients with stage IV disease 
who develop obstruction. Hemorrhage in an unresectable tumor 
can sometimes be controlled with angiographic embolization. 
External beam radiation also has been used for palliation.
Therapy for Rectal Carcinoma
Principles of Resection.  The biology of rectal adenocarci-
noma is thought to be identical to the biology of colonic adeno-
carcinoma, and the operative principles of complete resection 
of the primary tumor, its lymphatic bed, and any other involved 
organ apply to surgical resection of rectal carcinoma. However, 
the anatomy of the pelvis and proximity of other structures 
(ureters, bladder, prostate, vagina, iliac vessels, and sacrum) 
make resection more challenging and often require a different 
approach than for colonic adenocarcinoma. Moreover, it is more 
difficult to achieve negative radial margins in rectal cancers that 
extend through the bowel wall because of the anatomic limita-
tions of the pelvis. Therefore, local recurrence is higher than 
with similar stage colon cancers. However, unlike the intraperi-
toneal colon, the relative paucity of small bowel and other radi-
ation-sensitive structures in the pelvis makes it easier to treat 
rectal tumors with radiation. Therapeutic decisions, therefore, 
are based on the location and depth of the tumor and its relation-
ship to other structures in the pelvis.
Local Therapy.  The distal 10 cm of the rectum are accessible 
transanally. For this reason, several local approaches have been 
proposed for treating rectal neoplasms. Transanal excision (full 
thickness or mucosal) is an excellent approach for noncircum-
ferential, benign, villous adenomas of the rectum. Transanal 
endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally inva-
sive surgery (TAMIS) make use of a specially designed proc-
toscope, magnifying system, and instruments similar to those 
used in laparoscopy to allow local excision of lesions higher 
in the rectum (up to 15 cm). Although this technique has been 
used for selected T1, and some T2, carcinomas, local excision 
does not allow pathologic examination of the lymph nodes and 
might therefore understage patients. Moreover, local recurrence 
rates are high after transanal excision, and salvage surgery, 
while often curative, is associated with poorer survival than 
with initial radical surgery. Local excision of any rectal neo-
plasm should be considered an excisional biopsy because final 
pathologic examination of the specimen may reveal an invasive 
carcinoma that then mandates more radical therapy.
Ablative techniques, such as electrocautery or endocavi-
tary radiation, also have been used. The disadvantage of these 
techniques is that no pathologic specimen is retrieved to confirm 
the tumor stage. Fulguration is generally reserved for extremely 
high-risk patients with a limited life span who cannot tolerate 
more radical surgery.
Radical Resection.  Radical resection is preferred to local 
therapy for most rectal carcinomas. Radical resection involves 
removal of the involved segment of the rectum along with its lym-
phovascular supply. Although any microscopically negative mar-
gin has been suggested to be adequate, most surgeons still attempt 
to obtain a 2-cm distal mural margin for curative resections.
Total mesorectal excision (TME) is a technique that uses 
sharp dissection along anatomic planes to ensure complete resec-
tion of the rectal mesentery during low and extended low ante-
rior resections. For upper rectal or rectosigmoid resections, a 
partial mesorectal excision of at least 5 cm distal to the tumor 
appears adequate. TME both decreases local recurrence rates and 
improves long-term survival rates. Moreover, this technique is 
associated with less blood loss and less risk to the pelvic nerves 
and presacral plexus than is blunt dissection. The principles of 
TME should be applied to all radical resections for rectal cancer.
Recurrence of rectal cancer generally has a poor prog-
nosis. Extensive involvement of other pelvic organs (usually 
occurring in the setting of tumor recurrence) may require a pel-
vic exenteration. The rectal and perineal portions of this opera-
tion are similar to an APR, but en bloc resection of the ureters, 
bladder, and prostate or uterus and vagina are also performed. 
A permanent colostomy and an ileal conduit to drain the urinary 
tract may be necessary. The sacrum may also be resected if nec-
essary (sacrectomy) up to the level of the S2-S3 junction. These 
operations are best performed in tertiary centers with multidisci-
plinary teams consisting of a colon and rectal surgeon, urologist, 
neurosurgeon, and plastic surgeon.
1214
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Stage-Specific Therapy (Fig. 29-26).  Pretreatment stag-
ing of rectal carcinoma often relies on endorectal ultrasound 
to determine the T and N status of a rectal cancer. Ultrasound 
is highly accurate at assessing tumor depth, but less accurate 
in diagnosing nodal involvement. Ultrasound evaluation can 
guide choice of therapy in most patients. MRI is useful to assess 
mesorectal involvement. When the radial margin is threatened 
or involved, neoadjuvant chemoradiation is recommended.
Stage 0 (Tis, N0, M0).  Villous adenomas harboring carci-
noma in situ (high-grade dysplasia) are ideally treated with local 
excision. A 1-cm margin should be obtained. Rarely, radical 
resection will be necessary if transanal excision is not techni-
cally possible (large circumferential lesions).
Stage I: Localized Rectal Carcinoma (T1-2, N0, M0).  Although 
local excision has been used for small, favorable sessile uT1N0 
and uT2N0 rectal cancers, local recurrence rates may be as high 
as 20% and 40%, respectively. For this reason, radical resection 
is strongly recommended in all good-risk patients. Lesions with 
unfavorable histologic characteristics and those located in the 
distal third of the rectum, in particular, are prone to recurrence. 
In high-risk patients and in patients who refuse radical surgery 
because of the risk of need for a permanent colostomy, local 
excision may be adequate, but strong consideration should be 
given to adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemoradiation to improve 
local control. The efficacy of adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemo-
radiation followed by transanal excision in patients who can 
High risk or
refuses radical
resection
Transanal
excision +/-
neoadjuvant or
adjuvant
chemoradiation
Radical
resection
Radical
resection
Radical
resection
Continue
chemothrapy
Consider
resection
Chemoradiation
vs. palliative
procedure
stent, laser
ablation, stoma,
resection
Low risk and
accepts radical
resection
Neoadjuvant
chemoradiation
Neoadjuvant
chemoradiation
Asymptomatic
Symptomatic
Restage
Restage
Unresectable/
multiple
metastatic
sites
Resectable/single
metastatic site
Chemotherapy
No metastases
No metastases
Rectal adenocarcinoma
Stage II
(T3-4, N0, M0)
Stage III
(Tany, N1-3,M0)
Staging evaluation
CT chest/abdomen/pelvis
Endorectal U/S
+/- MRI
Colonoscopy/CT colonography (if possible)
Stage IV
(Tany, Nany, M1)
Stage I
(T1-2, N0, M0)
Restage
Figure 29-26.  Diagnostic algorithm for rectal cancer. CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; U/S = ultrasound.
tolerate radical surgery has been controversial. Early results 
from ACOSOG Z6041, in which patients with T2 rectal can-
cers received neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by transanal 
excision, showed a pathologic complete response rate of 44%. 
Long-term outcomes, however, are not yet known.85
Locally Advanced Rectal Cancer (Stages II and III)
Stage II: Localized Rectal Carcinoma (T3-4, N0, M0).  Larger 
rectal tumors, especially if located in the distal rectum, are more 
likely to recur locally. There are two schools of thought, each 
differing in their approach to control local recurrences. Advo-
cates of total mesorectal resection suggest that optimization 
of operative technique will obviate the need for any adjuvant 
chemoradiation to control local recurrence after resection of 
stages I, II, and III rectal cancers. The opposing school suggests 
that stages II and III rectal cancers will benefit from chemo-
radiation. They argue that such therapy reduces local recur-
rences and prolongs survival whether given preoperatively or 
postoperatively. The advantages of preoperative chemoradiation 
include tumor shrinkage, increased likelihood of resection and 
of a sphincter-sparing procedure, tumor downstaging by treating 
locally involved lymph nodes, and decreased risk to the small 
intestine. Disadvantages include possible overtreatment of 
early-stage tumors, impaired wound healing, and pelvic fibro-
sis increasing the risk of operative complications. Postopera-
tive radiation allows accurate pathologic staging of the resected 
tumor and lymph nodes and avoids the wound healing problems 
1215
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
associated with preoperative radiation. However, bulky tumors, 
tumors involving adjacent organs, and very low rectal tumors 
may be much more difficult to resect without preoperative radi-
ation and may require a more extensive operation.
Stage III: Lymph Node Metastasis (Tany, N1, M0).  Many 
surgeons now recommend chemotherapy and radiation either 
pre- or postoperatively for node-positive rectal cancers. The 
advantages and disadvantages are similar to those listed for 
stage II disease, except that the likelihood of overtreating an 
early-stage lesion is considerably less.
Over the past two decades, a wide variety of studies have 
addressed the issue of adjuvant and neoadjuvant therapy for 
locally advanced rectal cancer. Many of these studies demon-
strated both improved local control and prolonged survival and 
resulted in the 1990 National Institutes of Health (NIH) con-
sensus conference recommendation for postoperative chemo-
radiation therapy in these patients. There is little controversy 
regarding chemoradiation therapy for stage III (node-positive) 
disease. However, advances in surgical technique, such as TME, 
for locally advanced node-negative cancers (T3-4, N0; stage II) 
have improved local control with surgery alone, prompting some 
to abandon adjuvant chemoradiation in these patients, especially 
for those with cancers in the proximal rectum. Although the 
data from these studies are intriguing, other reports have shown 
that chemoradiation improves local control and survival even 
in patients who undergo TME. Thus, most colorectal surgeons 
in the United States continue to recommend adjuvant or neo-
adjuvant therapy for patients with locally advanced disease. 
Many European surgeons now rely heavily on MRI staging to 
determine the need for neoadjuvant chemoradiation. They use 
neoadjuvant chemoradiation if the radial margin is threatened 
or involved by the cancer or if anal sphincter or other local 
organ invasion is present. In the United States, chemoradia-
tion therapy is still recommended for all patients with stage III 
disease and the majority of patients with stage II disease. In 
select patients with T3 tumors, favorable histology, and nega-
tive radial margins, chemoradiation may not be necessary, but 
larger prospective studies are required before this approach can 
be recommended.
Appropriate timing of chemoradiation for locally advanced 
rectal cancer has been debated. Historically, preoperative 
chemoradiation has been advocated based on tumor shrinkage/
downstaging, improved resectability, and the possibility of per-
forming a sphincter-sparing operation in some patients. In addi-
tion, the absence of small bowel adhesions in the pelvis may 
decrease toxicity. However, preoperative radiation therapy 
may increase operative complications and impairs wound healing. 
Although preoperative endorectal ultrasound and MRI have 
improved our ability to stage rectal cancer, clinical “overstag-
ing” can be problematic, and neoadjuvant therapy may there-
fore overtreat patients with pT1-2, N0 tumors. Advocates of 
postoperative radiation therapy cite more accurate pathologic 
staging and fewer operative/postoperative complications. How-
ever, large, bulky tumors may be unresectable or require a more 
extensive operation (APR, pelvic exenteration) without preop-
erative therapy. In addition, postoperative pelvic radiation may 
compromise function of the neorectum.
Comparisons of perioperative toxicity and oncologic out-
come have been addressed by the German CAO/ARO/AIO-94 
trial. In this study, pre- and postoperative chemoradiation were 
associated with equivalent acute toxicity and equivalent post-
operative complication rates. Postoperative chemoradiation, 
however, doubled the risk of postoperative stricture formation. 
In addition, preoperative chemoradiation halved the risk of local 
recurrence (6% vs. 12%). Based on these data, most surgeons 
consider preoperative chemoradiation to be the most appropriate 
therapy for locally advanced rectal cancer.86
Stage IV: Distant Metastasis (Tany, Nany, M1).  Like stage 
IV colon carcinoma, survival is limited in patients with distant 
metastasis from rectal carcinoma. Isolated hepatic and/or pul-
monary metastases are rare, but when present may be resected 
for cure in selected patients.83 Some patients will require pal-
liative procedures. Radical resection may be required to con-
trol pain, bleeding, or tenesmus, but highly morbid procedures 
such as pelvic exenteration and sacrectomy should generally 
be avoided in this setting. Local therapy using cautery, endo-
cavitary radiation, or laser ablation may be adequate to con-
trol bleeding or prevent obstruction. Intraluminal stents may be 
useful in the uppermost rectum but often cause pain and tenes-
mus lower in the rectum. Occasionally, a proximal diverting 
colostomy will be required to alleviate obstruction. A mucus 
fistula should be created if possible to vent the distal colon. It 
is critical that the morbidity of any procedure be realistically 
weighed against potential benefit in these patients with limited 
life expectancy. The assistance of a palliative care team can be 
invaluable in this setting.84
Follow-Up and Surveillance
Patients who have been treated for one colorectal cancer are 
at risk for the development of recurrent disease (either locally 
or systemically) or metachronous disease (a second primary 
tumor). In theory, metachronous cancers should be preventable 
by using surveillance colonoscopy to detect and remove polyps 
before they progress to invasive cancer. For most patients, a 
colonoscopy should be performed within 12 months after the 
diagnosis of the original cancer (or sooner if the colon was not 
examined in its entirety prior to the original resection). If that 
study is normal, colonoscopy should be repeated every 3 to 
5 years thereafter.
The optimal method of following patients for recurrent 
cancer remains controversial. The goal of close follow- up 
observation is to detect resectable recurrence and to improve 
survival. Re-resection of local recurrence and resection of dis-
tant metastasis to liver, lung, or other sites are often technically 
challenging and highly morbid, with only a limited chance of 
achieving long-term survival. Thus, only selected patients who 
would tolerate such an approach should be followed intensively. 
Because most recurrences occur within 2 years of the original 
diagnosis, surveillance focuses on this time period. Patients 
who have undergone local resection of rectal tumors probably 
also should be followed with frequent endoscopic examinations 
(every 3–6 months for 3 years, then every 6 months for 2 years). 
CEA is often followed every 3 to 6 months for 2 years. CT scans 
are often performed annually for 5 years, but there are few data 
to support this practice. More intensive surveillance is appro-
priate in high-risk patients such as those with possible HNPCC 
syndrome or T3, N+ cancers. Although intensive surveillance 
improves detection of resectable recurrences, it is important to 
note that a survival benefit has never been proven. Therefore, 
the risks and benefits of intensive surveillance must be weighed 
and treatment individualized.
Treatment of Recurrent Colorectal Carcinoma
Between 20% and 40% of patients who have undergone cura-
tive intent surgery for colorectal carcinoma will eventually 
1216
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
develop recurrent disease. Most recurrences occur within the 
first 2 years after the initial diagnosis, but preoperative chemo-
radiation therapy may delay recurrence. While most of these 
patients will present with distant metastases, a small proportion 
will have isolated local recurrence and may be considered for 
salvage surgery. Recurrence after colon cancer resection usu-
ally occurs at the local site within the abdomen or in the liver 
or lungs. Resection of other involved organs may be necessary. 
Recurrence of rectal cancer can be considerably more difficult 
to manage because of the proximity of other pelvic structures. 
If the patient has not received chemotherapy and radiation, 
then adjuvant therapy should be administered prior to salvage 
surgery. Radical resection may require extensive resection of 
pelvic organs (pelvic exenteration with or without sacrectomy). 
Ideally, the aim of a salvage operation should be to resect all 
of the tumor with negative margins. However, if the ability 
to achieve a negative margin is in question, the addition of 
intraoperative radiation therapy (usually brachytherapy) can 
help improve local control. Pelvic MRI is useful for identify-
ing tumor extension that would prevent successful resection 
(extension of tumor into the pelvic sidewall, involvement of the 
iliac vessels or bilateral sacral nerves, sacral invasion above the 
S2-S3 junction). Patients should also undergo a thorough pre-
operative evaluation to identify distant metastases (CT of chest, 
abdomen, and pelvis, and PET scan) before undergoing such an 
extensive procedure. Nevertheless, radical salvage surgery can 
prolong survival in selected patients.
Minimally Invasive Techniques For Resection
Laparoscopic colectomy for cancer has been controversial. 
Early reports of high port site recurrence dampened enthusi-
asm for this technique.87 The ability to perform an adequate 
oncologic resection for cancer has also been questioned. Sev-
eral trials have laid to rest many of these fears. The Clinical 
Outcomes of Surgical Therapy Study Group (COST), 
the Colon Carcinoma Laparoscopic or Open Resection 
(COLOR) trial, and the United Kingdom Medical Research 
Council Conventional versus Laparoscopic-Assisted Surgery 
in Colorectal Cancer (CLASSICC) trial all have shown onco-
logic equivalence between open and laparoscopic techniques. 
In these multi-institutional studies, the rates of cancer recur-
rence, survival, and quality of life were similar, suggesting that, 
in the hands of an appropriately trained surgeon, laparoscopic 
colectomy is appropriate for cancer.88-90 The recent introduc-
tion of robotic surgery offers an additional minimally invasive 
approach. Early studies suggest that robotic surgery may be 
the oncologic equivalent to laparoscopic surgery for colorectal 
cancer. A prospective, randomized, multicenter trial, Robotic 
versus Laparoscopic Resection for Rectal Cancer (ROLARR) 
is under way in hopes of answering this question.91
OTHER NEOPLASMS
Rare Colorectal Tumors
Carcinoid Tumors.  Carcinoid tumors occur most commonly 
in the gastrointestinal tract, and up to 25% of these tumors are 
found in the rectum. Most small rectal carcinoids are benign, and 
overall survival is greater than 80%. However, the risk of malig-
nancy increases with size, and more than 60% of tumors greater 
than 2 cm in diameter are associated with distant metastases. 
Rectal carcinoids appear to be less likely to secrete vasoactive 
substances than carcinoids in other locations, and carcinoid 
syndrome is uncommon in the absence of hepatic metastases. 
Small carcinoids can be locally resected transanally. Larger 
tumors or tumors with obvious invasion into the muscularis 
require more radical surgery. Carcinoid tumors in the proximal 
colon are less common and are more likely to be malignant. Size 
also correlates with risk of malignancy, and tumors less than 
2 cm in diameter rarely metastasize. However, the majority of 
carcinoid tumors in the proximal colon present as bulky lesions, 
and up to two thirds of patients will have metastatic spread at the 
time of diagnosis. These tumors should usually be treated with 
radical resection. Because carcinoid tumors are typically slow 
growing, patients with distant metastases may expect reason-
ably long survival. Symptoms of carcinoid syndrome can often 
be alleviated with somatostatin analogues (octreotide) and/or 
interferon-α. Tumor debulking can offer effective palliation in 
selected patients.
Carcinoid Carcinomas.  Composite carcinoid carcinomas (ade-
nocarcinoids) have histologic features of both carcinoid tumors 
and adenocarcinomas. The natural history of these tumors more 
closely parallels that of adenocarcinomas than carcinoid tumors, 
and regional and systemic metastases are common. Carcinoid 
carcinoma of the colon and rectum should be treated according 
to the same oncologic principles as followed for management 
of adenocarcinoma.
Lipomas.  Lipomas occur most commonly in the submucosa 
of the colon and rectum. They are benign lesions, but rarely 
may cause bleeding, obstruction, or intussusception, especially 
when greater than 2 cm in diameter. Small asymptomatic lesions 
do not require resection. Larger lipomas should be resected by 
colonoscopic techniques or by a colotomy and enucleation or 
limited colectomy.
Lymphoma.  Lymphoma involving the colon and rectum is rare 
but accounts for about 10% of all gastrointestinal lymphomas. 
The cecum is most often involved, probably as a result of 
spread from the terminal ileum. Symptoms include bleeding and 
obstruction, and these tumors may be clinically indistinguish-
able from adenocarcinomas. Bowel resection is the treatment of 
choice for isolated colorectal lymphoma. Adjuvant therapy may 
be given based on the stage of disease.
Leiomyoma and Leiomyosarcoma.   Leiomyomas are benign 
tumors of the smooth muscle of the bowel wall and occur most 
commonly in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Most patients are 
asymptomatic, but large lesions can cause bleeding or obstruc-
tion. Because it is difficult to differentiate a benign leiomy-
oma from a malignant leiomyosarcoma, these lesions should 
be resected. Recurrence is common after local resection, but 
most small leiomyomas can be adequately treated with limited 
resection. Lesions larger than 5 cm should be treated with radi-
cal resection because the risk of malignancy is high.
Leiomyosarcoma is rare in the gastrointestinal tract. When 
this malignancy occurs in the large intestine, the rectum is the 
most common site. Symptoms include bleeding and obstruction. 
A radical resection is indicated for these tumors.
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor.  These rare tumors occur 
most commonly in the stomach and small intestine, but 5% 
to 10% arise in the colon or rectum. They are often mistaken 
for leiomyomas. Thirty percent to 50% are malignant; thus all 
lesions should be resected.
6
1217
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Retrorectal/Presacral Tumors
Tumors occurring in the retrorectal space are rare. This region 
lies between the upper two thirds of the rectum and the sacrum 
above the rectosacral fascia. It is bound by the rectum anteriorly, 
the presacral fascia posteriorly, and the endopelvic fascia later-
ally (lateral ligaments). The retrorectal space contains multiple 
embryologic remnants derived from a variety of tissues (neuro-
ectoderm, notochord, and hindgut). Tumors that develop in this 
space are often heterogeneous.
Congenital lesions are most common, comprising almost 
two thirds of retrorectal lesions. The remainder are classified as 
neurogenic, osseous, inflammatory, or miscellaneous lesions. 
Malignancy is more common in the pediatric population than 
in adults, and solid lesions are more likely to be malignant than 
are cystic lesions. Inflammatory lesions may be solid or cystic 
(abscess) and usually represent extensions of infection either in 
the perirectal space or in the abdomen.
Developmental cysts constitute the majority of congenital 
lesions and may arise from all three germ cell layers. Dermoid 
and epidermoid cysts are benign lesions that arise from the 
ectoderm. Enterogenous cysts arise from the primitive gut. 
Anterior meningocele and myelomeningocele arise from her-
niation of the dural sac through a defect in the anterior sacrum. 
A “scimitar sign” (sacrum with a rounded, concave border with-
out any bony destruction) is the pathognomonic radiographic 
appearance of this condition.
Solid lesions include teratomas, chordomas, neurologic 
tumors, or osseous lesions. Teratomas are true neoplasms and 
contain tissue from each germ cell layer. They often contain 
both cystic and solid components. Teratomas are more com-
mon in children than in adults, but when found in adults, 30% 
are malignant. Chordomas arise from the notochord and are the 
most common malignant tumor in this region. These are slow-
growing, invasive cancers that show characteristic bony destruc-
tion. Neurogenic tumors include neurofibromas and sarcomas, 
neurilemomas, ependymomas, and ganglioneuromas. Osseous 
lesions include osteomas and bone cysts, as well as neoplasms 
such as osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing’s tumor, chondromyxosar-
coma, and giant cell tumors.
Patients may present with pain (lower back, pelvic, or lower 
extremity), gastrointestinal symptoms, or urinary tract symp-
toms. Most lesions are palpable on digital rectal examination. 
While plain X-rays and CT scans often are used to evaluate these 
lesions, pelvic MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging 
study. Myelogram is occasionally necessary if there is central 
nervous system involvement. Treatment is almost always sur-
gical resection. The approach depends in part on the nature of 
the lesion and its location. Lesions high in the pelvis may be 
approached via a transabdominal route, whereas low lesions 
may be resected transsacrally. Intermediate lesions may require 
a combined abdominal and sacral operation. Although survival 
is excellent after resection of benign lesions, local recurrence is 
not uncommon. Prognosis after resection of malignant lesions is 
highly variable and reflects the biology of the underlying tumor.
The role of biopsy in this setting has been controversial. 
Historically, the recommendation was to avoid biopsy because 
of the risk of infection or needle tract seeding. This recommen-
dation has recently been challenged, especially for large and/
or unusual tumors that would be better treated with multimo-
dality neoadjuvant therapy (sarcomas, for example). A recent 
study confirmed the utility of needle biopsy of solid lesions and 
refuted concerns about needle tract seeding.92 As such, most 
solid lesions should be biopsied regardless of resectability. 
Biopsy of cystic lesions, especially meningoceles, should still 
be avoided because of the risk of infection.
Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors
Cancers of the anal canal are uncommon and account for 
approximately 2% of all colorectal malignancies. Neoplasms 
of the anal canal have traditionally been divided into those 
affecting the anal margin (distal to the dentate line) and those 
affecting the anal canal (proximal to the dentate line) based on 
lymphatic drainage patterns. Lymphatics from the anal canal 
proximal to the dentate line drain cephalad via the superior 
rectal lymphatics to the inferior mesenteric nodes and laterally 
along both the middle rectal vessels and inferior rectal ves-
sels through the ischiorectal fossa to the internal iliac nodes. 
Lymph from the anal canal distal to the dentate line usually 
drains to the inguinal nodes. It can also drain to the superior 
rectal lymph nodes or along the inferior rectal lymphatics to 
the ischiorectal fossa if primary drainage routes are blocked 
with tumor (Fig. 29-27).
A more clinically useful classification divides anal lesions 
into those that are perianal (can be completely visualized with 
gentle eversion of the buttocks) and those that are intra-anal 
(cannot be completely visualized with gentle eversion of the 
buttocks). In many cases, therapy depends on whether the tumor 
is perianal or intra-anal.
Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions.  Anal canal and peri-
anal dysplasia have long had a potpourri of nomenclature. Anal 
intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), Bowen’s disease, and carci-
noma in situ all refer to human papillomavirus (HPV)–induced 
dysplasia. Because these entities are pathologically identical, 
there has been a recent effort to standardize nomenclature. High-
grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) include high- 
and intermediate-grade dysplasia, AIN2 and AIN3, Bowen’s 
Inferior
mesenteric a.
Superior
rectal a.
Middle
rectal a.
Inferior
rectal a.
Common 
iliac a.
Figure 29-27.  Lymphatic drainage of the anal canal. a. = artery.
1218
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
disease, and carcinoma in situ. Low-grade squamous intraepi-
thelial lesions (LSIL) include low-grade dysplasia and AIN1.93
HSIL is a precursor to an invasive squamous cell carci-
noma (epidermoid carcinoma). HSIL may appear as a plaque-
like lesion or may only be apparent with high-resolution 
anoscopy and application of acetic acid or Lugol’s iodine 
solution. Both HSIL and LSIL are associated with infection 
with HPV, especially types 16 and 18. The incidence of both 
squamous intraepithelial lesions and epidermoid carcinoma of 
the anus has increased dramatically among human immunode-
ficiency virus (HIV)–positive, homosexual men. This increase 
is thought to result from increased rates of HPV infection along 
with HIV-induced immunosuppression. Treatment of HSIL is 
ablation. Because of a high recurrence and/or reinfection rate, 
these patients require extremely close surveillance. High-risk 
patients should be followed with frequent anal Papanicolaou 
(Pap) smears every 3 to 6 months. An abnormal Pap smear 
should be followed by an examination under anesthesia and 
anal mapping using high-resolution anoscopy. High-resolution 
anoscopy shows areas with abnormal telangiectasias that are 
consistent with high-grade dysplasia (HSIL). Many centers now 
consider this technique for repeated ablation of HSIL to be the 
optimal method for following these patients. It should be noted, 
however, that the practice has not been universally adopted, and 
it is unclear whether close surveillance in lower risk (nonimmu-
nosuppressed) patients is necessary. Rarely, extensive disease 
may require resection with flap closure. Medical therapy for 
HPV has also been proposed. Topical immunomodulators such 
as imiquimod (Aldara) have been shown to induce regression in 
some series.94 Topical 5-fluorouracil has also been used in this 
setting. Finally, the introduction of a vaccine against HPV may 
help decrease the incidence of this disease in the future.
Epidermoid Carcinoma.  Epidermoid carcinoma of the anus 
includes squamous cell carcinoma, cloacogenic carcinoma, tran-
sitional carcinoma, and basaloid carcinoma. The clinical behav-
ior and natural history of these tumors are similar. Epidermoid 
carcinoma is a slow-growing tumor and usually presents as an 
intra-anal or perianal mass. Pain and bleeding may be present. 
Perianal epidermoid carcinoma may be treated in a similar fash-
ion as squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in other locations 
because wide local excision can usually be achieved without 
resecting the anal sphincter. Intra-anal epidermoid carcinoma 
cannot be excised locally, and first-line therapy relies on che-
motherapy and radiation (the Nigro protocol: 5-fluorouracil, 
mitomycin C, and 30 Gy of external beam radiation). 
More than 80% of these tumors can be cured by using this 
regimen. Recurrence usually requires radical resection (APR). 
Metastasis to inguinal lymph nodes is a poor prognostic sign.
Verrucous Carcinoma (Buschke-Lowenstein Tumor, Giant 
Condyloma Acuminata).  Verrucous carcinoma is a locally 
aggressive form of condyloma acuminata. Although these 
lesions do not metastasize, they can cause extensive local tissue 
destruction and may be grossly indistinguishable from epider-
moid carcinoma. Wide local excision is the treatment of choice 
when possible, but radical resection may sometimes be required. 
Very large lesions may respond to external beam radiation, but 
resection is almost always required.
Basal Cell Carcinoma.  Basal cell carcinoma of the anus is 
rare and resembles basal cell carcinoma elsewhere on the skin 
(raised, pearly edges with central ulceration). This is a slow-
growing tumor that rarely metastasizes. Wide local excision 
is the treatment of choice, but recurrence occurs in up to 30% 
of patients. Radical resection and/or radiation therapy may be 
required for large lesions.
Adenocarcinoma.  Adenocarcinoma of the anus is extremely 
rare and usually represents downward spread of a low rectal ade-
nocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma may occasionally arise from the 
anal glands or may develop in a chronic fistula. Radical resection 
with or without adjuvant chemoradiation is usually required.
Extramammary perianal Paget’s disease is adenocarci-
noma in situ arising from the apocrine glands of the perianal 
area. The lesion is typically plaque-like and may be indistin-
guishable from HSIL. Characteristic Paget’s cells are seen histo-
logically. These tumors are often associated with a synchronous 
gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, so a complete evaluation of 
the intestinal tract should be performed. Wide local excision is 
usually adequate treatment for perianal Paget’s disease.
Melanoma.  Anorectal melanoma is rare, comprising less than 
1% of all anorectal malignancies and 1% to 2% of melanomas. 
Despite many advances in the treatment of melanoma, prog-
nosis for patients with anorectal disease remains poor. Overall 
5-year survival is less than 10%, and many patients present with 
systemic metastasis and/or deeply invasive tumors at the time 
of diagnosis. A few patients with anorectal melanoma, how-
ever, present with isolated local or locoregional disease that 
is potentially resectable for cure, and both radical resection 
(APR) and wide local excision have been advocated. Recur-
rence is common and usually occurs systemically regardless of 
the initial surgical procedure. Local resection with free margins 
does not increase the risk of local or regional recurrence, and 
APR offers no survival advantage over local excision. Because 
of the morbidity associated with APR, wide local excision is 
recommended for initial treatment of localized anal melanoma. 
In some patients, wide local excision may not be technically 
feasible, and APR may be required if the tumor involves a sig-
nificant portion of the anal sphincter or is circumferential. The 
addition of adjuvant chemotherapy, biochemotherapy, vaccines, 
or radiotherapy may be of benefit in some patients, but efficacy 
remains unproven.95
OTHER BENIGN COLORECTAL CONDITIONS
Rectal Prolapse and Solitary  
Rectal Ulcer Syndrome
Rectal Prolapse.  Rectal prolapse refers to a circumferential, 
full-thickness protrusion of the rectum through the anus and has 
also been called “first-degree” prolapse, “complete” prolapse, or 
procidentia. Internal prolapse occurs when the rectal wall intus-
suscepts but does not protrude and is probably more accurately 
described as internal intussusception. Mucosal prolapse is a 
partial-thickness protrusion often associated with hemorrhoidal 
disease and is usually treated with banding or hemorrhoidectomy.
In adults, this condition is far more common among 
women, with a female-to-male ratio of 6:1. Prolapse becomes 
more prevalent with age in women and peaks in the seventh 
decade of life. In men, prevalence is unrelated to age. 
Symptoms include tenesmus, a sensation of tissue protrud-
ing from the anus that may or may not spontaneously reduce, 
and a sensation of incomplete evacuation. Mucus discharge and 
leakage may accompany the protrusion. Patients also present 
with a myriad of functional complaints, from incontinence and 
diarrhea to constipation and outlet obstruction.
7
8
1219
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
A thorough preoperative evaluation, including colonic 
transit studies, anorectal manometry, tests of pudendal nerve 
terminal motor latency, EMG, and cinedefecography, may be 
useful. The colon should be evaluated by colonoscopy, air-con-
trast barium enema, or CT colonography to exclude neoplasms 
or diverticular disease. Cardiopulmonary condition should be 
thoroughly evaluated because comorbidities may influence the 
choice of surgical procedure.
The primary therapy for rectal prolapse is surgery, and 
more than 100 different procedures have been described to treat 
this condition. Operations can be categorized as either abdomi-
nal or perineal. Abdominal operations have taken three major 
approaches: (a) reduction of the perineal hernia and closure of 
the cul-de-sac (Moschowitz repair); (b) fixation of the rectum, 
either with a prosthetic sling (Ripsten and Wells rectopexy) or 
by suture rectopexy; or (c) resection of redundant sigmoid colon 
(Fig. 29-28). In some cases, resection is combined with rectal 
fixation (resection rectopexy). Abdominal rectopexy with or 
without resection also is increasingly performed laparoscopi-
cally or robotically. Perineal approaches have focused on tight-
ening the anus with a variety of prosthetic materials, reefing the 
rectal mucosa (Delorme procedure), or resecting the prolapsed 
bowel from the perineum (perineal rectosigmoidectomy or Alte-
meier procedure) (Fig. 29-29).
Because rectal prolapse occurs most commonly in 
elderly women, the choice of operation depends in part on the 
patient’s overall medical condition. Abdominal rectopexy (with 
or without sigmoid resection) offers the most durable repair, 
with recurrence occurring in less than 10% of patients. Peri-
neal rectosigmoidectomy avoids an abdominal operation and 
may be preferable in high-risk patients but is associated with 
a higher recurrence rate. Reefing the rectal mucosa is effective 
for patients with limited prolapse. Anal encirclement procedures 
generally have been abandoned.
Solitary Rectal Ulcer Syndrome.  Solitary rectal ulcer syn-
drome and colitis cystica profunda are commonly associated 
with internal intussusception. Patients may complain of pain, 
bleeding, mucus discharge, or outlet obstruction. In solitary rec-
tal ulcer syndrome, one or more ulcers are present in the distal 
rectum, usually on the anterior wall. In colitis cystica profunda, 
nodules or a mass may be found in a similar location. Evalu-
ation should include anorectal manometry, defecography, and 
either colonoscopy or barium enema to exclude other diagnoses. 
Biopsy of an ulcer or mass is mandatory to exclude malignancy 
or infection due to cytomegalovirus (CMV) in an immunosup-
pressed patient. Nonoperative therapy (high-fiber diet, def-
ecation training to avoid straining, and laxatives or enemas) 
is effective in the majority of patients. Biofeedback has also 
been reported to be effective in some patients. Surgery (either 
abdominal or perineal repair of prolapse as described earlier) 
is reserved for highly symptomatic patients who have failed all 
medical interventions.72
Volvulus
Volvulus occurs when an air-filled segment of the colon twists 
about its mesentery. The sigmoid colon is involved in up to 
90% of cases, but volvulus can involve the cecum (<20%) 
or transverse colon. A volvulus may reduce spontaneously, 
but more commonly produces bowel obstruction, which can 
progress to strangulation, gangrene, and perforation. Chronic 
constipation may produce a large, redundant colon (chronic 
megacolon) that predisposes to volvulus, especially if the mes-
enteric base is narrow.
The symptoms of volvulus are those of acute bowel 
obstruction. Patients present with abdominal distention, nau-
sea, and vomiting. Symptoms rapidly progress to generalized 
abdominal pain and tenderness. Fever and leukocytosis are her-
alds of gangrene and/or perforation. Occasionally, patients will 
report a long history of intermittent obstructive symptoms and 
distention, suggesting intermittent chronic volvulus.
Sigmoid Volvulus.  Sigmoid volvulus can often be differenti-
ated from cecal or transverse colon volvulus by the appearance 
of plain X-rays of the abdomen. Sigmoid volvulus produces a 
characteristic bent inner tube or coffee bean appearance, with 
the convexity of the loop lying in the right upper quadrant 
(opposite the site of obstruction). Gastrografin enema shows a 
narrowing at the site of the volvulus and a pathognomonic bird’s 
beak (Fig. 29-30).
Unless there are obvious signs of gangrene or peritonitis, 
the initial management of sigmoid volvulus is resuscitation fol-
lowed by endoscopic detorsion. Detorsion is usually most eas-
ily accomplished by using a rigid proctoscope, but a flexible 
sigmoidoscope or colonoscope may also be effective. A rec-
tal tube may be inserted to maintain decompression. Although 
these techniques are successful in reducing sigmoid volvulus 
in the majority of patients, the risk of recurrence is high (up to 
40%). For this reason, an elective sigmoid colectomy should be 
performed after the patient has been stabilized and undergone 
an adequate bowel preparation.
Clinical evidence of gangrene or perforation mandates 
immediate surgical exploration without an attempt at endo-
scopic decompression. Similarly, the presence of necrotic 
mucosa, ulceration, or dark blood noted on endoscopy exami-
nation suggests strangulation and is an indication for operation. 
Figure 29-28.  Transabdominal proctopexy for rectal 
prolapse. The fully mobilized rectum is sutured to the 
presacral fascia. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view. If 
desired, a sigmoid colectomy can be performed con-
comitantly to resect the redundant colon.
1220
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
If dead bowel is present at laparotomy, a sigmoid colectomy 
with end colostomy (Hartmann’s procedure) may be the safest 
operation to perform.
Cecal Volvulus.  Cecal volvulus results from nonfixation of the 
right colon. In the majority of cases, rotation occurs around the 
ileocolic blood vessels and vascular impairment occurs early, 
although 10% to 30% of the cecum folds upon itself (cecal 
bascule). Plain X-rays of the abdomen show a characteristic 
kidney-shaped, air-filled structure in the left upper quadrant 
(opposite the site of obstruction), and a Gastrografin enema 
confirms obstruction at the level of the volvulus.
Unlike sigmoid volvulus, cecal volvulus can almost never 
be detorsed endoscopically. Moreover, because vascular com-
promise occurs early in the course of cecal volvulus, surgical 
exploration is necessary when the diagnosis is made. Right 
hemicolectomy with a primary ileocolic anastomosis can usu-
ally be performed safely and prevents recurrence. Simple detor-
sion or detorsion and cecopexy are associated with a high rate 
of recurrence.
Transverse Colon Volvulus.  Transverse colon volvulus is 
extremely rare. Nonfixation of the colon and chronic constipation 
with megacolon may predispose to transverse colon volvulus. 
The radiographic appearance of transverse colon volvulus 
resembles sigmoid volvulus, but Gastrografin enema will reveal 
a more proximal obstruction. Although colonoscopic detorsion 
is occasionally successful in this setting, most patients require 
emergent exploration and resection.
Megacolon
Megacolon describes a chronically dilated, elongated, hypertro-
phied large bowel. Megacolon may be congenital or acquired 
and is usually related to chronic mechanical or functional 
obstruction. In general, the degree of megacolon is related to 
the duration of obstruction. Evaluation must always include 
examination of the colon and rectum (either endoscopically or 
radiographically) to exclude a surgically correctable mechanical 
obstruction.
Congenital megacolon caused by Hirschsprung’s disease 
results from the failure of migration of neural crest cells to the 
distal large intestine. The resulting absence of ganglion cells 
in the distal colon results in a failure of relaxation and causes a 
functional obstruction. The proximal, healthy bowel becomes 
progressively dilated. Surgical resection of the aganglionic 
segment is curative. Although Hirschsprung’s disease primar-
ily is a disease of infants and children, it occasionally presents 
Figure 29-29.  Perineal rectosigmoidec-
tomy shown in lithotomy position. A. A 
circular incision is made 2 cm proximal to 
the dentate line. B. The anterior peritoneal 
reflection is opened. C. The mesentery is 
divided and ligated. D. The peritoneum 
may be sutured to the bowel wall. E. The 
bowel is resected. F. A hand-sewn anasto-
mosis is performed.
1221
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
later in adulthood, especially if an extremely short segment 
of the bowel is affected (ultrashort-segment Hirschsprung’s 
disease).
Acquired megacolon may result from infection or chronic 
constipation. Infection with the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi 
(Chagas’ disease) destroys ganglion cells and produces both 
megacolon and megaesophagus. Chronic constipation from 
slow transit or secondary to medications (especially anticholin-
ergic medications) or neurologic disorders (paraplegia, polio-
myelitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis) may 
produce progressive colonic dilatation. Diverting ileostomy or 
subtotal colectomy with an ileorectal anastomosis is occasion-
ally necessary in these patients.
Colonic Pseudo-obstruction  
(Ogilvie’s Syndrome)
Colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie’s syndrome) is a func-
tional disorder in which the colon becomes massively dilated in 
the absence of mechanical obstruction. Pseudo-obstruction most 
commonly occurs in hospitalized patients and is associated with 
the use of narcotics, bed rest, and comorbid disease. Pseudo-
obstruction is thought to result from autonomic dysfunction and 
severe adynamic ileus. The diagnosis is made based on the pres-
ence of massive dilatation of the colon (usually predominantly 
the right and transverse colon) in the absence of a mechanical 
obstruction. Initial treatment consists of cessation of narcotics, 
anticholinergics, or other medications that may contribute to 
ileus. Strict bowel rest and intravenous hydration are crucial. 
Most patients will respond to these measures. In patients who 
fail to improve, colonoscopic decompression often is effective. 
However, this procedure is technically challenging, and great 
care must be taken to avoid causing perforation. Up to 40% of 
patients recur. Intravenous neostigmine (an acetylcholinester-
ase inhibitor) also is extremely effective in decompressing the 
dilated colon and is associated with a low rate of recurrence 
(20%). However, neostigmine may produce transient but pro-
found bradycardia and may be inappropriate in patients with 
cardiopulmonary disease. Because the colonic dilatation is typi-
cally greatest in the proximal colon, placement of a rectal tube is 
rarely effective. It is crucial to exclude mechanical obstruction 
(usually with a Gastrografin enema) prior to medical or endo-
scopic treatment.
Ischemic Colitis
Intestinal ischemia occurs most commonly in the colon. Unlike 
small bowel ischemia, colonic ischemia rarely is associated with 
major arterial or venous occlusion. Instead, most colonic isch-
emia appears to result from low flow and/or small vessel occlu-
sion. Risk factors include vascular disease, diabetes mellitus, 
vasculitis, hypotension, and tobacco use. In addition, ligation of 
the inferior mesenteric artery during aortic surgery predisposes 
to colonic ischemia. Occasionally, thrombosis or embolism may 
cause ischemia. Although the splenic flexure is the most com-
mon site of ischemic colitis, any segment of the colon may be 
affected. The rectum is relatively spared because of its rich col-
lateral circulation.
A
B
Figure 29-30.  Sigmoid volvulus: (A) Illustration and (B) Gastrografin enema showing “bird-beak” sign (arrow). (B: Reproduced with per-
mission from Nivatvongs S, Becker ER. Colon, rectum, and anal canal. In: James EC, Corry RJ, Perry JCF Jr, eds. Basic Surgical Practice. 
Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 1987. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1222
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Signs and symptoms of ischemic colitis reflect the extent 
of bowel ischemia. In mild cases, patients may have diarrhea 
(usually bloody) without abdominal pain. With more severe 
ischemia, intense abdominal pain (often out of proportion to the 
clinical examination), tenderness, fever, and leukocytosis are 
present. Peritonitis and/or systemic toxicity are signs of full-
thickness necrosis and perforation.
The diagnosis of ischemic colitis is often based on the 
clinical history and physical examination. Plain films may 
reveal thumb printing, which results from mucosal edema and 
submucosal hemorrhage. CT often shows nonspecific colonic 
wall thickening and pericolic fat stranding. Angiography is 
usually not helpful because major arterial occlusion is rare. 
While sigmoidoscopy may reveal characteristic dark, hemor-
rhagic mucosa, the risk of precipitating perforation is high. For 
this reason, sigmoidoscopy is relatively contraindicated in any 
patient with significant abdominal tenderness. Contrast studies 
(Gastrografin or barium enema) are similarly contraindicated 
during the acute phase of ischemic colitis.
Treatment of ischemic colitis depends on clinical sever-
ity. Unlike ischemia of the small bowel, the majority of patients 
with ischemic colitis can be treated medically. Bowel rest and 
broad-spectrum antibiotics are the mainstay of therapy, and 
80% of patients will recover with this regimen. Hemodynamic 
parameters should be optimized, especially if hypotension and 
low flow appear to be the inciting cause. Long-term sequelae 
include stricture (10%–15%) and chronic segmental ischemia 
(15%–20%). Colonoscopy should be performed after recovery 
to evaluate strictures and to rule out other diagnoses such as 
inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy. Failure to improve 
after 2 to 3 days of medical management, progression of symp-
toms, and deterioration in clinical condition are indications for 
surgical exploration. In this setting, all necrotic bowel should 
be resected. Primary anastomosis should be avoided. Occasion-
ally, repeated exploration (a second-look operation) may be 
necessary.
Infectious Colitis
Pseudomembranous Colitis (Clostridium difficile Colitis).
Pseudomembranous colitis is caused by C. difficile, a gram-
positive anaerobic bacillus. C. difficile colitis is extremely 
common and is the leading cause of nosocomially acquired diar-
rhea.6,88 The spectrum of disease ranges from watery diarrhea to 
fulminant, life-threatening colitis. C. difficile is carried in the 
large intestine of many healthy adults. Colitis is thought to result 
from overgrowth of this organism after depletion of the normal 
commensal flora of the gut with the use of antibiotics. Although 
clindamycin was the first antimicrobial agent associated with 
C. difficile colitis, almost any antibiotic may cause this disease. 
Moreover, although the risk of C. difficile colitis increases with 
prolonged antibiotic use, even a single dose of an antibiotic may 
cause the disease. Immunosuppression, medical comorbidities, 
prolonged hospitalization or nursing home residence, and bowel 
surgery increase the risk.
The pathogenic changes associated with C. difficile colitis 
result from production of two toxins: toxin A (an enterotoxin) 
and toxin B (a cytotoxin). Diagnosis of this disease was tradition-
ally made by culturing the organism from the stool. Detection of 
one or both toxins (either by cytotoxic assays or by immunoas-
says) has proven to be more rapid, sensitive, and specific. 
The diagnosis may also be made endoscopically by detection of 
characteristic ulcers, plaques, and pseudomembranes.
Management should include immediate cessation of 
the offending antimicrobial agent. Patients with mild disease 
(diarrhea but no fever or abdominal pain) may be treated as 
outpatients with a 10-day course of oral metronidazole. Oral 
vancomycin is a second-line agent used in patients allergic to 
metronidazole or in patients with recurrent disease. More severe 
diarrhea associated with dehydration and/or fever and abdomi-
nal pain is best treated with bowel rest, intravenous hydration, 
and oral metronidazole or vancomycin. Proctosigmoiditis may 
respond to vancomycin enemas. Recurrent colitis occurs in up 
to 20% of patients and may be treated by a longer course of 
oral metronidazole or vancomycin (up to 1 month) or rifaxi-
min (a rapamycin derivative). Reintroduction of normal flora 
by ingestion of probiotics or stool transplantation has been sug-
gested as a possible treatment for recurrent or refractory disease. 
Fulminant colitis, characterized by septicemia and/or evidence 
of perforation, requires emergent laparotomy. A total abdomi-
nal colectomy with end ileostomy may be lifesaving. Over the 
past decade, C. difficile colitis has increased in prevalence, and 
new, more virulent strains have appeared, making this disease 
increasingly challenging to treat.96
Other Infectious Colitides.  A variety of other infections with 
bacteria, parasites, fungi, or viruses may cause colonic inflam-
mation. Common bacterial infections include enterotoxic 
E. coli, Campylobacter jejuni, Yersinia enterocolitica, Salmo-
nella typhi, Shigella, and N. gonorrhoeae. Less commonly, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis, Actino-
mycosis israelii, or Treponema pallidum (syphilis) may cause 
colitis or proctitis. Parasitic infections such as amebiasis, cryp-
tosporidiosis, and giardiasis are also relatively common. Fungal 
infections (Candida species, histoplasmosis) are extremely rare 
in otherwise healthy individuals. The most common viral infec-
tions that produce colitic symptoms are HIV, herpes simplex 
viruses, and CMV.
Most symptoms are nonspecific and consist of diarrhea 
(with or without bleeding), crampy abdominal pain, and mal-
aise. A thorough history may offer clues to the etiology (other 
medical conditions, especially immunosuppression; recent 
travel or exposures; and ingestions). Diagnosis is usually made 
by identification of a pathogen in the stool, either by microscopy 
or culture. Serum immunoassays may also be useful (amebia-
sis, HIV, CMV). Occasionally, endoscopy with biopsy may be 
required. Treatment is tailored to the infection.
ANORECTAL DISEASES
Any patient with anal/perianal symptoms requires a careful his-
tory and physical, including a digital rectal examination. Other 
studies such as defecography, manometry, CT scan, MRI, con-
trast enema, endoscopy, endoanal ultrasound, or exam under 
anesthesia may be required to arrive at an accurate diagnosis.
Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are cushions of submucosal tissue containing 
venules, arterioles, and smooth muscle fibers that are located 
in the anal canal (see Fig. 29-4). Three hemorrhoidal 
cushions are found in the left lateral, right anterior, and 
right posterior positions. Hemorrhoids are thought to function 
as part of the continence mechanism and aid in complete clo-
sure of the anal canal at rest. Because hemorrhoids are a normal 
part of anorectal anatomy, treatment is only indicated if they 
become symptomatic. Excessive straining, increased abdominal 
9
1223
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
pressure, and hard stools increase venous engorgement of the 
hemorrhoidal plexus and cause prolapse of hemorrhoidal tissue. 
Bleeding, thrombosis, and symptomatic hemorrhoidal prolapse 
may result.
External hemorrhoids are located distal to the dentate line 
and are covered with anoderm. Because the anoderm is richly 
innervated, thrombosis of an external hemorrhoid may cause 
significant pain. It is for this reason that external hemorrhoids 
should not be ligated or excised without adequate local anes-
thetic. A skin tag is redundant fibrotic skin at the anal verge, 
often persisting as the residua of a thrombosed external hem-
orrhoid. Skin tags are often confused with symptomatic hem-
orrhoids. External hemorrhoids and skin tags may cause itching 
and difficulty with hygiene if they are large. Treatment of exter-
nal hemorrhoids and skin tags is only indicated for symptomatic 
relief.
Internal hemorrhoids are located proximal to the dentate 
line and covered by insensate anorectal mucosa. Internal hemor-
rhoids may prolapse or bleed, but rarely become painful unless 
they develop thrombosis and necrosis (usually related to severe 
prolapse, incarceration, and/or strangulation). Internal hemor-
rhoids are graded according to the extent of prolapse. First-
degree hemorrhoids bulge into the anal canal and may prolapse 
beyond the dentate line on straining. Second-degree hemor-
rhoids prolapse through the anus but reduce spontaneously. 
Third-degree hemorrhoids prolapse through the anal canal and 
require manual reduction. Fourth-degree hemorrhoids prolapse 
but cannot be reduced and are at risk for strangulation.
Combined internal and external hemorrhoids straddle 
the dentate line and have characteristics of both internal and 
external hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoidectomy is often required for 
large, symptomatic, combined hemorrhoids. Postpartum hem-
orrhoids result from straining during labor, which results in 
edema, thrombosis, and/or strangulation. Hemorrhoidectomy is 
often the treatment of choice, especially if the patient has had 
chronic hemorrhoidal symptoms. Portal hypertension was long 
thought to increase the risk of hemorrhoidal bleeding because of 
the anastomoses between the portal venous system (middle and 
upper hemorrhoidal plexuses) and the systemic venous system 
(inferior rectal plexuses). It is now understood that hemorrhoidal 
disease is no more common in patients with portal hypertension 
than in the normal population. Rectal varices, however, may 
occur and may cause hemorrhage in these patients. In general, 
rectal varices are best treated by lowering portal venous pressure. 
Rarely, suture ligation may be necessary if massive bleeding 
persists. Surgical hemorrhoidectomy should be avoided in these 
patients because of the risk of massive, difficult-to-control vari-
ceal bleeding.
Treatment
Medical Therapy.  Bleeding from first- and second-degree 
hemorrhoids often improves with the addition of dietary fiber, 
stool softeners, increased fluid intake, and avoidance of strain-
ing. Associated pruritus often may improve with improved 
hygiene. Many over-the-counter topical medications are des-
iccants and are relatively ineffective for treating hemorrhoidal 
symptoms.
Rubber Band Ligation.  Persistent bleeding from first-, second-, 
and selected third-degree hemorrhoids may be treated by rubber 
band ligation.
Mucosa located 1 to 2 cm proximal to the dentate line 
is grasped and pulled into a rubber band applier. After firing 
the ligator, the rubber band strangulates the underlying tissue, 
causing scarring and preventing further bleeding or prolapse 
(Fig. 29-31). In general, only one or two quadrants are banded 
per visit. Severe pain will occur if the rubber band is placed at 
or distal to the dentate line where sensory nerves are located. 
Other complications of rubber band ligation include urinary 
retention, infection, and bleeding. Urinary retention occurs in 
approximately 1% of patients and is more likely if the ligation 
has inadvertently included a portion of the internal sphincter. 
Necrotizing infection is an uncommon, but life-threatening 
complication. Severe pain, fever, and urinary retention are early 
signs of infection and should prompt immediate evaluation of 
the patient usually with an exam under anesthesia. Treatment 
includes débridement of necrotic tissue, drainage of associated 
abscesses, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Bleeding may occur 
approximately 7 to 10 days after rubber band ligation, at the 
time when the ligated pedicle necroses and sloughs. Bleeding 
is usually self-limited, but persistent hemorrhage may require 
exam under anesthesia and suture ligation of the pedicle.
Infrared Photocoagulation.  Infrared photocoagulation is an 
effective office treatment for small first- and second-degree 
hemorrhoids. The instrument is applied to the apex of each hem-
orrhoid to coagulate the underlying plexus. All three quadrants 
may be treated during the same visit. Larger hemorrhoids and 
hemorrhoids with a significant amount of prolapse are not effec-
tively treated with this technique.
Sclerotherapy.  The injection of bleeding internal hemorrhoids 
with sclerosing agents is another effective office technique for 
treatment of first-, second-, and some third-degree hemorrhoids. 
One to 3 mL of a sclerosing solution (phenol in olive oil, sodium 
morrhuate, or quinine urea) is injected into the submucosa of 
each hemorrhoid. Few complications are associated with sclero-
therapy, but infection and fibrosis have been reported.
Excision of Thrombosed External Hemorrhoids.  Acutely 
thrombosed external hemorrhoids generally cause intense pain 
and a palpable perianal mass during the first 24 to 72 hours after 
thrombosis. The thrombosis can be effectively treated with an 
elliptical excision performed in the office under local anesthe-
sia. Because the clot is usually loculated, simple incision and 
drainage is rarely effective. After 72 hours, the clot begins to 
resorb, and the pain resolves spontaneously. Excision is unnec-
essary, but sitz baths and analgesics are often helpful.
Operative Hemorrhoidectomy.  A number of surgical proce-
dures have been described for elective resection of symptom-
atic hemorrhoids. All are based on decreasing blood flow to 
the hemorrhoidal plexuses and excising redundant anoderm and 
mucosa.
Closed Submucosal Hemorrhoidectomy.  The Parks or Fer-
guson hemorrhoidectomy involves resection of hemorrhoidal 
tissue and closure of the wounds with absorbable suture. The 
procedure may be performed in the prone or lithotomy position 
under local, regional, or general anesthesia. The anal canal is 
examined and an anal speculum inserted. The hemorrhoid cush-
ions and associated redundant mucosa are identified and excised 
using an elliptical incision starting just distal to the anal verge 
and extending proximally to the anorectal ring. It is crucial to 
identify the fibers of the internal sphincter and carefully brush 
these away from the dissection in order to avoid injury to the 
sphincter. The apex of the hemorrhoidal plexus is then ligated 
and the hemorrhoid excised. The wound is then closed with a 
running absorbable suture. All three hemorrhoidal cushions may 
1224
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
be removed using this technique; however, care should be taken 
to avoid resecting a large area of perianal skin in order to avoid 
postoperative anal stenosis (Fig. 29-32).
Open Hemorrhoidectomy.  This technique, often called the 
Milligan and Morgan hemorrhoidectomy, follows the same 
principles of excision described earlier, but the wounds are left 
open and allowed to heal by secondary intention.
Whitehead’s Hemorrhoidectomy.  Whitehead’s hemorrhoid-
ectomy involves circumferential excision of the hemorrhoidal 
cushions just proximal to the dentate line. After excision, the 
rectal mucosa is then advanced and sutured to the dentate line. 
While some surgeons still use Whitehead’s hemorrhoidectomy, 
most have abandoned this approach because of the risk of 
ectropion (Whitehead’s deformity).
Procedure for Prolapse and Hemorrhoids/Stapled Hemor-
rhoidectomy.  Procedure for prolapse and hemorrhoids (PPH) 
has been proposed as an alternative surgical approach. The term 
PPH has largely replaced stapled hemorrhoidectomy because 
the procedure does not involve excision of hemorrhoidal tissue, 
but instead pexes the redundant mucosa above the dentate line. 
PPH removes a short circumferential segment of rectal mucosa 
proximal to the dentate line using a circular stapler. This effec-
tively ligates the venules feeding the hemorrhoidal plexus and 
fixes redundant mucosa higher in the anal canal. Several studies 
suggest that this procedure is safe and effective, is associated 
with less postoperative pain and disability, and has an equivalent 
risk of postoperative complications when compared to tradi-
tional hemorrhoidectomy.97,98 Nevertheless, with increased use 
of this technique, serious and occasionally life-threatening com-
plications have been described.99
Doppler-Guided Hemorrhoidal Artery Ligation.  Another 
recent approach to treating symptomatic hemorrhoids is Doppler-
guided hemorrhoidal artery ligation (also called transanal hemor-
rhoidal dearterioalization). In this procedure, a Doppler probe is 
used to identify the artery or arteries feeding the hemorrhoidal 
plexus. These vessels are then ligated. Early reports have shown 
promise, but long-term durability remains to be determined.100
Complications of Hemorrhoidectomy.  Postoperative pain 
following excisional hemorrhoidectomy requires analgesia usu-
ally with oral narcotics. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
muscle relaxants, topical analgesics, and comfort measures, 
including sitz baths, are often useful as well. Urinary retention 
is a common complication following hemorrhoidectomy and 
occurs in 10% to 50% of patients. The risk of urinary reten-
tion can be minimized by limiting intraoperative and periop-
erative intravenous fluids and by providing adequate analgesia. 
Pain can also lead to fecal impaction. Risk of impaction may 
be decreased by preoperative enemas or a limited mechanical 
bowel preparation, liberal use of laxatives postoperatively, and 
adequate pain control. While a small amount of bleeding, espe-
cially with bowel movements, is to be expected, massive hemor-
rhage can occur after hemorrhoidectomy. Bleeding may occur 
Elastic
bands
Elastic
bands
Elastic
bands
Figure 29-31.  Rubber band ligation of internal 
hemorrhoids. The mucosa just proximal to the inter-
nal hemorrhoids is banded.
1225
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
in the immediate postoperative period (often in the recovery 
room) as a result of inadequate ligation of the vascular pedi-
cle. This type of hemorrhage mandates an urgent return to the 
operating room where suture ligation of the bleeding vessel will 
often solve the problem. Bleeding may also occur 7 to 10 days 
after hemorrhoidectomy when the necrotic mucosa overlying 
the vascular pedicle sloughs. While some of these patients may 
be safely observed, others will require an exam under anesthe-
sia to ligate the bleeding vessel or to oversew the wounds if 
no specific site of bleeding is identified. Infection is uncom-
mon after hemorrhoidectomy; however, necrotizing soft tissue 
infection can occur with devastating consequences. Severe pain, 
fever, and urinary retention may be early signs of infection. If 
infection is suspected, emergent examination under anesthesia, 
drainage of abscess, and/or débridement of all necrotic tissue 
are required.
Long-term sequelae of hemorrhoidectomy include incon-
tinence, anal stenosis, and ectropion (Whitehead’s deformity). 
Many patients experience transient incontinence to flatus, but 
these symptoms are usually short-lived, and few patients have 
permanent fecal incontinence. Anal stenosis may result from 
scarring after extensive resection of perianal skin. Ectropion 
may occur after Whitehead’s hemorrhoidectomy.
Anal Fissure
A fissure in ano is a tear in the anoderm distal to the dentate 
line. The pathophysiology of anal fissure is thought to be related 
to trauma from either the passage of hard stool or prolonged 
diarrhea. A tear in the anoderm causes spasm of the internal 
anal sphincter, which results in pain, increased tearing, and 
decreased blood supply to the anoderm. This cycle of pain, 
spasm, and ischemia contributes to development of a poorly 
healing wound that becomes a chronic fissure. The vast major-
ity of anal fissures occur in the posterior midline. Ten percent 
to 15% occur in the anterior midline. Less than 1% of fissures 
occur off midline.
Symptoms and Findings.  Anal fissure is extremely common. 
Characteristic symptoms include tearing pain with defecation 
and hematochezia (usually described as blood on the toilet 
paper). Patients may also complain of a sensation of intense and 
painful anal spasm lasting for several hours after a bowel 
movement. On physical examination, the fissure can often be 
seen in the anoderm by gently separating the buttocks. Patients 
are often too tender to tolerate digital rectal examination, anos-
copy, or proctoscopy. An acute fissure is a superficial tear of the 
distal anoderm and almost always heals with medical manage-
ment. Chronic fissures develop ulceration and heaped-up edges 
with the white fibers of the internal anal sphincter visible at the 
base of the ulcer. There often is an associated external skin tag 
and/or a hypertrophied anal papilla internally. These fissures 
are more challenging to treat and may require surgery. A lateral 
location of a chronic anal fissure may be evidence of an underly-
ing disease such as Crohn’s disease, HIV, syphilis, tuberculosis, 
Figure 29-32.  Technique of closed sub-
mucosal hemorrhoidectomy. A. The patient 
is in prone jackknife position. B. A Fansler 
anoscope is used for exposure. C. A narrow 
ellipse of anoderm is excised. D. A submuco-
sal dissection of the hemorrhoidal plexus from 
the underlying anal sphincter is performed. 
E. Redundant mucosa is anchored to the proxi-
mal anal canal, and the wound is closed with a 
running absorbable suture. F. Additional quad-
rants are excised to complete the procedure.
1226
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
or leukemia. If the diagnosis is in doubt or there is suspicion of 
another cause for the perianal pain such as abscess or fistula, an 
examination under anesthesia may be necessary.
Treatment.  Therapy focuses on breaking the cycle of pain, 
spasm, and ischemia thought to be responsible for development 
of fissure in ano. First-line therapy to minimize anal trauma 
includes bulk agents, stool softeners, and warm sitz baths. The 
addition of 2% lidocaine jelly or other analgesic creams can 
provide additional symptomatic relief. Nitroglycerin ointment 
has been used locally to improve blood flow but often causes 
severe headaches. Both oral and topical calcium channel block-
ers (diltiazem and nifedipine) have also been used to heal fis-
sures and may have fewer side effects than topical nitrates.97 
Newer agents, such as arginine (a nitric oxide donor) and topical 
bethanechol (a muscarinic agonist), have also been used to treat 
fissures. Medical therapy is effective in most acute fissures, but 
will heal only approximately 50% of chronic fissures.
Botulinum toxin (Botox) causes temporary muscle paraly-
sis by preventing acetylcholine release from presynaptic nerve 
terminals. Injection of botulinum toxin is used in some centers 
as an alternative to surgical sphincterotomy for chronic fissure. 
Although there are few long-term complications from the use 
of botulinum toxin, healing appears to be equivalent to other 
medical therapies.98,101
Surgical therapy has traditionally been recommended for 
chronic fissures that have failed medical therapy, and lateral 
internal sphincterotomy is the procedure of choice. The aim of 
this procedure is to decrease spasm of the internal sphincter by 
Closure
Internal sphincter
incised
External
sphincter m.
Internal
sphincter m.
Fissure
Fissure-in-ano
A
B
C
D
Figure 29-33.  A through D. Open lateral internal sphincterotomy 
for fissure in ano. m = muscle.
Anal 
fissure
Sentinel
 pile
A
B
D
C
dividing a portion of the muscle. Approximately 30% of the 
internal sphincter fibers are divided laterally by using either 
an open (Fig. 29-33) or closed (Fig. 29-34) technique. Healing 
is achieved in more than 95% of patients using this technique, 
Figure 29-34.  A through D. Closed lateral internal 
sphincterotomy for fissure in ano.
1227
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
and most patients experience immediate pain relief. Recurrence 
occurs in less than 10% of patients, and the risk of incontinence 
(usually to flatus) ranges from 5% to 15%. Advancement flaps 
(VY) with or without sphincterotomy have also been reported 
to successfully treat chronic fissures.
Anorectal Sepsis and Cryptoglandular Abscess
Relevant Anatomy.  The majority of anorectal suppurative 
disease results from infections of the anal glands (cryptoglan-
dular infection) found in the intersphincteric plane. Their ducts 
traverse the internal sphincter and empty into the anal crypts at 
the level of the dentate line. Infection of an anal gland results in 
the formation of an abscess that enlarges and spreads along one 
of several planes in the perianal and perirectal spaces. The peri-
anal space surrounds the anus and laterally becomes continuous 
with the fat of the buttocks. The intersphincteric space separates 
the internal and external anal sphincters. It is continuous with 
the perianal space distally and extends cephalad into the rectal 
wall. The ischiorectal space (ischiorectal fossa) is located lat-
eral and posterior to the anus and is bounded medially by the 
external sphincter, laterally by the ischium, superiorly by the 
levator ani, and inferiorly by the transverse septum. The ischio-
rectal space contains the inferior rectal vessels and lymphatics. 
The two ischiorectal spaces connect posteriorly above the ano-
coccygeal ligament but below the levator ani muscle, forming 
the deep postanal space. The supralevator spaces lie above the 
levator ani on either side of the rectum and communicate 
posteriorly. The anatomy of these spaces influences the location 
and spread of cryptoglandular infection (Fig. 29-35).
As an abscess enlarges, it spreads in one of several direc-
tions. A perianal abscess is the most common manifestation and 
appears as a painful swelling at the anal verge. Spread through 
the external sphincter below the level of the puborectalis pro-
duces an ischiorectal abscess. These abscesses may become 
extremely large and may not be visible in the perianal region. 
Digital rectal exam will reveal a painful swelling laterally in the 
ischiorectal fossa. Intersphincteric abscesses occur in the inter-
sphincteric space and are notoriously difficult to diagnose, often 
requiring an examination under anesthesia. Pelvic and supral-
evator abscesses are uncommon and may result from extension 
of an intersphincteric or ischiorectal abscess upward or exten-
sion of an intraperitoneal abscess downward (Fig. 29-36).
Levator ani m.
Internal sphincter m.
Puborectalis and
deep external sphincter m.
Superficial external
sphincter m.
Subcutaneous
external sphincter m.
Peritoneum
Ureter
Supralevator 
space
Ischiorectal space
Perianal space
Peritoneum
Rectorectal space
Rectosacral fascia
Supralevator space
Levator ani m.
Deep postanal space
Superficial
postanal space
A
B
Figure 29-35.  Anatomy of perianorectal spaces. (A) Anterior view and (B) lateral view. m = muscle.
1228
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Diagnosis.  Severe anal pain is the most common presenting 
complaint. A palpable mass is often detected by inspection of 
the perianal area or by digital rectal examination. Occasionally, 
patients will present with fever, urinary retention, or life-
threatening sepsis. The diagnosis of a perianal or ischiorectal 
abscess can usually be made with physical exam alone (either 
in the office or in the operating room). However, complex or 
atypical presentations may require imaging studies such as CT 
or MRI to fully delineate the anatomy of the abscess.
Treatment.  Anorectal abscesses should be treated by drainage as 
soon as the diagnosis is established. If the diagnosis is in ques-
tion, an examination and drainage under anesthesia are often the 
most expeditious ways both to confirm the diagnosis and to treat 
the problem. Delayed or inadequate treatment may occasionally 
cause extensive and life-threatening suppuration with massive tis-
sue necrosis and septicemia. Antibiotics are only indicated if there 
is extensive overlying cellulitis or if the patient is immunocompro-
mised, has diabetes mellitus, or has valvular heart disease. Antibiot-
ics alone are ineffective at treating perianal or perirectal infection.
Perianal Abscess
Most perianal abscesses can be drained under local anesthesia in 
the office, clinic, or emergency room. Larger, more complicated 
abscesses may require drainage in the operating room. A skin 
incision is created, and a disk of skin excised to prevent prema-
ture closure. No packing is necessary, and sitz baths are started 
the next day (Fig. 29-37).
Ischiorectal Abscess
An ischiorectal abscess causes diffuse swelling in the ischiorectal 
fossa that may involve one or both sides, forming a “horseshoe” 
abscess. Simple ischiorectal abscesses are drained through an 
incision in the overlying skin. Horseshoe abscesses require 
drainage of the deep postanal space and often require counterin-
cisions over one or both ischiorectal spaces (Fig. 29-38).
Intersphincteric Abscess
Intersphincteric abscesses are notoriously difficult to diagnose 
because they produce little swelling and few perianal signs of 
B
A
Internal
sphincter m.
Perianal space
abscess
Levator
ani m.
External
sphincter m.
Longitudinal m.
Pelvirectal space
abscess
Intersphincteric space
abscess
Ischiorectal fossa
abscess
Figure 29-36.  A and B. Pathways of anorectal infection in perianal spaces. m = muscle.
A
B
C
Figure 29-37.  A through C. Technique of drainage of perianal abscess.
infection. Pain is typically described as being deep and “up 
inside” the anal area and is usually exacerbated by coughing or 
sneezing. The pain is so intense that it usually precludes a digital 
rectal examination. The diagnosis is made based on a high index 
of suspicion and usually requires an examination under anesthe-
sia. Once identified, an intersphincteric abscess can be drained 
through a limited, usually posterior, internal sphincterotomy.
1229
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Supralevator Abscess
This type of abscess is uncommon and can be difficult to diag-
nose. Because of its proximity to the peritoneal cavity, supral-
evator abscesses can mimic intra-abdominal conditions. Digital 
rectal examination may reveal an indurated, bulging mass above 
the anorectal ring. It is essential to identify the origin of a supra-
levator abscess prior to treatment. If the abscess is secondary to 
an upward extension of an intersphincteric abscess, it should be 
drained through the rectum. If it is drained through the ischio-
rectal fossa, a complicated, suprasphincteric fistula may result. 
If a supralevator abscess arises from the upward extension of an 
ischiorectal abscess, it should be drained through the ischiorec-
tal fossa. Drainage of this type of abscess through the rectum 
may result in an extrasphincteric fistula. If the abscess is sec-
ondary to intra-abdominal disease, the primary process requires 
treatment and the abscess is drained via the most direct route 
(transabdominally, rectally, or through the ischiorectal fossa).
Perianal Sepsis in the  
Immunocompromised Patient
The immunocompromised patient with perianal pain presents a 
diagnostic dilemma. Because of leukopenia, these patients may 
develop serious perianal infection without any of the cardinal 
signs of inflammation. While broad-spectrum antibiotics may 
cure some of these patients, an exam under anesthesia should 
not be delayed because of neutropenia. An increase in pain or 
fever and/or clinical deterioration mandates an exam under 
anesthesia. Any indurated area should be incised and drained, 
biopsied to exclude a leukemic infiltrate, and cultured to aid in 
the selection of antimicrobial agents.102
Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infection  
of the Perineum
Necrotizing soft tissue infection of the perineum is a rare, but 
lethal, condition. Most of these infections are polymicrobial and 
synergistic. The source of sepsis is commonly an undrained or 
inadequately drained cryptoglandular abscess or a urogenital 
infection. Occasionally, these infections may be encountered 
postoperatively (e.g., after hemorrhoidectomy). Immunocom-
promised patients and diabetic patients are at increased risk.
Physical examination may reveal necrotic skin, bullae, 
or crepitus. Patients often have signs of systemic toxicity and 
may be hemodynamically unstable. A high index of suspicion 
is necessary because perineal signs of severe infection may be 
minimal and prompt surgical intervention can be lifesaving.
Surgical débridement of all nonviable tissue is required to 
treat all necrotizing soft tissue infections. Multiple operations 
may be necessary to ensure that all necrotic tissue has been 
resected. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are frequently employed, 
but adequate surgical débridement remains the mainstay of 
therapy. Colostomy may be required if extensive resection of the 
sphincter is required or if stool contamination of the perineum 
makes wound management difficult. Despite early recognition 
and adequate surgical therapy, the mortality of necrotizing peri-
neal soft tissue infections remains approximately 50%.
Fistula In Ano
Drainage of an anorectal abscess results in cure for about 50% 
of patients. The remaining 50% develop a persistent fistula in 
ano. The fistula usually originates in the infected crypt (internal 
opening) and tracks to the external opening, usually the site of 
prior drainage. The course of the fistula can often be predicted 
by the anatomy of the previous abscess.
While the majority of fistulas are cryptoglandular in ori-
gin, trauma, Crohn’s disease, malignancy, radiation, or unusual 
infections (tuberculosis, actinomycosis, and chlamydia) may 
also produce fistulas. A complex, recurrent, or nonhealing fis-
tula should raise the suspicion of one of these diagnoses.
Diagnosis.  Patients present with persistent drainage from the 
internal and/or external openings. An indurated tract is often pal-
pable. Although the external opening is often easily identifiable, 
identification of the internal opening may be more challenging. 
Goodsall’s rule can be used as a guide in determining the loca-
tion of the internal opening (Fig. 29-39). In general, fistulas with 
an external opening anteriorly connect to the internal opening 
by a short, radial tract. Fistulas with an external opening pos-
teriorly track in a curvilinear fashion to the posterior midline. 
However, exceptions to this rule often occur if an anterior 
Figure 29-38.  Drainage of horseshoe abscess. The deep postanal 
space is entered, incising the anococcygeal ligament. Counter drain-
age incisions are made for each limb of the ischiorectal space.
Posterior
(curved tracts)
Transverse          Anal Line
Anterior
(straight tracts)
3cm
Exception
Figure 29-39.  Goodsall’s rule to identify the internal opening of 
fistulas in ano.
1230
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
external opening is greater than 3 cm from the anal margin. 
Such fistulas usually track to the posterior midline.
Fistulas are categorized based on their relationship to the 
anal sphincter complex, and treatment options are based on 
these classifications. An intersphincteric fistula tracks through 
the distal internal sphincter and intersphincteric space to an 
external opening near the anal verge (Fig. 29-40A). A trans-
sphincteric fistula often results from an ischiorectal abscess 
and extends through both the internal and external sphincters 
(Fig. 29-40B). A suprasphincteric fistula originates in the inter-
sphincteric plane and tracks up and around the entire external 
sphincter (Fig. 29-40C). An extrasphincteric fistula originates 
in the rectal wall and tracks around both sphincters to exit later-
ally, usually in the ischiorectal fossa (Fig. 29-40D).
Treatment.  The goal of treatment of fistula in ano is eradica-
tion of sepsis without sacrificing continence. Because fistulous 
tracks encircle variable amounts of the sphincter complex, sur-
gical treatment is dictated by the location of the internal 
and external openings and the course of the fistula. The 
external opening is usually visible as a red elevation of granula-
tion tissue with or without concurrent drainage. The internal 
opening may be more difficult to identify. Injection of hydrogen 
peroxide or dilute methylene blue may be helpful. Care must be 
taken to avoid creating an artificial internal opening (thus often 
converting a simple fistula into a complex fistula).
Simple intersphincteric fistulas can often be treated by 
fistulotomy (opening the fistulous tract), curettage, and healing 
by secondary intention (see Fig. 29-40A). “Horseshoe” fistulas 
usually have an internal opening in the posterior midline and 
extend anteriorly and laterally to one or both ischiorectal spaces 
by way of the deep postanal space. Treatment of a transsphinc-
teric fistula depends on its location in the sphincter complex. 
Figure 29-40.  The four major categories of fistula in ano (left side of drawings) and the usual operative procedure to correct the fistula (right 
side of drawings). A. Intersphincteric fistula with simple low tract. B. Uncomplicated transsphincteric fistula. C. Uncomplicated suprasphinc-
teric fistula. D. Extrasphincteric fistula secondary to anal fistula. (Data from Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S, eds. Principles and Practice of Surgery 
for the Colon, Rectum, and Anus. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1999:256-260.)
10
1231
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Fistulas that include less than 30% of the sphincter muscles can 
often be treated by sphincterotomy without significant risk of 
major incontinence (see Fig. 29-40B). High transsphincteric 
fistulas, which encircle a greater amount of muscle, are more 
safely treated by initial placement of a seton (see below). Simi-
larly, suprasphincteric fistulas are usually treated with seton 
placement (see Fig. 29-40C). Extrasphincteric fistulas are rare, 
and treatment depends on both the anatomy of the fistula and 
its etiology. In general, the portion of the fistula outside the 
sphincter should be opened and drained. A primary tract at the 
level of the dentate line may also be opened if present. Complex 
fistulas with multiple tracts may require numerous procedures 
to control sepsis and facilitate healing. Liberal use of drains and 
setons is helpful. Failure to heal may ultimately require fecal 
diversion (see Fig. 29-40D). Complex and/or nonhealing fis-
tulas may result from Crohn’s disease, malignancy, radiation 
proctitis, or unusual infection. Proctoscopy should be performed 
in all cases of complex and/or nonhealing fistulas to assess the 
health of the rectal mucosa. Biopsies of the fistula tract should 
be taken to rule out malignancy.
A seton is a drain placed through a fistula to maintain drain-
age and/or induce fibrosis. Cutting setons consist of a suture or a 
rubber band that is placed through the fistula and intermittently 
tightened in the office. Tightening the seton results in fibrosis 
and gradual division of the sphincter, thus eliminating the fistula 
while maintaining continuity of the sphincter. A noncutting seton 
is a soft plastic drain (often a vessel loop) placed in the fistula 
to maintain drainage. The fistula tract may subsequently be laid 
open with less risk of incontinence because scarring prevents 
retraction of the sphincter. Alternatively, the seton may be left in 
place for chronic drainage. Higher fistulas may be treated by an 
endorectal advancement flap (see below). Fibrin glue and a vari-
ety of collagen-based plugs also have been used to treat persistent 
fistulas with variable results. A more recent technique, ligation 
of the intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT), also shows promise. 
In this procedure, the fistula is identified in the intersphincteric 
plane (usually by placement of a lacrimal probe), divided, and 
the two ends ligated. Early reports have shown success with this 
technique, but long-term outcome is not yet known.103,104
Rectovaginal Fistula
A rectovaginal fistula is a connection between the vagina and 
the rectum or anal canal proximal to the dentate line. Recto-
vaginal fistulas are classified as low (rectal opening close to 
the dentate line and vaginal opening in the fourchette), middle 
(vaginal opening between the fourchette and cervix), or high 
(vaginal opening near the cervix). Low rectovaginal fistulas are 
commonly caused by obstetric injuries or trauma from a foreign 
body. Mid-rectovaginal fistulas may result from more severe 
obstetric injury, but also occur after surgical resection of a mid-
rectal neoplasm, radiation injury, or extension of an undrained 
abscess. High rectovaginal fistulas result from operative or 
radiation injury. Complicated diverticulitis may cause a colo-
vaginal fistula. Crohn’s disease can cause rectovaginal fistulas 
at all levels, as well as colovaginal and enterovaginal fistulas.
Diagnosis.  Patients describe symptoms varying from the sen-
sation of passing flatus from the vagina to the passage of solid 
stool from the vagina. Most patients experience some degree of 
fecal incontinence. Contamination may result in vaginitis. Large 
fistulas may be obvious on anoscopic and/or vaginal speculum 
examination, but smaller fistulas may be difficult to locate. 
Occasionally, a barium enema or vaginogram may identify 
these fistulas. Endorectal ultrasound may also be useful. With 
the patient in the prone position, installation of methylene blue 
into the rectum while a tampon is in the vagina may confirm the 
presence of a small fistula.
Treatment.  The treatment of rectovaginal fistula depends on 
the size, location, etiology, and condition of surrounding tissues. 
Because up to 50% of fistulas caused by obstetric injury heal 
spontaneously, it is prudent to wait 3 to 6 months before 
embarking on surgical repair in these patients. If the fistula was 
caused by a cryptoglandular abscess, drainage of the abscess 
may allow spontaneous closure.
Low and mid-rectovaginal fistulas are usually best treated 
with an endorectal advancement flap. The principle of this 
procedure is based on the advancement of healthy mucosa, 
submucosa, and circular muscle over the rectal opening (the 
high-pressure side of the fistula) to promote healing (Fig. 29-41). 
If a sphincter injury is present, an overlapping sphincteroplasty 
should be performed concurrently. Fecal diversion is rarely 
required. High rectovaginal, colovaginal, and enterovaginal fis-
tulas are usually best treated via a transabdominal approach. The 
diseased tissue, which caused the fistula (upper rectum, sigmoid 
colon, or small bowel), is resected and the hole in the vagina 
closed. Healthy tissue, such as omentum or muscle, frequently 
is interposed between the bowel anastomosis and the vagina to 
prevent recurrence.
Rectovaginal fistulas caused by Crohn’s disease, radia-
tion injury, or malignancy almost never heal spontaneously. 
In Crohn’s disease, treatment is based on adequate drainage of 
perianal sepsis and nutritional support. An endorectal advance-
ment flap may be performed if the rectum is spared from active 
Crohn’s disease. Fistulas resulting from radiation damage are 
not amenable to local repair with an advancement flap because 
of damage to the surrounding rectal and vaginal tissues. Such 
mid- and high rectovaginal fistulas are occasionally repaired 
successfully with a transabdominal approach in which healthy 
tissue (omentum, muscle, or nonradiated bowel) is interposed 
between the damaged rectum and vagina. Fistulas caused by 
malignancy should be treated with resection of the tumor. 
Because differentiating radiation damage from malignancy 
can be extremely difficult, all fistulas resulting from radiation 
should be biopsied to rule out the presence of cancer.
Perianal Dermatitis
Pruritus Ani.  Pruritus ani (severe perianal itching) is a com-
mon problem with a multitude of etiologies. Surgically cor-
rectable (anatomic) causes include prolapsing hemorrhoids, 
ectropion, fissure, fistula, and neoplasms. Perianal infection 
may also present with pruritus ani. Infections may be caused 
by fungus (Candida species and Epidermophyton organisms), 
parasites (Enterobius vermicularis [pinworms], Pediculus pubis 
[a louse], and Sarcoptes scabiei [scabies]), bacteria (Corynebac-
terium minutissimum [erythrasma] and T. pallidum [syphilis]), 
or viruses (HPV [condyloma acuminata]). Antibiotic use may 
also cause itching, usually by precipitating fungal infection. 
Noninfectious dermatologic causes include seborrhea, psoriasis, 
and contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis can be particularly 
troublesome because many over-the-counter topical agents used 
by patients to relieve itching may exacerbate the problem. Occa-
sionally, systemic diseases such as jaundice and diabetes may 
present with pruritus ani.
Despite the myriad of causes, the majority of pruritus ani is 
idiopathic and probably related to local hygiene, neurogenic, or 
1232
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
psychogenic causes. Treatment focuses on removal of irritants, 
improving perianal hygiene, dietary adjustments, and avoiding 
scratching. Biopsy and/or culture may be required to rule out 
an infectious or dermatologic cause. Hydrocortisone ointment 
0.5% to 1.0% can provide symptomatic relief but should not be 
used for prolonged periods of time because of the risk of dermal 
atrophy. Skin barriers such as Calmoseptine can also provide 
relief. Systemic antihistamines or tricyclic antidepressants have 
also been used with some success.
Nonpruritic Lesions.  Several perianal skin conditions may 
present with perianal skin changes. Leprosy, amebiasis, actino-
mycosis, and lymphogranuloma venereum produce characteris-
tic perianal lesions. Neoplasms such as squamous intraepithelial 
lesions, Paget’s disease, and invasive carcinomas may also 
appear first in the perianal skin. Biopsy can usually distinguish 
these diagnoses.
Probe in
rectovaginal
fistula
Rectal mucosa and
internal sphincter
muscle incised
Attenuated
rectovaginal
septum
Excess flap of
mucosa excised
Internal sphincter
muscle mobilized
Internal sphincter
muscle approximated
Flap of mucosa
and internal
sphincter muscle
Figure 29-41.  Endorectal advancement flap for rectovaginal fistula. (Reproduced with permission of Taylor & Francis, LLC from Gordon 
PH, Nivatvongs S, eds. Principles and Practice of Surgery for the Colon, Rectum, and Anus. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1999:412. 
Permission conveyed through kkjkjdht Clearance Center, Inc.)
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Bacterial Infections.  Proctitis is a common symptom of ano-
rectal bacterial infection. N. gonorrhoeae is the most common 
bacterial cause of proctitis and causes pain, tenesmus, rectal 
bleeding, and mucus discharge. Chlamydia trachomatis infec-
tion may be asymptomatic or may produce similar symptoms. 
T. pallidum, the microbe causing syphilis, causes a chancre at 
the site of inoculation, which may be asymptomatic or may 
present as an atypical fissure (primary syphilis). Condyloma lata 
are characteristic of secondary syphilis. Chancroid, caused by 
Haemophilus ducreyi, is a disease manifested by multiple pain-
ful, bleeding lesions. Inguinal lymphadenopathy and fluctuant, 
draining lymph nodes are characteristic. Donovania granuloma-
tis infection produces shiny, red masses on the perineum (granu-
loma inguinale). Diarrheal illnesses caused by organisms such 
as Campylobacter or Shigella may also be sexually transmitted. 
1233
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
Treatment consists of antimicrobial agents directed against the 
infecting organism.
Parasitic Infections.  Entamoeba histolytica is an increas-
ingly common sexually transmitted disease. Amebas produce 
ulcerations in the gastrointestinal mucosa and can infect any 
part of the gut. Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
and tenesmus. Giardia lamblia is also common and produces 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and malaise.
Viral Infections
Herpes Simplex Virus.  Herpes proctitis is extremely common. 
Proctitis is usually caused by type 2 herpes simplex virus and 
less commonly by type 1 herpes simplex virus. Patients com-
plain of severe, intractable perianal pain and tenesmus. Pain 
often precedes the development of characteristic vesicles, and 
these patients may require an examination under anesthesia to 
exclude another diagnosis such as an intersphincteric abscess. 
Diagnosis is confirmed by viral culture of tissue or vesicular 
fluid.
Human Papillomavirus.  HPV causes condyloma acuminata 
(anogenital warts) and is associated with squamous intraepithe-
lial lesions and squamous cell carcinoma (see previous section, 
“Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors”). Condylomas occur in the 
perianal area or in the squamous epithelium of the anal canal. 
Occasionally, the mucosa of the lower rectum may be affected. 
There are approximately 30 serotypes of HPV. As previously 
mentioned, HPV types 16 and 18, in particular, appear to pre-
dispose to malignancy and often cause flat dysplasia in skin 
unaffected by warts. In contrast, HPV types 6 and 11 commonly 
cause warts, but do not appear to cause malignant degeneration.
Treatment of anal condyloma depends on the location and 
extent of disease. Small warts on the perianal skin and distal 
anal canal may be treated in the office with topical application 
of bichloracetic acid or podophyllin. Although 60% to 80% of 
patients will respond to these agents, recurrence and reinfection 
are common. Imiquimod (Aldara) is an immunomodulator that 
was recently introduced for topical treatment of several viral 
infections, including anogenital condyloma.105 Initial reports 
suggest that this agent is highly effective in treating condyloma 
located on the perianal skin and distal anal canal. Larger and/
or more numerous warts require excision and/or fulguration in 
the operating room. Excised warts should be sent for pathologic 
examination to rule out dysplasia or malignancy. It is impor-
tant to note that prior use of podophyllin may induce histologic 
changes that mimic dysplasia. The recent introduction of a 
vaccine against HPV holds promise for preventing anogenital 
condylomas.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus.  See later section, “The 
Immunocompromised Patient.”
Pilonidal Disease
Pilonidal disease (cyst, infection) consists of a hair-containing 
sinus or abscess occurring in the intergluteal cleft. Although 
the etiology is unknown, it is speculated that the cleft creates 
a suction that draws hair into the midline pits when a patients 
sits. These ingrown hairs may then become infected and pres-
ent acutely as an abscess in the sacrococcygeal region. Once an 
acute episode has resolved, recurrence is common.
An acute abscess should be incised and drained as soon 
as the diagnosis is made. Because these abscesses are usu-
ally very superficial, this procedure can often be performed in 
the office, clinic, or emergency room under local anesthetic. 
Because midline wounds in the region heal poorly, some sur-
geons recommend using an incision lateral to the intergluteal 
cleft. A number of procedures have been proposed to treat a 
chronic pilonidal sinus. The simplest method involves unroof-
ing the tract, curetting the base, and marsupializing the wound. 
The wound must then be kept clean and free of hair until heal-
ing is complete (often requiring weekly office visits for wound 
care). Alternatively, a small lateral incision can be created and 
the pit excised. This method is effective for most primary pilo-
nidal sinuses. In general, extensive resection should be avoided. 
Complex and/or recurrent sinus tracts may require more exten-
sive resection and closure with a Z-plasty, advancement flap, or 
rotational flap.
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Hidradenitis suppurativa is an infection of the cutaneous apo-
crine sweat glands. Infected glands rupture and form subcutane-
ous sinus tracts. The infection may mimic complex anal fistula 
disease, but stops at the anal verge because there are no apocrine 
glands in the anal canal. Treatment involves incision and drain-
age of acute abscesses and unroofing of all chronically inflamed 
fistulas and débridement of granulation tissue. Radical excision 
and skin grafting are almost never necessary.
TRAUMA
Penetrating Colorectal Injury
Colorectal injury is common following penetrating trauma to 
the abdomen and has historically been associated with high 
mortality. In the first half of the twentieth century, the mortality 
rate from colorectal injury was as high as 90%. The introduction 
of exteriorization of colonic injuries and fecal diversion during 
World War II dramatically decreased mortality, and this princi-
ple has governed the management of large bowel injury for over 
50 years. Recently, however, this practice was challenged, and 
trauma surgeons are increasingly performing primary repairs in 
selected patients.
Management of colonic injury depends on the mechanism 
of injury, the delay between the injury and surgery, the over-
all condition and stability of the patient, the degree of perito-
neal contamination, and the condition of the injured colon. A 
primary repair may be considered in hemodynamically stable 
patients with few additional injuries and minimal contamination 
if the colon appears otherwise healthy. Contraindications to pri-
mary repair include shock, injury to more than two other organs, 
mesenteric vascular damage, and extensive fecal contamination. 
A delay of greater than 6 hours between the injury and the 
operation also is associated with increased morbidity and mor-
tality and is a relative contraindication to primary repair. Inju-
ries caused by high-velocity gunshot wounds or blast injuries 
are often associated with multiple intra-abdominal injuries and 
tissue loss and therefore are usually treated by fecal diversion 
after débridement of all nonviable tissue. Patient factors, such 
as medical comorbidities, advanced age, and the presence of 
tumor or radiation injury, must also be considered (Table 29-6).
Like injuries to the intraperitoneal colon, penetrating 
trauma to the rectum traditionally has been associated with high 
morbidity and mortality. Primary repair of the rectum is more 
difficult than primary repair of the colon, however, and most 
rectal injuries are associated with significant contamination. For 
that reason, the majority of penetrating rectal injuries should be 
treated with proximal fecal diversion and copious irrigation of 
1234
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the rectum (distal rectal washout). Small, clean rectal injuries 
may be closed primarily without fecal diversion in an otherwise 
stable patient. Intractable rectal bleeding may require angio-
graphic embolization. Very rarely, hemorrhage or extensive tis-
sue loss (especially if the anal sphincter is severely damaged) 
may require an emergent APR. However, this operation should 
be avoided, if at all possible, because of the morbidity associ-
ated with an extensive pelvic dissection in a severely injured 
patient.
Blunt Colorectal Injury
Blunt injury to the colon and rectum is considerably less com-
mon than penetrating injury. Nevertheless, blunt trauma can 
cause colon perforation, and shear injury to the mesentery can 
devascularize the intestine. Management of these injuries should 
follow the same principles outlined for management of penetrat-
ing injuries. Small perforations with little contamination in a 
stable patient may be closed primarily; more extensive injury 
requires fecal diversion. A serosal hematoma alone does not 
mandate resection, but the bowel should be carefully inspected 
to ensure that there is not an associated perforation or significant 
bowel ischemia.
Blunt injury to the rectum may result from significant 
trauma, such as a pelvic crush injury, or may result from local 
trauma caused by an enema or foreign body. Crush injuries, 
especially with an associated pelvic fracture, are often associ-
ated with significant rectal damage and contamination. These 
patients require débridement of all nonviable tissue, proximal 
fecal diversion, and a distal rectal washout, with or without 
drain placement. Blunt trauma from an enema or foreign body 
may produce a mucosal hematoma, which requires no surgical 
treatment if the mucosa is intact. Small mucosal tears may be 
closed primarily if the bowel is relatively clean and there is little 
contamination.
Iatrogenic Injury
Intraoperative Injury.  The colon and rectum are at risk for 
inadvertent injury during other procedures, especially during 
pelvic operations. The key to managing these injuries is early 
recognition. The vast majority of iatrogenic colorectal injuries 
may be closed primarily if there is little contamination and if 
the patient is otherwise stable. Delayed recognition of colorectal 
injuries may result in significant peritonitis and life-threatening 
sepsis. In these cases, fecal diversion is almost always required, 
and the patient may need repeated exploration for drainage of 
abscesses.
Injury from Barium Enema.  Colorectal injury from a bar-
ium enema is an extremely rare complication associated with 
a high rate of morbidity and mortality. Perforation with spill-
age of barium, especially above the peritoneal reflection, may 
result in profound peritonitis, sepsis, and a systemic inflam-
matory response. If the perforation is recognized early, it may 
be closed primarily and the abdomen irrigated to remove stool 
and barium. However, if the patient has developed sepsis, fecal 
diversion (with or without bowel resection) is almost always 
required. Rarely, a small mucosal injury to the extraperitoneal 
rectum may be managed with bowel rest, broad-spectrum anti-
biotics, and close observation.
Colonoscopic Perforation.  Perforation is the most common 
major complication after either diagnostic or therapeutic 
colonoscopy. Fortunately, this complication is rare and occurs 
in less than 1% of procedures. Perforation may result from 
trauma from the tip of the instrument, from shear forces related 
to the formation of a “loop” in the colonoscope, or from baro-
trauma from insufflation. Biopsy or fulguration can also cause 
perforation. Polypectomy using electrocautery may produce a 
full-thickness burn, resulting in postpolypectomy syndrome in 
which a patient develops abdominal pain, fever, and leukocyto-
sis without evidence of diffuse peritonitis.
Management of colonoscopic perforation depends on the 
size of the perforation, the duration of time since the injury, the 
overall condition of the patient, and the underlying diagnosis. 
A large perforation recognized during the procedure requires 
surgical exploration. Because the bowel has almost always 
been prepared prior to the colonoscopy, there is usually little 
contamination associated with these injuries, and most can be 
repaired primarily. If there is significant contamination, if there 
has been a delay in diagnosis with resulting peritonitis, or if the 
patient is hemodynamically unstable, proximal diversion with 
or without resection is the safest approach. It is also important to 
know the indication for and findings at the time of colonoscopy. 
If the patient has an underlying neoplasm and is stable, defini-
tive resection is best. Occasionally, a patient will develop 
abdominal pain and localized signs of perforation after what 
was thought to be an uneventful colonoscopy. Many of these 
patients will have a “microperforation,” which will resolve with 
bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and close observation. 
Evidence of peritonitis or any deterioration in clinical condition 
mandates exploration. Similarly, free retroperitoneal or intra-
peritoneal air may be discovered incidentally after colonoscopy. 
Table 29-6 
Criteria for use of an ostomy
Injuring agent factors
  High-velocity bullet wounds
  Shotgun wounds
  Explosive blast wounds
  Crush injury
Patient factors
  Presence of tumor
  Radiated tissue
  Medical condition
  Advanced age
Injury factors
  Inflamed tissue
  Advanced infection
  Distal obstruction
  Local foreign body
  Impaired blood supply
  Mesenteric vascular damage
  Shock with blood pressure <80/60 mmHg
  Hemorrhage >1000 mL
  More than two organs (especially kidney) injured
  Interval to operation >6 h (pancreatic, splenic, hepatic)
  Extensive injury requiring resection
  Major abdominal wall loss
  Thoracoabdominal penetration
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S,  
eds. Principles and Practice of Surgery for the Colon, Rectum, and 
Anus. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc; 1999:1249.
1235
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
In a completely asymptomatic patient, this finding is thought 
to result from barotrauma and dissection of air through tissue 
planes without a free perforation. Many of these patients can be 
successfully treated with bowel rest and broad-spectrum antibi-
otics. Surgical exploration is indicated if any clinical deteriora-
tion occurs.
Anal Sphincter Injury and Incontinence
The most common cause of anal sphincter injury is obstetric 
trauma during vaginal delivery. The risk of sphincter injury is 
increased by a laceration that extends into the rectum (fourth-
degree tear), infection of an episiotomy or laceration repair, 
prolonged labor, and possibly by use of a midline episiotomy. 
Sphincter damage may also result from hemorrhoidectomy, 
sphincterotomy, abscess drainage, or fistulotomy. Patients with 
incontinence and a suspected sphincter injury can be evaluated 
with anal manometry, EMG, pudendal nerve motor latency, and 
endoanal ultrasound. Mild incontinence, even in the presence of 
a sphincter defect, may respond to dietary changes and/or bio-
feedback. More severe incontinence may require surgical repair.
The anal sphincter can also be injured by penetrating or 
blunt mechanisms (impalement, blast injury, crush injuries of 
the pelvis). Because damage to the anal sphincter is not life-
threatening, definitive repair of the sphincter is often deferred 
until other injuries have been repaired and the patient’s clinical 
condition is stable. Isolated sphincter injuries that do not involve 
the rectum may be repaired primarily. Rectal injury accompa-
nied by sphincter injury should be treated with fecal diversion 
and distal rectal washout, with or without drain placement. Sig-
nificant perineal tissue loss may require extensive débridement 
and a diverting colostomy.
Surgical Repairs.  The most common method of repair of the 
anal sphincter is a wrap-around sphincteroplasty (Fig. 29-42).106 
The procedure involves mobilization of the divided sphincter 
muscle and reapproximation without tension. The internal and 
external sphincters may be overlapped together or separately. 
Postanal intersphincteric levatorplasty is less commonly used 
to repair sphincter defects but may be useful for incontinence 
caused by prolapse and/or loss of the anorectal angle (see 
“Continence”). The approach is via the intersphincteric plane 
posteriorly. It may be performed concomitantly with a perineal 
repair of rectal prolapse. The levator ani muscle is approximated 
to restore the anorectal angle, and the puborectalis and external 
sphincter muscle are tightened with sutures. These elective pro-
cedures usually do not require a diverting colostomy.
In cases where there has been significant loss of sphinc-
ter muscle or in which prior repairs have failed, more complex 
techniques, such as gracilis muscle transposition with or with-
out chronic, low-frequency electrostimulation, have been used 
with some success.107 In this procedure, the gracilis muscle is 
mobilized from the thigh, detached from its insertion on the 
tibial tuberosity, tunneled through the perineum, and wrapped 
around the anal canal. Another alternative in patients who have 
failed other repairs is the artificial anal sphincter. This device 
consists of an inflatable silastic cuff, a pressure-regulating bal-
loon, and a control pump. Patients deflate the cuff manually 
to open the anal canal; the cuff then reinflates spontaneously 
to maintain closure of the anal canal. Sacral nerve stimulation 
via an implanted pulse generator is a technique used for neu-
rogenic incontinence when the sphincter is intact.16,27 In some 
patients, an end stoma provides the best relief for intractable 
incontinence.108
Foreign Body
Foreign body entrapment in the rectum is not uncommon. 
Depending on the level of entrapment, a foreign body may cause 
damage to the rectum, rectosigmoid, or descending colon. Gen-
eralized abdominal pain suggests intraperitoneal perforation. 
Evaluation of the patient includes inspection of the perineum 
and a careful abdominal examination to detect any evidence of 
perforation. Plain films of the abdomen are mandatory to detect 
free intra-abdominal air.
Foreign bodies lodged low in the rectum may often be 
removed under conscious sedation with or without a local anes-
thetic block. Objects impacted higher in the rectum may require 
regional or general anesthesia for removal. Only rarely will a 
laparotomy be required to remove the object. After removal of 
the foreign body, it is crucial to evaluate the rectum and sig-
moid colon for injury. Proctoscopy and/or flexible sigmoidos-
copy should be performed. A hematoma without evidence of 
perforation requires no surgical treatment. Perforation of the 
rectum or sigmoid colon should be managed as described in the 
preceding sections.
THE IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PATIENT
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Patients infected with HIV may present with a myriad of gas-
trointestinal symptoms. Diarrhea, in particular, is extremely 
common. The severity of gastrointestinal disease depends 
Inferior rectal nerve
Pudendal nerve
Fibrotic portion of
external sphincter
Transverse superficial
perineal muscle
A
B
D
C
Figure 29-42.  Overlapping sphincteroplasty for incontinence from 
sphincter disruption. A. The external sphincter muscle with scar at 
site of injury is mobilized. B. The muscle edges are aligned in an 
overlapping fashion. C. Mattress sutures are used to approximate 
the muscle. D. The completed operation.
1236
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
in part on the degree of immunosuppression; however, both 
ordinary and opportunistic pathogens may affect patients at 
any stage of the disease. Opportunistic infections with bac-
teria (Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Chlamydia, and 
Mycobacterium species), fungi (histoplasmosis, coccidiosis, 
Cryptococcus), protozoa (toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, iso-
sporiasis), and viruses (CMV, herpes simplex virus) can cause 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss. CMV in particular 
may cause severe enterocolitis and is the most common infec-
tious cause of emergency laparotomy in acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS) patients. C. difficile colitis is a major 
concern in these patients, especially because many patients are 
maintained on suppressive antibiotic therapy. The incidence of 
gastrointestinal malignancy is also increased in patients with 
HIV infection.109 Kaposi’s sarcoma is the most common malig-
nancy in AIDS patients and can affect any part of the gastro-
intestinal tract. Patients may be asymptomatic or may develop 
bleeding or obstruction. Gastrointestinal lymphoma (usually 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) is also common. The incidence of 
colorectal carcinoma may also be increased in this population, 
although definitive data are lacking.
Perianal disease is extremely common in patients with 
HIV infection. Because HIV is sexually transmitted, it is com-
mon to find concomitant infection with other sexually trans-
mitted diseases such as Chlamydia, herpes simplex virus, and 
HPV (anal condyloma). Anal condyloma in particular are very 
common, and the incidence of dysplasia (HSIL) is high in the 
HIV-infected population.110 Abscesses and fistulas may be 
more difficult to diagnose in these patients and may be com-
plex. Many patients require an examination under anesthesia 
with biopsy and cultures to determine the etiology of many of 
these perianal problems. The introduction of highly active anti-
retroviral therapy (HAART) has changed the natural history of 
HIV infection, but it remains to be seen how these medications 
will affect the incidence and outcome of colorectal disease in 
this patient population.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION FOR TRANSPLANTATION
The gastrointestinal tract is a common site for posttransplanta-
tion complications that are responsible for significant morbid-
ity and mortality. In these patients, infection and medication 
are the most common causes of diarrhea. Immunosuppressant 
medications, in particular, may cause diarrhea. CMV infection 
is common and may be severe. C difficile colitis also occurs 
commonly. Diverticulitis appears to be more common in some 
populations of transplant patients and may be more likely to 
present with abscess or free perforation. Elective resection after 
recovery from one episode of confirmed diverticulitis may be 
indicated in the transplant population. Graft-versus-host disease 
is unique to transplant patients and often requires endoscopy 
and biopsy to diagnose gastrointestinal involvement. Patients 
are subject to the same opportunistic infections outlined earlier; 
however, sexually transmitted infections and Kaposi’s sarcoma 
are somewhat less prevalent. Perianal disease is somewhat less 
common in the transplant population than in patients infected 
with HIV; however, similar infections may occur, and immuno-
suppression often makes diagnosis and treatment challenging.
With increasing long-term survival among transplant 
recipients, the development of posttransplant malignancy has 
become a major concern. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative 
disease is increasingly common and may occur anywhere 
in the gastrointestinal tract. The risk of colorectal carcinoma 
is increased in patients with predisposing conditions such as 
ulcerative colitis. However, immunosuppression alone does not 
appear to increase the incidence of colorectal cancer, and current 
screening recommendations are similar to those for the average 
risk population. In contrast, the incidence of anal squamous cell 
carcinoma is dramatically increased in transplant patients, and 
patients with known HPV infection should undergo more vigor-
ous screening.
THE NEUTROPENIC PATIENT
Neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis) is a life-threatening prob-
lem with a mortality rate of greater than 50%. This syndrome 
is characterized by abdominal pain and distention, fever, diar-
rhea (often bloody), nausea, and vomiting in a patient with 
fewer than 1000 neutrophils/μL blood from any cause (bone 
marrow transplantation, solid-organ transplantation, or chemo-
therapy). CT scan of the abdomen often shows a dilated cecum 
with pericolic stranding. However, a normal-appearing CT scan 
does not exclude the diagnosis. Some patients will respond to 
bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiotics, parenteral nutrition, and 
granulocyte infusion or colony-stimulating factors. Evidence of 
perforation, generalized peritonitis, and deterioration in clinical 
condition are indications for operation.
Neutropenic patients often develop perianal pain, and 
diagnosis may be difficult because of a lack of inflammatory 
response to infection. While broad-spectrum antibiotics may 
cure some of these patients, an examination under anesthesia 
should not be delayed because of neutropenia. An increase in 
pain or fever and/or clinical deterioration mandates an exam 
under anesthesia. Any indurated area should be incised and 
drained, biopsied to exclude a leukemic infiltrate, and cultured 
to aid in the selection of antimicrobial agents.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Tran K. Capsule colonoscopy: PillCam Colon. Issues Emerg 
Health Technol. 2007;106:1-4.
2.	 de Franchis R, Rondonotti E, Villa F. Capsule endoscopy—
state of the art. Dig Dis. 2007;25:249-251.
3.	 Fireman Z, Kopelman Y. The colon: the latest terrain for cap-
sule endoscopy. Dig Liver Dis. 2007;39:895-899.
4.	 Spada C, De Vincentis F, Cesaro P, et al. Accuracy and safety 
of second-generation PillCam COLON capsule for colorectal 
polyp detection. Ther Adv Gastroenterol. 2012;5:173-178.
5.	 Keller J, Fibbe C, Rosien U, et al. Recent advances in capsule 
endoscopy: development of maneuverable capsules. Expert 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;6:561-566.
6.	 Smith RA, von Eschenbach AC, Wender R, et al. American 
Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer: 
update of early detection guidelines for prostate, colorectal, 
and endometrial cancers. Also: update 2001—testing for early 
lung cancer detection. CA Cancer J Clin. 2001;51:38-75.
7.	 Bernini A, Spencer MP, Wong WD, et al. Computed tomogra-
phy-guided percutaneous abscess drainage in intestinal dis-
ease: factors associated with outcome. Dis Colon Rectum. 
1997;40:1009-1013.
8.	 Mang T, Bogoni L, Salganicoff M, et al. Computer-aided 
detection of colorectal polyps in CT colonography with 
and without fecal tagging: a stand-alone evaluation. Invest 
Radiol. 2012;47:99-108.
1237
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
9.	 Garcia-Aguilar J, Pollack J, Lee SH, et al. Accuracy of 
endorectal ultrasonography in preoperative staging of rectal 
tumors. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:10-15.
10.	Turgeon DK, Novicki TJ, Quick J, et al. Six rapid tests for 
direct detection of Clostridium difficile and its toxins in fecal 
samples compared with the fibroblast cytotoxicity assay. J Clin 
Microbiol. 2003;41:667-670.
11.	Qiu H, Sirivongs P, Rothenberger M, et al. Molecular prog-
nostic factors in rectal cancer treated by radiation and surgery. 
Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:451-459.
12.	Offit K. Genetic prognostic markers for colorectal cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:124-125.
13.	Lynch HT, Lynch JF, Lynch PM, et al. Hereditary colorec-
tal cancer syndromes: molecular genetics, genetic counsel-
ing, diagnosis and management. Fam Cancer. 2008;7:27-39.
14.	Dailianas A, Skandalis N, Rimikis MN, et al. Pelvic floor 
study in patients with obstructive defecation: influence of 
biofeedback. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2000;30:176-180.
15.	FitzHarris GP, Garcia-Aguilar J, Parker SC, et al. Quality of 
life after subtotal colectomy for slow-transit constipation: 
both quality and quantity count. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46: 
433-440.
16.	Ganio E, Ratto C, Masin A, et al. Neuromodulation for fecal 
incontinence: outcome in 16 patients with definitive implant. 
The initial Italian Sacral Neurostimulation Group (GINS) 
experience. Dis Colon Rectum, 2001;44:965-970.
17.	Ruiz D, Pinto RA, Hull TL, et al. Does the radiofrequency 
procedure for fecal incontinence improve quality of life 
and incontinence at 1-year follow-up? Dis Colon Rectum. 
2010;53:1041-1046.
18.	Hussain ZI, Lim M, Stojkovic SG. Systematic review of peri-
anal implants in the treatment of faecal incontinence. Br J 
Surg. 2011;98:1526-1536.
19.	Tjandra JJ, Dykes SL, Kumar RR, et al. Practice param-
eters for the treatment of fecal incontinence. Dis Colon 
Rectum. 2007;50:1497-1507.
20.	Ky AJ, Sonoda T, Milsom JW. One-stage laparoscopic restor-
ative proctocolectomy: an alternative to the conventional 
approach? Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:207-210.
21.	Lezoche E, Feliciotti F, Paganini AM, et al. Laparoscopic 
colonic resections versus open surgery: a prospective non-
randomized study on 310 unselected cases. Hepatogastroen-
terology. 2000;47:697-708.
22.	Heuschen UA, Hinz U, Allemeyer EH, et al. One- or two-stage 
procedure for restorative proctocolectomy: rationale for a surgi-
cal strategy in ulcerative colitis. Ann Surg. 2001;234:788-794.
23.	Weeks JC, Nelson H, Gelber S, et al. Short-term quality-of-
life outcomes following laparoscopic-assisted colectomy vs. 
open colectomy for colon cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA. 
2002;287:321-328.
24.	deSouza AL, Prasad LM, Ricci J, et al. A comparison of open 
and robotic total mesorectal excision for rectal adenocarcinoma. 
Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:275-282.
25.	O’Riordain MG, Fazio VW, Lavery IC, et al. Incidence and 
natural history of dysplasia of the anal transitional zone after 
ileal pouch-anal anastomosis: results of a five-year to ten-year 
follow-up. Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:1660-1665.
26.	Regimbeau JM, Panis Y, Pocard M, et al. Handsewn ileal 
pouch-anal anastomosis on the dentate line after total proc-
tectomy: technique to avoid incomplete mucosectomy and the 
need for long-term follow-up of the anal transition zone. Dis 
Colon Rectum. 2001;44:43-50.
27.	Vaizey CJ, Kamm MA, Roy AJ, et al. Double-blind crossover 
study of sacral nerve stimulation for fecal incontinence. Dis 
Colon Rectum. 2000;43:298-302.
28.	Farouk R, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al. Functional out-
comes after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for chronic ulcer-
ative colitis. Ann Surg. 2000;231:919-926.
29.	Bullard KM, Madoff RD, Gemlo BT. Is ileoanal pouch func-
tion stable with time? Results of a prospective audit. Dis 
Colon Rectum. 2002;45:299-304.
30.	Biondo S, Frago R, Codina Cazador A, et al. Long-term func-
tional results from a randomized clinical study of transverse 
coloplasty compared with colon J-pouch after low anterior 
resection for rectal cancer. Surgery. 2013;153:383-392.
31.	Heah SM, Seow-Choen F, Eu KW, et al. Prospective, random-
ized trial comparing sigmoid vs. descending colonic J-pouch 
after total rectal excision. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45: 
322-328.
32.	Sandborn W, McLeod R, Jewell D. Pharmacotherapy for 
inducing and maintaining remission in pouchitis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2000;2:CD001176.
33.	Stocchi L, Pemberton JH. Pouch and pouchitis. Gastroenterol 
Clin North Am. 2001;30:223-241.
34.	Zmora O, Pikarsky AJ, Wexner SD. Bowel preparation for 
colorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum. 2001;44:1537-1549.
35.	Cannon JA, Altom LK, Deierhoi RJ, et al. Preoperative oral 
antibiotics reduce surgical site infection following elective 
colorectal resections. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55:1160-
1166.
36.	Cao F, Li J, Li F. Mechanical bowel preparation for elective 
colorectal surgery: updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012;27:803-810.
37.	Bonen DK, Cho JH. The genetics of inflammatory bowel 
disease. Gastroenterology. 2003;124:521-536.
38.	Yamamoto-Furusho JK. Genetic factors associated with the 
development of inflammatory bowel disease. World J Gastro-
enterol. 2007;13:5594-5597.
39.	Tremaine WJ. Is indeterminate colitis determinable? Curr 
Gastroenterol Rep. 2012;14:162-165.
40.	Lakatos PL, Lakatos L, Kiss LS, et al. Treatment of extraintes-
tinal manifestations in inflammatory bowel disease. Digestion. 
2012;86(Suppl 1):28-35.
41.	Alfadhli AA, McDonald JW, Feagan BG. Methotrexate 
for induction of remission in refractory Crohn’s disease. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;1:CD003459.
42.	Hanauer SB, Feagan BG, Lichtenstein GR, et al. Mainte-
nance infliximab for Crohn’s disease: the ACCENT I 
randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1541-1549.
43.	 Manz M, Vavricka SR, Wanner R, et al. Therapy of steroid- 
resistant inflammatory bowel disease. Digestion. 2012; 
86(Suppl 1): 11-15.
44.	Actis GC, Bruno M, Pinna-Pintor M, et al. Infliximab for 
treatment of steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis. Dig Liver 
Dis. 2002;34:631-634.
45.	Su C, Lewis JD, Deren JJ, et al. Efficacy of anti-tumor necro-
sis factor therapy in patients with ulcerative colitis. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2002;97:2577-2584.
46.	Matsumoto T, Iwao Y, Igarashi M, et al. Endoscopic and chro-
moendoscopic atlas featuring dysplastic lesions in surveil-
lance colonoscopy for patients with long-standing ulcerative 
colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008;14:259-264.
47.	Wong Kee Song LM, Adler DG, Chand B, et al. Chromoen-
doscopy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2007;66:639-649.
48.	Bamias G, Cominelli F. Novel strategies to attenuate immune 
activation in Crohn’s disease. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 
2006;6:401-407.
49.	Hall JF, Roberts PL, Ricciardi R, et al. Long-term follow-up 
after an initial episode of diverticulitis: what are the predictors 
of recurrence? Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:283-288.
50.	Daniels L, de Korte N, Winter D, et al. Overtreatment of sig-
moid diverticulitis: plea for a less aggressive approach. Dig 
Dis. 2012;30:86-91.
51.	American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures. Available 
from: http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@epidemiol-
ogysurveilance/documents/document/acspc-031941.pdf.
1238
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
52.	Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, et al. Over-
weight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively 
studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 2003;348: 
1625-1638.
53.	Woodhouse CR. Guidelines for monitoring of patients with 
ureterosigmoidostomy. Gut. 2002;51(Suppl 5):V15-V16.
54.	Baxter NN, Tepper JE, Durham SB, et al. Increased risk of 
rectal cancer after prostate radiation: a population-based 
study. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:819-824.
55.	Al-Tassan N, Chmiel NH, Maynard J, et al. Inherited vari-
ants of MYH associated with somatic G:C–>T:A mutations in 
colorectal tumors. Nat Genet. 2002;30:227-232.
56.	Lefevre JH, Rodrigue CM, Mourra N, et al. Implication of 
MYH in colorectal polyposis. Ann Surg. 2006;244:874-879.
57.	Martin M, Simon-Assmann P, Kedinger M, et al. DCC regu-
lates cell adhesion in human colon cancer derived HT-29 cells 
and associates with ezrin. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006;85:769-783.
58.	Lao VV, Grady WM. Epigenetics and colorectal cancer. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:686-700.
59.	Rex DK, Ahnen DJ, Baron JA, et al. Serrated lesions of the 
colorectum: review and recommendations from an expert 
panel. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:1315-1329.
60.	Janne PA, Mayer RJ. Chemoprevention of colorectal cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1960-1968.
61.	Lieberman DA, Weiss DG, Bond JH, et al. Use of colonos-
copy to screen asymptomatic adults for colorectal cancer. Vet-
erans Affairs Cooperative Study Group 380. N Engl J Med. 
2000;343:162-168.
62.	Bulow C, Vasen H, Järvinen H, et al. Ileorectal anastomosis is 
appropriate for a subset of patients with familial adenomatous 
polyposis. Gastroenterology. 2000;119:1454-1460.
63.	Steinbach G, Lynch PM, Phillips RK, et al. The effect of cele-
coxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in familial adenomatous 
polyposis. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1946-1952.
64.	Hampel H, Panescu J, Lockman J, et al. Screening for the 
Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer). 
N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1851-1860.
65.	Jarvinen HJ, Aarnio M, Mustonen H, et al. Controlled 15-year 
trial on screening for colorectal cancer in families with 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology. 
2000;118:829-834.
66.	National Quality Forum. Appendix A: Specifications of the 
National Voluntary Consensus Standards for Breast and 
Colon Cancer. http://www.qualityforum.org/pdf/cancer/ 
txbreast-colonAppa-Specsvoting01-18-07clean.pdf.
67.	Levin B, Brooks D, Smith RA, et al. Emerging technologies 
in screening for colorectal cancer: CT colonography, immu-
nochemical fecal occult blood tests, and stool screening using 
molecular markers. CA Cancer J Clin. 2003;53:44-55.
68.	Pignone M, Rich M, Teutsch SM, et al. Screening for colorec-
tal cancer in adults at average risk: a summary of the evidence 
for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 
2002;137:132-141.
69.	Mandel JS, Church TR, Bond JH, et al. The effect of fecal 
occult-blood screening on the incidence of colorectal cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1603-1607.
70.	Imperiale TF, Wagner DR, Lin CY, et al. Risk of advanced 
proximal neoplasms in asymptomatic adults according to the 
distal colorectal findings. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:169-174.
71.	Hardcastle JD, Armitage NC, Chamberlain J, et al. Fecal occult 
blood screening for colorectal cancer in the general population. 
Results of a controlled trial. Cancer. 1986;58:397-403.
72.	Winawer SJ, Flehinger BJ, Schottenfeld D, et al. Screen-
ing for colorectal cancer with fecal occult blood testing and 
sigmoidoscopy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:1311-1318.
73.	Yee J, Akerkar GA, Hung RK, et al. Colorectal neoplasia: 
performance characteristics of CT colonography for detection 
in 300 patients. Radiology. 2001;219:685-692.
74.	Greene FL, Fleming PD, Fleming ID, et al. AJCC Cancer 
Staging Manual. Springer: New York; 2002.
75.	O’Connell JB, Maggard MA, Clifford KY. Colon Cancer Sur-
vival Rates with the New American Joint Committee on Can-
cer Sixth Edition Staging. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96(19): 
1420-1425.
76.	Gunderson LL, Sargent DJ, Tepper JE, et al. Impact of T and 
N substage on survival and disease relapse in adjuvant rec-
tal cancer: a pooled analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2002;54:386-396.
77.	Johnson PM, Porter GA, Ricciardi R, et al. Increasing negative 
lymph node count is independently associated with improved 
long-term survival in stage IIIB and IIIC colon cancer. J Clin 
Oncol. 2006;24:3570-3575.
78.	 Chang GJ, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Skibber JM, et al. Lymph node 
evaluation and survival after curative resection of colon cancer: 
systematic review. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:433-441.
79.	Ricciardi R, Madoff RD, Rothenberger DA, et al. Population-
based analyses of lymph node metastases in colorectal cancer. 
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;4:1522-1527.
80.	Ricciardi R, Baxter NN. Association versus causation versus 
quality improvement: setting benchmarks for lymph node eval-
uation in colon cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:414-415.
81.	Puthillath A, Dunn KB, Rajput A, et al. Safety and efficacy 
of first-line chemotherapy in unresected metastatic colorectal 
cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2007;6:710-715.
82.	Sargent DJ, Marsoni S, Monges G, et al. Defective mismatch 
repair as a predictive marker for lack of efficacy of fluoro-
uracil-based adjuvant therapy in colon cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2010;28:3219-3226.
83.	Demmy TL, Dunn KB. Surgical and nonsurgical therapy for 
lung metastasis: indications and outcomes. Surg Oncol Clin N 
Am. 2007;16:579-605.
84.	Francescutti V, Miller A, Satchidanand Y, et al. Management of 
bowel obstruction in patients with stage IV cancer: predictors of 
outcome after surgery. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013;20:707-714.
85.	Garcia-Aguilar J, Shi Q, Thomas CR Jr, et al. A phase II trial 
of neoadjuvant chemoradiation and local excision for T2N0 
rectal cancer: preliminary results of the ACOSOG Z6041 trial. 
Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19:384-391.
86.	Sauer R, Liersch T, Merkel S, et al. Preoperative versus 
postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer. N Engl 
J Med. 2004;351:1731-1740.
87.	Berends FJ, Kazemier G, Bonjer HJ, et al. Subcutaneous 
metastases after laparoscopic colectomy. Lancet. 1994;344:58.
88.	Jayne DG, Guillou PJ, Thorpe H, et al. Randomized trial 
of laparoscopic-assisted resection of colorectal carcinoma: 
3-year results of the UK MRC CLASICC Trial Group. 
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3061-3068.
89.	A comparison of laparoscopically assisted and open colec-
tomy for colon cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2050-2059.
90.	Hazebroek EJ. COLOR: a randomized clinical trial compar-
ing laparoscopic and open resection for colon cancer. Surg 
Endosc. 2002;16:949-953.
91.	Collinson FJ, Jayne DG, Pigazzi A, et al. An international, 
multicentre, prospective, randomised, controlled, unblinded, 
parallel-group trial of robotic-assisted versus standard laparo-
scopic surgery for the curative treatment of rectal cancer. Int 
J Colorectal Dis. 2012;27:233-241.
92.	Merchea AL, Hubner M, Wenger D, Rose P, Dozois E. The 
value of preoperative biopsy in the management of solid 
presacral tumors. Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56:756-760.
93.	Darragh TM, Colgan TJ, Cox JT, et al. The lower ano-
genital squamous terminology standardization project for 
HPV-associated lesions: background and consensus recom-
mendations from the College of American Pathologists and 
the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology. 
J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2012;16:205-242.
1239
Colon, Rectum, and Anus
CHAPTER 29
94.	Stanley MA. Imiquimod and the imidazoquinolones: mecha-
nism of action and therapeutic potential. Clin Exp Dermatol. 
2002;27:571-577.
95.	Bullard KM, Tuttle TM, Rothenburger DA, et al. Surgical 
therapy for anorectal melanoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196: 
206-211.
96.	Cecil JA. Clostridium difficile: changing epidemiology, 
treatment and infection prevention measures. Curr Infect 
Dis Rep. 2012;14:612-619.
97.	Jonas M, Speake W, Scholefield J. Diltiazem heals glyceryl 
trinitrate-resistant chronic anal fissures: a prospective study. 
Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:1091-1095.
98.	Mentes BB, Irkörücü O, Akin M, et al. Comparison of botu-
linum toxin injection and lateral internal sphincterotomy 
for the treatment of chronic anal fissure. Dis Colon Rectum. 
2003;46:232-237.
99.	Manfredelli S, Montalto G, Leonetti G, et al. Conventional 
(CH) vs. stapled hemorrhoidectomy (SH) in surgical treat-
ment of hemorrhoids. Ten years experience. Ann Ital Chir. 
2012;83:129-134.
100.	Schuurman JP, Borel Rinkes IH, Go PM. Hemorrhoidal artery 
ligation procedure with or without Doppler transducer in 
grade II and III hemorrhoidal disease: a blinded randomized 
clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2012;255:840-845.
101.	Nelson RL, Thomas K, Morgan J, et al. Nonsurgical therapy for 
anal fissure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;2:CD003431.
102.	North JH Jr, Weber TK, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, et al. The 
management of infectious and noninfectious anorectal 
complications in patients with leukemia. J Am Coll Surg. 
1996; 183:322-328.
103.	Jacob TJ, Perakath B, Keighley MR. Surgical interven-
tion for anorectal fistula. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2010;5:CD006319.
104.	Shanwani A, Nor AM, Amri N. Ligation of the intersphinc-
teric fistula tract (LIFT): a sphincter-saving technique for 
fistula-in-ano. Dis Colon Rectum. 2010;53:39-42.
105.	Gunter J. Genital and perianal warts: new treatment opportuni-
ties for human papillomavirus infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2003;189(3 Suppl):S3-S11.
106.	Buie WD, Lowry AC, Rothenberger DA, et al. Clinical 
rather than laboratory assessment predicts continence after 
anterior sphincteroplasty. Dis Colon Rectum. 2001;44: 
1255-1260.
107.	Baeten CG, Bailey HR, Bakka A, et al. Safety and efficacy 
of dynamic graciloplasty for fecal incontinence: report of a 
prospective, multicenter trial. Dynamic Graciloplasty Therapy 
Study Group. Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:743-751.
108.	Tan EK, Vaizey C, Cornish J, et al. Surgical strategies for 
faecal incontinence—a decision analysis between dynamic 
graciloplasty, artificial bowel sphincter, and end stoma. 
Colorectal Dis. 2008;10:577-586.
109.	Cooksley CD, Hwang LY, Waller DK, et al. HIV-related 
malignancies: community-based study using linkage of can-
cer registry and HIV registry data. Int J STD AIDS. 1999;10: 
795-802.
110.	Palefsky JM. Anal squamous intraepithelial lesions: relation 
to HIV and human papillomavirus infection. J Acquir Immune 
Defic Syndr. 1999;21(Suppl 1):S42-S48.
This page intentionally left blank 
The Appendix
Mike K. Liang, Roland E. Andersson,  
Bernard M. Jaffe, and David H. Berger
30
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Appendiceal disease is a frequent reason for emergency hospital 
admission, and appendectomy is one of the most common emer-
gency procedures performed in contemporary medicine. Despite 
the prevalent role this organ plays in healthcare today, the 
human appendix was not noted until 1492. Leonardo da Vinci 
depicted the appendix in his anatomic drawings, but these were 
not published until the eighteenth century.1 In 1521, Berengario 
Da Capri and, in 1543, Andreas Vesalius published drawings 
recognizing the appendix.2
Credit is given to Jean Fernel for first describing appen-
diceal disease in a paper published in 1544. He reported on a 
7-year-old girl whose diarrhea he treated with doses of quince, 
an apple-like fruit used in folk remedies. She developed abdom-
inal pain and died. At autopsy, the quince was found to have 
obstructed the lumen of the appendix, causing necrosis and per-
foration.3 Lorenz Heister provided the first description of classic 
appendicitis in 1711.1
The first known appendectomy was performed in 1736 by 
Claudius Amyand in London. He operated on an 11-year-old 
boy with a scrotal hernia and a fecal fistula. Within the hernia 
sac, Amyand found a perforated appendix surrounded by omen-
tum. The appendix and omentum were amputated. The patient 
was discharged a month later in good condition.4
It would be over a century later before appendicitis was 
widely recognized as a common cause of right lower quadrant 
pain and early appendectomy advocated as treatment. Through-
out this period, there was extensive discussion of typhlitis and 
perityphlitis as the common etiologies of right lower quadrant 
pain. Only sporadic cases of right lower quadrant pain were 
treated with appendectomy. In 1886, Reginald H. Fitz presented 
his findings regarding appendicitis and recommended consid-
eration for operative treatment. In 1889, Charles McBurney 
published his landmark paper in the New York State Medical 
Journal describing the indications for early laparotomy for the 
treatment of appendicitis.5 During the following decade, the 
role of surgical treatment was discussed intensely between pro-
ponents of early appendectomy and of a more expectant man-
agement. It was recognized that most instances of appendicitis 
could resolve without surgical treatment; but, the problem was 
how to identify early the patients who had the progressive, often 
lethal form of the disease.6 Eventually, early appendectomy 
became the accepted standard of care, with broad indications in 
order to prevent perforation. This change in practice resulted in 
an enormous increase in the number of appendectomies during 
the first decades of the twentieth century. However, this had 
almost no impact on the incidence of perforated appendicitis 
or on the mortality of appendicitis.7 In the 1970s, the negative 
effects of the large number of appendectomies of uninflamed 
appendices were noted, and the focus gradually shifted toward 
a more conservative approach to exploration.8
EMBRYOLOGY, ANATOMY, AND PHYSIOLOGY
Embryology
In the sixth week of human embryonic development, the appen-
dix and cecum appear as outpouchings from the caudal limb 
of the midgut. The appendiceal outpouching, initially noted in 
the eighth week, begins to elongate at about the fifth month 
to achieve a vermiform appearance.9,10 The appendix maintains 
Historical Background	
1241
Embryology, Anatomy,  
and Physiology	
1241
Embryology / 1241
Anatomy / 1242
Physiology / 1242
Acute Appendicitis	
1243
Epidemiology / 1243
Etiology and Pathogenesis / 1243
Microbiology / 1243
Natural History / 1243
Clinical Presentation / 1243
Differential Diagnosis / 1246
Initial Management / 1248
Operative Interventions  
for the Appendix	
1251
Open Appendectomy / 1251
Laparoscopic Appendectomy / 1252
Laparoscopic versus Open  
Appendectomy / 1253
Laparoscopic Single-Incision  
Appendectomy / 1254
Natural Orifice Transluminal  
Endoscopic Surgery / 1254
Special Circumstances	
1256
Acute Appendicitis  
in the Young / 1256
Acute Appendicitis  
in the Elderly / 1256
Acute Appendicitis during  
Pregnancy / 1256
Postoperative Care  
and Complications	
1257
Surgical Site Infection / 1257
Stump Appendicitis / 1257
Incidental Appendectomy	
1257
Neoplasms of the Appendix	
1257
Prevalence of Neoplasms / 1257
Carcinoid / 1258
Adenocarcinoma / 1258
Mucocele / 1258
Pseudomyxoma Peritonei / 1258
Lymphoma	1259
chapter 
its position at the tip of the cecum throughout development. 
The subsequent unequal growth of the lateral wall of the cecum 
causes the appendix to find its adult position on the posterior 
medial wall, just below the ileocecal valve. The base of the 
appendix can be located by following the longitudinally ori-
ented taeniae coli to their confluence on the cecum. The tip of 
the appendix can be located anywhere in the right lower quad-
rant of the abdomen, pelvis, or retroperitoneum.
In patients with midgut malrotation and situs inversus, the 
cecum (and thus the appendix) will not reside in the usual right 
lower quadrant location. With midgut malrotation, the midgut 
(small bowel and proximal colon) incompletely rotates or fails 
to rotate around the axis of the superior mesenteric artery during 
fetal development. In this situation, the appendix will remain 
in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Situs inversus is a 
rare autosomal recessive congenital defect characterized by the 
transposition of abdominal and/or thoracic organs. In this situ-
ation, the appendix is found in the left lower quadrant of the 
abdomen.11
Anatomy
In the adult, the average length of the appendix is 6 to 9 cm; 
however, it can vary in length from <1 to >30 cm. The outer 
diameter varies between 3 and 8 mm, whereas the luminal diam-
eter varies between 1 and 3 mm.9
The appendix receives its arterial supply from the appen-
dicular branch of the ileocolic artery. This artery originates pos-
terior to the terminal ileum, entering the mesoappendix close 
to the base of the appendix.12 The lymphatic drainage of the 
appendix flows into lymph nodes that lie along the ileocolic 
artery. Innervation of the appendix is derived from sympa-
thetic elements contributed by the superior mesenteric plexus 
(T10-L1) and afferents from the parasympathetic elements via 
the vagus nerves.12
The histologic features of the appendix are contained 
within the three following layers: the outer serosa, which is an 
extension of the peritoneum; the muscularis layer, which is not 
well defined and may be absent in certain locations; and finally, 
the submucosa and mucosa. Lymphoid aggregates occur in the 
submucosal layer and may extend into the muscularis mucosa. 
Lymphatic channels are prominent in regions underlying these 
lymphoid aggregates. The mucosa is like that of the large intes-
tine, except for the density of the lymphoid follicles. The crypts 
are irregularly sized and shaped, in contrast to the more uniform 
appearance of the crypts in the colon. Neuroendocrine com-
plexes composed of ganglion cells, Schwann cells, neural fibers, 
and neurosecretory cells are positioned just below the crypts.13,14
Physiology
For many years, the appendix was erroneously believed to be a 
vestigial organ with no known function. It is now well recog-
nized that the appendix is an immunologic organ that actively 
participates in the secretion of immunoglobulins, particularly 
immunoglobulin A.
1242
Key Points
1 	 Appendicitis is one of the most common surgical emergen-
cies in contemporary medicine, with a yearly incidence rate 
of about 100 per 100,000 inhabitants. Lifetime risk for 
appendicitis is 8.6% for males and 6.7% for females, with 
the highest incidence in the second decade of life.
2 	 The natural history of appendicitis is unclear, but it appears 
that progression to perforation is not predictable and that 
spontaneous resolution is common, suggesting that nonper-
forated and perforated appendicitis may, in fact, be different 
diseases.
3 	 Right lower quadrant pain, gastrointestinal symptoms start-
ing after the onset of pain, and a systemic inflammatory 
response with leukocytosis and neutrophilia, increased 
C-reactive protein concentration, and fever are considered 
diagnostic of appendicitis. The Appendicitis Inflammatory 
Response Score or Alvarado score can help improve diag-
nostic accuracy.
4 	 Computed tomography scan has improved diagnostic accu-
racy in individual studies. However, in population-wide 
studies, the rate of misdiagnosis of appendicitis remains con-
stant. Rates of misdiagnosis are highest in female patients of 
child-bearing age and patients on the extremes of age (i.e., 
very young and very old).
5 	 The role of nonoperative treatment for uncomplicated appen-
dicitis remains controversial. Currently, appendectomy 
remains the standard of care. Laparoscopic appendectomy 
has a slight benefit over open appendectomy.
6 	 Perforated or complicated appendicitis is more common in 
the very young (age <5 years) and very old (age >65 years).
7 	 Complicated appendicitis without signs of sepsis or gen-
eralized peritonitis may benefit from nonoperative man-
agement. The role of interval appendectomy in these 
cases remains controversial.
8 	 Single-incision appendectomy provides no obvious 
advantage over standard laparoscopic appendectomy. 
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery remains 
an investigational procedure.
9 	 The incidence of fetal loss following normal appendec-
tomy in pregnant patients is 4%, and the risk of prema-
ture delivery is 10%. The greatest opportunity to 
improve fetal outcomes may be through improving 
diagnostic accuracy and reducing the rate of negative 
appendectomy.
10   Antibiotic prophylaxis is effective in the prevention of 
postoperative surgical site infection. Postoperative anti-
biotics are unnecessary following uncomplicated appen-
dicitis. For complicated appendicitis, a treatment 
duration of 4 to 7 days is recommended.
11   The role of incidental appendectomy is limited to patients 
at high risk for misdiagnosis of appendicitis (malrotation, 
patients unable to respond or react normally), patients at 
high risk for complications with appendicitis (children 
ready to undergo chemotherapy), and patients with lim-
ited access to modern healthcare.
12   The prevalence of appendiceal malignancy remains at or 
below 1% of appendectomies. Carcinoid and mucinous 
adenocarcinoma remain the most frequent histologic 
diagnosis.
1243
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
Although there is no clear role for the appendix in the 
development of human disease, an inverse association between 
appendectomy and the development of ulcerative colitis has 
been reported, suggesting a protecting effect of the appendec-
tomy. However, this association is only seen in patients treated 
with appendectomy for appendicitis before age 20.15-17
The association between Crohn’s disease and appendec-
tomy is less clear. Although earlier studies suggested that appen-
dectomy increases the risk of developing Crohn’s disease, more 
recent studies that carefully assessed the timing of appendectomy 
in relationship to the onset of Crohn’s disease demonstrated no 
correlation.17 A recent meta-analysis demonstrated a significant 
risk of Crohn’s disease early following appendicitis.18 This risk 
diminishes later, which suggests that a diagnostic (misidentifying 
Crohn’s disease as appendicitis) rather than a physiologic rela-
tionship exists between appendectomy and Crohn’s disease.
The appendix may function as a reservoir to recolonize 
the colon with healthy bacteria. One retrospective study dem-
onstrated that prior appendectomy may have an inverse relation-
ship to recurrent Clostridium difficile infections.19 However, in 
another retrospective study, prior appendectomy did not affect 
the rate of C. difficile infections.20 The role of the appendix in 
recolonizing the colon remains to be elucidated.
ACUTE APPENDICITIS
Epidemiology
The lifetime risk of developing appendicitis is 8.6% for males 
and 6.7% for females, with the highest incidence in the 
second and third decades.21 The rate of appendectomy for 
appendicitis has been decreasing since the 1950s in most coun-
tries. In the United States, it reached its lowest incidence rate 
of about 15 per 10,000 inhabitants in the 1990s.22 Since then, 
there has been an increase in the incidence rate of nonperforated 
appendicitis. The reason for this is not clear, but it has been pro-
posed that the increased use of diagnostic imaging has led to a 
higher detection rate of mild appendicitis that would otherwise 
resolve undetected.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
The etiology and pathogenesis of appendicitis are not completely 
understood. Obstruction of the lumen due to fecaliths or hyper-
trophy of lymphoid tissue is proposed as the main etiologic factor 
in acute appendicitis. The frequency of obstruction rises with the 
severity of the inflammatory process. Fecaliths and calculi are 
found in 40% of cases of simple acute appendicitis,23 in 65% of 
cases of gangrenous appendicitis without rupture, and in nearly 
90% of cases of gangrenous appendicitis with rupture.24
Traditionally, the belief has been that there is a predict-
able sequence of events leading to eventual appendiceal rupture. 
The proximal obstruction of the appendiceal lumen produces 
a closed-loop obstruction, and continuing normal secretion by 
the appendiceal mucosa rapidly produces distension. Disten-
sion of the appendix stimulates the nerve endings of visceral 
afferent stretch fibers, producing vague, dull, diffuse pain in the 
mid-abdomen or lower epigastrium. Distension increases from 
continued mucosal secretion and from rapid multiplication of 
the resident bacteria of the appendix. This causes reflex nausea 
and vomiting, and the visceral pain increases. As pressure in 
the organ increases, venous pressure is exceeded. Capillaries 
and venules are occluded but arterial inflow continues, result-
ing in engorgement and vascular congestion. The inflammatory 
process soon involves the serosa of the appendix and in turn 
the parietal peritoneum. This produces the characteristic shift in 
pain to the right lower quadrant.
The mucosa of the appendix is susceptible to impair-
ment of blood supply; thus, its integrity is compromised early 
in the process, which allows bacterial invasion. The area with 
the poorest blood supply suffers the most: ellipsoidal infarcts 
develop in the antimesenteric border. As distension, bacterial 
invasion, compromise of the vascular supply, and infarction 
progress, perforation occurs, usually on the antimesenteric bor-
der just beyond the point of obstruction. This sequence is not 
inevitable, however, and some episodes of acute appendicitis 
may resolve spontaneously.
Microbiology
Appendicitis may occur in clusters, suggesting an infectious 
genesis. However, an association with various contagious bac-
teria and viruses has only been found in a small proportion of 
appendicitis patients.25 The flora of the inflamed appendix dif-
fers from that of the normal appendix. About 60% of aspirates 
of inflamed appendices have anaerobes compared to 25% of 
aspirates from normal appendices.26 Tissue specimens from 
the inflamed appendix wall (not luminal aspirates) virtually all 
grow Escherichia coli and Bacteroides species on culture.27,28 
Fusobacterium nucleatum/necrophorum, which is not present in 
the normal cecal flora, has been identified in 62% of inflamed 
appendices.29 In addition to the other usual species (Peptostrep-
tococcus, Pseudomonas, Bacteroides splanchnicus, Bacteroides 
intermedius, Lactobacillus), previously unreported fastidious 
gram-negative anaerobic bacilli have been encountered. Patients 
with gangrene or perforated appendicitis appear to have more 
tissue invasion by Bacteroides.
Natural History
Because of the current predilection for surgical treatment, the 
natural history of appendicitis has not been well described. An 
increasing amount of circumstantial evidence suggests that not 
all patients with appendicitis will progress to perforation and 
that resolution may be a common event.30 Among the 
strongest evidence are two randomized trials comparing 
early laparoscopy with conservative management of patients 
with acute abdominal pain. These studies found three to five 
times more patients with appendicitis in the group of patients 
who were randomized to laparoscopy.31,32 Based on epidemio-
logic differences, it has been proposed that nonperforated and 
perforated appendicitis may, in fact, be different diseases.22
Clinical Presentation
The inflammatory process in the appendix presents as pain, which 
initially is of a diffuse visceral type and later becomes more local-
ized as the peritoneal lining gets irritated (Table 30-1).33
Symptoms.  Appendicitis usually starts with periumbilical and 
diffuse pain that eventually localizes to the right lower quad-
rant (sensitivity, 81%; specificity, 53%).34 Although right lower 
quadrant pain is one of the most sensitive signs of appendici-
tis, pain in an atypical location or minimal pain will often be 
the initial presentation. Variations in the anatomic location of 
the appendix may account for the differing presentations of the 
somatic phase of pain.
Appendicitis is also associated with gastrointestinal symp-
toms like nausea (sensitivity, 58%; specificity, 36%), vomiting 
(sensitivity, 51%; specificity, 45%), and anorexia (sensitivity, 
2
1
1244
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 30-1
Signs and symptoms of appendicitis (data from Andersson33)
True Positive  
Likelihood Ratio
95% Confidence  
Interval
True Negative  
Likelihood Ratio
95% Confidence 
Interval
Duration of symptoms (hours)
>9
>12
>24
>48
1.01
0.96
0.65
0.49
0.97–1.05
0.90–1.04
0.47–0.90
0.36–0.67
0.94
1.19
1.47
1.20
0.62–1.42
0.87–1.63
1.14–1.90
1.08–1.34
Fever
1.64
0.89–3.01
0.61
0.49–0.77
Gastrointestinal dysfunction
Anorexia
Nausea
Vomiting
1.27
1.15
1.63
1.14–1.41
1.04–1.36
1.45–1.84
0.59
0.72
0.75
0.45–0.77
0.57–0.91
0.69–0.80
Pain
Pain migration
Pain progression
Direct tenderness
Indirect tenderness
Psoas sign
Rebound
Percussion tenderness
Guarding
Rigidity
2.06
1.39
1.29
2.47
2.31
1.99
2.86
2.48
2.96
1.63–2.60
1.29–1.50
1.06–1.57
1.38–4.43
1.36–3.91
1.61–2.45
1.95–4.21
1.60–3.84
2.43–3.59
0.52
0.46
0.25
0.71
0.85
0.39
0.49
0.57
0.86
0.40–0.69
0.27–0.77
0.12–0.53
0.65–0.77
0.76–0.95
0.32–0.48
0.37–0.63
0.48–0.68
0.72–1.02
Temperature (degrees centigrade)
>37.7
>38.5
1.57
1.87
0.90–2.76
0.66–5.32
0.65
0.89
0.31–1.36
0.71–1.12
White blood cells (109/L)
≥10
≥15
4.20
7.20
2.11–8.35
4.31–12.00
0.20
0.66
0.10–0.41
0.56–0.78
C-reactive protein (mg/L)
>10
>20
1.97
2.39
1.58–2.45
1.67–3.41
0.32
0.47
0.20–0.51
0.28–0.81
Conclusions: Individually, disease history, clinical findings, and laboratory tests are weak. But, when combined, they yield high discriminatory power.
68%; specificity, 36%). Gastrointestinal symptoms that develop 
before the onset of pain suggest a different etiology such as 
gastroenteritis.34 Many patients complain of a sensation of 
obstipation prior to the onset of pain and feel that defeca-
tion will relieve their abdominal pain. Diarrhea may occur in 
association with perforation, especially in children.
Signs.  Early in presentation, vital signs may be minimally 
altered. The body temperature and pulse rate may be normal 
or slightly elevated. Changes of greater magnitude may indi-
cate that a complication has occurred or that another diagnosis 
should be considered.35
Physical findings are determined by the presence of peri-
toneal irritation and are influenced by whether the organ has 
already ruptured when the patient is first examined. Patients 
with appendicitis usually move slowly and prefer to lie supine 
due to the peritoneal irritation. On abdominal palpation, there 
is tenderness with a maximum at or near McBurney’s point 
(Fig. 30-1).5 On deep palpation, one can often feel a muscu-
lar resistance (guarding) in the right iliac fossa, which may be 
more evident when compared to the left side. When the pres-
sure of the examining hand is quickly relieved, the patient feels 
3
a ­sudden pain, the so-called rebound tenderness. Indirect ten-
derness (Rovsing’s sign) and indirect rebound tenderness (i.e., 
pain in the right lower quadrant when the left lower quadrant is 
palpated) are strong indicators of peritoneal irritation. Rebound 
tenderness can be very sharp and uncomfortable for the patient. 
It is therefore recommended to start with testing for indirect 
rebound tenderness and direct percussion tenderness.
Anatomic variations in the position of the inflamed appen-
dix lead to deviations in the usual physical findings. With a ret-
rocecal appendix, the abdominal findings are less striking, and 
tenderness may be most marked in the flank. When the appen-
dix hangs into the pelvis, abdominal findings may be entirely 
absent, and the diagnosis may be missed. Right-sided rectal ten-
derness is said to help in this situation, but the diagnostic value 
is low. Pain with extension of the right leg (psoas sign) indicates 
a focus of irritation in the proximity of the right psoas muscle. 
Similarly, stretching of the obturator internus through internal 
rotation of a flexed thigh (obturator sign) suggests inflammation 
near the muscle.
Laboratory Findings.  Appendicitis is associated with an 
inflammatory response that is strongly related to the severity of 
1245
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
the disease. Laboratory examinations are therefore an impor-
tant part of the diagnosis. Mild leukocytosis is often present in 
patients with acute, uncomplicated appendicitis and is usually 
accompanied by a polymorphonuclear prominence. It is unusual 
for the white blood cell count to be >18,000 cells/mm3 in uncom-
plicated appendicitis. Counts above this level raise the possibility 
of a perforated appendix with or without an abscess. An increased 
C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration is a strong indicator of 
appendicitis, especially for complicated appendicitis.36
White blood cell counts can be low due to lymphopenia 
or septic reaction, but in this situation, the proportion of neutro-
phils is usually very high. Therefore, all inflammatory variables 
should be viewed together. Appendicitis is very unlikely if the 
white blood cell count, proportion of neutrophils, and CRP are 
Figure 30-1.  McBurney’s point (1 = anterior superior iliac spine; 
2 = umbilicus; x = McBurney’s point).
all normal. The inflammatory response in acute appendicitis 
is a dynamic process. Early in the process, the inflammatory 
response can be weak. CRP elevation, in particular, can have up 
to a 12-hour delay. A decreasing inflammatory response may 
indicate spontaneous resolution.
Urinalysis can be useful to rule out the urinary tract as the 
source of infection; however, several white or red blood cells 
can be present from irritation of the ureter or bladder. Bacteri-
uria is generally not seen.
Clinical Scoring Systems.  The clinical diagnosis of appendi-
citis is a subjective estimate of the probability of appendicitis 
based on multiple variables that individually are weak discrimi-
nators; however, used in conjunction, they possess a high pre-
dictive value. This process can be made more objective by the 
use of clinical scoring systems, which are based on variables 
with proven discriminating power and assigned a proper weight. 
The Alvarado score is the most widespread scoring system. It 
is especially useful for ruling out appendicitis and selecting 
patients for further diagnostic workup.37 The Appendici-
tis Inflammatory Response Score resembles the Alvarado 
score but uses more graded variables and includes CRP 
(Table 30-2).38,39 Studies have shown it to perform better than 
the Alvarado score in accurately predicting appendicitis.38,39 
However, clinical scoring systems have not gained widespread 
acceptance in making the diagnosis of appendicitis.
Imaging Studies.  Plain films of the abdomen can show the 
presence of a fecalith and fecal loading in the cecum associ-
ated with appendicitis but are rarely helpful in diagnosing acute 
appendicitis40; however, they may be of benefit in ruling out other 
pathology. A chest radiograph is helpful to rule out referred pain 
from a right lower lobe pneumonic process. If the appendix fills 
on barium enema, appendicitis is unlikely41; however, this test 
is not indicated in the acute setting. Technetium-99m–labeled 
Table 30-2
Scoring systems
Alvarado Score37
Appendicitis Inflammatory Response Score38,39
Findings
Migratory right iliac fossa pain
Anorexia
Nausea or vomiting
Tenderness: right iliac fossa
Rebound tenderness right iliac fossa
Fever ≥36.3°C
Leukocytosis ≥10 × 109 cells/L
Shift to the left of neutrophils
Points
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
Findings
Vomiting
Pain in the right inferior fossa
Rebound tenderness or muscular defense
Light
Medium
Strong
Body temperature ≥38.5°C
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes
70%–84%
≥85%
White blood cell count
10.0–14.9 × 109 cells/L
≥15.0 × 109 cells/L
C-reactive protein concentration
10–49 g/L
≥50 g/L
Points
1
1
1
2
3
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
Score: <3: Low likelihood of appendicitis
4–6: Consider further imaging
≥7: High likelihood of appendicitis
Score: 0–4: Low probability. Outpatient follow-up.
5–8: Indeterminate group. Active observation or diagnostic laparoscopy.
9–12: High probability. Surgical exploration.
3
1246
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
leukocyte scan has been reported for use in diagnosing appendi-
citis with good results but has not gained widespread use due to 
its relative unavailability and impracticality in daily use.42
Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) scan are 
the most commonly used imaging tests in patients with abdomi-
nal pain, particularly in evaluation of possible appendicitis. 
Multiple meta-analyses have been performed comparing the two 
imaging modalities (Table 30-3).43-47 Overall, CT scan is more 
sensitive and specific than ultrasonography in diagnosing 
appendicitis. 
Graded compression ultrasonography is inexpensive, can 
be performed rapidly, does not require a contrast medium, and 
can be used in pregnant patients. Sonographically, the appen-
dix is identified as a blind-ending, nonperistaltic bowel loop 
originating from the cecum. With maximal compression, the 
diameter of the appendix is measured in the anterior-posterior 
direction. Thickening of the appendiceal wall and the presence 
of periappendiceal fluid are highly suggestive of appendicitis. 
Demonstration of an easily compressible appendix measur-
ing <5 mm in diameter excludes the diagnosis of appendicitis. 
The sonographic diagnosis of acute appendicitis has a reported 
sensitivity of 55% to 96% and a specificity of 85% to 98%. 
Ultrasonography is similarly effective in children and pregnant 
women, although its application is limited in late pregnancy. 
Ultrasonography has its limitations, particularly the operator-
dependent nature of results. In the adult population, ultrasonog-
raphy remains limited in its use.
With high-resolution helical CT, the inflamed appendix 
appears dilated (>5 mm), and the wall is thickened. There is 
often evidence of inflammation, which can include periappen-
diceal fat stranding, thickened mesoappendix, periappendiceal 
phlegmon, and free fluid. Fecaliths can be often visualized; 
however, their presence is not pathognomonic of appendicitis. 
CT scanning is also an excellent technique for identifying other 
inflammatory processes masquerading as appendicitis. Several 
CT techniques have been used, including focused and nonfo-
cused CT scans and contrast and noncontrast scans. Surpris-
ingly, all of these techniques have yielded essentially identical 
rates of diagnostic accuracy: 92% to 97% sensitivity, 85% to 
94% specificity, 90% to 98% accuracy, 75% to 95% positive 
predictive value, and 95% to 99% negative predictive value. 
The additional use of rectal contrast does not improve the results 
of CT scanning.
A number of studies have documented improvement in 
diagnostic accuracy with the liberal use of CT scanning in the 
workup of suspected appendicitis. CT lowered the rate of nega-
tive appendectomies from 19% to 12% in one study48 and the 
incidence of negative appendectomies in women from 24% to 
5% in another study.49 Use of CT altered the care of 24% of 
patients studied and provided an alternative diagnosis in half of 
the patients with normal appendices on CT scan.
Despite the potential usefulness of CT, there are signifi-
cant disadvantages. CT scanning is expensive, exposes the 
patient to significant radiation, and has limited use during preg-
nancy. Allergy to iodine or contrast limits the administration of 
contrast agents in some patients, and others cannot tolerate the 
oral ingestion of luminal dye.
The role of CT scanning in patients who present with right 
lower quadrant pain is unclear. One rationale is universal CT 
scanning. There is, however, an argument that indiscriminate 
diagnostic imaging can increase the detection of clinically non-
significant appendicitis that would resolve without treatment. 
Alternatively, selective CT scanning based on the likelihood of 
appendicitis takes advantage of the clinical skills of the surgeon 
and, when indicated, adds the expertise of the radiologist.
Despite the increased use of ultrasonography and CT, 
the rate of misdiagnosis of appendicitis has remained constant 
(15%). The percentage of misdiagnosed cases of appendici-
tis is significantly higher among women than men (22% vs. 
9.3%).50,51 The negative appendectomy rate is highest in women 
of reproductive age.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of acute appendicitis is essentially the 
diagnosis of acute abdomen. An identical clinical picture can 
result from a wide variety of acute processes within the peri-
toneal cavity that produce the same physiologic alterations as 
acute appendicitis.
The accuracy of preoperative diagnosis should be higher 
than 85%. If it is consistently less, it is likely that unnecessary 
operations are being performed and a more rigorous preopera-
tive differential diagnosis is needed.
The most common findings in the case of an erroneous 
preoperative diagnosis of appendicitis—together accounting 
for more than 75% of cases—are, in descending order of fre-
quency, acute mesenteric adenitis, no organic pathologic condi-
tion, acute pelvic inflammatory disease, twisted ovarian cyst or 
ruptured graafian follicle, and acute gastroenteritis.
The differential diagnosis of acute appendicitis depends on 
four major factors: the anatomic location of the inflamed appen-
dix; the stage of the process (uncomplicated or complicated); 
the patient’s age; and the patient’s gender.52-56
Pediatric Patient.  Acute mesenteric adenitis is the disease 
most often confused with acute appendicitis in children. Almost 
invariably, an upper respiratory tract infection is present or has 
recently subsided. The pain usually is diffuse, and tenderness 
is not as sharply localized as in appendicitis. Voluntary guard-
ing is sometimes present, but true rigidity is rare. Generalized 
lymphadenopathy may be noted. Laboratory procedures are of 
little help in arriving at the correct diagnosis, although a rela-
tive lymphocytosis, when present, suggests mesenteric adenitis. 
Observation for several hours is appropriate if the diagnosis of 
mesenteric adenitis is suspected, as it is a self-limited disease.
Elderly Patient.  Diverticulitis or perforating carcinoma of 
the cecum or of a portion of the sigmoid that overlies the right 
lower abdomen may be impossible to distinguish from appendi-
citis. These entities should be considered, particularly in older 
patients. CT scanning is often helpful in making a diagnosis in 
older patients with right lower quadrant pain and atypical clini-
cal presentations. In patients successfully managed conserva-
tively, interval surveillance of the colon (colonoscopy or barium 
enema) may be warranted.
Female Patient.  Diseases of the female internal reproductive 
organs that may erroneously be diagnosed as appendicitis are, 
in approximate descending order of frequency, pelvic inflam-
matory disease, ruptured graafian follicle, twisted ovarian cyst 
or tumor, endometriosis, and ruptured ectopic pregnancy. As a 
result, the rate of misdiagnosis remains higher among female 
patients.
In pelvic inflammatory disease, the infection is usually 
bilateral but, if confined to the right tube, may mimic acute 
appendicitis. Nausea and vomiting are present in patients with 
appendicitis but in only approximately 50% of those with pelvic 
4
1247
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
Table 30-3
Meta-analyses comparing CT scan and US outcomes
Author
Summary
Terasawa
Weston
Doria
Al-Khayal
Van Randen
Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
No. of studies
22
21
57
25
6
No. of patients CT
US
Total
1172
1516
2688
NR
NR
5039
NR
NR
13697
NR
NR
13046
NR
NR
671
Sensitivity
CT
US
94% (CI: 91%–95%)
86% (CI: 83%–88%)
97% (CI: 95%–98%)
87% (CI: 85%–89%)
94% (CI: 92%–97%)
88% (CI: 86%–90%)
93% (CI: 92%–95%)
84% (CI: 82%–85%) 
91% (CI: 
84%–95%)
78% (CI: 
67%–86%)
CT more sensitive than US in five of 
five meta-analyses
Specificity
CT
US
95% (CI: 93%–96%)
81% (CI: 78%–84%)
95% (CI: 93%–96%)
93% (CI: 92%–94%)
94% (CI: 94%–96%)
93% (CI: 90%–96%)
93 (CI: 92%–94%)
96 (CI: 95%–96%)
90% (CI: 
85%–94%)
83% (CI: 
76%–88%)
CT more specific than US in four of 
five meta-analyses
Positive 
predictive 
value
CT
US
NR
NR
94% (CI: 92%–95%)
89% (CI: 87%–90%)
NR
NR
90% (CI: 89%–92%)
90% (CI: 89%–91%)
NR
NR
CT has superior positive predictive 
value in one of two meta-analyses
Negative 
predictive 
value
CT
US
NR
NR
97% (CI: 96%–98%)
92% (CI:91%–93%)
NR
NR
96% (CI: 95%–97%)
93% (CI: 92%–94%)
NR
NR
CT has superior negative predictive 
value in both ­ 
meta-analyses
Accuracy
CT
US
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
94% (CI: 93%–94%)
92% (CI: 92%–96%)
NR
NR
CT is more accurate in the one study 
reporting results
CI = confidence interval; CT = computed tomography; NR = not reported; US = ultrasonography.
1248
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
inflammatory disease. Pain and tenderness are usually lower, 
and motion of the cervix is exquisitely painful. Intracellular dip-
lococci may be demonstrable on smear of the purulent vaginal 
discharge. The ratio of cases of appendicitis to cases of pelvic 
inflammatory disease is low in females in the early phase of the 
menstrual cycle and high during the luteal phase. The careful 
clinical use of these features has reduced the incidence of nega-
tive findings on laparoscopy in young women to 15%.
Ovulation commonly results in the spillage of sufficient 
amounts of blood and follicular fluid to produce brief, mild 
lower abdominal pain. If the amount of fluid is unusually copi-
ous and is from the right ovary, appendicitis may be simulated. 
Pain and tenderness may be rather diffuse, and leukocytosis and 
fever minimal or absent. Because this pain occurs at the mid-
point of the menstrual cycle, it is often called mittelschmerz.
Serous cysts of the ovary are common and generally remain 
asymptomatic. When right-sided cysts rupture or undergo tor-
sion, the manifestations are similar to those of appendicitis. 
Patients develop right lower quadrant pain, tenderness, rebound, 
fever, and leukocytosis. Both transvaginal ultrasonography and 
CT scanning can be diagnostic.
Torsion requires emergent operative treatment. If the tor-
sion is complete or longstanding, the pedicle undergoes throm-
bosis, and the ovary and tube become gangrenous and require 
resection. However, simple detorsion, fenestration of the cyst, 
and fixation of the ovary as a primary intervention, followed by 
a laparoscopy a few days later, can be recommended because 
it is often difficult to preoperatively determine the viability of 
the ovary.
Blastocysts may implant in the fallopian tube (usually the 
ampullary portion) and in the ovary. Rupture of right tubal or 
ovarian pregnancies can mimic appendicitis. Patients may give 
a history of abnormal menses, either missing one or two periods 
or noting only slight vaginal bleeding. Unfortunately, patients 
do not always realize they are pregnant. The development of 
right lower quadrant or pelvic pain may be the first symptom. 
The diagnosis of ruptured ectopic pregnancy should be rela-
tively easy. The presence of a pelvic mass and elevated levels 
of human chorionic gonadotropin are characteristic. Although 
the leukocyte count rises slightly, the hematocrit level falls as 
a consequence of the intra-abdominal hemorrhage. Vaginal 
examination reveals cervical motion and adnexal tenderness, 
and a more definitive diagnosis can be established by culdocen-
tesis. The presence of blood and particularly decidual tissue is 
pathognomonic. The treatment of ruptured ectopic pregnancy is 
emergency surgery.
Immunosuppressed Patient.  The incidence of acute appen-
dicitis in patients infected with human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) is reported to be 0.5%. This is higher than the 
0.1% to 0.2% incidence reported for the general population.57 
The presentation of acute appendicitis in HIV-infected patients 
is similar to that in noninfected patients. The majority of HIV-
infected patients with appendicitis have fever, periumbilical 
pain radiating to the right lower quadrant (91%), right lower 
quadrant tenderness (91%), and rebound tenderness (74%). 
HIV-infected patients do not manifest an absolute leukocyto-
sis; however, if a baseline leukocyte count is available, nearly 
all HIV-infected patients with appendicitis demonstrate a rela-
tive leukocytosis.57
The risk of appendiceal rupture appears to be increased in 
HIV-infected patients. In one large series of HIV-infected patients 
who underwent appendectomy for presumed appendicitis, 43% of 
patients were found to have perforated appendicitis at laparot-
omy.58 The increased risk of appendiceal rupture may be related 
to the delay in presentation seen in this patient population.57,58 A 
low CD4 count is also associated with an increased incidence of 
appendiceal rupture.57
The differential diagnosis of right lower quadrant pain is 
expanded in HIV-infected patients compared with the general 
population. In addition to the conditions discussed elsewhere 
in this chapter, opportunistic infections should be considered as 
a possible cause of right lower quadrant pain.57,58 Neutropenic 
enterocolitis (typhlitis) should also be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of right lower quadrant pain in HIV-infected patients.57,58
Initial Management
Uncomplicated Appendicitis
Operative versus Nonoperative Management of Uncompli-
cated Appendicitis  In patients with uncomplicated appendici-
tis, surgical treatment has been the standard of treatment since 
McBurney reported his experiences. The concept of nonopera-
tive treatment for uncomplicated appendicitis developed from 
two lines of observations. First, for patients in an environment 
where surgical treatment is not available (e.g., submarines, 
expeditions in remote areas), treatment with antibiotics alone 
was noted to be effective. Second, many patients with signs 
and symptoms consistent with appendicitis who did not pursue 
medical treatment would occasionally have spontaneous resolu-
tion of their illness.
A handful of observational studies and controlled trials 
have reported the outcomes of nonoperative versus opera-
tive treatment of presumed uncomplicated appendicitis 
(Table 30-4).59-64 Overall, there is a reported 9% short-term 
(<30 days) failure rate with nonoperative management of 
appendicitis (13% if evaluated per protocol). In patients in 
whom nonoperative treatment fails, nearly half of patients have 
complicated (perforated or gangrenous) appendicitis. After 1 
month, about 1% of patients in the trials underwent an interval 
appendectomy, and 13% of patients who initially were success-
fully treated with nonoperative measures developed recurrent 
appendicitis, with an 18% rate of complicated appendicitis. 
Follow-up was not longer than 1 year in any study. In addition, 
one-third of patients declined or dropped out from nonoperative 
management of appendicitis.
In comparison, operative appendectomy demonstrated a 
relatively low dropout rate (2%), lower proportion of compli-
cated appendicitis (25%), small proportion of a normal appendix 
(5%), and low rates of superficial surgical site infection (3.7%) 
and intra-abdominal abscess (1.3%).
The results in these studies must viewed with caution due 
to unclear selection of patients, incomplete diagnostic workup 
in the nonoperated patients, unclear gold standard for the 
operated patients, and high rates of crossover between the 
treatment arms. The consequences in terms of use of hospital 
beds, length of hospital stay, morbidity of delayed surgical treat-
ment after failed nonsurgical treatment, delayed diagnosis for 
patients with an underlying cancer in the appendix or cecum, 
and risk of increased antibiotic resistance need to be further 
investigated. Thus, operative treatment of presumed uncom-
plicated appendicitis still remains the standard of care. Certain 
subgroups with uncomplicated appendicitis may do well with 
nonoperative therapy. Patients pursuing nonoperative manage-
ment should be carefully counseled regarding the risks of treat-
ment failure and recurrent appendicitis.
5
1249
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
Table 30-4
Outcomes associated with nonoperative and operative management of acute appendicitis
Nonoperative Outcomes
Author
Study Type
No. 
Male
Age
Dropout 
after Ran-
domization
Failed 
Therapy in 
0–30 Days
Complicated 
Appendicitis
Interval 
Appendectomy
Failed Therapy 
in >30 Days
Complicated 
Appendicitis
Follow-Up Dura-
tion in Months 
(range)
Vons
PRCT
120a
75
21±9b
3
14
9
NR
30
3
12
Hansson
PRCT
202
103
38±1c
96
9
6/11d
NR
11
4/12d
12
Turhan
PCT
107
65
21c
5
14
0
NR
8
0
NR
Liu
RT
19
8
34±1e
NA
0
0
5
6
1
NR
Styrud
PT
128
128
18–50
79/104f
15
7
NR
16
5
4 (1–10)
Eriksson
PRCT
20
14
28 (18–53)
5g
1
1
NR
7
1
7 (3–12)
Overall
596
393 (66%)
23
188 (33%)
53 (8.9%)
23 (42%)
5 (0.8%)
78 (13%)
14 (17.7%)
<1 year
Operative Outcomes
Author
Study Type No.
Male
Age
Dropout after  
Randomization
Complicated 
Appendicitis
Normal Appendix
SSI, Superficial
Intra-abdominal 
Abscess
Vons
PRCT
120
70
34±12b
1
21
NR
1
NR
Hansson
PRCT
167
92
38±1c
13
92/250f
30/250f
7
5
Turhan
PCT
183
125
26±1
NR
34
NR
6
2
Liu
RT
151
104
34±1e
NR
47
5
9
0
Styrud
PT
124
124
18-50
NR
7
4
NR
NR
Eriksson
PRCT
20
13
35 (19–85)
NR
9
3
1
0
Overall
765
528 (69%)
33
14 (1.8%)
210 (24.8%)
42 (5.0%)
24 (3.7%)
7 (1.3%)
aAlthough 123 patients were randomized to nonoperative management and 3 patients dropped out, only 120 patients were included in the intent-to-treat analysis.
bStandard deviation.
cStandard error of the mean.
dStudy only reported pathology results based on the per-protocol group and not the intent-to-treat group.
eStudy did not report the meaning of these values.
fStudy did not report the intent-to-treat values; instead, at one institution, 79 of 104 patients declined to be included in the trial.
gThese patients declined to be included in the study and opted for surgical management.
NA = not applicable; NR = not reported; PCT = prospective controlled trial; PRCT = prospective randomized controlled trial; RT = retrospective trial; SSI = surgical site infection.
1250
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Urgent versus Emergent Appendectomy for Uncomplicated 
Appendicitis  Traditionally, appendicitis has been considered a 
surgical emergency. Once diagnosed, a patient was emergently 
taken to the operating room for surgical treatment. However, 
delays in diagnosis, lack of access to available operating suites, 
and nonoperative management of appendicitis have challenged 
the notion that uncomplicated appendicitis is a surgical emer-
gency.
Three retrospective studies have evaluated the role of 
emergent or urgent surgery for uncomplicated appendicitis; 
the emergent group had a time from presentation to the operat-
ing room of <12 hours, whereas the urgent group had a time 
from presentation to the operating room of 12 to 24 hours 
(Table 30-5).65-67 There was no statistically significant increase 
in the number of complicated appendicitis cases in the urgent 
group when compared to the emergent group. Similarly, rates 
of surgical site infection, intra-abdominal abscesses, conversion 
to an open procedure, or operative time showed no difference 
between the two groups. While length of stay was longer for 
the urgent group, it was not statistically or clinically different 
from the emergent group. Important caveats in consideration 
of urgent as opposed to emergent surgical care include the 
patient’s clinical examination, time of presentation from onset 
of symptoms, and duration of “delay” in surgery. Patients with 
clinical signs of perforation, patients with delayed presentation 
of greater than 48 hours from onset of symptoms, and patients 
whose definitive therapy may be delayed for more than 12 hours 
were beyond the scope of these studies.
Emergent versus urgent operation for uncomplicated 
appendicitis is dependent on each institution and surgeon. Insti-
tutions without readily available operating rooms and staff may 
consider performing appendectomy in an urgent fashion as 
opposed to emergently.
Complicated Appendicitis.  Complicated appendicitis typi-
cally refers to perforated appendicitis commonly associated 
with an abscess or phlegmon. The yearly incidence rate of 
perforated appendicitis is about 2 per 10,000 persons and has 
remarkable little variance over time, geographic region, and 
age.51,68,69 The proportion of perforated appendicitis, commonly 
around 25%, is often used as an indicator of quality of care. 
Differences in this proportion are almost entirely related to dif-
ferences in the incidence of nonperforated appendicitis. A low 
proportion of perforations may therefore be the consequence 
of a higher rate of detection and treatment of early or resolving 
appendicitis.
Children less than 5 years of age and patients more than 
65 years of age have the highest rates of perforation (45% and 
51%, respectively). The proportion of perforation increases 
with increasing duration of symptoms. There is, however, 
no association of in-hospital delay with perforation. This suggests 
that most perforations occur early, before the patient arrives to 
hospital. It has also been proposed that the increasing propor-
tion of perforations with time is explained by selection due to 
spontaneous resolution of noncomplicated appendicitis.
Perforated appendicitis has been suggested to increase the 
risk of female infertility due to impaired tubal function, but this 
has not been shown in epidemiologic studies.70
Rupture should be suspected in the presence of generalized 
peritonitis and a strong inflammatory response. In many cases, 
rupture is contained and patients display localized peritonitis. 
In 2% to 6% of cases, a palpable mass is detected on physical 
examination. This could represent a phlegmon, which consists 
Table 30-5
Emergent versus urgent surgery
Author
Abou-Nukta
Stahlfeld
Ingraham
Summary
Year
2006
2007
2010
No. of patients
Emergent
Urgent
233
76
53
18
24,647
4934
Time from presentation to 
OR (hours)
Emergent
Urgent
6.7±2.7
16.7±3.6
3.2±2.4
15.8±5.5
1.5
8.5
% Complicated
Emergent
Urgent
32%
37%
NR
NR
No difference in complicated appendicitis
Conversion to open, %
Emergent
Urgent
NR
15%
7%
NR
No difference in conversion rates
Operative duration 
(minutes)
Emergent
Urgent
81±31
82±31
54
56
51
50
No difference in operative duration
SSI, %
Emergent
Urgent
1%
1%
7.5%
0%
NR
One study demonstrates increased infections 
with emergent operation
Intra-abdominal abcess, %
Emergent
Urgent
2%
1%
NR
NR
No difference in intra-abdominal abscess 
rates
Length of stay (days)
Emergent
Urgent
2.5±2.3
2.9±1.8
2.7
2.1
1.8
1.8
No significant difference in length of stay
NR = not reported; OR = operating room; SSI = surgical site infection.
6
1251
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
of matted loops of bowel adherent to the adjacent inflamed 
appendix or a periappendiceal abscess. Patients who present 
with a mass have experienced symptoms for a longer dura-
tion, usually 5 to 7 days. Distinguishing acute, uncomplicated 
appendicitis from acute appendicitis with perforation based on 
clinical findings is often difficult, but it is important to make 
the distinction because the treatments may differ. CT scan may 
be beneficial in establishing a diagnosis and guiding therapy.
Operative versus Nonoperative Management of Complicated 
Appendicitis  Patients who present with signs of sepsis and gen-
eralized peritonitis should be taken to the operating room imme-
diately with concurrent resuscitation. The surgical approach is 
based on the surgeon’s level of comfort; however, open appen-
dectomy through a lower midline incision may be necessary to 
treat these complicated cases.
In patients with complicated appendicits and a contained 
abscess or phlegmon but limited peritonitis (focal right lower 
quadrant pain), the treatment options become more complicated. 
Often, these patients will require a challenging procedure with 
a high risk for development of a postoperative intra-abdominal 
abscess. Options include operative management versus conser-
vative management (antibiotics, bowel rest, fluids, and possible 
percutaneous drainage).
There have been no prospective randomized controlled 
studies comparing operative versus conservative management of 
complicated appendicitis in adults; all studies have been retro-
spective cohort studies. Two meta-analyses have been performed. 
In Andersson and Petzold’s 2007 analysis of 61 studies evaluating 
this issue, they noted that initial nonoperative management had 
superior outcomes.70 Nonoperative management included intra-
venous fluids, minimizing gastrointestinal stimulation, parenteral 
antibiotics, and percutaneous drainage where deemed appropri-
ate. The morbidity of immediate operative treatment was 36.5%, 
whereas the morbidity of conservative management was 11%. Of 
patients undergoing conservative treatment, 7.6% failed conser-
vative treatment and underwent operative management. This sub-
group had an overall complication rate of 13.5%. The recurrence 
rate was 7.4%, which does not necessitate interval appendectomy. 
The authors concluded that conservative treatment was favored 
over early operation in complicated appendicitis.30
Simillis and colleagues performed a meta-analysis of 17 
studies.71 They noted that conservative treatment was associ-
ated with fewer overall complications (odds ratio, 0.24; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 0.13 to 0.44), intra-abdom-
inal abscesses (odds ratio, 0.19; 95% CI, 0.07 to 0.58), bowel 
obstructions (odds ratio, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.17 to 0.71), and reop-
erations (odds ratio, 0.17; 95% CI, 0.04 to 0.75).71 The authors 
concluded that conservative treatment was favored over early 
operation in complicated appendicitis.
In the pediatric literature, there have been two prospec-
tive randomized controlled trials72,73 demonstrating that early 
operative intervention had equivalent or superior outcomes to 
conservative management, but these studies included interval 
appendectomy for all patients in their calculations. St. Peter 
and colleagues72 demonstrated that 20% of patients failed con-
servative treatment. Early surgical intervention had equivalent 
results to interval appendectomy. Alternatively, Blakely and 
colleagues73 noted that interval appendectomy, versus early 
appendectomy, had a higher incidence of adverse events (50% 
vs. 30%, P = .003), intra-abdominal abscesses (37% vs. 19%, 
P = .02), small bowel obstruction (10.4% vs. 0%, P = .01), and 
readmissions (31% vs. 8%, P = .06). In addition, Blakely and 
colleagues noted that 9% of the group treated conservatively 
developed recurrent appendicitis. The authors concluded that 
immediate surgical treatment was superior to conservative treat-
ment with interval appendectomy.
Interval Appendectomy Following Nonoperative Manage-
ment of Complicated Appendicitis  Interval appendectomy is 
defined as performing an appendectomy following initial suc-
cessful nonoperative management in patients with no further 
symptoms. The major argument against interval appendectomy 
is that many patients treated conservatively never develop mani-
festations of appendicitis, and those who do generally can be 
treated without additional morbidity. The major argument for 
interval appendectomy is to prevent future attacks of appendici-
tis or to identify other disease, such as appendiceal malignancy.
There has only been one small prospective randomized 
controlled trial (n = 40) investigating this subject. The litera-
ture is largely populated with small case series and retrospective 
cohort studies; there is no meta-analysis evaluating the subject 
(Table 30-6).74-81 Of the 1434 patients who had presumed com-
plicated appendicitis and were successfully treated conserva-
tively, 8.8% developed recurrent appendicitis with a median 
follow-up of 35 months. The incidence of complicated appen-
dicitis following recurrence was low (2.4%). Malignancy was 
noted in 1.3% of cases where pathology was reported. Many 
of the patients were excluded from these studies due to persis-
tent symptoms, persistent infections, or note of malignancy on 
screening colonoscopy.
Alternatively, of the 344 patients who had presumed com-
plicated appendicitis, were successfully treated conservatively, 
and subsequently underwent interval appendectomy, surgical 
complications occurred in 9.4% of the patients. Most patients 
underwent interval appendectomy 2 to 4 months after their acute 
presentation. Although operative and pathologic details were 
not uniformly reported in these patients, many continued to 
have evidence of appendicitis or abscess at the time of interval 
appendectomy; 3.6% of patients had malignancy in cases where 
pathology was reported.
The role of interval appendectomy following successful 
management of conservative treatment of complicated appen-
dicitis is unclear. Close clinical follow-up, a complete history 
searching for persistent symptoms, and screening colonoscopy 
(when age appropriate) should all be used to help guide the dis-
cussion with the patient on the role of interval appendectomy fol-
lowing conservative management of complicated appendicitis.
OPERATIVE INTERVENTIONS FOR THE APPENDIX
Open Appendectomy
Typically performed with a patient under general anesthesia, the 
patient is placed in supine position. The entire abdomen should 
be prepped and draped in case a larger incision is needed. For 
early nonperforated appendicitis, a right lower quadrant inci-
sion at McBurney’s point (one-third of the distance from the 
anterior superior iliac spine to the umbilicus) is commonly used. 
A McBurney (oblique) or Rocky-Davis (transverse) right lower 
quadrant muscle splitting incision is made. If perforated appen-
dicitis is suspected or the diagnosis is in doubt, a lower midline 
laparotomy can be considered. Although it has been reported 
that the position of the base of the appendix can change with 
pregnancy, prospective studies have demonstrated that preg-
nancy does not change the proportion of patients with the appen-
diceal base within 2 cm of McBurney’s point.82
7
1252
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Following entry into the abdomen, the patient should be 
placed in slight Trendelenburg position with rotation of the bed 
to the patient’s left. If the appendix is not easily identified, the 
cecum should be located. Tracing the taenia libera (anterior tae-
nia), the most visible of the three taeniae coli, distally, the base 
of the appendix can be identified.
The appendix will often have attachments to the lateral 
wall or pelvis that can be dissected free. Dividing the mesen-
tery of the appendix first will often allow improved exposure of 
the base of the appendix. The appendiceal stump can be man-
aged by simple ligation or by ligation and inversion. As long 
as the stump is clearly visible and the base of the cecum is not 
involved with the inflammatory process, the stump can be safely 
ligated. Obliteration of the mucosa with electrocautery with the 
intention to obviate the development of a mucocele is recom-
mended by some surgeons; however, no data have evaluated the 
risk or benefit of this surgical maneuver. Inversion of the stump 
with plication of the cecum has also been described. Placement 
of surgical drains for both uncomplicated83 and complicated 
appendicitis,84-87 practiced by many surgeons, has not been sup-
ported in clinical trials. Pus in the abdomen should be aspirated, 
but irrigation in complicated appendicitis is not recommended.88 
The skin can also be closed primarily in patients with perforated 
appendicitis.
If appendicitis is not found, a methodical search must be 
made for an alternative diagnosis. The cecum and mesentery 
should be inspected. The small bowel should be evaluated in a 
retrograde fashion beginning at the ileocecal valve. Concerns 
for Crohn’s disease or Meckel’s diverticulum should be of 
priority. In female patients, the reproductive organs should be 
closely inspected. If purulent or bilious fluid is encountered, it 
is imperative that the source be identified. For example, Val-
entino’s appendicitis, or a perforated duodenal ulcer presenting 
as appendicitis, should be excluded in such cases. A medial 
extension of the incision (Fowler-Weir) or superior extension 
of the lateral incision is appropriate if further evaluation of the 
lower abdomen or right colon is warranted. Selective laparos-
copy through a right lower quadrant incision has also been 
described.89 If upper abdominal pathology is encountered, a 
midline incision should be made.
Laparoscopic Appendectomy
The first reported laparoscopic appendectomy was performed 
in 1983 by Semm; however, the laparoscopic approach did 
Table 30-6 
Interval appendectomy following nonoperative management of complicated appendicitis
No Interval Appendectomy
Author
Year
Study 
Type
No.
Recurrent 
Appendicitis Appendectomy Complicated
Complications
Malignancy
Follow-Up 
Duration 
(months)
Youssef
2010
PCT
51
9
7
1
1
NR
24
Tekin
2008
CS
89
15
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
Lai
2006
RT
94
24
20
NR
NR
2
33
Kaminski
2005
CS
1012
39
39
NR
NR
NR
48
Kumar
2004
PRCT
20
2
2
NR
NR
1
34
Eryilmaz
2004
CS
25
3
3
NR
NR
NR
35
Dixon
2003
RT
116
32
22
0
NR
0
NR
Adalla
1996
CS
27
2
2
NR
NR
NR
NR
Overall
1434
126 (8.8%)
95 (7.1%)
1 (2.4%)
1 (11%)
3 (1.3%)
35
Interval Appendectomy
Author
Year
Study Type
No. 
Complications
Malignancy
Time of Surgery (months)
Lugo
2010
PT
46
3
2
2
Youssef
2010
PCT
10
1
NR
3
Lai
2006
RT
70
NR
2
2
Kumar
2004
PRCT
20
0
1
3
Dixon
2004
RCT
114
NR
NR
2
Friedell
2000
CS
5
0
1
2
Yamini
1998
CS
41
6
1
2
Eriksson
1998
CS
38
5
1
4
Overall
344
15 (9.4%)
8 (3.6%)
3
CS = case series; NR = not reported; PCT = prospective controlled trial; PRCT = prospective randomized controlled trial; RT = retrospective trial.
1253
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
not come into widespread use until much later, following the 
success of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. This may be due to 
the small incision already commonly used with open appen-
dectomy.
Laparoscopic appendectomy is performed under general 
anesthesia. An oro- or nasogastric tube and urinary catheter are 
placed. The patient should be placed supine with his or her left 
arm tucked and securely strapped to the operating table. Both 
surgeon and assistant should be standing on the patient’s left 
facing the appendix. The laparoscopic screens should be posi-
tioned on the patient’s right or at the foot of the bed. Standard 
laparoscopic appendectomy typically uses three ports. Typi-
cally, a 10- or 12-mm port is placed at the umbilicus, whereas 
two 5-mm ports are placed suprapubic and in the left lower 
quadrant. The patient should be placed in Trendelenburg and 
tilted to the left (Fig. 30-2).
The appendix should be identified similarly as in open sur-
gery by tracking the taenia libera/coli to the appendiceal base. 
Through the suprapubic port, the appendix should be grasped 
securely and elevated to the 10 o’clock position. An “appendi-
ceal critical view” should be obtained where the taenia libera 
is at the 3 o’clock position, the terminal ileum at the 6 o’clock 
position, and the retracted appendix at the 10 o’clock posi-
tion to allow proper identification of the base of the appendix 
(Fig. 30-3).90 Through the infraumbilical port, the mesentery 
should be gently dissected from the base of the appendix and a 
window created. Typically the base of the appendix is stapled, 
followed by stapling of the mesentery. Alternatively, the mesen-
tery may be divided by an energy device or clipped and the base 
of the appendix secured with an Endoloop. The stump should 
be carefully examined to ensure hemostasis, complete transec-
tion, and ensure that no stump is left behind. The appendix is 
removed through the infraumbilical trocar in a retrieval bag.
Laparoscopic versus Open Appendectomy
There have been multiple prospective, randomized controlled 
trials comparing laparoscopic and open appendectomy out-
comes. A number of meta-analyses have been performed evalu-
ating the cumulative outcomes (Table 30-7).91-99
Laparoscopic appendectomy is associated with fewer inci-
sional surgical site infections compared to open appendectomy. 
However, laparoscopic appendectomy may be associated with 
increased risk of intra-abdominal abscess compared to open 
appendectomy. There is less pain, shorter length of stay, and 
Figure 30-2.  Operating room setup.
Surgeon
Assistant
Anesthesiologist
1254
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
quicker return to normal activity with laparoscopic appendec-
tomy when compared to open appendectomy. Laparoscopic 
appendectomy is associated with increased operative duration 
and increased operating rooms costs; however, overall costs are 
likely similar when compared to open appendectomy. Patients 
tend to have improved satisfaction scores with laparoscopic 
appendectomy. Many of the differences, while statistically sig-
nificant, have nominal clinical difference, such as length of stay 
where differences are measured in hours.91-99
In addition, laparoscopic appendectomy may provide a 
benefit when the diagnosis is in question, such as in female 
patients of reproductive age, older patients in whom malignancy 
is suspected, and morbidly obese patients for whom larger open 
appendectomy incisions may be required.
Laparoscopic Single-Incision Appendectomy
There has been growing interest in laparoscopic single-incision 
appendectomy. Instead of two or three incisions, a single inci-
sion is made, typically periumbilical. The first published lapa-
roscopic-assisted, single-incision appendectomy was reported 
by Inoue in 1994, where the appendix was identified laparo-
scopically and grasped and pulled through the laparoscopic 
incision and the appendectomy completed in an open manner. 
The first reports of a pure laparoscopic single-incision appen-
dectomy were described in 2009 by multiple surgical groups. 
By this time, industry had designed multiple options for true 
single-port access as opposed to makeshift single-incision 
access.
With laparoscopic single-incision appendectomy, the 
patient is prepared similarly to laparoscopic appendectomy. 
Under general anesthesia, the patient is secured in a supine posi-
tion with the left arm tucked. The surgeon and assistant stand on 
the left side facing the appendix and the screen. When perform-
ing laparoscopic single-incision appendectomy, the surgeon’s 
hands perform the opposite function that they would normally 
in standard laparoscopic surgery. The surgeon’s right hand will 
grasp the appendix and retract it to the right lower quadrant at 
the 10 o’clock position.90 The surgeon’s left hand will dissect 
the mesenteric window and, upon identifying the appendiceal 
critical view, staple across the base of the appendix and mesen-
tery. If the base of the appendix cannot be definitively identified 
or the appendiceal critical view cannot be obtained, additional 
ports can be placed to perform a “plus one” or even standard 
laparoscopic appendectomy. The appendix may be placed in a 
retrieval bag or removed through the single incision.
There have been multiple small trials evaluating the effi-
cacy of laparoscopic single-incision appendectomy compared 
to standard appendectomy; however, there has only been one 
prospective randomized study (in the pediatric population) and 
one meta-analysis. Gill and colleagues, in 2012, reviewed nine 
studies for a total of 275 laparoscopic single-incision appen-
dectomies and 348 standard laparoscopic appendectomy proce-
dures. In this meta-analysis, there was no difference in operative 
time (57 ± 10 vs. 55 ± 13 minutes), complications (11% vs. 
8.3%), incisional surgical site infections (5.6% vs. 4.9%), intra-
abdominal abscesses (1.8% vs. 1.4%), or length of stay (3 ± 2 
vs. 4 ± 1 days). Cases were converted to open or additional ports 
were placed in 4% of laparoscopic single-incision appendecto-
mies and 0.9% of standard laparoscopic procedures. There was 
no difference in return to bowel function, postoperative pain, 
or return to normal activity. There was no difference in overall 
cost. The incidence of hernia formation following the laparo-
scopic single-incision appendectomy procedure compared to 
standard laparoscopy has not been reported.100
Although further study is needed, it appears that in lapa-
roscopic appendectomy, laparoscopic single-incision appendec-
tomy conveys no discernible advantage or disadvantage with 
short-term outcomes. Late outcomes and patient quality-
of-life outcomes remain to be investigated.
Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic 
Surgery
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) is a 
new surgical procedure using flexible endoscopes in the abdom-
inal cavity. In this procedure, access is gained by way of organs 
that are reached through a natural, already-existing external 
orifice. The hoped-for advantages associated with this method 
include the reduction of postoperative wound pain, shorter con-
valescence, avoidance of wound infection and abdominal wall 
hernias, and the absence of scars.
One hundred thirteen NOTES appendectomies in human 
patients have been reported in the medical literature. Eighty-
seven were performed transvaginally, and 26 were performed 
transgastrically.101 The vast majority of these cases are hybrid 
procedures (NOTES plus laparoscopic assist port) with only 
14 cases of pure NOTES appendectomies (three transvaginal 
Figure 30-3.  A and B. Appendiceal critical view.
8
1255
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
Table 30-7
Meta-analysis comparing laparoscopic versus open appendectomy outcomes
Author
Summary
Wei
Lui
Li
Markides
Bennet
Temple
Garbutt
Sauerland
Golub
Year
2011
2010
2010
2010
2007
1999
1999
1998
1998
No. of studies
25
16
44
12
34
8
11
28
16
No. of patients
LA
OA
Total
2220
2474
4694
1587
1674
3261
2609
2683
5292
NR
NR
2064
2350
4414
730
653
1383
1375
2877
887
795
1682
SSI
LA (%)
OA (%)
Odds Ratio∗
95% CI
Pooled effect
0.30–0.56
0.51
0.36–0.73
3.8
8.4
0.45
0.34–0.59
0.43
0.34–0.55
0.52
0.39–0.70
0.40
0.24–0.59
–5.6 to –0.8
–3.2
06.1 to –2.3
–4.2
2.8
7.0
0.19–0.47
9/9 favor LA
3/9 not SS
IAA
LA (%)
OA (%)
Odds Ratio∗
95% CI
Pooled effect
0.93–2.14
NR
1.56
1.01–2.43
1.24
0.84–1.84
2.29
1.48–3.53
1.94
0.98–5.58
–0.8 to 2.4
0.8
–0.4 to 2.3
0.52
2.0
0.94
0.88–6.64
3/8 LA = OA
7/8 not SS
Pain
Difference∗
–0.52
NR
–0.7
NR
–0.8
NR
–1.19
–.05
NR
6/6 favor LA
1 not SS
LOS
LA (days)
OA (days)
Differencea
–0.68
–0.82
1.2
1.8
–0.60
1.9
3.0
–1.10
1.4
2.0
–0.62
–0.16
–0.58
–15.0
3.2
3.8
9/9 favor LA
3/9 not SS
Return activity
LA (days)
OA (days)
Differencea
–3.1
–6.9
8.0
12.5
–4.5
NR
7.8
10.0
–2.2
–5.7
–5.5
–6.5
11.9
19.0
–7.1
8/8 favor LA
1/8 not SS
Operative time
LA (min)
OA (min)
Differencea
10.7
7.6
24.0
11.7
12.35
30.0
17.2
12.8
25.0
10.4
14.6
18.1
16.8
15.7
69.8
52.9
16.2
9/9 favor OA
Cost
Differencea
11%
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
–3%
1/3 favors LA
1/3 favors OA
1/3 LA = OA
2/3 not SS
Conversion rate
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
11%
11%
8%
NR
aIndex is open.
IAA = intra-abdominal abscess (specifically organ/space surgical site infection); LA = laparoscopic appendectomy; LOS = length of stay; NR = not reported; OA = open appendectomy; SS = statistically significant;  
SSI = surgical site infection (specifically superficial and deep).
1256
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and 11 transgastric). Although reported complication rates 
appear low, conversion rates (to hybrid procedures) remain 
high.
The main concern with NOTES has been complications 
with closure of the enterotomy. To date, there is no reliable 
method of closure of the gastrotomy site, and there has been 
significant morbidity reported with this approach.
Although the transvaginal approach appears to be more 
promising, in women surveyed on their perception of NOTES, 
three-quarters were either neutral or unhappy about the pros-
pects of NOTES.102
Much work remains to demonstrate whether NOTES is 
able to provide the theoretical benefits purported. Great care 
must be taken to prevent significant morbidity or mortality en 
route to studying these procedures.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Acute Appendicitis in the Young
The establishment of a diagnosis of acute appendicitis is more 
difficult in young children than in the adult. The inability of 
young children to give an accurate history, diagnostic delays 
by both parents and physicians, and the frequency of gastro-
intestinal distress in children are all contributing factors to the 
misdiagnosis and delay in diagnosis.103 In children, the physical 
examination findings of maximal tenderness in the right lower 
quadrant, the inability to walk or walking with a limp, and pain 
with percussion, coughing, and hopping were found to have the 
highest sensitivity for appendicitis.104
The more rapid progression to rupture and the inability of 
the underdeveloped greater omentum to contain a rupture lead 
to significant morbidity rates in children. Children <5 years of 
age have a negative appendectomy rate of 25% and an appendi-
ceal perforation rate of 45%. These rates may be compared with 
a negative appendectomy rate of <10% and a perforated appen-
dix rate of 20% in children 5 to 12 years of age.50,51 The inci-
dence of major complications after appendectomy in children 
is correlated with appendiceal rupture. The wound infection 
rate after the treatment of nonperforated appendicitis in chil-
dren is 2.8%, compared with a rate of 11% after the treatment 
of perforated appendicitis. The incidence of intra-abdominal 
abscess also is higher after the treatment of perforated appen-
dicitis than after nonperforated appendicitis (6% vs. 3%).105 
The treatment regimen for perforated appendicitis generally 
includes immediate appendectomy. Antibiotic coverage is lim-
ited to 24 to 48 hours in cases of nonperforated appendicitis. 
For perforated appendicitis, intravenous antibiotics usually are 
given until the white blood cell count is normal and the patient 
is afebrile for 24 hours. Laparoscopic appendectomy has been 
shown to be safe and effective for the treatment of appendicitis 
in children.106
Acute Appendicitis in the Elderly
Compared with younger adults, elderly patients with appendi-
citis often pose a more difficult diagnostic problem because of 
the atypical presentation, expanded differential diagnosis, and 
communication difficulty. These factors may be responsible for 
the disproportionately high perforation rate seen in the elderly. 
In the general population, perforation rates range from 20% to 
30%, compared with 50% to 70% in the elderly.107 In addition, 
the perforation rate appears to increase with age greater than 
80 years.108
Elderly patients usually present with lower abdominal 
pain, but on clinical examination, localized right lower quadrant 
tenderness is not as common as in younger patients. A ­history 
of periumbilical pain migrating to the right lower quadrant 
is reported infrequently. Although currently there are no criteria 
that definitively identify elderly patients with acute ­appendicitis 
who are at risk of rupture, prioritization should be given to 
patients with a temperature of greater than 38°C (100.4°F) and a 
shift to the left in leukocyte count of more than 76%, especially 
if they are male, are anorexic, or have had pain of long duration 
before admission.65
As a result of increased comorbidities and an increased 
rate of perforation, postoperative morbidity, mortality, and hos-
pital length of stay are increased in the elderly compared with 
younger populations with appendicitis. Although no random-
ized trials have been conducted, it appears that elderly patients 
benefit from a laparoscopic approach to treatment of appen-
dicitis. The use of laparoscopy in the elderly has significantly 
increased in recent years. In general, laparoscopic appendec-
tomy offers elderly patients with appendicitis a shorter length 
of hospital stay, a reduction in complication and mortality rates, 
and a greater chance of discharge to home (independent of fur-
ther nursing care or rehabilitation).109
Acute Appendicitis during Pregnancy
Appendectomy for presumed appendicitis is the most common 
surgical emergency during pregnancy. The incidence is approxi-
mately 1 in 766 births. Acute appendicitis can occur at any time 
during pregnancy but is rare in the third trimester.110 The overall 
negative appendectomy rate during pregnancy is approximately 
25% and appears to be higher than the rate seen in nonpregnant 
women.110,111 A higher rate of negative appendectomy is seen 
in the second trimester, whereas the lowest rate is in the third 
trimester. The diversity of clinical presentations and the diffi-
culty in making the diagnosis of acute appendicitis in pregnant 
women are well established. This is particularly true in the late 
second trimester and the third trimester, when many abdominal 
symptoms may be considered pregnancy related. In addition, 
during pregnancy, there are anatomic changes in the appendix 
and increased abdominal laxity that may further complicate clini-
cal evaluation.
Appendicitis in pregnancy should be suspected when a 
pregnant woman complains of abdominal pain of new onset. 
The most consistent sign encountered in acute appendicitis dur-
ing pregnancy is pain in the right side of the abdomen. Sev-
enty-four percent of patients report pain located in the right 
lower abdominal quadrant, with no difference between early 
and late pregnancy. Only 57% of patients present with the clas-
sic history of diffuse periumbilical pain migrating to the right 
lower quadrant. Laboratory evaluation is not helpful in estab-
lishing the diagnosis of acute appendicitis during pregnancy. 
The physiologic leukocytosis of pregnancy has been defined as 
high as 16,000 cells/mm3. In one series, only 38% of patients 
with appendicitis had a white blood cell count of more than 
16,000 cells/mm3.110 Recent data suggest that the incidence of 
perforated or complex appendicitis is not increased in pregnant 
patients.111
When the diagnosis is in doubt, abdominal ultrasound 
may be beneficial. Another option is magnetic resonance 
imaging, which has no known deleterious effects on the fetus. 
The American College of Radiology recommends the use 
of nonionizing radiation techniques for front-line imaging in 
1257
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
pregnant women.70 Laparoscopy has been advocated in equiv-
ocal cases, especially early in pregnancy; however, laparo-
scopic appendectomy may be associated with an increase in 
pregnancy-related complications. In an analysis of outcomes 
in California using administrative databases, laparoscopy was 
found to be associated with a 2.31 times increased risk of fetal 
loss compared with open surgery.111
The overall incidence of fetal loss after appendectomy 
is 4%, and the risk of early delivery is 7%. Rates of fetal loss 
are considerably higher in women with complicated appendici-
tis than in those with a negative appendectomy or with simple 
appendicitis. It is important to note that a negative appendectomy 
is not a benign procedure. Removing a normal appendix is associ-
ated with a 4% risk of fetal loss and 10% risk of early delivery. 
Maternal mortality after appendectomy is extremely rare 
(0.03%). Because the incidence of complicated appendix is simi-
lar in pregnant and nonpregnant women and because maternal 
mortality is so low, it appears that the greatest opportunity to 
improve fetal outcomes is by improving diagnostic accuracy and 
reducing the rate of negative appendectomy.110-113
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND COMPLICATIONS
Following uncomplicated appendectomy, complication rates are 
low,114 and most patients can quickly be started on a diet and 
discharged home the same day or the following day.115 Postop-
erative antibiotic therapy is unnecessary.116
Alternatively, with complicated appendectomy, compli-
cation rates are increased compared to uncomplicated appen-
dicitis.114 Patients should be continued on broad-spectrum 
antibiotics for 4 to 7 days.117,118 Postoperative ileus may 
occur, so diet should be started based on daily clinical 
evaluation. These patients are at increased risk for surgical site 
infections.
Surgical Site Infection
In patients with incisional (superficial or deep) surgical site 
infection, treatment should be opening of the incision and 
obtaining a culture. Following laparoscopic appendectomy, 
the extraction port site is the most common site of surgical site 
infection. Patients with cellulitis can be started on antibiotics. 
The cultured organisms are typically bowel flora, as opposed to 
skin flora.119
Patients with postoperative intra-abdominal abscesses can 
present in a variety of ways. Although fever, leukocytosis, and 
abdominal pain are common presentations, patients with ileus, 
bowel obstruction, diarrhea, and tenesmus may also harbor intra-
abdominal abscesses. Small abscesses can be simply treated with 
antibiotics; however, larger abscesses require drainage. Most 
commonly, percutaneous drainage with CT or ultrasound guid-
ance is effective. For abscesses not amenable to percutaneous 
drainage, laparoscopic abscess drainage is a viable option.
Stump Appendicitis
Incomplete appendectomy represents a failure of removing the 
entire appendix on the initial procedure. A review of literature 
has revealed only 60 reports of this phenomenon. Likely, incom-
plete appendectomy is underreported, and the true prevalence is 
much higher. Reported as “stump appendicitis,” patients typi-
cally present with recurrent symptoms of appendicitis approxi-
mately 9 years after their initial surgery. There was no difference 
in initial surgery between laparoscopic and open procedures. 
However, there were more complicated appendectomies on 
initial surgery. Patients ­presenting with stump appendicitis are 
more likely to have complicated appendicitis, have an open pro-
cedure, and undergo colectomy.
The key to avoiding stump appendicitis is prevention. 
Use of the “appendiceal critical view” (appendix placed at 
10 o’clock, taenia coli/libera at 3 o’clock, and terminal ileum at 
6 o’clock) and identification of where the taeniae coli merge and 
disappear is paramount to identifying and ligating the base of 
the appendix during the initial operation. The remaining stump 
should be no longer than 0.5 cm, as stump appendicitis has only 
been noted in stumps ≥0.5 cm in the literature.
In patients who have had prior appendectomy, a low index 
of suspicion is important to prevent delay in diagnosis and com-
plications. Prior appendectomy should not be an absolute crite-
rion in ruling out acute appendicitis.
INCIDENTAL APPENDECTOMY
Decisions regarding the efficacy of incidental appendectomy 
should be based on the epidemiology of appendicitis. The best data 
were published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
based on the period from 1979 to 1984.120 During this period, an 
average of 250,000 cases of appendicitis and 310,000 incidental 
appendectomies occurred annually in the United States. It was esti-
mated that 36 incidental appendectomies had to be performed to 
prevent one patient from developing appendicitis.121 In view of the 
added costs and risk of morbidity for each extension of a surgical 
intervention, this does not seem to justify incidental appendectomy.
The financial aspects of the decision to perform inciden-
tal appendectomy were assessed.122 For open appendectomy, 
there was a financial disincentive to perform incidental appen-
dectomy. On an annual basis, $20,000,000 had to be spent to 
save the $6,000,000 cost of appendicitis. With the laparoscopic 
approach, it was cost-effective to perform incidental appen-
dectomy only in patients less than 25 years of age and only 
if the reimbursement for surgeons was 10% of the usual and 
customary charges. At a higher rate of reimbursement, inci-
dental appendectomy was not cost-effective in any age group.
Although incidental appendectomy is generally neither clini-
cally nor economically appropriate, there are some special patient 
groups in whom it should be performed during laparotomy or 
laparoscopy for other indications. These include children about to 
undergo chemotherapy, the disabled who cannot describe symp-
toms or react normally to abdominal pain, patients with Crohn’s 
disease in whom the cecum is free of macroscopic disease, and 
individuals who are about to travel to remote places where 
there is no access to medical or surgical care.123
Appendectomy is routinely carried out during the perfor-
mance of Ladd’s procedure for malrotation because displace-
ment of the cecum into the left upper quadrant would complicate 
the diagnosis of subsequent appendicitis.
NEOPLASMS OF THE APPENDIX
Prevalence of Neoplasms
Multiple studies have evaluated the prevalence of mass lesions 
present in appendectomy specimens (Table 30-8).124-132 The 
prevalence of identifying a mass within the appendix is less than 
1%. Appendiceal carcinoid and appendiceal adenomas are the 
most common lesions identified. There is no clear age 
relationship associated with the identification of these 
masses.
9
10
11
12
1258
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
In older patients, the prevalence of identifying colon can-
cer appearing as appendicitis has been reported in a single study 
with a prevalence of less than 1%. The mean age in this case 
series was 69 years (range, 42 to 89 years).
Carcinoid
The finding of a firm, yellow, bulbar mass in the appendix 
should raise the suspicion of an appendiceal carcinoid. The 
appendix is the most common site of gastrointestinal carcinoid, 
followed by the small bowel and rectum. Carcinoid syndrome is 
rarely associated with appendiceal carcinoid unless widespread 
metastases are present, which occur in 2.9% of cases. Symp-
toms attributable directly to the carcinoid are rare, although the 
tumor can occasionally obstruct the appendiceal lumen much 
like a fecalith and result in acute ­appendicitis.131,133,134
The majority of carcinoids are located in the tip of the 
appendix. Malignant potential is related to size, with tumors 
<1 cm rarely resulting in extension outside of the appendix 
or adjacent to the mass. The mean tumor size for carcinoids is 
2.5 cm.133 Carcinoid tumors usually present with localized dis-
ease (64%). Treatment for tumors ≤1 cm is appendectomy. For 
tumors larger than 1 to 2 cm located at the base, involving the 
mesentery, or with lymph node metastases, right hemicolectomy 
is indicated. Despite these recommendations, surveillance, epi-
demiology, and end results data indicate that proper surgery for 
carcinoids is not performed at least 28% of the time.133
Adenocarcinoma
Primary adenocarcinoma of the appendix is a rare neoplasm with 
three major histologic subtypes: mucinous adenocarcinoma, 
colonic adenocarcinoma, and adenocarcinoid.135 The most com-
mon mode of presentation for appendiceal carcinoma is that of 
acute appendicitis. Patients also may present with ascites or a 
palpable mass, or the neoplasm may be discovered during an 
operative procedure for an unrelated cause. The recommended 
treatment for all patients with adenocarcinoma of the appendix 
is a formal right hemicolectomy. Appendiceal adenocarcinomas 
have a propensity for early perforation, although they are not 
clearly associated with a worsened prognosis.134 Overall 5-year 
survival is 55% and varies with stage and grade. Patients with 
appendiceal adenocarcinoma are at significant risk for both syn-
chronous and metachronous neoplasms, approximately half of 
which will originate from the gastrointestinal tract.135
Mucocele
A mucocele of the appendix is an obstructive dilatation by 
intraluminal accumulation of mucoid material. Mucoceles may 
be caused by one of four processes: retention cysts, mucosal 
hyperplasia, cystadenomas, and cystadenocarcinomas. The 
clinical presentation of a mucocele is nonspecific, and often it 
is an incidental finding at operation for acute appendicitis. An 
intact mucocele presents no future risk for the patient; however, 
the opposite is true if the mucocele has ruptured and epithelial 
cells have escaped into the peritoneal cavity. As a result, when 
a mucocele is visualized at the time of laparoscopic examina-
tion, conversion to open laparotomy is recommended. Conver-
sion from a laparoscopic approach to a laparotomy ensures that a 
benign process will not be converted to a malignant one through 
mucocele rupture. In addition, laparotomy allows for thorough 
abdominal exploration to rule out the presence of mucoid fluid 
accumulations.135
The presence of a mucocele of the appendix does not 
mandate performance of a right hemicolectomy. The princi-
ples of surgery include resection of the appendix, wide resec-
tion of the mesoappendix to include all the appendiceal lymph 
nodes, collection and cytologic examination of all intraperito-
neal mucus, and careful inspection of the base of the appendix. 
Right hemicolectomy or, preferably, ileocecectomy is reserved 
for patients with a positive margin at the base of the appen-
dix or positive periappendiceal lymph nodes. Recently, a more 
aggressive approach to ruptured appendiceal neoplasms has 
been advocated. This approach includes a thorough but mini-
mally aggressive approach at initial laparotomy, as described 
earlier, with subsequent referral to a specialized center for con-
sideration of reexploration and hyperthermic intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy.134
Pseudomyxoma Peritonei
Pseudomyxoma peritonei is a rare condition in which diffuse 
collections of gelatinous fluid are associated with mucinous 
Table 30-8
Prevalence of malignancy associated with appendix specimens
Author
No.
Male Gender Age (mean) Age (range) Adenoma
Carcinoid
Other
Overall
Ozer
2376
22 (81.5%)
26.7
NR
NR
27 (1.13%)
NR
27 (1.13%)
Lee
3744
NR
NR
NR
14 (0.35%)
9 (0.24%)
5 (0.12%)
28 (0.7%)
Sieren
141
6 (60%)
47
NR
NR
NR
NR
10 (7.1%)
Debnath
1941
11 (69%)
41.8
NR
NR
16 (0.82%)
NR
16 (0.82%)
In’t Hof
1485
4 (57%)
32.7
20–59
NR
7 (0.47%)
NR
7 (0.47%)
Smeenk
167,744
608 (41%)
61
7–93
NR
NR
NR
1482 (0.9%)
O’Donnel
2154
8 (36%)
30
14–83
NR
11 (0.5%)
11 (0.5%)
22 (1.02%)
Marudanayagam
2660
NR
NR
NR
16 (0.6%)
14 (0.52%)
10 (0.39%)
40 (1.50%)
Overall
184,118
30 (0.47%)
57 (0.54%)
26 (0.30%)
1558 (0.89%)
Laia
1873
11 (69%)
69
42–89
NR
NR
16 (0.85%)
16 (0.85%)
aLai reported only the incidence of colon cancer presenting as appendicitis.
NR = not reported.
1259
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
implants on peritoneal surfaces and omentum. Pseudomyxoma 
is two to three times more common in females than in males. 
Recent immunocytologic and molecular studies suggest that the 
appendix is the site of origin for the overwhelming majority of 
cases of pseudomyxoma. Pseudomyxoma is invariably caused 
by neoplastic mucus-secreting cells within the peritoneum. 
These cells may be difficult to classify as malignant because 
they may be sparse, widely scattered, and have a low-grade 
cytologic appearance. Patients with pseudomyxoma usually 
present with abdominal pain, distention, or a mass. Primary 
pseudomyxoma usually does not cause abdominal organ dys-
function. However, ureteral obstruction and obstruction of 
venous return can be seen.136 Pseudomyxoma is a disease that 
progresses slowly and in which recurrences may take years to 
develop or become symptomatic.136 In a series from the Mayo 
Clinic, 76% of patients developed recurrences within the abdo-
men.137 Lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis are 
uncommon.
The use of imaging before surgery is advantageous to plan 
surgery. CT scanning is the preferred imaging modality. At sur-
gery, a variable volume of mucinous ascites is found together 
with tumor deposits involving the right hemidiaphragm, right 
retrohepatic space, left paracolic gutter, ligament of Treitz, and 
the ovaries in women. Peritoneal surfaces of the bowel are usu-
ally free of tumor. Thorough surgical debulking is the main-
stay of treatment. All gross disease and the omentum should be 
removed. If not done previously, appendectomy is routinely per-
formed. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is 
performed in women. Survival is better in patients who undergo 
R0 or R1 resection than in patients who undergo R2 resection 
(visible gross disease remaining).138 Because 5-year survival of 
mucinous appendiceal neoplasms is only 30%, adjuvant intra-
peritoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy is advocated as a stan-
dard adjunct to radical cytoreductive surgery.139 ­Cytoreductive 
surgery with intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy 
is a long, tedious procedure with operative times of 300 to 
1020 minutes reported. In addition, morbidity (38%) and mor-
tality (6%) are high. Cytoreductive surgery with intraperitoneal 
hyperthermic chemotherapy is associated with a 5-year survival 
rate of 53% to 78%. Survival is associated with initial patient 
performance status.138-140
Any recurrence should be investigated completely. Recur-
rences are usually treated by additional surgery. It is important 
to note that surgery for recurrent disease is usually difficult and 
is associated with an increased incidence of enterotomies, anas-
tomotic leaks, and fistulas.136,137
Lymphoma
Lymphoma of the appendix is extremely uncommon. The gas-
trointestinal tract is the most frequently involved extranodal 
site for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.141 Other types of appendi-
ceal lymphoma, such as Burkitt’s lymphoma, as well as leu-
kemia, have also been reported.142 Primary lymphoma of the 
appendix accounts for 1% to 3% of gastrointestinal lymphomas. 
Appendiceal lymphoma usually presents as acute appendicitis 
and is rarely suspected preoperatively. Findings on CT scan 
of an appendiceal diameter ≥2.5 cm or surrounding soft tissue 
thickening should prompt suspicion of an appendiceal lym-
phoma. The management of appendiceal lymphoma confined 
to the appendix is appendectomy. Right hemicolectomy is indi-
cated if tumor extends beyond the appendix onto the cecum or 
mesentery. A postoperative staging workup is indicated before 
­initiating adjuvant therapy. Adjuvant therapy is not indicated for 
lymphoma confined to the appendix.142,143
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Williams RG. Presidential address: a history of appendicitis. 
Ann Surg. 1983;197:495-506.
2.	Deaver JB. Appendicitis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: P Blakiston’s 
Son & Co; 1905.
3.	Fernal J. Universal Medicina, 1554. Classic Description of 
Disease. U.S.: Springfield; 1932:614-615.
4.	Ellis H. Appendix. In: Schwartz SI, ed. Maingot’s Abdomi-
nal Operations. 8th ed., vol. 2. Norwalk: Appleton-Century-
Crofts; 1985:1255.
5.	McBurney C. Experience with early operative interference in 
cases of disease of the vermiform appendix. N Y State Med J. 
1889;50:676.
6.	Power D. The prognosis and modern treatment of appendicitis. 
Br Med J. 1899;2:1467-1470.
7.	Loveland JE. Reginald Heber Fitz. The exponent of appendi-
citis. Yale J Biol Med. 1937;9:509-520.
8.	Lichtner S, Pflanz M. Appendectomy in the Federal Republic 
of Germany: epidemiology and medical care patterns. Med 
Care. 1971;9:311-330.
9.	Williams RA, Myers P. Pathology of the Appendix. New 
York: Chapman and Hall Medical; 1994:1-7.
10.	Kelly HA, Hurdon E. The Vermiform Appendix and Its Dis-
eases. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1905:55-74.
11.	Akbulut S, Ulku A, Senol A, Tas M, Yagmur Y. Left-sided 
appendicitis: review of 95 published cases and a case report. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16:5598-5602.
12.	Meyers S, Miller TA. Acute Abdominal Pain: Physiology 
of the Acute Abdomen. In: Miller TA, ed. St. Louis: Quality 
Medical; 1998:641-667.
13.	Dhillon AP, Rode J. Serotonin and its possible role in the painful 
non-inflamed appendix. Diagn Histopathol. 1983;6:239-246.
14.	 Dhillon AP, Williams RA, Rode J. Age, site, and distribution of 
subepithelial neurosecretory cells in the appendix. Pathology. 
1992;24:56-59.
15.	Andersson RE, Olaison G, Tysk C, Ekbom A. Appendec-
tomy and protection against ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med. 
2001;344:808-814.
16.	Frisch M, Pedersen BV, Andersson RE. Appendicitis, mesen-
teric lymphadenitis, and subsequent risk of ulcerative colitis: 
cohort studies in Sweden and Denmark. BMJ. 2009;338:b716.
17.	Radford-Smith GL, Edwards JE, Purdie DM, et al. Protective 
role of appendectomy on onset and severity of ulcerative coli-
tis and Crohn’s disease. Gut. 2002;51:808-813.
18.	Kaplan GG, Jackson T, Sands BE, Frisch M, Andersson RE, 
Korzenik J. The risk of developing Crohn’s disease after 
an appendectomy: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2008;103:2925-2931.
19.	Merchant R, Mower WR, Ourian A, et al. Association between 
appendectomy and Clostridium difficile infection. J Clin Med 
Res. 2012;4:17-19.
20.	Im GY, Modayil RJ, Lin CT, et al. The appendix may protect 
against Clostridium difficile recurrence. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2011;9:1072-1077.
21.	Addiss DG, Shaffer N, Fowler BS, Tauxe RV. The epidemiol-
ogy of appendicitis and appendectomy in the United States. 
Am J Epidemiol. 1990;132:910-925.
22.	Livingston EH, Woodward WA, Sarosi GA, Haley RW. Dis-
connect between incidence of nonperforated and perforated 
appendicitis: implications for pathophysiology and manage-
ment. Ann Surg. 2007;245:886-892.
23.	Raahave D, Christensen E, Moeller H, Kirkeby LT, Loud FB, 
Knudsen LL. Origin of acute appendicitis: fecal retention in 
1260
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
colonic reservoirs: a case control study. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 
2007;8:55-62.
24.	Nitecki S, Karmeli R, Sarr MG. Appendiceal calculi and feca-
liths as indications for appendectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1990;171:185-188.
25.	Lamps LW. Appendicitis and infections of the appendix. 
Semin Diagn Pathol. 2004;21:86-97.
26.	Thadepalli H, Mandal AK, Chuah SK, Lou MA. Bacteriology 
of the appendix and the ileum in health and appendicitis. Am 
Surg. 1991;57:317-322.
27.	Pieper R, Kager L, Weintraub A, Lindberg AA, Nord CE. The 
role of Bacteroides fragilis in the pathogenesis of acute appen-
dicitis. Acta Chir Scand. 1982;148:39-44.
28.	Bennion RS, Baron EJ, Thompson JE, et al. The bacteriology 
of gangrenous and perforated appendicitis-revisited. Ann Surg. 
1990;211:165-171.
29.	Swidsinski A, Dörffel Y, Loening-Baucke V, et al. Acute 
appendicitis is characterised by local invasion with Fusobac-
terium nucleatum/necrophorum. Gut. 2011;60:34-40.
30.	Andersson RE. The natural history and traditional manage-
ment of appendicitis revisited: spontaneous resolution and 
predominance of prehospital perforations imply that a correct 
diagnosis is more important than an early diagnosis. World J 
Surg. 2007;31:86-92.
31.	Decadt B, Sussman L, Lewis MP, et al. Randomized clinical 
trial of early laparoscopy in the management of acute non-
specific abdominal pain. Br J Surg. 1999;86:1383-1386.
32.	Morino M, Pellegrino L, Castagna E, Farinella E, Mao P. 
Acute nonspecific abdominal pain: a randomized, con-
trolled trial comparing early laparoscopy versus clinical 
observation. Ann Surg. 2006;244:881-886.
33.	Andersson RE. Meta-analysis of the clinical and laboratory 
diagnosis of appendicitis. Br J Surg. 2004;91:28-37.
34.	Wagner JM, McKinney WP, Carpenter JL. Does this patient 
have appendicitis? JAMA. 1996;276:1589-1593.
35.	Berry J, Malt RA. Appendicitis near its centenary. Ann Surg. 
1984;200:567-575.
36.	 Bower RJ, Bell MJ, Ternberg JL. Diagnostic value of the white 
blood count and neutrophil percentage in the evaluation of abdom-
inal pain in children. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1981;152:424-426.
37.	Ohle R, O’Reilly F, O’Brien KK, Fahey T, Dimitrov BD. The 
Alvarado score for predicting acute appendicitis: a systematic 
review. BMC Med. 2011;9:139.
38.	Andersson M, Andersson RE. The appendicitis inflamma-
tory response score: a tool for the diagnosis of acute appen-
dicitis that outperforms the Alvarado score. World J Surg. 
2008;32:1843-1849.
39.	de Castro SM, Ünlü C, Steller EP, van Wagensveld BA, 
Vrouenraets BC. Evaluation of the appendicitis inflammatory 
response score for patients with acute appendicitis. World J 
Surg. 2012;36:1540-1545.
40.	Petroianu A, Alberti LR. Accuracy of the new radiographic sign 
of fecal loading in the cecum for differential diagnosis of acute 
appendicitis in comparison with other inflammatory diseases of 
right abdomen: a prospective study. J Med Life. 2012;5:85-91.
41.	el Ferzli G, Ozuner G, Davidson PG, Isenberg JS, Redmond P, 
Worth MH Jr. Barium enema in the diagnosis of acute appen-
dicitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;171:40-42.
42.	Rypins EB, Kipper SL. Scintigraphic determination of equivo-
cal appendicitis. Am Surg. 2000;66:891-895.
43.	Terasawa T, Blackmore CC, Bent S, Kohlwes RJ. Systematic 
review: computed tomography and ultrasonography to detect 
acute appendicitis in adults and adolescents. Ann Intern Med. 
2004;141:537-546.
44.	Weston AR, Jackson TJ, Blamey S. Diagnosis of appendicitis 
in adults by ultrasonography or computed tomography: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Technol Assess Health 
Care. 2005;21:368-379.
45.	 Doria AS, Moineddin R, Kellenberger CJ, et al. US or CT for 
diagnosis of appendicitis in children and adults? A meta-analysis. 
Radiology. 2006;241:83-94.
46.	Al-Khayal KA, Al-Omran MA. Computed tomography and 
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of equivocal acute appendi-
citis. A meta-analysis. Saudi Med J. 2007;28:173-180.
47.	van Randen A, Bipat S, Zwinderman AH, Ubbink DT, Stoker 
J, Boermeester MA. Acute appendicitis: meta-analysis of diag-
nostic performance of CT and graded compression US related 
to prevalence of disease. Radiology. 2008;249:97-106.
48.	Weyant MJ, Eachempati SR, Maluccio MA, et al. Interpreta-
tion of computed tomography does not correlate with labo-
ratory or pathologic findings in surgically confirmed acute 
appendicitis. Surgery. 2000;128:145-153.
49.	Fuchs JR, Schlamberg JS, Shortsleeve MJ, Schuler JG. Impact 
of abdominal CT imaging on the management of appendicitis: 
an update. J Surg Res. 2002;106:131-136.
50.	Flum DR, Morris A, Koepsell T, Dellinger EP. Has misdi-
agnosis of appendicitis decreased over time? A population-
based analysis. JAMA. 2001;286:1748-1753.
51.	Flum DR, Koepsell T. The clinical and economic correlates 
of misdiagnosed appendicitis: nationwide analysis. Arch 
Surg. 2002;137:799-804.
52.	Bongard F, Landers DV, Lewis F. Differential diagnosis of 
appendicitis and pelvic inflammatory disease. A prospective 
analysis. Am J Surg. 1985;150:90-96.
53.	Jepsen OB, Korner B, Lauritsen KB, et al. Yersinia enteroco-
litica infection in patients with acute surgical abdominal dis-
ease. A prospective study. Scand J Infect Dis. 1976;8:189-194.
54.	Knight PJ, Vassy LE. Specific diseases mimicking appendici-
tis in childhood. Arch Surg. 1981;116:744-746.
55.	McDonald JC. Nonspecific mesenteric lymphadenitis: collec-
tive review. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1963;116:409.
56.	Morrison JD. Yersinia and viruses in acute non-specific 
abdominal pain and appendicitis. Br J Surg. 1981;68: 
284-286.
57.	Flum DR, Steinberg SD, Sarkis AY, Wallack MK. Appendi-
citis in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. J 
Am Coll Surg. 1997;184:481-486.
58.	Bova R, Meagher A. Appendicitis in HIV-positive patients. 
Aust N Z J Surg. 1998;68:337-339.
59.	Vons C, Barry C, Maitre S, et al. Amoxicillin plus clavu-
lanic acid versus appendicectomy for treatment of acute 
uncomplicated appendicitis: an open-label, non-inferiority, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377:1573-1579.
60.	Hansson J, Körner U, Khorram-Manesh A, Solberg A, Lund-
holm K. Randomized clinical trial of antibiotic therapy versus 
appendicectomy as primary treatment of acute appendicitis in 
unselected patients. Br J Surg. 2009;96:473-481.
61.	Turhan AN, Kapan S, Kütükçü E, Yigˇitbas, H, Hatipogˇlu S, 
Aygün E. Comparison of operative and non operative manage-
ment of acute appendicitis. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 
2009;15:459-462.
62.	Liu K, Ahanchi S, Pisaneschi M, Lin I, Walter R. Can acute 
appendicitis be treated by antibiotics alone? Am Surg. 
2007;73:1161-1165.
63.	Styrud J, Eriksson S, Nilsson I, et al. Appendectomy versus anti-
biotic treatment in acute appendicitis: a prospective multicenter 
randomized controlled trial. World J Surg. 2006;30:1033-1037.
64.	Eriksson S, Granström L. Randomized controlled trial of 
appendicectomy versus antibiotic therapy for acute appendi-
citis. Br J Surg. 1995;82:166-169.
65.	Abou-Nukta F, Bakhos C, Arroyo K, et al. Effects of delaying 
appendectomy for acute appendicitis for 12 to 24 hours. Arch 
Surg. 2006;141:504-506.
66.	Stahlfeld K, Hower J, Homitsky S, Madden J. Is acute appen-
dicitis a surgical emergency? Am Surg. 2007;73:626-629; dis-
cussion 629-630.
1261
The Appendix
CHAPTER 30
67.	Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Bilimoria KY, et al. Effect of delay 
to operation on outcomes in adults with acute appendicitis. 
Arch Surg. 2010;145:886-892.
68.	Burkitt DP. The aetiology of appendicitis. Br J Surg. 
1971;58:695-699.
69.	Owings MF, Kozak LJ. Ambulatory and inpatient procedures 
in the United States, 1996. National Center for Health Statis-
tics Series 13, No. 139. Hyattsville: Department of Health and 
Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Health Statistics; 2004.
70.	 Andersson RE, Petzold MG.  Nonsurgical treatment of appendi-
ceal abscess or phlegmon:  a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Ann Surg. 2007;246(5):741-8.
71.	 Simillis C, Symeonides P, Shorthouse AJ, Tekkis PP. A meta-
analysis comparing conservative treatment versus acute appen-
dectomy for complicated appendicitis (abscess or phlegmon). 
Surgery. 2010;147:818-829.
72.	St. Peter SD, Aguayo P, Fraser JD, et al. Initial laparo-
scopic appendectomy versus initial nonoperative manage-
ment and interval appendectomy for perforated appendicitis 
with abscess: a prospective, randomized trial. J Pediatr Surg. 
2010;45:236-240.
73.	Blakely ML, Williams R, Dassinger MS, et al. Early vs inter-
val appendectomy for children with perforated appendicitis. 
Arch Surg. 2011;146:660-665
74.	Youssef T, Badrawy A. Prospective evaluation of the necessity 
of interval appendectomy after resolution of appendiceal mass. 
Egyptian J Surg. 2010;29:2.
75.	Tekin A, Kurtog˘ lu HC, Can I, Oztan S. Routine interval 
appendectomy is unnecessary after conservative treatment of 
appendiceal mass. Colorectal Dis. 2008;10:465-468.
76.	Lai HW, Loong CC, Chiu JH, Chau GY, Wu CW, Lui WY. 
Interval appendectomy after conservative treatment of an 
appendiceal mass. World J Surg. 2006;30:352-357.
77.	Kaminski A, Liu IL, Applebaum H, Lee SL, Haigh PI. 
Routine interval appendectomy is not justified after initial 
nonoperative treatment of acute appendicitis. Arch Surg. 
2005;140:897-901.
78.	Kumar S, Jain S. Treatment of appendiceal mass: prospec-
tive, randomized clinical trial. Indian J Gastroenterol. 
2004;23:165-167.
79.	Eryilmaz R, Sahin M, Savas MR. Is interval appendectomy 
necessary after conservative treatment of appendiceal masses? 
Ulus Travma Derg. 2004;10:185-188.
80.	Dixon MR, Haukoos JS, Park IU, et al. An assessment of the 
severity of recurrent appendicitis. Am J Surg. 2003;186:718-
722; discussion 722.
81.	Adalla SA. Appendiceal mass: interval appendicectomy 
should not be the rule. Br J Clin Pract. 1996;50:168-169.
82.	Hodjati H, Kazerooni T. Location of the appendix in the gravid 
patient: a re-evaluation of the established concept. Int J Gyne-
col Obstet. 2003;81:245-247.
83.	Tander B, Pektas O, Bulut M. The utility of peritoneal drains 
in children with uncomplicated perforated appendicitis. Pedi-
atr Surg Int. 2003;19:548-550.
84.	Narci A, Karaman I, Karaman A, et al. Is peritoneal drainage 
necessary in childhood perforated appendicitis? A compara-
tive study. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42:1864-1868.
85.	Toki A, Ogura K, Horimi T, et al. Peritoneal lavage versus 
drainage for perforated appendicitis in children. Surg Today. 
1995;25:207-210.
86.	Dandapat MC, Panda C. A perforated appendix: should we 
drain? J Indian Med Assoc. 1992;90:147-148.
87.	Greenall MJ, Evans M, Pollock AV. Should you drain a perfo-
rated appendix? Br J Surg. 1978;65:880-882.
88.	St Peter SD, Adibe OO, Iqbal CW, et al. Irrigation versus 
suction alone during laparoscopic appendectomy for perfo-
rated appendicitis: a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 
2012;256:581-585.
89.	Giri SK, Shaikh FM, Sil D, Drumm J, Naqvi SA. Our experi-
ence with selective laparoscopy through an open appendec-
tomy incision in the management of suspected appendicitis. 
Am J Surg. 2007;194:231-233.
90.	Subramanian A, Liang MK. A 60-year literature review of 
stump appendicitis: the need for a critical view. Am J Surg. 
2012;203:503-507.
91.	Wei B, Qi CL, Chen TF, et al. Laparoscopic versus open 
appendectomy for acute appendicitis: a meta-analysis. Surg 
Endosc. 2011;25:1199-1208.
92.	Liu Z, Zhang P, Ma Y, et al. Laparoscopy or not: a meta-
analysis of the surgical effects of laparoscopic versus open 
appendicectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 
2010;20:362-370.
93.	Li X, Zhang J, Sang L, et al. Laparoscopic versus conventional 
appendectomy—a meta-analysis of randomized controlled tri-
als. BMC Gastroenterol. 2010;10:129.
94.	 Markides G, Subar D, Riyad K. Laparoscopic versus open appen-
dectomy in adults with complicated appendicitis: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. World J Surg. 2010;34:2026-2040.
95.	Bennett J, Boddy A, Rhodes M. Choice of approach for 
appendicectomy: a meta-analysis of open versus laparoscopic 
appendicectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 
2007;17:245-255.
96.	Temple LK, Litwin DE, McLeod RS. A meta-analysis of lapa-
roscopic versus open appendectomy in patients suspected of 
having acute appendicitis. Can J Surg. 1999;42:377-383.
97.	Garbutt JM, Soper NJ, Shannon WD, Botero A, Littenberg 
B. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing 
laparoscopic and open appendectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc. 
1999;9:17-26
98.	Sauerland S, Lefering R, Holthausen U, Neugebauer EA. 
Laparoscopic vs conventional appendectomy—a meta-analy-
sis of randomised controlled trials. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 
1998;383:289-295.
99.	Golub R, Siddiqui F, Pohl D. Laparoscopic versus open appen-
dectomy: a metaanalysis. J Am Coll Surg. 1998;186:545-553.
100.	Gill RS, Shi X, Al-Adra DP, Birch DW, Karmali S. Sin-
gle-incision appendectomy is comparable to conventional 
laparoscopic appendectomy: a systematic review and 
pooled analysis. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 
2012;22:319-327.
101.	Coomber RS, Sodergren MH, Clark J, Teare J, Yang GZ, 
Darzi A. Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery 
applications in clinical practice. World J Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2012;4:65-74.
102.	Strickland AD, Norwood MG, Behnia-Willison F, Olakkengil 
SA, Hewett PJ. Transvaginal natural orifice translumenal 
endoscopic surgery (NOTES): a survey of women’s views on 
a new technique. Surg Endosc. 2010;24:2424-2431.
103.	Bundy DG, Byerley JS, Liles EA, et al. Does this child have 
appendicitis? JAMA. 2007;298:438-451.
104.	Colvin JM, Bachur R, Kharbanda A. The presentation of 
appendicitis in preadolescent children. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2007;23:849-855.
105.	Andersen BR, Kallehave FL, Andersen HK. Antibiotics versus 
placebo for prevention of postoperative infection after appen-
dicectomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;3:CD001439.
106.	Sauerland S, Lefering R, Neugebauer EA. Laparoscopic ver-
sus open surgery for suspected appendicitis. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD001546.
107.	Sheu BF, Chiu TE, Chen JC, Tung MS, Chang MW, Young 
YR. Risk factors associated with perforated appendicitis in 
elderly patients presenting with signs and symptoms of acute 
appendicitis. ANZ J Surg. 2007;77:662-666.
108.	Young YR, Chiu TF, Chen JC, et al. Acute appendicitis in the 
octogenarians and beyond: a comparison with younger geriat-
ric patients. Am J Med Sci. 2007;334:255-259.
1262
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
109.	Harrell AG, Lincourt AE, Novitsky YW, et al. Advantages 
of laparoscopic appendectomy in the elderly. Am Surg. 
2006;72:474-480.
110.	Andersen B, Nielsen TF. Appendicitis in pregnancy: diag-
nosis, management and complications. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. 1999;78:758-762.
111.	McGory ML, Zingmond DS, Tillou A, Hiatt JR, Ko CY, 
Cryer HM. Negative appendectomy in pregnant women is 
associated with a substantial risk of fetal loss. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;205:534-540.
112.	Bree RL, Ralls PW, Bafle DM, et al. Evaluation of patients 
with acute right upper quadrant pain. American College 
of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria. Radiology. 
2000;215(Suppl):153.
113.	Bailey LE, Finley RK Jr., Miller SF, Jones LM. Acute appen-
dicitis during pregnancy. Am Surg. 1986;52:218-221.
114.	Masoomi H, Nguyen NT, Stamos MJ, Smith BR. Overview of 
outcomes of laparoscopic and open Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
in the United States. Surg Technol Int. 2012;22:72-76.
115.	Cash C, Frazee R. Improvements in laparoscopic treatment for 
complicated appendicitis. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 
2012;22:581-583.
116.	Mui LM, Ng CS, Wong SK, et al. Optimum duration of pro-
phylactic antibiotics in acute non-perforated appendicitis. 
ANZ J Surg. 2005;75:425-428.
117.	Hoelzer DJ, Zabel DD, Zern JT. Determining duration of anti-
biotic use in children with complicated appendicitis. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J. 1999;18:979-982.
118.	Taylor E, Berjis A, Bosch T, Hoehne F, Ozaeta M. The 
efficacy of postoperative oral antibiotics in appendicitis: 
a randomized prospective double-blinded study. Am Surg. 
2004;70:858-862.
119.	Hamzaoglu I, Baca B, Böler DE, Polat E, Ozer Y. Is umbilical 
flora responsible for wound infection after laparoscopic sur-
gery? Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2004;14:263-267.
120.	Addiss DG, Shaffer N, Fowler BS, Tauxe RV. The epide-
miology of appendicitis and appendectomy in the United 
States. Am J Epidemiol. 1990;132:910-925.
121.	 Wang HT, Sax HC. Incidental appendectomy in the era of man-
aged care and laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192:182-188.
122.	Sugimoto T, Edwards D. Incidence and costs of incidental 
appendectomy as a preventive measure. Am J Public Health. 
1987;77:471-475.
123.	 Fisher KS, Ross DS. Guidelines for therapeutic decision in inci-
dental appendectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;171:95-98.
124.	Ozer MT, Demirbas S, Celik E, et al. Natural behavior and 
surgical treatment of appendiceal carcinoids: an analysis of 
2,376 consecutive emergency appendectomies. Bratisl Lek 
Listy. 2011;112:619-622.
125.	Lee WS, Choi ST, Lee JN, Kim KK, Park YH, Baek JH. A ret-
rospective clinicopathological analysis of appendiceal tumors 
from 3,744 appendectomies: a single-institution study. Int J 
Colorectal Dis. 2011;26:617-621.
126.	Sieren LM, Collins JN, Weireter LJ, et al. The incidence of 
benign and malignant neoplasia presenting as acute appendi-
citis. Am Surg. 2010;76:808-811.
127.	Debnath D, Rees J, Myint F. Are we missing diagnostic oppor-
tunities in cases of carcinoid tumours of the appendix? Sur-
geon. 2008;6:266-272.
128.	In’t Hof KH, van der Wal HC, Kazemier G, Lange JF. 
­Carcinoid tumour of the appendix: an analysis of 1,485 con-
secutive emergency appendectomies. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2008;12:1436-1438.
129.	 Smeenk RM, van Velthuysen ML, Verwaal VJ, Zoetmulder 
FA. Appendiceal neoplasms and pseudomyxoma peritonei: a 
population based study. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2008;34:196-201.
130.	O’Donnell M, Badger SA, Beattie GC, Carson J, Garstin 
WIH. Malignant neoplasms of the appendix. Int J Colorectal 
Dis. 2007;22:1239-1248.
131.	Marudanayagam R, Williams GT, Rees BI. Review of the 
pathological results of 2660 appendicectomy specimens. J 
Gastroenterol. 2006;41:745-749.
132.	Lai HW, Loong CC, Tai LC, Wu CW, Lui WY. Incidence and 
odds ratio of appendicitis as first manifestation of colon can-
cer: a retrospective analysis of 1873 patients. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2006;21:1693-1696.
133.	McGory ML, Maggard MA, Kang H, O’Connell JB, Ko CY. 
Malignancies of the appendix: beyond case series reports. Dis 
Colon Rectum. 2005;48:2264-2271.
134.	Dhage-Ivatury S, Sugarbaker PH. Update on the surgi-
cal approach to mucocele of the appendix. J Am Coll Surg. 
2006;202:680-684.
135.	McCusker ME, Cote TR, Clegg LX, Sobin LH. Primary 
malignant neoplasms of the appendix: a population-based 
study from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results 
program, 1973–1998. Cancer. 2002;94:3307-3312.
136.	Hinson FL, Ambrose NS. Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Br J 
Surg. 1998;85:1332-1339.
137.	Gough DB, Donohue JH, Schutt AJ, et al. Pseudomyxoma 
peritonei. Long-term patient survival with an aggressive 
regional approach. Ann Surg. 1994;219:112-119.
138.	Stewart JH IV, Shen P, Russell GB, et al. Appendiceal 
neoplasms with peritoneal dissemination: outcomes after 
cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic che-
motherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:624-634.
139.	Sugarbaker PH. New standard of care for appendiceal epithe-
lial neoplasms and pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome? Lan-
cet Oncol. 2006;7:69-76.
140.	McQuellon RP, Russell GB, Shen P, et al. Survival and health 
outcomes after cytoreductive surgery with intraperitoneal 
hyperthermic chemotherapy for disseminated peritoneal can-
cer of appendiceal origin. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15:125-133.
141.	Crump M, Gospodarowicz M, Shepherd FA. Lymphoma of 
the gastrointestinal tract. Semin Oncol. 1999;26:324-337.
142.	Pickhardt PJ, Levy AD, Rohrmann CA Jr, Abbondanzo SL, 
Kende AL. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of the appendix: clini-
cal and CT findings with pathologic correlation. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol. 2002;178:1123-1127.
143.	Muller G, Dargent JL, Duwel V, et al. Leukaemia and lym-
phoma of the appendix presenting as acute appendicitis or 
acute abdomen. Four case reports with a review of the litera-
ture. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1997;123:560-564.
Liver
Elaine Y. Cheng, Ali Zarrinpar, David A. Geller, 
John A. Goss, and Ronald W. Busuttil
31
History of Liver Surgery	
1264
Liver Anatomy	
1264
Segmental Anatomy / 1265
Hepatic Artery / 1266
Portal Vein / 1267
Hepatic Veins and Inferior  
Vena Cava / 1267
Bile Duct and Hepatic Ducts / 1268
Neural Innervation  
and Lymphatic Drainage / 1268
Liver Physiology	
1269
Bilirubin Metabolism / 1270
Formation of Bile / 1270
Drug Metabolism / 1270
Liver Function Tests / 1270
Hepatocellular Injury / 1270
Abnormal Synthetic Function / 1271
Cholestasis / 1271
Jaundice / 1271
Radiologic Evaluation  
of the Liver	
1272
Ultrasound / 1272
Computed Tomography / 1273
Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1274
Positron Emission Tomography / 1275
Acute Liver Failure	
1275
Etiology / 1276
Clinical Presentation / 1276
Diagnosis and Clinical  
Management / 1276
Prognosis / 1277
Liver Transplantation / 1277
Emerging Technologies / 1277
Cirrhosis and Portal  
Hypertension	
1277
Morphologic Classification  
of Cirrhosis / 1277
Etiology of Cirrhosis / 1278
Clinical Manifestations  
of Cirrhosis / 1279
Laboratory Findings Associated  
with Cirrhosis / 1279
Liver Biopsy / 1279
Hepatic Reserve and Assessment  
of Surgical Risk in the  
Cirrhotic Patient / 1279
Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score / 1280
Model for End-Stage Liver  
Disease Scoring System / 1280
Portal Hypertension / 1280
Imaging of the Portal Venous System  
and Measurement of Portal  
Venous Pressure / 1280
Etiology and Clinical Features  
of Portal Hypertension / 1281
Management of Gastroesophageal  
Varices / 1281
Prevention of Variceal  
Bleeding / 1281
Management of Acute Variceal  
Hemorrhage / 1282
Luminal Tamponade / 1282
Transjugular Intrahepatic  
Portosystemic Shunt / 1282
Balloon-Occluded Retrograde  
Transvenous Obliteration / 1282
Surgical Shunting / 1282
Nonshunt Surgical Management of  
Refractory Variceal Bleeding / 1283
Hepatic Transplantation / 1283
Budd-Chiari Syndrome / 1283
Infections of the Liver	
1284
Pyogenic Liver Abscesses / 1284
Amebic Abscesses / 1285
Hydatid Disease / 1285
Ascariasis / 1286
Schistosomiasis / 1286
Viral Hepatitis / 1286
Evaluation of an Incidental  
Liver Mass	
1287
Hepatic Cysts	
1288
Congenital Cysts / 1288
Biliary Cystadenoma / 1288
Polycystic Liver Disease / 1288
Caroli’s Disease / 1289
Benign Liver Lesions	
1289
Cyst / 1289
Hemangioma / 1289
Adenoma / 1290
Focal Nodular Hyperplasia / 1291
Bile Duct Hamartoma / 1291
Malignant Liver Tumors	
1291
Hepatocellular Carcinoma / 1291
Cholangiocarcinoma / 1291
Gallbladder Cancer / 1293
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer / 1293
Neuroendocrine Tumors / 1294
Other Metastatic Tumors / 1294
Treatment Options  
for Liver Cancer	
1294
Hepatic Resection / 1294
Liver Transplantation / 1295
Radiofrequency Ablation / 1295
Ethanol Ablation, Cryosurgery,  
and Microwave Ablation / 1295
Chemoembolization and Hepatic  
Artery Pump Chemoperfusion / 1295
Yttrium-90 Microspheres / 1296
Stereotactic Radiosurgery and  
Intensity-Modulated  
Radiation Therapy / 1296
Downstaging / 1296
Systemic Chemotherapy / 1296
Hepatic Resection  
Surgical Techniques	
1296
Nomenclature / 1296
Techniques and Devices for Dividing  
the Hepatic Parenchyma / 1296
Steps in Commonly Performed  
Hepatic Resections / 1297
Pringle and Ischemic  
Preconditioning / 1300
Preoperative Portal Vein  
Embolization / 1300
Staged Hepatectomy  
and Repeat Hepatic Resection  
for Recurrent Liver Cancer / 1301
Laparoscopic Liver Resection / 1301
chapter 
HISTORY OF LIVER SURGERY
The ancient Greek myth of Prometheus reminds us that the 
liver is the only organ that regenerates. According to Greek 
mythology, Zeus was furious with the Titan Prometheus 
because he gave fire to mortals. In return, Zeus chained 
Prometheus to Mount Caucasus and sent his giant eagle to 
eat his liver during the day, only to have it regenerate at 
night. Although this is folklore, the principles are correct 
that after hepatic resection, the remnant liver will hypertro-
phy over weeks to months to regain most of its original liver 
mass. It is interesting to note that the ancient Greeks seem 
to have been aware of this fact, because the Greek word for 
the liver, h¯epar, derives from the verb h¯epaomai, which 
means “mend” or “repair.” Hence h¯epar roughly translates 
as “repairable.”1 The importance of the liver dates back to 
even biblical times, for the Babylonians (c. 2000 B.C.) con-
sidered the liver to be the seat of the soul. There are scat-
tered reports of liver surgery for battlefield injuries, but the 
first recorded elective hepatic resection was done in 1888 
in ­Germany by Langenbuch. There followed reports of liver 
resections in the United States (Tiffany, 1890) and Europe 
(Lucke, 1891), as well as the first large series of hepatic 
resections by Keen in 1899.2,3 In 1908, Pringle described 
in Annals of Surgery the “arrest of hepatic hemorrhage due 
to trauma” by compression of the porta hepatis, a maneu-
ver that now bears his name.4 Possibly due to the potential 
for massive hemorrhage during liver surgery, very little 
progress in surgical techniques was recorded for the next 
half-century. Work by Rex, Cantlie, and others laid the 
groundwork for experimental and clinical reports in the 
1950s by Couinaud, Hjortsjo, Healey, Lortat-Jacob, and 
Starzl.5,6 These seminal contributions paved the way for the 
modern era of hepatic resection surgery.
1264
Key Points
1 	 When operating on the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, or 
­adjacent organs, recognition of the normal or variant vascu-
lar and biliary anatomy is essential to avoiding surgical 
­complications.
2 	 The liver is the largest gland in the body and performs a 
diverse spectrum of functions.
3 	 Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging 
with contrast enhancement constitute the mainstays for the 
radiologic evaluation of the liver.
4 	 Acute liver failure rapidly progresses to hepatic coma and 
death even with maximal medical therapy. The only defini-
tive treatment is orthotopic liver transplantation.
5 	 Cirrhosis is the end result of chronic hepatic insult, and fur-
ther deterioration can lead to the development of end-stage 
liver disease, which carries a high mortality rate.
6 	 Acute variceal bleeding should be managed with aggressive 
resuscitation and prompt endoscopic diagnosis with hemor-
rhage control. The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt procedure can be considered for cases refractory to 
medical treatment.
7 	 Common benign lesions of the liver include cysts, hem-
angiomas, focal nodular hyperplasia, and hepatocellular 
­adenomas. In most instances, these lesions can be reliably 
diagnosed by their characteristic features on imaging.
8 	 Many options exist for the treatment of hepatocellular 
carcinomas, and these cases are best managed by a mul-
tidisciplinary liver transplant team.
9 	 Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma. Under a protocol with strict eligi-
bility criteria, patients with unresectable tumors can be 
considered for liver transplantation following neoadju-
vant chemoradiation, with survival rates that compare 
favorably with the rates for resection.
10   The resectability of colorectal cancer metastases to the 
liver is primarily determined by the volume of the future 
liver remnant and the health of the background liver and 
not actual tumor number.
11   Laparoscopic liver resections can be performed safely by 
experienced surgeons in selected patients and have been 
shown to produce comparable morbidity and mortality 
rates to open resections.
LIVER ANATOMY
The liver is the largest organ in the body, weighing approxi-
mately 1500 g. It resides in the right upper abdominal cavity 
beneath the diaphragm and is protected by the rib cage. It is 
reddish brown and is surrounded by a fibrous sheath known as 
­Glisson’s capsule. The liver is held in place by several ligaments 
(Fig. 31-1). The round ligament is the remnant of the obliterated 
umbilical vein and enters the left liver hilum at the front edge 
of the falciform ligament. The falciform ligament separates 
the left lateral and left medial segments along the umbilical 
­fissure and anchors the liver to the anterior abdominal wall. 
Deep in the plane between the caudate lobe and the left lateral 
segment is the fibrous ligamentum venosum (Arantius’ liga-
ment), which is the obliterated ductus venosus and is covered 
by the plate of Arantius. The left and right triangular ligaments 
secure the two sides of the liver to the diaphragm. Extending 
from the triangular ligaments anteriorly on the liver are the 
coronary ligaments. The right coronary ligament also extends 
from the right undersurface of the liver to the peritoneum over-
lying the right kidney, thereby anchoring the liver to the right 
retroperitoneum. These ligaments (round, falciform, triangu-
lar, and coronary) can be divided in a bloodless plane to fully 
mobilize the liver to facilitate hepatic resection. Centrally and 
just to the left of the gallbladder fossa, the liver attaches via the 
hepatoduodenal and the gastrohepatic ligaments (Fig. 31-2). 
The hepatoduodenal ligament is known as the porta hepatis 
and contains the common bile duct, the hepatic artery, and the 
portal vein. From the right side and deep (dorsal) to the porta 
hepatis is the foramen of Winslow, also known as the epiploic 
foramen (see Fig. 31-2). This passage connects directly to 
the lesser sac and allows complete vascular inflow control to 
the liver when the hepatoduodenal ligament is clamped using 
the Pringle maneuver.
1265
Liver
CHAPTER 31
Segmental Anatomy
The liver is grossly separated into the right and left lobes 
by the plane from the gallbladder fossa to the inferior vena 
cava (IVC), known as Cantlie’s line.5 The right lobe typi-
cally accounts for 60% to 70% of the liver mass, with the left 
lobe (and caudate lobe) making up the remainder. The caudate 
lobe lies to the left and anterior of the IVC and contains three 
subsegments: the Spiegel lobe, the paracaval portion, and 
the caudate process.7 The falciform ligament does not separate the 
right and left lobes, but rather it divides the left lateral segment from 
the left medial segment. The left lateral and left medial segments 
also are referred to as sections as defined in the Brisbane 2000 
terminology, which is outlined later in the section titled “Hepatic 
Resection.” A significant advance in our understanding of liver 
anatomy came from the cast work studies of the French surgeon 
and anatomist Couinaud in the early 1950s. Couinaud divided the 
liver into eight segments, numbering them in a clockwise direction 
beginning with the caudate lobe as segment I.6 ­Segments II and III 
comprise the left lateral segment, and segment IV is the left medial 
segment (Fig. 31-3). Thus, the left lobe is made up of the left lateral 
segment (Couinaud’s segments II and III) and the left medial seg-
ment (segment IV). Segment IV can be subdivided into segment 
IVA and segment IVB. Segment IVA is cephalad and just below 
the diaphragm, spanning from segment VIII to the falciform liga-
Figure 31-1.  Hepatic ligaments suspending the 
liver to the diaphragm and anterior abdominal 
wall.
Diaphragm
Right triangular
ligament
Left triangular
ligament
Falciform
ligament
Round
ligament
Figure 31-2.  In situ liver hilar anatomy with hepatoduodenal and 
gastrohepatic ligaments. Foramen of Winslow is depicted.
Liver in situ
Foramen of
winslow
Gastrohepatic
ligament
Open hepato-
duodenal ligament
Figure 31-3.  Couinaud’s liver segments (I through VIII) num-
bered in a clockwise manner. The left lobe includes segments II 
to IV, the right lobe includes segments V to VIII, and the caudate 
lobe is segment I. IVC = inferior vena cava.
Right lobe
Left lobe
Right lobe
Left lobe
VIII
IVa
IVb
II
III
V
VII
VI
IVC
Caudate lobe
I
III
V
VII
VI
II
IVb
ment adjacent to segment II. Segment IVB is caudad and adjacent 
to the gallbladder fossa. Many anatomy textbooks also refer to seg-
ment IV as the quadrate lobe. Quadrate lobe is an outdated term, 
and the preferred term is segment IV or left medial segment. Most 
surgeons still refer to segment I as the caudate lobe, rather than 
segment I. The right lobe is comprised of segments V, VI, VII, and 
1266
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
VIII, with segments V and VIII making up the right anterior lobe, 
and segments VI and VII the right posterior lobe.
Additional functional anatomy was highlighted by 
­Bismuth based on the distribution of the hepatic veins. The 
three hepatic veins run in corresponding scissura (fissures) and 
divide the liver into four sectors.8 The right hepatic vein runs 
along the right scissura and separates the right posterolateral 
sector from the right anterolateral sector. The main scissura 
contains the middle hepatic vein and separates the right and left 
livers. The left scissura contains the course of the left hepatic 
vein and separates the left posterior and left anterior sectors.
Hepatic Artery
The liver has a dual blood supply consisting of the hepatic artery 
and the portal vein. The hepatic artery delivers approximately 
RHA
LHA
Hepatic artery
proper
Right gastric
artery
Common hepatic artery
Left gastric
artery
Celiac trunk
Splenic artery
Gastroduodenal artery
Figure 31-4.  Arterial anatomy of the upper 
abdomen and liver, including the celiac trunk 
and hepatic artery branches. a. = artery; LHA = 
left hepatic artery; RHA = right hepatic artery.
25% of the blood supply, and the portal vein approximately 
75%. The hepatic artery arises from the celiac axis (trunk), 
which gives off the left gastric, splenic, and common hepatic 
arteries (Fig. 31-4). The common hepatic artery then divides 
into the gastroduodenal artery and the hepatic artery proper. The 
right gastric artery typically originates off of the hepatic artery 
proper, but this is variable. The hepatic artery proper divides 
into the right and left hepatic arteries. This “classic” or standard 
arterial anatomy is present in only approximately 76% of cases, 
with the remaining 24% having variable anatomy. It is critical to 
understand the arterial (and biliary) anatomic variants to 
avoid surgical complications when operating on the liver, 
gallbladder, pancreas, or adjacent organs.
The most common hepatic arterial variants are shown 
(Fig. 31-5). Approximately 10% to 15% of the time, there is a 
Replaced right hepatic
artery from SMA (10%-15%)
Replaced left hepatic artery 
from left gastric artery (3%-10%)
Replaced right and replaced left 
hepatic arteries (1%-2%)
Completely replaced common
hepatic artery from SMA (1%-2%)
Figure 31-5.  Common hepatic 
artery anatomic variants. SMA = 
superior mesenteric artery.
1
1267
Liver
CHAPTER 31
replaced or accessory right hepatic artery arising from the supe-
rior mesenteric artery (SMA). When there is a replacement or 
accessory right hepatic artery, it travels posterior to the portal vein 
and then takes up a right lateral position before diving into the 
liver parenchyma. This can be recognized visually on a preopera-
tive computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan, and confirmed by palpation in the hilum where a sepa-
rate right posterior pulsation is felt distinct from that of the hepatic 
artery proper that lies anteriorly in the hepatoduodenal ligament to 
the left of the common bile duct. In approximately 3% to 10% of 
cases, there exists a replacement (or accessory) left hepatic artery 
coming off of the left gastric artery and running obliquely in the 
gastrohepatic ligament anterior to the caudate lobe before entering 
the hilar plate at the base of the umbilical fissure. Other less com-
mon variants (approximately 1% to 2% each) are the presence of 
both replaced right and replaced left hepatic arteries, as well as a 
completely replaced common hepatic artery coming off the SMA 
(see Fig. 31-5). Although not well demonstrated in the illustra-
tion, the clue for a completely replaced common hepatic artery 
coming off the SMA is the presence of a strong arterial pulsation 
to the right of and posterior to the common bile duct, rather than 
the left side and anterior, in the porta hepatis. Another important 
point is that the right hepatic artery passes deep and posterior to 
the common bile duct approximately 88% of the time but crosses 
anterior to the common bile duct in approximately 12% of cases. 
The cystic artery feeding the gallbladder usually arises from the 
right hepatic artery in Calot’s triangle.
Portal Vein
The portal vein is formed by the confluence of the splenic vein 
and the superior mesenteric vein. The inferior mesenteric vein 
usually drains into the splenic vein upstream from the conflu-
ence (Fig. 31-6). The main portal vein traverses the porta hepa-
tis before dividing into the left and right portal vein branches. 
The left portal vein typically branches from the main portal vein 
outside of the liver with a sharp bend to the left and consists of 
the transverse portion followed by a 90° turn at the base of the 
umbilical fissure to become the umbilical portion before enter-
ing the liver parenchyma (Fig. 31-7). The left portal vein then 
Figure 31-6.  Portal vein anatomy. The portal vein is formed by 
the confluence of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins. The 
inferior mesenteric vein drains into the splenic vein. The coronary 
(left gastric) vein drains into the portal vein in the vicinity of the 
confluence. v. = vein.
Coronary v.
Portal v.
Superior mesenteric v.
Inferior
mesenteric v.
Splenic v.
Figure 31-7.  Anatomy of the left portal vein (LPV). Cadaver cast 
shows the transverse and umbilical portions of the LPV.  
Main portal vein
Right
portal vein
Left
portal vein
Umbilical
portion LPV
I
II
III
IVA
IVB
V
VI
VII
VIII
VIII
Transverse
portion LPV
divides to give off the segment II and III branches to the left lat-
eral segment, as well as the segment IV branches that supply the 
left medial segment. The left portal vein also provides the domi-
nant inflow branch to the caudate lobe (although branches can 
arise from the main and right portal veins also), usually close 
to the bend between the transverse and umbilical portions. The 
division of the right portal vein is usually higher in the hilum 
and may be close to (or inside) the liver parenchyma at the hilar 
plate. Twenty percent to thirty-five percent of individuals have 
aberrant portal venous anatomy, with portal vein trifurcation or 
an aberrant branch from the left portal vein supplying the right 
anterior lobe being the most frequent.
The portal vein drains the splanchnic blood from the stom-
ach, pancreas, spleen, small intestine, and majority of the colon 
to the liver before returning to the systemic circulation. The por-
tal vein pressure in an individual with normal physiology is low 
at 3 to 5 mmHg. The portal vein is valveless, however, and in 
the setting of portal hypertension, the pressure can be quite high 
(20 to 30 mmHg). This results in decompression of the systemic 
circulation through portocaval anastomoses, most commonly via 
the coronary (left gastric) vein, which produces esophageal and 
gastric varices with a propensity for major hemorrhage. Another 
branch of the main portal vein is the superior pancreaticoduode-
nal vein (which comes off low in an anterior lateral position and 
is divided during pancreaticoduodenectomy). Closer to the liver, 
the main portal vein typically gives off a short branch (posterior 
lateral) to the caudate process on the right side. It is important 
to identify this branch and ligate it during hilar dissection for 
anatomic right hemihepatectomy to avoid avulsion.
Hepatic Veins and Inferior Vena Cava
There are three hepatic veins (right, middle, and left) that pass 
obliquely through the liver to drain the blood to the suprahepatic 
IVC and eventually the right atrium (Fig. 31-8). The right hepatic 
vein drains segments V through VIII; the middle hepatic vein 
drains segment IV as well as segments V and VIII; and the left 
hepatic vein drains segments II and III. The caudate lobe is unique 
because its venous drainage feeds directly into the IVC. In addi-
tion, the liver usually has a few small, variable short hepatic veins 
that directly enter the IVC from the undersurface of the liver. The 
left and middle hepatic veins form a common trunk approximately 
95% of the time before entering the IVC, whereas the right hepatic 
vein inserts separately (in an oblique orientation) into the IVC. 
1268
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
There is a large inferior accessory right hepatic vein in 15% to 20% 
of cases that runs in the hepatocaval ligament. This can be a source 
of torrential bleeding if control of it is lost during right hepatec-
tomy. The hepatic vein branches bisect the portal branches inside 
the liver parenchyma (i.e., the right hepatic vein runs between the 
right anterior and posterior portal veins; the middle hepatic vein 
passes between the right anterior and left portal vein; and the left 
hepatic vein crosses between the segment II and III branches of the 
left portal vein).
Bile Duct and Hepatic Ducts
Within the hepatoduodenal ligament, the common bile duct lies 
anteriorly and to the right. It gives off the cystic duct to the 
gallbladder and becomes the common hepatic duct before divid-
ing into the right and left hepatic ducts. In general, the hepatic 
ducts follow the arterial branching pattern inside the liver. The 
right anterior hepatic duct usually enters the liver above the hilar 
plate, whereas the right posterior duct dives behind the right 
portal vein and can be found on the surface of the caudate pro-
cess before entering the liver. The left hepatic duct typically 
has a longer extrahepatic course before giving off segmental 
branches behind the left portal vein at the base of the umbilical 
fissure. Considerable variation exists, and in 30% to 40% of 
Right lobe
Posterior
segment
structures
Middle
hepatic
v.
Anterior 
segment
structures
Gall bladder
Portal v.
Hepatic a.
Falciform
ligament
Left lobe
Medial
segment
structures
Lateral
segment
structures
Middle HV
Right HV
Left HV
IVC and 3 HVs
IVC 
Figure 31-8.  Confluence of the three hepatic veins (HVs) and the inferior vena cava (IVC). Note that the middle and left HVs drain into 
a common trunk before entering the IVC. a. = artery; v. = vein. (Adapted with permission from Cameron JL, ed. Atlas of Surgery. Vol. I, 
Gallbladder and Biliary Tract, the Liver, Portasystemic Shunts, the Pancreas. Toronto: BC Decker; 1990:153.)
cases, there is a nonstandard hepatic duct confluence with acces-
sory or aberrant ducts (Fig. 31-9). The cystic duct itself also has 
a variable pattern of drainage into the common bile duct. This 
can lead to potential injury or postoperative bile leakage during 
cholecystectomy or hepatic resection, and the surgeon needs to 
expect these variants. The gallbladder sits adherent to hepatic 
segments IVB (left lobe) and V (right lobe).
Neural Innervation and Lymphatic Drainage
The parasympathetic innervation of the liver comes from the 
left vagus, which gives off the anterior hepatic branch, and 
the right vagus, which gives off the posterior hepatic branch. 
The sympathetic innervation involves the greater thoracic 
splanchnic nerves and the celiac ganglia, although the function 
of these nerves is poorly understood. The denervated liver after 
hepatic transplantation seems to function with normal capacity. 
A common source of referred pain to the right shoulder and 
scapula as well as the right side or back is the right phrenic 
nerve, which is stimulated by tumors that stretch Glisson’s cap-
sule or by diaphragmatic irritation.
Lymph is produced within the liver and drains via the 
perisinusoidal space of Disse and periportal clefts of Mall to 
larger lymphatics that drain to the hilar cystic duct lymph node 
1269
Liver
CHAPTER 31
(Calot’s triangle node), as well as the common bile duct, 
hepatic artery, and retropancreatic and celiac lymph nodes. This 
is particularly important for resection of hilar cholangiocarci-
noma, which has a high incidence of lymph node metastases. 
The hepatic lymph also drains cephalad to the cardiophrenic 
lymph nodes, and the latter can be pathologically identified on 
a staging CT or MRI scan.
LIVER PHYSIOLOGY
The liver is the largest gland in the body and has an extraordi-
nary spectrum of functions. These include processes such as 
storage, metabolism, production, and secretion. One crucial role 
is the processing of absorbed nutrients through the metabolism 
of glucose, lipids, and proteins. The liver maintains glucose con-
centrations in a normal range over both short and long periods by 
performing several important roles in carbohydrate metabolism. 
In the fasting state, the liver ensures a sufficient supply of glu-
cose to the central nervous system. The liver can produce glu-
cose by breaking down glycogen through glycogenolysis and 
by de novo synthesis of glucose through gluconeogenesis from 
noncarbohydrate precursors such as lactate, amino acids, and 
glycerol. In the postprandial state, excess circulating glucose is 
removed by glycogen synthesis or glycolysis and lipogenesis. 
The liver also plays a central role in lipid metabolism through 
the formation of bile and the production of cholesterol and fatty 
acids. Protein metabolism occurs in the liver through amino acid 
deamination, resulting in the production of ammonia as well as 
the production of a variety of amino acids. In addition to metabo-
lism, the liver also is responsible for the synthesis of most circu-
lating plasma proteins. Among these proteins are albumin, factors 
of the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems, and compounds of 
the complement cascade. Furthermore, the detoxification 
of many substances through drug metabolism occurs in the 
rp
A: Normal bifurcation 57%
B: Trifurcation of 3 ducts 12%
C: R anterior (C1, 16%) or R posterior
     (C2, 4%) duct draining into CHD
D: R posterior (D1, 5%) or R anterior
     duct (D2, 1%) draining into the left
     hepatic duct
E: Absence of hepatic duct
    confluence 3%
F: Drainage of R posterior duct into
     cystic duct 2%
rp
rp
rp
rp
rp
rp
rp
rp
lh
lh
lh
lh
lh
lh
lh
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
IV
IV
III
III
II
II
I
I
F2%
E3%
D6%
C20%
A57%
B12%
4%
1%
1%
2%
5%
16%
C2
C1
D2
E2
E1
D1
Figure 31-9.  Main variations of hepatic duct confluence. As described by Couinaud in 1957, the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts has a vari-
able pattern in approximately 40% of cases. CHD = common hepatic duct; lh = left hepatic; R = right; ra = right anterior; rp = right posterior. 
(Reproduced with permission from Blumgart LH, Fong Y, eds. Surgery of the Liver and Biliary Tract. 3rd ed, Vol. I. London: Elsevier ­Science; 
2000. kkjkjdht © Elsevier Science.)
2
1270
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
liver, as do immunologic responses through the many immune 
cells found in its reticuloendothelial system.9 
Bilirubin Metabolism
Bilirubin is the breakdown product of normal heme catabolism. 
Bilirubin is bound to albumin in the circulation and sent to the 
liver. In the liver, it is conjugated to glucuronic acid to form 
bilirubin diglucuronide in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme 
glucuronyl transferase, making it water soluble. This glucuro-
nide is then excreted into the bile canaliculi. A small amount 
dissolves in the blood and is then excreted in the urine. The 
majority of conjugated bilirubin is excreted in the intestine 
as waste, because the intestinal mucosa is relatively imper-
meable to conjugated bilirubin. However, it is permeable to 
unconjugated bilirubin and urobilinogens, a series of bilirubin 
derivatives formed by the action of bacteria. Thus, some of the 
bilirubin and urobilinogens are reabsorbed in the portal circula-
tion; they are again excreted by the liver or enter the circulation 
and are excreted in the urine.10
Formation of Bile
Bile is a complex fluid containing organic and inorganic sub-
stances dissolved in an alkaline solution that flows from the 
liver through the biliary system and into the small intestine. The 
main components of bile are water, electrolytes, and a variety of 
organic molecules including bile pigments, bile salts, phospho-
lipids (e.g., lecithin), and cholesterol. The two fundamental roles 
of bile are to aid in the digestion and absorption of lipids and 
lipid-soluble vitamins and to eliminate waste products (bilirubin 
and cholesterol) through secretion into bile and elimination in 
feces. Bile is produced by hepatocytes and secreted through the 
biliary system. In between meals, bile is stored in the gallblad-
der and concentrated through the absorption of water and elec-
trolytes. Upon entry of food into the duodenum, bile is released 
from the gallbladder to aid in digestion. The human liver can 
produce about 1 L of bile daily.
Bile salts, in conjunction with phospholipids, are respon-
sible for the digestion and absorption of lipids in the small 
intestine. Bile salts are sodium and potassium salts of bile 
acids conjugated to amino acids. The bile acids are deriva-
tives of cholesterol synthesized in hepatocytes. Cholesterol, 
ingested from the diet or derived from hepatic synthesis, is 
converted into the bile acids cholic acid and chenodeoxycho-
lic acid. These bile acids are conjugated to either glycine or 
taurine before secretion into the biliary system. Bacteria in 
the intestine can remove glycine and taurine from bile salts. 
They can also convert some of the primary bile acids into sec-
ondary bile acids by removing a hydroxyl group, producing 
deoxycholic acid from cholic acid and lithocholic acid from 
chenodeoxycholic acid.
Bile salts secreted into the intestine are efficiently reab-
sorbed and reused. Approximately 90% to 95% of the bile salts 
are absorbed from the small intestine at the terminal ileum. 
The remaining 5% to 10% enter the colon and are converted 
to the secondary salts, deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid. 
The mixture of primary and secondary bile salts and bile acids 
is absorbed primarily by active transport in the terminal ileum. 
The absorbed bile salts are transported back to the liver in the 
portal vein and re-excreted in the bile. Those lost in the stool 
are replaced by synthesis in the liver. The continuous process 
of secretion of bile salts in the bile, their passage through the 
intestine, and their subsequent return to the liver is termed the 
enterohepatic circulation.10
Drug Metabolism
The liver plays an important role in providing mechanisms for 
ridding the body of foreign molecules (xenobiotics) that are 
absorbed from the environment. In most cases, a drug is rela-
tively lipophilic to ensure good absorption. The liver participates 
in the elimination of these lipid-soluble drugs by transforming 
them into more readily excreted hydrophilic products. There are 
two main reactions important for drug metabolism. Phase I reac-
tions include oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis of molecules. 
These result in metabolites that are more hydrophilic than the 
original chemicals. The cytochrome P450 system is a family 
of hemoproteins important for oxidative reactions involving 
drugs and toxic substances. Phase II reactions, also known 
as conjugation reactions, are synthetic reactions that involve 
addition of subgroups to the drug molecule. These subgroups 
include glucuronate, acetate, glutathione, glycine, sulfate, and 
methyl groups. These drug reactions occur mainly in the smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes.
Many factors can affect drug metabolism in the liver. When 
the rate of metabolism of a drug is increased (i.e., enzyme induc-
tion), the duration of the drug action will decrease. However, when 
the metabolism of a drug is decreased (i.e., enzyme inhibition), 
then the drug will circulate for a longer period of time. It is impor-
tant to note that some drugs may be converted to active products 
by metabolism in the liver. An example is acetaminophen when 
taken in larger doses. Normally, acetaminophen is conjugated by 
the liver to harmless glucuronide and sulfate metabolites that are 
water soluble and eliminated in the urine. During an overdose, 
the normal metabolic pathways are overwhelmed, and some of 
the drug is converted to a reactive and toxic intermediate by the 
cytochrome P450 system. Glutathione normally reacts with this 
intermediate, leading to the production and subsequent excre-
tion of a harmless product. However, as glutathione stores are 
diminished, the reactive intermediate cannot be detoxified and 
it combines with lipid membranes of hepatocytes, which results 
in cellular necrosis. Thus, treatment of acetaminophen overdoses 
consists of replenishing glutathione stores by supplementing with 
sulfhydryl compounds such as acetylcysteine.
Liver Function Tests
Liver function tests is a term frequently used to refer to measure-
ment of the levels of a group of serum markers for evaluation 
of liver dysfunction. Most commonly, levels of aspartate trans-
aminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phos-
phatase (AP), γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin 
are included in this panel. This term is a misnomer, however, 
because most of these tests measure not liver function but rather 
cell damage. More accurate measurement of the liver’s synthetic 
function is provided by serum albumin levels and prothrombin 
time (PT). Although measuring liver enzyme levels is impor-
tant in the assessment of a patient’s liver disease, these test 
results can be nonspecific. Thus, evaluation of patients with 
suspected liver disease should always involve careful interpre-
tation of abnormalities in these liver test results in the context of 
a thorough history and physical examination. The approach to 
evaluating abnormal laboratory values also can be simplified by 
categorizing the type of abnormality that predominates (hepa-
tocellular damage, abnormal synthetic function, or cholestasis).
Hepatocellular Injury
Hepatocellular injury of the liver is usually indicated by abnor-
malities in levels of the liver aminotransferases AST and ALT. 
1271
Liver
CHAPTER 31
These enzymes participate in gluconeogenesis by catalyzing 
the transfer of amino groups from aspartic acid or alanine to 
ketoglutaric acid to produce oxaloacetic acid and pyruvic 
acid, respectively (these enzymes are also referred to as serum 
glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase [SGOT] and serum 
­glutamic-pyruvic transaminase [SGPT]). AST is found in liver, 
cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle, kidney, brain, pancreas, lungs, 
and red blood cells and thus is less specific for disorders of the 
liver. ALT is predominately found in the liver and thus is more 
specific for liver disease. Hepatocellular injury is the trigger for 
release of these enzymes into the circulation. Common causes 
of elevated aminotransferase levels include viral hepatitis, alco-
hol abuse, medications, genetic disorders (Wilson’s disease, 
hemochromatosis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency), and autoimmune 
diseases.
The extent of serum aminotransferase elevations can 
suggest certain etiologies of the liver injury. However, the 
levels of the enzymes in these tests correlate poorly with the 
severity of hepatocellular necrosis, because they may not be 
significantly elevated in conditions of hepatic fibrosis or cir-
rhosis. In alcoholic liver disease, an AST:ALT ratio of >2:1 is 
common. Mild elevations of transaminase levels can be found 
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, chronic viral infection, or 
medication-induced injury. Moderate increases in the levels of 
these enzymes are common in acute viral hepatitis. In condi-
tions of ischemic insults, toxin ingestions (i.e., acetaminophen), 
and fulminant hepatitis, AST and ALT levels can be elevated 
to the thousands.
Abnormal Synthetic Function
Albumin synthesis is an important function of the liver and thus 
can be measured to evaluate the liver’s synthetic function. The 
liver produces approximately 10 g of albumin per day. However, 
albumin levels are dependent on a number of factors such as 
nutritional status, renal dysfunction, protein-losing enteropa-
thies, and hormonal disturbances. In addition, level of albumin 
is not a marker of acute hepatic dysfunction due to albumin’s 
long half-life of 15 to 20 days.
Most clotting factors (except factor VIII) are synthesized 
exclusively in the liver, and thus their levels can also be used 
as a measure of hepatic synthetic function. Measurements of 
the prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio 
(INR) are some of the best tests of hepatic synthetic function. 
PT measures the rate of conversion of prothrombin to throm-
bin. To standardize the reporting of PT and avoid interlabora-
tory variability, the INR was developed. The INR is the ratio 
of the patient’s PT to the mean control PT. Because vitamin K 
is involved in the γ-carboxylation of factors used to measure 
PT (factors II, VII, IX, and X), values also may be prolonged 
in other conditions such as vitamin K deficiency and warfarin 
therapy.
Cholestasis
Cholestasis is a condition in which bile flow from the liver to the 
duodenum is impaired. Disturbances in bile flow may be due to 
intrahepatic causes (hepatocellular dysfunction) or extrahepatic 
causes (biliary tree obstruction). Cholestasis often results in the 
release of certain enzymes and thus can be detected by measur-
ing the serum levels of bilirubin, AP, and GGT. Bilirubin is a 
breakdown product of hemoglobin metabolism. Unconjugated 
bilirubin is insoluble and thus is transported to the liver bound 
to albumin. In the liver, it is conjugated to allow excretion 
in bile. Measured total bilirubin levels can be normal or high in 
patients with significant liver disease because of the liver’s abil-
ity to conjugate significant amounts of bilirubin. Thus, to help 
aid in the diagnosis of hyperbilirubinemia, fractionation of total 
bilirubin is usually performed to distinguish between conjugated 
(direct) and unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin. Indirect bilirubin 
is a term frequently used to refer to unconjugated bilirubin in 
the circulation because the addition of another chemical is nec-
essary to differentiate this fraction from the whole. Normally, 
>90% of serum bilirubin is unconjugated. The testing process 
for conjugated bilirubin, in contrast, is direct without the addi-
tion of other agents. The direct bilirubin test measures the lev-
els of conjugated bilirubin and δ bilirubin (conjugated bilirubin 
bound to albumin).
The patterns of elevation of the different fractions of bili-
rubin provide important diagnostic clues as to the cause of cho-
lestasis. In general, an elevated indirect bilirubin level suggests 
intrahepatic cholestasis, and an elevated direct bilirubin level 
suggests extrahepatic obstruction. Mechanisms that can result 
in increases in unconjugated bilirubin levels include increased 
bilirubin production (hemolytic disorders and resorption of 
hematomas) or defects (inherited or acquired) in hepatic uptake 
or conjugation. The rate-limiting step in bilirubin metabolism 
is the excretion of bilirubin from hepatocytes, so conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia can be seen in inherited or acquired dis-
orders of intrahepatic excretion or extrahepatic obstruction. 
Conjugated bilirubin that cannot be excreted accumulates in 
hepatocytes, which results in its secretion into the circulation. 
Because conjugated bilirubin is water soluble, it can be found in 
the urine of patients with jaundice.
AP is an enzyme with a wide tissue distribution but is 
found primarily in the liver and bones. In the liver, it is expressed 
by the bile duct epithelium. In conditions of biliary obstruction, 
levels rise as a result of increased synthesis and release into 
the serum. Because the half-life of serum AP is approximately 
7 days, it may take several days for levels to normalize even 
after resolution of the biliary obstruction.
GGT is another enzyme found in hepatocytes and released 
from the bile duct epithelium. Elevation of GGT is an early 
marker and also a sensitive test for hepatobiliary disease. Like 
AP elevation, however, it is nonspecific and can be produced by 
a variety of disorders in the absence of liver disease. Increased 
levels of GGT can be induced by certain medications, alcohol 
abuse, pancreatic disease, myocardial infarction, renal failure, 
and obstructive pulmonary disease. For this reason, elevated 
GGT levels are often interpreted in conjunction with other 
enzyme abnormalities. For example, a raised GGT level with 
increased AP level supports a liver source.
Jaundice
Jaundice refers to the yellowish staining of the skin, sclera, and 
mucous membranes with the pigment bilirubin. Hyperbilirubi-
nemia usually is detectable as jaundice when blood levels rise 
above 2.5 to 3 mg/dL. Jaundice can be caused by a wide range 
of benign and malignant disorders. However, when present, it 
may indicate a serious condition, and thus knowledge of the 
differential diagnosis of jaundice and a systematic approach to 
the workup of the patient is necessary. Workup of a patient with 
jaundice is simplified by organizing the possible causes of the 
disorder into groups based on the location of bilirubin metabo-
lism. As mentioned previously, bilirubin metabolism can take 
place in three phases: prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic. 
1272
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The prehepatic phase includes the production of bilirubin 
from the breakdown of heme products and its transport to the 
liver. The majority of the heme results from red blood cell 
metabolism and the rest from other heme-containing organic 
compounds such as myoglobin and cytochromes. In the liver, 
the insoluble unconjugated bilirubin is then conjugated to gluc-
uronic acid to allow for solubility in bile and excretion. The 
posthepatic phase of bilirubin metabolism consists of excretion 
of soluble bilirubin through the biliary system into the duode-
num. Dysfunction in any of these phases can lead to jaundice.10
Prehepatic.  Jaundice as a result of elevated levels of uncon-
jugated bilirubin occurs from faulty prehepatic metabolism 
and usually arises from conditions that interfere with proper 
conjugation of bilirubin in the hepatocyte. Insufficient conju-
gation is often seen in processes that result in excessive heme 
metabolism. Subsequently, the conjugation system is over-
whelmed, which results in unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. 
Causes of hemolysis include inherited and acquired hemolytic 
anemias. Inherited hemolytic anemias include genetic disorders 
of the red blood cell membrane (hereditary spherocytosis and 
eliptocytosis), enzyme defects (glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase deficiency), and defects in hemoglobin structure 
(sickle cell anemia and thalassemias). Hemolytic anemias can 
also be acquired, and these can be further divided into those 
with immune-mediated and those with non–immune-mediated 
causes. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemias result in a posi-
tive finding on a direct Coombs’ test and have a variety of auto-
immune and drug-induced causes. In contrast, direct Coombs’ 
test results are negative in nonimmune hemolytic anemias. The 
causes in this latter category are varied and include drugs and 
toxins that directly damage red blood cells, mechanical trauma 
(heart valves), microangiopathy, and infections. Prehepatic dys-
function of bilirubin metabolism also can result from failure in 
the transport of unconjugated bilirubin to the liver by albumin 
in any condition that leads to plasma protein loss. A poor nutri-
tional state or excess protein loss as seen in burn patients can 
lead to elevated levels of unconjugated bilirubin in the circula-
tion and jaundice.
Intrahepatic.  Intrahepatic causes of jaundice involve the 
intracellular mechanisms for conjugation and excretion of bile 
from the hepatocyte. The enzymatic processes in hepatocytes 
can be affected by any condition that impairs hepatic blood 
flow and subsequent function of the liver (ischemic or hypoxic 
events). Furthermore, there are multiple inherited disorders of 
enzyme metabolism that can result in either unconjugated or 
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Gilbert’s syndrome is a genetic 
variant characterized by diminished activity of the enzyme 
glucuronyltransferase, which results in decreased conjugation 
of bilirubin to glucuronide. It is a benign condition that affects 
approximately 4% to 7% of the population. Typically, the dis-
ease results in transient mild increases in unconjugated bilirubin 
levels and jaundice during episodes of fasting, stress, or illness. 
These episodes are self-limited and usually do not require fur-
ther treatment. Another inherited disorder of bilirubin conjuga-
tion is Crigler-Najjar syndrome. It is a rare disease found in 
neonates and can result in neurotoxic sequelae from bilirubin 
encephalopathy.
In addition to defects in conjugation, disorders in bilirubin 
excretion in hepatocytes can also lead to jaundice. Rotor’s syn-
drome and Dubin-Johnson syndrome are two uncommon genetic 
disorders that disrupt secretion of conjugated bilirubin from the 
hepatocyte into the bile and result in conjugated hyperbilirubi-
nemia. There are also multiple acquired conditions that result in 
inflammation and intrahepatic cholestasis by affecting hepato-
cyte mechanisms for conjugation and excretion of bile. Viruses, 
alcohol abuse, sepsis, and autoimmune disorders all can result in 
inflammation in the liver with subsequent disruption of bilirubin 
transport in the liver. In addition, jaundice can also occur from 
the cytotoxic effects of many medications, including acetamino-
phen, oral contraceptives, and anabolic steroids.
Posthepatic.  Posthepatic causes of jaundice are usually the 
result of intrinsic or extrinsic obstruction of the biliary duct sys-
tem that prevents the flow of bile into the duodenum. There is a 
wide spectrum of pathologies that may present with obstructive 
jaundice. Intrinsic obstruction can occur from biliary diseases, 
including cholelithiasis, choledocholithiasis, benign and malig-
nant biliary strictures, cholangiocarcinoma, cholangitis, and 
disorders of the papilla of Vater. Extrinsic compression of the 
biliary tree is commonly due to pancreatic disorders. Patients 
with pancreatitis, pseudocysts, and malignancies can present 
with jaundice due to external compression of the biliary system. 
Finally, with the growing armamentarium of endoscopic tools 
and minimally invasive surgical approaches, surgical complica-
tions are becoming more frequent causes of extrahepatic cho-
lestasis. Misadventures with surgical clips, retained stones, and 
inadvertent ischemic insults to the biliary system can result in 
obstructive jaundice recognized at any time from immediately 
postoperatively to many years later.
RADIOLOGIC EVALUATION OF THE LIVER
Ultrasound
Abdominal ultrasound is a commonly applied imaging modal-
ity used to evaluate abdominal symptoms. Ultrasound tech-
nology is based on the pulse-echo principle. The ultrasound 
transducer converts electrical energy to high-frequency sound 
energy that is transmitted into tissue. Although some of the 
ultrasound waves are transmitted through the tissue, some 
are reflected back, and the ultrasound image is produced when 
the ultrasound receiver detects those reflected waves. This real-
time gray scale (B-mode) imaging is augmented by Doppler 
flow imaging. Doppler ultrasound not only can detect the pres-
ence of blood vessels but also can determine the direction and 
velocity of blood flow. Ultrasonography is a useful initial imag-
ing test of the liver because it is inexpensive, widely available, 
involves no radiation exposure, and is well tolerated by patients. 
It is excellent for diagnosing biliary pathology and focal liver 
lesions. In addition, liver injury can be evaluated in trauma 
patients using the focused abdominal sonography for trauma 
examination. Limitations of ultrasound include incomplete 
imaging of the liver, most often at the dome or beneath ribs on 
the surface, and incomplete visualization of lesion boundaries. 
Moreover, obesity and overlying bowel gas also can interfere 
with image quality. Thus, ultrasonographically detected masses 
usually require further evaluation by other imaging modalities 
due to the lower sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound com-
pared with CT and MRI.
The advent of contrast-enhanced ultrasound has improved 
the ability of this modality to differentiate among benign and 
malignant lesions. The injection of gas microbubble agents can 
increase the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound in detect-
ing and diagnosing liver lesions. Microbubbles are <10 μm 
1273
Liver
CHAPTER 31
and, when given intravenously, allow for more effective echo 
enhancement. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging of the 
liver improves delineation of liver lesions through identifica-
tion of dynamic enhancement patterns and the vascular mor-
phology of the lesion. In addition, some agents exhibit a late 
liver-specific phase in which the bubbles are taken up by cells 
in the reticuloendothelial system and accumulate in normal liver 
parenchyma after the vascular enhancement has faded.
The use of intraoperative ultrasound of the liver has rap-
idly expanded over the years with the increasing number and 
complexity of hepatic resections being performed.11 It has the 
ability to provide the surgeon with real-time accurate informa-
tion useful for surgical planning. Intraoperative ultrasound is 
considered the gold standard for detecting liver lesions, and 
studies have shown that it can identify 20% to 30% more lesions 
than other preoperative imaging modalities. Importantly, it has 
been shown to influence surgical management in almost 50% 
of planned liver resections for malignancies. Applications for 
intraoperative ultrasound of the liver include tumor staging, 
visualization of intrahepatic vascular structures (Fig. 31-10), 
and guidance of resection plane by assessment of the relation-
ship of a mass to the vessels. In addition, biopsy of lesions and 
ablation of tumors can be guided by intraoperative ultrasound.
Ultrasound elastography, also referred to as transient elas-
tography, can be used to assess the degree of fibrosis or cirrho-
sis in the liver. Low-frequency vibrations transmitted through 
the liver induce an elastic shear wave that is detected by pulse-
echo ultrasonography as the wave propagates through the liver. 
The velocity of the wave correlates with the stiffness of the 
organ—the wave travels faster through fibrotic or cirrhotic tis-
sues. Ultrasound elastography has been found in large cohorts 
of individuals to have a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 
91% for the diagnosis of cirrhosis when compared with liver 
biopsy.12 Unlike liver biopsy, ultrasound elastography is non-
invasive and can be repeated often without additional risk to 
the patient. Furthermore, this rapid test can acquire information 
from a larger area of the tissue relative to needle biopsy, provid-
ing a better understanding of the entire hepatic parenchyma and 
reducing sampling error.
Computed Tomography
CT produces a digitally processed cross-sectional image of the 
body from a large series of x-ray images. The introduction of 
helical (spiral) CT has improved the imaging capabilities of 
this technique compared to earlier conventional axial CT by 
combining a continuous patient-table motion with continuous 
rotation of the CT gantry and allowing rapid acquisition of a 
volume of data within a single breath hold. With the recent 
advent of multi-detector row CT scanners, high-resolution 
images can be obtained in submillimeter section thickness 
within a short scan time, with virtually no penalty in increased 
radiation dose. Together, these technologic advances have led to 
reduced motion artifacts due to variations in inspiration, facili-
tated optimal contrast delivery, and allowed for the capability 
to generate high-resolution reformations in any desired plane. 
In a single examination, modern-day CT scans provide detailed 
morphologic information on the number, size, distribution, and 
vascularity of liver lesions, all of which are vital in guiding the 
clinical management and therapeutic plan.
Contrast medium is routinely used in CT evaluation of 
the liver because of the similar densities of most pathologic 
liver masses and normal hepatic parenchyma. A CT scan with a ­ 
Figure 31-10.  Intraoperative liver ultrasound images of the portal 
veins, hepatic veins, and inferior vena cava (IVC). Upper panel 
shows the portal vein bifurcation with echogenic Glissonian sheath. 
The confluence of the three hepatic veins (right hepatic vein [RHV], 
middle hepatic vein [MHV], and left hepatic vein [LHV]) and the 
IVC is shown in the middle panel. An accessory LHV is present in 
this patient. Lower panel is a color Doppler image showing flow.
dual- or triple-phase bolus of intravenous contrast agent is per-
formed to achieve the greatest enhancement of contrast between 
normal and pathologic tissues.13 Ideally, contrast media should 
be selectively delivered to either the tumor or the liver, but not 
both. Radiologists use the dual blood supply of the liver and 
the hemodynamics of hepatic tumors to achieve this goal. The 
liver is unique in that it has a dual blood supply. As previously 
noted, the portal vein supplies approximately 75% of the blood 
flow and the hepatic artery the remaining 25%. However, many 
liver tumors receive the majority of their blood supply from the 
hepatic artery. After injection of the contrast agent, the rapid 
1274
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
scan time of helical CT allows for CT sections through the liver 
in both the arterial dominant phase (20 to 30 seconds after the 
beginning of contrast delivery) and venous or portal dominant 
phase (60 to 70 seconds after contrast injection) (Fig. 31-11). 
Thus, many hepatic tumors that derive the majority of their 
blood supply from the hepatic artery as well as other hypervas-
cular lesions are well delineated in the arterial phase. On the 
other hand, the portal phase provides optimal enhancement of 
the normal liver parenchyma because the majority of its blood 
supply is derived from the portal vein. This allows for detec-
tion of hypovascular lesions because they will appear hypoat-
tenuated in relation to the brighter normal liver parenchyma.3 
Furthermore, the arterial and portal phase images allow for 
Figure 31-11.  Computed tomographic (CT) images of hepatic 
veins and Couinaud’s liver segments. The images show the three 
hepatic veins and inferior vena cava (IVC) (upper panel), as well as 
Couinaud’s liver segments (lower panels). LHV = left hepatic vein; 
MHV = middle hepatic vein; RHV = right hepatic vein.
noninvasive mapping of the hepatic arterial and venous anat-
omy, information that is crucial in the preoperative planning for 
patients undergoing liver surgery.
CT cholangiography has emerged as a new imaging modal-
ity for biliary disease. This technique usually involves the use of 
contrast agents, which are excreted by hepatocytes into the bile 
ducts. CT cholangiography, therefore, provides information on 
hepatocyte function and bile flow, in addition to high-resolution 
depiction of the biliary tree. It has compared well to endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in identifying 
obstructive biliary disease.14 One of the major advantages of 
CT cholangiography over other imaging modalities is the abil-
ity to depict small nondilated peripheral biliary radicals. This 
technique may be useful in the context of live liver donation 
or complex biliary surgery to aid in the preoperative depiction 
of biliary anatomy. It also may be applicable in the postopera-
tive setting for the detection of biliary leakage or obstruction. 
A limitation of CT cholangiography is that the biliary tree may 
not be well visualized in patients with excessively dilated bile 
ducts or in those with hyperbilirubinemia, as bilirubin excretion 
is impaired in these cases.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is a technique that produces images based on magnetic 
fields and radio waves. The MRI scanner creates a powerful 
magnetic field that aligns the hydrogen atoms in the body, and 
radio waves are used to alter the alignment of this magnetiza-
tion. Different tissues absorb and release radio wave energy 
at different rates, and this information is used to construct an 
image of the body. Most tissues can be differentiated by differ-
ences in their characteristic T1 and T2 relaxation times. T1 is a 
measure of how quickly a tissue can become magnetized, and 
T2 measures how quickly it loses its magnetization. As with 
CT technology, advances in MRI now provide the opportunity 
to perform single-breath T1-weighted imaging and respiration-
triggered T2-weighted imaging. The development of breath-
hold imaging techniques has eliminated many of the motion 
artifacts that previously limited the sensitivity and application of 
MRI for imaging of the liver. Compared with CT scanning, the 
major advantages of MRI pertain to higher soft tissue contrast 
resolution and excellent depiction of fluid-containing structures, 
while obviating the need for ionizing radiation.
As with the iodinated contrast media use in CT scan-
ning, multiple contrast agents have been developed for MRI to 
increase the difference in signal intensity between normal liver 
and pathologic lesions. Various gadolinium-based compounds 
have been used as MRI contrast agents that behave in a man-
ner very similar to iodine in CT. Liver-specific MRI contrast 
agents also have been developed that rely either on excretion by 
Kupffer cells, such as ferumoxide (Feridex, Advanced Magnet-
ics, Cambridge, MA), or on secretion in bile by hepatocytes, 
including gadoxetate (Eovist or Primovist, Bayer-Schering, 
Berlin, Germany). These agents combine the information 
obtained during a standard MRI with additional functional 
data, which in turn yields improved detection and characteriza-
tion of lesions within the liver.15 
Just as ultrasound elastography is useful in the diagnosis of 
hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, magnetic resonance (MR) elastog-
raphy appears promising as an imaging modality in reducing the 
need for liver biopsy. In this technique, a vibration device is used 
to induce a shear wave in the liver. A modified MRI machine 
detects the shear wave, then generates a color-coded image that 
3
1275
Liver
CHAPTER 31
depicts the wave velocity, and hence stiffness, throughout the 
organ. Although preliminary studies have shown that MR elas-
tography can detect cirrhosis with a high degree of accuracy, 
the clinical utility of this modality, especially given its relatively 
high cost, remains to be determined.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
enables rapid, noninvasive depiction of both the biliary tree 
and the pancreatic duct without the use of ionizing radiation or 
intravenous contrast media. One of the most common clinical 
indications for MRCP is biliary obstruction. MRCP provides 
visualization of dilated bile ducts, and the high spatial and con-
trast resolution often enables accurate assessment of the level of 
occlusion in the biliary tree. MRCP also can be enhanced with 
liver-specific MRI contrast agents that are actively secreted into 
the bile, but the clinical indications for such studies are still a 
matter of intensive investigation.16
Positron Emission Tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear medicine test 
that produces images of metabolic activity in tissues by detect-
ing gamma rays emitted by a radioisotope incorporated into a 
metabolically active molecule. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is 
the most common metabolic molecule used in PET imaging. 
Although traditional imaging such as CT, ultrasound, and MRI 
provide anatomic information, PET offers functional imaging 
of tissues with high metabolic activity, including most types of 
metastatic tumors. PET imaging increasingly is used as a tool in 
the diagnostic evaluation of a patient with potentially resectable 
hepatic disease. In nonrandomized trials, PET demonstrated bet-
ter sensitivity and specificity than CT scanning for the detec-
tion of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic disease.17 Integrated 
PET/CT improves diagnostic accuracy over standard PET or 
CT alone and has been shown to be sensitive in the detection of 
liver metastases derived from a wide range of cancers, including 
colorectal (Fig. 31-12), breast, or lung primaries.17
More than 20% of patients with colorectal cancer ini-
tially present with hepatic metastasis, and a large percentage of 
patients undergoing resection for their primary colorectal can-
cer eventually experience disease recurrence in the liver. The 
role of FDG-PET/CT in colorectal cancers lies predominantly 
in tumor staging and follow-up, particularly in the detection of 
occult intrahepatic metastases or extrahepatic disease. Although 
hepatic resection of colorectal metastases provides survival 
rates nearing 50%, the presence of extrahepatic disease is a poor 
prognosticator and usually precludes aggressive surgical inter-
vention. Thus, accurate information regarding the extent of the 
disease is necessary for management of patients with colorectal 
metastases. PET/CT has also been shown to be more accurate 
than contrast-enhanced CT in tumor surveillance after radio-
frequency ablation.18 The sensitivity of FDG-PET, however, is 
lowered by neoadjuvant chemotherapy, most likely secondary 
to reduced metabolic activity within the tumor.
Although the role of PET/CT in the clinical management 
of liver metastases has been well-established, its utility in the 
diagnostic workup of primary liver tumors is still debated. In 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), FDG uptake correlates with 
the degree of differentiation—high-grade HCC lesions have 
increased FDG uptake compared to low-grade HCCs. As a 
result, the overall sensitivity of FDG-PET/CT in the detection of 
HCCs is reported to be only 50% to 65%, rendering this modality 
insufficient when used alone in the diagnosis of primary HCCs. 
For this reason, dual-tracer PET has been introduced to improve 
sensitivity in detecting all HCC. This modality combines the 
use of FDG, which accumulates in poorly differentiated tumors, 
with 11C-acetate, a tracer preferentially accumulated by well-
differentiated HCC lesions. Although the clinical benefits of 
dual-tracer PET/CT have yet to be fully established, this com-
bined modality has the potential to become a valuable tool in the 
diagnosis and staging of HCC. In cholangiocarcinoma tumors, 
FDG avidity depends on the morphologic characteristics and 
location of the lesion. Therefore, FDG-PET and FDG-PET/CT 
have not been shown to be highly beneficial in the diagnosis 
of primary cholangiocarcinoma, but they may be beneficial in 
the detection of regional and distal metastases, which can affect 
clinical decision making and patient management.
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
Acute liver failure (ALF) occurs when the rate and extent of 
hepatocyte death exceeds the liver’s regenerative capabilities. It 
was initially described as a specific disease entity in the 1950s. 
It also has been referred to as fulminant hepatic failure. ALF is a 
rare disorder affecting approximately 2000 patients annually in 
the United States. ALF is defined by the development of hepatic 
encephalopathy occurring within 26 weeks of severe liver injury 
in a patient without a history of previous liver disease or portal 
Figure 31-12.  Computed tomography (CT)–positron emission tomography (PET) scans before and after resection of liver metastasis from 
colorectal cancer in a 54-year-old patient. CT scan shows large 10-cm right lobe liver metastasis (left panel), and PET scan findings are 
strongly positive (middle panel). Two years after right hepatectomy, the patient has no evidence of recurrence and significant hypertrophy 
of the left lobe (right panel).
1276
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
hypertension.19 The manifestations of ALF may include cere-
bral edema, hemodynamic instability, increased susceptibility to 
bacterial and fungal infections, renal failure, coagulopathy, and 
metabolic disturbances. Even with current medical care, ALF 
can progress rapidly to hepatic coma and death. The most com-
mon cause of death is intracranial hypertension due to cerebral 
edema, followed by sepsis and multisystem organ failure. 
The causes of ALF, which are the most important variables 
in determining outcome, are numerous and can include viral 
infection as well as drug overdose, reaction, and toxicity. It has 
been determined that the etiologic factor leading to ALF varies 
according to geographic location.20 Before the introduction of 
orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), the chance for survival 
was <20%. Currently, most series report 5-year survival rates of 
>70% for affected patients.21
Etiology
Differences in etiology, management, and patient outcomes 
have been described for various regions of the globe. In the East 
and developing portions of the world, the most common causes 
of ALF are viral infections, primarily hepatitis B, A, and E.20  
In these areas, there are a relatively small number of drug-
induced cases. In contrast, 65% of cases of ALF in the West 
are thought to be due to drugs and toxins, with acetaminophen 
(paracetamol) being the most common etiologic agent in the 
United States, Australia, United Kingdom, and most of Europe. 
In France and Spain, where acetaminophen sales are restricted, 
the rate of acetaminophen-induced ALF is quite low.22 Acet-
aminophen-induced ALF is also uncommon in South America. 
The U.S. Acute Liver Failure Study Group identified several 
other causes of ALF, including autoimmune hepatitis, hypoper-
fusion of the liver (in cardiomyopathy or cardiogenic shock), 
pregnancy-related conditions, and Wilson’s disease.23 Even with 
exhaustive efforts to identify a cause, approximately 20% of all 
cases of ALF remain indeterminate in origin.
Clinical Presentation
In a multicenter study involving 17 tertiary care centers and 
308 patients in the United States, 73% of all patients with ALF 
were female, with a median age of 38 years.24 The most com-
mon ethnic group affected was whites (74%), followed by His-
panics (9%) and African Americans (3%). Patients were ill for 
a median of 6 days before the onset of encephalopathy and had 
a median of 2 days between the onset of jaundice and the devel-
opment of encephalopathy. Hepatic coma grade at presentation 
was approximately equally distributed across grades I to IV. 
Eighty-four percent of the patients in the study were referred 
from outside hospitals, 40% had a serum creatinine level exceed-
ing 2.0 mg/dL, and 14% had an arterial pH of <7.30. In addition, 
44% of the patients acquired a culture-proven infection.
Diagnosis and Clinical Management
When the medical history is obtained, it is important to address 
the possibility of exposure to viral infections, medications, and 
other possible toxins. The possibility of previous liver disease 
needs to be explored. The physical examination must assess 
and document the patient’s mental status as well as attempt to 
identify findings of chronic liver disease. The initial labora-
tory examination must evaluate the severity of the ALF as well 
as attempt to identify the cause (Table 31-1). A liver biopsy 
should be performed if certain disease entities such as autoim-
mune hepatitis or lymphoma are a possibility. Because of the 
associated coagulopathy, if a liver biopsy is needed, it is usually 
Table 31-1
Acute liver failure laboratory evaluation
Complete blood count
Complete metabolic panel
Amylase and lipase levels
Liver function tests
Prothrombin time/international normalized ratio
Factor V level
Factor VII level
Arterial blood gas concentrations
Arterial serum ammonia level
ABO typing
Acute hepatitis panel
Autoimmune marker levels
Ceruloplasmin level
Toxicology screening
Acetaminophen level
HIV screening
Pregnancy test (females)
HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
4
safest to obtain the tissue via a transjugular approach. Patients 
with ALF should be admitted to the hospital and monitored fre-
quently. Due to the rapidity with which this disease process may 
progress, a liver transplant center should be contacted and the 
affected patient transferred to the center early in the evaluation 
period.
If acetaminophen overdose is suspected to have occurred 
within a few hours of presentation, administration of activated 
charcoal may be useful to reduce the volume of acetamino-
phen present in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. N-acetylcysteine 
(NAC), the clinically effective antidote for acetaminophen over-
dose, should be administered as early as possible to any patient 
with suspected acetaminophen-associated ALF.25 NAC also 
should be administered to patients with ALF of unclear etiol-
ogy, because replenishing glutathione may be beneficial in this 
patient population as well.26 NAC can be administered either 
orally (140 mg/kg initial dose, followed by 70 mg/kg every 
4 hours × 17 doses) or via the intravenous route (loading dose of 
150 mg/kg, followed by a maintenance dose of 50 mg/kg every 
4 hours × 12 doses). For patients who are suspected of having 
drug-induced hepatotoxicity, it is important to obtain details 
regarding all prescription and nonprescription drugs, herbs, and 
dietary supplements that may have been taken in the previous 
year. Most instances of drug-induced hepatotoxicity occur in 
the first 6 months after drug initiation. Any suspected offending 
agent must be discontinued, and an attempt should be made to 
administer only essential medications.
The majority of patients with ALF need to be monitored 
in the intensive care unit (ICU) setting, and specific attention 
needs to be given to fluid management, ulcer prophylaxis, 
hemodynamic monitoring, electrolyte management, and sur-
veillance for and treatment of infection. Surveillance cultures 
should be performed to identify bacterial and fungal infec-
tions as early as possible. Serum phosphorus levels need to 
be monitored. Hypophosphatemia, a sign of hepatic regenera-
tion, may indicate a higher likelihood of spontaneous recovery 
and needs to be corrected via intravenous (IV) administration 
of phosphate. Sedation should be avoided, and the head of the 
bed should be elevated at least 30°. Neurologic examinations 
1277
Liver
CHAPTER 31
should be ­performed frequently. Intracranial pressure monitor-
ing is reserved for patients in whom a neurologic examination 
is no longer reliable. CT scans of the head should be performed 
to rule out mass lesion or hemorrhage, but they provide only 
limited information regarding increased intracranial pressure. 
The administration of blood products for thrombocytopenia and 
prolonged PT is recommended only in the setting of hemor-
rhage or before invasive procedures. Acute renal failure is a 
frequent complication in patients with ALF, and efforts should 
be made to protect renal function by maintaining sufficient 
perfusion and avoiding nephrotoxic medications. Should renal 
replacement therapy become necessary, continuous venovenous 
hemodialysis should be used rather than intermittent hemodialy-
sis, because continuous venovenous hemodialysis provides bet-
ter hemodynamic and intracranial pressure stability. The most 
severely affected patients have a poor prognosis with medical 
management alone and require liver transplantation. Identifying 
these patients early in the clinical course is important both to 
maximize the time available to obtain a donor liver allograft for 
those in need and to avoid transplant in those who will recover 
without it.
Prognosis
Accurate identification of ALF patients who will recover 
spontaneously is important because of the severe shortage of 
donor liver allografts and the potential complications of life-
long nonspecific immunosuppression. The most widely applied 
prognostic scoring system is the King’s College Hospital ALF 
criteria.27 This scoring system has separate criteria predicting a 
poor medical management outcome for acetaminophen-related 
and non–acetaminophen-related forms of ALF (Table 31-2). 
Many other prognostic models exist such as the Acute Physiol-
ogy and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score, the 
Clichy criteria,28 and actin-free Gc-globulin serum concentra-
tion.29 Overall, prognostic scoring systems have proven to have 
acceptable specificity but low sensitivity in determining patient 
Table 31-2
King’s College selection criteria for liver transplantation 
in acute liver failure
Cause
Selection Criteria
Acetaminophen
Arterial pH <7.30 irrespective of 
hepatic coma grade
Or
Prothrombin time >100 s + serum 
creatinine level >3.4 mg/dL + grade III 
or IV hepatic coma
Not acetaminophen
Prothrombin time >100 s irrespective 
of hepatic coma grade
Or
Any three of the following, irrespective 
of hepatic coma grade:
  Cryptogenic or drug-induced  
  hepatitis
  Jaundice to coma interval >7 d
  Prothrombin time >50 s
  Serum bilirubin level >17.5 mg/dL
  Age <10 y or >40 y
outcome and therefore should not replace the judgment of an 
experienced clinician.30
Liver Transplantation
Despite advances in medical management, OLT remains the 
only definitive therapy for patients unable to regenerate suffi-
cient hepatocyte mass in a timely manner. The advent of OLT 
has coincided with a rise in overall ALF survival rates from 
approximately 20% in the pretransplantation era to >70% at the 
present time. One-year posttransplantation survival for patients 
with ALF has been reported to be as high as 80% to 90%.21 
Although these improvements in survival rates are impressive, 
it should be noted that 10% of patients still die while awaiting 
OLT, which confirms that the potential for improved patient 
outcome still has not been realized because of the ongoing liver 
allograft shortage.
Emerging Technologies
As mentioned earlier, patient survival could be improved if 
additional time could be gained for the patient while awaiting 
liver replacement or hepatocyte regeneration. The development 
of a support device to replace the acutely failing liver has been 
a highly sought after (and elusive) goal. Several systems have 
been tested without definitive evidence of efficacy. Transient 
improvement in hepatic encephalopathy has been observed in 
several trials, but improvement in hepatocyte function and long-
term benefit have not been realized.31 Liver support trials are 
difficult to perform due to access to liver replacement, the rarity 
of affected patients, and the heterogeneous causes and varying 
levels of disease severity. Therefore, additional data are neces-
sary, and liver support systems should be used only as part of 
an approved clinical trial. Focus has now shifted toward xeno-
transplantation,32 organ engineering, and cell transplantation.33 
In the meantime, living donation and auxiliary liver transplanta-
tion can help overcome the organ shortage.34
CIRRHOSIS AND PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Cirrhosis, the final sequela of chronic hepatic insult, is char-
acterized by the presence of fibrous septa throughout the 
liver subdividing the parenchyma into hepatocellular nodules 
(Fig. 31-13).35 Cirrhosis is the consequence of sustained wound 
healing in response to chronic liver injury. Approximately 40% of 
cirrhotic patients are asymptomatic, but progressive deterioration 
leading to the need for liver transplantation or death is typical after 
the development of end-stage liver disease (ESLD). The compli-
cations of ESLD include progressive hyperbilirubinemia, malnu-
trition, decreased synthetic function of the liver, coagulopathy, 
portal hypertension (i.e., ascites and variceal bleeding), hepatic 
encephalopathy, and life-limiting fatigue. ESLD carries a 5-year 
mortality of 50%, with 70% of deaths due to liver failure.36 In the 
United States, cirrhosis accounts for 30,000 deaths per year and 
is the most common nonneoplastic cause of death among 
patients with hepatobiliary and digestive diseases. An addi-
tional 10,000 to 12,000 deaths occur annually due to HCC, the 
most rapidly increasing neoplasm in the United States.36.
Morphologic Classification of Cirrhosis
Morphologically, cirrhosis can be described as micronodular, 
macronodular, or mixed. Micronodular cirrhosis is character-
ized by thick regular septa, small uniform regenerative nodules, 
and involvement of virtually every hepatic lobule. Macronodu-
lar cirrhosis frequently has septa and regenerative nodules of 
5
1278
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
varying sizes. The regenerative nodules consist of irregularly 
sized hepatocytes with large nuclei and cell plates of varying 
thickness. Mixed cirrhosis is present when regeneration is occur-
ring in a micronodular liver and over time converts to a mac-
ronodular pattern. This morphologic categorization is limited, 
and cirrhosis is a dynamic process in which nodule size varies 
over time. The three patterns correlate poorly with etiology, and 
the same pattern can result from a variety of disease processes. 
Conversely, a single disease process can demonstrate several 
morphologic patterns. Irrespective of etiology and morphologic 
pattern, the cirrhotic liver frequently demonstrates right hepatic 
lobe atrophy, caudate lobe and left lateral segment hypertrophy, 
recanalization of the umbilical vein, a nodular surface contour, 
dilatation of the portal vein, gastroesophageal varices, and sple-
nomegaly on radiographic evaluation.
Etiology of Cirrhosis
Cirrhosis can result from a wide range of disease processes, 
including viral, autoimmune, drug-induced, cholestatic, and 
metabolic diseases (Table 31-3). In the diagnosis of alcoholic 
liver disease, documentation of chronic alcohol abuse is impera-
tive. Liver biopsy will reveal the typical findings of alcoholic 
Figure 31-13.  Histology of cirrhotic liver with regenerating mac-
ronodules. Upper panel: Grossly cirrhotic liver. Lower panel: 
Regenerative nodules and bridging fibrosis representative of cir-
rhosis seen on standard light microscopy (hematoxylin and eosin 
stain).
Table 31-3
Etiology of cirrhosis
Viral hepatitis (hepatitis B, C, and D)
Cryptogenic
Alcohol abuse
Metabolic abnormalities
  Iron overload (hemochromatosis)
  Copper overload (Wilson’s disease)
  α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
  Glycogen storage disease (types IA, III, and IV)
  Tyrosinemia
  Galactosemia
Cholestatic liver disease
Hepatic vein outflow abnormalities
  Budd-Chiari syndrome
  Cardiac failure
Autoimmune hepatitis
Toxins and drugs
hepatitis, including hepatocyte necrosis, Mallory bodies, neu-
trophil infiltration, and perivenular inflammation. Patients 
with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) often endorse a his-
tory of diabetes mellitus or metabolic syndrome. The diagno-
sis of NASH requires the demonstration of steatohepatitis on 
biopsy, the lack of a history of significant alcohol consumption, 
and exclusion of other causes of hepatic steatosis. Although 
cryptogenic cirrhosis, or cirrhosis without an apparent cause, 
accounted for a third of all cases in the past, this proportion 
has declined over time as it becomes increasingly apparent that 
many of such patients may actually have unrecognized NASH.
Chronic hepatitis C infection is the most common cause 
of chronic liver disease and the most frequent indication for 
liver transplantation in the United States. The identification of 
chronic hepatitis C infection is facilitated by serologic assays 
that detect antibody to hepatitis C and molecular assays that 
quantify hepatitis C viral RNA. Chronic hepatitis B, on the other 
hand, can be diagnosed based on the detection of hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg) more than 4 to 6 months after initial 
infection. Additional tests of hepatitis B viral replication, such 
as the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B viral DNA, 
can be used to confirm ongoing infection and to guide appropri-
ate antiviral therapy.
Autoimmune causes of cirrhosis include primary biliary 
cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and autoimmune hepa-
titis. Patients with primary biliary cirrhosis may be asymptom-
atic or may present with a history of fatigue, pruritus, and skin 
hyperpigmentation that is not related to jaundice. Antimitochon-
drial antibodies will test positive in the vast majority of cases. 
Affected patients also may have marked elevations in serum 
cholesterol, while hyperbilirubinemia is seen late in the course 
of the disease. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a chronic cho-
lestatic disease of the liver associated with ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn’s disease. The clinical presentation can include pruritus, 
steatorrhea, fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, and metabolic 
bone disease. The diagnosis is often established by imaging of 
the biliary tree, which reveals a characteristic picture of dif-
fuse, multifocal strictures with focal dilation of the bile ducts 
resulting in a beaded appearance. Complications are common 
and can include biliary strictures, cholangitis, cholelithiasis, and 
1279
Liver
CHAPTER 31
cholangiocarcinoma. Autoimmune hepatitis is often accompa-
nied by an elevation in serum globulins, particularly gamma 
globulins. Liver biopsy will show nonspecific changes such 
as a portal mononuclear cell infiltrate with the characteristic 
presence of plasma cells. Many patients with autoimmune hepa-
titis will respond to treatment with prednisone with or without 
azathioprine.
Hereditary hemochromatosis is the most common meta-
bolic disorder causing cirrhosis. This entity should be suspected 
if the patient’s clinical presentation includes skin hyperpigmen-
tation, diabetes mellitus, pseudogout, cardiomyopathy, or a fam-
ily history of cirrhosis. Elevated plasma ferritin and increased 
iron saturation levels suggest the presence of iron overload, but 
these findings also can be seen in other diseases of the liver. 
Confirmatory testing can be achieved by means of genetic test-
ing, liver biopsy, or by assessing the response to phlebotomy. 
Other uncommon metabolic disorders leading to cirrhosis 
include Wilson’s disease and α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Clinical Manifestations of Cirrhosis
The clinical history associated with cirrhosis can include 
fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, jaundice, abdominal pain, 
peripheral edema, ascites, GI bleeding, and hepatic encepha-
lopathy. On physical examination, a number of findings have 
been described in patients with cirrhosis. Spider angiomata and 
palmar erythema are believed to be caused by alterations in sex 
hormone metabolism. Finger clubbing may be a consequence 
of hypoalbuminemia, while the pathogenesis of white nail beds 
and Dupuytren’s contractures are less well understood. Males 
may develop features of feminization such as gynecomastia, 
loss of chest and axillary hair, and testicular atrophy. Sple-
nomegaly is common, whereas the cirrhotic liver itself may 
be enlarged, normal sized, or small. Ascites and pleural effu-
sion can be seen with fluid accumulation. Portal hypertension 
can manifest as caput medusae and/or the presence of the 
­Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur, a venous hum that can be aus-
cultated in the epigastrium resulting from collaterals between 
the portal system and the remnant of the umbilical vein. Jaun-
dice usually does not appear until the bilirubin rises above 
2 to 3 mg/dL. Asterixis can be detected in patients with hepatic 
encephalopathy. Other manifestations include fetor hepaticus, 
as well as features suggestive of malnutrition such as weakness, 
weight loss, and temporal muscle wasting.
Although fat stores and muscle mass are reduced, rest-
ing energy expenditure is increased. Muscle cramps occur 
frequently in the cirrhotic patient and are felt to correlate with 
ascites, low mean arterial pressure, and plasma renin activity. 
Abdominal hernias are common with ascites and should be 
electively repaired only in patients with well-compensated cir-
rhosis; otherwise, the hernia should be repaired at the time of 
or after hepatic transplantation. HCC can occur in all forms of 
cirrhosis, and every cirrhotic patient should undergo screening 
for the development of HCC every 6 months via imaging and 
measurement of a serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) level. Cirrhosis 
is associated with increased cardiac output and heart rate as 
well as decreased systemic vascular resistance and blood pres-
sure. Patients with cirrhosis are more prone to infections due to 
impaired phagocytic activity of the reticuloendothelial system. 
Bacterial infections, often of intestinal origin, are common and 
must be suspected in a patient with unexplained pyrexia or clini-
cal deterioration. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis also is seen 
in cases of cirrhosis with ascites. Intrinsic drug metabolism is 
reduced in the cirrhotic liver, and this fact needs to be recog-
nized when prescribing medications.
Laboratory Findings Associated with Cirrhosis
Laboratory findings vary in the cirrhotic patient depending 
on the degree of compensation; however, in general, a num-
ber of trends are seen. The cirrhotic patient usually has a mild 
normocytic normochromic anemia. The white blood cell and 
platelet counts are reduced, and the bone marrow is macro-
normoblastic. The PT is prolonged and does not respond to 
vitamin K therapy, and the serum albumin level is depressed. 
Urobilinogen is present and urinary sodium excretion is dimin-
ished in the presence of ascites. The serum levels of bilirubin, 
transaminases, and alkaline phosphatase may all be elevated. 
However, normal liver function test results do not eliminate the 
possibility of cirrhosis.
Liver Biopsy
The diagnosis of cirrhosis can be made in many cases from a 
constellation of clinical features, laboratory values, and radio-
graphic findings. Histopathologic examination of liver tissue is 
occasionally needed to confirm the diagnosis of cirrhosis and in 
determining disease etiology, activity, and progression. Liver 
biopsy can be performed via a percutaneous, transjugular, or 
laparoscopic approach. If needed, ultrasound or CT guidance 
can be helpful in obtaining an adequate sample and avoiding 
other viscera.
Various serologic markers of hepatic fibrosis are currently 
being investigated to help predict the presence of cirrhosis with-
out the need for liver biopsy. However, no currently available 
marker is sufficiently accurate for clinical use. Ultrasound elas-
tography, which measures the stiffness of the liver by induc-
ing an elastic shear wave that propagates through the tissue, 
shows promise as a noninvasive test in identifying patients with 
advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis. (See earlier section, “Radio-
logic Evaluation of the Liver.”)
Hepatic Reserve and Assessment of Surgical 
Risk in the Cirrhotic Patient
Assessing the hepatic reserve of the cirrhotic patient is impor-
tant, because cirrhosis and portal hypertension can have a 
negative impact on the outcome of nontransplant surgical pro-
cedures. Patients with liver disease undergoing surgery are at 
increased risk for surgical and anesthesia-related complications. 
The actual risk depends on the type of anesthetic used, the spe-
cific surgical procedure performed, and the severity of liver 
disease. Previous studies have demonstrated that emergency 
operations, cardiac surgery, hepatic resections, and abdominal 
surgery, particularly cholecystectomy, gastric resection, and 
colectomy, generate the highest operative risk among cirrhotic 
patients. Additionally, preoperative patient characteristics such 
as anemia, ascites, encephalopathy, malnutrition, hypoalbumin-
emia, hypoxemia, infection, jaundice, portal hypertension, and 
prolonged PT have also been associated with inferior outcomes 
after surgery. Nontransplant surgical procedures are contraindi-
cated in patients with acute fulminant hepatitis and those with 
severe decompensated chronic hepatitis.
A number of laboratory tests have been used to assess 
hepatic reserve in patients with cirrhosis. Tests of indocyanine 
green, sorbitol, and galactose elimination capacity as well as 
the carbon-13 galactose breath test and carbon-13 aminopyrine 
breath test have all been disappointing clinically due to their 
1280
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
dependence on flow to the liver as well as the unavailability and 
complexity of the tests. The monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) 
test, which measures MEGX formation after the administration 
of lidocaine, has been shown to be approximately 80% sensitive 
and specific in diagnosing cirrhosis. However, this test loses 
both sensitivity and specificity as the serum bilirubin level rises 
and interferes with the fluorescent readout system.
Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score
The Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score was originally developed 
to evaluate the risk of portocaval shunt procedures performed 
for portal hypertension and subsequently has been shown to 
be useful in predicting surgical risks of other intra-abdominal 
operations on cirrhotic patients (Table 31-4). Numerous stud-
ies have demonstrated overall surgical mortality rates of 10% 
for patients with class A cirrhosis, 30% for those with class B 
cirrhosis, and 75% to 80% for those with class C cirrhosis.37 
The CTP score is derived from five variables as shown in 
Table 31-4. The problems with the CTP score are the presence 
of subjective variables (encephalopathy and ascites), its narrow 
range (5 to 15 points), and the equal weighting given to each 
variable. Multiple retrospective studies have demonstrated that 
perioperative mortality and morbidity rates correlate well with 
the CTP score, and for over 30 years, this measure had been 
used as the principal predictor of operative risk.
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease  
Scoring System
The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) is a linear 
regression model based on objective laboratory values (INR, 
bilirubin level, and creatinine level). It was originally developed 
as a tool to predict mortality after transjugular intrahepatic por-
tosystemic shunt (TIPS) but has been validated and used as the 
sole method of liver transplant allocation in the United States 
since 2002. The MELD formula is as follows:
MELD Score = 9.57 Ln(SCr) + 3.78 Ln(Tbil) + 11.2  
Ln(INR) + 6.43
where Ln represents natural logarithm, SCr is serum cre-
atinine level (in milligrams per deciliter), and Tbil is serum bili-
rubin level (in milligrams per deciliter).
A number of studies have examined the relative values of 
MELD and CTP scores in predicting postoperative mortality in 
Table 31-4
Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score
Variable
1 Point
2 Points
3 Points
Bilirubin level
<2 mg/dL
2–3 mg/dL
>3 mg/dL
Albumin level
>3.5 g/dL
2.8–3.5 g/dL <2.8 g/dL
International 
normalized ratio
<1.7
1.7–2.2
>2.2
Encephalopathy
None
Controlled
Uncontrolled
Ascites
None
Controlled
Uncontrolled
Child-Turcotte-Pugh class
  Class A = 5–6 points
  Class B = 7–9 points
  Class C = 10–15 points
cirrhotic patients undergoing nontransplant surgical procedures. 
Northup and colleagues demonstrated that MELD score was the 
only statistically significant predictor of 30-day mortality.38 In 
this study, mortality increased by approximately 1% for each 
MELD point up to a score of 20 and by 2% for each MELD 
point above 20. A comparison of the MELD model with the 
CTP classification showed good correlation between the two 
measures in predicting mortality, especially in the setting of 
emergency surgery.39 In these studies, the relative risk of mortal-
ity increased by 14% for each 1-point increase in MELD score. 
As a result, it has been proposed that patients with a MELD 
score below 10 can safely undergo elective surgery, those with 
MELD between 10 and 15 may undergo surgery with caution, 
while those with MELD scores in excess of 15 should not be 
subjected to elective surgical procedures.40
Portal Hypertension
The portal venous system contributes approximately 75% of 
the blood and 72% of the oxygen supplied to the liver. In the 
average adult, 1000 to 1500 mL/min of portal venous blood is 
supplied to the liver. However, this amount can be significantly 
increased in the cirrhotic patient. The portal venous system 
is without valves and drains blood from the spleen, pancreas, 
gallbladder, and abdominal portion of the alimentary tract into 
the liver. Tributaries of the portal vein communicate with veins 
draining directly into the systemic circulation. These collateral 
communications occur at the gastroesophageal junction, anal 
canal, falciform ligament, splenic venous bed and left renal 
vein, and retroperitoneum (Fig. 31-14). The normal portal 
venous pressure is 5 to 10 mmHg, and at this pressure, very 
little blood is shunted from the portal venous system into the 
systemic circulation. As portal venous pressure increases, how-
ever, the collateral communications with the systemic circula-
tion dilate, and a large amount of blood may be shunted around 
the liver and into the systemic circulation.
Imaging of the Portal Venous System and 
Measurement of Portal Venous Pressure
The patency of the portal vein and the nature of the collateral 
circulation should be established. An understanding of portal 
vein patency and anatomy is crucial before undertaking porto-
systemic shunts, hepatic resection, or hepatic transplantation. 
The simplest initial investigation is abdominal ultrasonography. 
A large portal vein suggests portal hypertension but is not diag-
nostic. Doppler ultrasound is capable of outlining the anatomy 
of the portal vein, excluding the presence of thrombosis, and 
identifying the direction of portal venous blood flow. Doppler 
ultrasound also is useful in evaluating blood flow through sur-
gical shunts and TIPS. Abdominal CT and magnetic resonance 
angiography both are capable of revealing portal vein anatomy 
as well as patency. Visceral angiography and portal venography 
are reserved for cases that cannot be evaluated satisfactorily by 
noninvasive methods and require further clarification of portal 
patency or anatomy.
The most accurate method of determining portal hyperten-
sion is hepatic venography. The most commonly used procedure 
involves placing a balloon catheter directly into the hepatic vein 
and measuring the free hepatic venous pressure (FHVP) with 
the balloon deflated and the wedged hepatic venous pressure 
(WHVP) with the balloon inflated to occlude the hepatic vein. 
The hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is then calcu-
lated by subtracting the free from the wedged venous pressure 
1281
Liver
CHAPTER 31
(HVPG = WHVP – FHVP). The HVPG represents the pressure 
in the hepatic sinusoids and portal vein and is a measure of por-
tal venous pressure. Clinically significant portal hypertension is 
evident when HVPG exceeds 10 mmHg.
Etiology and Clinical Features  
of Portal Hypertension
The causes of portal hypertension can be divided into three 
major groups: presinusoidal, sinusoidal, and postsinusoidal.41 
Although multiple disease processes can result in portal hyper-
tension (Table 31-5), in the United States, the most common 
cause of portal hypertension is usually an intrahepatic one, 
namely, cirrhosis. The most significant clinical finding asso-
ciated with portal hypertension is the development of gastro-
esophageal varices, which are mainly supplied by the anterior 
branch of the left gastric (coronary) vein.
Portal hypertension also results in splenomegaly with 
enlarged, tortuous, and even aneurysmal splenic vessels. Spleno-
megaly is frequently associated with functional hypersplenism, 
Table 31-5
Etiology of portal hypertension
Presinusoidal
  Sinistral/extrahepatic
    Splenic vein thrombosis
    Splenomegaly
    Splenic arteriovenous fistula
  Intrahepatic
    Schistosomiasis
    Congenital hepatic fibrosis
    Nodular regenerative hyperplasia
    Idiopathic portal fibrosis
    Myeloproliferative disorder
    Sarcoid
    Graft-versus-host disease
Sinusoidal
  Intrahepatic
    Cirrhosis
      Viral infection
      Alcohol abuse
      Primary biliary cirrhosis
      Autoimmune hepatitis
      Primary sclerosing cholangitis
      Metabolic abnormality
Postsinusoidal
  Intrahepatic
    Vascular occlusive disease
  Posthepatic
    Budd-Chiari syndrome
    Congestive heart failure
    Inferior vena caval web
    Constrictive pericarditis
Figure 31-14.  Intra-abdominal venous flow pathways leading to 
engorged veins (varices) from portal hypertension. 1, Coronary 
vein; 2, superior hemorrhoidal veins; 3, paraumbilical veins; 
4, Retzius’ veins; 5, veins of Sappey; A, portal vein; B, splenic vein; 
C, superior mesenteric vein; D, inferior mesenteric vein; E, inferior 
vena cava; F, superior vena cava; G, hepatic veins; a, esophageal 
veins; a1, azygos system; b, vasa brevia; c, middle and inferior hem-
orrhoidal veins; d, intestinal; e, epigastric veins.
a1
a
F
G
E
1
A
B
b
D
2
4
c
d
e 
3
C
5
causing leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. Ascites occurs 
in the setting of severe portal hypertension in combination with 
hepatocyte dysfunction. The umbilical vein may recannulate and 
dilate, leading to visible collaterals on the abdominal wall. Anorec-
tal varices are present in approximately 45% of cirrhotic patients 
and must be distinguished from hemorrhoids, which do not com-
municate with the portal system and are not present at increased 
incidence in patients with portal hypertension. Large spontaneous 
venous shunts may form between the portal venous system and 
the left renal vein or the IVC, but these shunts are ineffective in 
reducing portal venous pressures and preventing bleeding from 
gastroesophageal varices.
Management of Gastroesophageal Varices
The most significant manifestation and the leading cause of 
morbidity and mortality related to portal hypertension is variceal 
bleeding. Approximately 30% of patients with compensated cir-
rhosis and 60% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis have 
esophageal varices. One third of all patients with varices will 
experience variceal bleeding. Each episode of bleeding is asso-
ciated with a 20% to 30% risk of mortality. If left untreated, 
70% of patients who survive the initial bleed will experience 
recurrent variceal hemorrhage within 2 years of the index 
­hemorrhage.
Prevention of Variceal Bleeding
Current measures aimed at preventing variceal bleeding include 
the administration of nonselective β-blockers and prophylactic 
1282
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
endoscopic surveillance with variceal band ligation. Meta-analyses 
have demonstrated that nonselective β-blockers such as proprano-
lol and nadolol reduce the index variceal bleed by approximately 
45% and decrease bleeding mortality by 50%.42 However, approx-
imately 20% of patients do not respond to β-blockade, and another 
20% cannot tolerate β-blockade due to medication side effects. 
Endoscopic surveillance with prophylactic variceal band liga-
tion has been associated with a lower incidence of a first variceal 
bleed.43 Variceal band ligation is recommended for patients with 
medium to large varices, performed every 1 to 2 weeks until oblit-
eration, followed by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) 1 to 
3 months later and surveillance EGD every 6 months to monitor 
for recurrence of varices.
Management of Acute Variceal Hemorrhage
Patients with acute variceal hemorrhage should be admitted to an 
ICU for resuscitation and management. Blood resuscitation should 
be performed carefully to reach a hemoglobin level of approxi-
mately 8 g/dL. Overzealous replacement of blood products and 
administration of saline can lead to both rebleeding and increased 
mortality. Administration of fresh frozen plasma and platelets can 
be considered in patients with severe coagulopathy. Use of recom-
binant factor VIIa has not been shown to be more beneficial than 
standard therapy and therefore is not recommended at this time. 
Cirrhotic patients with variceal bleeding have a high risk of devel-
oping bacterial infections, which are associated with increased 
risks of rebleeding and mortality. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
accounts for approximately half of these infections, with urinary 
tract infections and pneumonias comprising the remainder. The 
use of short-term prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., ceftriaxone 1 g/d 
intravenously) has been shown both to decrease the rate of bacte-
rial infections and to increase survival.
Vasoactive medications decrease blood flow to the gas-
troesophageal varices and can be initiated as soon as the diag-
nosis of variceal bleeding is made. Although vasopressin is the 
most potent available vasoconstrictor, its use is limited by its 
systemic vasoconstrictive effects that can produce hyperten-
sion, myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, ischemic abdominal 
pain, and limb gangrene. Octreotide, a somatostatin analog, has 
the advantage that it can be administered for 5 days or longer, 
and it is currently the preferred pharmacologic agent for initial 
management of acute variceal bleeding. In addition to pharma-
cologic therapy, endoscopy with variceal band ligation should 
be carried out as soon as possible. This combination of pharma-
cologic and endoscopic therapy has been shown both to 
improve the initial control of bleeding and to increase the 
5-day hemostasis rate.43 
Luminal Tamponade
When medical and endoscopic measures fail to control variceal 
hemorrhage, balloon tamponade using a Sengstaken-Blakemore 
tube will control refractory bleeding in up to 90% of patients. 
However, its application is limited due to the potential for com-
plications, which include aspiration, airway obstruction, and 
esophageal perforation due to overinflation or pressure necro-
sis. Therefore, the use of a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube should 
not exceed 36 hours to avoid tissue necrosis, and this treatment 
modality should only be considered a temporary bridge to more 
definitive measures of variceal hemorrhage control.
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt
The TIPS procedure involves implantation of a metallic stent 
between an intrahepatic branch of the portal vein and a hepatic 
vein radicle. The needle track is dilated until a portal pressure 
gradient of ≤12 mmHg is achieved. TIPS can be performed 
in 95% of patients by an experienced interventional radiolo-
gist, controls variceal bleeding in >90% of cases refractory to 
medical treatment, and should not affect subsequent hepatic 
transplantation. Possible complications include bleeding either 
intra-abdominally or via the biliary tree, infections, renal failure, 
decreased hepatic function, and hepatic encephalopathy, which 
occur in 25% to 30% of patients after the TIPS procedure. A 
high rate of thrombosis is seen and can be attributed to inti-
mal hyperplasia of the metallic stent. Frequent follow-up with 
repeated interventions such as dilation or restenting often are 
needed to maintain TIPS patency.
Balloon-Occluded Retrograde  
Transvenous Obliteration
The balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration 
(BRTO) procedure has been used for the specific manage-
ment of bleeding gastric varices in patients with spontaneous 
gastrorenal or splenorenal shunts shown on ­contrast-enhanced 
cross-sectional imaging. Using a transjugular or transfemoral 
approach, a balloon-occlusion catheter is directed through the 
left renal vein into the spontaneous shunt, which is then obliter-
ated with the use of a sclerosing agent. BRTO effectively con-
trols hemorrhage from gastric varices and preserves portal flow 
to the liver, thereby reducing the risk of hepatic encephalopathy 
relative to TIPS. The occlusion of spontaneous shunts, how-
ever, can theoretically exacerbate portal hypertension, precipi-
tate hemorrhage from esophageal varices, and exacerbate the 
accumulation of ascites.
Surgical Shunting
The need for surgical shunts has been reduced since the intro-
duction of the TIPS procedure and hepatic transplantation. At 
this time, the recommendation is that surgical shunts be consid-
ered only in patients who have MELD scores of <15, who are 
not candidates for hepatic transplantation, or who have limited 
access to TIPS therapy and the necessary follow-up. The aim of 
the surgical shunt is to reduce portal venous pressure, maintain 
total hepatic and portal blood flow, and avoid the high inci-
dence of complicating hepatic encephalopathy. Patient survival 
is determined by hepatic reserve.
The portacaval shunt, as first described by Eck in 1877, 
either joins the portal vein to the IVC in an end-to-side fashion 
and completely disrupts portal vein flow to the liver, or joins 
it in a side-to-side fashion and thereby maintains partial por-
tal venous flow to the liver. Currently this shunt is rarely per-
formed due to the high incidence of hepatic encephalopathy and 
decreased liver function resulting from the reduction of portal 
perfusion. The Eck fistula also makes subsequent hepatic trans-
plantation much more technically difficult.
The mesocaval shunt uses an 8- or 10-mm polytetrafluo-
roethylene (PTFE) graft to connect the superior mesenteric vein 
to the IVC. The mesocaval shunt is technically easier to perform 
and can be easily ligated during subsequent hepatic transplan-
tation. The smaller caliber of the shunt avoids the deleterious 
effects of portal blood flow deprivation on hepatic function. 
Small-diameter portosystemic shunts have been reported to 
reduce the incidence of encephalopathy but at the expense of 
increased risks of shunt thrombosis and rebleeding.
The surgical shunt currently used most often is the distal spl-
enorenal or Warren shunt (Fig. 31-15). This shunt is technically 
6
1283
Liver
CHAPTER 31
the most difficult to perform. It requires division of the gastro-
esophageal collaterals and allows venous drainage of the stomach 
and lower esophagus through the short gastrosplenic veins into 
the spleen, and ultimately decompresses the left upper quadrant 
by allowing the splenic vein to drain directly into the left renal 
vein via an end-to-side splenic to left renal vein anastomosis. This 
shunt has the advantages of being associated with a lower rate of 
hepatic encephalopathy and decompensation and not interfering 
with subsequent liver transplantation.
Nonshunt Surgical Management of  
Refractory Variceal Bleeding
In the patient with extrahepatic portal vein thrombosis and 
refractory variceal bleeding, the Sugiura procedure may be 
considered. The Sugiura procedure consists of extensive devas-
cularization of the stomach and distal esophagus along with tran-
section of the esophagus, splenectomy, truncal vagotomy, and 
pyloroplasty. As with performance of surgical shunts, patient 
survival is dependent on hepatic reserve at the time of the sur-
gical procedure. Experience in Western countries is somewhat 
limited, and a number of modifications have been made to the 
original Sugiura procedure over time.
Hepatic Transplantation
Patients with cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and variceal bleed-
ing usually die as a result of hepatic failure and not acute blood 
loss. Therefore, hepatic transplantation must be considered in 
the patient with ESLD, because it represents the patient’s only 
chance for definitive therapy and long-term survival. Hepatic 
transplantation also can be considered for the patient with vari-
ceal bleeding refractory to all other forms of management. Sur-
vival after hepatic transplantation is not affected adversely by 
the previous performance of endoscopic variceal band ligation, 
TIPS, or splenorenal or mesocaval shunts. Previous creation 
of an Eck fistula, however, does make hepatic transplantation 
much more technically difficult, and therefore this procedure 
should be avoided in the transplant candidate. In addition to 
saving the patient’s life, hepatic transplantation reverses most 
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 31-15.  Surgical shunts for portal hypertension. 
Types of portacaval anastomoses. A. Normal anatomy. 
B. Side-to-side portacaval shunt. C. End-to-side portacaval 
shunt. D. Mesocaval shunt. E. Distal splenorenal (Warren) 
shunt. (Reproduced with permission from Doherty GM, 
Way LW, eds. Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 
12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006). kkjkjdht © The 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
of the hemodynamic and humoral changes associated with 
­cirrhosis.
Budd-Chiari Syndrome
Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) is an uncommon congestive 
hepatopathy characterized by the obstruction of hepatic venous 
outflow. The incidence of BCS is 1 in 100,000 of the general 
population worldwide.44 Patients may present with acute signs 
and symptoms of abdominal pain, ascites, and hepatomegaly 
or more chronic symptoms related to long-standing portal 
hypertension. BCS is defined as primary when the obstructive 
process involves an endoluminal venous thrombosis. BCS is 
considered as a secondary process when the veins are com-
pressed or invaded by a neighboring lesion originating outside 
the vein.
A thorough evaluation demonstrates one or more throm-
botic risk factors in approximately 75% to 90% of patients with 
primary BCS.44 Primary myeloproliferative disorders, such as 
essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia rubra, account for 
approximately 35% to 50% of the primary cases of BCS. All 
known inherited thrombophilias also have been implicated in the 
development of BCS. Activated protein C resistance, generally 
related to factor V Leiden mutation, is present in approximately 
25% of patients. Anticardiolipin antibodies, hyperhomocystein-
emia, and oral contraceptive use all have been shown to be risk 
factors for BCS.44
Clinically significant BCS is usually the result of obstruc-
tion of two or more of the major hepatic veins. The obstruction 
results in hepatomegaly, liver congestion, and right upper quad-
rant pain. In addition, liver perfusion via the portal vein may be 
decreased, and 70% of affected patients have noninflammatory 
centrilobular necrosis on biopsy. Although ALF is rare, most 
patients will go on to develop chronic portal hypertension and 
ascites. Caudate lobe hypertrophy occurs in approximately 50% 
of cases and is due to the fact that the caudate lobe has direct 
venous drainage into the IVC. This caudate lobe hypertrophy, in 
turn, can result in further obstruction of the IVC.
1284
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Abdominal ultrasonography is the initial investigation of 
choice and can demonstrate the absence of hepatic vein flow, 
spider web hepatic veins, and collateral hepatic veins.45 CT or 
MRI of the abdomen also is capable of demonstrating hepatic 
vein thrombosis and evaluating the IVC but is limited in that 
it cannot show direction of blood flow. The definitive radio-
graphic study to evaluate BCS is hepatic venography to deter-
mine the presence and extent of hepatic vein thrombus as well 
as measure IVC pressures.
Initial treatment consists of diagnosing and medically 
managing the underlying disease process and preventing exten-
sion of the hepatic vein thrombosis through systemic anticoagu-
lation. The BCS-associated portal hypertension and ascites can 
be medically managed in a manner similar to that in most cir-
rhotic patients. Radiologic and surgical intervention should be 
reserved for patients whose condition is nonresponsive to medi-
cal therapy. Percutaneous angioplasty and TIPS, in combination 
with thrombolytic therapy, are the preferred strategies to restore 
the outflow of blood from the liver. Thrombolytic therapy alone 
may be attempted for acute thrombosis. Surgical shunting, 
namely with the side-to-side portacaval shunt, essentially turns 
the portal vein into a hepatic outflow tract. Most patients with 
a portacaval shunt show improvement in hepatic function and 
fibrosis at 1 year without significant hepatic encephalopathy.45 
However, the enthusiasm for this procedure has been curbed 
due to the relatively high rate of operative mortality and shunt 
dysfunction. Patients with progressive BCS and manifestations 
of ESLD will ultimately require hepatic transplantation.
INFECTIONS OF THE LIVER
The liver contains the largest portion of the reticuloendothelial 
system in the human body and is therefore able to handle the 
continuous low-level exposure to enteric bacteria that it receives 
through the portal venous system. Due to the high level of retic-
uloendothelial cells in the liver, nonviral infections are unusual.
Pyogenic Liver Abscesses
Pyogenic liver abscesses are the most common liver abscesses 
seen in the United States. They may be single or multiple and 
are more frequently found in the right lobe of the liver.46 The 
abscess cavities are variable in size and, when multiple, may 
coalesce to give a honeycomb appearance. Approximately 40% 
of abscesses are monomicrobial, an additional 40% are poly-
microbial, and 20% are culture-negative. The most common 
infecting agents are gram-negative bacteria; Escherichia coli 
is found in two thirds of cases, and other common organisms 
include Streptococcus faecalis, Klebsiella, and Proteus ­vulgaris. 
Anaerobic organisms such as Bacteroides fragilis also are seen 
frequently. In patients with endocarditis and infected indwelling 
catheters, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species are more 
commonly found.
In the past, pyogenic liver abscesses often resulted from 
infections of the intestinal tract such as acute appendicitis and 
diverticulitis, which then spread to the liver via the portal circu-
lation. With improved imaging modalities and earlier diagnosis 
of these intra-abdominal infections, this particular etiology of 
pyogenic liver abscesses has become less common. Pyogenic 
liver abscesses also occur as a result of impaired biliary drain-
age, subacute bacterial endocarditis, infected indwelling cath-
eters, dental work, or the direct extension of infections such as 
diverticulitis or Crohn’s disease into the liver. There appears 
Figure 31-16.  Computed tomographic scan of pyogenic liver 
abscesses. Multiple hepatic abscesses are seen in a patient after an 
episode of diverticulitis. Note the loculated large central abscess as 
well as the left lateral segment abscess.
to be an increasing incidence due to infection by opportunis-
tic organisms among immunosuppressed patients, including 
transplant and chemotherapy recipients as well as patients with 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Patients commonly present with right upper quadrant pain 
and fever. Jaundice occurs in up to one third of affected patients. 
A thorough history and physical examination are usually helpful 
in identifying the underlying cause of the liver abscess. Leuko-
cytosis, an elevated sedimentation rate, and an elevated AP level 
are the most common laboratory findings. Significant abnor-
malities in the results of the remaining liver function tests are 
unusual. Blood cultures will only reveal the causative organism 
in approximately 50% of cases. Ultrasound examination of the 
liver reveals pyogenic abscesses as round or oval hypoechoic 
lesions with well-defined borders and a variable number of 
internal echoes. CT scan is highly sensitive in the localization of 
pyogenic liver abscesses, which appear hypodense with periph-
eral enhancement and may contain air-fluid levels indicating 
a gas-producing infectious organism (Fig. 31-16). MRI of the 
abdomen can also detect pyogenic abscesses with a high level 
of sensitivity but plays a limited role because of its inability to 
be used for image-guided diagnosis and therapy.
The current cornerstones of treatment include correction 
of the underlying cause and IV antibiotic therapy. Empiric 
antibiotic therapy should cover gram-negative and anaerobic 
organisms; percutaneous needle aspiration and culture of the 
aspirate may be useful in guiding subsequent antibiotic therapy. 
IV antibiotic therapy should be continued for at least 8 weeks 
and can be expected to be effective in 80% to 90% of patients. 
Placement of a percutaneous drainage catheter is beneficial only 
for a minority of patients, as most pyogenic abscesses are quite 
viscous and catheter drainage is often ineffective.
Surgical drainage either via the laparoscopic or open 
approach may become necessary if initial therapies fail. Ana-
tomic surgical resection can be performed in patients with 
recalcitrant abscesses. It must be kept in mind throughout the 
evaluation and treatment of the presumed pyogenic abscess 
that a necrotic hepatic malignancy must not be mistaken for a 
hepatic abscess. Therefore, early diagnosis and progression to 
1285
Liver
CHAPTER 31
surgical resection should be advocated for patients who do not 
respond to initial antibiotic therapy.
Amebic Abscesses
Entamoeba histolytica is a parasite that is endemic worldwide, 
infecting approximately 10% of the world’s population. Amebi-
asis is most common in subtropical climates, especially in areas 
with poor sanitation. E. histolytica exists as cysts in a vegeta-
tive form that are capable of surviving outside the human body. 
The cystic form passes through the stomach and small bowel 
unharmed and then transforms into a trophozoite in the colon. 
Here it invades the colonic mucosa forming typical flask-shaped 
ulcers, enters the portal venous system, and is carried to the 
liver. Occasionally, the trophozoite will pass through the hepatic 
sinusoid and into the systemic circulation, which results in lung 
and brain abscesses.
Amebae multiply and block small intrahepatic portal radi-
cles with consequent focal infarction of hepatocytes. They con-
tain a proteolytic enzyme that also destroys liver parenchyma. 
The abscesses formed are variable in size and can be single or 
multiple. The amebic abscess is most commonly located in the 
superior-anterior aspect of the right lobe of the liver near the 
diaphragm and has a necrotic central portion that contains a 
thick, reddish brown, pus-like material. This material has been 
likened to anchovy paste or chocolate sauce. Amebic abscesses 
are the most common type of liver abscesses worldwide.
Amebiasis should be considered in patients who have trav-
eled to an endemic area and present with right upper quadrant 
pain, fever, hepatomegaly, and hepatic abscess.46 Leukocytosis 
is common, whereas elevated transaminase levels and jaundice 
are unusual. The most common biochemical abnormality is a 
mildly elevated AP level. Even though this disease process is 
secondary to a colonic infection, the presence of diarrhea is 
unusual. Most patients have a positive fluorescent antibody test 
for E. histolytica, and test results can remain positive for some 
time after a clinical cure. This serologic test has a high sensi-
tivity, and therefore amebiasis is unlikely if the test results are 
negative.
Ultrasound and CT scanning of the abdomen are both 
very sensitive but nonspecific for the detection of amebic 
abscesses.46 Amebic abscesses usually appear on CT as well-
defined low-density round lesions that have enhancement of the 
wall, somewhat ragged in appearance with a peripheral zone of 
edema. The central cavity may have septations as well as fluid 
levels. CT scanning is also useful in the detection of extrahe-
patic involvement.
Metronidazole 750 mg three times a day for 7 to 10 days 
is the treatment of choice and is successful in 95% of cases. 
Defervescence usually occurs in 3 to 5 days, but the time nec-
essary for the abscess to resolve depends on the initial size at 
presentation and varies from 30 to 300 days.46 Both ultrasound 
and CT of the liver can be used as follow-up after the initiation 
of medical therapy. Aspiration of the abscess rarely is needed 
and should be reserved for patients with large abscesses, those 
who do not respond to medical therapy, or those who appear to 
be superinfected. Furthermore, abscesses of the left lobe of the 
liver at risk for rupture into the pericardium should be treated 
with aspiration and drainage.
Hydatid Disease
Hydatid disease is due to infection by the tapeworm Echinococ-
cus granulosus in its larval or cyst stage.47 The tapeworm lives 
in canids, which are infected by eating the viscera of sheep that 
contain hydatid cysts. Scolices, contained in the cysts, adhere 
to the small intestine of dogs and become adult taenia, which 
attach to the intestinal wall. Each worm sheds approximately 
500 ova into the bowel. The infected ova-containing feces of 
dogs contaminate grass and farmland, and the ova are ingested 
by intermediate hosts such as sheep, cattle, pigs, and humans. 
The ova have chitinous envelopes that are dissolved by gastric 
juice. The liberated ovum then burrows through the intestinal 
mucosa and is carried by the portal vein to the liver, where it 
develops into an adult cyst. Most cysts are caught in the hepatic 
sinusoids, and therefore 70% of hydatid cysts form in the liver. 
A few ova pass through the liver and are held up in the pul-
monary capillary bed or enter the systemic circulation, forming 
cysts in the lung, spleen, brain, or bones.
Hydatid disease is most common in sheep-raising areas, 
where dogs have access to infected offal. These include South 
Australia, New Zealand, Africa, Greece, Spain, and the Middle 
East. Hydatid cysts commonly involve the right lobe of the liver, 
usually the anterior-inferior or posterior-inferior segments. The 
uncomplicated cyst may be silent and found only incidentally 
or at autopsy. Occasionally, the affected patient presents with 
symptoms such as dull right upper quadrant pain or abdomi-
nal distention. Cysts may become secondarily infected, involve 
other organs, or even rupture, which leads to an allergic or ana-
phylactic reaction.
The diagnosis of hydatid disease is based on the findings 
of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for echino-
coccal antigens, and results are positive in approximately 85% 
of infected patients.47 The ELISA results may be negative in an 
infected patient if the cyst has not leaked or does not contain 
scolices or if the parasite is no longer viable. Eosinophilia is 
seen in approximately 30% of infected patients. Ultrasonog-
raphy and CT scanning of the abdomen are both quite sensi-
tive for detecting hydatid cysts. The appearance of the cysts on 
images depends on the stage of cyst development. Typically, 
hydatid cysts are well-defined hypodense lesions with a dis-
tinct wall. Ring-like calcifications of the pericysts are present 
in 20% to 30% of cases. As healing occurs, the entire cyst calci-
fies densely, and a lesion with this appearance is usually dead 
or inactive. Daughter cysts generally occur in a peripheral loca-
tion within the main cyst and are typically slightly hypodense 
compared with the mother cyst. MRI of the abdomen may be 
useful to evaluate the pericyst, cyst matrix, and daughter cyst 
characteristics.
Unless the cysts are small or the patient is not a suitable 
candidate for surgical resection, the treatment of hydatid disease 
is surgically based because of the high risk of secondary infec-
tion and rupture. Medical treatment with albendazole relies on 
drug diffusion through the cyst membrane. The concentration 
of drug achieved in the cyst is uncertain but is better than that 
of mebendazole, and albendazole can be used as initial treat-
ment for small, asymptomatic cysts. For most cysts, surgical 
resection involving laparoscopic or open complete cyst removal 
with instillation of a scolicidal agent is preferred and usually is 
curative. If complete cystectomy is not possible, then formal 
anatomic liver resection can be undertaken. During surgical 
resection, caution must be exercised to avoid rupture of the cyst 
with release of protoscolices into the peritoneal cavity. Perito-
neal contamination can result in an acute anaphylactic reaction 
or peritoneal implantation of scolices with daughter cyst forma-
tion and inevitable recurrence.
1286
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Echinococcus multilocularis occurs in the Northern 
Hemisphere and can infect the liver in a fashion similar to that 
described earlier, although the cysts are multilocular. Infection 
of the lung also is common (alveolar echinococcosis). Canine 
species such as wolves, foxes, and dogs ingest infected vis-
cera of an intermediate host (e.g., rodents, moose) and become 
infected; humans become infected incidentally by ingesting 
contaminated food or water. Treatment consists of albendazole; 
however, infection in the lung produces a more generalized 
granulomatous reaction, can present in a manner similar to that 
of a malignancy, and often requires resection.
Ascariasis
Ascaris infection is particularly common in the Far East, India, 
and South Africa. Ova of the roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides 
arrive in the liver by retrograde locomotion in the bile ducts from 
the GI tract. The adult worm is 10 to 20 cm long and may lodge 
in the common bile duct, causing partial bile duct obstruction 
and secondary cholangitic abscesses. The Ascaris may serve as 
a nidus for the development of intrahepatic gallstones. The clini-
cal presentation in an affected patient may include biliary colic, 
acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, or hepatic abscesses.48 
Plain abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, and ERCP 
can demonstrate the Ascaris as linear filling defects within the 
bile ducts. Occasionally, worms can be seen moving into and 
out of the biliary tree from the duodenum. Treatment consists of 
the administration of piperazine citrate, mebendazole, or alben-
dazole in combination with endoscopic extraction of the worms. 
Surgical intervention may become necessary if the Ascaris can-
not be removed via ERCP.
Schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis affects >200 million people in 74 countries. 
Hepatic schistosomiasis occurs when emboli of the ova in the 
intestines reach the liver via the mesenteric venous system. Eggs 
excreted in the feces hatch in water to release free-swimming 
embryos, which enter snails and develop into fork-tailed cercar-
iae. They then re-enter human skin during contact with infected 
water. They burrow down to the capillary bed and enter the 
bloodstream, leading to widespread hematogenous dissemina-
tion. Those entering the intrahepatic portal system grow rapidly, 
resulting in a granulomatous reaction. The degree of consequent 
portal fibrosis is related to the adult worm load.
Schistosomiasis has three stages of clinical symptomatol-
ogy: the first includes itching after the entry of cercariae through 
the skin; the second includes fever, urticaria, and eosinophilia; 
and the third involves hepatic fibrosis followed by presinusoidal 
portal hypertension. During this third phase, the liver shrinks, 
the spleen enlarges, and the patient may develop complications 
of portal hypertension while hepatic function is maintained. 
Active infection is detected by stool examination. Serologic 
tests indicate past exposure but do not provide information 
regarding the timing of infection. A negative serologic test 
result excludes the presence of schistosomal infection. Serum 
levels of transaminases are usually normal, but the AP level may 
be mildly elevated. A decreased serum albumin level is usually 
the result of frequent GI bleeds and malnutrition.
Medical treatment of schistosomiasis includes education on 
hygiene and the avoidance of infected water. Treatment with pra-
ziquantel 40 to 75 mg/kg as a single dose is the treatment of choice 
for all forms of schistosomiasis and produces few side effects. 
GI bleeding usually is controlled by endoscopic variceal ligation. 
However, in a patient with refractory GI portal hypertensive bleed-
ing, distal splenorenal shunt or gastric devascularization and sple-
nectomy may be considered.
Viral Hepatitis
The role of the surgeon in the management of viral hepatitis is 
somewhat limited. However, the disease entities of hepatitis A, 
B, and C need to be kept in mind during any evaluation for liver 
disease. Hepatitis A usually results in an acute self-limited ill-
ness and only rarely leads to fulminant hepatic failure. Patients 
can present with fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexic 
fever, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. The most com-
mon physical findings are jaundice and hepatomegaly. Because 
the disease is self-limited, the treatment is usually supportive. 
Patients who develop fulminant infection require aggressive 
therapy and should be transferred to a center capable of per-
forming liver transplantation.
Hepatitis B and C, on the other hand, can both lead to 
chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, and HCC. The prevalence of 
chronic hepatitis B infection in the U.S. population is estimated 
to be 0.27%, but hepatitis B remains a major burden in resource-
limited countries, accounting for 30% of cirrhosis and 53% of 
HCC cases. The ultimate goal of treatment for chronic hepati-
tis B is viral suppression, thereby preventing the development 
of clinical outcomes such as cirrhosis, liver failure, and HCC. 
The cornerstone of current antiviral therapy includes pegylated 
interferon and nucleoside analogs such as tenofovir or enteca-
vir.49 These agents have been proven to reduce complications of 
cirrhosis and HCC and perhaps reverse previous damage to the 
liver. Interferon therapy produces various side effects including 
fatigue, flu-like symptoms, mood changes, bone marrow sup-
pression, and stimulation of autoimmunity. On the other hand, 
the nucleoside analogs are generally well-tolerated by patients. 
Compared with lamivudine, the nucleoside analogs are less 
likely to produce resistance and are more likely to be clinically 
effective. Despite its high rate of viral resistance, lamivudine 
may be the preferred treatment in some countries because of its 
relatively low cost.
Acute hepatitis C viral (HCV) infection typically devel-
ops 2 to 26 weeks after exposure to the virus, and presenting 
symptoms can include jaundice, nausea, dark urine, and right 
upper quadrant abdominal pain. Diagnosis is confirmed by 
testing for the presence of HCV RNA and anti-HCV antibod-
ies in the serum; viral RNA is first detectable in the serum by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) within days to weeks follow-
ing the exposure, whereas antibodies will not appear until 2 to 
6 months after. If the diagnosis of acute hepatitis is established 
and the virus is not spontaneously cleared within 12 weeks, 
patients should generally be treated with pegylated interferon 
monotherapy. High rates of sustained viral response, in excess 
of 80%, have been achieved with the early treatment of acute 
HCV infection.50 Unfortunately patients with acute HCV infec-
tion are typically asymptomatic, and the vast majority of cases 
go undetected. Untreated, most of these patients will eventually 
develop chronic infection.
Chronic HCV infection often follows a progressive course 
over many years and can ultimately result in cirrhosis, HCC, and 
the need for liver transplantation. Cirrhosis secondary to hepa-
titis C remains the leading indication for liver transplantation 
in the United States, Europe, and Japan. The decision to treat 
a patient with chronic HCV infection is complex and involves 
consideration of multiple factors including the natural history of 
1287
Liver
CHAPTER 31
the ­disease, stage of fibrosis, and the efficacy and adverse effects 
related to the treatment regimen. Patients with genotype 1 are now 
treated with triple-agent therapy including pegylated interferon, 
ribavirin, and a protease inhibitor. The protease inhibitors tela-
previr and boceprevir were recently approved for the treatment of 
chronic HCV genotype 1 infection, and their addition to the treat-
ment regimen has been shown to increase the rate of sustained 
viral response from 40% to 70%. These protease inhibitors do no 
exhibit significant antiviral activity against other HCV genotypes, 
and therefore genotypes 2, 3, and 4 are treated with interferon and 
ribavirin alone. Genotypes 2 and 3 are generally more responsive 
to treatment than genotypes 1 and 4, but the therapeutic response 
also is dependent on other factors such as baseline viral load, eth-
nicity, and the patient’s genetic background and compliance with 
the regimen.
EVALUATION OF AN INCIDENTAL LIVER MASS
A liver mass often is identified incidentally during a radio-
logic imaging procedure performed for another indication. For 
example, a liver mass may be discovered during evaluation for 
gallbladder disease or kidney stones. In addition, with advances 
in imaging technology, previously undetected lesions not infre-
quently are now identified. Although many of these lesions are 
benign and will require no further treatment, the concern for 
malignancy requires a thorough evaluation. Thus, an orderly 
approach should be taken to the workup of an incidental liver 
lesion to minimize unnecessary testing.51
The evaluation of an incidental liver mass begins with 
a history and physical examination (Fig. 31-17). The patient 
should be asked about abdominal pain, weight loss, previ-
ous liver disease, cirrhosis, alcohol use, viral hepatitis, blood 
transfusions, tattoos, oral contraceptive use (in women), and 
personal or family history of cancer. On physical examina-
tion, jaundice, scleral icterus, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
palpable mass, or stigmata of portal hypertension should be 
noted. After completion of the history and physical examina-
tion, blood work should be performed, including complete 
blood count; platelet count; measurement of levels of elec-
trolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, and albu-
min; liver function tests; serum ammonia level; coagulation 
­studies; hepatitis screen; and measurement of levels of the 
Diagnosis
Abdominal pain/weight loss
Liver disease/cirrhosis/alcohol use
Hepatitis/blood transfusion/tattoos
OCP/hormone use/cancer history
Jaundice/scleral icterus
Palpable mass/hepatomegaly
Stigmata of portal HTN
CBC, platelet count
Lytes/BUN/creat/glu/albumin
Liver function tests/ammonia
Coagulation studies
Hepatitis screen
Tumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA 19-9)
US
CT or MRI scan
Nuclear med.
Angiogram
Occult primary eval.
EGD
Colonoscopy
Mammogram
Gyn/PAP smear
(Percutaneous or laparoscopic)
Liver biopsy (if needed)
Additional imaging studies
Laboratory tests
History and physical exam
Mass identified incidentally by US or CT
Figure 31-17.  Algorithm for diagnostic workup of 
an incidental liver lesion. The evaluation includes 
history and physical examination, blood work, imag-
ing studies, and liver biopsy (if needed). AFP = 
α-fetoprotein; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; CA 19-9 = 
cancer antigen 19-9; CBC = complete blood count; 
CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen; creat = creatinine; 
CT = computed tomography; EGD = esophagogas-
troduodenoscopy; glu = glucose; Gyn = gynecologic; 
HTN = hypertension; MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging; OCP = oral contraceptive pill; PAP = Papa-
nicolaou; US = ultrasound.
1288
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen, AFP, and cancer 
antigen 19-9.
The differential diagnosis for an incidental liver mass 
includes cysts, benign solid lesions, and primary or metastatic 
cancers (Table 31-6). Ultrasound or CT is commonly per-
formed to evaluate respiratory or abdominal symptoms, and 
these imaging studies usually lead to the discovery of an inci-
dental liver lesion. Further radiologic evaluation by dual- or 
triple-phase CT scan or MRI is often necessary to fully char-
acterize the extent and nature of the lesion. Different types of 
liver masses have distinct appearances and patterns of contrast 
enhancement on these studies, facilitating the clinician in the 
diagnosis and formulation of the treatment plan. The use of 
liver-specific contrast agents in MRI provides information on 
hepatocyte function in combination with the structural data 
obtained during a standard MRI, and yields improved detection 
and characterization of liver lesions. CT cholangiography or 
MRCP can be obtained, particularly when visualization of the 
biliary tract is desired. These modalities may be useful in the 
depiction of benign or malignant strictures resulting in biliary 
obstruction. In the evaluation of metastases to the liver from a 
variety of primary cancers, FDG-PET/CT has emerged as an 
indispensable tool in disease staging and in the follow-up after 
treatment. The techniques available for imaging of liver lesions 
are described in detail earlier in the section “Radiologic Evalu-
ation of the Liver.”
Liver biopsy is indicated when biochemical analysis and 
diagnostic imaging fail to lead to a definitive diagnosis. Per-
cutaneous liver biopsy with ultrasound or CT guidance is the 
simplest, fastest, and most commonly performed approach to 
obtain hepatic tissue for histologic examination. Absolute con-
traindications to percutaneous liver biopsy include significant 
coagulopathy (as in patients with decompensated cirrhosis), 
biliary dilatation, and suspicion for hemangioma or echino-
coccal cyst. Obesity and the presence of ascites are relative 
contraindications that can present a challenge to the percutane-
ous approach. In these patients, laparoscopic liver biopsy can 
be considered. The laparoscopic technique is likely to have a 
higher diagnostic yield in cirrhotic patients with ascites and/or 
coagulopathy, in whom bleeding risk is excessive by the percu-
taneous route. Laparoscopy also offers the opportunity to stage 
the extent of disease in patients with various intra-abdominal 
malignancies.
Table 31-6
Classification of liver lesions
Benign
  Cyst
  Hemangioma
  Focal nodular hyperplasia
  Adenoma
  Biliary hamartoma
  Abscess
Malignant
  Hepatocellular carcinoma
  Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer)
  Gallbladder cancer
  Metastatic colorectal cancer
  Metastatic neuroendocrine cancer (carcinoid)
  Other metastatic cancers
HEPATIC CYSTS
Congenital Cysts
The majority of hepatic cysts are asymptomatic. Hepatic cysts 
are usually identified incidentally and can occur at any time 
throughout life. The most common benign lesion found in the 
liver is the congenital or simple cyst. The exact prevalence of 
simple hepatic cysts in the U.S. population is not known, but 
the female:male ratio is approximately 4:1, and the prevalence 
is approximately 2.8% to 3.6%.52 Simple cysts are the result of 
excluded hyperplastic bile duct rests. Simple cysts usually are 
identified in hepatic imaging studies as thin-walled, homoge-
neous, fluid-filled structures with few to no septations. The cyst 
epithelium is cuboidal and secretes a clear nonbilious serous 
fluid. With the exception of large cysts, simple cysts are usually 
asymptomatic. Large simple cysts may cause abdominal pain, 
epigastric fullness, and early satiety. Occasionally the affected 
patient presents with an abdominal mass.
Asymptomatic simple cysts are best managed conser-
vatively. The preferred treatment for symptomatic cysts is 
­ultrasound- or CT-guided percutaneous cyst aspiration followed 
by sclerotherapy. This approach is approximately 90% effective 
in controlling symptoms and ablating the cyst cavity. If percu-
taneous treatment is unavailable or ineffective, treatment may 
include either laparoscopic or open surgical cyst fenestration. The 
laparoscopic approach is being used more frequently and is 90% 
effective. The excised cyst wall is sent for pathologic analysis to 
exclude the presence of carcinoma, and the remaining cyst wall 
must be carefully inspected for evidence of neoplastic change. If 
such change is present, complete resection is required, either by 
enucleation or formal hepatic resection.
Biliary Cystadenoma
Biliary cystadenomas are slow-growing, unusual, benign lesions 
that most commonly present as large lesions in the right lobe of 
the liver. Although these lesions are usually benign, they can 
undergo malignant transformation. Patients with biliary cystad-
enomas commonly present with abdominal pain. An abdominal 
mass occasionally can be identified on physical examination. In 
contrast to simple cysts, biliary cystadenomas have walls that 
appear thicker with soft tissue nodules and septations that usu-
ally enhance. The protein content of the fluid can be variable 
and can affect the radiographic images on CT and MRI. Surgical 
resection is the preferred mode of treatment.
Polycystic Liver Disease
Adult polycystic liver disease (PCLD) occurs as an autosomal 
dominant disease and usually presents in the third decade of 
life. Approximately 44% to 76% of affected families are found 
to have mutations of PKD1, and approximately 75% have muta-
tions of PKD2.53 The prevalence and number of hepatic cysts 
are higher in females and increase with advancing age and with 
increasing severity of renal cystic disease and renal dysfunction. 
Patients with a small number of cysts or with small cysts (<2 cm) 
usually remain asymptomatic. In contrast, patients who develop 
many or large cysts, with a cyst-to-parenchymal volume ratio 
of >1, usually develop clinical symptoms, including abdominal 
pain, distension, shortness of breath, and early satiety. Disease 
progression often results in renal failure and the need for hemo-
dialysis. In most patients, the liver parenchymal volume and 
synthetic function are preserved despite extensive cystic dis-
ease. Hepatic decompensation, variceal hemorrhage, ascites, 
1289
Liver
CHAPTER 31
and encephalopathy develop rarely in patients with PCLD and 
only in those with massive cystic disease. The most common 
liver-specific complications associated with PCLD are intra-
cystic hemorrhage, infection, and posttraumatic rupture. The 
most common abnormal biochemical test finding is a modestly 
elevated γ-glutamyltransferase level, and the most useful imag-
ing tests are CT or MRI of the abdomen, which will demonstrate 
the characteristic polycystic appearance. Other conditions that 
may be associated with PCLD include cerebral aneurysm, diver-
ticulosis, mitral valve prolapse, and inguinal hernia.
The principal aim of treatment for PCLD is to ameliorate 
symptoms by decreasing liver volume. Medical therapy options 
for PCLD remain experimental at this time. Somatostatin ana-
logs such as octreotide and lanreotide have been shown to 
modestly reduce liver volume and are generally well tolerated. 
Sirolimus and other mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
inhibitors possess antiproliferative effects and thus have been 
postulated to slow disease progression. The effectiveness of 
these medical measures in relieving symptoms among patients 
with PCLD, however, remains to be proven.54
Cyst aspiration and sclerotherapy entail puncture of a cyst 
with an aspiration needle followed by injection of a scleros-
ing agent that causes destruction of the epithelial lining thereby 
inhibiting fluid production. Common agents used for sclerosis 
include ethanol, minocycline, and tetracycline. This technique 
may be considered if the patient has one or a few dominant 
cysts, each measuring over 5 cm. Appropriate candidates for 
sclerotherapy can experience a complete resolution of symp-
toms, but patients with numerous cysts often do not improve 
when this technique is used. This procedure is generally well 
tolerated, with the most common complication being pain from 
the instillation of ethanol.
Cyst fenestration, or surgical unroofing of the cyst, can be 
performed via an open or laparoscopic approach in symptomatic 
patients.55 This approach allows multiple cysts to be treated dur-
ing a single procedure, but carries the risk of potential surgical 
complications, including ascites, pleural effusion, hemorrhage, 
and biliary leakage. Immediate symptom relief can be achieved 
in up to 92% of cases, but 22% of patients eventually develop 
recurrence of their symptoms.
Hepatic resection can be considered for PCLD patients 
with massive hepatomegaly, when fenestration alone is unlikely 
to significantly reduce liver volume. Appropriate candidates are 
those with portions of liver that harbor numerous cysts, but have 
at least one spared segment with predominantly normal liver 
parenchyma. Because the intrahepatic vascular and biliary anat-
omy can be distorted by the cysts, PCLD patients undergoing 
hepatic resection are at increased risk for hemorrhagic and bili-
ary complications. Furthermore, adhesion formation after liver 
resection can increase the technical complexity of future OLT. 
Significant symptom relief has been reported in up to 86% of 
PCLD patients following hepatic resection.
OLT represents the only definitive therapy for patients 
with symptomatic PCLD. This therapeutic option is indicated 
in patients with severely disabling symptoms that lead to a poor 
quality of life or in those who have developed untreatable com-
plications such as portal hypertension and nutritional depriva-
tion. If the patient has severe renal insufficiency from polycystic 
kidney disease, consideration should be given to combined 
liver-kidney transplantation. Because of the genetic basis of 
PCLD, living-donor transplantation should be considered only 
if the presence of PCLD in the donor can be ruled out.
Caroli’s Disease
Caroli’s disease is a syndrome of congenital ductal plate mal-
formations of the intrahepatic bile ducts and is characterized 
by segmental cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary radi-
cals.56 Caroli’s disease also is associated with an increased 
incidence of biliary lithiasis, cholangitis, and biliary abscess 
formation. Caroli’s disease usually occurs in the absence of 
cirrhosis and is associated with cystic renal disease.56 The 
most common presenting symptoms include fever, chills, and 
abdominal pain. Most patients present by the age of 30 years, 
and males and females are affected equally. Rarely, patients 
can present later in life with complications secondary to portal 
hypertension. Approximately 33% of affected patients develop 
biliary lithiasis and 7% develop cholangiocarcinoma. The 
diagnosis of Caroli’s disease is made based on imaging stud-
ies. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, ERCP, 
and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography provide more 
detailed imaging of the biliary tree and confirm communica-
tion of the intrahepatic cysts with the biliary tree, which is 
necessary to solidify the diagnosis. Treatment consists of bili-
ary drainage, with ERCP and percutaneous transhepatic chol-
angiography serving as first-line therapeutic modalities. If the 
disease is limited to a single lobe of the liver, hepatic resec-
tion can be beneficial. Liver resection can be considered in the 
patient with hepatic decompensation or unresponsive recurrent 
cholangitis and possibly in the patient with a small (T1 or T2) 
cholangiocarcinoma.
BENIGN LIVER LESIONS
The liver is an organ that is commonly involved either primarily 
or secondarily with vascular, metabolic, infectious, and malig-
nant processes. Many classification schemes are used to help 
narrow the differential diagnosis of liver lesions: solid or cystic, 
single or multiple, cell of origin (hepatocellular, cholangiocel-
lular, or mesenchymal), and benign or malignant. Benign liver 
lesions occur in up to 20% of the general population and are 
much more common than malignant tumors. The most com-
mon benign lesions are cysts, hemangiomas, focal nodu-
lar hyperplasia (FNH), and hepatocellular adenomas (see 
Table 31-6). Many of these lesions have typical features in 
imaging studies that help confirm the diagnosis. 
Cyst
Hepatic cysts are the most frequently encountered liver lesion 
overall and are described in detail in the section “Hepatic 
Cysts.” Cystic lesions of the liver can arise primarily (con-
genital) or secondarily from trauma (seroma or biloma), infec-
tion (pyogenic or parasitic), or neoplastic disease. Congenital 
cysts are usually simple cysts containing thin serous fluid 
and are reported to occur in 5% to 14% of the population, 
with higher prevalence in women. In most cases, congenital 
cysts are differentiated from secondary cysts (infectious or 
neoplastic origin) in that they have a well-defined thin wall 
and no solid component and are filled with homogeneous, 
clear fluid. For benign solid liver lesions, the differential 
diagnosis includes hemangioma, adenoma, FNH, and bile 
duct ­hamartoma.
Hemangioma
Hemangiomas (also referred to as hemangiomata) are the most 
common solid benign masses that occur in the liver. They con-
sist of large endothelial-lined vascular spaces and ­represent 
7
1290
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
congenital vascular lesions that contain fibrous tissue and 
small blood vessels that eventually grow. They are predomi-
nantly seen in women and occur in 2% to 20% of the popula-
tion. They can range from small (≤1 cm) to giant cavernous 
hemangiomas (10 to 25 cm). Most hemangiomas are discov-
ered incidentally with little clinical consequence. However, 
large lesions can cause symptoms as a result of compression 
of adjacent organs or intermittent thrombosis, which in turn 
results in further expansion of the lesion. Spontaneous rupture 
(bleeding) is rare, but surgical resection can be considered if 
the patient is symptomatic. Resection can be accomplished by 
enucleation or formal hepatic resection, depending on the loca-
tion and involvement of intrahepatic vascular structures and 
hepatic ducts.
The majority of hemangiomas can be diagnosed by liver 
imaging studies. On biphasic contrast CT scan, large hemangio-
mas show asymmetrical nodular peripheral enhancement that is 
isodense with large vessels and exhibit progressive centripetal 
enhancement fill-in over time (Fig. 31-18). On MRI, hemangio-
mas are hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense 
on T2-weighted images.57 With gadolinium enhancement, hem-
angiomas show a pattern of peripheral nodular enhancement 
similar to that seen on contrast CT scans. Caution should be 
exercised in ordering a liver biopsy if the suspected diagnosis 
is hemangioma because of the risk of bleeding from the biopsy 
site, especially if the lesion is at the edge of the liver.
Adenoma
Hepatic adenomas are benign solid neoplasms of the liver. 
They are most commonly seen in premenopausal women older 
than 30 years of age and are typically solitary, although mul-
tiple adenomas also can occur. Prior or current use of estrogens 
(oral contraceptives) is a clear risk factor for development of 
liver adenomas, although they can occur even in the absence 
of oral contraceptive use. On gross examination, they appear 
soft and encapsulated and are tan to light brown. Histologi-
cally, adenomas lack bile duct glands and Kupffer cells, have 
no true lobules, and contain hepatocytes that appear congested 
or vacuolated due to glycogen deposition. On CT scan, adeno-
mas usually have sharply defined borders and can be confused 
with metastatic tumors. With venous phase contrast, they can 
look hypodense or isodense in comparison with background 
liver, whereas on arterial phase contrast, subtle hypervascular 
enhancement often is seen (see Fig. 31-18). On MRI scans, ade-
nomas are hyperintense on T1-weighted images and enhance 
early after gadolinium injection. With the use of liver-specific 
MRI contrast agents such as gadoxetate (Eovist or Primovist, 
Bayer-Schering, Berlin, Germany), hepatic adenomas can be 
Figure 31-18.  Computed tomographic scans showing classic appearance of benign liver lesions. Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is hyper-
vascular on arterial phase, isodense to liver on venous phase, and has a central scar (upper panels). Adenoma is hypovascular (lower left 
panel). Hemangioma shows asymmetrical peripheral enhancement (lower right panel).
1291
Liver
CHAPTER 31
better distinguished from FNH by their enhancement character-
istics during the hepatobiliary phase of imaging. The new MRI 
contrast agent, gadobenate dimeglumine (MultiHance, Bracco 
Diagnostics, Milan, Italy), is eliminated through both renal and 
biliary excretion. Therefore, liver lesions that contain hepato-
cytes with intact biliary excretion mechanism will take up this 
contrast agent and be easily distinguished from lesions that do 
not. This contrast agent has improved our ability to differenti-
ate hepatic adenoma from FNH with a high degree of accuracy.
Hepatic adenomas carry a significant risk of spontaneous 
rupture with intraperitoneal bleeding. The clinical presentation 
may be abdominal pain, and in 10% to 25% of cases, hepatic 
adenomas present with spontaneous intraperitoneal hemorrhage. 
Hepatic adenomas also have a risk of malignant transformation to 
a well-differentiated HCC. Therefore, it usually is recommended 
that a hepatic adenoma (once diagnosed) be surgically resected.
Focal Nodular Hyperplasia
FNH is a solid, benign lesion of the liver believed to be a hyper-
plastic response to an anomalous artery. Similar to adenomas, 
they are more common in women of childbearing age, although 
the link to oral contraceptive use is not as clear as with adeno-
mas. A good-quality biphasic CT scan usually is diagnostic of 
FNH, on which such lesions appear well circumscribed with a 
typical central scar (see Fig. 31-18). They show intense homo-
geneous enhancement on arterial phase contrast images and are 
often isodense or invisible compared with background liver 
on the venous phase. On MRI scans, FNH lesions are hypoin-
tense on T1-weighted images and isointense to hyperintense on 
T2-weighted images. After gadolinium administration, lesions 
are hyperintense but become isointense on delayed images. 
The fibrous septa extending from the central scar are also more 
readily seen with MRI. Unlike adenomas, FNH lesions usually 
do not rupture spontaneously and have no significant risk of 
malignant transformation. Therefore, the management of FNH 
is usually reassurance and prospective observation irrespective 
of size. Surgical resection can be recommended, however, when 
patients are symptomatic or when hepatic adenoma or HCC can-
not be definitively excluded. Oral contraceptive or estrogen use 
should be stopped when either FNH or adenoma is diagnosed.
Bile Duct Hamartoma
Bile duct hamartomas are typically small liver lesions, 2 to 4 mm 
in size, visualized on the surface of the liver at laparotomy. They 
are firm, smooth, and whitish yellow in appearance. They can be 
difficult to differentiate from small metastatic lesions, and exci-
sional biopsy often is required to establish the diagnosis.
MALIGNANT LIVER TUMORS
Malignant tumors in the liver can be classified as primary (can-
cers that originate in the liver) or metastatic (cancers that spread 
to the liver from an extrahepatic primary site) (see Table 31-6). 
Primary cancers in the liver that originate from hepatocytes 
are known as hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs or hepato-
mas), whereas cancers arising in the bile ducts are known as 
cholangiocarcinomas.
In the United States, approximately 150,000 new cases 
of colorectal cancer are diagnosed each year, and the majority 
of patients (approximately 60%) will develop hepatic metas-
tases over their lifetime. Hence, the most common tumor seen 
in the liver is metastatic colorectal cancer. This compares with 
approximately 18,000 new cases of HCC diagnosed annually in 
the United States. Interestingly, in a Western series of 1000 con-
secutive new liver cancer patients seen at a university medical 
center, 47% had HCC, 17% had colorectal cancer metastases, 
11% had cholangiocarcinomas, 7% had neuroendocrine metas-
tases, and 18% had other tumors.58 Although these figures do 
not reflect the incidence or prevalence of these liver cancers, 
they are indicative of referral patterns in a tertiary academic 
medical center with a large liver transplantation team and active 
hepatology clinic.
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
HCC is the fifth most common malignancy worldwide, with an 
estimated 750,000 new cases diagnosed annually. Because of its 
high fatality, it is the third most common cause of cancer death 
worldwide.59 Major risk factors are viral hepatitis (B or C), 
alcoholic cirrhosis, hemochromatosis, and NASH. In Asia, 
the risk is as high as 35 to 117 per 100,000 persons per year, 
whereas in the United States, the risk is only 7 per 100,000 per-
sons per year.59 Although cirrhosis is not present in all cases, 
it has been estimated to be present 70% to 90% of the time. In 
a person with cirrhosis, the annual conversion rate to HCC is 
2% to 6%.60 In patients with chronic HCV infection, cirrhosis 
usually is present before the HCC develops; however, in cases 
of hepatitis B virus infection, HCC tumors can occur before 
the onset of cirrhosis. HCCs are typically hypervascular with 
blood supplied predominantly from the hepatic artery. Thus, 
the lesion often appears hypervascular during the arterial phase 
of CT studies (Fig. 31-19) and relatively hypodense during the 
delayed phases due to early washout of the contrast medium by 
the arterial blood. MRI imaging also is effective in character-
izing HCC. HCC is variable on T1-weighted images and usu-
ally hyperintense on T2-weighted images. As with contrast CT, 
HCC enhances in the arterial phase after gadolinium injection 
because of its hypervascularity and becomes hypointense in the 
delayed phases due to contrast washout. HCC has a tendency to 
invade the portal vein, and the presence of an enhancing portal 
vein thrombus is highly suggestive of HCC.
The treatment of HCC is complex and is best managed 
by a multidisciplinary liver transplant team. A complete algo-
rithm for the evaluation and management of HCC is shown 
(Fig. 31-20). For patients without cirrhosis who develop 
HCC, resection is the treatment of choice. For patients 
with Child’s class A cirrhosis with preserved liver function and 
no portal hypertension, resection also is considered. If resec-
tion is not possible because of poor liver function and the HCC 
meets transplant criteria (discussed later), liver transplantation 
is the treatment of choice.61,62
The Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer Group has refined its 
HCC management strategy and has developed the American 
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases Practice Guide-
lines.63 Management guidelines vary slightly in Asia, Europe, 
the United States, and other countries based in part on avail-
ability of organ donors for liver transplantation. Living donor 
liver transplantation also is an alternative for patients with HCC 
awaiting transplantation to avoid dropout as a candidate for 
cadaveric donor liver transplantation due to tumor progression.62 
Specific treatment options are described in the next section.
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma, or bile duct cancer, is the second most 
common primary malignancy of the liver. Cholangiocarci-
noma is an adenocarcinoma of the bile ducts; it forms in the 
biliary epithelial cells and can be subclassified into peripheral 
8
1292
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(intrahepatic) bile duct cancer and central (extrahepatic) bile 
duct cancer. Extrahepatic bile duct cancer can be located dis-
tally or proximally. When proximal, it is referred to as a hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma (Klatskin’s tumor). Hilar cholangiocar-
cinoma originates in the wall of the bile duct at the hepatic 
duct confluence and usually presents with obstructive jaun-
dice rather than an actual liver mass. In contrast, a peripheral 
(or intrahepatic) cholangiocarcinoma represents a tumor mass 
within a hepatic lobe or at the periphery of the liver. A biopsy 
specimen from the cholangiocarcinoma will show adeno-
carcinoma, but pathologists are often unable to differentiate 
metastatic adenocarcinoma to the liver from primary bile duct 
adenocarcinoma. Therefore, a search for a primary site should 
Figure 31-19.  Computed tomographic (CT) images of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma (HCC) and peripheral cholangiocarcinoma. CT 
scans reveal a large (upper panel) and small (middle panel) hyper-
vascular HCC. A hypovascular left lobe peripheral cholangiocarci-
noma (CholangioCA) is also shown (lower panel).
be undertaken in cases in which an incidentally discovered 
liver lesion is proven to be an adenocarcinoma on biopsy.
Hilar cholangiocarcinoma is difficult to diagnose and typi-
cally presents as a stricture of the proximal hepatic duct caus-
ing painless jaundice. It preferentially grows along the length 
of the bile ducts, often involving the periductal lymphatics with 
frequent lymph node metastases. Surgical resection offers the 
only chance for cure of cholangiocarcinoma.64 The location and 
extent of tumor dictate the operative approach. In one series 
of 225 patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma, 65 (29%) were 
deemed to have unresectable tumors by initial imaging.65 Of 
the remaining 160 patients who underwent exploratory surgery 
with curative intent, 80 (50%) were found to have inoperable 
tumors. Histologically negative margins, concomitant hepatic 
resection, and well-differentiated tumor histology were associ-
ated with improved outcome after resection. In another series 
of 61 patients undergoing surgical exploration for hilar cholan-
giocarcinoma, the 5-year actuarial survival rates for an R0 or R1 
resection were 45% and 26%, respectively.66 In a large series 
reported by Nagino and colleagues, 132 patients with hilar chol-
angiocarcinoma underwent extended hepatectomy with resection 
of the caudate lobe and extrahepatic bile duct, and/or portal vein 
resection (n = 63) after portal vein embolization.67 The 3- and 
5-year survival rates were 41.7% and 26.8%, respectively.
In the absence of associated primary sclerosing cholangi-
tis (PSC), surgical resection is the treatment of choice for hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma. However, approximately 10% of patients 
with cholangiocarcinoma have PSC.68 Furthermore, cholangio-
carcinoma in the setting of PSC is frequently multicentric and 
often is associated with underlying liver disease, with eventual 
cirrhosis and portal hypertension. As a result, experience has 
shown that resection of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with 
PSC yields dismal results. This led transplant centers to consider 
OLT for patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma. The initial 
results of transplantation were disappointing, however, with 
high recurrence and overall 3-year survival rates of <30%.69
Because the growth of hilar cholangiocarcinoma indicates 
that this disease spreads in a locoregional manner, a rationale 
for the use of neoadjuvant chemoradiation was developed by the 
transplant team at the University of Nebraska in the late 1980s. 
This was adapted in 1993 by the transplant team at the Mayo 
Clinic, which led to the current Mayo Clinic protocol.70 The 
pretransplant Mayo protocol consists of external-beam radiation 
therapy plus a protracted course of intravenous 5-fluorouracil 
followed by iridium-192 brachytherapy.71 Patients then undergo 
an abdominal exploration with staging. If findings are negative, 
patients are given capecitabine for 2 of every 3 weeks until trans-
plantation. Even after restaging with CT/MRI and endoscopic 
ultrasonography, approximately 15% to 20% of patients will 
have positive findings for tumor on abdominal exploration.68,71 
The 5-year survival rate for those undergoing transplantation for 
cholangiocarcinoma at the Mayo Clinic is approximately 70% 
and compares favorably with the rate for resection.68,71 Current 
eligibility criteria for this Mayo Clinic protocol include unresect-
able hilar cholangiocarcinoma or hilar cholangiocarcinoma with 
PSC. The tumor must have a radial dimension of ≤3 cm with 
no intrahepatic or extrahepatic metastases, and the patient 
must not have undergone prior radiation therapy or trans-
peritoneal biopsy.71 Many centers have adopted similar protocols 
with comparable results.72
Peripheral, or intrahepatic, cholangiocarcinoma is less 
common than hilar cholangiocarcinoma. In a series of 53 patients 
9
1293
Liver
CHAPTER 31
at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center who underwent 
surgical exploration for a diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangio-
carcinoma, 33 (62%) were found to have resectable tumors.73 
Actuarial 3-year survival for patients undergoing resection was 
55%. Factors predictive of poor survival included vascular 
invasion, histologically positive margins, and multiple tumors. 
In a large series in Taiwan, 373 patients with peripheral chol-
angiocarcinoma underwent surgical treatment from 1977 to 
2001. Absence of mucobilia, nonpapillary tumor type, tumor 
of advanced stage, nonhepatectomy, and lack of postoperative 
chemotherapy were five independent prognostic factors that 
adversely affected overall survival.74 Liver transplantation has 
been performed for peripheral cholangiocarcinoma75; however, 
currently all but one center in the United States have eschewed 
this approach because of organ shortages and relatively high 
recurrence rates.
Gallbladder Cancer
Gallbladder cancer is a rare aggressive tumor with a very poor 
prognosis. Over 90% of patients have associated cholelithia-
sis. In one study examining the mode of presentation over a 
10-year period from 1990 to 2000 in 44 patients diagnosed 
with gallbladder cancer, the diagnosis was found to be made 
preoperatively in 57%, intraoperatively in 11%, and inciden-
tally after cholecystectomy in 32%.76 Surgical approaches can 
be classified into (a) reoperation for an incidental finding of 
gallbladder cancer after cholecystectomy, and (b) radical resec-
tion in patients with advanced disease. The results are dismal 
for radical resection in patients with advanced disease and 
positive hilar lymph nodes.77,78 For incidental gallbladder can-
cer beyond stage T1, reoperation with central liver resection, 
hilar lymphadenectomy, and evaluation of cystic duct stump is 
most commonly performed.79,80 The role of formal lobectomy 
or extended lobectomy as well as common bile duct resection 
is more controversial. In a single-center study of 23 patients 
undergoing attempted curative treatment by surgical resec-
tion, survival was 85% at 1 year, 63% at 2 years, and 55% at 
3 years.80 In a multicenter study encompassing 115 patients 
with incidentally discovered gallbladder cancer who underwent 
­re-resection,79 residual disease in the liver was identified in 46% 
of patients (0% of those with stage T1 disease, 10% of those 
with T2 tumors, and 36% of those with T3 disease). T stage also 
was associated with the risk of metastasis to locoregional lymph 
nodes (lymph node metastasis for T1 of 13%; for T2, 31%; and 
for T3, 46%). In another study, a German registry of incidental 
gallbladder cancer identified 439 patients. Patients with tumors 
staged as T2 or T3 after cholecystectomy had better survival 
if they underwent reoperation than if they were managed with 
observation.81 Hence, reoperation should be considered for all 
patients who have T2 or T3 tumors or for whom the accuracy of 
staging is in question.
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer
Over 50% to 60% of patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer 
will develop hepatic metastases during their lifetime. Resection 
for hepatic metastases has been a routine part of treatment for 
colorectal cancer since the publication of a large single-center 
experience demonstrating its safety and efficacy.82 Predictors of 
poor outcome in that study included node-positive primary, dis-
ease-free interval <12 months, more than one tumor, tumor size 
>5 cm, and carcinoembryonic antigen level >200 ng/mL. Tra-
ditional teaching suggested that hepatic resection for metastatic 
colorectal cancer to the liver, if technically feasible, should be 
performed only for fewer than four metastases.83 However, later 
studies challenged this paradigm. In a series of 235 patients who 
underwent hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer, the 
10-year survival rate of patients with four or more nodules was 
29%, nearly comparable to the 32% survival rate of patients 
Figure 31-20.  Algorithm for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The treatment algorithm for HCC begins with determining 
whether the patient is a resection candidate or liver transplant candidate. Bili = bilirubin level (in milligrams per deciliter); Child’s = Child-
Turcotte-Pugh class; lap = laparoscopic; LDLT = living-donor liver transplantation; LN = lymph node; MELD = Model for End-Stage Liver 
Disease; OLTx = orthotopic liver transplantation; Perc = percutaneous; RFA = radiofrequency ablation; TACE = transarterial chemoemboli-
zation; Tx = transplantation; UNOS = United Network for Organ Sharing; vasc. = vascular.
Resection
Non-cirrhotic/
Child’s A
Single lesion
No metastasis
OLTx evaluation
1 lesion ≤5 cm
3 lesions ≤3 cm
Child’s A/B/C
No gross vasc. invasion
No metastasis
Not Tx candidate
Co-morbid factors
≥4 lesions
Gross vasc. invasion
LN (+) or metastasis
LDLT ?
Suitable donor
Palliative care
Child’s C
Bili ≥3 
HCC Identified
Resection candidate?
Transplant candidate?
Yes
Yes
No
Sorafenib
Yes
Yes
No
OLTx
Clinical
trials
Neoadjuvant therapy
RFA/TACE/90 Yttrium
UNOS list (cadaver)
MELD score (? > 3 mos)
Perc/lap. RFA
Single lesion
< 5 cm
Child’s A/B
Tace/90 Yttrium
Multi-focal >5 cm
Child’s A/B/C
Bili <3
New
agents
1294
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with only a solitary tumor metastasis.84 In the Memorial Sloan-
Kettering Cancer Center series of 98 patients with four or more 
colorectal hepatic metastases who underwent resection between 
1998 and 2002, the 5-year actuarial survival was 33%.85 Fur-
thermore, improved chemotherapeutic regimens and surgical 
techniques have produced aggressive strategies for the man-
agement of this disease. Many groups now consider volume 
of future liver remnant and the health of the background liver, 
and not actual tumor number, as the primary determinants in 
selection for an operative approach.86,87 Hence, resectability is 
no longer defined by what is actually removed, but indications 
for hepatic resection now center on what will remain 
after resection.88 Use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 
portal vein embolization, two-stage hepatectomy, simultaneous 
ablation, and resection of extrahepatic tumor in select patients 
have increased the number of patients eligible for a surgical 
approach.89,90
Neuroendocrine Tumors
Hepatic metastases from neuroendocrine tumors have a pro-
tracted natural history and commonly are associated with 
debilitating endocrinopathies. Several groups have advocated 
an aggressive surgical approach of debulking surgery, both 
to control symptoms and to extend survival.91,92 In a series of 
170 patients undergoing resection of hepatic metastases from 
neuroendocrine tumors between 1977 and 1998 at the Mayo 
Clinic, overall survival was 61% and 35% at 5 and 10 years, 
respectively.93 There was no difference in survival between 
patients with carcinoid tumors and those with islet cell tumors. 
Major hepatectomy was performed in 91 patients (54%), 
and recurrence rate was 84% at 5 years. Belghiti’s group has 
described a two-stage strategy used in 41 patients with a primary 
neuroendocrine tumor and synchronous bilobar liver metasta-
ses.94 In the first stage, the primary tumor is resected and lim-
ited resection of metastases in the left hemiliver, combined with 
right portal vein ligation, is performed. After 8 weeks of hyper-
trophy, a right hepatectomy or extended right hepatectomy (also 
referred to as a right trisectionectomy; resection of Couinaud’s 
segments IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII of the liver) is performed.94 In 
patients treated using this strategy, the 2-, 5-, and 8-year Kaplan-
Meier overall survival rates were 94%, 94%, and 79%, respec-
tively, and disease-free survival rates were 85%, 50%, and 26%, 
respectively. Because systemic therapy has had little success in 
the treatment of advanced tumors, a broader approach using mul-
timodal therapy has been used to increase survival and improve 
hormone-related symptoms. These therapies include radiofre-
quency or microwave ablation and intra-arterial therapy with 
chemoembolization or radioembolization (yttrium-90). Some 
centers perform liver transplantation for selected patients (carci-
noid histology; primary tumor removed with curative resection; 
primary tumor drained by portal system; ≤50% hepatic paren-
chyma involved; good response or stable disease for at least 
6 months during pretransplantation period; and age 55 years or 
younger), although this is not routine.95
Other Metastatic Tumors
Nearly every cancer has the propensity to metastasize to the 
liver. Historically, enthusiasm was low for resecting metastases 
other than those from a colorectal cancer primary. This was due 
in part to the recognition that many other primary cancers (such 
as breast cancer) represent a systemic disease when liver metas-
tases are present. However, more recent studies have shown 
Table 31-7
Treatment options for liver cancer
Hepatic resection
Liver transplantation
Ablation techniques
  •  Radiofrequency ablation
  •  Ethanol ablation
  •  Cryoablation
  •  Microwave ablation
Regional liver therapies
  •  Chemoembolization/embolization
  •  Hepatic artery pump chemoperfusion
  •  Internal radiation therapy (yttrium-90 internal radiation)
External-beam radiation therapy
  •  Stereotactic radiosurgery (CyberKnife, Trilogy, 
Synergy)
  •  Intensity-modulated radiation therapy
Systemic chemotherapy
Multimodality approach
10
acceptable 5-year survival rates in the 20% to 40% range for 
resection of hepatic metastases from breast, renal, and other GI 
tumors.96,97 In a large study of hepatic resection for noncolorec-
tal, nonendocrine liver metastases in 1452 patients, nega-
tive prognostic factors were nonbreast origin, age >60 years, 
disease-free interval of <12 months, need for major hepatec-
tomy, performance of R2 resection, and presence of extrahe-
patic metastases.96
TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR LIVER CANCER
In general, the major treatment options for liver cancer can be 
categorized as shown in Table 31-7. The decision making for 
any given patient is complex and is best managed by a multidis-
ciplinary liver tumor board. The treatments listed in Table 31-7 
are not mutually exclusive; the important point is to select the 
most appropriate initial treatment after a complete evaluation. In 
general, surveillance imaging (CT or MRI) is performed every 
3 to 4 months during the first year after diagnosis to observe 
for response, progression, or recurrence. The treatment plan is 
individualized and modified according to the response of the 
patient.
Hepatic Resection
For primary liver cancers or hepatic metastases, hepatic resection 
is the gold standard and treatment of choice. Although there are 
anecdotal reports of long-term survival after ablation and other 
regional liver therapies, liver resection remains the only real 
option for cure. For HCC in the setting of cirrhosis, liver trans-
plantation also offers the potential for long-term survival, albeit 
with the consequences of immunosuppression. Hepatic resection 
also has been advocated for HCC in select patients with cirrho-
sis before secondary liver transplantation, although not without 
some controversy.98 Many large series of patients undergoing 
major hepatectomy now report mortality rates of <5%.99-102 Pre-
viously, a 1-cm tumor margin was considered desirable; how-
ever, recent studies have reported comparable survival rates with 
smaller margins.103-105 Technical innovation in liver surgery and 
a better understanding of perioperative care have even allowed 
surgeons to perform resections in cases with IVC involvement 
1295
Liver
CHAPTER 31
with extracorporeal liver surgery.106 The technical aspects of ana-
tomic hepatic lobectomies are described later.
Liver Transplantation
The rationale supporting OLT for HCC includes the fact that 
most HCCs (>80%) arise in the setting of cirrhosis.69,107 The 
cirrhotic liver often does not have enough reserve to tolerate 
a formal resection. Also, HCC tumors are commonly multifo-
cal and are underestimated by current CT or MRI imaging.108 
Furthermore, recurrence rates are high at 5 years after resec-
tion (>50%). Hence, OLT is an appealing treatment, because it 
removes both the cancer and the cirrhotic liver that leads to can-
cer. More than 6000 liver transplantations are performed each 
year in the United States, with 1-year survival rates approaching 
90%. In June 2013, approximately 15,800 patients were on the 
waiting list for liver transplantation.109
Initial series of OLT for HCC reported in the 1990s 
included advanced cases of HCC, and the 5-year survival rates 
were only 20% to 50%.69 This compared poorly with overall 
5-year survival rates of 70% to 75% for OLT in the Organ Pro-
curement and Transplantation Network/United Network for 
Organ Sharing (OPTN/UNOS) database. Mazzaferro and col-
leagues at Milan subsequently showed that survival rates were 
markedly improved when OLT was limited to patients with 
early-stage HCC (stage I or stage II) with one tumor ≤5 cm, or 
up to three tumors no larger than 3 cm, along with the absence 
of gross vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread.110 Multiple 
studies have validated these findings, and many groups have 
proposed an expansion of the Milan criteria.62
As noted previously, the 6- to 40-point MELD score was 
adopted by OPTN/UNOS in 2002 for allocation of deceased donor 
liver organs in the United States. In an attempt to prioritize patients 
with preserved liver function and progressive HCC, patients with 
stage I or stage II HCC are allocated exception points (currently 22 
MELD points, increasing every 3 months as long as they continue 
to meet transplant criteria). This allocation has had a positive effect 
for HCC liver transplant candidates, leading to decreased waiting 
list dropout and increased transplant rates with excellent long-term 
outcomes.111 The goal is to better equate death rates on the liver 
transplant waiting list for patients with stage I or stage II HCC 
with rates for patients with chronic liver disease without HCC. 
Although indications for liver transplantation have increased, the 
supply of donor livers has failed to keep pace with the numbers of 
potential recipients. A partial solution has been the use of living 
donor grafts. This is especially true in Asia where the incidence 
of HCC is high and the rate of cadaveric donation is low. Living 
donor grafts include right and left lobes, as well as dual grafts from 
separate donors to provide adequate hepatic mass to the recipient. 
The use of living donor grafts also allows for transplant programs 
to push the boundaries by accepting patients beyond the Milan 
criteria with good results.112
Radiofrequency Ablation
In 1891, d’Arsonval discovered that radiofrequency (RF) waves 
delivered as an alternating electric current (>10 kHz) could pass 
through living tissue without causing pain or neuromuscular exci-
tation. The resistance of the tissue to the rapidly alternating cur-
rent produced heat. This discovery contributed to the development 
of the surgical application of electrocautery. In 1908, Beer used 
RF coagulation to destroy urinary bladder tumors. Cushing and 
Bovie later applied RF ablation to intracranial tumors. In 1961, 
Lounsberry studied the histologic changes of the liver after RF 
ablation (RFA) in animal models. He found that RF caused local 
tissue destruction with uniform necrosis. In the early 1990s, two 
groups proposed that RFA can be an effective method for destroy-
ing unresectable malignant liver tumors.113,114 Both groups found 
that RFA produced lesions with well-demarcated areas of necro-
sis without viable tumor cells present. Clinical reports after short-
term follow-up suggested that RFA was safe and effective in the 
treatment of liver tumors.115-117 However, Abdalla and colleagues 
examined data for 358 consecutive patients with colorectal liver 
metastases treated with curative intent over a 10-year period 
(1992 to 2002).118 Liver-only recurrence after RFA was four times 
the rate after resection (44% vs. 11% of patients), and RFA alone 
or in combination with resection did not provide survival rates 
comparable to those with resection alone. Other studies have cor-
roborated this trend.119 Nonetheless, RFA remains a common 
procedure that can be performed by a percutaneous, minimally 
invasive laparoscopic, or open approach.120,121 It also has been used 
successfully to ablate small HCCs as a bridge to liver transplanta-
tion.122 Recently, results were reported for the first randomized 
clinical trial involving RFA treatment for HCC in 291 Chinese 
patients with three or fewer HCC tumors ranging in size from 
3 to 7.5 cm.123 Patients were randomly assigned to treatment arms 
of RFA alone (n = 100), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) 
alone (n = 95), or combined TACE plus RFA (n = 96). At a median 
follow-up of 28.5 months, median survival was 22 months in the 
RFA group, 24 months in the TACE group, and 37 months in the 
TACE plus RFA group. Patients treated with TACE plus RFA had 
significantly better overall survival than those treated with TACE 
alone (P < .001) or RFA alone (P < .001).
Ethanol Ablation, Cryosurgery,  
and Microwave Ablation
Percutaneous ethanol injection has been shown to be a safe 
and effective treatment for small HCCs.107 The ethanol usually 
is delivered by percutaneous injection under ultrasound or CT 
guidance. Percutaneous ethanol injection also is used to treat 
small HCC tumors as a bridge to liver transplantation in some 
centers to avoid patient dropout.61 Although cryosurgery was 
used in the late 1980s and 1990s for ablation of liver tumors, 
many have abandoned this approach in favor of RFA because of 
the latter’s fewer side effects and ease of use. Microwave abla-
tion is a thermal ablative technique used in the management of 
unresectable liver tumors to produce a coagulation necrosis. In 
a multicenter phase II U.S. trial using a 915-MHz microwave 
generator, 87 patients underwent 94 ablation procedures for 
224 hepatic tumors.124 Forty-five percent of the procedures were 
performed using an open approach, 7% laparoscopically, and 
48% percutaneously. The average tumor size was 3.6 cm (range, 
0.5 to 9.0 cm). At a mean follow-up of 19 months, 47% of the 
patients were alive with no evidence of disease. Local recurrence 
at the ablation site occurred in 2.7% of tumors, and regional 
recurrence occurred in 43% of patients. There were no procedure-
related deaths. Further studies are required to define the role of 
this technology in relation to the other ablation options available.
Chemoembolization and Hepatic  
Artery Pump Chemoperfusion
Chemoembolization is the process of injecting chemotherapeu-
tic drugs combined with embolization particles into the hepatic 
artery that supplies the liver tumor using a percutaneous, trans-
femoral approach. It is most commonly used for treatment of 
unresectable HCC. Three randomized trials and a meta-analysis 
1296
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
have shown a survival benefit with chemoembolization.125-128 In 
a study by Lo and colleagues, 80 Asian patients were randomly 
assigned to receive either chemoembolization with cisplatin in 
lipiodol or symptomatic treatment only.125 Chemoembolization 
resulted in a marked tumor response, and the actuarial survival 
was significantly better in the chemoembolization group (1- and 
3-year survival of 57% and 26%, respectively) than in the con-
trol group (1- and 3-year survival of 32% and 3%, respectively). 
In another randomized trial, a Barcelona group compared che-
moembolization with doxorubicin versus supportive care and 
showed that chemoembolization significantly improved 
survival.126 Finally, in a large prospective cohort study of 
8510 patients with unresectable HCC in Japan who received 
transcatheter arterial lipiodol chemoembolization, the 5-year sur-
vival rate was 26% and median survival time was 34 months.127 
The TACE-related mortality rate after the initial therapy was 
0.5%. Complications of TACE include liver dysfunction or liver 
failure, hepatic abscess, and hepatic artery thrombosis. Multiple 
studies also have shown promising results for chemoemboliza-
tion with drug-eluting beads in treatment of HCC.129
In the 1990s, hepatic artery pump chemoperfusion with 
floxuridine for colorectal cancer metastases to the liver was 
used both for treatment of inoperable disease and in the adjuvant 
setting.130 However, in the modern era of improved chemothera-
peutic options, this treatment modality is seldom used outside 
of a clinical trial.
Yttrium-90 Microspheres
Selective internal radioembolization or transarterial radioem-
bolization (TARE) is a promising new treatment modality for 
patients with inoperable primary or metastatic liver tumors. The 
treatment is a minimally invasive transcatheter therapy in which 
radioactive microspheres are infused into the hepatic arteries via 
a transfemoral percutaneous approach. The yttrium-90 micro-
spheres are directly injected into the hepatic artery branches that 
supply the tumor. Once infused, the microspheres deliver doses 
of high-energy, low-penetration radiation selectively to the tumor. 
The main indications are inoperable HCC131 and colorectal can-
cer hepatic metastases for which systemic chemotherapy has 
failed.132,133 In a recent study involving 137 patients with unre-
sectable chemorefractory liver metastases treated with radioem-
bolization, there was a response rate of 42.8% (2.1% complete 
response, 40.7% partial response) according to World Health 
Organization criteria.133 One-year survival rate was 47.8%, and 
2-year survival rate was 30.9%. Median survival was 457 days for 
patients with colorectal tumor metastases, 776 days for those with 
neuroendocrine tumor metastases, and 207 days for those with 
noncolorectal, nonneuroendocrine tumor metastases. The two 
products available in the United States are SIR-Spheres (Sirtex, 
Sydney, Australia) and TheraSphere (Nordian, Ottawa, Canada).
Stereotactic Radiosurgery and  
Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy
Although stereotactic radiosurgery (with CyberKnife and other 
systems) is in widespread use for brain and spinal tumors, body 
application to HCC or metastatic liver tumors has only recently 
occurred. In a phase I study, 31 patients with unresectable HCCs 
and 10 with unresectable cholangiocarcinomas completed a six-
fraction course of stereotactic body radiotherapy.134 The treat-
ment was well tolerated, and median survival was 11.7 and 15.0 
months for the two groups, respectively. A similar safety profile 
was observed in a study in the Netherlands.135 Further clinical 
trials are required to define the future role of stereotactic radio-
surgery in treatment of HCC and metastatic tumors. Intensity-
modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is another technologic 
advancement that facilitates the targeted delivery of external-
beam radiation. Early clinical data suggested favorable outcomes 
with IMRT for the treatment of patients with unresectable HCC, 
and ongoing trials are further examining the role of IMRT for 
these locally advanced tumors.
Downstaging
In more advanced-stage patients not eligible for MELD excep-
tion points, hepatic-directed therapy including TACE and tumor 
ablation with radiofrequency, microwave, and ethanol ablation 
have been found to be effective in shrinking tumors to meet 
Milan criteria (downstaging). Multiple centers have used down-
staging to allow for OLT in patients whose tumors responded 
and shrank to meet eligibility criteria.136,137
Systemic Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy has not demonstrated great efficacy in patients 
with HCC, especially in patients with significant cirrhosis. 
For treatment of HCC, the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib has 
shown some efficacy in a phase III randomized international 
multicenter trial. The SHARP trial (Sorafenib HCC Assessment 
Randomized Protocol) enrolled 602 patients with Child’s class 
A cirrhosis and inoperable HCC. At interim analysis, the trial 
was discontinued because a survival benefit was found in the 
treatment group. The median overall survival for patients receiv-
ing sorafenib was 10.7 months versus 7.9 months for patients 
in the control arm. Based on these findings, sorafenib received 
accelerated Food and Drug Administration approval for the 
treatment of advanced unresectable HCC.138 Future studies will 
likely examine the role of other molecularly targeted agents and 
combinations of sorafenib with other treatment modalities.
HEPATIC RESECTION SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Nomenclature
Due to the confusion in language with regard to anatomic 
descriptions of hepatic resections, a common nomenclature 
was introduced at the International Hepato-Pancreato-­
Biliary Association meeting in Brisbane, Australia, in 2000 
(Table 31-8).139,140 The goal was to provide universal terminol-
ogy for liver anatomy and hepatic resections, because there was 
much overlap among the designations for hepatic lobes, sections, 
sectors, and segments used by surgeons worldwide (Fig. 31-21). 
The most common or prevailing anatomic pattern was used as 
the basis for naming liver anatomy, and the surgical procedure 
nomenclature adopted for hepatic resections was based on the 
assigned anatomic terminology.141 Adoption of a common lan-
guage should enable hepatic surgeons to better understand and 
interpret liver surgery publications from different continents and 
disseminate their knowledge to the next generation of hepato-
biliary surgeons. Nonetheless, even today, the literature is full 
of both old and new liver resection terminology, so the surgeon 
in training must be familiar with all the various classifications.
Techniques and Devices for Dividing the 
Hepatic Parenchyma
Hepatic resection surgery has evolved over the past 50 years. A 
better understanding of liver anatomy and physiology, coupled 
with improved anesthesia techniques and widespread use of 
1297
Liver
CHAPTER 31
Table 31-9
Techniques and devices for dividing liver parenchyma 
and achieving hemostasis
Blunt fracture and clips
Monopolar cautery (Bovie)
Bipolar cautery
Argon beam coagulator
CUSA ultrasonic dissector
Hydro-Jet water-jet dissector
Harmonic Scalpel, AutoSonix ultrasonic transector-coagulator
LigaSure tissue fusion system
SurgRx EnSeal tissue sealing and transection system
Gyrus PK cutting forceps
Endovascular staplers
TissueLink sealing devices
Habib 4X Laparoscopic sealer
InLine bipolar linear coagulator
Topical agents (fibrin glues, Surgicel, Gelfoam, Avitene,  
  Tisseel, Floseal, Crosseal)
Table 31-8
Brisbane 2000 liver terminology
Older Hepatic Resection Terminology
Brisbane 2000 Hepatic Resection Terminology
  Right hepatic lobectomy
  Left hepatic lobectomy
  Right hepatic trisegmentectomy
  Left hepatic trisegmentectomy
  Left lateral segmentectomy
  Right posterior lobectomy
  Caudate lobectomy
  Right hepatectomy or right hemihepatectomy (V, VI, VII, VIII)
  Left hepatectomy or left hemihepatectomy (II, III, IV)
  Right trisectionectomy or extended right hepatectomy (or hemihepatectomy, IV, V,  
    VI, VII, VIII)
  Left trisectionectomy or extended left hepatectomy (or hemihepatectomy, II, III, IV, 
    V, VIII)
  Left lateral sectionectomy or bisegmentectomy (II, III)
  Right posterior sectionectomy (VI, VII)
  Caudate lobectomy or segmentectomy (I)
Alternative “sector” terminology
  Right anterior sectorectomy
  Right posterior sectorectomy or right lateral sectorectomy
  Left medial sectorectomy or left paramedian sectorectomy (bisegmentectomy,  
    III, IV)
  Left lateral sectorectomy (segmentectomy, II)
­intraoperative ultrasound, has led to virtually “bloodless” liver sur-
gery in the modern era (the year 2000 to the present). Innovations 
in technology have expanded the list of liver parenchymal tran-
section devices142-144 and hemostatic agents (Table 31-9). Use of 
each device or agent has a learning curve, and undoubtedly every 
experienced hepatic surgeon has his or her personal preferences.
One major trend has been the application of vascular sta-
pling devices for division of the hepatic and portal veins.145-147 
Based on early reports of successful stapling of extrahepatic 
vessels, stapling devices are now being used in the paren-
chymal transection phase, which remains a source of poten-
tial blood loss due to back bleeding from the middle hepatic 
vein.148,149 One advantage of the stapling technique is the speed 
with which the transection can be performed, which minimizes 
surface bleeding and period of ischemia for the remnant liver. 
IVC
RHV
MHV
VII
VIII
IVa
II
VI
V
IVb
III
Falciform lig.
Portal vein
IVC
LHV
I
Figure 31-21.  Hepatic anatomy. Hepatic segments removed in 
the formal major hepatic resections are indicated. IVC = inferior 
vena cava; LHV = left hepatic vein; MHV = middle hepatic vein; 
RHV = right hepatic vein.
However, a major disadvantage of the stapling technique is 
the cost of multiple stapler cartridges. This is balanced by the 
decreased expenses reported with avoidance of ICU admission 
and blood transfusion, as well as shortened operating room 
time. Another consideration in the use of staplers for paren-
chymal transection is the potential for bile leaks. However, 
in a large series of 101 consecutive right hemihepatectomies 
performed using the stapling technique, there was only one 
reported bile leak (1%), which sealed after ERCP.149
Steps in Commonly Performed  
Hepatic Resections
A fundamental understanding of hepatic anatomy is vital for 
any surgeon with the desire to perform hepatobiliary surgery. 
Each hepatic resection surgery can be broken down into a 
1298
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
series of orderly steps. The key to being a proficient hepatic 
surgeon is not to operate swiftly but rather to accomplish the 
operation by completing the steps in an orchestrated fashion. 
Mastery of the operative steps coupled with knowledge of 
liver anatomy and the common anatomic variants provides the 
foundation for safe hepatic surgery. There are many differ-
ent techniques and sequences for accomplishing each of the 
anatomic (and nonanatomic) hepatic operations. The authors 
present their preferred approach in a stepwise fashion for 
right hepatic lobectomy (right hemihepatectomy), left hepatic 
lobectomy (left hemihepatectomy), and left lateral segmen-
tectomy (left lateral sectionectomy). Provision of a detailed 
approach for every type of liver resection is beyond the scope 
of this chapter, and readers are referred to several excellent 
descriptions.150
Steps Common to All Open Major Hepatic Resections
  1.  Make the skin incision—right subcostal with or without a 
partial or complete left subcostal extension across the mid-
line, depending on the patient’s habitus and liver/tumor 
anatomy.
  2.  Open and explore the abdomen, and place a fixed table 
retractor (e.g., Thompson or Bookwalter).
  3.  Examine the liver with bimanual palpation. Perform liver 
ultrasound, and confirm the operation to be performed.
  4.  Take down the round and falciform ligaments, and expose 
the anterior surface of the hepatic veins.
  5.  For a left hepatectomy, divide the left triangular ligament; 
for a right hepatectomy, mobilize the right lobe from the 
right coronary and triangular ligaments.
  6.  Open the gastrohepatic ligament, palpate the porta hepatis, 
and assess for accessory or replaced hepatic arteries.
  7.  Perform a cholecystectomy; leave the gallbladder with 
the cystic duct intact if the gallbladder is involved by the 
tumor.
Right Hepatic Lobectomy (Right Hepatectomy or 
­Hemihepatectomy)
  8.  Mobilize the liver from the anterior aspect of the IVC in 
“piggyback” fashion; ligate the short hepatic veins up to 
the right hepatic vein (RHV).
  9.  Perform a right hilar dissection—gently lower the hilar 
plate, then doubly ligate and divide the right hepatic artery 
(RHA), superior to the right side of the common bile duct.
10.  Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory RHA if 
present.
11.  Expose the portal vein, identifying its right and left 
branches. There is a small lateral portal vein branch off the 
right portal vein (RPV) to the caudate lobe that should be 
controlled and ligated to allow the exposure of additional 
length on the RPV. Divide the RPV either with a vascular 
stapler or between vascular clamps.
12.  Dissect the avascular tissue along the suprahepatic vena 
cava between the right and middle hepatic veins. Pass a 
silastic tube of a Jackson-Pratt drain through this gap.
13.  Notch or divide the caudate process crossing to the right 
hepatic lobe, and bring the drain up and through this notch.
14.  Hang the liver over the drain by pulling up as you divide 
through the liver parenchyma.
15.  Repeat ultrasound and confirm the transection plane, stay-
ing just to the right of the middle hepatic vein (MHV) 
unless the tumor extends over it.
16.  Cauterize approximately 1 cm into the liver parenchyma, 
then switch to a hydro-jet dissection device in combination 
with Bovie electrocautery and suture ligation.
17.  Continue parenchymal division until the RHV is encoun-
tered. During this division, identification, control, ligation, 
and transection of the right hepatic duct (RHD) are obtained 
late in the parenchymal transection process.
18.  Divide the RHV between vascular clamps and suture ligate 
the RHV.
19.  Examine the transected liver edge for bleeding; place a 
figure-of-eight ligating vascular suture if bleeding is 
encountered.
20.  Ensure hemostasis of the transected liver edge with an 
argon beam coagulator and suture ligation.
21.  Inspect the transection surface for bile leaks. These should 
be clipped or suture ligated. Applying a dilute solution of 
hydrogen peroxide can facilitate the visualization of bile 
leaks.
22.  Inspect the IVC and right retroperitoneal space for 
­hemostasis.
23.  Perform completion ultrasound to confirm left portal vein 
(LPV) inflow and outflow in the remaining hepatic veins.
24.  Fix the proximal falciform ligament back to the diaphragm 
side with figure-of-eight sutures.
25.  Apply tissue sealant to the cut surface of the liver, and place 
a Jackson-Pratt drain in the right subphrenic space and close 
the abdomen (Fig. 31-22).
Comments  Although some liver surgeons advocate a one-
step division of the entire intrahepatic Glissonian pedicle as 
described by Launois and Jamieson,151 it is the authors’ pref-
erence to divide the RHA, RHD, and RPV in an extrahepatic 
­fashion. As for the transection plane, the key is to perform 
Figure 31-22.  Completed right hepatic lobectomy (right hepa-
tectomy) with the right portal vein, right hepatic artery, and right 
bile duct ligated and divided. The right hepatic vein is ligated and 
divided. Middle hepatic vein branches inside the liver are divided.
1299
Liver
CHAPTER 31
­accurate ultrasound visualization and mapping of the MHV and 
to stay just to the right of it. Weaving in and out or bisecting the 
MHV can leading to torrential back bleeding. Also, for bulky 
right lobe tumors adherent to the diaphragm or retroperitoneum, 
an anterior approach with division of the parenchyma can be 
performed before right lobe mobilization.152,153
Left Hepatic Lobectomy (Left Hepatectomy or 
­Hemihepatectomy)
  8.  Widely open the gastrohepatic ligament flush with the 
undersurface of the left lateral section and the caudate 
lobe.
  9.  Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory left hepatic 
artery (LHA) if present.
10.  Clamp the round ligament (ligament teres) and pull it ante-
riorly as a handle to expose the left hilum.
11.  Divide any existing parenchymal bridge between segments 
III and IVB.
12.  Dissect the left hilum at the base of the umbilical fissure 
and lower the hilar plate anterior to the left portal pedicle.
13.  Incise the peritoneum overlying the hilum from the left 
side, and doubly ligate the LHA (after test clamping and 
confirming a palpable pulse in the RHA).
14.  Dissect the portal vein at the base of the umbilical fissure 
(it will take a nearly 90° bend from the transverse to the 
umbilical portion).
15.  Expose the portal vein, identifying the right and left 
branches. Control the small portal vein branch off the LPV 
to the caudate lobe to allow the exposure of additional 
length. Divide the LPV either with a vascular stapler or 
between vascular clamps.
16.  Ligate and divide the ligamentum venosum caudally.
17.  Identify the long extrahepatic course of the left hepatic duct 
(LHD) behind the portal vein. Ligate and divide the LHD 
at the umbilical fissure.
18.  Fold the left lateral segment up and back to the right, expos-
ing the window at the base of the left hepatic vein (LHV) as 
it enters the IVC. This is facilitated by dividing any loose 
areolar tissue overlying the ligamentum venosum, which is 
divided proximally.
19.  Pass a large, blunt right-angle clamp in the window between 
the RHV and the MHV, and hug the back of the MHV, 
aiming for the deep edge of the LHV. Do not force it or 
perforate the IVC or MHV.
20.  Pass the silastic tube of a Jackson-Pratt drain through this 
window.
21.  Notch or divide the caudate process crossing to the left 
hepatic lobe and bring the drain up and through this notch.
22.  Hang the liver over the drain by pulling up as you divide 
through the liver parenchyma.
23.  Repeat ultrasound and confirm the transection plane on the 
anterior surface, staying close to the demarcated line. Do 
not bisect the MHV as it passes tangentially from the left 
to the right lobe.
24.  Cauterize down approximately 1 cm in the liver paren-
chyma, then switch to a hydro-jet dissection device in 
combination with Bovie electrocautery and suture ligation.
25.  Continue parenchymal division until the left/middle hepatic 
veins are encountered.
26.  Divide the LHV and MHV between vascular clamps and 
suture the ligate the LHV/MHV.
27.  Check the transected edge of the liver for surgical bleed-
ing; ensure hemostasis of the transected edge with an argon 
beam coagulator and suture ligation.
28.  Inspect the transection surface for bile leaks. These should 
be clipped or suture ligated. Apply dilute solution of hydro-
gen peroxide to facilitate the visualization of bile leaks.
29.  Perform completion ultrasound to confirm RPV inflow and 
RHV outflow.
30.  Apply tissue sealant to the transected surface of the liver. 
Place a Jackson-Pratt drain in the left subphrenic space and 
close the abdomen (Fig. 31-23).
Comments  Because the right posterior duct arises from the 
left hepatic duct (LHD) in approximately 20% of cases (see 
Fig. 31-9) and the right anterior duct comes off the LHD in 
approximately 5% of cases,6 it is vital to divide the LHD at 
the base of the umbilical fissure and not more centrally in the 
hilum as it bifurcates. If the LHD were divided as it appears to 
bifurcate from the right hepatic duct, then approximately 20% to 
25% of the time, either the right posterior or right anterior duct 
would be transected. After the LHD is divided as described ear-
lier (Step 17), the liver parenchyma is scored and divided hori-
zontally approximately 1 cm above the left hilum; the surgeon 
thus assumes that an aberrant right anterior or posterior duct is 
coming off the LHD in the hilum and preserves it. Then as the 
parenchymal transection reaches the left side of the gallblad-
der fossa, the transection plane turns vertical to run parallel to 
Cantlie’s line (or the left edge of the gallbladder bed). The left 
lobe of the liver will be well demarcated at this point (after the 
vascular inflow has been divided), which guides the transection 
plane on the anterior surface. In general, the transection plane 
should be close to the demarcation line to minimize the amount 
Figure 31-23.  Completed left hepatic lobectomy (left hepatectomy) 
resecting segments II, III, and IV.
1300
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of devascularized liver remaining. When dividing the LHV and 
MHV, the surgeon should keep in mind that they have a com-
mon trunk approximately 90% of the time. If it is not easy to 
open the window deep to the MHV and LHV, then division of 
the MHV and LHV can be accomplished after the parenchymal 
transection.
Left Lateral Segmentectomy (Left Lateral Sectionectomy)
  8.  Widely open the gastrohepatic ligament flush with the 
undersurface of the left lateral section and the caudate lobe.
  9.  Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory LHA if 
present.
10.  Clamp the round ligament and pull it anteriorly as a handle 
to expose the left hilum.
11.  Divide any existing parenchymal bridge between segments 
III and IVB.
12.  Carry the dissection down from the end of the round liga-
ment, and the segment III pedicle will be encountered.
13.  Incise the peritoneal reflection on the left side of the round 
ligament as it inserts into the umbilical fissure. This will 
facilitate encircling the segment III and II pedicles, which 
can be divided separately. When encircling the segment II 
pedicle, take care to avoid injury to the caudate inflow ves-
sels coming off the LPV.
14.  Divide the liver parenchyma, staying flush on the left side 
of the falciform ligament using Bovie electrocautery.
15.  Divide the LHV as the parenchymal transection is ­complete.
16.  A Pringle maneuver usually is not required for a left lateral 
sectionectomy because complete devascularization occurs 
before transection and little back bleeding is encountered.
Comments  If the segment III and II LHA branches are large, 
they can be individually ligated in the left hilum before the 
pedicles (with portal vein and hepatic duct branches) are taken. 
If the tumor is more peripheral in the left lateral segment, then 
the segment III and II pedicles can be divided with a vascular 
stapler inside the liver during the parenchymal transection.
Pringle and Ischemic Preconditioning
Pringle described clamping of the portal triad a century ago in 
the landmark paper “Notes on the Arrest of Hepatic Hemor-
rhage Due to Trauma.”4 Although the Pringle maneuver was 
initially described for controlling bleeding due to traumatic 
liver injury, it is commonly used during elective hepatic resec-
tions.154,155 The goal is to minimize blood loss and hypotension, 
which add significant morbidity to the operation. Furthermore, 
intraoperative blood transfusion has been shown to be an inde-
pendent risk factor for increased postoperative infection as 
well as worse patient survival in some studies. Therefore, all 
efforts should be made to minimize blood loss during hepatic 
resection.
Although the liver has been shown to tolerate up to 1 hour 
of warm ischemia, some technical variations of the Pringle 
maneuver include intermittent vascular occlusion with cycles 
of approximately 15 minutes on and 5 minutes off. Experi-
mental and clinical studies have demonstrated the efficacy of 
intermittent vascular occlusion in decreasing ischemia/reperfu-
sion injury compared with continuous vascular occlusion, with 
less elevation of postoperative liver enzyme levels.156 Another 
variation is selective hemihepatic vascular occlusion, which 
can reduce the severity of visceral congestion and total liver 
ischemia. In one prospective trial of total versus selective por-
tal triad clamping, both techniques of inflow clamping were 
found to be equally effective for patients with normal livers, but 
greater liver damage was observed with total inflow occlusion 
in patients with cirrhotic livers.157
In an attempt to decrease the ischemic damage associated 
with inflow occlusion, some hepatic surgeons have advocated 
the use of ischemic preconditioning.158 Ischemic preconditioning 
refers to the brief interruption of blood flow to an organ, fol-
lowed by a short reperfusion period, and then a more prolonged 
period of ischemia. In a randomized clinical trial involving 
100 patients undergoing major hepatic resection, Clavien and 
colleagues reported significantly less liver injury in the group 
who received ischemic preconditioning with a 10-minute clamp, 
a 10-minute reperfusion, and then a 30-minute clamp than in 
those who received a 30-minute clamp alone.159 Patients with 
steatosis also were especially protected by ischemic precondi-
tioning, and the mechanism was shown to be related in part to 
preservation of the adenosine triphosphate content of liver tissue.
Preoperative Portal Vein Embolization
The observation that tumor thrombosis of a major portal vein 
branch induced ipsilateral lobar atrophy and contralateral lobe 
hypertrophy led to the concept of intentional preoperative portal 
vein embolization (PVE) to induce compensatory hypertrophy of 
the remnant liver. This procedure was first described in the 1980s 
and is accomplished via a percutaneous, transhepatic route.160,161 
Numerous studies have subsequently confirmed that PVE is 
effective in inducing hypertrophy of nonembolized hepatic seg-
ments.67,162 PVE usually is performed in the setting of a planned 
right trisectionectomy or extended left hepatectomy (also 
referred to as a left trisectionectomy; resection of Couinaud’s 
segments II, III, IV, V, and VIII of the liver) or extended hepatic 
lobectomy when it is thought that the patient’s remnant liver will 
be too small to support liver function. The future liver remnant 
volume (e.g., the volume of segments II, III, and I) in a patient 
undergoing a planned right trisectionectomy can be directly mea-
sured by helical CT and then divided by the total estimated liver 
volume to calculate the percentage of the future liver remnant. 
If the future liver remnant is thought to be too small, then PVE 
should be considered to increase the size of the future liver rem-
nant.163 In general, surgery is planned approximately 4 weeks 
after PVE to allow adequate time for hypertrophy.
There is no universal agreement on what constitutes a 
future liver remnant adequate to avoid postoperative liver fail-
ure. It is thought that 25% to 30% of the total liver volume is 
adequate in patients with a normal liver.164 Vauthey and asso-
ciates reported that major postoperative complications were 
increased when the estimated future liver remnant was <25%.165 
Farges and colleagues conducted a prospective study to assess 
the benefits of PVE before right hepatectomy. They demon-
strated that PVE had no beneficial effect on the postoperative 
course in patients with normal livers but significantly reduced 
postoperative complications in patients with chronic liver dis-
eases.166 A larger remnant may be necessary even in patients 
with normal livers when a complex hepatectomy is planned 
or when the background liver is steatotic.167 This is especially 
relevant with the increased incidence of fatty liver disease. A 
larger remnant may also be needed when patients have received 
preoperative chemotherapy. Some have suggested that 40% of 
the total hepatic volume should remain to minimize postopera-
tive complications in patients who have underlying liver disease 
or who have received preoperative chemotherapy for colorec-
tal cancer metastases.168,169 In a recent study encompassing 
1301
Liver
CHAPTER 31
112 patients who underwent PVE, major complications, hepatic 
insufficiency, length of hospital stay, and 90-day mortality rate 
were significantly greater in patients with a standardized future 
liver remnant of ≤20% or a degree of hypertrophy of <5% than 
in patients with higher values.170 In another study, the authors 
performed PVE during neoadjuvant chemotherapy for colorec-
tal cancer metastases. After a median wait of 30 days after PVE, 
patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy showed median 
liver growth of 22% in the contralateral (nonembolized) lobe 
compared with 26% for those not receiving chemotherapy (not 
a statistically significant difference), which indicated that liver 
growth occurs after PVE even when cytotoxic chemotherapy is 
administered.171 PVE-related complications occur at a relatively 
low rate and include bleeding, hemobilia, liver abscess, incom-
plete embolization, and small bowel obstruction. To augment 
the ability to increase liver function reserve in patients who have 
undergone PVE, some groups have added ipsilateral hepatic 
artery embolization and ipsilateral hepatic vein embolization.172
Staged Hepatectomy and Repeat Hepatic 
Resection for Recurrent Liver Cancer
A two-stage hepatectomy is a sequential resection strategy to 
remove all metastatic liver tumors when it is impossible to 
resect all disease in a single operative procedure. The first-stage 
hepatectomy usually consists of clearance of the left hemiliver 
by nonanatomic resection, followed by right portal vein ligation 
or embolization to induce left lobe hypertrophy.173,174 This is fol-
lowed by a second-stage major right hepatectomy or extended 
right hepatectomy to resect the right liver metastases. This 
approach is most commonly used in cases of initially unresect-
able colorectal hepatic metastases and has yielded very good 
results.174 Another possibility is to potentiate the effect of PVE 
on increasing future liver remnant by performing an in situ liver 
transection along the future line of resection leaving the arterial 
and hepatic vein branches intact.175
The majority of patients undergoing hepatic resection for 
colorectal cancer metastases experience a recurrence. For those 
with limited disease recurrence confined to the liver, repeat 
hepatectomy is a reasonable option and can be performed with 
low morbidity and mortality in experienced hands.176 In one 
study, 126 patients who underwent a second liver resection for 
colorectal cancer metastases had 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates 
of 86%, 51%, and 34%, respectively. By multivariate analysis, 
the presence of more than one lesion and a tumor size of >5 cm 
were independent prognostic indicators of reduced survival.177 
In another study, 40 patients underwent a second hepatectomy 
for liver metastases from colorectal cancer and experienced a 
survival benefit similar to that from the first hepatectomy; how-
ever, the results suggested that this approach should be limited 
to those patients who do not have extrahepatic disease and for 
whom >1 year has elapsed since the first operation.178 A meta-
analysis of 21 studies examining clinical outcomes after first 
and second liver resections for colorectal cancer metastases 
showed that repeat hepatectomy was safe and provided a sur-
vival benefit equal to that from the first liver resection.179
Repeat hepatectomy also has been performed in patients 
with HCC. Nakajima and colleagues reported on follow-up of 
94 patients who underwent curative liver resection for HCC 
from 1991 to 1996.180 Of these, 57 patients had isolated recur-
rent disease in the liver. Twelve of these 57 patients underwent 
repeat hepatic resection, whereas the other 45 patients received 
ablation therapy. The overall survival rate in those undergoing a 
second hepatectomy was 90% at 2 years; however, the disease-
free survival rate was only 31% at 2 years, significantly lower 
than the 62% rate after initial hepatectomy. Likewise, in another 
group of 84 patients who underwent second hepatectomy for 
recurrent HCC, the overall 5-year survival rate was 50%, but 
the recurrence-free survival rate was only 10%.181 In a report 
of 67 patients undergoing a second resection for HCC, over-
all 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates were 93%, 70%, and 56%, 
respectively.182 Multivariate analysis showed that absence of 
portal invasion at the second resection, single HCC at primary 
hepatectomy, and disease-free interval of ≥1 year after primary 
hepatectomy were independent prognostic factors after the sec-
ond resection.
LAPAROSCOPIC LIVER RESECTION
Cherqui and colleagues first reported in 2000 that laparoscopic 
hepatic surgery was feasible.183 Since this initial report, laparo-
scopic liver surgery has expanded from the simple unroofing of 
hepatic cysts to resection of peripheral benign lesions to formal 
anatomic lobectomies for malignancy and laparoscopic hepa-
tectomy for living donor liver transplantation. While minimally 
invasive approaches have been widely adopted in other areas 
of abdominal surgery, there was initial apprehension regarding 
laparoscopic liver resection (LLR), hampering its widespread 
adoption.184 First, the elementary maneuvers of open hepatic 
surgery, such as manual palpation, organ mobilization, vascular 
control, and parenchymal transection, were thought to be dif-
ficult to reproduce laparoscopically. Second, there was concern 
that hemorrhage may be more difficult to control laparoscopi-
cally and that the risk of gas embolism may be increased by 
the use of pneumoperitoneum. Third, there was apprehension 
concerning the possibility of oncologic inadequacy and tumor 
seeding, but data regarding long-term oncologic outcomes were 
lacking at the time.
Because of the increased technical demands in LLR, 
stringent criteria based on surgeon experience and lesion size 
and location must be used. Surgeons should have an advanced 
understanding of liver anatomy, extensive experience in open 
liver surgery, and the technical skills to control major vascu-
lar and biliary structures laparoscopically before embarking on 
LLR. Familiarity with laparoscopic ultrasonography is needed 
to help confirm the number and size of lesions, demarcate tran-
section planes, and define relationships to major intrahepatic 
and extrahepatic structures intraoperatively. Smaller, more 
peripheral lesions, particularly those located in the anterolateral 
segments (segments II to VI) are most amenable to LLR. Sev-
eral centers have reported large series consisting of laparoscopic 
resections of the left lateral and anterior hepatic segments. Lapa-
roscopic major hepatectomy, such as lobectomies, trisegmen-
tectomies, and the resection of difficult posterior segments, has 
been described and can be performed by expert centers, but 
should not be considered standard practice at the current time.
As in open hepatic resections, various different techni-
cal approaches for performing major laparoscopic liver resec-
tion have been described. Hepatic resection can be achieved 
using either electrosurgical devices to transect the parenchyma, 
reserving staplers for larger vascular and biliary structures, or 
staplers alone to divide parenchyma and major structures with-
out the aid of portal triad clamping. As in open liver surgery, 
no single method of parenchymal transection has been shown 
to be superior.
1302
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Three general techniques have been used for laparoscopic 
hepatectomy. The pure laparoscopic method is suitable for expe-
rienced surgeons to achieve better cosmetic outcomes, whereas 
the hand-assisted method has been associated with a reduced 
conversion rate to open procedures. The addition of the assist-
ing hand allows for tactile feedback while palpating the liver 
and may help in abdominal exploration, parenchymal transec-
tion, mobilization of the liver, and providing gentle retraction. 
Additionally, in cases when significant bleeding is encountered, 
hand compression allows for easier hemostasis. The specimen 
is then removed from the hand-port incision. Hand assistance 
allows the laparoscopic approach to be extended to lesions in 
posterosuperior segments. Finally, the laparoscopic-assisted 
method, or the hybrid procedure, is used by surgeons for dif-
ficult or unique resections such as resection in cirrhotic livers, 
laparoscopic resection of tumors in unfavorable locations, and 
living donor hepatectomies.185 With the hybrid procedure, the 
liver is first mobilized laparoscopically, and the hilar dissection 
and parenchymal transection are then carried out under direct 
vision through an 8- to 12-cm midline or subcostal incision, 
through which the specimen is removed.
Results with laparoscopic liver resections have been 
excellent. Advantages of laparoscopic liver resection include 
reduced operative blood loss and need for portal triad clamping, 
decreased postoperative pain and narcotic requirements, faster 
return of bowel function, and shorter length of hospital stay.186 
The actual occurrence of gas embolism in clinical practice has 
proven to be extremely low. Carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum 
minimizes the risk of gas embolism as compared to air, and low-
ered pneumoperitoneum pressures further reduce its incidence. 
The occurrence of gas embolism has been also related to argon 
beam coagulation, which increases intra-abdominal pressure, 
leading to an increased risk of gas embolism.
Comparative studies between open resection and LLR 
for malignant lesions have revealed no difference in overall or 
disease-free survival after short- and medium-term follow-up, 
and no difference in the width of resection margins. Some series 
have even reported fewer positive resection margins with LLR 
compared to open resection for malignant lesions.187 No port 
site recurrences or tumor seeding has been reported to date after 
LLR. It has been proposed that LLR may allow for more timely 
start of adjuvant chemotherapy because of a quicker postopera-
tive recovery and fewer wound-related complications.
In particular to LLR for HCC, hypothesized advantages 
include avoidance of collateral vessel ligation, resulting in 
reduced portal hypertension, decreased need for intravenous 
fluids, and improved reabsorption of ascites. The reduced occur-
rence of postoperative ascites and hepatic insufficiency in cir-
rhotic patients has led to decreased morbidity in these high-risk 
patients operated through a laparoscopic approach. The persist-
ing underlying liver disease in these patients, however, dictates 
that HCC will recur in 40% to 90% of this population after 
resection, necessitating salvage liver transplantation.188 Laurent 
and colleagues189 reported that prior LLR for HCC compared to 
open resection facilitated subsequent salvage liver transplanta-
tion with decreased morbidity. In this study, patients with previ-
ous LLR had shorter hepatectomy and total operative times, less 
blood loss, and reduced need for blood transfusions after liver 
transplantation, possibly due to less arduous adhesiolysis.
Zhou and colleagues190 published a meta-analysis of 10 
nonrandomized controlled studies to compare surgical and 
oncologic outcomes following LLR or open resection for HCC. 
Compared with perioperative results of open liver resection, 
reports of LLR demonstrate advantageous outcomes related 
to blood loss, transfusion requirements, postoperative morbid-
ity, and hospital length of stay. There were significantly lower 
rates of cirrhotic decompensation and ascites, as well as a trend 
toward lower rates of postoperative liver failure following LLR. 
There were no differences in operative time or postoperative 
mortality. With regard to specific oncologic outcomes, there 
were no differences in pathologic resection margin or in 3- and 
5-year overall and disease-free survival. There were no reported 
cases of port site recurrences or peritoneal dissemination. This 
meta-analysis suggests that LLR is comparable, and in some 
parameters superior, to open resection for HCC.
Regarding LLR for metastatic colorectal cancer, mul-
tiple retrospective series have reported the safety, feasibility, 
and oncologic integrity of the laparoscopic approach. Castaing 
and colleagues191 reported a matched prospective comparison in 
patients undergoing resection of colorectal cancer liver metas-
tases via laparoscopic and open approaches. There were no dif-
ferences in resection margins, whereas the incidence of positive 
margins was greater in the open group. There were no differ-
ences in 1- or 3-year overall, recurrence-free, and disease-free 
survival, indicating that equivalent oncologic outcomes can be 
achieved with LLR in selected patients.
Initial experience with laparoscopic living-donor hepatec-
tomy for transplantation was with left lateral segmentectomy 
during liver allograft procurement for pediatric transplants. 
With continued advances in laparoscopic liver surgery, this 
approach has been applied to adult-to-adult donor right hepatec-
tomy using the hybrid procedure. Complication rates are com-
parable to those reported for open living-donor hepatectomies.
Laparoscopic liver resection can now be performed safely 
by experienced surgeons in selected patients. Benefits of the lap-
aroscopic approach include less operative blood loss, reduced 
postoperative pain and narcotic requirements, a shorter length 
of hospital stay, and comparable postoperative morbidity and 
mortality rates to open liver resection. Although small 
peripheral lesions in anterolateral segments are most 
amenable to laparoscopic resection, surgeons with extensive 
experience can embark on major hepatic resections using the 
laparoscopic approach. Comparative studies have identified sim-
ilar oncologic outcomes for laparoscopic and open resections for 
malignant lesions such as HCC and colorectal liver metastases.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Wikipedia. Prometheus. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Prometheus. Accessed June 7, 2013.
2.	Keen WW IV. Report of a case of resection of the liver 
for the removal of a neoplasm, with a table of seventy-six 
cases of resection of the liver for hepatic tumors. Ann Surg. 
1899;30(3):267.
3.	Fortner JG, Blumgart LH. A historic perspective of liver sur-
gery for tumors at the end of the millennium. J Am Coll Surg. 
2001;193(2):210.
4.	Pringle JH V. Notes on the arrest of hepatic hemorrhage due 
to trauma. Ann Surg. 1908;48(4):541.
5.	Cantlie J. On a new arrangement of the right and left lobes of 
the liver. Proc Anat Soc Great Britain Ireland. 1897;32:4.
6.	Couinaud C. Lobes de segments hepatiques: notes sur l’ 
architecture anatomique et chirurgical de foie. Presse Med. 
1954;62(33):709.
11
1303
Liver
CHAPTER 31
7.	Abdalla EK, Vauthey JN, Couinaud C. The caudate lobe of the 
liver: implications of embryology and anatomy for surgery. 
Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):835.
8.	Bismuth H. Surgical anatomy and anatomical surgery of the 
liver. World J Surg. 1982;6(1):3.
9.	Nordlie RC, Foster JD, Lange AJ. Regulation of glucose pro-
duction by the liver. Annu Rev Nutr. 1999;19:379.
10.	Merriman R. Approach to the patient with jaundice. In: 
Yamada T, ed. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4th ed. Phila-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Williams; 2003:911.
11.	Kruskal JB, Kane RA. Intraoperative US of the liver: techniques 
and clinical applications. Radiographics. 2006;26(4):1067.
12.	Martinez SM, Crespo G, Navasa M, Forns X. Noninvasive 
assessment of liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 2011;53(1):325.
13.	Federle MP, Blachar A. CT evaluation of the liver: principles 
and techniques. Semin Liver Dis. 2001;21(2):135.
14.	Hyodo T, Kumano S, Kushihata F, et al. CT and MR cholan-
giography: advantages and pitfalls in perioperative evaluation 
of biliary tree. Br J Radiol. 2012;85(1015):887.
15.	Ros PR, Davis GL. The incidental focal liver lesion: photon, 
proton, or needle? Hepatology. 1998;27(5):1183.
16.	Wald C, Scholz FJ, Pinkus E, Wise RE, Flacke S. An update 
on biliary imaging. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88(6):1195.
17.	Wiering B, Krabbe PF, Jager GJ, Oyen WJ, Ruers TJ. The 
impact of fluor-18-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomogra-
phy in the management of colorectal liver metastases. Cancer. 
2005;104(12):2658.
18.	Sacks A, Peller PJ, Surasi DS, Chatburn L, Mercier G, 
Subramaniam RM. Value of PET/CT in the manage-
ment of liver metastases, part 1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
2011;197(2):W256.
19.	Bernal W, Auzinger G, Dhawan A, Wendon J. Acute liver 
failure. Lancet. 2010;376(9736):190.
20.	Polson J, Lee WM. Etiologies of acute liver failure: location, 
location, location! Liver Transpl. 2007;13(10):1362.
21.	Agopian V, Petrowsky H, Kaldas FM, et al. The evolution of 
liver transplantation during three decades: analysis of 5347 
consecutive liver transplants at a single center. Ann Surg. 
2013;258:409.
22.	Escorsell A, Mas A, de la Mata M, Spanish Group for the 
Study of Acute Liver F. Acute liver failure in Spain: analysis 
of 267 cases. Liver Transpl. 2007;13(10):1389.
23.	Larson AM, Polson J, Fontana RJ, et al. Acetaminophen-
induced acute liver failure: results of a United States multi-
center, prospective study. Hepatology. 2005;42(6):1364.
24.	Ostapowicz G, Fontana RJ, Schiodt FV, et al. Results of a pro-
spective study of acute liver failure at 17 tertiary care centers 
in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(12):947.
25.	Hodgman MJ, Garrard AR. A review of acetaminophen poi-
soning. Crit Care Clin. 2012;28(4):499.
26.	Kortsalioudaki C, Taylor RM, Cheeseman P, Bansal S, Mieli-
Vergani G, Dhawan A. Safety and efficacy of N-acetylcysteine 
in children with non-acetaminophen-induced acute liver fail-
ure. Liver Transpl. 2008;14(1):25.
27.	O’Grady JG, Alexander GJ, Hayllar KM, Williams R. 
Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure. 
­Gastroenterology. 1989;97(2):439.
28.	Bismuth H, Samuel D, Castaing D, et al. Orthotopic liver 
transplantation in fulminant and subfulminant hepatitis. The 
Paul Brousse experience. Ann Surg. 1995;222(2):109.
29.	Antoniades CG, Berry PA, Bruce M, et al. Actin-free Gc globu-
lin: a rapidly assessed biomarker of organ dysfunction in acute 
liver failure and cirrhosis. Liver Transpl. 2007;13(9):1254.
30.	Renner EL. How to decide when to list a patient with acute 
liver failure for liver transplantation? Clichy or King’s College 
criteria, or something else? J Hepatol. 2007;46(4):554.
31.	Faybik P, Krenn CG. Extracorporeal liver support. Curr Opin 
Crit Care. 2013;19(2):149.
32.	Ekser B, Gridelli B, Tector AJ, Cooper DK. Pig liver xeno-
transplantation as a bridge to allotransplantation: which 
patients might benefit? Transplantation. 2009;88(9):1041.
33.	Yu Y, Fisher JE, Lillegard JB, Rodysill B, Amiot B, 
Nyberg SL. Cell therapies for liver diseases. Liver Transpl. 
2012;18(1):9.
34.	Faraj W, Dar F, Bartlett A, et al. Auxiliary liver trans-
plantation for acute liver failure in children. Ann Surg. 
2010;251(2):351.
35.	Wanless IR, Nakashima E, Sherman M. Regression of 
human cirrhosis. Morphologic features and the genesis 
of incomplete septal cirrhosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 
2000;124(11):1599.
36.	Fattovich G, Giustina G, Degos F, et al. Morbidity and mortal-
ity in compensated cirrhosis type C: a retrospective follow-up 
study of 384 patients. Gastroenterology. 1997;112(2):463.
37.	Doberneck RC, Sterling WA Jr, Allison DC. Morbidity and 
mortality after operation in nonbleeding cirrhotic patients. Am 
J Surg. 1983;146(3):306.
38.	Northup PG, Wanamaker RC, Lee VD, Adams RB, Berg CL. 
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) predicts non-
transplant surgical mortality in patients with cirrhosis. Ann 
Surg. 2005;242(2):244.
39.	Farnsworth N, Fagan SP, Berger DH, Awad SS. Child-­
Turcotte-Pugh versus MELD score as a predictor of outcome 
after elective and emergent surgery in cirrhotic patients. Am J 
Surg. 2004;188(5):580.
40.	Hanje AJ, Patel T. Preoperative evaluation of patients with liver 
disease. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;4(5):266.
41.	Shah V. Cellular and molecular basis of portal hypertension. 
Clin Liver Dis. 2001;5(3):629.
42.	Poynard T, Cales P, Pasta L, et al. Beta-adrenergic-antagonist 
drugs in the prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding in patients 
with cirrhosis and esophageal varices. An analysis of data and 
prognostic factors in 589 patients from four randomized clini-
cal trials. Franco-Italian Multicenter Study Group. N Engl J 
Med. 1991;324(22):1532.
43.	Garcia-Pagan JC, Bosch J. Endoscopic band ligation in the 
treatment of portal hypertension. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2005;2(11):526.
44.	Valla DC. The diagnosis and management of the Budd-
Chiari syndrome: consensus and controversies. Hepatology. 
2003;38(4):793.
45.	Henderson JM, Warren WD, Millikan WJ Jr, et al. Surgical 
options, hematologic evaluation, and pathologic changes in 
Budd-Chiari syndrome. Am J Surg. 1990;159(1):41.
46.	Barnes PF, De Cock KM, Reynolds TN, Ralls PW. A com-
parison of amebic and pyogenic abscess of the liver. Medicine 
(Baltimore). 1987;66(6):472.
47.	Pedrosa I, Saiz A, Arrazola J, Ferreiros J, Pedrosa CS. Hydatid 
disease: radiologic and pathologic features and complications. 
Radiographics. 2000;20(3):795.
48.	Khuroo MS, Zargar SA, Mahajan R. Hepatobiliary and pan-
creatic ascariasis in India. Lancet. 1990;335(8704):1503.
49.	Scaglione SJ, Lok AS. Effectiveness of hepatitis B treatment 
in clinical practice. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(6):1360.
50.	Corey KE, Mendez-Navarro J, Gorospe EC, Zheng H, Chung 
RT. Early treatment improves outcomes in acute hepatitis C virus 
infection: a meta-analysis. J Viral Hepat. 2010;17(3):201.
51.	Tsung A, Geller DA. Workup of the incidental liver lesion. 
Adv Surg. 2005;39:331.
52.	Caremani M, Vincenti A, Benci A, Sassoli S, Tacconi D. Eco-
graphic epidemiology of non-parasitic hepatic cysts. J Clin 
Ultrasound. 1993;21(2):115.
53.	Tahvanainen P, Tahvanainen E, Reijonen H, Halme L, Kaari-
ainen H, Hockerstedt K. Polycystic liver disease is genetically 
heterogeneous: clinical and linkage studies in eight Finnish 
families. J Hepatol. 2003;38(1):39.
1304
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
54.	Drenth JP, Chrispijn M, Nagorney DM, Kamath PS, Torres 
VE. Medical and surgical treatment options for polycystic 
liver disease. Hepatology. 2010;52(6):2223.
55.	Robinson TN, Stiegmann GV, Everson GT. Laparoscopic palli-
ation of polycystic liver disease. Surg Endosc. 2005;19(1):130.
56.	Caroli J. Disease of the intrahepatic biliary tree. Clin 
­Gastroenterol. 1972;2:147.
57.	Yoon SS, Charny CK, Fong Y, et al. Diagnosis, management, 
and outcomes of 115 patients with hepatic hemangioma. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2003;197(3):392.
58.	Geller DA, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Dvorchik I, Gamblin TC, 
Carr BI. Outcome of 1000 liver cancer patients evaluated 
at the UPMC Liver Cancer Center. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2006;10(1):63.
59.	International Agency for Research on Cancer. GLOBOCAN 
2008. Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr/. Accessed June 7, 
2013.
60.	Liaw YF, Tai DI, Chu CM, et al. Early detection of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma in patients with chronic type B hepatitis. A 
prospective study. Gastroenterology. 1986;90(2):263.
61.	Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Uva P. Treatment of HCC in 
patients awaiting liver transplantation. Am J Transplant. 
2007;7(8):1875.
62.	Zarrinpar A, Kaldas F, Busuttil RW. Liver transplantation for 
hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatobiliary Pancreat 
Dis Int. 2011;10(3):234.
63.	Bruix J, Sherman M, American Association for the Study 
of Liver Disease. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: 
an update. Hepatology. 2011;53(3):1020.
64.	DeOliveira ML, Kambakamba P, Clavien PA. Advances in 
liver surgery for cholangiocarcinoma. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 
2013;29(3):293.
65.	Jarnagin WR, Fong Y, DeMatteo RP, et al. Staging, resect-
ability, and outcome in 225 patients with hilar cholangiocarci-
noma. Ann Surg. 2001;234(4):507.
66.	Hidalgo E, Asthana S, Nishio H, et al. Surgery for hilar chol-
angiocarcinoma: the Leeds experience. Eur J Surg Oncol. 
2008;34(7):787.
67.	Nagino M, Kamiya J, Nishio H, Ebata T, Arai T, Nimura Y. 
Two hundred forty consecutive portal vein embolizations 
before extended hepatectomy for biliary cancer: surgical out-
come and long-term follow-up. Ann Surg. 2006;243(3):364.
68.	Gores GJ, Nagorney DM, Rosen CB. Cholangiocarci-
noma: is transplantation an option? For whom? J Hepatol. 
2007;47(4):455.
69.	Marsh JW, Geller DA, Finkelstein SD, Donaldson JB, Dvor-
chik I. Role of liver transplantation for hepatobiliary malignant 
disorders. Lancet Oncol. 2004;5(8):480.
70.	Rea DJ, Heimbach JK, Rosen CB, et al. Liver transplantation 
with neoadjuvant chemoradiation is more effective than resec-
tion for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg. 2005;242(3):451.
71.	Hassoun Z, Gores GJ, Rosen CB. Preliminary experience with 
liver transplantation in selected patients with unresectable hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):909.
72.	Darwish Murad S, Kim WR, Harnois DM, et al. Efficacy of 
neoadjuvant chemoradiation, followed by liver transplan-
tation, for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma at 12 US centers. 
­Gastroenterology. 2012;143(1):88.
73.	Weber SM, Jarnagin WR, Klimstra D, DeMatteo RP, Fong 
Y, Blumgart LH. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: resect-
ability, recurrence pattern, and outcomes. J Am Coll Surg. 
2001;193(4):384.
74.	Jan YY, Yeh CN, Yeh TS, Chen TC. Prognostic analysis of 
surgical treatment of peripheral cholangiocarcinoma: two 
decades of experience at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2005;11(12):1779.
75.	Hong JC, Jones CM, Duffy JP, et al. Comparative analysis of 
resection and liver transplantation for intrahepatic and hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma: a 24-year experience in a single center. 
Arch Surg. 2011;146(6):683.
76.	Smith GC, Parks RW, Madhavan KK, Garden OJ. A 10-year 
experience in the management of gallbladder cancer. HPB 
(Oxford). 2003;5(3):159.
77.	Bartlett DL, Fong Y, Fortner JG, Brennan MF, Blumgart 
LH. Long-term results after resection for gallbladder can-
cer. Implications for staging and management. Ann Surg. 
1996;224(5):639.
78.	Shoup M, Fong Y. Surgical indications and extent of resection 
in gallbladder cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):985.
79.	Pawlik TM, Gleisner AL, Vigano L, et al. Incidence of finding 
residual disease for incidental gallbladder carcinoma: implica-
tions for re-resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11(11):1478.
80.	Chan SY, Poon RT, Lo CM, Ng KK, Fan ST. Management of 
carcinoma of the gallbladder: a single-institution experience in 
16 years. J Surg Oncol. 2008;97(2):156.
81.	Goetze TO, Paolucci V. Benefits of reoperation of T2 and 
more advanced incidental gallbladder carcinoma: analysis of 
the German registry. Ann Surg. 2008;247(1):104.
82.	Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH. Clini-
cal score for predicting recurrence after hepatic resection for 
metastatic colorectal cancer: analysis of 1001 consecutive 
cases. Ann Surg. 1999;230(3):309.
83.	Poston G, Adam R, Vauthey JN. Downstaging or downsizing: 
time for a new staging system in advanced colorectal cancer? 
J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(18):2702.
84.	Minagawa M, Makuuchi M, Torzilli G, et al. Extension of 
the frontiers of surgical indications in the treatment of liver 
metastases from colorectal cancer: long-term results. Ann 
Surg. 2000;231(4):487.
85.	Kornprat P, Jarnagin WR, Gonen M, et al. Outcome after 
hepatectomy for multiple (four or more) colorectal metas-
tases in the era of effective chemotherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2007;14(3):1151.
86.	Charnsangavej C, Clary B, Fong Y, Grothey A, Pawlik TM, 
Choti MA. Selection of patients for resection of hepatic 
colorectal metastases: expert consensus statement. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2006;13(10):1261.
87.	Abdalla EK, Adam R, Bilchik AJ, Jaeck D, Vauthey JN, Mahvi D. 
Improving resectability of hepatic colorectal metastases: expert 
consensus statement. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13(10):1271.
88.	Pawlik TM, Schulick RD, Choti MA. Expanding criteria 
for resectability of colorectal liver metastases. Oncologist. 
2008;13(1):51.
89.	Clavien PA, Petrowsky H, DeOliveira ML, Graf R. Strategies 
for safer liver surgery and partial liver transplantation. N Engl 
J Med. 2007;356(15):1545.
90.	Adam R, Wicherts DA, de Haas RJ, et al. Patients with ini-
tially unresectable colorectal liver metastases: is there a pos-
sibility of cure? J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(11):1829.
91.	Que FG, Nagorney DM, Batts KP, Linz LJ, Kvols LK. Hepatic 
resection for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. Am J 
Surg. 1995;169(1):36.
92.	Touzios JG, Kiely JM, Pitt SC, et al. Neuroendocrine hepatic 
metastases: does aggressive management improve survival? 
Ann Surg. 2005;241(5):776.
93.	Sarmiento JM, Heywood G, Rubin J, Ilstrup DM, Nagorney 
DM, Que FG. Surgical treatment of neuroendocrine metasta-
ses to the liver: a plea for resection to increase survival. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2003;197(1):29.
94.	Kianmanesh R, Sauvanet A, Hentic O, et al. Two-step surgery 
for synchronous bilobar liver metastases from digestive endo-
crine tumors: a safe approach for radical resection. Ann Surg. 
2008;247(4):659.
95.	Mazzaferro V, Pulvirenti A, Coppa J. Neuroendocrine tumors 
metastatic to the liver: how to select patients for liver trans-
plantation? J Hepatol. 2007;47(4):460.
1305
Liver
CHAPTER 31
96.	Adam R, Aloia T, Krissat J, et al. Is liver resection justified for 
patients with hepatic metastases from breast cancer? Ann Surg. 
2006;244(6):897.
97.	Abbott DE, Brouquet A, Mittendorf EA, et al. Resection of 
liver metastases from breast cancer: estrogen receptor status 
and response to chemotherapy before metastasectomy define 
outcome. Surgery. 2012;151(5):710.
98.	Jarnagin W, Chapman WC, Curley S, et al. Surgical treatment 
of hepatocellular carcinoma: expert consensus statement. HPB 
(Oxford). 2010;12(5):302.
99.	Belghiti J, Hiramatsu K, Benoist S, Massault P, Sauvanet A, 
Farges O. Seven hundred forty-seven hepatectomies in the 
1990s: an update to evaluate the actual risk of liver resection. 
J Am Coll Surg. 2000;191(1):38.
100.	Jarnagin WR, Gonen M, Fong Y, et al. Improvement in 
perioperative outcome after hepatic resection: analysis of 
1,803 consecutive cases over the past decade. Ann Surg. 
2002;236(4):397.
101.	Imamura H, Seyama Y, Kokudo N, et al. One thousand fifty-
six hepatectomies without mortality in 8 years. Arch Surg. 
2003;138(11):1198.
102.	Mullen JT, Ribero D, Reddy SK, et al. Hepatic insufficiency 
and mortality in 1,059 noncirrhotic patients undergoing major 
hepatectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(5):854.
103.	Hamady ZZ, Cameron IC, Wyatt J, Prasad RK, Toogood GJ, 
Lodge JP. Resection margin in patients undergoing hepatec-
tomy for colorectal liver metastasis: a critical appraisal of the 
1 cm rule. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2006;32(5):557.
104.	Pawlik TM, Vauthey JN. Surgical margins during hepatic sur-
gery for colorectal liver metastases: complete resection not 
millimeters defines outcome. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15(3):677.
105.	Andreou A, Aloia TA, Brouquet A, et al. Margin status 
remains an important determinant of survival after surgical 
resection of colorectal liver metastases in the era of modern 
chemotherapy. Ann Surg. 2013;257(6):1079.
106.	Hemming AW, Mekeel KL, Zendejas I, Kim RD, Sicklick 
JK, Reed AI. Resection of the liver and inferior vena cava for 
hepatic malignancy. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217:115.
107.	Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Konstadoulakis M. Strategies for 
the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Clin 
Pract Oncol. 2007;4(7):424.
108.	Duffy JP, Vardanian A, Benjamin E, et al. Liver transplanta-
tion criteria for hepatocellular carcinoma should be expanded: 
a 22-year experience with 467 patients at UCLA. Ann Surg. 
2007;246(3):502.
109.	Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. Available 
at: http://www.optn.org. Accessed June 4, 2013.
110.	Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, et al. Liver transplanta-
tion for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinomas 
in patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(11):693.
111.	Wiesner RH, Freeman RB, Mulligan DC. Liver transplanta-
tion for hepatocellular cancer: the impact of the MELD alloca-
tion policy. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(5 Suppl 1):S261.
112.	de Villa V, Lo CM. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular 
carcinoma in Asia. Oncologist. 2007;12(11):1321.
113.	McGahan JP, Browning PD, Brock JM, Tesluk H. Hepatic 
ablation using radiofrequency electrocautery. Invest Radiol. 
1990;25(3):267.
114.	Rossi S, Fornari F, Pathies C, Buscarini L. Thermal lesions 
induced by 480 KHz localized current field in guinea pig and 
pig liver. Tumori. 1990;76(1):54.
115.	Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation 
of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: 
results in 123 patients. Ann Surg. 1999;230(1):1.
116.	Bilchik AJ, Wood TF, Allegra D, et al. Cryosurgical abla-
tion and radiofrequency ablation for unresectable hepatic 
malignant neoplasms: a proposed algorithm. Arch Surg. 
2000;135(6):657.
117.	Poon RT, Ng KK, Lam CM, et al. Learning curve for radio-
frequency ablation of liver tumors: prospective analysis 
of initial 100 patients in a tertiary institution. Ann Surg. 
2004;239(4):441.
118.	Abdalla EK, Vauthey JN, Ellis LM, et al. Recurrence and out-
comes following hepatic resection, radiofrequency ablation, 
and combined resection/ablation for colorectal liver metasta-
ses. Ann Surg. 2004;239(6):818.
119.	Weng M, Zhang Y, Zhou D, et al. Radiofrequency ablation 
versus resection for colorectal cancer liver metastases: a meta-
analysis. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45493.
120.	Sutherland LM, Williams JA, Padbury RT, Gotley DC, Stokes 
B, Maddern GJ. Radiofrequency ablation of liver tumors: a 
systematic review. Arch Surg. 2006;141(2):181.
121.	Berber E, Siperstein AE. Perioperative outcome after laparo-
scopic radiofrequency ablation of liver tumors: an analysis of 
521 cases. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(4):613.
122.	Martin AP, Goldstein RM, Dempster J, et al. Radiofrequency 
thermal ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma before liver 
transplantation—a clinical and histological examination. Clin 
Transplant. 2006;20(6):695.
123.	Cheng BQ, Jia CQ, Liu CT, et al. Chemoembolization com-
bined with radiofrequency ablation for patients with hepato-
cellular carcinoma larger than 3 cm: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA. 2008;299(14):1669.
124.	Iannitti DA, Martin RC, Simon CJ, et al. Hepatic tumor abla-
tion with clustered microwave antennae: the US Phase II trial. 
HPB (Oxford). 2007;9(2):120.
125.	Lo CM, Ngan H, Tso WK, et al. Randomized controlled trial 
of transarterial lipiodol chemoembolization for unresectable 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2002;35(5):1164.
126.	Llovet JM, Real MI, Montana X, et al. Arterial embolisa-
tion or chemoembolisation versus symptomatic treatment in 
patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;359(9319):1734.
127.	Takayasu K, Arii S, Ikai I, et al. Prospective cohort study 
of transarterial chemoembolization for unresectable hepa-
tocellular carcinoma in 8510 patients. Gastroenterology. 
2006;131(2):461.
128.	Sotiropoulos GC, Druhe N, Sgourakis G, et al. Liver trans-
plantation, liver resection, and transarterial chemoemboliza-
tion for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: which is the 
best oncological approach? Dig Dis Sci. 2009;54(10):2264.
129.	Lewandowski RJ, Geschwind JF, Liapi E, Salem R. Transcath-
eter intraarterial therapies: rationale and overview. Radiology. 
2011;259(3):641.
130.	Kemeny N, Huang Y, Cohen AM, et al. Hepatic arterial infu-
sion of chemotherapy after resection of hepatic metastases 
from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(27):2039.
131.	Ibrahim SM, Lewandowski RJ, Sato KT, et al. Radioem-
bolization for the treatment of unresectable hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma: a clinical review. World J Gastroenterol. 
2008;14(11):1664.
132.	Gulec SA, Fong Y. Yttrium 90 microsphere selective inter-
nal radiation treatment of hepatic colorectal metastases. Arch 
Surg. 2007;142(7):675.
133.	Sato KT, Lewandowski RJ, Mulcahy MF, et al. Unresectable 
chemorefractory liver metastases: radioembolization with 
90Y microspheres—safety, efficacy, and survival. Radiology. 
2008;247(2):507.
134.	Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, et al. Phase I study of 
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocel-
lular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin 
Oncol. 2008;26(4):657.
135.	Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, et al. Ste-
reotactic body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic 
liver tumors: a single institution phase I-II study. Acta Oncol. 
2006;45(7):831.
1306
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
136.	Chapman WC, Majella Doyle MB, Stuart JE, et al. Outcomes 
of neoadjuvant transarterial chemoembolization to downstage 
hepatocellular carcinoma before liver transplantation. Ann 
Surg. 2008;248(4):617.
137.	Yao FY, Kerlan RK Jr, Hirose R, et al. Excellent outcome 
following down-staging of hepatocellular carcinoma prior 
to liver transplantation: an intention-to-treat analysis. 
Hepatology. 2008;48(3):819.
138.	 Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, et al. Sorafenib in advanced 
hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(4):378.
139.	American Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association. IHPBA 
Brisbane liver terminology. Available at: http://www.ahpba.
org/resources/liver.asp. Accessed June 4, 2013.
140.	Pang YY. The Brisbane 2000 terminology of liver anatomy 
and resections. HPB (Oxford). 2002;4(2):99; author reply 99.
141.	Strasberg SM. Nomenclature of hepatic anatomy and resec-
tions: a review of the Brisbane 2000 system. J Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat Surg. 2005;12(5):351.
142.	Weber JC, Navarra G, Jiao LR, Nicholls JP, Jensen SL, Habib 
NA. New technique for liver resection using heat coagulative 
necrosis. Ann Surg. 2002;236(5):560.
143.	Geller DA, Tsung A, Maheshwari V, Rutstein LA, Fung 
JJ, Marsh JW. Hepatic resection in 170 patients using 
saline-cooled radiofrequency coagulation. HPB (Oxford). 
2005;7(3):208.
144.	Saiura A, Yamamoto J, Koga R, et al. Usefulness of LigaSure 
for liver resection: analysis by randomized clinical trial. Am J 
Surg. 2006;192(1):41.
145.	McEntee GP, Nagorney DM. Use of vascular staplers in major 
hepatic resections. Br J Surg. 1991;78(1):40.
146.	Jurim O, Colonna JO II, Colquhoun SD, Shaked A, Busuttil 
RW. A stapling technique for hepatic resection. J Am Coll 
Surg. 1994;178(5):510.
147.	Kaneko H, Otsuka Y, Takagi S, Tsuchiya M, Tamura A, 
Shiba T. Hepatic resection using stapling devices. Am J Surg. 
2004;187(2):280.
148.	Schemmer P, Friess H, Hinz U, et al. Stapler hepatectomy is 
a safe dissection technique: analysis of 300 patients. World J 
Surg. 2006;30(3):419.
149.	Balaa FK, Gamblin TC, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Geller DA. 
Right hepatic lobectomy using the staple technique in 
101 patients. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(2):338.
150.	Blumgart L. Liver resection for benign disease and for 
liver and biliary disease. In: Blumgart L, ed. Surgery of 
the Liver and Biliary Tract. 3rd ed. London: WB Saunders; 
2000:1639.
151.	Launois B, Jamieson GG. The importance of Glisson’s cap-
sule and its sheaths in the intrahepatic approach to resection 
of the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;174(1):7.
152.	Azoulay D, Marin-Hargreaves G, Castaing D, Adam R, Savier 
E, Bismuth H. The anterior approach: the right way for right 
massive hepatectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(3):412.
153.	Liu CL, Fan ST, Cheung ST, Lo CM, Ng IO, Wong J. Anterior 
approach versus conventional approach right hepatic resection 
for large hepatocellular carcinoma: a prospective randomized 
controlled study. Ann Surg. 2006;244(2):194.
154.	Makuuchi M, Mori T, Gunven P, Yamazaki S, Hasegawa H. 
Safety of hemihepatic vascular occlusion during resection of 
the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1987;164(2):155.
155.	Man K, Fan ST, Ng IO, Lo CM, Liu CL, Wong J. Prospec-
tive evaluation of Pringle maneuver in hepatectomy for liver 
tumors by a randomized study. Ann Surg. 1997;226(6):704.
156.	Belghiti J, Noun R, Malafosse R, et al. Continuous versus 
intermittent portal triad clamping for liver resection: a con-
trolled study. Ann Surg. 1999;229(3):369.
157.	Figueras J, Llado L, Ruiz D, et al. Complete versus selective 
portal triad clamping for minor liver resections: a prospective 
randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2005;241(4):582.
158.	Clavien PA, Yadav S, Sindram D, Bentley RC. Protec-
tive effects of ischemic preconditioning for liver resection 
performed under inflow occlusion in humans. Ann Surg. 
2000;232(2):155.
159.	Clavien PA, Selzner M, Rudiger HA, et al. A prospective ran-
domized study in 100 consecutive patients undergoing major 
liver resection with versus without ischemic preconditioning. 
Ann Surg. 2003;238(6):843.
160.	Kinoshita H, Sakai K, Hirohashi K, Igawa S, Yamasaki O, 
Kubo S. Preoperative portal vein embolization for hepatocel-
lular carcinoma. World J Surg. 1986;10(5):803.
161.	Makuuchi M, Thai BL, Takayasu K, et al. Preoperative por-
tal embolization to increase safety of major hepatectomy 
for hilar bile duct carcinoma: a preliminary report. Surgery. 
1990;107(5):521.
162.	Abdalla EK, Hicks ME, Vauthey JN. Portal vein emboliza-
tion: rationale, technique and future prospects. Br J Surg. 
2001;88(2):165.
163.	Chun YS, Ribero D, Abdalla EK, et al. Comparison of 
two methods of future liver remnant volume measurement. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(1):123.
164.	Abdalla EK, Barnett CC, Doherty D, Curley SA, Vauthey JN. 
Extended hepatectomy in patients with hepatobiliary malig-
nancies with and without preoperative portal vein emboliza-
tion. Arch Surg. 2002;137(6):675.
165.	Vauthey JN, Chaoui A, Do KA, et al. Standardized mea-
surement of the future liver remnant prior to extended liver 
resection: methodology and clinical associations. Surgery. 
2000;127(5):512.
166.	Farges O, Belghiti J, Kianmanesh R, et al. Portal vein emboli-
zation before right hepatectomy: prospective clinical trial. Ann 
Surg. 2003;237(2):208.
167.	Hemming AW, Reed AI, Howard RJ, et al. Preoperative por-
tal vein embolization for extended hepatectomy. Ann Surg. 
2003;237(5):686.
168.	Azoulay D, Castaing D, Smail A, et al. Resection of nonre-
sectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer after percuta-
neous portal vein embolization. Ann Surg. 2000;231(4):480.
169.	Kubota K, Makuuchi M, Kusaka K, et al. Measurement 
of liver volume and hepatic functional reserve as a guide to 
decision-making in resectional surgery for hepatic tumors. 
Hepatology. 1997;26(5):1176.
170.	Ribero D, Abdalla EK, Madoff DC, Donadon M, Loyer EM, 
Vauthey JN. Portal vein embolization before major hepatec-
tomy and its effects on regeneration, resectability and out-
come. Br J Surg. 2007;94(11):1386.
171.	Covey AM, Brown KT, Jarnagin WR, et al. Combined portal 
vein embolization and neoadjuvant chemotherapy as a treat-
ment strategy for resectable hepatic colorectal metastases. Ann 
Surg. 2008;247(3):451.
172.	Hwang S, Lee SG, Ko GY, et al. Sequential preoperative 
ipsilateral hepatic vein embolization after portal vein embo-
lization to induce further liver regeneration in patients with 
hepatobiliary malignancy. Ann Surg. 2009;249(4):608.
173.	Jaeck D, Oussoultzoglou E, Rosso E, Greget M, Weber JC, 
Bachellier P. A two-stage hepatectomy procedure combined 
with portal vein embolization to achieve curative resection 
for initially unresectable multiple and bilobar colorectal liver 
metastases. Ann Surg. 2004;240(6):1037.
174.	Adam R, Miller R, Pitombo M, et al. Two-stage hepatec-
tomy approach for initially unresectable colorectal hepatic 
metastases. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2007;16(3):525.
175.	 Schnitzbauer AA, Lang SA, Goessmann H, et al. Right portal vein 
ligation combined with in situ splitting induces rapid left lateral 
liver lobe hypertrophy enabling 2-staged extended right hepatic 
resection in small-for-size settings. Ann Surg. 2012;255(3):405.
176.	Adam R, Bismuth H, Castaing D, et al. Repeat hepatectomy 
for colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg. 1997;225(1):51.
1307
Liver
CHAPTER 31
177.	Petrowsky H, Gonen M, Jarnagin W, et al. Second liver resec-
tions are safe and effective treatment for recurrent hepatic 
metastases from colorectal cancer: a bi-institutional analysis. 
Ann Surg. 2002;235(6):863.
178.	Sa Cunha A, Laurent C, Rault A, Couderc P, Rullier E, Saric 
J. A second liver resection due to recurrent colorectal liver 
metastases. Arch Surg. 2007;142(12):1144.
179.	Antoniou A, Lovegrove RE, Tilney HS, et al. Meta-analysis 
of clinical outcome after first and second liver resection for 
colorectal metastases. Surgery. 2007;141(1):9.
180.	Nakajima Y, Ko S, Kanamura T, et al. Repeat liver resection for 
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(3):339.
181.	Itamoto T, Nakahara H, Amano H, et al. Repeat hepa-
tectomy for recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma. Surgery. 
2007;141(5):589.
182.	Minagawa M, Makuuchi M, Takayama T, Kokudo N. Selec-
tion criteria for repeat hepatectomy in patients with recurrent 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg. 2003;238(5):703.
183.	Cherqui D, Husson E, Hammoud R, et al. Laparoscopic 
liver resections: a feasibility study in 30 patients. Ann Surg. 
2000;232(6):753.
184.	Reddy SK, Tsung A, Geller DA. Laparoscopic liver resection. 
World J Surg. 2011;35(7):1478.
185.	Lin NC, Nitta H, Wakabayashi G. Laparoscopic major hepa-
tectomy: a systematic literature review and comparison of 3 
techniques. Ann Surg. 2013;257(2):205.
186.	Koffron AJ, Auffenberg G, Kung R, Abecassis M. Evaluation 
of 300 minimally invasive liver resections at a single institu-
tion: less is more. Ann Surg. 2007;246(3):385.
187.	Rao A, Rao G, Ahmed I. Laparoscopic vs. open liver resection 
for malignant liver disease. A systematic review. Surgeon. 
2012;10(4):194.
188.	Buell JF, Cherqui D, Geller DA, et al. The international 
position on laparoscopic liver surgery: The Louisville 
Statement, 2008. Ann Surg. 2009;250(5):825.
189.	Laurent A, Tayar C, Andreoletti M, Lauzet JY, Merle JC, Cher-
qui D. Laparoscopic liver resection facilitates salvage liver 
transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat Surg. 2009;16(3):310.
190.	Zhou YM, Shao WY, Zhao YF, Xu DH, Li B. Meta-analysis 
of laparoscopic versus open resection for hepatocellular car-
cinoma. Dig Dis Sci. 2011;56(7):1937.
191.	Castaing D, Vibert E, Ricca L, Azoulay D, Adam R, Gayet B. 
Oncologic results of laparoscopic versus open hepatectomy 
for colorectal liver metastases in two specialized centers. Ann 
Surg. 2009;250(5):849.
This page intentionally left blank 
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic 
Biliary System
Thai H. Pham and John G. Hunter
32
ANATOMY
Gallbladder
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac, about 7 to 10 cm long, 
with an average capacity of 30 to 50 mL. When obstructed, the 
gallbladder can distend markedly and contain up to 300 mL.1 
The gallbladder is located in a fossa on the inferior surface 
of the liver. A line from this fossa to the inferior vena cava 
divides the liver into right and left liver lobes. The gallbladder is 
divided into four anatomic areas: the fundus, the corpus (body), 
the infundibulum, and the neck. The fundus is the rounded, blind 
end that normally extends 1 to 2 cm beyond the liver’s margin. 
It contains most of the smooth muscles of the organ, in contrast 
to the body, which is the main storage area and contains most of 
the elastic tissue. The body extends from the fundus and tapers 
into the neck, a funnel-shaped area that connects with the cystic 
duct. The neck usually follows a gentle curve, the convexity of 
which may be enlarged to form the infundibulum or Hartmann’s 
pouch. The neck lies in the deepest part of the gallbladder fossa 
and extends into the free portion of the hepatoduodenal ligament 
(Fig. 32-1).
The same peritoneal lining that covers the liver covers the 
fundus and the inferior surface of the gallbladder. Occasion-
ally, the gallbladder has a complete peritoneal covering and is 
suspended in a mesentery off the inferior surface of the liver, 
and rarely, it is embedded deep inside the liver parenchyma (an 
intrahepatic gallbladder).
Anatomy	
1309
Gallbladder / 1309
Bile Ducts / 1310
Anomalies / 1312
Physiology	
1312
Bile Formation and Composition / 1312
Gallbladder Function / 1313
Sphincter of Oddi / 1313
Diagnostic Studies	
1313
Blood Tests / 1314
Ultrasonography / 1314
Oral Cholecystography / 1314
Biliary Radionuclide Scanning  
(HIDA Scan) / 1315
Computed Tomography / 1315
Percutaneous Transhepatic  
Cholangiography / 1315
Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1315
Endoscopic Retrograde  
Cholangiopancreatography / 1315
Endoscopic Ultrasound / 1316
Gallstone Disease	
1316
Prevalence and Incidence / 1316
Natural History / 1317
Gallstone Formation / 1318
Symptomatic Gallstones / 1319
Cholangiohepatitis / 1324
Operative Interventions  
for Gallstone Disease	
1324
Cholecystostomy / 1324
Cholecystectomy / 1324
Common Bile Duct Exploration / 1325
Common Bile Duct Drainage  
Procedures / 1327
Transduodenal Sphincterotomy / 1327
Other Benign Diseases  
and Lesions	
1327
Acalculous Cholecystitis / 1327
Biliary Cysts / 1330
Sclerosing Cholangitis / 1331
Stenosis of the Sphincter of Oddi / 1331
Bile Duct Strictures / 1331
Injury to the Biliary Tract	
1331
Gallbladder / 1331
Extrahepatic Bile Ducts / 1332
Tumors	
1334
Carcinoma of the Gallbladder / 1334
Bile Duct Carcinoma / 1335
The gallbladder is lined by a single, highly folded, tall 
columnar epithelium that contains cholesterol and fat globules. 
The mucus secreted into the gallbladder originates in the tubu-
loalveolar glands found in the mucosa lining the infundibulum 
and neck of the gallbladder, but are absent from the body and 
fundus. The epithelial lining of the gallbladder is supported by 
a lamina propria. The muscle layer has circular longitudinal 
and oblique fibers, but without well-developed layers. The peri-
muscular subserosa contains connective tissue, nerves, vessels, 
lymphatics, and adipocytes. It is covered by the serosa except 
where the gallbladder is embedded in the liver. The gallbladder 
differs histologically from the rest of the gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract in that it lacks a muscularis mucosa and submucosa.
The cystic artery that supplies the gallbladder is usually 
a branch of the right hepatic artery (>90% of the time). The 
course of the cystic artery may vary, but it nearly always is 
found within the hepatocystic triangle, the area bound by the 
cystic duct, common hepatic duct, and the liver margin (triangle 
of Calot). When the cystic artery reaches the neck of the gall-
bladder, it divides into anterior and posterior divisions. Venous 
return is carried either through small veins that enter directly 
into the liver or, rarely, to a large cystic vein that carries blood 
back to the portal vein. Gallbladder lymphatics drain into nodes 
at the neck of the gallbladder. Frequently, a visible lymph node 
overlies the insertion of the cystic artery into the gallbladder 
wall. The nerves of the gallbladder arise from the vagus and 
from sympathetic branches that pass through the celiac plexus. 
chapter 
The preganglionic sympathetic level is T8 and T9. Impulses 
from the liver, gallbladder, and the bile ducts pass by means 
of sympathetic afferent fibers through the splanchnic nerves 
and mediate the pain of biliary colic. The hepatic branch of the 
vagus nerve supplies cholinergic fibers to the gallbladder, bile 
ducts, and liver. The vagal branches also have peptide-containing 
1310
Key Points
1
	 The physiology of the gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi is 
regulated by a complex interplay of hormones and neuronal 
inputs designed to coordinate bile release with food consump-
tion. Dysfunctions related to this activity are linked to the 
development of gallbladder pathologies described in this 
chapter.
2
	 In Western countries, the most common type of gallstones are 
cholesterol stones. The pathogenesis of these stones relates to 
supersaturation of bile with cholesterol and subsequent pre-
cipitation.
3
	 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been demonstrated to be a 
safe and effective alternative to open cholecystectomy and has 
become the treatment of choice for symptomatic gallstones. 
Knowledge of the various anatomic anomalies of the cystic 
duct and artery is helpful in guiding the dissection of these 
structures as well as avoiding injury to the common bile duct 
during cholecystectomy.
4
	 Common bile duct injuries, although uncommon, can be 
devastating to patients. Proper exposure of Calot’s triangle 
and careful identification of the anatomic structures are 
keys to avoiding these injuries. Once a bile duct injury is 
diagnosed, the best outcomes are seen at large referral cen-
ters with experienced biliary surgeons.
5
	 The main risk factor for gallbladder disease in Western 
countries is cholelithiasis. The main complications include 
cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, and biliary 
pancreatitis. In addition, cholelithiasis plays the role as the 
major risk factor for the development of gallbladder cancer.
6
	 Carcinoma of the gallbladder and bile duct generally have 
a poor prognosis because patients usually present late in the 
disease process and have poor response to chemotherapy 
and radiation therapy. Surgery offers the best chance for 
survival and has good long-term survival in patients with 
early-stage disease.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
Figure 32-1.  Anterior aspect of the biliary anatomy. a = right 
hepatic duct; b = left hepatic duct; c = common hepatic duct; d = 
portal vein; e = hepatic artery; f = gastroduodenal artery; g = left 
gastric artery; h = common bile duct; i = fundus of the gallbladder; 
j = body of gallbladder; k = infundibulum; l = cystic duct; m = cystic 
artery; n = superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. Note the situation 
of the hepatic bile duct confluence anterior to the right branch of 
the portal vein, and the posterior course of the right hepatic artery 
behind the common hepatic duct.
nerves containing agents such as substance P, somatostatin, 
enkephalins, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.2
Bile Ducts
The extrahepatic bile ducts consist of the right and left hepatic 
ducts, the common hepatic duct, the cystic duct, and the com-
mon bile duct or choledochus. The common bile duct enters the 
second portion of the duodenum through a muscular structure, 
the sphincter of Oddi.3
The left hepatic duct is longer than the right and has a 
greater propensity for dilatation as a consequence of distal 
obstruction. The two ducts join to form a common hepatic duct, 
close to their emergence from the liver. The common hepatic 
duct is 1 to 4 cm in length and has a diameter of approximately 
4 mm. It lies in front of the portal vein and to the right of the 
hepatic artery. The common hepatic duct is joined at an acute 
angle by the cystic duct to form the common bile duct.
The length of the cystic duct is quite variable. It may be 
short or absent and have a high union with the hepatic duct, or 
long and run parallel, behind, or spiral to the main hepatic duct 
before joining it, sometimes as far as at the duodenum. Varia-
tions of the cystic duct and its point of union with the common 
hepatic duct are surgically important (Fig. 32-2). The segment 
of the cystic duct adjacent to the gallbladder neck bears a vari-
able number of mucosal folds called the spiral valves of Heister. 
They do not have any valvular function but may make cannula-
tion of the cystic duct difficult.
The common bile duct is about 7 to 11 cm in length and 
5 to 10 mm in diameter. The upper third (supraduodenal portion) 
passes downward in the free edge of the hepatoduodenal liga-
ment, to the right of the hepatic artery and anterior to the portal 
vein. The middle third (retroduodenal portion) of the common 
bile duct curves behind the first portion of the duodenum and 
diverges laterally from the portal vein and the hepatic arteries. 
The lower third (pancreatic portion) curves behind the head of 
the pancreas in a groove, or traverses through it and enters the 
second part of the duodenum. There, the pancreatic duct fre-
quently joins it. The common bile duct runs obliquely downward 
1311
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
within the wall of the duodenum for 1 to 2 cm before opening 
on a papilla of mucous membrane (ampulla of Vater), about 10 cm 
distal to the pylorus. The union of the common bile duct and 
the main pancreatic duct follows one of three configurations. 
In about 70% of people, these ducts unite outside the duodenal 
wall and traverse the duodenal wall as a single duct. In about 
20%, they join within the duodenal wall and have a short or 
no common duct, but open through the same opening into the 
duodenum. In about 10%, they exit via separate openings into 
the duodenum. The sphincter of Oddi, a thick coat of circular 
smooth muscle, surrounds the common bile duct at the ampulla 
of Vater (Fig. 32-3). It controls the flow of bile, and in some 
cases pancreatic juice, into the duodenum.
The extrahepatic bile ducts are lined by a columnar 
mucosa with numerous mucous glands in the common bile duct. 
A fibroareolar tissue containing scant smooth muscle cells sur-
rounds the mucosa. A distinct muscle layer is not present in 
the human common bile duct. The arterial supply to the bile 
ducts is derived from the gastroduodenal and the right hepatic 
arteries, with major trunks running along the medial and lateral 
walls of the common duct (sometimes referred to as 3 o’clock 
and 9 o’clock). These arteries anastomose freely within the duct 
walls. The density of nerve fibers and ganglia increases near the 
sphincter of Oddi, but the nerve supply to the common bile duct 
and the sphincter of Oddi is the same as for the gallbladder.1,2
Figure 32-2.  Variations of the cystic duct anatomy. A. Low junction between the cystic duct and common hepatic duct. B. Cystic duct adher-
ent to the common hepatic duct. C. High junction between the cystic and the common hepatic duct. D. Cystic duct drains into right hepatic 
duct. E. Long cystic duct that joins common hepatic duct behind the duodenum. F. Absence of cystic duct. G. Cystic duct crosses posterior 
to common hepatic duct and joins it anteriorly. H. Cystic duct courses anterior to common hepatic duct and joins it posteriorly.
Pancreatic duct
Common
bile duct 
Sphincter
of Oddi
Duodenum
Duodenal wall
Figure 32-3.  The sphincter of Oddi.
1312
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Anomalies
The classic description of the extrahepatic biliary tree and its 
arteries applies only in about one third of patients.4 The gall-
bladder may have abnormal positions, be intrahepatic, be 
rudimentary, have anomalous forms, or be duplicated. Iso-
lated congenital absence of the gallbladder is very rare, with a 
reported incidence of 0.03%. Before the diagnosis is made, the 
presence of an intrahepatic bladder or anomalous position must 
be ruled out. Duplication of the gallbladder with two separate 
cavities and two separate cystic ducts has an incidence of about 
one in every 4000 persons. This occurs in two major varieties: 
the more common form in which each gallbladder has its own 
cystic duct that empties independently into the same or different 
parts of the extrahepatic biliary tree, and as two cystic ducts that 
merge before they enter the common bile duct. Duplication is 
only clinically important when some pathologic processes affect 
one or both organs. A left-sided gallbladder with a cystic duct 
emptying into the left hepatic duct or the common bile duct and 
a retrodisplacement of the gallbladder are both extremely rare. 
A partial or totally intrahepatic gallbladder is associated with an 
increased incidence of cholelithiasis.
Small ducts (of Luschka) may drain directly from the liver 
into the body of the gallbladder. If present, but not recognized at 
the time of a cholecystectomy, a bile leak with the accumulation 
of bile (biloma) may occur in the abdomen. An accessory right 
hepatic duct occurs in about 5% of cases. Variations of how the 
common bile duct enters the duodenum are described in earlier, 
in the Bile Ducts section.
Anomalies of the hepatic artery and the cystic artery are 
quite common, occurring in as many as 50% of cases.5 In about 
5% of cases, there are two right hepatic arteries, one from the 
common hepatic artery and the other from the superior mesen-
teric artery. In about 20% of patients, the right hepatic artery 
comes off the superior mesenteric artery. The right hepatic 
artery may course anterior to the common duct. The right 
hepatic artery may be vulnerable during surgical procedures, 
in particular when it runs parallel to the cystic duct or in the 
mesentery of the gallbladder. The cystic artery arises from the 
right hepatic artery in about 90% of cases, but may arise from 
the left hepatic, common hepatic, gastroduodenal, or superior 
mesenteric arteries (Fig. 32-4).
PHYSIOLOGY
Bile Formation and Composition
The liver produces bile continuously and excretes it into the bile 
canaliculi. The normal adult consuming an average diet pro-
duces within the liver 500 to 1000 mL of bile a day. The secre-
tion of bile is responsive to neurogenic, humoral, and chemical 
stimuli. Vagal stimulation increases secretion of bile, whereas 
splanchnic nerve stimulation results in decreased bile flow. 
Hydrochloric acid, partly digested proteins, and fatty acids in 
the duodenum stimulate the release of secretin from the duode-
num that, in turn, increases bile production and bile flow. Bile 
flows from the liver through to the hepatic ducts, into the com-
mon hepatic duct, through the common bile duct, and finally 
into the duodenum. With an intact sphincter of Oddi, bile flow 
is directed into the gallbladder.
Bile is mainly composed of water, electrolytes, bile salts, 
proteins, lipids, and bile pigments. Sodium, potassium, calcium, 
and chlorine have the same concentration in bile as in plasma 
Figure 32-4.  Variations in the arterial supply to the gallbladder. 
A. Cystic artery from right hepatic artery, about 80% to 90%. 
B. Cystic artery from right hepatic artery (accessory or replaced) 
from superior mesenteric artery, about 10%. C. Two cystic arter-
ies, one from the right hepatic, the other from the common hepatic 
artery, rare. D. Two cystic arteries, one from the right hepatic, the 
other from the left hepatic artery, rare. E. The cystic artery branch-
ing from the right hepatic artery and running anterior to the com-
mon hepatic duct, rare. F. Two cystic arteries arising from the right 
hepatic artery, rare.
or extracellular fluid. The pH of hepatic bile is usually neutral 
or slightly alkaline, but varies with diet; an increase in protein 
shifts the bile to a more acidic pH. The primary bile salts, cho-
late and chenodeoxycholate, are synthesized in the liver from 
cholesterol. They are conjugated there with taurine and glycine 
and act within the bile as anions (bile acids) that are balanced 
by sodium. Bile salts are excreted into the bile by the hepatocyte 
and aid in the digestion and absorption of fats in the intestines.6 
In the intestines, about 80% of the conjugated bile acids are 
absorbed in the terminal ileum. The remainder is dehydroxyl-
ated (deconjugated) by gut bacteria, forming secondary bile 
acids deoxycholate and lithocholate. These are absorbed in the 
colon, transported to the liver, conjugated, and secreted into the 
bile. Eventually, about 95% of the bile acid pool is reabsorbed 
and returned via the portal venous system to the liver, the so-called 
enterohepatic circulation. Five percent is excreted in the stool, 
leaving the relatively small amount of bile acids to have maxi-
mum effect.
1313
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
Cholesterol and phospholipids synthesized in the liver are 
the principal lipids found in bile. The synthesis of phospholipids 
and cholesterol by the liver is, in part, regulated by bile acids. 
The color of the bile is due to the presence of the pigment bili-
rubin diglucuronide, which is the metabolic product from the 
breakdown of hemoglobin and is present in bile in concentra-
tions 100 times greater than in plasma. Once in the intestine, 
bacteria convert it into urobilinogen, a small fraction of which 
is absorbed and secreted into the bile.
Gallbladder Function
The gallbladder, the bile ducts, and the sphincter of Oddi act 
together to store and regulate the flow of bile. The main function 
of the gallbladder is to concentrate and store hepatic bile and to 
deliver bile into the duodenum in response to a meal.
Absorption and Secretion.  In the fasting state, approximately 
80% of the bile secreted by the liver is stored in the gallbladder. 
This storage is made possible because of the remarkable absorp-
tive capacity of the gallbladder, as the gallbladder mucosa has 
the greatest absorptive power per unit area of any structure in the 
body. It rapidly absorbs sodium, chloride, and water against sig-
nificant concentration gradients, concentrating the bile as much 
as 10-fold and leading to a marked change in bile composition. 
This rapid absorption is one of the mechanisms that prevent a 
rise in pressure within the biliary system under normal circum-
stances. Gradual relaxation as well as emptying of the gallblad-
der during the fasting period also plays a role in maintaining a 
relatively low intraluminal pressure in the biliary tree.
The epithelial cells of the gallbladder secrete at least two 
important products into the gallbladder lumen: glycoproteins 
and hydrogen ions. The mucosal glands in the infundibulum and 
the neck of the gallbladder secrete mucus glycoproteins that are 
believed to protect the mucosa from the lytic action of bile and to 
facilitate the passage of bile through the cystic duct. This mucus 
makes up the colorless “white bile” seen in hydrops of the gall-
bladder resulting from cystic duct obstruction. The transport of 
hydrogen ions by the gallbladder epithelium leads to a decrease 
in the gallbladder bile pH. The acidification promotes calcium 
solubility, thereby preventing its precipitation as calcium salts.6
Motor Activity.  Gallbladder filling is facilitated by tonic con-
traction of the sphincter of Oddi, which creates a pressure gradi-
ent between the bile ducts and the gallbladder. During fasting, 
the gallbladder does not simply fill passively. In association 
with phase II of the interdigestive migrating myenteric motor 
complex in the gut, the gallbladder repeatedly empties small 
volumes of bile into the duodenum. This process is mediated at 
least in part by the hormone motilin. In response to a meal, the 
gallbladder empties by a coordinated motor response of gall-
bladder contraction and sphincter of Oddi relaxation. One of the 
main stimuli to gallbladder emptying is the hormone cholecys-
tokinin (CCK). CCK is released endogenously from the duode-
nal mucosa in response to a meal.7 When stimulated by eating, 
the gallbladder empties 50% to 70% of its contents within 30 to 
40 minutes. Over the following 60 to 90 minutes, the gallbladder 
gradually refills. This is correlated with a reduced CCK level. 
Other hormonal and neural pathways also are involved in the 
coordinated action of the gallbladder and the sphincter of Oddi. 
Defects in the motor activity of the gallbladder are thought to 
play a role in cholesterol nucleation and gallstone formation.8
Neurohormonal Regulation.  The vagus nerve stimulates 
contraction of the gallbladder, and splanchnic sympathetic 
stimulation is inhibitory to its motor activity. Parasympatho-
mimetic drugs contract the gallbladder, whereas atropine leads 
to relaxation. Neurally mediated reflexes link the sphincter of 
Oddi with the gallbladder, stomach, and duodenum to coordi-
nate the flow of bile into the duodenum. Antral distention of the 
stomach causes both gallbladder contraction and relaxation of 
the sphincter of Oddi.
Hormonal receptors are located on the smooth muscles, 
vessels, nerves, and epithelium of the gallbladder. CCK is a pep-
tide that comes from epithelial cells of the upper GI tract and 
is found in the highest concentrations in the duodenum. CCK is 
released into the bloodstream by acid, fat, and amino acids in the 
duodenum.9 CCK has a plasma half-life of 2 to 3 minutes and is 
metabolized by both the liver and the kidneys. CCK acts directly 
on smooth muscle receptors of the gallbladder and stimulates 
gallbladder contraction. It also relaxes the terminal bile duct, 
the sphincter of Oddi, and the duodenum. CCK stimulation of 
the gallbladder and the biliary tree also is mediated by cholin-
ergic vagal neurons. In patients who have had a vagotomy, the 
response to CCK stimulation is diminished and the size and the 
volume of the gallbladder are increased.
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide inhibits contraction and 
causes gallbladder relaxation. Somatostatin and its analogues 
are potent inhibitors of gallbladder contraction. Patients treated 
with somatostatin analogues and those with somatostatinoma 
have a high incidence of gallstones, presumably due to the inhi-
bition of gallbladder contraction and emptying. Other hormones 
such as substance P and enkephalin affect gallbladder motility, 
but the physiologic role is unclear.7
Sphincter of Oddi
The sphincter of Oddi regulates flow of bile (and pancreatic 
juice) into the duodenum, prevents the regurgitation of duodenal 
contents into the biliary tree, and diverts bile into the gallblad-
der. It is a complex structure that is functionally independent 
from the duodenal musculature and creates a high-pressure zone 
between the bile duct and the duodenum. The sphincter of Oddi 
is about 4 to 6 mm in length and has a basal resting pressure 
of about 13 mmHg above the duodenal pressure. On manom-
etry, the sphincter shows phasic contractions with a frequency 
of about four per minute and an amplitude of 12 to 140 mmHg.8 
The spontaneous motility of the sphincter of Oddi is regulated 
by the interstitial cells of Cajal through intrinsic and extrinsic 
inputs from hormones and neurons acting on the smooth 
muscle cells.10 Relaxation occurs with a rise in CCK, lead-
ing to diminished amplitude of phasic contractions and reduced 
basal pressure, allowing increased flow of bile into the duode-
num (Fig. 32-5). During fasting, the sphincter of Oddi activity 
is coordinated with the periodic partial gallbladder emptying 
and an increase in bile flow that occurs during phase II of the 
migrating myoelectric motor complexes.11
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
A variety of diagnostic modalities are available for the patient 
with suspected disease of the gallbladder and the bile ducts. In 
1924, the diagnosis of gallstones was improved significantly by 
the introduction of oral cholecystography by Graham and Cole. 
For decades, it was the mainstay of investigation for gallstones. 
In the 1950s, biliary scintigraphy was developed, as well as 
intrahepatic and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC), 
allowing imaging of the biliary tract. Later ultrasonography, 
1
1314
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) vastly improved the ability to image the biliary tract.12
Blood Tests
When patients with suspected diseases of the gallbladder or the 
extrahepatic biliary tree are evaluated, a complete blood count 
and liver function tests are routinely requested. An elevated 
white blood cell (WBC) count may indicate or raise suspicion of 
cholecystitis. If associated with an elevation of bilirubin, alka-
line phosphatase, and aminotransferase, cholangitis should be 
suspected. Cholestasis, an obstruction to bile flow, is character-
ized by an elevation of bilirubin (i.e., the conjugated form) and 
a rise in alkaline phosphatase. Serum aminotransferases may 
be normal or mildly elevated. In patients with biliary colic or 
chronic cholecystitis, blood tests will typically be normal.
Ultrasonography
An ultrasound is the initial investigation of any patient sus-
pected of disease of the biliary tree.13 It is noninvasive, painless, 
does not submit the patient to radiation, and can be performed 
on critically ill patients. It is dependent upon the skills and the 
experience of the operator, and it is dynamic (i.e., static images 
do not give the same information as those obtained during the 
ultrasound investigation itself). Adjacent organs can frequently 
be examined at the same time. Obese patients, patients with 
Figure 32-5.  The effect of cholecystokinin on the gallbladder and 
the sphincter of Oddi. A. During fasting, with the sphincter of Oddi 
contracted and the gallbladder filling. B. In response to a meal, the 
sphincter of Oddi relaxed and the gallbladder emptying.
ascites, and patients with distended bowel may be difficult to 
examine satisfactorily with an ultrasound.
Ultrasound will show stones in the gallbladder with sensi-
tivity and specificity of >90%. Stones are acoustically dense and 
reflect the ultrasound waves back to the ultrasonic transducer. 
Because stones block the passage of sound waves to the region 
behind them, they also produce an acoustic shadow (Fig. 32-6). 
Stones move with changes in position. Polyps may be calcified 
and reflect shadows, but do not move with change in posture. 
Some stones form a layer in the gallbladder; others a sediment 
or sludge. A thickened gallbladder wall and local tenderness 
indicate cholecystitis. The patient has acute cholecystitis if a 
layer of edema is seen within the wall of the gallbladder or 
between the gallbladder and the liver in association with local-
ized tenderness. When a stone obstructs the neck of the gallblad-
der, the gallbladder may become very large, but thin walled. 
A contracted, thick-walled gallbladder is indicative of chronic 
cholecystitis.
The extrahepatic bile ducts are also well visualized by 
ultrasound, except for the retroduodenal portion. Dilation of 
the ducts in a patient with jaundice establishes an extrahepatic 
obstruction as a cause for the jaundice. Frequently, the site 
and, sometimes, the cause of obstruction can be determined by 
ultrasound. Small stones in the common bile duct frequently 
get lodged at the distal end of it, behind the duodenum, and 
are, therefore, difficult to detect. A dilated common bile duct 
on ultrasound, small stones in the gallbladder, and the clini-
cal presentation allow one to assume that a stone or stones are 
causing the obstruction. Periampullary tumors can be difficult to 
diagnose on ultrasound, but beyond the retroduodenal portion, 
the level of obstruction and the cause may be visualized quite 
well. Ultrasound can be helpful in evaluating tumor invasion 
and flow in the portal vein, an important guideline for resect-
ability of periampullary and pancreatic head tumors.14
Oral Cholecystography
Once considered the diagnostic procedure of choice for gall-
stones, oral cholecystography has largely been replaced by 
ultrasonography. It involves oral administration of a radiopaque 
compound that is absorbed, excreted by the liver, and passed 
into the gallbladder. Stones are noted on a film as filling defects 
in a visualized, opacified gallbladder. Oral cholecystography is 
of no value in patients with intestinal malabsorption, vomiting, 
obstructive jaundice, and hepatic failure.
Figure 32-6.  An ultrasonography of the gallbladder. Arrows indi-
cate the acoustic shadows from stones in the gallbladder.
1315
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
Biliary Radionuclide Scanning (HIDA Scan)
Biliary scintigraphy provides a noninvasive evaluation of the 
liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, and duodenum with both anatomic 
and functional information. 99mTechnetium-labeled derivatives 
of dimethyl iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) are injected intrave-
nously, cleared by the Kupffer cells in the liver, and excreted in 
the bile. Uptake by the liver is detected within 10 minutes, and 
the gallbladder, the bile ducts, and the duodenum are visual-
ized within 60 minutes in fasting subjects. The primary use of 
biliary scintigraphy is in the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis, 
which appears as a nonvisualized gallbladder, with prompt fill-
ing of the common bile duct and duodenum. Evidence of cystic 
duct obstruction on biliary scintigraphy is highly diagnostic for 
acute cholecystitis. The sensitivity and specificity for the diag-
nosis are about 95% each. False-positive results are increased in 
patients with gallbladder stasis, as in critically ill patients and in 
patients receiving parenteral nutrition. Filling of the gallbladder 
and common bile duct with delayed or absent filling of the duo-
denum indicates an obstruction at the ampulla. Biliary leaks as a 
complication of surgery of the gallbladder or the biliary tree can 
be confirmed and frequently localized by biliary scintigraphy.15
Computed Tomography
Abdominal CT scans are inferior to ultrasonography in diagnos-
ing gallstones. The major application of CT scans is to define 
the course and status of the extrahepatic biliary tree and adjacent 
structures. It is the test of choice in evaluating the patient with 
suspected malignancy of the gallbladder, the extrahepatic biliary 
system, or nearby organs, in particular, the head of the pancreas. 
Use of CT scan is an integral part of the differential diagnosis 
of obstructive jaundice (Fig. 32-7). Spiral CT scanning provides 
Figure 32-7.  Computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen 
from a patient with cancer of the distal common bile duct. The can-
cer obstructs the common bile duct as well as the pancreatic duct. 
1 = the portal vein; 2 = a dilated intrahepatic bile duct; 3 = dilated 
cystic duct and the neck of the gallbladder; 4 = dilated common 
hepatic duct; 5 = the bifurcation of the common hepatic artery into 
the gastroduodenal artery and the proper hepatic artery; 6 = dilated 
pancreatic duct; 7 = the splenic vein.
additional staging information, including vascular involvement 
in patients with periampullary tumors.16
Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography
Intrahepatic bile ducts are accessed percutaneously with a 
small needle under fluoroscopic guidance. Once the position 
in a bile duct has been confirmed, a guidewire is passed, and 
subsequently, a catheter is passed over the wire (Fig. 32-8). 
Through the catheter, a cholangiogram can be performed and 
therapeutic interventions done, such as biliary drain insertions 
and stent placements. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiog-
raphy (PTC) has little role in the management of patients with 
uncomplicated gallstone disease but is particularly useful in 
patients with bile duct strictures and tumors, as it defines the 
anatomy of the biliary tree proximal to the affected segment. 
As with any invasive procedure, there are potential risks. For 
PTC, these are mainly bleeding, cholangitis, bile leak, and 
other catheter-related problems.15
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Available since the mid-1990s, MRI provides anatomic details 
of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas similar to those obtained 
from CT. Many MRI techniques (i.e., heavily T2-weighted 
sequences, pulse sequences with or without contrast materials) 
can generate high-resolution anatomic images of the biliary 
tree and the pancreatic duct. It has a sensitivity and specificity 
of 95% and 89%, respectively, at detecting choledocholithia-
sis.17 MRI with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) offers a single noninvasive test for the diagnosis of bil-
iary tract and pancreatic disease18 (Fig. 32-9). In many centers, 
MRCP is first performed for diagnosis of biliary and pancreatic 
duct pathology, reserving endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography (ERCP) for therapeutic purposes only.
Endoscopic Retrograde 
Cholangiopancreatography
Using a side-viewing endoscope, the common bile duct can be 
cannulated and a cholangiogram performed using fluoroscopy 
(Fig. 32-10). The procedure requires intravenous (IV) sedation 
for the patient. The advantages of ERC include direct visual-
ization of the ampullary region and direct access to the distal 
common bile duct, with the possibility of therapeutic inter-
vention. The test is rarely needed for uncomplicated gallstone 
disease, but for stones in the common bile duct, in particular, 
when associated with obstructive jaundice, cholangitis, or gall-
stone pancreatitis, ERC is the diagnostic and often therapeutic 
procedure of choice. Once the endoscopic cholangiogram has 
shown ductal stones, sphincterotomy and stone extraction can 
be performed, and the common bile duct cleared of stones. In 
the hands of experts, the success rate of common bile duct can-
nulation and cholangiography is >90%. Complications of diag-
nostic ERC include pancreatitis and cholangitis and occur in 
up to 5% of patients.19 The development of small fiber-optic 
cameras that can be threaded through endoscopes used for endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) has facili-
tated the development of intraductal endoscopy. By providing 
direct visualization of the biliary and pancreatic ducts, this tech-
nology has been shown to increase the effectiveness of ERCP 
in the diagnosis of certain biliary and pancreatic diseases.20,21 
Intraductal endoscopy has been shown to have therapeutic 
applications that include biliary stone lithotripsy and extraction 
in high-risk surgical patients.22 As with most endoscopic proce-
dures, intraductal endoscopy generally is considered safe, but 
1316
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
there are no large trials that specifically address this issue. Typi-
cal complications such as bile duct perforation, minor bleeding 
from sphincterotomy or lithotripsy, and cholangitis have been 
described.23 Further refinement of this technology will enhance 
ERCP as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool.
Endoscopic Ultrasound
Endoscopic ultrasound requires a special endoscope with an 
ultrasound transducer at its tip. The results are operator depen-
dent, but offer noninvasive imaging of the bile ducts and adja-
cent structures. It is of particular value in the evaluation of 
tumors and their resectability. The ultrasound endoscope has 
a biopsy channel, allowing needle biopsies of a tumor under 
A
C
F
E
D
B
Safety
wire
inserted
External
drainage
catheter
21-guage
needle
Bile
duct
tumor
Guidewire inserted
through introducer
Drainage
catheter
Figure 32-8.  Schematic diagram of per-
cutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram and 
drainage for obstructing proximal cholangio-
carcinoma. A. Dilated intrahepatic bile duct is 
entered percutaneously with a fine needle. 
B. Small guidewire is passed through the 
needle into the duct. C. A plastic catheter 
has been passed over the wire, and the wire 
is subsequently removed. A cholangiogram is 
performed through the catheter. D. An external 
drainage catheter in place. E. Long wire placed 
via the catheter and advanced past the tumor 
and into the duodenum. F. Internal stent has 
been placed through the tumor.
ultrasonic guidance. Endoscopic ultrasound also has been used 
to identify bile duct stones, and although it is less sensitive than 
ERC, the technique is less invasive as cannulation of the sphinc-
ter of Oddi is not necessary for diagnosis of choledocholithiasis.
GALLSTONE DISEASE
Prevalence and Incidence
Gallstone disease is one of the most common problems 
affecting the digestive tract. Autopsy reports have shown a 
prevalence of gallstones from 11% to 36%.24 The prevalence 
of gallstones is related to many factors, including age, gender, 
1317
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
and ethnic background. Certain conditions predispose to the 
development of gallstones. Obesity, pregnancy, dietary fac-
tors, Crohn’s disease, terminal ileal resection, gastric surgery, 
hereditary spherocytosis, sickle cell disease, and thalassemia are 
all associated with an increased risk of developing gallstones.8 
Women are three times more likely to develop gallstones than 
B
A
Figure 32-9.  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. This 
view shows the course of the extrahepatic bile ducts (arrow) and the 
pancreatic duct (arrowheads).
Figure 32-10.  Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography. A. A schematic picture showing the side-viewing endoscope in the duodenum and a 
catheter in the common bile duct. B. An endoscopic cholangiography showing stones in the common bile duct. The catheter has been placed 
in the ampulla of Vater (arrow). Note the duodenal shadow indicated with arrowheads.
men, and first-degree relatives of patients with gallstones have 
a twofold greater prevalence.25
Natural History
Most patients will remain asymptomatic from their gallstones 
throughout life. For unknown reasons, some patients progress 
to a symptomatic stage, with biliary colic caused by a stone 
obstructing the cystic duct. Symptomatic gallstone disease may 
progress to complications related to the gallstones.26 These 
include acute cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis with or without 
cholangitis, gallstone pancreatitis, cholecystocholedochal fis-
tula, cholecystoduodenal or cholecystoenteric fistula leading to 
gallstone ileus, and gallbladder carcinoma. Rarely, complication 
of gallstones is the presenting picture.
Gallstones in patients without biliary symptoms are com-
monly diagnosed incidentally on ultrasonography, CT scans, or 
abdominal radiography or at laparotomy. Several studies have 
examined the likelihood of developing biliary colic or devel-
oping significant complications of gallstone disease. Approxi-
mately 3% of asymptomatic individuals become symptomatic 
per year (i.e., develop biliary colic). Once symptomatic, patients 
tend to have recurring bouts of biliary colic. Complicated gall-
stone disease develops in 3% to 5% of symptomatic patients per 
year. Over a 20-year period, about two thirds of asymptomatic 
patients with gallstones remain symptom free.27
Because few patients develop complications without 
previous biliary symptoms, prophylactic cholecystectomy in 
asymptomatic persons with gallstones is rarely indicated. For 
elderly patients with diabetes, for individuals who will be iso-
lated from medical care for extended periods of time, and in 
populations with increased risk of gallbladder cancer, a prophy-
lactic cholecystectomy may be advisable. Porcelain gallblad-
der, a rare premalignant condition in which the wall of the 
1318
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
gallbladder becomes calcified, is an absolute indication for 
cholecystectomy.
Gallstone Formation
Gallstones form as a result of solids settling out of solution. The 
major organic solutes in bile are bilirubin, bile salts, phospho-
lipids, and cholesterol. Gallstones are classified by their cho-
lesterol content as either cholesterol stones or pigment stones. 
Pigment stones can be further classified as either black or brown. 
In Western countries, about 80% of gallstones are cholesterol 
stones and about 15% to 20% are black pigment stones.28 Brown 
pigment stones account for only a small percentage. Both 
types of pigment stones are more common in Asia.
Cholesterol Stones.  Pure cholesterol stones are uncommon 
and account for <10% of all stones. They usually occur as single 
large stones with smooth surfaces. Most other cholesterol stones 
contain variable amounts of bile pigments and calcium, but are 
always >70% cholesterol by weight. These stones are usually 
multiple, of variable size, and may be hard and faceted or irregu-
lar, mulberry-shaped, and soft (Fig. 32-11). Colors range from 
whitish yellow and green to black. Most cholesterol stones are 
radiolucent; <10% are radiopaque. Whether pure or of mixed 
nature, the common primary event in the formation of choles-
terol stones is supersaturation of bile with cholesterol. There-
fore, high bile cholesterol levels and cholesterol gallstones are 
considered as one disease. Cholesterol is highly nonpolar and 
insoluble in water and bile. Cholesterol solubility depends on 
the relative concentration of cholesterol, bile salts, and lecithin 
(the main phospholipid in bile). Supersaturation almost always 
is caused by cholesterol hypersecretion rather than by a reduced 
secretion of phospholipid or bile salts.2
Cholesterol is secreted into bile as cholesterol-phospholipid 
vesicles. Cholesterol is held in solution by micelles, a conju-
gated bile salt-phospholipid-cholesterol complex, as well as by 
the cholesterol-phospholipid vesicles. The presence of vesicles 
and micelles in the same aqueous compartment allows the move-
ment of lipids between the two. Vesicular maturation occurs 
when vesicular lipids are incorporated into micelles. Vesicular 
phospholipids are incorporated into micelles more readily than 
vesicular cholesterol. Therefore, vesicles may become enriched 
Figure 32-12.  The three major components of bile plotted on trian-
gular coordinates. A given point represents the relative molar ratios 
of bile salts, lecithin, and cholesterol. The area labeled “micellar 
liquid” shows the range of concentrations found consistent with 
a clear micellar solution (single phase), where cholesterol is fully 
solubilized. The shaded area directly above this region corresponds 
to a metastable zone, supersaturated with cholesterol. Bile with a 
composition that falls above the shaded area has exceeded the solu-
bilization capacity of cholesterol and precipitation of cholesterol 
crystals occurs. (Reproduced with permission from Holzbach RT. 
Pathogenesis and medical treatment of gallstones. In: Slesinger 
MH, Fordtran JS, eds. Gastrointestinal Diseases. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1989:1672.)
Figure 32-11.  Gallbladder with cholesterol stones. Note the dif-
ferent shapes and sizes.
in cholesterol, become unstable, and then nucleate cholesterol 
crystals. In unsaturated bile, cholesterol enrichment of vesicles 
is inconsequential. In the supersaturated bile, cholesterol-dense 
zones develop on the surface of the cholesterol-enriched ves-
icles, leading to the appearance of cholesterol crystals. About 
one third of biliary cholesterol is transported in micelles, but the 
cholesterol-phospholipid vesicles carry the majority of biliary 
cholesterol29 (Fig. 32-12).
Pigment Stones.  Pigment stones contain <20% cholesterol 
and are dark because of the presence of calcium bilirubinate. 
Otherwise, black and brown pigment stones have little in com-
mon and should be considered as separate entities.
Black pigment stones are usually small, brittle, black, 
and sometimes spiculated. They are formed by supersaturation 
of calcium bilirubinate, carbonate, and phosphate, most often 
secondary to hemolytic disorders such as hereditary spherocy-
tosis and sickle cell disease, and in those with cirrhosis. Like 
cholesterol stones, they almost always form in the gallbladder. 
Unconjugated bilirubin is much less soluble than conjugated 
bilirubin in bile. Deconjugation of bilirubin occurs normally in 
bile at a slow rate. Excessive levels of conjugated bilirubin, as 
in hemolytic states, lead to an increased rate of production of 
unconjugated bilirubin. Cirrhosis may lead to increased secre-
tion of unconjugated bilirubin. When altered conditions lead to 
increased levels of deconjugated bilirubin in bile, precipitation 
with calcium occurs. In Asian countries such as Japan, black 
stones account for a much higher percentage of gallstones than 
in the Western hemisphere.
Brown stones are usually <1 cm in diameter, brownish-
yellow, soft, and often mushy. They may form either in the 
gallbladder or in the bile ducts, usually secondary to bacterial 
100
100
Moles % Bile salts
100
80
80
80
60
60
60
Moles % Cholesterol
Moles % Lecithin
Micellar
liquid
Metastable
supersaturated
zone
40
40
40
20
20
20
0
0
0
2 or more
phases
2
1319
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
infection caused by bile stasis. Precipitated calcium bilirubinate 
and bacterial cell bodies compose the major part of the stone. 
Bacteria such as Escherichia coli secrete β-glucuronidase that 
enzymatically cleaves bilirubin glucuronide to produce the 
insoluble unconjugated bilirubin. It precipitates with calcium, 
and along with dead bacterial cell bodies, forms soft brown 
stones in the biliary tree.
Brown stones are typically found in the biliary tree of 
Asian populations and are associated with stasis secondary to 
parasite infection. In Western populations, brown stones occur 
as primary bile duct stones in patients with biliary strictures or 
other common bile duct stones that cause stasis and bacterial 
contamination.2,30
Symptomatic Gallstones
Chronic Cholecystitis (Biliary Colic).  About two thirds of 
patients with gallstone disease present with chronic cholecysti-
tis characterized by recurrent attacks of pain, often inaccurately 
labeled biliary colic. The pain develops when a stone obstructs 
the cystic duct, resulting in a progressive increase of tension in 
the gallbladder wall. The pathologic changes, which often do 
not correlate well with symptoms, vary from an apparently nor-
mal gallbladder with minor chronic inflammation in the mucosa, 
to a shrunken, nonfunctioning gallbladder with gross transmu-
ral fibrosis and adhesions to nearby structures. The mucosa is 
initially normal or hypertrophied, but later becomes atrophied, 
with the epithelium protruding into the muscle coat, leading to 
the formation of the so-called Aschoff-Rokitansky sinuses.
Clinical Presentation  The chief symptom associated with 
symptomatic gallstones is pain. The pain is constant and 
increases in severity over the first half hour or so and typi-
cally lasts 1 to 5 hours. It is located in the epigastrium or right 
upper quadrant and frequently radiates to the right upper back 
or between the scapulae (Fig. 32-13). The pain is severe and 
comes on abruptly, typically during the night or after a fatty 
meal. It often is associated with nausea and sometimes vomit-
ing. The pain is episodic. The patient suffers discrete attacks of 
pain, between which they feel well. Physical examination may 
reveal mild right upper quadrant tenderness during an episode of 
pain. If the patient is pain free, the physical examination is usu-
ally unremarkable. Laboratory values, such as WBC count and 
liver function tests, are usually normal in patients with uncom-
plicated gallstones.
Atypical presentation of gallstone disease is common. Asso-
ciation with meals is present in only about 50% of patients. Some 
patients report milder attacks of pain, but relate it to meals. 
The pain may be located primarily in the back or the left upper 
or lower right quadrant. Bloating and belching may be present 
and associated with the attacks of pain. In patients with atypical 
presentation, other conditions with upper abdominal pain should 
be sought out, even in the presence of gallstones. These include 
peptic ulcer disease, gastroesophageal reflux disease, abdominal 
wall hernias, irritable bowel disease, diverticular disease, liver 
diseases, renal calculi, pleuritic pain, and myocardial pain. Many 
patients with other conditions have gallstones.
When the pain lasts >24 hours, an impacted stone in the 
cystic duct or acute cholecystitis (see later Acute Cholecystitis 
section) should be suspected. An impacted stone without chole-
cystitis will result in what is called hydrops of the gallbladder. 
The bile gets absorbed, but the gallbladder epithelium continues 
to secrete mucus, and the gallbladder becomes distended with 
mucinous material. The gallbladder may be palpable but usually 
2
2
15
14
7
64
50
13
5
244
1
4
2
9
6
1
4
3
9
6
3
2
2
15
19
11
2
5
2
3
11
35
33
2
3
A
B
Figure 32-13.  A. Sites of the most severe pain during an episode 
of biliary pain in 107 patients with gallstones (% values add up to 
>100% because of multiple responses). The subxiphoid and right 
subcostal areas were the most common sites; note that the left sub-
costal area was not an unusual site of pain. B. Sites of pain radiation 
(%) during an episode of biliary pain in the same group of patients. 
(Reprinted from Gunn A, Keddie N. Some clinical observations on 
patients with gallstones. Lancet. 1972;300(7771):239-241, Copy-
right 1972, with permission from Elsevier.)
is not tender. Hydrops of the gallbladder may result in edema of 
the gallbladder wall, inflammation, infection, and perforation. 
Although hydrops may persist with few consequences, early 
cholecystectomy is generally indicated to avoid complications.
Diagnosis  The diagnosis of symptomatic gallstones or chronic 
calculous cholecystitis depends on the presence of typical symp-
toms and the demonstration of stones on diagnostic imaging. An 
abdominal ultrasound is the standard diagnostic test for gall-
stones (see earlier Ultrasonography section).31 Gallstones are 
occasionally identified on abdominal radiographs or CT scans. 
In these cases, if the patient has typical symptoms, an ultra-
sound of the gallbladder and the biliary tree should be added 
before surgical intervention. Stones diagnosed incidentally in 
patients without symptoms should be left in place as discussed 
previously in the Natural History section. Occasionally, patients 
with typical attacks of biliary pain have no evidence of stones 
on ultrasonography. Sometimes only sludge in the gallbladder 
1320
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is demonstrated on ultrasonography. If the patient has recur-
rent attacks of typical biliary pain and sludge is detected on two 
or more occasions, cholecystectomy is warranted. In addition 
to sludge and stones, cholesterolosis and adenomyomatosis of 
the gallbladder may cause typical biliary symptoms and may 
be detected on ultrasonography. Cholesterolosis is caused by 
the accumulation of cholesterol in macrophages in the gallblad-
der mucosa, either locally or as polyps. It produces the classic 
macroscopic appearance of a “strawberry gallbladder.” Adeno-
myomatosis or cholecystitis glandularis proliferans is charac-
terized on microscopy by hypertrophic smooth muscle bundles 
and by the ingrowths of mucosal glands into the muscle layer 
(epithelial sinus formation). Granulomatous polyps develop in 
the lumen at the fundus, and the gallbladder wall is thickened 
and septae or strictures may be seen in the gallbladder. In symp-
tomatic patients, cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for 
patients with these conditions.32
Management  Patients with symptomatic gallstones should be 
advised to have elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. While 
waiting for surgery, or if surgery has to be postponed, the patient 
should be advised to avoid dietary fats and large meals. Diabetic 
patients with symptomatic gallstones should have a cholecystec-
tomy promptly, as they are more prone to develop acute chole-
cystitis that is often severe. Pregnant women with symptomatic 
gallstones who cannot be managed expectantly with diet modifi-
cations can safely undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy during 
the second trimester. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is safe and 
effective in children as well as in the elderly.33,34 Cholecys-
tectomy, open or laparoscopic, for patients with symptom-
atic gallstones offers excellent long-term results. About 90% of 
patients with typical biliary symptoms and stones are rendered 
symptom free after cholecystectomy. For patients with atypi-
cal symptoms or dyspepsia (flatulence, belching, bloating, and 
dietary fat intolerance), the results are not as favorable.
Acute Cholecystitis
Pathogenesis  Acute cholecystitis is secondary to gallstones in 
90% to 95% of cases. Acute acalculous cholecystitis is a condi-
tion that typically occurs in patients with other acute systemic 
diseases (see later Acalculous Cholecystitis section). In <1% of 
acute cholecystitis, the cause is a tumor obstructing the cystic 
duct. Obstruction of the cystic duct by a gallstone is the initi-
ating event that leads to gallbladder distention, inflammation, 
and edema of the gallbladder wall. Why inflammation develops 
only occasionally with cystic duct obstruction is unknown. It 
is probably related to the duration of obstruction of the cystic 
duct. Initially, acute cholecystitis is an inflammatory process, 
probably mediated by the mucosal toxin lysolecithin, a product 
of lecithin, as well as bile salts and platelet-activating factor. 
Increase in prostaglandin synthesis amplifies the inflammatory 
response. Secondary bacterial contamination is documented in 
15% to 30% of patients undergoing cholecystectomy for acute 
uncomplicated cholecystitis. In acute cholecystitis, the gallblad-
der wall becomes grossly thickened and reddish with subserosal 
hemorrhages. Pericholecystic fluid often is present. The mucosa 
may show hyperemia and patchy necrosis. In severe cases, about 
5% to 10%, the inflammatory process progresses and leads to 
ischemia and necrosis of the gallbladder wall. More frequently, 
the gallstone is dislodged and the inflammation resolves.35
When the gallbladder remains obstructed and secondary 
bacterial infection supervenes, an acute gangrenous chole-
cystitis develops, and an abscess or empyema forms within 
the gallbladder. Rarely, perforation of ischemic areas occurs. 
The perforation is usually contained in the subhepatic space 
by the omentum and adjacent organs. However, free perfora-
tion with peritonitis, intrahepatic perforation with intrahepatic 
abscesses, and perforation into adjacent organs (duodenum or 
colon) with cholecystoenteric fistula occur. When gas-forming 
organisms are part of the secondary bacterial infection, gas may 
be seen in the gallbladder lumen and in the wall of the gallblad-
der on abdominal radiographs and CT scans, an entity called an 
emphysematous gallbladder.
Clinical Manifestations  About 80% of patients with acute cho-
lecystitis give a history compatible with chronic cholecystitis. 
Acute cholecystitis begins as an attack of biliary colic, but in 
contrast to biliary colic, the pain does not subside; it is unremit-
ting and may persist for several days. The pain is typically in 
the right upper quadrant or epigastrium and may radiate to the 
right upper part of the back or the interscapular area. It is usu-
ally more severe than the pain associated with uncomplicated 
biliary colic. The patient is often febrile, complains of anorexia, 
nausea, and vomiting, and is reluctant to move, as the inflam-
matory process affects the parietal peritoneum. On physical 
examination, focal tenderness and guarding are usually present 
in the right upper quadrant. A mass, the gallbladder and adher-
ent omentum, is occasionally palpable; however, guarding may 
prevent this. A Murphy’s sign, an inspiratory arrest with deep 
palpation in the right subcostal area, is characteristic of acute 
cholecystitis.
A mild to moderate leukocytosis (12,000–15,000 cells/mm3) 
is usually present. However, some patients may have a normal 
WBC. A high WBC count (above 20,000) is suggestive of a 
complicated form of cholecystitis such as gangrenous cholecys-
titis, perforation, or associated cholangitis. Serum liver chemis-
tries are usually normal, but a mild elevation of serum bilirubin, 
<4 mg/mL, may be present along with mild elevation of alka-
line phosphatase, transaminases, and amylase.31 Severe jaundice 
is suggestive of common bile duct stones or obstruction of the 
bile ducts by severe pericholecystic inflammation secondary to 
impaction of a stone in the infundibulum of the gallbladder that 
mechanically obstructs the bile duct (Mirizzi’s syndrome). In 
elderly patients and in those with diabetes mellitus, acute cho-
lecystitis may have a subtle presentation resulting in a delay 
in diagnosis. The incidence of complications is higher in these 
patients, who also have approximately 10-fold the mortality rate 
compared to that of younger and healthier patients.
The differential diagnosis for acute cholecystitis includes 
a peptic ulcer with or without perforation, pancreatitis, appen-
dicitis, hepatitis, perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome), 
myocardial ischemia, pneumonia, pleuritis, and herpes zoster 
involving the intercostal nerve.
Diagnosis  Ultrasonography is the most useful radiologic test 
for diagnosing acute cholecystitis. It has a sensitivity and speci-
ficity of 95%. In addition to being a sensitive test for docu-
menting the presence or absence of stones, it will show the 
thickening of the gallbladder wall and the pericholecystic fluid 
(Fig. 32-14). Focal tenderness over the gallbladder when com-
pressed by the sonographic probe (sonographic Murphy’s sign) 
also is suggestive of acute cholecystitis. Biliary radionuclide 
scanning (HIDA scan) may be of help in the atypical case. Lack 
of filling of the gallbladder after 4 hours indicates an obstructed 
cystic duct and, in the clinical setting of acute cholecystitis, is 
highly sensitive and specific for acute cholecystitis. A normal 
3
1321
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
HIDA scan excludes acute cholecystitis. CT scan is frequently 
performed on patients with acute abdominal pain. It demon-
strates thickening of the gallbladder wall, pericholecystic fluid, 
and the presence of gallstones as well as air in the gallbladder 
wall, but is less sensitive than ultrasonography.
Treatment  Patients who present with acute cholecystitis will 
need IV fluids, antibiotics, and analgesia. The antibiotics should 
cover gram-negative aerobes as well as anaerobes. A third-
generation cephalosporin with good anaerobic coverage or a 
second-generation cephalosporin combined with metronidazole 
is a typical regimen. For patients with allergies to cephalospo-
rins, an aminoglycoside with metronidazole is appropriate. 
Although the inflammation in acute cholecystitis may be sterile 
in some patients, more than one half will have positive cultures 
from the gallbladder bile. It is difficult to know who is second-
arily infected; therefore, antibiotics have become a part of the 
management in most medical centers.
Cholecystectomy is the definitive treatment for acute cho-
lecystitis.36 In the past, the timing of cholecystectomy has been 
a matter of debate. Early cholecystectomy performed within 
2 to 3 days of the illness is preferred over interval or delayed 
cholecystectomy that is performed 6 to 10 weeks after initial 
medical treatment and recuperation. Several studies have shown 
that unless the patient is unfit for surgery, early cholecystec-
tomy should be recommended, as it offers the patient a defini-
tive solution in one hospital admission, quicker recovery times, 
and an earlier return to work.37
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of choice 
for acute cholecystitis. The conversion rate to an open chole-
cystectomy is higher (10%–15%) in the setting of acute chole-
cystitis than with chronic cholecystitis. The procedure is more 
tedious and takes longer than in the elective setting. However, 
when compared to the delayed operation, early operation carries 
a similar complication rate.
When patients present late, after 3 to 4 days of illness, or 
if they are unfit for surgery, they can be treated with antibiot-
ics with laparoscopic cholecystectomy scheduled for approxi-
mately 2 months later. Approximately 20% of patients will fail 
to respond to initial medical therapy and require an intervention. 
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy could be attempted, but the con-
version rate is high and some prefer to go directly for an open 
cholecystectomy. For those unfit for surgery, a percutaneous 
Figure 32-14.  Ultrasonography from a patient with acute chole-
cystitis. The arrowheads indicate the thickened gallbladder wall. 
There are several stones in the gallbladder (arrows) throwing 
acoustic shadows.
cholecystostomy or an open cholecystostomy under local 
analgesia can be performed. Failure to improve after chole-
cystostomy usually is due to gangrene of the gallbladder or per-
foration. For these patients, surgery is unavoidable. For those 
who respond after cholecystostomy, the tube can be removed 
once cholangiography through it shows a patent ductus cysticus. 
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy may then be scheduled in the 
near future.38 For the rare patients who can’t tolerate surgery, 
the stones can be extracted via the cholecystostomy tube before 
its removal.39
Choledocholithiasis.  Common bile duct stones may be small 
or large and single or multiple, and are found in 6% to 12% 
of patients with stones in the gallbladder. The incidence 
increases with age. About 20% to 25% of patients above the 
age of 60 with symptomatic gallstones have stones in the com-
mon bile duct as well as in the gallbladder.40 The vast major-
ity of ductal stones in Western countries are formed within the 
gallbladder and migrate down the cystic duct to the common 
bile duct. These are classified as secondary common bile duct 
stones, in contrast to the primary stones that form in the bile 
ducts. The secondary stones are usually cholesterol stones, 
whereas the primary stones are usually of the brown pigment 
type. The primary stones are associated with biliary stasis and 
infection and are more commonly seen in Asian populations. 
The causes of biliary stasis that lead to the development of pri-
mary stones include biliary stricture, papillary stenosis, tumors, 
or other (secondary) stones.
Clinical Manifestations  Choledochal stones may be silent and 
often are discovered incidentally. They may cause obstruction, 
complete or incomplete, or they may manifest with cholangitis 
or gallstone pancreatitis. The pain caused by a stone in the bile 
duct is very similar to that of biliary colic caused by impaction 
of a stone in the cystic duct. Nausea and vomiting are common. 
Physical examination may be normal, but mild epigastric or 
right upper quadrant tenderness as well as mild icterus are com-
mon. The symptoms may also be intermittent, such as pain and 
transient jaundice caused by a stone that temporarily impacts the 
ampulla but subsequently moves away, acting as a ball valve. A 
small stone may pass through the ampulla spontaneously with 
resolution of symptoms. Finally, the stones may become com-
pletely impacted, causing severe progressive jaundice. Eleva-
tion of serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and transaminases 
are commonly seen in patients with bile duct stones. However, 
in about one third of patients with common bile duct stones, the 
liver chemistries are normal.
Commonly, the first test, ultrasonography, is useful for 
documenting stones in the gallbladder (if still present), as well 
as determining the size of the common bile duct. As stones in 
the bile ducts tend to move down to the distal part of the com-
mon duct, bowel gas can preclude their demonstration on ultra-
sonography. A dilated common bile duct (>8 mm in diameter) 
on ultrasonography in a patient with gallstones, jaundice, and 
biliary pain is highly suggestive of common bile duct stones. 
Magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRC) provides excellent 
anatomic detail and has a sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 
89%, respectively, at detecting choledocholithiasis >5 mm in 
diameter.18 Endoscopic cholangiography is the gold standard for 
diagnosing common bile duct stones. It has the distinct advan-
tage of providing a therapeutic option at the time of diagnosis. 
In experienced hands, cannulation of the ampulla of Vater and 
diagnostic cholangiography are achieved in >90% of cases, with 
1322
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
associated morbidity of <5% (mainly cholangitis and pancre-
atitis). Endoscopic ultrasound has been demonstrated to be as 
good as ERCP for detecting common bile duct stones (sensitiv-
ity of 91% and specificity of 100%), but it lacks therapeutic 
intervention and requires expertise, making it less available.41 
PTC is rarely needed in patients with secondary common bile 
duct stones but is frequently performed for both diagnostic and 
therapeutic reasons in patients with primary bile duct stones.
Treatment  For patients with symptomatic gallstones and sus-
pected common bile duct stones, either preoperative endoscopic 
cholangiography or an intraoperative cholangiogram will docu-
ment the bile duct stones.42 If an endoscopic cholangiogram 
reveals stones, sphincterotomy and ductal clearance of the 
stones is appropriate, followed by a laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy. An intraoperative cholangiogram at the time of cholecys-
tectomy will also document the presence or absence of bile duct 
stones43 (Fig. 32-15). Laparoscopic common bile duct explora-
tion via the cystic duct or with formal choledochotomy allows 
the stones to be retrieved in the same setting (see Choledochal 
Exploration section). If the expertise and/or the instrumentation 
for laparoscopic common bile duct exploration are not avail-
able, a drain should be left adjacent to the cystic duct and the 
patient scheduled for endoscopic sphincterotomy the following 
day. An open common bile duct exploration is an option if the 
endoscopic method has already been tried or is, for some reason, 
not feasible. If a choledochotomy is performed, a T tube is left 
in place. Stones impacted in the ampulla may be difficult for 
both endoscopic ductal clearance as well as common bile duct 
exploration (open or laparoscopic). In these cases the common 
bile duct is usually quite dilated (about 2 cm in diameter). A 
choledochoduodenostomy or a Roux-en-Y choledochojejunos-
tomy may be the best option under this circumstance.44
Retained or recurrent stones following cholecystectomy 
are best treated endoscopically (Fig. 32-16). If the stones were 
Figure 32-15.  An endoscopic 
sphincterotomy. A. The sphinctero-
tome in place. B. Completed sphinc-
terotomy. C. Endoscopic picture of 
completed sphincterotomy.
deliberately left in place at the time of surgery or diagnosed 
shortly after the cholecystectomy, they are classified as retained; 
those diagnosed months or years later are termed recurrent. If a 
common bile duct exploration was performed and a T tube left 
in place, a T-tube cholangiogram is obtained before its removal. 
Retained stones can be retrieved either endoscopically or via 
the T-tube tract once it has matured (2–4 weeks). The T tube 
is then removed and a catheter passed through the tract into 
the common bile duct. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the stones 
are retrieved with baskets or balloons. Recurrent stones may be 
multiple and large. A generous endoscopic sphincterotomy will 
allow stone retrieval as well as spontaneous passage of retained 
and recurrent stones. Patients >70 years old presenting with bile 
duct stones should have their ductal stones cleared endoscopi-
cally. Studies comparing surgery to endoscopic treatment have 
documented less morbidity and mortality for endoscopic treat-
ment in this group of patients.45 They do not need to be sub-
mitted for a cholecystectomy, as only about 15% will become 
symptomatic from their gallbladder stones, and such patients 
can be treated as the need arises by a cholecystectomy.46
Cholangitis.  Cholangitis is one of the two main complications 
of choledochal stones, the other being gallstone pancreatitis. 
Acute cholangitis is an ascending bacterial infection in asso-
ciation with partial or complete obstruction of the bile ducts. 
Hepatic bile is sterile, and bile in the bile ducts is kept sterile by 
continuous bile flow and by the presence of antibacterial sub-
stances in bile, such as immunoglobulin. Mechanical hindrance 
to bile flow facilitates bacterial contamination. Positive bile cul-
tures are common in the presence of bile duct stones as well as 
with other causes of obstruction. Biliary bacterial contamination 
alone does not lead to clinical cholangitis; the combination of 
both significant bacterial contamination and biliary obstruction 
is required for its development. Gallstones are the most com-
mon cause of obstruction in cholangitis; other causes are benign 
1323
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
and malignant strictures, parasites, instrumentation of the ducts 
and indwelling stents, and partially obstructed biliary-enteric 
anastomosis. The most common organisms cultured from bile 
in patients with cholangitis include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, Streptococcus faecalis, Enterobacter, and Bacte-
roides fragilis.47
Clinical Presentation  Cholangitis may present as anything 
from a mild, intermittent, and self-limited disease to a fulminant, 
potentially life-threatening septicemia. The patient with gall-
stone-induced cholangitis is typically older and female. The most 
common presentation is fever, epigastric or right upper quad-
rant pain, and jaundice. These classic symptoms, well known 
as Charcot’s triad, are present in about two thirds of patients. 
The illness may progress rapidly with septicemia and disorien-
tation, known as Reynolds’ pentad (e.g., fever, jaundice, right 
upper quadrant pain, septic shock, and mental status changes). 
A
B
Figure 32-16.  Retained common bile duct stones. The patient pre-
sented 3 weeks after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A. An ultra-
sound shows a normal or mildly dilated common bile duct with a 
stone. Note the location of the right hepatic artery anterior to the 
common hepatic duct (an anatomic variation). B. An endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiography from the same patient shows multiple 
stones in the common bile duct. Only the top one showed on ultra-
sound as the other stones lie in the distal common bile duct behind 
the duodenum.
However, the presentation may be atypical, with little if any 
fever, jaundice, or pain. This occurs most commonly in the 
elderly, who may have unremarkable symptoms until they col-
lapse with septicemia. Patients with indwelling stents rarely 
become jaundiced. On abdominal examination, the findings are 
indistinguishable from those of acute cholecystitis.48
Diagnosis and Management  Leukocytosis, hyperbilirubinemia, 
and elevation of alkaline phosphatase and transaminases are com-
mon and, when present, support the clinical diagnosis of cholan-
gitis. Ultrasonography is helpful, as it will document the presence 
of gallbladder stones, demonstrate dilated ducts, and possibly 
pinpoint the site of obstruction; however, rarely will it elucidate 
the exact cause. The definitive diagnostic test is ERC. In cases 
in which ERC is not available, PTC is indicated. Both ERC and 
PTC will show the level and the reason for the obstruction, allow 
culture of the bile, possibly allow the removal of stones if pres-
ent, and allow drainage of the bile ducts with drainage catheters 
or stents. CT scanning and MRI will show pancreatic and peri-
ampullary masses, if present, in addition to the ductal dilatation.
The initial treatment of patients with cholangitis includes 
IV antibiotics and fluid resuscitation. These patients may 
require intensive care unit monitoring and vasopressor sup-
port. Most patients will respond to these measures. However, 
the obstructed bile duct must be drained as soon as the patient 
has been stabilized. About 15% of patients will not respond to 
antibiotics and fluid resuscitation, and an emergency biliary 
decompression may be required. Biliary decompression may 
be accomplished endoscopically, via the percutaneous tran-
shepatic route, or surgically. The selection of procedure should 
be based on the level and the nature of the biliary obstruction. 
Patients with choledocholithiasis or periampullary malignancies 
are best approached endoscopically, with sphincterotomy and 
stone removal, or by placement of an endoscopic biliary stent.49 
In patients in whom the obstruction is more proximal or peri-
hilar, or when a stricture in a biliary-enteric anastomosis is the 
cause or the endoscopic route has failed, percutaneous transhe-
patic drainage is used. When neither ERC nor PTC is available, 
an emergent operation for decompression of the common bile 
duct with a T tube may be necessary and lifesaving. Definitive 
operative therapy should be deferred until the cholangitis has 
been treated and the proper diagnosis established. Patients with 
indwelling stents and cholangitis usually require repeated imag-
ing and exchange of the stent over a guidewire.
Acute cholangitis is associated with an overall mortality 
rate of approximately 5%. When associated with renal failure, 
cardiac impairment, hepatic abscesses, and malignancies, the 
morbidity and mortality rates are much higher.
Biliary Pancreatitis.  Gallstones in the common bile duct are 
associated with acute pancreatitis. Obstruction of the pancreatic 
duct by an impacted stone or temporary obstruction by a stone 
passing through the ampulla may lead to pancreatitis. The exact 
mechanism by which the obstruction of the pancreatic duct leads 
to pancreatitis is still not clear. An ultrasonogram of the biliary 
tree in patients with pancreatitis is essential. If gallstones are 
present and the pancreatitis is severe, an ERC with sphincter-
otomy and stone extraction may abort the episode of pancreati-
tis. Once the pancreatitis has subsided, the gallbladder should be 
removed during the same admission. When gallstones are pres-
ent and the pancreatitis is mild and self-limited, the stone has 
probably passed. For these patients, a cholecystectomy and an 
intraoperative cholangiogram or a preoperative ERC is indicated.
1324
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Cholangiohepatitis
Cholangiohepatitis, also known as recurrent pyogenic chol-
angitis, is endemic to the Orient. It also has been encountered 
in the Chinese population in the United States, as well as in 
Europe and Australia. It affects both sexes equally and occurs 
most frequently in the third and fourth decades of life. Cholan-
giohepatitis is caused by bacterial contamination (commonly 
E. coli, Klebsiella species, Bacteroides species, or Enterococcus 
faecalis) of the biliary tree, and often is associated with biliary 
parasites such as Clonorchis sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, 
and Ascaris lumbricoides. Bacterial enzymes cause deconjuga-
tion of bilirubin, which precipitates as bile sludge. The sludge 
and dead bacterial cell bodies form brown pigment stones. The 
nucleus of the stone may contain an adult Clonorchis worm, 
an ovum, or an ascarid. These stones are formed throughout 
the biliary tree and cause partial obstruction that contributes to 
the repeated bouts of cholangitis. Biliary strictures form as a 
result of recurrent cholangitis and lead to further stone forma-
tion, infection, hepatic abscesses, and liver failure (secondary 
biliary cirrhosis).50
The patient usually presents with pain in the right upper 
quadrant and epigastrium, fever, and jaundice. Recurrence 
of symptoms is one of the most characteristic features of the 
disease. The episodes may vary in severity but, without inter-
vention, will gradually lead to malnutrition and hepatic insuf-
ficiency. An ultrasound will detect stones in the biliary tree, 
pneumobilia from infection due to gas-forming organisms, liver 
abscesses, and, occasionally, strictures. The gallbladder may be 
thickened but is inflamed in about 20% of patients and rarely 
contains stones. MRCP and PTC are the mainstays of biliary 
imaging for cholangiohepatitis. They can detect obstructions, 
define strictures and stones, and allow emergent decompression 
of the biliary tree in the septic patient. Hepatic abscesses may 
be drained percutaneously. The long-term goal of therapy is to 
extract stones and debris and relieve strictures. It may take sev-
eral procedures and require a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy 
to establish biliary-enteric continuity. Occasionally, resection of 
involved areas of the liver may offer the best form of treatment. 
Recurrences are common and the prognosis is poor once hepatic 
insufficiency has developed.51
OPERATIVE INTERVENTIONS FOR  
GALLSTONE DISEASE
Cholecystostomy
A cholecystostomy decompresses and drains the distended, 
inflamed, hydropic, or purulent gallbladder. It is applicable if 
the patient is not fit to tolerate an abdominal operation.52 
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage with a pigtail cath-
eter is the procedure of choice. The catheter is inserted over a 
guidewire that has been passed through the abdominal wall, the 
liver, and into the gallbladder (Fig. 32-17). By passing the cath-
eter through the liver, the risk of bile leak around the catheter 
is minimized.53 The catheter can be removed when the inflam-
mation has resolved and the patient’s condition improved. The 
gallbladder can be removed later, if indicated, usually by lapa-
roscopy. Surgical cholecystostomy with a large catheter placed 
under local anesthesia is rarely required today.
Cholecystectomy
Cholecystectomy is the most common major abdominal procedure 
performed in Western countries. Carl Langenbuch performed the 
Figure 32-17.  Percutaneous cholecystostomy. A pigtail catheter 
has been placed through the abdominal wall, the right lobe of the 
liver, and into the gallbladder.
first successful cholecystectomy in 1882, and for >100 years, it 
was the standard treatment for symptomatic gallbladder stones. 
Open cholecystectomy was a safe and effective treatment for both 
acute and chronic cholecystitis. In 1987, laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy was introduced by Philippe Mouret in France and quickly 
revolutionized the treatment of gallstones. It not only supplanted 
open cholecystectomy, but also more or less ended attempts for 
noninvasive management of gallstones, such as extracorporeal 
shock wave and bile salt therapy. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
offers a cure for gallstones with a minimally invasive procedure, 
minor pain and scarring, and early return to full activity. Today, 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for symp-
tomatic gallstones.
Absolute contraindications for the procedure are uncon-
trolled coagulopathy and end-stage liver disease. In the latter 
instance, liver transplantation, with cholecystectomy, may be 
used for treatment of severe recurrent gallstone disease. Rarely, 
patients with severe obstructive pulmonary disease or conges-
tive heart failure (e.g., cardiac ejection fraction <20%) may not 
tolerate pneumoperitoneum with carbon dioxide and require 
open cholecystectomy. Conditions formerly believed to be rela-
tive contraindications such as acute cholecystitis, gangrene and 
empyema of the gallbladder, biliary-enteric fistulae, obesity, 
pregnancy, ventriculoperitoneal shunt, cirrhosis, and previous 
upper abdominal procedures are now considered risk factors 
for a potentially difficult laparoscopic cholecystectomy. When 
important anatomic structures cannot be clearly identified or 
when no progress is made over a set period of time, a conver-
sion to an open procedure is usually indicated. In the elective 
setting, conversion to an open procedure is needed in about 5% 
of patients.54 Emergent procedures may require more skill on 
the part of the surgeon and be needed in patients with compli-
cated gallstone disease; the incidence of conversion is 10% to 
30%. Conversion to an open procedure is not a failure, and the 
possibility should be discussed with the patient preoperatively.
Serious complications are rare. The mortality rate for lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy is about 0.1%. Wound infection and 
cardiopulmonary complication rates are considerably lower fol-
lowing laparoscopic cholecystectomy than are those for an open 
procedure. However, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is associ-
ated with a higher injury rate to the bile ducts (see later section, 
Injury to the Biliary Tract).55
1325
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
Patients undergoing cholecystectomy should have a 
complete blood count and liver function tests preoperatively. 
Prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis with either low 
molecular weight heparin or compression stockings is indicated. 
The patient should be instructed to empty their bladder before 
coming to the operating room. Urinary catheters are rarely 
needed. An orogastric tube is placed if the stomach is distended 
with gas and is removed at the end of the operation.
Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy.  The patient is placed supine 
on the operating table with the surgeon standing at the patient’s 
left side. Some surgeons prefer to stand between the patient’s 
legs while doing laparoscopic procedures in the upper abdomen. 
The pneumoperitoneum is created with carbon dioxide gas, 
either with an open technique or by closed needle technique. 
Initially, a small incision is made in the upper edge of the umbi-
licus. With the closed technique, a special hollow insufflation 
needle (Veress needle) that is spring-loaded with a retractable 
cutting outer sheath is inserted into the peritoneal cavity and 
used for insufflation. Once an adequate pneumoperitoneum is 
established, a 10-mm trocar is inserted through the supraumbili-
cal incision. With the open technique, the supraumbilical inci-
sion is carried through the fascia and into the peritoneal cavity. 
A special blunt cannula (Hasson cannula) is inserted into the 
peritoneal cavity and anchored to the fascia. The laparoscope 
with the attached video camera is passed through the umbili-
cal port and the abdomen inspected. Three additional ports are 
placed under direct vision (Fig. 32-18). A 10-mm port is placed 
in the epigastrium, a 5-mm port in the middle of the clavicular 
line, and a 5-mm port in the right flank, in line with the gall-
bladder fundus. Occasionally, a fifth port is required for better 
visualization in patients recovering from pancreatitis or those 
with semi-acute cholecystitis, as well as in very obese patients.
Through the lateral-most port, a grasper is used to grasp 
the gallbladder fundus. It is retracted over the liver edge upward 
and toward the patient’s right shoulder to expose the proximal 
gallbladder and the hilar area. Exposure of the hilar area may 
be facilitated by placing the patient in reverse Trendelenburg 
position with slight tilting of the table to bring the right side 
up. Through the midclavicular port a second grasper is used 
to grasp the gallbladder infundibulum and retract it laterally to 
expose the triangle of Calot. Before this, it may be necessary 
to take down any adhesions between the omentum, duodenum, 
or colon, and the gallbladder. Most of the dissection is carried 
out through the epigastric port using a dissector, hook cautery, 
or scissors.
The dissection starts at the junction of the gallbladder 
and the cystic duct. A helpful anatomic landmark is the cys-
tic artery lymph node. The peritoneum, fat, and loose areolar 
tissue around the gallbladder and the cystic duct–gallbladder 
junction is dissected off toward the bile duct. This is contin-
ued until the gallbladder neck and the proximal cystic duct are 
clearly identified. The next step is the identification of the cystic 
artery, which usually runs parallel to and somewhat behind the 
cystic duct. A hemoclip is placed on the proximal cystic duct. 
If an intraoperative cholangiogram is to be performed, a small 
incision is made on the anterior surface of the cystic duct, just 
proximal to the clip, and a cholangiogram catheter is passed 
into the cystic duct. Once the cholangiogram is completed, the 
catheter is removed and two clips are placed proximal to the 
incision, and the cystic duct is divided. A wide cystic duct may 
be too big for clips, requiring the placement of a pre-tied loop 
ligature to close. The cystic artery is then clipped and divided.
Finally, the gallbladder is dissected out of the gallblad-
der fossa, using either a hook or scissors with electrocautery. 
Before the gallbladder is removed from the liver edge, the 
operative field is carefully searched for bleeding points, and 
the placement of the clips on the cystic duct and cystic artery 
is inspected. The gallbladder is removed through the umbili-
cal incision. The fascial defect and skin incision may need to 
be enlarged if the stones are large. If the gallbladder is acutely 
inflamed or gangrenous, or if the gallbladder is perforated, it is 
placed in a retrieval bag before it is removed from the abdomen. 
Any bile or blood that has accumulated during the procedure 
is sucked away, and if stones were spilled, they are retrieved, 
placed inside a retrieval bag, and removed. If the gallbladder 
was severely inflamed or gangrenous or if any bile or blood is 
expected to accumulate, a closed-suction drain can be placed 
through one of the 5-mm ports and left underneath the right liver 
lobe close to the gallbladder fossa.
Open Cholecystectomy.  The same surgical principles apply 
for laparoscopic and open cholecystectomies. Open cholecystec-
tomy has become an uncommon procedure, usually performed 
either as a conversion from laparoscopic cholecystectomy or 
as a second procedure in patients who require laparotomy for 
another reason. After the cystic artery and cystic duct have 
been identified, the gallbladder is dissected free from the liver 
bed, starting at the fundus. The dissection is carried proximally 
toward the cystic artery and the cystic duct, which are then 
ligated and divided.
Intraoperative Cholangiogram or Ultrasound.  The bile 
ducts are visualized under fluoroscopy by injecting contrast 
through a catheter placed in the cystic duct (Fig. 32-19A). Their 
size can then be evaluated, the presence or absence of com-
mon bile duct stones assessed, and filling defects confirmed, as 
the dye passes into the duodenum. Routine intraoperative 
cholangiography will detect stones in approximately 7% of 
patients, as well as outlining the anatomy and detecting injury56,57 
(Fig. 32-19B). A selective intraoperative cholangiogram can be 
performed when the patient has a history of abnormal liver func-
tion tests, pancreatitis, jaundice, a large duct and small stones, 
a dilated duct on preoperative ultrasonography, and if preop-
erative endoscopic cholangiography for the above reasons was 
unsuccessful. Laparoscopic ultrasonography is as accurate as 
intraoperative cholangiography in detecting common bile duct 
stones, and it is less invasive; however, it requires more skill to 
perform and interpret.58,59
Common Bile Duct Exploration
Common bile duct stones that are detected intraoperatively 
on intraoperative cholangiography or ultrasonography may be 
managed with laparoscopic choledochal exploration as a part 
of the laparoscopic cholecystectomy procedure. Patients with 
common bile duct stones detected preoperatively, but in whom 
endoscopic clearance was either not available or unsuccess-
ful, should also have their ductal stones managed during the 
cholecystectomy.
If the stones in the duct are small, they may sometimes be 
flushed into the duodenum with saline irrigation via the cholan-
giography catheter after the sphincter of Oddi has been relaxed 
with glucagon. If irrigation is unsuccessful, a balloon catheter 
may be passed via the cystic duct and down the common bile 
duct, where it is inflated and withdrawn to retrieve the stones. 
The next attempt is usually made with a wire basket passed 
1326
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
under fluoroscopic guidance to catch the stones (Fig. 32-20). If 
needed, a flexible choledochoscope is the next step. The cystic 
duct may have to be dilated to allow its passage. Once in the 
common bile duct, the stones may be caught into a wire bas-
ket under direct vision or pushed into the duodenum. When the 
duct has been cleared, the cystic duct is ligated and cut and the 
cholecystectomy completed. Occasionally, a choledochotomy, 
an incision into the common bile duct itself, is necessary. The 
flexible choledochoscope is then passed into the duct for visual-
ization and clearance of stones. The choledochotomy is sutured 
Figure 32-18.  Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A. The trocar placement. B. The fundus has been grasped and retracted cephalad to expose 
the proximal gallbladder and the hepatoduodenal ligament. Another grasper retracts the gallbladder infundibulum posterolaterally to better 
expose the triangle of Calot (hepatocystic triangle bound by the common hepatic duct, cystic duct, and liver margin). C. The triangle of Calot 
has been opened and the neck of the gallbladder and part of the cystic duct dissected free. A clip is being placed on the cystic duct–gallbladder 
junction. D. A small opening has been made into the cystic duct, and a cholangiogram catheter is to be inserted. E. The cystic duct has been 
divided, and the cystic artery is being divided. F. An intraoperative picture showing a grasper pulling the infundibulum of the gallbladder 
laterally, exposing the triangle of Calot that has been dissected. The cystic artery can be seen crossing the dissected area upward and to the left.
1327
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
with a T tube left in the common bile duct with one end taken 
out through the abdominal wall for decompression of the bile 
ducts. By managing common bile duct stones at the time of the 
cholecystectomy, the patients can have all of their gallstone 
disease treated with one invasive procedure. It does, however, 
depend on the available surgical expertise.60
Common Bile Duct Drainage Procedures
Rarely, when the stones cannot be cleared and/or when the duct 
is very dilated (>1.5 cm in diameter), a choledochal drainage 
procedure is performed (Fig. 32-21). Choledochoduodenostomy 
is performed by mobilizing the second part of the duodenum 
(a Kocher maneuver) and anastomosing it side to side with the 
common bile duct.
A choledochojejunostomy is done by bringing up a 45-cm 
Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum and anastomosing it end to side to 
the common bile duct.
Choledochojejunostomy or, more often, a hepaticojeju-
nostomy, also can be used to repair common bile duct stric-
tures or as a palliative procedure for malignant obstruction in 
the periampullary region. If the common bile duct has been 
transected or injured, it can be managed by an end-to-end 
choledochojejunostomy.
Transduodenal Sphincterotomy
In the majority of cases, endoscopic sphincterotomy has 
replaced open transduodenal sphincterotomy. If an open pro-
cedure for common bile duct stones is being done in which the 
stones are impacted, recurrent, or multiple, the transduodenal 
approach may be feasible. The duodenum is incised trans-
versely. The sphincter then is incised at the 11 o’clock position 
to avoid injury to the pancreatic duct. The impacted stones are 
removed, as are large stones from the duct. There is no need to 
Figure 32-19.  A. An intraoperative cholangiogram. The bile ducts are of normal size, with no intraluminal filling defects. The left and the 
right hepatic ducts are visualized, the distal common bile duct tapers down, and the contrast empties into the duodenum. Cholangiography 
grasper that holds the catheter and the cystic duct stump partly projects over the common hepatic duct. B. An intraoperative cholangiogram 
showing common bile duct stone (arrow). A small amount of contrast has passed into the duodenum.
A
B
fully clear the duct of stones, as they can pass spontaneously 
through the cut sphincter.
OTHER BENIGN DISEASES AND LESIONS
Acalculous Cholecystitis
Acute inflammation of the gallbladder can occur without gall-
stones. Acalculous cholecystitis typically develops in critically 
ill patients in the intensive care unit. Patients on parenteral 
nutrition with extensive burns, sepsis, major operations, mul-
tiple trauma, or prolonged illness with multiple organ system 
failure are at risk for developing acalculous cholecystitis. The 
cause is unknown, but gallbladder distention with bile stasis and 
ischemia has been implicated as causative factors. Pathologic 
examination of the gallbladder wall reveals edema of the serosa 
and muscular layers, with patchy thrombosis of arterioles and 
venules.61,62
The symptoms and signs depend on the condition of the 
patient, but in the alert patient, they are similar to acute calcu-
lous cholecystitis, with right upper quadrant pain and tender-
ness, fever, and leukocytosis. In the sedated or unconscious 
patient, the clinical features are often masked, but fever and 
elevated WBC count, as well as elevation of alkaline phospha-
tase and bilirubin, are indications for further investigation.
Ultrasonography is usually the diagnostic test of choice, 
as it can be done bedside in the intensive care unit. It can dem-
onstrate the distended gallbladder with thickened wall, biliary 
sludge, pericholecystic fluid, and the presence or absence of 
abscess formation. Abdominal CT scan can aid in the diagnosis 
of acalculous cholecystitis and additionally allows imaging of 
the abdominal cavity and chest to rule out other sources of infec-
tion. A HIDA scan can be useful and will show nonvisualization of 
1328
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 32-20.  Laparoscopic bile duct exploration. I. Transcystic basket retrieval using fluoroscopy. A. The basket has been advanced past 
the stone and opened. B. The stone has been entrapped in the basket, and together, they are removed from the cystic duct. II. Transcystic 
choledochoscopy and stone removal. C. The basket has been passed through the working channel of the scope, and the stone is entrapped 
under direct vision. D. Entrapped stone. E. A view from the choledochoscope. III. Choledochotomy and stone removal. F. A small incision 
is made in the common bile duct. G. The common bile duct is cleared of stones. H. A T tube left in the common bile duct with one end taken 
out through the abdominal wall for decompression of the bile ducts.
A
B
C
D
F
G
H
E
1329
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
Figure 32-21.  Biliary enteric anastomoses. There are three types. I. Choledochoduodenostomy. A. The distal common bile duct is opened 
longitudinally, as is the duodenum. B. Interrupted sutures are placed between the common bile duct and the duodenum. C. Completed cho-
ledochoduodenostomy. II. Choledochojejunostomy. D. The common bile duct and small bowel are divided. E. A Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum 
is anastomosed to the choledochus. III. Hepaticojejunostomy. F. The entire extrahepatic biliary tree has been resected and the reconstruction 
done with a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum. G. Percutaneous transhepatic stents are placed across hepaticojejunostomy.
1330
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the gallbladder, but it is a less sensitive test with high false-positive 
rates in patients who are fasting, on total parenteral nutrition, 
or have liver disease.63 Acalculous cholecystitis requires urgent 
intervention. Percutaneous ultrasound- or CT-guided cholecys-
tostomy is the treatment of choice for these patients, as they 
are usually unfit for surgery (see Fig. 32-17). If the diagnosis 
is uncertain, percutaneous cholecystostomy is both diagnostic 
and therapeutic. About 90% of patients will improve with the 
percutaneous cholecystostomy. However, if they do not improve, 
other steps, such as open cholecystostomy or cholecystectomy, 
may be required. If needed, cholecystectomy is performed after 
the patient has recovered from the underlying disease.
Biliary Cysts
Choledochal cysts are congenital cystic dilatations of the extra-
hepatic and/or intrahepatic biliary tree. They are rare—the 
incidence is between 1:100,000 and 1:150,000 in populations 
of Western countries—but are more commonly seen in popu-
lations of Eastern countries. Choledochal cysts affect females 
three to eight times more often than males. Although frequently 
diagnosed in infancy or childhood, as many as one half of the 
patients have reached adulthood when diagnosed. The cause is 
unknown. Weakness of the bile duct wall and increased pressure 
secondary to partial biliary obstruction are required for biliary 
Type III
Type II
Type I
Type V
Type IVb
Type IVa
Figure 32-22.  Classification of choledochal cysts. Type I, fusiform or cystic dilations of the extrahepatic biliary tree, is the most common 
type, making up >50% of the choledochal cysts. Type II, saccular diverticulum of an extrahepatic bile duct. Rare, <5% of choledochal cysts. 
Type III, bile duct dilatation within the duodenal wall (choledochoceles), makes up about 5% of choledochal cysts. Types IVa and IVb, mul-
tiple cysts, make up 5% to 10% of choledochal cysts. Type IVa affects both extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts, whereas type IVb cysts 
affect the extrahepatic bile ducts only. Type V, intrahepatic biliary cysts, is very rare and makes up 1% of choledochal cysts.
cyst formation. More than 90% of patients have an anomalous 
pancreaticobiliary duct junction, with the pancreatic duct join-
ing the common bile duct >1 cm proximal to the ampulla. This 
results in a long common channel that may allow free reflux of 
pancreatic secretions into the biliary tract, leading to inflam-
matory changes, increased biliary pressure, and cyst formation. 
Choledochal cysts are classified into five types (Fig. 32-22). 
The cysts are lined with cuboidal epithelium and can vary in size 
from 2 cm in diameter to giant cysts.
Adults commonly present with jaundice or cholangitis. 
Less than one half of patients present with the classic clinical 
triad of abdominal pain, jaundice, and a mass. Ultrasonography 
or CT scanning will confirm the diagnosis, but endoscopic chol-
angiography, transhepatic cholangiography, or MRC is required 
to assess the biliary anatomy and to plan the appropriate surgi-
cal treatment. For types I, II, and IV, excision of the extrahe-
patic biliary tree, including cholecystectomy, with a Roux-en-Y 
hepaticojejunostomy is ideal. In type IV, additional segmental 
resection of the liver may be appropriate, particularly if intrahe-
patic stones, strictures, or abscesses are present or if the dilata-
tions are confined to one lobe. The risk of cholangiocarcinoma 
developing in choledochal cysts is as high as 15% in adults and 
supports complete excision when they are diagnosed. For type 
III, sphincterotomy is recommended.64
1331
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
Sclerosing Cholangitis
Sclerosing cholangitis is an uncommon disease characterized 
by inflammatory strictures involving the intrahepatic and extra-
hepatic biliary tree. It is a progressive disease that eventually 
results in secondary biliary cirrhosis. Sometimes, biliary stric-
tures are clearly secondary to bile duct stones, acute cholan-
gitis, previous biliary surgery, or toxic agents, and are termed 
secondary sclerosing cholangitis. However, primary scleros-
ing cholangitis is a disease entity of its own, with no known 
attributing cause. It is associated with ulcerative colitis in about 
two thirds of patients. Other diseases associated with scleros-
ing cholangitis include Riedel’s thyroiditis and retroperitoneal 
fibrosis. Autoimmune reaction, chronic low-grade bacterial or 
viral infection, toxic reaction, and genetic factors have all been 
suggested to play a role in its pathogenesis. The human leuko-
cyte antigen haplotypes HLA-B8, -DR3, -DQ2, and -DRw52A, 
commonly found in patients with autoimmune diseases, also are 
more frequently seen in patients with sclerosing cholangitis than 
in controls. Patients with sclerosing cholangitis are at risk for 
developing cholangiocarcinoma. Eventually, 10% to 20% of the 
patients will develop cancer. Cholangiocarcinoma can present at 
any time during the disease process and does not correlate with 
the extent of sclerosing cholangitis or the development of liver 
failure, but frequently follows an aggressive course.
The mean age of presentation is 30 to 45 years, and men 
are affected twice as commonly as women. The usual presen-
tation is intermittent jaundice, fatigue, weight loss, pruritus, 
and abdominal pain. Symptoms of acute cholangitis are rare, 
without preceding biliary tract intervention or surgery. More 
than one half of patients are symptomatic when diagnosed. In 
several patients with ulcerative colitis, abnormal liver func-
tion tests found on routine testing lead to the diagnosis. The 
clinical course in sclerosing cholangitis is highly variable, but 
cyclic remissions and exacerbations are typical. However, some 
patients remain asymptomatic for years, while others progress 
rapidly with the obliterative inflammatory changes leading to 
secondary biliary cirrhosis and liver failure. In patients with 
associated ulcerative colitis, the course of each disease seems 
independent of the other. Colectomy for the colitis makes no 
difference to the course of primary sclerosing cholangitis. The 
median survival for patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis 
from the time of diagnosis ranges from 10 to 12 years, and most 
die from hepatic failure.65
The clinical presentation and elevation of alkaline phos-
phatase and bilirubin may suggest the diagnosis, but ERC, 
revealing multiple dilatations and strictures (beading) of both 
the intra- and extrahepatic biliary tree, confirms it. The hepatic 
duct bifurcation is often the most severely affected segment. A 
liver biopsy may not be diagnostic, but is important to deter-
mine the degree of hepatic fibrosis and the presence of cirrhosis. 
Sclerosing cholangitis is followed by ERC and liver biopsies to 
provide appropriate management.
There is no known effective medical therapy for primary 
sclerosing cholangitis and no known curative treatment. Cor-
ticosteroids, immunosuppressants, ursodeoxycholic acid, and 
antibiotics have been disappointing. Biliary strictures can be 
dilated and stented either endoscopically or percutaneously. 
These measures have given short-term improvements in symp-
toms and serum bilirubin levels and long-term improvements 
in only less than one half of the patients. Surgical management 
with resection of the extrahepatic biliary tree and hepaticoje-
junostomy has produced reasonable results in patients with 
extrahepatic and bifurcation strictures, but without cirrhosis or 
significant hepatic fibrosis.66 In patients with sclerosing cholan-
gitis and advanced liver disease, liver transplantation is the only 
option. It offers excellent results, with overall 5-year survival 
as high as 85%. Primary sclerosing cholangitis recurs in 10% to 
20% of patients and may require retransplantation.67,68
Stenosis of the Sphincter of Oddi
A benign stenosis of the outlet of the common bile duct is 
usually associated with inflammation, fibrosis, or muscular 
hypertrophy. The pathogenesis is unclear, but trauma from the 
passage of stones, sphincter motility disorders, and congenital 
anomalies have been suggested. Episodic pain of the biliary 
type with abnormal liver function tests is a common presenta-
tion. However, recurrent jaundice or pancreatitis also may play 
a role. A dilated common bile duct that is difficult to cannu-
late with delayed emptying of the contrast are useful diagnostic 
features. Ampullary manometry and special provocation tests 
are available in specialized units. If the diagnosis is well estab-
lished, endoscopic or operative sphincterotomy will yield good 
results.69
Bile Duct Strictures
Benign bile duct strictures can have numerous causes. However, 
the vast majority were caused by operative injury, most com-
monly by laparoscopic cholecystectomy (see later section, Injury 
to the Biliary Tract). Other causes include fibrosis due to chronic 
pancreatitis, common bile duct stones, acute cholangitis, biliary 
obstruction due to cholecystolithiasis (Mirizzi’s syndrome), scle-
rosing cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, and strictures of a biliary-
enteric anastomosis. Bile duct strictures that go unrecognized 
or are improperly managed may lead to recurrent cholangitis, 
secondary biliary cirrhosis, and portal hypertension.70
Patients with bile duct strictures most commonly present 
with episodes of cholangitis. Less commonly, they may pres-
ent with jaundice without evidence of infection. Liver function 
tests usually show evidence of cholestasis. An ultrasound or 
a CT scan will show dilated bile ducts proximal to the stric-
ture, as well as provide some information about the level of 
the stenosis. MRC will also provide good anatomic informa-
tion about the location and the degree of dilatation. In patients 
with intrahepatic ductal dilatation, a percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiogram will outline the proximal biliary tree, define 
the stricture and its location, and allow decompression of the 
biliary tree with transhepatic catheters or stents (Fig. 32-23). 
An endoscopic cholangiogram will outline the distal bile duct. 
Treatment depends on the location and the cause of the stricture. 
Percutaneous or endoscopic dilatation and/or stent placement 
give good results in more than one half of patients. Surgery with 
Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy or hepaticojejunostomy is 
the standard of care with good or excellent results in 80% to 
90% of patients.71 Choledochoduodenostomy may be a choice 
for strictures in the distal-most part of the common bile duct.
INJURY TO THE BILIARY TRACT
Gallbladder
Injuries to the gallbladder are uncommon. Penetrating injuries 
are usually caused by gunshot wounds or stab wounds, and 
rarely by a needle biopsy procedure of the liver. Nonpenetrat-
ing trauma is extremely rare. These types of injury to the gall-
bladder include contusion, avulsion, laceration, rupture, and 
1332
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
traumatic cholecystitis. The treatment of choice is cholecys-
tectomy, and the prognosis is directly related to the type and 
incidence of associated injury.
Extrahepatic Bile Ducts
Penetrating trauma to the extrahepatic bile ducts is rare and 
is usually associated with trauma to other viscera. The great 
majority of injuries of the extrahepatic biliary duct system are 
iatrogenic, occurring in the course of laparoscopic or open cho-
lecystectomies.72 Less commonly, biliary injury is associated 
with common bile duct exploration, division or mobilization of 
the duodenum during gastrectomy, and dissection of the hepatic 
hilum during liver resections. The exact incidence of bile duct 
injury during cholecystectomy is unknown, but data suggest that 
during open cholecystectomy, the incidence is relatively low 
(about 0.1% to 0.2%). However, the incidence during laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy, as derived from state and national data-
bases, estimates the rate of major injury to range between 0.1% 
to 0.55%, and the incidence of minor injuries and bile leaks to 
be about 0.3%, a total of 0.85%. Limited view, difficult orienta-
tion and assessment of depth on a two-dimensional image, and 
the lack of tactile sensation and unusual manual skills that are 
needed have led to the rise in bile duct injury during laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy.73
A number of different factors are associated with bile duct 
injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. These include 
acute or chronic inflammation, obesity, anatomic variations, and 
bleeding. Surgical technique with inadequate exposure and fail-
ure to identify structures before ligating or dividing them are the 
Figure 32-23.  An endoscopic retrograde cholangiography show-
ing stricture of the common hepatic duct (arrow). The patient had 
recently had a laparoscopic cholecystectomy; clips from the opera-
tion can be seen projected over the common bile duct.
most common cause of significant biliary injury. The bile ducts 
may be narrow and can be mistaken for the cystic duct. The cys-
tic duct may run along side the common bile duct before join-
ing it, leading the surgeon to the wrong place. Additionally, the 
cystic duct may enter the right hepatic duct, and the right hepatic 
duct may run aberrantly, coursing through the triangle of Calot 
and entering the common hepatic duct. A number of intra-
operative technical factors have been implicated in biliary 
injuries. Excessive cephalad retraction of the gallbladder may 
align the cystic duct with the common bile duct, and the latter is 
then mistaken for the cystic duct and clipped and divided. The 
use of an angled laparoscope instead of an end-viewing one will 
help visualize the anatomic structures, in particular those around 
the triangle of Calot. An angled scope also will aid in the proper 
placement of clips. Careless use of electrocautery may lead to 
thermal injury. Dissection deep into the liver parenchyma may 
cause injury to intrahepatic ducts, and poor clip placement close 
to the hilar area or to structures not well visualized can result in 
a clip across a bile duct.74,75
The routine use of intraoperative fluoroscopic cholangiog-
raphy to prevent bile duct injury is controversial.76 Routine use 
may limit the extent of injury but does not seem to prevent it 
entirely. Nonetheless, the frequency of bile duct injuries is cut by 
50% when an intraoperative cholangiogram is performed. Critical 
to the successful use of cholangiography is accurate interpretation 
of the imaging. It is important to check that the whole biliary sys-
tem fills with contrast, including both major ducts on the right and 
the left hepatic duct, and that there is no extravasation of contrast.
Diagnosis.  Only about 25% of major bile duct injuries (com-
mon bile duct or hepatic duct) are recognized at the time of oper-
ation. Most commonly, intraoperative bile leakage, recognition 
of the correct anatomy, and an abnormal cholangiogram lead to 
the diagnosis of a bile duct injury. More than half of patients 
with biliary injury will present within the first postoperative 
month. The remainder will present months or years later, with 
recurrent cholangitis or cirrhosis from a remote bile duct injury. 
In the early postoperative period, patients present either with 
progressive elevation of liver function tests due to an occluded 
or a stenosed bile duct, or with a bile leak from an injured duct. 
Bile leak, most commonly from the cystic duct stump, a tran-
sected aberrant right hepatic duct, or a lateral injury to the main 
bile duct, usually presents with pain, fever, and a mild elevation 
of liver function tests. A CT scan or an ultrasound will show 
either a collection (biloma) in the gallbladder area or free fluid 
(bile) in the peritoneum (Fig. 32-24). Bilious drainage through 
operatively placed drains or through the wounds is abnormal. 
The site of the bile leak can be confirmed noninvasively with 
a HIDA scan. In patients with a surgical drain or a percutane-
ously placed catheter, injection of water-soluble contrast media 
through the drainage tract (sinogram) can often define the site 
of leakage and the anatomy of the biliary tree.77
CT scan and ultrasound also are important in the initial 
evaluation of the jaundiced patient, as they can demonstrate the 
dilated part of the biliary tree proximal to the stenosis or obstruc-
tion, and may identify the level of the extrahepatic bile duct 
obstruction. In the jaundiced patient with dilated intrahepatic 
ducts, a percutaneous cholangiogram will outline the anatomy 
and the proximal extent of the injury and allow decompression 
of the biliary tree with catheter or stent placements. An endo-
scopic cholangiogram demonstrates the anatomy distal to the 
injury and may allow the placement of stents across a stricture to 
4
1333
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
relieve an obstruction (see Fig. 32-23). MRI cholangiography, if 
available, provides an excellent, noninvasive delineation of the 
biliary anatomy both proximal and distal to the injury.
Management.  The management of bile duct injuries depends 
on the type, extent, and level of injury, and the time of its diag-
nosis. Initial proper treatment of bile duct injury diagnosed dur-
ing the cholecystectomy can avoid the development of a bile 
duct stricture. If a major injury is discovered and an experienced 
biliary surgeon is not available, an external drain and, if neces-
sary, transhepatic biliary catheters are placed, and the patient is 
transferred to a referral center.73
Transected bile ducts <3 mm or those draining a single 
hepatic segment can safely be ligated. If the injured duct is 
≥4 mm, it is likely to drain multiple segments or an entire lobe, 
and thus needs to be reimplanted. Lateral injury to the common 
bile duct or the common hepatic duct, recognized at the time of 
surgery, is best managed with a T-tube placement. If the injury 
is a small incision in the duct, the T tube may be placed through 
it as if it were a formal choledochotomy. In more extensive lat-
eral injuries, the T tube should be placed through a separate 
choledochotomy and the injury closed over the T-tube end to 
minimize the risk of subsequent stricture formation.
Major bile duct injuries such as transection of the common 
hepatic or common bile duct are best managed at the time of 
injury. In many of these major injuries, the bile duct has not only 
been transected, but a variable length of the duct removed. This 
injury usually requires a biliary enteric anastomosis with a jeju-
nal loop. Either an end-to-side Roux-en-Y choledochojejunos-
tomy or, more commonly, a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy 
should be performed. Transhepatic biliary catheters are placed 
through the anastomosis to stent it and to provide access to the 
biliary tract for drainage and imaging. Although rare, when the 
injury is to the distal common bile duct, a choledochoduodenos-
tomy can be performed. If there is no or minimal loss of ductal 
length, a duct-to-duct repair may be done over a T tube that is 
placed through a separate incision. It is critical to perform a 
tension-free anastomosis to minimize the high risk of postopera-
tive stricture formation.66
B
A
Figure 32-24.  A. Computed tomographic scan of a patient with bile leak after cholecystectomy. The short arrows indicate the intraperitoneal 
collections. Both air and bile are seen in the gallbladder bed (long arrow) as well as a surgical clip. B. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiog-
raphy from the same patient showing a leak from the cystic duct stump (arrow). Note the filling of the pancreatic duct.
Cystic duct leaks can usually be managed with percutane-
ous drainage of intra-abdominal fluid collections followed by an 
endoscopic biliary stenting (see Fig. 32-24).
Major injuries diagnosed postoperatively require transhe-
patic biliary catheter placement for biliary decompression as 
well as percutaneous drainage of intra-abdominal bile collec-
tions, if any. When the acute inflammation has resolved 6 to 8 
weeks later, operative repair is performed.
Patients with bile duct stricture from an injury or as a 
sequela of previous repair usually present with either progres-
sive elevation of liver function tests or cholangitis. The initial 
management usually includes transhepatic biliary drainage cath-
eter placement for decompression as well as for defining the 
anatomy and the location and the extent of the damage. These 
catheters will also serve as useful technical aids during subse-
quent biliary enteric anastomosis. An anastomosis is performed 
between the duct proximal to the injury and a Roux loop 
of jejunum. Balloon dilatation of a stricture usually requires 
multiple attempts and rarely provides adequate long-term relief. 
Self-expanding metal or plastic stents, placed either percutane-
ously or endoscopically across the stricture, can provide tempo-
rary drainage and, in the high-risk patient, permanent drainage 
of the biliary tree.
Outcome.  Good results can be expected in 70% to 90% of 
patients with bile duct injuries.78 The best results are obtained 
when the injury is recognized during the cholecystectomy and 
repaired by an experienced biliary tract surgeon. The operative 
mortality rate varies from 0% to almost 30% in various series, 
but commonly is about 5% to 8%. Common complications that 
are specific for bile duct repairs include cholangitis, external bil-
iary fistula, bile leak, subhepatic and subphrenic abscesses, and 
hemobilia. Restenosis of a biliary enteric anastomosis occurs in 
about 10% of patients, and may manifest up to 20 years after 
the initial procedure. Approximately two thirds of recurrent 
strictures become symptomatic within 2 years after repair. The 
more proximal strictures are associated with a lower success 
rate than are distal ones. The worst results are in patients with 
many operative revisions and in those who have evidence of 
1334
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
liver failure and portal hypertension. However, previous repair 
does not preclude successful outcome of repeated attempts, 
particularly in patients with good liver function. Patients with 
deteriorating liver function are candidates for liver transplants.
TUMORS
Carcinoma of the Gallbladder
Cancer of the gallbladder is a rare malignancy that occurs 
predominantly in the elderly. It is an aggressive tumor, with 
poor prognosis except when incidentally diagnosed at an early 
stage after cholecystectomy for cholelithiasis. The overall 
reported 5-year survival rate is about 5%.79
Incidence.  Gallbladder cancer is the fifth most common GI 
malignancy in Western countries. However, it accounts for only 
2% to 4% of all malignant GI tumors, with about 5000 new cases 
diagnosed annually in the United States. It is two to three times 
more common in females than males, and the peak incidence is 
in the seventh decade of life. Its occurrence in random autopsy 
series is about 0.4%, but approximately 1% of patients undergo-
ing cholecystectomy for gallstone disease are found incidentally 
to have gallbladder cancer. The incidence of gallbladder cancer 
is particularly high in native populations of the United States, 
Mexico, and Chile. The annual incidence in Native American 
females with gallstones approaches 75 per 100,000, compared 
with the overall incidence of gallbladder cancer of 2.5 cases per 
100,000 residents in the United States.80
Etiology.  Cholelithiasis is the most important risk factor for 
gallbladder carcinoma, and up to 95% of patients with carci-
noma of the gallbladder have gallstones.81 However, the 20-year 
risk of developing cancer for patients with gallstones is <0.5% 
for the overall population and 1.5% for high-risk groups. The 
pathogenesis has not been defined but is probably related to 
chronic inflammation. Larger stones (>3 cm) are associated 
with a 10-fold increased risk of cancer.82 The risk of developing 
cancer of the gallbladder is higher in patients with symptomatic 
than asymptomatic gallstones.
Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder are associated with 
increased risk of cancer, particularly in polyps >10 mm.83 The 
calcified “porcelain” gallbladder is associated with >20% inci-
dence of gallbladder carcinoma. These gallbladders should be 
removed, even if the patients are asymptomatic. Patients with 
choledochal cysts have an increased risk of developing cancer 
anywhere in the biliary tree, but the incidence is highest in the 
gallbladder. Sclerosing cholangitis, anomalous pancreatico-
biliary duct junction, and exposure to carcinogens (azotoluene, 
nitrosamines) also are associated with cancer of the gallbladder.
Pathology.  Between 80% and 90% of the gallbladder tumors 
are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell, adenosquamous, oat 
cell, and other anaplastic lesions occur rarely. The histologic 
subtypes of gallbladder adenocarcinomas include papillary, 
nodular, and tubular. Less than 10% are of the papillary type, 
but these are associated with an overall better outcome, as they 
are most commonly diagnosed while localized to the gallblad-
der. Cancer of the gallbladder spreads through the lymphatics, 
with venous drainage, and with direct invasion into the liver 
parenchyma. Lymphatic flow from the gallbladder drains first 
to the cystic duct node (Calot’s), then the pericholedochal and 
hilar nodes, and finally the peripancreatic, duodenal, periportal, 
celiac, and superior mesenteric artery nodes. The gallbladder 
veins drain directly into the adjacent liver, usually segments 
Figure 32-25.  Computed tomography scan of a patient with gall-
bladder cancer. The image shown is at the level of the liver hilum. 
The portal vein is bifurcating into the left and right portal branch. 
The tumor has invaded segment IV of the liver (arrowheads) and 
obstructed the common hepatic duct, resulting in intrahepatic ductal 
dilatation (arrows).
IV and V, where tumor invasion is common (Fig. 32-25). The 
gallbladder wall differs histologically from the intestines in that 
it lacks a muscularis mucosa and submucosa. Lymphatics are 
present in the subserosal layer only. Therefore, cancers invading 
but not growing through the muscular layer have minimal risk 
of nodal disease. When diagnosed, about 25% of gallbladder 
cancers are localized to the gallbladder wall, 35% have regional 
nodal involvement and/or extension into adjacent liver, and 
approximately 40% have distant metastasis.84
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Signs and symp-
toms of carcinoma of the gallbladder are generally indistinguish-
able from those associated with cholecystitis and cholelithiasis. 
These include abdominal discomfort, right upper quadrant pain, 
nausea, and vomiting. Jaundice, weight loss, anorexia, ascites, 
and abdominal mass are less common presenting symptoms. 
More than one half of gallbladder cancers are not diagnosed 
before surgery. Common misdiagnoses include chronic cho-
lecystitis, acute cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, hydrops of 
the gallbladder, and pancreatic cancer. Laboratory findings are 
not diagnostic but, if abnormal, are most often consistent with 
biliary obstruction. Ultrasonography often reveals a thickened, 
irregular gallbladder wall or a mass replacing the gallbladder. 
Ultrasonography may visualize tumor invasion of the liver, 
lymphadenopathy, and a dilated biliary tree. The sensitivity of 
ultrasonography in detecting gallbladder cancer ranges from 
70% to 100%. A CT scan is an important tool for staging and 
may identify a gallbladder mass or local invasion into adjacent 
organs. In addition, a spiral CT scan can demonstrate vascular 
invasion; however, CT scan is a poor method for identifying 
nodal spread. In jaundiced patients, a percutaneous transhepatic 
or endoscopic cholangiogram may be helpful to delineate the 
extent of biliary tree involvement, and typically shows a long 
stricture of the common bile duct. With newer MRI techniques, 
5
1335
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
MRCP has evolved into a single noninvasive imaging method 
that allows complete assessment of biliary, vascular, nodal, 
hepatic, and adjacent organ involvement.85 If diagnostic studies 
suggest that the tumor is unresectable, a CT scan or ultrasound-
guided biopsy of the tumor can be obtained to provide a patho-
logic diagnosis.
Treatment.  Surgery remains the only curative option for gall-
bladder cancer as well as for cholangiocarcinoma. However, 
palliative procedures for patients with unresectable can-
cer and jaundice or duodenal obstruction remain the most 
frequently performed surgery for gallbladder cancers. Today, 
patients with obstructive jaundice can frequently be managed 
with either endoscopic or percutaneously placed biliary stents. 
There are no proven effective options for adjuvant radiation or 
chemotherapy for patients with gallbladder cancer.
The pathologic stage of gallbladder cancer determines 
the operative treatment for patients with localized gallbladder 
cancer. Patients without evidence of distant metastasis warrant 
exploration for tissue diagnosis, pathologic staging, and pos-
sible curative resection.
Tumors limited to the muscular layer of the gallbladder 
(T1) are usually identified incidentally, after cholecystectomy 
for gallstone disease. There is near universal agreement that 
simple cholecystectomy is an adequate treatment for T1 lesions 
and results in a near 100% overall 5-year survival rate. When the 
tumor invades the perimuscular connective tissue without exten-
sion beyond the serosa or into the liver (T2 tumors), an extended 
cholecystectomy should be performed.86 That includes resection 
of liver segments IVB and V, and lymphadenectomy of the cys-
tic duct and pericholedochal, portal, right celiac, and posterior 
pancreatoduodenal lymph nodes. One half of patients with T2 
tumors are found to have nodal disease on pathologic examina-
tion. Therefore, regional lymphadenectomy is an important part 
of surgery for T2 cancers.87 For tumors that grow beyond the 
serosa or invade the liver or other organs (T3 and T4 tumors), 
there is a high likelihood of intraperitoneal and distant spread. 
If no peritoneal or nodal involvement is found, complete tumor 
excision with an extended right hepatectomy (segments IV, V, 
VI, VII, and VIII) must be performed for adequate tumor clear-
ance. An aggressive approach in patients who will tolerate sur-
gery has resulted in an increased survival for T3 and T4 lesions.
Prognosis.  Most patients with gallbladder cancer have unre-
sectable disease at the time of diagnosis. The 5-year survival 
rate of all patients with gallbladder cancer is <5%, with a 
median survival of 6 months.88 Patients with T1 disease treated 
with cholecystectomy have an excellent prognosis (85%–100% 
5-year survival rate). The 5-year survival rate for T2 lesions 
treated with an extended cholecystectomy and lymphadenec-
tomy compared with simple cholecystectomy is >70% vs. 25% 
to 40%, respectively. Patients with advanced but resectable gall-
bladder cancer are reported to have 5-year survival rates of 20% 
to 50%. However, the median survival for patients with distant 
metastasis at the time of presentation is only 1 to 3 months.
Recurrence after resection of gallbladder cancer occurs 
most commonly in the liver or the celiac or retropancreatic 
nodes. The prognosis for recurrent disease is very poor. Death 
occurs most commonly secondary to biliary sepsis or liver fail-
ure. The main goal of follow-up is to provide palliative care. 
The most common problems are pruritus and cholangitis associ-
ated with obstructive jaundice, bowel obstruction secondary to 
carcinomatosis, and pain.
Bile Duct Carcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare tumor arising from the biliary epi-
thelium and may occur anywhere along the biliary tree. About 
two thirds are located at the hepatic duct bifurcation. Surgi-
cal resection offers the only chance for cure; however, many 
patients have advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. There-
fore, palliative procedures aimed to provide biliary drainage to 
prevent liver failure and cholangitis are often the only thera-
peutic possibilities. Most patients with unresectable disease die 
within 1 year of diagnosis.89
Incidence.  The autopsy incidence of bile duct carcinoma is 
about 0.3%. The overall incidence of cholangiocarcinoma in the 
United States is about 1.0 per 100,000 people per year, with 
about 3000 new cases diagnosed annually. The male-to-female 
ratio is 1.3:1, and the average age of presentation is between 50 
and 70 years.
Etiology.  Risk factors associated with cholangiocarcinoma 
include primary sclerosing cholangitis, choledochal cysts, ulcer-
ative colitis, hepatolithiasis, biliary-enteric anastomosis, and 
biliary tract infections with Clonorchis or in chronic typhoid 
carriers. Features common to most risk factors include biliary 
stasis, bile duct stones, and infection. Other risk factors associ-
ated with cholangiocarcinoma are liver flukes, dietary nitrosa-
mines, Thorotrast, and exposure to dioxin.90,91
Pathology.  Over 95% of bile duct cancers are adenocarcino-
mas. Morphologically, they are divided into nodular (the most 
common type), scirrhous, diffusely infiltrating, or papillary. 
Anatomically, they are divided into distal, proximal, or peri-
hilar tumors. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas occur, but they 
are treated like hepatocellular carcinoma, with hepatectomy 
when possible. About two thirds of cholangiocarcinomas are 
located in the perihilar location. Perihilar cholangiocarcino-
mas, also referred to as Klatskin tumors, are further classified 
based on anatomic location by the Bismuth-Corlette classifica-
tion (Fig. 32-26). Type I tumors are confined to the common 
Figure 32-26.  Bismuth-Corlette classification of bile duct tumors.
Type IIIb
Type II
Type I
Type IV
Type IIIa
6
1336
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
hepatic duct, but type II tumors involve the bifurcation without 
involvement of the secondary intrahepatic ducts. Type IIIa and 
IIIb tumors extend into the right and left secondary intrahepatic 
ducts, respectively. Type IV tumors involve both the right and 
left secondary intrahepatic ducts.
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis.  Painless jaundice 
is the most common presentation. Pruritus, mild right upper 
quadrant pain, anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss also may be 
present. Cholangitis is the presenting symptom in about 10% of 
patients, but occurs more commonly after biliary manipulation 
in these patients. Except for jaundice, physical examination is 
usually normal in patients with cholangiocarcinoma. Occasion-
ally, asymptomatic patients are found to have cholangiocarci-
noma while being evaluated for elevated alkaline phosphatase 
and γ-glutamyltransferase levels. Tumor markers such CA 125 
and carcinoembryonic antigen can be elevated in cholangiocar-
cinoma but tend to be nonspecific because they also increase 
in other GI and gynecologic malignancies or cholangiopatholo-
gies. The tumor marker most commonly used to aid the diagno-
sis of cholangiocarcinoma is CA 19-9, which has a sensitivity of 
79% and specificity of 98% if the serum value is >129 U/mL.92 
However, mild elevations in CA 19-9 can be seen in cholangitis, 
other GI and gynecologic neoplasms, and patients who lack the 
Lewis blood type antigen.93
The initial tests are usually ultrasound or CT scan. A peri-
hilar tumor causes dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree, but 
normal or collapsed gallbladder and extrahepatic bile ducts dis-
tal to the tumor. Distal bile duct cancer leads to dilatation of 
the extra- and intrahepatic bile ducts as well as the gallbladder. 
Ultrasound can establish the level of obstruction and rule out the 
presence of bile duct stones as the cause of the obstructive jaundice 
(Fig. 32-27). It is usually difficult to visualize the tumor itself 
on ultrasound or on a standard CT scan. Either ultrasound or 
spiral CT can be used to determine portal vein patency. The 
biliary anatomy is defined by cholangiography. PTC defines 
B
A
Figure 32-27.  A. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiography from a patient with cancer of the common hepatic duct (arrowheads). The com-
mon bile duct is of normal size, as is the cystic duct (arrow), but the proximal biliary tree is dilated. The gallbladder is not visualized because 
of tumor obstructing its neck. B. An ultrasound from the same patient showing dilated ducts and tumor obstructing the common hepatic duct 
(arrow). The walls of the bile ducts adjacent to the obstruction are thickened by tumor infiltration (arrowheads).
the proximal extent of the tumor, which is the most important 
factor in determining resectability. ERC is used, particularly in 
the evaluation of distal bile duct tumors. For the evaluation of 
vascular involvement, celiac angiography may be necessary. 
With the newer types of MRI, a single noninvasive test has the 
potential of evaluating the biliary anatomy, lymph nodes, and 
vascular involvement, as well as the tumor growth itself.94
Tissue diagnosis may be difficult to obtain nonoperatively 
except in advanced cases. Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration 
biopsy, biliary brush or scrape biopsy, and cytologic examina-
tion have a low sensitivity in detecting malignancy. Patients 
with potentially resectable disease should, therefore, be offered 
surgical exploration based on radiographic findings and clinical 
suspicion.95
Treatment.  Surgical excision is the only potentially cura-
tive treatment for cholangiocarcinoma. In the past one to two 
decades, improvements in surgical techniques have resulted 
in lower mortality and better outcome for patients undergoing 
aggressive surgical excision for cholangiocarcinoma.96
Patients should undergo surgical exploration if they have 
no signs of metastasis or locally unresectable disease. How-
ever, despite improvements in ultrasonography, CT scanning, 
and MRI, more than one half of patients who are explored are 
found to have peritoneal implants, nodal or hepatic metastasis, 
or locally advanced disease that precludes resection. For these 
patients, surgical bypass for biliary decompression and cho-
lecystectomy to prevent the occurrence of acute cholecystitis 
should be performed.97
For unresectable perihilar cholangiocarcinoma, Roux-en-
Y cholangiojejunostomy to either segment II or III bile ducts or 
to the right hepatic duct can be performed.
For curative resection, the location and local exten-
sion of the tumor dictates the extent of the resection. Perihilar 
tumors involving the bifurcation or proximal common hepatic 
duct (Bismuth-Corlette type I or II) with no signs of vascular 
1337
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
involvement are candidates for local tumor excision with portal 
lymphadenectomy, cholecystectomy, common bile duct exci-
sion, and bilateral Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomies. If the 
tumor involves the right or left hepatic duct (Bismuth-Corlette 
type IIIa or IIIb), right or left hepatic lobectomy, respectively, 
should also be performed. Frequently, resection of the adjacent 
caudate lobe is required because of direct extension into caudate 
biliary radicals or parenchyma.95
Distal bile duct tumors are more often resectable. They 
are treated with pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy 
(Whipple procedure). For patients with distal bile duct cancer 
found to be unresectable on surgical exploration, Roux-en-Y 
hepaticojejunostomy, cholecystectomy, and gastrojejunostomy 
to prevent gastric outlet obstruction should be performed.
Nonoperative biliary decompression is performed for 
patients with unresectable disease on diagnostic evaluation. 
Percutaneous placement of expandable metal stents or drain-
age catheters is usually the appropriate approach for proximal 
tumors. However, for distal bile duct tumors, endoscopic place-
ment is often the preferred approach (Fig. 32-28). There is a sig-
nificant risk of cholangitis with internal and external drainage, 
and stent occlusion is not uncommon. However, although surgi-
cal bypass offers improved patency and fewer episodes of chol-
angitis, an operative intervention is not warranted in patients 
with metastatic disease.98
There is no proven role for adjuvant chemotherapy in the 
treatment of cholangiocarcinoma. Adjuvant radiation therapy 
has also not been shown to increase either quality of life or 
survival in resected patients. Patients with unresectable disease 
Figure 32-28.  A through F. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography and placement of a biliary drainage catheter. The catheter has been 
passed through the tumor area (distal cholangiocarcinoma) that is obstructing the distal common bile duct and into the duodenum.
often are offered treatment with 5-fluorouracil alone or in com-
bination with mitomycin C and doxorubicin, but the response 
rates are low, <10% and <30%, respectively. The combination 
of radiation and chemotherapy may be more effective than 
either treatment alone for unresectable disease, but no data from 
randomized trials are available. Giving chemoradiation to these 
patients can be difficult because of the high incidence of chol-
angitis. External-beam radiation has not been shown to be an 
effective treatment for unresected disease. The use of interstitial 
(intraoperative) radiation, brachytherapy with iridium-192 via 
percutaneous or endoscopic stents, and combined interstitial and 
external-beam radiation for unresectable cholangiocarcinoma 
has been reported with some encouraging results. However, no 
randomized, prospective trials have been reported.95 A palliative 
measure that has been shown effective in a multicenter random-
ized trial is photodynamic therapy. In this trial, patients with 
a diagnosis of unresectable cholangiocarcinoma were random-
ized to biliary stenting with photodynamic therapy or stenting 
alone. The authors found that photodynamic therapy prolonged 
survival by approximately 400 days and improved quality of life 
on standardized questionnaire.99
Prognosis.  Most patients with perihilar cholangiocarcinoma 
present with advanced, unresectable disease. Patients with unre-
sectable disease have a median survival between 5 and 8 months. 
The most common causes of death are hepatic failure and chol-
angitis. The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with resect-
able perihilar cholangiocarcinoma is between 10% and 30%, but 
for patients with negative margins, it may be as high as 40%. 
1338
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The operative mortality for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma is 6% 
to 8%. Patients with distal cholangiocarcinoma are more likely 
to have resectable disease and improved prognosis compared to 
perihilar cholangiocarcinoma. The overall 5-year survival rate 
for resectable disease is 30% to 50%, and the median survival 
is 32 to 38 months.
The greatest risk factors for recurrence after resection 
are the presence of positive margins and lymph node–positive 
tumors. Therapy for recurrent disease is palliation of symptoms. 
Surgery is not recommended for patients with recurrent disease.94
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Clemente CD/ Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 
1985:132.
2.	 Klein AS, Lillemoe KD, Yeo CJ, et al. Liver, biliary tract, and 
pancreas. In: O’Leary JP, ed. Physiologic Basis of Surgery. 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1996:441.
3.	 Scott-Conner CEH, Dawson DL. Operative Anatomy. Phila-
delphia: JB Lippincott; 1993:388.
4.	 Molmenti EP, Pinto PA, Klein J, et al. Normal and variant 
arterial supply of the liver and gallbladder. Pediatr Transplant. 
2003;7:80.
5.	 Chen TH, Shyu JF, Chen CH, et al. Variations of the cys-
tic artery in Chinese adults. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan 
Tech. 2000;10:154.
6.	 Boyer J. Bile secretion—models, mechanisms, and malfunc-
tions. A perspective on the development of modern cellular 
and molecular concepts of bile secretion and cholestasis. J Gas-
troenterol. 1996;31:475.
7.	 Geoghegan J, Pappas TN. Clinical uses of gut peptides. Ann 
Surg. 1997;225:145.
8.	 Al-Jiffry BO, Shaffer EA, Saccone GT, et al. Changes in 
gallbladder motility and gallstone formation following lapa-
roscopic gastric banding for morbid obesity. Can J Gastroen-
terol. 2003;17:169.
9.	 McDonnell CO, Bailey I, Stumpf T, et al. The effect of cho-
lecystectomy on plasma cholecystokinin. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2002;97:2189.
10.	 Woods CM, Mawe GM, Saccone GTP. The sphincter of 
Oddi: understanding its control and function. Neurogastro-
enterol Motil. 2005;17(Supp 1):31.
11.	 Yokohata K, Tanaka M. Cyclic motility of the sphincter of 
Oddi. J Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surg. 2000;7:178.
12.	 Ahrendt SA. Biliary tract surgery. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 
1999;1:107.
13.	 Lee HJ, Choi BI, Han JK, et al. Three-dimensional ultraso-
nography using the minimum transparent mode in obstruc-
tive biliary diseases: early experience. J Ultrasound Med. 
2002;21:443.
14.	 Ralls PW, Jeffrey RB Jr, Kane RA, et al. Ultrasonography. 
Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2002;31:801.
15.	 Wexler RS, Greene GS, Scott M. Left hepatic and common 
hepatic ductal bile leaks demonstrated by Tc-99m HIDA scan 
and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram. Clin Nucl Med. 
1994;19:59.
16.	 Breen DJ, Nicholson AA. The clinical utility of spiral CT chol-
angiography. Clin Radiol. 2000;55:733.
17.	 Liu TH, Consorti ET, Kawashima A, et al. Patient evaluation 
and management with selective use of magnetic resonance 
cholangiography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography before laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Ann Surg. 
2001;234:33.
18.	 Magnuson TH, Bender JS, Duncan MD, et al. Utility of mag-
netic resonance cholangiography in the evaluation of biliary 
obstruction. J Am Coll Surg. 1999;189:63.
19.	 Washington M, Ghazi A. Complications of ERCP. In: Scott-
Conner CEH, ed. The SAGES Manual. New York: Springer-
Verlag; 1999:516.
20.	 Tischendorf JJ, Kruger M, Trautwein C, et al. Cholangio-
scopic characterization of dominant bile duct stenoses in 
patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Endoscopy. 
2006;38:665.
21.	 Tajiri H, Kobayashi M, Ohtsu A, et al. Peroral pancreatos-
copy for the diagnosis of pancreatic diseases. Pancreas. 
1998;16:408.
22.	 Hui CK, Lai KC, Ng M, et al. Retained common bile duct 
stones: a comparison between biliary stenting and complete 
clearance of stones by electrohydraulic lithotripsy. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther. 2003;17:289.
23.	 Tsuyuguchi T, Saisho H, Ishihara T, et al. Long-term follow-
up after treatment of Mirizzi syndrome by peroral cholangios-
copy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2000;52:639.
24.	 Brett M, Barker DJ. The world distribution of gallstones. Int J 
Epidemiol. 1976;5:335.
25.	 Nakeeb A, Comuzzie AG, Martin L, et al. Gallstones: genetics 
versus environment. Ann Surg. 2002;235:842.
26.	 Brasca A, Berli D, Pezzotto SM, et al. Morphological and 
demographic associations of biliary symptoms in subjects 
with gallstones: findings from a population-based survey in 
Rosario, Argentina. Dig Liver Dis. 2002;34:577.
27.	 Attili AF, De Santis A, Capri R, et al. The natural history of 
gallstones: the GREPCO experience. The GREPCO Group. 
Hepatology. 1995;21:655.
28.	 Bellows CF, Berger DH, Crass RA. Management of gall-
stones. Am Fam Physician. 2005;72:637.
29.	 Strasberg SM. The pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstones a 
review. J Gastrointest Surg. 1998;2:109.
30.	 Stewart L, Oesterle AL, Erdan I, et al. Pathogenesis of pigment 
gallstones in Western societies: the central role of bacteria. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2002;6:891.
31.	 Trowbridge RL, Rutkowski NK, Shojania KG. Does this 
patient have acute cholecystitis? JAMA. 2003;289:80.
32.	 Fletcher DR. Gallstones. Modern management. Aust Fam 
Physician. 2001;30:441.
33.	 Della Corte C, Falchetti D, Nebbia G, et al. Management of 
cholelithiasis in Italian children: a national multicenter study. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14:1383.
34.	 Weber DM. Laparoscopic surgery: an excellent approach in 
elderly patients. Arch Surg. 2003;138:1083.
35.	 Strasberg SM. Cholelithiasis and acute cholecystitis. Baillieres 
Clin Gastroenterol. 1997;11:643.
36.	 Kiviluoto T, Siren J, Luukkonen P, et al. Randomised trial of 
laparoscopic versus open cholecystectomy for acute and gan-
grenous cholecystitis. Lancet. 1998;351:321.
37.	 Lo CM, Liu CL, Fan ST, et al. Prospective randomized study 
of early versus delayed laparoscopic cholecystectomy for 
acute cholecystitis. Ann Surg. 1998;227:461.
38.	 Chikamori F, Kuniyoshi N, Shibuya S, et al. Early scheduled 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy following percutaneous tran-
shepatic gallbladder drainage for patients with acute chole-
cystitis. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1704.
39.	 Patel M, Miedema BW, James MA, et al. Percutaneous chole-
cystostomy is an effective treatment for high-risk patients with 
acute cholecystitis. Am Surg. 2000;66:33.
40.	 Ko C, Lee S. Epidemiology and natural history of common bile 
duct stones and prediction of disease. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2002;56:S165.
41.	 Amouyal P, Amouyal G, Levy P, et al. Diagnosis of choledo-
cholithiasis by endoscopic ultrasonography. Gastroenterology. 
1994;106:1062.
42.	 Tranter S, Thompson M. Comparison of endoscopic sphincter-
otomy and laparoscopic exploration of the common bile duct. 
Br J Surg. 2002;89:1495.
1339
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary System
CHAPTER 32
43.	 Hamy A, Hennekinne S, Pessaux P, et al. Endoscopic sphinc-
terotomy prior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy for the treat-
ment of cholelithiasis. Surg Endosc. 2003;17:872.
44.	 Lilly MC, Arregui ME. A balanced approach to choledocholi-
thiasis. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:467.
45.	 Ross SO, Forsmark CE. Pancreatic and biliary disorders in the 
elderly. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2000;30:531.
46.	 Lai ECS, Mok FPT, Tan ESY, et al. Endoscopic biliary drain-
age for severe acute cholangitis. N Engl J Med. 1992;326: 
1582.
47.	 Lipsett PA, Pitt HA. Acute cholangitis. Front Biosci. 
2003;8:S1229.
48.	 Lillemoe KD. Surgical treatment of biliary tract infections. Am 
Surg. 2000;66:138.
49.	 Rhodes M, Sussman L, Cohen L, et al. Randomised trial of 
laparoscopic exploration of common bile duct versus postop-
erative endoscopic retrograde cholangiography for common 
bile duct stones. Lancet. 1998;351:159.
50.	 Sperling RM, Koch J, Sandhu JS, et al. Recurrent pyo-
genic cholangitis in Asian immigrants to the United States: 
natural history and role of therapeutic ERCP. Dig Dis Sci. 
1997;42:865.
51.	 Thinh NC, Breda Y, Faucompret S, et al. Oriental biliary 
lithiasis. Retrospective study of 690 patients treated surgically 
over 8 years at Hospital 108 in Hanoi (Vietnam). Med Trop 
(Mars). 2001;61:509.
52.	 Byrne MF, Suhocki P, Mitchell RM, et al. Percutaneous 
cholecystostomy in patients with acute cholecystitis: experi-
ence of 45 patients at a US referral center. J Am Coll Surg. 
2003;197:206.
53.	 Akhan O, Akinci D, Ozmen MN. Percutaneous cholecystos-
tomy. Eur J Radiol. 2002;43:229.
54.	 Khaitan L, Apelgren K, Hunter J, et al. A report on the Society 
of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) 
Outcomes Initiative: what have we learned and what is its 
potential? Surg Endosc. 2003;17:365.
55.	 Richards C, Edwards J, Culver D, et al. Does using a laparo-
scopic approach to cholecystectomy decrease the risk of surgi-
cal site infection? Ann Surg. 2003;237:358.
56.	 Flum DR, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, et al. Intraoperative chol-
angiography and risk of common bile duct injury during cho-
lecystectomy. JAMA. 2003;289:1639.
57.	 Hunter JG. Acute cholecystitis revisited: get it while it’s 
hot. Ann Surg. 1998;227:468.
58.	 Biffl W, Moore E, Offner P, et al. Routine intraoperative ultra-
sonography with selective cholangiography reduces bile duct 
complications during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2001;193:272.
59.	 Halpin VJ, Dunnegan D, Soper NJ. Laparoscopic intracorpo-
real ultrasound versus fluoroscopic intraoperative cholangiog-
raphy: after the learning curve. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:336.
60.	 Barwood NT, Valinsky LJ, Hobbs MS, et al. Changing meth-
ods of imaging the common bile duct in the laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy era in Western Australia: Implications for 
surgical practice. Ann Surg. 2002;235:41.
61.	 Pelinka LE, Schmidhammer R, Hamid L, et al. Acute acalcu-
lous cholecystitis after trauma: a prospective study. J Trauma-
Injury Infect Crit Care. 2003;55:323.
62.	 Ryu JK, Ryu KH, Kim KH. Clinical features of acute acalcu-
lous cholecystitis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2003;36:166.
63.	 Yasuda H, Takada T, Kawarada Y, et al. Unusual cases of 
acute cholecystitis and cholangitis: Tokyo Guidelines. J Hepa-
tobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2007;14:98.
64.	 Lipsett PA, Pitt HA. Surgical treatment of choledochal cysts. 
J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2003;10:352.
65.	 Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA, Nakeeb A, et al. Diagnosis and manage-
ment of cholangiocarcinoma in primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 1999;3:357.
66.	 Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA, Kalloo AN, et al. Primary scleros-
ing cholangitis: resect, dilate, or transplant? Ann Surg. 
1998;227:412.
67.	 Goss JA, Shackleton CR, Farmer DG, et al. Orthotopic liver 
transplantation for primary sclerosing cholangitis. A 12-year 
single center experience. Ann Surg. 1997;225:472.
68.	 Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA. Surgical treatment for primary scleros-
ing cholangitis. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 1999;6:366.
69.	 Linder JD, Klapow JC, Linder SD, et al. Incomplete response 
to endoscopic sphincterotomy in patients with sphincter of 
Oddi dysfunction: evidence for a chronic pain disorder. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1738.
70.	 Lillemoe KD, Melton GB, Cameron JL, et al. Postoperative 
bile duct strictures: Management and outcome in the 1990s. 
Ann Surg. 2000;232:430.
71.	 Melton GB, Lillemoe KD. The current management of postop-
erative bile duct strictures. Adv Surg. 2002;36:193.
72.	 Archer SB, Brown DW, Smith CD, et al. Bile duct injury dur-
ing laparoscopic cholecystectomy: results of a national survey. 
Ann Surg. 2001;234:549.
73.	 Ahrendt SA, Pitt HA. Surgical therapy of iatrogenic lesions of 
biliary tract. World J Surg. 2001;25:1360.
74.	 Strasberg SM. Avoidance of biliary injury during laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2002;9:543.
75.	 Way LW, Stewart L, Gantert W, et al. Causes and preven-
tion of laparoscopic bile duct injuries: analysis of 252 cases 
from a human factors and cognitive psychology perspective 
[Comment]. Ann Surg. 2003;237:460.
76.	 Flum DR, Flowers C, Veenstra DL. A cost-effectiveness 
analysis of intraoperative cholangiography in the prevention 
of bile duct injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am 
Coll Surg. 2003;196:385.
77.	 Lee CM, Stewart L, Way LW. Postcholecystectomy abdomi-
nal bile collections. Arch Surg. 2000;135:538.
78.	 Melton GB, Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, et al. Major bile duct 
injuries associated with laparoscopic cholecystectomy: effect 
of surgical repair on quality of life. Ann Surg. 2002;235:888.
79.	 Grobmyer SR, Lieberman MD, Daly JM. Gallbladder cancer 
in the twentieth century: single institution’s experience. World 
J Surg. 2004;28:47.
80.	 Pandey M, Shukla VK. Diet and gallbladder cancer: a case-
control study. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2002;11:365.
81.	 Serra I, Calvo A, Baez S, et al. Risk factors for gallbladder 
cancer. An international collaborative case control study. 
Cancer. 1996;78:1515.
82.	 Lowenfels AB, Walker AM, Althaus DP, et al. Gallstone 
growth, size, and risk of gallbladder cancer: an interracial 
study. Int J Epidemiol. 1998;18:50.
83.	 Csendes A, Burgos AM, Csendes P, et al. Late follow-up of 
polypoid lesions of the gallbladder smaller than 10 mm. Ann 
Surg. 2001;234:657.
84.	 Wagholikar G, Behari A, Krishnani N, et al. Early gallbladder 
cancer. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;194:137.
85.	 Kim JH, Kim TK, Eun HW. Preoperative evaluation of gall-
bladder carcinoma: efficacy of combined use of MR imag-
ing, MR cholangiography, and contrast-enhanced dual phase 
three dimensional MR angiography. J Magn Reson Imaging. 
2002;16:676.
86.	 Bartlett DL, Fong Y, Fortner JG, et al. Long-term results after 
resection for gallbladder cancer. Implications for staging and 
management. Ann Surg. 1996;224:639.
87.	 Wakai T, Shirai Y, Hatakeyama K. Radical second resection 
provides survival benefit for patients with T2 gallbladder car-
cinoma first discovered after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
World J Surg. 2002;26:867.
88.	 Noshiro H, Chijiiwa K, Yamaguchi K, et al. Factors affecting 
surgical outcome for gallbladder carcinoma. Hepatogastroen-
terology. 2003;50:939.
1340
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
89.	 Strasberg SM. Resection of hilar cholangiocarcinoma. HPB 
Surg. 1998;10:415.
90.	 Tocchi A, Mazzoni G, Liotta G, et al. Late development of bile 
duct cancer in patients who had biliary-enteric drainage for 
benign disease: a follow-up study of more than 1000 patients. 
Ann Surg. 2001;234:210.
91.	 Ahrendt SA, Rashid A, Chow JT, et al. p53 overexpression and 
K-ras gene mutations in primary sclerosing cholangitis-associated 
biliary tract cancer. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2000;7:426.
92.	 Nehls O, Gregor M, Klump B. Serum and bile markers for 
cholangiocarcinoma. Semin Liver Dis. 2004;24:139.
93.	 Siqueira E, Schoen RE, Silverman W, et al. Detecting cholan-
giocarcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2005;56:40.
94.	 Ahrendt SA, Nakeeb A, Pitt HA. Cholangiocarcinoma. Clin 
Liver Dis. 2001;5:191.
95.	 Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL. Surgery for hilar cholangiocarci-
noma: the Johns Hopkins approach. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat 
Surg. 2000;7:115.
96.	 Mulholland MW, Yahanda A, Yeo CJ. Multidisciplinary 
management of perihilar bile duct cancer. J Am Coll Surg. 
2001;193:440.
97.	 Vollmer CM, Drebin JA, Middleton WD, et al. Utility of stag-
ing laparoscopy in subsets of peripancreatic and biliary malig-
nancies [Comment]. Ann Surg. 2002;235:1.
98.	 Strasberg SM. ERCP and surgical intervention in pancreatic 
and biliary malignancies. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56:S213.
99.	 Ortner ME, Caca K, Berr F, et al. Successful photodynamic 
therapy for nonresectable cholangiocarcinoma: a randomized 
prospective study. Gastroenterology. 2003;125:1355.
Pancreas
William E. Fisher, Dana K. Andersen,  
John A. Windsor, Ashok K. Saluja,  
and F. Charles Brunicardi
33
ANATOMY
The pancreas is perhaps the most unforgiving organ in the 
human body, leading most surgeons to avoid even palpating it 
unless necessary. Situated deep in the center of the abdomen, 
the pancreas is surrounded by numerous important structures 
and major blood vessels. Seemingly minor trauma to the pan-
creas can result in the release of pancreatic enzymes and cause 
life-threatening pancreatitis. Therefore, knowledge of the rela-
tionships of the pancreas to surrounding structures is critically 
important for all surgeons to ensure that pancreatic injury is 
avoided during abdominal surgery.
Gross Anatomy
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that lies in an oblique 
position, sloping upward from the C-loop of the duodenum to 
the splenic hilum (Fig. 33-1). In an adult, the pancreas weighs 
75 to 100 g and is about 15 to 20 cm long. The fact that the pan-
creas is situated so deeply in the abdomen and is sealed in the 
retroperitoneum explains the poorly localized and sometimes 
ill-defined nature with which pancreatic pathology presents. 
Patients with pancreatic cancer without bile duct obstruction 
usually present after months of vague upper abdominal discom-
fort, or no antecedent symptoms at all. Due to its retroperitoneal 
location, pain associated with pancreatitis often is characterized 
as penetrating through to the back.
Regions of the Pancreas
Surgeons typically describe the location of pathology within the 
pancreas in relation to four regions: the head, neck, body, and 
tail. The head of the pancreas is nestled in the C-loop of the 
duodenum and is posterior to the transverse mesocolon. Just pos-
terior to the head of the pancreas lie the vena cava, the right renal 
artery, and both renal veins. The neck of the pancreas lies directly 
anterior to the portal vein. At the inferior border of the neck of 
the pancreas, the superior mesenteric vein joins the splenic vein 
and then continues toward the porta hepatis as the portal vein. 
The inferior mesenteric vein often joins the splenic vein near its 
junction with the portal vein. Sometimes, the inferior ­mesenteric 
Anatomy	
1341
Gross Anatomy / 1341
Regions of the Pancreas / 1341
Pancreatic Duct Anatomy / 1344
Vascular and Lymphatic Anatomy / 1344
Neuroanatomy / 1346
Histology and Physiology	
1346
Exocrine Pancreas / 1347
Endocrine Pancreas / 1348
Islet Distribution / 1351
Acute Pancreatitis	
1351
Definition, Incidence, and  
Epidemiology / 1351
Etiology / 1351
Gallstones / 1351
Alcohol / 1352
Iatrogenic / 1352
Hereditary Pancreatitis / 1352
Tumors / 1352
Hyperlipidemia / 1352
Drugs and Miscellaneous Causes / 1353
Pathophysiology / 1353
Precipitating Initial Events / 1353
Intrapancreatic Events / 1354
Systemic Events / 1355
Management of the Patient / 1355
Diagnosis / 1355
Pain Management / 1357
Predicting Severity / 1357
Classification of the Severity of Acute 
Pancreatitis / 1357
Determining the Etiology / 1357
Fluid Resuscitation / 1357
Nutritional Support / 1358
Cross-sectional Imaging / 1358
Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde  
Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) / 1358
Antibiotics / 1359
Managing Local Complications / 1359
Managing Organ Failure / 1360
Cholecystectomy / 1361
Chronic Pancreatitis	
1361
Definition, Incidence, and  
Prevalence / 1361
Etiology / 1361
Genetic Causes / 1361
Alcohol / 1362
Hyperparathyroidism / 1365
Hyperlipidemia / 1365
Classification / 1365
Chronic Calcific (Lithogenic)  
Pancreatitis / 1365
Chronic Obstructive Pancreatitis / 1365
Chronic Inflammatory Pancreatitis / 1366
Tropical (Nutritional) Pancreatitis / 1366
Asymptomatic Pancreatic Fibrosis / 1367
Idiopathic Pancreatitis / 1367
Pathology / 1367
Presentation, Natural History,  
and Complications / 1371
Complications / 1375
Treatment / 1379
Pancreatic Neoplasms	
1390
Neoplasms of the Endocrine  
Pancreas / 1390
Insulinoma / 1391
Noninsulinoma Hyperinsulinemia  
Hypoglycemia Syndrome / 1391
Gastrinoma / 1391
Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide-Secreting 
Tumor / 1392
Glucagonoma / 1393
Somatostatinoma / 1393
Nonfunctioning Pancreatic Endocrine 
Tumors / 1393
Neoplasms of the Exocrine  
Pancreas / 1393
chapter 
1342
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
vein joins the superior mesenteric vein or merges with the supe-
rior mesenteric portal venous junction to form a trifurcation 
(Fig. 33-2). The superior mesenteric artery lies parallel to and 
just to the left of the superior mesenteric vein. The uncinate 
process and the head of the pancreas wrap around the right side 
of the portal vein and end posteriorly near the space between 
the superior mesenteric vein and superior mesenteric artery. 
Venous branches draining the pancreatic head and uncinate 
process enter along the right lateral and posterior sides of the 
portal vein. There are usually no anterior venous tributaries, 
and a plane can usually be developed between the neck of the 
pancreas and the portal and superior mesenteric veins during 
pancreatic resection, unless the tumor is invading the vein ante-
riorly. The common bile duct runs in a deep groove on the 
posterior aspect of the pancreatic head until it passes through 
the pancreatic parenchyma to join the main pancreatic duct at 
the ampulla of Vater. The body and tail of the pancreas lie 
just anterior to the splenic artery and vein. The vein runs in a 
groove on the back of the pancreas and is fed by multiple frag-
ile venous branches from the pancreatic parenchyma. These 
branches must be divided to perform a spleen-sparing distal 
pancreatectomy. The splenic artery runs parallel and just supe-
rior to the vein along the posterior superior edge of the body 
and tail of the pancreas. The splenic artery often is tortuous. 
The anterior surface of the body of the pancreas is covered by 
peritoneum. Once the gastrocolic omentum is divided, the body 
and tail of the pancreas can be seen along the floor of the lesser 
sac, just posterior to the stomach.
Pancreatic pseudocysts commonly develop in this area, 
and the posterior aspect of the stomach can form the anterior 
wall of the pseudocyst, allowing drainage into the stomach. The 
base of the transverse mesocolon attaches to the inferior margin 
of the body and tail of the pancreas. The transverse mesoco-
lon often forms the inferior wall of pancreatic pseudocysts or 
inflammatory processes, allowing surgical drainage through the 
transverse mesocolon. The body of the pancreas is anterior to the 
1342
Key Points
1 	 Incomplete fusion of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic ducts 
results in pancreas divisum, but a variety of ductal anomalies 
can be seen. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
as well as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
can identify these ductal anomalies, and clarification of the 
ductal pattern of the pancreas is important before attempts at 
interventions.
2 	 The “replaced right hepatic artery” occurs in 15% of patients 
and needs to be identified preoperatively to prevent inadver-
tent injury with resulting hepatic necrosis. Anomalous hepatic 
arterial anatomy can result in hepatic ischemia during dissec-
tion of the porta hepatis as well. “Thin cut” multidetector com.
puted tomographic images are usually able to identify the rel-
evant arterial and venous patterns around the pancreas. 
3 	 Regardless of the etiology, the management of the early phase 
of acute pancreatitis is critical to achieve a successful out-
come. Aggressive fluid resuscitation and early enteral feeding 
both reduce the risk of complications. It is no longer consid-
ered appropriate to “rest the pancreas” if the patient can toler-
ate enteral nutrients.
4 	 Surgical intervention in acute pancreatitis is reserved for 
patients with infected collections or infected necrosis only, or 
to relieve an impacted gallstone in the ampulla if endoscopic 
or radiologic treatments are unavailable or unsuccessful. Infec-
tion is usually confirmed by a pattern of air in the retroperito-
neum on computed tomographic scan, or by documentation of 
bacteria on Gram’s stain or culture from fine-needle aspiration 
of a suspected infected fluid collection. Fine-needle aspiration 
of suspicious fluid collections should not be converted to per-
cutaneous drainage unless infection is confirmed, and the con-
sensus decision has been made that percutaneous drainage is 
appropriate for the individual patient.
5 	 The appearance of chronic pancreatitis on computed tomo-
graphic scan varies dramatically, and multiple diagnostic stud-
ies are usually needed to establish the extent of disease. 
Calcific pancreatitis is not a marker of alcoholic pancreatitis 
alone, and rarely indicates autoimmune pancreatitis. Endo-
scopic ultrasound provides a better assessment of the disease 
than computed tomography and is useful to disclose indo-
lent or unsuspected cancer, which can occur in up to 10% 
of patients. 
6 	 The nidus of inflammation in chronic pancreatitis due to 
any cause is the head of the gland. Therefore, treatment 
approaches that address the disease in the head have the 
best long-term results. The Whipple procedure, the Beger 
procedure, and the Frey procedure, with or without longi-
tudinal duct drainage, are the best surgical options, as all 
three approaches remove all or most of the disease in the 
head of the gland. 
7 	 The precursor lesion that probably leads to most cases of 
ductular adenocarcinoma is the ductal epithelial hyperpla-
sia/dysplasia process described by the pancreatic intra­
epithelial neoplasia classification system. Pancreatic 
intra­epithelial neoplasia 2 and pancreatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia 3 lesions may be associated with other, nonspe-
cific changes in pancreatic morphology seen on imaging 
studies, or may only be seen histologically. Resection mar-
gins for pancreatic neoplasms should be examined for 
advanced pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia stage patterns 
of ductal hyperplasia to ensure adequate resection status. 
8 	 Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms are small macro-
scopic polypoid or plaque-like adenomas that develop in 
the main pancreatic duct or in side-branch ducts, and secrete 
mucin. They are often silent symptomatically, but cause 
characteristic appearances of small cyst-like collections of 
mucus, or diffuse dilatation of the main pancreatic duct 
with mucus. These premalignant lesions may be multifocal 
or single and can evolve into invasive adenocarcinoma in a 
similar pattern as with other adenomatous polypoid lesions 
of the gastrointestinal tract. They have been diagnosed with 
increasing frequency, and account for more than one third 
of pancreatic resections at some centers. Main-duct intra-
ductal papillary mucinous neoplasms are an indication for 
resection; side-branch intraductal papillary mucinous neo-
plasms have a lower incidence of malignancy and are some-
times followed with serial imaging surveillance. 
1343
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Body of Pancreas
Tail of Pancreas
Neck of Pancreas
Stomach
Liver
Portal Vein
Splenic Vein
Gallbla dder
Duodeunm
Head of Pancreas
Uncinate Process
of Pancreas
Left Kidney
Vena Cave
Duodenum
Aorta
Stomach
Head of Pancreas
Left Kidney
SMA
SMA
Duodenum
Jejunum
4th Portion
Of Duodenum
Head of Pancreas
Portal Vein
IMV
SMV
Head of Pancreas
Duodenum
Jejunum
Tail of Pancreas
Stomach
Liver
Portal Vein
Head of Pancreas
Duodenum
SMV
Figure 33-1.  Pancreatic anatomy as seen on computed tomography. Knowledge of the relationship of the pancreas with surrounding struc-
tures is important to ensure that injury is avoided during abdominal surgery. IMV = inferior mesenteric vein; SMA = superior mesenteric 
artery; SMV = superior mesenteric vein.
aorta at the origin of the superior mesenteric artery. The neck of 
the pancreas is anterior to the vertebral body of L1 and L2, and 
blunt anteroposterior trauma can compress the neck of the pan-
creas against the spine, causing parenchymal and, sometimes, 
ductal injury. The neck divides the pancreas into approximately 
two equal halves. The small portion of the pancreas anterior to 
the left kidney is referred to as the tail and is nestled in the hilum 
of the spleen near the splenic flexure of the left colon. Aware-
ness of these anatomic relationships is important to avoid injury 
to the pancreatic tail during left colectomy or splenectomy.
Figure 33-2.  Variations in portal venous anatomy. The superior mesenteric vein joins the splenic vein and then continues toward the porta 
hepatis as the portal vein. The inferior mesenteric vein often joins the splenic vein near its junction with the portal vein, but sometimes joins 
the superior mesenteric vein; or the three veins merge as a trifurcation to form the portal vein.
Portal
vein
Splenic
vein
Inferior
mesenteric
vein
Superior
mesenteric
vein
Superior
mesenteric
vein
Superior
mesenteric
vein
Inferior
mesenteric
vein
Inferior
mesenteric
vein
Splenic
vein
Splenic
vein
Portal
vein
Portal
vein
1344
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Pancreatic Duct Anatomy
An understanding of embryology is required to appreciate the 
common variations in pancreatic duct anatomy. The pancreas 
is formed by the fusion of a ventral and dorsal bud (Fig. 33-3). 
The duct from the smaller ventral bud, which arises from the 
hepatic diverticulum, connects directly to the common bile 
duct. The duct from the larger dorsal bud, which arises from 
the duodenum, drains directly into the duodenum. The duct of 
the ventral anlage becomes the duct of Wirsung, and the duct 
from the dorsal anlage becomes the duct of Santorini. With gut 
rotation, the ventral anlage rotates to the right and around the 
posterior side of the duodenum to fuse with the dorsal bud. The 
ventral anlage becomes the inferior portion of the pancreatic 
head and the uncinate process, while the dorsal anlage becomes 
the body and tail of the pancreas. The ducts from each anlage 
usually fuse together in the pancreatic head such that most of the 
pancreas drains through the duct of Wirsung, or main pancreatic 
duct, into the common channel formed from the bile duct and 
pancreatic duct. The length of the common channel is variable. 
In about one third of patients, the bile duct and pancreatic duct 
remain distinct to the end of the papilla, the two ducts merge at 
the end of the papilla in another one third, and in the remaining 
one third, a true common channel is present for a distance of 
several millimeters. Commonly, the duct from the dorsal anlage, 
the duct of Santorini, persists as the lesser pancreatic duct, and 
sometimes drains directly into the duodenum through the lesser 
papilla just proximal to the major papilla. In approximately 30% 
of patients, the duct of Santorini ends as a blind accessory duct 
and does not empty into the duodenum. In 10% of patients, 
the ducts of Wirsung and Santorini fail to fuse.1 This results 
in the majority of the pancreas draining through the duct of San-
torini and the lesser papilla, while the inferior portion of the 
pancreatic head and uncinate process drains through the duct 
of Wirsung and major papilla. This normal anatomic variant, 
which occurs in one out of 10 patients, is referred to as pancreas 
divisum (Fig. 33-3). In a minority of these patients, the minor 
papilla can be inadequate to handle the flow of pancreatic juices 
from the majority of the gland. This relative outflow obstruction 
can result in pancreatitis and is sometimes treated by sphinctero-
plasty of the minor papilla.
The main pancreatic duct is usually only 2 to 3 mm in 
diameter and runs midway between the superior and inferior 
borders of the pancreas, usually closer to the posterior than to 
the anterior surface. Pressure inside the pancreatic duct is about 
twice that in the common bile duct, which is thought to prevent 
reflux of bile into the pancreatic duct. The main pancreatic duct 
joins with the common bile duct and empties at the ampulla of 
Vater or major papilla, which is located on the medial aspect of 
the second portion of the duodenum. The muscle fibers around 
the ampulla form the sphincter of Oddi, which controls the flow 
of pancreatic and biliary secretions into the duodenum. Contrac-
tion and relaxation of the sphincter is regulated by complex neu-
ral and hormonal factors. When the accessory pancreatic duct 
or lesser duct drains into the duodenum, a lesser papilla can be 
identified approximately 2 cm proximal to the ampulla of Vater.
Vascular and Lymphatic Anatomy
The blood supply to the pancreas comes from multiple branches 
from the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries (Fig. 33-4). The 
common hepatic artery gives rise to the gastroduodenal artery 
before continuing toward the porta hepatis as the proper hepatic 
artery. The right gastric artery branches off the gastroduodenal 
artery just superior to the duodenum. The gastroduodenal artery 
then travels inferiorly anterior to the neck of the pancreas and 
posterior to the duodenal bulb. A posterior ulcer in the duodenal 
bulb can erode into the gastroduodenal artery in this location. At 
the inferior border of the duodenum, the gastroduodenal artery 
then gives rise to the right gastroepiploic artery then continues 
on as the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, which 
branches into the anterior and posterior superior pancreaticoduo-
denal arteries. As the superior mesenteric artery passes behind 
the neck of the pancreas, it gives off the inferior pancreaticoduo-
denal artery at the inferior margin of the neck of the pancreas. 
This vessel quickly divides into the anterior and posterior infe-
rior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. The superior and inferior pan-
creaticoduodenal arteries join together within the parenchyma 
of the anterior and posterior sides of the head of the pancreas along 
the medial aspect of the C-loop of the duodenum to form arcades 
that give off numerous branches to the duodenum and head of 
the pancreas. Therefore, it is impossible to resect the head of the 
Figure 33-3.  Embryology of pancreas and duct variations. The duct of Wirsung from the ventral bud connects to the bile duct, while the duct 
of Santorini from the larger dorsal bud connects to the duodenum. With gut rotation, the two ducts fuse in most cases such that the majority 
of the pancreas drains through the duct of Wirsung to the major papilla. The duct of Santorini can persist as a blind accessory duct or drain 
through the lesser papilla. In a minority of patients, the ducts remain separate, and the majority of the pancreas drains through the duct of 
Santorini, a condition referred to as pancreas divisum.
Blind
accessory duct
30%
60%
Minor papilla
10%
Dorsal anlage
Ventral anlage
Ventral bud
Liver bud
Lesser or
accessory
papilla
Greater
papilla
Fusion of
two ducts
Bile duct
Dorsal bud
Duct of
Santorini
Duct of
Wirsung
1
1345
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
pancreas without devascularizing the duodenum, unless a rim 
of pancreas containing the pancreaticoduodenal arcade is pre-
served. Variations in the arterial anatomy occur in one out of 
five patients. The right hepatic artery, common hepatic artery, 
or gastroduodenal arteries can arise from the superior mesen-
teric artery. In 15% to 20% of patients, the right hepatic artery 
will arise from the superior mesenteric artery and travel upwards 
toward the liver along the posterior aspect of the head of the 
pancreas (referred to as a replaced right hepatic artery). It 
is important to look for this variation on preoperative com-
puted tomographic (CT) scans and in the operating room so the 
replaced hepatic artery is recognized and injury is avoided. The 
body and tail of the pancreas are supplied by multiple branches 
of the splenic artery. The splenic artery arises from the celiac 
trunk and travels along the posterior-superior border of the body 
and tail of the pancreas toward the spleen. The inferior pancreatic 
artery usually arises from the superior mesenteric artery and runs 
to the left along the inferior border of the body and tail of the 
pancreas, parallel to the splenic artery. Three vessels run perpen-
dicular to the long axis of the pancreatic body and tail and con-
nect the splenic artery and inferior pancreatic artery. They are, 
from medial to lateral, the dorsal, great, and caudal pancreatic 
arteries. These arteries form arcades within the body and tail of 
the pancreas, and account for the rich blood supply of the organ.
The venous drainage of the pancreas follows a pattern sim-
ilar to that of the arterial supply (Fig. 33-5). The veins are usually 
Figure 33-4.  Arterial supply to the pan-
creas. Multiple arcades in the head and 
body of the pancreas provide a rich blood 
supply. The head of the pancreas cannot 
be resected without devascularizing the 
duodenum unless a rim of pancreas con-
taining the pancreaticoduodenal arcade 
is preserved.
Bile
duct
Portal
vein
Abdominal aorta
Celiac trunk
Splenic artery
Dorsal
pancreatic artery
Great
pancreatic
artery
Caudal
artery
Inferior
pancreatic artery
Anterior inferior
pancreaticoduodenal artery
Anterior superior
pancreatico-
duodenal
artery
Posterior inferior
pancreaticoduodenal artery
Posterior superior
pancreatico-
duodenal
artery
Gastroduodenal
artery
Hepatic artery
proper
Common hepatic
artery
Superior
mesenteric artery
Spleen
Duodenum
Figure 33-5.  Venous drainage from the pancreas. The venous drainage of the pancreas follows a pattern similar to the arterial supply, with 
the veins usually superficial to the arteries. Anterior traction on the transverse colon can tear fragile branches along the inferior border of 
the pancreas, which then retract into the parenchyma of the pancreas. Venous branches draining the pancreatic head and uncinate process 
enter along the right lateral and posterior sides of the portal vein. There are usually no anterior venous tributaries, and a plane can usually be 
developed between the neck of the pancreas and the portal and superior mesenteric veins.
Bile
duct
Portal vein
Left gastric vein
Splenic vein
Inferior mesenteric vein
Middle colic vein
Anteroinferior
pancreatico-
duodenal
vein
Anterosuperior
pancreatico-
duodenal
vein
Posterosuperior
pancreatico-
duodenal
vein
Right
gastroepiploic
vein
Superior mesenteric vein
Abdominal
aorta
Spleen
2
1346
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
superficial to the arteries within the parenchyma of the pancreas. 
There is an anterior and posterior venous arcade within the head 
of the pancreas. The superior veins drain directly into the portal 
vein just above the neck of the pancreas. The posterior inferior 
arcade drains directly into the inferior mesenteric vein at the 
inferior border of the neck of the pancreas. These venous tribu-
taries must be divided during a Whipple procedure. The anterior 
inferior pancreaticoduodenal vein joins the right gastroepiploic 
vein and the middle colic vein to form a common venous trunk, 
which enters into the superior mesenteric vein. Traction on the 
transverse colon during colectomy can tear these fragile veins, 
which then retract into the parenchyma of the pancreas, making 
control tedious. There also are numerous small venous branches 
coming from the pancreatic parenchyma directly into the lateral 
and posterior aspect of the portal vein. Venous return from the 
body and tail of the pancreas drains into the splenic vein.
The lymphatic drainage from the pancreas is diffuse and 
widespread (Fig. 33-6). The profuse network of lymphatic ves-
sels and lymph nodes draining the pancreas provides egress to 
tumor cells arising from the pancreas. This diffuse lymphatic 
drainage contributes to the fact that pancreatic cancer often 
presents with positive lymph nodes and a high incidence of local 
recurrence after resection. Lymph nodes can be palpated along 
the distal bile duct and posterior aspect of the head of the pan-
creas in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, where the mesenteric 
vein passes under the neck of the pancreas, along the inferior 
border of the body, at the celiac axis and along the hepatic artery 
ascending into the porta hepatis, and along the splenic artery and 
vein. The pancreatic lymphatics also communicate with lymph 
nodes in the transverse mesocolon and mesentery of the proxi-
mal jejunum. Tumors in the body and tail of the pancreas often 
metastasize to these nodes and lymph nodes along the splenic 
vein and in the hilum of the spleen.
Neuroanatomy
The pancreas is innervated by the sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic nervous systems. The acinar cells responsible for exocrine 
secretion, the islet cells responsible for endocrine secretion, 
and the islet vasculature are innervated by both systems. 
The ­parasympathetic system stimulates endocrine and exocrine 
secretion and the sympathetic system inhibits secretion.2The 
pancreas is also innervated by neurons that secrete amines and 
peptides, such as somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal peptide 
(VIP), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and galanin. The 
exact role of these neurons in pancreatic physiology is uncer-
tain, but they do appear to affect both exocrine and endocrine 
function. The pancreas also has a rich supply of afferent sensory 
fibers, which are responsible for the intense pain associated with 
advanced pancreatic cancer, as well as acute and chronic pancre-
atitis. These somatic fibers travel superiorly to the celiac ganglia 
(Fig. 33-7). Interruption of these somatic fibers can stop trans-
mission of pain sensation.
HISTOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The exocrine pancreas accounts for about 85% of the pancreatic 
mass; 10% of the gland is accounted for by extracellular matrix, 
and 4% by blood vessels and the major ducts, whereas only 2% 
of the gland is comprised of endocrine tissue. The endocrine 
and exocrine pancreas are sometimes thought of as function-
ally separate, but these different components of the organ are 
coordinated to allow an elegant regulatory feedback system for 
digestive enzyme and hormone secretion. This complex system 
regulates the type of digestion, its rate, and the processing and 
distribution of absorbed nutrients. This coordination is facili-
tated by the physical approximation of the islets and the exo-
crine pancreas, the presence of specific islet hormone receptors 
on the plasma membranes of pancreatic acinar cells, and the 
existence of an islet-acinar portal blood system.
Although patients can live without a pancreas when insu-
lin and digestive enzyme replacement are administered, the loss 
of this islet-acinar coordination leads to impairments in diges-
tive function. Although only approximately 20% of the normal 
pancreas is required to prevent insufficiency, in many patients 
undergoing pancreatic resection, the remaining pancreas is not 
normal, and pancreatic endocrine and exocrine insufficiency can 
develop with removal of smaller portions of the gland.
Celiac
lymph node
Hepatic
lymph node
Pyloric
lymph node
Anterior
pancreatico-
duodenal
lymph node
Posterior
pancreaticoduodenal
lymph node
Superior mesenteric
lymph node
Inferior
body
Superior body 
Splenic 
lymph
node
Duodenum
Spleen
Figure 33-6.  Lymphatic supply to the 
pancreas. The lymphatic drainage from 
the pancreas is diffuse and widespread, 
which explains the high incidence of 
lymph node metastases and local 
recurrence of pancreatic cancer. The 
pancreatic lymphatics also commu-
nicate with lymph nodes in the trans-
verse mesocolon and mesentery of the 
proximal jejunum. Tumors in the body 
and tail of the pancreas are often unre-
sectable because they metastasize to 
these lymph nodes. (Reproduced with 
permission from Bell RH Jr: Atlas of 
pancreatic surgery, in Bell RH Jr, 
Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW (eds): 
Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and 
Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 
1996, p 969.)
1347
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Exocrine Pancreas
The pancreas secretes approximately 500 to 800 mL per day 
of colorless, odorless, alkaline, isosmotic pancreatic juice. Pan-
creatic juice is a combination of acinar cell and duct cell secre-
tions. The acinar cells secrete amylase, proteases, and lipases, 
enzymes responsible for the digestion of all three food types: 
carbohydrate, protein, and fat. The acinar cells are pyramid-
shaped, with their apices facing the lumen of the acinus. Near 
the apex of each cell are numerous enzyme-containing zymogen 
granules that fuse with the apical cell membrane (Fig. 33-8). 
Unlike the endocrine pancreas, where islet cells specialize in the 
secretion of one hormone type, individual acinar cells secrete all 
types of enzymes. However, the ratio of the different enzymes 
released is adjusted to the composition of digested food through 
nonparallel regulation of secretion.
Pancreatic amylase is secreted in its active form and com-
pletes the digestive process already begun by salivary amylase. 
Amylase is the only pancreatic enzyme secreted in its active 
form, and it hydrolyzes starch and glycogen to glucose, malt-
ose, maltotriose, and dextrins. These simple sugars are trans-
ported across the brush border of the intestinal epithelial cells 
by active transport mechanisms. Gastric hydrolysis of protein 
yields peptides that enter the intestine and stimulate intestinal 
endocrine cells to release cholecystokinin (CCK)-releasing pep-
tide, CCK, and secretin, which then stimulate the pancreas to 
secrete enzymes and bicarbonate into the intestine.
The proteolytic enzymes are secreted as proenzymes that 
require activation. Trypsinogen is converted to its active form, 
trypsin, by another enzyme, enterokinase, which is produced 
by the duodenal mucosal cells. Trypsin, in turn, activates the 
other proteolytic enzymes. Trypsinogen activation within the 
pancreas is prevented by the presence of inhibitors that are also 
secreted by the acinar cells. A failure to express a normal tryp-
sinogen inhibitor, pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI), 
also known as serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 1 (SPINK1), 
is a cause of familial pancreatitis. Inhibition of trypsinogen 
activation ensures that the enzymes within the pancreas remain 
Figure 33-7.  Innervation of the pancreas. 
The pancreas has a rich supply of afferent 
sensory fibers that travel superiorly to the 
celiac ganglia. Interruption of these somatic 
fibers with a celiac plexus block can interfere 
with transmission of pancreatic pain. (Repro-
duced with permission from Bell RH Jr: 
Atlas of pancreatic surgery, in Bell RH Jr, 
Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW [eds]: Diges-
tive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Phila-
delphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996, p 969.)
Spleen
Pancreas
Esophagus
Celiac ganglion
Right vagus nerve
Left vagus nerve
Splanchnic nerves
Duodenum
Abdominal aorta
Figure 33-8.  Acinar cell. Zymogen granules fuse with the apical 
membrane and release multiple enzymes to digest carbohydrates, 
proteins, and fat. (Reproduced with permission from Bloom W, 
Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders,1975, p 738.)
Acinar cells
Centroacinar cells
Intercalated duct
in an inactive precursor state and are activated only within the 
duodenum. Trypsinogen is expressed in several isoforms, and 
a missense mutation on the cationic trypsinogen, or PRSS1, 
results in premature, intrapancreatic activation of trypsinogen. 
This accounts for about two-thirds of cases of hereditary pan-
creatitis. Chymotrypsinogen is activated to form chymotrypsin. 
1348
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 33-1
Pancreatic enzymes
Enzyme
Substrate
Product
Carbohydrate
  Amylase (active)
Starch, glycogen
Glucose, maltose, maltotriose, 
  dextrins
Protein
  Endopeptidases
    Trypsinogen (inactive) 
Enterokinase Trypsin (active)
    Chymotrypsinogen (inactive) 
Enterokinase
Trypsin
 Chymotrypsin 
  (active)
    Proelastase (inactive) 
Enterokinase
Trypsin
 Elastase (active)
  Exopeptidases
    Procarboxy peptidase A&B (inactive)  
Enterokinase 
  Carboxypeptidase A&B (active)
Cleave bonds between amino acids
Cleave amino acids from end
  of peptide chains
Amino acids, dipeptides
—
Fat
  Pancreatic lipase (active)
  Phospholipase A2 (inactive) 
   Trypsin
 Phospholipase A2 
  (active)
  Cholesterol esterase
Triglycerides
Phospholipase
Neutral lipids
2-Monoglycerides, fatty acids
—
—
Elastase, carboxypeptidase A and B, and phospholipase are 
also activated by trypsin. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase 
cleave bonds between amino acids within a target peptide chain, 
and carboxypeptidase A and B cleave amino acids at the end 
of peptide chains. Individual amino acids and small dipeptides 
are then actively transported into the intestinal epithelial cells. 
Pancreatic lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides to 2-monoglyceride 
and fatty acid. Pancreatic lipase is secreted in an active form. 
Colipase is also secreted by the pancreas and binds to lipase, 
changing its molecular configuration and increasing its activity. 
Phospholipase A2 is secreted by the pancreas as a proenzyme 
that becomes activated by trypsin. Phospholipase A2 hydro-
lyzes phospholipids and, as with all lipases, requires bile salts 
for its action. Carboxylic ester hydrolase and cholesterol ester-
ase hydrolyze neutral lipid substrates like esters of cholesterol, 
fat-soluble vitamins, and triglycerides. The hydrolyzed fat is 
then packaged into micelles for transport into the intestinal epi-
thelial cells, where the fatty acids are reassembled and packaged 
inside chylomicrons for transport through the lymphatic system 
into the bloodstream (Table 33-1).
The centroacinar and intercalated duct cells secrete the 
water and electrolytes present in the pancreatic juice. About 
40 acinar cells are arranged into a spherical unit called an aci-
nus. Centroacinar cells are located near the center of the acinus 
and are responsible for fluid and electrolyte secretion. These 
cells contain the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which is needed 
for bicarbonate secretion. The amount of bicarbonate secreted 
varies with the pancreatic secretory rate, with greater concen-
trations of bicarbonate being secreted as the pancreatic secre-
tory rate increases. Chloride secretion varies inversely with 
bicarbonate secretion such that the sum of these two remains 
constant. In contrast, sodium and potassium concentrations 
are kept constant throughout the spectrum of secretory rates3  
(Fig. 33-9). The hormone secretin is released from cells in the 
duodenal mucosa in response to acidic chyme passing through 
the pylorus into the duodenum. Secretin is the major stimulant 
for bicarbonate secretion, which buffers the acidic fluid entering 
the duodenum from the stomach. CCK also stimulates bicarbon-
ate secretion, but to a much lesser extent than secretin. CCK 
potentiates secretin-stimulated bicarbonate secretion. Gastrin 
and acetylcholine, both stimulants of gastric acid secretion, 
are also weak stimulants of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion.4 
Truncal vagotomy produces a myriad of complex effects on the 
downstream digestive tract, but the sum effect on the exocrine 
pancreas is a reduction in bicarbonate and fluid secretion.5 The 
endocrine pancreas also influences the adjacent exocrine pan-
creatic secretions. Somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide (PP), 
and glucagon are all thought to inhibit exocrine secretion.
The acinar cells release pancreatic enzymes from their 
zymogen granules into the lumen of the acinus, and these pro-
teins combine with the water and bicarbonate secretions of the 
centroacinar cells. The pancreatic juice then travels into small 
intercalated ducts. Several small intercalated ducts join to form an 
interlobular duct. Cells in the interlobular ducts contribute fluid 
and electrolytes to adjust the final concentrations of the pancre-
atic fluid. Interlobular ducts then join to form about 20 secondary 
ducts that empty into the main pancreatic duct. Destruction of the 
branching ductal tree from recurrent inflammation, scarring, and 
deposition of stones eventually contributes to destruction of the 
exocrine pancreas and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Endocrine Pancreas
There are nearly 1 million islets of Langerhans in the normal 
adult pancreas. They vary greatly in size from 40 to 900 μm. 
Larger islets are located closer to the major arterioles and smaller 
islets are embedded more deeply in the parenchyma of the pan-
creas. Most islets contain 3000 to 4000 cells of five major types: 
alpha cells that secrete glucagon, β-cells that secrete insulin, 
delta cells that secrete somatostatin, epsilon cells that secrete 
ghrelin, and PP cells that secrete PP (Table 33-2).
1349
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Insulin is the best-studied pancreatic hormone. The discov-
ery of insulin in 1920 by Frederick Banting, an orthopedic sur-
geon, and Charles Best, a medical student, was recognized with 
the awarding of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. They 
produced diabetes in dogs by performing total pancreatectomy 
and then treated them with crude pancreatic extracts from dog 
and calf pancreata using techniques to prevent the breakdown 
of insulin by the proteolytic enzymes of the exocrine pancreas. 
Table 33-2
Pancreatic islet peptide products
Hormones
Islet Cell
Functions
Insulin
β (beta cell)
Decreased gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, fatty acid breakdown, and  
  ketogenesis
Increased glycogenesis, protein synthesis, and glucose uptake
Glucagon
α (alpha cell)
Opposite effects of insulin; increased hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
Somatostatin
δ (delta cell)
Inhibits GI secretion
Inhibits secretion and action of all GI endocrine peptides
Inhibits cell growth
Pancreatic polypeptide
PP (PP cell)
Inhibits pancreatic exocrine secretion and section of insulin
Facilitates hepatic effect of insulin
Amylin (IAPP)
β (beta cell)
Counterregulates insulin secretion and function
Pancreastatin
β (beta cell)
Decreases insulin and somatostatin release
Increases glucagon release
Decreases pancreatic exocrine secretion
Ghrelin
(epsilon cell)
Decreases insulin release and insulin action
IAPP = islet amyloid polypeptide.
Figure 33-9.  Composition of pancreatic exocrine secretions. 
Greater concentrations of bicarbonate are secreted at higher secre-
tory rates, and chloride secretion varies inversely with bicarbon-
ate secretion. In contrast, sodium and potassium concentrations are 
independent of the secretory rate. (Reproduced with permission 
from Bro-Rasmussen F et al: The composition of pancreatic juice 
as compared to sweat, parotid saliva, and tears. Acta Phys Scandinav. 
37:97–113, 1956.)
Concentration (mEq/L)
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
  0
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Secretory rate (mL/min)
Pancreatic juice
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Plasma
Na
HCO3
Cl
K
Na=151.5
HCO3=26.0
Cl=110.0
K=5.38
Insulin was subsequently purified and found to be a 56-amino 
acid peptide with two chains, an α and a β chain, joined by two 
disulfide bridges and a connecting peptide, or C-peptide. Pro-
insulin is made in the endoplasmic reticulum and then is trans-
ported to the Golgi complex, where it is packaged into granules 
and the C-peptide is cleaved off. There are two phases of insulin 
secretion. In the first phase, stored insulin is released. This phase 
lasts about 5 minutes after a glucose challenge. The second phase 
of insulin secretion is a longer, sustained release due to ongoing 
production of new insulin. β-cell synthesis of insulin is regu-
lated by plasma glucose levels, neural signals, and the paracrine 
influence of other islet cells. The diagnosis of diabetes is made 
by using oral and intravenous (IV) glucose tolerance tests. Oral 
glucose not only enters the bloodstream but also stimulates the 
release of enteric hormones such as gastric inhibitory peptide 
(also known as glucose-dependentinsulinotropic polypeptide 
or GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and CCK that aug-
ment the secretion of insulin, and are therefore referred to as 
incretins. As a result, oral glucose is a more vigorous stimulus to 
insulin secretion than IV glucose. In the oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT), the patient is fasted overnight, and a basal glucose 
value is determined. Forty g/m2or 75 g of glucose is given orally 
over 10 minutes. Blood samples are taken every 30 minutes for 
2 hours. Normal values and criteria for diabetes vary by age, but 
essentially all values should be <200 mg/dL, and the 120-minute 
value should be <140 mg/dL.
Insulin secretion by the β-cell is also influenced by plasma 
levels of amino acids such as arginine, lysine, leucine, and free 
fatty acids. Glucagon, GIP, GLP-1, and CCK stimulate insulin 
release, while somatostatin, amylin, and pancreastatin inhibit 
insulin release.6 Cholinergic fibers and beta sympathetic fibers 
stimulate insulin release, while alpha sympathetic fibers inhibit 
insulin secretion.
Insulin’s glucoregulatory function is to inhibit endogenous 
(hepatic) glucose production and to facilitate glucose transport 
1350
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
into cells, thus lowering plasma glucose levels. Insulin also 
inhibits glycogenolysis, fatty acid breakdown, and ketone for-
mation, and stimulates protein synthesis. There is a considerable 
amount of functional reserve in insulin secretory capacity. If 
the remaining portion of the pancreas is healthy, about 80% of 
the pancreas can be resected without the patient becoming dia-
betic.7 In patients with chronic pancreatitis, or other conditions 
in which much of the gland is diseased, resection of a smaller 
fraction of the pancreas can result in pancreatogenic, or type 3c 
diabetes (Table 33-3).
Insulin receptors are dimeric, tyrosine kinase–containing 
transmembrane proteins that are located on all cells. Insulin defi-
ciency (seen in type 1 and type 3c diabetes) results in an overex-
pression or upregulation of insulin receptors, which causes an 
enhanced sensitivity to insulin in muscle and adipocytes (and 
therefore increases the risk of insulin-induced hypoglycemia). 
Type 2 diabetes is associated with a downregulation of insulin 
receptors and relative hyperinsulinemia, with resulting insulin 
resistance. Some forms of diabetes are associated with selected 
impairments of hepatic or peripheral insulin receptors, such as 
pancreatogenic or type 3c diabetes (T3cDM) or maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young (MODY).
Glucagon is a 29-amino-acid, single-chain peptide that 
promotes hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and coun-
teracts the effects of insulin through its hyperglycemic action. 
Glucose is the primary regulator of glucagon secretion, as it 
is with insulin, but it has an inhibitory rather than stimulatory 
effect. Glucagon release is stimulated by hypoglycemia, and by 
the amino acids arginine and alanine. GLP-1 inhibits glucagon 
secretion in vivo, and insulin and somatostatin inhibit glucagon 
secretion in a paracrine fashion within the islet. The same neural 
impulses that regulate insulin secretion also regulate glucagon 
secretion, so that the two hormones work together in a balance 
of actions to maintain glucose levels. Cholinergic and beta sym-
pathetic fibers stimulate glucagon release, while alpha sympa-
thetic fibers inhibit glucagon release.8 In pancreatogenic or 
type 3c diabetes, glucagon responsiveness to a fall in blood glu-
cose is lost, thereby increasing the risk for hypoglycemia.
Although originally isolated from the hypothalamus, 
somatostatin is a peptide that is now known to have a wide ana-
tomic distribution, not only in neurons but also in the pancreas, 
gut, and other tissues. It is a highly conserved peptide hormone, 
as it is found in lower vertebrates, and is now realized to be of 
fundamental importance in regulatory processes throughout the 
body. One gene encodes for a common precursor that is dif-
ferentially processed to generate tissue-specific amounts of two 
bioactive products, somatostatin-14, and somatostatin-28. These 
peptides inhibit endocrine and exocrine secretion and affect 
neurotransmission, GI and biliary motility, intestinal absorption, 
vascular tone, and cell proliferation.
Five different somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) have been 
cloned and the biologic properties of each are being unraveled.9 
All five are G-protein-coupled receptors with seven highly con-
served transmembrane domains and unique amino and carboxy 
termini. Phosphorylation sites located within the second and 
third intracellular loops and in the cytoplasmic C-terminal seg-
ment are thought to mediate receptor regulation. Although the 
naturally occurring peptides bind to all five receptors, soma-
tostatin-28 is relatively selective for SSTR5. The hexapeptide 
and octapeptide analogues such as octreotide bind only to 
SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5. These analogues have a longer 
serum half-life, and their potent inhibitory effect has been used 
clinically to treat both endocrine and exocrine disorders. For 
example, octreotide has been shown to decrease fistula output 
and speed the time it takes for enteric and pancreatic fistulas to 
close.10
Endocrine release of somatostatin occurs during a meal. 
The major stimulant is probably intraluminal fat. Acidification 
of the gastric and duodenal mucosa also releases somatostatin 
in isolated perfused organ preparations. Acetylcholine from the 
cholinergic neurons inhibits somatostatin release.
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) is a 36-amino-acid, straight-
chain peptide discovered by Kimmel in 1968 during the process 
of insulin purification. Protein is the most potent enteral stimu-
lator of PP release, closely followed by fat, whereas glucose has 
a weaker effect.11 Hypoglycemia, whether or not it is insulin 
Table 33-3
Clinical and laboratory findings in types of diabetes mellitus
Parameter
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3c
IDDM
NIDDM
Pancreatogenic
Ketoacidosis
Common
Rare
Rare
Hyperglycemia
Severe
Usually Mild
Mild
Hypoglycemia
Common
Rare
Common
Peripheral Insulin Sensitivity
Normal or Increased
Decreased
Increased
Hepatic Insulin Sensitivity
Normal
Normal or Decreased
Decreased
Insulin Levels
Low
High
Low
Glucagon Levels
Normal or High
Normal or High
Low
PP Levels
Normal or Low (late)
High
Low
GIP Levels
Normal or Low
Normal or High
Low
GLP-1 Levels
Normal
Normal or High
Normal or High
Typical Age of Onset
Childhood or adolescence
Adulthood
Any
Abbreviations: IDDM, insulin dependent diabetes mellitus; NIDDM, non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus; PP, pancreatic polypeptide; GIP, glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1. [Reproduced with permission from Cui YF & Andersen DK. kkjkjdht Elsevier159]
1351
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
induced, strongly stimulates PP secretion through cholinergic 
stimulation.12 Phenylalanine, tryptophan, and fatty acids in the 
duodenum stimulate PP release, probably by inducing CCK and 
secretin release. In the isolated perfused pancreas, insulin and 
gastric inhibitory peptide stimulate PP release, while glucagon 
and somatostatin inhibit it. Vagal stimulation of the pancreas is 
the most important regulator of PP secretion. In fact, vagotomy 
eliminates the rise in PP levels usually seen after a meal. This 
can be used as a test for the completeness of a surgical vagot-
omy or for the presence of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
PP has been shown to inhibit choleresis (bile secretion), 
gallbladder contraction, and secretion by the exocrine pancreas. 
However, PP’s most important role is in glucose regulation 
through its regulation of hepatic insulin receptor gene expres-
sion. A deficiency in PP secretion due to proximal pancreatec-
tomy, severe chronic pancreatitis, or cystic fibrosis,is associated 
with diminished hepatic insulin sensitivity due to reduced 
hepatic insulin receptor availability.13 This effect is reversed by 
PP administration.14
Recent studies have shown that a fifth islet peptide, ghre-
lin, is secreted from a distinct population of islet cells, called 
epsilon cells.15,16 Ghrelin also is present in the gastric fundus 
in large amounts and stimulates growth hormone secretion via 
growth hormone releasing hormone release from the pituitary. 
It is an orexigenic, or appetite-stimulating, peptide the plasma 
levels of which are increased in obesity. Ghrelin has also been 
shown to block insulin effects on the liver, and inhibits the 
β-cell response to incretin hormones and glucose.17 Therefore, 
ghrelin secretion from and within the islet may modulate the 
responses of other islet cells to nutrient and hormonal stimuli.
In addition to the five main peptides secreted by the pan-
creas, there are a number of other peptide products of the islet 
cells, including amylin and pancreastatin, as well as neuropep-
tides such as VIP, galanin, and serotonin. Amylin or islet amy-
loid polypeptide (IAPP) is a 37-amino-acid polypeptide that is 
predominantly expressed by the pancreatic β-cells, where it is 
stored along with insulin in secretory granules.18 The function of 
IAPP seems to be the modulation or counterregulation of insulin 
secretion and function. Pancreastatin is a recently discovered 
pancreatic islet peptide product that inhibits insulin, and possi-
bly somatostatin release, and augments glucagon release.19,20 In 
addition to this effect on the endocrine pancreas, pancreastatin 
inhibits pancreatic exocrine secretion.21
Islet Distribution
The β-cells are generally located in the central portion of each 
islet and make up about 70% of the total islet cell mass. The other 
cell types are located predominantly in the periphery. The delta 
cells are least plentiful, making up only 5%; the α-cells make up 
10%, and the PP cells make up 15%.22 In contrast to the acinar 
cells that secrete the full gamut of exocrine enzymes, the islet 
cells seem to specialize in the secretion of predominantly one 
hormone. However, individual islet cells can secrete multiple 
hormones. For example, the β-cells secrete both insulin and amy-
lin, which counterregulates the actions of insulin. In reality, more 
than 20 different hormones are secreted by the islets, and the 
exact functions of this milieu are very complex. There is diversity 
among the islets depending on their location within the pancreas. 
The α- and δ-cells are evenly distributed throughout the pan-
creas, but islets in the head and uncinate process (ventral anlage) 
have a higher percentage of PP cells and fewer α-cells, whereas 
islets in the body and tail (dorsal anlage) contain the majority of 
α-cells and few PP cells. This is clinically significant because 
pancreatoduodenectomy removes 95% of the PP cells in the pan-
creas. This may partially explain the higher incidence of glucose 
intolerance after the Whipple procedure compared to a distal 
pancreatectomy with an equivalent amount of tissue resected. In 
addition, chronic pancreatitis, which disproportionately affects 
the pancreatic head, is associated with PP deficiency and pan-
creatogenic diabetes.23 The relative preponderance of α-cells in 
the body and tail of the pancreas explains the typical location of 
glucagonomas.
ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Definition, Incidence, and Epidemiology
Acute pancreatitis is a common and challenging disease that 
can develop both local and systemic complications. Its hall-
mark is acute pancreatic inflammation associated with little or 
no fibrosis. It ranges from a mild self-limiting inflammation 
of the pancreas to critical disease characterized by infected 
pancreatic necrosis, multiple organ failure and a high risk of 
mortality.24 The clinical outcome has improved over recent 
decades, even in the absence of specific treatments that target 
outcome-determining pathophysiology, probably because of 
a more consistent approach to diagnosis, monitoring and 
­management.
Acute pancreatitis is the most common gastrointestinal dis-
charge diagnosis in the United States (274,119 patients in 2009), 
an incidence which has increased 30% since 2000, and is associ-
ated with the highest aggregate inpatient costs at 2.6 billion dol-
lars per year.25 The crude mortality rate of 1.0/100,000 ranks it 
as the 14th most fatal illness overall and the ninth most common 
noncancer gastrointestinal death. Worldwide the incidence of 
acute pancreatitis ranges from 5 to 80/100,000 population with 
the highest incidence recorded in Finland and United States.26 The 
racial incidence of acute pancreatitis also shows significant varia-
tion related to the prevalence of etiological factors and ethnicity. 
The annual incidence of acute pancreatitis in Native Americans is 
4 per 100,000 population; in whites it is 5.7 per 100,000 popula-
tion; and in blacks it is 20.7 per 100,000 population.27 Smoking is 
an independent risk factor for acute pancreatitis.28
Etiology
Many factors have been causally related to the onset of acute 
pancreatitis (Table 33-4), but in many instances the mechanism 
is poorly understood. The most common causes are gallstones 
and alcohol, accounting for up to 80% of cases, but it is not 
uncommon to diagnose acute pancreatitis in the absence of these 
etiological factors. Therefore it is important that a systematic 
approach is taken to the identification of other, less common, 
and potentially modifiable, factors. The median age of the 
onset of acute pancreatitis varies with etiology; alcohol and 
drug induced pancreatitis typically present in the third or fourth 
decade compared with gallstone and trauma induced disease in 
the sixth decade. The gender difference is probably more related 
to etiology: in males alcohol is more often the cause while in 
females it is gallstones.
Gallstones
Evidence that passage of a gallstone is related to the onset 
of acute pancreatitis comes from the characteristic transient 
derangement of liver function tests and the high retrieval rate 
1352
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of gallstones from feces within 10 days of an attack of acute 
pancreatitis compared with those without acute pancreatitis 
(88% vs. 11%).29 The mechanism by which small gallstones 
migrating down the common bile duct, past the pancreatic 
duct junction and into the duodenum, cause acute pancreatitis 
is not clear. Opie made the seminal observation of a gallstone 
impacted in the sphincter of Oddi in two fatal cases of acute 
pancreatitis, which lead to the “common channel” hypothesis. 
It was proposed that a gallstone transiently lodged in the distal 
common channel of the ampulla of Vater allowed bile to reflux 
into the pancreatic duct, but this cannot be reliably reproduced 
in experimental models. Another proposal suggested that tran-
sient incompetence caused by the passage of a stone through 
the sphincter might allow duodenal fluid and bile to reflux into 
the pancreatic duct, but this is refuted by the usual absence of 
acute pancreatitis after endoscopic sphincterotomy or surgical 
sphinteroplasty. A third possibility is that acute pancreatitis is 
due to a gallstone obstructing the pancreatic duct, leading to 
ductal hypertension. It has been postulated that this backpres-
sure might lead to minor ductal disruption, extravasation of pan-
creatic juice into the less alkaline interstitium of the pancreas, 
and promotion of enzyme activation. When gallstones and other 
etiological factors cannot be identified there is still the possibil-
ity of finding microlithiasis, seen as birefringent crystals, on bile 
microscopy.30 This occult microlithiasis is probably responsible 
for up to half of those with idiopathic acute pancreatitis.
Alcohol
Alcohol ingestion is associated with acute pancreatitis and sus-
tained alcohol ingestion is associated with recurrent acute pan-
creatitis and development of chronic pancreatitis in susceptible 
individuals who have been drinking for more than a decade. 
The type of alcohol consumed is less important than the amount 
Table 33-4
Etiologies of acute pancreatitis
Alcohol
Biliary tract disease
Hyperlipidemia
Hereditary
Hypercalcemia
Trauma
  External
  Surgical
  Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Ischemia
  Hypoperfusion
  Atheroembolic
  Vasculitis
Pancreatic duct obstruction
  Neoplasms
  Pancreas divisum
  Ampullary and duodenal lesions
Infections
Venom
Drugs
Idiopathic
Source: Reproduced with permission from Yeo CJ, Cameron JL: Exo-
crine pancreas, in Townsend CM et al (eds): Sabiston’s Textbook of Sur-
gery. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2000, p 1117. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
consumed (typically 100 to 150 grams per day) and the pattern of 
drinking. It is common for patients with alcohol associated acute 
pancreatitis to have a history of excess alcohol consumption 
prior to the first attack. There are several mechanisms by which 
ethanol causes acute pancreatitis. Ethanol is a metabolic toxin 
to pancreatic acinar cells and causes a brief secretory increase 
followed by inhibition. The secretory burst coupled with ethanol 
induced spasm of the sphincter of Oddi is thought to incite acute 
pancreatitis. Ethanol also induces ductal permeability, which 
would allow prematurely activated enzymes to cause damage 
to the pancreatic parenchyma. Ethanol also increases the pro-
tein content of pancreatic juice, decreases bicarbonate levels, 
and trypsin inhibitor concentration. The formation of protein 
plugs may also contribute by causing an obstructive element to 
pancreatic outflow.
Iatrogenic
Acute pancreatitis can result from a number of treatments, 
including pancreatic biopsy, exploration of the extrahepatic 
biliary tree and ampulla of Vater, distal gastrectomy, splenec-
tomy, colectomy, nephrectomy, aortic aneurysmorraphy, and 
retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. As the pancreas is suscep-
tible to ischemia it can also occur secondary to splanchnic hypo-
perfusion with cardio-pulmonary bypass or cardiac transplant. 
Most commonly, acute pancreatitis occurs as a complication of 
ERCP in 5% to 10% of procedures, and in many series it is 
the third most common identified etiological factor. The risk of 
post-ERCP acute pancreatitis is increased if the contrast agent 
is infused repeatedly under high pressure by the endoscopist and 
in patients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. Recent evidence 
demonstrates that the risk can be decreased with prophylactic, 
rectally administered, nonsteroidal drugs.31
Hereditary Pancreatitis
Hereditary pancreatitis is an autosomal dominant disorder 
usually related to mutations of the cationic trypsinogen gene 
(PRSS1). Mutations in this gene cause premature activation of 
trypsinogen to trypsin and cause abnormalities of ductal secre-
tion, both of which promote acute pancreatitis. Mutations in the 
SPINK1 protein, which blocks the active binding site of trypsin, 
is also likely to have a role in predisposing to acute pancreatitis. 
Variations in penetration and phenotype are common and there 
are many other mutations that may become implicated. Mutant 
enzymes activated within acinar cells can overwhelm the first 
line of defense (pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor) and resist 
backup defenses (e.g., proteolytic degradation, enzyme Y, and 
trypsin itself) allowing activated mutant cationic trypsin to trig-
ger the entire zymogen activation cascade.32
Tumors
A pancreatic or periampullary tumor should be considered in 
any patient with idiopathic acute pancreatitis. Approximately 
1% to 2% of patients with acute pancreatitis have a pancreatic 
tumor, and an episode of acute pancreatitis can be the first clini-
cal manifestation of the tumor. If no historical information leads 
to an etiologic diagnosis, cross sectional pancreatic imaging 
after the resolution of an unexplained episode of acute pancre-
atitis is indicated.
Hyperlipidemia
Patients with types I and V hyperlipoproteinemia can experience 
episodes of abdominal pain, and these often occur in association 
with marked hypertriglyceridaemia. Lipase is thought to liberate 
1353
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
toxic fatty acids into the pancreatic microcirculation, leading to 
microcirculatory impairment and ischemia. Dietary modifica-
tions to restrict triglycerides are usually effective, but clofibrate 
may be prescribed in refractory cases of hypertriglyceridemia.
Drugs and Miscellaneous Causes
Many drugs can produce hyperamylasemia and/or abdominal 
pain, and a drug is considered suspect if the pancreatitis-like 
illness resolves with its discontinuation. Ethical considerations 
generally rule out rechallenge with the suspect drug, so the con-
nection often remains vague. However, despite these limita-
tions, certain drugs are known to be capable of causing acute 
pancreatitis. These include the thiazide diuretics, furosemide, 
estrogens, azathioprine, l-asparaginase, 6-mercaptopurine, 
methyldopa, the sulfonamides, tetracycline, pentamidine, pro-
cainamide, nitrofurantoin, dideoxyinosine, valproic acid, and 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. In addition, lipid-based intrave-
nous drugs and solutions, such as propofol, can also cause acute 
pancreatitis.33 A history of verified or suspected drug-induced 
pancreatitis should serve as a contraindication to prescribing 
that medication again.
Hypercalcemic states arising from hyperparathyroidism 
can result in both acute and chronic pancreatitis; the mecha-
nism most likely involves hypersecretion and the formation of 
calcified stones intraductally. Also implicated are infestations 
by Ascaris lumbricoides and the liver fluke Clonorchis sinensis, 
which is endemic to China, Japan, and Southeast Asia. These 
cause Oriental cholangitis, which is associated with cholangio-
carcinoma obstructing the pancreatic duct.
Other implicated factors include azotemia, vasculitis, 
and the sting of the Trinidadian scorpion Tityus trinitatis. This 
scorpion’s venom has been shown to cause neurotransmitter 
discharge from cholinergic nerve terminals, leading to massive 
production of pancreatic juice. Poisoning with antiacetylcholin-
esterase insecticides has a similar effect. Finally, no apparent 
cause can be ascribed to some episodes of acute pancreatitis, 
and these constitute the group referred to as idiopathic pan-
creatitis. Some of these patients are eventually found to have 
gallstone-related pancreatitis, which calls for caution in labeling 
any episode “idiopathic.”
Pathophysiology
Acute pancreatitis occurs in various degrees of severity, the 
determinants of which are multifactorial. The generally preva-
lent belief today is that pancreatitis begins with the activation 
of digestive zymogens inside acinar cells, which cause acinar 
cell injury. Studies suggest that the ultimate severity of the 
resulting pancreatitis may be determined by the events that 
occur subsequent to acinar cell injury.34 These include inflam-
matory cell recruitment and activation, as well as generation 
and release of cytokines and other chemical mediators of 
inflammation (Fig. 33-10).
Precipitating Initial Events
Acinar Cell Events.  Acute pancreatitis is an inflammatory dis-
order believed to begin in the pancreas and is generally restricted 
to it; although in some cases its effects can be systemic, diverse 
and result in multiple organ failure. In 1896, Chiari advanced 
the understanding of acute pancreatitis by proposing the concept 
that the pancreatitis is essentially the premature, intrapancreatic 
activation of digestive enzymes, resulting in auto-digestion of 
the organ. Since then the intra-acinar activation of zymogens 
•  Zymogen activation
•  Inhibited secretion
•  Release of cytokines and other
     inflammatory mediators 
Multi-organ
failure
Systemic
inflammatory
response
Inflammation
ischemia
•  Necrosis
•  Apoptosis
Injurious
cytokines / 
chemokines 
Edema
Insult
Figure 33-10.  Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis.
has been demonstrated consistently in multiple animal mod-
els of acute pancreatitis and is considered a central piece in 
the puzzle of acute pancreatitis.35, 36 The key role of trypsin 
activation in acute pancreatitis has gained additional support 
from recent studies showing that mice lacking trypsinogen-7 
(the isoform of trypsinogen which is activated during acute 
pancreatitis in mice) have significantly less pancreatic injury 
during acute pancreatitis37 and that intra-acinar expression of 
active trypsin causes pancreatitis in mice.38 The role of trypsin 
activation in the pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis has also 
been suggested by clinical studies; e.g., hereditary pancreatitis 
is associated with mutations that lead to elevated intracellular 
trypsin activation39 and activation of trypsinogen has been dem-
onstrated in clinical pancreatitis as well.40
1354
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The mechanisms by which injurious stimuli lead to intra-
acinar activation of trypsinogen and autodigestion of the gland 
have been the focus of research in pancreatitis for decades. 
Because the exocrine pancreas produces enzymes that are 
potentially injurious to it, several protective mechanisms have 
evolved to prevent autodigestion under normal conditions. 
Enzymes are synthesized as inactive precursors called proen-
zymes or zymogens, which are then transported and secreted 
outside the gland. Their activation occurs safely in the duo-
denum, where the brush-border enzyme enteropeptidase (or 
enterokinase) activates the trypsinogen, and the resulting tryp-
sin then activates the other zymogens in a cascade reaction. 
This separates the site of production of these enzymes from 
the site of activation and thus the pancreas is insulated against 
enzymatic attack. Within the acinar cell itself, the potentially 
harmful digestive enzymes are segregated from the surrounding 
cytoplasm by being enclosed within membrane-bound organ-
elles referred to as zymogen granules. Another layer of protec-
tion is provided by the synthesis of trypsin inhibitors, which are 
transported and stored along with the digestive enzyme zymo-
gens. These are available to inhibit small amounts of prema-
turely-activated trypsinogen within the pancreatic acinar cells. 
It is theorized that acute pancreatitis occurs when this process 
goes awry and the gland is injured by the erroneously-activated 
enzymes that it produces. Although the mechanism(s) of errone-
ous activation are not fully understood, it has been shown that 
intra-acinar activation of trypsinogen goes hand-in-hand with 
inhibition of acinar secretion.41, 42 Furthermore, in the presence 
of injurious stimuli, the zymogens responsible for initiating the 
disease are not secreted outside, but are observed to co-localize 
with cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain lysosomal enzymes such 
as cathepsin B.43 Data suggest that cathepsin B in these vacu-
oles activates trypsinogen. Thus, inhibition of cathepsin B by 
pharmacological inhibitors44 or by genetic deletion of cathep-
sin B eliminates trypsin activation and decreases the severity 
of pancreatitis in animal models.45 What leads to the coming 
together of zymogens and lysosomal hydrolases is unclear, but 
injurious stimuli leading to sustained cytosolic calcium increase 
have been indicted. ­Blocking this calcium increase prevents co-
localization and activation of trypsin, and decreases injury due to 
pancreatitis.46 Based on these data, pre-ERCP supplementation 
of magnesium, a natural antagonist of calcium, is currently being 
evaluated as a strategy to decrease post-ERCP pancreatitis.47 
How activation of trypsin in the co-localization vacuoles leads 
to pancreatic damage is also not clear. Recent work has led to 
the novel hypothesis that the lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin B 
activates trypsinogen to trypsin within the co-localization vacu-
oles. Trypsin then permeabilizes these co-localization vacuoles 
causing the release of cathepsin B into the cytosol. Once in the 
cytosol, cathepsin B initiates apoptotic cell death by permeabiliz-
ing mitochondrial membranes, which allows cytochrome C to be 
released into the cytosol. This initiates the apoptotic cascade and 
results in the apoptotic death of the acinar cells (Fig. 33-11).48
Intrapancreatic Events
Activated neutrophils are attracted to a focus of tissue injury 
and after activation release superoxides (the “respiratory burst”) 
and proteolytic enzymes (cathepsins, elastase and collagenase) 
which cause further injury. In addition macrophages release 
cytokines (including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), inter-
leukin (IL)-6, and IL-8) which mediate the local and the sys-
temic inflammatory responses. These inflammatory mediators 
cause an increased pancreatic vascular permeability, leading to 
edema, hemorrhage, and microthrombi. Fluid may collect in 
and around the pancreas. The failure of the pancreatic micro-
circulation, a feature of more severe acute pancreatitis, results 
in pancreatic hypoperfusion and necrosis. Acute inflammation 
of the pancreatic parenchyma and peripancreatic tissues, but 
without recognizable necrosis is termed interstitital edema-
tous pancreatitis.24 When necrosis is present, and evidenced 
by pancreatic hypoperfusion with constrast CT, it is termed 
necrotizing pancreatitis (Fig. 33-12). The updated morphologi-
cal definitions and the contrast enhanced CT criteria for the 
diagnosis of the local complications of acute pancreatitis have 
recently been published in the revised Atlanta statement,49 and 
summarized in Table 33-5.50
Figure 33-11.  Schematic representation of the 
acinar cell events in acute pancreatitis. When aci-
nar cells are pathologically stimulated, their lyso-
somal (L) and zymogen (Z) contents colocalize, 
consequently trypsinogen is activated to trypsin 
by cathepsin B. Increased cytosolic calcium is 
required for colocalization. Once trypsin has per-
meabilized the contents of the cytosol, cathepsin B 
and other contents of these colocalized organ-
elles are released. Once in the cytosol, cathepsin 
B activates apoptosis by causing cytochrome c 
to be released from the mitochondria. Activation 
of PKC results in a sudden activation of nuclear 
factor kappa beta (NKκb) which in turn triggers 
the release of cytokines that attract inflammatory 
response cells which mediate local and systemic 
inflammation cascades.37
Acinar cell death
To Pancreatic Duct
Trypsinogen
Cathepsin B
Active Trypsin
early stages
Leaky colocalized
organelles
Colocalization
Sustained
Rise in Ca2+
PKC activation
Insult
Systemic Inflammation
Release of Cytokines
and Chemokines
Recruitment of
Inflammatory Cells
Later stages
NF–KB
activation
Local Injury: Pancreatitis
Z
L
1355
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Systemic Events
An important aspect of the pathophysiology of acute pancre-
atitis is the mechanism by which events occurring in the pan-
creas induce systemic inflammation and multiorgan failure.
The NFκB- dependent inflammatory pathway is one such key 
pathway. NFκB activation parallels trypsin activation in acute 
pancreatitis but appears to be independent of it. The role of 
trypsin in NFκB activation was debated for a long time, but 
this issue seems to be largely settled following the observation 
that NFκB activation still occurs in acini from trypsin knockout 
mice, which obviously do not have pathologic trypsin activa-
tion.37 However, sustained calcium increase, which leads to 
trypsinogen activation, is critical for NFκB activation as well, 
since attenuation of cytosolic calcium also abrogates NFκB acti-
vation.51 Once activated, NFκB regulates synthesis of multiple 
cytokines and chemokines, leading to recruitment of various 
inflammatory cells that then magnify and propagate systemic 
inflammation.
Although intra-acinar events initiate acute pancreatitis, 
events occurring subsequent to acinar cell injury determine the 
severity of pancreatitis. Once recruited to the pancreas, various 
inflammatory cells lead to further acinar cell injury and cause 
an elevation of various pro-inflammatory mediators such as 
TNF-α; IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, and other chemokines and anti-inflam-
matory factors.36 Elucidation of these mediators has encouraged 
efforts to target their production or activity with an aim to mod-
ulate the course of severe acute pancreatitis.
Organ failure can develop at any stage of acute pancreati-
tis, associated with an overwhelming proinflammatory response 
Figure 33-12.  CT scan showing well perfused interstitial edema-
tous acute pancreatitis of the neck and tail of the pancreas with a con-
fluent area of necrosis of the pancreatic body. Pancreas surrounded 
by fluid, inflammation, and possible peripancreatic fat necrosis.
Table 33-5
Local complications of acute pancreatitis50
Content
Acute (<4 weeks, no defined wall)
Chronic (>4 weeks, defined wall)
No infection
Infection
No infection
Infection
Fluid
Acute pancreatic fluid collection (APFC) Infected APFC
Pseudocyst
Infected pseudocyst
Solid é fluid
Acute necrotic collection (ANC)
Infected ANC
Walled off necrosis (WON) Infected WON
Source: Reproduced with permission from Windsor JA, Petrov MS: Acute pancreatitis reclassified. Commentary. Gut. 2013;62:4. With permission from 
the BMJ Publishing Group.
early, or later secondary to the development of infected local 
complications. The drivers of the systemic response are poorly 
understood, although factors include the elaboration of proin-
flammatory cytokines, and it appears that mesenteric lymph, 
bypassing the liver and containing these constituents, may con-
tribute to the development of organ failure.52 The development of 
pancreatic necrosis, the breakdown of the intestinal barrier and 
the suppression of the immune response through the compen-
satory inflammatory response contribute to the development of 
infected pancreatic necrosis, the incidence of which peaks in the 
third to fourth week. This is usually associated with deterioration 
in the patient and may be associated with the late development of 
the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and multi-
organ dysfunction syndrome/failure (MODS/F).
Organ failure is scored using the Marshall or Sequential 
Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) systems (Table 33-6). The 
three organ systems most frequently involved are cardiovascu-
lar, respiratory, and renal. Multiple organ failure is defined as 
two or more organs registering 2 or more points on these scoring 
systems.49 Monitoring organ failure over time and in response to 
treatment is important in the clinical care of the disease.
Management of the Patient
General Considerations.  The management of acute pancre-
atitis covers a wide spectrum of severity. Patients with sus-
pected acute pancreatitis should be admitted to hospital. Those 
with mild acute pancreatitis usually remain in hospital for less 
than a week, while those with severe and critical acute pancre-
atitis may require many weeks or months of intensive treat-
ment. The risk of mortality reflects this spectrum of severity. 
The risk is less than 1% for those with mild disease, increasing 
to around 10% for those with moderate disease, but for severe 
and critical disease the mortality risk is much higher (20% to 
40% and greater than 50%, respectively). The earlier identifi-
cation of these high-risk categories and the transfer of these 
patients to specialized centers is an important priority of man-
agement.53 Scoring systems such as Ranson’s Criteria identify 
these high-risk patients (Table 33-7). The management of acute 
pancreatitis should be multidisciplinary and it is important that 
a coordinated care plan is carefully supervised.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis requires the patient to pres-
ent with abdominal pain consistent with acute pancreatitis 
(acute onset of a severe constant epigastric pain which often 
radiates through to the mid back) and the elevation of serum 
amylase or lipase (>3 times upper limit of normal). Imaging 
(usually by contrast enhanced CT scanning) is only required for 
the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis when these diagnostic criteria 
are not met.49 Because of the many causes of hyperamylasemia, 
1356
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 33-7
Ranson’s prognostic signs of pancreatitis
Criteria for acute pancreatitis not due to gallstones
At admission
During the initial 48 h
  Age >55 y
  Hematocrit fall >10 points
  WBC >16,000/mm3
  BUN elevation >5 mg/dL
  Blood glucose >200 mg/dL   Serum calcium <8 mg/dL
  Serum LDH >350 IU/L
  Arterial PO2 <60 mm Hg
  Serum AST >250 U/dL
  Base deficit >4 mEq/L
  Estimated fluid 
sequestration >6 L
Criteria for acute gallstone pancreatitis
At admission
During the initial 48 h
  Age >70 y
  Hematocrit fall >10 points
  WBC >18,000/mm3
  BUN elevation >2 mg/dL
  Blood glucose >220 mg/dL   Serum calcium <8 mg/dL
  Serum LDH >400 IU/L
  Base deficit >5 mEq/L
  Serum AST >250 U/dL
  Estimated fluid 
sequestration >4 L
AST = aspartate transaminase; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; LDH = 
lactate dehydrogen-ase; PO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; WBC = white 
blood cell count. 
Note: Fewer than 3 positive criteria predict mild, uncomplicated disease 
whereas more than 6 positive criteria predict severe disease with a mor-
tality risk of 50%.
Sources: Data from Ranson JHC: Etiological and prognostic factors in 
human acute pancreatitis: A review. Am J Gastroenterol 77:633, 1982, 
and From Ranson JH, Rifkind KM, Roses DF, et al. Prognostic signs 
and the role of operative management in acute pancreatitis. Surg Gyne-
col Obstet 139:69, 1974.
Table 33-6
Sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score in acute pancreatitis49
0
1
2
3
4
Respiration
(PaO2FIO2) (mm Hg)
>400
≤400
≤300
≤200 with respiratory 
support
≤100 with respiratory 
support
Coagulation
Platelets (xl01 per μL)
>150
≤150
≤100
≤50
≤20
Liver
Bilirubin (μmol/L)
<20
20–32
33–101
102–204
>204
Cardiovascular
Hypotension
No 
hypotension
MAP 
<70mm Hg
Dopamine ≤5 or 
dobutamine (any dose)∗
Dopamine >5 or epi 
≤0.1∗ or norepi ≤0.1∗
Dopamine >15 or epi 
>0.1∗ or norepi >0.1∗
Central nervous system
Glasgow coma score
15
13–14
10–12
6–9
<6
Kidney
Creatinine (μmol/L) or 
urine output
<110
110–170
171–299
300–440 or  
<500 ml/day
>440 or <200 ml/day
MAP = mean arterial pressure. Epi = epineptvine. Norepi = norepinephrine. ∗Adrenergic agents administered for at least 1 h (doses given in μg/kg per min). 
A score of 2 or more in any two systems indicates the presence of multiple organ failure.
it is important to measure either the pancreatic isoenzyme of 
amylase or lipase.
The serum amylase concentration increases almost imme-
diately with the onset of disease and peaks within several 
hours.54 It remains elevated for 3 to 5 days before returning 
to normal. There is no significant correlation between the mag-
nitude of serum amylase elevation and severity of pancreatitis; 
in fact, a milder form of acute pancreatitis is often associated 
with higher levels of serum amylase compared with that in a 
more severe form of the disease.
It is important to note that hyperamylasemia can also occur 
as a result of conditions not involving pancreatitis. For exam-
ple, hyperamylasemia can occur in a patient with small bowel 
obstruction, perforated duodenal ulcer, or other intra-abdominal 
inflammatory conditions. In contrast, a patient with acute pancre-
atitis may have a normal serum amylase level, which could be due 
to several reasons. In patients with hyperlipidemia, values might 
appear to be normal because of interference by lipids with chemi-
cal determination of serum amylase. In many cases, urinary clear-
ance of pancreatic enzymes from the circulation increases during 
pancreatitis; therefore, urinary levels may be more sensitive than 
serum levels. For these reasons, it is recommended that amylase 
concentrations also be measured in the urine. Urinary amylase 
levels usually remain elevated for several days after serum lev-
els have returned to normal. In patients with severe pancreatitis 
associated with significant necrotic damage, the pancreas may not 
release large amounts of enzymes into the circulation.
With increasing severity of disease, the intravascular fluid 
loss may become life-threatening as a result of sequestration of 
edematous fluid in the retroperitoneum. Hemoconcentration then 
results in an elevated hematocrit. However, there also may be 
bleeding into the retroperitoneum or the peritoneal cavity. In 
some patients (about 1%), the blood from necrotizing pancreatitis 
may dissect through the soft tissues and manifest itself as a bluish 
discoloration around the umbilicus (Cullen’s sign) or in the flanks 
1357
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
(Grey Turner’s sign). The severe fluid loss may lead to prerenal 
azotemia with elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels. 
There also may be hyperglycemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hypo-
calcemia sufficient in some cases to produce tetany.
Pain Management
Pain is the cardinal symptom of acute pancreatitis and its relief 
is a clinical priority. There is a lack of high quality evidence 
to guide the choice of analgesic. Because of unpredictable 
­absorption analgesia should be administered intravenously, at 
least at the outset and before oral intake has been established. 
Those with mild pain can usually be managed with a nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug (e.g., metamizole 2g/8h IV) while those 
with more severe pain are best managed with opioid analgesia 
(e.g., buprenorphine 0.3mg/4h IV). Administration of buprenor-
phine, pentazocine, procaine hydrochloride, and meperidine are 
all of value in controlling abdominal pain. Morphine is to be 
avoided, due to its potential to cause sphincter of Oddi spasm.
Predicting Severity
Where classification relates to the present or past severity of 
acute pancreatitis, prediction is about the future and ultimate 
severity and outcome of the patient. Accurately predicting 
acute pancreatitis severity is important in making triage deci-
sions about whether a patient should be transferred to a tertiary 
hospital, or admitted to an intensive care unit, and in making 
decisions about fluid therapy, whether an ERCP is indicated, 
and other issues. There is a long history of attempts to find prog-
nostic or predictive markers that accurately stratify the risk, with 
the most widely used being the Ranson’s criteria (Table 33-7) 
or modified Glasgow criteria. Both use clinical and biochemical 
parameters scored over the first 48 hours of admission. When 
there are 3 or more positive criteria, the disease is considered 
“predicted severe.” There are many other approaches to predict-
ing severity. At 24 hours after admission an APACHE II score 
of 8 or more or a serum C-reactive protein level of >150mg/dl 
has a similar accuracy in predicting severity as Ranson’s crite-
ria.54 The more recently proposed Bedside Index for Severity 
of Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP) is calculated from blood urea 
nitrogen (> 25 mg/dl), impaired mental status (GCS <15), pres-
ence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), age 
>60 years, and pleural effusion. Although it has the advantage 
of simplicity and can be performed within the first 24 hours 
of admission it has performed no better than other predictors 
in comparison studies.55 The presence of SIRS also has prog-
nostic significance.56 There remains some controversy as to the 
importance of obesity as a risk factor for severe and critical 
acute pancreatitis.57 Another approach has been taken in seeking 
to predict those with ‘harmless’ acute pancreatitis58 using three 
factors that can be determined on admission; absence of rebound 
tenderness or guarding, normal hematocrit, and normal serum 
creatinine. The accuracy of this approach appears to be over 
90%, and triages most patients with acute pancreatitis away 
from intensive care.
Unfortunately these and many other single and combined 
predictors of severity have an accuracy of only around 70%.54 
This means that there is misclassification error of 30% that 
­limits the value in predicting the severity of acute ­pancreatitis 
in individual patients. In the absence of any new biomarkers of 
ultimate disease severity, making better use of existing predic-
tors through sequencing tests, combining tests or using artificial 
neural ­network methodologies has shown promise.59
Classification of the Severity of Acute 
Pancreatitis
Accurately classifying or staging acute pancreatitis severity is 
important for clinical decision-making, communication, and 
enrollment into trials. The wide spectrum of pancreatitis severity 
has not been captured in the previous binary classifications (mild 
or severe). A four-category classification of severity (mild, mod-
erate, severe, critical) (Table 33-8) has been developed on the 
principle of casual inference, derived by meta-analysis, refined 
by an international multidisciplinary process and independently 
validated.60 The key determinants of severity are local compli-
cations (absent, sterile or infected) and systemic complications 
(absent, transient organ failure, or persistent organ failure).61The 
tracking of patient severity is important in delineating the clinical 
trajectory of a patient, and this classification of severity can be 
applied on a frequent basis. It can also be used in retrospect for 
audit purposes.
Determining the Etiology
A history of alcohol ingestion must be ascertained and preferably 
confirmed with blood ethanol levels. Gallstones should be inves-
tigated by ultrasonography. A gallstone etiology is more likely in 
females over the age of 50 with an elevation of alkaline phospha-
tase (>300 IU/L), alanine transferase (>100 IU/L) and amylase 
(>4000 IU/L). In the absence of gallstones and alcohol, a system-
atic approach to the identification of another factor will include 
taking a history for drug use, trauma, ERCP, infection, and mea-
suring serum triglycerides, calcium, and others (Table 33-4).
Fluid Resuscitation
Fluid therapy to restore and maintain circulating blood volume 
is the most important intervention in the early management of 
acute pancreatitis.62 A recent systematic review has shown that 
Table 33-8
Four categories of acute pancreatitis severity based on organ failure and local complications61
DETERMINANTS
NO LOCAL COMPLICATIONS STERILE LOCAL COMPLICATIONS INFECTED LOCAL COMPLICATIONS
NO ORGAN FAILURE
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
TRANSIENT ORGAN 
FAILURE
MODERATE
MODERATE
SEVERE
PERSISTENT ORGAN 
FAILURE
SEVERE
SEVERE
CRITICAL
1358
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the evidence base for fluid therapy is scant, however.63 It is not 
known which fluid to give, how aggressively to administer it 
or what goal to use as a guide or to monitor the response to it. 
While there are proponents for aggressive fluid therapy and for 
specific resuscitation goals, it is probably best to resuscitate 
with a balanced crystalloid and to restore normal blood vol-
ume, blood pressure, and urine output. On the basis of recent 
data it appears that lactated Ringer’s solution may be supe-
rior to normal saline in reducing the systemic inflammatory 
response.64 Caution needs to be exercised in those with cardiac 
and renal disease and in the elderly.
Nutritional Support
In contrast to analgesia and fluid therapy there is a sound 
evidence base for nutritional support in acute pancreatitis.65 
It is no longer acceptable to “rest the pancreas” by avoid-
ing enteral nutrition, and parenteral nutrition should only be 
offered if the patient’s calculated nutritional requirements 
cannot be achieved by the enteral route. Enteral nutrition 
should be commenced after initial fluid resuscitation and 
within the first 24 hours of admission. It can be introduced 
through a nasogastric tube and increased in step-wise fashion 
over 2 to 3 days.66 The tube can be advanced to the jejunum, 
by endoscopy or fluoroscopy, if there is evidence of feed-
ing intolerance. A delay in commencing enteral nutrition may 
contribute to the development of intestinal ileus and feeding 
intolerance. Aggressive early enteral feeding, particularly 
prior to adequate resuscitation, may put the patient at risk of 
nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia. There is no evidence to 
support the use of elemental or immune-enhancing formulas 
over standard polymeric formulas.67
In predicted mild acute pancreatitis the transition from oral 
fluids to food is usually timed to when the patient’s abdomi-
nal pain has resolved, but the trend is toward allowing patients to 
resume intake ad libidum (i.e., patient controlled nutrition).
Figure 33-13.  Corresponding CT (A) and MR (B) images of a patient with a symptomatic pseudocyst. CT image reveals a well circumscribed 
homogenous collection (arrows) exerting mass effect on antrum of stomach. The T2-weighted MR image clearly distinguishes necrotic 
pancreas (black arrows) from fluid (white arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Bollen TL et al. Imaging of acute pancreatitis: Update 
of the revised Atlanta Classification. Radiol Clin North Am. 2012;50:429. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
A
B
Cross-sectional Imaging
It may be necessary to perform a CT scan to diagnose acute 
pancreatitis in patients who are severely ill, or in those present-
ing with undifferentiated abdominal pain. But there is no advan-
tage in using CT findings, or a “CT Severity Index,” over other 
methods in predicting the severity of acute pancreatitis.54 The 
primary purpose of cross sectional imaging is the diagnosis of 
local complications, in particular the development and extent of 
pancreatic necrosis or the presence of different fluid collections. 
CT scanning is important to guide the insertion of percutane-
ous drains in the management of local complications. MR is 
superior to CT scanning in detecting any solid content within 
collections (Fig. 33-13). When bleeding is suspected in associa-
tion with a local complication, an arterial phase CT scan (CTa) 
is useful in detecting a pseudoaneurysm, active bleeding, and/
or hematoma.
Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde 
Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
Randomized trials have demonstrated that early ERCP (within 
24 or 48 hours of admission) reduces complications, but not 
mortality, in patients with predicted severe gallstone-associated 
acute pancreatitis. The benefits of this invasive modality (release 
of the presumed impacted stone) may be offset, however, but the 
risks of the procedure, which include an increase in the sever-
ity of pancreatitis, bleeding, cholangitis, and duodenal perfo-
ration. More recent evidence has suggested that early ERCP 
confers no benefit in the absence of concomitant cholangitis, as 
the offending common duct stone usually passes before ERCP 
can be performed.68 If symptoms and chemical abnormalities 
persist or increase after intial presentation, magnetic resonance 
cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) can detect a filling defect 
in the distal common bile duct, and may be used as prerequisite 
for attempted ERCP.69 Persistent cholestasis without cholangitis 
may require an ERCP but is rarely indicated in the acute setting.
3
1359
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Antibiotics
Although the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat estab-
lished infection in acute pancreatitis is a well-established prac-
tice, there has been considerable controversy surrounding the 
use of prophylactic antibiotics. The overuse of antibiotics has 
been associated with a documented rise in fungal infections and 
resistant organisms. Overall, it appears that the most recent and 
generally better designed studies do not support the use of pro-
phylactic antibiotics to reduce the frequency of pancreatic infec-
tious complications, surgical intervention, and death.70
Managing Local Complications
Vigilance is required for the timely and accurate diagnosis of 
local complications. The decisions regarding how and when 
Figure 33-14.  Operative view of infected acute pancreatitis. Peri-
pancreatic infection, characterized by mucopurulent exudate, extends 
far beyond the boundaries of the pancreas in the retroperitoneum.
to intervene are often difficult. While guided by the informa-
tion gained by cross-sectional imaging, the decision to inter-
vene is based on the clinical status and trajectory of the patient 
and the poor response to maximal intensive care support. This 
means close monitoring of the patient by serial examination, 
supplemented by regular measurement of inflammatory mark-
ers (e.g., C reactive protein) and a pancreatic protocol CT scan 
if a local complication is suspected and intervention considered 
warranted. In practice, intervention is delayed in order to allow 
demarcation of necrosis, and a reduced the risk of bleeding, dis-
seminated infection and collateral damage to adjacent organs by 
an intervention (Fig. 33-14). Appreciation of this has resulted 
in a notable trend toward delayed intervention, now uncommon 
before 3 to 4 weeks from the onset of symptoms. An impor-
tant emerging approach is the increasing use of ­percutaneous 
­catheter drainage in patients with suspected infected compli-
cations.71 Fine needle aspiration is now rarely used to confirm 
infection because the insertion of a needle at the time of planned 
drainage allows confirmation of the suspected infection. Pre-
emptive drainage with one or more catheters often produces 
improvement or stabilization of the patient’s overall clinical sta-
tus.72 In this way drainage “buys time” and allows the lesion to 
become more walled off and safer to treat. Recent data suggest 
that primary percutaneous catheter drainage may be the only 
intervention required in a third to a half of patients and that 
this proportion might increase further if there were a standard 
protocol of regular catheter exchange, upsizing and irrigation.72 
A proportion of patients do however require further treatment 
when they fail to respond (the so-called “step up approach”) and 
there is a wide array of minimally invasive options to choose 
from73(Fig. 33-15). These interventions can be classified on the 
basis of the method of visualization, route taken to the lesion 
and the purpose of the intervention.74 In practice the approach 
taken will depend on local expertise and equipment as well as 
Figure 33-15.  Two minimally invasive interventions for local complications of acute pancreatitis: A. video-assisted retroperitoneal debride-
ment and B. endoscopic transgastric necrosectomy 76. (Reproduced with permission from Bakker OJ et al. Endoscopic transgastric vs surgical 
necrosectomy for infected necrotizing pancreatitis: A randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(10):1053. kkjkjdht © 2012 American Medical 
Association. All rights reserved.)
Stomach
Peritoneal space
Peripancreatic
fluid collection
with necrotic tissue
Endoscope
(with balloon dilatation)
Pancreas
R
POSTERIOR
LATERAL VIEW
Necrotic tissue
in snare
L
Stomach
Spleen
Peripancreatic
fluid collection
with necrotic tissue
Access to
retroperitoneal
space
Costal margin
Pancreas
Pancreas
Liver
Necrotic
tissue
Long grasping
forceps
Laparoscope
Stomach
Spleen
Peripancreatic
fluid collection
with necrotic tissue
Endoscope
Stomach wall
Fluid collection
Aorta
POSTERIOR
1360
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the location and type of the specific local complication. A large 
Dutch randomized trial has shown that open surgical techniques 
should only be considered in those who fail to respond to the 
step-up approach, that is prior percutaneous drainage and mini-
mally invasive intervention.75 The exception is to be found in 
the rare situation where an abdominal compartment syndrome 
requires open decompression, but this is usually earlier than the 
optimal time to intervene for local complications. A recent land-
mark randomized trial has compared two minimally invasive 
techniques, endoscopic transgastric drainage and the videoscope 
assisted retroperitoneal debridement through a flank incision 
(Fig. 33-15). The data show that the former approach is supe-
rior, although the latter has a role when the walled off necrosis 
is remote from the stomach or duodenum, as in the left flank.76
The management of an acute noninfected pseudocyst is 
usually conservative, as about half of these will resolve spon-
taneously. When symptoms of pain or inability to eat persist 
or infection occurs, intervention is required. Pseudocysts per-
sist because of communication with the main pancreatic duct 
and/or distal ductal stenosis. Percutaneous drainage should be 
avoided in this situation because of the risk of external pancre-
atic fistula.77 EUS guided internal drainage into stomach, duo-
denum, or transpapillary pancreatic duct stenting is the preferred 
approach.
Managing Organ Failure
The specific management of multiple organ failure is beyond 
the scope of this chapter. The early identification of organ dys-
function and failure is important because it is a key determinant 
of severity and outcome and to facilitate the timely transfer of 
the patient to an intensive care unit to optimize management, 
provide organ support, and allow more intensive monitoring. 
The severity of organ failure can be scored (Table 33-6). The 
responsiveness of organ failure to resuscitation over the first 48 
hours is an important prognostic clue; those that respond have 
transient organ failure and have a better outlook than those who 
do not respond and have persistent organ failure.78 Organ fail-
ure that develops later in the disease course is usually second-
ary to infection of a local complication and should be managed 
accordingly (Table 33-9).
1. Diagnosis
  • History of abdominal pain consistent with acute  
pancreatitis
  • >3x elevation of pancreatic enzymes
  • CT scan if required to confirm diagnosis
2. Initial assessment / management (first 4 hrs)
  • Analgesia
  • Fluid resuscitation
  • Predict severity of pancreatitis
     ° Ranson’s criteria
     ° HAPS score
  • Assess systemic response
     ° SIRS score
     ° SOFA (organ failure)
3. Reassessment / management (4 to 6 hrs)
  • Assess response to fluid resuscitation
     ° mean arterial pressure
     ° heart rate
     ° urine output
     ° hematocrit
  • Determine etiology
     ° Ultrasound for gallstones/sludge
     ° History of alcohol consumption
     ° Laboratory evaluation of other causes
  • MRCP and/or Urgent ERCP if concomitant cholangitis is 
present
     ° not for cholestasis or predicted severe disease  
per se
  • Transfer to ICU or specialist center as needed
     ° Deterioration or failure to respond to initial  
management
     ° Intensive support for persistent organ failure
  • Commence enteral nutrition
     ° Once normovolemia restored (usually after  
6 hours)
     ° Commence via NG tube if no gastric stasis
  • No prophylactic antibiotics or probiotics
4. Conservative management and monitoring (at least daily)
  • Clinical evaluation
     ° Assess cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal function
     ° Detect peritonitis and abdominal compartment 
syndrome
  • Daily C-Reactive Protein
  • Classify severity (mild, moderate, severe, critical)
  • Detect intolerance of NG EN
     ° Advance tube for NJ feeding if needed
     ° Consider supplemental Parenteral Nutrition by day 4
5. Indications for “pancreatic protocol CT scan” (rarely in 
1st week)
  • For significant clinical deterioration and elevated CRP
  • For suspicion of local pancreatic complications
  • For suspected bowel ischemia
  • For acute bleeding (CTa) (if stable enough & consider 
embolization)
  • For abdominal compartment syndrome
6. Invasive intervention
  • For deteriorating patient with suspected infected local 
complication
  • “Step up approach” with initial drain guided by current 
CT scan (percutaneous or endoscopic drainage)
  • Delay for 3 to 4 weeks with intensive care support, if 
possible
  • If failure to respond or secondary deterioration, repeat 
CT scan, and select appropriate minimally invasive 
technique based on available expertise and equipment
     ° Video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement or 
percutaneous nephroscopic debridement
     ° Endoscopic transluminal debridement
     ° Ongoing large bore drainage and irrigation
7. Indication for laparotomy
  • Failed “step-up approach” for further debridement/
drainage
  • Acute abdomen (perforation or ischemia)
  • Severe abdominal compartment syndrome (rarely)
Table 33-9
Algorithm for the evaluation and management of acute pancreatitis
1361
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Cholecystectomy
While it is widely accepted that cholecystectomy is essential 
to prevent gallstone pancreatitis recurrence, the timing of cho-
lecystectomy is important. Index cholecystectomy, done in 
the same admission and prior to discharge, appears safe and 
can almost always be accomplished laparoscopically.79 But 
index cholecystectomy is not suitable for all patients, par-
ticularly some who have had local pancreatic complications 
which includes a large phlegmon which extends into the porta 
Table 33-10
Complications of acute pancreatitis
I. Local
  A. Pancreatic phlegmon
  B. Pancreatic abscess
  C. Pancreatic pseudocyst
  D. Pancreatic ascites
  E. Involvement of adjacent organs, with hemorrhage, 
thrombosis, bowel infarction, obstructive jaundice, 
fistula formation, or mechanical obstruction
II. Systemic
  A. Pulmonary
    1. Pneumonia, atelectasis
    2. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
    3. Pleural effusion
  B. Cardiovascular
    1. Hypotension
    2. Hypovolemia
    3. Sudden death
    4. Nonspecific ST-T wave changes
    5. Pericardial effusion
  C. Hematologic
    1. Hemoconcentration
    2. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
  D. GI hemorrhage
    1. Peptic ulcer
    2. Erosive gastritis
    3. Portal vein or splenic vein thrombosis with varices
  E. Renal
    1. Oliguria
    2. Azotemia
    3. Renal artery/vein thrombosis
  F. Metabolic
    1. Hyperglycemia
    2. Hypocalcemia
    3. Hypertriglyceridemia
    4. Encephalopathy
    5. Sudden blindness (Purtscher’s retinopathy)
  G. Central nervous system
    1. Psychosis
    2. Fat emboli
    3. Alcohol withdrawal syndrome
  H. Fat necrosis
    1. Intra-abdominal saponification
    2. Subcutaneous tissue necrosis
Source: Reproduced with permission from Greenberger NJ, Toskes PP, Is-
selbacher KJ: Acute and chronic pancreatitis, in Isselbacher KJ et al (eds): 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 13th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1994, p 1524. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
hepatis. These patients may require an interval cholecystec-
tomy after resolution of the inflammatory process. If surgery 
is required for the management of local complications, then a 
cholecystectomy is often performed at that time.
The management of acute pancreatitis remains a formi-
dable challenge due to the variety and severity of many asso-
ciated complications (Table 33-10), and continues to evolve. 
Although specific treatments for acute pancreatitis remain elu-
sive, progress has been made in the management of pain, fluid 
resuscitation, antibiotic prophylaxis, enteral nutrition, thera-
peutic ERCP, and cholecystectomy. Progress has also been 
made in the intensive care management of systemic complica-
tions and in the development of less invasive interventions for 
the treatment of local complications, particularly infected 
pancreatic necrosis.
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Definition, Incidence, and Prevalence
Chronic pancreatitis is an incurable, chronic inflammatory con-
dition that is multifactorial in its etiology, highly variable in 
its presentation, and a challenge to treat successfully. Autopsy 
studies indicate that evidence of chronic inflammation, such as 
fibrosis, duct ectasia, and acinar atrophy is seen in up to 5% of 
the population,80 although these data are difficult to interpret 
because many of these changes are also present in asymptom-
atic elderly patients.81 Population studies suggest a prevalence 
that ranges from 5 to 40 persons per 100,000 population, with 
considerable geographic variation.82 Differences in diagnostic 
criteria, regional nutrition, alcohol consumption, and medical 
access account for variations in the frequency of the diagnosis, 
but the overall incidence of the disease has risen progressively 
over the past 50 years.
Etiology
There are multiple etiologies of chronic pancreatitis, includ-
ing genetic mutations, alcohol exposure, duct obstruction due 
to trauma, gallstones, and tumors, metabolic diseases such as 
hyperlipidemia and hyperparathyroidism, and auto-immune 
disease. In addition, nutritional causes include so-called “tropi-
cal pancreatitis,” which has been thought to result from inges-
tion of certain starches. A significant number of patients have 
no discernible cause of the disease despite extensive testing, 
and are said to have idiopathic chronic pancreatitis.
Genetic Causes
In 1952, Comfort and Steinberg reported a kindred of “heredi-
tary chronic relapsing pancreatitis” after treating the proband, 
a 24-year-old woman, at the Mayo Clinic.83 Subsequently, 
familial patterns of chronic, nonalcoholic pancreatitis have 
been described worldwide, and a familiar pattern has emerged. 
Typically, patients first present in childhood or adolescence 
with abdominal pain and are found to have chronic calcific pan-
creatitis on imaging studies. Progressive pancreatic dysfunction 
is common, and many patients present with symptoms due to 
pancreatic duct obstruction. The risk of subsequent carcinoma 
formation is increased, reaching a prevalence, in some series, of 
40%, but the age of onset for carcinoma is typically >50 years 
old.84 The disorder is characterized by an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance, with 80% penetrance and variable expres-
sion. The incidence is equal in both sexes.
4
1362
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Whitcomb and colleagues,85 and separately LeBodic and 
associates,86 performed gene linkage analysis and identified a 
linkage for hereditary pancreatitis to chromosome 7q35. Subse-
quently, the region was sequenced and revealed eight trypsino-
gen genes. Mutational analysis revealed a missense mutation 
resulting in an Arg to His substitution at position 117 of the 
cationic trypsinogen gene, or PRSS1, one of the primary sites 
for proteolysis of trypsin. This gain-of-function mutation results 
in an excess production of trypsinogen, which results in persis-
tent and uncontrolled proteolytic activity and autodestruction 
within the pancreas.87 The position 117 mutation of PRSS1 and 
an additional mutation, now known collectively as the R122H 
and N291 mutations of PRSS1, account for about two-thirds of 
cases of hereditary pancreatitis. Recently, Masson and associ-
ates described a gain-of-function mutation in the anionic tryp-
sinogen gene, PRSS2, that is also present in some cases.88
Similarly,SPINK1, an inflammation-induced trypsin 
inhibitor secreted in acinar cells, has been found to have a 
role in hereditary pancreatitis. SPINK1 specifically inhibits 
trypsin action by competitively blocking the active site of the 
enzyme. Witt and colleagues investigated 96 unrelated chil-
dren with chronic pancreatitis in Germany and found a variety 
of SPINK1 mutations in 23% of the patients.89 Several stud-
ies have now confirmed an association of loss-of-function 
SPINK1 mutations with familial and idiopathic forms of 
chronic pancreatitis, as well as so-called tropical pancreati-
tis.90, 91 SPINK1 mutations are common in the general popula-
tion as well, and the frequency of these mutations varies in 
different cohorts of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, from 6.4% 
in France92 to 25.8% in the United States.93 Thus, hereditary 
pancreatitis results from one or more mutational defects that 
incapacitate an auto-protective process that normally prevents 
proteolysis within the pancreas.
Cystic fibrosis, originally termed cystic fibrosis of the pan-
creas, results from a variety of mutations of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane receptor (CFTR). The CFTR is present in pancre-
atic duct cells, and controls the amount of chloride and bicarbonate 
secreted into the normally alkaline pancreatic juice. The CFTR 
gene contains over 4300 nucleotides, divided into 24 exons, which 
encode a 1480-amino acid protein. Over 1000 polymorphisms 
have been reported, and many are common.32 The CFTR muta-
tion associated with the classic pulmonary disease, F508, is rarely 
observed in chronic pancreatitis. But other CFTR mutations have 
been noted to be associated with chronic idiopathic pancreatitis 
and auto-immune pancreatitis in which the pulmonary, intestinal, 
and cutaneous manifestations of the disease are silent.94
Many studies have been undertaken to determine whether 
specific genetic abnormalities are associated with alcoholic 
chronic pancreatitis, and which might confer susceptibility to 
the disease. A 5.8% rate of SPINK1 mutations in patients with 
alcoholic pancreatitis has been shown, compared to a 0.8% rate 
in the control population, and studies of the known mutations of 
the CFTR gene have failed to demonstrate a strong association 
with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.89
In 2012, a landmark study by Whitcomb and associates 
demonstrated a likely genetic cause of the predisposition to 
alcohol-induced chronic pancreatitis in men95. In a genome-
wide association study of more than 2000 patients, these 
researchers discovered that a common DNA variant on the X 
chromosome is present in 26% of men without pancreatitis, but 
jumps to nearly 50% of men diagnosed with alcoholic pancre-
atitis. The variant involves the claudin 2 (CLDN2) gene, which 
encodes a tight junction protein normally present in ductal cells. 
In cases of chronic pancreatitis, the CLDN2 protein is abnor-
mally expressed in acinar cells, and may alter the secretory 
dynamics of enzyme release. The abnormality does not appear 
to cause pancreatitis but if pancreatitis occurs for any reason in 
a person with the CLDN2 variant, it is more likely that the per-
son will develop chronic pancreatitis; the risk is increased even 
further among alcohol users. Only 10% of women have the X 
chromosome-linked variant on both X chromosomes, and most 
women with the CLDN2 variant on one X chromosome appear 
to be protected from alcoholic chronic pancreatitis by the other 
X chromosome, if it is normal. Men, with only one X chromo-
some, have no protection if they inherit a CLDN2 mutation. 
This helps to explain the high prevalence of alcoholic chronic 
pancreatitis among men, although the mechanism remains 
unclear. This study does not demonstrate a genetic cause for all 
cases of alcohol-related chronic pancreatitis, but shows that a 
genetic element contributes to many patients with the disease 
(Fig. 33-16).
Alcohol
In 1878, Friedreich proposed that “a general chronic interstitial 
pancreatitis may result from excessive alcoholism (drunkard’s 
pancreas).”96 Since that observation, numerous studies have 
shown that a causal relationship exists between alcohol and 
chronic pancreatitis, but the prevalence of alcohol as the etiol-
ogy of the disease in Western countries ranges widely, from 
38% to 94%97(Fig. 33-17).
There is a linear relationship between exposure to alcohol 
and the development of chronic pancreatitis.98 The risk of dis-
ease is present in patients with even a low or occasional expo-
sure to alcohol (1 to 20 g/d), perhaps due to the CLDN2 gene 
mutation described above, so there is no threshold level of alco-
hol exposure below which there is no risk of developing chronic 
pancreatitis. Furthermore, although the risk of disease is dose 
related, and highest in heavy (>150 g/d) drinkers, the prevalence 
of chronic pancreatitis among confirmed alcohol abusers is only 
5% to15%.99 However, the duration of alcohol consumption is 
definitely associated with the development of pancreatic dis-
ease. The onset of disease typically occurs between ages 35 to 
40 years, after 16 to 20 years of heavy alcohol consumption. 
Recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis are typically followed 
by chronic symptoms after 4 or 5 years.100
Although the pattern of disease presentation is well 
known in those alcohol users who develop pancreatic disease, 
the pathophysiology of alcohol-induced pancreatic disease 
is still an area of active investigation. In their 1946 classic 
study, Comfort, Gambrill, and Baggenstoss proposed that 
chronic pancreatitis was the result of multiple episodes of 
acute inflammation, with residual and progressively increas-
ing chronic inflammation.101 Subsequently, other investigators 
proposed that initial acute inflammation was not necessarily 
linked to chronic changes in the pancreas,102 and Kondo and 
associates showed that other, additional factors were neces-
sary for repeated exposure to alcohol to cause chronic pancre-
atitis.103 Regardless of the requirement for other predisposing 
or facilitative factors, the concept that multiple episodes (or 
a prolonged course) of pancreatic injury ultimately leads to 
chronic disease is widely accepted as the pathophysiologic 
sequence104 (Fig. 33-18).
Although direct alcohol exposure to the pancreatic ductal 
system, or elevated levels of alcohol in the bloodstream, has 
1363
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Figure 33-16.  Schematic model of genetic causes of chronic pan-
creatitis. A pancreatic acinus is portrayed showing the pathway for 
digestive enzymes (zymogens) to be secreted by the acinar cell 
into the ductal system where water, sodium, and bicarbonate are 
secreted by the duct and centroacinar (CA) cells. Mutations in 
at least five genes have been identified as risk factors for chronic 
pancreatitis: gain-of function mutations in the cationic trypsinogen 
genes (PRSS1, PRSS2) cause hereditary pancreatitis. Cationic and 
anionic trypsinogen are normally active in the duodenum by entero-
kinase (EK). Premature activation of the trypsin in the acinar cell 
leads to zymogen activation, local cellular injury, and inflamma-
tion. Mutations of the trypsin inhibitors SPINK1 or chymotrypsin 
C (CTRC), or of the calcium sensing receptor CASR, result in 
premature activation of trypsinogen. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane receptor CFTR results in trypsinogen stasis within 
the ducts due to insufficient secretion by duct cells. A Mutation in 
claudin-2 (CLDN2) results in abnormal expression in acinar cells, 
instead of its normal location between duct cells, and is associated 
with the accelerated development of chronic pancreatitis in alcohol 
abusers. (Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers, Ltd. 
Whitcomb DC et al: Common genetic variants in the CLDN2 and 
PRSS1-PRSS2 loci alter risk for alcohol-related and sporadic 
pancreatitis. Nat Genet. 2012;44:1349. kkjkjdht © 2012.)
basolateral
membrane
Acinar call
Key
zymogens
claudin-2
CFTR
calcium regulation
CA
zymogens: including;
trypsinogens (PRSS1, PRSS2)
chymotrypsin C (CTRC)
(SPINK1 - inflammation-
induced trypsin inhibitor)
Calcium sensing receptor (CASR)
CFTR
Duodenum
Zymogen
Secretion
abnormal
claudin-2
localization
Duct cell
bicarbonate
sodium
water
trypsinogen zymogens
EK
trypsin
active digestive
enzymes
CASR
Figure 33-17.  Etiologies of chronic pancreatitis. (Reproduced 
with permission from Whitcomb DC. Acad Med. 86:1353,2011.)
Very heavy drinking (15%)
Alcohol + genetic (3%)
Idiopathic
(42%)
Genetic
(24%)
CFTR
(14%)
CFTR +
SPINK1
(3%)
SPINK1
(4%)
PRSS1
(3%)
Hyperlipidemia,
Autoimmune,
Other (4%)
Obstructive
(9%)
Gallstone /
severe AP
(3%)
calization of digestive enzymes and lysosomal hydrolase within 
acinar cells, leading to autodigestion106, 107 (see section on Acute 
Pancreatitis). A high-protein, low-bicarbonate, low-volume 
secretory output is seen after chronic alcohol exposure which 
may contribute to the precipitation of proteins in secondary 
ducts in the early stages of chronic pancreatitis.108 Calcium is 
complexed to protein plugs in small ductules, secondary ducts, 
and, eventually, in the main ductal system, which causes ductal 
cell injury and obstruction of the secretory system, which fur-
ther promotes an inflammatory response.
Cigarette smoking has been strongly associated with 
chronic pancreatitis,109 but until recently it was unclear whether 
this was a causative risk factor. Studies have now shown that 
smoking actually accelerates the development of alcoholic 
pancreatitis,110 and the risk of cancer in chronic pancreatitis is 
increased significantly by smoking. In hereditary pancreatitis, 
smoking has been found to lower the age of onset of carcinoma 
Figure 33-18.  “Multiple hit” theory of the etiology of chronic 
pancreatitis. Multiple episodes of acute pancreatitis cause progres-
sively more organized inflammatory changes that ultimately result 
in chronic inflammation and scarring. [Reproduced with permission 
from Apte et al.104 kkjkjdht Elsevier.]
Time
Degree of pancreatic damage
= Episode of acute pancreatitis
Necrosis-fibrosis sequence
been shown to alter the integrity and function of pancreatic 
ducts and acini directly,105 most investigators believe that alco-
hol metabolites such as acetaldehyde, combined with oxidant 
injury, result in local parenchymal injury that is preferentially 
targeted to the pancreas in predisposed individuals. Repeated 
or severe episodes of toxin-induced injury activate a cascade 
of cytokines, which, in turn, induces pancreatic stellate cells 
(PSCs) to produce collagen and cause fibrosis (Fig. 33-19). 
It remains to be determined whether alcohol sensitizes the 
pancreas of susceptible individuals to another cause of acute 
inflammation, or whether genetic or other factors predispose to 
direct alcohol-related injury.104
Alcohol may interfere with the intracellular transport and 
discharge of digestive enzymes, and may contribute to the colo-
1364
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Normal pancreas
Alcohol
Metabolic / oxidative stress
Sentinel event
Acinar cell injury
(+ / - Necrosis)
Inflammatory response:
pro-inflammatory 
(Early)
Anti-inflammatory 
(Later)
Alcohol
metabolic/oxidative stress
Recurrent acute pancreatitis
(RAP)
Anti-inflammatory
Fibrosis
Healed
Stress
RAP
Normal 
(Recovered):
Normal:
Stellate cells
(Inactive)
Cytokines
Chronic
pancreatitis:
Fibrosis
Early acute
pancreatitis: 
Neutrophil
Lymphocyte
Macrophage
Stellate cell
(Active)
Collagen, etc.
Late acute
pancreatitis:
M
(Antiinflam-
matory)
Necrosis
 = Stress, ETOH
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Figure 33-19.  The sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE) hypothesis for the development of chronic pancreatitis. A critical episode of acute 
pancreatitis activates cytokine-induced transformation of pancreatic stellate cells, which results in collagen production and fibrosis. ETOH = 
ethyl alcohol. (Reproduced with permission from Schneider et al.135 kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1365
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
by about 20 years.111 Smoking therefore appears to be an inde-
pendent risk factor for the late complications of alcoholic pan-
creatitis, if not an early cofactor for the development of fibrosis.
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia is a known cause of pancreatic hypersecre-
tion,112 and chronic hypercalcemia caused by untreated hyper-
parathyroidism is associated with chronic calcific pancreatitis.113 
Hypercalcemia is also a stimulant for pancreatic calcium secre-
tion, which contributes to calculus formation and obstructive 
pancreatopathy. The treatment is correction of the hyperpara-
thyroidism and assessment of any additional endocrinopathies.
Hyperlipidemia
In addition to the risk of acute pancreatitis, hyperlipidemia and 
hypertriglyceridemia predispose women to chronic pancreati-
tis when they receive estrogen replacement therapy.114 Fast-
ing triglyceride levels <300 mg/dL are below the threshold for 
this to occur, and the mechanism of estrogen potentiation of 
hyperlipidemia-induced chronic pancreatitis is unknown. It is 
assumed that chronic changes occur after repeated subclinical 
episodes of acute inflammation. Aggressive therapy of hyper-
lipidemia is therefore important in peri- or postmenopausal 
patients who are candidates for estrogen therapy.
Classification
A major impediment to a better understanding of the etiology, 
frequency and severity of chronic pancreatitis has been the dif-
ficulty with which investigators and clinicians have struggled 
to identify a useful classification system. Multiple classification 
systems have been proposed. The TIGAR-O scheme catego-
rizes chronic pancreatitis according to risk factors and eti-
ologies, such as a) toxic-metabolic, b) idiopathic, c) genetic, 
d) auto-immune, e) recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis, or 
f) obstructive.115 A recent classification system based on his-
topathology as well as etiology, as delineated by Singer and 
Chari,116 is shown in Table 33-11.
Chronic Calcific (Lithogenic) Pancreatitis
This type is the largest subgroup in the classification scheme pro-
posed by Singer and Chari, and includes patients with calcific 
pancreatitis of most etiologies. Although the majority of patients 
with calcific pancreatitis have a history of alcohol abuse, stone 
formation and parenchymal calcification can develop in a variety 
of etiologic subgroups; hereditary pancreatitis and tropical pan-
creatitis are particularly noteworthy for the formation of stone 
disease. The clinician should therefore avoid the assumption that 
calcific pancreatitis confirms the diagnosis of alcohol abuse.
Chronic Obstructive Pancreatitis
This refers to chronic inflammatory changes that are caused by 
the compression or occlusion of the proximal ductal system by 
tumor, gallstone, posttraumatic scar, or inadequate duct caliber 
(as in pancreas divisum). Obstruction of the main pancreatic 
duct by inflammatory (posttraumatic) or neoplastic processes 
can result in diffuse fibrosis, dilated main and secondary pan-
creatic ducts, and acinar atrophy. The patient may have little in 
the way of pain symptoms or may present with signs of exo-
crine insufficiency. Intraductal stone formation is rare, and both 
functional and structural abnormalities may improve when the 
obstructive process is relieved or removed. Trauma to the pan-
creas frequently results in duct injury and leakage, which may 
result in pseudocyst formation as well as local scar formation. 
Inadequately treated pancreatic trauma may result in persistent 
inflammatory changes in the distal gland.117
Pancreas divisum represents a special case of obstruc-
tive pancreatitis. It is the most common congenital anomaly 
involving the pancreas and occurs in up to 10% of children. It 
is thought to predispose the pancreas to recurrent acute pancre-
atitis and chronic pancreatitis, due to functional obstruction of 
a diminutive duct of Santorini that fails to communicate with 
Table 33-11
Classification of chronic pancreatitis based on etiologic causes
Chronic Calcific 
Pancreatitis
Chronic Obstructive 
Pancreatitis
Chronic Inflammatory 
Pancreatitis
Chronic Autoimmune 
Pancreatitis
Asymptomatic 
­Pancreatic Fibrosis
Alcohol
Pancreatic tumors
Unknown
Associated with 
autoimmune disorders 
(e.g., primary sclerosing 
cholangitis)
Chronic alcoholic
Hereditary
Ductal stricture
Endemic in 
asymptomatic residents 
in tropical climates
Tropical
Gallstone- or trauma-
induced or pancreas 
divisum
Hyperlipidemia
Sjögren’s syndrome
Hypercalcemia
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Drug-induced
Idiopathic
Source: Reproduced with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. From Singer et al.116
1366
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Wirsung’s duct (Fig. 33-20). However, the classic picture of 
obstructive pancreatopathy with a dilated dorsal duct is unusual 
in pancreas divisum, so a decompressive operation or a lesser 
papilla sphincteroplasty is frequently not feasible or unsuccess-
ful. Endoscopic stenting through the lesser papilla may result in 
temporary relief of symptoms, and this response would increase 
the possibility that a permanent surgical or endoscopic interven-
tion will be successful. Although some authors emphasize the 
pathologic implications of pancreas divisum,118 others express 
skepticism that it represents a true risk to pancreatic secretory 
capacity or contributes to the development of chronic pancreati-
tis.119, 120A recent French study reveals that pancreas divisum is 
equally prevalent among patients with idiopathic chronic pan-
creatitis and normal controls (7%), and is minimally increased in 
patients with PRSS1 and SPINK1 mutations. It is accompanied 
by CFTR mutations in 47% of patients, however, suggesting 
that the presence of pancreas divisum together with mutational 
events may increase the susceptibility to pancreatitis.121
Chronic Inflammatory Pancreatitis
Chronic inflammatory pancreatitis is characterized by diffuse 
fibrosis and a loss of acinar elements with a predominant mono-
nuclear cell infiltration throughout the gland.
A variant of chronic pancreatitis is a nonobstructive, 
diffusely infiltrative disease associated with fibrosis, a mono-
nuclear cell (lymphocyte, plasma cell, or eosinophil) infiltrate, 
and an increased titer of one or more autoantibodies.122 This 
type, referred to as autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), is associated 
with a variety of illnesses with suspected or proven autoimmune 
etiology, such as Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
type I diabetes mellitus. AIP has been characterized as either 
type I, with accompanying systemic or multiorgan dysfunction, 
or type II, which is restricted to the pancreas.
Compressive stenosis of the intrapancreatic portion of 
the common bile duct is frequently seen in both types of AIP, 
along with symptoms of obstructive jaundice. Increased levels of 
serum β-globulin or immunoglobulin G4 are also present. Ste-
roid therapy is uniformly successful in ameliorating the disease, 
including any associated bile duct compression.123 CFTR muta-
tions which result in dislocation of the transmembrane protein 
have been found in AIP, and steroid therapy results in a normal-
ization of the CFTR localization, and a resumption of normal 
chloride and bicarbonate secretion.124 The differential diagnosis 
includes lymphoma, plasmacytoma (“pseudotumor” of the pan-
creas), and diffuse infiltrative carcinoma. Although the diagnosis 
is confirmed on pancreatic biopsy, presumptive treatment with 
steroids is usually undertaken, especially when clinical and labo-
ratory findings, such as an elevation in IgG4 levels, support the 
diagnosis. Failure to obtain a cytologic specimen may lead to 
an unnecessary resectional procedure, and an untreated inflam-
matory component may cause sclerosis of the extrahepatic or 
intrahepatic bile ducts, with eventual liver failure.125
Tropical (Nutritional) Pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is highly prevalent among adolescents and 
young adults in Indonesia, southern India, and tropical Africa. 
Abdominal pain develops in adolescence, followed by the devel-
opment of a brittle form of pancreatogenic diabetes. Parenchy-
mal and intraductal calcifications are seen, and the pancreatic 
duct stones may be quite large.126 Many of the patients appear 
malnourished, some present with extreme emaciation, and a 
characteristic cyanotic coloration of the lips may be seen.127 In 
addition to protein-caloric malnutrition, toxic products of some 
indigenous foodstuffs have also been thought to contribute to the 
disease. Because of the geographic concentration of this early-
onset form of chronic pancreatitis, it has been termed “tropical 
pancreatitis,” although the exact etiology remains unclear.
Clinically, tropical pancreatitis presents much like hereditary 
pancreatitis, and a familial pattern among cases is not unusual. 
B
A
D
C
Normal pancreas
Absence of duct 
of Santorini
Normal pancreas
with duct of Santorini
Pancreas divisum
Small duct
of Wirsung
Pancreas divisum
No duct of Wirsung
Figure 33-20.  Pancreas divisum. Normal pancreatic duct anatomy and the variations of partial or complete pancreas divisum are shown. 
(Reproduced with permission of Wiley-Blackwell. From Warshaw.118)
1367
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
SPINK1mutations have been documented in 20% to 55% of 
patients with tropical pancreatitis, and CFTR mutations have been 
reported as well.90, 91The accelerated deterioration of endocrine and 
exocrine function, the chronic pain due to obstructive disease, and 
the recurrence of symptoms despite decompressive procedures 
characterize the course of disease. As immigrants from the tropi-
cal regions increasingly find their way to all parts of the world, an 
awareness of this severe form of chronic pancreatitis is helpful for 
those who treat patients with pancreatic disease.
Asymptomatic Pancreatic Fibrosis
Pancreatic fibrosis is seen in some asymptomatic elderly 
patients, in tropical populations, or in asymptomatic alcohol 
users. There is diffuse perilobar fibrosis and a loss of acinar cell 
mass, but without a main ductular component.
A shortcoming of these clinical classification systems is 
the lack of histologic criteria of chronic inflammation due to 
the usual absence of a biopsy specimen. The differentiation of 
recurrent acute pancreatitis from chronic pancreatitis with exac-
erbations of pain can be difficult to establish and is not facili-
tated by the current system. Similarly, cystic fibrosis is known 
to cause fibrosis and acinar dysfunction but is not included in 
the classification despite increasing evidence for its possible 
role in idiopathic chronic pancreatitis.128 Therefore, further 
refinements in the classification system for chronic pancreatitis 
are needed to allow a better prediction of its clinical course and 
a more accurate diagnosis of a likely etiologic agent.
Idiopathic Pancreatitis
When a definable cause for chronic pancreatitis is lacking, the 
term idiopathic is used to categorize the illness. Classically, 
the idiopathic group includes young adults and adolescents 
who lack a family history of pancreatitis but who may repre-
sent individuals with spontaneous gene mutations encoding 
regulatory proteins in the pancreas. A variable percentage of 
SPINK1 and CFTR mutations have been described in various 
studies. In addition, the idiopathic group has included a large 
number of older patients for whom no obvious cause of recur-
rent or chronic pancreatitis can be found.129 However, because 
the prevalence of biliary calculi increases steadily with age, it 
is not surprising that, as methods of biliary stone detection have 
improved, many elderly “idiopathic” pancreatitis patients are 
found to have biliary tract disease.130
As previously noted , an increasing number of mutations 
of the SPINK1 and CFTR genes have been identified in asso-
ciation with various forms of chronic pancreatitis. However, 
the role of genetic analysis in the management of these patients 
remains unclear, as guidelines have yet to be developed to allow 
physicians to use the data consistently.32 The clinical man-
agement of patients who harbor a minor CFTR mutation and 
chronic pancreatitis, for example, is still dictated by the clinical 
manifestations of the pancreatitis.
Pathology
Histology.  In early chronic pancreatitis, the histologic changes 
are unevenly distributed and are characterized by induration, 
nodular scarring, and lobular regions of fibrosis (Fig. 33-21). As 
the disease progresses, there is a loss of normal lobulation, with 
thicker sheets of fibrosis surrounding a reduced acinar cell mass, 
and dilatation of ductular structures (Fig. 33-22). The ductular 
epithelium is usually atypical and may display features of dys-
plasia, as evidenced by cuboidal cells with hyperplastic features, 
accompanied by areas of mononuclear cell infiltrates or patchy 
Figure 33-21.  Histology of early chronic pancreatitis. High-power 
microscopic (40x) histology of chronic pancreatitis shows an infil-
tration of mononuclear inflammatory cells throughout the inter-
stitium of the pancreas, with little fibrosis. (Courtesy of Rhonda 
Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)
Figure 33-22.  Gross appearance of chronic pancreatitis. Areas 
of fibrosis and scarring are seen adjacent to other areas within the 
gland in which the lobar architecture is grossly preserved. A dilated 
pancreatic duct indicates the presence of downstream obstruction 
in this specimen removed from a patient with chronic pancreatitis. 
(Courtesy of Rhonda Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)
areas of necrosis. Cystic changes may be seen, but areas of rela-
tively intact acinar elements and normal-appearing islets persist. 
In severe chronic pancreatitis, there is considerable replacement 
of acinar tissue by broad, coalescing areas of fibrosis, and the 
islet size and number are reduced (Fig. 33-23). Small arteries 
appear thickened and neural trunks become prominent.131
Tropical pancreatitis and hereditary pancreatitis are histo-
logically indistinguishable from chronic alcoholic pancreatitis. 
In obstructive chronic pancreatitis, calculi are absent, although 
periacinar fibrosis and dilated ductular structures are prominent. 
In pancreatic lobular fibrosis seen in elderly subjects, small 
ducts are dilated, sometimes with small calculi trapped within. 
Hypertrophy of ductular epithelia is thought to cause this small-
duct disease, which is accompanied by perilobular fibrosis.132
Fibrosis.  A common feature of all forms of chronic pancreati-
tis is the perilobular fibrosis that forms surrounding individual 
acini, then propagates to surround small lobules, and eventu-
ally coalesces to replace larger areas of acinar tissue. The 
­pathogenesis of this process involves the activation of pancreatic 
1368
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
stellate cells (PSCs) that are found adjacent to acini and small 
arteries.133 The extended cytoplasmic processes of PSCs encircle 
the acini but appear quiescent in the normal gland, where they 
contain lipid vacuoles and cytoskeletal proteins. In response to 
pancreatic injury, the PSCs become activated and proliferate 
(similarly to hepatic stellate cells), lose their lipid vesicles, and 
transform into myofibroblast-like cells. These cells respond to 
proliferative factors such as transforming growth factor beta, 
platelet-derived growth factor, and proinflammatory cytokines 
and synthesize and secrete type I and III collagen and fibronec-
tin. Studies indicate that vitamin A metabolites, similar to those 
present in quiescent PSCs, can inhibit the collagen production of 
activated cultured PSCs.134 This raises the possibility that early 
intervention may be possible to interrupt or prevent the fibrosis 
resulting from ongoing activation of PSCs.
The overall pathogenic sequence proposed by Schneider 
and Whitcomb135 whereby alcohol induces acute pancreati-
tis and, with ongoing exposure, promotes the development of 
chronic fibrosis, is summarized in Fig. 33-19. PSCs surround-
ing the acinus are activated in acute pancreatitis but may be 
inactivated by anti-inflammatory cytokines and, in the absence 
of further injury, may revert to a quiescent state. The role of 
proinflammatory macrophages, cytokines, and PSCs in models 
of acute and chronic pancreatitis represents an important area 
of current research.
Stone Formation.  Pancreatic stones are composed largely of 
calcium carbonate crystals trapped in a matrix of fibrillar and 
other material. The fibrillar center of most stones contains no 
calcium but rather a mixture of other metals. This suggests that 
stones form from an initial noncalcified protein precipitate, 
which serves as a focus for layered calcium carbonate precipita-
tion. The same low-molecular-weight protein is present in stones 
and protein plugs and was initially named pancreatic stone pro-
tein, or PSP.136 PSP was found to be a potent inhibitor of calcium 
carbonate crystal growth and has subsequently been renamed 
lithostathine.137 Independently, a 15-kDa fibrillar protein isolated 
from the pancreas was named pancreatic thread protein, and it 
has been shown to be homologous with lithostathine. Finally, a 
protein product of the reg gene, so named because it is expressed 
in association with regenerating islets in models of pancreatic 
injury, was isolated and called reg protein, and was subsequently 
Figure 33-23.  Histology of severe chronic pancreatitis. High-
power microscopic (40×) histologic appearance of advanced 
chronic pancreatitis shows extensive sheets of fibrosis and loss of 
acinar tissue, with preservation of islet tissue in scattered areas. 
(Courtesy of Rhonda Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)
0
10
20
30
 g lithostathine/mg total protein
CCP
Alc.
OPD
Controls
Figure 33-24.  Lithostathine levels in chronic calcific pancreatitis 
(CCP) patients, patients with alcohol abuse (Alc.), patients with 
other pancreatic disease (OPD), and controls. (Reproduced with 
permission of Wiley-Blackwell. From Goggin et al.140)
found to be homologous with lithostathine.138 No overall homol-
ogy has been found between lithostathine and other pancreatic 
proteins. The PSP/pancreatic thread protein/reg/lithostathine 
gene encodes for a 166-amino acid product that undergoes post-
translational modification to produce isoforms present in pancre-
atic juice. The protein is expressed in all rodents and mammals, 
both in the pancreas as well as in brain tissue, where it is found 
in particularly high concentrations in pyramidal neurons in 
Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome. It is also found in the 
renal tubules, which is consistent with its biologic action of pre-
venting calcium carbonate precipitation.
Calcium and bicarbonate ions are normally present in pan-
creatic juice in high concentrations, and the solubility product 
of calcium carbonate is greatly exceeded under normal condi-
tions. Microcrystals of calcium carbonate can be seen in normal 
pancreatic juice but are usually clinically silent. Lithostathine is 
a potent inhibitor of calcium carbonate crystal formation, at a 
concentration of only 0.1 μmol/L. However, lithostathine con-
centrations in normal pancreatic juice are in the range of 20 
to 25 μmol/L, so a constant suppression of calcium carbonate 
crystal formation is present in the normal pancreas.
In alcoholics and in patients with alcoholic chronic pan-
creatitis, lithostathine expression and secretion are dramati-
cally inhibited139 (Fig. 33-24). In addition, elevated levels of 
precipitated lithostathine in the duct fluid in chronic pancreati-
tis patients suggests that the availability of the protein may be 
further reduced by the action of increased proteases and other 
proteins present in the duct fluid of alcoholic patients. Increased 
pancreatic juice protein levels in alcoholic men are reversible by 
abstinence from alcohol,140 so the availability and effectiveness 
of lithostathine may be restored in patients with early-stage dis-
ease by timely intervention. Nevertheless, calcific stone forma-
tion represents an advanced stage of disease, which can further 
promote injury or symptoms due to mechanical damage to duct 
epithelium or obstruction of the ductular network.
Duct Distortion.  Although calcific stone disease is normally 
a marker for an advanced stage of disease, parenchymal and 
1369
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
ductular calcifications do not always correlate with symptoms. 
Obstructing main duct stones are commonly observed and are 
thought to be an indication for endoscopic or surgical removal. 
The ball-valve effect of a stone in a secreting system produces 
inevitable episodes of duct obstruction, usually accompanied by 
pain. But some patients with complete duct obstruction have 
prolonged periods of painlessness. Ductular hypertension has 
been documented in patients with proximal stenosis of the main 
pancreatic duct, and prolonged ductular distention after secre-
tin administration is taken as a sign of ductular obstruction.141 
Although calculus disease and duct enlargement appear together 
as late stages of chronic pancreatitis, controversy persists over 
whether they are associated, are independent events, or are caus-
ally related.
Radiology.  Radiologic imaging of chronic pancreatitis assists 
in four areas: (a) diagnosis, (b) the evaluation of severity of 
disease, (c) detection of complications, and (d) assistance in 
determining treatment options.142 With the advent of cross-
sectional imaging techniques such as CT and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), the contour, content, ductal pattern, 
calcifications, calculi, and cystic disease of the pancreas are 
all readily discernible. Transabdominal ultrasonography is fre-
quently used as a screening method for patients with abdominal 
symptoms or trauma, and the extension of ultrasonic imaging 
to include endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and laparoscopic US 
have resulted in the highest-resolution images that are capable 
of detecting very small (<1 cm) abnormalities in the pancreas. 
EUS is now frequently used as a preliminary step in the evalua-
tion of patients with pancreatic disease, and magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is increasingly being used 
to select patients who are candidates for the most invasive imag-
ing method, ERCP. The staging of disease is important in the 
care of patients, and a combination of imaging methods is usu-
ally used (Table 33-12).
Ultrasonography is frequently used as an initial imaging 
method in patients with abdominal symptoms, and changes 
consistent with pancreatic duct dilatation, intraductal filling 
defects, cystic changes, and a heterogeneous texture are seen in 
chronic pancreatitis (Fig. 33-25). The sensitivity of transabdom-
inal ultrasonography ranges from 48% to 96%, and is operator 
dependent.143 However, the contour, texture, and ductal pattern 
are usually quite discernible, and it is a reliable method for peri-
odic re-examination to determine the efficacy of treatment.
EUS has heavily impacted the evaluation and manage-
ment of patients with chronic pancreatitis. Although it is more 
operator dependent and less widely available than transabdomi-
nal ultrasonography, EUS provides not only imaging capability 
but adds the capacity to obtain cytologic and chemical sam-
ples of tissue and fluid aspirated with linear array monitoring 
(Fig. 33-26). EUS images obtained through a high-frequency 
(7.5- to 12.5-mHz) transducer are able to evaluate subtle 
changes in 2- to 3-mm structures within the pancreas and can 
detect indolent neoplasms in the setting of chronic inflamma-
tion. Small intraductal lesions, intraductal mucus, cystic lesions, 
and subtle ductular abnormalities are recognizable by EUS 
(Table 33-13). This allows ERCP to be reserved for these patients 
who require therapeutic maneuvers, or for the evaluation of more 
complex problems. EUS is comparable to ERCP in the detection 
of advanced changes in chronic pancreatitis and may be more 
sensitive than ERCP in the detection of mild disease.144
CT scanning has affected the diagnosis of pancreatic 
disease more broadly than any other method. With the advent 
of faster helical CT scanning and CT angiography, visualiza-
tion of the nature, extent, location, and relative relationships of 
pancreatic structures and lesions is possible with great clarity. 
Duct ­dilatation, calculous disease, cystic changes, inflammatory 
events, and anomalies are all detectable with a resolution of 3 
to 4 mm (Fig. 33-27). CT scanning has a false-negative rate 
of <10% for chronic pancreatitis, but early or mild chronic 
Table 33-12
Cambridge classification of pancreatic morphology in chronic pancreatitis
Classification
ERCP Findings
CT and US Findings
Normal
No abnormal SBDs
Normal gland size, shape; homogeneous 
parenchyma
Equivocal
MPD normal
One of the following: less than three abnormal 
SBDs; MPD 2–4 mm; gland enlarged more than two 
times normal size; heterogeneous parenchyma
Mild
MPD normal
Two or more of the following: less than three 
abnormal SBDs; MPD 2–4 mm; slight gland 
enlargement; heterogeneous parenchyma
Moderate
MPD changes
Small cysts <10 mm; MPD irregularity
SBD changes
Focal acute pancreatitis; increased echogenicity of 
MPD walls; gland-contour irregularity
Severe
Any of the above changes plus one or more of the 
following: Cysts <10 mm; intraductal filling defects; 
calculi; MPD obstruction or stricture; severe MPD 
irregularity; contiguous organ invasion
—
CT = computed tomography; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; MPD = main pancreatic duct; SBD = side-branch duct; US =  
ultrasound. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. From Freeny.142
5
1370
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­disease may go undetected by CT imaging. The earliest changes 
are dilatation of secondary ducts and heterogeneous parenchymal 
changes, which are detectable by EUS and ERCP. Another draw-
back of CT scanning is its lower sensitivity for detecting small 
neoplasms, which are seen with increased frequency in chronic 
pancreatitis and may be invisible to all modalities except EUS.
An MRI, in both the cross-sectional mode and the coro-
nally oriented heavily weighted T2 or high spin ratio imaging 
(MRCP) that can disclose fluid-filled ducts and cystic lesions, 
has added greatly to the imaging options for chronic pancreatitis 
(Fig. 33-28). The resolution of cross-sectional MRI scanning is 
now approaching that of CT scanning, although the availability 
of MRI scanners and the complexity of the images produced have 
limited their large-scale use for routine imaging of the pancreas. 
MRCP has been shown to be an effective screening technique 
for disclosing ductal abnormalities that correlates closely with 
Figure 33-25.  Sonography in chronic pancreatitis. Transabdomi-
nal sonogram of patient with chronic pancreatitis demonstrates het-
erogeneity of the pancreatic parenchyma, dilated ductal systems, 
and cyst formation. (Reproduced with permission from Bolondi 
et al. Radiol Clin North Am. 27: 815, 1989.)
Figure 33-26.  Endoscopic ultrasound of chronic pancreatitis. The 
endoscopic ultrasound appearance of the parenchyma is hetero-
geneous, and dilated ducts are seen, indicating early obstructive 
pancreatopathy. (Courtesy of Mark Topazian, Division of Digestive 
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic.)
Figure 33-27.  Computed tomographic imaging of chronic pancre-
atitis. A dilated pancreatic duct is seen, with evidence of intraductal 
stones and parenchymal calcification. (Reproduced with permission 
from Forsmark CE:201 Management of pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 
2013;144:1282. © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier, Inc. 
All rights reserved.)
Table 33-13
Endoscopic ultrasound features of chronic pancreatitis
Endoscopic Ultrasound  
Feature
Implication
Ductal changes
  Duct size >3 mm
Ductal dilation
  Tortuous pancreatic duct
Ductal irregularity
  Intraductal echogenic foci
Stones or calcification
  Echogenic duct wall
Ductal fibrosis
  Side-branch ectasia
Periductal fibrosis
Parenchymal changes
  Inhomogeneous echo pattern
Edema
  Reduced echogenic foci  
(1–3 mm)
Edema
  Enhanced echogenic foci
Calcifications
  Prominent interlobular septae
Fibrosis
  Lobular outer gland margin
Fibrosis, glandular atrophy
  Large, echo-poor cavities  
(>5 mm)
Pseudocyst
Source: Reproduced with permission from Catalano et al.143 kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.
the contrast-filled ducts imaged by ERCP.145 The advantages of 
MRCP include its noninvasive methodology and its ability to 
image obstructed ducts that are not opacified by ERCP injection. 
It is therefore a useful screening study to detect duct abnormali-
ties and to confirm the need for interventional procedures. Oral, 
IV, and intraductal contrast are unnecessary for MRCP, and its 
lack of ionizing radiation makes this the safest method to image 
the ductal system in high-risk patients.
For the diagnosis and staging of chronic pancreatitis, ERCP 
is considered to be the gold standard . It also serves as a vehicle 
that enables other diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers, such as 
1371
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
biopsy or brushing for cytology, or the use of stents to relieve 
obstruction or drain a pseudocyst (Fig. 33-29). Unfortunately, 
ERCP also carries a risk of procedure-induced pancreatitis that 
occurs in approximately 5% of patients.31,145 Patients at increased 
risk include those with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and those 
with a previous history of post-ERCP pancreatitis. Post-ERCP 
pancreatitis occurs after uncomplicated procedures, as well as 
after those that require prolonged manipulation. Severe pancre-
atitis and deaths have occurred after ERCP. It should be reserved 
for patients in whom the diagnosis is unclear despite the use of 
other imaging methods, or in whom a diagnostic or therapeutic 
maneuver is specifically indicated.
Figure 33-28.  Coronal T2-weighted magnetic resonance image 
showing evidence of chronic pancreatitis, including a pancreatic 
duct dilatation and side-branch clubbing. (Reproduced with permis-
sion of Mellena Bridges, MD, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Department 
of Radiology.)
Figure 33-29.  Pancreatic duct stenting. At endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography, a stent is placed in the proximal pan-
creatic duct to relieve obstruction and reduce symptoms of pain. 
Pancreatic duct stents are left in place for only a limited time to 
avoid further inflammation.
Figure 33-30.  Pain location in chronic pancreatitis. (Reproduced 
with permission from Murayama KM, Jochl RJ. Chronic pancre-
atitis, in Greenfield LJ et al (eds): Surgery, Scientific Principles 
and Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2001, p 969.)
Presentation, Natural History,  
and Complications
Presenting Signs and Symptoms.  Pain is the most common 
symptom of chronic pancreatitis. It is usually midepigastric in 
location but may localize or involve either the left or right upper 
quadrant of the abdomen. Occasionally, it is perceived in the 
lower midabdomen but is frequently described as penetrating 
through to the back (Fig. 33-30). The pain is typically steady 
and boring, but not colicky. It persists for hours or days and 
may be chronic with exacerbations caused by eating or drink-
ing alcohol. Chronic alcoholics also describe a steady, constant 
pain that is temporarily relieved by alcohol, followed by a more 
severe recurrence hours later.
Patients with chronic pancreatic pain typically flex their 
abdomen and either sit or lie with their hips flexed, or lie on 
their side in a fetal position. Unlike ureteral stone pain or biliary 
colic, the pain causes the patient to be still. Nausea or vomit-
ing may accompany the pain, but anorexia is the most common 
associated symptom.
Pain from chronic pancreatitis has been ascribed to three 
possible etiologies. Ductal hypertension, due to strictures or 
stones, may predispose to pain that is initiated or exacerbated 
by eating. Chronic pain without exacerbation may be related to 
parenchymal disease or retroperitoneal inflammation with per-
sistent neural involvement. Acute exacerbations of pain in the 
setting of chronic pain may be due to acute increases in duct 
pressure or recurrent episodes of acute inflammation in the set-
ting of chronic parenchymal disease. Nealon and Matin have 
described these various pain syndromes as being predictive of 
the response to various surgical procedures.146 Pain that is found 
in association with ductal hypertension is most readily relieved 
by pancreatic duct decompression, through endoscopic stenting 
or surgical decompression.
The surgical relief of pain due to obstructive pancreatopathy 
may be dependent on the degree of underlying fibrosis rather than 
the presence of ductal obstruction, per se, according to a recent 
study from Johns Hopkins by Cooper et al.147About 35 patients 
with chronic pain associated with evidence of duct obstruc-
tion were treated with Local Resection of the pancreatic head 
and ­Longitudinal Pancreatico-Jejunostomy (LR-LPJ), or Frey 
1372
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­procedure, and the degree of pain resolution after surgery was 
compared to the degree of underlying parenchymal fibrosis. After 
a follow-up that averaged 22 months, patients with more than 
80% fibrosis had 100% pain relief, whereas only 60% patients 
with less than 10% fibrosis experienced substantial or complete 
pain relief (Fig. 33-31). These findings suggest that minimal 
fibrosis, or “minimal change chronic pancreatitis,” may produce 
chronic pain due to extrapancreatic or “peri-pancreatic” inflam-
matory events which are not ameliorated by decompression.
The pain of chronic pancreatitis may decrease or disappear 
completely over a period of years, as symptoms of exocrine and 
endocrine deficiency become apparent.148 This is referred to as 
burned outpancreatitis and correlates with the progression of 
disease from a mild or moderate stage to severe destruction of 
the pancreas. Although this evolution of painful to nonpainful 
disease is sometimes used as a justification to avoid intervention 
in painful chronic pancreatitis, noninterventional approaches to 
the treatment of chronic pancreatitis are inevitably accompanied 
by the development of narcotic addiction, inability to work, and 
the sequelae of chronic illness.
Although increased ductal pressure, and therefore paren-
chymal pressure, is thought to be the cause of pain in chronic 
obstructive pancreatitis, the role of chronic inflammation 
per se, and the development of actual nerve damage in the dis-
eased gland, are also thought to contribute to pain.149 Chronic 
inflammation results in the infiltration of tissue by macrophages, 
which secrete prostaglandins and other nociceptive agents that 
cause chronic stimulation of afferent neural fibers. Inflamma-
tory damage to the perineurial layers surrounding the unmyelin-
ated pancreatic nerves and a focal infiltration of inflammatory 
cells around nerves suggest that neural fibers are a target for the 
cellular response to inflammation in the pancreas.150
Strategies to relieve pain are therefore based on three 
approaches: (a) reducing secretion and/or decompress the secre-
tory compartment, (b) resecting the focus of chronic inflamma-
tory change, or (c) interrupting the transmission of afferent neural 
impulses through neural ablative procedures. A trial of antisecre-
tory therapy or endoscopic duct drainage may select those patients 
who will benefit preferentially from a decompressive procedure.
80
75
70
65
60
MIF
Percent Symptom Relief (%)
INF
SEF
Figure 33-31.  Pain relief from chronic pancreatitis treated with the 
Frey procedure correlates with the degree of underlying fibrosis. 
Percent of patients with pain relief for those with mild or minimal 
fibrosis (MIF, n=13), intermediate fibrosis (INF, n=7), and severe 
or extensive fibrosis (SEF, n=14). P<0.05 for MIF vs. SEF by chi-
square analysis. (From Cooper M et al: Extent of pancreatic fibrosis 
as a determinant of symptom resolution after the Frey procedure: A 
clinico-pathologic analysis. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17:682. With 
kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media.)
60
40
20
7
0
10
25
50
75
Fecal fat excretion (g/day)
Normal lipase output (%)
Figure 33-32.  Relationship of lipase output to fat malabsorption. 
Excess fecal fat appears when the pancreatic lipase output falls 
below 10% of normal secretory values. (Data from DiMagno 
et al.151)
Malabsorption and Weight Loss.  When pancreatic exocrine 
capacity falls below 10% of normal, diarrhea and steatorrhea 
develop151 (Fig. 33-32). Patients describe a bulky, foul-smelling, 
loose (but not watery) stool that may be pale in color and float 
on the surface of toilet water. Frequently, patients will describe 
a greasy or oily appearance to the stool, or may describe an “oil 
slick” on the water’s surface. In severe steatorrhea, an orange, 
oily stool is often reported. As exocrine deficiency increases, 
symptoms of steatorrhea are often accompanied by weight loss. 
Patients may describe a good appetite despite weight loss, or 
diminished food intake due to abdominal pain.
In severe symptomatic chronic pancreatitis, anorexia or 
nausea may occur with or separate from abdominal pain. The 
combination of decreased food intake and malabsorption of 
nutrients usually results in chronic weight loss. As a result, 
many patients with severe chronic pancreatitis are below ideal 
body weight.
Lipase deficiency tends to manifest itself before trypsin 
deficiency, so the presence of steatorrhea may be the first func-
tional sign of pancreatic insufficiency.152 As pancreatic exocrine 
function deteriorates further, the secretion of bicarbonate into 
the duodenum is reduced, which causes duodenal acidification 
and further impairs nutrient absorption.153 Pancreatic exocrine 
insufficiency is frequently asymptomatic, however, and pancre-
atic exocrine function is difficult to measure, so a diagnosis of 
chronic pancreatitis is sufficient to justify a trial of pancreatic 
enzyme supplements. Each meal should be followed by 90,000 
United States Pharmacopeia units of lipase, and the metabolic 
and symptomatic status of the patients should be followed.154
Pancreatogenic Diabetes.  The islets comprise only 2% of the 
mass of the pancreas, but they are preferentially conserved when 
pancreatic inflammation occurs. In chronic pancreatitis, acinar 
tissue loss and replacement by fibrosis is greater than the degree 
of loss of islet tissue, although islets are typically smaller than 
normal and may be isolated from their surrounding vascular net-
work by the fibrosis. With progressive destruction of the gland, 
endocrine insufficiency commonly occurs. Frank diabetes is 
seen initially in about 20% of patients with chronic pancreati-
tis, and impaired glucose metabolism can be detected in up to 
70% of patients. In a study of 500 patients with predominantly 
1373
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
alcoholic chronic pancreatitis, diabetes developed in 83% within 
25 years of the clinical onset of chronic pancreatitis, and more 
than half of the diabetic patients required insulin treatment.155 
Ketoacidosis and diabetic nephropathy are relatively uncom-
mon in pancreatogenic diabetes (Table 33-3), but retinopathy 
and neuropathy are seen to occur with a similar frequency as in 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes.156
Pancreatogenic diabetes is most common in cases of 
chronic pancreatitis, and is often seen after surgical resection 
for benign or malignant disease157,158 (Fig. 33-33). Distal pan-
createctomy and Whipple procedures have a higher incidence 
of diabetes than do drainage procedures, and the severity of dia-
betes is usually worse after subtotal or total pancreatectomy. 
Pancreatogenic, or type 3c diabetes (T3cDM), is seen in cystic 
fibrosis, in association with pancreatic cancer, and in cases of 
severe hemachomatosis.159
The etiology and pathophysiology of pancreatogenic 
diabetes is distinct from that of either autoimmune (type 1) or 
obesity-related (type 2) diabetes. In type 3c diabetes, the loss 
of functioning pancreatic tissue by disease or surgical removal 
results in a global deficiency of all three glucoregulatory islet 
cell hormones: insulin, glucagon, and PP. In addition, there 
is a paradoxical combination of enhanced peripheral sensitiv-
ity to insulin and decreased hepatic sensitivity to insulin.160 
As a result, insulin therapy is frequently difficult; patients are 
hyperglycemic when insulin replacement is insufficient (due 
to unsuppressed hepatic glucose production) or hypoglycemic 
when insulin replacement is barely excessive (due to enhanced 
peripheral insulin sensitivity and a deficiency of pancreatic glu-
cagon secretion to counteract the hypoglycemia). This form of 
diabetes is referred to as brittle diabetes and requires special 
attention.
PP deficiency correlates with the severity of chronic 
pancreatitis, and impairments in the hepatic action of insulin 
are reversed in PP-deficient chronic pancreatitis patients by 
administration of PP161. In addition, a recent study of type 1 and 
type 3c diabetic patients on insulin pump therapy revealed 
that the addition of a continuous subcutaneous infusion of PP 
reduced the insulin requirements needed for glycemic control.162 
This suggests that the treatment of pancreatogenic diabetes may 
be improved by the use of a clinically suitable PP analog or PP 
receptor agonist.
Laboratory Studies.  The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis 
depends on the clinical presentation, a limited number of indi-
rect measurements that correlate with pancreatic function, and 
selected imaging studies (Table 33-14).The direct ­measurement 
Hemochromatosis
8%
Cystic fibrosis
4%
Pancreatic resection
3%
Chronic pancreatitis
76%
Pancreatic
neoplasia
9%
A  Distribution of T1DM, T2DM and T3cDM
B  Distribution of causes of T3cDM
T3cDM
8%
T1DM
12%
T2DM
80%
Figure 33-33.  Distribution of types of 
diabetes (A) and causes of type 3c (pan-
creatogenic) diabetes (B) based on stud-
ies of 1922 diabetic patients referred to 
an academic medical center as reported 
by Hardt et al.157 (Reproduced from Cui 
YF and Andersen DK159 with permission. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Table 33-14
Tests for chronic pancreatitis
I. Measurement of pancreatic products in blood
  A. Enzymes
  B. Pancreatic polypeptide
II. Measurement of pancreatic exocrine secretion
  A. Direct measurements
    1. Enzymes
    2. Bicarbonate
  B. Indirect measurement
    1. Bentiromide test
    2. Schilling test
    3. Fecal fat, chymotrypsin, or elastase concentration
    4. [14C]-olein absorption
III. Imaging techniques
  A. Plain film radiography of abdomen
  B. Ultrasonography
  C. Computed tomography
  D. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
  E. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
  F. Endoscopic ultrasonography
of pancreatic enzymes (e.g., lipase and amylase) by blood test 
is highly sensitive and fairly specific in acute pancreatitis but 
is seldom helpful in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. The 
pancreatic endocrine product that correlates most strongly 
with chronic pancreatitis is the PP response to a test meal 
(Fig. 33-34). Severe chronic pancreatitis is associated with a 
blunted or absent PP response to feeding but, as with many other 
tests, a normal PP response does not rule out the presence of 
early disease.14
The measurement of pancreatic exocrine secretion 
requires aspiration of pancreatic juice from the duodenum 
after nutrient (Lundh test meal) or hormonal (CCK or secretin) 
stimulation.163,164 Direct aspiration of pancreatic juice by endo-
scopic cannulation of the duct is performed in some centers, but 
is not risk free, comfortable for the patient, or more sensitive 
than luminal intubation methods.165
Indirect tests of pancreatic exocrine function are based on 
the measurement of metabolites of compounds that are altered 
1374
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(“digested”) by pancreatic exocrine products and can be quanti-
fied by serum or urine measurements. A commonly used indirect 
test is the bentiromide test, in which N-benzoyl-l-tyrosyl-p-­
aminobenzoic acid is ingested by the subject, and the urinary 
excretion of the proteolytic metabolite p-aminobenzoic acid 
(PABA) is measured.166 Although the sensitivity of the test is as 
high as 100% in patients with severe chronic pancreatitis, it iden-
tifies only 40% to 50% of patients with mild disease, and reduced 
PABA excretion is found in patients with a variety of other GI, 
hepatic, and renal diseases. The quantification of stool fat has 
also been used as a measure of pancreatic lipase secretion, either 
through the direct measurement of total fecal fat levels while the 
subject consumes a diet of known fat content, or by the measure-
ment of exhaled 14CO2 after ingestion of [14C]-triolein or [14C]-
olein. This so-called triolein breath test is less cumbersome than 
intubation methods, and avoids the necessity of stool collections 
and analysis, but also has a high false-negative rate.167
Fecal levels of chymotrypsin168 and elastase169 have been 
proposed as simpler, less expensive tests of exocrine function 
and correlate well with loss of pancreatic function. As with 
other test methods, however, these tests lose their sensitivity 
in patients with mild to moderate chronic pancreatitis and may 
be more sensitive for other causes of pancreatic dysfunction, 
including cystic fibrosis. Fecal elastase C1 measurements have 
become widespread in their use, and levels above 200 µg/g are 
considered normal, whereas levels below 100 µg/g are indica-
tive of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.170 The sensitivity and 
specificity of fecal elastase C1 measurements fall short of those 
needed for definitive diagnosis of pancreatic exocrine insuffi-
ciency, however.171
Radiologic imaging has become the principal method of 
diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, with the codification of clas-
sification systems that correlate with proven disease. ERCP has 
been considered the most sensitive radiologic test for the diag-
nosis of chronic pancreatitis, with specific ERCP findings that are 
highly correlative with the degree or stage of chronic disease172 
(Table 33-15). CT scanning is sensitive for the ­diagnosis 
of chronic pancreatitis when calcification, duct dilatation, or 
0
40
80
120
160
Time (min)
20
60
100
140
180
0
40
80
120
160
200
–40
IR-pancreatic polypeptide
 (pmol/L)
NL
CP
Figure 33-34.  Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) response to a test meal. 
Immunoreactive PP (IR-PP) responses in control subjects (NL, n = 
6) and patients with severe chronic pancreatitis (CP) accompanied 
by PP deficiency (CP, n = 5) are shown. A test meal was adminis-
tered at 0 minutes. Means ± standard error of the mean are shown. 
(Reproduced with permission from Brunicardi et al.161 kkjkjdht 
1996 The Endocrine Society.)
Table 33-15
Cambridge classification of chronic pancreatitis by 
­endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Grade
Main Pancreatic Duct
Side Branches
Normal
Normal
Normal
Suggestive
Normal
<3 Abnormal
Mild
Normal
≥3 Abnormal
Moderate
Abnormal
>3 Abnormal
Severe
Abnormal plus at least 
one of the following: 
Large cavity, Duct obstr­
uction, Dilation or duct 
irregularity, Intraductal 
filing defects
Source: Reproduced with permission from Axon ATR et al. Pancrea-
tography in chronic pancreatitis: International definitions. Gut 25:1107, 
1984. With permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.
cystic disease is present, but is not accurate in the absence of 
these findings. CT is helpful as a screening study to guide inter-
ventional therapy or other diagnostic modalities,142 although 
EUS has become the preferred method for the diagnosis of pan-
creatic disease and offers the advantage of very-high-resolution 
images of the pancreatic parenchyma, the main and secondary 
ductal systems, cystic lesions, and calcific changes. EUS find-
ings may be inconclusive in mild or “minimal change” pan-
creatitis, however, and improved criteria for an EUS-based 
diagnosis are still a work in progress. Most importantly, EUS 
is highly reliable in ruling out pancreatic carcinoma when CT 
findings are normal or equivocal.173
Prognosis and Natural History.  The prognosis for patients 
with chronic pancreatitis is dependent on the etiology of the 
disease, the development of complications, and on the age and 
socioeconomic status of the patient. The influence of treat-
ment is less evident in long-term studies, although the general 
absence of randomized, prospective trials clouds the issue of 
whether specific forms of therapy alter the long-term outlook 
for patients with the disease.
Several studies have demonstrated that, although symp-
toms of pain decrease over time in about half of the patients, 
this decline is also accompanied by a progression of exocrine 
and endocrine insufficiency.174 In general, the likelihood of 
eventual pain relief is dependent upon the stage of disease at 
diagnosis, and the persistence of alcohol use in patients with 
alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. Miyake and colleagues found that 
pain relief was achieved in 60% of alcoholic patients who suc-
cessfully discontinued drinking, but in only 26% who did not.175
The long-term survival of patients with chronic pancreatitis 
is less than for patients without pancreatitis. In an international 
multicenter study of >2000 patients, Lowenfels and colleagues 
found that the 10- and 20-year survival rates for patients with 
chronic pancreatitis were 70% and 45%, respectively, compared 
to 93% and 65% for patients without pancreatitis.174 The mortal-
ity risk was found to be 1.6-fold higher in patients who contin-
ued to abuse alcohol, compared to those who did not. Continued 
alcohol abuse has a similar effect on the response to surgical 
treatment (Fig. 33-35), and results in a twofold increase in mor-
tality over a 10- to 14-year follow-up period.176
1375
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
In addition to progressive endocrine and exocrine dysfunc-
tion, and the risk of the specific complications outlined below 
and in Table 33-16, the other significant long-term risk for the 
patient with chronic pancreatitis is the development of pancre-
atic carcinoma.178 There is a progressive, cumulative increased 
risk of carcinoma development in patients with chronic pancre-
atitis, which continues throughout the subsequent lifetime of 
the patient (Fig. 33-36). The incidence of carcinoma in patients 
with chronic pancreatitis ranges from 1.5% to 6%,177 which is at 
least 10-fold greater than that of patients of similar age seen in a 
hospital setting. In a recent study, the risk of carcinoma among 
patients with chronic pancreatitis accompanied by diabetes was 
found to be increased 33-fold compared to healthy, comparably 
aged controls.178 In patients with advanced chronic pancreatitis 
referred for surgical therapy, indolent, undiagnosed carcinoma 
can be seen in as many as 10% of patients.179
The development of carcinoma in the setting of chronic 
pancreatitis is no doubt related to the dysregulation of cellu-
lar proliferation and tissue repair processes in the setting of 
chronic inflammation, as is seen throughout the alimentary tract 
2
4
6
8
10
0
60
Non-alcoholics
Pancreatico-
duodenectomy
alcoholics
Alcoholics; 40%–80%
distal pancreatectomy
Alcoholics; 80%–95%
distal pancreatectomy
Years after surgical procedure
Percent surviving
12
14
70
80
90
100
Figure 33-35.  Effect of alcohol use on survival 
after surgical procedures. The cumulative survival of 
patients with chronic pancreatitis following pancreat-
icoduodenectomy or distal pancreatectomy is shown 
for nonalcoholic and alcoholic patients. (Reproduced 
with permission from Frey et al.176)
Table 33-16
Complications of chronic pancreatitis
Intrapancreatic complications
  Pseudocysts
    Duodenal or gastric obstruction
    Thrombosis of splenic vein
    Abscess
    Perforation
    Erosion into visceral artery
  Inflammatory mass in head of pancreas
    Bile duct stenosis
    Portal vein thrombosis
    Duodenal obstruction
  Duct strictures and/or stones
    Ductal hypertension and dilatation
  Pancreatic carcinoma
Extrapancreatic complications
  Pancreatic duct leak with ascites or fistula
  Pseudocyst extension beyond lesser sac into mediastinum, 
retroperitoneum, lateral pericolic spaces, pelvis, or 
adjacent viscera
Years after diagnosis of pancreatitis
Cumulative incidence of pancreatic cancer (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
5
10
15
20
(1160)
(599)
(244)
(64)
Figure 33-36.  Cumulative risk of pancreatic cancer in patients 
with chronic pancreatitis. The number of patients evaluated at 
different time intervals is shown in parentheses. (Reproduced with 
permission from Lowenfels AB et al. kkjkjdht © 1993 Massachusetts 
Medical Society. All rights reserved.177)
and elsewhere. In the setting of chronic pancreatitis, ­carcinoma 
­development can be especially cryptic, and the diagnosis of 
early-stage tumors is particularly difficult. Awareness of this 
risk justifies close surveillance for cancer in patients with 
chronic pancreatitis. Periodic measurement of tumor markers 
such as CA19-9, and periodic imaging of the pancreas with 
CT scan and EUS seem logical in order to detect the devel-
opment of carcinoma in the patient with chronic pancreatitis, 
although no evidence exists to indicate that this alters the out-
come of patients who develop pancreatic cancer. Surgical pro-
cedures performed for presumed chronic pancreatitis should 
always include biopsy of the tissue to exclude the diagnosis of 
malignancy.
Complications
Pseudocyst.  A chronic collection of pancreatic fluid sur-
rounded by a nonepithelialized wall of granulation tissue and 
fibrosis is referred to as a pseudocyst. Pseudocysts occur in 
up to 10% of patients with acute pancreatitis, and in 20% to 38% 
1376
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
of patients with chronic pancreatitis, and thus, they comprise the 
most common complication of chronic pancreatitis.180-182 The 
identification and treatment of pseudocysts requires definition 
of the various forms of pancreatic fluid collections that occur 
(Table 33-17). In chronic pancreatitis, a pancreatic duct leak 
with extravasation of pancreatic juice results in a peri-pancreatic 
fluid collection (PPFC). Over a period of 3 to 4 weeks, the PPFC 
is sealed by an inflammatory reaction that leads to development 
of a wall of acute granulation tissue without much fibrosis. This 
is referred to as an acute pseudocyst. Acute pseudocysts may 
resolve spontaneously in up to 50% of cases, over a course of 6 
weeks or longer.183 Pseudocysts >6 cm resolve less frequently 
than smaller ones but may regress over a period of weeks to 
months. Pseudocysts are multiple in 17% of patients,182 or may 
be multilobulated. They may occur intrapancreatically or extend 
beyond the region of the pancreas into other cavities or compart-
ments (Fig. 33-37).
Pseudocysts may become secondarily infected, in which 
case they become abscesses. They can compress or obstruct 
adjacent organs or structures, leading to superior mesenteric-
portal vein thrombosis or splenic vein thrombosis.184 They can 
erode into visceral arteries and cause intracystic hemorrhage 
or pseudoaneurysms (Fig. 33-38). They also can perforate and 
cause peritonitis or intraperitoneal bleeding.185
Figure 33-37.  Extensive pseudocyst disease. A computed tomo-
graphic scan in a patient with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis dem-
onstrates multiloculated pseudocyst disease.
Figure 33-38.  Pseudoaneurysm of the gastroduodenal artery. 
A pseudocyst can erode into an adjacent artery, which results in 
contained hemorrhage otherwise known as a pseudoaneurysm. A 
contrast-injected computed tomographic scan reveals active bleed-
ing (area marked B) into a pseudocyst (arrows) as a result of this 
process. (Reproduced with permission from Balthazar EJ: CT 
diagnosis and staging of acute pancreatitis. Radiol Clin North Am. 
1989;27:19. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Table 33-17
Definitions of pancreatic fluid collections
Term
Definition
Peripancreatic fluid 
collection
A collection of enzyme-rich pancreatic 
juice that occurs early in the course of 
acute pancreatitis, or that forms after a 
pancreatic duct leak; located in or near 
the pancreas; it lacks a well-organized 
wall of granulation or fibrous tissue
Early pancreatic 
(sterile) necrosis
A focal or diffuse area of nonviable 
pancreatic parenchyma, typically 
occupying >30% of the gland and 
containing liquefied debris and fluid
Late pancreatic 
(sterile) necrosis
An organized collection of sterile 
necrotic debris and fluid with a well-
defined margin or wall within the 
normal domain of the pancreas
Acute pseudocyst
A collection of pancreatic juice enclosed 
within a perimeter of early granulation 
tissue, usually as a consequence of acute 
pancreatitis that has occurred within the 
preceding 3–4 wk
Chronic pseudocyst
A collection of pancreatic fluid 
surrounded by a wall of normal 
granulation and fibrous tissue, usually 
persisting for >6 wk
Pancreatic abscess
Any of the above in which gross 
purulence (pus) is present, with 
bacterial or fungal organisms 
documented to be present
Source: Modified with permission from Baron et al.186 kkjkjdht 
­Elsevier.
Pseudocysts usually cause symptoms of pain, fullness, 
or early satiety. Asymptomatic pseudocysts can be managed 
expectantly and may resolve spontaneously or persist without 
complication.181 Symptomatic or enlarging pseudocysts require 
treatment, and any presumed pseudocyst without a documented 
antecedent episode of acute pancreatitis requires investigation 
to determine the etiology of the lesion.183 Although pseudocysts 
comprise roughly two thirds of all pancreatic cystic lesions, they 
resemble cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinoma radiographi-
cally. An incidentally discovered cystic lesion should be exam-
ined by EUS and aspirated to determine whether it is a true 
neoplasm or a pseudocyst.
The timing and method of treatment requires careful con-
sideration. Pitfalls in the management of pseudocysts result 
from the incorrect (presumptive) diagnosis of a cystic neoplasm 
masquerading as a pseudocyst, a failure to appreciate the solid 
or debris-filled contents of a pseudocyst that appears to be fluid 
filled on CT scan, and a failure to document true adherence with 
1377
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
an adjacent portion of the stomach before attempting transgas-
tric internal drainage.
If infection is suspected, the pseudocyst should be aspi-
rated (not drained) by CT- or US-guided FNA, and the contents 
examined for organisms by Gram’s stain and culture.185 If infec-
tion is present, and the contents resemble pus, external drainage 
is employed, using either surgical or percutaneous techniques.
If the pseudocyst has failed to resolve with conservative 
therapy, and symptoms persist, internal drainage is usually pre-
ferred to external drainage, to avoid the complication of a pan-
creaticocutaneous fistula. Pseudocysts communicate with the 
pancreatic ductal system in up to 80% of cases,186 so external 
drainage creates a pathway for pancreatic duct leakage to and 
through the catheter exit site. Internal drainage may be performed 
with either percutaneous catheter-based methods (transgastric 
puncture and stent placement to create a cystogastrostomy), 
endoscopic methods (transgastric or transduodenal puncture 
and multiple stent placements, with or without a nasocystic irri-
gation catheter), or surgical methods (a true cystoenterostomy, 
biopsy of cyst wall, and evacuation of all debris and contents). 
Surgical options include a cystogastrostomy (Fig. 33-39), a 
Roux-en-Y cystojejunostomy, or a cystoduodenostomy. Cysto-
jejunostomy is the most versatile method, and it can be applied 
to pseudocysts that penetrate into the transverse mesocolon, the 
paracolic gutters, or the lesser sac. ­Cystogastrostomy can be 
performed endoscopically187 (Fig. 33-40), laparoscopically,188 
or by a combined laparoscopic-endoscopic method.189
Because pseudocysts often communicate with the pan-
creatic ductal system, two newer approaches to pseudocyst 
management are based on main duct drainage, rather than pseu-
docyst drainage per se. Transpapillary stents inserted at the 
time of ERCP may be directed into a pseudocyst through the 
ductal communication itself (Fig. 33-41), or can be left across 
the area of suspected duct leakage to facilitate decompression 
and cyst drainage, analogous to the use of common bile duct 
stents in the setting of a cystic duct leak.186 In a surgical series of 
patients with chronic pancreatitis, ductal dilatation, and a coex-
isting pseudocyst, Nealon and Walser showed that duct drainage 
alone, without a separate cystoenteric anastomosis, was as suc-
cessful as a combined drainage procedure.190 Furthermore, the 
“duct drainage only” group enjoyed a shorter hospital stay and 
fewer complications than the group who underwent a separate 
Figure 33-39.  Cystogastrostomy drainage of a retrogastric pancre-
atic pseudocyst. A larger opening is made through the common wall 
of a retrogastric pseudocyst, and a portion of the pseudocyst wall 
is submitted for histologic confirmation of the diagnosis. Suture 
reinforcement of the communication is performed to avoid the com-
plication of bleeding. (Reproduced with permission from Bell.188)
A
B
Stomach
FNA
needle
Pseudocyst
Duodenum
Pancreas
Liver
Pseudocyst
Double
pigtailed
stents
Pancreas
Stomach
EUS
scope
Figure 33-40.  Technique of endoluminal cystogastrostomy. 
A. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided transgastric puncture of 
pancreatic pseudocyst. B. Transgastric stents placed across fused 
posterior wall of stomach and anterior wall of pseudocyst. (Repro-
duced with permission from Chauhan SS, Forsmark CE. Evidence-
based treatment of pancreatic pseudocysts. Gastroenterol 2013; 
145: 512 kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
cystoenterostomy. These observations suggest that transductal 
drainage may be a safe and effective approach to the manage-
ment of pseudocystic disease.
The complications of endoscopic or radiologic drainage of 
pseudocysts often require surgical intervention. Bleeding from 
the cystoenterostomy, and inoculation of a pseudocyst with fail-
ure of resolution and persistence of infection, may require sur-
gical treatment. Bleeding risks may be lessened by the routine 
use of EUS in the selection of the site for transluminal stent 
placement.191 Percutaneous and endoscopic treatment of pseu-
docysts requires large-bore catheters, multiple stents, and an 
aggressive approach to management for success to be achieved. 
Failure of nonsurgical therapy, with subsequent salvage proce-
dures to remove infected debris and establish complete drain-
age, is associated with increased risks for complications and 
death.192 The most experienced therapeutic endoscopists report 
a complication rate of 17% to 19% for the treatment of sterile 
1378
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
pseudocysts, and deaths as a result of endoscopic therapy have 
occurred.193 Therefore, the use of endoscopic methods to treat 
sterile or infected pancreatic necrosis has a higher complication 
rate and is limited to specialized centers.
Resection of a pseudocyst is sometimes indicated for cysts 
located in the pancreatic tail, or when a midpancreatic duct 
disruption has resulted in a distally located pseudocyst. Distal 
pancreatectomy for removal of a pseudocyst, with or without 
splenectomy, can be a challenging procedure in the setting of 
prior pancreatitis. An internal drainage procedure of the com-
municating duct or of the pseudocyst itself should be considered 
when distal resection is being contemplated.
Pancreatic Ascites.  When a disrupted pancreatic duct leads to 
pancreatic fluid extravasation that does not become sequestered 
as a pseudocyst, but drains freely into the peritoneal cavity, pan-
creatic ascites occurs. Occasionally, the pancreatic fluid tracks 
superiorly into the thorax, and a pancreatic pleural effusion 
occurs. Referred to as internal pancreatic fistulae, both compli-
cations are seen more often in patients with chronic pancreatitis 
rather than after acute pancreatitis. Pancreatic ascites and pleu-
ral effusion occur together in 14% of patients, and 18% have a 
pancreatic pleural effusion alone.194
A
B
Figure 33-41.  Transpapillary drainage of a pancreatic pseudocyst. 
A. Endoscopic passage of a flexible wire through the major papilla, 
through the pancreatic duct, and into a communicating pseudocyst. 
 B. Placement of a stent over the wire into the pseudocyst with 
transpapillary drainage. (Reproduced with permission from Kozarek 
et al.187)
Patients demonstrate the general demographics of chronic 
pancreatitis and usually present with a subacute or recent his-
tory of progressive abdominal swelling despite weight loss. Pain 
and nausea are rarely present. The abdominal CT scan discloses 
ascites and the presence of chronic pancreatitis or a partially 
collapsed pseudocyst (Fig. 33-42). Paracentesis or thoracente-
sis reveals noninfected fluid with a protein level >25 g/L and 
a markedly elevated amylase level. Serum amylase may also 
be elevated, presumably from reabsorption across the parietal 
membrane. Serum albumin may be low, and patients may have 
coexisting liver disease. Paracentesis is therefore critical to dif-
ferentiate pancreatic from hepatic ascites.
ERCP is most helpful to delineate the location of the pan-
creatic duct leak and to elucidate the underlying pancreatic duc-
tal anatomy. Pancreatic duct stenting may be considered at the 
time of ERCP, but if nonsurgical therapy is undertaken and then 
abandoned, repeat imaging of the pancreatic duct is appropriate 
to guide surgical treatment.
Antisecretory therapy with the somatostatin analogue 
octreotide acetate, together with bowel rest and parenteral nutri-
tion, is successful in more than half of patients.195 Reapposition 
of serosal surfaces to facilitate closure of the leak is considered a 
part of therapy, and this is accomplished by complete paracentesis. 
For pleural effusions, a period of chest tube drainage may facili-
tate closure of the internal fistula.195 Surgical therapy is reserved 
for those who fail to respond to medical treatment. If the leak 
originates from the central region of the pancreas, a Roux-en-Y 
pancreaticojejunostomy is performed to the site of duct leakage 
(Fig. 33-43). If the leak is in the tail, a distal pancreatectomy may 
be considered, or an internal drainage procedure can be performed. 
The results of surgical treatment are usually favorable if the ductal 
anatomy has been carefully delineated preoperatively.
Pancreatic-Enteric Fistula.  The erosion of a pancreatic pseu-
docyst into an adjacent hollow viscus can result in a pancreatic-
enteric fistula. The most common site of communication is the 
transverse colon or splenic flexure. The fistula usually presents 
with evidence of GI or colonic bleeding and sepsis. If the fistula 
communicates with the stomach or duodenum, it may close spon-
taneously or persist as a pancreatic-enteric fistula. When the fis-
tula involves the colon, operative correction is usually required.196
Figure 33-42.  Pancreatic ascites. Computed tomographic scan of a 
patient with a ruptured pancreatic pseudocyst resulting in intraperito-
neal pancreatic fluid. (Reproduced with permission from Cameron JL, 
Cameron AM (eds): Current Surgical Therapy, 11th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier, 2014, p 458. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1379
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Head-of-Pancreas Mass.  In up to 30% of patients with 
advanced chronic pancreatitis, an inflammatory mass develops 
in the head of the pancreas.197 The clinical presentation includes 
severe pain, and frequently includes stenosis of the distal com-
mon bile duct, duodenal stenosis, compression of the portal vein, 
and stenosis of the proximal main pancreatic duct (Table 33-18). 
Mutations and polymorphisms of p53 have been found in these 
patients, and a focus of ductular carcinoma was found in 3.7% of 
patients with pancreatic head enlargement in one series.198 It was 
concluded that an accelerated transformation from hyperplasia 
to dysplasia exists in patients with pancreatic head enlargement, 
although the etiology for this process remains unclear.
Splenic and Portal Vein Thrombosis.  Vascular complica-
tions of chronic pancreatitis are fortunately infrequent, because 
Figure 33-43.  Internal drainage for leaking pancreatic duct. A 
Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy is performed at the site of duct 
rupture to accomplish internal drainage of the pancreatic duct leak. 
(Reproduced with permission from Lipsett.196)
Table 33-18
Signs and symptoms of chronic pancreatitis with and 
without a pancreatic head mass
Signs and Symptoms
With Head 
Enlargement  
(n = 138) (%)
Without Head 
Enlargement 
(n = 141) (%)
Daily severe pain
67
40
Cholestasis
46
11
Duodenal obstruction
30
7
Diabetes mellitus
18
30
Vascular involvement
15
8
Source: Reproduced with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. From 
Beger et al.197
they are difficult to treat successfully. Portal vein compression 
and occlusion can occur as a consequence of an inflammatory 
mass in the head of the pancreas, and splenic vein thrombosis 
occurs in association with chronic pancreatitis in 4% to 8% of 
cases.199 Variceal formation can occur as a consequence of either 
portal or splenic venous occlusion, and splenic vein thrombo-
sis with gastric variceal formation is referred to as left-sided or 
sinistral portal hypertension. Although bleeding complications 
are infrequent, the mortality risk of bleeding is >20%. When 
gastroesophageal varices are caused by splenic vein thrombo-
sis, the addition of splenectomy to prevent variceal hemorrhage 
is prudent when surgery is otherwise indicated to correct other 
problems.
Treatment
Medical Therapy.  The medical treatment of chronic or recur-
rent pain in chronic pancreatitis requires the use of analgesics, a 
cessation of alcohol use, oral enzyme therapy, and the selective 
use of antisecretory therapy. Interventional procedures to block 
visceral afferent nerve conduction or to treat obstructions of the 
main pancreatic duct are also an adjunct to medical treatment.
Analgesia.  Oral analgesics are prescribed as needed, alone or 
with analgesia-enhancing agents such as gabapentin. Adequate 
pain control usually requires the use of narcotics, but these 
should be titrated to achieve pain relief with the lowest effective 
dose. Opioid addiction is common, and the use of long-acting 
analgesics by transdermal patch together with oral agents for 
pain exacerbations slightly reduces the sedative effects of high-
dose oral narcotics.
It is essential for patients to abstain from alcohol. In 
addition to removing the causative agent, alcohol abstention 
results in pain reduction or relief in 60% to 75% of patients 
with chronic pancreatitis.200 Despite this benefit, roughly half of 
alcoholic chronic pancreatitis patients continue to abuse alcohol.
Enzyme Therapy.  Pancreatic enzyme administration serves 
to reverse the effects of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. 
Adequate pancreatic enzyme replacement reverses the exocrine 
insufficiency seen in most patients, and prevents secondary 
complications such as metabolic bone disease due to inadequate 
absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. In addi-
tion, pancreatic enzyme replacement may reduce or alleviate the 
pain experienced by patients. The choice of enzyme supplement 
and the dose should be selected based on whether malabsorption 
or pain (or both) are the indications for therapy201 (Table 33-19). 
Conventional (nonenteric-coated) enzyme preparations are par-
tially degraded by gastric acid but are available within the duo-
denal and jejunal regions to bind to CCK-releasing peptide, and 
downregulate the release of CCK. This theoretically reduces the 
enteric signal for pancreatic exocrine secretion, which reduces 
the pressure within a partially or completely obstructed pan-
creatic duct.202 Enteric-coated preparations result in little to no 
pain relief, presumably due to their reduced bioavailability in 
the proximal gut. Due to the loss of pancreatic enzymes by acid 
hydrolysis and proteolysis, relatively large doses are required 
to achieve effective levels of enzyme within the proximal small 
bowel. Enteric-coated preparations are protected from acid deg-
radation but are presumably not released in the critical proximal 
gut in sufficient quantity to inhibit the stimulus for endogenous 
pancreatic enzyme secretion. Nonalcoholic patients may expe-
rience more effective pain relief than alcoholic patients, but it 
is recommended that all patients with chronic pancreatitis pain 
1380
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
begin a trial of nonenteric-coated enzyme supplements together 
with an acid-suppressive medication for 1 month. If pain relief is 
achieved, therapy is continued. If enzyme therapy fails, further 
investigation of the pancreatic ductal system by ERCP guides 
the therapy based on specific anatomical findings (Fig. 33-44).
Antisecretory Therapy.  Somatostatin administration has 
been shown to inhibit pancreatic exocrine secretion and CCK 
release.203 The somatostatin analogue octreotide acetate has 
therefore been investigated for pain relief in patients with 
chronic pancreatitis. In a double-blind, prospective, randomized 
4-week trial, 65% of patients who received 200 μg of octreotide 
acetate subcutaneously three times daily reported pain relief, 
compared with 35% of placebo-treated subjects204. Patients who 
had the best results were patients with chronic abdominal pain, 
suggestive of obstructive pancreatopathy. However, in another 
trial that used a 3-day duration of treatment, no significant pain 
relief was observed.205 Anecdotal reports suggest that severe 
pain exacerbations in chronic pancreatitis can benefit from a 
combination of octreotide therapy and TPN, and a pilot study 
of the effectiveness of the sustained-release form of octreotide 
suggested that it was as effective as three-times-per-day admin-
istration of the short-acting form of the drug 206.
Neurolytic Therapy.  Celiac plexus neurolysis with alcohol 
injection has been an effective form of analgesic treatment in 
patients with pancreatic carcinoma. However, the use of radio-
logically- or endoscopically-guided celiac plexus blockade in 
chronic pancreatitis has been disappointing. Due to the risk of 
alcohol injury and the need for repeated injections, celiac plexus 
blockade in chronic pancreatitis has used short-acting analgesics 
or other drugs rather than 50% alcohol. A trial of EUS-guided 
celiac plexus blockade revealed successful pain relief in 55% of 
patients, but the benefit lasted beyond 6 months in only 10% of 
patients.207 The procedure therefore appears safe, but the effect 
is short lived in those patients who obtain pain relief.
Endoscopic Management.  The techniques of endoscopic 
treatment of pancreatic duct obstruction, stone disease, pseu-
docyst formation, pancreatic duct leak, and for the diagno-
sis and management of associated pancreatic tumors have 
expanded greatly over the past 10 years. Newer endoscopes 
with expanded therapeutic capabilities have been introduced, 
Table 33-19
Pancreatic enzyme preparations
Product
Formulation
Manufacturer
Lipase content (USP)/pill or capsule
Zenpep
Enteric-coated porcine
Aptalis
3000, 5000, 10,000, 15,000, 20,000
Creon
Enteric-coated porcine
Abbott
3000, 6000, 12,000, 24,000
Pancreaze
Enteric-coated porcine
Ortho-McNeil-Janssen
4200, 10,500, 16,800, 21,000
Pertzye
Enteric-coated porcine mixed with 
bicarbonate granules
Digestive Care
8000, 16,000
Ultresa
Enteric-coated porcine
Aptalis
13,800, 20,700, 23,000
Viokace
Tablet non-enteric-coated porcine
Aptalis
10,440, 20,880
USP: United States Pharmacopeia, the standard for lipase content in the United States. An average meal requires roughly 90,000 
USP units of lipase for fat digestion. Enzyme therapy of exocrine deficiency typically begins with a dose of 50,000 USP units per 
meal with subsequent adjustment.
(Reproduced with permission from Forsmark CE. Management of chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol 2013; 144: 1282. © 2013 
AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.)
and the role of EUS and EUS-guided needle and catheter inser-
tion has expanded the ability of the therapeutic endoscopist 
in the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pancreatitis and its 
complications.208
Pancreatic duct stenting is used for treatment of proximal 
pancreatic duct stenosis, decompression of a pancreatic duct 
leak, and for drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts that can be 
catheterized through the main pancreatic duct. Pancreatic duct 
stents can induce an inflammatory response within the duct, so 
prolonged stenting is usually avoided. Patients with sphincter 
of Oddi dyskinesia are at high risk for developing post-ERCP 
pancreatitis after biliary sphincterotomy, and the prophylactic 
placement of a pancreatic duct stent reduces the amylase level 
and development of pancreatitis after biliary sphincterotomy.209 
Pancreatic duct leaks are seen in 37% of patients with acute 
pancreatitis, and pancreatic duct stenting appear to facilitate the 
resolution of the leak.210 Similarly, pancreatic duct stenting has 
been used to treat postsurgical pancreatic duct leaks and post-
traumatic leaks.210–212
Pancreas divisum (see Fig. 33-3) is thought to cause pain 
and chronic pancreatitis due to functional or mechanical obstruc-
tion of the dorsal duct draining exclusively, or predominantly, 
through the lesser papilla. A study from Marseille reported good 
long-term results in 24 patients after minor papilla sphincter-
otomy and dorsal duct stenting.213 The number of patients with 
chronic pain decreased from 83% before stenting to 29% after 
stenting, but pancreatitis or recurrent papillary stenosis occurred 
in 38%. Patients that responded best were those with intermit-
tent pain, and this subset may be preferentially treated with 
endoscopic therapy.
Idiopathic pancreatitis patients have been treated with endo-
scopic stenting, pancreatic duct sphincterotomy, and endoscopic 
stone removal with good results. In a prospective randomized trial, 
53% of idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis patients in the control 
group experienced continued episodes of pancreatitis, although 
only 11% of the treated patients had continued symptoms.214
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) has been 
used for pancreatic duct stones, together with endoscopic stent-
ing and stone removal.215 A single ESWL session was used in 
35 patients with pancreatic duct stones, together with 86 ERCP 
sessions to complete the stone removal process. After 2.4 years, 
1381
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Make a correct diagnosis
 • Appropriate history
 • Corroborating imaging tests
  • MRI/MRCP
  • EUS
  • CT
 • Functional tests if imaging tests equivocal
  • Tube-based secretin test
  • Endoscopic-based secretin test
 • Assess for alternative diseases and complications and
 treat if present
  • Pancreatic cancer or IPMN
  • Pseudocyst
  • Bile duct obstruction
  • Duodenal obstruction
Medical therapy
 • Measure pain severity, character, and impact on QOL
 • Refer for formal structured smoking and alcohol cessation
    programs
 • Counsel on good nutrition and initiate supplementation
    with vitamin D and calcium
   • Baseline bone mineral density tasting
 • Provide information on local and national support groups
 • Initiate analgesics (starting with Tramadol)
   • Increase dose and potenay slowly as required
 • Initiate adjunctive agents in those with persistent pain or
 requiring higher dosages or potency of narcotics
   • Pregabalin, Gabapentin
   • SSRI
   • SSNRI
   • Tricyclic antidepressants
 • Assess for evidence of coexistent exocrine or endocrine
 insufficiency and treat if present
   • Fecal elastase or serum trypsin
   • HgB A1C or GTT
 • Initiate steroids if autoimmune pancreatitis
Inflammatory mass in pancreatic head
 • With or without dilated pancreatic duct
 • With or without duodenal or biliary
   obstruction
Surgical therapy in fit patients
 • DPPHR
  • Berger operation
  • Frey operation
  • Berne operation
 • Whipple operation
Discuss options with patient, including
that data supports superiority of surgery.
Surgery remains an option for failure of
endoscopic therapy
 • Endoscopic therapy
  • Pancreatic and biliary
    sphincterotomy
  • Stricture dilation and stenting
  • Lithotripsy
  • Stone extraction
 • Surgical therapy
  • Modified Puestow or Frey operation
• Continued medical therapy
• Surgical therapy
  • “V-plasty”
  • Total pancreatectomy, with islet
    cell autotransplantation
Dilated pancreatic duct (≥6mm)
Small duct disease (pancreatic duct
≤6mm)
Treatment effective?
Continue treatment with periodic
re-assessment
Yes
No
Assess anatomy of pancreas and
pancreatic duct
Figure 33-44.  Management algorithm for chronic pancreatitis. IPMN – intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; QOL – quality of life; 
SSRI – selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; SSNRI – selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; GTT – glucose tolerance test. 
(Reproduced with permission from Forsmark CE: Management of pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2013;144:1282. © 2013 AGA Institute. Published 
by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.)
1382
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
80% of patients had significant relief of symptoms (Fig. 33-45). 
However, due to the tendency for recurrent stone formation, the 
use of ESWL for long-term management of calcific pancreatitis 
remains uncertain.
Surgical Therapy
Indications and History  The traditional approach to surgical 
treatment of chronic pancreatitis and its complications has main-
tained that surgery should be considered only when the medical 
therapy of symptoms has failed. Nealon and Thompson published 
a landmark study in 1993, however, that showed that the pro-
gression of chronic obstructive pancreatitis could be delayed or 
prevented by pancreatic duct decompression.216 No other therapy 
has been shown to prevent the progression of chronic pancreati-
tis, and this study demonstrated the role of surgery in the early 
management of the disease (Table 33-20). Small-duct disease or 
“minimal change chronic pancreatitis” are causes for uncertainty 
over the choice of operation, however. Major resections have a 
high complication rate, both early and late, in chronic alcoholic 
pancreatitis, and lesser procedures often result in symptomatic 
recurrence. So the choice of operation and the timing of surgery 
are based on each patient’s pancreatic anatomy, the likelihood 
A
B
Figure 33-45.  Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy treatment of 
pancreatic duct stones. The endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancre-
atography images are shown (A) before and (B) after extracorporeal 
shock wave lithotripsy therapy of pancreatic duct obstruction due 
to calculus formation. (Reproduced with permission from Kozarek 
et al.215)
Table 33-20
Effect of surgical drainage on progression of chronic 
pancreatitis
Treatment Group
24-Month Evaluation
Operated (n = 47)
Mild to moderate 48 (87%); severe 
6 (13%)
Nonoperated (n = 36)
Mild to moderate 8 (22%); severe 
28 (78%)
Eighty-three patients with chronic pancreatitis were evaluated by exo-
crine, endocrine, nutritional, and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography studies, and all had mild to moderate disease and dilated 
pancreatic ducts. A Puestow-type duct decompression procedure was 
performed in 47 patients, and all subjects were restaged by the same 
methods 24 months later. Source: Reproduced with permission from 
Nealon et al.216
(or lack thereof) that further medical and endoscopic therapy will 
halt the symptoms of the disease, and the chance that a good 
result will be obtained with the lowest risk of morbidity and mor-
tality. Finally, preparation for surgery should include restoration 
of protein-caloric homeostasis, abstinence from alcohol and 
tobacco, and a detailed review of the risks and likely outcomes 
to establish a bond of trust and commitment between the patient 
and the surgeon.
Historically, the surgery for chronic pancreatitis before the 
second half of the twentieth century was a true demonstration of 
trial and error.217 Obtaining good surgical outcomes before the 
availability of CT scans and ERCP was either the result of ser-
endipity or due to the skill and creativity of the surgeon. In 1911, 
Link described an operation he devised on the spot, when a lapa-
rotomy in a young woman with abdominal pain revealed a fluc-
tuant, obstructed pancreatic duct. After performing a dochotomy 
and evacuating multiple stones, he inserted a rubber tube, and 
exteriorized the pancreatostomy just above her navel.218 He later 
described the operation as having been a success for the next 30 
years of the patient’s life, during which the patient managed the 
care of the drainage tube without apparent problems.219
With the demonstration in 1942 by Priestley that total 
pancreatectomy was technically feasible,220 and the report in 
1946 by Whipple that proximal pancreatic resection was ben-
eficial in (three) patients with chronic pancreatitis,221 the option 
of surgical resection as treatment for chronic pancreatitis was 
established. By the mid 1950s, however, growing disappoint-
ment with the high risk of resection and the lack of long-term 
benefit overshadowed the surgical treatment of chronic pancre-
atitis. The choice of resection vs. drainage was largely based 
on surgeon preference until the 1970s, when the widespread 
adoption of ERCP and CT scans provided the ability to pre-
operatively diagnose obstructive and sclerotic disease, and this 
resulted in the rational selection of operative procedures. During 
this period, the major drawbacks to surgical therapy remained 
the recurrence of symptoms despite surgery, the corresponding 
development of an inflammatory (or malignant) mass in the 
undrained pancreatic head (Fig. 33-46), or the high morbidity 
and mortality of major resectional procedures that seemed to 
predispose the patients to a cascade of metabolic problems.222
Sphincteroplasty  The sphincter of Oddi and the pancreatic 
duct sphincter serve as gatekeepers for the passage of pancreatic 
juice into the duodenum (Fig. 33-47). Stenosis of either sphincter 
1383
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
(sclerosing papillitis), due to scarring from pancreatitis or 
from the passage of gallstones, may result in obstruction of the 
pancreatic duct and chronic pain.223 As gallstone pancreatitis 
became a popular diagnosis in the 1940s and 1950s, attention 
was focused on the ampullary region as a possible cause of 
chronic symptoms, and surgical sphincteroplasty was advo-
cated. Although endoscopic techniques are now used routinely 
to perform sphincterotomy of either the common bile duct or 
pancreatic duct, a true (permanent) sphincteroplasty can only be 
performed surgically. Transduodenal sphincteroplasty with inci-
sion of the septum between the pancreatic duct and common bile 
duct appears to offer significant relief for patients with obstruc-
tion and inflammation isolated to this region (Fig. 33-48).
Drainage Procedures  After the early reports of success with pan-
creatostomy for the relief of symptoms of chronic pancreatitis,219 
Cattell described pancreaticojejunostomy for relief of pain in 
Figure 33-46.  Head-of-pancreas mass after Puestow procedure. 
The computed tomographic appearance of an inflammatory mass 
occupying the head of the pancreas, which developed 2 years after 
Puestow decompression of the body and tail of pancreas.
unresectable pancreatic carcinoma.224 Shortly thereafter, Duval,225 
and separately, Zollinger and associates,226 described the caudal 
Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy for the treatment of chronic 
pancreatitis in 1954 (Fig. 33-49). The so-called Duval procedure 
was used for decades by some surgeons, but it almost invariably 
failed due to restenosis and segmental obstruction of the pan-
creas due to progressive scarring. In 1958, Puestow and Gillesby 
described these segmental narrowings and dilatations of the ductal 
system as a “chain of lakes,” and proposed a longitudinal decom-
pression of the body and tail of the pancreas into a Roux limb 
of jejunum227 (Fig. 33-50). Four of Puestow and Gillesby’s 21 
initial cases were side-to-side anastomoses, and 2 years after their 
report, Partington and Rochelle described a much simpler version 
of the longitudinal, or side-to-side Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunos-
tomy that became universally known as the Puestow procedure228 
(Fig. 33-51).
The effectiveness of decompression of the pancreatic 
duct is dependent on the extent to which ductal hypertension 
is the etiologic agent for the disease. Thus, the diameter of the 
pancreatic duct is a surrogate for the degree of ductal hyper-
tension, and the Puestow procedure has been shown to be effec-
tive for pain relief when the maximum duct diameter is 6 mm. 
Results are less impressive in glands with smaller caliber ducts, 
although Izbicki and associates have described good results with 
a conization method that allows a longitudinal decompression 
of more normal caliber ducts.229 Successful pain relief after the 
Puestow-type decompression procedure has been reported in 
75% to 85% of patients for the first few years after surgery, but 
pain recurs in >20% of patients after 5 years,148 even in patients 
who are abstinent from alcohol.
With the advent of therapeutic endoscopy and techniques for 
transluminal stone removal and lithotripsy, multiple series have 
reported the successful endoscopic treatment of pancreatic duct 
calculi, although the long-term outcomes of these efforts has been 
uneven.230–233 Endoscopic removal of pancreatic duct stones is usu-
ally coupled to prolonged pancreatic duct stenting, which carries the 
risk of further inflammation.234,235 Despite the risk of perioperative 
Pancreas
Common 
 bile duct
Duodenal 
wall
Major 
papilla
Sphincter of 
ampulla
Mucosa
Submucosa
 Sphincter of 
pancreatic duct
 Pancreatic 
duct
Sphincter of 
 common bile duct
Longitudinal muscle
of duodenal wall
Circular muscle of duodenal wall
Figure 33-47.  Schematic diagram of the 
ampullary, biliary, and pancreatic duct sphinc-
ters. The point of merger of the bile duct and 
pancreatic duct is highly variable, and a true 
sphincter of the pancreatic duct may be poorly 
developed. (Redrawn with permission from 
Welling TH, Simeone DM: Gallbladder and 
biliary tract, in Yamada T et al (eds): Textbook 
of Gastroenterology, 5th ed. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2009, p 1940.)
1384
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
complications, the surgical management of pancreatic duct stones 
and stenosis has been shown to be superior to endoscopic treat-
ment in randomized clinical trials in which the long, side-to-side 
technique of pancreaticojejunostomy is used.236,237
Figure 33-48.  Operative sphincteroplasty of the biliary and pancre-
atic duct. The ampullary and bile duct sphincters are divided, as is the 
pancreatic duct sphincter, with suture apposition of the mucosal edges 
of the incision. (Data from Moody et al.223)
Figure 33-49.  Duval’s caudal pancreaticojejunostomy. (Repro-
duced with permission from Greenlee HB: The role of surgery for 
chronic pancreatitis and its complications, in Nyhus LM (ed): Surg 
Annu, Vol 15. Norwalk: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1983, p 289. 
kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
Figure 33-50.  Puestow and Gillesby’s longitudinal pancreaticoje-
junostomy. Originally described as an invaginating anastomosis that 
drained the entire body and tail, the anastomosis was created after 
amputating the tail of the gland and opening the duct along the long 
axis of the gland. (Reproduced with permission from Greenlee HB: 
The role of surgery for chronic pancreatitis and its complications, 
in Nyhus LM (ed): Surg Annu, Vol 15. Norwalk: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1983, p 290. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
Resectional Procedures
Distal Pancreatectomy  For patients with focal inflammatory 
changes localized to the body and tail, or in whom no significant 
ductal dilatation exists, the technique of partial (40%–80%) dis-
tal pancreatectomy has been advocated (Fig. 33-52). Although 
distal pancreatectomy is less morbid than more extensive resec-
tional procedures, the operation leaves untreated a major portion 
of the gland, and is therefore associated with a significant risk of 
symptomatic recurrence. It has been a more popular operation in 
British centers, where its success seems to be greater, perhaps 
due to the lower incidence of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.238 
However, long-term outcomes reveal good pain relief in only 
60% of patients, with completion pancreatectomy required for 
pain relief in 13% of patients.
Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy has been shown to be 
feasible for the removal of focal lesions of the distal pancreas239 
but is more difficult in the setting of chronic pancreatitis.
Ninety-Five Percent Distal Pancreatectomy  In 1965, Fry and 
Child proposed the more radical 95% distal pancreatectomy, 
which was intended for patients with sclerotic (small duct) 
disease, and which attempted to avoid the morbidity of total 
pancreatectomy by preserving the rim of pancreas in the pan-
creaticoduodenal groove, along with its associated blood vessels 
and distal common bile duct.222 The operation was found to be 
associated with pain relief in 60% to 77% of patients long term, 
but is accompanied by a high risk of brittle diabetes, hypoglyce-
mic coma, and malnutrition.240 Although the operation was the 
first attempt to resect the pancreatic head while preserving the 
duodenum and distal bile duct, the extensive degree of pancre-
atic removal led to its failure as viable treatment for the symp-
toms of pancreatic sclerosis.
1385
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Proximal Pancreatectomy  In 1946, Whipple reported a series 
of five patients treated with either pancreaticoduodenectomy 
or total pancreatectomy for symptomatic chronic pancreatitis, 
with one operative death.221 Subsequently, proximal pancre-
atectomy or pancreaticoduodenectomy, with or without pylorus 
preservation (Fig. 33-53), has been widely used for the treat-
ment of chronic pancreatitis.217,241 In the three largest modern 
(circa 2000) series of the treatment of chronic pancreatitis by the 
Whipple procedure, pain relief 4 to 6 years after operation was 
found in 71% to 89% of patients. However, mortality ranged 
from 1.5% to 3%, and major complications occurred in 25% 
to 38% of patients at the Johns Hopkins Hospital,242 the Mayo 
Clinic,243 and the Massachusetts General Hospital.244 In follow-
up, 25% to 48% of patients developed diabetes, and about the 
same percentage required exocrine therapy. Advocates of the 
Figure 33-51.  Longitudinal dochotomy in obstructing calcific 
pancreatitis. A longitudinal pancreatotomy typically discloses 
segmental stenosis of the pancreatic duct and the presence of 
intraductal calculi in a patient with chronic calcific pancreatitis 
(A). Following mobilization of a Roux limb of jejunum, a longitudi-
nal pancreaticojejunostomy is performed to permit extensive drain-
age of the pancreatic duct system (B). This technique, described by 
Partington and Rochelle, is the typical method used for the Puestow 
procedure. (Data from Partington et al.228)
A
B
Splenic artery
Figure 33-52.  Distal (spleen-sparing) pancreatectomy. A distal 
pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis is usually performed with 
en bloc splenectomy, using either an open or laparoscopic tech-
nique. In the presence of minimal inflammation, a spleen-sparing 
version can be performed, as shown here.
Whipple procedure uniformly suggest that the high rate of 
symptomatic relief outweighs the metabolic consequences and 
the mortality risk of the procedure.
Total Pancreatectomy  Priestley and associates first described 
successful total pancreatectomy in 1944 in a patient with 
hyperinsulinism,220 and two of Whipple’s original five cases 
of chronic pancreatitis reported in 1946 were treated with total 
pancreatectomy.221 Subsequently, surgeons who used total pan-
createctomy found that the operation produces no better pain 
relief for their patients than pancreaticoduodenectomy (about 
80%–85%). Moreover, the metabolic consequences of total 
pancreatectomy in the absence of islet cell transplantation are 
profound and life-threatening. The patients have a “brittle” form 
of diabetes in which avoidance of hyper- and hypoglycemia is 
problematic.245–247 In addition, lethal episodes of hypoglycemia 
are common in severe apancreatic diabetes. These are due to 
hypoglycemic unresponsiveness, due to the absence of pancre-
atic glucagon, and to hypoglycemia unawareness, despite an 
ongoing need to treat with exogenous insulin.248 In a series of 
>100 patients treated with total pancreatectomy, Gall and col-
leagues showed that half of all the late deaths after this operation 
were due to (iatrogenic) hypoglycemia.249 Despite newer forms 
of insulin, insulin delivery systems, and blood glucose moni-
toring, severe pancreatogenic diabetes remains an adverse out-
come, as complete prevention of the physiologic consequences 
of total pancreatectomy remains an unfulfilled goal. With the 
growing acceptance of islet auto-transplantation as an adjunct 
to the procedure (see below), total pancreatectomy itself is 
now used only rarely for the treatment of refrectory chronic 
pancreatitis.
Hybrid Procedures  In 1980, Beger and associates described the 
Duodenum-preserving Pancreatic Head Resection or DPPHR250 
1386
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
(Fig. 33-54), and published long-term results with DPPHR for 
the treatment of chronic pancreatitis in 1985,251 and again in 
1999.252 In 388 patients who were followed for an average of 
6 years after DPPHR, pain relief was reportedly maintained in 
91%, mortality was <1%, and diabetes developed in 21%, with 
11% demonstrating a reversal of their preoperative diabetic sta-
tus. These authors also compared the DPPHR procedure with 
the pylorus-sparing Whipple procedure in a randomized trial 
of 40 patients with chronic pancreatitis.253 The mortality was 
reportedly zero in both groups, and the morbidity was also com-
parable. Pain relief (over 6 months) was seen in 94% of DPPHR 
patients, but in only 67% of Whipple patients. Furthermore, the 
insulin secretory capacity and glucose tolerance were noted to 
deteriorate in the Whipple group, but actually improved in the 
DPPHR patients.
The DPPHR requires the careful dissection of the gas-
troduodenal artery and the creation of two anastomoses 
(Fig. 33-55), and carries a similar complication risk as the 
Whipple procedure due to the risk of pancreatic leakage and 
intra-abdominal fluid collections.
In 1987, Frey and Smith described the local resection 
of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunos-
tomy (LR-LPJ), which included excavation of the pancreatic 
head, including the ductal structures in continuity with a long 
dichotomy of the dorsal duct254 (Fig. 33-56). The Frey proce-
dure provides thorough decompression of the pancreatic head as 
well as the body and tail of the gland, and a long-term follow-
up suggested that improved outcomes are associated with this 
more extensive decompressive procedure. Frey and Amikura 
reported their results in 50 patients followed for >7 years, and 
found complete or substantial pain relief in 87% of patients. 
There was no operative mortality, but 22% of patients devel-
oped postoperative complications.255
Key steps in the performance of the LR-LPJ include pres-
ervation of the pancreatic neck as well as the capsule of the 
posterior pancreatic head. In the pancreaticoduodenectomy and 
the DPPHR, the pancreatic neck is freed up from the portal and 
superior mesenteric vein confluence and divided. In the LR-LPJ, 
the neck of the pancreas is preserved intact as are the body and 
tail of the pancreas. Not having to divide the pancreatic neck, 
as in the pancreaticoduodenectomy or DPPHR, reduces the risk 
of the operation, as it avoids intraoperative problems with the 
venous structures lying posterior to the gland. To reduce the risk 
of penetrating the posterior capsule of the head, Frey recom-
mended in his 1994 report that the posterior limit of resection 
be the back wall of the opened duct of Wirsung and duct to the 
uncinate (Fig. 33-57).
Subsequent to Frey’s own modification of the tech-
nique, other surgeons have described modifications of 
the extent or technique of the LR-LPJ. Andersen and 
­Topazian advocated performing the LR-LPJ as it was origi-
nally described, in which the entirety of the ducts are excised 
from the head (Fig. 33-58), and described the use of the ultra-
sonic aspirator and dissector for this purpose.256 The use of 
this device permits precise removal of the ducts and adjacent 
tissue with good visualization and without complications. 
There is little pancreatic tissue behind these ducts and the 
pancreatic capsule is continuously palpated as the dissection 
proceeds to ensure a safe margin of resection. The intrapan-
creatic portion of the common bile duct is usually exposed, 
and avoiding injury to it is enhanced by the ultrasonic aspi-
rator. The majority of the parenchyma of the uncinate pro-
cess is spared, and the excavation of the pancreatic head is 
made contiguous with a generous dochotomy of the dorsal 
duct. Whether merely unroofing as opposed to removal of the 
proximal ducts contributes to better pain relief is not known 
and awaits a randomized trial to compare the two versions 
of the LR-LPJ. Izbicki and colleagues at the University of 
Hamburg also recommend a more extensive excavation of 
the pancreatic head, and use a technique that they refer to 
as the Hamburg modification of the LR-LPJ257 (Fig. 33-59). 
This wider excavation of the pancreatic head is created in 
continuity with the dorsal dochotomy, and is followed by a 
single, side-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy.
Figure 33-53.  The pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) can be performed either with the standard technique, which includes 
distal gastrectomy (A), or with preservation of the pylorus (B). The pylorus-sparing version of the procedure is used most commonly. (Repro-
duced from Gaw JU, Andersen DK: Pancreatic surgery, in Wu GY, Aziz K, Whalen GF (eds): An Internist’s Illustrated Guide to Gastroin-
testinal Surgery. Totowa: Humana Press, 2003, p 229, with permission.)
Choledochojejunostomy
Gastrojejunostomy
Pancreaticojejunostomy
A
Choledochojejunostomy
Duodenojejunostomy
Pancreaticojejunostomy
B
1387
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
In 2001, Ho and Frey subsequently described merely exca-
vating the core of the pancreatic head, and draining the exca-
vation with a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy, but without 
any effort to include the dorsal duct258,259 (Fig. 33-60). In 2003, 
Farkas and colleagues described a similar excavation of the cen-
tral portion of the pancreatic head without any effort to include 
the duct of the body in the lateral pancreaticojejunostomy,260 
and reported excellent results with what they termed an organ-
preserving pancreatic head resection (OPPHR) in a randomized 
comparison to the pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy 
(PPPD).261
This approach was advocated by Gloor and associates in 
Bern as an alternative to the DPPHR procedure in patients with 
portal hypertension,262 and was described as the Berne modi-
fication of the DPPHR (Fig. 33-61). Köninger and colleagues 
in Heidelberg subsequently published a randomized, controlled 
trial of the “Berne” version of the excavation method compared 
Figure 33-54.  The duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resec-
tion described by Beger and colleagues. A. The completed resection 
after transection of the pancreatic neck, and subtotal removal of the 
pancreatic head, with preservation of the distal common bile duct 
and duodenum. B. Completion of the reconstruction with anasto-
mosis to the distal pancreas and to the proximal pancreatic rim by 
the same Roux limb of jejunum. (Reproduced with permission from 
Bell.188)
A
Common
bile duct
Pancreatic
duct
Pancreatic
remnant
B
Figure 33-55.  Intraoperative view of the Beger procedure. The 
gastroduodenal artery is encircled by a vessel loop. Just below, the 
intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct is exposed as it 
courses toward the ampulla. A rim of well-vascularized pancreatic 
tissue remains in the duodenal C-loop. Preservation of the posterior 
branch of the gastroduodenal artery is essential to preserve viability 
of these structures.
to the “classic” Beger procedure.263 Operative times and length 
of stay were shorter in the group undergoing excavation of the 
pancreatic head, while long-term outcomes and quality-of-life 
scores were identical over 2 years postoperatively.
The common element of these variations on the theme of 
LR-LPJ remains the excavation or “coring out” of the central 
portion of the pancreatic head. It remains uncertain, however, 
whether and to what degree the dochotomy needs to be extended 
into the body and tail. The logical conclusion of all of 
these efforts is that the head of the pancreas is the nidus 
of the chronic inflammatory process in chronic pancreatitis, and 
that removal of the central portion of the head of the gland is the 
key to the successful resolution of pain long-term.
Complications  Initial and long-term results of the LR-LPJ 
demonstrate pain relief that is equivalent to that of pancreati-
coduodenectomy and the DPPHR.264,265 The observed mortal-
ity rate has been virtually zero, and therefore, less than with 
the Whipple procedure. Major complications were less with the 
LR-LPJ (16%) than with pancreaticoduodenectomy (40%) or 
DPPHR (25%) in one single-site series, and the incidence of 
new postoperative diabetes after LR-LPJ was 8% with an aver-
age follow-up of 3 years.179
Comparisons of the three operative procedures: Pancreaticodu-
odenectomy (Whipple procedure), DPPHR (Beger procedure), 
and LR-LPJ (Frey procedure). There has been considerable 
interest to apply evidence-based methods to the study of the 
three operations currently advocated for the treatment of 
6
1388
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-56.  Frey procedure. The local resection of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy (LR-LPJ) provides 
complete decompression of the entire pancreatic ductal system. Reconstruction is performed with a side-to-side Roux-en-Y pancreaticojeju-
nostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell.188)
Figure 33-57.  Operative view of excavated head of the pancreas 
during the Frey procedure. The main pancreatic duct is opened 
widely down to the level of the ampulla, and the head of the pan-
creas is excavated in a conical fashion so as to allow complete 
decompression of the chronically obstructed and inflamed pancre-
atic ducts. (Reproduced with permission from Aspelund G et al: 
Improved outcomes for benign disease with limited pancreatic head 
resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 9:400, 2005.With kind permission 
from Springer Science + Business Media.)
Figure 33-58.  Complete excavation of the pancreatic head and 
distal pancreatic dochotomy. A true excavation and removal of 
the proximal ductal system is combined with a distal pancreatic 
dochotomy. Reconstruction is performed with a single side-to-side 
Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission 
from Andersen DK, Topazian MD: Pancreatic head excavation: A 
variation on the theme of duodenum-preserving pancreatic head 
resection. Arch Surg. 139:375, 2004. kkjkjdht © 2004 American 
Medical Association. All rights reserved.)
1389
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Figure 33-59.  The Hamburg modification of the local resection 
of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Izbicki JR, Yekebas EF, Mann 
O: Chronic pancreatitis, in Yeo CJ et al (eds): Shackelford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. New York: Saunders, 2007, p 1310. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Line of enterotomy
Jejunal limb
secured with 1st
row of sutures
Normal pancreatic duct
Pancreatic head cored out
A
B
Figure 33-60.  Excavation of pancreatic head without longitudinal 
pancreaticojejunostomy. (Data from Ho HS, Frey CF.259)
Figure 33-61.  The Berne modification of the local resection of the 
pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy. (From 
Gloor B, Friess H, Uhl W, et al: A modified technique of the Beger 
and Frey procedure in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Dig Surg. 
18:21, 2001. kkjkjdht © 2001, Karger Publishers.)
chronic pancreatitis. The best studies, or level 1 data by the 
Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy, are prospective, 
randomized controlled trials comparing two or more opera-
tions from a single or multi-institutional study. Retrospec-
tive, cohort-based studies are regarded as level 2 data by the 
Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy criteria.
To date, six published level 1 studies and three level 2 
studies have examined various comparisons between these 
three operations. In the level 1 study of 43 patients by Klempa 
and colleagues,266 DPPHR patients had a shorter hospital stay, 
greater weight gain, less postoperative diabetes, and exocrine 
dysfunction than standard Whipple patients over a 3- to 5-year 
follow-up. Pain control was similar between the two procedures. 
This was confirmed in a level 1 study of 40 patients by Buchler 
and associates,267 in which DPPHR patients reported better pain 
relief, glucose tolerance, and weight gain compared to pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) patients; however, 
the follow-up averaged <1 year. Similar results were observed in 
a recent level 2 retrospective study of 123 patients.268
In a level 1 study of 61 patients randomized to PPPD or 
LR-LPJ, Izbicki and colleagues found a lower postoperative 
complication rate associated with the Frey procedure (19%) 
compared to the PPPD group (53%), and better global quality-
of-life scores (71% vs. 43%, respectively).264 Both operations 
were equally effective in controlling pain over a 2-year follow-
up. More recently, the level 1 study by Farkas and associates261 
examined 40 patients randomized to PPPD or the method of 
excavation of the pancreatic head that their group described as 
an organ-preserving pancreatic head resection (OPPHR), and 
found that OPPHR was associated with a shorter operating time, 
1390
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
less postoperative morbidity, shorter hospital stay, and better 
quality of life than PPPD. The degree of pain relief was equal 
over a 1- to 3-year follow-up. Operation times have been shown 
to be shorter with the LR-LPJ and DPPHR compared to the 
PPPD, and intraoperative blood loss and perioperative transfu-
sion requirements are less with LR-LPJ and DPPHR procedures.
Late Morbidity and Mortality  In 2005, Izbicki’s group 
reported on a level 1 study of 74 patients randomized to the 
DPPHR or LR-LPJ who were then followed for an average of 
8.5 years.269 There were no significant differences between the 
groups with regard to global quality of life, pain scores, late 
mortality, and exocrine or endocrine insufficiency. The level 1 
study by Köninger, which compared the classic DPPHR with 
excavation of the pancreatic head, showed identical outcomes 
at 2 years after an initial reduction in morbidity associated with 
the excavation procedure.263 These results were echoed in the 
level 2 study by Aspelund and associates, which demonstrated 
fewer complications with both the DPPHR and LR-LPJ proce-
dures compared to pancreaticoduodenectomy, a lower incidence 
of new diabetes (8%) for both DPPHR and LR-LPJ compared 
to the Whipple procedure (25%), but no significant differences 
in outcomes or pain relief between DPPHR and LR-LPJ.179 
Finally, level 2 data support the efficacy of both DPPHR and 
LR-LPJ in patients with dilated as well as nondilated ducts.270–272
Long-term exocrine and/or endocrine insufficiency in 
chronic pancreatitis patients treated surgically is a product 
of the surgical intervention as well as the progression of the 
underlying disease. Although the short-term (3-year) incidence 
of new diabetes after operation appears less with the LR-LPJ 
and DPPHR than with the PPPD, the late incidence of diabe-
tes appears similar in all groups. After an average of 7 years 
of follow-up after LR-LPJ or PPPD, survival, pain relief, and 
pancreatic function were similar in both groups. The rate of dia-
betes was slightly lower after LR-LPJ (61%) than after PPPD 
(65%), but these had both more than doubled from their preop-
erative status.260–266 Therefore, although the limited pancreatic 
procedures of DPPHR and LR-LPJ have a lower initial rate of 
endocrine dysfunction, the long-term risk of diabetes is more 
related to the progression of the underlying disease than to the 
effects of operation.
The decreased incidence of postoperative diabetes in the 
near-term after the duodenum-sparing operations may be the 
result of a preserved β-cell mass in the more conservative resec-
tions, and may also be due to the conservation of the PP-secreting 
cells localized to the posterior head and uncinate process. Preser-
vation of near-normal glucose metabolism and the avoidance of 
pancreatogenic diabetes is therefore a significant but time-limited 
benefit of the newer operative procedures.
Total Pancreatectomy with Islet Auto-Transplantation  Islet 
cell transplantation for the treatment of diabetes is an attractive 
adjunct to pancreatic surgery in the treatment of benign pancre-
atic disease, but problems due to rejection of allotransplanted 
islets have plagued this method since its initial clinical appli-
cation in the early 1970s. However, despite the difficulties in 
recovering islets from a chronically inflamed gland, Najarian 
and associates demonstrated the utility of autotransplantation 
of islets in patients with chronic pancreatitis in 1980.273 Subse-
quently, through refinements in the methods of harvesting and 
gland preservation, and through standardization of the methods 
by which islets are infused into the portal venous circuit for 
intrahepatic engraftment, the success of total pancreatectomy 
combined with islet auto-transplantation has steadily increased 
to achieve insulin independence in the majority of patients 
treated in recent series.274,275 Although 2 to 3 million islets are 
required for successful engraftment in an allogeneic recipient, 
the auto-transplant recipient can usually achieve long-term, 
insulin-independent status after engraftment of only 300,000 to 
400,000 islets.276
The ability to recover a sufficient quantity of islets from 
a sclerotic gland is dependent on the degree of fibrotic disease 
present, so the selection of patients as candidates for autologous 
islet transplantation is important. The impressive improvement 
in quality of life measures and pain relief seen after total pan-
createctomy with islet auto-transplantation (TP-IAT) indicate 
that it is a highly successful form of therapy for some patients. 
The significant morbidity risk of TP-IAT, and the likelihood 
of unsuccessful recovery of sufficient numbers of islets due to 
advanced disease, however, suggest that further definition is 
needed regarding criteria for considering TP-IAT vs. hybrid or 
resectional procedures for patients with persistent symptoms. 
The recent study which compared degree of fibrosis with the 
extent of pain relief after the LR-LPJ procedure suggests that 
the extent of pancreatic fibrosis may be a useful guide to the 
selection of surgical therapy for refractory symptomatic chronic 
pancreatits.147 Further studies will require accurate methods to 
quantify the extent of fibrosis preoperatively.
PANCREATIC NEOPLASMS
Neoplasms of the Endocrine Pancreas
Neoplasms of the endocrine pancreas are relatively uncommon 
but do occur with enough frequency (five cases per million 
population) that most surgeons will encounter them in an urban 
practice. The cells of the endocrine pancreas, or islet cells, origi-
nate from neural crest cells, also referred to as amine precursor 
uptake and decarboxylation cells. Multiple endocrine neopla-
sia (MEN) syndromes occur when these cells cause tumors in 
multiple sites. The MEN1 syndrome involves pituitary tumors, 
parathyroid hyperplasia, and pancreatic neoplasms. Some pan-
creatic endocrine neoplasms are functional, secreting peptide 
products that produce interesting clinical presentations. Neo-
plasms of the endocrine pancreas that are not associated with 
excess hormone levels and a recognizable clinical syndrome 
are considered nonfunctional. Special immunohistochemical 
stains allow pathologists to confirm the peptide products being 
produced within the cells of a pancreatic endocrine tumor. 
However, the histologic characteristics of these neoplasms do not 
predict their clinical behavior, and malignancy is usually deter-
mined by the presence of local invasion and lymph node or hepatic 
metastases. Unfortunately, most pancreatic endocrine tumors are 
malignant, but the course of the disease is far more favorable than 
that seen with pancreatic exocrine cancer. The key to diagnosing 
these rare tumors is recognition of the classic clinical syndrome; 
confirmation is achieved by measuring serum levels of the ele-
vated hormone. Localization of the tumor can be a challenging 
step, but once accomplished, the surgery is relatively straight-
forward. The goals of surgery range from complete resection, 
often accomplished with insulinomas, to controlling symptoms 
with debulking procedures. Unresectable disease in the liver is 
often addressed with chemoembolization.
As with pancreatic exocrine tumors, the initial diagnos-
tic imaging test of choice for pancreatic endocrine tumors is a 
multidetector CT scan with four phases of contrast and fine cuts 
through the pancreas and liver. Neuroendocrine tumors of the 
1391
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
pancreas often enhance with contrast. EUS also can be valuable 
in localizing these tumors, which can produce dramatic symp-
toms despite their small (<1 cm) size. In contrast to pancreatic 
exocrine tumors, many of the endocrine tumors have somatosta-
tin receptors (SSTRs) that allow them to be detected by a radio-
labeled octreotide scan. A radioactive somatostatin analogue is 
injected intravenously, followed by whole-body radionuclide 
scanning (Fig. 33-62). The success of this modality in localizing 
tumors and detecting metastases has decreased the use of older 
techniques such as angiography and selective venous sampling.
Insulinoma
Insulinomas are the most common functional pancreatic endo-
crine neoplasms and present with a typical clinical syndrome 
known as Whipple’s triad. The triad consists of symptomatic fast-
ing hypoglycemia, a documented serum glucose level <50 mg/dL, 
and relief of symptoms with the administration of glucose. 
Patients can present with a profound syncopal episode or less 
severe symptoms that are averted by frequent eating. Common 
symptoms include palpitations, trembling, diaphoresis, confusion 
or obtundation, and seizure, and family members may report that 
the patient has undergone a personality change.
Routine laboratory studies will uncover a low blood sugar, 
the cause of all of these symptoms. Serum insulin levels are 
elevated. C-peptide levels should also be elevated and rule 
out the unusual case of surreptitious administration of insu-
lin or oral hypoglycemic agents, because excess endogenous 
Figure 33-62.  Radioactive octreotide scan demonstrating pancre-
atic endocrine tumor in the body of the pancreas (arrow).
­insulin ­production leads to excess C-peptide. The diagnosis can 
be clinched with a monitored fast in which blood is sampled 
every 4 to 6 hours for glucose and insulin levels until the patient 
becomes symptomatic. However, this can be dangerous and 
must be done with close supervision.
Insulinomas are usually localized with CT scanning and 
EUS. Technical advances in EUS have led to preoperative iden-
tification of >90% of insulinomas.277 Visceral angiography with 
venous sampling is rarely required to accurately localize the 
tumor. Insulinomas are evenly distributed throughout the head, 
body, and tail of the pancreas.278
Unlike most endocrine pancreatic tumors, the majority 
(90%) of insulinomas are benign and solitary, and only 10% 
are malignant. They are typically cured by simple enucleation. 
However, tumors located close to the main pancreatic duct and 
large (>2 cm) tumors may require a distal pancreatectomy or 
pancreaticoduodenectomy. Intraoperative US is useful to deter-
mine the tumor’s relation to the main pancreatic duct and guides 
intraoperative decision making. Enucleation of solitary insuli-
nomas and distal pancreatectomy for insulinoma can sometimes 
be performed using a minimally invasive technique.
Approximately 90% of insulinomas are sporadic, and 10% 
are associated with the MEN1 syndrome. Insulinomas associ-
ated with the MEN1 syndrome are more likely to be multifocal 
and have a higher rate of recurrence.
Noninsulinoma Hyperinsulinemia 
Hypoglycemia Syndrome
A syndrome of noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglyce-
mia was described by Service et al. in 1999.279 The syndrome 
is associated with beta-cell hypertrophy, islet hyperplasia and 
increased beta-cell mass. When these findings are accompanied 
by ectopic islet tissue, multilobulated islets, and ductulo-insular 
complexes, the definition of nesideoblastosis is met. Nesideo-
blastosis accompanied by hyperinsulinism was previously consid-
ered a disease of neonates, where subtotal or total pancreatectomy 
was required to correct potentially fatal neonatal hyperinsulin-
ism. However, dozens of cases of nesideoblastosis associated 
with hyperinsulinism have now been reported in patients 2 to 5 
years after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.280 Many of these patients 
have undergone partial or total pancreatectomy to prevent poten-
tially fatal hypoglycemia. The illness in former bariatric surgery 
patients appears to result from an idiosyncratically-prolonged 
hypersecretion of the incretin hormones GIP and GLP-1after the 
gastric bypass. GLP-1 is a potent stimulant of the expression of 
the transcription factor PDX-1, which normally regulates beta-
cell development and growth. Conversion of the gastric bypass 
to a form of bariatric procedure which restores normal intestinal 
flow of nutrients, such as the gastric sleeve, or the addition of a 
restriction element such as an adjustable gastric band, appears to 
prevent episodes of hypoglycemia in these patients. Pancreatic 
resection without conversion of the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
allows the abnormal entero-insular relationship to continue, and 
hyperinsulinemia persists or recurs after partial pancreatectomy.
Gastrinoma
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) is caused by a gastrinoma, 
an endocrine tumor that secretes gastrin, leading to acid hyper-
secretion and peptic ulceration. Many patients with ZES present 
with abdominal pain, peptic ulcer disease, and severe esopha-
gitis. However, in the era of effective antacid therapy, the 
­presentation can be less dramatic. Although most of the ulcers 
1392
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
are solitary, multiple ulcers in atypical locations that fail to 
respond to antacids should raise suspicion for ZES and prompt 
a work-up. At the time of diagnosis, 21% of patients with gas-
trinoma have diarrhea .
The diagnosis of ZES is made by measuring the serum 
gastrin level. It is important that patients stop taking proton 
pump inhibitors for this test. In most patients with gastrinomas, 
the level is >1000 pg/mL. Gastrin levels can be elevated under-
conditions other than ZES. Common causes of hypergastrin-
emia include pernicious anemia, treatment with proton pump 
inhibitors, renal failure, G-cell hyperplasia, atrophic gastritis, 
retained or excluded antrum, and gastric outlet obstruction. In 
equivocal cases, when the gastrin level is not markedly elevated, 
a secretin stimulation test is helpful.
In 70% to 90% of patients, the primary gastrinoma is found 
in Passaro’s triangle, an area defined by a triangle with points 
located at the junction of the cystic duct and common bile duct, 
the second and third portion of the duodenum, and the neck and 
body of the pancreas (Fig. 33-63). However, because gastrinomas 
can be found almost anywhere, whole-body imaging is required. 
The test of choice is SSTR (octreotide) scintigraphy in combi-
nation with CT. The octreotide scan is more sensitive than CT, 
locating about 85% of gastrinomas and detecting tumors <1 cm. 
With the octreotide scan, the need for tedious and technically 
demanding selective angiography and measurement of gastrin 
gradients has declined. EUS is another modality that assists in the 
preoperative localization of gastrinomas. It is particularly help-
ful in localizing tumors in the pancreatic head or duodenal wall, 
where gastrinomas are usually <1 cm in size. A combination of 
octreotide scan and EUS detects >90% of gastrinomas.
It is important to rule out MEN1 syndrome by checking 
serum calcium levels before surgery because resection of the 
gastrinoma(s) in these patients rarely results in normalization 
of serum gastrin concentrations or a prolongation of survival. 
Only one fourth of gastrinomas occur in association with the 
MEN1 syndrome. One half of patients with gastrinomas will 
have solitary tumors while the remainder will have multiple gas-
trinomas. Multiple tumors are more common in patients with 
Figure 33-63.  Passaro’s triangle. The typical location of a gas-
trinoma is described by this anatomic region, including the head 
of the pancreas, duodenum, and the lymphatic bed posterior and 
superior to the duodenum, as originally described by E. Passaro. 
(Reproduced with permission from Stable BE, Morrow DJ, Passaro 
E: The gastrinoma triangle: operative implications. Am J Surg. 
1984;147:25. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
MEN1 syndrome. Aggressive surgical treatment is justified 
in patients with sporadic gastrinomas. If patients have MEN1 
syndrome, the parathyroid hyperplasia is addressed with total 
parathyroidectomy and implantation of parathyroid tissue in the 
forearm.
Approximately 50% of gastrinomas metastasize to lymph 
nodes or the liver, and are therefore considered malignant. 
Patients who meet criteria for operability should undergo explo-
ration for possible removal of the tumor. Although the tumors 
are submucosal, a full-thickness excision of the duodenal wall is 
performed if a duodenal gastrinoma is found. All lymph nodes in 
Passaro’s triangle are excised for pathologic analysis. If the gas-
trinoma is found in the pancreas and does not involve the main 
pancreatic duct, it is enucleated. Pancreatic resection is justified 
for solitary gastrinomas with no metastases. A highly selective 
vagotomy can be performed if unresectable disease is identified 
or if the gastrinoma cannot be localized. This may reduce the 
amount of expensive proton pump inhibitors required. In cases in 
which hepatic metastases are identified, resection is justified if the 
primary gastrinoma is controlled and the metastases can be safely 
and completely removed. Debulking or incomplete removal of 
multiple hepatic metastases is probably not helpful, especially 
in the setting of MEN1. The application of new modalities such 
as radiofrequency ablation seems reasonable, but data to sup-
port this approach are limited.281 Postoperatively, patients are 
followed with fasting serum gastrin levels, secretin stimulation 
tests, octreotide scans, and CT scans. In patients found to have 
inoperable disease, chemotherapy with streptozocin, doxorubi-
cin, and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is used. Other approaches such as 
somatostatin analogues, interferon, and chemoembolization also 
have been used in gastrinoma with some success.
Unfortunately, a biochemical cure is achieved in only 
about one-third of the patients operated on for ZES. Despite 
the lack of success, long-term survival rates are good, even in 
patients with liver metastases. The 15-year survival rate for 
patients without liver metastases is about 80%, while the 5-year 
survival rate for patients with liver metastases is 20% to 50%. 
Pancreatic tumors are usually larger than tumors arising in the 
duodenum, and more often have lymph node metastases. In gas-
trinomas, liver metastases decrease survival rates, but lymph 
node metastases do not. The best results are seen after complete 
excision of small sporadic tumors originating in the duodenum. 
Large tumors associated with liver metastases, located outside 
of Passaro’s triangle, have the worst prognosis.
Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide-Secreting Tumor
In 1958, Verner and Morrison first described the syndrome 
associated with a pancreatic neoplasm secreting VIP. The clas-
sic clinical syndrome associated with this pancreatic endocrine 
neoplasm consists of severe intermittent watery diarrhea leading 
to dehydration, and weakness from fluid and electrolyte losses. 
Large amounts of potassium are lost in the stool. The vasoactive 
intestinal peptide-secreting tumor (VIPoma) syndrome is also 
called the WDHA syndrome due to the presence of watery diar-
rhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria. The massive (5 L/d) and 
episodic nature of the diarrhea associated with the appropriate 
electrolyte abnormalities should raise suspicion of the diagno-
sis. Serum VIP levels must be measured on multiple occasions 
because the excess secretion of VIP is episodic and single mea-
surements might be normal and misleading. ACT scan localizes 
most VIPomas, although as with all islet cell tumors, EUS is the 
most sensitive imaging method. Electrolyte and fluid ­balance 
1393
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
is sometimes difficult to correct preoperatively and must be 
pursued aggressively. Somatostatin analogues are helpful in 
controlling the diarrhea and allowing replacement of fluid and 
electrolytes. VIPomas are more commonly located in the dis-
tal pancreas and most have spread outside the pancreas. Pal-
liative debulking operations can sometimes improve symptoms 
for a period, along with somatostatin analogues. Hepatic artery 
embolization also has been reported as a potentially beneficial 
treatment.282
Glucagonoma
Diabetes in association with dermatitis should raise the suspi-
cion of a glucagonoma. The diabetes usually is mild. The classic 
necrolytic migratory erythema manifests as cyclic migrations of 
lesions with spreading margins and healing centers typically on 
the lower abdomen, perineum, perioral area, and feet. Patients 
also complain of an enlarged, sensitive tongue. The diagnosis is 
confirmed by measuring serum glucagon levels, which are usu-
ally >500 pg/mL. Glucagon is a catabolic hormone, and most 
patients present with malnutrition. The rash associated with glu-
cagonoma is thought to be caused by low levels of amino acids. 
Preoperative treatment usually includes control of the diabetes, 
parenteral nutrition, and octreotide. Like VIPomas, glucagono-
mas are more often in the body and tail of the pancreas and tend to 
be large tumors with metastases. Again, debulking operations are 
recommended in good operative candidates to relieve symptoms.
Somatostatinoma
Because somatostatin inhibits pancreatic and biliary secretions, 
patients with a somatostatinoma present with gallstones due to 
bile stasis, diabetes due to inhibition of insulin secretion, and 
steatorrhea due to inhibition of pancreatic exocrine secretion and 
bile secretion. Most somatostatinomas originate in the proximal 
pancreas or the pancreatoduodenal groove, with the ampulla and 
periampullary area as the most common site (60%). The most 
common presentations are abdominal pain (25%), jaundice 
(25%), and cholelithiasis (19%).283 This rare type of pancreatic 
endocrine tumor is diagnosed by confirming elevated serum 
somatostatin levels, which are usually >10 n g/mL. Although 
most reported cases of somatostatinoma involve metastatic dis-
ease, an attempt at complete excision of the tumor and cholecys-
tectomy is warranted in fit patients.
Nonfunctioning Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Although some pancreatic endocrine neoplasms secrete one or 
more hormones and are associated with interesting character-
istic clinical syndromes, most are not associated with elevated 
serum hormone levels that cause symptoms. Pancreatic endo-
crine tumors are considered functional if they are associated 
with a clinical syndrome and nonfunctioning if not associated 
with clinical symptoms. The majority of pancreatic endocrine 
tumors (PET), also called pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors 
(PNET), are malignant because they have the potential for 
uncontrolled growth and metastasis. Immunohistochemical 
markers such as synaptophysin, chromogranin A (CgA), and 
neuron-specific enolase can be helpful in the diagnosis but the 
gross histology is not a reliable predictor of biologic behavior. 
CgA is used by some as a serum marker to monitor patients for 
disease recurrence or response to treatment but the test performs 
poorly for this purpose. Patients often present similar to patients 
with pancreatic adenocarcinoma with vague pain, or weight 
loss but PNETs are increasingly discovered incidentally when 
imaging is performed for another reason. The tumor frequently 
enhances with arterial contrast.(Fig. 33-64) Sometimes a cystic 
component is seen due to central necrosis. Octreoscan (soma-
tostatin receptor scintigraphy) can be helpful to stage the dis-
ease. Surgical resection is always recommended in fit patients 
in the absence of metastatic disease. Adjuvant treatment after 
resection is withheld in the absence of radiographically demon-
strable metastatic disease even if CgA levels remain elevated. 
Although these tumors have a slow growth pattern compared to 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, many patients with PNETs 
will die of their disease even after an apparent complete resec-
tion. Incomplete resection (debulking) for locally advanced or 
metastatic PNETs of the pancreas is controversial because of the 
favorable survival duration of patients without surgery. How-
ever, in carefully selected fit patients with a PNET in the head of 
the pancreas and minimal disease in the liver, a pancreaticoduo-
denectomy with wedge resection of the liver metastasis might 
be appropriate because this avoids the morbidity of gastrointes-
tinal hemorrhage, biliary and gastric outlet obstruction before 
death from the metastatic disease. Recently molecular analysis 
has shown that PNETs have activation of mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) and the VEGF pathway. Antitumor activ-
ity has been demonstrated in recent clinical trials with Everoli-
mus, an mTOR inhibitor in combination with temozolomide and 
sunitinib.284,285 In addition, some centers are combining resec-
tion with transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) of metastatic 
disease in the liver.
Neoplasms of the Exocrine Pancreas
Epidemiology and Risk Factors.  It is estimated that in 2012, 
43,920 Americans were diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and 
37,390 died from the disease. Worldwide, over 265,000 people 
contract this disease annually, of which 74% of patients die 
within the first year after diagnosis.286,287 Overall, pancreatic 
cancer has the worst prognosis of all malignancies with a 5-year 
survival rate of only 6%.288 The incidence of pancreatic cancer 
continues to increase, perhaps related to the increased incidence 
of risk factors such as obesity and diabetes,289 and as a result, 
it is predicted that pancreatic cancer will become the leading 
cause of cancer deaths in the United States by 2050.287 Despite 
its ubiquity, this disease is extremely difficult to treat, and its 
exact cause is unknown. However, epidemiologic studies link-
ing various environmental and host factors provide some clues. 
Recent discoveries using modern molecular biologic techniques 
have also improved our understanding of the causes of pancre-
atic cancer. The etiology of pancreatic cancer likely involves a 
complex interaction of genetic and environmental factors. These 
factors will become more fully understood as better diagnostic 
tools such as DNA sequencing become clinically available to 
screen populations at risk for developing pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic cancer is more common in the elderly with most 
patients being >60 years old. Pancreatic cancer is more common 
in African Americans and slightly more common in men than 
women. The risk of developing pancreatic cancer is two to three 
times higher if a parent or sibling had the disease. Another risk 
factor that is consistently linked to pancreatic cancer is cigarette 
smoking. Smoking increases the risk of developing pancreatic 
cancer by at least twofold due to the carcinogens in cigarette 
smoke.290 Coffee and alcohol consumption have been investi-
gated as possible risk factors, but the data are inconsistent. As 
in other GI cancers, diets high in fat and low in fiber, fruits, and 
vegetables are thought to be associated with an increased risk 
of pancreatic cancer.
1394
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-64.  Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET) demonstrating enhancement during arterial phase of CT scan. Pancreatic head PNET 
seen in (left) sagital, (middle) coronal, and (right) lateral views of the abdomen.
Diabetes has been known to be associated with pancreatic 
cancer for many years. In fact, glucose intolerance is present 
in 80% of patients with pancreatic cancer, and approximately 
50% have overt diabetes, a much greater incidence than would 
be expected to occur by chance. Pre-existing type 2 diabetes 
increases the risk for development of pancreatic cancer by about 
twofold.291 The new onset of diabetes also can be an early mani-
festation of otherwise occult pancreatic cancer. Thus, the new 
onset of diabetes, or a sudden increase in insulin requirement 
in an elderly patient with pre-existing diabetes, should provoke 
concern for the presence of pancreatic cancer.
Recent epidemiologic studies have confirmed the fact that 
patients with chronic pancreatitis, especially familial pancreatitis, 
have an increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer.111,177,178 
Large, retrospective cohort studies of patients with pancreatitis 
have revealed up to a 20-fold increase in risk for pancreatic can-
cer. This increased risk seems to be independent of the type of 
pancreatitis, a finding consistent with the fact that most studies 
have shown little effect of alcohol ingestion per se on the risk 
of pancreatic carcinoma. The mechanisms involved in carcino-
genesis in patients with pre-existing pancreatitis are unknown. 
However, the mutated K-ras oncogene, which is present in most 
1395
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
cases of pancreatic cancer, has been detected in the ductal epi-
thelium of some patients with chronic pancreatitis.
Genetics of Pancreatic Cancer.  Pancreatic carcinogenesis 
probably involves multiple mutations that are inherited and 
acquired throughout aging. The K-ras oncogene is currently 
thought to be the most commonly mutated gene in pancreatic 
cancer, with approximately 90% of tumors having a mutation.293 
This prevalent mutation is present in precursor lesions and is 
therefore thought to occur early and be essential to pancre-
atic cancer development. K-ras mutations can be detected in 
DNA from serum, stool, pancreatic juice, and tissue aspirates 
of patients with pancreatic cancer, suggesting that the presence 
of this mutation may provide the basis for diagnostic testing in 
select individuals. The HER-2/neu oncogene, homologous to 
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr), is overexpressed 
in pancreatic cancers.292 This receptor is involved in signal 
transduction pathways that lead to cellular proliferation. Multiple 
tumor-suppressor genes are deleted and/or mutated in pancreatic 
cancer, includingp53, p16, and DPC4 (Smad 4), and in a minor-
ity of cases, BRCA2.293 Most pancreatic cancers have three or 
more of the above mutations.
With the completion of the human genome project, 
comparison of the normal genome and the results of DNA 
sequencing of pancreatic and other cancers is an active area of 
research. The genetic landscape of pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
has recently been investigated using exome capture technology 
combined with the SOLiD or Illumina next generation sequenc-
ing platforms and copy number analysis. Detailed analysis of 
99 tumors reaffirmed the importance of the already known 
mutations such as KRAS, TP53, CDKN2A, SMAD4, MLL3, 
TGFBR2, ARID1A, and SF3B1 in pancreatic cancer and identi-
fied 8 novel significantly mutated genes involved in chromatin 
modification (EPC1 and ARID2), DNA damage repair (ATM) 
and other mechanisms (ZIM2, MAP2K4, NALCN, SLC16A4, 
and MAGEA6). Pathway-based analysis of recurrently altered 
genes also revealed the involvement of axon-guidance genes, 
particularly SLIT/ROBO signaling, in pancreatic carcinogenesis.294 
Rapid and sensitive sequencing techniques will hopefully lead 
to better diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for pancreatic 
cancer. It is estimated that up to 10% of pancreatic cancers occur 
as a result of an inherited genetic predisposition. A family history 
of pancreatic cancer in a first-degree relative increases the risk of 
pancreatic cancer by about twofold.293 Rare familial cancer syn-
dromes that are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic 
cancer include BRCA2, the familial atypical multiple mole–mel-
anoma syndrome, hereditary pancreatitis, familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP), hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia.293
In addition to mutations in oncogenes and tumor-suppressor 
genes, pancreatic cancers also are known to have aberrations in 
the expression of growth factors and their receptors. These growth 
factors include epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, 
transforming growth factor beta, insulin-like growth factor, hepa-
tocyte growth factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor.292
The fact that many GI hormones and growth factors 
affect the growth of the normal exocrine pancreas suggests 
that these peptides also could affect the growth of pancreatic 
cancer, and some studies in cell culture and laboratory animals 
have supported this hypothesis.295 Newer drugs such as erlo-
tinib (Tarceva) and cetuximab (Erbitux), EGFr inhibitors, and 
bevacizumab (Avastin), a vascular endothelial growth factor 
inhibitor, and other drugs aimed at manipulation of growth 
factors, their receptors, and secondary messengers are the sub-
ject of ongoing clinical research. However, the combination 
of these drugs with standard chemotherapy in recent trials has 
not resulted in dramatic improvements in overall survival in 
pancreatic cancer.
Pathology.  Pancreatic cancer probably arises through a step-
wise progression of cellular changes, just as colon cancer pro-
gresses by stages from hyperplastic polyp to invasive cancer. 
Systematic histologic evaluation of areas surrounding pan-
creatic cancers has revealed the presence of precursor lesions 
that have been named pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia  
(Fig. 33-65). Three stages of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
have been defined. These lesions demonstrate the same onco-
gene mutations and loss of tumor-suppressor genes found in 
invasive cancers, the frequency of these abnormalities increas-
ing with progressive cellular atypia and architectural disarray.296 
The ability to detect these precursor lesions in humans at a stage 
where the cancer can still be prevented or cured is an important 
goal of current pancreatic cancer research.
About two-thirds of pancreatic adenocarcinomas 
arise within the head or uncinate process of the pancreas; 15% 
are in the body, and 10% in the tail, with the remaining tumors 
demonstrating diffuse involvement of the gland. Tumors in the 
pancreatic body and tail are generally larger at the time of diag-
nosis, and therefore, less commonly resectable. Tumors in the 
head of the pancreas are typically diagnosed earlier because they 
cause obstructive jaundice. Ampullary carcinomas, carcinomas 
of the distal bile duct, and periampullary duodenal adenocarci-
nomas present in a similar fashion to pancreatic head cancer but 
have a slightly better prognosis, probably because early obstruc-
tion of the bile duct and jaundice leads to the diagnosis.
In addition to ductal adenocarcinoma, which makes up 
about 75% of nonendocrine cancers of the pancreas, there are 
a variety of less common types of pancreatic cancer. Adeno-
squamous carcinoma is a variant that has both glandular and 
squamous differentiation. The biologic behavior of this lesion 
is unfortunately no better than the typical ductal adenocarci-
noma.297 Acinar cell carcinoma is an uncommon type of pan-
creatic cancer that usually presents as a large tumor, often 
10 cm in diameter or more, but the prognosis of patients with 
these tumors may be better than with ductal cancer.
Diagnosis and Staging.  Exact pathologic staging of pancre-
atic cancer is important because it allows accurate quantitative 
assessment of results and comparisons between institutions. The 
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging of pancreatic cancer is 
shown in Table 33-21 .
T1 lesions are ≤2 cm in diameter and are limited to the pan-
creas. T2 lesions also are limited to the pancreas, but are >2 cm. 
T3 lesions extend beyond the pancreas but do not involve the 
celiac axis or superior mesenteric artery. T4 lesions involve the 
celiac axis or superior mesenteric artery and are not resectable. T1 
and T2 tumors with no lymph node involvement are considered 
stage I disease (stage IA and IB). More extensive invasion, such 
as that associated with T3 tumors, indicates stage IIA disease. 
Any lymph node involvement indicates stage IIB disease. Locally 
advanced unresectable tumors (T4) without metastatic disease are 
considered stage III while patients with metastases to distant sites 
such as the liver or lungs are stage IV.
Eight percent of pancreas cancer cases are diagnosed while 
the cancer is still confined to the primary site (localized stage); 
27% are diagnosed after the cancer has spread to regional lymph 
7
1396
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Normal
PanIN-1A
PanIN-1B
PanIN-2
KI-67, TopoΙΙα, 14-3-3σ
p53, DPC4, BRCA2
Cyclin D1
Mesothelin
Mucin 1
Mucin 1
p16
PSCA, Mucin5, Fascin
Telomere    K-ras
shortening
PanIN-3
Invasion
Figure 33-65.  Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). Histology (top panel) showing grades PanIN-1A (A), PanIN-1B (B), PanIN-2 
(C), and PanIN-3 (D), and schema of correlation of histology with mutational events (bottom panel) showing cumulative abnormalities of 
tumor-promoter and tumor suppressor factors such as kRAS, p53, etc, and their corresponding cellular phenotype. (From Hruban RH, Takaori 
K, Klimstra DS, et al: An illustrated consensus on the classification of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms. Am J Surg Pathol. 28:977, 2004.)
nodes or directly beyond the primary site; 53% are diagnosed after 
the cancer has already metastasized (distant stage); and for the 
remaining 12%, the staging information was unknown. The corre-
sponding 5-year relative survival rates were: 23.3% for localized, 
8.9% for regional, 1.8% for distant, and 3.9% for unstaged. The 
overall 5-year relative survival rate for patients with pancreatic 
cancer for 2002 to 2008 from 18 Surveillance, Epidemiology and 
End Results (SEER) geographic areas was 5.8%.298
The most critical deficit in the ability to treat pancreatic 
cancer effectively is the lack of tools for early diagnosis. The 
pancreas is situated deep within the abdomen, and the early 
symptoms of pancreatic cancer often are too vague to raise sus-
picion of the disease. Ultimately, the majority of patients pres-
ent with pain and jaundice. On physical examination, weight 
loss is evident and the skin is icteric; a distended gallbladder is 
palpable in about one-fourth of patients. More fortunate patients 
have tumors situated such that biliary obstruction and jaundice 
occurs early and prompts diagnostic tests. Unfortunately, how-
ever, the vast majority of patients are not diagnosed until weight 
loss has occurred—a sign of advanced disease.
Although it is often taught that carcinoma of the pan-
creas presents with painless jaundice (to help distinguish it 
1397
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Table 33-21
Staging of pancreatic cancer
Tumor (T)
  TX: Primary tumor cannot be assessed
  T0: No evidence of primary tumor
  Tis: Carcinoma in situ
  T1: Tumor is limited to the pancreas and is ≤2 cm in greatest dimension
  T2: Tumor is limited to the pancreas and is >2 cm in greatest dimension
  T3: Tumor extends beyond the pancreas but without involvement of the celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery
  T4: Tumor involves the celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery (unresectable primary tumor)
Regional lymph nodes (N)
  NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
  N0: No regional lymph node metastasis
  N1: Regional lymph node metastasis
Distant metastasis (M)
  MX: Distant metastasis cannot be assessed
  M0: No distant metastasis
  M1: Distant metastasis
Stage
T
N
M
Description
IA
1
0
0
Limited to pancreas ≤2 cm
IB
2
0
0
Limited to pancreas >2 cm
IIA
3
0
0
Extends beyond pancreas but does not involve arteries
IIB
1-3
1
0
Any tumor without artery involvement with lymph node involvement
III
4
Any
0
Tumor involves arteries (unresectable)
IV
Any
Any
1
Any tumor with distant metastases
Used with the permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is the AJCC Cancer 
Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.
from ­choledocholithiasis), this aphorism is not accurate. Most 
patients do experience pain as part of the symptom complex of 
pancreatic cancer, and it is often the first symptom. Therefore, 
awareness of the way pancreatic pain is perceived may help 
clinicians suspect pancreatic cancer. The pain associated with 
pancreatic cancer is usually perceived in the epigastrium but 
can occur in any part of the abdomen, and often, but not always, 
penetrates to the back. When questioned in retrospect, patients 
often recall mild and vague pain for many months before diag-
nosis. A low threshold for ordering a CT scan with “pancre-
atic protocol” should be maintained for elderly patients with 
unexplained, persistent, although vague, abdominal pain. As 
mentioned above, new-onset diabetes in an elderly patient, espe-
cially if combined with vague abdominal pain, should prompt a 
search for pancreatic cancer.
Unfortunately, at this time there is no sensitive and specific 
serum marker to assist in the timely diagnosis of pancreatic can-
cer. With jaundice, direct hyperbilirubinemia and elevated alkaline 
phosphatase are expected but do not serve much of a diagnostic 
role other than to confirm the obvious. With long-standing bili-
ary obstruction, the prothrombin time will be prolonged due to a 
depletion of vitamin K, a fat-soluble vitamin dependent on bile 
flow for absorption. CA19-9 is a mucin-associated carbohydrate 
antigen that can be detected in the serum of patients with pancre-
atic cancer. Serum levels are elevated in about 75% of patients 
with pancreatic cancer. However, CA19-9 is also elevated in 
about 10% of patients with benign diseases of the pancreas, liver, 
and bile ducts.299 CA19-9 is thus neither sufficiently sensitive nor 
specific to allow an early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Despite 
the fact that many tumor markers such as CA19-9 have been 
studied, there are still no effective screening tests for pancreatic 
cancer. Research taking advantage of recent advances in genom-
ics, gene expression analysis, and proteomics has demonstrated 
thousands of genes and corresponding proteins that are differen-
tially expressed in pancreatic tumors that have potential for early 
detection of pancreatic cancer.300 Some of these proteins would be 
expected to be expressed at the cell surface or in pancreatic juice 
and may become useful as biomarkers for pancreatic cancer in 
the future.
In patients presenting with jaundice, a reasonable first 
diagnostic imaging study is abdominal ultrasound. If bile duct 
dilation is not seen, hepatocellular disease is likely. Demonstra-
tion of cholelithiasis and bile duct dilation suggests a diagnosis 
of choledocholithiasis, and the next logical step would be ERCP 
to clear the bile duct. In the absence of gallstones, malignant 
obstruction of the bile duct is likely, and a CT scan rather than 
ERCP would be the next logical step. For patients suspected 
of having pancreatic cancer who present without jaundice, a 
CT scan should be the first test.
The current diagnostic and staging test of choice for pan-
creatic cancer is a multidetector, dynamic, contrast-enhanced 
CT scan, and the techniques for obtaining high-quality images 
are constantly improving (Fig. 33-66). The accuracy of CT scan-
ning for predicting unresectable disease is about 90% to 95%.301 
In contrast, CT scanning is less accurate in predicting resect-
able disease. CT scanning will miss small liver metastases, and 
predicting arterial involvement is sometimes difficult. CT find-
ings that indicate a tumor is unresectable include involvement of 
≥ 180 degrees of the celiac axis, hepatic or superior mesenteric 
artery, enlarged lymph nodes outside the boundaries of resection, 
1398
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-66.  Computed tomography scan demonstrating resectable pancreatic cancer. SMA = superior mesenteric artery.
ascites, and distant metastases (e.g., liver). Invasion of the supe-
rior mesenteric vein or portal vein is not in itself a contrain-
dication to resection as long as the veins are patent. Tumors 
are considered “borderline resectable” if there is abutment of 
≤ 180 degrees of the circumference of the SMA, celiac axis, 
or hepatic artery or if there is a short segment of vein occlu-
sion. Also, patients with CT findings suspicious for metastatic 
disease, like 1 mm liver lesions too small to characterize or 
biopsy, are considered “borderline resectable” as are patients 
with multiple comorbidities or marginal performance status. 
There is growing consensus that neoadjuvant treatment should 
be considered in all patients with any radiographic evidence of 
extension to adjacent vascular structures.
Currently, CT is probably the single most versatile and cost-
effective tool for the diagnosis and staging of pancreatic cancer. 
Abdominal MRI is rapidly evolving but currently provides essen-
tially the same information as CT scanning. Positron emission 
tomography scanning is becoming more widely available and 
may help distinguish chronic pancreatitis from pancreatic cancer. 
EUS can be used to detect small pancreatic masses that could 
be missed by CT scanning and is commonly used when there 
is a high suspicion for pancreatic cancer but no mass is identi-
fied by the CT scan. EUS has the added advantage of provid-
ing the opportunity for transluminal biopsy of pancreatic masses, 
although a tissue diagnosis before pancreaticoduodenectomy is 
not required. However, in specific patients a histologic diagnosis 
may be necessary such as for those in a neoadjuvant clinical trial 
or before chemotherapy in advanced tumors. EUS is a sensitive 
test for portal/superior mesenteric vein invasion, although it is 
somewhat less effective at detecting superior mesenteric artery 
invasion. When all of the current staging modalities are used, 
their accuracy in predicting resectability is reported to be about 
80%, meaning that one in five patients brought to the operating 
room with the intent of a curative resection will be found at the 
time of surgery to have unresectable disease.302
In an attempt to avoid such futile laparotomies, preliminary 
laparoscopy has been advocated for patients with disease felt to 
be resectable by CT imaging (Fig. 33-67). Diagnostic laparos-
copy with the use of US is reported to improve the accuracy of 
predicting resectability to about 98%.302 The technique involves 
more than simple visualization with the scope and requires the 
placement of multiple ports and manipulation of the tissues. A 
general exploration of the peritoneal surfaces is carried out. The 
ligament of Treitz and the base of the transverse mesocolon are 
examined for tumor. The gastrocolic ligament is incised, and the 
lesser sac is examined. The US probe is used to examine the liver, 
porta hepatis, and the portal vein and superior mesenteric artery.
The percentage of patients in whom a positive laparoscopy 
helps avoid a nontherapeutic laparotomy varies from 10% to 
30% in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas but may be as 
high as 50% in patients with tumors in the body and tail of the 
gland. As the quality of CT scanning has improved, the value 
Figure 33-67.  Liver metastases identified at diagnostic laparoscopy.
1399
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
of routine diagnostic laparoscopy has decreased. However, the 
morbidity of diagnostic laparoscopy is less than that of lapa-
rotomy, and the procedure can be performed on an ­outpatient 
basis. Patients who are found to have unresectable disease 
recover more rapidly from a laparoscopy than a laparotomy and 
can receive palliative chemotherapy and radiation sooner. The 
potential immunosuppressive effects of a major surgical pro-
cedure also are avoided, as well as the negative psychologic 
impact of a major painful operation with little benefit.
Biliary obstruction can be relieved with an endoscopic 
approach in almost all cases. When large (10F) plastic stents 
are used, most patients do not require replacement for about 
3 months. Metallic wall stents last about 5 months on average 
and usually fail only with tumor ingrowth.303 Keeping in mind 
that patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer usually live 
<1 year, the requirement for numerous stent changes is unlikely.
Diagnostic laparoscopy is possibly best applied to patients 
with pancreatic cancer on a selective basis. Diagnostic lapa-
roscopy will have a higher yield in patients with large tumors 
(>4 cm), tumors located in the body or tail, patients with equivo-
cal findings of metastasis or ascites on CT scan, and patients 
with other indications of advanced disease such as marked 
weight loss or markedly elevated CA19-9 (>1000 U/mL). An 
algorithm for the diagnosis, staging, and treatment of pancreatic 
cancer is shown in Fig. 33-68.
Palliative Surgery and Endoscopy.  For the 85% to 90% of 
patients with pancreatic cancer who have disease that precludes 
surgical resection, appropriate and effective palliative treatment 
is critical to the quality of their remaining life. Because of the 
poor prognosis of the disease, it is not appropriate to use inva-
sive and toxic regimens in patients with extremely advanced 
disease and poor performance status. When patients do desire 
antineoplastic therapy, it is important to encourage them to 
enroll in clinical trials so that therapeutic advances can be 
made. In general, there are three clinical problems in advanced 
pancreatic cancer that require palliation: pain, jaundice, and 
­duodenal obstruction. The mainstay of pain control is oral 
narcotics. Sustained-release preparations of morphine sulfate 
are frequently used. Invasion of retroperitoneal nerve trunks 
accounts for the severe pain experienced by patients with 
advanced pancreatic cancer. A celiac plexus nerve block can 
control pain effectively for a period of months, although the 
procedure sometimes needs to be repeated.304
Jaundice is present in the majority of patients with pancre-
atic cancer, and the most troublesome aspect for the patient is 
the accompanying pruritus. Biliary obstruction may also lead to 
cholangitis, coagulopathy, digestive symptoms, and hepatocel-
lular failure. In the past, surgeons traditionally performed a bili-
ary bypass when unresectable disease was found at laparotomy. 
As many patients today already have a bile duct stent in place by 
the time of operation, it is not clear that operative biliary bypass 
is required. If an operative bypass is performed, choledochoje-
junostomy is the preferred approach. Although an easy proce-
dure to perform, choledochoduodenostomy is felt to be unwise 
because of the proximity of the duodenum to tumor. Some have 
discouraged the use of the gallbladder for biliary bypass305; 
however, it is suitable as long as the cystic duct clearly enters 
the common duct well above the tumor.
Duodenal obstruction is usually a late event in pancreatic 
cancer and occurs in only about 20% of patients.305 Therefore, 
in the absence of signs or symptoms of obstruction, such as a 
tumor that is already encroaching on the duodenum at the time 
of surgery, the routine use of prophylactic gastrojejunostomy 
when exploration reveals unresectable tumor is controversial. 
Although anastomotic leaks are uncommon, gastrojejunostomy 
is sometimes associated with delayed gastric emptying, the very 
symptom the procedure is designed to treat.
Whether performing both a biliary and enteric bypass 
or just a biliary bypass, the jejunum is brought anterior to 
CT scan
Quad phase
Multidetector
Fine cuts
Unresectable
mass
CT or EUS
guided biopsy
Clinical
trial
Resectable 
mass
No mass but
suspicion remains
Clinical trial
Diagnostic
laparoscopy
(selective)
EUS biopsy
diagnostic
laparoscopy
Neoadjuvant
clinical
trial
ERCP / EUS
Observe/reimage
Whipple
procedure
Figure 33-68.  Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for pancreatic cancer. If computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrates a potentially resect-
able tumor, patients are offered participation in a clinical trial after histologic confirmation by CT or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided biopsy. 
If CT scan demonstrates resectable disease, diagnostic laparoscopy is used selectively in patients with tumors in the body/tail, equivocal findings 
of metastasis or CT scan, ascites, high CA19-9, or marked weight loss. Patients also have diagnostic laparoscopy if they elect to participate in a 
neoadjuvant clinical trial. In cases where no mass is demonstrated on CT scan, but suspicion of cancer remains, EUS or endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with brushings are performed, and the CT may be repeated after an interval of observation.
1400
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-69.  Biliary-enteric bypass to palliate unresectable pan-
creatic cancer. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH Jr: Atlas 
of pancreatic surgery, in Bell RH Jr, Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW 
(eds): Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott-Raven, 1996, p 1074.)
Figure 33-70.  Expandable metallic 
biliary stent. After ERCP cannulation 
of the distal bile duct (left) the stent is 
advanced over the cannula and placed 
across the obstruction in the distal bile 
duct (right).
the colon, if possible, rather than retrocolic, where the tumor 
potentially would invade the bowel sooner. Some surgeons use 
a loop of jejunum with a jejunojejunostomy to divert the enteric 
stream away from the biliary-enteric anastomosis. Others use 
a Roux-en-Y limb with the gastrojejunostomy located 50 cm 
downstream from the hepaticojejunostomy (Fig. 33-69). Poten-
tial advantages of the defunctionalized Roux-en-Y limb include 
the ease with which it will reach up to the hepatic hilum, prob-
able decreased risk of cholangitis, and easier management of 
biliary anastomotic leaks. If a gastrojejunostomy is performed, 
it should be placed dependently and posterior along the greater 
curvature to improve gastric emptying, and a vagotomy should 
not be performed. If patients are explored laparoscopically and 
found to have unresectable disease, palliation of jaundice can be 
achieved in a minimally invasive fashion with ERCP and place-
ment of a coated, expandable metallic endoscopic biliary stent 
(Fig. 33-70). Endoscopic stents are definitely not as durable as 
a surgical bypass. Recurrent obstruction and cholangitis is more 
common with stents and results in inferior palliation. However, 
this minimally invasive approach is associated with consider-
ably less initial morbidity and mortality than surgical bypass. 
Newer, expandable metallic wall stents demonstrate improved 
patency and provide better palliation than plastic stents.
If an initial diagnostic laparoscopy reveals a contraindica-
tion to the Whipple procedure, such as liver metastases, it is not 
appropriate to perform a laparotomy simply to create a biliary 
bypass. In such a patient, it is better to place an endoscopic stent. 
In contrast, if a laparotomy has already been performed as part 
of the assessment of resectability and the Whipple procedure is 
not possible, a surgical bypass is usually performed. However, 
if the patient has a functioning endoscopic stent already in place, 
it may be reasonable to forego surgical bypass.
Palliative Chemotherapy and Radiation.  For patients with 
locally advanced unresectable disease are treated with che-
mothearpy and possibly radiation and patients with Stage IV 
metastatic disease are treated with systemic chemotherapy. 
Gemcitabine (Gemzar®) was approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for use in pancreatic cancer in 
1996. In patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer, gem-
citabine results in symptomatic improvement, improved pain 
control and performance status, and weight gain.306 However, 
survival is improved by only 1 to 2 months. Erlotinib (Tarceva®) 
was approved in 2005 based on very minimal improvement in 
overall survival in combination with gemcitabine. Frequently 
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and capecitabine (Xeloda®) are used as a 
radiosensitizer in patients receiving radiation therapy. FOLFIRI-
NOX (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin) is 
an aggressive chemotherapy regimen that was recently shown 
to improve objective response rate from 9% to 32% and median 
overall survival of patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer 
from 7 to 11 months but the improvement is associated with 
increased toxicity so patient selection is important.307Although 
these results may warrant treatment in patients who understand 
the benefits and risks, the lack of significant survival advan-
tage should encourage physicians to refer motivated patients 
for experimental protocols, because it is only through continued 
clinical research that more meaningful treatments for pancreatic 
cancer will be developed.
Ablation for Locally Advanced Unresectable Disease. ­ 
Persistent arterial vascular encasement after neoadjuvant ther-
apy contraindicates resection. Irreversible electroporation using 
1401
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
the Nanoknife® is reported to enable treatment of pancreatic 
tumors abutting vascular structures without compromise of 
the vessels or concern for the heat sink effect of nearby blood 
flow.308 This modality is new but early reports with limited 
numbers of patients indicate it may be safe in combination with 
chemotherapy. Randomized prospective trials are needed. How-
ever, these early results are of particular interest because of the 
potential to down stage and offer surgery to patients initially 
diagnosed with locally advanced unresectable disease.
Surgical Resection: Pancreaticoduodenectomy.  In a 
patient with appropriate clinical and/or imaging indications of 
pancreatic cancer, a tissue diagnosis before performing a pan-
creaticoduodenectomy is not essential. Although percutaneous 
CT-guided biopsy is usually safe, complications such as hemor-
rhage, pancreatitis, fistula, abscess, and even death can occur. 
Tumor seeding along the subcutaneous tract of the needle is 
uncommon. Likewise, FNA under EUS guidance is safe and 
well tolerated. The problem with preoperative or even intra-
operative biopsy is that many pancreatic cancers are not very 
cellular and contain a significant amount of fibrous tissue, so a 
biopsy may be misinterpreted as showing chronic pancreatitis if 
it does not contain malignant glandular cells. In the face of clini-
cal and radiologic preoperative indications of pancreatic cancer, 
a negative biopsy should not preclude resection. In patients who 
are not candidates for resection because of metastatic disease, 
biopsy for a tissue diagnosis becomes important because these 
patients may be candidates for palliative chemotherapy trials. 
It is especially important to make an aggressive attempt at tis-
sue diagnosis before surgery in patients whose clinical presen-
tation and imaging studies are more suggestive of alternative 
diagnoses such as pancreatic lymphoma or pancreatic islet cell 
tumors. These patients might avoid surgery altogether in the 
case of lymphoma or warrant an aggressive approach in the case 
of islet cell carcinoma.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy can be performed through a 
midline incision from xiphoid to umbilicus or through a bilateral 
subcostal incision. The initial portion of the procedure is an assess-
ment of resectability. The liver and visceral and parietal peritoneal 
surfaces are thoroughly assessed. The gastrohepatic omentum is 
opened, and the celiac axis area is examined for enlarged lymph 
nodes. The base of the transverse mesocolon to the right of the 
middle colic vessels is examined for tumor involvement.
The ascending and hepatic flexure of the colon are mobi-
lized off the duodenum and head of the pancreas and reflected 
medially. A Kocher maneuver is performed by dissecting 
behind the head of the pancreas. The superior mesenteric vein is 
identified early in the case and dissected up toward the inferior 
border of the neck of the pancreas. The gastroepiploic vein and 
artery are ligated to prevent any traction injury. The relation of 
the tumor to the superior mesenteric vein and artery cannot be 
accurately assessed by palpation at this point and is not com-
pletely determined until later in the operation when the neck of 
the pancreas is divided and the surgeon is committed to resec-
tion. Mesenteric vascular involvement is best determined by a 
high quality preoperative CT scan.
It is important to assess for an aberrant right hepatic artery, 
which is present in 20% of patients. The aberrant artery arises 
from the superior mesenteric artery posterior to the pancreas and 
ascends parallel and adjacent to the superior mesenteric and portal 
veins. The presence of an aberrant right hepatic artery should be 
apparent on the preoperative CT scan and can be identified intra-
operatively by palpation on the back side of the hepatoduodenal 
ligament, where a prominent pulse will be felt posterior and to the 
right of the portal vein.
The porta hepatis is examined. Enlarged or firm lymph 
nodes that can be swept down toward the head of the pancreas 
with the specimen do not preclude resection. If the assessment 
phase reveals no contraindications to the Whipple procedure 
(Table 33-22), the resection phase commences.
If the pylorus is to be preserved, the stomach and proximal 
duodenum are mobilized off the pancreas, preserving the gas-
troepiploic vessels down to the pylorus. The proximal hepatic 
artery is identified usually by removing a lymph node that com-
monly lies just anterior to the artery. The hepatic artery is dis-
sected and traced toward the porta hepatis. Small vessels in this 
area can be ligated with 3-0 or 4-0 silk ligatures to prevent both-
ersome hemorrhage later in the case that makes subsequent dis-
section more tedious. The gastroduodenal branch of the hepatic 
artery is identified. A test clamping is performed to ensure that a 
strong pulse remains in the proper hepatic artery before division 
of the gastroduodenal artery. Once the gastroduodenal artery is 
divided, the hepatic artery is retracted medially and the common 
bile duct is retracted laterally to reveal the anterior surface of 
the portal vein behind them. Dissection is performed only on the 
anterior surface of the vein. If there is no tumor involvement, the 
neck of the pancreas will separate from the vein easily. A large, 
blunt-tipped clamp is a safe instrument to use for this dissection. 
The tunnel under the neck of the pancreas can then be completed 
mostly under direct vision from inferior and superior.
The gallbladder is then mobilized from the liver, the cys-
tic duct and artery are ligated, and the gallbladder is removed. 
The common hepatic duct is circumferentially dissected. Either 
the duodenum is divided 2 cm distal to the pylorus (which 
defines the procedure as a pylorus-preserving pancreatico-­
duodenectomy, or PPPD) or the antrum is divided, as classically 
described by Whipple. The jejunum is divided beyond the liga-
ment of Treitz, and the mesentery is ligated until the jejunum 
can be delivered posterior to the superior mesenteric vessels 
from left to right.
The common hepatic duct is then divided just above the 
entrance of the cystic duct, and the duct is dissected down to the 
superior margin of the duodenum. Inferior traction on the distal 
bile duct opens the plane to make visible the anterior portion 
of the portal vein. The pancreatic neck is divided anterior to 
the portal vein (Fig. 33-71). The pancreatic head and uncinate 
process then are dissected off of the right lateral aspect of the 
superior mesenteric vein, ligating the fragile branches draining 
the head and uncinate process into the portal vein (Fig. 33-72). 
Table 33-22
Findings at exploration
Findings contraindicating resection
  Liver metastases (any size)
  Celiac lymph node involvement
  Peritoneal implants
  Hepatic hilar lymph node involvement
Findings not contraindicating resection
  Invasion at duodenum or distal stomach
  Involved peripancreatic lymph nodes
  Involved lymph nodes along the porta hepatis that can be 
swept down with the specimen
1402
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-71.  Division of the pancreatic neck. The pancreatic 
neck is separated from the anterior surface of the portal vein and 
then divided. If there is no tumor involvement, the neck of the pan-
creas will separate from the vein easily. A large, blunt-tipped clamp 
is a safe instrument to use for this dissection. (Reproduced with 
permission from Bell RH Jr: Atlas of pancreatic surgery, in Bell 
RH Jr, Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW (eds): Digestive Tract Surgery: 
A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996, p 1054.)
Figure 33-72.  Dissection of the pancreatic head and uncinate pro-
cess. The pancreatic head and uncinate process are dissected off of 
the right lateral aspect of the superior mesenteric vein and portal 
vein by ligating the fragile venous branches. (Reproduced with per-
mission from Bell RH Jr: Atlas of pancreatic surgery, in Bell RH Jr, 
Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW (eds): Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text 
and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1996, p 1056.)
The uncinate process is then dissected off of the posterior and 
lateral aspect of the superior mesenteric artery. This can be the 
most tedious portion of the operation, but thoroughly clearing 
all tissue from the mesenteric vessels helps avoid incomplete 
resection. The wound is irrigated and meticulous hemostasis is 
assured at this point because the view of the portal vein area and 
retroperitoneum is more difficult after the reconstruction phase 
is completed.
The reconstruction involves anastomoses of the pancreas 
first, then the bile duct, and, finally, the duodenum or stomach. 
There are various techniques for the pancreatic anastomoses, and 
all have equivalent outcomes. After the pancreatic anastomosis 
is completed, the choledochojejunostomy is performed about 
10 cm down the jejunal limb from the pancreatic anastomosis. 
This is usually performed in an end-to-side fashion with one 
layer of interrupted sutures. The duodenojejunostomy or gastro-
jejunostomy is performed another 10 to 15 cm downstream from 
the biliary anastomosis, using a two-layer technique.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy with Vascular Resection.  
Accurate staging of pancreatic cancer with a high-quality pre-
operative CT scan is extremely important. Involvement of the 
superior mesenteric artery, the celiac axis, or hepatic artery 
indicate a T4/Stage 3 tumor that is locally advanced and unre-
sectable. However, involvement of the portal vein or superior 
mesenteric vein does not necessarily preclude resection as long 
as there is a patent superior mesenteric vein-portal vein conflu-
ence. Reconstruction can often be accomplished with a primary 
anastomosis of the vein. When resection of more than 2 cm of 
vein is required, an interposition graft such as the internal jugu-
lar vein, can be used for a tension-free reconstruction. During 
the last decade, studies have been published evaluating mor-
tality rates and long-term survival after partial and segmental 
portal/mesenteric vein resection with mortality rates below 5%, 
similar to those of standard pancreaticoduodenectomy. When 
performed in expert centers, the surgical and oncologic outcome 
of pancreaticoduodenectomy without and with venous resection 
appear to be similar.309,310
Minimally Invasive Pancreatectomy.  Laparoscopic distal 
pancreatectomy has been proven to be safe and is appropriate 
for essentially all indications for pancreatectomy. This approach 
is associated with decreased blood loss and quicker recovery. 
Centrally located lesions near the splenoportal confluence must 
be approached laparoscopically with caution. Robotic technol-
ogy such as the da Vinci® Surgical System may make dissec-
tion and control of major vessels in this area easier and perhaps 
more safe. Interest in laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy is 
increasing throughout the United States with some early adopt-
ers reporting excellent outcomes comparable to the open pro-
cedure in single-institution series.311 Early results indicate this 
technique is feasible but considerable expertise is required in 
both open pancreatic resection as well as advanced laparoscopic 
techniques to achieve these outcomes. Whether the advantages 
seen in other areas of minimally invasive surgery apply to the 
Whipple procedure is an area of current investigation.
1403
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Variations and Controversies.  The preservation of the 
pylorus has several theoretical advantages, including preven-
tion of reflux of pancreaticobiliary secretions into the stomach, 
decreased incidence of marginal ulceration, normal gastric acid 
secretion and hormone release, and improved gastric function. 
Patients with pylorus-preserving resections have appeared 
to regain weight better than historic controls in some studies. 
Return of gastric emptying in the immediate postoperative 
period may take longer after the pylorus-preserving operation, 
and it is controversial whether there is any significant improve-
ment in long-term quality of life with pyloric preservation.312,313
Figure 33-73.  Techniques for pancreaticojejunostomy. A to D. Duct-to-mucosa, end-to-side E. Intraoperative photographs of end-to-side 
pancreaticojejunostomy. F to J. End-to-end invagination. K to O. End-to-side invagination.
Techniques for the pancreaticojejunostomy include end-
to-side or end-to-end and duct-to-mucosa sutures or invagi-
nation (Fig. 33-73). Pancreaticogastrostomy has also been 
investigated.
Some surgeons use stents, glue to seal the anastomosis, 
or octreotide to decrease pancreatic secretions. No matter what 
combination of these techniques is used, the pancreatic leakage 
rate is always about 10%. Therefore, the choice of techniques 
depends more on the surgeon’s personal experience.
Traditionally, most surgeons place drains around the 
pancreatic and biliary anastomoses because disruption of 
1404
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-73.  (Continued)
1405
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
Figure 33-73.  (Continued) 
the ­pancreaticojejunostomy cannot be avoided in one out of 
10 patients. This complication can lead to the development of an 
upper abdominal abscess or can present as an external pancre-
atic fistula. Usually, a pure pancreatic leak is controlled by the 
drains and will eventually seal spontaneously. Combined pan-
creatic and biliary leaks are cause for concern because bile will 
activate the pancreatic enzymes. In its most virulent form, dis-
ruption leads to necrotizing retroperitoneal infection, which can 
erode major arteries and veins of the upper abdomen, including 
the exposed portal vein and its branches or the stump of the gas-
troduodenal artery. Impending catastrophe is often preceded by 
a small herald bleed from the drain site. Depending on the clini-
cal situation, such an event is an indication to perform an angio-
gram or return the patient to the operating room to widely drain 
the pancreaticojejunostomy and to repair the involved blood 
vessel. Open packing may be necessary to control diffuse necro-
sis and infection. Some studies have questioned the practice of 
routine drain placement after pancreaticoduodenectomy. These 
studies indicated that most pancreatic leaks can be managed 
with percutaneous drainage.314 The practice of routine drain-
age after pancreatic resection is currently being investigated 
in a randomized multicenter clinical trial. Many patients with 
1406
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
­pancreatic cancer are malnourished preoperatively and suffer 
from gastroparesis in the immediate postoperative period. Rou-
tine placement of a feeding jejunostomy tube and gastrostomy 
tube has become less common, and most surgeons use these 
tubes selectively. Gastrostomy tubes may decrease the length of 
stay in patients who might be predicted to have severe gastropa-
resis. Jejunostomy tubes are certainly not benign and can result 
in leaks and intestinal obstruction. However, parenteral nutrition 
is also associated with serious complications such as line sepsis, 
loss of gut mucosal integrity, and hepatic dysfunction.
Because of the high incidence of direct retroperitoneal inva-
sion and regional lymph node metastasis at the time of surgery, it 
has been argued that the scope of resection for pancreatic cancer 
should be enlarged to include a radical regional lymphadenec-
tomy and resection of areas of potential retroperitoneal invasion. 
The “radical pancreaticoduodenectomy” includes extension 
of the pancreatic resection to the middle body of the pancreas, 
segmental resection of the portal vein, if necessary, resection 
of retroperitoneal tissue along the right perinephric area, and 
lymphadenectomy to the region of the celiac plexus. In the 
hands of experienced surgeons, these techniques are associated 
with greater blood loss but no increase in mortality; however, 
improved survival has not been demonstrated. Total pancreatec-
tomy has also been considered in the past. Although pancreatic 
leaks are eliminated, major morbidity from brittle diabetes and 
exocrine insufficiency outweigh any theoretical benefit.
Pancreatic cancer can recur locally after pancreaticoduo-
denectomy. Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) delivers a full 
therapeutic dose of radiation to the operative bed at the time of 
resection. Radiation to surrounding normal areas is minimized, 
but the radiation is delivered all in one setting, usually about 
15 minutes, rather than in fractionated doses over time. IORT 
is best performed in a shielded, dedicated, operating room suite 
rather than by transporting the patient in the middle of an already 
long and complicated operation. IORT may improve local con-
trol and palliate symptoms after pancreaticoduodenectomy. 
However, IORT has not been shown to be superior to standard 
external beam radiation therapy, and further randomized trials 
are needed to determine how this modality should be utilized.315
Complications of Pancreaticoduodenectomy.  The opera-
tive mortality rate for pancreaticoduodenectomy has decreased 
to <5% in “high volume” centers (where individual surgeons 
perform more than fifteen cases per year), suggesting that 
patients in rural areas would benefit from referral to large urban 
centers.316,317 The most common causes of death are sepsis, hem-
orrhage, and cardiovascular events. Postoperative complications 
are unfortunately still very common, and include delayed gastric 
emptying, pancreatic fistula, and hemorrhage.
Delayed gastric emptying is common after pancreatico-
duodenectomy and is treated conservatively as long as complete 
gastric outlet obstruction is ruled out by a contrast study. In the 
acute phase, IV erythromycin may help but the problem usually 
improves with time.
Considerable attention has been focused on the prevention of 
pancreatic leak after pancreas resection. Modifications of the anas-
tomotic technique (end-to-side or end-to-end, duct-to-mucosa, or 
invaginated), the use of jejunum or the stomach for drainage, the 
use of pancreatic duct stents, the use of octreotide, and various 
sealants have all been evaluated. Octreotide, a synthetic analogue 
of somatostatin with a longer half-life, has been evaluated as a 
pharmacologic therapy to reduce pancreatic secretion and the rate 
of pancreatic fistula after pancreatic resection. European studies 
advocate the routine use of octreotide while North American trials 
conclude that octreotide is useless. European studies have dem-
onstrated a significant reduction in the rate of postoperative 
pancreatic fistula with prophylactic preoperative octreotide 
injection.318–320 However, randomized prospective stud-
ies in the United States showed that octreotide did not prevent 
postoperative pancreatic fistula when used following pancre-
atic resection.321–325 However, a subgroup analysis done by Suc 
and colleagues326 suggested that there may be a benefit to using 
octreotide in a high-risk group of patients undergoing pancreati-
coduodenectomy who have a pancreatic duct measuring <3 mm. 
Some studies suggest a higher rate of complications321,323 in 
patients who receive octreotide even though the difference was 
not statistically significant, while others report a significantly 
lower rate of complications with the use of octreotide.319,320 
Finally, the optimal dose, route (IV drip vs. subcutaneous injec-
tion), and timing (preoperative, intraoperative, or postoperative) 
of octreotide use is unclear.
Many technical modifications to the classic pancreatico-
duodenectomy have been described. However, >70 technical 
variations to the pancreaticoenteric anastomosis have not clearly 
demonstrated an objective method to consistently decrease the 
rate of fistula, which varies from 0% to 40% depending on the 
definition of fistula.321,322,327–335 Yeo compared the incidence 
of pancreatic fistula in patients who had a pancreaticoduode-
nectomy with reconstruction via a pancreaticogastrostomy or 
pancreaticojejunostomy.335 There was no significant difference 
between the two techniques in the incidence of pancreatic fis-
tula. A recent meta-analysis summarized the results of 16 trials 
comparing pancreaticogastrostomy to pancreaticojejunostomy. 
All of the observational clinical studies reported superiority 
of pancreaticogastrostomy over pancreaticojejunostomy, most 
likely influenced by publication bias. In contrast, all random-
ized prospective trials failed to show advantage of a particular 
technique, suggesting both techniques provide equally good 
results.336
Other options to consider when performing the pancre-
atic anastomosis are the duct-to-mucosa vs. the invagination 
techniques. Many surgeons choose the technique at the time of 
operation, depending on the size of the pancreatic duct and the 
texture of pancreas.337 The duct-to-mucosa anastomosis results 
in a low pancreatic fistula rate338 in patients with a large pan-
creatic duct and a fibrotic pancreas. However, the end-to-end 
invagination technique may be more secure in patients with a 
small duct and soft pancreas.
Even though there has been little convincing evidence 
for the use of a pancreatic duct stent, proponents suggest that 
a stent may discourage a pancreatic leak and aid in technical 
precision.339,340 Both internal stenting as well as external stenting 
have been shown to reduce the incidence of pancreatic fistula in 
some clinical studies.338
Some studies333,341 suggest that an isolated Roux-en-Y pan-
creaticoenteric anastomosis may be associated with a lower rate 
of postoperative pancreatic leak. The logic behind this techni-
cal modification is that the use of separate Roux-en-Y limbs 
for biliary and pancreatic secretions may protect the pancreatic 
anastomosis from activated pancreatic enzymes.
Avoiding the pancreatic anastomosis altogether by ductal 
ligation or occlusion has also been evaluated as a potential tech-
nique to reduce the rate of postoperative pancreatic fistula.342 
Ductal occlusion with neoprene or prolamine, which are nonre-
sorbable glues, has been abandoned due to pancreatic atrophy 
1407
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
and loss of exocrine function.343 Tran and associates examined 
duct occlusion in pancreaticojejunostomy and showed that duct 
occlusion significantly increases the risk of endocrine insuf-
ficiency without a decrease in the postoperative complication 
rate.344 To avoid long-term loss of function, absorbable glues, 
such as fibrin glue, have been evaluated to limit the action of 
pancreatic enzymes until the anastomosis is healed. Fibrin glue 
has been used for both duct occlusion and has also been applied 
to the surface of the pancreatic stump and anastomotic site with-
out clear improvement in pancreatic fistula rate. The effect of 
BioGlue¯ applied to the anastomotic surface after the Whipple 
procedure and pancreatic stump after distal pancreatectomy was 
recently evaluated in a retrospective cohort study. There were 
no statistically significant differences in the incidence or sever-
ity grades of postoperative pancreatic fistulas.345
If not combined with a biliary leak, pancreatic fistula, 
although serious, can usually be managed conservatively. In about 
95% of cases, reoperation is not indicated and prolonged drain-
age, using drains placed in the original operation or percutaneously 
after resection, results in spontaneous closure of the fistula.346
Hemorrhage can occur either intraoperatively or postop-
eratively. Intraoperative hemorrhage typically occurs during the 
dissection of the portal vein. A major laceration of the portal 
vein can occur at a point in the operation at which the portal vein 
is not yet exposed. Temporary control of hemorrhage is gener-
ally possible in this situation by compressing the portal vein and 
superior mesenteric vein against the tumor with the surgeon’s 
left hand behind the head of the pancreas. An experienced assis-
tant is needed to divide the neck of the pancreas to the left of the 
portal vein and achieve proximal and distal control. Sometimes, 
the vein can be sutured closed with minimal narrowing. Other 
times, a segmental resection and interposition graft (internal 
jugular vein) may be needed.
Postoperative hemorrhage can occur from inadequate liga-
ture of any one of numerous blood vessels during the procedure. 
Hemorrhage can also occur due to digestion of retroperitoneal 
blood vessels due to a combined biliary-pancreatic leak. Uncom-
monly, a stress ulcer, or later, a marginal ulcer, can result in GI 
hemorrhage. Typically, a vagotomy is not performed when pan-
creaticoduodenectomy is performed for pancreatic cancer, but 
patients are placed on proton pump inhibitors.
Outcome and Value of Pancreaticoduodenectomy for 
Cancer.  Survival figures indicate that perhaps few patients are 
cured indefinitely of pancreatic cancer with pancreaticoduode-
nectomy. Survival rates vary according to the stage of disease at 
diagnosis, and most patients have evidence of locally advanced 
disease at the time of surgery. The tumor tends to recur locally 
with retroperitoneal and regional lymphatic disease. In addition, 
most patients also develop hematogenous metastases, usually 
in the liver. Malignant ascites, peritoneal implants, and malig-
nant pleural effusions are all common. Median survival after 
pancreaticoduodenectomy is about 22 months. Even long-term 
(5-year) survivors often eventually die due to pancreatic can-
cer as late recurrence is common. Although pancreaticoduode-
nectomy may be performed with the hope of the rare cure in 
mind, the operation more importantly provides better palliation 
than any other treatment, and is the only modality that offers 
any meaningful improvement in survival. If the procedure is 
performed without major complications, many months of pal-
liation are usually achieved. It is the surgeon’s duty to make 
sure patients and their families have a realistic understanding 
of the true goals of pancreaticoduodenectomy in the setting of 
pancreatic cancer.
Adjuvant Chemotherapy and Radiation.  Small studies in 
the 1980s suggested that adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-FU 
combined with radiation improves survival by about 9 months 
after pancreatic resection for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.347 
Subsequent, noncontrolled studies have reinforced that con-
cept; however, the data have been criticized due to the low 
number of patients and low dose of radiation therapy that was 
given. In addition, gemcitabine has replaced 5-FU as standard 
therapy in pancreatic cancer but is thought to be too toxic when 
given with radiotherapy at current doses. However, a recent 
large European multicenter trial concluded that there was no 
value to chemoradiotherapy, although the study suggested the 
possibility that chemotherapy alone might have survival ben-
efit.348 In contrast to that study, remarkable results in adjuvant 
therapy have been reported by the Virginia Mason Clinic with 
combination 5-FU, cisplatinum, interferon-α, and external 
beam radiation. Although the toxicity is high (42% hospitalized 
for GI toxicity), the promising results prompted larger confir-
matory studies. Unfortunately, one such study was stopped 
due to toxicity and this protocol has not been widely adopted. 
Results with FOLFIRINOX in the setting of metastatic disease 
have encouraged some oncologists, despite a lack of data, to 
offer this aggressive treatment in the adjuvant or neoadjuvant 
setting. Nevertheless, pending further study, it is typical in the 
United States for patients with acceptable functional status to 
receive some form of adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
after surgery.
Neoadjuvant Treatment.  There are several potential advan-
tages to the use of chemoradiation before an attempt at sur-
gical resection. For example, it avoids the risk that adjuvant 
treatment is delayed by complications of surgery. Neoadjuvant 
treatment also may decrease the tumor burden at operation, 
increasing the rate of resectability and killing some tumor cells 
before they can be spread intraoperatively. Another potential 
advantage is that it allows patients with occult metastatic dis-
ease to avoid the morbidity of pancreatic resection. As many 
as 20% of patients treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiation 
develop metastatic disease detected by restaging CT and do 
not go on to surgery. This approach may separate patients into 
a subset likely to benefit from resection and a subset in whom 
surgery would be unlikely to provide clinical benefit. Preopera-
tive chemoradiation has been shown not to increase the periop-
erative morbidity or mortality of pancreaticoduodenectomy. It 
may even decrease the incidence of pancreatic fistula. Prospec-
tive randomized trials investigating this concept are ongoing 
but are difficult to complete due to the high number of patients 
who fail to complete or receive a full course of either therapy. 
Recent studies have shown that neoadjuvant therapy is associ-
ated with a lower rate of lymph node positivity and improved 
overall survival and should be considered an acceptable alter-
native to surgery followed by adjuvant therapy for resectable 
pancreatic cancer. Patients should be encouraged to consider 
available clinical trials of neoadjuvant therapy for resectable 
pancreatic cancer. 349
Postoperative Surveillance.  Recurrence after successful 
resection usually manifests as hepatic metastases. After adju-
vant chemoradiation with 5-FU and external beam radiation, 
gemcitabine is usually administered on a weekly basis for 6 
1408
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
months. During this time period, patients are monitored with 
frequent physical examinations and laboratory tests, including 
CA19-9. CT scans are typically ordered every 3 months in the 
first two years after resection or when a rising CA19-9 or new 
symptoms suggest recurrence. Surgical therapy for recurrent 
disease is usually reserved for patients who remain reasonable 
operative candidates who develop symptomatic gastric outlet or 
bowel obstruction.
Future Therapy.  The most needed advance in pancreatic 
cancer therapy is the ability to diagnose the disease at earlier 
stages. Recent developments in genomics and proteomics using 
high-throughput sequencing techniques and global expression 
methodologies may make this possible. Gene therapy is also 
under investigation using different strategies, including immu-
notherapeutic gene therapy, replacement of tumor suppressor 
gene function, inactivation of oncogenes, and suicide gene 
therapy.350 With immunotherapeutic gene therapy, the goal is to 
assist the immune system in recognizing the cancer cells. Cancer 
cells have been forced to express tumor-specific antigens and 
cytokines that activate the immune system and that may have 
antitumor effects. Because pancreatic cancer is a disease with 
multiple genetic aberrations, inactivated tumor suppressor genes 
have been replaced, and mutated oncogenes have been inacti-
vated with gene therapy. In suicide gene therapy, a transgene is 
introduced that converts an inactive nontoxic drug into an active 
cytotoxic agent. The herpes simplex virus-thymidine kinase sys-
tem has been the most extensively studied.350 Various delivery 
systems, including viral vectors, liposomes, and protein-­
conjugated DNA, exist. With each of these strategies and deliv-
ery systems, tumor cell–specific delivery would be extremely 
desirable but awaits the discovery of effective tumor-specific 
promoters. Cancer vaccines and immunotherapy are intriguing 
because immunotherapy has the potential to specifically target 
tumor cells and limit toxicities compared to chemotherapy. 
With recent sequencing of the pancreatic cancer genome, more 
candidate immune targets will be identified to serve as immu-
nogens and insights into overcoming the immunosuppressive 
tumor microenvironment could possibly follow. Clinical trials 
for pancreatic cancer are ongoing and offer hope for more mean-
ingful treatment.
Ampullary and Periampullary Cancer.  Ampullary can-
cers need to be distinguished from periampullary cancers. The 
ampulla is the junction of the biliary and pancreatic ducts within 
the duodenum. Periampullary cancer includes tumors arising 
from the distal bile duct, duodenal mucosa, or pancreas just 
adjacent to the ampulla, and the ampulla can be overgrown by 
cancers that arise from these adjacent areas, making it impos-
sible to determine the true site of origin. Clinically, the term 
periampullary cancer is, therefore, a nonspecific term used to 
refer to a variety of tumors arising at the intersection of these 
four sites. The term ampullary cancer is more specific and is 
reserved for tumors that arise at the ampulla. Based on their 
location, ampullary cancers are usually detected relatively early 
due to the appearance of jaundice and have a more favorable 
prognosis. The ampulla of Vater is lined by an epithelial layer 
that transitions from pancreatic and biliary ductal epithelium 
to duodenal mucosal epithelium. Ampullary adenocarcinomas 
can therefore have an intestinal and/or pancreaticobiliary his-
tologic morphology, with the former having a better progno-
sis. Patients with ampullary cancer have a 10-year survival of 
about 35%, which is a much better prognosis than patients with 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The difference in survival is not 
entirely explained by an earlier presentation and lower inci-
dence of lymph node metastases. There are probably biologic, 
particularly molecular, differences between ampullary and pan-
creatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Intestinal type ampul-
lary cancers have a lower incidence of EGFr and mutant p53 
overexpression, and fewer activating K-ras mutations. These 
tumors are more likely to have genetic changes similar to colon 
cancer such as microsatellite instability and adenomatous pol-
yposis coli mutations.
Management of Periampullary Adenomas.  Benign tumors 
such as ampullary adenomas can also originate at the ampulla. 
The accuracy of endoscopic biopsy in distinguishing ampullary 
cancer from benign adenoma is poor with false-negative rates 
from 25% to 56% even if sphincterotomy precedes the biopsy. 
However, benign villous adenomas of the ampullary region can 
be excised locally. This technique is applicable only for small 
tumors (approximately 2 cm or less) with no evidence of malig-
nancy upon biopsy. EUS may help to accurately determine if 
there is invasion into the duodenal wall. In the absence of inva-
sion, adenomas may be amenable to an endoscopic or trans-
duodenal excision. A longitudinal duodenotomy is made and 
the tumor is excised with a 2- to 3-mm margin of normal duo-
denal mucosa. In some centers, small periampullary adenomas 
can also be removed endoscopically. A preoperative diagnosis 
of cancer is a contraindication to transduodenal excision, and 
pancreaticoduodenectomy should be performed. Likewise, if 
final pathologic examination of a locally excised tumor reveals 
invasive cancer, the patient should be returned to the operat-
ing room for a pancreaticoduodenectomy. An important subset 
of patients are those with FAP, who develop periampullary or 
duodenal adenomas. These lesions have a high incidence of 
harboring carcinoma, and frequently recur unless the mucosa 
at risk is resected. A standard (not pylorus-sparing) Whipple 
is the procedure of choice in FAP patients with periampullary 
lesions.
Cystic Neoplasms of the Pancreas.  A cystic neoplasm needs 
to be considered when a patient presents with a fluid-containing 
pancreatic lesion (Fig. 33-74). Cystic neoplasms of the pancreas 
may be more frequent than previously recognized and are being 
identified with increasing frequency as the use of abdominal 
Figure 33-74.  Mucinous cystic neoplasm in tail of pancreas.
1409
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
CT scanning has increased. Most of these lesions are benign or 
slow growing, and the prognosis is significantly better than with 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. However, some of these neoplasms 
slowly undergo malignant transformation and thus represent an 
opportunity for surgical cure, which is ­exceedingly uncommon 
in the setting of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The dilemma for 
the surgeon is an accurate assessment of the risk-benefit ratio 
of resection vs. observation of these lesions in individual 
patients. Radiologic features including the size of the lesion 
and its growth rate, the density of the lesion, characteristics 
of the wall such as nodules, septations, or calcifications, and 
the relationship between the lesion and the pancreatic duct 
can help categorize these lesions. Although a thorough history 
and radiographic findings often suggest a particular diagnosis, 
EUS-guided FNA and analysis of cyst fluid or ERCP provide 
useful additional information to guide clinical decision mak-
ing. Cysts that contain thick fluid with mucin, elevated carci-
noembryonic antigen (CEA), or atypical cells must be treated 
as potentially malignant351 (Fig. 33-75).
Pseudocysts.  The most common cystic lesion of the pancreas 
is the pseudocyst, which, of course, has no epithelial lining 
and is a nonneoplastic complication of pancreatitis or pancre-
atic duct injury. As discussed in “Complications of Chronic 
­Pancreatitis,” the diagnosis is usually straightforward from the 
clinical history. Although not usually necessary, analysis of 
pseudocyst fluid would reveal a high amylase content. The dan-
ger comes in mistaking a cystic pancreatic neoplasm for a pseu-
docyst and incorrectly draining a cystic neoplasm into the GI 
tract rather than resecting the neoplasm. For this reason, biopsy 
of the pseudocyst wall is a common step in the management of 
pancreatic pseudocysts.
Cystadenoma.  Serous cystadenomas are essentially con-
sidered benign tumors without malignant potential. Serous 
cystadenocarcinoma has been reported very rarely (<1%). 
Therefore, malignant potential should not be used as an argu-
ment for surgical resection, and the majority of these lesions 
can be safely observed in the absence of symptoms due to mass 
effect or rapid growth. The average rate of growth is about 
0.45 cm/year. About 50% of cystadenomas are asymptom-
atic and detected as an incidental finding. Most symptomatic 
patients have mild upper abdominal pain, epigastric fullness, or 
Detailed clinical Hx and
pancreas protocol CT
Asymptomatic
MCN/IPMN < 3 cm,
serous cystadenoma,
branch duct IPMN
Symptomatic, or
MCN/IPMN > 3 cm
Resect
Further evaluation
Repeat CT
in 1 year
Repeat CT
q 6–12 months∗
< 1 cm
< 1 cm
≤ 2 cm
1–3 cm
∗ ↑interval if stable × 2 years
No
Yes
Repeat CT
q 3–6 months∗
Resect
2–3 cm
EUS-FNA
MRCP/ERCP
 • Mucin present
 • CEA > 200 ng/mL
 • Atypical cells present
 • Solid component
 • Dilated main pancreatic duct
Figure 33-75.  Algorithm for management of pancreatic cystic neoplasms. CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen; CT = computed tomogra-
phy; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS = endoscopic ultrasound; FNA = fine-needle aspiration; Hx = his-
tory; IPMN = intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas; MCN = mucinous cystic neoplasm; MRCP = magnetic resonance 
­cholangiopancreatography.
1410
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
moderate weight loss. Occasionally, cystadenomas can grow to 
a size capable of producing jaundice or GI obstruction due to 
mass effect (Fig. 33-76). For symptomatic patients with serous 
cystadenoma, surgical resection is indicated. For lesions in the 
tail, splenectomy is not necessary, given the benign nature of 
the tumor. In appropriate candidates, a laparoscopic approach 
to distal pancreatectomy can be considered.352 These cysts are 
frequently found in older women in which pancreatic resec-
tion for a benign neoplasm should be avoided in the absence of 
significant symptoms. All regions of the pancreas are affected, 
with half in the head/uncinate process, and half in the neck, 
body, or tail of the pancreas. They have a spongy appearance, 
and multiple small cysts (microcystic) are more common than 
larger cysts (macrocystic or oligocystic). These lesions contain 
thin serous fluid that does not stain positive for mucin and is low 
in CEA (<200 ng/mL). Typical imaging characteristics include a 
well-circumscribed cystic mass, small septations, fluid close to 
water density, and sometimes, a central scar with calcification. 
If a conservative management is adopted, it is important to be 
sure of the diagnosis. EUS-FNA should yield nonviscous fluid 
with low CEA and amylase levels, and if cells are obtained, 
which is rare, they are cuboidal and have a clear cytoplasm.
Mucinous Cystadenoma and Cystadenocarcinoma.  Muci-
nous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) encompass a spectrum rang-
ing from benign but potentially malignant to carcinoma with a 
very aggressive behavior (Table 33-23). There is often hetero-
geneity within the lesions with benign and malignant-appear-
ing regions, making it impossible to exclude malignancy with 
biopsy. MCNs are commonly seen in perimenopausal women, 
and about two-thirds are located in the body or tail of the pan-
creas. Like cystadenomas, most MCNs are now incidental 
findings identified during imaging performed for other rea-
sons. When symptoms are present, they are usually nonspe-
cific and include upper abdominal discomfort or pain, early 
satiety, and weight loss. On imaging studies, the cysts have 
thick walls and do not communicate with the main pancreatic 
duct (see Fig. 33-74). There may be nodules or calcifications 
within the wall of the cyst. The cysts are lined by tall columnar 
epithelium that fills the cyst with viscous mucin. The submu-
cosal layer consists of a highly cellular stroma of spindle cells 
with elongated nuclei similar to the “ovarian stroma,” which is 
a key pathologic feature distinguishing these lesions. Elevated 
CEA levels in the fluid (>200 ng/mL) may suggest malig-
nant transformation. Solid areas may contain atypical cells 
or invasive cancer, and extensive sampling of the specimen 
is necessary to accurately predict prognosis. Resection is the 
treatment of choice for most mucin-producing cystic tumors. 
Malignancy cannot be ruled out without removal and extensive 
sampling of the tumor. Malignancy has been reported in 6% 
to 36% of MCNs. Current thinking is that all of these tumors 
will eventually evolve into cancer if left untreated. Malignant 
transformation is more common with larger tumors, and older 
Figure 33-76.  Computed tomography appearance of massive mul-
tiseptated serous cystadenoma in head of pancreas with central stel-
late scar (left) and resected specimen (right).
Table 33-23. 
World Health Organization classification of primary tu-
mors of the exocrine pancreas
A. Benign
	
 1.  Serous cystadenoma (16%)
	
 2.  Mucinous cystadenoma (45%)
	
3.  Intraductal papillary-mucinous adenoma (32%)
	
4.  Mature cystic teratoma
B. Borderline
	
1.  Mucinous cystic tumor with moderate dysplasia
	
2.  Intraductal papillary mucinous tumor with moderate 
dysplasia
	
3.  Solid pseudopapillary tumor
C. Malignant
	
1.  Ductal adenocarcinoma
	
2.  Serous/mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (29%)
	
3.  Intraductal mucinous papillary tumor
1411
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
patients, and there appears to be a stepwise accumulation of 
mutations (K-ras, p53). Because most MCNs are located in 
the body and tail of the pancreas, distal pancreatectomy is the 
most common treatment. For small lesions, it may be appro-
priate to preserve the spleen but splenectomy ensures removal 
of the lymph node basin that can potentially be involved. It 
is very important not to rupture the cyst during resection and 
the tumor should be removed intact, not morselized. There-
fore, a laparoscopic approach may not be appropriate for larger 
lesions. Completely resected MCNs without atypia are usually 
cured especially if small (<3 cm). Even patients with moderate 
dysplasia or carcinoma in situ are usually cured by complete 
resection. In the presence of invasive carcinoma, mucinous 
cystadenocarcinoma, the prognosis is dismal, similar to typical 
ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm.  Intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) usually occur within 
the head of the pancreas and arise within the pancreatic ducts. 
The ductal epithelium forms a papillary projection into the 
duct, and mucin production causes intraluminal cystic 
dilation of the pancreatic ducts. (Fig. 33-77). Imaging 
studies demonstrate diffuse dilation of the pancreatic duct, 
and the pancreatic parenchyma is often atrophic due to chronic 
duct obstruction. However, classic features of chronic pan-
creatitis, such as calcification and a beaded appearance of the 
duct, are not present. At ERCP, mucin can be seen extruding 
from the ampulla of Vater, a so-called fish-eye lesion that is 
virtually diagnostic of IPMN (Fig. 33-78). Initial reports sug-
gested a male predominance, but more recent series indicate 
an equal distribution. Patients are usually in their seventh to 
eighth decade of life and present with abdominal pain or 
recurrent pancreatitis, thought to be caused by obstruction of 
the pancreatic duct by thick mucin. Some patients (5%–10%) 
have steatorrhea, diabetes, and weight loss secondary to 
­pancreatic insufficiency. Some IPMNs primarily involve the 
main pancreatic duct, while others involve the branch ducts 
(Fig. 33-79). Malignant transformation is found in main duct 
IPMNs in 57% to 92% of cases and all main duct IPMNs should 
Figure 33-77.  Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm histology. 
Papillary projections of ductal epithelium resemble villous morphol-
ogy and contain mucin-filled vesicles. (From Asiyanbola B, Andersen 
DK: IPMN. Editorial Update. Access Surgery, McGraw-Hill, 2008, 
with permission. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
be resected in fit surgical candidates. Branch-duct type IPMNs 
are often found in the uncinate process, are sometimes asymp-
tomatic, and are less frequently associated with malignant trans-
formation (6%–46%). Asymptomatic branch-duct IPMNs less 
than 1 cm can be observed with annual imaging.353 Lesions 1 to 
2 cm should be evaluated with EUS-FNA to rule out high-risk 
features such as mural nodules, a dilated main duct, positive 
cytology or cyst fluid CEA >200. In the absence of these fea-
tures, continued observation with serial imaging (1–2 cm; every 
6–12 months/2-3 cm; every 3–6 months) is appropriate. Branch-
duct IPMNs >3cm should be resected353.
The surgical management of IPMNs is complicated by 
the fact that the lesion itself is small and preoperative imaging 
studies show a dilated pancreatic duct but not necessarily the 
mass. Mucus can dilate the duct proximal and distal to the lesion. 
Furthermore, these lesions can spread microscopically along the 
duct, and there can be skip areas of normal duct between the 
diseased portions. Therefore, thorough preoperative imaging 
including EUS, MRCP, or ERCP, and sometimes pancreatic 
ductoscopy, which can also be repeated intraoperatively, is use-
ful (see Fig. 33-78). The surgeon needs to be prepared to extend 
the resection, if necessary, based on intraoperative findings and 
frozen section of the margin. Extending the resection to the point 
of total pancreatectomy is controversial due to the morbidity of 
this operation. Like MCNs, the IPMNs require careful histologic 
examination of the entire specimen for an invasive cancer, which 
if carefully sought, is found in 35% to 40% of cases.
Survival of patients with IPMN, even when malignant and 
invasive, can be quite good. As with MCN, patients with bor-
derline tumors or carcinoma in situ are usually cured. In IPMN 
associated with invasive carcinoma, the 5- and 10-year survival 
is 60% and 50%, which is much better than typical pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma.356
For this reason, if recurrence occurs in the remaining pan-
creas, further resection is warranted because several series have 
shown that some of these cases are salvageable. Patients with 
IPMN are also at risk for other malignancies and should undergo 
colonoscopy and close surveillance.
Solid-Pseudopapillary Tumor.  Solid-pseudopapillary tumors 
are rare and typically occur in young women. Previous names 
for this entity include, solid and cystic, solid and papillary, 
cystic and papillary, and papillary-cystic tumor. They are typi-
cally well circumscribed on CT (Fig. 33-80). The cysts are not 
true epithelial-lined cysts but rather represent a necrotic/degen-
erative process. Histology may be similar to neuroendocrine 
tumors, but they do not stain positive for neuroendocrine mark-
ers such as chromogranin. Most are cured by resection but liver 
and peritoneal metastasis has been reported.
Other Cystic Neoplasms.  Rarely, typical ductal adenocarci-
noma of the pancreas may undergo cystic degeneration due to 
central necrosis. Occasionally, this will create difficulty in the 
proper preoperative diagnosis and should be kept in mind when 
deciding to conservatively follow a cystic pancreatic neoplasm. 
It is more common, 5% to 10%, for neuroendocrine tumors of 
the pancreas to contain cysts. These cysts are filled with sero-
sanguineous fluid rather than necrotic debris. Lymphoepithe-
lial cysts of the pancreas usually occur in men in their fifth to 
sixth decade. These benign lesions may be unilocular or mul-
tilocular and vary widely in size. The contents of the cyst are 
also variable and may be thin serous fluid or cheesy/caseous 
8
1412
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 33-78.  Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). A. Examples of “fish-eye deformity” of IPMN. Mucin is seen extruding 
from the ampulla. B. Mucin coming from pancreatic duct when neck of pancreas is transected during Whipple procedure (left). Intraoperative 
pancreatic ductoscopy to assess the pancreatic tail (right).C. Views of pancreatic duct during ductoscopy; normal (left) and IPMN (right).
1413
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
material if there is increased keratin formation. A substantial 
number of patients with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome develop 
pancreatic cysts that resemble serous cystadenomas. There may 
be multiple lesions scattered throughout the pancreas. Patients 
with polycystic kidney and hepatic disease may also develop 
benign pancreatic cysts (cystadenomas). With all of these rare 
cystic neoplasms, careful clinical history, high-quality pancre-
atic imaging, and sampling of the cyst fluid for analysis will 
guide proper treatment.
Pancreatic Lymphoma.  Lymphoma can affect the pancreas. 
Primary involvement of the pancreas with no disease outside the 
pancreas also occurs. The clinical presentation often is similar 
to pancreatic adenocarcinoma, with vague abdominal pain and 
weight loss. Identification of a large mass often involving the 
head and body of the pancreas should raise suspicion. Percuta-
neous or EUS-guided biopsy will confirm the diagnosis in most 
cases. If the diagnosis cannot be confirmed preoperatively, lapa-
roscopic exploration and biopsy are indicated.354 There is no role 
for resection in the management of pancreatic lymphoma. Endo-
scopic stenting to relieve jaundice followed by chemotherapy is 
the standard treatment, and long-term remission is often achieved.
Figure 33-80.  Abdominal computed tomographic scan of a 25-year-old woman demonstrating a well-circumscribed cystic lesion with 
septation in body/tail of pancreas. At surgery, the tumor was adherent to the splenic artery. Pathologic diagnosis was solid-pseudopapillary 
carcinoma.
Figure 33-79.  Operative specimen of pancreas with multifocal 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (black arrow) and a focus 
of invasive adenocarcinoma (white arrow). (From Asiyanbola B, 
Andersen DK: IPMN. Editorial Update. Access Surgery, McGraw-
Hill, 2008, with permission. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc.)
1414
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Silen W. Surgical anatomy of the pancreas. Surg Clin North 
Am.1964;44:1253.
2.	Havel PJ, Taborsky GJ Jr. The contribution of the autonomic 
nervous system to changes of glucagon and insulin secretion 
during hypoglycemic stress. Endocr Rev.1989;10:332-350.
3.	Davenport HW: Pancreatic secretion. In Davenport HN, ed: 
Physiology of the Digestive Tract, 5th ed. Chicago: Year Book 
Medical Publishers; 1982:143.
4.	Valenzuela JE, Weiner K, Saad C. Cholinergic stimulation of 
human pancreatic secretion. Dig Dis Sci.1986;31:615-619.
5.	Konturek SJ, Becker HD, Thompson JC. Effect of vagot-
omy on hormones stimulating pancreatic secretion. Arch 
Surg.1974;108:704-708.
6.	Ebert R, Creutzfeldt W. Gastrointestinal peptides and insulin 
secretion. Diabetes Metab Rev. 1987;3:1-26.
7.	Leahy JL, Bonner-Weir S, Weir GC. Abnormal glucose regu-
lation of insulin secretion in models of reduced B-cell mass. 
Diabetes.1984; 33:667-673.
8.	Brunicardi FC, Sun YS, Druck P, et al. Splanchnic neural 
regulation of insulin and glucagon secretion in the isolated 
perfused human pancreas. Am J Surg.1987;153:34-40.
9.	Yamada Y, Post SR, Wang K, et al. Cloning and functional 
characterization of a family of human and mouse somatostatin 
receptors expressed in brain, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.1992;89:251-255.
10.	Voss M, Pappas T. Pancreatic fistula. Curr Treat Options Gas-
troenterol. 2002;5:345-353.
11.	Floyd JC Jr, Fajans SS, Pek S. Regulation in healthy subjects 
of the secretion of human pancreatic polypeptide, a newly rec-
ognized pancreatic islet polypeptide. Trans Assoc Am Physi-
cians.1976;89:146-158.
12.	Adrian TE, Bloom SR, Besterman HS, et al. Mechanism of 
pancreatic polypeptide release in man. Lancet.1977;1:161-163.
13.	Kono T, XP Wang, WE Fisher, DK Andersen, FC Brunicardi. 
Pancreatic Polypeptide (PP). In: L Martini, ed., Encyclopedia of 
Endocrine Diseases Volume 3, Elsevier. 2004; 488-496.
14.	Andersen DK. Mechanisms and emerging treatments of the 
metabolic complications of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 
2007;35: 1-5.
15.	Wierup N, Svensson H, Mulder H, Sundler F. The ghrelin cell: 
anovel developmentally regulated islet cell in the human pan-
creas. Regul Pept. 2002;107:63-69.
16.	Prado CL, Pugh-Bernard AE, Elghazi L, Sosa-Pineda B, 
Sussel L. Ghrelin cells replace insulin-producing beta cells in 
two mouse models of pancreas development. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2004;101:2924-2429.
17.	Sun Y, Asnicar M, Saha PK, Chan L,Smith RG. Ablation 
of ghrelin improves the diabetic but not obese phenotype of 
ob/ob mice. Cell Metab. 2006;3:379-386.
18.	Westermark P, Wilander E, Westermark GT, et al. Islet amy-
loid polypeptide-like-immunoreactivity in the islet b-cells of 
type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic and non-diabetic indi-
viduals. Diabetologia. 1987;30:887-892.
19.	Tatemoto K, Efendic S, Mutt V,Makk G, Feistner GJ, Barchas 
JD. Pancreastatin, a novel pancreatic peptide that inhibits insu-
lin secretion. Nature. 1986;324:476-478.
20.	Efendic S, Tatemoto K, Mutt V, Quan C, Chang D, Ostenson 
CG. Pancreastatin and islet hormone release. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1987:84:7257-7260.
21.	Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Nakamura R, Kitani K, Tatemoto 
K. Inhibitory effect of pancreastatin on pancreatic exocrine 
secretion in the conscious rat. Reg Peptides. 1989;25:157-166.
22.	Gorelick FS, Jamieson JD. Structure-function relationship of 
the pancreas. In: Johnson LR, ed: Physiology of the Gastroin-
testinal Tract. New York: Raven Press; 1981:773.
23.	Kennedy FP. Pathophysiology of pancreatic polypeptide 
secretion in human diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 
1990;2:155.
24.	Petrov MS, Shanbhag S, Chakraborty M, Phillips AR, 
Windsor JA. Organ failure and infection of pancreatic 
necrosis as determinants of mortality in patients with acute 
pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2010;139: 813-820.
25.	Peery AF, Dellon ES, Lund J, et al. Burden of gastrointestinal 
disease in the United States: 2012 update. Gastroenterology. 
2012;143(5): 1179-1187.
26.	Banks PA. Epidemiology, natural history, and predictors of 
disease outcome in acute and chronic pancreatitis. Gastroin-
tesinal Endoscopy. 2002;56(6 Suppl):S226-S230.
27.	Akhtar AJ, Shaheen M. Extrapancreatic manifestations of 
acute pancreatitis in African-American and Hispanic patients. 
Pancreas. 2004; 29(4): 291-297.
28.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P. Acute pancreatitis: is smok-
ing a risk factor for acute pancreatitis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2011; 8(11): 603-604.
29.	Acosta JM, Ledesma CL. Gallstone migration as a cause of 
acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1974;290:484-487.
30.	Lee SP, Nicholls JF, Park HZ. Biliary sludge as a cause of 
acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1992; 326(9): 589-593.
31.	 Elmunzer BJ,Schelman JM, Lehman GA, et al. A random-
ized trial of rectal indomethacin to prevent post-ERCP 
pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:1414-1422.
32.	Whitcomb DC. Genetics of alcoholic and nonalcoholic 
pancreatitis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012;28(5): 
501-506.
33.	Muniraj TT, Aslanian HR. Hypertriglyceridemia independent 
propofol-induced pancreatitis. J Pancreas. 2012;13: 451-453.
34.	Saluja A, Steer M. Pathophysiology of pancreatitis. Role of 
cytokines and other mediators of inflammation. Digestion. 
1999;60:27-33.
35.	Hofbauer B, Saluja AK, Lerch MM, et al. Intra-acinar cell acti-
vation of trypsinogen during caerulein-induced pancreatitis in 
rats. Am J Physiol. 1998;275(2 Pt 1): G352-G362.
36.	Saluja AK, Lerch MM, Phillips PA, Dudeja V. Why does pan-
creatic overstimulation cause pancreatitis? Annu Rev Physiol. 
2007;69: 249-269.
37.	Dawra R, Sah RP, Dudeja V, et al. Intra-acinar trypsinogen 
activation mediates early stages of pancreatic injury but not 
inflammation in mice with acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 
2011;141(6): 2210-2217 e2212.
38.	Gaiser S, Daniluk J, Liu Y, et al. Intracellular activation of 
trypsinogen in transgenic mice induces acute but not chronic 
pancreatitis. Gut. 2011;60(10): 1379-1388.
39.	Whitcomb DC, Gorry MC, Preston RA, et al. Hereditary pan-
creatitis is caused by a mutation in the cationic trypsinogen 
gene. Nat Genet. 1996;14(2): 141-145.
40.	Kloppel G, Dreyer T, Willemer S, et al. Human acute pancre-
atitis: its pathogenesis in the light of immunocytochemical and 
ultrastructural findings in acinar cells. Virchows Arch A Pathol 
Anat Histopathol. 1986;409(6): 791-803.
41.	Saluja A, Saluja M, Villa A, et al. Pancreatic duct obstruction 
in rabbits causes digestive zymogen and lysosomal enzyme 
colocalization. J Clin Invest. 1989;84(4): 1260-1266.
42.	Saluja AK, Saluja M, Printz H, Zavertnik A, Sengupta A, Steer 
ML. Experimental pancreatitis is mediated by low-affinity 
cholecystokinin receptors that inhibit digestive enzyme secre-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1989;86(22): 8968-8971.
43.	Saluja A, Hashimoto S, Saluja M, et al. Subcellular redistribu-
tion of lysosomal enzymes during caerulein-induced pancre-
atitis. Am J Physiol. 1987;253(4 Pt 1): G508-G516.
44.	Van Acker GJ, Saluja AK, Bhagat L, et al. Cathepsin B 
inhibition prevents trypsinogen activation and reduces pan-
creatitis severity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 
2002;283(3): G794-G800.
1415
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
45.	Halangk W, Lerch MM, Brandt-Nedelev B, et al. Role 
of cathepsin B in intracellular trypsinogen activation and 
the onset of acute pancreatitis. J Clin Invest. 2000;106(6): 
773-781.
46.	Saluja AK, Bhagat L, Lee HS, et al. Secretagogue-induced 
digestive enzyme activation and cell injury in rat pancreatic 
acini. Am J Physiol. 1999;276(4 Pt 1): G835-G842.
47.	Fluhr G, Mayerle J, Weber E, et al. Pre-study protocol Mag-
PEP: amulticentre randomized controlled trial of magnesium 
sulphate in the prevention of post-ERCP pancreatitis. BMC 
Gastroenterol. 2013;13(1): 11.
48.	Dudeja V, Phillips P, Mujumdar N, et al: Heat shock pro-
tein 70 inhibits apoptosis in cancer cells by two simultane-
ous but independent mechanisms. Gastroenterology. 2009; 
136: 1772-1782.
49.	 Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al. Classification of 
acute pancreatitis – 2012: revision of the Atlanta classification 
and definitions by international consensus. Gut. 2013; 62(1): 
102-111.
50.	Windsor JA, Petrov MS. Acute pancreatitis reclassified. Com-
mentary. Gut. 2013; 62(1): 4-5.
51.	Hietaranta AJ, Singh VP, Bhagat L, et al. Water immersion 
stress prevents caerulein-induced pancreatic acinar cell nf-kappa 
b activation by attenuating caerulein-induced intracellular Ca2+ 
changes. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(22): 18742-18747.
52.	Fanous MYZ, Phillips AJP, Windsor JA. Mesenteric lymph: 
the bridge to future management of critical illness. J Pancreas. 
2007; 8(4): 374-399.
53.	Working Party of British Society of Gastroenterology, Associa-
tion of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland, Pancreatic Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland, Association of Upper GI Surgeons 
of Great Britain and Ireland. UK guidelines for the management 
of acute pancreatitis. Gut. 2005; 54 Suppl 3: iii1-iii9.
54.	Whitcomb DC. Acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2006; 
354:2142-2150.
55.	Papachristou GI, Muddana V, Yadav D, et al. The bedside 
index for severity of acute pancreatitis (BISAP). Am J Gastro-
enterol. 2010; 105(2): 435-441.
56.	Mofidi R, Duff MD, Wigmore SJ, et al. Association between 
early systemic inflammatory response, severity of multiorgan 
dysfunction and death in acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2006; 
93: 738-744.
57.	Chen SM, Xiong GS, Wu SM. Is obesity an indicator of com-
plications and mortality in acute pancreatitis? An updated 
meta-analysis. J Dig Dis. 2012; 13: 244-251.
58.	Lankisch PG, Weber-Dany B, Hebel K, et al. The harmless 
acute pancreatitis score: a clinical algorithm for rapid initial 
stratification of non-severe disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepa-
tol. 2009; 7: 702-705.
59.	Windsor JA. Assessment of the severity of acute pancreatitis: 
no room for complacency. Pancreatol. 2008; 8(2): 105-109.
60.	Dellinger EP, Forsmark CE, Layer P, et al. Determinants-
based classification of acute pancreatitis severity: an interna-
tional multidisciplinary consultation. Ann Surg. 2012; 256: 
875-880.
61.	Petrov MS, Windsor JA. Classification of the severity of 
acute pancreatitis: how many categories make sense? Am J 
Gastroenterol. 2010;105 (1):74-77.
62.	Gardner TB, Vege, SS, Pearson RK, Chari ST. Fluid resuscita-
tion in acute pancreatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 6: 
1070-1076.
63.	Haydock M, Mittal A, Petrov M, Windsor JA. Fluid therapy 
in acute pancreatitis—anybody’s guess. Ann Surg. 2012; doi: 
10.1097/SLA.0b013e31827773ff.
64.	Wu BU, Hwang JQ, Gardner TH, et al. Lactated Ringer’s 
solution reduces systemic inflammation compared with 
saline in patients with acute pancreatitis. Clin Gastroen-
terol Hepatol. 2011;9: 710-717.
65.	Al-Omran M, Albalawi ZH, Tashkandi MF, Al-Ansary 
LA. Enteral versus parenteral nutrition for acute pancreati-
tis. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews 2010; 20(1): 
CD002837. doi: 10.1002/14651858
66.	Singh N, Sharma B, Sharma M, et al. Evaluation of early 
enteral feeding through nasogastric and nasojejunal tube 
in severe acute pancreatitis: a noninferiority randomized 
controlled trial. Pancreas. 2012; 41(1): 153-159.
67.	Petrov MS, Loveday BP, Pylypchuk RD, et al. Systematic 
review and meta-analysis of enteral nutrition formulations in 
acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2009;96:1243-1252.
68.	Petrov MS, van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, et al. Early 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography versus con-
servative management in acute biliary pancreatitis without 
cholangitis: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Ann Surg. 
2008;247(2)250-257.
69.	Kraft M, Lerch MM: Gallstone pancreatitis: when is endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography truly necessary? 
Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2003;5:125-132.
70.	Wittau M, Mayer B, Scheele J, et al. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis of antibiotic prophylaxis in severe acute pan-
creatitis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2011; 46(3): 261-270.
71.	Windsor JA. Infected pancreatic necrosis: drain first, but do it 
better. HPB (Oxford). 2011; 13(6): 367-368.
72.	Van Baal MC, van Santvoort HC, Bollen TL, et al. Systematic 
review of percutaneous catheter drainage as primary treatment 
for necrotizing pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2011; 98(1): 18-27.
73.	Freeman M, Werner J, van Santvoort HC, et al. Interven-
tions for necrotizing pancreatitis: summary of a multidisci-
plinary consensus conference. Pancreas. 2012;41:1176-1194.
74.	Loveday BP, Petrov MS, Connor S, et al. A comprehensive 
classification of invasive procedures for treating the local 
complications of acute pancreatitis based on visualization, 
route, and purpose. Pancreatol. 2011; 11(4): 406-413.
75.	Van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. A step-
up approach or open necrosectomy for necrotizing pancre-
atitis. N Engl J Med. 2010; 362(16): 1491-1502.
76.	 Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al. Endoscopic 
transgastric versus surgical necrosectomy for infected necrotizing 
pancreatitis: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012; 307: 1053-1061.
77.	Nealon WH, Walser E. Main pancreatic ductal anatomy can 
direct choice of modality for treating pancreatic pseudocysts 
(surgery versus percutaneous drainage). Ann Surg. 2002; 
235(6): 751-758.
78.	Johnson CD, Abu-Hilal M. Persistent organ failure during the 
first week as a marker of fatal outcome in acute pancreatitis. 
Gut. 2004; 53: 1340-1344.
79.	Van Baal MC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. Timing of 
cholecystectomy after mild biliary pancreatitis: a systematic 
review. Ann Surg. 2012; 255(5): 860-866.
80.	Skyhoj J, Olsen T: The incidence and clinical relevance of 
chronic inflammation in the pancreas in autopsy material. Acta 
Pathol Microbiol Scand.1978;86:361-365.
81.	Zdankiewicz PD, Andersen DK. Pancreatitis in the elderly. 
In: Rosenthal R, Katlic M, Zenilman ME, eds: Principles and 
Practice of Geriatric Surgery. New York: Springer-Verlag; 
2001:740.
82.	Worning H. Incidence and prevalence of chronic pancreatitis. 
In: Beger HG, Buchler M, Ditschuneit H, eds. Chronic Pan-
creatitis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1990:8.
83.	 Comfort MW, Steinberg AG. Pedigree of a family with hereditary 
chronic relapsing pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 1952;21:54-63.
84.	Tomsik H, Gress T, Adler G: Hereditary pancreatitis. In: Beger 
HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 
1998:355.
85.	Whitcomb DC, Preston RA, Aston CE, et al. A gene for hered-
itary pancreatitis maps to chromosome 7q35. Gastroenterol-
ogy.1996;110:1975-1980.
1416
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
86.	Le Bodic L, Bignon JD, Raguenes O, et al. The hereditary 
pancreatitis gene maps to long arm of chromosome 7. Hum 
Mol Genet. 1996; 5:549-554.
87.	Whitcomb DC: Hereditary diseases of the pancreas. In: 
Yamada T, Alpers DH, Laine L, et al, eds. Textbook of Gas-
troenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2002:2147.
88.	Masson E, Le Marechal C, Delcenserie R, et al. Hereditary 
pancreatitis caused by a double gain-of-function trypsinogen 
mutation. Hum Genet. 2008;123:521-529.
89.	Witt H, Luck W, Hennies HC, et al. Mutations in the gene 
encoding the serine protease inhibitor, Kazal type 1 are associ-
ated with chronic pancreatitis. Nat Genet. 2000;25:213-216.
90.	Hassan Z, Mohan V, Ali L, et al. SPINK1 is a susceptibility 
gene for fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes in subjects from 
the Indian subcontinent. Am J Hum Genet. 2002;71:964-968.
91.	Schneider A, Suman A, Rossi L, et al. SPINK1/PSTI mutations 
are associated with tropical pancreatitis and type II diabetes 
mellitus in Bangladesh. Gastroenterol. 2002;123:1026-1030.
92.	Chen JM, Mercier B, Audrezet MP, et al. Mutational analy-
sis of the human pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI) 
gene in hereditary and sporadic chronic pancreatitis. J Med 
Genet. 2000;37:67.
93.	Pfutzer RH, Barmada MM, Brunskill AP, et al. SPINK1/
PSTI polymorphisms act as disease modifiers in familial and 
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2000;119: 
615-623.
94.	Cohn JA, Friedman KJ, Noone PG, Knowles MR, Silver-
man LM, Jowell PS. Relation between mutations of the cys-
tic fibrosis gene and idiopathic pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 
1998;339:653-658.
95.	Whitcomb DC, LaRusch J, Krasinskas AM, et al. Com-
mon genetic variants in the CLDN2 and PRSS1-PRSS2 loci 
alter risk for alcohol-related and sporadic pancreatitis. Nat 
Genet. 2012; 44: 1349-1356.
96.	Friedreich N. Disease of the pancreas. In: Ziemssen 
H, ed. Cyclopedia of the Practice of Medicine. New York: 
William Wood; 1878:549.
97.	Worning H. Alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al 
eds. The Pancreas. London:Blackwell Sciences; 1998:672.
98.	Durbec JP, Sarles H. Multicenter survey of the etiology of 
pancreatic diseases. Relationship between the relative risk of 
developing chronic pancreatitis and alcohol, protein, and lipid 
consumption. Digestion. 1978;18:337-350.
99.	Lankisch PG, Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P. What is the 
risk of alcoholic pancreatitis in heavy drinkers? Pancreas. 
2002;25:411-412.
100.	Layer P, Yamamoto H, Kalthoff L, Clain JE, Bakken LJ, 
DiMagno EP. The different courses of early-and late-onset 
idiopathic and alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 
1994;107:1481-1487.
101.	Comfort MW, Gambrill EE, Baggenstoss AH. Chronic 
relapsing pancreatitis. A study of twenty-nine cases without 
associated disease of the biliary or gastro-intestinal tract. Gas-
troenterology.1968;4:760-765.
102.	Ammann RW, Muellhaupt B, Meyenberger C, Heitz 
PU.Alcoholic nonprogressive chronic pancreatitis: prospec-
tive long-term study of a large cohort with alcoholic acute 
pancreatitis (1976-1992). Pancreas. 1994;9:365373.
103.	Kondo T, Hayakawa T, Shibata T, et al. Aberrant pancreas 
is not susceptible to alcoholic pancreatitis. Int J Pancreatol. 
1991;8:245-252.
104.	Apte MV, Wilson JS. Alcohol-induced pancreatic injury. Best 
Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2003; 17: 593-612.
105.	Niebergall-Roth E, Harder H, Singer MV. A review: acute 
and chronic effects of ethanol and alcoholic beverages on the 
pancreatic exocrine secretion in vivo and in vitro. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res. 1998;22:1570-1583.
106.	Lerch MM, Albrecht E, Ruthenburger M, Mayerle J, Halangk 
W, Krüger B. Pathophysiology of alcohol-induced pancreatitis. 
Pancreas. 2003;27:291.
107.	Gorelick FS. Alcohol and zymogen activation in the pancre-
atic acinar cell. Pancreas. 2003;27:305-310.
108.	Sarles H, Bernard JP, Johnson C. Pathogenesis and epidemiol-
ogy of chronic pancreatitis. Annu Rev Med.1989;40:453-468.
109.	Imoto M, DiMagno EP. Cigarette smoking increases the risk 
of pancreatic calcification in late-onset but not early-onset 
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2000;21:115-119.
110.	 Rebours V, Vullierme MP, Hentic O, et al. Smoking and 
the course of recurrent acute and chronic alcoholic pan-
creatitis: adose-dependent relationship. Pancreas. 2012; 41: 
1219-1224.
111.	 Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Whitcomb DC. Risk factors for 
cancer in hereditary pancreatitis. International Hereditary Pan-
creatitis Study Group. Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:565-575.
112.	Goebell H, Steffen C, Baltzer G, et al. Stimulation of pancre-
atic secretion of enzymes by acute hypercalcaemia in man. 
Eur J Clin Invest. 1973;3:98-104.
113.	Bess MA, Edis AJ, van Heerden JA: Hyperparathyroidism 
and pancreatitis. Chance or a causal association? JAMA. 
1980;243:246-247.
114.	Glueck CJ, Lang J, Hamer T, et al: Severe hypertriglyceri-
demia and pancreatitis when estrogen replacement ­therapy 
is given to hypertriglyceridemic women. J Lab Clin Med. 
1994;123:59-64.
115.	Etemad B, Whitcomb DC. Chronic pancreatitis: Diagnosis, 
classification, and new genetic developments. Gastroenterol. 
2001; 120: 682-707.
116.	Singer MV, Chari ST: Classification of chronic pancreatitis. 
In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-
Science; 1998:665.
117.	Othersen HB Jr., Moore FT, Boles ET: Traumatic pancreatitis 
and pseudocyst in childhood. J Trauma. 1968;8:535-546.
118.	 Warshaw AL: Pancreas divisum and pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, 
et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:364.
119.	Delhaye M, Engelholm L, Cremer M: Pancreas divisum: con-
genital anatomic variant or anomaly? Contribution of endo-
scopic retrograde dorsal pancreatography. Gastroenterol. 
1985;89:951-958.
120.	Sugawa C, Walt AJ, Nunez DC, et al: Pancreas divisum: is it 
a normal anatomic variant? Am J Surg.1987;153:62-67.
121.	 Bertin C, Pellitier AL, Vullierme MP, et al. Pancreas divisum 
is not a cause of pancreatitis itself but acts as a partner of 
genetic mutations. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012; 107: 311-317.
122.	Yoshida K, Toki F, Takeuchi T, Watanabe S, Shiratori K, 
Hayashi N. Chronic pancreatitis caused by an autoimmune 
abnormality. Proposal of the concept of autoimmune pancre-
atitis. Dig Dis Sci.1995;40:1561-1568.
123.	Ito T, Nakano I, Koyanagi S, et al. Autoimmune pancre-
atitis as a new clinical entity. Three cases of autoimmune 
pancreatitis with effective steroid therapy. Dig Dis Sci. 1997; 
42:1458-1468.
124.	 Ko SB, Mizuno M, Yatabe Y, et al. Corticosteroids correct 
aberrant CFTR localization in the duct and generate acinar 
cells in auto-immune pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2010; 138: 
1988-1996.
125.	Stathopoulos G, Nourmand AD, Blackstone M, et al. Rap-
idly progressive sclerosing cholangitis following surgical 
treatment of pancreatic pseudotumor. J Clin Gastroenterol. 
1995;21:143-148.
126.	Mohan V, Pitchumoni CS: Tropical chronic pancreatitis. 
In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-­
Science; 1998:688.
127.	Pitchumoni CS, Jain NK, Lowenfels AB, DiMagno EP. 
Chronic cyanide poisoning: unifying concept for alcoholic 
and tropical pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1988;3:220-222.
1417
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
128.	Cohn JA, Bornstein JD, Jowell PS. Cystic fibrosis mutations 
and genetic predisposition to idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. 
Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:621-631.
129.	Layer P, Kalthoff L, Clain JE, et al. Nonalcoholic chronic pan-
creatitis: two diseases? Dig Dis Sci. 1985;30:980.
130.	Ammann RW. Chronic pancreatitis in the elderly. Gastroen-
terol Clin North Am. 1990;19:905-914.
131.	Kloppel G, Maillet B. Pathology of chronic pancreatitis. In: 
Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-­
Science;1998:720.
132.	Nagai H, Ohtsubo K. Pancreatic lithiasis in the aged. Its 
clinicopathology and pathogenesis. Gastroenterol. 1984;86: 
331-338.
133.	Apte MV, Wilson JS. Stellate cell activation in alcoholic 
pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2003;27:316-320.
134.	McCarroll J, Phillips P, Santucci N, et al. Vitamin A induces 
quiescence in culture-activated pancreatic stellate cells—
potential as an antifibrotic agent. Pancreas. 2003;27:396 
(abstr).
135.	Schneider A, Whitcomb DC. Hereditary pancreatitis: a model 
for inflammatory diseases of the pancreas. Best Pract Res Clin 
Gastroenterol. 2002;16:347-363.
136.	Guy O, Robles-Diaz G, Adrich Z, Sahel J, Sarles H. Protein 
content of precipitates present in pancreatic juice of alcoholic 
subjects and patients with chronic calcifying pancreatitis. 
Gastroenterology. 1983;84:102-107.
137.	 Sarles H, Dagorn JC, Giorgi D, Bernard JP. Renaming pancreatic 
stone protein as “lithostathine.” Gastroenterol. 1990;99:900-901.
138.	Watanabe T, Yonekura H, Terazono K, Yamamoto H, 
Okamoto H. Complete nucleotide sequence of human reg gene 
and its expression in normal and tumoral tissues. The reg pro-
tein, pancreatic stone protein, and pancreatic thread protein are 
one and the same product of the gene. J Biol Chem. 1990;265: 
7432-7439.
139.	Giorgi D, Bernard JP, Rouquier S, Iovanna J, Sarles H, 
Dagorn JC. Secretory pancreatic stone protein messenger 
RNA. Nucleotide sequence and expression in chronic calcify-
ing pancreatitis. J Clin Invest.1989;84:100-106.
140.	Goggin P, Johnson P. Pancreatic stones. In: Beger HG, et al, 
eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:711.
141.	Warshaw AL, Simeone J, Schapiro RH, Hedberg SE, 
Mueller PE, Ferrucci JT Jr. Objective evaluation of ampullary 
stenosis with ultrasonography and pancreatic stimulation. Am 
J Surg. 1985;149:65-72.
142.	Freeny P. Radiology. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. 
London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:728.
143.	Catalano MF, Lahoti S, Geenen JE, et al. Prospective evalu-
ation of endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde 
pancreatography, and secretin test in the diagnosis of chronic 
pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc.1998;48:11-17.
144.	Kahl S, Glasbrenner B, Leodolter A, Pross M, Schulz HU, 
Malfertheiner P. EUS in the diagnosis of early chronic 
pancreatitis: a prospective follow-up study. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2002;55:507-511.
145.	Freeman ML, DiSario JA, Nelson DB, et al: Risk factors for 
post-ERCP pancreatitis: a prospective, multicenter study. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:425-434.
146.	Nealon WH, Matin S. Analysis of surgical success in prevent-
ing recurrent acute exacerbations in chronic pancreatitis. Ann 
Surg. 2001;233:793
147.	 Cooper M, Makary MA, Ng Y, et al. Extent of pancreatic 
fibrosis as a determinant of symptom resolution after the 
Frey procedure: A clinico-pathologic analysis. J Gastrointest 
Surg. 2013;17: 682-687.
148.	Ammann RW, Akovbiantz A, Largiader F, et al. Course and 
outcome of chronic pancreatitis. Longitudinal study of a 
mixed medical-surgical series of 245 patients. Gastroenterol. 
1984;86:820-828.
149.	Bockman DE, Buchler M, Malfertheiner P, et al. Analysis 
of nerves in chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 1988;94: 
1459-1469.
150.	Anaparthy R, Pasricha PJ. Pain and chronic pancreatitis: 
is it the plumbing or the wiring? Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 
2008; 10: 101-106.
151.	DiMagno EP, Go VL, Summerskill WH. Relations between 
pancreatic enzyme outputs and malabsorption in severe pan-
creatic insufficiency. N Engl J Med. 1973;288:813-815.
152.	Rothenbacher D, Low M, Hardt PD, et al. Prevalence and 
determinants of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency among 
older adults: results of a population-based study. Scand J 
Gastroenterol. 2005; 40: 697-704.
153.	Dutta SK, Russell RM, Iber FL. Influence of exocrine pancre-
atic insufficiency on the intraluminal pH of the proximal small 
intestine. Dig Dis Sci. 1979;24:529-534.
154.	DiMagno MJ, DiMagno EP. Chronic pancreatitis. Curr 
Opin Gastroenterol. 2012;28: 523-531.
155.	Malka D, Hammel P, Sauvanet A, et al: Risk factors for diabetes 
mellitus in chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2000; 119:1324.
156.	Couet C, Genton P, Pointel JP, et al. The prevalence of reti-
nopathy is similar in diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic 
pancreatitis with or without pancreatectomy and in idiopathic 
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care.1985;8:323-328.
157.	Hardt P, Brendel MD, Kloer HU, Bretzel RG. Is pancreatic 
diabetes (type 3c diabetes) underdiagnosed and misdiag-
nosed? Diabetes Care. 2008; 31 Suppl 2: S165-S169.
158.	Slezak LA, Andersen DK. Pancreatic resection: effects on glu-
cose metabolism. World J Surg. 2001;25:452-460.
159.	Cui Y, Andersen DK. Pancreatogenic diabetes: special con-
siderations for management. Pancreatol. 2011; 11: 279-294.
160.	Seymour NE, Volpert AR, Lee EL, Andersen DK, 
Hernandez C. Alterations in hepatocyte insulin binding in 
chronic pancreatitis: effects of pancreatic polypeptide. Am J 
Surg.1995;169:105-109, discussion 110.
161.	Brunicardi FC, Chaiken RL, Ryan AS, et al. Pancreatic 
polypeptide administration improves abnormal glucose 
metabolism in patients with chronic pancreatitis. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1996;81:3566-3572.
162.	Rabiee A, Galiatsatos P, Salas-Carrillo R, et al. Pancreatic 
polypeptide administration enhances insulin sensitivity 
and reduces the insulin requirement of patients on insulin 
pump therapy. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011; 5: 1521-1528.
163.	Gyr K, Agrawal NM, Felsenfeld O, Font RG. Comparative 
study of secretin and Lundh tests. Am J Dig Dis. 1975;20:506.
164.	Somogyi L, Cintron M, Toskes PP. Synthetic porcine secretin 
is highly accurate in pancreatic function testing in individuals 
with chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2000;21:262-265.
165.	Denyer ME, Cotton PB: Pure pancreatic juice studies in 
normal subjects and patients with chronic pancreatitis. Gut. 
1979;20:89-97.
166.	Tanner AR, Fisher D, Ward C, et al: An evaluation of the one-
day NBT-PABA/14C-PABA in the assessment of pancreatic 
exocrine insufficiency. Digestion. 1984;29:42-46.
167.	Brugge W, Goff JS, Allen N: Development of a dual label 
Schilling test for pancreatic exocrine function based on the 
differential absorption of cobalamin malabsorption in pancre-
atic insufficiency. J Clin Invest.1978;61:47.
168.	Haverback B, Dyce B, Gutentag P. Measurement of trypsin 
and chymotrypsin in stool: a diagnostic test for pancreatic 
exocrine function. Gastroenterology. 1986;44:588.
169.	Gullo L, Ventrucci M, Tomassetti P, Migliori M, Pezzilli R. 
Fecal elastase 1 determination in chronic pancreatitis. Dig Dis 
Sci. 1999;44:210-213.
170.	Hardt PD, Hauenschild A, Nalop J, et al. High prevalence 
of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in diabetes mellitus. A 
multicenter study screening fecal elastase 1 concentrations in 
1,021 diabetic patients. Pancreatol. 2003;3:395-402.
1418
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
171.	DiMagno MJ, DiMagno EP. Chronic pancreatitis. Curr Opin 
Gastroenterol. 2010;26:490-498.
172.	 Axon AT, Classen M, Cotton PB, et al. Pancreatography in 
chronic pancreatitis: international definitions. Gut. 1984;25: 
1107-1112.
173.	Catanzaro A, Richardson S, Veloso H, et al: Long-term fol-
low-up of patients with clinically indeterminate suspicion 
of pancreatic cancer and normal EUS. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2003;58:836-840.
174.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Progno-
sis of chronic pancreatitis: an international multicenter study. 
International Pancreatitis Study Group. Am J Gastroenterol. 
1994;89:1467-1471.
175.	Miyake H, Harada H, Kunichika K, Ochi K, Kimura I. Clini-
cal course and prognosis of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 
1987;2:378-385.
176.	Frey CF, Child CG, Fry W. Pancreatectomy for chronic pan-
creatitis. Ann Surg. 1976;184:403-413.
177.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Pan-
creatitis and the risk of pancreatic cancer. International 
Pancreatitis Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1993:328: 
1433-1437.
178.	 Liao KF, Lai SW, Li CI, Chen WC. Diabetes mellitus cor-
relates with increased risk of pancreatic cancer: a popula-
tion-based cohort study in Taiwan. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2012;27:709-713.
179.	Aspelund G, Topazian MD, Lee JH, Andersen DK. Improved 
outcomes for benign disease with limited pancreatic head 
resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005;9:400-409.
180.	Sankaran S, Walt AJ. The natural and unnatural history of 
pancreatic pseudocysts. Br J Surg. 1975;62:37-44.
181.	Yeo CJ, Bastidas JA, Lynch-Nyhan A, Fishman EK, Zinner 
MJ, Cameron JL. The natural history of pancreatic pseudo-
cysts documented by computed tomography. Surg Gynecol 
Obstet. 1990;170:411.
182.	Goulet RJ, Goodman J, Schaffer R, Dallemand S, Andersen DK. 
Multiple pancreatic pseudocyst disease. Ann Surg. 1984;199: 
6-13.
183.	Vitas GJ, Sarr MG. Selected management of pancreatic pseu-
docysts: operative versus expectant management. Surgery. 
1992;111:123-130.
184.	Warshaw AL, Jin GL, Ottinger LW: Recognition and clini-
cal implications of mesenteric and portal vein obstruction in 
chronic pancreatitis. Arch Surg. 1987;122:410-415.
185.	Warshaw AL, Rattner DW: Timing of surgical drainage for 
pancreatic pseudocyst. Clinical and chemical criteria. Ann 
Surg. 1985;202:720-724.
186.	Baron TH, Harewood GC, Morgan DE, et al. Outcome differ-
ences after endoscopic drainage of pancreatic necrosis, acute 
pancreatic pseudocysts, and chronic pancreatic pseudocysts. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56:7-17.
187.	Kozarek RA, Brayko CM, Harlan J, et al. Endoscopic drain-
age of pancreatic pseudocysts. Gastrointest Endosc. 1985;31: 
322-327.
188.	 Bell RH Jr. Atlas of pancreatic surgery. In: Bell RH Jr, Rikkers 
LF, Mulholland MW, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery. A Text 
and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1996:963.
189.	Park AE, Heniford BT: Therapeutic laparoscopy of the pan-
creas. Ann Surg. 2002;236:149.
190.	Nealon WH, Walser. Duct drainage alone is sufficient in the 
operative management of pancreatic pseudocyst in patients 
with chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2003;237:614-620, 
discussion 620-622.
191.	Hawes RH. Endoscopic management of pseudocysts. Rev 
Gastroenterol Disord. 2003;3:135-141.
192.	Heider R, Meyer AA, Galanko JA, et al: Percutaneous drain-
age of pancreatic pseudocysts is associated with a higher fail-
ure rate than surgical treatment in unselected patients. Ann 
Surg. 1999;229:781-787.
193.	Rao R, Fedorak I, Prinz RA. Effect of failed computed tomog-
raphy-guided and endoscopic drainage on pancreatic pseudo-
cyst management. Surgery. 1993;114:843-847, discussion 
847-849.
194.	Lipsett PA, Cameron JL. Internal pancreatic fistula. Am J 
Surg. 1992;163:216-220.
195.	Uchiyama T, Suzuki T, Adachi A, et al. Pancreatic pleural 
effusion: case report and review of 113 cases in Japan. Am J 
Gastroenterol. 1992;87:387-391.
196.	Lipsett PA, Cameron JL. Treatment of ascites and fistulas. 
In: Beger HG et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-
Science; 1998:788.
197.	Beger H, Schlosser W, Poch B, et al. Inflammatory mass in the 
head of the pancreas. In: Beger HG et al, eds. The Pancreas. 
London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:757.
198.	Friess H, Yamanaka Y, Buchler M, et al. A subgroup of 
patients with chronic pancreatitis overexpress the c-erb B-2 
protooncogene. Ann Surg. 1994;220:183192.
199.	Sakorafas GH, Sarr MG, Farley DR, et al: The significance of 
sinistral portal hypertension complicating chronic pancreatitis. 
Am J Surg. 2000;179:129.
200.	 Amann ST, Toskes PP. Analgesic treatment. In: Beger HG et al, 
eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:766.
201.	Forsmark CE. Management of chronic pancreatitis. Gastroen-
terol. 2013; 144: 1282-1291.
202.	Halgreen H, Pedersen NT, Worning H. Symptomatic effect of 
pancreatic enzyme therapy in patients with chronic pancreatitis. 
Scand J Gastroenterol. 1986;21:104-108.
203.	Hildebrand P, Ensinck JW, Gyr K, et al: Evidence for hor-
monal inhibition of exocrine pancreatic function by soma-
tostatin 28 in humans. Gastroenterol. 1992;103:240-247.
204.	Toskes PP, Forsmark CE, DeMeo MT, et al.A multicenter 
controlled trial of octreotide for pain of chronic pancreatitis. 
Pancreas 8. 1993; A774.
205.	Malfertheiner P, Mayer D, Buchler M, et al. Treatment of pain 
in chronic pancreatitis by inhibition of pancreatic secretion 
with octreotide. Gut. 1995;36:450-454.
206.	Lieb JG, Shuster JJ, Theriaque D, et al. A pilot study of 
octreotide LAR vs. octreotide tid for pain and quality of life 
in chronic pancreatitis. J Pancreas. 2009; 10: 518-522.
207.	Gress F, Schmitt C, Sherman S, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-
guided celiac plexus block for managing abdominal pain asso-
ciated with chronic pancreatitis: a prospective single center 
experience. Am J Gastroenterol. 2001;96:409-416.
208.	Jacob L, Geenen JE, Catalano MF, Geenen DJ. Prevention of 
pancreatitis in patients with idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis: 
aprospective nonblinded randomized study using endoscopic 
stents. Endoscopy. 2001;33:559-552.
209.	 Aizawa T, Ueno N. Stent placement in the pancreatic duct pre-
vents pancreatitis after endoscopic sphincter dilation for removal 
of bile duct stones. Gastrointest Endosc.2001;54:209-213.
210.	Lau ST, Simchuk EJ, Kozarek RA, et al. A pancreatic ductal 
leak should be sought to direct treatment in patients with acute 
pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 2001;181:411-415.
211.	Canty TG Sr, Weinman D.Management of major pancreatic 
duct injuries in children. J Trauma. 2001;50:1001-1007.
212.	Kim HS, Lee DK, Kim IW, et al. The role of endoscopic ret-
rograde pancreatography in the treatment of traumatic pancre-
atic duct injury. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:49-55.
213.	Heyries L, Barthet M, Delvasto C, et al. Long-term results of 
endoscopic management of pancreas divisum with recurrent 
acute pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:376-381.
214.	Gabbrielli A, Mutignani M, Pandolfi M, et al. Endotherapy of 
early onset idiopathic chronic pancreatitis: Results with long-
term follow-up. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:488.
215.	Kozarek RA, Brandabur JJ, Ball TJ, et al. Clinical outcomes 
in patients who undergo extracorporeal shock wave litho-
tripsy for chronic calcific pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2002;56:496-500.
1419
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
216.	Nealon WH, Thompson JC. Progressive loss of pancreatic 
function in chronic pancreatitis is delayed by main pancreatic 
duct decompression. A longitudinal prospective analysis of 
the modified puestow procedure. Ann Surg. 1993;217:458-
466, discussion 466-468.
217.	Andersen DK, Frey CF. The evolution of the surgery for 
chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2010; 251: 18-32.
218.	Link G. The treatment of chronic pancreatitis by pancreatos-
tomy: a new operation. Ann Surg. 1911;53:768-782.
219.	Link G. Long term outcome of pancreatostomy for chronic 
pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1935;101:287.
220.	Priestley JT, Comfort MW, Radcliffe J. Total pancreatectomy 
for hyperinsulinism due to an islet-cell adenoma: Survival and 
cure at sixteen months after operation presentation of meta-
bolic studies. Ann Surg. 1944;119:211-221.
221.	Whipple AO. Radical surgery for certain cases of pancre-
atic fibrosis associated with calcareous deposits. Ann Surg. 
1946;124:991-1008.
222.	Fry WJ, Child CG III. Ninety-five per cent distal pancreatec-
tomy for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1965;162:543-549.
223.	Moody FG, Calabuig R, Vecchio R, et al. Stenosis of the 
sphincter of Oddi. Surg Clin North Am. 1990;70:1341-1354.
224.	Cattell RB. Anastomosis of the duct of Wirsung in palliative 
operation for carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Surg Clin 
North Am. 1947;27:636-643.
225.	Duval MK Jr. Caudal pancreatico-jejunostomy for chronic 
relapsing pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1954;140:775-785.
226.	Zollinger RM, Keith LM Jr, Ellison EH. Pancreatitis. N Engl 
J Med. 1954;251:497-502.
227.	Puestow CB, Gillesby WJ. Retrograde surgical drainage of 
pancreas for chronic relapsing pancreatitis. AMA Arch Surg. 
1958;76:898-907.
228.	Partington PF, Rochelle RE. Modified Puestow procedure 
for retrograde drainage of the pancreatic duct. Ann Surg. 
1960;152:1037-1043.
229.	Izbicki JR, Bloechle C, Broering DC, et al. Longitudinal 
V-shaped excision of the ventral pancreas for small duct dis-
ease in severe chronic pancreatitis: prospective evaluation of 
a new surgical procedure. Ann Surg. 1998;227:213-219.
230.	Eleftheriadis N, Dinu F, Delhaye M. Long-term outcome after 
pancreatic stenting in severe chronic pancreatitis. Endoscopy. 
2005;37:223-230.
231.	Gabbrielli A, Pandolfi M, Mutignani M, et al. Efficacy of main 
pancreatic-duct endoscopic drainage in patients with chronic 
pancreatitis, continuous pain, and dilated duct. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2009;61:576-581.
232.	Morgan DE, Smith JK, Hawkins K, Wilcox CM. Endoscopic 
stent therapy in advanced chronic pancreatitis: relationships 
between ductal changes, clinical response, and stent patency. 
Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:821-826.
233.	Rosch T, Daniel S, Scholz M, et al. Endoscopic treatment of 
chronic pancreatitis: a multicenter study of 1000 patients with 
long-term follow-up. Endoscopy. 2002;34:765-771.
234.	Ponchon T, Bory RM, Hedelius F, et al. Endoscopic stenting 
for pain relief in chronic pancreatitis: results of a standardized 
protocol. Gastrointest Endosc. 1995;42:452-456.
235.	Vitale GC, Cothron K, Vitale EA, et al. Role of pancreatic 
duct stenting in the treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Surg 
Endosc. 2004;18:1431.
236.	Bradley EL III. Long-term results of pancreatojejunostomy in 
patients with chronic pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 1987;153:207.
237.	Cahen DL, Gouma DJ, Nio Y, et al. Endoscopic versus surgi-
cal drainage of the pancreatic duct in chronic pancreatitis. N 
Engl J Med. 2007;356:676.
238.	Aldridge MC, Williamson RC. Distal pancreatectomy with 
and without splenectomy. Br J Surg. 1991;78:976.
239.	Khanna A, Koniaris LG, Nakeeb A, et al. Laparoscopic 
spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2005;9:733.
240.	Hess W. Surgical tactics in chronic pancreatitis. In: Hess W, 
Berci G, eds. Textbook of Bilio-Pancreatic Diseases, Vol. 4. 
Paua: Piccin Nuova Libraria; 1997:2299.
241.	Traverso LW, Longmire WP Jr: Preservation of the pylorus 
in pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1978; 
146:959.
242.	Huang JJ, Yeo CJ, Sohn TA, et al. Quality of life and outcomes 
after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 2000;231:890.
243.	Sakorafas GH, Farnell MB, Nagorney DM, et al. Pancreato-
duodenectomy for chronic pancreatitis: Long-term results in 
105 patients. Arch Surg. 2000;135:517, discussion 523.
244.	Jimenez RE, Fernandez-del Castillo C, Rattner DW, et al. Out-
come of pancreaticoduodenectomy with pylorus preservation 
or with antrectomy in the treatment of chronic pancreatitis. 
Ann Surg. 2000;231:293.
245.	Braasch JW, Vito L, Nugent FW. Total pancreatectomy of 
end-stage chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1978;188:317.
246.	Cooper MJ, Williamson RC, Benjamin IS, et al. Total pancre-
atectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 1987;74:912.
247.	Mannell A, Adson MA, McIlrath DC, et al. Surgical man-
agement of chronic pancreatitis: Long-term results in 141 
patients. Br J Surg. 1988;75:467.
248.	Alberti M. Proceedings of the Post EASD International Sym-
posium on Diabetes Secondary to Pancreatopathy, Interna-
tional Congress Series, Padova, 1987. Amsterdam: Excerpta 
Medica; 1988:211.
249.	Gall FP, Muhe E, Gebhardt C. Results of partial and total pan-
creaticoduodenectomy in 117 patients with chronic pancreati-
tis. World J Surg. 1981;5:269.
250.	Beger HG, Witte C, Krautzberger W, et al. Experiences with 
duodenum-sparing pancreas head resection in chronic pancre-
atitis. Chirurg. 1980;51:303.
251.	Beger HG, Krautzberger W, Bittner R, et al. Duodenum-pre-
serving resection of the head of the pancreas in patients with 
severe chronic pancreatitis. Surgery. 1985;97:467.
252.	Beger HG, Schlosser W, Friess HM, et al. Duodenum-preserv-
ing head resection in chronic pancreatitis changes the natural 
course of the disease: A single-center 26-year experience. Ann 
Surg. 1999;230:512, discussion 519.
253.	Buchler MW, Friess H, Muller MW, et al. Randomized trial of 
duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection versus pylo-
rus-preserving Whipple in chronic pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 
1995;169:65, discussion 69.
254.	Frey CF, Smith GJ. Description and rationale of a new opera-
tion for chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1987;2:701.
255.	Frey CF, Amikura K. Local resection of the head of the pan-
creas combined with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy in 
the management of patients with chronic pancreatitis. Ann 
Surg. 1994;220:492, discussion 504.
256.	Andersen DK, Topazian MD. Pancreatic head excavation: A 
variation on the theme of duodenum-preserving pancreatic 
head resection. Arch Surg. 2004;139:375.
257.	Izbicki JR, Strate T, Yekebas EE, et al. Chronic pancreatitis. 
In: Yeo CJ, Dempsey DT, Klein AS, et al, eds. Shackleford’s 
Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 6th ed. New York: Saunders; 
2007:1218.
258.	Ho HS, Frey CF. The Frey procedure: Combined local resec-
tion of the head of the pancreas with longitudinal pancreatico-
jejunostomy. Operat Tech Gen Surg. 2001;4:153.
259.	Ho HS, Frey CF. The Frey procedure: Local resection of pan-
creatic head combined with lateral pancreaticojejunostomy. 
Arch Surg. 2001;136:1353.
260.	Farkas G, Leindler L, Daroczi M, et al. Organ-preserving pan-
creatic head resection in chronic pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2003; 
90:29.
261.	Farkas G, Leindler L, Daroczi M, Farkas G Jr. Prospective 
randomised comparison of organ-preserving pancreatic head 
resection with pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. 
Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2006;391:338-342.
1420
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
262.	Gloor B, Friess H, Uhl W, et al. A modified technique of the 
Beger and Frey procedure in patients with chronic pancreati-
tis. Dig Surg. 2001;18:21-25.
263.	Koninger J, Seiler CM, Sauerland S, et al. Duodenum-preserv-
ing pancreatic head resection—a randomized controlled trial 
comparing the original Beger procedure with the Berne modi-
fication (ISRCTN No. 50638764). Surgery. 2008;143:490-
498.
264.	Izbicki JR, Bloechle C, Broering DC, et al. Extended drainage 
versus resection in surgery for chronic pancreatitis: a prospec-
tive randomized trial comparing the longitudinal pancreati-
cojejunostomy combined with local pancreatic head excision 
with the pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy. Ann 
Surg. 1998;228:771-779.
265.	Strate T, Bachmann K, Busch P, et al. Resection vs. drain-
age in treatment of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results of a 
randomized trial. Gastroenterology. 2008;134:1406-1411.
266.	Klempa I, Spatny M, Menzel J, et al. Pancreatic function and 
quality of life after resection of the head of the pancreas in 
chronic pancreatitis. A prospective, randomized compara-
tive study after duodenum preserving resection of the head of 
the pancreas versus Whipple’s operation. Chirurg. 1995;66: 
350-359.
267.	Buchler MW, Friess H, Bittner R, et al. Duodenum-preserving 
pancreatic head resection: long-term results. J Gastrointest 
Surg. 1997;1:13-19.
268.	Zheng Z, Xiang G, Tan C, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy vs. 
duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection for the treat-
ment of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2012;41:147-152.
269.	Strate T, Taherpour Z, Bloechle C, et al. Long term follow-
up of a randomized trial comparing the Beger and Frey pro-
cedures for patients suffering from chronic pancreatitis. Ann 
Surg. 2005;241:591.
270.	Riediger H, Adam U, Fischer E, et al. Long-term outcome 
after resection for chronic pancreatitis in 224 patients. J Gas-
trointest Surg. 2007;11:949-959, discussion 959-960.
271.	Ramesh H, Jacob G, Lekha V, Venugopal A. Ductal drain-
age with head coring in chronic pancreatitis with small-duct 
disease. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2003;10:366-372.
272.	Shrikhande SV, Kleeff J, Friess H, et al. Management of 
pain in small duct chronic pancreatitis. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2006;10:227-233.
273.	Najarian JS, Sutherland DE, Baumgartner D, et al. Total 
or near total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation 
for treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1980;192: 
526-542.
274.	Sutherland DE, Radosevich DM, Bellin, MA, et al. Total 
pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation for chronic 
pancreatits. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;214:409-426.
275.	Robertson RP, Lanz KJ, Sutherland DE, et al. Prevention 
of diabetes for up to 13 years by autoislet transplantation 
after pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes. 
2001;50:47-50.
276.	Rastellini C. Donor and recipient selection in pancreatic islet 
transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2002;7:196.
277.	Richards ML, Gauger PG, Thompson NW, Kloos RG, 
Giordano T. Pitfalls in the surgical treatment of insulinoma. 
Surgery. 2002;132:1040-1049, discussion 1049.
278.	Howard TJ, Stabile BE, Zinner MJ, Chang S, Bhagavan BS, 
Passaro E Jr. Anatomic distribution of pancreatic endocrine 
tumors. Am J Surg. 1990;159:258-264.
279.	Service FJ, Natt N, Thompson GB, et al. Noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous hypoglycemia: A novel syndrome of hyper-
insulinemic hypoglycemia in adults independent of mutations 
in Kir6.2 and SUR1 genes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999; 
84: 1582-1589.
280.	 Cui YF, Elahi D, Andersen DK. Advances in the etiology 
and management of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. J Gastrointest Surg. 2011;15: 
1879-1888.
281.	Deol ZK, Frezza E, DeJong S, Pickleman J. Solitary hepatic 
gastrinoma treated with laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation. 
JSLS. 2003;7:285-289.
282.	Case CC, Wirfel K, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R. Vasoactive intes-
tinal polypeptide-secreting tumor (VIPoma) with liver metas-
tases: dramatic and durable symptomatic benefit from hepatic 
artery embolization, a case report. Med Oncol. 2002;19: 
181-187.
283.	Tanaka S, Yamasaki S, Matsushita H, et al. Duodenal 
somatostatinoma: a case report and review of 31 cases with 
special reference to the relationship between tumor size and 
metastasis. Pathol Int. 2000;50:146-152.
284.	Raymond E et al. Updated results of the phase III trial of suni-
tinib (SU) versus placebo (PBO) for treatment of advanced 
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NET). ASCO 2010 Gas-
trointestinal Cancers Symposium Abstr 127.
285.	 Kulke M et al. Phase I/II study of everolimus (RAD001) in com-
bination with temozolomide (TMZ) in patients with advanced 
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NET) ASCO 2010.
286.	Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, et al. Global cancer statistics. 
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2011; 61: 69-90.
287.	Seigel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics 2012. CA: 
A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2012; 62:10-29.
288.	http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/pancreas.html: SEER 
Stat Fact Sheets. [Accessed March 20, 2009.]
289.	Cui YF, Andersen DK. Diabetes and pancreatic cancer. 
Endocr Rel Cancer. 2012; 19: F9-F26.
290.	Gold EB, Goldin SB: Epidemiology of and risk factors for 
pancreatic cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1998;7:67.
291.	Fisher WE. Diabetes: Risk factor for the development of pan-
creatic cancer or manifestation of the disease? World J Surg. 
2001;25:503.
292.	Jean M, Lowy A, Chiao P, et al: The Molecular Biology of 
Pancreatic Cancer. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.
293.	Berger D, Fischer W. Inherited Pancreatic Cancer Syn-
dromes. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.
294.	Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, et al. Pancreatic cancer 
genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. 
Nature. 2012; 491: 399-405.
295.	Fisher WE, Muscarella P, Boros LG, et al. Gastrointestinal 
hormones as potential adjuvant treatment of exocrine pancre-
atic adenocarcinoma. Int J Pancreatol. 1998;24:169-180.
296.	Biankin AV, Kench JG, Dijkman FP, et al. Molecular 
pathogenesis of precursor lesions of pancreatic ductal ade-
nocarcinoma. Pathology. 2003;35:14.
297.	Wilentz RE, Hruban RH. Pathology of cancer of the pancreas. 
Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1998;7:43-65.
298.	Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer sta-
tistics review 1975-2009 (Vintage 2009 populations) National 
Cancer Institute, Betheda. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/
csr/1975_2009_pops09/.
299.	Ritts R, Pitt H. CA19-9 in pancreatic cancer. Surg Oncol Clin 
N Am. 1998;7:93-101.
300.	Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Maitra A, Olsen M, et al. Explora-
tion of global gene expression patterns in pancreatic adeno-
carcinoma using cDNA microarrays. Am J Pathol. 2003;162: 
1151-1162.
301.	Squillaci E, Fanucco E, Scuito F: Vascular involvement in 
pancreatic neoplasm: a comparison between spiral CT and 
DSA. Dig Dis Sci. 2003;48:449-458.
302.	Kim HJ, Conlon KC: Laparoscopic Staging. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 2002.
303.	Shah RJ, Howell DA, Desilets DJ, et al. Multicenter ran-
domized trial of the spiral Z-stent compared with the Wall-
stent for malignant biliary obstruction. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2003;57:830-836.
1421
Pancreas
CHAPTER 33
304.	Lillemoe K, Cameron JL, Kaufman HS, Yeo CJ, Pitt HA, Sau-
ter PK. Chemical splanchnicectomy in patients with unresect-
able pancreatic cancer. A prospective randomised trial. Ann 
Surg. 1993;217: 447-455.
305.	Singh SM, Reber HA. Surgical palliation for pancreatic can-
cer. Surg Clin North Am. 1989;69:599-611.
306.	Casper ES, Green MR, Kelsen DP, et al. Phase II trial of gem-
citabine (2,2’-difluorodeoxycytidine) in patients with adeno-
carcinoma of the pancreas. Invest New Drugs. 1994;12:29-34.
307.	Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, et al. Folfirinox versus 
gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 2011; 364: 1817-1825.
308.	Martin RC II, McFarland K, Ellis S, Velanovich V. Irrevers-
able electroporation therapy in the management of locally 
advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2012; 
215: 361-369.
309.	Bachellier P, Nakano H, Oussoultzoglou PD, et al. Is pancre-
aticoduodenectomy with mesentericoportal venous resection 
safe and worthwhile? Am J Surg. 2001; 182: 120-129.
310.	van Geenen RC, ten Kate FJ, de Witt LT, et al. Segmental 
resection and wedge excision of the portal or superior mesen-
teric vein during pancreaticoduoodenectomy. Surgery. 2001; 
129: 158-163.
311.	Giulianotti PC, Sbrana F, Bianco FM, et al. Robot-assisted 
laparoscopic pancreatic surgery: single-surgeon experience. 
Surg Endosc. 2010; 24: 1646-1657.
312.	Yamaguchi K, Kishinaka M, Nagai E, et al. Pancreatoduode-
nectomy for pancreatic head carcinoma with or without pylo-
rus preservation. Hepatogastroenterol. 2001;48:1479-1485.
313.	Ohtsuka T, Yamaguchi K, Ohuchida J, et al. Comparison of 
quality of life after pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenec-
tomy and Whipple resection. Hepatogastroenterol. 2003; 
50:846-850.
314.	Fisher WE, Hodges SE, Silbefein EJ, et al. Pancreatic resec-
tion without routine intraperitoneal drainage. HPB (Oxford) 
2011; 13: 503-510.
315.	 Sindelar WF, Kinsella TJ. Studies of intraoperative radiotherapy 
in carcinoma of the pancreas. Ann Oncol. 1999;10:226-230.
316.	Birkmeyer JD, Finlayson SR, Tosteson AN, et al. Effect of 
hospital volume on in-hospital mortality with pancreatico-
duodenectomy. Surgery. 1999;125:250.
317.	Gordon TA, Bowman HM, Tielsch JM, et al. Statewide 
regionalization of pancreaticoduodenectomy and its effect on 
in-hospital mortality. Ann Surg. 1998;228:71-78.
318.	 Buchler M, Friess H, Klempa I, et al. Role of octreotide in 
the prevention of postoperative complications following pan-
creatic resection. Am J Surg. 1992;163:125-130, discussion 
130-131.
319.	Montorsi M, Zago M, Mosca F, et al. Efficacy of octreotide 
in the prevention of pancreatic fistula after elective pancreatic 
resections: A prospective, controlled, randomized clinical 
trial. Surgery. 117:26-31.
320.	Pederzoli P, Bassi C, Falconi M, et al. Efficacy of octreotide in 
the prevention of complications of elective pancreatic surgery. 
Italian Study Group. Br J Surg. 1994;81:265-269.
321.	Barnett SP, Hodul PJ, Creech S, et al. Octreotide does not 
prevent postoperative pancreatic fistula or mortality follow-
ing pancreaticoduodenectomy. Am Surg. 2004;70:222-226, 
discussion 227.
322.	Hesse UJ, DeDecker C, Houtmeyers P, et al. Prospectively 
randomized trial using perioperative low-dose octreotide to 
prevent organ-related and general complications after pan-
creatic surgery and pancreatico-jejunostomy. World J Surg. 
29:1325-1328.
323.	Lowy AM, Lee JE, Pisters PW, et al. Prospective, random-
ized trial of octreotide to prevent pancreatic fistula after pan-
creaticoduodenectomy for malignant disease. Ann Surg. 226: 
632-641.
324.	Moon HJ, Heo JS, Choi SH, et al. The efficacy of the pro-
phylactic use of octreotide after a pancreaticoduodenectomy. 
Yonsei Med J. 2005;46:788-793.
325.	Srivastava S, Sikora SS, Pandey CM, et al. Determinants of 
pancreaticoenteric anastomotic leak following pancreatico-
duodenectomy. ANZ J Surg. 2001;71:511-515.
326.	Suc B, Msika S, Piccinini M, et al. Octreotide in the preven-
tion of intra-abdominal complications following elective 
pancreatic resection: a prospective, multicenter randomized 
controlled trial. Arch Surg. 2004;139:288-294, discussion 
295.
327.	Aranha GV, Hodul PJ, Creech S, Jacobs W. Zero mortality 
after 152 consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies with pan-
creaticogastrostomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197:223-231, dis-
cussion 231-232.
328.	Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Kim MP, et al. Does fibrin glue 
sealant decrease the rate of pancreatic fistula after pancreati-
coduodenectomy? Results of a prospective randomized trial. 
J Gastrointest Surg. 2004;8:766-772, discussion 772-774.
329.	Nakao A, Fujii T, Sugimoto H, et al. Is pancreaticogastros-
tomy safer than pancreaticojejunostomy? J Hepatobiliary 
Pancreat Surg. 2006;13:202-206.
330.	Payne RF, Pain JA. Duct-to-mucosa pancreaticogastrostomy 
is a safe anastomosis following pancreaticoduodenectomy. Br 
J Surg. 2006;93:73-77.
331.	Peng S, Mou Y, Cai X, et al. Binding pancreaticojejunos-
tomy is a new technique to minimize leakage. Am J Surg. 
2002;183:283-285.
332.	Rosso E, Bachellier P, Oussoultzoglou E, et al. Toward zero 
pancreatic fistula after pancreaticoduodenectomy with pancre-
aticogastrostomy. Am J Surg. 2006;191:726-732, discussion 
733-734.
333.	Sutton CD, Garcea G, White SA, et al. Isolated Roux-loop 
pancreaticojejunostomy: A series of 61 patients with zero 
postoperative pancreaticoenteric leaks. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2004;8:701-705.
334.	Suzuki Y, Kuroda Y, Morita A, et al. Fibrin glue sealing for 
the prevention of pancreatic fistulas following distal pancre-
atectomy. Arch Surg. 1995;130:952-955.
335.	Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Maher MM, et al. A prospective ran-
domized trial of pancreaticogastrostomy versus pancreati-
cojejunostomy after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 
1995;222:580, discussion 588.
336.	Wente MN, Shrikhande SV, Muller MW, et al. Pancreaticoje-
junostomy vs. pancreaticogastrostomy: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Am J Surg. 2007;193:171-183.
337.	Suzuki Y, Fujino Y, Tanioka Y, et al. Selection of pancreati-
cojejunostomy techniques according to pancreatic texture and 
duct size. Arch Surg. 2002;137:1044-1047, discussion 1048.
338.	Reid-Lombardo KM, Farnell MB, Crippa S, et al. Pancreatic 
anastomotic leakage after pancreaticoduodenectomy in 1,507 
patients: a report from the Pancreatic Anastomotic Leak Study 
Group. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11:1451-1458.
339.	Poon RT, Lo SH, Fong D, et al. Prevention of pancreatic anas-
tomotic leakage after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Am J Surg. 
2002;183:42-52.
340.	Okamoto A, Tsuruta K. Fistulation method: simple and 
safe pancreaticojejunostomy after pancreatoduodenectomy. 
Surgery. 2000;127:433-438.
341.	Yang YM, Tian XD, Zhuang Y, et al. Risk factors of pancre-
atic leakage after pancreaticoduodenectomy. World J Gastro-
enterol. 2005;11:2456-2461.
342.	Di Carlo V, Chiesa R, Pontiroli AE, et al. Pancreatoduodenec-
tomy with occlusion of the residual stump by Neoprene injec-
tion. World J Surg. 1989;13:105-110, discussion 110-111.
343.	Buchler MW, Friess H, Wagner M, et al. Pancreatic fis-
tula after pancreatic head resection. Br J Surg. 2000;87: 
883-889.
1422
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
344.	Tran K, Van Eijck C, Di Carlo V, et al. Occlusion of the pan-
creatic duct versus pancreaticojejunostomy: a prospective ran-
domized trial. Ann Surg. 2002;236:422-428, discussion 428.
345.	Fisher WE, Chai C, Hodges SE, Wu MF, Hilsenbeck SG, 
Brunicardi FC. Effect of BioGlue on the incidence of pancre-
atic fistula following pancreas resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2008;12:882-890.
346.	Kazanjian KK, Hines OJ, Eibl G, Reber HA. Management of 
pancreatic fistulas after pancreaticoduodenectomy: results in 437 
consecutive patients. Arch Surg. 2005;140:849-854, discussion 
854-856.
347.	Group GTS. Further evidence of effective adjuvant combined 
radiation and chemotherapy following curative resection of 
pancreatic cancer. Cancer. 1997;59:2006-2010.
348.	Neoptolemos JP, Dunn JA, Stocken DD, et al. Adjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy in resectable pancreatic 
cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2001;358:1576.
349.	Gillen S, Schuster T, Meyer zum Büschenfelde C, et al. Pre-
operative neoadjuvant therapy in pancreatic cancer: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of response and resection 
percentages. PLoS Med. 7(4): e1000267. Doi:10:1371/journal.
pmed.1000267.
350.	Yazawa K, Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC. Current progress 
in suicide gene therapy for cancer. World J Surg. 2002;26: 
783-789.
351.	Kiely JM, Nakeeb A, Komorowski RA, Wilson SD, Pitt HA. 
Cystic pancreatic neoplasms: enucleate or resect? J Gastroin-
test Surg. 2003;7:890-897.
352.	Obermeyer R, Fisher W, Sweeney J, et al. Laparoscopic distal 
pancreatectomy for serous oligocystic adenoma. Surg Rounds. 
2003;423.
353.	Salvia R, Fernandez-del Castillo C, Bassi C, et al. Main-duct 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas: 
clinical predictors of malignancy and long-term survival fol-
lowing resection. Ann Surg. 2004;239:678-685, discussion 
685-687.
354.	Boni L, Benevento A, Dionigi G, Cabrini L, Dionigi R. 
Primary pancreatic lymphoma. Surg Endosc. 2002;16: 
1107-1108.
Spleen
Adrian E. Park, Eduardo M. Targarona, and 
Igor Belyansky
34
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
For more than two millennia, the spleen has perhaps been the least 
understood and most underappreciated major organ. The central 
role played by the spleen in regulating the immune system as well 
as influencing metabolic and endocrine functions has only become 
clear over the past few decades. Our previous notion of the spleen 
as an utterly dispensable filter of the blood has been dispelled, 
enlightening our surgical approach to this fascinating organ.
Many of the “founding fathers of medicine” have weighed 
in on the anatomy and function of the spleen over the centuries. 
Hippocrates1-3 in the fourth century bc was one of the first to 
write on the spleen. He taught broadly on the need for balance 
and equilibrium between the patient and his environment. Ill-
ness arose from disharmony in nature, particularly among the 
patient’s four humors: blood, phlegm, black bile (melancholia), and 
yellow bile. Hippocrates wrote of a direct connection between 
the brain and spleen and its particular association with the black 
bile. These ideas would influence thinking about the role of the 
spleen for more than 1000 years.2
Aristotle, later in the same era, famously stated that, 
“Nature makes nothing in vain,” yet held the spleen to be an 
organ of minor importance whose main role was to counterbal-
ance the liver.4 He also described how the “hot character” of the 
spleen aided in digestion.
Galen, in the second century ad, engaged in more serious 
anatomic investigation espousing the early belief that function 
followed structure. His investigations, though pioneering, lacked 
sufficient rigor, evidenced by his contention that black bile or 
melancholia flowed from the liver to the spleen and then through 
the short gastric vessels into the stomach to be excreted. The 
influence of Galen’s teaching endured for more than 1200 years.
Historical Background	
1423
Embryology and Anatomy	
1424
Physiology and  
Pathophysiology	
1426
Imaging for Evaluation  
of Size and Pathology	
1428
Ultrasound / 1428
Computed Tomography / 1428
Plain Radiography / 1428
Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1429
Angiography / 1429
Nuclear Imaging / 1429
Indications for Splenectomy	
1429
Benign Disorders / 1429
Malignant Conditions / 1434
Other Diseases of the Spleen / 1436
Preoperative Considerations	
1438
Vaccination and Patient  
Education / 1438
Deep Vein Thrombosis Prophylaxis / 1439
Splenectomy Techniques	
1439
Patient Preparation / 1439
Open Splenectomy / 1439
Laparoscopic Splenectomy / 1440
Hand-Assisted Splenectomy / 1441
Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery 
Splenectomy / 1443
Robotic Splenectomy / 1443
Partial Splenectomy / 1443
Inadvertent Intraoperative  
Splenic Injury / 1443
Splenectomy Outcomes	
1443
Complications / 1444
Hematologic Outcomes / 1444
Overwhelming Postsplenectomy 
 Infection / 1444
In the early seventeenth century, several physician sci-
entists, Malpighi being the most prominent, began testing 
hypotheses on splenic function by splenectomizing dogs. He 
reportedly followed several dogs 5 years postoperatively, not-
ing their healthy survival though apparent ravenous hunger and 
enhanced sexual appetites. The spleen, still in the era of “bal-
anced humors,” was thus felt to play a role in balancing various 
appetites as well. In addition to melancholy, the spleen became 
associated with anger and, paradoxically, was also seen as the 
“seat of laughter.”5
The claim for the first human splenectomy may have pre-
dated that of canine splenectomy. Andriano Zaccavello was 
credited in 1549 with having performed a splenectomy on a 
middle-aged woman. This claim remains shrouded in contro-
versy, and the indication for the surgery and whether in fact 
splenectomy was performed have been called into question. The 
patient apparently survived. Most patients who underwent sple-
nectomy in the three centuries that followed fared badly. The 
vast majority of splenectomies performed were partial. Most 
of these patients required surgery for left upper quadrant stab 
wounds sustained in battles or duels resulting in partial or com-
plete splenic prolapse.6
It was in the early eighteenth century that the growing body 
of anatomic microstructural knowledge began to turn the tide on 
the long-held theory of health and disease deriving from a bal-
ance of the four humors. William Henson believed the spleen to 
be a ductless vascular gland similar to the thyroid and adrenals. 
In 1777, he wrote of the lymphatic nature of the spleen and its 
filtering function and even suggested its role in hematopoiesis.13
Rudolf Virchow, one of the first to discover leukemia, 
implicated the spleen as figuring prominently in all leukemia 
patients. He suspected that the spleen was responsible for 
chapter 
generating the leukocytes in large quantities in these patients. 
There soon followed an enthusiastic effort by surgeons to cure 
leukemia by splenectomy. Dr. Thomas Bryant performed the 
first splenectomy in 1866 in a patient with leukemia. The patient 
died, as did all 14 patients who underwent splenectomy for 
leukemia over the next 15 years. After his second consecutive 
mortality in this setting, Bryant declared that “the operation is 
physiologically unsound & surgically unsafe for leukemia and 
should not be performed.”7 In 1908, Johnson reported a series 
of 99 splenectomies for leukemia with an 85% mortality rate. 
Unfortunately, it took several decades for his words to be 
heeded.
In 1916, a medical student from Prague named Paul 
Kaznelson wrote on the key role played by the spleen in the 
destruction of platelets leading to the first reported (and success-
ful) splenectomy for a patient with idiopathic thrombocytopenia 
purpura.2
As surgeons’ experience with the procedure grew, the 
associated morbidity and mortality decreased. By 1920, the 
Mayo Clinic experience with splenectomy reported a reduced 
mortality rate of 11%.1
O’Donnell in 1929 was the first to describe fatal postsple-
nectomy sepsis in a child who had undergone the surgery for 
hemolytic anemia.3 It took Springer’s 1973 review of almost 
2800 postsplenectomy patients and the 2.5% incidence of sepsis-
induced mortality (vs. 0.01% in the general population) to reori-
ent surgeons to more conservative splenic procedures.2,3
The advent of minimally invasive surgery and laparo-
scopic splenectomy in the early 1990s represented a clear 
advance, benefitting the patient through this evolution of surgi-
cal technique. Most large series of laparoscopic splenectomy for 
benign and malignant indication now report a mortality rate of 
<1%.9,10 As even more contemporary research reveals the spleen 
to play a central role in immune, metabolic, and endocrine 
1424
Key Points
1
	 The human spleen plays a key immunologic role in defense 
against a number of organisms, particularly encapsulated 
bacteria.
2
	 The spleen can cause significant morbidity and/or hemato-
logic disturbance if it becomes hyperfunctioning (hyper-
splenism) or hypertrophied (splenomegaly).
3
	 There is a broad spectrum of nontraumatic diseases for 
which elective splenectomy can be curative or palliative. 
They can be broadly categorized as red blood cell disorders 
and hemoglobinopathies, white blood cell disorders, platelet 
disorders, bone marrow disorders, infections and abscesses, 
cysts and tumors, storage diseases and infiltrative disorders, 
and miscellaneous conditions.
4
	 Partial splenectomy may be a suitable alternative to total 
splenectomy for certain conditions of hypersplenism or sple-
nomegaly, particularly in children in whom preservation of 
splenic immunologic function is especially important.
5
	 Preoperative splenic artery embolization for elective splenec-
tomy has benefits and disadvantages. It may be most suitable in 
cases of enlarged spleen. Conclusive evidence is lacking.
6
	 Laparoscopic splenectomy provides equal hematologic 
outcomes with decreased morbidity compared with the 
open operation. The laparoscopic approach has emerged 
as the standard for elective, nontraumatic splenectomy.
7
	 Inadvertent intraoperative splenic injury is a scenario for 
which every abdominal surgeon should be prepared. 
Availability of a predetermined algorithm, with emphasis 
on the patient’s condition, facilitates intraoperative deci-
sion making.
8
	 Overwhelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) is an 
uncommon but potentially grave disease. Children and 
those undergoing splenectomy for hematologic malig-
nancy are at elevated risk.
9
	 Antibiotic prophylactic strategies against OPSI vary 
widely. Data regarding their use are lacking.
10   Vaccination of the splenectomized patient remains the 
most effective prevention strategy against OPSI. Preop-
erative vaccination before elective splenectomy is most 
prudent.
function, it follows that the surgeon’s role going forward will 
be to preserve this organ and its functions whenever possible.
EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY
Consisting of an encapsulated mass of vascular and lymphoid 
tissue, the spleen is the largest reticuloendothelial organ in the 
body. Arising from the primitive mesoderm as an outgrowth of 
the left side of the dorsal mesogastrium, by the fifth week of 
gestation, the spleen is evident in an embryo 8 mm long.
Development begins through the formation of the splanch-
nic mesodermal plate, derived from the mesoderm, at embryonic 
day 12. The embryonic spleen is first colonized by erythroid 
and myeloid progenitor cells at 2 weeks of gestation. Follow-
ing soon thereafter, the hematopoietic stem cells take up resi-
dence in the forming spleen.11 The spleen assumes an important 
hematopoietic role until the fifth month of gestation. After birth, 
splenic erythropoietic function may persist in some hematologic 
disorders.12
The organ continues its differentiation and migration to 
the left upper quadrant, where it comes to rest with its smooth, 
diaphragmatic surface facing posterosuperiorly.8
The most common anomaly of splenic embryology is the 
accessory spleen. Present in up to 20% of the population, one or 
more accessory spleens may also occur in up to 30% of patients 
with hematologic disease. Over 80% of accessory spleens are 
found in the region of the splenic hilum and vascular pedicle. 
Other locations for accessory spleens in descending order of fre-
quency are the gastrocolic ligament, the pancreas tail, the greater 
omentum, the stomach’s greater curve, the splenocolic ligament, 
the small and large bowel mesentery, the left broad ligament in 
women, and the left spermatic cord in men (Fig. 34-1).8,13
The abdominal surface of the diaphragm separates the 
spleen from the lower left lung and pleura and the ninth to 
1425
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
eleventh ribs. The visceral surface faces the abdominal cavity 
and contains gastric, colic, renal, and pancreatic impressions. 
Spleen size and weight vary with age, with both diminishing in 
the elderly and in those with underlying pathologic conditions. 
The average adult spleen is 7 to 11 cm in length and weighs 150 g 
(range, 70 to 250 g).
The spleen’s superior border separates the diaphragmatic 
surface from the gastric impression of the visceral surface and 
often contains one or two notches, which are particularly pro-
nounced when the spleen is greatly enlarged.
Of particular clinical relevance, the spleen is suspended 
in position by several ligaments and peritoneal folds to the 
colon (splenocolic ligament), the stomach (gastrosplenic liga-
ment), the diaphragm (phrenosplenic ligament), and the kidney, 
adrenal gland, and tail of the pancreas (splenorenal ligament) 
(Fig. 34-2). The gastrosplenic ligament contains the short gas-
tric vessels; the remaining ligaments are avascular, with rare 
exceptions, such as in patients with portal hypertension. The 
relationship of the pancreas to the spleen also has important 
clinical implications. In cadaveric anatomic series, the tail of 
the pancreas has been demonstrated to lie within 1 cm of the 
splenic hilum 75% of the time and to actually abut the spleen in 
30% of patients.2
The spleen derives most of its blood from the splenic 
artery, the longest and most tortuous of the three main branches 
of the celiac artery. The splenic artery can be characterized by 
the pattern of its terminal branches. The distributed type of 
splenic artery is the most common (70%) and is distinguished 
by a short trunk with many long branches entering over three-
Figure 34-1.  Sites where accessory spleens are found in order of 
importance. A. Hilar region, 54%; B. pedicle, 25%; C. tail of pan-
creas, 6%; D. splenocolic ligament, 2%; E. greater omentum, 12%; 
F. mesentery, 0.5%; G. left ovary, 0.5%. 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 34-2.  Suspensory ligaments of the spleen. (Data from 
­Poulin EC, Thibault C. The anatomical basis for laparoscopic 
­splenectomy. Can J Surg. 1993;36:484.)
Gastrosplenic 
ligament
Lesser sac
Greater omentum
Splenocolic 
ligament
Sustentaculum 
lienis
Phrenicocolic 
ligament
fourths of the spleen’s medial surface. The less common magis-
tral type of splenic artery (30%) has a long main trunk dividing 
near the hilum into short terminal branches, and these enter over 
25% to 30% of the spleen’s medial surface. The spleen also 
receives some of its blood supply from the short gastric vessels 
that branch from the left gastroepiploic artery running within 
the gastrosplenic ligament. The splenic vein joins the superior 
mesenteric vein to form the portal vein and accommodates the 
major venous drainage of the spleen.
When a normal, freshly excised spleen is sectioned, the cut 
surface is finely granular and predominantly dark red with whit-
ish nodules distributed liberally across its expanse. This gross 
observation reflects the spleen’s microstructure. The splenic 
parenchyma is composed of two main elements: the red pulp, 
constituting approximately 75% of total splenic volume, and 
the white pulp (Fig. 34-3). At the interface between the red and 
white pulp is the narrow marginal zone.
Blood enters the red pulp through cords comprised of 
fibroblasts and reticular fibers, which contain many macro-
phages and lack an endothelial lining. The blood then passes 
from these “open” cords to venous sinuses, which are sur-
rounded and separated by the same reticulum, and ultimately 
drains into tributaries of the splenic vein. An understand-
ing of the microanatomy of these sinuses has elucidated 
the mechanical filtration function of the spleen. Unlike the 
cords of the red pulp, the sinuses of the red pulp are lined 
by endothelial cells. These cells contain unique stress fibers 
that connect the endothelial cells and that contain actin 
and myosin–like filaments capable of producing a sliding 
action. When activated, these filaments can create slits or 
gaps between the endothelial cells through which blood can 
then pass from the cords.11 Aging erythrocytes with stiffer 
membranes get stuck trying to pass into the sinus and are 
phagocytized by macrophages within the red pulp.12
1426
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
The red pulp thus serves as a dynamic filtration system, 
enabling macrophages to remove microorganisms, cellular 
debris, antigen-antibody complexes, and senescent erythrocytes 
from the circulation.
Around the terminal millimeters of splenic arterioles, a 
periarticular lymphatic sheath replaces the native adventitia 
of the vessel. The sheath is comprised of T lymphocytes and 
intermittent aggregations of B lymphocytes or lymphoid fol-
licles. When antigenically stimulated, the follicles, serving as 
centers of lymphocyte proliferation, develop germinal centers, 
which regress as the stimulus or infection subsides. This white 
pulp consists of nodules that normally are ≤1 mm in size but 
can increase to several centimeters when nodules coalesce, as 
occurs in certain lymphoproliferative disorders. At the junction 
between the white and red pulp is the marginal zone, where 
lymphocytes are more loosely aggregated.
As well as serving as a transit area, the marginal zone is 
home to its own unique population of cells. Notably two specific 
types of macrophages reside there, marginal zone macrophages 
and marginal zone metallophilic macrophages. The former 
play an important role in the targeting and clearance of 
certain bacterial pathogens. The latter have been shown to be 
the main producers of interferons A and B in response to a viral 
challenge.11
PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The spleen is contained by a 1- to 2-mm thick capsule. In 
humans, the capsule is rich in collagen and contains some elas-
tin fibers. Many mammals have splenic capsules and trabecu-
lae with abundant smooth muscle cells, which upon autonomic 
stimulation contract to expel large volumes of stored blood into 
the general circulation. The human splenic capsule and trabecu-
lae, by contrast, contain few or no smooth muscle cells.
Total splenic inflow of blood is approximately 250 to 300 
mL/min. Blood flows through successively tapering arteries to 
arterioles, traverses the white pulp, crosses the marginal zone, 
Figure 34-3.  Splenic architecture. (Used with permission of Ivan 
George, University of Maryland School of Medicine.)
Trabeculae 
(depicted as both capsular 
and white lined material)
Splenic capsule
Red pulp
White pulp
and enters the red pulp. From that entry, the flow rate through 
the spleen may vary greatly. Animal studies measuring the tran-
sit times of isotopically labeled blood through the spleen have 
revealed three distinct velocities of flow. Humans have long 
been recognized to have both a fast or closed circulation—with 
blood passing directly from arterioles into venous sinuses—and 
a slower or open circulation. Most of the spleen’s filtration func-
tion occurs via the slower circulation. During open circulation, 
blood percolates through the reticular space and splenic cords, 
thus gaining access through gaps or slits in the endothelial cell 
lining to the sinuses as previously described. Flowing into 
and out of the venous sinuses through these gaps, the blood is 
exposed to extensive contact with splenic macrophages. These 
are responsible for the innate immune response of the spleen, 
which occurs largely within the marginal zone. The white pulp, 
by contrast, is involved only in adaptive immunity. In addition, 
because the passage of plasma through these spaces does not 
slow in a similar manner, a temporary and unique adhesive con-
tact between blood cells and components of the splenic cord 
may occur. That there is a selective slowing of blood cell flow 
versus plasma flow is further evidenced by the fact that within 
the spleen, the erythrocyte concentration (hematocrit) is twice 
that of the general circulation. During this contact with splenic 
macrophages, it is likely that the removal of both cellular debris 
and senescent blood cells occurs.14
The process by which the spleen removes erythrocyte 
inclusions, such as Heinz bodies (intracellular altered hemo-
globin), without cell lysis while red blood cells travel through 
the spleen is not well understood. The spleen acts as the major 
site for clearance from the blood of damaged or aged red blood 
cells and, in addition, has a part in the removal of abnormal 
white blood cells and platelets. A minimum of 2 days of the 
erythrocyte’s 120-day life cycle is spent sequestered in the 
spleen. Daily, approximately 20 mL of aged red blood cells are 
removed. Evidence suggests that, as erythrocytes age, previ-
ously undetected antigens on their surfaces may attach to auto-
antibodies in the circulation; then macrophages may bind to 
the antibodies and initiate phagocytosis. It is probable that the 
erythrocyte is damaged over time by multiple passages through 
the spleen as well as delayed transit through the congested and 
relatively hypoxic and acidotic environment of the splenic 
cords.
The spleen can also serve as an extra medullary site for 
hematopoiesis, if required. Another role played by the spleen is 
in recycling iron. Erythrocytes in large numbers are destroyed 
intravascularly throughout the body. The released hemoglobin 
is then bound to haptoglobin, which is ultimately scavenged 
from the circulation in the spleen.15
The spleen plays a vital, although not indispensable, role 
in host defense evidenced by the healthy survival of splenec-
tomized patients. Both innate and adaptive immune responses 
(historically categorized as cell-mediated and humoral immu-
nity) occur within the spleen.
In addition to the previously noted activities of the mar-
ginal zone macrophages, marginal zone B cells serve to detect 
circulating pathogens and respond quickly to either differenti-
ate into immunoglobulin M (IgM)–producing plasma cells or 
to function as antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which facilitate 
pathogen removal and destruction.
It is APC entry in the white pulp in particular that is key 
to the initiation of the adaptive immune response. Antigens are 
thus presented to immunocompetent centers within the lymphoid 
1
1427
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
follicles. This gives rise to the elaboration of immunoglobulins 
(predominantly IgM). After an antigen challenge, such an acute 
IgM response results in the release of opsonic antibodies from 
the white pulp of the spleen. Antigen clearance is then facili-
tated by the splenic and hepatic reticuloendothelial systems.
The structure and immunophysiology of the white pulp is 
very similar to that of lymph nodes, with the notable difference 
being that material enters the lymph node in the lymph whereas 
it is delivered to the white pulp in the blood.16
The spleen also produces opsonins, tuftsin, and proper-
din. Circulating monocytes are converted within the red pulp 
into fixed macrophages that account for the spleen’s remarkable 
phagocytic activity.
The spleen also appears to be a major source of the protein 
properdin, important in the initiation of the alternate pathway of 
complement activation. The splenic reticuloendothelial system 
is better able to clear bacteria that are poorly or inadequately 
opsonized from the circulation than is the hepatic reticuloendo-
thelial system. Encapsulated bacteria generally fit such a pro-
file, hence the risk posed by pneumococcus and Haemophilus 
influenzae to an asplenic patient. There appears to be sufficient 
physiologic capacity within the complement cascade to with-
stand the loss of tuftsin and properdin production without an 
increase in patient vulnerability after splenectomy.17-19
In patients with chronic hemolytic disorders, splenic tissue 
may become permanently hypertrophied. The reticular spaces of 
the red pulp become distended with macrophages engorged with 
the products of erythrocyte breakdown, and splenomegaly can 
result. It is important to distinguish between splenomegaly and 
hypersplenism, two similar but distinct terms that are critical to 
understand when discussing splenic pathology. Splenomegaly 
refers simply to abnormal enlargement of the spleen. Spleno-
megaly is described variably within the surgical literature 
as moderate, massive, and hyper, which reflects a lack 
of consensus. Most would agree, however, that splenomegaly 
applies to organs weighing ≥500 g and/or averaging ≥15 cm 
in length.
Massive splenomegaly similarly lacks a consensus defini-
tion but has been described variably as spleens >1 kg in mass or 
>22 cm in length (Fig. 34-4).6 Spleens palpable below the left 
costal margin are thought to be at least double normal size, with 
an estimated weight of ≥750 g.20
There is not a single, universally accepted standard, but 
most would agree that an ex vivo mass of >1 kg or a pole-to-
pole length of >15 cm generally qualifies as splenomegaly. 
Hypersplenism often is found in association with splenomegaly 
but is not synonymous with it. Hypersplenism is defined as the 
presence of one or more cytopenias in the context of a normally 
functioning bone marrow.
Disorders causing hypersplenism can be categorized as 
either (a) those in which increased destruction of abnormal 
blood cells occurs in an intrinsically normal spleen (e.g., 
hemolytic anemias) or (b) primary disorders of the spleen 
resulting in increased sequestration and destruction of normal 
blood cells (e.g., infiltrative disorders).
The life cycles of cellular elements vary widely in human 
blood. A neutrophil in circulation has a normal half-life of 
approximately 6 hours. The spleen’s role in the normal clearance 
of neutrophils is not well established. It is clear that hypersplen-
ism may result in neutropenia through sequestration of normal 
white blood cells or the removal of abnormal ones. Platelets, on 
the other hand, generally survive in the circulation for 10 days. 
A
B
C
Figure 34-4.  Splenomegaly. A. Computed tomography (CT) scan. 
B. Three-dimensional reconstruction of CT scan. C. Postoperative 
specimen.
2
3
1428
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Under normal circumstances, a third of the total platelet pool 
is sequestered in the spleen. Thrombocytopenia may result 
from excessive sequestration of platelets as well as accelerated 
platelet destruction in the spleen. Splenomegaly may result in 
sequestration of up to 80% of the platelet pool. The spleen may 
also contribute to the immunologic alteration of platelets, which 
leads to thrombocytopenia in the absence of splenomegaly (e.g., 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura [ITP]).21
The immunologic functions of the spleen are consistent 
with those of other lymphoid organs. It is a site of bloodborne 
antigen presentation and the initiation of T- and B-lymphocyte 
activities involved in humoral and cellular immune responses. 
Alteration of splenic immune function often gives rise to anti-
body production, which results in blood cell destruction.
Although the spleen contributes to the process of eryth-
rocyte maturation, in adult humans there is little evidence of 
normal hematopoietic function. The spleen does have a minor 
role in hematopoiesis in the fourth month in the human fetus, 
and reactivation can occur in childhood if the bone marrow fails 
to meet the hematologic needs. Splenic hematopoiesis giving 
rise to abnormal red blood cells is seen in adults with myelopro-
liferative disorders. In addition, in response to some anemias, 
elements of the red pulp may revert to hematopoiesis.
IMAGING FOR EVALUATION OF  
SIZE AND PATHOLOGY
Prior to operation, thorough assessment of anatomic detail and 
functional status of the spleen is essential for surgical planning. 
Special preoperative consideration needs to be given to patients 
with splenomegaly because minimally invasive methods 
increase in difficulty with increasing size of the spleen. Other 
indications for splenic imaging include trauma, investigations of 
left upper quadrant pain, characterization of splenic lesions such 
as tumors, cysts, and abscesses, and guidance for percutaneous 
procedures.22,23
Preoperative imaging of the spleen is primarily performed 
to obtain an accurate assessment of the splenic volume in order 
to confirm and document splenomegaly as well as to exclude 
any large splenic lesion that could affect the surgical resection 
plane. Identification of the presence of accessory spleens in the 
preoperative setting is also important, although lack of acces-
sory tissue on the imaging should not preclude a thorough intra-
operative search.
The guidelines of the European Association for Endoscopic 
Surgery suggest that all patients should undergo preoperative 
imaging.20 Some of the common imaging modalities include 
ultrasound and computed tomography (CT), both enabling mea-
surement of splenic size and volume. When desired, the splenic 
volume may be calculated using a formula for the volume of a 
prolate ellipsoid: Volume (cc) = Length (cm) × Width (cm) × 
Height (cm) × 0.52.43 Other imaging modalities, although not as 
commonly used, include nuclear medicine studies and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI).
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is the least invasive mode of splenic imaging. It is 
rapid, easy to perform, and does not expose the patient to ioniz-
ing radiation. It is often the first imaging modality applied to the 
spleen during evaluation and resuscitation of the trauma patient, 
although questions of sensitivity and specificity remain.24,25 In 
the elective setting, such as for routine diagnostic purposes or 
for preoperative planning, it is the least costly modality avail-
able, and the sensitivity of ultrasound for detecting textural 
lesions of the spleen can be quite good in experienced hands.26
When examining a normal spleen, differentiation between 
red and white pulp is not possible, and a homogeneous acous-
tic echotexture should be visualized. Splenic artery and vein 
patency may be assessed using Doppler imaging. Splenic artery 
anatomy has been classified commonly into two patterns: dis-
tributed and magistral. This variability in vascular distribution 
visualized by Doppler imaging becomes important when there 
is consideration of performing a partial splenectomy.
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided procedures for splenic 
disease (e.g., cyst aspiration, biopsy), historically avoided due 
to the risk of hemorrhage and other complications, are becoming 
more common as the safety of these procedures is being increas-
ingly demonstrated.22,23
Computed Tomography
CT affords a high degree of resolution and detail of the splenic 
parenchyma, vasculature, and its relationship to neighboring 
structures. Modern-day CT is more automated and thus less 
operator dependent than ultrasound, which makes it the pre-
ferred imaging modality for many practitioners. Furthermore, 
CT has become an invaluable tool in the evaluation and man-
agement of the blunt trauma patient, and standardized scoring 
systems for splenic trauma based on CT images now aid in man-
agement decisions.27 In the nontrauma setting, CT is extremely 
useful for assessment of splenomegaly, identification of solid 
and cystic lesions, and guidance of percutaneous procedures.3 
The use of iodinated contrast material adds diagnostic clarity 
to CT imaging of the spleen, although at the cost of the small 
but real risks of renal impairment or allergic reaction. Three-
dimensional reconstruction after CT scan may help to predict 
the difficulty of the procedure and to choose the best surgical 
approach: open or laparoscopic.29,30
The appearance of normal splenic tissue on a noncontrast 
CT is uniform parenchymal attenuation. On a contrast-enhanced 
CT, the appearance of the spleen depends largely on the timing 
of the intravenous bolus administration of contrast material. Due 
to the different rates of flow through the red and white pulp, 
the spleen appears heterogeneously enhancing during the first 
minute after initiation of intravenous administration of contrast 
material. The frequency of these artifacts increases with advanc-
ing patient age. When evaluating a splenic abscess, a contrast-
enhanced CT should be considered.28,43
Three-dimensional CT volumetry is a novel modality that 
measures the volume of the spleen. This tool may be of some 
benefit in planning technically challenging cases involving sple-
nomegaly. A recent retrospective review of laparoscopic sple-
nectomy patients who underwent CT volumetry preoperatively 
demonstrated a higher conversion rate when the spleen was 
measured to be greater than 2700 cc.29 This information may 
aid in preoperative planning in determining which patients may 
benefit from a hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery approach or 
open approach.97
Plain Radiography
Rarely is plain radiography used for primary splenic imaging. 
Plain films can indirectly provide an outline of the spleen in the 
left upper quadrant or suggest splenomegaly by revealing dis-
placement of adjacent air-filled structures (e.g., the stomach or 
splenic flexure of the colon). Plain films may also demonstrate 
1429
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
splenic calcifications. Splenic calcifications often are found in 
association with splenomegaly but are otherwise a nonspecific 
finding. Splenic calcifications can indicate a number of benign, 
neoplastic, or infectious processes, including phlebolith, splenic 
artery aneurysm, sickle cell changes, tumors (e.g., hemangioma, 
hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma), echinococcosis, or tuberculosis.26
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Although MRI offers excellent detail and versatility in abdomi-
nal imaging, it is more expensive than CT scanning or ultra-
sound and offers no obvious advantage for primary imaging of 
the spleen. MRI can be a valuable adjunct to the more com-
monly used imaging techniques when splenic disease is sus-
pected but not definitively diagnosed.26,28
Magnetic resonance (MR) signal characteristics of the 
spleen are related to the relative ratio of red and white pulp and 
the relationship of the timing of the intravenous (IV) contrast 
bolus and the time of image acquisition. The spleen will gener-
ally have a homogeneous MR signal on noncontrast images. 
On contrast MRI, the spleen appears to have heterogeneous 
enhancement during the arterial phase of contrast enhancement.
Angiography
Angiography of the spleen most commonly refers to invasive 
arterial imaging, and when it is combined with therapeutic 
splenic arterial embolization (SAE), there are multiple appli-
cations for this procedure: localization and treatment of hem-
orrhage in select trauma patients31; delivery of a variety of 
therapies in patients with cirrhosis or portal and sinistral hyper-
tension and in transplant patients32; and adjunct (or, more con-
troversially, as an alternative) to splenectomy for treatment of 
hematologic disorders such as ITP or hypersplenism.33 Preop-
erative or intraoperative SAE for elective splenectomy is also a 
common, although not universal, practice. Few prospective data 
have been published in the last 5 years on preoperative SAE.34 
Preoperative SAE is purported not only to facilitate operation 
but also possibly to allow a laparoscopic approach in patients 
whose spleens had previously been considered too large for, 
or otherwise not amenable to, laparoscopic resection. Limited 
success in using partial SAE as an alternative to therapeutic 
splenectomy in chronic ITP has been previously reported.35 Its 
detractors argue that the need for increased analgesics and occa-
sional extended hospital stay preoperatively, the possibility of 
pancreatitis, and the well-described risks of invasive arteriogra-
phy negate any presumed benefits of preoperative SAE.
Nuclear Imaging
Radioscintigraphy with technetium-99m sulfur colloid demon-
strates splenic location and size. It may be especially helpful in 
locating accessory spleens after unsuccessful splenectomy for 
ITP and has recently proven useful in diagnosing splenosis.36,37 
Unfortunately, no conclusive outcome benefit has been shown 
for preoperative technetium scanning before splenectomy.38,39 
When dealing with diseases of platelet sequestration, indium-
labeled autologous platelet scanning (ILAPS) demonstrates 
whether platelet sequestration is predominantly in the spleen, 
liver, or both. This becomes important in deciding whether or 
not a patient will benefit from a splenectomy. ILAPS is a nuclear 
imaging modality in which autologous platelets are reinfused 
into the patient after ex vivo labeling. Subsequent scintigraphy 
demonstrates the site(s) of platelet sequestration and clearance. 
It has been proposed that patients with purely or predominantly 
splenic sequestration determined by ILAPS may be more likely 
to respond to splenectomy than those exhibiting hepatic, mixed, 
or diffuse patterns.33
An emerging and novel application for spleen scintigra-
phy may be as a noninvasive method to diagnose nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH). NASH, which may lead to cirrhosis, 
can result from nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the 
most common cause of steatosis. With the rising prevalence of 
obesity in the United States, NAFLD is also increasingly prev-
alent.12 The diagnosis of progression from NAFLD to NASH 
has been dependent on histologic assessment of tissue obtained 
from liver biopsy. Characteristics unique to NASH have been 
reported, among them the association of splenic enlargement, 
not seen to a similar degree in NAFLD.10
In addition, the ratio of liver-to-spleen uptake determined 
by scintigraphy has been found to be predictably altered in 
NASH patients. The liver-to-spleen uptake ratio is significantly 
decreased in NASH patients, but not NAFLD patients, leading 
some to conclude that technetium-99m-phytate scintigraphy is a 
reliable tool to differentiate NASH from NAFLD.40
INDICATIONS FOR SPLENECTOMY
Splenectomy is therapeutic for a large host of conditions, which 
can be divided into the following broad categories: (a) benign, 
including red blood cell disorders, hemoglobinopathies, and 
platelet disorders; (b) malignant, including white blood cell 
disorders and bone marrow disorders (myeloproliferative dis-
orders); and (c) other, including cysts and tumors, infections 
and abscesses, splenic rupture, and a number of miscellaneous 
disorders and lesions (Table 34-1).
Overall, the most common indication for splenectomy is 
trauma to the spleen, whether external trauma (blunt or penetrat-
ing) or iatrogenic injury (e.g., during operative procedures for 
other reasons). Inadvertent intraoperative injury to the spleen 
in the nontrauma patient is discussed in a later section. Man-
agement of splenic injury in the trauma patient is beyond the 
scope of this chapter. The most common indication for elective 
splenectomy is ITP.
Benign Disorders
Red Blood Cell Disorders
Congenital
Hereditary Spherocytosis.  Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) 
results from an inherited dysfunction or deficiency in one of the 
erythrocyte membrane proteins (spectrin, ankyrin, band 3 pro-
tein, or protein 4.2). The resulting destabilization of the mem-
brane lipid bilayer allows a pathologic release of membrane 
lipids. The red blood cell assumes a more spherical, less deform-
able shape, and the spherocytic erythrocytes are sequestered and 
destroyed in the spleen. Hemolytic anemia ensues; in fact, HS is 
the most common hemolytic anemia for which splenectomy is 
indicated. HS is inherited primarily in an autosomal dominant 
fashion; the estimated prevalence in Western populations is 1 
in 5000.41-43
Patients with typical HS forms may have mild jaundice. 
Splenomegaly usually is present on physical examination. Lab-
oratory examination reveals varying degrees of anemia: patients 
with mild forms of the disease may have no anemia; patients 
with severe forms may have hemoglobin levels as low as 4 to 
6 g/dL. The mean corpuscular volume is typically low to nor-
mal or slightly decreased. For screening, a combined elevated 
1430
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 34-1
Indications for and expected response to splenectomy in various diseases and conditions
Disease/Condition
Indications for Splenectomy
Response to Splenectomy
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hemolytic anemia, recurrent transfusions, 
intractable leg ulcers
Improves or eliminates anemia
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Limited role for splenectomy
—
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Only in severe cases, recurrent transfusions
Decreased transfusion requirement, 
palliative only
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency
None
—
Warm-antibody autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia
Failure of medical (steroid) therapy
60%–80% response rate, recurrences 
common
Sickle cell disease
History of acute sequestration crisis, 
splenic symptoms, or infarction (consider 
concomitant cholecystectomy)
Palliative, variable response
Thalassemia
Excessive transfusion requirements, 
symptomatic splenomegaly, or infarction
Diminished transfusion requirements, 
relief of symptoms
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Intolerable symptomatic splenomegaly
Relief of abdominal pain and early satiety
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Symptomatic splenomegaly
Relief of abdominal pain and early satiety
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
Symptomatic splenomegaly
Relief of abdominal pain and early satiety
Essential thrombocythemia
Only for advanced disease (i.e., 
transformation to myeloid metaplasia or 
AML) with severe symptomatic splenomegaly
Relief of abdominal pain and early satiety
Polycythemia vera
Only for advanced disease (i.e., 
transformation to myeloid metaplasia or 
AML) with severe symptomatic splenomegaly
Relief of abdominal pain and early satiety
Myelofibrosis (agnogenic myeloid 
metaplasia)
Severe symptomatic splenomegaly
76% clinical response at 1 y, high risk of 
hemorrhagic, thrombotic, and infectious 
complications (26%)
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Cytopenias and anemia
75% response rate
Hodgkin’s disease
Surgical staging in selected cases
—
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Cytopenias, symptomatic splenomegaly
Improved complete blood count values, 
relief of symptoms
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Failure of medical therapy, recurrent disease
75%–85% rate of long-term response
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Excessive plasma exchange requirement
Typically curative
Abscesses of the spleen
Therapy of choice
Curative
Symptomatic parasitic cysts
Therapy of choice
Curative; exercise caution not to spill cyst 
contents
Symptomatic nonparasitic cysts
Partial splenectomy for small cysts; unroofing 
for large cysts
Curative
Gaucher’s disease
Hypersplenism
Improves cytopenias; does not correct 
underlying disease
Niemann-Pick disease
Symptomatic splenomegaly
Improves symptoms; does not correct 
underlying disease
Amyloidosis
Symptomatic splenomegaly
Improves symptoms; does not correct 
underlying disease
Sarcoidosis
Hypersplenism or symptomatic splenomegaly
Improves symptoms and cytopenias; does 
not correct underlying disease
Felty’s syndrome
Neutropenia
80% durable response rate
Splenic artery aneurysm
Splenectomy best for distal lesions near 
splenic hilum
Curative
Portal hypertension
Portal or sinistral hypertension due to splenic 
vein thrombosis
Palliative
1431
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration and an elevated 
erythrocyte distribution width are an excellent predictor. Other 
laboratory indicators of HS include those providing evidence of 
rapid red blood cell destruction, including elevated reticulocyte 
count, elevated lactate dehydrogenase level, and increased level 
of unconjugated bilirubin. Spherocytes are readily apparent on 
peripheral blood film.
Risks and benefits should be assessed carefully before 
splenectomy and cholecystectomy are performed for HS.41 The 
main indications are symptomatic hemolytic anemia, growth 
retardation, skeletal changes, leg ulcers, and extramedullary 
hemopoietic tumors in young patients. If gallstones coexist with 
spherocytosis, the gallbladder should be removed, but prophy-
lactic cholecystectomy without gallstones is not recommended. 
Near total splenectomy is advocated in children. Dramatic clini-
cal improvement—despite persistent hemolysis—usually occurs 
after splenectomy in patients with severe disease. Because 
children can be affected with HS, the timing of splenectomy is 
important and is aimed at reducing the quite small possibility of 
overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis. Delaying such an opera-
tion until the patient is between the ages of 4 and 6—unless 
the anemia and hemolysis accelerate—is recommended by most 
experts.44
Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE) merits brief discussion to 
distinguish it from HS. Both HS and HE are conditions of the 
red blood cell membrane that result from genetic defects in 
skeletal membrane proteins. With the HE defect, the red blood 
cell elongates as it circulates, so that far fewer red blood cells 
are sequestered or destroyed when transiting the splenic paren-
chyma. Unless more than 50% of red blood cells are affected (a 
scenario that could permit development of a clinical syndrome 
like HS), HE may be considered harmless.
Red Blood Cell Enzyme Deficiencies.  Red blood cell enzyme 
deficiencies associated with hemolytic anemia may be classified 
into two groups: deficiencies of enzymes involved in glycolytic 
pathways, such as pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency, and defi-
ciencies of enzymes needed to maintain a high ratio of reduced 
to oxidized glutathione in the red blood cell, protecting it from 
oxidative damage, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) deficiency.45
Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency  The most common red blood cell 
enzyme deficiency to cause congenital chronic hemolytic ane-
mia is PK deficiency.45 Its pathophysiology is unclear. PK defi-
ciency affects people worldwide, with a slight preponderance 
among those of northern European or Chinese descent. Clinical 
manifestations of the disease vary widely, from transfusion-
dependent severe anemia in early childhood to well-compensated 
mild anemia in adolescents or adults. Diagnosis is made either 
by a screening test or by detection of specific mutations at the 
complementary DNA or genomic level. Splenomegaly is com-
mon, and in severe cases, splenectomy can alleviate transfusion 
requirements.5 As with other disorders that cause hemolytic 
anemia in children, splenectomy should be delayed if possible 
to at least 4 years of age to reduce the risk of postsplenectomy 
infection.
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency  The most 
common red blood cell enzyme deficiency overall is G6PD defi-
ciency. It is far more prevalent than PK deficiency with more 
than 400 million people affected worldwide, although most 
experience only moderate health risks and no longevity reduc-
tion.46 Clinical manifestations—chronic hemolytic anemia, 
acute intermittent hemolytic episodes, or no hemolysis—depend 
on the variant of G6PD deficiency. The mainstay of therapy is 
avoidance of drugs known to precipitate hemolysis in patients 
with G6PD deficiency. Transfusions are given in cases of symp-
tomatic anemia. Conventional wisdom is that splenectomy is 
not indicated in this disease, and certainly the overwhelming 
majority of patients with G6PD deficiency will neither require 
nor benefit from splenectomy. However, one report described a 
small collection of cases of six symptomatic G6PD deficiency 
patients who had severe hemolytic anemia and required transfu-
sion, all of whom were identified to share a common mutation 
at exon 10. All underwent splenectomy. A complete response 
occurred in four patients (transfusion requirement eliminated), 
and a partial response occurred in one patient (transfusion 
requirement reduced); no follow-up data were provided for the 
remaining patient. This study indicates that for a carefully select 
group of patients with severe hemolytic anemia attributable to 
G6PD deficiency, splenectomy may be of benefit, although 
more data must be collected before such a recommendation can 
be made.46
Acquired
Warm-Antibody Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia.  Autoim-
mune hemolytic anemias (AIHAs) are characterized by the 
destruction of red blood cells, whose erythrocyte life span is 
diminished by autoantibodies leveled against antigens. AIHA 
is classified as either primary or secondary, depending on 
whether an underlying cause, such as a disease or toxin, is iden-
tified. AIHA is also divided into “warm” and “cold” catego-
ries, based on the temperature at which the autoantibodies exert 
their effect.47 In cold-agglutinin disease, severe symptoms are 
uncommon and splenectomy is almost never indicated; there-
fore, this entity is not discussed further in this section. However, 
warm-antibody AIHA has clinical consequences with which the 
surgeon should be familiar.
Warm-antibody AIHA, although occurring primarily 
in midlife, can affect individuals at all ages. The disorder is 
more common among women, and fully half of warm-antibody 
AIHA cases are idiopathic. Clinical presentation may be acute 
or gradual. Findings include mild jaundice and symptoms and 
signs of anemia. One-third to one-half of patients present with 
splenomegaly. Sometimes in such cases the spleen is palpable 
on physical examination. The diagnosis relies on demonstrat-
ing hemolysis as indicated by anemia, reticulocytosis, and/or 
products of red blood cell destruction, including bilirubin, in the 
blood, urine, and stool. A positive result on direct Coombs’ test 
confirms the AIHA diagnosis by distinguishing autoimmune 
from other forms of hemolytic anemia.
Treatment of AIHA depends on the severity of the disease 
and whether it is primary or secondary. Severe symptomatic 
anemia demands prompt attention, often requiring red blood cell 
transfusion. The mainstay treatment for both primary and sec-
ondary forms of symptomatic, unstable AIHA is corticosteroids. 
Therapy should continue until a response is noted by a rise in 
hematocrit and fall in reticulocyte count, which generally occurs 
within 3 weeks.
Clinical response to splenectomy for AIHA varies, and the 
evidence from a number of small case series is conflicting. For 
example, one 2004 series reported a favorable response to sple-
nectomy in patients with AIHA secondary to chronic lympho-
cytic leukemia,48 whereas more recent series found no benefit 
from splenectomy in patients with AIHA secondary to systemic 
lupus erythematosus or inflammatory bowel disease.49
1432
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Favorable responses to splenectomy have been reported in 
patients with warm-antibody AIHA. Transient responses are 
more common, however, and many patients eventually expe-
rience hemolysis again despite splenectomy.48,49 The decision 
regarding splenectomy in the case of AIHA should be individu-
alized based on careful consideration of the clinical history and 
frank discussion with the patient. It is considered as a third-line 
therapy after failure of steroids or anti-CD20 antibody admin-
istration.50
Hemoglobinopathies.  Sickle cell disease is an inherited 
chronic hemolytic anemia that results from the mutant sickle 
cell hemoglobin (HbS) within the red blood cell and is inherited 
in an autosomal codominant fashion. Persons who inherit an 
HbS gene from one parent (heterozygous) are carriers; those 
who inherit an HbS gene from both parents (homozygous) have 
sickle cell anemia.51
In sickle cell disease, the underlying abnormality is the 
mutation of adenine to thymine in the sixth codon of the β-globin 
gene, which results in the substitution of valine for glutamic 
acid as the sixth amino acid of the β-globin chain. Mutant β 
chains included in the hemoglobin tetramer create HbS. Deoxy-
genated HbS is insoluble and becomes polymerized and sickled. 
The subsequent lack of deformability of the red blood cell, in 
addition to other processes, results in microvascular congestion, 
which may lead to thrombosis, ischemia, and tissue necrosis. 
The disorder is characterized by painful intermittent episodes.
Sequestration occurs in the spleen, with splenomegaly 
resulting early in the disease course. In most patients, subse-
quent infarction of the spleen and autosplenectomy occur at 
some later time. The most frequent indications for splenectomy 
in sickle cell disease are recurrent acute sequestration crises, 
hypersplenism, and splenic abscess. The occurrence of one 
major acute sequestration crisis, characterized by rapid painful 
enlargement of the spleen and circulatory collapse, generally 
is considered sufficient grounds for splenectomy. Preoperative 
preparation should include special attention to adequate hydra-
tion and avoidance of hypothermia.
Splenectomy does not affect the sickling process, and ther-
apy for sickle cell anemia remains largely palliative. It is only 
indicated in cases of massive splenomegaly or frequent seques-
tration crisis. The patients often have a functional asplenia. 
Transfusions are indicated for anemia, for moderately severe 
episodes of acute chest syndrome (i.e., a new infiltrate on chest 
radiograph associated with new symptoms, such as fever, cough, 
sputum production, or hypoxia), and preoperatively before sple-
nectomy. Patients experiencing stroke or a severe crisis may 
require hydration and an exchange transfusion, which may be 
performed manually or with automated apheresis equipment. 
Hydroxyurea is an oral chemotherapeutic agent that upregulates 
fetal hemoglobin, which interferes with polymerization of HbS 
and thus reduces the sickling process.52
Thalassemia.  Thalassemia is the term for a group of inherited 
disorders of hemoglobin synthesis prevalent among people of 
Mediterranean extraction and classified according to the hemo-
globin chain (α, β, or γ) affected. As a group, the thalassemias 
are the most common genetic diseases known to arise from a 
single gene defect.53,54 Most forms of this disorder are inherited 
in Mendelian recessive fashion from asymptomatic carrier par-
ents. In the so-called thalassemia belt that extends throughout 
the shores of the Mediterranean as well as through the Arabian 
Peninsula, Turkey, Iran, India, and southeastern Asia, the incidence 
of thalassemia is between 2.5% and 15%. However, thalas-
semias have been found in people of all ethnic origins.54
In all forms of thalassemia, the primary defect is absent or 
reduced production of hemoglobin chains. From this abnormal-
ity, two significant consequences arise: (a) reduced functioning 
of hemoglobin tetramers, yielding hypochromia and microcy-
tosis; and (b) unbalanced biosynthesis of individual α and β 
subunits, which results in insoluble red blood cells that cannot 
release oxygen normally and may precipitate with cell aging. 
Both underproduction of hemoglobin and excess production of 
unpaired hemoglobin subunits contribute to thalassemia-associated 
morbidity and mortality.
A diagnosis of thalassemia major (homozygous form) is 
made by demonstrating hypochromic microcytic anemia asso-
ciated with randomly distorted red blood cells and nucleated 
erythrocytes (target cells) on peripheral blood smear.5 Elevated 
reticulocyte count and white blood cell count are among the 
associated findings. Because α chains are needed to form both 
fetal hemoglobin and adult hemoglobin, α-thalassemia becomes 
symptomatic in utero or at birth. By contrast, β-thalassemia 
becomes symptomatic at 4 to 6 months, because β chains are 
involved only in adult hemoglobin synthesis.
The clinical spectrum of the thalassemias is wide. Het-
erozygous carriers of the disease are usually asymptomatic. 
Homozygous individuals, on the other hand, typically present 
before 2 years of age with pallor, growth retardation, jaundice, 
and abdominal swelling due to liver and spleen enlargement. 
Among other characteristics of thalassemia major are intractable 
leg ulcers, head enlargement, frequent infections, and the need 
for periodic blood transfusions. Untreated individuals usually 
die in late infancy or early childhood from severe anemia.5
Treatment for thalassemia involves red blood cell transfu-
sions to maintain a hemoglobin level of >9 mg/dL, along with 
intensive parenteral chelation therapy with deferoxamine. Sple-
nectomy is indicated for patients with excessive transfusion 
requirements (>200 mL/kg per year), discomfort due to spleno-
megaly, or painful splenic infarction. Careful assessment of the 
risk-benefit ratio is essential. Thalassemia patients are at high 
risk for pulmonary hypertension after splenectomy; the precise 
etiology of this sequela is under investigation.55 The increase 
in infectious complications is likely to be due to a coexisting 
immune deficiency, in large part brought about by iron over-
load, which may be associated both with the thalassemia itself 
and with transfusions. The disproportionately high rate of over-
whelming postsplenectomy infection in thalassemia patients 
has led some investigators to consider partial splenectomy 
in children; some success in reducing mortality has been 
reported.56 However, splenectomy should be delayed until after 
the age of 4 years unless it is absolutely necessary.
Platelet Disorders
Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura  Idiopathic thrombo-
cytopenic purpura (ITP), also called immune thrombocytope-
nic purpura, is an autoimmune disorder characterized by a low 
platelet count and mucocutaneous and petechial bleeding. The 
low platelet count stems from premature removal of platelets 
opsonized by antiplatelet immunoglobulin G autoantibodies 
produced in the spleen. This clearance occurs through the inter-
action of platelet autoantibodies with Fc receptors expressed on 
tissue macrophages, predominantly in the spleen and liver. The 
estimated incidence of ITP is 100 persons per million annu-
ally, about one-half of whom are children.57 Adult-onset and 
4
1433
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
childhood-onset ITP are strikingly different in their clinical 
course and management.
Patients with ITP typically present with petechiae or 
ecchymoses, although some experience major bleeding from 
the outset. Bleeding may occur from mucosal surfaces in the 
form of gingival bleeding, epistaxis, menorrhagia, hematuria, or 
even melena. The severity of bleeding frequently corresponds 
to the deficiency in platelets: Patients with counts greater than 
50,000/mm3 usually present with incidental findings; those 
with counts between 30,000 and 50,000/mm3 often have easy 
bruising; those with platelet counts between 10,000 and 30,000/
mm3 may develop spontaneous petechiae or ecchymoses; and 
those with counts less than 10,000/mm3 are at risk for internal 
bleeding.57 The incidence of major intracranial hemorrhage is 
approximately 1%, and it usually occurs early in the disease 
course. The duration of the bleeding helps to distinguish acute 
from chronic forms of ITP. Children often present at a young 
age (peak age of approximately 5 years) with sudden onset of 
petechiae or purpura several days to weeks after an infectious 
illness. In contrast, adults experience a more chronic form of 
disease with an insidious onset. Splenomegaly is uncommon 
with ITP in both adults and children, and its occurrence should 
prompt a search for a separate cause of thrombocytopenia. Up to 
10% of children, however, have a palpable spleen tip.
Diagnosis of ITP is based on exclusion of other possibili-
ties in the presence of a low platelet count and mucocutane-
ous bleeding. Other diseases resulting in secondary forms of 
ITP, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid 
syndrome, lymphoproliferative disorders, human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) infection, and hepatitis C, should be identi-
fied and treated when present. In addition, any history of use 
of a drug known to cause thrombocytopenia, such as certain 
antimicrobials, anti-inflammatories, antihypertensives, and anti-
depressants, should be sought. In addition to low platelet count, 
another laboratory finding characteristic of ITP is the presence 
of large, immature platelets (megakaryocytes) on peripheral 
blood smear.
The usual first line of therapy is oral prednisone at a dos-
age of 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg per day.58,59 No consensus exists as to the 
optimal duration of steroid therapy, but most responses occur 
within the first 3 weeks. Response rates range from 50% to 75%, 
but relapses are common. IV immunoglobulin, given at 1.0 g/kg 
per day for 2 to 3 days, is indicated for internal bleeding when 
platelet counts remain less than 5000/mm3, when extensive pur-
pura exists, or to preoperatively boost platelets. IV immunoglob-
ulin is thought to impair clearance of immunoglobulin G–coated 
platelets by competing for binding to tissue macrophage recep-
tors. An immediate response is common, but a sustained remis-
sion is not. The medical approach to ITP has been modified with 
the advent of rituximab60 and thrombopoietin receptor agonists. 
Therapeutic recommendations are summarized in Table 34-2. 
Splenectomy is selectively indicated for failure of medical ther-
apy, for prolonged use of steroids with undesirable effects, and 
in selected cases after first relapse.5 Prolonged use of steroids 
can be defined in various ways, but a persistent need for more 
than 10 to 20 mg/d for 3 to 6 months to maintain a platelet count 
of greater than 30,000/mm3 generally prompts referral for sple-
nectomy. Splenectomy is an effective option for refractory ITP 
and provides a permanent response without subsequent need for 
steroids in 75% to 85% of patients. Two recent reviews and 
meta-analyses have assessed the global results of splenectomy 
for ITP, specifically after the use of laparoscopic techniques. 
In 2004, Kojouri and colleagues60 reviewed 135 case series 
from 1966 to 2004, pooling 4955 patients. The long-term plate-
let count response was assessed, as was the ability to predict 
response and the incidence of complications. Complete response 
was achieved in 66% of cases with a follow-up ranging from 1 to 
153 months, and complete and partial responses occurred in as 
many as 88% of patients, regardless of the duration of follow-
up. They also analyzed 12 preoperative demographic, clinical, 
and laboratory parameters and found no predictive capability of 
platelet response in any of them. Mortality was very low (1%), 
and morbidity was 10%. Limitations of this review included old 
case series and a low percentage of laparoscopic splenectomies. 
In a 2009 systemic review involving 1223 patients, Mikhael and 
colleagues61 evaluated the short- and long-term outcomes after 
laparoscopic splenectomy. The conversion rate to open surgery 
was 5.6%, and the immediate nonresponder rate was 8.2%; 
however, eventually a clinical response was achieved in 72% of 
the patients on long-term follow-up (5 years). The initial con-
cerns regarding the potential for missing accessory spleens, lon-
ger operative times, and increased cost related to laparoscopic 
versus open splenectomy have been resolved. Laparoscopy is 
now the approach of choice for elective splenectomy for ITP.62,63
In children with ITP, the course is self-limited, with 
durable and complete remission in greater than 70% of patients 
regardless of therapy. Because of the good prognosis without 
treatment, the decision to intervene surgically is controversial 
and is largely to obviate intracranial hemorrhage discussed 
Table 34-2
Second-line treatment options for immune thrombo-
cytopenia
Splenectomy
Advantages
•  Effective, time-honored treatment
•  Most effective response (overall 88%, partial 22%, 
complete 66%)
Disadvantages
•  Surgical procedure with associated morbidity and 
mortality
•  Risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection
•  Increased risk of thrombotic events
Rituximab
Advantages
•  Nonsurgical
•  Good experience since 1999
•  Initial response 63%, 31% at 2 years
Disadvantages
•  Short follow-up
•  Severe toxicity 2%–6%
Thrombopoietin Receptor Agonist
Advantages
•  Nonsurgical
•  Oral agent self-administered weekly
•  80% response rate
Disadvantages
•  Long-term treatment required
•  Long-term risk not well known
•  Potential toxicity
1434
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
earlier. Thus, children with typical ITP—and certainly those 
without hemorrhage—are managed principally by observation, 
with short-term therapy in select cases. Urgent splenectomy, in 
conjunction with aggressive medical therapy, may play a role 
in the rare circumstance of severe, life-threatening bleeding in 
both children and adults.
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura.  Thrombotic throm-
bocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a serious disorder characterized 
by thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and 
neurologic complications. Abnormal platelet clumping occurs 
in arterioles and capillaries, reducing the lumen of these vessels 
and predisposing the patient to microvascular thrombotic epi-
sodes. The reduced lumen size also causes shearing stresses on 
erythrocytes, which leads to deformed red blood cells subject to 
hemolysis. Hemolysis may also be due in part to sequestration 
and destruction of erythrocytes in the spleen. Research has dem-
onstrated that the underlying abnormality is likely related to the 
persistence of unusually large multimers of von Willebrand fac-
tor associated with platelet clumping in the patient’s blood.64,65
TTP occurs in approximately 3.7 individuals per million, 
but this rare disorder’s dramatic clinical sequelae and favorable 
response to early therapy demand an understanding of its clini-
cal presentation to ensure an early diagnosis. Clinical features 
of the disorder include petechiae, fever, neurologic symptoms, 
renal failure, and, infrequently, cardiac symptoms such as heart 
failure or arrhythmias. Petechial hemorrhages in the lower 
extremities are the most common presenting sign. Along with 
fever, patients may experience flu-like symptoms, malaise, or 
fatigue. Neurologic changes range from generalized headaches 
to altered mental status, seizures, and even coma. Generally, 
however, the mere presence of petechiae and thrombocytopenia 
is sufficient to lead to the diagnosis of TTP and consideration 
of treatment.
The diagnosis is confirmed by the peripheral blood smear, 
which shows schistocytes, nucleated red blood cells, and baso-
philic stippling. Although other conditions such as tight aortic 
stenosis or prosthetic valves may lead to the presence of schis-
tocytes, these conditions generally are not accompanied by 
thrombocytopenia. TTP may be distinguished from autoimmune 
causes of thrombocytopenia, such as Evans’ syndrome (ITP and 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia) or systemic lupus erythemato-
sus, by a negative result on Coombs’ test.
Plasma exchange is the first-line therapy for TTP. This 
treatment consists of the daily removal of a single volume of the 
patient’s plasma and its replacement with fresh-frozen plasma 
until the thrombocytopenia, anemia, and associated symptoms 
are corrected. Therapy is then tapered over 1 to 2 weeks.51 Sple-
nectomy plays a key role for patients who experience relapse or 
who require multiple plasma exchanges to control symptoms, 
and generally is well tolerated without significant morbidity.65
Malignant Conditions
White Blood Cell Disorders.  The role of splenectomy 
in patients with white blood cell disorders varies. As for the 
myelogenous diseases mentioned previously, splenectomy for 
white blood cell disorders can be effective therapy for symptom-
atic splenomegaly and hypersplenism, improving some clinical 
parameters but generally not altering the course of the underly-
ing disease. Historically, splenectomy has played a role during 
surgical staging for Hodgkin’s disease, although this practice 
has become obsolete with the advent of imaging technologies 
(CT scan and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography [18F-FDG PET]).66-68 Careful consideration of the 
intended benefits of splenectomy must be weighed against the 
significant perioperative and postsplenectomy risks in this often 
complex patient population.43
Hairy Cell Leukemia  Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an uncom-
mon blood disorder, representing only 2% of all adult leuke-
mias. HCL is characterized by splenomegaly, pancytopenia, 
and large numbers of abnormal lymphocytes in the bone mar-
row. These lymphocytes contain irregular hair-like cytoplasmic 
projections identifiable on the peripheral smear. Many HCL 
patients have few symptoms and require no specific therapy. 
Splenectomy does not correct the underlying disorder but does 
return cell counts to normal in 40% to 70% of patients and alle-
viates symptoms of splenomegaly. However, with the advent 
of diverse new drugs (e.g., rituximab, pentostatin, cladribine), 
splenectomy has become rarely indicated.69
Hodgkin’s Disease  Hodgkin’s disease (HD) is a disorder of the 
lymphoid system characterized by the presence of Reed-Stern-
berg cells (which actually form the minority of the Hodgkin’s 
tumor). More than 90% of patients with HD present with lymph-
adenopathy above the diaphragm. Lymph nodes can become 
particularly bulky in the mediastinum, which may result in 
shortness of breath, cough, or obstructive pneumonia. Lymph-
adenopathy below the diaphragm is rare on presentation but can 
arise with disease progression. The spleen is often an occult 
site of spread, but massive splenomegaly is not common. In 
addition, large spleens do not necessarily signify involvement.67
Four major histologic types exist: lymphocyte predomi-
nance type, nodular sclerosis type, mixed cellularity type, and 
lymphocyte depletion type. The histologic type, along with 
location of disease and symptomatology, influence survival for 
patients with HD. Stage I disease is limited to one anatomic 
region; stage II disease is defined by the presence of two or 
more contiguous or noncontiguous regions on the same side 
of the diaphragm; stage III disease involves disease on both 
sides of the diaphragm, but limited to lymph nodes, spleen, and 
Waldeyer’s ring (the ring of lymphoid tissue formed by the lin-
gual, palatine, and nasopharyngeal tonsils); and stage IV disease 
includes involvement of the bone marrow, lung, liver, skin, gas-
trointestinal tract, or any organ or tissue other than the lymph 
nodes or Waldeyer’s ring.67
Staging laparotomy for HD is less commonly performed 
in the current era of minimally invasive surgery and advanced 
imaging techniques. More liberal use of diagnostic tools (CT 
scan and 18F-FDG PET) and chemotherapy for patients with 
HD has drastically reduced the indications for surgical stag-
ing. Current indications for surgical staging include clinical 
suspicion of lymphoma without evidence of peripheral disease 
or patients requiring restaging for suspicion of failure after 
chemotherapy.67,70
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) 
encompasses all malignancies derived from the lymphoid sys-
tem except classic HD.68 A proliferation of any one of the three 
predominant lymph cell types—natural killer cells, T cells, or 
B cells—may be included in the category of NHL. Because of 
the wide net cast by NHL, the clinical presentations of the dis-
orders under its umbrella vary. The subentities of NHL may be 
clinically classified into nodal or extranodal, as well as indo-
lent, aggressive, and very aggressive groups. Patients with indo-
lent lymphomas may present with mild or no symptoms and 
seek medical attention for a swollen lymph node, whereas 
1435
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
the aggressive and very aggressive lymphomas create easily 
noticeable symptoms, such as pain, swelling due to obstruction 
of vessels, fever, and night sweats. Surgical staging is no lon-
ger indicated for NHL, because the combination of history and 
physical examination, chest radiograph and abdominal/pelvic 
CT scan, biopsy of involved lymph nodes (including laparo-
scopically directed nodal and liver biopsies), and bone marrow 
biopsy is sufficient.68 Splenomegaly exists in some, but not all, 
forms of NHL. Splenectomy is indicated in cases where a diag-
nosis cannot be established by obtaining peripheral tissue and 
clinical suspicion remains71,72 or for management of symptoms 
related to an enlarged spleen as well as for improvement of 
cytopenias. Splenectomy does not alter the natural history 
of the disease, but related thrombocytopenia may improve in up 
to 75% of patients.
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia  Chronic lymphocytic leuke-
mia (CCL) is currently considered a subtype of NHL. The main 
characteristic of CLL is a progressive accumulation of old and 
nonfunctional lymphocytes.68,73 Symptoms of CLL are nonspe-
cific and include weakness, fatigue, fever without illness, night 
sweats, and frequent bacterial and viral infections. The most fre-
quent finding is lymphadenopathy. When the spleen is enlarged, 
it may be massive or barely palpable below the costal margin. 
Splenectomy is indicated to improve cytopenias and was shown 
to be 75% effective in a combined group of patients who had 
either CLL or nonmalignant HD.44 Splenectomy may facilitate 
chemotherapy in patients whose cell counts were prohibitively 
low before spleen removal. Palliative splenectomy also is indi-
cated for symptomatic splenomegaly.
Bone Marrow Disorders (Myeloproliferative Disorders).  
The myeloproliferative disorders are characterized by an abnor-
mal growth of cell lines in the bone marrow. They include 
chronic myeloid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, chronic 
myelomonocytic leukemia, essential thrombocythemia, poly-
cythemia vera, and myelofibrosis, also known as agnogenic 
myeloid metaplasia (see “Myelofibrosis [Agnogenic Myeloid 
Metaplasia]” later in this chapter). The common underlying 
problem leading to splenectomy in these disorders is symptom-
atic splenomegaly. Symptoms due to splenomegaly consist of 
early satiety, poor gastric emptying, heaviness or pain in the 
left upper quadrant, and even diarrhea. Hypersplenism, when 
it occurs in these conditions, usually is associated with spleno-
megaly. Splenectomy performed in the setting of the myelopro-
liferative disorders is generally for treatment of the pain, early 
satiety, and other symptoms of splenomegaly.
Splenomegaly can sometimes be treated nonsurgically by 
chemotherapeutic agents (busulfan, hydroxyurea, interferon-α) 
to achieve mild to moderate size reductions and some relief 
of symptoms, but discontinuation of treatment may result in 
rapid splenic regrowth. Radiation has been used since 1903 
to treat symptomatic splenomegaly, but today it is principally 
used in situations in which splenectomy is not an option.
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia  Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) 
is a disorder of the primitive pluripotent stem cells in the bone 
marrow that results in a significant increase in erythroid, mega-
karyotic, and pluripotent progenitors in the peripheral blood 
smear. The genetic hallmark is a transposition between the 
bcr gene on chromosome 9 and the abl gene on chromosome 
22. CML accounts for 7% to 15% of all leukemias, with an 
incidence of 1.5 in 100,000 in the United States.54 It is often 
asymptomatic, but CML can cause fatigue, anorexia, sweating, 
and left upper quadrant pain and early satiety secondary to sple-
nomegaly. Enlargement of the spleen is found in roughly one-
half of patients with CML. Current therapy includes imatinib or 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Splenectomy is indicated 
to ease pain and early satiety and does not prevent blast crisis.55
Acute Myeloid Leukemia  Like CML, acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML) involves the abnormal growth of stem cells in the bone 
marrow. Unlike CML, AML has a presentation that is more rapid 
and dramatic. The proliferation and accumulation of hematopoi-
etic stem cells in the bone marrow and blood inhibit the growth 
and maturation of normal red blood cells, white blood cells, and 
platelets. Death usually results within weeks to months if AML 
goes untreated. The incidence of AML is approximately 9200 
new cases each year in the United States, and it accounts for 
1.2% of all cancer deaths.74 Patients with other myeloprolifera-
tive disorders, such as polycythemia vera, primary thrombocy-
tosis, or myeloid metaplasia, are at increased risk for leukemic 
transformation to AML. Presenting signs and symptoms of 
AML include a viral-like illness with fever, malaise, and fre-
quently bone pain due to the expansion of the medullary space. 
Standard treatment is combined induction therapy with dauno-
rubicin, cytarabine, and stem cell transplantation. Splenectomy 
is indicated in AML only in the uncommon circumstance that 
left upper quadrant pain and early satiety become unbearable. 
The benefit must be weighed against the heightened risk of post-
splenectomy infection in AML patients immunocompromised 
due to neutropenia and chemotherapy.74
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia  Like CML and AML, 
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is characterized 
by a proliferation of hematopoietic elements in the bone mar-
row and blood. CMML differs from CML in that it is associated 
with monocytosis in the peripheral smear (>1 × 103 monocytes/
mm3) and in the bone marrow. Splenomegaly occurs in one-half 
of these patients, and splenectomy can result in symptomatic 
relief.75
Essential Thrombocythemia  Essential thrombocythemia (ET) 
represents abnormal growth of the megakaryocyte cell line, 
resulting in increased levels of platelets in the bloodstream. The 
diagnosis is made after the exclusion of other chronic myeloid 
disorders such as CML, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis 
that may also present with thrombocytosis.76 Clinical manifesta-
tions of ET include vasomotor symptoms, thrombohemorrhagic 
events, recurrent fetal loss, and the transformation to myelofi-
brosis with myeloid metaplasia or AML. Hydroxyurea is used 
to reduce thrombotic events in ET but does not alter transforma-
tion to myelofibrosis or leukemia. Splenomegaly occurs in one-
third to one-half of patients with ET. Splenectomy is not felt 
to be helpful in the early stages of ET and is best reserved for 
the later stages of disease, when myeloid metaplasia has devel-
oped.72 Even in these circumstances, candidates should be cho-
sen selectively, because significant bleeding has been reported 
to complicate splenectomy in these patients.
Polycythemia Vera  Polycythemia vera (PV) is a clonal, 
chronic, progressive myeloproliferative disorder characterized 
by an increase in red blood cell mass, frequently accompanied 
by leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and splenomegaly. Patients 
with PV typically enjoy longer survival than those affected by 
hematologic malignancies but remain at risk for transformation 
to myelofibrosis or AML. The disease is rare, with an annual 
incidence of 5 to 17 cases per million population.76,77 Physi-
cal findings include ruddy cyanosis, conjunctival plethora, 
5
1436
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and hypertension. Treatment 
should be tailored to the risk status of the patient and ranges 
from phlebotomy and aspirin administration to the use of che-
motherapeutic agents. As in ET, splenectomy is not helpful in 
the early stages of disease and is best reserved for patients with 
late-stage disease in whom myeloid metaplasia has developed 
and splenomegaly-related symptoms are severe.76,77
Myelofibrosis (Agnogenic Myeloid Metaplasia)  The term 
myelofibrosis may be used to describe either the generic condi-
tion of fibrosis of the bone marrow (which may be associated 
with a number of benign and malignant disorders) or a specific, 
chronic, malignant hematologic disease associated with sple-
nomegaly, the presence of red blood cell and white blood cell 
progenitors in the bloodstream, marrow fibrosis, and extramed-
ullary hematopoiesis, otherwise known as agnogenic myeloid 
metaplasia (AMM). AMM also can be referred to as myeloscle-
rosis, idiopathic myeloid metaplasia, and osteosclerosis. In this 
chapter, the term myelofibrosis is synonymous with AMM.
In AMM, fibrosis of the bone marrow is believed to be a 
response to a clonal proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. 
Marrow failure is common. The true incidence of AMM is 
unknown due to the scarcity of epidemiologic data, but one 
study estimated its U.S. incidence at 1.46 per 100,000 popula-
tion.78-80 The diagnosis is made by a careful examination of the 
peripheral blood smear and bone marrow. Nucleated red blood 
cells and immature myeloid elements in the blood are present 
in 96% of cases and strongly suggest the diagnosis. Teardrop 
poikilocytosis is another frequent finding. Care must be taken, 
however, to exclude a history of a primary neoplasm (such as 
lymphoma or adenocarcinoma of the stomach, lung, prostate, or 
breast) or tuberculosis, because patients with these conditions 
may develop secondary myelofibrosis.
Treatment depends on symptoms: Asymptomatic patients 
are closely followed, whereas symptomatic patients undergo 
therapeutic intervention targeted to their symptoms. The only 
curative therapy is allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in 
younger, high-risk patients. Supportive therapy for clinically 
symptomatic anemia includes steroids, danazol, erythropoietin, 
or blood transfusion.78,80 Splenomegaly-related symptoms are 
best treated with splenectomy. Although some chemotherapeu-
tic agents (busulfan, hydroxyurea, interferon-α) and low-dose 
radiation can reduce splenic size, their discontinuation usually 
results in rapid splenic regrowth.
A thorough preoperative workup must precede sple-
nectomy in patients with AMM. The candidate must possess 
acceptable cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, and renal reserve for 
the operation. The coagulation system should be examined; 
testing should include measurement of coagulation factors V 
and VIII and fibrin split products, platelet count, and bleeding 
time. Low platelet counts may require administration of ste-
roids and/or platelet transfusion at the time of surgery. Sple-
nectomy provides durable, effective palliation for nearly all 
patients with AMM, although postoperative complications are 
more common in patients with AMM than in those with other 
hematologic indications. The Mayo Clinic recently published 
its 30-year experience with 314 myelofibrosis patients who 
underwent splenectomy. Nearly half of the operations (49%) 
were performed to alleviate the mechanical symptoms of sple-
nomegaly; the remainder were undertaken to manage anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, or portal hypertension. Response to sple-
nectomy was 76% overall at 1 year; overall complication rate 
was 28%, including 21 perioperative deaths.81 Thrombosis, 
hemorrhage, and infection complications were common, with 
preoperative thrombocytopenia an independent predictor of 
mortality risk. These data underscore the severity of this malig-
nancy and emphasize need for careful patient selection when 
considering splenectomy in AMM.79
Other Diseases of the Spleen
Infections and Abscesses.  Primary infections of the spleen 
are infrequently reported. However, the potential effects of 
certain systemic infections on the spleen merit close attention, 
mostly because of the potential risk of spontaneous splenic rup-
ture. Infectious mononucleosis due to either Epstein-Barr virus 
or cytomegalovirus infection imparts a small but often-discussed 
risk of spontaneous splenic rupture in both adults and children. 
The true incidence may be underreported, however. Recent case 
reports abound in the literature regarding spontaneous splenic 
rupture due to a variety of infectious causes (malaria, Listeria 
infection, fungal infections, dengue, and Q fever, to name a few) 
as well as a variety of neoplastic and other noninfectious causes 
(lymphoma, angiosarcoma, amyloidosis, pregnancy). The pre-
sumed pathophysiologic mechanism is infiltration of the splenic 
parenchyma with inflammatory cells, which distorts the archi-
tecture and fibrous support system of the spleen and thins the 
splenic capsule.82 In this setting, splenic rupture can occur spon-
taneously or after a seemingly minor external trauma or even a 
Valsalva maneuver.
Abscesses of the spleen are uncommon, with an incidence 
of 0.14% to 0.7% based on autopsy findings.82 They occur 
more frequently in tropical locations, where they are associated 
with thrombosed splenic vessels and infarction in patients with 
sickle cell anemia. Five distinct mechanisms of splenic abscess 
formation have been described: (a) hematogenous infection; 
(b) contiguous infection; (c) hemoglobinopathy; (d) immuno-
suppression, including HIV infection and chemotherapy; and (e) 
trauma. Presentation frequently is delayed, with most patients 
enduring symptoms for 16 to 22 days before diagnosis. Clinical 
manifestations include fever, left upper quadrant pain, leukocy-
tosis, and splenomegaly in about one-third of patients. The diag-
nosis is confirmed by ultrasound or CT scan, which has a 95% 
sensitivity and specificity. The most common organisms in most 
series are aerobic microbes (streptococci and Escherichia coli), 
but other microorganisms have also been isolated (Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis and Salmonella typhi). Upon discovery of a 
splenic abscess, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started, 
with adjustment to more specific therapy based on culture results 
and continuation of treatment for 14 days. Splenectomy is the 
operation of choice, but percutaneous and open drainage are 
options for patients who cannot tolerate splenectomy. Percuta-
neous drainage is successful for patients with unilocular disease.
Cysts.  Splenic cysts (Fig. 34-5) can be categorized according 
to a number of criteria; one clinically relevant scheme is to char-
acterize splenic cysts as either parasitic or nonparasitic.
Parasitic infection is the most common cause of splenic 
cysts worldwide, and the majority is due to Echinococcus spe-
cies. Such cysts are more commonly found in areas where the 
pathogen is endemic. Symptoms, when present, generally are 
related to the presence of a mass lesion in the left upper quadrant 
or a lesion that impinges on the stomach. Ultrasound can estab-
lish the presence of a cystic lesion and occasionally incidentally 
detect asymptomatic lesions as well. Serologic testing for echi-
nococcal antibodies can confirm or exclude the cystic lesion as 
1437
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
parasitic, an important piece of information when planning oper-
ative therapy. Symptomatic parasitic cysts are best treated with 
splenectomy. Avoidance of spillage of parasitic cyst contents 
into the peritoneal cavity to avoid the possibility of anaphylactic 
shock is an important principle in surgical management.
Cysts resulting from trauma are termed pseudocysts due 
to their lack of cellular lining. Less common examples of non-
parasitic cysts are dermoid, epidermoid, and epithelial cysts.66 
The treatment of nonparasitic cysts depends on whether or not 
they produce symptoms. Asymptomatic nonparasitic cysts may 
be observed with close follow-up by ultrasound to exclude sig-
nificant expansion. Patients should be advised of the risk of 
cyst rupture with even minor abdominal trauma if they elect 
nonoperative management for large cysts. Small symptomatic 
nonparasitic cysts may be excised with splenic preservation, and 
large symptomatic nonparasitic cysts may be unroofed. Both of 
these operations may be performed laparoscopically.66
Tumors and Metastasis.  The most common primary tumor 
of the spleen is sarcoma. Autopsy studies reveal an approxi-
mately 0.6% rate of tumor metastasis to the spleen; most of 
A
B
C
D
these metastases are carcinomas. Lung cancer is the tumor that 
most commonly spreads to the spleen.83-85
The spleen is an infrequent site for metastatic deposits 
and usually appears in cases of widely disseminated disease. In 
some circumstances, colorectal, ovary, and melanoma metasta-
ses can be isolated to the spleen. If after a thorough examination, 
the isolated splenic metastasis is confirmed, a laparoscopic sple-
nectomy with intact spleen retrieval should be considered.84,85
Storage Diseases and Infiltrative Disorders
Gaucher’s Disease  Gaucher’s disease is an inherited lipid stor-
age disorder characterized by the deposition of glucocerebroside 
in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. The underlying 
abnormality is a deficiency in the activity of a lysosomal hydro-
lase. Abnormal glycolipid storage results in organomegaly, 
particularly hepatomegaly and splenomegaly.86,87 Patients with 
Gaucher’s disease frequently experience symptoms related to 
splenomegaly, including early satiety and abdominal discom-
fort, and to hypersplenism, including thrombocytopenia, normo-
cytic anemia, and mild leukopenia. These latter findings occur 
as a result of excessive sequestration of formed blood elements 
Figure 34-5.  A. Computed tomography (CT) scan of giant splenic cyst. B. Three-dimensional CT reconstruction of splenic cyst. C and D. 
Macroscopic aspect of a multicystic spleen lesion.
1438
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
in the spleen. Other symptoms in patients with Gaucher’s disease 
include bone pain, pathologic fractures, and jaundice. Splenectomy 
alleviates hematologic abnormalities in patients with hyper-
splenism, but it does not correct the underlying disease process. 
Partial splenectomy has been shown to be effective in children 
to correct both hematologic problems and symptoms due to 
splenomegaly without incurring the risk of overwhelming post-
splenectomy sepsis.
Niemann-Pick Disease  Niemann-Pick disease is an inherited 
disorder of abnormal lysosomal storage of sphingomyelin and 
cholesterol in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. Four 
types of the disease (A, B, C, and D) exist, with unique clinical 
presentations. Types A and B result from a deficiency in lyso-
somal hydrolase and are the forms most likely to demonstrate 
splenomegaly with its concomitant symptoms.
Amyloidosis  Amyloidosis is a disorder of abnormal extracellu-
lar protein deposition. There are multiple forms of amyloidosis, 
each with its own individual clinical presentation, and the sever-
ity of disease may range from asymptomatic to multiorgan fail-
ure. Patients with primary amyloidosis, associated with plasma 
cell dyscrasia, have splenic involvement in approximately 5% of 
cases. Secondary amyloidosis, associated with chronic inflam-
matory conditions, also may present with an enlarged spleen. 
Symptoms of splenomegaly are relieved by splenectomy.
Sarcoidosis  Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disease of young 
adults characterized by noncaseating granulomas in affected 
tissues. Signs and symptoms of the disease range in severity 
and typically are nonspecific, such as fatigue and malaise. Any 
organ system may be involved. The most commonly involved 
organ is the lung, followed by the spleen. Splenomegaly occurs 
in approximately 25% of patients. Massive splenomegaly (>1 kg) 
is rare.69 Other affected tissues include the lymph nodes, eyes, 
joints, liver, spleen, and heart. When splenomegaly occurs and 
causes symptoms related to size or hypersplenism, splenectomy 
effectively relieves symptoms and corrects hematologic abnor-
malities such as anemia and thrombocytopenia. Spontaneous 
splenic rupture has been reported in sarcoidosis.88
Miscellaneous Disorders and Lesions
Splenic Artery Aneurysm  Although splenic artery aneurysm is 
rare, it is the most common visceral artery aneurysm. Women 
are four times more likely to be affected than men. The aneu-
rysm usually arises in the middle to distal portion of the splenic 
artery.89,90 Indications for treatment include presence of symp-
toms, pregnancy, intention to become pregnant, and presence 
of pseudoaneurysms associated with inflammatory processes. 
Aneurysm resection or ligation alone is acceptable for amenable 
lesions in the mid-splenic artery, but distal lesions in close prox-
imity to the splenic hilum should be treated with concomitant 
splenectomy. An excellent prognosis follows elective treatment. 
Splenic artery embolization has been used to treat splenic artery 
aneurysm, but painful splenic infarction and abscess may follow.
Portal Hypertension  Portal hypertension can result from 
numerous causes but is usually due to cirrhosis. Splenomegaly 
and splenic congestion often accompany portal hypertension, 
which leads to sequestration and destruction of circulating 
cells in the spleen. Splenectomy is not indicated for hyper-
splenism per se in patients with portal as there is no correla-
tion between the degree of pancytopenia and long-term survival 
in these patients.5 In rare circumstances in which splenectomy 
is required to reduce bleeding from esophageal varices exac-
erbated by thrombocytopenia, a concomitant splenorenal shunt 
procedure should be performed to decompress the portal system.
Portal hypertension secondary to splenic vein thrombosis 
is potentially curable with splenectomy. Patients with bleeding 
from isolated gastric varices who have normal liver function 
test results, especially those with a history of pancreatic disease, 
should be examined for splenic vein thrombosis and treated with 
splenectomy if findings are positive.
Felty’s Syndrome  The triad of rheumatoid arthritis, spleno-
megaly, and neutropenia is called Felty’s syndrome. It exists in 
approximately 3% of all patients with rheumatoid arthritis, two-
thirds of whom are women. Immune complexes coat the surface 
of white blood cells, which leads to their sequestration and clear-
ance in the spleen with subsequent neutropenia. This neutropenia 
(<2000 neutrophils/mm3) increases the risk for recurrent infec-
tions and often drives the decision for splenectomy. The size of 
the spleen is variable, from nonpalpable in 5% to 10% of patients 
to massively enlarged in others. In Felty’s syndrome the spleen 
is four times heavier than normal. Corticosteroids, hematopoi-
etic growth factors, methotrexate, and splenectomy have all been 
used to treat the neutropenia of Felty’s syndrome. Responses to 
splenectomy have been excellent, with >80% of patients show-
ing a durable increase in white blood cell count. More than one-
half of patients who had infections before surgery did not have 
any infections after splenectomy.91 Besides symptomatic neu-
tropenia, other indications for splenectomy include transfusion-
dependent anemia and profound thrombocytopenia.
Wandering Spleen  A very uncommon anatomic abnormality is 
the “wandering spleen.” The spleen “floats” inside the abdomi-
nal cavity due to an anomaly of embryogenesis. The wandering 
spleen is not normally attached to adjacent viscera in the splenic 
fossa. This may lead to splenic torsion and infarction. Spleen 
removal or splenopexy is indicated.92
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
As part of preoperative discussion prior to splenectomy, patients 
should be consulted on potential complications associated with 
this procedure, including overwhelming postsplenectomy sep-
sis, splenic vein thrombosis, bleeding, arteriothombosis (myo-
cardial infarction, stroke), deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary 
hypertension.
Vaccination and Patient Education
Considering that infection is the most common complication, 
patient education and vaccinations against encapsulated patho-
gens are the mainstay of preventive therapy.93,61 Although rare, 
the most feared and extreme infectious complication is over-
whelming postsplenectomy sepsis (OPSS). (See later section, 
“Overwhelming Postsplenectomy Infection,” for detailed dis-
cussion.) Patients undergoing splenectomy for hematologic or 
malignant indications have the greatest risk, whereas patients 
who undergo splenectomy for trauma or iatrogenic injury have 
the lowest risk. OPSS is more common in the pediatric popu-
lation, with 4.4% of children less than 16 years of age versus 
0.9% of adults developing this life-threatening condition. The 
risk has been observed to be the greatest in the first 2 years 
after splenectomy; however, asplenic patients remain at lifelong 
risk.108,109,110 Considering that the spleen is the site for special 
adaptation of macrophages that target encapsulated organ-
isms, asplenic patients are at higher risk of infection caused by 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (responsible for >50% of OPSS), H. 
influenzae type b, Neisseria meningitidis, and Capnocytophaga 
canimorsus (transmitted by dog bites).111
1439
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
In the setting of elective splenectomy, patients should be 
vaccinated 2 weeks prior to surgery to optimize antigen recog-
nition and processing. If splenectomy is performed emergently, 
vaccinations can be administered postoperatively and consid-
eration should be given to delaying administration for 2 weeks 
to avoid the transient immunosuppression associated with sur-
gery. Preoperative and postoperative patient education regard-
ing OPSS is paramount because patients with OPSS may rapidly 
progress from a febrile illness to circulatory collapse and death 
within a matter of hours. In one study, 28% of asplenic patients 
were unaware of the potential infection risks and the main rea-
sons were that correct advice was not given or that that advice 
was forgotten.107,108
The use of currently available vaccines against pneumo-
coccus and other encapsulated organisms has led to a drop in 
the overall incidence of OPSI to <1%. The mechanism by which 
vaccination protects asplenic patients is not entirely understood. 
Serum antibody titers do not necessarily correspond to clinical 
immunity. Moreover, antibody levels after pneumococcus vac-
cination decline steadily within 5 to 10 years. Revaccination is 
reasonably recommended for these patients, although the effi-
cacy of this measure is not proven.107–111
Deep Vein Thrombosis Prophylaxis
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) after splenectomy is not infrequent, 
especially in cases involving splenomegaly and myeloprolifera-
tive disorders.76 The risk of portal vein thrombosis (PVT) may 
reach 40% for patients presenting with both splenomegaly and 
myeloproliferative disorders. Postsplenectomy PVT typically 
presents with anorexia, abdominal pain, leukocytosis, and throm-
bocytosis. Effective PVT treatment is possible by maintaining a 
high index of suspicion, achieving early diagnosis with contrast-
enhanced CT, and starting anticoagulation immediately. DVT 
prophylaxis, including use of sequential compression devices 
and subcutaneous administration of heparin (5000 U), should be 
initiated for patients undergoing splenectomy.8,77 Each patient’s 
risk factors for DVT should be evaluated, and when elevated risk 
exists (obesity, history of prior venous thromboembolism, known 
hypercoagulable state, older age), an antithrombotic regimen, 
including low-molecular-weight heparin, should be pursued.
SPLENECTOMY TECHNIQUES
Patient Preparation
All patients undergoing elective splenectomy should be vacci-
nated at least 1 week preoperatively with polyvalent pneumococ-
cal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus vaccines.93 Assessment 
of the potential need for transfusion of blood products and 
optimization of preoperative coagulation status are necessary. 
It is the authors’ practice to order blood typing and antibody 
screening tests for normosplenic patients undergoing elective 
splenectomy. Anemic patients should be transfused before sur-
gery to a hemoglobin level of 10 g/dL. In more complex cases, 
including patients with splenomegaly, at least 2 to 4 units of 
cross-matched blood should be available at the time of surgery. 
Thrombocytopenia may be transiently corrected with platelet 
transfusions. Thrombocytopenic patients preferably should not 
undergo transfusion before the day of surgery and ideally not 
before the intraoperative ligation of the splenic artery.
Patients who have been maintained on corticosteroid 
therapy preoperatively should receive parenteral corticosteroid 
therapy perioperatively. Bowel preparation is not routinely 
performed for patients undergoing elective splenectomy. All 
splenectomy patients do receive DVT prophylaxis, as discussed 
previously. After endotracheal intubation, a nasogastric (NG) 
tube is inserted for stomach decompression.
Open Splenectomy
Although laparoscopic surgery increasingly has achieved 
acceptance as the standard approach for normosplenic patients 
requiring splenectomy, open splenectomy (OS) is still widely 
practiced. Traumatic rupture of the spleen continues as the most 
common indication for OS. Several other clinical scenarios 
favor an OS approach, including massive splenomegaly, ascites, 
portal hypertension, multiple prior operations, extensive splenic 
irradiation, and possible splenic abscess.
During OS, the patient is placed in the supine position 
with the surgeon situated at the patient’s right. A left subcostal 
incision paralleling the left costal margin and lying two finger-
breadths below it is preferred for most elective splenectomies. 
A midline incision is optimal for exposure when the spleen is 
ruptured or massively enlarged. The spleen is mobilized by 
dividing ligamentous attachments, usually beginning with the 
splenocolic ligament (Fig. 34-6). In patients with significant 
splenomegaly, once lesser sac access has been achieved through 
either the gastrosplenic or gastrohepatic attachments, ligating 
the splenic artery in continuity along the superior border of the 
pancreas may be preferable. This maneuver may serve several 
purposes: allowing safer manipulation of the spleen and dis-
section of the splenic hilum, facilitating some shrinkage of the 
spleen, and providing an autotransfusion of erythrocytes and 
platelets. Further medial mobilization of the spleen is achieved 
by incising its lateral peritoneal attachments, most notably the 
splenophrenic ligament. Then follows individual ligation and 
sequential division of the short gastric vessels, steps that if 
carefully executed reduce the risk of these vessels’ retracting 
and bleeding. Splenic hilar dissection then takes place. When-
ever possible, care should be taken to dissect and individually 
ligate the splenic artery and vein (in that order) before dividing 
Figure 34-6.  Splenocolic ligament is divided at the beginning of 
open splenectomy.
1440
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
them. As noted in the discussion of splenic anatomy, the tail of 
the pancreas lies within 1 cm of the splenic hilum in 75% of 
patients; therefore, during hilar dissection, great care must be 
taken to avoid injuring the pancreas.
Once the spleen is excised, hemostasis is secured by irri-
gating, suctioning, and scrupulously inspecting the bed of dis-
section. The splenic bed is not routinely drained. A thorough 
search for accessory spleens must be undertaken when a hema-
tologic disorder has occasioned splenectomy. At the completion 
of surgery, the nasogastric tube is removed.
Laparoscopic Splenectomy
Laparoscopic splenectomy (LS) has become the procedure of 
choice over the last two decades, since it has been first described 
Delaitre and Maignien in 1991.25 In fact, LS is now the gold 
standard for elective splenectomy in patients with normal-sized 
spleens.  In experienced hands, LS is associated with 
decreased intraoperative blood loss, shorter hospital length 
of stay, and lower morbidity rates when compared to OS.112,113
Since the introduction of the lateral approach,94 most LS 
procedures are now performed with the patient in the right lat-
eral decubitus position (Fig. 34-7). A midway “double-access” 
technique in which the patient is in a 45° right lateral decubi-
tus position has also been advocated. This positioning permits 
concomitant surgery, such as laparoscopic cholecystectomy, 
more easily than does the lateral approach. The double-access 
technique requires the placement of five or six trocars. The lat-
eral approach routinely involves the use of three or four trocars 
positioned as shown in Fig. 34-7. Use of an angled (30° or 45°) 
laparoscope (2, 5, or 10 mm) greatly facilitates the procedure. 
Exposure of the vital anatomy in a manner that allows for a more 
intuitive sequence of dissection, paralleling that of OS, may be 
considered an additional advantage of the lateral approach.
Placement of trocars in the left upper quadrant should 
be performed under laparoscopic visualization, particularly if 
any degree of splenomegaly exists, because the latter can sig-
5-mm cephalad working port
5-mm camera port with 30’ scope
2-mm accessory 
port (flank)
10/12-mm caudad 
working port
Figure 34-8.  Splenic hilum can be divided laparoscopically en 
masse once the spleen has been rotated medially having been mobi-
lized from its lateral attachments.
Figure 34-7.  Patient positioning and trocar placement for laparoscopic splenectomy.
nificantly reduce the available operating space. As with OS, 
the splenocolic ligament and the lateral peritoneal attachments 
are divided with resultant medial mobilization of the spleen. 
The short gastric vessels may be divided usually with hemo-
static energy sources such as ultrasonic dissection, diathermy, 
or radiofrequency ablation. With the lower pole of the spleen 
gently retracted, the splenic hilum is accessible to further appli-
cations of clips or an endovascular stapling device. The splenic 
artery and vein are divided separately when possible. Good 
long-term outcomes, however, are increasingly being achieved 
with mass hilar stapling (Fig. 34-8). Using the lateral approach 
with the spleen thus elevated, the surgeon can easily visualize 
the tail of the pancreas and avoid injury when placing the endo-
vascular stapler.
6
1441
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
Once excised, the spleen is placed in a durable ripstop 
nylon sack (Fig. 34-9), the neck of which is drawn through one 
of the 10-mm trocar sites. Morcellation of the spleen takes place 
A
B
Figure 34-9.  Spleen extraction. A. Spleen is placed into a ripstop 
nylon bag before morcellation. B. Splenic morcellation.
within the sack and allows piecemeal extraction; a blunt instru-
ment should be used to disrupt and remove the spleen to avoid 
the risk of sack rupture, spillage of contents, and subsequent 
splenosis (Fig. 34-10).
Hand-Assisted Splenectomy
When LS is performed in patients with splenomegaly, there 
have been reports of high rates of both complications and con-
version to open splenectomy.96 Hand-assisted laparoscopic sur-
gery (HALS) has been described as an alternative to the LS 
approach.20,95,97 Spleens greater than 22 cm in craniocaudal 
length or 19 cm in width may benefit from HALS over a purely 
laparoscopic approach.97 It has been reported that the use of 
this technique has resulted in a marked reduction in average 
operative time for patients with massive splenomegaly (146 vs. 
295 minutes). Although HALS does require a small incision 
(7–8 cm) for hand insertion and specimen extraction, no differ-
ences in length of stay were observed when comparing these 
patients to those managed purely laparoscopically.97
When performing HALS splenectomy, patient position-
ing is similar to that of LS (Fig. 34-11). For patients with mas-
sive spleens, lateral positioning is altered slightly, such that 
the patient is placed supine with the left side elevated at 45°. 
Depending on the hand dominance of the surgeon, the hand-
assist device can be placed in either a midline position for right-
hand dominant or a subcostal position for left-hand dominant 
surgeons. A 7- to 8-cm incision should be made 2 to 4 cm caudal 
to the inferior pole of the enlarged spleen. The hand-assisted 
technique allows for a tactile feedback and atraumatic manipu-
lation of the enlarged spleen.
Figure 34-10.  Morcellation and extraction of the spleen within 
nylon sac extending through the 10-mm trocar site. (Illustration 
is reproduced with permission from Park A et al. Laparoscopic vs 
open splenectomy. Arch Surg. 1999;134:1263. kkjkjdht © 1999 
American Medical Association. All rights reserved.)
1442
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
Figure 34-11.  A. Patient table placement for hand-assisted laparoscopic splenectomy (HALS) in case of splenomegaly. B and C. Intraop-
erative images of HALS.
1443
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
The nondominant hand provides medial retraction and 
rotation of the spleen through a hand-assist port, while the domi-
nant hand carries out the dissection using laparoscopic instru-
ments. The anterior and posterior attachments of the spleen 
are taken down as in the laparoscopic approach, and the hilar 
pedicle is ligated using an endoscopic vascular stapler.
Single-Incision Laparoscopic  
Surgery Splenectomy
Single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) splenectomy 
emphasizes the concept of surgery through one small transab-
dominal incision rather than the standard multiple trocar sites, 
with theoretical benefits of less pain and better cosmetics. The 
incision can be hidden periumbilically and is used as the speci-
men extraction site at the end of the case. This approach for 
solid organs poses several technical challenges. Since all instru-
ments are closely aligned together, “fencing” of instruments 
and the laparoscope and limited degrees of movement are com-
monly encountered. The spleen, being a solid organ, cannot be 
grasped, and thus retraction may be more challenging in these 
cases. Furthermore, it has been reported that periumbilical port 
position may result in technical challenges when dealing with 
high body mass index or tall patients, precluding the surgeon 
from adequately reaching the spleen. Other alternatives to single 
port placements have been reported, although to date, no proven 
benefits of SILS splenectomy have been demonstrated.98,114,115
Robotic Splenectomy
The robotic approach does offer a unique three-dimensional 
visualization of the surgical field. It is also debated that robotic 
intervention facilitates movement with higher precision than 
standard laparoscopy. Otherwise the overall surgical approach 
to splenectomy is very similar to standard laparoscopy, although 
not as cost effective. To date, no randomized prospective data 
are available that show a clear benefit of robotic versus laparo-
scopic splenectomy.99,100
Partial Splenectomy
The past few decades have witnessed ever-widening endorse-
ment for and practice of partial splenectomy. This technique, 
initially reported in the early eighteenth century, is particularly 
indicated to minimize the risk of postsplenectomy sepsis in chil-
dren. Certain lipid storage disorders leading to splenomegaly 
(e.g., Gaucher’s disease) and some forms of traumatic splenic 
injury (blunt and penetrating) and spherocytosis in children 
are amenable to treatment with partial splenectomy. Both the 
laparoscopic and open approaches for partial splenectomy have 
been well described. The spleen must be adequately mobilized, 
and the splenic hilar vessels attached to the targeted segment, 
ligated, and divided. The devascularized segment of spleen 
is transected along an obvious line of demarcation. Bleeding 
from the cut surface of the spleen usually is limited and can be 
controlled by various methods, including cauterization, argon 
coagulation, or application of direct hemostatic agents such as 
cellulose gauze and fibrin glue.
Inadvertent Intraoperative Splenic Injury
Inadvertent intraoperative injury to the spleen is a noted occur-
rence in the surgical literature, familiar to and dreaded by the 
abdominal surgeon. The true incidence is unknown. The 
gravity of such injury is not to be underestimated. Sig-
nificant short-term morbidity is associated with injury to the 
spleen, including increased blood loss, need for transfusion, and 
prolonged hospital stay.102
Intraoperative injury to the spleen has been linked with 
numerous operations, such as gastric fundoplication, colectomy, 
paraesophageal hernia repair, nephrectomy, and abdominal and 
pelvic vascular surgery. There are also reports of splenic injuries 
after endoscopic procedures, such as colonoscopy.
Improper traction on the spleen against its peritoneal 
attachments is the most common mechanism of intraopera-
tive injury. Capsular tears are the most common type of injury, 
but parenchymal lacerations and subcapsular hematomas also 
occur. The lower pole is more commonly injured, owing to its 
orientation and the greater concentration of peritoneal attach-
ments found here.
As with all hemorrhage, prompt temporary control of 
bleeding should be obtained by direct compression of the spleen 
itself, packing of the left upper quadrant, compression of the 
vessels at the splenic hilum, or pressure on the splenic artery at 
the superior pancreatic margin. The spleen should then be mobi-
lized from its peritoneal attachments and the nature of the injury 
assessed. Overall, the patient’s condition is the primary deter-
minant of whether splenic salvage can be attempted, although 
hilar injury is best managed by splenectomy. When dealing 
with capsular tears (most common injury), strong consideration 
should be given to splenorrhaphy techniques: application of 
topical hemostatics, suture plication of disrupted parenchyma 
with or without omental buttress, and the use of bioabsorbable 
mesh sheets.
The time-honored surgical tenets of liberal exposure 
and visualization are particularly germane to the avoidance of 
splenic injury. Incisions and approaches must be tailored to both 
patient circumstances and surgeon experience. There is some 
evidence to support the assertion that use of the laparoscopic 
approach may reduce the incidence of splenic injury for certain 
operations. As with all hemorrhage, prompt temporary control 
of bleeding is required. Direct compression of the spleen itself, 
packing of the left upper quadrant, compression of the vessels at 
the splenic hilum, or pressure on the splenic artery at the supe-
rior pancreatic margin can slow or stop hemorrhage and allow 
more deliberate consideration of management options.
The spleen is mobilized from its peritoneal attachments 
and the nature of the injury assessed. Overall, the patient’s con-
dition is the primary determinant of whether splenic salvage can 
be attempted. The type of injury plays a role as well; it has been 
suggested that hilar injury is best managed by splenectomy.80 
Barring these unfavorable circumstances, however, and recall-
ing that the majority of intraoperative splenic injuries are cap-
sular tears, it is reasonable to expect that splenic preservation 
can be achieved in many appropriately selected situations. Pre-
sented with one of these situations, the surgeon has at his or her 
disposal a number of useful and well-described splenorrhaphy 
techniques: application of topical hemostatics, suture plication 
of disrupted parenchyma with or without omental buttress, and 
the use of bioabsorbable mesh sheets.
SPLENECTOMY OUTCOMES
Changes in blood composition resulting from splenectomy 
include the appearance of Howell-Jolly bodies and siderocytes. 
After splenectomy, leukocytosis and increased platelet counts 
are common as well. Although platelet counts most often rise 
within 2 days, they may not peak for several weeks in patients 
7
1444
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with preoperative thrombocytopenia (see “Hematologic Out-
comes” later). Similarly, within 1 day after splenectomy, the 
white blood cell count typically rises, and such elevation may 
continue for several months.
Complications
Complications of splenectomy may be classified as pulmonary, 
hemorrhagic, infectious, pancreatic, and thromboembolic.9,103 
Left lower lobe atelectasis is the most common complication 
after OS; pleural effusion and pneumonia also can occur. Hem-
orrhage can occur intraoperatively or postoperatively, present-
ing as subphrenic hematoma. Transfusions have become less 
common since the advent of LS, although the indication for 
operation influences the likelihood of transfusion as well. Sub-
phrenic abscess and wound infection are among the periopera-
tive infectious complications. The placement of a drain in the 
left upper quadrant may be associated with postoperative sub-
phrenic abscess and is not routinely recommended. Pancreati-
tis, pseudocyst, and pancreatic fistula are among the pancreatic 
complications that may result from intraoperative trauma to the 
pancreas during dissection of the splenic hilum.
Hematologic Outcomes
The results of splenectomy may be appraised according to the 
level of hematologic response (e.g., rise in platelet and hemo-
globin levels) in those disorders in which the spleen contributes 
to the hematologic problem. Hematologic responses may be 
divided into initial and long-term responses. For thrombocyto-
penia, an initial response typically is defined as a rise in plate-
let count within several days of splenectomy. Reported series 
demonstrate the effectiveness of LS in providing a long-term 
platelet response in approximately 80% of individuals with ITP 
(Table 34-3). These results are consistent with the long-term 
success rate associated with OS.
For chronic hemolytic anemias, a rise in hemoglobin 
levels to >10 g/dL without the need for transfusion signifies a 
successful response to splenectomy. By this criterion, splenec-
tomy has been reported to be successful for the vast majority of 
patients with chronic hemolytic anemia. For hemolytic anemia 
Table 34-3
Outcome after splenectomy
Outcome Variable
Studies (n)
Patients (n)
Pooled Results and CI
P
Mortality
38
2914
–0.01 (–0–02, 0)
1
Complications
  Pooled
38
2914
–0.11 (–0.16, –0.05)
<.00001
  Minor
36
2914
–0.03 (–0.05, –0.01)
.13
  Severe
36
2745
–0.07 (–0.11, –0.03)
<.00001
  Thrombosis
35
2695
–0.01 (–0.02, 0.01)
1
  Organ injury
34
2639
0.01 (–0, 0.02)
1
Acces. spleen
29
2135
0.02 (–0.01, 0.05)
.87
Operative time
18
1370
57.4 min (43.3, 71.4)
<.00001
Blood loss
10
759
–41 mL (–87, 4.71)
<.00001
Length of stay
20
1566
–2.48 d (–2.89, –2.07)
<.00001
Source: From Bai YN, Jiang H, Prasoon P. A meta-analysis of perioperative outcomes of laparoscopic splenectomy for hematological diseases. World J 
Surg. 2012;36:2349-2358. With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media.
due to spherocytosis, the success rate is usually higher, ranging 
from 90% to 100%.
Splenectomy results also may be examined in terms of sur-
gical and postsurgical characteristics, including operative time, 
recovery time, and morbidity and mortality rates, all of which 
tend to vary according to hematologic indication9 (Tables 34-3 
and 34-4).
Results of few prospective, randomized trials comparing 
LS and OS have been published. However, several recent meta-
analyses9,94 of published comparative series including 38 papers 
with more than 2914 patients indicate that the laparoscopic 
approach typically results in longer operative times, shorter hos-
pital stays, lower morbidity rates, similar blood loss, and similar 
mortality rates compared with OS. Questions of the cost effec-
tiveness of LS persist, although analysis of this issue is hindered 
by a lack of universally accepted metrics as well as a paucity of 
recent objective data. Proponents of LS argue that the generally 
higher operating room charges are offset by the reduced hospital 
stay and presumably shorter time of lost productivity. For those 
institutions with experienced personnel and technical capability, 
the laparoscopic approach has emerged as the standard for elec-
tive, nontraumatic splenectomy.
Overwhelming Postsplenectomy Infection
Asplenic patients bear an increased susceptibility to infection for 
the remainder of their lives. Although the overwhelming major-
ity of splenectomized patients experience no ill consequence 
from the absence of the spleen, the potentially catastrophic con-
sequences of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) 
demand lifelong vigilance and intimate knowledge of the appro-
priate precautions and preventative measures. All involved—
patients, family members, and physicians—need to play an 
active role.17
Clinical Features.  Sepsis in splenectomized patients is a 
medical emergency. Therefore, any clinical suggestion of 
infection, including seemingly isolated fevers, must be viewed 
with a high index of suspicion and treated empirically as thor-
ough investigation proceeds. OPSI may begin with a relatively 
1445
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
mild-appearing prodrome with nonspecific symptoms. In addi-
tion to fever, nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, myal-
gias, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and others 
should be viewed with alarm in the asplenic patient. Absent the 
spleen, the infectious process signaled by such symptoms can 
progress rapidly to fulminant bacteremic septic shock, with 
hypotension, anuria, and disseminated intravascular coagula-
tion. The need for a high index of suspicion, prompt action, 
and aggressive education of the patient, family, and medical 
provider cannot be overstated.
The true incidence of OPSI is not precisely known, 
because defining criteria vary among published series. Over-
all lifetime risk remains low, ranging from <1% to 5%.9,17,106,107 
Among those who develop OPSI, some characteristics can be 
identified that impart greater risk. Reason for splenectomy is 
the single most influential determinant of OPSI risk. Case series 
demonstrate that those who undergo splenectomy for hemato-
logic disease (malignancy, myelodysplasia, or hemoglobinopa-
thy) are far more susceptible to OPSI than patients who undergo 
splenectomy for trauma or iatrogenic reasons. Age is also an 
important consideration, with children 5 years of age or less 
and adults 50 years or older being at elevated risk. Finally, 
time interval from spleen removal must be considered. A 
large number of OPSI cases occur many years to decades later. 
This observation underscores both the threat of this lethal dis-
ease and the need for lifelong vigilance.
Microbiology and Pathogenesis.  Life-threatening infection in 
the asplenic patient is attributable to three factors: loss of splenic 
macrophages, diminished tuftsin production, and loss of the 
spleen’s reticuloendothelial screening function. In the normal host, 
these three factors work in concert to eliminate opsonized bacte-
ria from the bloodstream. This system is particularly suited to the 
removal of encapsulated bacteria, whose polysaccharide coating is a 
natural defense against opsonization (S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, 
and N. meningitidis are classic examples). Infections with protozoa 
that invade the red blood cell, such as Babesia microti (transmit-
ted by tick bites), Ehrlichia, and Plasmodium, occur more fre-
quently in splenectomized individuals than in normal hosts. Other 
potential infectious bacterial sources include group A streptococci, 
C. canimorsus (transmitted by dog bites), group B streptococci, 
Enterococcus species, Bacteroides species, Salmonella species, 
and Bartonella species.111 In the absence of the spleen, elimination 
of these pathogens from the bloodstream falls solely to the liver, a 
process that has been demonstrated to be less effective.9,107
Table 34-4
Laparoscopic splenectomy results by hematologic indication
ITP (n = 151)
TTP (n = 7)
Anemia (n = 40)
Malignancy (n = 28)
OR time (min)
128
146
149
165
EBL (mL)
137
96
116
238
LOS (days)
2.2
3.0
2.2
2.6
Conversions from LS to OS
3 (2%)
1 (14%)
1 (3%)
1 (4%)
Complications
14 (9%)
0
1 (3%)
3 (11%)
EBL = estimated blood loss; ITP = idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura; LOS = length of hospital stay; LS = laparoscopic splenectomy; OR = operating 
room; OS = open splenectomy; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Source: Data from Park A, McKinlay R. Spleen. In: Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, et al, eds. Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery. 8th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill; 2005:1312.
Antibiotics and the Asplenic Patient.  Antibiotic therapy 
for the asplenic patient can be considered in three contexts: 
deliberate therapy for established or presumed infections, pro-
phylaxis in anticipation of invasive procedures (e.g., dental 
procedures), and general prophylaxis. For the latter two indica-
tions, unfortunately, evidence supporting efficacy is scant, and 
guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis are not uniform. Optimal 
duration of chemoprophylaxis in children is unclear. Daily 
doses of antibiotics until 5 years of age or at least 5 years 
after splenectomy are commonly recommended,108,109 although 
some advocate continuation into at least young adulthood. Con-
cerns regarding compliance and bacterial resistance have been 
raised, which have led some authors to suggest that lifelong 
daily antibiotic prophylaxis be recommended only for those 
patients whose antibody titers fail to respond appropriately to 
vaccination or, alternately, that asplenic patients be advised to 
carry at all times a reserve supply of antibiotic to be self-admin-
istered at the earliest sign of infection.109  Considering 
the grave consequences of OPSI and its relatively low 
incidence, controlled trials resulting in meaningful data on this 
issue seem unlikely to be performed.
Several risk management strategies are commonly rec-
ommended to asplenic patients, including wearing a medical 
bracelet, carrying a laminated medical alert card, possessing a 
medical letter with specific empiric therapy instructions (includ-
ing drug names and dosages), and keeping a 5-day supply of 
standby antibiotics, particularly when travel is anticipated.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Moynihan B. The surgery of the spleen. Br J Surg. 1920;8:307.
2.	 McClusky DA III, Skandalakis LJ, Colborn GL, et al. Tribute 
to a triad: history of splenic anatomy, physiology, and surgery–
part 1. World J Surg. 1999;23:311-325.
3.	 McClusky DA III, Skandalakis LJ, Colborn GL, et al. Tribute 
to a triad: history of splenic anatomy, physiology, and surgery–
part 2. World J Surg. 1999;23:514-526.
4.	 Aristotle. De Paribus Animalium [On the Parts of Animals]. 
A.L. Peck, translator. Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 
1961.
5.	 Malpighi M, quoted in Foster M. Lectures on the History 
of Physiology during the Sixteenth, Seveteenth and Eigh-
teenth Centuries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 
1901:164.
8
9
10
1446
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
6.	 Morgenstern L. A history of splenectomy. In: Hiatt JR, Philips 
EH, Morgenstern L, eds. Surgical Disease of the Spleen. New 
York: Springer; 1997.
7.	 Bryant T. Case of excision of the spleen for an enlargement of 
the organ, attended with leucocythaemia; with remarks. Guys 
Hosp Rep. 1867;13:412.
8.	 Morgenstern L, Skandalakis JE. Anatomy and embryology 
of the spleen. In: Hiatt JR, Phillips EH, Morgenstern L, eds: 
Surgical Diseases of the Spleen. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag; 1997:15.
9.	 Bickenbach KA, Gonen M, Labow DM, et al. Indications for 
and efficacy of splenectomy for haematological disorders. Br 
J Surg. 2013;100:794-800.
10.	Musallam KM, Khalife M, Sfeir PM, et al. Postoperative out-
comes after laparoscopic compared with open splenectomy. 
Ann Surg. 2012;257:1116-1123.
11.	Mebius RE, Kraal G. Structure and function of the spleen. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 2005;5:606-616.
12.	Tarantino G, Savastano S, Capone D, et al. Spleen: a new 
role for an old player? World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17:3776-
3784.
13.	Gray H. On the Structure and Use of the Spleen. London: John 
W. Parker and Son; 1854:1-53.
14.	Bratosin D, Mazurier J, Tissier JP, et al. Cellular and molecu-
lar mechanisms of senescent erythrocyte phagocytosis by 
macrophages. A review. Biochimie. 1998;80:173-195.
15.	Knutson M, Wessling-Resnick M. Iron metabolism in the 
reticuloendothelial system. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 
2003;38:61-88.
16.	Nolte MA, Belien JA, Schadee-Eestermans I, et al. A con-
duit system distributes chemokines and small blood-borne 
molecules through the splenic white pulp. J Exp Med. 2003; 
198:505-512.
17.	Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-splenectomy and 
hyposplenic states. Lancet. 2011;378:86-97.
18.	Spelman D, Buttery J, Daley A, et al. Guidelines for the pre-
vention of sepsis in asplenic and hyposplenic patients. Intern 
Med J. 2008;38:349-356.
19.	Davies JM, Lewis MP, Wimperis J, et al. Review of guidelines 
for the prevention and treatment of infection in patients with 
an absent or dysfunctional spleen: prepared on behalf of the 
British Committee for Standards in Haematology by a work-
ing party of the Haemato-Oncology Task Force. Br J Haema-
tol. 2011;155:308-317.
20.	Habermalz B, Sauerland S, Decker G, et al. Laparoscopic 
splenectomy: the clinical practice guidelines of the European 
Association for Endoscopic Surgery (EAES). Surg Endosc. 
2008;22:821-848.
21.	Pozo AL, Godfrey EM, Bowles KM. Splenomegaly: inves-
tigation, diagnosis and management. Blood Rev. 2009;23: 
105-111.
22.	McInnes MD, Kielar AZ, Macdonald DB. Percutaneous 
image-guided biopsy of the spleen: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the complication rate and diagnostic accu-
racy. Radiology. 2011;260:699-708.
23.	Singh AK, Shankar S, Gervais DA, Hahn PF, Mueller PR. 
Image-guided percutaneous splenic interventions. Radio-
graphics. 2012;32:523-534.
24.	Zarzaur BL, Kozar RA, Fabian TC, Coimbra R. A survey of 
American Association for the Surgery of Trauma member 
practices in the management of blunt splenic injury. J Trauma. 
2011;70:1026-1031.
25.	Myers J. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma 
(FAST): the truth about ultrasound in blunt trauma. J Trauma. 
2007;62(6 Suppl):S28.
26.	Kamaya A, Weinstein S, Desser TS. Multiple lesions of the 
spleen: differential diagnosis of cystic and solid lesions. Semin 
Ultrasound CT MR. 2006;27:389-403.
27.	Thompson BE, Munera F, Cohn SM, et al. Novel computed 
tomography scan scoring system predicts the need for inter-
vention after splenic injury. J Trauma. 2006;60:1083-1086.
28.	Karakas HM, Tuncbilek N, Okten OO. Splenic abnormalities: 
an overview on sectional images. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2005; 
11:152-158.
29.	Filicori F, Stock C, Schweitzer AD, et al. Three-dimensional 
CT volumetry predicts outcome of laparoscopic splenectomy 
for splenomegaly: retrospective clinical study. World J Surg. 
2013;37:52-58.
30.	Berindoague R, Targarona EM, Balague C, et al. Can we pre-
dict immediate outcome after laparoscopic splenectomy for 
splenomegaly? Multivariate analysis of clinical, anatomic, and 
pathologic features after 3D reconstruction of the spleen. Surg 
Innov. 2007;14:243-251.
31.	Dent D, Alsabrook G, Erickson BA, et al. Blunt splenic inju-
ries: high nonoperative management rate can be achieved with 
selective embolization. J Trauma. 2004;56:1063-1067.
32.	Koconis KG, Singh H, Soares G. Partial splenic embolization 
in the treatment of patients with portal hypertension: a review 
of the English language literature. J Trauma. 2007;18:463-481.
33.	Cuker A, Cines DB. Evidence-based mini-review: is indium-
labeled autologous platelet scanning predictive of response 
to splenectomy in patients with chronic immune thrombo-
cytopenia? Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 
2010;2010:385-386.
34.	Wu Z, Zhou J, Pankaj P, Peng B. Comparative treatment and 
literature review for laparoscopic splenectomy alone versus 
preoperative splenic artery embolization splenectomy. Surg 
Endosc. 2012;26:2758-2766.
35.	Mousa A, Armbruster J, Adongay J, Aburahma AF. Splenic 
artery embolization as a treatment option for chronic pancyto-
penia secondary to hypersplenism: a case report and review of 
literature. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2012;46:501-503.
36.	Williams G, Rosen MP, Parker JA, et al. Splenic implants 
detected by SPECT images of Tc-99m labeled damaged red 
blood cells. Clin Nucl Med. 2006;31:467-469.
37.	Lui EH, Lau KK. Intra-abdominal splenosis: how clinical his-
tory and imaging features averted an invasive procedure for 
tissue diagnosis. Australas Radiol. 2005;49:342-344.
38.	Balague C, Vela S, Targarona EM, et al. Predictive factors for 
successful laparoscopic splenectomy in immune thrombocy-
topenic purpura: study of clinical and laboratory data. Surg 
Endosc. 2006;20:1208-1213.
39.	Mikhael J, Northridge K, Lindquist K, Kessler C, Deuson 
R, Danese M. Short-term and long-term failure of laparo-
scopic splenectomy in adult immune thrombocytopenic pur-
pura patients: a systematic review. Am J Hematol. 2009;84: 
743-748.
40.	Bolton-Maggs PH, Langer JC, Iolascon A, Tittensor P, King 
MJ; General Haematology Task Force of the British Commit-
tee for Standards in Haematology. Guidelines for the diag-
nosis and management of hereditary spherocytosis—2011 
update. Br J Haematol. 2012;156:37-49.
41.	Schilling RF. Risks and benefits of splenectomy versus no 
splenectomy for hereditary spherocytosis—a personal view. 
Br J Haematol. 2009;145:728-732.
42.	Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas N. Hereditary spherocy-
tosis. Lancet. 2008;372:1411-1422.
43.	Hollingsworth CL, Rice HE. Hereditary spherocytosis and 
partial splenectomy in children: review of surgical technique 
and the role of imaging. Pediatr Radiol. 2010;40:1177-1183.
44.	Casale M, Perrotta S. Splenectomy for hereditary spherocy-
tosis: complete, partial or not at all? Expert Rev Hematol. 
2011;4:627-635.
45.	Prchal JT, Gregg XT. Red cell enzymopathies. In: Hoffman R, 
ed. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. 3rd ed. New 
York: Churchill Livingstone; 2001:561.
1447
Spleen
CHAPTER 34
46.	Hamilton JW, Jones FGC. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase Guadalajara—a case of chronic non-spherocytic hae-
molytic anaemia responding to splenectomy and the role of 
splenectomy in this disorder. Hematology. 2004;9:307-309.
47.	Michel M. Classification and therapeutic approaches in auto-
immune hemolytic anemia: an update. Expert Rev Hematol. 
2011;4:607-618.
48.	Hill J, Walsh RM, McHam S, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy 
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia in patients with chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia: a case series and review of the litera-
ture. Am J Hematol. 2004;75:134-138.
49.	Plikat K, Rogler G, Scholmerich J. Coombs-positive autoim-
mune hemolytic anemia in Crohn’s disease. Eur J Gastroen-
terol Hepatol. 2005;17:661-666.
50.	Rigal D, Meyer F. Autoimmune haemolytic anemia: diag-
nosis strategy and new treatments. Transfus Clin Biol. 
2011;18:277-285.
51.	Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin MT. Sickle-cell disease. 
Lancet. 2010;376:2018-2031.
52.	al-Salem AH. Indications and complications of splenec-
tomy for children with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Surg. 
2006;41:1909-1915.
53.	Rachmilewitz EA, Giardina PJ. How I treat thalassemia. 
Blood. 2011;118:3479-3488.
54.	Phrommintikul A, Sukonthasarn A, Kanjanavanit R, et al. 
Splenectomy: a strong risk factor for pulmonary hypertension 
in patients with thalassaemia. Heart. 2006;92:1467-1472.
55.	Sheikha AK, Salih ZT, Kasnazan KH, et al. Prevention of 
overwhelming postsplenectomy infection in thalassemia 
patients by partial rather than total splenectomy. Can J Surg. 
2007;50:382-386.
56.	Cines DB, Blanchette VS. Immune thrombocytopenic pur-
pura. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:995-1008.
57.	George JN. Sequence of treatments for adults with primary 
immune thrombocytopenia Am J Hematol. 2012;87(Suppl 1): 
S12-S15.
58.	Rodehiero F, Besalduch J, Michel M, Provan D, Grotzinger 
K, Thompson G. Treatment practices in adults with chronic 
immune thrombocytopenia—a European perspective. Eur J 
Haematol. 2010;84:160-168.
59.	Auger S, Duny Y, Rossi JF, Quittet P. Rituximab before sple-
nectomy in adults with primary idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura: a meta-analysis. Br J Haematol. 2012;158:386-398.
60.	Kojouri K, Vesely SK, Terrell DR, George JN. Splenectomy 
for adult patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura: a systematic review to assess long-term platelet count 
responses, prediction of response, and surgical complications. 
Blood. 2004;104:2623-2634.
61.	Mikhael J, Northridge K, Lindquist K, Kessler C, Deuson 
R, Danese M. Short-term and long-term failure of laparo-
scopic splenectomy in adult immune thrombocytopenic pur-
pura patients: a systematic review. Am J Hematol. 2009;84: 
743-748.
62.	Szold A, Kais H, Keidar A, et al. Chronic idiopathic throm-
bocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a surgical disease. Surg Endosc. 
2002;16:155-158.
63.	Keidar A, Feldman M, Szold A. Analysis of outcome of lapa-
roscopic splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura by platelet count. Am J Hematol. 2005;80:95-100.
64.	Dubois L, Gray DK. Case series: splenectomy: does it still 
play a role in the management of thrombotic thrombocytope-
nic purpura? Can J Surg. 2010;53:349-355.
65.	Targarona EM. Spleen, hematological disorders. In: Matteotti 
R, Becker JM, Ashley SM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgical 
Oncology. State-of-the-Art Cancer Management. New York: 
Springer Verlag; 2011.
66.	Townsend W, Linch D. Hodgkin’s lymphoma in adults. Lancet. 
2012;380:836-847.
67.	Shankland KR, Armitage JO, Hancock BW. Non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma. Lancet. 2012;380:848-857.
68.	Habermann TM, Rai K. Historical treatments of in hairy cell 
leukemia, splenectomy and interferon: past and current uses. 
Leuk Lymphoma. 2011;52(Suppl 2):18-20.
69.	Casaccia M, Torelli P, Cavaliere D, et al: Laparoscopic lymph 
node biopsy in intra-abdominal lymphoma: high diagnostic 
accuracy achieved with a minimally invasive procedure. Surg 
Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2007;17:175-178.
70.	Shanshal M, Haddad RY. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Dis 
Mon. 2012;58:153-167.
71.	Bennett M, Schechter GP. Treatment of splenic marginal zone 
lymphoma: splenectomy versus rituximab. Semin Hematol. 
2010;47:143-147.
72.	Matutes E, Oscier D, Montalban C, et al. Splenic marginal 
zone lymphoma proposals for a revision of diagnostic, staging 
and therapeutic criteria. Leukemia. 2008;22:487-495
73.	Ferrara F, Schiffer CA. Acute myeloid leukaemia in adults. 
Lancet. 2013;381:484-495.
74.	Jabbour E, Kantarjian H. Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2012 
update on diagnosis, monitoring, and management. Am J 
Hematol. 2012;87:1037-1045.
75.	 Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: 
2012 update on diagnosis, risk stratification, and management. 
Am J Hematol. 2012;87:285-293.
76.	Logan MS, Watson CM, Nottingham JM. Symptomatic sple-
nomegaly in polycythemia vera: a review of the indications 
for splenectomy and perioperative considerations. Am Surg. 
2009;75:363-368.
77.	Tefferi A. How I treat myelofibrosis. Blood. 2011;117: 
3494-3504.
78.	Mesa R. Myeloproliferative disorder-associated massive sple-
nomegaly. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2008;6:278, 281-282.
79.	Cervantes F. Myelofibrosis: biology and treatment options. 
Eur J Haematol Suppl. 2007;68:13-17.
80.	Mesa RA, Nagorney DS, Schwager S, et al. Palliative goals, 
patient selection, and perioperative platelet management: 
outcomes and lessons from three decades of splenectomy for 
myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia at the Mayo Clinic. 
Cancer. 2006;107:361-370.
81.	Lee WS, Choi ST, Kim KK. Splenic abscess: a single institu-
tion study and review of the literature. Yonsei Med J. 2011; 
52:288-292.
82.	Comitalo JB. Laparoscopic treatment of splenic cysts. JSLS. 
2001;5:313-316.
83.	Gatby PA, Mudan SS, Wotherspoon AC. Splenectomy for 
non-haematological metastatic malignant disease. Langen-
becks Arch Surg. 2011;396:625-638.
84.	Lopez Monclova J, Targarona Soler E, Peraza Solis Y, et al. 
Laparoscopic approach for isolated splenic metastasis: com-
prehensive literature review and report of 6 cases. Surg Lapa-
rosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2013;23:21-24.
85.	Cox TM, Aerts JM, Belmatoug N, et al. Management of 
non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease with special reference to 
pregnancy, splenectomy, bisphosphonate therapy, use of bio-
markers and bone disease monitoring. J Inherit Metab Dis. 
2008;31:319-336.
86.	Guggenbuhl P, Grosbois B, Chalès G. Gaucher disease. Joint 
Bone Spine. 2008;75:116-124.
87.	Xiao GQ, Zinberg JM, Unger PD. Asymptomatic sarcoid-
osis presenting as massive splenomegaly. Am J Med. 2002; 
113:698-699.
88.	Obuchi T, Sasaki A, Nakajima J, Nitta H, Otsuka K, 
Wakabayashi G. Laparoscopic surgery for splenic 
artery aneurysm. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 
2009;19:338-340.
89.	 Sadat U, Dar O, Walsh S, Varty K. Splenic artery aneurysms 
in pregnancy—a systematic review. Int J Surg. 2008;6:261-265.
1448
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
90.	Rashba EJ, Rowe JM, Packman CH. Treatment of the neutro-
penia of Felty syndrome. Blood Rev. 1996;10:177-184.
91.	Montenovo MI, Ahad S, Oelschlager BK. Laparoscopic 
splenopexy for wandering spleen: case report and review of 
the literature. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2010; 
20:e182-e184.
92.	 Mourtzoukou EG, Pappas G, Peppas G, Falagas ME. Vac-
cination of asplenic or hyposplenic adults. Br J Surg. 2008; 
95:273-280.
93.	Bai YN, Jiang H, Prasoon P. A meta-analysis of periopera-
tive outcomes of laparoscopic splenectomy for hematological 
disorders. World J Surg. 2012;36:2349-2358.
94.	Park AE, Gagner M, Pomp A. The lateral approach to laparo-
scopic splenectomy. Am J Surg. 1997;173:126-130.
95.	Patel AG, Parker JE, Wallwork B, et al. Massive splenomeg-
aly is associated with significant morbidity after laparoscopic 
splenectomy. Ann Surg. 2003;238:235-240.
96.	Pietrabissa A, Morelli L, Peri A, et al. Laparoscopic treatment 
of splenomegaly: a case for hand-assisted laparoscopic sur-
gery. Arch Surg. 2011;146:818-823.
97.	Kercher KW, Matthews BD, Walsh RM, et al. Laparo-
scopic splenectomy for massive splenomegaly. Am J Surg. 
2002;183:192-196.
98.	Monclova JL, Targarona EM, Vidal P, et al. Single inci-
sion versus reduced port splenectomy-searching for the best 
alternative to conventional laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg 
Endosc. 2013;27:895-890.
99.	Giulianotti, Buchs NC, Addeo P, et al. Robot-assisted partial 
and total splenectomy. Int J Med Robot. 2011;7:482-488.
100.	Bodner J, Kafka-Ritsch R, Lucciarini P, et al. A critical com-
parison of robotic versus conventional laparoscopic splenec-
tomies. World J Surg. 2005;29:982-985; discussion 985-986.
101.	Cassar K, Munro A. Iatrogenic splenic injury. J R Coll 
Surg Edinb. 2002;47:731-741.
102.	Cadili A, de Gara C. Complications of splenectomy. Am J 
Med. 2008;121:371-375.
103.	James AW, Rabl C, Westphalen AC, Fogarty PF, Posselt 
AM, Campos GM. Portomesenteric venous thrombosis after 
laparoscopic surgery: a systematic literature review. Arch 
Surg. 2009;144:520-526.
104.	Targarona EM. Portal vein thrombosis after laparoscopic sple-
nectomy: the size of the risk. Surg Innov. 2008;15:266-270.
105.	Wang H, Kopac D, Brisebois R, Sample C, Shapiro AM. Ran-
domized controlled trial to investigate the impact of antico-
agulation on the incidence of splenic or portal vein thrombosis 
after laparoscopic splenectomy. Can J Surg. 2011;54: 227-231.
106.	Okabayashi T, Hanazaki K. Overwhelming postsplenectomy 
infection syndrome in adults: a clinically preventable disease. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14:176-179.
107.	Taylor MD, Genuit T, Napolitano LM. Overwhelming 
postsplenectomy sepsis and trauma: time to consider revac-
cination? J Trauma. 2005;59:1482-1485.
108.	Jones P, Leder K, Woolley I, et al. Postsplenectomy infection: 
strategies for prevention in general practice. Aust Fam Physi-
cian. 2010;39:383-386.
109.	Denholm JT, Jones PA, Spelman DW, et al. Spleen registry 
may help reduce the incidence of overwhelming postsplenec-
tomy infection in Victoria. Med J Aust. 2010;192:49-50.
110.	Holdsworth RJ, Irwing AD Cuschia A. Postsplenectomy Sep-
sis and its Mortality rate: actual versus percieved risks Br J 
Surg. 1991;78(9):1031-1038
111.	Waghorn DJ. Overwhelming infection in asplenic patients: 
current best practice preventive measures are not being fol-
lowed. J Clin Pathol. 2001;54(3):214-218
112.	Park A, Maraccio M, Sterbach M, et al. Laparoscopic vs open 
splenectomy. Arch Surg. 1999;134(11):1263-1269
113.	Winslow ER, Brunt LM. Perioperative outcomes of lapa-
roscopic versus open splenectomy: a meta-analysis with 
emphasis on complications. Surgery. 2003;134(4):647-653; 
DISCUSSION 654-655
114.	Vantansev C, Ece I, Jr. Single incision laparoscopic sple-
nectomy with double ports. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan 
Tech. 2009.19(6):e225-227
115.	Barbaros U, Dinccag A. Single Incision laparoscopic sple-
nectomy: the fist two cases. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009:13(8): 
1520-1523
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, 
Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
Neal E. Seymour and Robert L. Bell
35
ABDOMINAL WALL
General Considerations
The abdominal wall provides structure, protection, and sup-
port for abdominal and retroperitoneal structures and is defined 
superiorly by the costal margins, inferiorly by the pelvic ring, 
and posteriorly by the vertebral column. Knowledge of its spe-
cific anatomic features is required for management of abdomi-
nal wall diseases or during entry into the peritoneal cavity.
Surgical Anatomy
The abdominal wall is an anatomically complex, layered struc-
ture with segmentally derived blood supply and innervation 
(Fig. 35-1). It is mesodermal in origin and develops as bilateral 
migrating sheets, which originate in the paravertebral region and 
envelop the future abdominal area. The leading edges of these 
structures develop into the rectus abdominis muscles, which 
eventually meet in the anterior midline. The rectus abdominis 
is longitudinally oriented and encased within an aponeurotic 
sheath, the layers of which are fused in the midline at the linea 
alba. The rectus insertions are on the pubic bones inferiorly and 
on the fifth and sixth ribs, as well as the seventh costal cartilages 
and the xiphoid process superiorly. The lateral border of the 
rectus muscles has a curved shape identifiable as the surface 
landmark, the linea semilunaris. Three tendinous intersections 
cross the rectus muscles at the level of the xiphoid process, 
umbilicus, and about halfway between the xiphoid process and 
the umbilicus (see Fig. 35-1).
Lateral to the rectus sheath are three muscular layers with 
oblique fiber orientations relative to one another (Fig. 35-2). 
These layers are derived from laterally migrating mesodermal 
tissues during the sixth to seventh week of fetal development. 
The external oblique muscle runs inferiorly and medially, aris-
ing from the margins of the lowest eight ribs and costal carti-
lages. The external oblique muscles originate on the latissimus 
dorsi and serratus anterior muscles, as well as on the iliac crest. 
chapter 
Abdominal Wall	
1449
General Considerations / 1449
Surgical Anatomy / 1449
Physiology / 1450
Abdominal Anatomy and Surgical  
Incisions / 1451
Congenital Abnormalities / 1453
Acquired Abnormalities / 1453
Omentum	
1456
Surgical Anatomy / 1456
Physiology / 1457
Omental Infarction / 1457
Omental Cysts / 1457
Omental Neoplasms / 1457
Mesentery	
1457
Surgical Anatomy / 1457
Sclerosing Mesenteritis / 1458
Mesenteric Cysts / 1459
Mesenteric Tumors / 1460
Retroperitoneum	
1460
Surgical Anatomy / 1460
Retroperitoneal Infections / 1460
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis / 1460
Medially, the external obliques form a tendinous aponeurosis, 
which is contiguous with the anterior rectus sheath. The ingui-
nal ligament is the inferior-most edge of the external oblique 
aponeurosis, reflected posteriorly in the area between the ante-
rior superior iliac spine and pubic tubercle. The internal oblique 
muscle lies deep to the external oblique and arises from the 
lateral aspect of the inguinal ligament, the iliac crest, and the 
thoracolumbar fascia. Its fibers course superiorly and medially 
and form a tendinous aponeurosis that contributes components 
to both the anterior and posterior rectus sheath. The lower 
medial and inferior-most fibers of the internal oblique may 
fuse with the lower fibers of the transversus abdominis muscle 
(the conjoined area). The inferior-most fibers of the internal 
oblique muscle are contiguous with the cremasteric muscle in 
the inguinal canal. These relationships are of critical signifi-
cance in the management of inguinal hernias. The transversus 
abdominis muscle is the deepest of the three lateral muscles 
and runs transversely from the lowest six ribs, the lumbosa-
cral fascia, and the iliac crest, to the lateral border of the rectus 
abdominis. The arcuate line (semicircular line of Douglas) lies 
roughly at the level of the anterior superior iliac spines (Fig. 35-3). 
Above the arcuate line, the anterior rectus sheath is formed by 
the external oblique aponeurosis and the external lamina of the 
internal oblique aponeurosis, whereas the posterior rectus sheath 
is formed by the internal lamina of the internal oblique apo-
neurosis and the transversus abdominis aponeurosis. Below the 
arcuate line, the anterior rectus sheath is formed by the external 
oblique aponeurosis, the laminae of the internal oblique apo-
neurosis, and the transversus abdominis aponeurosis. There is 
no aponeurotic posterior covering of this lower portion of 
the rectus muscles, although the endoabdominal, or trans-
versalis, fascia provides contiguous coverage of the posterior 
aspect of the abdominal above and below the arcuate line.
The blood supply to the muscles of the anterior abdominal 
wall is derived mainly from the superior and inferior epigastric 
arteries (Fig. 35-4). The superior epigastric artery arises from 
1
the internal thoracic artery, while the inferior epigastric artery 
arises from the external iliac artery. A collateral network of 
branches of the subcostal and lumbar arteries also contributes 
the abdominal wall blood supply. The lymphatic drainage of the 
abdominal wall is predominantly to the major nodal basins in 
the superficial inguinal and axillary areas.
Anterior abdominal wall innervation is segmental. Motor 
nerves to the rectus, oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles 
run from the anterior rami of spinal nerves at the T6 to T12 
1450
Figure 35-1.  Anterior abdominal wall. 
Linea alba is the midline aponeurotic 
demarcation between the bellies of the rec-
tus abdominis muscles. The rectus abdom-
inis muscle and its tendinous intersections 
on the left are shown deep to the reflected 
anterior rectus sheath. (Reproduced with 
permission from Moore KL, Dalley AF, 
eds. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 1999:181.)
Key Points
1
	 There are important anatomic differences in the rectus sheath 
structures above and below the arcuate line. The laminae of the 
internal oblique, which contribute to both the anterior and 
(along with the transversus abdominis) posterior rectus above 
the arcuate line, only contribute to the anterior sheath below 
the arcuate line. There is no aponeurotic posterior covering 
on the lower portion of the rectus muscles.
2
	 Rectus diastasis is associated with abdominal wall bulging 
consequent to separation of the rectus abdominis muscles in 
the midline. It does not represent a hernia, and surgical inter-
ventions for this condition are of questionable, if any, clinical 
benefit.
3
	 When resection of abdominal wall desmoid tumors is under-
taken, it must be recognized that failure to achieve negative 
margins is associated with an extremely high risk of local 
recurrence of the tumor.
4
	 Primary repair of ventral incisional hernias is associated with 
unacceptably high failure rates, and repair using other 
approaches, such as use of prosthetic mesh, is preferred.
5
	 The addition of the closed videoscopic technique to com-
ponents separation procedures has been associated with a 
significant decrease in the incidence of local wound com-
plications.
6
	 Potential benefits of laparoscopic incisional hernia repairs 
compared to open repairs with mesh include shorter hospi-
talization, lower risk of wound complications, and better 
abdominal wall function. A lower recurrence rate benefit 
remains controversial.
7
	 Surgical treatment of sclerosing mesenteritis is most often 
undertaken to confirm diagnosis and to rule out neoplasm 
as the cause of a mesenteric mass. Resection possibilities 
are limited by the extensiveness of the process as well as 
by the questionable benefit in most cases.
8
	 Potential surgical interventions in retroperitoneal fibrosis 
include operative biopsy to rule out neoplasm, ureteral 
stent placement, open or laparoscopic ureterolysis, and 
endovascular interventions for iliocaval occlusion.
levels. The overlying skin is innervated by afferent branches of 
the T4 through L1 nerve roots, with T10 nerve roots providing 
sensation around the umbilicus (Fig. 35-5).
Physiology
The rectus muscles, external obliques, and internal obliques 
work as a unit to flex the trunk anteriorly or laterally. Trunk 
rotation is achieved by simultaneous contraction of a unilateral 
external oblique and the contralateral internal oblique (e.g., 
5th costal cartilage
 Anterior layer
of rectus sheath
Rectus abdominis m.
External oblique m.
Tendinous
intersection
Anterior
superficial
iliac spine
 External
   oblique
aponeurosis
Superficial fascia
Serratus anterior
Anterior layer of 
rectus sheath
Linea alba
External oblique m.
Superficial cord
1451
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
rotation to the right is produced by contraction of the left exter-
nal oblique muscle and the right internal oblique). All of the 
truncal muscles are involved in raising intra-abdominal pres-
sure. Abdominal musculature contraction that occurs when the 
diaphragm is relaxed will result in expiration of air from the 
lungs, or a cough if this contraction is forceful. If the diaphragm 
is contracted when the abdominal musculature is contracted 
(Valsalva maneuver), the increased abdominal pressure aids in 
processes such as micturition, defecation, and childbirth.
Abdominal Anatomy and Surgical Incisions
Surgeons must deal with the abdominal wall to access pre-, 
intra-, and retroperitoneal sites. This begs practical questions 
of where and how to make incisions. Incisions for open surgery 
Figure 35-2.  The three muscular layers of the abdominal wall lateral to the rectus abdominis are the external oblique, internal oblique, and 
transversus abdominis muscles, shown here on the low abdomen, where the lower margin of the external oblique reflects posteriorly as the 
inguinal ligament. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Dalley AF, eds. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999:181.)
Figure 35-3.  Cross-sectional anatomy of the abdominal wall above and below the arcuate line of Douglas. The lower right abdominal wall 
segment shows clearly the absence of an aponeurotic covering of the posterior aspect of the rectus abdominis muscle inferior to the arcuate 
line. Superior to the arcuate line, there are both internal oblique and transversus abdominis aponeurotic contributions to the posterior rectus 
sheath. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Dalley AF, eds. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins; 1999:185.)
are generally located in proximity to the principal operative 
targets. Laparoscopic port site incisions might be remote 
from the site of interest and are carefully planned based on 
the instrument approach angles and working distances both to 
the operative site and between ports. Orientation of any inci-
sion may be determined based on expected quality of exposure, 
closure considerations including cosmesis, avoidance of previ-
ous incision sites, and surgeon preference. In general, incisions 
for open peritoneal access can be longitudinal (in or off the 
midline), transverse (lateral to or crossing midline), or oblique 
(directed either upward or downward toward the flank) (Fig. 
35-6). Modifications are numerous and can consist of various 
extensions to optimize exposure in specific clinical situations. 
Midline incisions are used for the majority of nonlaparoscopic 
Femoral
Nerve
Artery
Vein
Internal oblique muscle
External oblique muscle
Anterior superior iliac spine
External oblique aponeurosis
Incurved lower margin(gutter)
of aponeurosis forming inguinal
ligament               
Testis   
Anterior superior 
illac spine
Transverse abdominal 
muscle
Deep inguinal ring
(transversalis fascia)
Spermatic cord
Pubic crest
Inguinal ligament(passing
anterior to pectin pubis)
Pubic tubercle
 
Rectus sheath
Linea alba
 
 
Rectus sheath
Aponeurosis of transverse
abdominal muscle
Parietal peritoneum
Transverse fascia
Transverse abdominal muscle
Internal oblique
External oblique
Subcutaneous tissue
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Skin   
Aponeurosis of internal oblique
Parietal peritoneum
Extraperitoneal fat
Transversalis fascia
Linea alba
Rectus
abdominis
1452
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 35-5.  Dermatomal sensory innervation of the abdominal 
wall. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Dalley AF, 
eds. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 1999:86.)
Figure 35-6.  Various anterior abdominal wall incisions for expo-
sure of peritoneal structures. A. Midline incision; B. paramedian 
incision; C. right subcostal incision and “saber slash” extension to 
costal margin (dashed line); D. bilateral subcostal (also bucketh-
andle, chevron, gable) incision and “Mercedes Benz” extension 
(dashed line); E. Rocky-Davis incision and Weir extension (dashed 
line); F. McBurney incision; G. transverse incision and extension 
across midline (dashed line); and H. Pfannenstiel incision.
Figure 35-4.  The superior and inferior epigastric arteries form an 
anastomosing network of vessels in and around the rectus sheath, 
with collateralization to subcostal and lumbar vessels situated more 
laterally on the abdominal wall. Lymphatic drainage is via axillary 
or inguinal nodal basins. (Reproduced with permission from Moore 
KL, Dalley AF, eds. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 4th ed. Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999:188.)
procedures on the gastrointestinal tract. Incising the fused mid-
line aponeurotic tissue of the linea alba is simple and does not 
injure skeletal muscle. Paramedian incisions through the rectus 
abdominis sheath structures have largely been abandoned in 
favor of midline or nonlongitudinal incisions. Incisions lateral 
to the midline made with transverse or oblique orientations can 
either divide the successive muscular layers or bluntly separate 
the fibers. This latter muscle-splitting approach, exemplified 
by the classic McBurney incision for appendectomy, may be 
less destructive to tissue but offers more limited exposure. Sub-
costal incisions on the right (Kocher incision for cholecystec-
tomy) or left (for splenectomy) are archetypal muscle-dividing 
incisions that result in transection of intervening musculoapo-
neurotic tissues, including a portion of the rectus abdominis. 
These incisions are closed in two layers, the more superficial 
one incorporating the anterior aponeurotic sheath of the rectus 
medially, transitioning to external oblique muscle and aponeu-
rosis laterally. The posterior, deeper layer consists of internal 
oblique and transversus abdominis muscle. Similar anatomic 
considerations are guide closure of transversely oriented mus-
cle-dividing incisions. The Pfannenstiel incision, used com-
monly for pelvic procedures, is distinguished by transverse skin 
and anterior rectus sheath incisions, followed by rectus muscle 
retraction and longitudinal incision of the peritoneum. Irrespec-
tive of the incision type, suture apposition of abdominal wall 
tissues during closure is accomplished without significant ten-
sion and with great precision.
Abdominal incisions can lead to short- and long-term 
complications and patient disability. The question of how large 
an incision ought to be has no simple answer. In general, it is 
prudent to make incisions no larger than necessary to safely 
accomplish the operative goals. Laparoscopic and other mini-
mally invasive surgical methods owe their development in large 
Axillary
lymph nodes
Superficial 
inguinal
lymph nodes
Intercostal artery
Superior 
epigastric artery
Lumbar arteries
Inferior 
epigastric artery
Deep circumflex
iliac artery
External 
iliac artery
C3
C4
C5
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
T1
C5
C6
C7
C8
L1
L2
L3
L4    
S2
S3
C
D
E
F
H
G
A
B
1453
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
part to the belief that minimizing surgical injury to the abdomi-
nal wall is of significant benefit to the patient. For open surgery, 
a variety of devices are available to retract the abdominal wall 
and facilitate peritoneal exposure without subjecting the patient 
to excessively large incisions or surgical personnel to exhausting 
retraction tasks (Fig. 35-7). Examples include the Bookwalter™, 
Omni-Tract, and Thompson retractors.
Congenital Abnormalities
The abdominal wall layers begin to form within in first weeks 
following conception. In early embryonic development, there is 
a large central defect through which pass the vitelline (ompha-
lomesenteric) duct and allantois. The vitelline duct connects the 
embryonic and fetal midgut to the yolk sac. During the sixth 
week of development, the abdominal contents grow too large for 
the abdominal wall to completely contain them, and the embry-
onic midgut herniates into the umbilical cord. While outside 
the developing abdomen, it undergoes a 270-degree counter-
clockwise rotation on the developing mesentery. At the end of 
the twelfth week, it returns to the abdominal cavity. Defects in 
abdominal wall closure may lead to omphalocele or gastroschi-
sis. In omphalocele, viscera protrude through an open umbili-
cal ring and are covered by a sac derived from the amnion. In 
gastroschisis, the viscera protrude through a defect lateral to the 
umbilicus and no sac is present.
During the third trimester, the vitelline duct regresses. Per-
sistence of a vitelline duct remnant on the ileal border results in 
a Meckel’s diverticulum. Complete failure of the vitelline duct 
to regress results in a vitelline duct fistula, which is associated 
with drainage of small intestinal contents from the umbilicus. 
If both the intestinal and umbilical ends of the vitelline duct 
regress into fibrous cords, a central vitelline duct (omphalo-
mesenteric) cyst may occur. Persistent vitelline duct remnants 
between the gastrointestinal tract and the anterior abdominal 
wall may be associated with small intestinal volvulus in neo-
nates. When diagnosed, vitelline duct fistulas and cysts should 
be excised along with any accompanying fibrous cord.
The urachus is a fibromuscular tubular extension of the 
allantois that develops with the descent of the bladder to its 
Figure 35-7.  Bookwalter™ retractor in use for exposure of peri-
toneal structures during abdominal surgery. Devices of this type 
are valuable exposure aids that reduce the physical demands on 
personnel in the operating room and allow more complete focus on 
the surgical site of interest.
pelvic position. Persistence of urachal remnants can result in 
cysts as well as fistulas to the urinary bladder with drainage of 
urine from the umbilicus. These are treated by urachal excision 
and closure of any bladder defect that may be present.
Acquired Abnormalities
Rectus Abdominis Diastasis.  Rectus abdominis diastasis 
(or diastasis recti) results from a separation of the two rectus 
abdominis muscle pillars. This results in the characteristic bulg-
ing of the abdominal wall in the epigastrium that is sometimes 
mistaken for a ventral hernia despite the fact that the midline 
aponeurosis is intact and no hernia defect is present. Diastasis 
may be congenital, as a result of a more lateral insertion of the 
rectus muscles to the ribs and costochondral junctions, but is 
more typically an acquired condition with advancing age, obe-
sity, or following pregnancy. In the postpartum setting, rectus 
diastasis tends to occur in women of advanced maternal age, 
after multiple or twin pregnancies, or in women who deliver 
high-birth-weight infants. Diastasis is usually easily identified 
on physical examination (Fig. 35-8). Computed tomography 
(CT) scanning can provide an accurate measure of the distance 
between the rectus pillars and will differentiate rectus diastasis 
from a true ventral hernia if clarification is required. Surgical 
correction of rectus diastasis by plication of the broad midline 
aponeurosis has been described for cosmetic indications and for 
disability of abdominal wall muscular function. However, 
these approaches introduce the risk of an actual ventral 
hernia and are of questionable value in addressing any actual 
pathology.
Rectus Sheath Hematoma.  Hemorrhage from the network of 
collateralizing vessels within the rectus sheath and muscles can 
result in a rectus sheath hematoma. Although a history of trauma 
might be elicited, other less obvious events including sudden 
contraction of the rectus muscles with coughing, sneezing, or 
any vigorous physical activity may also cause this condition. 
Spontaneous rectus sheath hematomas occur most frequently in 
the elderly and in those on anticoagulation therapy. Patients fre-
quently describe the sudden onset of unilateral abdominal pain 
that may be confused with lateralized peritoneal disorders such 
as appendicitis.
Figure 35-8.  Diastasis recti visible in the midepigastrium with 
Valsalva maneuver. The edges of the rectus abdominis muscle, rigid 
with voluntary contraction, are palpable along the entire length of 
the bulging area. This should not be mistaken for a ventral hernia.
2
1454
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
History and physical examination alone may be diagnostic. 
Pain typically increases with contraction of the rectus muscles, 
and a tender mass may be palpated. The ability to appreciate an 
intra-abdominal mass is ordinarily degraded with contraction 
of the rectus muscles. Fothergill’s sign is a palpable abdomi-
nal mass that remains unchanged with contraction of the rectus 
muscles and is classically associated with rectus hematoma. A 
hemoglobin/hematocrit level and coagulation studies should be 
obtained. Both ultrasonography and CT (Fig. 35-9) can provide 
confirmatory imaging information and exclude other disorders.
Specific treatment depends on the severity of the hemor-
rhage. Small, unilateral, and stable hematomas may be observed 
without hospitalization. Bilateral or large hematomas will likely 
require hospitalization, as well as potential resuscitation. Trans-
fusion or coagulation factor replacement may be indicated in 
some situations. Angiographic embolization is required infre-
quently, but may be necessary if hematoma enlargement, free 
bleeding, or clinical deterioration occurs. Surgical therapy is 
used in the rare situations of failed angiographic treatment or 
hemodynamic instability that precludes any other options. The 
operative goals are evacuation of the hematoma and ligation 
of any bleeding vessel identified. Mortality in this condition is 
rare, but has been reported in patients requiring surgical treat-
ment and in the elderly.
Desmoid Tumors.  Desmoid tumors of the abdominal wall are 
fibrous neoplasms originating from the musculoaponeurotic 
structures of the anterior abdomen. They are also referred to 
collectively as aggressive fibrosis, a term that describes their 
aggressive and infiltrative local behavior. They do not have 
metastatic potential, and although there is marked cellularity 
in biopsy specimens, there are no specific histologic character-
istics that suggest malignancy, per se. Desmoid tumors of the 
abdominal wall have a slight female predominance and occur 
either sporadically or in the setting of familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP), with the greatest risk incurred in Gardner’s 
syndrome. As many as 10% to 15% of FAP patients develop 
Figure 35-9.  Computed tomography scan showing a medium-
sized right rectus sheath hematoma. This occurred in an elderly, 
anticoagulated patient without a clear history of trauma. Because of 
its size and the patient’s slender body habitus, this hematoma was 
palpable and could be followed clinically.
desmoid tumors of the abdominal wall, abdomen, or retroperi-
toneum, and this condition can account for patient mortality 
from complications of aggressive local growth. In non-FAP 
settings, abdominal wall desmoids occur most frequently in 
postpartum women or in surgical scars. Radical resection with 
frozen section margins and immediate mesh reconstruction of 
any consequent abdominal wall defect is the most commonly 
recommended treatment. Involvement of margins is associated 
with recurrence rates as high as 80%. Extensive infiltration 
and involvement of peritoneal structures frequently makes 
desmoid resection technically unfeasible. Medical treatment 
with an antineoplastic agent such as doxorubicin, dacarbazine, 
or carboplatin can produce remission for variable periods in up 
to 50% of patients, although the prognosis of advanced des-
moids, particularly in FAP, is poor, with a 5-year mortality rate 
as high as 50% reported. Combined medical treatments and the 
addition of imatinib have been used with some success in small 
numbers of patients; radiation therapy has been used in both 
adjuvant and palliative roles with high response rates.
Other Abdominal Wall Tumors.  The abdominal wall may 
be the site of various benign neoplasms including lipomas and 
neurofibromas. Surgical treatment is not always mandatory, 
but local excision is recommended for symptomatic or enlarg-
ing lesions. Primary abdominal wall malignancies are exceed-
ingly rare and include subtypes of sarcomas (leiomyosarcoma, 
malignant fibrous histiocytoma, fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma, 
and rhabdomyosarcoma), dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, 
schwannoma, and melanoma. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) or CT is used for tumor staging, and chest CT should 
be included to rule out pulmonary metastases. These studies 
define the extent of the tumor and involvement of contigu-
ous structures in anticipation of surgical treatment. Prior to 
surgery for abdominal wall sarcomas, a core needle biopsy is 
generally obtained (with image guidance if needed). Once the 
diagnosis is established, treatment consists of resection with 
tumor-free margins, applying the same general principles used 
for extremity sarcoma resection. Meticulous dissection avoid-
ing violation of tumor capsule and maintaining margins greater 
than 2 cm, if possible, are essential considerations. Extensive 
resection may leave a considerable abdominal wall defect that 
will have to be reconstructed. Immediate reconstruction with 
mesh and/or wound coverage with rotational or free myocutane-
ous flaps are the best options if primary closure is not feasible. 
Although these tumors are frequently described as radiation- 
and chemotherapy-resistant, both modalities have been used 
in advanced cases in both adjuvant and palliative settings. The 
very limited experience in these rare conditions makes commen-
tary on the effectiveness of these therapies difficult.
Abdominal wall resection may also be required with con-
tiguous involvement of gastrointestinal or gynecologic malig-
nancies. Primary closure may be feasible, but prosthetic mesh 
use (even in the setting of bowel resection), absorbable or bio-
logic mesh reinforcement, and myocutaneous flap reconstruc-
tion are also options.
Abdominal Wall Hernias.  Hernias of the anterior abdominal 
wall, or ventral hernias, represent defects in the parietal abdomi-
nal wall fascia and muscle through which intra-abdominal or 
preperitoneal contents can protrude. Ventral hernias may be 
congenital or acquired. Acquired hernias may develop via slow 
architectural deterioration of the musculoaponeurotic tissues, or 
they may develop from failed healing of an anterior abdominal 
3
1455
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
wall incision (incisional hernia). The most common finding is a 
mass or bulge, which may increase in size with Valsalva. Ven-
tral hernias may be asymptomatic or cause a considerable degree 
of discomfort and will generally enlarge over time. Physical 
examination reveals a bulge on the anterior abdominal wall that 
may reduce spontaneously, with recumbency, or with manual 
pressure. A hernia that cannot be reduced is described as incar-
cerated and generally requires surgical correction. Incarceration 
of an intestinal segment may be accompanied by nausea, vomit-
ing, and significant pain, and is a true surgical emergency. If 
the blood supply to the incarcerated bowel is compromised, the 
hernia is described as strangulated, and the localized ischemia 
may lead to infarction and perforation.
Primary ventral hernias (nonincisional) are generally 
named according to their anatomic location. Epigastric hernias 
are located in the midline between the xiphoid process and the 
umbilicus. They are generally small and may be multiple, and at 
elective repair, they are usually found to contain omentum or a 
portion of the falciform ligament. These may be congenital and 
due to defective midline fusion of developing lateral abdominal 
wall elements.
Umbilical hernias occur at the umbilical ring and may be 
present at birth or develop later in life. Umbilical hernias are pres-
ent in approximately 10% of all newborns and are more common 
in premature infants. Most congenital umbilical hernias close 
spontaneously by 5 years. If closure does not occur, elective sur-
gical repair is usually advised. Adults with small, asymptomatic 
umbilical hernias should be followed clinically. Surgical treat-
ment is offered if a hernia is observed to enlarge or is associated 
with symptoms, or if incarceration occurs. Surgical treatment can 
consist of primary sutured repair or placement of prosthetic mesh 
for larger defects (>2 cm) using open or laparoscopic methods.
Patients with advanced liver disease, ascites, and umbili-
cal hernia require special consideration. Enlargement of the 
umbilical ring usually occurs in this clinical situation as a result 
of increased intra-abdominal pressure from uncontrolled asci-
tes. First line of therapy is aggressive medical correction of 
the ascites and paracentesis for tense ascites with respiratory 
compromise. These hernias are usually filled with ascitic fluid, 
but omentum or bowel may enter the defect after large-volume 
paracentesis. Uncontrolled ascites may lead to skin breakdown 
on the protuberant hernia and eventual ascitic leak, which can 
predispose the patient to bacterial peritonitis. Patients with 
refractory ascites may be candidates for transjugular intrahe-
patic portocaval shunt (TIPS) or eventual liver transplantation. 
Umbilical hernia repair should be deferred until after the ascites 
is controlled.
Spigelian hernias can occur anywhere along the length 
of the Spigelian line or zone—an aponeurotic band of variable 
width at the lateral border of the rectus abdominis. However, 
the most frequent location of these rare hernias is at or slightly 
above the level of the arcuate line. These are not always clini-
cally evident as a bulge and may come to medical attention 
because of pain or incarceration. The largest review of surgical 
management of these hernias suggests that the risk of incarcera-
tion is as high as 17% at the time of diagnosis. This has been 
cited as a justification for mandatory repair of Spigelian hernias 
after they have been diagnosed. Repair may be accomplished 
with either open or laparoscopic procedures.
Incisional Hernias.  As many as 10% to 20% of patients may 
eventually develop hernias at incision sites following open 
abdominal surgery. The etiology of any given case of incisional 
hernia can be difficult to determine. Obesity, primary wound 
healing defects, multiple prior procedures, prior incisional her-
nias, and technical errors during repair may all be contributory. 
Repair of incisional hernias can be technically challenging, and 
a myriad of methods have been described. The most important 
distinctions in surgical management of incisional hernias are 
primary versus mesh repair and open versus laparoscopic repair.
Primary repairs of incisional hernia include both simple 
suture closure and components separation. Primary repair by sim-
ple suture approximation, even for small hernias (defects <3 cm), 
is associated with high reported hernia recurrence rates. In a 
randomized prospective study of open primary and open mesh 
incisional hernia repairs in 200 patients, investigators from the 
Netherlands found that after 3 years, recurrence rates were 43% 
and 24%, respectively.  Risk factors for recurrence were pri-
mary suture repair, postoperative wound infection, pros-
tate problems, and surgery for abdominal aortic aneurysm.
In an effort to decrease suture line tension associated with 
primary repair, Ramirez described the components separation 
technique in 1990. This procedure entailed creation of large sub-
cutaneous flaps lateral to the fascial defect followed by bilateral 
incision of the external oblique aponeuroses and, if necessary, 
incision of the posterior rectus sheaths bilaterally. The net effect 
is up to 10 cm of medial mobilization of the rectus muscles 
allowing for primary apposition of the fascia. Early reports of 
components separation demonstrated a high wound infection 
rate (20%) and an 18.2% hernia recurrence rate at 1 year. How-
ever, as the technique evolved, an improved understanding of 
key operative elements, including maximal preservation of the 
rectus perforator vessels and minimal dissection of the subcu-
taneous tissues, has led to fewer postoperative wound compli-
cations. In recent years, further modifications have included 
the endoscopic components separation technique as well as the 
addition of mesh reinforcement to primary fascial edge closure. 
Using the former closed technique with videoscopic control, 
effective external oblique division is achieved without creation 
of extensive subcutaneous flaps. This has been shown to dra-
matically decrease wound complications associated with 
the open procedure. The use of either permanent implant 
or biologic materials with components separation may lead to 
a hernia recurrence rate as low as 4% at 1 year of follow-up.
Mesh repair has become the standard in the elective man-
agement of most incisional hernias. Mesh can be placed as an 
underlay deep to the fascial defect (intra- or preperitoneal), an 
interlay either bridging the gap between the defect edges or 
within the abdominal wall musculoaponeurotic layers (intrapa-
rietal), or an onlay (superficial to the fascial defect). Laparo-
scopic repairs use an underlay technique. Each mesh material 
type has specific density, porosity, and strength characteristics. 
Some of the commercially available meshes for incisional her-
nia repair are listed in Table 35-1. Permanent mesh implants 
are made of prosthetic materials that do not degrade over time. 
Their principal advantages are ease of use, relatively low cost, 
and durability. Absorbable meshes are degraded and eliminated 
from tissues, gradually losing the structural integrity needed for 
tissue support. They can be useful for temporary abdominal wall 
closure in contaminated or infected fields but will eventually 
leave patients with an incisional hernia. Biologic meshes are 
prepared from collagen-rich porcine, bovine, or human tissues 
from which all antigenic cellular materials have been removed. 
These can also be chemically treated to crosslink collagen mol-
ecules, increasing strength and durability at the cost of some 
4
5
1456
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
impairment in host cellular ingrowth. Over time, biologic mesh-
derived collagen is incorporated into the host tissue, remodeled, 
and eventually replaced by host collagen. These characteristics 
may be useful in the setting of contaminated or infected fields. 
However, when used to bridge ventral hernia defects, biologic 
meshes are associated with excessively high hernia recurrence 
rates and ought to be reserved for tissue reinforcement rather 
than replacement. Newer prosthetic absorbable mesh materials 
are now available that share some of the characteristics of bio-
logics (e.g., host tissue ingrowth and replacement with collagen) 
and can also be used for reinforcement of primary closure at a 
considerably lower cost.
In recent years, the trend toward use of minimally inva-
sive surgical methods has exerted a great influence on incisional 
hernia management. However, open repairs continue to be per-
formed extensively, mostly using a mesh underlay technique, 
often with extensive dissection of a preperitoneal space to 
accommodate a large sheet of polypropylene or woven polyester 
mesh. This method isolates mesh from the peritoneal contents. 
Although the implications of direct mesh contact with peritoneal 
Table 35-1
Commercially available meshes for incisional hernia 
repair
Proprietary Name
Composition
Prosthetic meshes
Parietex
Polyester/collagen film
Composix
Polypropylene/ePTFE
DualMesh, Dulex, 
MotifMESH
ePTFE
Prolene, Surgipro, ProLite
Polypropylene
Proceed, Physiomesh
Polypropylene/polydioxanone
Sepramesh IP
Polypropylene/hyaluronate 
gel
C-Qur
Polypropylene/omega-3 fatty 
acid
TiMESH
Polypropylene/titanium
Biologic meshes
Surgisis Gold
Porcine small intestine 
submucosa
AlloDerm
Human dermis
SurgiMend
Fetal bovine dermis
CollaMend
Porcine dermis
AlloMax
Human dermis
Strattice
Porcine dermis
Veritas
Bovine pericardium
Absorbable meshes
Gore Bio-A
Polyglycolide/trimethylene 
carbonate
Vicryl
Polyglactin 910
Dexon
Polyglycolic acid
ePTFE = expanded polytetrafluoroethylene.
structures is somewhat controversial, dense adhesions to intes-
tine may complicate reoperation, and at least anecdotally may 
predispose to erosion and fistulization even without a concomi-
tant bowel resection. Meshes with adhesion barrier coatings of 
fish oil, oxidized cellulose, or hyaluronic acid have been offered 
as solutions for this concern. Expanded polytetrafluoroethylene 
(ePTFE) prostheses are also used if contact with peritoneal 
structures is unavoidable because this material tends not to be 
associated with development of dense adhesions.
Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair was first described 
by LeBlanc and Booth in 1993. Since that time, numerous 
studies have examined early and late results compared to open 
repair. In 2000, data from 407 patients undergoing laparo-
scopic incisional hernia as part of a multicenter trial revealed 
a recurrence rate of only 3.4%, with a mean follow-up of 
more than 2 years. Of the recurrences noted, the vast majority 
were felt to be secondary to technical errors committed early 
in the surgeons’ experience that were avoided during the later 
cases. Studies using pooled multicenter data or meta-analyses 
of published reports have tended to strongly favor laparoscopic 
incisional hernia repairs based on fewer wound complications, 
fewer overall complications, and lower recurrence rates when 
compared to the open technique. Authors speculate that these 
benefits are achieved by eliminating repeated abdominal inci-
sions and improving detection of unsuspected secondary defects 
that might not otherwise be appreciated during open repair. 
However, a recent Cochrane database review of studies total-
ing 880 cases and including the results from 10 randomized 
controlled trials concluded that short-term recurrence rates did 
not differ significantly and laparoscopic repairs were associated 
with higher in-hospital costs despite generally shorter lengths 
of stay. The major benefit for laparoscopic repairs compared 
to open repairs was a consistently lower risk of wound infec-
tions. In a recent multicenter randomized trial, in addition 
to lower infection rates, superior early physical function 
was also demonstrated very early after laparoscopic repairs 
compared to open repair. 
The technique of laparoscopic incisional hernia repair 
generally involves laterally placed ports for midline defects and 
contralaterally placed ports for lateral defects. All adhesions to 
the anterior abdominal wall are divided, taking great care not to 
injure the intestine either directly or with thermal or electrical 
energy. The contents of the hernia sac are completely reduced, 
but in contrast to open repairs, the sac itself is left in situ. Once 
the area encompassing all fascial defects is defined, a mesh is 
fashioned to allow for sufficient overlap (at least 4 cm) under 
the healthy abdominal wall. After insertion into the abdomen, 
the mesh is fixed into position with transfascial sutures, placed 
circumferentially around the mesh, and spiral tacks are placed 
according to surgeon preference (Fig. 35-10). It has been pro-
posed that transfascial sutures contribute to excessive postop-
erative pain, and some surgeons have eliminated them from the 
aforementioned technique, relying solely on spiral tacks for the 
strength of the repair. LeBlanc reviewed the utility of trans-
fascial sutures and recommended a minimum 5-cm overlap of 
mesh from defect edge if transfascial sutures are not used.
OMENTUM
Surgical Anatomy
The greater omentum and lesser omentum are fibrofatty aprons 
that provide support, coverage, and protection of peritoneal contents. 
6
1457
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
These structures begin to develop during the fourth week of ges-
tation. The greater omentum develops from the dorsal mesogas-
trium, which begins as a double-layered structure. The spleen 
develops in between the two layers, and later in development, 
the two layers fuse, giving rise to the intraperitoneal spleen and 
the gastrosplenic ligament. The fused layers then hang from 
the greater curvature of the stomach and drape over the trans-
verse colon, to which its posterior surface becomes fixed. The 
gastrocolic ligament and the gastrosplenic ligament are those 
segments of the greater omental apron that connect the named 
structures. In the adult, the greater omentum lies in between 
the anterior abdominal wall and the hollow viscera and usually 
extends into the pelvis.
The lesser omentum, otherwise known as the hepatoduo-
denal and hepatogastric ligaments, develops from the mesoderm 
of the septum transversum, which connects the embryonic liver 
to the foregut. The common bile duct, portal vein, and hepatic 
artery are located in the inferolateral margin of the lesser omen-
tum, which also forms the anterior border of the foramen of 
Winslow.
The blood supply to the greater omentum is derived from 
the right and left gastroepiploic arteries. The venous drainage 
parallels the arterial supply to a great extent, with the left and 
right gastroepiploic veins ultimately draining into the portal 
system.
Physiology
In the early twentieth century, the British surgeon Rutherford 
Morison noted that the omentum tended to wall off areas of 
infection and limit the spread of intraperitoneal contamination. 
He termed the omentum the “abdominal policeman.” Shortly 
after his description was published, several reports suggested 
intrinsic hemostatic characteristics of the omentum. In 1996, 
researchers from the Netherlands demonstrated that the concen-
tration of tissue factor in omentum is over twice the amount per 
gram of that found in muscle. This facilitates activation of coag-
ulation at sites of inflammation, ischemia, infection, or trauma 
Figure 35-10.  Intraperitoneal view of expanded polytetrafluo-
roethylene mesh used for laparoscopic ventral incisional hernia 
repair. The mesh is in place on the posterior aspect of the abdomi-
nal wall without apparent laxity due to the ongoing carbon dioxide 
insufflation. Once pneumoperitoneum is released, sufficient laxity 
is introduced to relieve any pull at the fixation points and to permit 
good apposition of mesh to the abdominal wall surface.
within the peritoneal cavity. The consequent local production 
of fibrin contributes to the ability of the omentum to adhere to 
areas of injury or inflammation.
Omental Infarction
Interruption of the blood supply to the omentum is a rare cause 
of an acute abdomen that may be secondary to torsion of the 
omentum around its vascular pedicle, thrombosis or vasculitis 
of the omental vessels, or omental venous outflow obstruction. 
Fewer than 100 cases have been reported, and the diagnosis is 
most likely to be made in male adults. Depending on the loca-
tion of the infarcted omental tissue, this disease process may 
mimic appendicitis, cholecystitis, diverticulitis, perforated 
peptic ulcer, or ruptured ovarian cyst, with abdominal pain 
and tenderness typical at locations typical for these conditions. 
Abdominal examination may reveal a tender, palpable mass. 
The diagnosis is generally inferred from abdominal CT or ultra-
sonography, which shows a localized inflammatory mass of fat 
density. In patients with convincing imaging who are clinically 
stable without signs of worsening peritonitis, supportive care 
is sufficient. However, some cases may be indistinguishable 
from more worrisome surgical conditions. In these instances, 
laparoscopic exploration can establish an accurate diagnosis and 
permit resection of the infarcted tissue, which should result in 
rapid resolution of symptoms.
Omental Cysts
Cystic lesions of the omentum and mesentery are related dis-
orders, likely resulting from either peritoneal inclusions or 
degeneration of lymphatic structures. Omental cysts are far 
less common than mesenteric cysts. Omental cysts may present 
as an asymptomatic abdominal mass or may cause abdominal 
pain with or without appreciable mass or distention. Physical 
examination may reveal a freely mobile intra-abdominal mass. 
Both CT and abdominal ultrasound reveal a well-circumscribed, 
cystic-mass lesion arising from the greater omentum. Treatment 
involves resection of all symptomatic omental cysts. Resection 
of these benign lesions is readily accomplished using laparo-
scopic techniques.
Omental Neoplasms
Primary tumors of the omentum are rare. Benign tumors of the 
omentum include lipomas, myxomas, and desmoid tumors. 
Primary malignant tumors of the omentum are usually meso-
dermally derived and may share immunohistochemical char-
acteristics of gastrointestinal stromal tumors including c-kit 
immunopositivity. Metastatic tumors of the omentum are com-
mon, with metastatic ovarian cancer having the highest prepon-
derance of omental involvement. Cancers of any portion of the 
gastrointestinal tract, as well as melanoma, uterus, and kidney 
cancer, may also metastasize to the omentum.
MESENTERY
Surgical Anatomy
The small and large intestinal mesenteries serve as the major 
pathways for arterial, venous, lymphatic, and neural structures 
to course to and from the bowel. Mesenteric tissues develop 
from embryonic dorsal mesentery that attaches the foregut, mid-
gut, and hindgut to the posterior abdominal wall. The dorsal 
mesentery becomes the greater omentum proximally, the small 
intestinal mesentery in the region of the jejunum and ileum, and 
1458
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the mesocolon in the region of the colon. During fetal develop-
ment, after the herniated and 270-degree rotated midgut returns 
to its intraperitoneal location, the reduced mesentery achieves 
its final fixation state. The duodenum and lateral colon segments 
become fixed to the retroperitoneum, whereas the small intesti-
nal mesentery, transverse colon mesentery, and sigmoid colon 
mesentery remain mobile (Fig. 35-11). Defects in these normal 
developmental steps starting with midgut rotation result in the 
spectrum of disorders associated with midgut malrotation. The 
related anatomic anomalies of the mesentery include paraduo-
denal or mesocolic hernias (Fig. 35-12), which can present as 
chronic or acute intestinal obstruction in children or adults.
Sclerosing Mesenteritis
Sclerosing mesenteritis, also referred to as retractile mesen-
teritis, mesenteric panniculitis, or mesenteric lipodystrophy, is 
an inflammatory and fibrotic process involving the intestinal 
mesentery. There is no gender or race predominance, but the 
condition is most commonly diagnosed in individuals older 
than 50 years of age.
The etiology of this process is unknown, but its cardinal 
feature is increased tissue density within the mesentery. This 
can be localized and associated with a discrete nonneoplastic 
mesenteric mass, or it can be more diffuse, sometimes involving 
large swaths of mesentery without well-defined borders. There 
may be varying relative degrees of fat tissue degeneration, 
inflammation, and fibrosis on histologic examination, giving 
Figure 35-11.  Rotational events during gastrointestinal 
(GI) tract development in the fetus result in the final posi-
tioning of the GI tract segments and anatomic relationships 
of intestinal mesentery to the retroperitoneum. The cecum, 
designated “B,” can be followed during the course of the 
270-degree counterclockwise rotation of the mesentery 
to its right lower quadrant position. During the course of 
these events, the duodenum and right and left colon seg-
ments and their mesenteries become affixed to the retro-
peritoneum, leaving the small intestine and sigmoid colon 
mobile on their respective mesenteries. (Reproduced with 
permission from Healy JE, Hodge J (eds). Surgical Anat-
omy, 2nd ed. Toronto: BC Decker, 1990:151.) 
Figure 35-12.  Mesocolic hernia of small bowel into a retrocolic 
hernia sac posterior to the descending colon mesentery. Hernias 
of this type, as well as hernias into paraduodenal recesses, result 
from abnormal fixation of mesenteric structures during the course 
of intestinal rotation. (Reproduced with permission from Healy JE, 
Hodge J, eds. Surgical Anatomy. 2nd ed. Toronto: BC Decker; 
1990:153.)
rise to the various terms used to describe this condition. It is 
not clear if these variations represent stages in a sequential pro-
cess or differences in basic pathobiology. Abdominal pain is the 
most frequent presenting symptom, followed by the presence of 
1
2
4
5
3
Liver
Stomach
Aorta
Sup.
mesenteric artery
Aorta
Mesosigmoid, not fixed
Transv.
mesocolon,
not fixed
Umbilicus
Umbilicus A
B
B
A
A'
A'
A"
B'
B'
B"
B"'
270°
90°
Mesentery,
fixed
Mesenteric
attachment
of small 
intestine
Sup. mesen-
teric art.
Mesentery
fixed
A'
A'
A'
A'"
A"
B"
B'
B'
B'
B'"
A
B
Inferior mesenteric v.
Left colic a.
Hernial sac
1459
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
a mass or, much more rarely, intestinal obstruction. However, 
many cases are discovered incidentally when imaging studies, 
most frequently CT scan, are performed for unrelated reasons.
CT of the abdomen shows a mass lesion or an area of the 
mesentery with a higher density than normal mesenteric tis-
sue. Vascular structures are seen coursing through the affected 
areas, which sometimes involve in the mesenteric root (Fig. 
35-13). Although CT cannot definitively distinguish sclerosing 
mesenteritis from a mesenteric tumor, identification of a “fat 
ring sign” or hypodense zone around the mass area has been 
suggested as a means of distinguishing sclerosing mesenteritis 
from lymphoma. The presence of a hyperattenuating stripe has 
also been suggested as radiologic finding that would favor the 
mesenteritis diagnosis.
Operative findings range from a discrete mesenteric mass 
(Fig. 35-14) to broad areas of mesenteric nodularity and thick-
ening. Surgical biopsy has frequently been used to confirm the 
diagnosis and to rule out a neoplastic process. The extent and 
location of mesenteric involvement define and, in some cases, 
limit the options for surgical intervention. In addition to sim-
ple biopsy, bowel and mesenteric resection can be considered, 
particularly in cases where this is technically feasible based 
on mass size and the ability to avoid injury to small intestinal 
blood supply. Often, however, the involvement of the vascular 
structures at the mesenteric root makes resection unfeasible. 
Rarely, an ostomy of some type for fecal diversion in the face of 
obstruction can be considered. Positron emission tomog-
raphy with CT scanning has proven effective in ruling out 
neoplasia for focal mesenteric masses, leaving the sclerosing 
mesenteritis diagnosis as one of exclusion. 
In most cases of sclerosing mesenteritis, the process 
appears to be self-limited and may even demonstrate regression 
if followed with interval imaging studies. Clinical symptoms 
Figure 35-13.  Computed tomography scan of sclerosing mes-
enteritis (mesenteric lipodystrophy). This condition cannot easily 
be distinguished from a neoplasm of the mesentery on radiologic 
study. In this case, the study showed “fatty mesenteric tumor with 
involvement of mesenteric vessels,” and “mesenteric lipodystro-
phy” was demonstrated by biopsy at exploration. The finding of a 
“hyperattenuating stripe” around the lesion, as seen in this image, 
has been associated with the mesenteritis diagnosis.
Figure 35-14.  Operative findings at the time of resection of what 
was believed to be a mesenteric tumor but that proved to be a focus 
of mesenteric lipodystrophy. In this case, the relatively small site 
of involvement and the peripheral location in the small intestinal 
mesentery permitted management by resection en bloc with a seg-
ment of adjacent small bowel.
are very likely to improve without intervention, and therefore, 
aggressive surgical treatments are generally not indicated. In 
clinically problematic cases that are not amenable to resection 
because of widespread mesenteric involvement or unfavorable 
location, medical treatment has been given to alleviate severe 
symptoms. Among the agents that have been used are cortico-
steroids, colchicine, tamoxifen, and cyclophosphamide.
Mesenteric Cysts
Cysts of the mesentery are benign lesions with an incidence 
of less than 1 in 100,000. The etiology of such cysts remains 
unknown, but several theories regarding their development 
exist, including degeneration of the mesenteric lymphatics or 
peritoneal inclusions arising as congenital anomalies.
Mesenteric cysts may be asymptomatic or cause acute 
or chronic symptoms of a mass lesion. Acute pain is generally 
caused by rupture or torsion of the cyst or from acute hemor-
rhage into the cyst cavity. Mesenteric cysts may also cause 
intermittent abdominal pain secondary to compression of adja-
cent structures or reversible torsion of the cyst. Mesenteric cysts 
can also be the cause of nonspecific symptoms such as anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and weight loss.
Physical examination may reveal a mass lesion that is 
mobile only from the patient’s right to left or left to right (Tillaux’s 
sign), in contrast to the findings with omental cysts, which 
should be freely mobile in all directions. Tillaux was the first to 
record this physical finding and, in 1850, the first to successfully 
remove a mesenteric cyst.
CT (Fig. 35-15), ultrasound, and MRI all have been used 
to evaluate patients with mesenteric cysts. Cysts generally 
appear unilocular without solid component on imaging. Less 
frequently, they may be multiple or multilocular or difficult to 
distinguish from solid mesenteric tumors with cystic compo-
nents such as a cystic stromal tumor or mesothelioma. Mesen-
teric cystic lymphangioma may present as numerous, often large 
cysts in the setting of abdominal pain. These can be difficult to 
treat and almost invariably recur after excision.
When symptomatic, simple mesenteric cysts are surgically 
excised either openly or laparoscopically. Cyst unroofing or 
marsupialization is not recommended because mesenteric cysts 
7
1460
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
have a high propensity to recur after drainage alone. On rare 
occasion, adjacent mesentery or bowel may be densely adherent 
to the cyst, or mesenteric vessels must be sacrificed in order to 
achieve complete excision. In this case, segmental bowel resec-
tion inclusive of the adjacent mesentery is performed.
Mesenteric Tumors
Primary tumors of the mesentery are rare. Benign tumors of the 
mesentery include lipoma, cystic lymphangioma, and desmoid 
tumors. Primary malignant tumors of the mesentery are similar 
to those described for omentum. Liposarcomas, leiomyosar-
comas, malignant fibrous histiocytomas, lipoblastomas, and 
lymphangiosarcomas have all been described. Metastatic small 
intestinal carcinoid in mesenteric lymph nodes may exceed the 
bulk of primary disease and compromise blood supply to the 
bowel. Treatment of mesenteric malignancies involves wide 
resection of the mass. Because of the proximity to the blood 
supply to the intestine, such resections may be technically 
unfeasible or involve loss of substantial lengths of bowel.
RETROPERITONEUM
Surgical Anatomy
The retroperitoneum is defined as the space between the poste-
rior envelopment of the peritoneum and the posterior body wall 
(Fig. 35-16). The retroperitoneal space is bounded superiorly by 
the diaphragm, posteriorly by the spinal column and iliopsoas 
muscles, and inferiorly by the levator ani muscles. Although 
technically bounded anteriorly by the posterior reflection of the 
peritoneum, the anterior border of the retroperitoneum is quite 
convoluted, extending into the spaces in between the mesenter-
ies of the small and large intestine. Because of the rigidity of the 
superior, posterior, and inferior boundaries, and the compliance 
of the anterior margin, retroperitoneal tumors tend to expand 
anteriorly toward the peritoneal cavity.
Retroperitoneal Infections
The posterior reflection of the peritoneum limits the spread of 
most intra-abdominal infections into the peritoneum. Accordingly, 
Figure 35-15.  Computed tomography (CT) scan of a mesenteric cyst (left panel). Unilocular appearance without associated solid component 
strongly suggests the diagnosis of benign cyst. The operative findings during laparoscopic eploration (right panel) confirm the CT diagnosis 
of unilocular cyst, which is then enucleated from the mesentery in a relatively avascular plane adjacent to mesenteric vessels.
the source of retroperitoneal infections is usually an organ con-
tained within or abutting the retroperitoneum. Retrocecal appen-
dicitis, contained perforation of duodenal ulcers, iatrogenic 
perforation with esophagogastroduodenoscopy or endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography, and complicated pancre-
atitis may all lead to retroperitoneal infection with or without 
abscess formation. The substantial space and rather nondiscrete 
boundaries of the retroperitoneum allow some retroperitoneal 
abscesses to become quite large prior to diagnosis.
Patients with a retroperitoneal abscess usually present with 
pain and fever, but more worrisome signs of sepsis may also be 
present depending on clinical severity. The site of pain may be 
variable and can include the back, pelvis, or thighs. Erythema 
may be observed around the umbilicus or flank. The diagnosis 
is best established by CT, which may demonstrate a unilocular 
or multilocular collection along with retroperitoneal soft tissue 
stranding (Fig. 35-17).
Management of retroperitoneal infections includes identi-
fication and treatment of the underlying condition, intravenous 
antibiotics, and drainage of all well-defined collections. Image-
guided percutaneous drainage is strongly favored, but operative 
drainage may sometimes be needed for adequate drainage of 
complex or multiple collections. The mortality rate of retroperi-
toneal abscess has been reported to be as high as 25%, and even 
higher in rare cases of necrotizing fasciitis of the retroperitoneum.
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a class of disorders characterized by 
hyperproliferation of fibrous tissue in the retroperitoneum. This 
may be a primary disorder as in idiopathic retroperitoneal fibro-
sis, also known as Ormond’s disease, or a secondary reaction to 
an inciting inflammatory process, malignancy, or medication. 
Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare disorder, usually 
affecting 0.5 per 100,000 patients annually. Men are twice as 
likely to be affected as women, with no predilection for any 
particular ethnic group. The disease primarily affects individu-
als in the fourth to the sixth decades of life.
Although allergic or autoimmune mechanisms have been 
postulated, the pathogenesis of this condition remains uncertain. 
1461
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
In the closely related condition of chronic perioaortitis, an asso-
ciation with the HLA-DRB1*03 allele, which has been linked to 
autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, type 
1 diabetes mellitus, and myasthenia gravis, is of particular interest 
Figure 35-16.  Anatomy of the retroperitoneum. (Reproduced with permission from Healy JE, Hodge J, eds. Surgical Anatomy. 2nd ed. 
Toronto: BC Decker; 1990:201.)
Figure 35-17.  Computed tomography scan of retroperitoneal 
abscess complicating complex, surgically treated retroperitoneal 
infection that had resulted from ampullary perforation at the time 
of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. This pattern 
of infection may be difficult to treat and result in multiple interven-
tions such as percutaneous drainage before resolution.
in defining an autoimmune cause of retroperitoneal fibrosis. Cir-
culating antibodies to ceroid, a lipoproteinaceous by-product of 
vascular atheromatous plaque oxidation, are present in more than 
90% of patients with retroperitoneal fibrosis. The relationship of 
these finding to the occurrence of fibrosis remains uncertain. The 
early inflammatory reaction is predominated by T-helper cells, 
plasma cells, and macrophages, but is subsequently replaced by 
collagen-synthesizing fibroblasts. Microscopically, the infiltrate 
is indistinguishable from the periadventitial involvement of aortic 
aneurysmal disease, Reidel’s thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, 
and Peyronie’s disease. The fibrotic process begins in the ret-
roperitoneum just below the level of the renal arteries. Fibrosis 
gradually expands, encasing the ureters, inferior vena cava, aorta, 
mesenteric vessels, or sympathetic nerves. Bilateral involvement 
is noted in 67% of cases.
Retroperitoneal fibrosis may also appear secondarily with 
a variety of inflammatory conditions including abdominal aortic 
aneurysm, pancreatitis, histoplasmosis, tuberculosis, or actino-
mycosis. It also is associated with a variety of malignancies, 
including prostate, pancreas, and gastric cancer, as well as non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, stromal tumors, and carcinoid tumors. 
Retroperitoneal fibrosis has been described in association with 
autoimmune disorders including ankylosing spondylitis, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, and 
polyarteritis nodosa.
There is strong evidence that methysergide, a semisyn-
thetic ergot alkaloid used in the treatment of migraine head-
aches, plays a causal role in some cases of retroperitoneal 
Posterior
wall of liver
Right
adrenal gland
Duodenum
Right ureter
Right kidney
Quadratus 
lumborum m.
Psoas major m.
Common
iliac a.
Lesser 
peritoneal
cavity
Spleen
Left adrenal
gland
Phrenocolic
ligament
Left kidney
Pancreas
1462
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
fibrosis. Other medications that have been linked to retroperi-
toneal fibrosis include β-blockers, hydralazine, α-methyldopa, 
and entacapone, which inhibits catechol-O-methyltransferase 
and is used as an adjunct with levodopa in the treatment of Par-
kinson’s disease. The retroperitoneal fibrosis regresses upon 
discontinuation of these medications.
Presenting symptoms depend on the structure or structures 
affected by the fibrotic process. Initially, patients complain of 
the insidious onset of dull, poorly localized abdominal pain. 
Sudden-onset or severe abdominal pain may signify acute mes-
enteric ischemia. Other symptoms of retroperitoneal fibrosis 
may include unilateral leg swelling, intermittent claudication, 
oliguria, hematuria, or dysuria.
As with the patient’s symptomatology, findings on physi-
cal examination vary with the retroperitoneal structure involved. 
Consequently, findings may include hypertension, the palpation 
of an abdominal or flank mass, lower-extremity edema (uni-
lateral or bilateral), or diminished lower-extremity pulses (uni-
lateral or bilateral). Laboratory evaluation may reveal elevated 
blood urea nitrogen and/or creatinine levels. As with many auto-
immune inflammatory processes, the erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate almost always is elevated in patients with retroperitoneal 
fibrosis.
Many imaging modalities have been used with various 
sensitivities to diagnose retroperitoneal fibrosis. Abdominal/
lower-extremity ultrasonography is the least invasive imag-
ing procedure but is technician dependent. It may be useful 
if iliocaval compressive or renal symptoms predominate. A 
lower-extremity ultrasound may show deep venous thrombosis, 
whereas abdominal ultrasonography may identify a mass lesion 
or hydronephrosis. Once the diagnostic procedure of choice, 
intravenous pyelography (IVP) is less commonly used today. If 
the ureters are involved, IVP findings include ureteral compres-
sion, ureteral deviation toward the midline, and hydronephrosis.
Abdominopelvic CT with oral and intravenous contrast 
is the imaging procedure of choice and will generally allow 
the extent of the fibrotic process to be determined. If there is 
diminished renal function, avoidance of the use of intravenous 
contrast will reduce the ability to characterize retroperitoneal 
tissue planes. In this case, MRI may be used, since the signal 
intensity of the fibrotic process is discrete from muscle or fat. 
Additionally, magnetic resonance angiography will generally 
provide a good assessment of the degree of iliocaval involve-
ment. Once a mass lesion is identified, the mass should be biop-
sied to rule out a retroperitoneal malignancy. The specimen may 
be retrieved using image-guided techniques or surgical retro-
peritoneal biopsy, which may be performed laparoscopically or 
during open laparotomy.
Once malignancy, drug-induced, and infectious etiologies 
are ruled out, treatment of the retroperitoneal fibrotic process 
is instituted. Corticosteroids, with or without surgery, are the 
mainstay of medical therapy. Surgical treatment consists primar-
ily of ureterolysis or ureteral stenting and is required in patients 
who present with significant hydronephrosis. Laparoscopic ure-
terolysis has been shown to be as efficacious as open the open 
procedure. Patients with iliocaval thrombosis require anticoag-
ulation, although appropriate duration of therapy is uncertain. 
Endovascular interventions for iliocaval occlusion have also 
been shown to be effective in small numbers of patients. 
Prednisone is initially administered at a relatively high 
dose (60 mg every other day for 2 months), and then gradually 
tapered over the next 2 months. Therapeutic efficacy is assessed 
based on patient symptoms and interval imaging studies. Cyclo-
sporin, tamoxifen, and azathioprine have also been used to treat 
patients who respond poorly to corticosteroids.
The overall prognosis in idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis 
is good, with 5-year survival rates of 90% to 100%. Because 
long-term recurrences have been described, lifelong follow-up 
is warranted.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
General References
Burt BM, Tavakkolizaden A, Ferzoco SJ. Incisions, closures, and 
management of the abdominal wound. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley 
SW, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations. 11th ed. New York: 
McGraw Hill; 2007:71-102.
Flament JB, Avisse C, Delattre JF. Anatomy of the abdominal wall. 
In: Bendavid R, Abrahamson J, Arregui ME, et al, eds. Abdomi-
nal Wall Hernias: Principles and Management. 1st ed. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 2001:39-63.
Sauerland S, Walgenbach M, Habermalz B, et al. Laparoscopic 
versus open surgical techniques for ventral or incisional her-
nia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 16 (3): 2011.
Abdominal Wall
Albright E, Diaz D, Davenport D, Roth JS. The component sepa-
ration technique for hernia repair: a comparison of open and 
endoscopic techniques. Am Surg. 2011;77:839-843.
Anthony T, Bergen PC, Kim LT, et al. Factors affecting recurrence fol-
lowing incisional herniorrhaphy. World J Surg. 2000;24:95-100.
Bertani E, Chiappa A, Testori A, et al. Desmoid tumors of the 
anterior abdominal wall: results from a monocentric surgi-
cal experience and review of the literature. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2009;16:1642-1649.
Blatnik J, Jin J, Rosen M. Abdominal hernia repair with bridging 
acellular dermal matrix: an expensive hernia sac. Am J Surg. 
2008;196:47-50.
de Vries Reilingh TS, Bodegom ME, van Goor H, et al. Autolo-
gous tissue repair of large abdominal wall defects. Br J Surg. 
2007;94:791-803.
Edlow JA, Juang P, Marglies S, et al. Rectus sheath hematoma. Ann 
Emerg Med. 1999;34:671-675.
Halm JA, de Wall LL, Steyerberg EW, et al. Intraperitoneal poly-
propylene mesh hernia repair complicates subsequent abdomi-
nal surgery. World J Surg. 2007;31:423-429.
Harth KC, Rose J, Delaney CP, et al. Open versus endoscopic 
component separation: a cost comparison. Surg Endosc. 
2011;25:2865-2870.
Heniford BT, Park A, Ramshaw BJ, et al. Laparoscopic ventral 
and incisional hernia repair in 407 patients. J Am Coll Surg. 
2000;190:645-650.
Hesselink VJ, Luijendijk R, de Wilt JH, et al. An evaluation of risk 
factors in incisional hernia recurrence. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1993;176:228-234.
Jin J, Rosen MJ, Blatnik J, et al. Use of acellular dermal matrix for 
complicated hernia repair: does technique affect outcome? J Am 
Coll Surg. 2007;205:654-660.
Klingler PJ, Wetscher G, Glaser K, et al. The use of ultrasound to 
differentiate rectus sheath hematoma from other acute abdomi-
nal disorders. Surg Endosc. 1999;13:1129-1134.
Knechtel G, Stoeger H, Szkandera J, Dorr K, Beham A, Samonigg 
H. Desmoid tumor treated with polychemotherapy followed by 
imatinib: a case report and review of the literature. Case Rep 
Oncol. 2010;3:287-293.
Korenkov M, Sauerland S, Arndt M, et al. Randomized clinical 
trial of suture repair, polypropylene mesh, or autodermal her-
nioplasty for incisional hernia. Br J Surg. 2002;89:50-56.
8
1463
Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and Retroperitoneum
CHAPTER 35
Larson DW, Farley DR. Spigelian hernias: repair and outcome for 
81 patients. World J Surg. 2002;26:1277-1281.
LeBlanc KA. Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair: are transfas-
cial sutures necessary? A review of the literature. Surg Endosc. 
2007;21:508-513.
LeBlanc KA, Booth WV. Laparoscopic repair of incisional 
abdominal hernias using expanded polytetrafluorethylene: 
preliminary findings. Surg Laparosc Endosc. 1993;3:39-41.
Luijendijk RW, Hop WC, van den Tol MP, et al. A comparison 
of suture repair with mesh repair for incisional hernia. N Engl 
J Med. 2000;343:392-398.
National Center for Health Statistics. Detailed diagnoses and proce-
dures. National Hospital Discharge Survey, Series 13, No. 122, 
1995.
Park A, Birch DW, Lovrics P. Laparoscopic and open inci-
sional hernia repair: a comparison study. Surgery. 1998;124: 
816-821.
Perry CW, Phillips BJ. Rectus sheath hematoma: review of an 
uncommon surgical complication. Hosp Physician. 2001;56: 
35-37.
Pierce RA, Spitler JA, Frisella MM, et al. Pooled data analysis 
of laparoscopic vs. open ventral hernia repair: 14 years of 
patient data accrual. Surg Endosc. 2007;21:378-386.
Quintini C, Ward G, Shatnawei A, et al. Mortality of intra-abdomi-
nal desmoid tumors in patients with familial adenomatous pol-
yposis: a single center review of 154 patients. Ann Surg. 2012; 
255:511-516.
Ramirez OM, Ruas E, Dellon AL. “Components separation” 
method for closure of abdominal-wall defects: an anatomic 
and clinical study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;86:519-526.
Rogmark P, Petersson U, Bringman S, et al. Short-term outcomes 
for open and laparoscopic midline incisional hernia repair: a 
randomized multicenter controlled trial: the ProLOVE (pro-
spective randomized trial on open versus laparoscopic opera-
tion of ventral eventrations) trial. Ann Surg. 2013;258:37-45.
Stojadinovic A, Hoos A, Karpoff HM, et al. Soft tissue tumors of 
the abdominal wall. Analysis of disease patterns and treatment. 
Arch Surg. 2001;136:70-79.
Stoppa R, Ralaimiaramanana F, Henry X, et al. Evolution of 
large ventral incisional hernia repair: the French contribu-
tion to a difficult problem. Hernia. 1999;3:1-3.
Zainea GG, Jordan F. Rectus sheath hematomas: their pathogenesis, 
diagnosis, and management. Am Surg. 1988;54:630-633.
Omentum
Beelen RHJ. The greater omentum: physiology and immunological 
concepts. Neth J Surg. 1991;43:145-149.
Fukatsu K, Saito H, Han I, et al. The greater omentum is the pri-
mary site of neutrophil exudation in peritonitis. J Am Coll Surg. 
1996;183:450-456.
Goldsmith HS, ed. The Omentum: Research and Clinical Applica-
tions. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2000.
Liebermann-Meffert D. The greater omentum. Anatomy, embry-
ology, and surgical applications. Surg Clin North Am. 2000; 
80:275-293, xii.
Liebermann-Meffert D, White H, eds. The Greater Omentum. Anat-
omy, Physiology, Pathology, Surgery with an Historical Survey. 
New York: Springer-Verlag; 1983.
Logmans A, Schoenmakers CH, Haensel SM, et al. High tissue fac-
tor concentration in the omentum, a possible cause of its hemo-
static properties. Eur J Clin Invest. 1996;26:82-83.
Morison R. Remarks on some functions of the omentum. Br Med 
J. 1906;1:76.
Nakagawa M, Akasaka Y, Kanai T, et al. Extragastrointestinal stro-
mal tumor of the greater omentum: case report and review of 
the literature. Hepatogastroenterology. 2003;50:691-695.
O’Leary DP. Use of the greater omentum in colorectal surgery. Dis 
Colon Rectum. 1999;42:533-539.
Powers JC, Fitzgerald JF, McAlvanah MJ. The anatomical basis 
for the surgical detachment of the greater omentum from the 
transverse colon. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1976;143:105-106.
Saborido BP, Romero CJ, Medina ME, et al. Idiopathic segmental 
infarction of the greater omentum as a cause of acute abdomen. 
Report of two cases and review of the literature. Hepatogastro-
enterology. 2001;48:737-740.
Schwartz RW, Reames M, McGrath PC, et al. Primary solid neo-
plasms of the greater omentum. Surgery. 2011;15:409-411.
Mesentery
Burkett JS, Pickleman J. The rationale for surgical treatment of mesen-
teric and retroperitoneal cysts. Am Surg. 1994;60:432-435.
Daskalogiannaki M, Voloudaki A, Prassopoulos P, et al. CT evalu-
ation of mesenteric panniculitis: prevalence and associated dis-
eases. Am J Roentgenol. 2000;174:427-431.
Egozi EI, Ricketts RR. Mesenteric and omental cysts in children. 
Am Surg. 1997;63:287-290.
Emory T, Monihan J, Carr NJ, et al. Sclerosing mesenteritis, mesen-
teric panniculitis, and mesenteric lipodystrophy: a single entity? 
Am J Surg Pathol. 1997;21:392-398.
Genereau T, Bellin MF, Wechsler B, et al. Demonstration of 
efficacy of combining corticosteroids and colchicine in two 
patients with idiopathic sclerosing mesenteritis. Dig Dis Sci. 
1996;41:684-688.
Hebra A, Brown MF, McGeehin KM, et al. Mesenteric, omental 
and retroperitoneal cysts in children: a clinical study of 22 
cases. South Med J. 1993;86:173-176.
Issa I, Baydoun H. Mesenteric panniculitis: various presentations 
and treatment regimens. World J Gastroenterol. 2009;15: 
3827-3830.
Kelly JK, Hwang WS. Idiopathic retractile (sclerosing) mesenteritis 
and its differential diagnosis. Am J Surg Pathol. 1989;13:513-521.
O’Brien MF, Winter DC, Lee G, et al. Mesenteric cysts—a series 
of six cases with a review of the literature. Ir J Med Sci. 
1999;168:233-236.
Ogden WW, Bradburn DM, Rives JD. Panniculitis of the mes-
entery. Ann Surg. 1960;151:659-668.
Ros PR, Olmsted WW, et al. Mesenteric and omental cysts: his-
tologic classification with imaging correlation. Radiology. 
1987;164:327-332.
Shamiyeh A, Rieger R, Schrenk P, Wayand W. Role of laparo-
scopic surgery in treatment of mesenteric cysts. Surg Endosc. 
1999;13:937-939.
Takiff H, Calabria R, Yin L, et al. Mesenteric cysts and intra-
abdominal cystic lymphangiomas. Arch Surg. 1985;120: 
1266-1269.
Zissen R, Metser U, Hain D, et al. Mesenteric panniculitis in onco-
logic patients: PET-CT findings. Br J Radiol. 2006;79:37-43.
Retroperitoneum
Cerfolio RJ, Morgan AS, Hirvela ER, et al. Idiopathic retroperi-
toneal fibrosis: is there a role for postoperative steroids? Curr 
Surg. 1990;47:423-427.
Duchene DA, Winfield HN, Cadeddu JA, et al. Multi-institutional 
survey of laparoscopic ureterolysis for retroperitoneal fibrosis. 
Urology. 2007;69:1017-1021.
Gilkeson GS, Allen NB. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. A true connective 
tissue disease. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 1996;22:23-38.
Hartung O, Alimi YS, Di Mauro P, et al. Endovascular treatment 
of iliocaval occlusion caused by retroperitoneal fibrosis: late 
results in two cases. J Vasc Surg. 2002;36:849-852.
Higgins PM, Bennett-Jones DN, Naish PF, et al. Non-operative 
management of retroperitoneal fibrosis. Br J Surg. 1990;8: 
206-222.
Kardar AH, Kattan S, Lindstedt E, et al. Steroid therapy for idio-
pathic retroperitoneal fibrosis: dose and duration. J Urol. 
2002;168:550-555.
1464
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Kottra JJ, Dunnick NR. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. Radiol Clin North 
Am. 1996;34:1259-1275.
Martorana D, Vaglio A, Greco P, et al. Chronic periaortitis and 
HLA-DRB1*03: another clue to an autoimmune origin. Arthri-
tis Rheum. 2006;55:126-130.
Marzano A, Trapani A, Leone N, et al. Treatment of idiopathic 
retroperitoneal fibrosis using cyclosporine. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2001;60:427-428.
Ormond JK. Bilateral ureteral obstruction due to envelop-
ment and compression by an inflammatory process. J Urol. 
1948;59:1072-1079.
Pryor JP, Piotrowski E, Seltzer CW, et al. Early diagnosis of ret-
roperitoneal necrotizing fasciitis. Crit Care Med. 2001;29: 
1071-1073.
Rhee RY, Gloviczki P, Luthra HS, et al. Iliocaval complications of 
retroperitoneal fibrosis. Am J Surg. 1994;168:179-183.
Srinivasan AK, Richstone L, Permpongkosol S, et al. Com-
parison of laparoscopic with open approach for uterolysis 
in patients with retroperitoneal fibrosis. J Urol. 2008;179: 
1875-1878.
Uchida K, Okazaki K, Asada M, et al. Case of chronic pancreatitis 
involving an autoimmune mechanism that extended to retro-
peritoneal fibrosis. Pancreas. 2003;26:92-94.
Woodburn KR, Ramsay G, Gillespie G, et al. Retroperitoneal nec-
rotizing fasciitis. Br J Surg. 1992;79:342-344.
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Janice N. Cormier, Alessandro Gronchi, and  
Raphael E. Pollock
36
INTRODUCTION
Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms that arise 
predominantly from cells of the embryonic mesoderm. While 
the majority of sarcomas are soft tissue sarcomas, other 
types of sarcoma include bone sarcomas (osteosarcoma, 
chondrosarcoma, and rare bone tumors like chordoma, angio-
sarcoma, and leiomyosarcoma of bone) and Ewing’s sarcoma/
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, which can occur 
either in the bone or in the soft tissues. The primary focus of 
this chapter is soft tissue sarcomas. Most primary soft tissue 
sarcomas originate in an extremity (50%–60%); the next most 
common sites are the trunk (19%), retroperitoneum (15%), and 
head and neck (9%). The anatomic site of a primary sar-
coma influences treatment and outcome.1 
Soft tissue sarcomas include more than 50 histologic sub-
types (Table 36-1). Historically, the most common subtypes in 
adults (excluding Kaposi’s sarcoma) were malignant fibrous his-
tiocytoma (28%), liposarcoma (15%), leiomyosarcoma (12%), 
synovial sarcoma (10%), and malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
tumor (6%).2 Today, malignant fibrous histiocytoma is classified 
as either leiomyosarcoma, pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma, 
myxofibrosarcoma, or dedifferentiated liposarcoma based on 
cellular differentiation and genetics. Embryonal/alveolar rhab-
domyosarcomas are the most common soft tissue sarcomas of 
childhood, whereas pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma occurs pre-
dominantly in adults, and although it shares part of the name, it 
has a different biology and should not be treated as a pediatric 
sarcoma.
During the past 25 years, patients with extremity sarcomas 
have been treated with a multimodality approach, which has 
led to some improvements in survival, local control, and qual-
ity of life.3  However, patients with abdominal sarcomas 
continue to have high rates of recurrence and poor overall 
survival.4 The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with 
all stages of soft tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%. Of the 
patients who die of sarcoma, most succumb to lung metastasis, 
which 80% of the time occurs within 2 to 3 years after initial 
diagnosis.
INCIDENCE
In the United States in 2012, approximately 11,280 new cases of 
soft tissue sarcoma were diagnosed, and 3900 deaths were attribut-
able to this disease.5 The true incidence of sarcoma is thought to be 
higher than reported, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) 
likely account for an additional 5000 new sarcoma cases per year.1 
Overall, sarcomas affect 5 to 6 individuals per 100,000 inhabitants 
per year,6 accounting for less than 1% of all malignancies in 
adults and 15% of malignancies in children.7 
Introduction	
1465
Incidence	
1465
Epidemiology	
1466
Radiation Exposure / 1466
Occupational Chemical Exposure / 1466
Trauma / 1466
Chronic Lymphedema / 1466
Molecular Pathogenesis	
1466
Translocation-Associated  
Sarcomas / 1467
Amplification-Associated  
Sarcomas / 1467
Oncogenic Mutations / 1467
Complex Genomic Rearrangements / 1467
Initial Assessment	
1468
Clinical Presentation / 1468
Diagnostic Imaging / 1468
Biopsy Techniques / 1469
Pathologic Assessment and  
Classification / 1470
Staging and Prognostic Factors / 1470
Treatment of Extremity and  
Trunk Wall Sarcoma	
1472
Surgery / 1472
Radiation Therapy / 1474
Systemic Therapy / 1475
Concurrent Chemoradiation  
Therapy / 1477
Posttreatment Surveillance / 1477
Management of Recurrent  
Sarcoma / 1478
Special Clinical Situations	
1479
Myxoid Liposarcoma / 1479
Retroperitoneal Sarcoma / 1479
Gastrointestinal Sarcoma / 1480
Breast Sarcoma / 1481
Uterine Sarcoma / 1481
Gastrointestinal Stromal  
Tumors	
1481
Radiologic Assessment / 1482
Management of Localized Disease / 1482
Management of Locally Advanced or 
Metastatic Disease / 1482
Multidisciplinary Treatment / 1483
Postoperative Imatinib / 1483
Preoperative Imatinib / 1484
Desmoids	
1485
Dermatofibrosarcoma  
Protuberans	
1485
Pediatric Sarcomas	
1485
Rhabdomyosarcoma / 1485
Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue  
Sarcomas / 1486
Research Perspectives	
1486
Conclusions	
1486
chapter 
1
2
3
4
5
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Except for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients 
with neurofibromatosis, sarcomas do not seem to result from 
progression or dedifferentiation of a benign soft tissue tumor. 
While most sarcomas are of unknown cause, a few sarcoma sub-
types have been observed in settings suggesting etiology.
Radiation Exposure
External radiation therapy is a rare but well-established risk fac-
tor for soft tissue sarcoma that may be associated with radiation-
induced mutations of the p53 gene.8 The incidence of sarcoma 
among patients who are often treated with radiation for cancer 
of the breast, cervix, ovary, testes, or lymphatic system is 8 to 
50 times the general-population risk.9,10 In a review of 160 
patients with postirradiation sarcomas, the most common 
histologic types were osteogenic sarcoma, malignant fibrous 
histiocytoma, angiosarcoma, and lymphangiosarcoma.9 The 
risk of developing a sarcoma increased with radiation dose, 
and the median time between radiation therapy and diagnosis 
of sarcoma was 10 years.9 A recent review of 44 patients with 
radiation-induced sarcomas identified between 1989 and 2009 
noted that the average period from initial radiation treatment 
to diagnosis was 16 years and that radiation-induced sarcomas 
occurred most commonly in patients treated for breast cancer 
(36% of the patients in the series) and lymphoma (34% of the 
patients in the series).11 The 5-year overall survival rate for 
patients presenting without metastasis was 44%.
Occupational Chemical Exposure
Exposure to herbicides such as phenoxyacetic acids and to wood 
preservatives containing chlorophenols has been linked to an 
increased risk of soft tissue sarcoma.12 Several chemical car-
cinogens, including thorium oxide (Thorotrast), vinyl chloride, 
and arsenic, have been associated with hepatic angiosarcomas.13
Trauma
Although patients with sarcoma often report a history of trauma, 
no causal relationship has been established. More often, a minor 
injury calls attention to a pre-existing tumor.
Chronic Lymphedema
In 1948, Stewart and Treves first described the association 
between chronic lymphedema after axillary dissection and sub-
sequent lymphangiosarcoma (Fig. 36-1).14 Lymphangiosarcoma 
has been estimated to occur in 0.07% of patients who undergo 
axillary node dissection.15 It also has been reported to occur 
after filarial infections and in the lower extremities of patients 
with congenital lymphedema.16,17 Lymphangiosarcoma is gen-
erally an aggressive tumor; average survival of patients with 
lymphangiosarcoma is 19 months.18
MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS
Sarcomas can be broadly classified into three groups accord-
ing to the genetic events underlying their development: specific 
translocations or gene amplification, defining oncogenic muta-
tions, and complex genomic rearrangements.19 In general, sar-
comas resulting from identifiable molecular events tend to occur 
in younger patients with histology suggesting a clear line of 
differentiation. The identifiable molecular events include point 
1466
Table 36-1
Relative frequency of histologic subtypes of soft tissue 
sarcoma
Histologic Subtypes
No.
%
Liposarcoma
188
15
Leiomyosarcoma
148
12
Unclassified sarcoma
140
11
Synovial sarcoma
125
10
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
72
6
Rhabdomyosarcoma
60
5
Fibrosarcoma
38
3
Ewing sarcoma
25
2
Angiosarcoma
25
2
Osteosarcoma
14
1
Epithelioid sarcoma
14
1
Chondrosarcoma
13
1
Clear cell sarcoma
12
1
Alveolar soft part sarcoma
7
1
Malignant hemangiopericytoma
5
0.4
Source: Data from Coindre et al.2
Key Points
1 	 Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that can occur 
throughout the body and encompass more than 50 subtypes 
with distinct histologic lines of differentiation.
2 	 Approximately two thirds of soft tissue sarcomas arise in the 
extremities; the remaining one third is distributed between the 
retroperitoneum, trunk, abdomen, head, and neck.
3 	 Multimodality treatment, including surgical resection, radia-
tion therapy, and, in selected cases, systemic chemotherapy, 
has been applied to patients with locally advanced, high-grade, 
extremity sarcomas.
4 	 Overall 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages of soft 
tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%.
5 	 These rare tumors account for less than 1% of cancer in 
adults (estimated 10,000 cases per year in the United 
States) and represent 15% of cancers in children.
6 	 The treatment algorithm for soft tissue sarcomas depends 
on tumor stage, site, and histology.
7 	 Of the patients who die of sarcoma, most will succumb to 
metastatic disease in the lungs, which 80% of the time 
occurs within 2 to 3 years of the initial diagnosis.
8 	 Progress in the understanding of soft tissue sarcoma biol-
ogy is crucial for the development of new treatments.
1467
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
mutations, translocations causing overexpression of an autocrine 
grow factor, and oncogenic fusion transcription factor produc-
ing a cellular environment prone to malignant transformation. 
In contrast, sarcomas without identifiable genetic changes or 
expression profile signatures tend to occur in older patients and 
exhibit pleomorphic cytology and p53 dysfunction.20 Improved 
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of sarcomas has 
revealed several potential targets against which investigators are 
working to develop subtype-specific targeted therapy.
Translocation-Associated Sarcomas
To date, translocations have been identified in 14 subtypes of 
soft tissue sarcoma, accounting for 20% to 30% of all sarcomas21 
(Table 36-2). Translocations result in in-frame gene fusion, which 
in turn results in fused products encoding oncoproteins that func-
tion as transcriptional activators or repressors.22,23 The best char-
acterized gene fusions are in Ewing’s sarcoma (EWS-FLI1), clear 
cell sarcoma (EWS-ATF1), myxoid/round cell liposarcoma (TLS-
CHOP), alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (PAX3-FHKR), desmoplas-
tic small round cell tumor (EWS-WT1), and synovial sarcoma 
(SS18-SSX). Fusion gene–related sarcomas have been estimated 
to account for 30% or more of all sarcomas.24
Direct or indirect interactions between fusion transcripts 
and cell cycle regulators have been elucidated by several inves-
tigators and identify these transcripts as potentially promising 
molecular therapeutic targets.25 However, fusion genes in sar-
coma have been successfully targeted in only a few cases, in 
which fusion resulted in overexpression of a growth factor or 
growth factor receptor. Several growth factors and their recep-
tors (e.g., epidermal growth factor receptor) previously reported 
to play an important role in autocrine or paracrine stimulation 
of carcinoma growth have been associated with high histologic 
grade and poor prognosis in soft tissue sarcomas.
Amplification-Associated Sarcomas
Oncogenes are genes that can induce malignant transformation 
and tend to drive cell proliferation. Several oncogenes have 
been associated with soft tissue sarcomas, including MDM2, 
N-myc, c-erbB2, and members of the ras family. These onco-
genes produce specific oncoproteins that either play a role in 
nuclear function and cellular signal transduction or function as 
growth factors or growth factor receptors. This typically occurs 
in dedifferentiated liposarcoma, where the amplification of 
MDM2 drives the neoplastic process. Amplification of these 
genes has been shown to correlate with adverse outcome in sev-
eral types of soft tissue sarcoma.22
Oncogenic Mutations
GISTs are the classic example of sarcomas in which tumorigen-
esis is primarily driven by a single activating mutation, in the 
gene encoding KIT receptor tyrosine kinase or platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor-α (PDGFRA).19 The majority of GISTs 
have mutations in exon 11 of KIT and respond dramatically to 
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate, although this 
treatment rarely produces cure.
Complex Genomic Rearrangements
The largest group of sarcomas is the group with complex cytoge-
netic alterations, which includes high-grade spindle cell sarco-
mas and pleomorphic sarcomas.19 Many sarcomas in this group 
exhibit inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. The two genes 
most relevant to soft tissue sarcoma are retinoblastoma (Rb) and 
Figure 36-1.  A 57-year-old with a chronic, progressive lymph-
edema of the left upper extremity developed lymphangiosarcoma 
10 years after breast cancer treatment.
Table 36-2 
Fusion transcripts in soft tissue sarcoma
Diagnosis
Chromosomal 
Abnormality
Genes 
Involved
Alveolar 
rhabdomyosarcoma
t(2;13)(q35;q14)
t(1;13)(p36;q14)
PAX3-FKHR
PAX7-FKHR
Alveolar soft part 
sarcoma
t(X;17)
(p11.2;q25)
TFE3-ASPL
Angiomatoid fibrous 
histiocytoma
t(12;16)(q13;p11)
FUS-ATF1
Clear cell sarcoma
t(12;22)(q13;q12)
EWS-ATF1
Congenital 
fibrosarcoma/
congenital 
mesoblastic nephroma
t(12;15)(p13;q25)
ETV6-NTRK3
Dermatofibrosarcoma 
protuberans
t(17;22)(q22;q13)
PDFGB-
COL1A1
Desmoplastic small 
round cell tumor
t(11;22)(p13;q12)
EWS-WT1
Endometrial stromal 
sarcoma
t(7;17)(p15;q21)
JAZF1-JJAZ1
Ewing’s sarcoma/
peripheral primitive 
neuroectodermal 
tumor
t(11;22)(q24;q12)
t(21;22)(q22;q12)
t(7;22)(p22;q12)
t(17;22)(q12;q12)
t(2;22)(q33;q12)
t(16;21)(p11;q22)
EWS-FLI1
EWS-ERG
EWS-ETV1
EWS-FEV
EWS-E1AF
FUS-ERG
Low-grade 
fibromyxoid sarcoma
t(7;16)(q33;p11)
FUS-CREB3I2
Inflammatory 
myofibroblastic tumor
t(1;2)(q22;p23)
t(2;19)(p23;p13)
t(2;17)(p23;q23)
TPM3-ALK
TPM4-ALK
CLTC-ALK
Myxoid liposarcoma
t(12;16)(q13;p11)
t(12;22)(q13;q12)
TLS-CHOP
EWS-CHOP
Myxoid 
chondrosarcoma
t(9;22)(q22;q12)
t(9;15)(q22;q21)
t(9;17)(q22;q11)
EWS-CHN
TFC12-CHN
TAF2N-CHN
Synovial sarcoma
t(x;18)(p11;q11)
SSX1-SYT
SSX2-SYT
SSX4-SYT
1468
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
p53. Mutations or deletions in Rb can lead to retinoblastoma, the 
most common malignant ocular neoplasm of childhood. Survi-
vors of retinoblastoma are at risk for developing soft tissue and 
bone sarcomas later in life. Patients with germline mutations 
in p53 (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) have a high incidence of soft 
tissue sarcomas Mutant p53 expression is thought to correlate 
with poor overall survival.22 Strategies to target p53 mutation 
are being investigated for treatment of some sarcomas.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease) 
occurs in approximately 1 of every 3000 people and is due to 
various mutations in the NF-1 tumor suppressor gene, located 
on chromosome 17. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 have 
an estimated 3% to 15% additional risk of malignant disease 
compared with the general population lifetime risk, including 
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) and GIST. 
In turn, 25% to 50% of patients with MPNST have a mutation 
in NF-1.26
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
The clinical behavior of most soft tissue sarcomas is determined 
by anatomic location (depth in relation to the investing fascia), 
histologic subtype and grade of aggressiveness, and size. The 
dominant pattern of metastasis is hematogenous, primarily to 
the lungs. Lymph node metastasis is rare (affecting <5% of 
patients) except in a few histologic subtypes, including epithe-
lioid sarcoma, pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, 
angiosarcoma, and, more rarely, synovial sarcoma and myxofi-
brosarcoma,.27
Clinical Presentation
Soft tissue sarcomas most commonly present as an asymptom-
atic mass. Extremity sarcomas may present as a deep venous 
thrombosis, particularly in patients without significant risk fac-
tors for thrombosis.28 Tumors in the distal extremities are gen-
erally smaller, whereas tumors in the proximal extremities and 
retroperitoneum can grow quite large before becoming apparent. 
Tumors often grow centrifugally and can compress surrounding 
normal structures. Infrequently, tumor impingement on bone or 
neurovascular bundles produces pain, edema, and swelling. Less 
frequently, tumors cause obstructive gastrointestinal symptoms 
or neurologic symptoms related to compression of lumbar or 
pelvic nerves. Often an extremity mass is discovered after a 
traumatic event that draws attention to a pre-existing lesion.
The differential diagnosis of a soft tissue mass should 
include consideration of lipoma (which is 100 times more com-
mon than sarcoma), lymphangioma, leiomyoma, neurinoma, 
primary or metastatic carcinoma, melanoma, and lymphoma. 
Superficial small lesions (<5 cm) that are new or that are not 
enlarging as indicated by clinical history can be observed. 
Enlarging masses and masses larger than 5 cm or deep to the 
fascia should be evaluated with a history, imaging, and biopsy.29
Diagnostic Imaging
Diagnostic imaging should be performed before any invasive 
procedure to avoid the possibility of soft tissue swelling or 
hemorrhage complicating the image interpretation. Pretreatment 
diagnostic imaging is helpful for defining the size and anatomic 
location of a tumor and its proximity to adjacent structures; stag-
ing disease with respect to regional or metastatic spread; guid-
ing percutaneous biopsy; and establishing whether a tumor is 
benign or malignant and low grade or high grade.
Radiographs are useful in the evaluation of primary bone 
tumors but not in the evaluation of soft tissue sarcomas of the 
extremities unless there is underlying bone involvement from an 
adjacent soft tissue tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
is the preferred imaging technique for soft tissue sarcomas of the 
extremities, whereas computed tomography (CT) is most use-
ful for evaluating retroperitoneal, intra-abdominal, and truncal 
sarcomas.30 CT of the chest should be performed to assess for 
lung metastases in patients with high-grade tumors larger than 
5 cm. Abdominal/pelvic CT should be performed in patients 
with myxoid round cell liposarcomas, leiomyosarcomas, epi-
thelioid sarcomas, or angiosarcomas because of their propensity 
to metastasize to the abdomen and/or pelvis.1 MRI of the brain 
should be considered for patients with alveolar soft part sarco-
mas and angiosarcomas because of their propensity to metasta-
size to the brain.
Ultrasonography.  Ultrasonography may have a diagnostic 
role in patients with soft tissue sarcoma who cannot undergo 
MRI. Ultrasonography can also be a useful adjunct to MRI 
when findings on MRI are indeterminate and for delineating 
adjacent vascular structures. Finally, ultrasonography can be 
used for postoperative surveillance and to guide biopsies.
Computed Tomography.  Chest CT should be performed to 
evaluate for lung metastasis at presentation and before any radi-
cal treatment. CT is also the preferred imaging technique for 
evaluating retroperitoneal sarcomas (Fig. 36-2).30 Current CT 
techniques can provide a detailed image of the abdomen and 
pelvis and can delineate adjacent organs and vascular struc-
tures. For extremity sarcomas, CT may be useful if MRI is 
not available or cannot be used. When histologic assessment 
of an extremity sarcoma reveals a myxoid liposarcoma, CT of 
the abdomen and pelvis should be done because this subtype is 
known to metastasize to the abdomen.31
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  MRI is the most useful imag-
ing modality for extremity sarcomas because of its superior 
soft tissue contrast resolution and multiplanar capabilities. MRI 
accurately delineates muscle groups and distinguishes among 
bone, vascular structures, and tumor. Sagittal and coronal views 
allow evaluation of anatomic compartments in three dimensions 
(Fig. 36-3). Soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities usually pres-
ent on MRI as a heterogeneous mass. Their signal intensity tends 
Figure 36-2.  A 69-year-old woman with a leiomyosarcoma involv-
ing the inferior vena cava.
1469
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
to be equal to or slightly higher than that of adjacent skeletal 
muscle on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous and high on 
T2-weighted images. Hemorrhagic, cystic, or necrotic changes 
may also be observed in the tumor. If adjacent vascular structures 
must be delineated, special MRI techniques may be performed, 
including magnetic resonance angiography. MRI may also be an 
important adjunct to cytologic analysis in distinguishing benign 
lesions such as lipomas, hemangiomas, schwannomas, neu-
rofibromas, and intramuscular myxomas from their malignant 
counterparts. In patients undergoing preoperative chemotherapy, 
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI can be useful in evaluating 
intratumoral necrosis.
MRI is also valuable for assessing tumor recurrence after 
surgery. A baseline image is usually obtained 3 months after 
surgery. Some clinicians forego routine postoperative imaging 
of the primary extremity tumor site in asymptomatic patients, 
citing the difficulties in detecting early recurrence in scarred, 
irradiated tissue.30 Others advocate routine imaging every 3 to 
4 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months in years 3 through 
5, and then annually.
Positron Emission Tomography.  Positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) is a functional imaging modality that measures tumor 
uptake of the glucose analog [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). 
PET imaging allows evaluation of the entire body. Although 
PET/CT may be useful in specific circumstances, FDG-PET is 
not currently recommended for the initial staging of patients 
with soft tissue sarcoma.
Roberge and colleagues compared FDG-PET/CT versus 
chest CT alone in the initial staging of 75 patients with soft 
tissue sarcoma and found that only one patient had disease 
upstaged as a result of PET, whereas two had false-positive find-
ings and three had indeterminate findings with no subsequent 
development of metastasis.32 Previous studies that reported a 
marginal benefit of PET/CT for detecting metastasis at the time 
of sarcoma staging included patients with more heterogeneous 
tumors, such as osseous tumors, soft tissue osteosarcomas, 
Ewing’s sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.33-35
In patients with sarcoma, PET has primarily been used 
to assist with tumor grading and to assess response to che-
motherapy.36-39 In 50 patients with resectable high-grade soft 
tissue tumors scheduled for preoperative chemotherapy and 
tumor resection, a 35% or greater reduction in tumor FDG 
uptake following an initial cycle of chemotherapy was associ-
ated with histopathologic tumor response defined as pathologic 
necrosis in 95% or more of the resected specimen.40
Biopsy Techniques
Fine-Needle Aspiration.  At centers where cytopatholo-
gists have experience with evaluation of mesenchymal tumors, 
fine-needle aspiration is an acceptable method of diagnosing 
most soft tissue sarcomas, particularly when the results corre-
late closely with clinical and radiologic findings.41 Fine-needle 
aspiration of primary tumors has a lower diagnostic accuracy 
rate (60%–90%) than core needle biopsy and is often not suffi-
cient for establishing a specific histologic diagnosis and grade.42 
However, fine-needle aspiration is the procedure of choice to 
confirm or rule out the presence of a metastatic focus or local 
recurrence.43
Although fine-needle aspiration of superficial lesions can 
often be done in the clinic, fine-needle aspiration of deeper 
tumors may need to be done by an interventional radiologist 
under sonographic or CT guidance. Generally, a 21- to 23-gauge 
needle is introduced into the mass after appropriate cleansing of 
the skin and injection of local anesthetic. Negative pressure is 
applied, and the needle is moved back and forth several times in 
various directions. After the negative pressure is released, the 
needle is withdrawn, and the contents of the needle are used to 
prepare smears.44 A cytopathologist then examines the slides 
to determine whether sufficient diagnostic material is present.
Core Needle Biopsy.  Core needle biopsy is safe, accurate,45,46 
and economical47 and has become the preferred technique for 
diagnosing soft tissue lesions. Dupuy and colleagues found that 
core needle biopsy had an accuracy of 93% in 221 patients with 
musculoskeletal neoplasms.45
Sonography/CT guidance can prevent sampling of nondi-
agnostic necrotic or cystic areas of the tumor and thus increase 
the positive yield rate. Sonography/CT guidance also permits 
biopsy of tumors in otherwise inaccessible locations and tumors 
located near vital structures.
The tissue sample obtained from core needle biopsy is 
usually sufficient for several diagnostic tests, such as elec-
tron microscopy, cytogenetic analysis, and flow cytometry. 
The reported complication rate for core needle biopsy is less 
than 1%.45,46
Incisional Biopsy.  Historically, an open surgical biopsy was 
the gold standard for achieving adequate tissue for definitive 
and specific histologic diagnosis of bone or soft tissue sarcomas. 
Contemporary guidelines recommend incisional biopsy when 
core needle biopsy cannot produce adequate tissue for diagnosis 
or when findings on core needle biopsy are nondiagnostic.
The disadvantages of incisional biopsy include the need 
to schedule the procedure, the need for general anesthesia, and 
high costs. In addition, an inappropriately placed incisions can 
necessitate more extensive definitive resection to encompass 
the biopsy site. In a series of 107 patients with soft tissue sar-
coma, planned surgical treatments had to be changed because 
of poorly oriented biopsies in 25% of cases.48 Complication 
rates up to 17% have been reported after incisional biopsies.44 
Potential complications include hematoma, infection, wound 
dehiscence, and tumor fungation, any of which can delay defin-
itive treatment.44
Figure 36-3.  A 62-year-old man presented with right thigh pain. 
Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a 20-cm high-grade sar-
coma within the medial compartment.
1470
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Incisional biopsies should be performed only by surgeons 
experienced in the management of soft tissue sarcoma, ideally 
in a center specializing in the treatment of sarcoma and by the 
surgeon who will perform the definitive surgery. The biopsy 
incision should be oriented longitudinally along the extremity 
to allow a subsequent wide local excision that encompasses the 
biopsy site, scar, and tumor en bloc. A poorly oriented biopsy 
incision often necessitates an excessively large surgical defect 
for a wide local excision, which in turn can result in a larger 
postoperative radiation therapy field to encompass all tissues 
at risk. Adequate hemostasis must be achieved at the time of 
biopsy to prevent dissemination of tumor cells into adjacent tis-
sue planes by hematoma.
Excisional Biopsy.  Excisional biopsy can be performed 
for easily accessible (superficial) extremity or truncal lesions 
smaller than 3 cm. However, excisional biopsy rarely provides 
benefits over other biopsy techniques. Excisional biopsies 
should not be performed for lesions involving the hands and feet 
because such biopsies may complicate definitive re-excision. 
For sarcomas with initial diagnosis confirmed with excisional 
biopsy, microscopic residual disease has been reported in up 
to 69% of re-excision specimens49,50; without re-excision, the 
reported rate of local recurrence is 30% to 40% when margins 
are positive or uncertain.
Wide en bloc excision is seldom performed as a diagnostic 
procedure. When en bloc excision is done for diagnosis, the mar-
gin status is often not adequately evaluated during pathologic 
assessment of the specimen. Unless detailed descriptions of the 
surgical procedure and the pathology specimen are provided, the 
margins should be classified as uncertain or unknown, a classifi-
cation associated with the same prognosis as resection margins 
that are positive for tumor cells. In patients with uncertain or 
unknown margins, re-excision should be performed if possible 
to ensure negative margins. The biopsy site or tract (if appli-
cable) should be included en bloc with the re-resected specimen.
Pathologic Assessment and Classification
Sarcoma is generally diagnosed by morphologic assessment 
based on microscopic examination of histologic sections by an 
experienced sarcoma pathologist. However, even expert sar-
coma pathologists disagree on the specific histologic diagnosis 
and the tumor grade in 25% to 40% of cases.51
Morphologic assessment can be supported by ancillary 
techniques, including conventional cytogenetics; immunohis-
tochemistry; and molecular genetic testing, which is useful for 
classifying soft tissue sarcoma subtypes with multiple genetic 
aberrations. Other molecular diagnostic techniques include 
cytogenetic analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and 
polymerase chain reaction–based methods.52 However, molecu-
lar genetic techniques are associated with significant technical 
limitations and should be interpreted in the context of the sar-
coma’s morphologic features.
Some experts have suggested that pathologic classifica-
tion of soft tissue sarcomas has more prognostic significance 
than does tumor grade when other pretreatment variables are 
taken into account. Tumors with limited metastatic potential 
include desmoid, atypical lipomatous tumor (also called well-
differentiated liposarcoma), dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, 
and solitary fibrous tumor. Tumors with an intermediate risk of 
metastatic spread usually have a large myxoid component and 
include myxoid liposarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, and extraskel-
etal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Among the highly aggressive 
tumors with substantial metastatic potential are angiosarcoma, 
clear cell sarcoma, pleomorphic and dedifferentiated liposar-
coma, leiomyosarcoma, MPNST, rhabdomyosarcoma, and 
synovial sarcoma.
It has recently been noted that malignant fibrous histio-
cytoma is not associated with a distinct gene cluster, suggest-
ing that malignant fibrous histiocytoma is not a separate tumor 
entity but rather a common morphologic appearance of various 
sarcoma subtypes.53,54 For example, most tumors initially diag-
nosed as malignant fibrous histiocytoma in the retroperitoneum 
have been reclassified using genomic profiling as dedifferenti-
ated liposarcomas,55 whereas those in the extremities have been 
reclassified as leiomyosarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, or pleo-
morphic undifferentiated sarcoma.
Guidelines for the pathologic reporting of sarcoma have 
been established.1 Included in the report should be the primary 
diagnosis, anatomic site, depth, size, and histologic grade, pres-
ence or absence of necrosis, status of excision margins and 
lymph nodes, TNM stage, and additional features of the tumor 
(i.e., mitotic rate and presence or absence of vascular invasion).
Staging and Prognostic Factors
Soft tissue sarcoma is most commonly staged using either the 
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) system (gener-
ally used in the United States) or the World Health Organiza-
tion system. A unique aspect of sarcoma staging is the inclusion 
of tumor grade, which is one of the most important prognostic 
factors.56
The seventh edition of the AJCC staging system for soft 
tissue sarcomas is based on histologic grade of aggressive-
ness, tumor size and depth, and the presence of nodal or distant 
metastases.57 This system does not apply to GIST, fibromatosis 
(desmoid tumor), Kaposi’s sarcoma, or infantile fibrosarcoma.
Histologic Grade of Aggressiveness.  Histologic grade is the 
most important prognostic factor for patients with soft tissue 
sarcoma. For accurate determination of grade, an adequate tis-
sue sample must be appropriately fixed, stained, and reviewed 
by an experienced sarcoma pathologist. The features that define 
grade are cellularity, differentiation (good, moderate, or poor/
anaplastic), pleomorphism, necrosis (absent, <50%, or ≥50%), 
and number of mitoses per high-power field (<10, 10–19, or 
≥20). Tumor grade has been shown to predict metastasis and 
overall survival.58 Metastasis has been estimated to occur in 5% 
to 10% of low-grade lesions, 25% to 30% of intermediate-grade 
lesions, and 50% to 60% of high-grade lesions.
The number of grades varies according to the classifica-
tion system used. The most common classification systems, 
those of the National Cancer Institute and the French Federation 
of Cancer Centers, use three-tier tumor grades.59 The National 
Cancer Institute system is based primarily on histologic sub-
type, location, and amount of necrosis. The French Federation 
of Cancer Centers system is based on tumor differentiation 
(good, moderate, or poor/anaplastic), number of mitoses per 
high-power field (<10, 10–19, or ≥20), and amount of tumor 
necrosis (absent, <50%, or ≥50%). A comparative analysis of 
the two systems suggested that the French Federation of Can-
cer Centers system has better prognostic capability, predicting 
5-year survival rates of 90%, 70%, and 40% for grade 1, 2, and 
3 tumors, respectively.59
Following the recommendation of the College of Ameri-
can Pathologists, the committee that developed the 2008 AJCC 
staging system changed the system from a four-grade to a 
1471
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
three-grade system in which the grades are well differentiated 
(grade 1), moderately differentiated (grade 2), and poorly dif-
ferentiated (grade 3).60 Grade 1 is considered low grade, and 
grades 2 and 3 are considered high grade.
Tumor Size and Location.  Tumor size is an important prog-
nostic variable in soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcomas have classi-
cally been stratified into two size groups; T1 lesions are 5 cm or 
smaller, and T2 lesions are larger than 5 cm. Some authors have 
suggested adding a third group for tumors larger than 15 cm, 
because such tumors are associated with a worse prognosis than 
tumors measuring between 5 and 15 cm.61,62
Anatomic tumor location was incorporated into the AJCC 
staging system in 1998. Soft tissue sarcomas above the superfi-
cial investing fascia of the extremity or trunk are designated “a” 
lesions within the T category, whereas tumors invading or deep 
to the fascia and all retroperitoneal, mediastinal, and visceral 
tumors are designated “b” lesions.
Nodal Metastasis.  Overall, lymph node metastases arising 
from soft tissue sarcomas are rare,27 but the incidence of nodal 
involvement is higher for epithelioid sarcoma, pediatric rhab-
domyosarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, myxo-
fibrosarcoma, and angiosarcoma. In the seventh edition of the 
AJCC staging system, sarcoma associated with nodal metas-
tases was reclassified as stage III rather than stage IV because 
several studies reported better survival for patients with isolated 
regional lymph node metastases treated with radical lymphade-
nectomy than for patients with distant metastases.27, 63-65 Patients 
with clinically or radiologically suspicious regional nodes 
should have metastases confirmed or ruled out by fine-needle 
aspiration before radical lymphadenectomy.
Distant Metastasis.  Distant metastases occur most often in 
the lungs (Fig. 36-4). Selected patients with pulmonary metas-
tases may survive for long periods after surgical resection and 
chemotherapy. Other potential sites of metastasis include bone 
(Fig. 36-5), brain (Fig. 36-6), and liver (Fig. 36-7). Visceral and 
Figure 36-4.  A 74-year-old man with a history of an extraskeletal 
myxoid chondrosarcoma of the gluteal region developed multiple 
lung metastases.
Figure 36-5.  A 36-year-old woman with history of multifocal 
sclerosing osteosarcoma of the humerus developed diffuse bony 
metastases 2 years after diagnosis.
Figure 36-6.  A 64-year-old man with a history of a T2 high-grade 
pleomorphic sarcoma of the thigh who developed brain metastases 
14 months after diagnosis.
Figure 36-7.  A 33-year-old woman with osteosarcoma of the ster-
num who presented with a liver metastasis 3 years after diagnosis.
1472
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
retroperitoneal sarcomas have a higher incidence of liver and 
peritoneal metastases.
Prognostic Factors.  Prognostic variables in soft tissue sar-
coma include primary tumor size, grade, and depth, all of which 
are incorporated into the staging system, as well as histology, 
tumor site, and presentation (local recurrence or initial diagno-
sis). Patient factors such as older age and gender have also been 
associated with recurrence and mortality in several studies.66 A 
positive microscopic margin and early recurrence after resection 
of an extremity sarcoma have been shown to be associated with 
decreased survival.67
Several groups have reported that Ki-67, a proliferation 
marker, is correlated with a poor clinical outcome in high-grade 
extremity sarcomas.68,69 E-cadherin and catenins, proteins essential 
for intercellular junctions, have been associated with poor outcome 
in patients with soft tissue sarcoma.68 Similarly, higher CD100 
expression has been shown to correlate with higher proliferative 
potential and poorer outcome.69
Prognostic Nomograms.  Prognostic nomograms for soft tis-
sue sarcoma have been introduced for use in patient counsel-
ing, selecting appropriate surveillance strategies, and selecting 
patients for clinical trials.70 One such nomogram, developed 
by Kattan and colleagues at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, considers age, histology, grade, location, depth, and 
size to determine the likelihood of 12-year sarcoma-specific 
survival.70 Two validation studies using the nomogram demon-
strated good predictive value.71 More recently, the same group 
of investigators developed histology subtype-specific nomo-
grams for patients with liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and 
GIST72 and demonstrated that they were accurate in predicting 
disease-specific survival. Other investigators have just devel-
oped a site-specific nomogram for patients with retroperitoneal 
sarcoma, demonstrating an accurate prediction of survival and 
disease recurrence.73
TREATMENT OF EXTREMITY AND TRUNK  
WALL SARCOMA
The goals of treatment of soft tissue sarcoma are to maximize the 
likelihood of long-term recurrence-free survival while minimiz-
ing morbidity and maximizing function. In the past two decades, 
a multimodality treatment approach with optimal sequencing of 
treatments for individual patients has been shown to improve 
survival.74 Furthermore, patients with soft tissue sarcoma treated 
at high-volume centers have been shown to have improved sur-
vival and functional outcomes.75 Care at such centers is particu-
larly important for patients with high-risk and advanced disease.
The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages 
of soft tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%. For patients with extremity 
sarcomas, a multidisciplinary treatment approach has resulted 
in local control rates exceeding 90% and 5-year survival rates 
exceeding 70%. Most patients who die of soft tissue sarcoma die 
of metastatic disease, which becomes evident within 2 to 3 years 
of initial diagnosis in 80% of cases.
Recommendations for evaluation and treatment of patients 
presenting with soft tissue masses are summarized in Table 36-3.
Surgery
Primary tumors with no evidence of distant metastasis are man-
aged with surgery alone or, when wide pathologic margins 
cannot be achieved because of anatomic constraints and/or the 
grade is high, surgery plus radiation therapy. The type of surgical 
resection is determined by several factors, including tumor loca-
tion, tumor size, depth of invasion, involvement of nearby struc-
tures, need for skin grafting or autogenous tissue reconstruction, 
and the patient’s performance status. In 1985, the National Insti-
tutes of Health developed a consensus statement recommending 
limb-sparing surgery for most patients with high-grade extrem-
ity sarcomas.76 However, for patients with primary or recurrent 
tumors that cannot be grossly resected with a limb-sparing proce-
dure and preservation of function (<5% of patients), amputation 
remains the treatment of choice.
Margin status after surgical resection has been shown to 
be an independent prognostic factor.77,78 The goal of surgical 
resection is to achieve a complete resection because microscopi-
cally positive or grossly positive resection margins are associ-
ated with increased risk of local recurrence and death.79 If an 
unexpected positive margin is found on pathologic examination 
of the resection specimen, re-excision should be performed. In 
patients with a positive margin, particularly in patients with 
macroscopic residual disease, local control is unlikely even with 
the addition of postoperative radiation therapy.80
Wide Local Excision.  The preferred treatment for extremity 
sarcomas is wide local excision that includes resection of the 
biopsy site. The goal of wide local excision is to remove the 
tumor with approximately 1 to 2 cm of surrounding normal 
soft tissue,77 but narrower margins may be necessary to pre-
serve uninvolved critical neurovascular structures and may be 
adequate for patients undergoing radiation therapy.81 Dissection 
should proceed through grossly normal tissue planes not abut-
ting the tumor. Soft tissue sarcomas are generally surrounded 
by a zone of compressed reactive tissue that forms a pseudo-
capsule, but this pseudocapsule should not be used to guide 
resection (enucleation). If the tumor is adjacent to or displacing 
major neurovascular structures, these do not need to be resected, 
but the adventitia or perineurium should be removed.1 For some 
massive tumors of the extremities, wide local excision entails a 
Table 36-3 
Recommendations for the management of soft tissue 
masses
1.  Soft tissue tumors that are enlarging or greater than 
3 cm should be evaluated with radiologic imaging 
(ultrasonography or computed tomography [CT]), and a 
tissue diagnosis should be made using core needle biopsy.
2.  Once a sarcoma diagnosis is established, obtain imaging 
(magnetic resonance imaging for extremity lesions 
and CT for other anatomic locations) and evaluate for 
metastatic disease with chest CT for intermediate- or 
high-grade (grade 2 or 3) or large (T2) tumors.
3.  A wide local excision with 1- to 2-cm margins is adequate 
therapy for low-grade lesions and T1 tumors.
4.  Radiation therapy plays a critical role in the management 
of large (T2), intermediate- or high-grade tumors.
5.  Patients with locally advanced high-grade sarcomas or 
distant metastases should be evaluated for chemotherapy.
6.  An aggressive surgical approach should be taken in the 
treatment of patients with an isolated local recurrence or 
resectable distant metastases.
1473
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
radical or complete anatomic compartment resection. Surgical 
clips should be placed to delineate the extent of the resection 
bed for patients likely to require postoperative radiation therapy.
Recent reports demonstrate encouraging results follow-
ing radical en bloc resection with vascular reconstruction in 
the lower extremities.82,83 While en bloc resection with vascular 
reconstruction has been associated with increased rates of post-
operative complications, reported local recurrence and 5-year 
survival rates are similar to those for patients not requiring ves-
sel resection.84,85 Similarly, studies have shown acceptable func-
tional outcomes with resection of the sciatic, tibial, and peroneal 
nerves with appropriate reconstruction and rehabilitation.86
Bone invasion from extremity soft tissue sarcoma, which 
can generally be identified using high-quality cross-sectional 
imaging such as MRI, has been estimated to occur in about 5% 
of patients and is associated with reduced overall survival.87 In 
cases of bone invasion, bone resection is required to obtain an 
adequate surgical margin and to achieve local control. Although 
tumor resection and repair of skeletal defects are possible, the 
likelihood of postoperative complications may be increased, and 
functional outcomes may be less favorable. Lin and colleagues88 
recently analyzed 55 patients with soft tissue sarcomas abutting 
bone and reported that in the absence of frank cortical bone pen-
etration, periosteum was an adequate surgical margin in patients 
treated with wide local excision and radiation.
Soft tissue sarcomas arising in the distal extremities, par-
ticularly the hands and feet, present unique technical challenges. 
While distal-extremity tumors are often detected at a smaller 
size (<5 cm) than proximal-extremity tumors, resection and 
reconstruction techniques are often more complex for distal-
extremity tumors, and preoperative planning is critical to obtain 
favorable functional outcomes. Identifying the proximity of the 
tumor to underlying critical structures (e.g., bone, tendon, or 
neurovascular structures) using MRI is essential for surgical 
planning. In a reported series of patients with sarcomas of the 
hands or feet treated with limited surgery only, 32% of patients 
had local recurrences.89 Preservation of function and acceptable 
recurrence rates with limited surgery and adjuvant radiation 
therapy for soft tissue sarcomas of the distal extremities have 
been reported.90 For locally advanced tumors, repair of bone 
defects, vascular reconstruction, tendon transfers, and soft tissue 
reconstruction using regional or free flaps have resulted in good 
functional outcomes.91 Amputation remains a reasonable option 
for patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the distal extremities 
when acceptable oncologic or functional outcomes cannot be 
achieved using available limb salvage techniques.
In an interesting study conducted in Ontario and Quebec, 
investigators found patients expecting a difficult recovery and 
patients with uncertain expectations had worse functional out-
comes than patients anticipating an easy recovery, indicating 
that preoperative education including consultation with reha-
bilitation services may optimize outcomes.92 Furthermore, all 
patients undergoing resection of extremity sarcomas should 
undergo physical therapy beginning immediately after surgery 
and continuing until maximum function is achieved.1
Locoregional Lymphadenectomy.  Several studies have 
reported improved survival for patients with isolated regional 
lymph node metastases treated with radical lymphadenec­
tomy.27, 63-65 Patients with clinically or radiologically suspicious 
regional nodes should have metastases confirmed before radical 
lymphadenectomy. At our institution, we perform ultrasound-guided 
fine-needle aspiration of lymph nodes in selected patients with 
suspicious clinical or radiologic findings. The utility of sentinel 
lymph node biopsy has remained controversial despite the rec-
ognition that several histologic subtypes of high-grade sarcoma 
are known to have a propensity for lymph node metastasis. How-
ever, there have been no prospective studies of the sensitivity and 
specificity of sentinel lymph node biopsy for such tumors.
Amputation.  Amputation is the treatment of choice for the 5% 
of patients with primary or recurrent extremity tumors whose 
tumors cannot be grossly resected with limb-sparing proce-
dures and preservation of function. Historically, local excision 
of large, high-grade soft tissue sarcomas resulted in local fail-
ure rates of 50% to 70%, even when a margin of normal tissue 
around the tumor was excised; consequently, radical resection 
or amputation was recommended. Today, however, the addition 
of radiation therapy to less radical surgical resection has made 
limb salvage possible in most cases.
A comparison of amputation versus limb-sparing sur-
gery followed by adjuvant radiation therapy performed by the 
National Cancer Institute between 1975 and 1981 demonstrated 
no significant difference between the two groups in local recur-
rence or overall survival rate.93 Potter and colleagues49 later 
reviewed the entire National Cancer Institute experience with 
123 patients treated with conservative surgery plus radiation 
therapy and 83 treated with amputation. The local recurrence 
rate was significantly higher in the surgery and adjuvant radia-
tion therapy group: 8% versus 0% in the amputation group. 
However, survival rates did not differ between the groups. 
Several large single-institution studies have since also reported 
favorable local control rates with conservative resection plus 
radiation therapy.94-96
Isolated Regional Perfusion.  Isolated regional perfusion is 
a limb-sparing technique in which a soft tissue sarcoma is per-
fused with high concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-α and 
melphalan under hyperthermic conditions. The technique is gen-
erally used for locally advanced, multifocal, or locally recurrent 
disease; it has also served as a palliative treatment to achieve 
local control for patients with distant metastases.
Limb perfusion requires isolating the main artery and 
vein of the perfused limb from the systemic circulation. The 
anatomic approach is determined by tumor site: external iliac 
vessels are used for thigh tumors, femoral or popliteal vessels 
for calf tumors, and axillary vessels for upper extremity tumors. 
The vessels are dissected, and all collateral vessels are ligated. 
The main artery and vein are then cannulated and connected 
to a pump oxygenator similar to that used in cardiopulmonary 
bypass. Either a tourniquet or an Esmarch band is applied to 
the limb to achieve complete vascular isolation. Chemothera-
peutic agents are then added to the perfusion circuit and circu-
lated for 90 minutes. Systemic leakage from the perfused limb 
is monitored continuously with 99Tc-radiolabeled human serum 
albumin injected into the perfusate, and radioactivity above the 
precordial area is recorded with a Geiger counter. During the 
entire procedure, hyperthermia of the perfused limb is main-
tained by external heating and by warming the perfusate to 
40°C. At the end of the procedure, the limb is washed out, the 
cannulas are extracted, and the blood vessels are repaired.
Despite the 40-year history of using isolated limb perfusion 
to treat extremity sarcomas, many questions about this technique 
remain to be answered. The optimal chemotherapeutic agent in 
1474
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the perfusion circuit, the benefits of hyperthermia, and the effec-
tiveness of hyperthermic perfusion as neoadjuvant or adjuvant 
treatment remain to be elucidated. Studies published to date have 
involved heterogeneous patient groups and various chemothera-
peutic agents. Despite these limitations, response rates from 18% 
to 80% and overall 5-year survival rates from 50% to 70% have 
been reported.97-101 However, survival outcomes following iso-
lated limb perfusion have not yet been directly compared with 
survival outcomes after more conventional treatment approaches.
In the initial report of isolated regional perfusion for 
extremity sarcomas, published in 1974, McBride reported 
results in 79 patients with extremity sarcomas who had been 
treated with isolated limb perfusion during the previous 14 
years.97 All patients received melphalan and dactinomycin. The 
overall 5-year survival rate was 57%, and only 13 patients had 
subsequent amputation for recurrent disease. Over the next 20 
years, isolated perfusion for treatment of extremity sarcoma 
fell out of favor for several reasons. Most notably, improved 
survival and decreased local recurrence rates could be obtained 
with less radical therapy, including conservative surgical exci-
sion combined with radiation to allow limb sparing in patients 
who were previously thought to require amputation.
A 1992 report by Lienard and colleagues101 renewed 
interest in isolated limb perfusion for extremity tumors. Those 
investigators reported a 100% response rate among patients 
with extremity melanomas and sarcomas treated with high-dose 
recombinant tumor necrosis factor-α plus interferon-γ and mel-
phalan in an isolated perfusion circuit. This report led to larger 
studies geared specifically to patients with sarcoma. The largest 
of these studies, the European Multicenter Study, was reported 
by Eggermont and colleagues in 1996.99 In that study of 186 
patients, the overall tumor response rate was 82%, and the clini-
cal and pathologic complete response rate was 29%. Although 
all of the study participants were reported to initially be candi-
dates for amputation, the rate of limb salvage following isolated 
limb perfusion was 82%.99 Subsequent studies have shown high 
local response and limb salvage rates and acceptable local and 
systemic toxic effects.102
However, results in the United States have been inferior to 
those reported in Europe. In a study by Fraker and colleagues, 
the complete response rate was 26%, and an additional 30% of 
patients had a partial response. Fourteen patients (32%) under-
went amputation for progressive tumors, while the remaining 
30 patients (68%) were able to undergo limb-sparing surgery 
after isolated limb perfusion.100 The inferior results in the U.S.-
based studies are thought to be due to patient selection biases 
and the degree of treatment before limb perfusion.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy is part of the standard treatment for high-
grade extremity and trunk wall soft tissue sarcomas either in the 
pre- or postoperative setting. Patients with low-grade tumors 
or small, superficial high-grade tumors that have been resected 
with adequate margins may safely avoid radiation therapy.
The evidence supporting adjuvant radiation therapy for 
patients eligible for conservative surgical resection comes from 
two randomized trials103,104 and three large single-institution 
reports.105-107 In a randomized trial by the National Cancer 
Institute, 91 patients with high-grade extremity tumors were 
treated with limb-sparing surgery followed by chemotherapy 
alone or radiation therapy plus chemotherapy. The 10-year 
local control rate was 98% for patients receiving radiation 
therapy compared with 70% for those not receiving radiation 
therapy (P = .0001).103 Similarly, in a randomized trial from 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 164 patients under-
went conservative surgery followed by observation or brachy-
therapy. For patients with high-grade tumors, the 5-year local 
control rate was 66% in the observation group and 89% in the 
brachytherapy group (P = .003).104 For patients with low-grade 
tumors, no significant difference was observed between treat-
ment groups.108
Until recently, the standard treatment guidelines required 
radiation therapy after surgery for all patients with intermedi-
ate- or high-grade tumors of any size. However, small tumors 
(≤5 cm) have not generally been associated with local recurrence, 
and radiation therapy for such tumors may not be necessary.104 In 
a series of 174 patients reported by Geer and colleagues, postop-
erative radiation therapy did not improve 5-year local recurrence 
or overall survival rates for patients with small soft tissue sarco-
mas.109 Karakousis and colleagues reported a 5-year local recur-
rence rate of 6% for 80 patients with extremity sarcomas treated 
with wide local excision and observation, a rate similar to that for 
the 64 patients who underwent resection with narrower surgical 
margins and postoperative radiation therapy.110
The optimal mode of radiation therapy (external-beam 
radiation therapy, brachytherapy, or intensity-modulated radia-
tion therapy [IMRT]) and timing of radiation therapy (preopera-
tive, intraoperative, or postoperative) have yet to be defined. 
External-beam radiation therapy can be delivered using pho-
tons or particle beams (electrons, protons, pions, or neutrons). 
Conventional fractionation is usually 1.8 to 2 Gy per day. CT 
is an integral part of radiation therapy, used to define the gross 
tumor volume and to estimate the margin of tissue at risk for 
microscopic tumor involvement. The optimal radiation margin 
is not well defined: a margin of 5 to 7 cm is standard, but some 
centers advocate wider margins for tumors larger than 15 cm. At 
most institutions, the typical preoperative dose is 50 Gy given 
in 25 fractions, and resection is performed 4 to 8 weeks after 
completion of radiation therapy to allow acute radiation changes 
to subside. Postoperative radiation therapy planning is based 
on tumor site, tumor grade, surgical margins, and institutional 
preferences. The entire surgical scar and drain sites should be 
included in the field so that a near-full dose can be administered 
to the superficial skin. Metallic clips placed in the tumor bed 
during surgery can help define the limits of the resection and aid 
in radiation therapy planning. Doses of 60 to 70 Gy are usually 
necessary for postoperative treatment.
No consensus exists on the optimal sequence of radia-
tion therapy and surgery. The available data come largely from 
single-institution, nonrandomized studies. Proponents of pre-
operative radiation therapy note that multidisciplinary planning 
with radiation oncologists, medical oncologists, and surgeons 
is easier early in the course of therapy. In addition, for some 
radiosensitive histologic subtypes, such as myxoid liposarcoma, 
preoperative radiation therapy may shrink the tumor, facilitat-
ing resection with negative margins. Furthermore, a tissue bed 
undisturbed by resection has better tissue oxygenation and can 
be successfully treated with lower doses of radiation. In addi-
tion, Nielsen and colleagues111 demonstrated that preoperative 
radiation fields are smaller than postoperative radiation fields 
and that the average number of joints included in the field is 
lower with preoperative than postoperative radiation therapy, 
which may result in improved functional outcome. Critics of 
preoperative radiation therapy cite the difficulty of pathologic 
1475
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
assessment of margins and the increased rate of postoperative 
wound complications.112 However, reconstructive surgical tech-
niques with advanced tissue transfer procedures are being used 
more often in these high-risk wounds and reportedly result in 
better outcomes. The higher doses generally required for post-
operative radiation therapy have also been shown to be associ-
ated with greater long-term functional impairment.
The only randomized comparison of preoperative and 
postoperative radiation therapy to date was performed by the 
National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials–Canadian 
Sarcoma Group.113 This trial was designed to examine compli-
cations and functional outcome. The 190 patients enrolled from 
October 1994 to December 1997 were randomized to preopera-
tive radiation therapy (50 Gy) or postoperative radiation therapy 
(66 Gy). With a median follow-up time of 3.3 years, the recur-
rence and progression-free survival rates were similar in the two 
groups. However, the incidence of wound complications was 
significantly lower with preoperative radiation therapy (3% vs. 
17%), and the incidence of wound complications was signifi-
cantly higher for tumors of the lower extremity (43%) than for 
those of the upper extremity (5%).113 Late radiation toxic effects 
(e.g., fibrosis, joint stiffness, and edema) were more common 
with postoperative than preoperative radiation therapy (48% vs. 
32%) because of higher postoperative radiation doses and larger 
treatment field sizes.114
Brachytherapy involves the placement of multiple radioac-
tive seeds through catheters inserted in the tumor resection bed. 
The primary benefit of brachytherapy is the shorter overall treat-
ment time of 4 to 6 days, compared to the 4 to 6 weeks gener-
ally required for preoperative or postoperative radiation therapy 
regimens. A cost-analysis comparison of adjuvant brachyther-
apy versus adjuvant external-beam irradiation for soft tissue 
sarcomas showed that costs were lower with brachytherapy.115 
Brachytherapy can also be used for recurrent disease previously 
treated with external-beam radiation. Guidelines established at 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center recommend spacing 
the afterloading catheters in 1-cm increments while leaving a 
2-cm margin around the surgical bed.104 After adequate wound 
healing is confirmed, usually after the fifth postoperative day, 
the catheters are loaded with seeds containing iridium-192 
that deliver 42 to 45 Gy of radiation to the tumor bed over 
4 to 6 days. The primary disadvantage of brachytherapy is that it 
requires significant expertise, extended inpatient hospital stays, 
and bed rest.
IMRT delivers radiation more precisely to the tumor than 
external-beam irradiation while minimizing the volume of sur-
rounding tissues exposed to high radiation doses. The proposed 
benefits of preoperative IMRT include reduced risk of postop-
erative wound infections because of minimization of the dose 
to the skin116 and protection of underlying bone (e.g., femur) 
as a result of concave dose distributions.117 There have been 
no prospective randomized trials comparing the long-term out-
comes following IMRT versus other types of radiation therapy. 
In a retrospective analysis of IMRT, patients with negative and 
positive/close (within 1 mm) margins were found to have 5-year 
local control rates of 94%.118 In addition, the rates of posttreat-
ment edema and joint stiffness with IMRT were lower than the 
expected rates with conventional radiation therapy.
Local toxic effects of radiation therapy vary according to 
radiation dose, field size, and timing (preoperative or postop-
erative). With preoperative radiation therapy, the most frequent 
wound complications are wound dehiscence, wound necrosis, 
persistent drainage, infection, seroma formation, ulceration, 
and cellulitis.113 Postoperative irradiation of free flaps is often 
associated with wound complications, and patients should 
be advised that secondary surgical repair may be necessary. 
Wound complication rates of 13% to 37% have been reported 
for preoperative radiation therapy, compared to 5% to 20% for 
postoperative radiation therapy.119 If catheters are loaded after 
the fifth postoperative day, rates of wound complications after 
brachytherapy are similar to those after postoperative radiation 
therapy.
Long-term (chronic) effects of radiation therapy (those 
occurring >1 year after completion of therapy) are generally 
related to fibrosis/contractures, lymphedema, neurologic injury, 
osteitis, and fractures, all of which can cause substantial func-
tional impairment.119 Variables associated with poorer functional 
outcome after radiation therapy include larger tumors, higher 
doses of radiation (>63 Gy), longer radiation fields (>35 cm), 
poor radiation technique, neural sacrifice, postoperative fractures, 
and wound complications.114,120 Additionally, complications of 
any kind are less likely after treatment for upper extremity sar-
coma than after treatment for lower extremity sarcoma.112,113
Definitive radiation therapy that delivers maximal-tissue-
tolerance doses of radiation may be appropriate for selected 
patients with unresectable soft tissue sarcomas. In a study of 
112 patients with unresectable soft tissue sarcomas, tumor size 
and radiation dose were found to influence local control and sur-
vival.121 The local control rate was 51% for tumors smaller than 
5 cm and 9% for tumors larger than 10 cm, and patients who 
received at least 64 Gy had better local control and survival.
Systemic Therapy
Despite improvements in local control rates, metastasis and 
death remain significant problems for patients with high-risk 
soft tissue sarcomas. Patients considered at high risk of death 
from sarcoma include those presenting with metastatic disease, 
localized sarcomas at nonextremity sites, or sarcomas of inter-
mediate- or high-grade histology larger than 5 cm.58,104
Standard Chemotherapy.  For most patients with sarcoma, 
results of conventional chemotherapy regimens have been poor. 
The chemosensitivity of soft tissue sarcoma varies by histologic 
subtype.29 Synovial sarcoma, myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, 
and uterine leiomyosarcoma are sensitive to chemotherapy,122 
whereas pleomorphic liposarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, epithe-
lioid sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, MPNSTs, angiosarcoma, and 
desmoplastic round cell tumors have intermediate sensitivity to 
chemotherapy. Relatively chemoresistant histologic subtypes 
include clear cell sarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, alveo-
lar soft part sarcoma, and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. 
Considering the variability of responses by histologic subtype, 
it is not surprising that clinical trials of standard chemotherapy, 
which often include heterogeneous populations with respect to 
tumor grade and histology, have demonstrated no overall sur-
vival benefit.
Doxorubicin and ifosfamide are the two most active agents 
against soft tissue sarcoma, with consistently reported response 
rates of 20% or greater and positive dose-response curves.123,124 
The European guidelines recommend doxorubicin 75 mg/m2 
every 3 weeks as first-line treatment for advanced disease.29 
Treatment duration is based on response, but a maximum of six 
cycles is generally recommended because of the risk of cumula-
tive cardiotoxicity. Ifosfamide is the recommended second-line 
treatment and is recommended for first-line treatment in patients 
1476
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with cardiac morbidity. The standard dose of ifosfamide is 9 
to 10 g/m2; however, single-institution series using higher-dose 
regimens (>10 g/m2) or standard-dose ifosfamide combined 
with doxorubicin have shown response rates of 20% to 60%.124 
Synovial sarcomas have been shown to be particularly sensi-
tive to ifosfamide. Ifosfamide-associated toxic effects include 
hemorrhagic cystitis, neurotoxicity, and renal tubular acidosis. 
Historically, combination therapy with doxorubicin plus ifos-
famide, dacarbazine, or both has resulted in increased response 
rates but no improvement in overall survival.125 Dacarbazine as 
a single agent has also demonstrated activity in clinical trials.
Over the past decade, several additional chemotherapeutic 
agents, including gemcitabine, taxanes, and trabectedin, have 
been noted to be active against soft tissue sarcomas. Gemcitabine 
as a single agent was reported to produce responses in 18% of 
patients with advanced sarcoma.126 Gemcitabine combined with 
docetaxel has been reported to produce response rates as high as 
53% in patients with uterine leiomyosarcoma.126,127 Gemcitabine 
combined with vinorelbine has also been associated with clini-
cal benefit in patients with advanced sarcomas.128 The taxanes 
(docetaxel and paclitaxel) have been found to be active against 
angiosarcomas, particularly of the face and scalp, likely because 
of their potent antiangiogenic effects.129,130
Novel Chemotherapeutic Agents.  Trabectedin, a marine-
derived alkaloid that binds DNA, affecting transcription and 
inducing the formation of DNA double-strand breaks, has 
shown benefit in the treatment of advanced soft tissue sarco-
mas, particularly leiomyosarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, and 
other translocation-related sarcomas.131 Trabectedin is generally 
well tolerated but can be associated with prolonged and severe 
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and hepatic toxic effects.
Palifosfamide is a stabilized formulation of the active 
metabolite of ifosfamide that has been reported to be better tol-
erated than ifosfamide.132 Early trials have suggested antitumor 
activity comparable or superior to that of ifosfamide without 
nephrotoxicity.
Targeted Therapies.  Several targeted agents are being investi-
gated for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. Among these are 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., imatinib, sunitinib, sorafenib, 
and dasatinib) that have been developed and approved for treat-
ment of GIST. Clinical data accumulated in phase II trials also 
support the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., imatinib, 
sorafenib, and sunitinib) in the management of other advanced 
sarcomas.125 Anti–vascular endothelial growth factor antibod-
ies such as bevacizumab have demonstrated activity in patients 
with metastatic or unresectable angiosarcoma, solitary fibrous 
tumor, and epithelioid hemangioendothelioma.133 Pazopanib is 
an oral angiogenesis inhibitor that targets vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptors, platelet-derived growth factor recep-
tor (PDGFR), and c-kit. In a recent phase III study, pazopanib 
showed efficacy against placebo in second or further line of 
therapy in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma.134 Inhibi-
tors of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, including 
temsirolimus, everolimus, and ridaforolimus, have also shown 
activity against some soft tissue sarcomas (i.e., PEComas).135
Benefits of Systemic Therapy.  The use of adjuvant and 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas remains 
controversial. More than a dozen individual randomized trials 
of adjuvant chemotherapy have failed to demonstrate improve-
ment in disease-free or overall survival for patients with soft 
tissue sarcoma. However, several limitations of these individual 
­trials may explain the lack of observed improvement. First, the 
chemotherapy regimens used were suboptimal, consisting of 
single-agent therapy (most commonly with doxorubicin) and 
insufficiently intensive dosing schedules. Second, the patient 
groups were not large enough to reveal clinically significant dif-
ferences in survival rates. Finally, most studies included patients 
at low risk of metastasis and death, namely those with small 
(<5 cm) and low-grade tumors.
The Sarcoma Meta-Analysis Collaboration analyzed 
1568 patients from 14 trials of doxorubicin-based adjuvant 
chemotherapy to evaluate the effect of adjuvant chemotherapy 
on localized, resectable soft tissue sarcomas.136 At a median 
follow-up time of 9.4 years, doxorubicin-based chemotherapy 
significantly improved the time to local and distant recurrence 
and recurrence-free survival rates. However, the absolute ben-
efit in overall survival was only 4%, which was not significant 
(P = .12). In a subset analysis, patients with extremity tumors 
had a 7% benefit in terms of overall survival (P = .029).136
After this meta-analysis, randomized controlled trials of 
more contemporary anthracycline/ifosfamide dosing combina-
tions with relatively small numbers of patients have yielded 
conflicting results. In an Italian cooperative trial, adjuvant che-
motherapy improved median disease-free and overall survival 
times in patients with high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas.137 
In that study, 104 patients with high-grade tumors 5 cm or larger 
were randomized to definitive surgery or surgery plus adjuvant 
chemotherapy consisting of epirubicin (60 mg/m2/d on days 1 
and 2) and ifosfamide (1.8 g/m2/d on days 1 through 5) for five 
cycles. With a median follow-up time of almost 5 years, disease-
free survival times were 16 months in the surgery-alone group 
and 48 months in the combined-treatment group (P = .04), and 
median overall survival times were 46 months in the surgery-
alone group and 75 months in the combined-treatment group 
(P = .03).137 However, several years later, the surgery-alone 
and combined-treatment groups had equivalent relapse rates and 
deaths, which resulted in statistically similar overall survival.138
In an effort to further assess the role of chemotherapy 
in patients with stage III extremity sarcoma, a cohort analy-
sis of the combined databases of The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Can-
cer Center was performed. Data on 674 patients with stage III 
extremity sarcoma who received either preoperative or postop-
erative doxorubicin-based chemotherapy were reviewed. The 
5-year disease-specific survival rate was 61%.139 Cox regres-
sion analysis showed a time-varying effect of chemotherapy 
with an associated benefit during the first year while receiving 
chemotherapy. However, the clinical benefits of chemotherapy 
in patients with stage III sarcomas were not sustained beyond 
1 year. Grobmyer and colleagues compared the outcomes of 
patients treated at two institutions (1990–2001) with surgery 
only or surgery plus preoperative chemotherapy containing 
doxorubicin and ifosfamide. In this analysis, chemotherapy was 
associated with an improvement in the 3-year disease-specific 
survival rate that was most pronounced in patients with tumors 
larger than 10 cm (62% for surgery alone vs. 83% for neoadju-
vant chemotherapy and surgery).140
More recently, the European Organization for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) completed a phase III ran-
domized study (trial EORTC-62931; conducted from 1995 
through 2003) comparing surgery alone versus surgery plus 
adjuvant ifosfamide (5 g/m2) plus doxorubicin (75 mg/m2) 
with growth factor support (lenograstim) every 21 days for five 
1477
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
cycles in 351 patients with resected grade II or III soft tissue 
sarcoma at any site. The estimated relapse-free survival rate 
was 52% in both arms, and the overall survival rate was better 
in the control arm (69% vs. 64%).141 Although most individual 
studies are underpowered, data from all of these studies suggest 
that chemotherapy regimens that incorporate ifosfamide may 
provide some disease-free survival benefit but do not improve 
long-term overall survival for the majority of patients with soft 
tissue sarcoma.
In 2008, two updates to the 1997 Sarcoma Meta-Analysis 
Collaboration were published.142,143 O’Connor and colleagues 
included all of the trials in the original meta-analysis and added 
data from four additional trials, for a total of 18 trials with 2170 
patients.142 The results showed a benefit of chemotherapy in 
terms of disease-free survival at 5 years and recurrence-free 
survival at 10 years but again failed to demonstrate a benefit in 
terms of long-term overall survival. The second update, by Per-
vaiz and colleagues, which did not include the EORTC-62931 
trial, showed that adjuvant chemotherapy was associated with 
a significant decrease in the risk of death (hazard ratio, 0.77; 
P = .01).143
Because the evidence regarding adjuvant systemic therapy 
for stage III soft tissue sarcoma is inconclusive, considerable 
variation still exists in treatment recommendations even though 
patients with large, stage II or stage III soft tissue sarcomas are 
at high risk for recurrence and metastasis. Chemotherapy may 
be considered to downstage large tumors to enable limb-sparing 
procedures, particularly for tumors known to be chemosensi-
tive. It is likely that subsets of high-risk patients with extremity 
soft tissue sarcoma defined on the basis of tumor size or histol-
ogy derive significant benefit from systemic chemotherapy. For 
example, retrospective cohort analyses have noted a disease-
specific survival benefit in patients with large, high-grade lipo-
sarcomas and synovial sarcomas of the extremity treated with 
ifosfamide plus doxorubicin versus no chemotherapy.144
Neoadjuvant (Preoperative) Chemotherapy.  The use of 
neoadjuvant (preoperative) chemotherapy for soft tissue sarco-
mas is based on the belief that only 30% to 50% of patients 
respond to standard adjuvant (postoperative) chemotherapy. 
The rationale for using neoadjuvant chemotherapy is that it 
enables oncologists to identify patients whose disease is sensi-
tive to a particular chemotherapy regimen by assessing response 
while the primary tumor is in situ. Patients whose tumors do not 
respond to short courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy can thus 
be spared the toxic effects of prolonged adjuvant chemotherapy. 
Another advantage of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is that it may 
shrink tumors, enabling less morbid operations. The theoreti-
cal disadvantages of neoadjuvant chemotherapy are related to 
myelosuppression and potential postoperative wound healing 
complications.
A recent randomized study comparing three preoperative 
cycles of full-dose anthracycline-ifosfamide–based chemother-
apy with three preoperative plus two postoperative cycles of the 
same regimen in high-risk extremity and trunk wall soft tissue 
sarcomas showed equivalence between the two approaches, sug-
gesting the possibility of limiting chemotherapy administration 
to the three preoperative courses, improving the ratio between 
toxicity and expected benefit.145
A subanalysis on response showed how tumor attenuation 
on CT scan and MRI obtained by the administration of such 
preoperative treatment was associated with a higher percentage 
of pathologic necrosis146 and better outcome.147
Eilber and colleagues examined treatment-induced patho-
logic necrosis in patients who received neoadjuvant therapy for 
high-grade extremity sarcomas.148 The addition of ifosfamide to 
other agents (doxorubicin alone or doxorubicin and cisplatin) 
increased the rate of pathologic necrosis to 48% compared to 
13% with other combinations. The 5- and 10-year local recur-
rence rates were significantly lower for patients with 95% or 
greater pathologic necrosis (6% and 11%, respectively) than for 
patients with less than 95% pathologic necrosis (17% and 23%, 
respectively).
Concurrent Chemoradiation Therapy
Treatment approaches that combine systemic chemotherapy 
with radiosensitizers and concurrent external-beam radiation 
therapy may improve disease-free survival by treating micro-
scopic disease and enhancing the treatment of macroscopic 
disease. Concurrent chemoradiation therapy with doxorubicin-
based regimens reportedly produces favorable local control 
rates for patients with sarcoma.144 Since those findings were 
published, several groups have evaluated routes of administra-
tion, alternative chemotherapeutic agents, and the toxicity of 
combined therapies.
Theoretical advantages notwithstanding, concurrent 
chemoradiation therapy decreases the total treatment time for 
patients with high-risk sarcoma. This decrease represents a sub-
stantial advantage over current sequential combined-modality 
treatment approaches, for which the total duration of radiation 
therapy, chemotherapy, surgery, and rehabilitation frequently 
exceeds 6 to 9 months.
Posttreatment Surveillance
Currently, posttreatment surveillance is recommended for 
all patients with soft tissue sarcomas based on a few reports 
involving small numbers of patients indicating that local recur-
rence can be successfully treated with radical re-excision with 
or without radiation therapy.149,150 Similarly, several groups have 
reported that survival can be prolonged by resection of pulmo-
nary metastases.151,152
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) 
recommends a history and physical and chest CT or radiogra-
phy every 3 to 6 months for 2 to 3 years after completion of 
treatment. Because most cases of distant metastasis occur within 
2 to 3 years of initial diagnosis, the NCCN guidelines indicate 
that follow-up intervals can be lengthened to every 6 months 
and imaging can be done annually during years 2 through 5.1 
Consideration should also be given to imaging the primary 
tumor site; most experts recommend that the tumor site be eval-
uated every 6 months with MRI for extremity tumors or CT 
for intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal tumors. Guidelines have 
been established for using MRI to distinguish recurrences from 
typical postsurgical changes: a discrete nodule with low signal 
intensity on T1-weighted images and higher signal intensity on 
T2-weighted images that enhances after administration of intra-
venous contrast material is strongly suggestive of recurrence 
and should be biopsied. Ultrasonography may be an alternative 
to MRI or CT for assessing for recurrence in the extremities.
Recurrence is common after surgery for abdominal soft tis-
sue sarcomas. CT is useful for detecting recurrences at primary 
and distant anatomic sites in the abdomen and pelvis. After sur-
gery, CT every 3 to 6 months during the first 2 years and every 
6 months for 3 years thereafter has been recommended. How-
ever, today many experienced surgeons are advocating less 
aggressive imaging for asymptomatic patients, particularly 
1478
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
after a second recurrence of retroperitoneal sarcoma, arguing 
that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that survival is 
improved by earlier detection.
Whooley and colleagues reviewed the efficacy of the sur-
veillance strategy used at Roswell Park Cancer Institute for 174 
patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities.153 Patients 
were evaluated every 3 months for the first 2 years, every 4 to 
6 months during year 3, and every 6 months during years 4 and 
5. Local recurrence occurred in 18% of patients at a median 
time after completion of treatment of 14 months, and all but 
one of the recurrences were detected with physical examination 
alone. Fifty-seven patients had distant recurrences (at a median 
of 18 months after treatment), of which 36 were asymptom-
atic and diagnosed by surveillance imaging. The investigators 
determined that the positive predictive value of chest radiogra-
phy during follow-up was 92%.153 However, evaluation of the 
primary tumor site by CT or MRI was ineffective in detecting 
recurrences. The authors recommended that patient character-
istics, location of the primary tumor, previous treatment, and 
physician familiarity with changes after surgery and radiation 
therapy should all be considered in determining the need for 
radiographic imaging.
Management of Recurrent Sarcoma
Up to 20% of patients with extremity sarcoma develop locally 
recurrent disease, which is often accompanied by distant metas-
tases; thus, all patients with recurrent extremity sarcoma should 
undergo a full staging assessment. Patients with microscopically 
positive surgical margins are at increased risk of local recur-
rence. In a series of 179 patients with locally recurrent extremity 
soft tissue sarcoma at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
the median interval to local recurrence was 16 months; 65% 
of patients developed a local recurrence  by 2 years, and 90% 
by 4 years.149 The majority of patients (89%) were treated with 
additional limb-sparing surgery, and 73% received additional 
adjuvant therapy; the disease-specific survival after treatment 
of first local recurrence was 55% at 4 years. Independent prog-
nostic factors for disease-specific survival after local recurrence 
included tumor grade, local recurrence size, and local recur-
rence-free interval. These data indicate that an isolated local 
recurrence should be treated aggressively with resection with 
negative margins.
For patients with extremity sarcomas, achieving negative 
margins on resection of recurrent disease frequently requires 
amputation. However, in some patients with recurrent extrem-
ity sarcoma, function-preserving resection combined with addi-
tional radiation therapy, with or without chemotherapy, can 
produce acceptable rates of local control.154-156 Nori and col-
leagues reported a local control rate of 69% among 40 patients 
with recurrent tumors treated with re-excision and brachyther-
apy to a median dose of 45 Gy.156 In a similar series, Midis and 
colleagues reported that limb-sparing surgery was possible in 
66% of patients, and the 5-year local recurrence-free survival 
rate was 72% in those patients.154
The primary determinant of survival in patients with soft tis-
sue sarcoma is the development of distant metastases. Patients with 
extremity sarcomas generally develop pulmonary metastases.153 
Less common sites of metastasis for soft tissue sarcomas include 
bone (7%), liver (4%),49 and lymph nodes (5%–7%).27 Myxoid 
liposarcoma of the extremity is known to metastasize to the abdo-
men and pelvis; therefore, staging CT of these regions must be 
performed before definitive local therapy is administered.31
Management of Recurrent and Distant Metastatic 
­Sarcoma.  In selected individuals with distant metastatic dis-
ease, surgical resection of a primary soft tissue sarcoma may 
be appropriate as a palliative procedure. The decision should 
be based on the patient’s symptoms, which often include pain; 
ability to achieve local tumor control; comorbidities; anticipated 
morbidity of the surgical procedure; and the extent of metastases.
The most common initial site of distant metastasis of soft tis-
sue sarcomas is the lung. Selected patients with a limited number 
of pulmonary nodules (less than four nodules), long ­disease-free 
intervals, and no endobronchial invasion may become long-term 
survivors after pulmonary resection (Fig. 36-8); 15% to 40% of 
patients with complete resection of metastatic disease confined 
to the lung are long-term survivors.153,157 In a retrospective multi-
institutional study of 255 patients with lung metastases, the 5-year 
overall survival rate after metastasectomy was 38%.151 Favor-
able prognostic factors in that study included microscopically 
tumor-free margins, age younger than 40 years, and grade 1 or 
2 tumor.151 For patients who are surgical candidates, pulmonary 
resection alone can be more cost-effective than watchful waiting, 
chemotherapy, or chemotherapy plus surgery.152
Chemotherapy for Distant Metastatic Sarcoma.  Doxoru-
bicin, either alone or combined with other agents, has been the 
primary treatment modality for patients with advanced or dis-
tant metastatic sarcomas for several decades.125 Although most 
patients with metastatic disease are not curable, some patients 
with limited disease experience stabilization of disease with 
multidisciplinary treatment, which often includes surgery and 
radiation therapy in addition to chemotherapy. Several factors 
predict better outcome for patients with recurrent metastatic 
sarcoma undergoing chemotherapy, including good perfor-
mance status, previous response to chemotherapy, younger 
age, absence of hepatic metastases, low-grade tumor, and long 
­disease-free interval.158 Isolated liver metastases, if stable over 
several months, may be amenable to resection,159 radiofrequency 
ablation,160 or chemoembolization.161
Figure 36-8.  A 69-year-old patient with a history of a dedifferenti-
ated liposarcoma of the retroperitoneum developed a solitary lung 
metastasis 6 years after surgical resection.
1479
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
As data accumulate regarding the sensitivity of sarcoma 
subtypes to particular chemotherapies, it is critical that histology-
driven treatment approaches be used. New therapies are also 
being identified based on the unique molecular signatures of 
sarcomas.125
Palliative Radiation Therapy.  Definitive radiation therapy 
can be considered when no acceptable surgical option is avail-
able (e.g., in patients with significant medical comorbidities). In 
this setting, radiation doses greater than 63 Gy yielded superior 
tumor control, but doses greater than 68 Gy resulted in increased 
rates of major complications.162
SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONS
Myxoid Liposarcoma
Myxoid liposarcomas belong to the group of soft tissue sarco-
mas with lipomatous differentiation. However, myxoid liposar-
comas differ from the other liposarcoma subtypes with respect 
to morphology (i.e., myxoid stroma and lipomatous differen-
tiation) and clinical behavior. Myxoid liposarcomas frequently 
present as slow-growing, deep tumors in the lower extremity 
and can metastasize to other soft tissue locations, including the 
retroperitoneum and extremities.163,164 For this reason, CT of the 
chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended for adequate stag-
ing and surveillance of myxoid liposarcoma.
Retroperitoneal Sarcoma
Most retroperitoneal tumors are malignant, and about one third 
are soft tissue sarcomas. Also to be considered in the differen-
tial diagnosis of a retroperitoneal tumor are primary germ cell 
tumors, lymphoma, and metastatic testicular cancer. Approxi-
mately 1000 new cases of retroperitoneal sarcoma are diag-
nosed annually in the United States, and these tumors account 
for 10% to 15% of all adult tissue sarcomas. Approximately two 
thirds of retroperitoneal sarcomas are high grade (either grade 2 
or 3), and liposarcoma and leiomyosarcoma are the most com-
mon histologies.
Retroperitoneal sarcomas generally present as large 
masses: 70% are larger than 10 cm at diagnosis.165 They typi-
cally do not produce symptoms until they grow large enough to 
compress or invade contiguous structures, although pain, early 
satiety, and obstructive gastrointestinal symptoms may occur 
early in the disease course in some patients. Evaluation of a 
patient with a retroperitoneal mass begins with an accurate his-
tory that should exclude signs and symptoms associated with 
lymphoma (e.g., fever and night sweats). A complete physical 
examination, with particular attention to all nodal basins and 
with a testicular examination in men, is critically important. 
Laboratory assessment can be helpful; elevated lactate dehy-
drogenase levels may suggest lymphoma, and elevated β-human 
chorionic gonadotropin levels or α-fetoprotein levels may indi-
cate a germ cell tumor.
Although the general principles of evaluation and man-
agement for retroperitoneal sarcomas are similar to those for 
extremity sarcomas, there are some differences. Contrast-
enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis is used to define the 
extent of the tumor and its relationship to surrounding struc-
tures, particularly vascular structures, for surgical planning; 
contrast-enhanced CT can also often distinguish between well-
differentiated and dedifferentiated liposarcoma. CT imaging is 
also done to evaluate the liver for the evidence of metastases, 
the peritoneal cavity for evidence of discontiguous disease, and 
the kidneys for assessment of function. Angiography or mag-
netic resonance arteriography/venography can also be used to 
delineate vascular anatomy when involvement of critical vascu-
lar structures is suspected. Thoracic CT should be performed to 
evaluate for potential lung metastases because 11% of patients 
with retroperitoneal sarcoma present with synchronous meta-
static disease. CT-guided core needle biopsy is appropriate to 
provide a tissue diagnosis; however, negative biopsy findings 
should not delay operative intervention.
Complete surgical resection is the most effective treat-
ment for primary or recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma 
(Fig. 36-9). En bloc resection often necessitates sacrificing con-
tiguous structures such as the colon, kidney, spleen, pancreas, 
psoas muscle, small bowel, inferior vena cava, and aorta.166 In 
a review of 25 patients who underwent resection of retroperito-
neal sarcoma with major blood vessel involvement in a 16-year 
time span, postoperative morbidity and mortality rates were 
36% and 4%, respectively. Vessel patency rates were greater 
than 88% with a median follow-up time of 19.3 months.83,167 
Local control and survival rates were favorable in patients 
with tumor-free resection margins. The authors concluded that 
vascular resection is the treatment of choice in sarcomas that 
involve major blood vessels in the retroperitoneum.83 Similar 
considerations were made by other groups reporting specifi-
cally on inferior vena cava resection in the context of multi-
visceral resection for retroperitoneal sarcoma and on surgical 
morbidity after extended surgical resection of retroperitoneal 
sarcoma. Extended procedures, including also vessels, are fea-
sible and safe if carried out in experienced centers. While the 
goal of sarcoma resection is wide excision, this is unlikely to 
be achievable in most patients with retroperitoneal sarcomas. 
Surgery is considered marginal in most cases, even when mac-
roscopically complete, but every attempt should be made to 
minimize this marginality by liberally resecting surrounding 
organs when needed. The extension of surgery should then take 
into consideration a trade-off between expected morbidity and 
benefit and should be best carried out at high-volume centers, 
where technical skills and knowledge of the natural history of 
this very rare disease can be found.
Figure 36-9.  A 45-year-old woman with a massive retroperitoneal 
atypical lipomatous tumor with displacement of the left kidney.
1480
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
In an analysis of 500 patients with retroperitoneal soft tis-
sue sarcoma treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Cen-
ter, the median survival time was 103 months for those who 
underwent complete resection versus 18 months for those who 
underwent incomplete resection or observation without resec-
tion.165 In general, surgical resection should not be offered 
unless radiographic evidence indicates the potential for com-
plete resection; however, palliative surgical resection may be 
considered to reduce symptoms of intestinal obstruction, pain, 
or bleeding.168 In particular, in patients with atypical lipomatous 
tumors, an aggressive surgical approach including incomplete 
resection or debulking is justified to palliate symptoms and may 
provide a potential survival benefit.169 Such an approach is not 
justified for dedifferentiated liposarcomas or other high-grade 
retroperitoneal sarcomas because these tumors have high rates 
of distant metastasis and local recurrence.
Adjuvant Therapy.  Most studies have failed to show a sur-
vival benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy for retroperitoneal 
sarcoma.170-172 Because of the high rates of local recurrence, 
adjuvant radiation therapy has been proposed for treating micro-
scopic residual disease following surgical resection. However, 
the optimal technique and timing of radiation therapy have not 
been established, and the potential benefits of radiation therapy 
must be weighed against the increased risk of treatment-related 
toxic effects.
Radiation treatment of retroperitoneal sarcomas is com-
plex because tumors are usually large, which necessitates large 
treatment fields close to radiosensitive structures (e.g., bowel). 
Several techniques have been used, including preoperative and 
postoperative external-beam radiation therapy, intraoperative 
radiation therapy, and brachytherapy.173 Preoperative radiation 
therapy is feasible and well tolerated. Toxic effects may be less 
severe with preoperative radiation therapy given that the tumor 
borders are definable, the tumor displaces radiosensitive viscera 
away from the treatment field, and effective doses of radiation 
may be lower preoperatively.174
Several studies have shown favorable local control rates 
for intermediate- and high-grade retroperitoneal sarcoma treated 
with preoperative radiation therapy and complete resection.173 
However, most studies have failed to show a survival benefit.175 
This situation prompted the initiation of a multicenter, ran-
domized trial sponsored by the American College of Surgeons 
Oncology Group (ACOSOG) comparing surgery to surgery 
with preoperative radiation (ACOSOG Z9031). Unfortunately, 
the study was closed prematurely in 2006 because of low patient 
accrual. A similar study is now ongoing in Europe, sponsored 
by the Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group (STBSG) of the 
EORTC.
Current recommendations for radiation therapy for patients 
with retroperitoneal sarcoma at MD Anderson Cancer Center 
are based on disease characteristics at presentation.176 For high-
risk patients, defined as those with large, high-grade tumors or 
recurrent low-grade tumors, preoperative radiation therapy to a 
total dose of 50 Gy followed by surgical resection is considered. 
Postoperative radiation is discouraged unless the resected tumor 
bed is clearly away from dose-limiting structures.
Treatment of Recurrence.  Retroperitoneal sarcomas recur 
more often than extremity and trunk wall ones. Retroperito-
neal leiomyosarcomas, in addition to recurring locally in the 
tumor bed and metastasizing to the lungs, frequently spread 
to the liver. Retroperitoneal sarcomas can also recur diffusely 
throughout the peritoneal cavity (sarcomatosis). Resection 
of recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma is similar to resection of 
recurrent extremity sarcoma. However, the likelihood that a 
recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma will be resectable declines 
precipitously with each recurrence. In a large series of patients 
treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the authors 
were able to resect recurrent tumors in 57% of patients with a 
first recurrence but only 20% of patients with a second recur-
rence and 10% of patients with a third recurrence.68 In up to 
25% of patients, well-differentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma 
recurs in a poorly differentiated form or recurs with areas of 
dedifferentiation. Dedifferentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma 
is more aggressive than its well-differentiated precursor and has 
a greater propensity for distant metastasis.
Gastrointestinal Sarcoma
Patients with gastrointestinal sarcoma most often present with 
nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms that are determined by 
the site of the primary tumor. In a series from Memorial Sloan-
Kettering Cancer Center, early satiety and dyspepsia were noted 
in patients with tumors of the upper gastrointestinal tract, whereas 
tenesmus and changes in bowel habits were common in patients 
with tumors of the lower gastrointestinal tract.177 In a series of 80 
patients with various smooth-muscle tumors of the gastrointesti-
nal tract, Chou and colleagues178 identified the most common pre-
senting symptoms and signs as gastrointestinal bleeding (44%), 
abdominal mass (38%), and abdominal pain (21%).
Establishing the diagnosis of a gastrointestinal sarcoma 
preoperatively is often difficult. Radiologic assessment, includ-
ing CT of the abdomen or pelvis, is sometimes useful to deter-
mine the anatomic location, size, and extent of disease. Patients 
with localized disease frequently present with a large intra-
abdominal mass. However, there is no radiographic evidence 
of regional lymph node metastases, which would be typical of 
an adenocarcinoma of similar size and anatomic location. In 
patients with advanced gastrointestinal sarcoma, CT may dem-
onstrate disseminated intra-abdominal masses with or without 
concomitant ascites and invasion of tissue planes.
Endoscopy (esophagoduodenoscopy or colonoscopy) has 
become the mainstay for evaluating symptoms related to the 
gastrointestinal tract. For tumors involving the stomach, upper 
endoscopy with endoscopic ultrasonography and biopsy are 
important diagnostic tests used to distinguish gastrointestinal 
sarcoma from adenocarcinoma of the stomach. This distinction 
is clinically significant because the extent of resection (local 
excision versus gastrectomy) and the role of regional lymphade-
nectomy differ for these two conditions. For gastrointestinal sar-
comas, lymphatic spread is not the primary route of metastasis; 
consequently, lymphadenectomy is not routinely performed as 
part of resection. The general recommendation for gastrointesti-
nal sarcoma, based on published data and the primary pattern of 
distant (vs. local) failure, is to resect the tumor with a 2- to 4-cm 
margin of normal tissue. However, some cases may be techni-
cally challenging because of the tumor’s anatomic location or 
size. For example, for gastric tumors located near the gastro-
esophageal junction, achieving adequate surgical margins may 
not be possible without a total or proximal subtotal gastrectomy. 
Similarly, large leiomyosarcomas arising from the stomach with 
invasion of adjacent organs should be resected together with the 
adjacent involved viscera en bloc.
For sarcomas of the small or large intestine, segmental 
bowel resection is the standard treatment. For sarcomas of the 
1481
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
jejunum, ileum, and colon, the tumor is excised en bloc with 
the involved segment of intestine and its mesentery; radical 
mesenteric lymphadenectomy is not attempted. For sarcomas 
originating in the rectum, the tumor resection technique is based 
on the anatomic location and size of the tumor. For small, low 
rectal lesions, clear margins may be achievable with a transanal 
excision. Large or locally invasive lesions may require more 
extensive operations for complete tumor extirpation.179,180
Breast Sarcoma
Sarcomas of the breast are rare tumors, accounting for less than 
1% of all breast malignancies and less than 5% of all soft tissue 
sarcomas. A variety of histologic subtypes have been reported 
within the breast, including angiosarcoma, stromal sarcoma, 
fibrosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma.
Angiosarcoma of the breast accounts for about 50% of all 
sarcomas of the breast and has increasingly been associated with 
radiation therapy for treatment of primary breast cancer.10 The 
period between radiation therapy and diagnosis of radiation-
associated breast sarcoma has been reported to range from 3 to 
20 years, with an incidence of 0.3% at 10 years and 0.5% at 
15 years.181 In a retrospective study of 55 patients with angio-
sarcoma of the breast, patients with radiation-associated angio-
sarcoma were on average 30 years older and were less likely 
to present with distant metastases than radiation-naïve patients. 
Clinically, radiation-associated angiosarcoma of the breast may 
occur in the irradiated chest wall after mastectomy or in the irra-
diated breast following segmental resection. The findings at pre-
sentation of a patient with cutaneous angiosarcoma often include 
an expanding erythematous patch, red papular eruptions, bluish-
black lesions, or bruise-like discoloration overlying an area of 
induration. Mammography is often nonspecific, and diagnosis 
requires punch or incisional biopsy.
Cystosarcoma phyllodes are generally not considered to 
be sarcomas, because these tumors are thought to originate from 
hormonally responsive stromal cells of the breast and are usu-
ally benign. In patients with these tumors, infiltrating tumor 
margins, severe stromal overgrowth, atypia, and cellularity have 
all been identified as risk factors for metastases.182
As with sarcomas at other anatomic sites, histopathologic 
grade and tumor size are important prognostic factors for sarco-
mas of the breast. The likelihood of local recurrence increases 
as tumor size increases; tumors smaller than 5 cm are associ-
ated with better overall survival. Local and distant recurrences 
are more common in patients with high-grade lesions. Complete 
excision with negative margins is the primary therapy. Simple 
mastectomy confers no additional benefit if complete excision 
can be accomplished by segmental mastectomy. Because of low 
rates of regional lymphatic spread, axillary dissection is not rou-
tinely indicated. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy 
may be considered for patients with large, high-risk tumors.
Uterine Sarcoma
Sarcomas account for less than 5% of uterine malignancies. 
Uterine sarcomas have been classified into four histologic sub-
groups: uterine leiomyosarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, 
malignant mixed müllerian tumor (carcinosarcoma), and undif-
ferentiated endometrial sarcoma. Five-year overall survival 
rates for patients with uterine sarcoma are 30% to 50%.183 Total 
abdominal hysterectomy (TAH) is recommended for localized 
disease. Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is mandatory only 
in endometrial stromal sarcoma. Because uterine sarcomas are 
rare, the benefits of adjuvant therapy (e.g., chemotherapy, hor-
monal therapy) have not been adequately evaluated. Pelvic post-
operative irradiation has been studied instead in a randomized 
fashion. The results of such study have been reported, showing 
no benefit in survival in favor of radiation therapy.184
Uterine leiomyosarcomas are smooth-muscle tumors and 
account for 35% to 40% of uterine sarcomas. Leiomyosarcoma 
can affect women in their twenties, although it is more com-
monly diagnosed between 50 and 60 years of age. Standard 
treatment is TAH with or without ovarian preservation depend-
ing on the patient’s wishes and menopausal status. Lymph node 
metastasis is present in less than 5% of patients at diagnosis, and 
lymphadenectomy is not recommended. Adjuvant pelvic radia-
tion therapy can be considered for selected high-risk patients. 
Adjuvant chemotherapy is controversial. Gemcitabine plus 
docetaxel has been noted to be well tolerated and highly active, 
with a response rate of 53% in patients with unresectable uter-
ine leiomyosarcoma.127 Doxorubicin and trabectedin have also 
demonstrated activity when used as first- or second-line therapy.
Endometrial stromal sarcomas account for approximately 
7% to 10% of uterine sarcomas. Mitotic count is used to clas-
sify endometrial stromal sarcomas as low grade (<10 mitoses 
per 10 high-power fields) or high-grade (>10 mitoses per 10 
high-power fields). In general, low-grade tumors demonstrate 
an indolent clinical course, while high-grade tumors are more 
aggressive with a poorer prognosis. Unlike other uterine sar-
comas subtypes, endometrial stromal sarcomas express pro-
gesterone receptors and have been found to be responsive to 
hormonal manipulation as an adjuvant therapy or for treatment 
of recurrent disease.185,186 Surgical treatment for these tumors 
includes TAH and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in premeno-
pausal women; postoperative hormone replacement therapy is 
contraindicated.187 Recurrent or advanced disease may respond 
to antiestrogen therapy. Tamoxifen is not recommended because 
it may be proestrogenic in this setting.
Malignant mixed müllerian tumor accounts for 50% of 
uterine sarcomas and arises predominantly in postmenopausal 
women. This tumor is regarded as epithelial and is treated not 
with agents typically used to treat sarcoma but with agents used 
to treat ovarian and endometrial cancers.
Undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma is an aggressive 
malignancy that does not express estrogen or progesterone 
receptors. It is associated with a poor prognosis even in patients 
presenting with localized disease. TAH with or without pres-
ervation of the ovaries is recommended; postoperative pelvic 
radiation therapy may also be administered. Systemic agents for 
other soft tissue sarcomas are used for recurrent and/or meta-
static disease.
GASTROINTESTINAL STROMAL TUMORS
GISTs, which account for the majority of gastrointestinal 
sarcomas, have distinctive molecular features that have been 
characterized over the last decade. These tumors share phe-
notypic similarities with the intestinal pacemaker cells known 
as the interstitial cells of Cajal188; interstitial cells of Cajal and 
GIST cells express the hematopoietic progenitor cell marker 
CD34 and the growth factor receptor c-Kit.189 Expression of the 
c-Kit gene protein product, CD117, has emerged as an impor-
tant defining feature of GISTs. Using these diagnostic criteria, 
the incidence of GIST has been estimated to be 6 to 15 cases 
per million individuals per year.190-192 Until recently, systemic 
1482
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
treatment for patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST was 
of little benefit because these tumors were resistant to conven-
tional chemotherapy. Since the recognition that KIT activation 
occurs in most GISTs, KIT inhibition has emerged as the pri-
mary treatment modality along with surgery.
Approximately 80% of GISTs have a mutation in the gene 
encoding the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase, and 5% to 10% have 
a mutation in the gene encoding the related PDGFRA recep-
tor tyrosine kinase; such mutations result in the expression of 
mutant proteins with constitutive tyrosine kinase activity.1 The 
remaining GISTs do not have a detectable mutation, but lack of 
a mutation does not preclude a diagnosis of GIST if the tumor 
is morphologically typical of GIST. The presence and type of 
KIT (exon 11 or exon 9) or PDGFRA (exon 18) mutation has 
been found to predict tumor response to imatinib. In a phase II 
trial, patients with KIT exon 11 mutations had better response 
rates (83.5% vs. 47.8%) and survival than those with KIT exon 9 
mutations or those without KIT or PDGFRA mutation.193 These 
findings have subsequently been confirmed in two additional 
phase III trials conducted by the EORTC–Italian Sarcoma 
Group–Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group (EORTC-
62005).194,195
The most common locations for GISTs are the stomach 
(60%) and small intestine (30%), but GISTs can arise anywhere 
along the gastrointestinal tract.196 Gastric GISTs have been 
shown to be associated with a more favorable prognosis than 
GISTs at other sites.197 GISTs are most commonly diagnosed 
by upper endoscopy and/or CT of the abdomen as an incidental 
finding in an asymptomatic patient or in a patient being evalu-
ated for symptoms of early satiety, abdominal pain, or gastroin-
testinal bleeding. GIST most frequently metastasizes to the liver 
and/or abdominal cavity.
Radiologic Assessment
FDG-PET has been reported to be useful for preoperative 
staging of GISTs because it may reveal early metastases and 
establish baseline metabolic activity. PET has been shown 
to be highly sensitive in detecting early response to imatinib 
treatment and in predicting long-term response in patients with 
metastatic GIST. If PET is to be used for monitoring response to 
therapy, baseline PET should be performed before initiation of 
treatment. Because PET is still not widely available and because 
PET fails to detect some lesions because of poor glucose uptake, 
new CT-based criteria for detection of GIST and for predicting 
prognosis of GIST have also been proposed.198
Management of Localized Disease
Complete surgical resection with negative margins is the rec-
ommended treatment for localized GISTs. Extended anatomic 
resection and lymphadenectomy are not required. Resection 
of even locally advanced tumors is associated with improved 
survival.199 The 5-year survival rate for all patients with GISTs 
ranges from 20% to 44%, and the 5-year survival rate for 
patients with completely excised early-stage tumors is up to 
75%.199 An analysis of 200 patients by DeMatteo and colleagues 
found a disease-specific survival rate of 54% for patients with 
grossly complete resection of primary GIST, and the median 
survival duration for patients with metastatic disease was only 
20 months.57
As for other soft tissue sarcomas, tumor size has con-
sistently been identified as an important prognostic factor for 
GIST. Mitotic activity has also been identified as an important 
prognostic factor and is generally categorized as fewer than 
5, 5 to 10, or more than 10 mitoses per high-power field. The 
National Institutes of Health200 and the Armed Forces Insti-
tute of Pathology196 have proposed prognostic criteria for risk 
stratification of surgically treated, localized primary GIST. 
Both groups take into account tumor size and mitotic count; the 
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology also includes tumor site as 
a prognostic variable. Accurate risk stratification is essential for 
selecting patients most likely to benefit from adjuvant treatment.
Management of Locally Advanced or 
Metastatic Disease
Treatment with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, ST1571), a selec-
tive inhibitor of the KIT protein tyrosine kinase, has resulted in 
impressive clinical responses in a large percentage of patients 
with unresectable or metastatic GISTs. On the basis of the initial 
results in a single patient with metastatic GIST, the EORTC Soft 
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group initiated a phase I study to 
test the safety and efficacy of imatinib.201 In that study, 53% of 
patients with GISTs had confirmed partial responses; investiga-
tors concluded that imatinib is safe and effective against this 
disease.201 A multicenter, international trial of imatinib for GIST 
was begun in July 2000 at four treatment centers: Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Fox Chase 
Cancer Center, and University Hospital of Helsinki, Finland.202 
A total of 147 patients with unresectable or metastatic GISTs 
were randomized to 400 or 600 mg of imatinib daily for up to 
24 months. Objective response was demonstrated in 79 patients 
(54%); all had partial responses, and there was no significant 
difference in response rate between imatinib doses.203 Fourteen 
percent of patients experienced disease progression. The toxic-
ity profile was acceptable; the predominant effects were gastro-
intestinal effects (diarrhea, nausea), periorbital edema, muscle 
cramps, and fatigue. However, 21% of patients experienced 
serious (grade 3 or 4) adverse events, including gastrointestinal 
bleeding in 5% of patients, most likely related to the rapid tumor 
response of mural lesions.
A phase III randomized Intergroup trial was simultane-
ously performed to assess the clinical activity of imatinib at 
two dose levels for patients with unresectable or metastatic 
GIST expressing the c-Kit tyrosine kinase.204 From Decem-
ber 15, 2000, through September 1, 2001, 746 patients were 
accrued and randomized to low-dose (400 mg/d) or high-dose 
(800 mg/d) imatinib. The primary endpoint of the trial was sur-
vival. Preliminary toxicity data from 325 patients revealed a 
23% incidence of grade 3 or 4 adverse events, including nausea 
and vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, abdominal pain, edema, 
fatigue, and rash.
In February 2002, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
approved imatinib for treatment of GIST based on the results of 
these promising clinical trials. Both the Intergroup trial men-
tioned in the preceding paragraph and a separate phase III trial 
compared the efficacy of low-dose (400 mg/d) and high-dose 
(800 mg/d) imatinib in patients with metastatic or unresectable 
GISTs.205,206 Both studies showed equivalent response rates and 
overall survival for the two doses but increased toxicity for the 
800-mg/d dose. Current recommendations include consideration 
of dose escalation to 800 mg/d for patients who experience dis-
ease progression at a dose of 400 mg/d and for patients with 
advanced GIST and KIT exon 9 mutations.1,207
The optimal duration of imatinib treatment, the duration 
of benefit from imatinib, and the long-term toxicity of imatinib 
1483
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
have not been established. When feasible, imatinib should be 
continued in the absence of disease progression. A randomized 
trial reported worse median progression-free survival in patients 
who stopped imatinib after 1 year than in patients who contin-
ued beyond 1 year (progression-free survival of 6 months vs. 
18 months).208 Less than 4% of patients with GISTs have expe-
rienced serious adverse events with imatinib. Mild gastrointes-
tinal toxicity is the most frequently reported adverse event, but 
gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage, presumably from rapid tumor 
necrosis, has also been reported. Thus, all patients with GISTs 
treated on clinical protocols should be evaluated and followed 
by a team of medical professionals that includes a surgeon.
Many patients with GIST develop resistance to imatinib. 
Primary resistance is defined as clinical progression that devel-
ops during the first 6 months of treatment and is most commonly 
seen in patients with KIT exon 9 mutation, PDGFRA exon 18 
mutation, or no mutations.209 Secondary resistance is defined as 
progression that develops more than 6 months after the start of 
treatment in a patient with an initial response.210 Imatinib resis-
tance should be managed by either dose escalation or transition 
to treatment with sunitinib.1
In 2006, sunitinib malate (SU11248, Sutent, Pfizer) 
emerged as an alternative systemic treatment for patients unable 
to tolerate imatinib and patients with imatinib-refractory GIST. 
Sunitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets multiple 
kinases, including the vascular endothelial growth factor recep-
tors, PDGFRA, KIT, and FLt3. Sunitinib has both antiangio-
genic and antiproliferative activity. In a phase III randomized 
placebo-controlled trial, sunitinib was associated with a signifi-
cant improvement in median time to progression (27.3 weeks 
vs. 6.4 weeks with placebo) in patients with imatinib-resistant 
GIST.131 In addition, sunitinib therapy was well tolerated; diar-
rhea, fatigue, and nausea were the most common adverse effects. 
Sunitinib has also been associated with hand-foot skin reaction, 
hypertension, cardiotoxicity, and hypothyroidism.211-213 In 2006, 
sunitinib was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion for treatment of patients with resistance or intolerance to 
imatinib.
Other tyrosine kinase inhibitors are in development, many 
of which target more than one family of protein kinases.214 
Among these are sorafenib, dasatinib, and nilotinib, which 
are actively being investigated for the treatment of imatinib-­
resistant GIST.215 Everolimus (RAD001) and protein kinase C 
are being investigated as agents that may maximize the extent 
and duration of response to imatinib by blocking potential path-
ways of resistance.
Multidisciplinary Treatment
Although imatinib has improved survival of patients with 
advanced GIST, most patients with advanced GIST are not 
cured with imatinib. Some patients develop secondary resistance 
to imatinib with one or more sites of disease progression after 
6 months of clinical response (Fig. 36-10A [before imatinib], 
Fig. 36-10B [after imatinib]). The mechanisms of imatinib 
resistance are currently being investigated. Surgery has been 
shown to be beneficial for selected patients with isolated disease 
progression during imatinib therapy.216-219 Surgical resection of 
residual metastatic disease responding to imatinib-sensitive 
GIST has also been shown to result in progression-free survival 
in 70% to 96% of patients with imatinib- or sunitinib-sensitive 
GISTs.218-220 The optimal timing of surgery in relation to ima-
tinib therapy for patients with metastatic disease remains to be 
Figure 36-10.  A 57-year-old man with a history of a pelvic 
gastrointestinal stromal tumor involving the small bowel mesen-
tery treated preoperatively with 6 months of imatinib (Gleevec). 
A. Before imatinib. B. After imatinib.
determined. It is not possible to compare outcomes for patients 
treated with kinase inhibitors alone and patients treated with 
kinase inhibitors plus surgical resection outside the context of 
randomized trials given the heterogeneity of patients and biases 
associated with selection of patients for surgical resection.
Postoperative Imatinib
Given the promising results of imatinib therapy for metastatic 
and locally advanced GIST, the next step was to study the 
efficacy of imatinib as adjuvant (postoperative) treatment in 
patients with surgically resectable disease, particularly those 
at high risk for recurrence because of large tumor size or high 
mitotic count. The ACOSOG first evaluated the efficacy of 1 
year of postoperative imatinib in a single-arm phase II trial with 
106 patients with high-risk GIST and compared the results with 
historical controls. Adjuvant treatment with imatinib for GIST 
patients was then examined in two key trials. In the ACOSOG 
randomized, double-blind, phase III Z9001 study,207 treatment 
with 12 months of imatinib was compared with placebo, fol-
lowing complete resection of a primary GIST >3 cm. Primary 
and secondary endpoints were recurrence-free survival (RFS) 
and overall survival (OS), respectively. Results showed a 
1484
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
significant benefit in RFS, but not OS, with 12 months of ima-
tinib. Based on these results, imatinib for the adjuvant treatment 
of adult patients following resection of KIT-positive GIST was 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2008 
and by the European Medical Agency (EMA) in 2009.
A more recent study conducted by the Scandinavian Sar-
coma Group (SSG) and the Sarcoma Group of the Arbeitsge-
meinschaft Internistische Onkologie (AIO; SSGXVIII/AIO 
trial) compared 12 versus 36 months of adjuvant imatinib 400 
mg/d in patients with GIST at high risk of recurrence (defined 
as a GIST tumor diameter >10 cm, or mitotic count >10 per 
50 high-powered fields, or tumor diameter >5 cm and mitotic 
count >5 per 50 high-power fields, or tumor rupture).208 Results 
showed that both RFS and OS significantly improved with 36 
months of imatinib: the 5-year RFS rates for patients receiv-
ing 36 versus 12 months of imatinib were 65.6% versus 47.9%, 
respectively, and the 5-year OS rates were 92% versus 81.7%, 
respectively.
The NCCN and the European Society of Medical Oncol-
ogy now recommend that imatinib be considered for patients 
at intermediate or high risk of recurrence after resection and 
that at least 36 months of adjuvant imatinib be considered for 
patients at high risk of recurrence.221 Further, both the Food and 
Drug Administration and EMA updated the label, extending the 
duration of adjuvant therapy to at least 36 months in patients at 
high risk of recurrence.
Another study, sponsored by the EORTC (EORTC-
62024), compared imatinib for 24 months versus no treat-
ment.209 Results will be soon communicated.
Whether longer treatment durations may be of further 
benefit is still an open question, which will be addressed by 
future studies. However, paralleling what is commonly done 
in the metastatic setting, many investigators believe that even 
adjuvant imatinib should become a chronic therapy. While 
moving toward more prolonged adjuvant treatment durations, 
it is all the more essential to identify the appropriate patients to 
treat to avoid the burden of adverse events or increased finan-
cial liability for patients who will not derive therapeutic ben-
efit from imatinib. Risk stratification based on patients’ risk of 
recurrence is a key component to optimizing adjuvant treatment. 
The most practical stratification scheme to use for making a 
decision for adjuvant therapy is the modified National Insti-
tutes of Health consensus criteria.222 High-risk GIST patients, 
whose tumor harbors a sensitive genotype, should be treated by 
adjuvant imatinib, because they have a poor prognosis. On the 
contrary, neither low-risk nor intermediate-risk GIST patients 
need adjuvant therapy, even if their tumor carries a sensitive 
genotype. In fact, evidence has been provided that the outcome 
of these patients with intermediate- or low-risk GIST is good. 
When using other risk stratification schemes, such as the Armed 
Forces Institute of Pathology table, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center nomogram, or the heat map,197,223,224 there is a 
consensus to treat all patients having 30% or higher risk of 
recurrence, if their tumor carries a sensitive genotype. There is 
also a consensus not to treat patients having 10% or less risk of 
recurrence, even if their tumor carries a sensitive genotype. All 
patients having a risk between 10% and 30% should be evalu-
ated on a case-by-case basis, and advantages/disadvantages of 
treatment should be made clear and discussed with the patient. 
Whenever a decision for adjuvant therapy is made, treatment 
duration of at least 36 months should be considered indepen-
dently from the risk.
Beside the risk of recurrence, the other important factor 
to consider is the tumor genotype. In other words, as found in 
both the metastatic and adjuvant settings, GIST tumors with 
KIT exon 11 and PDGFRA non-D842V mutations are sensi-
tive to imatinib. Patients with these mutations are suitable for 
adjuvant imatinib if the risk determined by stratification tools 
is significant. Patients with KIT exon 9 mutations should also 
be treated; a higher dose (800 mg/d) may be more appropriate 
but remains to be studied clinically. Patients with PDGFRA 
D842V–mutated tumors should not be treated with adjuvant 
imatinib, nor should patients with KIT and PDGFRA wild-
type tumors associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 or the 
pediatric GIST/Carney-Stratakis syndromes, whatever the risk. 
Patients with sporadic wild-type GIST could be treated on an 
individual basis.
Preoperative Imatinib
Patients with marginally resectable GIST or at significant risk 
for operative morbidity should be considered for preoperative 
imatinib with close monitoring. Since the optimal duration of 
preoperative therapy is unknown, imatinib should be continued 
until maximal response is achieved or until there is evidence 
of progression.225 Preoperative imatinib can be stopped imme-
diately before surgery and resumed when oral medications are 
restarted.
Preoperative imatinib in patients with primary GIST or 
resectable metastatic GIST has been evaluated in the context 
of two randomized phase II studies. The Radiation Treatment 
Oncology Group (RTOG 0132/ACRIN 6665) evaluated the 
efficacy of preoperative imatinib (600 mg/d) for 8 to 10 weeks 
before surgery and 24 months after surgery in patients with pri-
mary (n = 30) or potentially resectable recurrent or metastatic 
(n = 22) tumors.226 Primarily stable disease was noted during 
imatinib treatment, and the 2-year progression-free survival rates 
were 83% for primary GIST and 77% for recurrent or metastatic 
GIST.227 In another study, 19 patients undergoing surgical resec-
tion at a single institution were randomized to preoperative ima-
tinib (600 mg/d) for 3, 5, or 7 days followed by surgical resection 
and postoperative imatinib for 24 months. The response rate 
assessed using FDG-PET was 69%, and the median disease-free 
survival time following treatment with surgery and imatinib was 
46 months.228
Similar results were observed in a prospective series of 
patients treated at a major institution.229
All these studies show that neoadjuvant treatment is fea-
sible, but to maximize the benefit of preoperative therapy, the 
following factors need to be considered. First, the patient should 
in principle have a favorable mutational status; otherwise, the 
treatment would be in vane, allowing the tumor to continue 
growing. Fortunately. the majority of GISTs will respond, but 
it should not be forgotten that, especially in gastric location, the 
amount of insensitive mutations in the localized setting is less 
uncommon than what has been previously reported.230 How-
ever, we do not absolutely need to know the mutational status 
in advance, but should be aware that mutation is an issue. Alter-
natively, if mutation status is not determined prior to treatment, 
we may also check response very early, either by CT, PET, 
or contrast-enhanced ultrasound. If a radiographic response is 
detected within a month, then the mutation status is likely favor-
able, and the treatment could be continued without necessarily 
pursuing mutation testing. If not, then mutation status should be 
investigated before continuing the treatment.
1485
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
Second, the resectability of the tumor and the extent of 
resection necessary should be considered. Other than presenta-
tions of clearly inoperable tumors (which are usually treated 
with imatinib upfront) or symptomatic tumors requiring urgent 
intervention (hemorrhage, perforation, etc.), there are few rea-
sons today to perform extended procedures (i.e., multivisceral 
resections or formal organ resections) without first attempting 
preoperative therapy. For instance, patients with large GISTs 
who may require a long midline incision for resection may 
benefit from neoadjuvant imatinib to downstage the operation, 
potentially converting an open laparotomy approach to a laparo-
scopic one. Another typical circumstance in which neoadjuvant 
therapy may be beneficial is in patients with GISTs arising in 
the esophagus, gastroesophageal junction, duodenum, or distal 
rectum. Preoperative treatment may shrink the tumor and allow 
a more conservative local excision. In general, such patients 
would normally undergo postoperative adjuvant treatment as 
well because of the expected recurrence risk. The chance of 
obtaining a response is high and the benefit for tumor shrink-
age obvious, so this approach should always be discussed for 
patients affected by bulky and/or poorly located disease (esoph-
agus, gastroesophageal junction, duodenum, distal rectum) as 
well as for those who would be candidates for an adjuvant treat-
ment anyway.
Third, in the studies mentioned earlier, patients underwent 
surgery after a limited treatment duration (3 months at best). It 
is now well known that the preoperative treatment may result in 
sustained tumor shrinkage if given for a longer duration. Surgi-
cal resection may then be performed between 6 and 12 months 
or sooner if treatment effect plateaus. This allows for optimal 
tumor shrinkage, or at least shrinkage to the point where there 
is no further benefit to be gained by further neoadjuvant therapy 
without the risk of developing secondary resistance.
DESMOIDS
Desmoid tumors are not low-grade sarcomas but can be locally 
aggressive, although they do not metastasize. Approximately 
half of these tumors arise in the extremities; the remaining 
lesions are located on the trunk or in the retroperitoneum. 
Abdominal wall desmoids are associated with pregnancy and 
are thought to be the result of hormonal influence. Although 
usually sporadic, desmoids may occur in association with famil-
ial adenomatous polyposis, a presentation that is referred to as 
Gardner’s syndrome and is linked to germline mutations in the 
APC gene. Sporadic cases of desmoid fibromatosis are com-
monly linked to mutations in CTNNB1, the gene for β-catenin.
The primary therapy for desmoid tumors has long been 
considered surgical resection with wide local excision to 
achieve negative margins. However, local recurrence occurs in 
up to one third of patients independently of the quality of surgi-
cal margins.231-233 Up to two thirds of the patients operated on 
with positive margins do not recur. This is why there is growing 
evidence that the primary approach could be more conserva-
tive. Function-sparing operations should be the goal, even if a 
positive margin is left on a critical structure. Moreover, some 
authors advocate the possibility to observe patients at presen-
tation, limiting surgery to those who progress or fail medical 
therapies. It has in fact been reported that by this approach, 
up to 50% of patients skip surgical resection.234,235 Radiation 
therapy may be effective in patients with unresectable tumors 
or as adjuvant therapy following surgery for recurrent disease, 
although long-term side effects and the risk of radiation-induced 
sarcoma should always be considered. When used, a dose of 50 
to 54 Gy is usually recommended. Systemic treatment is another 
option, when surgery is not indicated. Hormonal therapies such 
as tamoxifen have been reported to be beneficial, as have non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which are known to affect the 
β-catenin signaling pathways. Chemotherapy is also effective, 
although usually reserved for patients with tumor-associated 
symptoms who have not responded to other interventions. Com-
binations of methotrexate and vinblastine have been shown to 
have activity, as have single-agent pegylated liposomal doxo-
rubicin236 and sorafenib.237 Imatinib has also been studied with 
unconvincing results.238-240
DERMATOFIBROSARCOMA PROTUBERANS
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare low-grade sarcoma 
arising in the dermis that rarely metastasizes but is locally 
aggressive. The overall annual incidence has been estimated at 
4.2 cases per million individuals,241 and the incidence is higher 
among blacks than whites (6.5 vs. 3.9 per million per year). 
Approximately 40% of cases arise on the trunk, and most of the 
remaining tumors are distributed between the head and neck and 
the extremities. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans presents as 
a nodular, cutaneous mass that grows slowly and persistently. 
Satellite lesions may be found in patients with larger tumors. 
Standard treatment is wide local excision, which generally 
results in local recurrence rates of less than 10%.242 Although 
local recurrence rates as high as 30% to 50% have been reported 
in population-based series, the associated 5-year survival rate is 
greater than 99%.241
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans arises from a specific 
chromosomal translocation involving chromosomes 17 and 22, 
in which the collagen 1 α 1 gene is fused to the gene for PDGF 
β-chain (PDGFB).243 The resultant deregulated expression of 
PDGFB leads to continuous activation of the PDGFR protein 
tyrosine kinase, which promotes tumor cell growth. The identi-
fication of this chromosomal translocation in more than 90% of 
cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans has led to the devel-
opment of targeted therapy. Inhibiting PDGFR with imatinib 
has been shown to induce clinical and radiologic improvement 
in patients with unresectable dermatofibrosarcoma protuber-
ans.20 These data have resulted in the approval by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration of imatinib for treatment of patients 
with locally advanced dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
PEDIATRIC SARCOMAS
Soft tissue sarcomas in children are relatively rare, accounting 
for 7% to 8% of all pediatric cancers and totaling approximately 
600 new cases per year.244 Pediatric sarcomas have traditionally 
been divided into two groups: rhabdomyosarcoma and nonrhab-
domyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Associated with skeletal muscle, rhabdomyosarcomas are the 
most common soft tissue tumors among children younger than 
15 years and can occur at any site comprised of striated mus-
cle. Patients with these tumors generally present with a pain-
less enlarging mass; about 24% of tumors are located in the 
genitourinary system, 20% in the extremities, 20% in the head 
and neck, 16% in the parameningeal region, and 22% in other 
sites.245
1486
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Rhabdomyosarcoma is a small round cell tumor that dem-
onstrates muscle differentiation upon light microscopy and 
immunohistochemical analysis. Two primary histologic sub-
types account for 90% of cases: embryonal (70%) and alveolar 
(20%). Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma is associated with cytoge-
netic translocation [t(2:13)(q35:q14)] in 85% to 90% of cases 
and [t(1:13)(p36:q14)] in 10% of cases.246 These translocations 
affect biologic activity at the levels of protein function and gene 
expression, thereby affecting the control of cell growth, apopto-
sis, differentiation, and motility and ultimately contributing to 
tumorigenic behavior.247 Whereas alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas 
often have translocations, most embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas 
have an allelic loss at chromosome 11p15.5 that is thought to 
inactivate a tumor suppressor gene.247,248 Both of these distinct 
molecular subtypes of rhabdomyosarcoma are thought to have 
similar alterations in downstream targets such as the p53 and Rb 
pathways.247 Further insight into these genetic alterations may 
lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of rhabdomyo-
sarcoma and provide novel targets for therapeutic approaches.
Extent of disease is the strongest predictor of long-term 
outcome. Several staging systems for rhabdomyosarcoma are 
available. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group 
system is based on surgical-pathologic groupings. Multidis-
ciplinary evaluation including pediatric oncologists, surgical 
subspecialists, and radiation oncologists is critical to plan the 
best treatment approach to maximize local tumor control while 
minimizing long-term treatment effects.
Complete surgical resection is the treatment of choice 
for rhabdomyosarcoma when function and cosmesis can be 
preserved. Patients who are able to undergo a complete tumor 
resection with negative (group I) or microscopic surgical mar-
gins (group II) are able to undergo less intensive systemic ther-
apy and still have overall survival rates approaching 90%.249 At 
some anatomic sites, in particular the head and neck and genito-
urinary system, surgery is often avoided because the associated 
morbidity would be substantial. Recent findings suggest that 
chemotherapy alone can adequately control many such tumors. 
In the second International Society of Paediatric Oncology study 
of rhabdomyosarcoma (MMT84), the choice of local treatment 
was based on response to initial chemotherapy such that radical 
surgery and radiation therapy were avoided in 66% of patients. 
Among the patients who subsequently developed local relapse, 
the 5-year overall survival rate after salvage therapy was 46%.249
Unlike other soft tissue sarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas 
have a high propensity for lymph node metastasis, with rates 
up to 20% to 30% for sites such as the extremities, parates-
ticular nodes, and prostate. Lymph node sampling and, more 
recently, sentinel lymph node mapping have been used to evalu-
ate regional node status in children with rhabdomyosarcoma.
About 15% to 20% of patients with rhabdomyosarcoma have 
distant metastasis at presentation, most commonly (40%–50% of 
cases) to the lungs, followed by bone marrow and bone. However, 
all patients with rhabdomyosarcoma are assumed to have micro-
metastatic disease at presentation. Therefore, multiagent chemo-
therapy is recommended for all patients with rhabdomyosarcoma. 
Combination regimens including vincristine, dactinomycin, and 
cyclophosphamide continue to be the basis of effective curative 
therapy.245 Although various combinations including doxoru-
bicin, ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide have been shown to 
be active against rhabdomyosarcoma, they have not improved 
outcomes.249,250 Radiation therapy is given to most patients with 
microscopic residual disease (group II) after resection.
The prognosis for children with rhabdomyosarcomas is 
related to tumor site, surgical-pathologic grouping, and tumor 
histology. The 5-year disease-free survival rate for all patients 
has been reported to be 65%. Five-year disease-free survival 
rates for patients in groups I, II, III, and IV have been reported to 
be 84%, 74%, 62%, and 23%, respectively (see Table 36-3).251
Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Approximately 60% of soft tissue sarcomas in children are non-
rhabdomyosarcomas. These include numerous histologic subtypes, 
which are generally categorized into four groups: (a) fibrosarcoma, 
(b) Kaposi’s sarcoma, (c) other “specified” soft tissue sarcomas 
(e.g., synovial, angiosarcoma, hemangiopericytoma, leiomyosar-
coma, liposarcoma, and extraosseous Ewing’s sarcoma), and (d) 
“unspecified” soft tissue sarcoma.252 The most common subtypes 
are synovial sarcoma, MPNST, and fibrosarcoma. No single his-
tology accounts for more than 15% of all cases.
As with adult tumors, the evaluation of the soft tissue 
mass begins with a history and physical examination followed 
by imaging, which usually includes MRI. A CT scan of the chest 
is important for evaluation of metastatic disease. A core needle 
biopsy is generally required to establish a diagnosis. Surgery 
remains the primary treatment of nonrhabdomyosarcoma, and 
local control of large, high-grade tumors is improved with radia-
tion therapy. The prognostic factors for children with nonrhab-
domyosarcoma are similar to those for adults, and the role of 
chemotherapy for high-risk tumors is unclear, as for adults.
RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES
As the molecular alterations associated with various sar-
coma subtypes are elucidated, many new potential targets for 
therapeutic intervention will be identified. A wide variety of 
DNA alterations have been observed in sarcomas that result in 
mutated genes encoding proteins ranging from transcription fac-
tors to tyrosine kinases to cytokines.215 The challenge in identi-
fying therapeutic targets in sarcoma is to identify those that are 
specifically important to cellular function. The ideal therapeutic 
target has been described as a single molecule that is critical for 
pathogenesis, is expressed and active, is involved in a single 
pathway amenable to blockade (i.e., no alternative bypass path-
ways exist), and is critical for sarcoma cell survival.24
CONCLUSIONS
Soft tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous family of rare tumors, 
accounting for approximately 1% of malignancies in adults. The 
etiology in the vast majority of patients is sporadic, and the man-
agement of such diverse tumors is complex. Diagnosis by light 
microscopy is inexact, but molecular diagnosis, although still in 
its infancy, holds great promise. The natural history of soft tis-
sue sarcomas is well established. Approximately two thirds of 
cases arise in the extremities, and the remaining one third are dis-
tributed between the retroperitoneum, trunk, abdomen, and head 
and neck. The management algorithm for soft tissue sarcomas is 
complex and depends on tumor stage, site, and histology.  
The most common site of metastasis is the lungs, and metas-
tasis generally occurs within 3 years of diagnosis.
Soft tissue sarcomas have unique molecular profiles that 
contribute to varying responses to systemic therapy. Doxorubi-
cin-based regimens have been the mainstay of treatment for the 
past two decades; however, it is now clear that specific ­histologic 
6
7
1487
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
subtypes have increased sensitivity to specific agents. For exam-
ple, angiosarcomas are more sensitive to paclitaxel, while leio-
myosarcoma is sensitive to gemcitabine and docetaxel. Progress 
in understanding of soft tissue sarcoma biology is crucial 
for the development of additional therapeutic targets.  Drug 
engineering will enable molecular-based therapies to become 
increasingly incorporated into clinical trials and, with success, 
into standard treatment strategies for soft tissue sarcomas in the 
near future.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Demetri GD, Benjamin RS, Blanke CD, et al. NCCN Task Force 
report: management of patients with gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor (GIST)—update of the NCCN clinical practice guidelines. 
J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2007;5(Suppl 2):S1-S29; quiz S30.
2.	Coindre JM, Terrier P, Guillou L, et al. Predictive value of 
grade for metastasis development in the main histologic types 
of adult soft tissue sarcomas: a study of 1240 patients from the 
French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group. Cancer. 
2001;91:1914-1926.
3.	Gronchi A, Miceli R, Colombo C, et al. Primary extremity soft 
tissue sarcomas: outcome improvement over time at a single 
institution. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:1675-1681.
4.	Gronchi A, Pollock R. Surgery in retroperitoneal soft tissue 
sarcoma: a call for a consensus between Europe and North 
America. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:2107-2110.
5.	American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2007. 
Available at: http://www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactssta-
tistics/cancerfactsfigures2007/index.
6.	Gatta G, Van Der Zwan JM, Casali PG, et al. Rare cancers are 
not so rare: the rare cancer burden in Europe. Eur J Cancer. 
2011;47:2493-2511.
7.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10-29.
8.	Gonin-Laurent N, Hadj-Hamou N, Vogt N, et al. RB1 and 
TP53 pathways in radiation-induced sarcomas. Oncogene. 
2007;26:6106-6112.
9.	Brady MS, Gaynor JJ, Brennan MF. Radiation-associated sar-
coma of bone and soft tissue. Arch Surg. 1992;127:1379-1385.
10.	Vorburger SA, Xing Y, Hunt KK, et al. Angiosarcoma of the 
breast. Cancer. 2005;104:2682-2688.
11.	Riad S, Biau D, Holt GE, et al. The clinical and functional out-
come for patients with radiation-induced soft tissue sarcoma. 
Cancer. 2012;118:2682-2692.
12.	Smith AH, Pearce NE, Fisher DO, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma 
and exposure to phenoxyherbicides and chlorophenols in New 
Zealand. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1984;73:1111-1117.
13.	Huang HY, Li CF, Huang WW, et al. A modification of NIH 
consensus criteria to better distinguish the highly lethal subset 
of primary localized gastrointestinal stromal tumors: a subdi-
vision of the original high-risk group on the basis of outcome. 
Surgery. 2007;141:748-756.
14.	Stewart FW. Lymphangiosarcoma in post-mastectomy lymph-
edema. Cancer. 1948;1.
15.	Stewart NJ, Pritchard DJ, Nascimento AG, et al. Lymphan-
giosarcoma following mastectomy. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 
1995;320:135-141.
16.	Kelly-Hope LA, Thomas BC, Bockarie MJ, et al. Lymphatic 
filariasis in the Democratic Republic of Congo; micro-­
stratification overlap mapping (MOM) as a prerequisite for 
control and surveillance. Parasit Vectors. 2011;4:178.
17.	Pardini M, Bonzano L, Roccatagliata L, et al. Functional mag-
netic resonance evidence of cortical alterations in a case of 
reversible congenital lymphedema of the lower limb: a pilot 
study. Lymphology. 2007;40:19-25.
18.	Schiffman S, Berger A. Stewart-Treves syndrome. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2007;204:328.
19.	Demicco EG, Maki RG, Lev DC, et al. New therapeutic tar-
gets in soft tissue sarcoma. Adv Anat Pathol. 2012;19:170-180.
20.	Wunder JS, Nielsen TO, Maki RG, et al. Opportunities for 
improving the therapeutic ratio for patients with sarcoma. 
Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:513-524.
21.	Guillou L, Benhattar J, Gengler C, et al. Translocation-­positive 
low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma: clinicopathologic and molec-
ular analysis of a series expanding the morphologic spectrum 
and suggesting potential relationship to sclerosing epithelioid 
fibrosarcoma: a study from the French Sarcoma Group. Am J 
Surg Pathol. 2007;31:1387-1402.
22.	Levine EA. Prognostic factors in soft tissue sarcoma. Semin 
Surg Oncol. 1999;17:23-32.
23.	Sorensen PH, Triche TJ. Gene fusions encoding chimaeric 
transcription factors in solid tumours. Semin Cancer Biol. 
1996;7:3-14.
24.	Borden EC, Baker LH, Bell RS, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas 
of adults: state of the translational science. Clin Cancer Res. 
2003;9:1941-1956.
25.	Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M. Recent advances in the molecular 
pathology of soft tissue sarcoma: implications for diagnosis, 
patient prognosis, and molecular target therapy in the future. 
Cancer Sci. 2009;100:200-208.
26.	Karnes PS. Neurofibromatosis: a common neurocutaneous 
disorder. Mayo Clin Proc. 1998;73:1071-1076.
27.	Fong Y, Coit DG, Woodruff JM, et al. Lymph node metasta-
sis from soft tissue sarcoma in adults. Analysis of data from 
a prospective database of 1772 sarcoma patients. Ann Surg. 
1993;217:72-77.
28.	Benns M, Dalsing M, Sawchuck A, et al. Soft tissue sarco-
mas may present with deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg. 
2006;43:788-793.
29.	Grimer R, Judson I, Peake D, et al. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcoma. 2010;2010:506182.
30.	Heslin MJ, Smith JK. Imaging of soft tissue sarcomas. Surg 
Oncol Clin N Am. 1999;8:91-107.
31.	Pearlstone DB, Pisters PW, Bold RJ, et al. Patterns of recur-
rence in extremity liposarcoma: implications for staging and 
follow-up. Cancer. 1999;85:85-92.
32.	Roberge D, Hickeson M, Charest M, et al. Initial McGill expe-
rience with fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT staging of soft-tissue 
sarcoma. Curr Oncol. 2010;17:18-22.
33.	Tateishi U, Yamaguchi U, Seki K, et al. Bone and soft-tissue 
sarcoma: preoperative staging with fluorine 18 fluorode-
oxyglucose PET/CT and conventional imaging. Radiology. 
2007;245:839-847.
34.	Iagaru A, Quon A, McDougall IR, et al. F-18 FDG PET/CT 
evaluation of osseous and soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Nucl Med. 
2006;31:754-760.
35.	Piperkova E, Mikhaeil M, Mousavi A, et al. Impact of PET 
and CT in PET/CT studies for staging and evaluating treat-
ment response in bone and soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Nucl 
Med. 2009;34:146-150.
36.	Schuetze SM. Utility of positron emission tomography in sar-
comas. Curr Opin Oncol. 2006;18:369.
37.	Schuetze SM, Rubin BP, Vernon C, et al. Use of positron 
emission tomography in localized extremity soft tissue sar-
coma treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer. 2004; 
103:339-348.
38.	Folpe AL, Lyles RH, Sprouse JT, et al. (F-18) fluorodeoxy-
glucose positron emission tomography as a predictor of patho-
logic grade and other prognostic variables in bone and soft 
tissue sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;6:1279-1287.
39.	Eary JF, O’Sullivan F, Powitan Y, et al. Sarcoma tumor FDG 
uptake measured by PET and patient outcome: a retrospective 
analysis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2002;29:1149-1154.
8
1488
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
40.	Benz MR, Czernin J, Allen-Auerbach MS, et al. FDG-PET/
CT imaging predicts histopathologic treatment responses 
after the initial cycle of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in high-
grade soft-tissue sarcomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15: 
2856-2863.
41.	Kilpatrick SE, Geisinger KR. Soft tissue sarcomas: the use-
fulness and limitations of fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Am J 
Clin Pathol. 1998;110:50-68.
42.	Yang YJ, Damron TA. Comparison of needle core biopsy and 
fine-needle aspiration for diagnostic accuracy in musculoskel-
etal lesions. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2004;128:759-764.
43.	Clark MA, Fisher C, Judson I, et al. Soft-tissue sarcomas in 
adults. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:701-711.
44.	Ayala AG, Ro JY, Fanning CV, et al. Core needle biopsy and 
fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis of bone and soft-tissue 
lesions. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1995;9:633-651.
45.	Dupuy DE, Rosenberg AE, Punyaratabandhu T, et al. Accu-
racy of CT-guided needle biopsy of musculoskeletal neo-
plasms. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1998;171:759-762.
46.	Strauss DC, Qureshi YA, Hayes AJ, et al. The role of core nee-
dle biopsy in the diagnosis of suspected soft tissue tumours. 
J Surg Oncol. 2010;102:523-529.
47.	Skrzynski MC, Biermann JS, Montag A, et al. Diagnostic 
accuracy and charge-savings of outpatient core needle biopsy 
compared with open biopsy of musculoskeletal tumors. J Bone 
Joint Surg. 1996;78:644-649.
48.	Huvos AG. The importance of the open surgical biopsy in the 
diagnosis and treatment of bone and soft-tissue tumors. Hema-
tol Oncol Clin North Am. 1995;9:541-544.
49.	Potter DA, Glenn J, Kinsella T, et al. Patterns of recurrence in 
patients with high-grade soft-tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 
1985;3:353-366.
50.	Noria S, Davis A, Kandel R, et al. Residual disease following 
unplanned excision of a soft-tissue sarcoma of an extremity. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996;78:650-655.
51.	Presant CA, Russell WO, Alexander RW, et al. Soft-tissue and 
bone sarcoma histopathology peer review: the frequency of 
disagreement in diagnosis and the need for second pathology 
opinions. The Southeastern Cancer Study Group experience. 
J Clin Oncol. 1986;4:1658-1661.
52.	Pfeifer J, Hill D, O’Sullivan M, et al. Diagnostic gold standard 
for soft tissue tumours: morphology or molecular genetics? 
Histopathology. 2002;37:485-500.
53.	Fletcher CD, Gustafson P, Rydholm A, et al. Clinicopatho-
logic re-evaluation of 100 malignant fibrous histiocytomas: 
prognostic relevance of subclassification. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 
19:3045-3050.
54.	Tschoep K, Kohlmann A, Schlemmer M, et al. Gene expres-
sion profiling in sarcomas. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007; 
63:111-124.
55.	Coindre JM, Hostein I, Maire G, et al. Inflammatory malig-
nant fibrous histiocytomas and dedifferentiated liposarcomas: 
histological review, genomic profile, and MDM2 and CDK4 
status favour a single entity. J Pathol. 2004;203:822-830.
56.	Coindre JM. Grading of soft tissue sarcomas: review and 
update. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1448-1453.
57.	DeMatteo RP, Lewis JJ, Leung D, et al. Two hundred gastro-
intestinal stromal tumors: recurrence patterns and prognostic 
factors for survival. Ann Surg. 2000;231:51-58.
58.	Coindre JM, Terrier P, Bui NB, et al. Prognostic factors in 
adult patients with locally controlled soft tissue sarcoma. A 
study of 546 patients from the French Federation of Cancer 
Centers Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:869-877.
59.	Guillou L, Coindre JM, Bonichon F, et al. Comparative study 
of the National Cancer Institute and French Federation of Can-
cer Centers Sarcoma Group grading systems in a population 
of 410 adult patients with soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 
1997;15:350-362.
60.	Rubin BP, Fletcher CD, Inwards C, et al. Protocol for the 
examination of specimens from patients with soft tissue 
tumors of intermediate malignant potential, malignant soft tis-
sue tumors, and benign/locally aggressive and malignant bone 
tumors. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1616-1629.
61.	Ramanathan RC, A’Hern R, Fisher C, et al. Modified staging 
system for extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 
1999;6:57-69.
62.	Lahat G, Tuvin D, Wei C, et al. New perspectives for stag-
ing and prognosis in soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2008;15:2739-2748.
63.	Atalay C, Altinok M, Seref B. The impact of lymph node 
metastases on survival in extremity soft tissue sarcomas. 
World J Surg. 2007;31:1433-1437.
64.	Riad S, Griffin AM, Liberman B, et al. Lymph node metastasis 
in soft tissue sarcoma in an extremity. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 
2004;426;129-134.
65.	Behranwala KA, A’Hern R, Omar AM, et al. Prognosis of 
lymph node metastasis in soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2004;11:714-719.
66.	Grobmyer SR, Brennan MF. Predictive variables detailing 
the recurrence rate of soft tissue sarcomas. Curr Opin Oncol. 
2003;15:319-326.
67.	Gronchi A, Lo Vullo S, Colombo C, et al. Extremity soft tissue 
sarcoma in a series of patients treated at a single institution: 
local control directly impacts survival. Ann Surg. 2010;251:506.
68.	Heslin MJ, Cordon-Cardo C, Lewis JJ, et al. Ki-67 detected 
by MIB-1 predicts distant metastasis and tumor mortality in 
primary, high grade extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 
1998;83:490-497.
69.	Ch’ng E, Tomita Y, Zhang B, et al. Prognostic signifi-
cance of CD100 expression in soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 
2007;110:164-172.
70.	Kattan MW, Leung DH, Brennan MF. Postoperative nomo-
gram for 12-year sarcoma-specific death. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 
20:791-796.
71.	Eilber FC, Kattan MW. Sarcoma nomogram: validation 
and a model to evaluate impact of therapy. J Am Coll Surg. 
2007;205:S90-S95.
72.	Dalal KM, Kattan MW, Antonescu CR, et al. Subtype spe-
cific prognostic nomogram for patients with primary liposar-
coma of the retroperitoneum, extremity, or trunk. Ann Surg. 
2006;244:381-391.
73.	Gronchi A, Miceli R, Shurell E, et al. Outcome prediction in 
primary resected retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma: histology-
specific overall survival and disease-free survival nomo-
grams built on major sarcoma center datasets. J Clin Oncol. 
2013;31:1649.
74.	Clasby R, Tilling K, Smith M, et al. Variable management of 
soft tissue sarcoma: regional audit with implications for spe-
cialist care. Br J Surg. 1997;84:1692-1696.
75.	Gutierrez JC, Perez EA, Moffat FL, et al. Should soft tissue 
sarcomas be treated at high-volume centers? An analysis of 
4205 patients. Ann Surg. 2007;245:952-958.
76.	National Institutes of Health. National Institutes of Health 
consensus development panel on limb-sparing treatment of 
adult soft tissue sarcoma and osteosarcomas, Vol. 3, Cancer 
Treatment Symposium, 1985. Available at: http://consensus.
nih.gov/1984/1984SarcomasOsteosarcomas046html.htm.
77.	McKee MD, Liu DF, Brooks JJ, et al. The prognostic signifi-
cance of margin width for extremity and trunk sarcoma. J Surg 
Oncol. 2004;85:68-76.
78.	Herbert SH, Corn BW, Solin LJ, et al. Limb-preserving treat-
ment for soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. The signifi-
cance of surgical margins. Cancer. 1993;72:1230-1238.
79.	Pisters P, Leung D, Woodruff J, et al. Analysis of prognostic 
factors in 1,041 patients with localized soft tissue sarcomas of 
the extremities. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:1679-1689.
1489
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
80.	Alektiar K, Velasco J, Zelefsky M, et al. Adjuvant radiother-
apy for margin-positive high-grade soft tissue sarcoma of the 
extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:1051.
81.	Kim BK, Chen YLE, Kirsch DG, et al. An effective preopera-
tive three-dimensional radiotherapy target volume for extrem-
ity soft tissue sarcoma and the effect of margin width on local 
control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77:843-850.
82.	McKay A, Motamedi M, Temple W, et al. Vascular reconstruc-
tion with the superficial femoral vein following major onco-
logic resection. J Surg Oncol. 2007;96:151-159.
83.	Schwarzbach MH, Hormann Y, Hinz U, et al. Results of limb-
sparing surgery with vascular replacement for soft tissue sar-
coma in the lower extremity. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:88-97.
84.	Karakousis CP, Karmpaliotis C, Driscoll DL. Major vessel 
resection during limb-preserving surgery for soft tissue sarco-
mas. World J Surg. 1996;20:345-349; discussion 350.
85.	Ghert MA, Davis AM, Griffin AM, et al. The surgical and 
functional outcome of limb-salvage surgery with vascular 
reconstruction for soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2005;12:1102-1110.
86.	Brooks A, Gold J, Graham D, et al. Resection of the sciatic, 
peroneal, or tibial nerves: assessment of functional status. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2002;9:41-47.
87.	Ferguson PC, Griffin AM, O’Sullivan B, et al. Bone invasion 
in extremity soft-tissue sarcoma: impact on disease outcomes. 
Cancer. 2006;106:2692-2700.
88.	Lin PP, Pino ED, Normand AN, et al. Periosteal margin in 
soft-tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2007;109:598-602.
89.	Owens JC, Shiu MH, Smith R, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas of 
the hand and foot. Cancer. 2006;55:2010-2018.
90.	Schoenfeld GS, Morris CG, Scarborough MT, et al. Adjuvant 
radiotherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcoma involv-
ing the distal extremities. Am J Clin Oncol. 2006;29:62-65.
91.	Ferguson PC. Surgical considerations for management of dis-
tal extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Curr Opin Oncol. 2005; 
17:366-369.
92.	Davidge K, Bell R, Ferguson P, et al. Patient expectations 
for surgical outcome in extremity soft tissue sarcoma. J Surg 
Oncol. 2009;100:375-381.
93.	Rosenberg SA, Tepper J, Glatstein E, et al. The treatment 
of soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremities: prospective ran-
domized evaluations of (1) limb-sparing surgery plus radia-
tion therapy compared with amputation and (2) the role of 
adjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Surg. 1982;196:305-315.
94.	Lindberg RD, Martin RG, Romsdahl MM, et al. Conservative 
surgery and postoperative radiotherapy in 300 adults with soft-
tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 1981;47:2391-2397.
95.	Suit HD, Proppe KH, Mankin HJ, et al. Preoperative radia-
tion therapy for sarcoma of soft tissue. Cancer. 1981;47: 
2269-2274.
96.	Leibel SA, Tranbaugh RF, Wara WM, et al. Soft tissue sarco-
mas of the extremities: survival and patterns of failure with 
conservative surgery and postoperative irradiation compared 
to surgery alone. Cancer. 1982;50:1076-1083.
97.	McBride CM. Sarcomas of the limbs. Results of adjuvant 
chemotherapy using isolation perfusion. Arch Surg. 1974; 
109:304-308.
98.	Hoekstra HJ, Schraffordt Koops H, Molenaar WM, et al. 
Results of isolated regional perfusion in the treatment of 
malignant soft tissue tumors of the extremities. Cancer. 
1987;60:1703-1707.
99.	Eggermont AM, Schraffordt Koops H, Klausner JM, et al. Iso-
lated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan 
for limb salvage in 186 patients with locally advanced soft tis-
sue extremity sarcomas. The cumulative multicenter European 
experience. Ann Surg. 1996;224:756-764; discussion 764-765.
100.	Fraker D, Alexander HR, Ross M. A phase II trial of isolated 
perfusion with high dose tumor necrosis factor and melphalan 
for unresectable extremity sarcomas. Soc Surg Oncol Proc. 
Abstract 53, 1999.
101.	Lienard D, Ewalenko P, Delmotte JJ, et al. High-dose recom-
binant tumor necrosis factor alpha in combination with inter-
feron gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion of the limbs 
for melanoma and sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10:52-60.
102.	Grunhagen DJ, de Wilt JH, Graveland WJ, et al. Outcome and 
prognostic factor analysis of 217 consecutive isolated limb per-
fusions with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and melphalan for limb-
threatening soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2006;106:1776-1784.
103.	Yang JC, Chang AE, Baker AR, et al. Randomized pro-
spective study of the benefit of adjuvant radiation therapy 
in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. 
J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:197-203.
104.	Pisters PW, Harrison LB, Leung DH, et al. Long-term results 
of a prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in 
soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:859-868.
105.	Suit HD, Spiro I. Role of radiation in the management of 
adult patients with sarcoma of soft tissue. Semin Surg Oncol. 
1994;10:347-356.
106.	Barkley HT Jr, Martin RG, Romsdahl MM, et al. Treatment 
of soft tissue sarcomas by preoperative irradiation and con-
servative surgical resection. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1988;14:693-699.
107.	Wilson AN, Davis A, Bell RS, et al. Local control of soft 
tissue sarcoma of the extremity: the experience of a multi-
disciplinary sarcoma group with definitive surgery and radio-
therapy. Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A:746-751.
108.	Pisters PW, Harrison LB, Woodruff JM, et al. A prospective 
randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in the manage-
ment of low-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity and 
superficial trunk. J Clin Oncol. 1994;12:1150-1155.
109.	Geer RJ, Woodruff J, Casper ES, et al. Management of small 
soft-tissue sarcoma of the extremity in adults. Arch Surg. 
1992;127:1285-1289.
110.	Karakousis CP, Emrich LJ, Rao U, et al. Limb salvage in soft 
tissue sarcomas with selective combination of modalities. Eur 
J Surg Oncol. 1991;17:71-80.
111.	Nielsen OS, Cummings B, O’Sullivan B, et al. Preopera-
tive and postoperative irradiation of soft tissue sarcomas: 
effect of radiation field size. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1991;21:1595-1599.
112.	Tseng JF, Ballo MT, Langstein HN, et al. The effect of pre-
operative radiotherapy and reconstructive surgery on wound 
complications after resection of extremity soft-tissue sarco-
mas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:1209-1215.
113.	O’Sullivan B, Davis AM, Turcotte R, et al. Preoperative 
versus postoperative radiotherapy in soft-tissue sarcoma of 
the limbs: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359:2235-2241.
114.	Davis AM, O’Sullivan B, Turcotte R, et al. Late radiation 
morbidity following randomization to preoperative versus 
postoperative radiotherapy in extremity soft tissue sarcoma. 
Radiother Oncol. 2005;75:48-53.
115.	Janjan NA, Yasko AW, Reece GP, et al. Comparison of 
charges related to radiotherapy for soft-tissue sarcomas treated 
by preoperative external-beam irradiation versus interstitial 
implantation. Ann Surg Oncol. 1994;1:415-422.
116.	Griffin AM, Euler CI, Sharpe MB, et al. Radiation planning 
comparison for superficial tissue avoidance in radiotherapy 
for soft tissue sarcoma of the lower extremity. Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67:847-856.
117.	Hong L, Alektiar KM, Hunt M, et al. Intensity-modulated 
radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma of the thigh. Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;59:752-759.
118.	Alektiar KM, Brennan MF, Singer S. Influence of site on the 
therapeutic ratio of adjuvant radiotherapy in soft-tissue sar-
coma of the extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005; 
63:202-208.
1490
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
119.	Cannon CP, Ballo MT, Zagars GK, et al. Complications of 
combined modality treatment of primary lower extremity soft-
tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2006;107:2455-2461.
120.	Stinson SF, DeLaney TF, Greenberg J, et al. Acute and long-
term effects on limb function of combined modality limb 
sparing therapy for extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;21:1493-1499.
121.	Kepka L, DeLaney TF, Suit HD, et al. Results of radiation 
therapy for unresected soft-tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol 
Biol Phys. 2005;63:852.
122.	Ferrari A, Gronchi A, Casanova M, et al. Synovial sarcoma: 
a retrospective analysis of 271 patients of all ages treated at a 
single institution. Cancer. 2004;101:627-634.
123.	O’Bryan RM, Baker LH, Gottlieb JE, et al. Dose response eval-
uation of adriamycin in human neoplasia. Cancer. 1977;39: 
1940-1948.
124.	Patel SR, Vadhan-Raj S, Papadopolous N, et al. High-dose 
ifosfamide in bone and soft tissue sarcomas: results of phase 
II and pilot studies—dose-response and schedule dependence. 
J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2378-2384.
125.	Movva S, Verschraegen C. Systemic management strate-
gies for metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. Drugs. 2011;71: 
2115-2129.
126.	Patel SR, Gandhi V, Jenkins J, et al. Phase II clinical inves-
tigation of gemcitabine in advanced soft tissue sarcomas and 
window evaluation of dose rate on gemcitabine triphosphate 
accumulation. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3483-3489.
127.	Hensley ML, Maki R, Venkatraman E, et al. Gemcitabine 
and docetaxel in patients with unresectable leiomyosarcoma: 
results of a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2824-2831.
128.	Dileo P, Morgan JA, Zahrieh D, et al. Gemcitabine and vinorel-
bine combination chemotherapy for patients with advanced 
soft tissue sarcomas: results of a phase II trial. Cancer. 
2007;109:1863-1869.
129.	Fata F, O’Reilly E, Ilson D, et al. Paclitaxel in the treatment 
of patients with angiosarcoma of the scalp or face. Cancer. 
1999;86:2034-2037.
130.	Skubitz KM, Haddad PA. Paclitaxel and pegylated-­liposomal 
doxorubicin are both active in angiosarcoma. Cancer. 2005; 
104:361-366.
131.	Demetri GD, van Oosterom AT, Garrett CR, et al. Efficacy 
and safety of sunitinib in patients with advanced gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumour after failure of imatinib: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;368:1329-1338.
132.	Jung S, Kasper B. Palifosfamide, a bifunctional alkylator for 
the treatment of sarcomas. Invest Drugs J. 2010;13:38.
133.	Agulnik M, Okuno S, Von Mehren M, et al. An open-label 
multicenter phase II study of bevacizumab for the treatment 
of angiosarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:10522.
134.	Sleijfer S, Ray-Coquard I, Papai Z, et al. Pazopanib, a mul-
tikinase angiogenesis inhibitor, in patients with relapsed or 
refractory advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study from 
the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer-Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group (EORTC study 
62043). J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:3126-3132.
135.	Ganjoo KN. New developments in targeted therapy for soft 
tissue sarcoma. Curr Oncol Rep. 2010;12:261-265.
136.	Adjuvant chemotherapy for localised resectable soft-­
tissue sarcoma of adults: meta-analysis of individual data. 
Sarcoma Meta-Analysis Collaboration. Lancet. 1997;350: 
1647-1654.
137.	Frustaci S, Gherlinzoni F, De Paoli A, et al. Adjuvant che-
motherapy for adult soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities 
and girdles: results of the Italian randomized cooperative trial. 
J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1238-1247.
138.	Frustaci S, De Paoli A, Bidoli E, et al. Ifosfamide in the 
adjuvant therapy of soft tissue sarcomas. Oncology. 2003;65 
(Suppl 2):80-84.
139.	Cormier JN, Huang X, Xing Y, et al. Cohort analysis of 
patients with localized, high-risk, extremity soft tissue sar-
coma treated at two cancer centers: chemotherapy-associated 
outcomes. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4567-4574.
140.	Grobmyer SR, Maki RG, Demetri GD, et al. Neo-adjuvant 
chemotherapy for primary high-grade extremity soft tissue 
sarcoma. Ann Oncol. 2004;15:1667-1672.
141.	Woll P, Van Glabbeke M, Hohenberger P, et al. Adjuvant che-
motherapy (CT) with doxorubicin and ifosfamide in resected 
soft tissue sarcoma (STS): interim analysis of a randomised 
phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:10008.
142.	O’Connor J, Chacón M, Petracci F, et al. Adjuvant chemother-
apy in soft tissue sarcoma (STS): a meta-analysis of published 
data. ASCO Meeting Abstracts, 2008, Abstract 10526.
143.	Pervaiz N, Colterjohn N, Farrokhyar F, et al. A systematic 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of adjuvant che-
motherapy for localized resectable soft-tissue sarcoma. Can-
cer. 2008;113:573-581.
144.	Eilber FC, Tap WD, Nelson SD, et al. Advances in chemo-
therapy for patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Orthop 
Clin North Am. 2006;37:15-22.
145.	Gronchi A, Frustaci S, Mercuri M, et al. Short, full-dose adju-
vant chemotherapy in high-risk adult soft tissue sarcomas: a 
randomized clinical trial from the Italian Sarcoma Group and 
the Spanish Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:850-856.
146.	 Stacchiotti S, Collini P, Messina A, et al. High-grade soft-tissue 
sarcomas: tumor response assessment—pilot study to assess the 
correlation between radiologic and pathologic response by using 
RECIST and Choi Criteria. Radiology. 2009;251:447-456.
147.	Stacchiotti S, Verderio P, Messina A, et al. Tumor response 
assessment by modified Choi criteria in localized high-risk 
soft tissue sarcoma treated with chemotherapy. Cancer. 
2012;118:5857.
148.	Eilber FC, Rosen G, Eckardt J, et al. Treatment-induced patho-
logic necrosis: a predictor of local recurrence and survival in 
patients receiving neoadjuvant therapy for high-grade extrem-
ity soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3203-3209.
149.	Eilber FC, Brennan MF, Riedel E, et al. Prognostic factors for 
survival in patients with locally recurrent extremity soft tissue 
sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;12:228-236.
150.	Singer S, Antman K, Corson JM, et al. Long-term salvage-
ability for patients with locally recurrent soft-tissue sarcomas. 
Arch Surg. 1992;127:548-553; discussion 553-554.
151.	van Geel AN, Pastorino U, Jauch KW, et al. Surgical treat-
ment of lung metastases: the European Organization for 
Research and Treatment of Cancer-Soft Tissue and Bone Sar-
coma Group study of 255 patients. Cancer. 1996;77:675-682.
152.	Porter GA, Cantor SB, Walsh GL, et al. Cost-effectiveness 
of pulmonary resection and systemic chemotherapy in the 
management of metastatic soft tissue sarcoma: a combined 
analysis from the University of Texas M. D. Anderson and 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centers. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2004;127:1366-1372.
153.	Whooley BP, Mooney MM, Gibbs JF, et al. Effective fol-
low-up strategies in soft tissue sarcoma. Semin Surg Oncol. 
1999;17:83-87.
154.	Midis GP, Pollock RE, Chen NP, et al. Locally recurrent soft 
tissue sarcoma of the extremities. Surgery. 1998;123:666-671.
155.	Karakousis CP, Proimakis C, Rao U, et al. Local recur-
rence and survival in soft-tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 
1996;3:255-260.
156.	Nori D, Schupak K, Shiu MH, et al. Role of brachyther-
apy in recurrent extremity sarcoma in patients treated with 
prior surgery and irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
1991;20:1229-1233.
157.	Suri RM, Deschamps C, Cassivi SD, et al. Pulmonary resec-
tion for metastatic malignant fibrous histiocytoma: an analysis 
of prognostic factors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80:1847-1852.
1491
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
158.	 Van Glabbeke M, van Oosterom AT, Oosterhuis JW, et al. 
Prognostic factors for the outcome of chemotherapy in 
advanced soft tissue sarcoma: an analysis of 2,185 patients 
treated with anthracycline-containing first-line regimens—a 
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer 
Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 
1999;17:150-157.
159.	Zacherl M, Bernhardt GA, Zacherl J, et al. Surgery for liver 
metastases originating from sarcoma-case series. Langenbecks 
Arch Surg. 2011;396:1083-1091.
160.	Jones RL, McCall J, Adam A, et al. Radiofrequency ablation 
is a feasible therapeutic option in the multi modality manage-
ment of sarcoma. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2010;36:477-482.
161.	Maluccio MA, Covey AM, Schubert J, et al. Treatment of 
metastatic sarcoma to the liver with bland embolization. Can-
cer. 2006;107:1617-1623.
162.	Kepka L, Suit HD, Goldberg SI, et al. Results of radia-
tion therapy performed after unplanned surgery (without 
re-­excision) for soft tissue sarcomas. J Surg Oncol. 2005;92: 
39-45.
163.	Spillane AJ, Fisher C, Thomas JM. Myxoid liposarcoma—the 
frequency and the natural history of nonpulmonary soft tissue 
metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 1999;6:389-394.
164.	Estourgie SH, Nielsen GP, Ott MJ. Metastatic patterns of 
extremity myxoid liposarcoma and their outcome. J Surg 
Oncol. 2002;80:89-93.
165.	Lewis JJ, Leung D, Woodruff JM, et al. Retroperitoneal soft-
tissue sarcoma: analysis of 500 patients treated and followed 
at a single institution. Ann Surg. 1998;228:355-365.
166.	Bonvalot S, Raut CP, Pollock RE, et al. Technical consid-
erations in surgery for retroperitoneal sarcomas: position 
paper from E-Surge, a Master Class in Sarcoma Surgery, and 
EORTC–STBSG. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;1-11.
167.	Bonvalot S, Miceli R, Berselli M, et al. Aggressive surgery in 
retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma carried out at high-volume 
centers is safe and is associated with improved local control. 
Ann Surg Oncol. 2010;17:1507-1514.
168.	Yeh JJ, Singer S, Brennan MF, et al. Effectiveness of pal-
liative procedures for intra-abdominal sarcomas. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2005;12:1084-1089.
169.	Windham TC, Pisters PW. Retroperitoneal sarcomas. Cancer 
Control. 2005;12:36-43.
170.	Tierney JF, Mosseri V, Stewart LA, et al. Adjuvant chemo-
therapy for soft-tissue sarcoma: review and meta-analysis of 
the published results of randomised clinical trials. Br J Can-
cer. 1995;72:469-475.
171.	Glenn J, Sindelar WF, Kinsella T, et al. Results of multimo-
dality therapy of resectable soft-tissue sarcomas of the retro-
peritoneum. Surgery. 1985;97:316-325.
172.	Singer S, Corson JM, Demetri GD, et al. Prognostic factors 
predictive of survival for truncal and retroperitoneal soft-­
tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg. 1995;221:185-195.
173.	Pawlik TM, Ahuja N, Herman JM. The role of radiation in 
retroperitoneal sarcomas: a surgical perspective. Curr Opin 
Oncol. 2007;19:359-366.
174.	Pawlik TM, Pisters PW, Mikula L, et al. Long-term results 
of two prospective trials of preoperative external beam radio-
therapy for localized intermediate- or high-grade retroperito-
neal soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:508-517.
175.	Tzeng CW, Fiveash JB, Heslin MJ. Radiation therapy 
for retroperitoneal sarcoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 
2006;6:1251-1260.
176.	Ballo MT, Zagars GK, Pollock RE, et al. Retroperitoneal soft 
tissue sarcoma: an analysis of radiation and surgical treatment. 
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67:158-163.
177.	Conlon KC, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Primary gastrointestinal 
sarcomas: analysis of prognostic variables. Ann Surg Oncol. 
1995;2:26-31.
178.	Chou FF, Eng HL, Sheen-Chen SM. Smooth muscle tumors of 
the gastrointestinal tract: analysis of prognostic factors. Sur-
gery. 1996;119:171-177.
179.	Horowitz J, Spellman JE Jr, Driscoll DL, et al. An institutional 
review of sarcomas of the large and small intestine. J Am Coll 
Surg. 1995;180:465-471.
180.	Meijer S, Peretz T, Gaynor JJ, et al. Primary colorectal sar-
coma. A retrospective review and prognostic factor study of 
50 consecutive patients. Arch Surg. 1990;125:1163-1168.
181.	Kirova YM, Vilcoq JR, Asselain B, et al. Radiation-induced 
sarcomas after radiotherapy for breast carcinoma: a large-
scale single-institution review. Cancer. 2005;104:856-863.
182.	Chen WH, Cheng SP, Tzen CY, et al. Surgical treatment of 
phyllodes tumors of the breast: retrospective review of 172 
cases. J Surg Oncol. 2005;91:185-194.
183.	Denschlag D, Masoud I, Stanimir G, et al. Prognostic fac-
tors and outcome in women with uterine sarcoma. Eur J Surg 
Oncol. 2007;33:91-95.
184.	Reed N, Mangioni C, Malmström H, et al. Phase III ran-
domised study to evaluate the role of adjuvant pelvic radio-
therapy in the treatment of uterine sarcomas stages I and II: an 
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer 
Gynaecological Cancer Group Study (protocol 55874). Eur J 
Cancer. 2008;44:808-818.
185.	Leunen M, Breugelmans M, De Sutter P, et al. Low-grade 
endometrial stromal sarcoma treated with the aromatase inhib-
itor letrozole. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;95:769-771.
186.	Scribner DR Jr, Walker JL. Low-grade endometrial stro-
mal sarcoma preoperative treatment with Depo-Lupron and 
Megace. Gynecol Oncol. 1998;71:458-460.
187.	Grimer R, Judson I, Peake D, et al. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcoma. 2010;2010:506182.
188.	Kindblom LG, Remotti HE, Aldenborg F, et al. Gastrointesti-
nal pacemaker cell tumor (GIPACT): gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors show phenotypic characteristics of the interstitial cells 
of Cajal. Am J Pathol. 1998;152:1259-1269.
189.	Hirota S, Isozaki K, Moriyama Y, et al. Gain-of-function 
mutations of c-kit in human gastrointestinal stromal tumors. 
Science. 1998;279:577-580.
190.	Nilsson B, Bumming P, Meis-Kindblom JM, et al. Gastro-
intestinal stromal tumors: the incidence, prevalence, clini-
cal course, and prognostication in the preimatinib mesylate 
era—a population-based study in western Sweden. Cancer. 
2005;103:821-829.
191.	Rubio J, Marcos-Gragera R, Ortiz MR, et al. Population-based 
incidence and survival of gastrointestinal stromal tumours 
(GIST) in Girona, Spain. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:144-148.
192.	Tran T, Davila JA, El-Serag HB. The epidemiology of malig-
nant gastrointestinal stromal tumors: an analysis of 1,458 cases 
from 1992 to 2000. Am J Gastroenterol. 2005;100:162-168.
193.	Heinrich MC, Corless CL, Demetri GD, et al. Kinase muta-
tions and imatinib response in patients with metastatic gastro-
intestinal stromal tumor. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:4342-4349.
194.	Debiec-Rychter M, Dumez H, Judson I, et al. Use of c-KIT/
PDGFRAmutational analysis to predict the clinical response 
to imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal 
tumours entered on phase I and II studies of the EORTC Soft 
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J Cancer. 2004;40: 
689-695.
195.	Heinrich MC, Owzar K, Corless CL, et al. Correlation of 
kinase genotype and clinical outcome in the North American 
Intergroup phase III trial of imatinib mesylate for treatment 
of advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor: CALGB 150105 
Study by Cancer and Leukemia Group B and Southwest 
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:5360-5367.
196.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: review 
on morphology, molecular pathology, prognosis, and differen-
tial diagnosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1466-1478.
1492
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
197.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: 
pathology and prognosis at different sites. Semin Diagn 
Pathol. 2006;70-83.
198.	Choi H, Charnsangavej C, Faria SC, et al. Correlation of 
computed tomography and positron emission tomography in 
patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor treated 
at a single institution with imatinib mesylate: proposal of 
new computed tomography response criteria. J Clin Oncol. 
2007;25:1753-1759.
199.	Ng EH, Pollock RE, Munsell MF, et al. Prognostic factors 
influencing survival in gastrointestinal leiomyosarcomas. 
Implications for surgical management and staging. Ann Surg. 
1992;215:68-77.
200.	Fletcher CD, Berman JJ, Corless C, et al. Diagnosis of gastro-
intestinal stromal tumors: a consensus approach. Hum Pathol. 
2002;33:459-465.
201.	van Oosterom AT, Judson I, Verweij J, et al. Safety and effi-
cacy of imatinib (STI571) in metastatic gastrointestinal stro-
mal tumours: a phase I study. Lancet. 2001;358:1421-1423.
202.	Blanke CD, von Mehren M, Joensuu H, et al. Evaluation of 
the safety and efficacy of an oral molecularly targeted therapy, 
ST1571, in patients with unresectable metastatic gastrointesti-
nal stromal tumors (GISTs) expressing C-KIT (CD117). Proc 
Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2001;20:1.
203.	von Mehren M, Blanke C, Joensuu H, et al. High incidence 
of durable responses induced by imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) 
in patients with unresectable and metastatic gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2002;21:1608.
204.	Demetri G, Rankin C, Fletcher C, et al. Phase III dose-­
randomized study of imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, ST1571) 
for GIST; intergroup S0033 early results. Proc Am Soc Clin 
Oncol. 2002;21:1651.
205.	Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free sur-
vival in gastrointestinal stromal tumours with high-dose ima-
tinib: randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364:1127-1134.
206.	Blanke CD, Rankin C, Demetri GD, et al. Phase III random-
ized, intergroup trial assessing imatinib mesylate at two dose 
levels in patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointesti-
nal stromal tumors expressing the kit receptor tyrosine kinase: 
S0033. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:626-632.
207.	Zalcberg JR, Verweij J, Casali PG, et al. Outcome of patients 
with advanced gastro-intestinal stromal tumours crossing over 
to a daily imatinib dose of 800mg after progression on 400 mg. 
Eur J Cancer. 2005;41:1751-1757.
208.	Blay JY, Le Cesne A, Ray-Coquard I, et al. Prospective mul-
ticentric randomized phase III study of imatinib in patients 
with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors comparing 
interruption versus continuation of treatment beyond 1 year: 
the French Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1107-1113.
209.	Benjamin RS, Debiec-Rychter M, Le Cesne A, et al. Gas-
trointestinal stromal tumors II: medical oncology and tumor 
response assessment. Semin Oncol. 2009;302-311.
210.	Maleddu A, Pantaleo MA, Nannini M, et al. Mechanisms 
of secondary resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in gas-
trointestinal stromal tumours (review). Oncol Rep. 2009;21: 
1359-1366.
211.	Chu D, Lacouture ME, Weiner E, et al. Risk of hand-foot skin 
reaction with the multitargeted kinase inhibitor sunitinib in 
patients with renal cell and non–renal cell carcinoma: a meta-
analysis. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2009;7:11-19.
212.	Zhu X, Stergiopoulos K, Wu S. Risk of hypertension and renal 
dysfunction with an angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib: system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Acta Oncol. 2009;48:9-17.
213.	Chu TF, Rupnick MA, Kerkela R, et al. Cardiotoxicity asso-
ciated with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. Lancet. 
2007;370:2011.
214.	Boyar MS, Taub RN. New strategies for treating GIST when 
imatinib fails. Cancer Invest. 2007;25:328-335.
215.	Cassier PA, Dufresne A, Fayette J, et al. Emerging drugs for 
the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. Expert Opin Emerg 
Drugs. 2007;12:139-153.
216.	Andtbacka RH, Ng CS, Scaife CL, et al. Surgical resection of 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors after treatment with imatinib. 
Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:14-24.
217.	Desai J, Shankar S, Heinrich MC, et al. Clonal evolution of 
resistance to imatinib in patients with metastatic gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:5398-5405.
218.	DeMatteo RP, Maki RG, Singer S, et al. Results of tyro-
sine kinase inhibitor therapy followed by surgical resec-
tion for metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Ann Surg. 
2007;245:347-352.
219.	Raut CP, Posner M, Desai J, et al. Surgical management of 
advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors after treatment 
with targeted systemic therapy using kinase inhibitors. J Clin 
Oncol. 2006;24:2325-2331.
220.	Gronchi A, Fiore M, Miselli F, et al. Surgery of residual 
disease following molecular-targeted therapy with imatinib 
mesylate in advanced/metastatic GIST. Ann Surg. 2007;245: 
341-346.
221.	The ESMO/European Sarcoma Network Working Group. 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: ESMO clinical recommen-
dations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 
2012;23:49-55.
222.	Joensuu H. Risk stratification of patients diagnosed with 
gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Hum Pathol. 2008;39: 
1411-1419.
223.	Gold JS, Gönen M, Gutiérrez A, et al. Development and vali-
dation of a prognostic nomogram for recurrence-free survival 
after complete surgical resection of localised primary gastro-
intestinal stromal tumour: a retrospective analysis. Lancet 
Oncol. 2009;10:1045-1052.
224.	Joensuu H, Vehtari A, Riihimäki J, et al. Risk of recurrence 
of gastrointestinal stromal tumour after surgery: an analysis of 
pooled population-based cohorts. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:265.
225.	Demetri GD, Antonia S, Benjamin RS, et al. Soft tissue sar-
coma. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2010;8:630-674.
226.	van der Zwan SM, DeMatteo RP. Gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor: 5 years later. Cancer. 2005;104:1781-1788.
227.	Eisenberg BL, Harris J, Blanke CD, et al. Phase II trial of 
neoadjuvant/adjuvant imatinib mesylate (IM) for advanced 
primary and metastatic/recurrent operable gastrointestinal 
stromal tumor (GIST): early results of RTOG 0132/ACRIN 
6665. J Surg Oncol. 2008;99:42-47.
228.	McAuliffe JC, Hunt KK, Lazar AJF, et al. A randomized, 
phase II study of preoperative plus postoperative imatinib 
in GIST: evidence of rapid radiographic response and tem-
poral induction of tumor cell apoptosis. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2009;16:910-919.
229.	Fiore M, Palassini E, Fumagalli E, et al. Preoperative ima-
tinib mesylate for unresectable or locally advanced primary 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). Eur J Surg Oncol. 
2009;35:739-745.
230.	Emile J, Brahimi S, Coindre J, et al. Frequencies of KIT 
and PDGFRA mutations in the MolecGIST prospective 
­population-based study differ from those of advanced GISTs. 
Med Oncol. 2012;29:1765-1772.
231.	Gronchi A, Casali P, Mariani L, et al. Quality of surgery and 
outcome in extra-abdominal aggressive fibromatosis: a series 
of patients surgically treated at a single institution. J Clin 
Oncol. 2003;21:1390-1397.
232.	Lev D, Kotilingam D, Wei C, et al. Optimizing treatment of 
desmoid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1785-1791.
233.	Salas S, Dufresne A, Bui B, et al. Prognostic factors influ-
encing progression-free survival determined from a series of 
sporadic desmoid tumors: a wait-and-see policy according to 
tumor presentation. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:3553-3558.
1493
Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CHAPTER 36
234.	Bonvalot S, Eldweny H, Haddad V, et al. Extra-abdominal pri-
mary fibromatosis: aggressive management could be avoided 
in a subgroup of patients. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2008;34:462-468.
235.	Fiore M, Rimareix F, Mariani L, et al. Desmoid-type fibro-
matosis: a front-line conservative approach to select patients 
for surgical treatment. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009;16:2587-2593.
236.	Constantinidou A, Scurr M, Jones R, et al. Treatment of 
aggressive fibromatosis with pegylated liposomal doxorubi-
cin: The Royal Marsden Hospital experience. J Clin Oncol. 
(Meeting Abstracts), Abstract 10519, 2009.
237.	Gounder MM, Lefkowitz RA, Keohan ML, et al. Activity of 
sorafenib against desmoid tumor/deep fibromatosis. Clin Can-
cer Res. 2011;17:4082-4090.
238.	 Dufresne A, Penel N, Salas S, et al. Updated outcome with long 
term follow-up of imatinib for the treatment of progressive or 
recurrent aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumor): A FNCLCC/
French Sarcoma Group phase II trial. Age. 2009;40:59.
239.	Chugh R, Wathen JK, Patel SR, et al. Efficacy of imatinib in 
aggressive fibromatosis: results of a phase II multicenter Sar-
coma Alliance for Research through Collaboration (SARC) 
trial. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:4884-4891.
240.	Penel N, Le Cesne A, Bui B, et al. Imatinib for progressive 
and recurrent aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumors): an 
FNCLCC/French Sarcoma Group phase II trial with a long-
term follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:452-457.
241.	Criscione VD, Weinstock MA. Descriptive epidemiology of 
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in the United States, 1973 
to 2002. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56:968-973.
242.	Fiore M, Miceli R, Mussi C, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma pro-
tuberans treated at a single institution: a surgical disease with 
a high cure rate. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7669-7675.
243.	McArthur GA. Molecular targeting of dermatofibrosarcoma 
protuberans: a new approach to a surgical disease. J Natl 
Compr Canc Netw. 2007;5:557-562.
244.	Grovas A, Fremgen A, Rauck A, et al. The National Can-
cer Data Base report on patterns of childhood cancers in the 
United States. Cancer. 1997;80:2321-2332.
245.	Meyer WH, Spunt SL. Soft tissue sarcomas of childhood. 
Cancer Treat Rev. 2004;30:269-280.
246.	Barr FG, Chatten J, D’Cruz CM, et al. Molecular assays for 
chromosomal translocations in the diagnosis of pediatric soft 
tissue sarcomas. JAMA. 1995;273:553-557.
247.	Xia SJ, Pressey JG, Barr FG. Molecular pathogenesis of rhab-
domyosarcoma. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002;1:97-104.
248.	Scrable H, Witte D, Shimada H, et al. Molecular differen-
tial pathology of rhabdomyosarcoma. Genes Chromosomes 
Cancer. 1989;1:23-35.
249.	Flamant F, Rodary C, Rey A, et al. Treatment of non-­
metastatic rhabdomyosarcomas in childhood and adoles-
cence. Results of the second study of the International Society 
of Paediatric Oncology: MMT84. Eur J Cancer. 1998;34: 
1050-1062.
250.	Crist WM, Anderson JR, Meza JL, et al. Intergroup rhabdo-
myosarcoma study-IV: results for patients with nonmetastatic 
disease. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3091-3102.
251.	Crist WM, Garnsey L, Beltangady MS, et al. Prognosis in 
children with rhabdomyosarcoma: a report of the intergroup 
rhabdomyosarcoma studies I and II. Intergroup Rhabdomyo-
sarcoma Committee. J Clin Oncol. 1990;8:443-452.
252.	Loeb DM, Thornton K, Shokek O. Pediatric soft tissue sarco-
mas. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:615-627, vii.
This page intentionally left blank 
Inguinal Hernias
Justin P. Wagner, F. Charles Brunicardi, Parviz K. 
Amid, and David C. Chen
37
INTRODUCTION
Inguinal hernia repair is the most commonly performed 
operation in the United States, owing to a significant life-
time incidence and variety of successful treatment modali-
ties. Approximately 800,000 cases were performed in 2003, 
not including recurrent or bilateral hernias.1 Advancements in 
perioperative anesthesia and operative technique have made 
this an outpatient ambulatory operation with low recurrence 
rates and morbidity. Given this success, quality of life and the 
avoidance of chronic pain have become the most important 
considerations in hernia repair.
Approximately 75% of abdominal wall hernias occur in 
the groin. The lifetime risk of inguinal hernia is 27% in men and 
3% in women.2 Of inguinal hernia repairs, 90% are performed 
in men and 10% in women. The incidence of inguinal hernias 
in males has a bimodal distribution, with peaks before the first 
year of age and after age 40. Abramson demonstrated the age 
dependence of inguinal hernias in 1978. Those age 25 to 34 
years had a lifetime prevalence rate of 15%, whereas those age 
75 years and over had a rate of 47% (Table 37-1).3 Approxi-
mately 70% of femoral hernia repairs are performed in women; 
however, inguinal hernias are five times more common than 
femoral hernias. The most common subtype of groin hernia in 
men and women is the indirect inguinal hernia.4
History
Evidence of surgical repair of inguinal hernias can be traced 
back to ancient civilizations of Egypt and Greece.5 Early man-
agement of inguinal hernias often involved a conservative 
approach with operative management reserved only for 
complications. Surgery often involved routine excision of 
the testicle, and wounds were closed with cauterization or left 
to granulate on their own. Considering these procedures were 
performed before the advent of the aseptic technique, it is safe 
to assume that mortality was quite high. For those that survived 
the operation, recurrence of the hernia was common.
From the late 1700s to the early 1800s, physicians 
including Hesselbach, Cooper, Camper, Scarpa, Richter, and 
Gimbernat identified vital components of the inguinal region, 
and their contributions are reflected in the current nomenclature. 
Improved understanding of the anatomy and pathophysiology 
of inguinal hernias, coupled with the development of aseptic 
technique, led surgeons such as Marcy, Kocher, and Lucas-
Championnière to perform sac dissection, high ligation, and 
closure of the internal ring. Outcomes improved, but recurrence 
rates remained high with prolonged follow-up.
Based on a comprehensive understanding of inguinal anat-
omy, Bassini (1844–1924) transformed inguinal hernia repair 
into a successful venture with minimal morbidity. The success 
of the Bassini repair over its predecessors ushered in an era of 
tissue-based repairs. Modifications of the Bassini repair were 
manifest in the McVay and Shouldice repairs. All three of these 
techniques, as well as modern variations such as the Desarda 
operation, are currently practiced.6
In the early 1980s, Lichtenstein popularized the tension-
free repair, supplanting tissue-based repairs with the widespread 
acceptance of prosthetic materials for inguinal floor reconstruc-
tion. This technique was superior to previous tissue-based repair 
in that mesh could restore the strength of the transversalis fascia, 
thereby avoiding tension in the defect closure. Superior results 
were reproducible regardless of hernia size and type, and they 
were achievable among expert and nonexpert hernia surgeons 
alike.7
With the advent of minimally invasive surgery, ingui-
nal hernia repair underwent its most recent transformation. 
Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair offers an alternative 
approach, minimizes postoperative pain, and improves recov-
Introduction	
1495
History / 1495
Anatomy / 1496
Pathophysiology / 1500
Diagnosis	
1502
History / 1502
Physical Examination / 1503
Imaging / 1504
Treatment	
1504
Open Approach / 1505
Laparoscopic Approach / 1509
Prosthesis Considerations / 1513
Complications	
1514
Hernia Recurrence / 1514
Pain / 1514
Cord and Testes Injury / 1515
Laparoscopic Complications / 1515
Hematomas and Seromas / 1516
Outcomes	
1516
chapter 
1
ery. Since the initial description by Ger, the laparoscopic 
method has become significantly more sophisticated. Refine-
ments in approach and technique have led to the development 
of the intraperitoneal onlay mesh, the transabdominal preperi-
toneal (TAPP) repair, and the totally extraperitoneal (TEP) 
repair. Furthermore, an array of prosthetic materials has 
been introduced to minimize recurrence and improve 
quality of life. Irrespective of the approach, successful surgi-
cal treatment of inguinal hernias depends on a sound grasp of 
inguinal anatomy. 
Anatomy
The inguinal canal is an approximately 4- to 6 cm-long cone-
shaped region situated in the anterior portion of the pelvic basin 
(Fig. 37-1). The canal begins on the posterior abdominal wall, 
where the spermatic cord passes through the deep (internal) 
inguinal ring, a hiatus in the transversalis fascia. The canal con-
cludes medially at the superficial (external) inguinal ring, the 
point at which the spermatic cord crosses a defect in the external 
oblique aponeurosis. The boundaries of the inguinal canal are 
comprised of the external oblique aponeurosis anteriorly, the 
internal oblique muscle laterally, the transversalis fascia and 
transversus abdominis muscle posteriorly, the internal oblique 
muscle superiorly, and the inguinal (Poupart’s) ligament infe-
riorly. The spermatic cord traverses the inguinal canal, and it 
contains three arteries, three veins, two nerves, the pampiniform 
venous plexus, and the vas deferens. It is enveloped in three lay-
ers of spermatic fascia.
Additional important structures surrounding the inguinal 
canal include the iliopubic tract, the lacunar ligament, Cooper’s 
1496
Table 37-1
Inguinal hernia prevalence by age
Age (Y)
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75+
Current 
prevalence (%)
12
15
20
26
29
34
Lifetime 
prevalence (%)
15
19
28
34
40
47
Current = repaired hernias excluded; lifetime = repaired hernias included.
Key Points
1 	 Conservative management of asymptomatic inguinal hernias 
is acceptable.
2 	 A proficient understanding of groin anatomy is essential to 
successful inguinal hernia treatment.
3 	 Elective repair of inguinal hernias can be undertaken using an 
laparoscopic or open approach.
4 	 The use of prosthetic mesh as a reinforcement significantly 
improves recurrence rates, whether the repair is open or 
laparoscopic.
5 	 Recurrence, pain, and quality of life are important outcome 
factors.
6 	 Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair results in less pain and 
faster recovery, yet requires specialized training and 
equipment.
2
ligament, and the conjoined tendon (Fig. 37-2). The iliopubic 
tract is an aponeurotic band that begins at the anterior superior 
iliac spine and inserts into Cooper’s ligament from above. It 
forms on the deep inferior margin of the transversus abdomi-
nis and transversalis fascia. The shelving edge of the inguinal 
ligament is a structure that connects the iliopubic tract to the 
inguinal ligament. The iliopubic tract helps form the inferior 
margin of the internal inguinal ring as it courses medially, 
where it continues as the anteromedial border of the femoral 
canal. The lacunar ligament, or ligament of Gimbernat, is the 
triangular fanning of the inguinal ligament as it joins the pubic 
tubercle. Cooper’s (pectineal) ligament is the lateral portion 
of the lacunar ligament that is fused to the periosteum of the 
pubic tubercle. The conjoined tendon is commonly described 
as the fusion of the inferior fibers of the internal oblique and 
transversus abdominis aponeurosis at the point where they 
insert on the pubic tubercle.
Inguinal hernias are generally classified as indirect, 
direct, and femoral based on the site of herniation relative to 
surrounding structures. Indirect hernias protrude lateral to the 
inferior epigastric vessels, through the deep inguinal ring. Direct 
hernias protrude medial to the inferior epigastric vessels, within 
Hesselbach’s triangle. The borders of the triangle are the ingui-
nal ligament inferiorly, the lateral edge of rectus sheath medi-
ally, and the inferior epigastric vessels superolaterally. Femoral 
hernias protrude through the small and inflexible femoral ring. 
The borders of the femoral ring include the iliopubic tract and 
inguinal ligament anteriorly, Cooper’s ligament posteriorly, the 
lacunar ligament medially, and the femoral vein laterally. The 
Nyhus classification categorizes hernia defects by location, size, 
and type (Table 37-2).
1497
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
The laparoscopic approach to hernia repair provides a 
posterior perspective to the peritoneal and preperitoneal spaces 
(Fig. 37-3). Intraperitoneal points of reference are the five 
peritoneal folds, bladder, inferior epigastric vessels, and psoas 
muscle (Fig. 37-4). Two potential spaces exist within the pre-
peritoneum. Between the peritoneum and the posterior lamina 
of the transversalis fascia is Bogros’s (preperitoneal) space. 
This area contains preperitoneal fat and areolar tissue. The most 
medial aspect of the preperitoneal space, that which lies superior 
to the bladder, is known as the space of Retzius. The posterior 
perspective also allows visualization of the myopectineal orifice 
of Fruchaud, a relatively weak portion of the abdominal wall 
that is divided by the inguinal ligament (Fig. 37-5).
The vascular space is situated between the posterior and 
anterior laminae of the transversalis fascia, and it houses the 
inferior epigastric vessels. The inferior epigastric artery supplies 
the rectus abdominis. It is derived from the external iliac artery, 
and it anastomoses with the superior epigastric, a continuation 
of the internal thoracic artery. The epigastric veins course paral-
lel to the arteries within the rectus sheath, posterior to the rectus 
muscles. Inspection of the internal inguinal ring will reveal the 
deep location of the inferior epigastric vessels.
Nerves of interest in the inguinal region are the ilioingui-
nal, iliohypogastric, genitofemoral, and lateral femoral cutaneous 
nerves (Figs. 37-6 and 37-7). The ilioinguinal and iliohypogas-
tric nerves arise together from the first lumbar nerve (L1). The 
Internal ring
External ring
Aponeurotic arch of
transverse abdominus m.
Spermatic cord
Femoral vessels
Inguinal ligament
Inguinal canal
Figure 37-1.  Location and orientation of the inguinal canal within the pelvic basin. Boundaries of the canal include: transversus abdominus and 
transversalis fascia posterior; internal oblique muscle superior; external oblique aponeurosis anterior; inguinal ligament inferior. m. = muscle.
Inguinal ligament
Coccyx
Pubic crest
Superior ramus
of the pubis
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Iliac fossa
Iliopubic tract
Cooper’s ligament
Ischial spine
Body
Pubic symphysis
Adductor longus m.       
Adductor brevis m.
Adductor magnus m.
Gracilis
Figure 37-2.  Ligaments that contribute to the inguinal canal include the inguinal ligament, Cooper’s ligament, and the lacunar ligament. The 
iliopubic tract originates and inserts in a similar fashion to the inguinal ligament, but in a deeper position. m. = muscle.
1498
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
ilioinguinal nerve emerges from the lateral border of the psoas 
major and passes obliquely across the quadratus lumborum. At 
a point just medial to the anterior superior iliac spine, it pierces 
the transversus and internal oblique muscles to enter the inguinal 
canal and exits through the superficial inguinal ring. It supplies 
somatic sensation to the skin of the upper and medial thigh. In 
males, it also innervates the base of the penis and upper scrotum. 
In females, it innervates the mons pubis and labium majus. The 
iliohypogastric nerve arises from T12–L1. After it pierces the 
deep abdominal wall, it courses between the internal oblique and 
transversus abdominis, supplying both. It then divides into lateral 
and anterior cutaneous branches. A common variant is for the ilio-
hypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves to exit around the superficial 
inguinal ring as a single entity. The genitofemoral nerve arises 
from L1–L2, courses along the retroperitoneum, and emerges on 
the anterior aspect of the psoas. It then divides into genital and 
femoral branches. The genital branch enters the inguinal canal 
lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels, and it courses ventral to 
the iliac vessels and iliopubic tract. In males, it travels through 
Table 37-2
Nyhus classification system
Type I
Indirect hernia; internal abdominal ring 
normal; typically in infants, children, 
small adults
Type II
Indirect hernia; internal ring enlarged 
without impingement on the floor of the 
inguinal canal; does not extend to the 
scrotum
Type IIIA
Direct hernia; size is not taken into 
account
Type IIIB
Indirect hernia that has enlarged enough 
to encroach upon the posterior inguinal 
wall; indirect sliding or scrotal hernias 
are usually placed in this category 
because they are commonly associated 
with extension to the direct space; also 
includes pantaloon hernias
Type IIIC
Femoral hernia
Type IV
Recurrent hernia; modifiers A–D are 
sometimes added, which correspond 
to indirect, direct, femoral, and mixed, 
respectively
Inferior epigastric vessels
Cooper’s ligament
Pubic tubercle
Arcuate line
Umbilicus
Linea alba
Rectus muscle
Deep
inguinal
ring
Iliopubic
tract
External iliac
vessels
Indirect
hernia site
Direct
hernia site
Obturator
vessels
Transversus
abdominis
muscle
arch
Superior
anterior
crus
Spermatic cord
Spermatic 
vessels
Femoral canal
Figure 37-3.  Anatomy of the groin region from the posterior perspective.
A
A - Umbilicus
B - Median umbilical ligament 
      (urachus)
C - Medial umbilical ligament 
      (obliterated umbilical vein)
D - Lateral umbilical ligament 
      (inferior epigastric vessels)
E - Lateral fossa (indirect hernia)
F - Medial fossa (direct hernia)
G - Supravesical fossa
B
E
F
Bladder
G
C D
Figure 37-4.  Posterior view of intraperitoneal folds and associ-
ated fossa: A. Umbilicus. B. Median umbilical ligament. C. Medial 
umbilical ligament (obliterated umbilical vein). D. Lateral umbili-
cal ligament (inferior epigastric vessels). E. Lateral fossa (indirect 
hernia). F. Medial fossa (direct hernia). G. Supravesical fossa. 
(Modified with permission from Rowe JS Jr, Skandalakis JE, Gray 
SW. Multiple bilateral inguinal hernias. Am Surg. 1973;39:269.)
1499
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
the superficial inguinal ring and supplies the ipsilateral scrotum 
and cremaster muscle. In females, it supplies the ipsilateral mons 
pubis and labium majus. The femoral branch courses along the 
femoral sheath, supplying the skin of the upper anterior thigh. The 
lateral femoral cutaneous nerve arises from L2–L3, emerges lat-
eral to the psoas muscle at the level of L4, and crosses the iliacus 
muscle obliquely toward the anterior superior iliac spine. It then 
passes inferior to the inguinal ligament where it divides to supply 
the lateral thigh (Fig. 37-8).
The preperitoneal anatomy seen in laparoscopic hernia 
repair led to characterization of important anatomic areas of 
interest, known as the triangle of doom, the triangle of pain, and 
the circle of death (Fig. 37-9).8 The triangle of doom is bordered 
medially by the vas deferens and laterally by the vessels of the 
spermatic cord. The contents of the space include the external 
iliac vessels, deep circumflex iliac vein, femoral nerve, and gen-
ital branch of the genitofemoral nerve. The triangle of pain is a 
region bordered by the iliopubic tract and gonadal vessels, and 
it encompasses the lateral femoral cutaneous, femoral branch 
of the genitofemoral, and femoral nerves. The circle of death 
is a vascular continuation formed by the common iliac, internal 
iliac, obturator, inferior epigastric, and external iliac vessels.
Epigastric vessels
Internal spermatic
vessels
Iliopsoas muscle
Iliopubic
tract
Myopectineal
orifice
External iliac a. and v.
Vas deferens
Obturator n.
Obturator vessels
Lacunar ligament
Cooper's ligament
Figure 37-5.  Posterior view of the myopectineal orifice of Fruchaud. a. = artery; n. = nerve; v. = vein.
Ilioinguinal n.
Iliohypogastric n.
Iliac m.
Lateral femoral
cutaneous n.
Femoral n.
Inguinal ligament
Genitofemoral n.
(femoral branch)
(genital branch)
Iliopectinal arch
Pectineal ligament
Iliopubic tract
Lacunar ligament
Figure 37-6.  Retroperitoneal view of major inguinal nerves and their courses. m. = muscle; n. = nerve.
1500
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Pathophysiology
Inguinal hernias may be congenital or acquired. Most adult 
inguinal hernias are considered acquired defects in the abdomi-
nal wall although collagen studies have demonstrated a heritable 
predisposition. A number of studies have attempted to delin-
eate the precise causes of inguinal hernia formation; however, 
the best-characterized risk factor is weakness in the abdomi-
nal wall musculature (Table 37-3). Congenital hernias, which 
make up the majority of pediatric hernias, can be considered 
an impedance of normal development, rather than an acquired 
weakness. During the normal course of development, the testes 
descend from the intra-abdominal space into the scrotum in the 
third trimester. Their descent is preceded by the gubernaculum 
and a diverticulum of peritoneum, which protrudes through the 
inguinal canal and becomes the processus vaginalis. Between 
36 and 40 weeks of gestation, the processus vaginalis closes 
and eliminates the peritoneal opening at the internal inguinal 
ring.9 Failure of the peritoneum to close results in a patent pro-
cessus vaginalis (PPV), hence the high incidence of indirect 
inguinal hernias in preterm babies. Children with congenital 
indirect inguinal hernias will present with a PPV; however, a 
patent processus does not necessarily indicate an inguinal hernia 
(Fig. 37-10). In a study of nearly 600 adults undergoing general 
laparoscopy, bilateral inspection revealed that 12% had PPV. 
None of these patients had clinically significant symptoms of a 
groin hernia.10 In a group of 300 patients undergoing unilateral 
laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair, 12% were found to have a 
contralateral PPV, which was associated with a fourfold 5-year 
incidence of inguinal hernia.11
Figure 37-7.  Anterior view of the five major nerves of the inguinal region.
Femoral branch of
genitofemoral n.
Ilioinguinal n.
Lateral femoral
cutaneous n.
Medial and intermediate
femoral cutaneous nn.
Saphenous n.
Iliohypogastric n.
Genital branch of
genitofemoral n.
Figure 37-8.  Sensory dermatomes of the major nerves in the groin 
area. n. = nerve.
1501
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
The presence of a PPV likely predisposes a patient to the 
development of an inguinal hernia. This likelihood depends on 
the presence of other risk factors such as inherent tissue weak-
ness, family history, and strenuous activity. Overall, there are 
limited data regarding the etiology of inguinal hernia devel-
opment. Several studies have documented strenuous physical 
activity as a risk factor for acquired inguinal hernia.12,13 Repeated 
physical exertion may increase intra-abdominal pressure; how-
ever, whether this process occurs in combination with a PPV or 
through age-related weakness of abdominal wall musculature is 
unknown. A case-controlled study of over 1400 male patients 
with inguinal hernia revealed that a positive family history was 
associated with an eightfold lifetime incidence of inguinal her-
nia. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease also significantly 
increases the risk of direct inguinal hernias, as it is accompanied 
by repeated episodes of high intra-abdominal pressure.14 Several 
studies have suggested a protective effect of obesity. In a large, 
population-based prospective study of American individuals 
(First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey), the 
risk of inguinal hernia development in obese men was only 50% 
that of normal weight males, whereas the risk in overweight 
males was 80% that of nonobese men. A possible explanation 
is the increased difficulty in detecting inguinal hernias in obese 
individuals.15
Inferolateral border:
iliopubic tract
Deep circumflex
iliac a. & v.
Lateral border:
reflected 
peritoneum
Lat. femoral cutaneous n.
Ant. femoral cutaneous n. or 
other variable branches
Femoral br. of genitofemoral n.
Femoral n.
Superomedial border:
gonadal vessels
Lateral border:
gonadal vessels
Genital branch of
genitofemoral nerve
Iliac vein
Iliac artery
Medial border:
ductus deferens
Posterior border:
peritoneal edge
Deep ring
A
B
Figure 37-9.  Borders and contents of the (A) triangle of doom and (B) triangle of pain. a. = artery; Ant. = anterior; br. = branch; Lat. = 
lateral; n. = nerve; v. = vein. (Modified with permission from Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE. Laparoscopic cadaveric anatomy of the inguinal 
area. Probl Gen Surg. 1995;12:13.)
1502
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Epidemiologic studies have identified risk factors that 
may predispose to a hernia. Microscopic examination of skin 
of inguinal hernia patients demonstrated significantly decreased 
ratios of type I to type III collagen. Type III collagen does not 
contribute to wound tensile strength as significantly as type I 
collagen. Additional analyses revealed disaggregated collagen 
tracts with decreased collagen fiber density in hernia patients’ 
skin.16 Collagen disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are 
also associated with an increased incidence of hernia formation 
(Table 37-4). Recent studies have found an association between 
concentrations of extracellular matrix elements and hernia for-
mation.17 Although a significant amount of work remains to elu-
cidate the biologic nature of hernias, current evidence suggests 
they have a multifactorial etiology with both environmental and 
hereditary influences.
DIAGNOSIS
History
Inguinal hernias present along a spectrum of scenarios. These 
range from incidental discovery to surgical emergencies such 
as incarceration and strangulation of the hernia sac contents. 
Patients who present with a symptomatic groin hernia will 
Table 37-3
Presumed causes of groin herniation
Coughing
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Obesity
Straining
  Constipation
  Prostatism
Pregnancy
Birthweight <1500 g
Family history of a hernia
Valsalva’s maneuver
Ascites
Upright position
Congenital connective tissue disorders
Defective collagen synthesis
Previous right lower quadrant incision
Arterial aneurysms
Cigarette smoking
Heavy lifting
Physical exertion
Figure 37-10.  Varying degrees of closure of the processus vagi-
nalis (PV). A. Closed PV. B. Minimally patent PV. C. Moderately 
patent PV. D. Scrotal hernia.
Table 37-4
Connective tissue disorders associated with groin 
herniation
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Cutis laxa (congenital elastolysis)
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Hurler-Hunter syndrome
Marfan’s syndrome
Congenital hip dislocation in children
Polycystic kidney disease
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
Williams syndrome
Androgen insensitivity syndrome
Robinow’s syndrome
Serpentine fibula syndrome
Alport’s syndrome
Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome
Leriche’s syndrome
Testicular feminization syndrome
Rokitansky-Mayer-Küster syndrome
Goldenhar’s syndrome
Morris syndrome
Gerhardt’s syndrome
Menkes’ syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Pfannenstiel syndrome
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Alopecia-photophobia syndrome
1503
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
frequently report groin pain. Extrainguinal symptoms such as 
a change in bowel habits or urinary symptoms are less com-
mon. Inguinal hernias may compress adjacent nerves, leading 
to generalized pressure, localized sharp pain, and referred pain. 
Pressure or heaviness in the groin is a common complaint, espe-
cially at the conclusion of the day or following prolonged activ-
ity. Sharp pain tends to indicate an impinged nerve and may 
not be related to the extent of physical activity performed by 
the patient. Neurogenic pain may be referred to the scrotum, 
testicle, or inner thigh. Questions should be directed to elicit and 
characterize extrainguinal symptoms. A change in bowel habits 
or urinary symptoms may indicate a sliding hernia consisting 
of intestinal contents or involvement of the bladder within the 
hernia sac.
Important considerations of the patient’s history include 
the duration and timing of symptoms. Hernias will often increase 
in size and content over a protracted time. Much less commonly, 
a patient will present with a history of acute inguinal herniation 
following a strenuous activity. It is more likely that an asymp-
tomatic inguinal hernia became evident once the patient experi-
enced symptoms after an acute event. Questions should also be 
directed to characterize whether the hernia is reducible. Patients 
will often reduce the hernia by pushing the contents back into 
the abdomen, thereby providing temporary relief. As the defect 
size increases and more intra-abdominal contents fill the hernia 
sac, the hernia may become harder to reduce.
Physical Examination
Physical examination is essential to the diagnosis of inguinal 
hernia. Asymptomatic hernias are frequently diagnosed inciden-
tally on physical examination or may be brought to the patient’s 
attention as an abnormal bulge. Ideally, the patient should be 
examined in a standing position to increase intra-abdominal 
pressure, with the groin and scrotum fully exposed. Inspection is 
performed first, with the goal of identifying an abnormal bulge 
along the groin or within the scrotum. If an obvious bulge is not 
detected, palpation is performed to confirm the presence of the 
hernia.
Palpation is performed by advancing the index fin-
ger through the scrotum toward the external inguinal ring 
(Fig. 37-11). This allows the inguinal canal to be explored. 
The patient is then asked to perform Valsalva’s maneuver to 
protrude the hernia contents. These maneuvers will reveal an 
abnormal bulge and allow the clinician to determine whether the 
hernia is reducible or not. Examination of the contralateral side 
affords the clinician the opportunity to compare the presence 
and extent of herniation between sides. This is especially useful 
in the case of a small hernia. In addition to inguinal hernia, a 
number of other diagnoses may be considered in the differential 
of a groin bulge (Table 37-5).
Certain techniques of the physical examination have 
classically been used to differentiate between direct and indi-
rect hernias. The inguinal occlusion test entails the examiner 
blocking the internal inguinal ring with a finger as the patient 
is instructed to cough. A controlled impulse suggests an indi-
rect hernia, while persistent herniation suggests a direct her-
nia. Transmission of the cough impulse to the tip of the finger 
implies an indirect hernia, while an impulse palpated on the 
dorsum of the finger implies a direct hernia. When results of 
physical examination are compared against operative findings, 
there is a probability somewhat higher than chance (i.e., 50%) 
of correctly diagnosing the type of hernia.18,19 Accordingly, 
Figure 37-11.  Digital examination of the inguinal canal.
Table 37-5
Differential diagnosis of groin hernia
Malignancy
  Lymphoma
  Retroperitoneal sarcoma
  Metastasis
  Testicular tumor
Primary testicular
  Varicocele
  Epididymitis
  Testicular torsion
  Hydrocele
  Ectopic testicle
  Undescended testicle
Femoral artery aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm
Lymph node
Sebaceous cyst
Hidradenitis
Cyst of the canal of Nuck (female)
Saphenous varix
Psoas abscess
Hematoma
Ascites
1504
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
these tests should be used to detect hernias, but not to diagnose 
hernia types.
External groin anatomy is difficult to assess in obese 
patients, making the physical diagnosis of inguinal hernia chal-
lenging. A further challenge to the physical examination is 
the identification of a femoral hernia. Femoral hernias should 
be palpable below the inguinal ligament, lateral to the pubic 
tubercle. In obese patients, a femoral hernia may be missed or 
misdiagnosed as a hernia of the inguinal canal. In contrast, a 
prominent inguinal fat pad in a thin patient, otherwise known 
as a femoral pseudohernia, may prompt an erroneous diagnosis 
of femoral hernia.
Imaging
In the case of an ambiguous diagnosis, radiologic investigations 
may be used as an adjunct to history and physical examination. 
Imaging in obvious cases is unnecessary and costly. The most 
common radiologic modalities include ultrasonography (US), 
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI). Each technique has certain advantages over physical 
examination alone; however, each modality is associated with 
potential limitations.
US is the least invasive technique and does not impart any 
radiation to the patient. Anatomic structures can be more easily 
identified by the presence of bony landmarks; however, because 
there are few bones in the inguinal canal, other structures such 
as the inferior epigastric vessels are used to define groin anat-
omy. Positive intra-abdominal pressure is used to elicit the 
herniation of abdominal contents. Movement of these contents 
through the canal is essential to making the diagnosis with US, 
and lack of this movement may lead to a false-negative result. 
A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that US detects inguinal 
hernia with a sensitivity of 86% and specificity of 77%.20 In thin 
patients, normal movement of the spermatic cord and posterior 
abdominal wall against the anterior abdominal wall may lead to 
false-positive diagnoses of hernia.21
CT and MRI provide static images that are able to delin-
eate groin anatomy, to detect groin hernias, and to exclude 
potentially confounding diagnoses (Fig. 37-12). A meta-analysis 
determined that standard CT detects inguinal hernia with a 
sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 65%. Although direct her-
niography has a higher sensitivity and specificity than CT, its 
invasiveness and limited availability restrict its routine use.20 As 
CT imaging increases in resolution, its sensitivity in detecting 
inguinal hernia is expected to expand; however, this has yet to 
be clinically confirmed by surgical correlation.22
When used to diagnose inguinal hernia, MRI is frequently 
reserved for cases where physical examination detects a groin 
bulge, but where US is inconclusive. In a 1999 study of 41 
patients with clinical findings of inguinal hernia, laparoscopy 
revealed that MRI was an effective diagnostic test, with a sen-
sitivity of 95% and specificity of 96%.23 MRI has become more 
sophisticated since 1999; however, its high cost and limited 
access remain obstacles to more routine use.
TREATMENT
Surgical repair is the definitive treatment of inguinal hernias; 
however, operation is not necessary in a subset of patients. 
When the patient’s medical condition confers an unacceptable 
level of operative risk, elective surgery should be deferred 
until the condition resolves, and operations reserved for life-
threatening emergencies. Although the natural history of 
untreated inguinal hernias is poorly defined, the rates of incar-
ceration and strangulation are low in the asymptomatic popu-
lation. As a result, nonoperative management is an appropriate 
consideration in minimally symptomatic patients. Prospective 
studies and meta-analyses have demonstrated no difference in 
intent-to-treat outcomes, quality of life, or cost-effectiveness 
between nonoperative management and elective repair among 
healthy inguinal hernia patients.24,25 A 2012 systematic review 
found that 72% of asymptomatic inguinal hernia patients 
developed symptoms (mostly pain) and had surgical repair 
within 7.5 years of diagnosis.26 Nevertheless, the complication 
rates of immediate and delayed elective tension-free repair are 
equivalent.25,27 A nonoperative strategy is safe for minimally 
symptomatic inguinal hernia patients, and it does not increase 
the risk of developing hernia complications.
Nonoperative inguinal hernia treatment targets pain, pres-
sure, and protrusion of abdominal contents in the symptomatic 
patient population. The recumbent position aids in hernia reduc-
tion via the effects of gravity and a relaxed abdominal wall. 
Trusses externally confine hernias to a reduced state and inter-
mittently relieve symptoms in up to 65% of patients; however, 
they do not prevent complications, and they may be associated 
with an increased rate of incarceration.28 The risks of incarcera-
tion and strangulation appear to decrease over the first year, 
likely because gradual enlargement of the abdominal wall defect 
facilitates spontaneous reduction of hernia contents. The sheer 
volume of protruding tissue in an inguinal hernia does not nec-
essarily signify severe morbidity.
Femoral and symptomatic inguinal hernias carry higher 
complication risks, and so surgical repair is performed earlier 
for these patients. Irrespective of symptoms, one study found the 
3-month and 2-year cumulative incidences of strangulation were 
2.8% and 4.5%, respectively, for inguinal hernias and 22% and 
45%, respectively, for femoral hernias.29 Data from the Swedish 
Hernia Registry demonstrate that emergent operation is associ-
ated with a sevenfold increase in all-cause mortality over that of 
elective surgery among 107,838 groin hernia repairs.30 For this 
reason, it is recommended that femoral hernias and symptomatic 
inguinal hernias be electively repaired, when possible.
Figure 37-12.  Computed tomography scan depicting a large 
right inguinal hernia (arrow). A smaller left inguinal hernia is also 
visualized.
1505
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
The administration of preoperative prophylactic antibiot-
ics in elective inguinal hernia repair remains controversial. A 
systematic review of 7843 elective open hernia repairs from 
the Cochrane Database in 2012 revealed an overall decrease 
in infection rates (odds ratio [OR] 0.64, confidence interval 
[CI] 0.50–0.82) when prophylactic antibiotics are adminis-
tered; however, the absolute risk reduction was not sufficient to 
justify universal recommendations for or against the practice. 
Overall wound infection rates are higher than those expected 
for clean operations, and there was a significant reduction in 
the rate of wound infection among patients undergoing repair 
with a prosthetic mesh.31,32 Although there is no universal guide-
line regarding the administration of prophylactic antibiotics for 
open elective hernia repair, it is our experience that meticulous 
perioperative protocol and surgical technique are more reliable 
countermeasures to prevent wound infection than antibiotics. 
Nevertheless, data trends and quality improvement measures 
have resulted in routine administration of prophylactic periop-
erative antibiotics in inguinal hernia repairs.
Incarceration occurs when hernia contents fail to reduce; 
however, a minimally symptomatic, chronically incarcerated 
hernia may also be treated nonoperatively. Taxis should be 
attempted for incarcerated hernias without sequelae of stran-
gulation, and the option of surgical repair should be discussed 
prior to the maneuver. To perform taxis, analgesics and light 
sedatives are administered, and the patient is placed in the 
Trendelenburg position. The hernia sac is elongated with both 
hands, and the contents are compressed in a milking fashion to 
ease their reduction into the abdomen.
The indication for emergent inguinal hernia repair is 
impending compromise of intestinal contents. As such, stran-
gulation of hernia contents is a surgical emergency. Clinical 
signs that indicate strangulation include fever, leukocytosis, and 
hemodynamic instability. The hernia bulge is usually warm and 
tender, and the overlying skin may be erythematous or discol-
ored. Symptoms of bowel obstruction in patients with sliding or 
incarcerated inguinal hernias may also indicate strangulation. 
Taxis should not be performed when strangulation is suspected, 
as reduction of potentially gangrenous tissue into the abdo-
men may result in an intra-abdominal catastrophe. Preopera-
tively, the patient should receive fluid resuscitation, nasogastric 
decompression, and prophylactic intravenous antibiotics.
Open Approach
Open inguinal hernia repairs are subdivided into techniques that 
employ prostheses to create a tension-free repair and those that 
reconstruct the inguinal floor using native tissue. Tissue repairs 
are indicated when the use of prosthetic material is contraindi-
cated, (contamination or strangulation).
The option to administer locoregional anesthesia is an 
advantage of the open approach. Common anesthetic agents 
include lidocaine or the longer-acting bupivacaine, both with 
the option of adding epinephrine. In advance of the initial inci-
sion, a field block or ilioinguinal nerve block may be employed. 
A regional block is an option for patients who cannot tolerate 
general anesthesia, and it exerts a broader effect than local anes-
thesia alone.
Exposure of the anterior inguinal region is common to 
the open approaches. An oblique or horizontal incision is per-
formed over the groin (Fig. 37-13). The incision begins two 
fingerbreadths inferior and medial to the anterior superior iliac 
spine. It is then extended medially for approximately 6 to 8 cm. 
The  subcutaneous tissue is dissected using electrocautery. 
Scarpa’s fascia is divided to expose the external oblique aponeu-
rosis. A small incision is made in the external oblique aponeu-
rosis parallel to the direction of the muscle fibers. Metzenbaum 
scissors are introduced and spread beneath the fibers to separate 
adhesions to the underlying ilioinguinal nerve. The scissors are 
then used to incise the aponeurosis superior to the inguinal liga-
ment, splitting the external inguinal ring.
The flaps of the external oblique aponeurosis are elevated 
with Hemostat clamps. The interior oblique fibers are dissected 
bluntly from the overlying external oblique flaps. Dissection of 
the inferior flap reveals the shelving edge of the inguinal liga-
ment. The iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves are identified 
and preserved. Effort should be made to avoid removing nerves 
from their natural bed and disrupting the protective investing 
fascia. The pubic tubercle is identified and the cord structures 
are atraumatically dissected off of the pubis, encircled, and ele-
vated with a Penrose drain. The cord is elevated 2 cm over the 
pubic symphysis in an avascular plane, and cremasteric fibers 
are preserved to avoid injuring cord structures (Fig. 37-14).
An indirect hernia sac will generally be found on the 
anterolateral surface of the spermatic cord after division of the 
cremasteric muscle in the direction of its fibers. The genital 
nerve is visualized along the inferolateral surface of the cord 
adjacent to the external spermatic vein. The floor of the ingui-
nal canal is fully assessed for direct hernias. If a hernia is not 
visualized upon entry into the inguinal canal, the preperitoneal 
space should be explored for a femoral hernia. In addition to 
sac identification, the vas deferens and vessels of the sper-
matic cord must be identified to allow dissection of the sac 
from the cord. At the leading edge of the sac, the two layers 
of peritoneum will fold upon themselves and reveal a white 
edge, which may help in the identification of the sac. The sac 
can then be grasped with a tissue forceps and bluntly dissected 
from the cord. The dissection is carried proximally toward the 
deep inguinal ring.
In cases where the viability of sac contents is in question, 
the sac should be incised, and hernia contents should be evalu-
ated for signs of ischemia. The defect should be enlarged to 
augment blood flow to the sac contents. Viable contents may 
be reduced into the peritoneal cavity, while nonviable contents 
should be resected, and synthetic prostheses should be avoided 
in the repair. In elective cases, the sac may be amputated at the 
internal inguinal ring or inverted into the preperitoneum. Both 
methods are effective; however, patients undergoing sac exci-
sion had significantly increased postoperative pain in a prospec-
tive trial.33 Dissection of a densely adherent sac may result in 
injury to cord structures and should be avoided; however, sac 
ligation at the internal inguinal ring is necessary in these cases. 
A hernia sac that extends into the scrotum may require division 
within the inguinal canal, as extensive dissection and reduction 
risks injury to the pampiniform plexus, resulting in testicular 
atrophy and orchitis.
At this point, the inguinal canal is reconstructed, either 
with native tissue or with prostheses. The following sections 
describe the most commonly performed types of tissue-based 
and prosthetic-based reconstructions.
Tissue Repairs.  Tissue-based herniorrhaphy is a suitable alter-
native when prosthetic materials cannot be used safely. Indica-
tions for tissue repairs include operative field contamination, 
emergency surgery, and when the viability of hernia contents 
1506
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is uncertain. General surgeons should understand inguinal 
anatomy and possess the expertise and ability to perform an 
effective tissue-based repair.
Bassini Repair  The Bassini repair was an historic advancement 
in operative technique. Its current use is limited, as modern tech-
niques reduce recurrence. The original repair includes dissection 
of the spermatic cord, dissection of the hernia sac with high 
ligation, and extensive reconstruction of the floor of the inguinal 
canal (Fig. 37-15). After exposing the inguinal floor, the trans-
versalis fascia is incised from the pubic tubercle to the internal 
inguinal ring. Preperitoneal fat is bluntly dissected from the 
upper margin of the posterior side of the transversalis fascia to 
permit adequate tissue mobilization. A triple-layer repair is then 
performed. The internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and 
transversalis fascia are fixed to the shelving edge of the ingui-
nal ligament and pubic periosteum with interrupted sutures. The 
lateral aspect of the repair reinforces the medial border of the 
internal inguinal ring.
Shouldice Repair  The Shouldice repair recapitulates principles 
of the Bassini repair, and its distribution of tension over several 
Standard groin incision
Ex. oblique
Spermatic cord
Camper’s
fascia
Scarpa’s
fascia
Hemostat
External ring
Inguinal
floor
SQ fat
A
Repaired
defect in
transversalis
fascia
Direct hernia
sac
Indirect hernia
sac
Illioinguinal 
nerve
B
Figure 37-13.  A. Layers of the abdominal wall in the anterior open approach to hernia repair. B. Identification of indirect and direct hernia 
sacs with retraction of the spermatic cord and ilioinguinal nerve. Ex. = external; SQ = subcutaneous.
Figure 37-14.  Anterior open exposure of the inguinal canal. m. = 
muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.
1507
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
tissue layers results in lower recurrence rates (Fig. 37-16). During 
dissection of the cord, the genital branch of the genitofemoral 
nerve is routinely divided, resulting in ipsilateral loss of sensa-
tion to the scrotum in men or the mons pubis and labium majus 
in women. With the posterior inguinal floor exposed, an incision 
in the transversalis fascia is made between the pubic tubercle and 
internal ring. Care is taken to avoid injury to preperitoneal struc-
tures, which are bluntly dissected to mobilize the upper and lower 
fascial flaps. At the pubic tubercle, the iliopubic tract is sutured 
to the lateral edge of the rectus sheath using a synthetic, nonab-
sorbable, monofilament suture. This continuous suture progresses 
laterally, approximating the edge of the inferior transversalis flap 
to the posterior aspect of the superior flap. At the internal inguinal 
ring, the suture continues back in the medial direction, approxi-
mating the edge of the superior transversalis fascia flap to the 
shelving edge of the inguinal ligament. At the pubic tubercle, this 
suture is tied to the tail of the original stitch. The next suture 
begins at the internal inguinal ring, and it continues medially, 
apposing the aponeuroses of the internal oblique and transversus 
abdominis to the external oblique aponeurotic fibers. At the pubic 
tubercle, the suture doubles back through the same structures lat-
erally toward the tightened internal ring.
McVay Repair  The McVay repair addresses both inguinal and 
femoral ring defects. This technique is indicated for femoral 
hernias and in cases where the use of prosthetic material is 
contraindicated (Fig. 37-17). Once the spermatic cord has been 
Spermatic
cord
Poupart's
ligament   
Internal abdominal
oblique muscle
External abdominal
oblique aponeurosis
Preperitoneal fat
Transversalis fascia
A
B
EO
TA
TF
IL
IO
Figure 37-15.  Bassini repair. A. The transversalis fascia is opened 
B. Reconstruction of the posterior wall by suturing the transversalis 
fascia (TF), the transversus abdominis muscle (TA), and the internal 
oblique muscle (IO) medially to the inguinal ligament (IL) laterally. 
EO = external oblique aponeurosis.
A
B
Figure 37-16.  Shouldice repair. A. The iliopubic tract is sutured to 
the medial flap of the transversalis fascia and the internal oblique 
and transverse abdominis muscles. B. The second of the four suture 
lines, reversing toward the pubic tubercle approximating the inter-
nal oblique and transversus muscles to the inguinal ligament. Two 
more suture lines affix the internal oblique and transversus muscles 
medially.
Cooper’s ligament
Figure 37-17.  McVay Cooper’s ligament repair.
1508
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
isolated, an incision in the transversalis fascia permits entry 
into the preperitoneal space. The upper flap is mobilized by 
gentle blunt dissection of underlying tissue. Cooper’s ligament 
is bluntly dissected to expose its surface. A 2- to 4-cm relaxing 
incision is made in the anterior rectus sheath vertically from the 
pubic tubercle. This incision is essential to reduce tension on the 
repair; however, it may result in increased postoperative pain 
and higher risk of ventral abdominal herniation. Using either 
interrupted or continuous suture, the superior transversalis flap 
is then fastened to Cooper’s ligament, and the repair is contin-
ued laterally along Cooper’s ligament to occlude the femoral 
ring. Lateral to the femoral ring, a transition stitch is placed, 
affixing the transversalis fascia to the inguinal ligament. The 
transversalis is then sutured to the inguinal ligament laterally to 
the internal ring.
Prosthetic Repairs.  The popularization of tension-free pros-
thetic mesh repairs signified a paradigm shift in the surgical 
concept of inguinal hernia pathophysiology. Mesh-based her-
nioplasty is the most commonly performed general surgical 
procedure, owing to the technique’s efficacy and improved 
outcomes. The techniques of the most commonly performed 
prosthetic repairs are presented in this section.
Lichtenstein Tension-Free Repair  The Lichtenstein technique 
expands the domain of the inguinal canal by reinforcing the 
inguinal floor with a prosthetic mesh, thereby minimizing ten-
sion in the repair (Fig. 37-18). Initial exposure and mobiliza-
tion of cord structures is identical to other open approaches. 
The inguinal canal is dissected to expose the shelving edge of 
the inguinal ligament, the pubic tubercle, and sufficient area for 
mesh. The mesh is a 7 × 15 cm rectangle with a rounded medial 
edge, and it must be large enough to extend 2 to 3 cm superior 
to Hesselbach’s triangle. The lateral portion of the mesh is split 
such that the superior tail comprises two thirds of its width, and 
the inferior tail comprises the remaining one third. The medial 
edge of the mesh is affixed to the anterior rectus sheath such 
that it overlaps the pubic tubercle by 1.5 to 2 cm. This refine-
ment to the original Lichtenstein technique minimizes medial 
recurrence.34
For fixation of the inferior margin of the mesh, a perma-
nent, synthetic, monofilament suture is used, taking care to 
avoid placing sutures directly into the periosteum of the pubic 
tubercle. Fixation is continued along the shelving edge of the 
inguinal ligament from medial to lateral, ending at the internal 
ring. The upper tail of the mesh is then fixed to the internal 
oblique aponeurosis and the medial edge to the rectus sheath 
using a synthetic, absorbable suture.
In the case of a femoral hernia, a triangular extension of 
the inferior aspect of the mesh is sutured to Cooper’s ligament 
medially and to the inguinal ligament laterally. The lateral tails 
of the mesh are tailored to fit snugly around the cord at the 
internal ring, but not too tight to strangulate it. The tails are then 
sutured to the inguinal ligament with an interrupted stitch and 
placed beneath the external oblique aponeurosis.
Plug and Patch Technique  A modification of the Lichtenstein 
repair, the plug and patch technique was developed by Gilbert 
and later popularized by Rutkow and Robbins.35 Prior to plac-
ing the prosthetic mesh patch over the inguinal floor, a three-
dimensional prosthetic plug is placed in the space previously 
occupied by the hernia sac (Fig. 37-19). In the case of an indirect 
Figure 37-18.  Lichtenstein tension-free hernioplasty. m. = muscle; 
n. = nerve; v. = vein.
Slit
A
B
Figure 37-19.  Plug and patch repair. A. A plug may be created 
from a flat piece of mesh, or a preformed, commercially available 
plug is placed in the internal ring. B. Final view of the repair fol-
lowing placement of the plug and patch.
1509
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
hernia, the plug is placed alongside the spermatic cord through 
the internal ring. Prosthetic plugs of various sizes are available, 
and one of appropriate size is fixed to the margins of the inter-
nal ring with interrupted sutures.36 For direct hernias, the sac 
is reduced, and the plug is sutured to Cooper’s ligament, the 
inguinal ligament, and the internal oblique aponeurosis.
Prolene Hernia System  The Prolene Hernia System (PHS) 
repair provides reinforcement to the anterior and posterior 
aspects of the abdominal wall. Exposure of the inguinal canal 
is identical to that of other open approaches. With an indirect 
hernia, the sac is dissected from the spermatic cord, and the pre-
peritoneal space is bluntly dissected through the internal ring. 
With a direct hernia, the transversalis fascia is opened at the 
defect, and the preperitoneal space is bluntly dissected to create 
space for the mesh. The mesh has an underlay flap and an onlay 
flap, joined by a short cylindrical connector (Fig. 37-20). The 
underlay portion of the mesh is then placed through the hernia 
defect into the preperitoneal space. The advantage of the pre-
peritoneal mesh position is that increased intra-abdominal pres-
sure pushes the mesh into closer apposition to the abdominal 
wall. The overlay flap reinforces the inguinal floor similar to a 
tension-free repair. The spermatic cord is placed through a slit 
in the onlay portion of the mesh. Three to four circumferential 
interrupted sutures anchor the anterior layer of the mesh to the 
inguinal canal floor.
Wound Closure.  Once the reconstruction of the inguinal canal 
is complete, the cord contents are returned to their anatomic 
position. The external oblique aponeurosis is then reapproxi-
mated continuously from medial to lateral using an absorb-
able suture. The external ring should be reconstructed in close 
apposition to the spermatic cord to avoid the appearance of 
recurrence on future examination. Scarpa’s fascia and skin are 
appropriately closed.
Giant Prosthetic Reinforcement of the Visceral Sac.  In 
giant prosthetic reinforcement of the visceral sac, also known as 
the Stoppa repair, a broad prosthetic mesh is placed in the pre-
peritoneal space from an anterior approach. In unilateral repair, 
an 8- to 10-cm Pfannenstiel or low transverse incision is made 
above the internal inguinal ring. The lateral aspect of the rectus 
sheath and the oblique muscles are divided along the length of 
the incision. The transversalis is incised, and the preperitoneal 
space is dissected widely (Fig. 37-21). The preperitoneal dissec-
tion is carried medially to expose Cooper’s ligament and later-
ally over the iliopubic tract to the anterior superior iliac spine. 
If bilateral hernias are present, a lower midline incision allows 
for access and the preperitoneal dissection spans the entire area 
between both anterior superior iliac spines and both inguinal 
canals. For direct defects, the transversalis fascia may be sutured 
to Cooper’s ligament to obliterate the sac’s laxity. Indirect her-
nias require directed dissection from the internal ring. Large or 
densely adherent indirect hernia sacs are dissected from the cord 
at the internal ring and ligated, and the peritoneum is closed.
The mesh should be large enough to cover the area from 
the midline to 1 cm medial to the anterior superior iliac spine 
and from the umbilicus to the pubic symphysis. The middle por-
tion and lower corners of the mesh are clamped. The mesh is 
placed flat along the inferior margin of the preperitoneal space 
(Fig. 37-22). The medial clamp is directed into the space of 
Retzius, the middle clamp is placed over the pubic ramus and 
iliac vessels, and the lateral clamp is placed into the iliac fossa 
cover the spermatic cord. Splitting the mesh to accommodate 
the cord may predispose to hernia recurrence. Alternatively, 
the mesh may be fixed with interrupted sutures to the anterior 
abdominal wall; however, care must be taken to avoid injuring 
the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve and the inferior epigastric 
vessels. For bilateral hernias, a single large mesh is placed into 
the preperitoneal space using up to eight clamps along its infe-
rior edge. The transversalis is reapproximated and the wound 
is closed.
Laparoscopic Approach
Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repairs reinforce the abdominal 
wall via a posterior approach. Principal laparoscopic methods 
include the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair, the 
totally extraperitoneal (TEP) repair, and the less commonly 
performed intraperitoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) repair.
Although laparoscopic repairs in experienced hands are rel-
atively expedient, they necessitate the administration of general 
anesthesia and its inherent risks. Any patient with a contraindica-
tion to the use of general anesthesia should not undergo laparo-
scopic hernia repair. Occasionally, general anesthesia induction 
may result in reduction of an incarcerated or strangulated ingui-
nal hernia. If the surgeon suspects this might have occurred, the 
abdomen should be explored for nonviable tissue either via lapa-
roscopy or upon conversion to an open laparotomy.
The indications for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair are 
similar to those for open repair.  Most surgeons would agree that 
the laparoscopic approach to bilateral or recurrent ingui-
nal hernias is superior to the open approach.37 Concurrent 
inguinal hernia repair should be considered if a hernia patient 
Figure 37-20.  The Prolene Hernia System prosthesis.
Peritoneum
Preperitonial
space
Abdominal 
wall
Mesh
Figure 37-21.  Extensive dissection of the preperitoneal space on 
both sides will accommodate a large prosthesis.
3
1510
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
is scheduled to undergo another clean laparoscopic procedure, 
such as prostatectomy.38,39 International Endohernia Society 
(IEHS) guidelines offer a Grade A recommendation that TEP 
and TAPP are preferred alternatives to Lichtenstein repair for 
recurrent hernias after open anterior repair.40 The possibility of 
bilateral repair should be discussed with all patients undergoing 
laparoscopic inguinal hernia surgery.
The operating room configuration is identical for TAPP, 
TEP, and IPOM procedures. The patient is placed in the 
Trendelenburg position, and video screens are placed at the foot 
of the bed. The surgeon stands contralateral to the hernia, and 
the assistant stands opposite the surgeon. The patient’s arms are 
tucked to the sides. Fig. 37-23 demonstrates a typical operating 
room setup for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. The follow-
ing sections outline the most commonly performed laparoscopic 
inguinal hernia repair techniques.
Transabdominal Preperitoneal Procedure.  The transab-
dominal approach confers the advantage of an intraperitoneal 
perspective, which is useful for bilateral hernias, large hernia 
defects, and scarring from previous lower abdominal surgery. 
The abdominal cavity is accessed using a dissecting trocar or 
open Hasson technique. Pneumoperitoneum is instilled to a level 
of 15 mmHg. Two 5-mm trocars are placed lateral and slightly 
inferior to the umbilical trocar, avoiding injury to the inferior 
epigastric vessels (Fig. 37-24). The patient is then placed in the 
Trendelenburg position, and the pelvis is inspected.
The bladder, median and medial umbilical ligaments, 
external iliac, and inferior epigastric vessels are visualized. 
An incision is made in the peritoneum at the medial umbilical 
ligament 3 to 4 cm superior to the hernia defect, and it is carried 
laterally to the anterior superior iliac spine. For bilateral inguinal 
hernia repair, bilateral peritoneal incisions are advisable, leav-
ing a midline bridge of tissue to avoid injuring a potential patent 
urachus. The inferior edge of incised peritoneum is retracted, 
and the preperitoneum is dissected to expose the spermatic cord. 
If a direct hernia is encountered, the sac is inverted and fixed 
to Cooper’s ligament to prevent development of hematoma or 
seroma. An indirect hernia sac will usually protrude anterior to 
the spermatic cord. In this case, the sac is grasped and elevated 
superiorly from the cord and the space below is developed 
bluntly to allow for mesh placement. The sac is dissected from 
its adhesions, and the cord is skeletonized.
The mesh usually measures 10 × 15 cm to completely 
cover the myopectineal orifice (Fig. 37-25). It is rolled length-
wise and placed through the 12-mm trocar. It is unrolled in the 
preperitoneal space and secured medially to Cooper’s ligament 
using a spiral tacker. During this fixation, the surgeon palpates 
the end of the tacker from the abdominal surface to ensure its 
proper angle and to stabilize the pelvis. The mesh is then pulled 
taut and fixed lateral to the anterior superior iliac spine. Tacks 
are placed above the iliopubic tract to avoid injury to the lat-
eral cutaneous nerve of the thigh and the femoral branch of the 
genitofemoral nerve. The peritoneal edges are reapproximated 
using tacks or intracorporeal sutures as the mesh is stabilized. 
The peritoneum should be closed completely to avoid contact 
between the mesh and the intestine. The abdomen is desufflated 
and the trocars are removed. The fascial defect of the 12-mm 
port and the skin incisions are appropriately closed.
C
A
B
D
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
H
H
E
E
F
F
G
G
Figure 37-22.  Giant prosthetic reinforcement of the visceral sac. A. Exposure of the preperitoneal space. B. Dissection of the hernia sac from 
the spermatic cord. C. Reduction of the sac and elevation of the cord. D. Orientation and placement of the giant mesh.
1511
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
Totally Extraperitoneal Procedure.  The advantage of the 
TEP repair is the access to the preperitoneal space without intraper-
itoneal infiltration. Consequently, this approach minimizes the risk 
of injury to intra-abdominal organs and port site herniation through 
an iatrogenic defect in the abdominal wall. As with TAPP, TEP is 
indicated for repair of bilateral inguinal hernias or for unilateral 
hernias when scarring makes the anterior approach challenging.
A small horizontal incision is made inferior to the umbi-
licus. Subcutaneous tissue is dissected to the level of the ante-
rior rectus sheath, which is then incised lateral to the linea alba. 
The rectus muscle is retracted superolaterally, and a dissect-
ing balloon is advanced through the incision toward the pubic 
symphysis. Under direct visualization with a 30° laparoscope, 
the balloon is inflated slowly to bluntly dissect the preperi-
toneal space (Fig. 37-26). The dissecting balloon is replaced 
with a 12-mm balloon trocar, and pneumopreperitoneum is 
achieved by insufflation to 15 mmHg. A 5-mm trocar is placed 
suprapubically in the midline, and another is placed inferior 
to the insufflation port (see Fig. 37-24). The patient is placed 
in the Trendelenburg position, and the operation proceeds in 
an identical fashion to TAPP. No modifications are necessary 
to repair bilateral inguinal hernias with the TEP approach. 
Figure 37-23.  Operating room setup for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.
1512
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
B
A
 
Figure 37-24.  Trocar placement for (A) transabdominal preperitoneal repair and (B) totally extraperitoneal repair.
Figure 37-25.  View of mesh placement in posterior repairs. A 
large mesh overlaps the myopectineal orifice.
Figure 37-26.  Balloon dissection of the preperitoneal space in a 
totally extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair.
1513
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
Any peritoneal rents should be repaired prior to desufflation to 
prevent mesh from contacting intraperitoneal structures. Fol-
lowing mesh placement, the preperitoneal space is desufflated 
slowly under direct vision to ensure proper mesh positioning. 
Trocars are removed, and the anterior rectus sheath is closed 
with an interrupted suture.
Intraperitoneal Onlay Mesh Procedure.  In contrast to TAPP 
and TEP, the IPOM procedure permits the posterior approach 
without preperitoneal dissection. It is an attractive procedure in 
cases where the anterior approach is unfeasible, in recurrent her-
nias that are refractory to other approaches, or where extensive 
preperitoneal scarring would make TEP or TAPP challenging. 
Port placement and inguinal hernia identification are identical to 
TAPP. Hernia sac contents are reduced; however, the sac itself 
is not inverted from the preperitoneal space. Instead, mesh is 
placed directly over the defect and fixed in place with sutures 
or spiral tacks. Because these anchors are placed through the 
peritoneum without preperitoneal inspection, the lateral cutane-
ous nerve of the thigh and the genitofemoral nerve are especially 
prone to injury. Furthermore, intraperitoneal mesh migration is 
a documented phenomenon that can lead to postoperative mor-
bidity, recurrence, and reoperation.
Prosthesis Considerations
The success of prosthetic repairs has generated considerable 
debate about the desirable physical attributes of mesh and their 
fixation. An ideal mesh should be easy to handle, flexible, 
strong, immunologically inert, contraction-resistant, infection-
resistant, and inexpensive to manufacture.41 The following 
section reviews the most common types of mesh and fixatives 
currently available.
Synthetic Mesh Material.  Polypropylene and polyester are 
the most common synthetic prosthetic materials used in her-
nia repair. These materials are permanent and hydrophobic, 
and they promote a local inflammatory response that results in 
cellular infiltration and scarring with slight contraction in size. 
Other synthetic mesh materials are under investigation with the 
goals of minimizing postoperative pain and preventing infection 
or recurrence. In selecting mesh material, considerations include 
mesh absorbability, thickness, weight, porosity, and strength.
Variations in the fiber diameter and fiber count of mesh 
materials categorize them as heavyweight or lightweight in 
density. Commonly used lightweight mesh materials include 
β-d-glucan, titanium-coated polypropylene, and polypropylene-
poliglecaprone. These materials have greater elasticity and 
less theoretical surface area contact with surrounding tissues 
than their heavyweight counterparts.42 Accordingly, they are 
hypothesized to reduce scarring and chronic pain with equiva-
lent recurrence rates. The use of lightweight mesh in TEP and 
TAPP repairs is associated with fewer 3-month cumulative 
mesh-related complications.40 A 2012 meta-analysis of 2310 
patients undergoing open or laparoscopic hernia repairs found 
a lower incidence of chronic pain (relative risk [RR] 0.61, 
CI 0.50–0.74) following use of lightweight mesh versus 
heavyweight mesh, and no significant difference in rates 
of recurrence.43 When available, lightweight mesh should be 
considered for all prosthetic repairs to minimize postoperative 
chronic pain. 
A disadvantage of currently available commercial pros-
theses is their high cost. In settings where resources are limited, 
prosthetic repairs are performed using alternative materials. 
Polypropylene and polyethylene mosquito nets are inexpensive 
and ubiquitous in sub-Saharan Africa and India, and they have 
similar mechanical properties to commercially available hernio-
plasty meshes. Meta-analysis of 577 hernioplasties performed 
using sterilized mosquito nets demonstrated similar rates of 
short-term mesh-related complications (6.1%) and recurrence 
(0.17%) to those using commercial meshes.44 Furthermore, the 
disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) prevented by inguinal 
hernia repair signify a comparable impact to that of vaccination 
in sub-Saharan Africa.45,46 Expensive prostheses are not neces-
sarily needed for hernia surgery, either in resource-limited or in 
resource-abundant settings, and the anticipated benefits should 
be evaluated with consideration of increased costs.
Biologic Mesh.  Although indications for the use of biologic 
prostheses have not been absolutely defined, they are commonly 
reserved for contaminated cases or when domain expansion is 
necessary in the face of high infection risk. There are numer-
ous biologic materials available with differing properties, but 
in general, they have lower tensile strength and subsequent 
higher rates of rupture than synthetic prostheses.47 They also 
have varying degrees of tensile strength and tissue biocompat-
ibility between them. In ventral hernia repairs, xenograft mate-
rial was associated with a lower rate of recurrence than allograft 
material.48 A review of biologic materials concluded that cross-
linked graft materials are more durable and less prone to failure 
than non–cross-linked grafts.49 Nevertheless, their diminished 
ability to remodel adversely affects rates of infection and incor-
poration. While new prosthetic materials continue to be devel-
oped, no single biologic warrants routine use. These materials 
will continue to evolve, and they remain an important tool for 
challenging cases when used judiciously.
Fixation Technique.  Independent of prosthesis material, the 
method of its fixation remains disputed. Suturing, stapling, and 
tacking prostheses entail tissue perforation, which may cause 
inflammation, neurovascular injury, and chronic pain devel-
opment. Conversely, improper prosthesis fixation may result 
in mesh migration, repair failure, meshoma pain, and hernia 
recurrence. Mesh may be fixed with fibrin-derived glue, and 
self-gripping mesh has been developed to minimize trauma 
to surrounding tissues and to reduce the risk for entrapment 
neuropathy. For hernias repaired via a strictly preperitoneal 
approach, prosthesis fixation may not be necessary at all.
Fibrin glue fixation is a successful alternative to tack fixa-
tion in hernia repair with a synthetic prosthesis. Recent stud-
ies comparing fibrin glue fixation and suture fixation in open 
hernia repair show superior rates of chronic pain with both 
Lichtenstein and plug and patch techniques.50,51 Meta-analyses of 
laparoscopic hernia repair determined the incidence of chronic 
postoperative pain after tacker fixation was significantly higher 
than after fibrin glue fixation, with one showing an RR of 4.64 
(CI 1.9–11.7). Rates of other postoperative complications and 
recurrence were similar between both fixation methods.52,53 
Glue fixation is a promising technical refinement; however, its 
questionable efficacy in larger hernias, long-term outcomes, and 
cost remain considerations.
In TEP repairs, fixation of mesh may not be compulsory. 
A prospective randomized trial comparing fixation and no fixa-
tion in TEP repairs found a significant increase in new pain and 
equivalent recurrence rates in the fixation group several months 
after repair.54 A 2012 meta-analysis comparing laparoscopic 
tacker mesh fixation to no mesh fixation found no statistically 
significant differences in operative duration, pain, mesh-related 
4
1514
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Table 37-6
Complications of groin hernia repairs
Recurrence
Chronic groin pain
  Nociceptive
    Somatic
    Visceral
  Neuropathic
    Iliohypogastric
    Ilioinguinal
    Genitofemoral
    Lateral cutaneous
    Femoral
Cord and testicular
  Hematoma
  Ischemic orchitis
  Testicular atrophy
  Dysejaculation
  Division of vas deferens
  Hydrocele
  Testicular descent
Bladder injury
Wound infection
Seroma
Hematoma
  Wound
  Scrotal
  Retroperitoneal
Osteitis pubis
Prosthetic complications
  Contraction
  Erosion
  Infection
  Rejection
  Fracture
Laparoscopic
  Vascular injury
    Intra-abdominal
    Retroperitoneal
    Abdominal wall
    Gas embolism
  Visceral injury
    Bowel perforation
    Bladder perforation
  Trocar site complications
    Hematoma
    Hernia
    Wound infection
    Keloid
  Bowel obstruction
    Trocar or peritoneal closure site hernia
    Adhesions
  Miscellaneous
    Diaphragmatic dysfunction
    Hypercapnia
General
  Urinary
  Paralytic ileus
  Nausea and vomiting
  Aspiration pneumonia
  Cardiovascular and respiratory insufficiency
complications, recurrence, or length of stay between the two 
methods.55 Studies of three-dimensional, ergonomically con-
toured mesh without fixation, as well as self-gripping meshes, 
have yielded similar results.56 In the preperitoneal approach, the 
re-approximation of surrounding tissues and physiologic intra-
abdominal pressure hypothetically prevent mesh migration. 
Due to higher theoretical risk of mesh migration, repair with-
out fixation is not recommended for anterior or transperitoneal 
approaches.
COMPLICATIONS
As with other clean operations, the most common complications 
of inguinal hernia repair include bleeding, seroma, wound infec-
tion, urinary retention, ileus, and injury to adjacent structures 
(Table 37-6). Complications specific to herniorrhaphy and her-
nioplasty include hernia recurrence, chronic inguinal and pubic 
pain, and injury to the spermatic cord or testis. The incidence, 
prevention, and treatment of these complications are discussed 
in the ensuing section.
Hernia Recurrence
When a patient develops pain, bulging, or a mass at the site 
of an inguinal hernia repair, clinical entities such as seroma, 
persistent cord lipoma, and hernia recurrence should be con-
sidered. Common medical issues associated with recurrence 
include malnutrition, immunosuppression, diabetes, steroid use, 
and smoking. Technical causes of recurrence include improper 
mesh size, tissue ischemia, infection, and tension in the recon-
struction. A focused physical examination should be performed. 
As with primary hernias, US, CT, or MRI can elucidate ambigu-
ous physical findings. When a recurrent hernia is discovered and 
warrants re-operation, an approach through a virgin plane facili-
tates its dissection and exposure. Extensive dissection of the 
scarred field and mesh may result in injury to cord structures, 
viscera, large blood vessels, and nerves. After an initial anterior 
approach, the posterior laparoscopic approach will usually be 
easier and more effective than another anterior dissection. Con-
versely, failed preperitoneal repairs should be approached using 
an open anterior repair.
Pain
Pain after inguinal hernia repair is classified into acute or 
chronic manifestations of three mechanisms: nociceptive 
(somatic), neuropathic, and visceral pain. Nociceptive pain is 
the most common of the three. Because it is usually a result of 
ligamentous or muscular trauma and inflammation, nociceptive 
pain is reproduced with abdominal muscle contraction. Treat-
ment consists of rest, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), and reassurance, as it resolves spontaneously in 
most cases. Neuropathic pain occurs as a result of direct nerve 
damage or entrapment. It may present early or late, and it mani-
fests as a localized, sharp, burning or tearing sensation. It may 
respond to pharmacologic therapy and to local steroid or anes-
thetic injections when indicated. Visceral pain refers to pain 
conveyed through afferent autonomic pain fibers. It is usually 
poorly localized and may occur during ejaculation as a result of 
sympathetic plexus injury.
Chronic postoperative pain remains an important measure 
of clinical outcome that has been reported in as many as 63% of 
inguinal hernia repair cases.57–59 Despite the significant anatomic 
variation in the three inguinal nerves, literature reviews suggest 
1515
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
identification of all three nerves is possible in 70% to 90% of 
cases.60 Meticulous nerve identification may prevent injury that 
results in debilitating chronic postoperative pain syndromes. 
Notwithstanding, moderate-to-severe pain adversely affects 
physical activity, social interactions, healthcare utilization, 
employment, and productivity in 6% to 8% of patients.58,59,61–64 
Pain in this subset of patients comprises a tremendous individ-
ual and societal burden.
Post-herniorrhaphy inguinodynia is a debilitating chronic 
complication caused by a combination of nociceptive, neuro-
pathic, and visceral elements. Its incidence is independent of 
the method of hernia repair; however, the original operative 
technique determines options for intervention and remedial 
surgery.62 Treatment is based on repair technique, subsequent 
re-operations, pain character, and the presence of recurrence, 
meshoma, and fixation material. Selective ilioinguinal, iliohy-
pogastric, and genitofemoral neurolysis or neurectomy, removal 
of mesh and fixation material, and revision of the repair are 
common options for treatment. Nevertheless, anatomic varia-
tion and cross-innervation of the inguinal nerves in the retro-
peritoneum and inguinal canal make selective neurectomy less 
reliable.65–69 When inguinodynia is refractory to pharmacologic 
and interventional measures, triple neurectomy with removal of 
meshoma is arguably the most effective option for the major-
ity of patients.64, 67–74 Refractory inguinodynia with concurrent 
orchialgia also requires resection of the paravasal nerves.74
Other chronic pain syndromes include local nerve entrap-
ment, meralgia paresthetica, and osteitis pubis. At greatest risk 
of entrapment are the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves 
in anterior repairs and the genitofemoral and lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerves in laparoscopic repairs. Clinical manifesta-
tions of nerve entrapment mimic acute neuropathic pain, and 
they occur with a dermatomal distribution. Injury to the lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerve results in meralgia paresthetica, a 
condition characterized by persistent paresthesias of the lateral 
thigh. Initial treatment of nerve entrapment consists of rest, ice, 
NSAIDs, physical therapy, and possible local corticosteroid and 
anesthetic injection. Osteitis pubis is characterized by inflam-
mation of the pubic symphysis and usually presents as medial 
groin or symphyseal pain that is reproduced by thigh adduc-
tion. Avoiding the pubic periosteum when placing sutures and 
tacks reduces the risk of developing osteitis pubis. CT scan or 
MRI excludes hernia recurrence, and bone scan is confirmatory 
for the diagnosis. Initial treatment is identical to that of nerve 
entrapment; however, if pain remains intractable, orthopedic 
surgery consultation should be sought for possible bone resec-
tion and curettage. Irrespective of treatment, the condition often 
takes 6 months to resolve.75
Cord and Testes Injury
Injury to spermatic cord structures may result in ischemic orchi-
tis or testicular atrophy. Ischemic orchitis is likely caused by 
injury to the pampiniform plexus and not to the testicular artery. 
It usually manifests within 1 week of inguinal hernia repair as an 
enlarged, indurated, and painful testis, and it is almost certainly 
self-limited. It occurs in <1% of primary hernia repairs; how-
ever, this figure is larger for recurrent inguinal hernia repairs.76 
US will demonstrate testicular blood flow to differentiate 
between ischemia and necrosis. Emergent orchiectomy is only 
necessary in the case of necrosis. Injury to the testicular artery 
also may lead to testicular atrophy, which is manifest over a pro-
tracted period. Treatment for ischemic orchitis most frequently 
consists of reassurance, NSAIDs, and comfort measures. Intra-
operatively, proximal ligation of large hernia sacs to avoid cord 
manipulation minimizes the risk of injury.
Injury to the vas deferens within the cord may lead to 
infertility. In open inguinal hernia repairs, isolating the vas 
deferens along with the cord structures using digital manipula-
tion may cause injury or disruption. In laparoscopic approach, 
grasping the vas may result in a crush injury. Transections of 
the vas deferens should be addressed with a urologic consult 
and early anastomosis, if possible. Historically, surgeons and 
their patients speculated that synthetic material would increase 
the risks of mesh rejection, carcinogenesis, and inflammation; 
however, as mesh became used more frequently, these concerns 
did not manifest. Nevertheless, one study found prosthetic mesh 
may exert long-term deleterious effects upon the vas deferens, 
causing azoospermia.77 Similar studies report varied results, 
though. A recent prospective study from the Swedish Hernia 
Registry discovered no difference in rates of patient-reported 
infertility between the general population and patients who 
underwent either mesh or tissue-based inguinal hernia repair.78 
Chronic scarring may lead to vas deferens obstruction, result-
ing in decreased fertility rates and a dysejaculation syndrome. 
Pain and burning during ejaculation are usually self-limited, and 
more common causes, such as sexually transmitted diseases, 
should be excluded.
In females, the round ligament is the analog to the sper-
matic cord, and it maintains uterine anteversion. Injury to the 
artery of the round ligament does not result in clinically signifi-
cant morbidity.
Laparoscopic Complications
In general, the risks of the TEP technique mirror those of open 
anterior repairs, as the peritoneal space is not violated. Com-
plications of transabdominal laparoscopy include urinary reten-
tion, paralytic ileus, visceral injuries, vascular injuries, and less 
commonly, bowel obstruction, hypercapnia, gas embolism, and 
pneumothorax. The most common complications of laparo-
scopic inguinal hernia repair are presented in this section.
Urinary Retention.  The most common cause of urinary reten-
tion after hernia repair is general anesthesia, which is routine 
in laparoscopic hernia repairs. Among 880 patients undergoing 
inguinal hernia repair with local anesthesia only, 0.2% devel-
oped urinary retention, whereas the rate of urinary retention 
was 13% among 200 patients undergoing repair with general or 
spinal anesthesia.79 Other risk factors for postoperative urinary 
retention include pain, narcotic analgesia, and perioperative 
bladder distention. Initial treatment of urinary retention requires 
decompression of the bladder with short-term catheterization. 
Patients will generally require an overnight admission and trial 
of normal voiding before discharge. Failure to void normally 
requires reinsertion of the catheter for up to a week. Chronic 
requirement of a urinary catheter is rare, although older patients 
may require prolonged catheterization.
Ileus and Bowel Obstruction.  The laparoscopic transab-
dominal approach is associated with a higher incidence of ileus 
than other modes of repair. This complication is self-limited; 
however, it necessitates sustained inpatient observation, intra-
venous fluid maintenance, and possibly nasogastric decom-
pression. Abdominal imaging may be helpful to confirm the 
diagnosis and to exclude bowel obstruction. Prolonged absence 
of bowel function, in conjunction with a suspicious abdominal 
1516
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
series, should raise concern for obstruction. In this case, CT of 
the abdomen is helpful to distinguish anatomic sites of obstruc-
tion, inflammation, and ischemia. In TAPP repairs, obstruction 
occurs most commonly secondary to herniation of bowel loops 
through peritoneal defects or large trocar insertion sites; how-
ever, the use of smaller trocars and the preponderance of TEP 
repairs have reduced the frequency of this complication. True 
obstruction warrants reoperation.
Visceral Injury.  Small bowel, colon, and bladder are at risk 
for injury in laparoscopic hernia repair. The presence of intra-
abdominal adhesions from previous surgeries may predispose to 
visceral injuries. Direct bowel injuries may also result from tro-
car placement. In reoperative abdominal surgery, open Hasson 
technique and direct visualization of trocars are recommended 
to reduce the likelihood of visceral injury. Bowel injury may 
also occur secondary to electrocautery and instrument trauma 
outside of the camera field. Missed bowel injuries are associated 
with increased mortality. If injury to the bowel is suspected, its 
entire length should be examined, and conversion to open repair 
may be necessary.
Bladder injuries are less common than visceral injuries, 
and they are usually associated with perioperative bladder dis-
tention or extensive dissection of perivesical adhesions. As with 
bladder injuries encountered in open surgery, cystotomies must 
be repaired in several layers with 1 to 2 weeks of Foley catheter 
decompression. A confirmatory cystogram may be performed 
before catheter removal to confirm healing of the injury.
Vascular Injury.  The most severe vascular injuries usually 
occur in iliac or femoral vessels, either by misplaced sutures in 
anterior repairs, or by trocar injury or direct dissection in lapa-
roscopic repairs. In these cases, exsanguination may be swift. 
Conversion to an open approach may be necessary, and bleeding 
should be temporarily controlled with mechanical compression 
until vascular control is obtained.
The most commonly injured vessels in laparoscopic her-
nia repair include the inferior epigastrics and external iliacs. 
Although apparent upon initial approach, these vessels may 
be obscured during mesh positioning, and tacks or staples 
may injure them. Often, due to tamponade effect, injury to 
the inferior epigastric vessels is not apparent until the adja-
cent trocar is removed. If injured, the inferior epigastrics may 
be ligated with a percutaneous suture passer or endoscopic 
hemoclips.
If the tissue pressure exerted by pneumoperitoneum is 
greater than an injured vessel’s hydrostatic intraluminal pres-
sure, bleeding will not manifest until pneumoperitoneum is 
released. The presentation of an inferior epigastric vein injury 
is often delayed because of this effect, and it may result in a 
significant rectus sheath hematoma. Accordingly, the surgeon 
should be aware of this intraoperative consideration.
Hematomas and Seromas
Hematomas may present as localized collections or as diffuse 
bruising over the operative site. Injury to spermatic cord vessels 
may result in a scrotal hematoma. Although they are self-limited, 
characteristic dark blue discoloration of the entire scrotum may 
alarm patients. Intermittent warm and cold compression aids in 
resolution. Hematomas may also develop in the incision, retro-
peritoneum, rectus sheath, and peritoneal cavity. The latter three 
sites are more frequently associated with laparoscopic repair. 
Bleeding within the peritoneum or preperitoneal space may not 
be readily apparent on physical examination. For this reason, 
close monitoring of subjective complaints, vital signs, urine out-
put, and physical parameters is necessary.
Seromas are loculated fluid collections that most com-
monly develop within 1 week of synthetic mesh repairs. Large 
hernia sac remnants may fill with physiologic fluid and mimic 
seromas. Patients often mistake seromas for early recurrence. 
Treatment consists of reassurance and warm compression to 
accelerate resolution. To avoid secondary infection, seromas 
should not be aspirated unless they cause discomfort or they 
restrict activity for a prolonged time.
OUTCOMES
The incidence of recurrence is the most-cited measure of post-
operative outcome following inguinal hernia repair. In evaluat-
ing the various available techniques, other salient signifiers of 
outcome include complication rates, operative duration, 
hospital stay, and quality of life. The following section 
summarizes the evidence-based outcomes of the various 
approaches to inguinal hernia repair.
Among tissue repairs, the Shouldice operation is the 
most commonly performed technique, and it is most frequently 
executed at specialized centers. A 2012 meta-analysis from the 
Cochrane Database demonstrated significantly lower rates of 
hernia recurrence (OR 0.62, CI 0.45–0.85) in patients under-
going Shouldice operations when compared with other open 
tissue-based methods.80 In experienced hands, the overall recur-
rence rate for the Shouldice repair is about 1%.81 Although it is 
an elegant procedure, its meticulous nature requires significant 
technical expertise to achieve favorable outcomes, and it is 
associated with longer operative duration and longer hospital 
stay. One study found the recurrence rate for Shouldice repairs 
decreased from 9.4% to 2.5% after surgeons performed the 
repair six times.82 Compared with mesh repairs, the Shouldice 
technique resulted in significantly higher rates of recurrence (OR 
3.65, CI 1.79–7.47); however, it is the most effective tissue-based 
repair when mesh is unavailable or contraindicated.80
Hernia recurrence is drastically reduced as a result of the 
Lichtenstein tension-free repair.83 Compared with open elec-
tive tissue-based repairs, mesh repair is associated with fewer 
recurrences (OR 0.37, CI 0.26–0.51) and with shorter hos-
pital stay and faster return to usual activities.84,85 In a multi-
institutional series, 3019 inguinal hernias were repaired using 
the Lichtenstein technique, with an overall recurrence rate of 
0.2%.86 Among other tension-free repairs, the Lichtenstein 
technique remains the most commonly performed procedure 
worldwide. Meta-analysis demonstrates no significant differ-
ences in outcomes between the Lichtenstein and the plug and 
patch techniques; however, intra-abdominal plug migration and 
erosion into contiguous structures occurs in approximately 6% 
of cases.84,87,88 The Stoppa technique results in longer operative 
duration than the Lichtenstein technique. Nevertheless, postop-
erative acute pain, chronic pain, and recurrence rates are similar 
between the two methods.89 Perhaps the most compelling advan-
tage of the Lichtenstein technique is that nonexpert surgeons 
rapidly achieve similar outcomes to their expert counterparts. 
Guidelines issued by the European Hernia Society recommend 
the Lichtenstein repair for adults with either unilateral or bilat-
eral inguinal hernias as the preferred open technique.85
Compared to open approaches, laparoscopic primary 
inguinal hernia repair produces equivalent recurrence rates and 
improved recovery time, pain prevention, and return to normal 
5
1517
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
activities.90 In a study of 168 patients randomized to either 
TEP or Lichtenstein repair, the 5-year recurrence rates were 
extremely low in both groups.91,92 Similarly, a study of 200 male 
patients randomized to either ambulatory TEP or Lichtenstein 
repair demonstrated no recurrences in either group after 1 year.93 
Because laparoscopic surgery requires specialized instruments 
and longer operative times, its cost is higher than conven-
tional open repair; however, the potential financial benefit 
of shorter recovery and decreased pain may offset these costs 
in the long term. 
Perhaps the most salient difference between open and 
laparoscopic techniques is the number of cases needed to 
develop technical proficiency. In a randomized controlled trial 
performed by the Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study, 2-year 
recurrence rates were 10.1% in patients undergoing laparoscopic 
repair and 4.9% in those undergoing open repair, and the out-
comes of laparoscopic repairs improved after each surgeon per-
formed at least 250 cases.94 More recently, Lal and colleagues 
found that surgeons sustained a decrease from 9% to 2.9% in 
postoperative recurrences after performing 100 TEP opera-
tions.95 Other studies also suggest surgeons develop proficiency 
in these laparoscopic techniques after performing 30 to 100 
cases; however, this estimate has decreased precipitously since 
laparoscopic technique was first introduced.94,96,97
Although controversy persists regarding the utility 
of TEP vs. TAPP, reviews to date find no significant differ-
ences in operative duration, length of stay, time to recovery, 
or short-term recurrence rate between the two approaches. In 
TAPP repair, the risk of intra-abdominal injury is higher than 
in TEP repair. This finding prompted the IEHS to recommend 
that TAPP should only be attempted by surgeons with sufficient 
experience.40 A Cochrane systematic review found that rates of 
port-site hernias and visceral injuries were higher for the TAPP 
technique, whereas TEP may be associated with a higher rate of 
conversion to an alternative approach; however, neither finding 
was sufficiently compelling to recommend one technique over 
the other.97
The frequency with which the above inguinal hernia repair 
techniques are performed reinforces the importance of broad 
experience. The authors recommend that surgeons become pro-
ficient in several techniques to address different manifestations 
of inguinal hernias. Surgeons should tailor this experience to 
optimize outcomes for each patient.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Rutkow IM. Demographic and socioeconomic aspects of her-
nia repair in the United States in 2003. Surg Clin North Am. 
2003;83:1045.
2.	Gould J. Laparoscopic versus open inguinal hernia repair. 
Surg Clin N Am. 2008;88:1073-1081.
3.	Abramson JH, Gofin J, Hopp C, et al. The epidemiology of 
inguinal hernia. A survey in western Jerusalem. J Epidemiol 
Community Health. 1978;32:59.
4.	Rutkow IM. Epidemiologic, economic, and sociologic aspects 
of hernia surgery in the United States in the 1990s. Surg Clin 
North Am. 1998;78:941.
5.	Johnson J, Roth JS, Hazey JW, et al. The history of open 
inguinal hernia repair. Curr Surg. 2004;61:49.
6.	Desarda MP. Physiological repair of inguinal hernia: a 
new technique (study of 860 patients). Hernia. 2006;10: 
143-146.
7.	Shulman AG, Amid PK, Lichtenstein IL. A survey of non-
expert surgeons using the open tension-free mesh patch repair 
for primary inguinal hernias. Int Surg. 1995;80:35-36.
8.	Spaw AT, Ennis BW, Spaw LP. Laparoscopic hernia repair: 
the anatomic basis. J Laparoendosc Surg. 1991;1:269.
9.	Miltenburg DM, Nuchtern JG, Jaksic T, et al. Laparoscopic 
evaluation of the pediatric inguinal hernia—a meta-analysis. 
J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:874.
10.	van Wessem KJ, Simons MP, Plaisier PW, et al. The etiol-
ogy of indirect inguinal hernias: congenital and/or acquired? 
Hernia. 2003;7:76.
11.	van Veen RN, van Wessem KJ, Halm JA, et al. Patent proces-
sus vaginalis in the adult as a risk factor for the occurrence of 
indirect inguinal hernia. Surg Endosc. 2007;21:202.
12.	Carbonell JF, Sanchez JL, Peris RT, et al. Risk factors associ-
ated with inguinal hernias: a case control study. Eur J Surg. 
1993;159:481.
13.	Flich J, Alfonso JL, Delgado F, et al. Inguinal hernia and cer-
tain risk factors. Eur J Epidemiol. 1992;8:277.
14.	Lau H, Fang C, Yuen WK, et al. Risk factors for inguinal 
hernia in adult males: a case-control study. Surgery. 2007; 
141:262.
15.	Ruhl CE, Everhart JE. Risk factors for inguinal hernia among 
adults in the US population. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;165:1154.
16.	Klinge U, Binnebosel M, Mertens PR. Are collagens the cul-
prits in the development of incisional and inguinal hernia dis-
ease? Hernia. 2006;10:472.
17.	Franz MG. The biology of hernias and the abdominal wall. 
Hernia. 2006;10:462-471.
18.	Ralphs DN, Brain AJ, Grundy DJ, et al. How accurately can 
direct and indirect inguinal hernias be distinguished? Br Med J. 
1980;280:1039.
19.	Cameron AE. Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of direct and 
indirect inguinal hernia. Br J Surg. 1994;81:250.
20.	Robinson A, Light D, Kasim A, et al. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the role of radiology in the diagnosis of occult 
hernia. Surg Endosc. 2013;27:11-18.
21.	Jamadar DA, Jacobson JA, Morag Y, et al. Sonography 
of inguinal region hernias. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2006; 
187:185.
22.	Burkhardt JH, Arshanskiy Y, Munson JL, et al. Diagnosis of 
inguinal region hernias with axial CT: the lateral crescent sign 
and other key findings. Radiographics. 2011;31:E1-12.
23.	van den Berg JC, de Valois JC, Go PM, et al. Detection of 
groin hernia with physical examination, ultrasound, and 
MRI compared with laparoscopic findings. Invest Radiol. 
1999;34:739-743.
24.	Fitzgibbons RJ Jr, Giobbie-Hurder A, Gibbs JO, et al. Watch-
ful waiting vs repair of inguinal hernia in minimally symptom-
atic men: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2006;295:285.
25.	van den Heuvel, Dwars BJ, Klassen DR, et al. Is surgical 
repair of an asymptomatic groin hernia appropriate? A review. 
Hernia. 2011;15:251-259.
26.	Mizrahi H, Parker MC. Management of asymptomatic 
inguinal hernia: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch 
Surg. 2012;147:277-281.
27.	Thompson JS, Gibbs JO, Reda DJ, et al. Does delaying 
repair of an asymptomatic hernia have a penalty? Am J Surg. 
2008;195:89-93.
28.	Law NW, Trapnell JE. Does a truss benefit a patient with 
inguinal hernia? BMJ. 1992;304:1092.
29.	Gallegos NC, Dawson J, Jarvis M, et al. Risk of strangulation 
in groin hernias. Br J Surg. 1991;78:1171.
30.	Nilsson H, Stylianidis G, Haapamäki M, et al. Mortality 
after groin hernia surgery. Ann Surg. 2007;245:656-660.
31.	Sanchez-Manuel FJ, Lozano-Garcia J, Seco-Gil JL. Antibiotic 
prophylaxis for hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;2:CD003769.
6
1518
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
32.	Yin Y, Song T, Liao B, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis in patients 
undergoing open mesh repair of inguinal hernia: a meta-
analysis. Am Surg. 2012;78:359-365.
33.	Delikoukos S, Lavant L, Hlias G, et al. The role of hernia sac 
ligation in postoperative pain in patients with elective tension-
free indirect inguinal hernia repair: a prospective randomized 
study. Hernia. 2007;11:425.
34.	Amid PK, Shulman AG, Lichtenstein IL. Critical scru-
tiny of the open "tension-free" hernioplasty. Am J Surg. 
1993;165:369-371.
35.	Gilbert AI. Sutureless repair of inguinal hernia. Am J Surg. 
1992;163:331.
36.	Millikan KW, Cummings B, Doolas A. The Millikan modified 
mesh-plug hernioplasty. Arch Surg. 2003;138:525, discussion 
529.
37.	Voyles CR, Hamilton BJ, Johnson WD, et al. Meta-analysis 
of laparoscopic inguinal hernia trials favors open hernia repair 
with preperitoneal mesh prosthesis. Am J Surg. 2002;184:6.
38.	Lee BC, Rodin DM, Shah KK, et al. Laparoscopic inguinal 
hernia repair during laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. BJU 
Int. 2007;99:637.
39.	Antunes AA, Dall’oglio M, Crippa A, et al. Inguinal her-
nia repair with polypropylene mesh during radical retropu-
bic prostatectomy: an easy and practical approach. BJU Int. 
2005;96:330.
40.	Bittner R, Arregui ME, Bisgaard T, et al. Guidelines for 
laparoscopic (TAPP) and endoscopic (TEP) treatment of 
inguinal hernia [International Endohernia Society (IEHS)]. 
Surg Endosc. 2011;25:2773-2843.
41.	Earle DB, Romanelli J. Prosthetic materials for hernia: what’s 
new. How to make sense of the multitude of mesh options for 
inguinal and ventral hernia repairs. Contemp Surg. 2007;63:63.
42.	Sajid MS, Ladwa N, Kalra L, et al. A meta-analysis examin-
ing the use of tacker mesh fixation versus glue mesh fixation 
in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. Am J Surg. 2013;206: 
103-111.
43.	Sajid MS, Leaver C, Baig MK, et al. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the use of lightweight versus heavyweight 
mesh in open inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2012;99:29-37.
44.	SØrensen CG, Rosenberg J. The use of sterilized mosquito 
nets for hernioplasty: a systematic review. Hernia. 2012;16: 
621-625.
45.	Jacobs DO. Improving surgical services in developing nations: 
getting to go. World J Surg. 2010;34:2509-2510.
46.	Luboga S, Macfarlane SB, von Schreeb J, et al. Increasing 
access to surgical services in sub-Saharan Africa: priorities 
for national and international agencies recommended by the 
Bellagio Essential Surgery Group. PLoS Med. 2009;6:1-5.
47.	Earle DB, Mark LA. Prosthetic material in inguinal hernia 
repair: how do I choose? Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:179.
48.	Beale EW, Hoxworth RE, Livingston EH, et al. The role of 
biologic mesh in abdominal wall reconstruction: a systematic 
review of the current literature. Am J Surg. 2012;204:510-517.
49.	Smart NJ, Bloor S. Durability of biologic implants for use in 
hernia repair: a review. Surg Innov. 2012;19:221-229.
50.	Campanelli G, Cavalli M, Sfeclan CJ, et al. Reducing postop-
erative pain: the use of Tisseel for mesh fixation in inguinal 
hernia repair. Surg Technol Int. 2012;7:XXII.
51.	Fortelny RH, Petter-Puchner AH, Glaser KS, et al. Use of 
fibrin sealant (Tisseel/Tissucol) in hernia repair: a systematic 
review. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:1803-1812.
52.	Kaul A, Hutfless S, Le H, et al. Staple versus fibrin glue fixa-
tion in laparoscopic total extraperitoneal repair of inguinal 
hernia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Endosc. 
2012;26:1269-1278.
53.	Sajid MS, Ladwa N, Kalra L, et al. A meta-analysis examining 
the use of tacker mesh fixation versus glue mesh fixation in 
laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. Am J Surg. 2013;206:103.
54.	Taylor C, Layani L, Liew V, et al. Laparoscopic inguinal her-
nia repair without mesh fixation, early results of a large ran-
domised clinical trial. Surg Endosc. 2008;22:757.
55.	Sajid MS, Ladwa N, Kalra L, et al. A meta-analysis examining 
the use of tacker fixation versus no-fixation of mesh in lapa-
roscopic inguinal hernia repair. Int J Surg. 2012;10:224-231.
56.	Morrison JE Jr, Jacobs VR. Laparoscopic preperitoneal ingui-
nal hernia repair using preformed polyester mesh without fixa-
tion: prospective study with 1-year follow-up results in a rural 
setting. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2008;18:33.
57.	Reinpold WM, Nehls J, Eggert A. Nerve management and 
chronic pain after open inguinal hernia repair: a prospective 
two phase study. Ann Surg. 2011;254:163-168.
58.	Kehlet H. Chronic pain after groin hernia repair. Br J Surg. 
2008;95:135-136.
59.	Aasvang E, Kehlet H. Surgical management of chronic pain 
after inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2005;92:795-801.
60.	Alfieri S, Amid PK, Campanelli G, et al. International 
guidelines for prevention and management of post-operative 
chronic pain following inguinal hernia surgery. Hernia. 
2011;15:239-249.
61.	Aasvang EK, Bay-Nielsen M, Kehlet H. Pain and functional 
impairment 6 years after inguinal herniorrhaphy. Hernia. 
2006;10:316-321.
62.	Bay-Nielsen M, Perkins FM, Kehlet H. Danish Hernia Data-
base. Pain and functional impairment 1 year after inguinal 
herniorrhaphy: a nationwide questionnaire study. Ann Surg. 
2001;233:1-7.
63.	Callesen T, Bech K, Kehlet H. Prospective study of chronic 
pain after groin hernia repair. Br J Surg. 1999;86:1528-1531.
64.	Aasvang EK, Kehlet H. The effect of mesh removal and selec-
tive neurectomy on persistent postherniotomy pain. Ann Surg. 
2009;249:327-334.
65.	Rab M, Ebmer J, Dellon AL. Anatomic variability of the ilio-
inguinal and genitofemoral nerve: implications for the treat-
ment of groin pain. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;108:1618-1623.
66.	Klaassen Z, Marshall E, Tubbs RS, et al. Anatomy of the ilio-
inguinal and iliohypogastric nerves with observations. Pain 
Intensity Instruments. Clin Anat. 2011;24:454-461.
67.	Zacest AC, Magill ST, Anderson VC, et al. Long-term out-
come following ilioinguinal neurectomy for chronic pain. 
J Neurosurg. 2010;112:784-789.
68.	Loos MJ, Scheltinga MR, Roumen RM. Tailored neurec-
tomy for treatment of postherniorrhaphy inguinal neuralgia. 
Surgery. 2010;147:275-281.
69.	Kim DH, Murovic JA, Tiel RL, et al. Surgical management 
of 33 ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric neuralgias at Louisiana 
State University Health Sciences Center. Neurosurgery. 2005; 
56:1013; discussion 1013.
70.	Starling JR, Harms BA. Ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, and 
genitofemoral neuralgia. In: Bendavid R, ed. Prostheses 
and Abdominal Wall Hernia. Austin: RG Landes Co; 1994: 
351-356.
71.	Amid PK. A 1-stage surgical treatment for postherniorrha-
phy neuropathic pain: triple neurectomy and proximal end 
implantation without mobilization of the cord. Arch Surg. 
2002;137:100-104.
72.	Madura JA, Madura JA II, Copper CM, et al. Inguinal neurec-
tomy for inguinal nerve entrapment: an experience with 100 
patients. Am J Surg. 2005;189:283.
73.	Starling JR, Harms BA, Schroeder ME, et al. Diagnosis and 
treatment of genitofemoral and ilioinguinal entrapment neural-
gia. Surgery. 1987;102:581-586.
74.	Amid PK, Chen DC. Surgical treatment of chronic groin and 
testicular pain after laparoscopic and open preperitoneal ingui-
nal hernia repair. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;213:531-536.
75.	LeBlanc KE, LeBlanc KA. Groin pain in athletes. Hernia. 
2003;7:68.
1519
Inguinal Hernias
CHAPTER 37
76.	Fong Y, Wantz GE. Prevention of ischemic orchitis dur-
ing inguinal hernioplasty. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992; 
174:399.
77.	Shin D, Lipshultz LI, Goldstein M, et al. Herniorrhaphy with 
polypropylene mesh causing inguinal vasal obstruction: a 
preventable cause of obstructive azoospermia. Ann Surg. 
2005;241:553.
78.	 Hallén M, Sandblom G, Nordin P, et al. Male infertility after 
mesh hernia repair: a prospective study. Surgery. 2011;149(2): 
179-184.
79.	Finley RK Jr, Miller SF, Jones LM. Elimination of uri-
nary retention following inguinal herniorrhaphy. Am Surg. 
1991;57:486; discussion 488.
80.	Amato B, Moja L, Panico S, et al. Shouldice technique versus 
other open techniques for inguinal hernia repair. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;4:CD001543.
81.	Glassow F. The Shouldice Hospital technique. Int Surg. 
1986;71:148.
82.	Kingsnorth AN, Britton BJ, Morris PJ. Recurrent inguinal 
hernia after local anaesthetic repair. Br J Surg. 1981;68:273.
83.	Lichtenstein IL, Shulman AG, Amid PK. Use of mesh to 
prevent recurrence of hernias. Postgrad Med. 1990;87:155.
84.	Scott N, Go PM, Graham P, et al. Open mesh versus non-
mesh for groin hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2001;3:CD002197.
85.	Simon MP, Aufenacker T, Bay-Nielsen M, et al. European 
Hernia Society guidelines on the treatment of inguinal hernia 
in adult patients. Hernia. 2009;13:343-403.
86.	Schulman A, Amid P, Lichtenstein I. The safety of mesh repair 
for primary inguinal hernias: results of 3,019 operations from 
five diverse surgical sources. Am Surg. 1992;58:255.
87.	Kingsnorth AN, Hyland ME, Porter CA, et al. Prospective 
double-blind randomized study comparing Perfix¯ plug-and-
patch with Lichtenstein patch in inguinal hernia repair: one 
year quality of life results. Hernia. 2000;4:255-258.
88.	Li J, Ji Z, Li Y. Comparison of mesh-plug and Lichtenstein 
for inguinal hernia repair: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. Hernia. 2012;16:541-548.
89.	Willaert W, De Bacquer D, Rogiers X, et al. Open preperito-
neal techniques versus Lichtenstein repair for elective inguinal 
hernias. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;7:CD008034.
90.	McCormack K, Scott NW, Go PM, et al. Laparoscopic tech-
niques versus open techniques for inguinal hernia repair. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;1:CD001785.
91.	Andersson B, Hallen M, Leveau P, et al. Laparoscopic 
extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair versus open mesh 
repair: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Surgery. 
2003;133:464.
92.	Hallen M, Bergenfelz A, Westerdahl J. Laparoscopic extra-
peritoneal inguinal hernia repair versus open mesh repair: 
long-term follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Surgery. 
2008;143:313.
93.	Lau H, Patil NG, Yuen WK. Day-case endoscopic totally 
extraperitoneal inguinal hernioplasty versus open Lichtenstein 
hernioplasty for unilateral primary inguinal hernia in males: a 
randomized trial. Surg Endosc. 2006;20:76.
94.	Neumayer L, Giobbie-Hurder A, Jonasson O, et al. Open 
mesh versus laparoscopic mesh repair of inguinal hernia. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1819.
95.	Lal P, Kajla RK, Chander J, et al. Laparoscopic total extraperi-
toneal (TEP) inguinal hernia repair: overcoming the learning 
curve. Surg Endosc. 2004;18:642.
96.	Katkhouda N, Campos GMR, Mavor E, et al. Laparoscopic 
extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair. A safe approach based 
on the understanding of rectus sheath anatomy. Surg Endosc. 
1999;13:1243-1246.
97.	Wake BL, McCormack K, Fraser C, et al. Transabdominal 
pre-peritoneal (TAPP) vs totally extraperitoneal (TEP) lapa-
roscopic techniques for inguinal hernia repair. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev. 2005;1:CD004703.
This page intentionally left blank 
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
Geeta Lal and Orlo H. Clark
38
THYROID
Historical Background
Goiters (from the Latin guttur, throat), defined as an enlarge-
ment of the thyroid, have been recognized since 2700 b.c. even 
though the thyroid gland was not documented as such until the 
Renaissance period. In 1619, Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aqua-
pendente recognized that goiters arose from the thyroid gland. 
The term thyroid gland (Greek thyreoeides, shield-shaped) is, 
however, attributed to Thomas Wharton in his Adenographia 
(1656). In 1776, the thyroid was classified as a ductless gland 
by Albrecht von Haller and was thought to have numerous func-
tions ranging from lubrication of the larynx to acting as a res-
ervoir for blood to provide continuous flow to the brain, and to 
beautifying women’s necks. Burnt seaweed was considered to 
be the most effective treatment for goiters.
The first accounts of thyroid surgery for the treatment of 
goiters were given by Roger Frugardi in 1170. In response to 
failure of medical treatment, two setons were inserted at right 
angles into the goiter and tightened twice daily until the goiter 
separated. The open wound was treated with caustic powder and 
left to heal. However, thyroid surgery continued to be hazard-
ous with prohibitive mortality rates (>40%) until the latter half 
of the nineteenth century, when advances in general anesthesia, 
antisepsis, and hemostasis enabled surgeons to perform thyroid 
surgery with significantly reduced mortality and morbidity rates. 
The most notable thyroid surgeons were Emil Theodor Kocher 
(1841–1917) and C.A. Theodor Billroth (1829–1894), who per-
formed thousands of operations with increasingly successful 
results. However, as more patients survived thyroid operations, 
new problems and issues became apparent. After total thyroidec-
tomy, patients (particularly children) became myxedematous with 
cretinous features. Myxedema was first effectively treated in 1891 
by George Murray using a subcutaneous injection of an extract 
of sheep’s thyroid, and later, Edward Fox demonstrated that oral 
therapy was equally effective. In 1909, Kocher was awarded the 
Nobel Prize for medicine in recognition “for his works on the 
physiology, pathology, and surgery of the thyroid gland.”
Embryology
The thyroid gland arises as an outpouching of the primitive 
foregut around the third week of gestation. It originates at the 
base of the tongue at the foramen cecum. Endoderm cells in 
the floor of the pharyngeal anlage thicken to form the medial 
thyroid anlage (Fig. 38-1) that descends in the neck anterior 
to structures that form the hyoid bone and larynx. During its 
descent, the anlage remains connected to the foramen cecum 
via an epithelial-lined tube known as the thyroglossal duct. The 
epithelial cells making up the anlage give rise to the thyroid fol-
licular cells. The paired lateral anlages originate from the fourth 
branchial pouch and fuse with the median anlage at approxi-
mately the fifth week of gestation. The lateral anlages are neu-
roectodermal in origin (ultimobranchial bodies) and provide the 
calcitonin producing parafollicular or C cells, which thus come 
to lie in the superoposterior region of the gland. Thyroid fol-
licles are initially apparent by 8 weeks, and colloid formation 
begins by the eleventh week of gestation.
Developmental Abnormalities
Thyroglossal Duct Cyst and Sinus.  Thyroglossal duct cysts 
are the most commonly encountered congenital cervical anoma-
lies. During the fifth week of gestation, the thyroglossal duct 
lumen starts to obliterate, and the duct disappears by the eighth 
week of gestation. Rarely, the thyroglossal duct may persist in 
whole or in part. Thyroglossal duct cysts may occur anywhere 
along the migratory path of the thyroid, although 80% are found 
in juxtaposition to the hyoid bone. They are usually asymptom-
atic but occasionally become infected by oral bacteria, prompt-
ing the patient to seek medical advice. Thyroglossal duct sinuses 
result from infection of the cyst secondary to spontaneous or 
chapter 
Thyroid	
1521
Historical Background / 1521
Embryology / 1521
Developmental Abnormalities / 1521
Thyroid Anatomy / 1523
Thyroid Histology / 1525
Thyroid Physiology / 1525
Evaluation of Patients with Thyroid  
Disease / 1528
Benign Thyroid Disorders / 1530
Solitary Thyroid Nodule / 1537
Malignant Thyroid Disease / 1540
Parathyroid	
1556
Historical Background / 1556
Embryology / 1556
Anatomy and Histology / 1557
Parathyroid Physiology  
and Calcium Homeostasis / 1558
Hyperparathyroidism / 1559
Hypoparathyroidism / 1574
Adrenal	
1574
Historical Background / 1574
Embryology / 1574
Anatomy / 1575
Adrenal Physiology / 1575
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex / 1578
Disorders of the Adrenal Medulla / 1585
The Adrenal Incidentaloma / 1588
Adrenal Insufficiency / 1590
Adrenal Surgery / 1590
surgical drainage of the cyst and are accompanied by minor 
inflammation of the surrounding skin. Histologically, thyroglos-
sal duct cysts are lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar 
epithelium and squamous epithelium, with heterotopic thyroid 
tissue present in 20% of cases.
The diagnosis usually is established by observing a 1- to 
2-cm, smooth, well-defined midline neck mass that moves 
upward with protrusion of the tongue. Routine thyroid imaging 
is not necessary, although thyroid scintigraphy and ultrasound 
have been performed to document the presence of normal thy-
roid tissue in the neck. Treatment involves the “Sistrunk opera-
tion,” which consists of en bloc cystectomy and excision of the 
central hyoid bone to minimize recurrence. Approximately 1% 
of thyroglossal duct cysts are found to contain cancer, which is 
usually papillary (85%). The role of total thyroidectomy in this 
setting is debated, but is advised in patients with large tumors, 
particularly if there are additional thyroid nodules and evidence 
of cyst wall invasion or lymph node metastases.1 Squamous, 
Hürthle cell, and anaplastic cancers also have been reported but 
are rare. Medullary thyroid cancers (MTCs) are, however, not 
found in thyroglossal duct cysts.
Lingual Thyroid.  A lingual thyroid represents a failure of 
the median thyroid anlage to descend normally and may be the 
only thyroid tissue present. Intervention becomes necessary 
for obstructive symptoms such as choking, dysphagia, airway 
obstruction, or hemorrhage. Many of these patients develop 
hypothyroidism. Medical treatment options include administra-
tion of exogenous thyroid hormone to suppress thyroid-stim-
ulating hormone (TSH) and radioactive iodine (RAI) ablation 
followed by hormone replacement. Surgical excision is rarely 
needed but, if required, should be preceded by an evaluation of 
normal thyroid tissue in the neck to avoid inadvertently render-
ing the patient hypothyroid.
Ectopic Thyroid.  Normal thyroid tissue may be found any-
where in the central neck compartment, including the esopha-
gus, trachea, and anterior mediastinum. Thyroid tissue has been 
observed adjacent to the aortic arch, in the aortopulmonary win-
dow, within the upper pericardium, or in the interventricular 
septum. Often, “tongues” of thyroid tissue are seen to extend 
off the inferior poles of the gland and are particularly appar-
ent in large goiters. Thyroid tissue situated lateral to the carotid 
sheath and jugular vein, previously termed lateral aberrant 
1522
Buccal
cavity
1
2
3
4
Endoderm
Median thyroid
diverticulum
Tracheo-
esophageal tube
1st
pharyngeal
pouch
2nd pouch 
3rd pouch 
4th pouch 
Figure 38-1.  Thyroid embryology—early development of the 
median thyroid anlage as a pharyngeal pouch. (Reproduced with 
permission from Embryology and developmental abnormalities. 
In: Cady B, Rossi R, eds. Surgery of the Thyroid and Parathyroid 
Glands. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:6.)
Key Points
1 	 There has been a paradigm shift in the surgical management 
of Graves’ disease with increased use of total or near-total 
thyroidectomy, rather than subtotal thyroidectomy.
2 	 Familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer is increasingly being 
recognized as a separate entity. Surgeons must be aware of 
the potential for false-negative fine-needle aspiration biopsy 
in this setting.
3 	 Fine-needle aspiration biopsies are now classified into six 
groups based on the risk of malignancy associated with each 
group (Bethesda criteria).
4 	 Total thyroidectomy is the surgical treatment of choice for 
most thyroid cancers, provided complication rates are low.
5 	 Due to the limitations of fine-needle aspiration biopsy in the 
setting of indeterminate thyroid nodules, a number of molec-
ular markers are being evaluated as adjuncts to refine the 
diagnosis and management of these patients.
6 	 Focused mini-incision parathyroidectomy, after appropriate 
localization, has become the procedure of choice for the 
treatment of sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism.
7 	 Parathyroidectomy has been shown to improve the classic 
and the so-called nonspecific symptoms and metabolic com-
plications of primary hyperparathyroidism.
8 	 Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism is being increas-
ingly recognized; however, there are no definitive guide-
lines for management.
9 	 Very high calcium and parathyroid hormone levels in a 
patient with primary hyperparathyroidism should alert 
the surgeon to the presence of a possible parathyroid car-
cinoma.
10   Subclinical Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by 
subtle abnormalities in corticosteroid synthesis, and 
many of its manifestations appear to be treated by adre-
nalectomy.
11   Fine-needle aspiration biopsy has a very limited role in 
the evaluation of adrenal incidentalomas unless the 
patient has previously had a cancer and should only be 
performed after appropriate biochemical studies have 
been performed to rule out pheochromocytoma.
12   Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the procedure 
of choice for excision of most adrenal lesions, except 
known or suspected cancers.
1523
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
thyroid, almost always represents metastatic thyroid cancer in 
lymph nodes, and not remnants of the lateral anlage that had 
failed to fuse with the main thyroid, as previously suggested by 
Crile. Even if not readily apparent on physical examination or 
ultrasound imaging, the ipsilateral thyroid lobe contains a focus 
of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), which may be microscopic.
Pyramidal Lobe.  Normally the thyroglossal duct atrophies, 
although it may remain as a fibrous band. In about 50% of indi-
viduals, the distal end that connects to the thyroid persists as a 
pyramidal lobe projecting up from the isthmus, lying just to the 
left or right of the midline. In the normal individual, the pyramidal 
lobe is not palpable, but in disorders resulting in thyroid hypertro-
phy (e.g., Graves’ disease, diffuse nodular goiter, or lymphocytic 
thyroiditis), the pyramidal lobe usually is enlarged and palpable.
Thyroid Anatomy
The anatomic relations of the thyroid gland and surrounding 
structures are depicted in Fig. 38-2. The adult thyroid gland 
is brown in color and firm in consistency and is located pos-
terior to the strap muscles. The normal thyroid gland weighs 
approximately 20 g, but gland weight varies with body weight 
and iodine intake. The thyroid lobes are located adjacent to the 
thyroid cartilage and connected in the midline by an isthmus 
that is located just inferior to the cricoid cartilage. A pyrami-
dal lobe is present in about 50% of patients. The thyroid lobes 
extend to the midthyroid cartilage superiorly and lie adjacent to 
the carotid sheaths and sternocleidomastoid muscles laterally. 
The strap muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, and superior 
belly of the omohyoid) are located anteriorly and are innervated 
by the ansa cervicalis (ansa hypoglossi). The thyroid gland is 
enveloped by a loosely connecting fascia that is formed from 
the partition of the deep cervical fascia into anterior and poste-
rior divisions. The true capsule of the thyroid is a thin, densely 
adherent fibrous layer that sends out septa that invaginate into 
the gland, forming pseudolobules. The thyroid capsule is con-
densed into the posterior suspensory or Berry’s ligament near 
the cricoid cartilage and upper tracheal rings.
Blood Supply.  The superior thyroid arteries arise from the 
ipsilateral external carotid arteries and divide into anterior and 
posterior branches at the apices of the thyroid lobes. The inferior 
Sup. thyroid a. and v.
Pyramidal
lobe
Common carotid a.
Common carotid a.
Thyroid 
cartilage
Int. jugular v.
Int. jugular v.
Recurrent laryngeal n.
Recurrent
laryngeal n.
Vagus n.
Vagus n.
Vagus n.
Arch of aorta
Thyrocervical 
trunk
Inf. thyroid v.
Middle thyroid v.
Ext. carotid a.
Thyroidea ima a.
(variable)
Trachea
Sternocleido-
mastoid m.
Inf. thyroid a.
Vertebral
v. and a. 
Thyroid gland
Strap muscles
A
B
Figure 38-2.  Anatomy of the thyroid gland and surrounding structures, viewed anteriorly (A) and in cross-section (B). a. = artery; 
m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.
1524
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
thyroid arteries arise from the thyrocervical trunk shortly after 
their origin from the subclavian arteries. The inferior thyroid 
arteries travel upward in the neck posterior to the carotid sheath 
to enter the thyroid lobes at their midpoint. A thyroidea ima artery 
arises directly from the aorta or innominate in 1% to 4% of indi-
viduals to enter the isthmus or replace a missing inferior thyroid 
artery. The inferior thyroid artery crosses the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve (RLN), necessitating identification of the RLN before the 
arterial branches can be ligated. The venous drainage of the thy-
roid gland occurs via multiple small surface veins, which coalesce 
to form three sets of veins—the superior, middle, and inferior 
thyroid veins. The superior thyroid veins run with the superior 
thyroid arteries bilaterally. The middle vein or veins are the least 
consistent. The superior and middle veins drain directly into the 
internal jugular veins. The inferior veins often form a plexus, 
which drains into the brachiocephalic veins.
Nerves.  The left RLN arises from the vagus nerve where it 
crosses the aortic arch, loops around the ligamentum arteriosum, 
and ascends medially in the neck within the tracheoesophageal 
groove. The right RLN arises from the vagus at its crossing with 
the right subclavian artery. The nerve usually passes posterior 
to the artery before ascending in the neck, its course being more 
oblique than the left RLN. Along their course in the neck, the 
RLNs may branch, and pass anterior, posterior, or interdigitate 
with branches of the inferior thyroid artery (Fig. 38-3). The right 
RLN may be nonrecurrent in 0.5% to 1% of individuals and often 
is associated with a vascular anomaly. Nonrecurrent left RLNs 
are rare but have been reported in patients with situs inversus and 
a right-sided aortic arch. The RLN may branch in its course in the 
neck, and identification of a small nerve should alert the surgeon 
to this possibility. Identification of the nerves or their branches 
often necessitates mobilization of the most lateral and posterior 
extent of the thyroid gland, the tubercle of Zuckerkandl, at the 
level of the cricoid cartilage. The last segments of the nerves 
often course below the tubercle and are closely approximated to 
the ligament of Berry. Branches of the nerve may traverse the 
ligament in 25% of individuals and are particularly vulnerable 
to injury at this junction. The RLNs terminate by entering the 
larynx posterior to the cricothyroid muscle.
The RLNs innervate all the intrinsic muscles of the larynx, 
except the cricothyroid muscles, which are innervated by the 
external laryngeal nerves. Injury to one RLN leads to paralysis 
of the ipsilateral vocal cord, which comes to lie in the parame-
dian or the abducted position. The paramedian position results 
in a normal but weak voice, whereas the abducted position leads 
to a hoarse voice and an ineffective cough. Bilateral RLN injury 
may lead to airway obstruction, necessitating emergency trache-
ostomy, or loss of voice. If both cords come to lie in an abducted 
position, air movement can occur, but the patient has an ineffec-
tive cough and is at increased risk of repeated respiratory tract 
infections from aspiration.
The superior laryngeal nerves also arise from the vagus 
nerves. After their origin at the base of the skull, these nerves 
travel along the internal carotid artery and divide into two 
branches at the level of the hyoid bone. The internal branch of 
the superior laryngeal nerve is sensory to the supraglottic larynx. 
Injury to this nerve is rare in thyroid surgery, but its occurrence 
may result in aspiration. The external branch of the superior 
laryngeal nerve lies on the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle 
1) Nerve in tracheoesophageal
    groove   R: 64%   L: 77% 
4) Nerve between branches of 
    inferior thyroid artery  R: 7%   L: 67% 
2) Nerve lateral to trachea
    R: 28%   L: 17%
5) Nerve posterior to artery
    R: 53%   L: 69%
3) Nerve far anterior
6) Nerve anterior to artery
7) Artery absent  R: 3%   L: 1%
Figure 38-3.  Relationship of recurrent laryngeal nerve to the inferior thyroid artery—the superior parathyroid is characteristically dorsal to 
the plane of the nerve, whereas the inferior gland is ventral to the nerve.
1525
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
and descends alongside the superior thyroid vessels before inner-
vating the cricothyroid muscle. Cernea and colleagues2 proposed 
a classification system to describe the relationship of this nerve 
to the superior thyroid vessels (Fig. 38-4). The type 2a variant, 
in which the nerve crosses below the tip of the thyroid superior 
pole, occurs in up to 20% of individuals and places the nerve at a 
greater risk of injury. Therefore, the superior pole vessels should 
not be ligated en masse, but should be individually divided, low 
on the thyroid gland and dissected lateral to the cricothyroid mus-
cle. Injury to this nerve leads to inability to tense the ipsilateral 
vocal cord and hence difficulty “hitting high notes,” difficulty 
projecting the voice, and voice fatigue during prolonged speech.
Sympathetic innervation of the thyroid gland is provided 
by fibers from the superior and middle cervical sympathetic 
ganglia. The fibers enter the gland with the blood vessels and 
are vasomotor in action. Parasympathetic fibers are derived 
from the vagus nerve and reach the gland via branches of the 
laryngeal nerves.
Parathyroid Glands.  The embryology and anatomy of the para-
thyroid glands are discussed in detail in the Parathyroid Gland 
section of this chapter. About 85% of individuals have four para-
thyroid glands that can be found within 1 cm of the junction of 
the inferior thyroid artery and the RLN. The superior glands are 
usually located dorsal to the RLN, whereas the inferior glands are 
usually found ventral to the RLN (Fig. 38-5).
Lymphatic System.  The thyroid gland is endowed with an 
extensive network of lymphatics. Intraglandular lymphatic ves-
sels connect both thyroid lobes through the isthmus and also drain 
to perithyroidal structures and lymph nodes. Regional lymph 
nodes include pretracheal, paratracheal, perithyroidal, RLN, 
superior mediastinal, retropharyngeal, esophageal, and upper, 
middle, and lower jugular chain nodes. These lymph nodes can 
be classified into seven levels as depicted in Fig. 38-6. The central 
compartment includes nodes located in the area between the two 
carotid sheaths, whereas nodes lateral to the vessels are present 
in the lateral compartment. Thyroid cancers may metastasize to 
any of these regions, although metastases to submaxillary nodes 
(level I) are rare (<1%). There also can be “skip” metastases to 
nodes in the lateral ipsilateral neck without central neck nodes.
Thyroid Histology
Microscopically, the thyroid is divided into lobules that contain 
20 to 40 follicles (Fig. 38-7). There are about 3 × 106 follicles 
in the adult male thyroid gland. The follicles are spherical and 
average 30 μm in diameter. Each follicle is lined by cuboidal 
epithelial cells and contains a central store of colloid secreted 
from the epithelial cells under the influence of the pituitary hor-
mone TSH. The second group of thyroid secretory cells is the C 
cells or parafollicular cells, which contain and secrete the hor-
mone calcitonin. They are found as individual cells or clumped 
in small groups in the interfollicular stroma and located in the 
upper poles of the thyroid lobes.
Thyroid Physiology
Iodine Metabolism.  The average daily iodine requirement is 
0.1 mg, which can be derived from foods such as fish, milk, 
and eggs or as additives in bread or salt. In the stomach and 
jejunum, iodine is rapidly converted to iodide and absorbed 
into the bloodstream, and from there it is distributed uniformly 
throughout the extracellular space. Iodide is actively transported 
into the thyroid follicular cells by an adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)–dependent process. The thyroid is the storage site of 
>90% of the body’s iodine content and accounts for one third of 
the plasma iodine loss. The remaining plasma iodine is cleared 
via renal excretion.
Thyroid Hormone Synthesis, Secretion, and Transport.  
The synthesis of thyroid hormone consists of several steps 
(Fig. 38-8). The first, iodide trapping, involves active (ATP-
dependent) transport of iodide across the basement membrane 
of the thyrocyte via an intrinsic membrane protein, the sodium/ 
iodine (Na+/I–) symporter. Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a large (660 kDa) 
glycoprotein, which is present in thyroid follicles and has four 
tyrosyl residues. The second step in thyroid hormone synthe-
sis involves oxidation of iodide to iodine and iodination of 
tyrosine residues on Tg, to form monoiodotyrosines (MIT) 
1cm
Type 1
Type 2a
Type 2b
Figure 38-4.  Relationship of the external branch of the superior 
laryngeal nerve and superior thyroid artery originally described by 
Cernea and colleagues.2 In type 1 anatomy, the nerve crosses the 
artery ≥1 cm above the superior aspect of the thyroid lobe. In type 2 
anatomy, the nerve crosses the artery <1 cm above the thyroid pole 
(2a) or below (2b) it. (Reproduced with permission from Bliss RD 
et al. Surgeon’s approach to the thyroid gland: Surgical anatomy 
and the importance of technique. World J Surg. 2000;24:893. With 
kind permission of Springer Science + Business Media.)
1526
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
and diiodotyrosines (DIT). Both processes are catalyzed by 
thyroid peroxidase (TPO). A recently identified protein, pen-
drin, is thought to mediate iodine efflux at the apical membrane. 
The third step leads to coupling of two DIT molecules to form 
tetra-iodothyronine or thyroxine (T4), and one DIT molecule 
with one MIT molecule to form 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine (T3) 
or 3,3′,5′-triiodothyronine reverse (rT3). When stimulated by 
TSH, thyrocytes form pseudopodia, which encircle portions 
of cell membrane containing Tg, which in turn, fuse with 
enzyme-containing lysosomes. In the fourth step, Tg is hydro-
lyzed to release free iodothyronines (T3 and T4) and mono- and 
diiodotyrosines. The latter are deiodinated in the fifth step to 
yield iodide, which is reused in the thyrocyte. In the euthyroid 
state, T4 is produced and released entirely by the thyroid gland, 
whereas only 20% of the total T3 is produced by the thyroid. 
Most of the T3 is produced by peripheral deiodination (removal 
of 5′-iodine from the outer ring) of T4 in the liver, muscles, 
kidney, and anterior pituitary, a reaction that is catalyzed by 
5′-mono-deiodinase. Some T4 is converted to rT3, the metaboli-
cally inactive compound, by deiodination of the inner ring of T4. 
In conditions such as Graves’ disease, toxic multinodular goi-
ter, or a stimulated thyroid gland, the proportion of T3 released 
from the thyroid may be dramatically elevated. Thyroid hor-
mones are transported in serum bound to carrier proteins such 
as T4-binding globulin, T4-binding prealbumin, and albumin. 
Only a small fraction (0.02%) of thyroid hormone (T3 and T4) 
is free (unbound) and is the physiologically active component. 
T3 is the more potent of the two thyroid hormones, although 
its circulating plasma level is much lower than that of T4. T3 is 
less tightly bound to protein in the plasma than T4, and so it 
enters tissues more readily. T3 is three to four times more active 
than T4 per unit weight, with a half-life of about 1 day, compared 
to approximately 7 days for T4.
The secretion of thyroid hormone is controlled by the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis (Fig. 38-9). The hypo-
thalamus produces a peptide, the thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH), which stimulates the pituitary to release TSH 
or thyrotropin. TRH reaches the pituitary via the portovenous 
circulation. TSH, a 28-kDa glycopeptide, mediates iodide trap-
ping, secretion, and release of thyroid hormones, in addition to 
increasing the cellularity and vascularity of the thyroid gland. 
The TSH receptor (TSH-R) belongs to a family of G-protein–
coupled receptors that have seven transmembrane-spanning 
domains and use cyclic adenosine monophosphate in the signal-
transduction pathway. TSH secretion by the anterior pituitary 
is also regulated via a negative feedback loop by T4 and T3. 
Because the pituitary has the ability to convert T4 to T3, the latter 
is thought to be more important in this feedback control. T3 also 
inhibits the release of TRH.
The thyroid gland also is capable of autoregulation, which 
allows it to modify its function independent of TSH. As an 
adaptation to low iodide intake, the gland preferentially syn-
thesizes T3 rather than T4, thereby increasing the efficiency of 
secreted hormone. In situations of iodine excess, iodide trans-
port, peroxide generation, and synthesis and secretion of thyroid 
hormones are inhibited. Excessively large doses of iodide may 
lead to initial increased organification, followed by suppression, 
a phenomenon called the Wolff-Chaikoff effect. Epinephrine 
and human chorionic gonadotropin hormones stimulate thyroid 
hormone production. Thus, elevated thyroid hormone levels 
are found in pregnancy and gynecologic malignancies such as 
hydatidiform mole. In contrast, glucocorticoids inhibit thyroid 
Lower parathyroid
Upper parathyroid
Int. jugular v.
Recurrent laryngeal n.
Thyroid
Inferior thyroid a.
Common carotid a. 
Figure 38-5.  Relationship of the parathyroids to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. a. = artery; v. = vein.
1527
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
hormone production. In severely ill patients, peripheral thyroid 
hormones may be reduced, without a compensatory increase in 
TSH levels, giving rise to the euthyroid sick syndrome.
Thyroid Hormone Function.  Free thyroid hormone enters 
the cell membrane by diffusion or by specific carriers and is 
carried to the nuclear membrane by binding to specific pro-
teins. T4 is deiodinated to T3 and enters the nucleus via active 
transport, where it binds to the thyroid hormone receptor. The 
T3 receptor is similar to the nuclear receptors for glucocorti-
coids, mineralocorticoids, estrogens, vitamin D, and retinoic 
acid. In humans, two types of T3 receptor genes (α and β) are 
located on chromosomes 3 and 17. Thyroid receptor expression 
depends on peripheral concentrations of thyroid hormones and 
I
IV
VII
III
II
V
VI
Trapezius m.
Sternocleidomastoid m.
Central neck nodes
Upper jugular nodes
Submaxillary nodes
Parotid
Middle jugular nodes
Anterior mediastinal
nodes
Posterior
triangle
Lower jugular nodes
External
jugular
node
Sternocleido-
mastoid m.
Spinal accessory n.
Jugulodigastric node
Deep lateral nodes
Intercalated
node
Transverse
cervical chain
of nodes
Digastric m.
Mandibular &
submandibular
nodes
Submental node
Hyoid
Internal jugular
chain of nodes
Strap muscle
Superior thyroid nodes
Anterior superficial
cervical nodes
Supra-
clavicular nodes 
A
B
Figure 38-6.  A and B. Lymph nodes in the neck can be divided into six regions. Upper mediastinal nodes constitute level VII. m. = muscle; 
n. = nerve.
is tissue specific—the α form is abundant in the central ner-
vous system, whereas the β form predominates in the liver. 
Each gene product has a ligand-independent, amino-terminal 
domain; a ligand-binding, carboxy-terminal domain; and 
centrally located DNA-binding regions. Binding of thyroid 
hormone leads to the transcription and translation of specific 
hormone-responsive genes.
Thyroid hormones affect almost every system in the body. 
They are important for fetal brain development and skeletal mat-
uration. T3 increases oxygen consumption, basal metabolic rate, 
and heat production by stimulation of Na+/K+ ATPase in various 
tissues. It also has positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on 
the heart by increasing transcription of the Ca2+ ATPase in the 
1528
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
sarcoplasmic reticulum and increasing levels of β-adrenergic 
receptors and concentration of G proteins. Myocardial α recep-
tors are decreased, and actions of catecholamines are amplified. 
Thyroid hormones are responsible for maintaining the normal 
hypoxic and hypercapnic drive in the respiratory center of the 
brain. They also increase gastrointestinal (GI) motility, leading 
to diarrhea in hyperthyroidism and constipation in hypothyroid-
ism. Thyroid hormones also increase bone and protein turnover 
and the speed of muscle contraction and relaxation. They also 
increase glycogenolysis, hepatic gluconeogenesis, intestinal 
glucose absorption, and cholesterol synthesis and degradation.
Evaluation of Patients with Thyroid Disease
Tests of Thyroid Function.  A multitude of different tests are 
available to evaluate thyroid function. No single test is sufficient 
to assess thyroid function in all situations, and the results must 
be interpreted in the context of the patient’s clinical condition. 
Figure 38-7.  Normal thyroid histology—follicular cells surround 
colloid.
H2O2 Generation
Iodination
Differentiation
Growth
Hormone synthesis
CREB
CREM
PAX-8
TTF-1
TTF-2
XXXXX
IP3
PKC
DAG
PKA
PIP2
ATP
cAMP
PLC
Gq
GS
GI
AC
TSHR
TSH
IGF-1 R
IGF-1 
NIS
Iodide uptake
MIT
DIT
T3
T4
T3
T4
Hydrolysis
NADP+
NADPH
H2O2
H2O2
2O2
TPO
Tg
Tg
TPO
I or HOI
Coupling
Organification
MIT
DIT
MIT
DIT
T3
T4
Dehalogenase
I–
I–
Figure 38-8.  Thyroid follicular cell showing the major signaling pathways involved in thyroid cell growth and function and key steps in thy-
roid hormone synthesis. The basal membrane of the cell in contact with the circulation and its apical surface contact the thyroid follicle. Thy-
roid hormone synthesis is initiated by the binding of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to the TSH receptor (TSHR), a G-protein–coupled 
transmembrane receptor, on the basal membrane. Activation leads to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), phosphorylation 
of protein kinase A (PKA), and activation of target cytosolic and nuclear proteins. The protein kinase C (PKC) pathway is stimulated at higher 
doses of TSH. Iodide is actively transported into the cell via the Na/I symporter (NIS) and flows down an electrical gradient to the apical 
membrane. There, thyroid peroxidase (TPO) oxidizes iodide and iodinated tyrosyl residues on thyroglobulin (Tg) in the presence of peroxide 
(H2O2). Mono- and diiodotyrosyl (MIT, DIT) residues are also coupled to form T4 and T3 by TPO. Thyroglobulin carrying T4 and T3 is then 
internalized by pinocytosis and digested in lysosomes. Thyroid hormone is released into the circulation, while MIT and DIT are deiodinated 
and recycled. ATP = adenosine triphosphate; CREB = cAMP response element binding protein; CREM = cAMP response element modula-
tor; DAG = diacylglycerol; IGF-1 = insulin-like growth factor 1; IP3 = inositol-3-phosphate; NADP+ = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate, oxidized form; NADPH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; PIP2 = phosphatidylinositol; PLC = phospholipase C; 
T3 = 3,5′,3-triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine. (Reproduced with permission from Kopp P. Pendred’s syndrome and genetic defects in thyroid 
hormone synthesis. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2000;1:114. Kluwer Academic Publishers.)
1529
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
TSH is the only test necessary in most patients with thyroid 
nodules that clinically appear to be euthyroid.
Serum Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (Normal 0.5–5 μU/mL)  
The tests for serum TSH are based on the following principle: 
monoclonal TSH antibodies are bound to a solid matrix and bind 
serum TSH. A second monoclonal antibody binds to a separate 
epitope on TSH and is labeled with radioisotope, enzyme, or 
fluorescent tag. Therefore, the amount of serum TSH is propor-
tional to the amount of bound secondary antibody (immunomet-
ric assay). Serum TSH levels reflect the ability of the anterior 
pituitary to detect free T4 levels. There is an inverse relationship 
between the free T4 level and the logarithm of the TSH concen-
tration—small changes in free T4 lead to a large shift in TSH lev-
els. The ultrasensitive TSH assay has become the most sensitive 
and specific test for the diagnosis of hyper- and hypothyroidism 
and for optimizing T4 therapy.
Total T4 (Reference Range 55–150 nmol/L) and T3 (Reference 
Range 1.5–3.5 nmol/L)  Total T4 and T3 levels are measured 
by radioimmunoassay and measure both the free and bound 
components of the hormones. Total T4 levels reflect the output 
from the thyroid gland, whereas T3 levels in the nonstimulated 
thyroid gland are more indicative of peripheral thyroid hor-
mone metabolism, and are, therefore, not generally suitable as a 
general screening test. Total T4 levels are increased not only in 
hyperthyroid patients, but also in those with elevated Tg levels 
secondary to pregnancy, estrogen/progesterone use, or congeni-
tal diseases. Similarly, total T4 levels decrease in hypothyroid-
ism and in patients with decreased Tg levels due to anabolic 
steroid use and protein-losing disorders like nephrotic syndrome. 
Individuals with these latter disorders may be euthyroid if their 
free T4 levels are normal. Measurement of total T3 levels is 
important in clinically hyperthyroid patients with normal T4 lev-
els, who may have T3 thyrotoxicosis. As discussed previously in 
Thyroid Hormone Synthesis, Secretion, and Transport, total T3 
levels often are increased in early hypothyroidism.
Free T4 (Reference Range 12–28 pmol/L) and Free T3 (3–9 
pmol/L)  These radioimmunoassay-based tests are a sensitive 
and accurate measurement of biologically active thyroid hor-
mone. Free T4 estimates are not performed as a routine screening 
tool in thyroid disease. Use of this test is confined to cases of 
early hyperthyroidism in which total T4 levels may be normal 
but free T4 levels are raised. In patients with end-organ resistance 
to T4 (Refetoff’s syndrome), T4 levels are increased, but TSH 
levels usually are normal. Free T3 is most useful in confirming 
the diagnosis of early hyperthyroidism, in which levels of free 
T4 and free T3 rise before total T4 and T3. Free T4 levels may also 
be measured indirectly using the T3-resin uptake test. If free T4 
levels are increased, fewer hormone binding sites are available 
for binding radiolabeled T3 that has been added to the patient’s 
serum. Therefore, more T3 binds with an ion-exchange resin, and 
the T3-resin uptake is increased.
Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone  This test is useful to evaluate 
pituitary TSH secretory function and is performed by adminis-
tering 500 μg of TRH intravenously and measuring TSH levels 
after 30 and 60 minutes. In a normal individual, TSH levels 
should increase at least 6 μIU/mL from the baseline. This test 
also was previously used to assess patients with borderline 
hyperthyroidism but has largely been replaced by sensitive TSH 
assays for this purpose.
Thyroid Antibodies  Thyroid antibodies include anti-Tg, antimi-
crosomal, or anti-TPO and thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin 
(TSI). Anti-Tg and anti-TPO antibody levels do not determine 
thyroid function, but rather indicate the underlying disorder, 
usually an autoimmune thyroiditis. About 80% of patients with 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis have elevated thyroid antibody levels; 
however, levels may also be increased in patients with Graves’ 
disease, multinodular goiter, and occasionally, thyroid neoplasms.
Serum Thyroglobulin  Tg is only made by normal or abnormal 
thyroid tissue. It normally is not released into the circulation 
in large amounts but increases dramatically in destructive pro-
cesses of the thyroid gland, such as thyroiditis, or overactive 
states such as Graves’ disease and toxic multinodular goiter. 
The most important use for serum Tg levels is in monitoring 
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer for recurrence, partic-
ularly after total thyroidectomy and RAI ablation. Elevated anti-
Tg antibodies can interfere with the accuracy of serum Tg levels 
and should always be measured when interpreting Tg levels.
Serum Calcitonin (0–4 pg/mL Basal)  This 32-amino-acid 
polypeptide is secreted by the C cells and functions to lower 
serum calcium levels, although in humans, it has only minimal 
physiologic effects. It is also a sensitive marker of MTC.
Thyroid Imaging
Radionuclide Imaging  Both iodine-123 (123I) and iodine-131 
(131I) are used to image the thyroid gland. The former emits low-
dose radiation, has a half-life of 12 to 14 hours, and is used to 
image lingual thyroids or goiters. In contrast, 131I has a half-life 
of 8 to 10 days and leads to higher-dose radiation exposure. 
Therefore, this isotope is used to screen and treat patients with 
differentiated thyroid cancers for metastatic disease. The images 
Thyroid
Portal
system
Hypothalamus
TRH
Tissue
TSH
+
+
T4
T4
T4
T3
T3
T3
–
–
I
I
“Free”
Figure 38-9.  Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid hormone axis. In 
both the hypothalamus and pituitary, 3,5′,3-triiodothyronine (T3) 
is primarily responsible for inhibition of thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secretion. 
T4 = thyroxine. (Reproduced with permission from Greenspan FS. 
The thyroid gland. In: Greenspan FS, Gardner D, eds. Basic and 
Clinical Endocrinology. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001:217. 
kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
1530
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
obtained by these studies provide information not only about 
the size and shape of the gland, but also the distribution of 
functional activity. Areas that trap less radioactivity than the 
surrounding gland are termed cold (Fig. 38-10), whereas areas 
that demonstrate increased activity are termed hot. The risk of 
malignancy is higher in “cold” lesions (20%) compared to “hot” 
or “warm” lesions (<5%). Technetium Tc 99m pertechnetate 
(99mTc) is taken up by the thyroid gland and is increasingly 
being used for thyroid evaluation. This isotope is taken up by 
the mitochondria, but is not organified. It also has the advantage 
of having a shorter half-life and minimizes radiation exposure. 
It is particularly sensitive for nodal metastases. More recently, 
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography 
(PET) combined with computed tomography (CT) is being 
increasingly used to screen for metastases in patients with 
thyroid cancer in whom other imaging studies are negative. PET 
scans are not routinely used in the evaluation of thyroid nodules; 
however, they may show clinically occult thyroid lesions. There 
are several recent reports of rates of malignancy in these lesions 
ranging from 14% to 63%. These incidentally discovered nod-
ules should be worked up by ultrasound and fine-needle aspira-
tion biopsy (FNAB).
Ultrasound  Ultrasound is an excellent noninvasive and por-
table imaging study of the thyroid gland with the added advan-
tage of no radiation exposure. It is helpful in the evaluation of 
thyroid nodules, distinguishing solid from cystic ones, and pro-
viding information about size and multicentricity. In addition, 
characteristics such as echotexture, shape, borders and presence 
of calcifications, and vascularity can provide useful information 
regarding risk of malignancy. Ultrasound is also especially help-
ful for assessing cervical lymphadenopathy (Fig. 38-11) and to 
guide FNAB. An experienced ultrasonographer is necessary for 
the best results.
Computed Tomography/Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Scan  CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies pro-
vide excellent imaging of the thyroid gland and adjacent nodes 
and are particularly useful in evaluating the extent of large, 
fixed, or substernal goiters (which cannot be evaluated by ultra-
sound) and their relationship to the airway and vascular struc-
tures. Noncontrast CT scans should be obtained for patients 
who are likely to require subsequent RAI therapy. If contrast is 
necessary, therapy needs to be delayed by several months. Com-
bined PET-CT scans are increasingly being used for Tg-positive, 
RAI-negative tumors.
Benign Thyroid Disorders
Hyperthyroidism.  The clinical manifestations of hyperthy-
roidism result from an excess of circulating thyroid hormone. 
Hyperthyroidism may arise from a number of conditions that 
are listed in Table 38-1. It is important to distinguish disorders 
such as Graves’ disease and toxic nodular goiters that result from 
increased production of thyroid hormone from those disorders 
that lead to a release of stored hormone from injury to the thyroid 
gland (thyroiditis) or from other nonthyroid gland–related con-
ditions. The former disorders lead to an increase in RAI uptake 
(RAIU), whereas the latter group is characterized by low RAIU. 
Of these disorders, Graves’ disease, toxic multinodular goiter, 
and solitary toxic nodule are most relevant to the surgeon.
Figure 38-11.  Thyroid ultrasound showing a lymph node (arrow) along the carotid artery.
Figure 38-10.  Radioactive iodine scan of the thyroid, with the 
arrow showing an area of decreased uptake, a cold nodule.
1531
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Diffuse Toxic Goiter (Graves’ Disease)  Although originally 
described by the Welsh physician Caleb Parry in a posthumous 
article in 1825, this disorder is known as Graves’ disease after 
Robert Graves, an Irish physician who described three patients 
in 1835. Graves’ disease is by far the most common cause 
of hyperthyroidism in North America, accounting for 60% to 
80% of cases. It is an autoimmune disease with a strong famil-
ial predisposition, female preponderance (5:1), and peak inci-
dence between the ages of 40 and 60 years. Graves’ disease 
is characterized by thyrotoxicosis, diffuse goiter, and extra-
thyroidal conditions including ophthalmopathy, dermopathy 
(pretibial myxedema), thyroid acropachy, gynecomastia, and 
other manifestations.
Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Pathology.  The exact etiology of 
the initiation of the autoimmune process in Graves’ disease is 
not known. However, conditions such as the postpartum state, 
iodine excess, lithium therapy, and bacterial and viral infections 
have been suggested as possible triggers. Genetic factors also 
play a role, as haplotyping studies indicate that Graves’ disease 
is associated with certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) hap-
lotypes, including HLA-B8, HLA-DR3, and HLADQA1*0501 
in Caucasian patients, whereas HLA-DRB1*0701 is protective 
against it. Polymorphisms of the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte anti-
gen 4 (CTLA-4) gene also have been associated with Graves’ 
disease development.3 Once initiated, the process causes sensi-
tized T-helper lymphocytes to stimulate B lymphocytes, which 
produce antibodies directed against the thyroid hormone recep-
tor. TSIs or antibodies that stimulate the TSH-R, as well as 
TSH-binding inhibiting immunoglobulins or antibodies, have 
been described. The thyroid-stimulating antibodies stimulate 
the thyrocytes to grow and synthesize excess thyroid hormone, 
which is a hallmark of Graves’ disease. Graves’ disease also 
is associated with other autoimmune conditions such as type 
1 diabetes mellitus, Addison’s disease, pernicious anemia, and 
myasthenia gravis.
Macroscopically, the thyroid gland in patients with Graves’ 
disease is diffusely and smoothly enlarged, with a concomitant 
increase in vascularity. Microscopically, the gland is hyperplas-
tic, and the epithelium is columnar with minimal colloid pres-
ent. The nuclei exhibit mitosis, and papillary projections of 
hyperplastic epithelium are common. There may be aggregates 
of lymphoid tissue, and vascularity is markedly increased.
Clinical Features.  The clinical manifestations of Graves’ dis-
ease can be divided into those related to hyperthyroidism and 
those specific to Graves’ disease. Hyperthyroid symptoms 
include heat intolerance, increased sweating and thirst, and 
weight loss despite adequate caloric intake. Symptoms of 
increased adrenergic stimulation include palpitations, nervous-
ness, fatigue, emotional lability, hyperkinesis, and tremors. 
The most common GI symptoms include increased frequency 
of bowel movements and diarrhea. Female patients often 
develop amenorrhea, decreased fertility, and an increased 
incidence of miscarriages. Children experience rapid growth 
with early bone maturation, whereas older patients may pres-
ent with cardiovascular complications such as atrial fibrillation 
and congestive heart failure.
On physical examination, weight loss and facial flush-
ing may be evident. The skin is warm and moist, and African 
American patients often note darkening of their skin. Tachycar-
dia or atrial fibrillation is present, with cutaneous vasodilation 
leading to a widening of the pulse pressure and a rapid falloff 
in the transmitted pulse wave (collapsing pulse). A fine tremor, 
muscle wasting, and proximal muscle group weakness with 
hyperactive tendon reflexes often are present.
Approximately 50% of patients with Graves’ disease also 
develop clinically evident ophthalmopathy, and dermopathy 
occurs in 1% to 2% of patients. It is characterized by deposition 
of glycosaminoglycans, leading to thickened skin in the pre-
tibial region and dorsum of the foot (Fig. 38-12). Eye symptoms 
include lid lag (von Graefe’s sign), spasm of the upper eyelid 
revealing the sclera above the corneoscleral limbus (Dalrymple’s 
sign), and a prominent stare, due to catecholamine excess. True 
infiltrative eye disease results in periorbital edema, conjunctival 
swelling and congestion (chemosis), proptosis, limitation of 
upward and lateral gaze (from involvement of the inferior and 
medial rectus muscles, respectively), keratitis, and even blind-
ness due to optic nerve involvement. The etiology of Graves’ 
ophthalmopathy is not completely known; however, orbital 
fibroblasts and muscles are thought to share a common antigen, 
the TSH-R. Ophthalmopathy is thought to result from inflam-
mation caused by cytokines released from sensitized killer 
T lymphocytes and cytotoxic antibodies. Gynecomastia is com-
mon in young men. Rare bony involvement leads to subperi-
osteal bone formation and swelling in the metacarpals (thyroid 
acropachy). Onycholysis, or separation of fingernails from their 
beds, is a commonly observed finding. On physical examina-
tion, the thyroid usually is diffusely and symmetrically enlarged, 
as evidenced by an enlarged pyramidal lobe. There may be an 
overlying bruit or thrill over the thyroid gland and a loud venous 
hum in the supraclavicular space.
Diagnostic Tests.  The diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is made 
by a suppressed TSH with or without an elevated free T4 or 
T3 level. If eye signs are present, other tests are generally not 
needed. However, in the absence of eye findings, an 123I uptake 
and scan should be performed. An elevated uptake, with a 
diffusely enlarged gland, confirms the diagnosis of Graves’ 
disease and helps to differentiate it from other causes of hyper-
thyroidism. Technetium scintigraphy (using pertechnetate, 
which is trapped by the thyroid, but not organified) can also 
be used to determine etiology. While technetium scans results 
in low range of normal uptake and high background activity, 
Table 38-1
Differential diagnosis of hyperthyroidism
Increased Hormone  
Synthesis (Increased RAIU)
Release of Preformed  
Hormone (Decreased RAIU)
Graves’ disease (diffuse toxic 
  goiter)
Toxic multinodular goiter
Toxic adenoma
Drug induced—amiodarone, 
  iodine
Thyroid cancer
Struma ovarii
Hydatidiform mole
TSH-secreting pituitary 
  adenoma
Thyroiditis—acute phase 
  of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 
subacute thyroiditis
Factitious (iatrogenic) 
  thyrotoxicosis
“Hamburger thyrotoxicosis”
RAIU = radioactive iodine uptake; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.
1532
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
total-body radiation exposure is less than that of 123I scans. If 
free T4 levels are normal, free T3 levels should be determined, as 
they often are elevated in early Graves’ disease or toxic nodules 
(T3 toxicosis). Anti-Tg and anti-TPO antibodies are elevated in 
up to 75% of patients but are not specific. Elevated TSH-R or 
thyroid-stimulating antibodies (TSAb) are diagnostic of Graves’ 
disease and are increased in about 90% of patients. MRI scans 
of the orbits are useful in evaluating Graves’ ophthalmopathy.
Treatment.  Graves’ disease may be treated by any of three treat-
ment modalities: antithyroid drugs, thyroid ablation with radio-
active 131I, and thyroidectomy. The choice of treatment depends 
on several factors, as discussed in the following sections.
Antithyroid Drugs.  Antithyroid medications generally are admin-
istered in preparation for RAI ablation or surgery. The drugs 
commonly used are propylthiouracil (PTU, 100 to 300 mg three 
times daily) and methimazole (10 to 30 mg three times daily, 
then once daily). Methimazole has a longer half-life and can be 
dosed once daily. Both drugs reduce thyroid hormone produc-
tion by inhibiting the organic binding of iodine and the cou-
pling of iodotyrosines (mediated by TPO). In addition, PTU 
also inhibits the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, making it 
useful for the treatment of thyroid storm. Both drugs can cross 
the placenta, inhibiting fetal thyroid function, and are excreted 
in breast milk, although PTU has a lower risk of transplacental 
transfer. Methimazole also has been associated with congeni-
tal aplasia; therefore, PTU is preferred in pregnant and breast-
feeding women. Side effects of treatment include reversible 
granulocytopenia, skin rashes, fever, peripheral neuritis, poly-
arteritis, vasculitis, hepatitis, and, rarely, agranulocytosis and 
aplastic anemia. Patients should be monitored for these pos-
sible complications and should always be warned to stop PTU 
or methimazole immediately and seek medical advice should 
they develop a sore throat or fever. Treatment of agranulocy-
tosis involves admission to the hospital, discontinuation of the 
drug, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Surgery should be 
postponed until the granulocyte count reaches 1000 cells/mm3.
The dose of antithyroid medication is titrated as needed 
in accordance with TSH and T4 levels. Most patients have 
improved symptoms in 2 weeks and become euthyroid in about 
6 weeks. Some physicians use the block-replace regimen, by 
adding T4 (0.05 to 0.10 mg) to prevent hypothyroidism and 
suppress TSH secretion, because some, but not all, studies sug-
gest that this reduces recurrence rates. The length of therapy is 
debated. Treatment with antithyroid medications is associated 
with a high relapse rate when these drugs are discontinued, with 
40% to 80% of patients developing recurrent disease after a 1- to 
2-year course. Patients with small glands are less likely to recur 
so that treatment for curative intent is reserved for patients with 
(a) small, nontoxic goiters less than 40 g; (b) mildly elevated 
thyroid hormone levels; (c) negative or low or titers of thyroid 
hormone receptor antibodies; and (d) rapid decrease in gland 
size with antithyroid medications. The catecholamine response 
of thyrotoxicosis can be alleviated by administering β-blocking 
agents. β-Blockade should be considered in all patients with 
symptomatic thyrotoxicosis and is recommended for elderly 
patients, those with coexistent cardiac disease, and patients 
with resting heart rates >90 bpm. These drugs have the added 
effect of decreasing the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. Pro-
pranolol is the most commonly prescribed medication in doses 
of about 20 to 40 mg four times daily. Higher doses are some-
times required due to increased clearance of the medication. 
Caution should be exercised in patients with asthma. Calcium 
channel blockers are useful for rate control in patients in whom 
β-blockers are contraindicated.
Radioactive Iodine Therapy (131I).  RAI forms the mainstay of 
Graves’ disease treatment in North America. The major advan-
tages of this treatment are the avoidance of a surgical procedure 
and its concomitant risks, reduced overall treatment costs, and 
ease of treatment. Antithyroid drugs are given until the patient 
A
B
Figure 38-12.  A. Graves’ ophthalmopathy and (B) pretibial myx-
edema. This patient demonstrates exophthalmos, proptosis, perior-
bital swelling, congestion, and edema of the conjunctiva.
1533
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
is euthyroid and then discontinued to maximize drug uptake. 
The 131I dose is calculated after a preliminary scan and usually 
consists of 8 to 12 mCi administered orally. After standard treat-
ment with RAI, most patients become euthyroid within 2 months. 
However, only about 50% of patients treated with RAI are 
euthyroid 6 months after treatment, and the remaining are still 
hyperthyroid or already hypothyroid.4 After 1 year, about 2.5% 
of patients develop hypothyroidism each year. RAI also has been 
documented to lead to progression of Graves’ ophthalmopathy 
(33% after RAI compared to 16% after surgery), and ophthal-
mopathy is more common in smokers. Although there is no evi-
dence of long-term problems with infertility, and overall cancer 
incidence rates are unchanged, there is a small increased risk of 
nodular goiter, thyroid cancer,5 and hyperparathyroidism (HPT)6 
in patients who have been treated with RAI. Patients treated with 
RAI have an unexplained increase in their overall and cardiovas-
cular mortality rates when compared to the general population.
RAI therapy is therefore most often used in older patients 
with small or moderate-sized goiters, those who have relapsed 
after medical or surgical therapy, and those in whom antithyroid 
drugs or surgery are contraindicated. Absolute contraindications 
to RAI include women who are pregnant (or planning pregnancy 
within 6 months of treatment) or breastfeeding. Relative contra-
indications include young patients (i.e., especially children and 
adolescents), those with thyroid nodules, and those with oph-
thalmopathy. Lack of access to a high-volume thyroid surgeon 
is also a consideration. The higher the initial dose of 131I, the 
earlier the onset and the higher the incidence of hypothyroidism.
Surgical Treatment.  In North America, surgery is recommended 
when RAI is contraindicated as in patients who (a) have con-
firmed cancer or suspicious thyroid nodules, (b) are young, (c) 
desire to conceive soon (<6 months) after treatment, (d) have 
had severe reactions to antithyroid medications, (e) have large 
goiters (>80 g) causing compressive symptoms, and (f) are 
reluctant to undergo RAI therapy. Relative indications for thy-
roidectomy include patients, particularly smokers, with mod-
erate to severe Graves’ ophthalmopathy, those desiring rapid 
control of hyperthyroidism with a chance of being euthyroid, 
and those demonstrating poor compliance to antithyroid medica-
tions. Pregnancy is also a relative contraindication, and surgery 
should be used only when rapid control is needed and antithy-
roid medications cannot be used. Surgery is best performed in 
the second trimester. The goal of thyroidectomy for Graves’ 
disease should be the complete and permanent control of the 
disease with minimal morbidity. Patients should be rendered 
euthyroid before operation with antithyroid drugs that should be 
continued up to the day of surgery. Lugol’s iodide solution or 
saturated potassium iodide generally is administered beginning 
7 to 10 days preoperatively (three drops twice daily) to reduce 
vascularity of the gland and decrease the risk of precipitating 
thyroid storm. The major action of iodine in this situation is to 
inhibit release of thyroid hormone. If it is not possible to render 
the patient euthyroid prior to surgery (if the surgery is urgent 
or the patient is allergic to antithyroid medications), the patient 
can be prepared with β-blockade and potassium iodide alone. 
Steroids can be a useful adjunct in this situation.
The extent of thyroidectomy to be performed used to be 
determined by the desired outcome (risk of recurrence vs. 
euthyroidism) and surgeon experience. In patients with coexis-
tent thyroid cancer and those who refused RAI therapy or had 
severe ophthalmopathy or life-threatening reactions to antithy-
roid medications (vasculitis, agranulocytosis, or liver failure), 
total or near-total thyroidectomy was recommended. Ophthal-
mopathy has been demonstrated to stabilize or improve in most 
patients after total thyroidectomy, presumably from removal of 
the antigenic stimulus. A subtotal thyroidectomy, leaving a 4- 
to 7-g remnant, was recommended for all remaining patients. 
During subtotal thyroidectomy, remnant tissue may be left on 
each side (bilateral subtotal thyroidectomy), or a total lobec-
tomy can be performed on one side with a subtotal thyroidec-
tomy on the other side (Hartley-Dunhill procedure). Results 
were similar with either procedure,7 but the latter procedure 
was theoretically associated with fewer complications and 
requires re-entering only one side of the neck should recurrence 
require reoperation. Most studies, however, show no difference 
in the rates of complications with either approach, although 
patients undergoing a total resection had higher rates of tempo-
rary hypoparathyroidism. However, patients treated with sub-
total thyroidectomy are prone to recurrence, the rates of which 
are dependent on remnant size. Based on the current evidence, 
recently published guidelines from the American Thyroid 
Association (ATA) and the American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists (AACE) recommend total or near-total thy-
roidectomy as the procedure of choice for the surgical manage-
ment of Graves’ disease.8 Recurrent thyrotoxicosis usually 
is managed by radioiodine treatment.
Toxic Multinodular Goiter  Toxic multinodular goiters usu-
ally occur in older individuals, who often have a prior history 
of a nontoxic multinodular goiter. Over several years, enough 
thyroid nodules become autonomous to cause hyperthyroidism. 
The presentation often is insidious in that hyperthyroidism may 
only become apparent when patients are placed on low doses of 
thyroid hormone suppression for the goiter. Some patients have 
T3 toxicosis, whereas others may present only with atrial fibril-
lation or congestive heart failure. Hyperthyroidism also can be 
precipitated by iodide-containing drugs such as contrast media 
and the antiarrhythmic agent amiodarone (Jod-Basedow hyper-
thyroidism). Symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism are similar 
to Graves’ disease, but extrathyroidal manifestations are absent.
Diagnostic Studies.  Blood tests are similar to Graves’ disease 
with a suppressed TSH level and elevated free T4 or T3 levels. 
RAI uptake also is increased, showing multiple nodules with 
increased uptake and suppression of the remaining gland.
Treatment.  Hyperthyroidism must be adequately controlled. 
Both RAI and surgical resection may be used for treatment. 
When surgery is performed, near-total or total thyroidectomy is 
recommended to avoid recurrence and the consequent increased 
complication rates with repeat surgery. Care must be taken in 
identifying the RLN, which may be found laterally on the thy-
roid (rather than posterior) or stretched anteriorly over a nodule. 
RAI therapy is reserved for elderly patients who represent very 
poor operative risks, provided there is no airway compression 
from the goiter and thyroid cancer is not a concern. However, 
because uptake is less than in Graves’ disease, larger doses of 
RAI often are needed to treat the hyperthyroidism. Furthermore, 
RAI-induced thyroiditis has the potential to cause swelling and 
acute airway compromise and leaves the goiter intact, with the 
possibility of recurrent hyperthyroidism.
Toxic Adenoma  Hyperthyroidism from a single hyperfunction-
ing nodule typically occurs in younger patients who note recent 
growth of a long-standing nodule along with the symptoms of 
hyperthyroidism. Toxic adenomas are characterized by somatic 
mutations in the TSH-R gene, although G-protein–stimulating 
1
1534
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
gene (gsp) mutations may occur also.9 Most hyperfunctioning 
or autonomous thyroid nodules have attained a size of at least 
3 cm before hyperthyroidism occurs. Physical examination usu-
ally reveals a solitary thyroid nodule without palpable thyroid 
tissue on the contralateral side. RAI scanning shows a “hot” 
nodule with suppression of the rest of the thyroid gland. These 
nodules are rarely malignant. Smaller nodules may be man-
aged with antithyroid medications and RAI. Larger nodules can 
require higher doses, which can lead to hypothyroidism. Sur-
gery (lobectomy and isthmusectomy) is preferred to treat young 
patients and those with larger nodules. Percutaneous ethanol 
injection (PEI) has been reported to have reasonable success 
rates but has not been directly compared with surgery.
Thyroid Storm  Thyroid storm is a condition of hyperthyroid-
ism accompanied by fever, central nervous system agitation or 
depression, and cardiovascular and GI dysfunction, including 
hepatic failure. The condition may be precipitated by abrupt 
cessation of antithyroid medications, infection, thyroid or non-
thyroid surgery, and trauma in patients with untreated thyrotoxi-
cosis. Occasionally, thyroid storm may result from amiodarone 
administration or exposure to iodinated contrast agents or fol-
lowing RAI therapy. This condition was previously associated 
with high mortality rates but can be appropriately managed in 
an intensive care unit setting. β-Blockers are given to reduce 
peripheral T4 to T3 conversion and decrease the hyperthyroid 
symptoms. Oxygen supplementation and hemodynamic support 
should be instituted. Nonaspirin compounds can be used to treat 
pyrexia, and Lugol’s iodine or sodium ipodate (intravenously) 
should be administered to decrease iodine uptake and thyroid 
hormone secretion. PTU therapy blocks the formation of new 
thyroid hormone and reduces peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. 
Corticosteroids often are helpful to prevent adrenal exhaustion 
and block hepatic thyroid hormone conversion.
Hypothyroidism.  Deficiency in circulating levels of thyroid 
hormone leads to hypothyroidism and, in neonates, to cretin-
ism, which is characterized by neurologic impairment and men-
tal retardation. Hypothyroidism also may occur in Pendred’s 
syndrome (associated with deafness) and Turner’s syndrome. 
Conditions that cause hypothyroidism are listed in Table 38-2.
Clinical Features  Failure of thyroid gland development or 
function in utero leads to cretinism and characteristic facies 
similar to those of children with Down syndrome and dwarf-
ism. Failure to thrive and severe mental retardation often are 
present. Immediate testing and treatment with thyroid hormone 
at birth can lessen the neurologic and intellectual deficits. 
Hypothyroidism developing in childhood or adolescence results 
in delayed development and may also lead to abdominal disten-
tion, umbilical hernia, and rectal prolapse. In adults, symptoms 
in general are nonspecific, including tiredness, weight gain, 
cold intolerance, constipation, and menorrhagia. Patients with 
severe hypothyroidism or myxedema develop characteristic 
facial features due to the deposition of glycosaminoglycans 
in the subcutaneous tissues, leading to facial and periorbital 
puffiness. The skin becomes rough and dry and often devel-
ops a yellowish hue from reduced conversion of carotene to 
vitamin A. Hair becomes dry and brittle, and severe hair loss 
may occur. There is also a characteristic loss of the outer two 
thirds of the eyebrows. An enlarged tongue may impair speech, 
which is already slowed, in keeping with the impairment of 
mental processes. Patients may also have nonspecific abdomi-
nal pain accompanied by distention and constipation. Libido 
and fertility are impaired in both sexes. Cardiovascular changes 
in hypothyroidism include bradycardia, cardiomegaly, pericar-
dial effusion, reduced cardiac output, and pulmonary effusions. 
When hypothyroidism occurs as a result of pituitary failure, 
other features of hypopituitarism, such as pale, waxy skin; loss 
of body hair; and atrophic genitalia, may be present.
Laboratory Findings  Hypothyroidism is characterized by low 
circulating levels of T4 and T3. Raised TSH levels are found in 
primary thyroid failure, whereas secondary hypothyroidism is 
characterized by low TSH levels that do not increase following 
TRH stimulation. Thyroid autoantibodies are highest in patients 
with autoimmune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ dis-
ease) and may also be elevated in patients with nodular goiter 
and thyroid neoplasms. An electrocardiogram demonstrates 
decreased voltage with flattening or inversion of T waves.
Treatment  T4 is the treatment of choice and is administered 
in dosages varying from 50 to 200 μg per day, depending on 
the patient’s size and condition. Starting doses of 100 μg of T4 
daily are well tolerated; however, elderly patients and those with 
coexisting heart disease and profound hypothyroidism should be 
started on a considerably lower dose such as 25 to 50 μg daily 
because of associated hypercholesterolemia and atherosclero-
sis. The dose can be slowly increased over weeks to months to 
attain a euthyroid state. A baseline electrocardiogram should 
always be obtained in patients with severe hypothyroidism 
before treatment. T4 dosage is titrated against clinical response 
Table 38-2
Causes of hypothyroidism
Primary (Increased TSH Levels)
Secondary (Decreased TSH Levels)
Tertiary
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Pituitary tumor
Hypothalamic insufficiency
RAI therapy for Graves’ disease
Pituitary resection or ablation
Resistance to thyroid hormone
Postthyroidectomy
Excessive iodine intake
Subacute thyroiditis
Medications: antithyroid drugs, lithium
Rare: iodine deficiency, dyshormogenesis
RAI = radioactive iodine; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.
1535
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
and TSH levels, which should return to normal. The manage-
ment of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism (normal T4, 
slightly raised TSH) is controversial. Some evidence suggests 
that patients with subclinical hypothyroidism and increased 
antithyroid antibody levels should be treated, because they will 
subsequently develop hypothyroidism. Patients who present 
with myxedema coma may require initial emergency treatment 
with large doses of IV T4 (300 to 400 μg), with careful monitor-
ing in an intensive care unit setting.
Thyroiditis.  Thyroiditis usually is classified into acute, sub-
acute, and chronic forms, each associated with a distinct clinical 
presentation and histology.
Acute (Suppurative) Thyroiditis  The thyroid gland is inher-
ently resistant to infection due to its extensive blood and 
lymphatic supply, high iodide content, and fibrous capsule. 
However, infectious agents can seed it (a) via the hematoge-
nous or lymphatic route, (b) via direct spread from persistent 
pyriform sinus fistulae or thyroglossal duct cysts, (c) as a result 
of penetrating trauma to the thyroid gland, or (d) due to immu-
nosuppression. Streptococcus and anaerobes account for about 
70% of cases; however, other species also have been cultured.10 
Acute suppurative thyroiditis is more common in children and 
often is preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection or otitis 
media. It is characterized by severe neck pain radiating to the 
jaws or ear, fever, chills, odynophagia, and dysphonia. Compli-
cations such as systemic sepsis, tracheal or esophageal rupture, 
jugular vein thrombosis, laryngeal chondritis, and perichondritis 
or sympathetic trunk paralysis may also occur.
The diagnosis is established by leukocytosis on blood 
tests and FNAB for Gram’s stain, culture, and cytology. CT 
scans may help to delineate the extent of infection and identify 
abscesses. A persistent pyriform sinus fistula should always be 
suspected in children with recurrent acute thyroiditis. The sen-
sitivity of identification of fistulae in the acute setting is lowest 
for barium esophagography (50%) and best for direct endoscopy 
(100%), with CT scans being intermediate (80%). Both barium 
esophagogram and CT scans have improved sensitivity once the 
acute inflammation has resolved (100% and 83%, respectively), 
with CT being better at defining the accurate anatomic pathway 
and its relationship to the thyroid gland.11 Treatment consists 
of parenteral antibiotics and drainage of abscesses. Thyroidec-
tomy may be needed for persistent abscesses or failure of open 
drainage. Patients with pyriform sinus fistulae require complete 
resection of the sinus tract, including the area of the thyroid 
where the tract terminates, to prevent recurrence. Transnasal 
flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy is being increasingly used to 
identify the internal opening of the pyriform sinus tract and may 
also allow electrocauterization of the tract, and success rates 
similar to open surgery have been reported.
Subacute Thyroiditis  Subacute thyroiditis can occur in the 
painful or painless forms. Although the exact etiology is not 
known, painful thyroiditis is thought to be viral in origin or 
result from a postviral inflammatory response. Genetic pre-
disposition may also play a role, as manifested by its strong 
association with the HLA-B35 haplotype. One model of patho-
genesis suggests that viral or thyroid antigens, when presented 
by macrophages in the context of HLA-B35, stimulate cytotoxic 
T lymphocytes and damage thyroid follicular cells.
Painful thyroiditis most commonly occurs in 30- to 
40-year-old women and is characterized by the sudden or grad-
ual onset of neck pain, which may radiate toward the mandible 
or ear. History of a preceding upper respiratory tract infection 
often can be elicited. The gland is enlarged, exquisitely ten-
der, and firm. The disorder classically progresses through four 
stages. An initial hyperthyroid phase, due to release of thyroid 
hormone, is followed by a second, euthyroid phase. The third 
phase, hypothyroidism, occurs in about 20% to 30% of patients 
and is followed by resolution and return to the euthyroid state 
in >90% of patients. A few patients develop recurrent disease.
In the early stages of the disease, TSH is decreased, and 
Tg, T4, and T3 levels are elevated due to the release of pre-
formed thyroid hormone from destroyed follicles. The erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate is typically >100 mm/h. RAIU also is 
decreased (<2% at 24 hours), even in euthyroid patients, due to 
the release of thyroid hormones from destruction of the thyroid 
parenchyma. Painful thyroiditis is self-limited, and therefore, 
treatment is primarily symptomatic. Aspirin and other nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used for pain relief, but ste-
roids may be indicated in more severe cases. Short-term thyroid 
replacement may be needed and may shorten the duration of 
symptoms. Thyroidectomy is reserved for the rare patient who 
has a prolonged course not responsive to medical measures or 
for recurrent disease.
Painless thyroiditis is considered to be autoimmune in ori-
gin and may occur sporadically or in the postpartum period; the 
latter typically occurs at about 6 weeks after delivery in women 
with high TPO antibody titers in early pregnancy. This timing 
is thought to coincide with a decrease in the normal immune 
tolerance of pregnancy and consequent rebound elevation of 
antibody titers.
Painless thyroiditis also is more common in women and 
usually occurs between 30 and 60 years of age. Physical exami-
nation demonstrates a normal sized or minimally enlarged, 
slightly firm, nontender gland. Laboratory tests and RAIU 
are similar to those in painful thyroiditis, except for a normal 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The clinical course also paral-
lels painful thyroiditis. Patients with symptoms may require 
β-blockers and thyroid hormone replacement. Thyroidectomy 
or RAI ablation is only indicated for the rare patient with recur-
rent, disabling episodes of thyroiditis.
Chronic Thyroiditis
Lymphocytic (Hashimoto’s) Thyroiditis.  Lymphocytic thyroiditis 
was first described by Hashimoto in 1912 as struma lymphoma-
tosa—a transformation of thyroid tissue to lymphoid tissue. It is 
the most common inflammatory disorder of the thyroid and the 
leading cause of hypothyroidism.
Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Pathology.  Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is 
an autoimmune process that is thought to be initiated by the 
activation of CD4+ T (helper) lymphocytes with specificity for 
thyroid antigens. Once activated, T cells can recruit cytotoxic 
CD8+ T cells to the thyroid. Hypothyroidism results not only 
from the destruction of thyrocytes by cytotoxic T cells but also 
by autoantibodies, which lead to complement fixation and kill-
ing by natural killer cells or block the TSH-R. Antibodies are 
directed against three main antigens—Tg (60%), TPO (95%), 
and TSH-R (60%)—and, less commonly, the sodium/iodine 
symporter (25%). Apoptosis (programmed cell death) also has 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s thyroid-
itis. Chronic thyroiditis also has been associated with increased 
intake of iodine and administration of medications such as 
interferon-α, lithium, and amiodarone. Support for an inher-
ited predisposition includes an increased incidence of thyroid 
1536
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
autoantibodies in first-degree relatives of patients with Hashi-
moto’s thyroiditis compared to controls and the occurrence of 
the autoantibodies and hypothyroidism in patients with specific 
chromosomal abnormalities such as Turner’s syndrome and 
Down syndrome. Associations with HLA-B8, DR3, and DR5 
haplotypes of the major histocompatibility complex also have 
been described.
On gross examination, the thyroid gland is usually mildly 
enlarged throughout and has a pale, gray-tan cut surface that is 
granular, nodular, and firm. On microscopic examination, the 
gland is diffusely infiltrated by small lymphocytes and plasma 
cells and occasionally shows well-developed germinal centers. 
Thyroid follicles are smaller than normal with reduced amounts 
of colloid and increased interstitial connective tissue. The fol-
licles are lined by Hürthle or Askanazy cells, which are charac-
terized by abundant eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm.
Clinical Presentation.  Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is also more com-
mon in women (male:female ratio 1:10 to 20) between the ages 
of 30 and 50 years old. The most common presentation is that of 
a minimally or moderately enlarged firm granular gland discov-
ered on routine physical examination or the awareness of a pain-
less anterior neck mass, although 20% of patients present with 
hypothyroidism, and 5% present with hyperthyroidism (Hashi-
toxicosis). In classic goitrous Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, physical 
examination reveals a diffusely enlarged, firm gland, which also 
is lobulated. An enlarged pyramidal lobe often is palpable.
Diagnostic Studies.  When Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is suspected 
clinically, an elevated TSH and the presence of thyroid autoan-
tibodies usually confirm the diagnosis. FNAB with ultrasound 
guidance is indicated in patients who present with a solitary sus-
picious nodule or a rapidly enlarging goiter. Thyroid lymphoma 
is a rare but well-recognized, ominous complication of chronic 
autoimmune thyroiditis and has a prevalence 80 times higher than 
expected frequency in this population than in a control population 
without thyroiditis. Recent studies of clonal similarity indicate that 
lymphoma may, in fact, evolve from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.12
Treatment.  Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is indicated 
in overtly hypothyroid patients, with a goal of maintaining nor-
mal TSH levels. The management of patients with subclinical 
hypothyroidism (normal T4 and elevated TSH) is controversial. 
A systematic review of cohort studies showed that in age- and 
sex-adjusted analyses, subclinical hypothyroidism is associated 
with a hazard ratio (HR) for coronary heart disease events of 
1.89 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.28 to 2.80; P <.001) and 
coronary heart disease mortality of 1.58 (95% CI, 1.10 to 2.27; P 
= .005) for a TSH level of 10 to 19.9 mIU/L.13 The data for TSH 
levels of 5 to 10 mIU/L were less convincing. An evaluation of 
the 12 randomized controlled trials in this area only showed a 
trend toward improvement of some lipid parameters, and none 
of the included trials evaluated overall mortality or cardiac mor-
bidity. Given the above, levothyroxine is recommended for all 
patients with TSH levels >10 μIU/mL and patients with levels 
of 5 to 10 μIU/mL in the presence of a goiter or anti-TPO anti-
bodies. Treatment is also advised especially for middle-aged 
patients with cardiovascular risk factors such as hyperlipidemia 
or hypertension and in pregnant patients. Surgery may occa-
sionally be indicated for suspicion of malignancy or for goiters 
causing compressive symptoms or cosmetic deformity.
Riedel’s Thyroiditis  Riedel’s thyroiditis is a rare variant of 
thyroiditis also known as Riedel’s struma or invasive fibrous 
thyroiditis that is characterized by the replacement of all or part 
of the thyroid parenchyma by fibrous tissue, which also invades 
into adjacent tissues. The etiology of this disorder is contro-
versial, and it has been reported to occur in patients with other 
autoimmune diseases. This association, coupled with the pres-
ence of lymphoid infiltration and response to steroid therapy, 
suggests a primary autoimmune etiology. Riedel’s thyroiditis 
also is associated with other focal sclerosing syndromes includ-
ing mediastinal, retroperitoneal, periorbital, and retro-orbital 
fibrosis and sclerosing cholangitis, suggesting that it may, in 
fact, be a primary fibrotic disorder. The disease occurs predomi-
nantly in women between the ages of 30 and 60 years old. It 
typically presents as a painless, hard anterior neck mass, which 
progresses over weeks to years to produce symptoms of com-
pression, including dysphagia, dyspnea, choking, and hoarse-
ness. Patients may present with symptoms of hypothyroidism 
and hypoparathyroidism as the gland is replaced by fibrous 
tissue. Physical examination reveals a hard, “woody” thyroid 
gland with fixation to surrounding tissues. The diagnosis needs 
to be confirmed by open thyroid biopsy, because the firm and 
fibrous nature of the gland renders FNAB inadequate.
Surgery is the mainstay of the treatment. The chief goal 
of operation is to decompress the trachea by wedge excision 
of the thyroid isthmus and to make a tissue diagnosis. More 
extensive resections are not advised due to the infiltrative nature 
of the fibrotic process that obscures usual landmarks and struc-
tures. Hypothyroid patients are treated with thyroid hormone 
replacement. Some patients who remain symptomatic have been 
reported to experience dramatic improvement after treatment 
with corticosteroids and tamoxifen. More recently mycopheno-
late mofetil has been used to attenuate the inflammatory process 
and led to dramatic symptom improvements in some patients.14
Goiter.  Any enlargement of the thyroid gland is referred to as 
a goiter. The causes of nontoxic goiters are listed in Table 38-3. 
Goiters may be diffuse, uninodular, or multinodular. Most non-
toxic goiters are thought to result from TSH stimulation second-
ary to inadequate thyroid hormone synthesis and other paracrine 
growth factors.15 Elevated TSH levels induce diffuse thyroid 
hyperplasia, followed by focal hyperplasia, resulting in nod-
ules that may or may not concentrate iodine, colloid nodules, or 
microfollicular nodules. The TSH-dependent nodules progress 
to become autonomous. Familial goiters resulting from inher-
ited deficiencies in enzymes necessary for thyroid hormone 
synthesis may be complete or partial. The term endemic goiter 
Table 38-3
Etiology of nontoxic goiter
Classification
Specific Etiology
Endemic
Iodine deficiency, dietary 
goitrogens (cassava, cabbage)
Medications
Iodide, amiodarone, lithium
Thyroiditis
Subacute, chronic 
(Hashimoto’s)
Familial
Impaired hormone synthesis 
from enzyme defects
Neoplasm
Adenoma, carcinoma
Resistance to thyroid 
hormone
—
1537
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
refers to the occurrence of a goiter in a significant proportion of 
individuals in a particular geographic region. In the past, dietary 
iodine deficiency was the most common cause of endemic goi-
ter. This condition has largely disappeared in North America 
due to routine use of iodized salt and iodination of fertilizers, 
animal feeds, and preservatives. However, in areas of iodine 
deficiency, such as Central Asia, South America, and Indonesia, 
up to 90% of the population have goiters. Other dietary goitro-
gens that may participate in endemic goiter formation include 
kelp, cassava, and cabbage. In many sporadic goiters, no obvi-
ous cause can be identified.
Clinical Features  Most patients with nontoxic goiters are 
asymptomatic, although patients often complain of a pressure 
sensation in the neck. As the goiters become very large, compres-
sive symptoms such as dyspnea and dysphagia ensue. Patients 
also describe having to clear their throats frequently (catarrh). 
Dysphonia from RLN injury is rare, except when malignancy is 
present. Obstruction of venous return at the thoracic inlet from a 
substernal goiter results in a positive Pemberton’s sign—facial 
flushing and dilatation of cervical veins upon raising the arms 
above the head (Fig. 38-13A). Sudden enlargement of nodules 
or cysts due to hemorrhage may cause acute pain. Physical 
examination may reveal a soft, diffusely enlarged gland (simple 
goiter) or nodules of various size and consistency in case of a 
multinodular goiter. Deviation or compression of the trachea 
may be apparent.
Diagnostic Tests  Patients usually are euthyroid with normal 
TSH and low-normal or normal free T4 levels. If some nod-
ules develop autonomy, patients have suppressed TSH levels or 
become hyperthyroid. RAI uptake often shows patchy uptake 
with areas of hot and cold nodules. FNAB is recommended in 
patients who have a dominant nodule or one that is painful or 
enlarging, as carcinomas have been reported in 5% to 10% of 
multinodular goiters. CT scans are helpful to evaluate the extent 
of retrosternal extension and airway compression (Fig. 38-13B).
Treatment  Most euthyroid patients with small, diffuse goi-
ters do not require treatment. Some physicians give patients 
with large goiters exogenous thyroid hormone to reduce the 
TSH stimulation of gland growth; this treatment may result in 
decrease and/or stabilization of goiter size and is most effective 
for small diffuse goiters. Endemic goiters are treated by iodine 
administration. Surgical resection is reserved for goiters that (a) 
continue to increase despite T4 suppression, (b) cause obstruc-
tive symptoms, (c) have substernal extension, (d) have malig-
nancy suspected or proven by FNAB, and (e) are cosmetically 
unacceptable. Near-total or total thyroidectomy is the treatment 
of choice, and patients require lifelong T4 therapy.
Solitary Thyroid Nodule
Solitary thyroid nodules are present in approximately 4% of 
individuals in the United States, whereas thyroid cancer has a 
much lower incidence of 40 new cases per 1 million. Therefore, 
it is of utmost importance to determine which patients with soli-
tary thyroid nodule would benefit from surgery.
History.  Details regarding the nodule, such as time of onset, 
change in size, and associated symptoms such as pain, dys-
phagia, dyspnea, or choking, should be elicited. Pain is an 
unusual symptom and, when present, should raise suspicion 
for intrathyroidal hemorrhage in a benign nodule, thyroiditis, or 
malignancy. Patients with MTC may complain of a dull, aching 
sensation. A history of hoarseness is worrisome, as it may be 
secondary to malignant involvement of the RLNs. Most impor-
tantly, patients should be questioned regarding risk factors for 
malignancy, such as exposure to ionizing radiation and fam-
ily history of thyroid and other malignancies associated with 
thyroid cancer.
External-Beam Radiation  Low-dose therapeutic radiation has 
been used to treat conditions such as tinea capitis (6.5 cGy), thymic 
enlargement (100 to 400 cGy), enlarged tonsils and adenoids 
(750 cGy), acne vulgaris (200 to 1500 cGy), and other con-
ditions such as hemangioma and scrofula. Radiation (approxi-
mately 4000 cGy) is also an integral part of the management of 
patients with Hodgkin’s disease. It is now known that a history 
of exposure to low-dose ionizing radiation to the thyroid gland 
places the patient at increased risk for developing thyroid can-
cer. The risk increases linearly from 6.5 to 2000 cGy, beyond 
which the incidence declines as the radiation causes destruc-
tion of the thyroid tissue. The risk is maximum 20 to 30 years 
after exposure, but these patients require lifelong monitoring. 
During the nuclear fallout from Chernobyl in 1986, 131I release 
was accompanied by a marked increase in the incidence of both 
benign and malignant thyroid lesions noted within 4 years of 
exposure, particularly in children.16 Most thyroid carcinomas 
following radiation exposure are papillary, and some of these 
cancers with a solid type of histology and presence of RET/PTC 
translocations appear to be more aggressive. In general, there 
is a 40% chance that patients presenting with a thyroid nodule 
and a history of radiation have thyroid cancer. Of those patients 
who have thyroid cancer, the cancer is located in the dominant 
nodule in 60% of patients, but in the remaining 40% of patients, 
the cancer is in another nodule in the thyroid gland.
Family History  A family history of thyroid cancer is a risk fac-
tor for the development of both medullary and nonmedullary 
thyroid cancer. Familial MTCs occur in isolation or in associa-
tion with other tumors as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 2 (MEN2) syndromes. Nonmedullary thyroid cancers can 
occur in association with other known familial cancer syn-
dromes such as Cowden’s syndrome, Werner’s syndrome (adult 
progeroid syndrome), and familial adenomatous polyposis 
(Table 38-4). Nonmedullary thyroid cancers can also occur 
independently of these syndromes as the predominant tumors in 
the families. The definition of familial nonmedullary thyroid 
cancer (FNMTC) is variable across the literature; however, in 
most studies, it is defined by the presence of two or more first-
degree relatives with follicular cell–derived cancers. FNMTC is 
now recognized as a distinct clinical entity associated with a 
high incidence of multifocal tumors and benign thyroid nodules. 
Some studies report that these patients have higher locore-
gional recurrence rates and consequent shorter disease-free 
survival. Several candidate loci that predispose to these tumors 
have been identified, including MNG1 (14q32), thyroid carci-
noma with oxphilia (TCO, on 19p13.2), fPTC/papillary renal 
neoplasia (PRN, on 1q21), NMTC (2q21), FTEN (8p23.1-p22), 
and the telomere-telomerase complex.17
Physical Examination.  The thyroid gland is best palpated 
from behind the patient and with the neck in mild extension. 
The cricoid cartilage is an important landmark, as the isthmus 
is situated just below it. Nodules that are hard, gritty, or fixed 
to surrounding structures such as the trachea or strap muscles 
are more likely to be malignant. The cervical chain of lymph 
nodes should be assessed as well as the nodes in the posterior 
triangle.
2
1538
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Diagnostic Investigations.  An algorithm for the workup of 
a solitary thyroid nodule is shown in Fig. 38-14.
Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy  FNAB has become the single 
most important test in the evaluation of thyroid masses and can 
be performed with or without ultrasound guidance.18 Ultrasound 
guidance is recommended for nodules that are difficult to pal-
pate, for cystic or solid-cystic nodules that recur after the initial 
aspiration, and for multinodular goiters. A 23-gauge needle is 
inserted into the thyroid mass, and several passes are made while 
aspirating the syringe. After releasing the suction on the syringe, 
the needle is withdrawn and the cells are immediately placed on 
A
B
Figure 38-13.  A. Retrosternal extension of a large goiter may result in impeded flow in the superior vena cava, leading to dilated veins over 
the chest wall. This may become more prominent when patients raise their arms above the head—Pemberton’s sign. B. Computed tomography 
scan demonstrating retrosternal extension and consequent tracheal deviation and compression from a large goiter.
1539
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
prelabeled dry glass slides; some are immersed in a 70% alcohol 
solution while others are air dried. A sample of the aspirate is 
also placed in a 90% alcohol solution for cytospin or cell pellet. 
The slides are stained by Papanicolaou’s or Wright’s stains and 
examined under the microscope. If a bloody aspirate is obtained, 
the patient should be repositioned in a more upright position and 
the biopsy repeated with a finer (25- to 30-gauge) needle.
After FNAB, the majority of nodules can be classified into 
several categories that determine further management. To 
address the issue of variability in the terminology of fine-needle 
aspiration (FNA), the National Cancer Institute (NCI) hosted the 
“NCI Thyroid Fine Needle Aspiration State of the Science 
Conference,” which then defined the Bethesda criteria for 
thyroid FNA.19 Accordingly, optimum cytology specimens 
should have at least six follicles each containing at least 10 to 15 
cells from at least two aspirates.
The FNA is classified as “nondiagnostic or unsatisfactory” 
in 2% to 20% of cases and typically results from a virtually acel-
lular specimen, cyst fluid, or the presence of blood or clotting 
artifact. The risk of malignancy in this setting ranges from 1% to 
4%, and reaspiration under ultrasound guidance is recommended. 
A “benign” result is obtained in 60% to 70% of thyroid FNAs. 
The most common lesion in this setting is a follicular nodule 
(includes adenomatoid nodule, colloid nodule, and follicular 
adenoma). Other diagnoses include lymphocytic (Hashimoto’s) 
thyroiditis and granulomatous thyroiditis. False-negative results 
3
Table 38-4
Familial cancer syndromes involving nonmedullary thyroid cancer
Syndrome
Gene
Manifestation
Thyroid Tumor
Cowden’s syndrome
PTEN
Intestinal hamartomas, benign 
and malignant breast tumors
FTC, rarely PTC and Hürthle 
cell tumors
FAP
APC
Colon polyps and cancer, 
duodenal neoplasms, desmoids
PTC cribriform growth pattern
Werner’s syndrome
WRN
Adult progeroid syndrome
PTC, FTC, anaplastic cancer
Carney complex type 1
PRKAR1α
Cutaneous and cardiac 
myxomas, breast and adrenal 
tumors
PTC, FTC
McCune-Albright syndrome
GNAS1
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, 
endocrine abnormalities, café-
au-lait spots
PTC clear cell
FAP = familial adenomatous polyposis; FTC = follicular thyroid cancer; PTC = papillary thyroid cancer.
Solitary thyroid nodule
FNAB
Benign
Malignant
Non-
diagnostic
Repeat
FNAB with
u/s
guidance
Cyst
Colloid
nodule
Aspirate
Reaccum-ulates x 3
Thyroidectomy
Observe
Continued
growth,
compressive
symptoms
+/–FNAB
AUS/FLUS
FN or
Suspicious
for FN
Suspicious
for
malignancy
Near-total/ total
Thyroidectomy
Repeat
FNAB
Lobectomy
Lobectomy or
near-total/total
thyroidectomy
Figure 38-14.  Management of a solitary thyroid nodule based on Bethesda criteria. a = except in patients with a history of external 
radiation exposure or a family history of thyroid cancer; FNAB = fine-needle aspiration biopsy; AUS = atypia of unknown significance; 
FLUS = follicular lesion of unknown significance; FN = follicular neoplasm.
1540
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
are reported in up to 3% of cases, and follow-up is recom-
mended. A result of “atypia of unknown significance (AUS) or 
follicular lesion of unknown significance (FLUS)” is obtained 
in 3% to 6% of biopsies. The risk of malignancy in this scenario 
is difficult to determine; however, it is thought to be in the range 
of 10% to 35% for FLUS and 60% to 75% for AUS. Clinical 
correlation and a repeat FNA are recommended for AUS lesions 
(which often results in a more definitive interpretation), although 
clinical observation or surgery may be appropriate because of 
worrisome clinical or ultrasound findings. The category of 
“follicular neoplasm” is intended to identify nodules that might 
be follicular carcinomas. The term suspicious for a follicular 
neoplasm is preferred by some laboratories for this category 
because up to 35% of cases turn out not to be neoplasms but 
hyperplastic proliferations of follicular cells, most commonly 
those of multinodular goiter. Lobectomy is the preferred treat-
ment for this result, and approximately 15% to 35% of lesions 
placed in this category prove to be malignant. Hürthle cell neo-
plasms are also included in this category. Most papillary and other 
carcinomas can be diagnosed by FNA, but the features are subtle 
at times, such as in follicular variant of papillary carcinomas. If the 
diagnosis is uncertain, the lesions are classified as “suspicious for 
malignancy.” Lobectomy or near-total thyroidectomy is recom-
mended because more than 60% turn out to be malignant. This 
category also includes lesions suspicious for medullary carci-
noma and lymphoma, and ancillary testing such as immunohisto-
chemical analysis and flow cytometry may be helpful. The risk of 
malignancy in lesions classified as “malignant” by FNA is 97% to 
99%, and near-total/total thyroidectomy is recommended.
Laboratory Studies  Most patients with thyroid nodules are 
euthyroid. Determining the blood TSH level is helpful. If a 
patient with a nodule is found to be hyperthyroid, the risk of 
malignancy is approximately 1%. Serum Tg levels cannot dif-
ferentiate benign from malignant thyroid nodules unless the lev-
els are extremely high, in which case metastatic thyroid cancer 
should be suspected. Tg levels are, however, useful in following 
patients who have undergone total thyroidectomy for thyroid 
cancer and also for serial evaluation of patients undergoing 
nonoperative management of thyroid nodules. Serum calcitonin 
levels should be obtained in patients with MTC or a family his-
tory of MTC or MEN2. There is insufficient evidence to recom-
mend routine calcitonin testing for all nodules. All patients with 
MTC should be tested for RET oncogene mutations and have a 
24-hour urine collection with measurement of levels of vanil-
lylmandelic acid (VMA), metanephrine, and catecholamine 
levels to rule out a coexisting pheochromocytoma. About 10% 
of patients with familial MTC and MEN2A have de novo RET 
mutations, so that their children are at risk for thyroid cancer.
Imaging  Ultrasound is helpful for detecting nonpalpable thy-
roid nodules, differentiating solid from cystic nodules, and 
identifying adjacent lymphadenopathy. Ultrasound evaluation 
can identify features of a nodule that increase the a priori risk 
of malignancy, such as fine stippled calcification and enlarged 
regional nodes; however, a tissue diagnosis is strongly recom-
mended before thyroidectomy.20 Ultrasound also provides a 
noninvasive and inexpensive method of following the size of 
suspected benign nodules diagnosed by FNAB and for identi-
fying enlarged lymph nodes. Ultrasound elastography is used 
to evaluate tissue stiffness noninvasively. This technique takes 
advantage of the fact that malignant nodules tend to be harder 
than benign nodules and thus deform less compared with the 
surrounding normal thyroid parenchyma.21 Larger studies are 
warranted before elastography can be routinely included in the 
evaluation of thyroid nodules. CT and MRI are unnecessary in 
the routine evaluation of thyroid tumors except for large, fixed, 
or substernal lesions. Scanning the thyroid with 123I or 99mTc 
is rarely necessary, and thyroid scanning currently is recom-
mended in the assessment of thyroid nodules only in patients 
who have follicular thyroid nodules on FNAB and a suppressed 
TSH. PET scanning does not play a major role in the primary 
evaluation of thyroid nodules.
Management.  Malignant tumors are treated by thyroidectomy, 
as discussed earlier and later in this chapter in Surgical Treat-
ment under Malignant Thyroid Disease. Simple thyroid cysts 
resolve with aspiration in about 75% of cases, although some 
require a second or third aspiration. If the cyst persists after 
three attempts at aspiration, unilateral thyroid lobectomy is rec-
ommended. Lobectomy also is recommended for cysts >4 cm in 
diameter or complex cysts with solid and cystic components, as 
the latter have a higher incidence of malignancy (15%). When 
FNAB is used in complex nodules, the solid portion should be 
sampled. If a colloid nodule is diagnosed by FNAB, patients 
should still be observed with serial ultrasound and Tg measure-
ments. If the nodule enlarges, repeat FNAB often is indicated. 
Although controversial, levothyroxine in doses sufficient to 
maintain a serum TSH level between 0.1 and 1.0 μU/mL may 
also be administered. In areas with a high prevalence of iodine 
deficiency, this can decrease nodule size and potentially prevent 
the growth of new nodules. In iodine-sufficient populations, the 
data are less impressive. Randomized controlled trial analyses 
have shown that less than 25% of benign nodules shrink more 
than 50% with TSH suppression in iodine-replete populations. 
Thyroidectomy should be performed if a nodule enlarges on 
TSH suppression or causes compressive symptoms, or for cos-
metic reasons. An exception to this general rule is the patient 
who has had previous irradiation of the thyroid gland or has 
a family history of thyroid cancer. In these patients, total or 
near-total thyroidectomy is recommended because of the high 
incidence of thyroid cancer and decreased reliability of FNAB 
in this setting.
Malignant Thyroid Disease
In the United States, thyroid cancer accounts for <1% of all 
malignancies (2% of women and 0.5% of men) and is the most 
rapidly increasing cancer in women. Thyroid cancer is respon-
sible for six deaths per million persons annually. Most patients 
present with a palpable swelling in the neck, which initiates 
assessment through a combination of history, physical exami-
nation, and FNAB.
Molecular Genetics of Thyroid Tumorigenesis.  Several 
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are involved in thy-
roid tumorigenesis,22 as depicted in Table 38-5. The RET 
proto-oncogene (Fig. 38-15) plays a significant role in the 
pathogenesis of thyroid cancers. It is located on chromosome 
10 and encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, which binds sev-
eral growth factors such as glial-derived neurotrophic factor 
and neurturin. The RET protein is expressed in tissues derived 
from the embryonic nervous and excretory systems. Therefore, 
RET disruption can lead to developmental abnormalities in 
organs derived from these systems, such as the enteric nervous 
system (Hirschsprung’s disease) and kidney. Germline muta-
tions in the RET proto-oncogene are known to predispose to 
1541
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Table 38-5
Oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and other genetic alterations implicated in thyroid tumorigenesis
Gene
Function
Tumor
Oncogenes
RET
Membrane receptor with tyrosine kinase 
activity
Sporadic and familial MTC, PTC (RET/PTC 
rearrangements)
MET
Same
Overexpressed in PTC
TRK1
Same
Activated in some PTC
TSH-R
Linked to heterotrimeric G protein
Hyperfunctioning adenoma
Gsα (gsp)
Signal transduction molecule (GTP binding)
Hyperfunctioning adenoma, follicular adenoma
Ras
Signal transduction protein
Follicular adenoma and carcinoma, PTC
PAX8/PPARγ1
Oncoprotein
Follicular adenoma, follicular carcinoma
B-Raf (BRAF)
Signal transduction
PTC, tall cell and poorly differentiated, anaplastic
CTNNB1 (β-catenin)
Signal transduction
Upregulated in poorly differentiated and anaplastic 
cancers
Tumor suppressors
p53
Cell cycle regulator, arrests cells in G1, 
induces apoptosis
Dedifferentiated PTC, FTC, anaplastic cancers
p16
Cell cycle regulator, inhibits cyclin-
dependent kinase
Thyroid cancer cell lines
PTEN
Protein tyrosine phosphatase
Follicular adenoma and carcinoma
Other genetic alterations
microRNA
Small, noncoding RNA
Specific types upregulated in papillary and some 
follicular carcinomas
FTC = follicular thyroid cancer; GTP = guanosine triphosphate; MTC = medullary thyroid cancer; PTC = papillary thyroid cancer.
Receptor
GDNF
Tyrosine
kinase
Intracellular
Extracellular
Substrate
ATP
620 618 811 609
634
830
804
768
= MEN2A & FMTC mutation
= MEN2B mutation
= FMTC mutation
= Hirschsprung's disease 
   mutation
918
Figure 38-15.  Structure of the RET tyrosine kinase receptor. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) and type 2B (MEN2B), familial 
medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC), and Hirschsprung’s disease result from germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. The extracellular domain 
binds the ligand glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and contains 28 cysteine residues. Mutations in cysteine residues at codons 609, 611, 
618, 620, and 634, which are in the juxtamembrane region of the receptor, are associated with MEN2A and FMTC. The ATP-binding site is located 
intracellularly near the site, which binds the substrate for the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain. Mutations at codon 918 (Met to Thr) alter the substrate 
binding pocket located in the intracellular region and cause MEN2B. FMTC is associated with mutations at codons 768 and 804. ATP = adenosine 
triphosphate. (Reproduced with permission from Wells S, Franz C. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. World J Surg. 2000;24:954. With kind 
permission of Springer Science + Business Media.)
1542
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
MEN2A, MEN2B, and familial MTCs, and somatic mutations 
have been demonstrated in tumors derived from the neural crest, 
such as MTCs (30%) and pheochromocytomas. The tyrosine 
kinase domain of RET can fuse with other genes by rearrange-
ment. These fusion products also function as oncogenes and 
have been implicated in the pathogenesis of PTCs. At least 15 
RET/PTC rearrangements have been described and appear to be 
early events in tumorigenesis. Young age and radiation expo-
sure seem to be independent risk factors for the development 
of RET/PTC rearrangements. Up to 70% of papillary cancers 
in children exposed to the radiation fallout from the 1986 Cher-
nobyl disaster carry RET/PTC rearrangements, the most com-
mon being RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3. These rearrangements 
confer constitutive activation of the receptor tyrosine kinases. 
RET/PTC3 is associated with a solid type of PTC that appears to 
present at a higher stage and to be more aggressive. It has now 
been established that RET/PTC signaling involves the mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway via other signaling 
molecules such as Ras, Raf, and MEK. In normal cells, physi-
ologic activation of Raf kinases occurs via direct interaction 
with guanosine triphosphate (GTP)–bound Ras, a membrane-
bound small G protein. Activated Raf, a serine-threonine kinase, 
in turn phosphorylates MEK, another serine-threonine kinase. 
This leads to phosphorylation of ERK/MAPK, which phosphor-
ylates regulatory molecules in the nucleus, thereby altering gene 
expression. Aberrant activation of the MAPK pathway leads to 
tumorigenesis. Aside from RET/PTC alterations, mutations in 
the Ras genes can also activate the MAPK pathway. Mutated 
RAS oncogenes have been identified in up to 20% to 40% of 
thyroid follicular adenomas and carcinomas, multinodular goi-
ters, and papillary and anaplastic carcinomas. There are three 
Raf kinases, A-Raf, B-Raf (BRAF), and C-Raf. Mutations in 
BRAF also have been implicated in aberrant MAPK pathway 
activation and tumorigenesis. Of the various identified BRAF 
mutations, T1799A (V600E amino acid substitution) is the most 
common and occurs frequently in thyroid cancers. Interestingly, 
BRAF mutations occur in papillary and anaplastic tumors (aver-
age prevalence of 44% and 22%, respectively),15 but not in fol-
licular thyroid cancers, suggesting a role in the pathogenesis 
of these malignancies. Studies also show that BRAF mutations 
are associated with more aggressive clinicopathologic features, 
including larger tumor size, invasion, and lymphadenopathy, 
and may have a role as prognostic markers.
The p53 gene is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a 
transcriptional regulator, which causes cell cycle arrest allow-
ing repair of damaged DNA, thus helping to maintain genomic 
integrity. Mutations of p53 are rare in PTCs but common in 
undifferentiated thyroid cancers and thyroid cancer cell lines. 
Other cell cycle regulators and tumor suppressors such as p15 
and p16 are mutated more commonly in thyroid cancer cell lines 
than in primary tumors. An oncogene resulting from the fusion 
of the DNA binding domain of the thyroid-transcription fac-
tor PAX8 gene to the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma 1 (PPARγ1) has been noted to play an important role 
in the development of follicular neoplasms, including follicu-
lar cancers. Thyroid cancer stem cells have also been identi-
fied; however, their role in thyroid carcinogenesis remains to 
be determined.24
Specific Tumor Types
Papillary Carcinoma  Papillary carcinoma accounts for 80% 
of all thyroid malignancies in iodine-sufficient areas and is the 
predominant thyroid cancer in children and individuals exposed 
to external radiation. Papillary carcinoma occurs more often in 
women, with a 2:1 female-to-male ratio, and the mean age at 
presentation is 30 to 40 years. Most patients are euthyroid and 
present with a slow-growing painless mass in the neck. Dys-
phagia, dyspnea, and dysphonia usually are associated with 
locally advanced invasive disease. Lymph node metastases are 
common, especially in children and young adults, and may be 
the presenting complaint. “Lateral aberrant thyroid” almost 
always denotes a cervical lymph node that has been invaded by 
metastatic cancer. Suspicion of thyroid cancer often originates 
through physical examination of patients and a review of their 
history. Diagnosis is established by FNAB of the thyroid mass 
or lymph node. Once thyroid cancer is diagnosed on FNAB, a 
complete neck ultrasound is strongly recommended to evalu-
ate the contralateral lobe and for lymph node metastases in the 
central and lateral neck compartments. Distant metastases are 
uncommon at initial presentation, but may ultimately develop 
in up to 20% of patients. The most common sites are lungs, fol-
lowed by bone, liver, and brain.
Pathology.  On gross examination, PTCs generally are hard and 
whitish and remain flat on sectioning with a blade, in contrast 
to normal tissue or benign nodular lesions that tend to bulge. 
Macroscopic calcification, necrosis, or cystic change may be 
apparent. Histologically, papillary carcinomas may exhibit pap-
illary projections (Fig. 38-16A), a mixed pattern of papillary 
and follicular structures, or a pure follicular pattern (follicular 
variant). The diagnosis is established by characteristic nuclear 
cellular features. Cells are cuboidal with pale, abundant cyto-
plasm, crowded nuclei that may demonstrate “grooving,” and 
intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions (leading to the designation 
of Orphan Annie nuclei [Fig. 38-16B]), which allow diagnosis 
by FNAB. Psammoma bodies, which are microscopic, calci-
fied deposits representing clumps of sloughed cells, also may 
be present. Mixed papillary-follicular tumors and follicular 
variants of papillary carcinoma are classified as papillary car-
cinomas because they behave biologically as papillary carcino-
mas. Multifocality is common in papillary carcinoma and may 
be present in up to 85% of cases on microscopic examination. 
Multifocality is associated with an increased risk of cervical 
nodal metastases, and these tumors may rarely invade adjacent 
structures such as the trachea, esophagus, and RLNs. Other vari-
ants of papillary carcinoma include tall cell, insular, columnar, 
diffuse sclerosing, clear cell, trabecular, and poorly differenti-
ated types. These variants account for about 1% of all papillary 
carcinomas and are generally associated with a worse prognosis.
Minimal or occult/microcarcinoma refers to tumors of 1 cm 
or less in size with no evidence of local invasiveness through 
the thyroid capsule or angioinvasion, and that are not associated 
with lymph node metastases. They are nonpalpable and usually 
are incidental findings at operative, histologic, or autopsy exami-
nation. Studies have demonstrated occult PTC to be present in 
2% to 36% of thyroid glands removed at autopsy. These tumors 
are also being identified more frequently due to the widespread 
use of ultrasound. These occult tumors are generally associated 
with a better prognosis than larger tumors, but they may be more 
aggressive than previously appreciated. About 25% of patients 
with these tumors have associated occult lymph node metastases.
Prognostic Indicators.  In general, patients with PTC have an 
excellent prognosis with a >95% 10-year survival rate. Several 
prognostic indicators have been incorporated into various staging 
1543
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
systems, which enable patients to be stratified into low-risk and 
high-risk groups. Unfortunately, all of these classification sys-
tems rely on data that are not available preoperatively.
In 1987, Hay and colleagues25 at the Mayo Clinic proposed 
the AGES scoring system, which incorporates Age, histologic 
Grade, Extrathyroidal invasion, and metastases and tumor Size 
to predict the risk of dying from papillary cancer. Low-risk 
patients are young, with well-differentiated tumors, no metas-
tases, and small primary lesions, whereas high-risk patients are 
older, with poorly differentiated tumors, local invasion, dis-
tant metastases, and large primary lesions. The MACIS scale 
is a postoperative system modified from the AGES scale. This 
scale incorporates distant Metastases, Age at presentation (<40 
or >40 years old), Completeness of original surgical resection, 
extrathyroidal Invasion, and Size of original lesion (in centi-
meters) and classifies patients into four risk groups based on 
their scores. Cady proposed the AMES system26 to classify dif-
ferentiated thyroid tumors into low- and high-risk groups using 
Age (men <40 years old, women <50 years old), Metastases, 
Extrathyroidal spread, and Size of tumors (< or >5 cm). Another 
classification system is the TNM system (Tumor, Nodal status, 
Metastases; Table 38-6), which used by most medical centers in 
North America.27 A simplified system by DeGroot and associ-
ates28 uses four groups—class I (intrathyroidal), class II (cervi-
cal nodal metastases), class III (extrathyroidal invasion), and 
class IV (distant metastases)—to determine prognosis.
Several molecular and genetic markers such as tumor DNA 
aneuploidy, decreased cyclic adenosine monophosphate response 
to TSH, increased epidermal growth factor binding, presence of 
N-ras and gsp mutations, overexpression of c-myc, and presence 
of p53 mutations also have been associated with a worse prog-
nosis. The presence of BRAF V600E mutation, as previously 
mentioned, is associated with aggressive tumor characteristics, 
including extrathyroidal extension, older age at presentation, and 
lymph node and distant metastases. This mutation also appears to 
be an independent predictor of both tumor recurrence (even for 
early-stage disease) and tumor-related mortality. Some studies 
propose that BRAF mutation status on FNAB can be used to tai-
lor initial management including more extensive initial surgical 
excision, high-dose postoperative RAI therapy, increased TSH 
suppression, and closer follow up.29 The correlation of RET/PTC 
rearrangements and Ras mutations with prognosis is less clear.
Surgical Treatment.  Most authors agree that patients with high-
risk tumors (judged by any of the classification systems dis-
cussed earlier in Prognostic Indicators) or bilateral tumors 
should undergo total or near-total thyroidectomy. The optimal 
surgical strategy in the majority of patients with low-risk (small, 
unilateral) cancers was controversial for many years, with the 
focus of the debate centering around outcome data and risks 
associated with extent of thyroidectomy in this group of patients.
Proponents of total thyroidectomy indicate that it enables 
the use of RAI to effectively detect and treat residual thyroid 
tissue or metastatic disease and makes serum Tg level a more 
sensitive marker of recurrent or persistent disease. It is also 
known that a significant proportion (33% to 50%) of patients 
who develop a recurrence die from their disease,30 and even 
though the data are retrospective, long-term, follow-up studies 
suggest that recurrence rates are lowered and that survival is 
improved in patients undergoing near-total or total thyroidec-
tomy28, 30-34 (Fig. 38-17). In addition, diminished survival is 
noted in patients with low-risk disease (mortality rates of 5% at 
10 to 20 years), and it is not possible to accurately risk stratify 
patients preoperatively. More recently, a large study of >50,000 
patients with papillary cancer demonstrated that, in multivariate 
analyses, total thyroidectomy led to a significantly improved 
recurrence and survival for tumors >1 cm. Furthermore, the 
authors also showed that patients with tumors 1 to 2 cm in diam-
eter who were treated with lobectomy had a 24% higher risk of 
recurrence and a 49% higher risk of thyroid cancer mortality.35 
Based on the above, current guidelines for the evidence-
based management of thyroid cancers recommend a near-
total or total thyroidectomy for primary cancers >1 cm unless 
there are contraindications to the surgery.36 
When PTC is diagnosed by FNAB, the definitive operation 
can be done without confirming the diagnosis by frozen section 
during the operation. Patients with a nodule that is suspicious for 
papillary cancer should be treated by thyroid lobectomy, isthmu-
sectomy, and removal of any pyramidal lobe or adjacent lymph 
nodes. If intraoperative frozen-section examination of a lymph 
node or primary tumor confirms carcinoma, completion total or 
near-total thyroidectomy is performed. If a definitive diagnosis 
cannot be made or the surgeon is concerned about the viability 
of the parathyroid glands or the status of the RLN, the opera-
tion is terminated. When final histology confirms carcinoma, 
4
Figure 38-16.  A. Histomicrograph of a papillary thyroid cancer (hematoxylin-eosin stain). B. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimen from 
a papillary thyroid cancer showing typical intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions in the center of the slide.
1544
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
completion thyroidectomy usually is performed. Thyroid lobec-
tomy alone is considered sufficient treatment for small (<1 cm), 
incidentally discovered, low-risk, unifocal, intrathyroidal papil-
lary carcinomas in the absence of prior head and neck irradiation 
or radiologically or clinically involved cervical nodal metastases.
During thyroidectomy, enlarged or obviously involved 
central neck nodes should be removed (therapeutic central-
compartment, level VI), along with nodes with known lateral 
neck metastases. Some investigators recommend routine bilateral 
central neck dissection due to the high incidence of microscopic 
metastases and data showing improved rates of recurrence and 
survival (compared to historic controls). However, these risks 
need to be balanced with the increased risk of hypoparathyroid-
ism with routine central neck dissection and the fact that some 
studies do not show any difference in recurrence rates or rates of 
low or undetectable Tg levels. The 2009 ATA guidelines for thy-
roid cancer management suggest that prophylactic (ipsilateral or 
bilateral) dissection may be performed in patients with advanced 
(T3 or T4) papillary thyroid carcinoma, whereas the procedure is 
not needed for small (T1 and T2) tumors that are clinically node 
negative.36 Further prospective studies are needed before defini-
tive recommendations can be made in this regard.
Biopsy-proven lymph node metastases detected clinically 
or by imaging in the lateral neck in patients with papillary carci-
noma are managed with modified radical or functional neck dis-
section,36 as described later in this chapter in Thyroid Surgery. 
Dissection of the posterior triangle and suprahyoid dissection 
usually are not necessary unless there is extensive metastatic 
disease in levels 2, 3, and 4, but should be performed when 
appropriate. Prophylactic lateral neck node dissection is not nec-
essary in patients with PTC, because these cancers do not appear 
to metastasize systemically from lymph nodes, and micrometas-
tases often can be ablated with RAI therapy.
Follicular Carcinoma  Follicular carcinomas account for 10% 
of thyroid cancers and occur more commonly in iodine-defi-
cient areas. The overall incidence of this tumor is declining 
in the United States, probably due to iodine supplementation 
and improved histologic classification. Women have a higher 
incidence of follicular cancer, with a female-to-male ratio of 
3:1, and a mean age at presentation of 50 years old. Follicular 
cancers usually present as solitary thyroid nodules, occasion-
ally with a history of rapid size increase, and long-standing goi-
ter. Pain is uncommon, unless hemorrhage into the nodule has 
occurred. Unlike papillary cancers, cervical lymphadenopathy 
is uncommon at initial presentation (about 5%), although distant 
metastases may be present. In <1% of cases, follicular cancers 
may be hyperfunctioning, leading patients to present with signs 
and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. FNAB is unable to distinguish 
benign follicular lesions from follicular carcinomas. Therefore, 
preoperative clinical diagnosis of cancer is difficult unless dis-
tant metastases are present. Large follicular tumors (>4 cm) in 
older men are more likely to be malignant.
Due to the limitations inherent in the FNAB diagnosis, a 
number of studies have focused on identifying molecular mark-
ers to distinguish benign from malignant follicular lesions. 
Many of these genetic changes can be identified using tis-
sue obtained during FNAB. While no single marker has met 
the ideal characteristics of being simple to use, reproducible, 
and cost-effective, several studies have explored combinations 
of markers that appear to be useful in differentiating benign 
from malignant lesions. Nikiforov and colleagues demonstrated 
Table 38-6
TNM classification of thyroid tumors
Papillary or Follicular Tumors
Stage
TNM
<45 y
I
Any T, any N, M0
II
Any T, any N, M1
≥45 y
I
T1, N0, M0
II
T2, N0, M0
III
T3, N0, M0; T1–3, N1a, M0
IVA
T4a, N0–1a, M0; T1–4a, N1b, M0
IVB
T4b, any N, M0
IVC
Any T, any N, M1
Medullary Thyroid Cancer
Stage
TNM
I
T1, N0, M0
II
T2–3, N0, M0
III
T1–3, N1a, M0
IVA
T4a, N0–1a, M0; T1–4a, N1b, M0
IVB
T4b, any N, M0
IVC
Any T, any N, M1
Anaplastic Cancer
Stage
TNM
IVA
T4a, Any N, M0
IVB
T4b, Any N, M0
IVC
Any T, Any M, M1
Definitions:
Primary tumor (T)
TX = Primary tumor cannot be assessed
T0 = No evidence of primary tumor
T1 = Tumor ≤2 cm in diameter, limited to thyroid
T2 = Tumor >2 cm but <4 cm in diameter, limited to thyroid
T3 = Tumor >4 cm in diameter, limited to thyroid, or any tumor with 
minimal extrathyroidal invasion
T4a = Any size tumor extending beyond capsule to invade subcutaneous 
soft tissue, larynx, trachea, esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerve, or 
intrathyroidal anaplastic cancer
T4b = Tumor invading prevertebral fascia, or encasing carotid artery or 
mediastinal vessels; or extrathyroidal anaplastic cancer
Regional lymph nodes (N)—include central, lateral cervical, and upper 
mediastinal nodes
NX = Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0 = No regional lymph node metastasis
N1 = Regional lymph node metastasis
N1a = Metastases to level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal, and prelaryn-
geal/Delphian lymph nodes)
N1b = Metastases to unilateral, bilateral, or contralateral cervical or su-
perior mediastinal lymph nodes
Distant metastasis (M)
MX = Distant metastases cannot be assessed
M1 = No distant metastasis
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on 
Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is 
the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by 
Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.
5
1545
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
the utility of examining a combination of DNA-based markers 
including BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC, and PAX/PPARγ abnormali-
ties in the diagnosis of indeterminate nodules. In their study, 
the presence of any mutation in an FNAB sample was a strong 
indicator of cancer.37,38 Expression arrays also have been used 
to investigate the role of microRNAs, which are a new class of 
small, noncoding RNAs that have been implicated in carcino-
genesis. The specific microRNAs miR-197 and miR-346 are 
upregulated in follicular thyroid cancers39 and have the potential 
to be used as diagnostic markers. Additional studies have also 
demonstrated the feasibility of studying a panel of microRNAs 
in a small number of FNA samples. Peripheral blood measure-
ment of TSH-R mRNA levels was able to predict malignancy 
with a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 80%; however, its 
widespread application requires further study.40 A recently pub-
lished prospective, multicenter study validated a novel diagnos-
tic test that measures the expression of 167 genes (Veracyte). 
The gene expression classifier correctly classified 78 of 85 
indeterminate nodules as suspicious with a sensitivity of 92%. 
Additional studies are needed to assess its utility in the broader 
clinical setting.41
Pathology.  Follicular carcinomas usually are solitary lesions, 
and the majority are surrounded by a capsule. Histologically, 
follicles are present, but the lumen may be devoid of colloid. 
Architectural patterns depend on the degree of differentiation 
demonstrated by the tumor. Malignancy is defined by the pres-
ence of capsular and vascular invasion (Fig. 38-18). In general, 
minimally invasive tumors appear grossly encapsulated and 
have microscopic invasion through the tumor capsule without 
extension into the parenchyma and/or invasion into small- to 
medium-sized vessels (venous caliber) in or immediately out-
side the capsule, but not within the tumor. On the other hand, 
widely invasive tumors demonstrate evidence of large vessel 
invasion and/or broad areas of tumor invasion through the cap-
sule. They may, in fact, be unencapsulated. It is important to 
note that there is a wide variation of opinion among clinicians 
and pathologists with respect to the above definitions. Tumor 
infiltration and invasion, as well as tumor thrombus within the 
middle thyroid or jugular veins, may be apparent at operation.
Surgical Treatment and Prognosis.  Patients diagnosed by FNAB 
as having a follicular lesion should undergo thyroid lobectomy 
because at least 80% of these patients will have benign adeno-
mas. Total thyroidectomy is recommended by some surgeons 
in older patients with follicular lesions >4 cm because of the 
higher risk of cancer in this setting (50%) and certainly should 
be performed in patients with atypia on FNA, a family history 
Less than near-total
thyroidectomy
P = 0.02
Less than
near-total
thyroidectomy
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
4
6
8
10
12
Cumulative death (%)
Near-total or total
thyroidectomy
Near-total
or total
thyroidectomy
Years after initial therapy
0
436
11
352
6
290
7
227
2
181
1
120
0
64
0
29
0
698
5
554
6
441
6
365
1
314
3
209
2
100
0
32
Figure 38-17.  Improved survival in patients with papillary or follicular thyroid cancer following total or near-total thyroidectomy compared 
to those who underwent less than near-total thyroidectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Mazzaferri E, Jhiang S. Long-term impact of 
initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. Am J Med. 1994;97:424. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Figure 38-18.  Hematoxylin-eosin–stained section from follicular 
thyroid carcinoma showing capsular invasion.
1546
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
of thyroid cancer, or a history of radiation exposure. Intraop-
erative frozen-section examination usually is not helpful, but 
should be performed when there is evidence of capsular or 
vascular invasion or when adjacent lymphadenopathy is present. 
Total thyroidectomy should be performed when thyroid cancer 
is diagnosed. There is debate among experts about whether 
patients with minimally invasive follicular cancers should 
undergo completion thyroidectomy because the prognosis 
is so good in these patients. A diagnosis of frankly invasive 
carcinoma or follicular carcinoma with angioinvasion, with or 
without capsular invasion, necessitates completion of total thy-
roidectomy primarily so that 131I can be used to detect and ablate 
metastatic disease. Prophylactic nodal dissection is not needed 
because nodal involvement is infrequent, but in the unusual 
patient with nodal metastases, therapeutic neck dissection is 
recommended. Prophylactic central neck dissection may be con-
sidered in patients with large tumors. The cumulative mortality 
from follicular thyroid cancer is approximately 15% at 10 years 
and 30% at 20 years. Poor long-term prognosis is predicted by 
age over 50 years old at presentation, tumor size >4 cm, higher 
tumor grade, marked vascular invasion, extrathyroidal invasion, 
and distant metastases at the time of diagnosis.
Hürthle Cell Carcinoma  Hürthle cell carcinomas account for 
approximately 3% of all thyroid malignancies and, under the 
World Health Organization classification, are considered to be 
a subtype of follicular thyroid cancer. Hürthle cell cancers also 
are characterized by vascular or capsular invasion and, there-
fore, cannot be diagnosed by FNAB. Tumors contain sheets of 
eosinophilic cells packed with mitochondria, which are derived 
from the oxyphilic cells of the thyroid gland. Hürthle cell 
tumors differ from follicular carcinomas in that they are more 
often multifocal and bilateral (about 30%), usually do not take 
up RAI (about 5%), are more likely to metastasize to local nodes 
(25%) and distant sites, and are associated with a higher mortal-
ity rate (about 20% at 10 years). Hence, they are considered to 
be a separate class of tumors by some groups.
Management is similar to that of follicular neoplasms, 
with lobectomy and isthmusectomy being sufficient surgical 
treatment for unilateral Hürthle cell adenomas. When Hürthle 
cell neoplasms are found to be invasive on definitive paraffin-
section histology, then total thyroidectomy should be performed. 
These patients should also undergo routine central neck node 
removal, similar to patients with MTC, and modified radical 
neck dissection when lateral neck nodes are palpable or identi-
fied by ultrasonography. Although RAI scanning and ablation 
usually are ineffective, they probably should be considered to 
ablate any residual normal thyroid tissue and occasionally ablate 
tumors because there is no other good therapy.
Postoperative Management of Differentiated  
Thyroid Cancer
Radioiodine Therapy  The issue of whether RAI therapy 
offers any benefit to patients with differentiated thyroid cancer 
remains controversial in the absence of prospective, random-
ized controlled trials. Long-term cohort studies by Mazzaferri 
and associates and DeGroot and colleagues demonstrate that 
postoperative RAI therapy reduces recurrence (Fig. 38-19) and 
provides a small improvement in survival, even in low-risk 
patients.28,32 Screening with RAI is more sensitive than chest 
x-ray or CT scanning for detecting metastases; however, it is 
less sensitive than Tg measurements for detecting metastatic 
disease in most differentiated thyroid cancers except Hürthle 
cell tumors. Screening and treatment are facilitated by the 
removal of all normal thyroid tissue, which effectively competes 
for iodine uptake. Metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma 
can be detected and treated by 131I in about 75% of patients. 
Multiple studies show that RAI effectively treats >70% of lung 
micrometastases that are detected by RAI scan in the presence 
of a normal chest x-ray, whereas the success rates drop to <10% 
with pulmonary macrometastases. Early detection therefore 
appears to be very important to improve prognosis.
Several features place patients at increased risk for local 
recurrences or metastases. These high-risk features include cer-
tain histologic subtypes (such as tall cell, columnar, insular, 
solid variant and poorly differentiated thyroid cancer), presence 
of intrathyroidal vascular invasion, or gross or microscopic mul-
tifocal disease. However, there are currently inadequate data 
to determine whether RAI ablation has any benefits based on 
these features alone, independent of patient age, tumor size, and 
lymph node status. Thus, the current ATA guidelines strongly 
recommend RAI after total thyroidectomy only for patients with 
known distant metastases. In addition, RAI is also indicated for 
patients with gross extrathyroidal extension of tumor (regardless 
of size) or tumors >4 cm, even in the absence of other high-risk 
features. Ablation is also recommended, albeit based on expert 
opinion, for selected patients with 1- to 4-cm tumors with lymph 
node metastases or other high-risk features outlined above, 
when the combination of T and N status, age, and histology 
predicts an intermediate to high rate of tumor recurrence.36 In 
contrast, RAI is not indicated for patients with unifocal cancers 
<1 cm in diameter or patients with multifocal tumors (all <1 cm) 
without additional high-risk features. This latter indication is a 
major change from the 2006 guidelines wherein RAI was rec-
ommended for all multifocal tumors.
Remnant ablation can be performed with either thyroid hor-
mone withdrawal or recombinant TSH (rTSH) stimulation. This 
is based on randomized studies showing that both techniques are 
equally effective in preparing patients for ablation, with the lat-
ter being associated with an improved quality of life. If hormone 
withdrawal is used, T4 therapy should be discontinued for approxi-
mately 6 weeks before scanning with 131I. Patients should receive 
T3 during this time period to decrease the period of hypothyroid-
ism. T3 has a shorter half-life than T4 (1 day vs. 1 week) and needs 
to be discontinued for 2 weeks to allow TSH levels to rise before 
treatment. Levels >30 mU/L are considered optimal, based on non-
controlled studies. A low-iodine diet also is recommended during 
this 2-week period. The usual protocol involved administering a 
screening dose of 1 to 3 mCi and measuring uptake 24 hours later. 
After a total thyroidectomy, this value should be <1%. A “hot” 
spot in the neck after initial screening usually represents residual 
normal tissue in the thyroid bed. Some investigators recommend 
omitting the scanning dose altogether to minimize thyrocyte 
“stunning” and subsequent requirement for higher treatment doses. 
Others recommend scanning only if the size of the remnant cannot 
be determined by the operative report or ultrasound, or if the results 
would alter the decision to treat or the dose to be administered. 
Current guidelines recommend using either 123I or low-activity 
131I (1- to 3-mCi dose) and delivering a therapeutic dose within 
72 hours. Treatment doses of 30 to 100 mCi are recommended 
for ablation in low-risk patients as these doses show similar rates 
of ablation and recurrence rates. A 30-mCi dose is also effective 
at ablating the remnant with recombinant TSH. In higher risk 
patients (residual microscopic disease suspected or documented; 
tall cell, insular, or columnar cell histology), higher doses (100 to 
1547
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Initial medical therapy
all recurrences
None
T4 alone
P< .05
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
P< .0001
Years after initial therapy
Percent cancer recurrences
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
None
T4 + RAI      
T4 alone      
T4 + RAI remnant ablation
34/163
15/230
101/789
22/112
0/135
51/603
5/82
3/102
17/462
1/66
1/84
7/378
2/54
1/67
10/326
4/39
0/38
6/229
0/25
0/26
10/135
0/13
0/18
1/51
Initial medical therapy
distant recurrences
None
T4 alone
P<.0002
P<.02
Years after initial therapy
Percent distant recurrence
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
None 
       8/163        9/112     3/82        0/66 
    1/54        4/39       0/25         0/13
T4 alone       19/789      15/603     7/462      0/378       2/326      4/229     8/135       1/51
T4 + RAI         2/230        0/135     1/102      0/84         1/67        0/38       0/26         0/11
T4 + RAI remnant ablation
A
B
Figure 38-19.  Tumor recurrence at a median of 16.7 years after thyroid surgery. The numerator is the number of patients with recurrence, 
and the denominator is the number of patients in each time interval. The P values are derived from log-rank statistical analysis of 40-year life-
table data. Figure shows that all recurrences (A) and distant metastases (B) were reduced in patients who received radioactive iodine (RAI) 
in addition to thyroxine (T4) therapy. (Reproduced with permission from Mazzaferri E, Kloos R. Current approaches to primary therapy for 
papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86:1453. kkjkjdht by The Endocrine Society.)
1548
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
200 mCi) are recommended. If patients have an elevated Tg level, 
but negative RAI scan, some physicians recommend treating 
once with 100 mCi of 131I and repeating the imaging 1 to 2 weeks 
later. Approximately one third of these patients demonstrate 
uptake on posttreatment imaging, and Tg levels usually decrease 
in these patients, documenting therapeutic benefit. The maxi-
mum dose of radioiodine that can be administered at one time 
without performing dosimetry is approximately 200 mCi with 
a cumulative dose of 1000 to 1500 mCi. Up to 500 mCi can be 
given with proper pretreatment dosimetry. Recent studies also 
show an increase in the number of second cancers in patients 
treated with RAI.42 The early and delayed complications of RAI 
therapy are listed in Table 38-7.
External-Beam Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy  External-
beam radiotherapy is occasionally required to control unresect-
able, locally invasive or recurrent disease and to treat metastases 
in support bones to decrease the risk of fractures. It also is of 
value for the treatment and control of pain from bony metastases 
when there is minimal or no RAIU. Single-drug and multidrug 
chemotherapy has been used with little success in disseminated 
thyroid cancer, and there is no role for routine chemotherapy.36 
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and paclitaxel (Taxol) are the most 
frequently used agents. The former acts as a radiation sensitizer 
and should be considered in patients undergoing external-beam 
radiation.
Novel Therapies  These therapies are directed at the pathways 
known to be involved in various thyroid cancers.43 Oncogenic 
kinase inhibitors that inhibit the mutant V600E BRAF kinase 
(PLX4032) selectively or both the wild-type and mutant kinase 
(XL281) have shown promise in the treatment of patients with 
metastatic papillary cancers. These drugs are associated with GI 
toxicity (nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) and an increased risk 
of cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas. Other kinases target-
ing the VEGF and RET receptors have also shown promising 
results. However, the low rate of partial responses, lack of com-
plete response, and ultimate resistance to therapy highlight the 
need for ongoing research in this area.
Thyroid Hormone  T4 is necessary as replacement therapy 
in patients after total or near-total thyroidectomy, and also 
has the additional effect of suppressing TSH and reducing 
the growth stimulus for any possible residual thyroid can-
cer cells. TSH suppression reduces tumor recurrence rates. 
Current guidelines advise maintaining TSH levels <0.1 mU/
mL in patients with persistent disease and maintaining TSH 
in the low normal range (0.3 to 2 mU/mL) in patients who 
are clinically and biochemically free of disease and at low 
risk for recurrence. For high-risk patients in the latter group, 
maintenance of TSH levels of 0.1 to 0.5 mU/mL is advised.36 
The risk of tumor recurrence must be balanced with the side 
effects associated with prolonged TSH suppression, includ-
ing osteopenia and cardiac problems, particularly in older 
patients.
Follow-Up of Patients with Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Thyroglobulin Measurement  Tg and anti-Tg antibody levels 
should be measured initially at 6-month intervals. In low-risk 
patients, who have low suppressed Tg levels in the first year, 
serum Tg should be measured after T4 withdrawal or recombi-
nant TSH stimulation approximately 12 months after ablation. 
Patients with undetectable stimulated Tg levels can be followed 
annually with clinical exam and Tg levels on T4 replacement. 
A single rTSH-stimulated Tg level of <0.5 ng/mL (with absent 
antibodies) has a 98% to 99.5% probability of identifying 
patients completely free of disease on follow-up. A Tg level 
of >2 ng/mL following rTSH stimulation is highly sensitive in 
identifying patients with recurrent tumor.36 Tg measurements in 
FNAB aspirates have also been shown to be useful in the detec-
tion of nodal metastatic disease.44
Imaging  After the first posttreatment scan, low-risk patients 
with negative TSH-stimulated Tg and cervical ultrasound do 
not require routine diagnostic whole-body radioiodine scans. 
However, diagnostic whole-body scans 6 to 12 months after 
remnant ablation may be of value in the follow-up of patients 
with high or intermediate risk of persistent disease. It also is rec-
ommended that cervical ultrasound be performed to evaluate the 
thyroid bed and central and lateral cervical nodal compartments 
at 6 and 12 months after thyroidectomy and then annually for at 
least 3 to 5 years, depending on the patient’s risk for recurrent 
disease and Tg status. Sonographically suspicious nodes >5 to 
8 mm on the smallest diameter measurement should be biopsied 
for cytology as well as Tg measurement in the aspirate washout. 
Smaller nodes can be followed and biopsied if there is contin-
ued growth.36 FDG-PET and PET-CT scans have been shown 
to be useful to localize recurrent or persistent thyroid cancer 
in patients who have Tg-positive, RAI scan–negative disease. 
FDG-PET can also be useful for the initial staging of patients 
with poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas or Hürthle cell 
tumors, particularly in patients with other evidence of dis-
ease on imaging or Tg levels. In addition, they may be used 
Table 38-7
Complications of radioactive iodine therapy (131I) and 
doses at which they are observed
Acute
Long-Term
Neck pain, swelling, and  
  tenderness
Thyroiditis (if remnant  
  present)
Sialadenitis (50–450 mCi),  
  taste dysfunction
Hemorrhage (brain  
  metastases)
Cerebral edema (brain  
  metastases, 200 mCi)
Vocal cord paralysis
Nausea and vomiting  
  (50–450 mCi)
Bone marrow suppression 
  (200 mCi)
Hematologic
Bone marrow suppression  
  (>500 mCi)
Leukemia (>1000 mCi)
Fertility
Ovarian/testicular damage,  
  infertility
Increased spontaneous  
  abortion rate
Pulmonary fibrosis
Chronic sialadenitis, nodules, 
  taste dysfunction
Increased risk of cancer
Anaplastic thyroid cancer
Gastric cancer
Hepatocellular cancer
Lung cancer
Breast cancer (>1000 mCi)
Bladder cancer
Hypoparathyroidism
1549
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
as a prognostic tool in patients with metastatic disease and to 
evaluate the response to treatment in patients with metastatic or 
locally advanced disease.
Medullary Carcinoma  MTC accounts for about 5% of thyroid 
malignancies and arises from the parafollicular or C cells of 
the thyroid, which, in turn, are derived from the ultimobran-
chial bodies. These cells are concentrated superolaterally in the 
thyroid lobes, and this is where MTC usually develops. C cells 
secrete calcitonin, a 32-amino-acid polypeptide that functions 
to lower serum calcium levels, although its effects in humans 
are minimal. Most MTCs occur sporadically. However, approxi-
mately 25% occur within the spectrum of several inherited syn-
dromes such as familial MTC, MEN2A, and MEN2B. All these 
variants are known to result secondary to germline mutations in 
the RET proto-oncogene. The syndromes also are character-
ized by genotype-phenotype correlations, with specific muta-
tions leading to particular clinical manifestations. The salient 
clinical and genetic features of these syndromes are outlined 
in Table 38-8. Some clinical features of MEN2B patients are 
shown in Fig. 38-20.
Patients with MTC often present with a neck mass that may 
be associated with palpable cervical lymphadenopathy (15% to 
20%). Pain or aching is more common in patients with these 
tumors, and local invasion may produce symptoms of dysphagia, 
dyspnea, or dysphonia. Distant blood-borne metastases to the 
liver, bone (frequently osteoblastic), and lung occur later in the 
disease. The female-to-male ratio is 1.5:1. Most patients present 
between 50 and 60 years old, although patients with familial dis-
ease present at a younger age. Medullary thyroid tumors secrete 
not only calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), but 
also other peptides such as calcitonin gene–related peptide, his-
taminadases, prostaglandins E2 and F2α, and serotonin. Patients 
with extensive metastatic disease frequently develop diarrhea, 
which may result from increased intestinal motility and impaired 
intestinal water and electrolyte flux. About 2% to 4% of patients 
develop Cushing’s syndrome as a result of ectopic production of 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
Table 38-8
Clinical and genetic features of medullary thyroid cancer syndromes
Syndrome
Manifestations
Ret Mutations
MEN2A
MTC, pheochromocytoma, primary 
hyperparathyroidism, lichen planus 
amyloidosis
Exon 10—codons 609, 611, 618, 620
Exon 11—codon 634 (more commonly 
associated with pheochromocytoma and 
primary hyperparathyroidism)
MEN2B
MTC, pheochromocytoma, Marfanoid 
habitus, mucocutaneous ganglioneuromatosis
Exon 16—codon 918
Familial MTC
MTC
Codons 609, 611, 618, 620, and 634
Codons 768, 790, 791, or 804 (rare)
MEN2A and Hirschsprung’s disease
MTC, pheochromocytoma, primary 
hyperparathyroidism, Hirschsprung’s disease
Codons 609, 618, 620
MEN2 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; MTC = medullary thyroid cancer.
B
A
Figure 38-20.  Features of MEN2B: thickened lips (A) and mucosal neuromas (A and B).
1550
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Pathology.  MTCs typically are unilateral (80%) in patients with 
sporadic disease and multicentric in familial cases, with bilateral 
tumors occurring in up to 90% of familial patients. Familial cases 
also are associated with C-cell hyperplasia, which is considered 
a premalignant lesion. Microscopically, tumors are composed of 
sheets of infiltrating neoplastic cells separated by collagen and 
amyloid. Marked heterogeneity is present; cells may be polygo-
nal or spindle shaped. The presence of amyloid is a diagnostic 
finding, but immunohistochemistry for calcitonin is more com-
monly used as a diagnostic tumor marker. These tumors also 
stain positively for CEA and calcitonin gene–related peptide.
Diagnosis.  The diagnosis of MTC is established by history, 
physical examination, raised serum calcitonin, or CEA levels, 
and FNAB cytology of the thyroid mass. Attention to family 
history is important because about 25% of patients with MTC 
have familial disease. Because it is not possible to distinguish 
sporadic from familial disease at initial presentation, all new 
patients with MTC should be screened for RET point mutations, 
pheochromocytoma, and HPT. Screening of patients with famil-
ial MTC for RET point mutations has largely replaced using 
provocative testing with pentagastrin or calcium-stimulated 
calcitonin levels to make the diagnosis. Calcitonin and CEA 
are used to identify patients with persistent or recurrent MTC. 
Calcitonin is a more sensitive tumor marker, but CEA is a better 
predictor of prognosis.
Treatment.  The ATA published guidelines for the management 
of medullary cancers in 2009.45 A neck ultrasound is recom-
mended to evaluate the central and lateral neck compartments 
and the superior mediastinum. Serum calcitonin, CEA, and cal-
cium levels should also be measured, and RET proto-oncogene 
mutation testing should be performed. Pheochromocytomas 
need to be excluded. If patients are found to have a pheochro-
mocytoma, this must be operated on first. These tumors are gen-
erally (>50%) bilateral. Total thyroidectomy is the treatment of 
choice for patients with MTC because of the high incidence of 
multicentricity, the more aggressive course, and the fact that 131I 
therapy usually is not effective.
Central compartment nodes frequently are involved early 
in the disease process, so that a bilateral prophylactic central 
neck node dissection should be routinely performed. In patients 
with palpable or imaging-detected cervical nodes or calcitonin 
levels >400 pg/mL, additional imaging to include a neck and 
chest CT and a triple-phase liver CT or contrast-enhanced MRI 
is recommended to assess for metastatic disease. In patients with 
no distant disease, an ipsilateral or bilateral lateral neck dis-
section (levels IIA, III, IV, and V) is advised. Less aggressive 
neck surgery should be considered to preserve speech and swal-
lowing while maintaining locoregional control in patients with 
limited metastatic disease. The role of prophylactic lateral neck 
dissection is controversial. Some groups favor this procedure if 
central neck lymph nodes are involved or if the primary tumor 
is ≥1.5 cm.
In the case of locally recurrent or widely metastatic dis-
ease, tumor debulking is advised not only to ameliorate symp-
toms of pain, flushing, and diarrhea, but also to decrease risk 
of death from recurrent central neck or mediastinal disease. 
External-beam radiotherapy is controversial but can be consid-
ered for patients with resected T4 disease and for patients with 
unresectable residual or recurrent tumor and symptomatic bony 
metastases. Liver metastases tend to be multiple and are typi-
cally not amenable to resection, percutaneous ethanol ablation, 
or radiofrequency ablation. However, chemoembolization may 
be helpful in this setting. There is no effective chemotherapy 
regimen.
Various targeted therapies directed against the RET kinase 
have been investigated for the treatment of MTC.43 Many of these 
also inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), 
due to their close structural similarities. Sorafenib, sunitinib, 
lenvatinib (E7080), and cabozantinib (XL-184) are some such 
multikinase inhibitors, whereas axitinib and pazopanib act only 
on VEGFR. Vandetanib inhibits both targets and is also an epi-
dermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, and is the only 
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for 
the treatment of advanced and progressive MTC based on data 
that it prolongs progression-free survival, in addition to reduc-
ing secretion of calcitonin and CEA. An anti-CEA monoclonal 
antibody (labetuzumab) also has shown antitumor response in a 
small group of patients. Patients with recurrent/metastatic disease 
should be enrolled in well-designed clinical trials.
In patients who have hypercalcemia and an increased PTH 
at the time of thyroidectomy, only obviously enlarged parathy-
roid glands should be removed. The other parathyroid glands 
should be preserved and marked in patients with normocalcemia, 
as only about 20% of patients with MEN2A develop HPT. When 
a normal parathyroid cannot be maintained on a vascular pedicle, 
it should be removed, biopsied to confirm that it is a parathyroid, 
and then autotransplanted to the forearm of the nondominant 
arm, particularly in patients with MEN2A. Re-implantation into 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle is also acceptable for patients 
with known MEN2B and familial MTC.
Prophylactic total thyroidectomy is indicated in RET muta-
tion carriers once the mutation is confirmed. The ATA strati-
fies mutation into various risk levels to offer recommendations 
regarding age at which a prophylactic thyroidectomy should be 
performed and to predict phenotypes, including pheochromo-
cytomas. In general, in patients with less aggressive mutations, 
thyroidectomy may be delayed >5 years, especially if there 
is a normal annual serum calcitonin, neck ultrasound, less 
aggressive family history, or family preference. Children with 
mutations at codon 634 are advised to undergo thyroidectomy 
at <5 years of age, and those with MEN2B-related mutations 
should undergo the procedure before age 1. Central neck dissection 
can be avoided in children who are RET-positive and calcitonin-
negative with a normal ultrasound examination. When the calci-
tonin is increased or the ultrasound suggests a thyroid cancer, a 
prophylactic central neck dissection is indicated.
Postoperative Follow-Up and Prognosis.  Patients are followed by 
annual measurements of calcitonin and CEA levels, in addition 
to history and physical examination. Other modalities used to 
localize recurrent disease include ultrasound, CT, MRI, and 
more recently, FDG-PET/CT scans. Prognosis is related to dis-
ease stage. The 10-year survival rate is approximately 80% but 
decreases to 45% in patients with lymph node involvement. Sur-
vival also is significantly influenced by disease type. It is best in 
patients with non-MEN familial MTC, followed by those with 
MEN2A, and then those with sporadic disease. Prognosis is the 
worst (survival of 35% at 10 years) in patients with MEN2B. 
Performing prophylactic surgery in RET oncogene mutation 
carriers not only improves survival rates but also renders most 
patients calcitonin free.
Anaplastic Carcinoma  Anaplastic carcinoma accounts for 
approximately 1% of all thyroid malignancies in the United 
1551
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
States. Women are more commonly affected, and the majority 
of tumors present in the seventh and eighth decade of life. The 
typical patient has a long-standing neck mass, which rapidly 
enlarges and may be painful. Associated symptoms such as 
dysphonia, dysphagia, and dyspnea are common. The tumor is 
large and may be fixed to surrounding structures or may be ulcer-
ated with areas of necrosis (Fig. 38-21). Lymph nodes usually 
are palpable at presentation. Evidence of metastatic spread also 
may be present. Diagnosis is confirmed by FNAB revealing 
characteristic giant and multinucleated cells. Differential diag-
noses on FNA can include lymphomas, medullary carcinomas, 
direct extension from a laryngeal carcinoma, or other metastatic 
carcinomas or melanoma. When spindle cell elements are present, 
primary and metastatic sarcomas need to be considered as well. 
Immunohistochemical markers can aid with excluding other 
diagnoses. Core or incisional biopsy occasionally is needed to 
confirm the diagnosis, especially when there is necrotic material 
on the FNA.
Pathology.  On gross inspection, anaplastic tumors are firm and 
whitish in appearance. Microscopically, sheets of cells with 
marked heterogeneity are seen. The three main histologic growth 
patterns are spindle cell, squamoid, and pleomorphic giant cell. 
Tumors may show a predominance of one pattern or a mixture 
of various patterns. Foci of more differentiated thyroid tumors, 
either follicular or papillary, may be seen, suggesting that ana-
plastic tumors arise from more well-differentiated tumors.
Treatment and Prognosis.  This tumor is one of the most aggres-
sive thyroid malignancies, with few patients surviving 6 months 
beyond diagnosis. All forms of treatment have been disappoint-
ing. The ATA recently published guidelines for the management 
of patients with anaplastic cancer.46 Imaging (ultrasound, CT, 
MRI, or PET-CT) should be obtained to assess resectability. 
All patients should have preoperative laryngoscopy to assess 
the status of the vocal cords. A total or near-total thyroidec-
tomy with therapeutic lymph node dissection is recommended 
for patients with an intrathyroidal mass (although lobectomy 
may also be appropriate, particularly if there is concern for 
vocal cord paralysis). If extrathyroidal extension is present, an 
en bloc resection should be considered if all gross disease can 
be removed (R1). Tracheostomy should be avoided as long as 
possible unless there is impending airway loss. Adjuvant radia-
tion with should be offered to patients with a good performance 
status and no metastatic disease who desire aggressive manage-
ment. Cytotoxic chemotherapy (with some combination of a tax-
ane, anthracycline, and platinum) is typically given concurrently 
and has been associated with prolonged survival, although these 
agents are also being used in a neoadjuvant fashion particularly 
in patients with unresectable disease.
Lymphoma  Lymphomas account for <1% of thyroid malignan-
cies, and most are of the non-Hodgkin’s B-cell type. Although 
the disease can arise as part of a generalized lymphomatous con-
dition, most thyroid lymphomas develop in patients with chronic 
lymphocytic thyroiditis. Chronic antigenic lymphocyte stimu-
lation has been suggested to result in lymphocyte transforma-
tion. Patients usually present with symptoms similar to those of 
patients with anaplastic carcinoma, although the rapidly enlarg-
ing neck mass often is painless. Patients may present with acute 
respiratory distress. Ultrasound can be useful for early diagno-
sis, and lymphoma appears as a well-defined hypoechoic mass. 
The diagnosis usually is suggested by FNAB, but FNAB can be 
nondiagnostic, particularly in the setting of low-grade lympho-
mas. Therefore, needle core or open biopsy may be necessary for 
definitive diagnosis. Staging studies should be obtained expedi-
tiously to assess the extent of extrathyroidal spread.39
Treatment and Prognosis  Patients with thyroid lymphoma 
respond rapidly to chemotherapy (CHOP—cyclophosphamide, 
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), which also has been 
associated with improved survival. Combined treatment with 
radiotherapy and chemotherapy often is recommended. Thy-
roidectomy and nodal resection are used to alleviate symptoms 
of airway obstruction in patients who do not respond quickly 
to the above regimens or who have completed the regimen 
before diagnosis. Prognosis depends on the histologic grade of 
the tumor and whether the lymphoma is confined to the thy-
roid gland or is disseminated. The overall 5-year survival rate is 
about 50%; patients with extrathyroidal disease have markedly 
lower survival rates.
Metastatic Carcinoma  The thyroid gland is a rare site of metas-
tases from other cancers, including kidney, breast, lung, and 
melanoma. Clinical examination and a review of the patient’s 
history often suggest the source of the metastatic disease, and 
FNAB usually provides definitive diagnosis. Resection of the 
thyroid, usually lobectomy, may be helpful in many patients, 
depending on the status of their primary tumor.
Thyroid Surgery
Conduct of Thyroidectomy  Patients with any recent or remote 
history of altered phonation or prior neck surgery should undergo 
vocal cord assessment by direct or indirect laryngoscopy before 
thyroidectomy. The patient is positioned supine, with a sandbag 
between the scapulae. The head is placed on a donut cushion, 
and the neck is extended to provide maximal exposure. A Kocher 
transverse collar incision, typically 4 to 5 cm in length, is placed 
in or parallel to a natural skin crease 1 cm below the cricoid car-
tilage (Fig. 38-22A), although longer incisions may be needed. 
The subcutaneous tissues and platysma are incised sharply, and 
subplatysmal flaps are raised superiorly to the level of the thyroid 
Figure 38-21.  Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a patient 
with anaplastic thyroid cancer. Note heterogeneity consistent with 
necrosis.
1552
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
cartilage and inferiorly to the suprasternal notch (Fig. 38-22B). 
The strap muscles are divided in the midline along the entire 
length of the mobilized flaps, and the thyroid gland is exposed. 
On the side to be approached first, the sternohyoid muscles are 
separated from the underlying sternothyroid muscle by blunt 
dissection until the internal jugular vein and ansa cervicalis nerve 
are identified. The strap muscles rarely need to be divided to 
gain exposure to the thyroid gland. If this maneuver is necessary, 
the muscles should be divided high to preserve their innervation 
by branches of the ansa cervicalis. If there is evidence of direct 
Incorrect
Cricoid cartilage
Correct
A
Platysma
Cautery
Five straight clamps 
on dermis
B
Middle thyroid v.
C
Cricothyroid m.
External branch of
superior laryngeal n.
Superior 
thyroid vessels
D
Figure 38-22.  Conduct of thyroidectomy. A. Correct placement of thyroidectomy incision. B. Raising subplatysmal flaps. C. Dissection of 
middle thyroid vein. D. Dissection of the superior pole vessels, which should be individually ligated. E. Dissection at the ligament of Berry. 
Note small artery and vein within the ligament and the recurrent laryngeal nerve coursing laterally. F. Endoscopic thyroidectomy via axillary 
incisions. m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.
1553
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
tumor invasion into the strap muscles, the portion of involved 
muscle should be resected en bloc with the thyroid gland. The 
sternothyroid muscle is then dissected off the underlying thyroid 
by a combination of sharp and blunt dissection, thus exposing 
the middle thyroid veins. The thyroid lobe is retracted medially 
and anteriorly, and the lateral tissues are swept posterolaterally 
using a peanut sponge. The middle thyroid veins are ligated and 
divided (Fig. 38-22C). Attention is then turned to the midline 
where Delphian nodes and the pyramidal lobe are identified. The 
fascia just cephalad and caudad to the isthmus is divided. The 
superior thyroid pole is identified by retracting the thyroid first 
inferiorly and medially, and then the upper pole of the thyroid 
is mobilized caudally and laterally. The dissection plane is kept 
as close to the thyroid as possible, and the superior pole vessels 
are individually identified, skeletonized, ligated, and divided low 
on the thyroid gland to avoid injury to the external branch of the 
superior laryngeal nerve (Fig. 38-22D). Once these vessels are 
divided, the tissues posterior and lateral to the superior pole can 
be swept from the gland in a posteromedial direction, to reduce 
the risk of damaging vessels supplying the upper parathyroid.
The RLNs should then be identified. The course of the right 
RLN is more oblique than the left RLN. The nerves can be most 
consistently identified at the level of the cricoid cartilage. The 
parathyroids usually can be identified within 1 cm of the cross-
ing of the inferior thyroid artery and the RLN, although they also 
may be ectopic in location. The lower pole of the thyroid gland 
Small artery & vein
in ligament of Berry
Recurrent laryngeal n.
Thyroid
E
F
Figure 38-22.  (Continued )
1554
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
should be mobilized by gently sweeping all tissues dorsally. The 
inferior thyroid vessels are dissected, skeletonized, ligated, and 
divided as close to the surface of the thyroid gland as possible 
to minimize devascularization of the parathyroids (extracapsular 
dissection) or injury to the RLN. The RLN is most vulnerable to 
injury in the vicinity of the ligament of Berry. The nerve often 
passes through this structure along with small crossing arterial 
and venous branches (Fig. 38-22E). Any bleeding in this area 
should be controlled with gentle pressure before carefully iden-
tifying the vessel and ligating it. Use of the electrocautery should 
be avoided in proximity to the RLN. Once the ligament is divided, 
the thyroid can be separated from the underlying trachea by sharp 
dissection. The pyramidal lobe, if present, must be dissected in a 
cephalad direction to above the level of the notch in the thyroid 
cartilage or higher in continuity with the thyroid gland. If a lobec-
tomy is to be performed, the isthmus is divided flush with the 
trachea on the contralateral side and suture ligated. The procedure 
is repeated on the opposite side for a total thyroidectomy.
Parathyroid glands that are located anteriorly on the surface 
of the thyroid cannot be dissected from the thyroid with a good 
blood supply or that have been inadvertently removed during the 
thyroidectomy should be resected, confirmed as parathyroid tissue 
by frozen section, divided into 1-mm fragments, and reimplanted 
into individual pockets in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The 
sites should be marked with silk sutures and a clip. If a subtotal 
thyroidectomy is to be performed, once the superior pole vessels 
are divided and the thyroid lobe mobilized anteriorly, the thyroid 
lobe is cross-clamped with a Mayo clamp, leaving approximately 
4 g of the posterior portion of the thyroid. The thyroid remnant 
is suture ligated, taking care to avoid injury to the RLN. Routine 
drain placement rarely is necessary. After adequate hemostasis 
is obtained, the strap muscles are reapproximated in the midline. 
The platysma is approximated in a similar fashion. The skin can 
be closed with subcuticular sutures or clips.
Minimally Invasive Approaches  Several approaches to mini-
mally invasive thyroidectomy have been described. Mini-incision 
procedures use a small, 3-cm incision with no flap creation and 
minimal dissection to deliver the thyroid into the wound and then 
perform the pretracheal and paratracheal dissection. Video assis-
tance can be used to improve the visualization via the small inci-
sion. Totally endoscopic approaches also have been described, 
via the supraclavicular, anterior chest, axillary, and breast 
approach. The axillary, anterior chest, and breast approaches 
eliminate the skin incision in the neck but are more invasive. The 
endoscopic approaches can also be performed with the assistance 
of robotic techniques. More recently, there have been reports of 
transoral robotic-assisted thyroidectomy in which the thyroid is 
approached through the oral cavity. These methods are feasible, 
but clear benefits over the “traditional” open approach via small 
neck incisions have not been established.48
Typically, endoscopic thyroidectomies are performed under 
general anesthesia. For the axillary approach, a 30-mm skin 
incision is made in the axilla, and 12-mm and 5-mm trocars are 
inserted through this incision (Fig. 38-22F). An additional 5-mm 
trocar is inserted adjacent to the incision. For the anterior chest 
approach, a 12-mm skin incision is made in the skin of the anterior 
chest approximately 3 to 5 cm below the border of the ipsilateral 
clavicle. Two additional 5-mm trocars are inserted by endoscopic 
guidance below the ipsilateral clavicle, and carbon dioxide (CO2) 
is then insufflated up to a pressure of 4 mmHg to facilitate creation 
of a working space. The anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle is then separated from the sternohyoid muscle to expose 
the sternothyroid muscle. The thyroid gland is exposed by split-
ting the sternothyroid muscle. The lower pole is retracted upward 
and dissected from the adipose tissue to identify the RLN. As the 
RLN is exposed, Berry’s ligament is exposed and incised with a 
5-mm clip or laparoscopic coagulating shears. The upper pole of 
the thyroid gland is separated from the cricothyroid muscle, and 
the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve can be identi-
fied during this maneuver. The upper pole of the thyroid gland 
then is dissected free.
Surgical Removal of Intrathoracic Goiter  A goiter is consid-
ered mediastinal if at least 50% of the thyroid tissue is located 
intrathoracically. Mediastinal goiters can be primary or second-
ary. Primary mediastinal goiters constitute approximately 1% 
of all mediastinal goiters and arise from accessory (ectopic) 
thyroid tissue located in the chest. These goiters are supplied 
by intrathoracic blood vessels and do not have any connection 
to thyroid tissue in the neck. The vast majority of mediastinal 
goiters are, however, secondary mediastinal goiters that arise 
from downward extension of cervical thyroid tissue along the 
fascial planes of the neck and derive their blood supply from 
the superior and inferior thyroid arteries. Virtually all intratho-
racic goiters can be removed via a cervical incision. Patients 
who have (a) invasive thyroid cancers, (b) had previous thyroid 
operations and may have developed parasitic mediastinal ves-
sels, or (c) primary mediastinal goiters with no thyroid tissue in 
the neck may require a median sternotomy for removal.49 The 
chest, however, should be prepared in most cases in the event it 
is necessary to perform a median sternotomy to control medi-
astinal bleeding or completely remove an unsuspected invasive 
cancer. The goiter is approached via a neck incision. The supe-
rior pole vessels and the middle thyroid veins are identified and 
ligated first. Early division of the isthmus helps with subsequent 
mobilization of the substernal goiter from beneath the sternum. 
Placement of large 1-0 or 2-0 sutures deep into the goiter, when 
necessary, helps deliver it. For patients in whom thyroid cancer 
is suspected or demonstrated in an intrathoracic gland, attempts 
should be made to avoid rupture of the thyroid capsule. When 
sternotomy is indicated, the sternum usually should be divided 
to the level of the third intercostal space and then laterally on one 
side at the space between the third and fourth ribs (Fig. 38-23).
1
2
3
Figure 38-23.  Conduct of thyroidectomy. Incisions for a partial 
sternotomy.
1555
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Central and Lateral Neck Dissection for Nodal Metastases  
Central compartment (medial to the carotid sheath) lymph nodes 
frequently are involved in patients with papillary, medullary, 
and Hürthle cell carcinomas and should be removed at the time 
of thyroidectomy, preserving the RLNs and parathyroid glands. 
Central neck dissection is particularly important in patients with 
medullary and Hürthle cell carcinoma because of the high fre-
quency of microscopic tumor spread and because these tumors 
cannot be ablated with 131I. An ipsilateral modified radical neck 
dissection is indicated in the presence of palpable cervical 
lymph nodes or prophylactically in some patients with medul-
lary carcinoma.
A modified radical (functional) neck dissection can be per-
formed via the cervical incision used for thyroidectomy, which 
can be extended laterally (Fig. 38-24A) to the anterior margin 
of the trapezius muscle. The procedure involves removal of 
all fibro-fatty tissue along the internal jugular vein (levels II, 
III, and IV) and the posterior triangle (level V). In contrast to 
1
2
3
McFee incision
A
B
Spinal 
accessory n.
Phrenic n.
Vagus n.
Scalenus
anticus m.
Lymph
nodes
Carotid a. 
Internal
jugular v.
Figure 38-24.  Conduct of neck dissection. 
A. Incisions for modified radical neck dissection. 
B. Anatomic relations of structures identified dur-
ing a modified radical neck dissection. a. = artery; 
m. = muscle; n. = nerve.
1556
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
a radical neck dissection, the internal jugular vein, the spinal 
accessory nerve, the cervical sensory nerves, and the sternoclei-
domastoid muscle are preserved unless they are adherent to or 
invaded by tumor. The procedure begins by opening the plane 
between the strap muscles medially and the sternocleidomas-
toid muscle laterally. The anterior belly of the omohyoid muscle 
is retracted laterally, and the dissection is carried posteriorly 
until the carotid sheath is reached. The internal jugular vein is 
retracted medially with a vein retractor and the fibro-fatty tissue 
and lymph nodes are dissected away from it by a combination of 
sharp and blunt dissection. The lateral dissection is carried along 
the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, remov-
ing the tissue from the posterior triangle. The deep dissection 
plane is the anterior scalenus muscle, the phrenic nerve, the bra-
chial plexus, and the medial scalenus muscle. The phrenic nerve 
is preserved on the scalenus anterior muscle, as are the cervical 
sensory nerves in most patients (Fig. 38-24B). Dissection along 
the spinal accessory nerve superiorly is most important because 
this is a frequent site of metastatic disease.
Complications of Thyroid Surgery  Nerves, parathyroids, and 
surrounding structures are all at risk of injury during thyroidec-
tomy. Injury to the RLN may occur by severance, ligation, or 
traction, but should occur in <1% of patients undergoing thy-
roidectomy by experienced surgeons. The RLN is most vulner-
able to injury during the last 2 to 3 cm of its course, but also 
can be damaged if the surgeon is not alert to the possibility of 
nerve branches and the presence of a nonrecurrent nerve, par-
ticularly on the right side. If the injury is recognized intraopera-
tively, most surgeons advocate primary reapproximation of the 
perineurium using nonabsorbable sutures. Approximately 20% 
of patients are at risk of injury to the external branches of the 
superior laryngeal nerve, especially if superior pole vessels are 
ligated en masse. The cervical sympathetic trunk is at risk of 
injury in invasive thyroid cancers and retroesophageal goiters 
and may result in Horner’s syndrome. Transient hypocalcemia 
(from surgical injury or inadvertent removal of parathyroid tis-
sue) has been reported in up to 50% of cases, but permanent 
hypoparathyroidism occurs <2% of the time. Postoperative 
hypocalcemia is more likely in patients who undergo concomi-
tant thyroidectomy and central and lateral neck dissection and 
in patients with Graves’ disease. Postoperative hematomas or 
bleeding may also complicate thyroidectomies and rarely neces-
sitate emergency reoperation to evacuate the hematoma. Bilat-
eral vocal cord dysfunction with airway compromises requires 
immediate reintubation and tracheostomy. Seromas may need 
aspiration to relieve patient discomfort. Wound cellulitis and 
infection and injury to surrounding structures, such as the 
carotid artery, jugular vein, and esophagus, are infrequent.
Nerve Monitoring  Intraoperative RLN and external laryngeal 
nerve monitoring techniques are being increasingly used during 
thyroid and parathyroid surgery. Both continuous monitoring 
using endotracheal tube electrodes and intermittent monitoring 
by periodic stimulation and laryngeal palpation are used. Many 
published studies have established the feasibility of nerve mon-
itoring; however, none were able to shown that the technique 
equivocally reduces nerve injury (particularly by experienced 
surgeons and especially when the RLN is routinely visually 
identified) until recently. In 2009, Barczynski and colleagues50 
were the first to demonstrate, in their prospective randomized 
trial with 2000 nerves at risk that neuromonitoring was asso-
ciated with a statistically significant improvement in transient 
RLN injury rates when compared to the practice of visualiza-
tion of the nerve alone and particularly in patients at higher risk 
of nerve injury. Of note, there was no difference in permanent 
RLN injury rates, and a later meta-analysis of all the published 
studies also failed to show a protective effect of neuromonitor-
ing. Despite this, the technology has become widely adopted. 
As additional studies have documented that direct RLN stimu-
lation has a low sensitivity of predicting vocal cord paralysis, 
when compared to vagal stimulation, attempts have been made 
to identify critical steps in the process. Currently, adequate RLN 
monitoring includes (a) stimulation of the vagus nerve prior to 
any dissection in the tracheoesophageal groove; (b) stimulation 
of the RLN prior to resecting the thyroid; (c) stimulation of the 
most proximally exposed portion of the RLN after the ligament 
of Berry has been completely divided; and (d) stimulation of the 
vagus nerve after complete hemostasis has been achieved on that 
side of the neck prior to closing or going on to the opposite lobe. 
Recently, an international group has proposed guidelines for 
RLN monitoring in thyroid and parathyroid surgery, and pre- and 
postoperative laryngoscopy is recommended, in addition to vagal 
stimulation. Not all experts agree with this recommendation.
PARATHYROID
Historical Background
In 1849, the curator of the London Zoological Gardens, 
Sir Richard Owen, provided the first accurate description of the 
normal parathyroid gland after autopsy examination of an Indian 
rhinoceros. However, human parathyroids were not grossly and 
microscopically described until 1879 by Ivar Sandström, a med-
ical student in Uppsala, Sweden. He suggested that these glands 
be named the glandulae parathyroideae, although their function 
was not known.
The association of HPT and the bone disease osteitis fibrosa 
cystica (described by von Recklinghausen) was recognized in 
1903. Calcium measurement became possible in 1909, and the 
association between serum calcium levels and the parathyroid 
glands was established. The first successful parathyroidectomy 
was performed in 1925 by Felix Mandl on a 38-year-old man who 
had severe bone pain secondary to advanced osteitis fibrosa cys-
tica. The patient’s condition dramatically improved after the oper-
ation, and he lived for another 7 years before dying of recurrent 
HPT or renal failure. In 1926, the first parathyroid operation was 
performed at Massachusetts General Hospital. Edward Churchill, 
assisted by an intern named Oliver Cope, operated on the famous 
sea captain Charles Martell for severe primary HPT (PHPT). 
It was not until his seventh operation, which included total thy-
roidectomy, that an ectopic adenoma was found substernally. 
Unfortunately, Captain Martell died 6 weeks later, likely due to 
laryngeal spasm and complications of renal stones and ureteral 
obstruction. The first successful parathyroidectomy for HPT in 
the United States was performed on a 56-year-old woman in 1928 
by Isaac Y. Olch at the Barnes Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri. 
At operation, a parathyroid adenoma was found attached to the 
left lower lobe of the thyroid gland. Postoperatively, the patient 
developed tetany, requiring lifelong supplemental calcium.
Embryology
In humans, the superior parathyroid glands are derived from 
the fourth branchial pouch, which also gives rise to the thyroid 
gland. The third branchial pouches give rise to the inferior para-
thyroid glands and the thymus (Fig. 38-25). The parathyroids 
1557
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
remain closely associated with their respective branchial pouch 
derivatives. The position of normal superior parathyroid glands 
is more consistent, with 80% of these glands being found near 
the posterior aspect of the upper and middle thyroid lobes, at 
the level of the cricoid cartilage.51 Approximately 1% of normal 
upper glands may be found in the paraesophageal or retroesopha-
geal space. Enlarged superior glands may descend in the tracheo-
esophageal groove and come to lie caudal to the inferior glands. 
Truly ectopic superior parathyroid glands are rare, but may be 
found in the middle or posterior mediastinum or in the aortopul-
monary window.51 As the embryo matures, the thymus and infe-
rior parathyroids migrate together caudally in the neck. The most 
common location for inferior glands is within a distance of 1 cm 
from a point centered where the inferior thyroid artery and RLN 
cross. Approximately 15% of inferior glands are found in the 
thymus. The position of the inferior glands, however, tends to be 
more variable due to their longer migratory path. Undescended 
inferior glands may be found near the skull base, angle of the 
mandible, or superior to the upper parathyroid glands along with 
an undescended thymus. The frequency of intrathyroidal glands 
is about 2%.
Anatomy and Histology
Most patients have four parathyroid glands. The superior glands 
usually are dorsal to the RLN at the level of the cricoid cartilage, 
whereas the inferior parathyroid glands are located ventral to the 
nerve. Normal parathyroid glands are gray and semitransparent 
in newborns but appear golden yellow to light brown in adults. 
Parathyroid color depends on cellularity, fat content, and vas-
cularity. Moreover, they often are embedded in and sometimes 
difficult to discern from surrounding fat. Normal parathyroid 
glands are located in loose tissue or fat and are ovoid. They 
measure up to 7 mm in size and weigh approximately 40 to 50 
mg each. Parathyroid glands usually derive their blood supply 
from branches of the inferior thyroid artery, although branches 
from the superior thyroid artery supply at least 20% of upper 
glands. Branches from the thyroidea ima, and vessels to the tra-
chea, esophagus, larynx, and mediastinum may also be found. 
The parathyroid glands drain ipsilaterally by the superior, mid-
dle, and inferior thyroid veins.
Akerström and colleagues,52 in an autopsy series of 503 
cadavers, found four parathyroid glands in 84% of cases. Super-
numerary glands were present in 13% of patients, most com-
monly in the thymus. Only 3% of patients had less than four 
glands. Similar results were obtained in other dissection studies 
of 428 human subjects by Gilmour who reported a 6.7% inci-
dence of supernumerary glands.53
Histologically, parathyroid glands are composed of chief 
cells and oxyphil cells arranged in trabeculae, within a stroma 
composed primarily of adipose cells (Fig. 38-26). The parathy-
roid glands of infants and children are composed mainly of chief 
cells, which produce parathyroid hormone (PTH). Acidophilic, 
mitochondria-rich oxyphil cells are derived from chief cells, 
can be seen around puberty, and increase in numbers in adult-
hood. A third group of cells, known as water-clear cells, also 
Parathyroid III
Foramen caecum
Thyroglossal duct
Median thyroid
Thymus
Trachea
Esophagus
Fifth branchial
pouch
Fourth
branchial
pouch
Third
branchial
pouch
Parathyroid IV
Ultimobranchial
body
Median thyroid
Lateral
thyroid or 
ultimobranchial 
body
Esophagus
Parathyroid IV
Parathyroid III
Thymus
A
B
Figure 38-25.  Parathyroid embryology. Figure demonstrates a 
schematic view of the pharynx of an 8- to 10-mm embryo (A) and 
locations of the thyroid, parathyroid, and thymic tissues in a 13- to 
14-mm embryo (B). The lower parathyroids are derived from the 
third branchial pouch and migrate with the thymus, whereas the 
upper parathyroids are derived from the fourth branchial pouch and 
lie in close proximity to the ultimobranchial bodies. (Reproduced 
with permission from Henry J. Applied embryology of the thyroid 
and parathyroid glands. In: Randolph G, ed. Surgery of the Thyroid 
and Parathyroid Glands. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company; 
2003. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Figure 38-26.  Normal parathyroid histology showing chief cells 
interspersed with adipose cells.
1558
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
are derived from chief cells, are present in small numbers, and 
are rich in glycogen. Although most oxyphil and water-clear 
cells retain the ability to secrete PTH, their functional signifi-
cance is not known.
Parathyroid Physiology  
and Calcium Homeostasis
Calcium is the most abundant cation in human beings and 
has several crucial functions. Extracellular calcium levels are 
10,000-fold higher than intracellular levels, and both are tightly 
controlled. Extracellular calcium is important for excitation-
contraction coupling in muscle tissues, synaptic transmission 
in the nervous system, coagulation, and secretion of other hor-
mones. Intracellular calcium is an important second messenger 
regulating cell division, motility, membrane trafficking, and 
secretion. Calcium is absorbed from the small intestine in its 
inorganic form. Calcium fluxes in the steady state are depicted 
in Fig. 38-27.
Extracellular calcium (900 mg) accounts for only 1% of 
the body’s calcium stores, the majority of which is sequestered 
in the skeletal system. Approximately 50% of the serum cal-
cium is in the ionized form, which is the active component. The 
remainder is bound to albumin (40%) and organic anions such 
as phosphate and citrate (10%). The total serum calcium levels 
range from 8.5 to 10.5 mg/dL (2.1 to 2.6 mmol/L), and ion-
ized calcium levels range from 4.4 to 5.2 mg/dL (1.1 to 1.3 
mmol/L). Both concentrations are tightly regulated. The total 
serum calcium level must always be considered in its relation-
ship to plasma protein levels, especially serum albumin. For 
each gram per deciliter of alteration of serum albumin above or 
below 4.0 mg/dL, there is a 0.8 mg/dL increase or decrease in 
protein-bound calcium and, thus, in total serum calcium levels. 
Total and, particularly, ionized calcium levels are influenced by 
various hormone systems.
Parathyroid Hormone.  The parathyroid cells rely on a 
G-protein–coupled membrane receptor, designated the calcium-
sensing receptor (CASR), to regulate PTH secretion by sensing 
extracellular calcium levels54 (Fig. 38-28). PTH secretion also 
is stimulated by low levels of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, cat-
echolamines, and hypomagnesemia. The PTH gene is located on 
chromosome 11. PTH is synthesized in the parathyroid gland as 
a precursor hormone preproPTH, which is cleaved first to pro-
PTH and then to the final 84-amino-acid PTH. Secreted PTH 
has a half-life of 2 to 4 minutes. In the liver, PTH is metabolized 
into the active N-terminal component and the relatively inactive 
C-terminal fraction. The C-terminal component is excreted by 
the kidneys and accumulates in chronic renal failure.
PTH functions to regulate calcium levels via its actions on 
three target organs, the bone, kidney, and gut. PTH increases 
the resorption of bone by stimulating osteoclasts and promotes 
the release of calcium and phosphate into the circulation. At the 
kidney, calcium is primarily absorbed in concert with sodium 
in the proximal convoluted tubule, but fine adjustments occur 
more distally. PTH acts to limit calcium excretion at the dis-
tal convoluted tubule via an active transport mechanism. PTH 
also inhibits phosphate reabsorption (at the proximal convoluted 
tubule) and bicarbonate reabsorption. It also inhibits the Na+/H+ 
antiporter, which results in a mild metabolic acidosis in hyper-
parathyroid states. PTH and hypophosphatemia also enhance 
1-hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, which is responsible 
for its indirect effect of increasing intestinal calcium absorption.
Calcitonin.  Calcitonin is produced by thyroid C cells and func-
tions as an antihypercalcemic hormone by inhibiting osteoclast-
mediated bone resorption. Calcitonin production is stimulated 
by calcium and pentagastrin and also by catecholamines, chole-
cystokinin, and glucagon. When administered intravenously to 
experimental animals, it produces hypocalcemia. At the kidney, 
calcitonin increases phosphate excretion by inhibiting its reab-
sorption. Calcitonin plays a minimal, if any, role in the regula-
tion of calcium levels in humans. However, it is very useful as 
a marker of MTC and in treating acute hypercalcemic crisis.
Vitamin D.  Vitamin D refers to vitamin D2 and vitamin D3, both 
of which are produced by photolysis of naturally occurring ste-
rol precursors. Vitamin D2 is available commercially in pharma-
PTH
PTH
VIT. D
ECF
CALCIUM
900 mg
Kidney
Urine
0.15 - 0.3 g
900 -
1400 g
Bone
0.25 - 0.5 g
0.25 - 0.5 g
0.25 - 0.5 g
0.1 - 0.2 g
0.4 - 1.5 g
0.35 - 1.0 g
VIT. D
PTH
Figure 38-27.  Calcium balance and fluxes 
in a normal human. Solid arrows depict a 
direct effect, whereas dashed arrows depict 
an indirect effect. The thickness of the arrows 
is representative of the magnitude of the flux. 
ECF = extracellular fluid; PTH = parathyroid 
hormone; VIT. = vitamin. (Reproduced with 
permission from Bruder J, et al. Mineral 
metabolism. In: Felig P, Frohman L, eds. 
Endocrinology and Metabolism. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Publishers, Inc; 2001:1081. 
kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, 
Inc.)
1559
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
ceutical preparations, whereas vitamin D3 is the most important 
physiologic compound and is produced from 7-dehydrocholes-
terol, which is found in the skin. Vitamin D is metabolized in the 
liver to its primary circulating form, 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Fur-
ther hydroxylation in the kidney results in 1,25-dihydroxy vita-
min D, which is the most metabolically active form of vitamin D. 
Vitamin D stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphate 
from the gut and the resorption of calcium from the bone.
Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperfunction of the parathyroid glands may be classified as 
primary, secondary, or tertiary. PHPT arises from increased 
PTH production from abnormal parathyroid glands and 
results from a disturbance of normal feedback control exerted 
by serum calcium. Elevated PTH levels may also occur as a 
compensatory response to hypocalcemic states resulting from 
chronic renal failure or GI malabsorption of calcium. This sec-
ondary HPT can be reversed by correction of the underlying 
problem (e.g., kidney transplantation for chronic renal failure). 
However, chronically stimulated glands may occasionally 
become autonomous, resulting in persistence or recurrence of 
hypercalcemia after successful renal transplantation, resulting 
in tertiary HPT.
Primary Hyperparathyroidism.  PHPT is a common dis-
order, affecting 100,000 individuals annually in the United 
States. PHPT occurs in 0.1% to 0.3% of the general population 
and is more common in women (1:500) than in men (1:2000). 
Increased PTH production leads to hypercalcemia via increased 
GI absorption of calcium, increased production of vitamin D3, 
and reduced renal calcium clearance. PHPT is characterized by 
increased parathyroid cell proliferation and PTH secretion that 
is independent of calcium levels.
Etiology.  The exact cause of PHPT is unknown, although expo-
sure to low-dose therapeutic ionizing radiation and familial 
predisposition account for some cases. Various diets and inter-
mittent exposure to sunshine may also be related. Other causes 
include renal leak of calcium and declining renal function with 
NH2
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
[Ca2+]i
CASR
PKC
COOH
G proteins 
PLC
Ins (1,4,5) P3
Regulation of PTH
Parathyroid cell
Systemic effects
Kidney
25(OH)D3
Liver
Vitamin D
1,25(OH)2D3
Bone
Small intestine
ER
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Figure 38-28.  Regulation of calcium homeostasis. The calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) is expressed on the surface of the parathyroid 
cell and senses fluctuations in the concentration of extracellular calcium. Activation of the receptor is thought to increase intracellular cal-
cium levels, which, in turn, inhibit parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion via posttranslational mechanisms. Increased PTH secretion leads 
to an increase in serum calcium levels by increasing bone resorption and enhancing renal calcium reabsorption. PTH also stimulates renal 
1-α-hydroxylase activity, leading to an increase in 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, which also exerts a negative feedback on PTH secretion. PKC = 
protein kinase C; PLC = phospholipase C. (Reproduced with permission from Carling T. Molecular pathology of parathyroid tumors. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab. 2001;12:54. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1560
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
age as well as alteration in the sensitivity of parathyroid glands 
to suppression by calcium. The latency period for development 
of PHPT after radiation exposure is longer than that for the 
development of thyroid tumors, with most cases occurring 30 to 
40 years after exposure. Patients who have been exposed to 
radiation have similar clinical presentations and calcium lev-
els when compared to patients without a history of radiation 
exposure. However, the former tend to have higher PTH lev-
els and a higher incidence of concomitant thyroid neoplasms. 
Lithium therapy has been known to shift the set point for PTH 
secretion in parathyroid cells, thereby resulting in elevated PTH 
levels and mild hypercalcemia. Lithium stimulates the growth 
of abnormal parathyroid glands in vitro and also in susceptible 
patients in vivo.55 PHPT results from the enlargement of a single 
gland or parathyroid adenoma in approximately 80% of cases, 
multiple adenomas or hyperplasia in 15% to 20% of patients, 
and parathyroid carcinoma in 1% of patients. Existence of two 
enlarged glands or double adenomas is supported by biochemi-
cal (calcium and PTH), intraoperative PTH (IOPTH), molecu-
lar, and histologic data. This entity is less common in younger 
patients but accounts for up to 10% of older patients with PHPT. 
It should be emphasized that when more than one abnormal 
parathyroid gland is identified preoperatively or intraopera-
tively, the patient has hyperplasia (all glands abnormal) until 
proven otherwise.
Genetics  Most cases of PHPT are sporadic. However, PHPT 
also occurs within the spectrum of a number of inherited disor-
ders such as MEN1, MEN2A, isolated familial HPT, and famil-
ial HPT with jaw-tumor syndrome. All of these syndromes are 
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. PHPT is the earli-
est and most common manifestation of MEN156 and develops 
in 80% to 100% of patients by age 40 years old. These patients 
also are prone to pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and pitu-
itary adenomas and, less commonly, to adrenocortical tumors, 
lipomas, skin angiomas, and carcinoid tumors of the bronchus, 
thymus, or stomach. About 50% of patients develop gastri-
nomas, which often are multiple and metastatic at diagnosis. 
Insulinomas develop in 10% to 15% of cases, whereas many 
patients have nonfunctional pancreatic endocrine tumors. Pro-
lactinomas occur in 10% to 50% of MEN1 patients and consti-
tute the most common pituitary lesion. MEN1 has been shown 
to result from germline mutations in the MEN1 gene, a tumor 
suppressor gene located on chromosome 11q12-13 that encodes 
menin, a protein that is postulated to interact with the transcrip-
tion factors JunD and nuclear factor-κB in the nucleus, in addi-
tion to replication protein A and other proteins.57 Most MEN1 
mutations result in a nonfunctional protein and are scattered 
throughout the translated nine exons of the gene. This makes 
presymptomatic screening for mutation carriers difficult. MEN1 
mutations also have been found in kindreds initially suspected 
to represent isolated familial HPT. HPT develops in about 20% 
of patients with MEN2A and generally is less severe. MEN2A 
is caused by germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene 
located on chromosome 10. In contrast to MEN1, genotype-
phenotype correlations have been noted in this syndrome in 
that individuals with mutations at codon 634 are more likely to 
develop HPT. Patients with the familial HPT with jaw-tumor 
syndrome have an increased predisposition to parathyroid 
carcinoma. This syndrome maps to a tumor suppressor locus 
HRPT2 (CDC73 or parafibromin) on chromosome 1. Patients 
belonging to isolated HPT kindreds also appear to demonstrate 
linkage to HRPT2.
Approximately 25% to 40% of sporadic parathyroid 
adenomas and some hyperplastic parathyroid glands have loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH) at 11q13, the site of the MEN1 gene. 
The parathyroid adenoma 1 oncogene (PRAD1), which encodes 
cyclin D1, a cell cycle control protein, is overexpressed in 
about 18% of parathyroid adenomas. This was demonstrated 
to result from a rearrangement on chromosome 11 that places 
the PRAD1 gene under the control of the PTH promoter. Other 
chromosomal regions deleted in parathyroid adenomas and 
possibly reflecting loss of tumor suppressor genes include 1p, 
6q, and 15q, whereas amplified regions suggesting oncogenes 
have been identified at 16p and 19p. RET mutations are rare in 
sporadic parathyroid tumors. Sporadic parathyroid cancers are 
characterized by uniform loss of the tumor suppressor gene RB, 
which is involved in cell cycle regulation, and 60% have HRPT2 
(CDC73) mutations. These alterations are rare in benign para-
thyroid tumors and may have implications for diagnosis. The 
p53 tumor suppressor gene is also inactivated in a subset (30%) 
of parathyroid carcinomas.
Clinical Manifestations  Patients with PHPT formerly presented 
with the “classic” pentad of symptoms (i.e., kidney stones, pain-
ful bones, abdominal groans, psychic moans, and fatigue over-
tones). With the advent and widespread use of automated blood 
analyzers in the early 1970s, there has been an alteration in the 
“typical” patient with PHPT. They are more likely to be mini-
mally symptomatic or asymptomatic. Currently, most patients 
present with weakness, fatigue, polydipsia, polyuria, nocturia, 
bone and joint pain, constipation, decreased appetite, nausea, 
heartburn, pruritus, depression, and memory loss. Patients with 
PHPT also tend to score lower than healthy controls when 
assessed by general multidimensional health assessment tools 
such as the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-36) and other specific questionnaires. Furthermore, these 
symptoms and signs improve in most, but certainly not all, 
patients after parathyroidectomy. Truly “asymptomatic” PHPT 
appears to be rare, occurring in <5% of patients, as determined 
by prospectively administered questionnaires. Complications of 
PHPT are described below.
Renal Disease.  Approximately 80% of patients with PHPT have 
some degree of renal dysfunction or symptoms. Kidney stones 
were previously reported in up to 80% of patients but now occur 
in about 20% to 25%. The calculi are typically composed of 
calcium phosphate or oxalate. In contrast, PHPT is found to be 
the underlying disorder in only 3% of patients presenting with 
nephrolithiasis. Nephrocalcinosis, which refers to renal paren-
chymal calcification, is found in <5% of patients and is more 
likely to lead to renal dysfunction. Chronic hypercalcemia also 
can impair concentrating ability, thereby resulting in polyuria, 
polydipsia, and nocturia. The incidence of hypertension is vari-
able but has been reported to occur in up to 50% of patients 
with PHPT. Hypertension appears to be more common in older 
patients and correlates with the magnitude of renal dysfunction 
and, in contrast to other symptoms, is least likely to improve 
after parathyroidectomy.
Bone Disease.  Bone disease, including osteopenia, osteoporosis, 
and osteitis fibrosa cystica, is found in about 15% of patients 
with PHPT. Increased bone turnover, as found in patients with 
osteitis fibrosa cystica, can be determined by documenting an 
elevated blood alkaline phosphatase level. Advanced PHPT 
with osteitis fibrosa cystica now occurs in <5% of patients. It 
has pathognomonic radiologic findings, which are best seen 
1561
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
on x-rays of the hands and are characterized by subperiosteal 
resorption (most apparent on the radial aspect of the middle pha-
lanx of the second and third fingers), bone cysts, and tufting of 
the distal phalanges (Fig. 38-29). The skull also may be affected 
and appears mottled with a loss of definition of the inner and 
outer cortices. Brown or osteoclastic tumors and bone cysts also 
may be present. Severe bone disease, resulting in bone pain and 
tenderness and/or pathologic fractures, is rarely observed nowa-
days. However, reductions of bone mineral density (BMD) with 
osteopenia and osteoporosis are more common. Patients with 
normal serum alkaline phosphatase levels almost never have 
clinically apparent osteitis fibrosa cystica. HPT typically results 
in a loss of bone mass at sites of cortical bone such as the radius 
and relative preservation of cancellous bone such as that located 
at the vertebral bodies. Patients with PHPT, however, also may 
have osteoporosis of the lumbar spine that improves dramati-
cally following parathyroidectomy. Fractures also occur more 
frequently in patients with PHPT, and the incidence of fractures 
also decreases after parathyroidectomy. Bone disease correlates 
with serum PTH and vitamin D levels.
Gastrointestinal Complications.  PHPT has been associated with 
peptic ulcer disease. In experimental animals, hypergastrinemia 
has been shown to result from PTH infusion into blood ves-
sels supplying the stomach, independent of its effects on serum 
calcium. An increased incidence of pancreatitis also has been 
reported in patients with PHPT, although this appears to occur 
only in patients with profound hypercalcemia (Ca2+ ≥12.5 mg/
dL). Patients with PHPT also have an increased incidence of 
cholelithiasis, presumably due to an increase in biliary calcium, 
which leads to the formation of calcium bilirubinate stones.
Neuropsychiatric Complications.  Severe hypercalcemia may lead 
to various neuropsychiatric manifestations such as florid psy-
chosis, obtundation, or coma. Other findings such as depression, 
anxiety, and fatigue are more commonly observed in patients 
with only mild hypercalcemia. The etiology of these symptoms 
is not known. Studies demonstrate that levels of certain neu-
rotransmitters (monoamine metabolites 5-hydroxyindoleacetic 
acid and homovanillic acid) are reduced in the cerebrospinal 
fluid of patients with PHPT when compared to controls. Elec-
troencephalogram abnormalities also occur in patients with 
primary and secondary HPT and normalize following parathy-
roidectomy.
Other Features.  PHPT also can lead to fatigue and muscle 
weakness, which is prominent in the proximal muscle groups. 
Although the exact etiology of this finding is not known, muscle 
biopsy studies show that weakness results from a neuropathy, 
rather than a primary myopathic abnormality. Patients with HPT 
also have an increased incidence of chondrocalcinosis, gout, 
and pseudogout, with deposition of uric acid and calcium pyro-
phosphate crystals in the joints. Calcification at ectopic sites 
such as blood vessels, cardiac valves, and skin also has been 
reported, as has hypertrophy of the left ventricle independent of 
the presence of hypertension. There is also evidence for subtle 
cardiovascular manifestations in mild disease, such as changes 
in endothelial function, increased vascular stiffness, and perhaps 
subtle diastolic dysfunction. Several large studies from Europe 
also suggest that PHPT is associated with increased death rates 
from cardiovascular disease and cancer even in patients with 
mild HPT, although this finding was not substantiated in North 
American studies.
Physical Findings  Parathyroid tumors are seldom palpable, 
except in patients with profound hypercalcemia or parathyroid 
cancer. A palpable neck mass in a patient with PHPT is more 
likely to be thyroid in origin or a parathyroid cancer. Patients 
also may demonstrate evidence of band keratopathy, a depo-
sition of calcium in Bowman’s membrane just inside the iris 
of the eye. This nonspecific condition generally is caused by 
chronic eye diseases such as uveitis, glaucoma, and trauma but 
also may occur in the presence of conditions associated with 
high calcium or phosphate levels. Fibro-osseous jaw tumors, 
and/or the presence of familial disease in patients with PHPT 
and jaw tumors, if present, should alert the physician to the pos-
sibility of parathyroid carcinoma.
Differential Diagnosis  Hypercalcemia may be caused by a mul-
titude of conditions, as listed in Table 38-9. PHPT and malig-
nancy account for >90% of all cases of hypercalcemia. PHPT 
is more common in the outpatient setting, whereas malignancy 
is the leading cause of hypercalcemia in hospitalized patients. 
PHPT can virtually always be distinguished from other diseases 
causing hypercalcemia by a combination of history, physical 
examination, and appropriate laboratory investigations.
Figure 38-29.  X-ray of the hand showing subperiosteal bone 
resorption most apparent along the radial aspect of the middle pha-
lanx, characteristic of osteitis fibrosa cystica.
1562
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Hypercalcemia associated with malignancy includes three 
distinct syndromes. Although bone metastases may cause hyper-
calcemia, patients with solid tumors of the lung, breast, kidney, 
head and neck, and ovary often have humoral hypercalcemia of 
malignancy, without any associated bony metastases. In addition, 
hypercalcemia also may be associated with hematologic malig-
nancies such as multiple myeloma. Humoral hypercalcemia of 
malignancy is known to be mediated primarily by PTH-related 
peptide (PTHrP), which also plays a role in the hypercalcemia 
associated with bone metastases and multiple myeloma.
Thiazide diuretics cause hypercalcemia by decreasing 
renal clearance of calcium. This corrects in normal patients 
within days to weeks after discontinuing the diuretic, but 
patients with PHPT continue to be hypercalcemic. Thiazide 
diuretics can, therefore, exacerbate underlying PHPT and can 
be used to unmask PHPT in patients with borderline hyper-
calcemia. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) is a 
rare autosomal dominant condition with nearly 100% pen-
etrance and results from inherited heterozygous mutations 
in the CASR gene located on chromosome 3.54 Homozygous 
germline mutations at this locus result in neonatal hyper-
calcemia, a condition that can rapidly prove fatal. Patients 
with FHH have lifelong hypercalcemia, which is not cor-
rected by parathyroidectomy. Hypercalcemia also is found 
in approximately 10% of patients with sarcoidosis secondary 
to increased 25-hydroxy vitamin D 1-hydroxylase activity in 
lymphoid tissue and pulmonary macrophages, which is not 
subject to inhibitory feedback control by serum calcium. Thy-
roid hormone also has bone-resorption properties, thus causing 
hypercalcemia in thyrotoxic states, especially in immobilized 
patients. Hemoconcentration appears to be an important fac-
tor in the hypercalcemia associated with adrenal insufficiency 
and pheochromocytoma, although the latter patients may have 
associated parathyroid tumors (MEN2A), and some pheo-
chromocytomas are known to secrete PTHrP. Other endocrine 
lesions such as vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumors 
may be associated with hypercalcemia due to increased secre-
tion of PTHrP. Milk-alkali syndrome requires the ingestion of 
large quantities of calcium with an absorbable alkali such as 
that used in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease with antacids. 
Ingestions of large quantities of vitamins D and A are infre-
quent causes of hypercalcemia, as is immobilization.
Diagnostic Investigations
Biochemical Studies.  The presence of an elevated serum calcium 
and intact PTH or two-site PTH levels, without hypocalciuria, 
establishes the diagnosis of PHPT with virtual certainty. These 
sensitive PTH assays use immunoradiometric or immunochemi-
luminescent techniques and can reliably distinguish PHPT from 
other causes of hypercalcemia. Furthermore, they do not cross-
react with PTHrP (Fig. 38-30). In patients with metastatic cancer 
and hypercalcemia, intact PTH levels help to determine whether 
the patient also has concurrent PHPT. Although extremely rare, 
a patient with hypercalcemia may have a tumor that secretes 
PTH. FNAB of such a tumor for PTH levels or selective venous 
catheterization of the veins draining such tumors can help clar-
ify the diagnosis.
Patients with PHPT also typically have decreased serum 
phosphate (∼50%) and elevated 24-hour urinary calcium con-
centrations (∼60%). A mild hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
also is present (80%), thereby leading to an elevated chloride-
to-phosphate ratio (>33). Urinary calcium levels need not be 
measured routinely, except in patients who have not had previ-
ously documented normocalcemia or have a family history of 
hypercalcemia to rule out FHH. In patients with FHH, 24-hour 
urinary calcium excretion is characteristically low (<100 mg/d). 
Furthermore, the serum calcium-to-creatinine clearance ratio 
usually is <0.01 in patients with FHH, whereas it is typically 
>0.02 in patients with PHPT. Other biochemical features of 
PHPT are listed in Table 38-10. Elevated levels of alkaline 
Table 38-9
Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia
Hyperparathyroidism
Malignancy—hematologic (multiple myeloma), solid tumors 
(due to PTHrP)
Endocrine diseases—hyperthyroidism, Addisonian crisis, 
VIPoma
Granulomatous diseases—sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, 
berylliosis, histoplasmosis
Milk-alkali syndrome
Drugs—thiazide diuretics, lithium, vitamin A or D 
intoxication
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
Paget’s disease
Immobilization
PTHrP = parathyroid hormone-related protein; VIP = vasoactive  
intestinal peptide.
Coexisting primary
hyperparathyroidism
and malignancy
Intact PTH
Normal
range
Hypo-
parathyroidism
Primary
hyper-
parathyroidism
Limit of
detection
Hypercalcemia
associated
with 
malignancy
968
634
Intact PTH (pg/mL of hPTH [1-84])
Normal
500
200
150
100
50
Figure 38-30.  Intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) measurement 
allows differentiation between the various causes of hypercalcemia. 
(Reproduced with permission from Endres D, et al. Measure-
ment of parathyroid hormone. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 
1989;18:622. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1563
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
phosphatase may be found in approximately 10% of patients 
with PHPT and are indicative of high-turnover bone disease. 
These patients are prone to developing postoperative hypo-
calcemia due to bone hunger. Serum and urine protein electro-
phoresis may be necessary to exclude multiple myeloma.
Occasionally, patients present with normocalcemic PHPT 
due to vitamin D deficiency, a low serum albumin, excessive 
hydration, a high-phosphate diet, or a low normal blood calcium 
set point. These patients have increased total PTH levels with 
or without increased blood ionized calcium levels and must be 
distinguished from patients with renal leak hypercalciuria who 
also have increased PTH levels due to excessive calcium loss in 
the urine. This can be accomplished by administering thiazide 
diuretics. In patients with idiopathic hypercalciuria, the urinary 
calcium level falls, and the secondary increase in the blood PTH 
level also decreases to normal, whereas patients with normocal-
cemic HPT continue to have elevated urine calcium and blood 
PTH levels and may, in fact, become hypercalcemic.
Radiologic Tests.  In patients with profound hypercalcemia or 
PHPT associated with vitamin D deficiency, hand and skull 
x-rays may demonstrate osteitis fibrosa cystica, but this is rare 
in current clinical practice. BMD studies using dual-energy 
absorptiometry are being increasingly used to assess the effects 
of PHPT on bone. Abdominal ultrasound examination is used 
selectively to document renal stones. Parathyroid localization 
studies are not used to confirm the diagnosis of PHPT, but rather 
to aid in identifying the location of the offending gland(s), as 
discussed later in Preoperative Localization Tests.
Table 38-10
Biochemical features of primary hyperparathyroidism
Serum Tests
Alteration
Calcium
Increased, except in 
normocalcemic primary 
hyperparathyroidism
Intact PTH
Increased or 
inappropriately high
Chloride
Increased or high normal
Phosphate
Decreased or low normal
Chloride:phosphate ratio
Increased (usually >33)
Magnesium
Unchanged or decreased 
(in patients with osteitis 
fibrosa cystica)
Uric acid
Normal or increased
Alkaline phosphatase
Normal or increased 
(in the presence of high 
turnover bone disease)
Acid-base status
Mild hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis
Calcium:creatinine clearance ratio >0.02 (vs. <0.01 in FHH)
1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D
Normal or increased
Urine tests
24-h urinary calcium
Normal or increased
BFHH = benign familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; PTH = parathy-
roid hormone.
Treatment
Indications for Parathyroidectomy and Role of Medical Management.  
Most authorities agree that patients who have developed 
complications and have “classic” symptoms of PHPT should 
undergo parathyroidectomy. However, the treatment of patients 
with asymptomatic PHPT has been the subject of controversy, 
due, in part, to the fact that there is little agreement on what 
constitutes an asymptomatic patient.
At the National Institutes of Health consensus conference 
in 1990, “asymptomatic” PHPT was defined as “the absence 
of common symptoms and signs of PHPT, including no bone, 
renal, gastrointestinal, or neuromuscular disorders.” To deter-
mine the best course of action for these patients, it is important 
to consider the natural history of untreated PHPT and the out-
comes of treatment options, both medical and surgical.
With respect to the natural history, the panel advocated 
nonoperative management of these patients with mild PHPT 
based on observational studies, which suggested relative stabil-
ity of biochemical parameters over time. However, the consensus 
panel considered certain patients to be candidates for surgery 
based on testing or other information indicating end-organ 
effects or a higher likelihood of disease progression, and this led 
to the establishment of initial guidelines for parathyroidectomy.58 
Subsequently, another observational study on the natural history 
of treated versus untreated HPT was published by Silverberg 
and colleagues.59 In their cohort of 52 patients with asymptom-
atic HPT followed without surgery, levels of serum and urinary 
calcium, PTH, alkaline phosphatase, and vitamin D metabolites 
remained relatively stable over a 10-year period in most patients. 
Average bone mass also remained relatively stable. However, the 
study also reported development of a new indication for surgery 
in 14 (27%) of 52 of their asymptomatic patients and, because 
approximately 50% of their patients were initially treated surgi-
cally, overall, about 75% of patients were underwent parathy-
roidectomy. Age <50 years was predictive of progression, and 
patients undergoing parathyroidectomy showed not only normal-
ization of calcium and PTH levels, but also improved BMD at 
the spine and hip. Based on these and other studies, the guide-
lines were reassessed at a second workshop on asymptomatic 
PHPT held at the National Institutes of Health in 2002.60
Since that time, additional studies have provided further 
insights into the natural history of treated and untreated HPT. 
Three of these were randomized, controlled, prospective studies 
ranging in duration from 1 to 3.5 years. One was an observa-
tional study (a continuation of the Columbia University PHPT 
Project) but was notable for its long duration of follow-up of 
15 years.61 These studies confirmed the relative stability of vari-
ous biochemical indices, thus validating the need for guidelines. 
However, the long-term study suggested that the stability was 
not indefinite as calcium levels tended to rise in years 13 to 15. 
In addition, the study also demonstrated that bone density mea-
surements remained stable for 8 to 10 years, but cortical bone 
density worsened after year 10. More concerning was the fact 
that 60% of patients lost >10% of their BMD over the 15-year 
observation period. Furthermore, whether patients met the 2002 
guidelines for surgery did not appear to predict the risk of pro-
gressive disease, with 40% of patients undergoing follow-up 
eventually needing surgery. Although there are no randomized 
trials, registry data also suggest that fracture risk is increased for 
PHPT up to 10 years prior to diagnosis and treatment.
Medical options for treating PHPT and its complications 
include antiresorptive treatments such as bisphosphonates, 
1564
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), and selective estrogen recep-
tor modulators such as raloxifene.62 Bisphosphonates and HRT 
are reasonable options in patients for whom skeletal protection is 
needed, as evidence from randomized, placebo-controlled trials 
indicates that these medications are very effective at decreasing 
bone turnover and increasing BMD in PHPT, with the effects 
being comparable to patients undergoing parathyroidectomy. 
Caution needs to be exercised due to the nonskeletal effects of 
HRT, and hence, bisphosphonates are preferred. There are no 
clinical studies regarding the effects of raloxifene on BMD in 
HPT, and none of these agents affects calcium or PTH levels. 
More recently, calcimimetics (modifiers of the sensitivity of the 
CASR) have been used in randomized, multicenter controlled 
trials and have been shown to decrease both serum calcium 
and PTH levels in both symptomatic and asymptomatic PHPT 
patients. Unfortunately, bone density failed to improve in medi-
cally treated patients. Although this therapy shows promise, 
long-term outcome data are lacking, and their routine use is not 
advocated at this time, except in patients who are very poor 
operative risks or refuse surgery.
Successful parathyroidectomy results in resolution of oste-
itis fibrosa cystica and decreased formation of renal stones in 
symptomatic (classic) patients. In addition, it results in improved 
BMD (6% to 8% in the first year and up to 12% to 15% at 
15 years) and fracture risk (by 50% at hip and upper arm and 
30% overall) after adjustment for age, sex, and previous fractures 
over a 20-year observation period.59 There are also data to show 
that it improves a number of the nonspecific manifestations of 
PHPT such as fatigue, polydipsia, polyuria and nocturia, bone 
and joint pain, constipation, nausea, and depression in many 
patients. This also has been demonstrated using symptom 
questionnaires and various standardized general quality-
of-life assessments such as the SF-36 and a specific parathyroid-
ectomy assessment of symptoms scale.63 The increased death 
rate in patients with PHPT appears to be reversible by successful 
parathyroidectomy, at least in some studies. Lastly, parathyroid-
ectomy can be accomplished with >95% success rates with 
minimal morbidity, even in elderly patients and is the only cura-
tive treatment option for PHPT. Previous investigations also 
have documented that parathyroidectomy is more cost-effective 
than medical management or follow-up.64
Given the above, it is recommended that parathyroidec-
tomy should be offered to virtually all patients except those in 
whom the operative risks are prohibitive. This is also acknowl-
edged by the panel of the latest workshop, which stated that 
“even though patients may not meet the guidelines for surgical 
intervention, it is always a reasonable option in those who do 
not have medical contraindications.”
Currently, parathyroidectomy is recommended for patients 
with smaller elevations in serum calcium levels (>1 mg/dL 
above the upper limit of normal) and if BMD measured at any 
of three sites (radius, spine, or hip) is greater than 2.5 standard 
deviations below those of gender- and race-matched, not age-
matched, controls (i.e., peak bone density or T score [rather than 
Z score] <2.5). In addition, patients <50 years of age are advised 
to undergo parathyroidectomy. The significant changes from the 
previous guidelines pertain to the fact that (a) hypercalciuria 
(>400 mg/24 h), in the absence of nephrolithiasis, is no lon-
ger considered an indication for parathyroidectomy; and (b) an 
absolute glomerular filtration rate <60 mL/min, rather than a 
reduction of creatinine clearance by 30%, is used as a threshold 
for recommending surgery. These changes are based on (a) data 
that demonstrate that hypercalciuria per se is not a risk factor 
for kidney stones, and (b) the most recent epidemiologic data 
from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-
vey using a numerical cutoff for kidney function that relies on 
an age invariant standard, similar to densitometric guidelines. 
Although the guidelines for BMD did not change, it was noted 
that a patient with a history of fragility fracture(s) should also 
undergo parathyroidectomy.55 The current guidelines are sum-
marized in Table 38-11.
It is important to point out that the neurocognitive and neu-
ropsychological aspects of PHPT remain a topic of controversy 
with respect to the guidelines for parathyroidectomy. Although 
there were more studies since the previous iteration of the guide-
lines, there were concerns that while some lacked adequate con-
trols and were plagued by problems related to the instruments 
used to quantify these nonspecific symptoms, others showed 
variability in improvement of neurocognitive symptoms fol-
lowing parathyroidectomy. Similarly, uncertainty is also pres-
ent concerning the cardiovascular consequences of mild HPT. 
Therefore, the workshop panel emphasizes that these criteria 
alone should not be used as guidelines for surgical intervention.
Since there are no definitive criteria to indicate which 
patients with mild PHPT will develop progressive disease, more 
clinical studies are required. Patients who do not undergo sur-
gery should undergo routine follow-up as outlined in the recent 
workshop summary statement, consisting of annual calcium and 
serum creatinine measurements, and measurements of BMD at 
three sites every 1 to 2 years.65
Preoperative Localization Tests.  Localization studies may be 
classified into noninvasive or invasive modalities. These 
studies have variable performance characteristics, which, in 
turn, vary with operator and institutional experience, as outlined 
in Table 38-12. Localization studies have permitted surgeons 
to perform more limited operations, some of them under local 
anesthesia. These “minimally invasive” procedures include uni-
lateral and focused neck exploration, radio-guided parathyroid-
ectomy, and several endoscopic or video-assisted approaches. 
The use of localization studies has been shown in some studies 
to be associated with lower morbidity rates (hypoparathyroidism 
and RLN injury) and decreased operative times, reduced dura-
tion of hospital stay, and improved cosmetic outcomes, while 
maintaining success rates similar to those obtained with tradi-
tional bilateral neck explorations. Some studies also show that 
use of localization studies may be more cost-effective. Overall, it 
6
Table 38-11
Indications for parathyroidectomy in patients with as-
ymptomatic primary HPT (2009 NIH consensus confer-
ence guidelines)
• Serum calcium >1 mg/dL above the upper limits of normal
• GFR <60 mL/min
• Substantially decreased bone mineral density at the lumbar 
spine, hip, or distal radius (>2.5 SD below peak bone mass, 
T score <−2.5
• Age <50 y
• Long-term medical surveillance not desired or possible
GFR = glomerular filtration rate; HPT = hyperparathyroidism;  
NIH = National Institutes of Health; SD = standard deviation.
1565
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
has become routine to localize hyperfunctioning parathyroid 
glands before parathyroidectomy. It is important to point out 
that imaging is not a diagnostic approach, and the decision for 
exploration should be made before any imaging is performed.
99mTc-labeled sestamibi (Fig. 38-31A) is the most widely 
used and accurate modality with a sensitivity >80% for detec-
tion of parathyroid adenomas. Sestamibi (Cardiolite) initially 
was introduced for cardiac imaging and is concentrated in mito-
chondria-rich tissue. It was subsequently noted to be useful for 
parathyroid localization due to the delayed washout of the radio-
nuclide from hypercellular parathyroid tissue compared to thyroid 
tissue. Sestamibi scans generally are complemented by neck ultra-
sound (Fig. 38-31B), which can identify adenomas with >75% 
sensitivity in experienced centers and is most useful in identifying 
intrathyroidal parathyroids. Single-photon emission CT, particu-
larly when used with CT, has been shown to be superior to other 
nuclear medicine–based imaging. Specifically, single-photon 
emission CT can indicate whether an adenoma is located in the 
anterior or posterior mediastinum (aortopulmonary window), thus 
enabling the surgeon to modify the operative approach accord-
ingly. CT and MRI scans are less sensitive than sestamibi scans, 
but are helpful in localizing large paraesophageal and mediastinal 
glands. More recently, four-dimensional CT (4D-CT) has shown 
utility in parathyroid localization. This technique incorporates 
the perfusion of contrast in hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue 
over time, thus providing functional information in addition to the 
Table 38-12
Commonly used parathyroid localization studies
Study
Advantages
Disadvantages
Preoperative, noninvasive
Sestamibi-technetium- 
99m scan
Allows planar and SPECT imaging
False-positive tests due to thyroid neoplasms, 
lymphadenopathy
Ultrasound
Identification of juxta- and intrathyroidal 
tumors
False-positive results due to thyroid nodules, 
cysts, lymph nodes, esophageal lesions
Relatively inexpensive
False-negatives result from substernal, 
ectopic, and undescended tumors
CT scan
Localization of ectopic (mediastinal) glands
Not useful for juxta- or intrathyroidal glands
False-positive results from lymph nodes
Relatively high cost
Radiation exposure
Requires IV contrast
Interference from shoulders and metallic clips
MRI scan
Localization of ectopic tumors
Expensive
No radiation exposure
False-positive results from lymph nodes and 
thyroid nodules
No IV contrast
Cannot be used in claustrophobic patients
Four-dimensional CT scan
Structural and functional information
Similar to CT scan
Preoperative, invasive
FNAB
Can distinguish parathyroid tumor from 
lymphadenopathy using PTH assay
Experienced cytologist needed
Angiogram
Provides a road map for selective venous 
sampling
Expensive
Treatment of mediastinal tumors by 
embolization
Experienced radiologist needed
Neurologic complications
Venous sampling
Useful to lateralize tumor in equivocal cases 
or negative localization studies
Expensive, experienced radiologist needed
Intraoperative
PTH assay
Immediate confirmation of tumor removal
Expensive
Increased operative time, decreased accuracy 
in multiple-gland disease
CT = computed tomography; FNAB = fine-needle aspiration biopsy; IV = intravenous; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PTH = parathyroid  
hormone; SPECT = single-photon emission computed tomography.
1566
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
anatomic information provided by conventional three-dimen-
sional CT imaging. In one study, 4D-CT showed improved sensi-
tivity of 88% compared to that of sestamibi (65%) and ultrasound 
(57%) for lateralization of the enlarged gland and also showed 
superiority when localization to the correct quadrant was exam-
ined.66 A combination of 4D-CT and ultrasound has been reported 
to have a positive predictive value of 92% for single-gland dis-
ease and 75% for multiple-gland disease.
IOPTH was initially introduced in 1993 and is used to 
determine the adequacy of parathyroid resection (Fig. 38-32).67 
According to one commonly used criterion, when the PTH falls 
by 50% or greater 10 minutes after removal of a parathyroid 
tumor, as compared to the highest preremoval value, the test is 
considered positive, and the operation is terminated. IOPTH mea-
surements, like localization studies, are less reliable in multiglan-
dular disease. Bilateral internal jugular vein sampling has also 
been used to lateralize tumors intraoperatively but is less accurate.
Operative Approaches  Unilateral parathyroid exploration was 
first carried out using intraoperative staining of a biopsy from 
A
B
Figure 38-31.  A. Sestamibi scan in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism showing persistent uptake suggesting a left lower hypercel-
lular parathyroid gland. B. Neck ultrasound in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism showing a left lower parathyroid adenoma.
1567
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
the normal parathyroid gland with Sudan black dye to rule out a 
double adenoma. Initially, the choice of side to be explored was 
random, but the introduction of preoperative localization studies 
has enabled a more directed approach. In contrast, the focused 
approach identifies only the enlarged parathyroid gland, and no 
attempts are made to locate other parathyroid glands. Unilateral 
neck explorations have several advantages over bilateral neck 
exploration, including reduced operative times and complica-
tions, such as injury to the RLN and hypoparathyroidism. How-
ever, most existing studies comparing the two approaches are 
retrospective and do not analyze the results on an intent-to-treat 
basis. Another argument against a unilateral exploration is the 
risk of missing another adenoma on the opposite side of the neck. 
The incidence of double adenomas has been reported to range 
from 0% to 10%, with an increased incidence in elderly patients. 
The risk of missing a second adenoma is higher in populations 
with a higher incidence of multiple adenomas, such as those 
with familial HPT, MEN syndromes, and the elderly. Another 
difficulty inherent with unilateral exploration is the inability to 
discern whether the combination of an abnormal gland and a 
normal gland on the initial side constitutes a single adenoma 
or asymmetric hyperplasia. A recently published update on the 
5-year results of a randomized trial comparing unilateral versus 
bilateral neck exploration did not note any difference in the rates 
of recurrent or persistent disease in the two groups of patients.68 
These issues will only be resolved by a large, prospective, mul-
ticenter study or improved molecular analytic techniques.
Radio-guided parathyroidectomy takes advantage of the 
ability of parathyroid tumors to retain 99mTc-sestamibi. One to 
2 mCi of the isotope is injected before surgery, and a hand-held 
gamma probe is used to guide the identification of the enlarged 
gland, taking care to ensure the equilibration of radioactivity 
counts in all quadrants. Reported advantages include easier 
localization, particularly in reoperative cases, and the ability to 
perform the procedure under local anesthetic or sedation using 
smaller incisions. Many studies demonstrated the feasibility of 
this technique; however, it is rarely used now, largely because 
it offers little advantage over preoperative sestamibi scans and 
is associated with increased operative times. Like preoperative 
scanning, it also has reduced accuracy in the presence of multi-
glandular disease.
Endoscopic approaches include both video-assisted and 
total endoscopic techniques. Total endoscopic parathyroidec-
tomy was first described by Gagner in 1996,69 and several other 
investigators have since reported on this technique. Although 
port placements are variable, as is the case with endoscopic thy-
roidectomy, they all involve creation of a working space in the 
neck using CO2 insufflation, with the reported advantages being 
superior cosmesis and excellent visualization. Although feasi-
ble, these techniques also have been associated with increased 
operating times, more personnel, and greater expense, and 
have, in general, not been useful for patients with multiglandu-
lar disease, a large thyroid mass, or previous neck surgery and 
irradiation. Their greatest use has been in patients with tumors 
at ectopic sites such as the mediastinum where thoracoscopic 
parathyroidectomy is an excellent alternative to sternotomy. 
Robotic approaches using a gasless, transaxillary technique are 
also being used for parathyroidectomy. Reported advantages 
include improved three-dimensional magnified visualization, 
refined ergonomic control, more freedom of motion with multi-
articulated instruments, and improved cosmetic result as a result 
of incision placement in the axilla.70
Studies have shown that if both sestamibi scan and neck 
ultrasound studies independently identify the same, enlarged 
parathyroid gland, and no other gland, it is indeed the abnormal 
gland in approximately 95% of cases. These patients with spo-
radic PHPT are candidates for a focused neck exploration, an 
approach that is most commonly referred to as minimally invasive 
parathyroidectomy. A standard bilateral neck exploration 
is planned if parathyroid localization studies or IOPTH 
are not available; if the localizing studies fail to identify any 
abnormal parathyroid gland or identify multiple abnormal 
glands in patients with a family history of PHPT, MEN1, or 
MEN2A; or if a concomitant thyroid disorder requires bilateral 
exploration. In addition, finding a minimally abnormal parathy-
roid gland on the side indicated by localization studies during 
focal exploration should prompt a bilateral exploration or at 
least the identification of a normal parathyroid gland on the 
same side. In patients with MEN1, HPT should be corrected 
before treatment of gastrinomas because gastrin levels decline 
after parathyroidectomy.
Conduct of Parathyroidectomy (Standard Bilateral 
Exploration)  An experienced parathyroid surgeon with a thor-
ough knowledge of parathyroid anatomy and embryology and 
meticulous technique is crucial for the best surgical results. The 
procedure usually is performed under general anesthesia. The 
patient is positioned supine on the operating table with the neck 
extended. For a bilateral exploration, the neck is explored via 
a 3- to 4-cm incision just caudal to the cricoid cartilage. The 
initial dissection and exposure is similar to that used for thy-
roidectomy. After the strap muscles are separated in the midline, 
one side of the neck is chosen for exploration. In contrast to 
a thyroidectomy, the dissection during a parathyroidectomy is 
maintained lateral to the thyroid, making it easier to identify the 
parathyroid glands and not disturb their blood supply.
Identification of Parathyroids.  A bloodless field is important to 
allow identification of parathyroid glands. The middle thyroid 
7
Standard 24 hr irma pg/ml
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0
correlation r  =  0.9161
r2 =  0.8393
p value   <0.0001
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
Figure 38-32.  Correlation of the 10-minute incubation time quick 
parathyroid hormone assay with the 24-hour immunoradiometric 
(irma) parathyroid hormone assay from 138 paired intraoperative 
samples from 38 patients undergoing parathyroidectomy. (Repro-
duced with permission from Irvin G, et al. Clinical usefulness of 
an intraoperative “quick parathyroid hormone” assay. Surgery. 
1993;114:1020. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1568
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
veins are ligated and divided, thus enabling medial and anterior 
retraction of the thyroid lobe, with the aid of a peanut sponge or 
placement of 2-0 silk sutures into the thyroid. The space between 
the carotid sheath and thyroid is then opened by gentle sharp and 
blunt dissection, from the cricoid cartilage superiorly to the thy-
mus inferiorly and the RLN is identified. Approximately 85% 
of the parathyroid glands are found within 1 cm of the junction 
of the inferior thyroid artery and RLNs. The upper parathyroid 
glands usually are superior to this junction and dorsal (posterior) 
to the nerve, whereas the lower glands are located inferior to the 
junction and ventral (anterior) to the recurrent nerve. Because 
parathyroid glands are partly surrounded by fat, any fat lobule at 
typical parathyroid locations should be explored because the 
normal or abnormal parathyroid gland may be concealed in 
the fatty tissue. The thin fascia overlying a “suspicious” fat lobule 
should be incised using a sharp curved hemostat and scalpel. 
This maneuver often causes the parathyroid gland to “pop” out. 
Alternatively, gentle, blunt peanut sponge dissection between 
the carotid sheath and the thyroid gland often reveals a “float” 
sign, suggesting the site of the abnormal parathyroid gland. 
Normal parathyroids are light beige and only slightly darker or 
brown compared to adjacent fat.
Parathyroid tissue needs to be distinguished from normal 
or brown fat tissue, thyroid nodules, lymph nodes, and ectopic 
thymus. Lymph nodes generally are light beige to whitish gray 
in color, glassy, and multiple in number, whereas thyroid nod-
ules generally are more vascular, firm, dark or reddish brown 
in color, and have a more variegated appearance. Intraopera-
tively, a suspicious nodule may be aspirated using a fine needle 
attached to a syringe containing 1 cc of saline. Very high PTH 
levels in the aspirate have been shown to be diagnostic in the 
intraoperative identification of parathyroid glands. Several char-
acteristics such as size (>7 mm), weight, and color are used 
to distinguish normal from hypercellular parathyroid glands. 
Hypercellular glands generally are darker, more firm, and more 
vascular than normocellular glands. No single method is 100% 
reliable, and therefore, the parathyroid surgeon must rely on 
experience and, at times, advice from a pathologist to help dis-
tinguish normal from hypercellular glands. Although several 
molecular studies have shown use in distinguishing parathyroid 
adenomas from hyperplasia, this determination also must be made 
by the surgeon intraoperatively by documenting the presence of 
a normal parathyroid gland.
Location of Parathyroid Glands.  The majority of lower parathy-
roid glands are found in proximity to the lower thyroid pole 
(Fig. 38-33A). If not found at this location, the thyrothymic 
ligament and thymus should be mobilized. The upper end of the 
cervical thymus is gently grasped with a right angle clamp, and 
the distal portion is bluntly dissected from perithymic fat with a 
peanut sponge. One can then “walk down” the thymus with suc-
cessive right-angle clamps (Fig. 38-33B). Applying light tension 
along with a “twisting” motion helps to free the upper thymus. 
The carotid sheath also should be opened from the bifurcation 
to the base of the neck if the parathyroid tumor cannot be found. 
If these maneuvers are unsuccessful, an intrathyroidal gland 
should be sought by using intraoperative ultrasound, incising 
the thyroid capsule on its posterolateral surface, or by perform-
ing an ipsilateral thyroid lobectomy and “bread-loafing” the thy-
roid lobe. Preoperative or intraoperative ultrasonography can be 
useful for identifying intrathyroidal parathyroid glands. Rarely, 
the third branchial pouch may maldescend and be found high 
in the neck (undescended parathymus), anterior to the carotid 
bulb, along with the missing parathyroid gland. Upper para-
thyroid glands are more consistent in position and usually are 
found near the junction of the upper and middle thirds of the 
gland, at the level of the cricoid cartilage (Fig. 38-33C). Ectopic 
upper glands may be found in carotid sheath, tracheoesopha-
geal groove, retroesophageal, or in the posterior mediastinum. 
The locations of ectopic upper and lower parathyroid glands are 
shown in Fig. 38-34. Every attempt must be made to identify 
Upper parathyroid gland
Recurrent
laryngeal n.
Inf. thyroid a. 
Thymus
Lower
parathyroid
gland
Thyroid
A
B
C
Figure 38-33.  Conduct of parathyroidectomy. A. Exposure of the 
lower parathyroid gland near the inferior pole of the thyroid gland 
and anterior to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. B. A thymectomy may 
be necessary if the lower parathyroid cannot be found in its usual 
location, or if the patient has familial primary hyperparathyroid-
ism or secondary hyperparathyroidism. C. Exposure of the upper 
parathyroid gland near the insertion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve 
at the level of the cricothyroid muscle. a. = artery; Inf. = inferior; 
n. = nerve.
1569
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
all four glands. Treatment depends on the number of abnormal 
glands.
1.	  A single adenoma is presumed to be the cause of a patient’s 
PHPT if only one parathyroid tumor is identified and the 
other parathyroid glands are normal, a situation present in 
about 80% of patients with PHPT. Adenomas typically have 
an atrophic rim of normal parathyroid tissue, but this char-
acteristic may be absent. The adenoma is dissected free of 
surrounding tissue, taking care to stay immediately adjacent 
to the tumor, without fracturing it. The vascular pedicle is 
clamped, divided, and ligated. Care should be taken to not 
rupture the parathyroid gland to decrease the risk of parathy-
romatosis. If there is any question about the presumed nor-
mal glands, one of them should be biopsied and examined 
by frozen section.
2.	  If two abnormal and two normal glands are identified, the 
patient has double adenomas. Triple adenomas are present 
if three glands are abnormal and one is normal. Multiple 
adenomas are more common in older patients with an inci-
dence of up to 10% in patients >60 years old. The abnormal 
glands should be excised, provided the remaining glands are 
confirmed as such, thus excluding asymmetric hyperplasia 
after biopsy and frozen section.
3.	  If all parathyroid glands are enlarged or hypercellular, 
patients have parathyroid hyperplasia that has been shown 
to occur in about 15% of patients in various series. These 
glands are often lobulated, usually lack the rim of normal 
parathyroid gland seen in adenomas, and may be variable 
in size. It often is difficult to distinguish multiple adenomas 
from hyperplasia with variable gland size. Hyperplasia may 
be of the chief cell (more common), mixed, or clear cell 
type. Patients with hyperplasia may be treated by subtotal 
parathyroidectomy or by total parathyroidectomy and auto-
transplantation, with the choice of procedure being deter-
mined by rates of recurrence, postoperative hypocalcemia, 
and failure rates of autotransplanted tissue. Initial stud-
ies demonstrated equivalent cure rates and postoperative 
hypocalcemia for the two techniques, with the latter hav-
ing the added advantage of avoiding recurrence in the neck. 
However, autotransplanted tissue may fail to function in 
about 5% of cases.
All four parathyroid glands are identified and carefully 
mobilized. For patients with hyperplasia, a titanium clip is 
placed across the most normal gland, leaving a 50-mg rem-
nant and taking care to avoid disturbing the vascular pedicle 
and that the gland is resected with a sharp scalpel. If possible, 
it is preferable to subtotally resect an inferior gland, which is 
more easily accessible in case of recurrence due to its anterior 
location with respect to the RLN. The resected parathyroid tis-
sue is confirmed by frozen section or PTH assay. If the rem-
nant appears to be viable, the remaining glands are resected. If 
there is any question as to the viability of the initially subtotally 
resected gland, another gland is chosen for subtotal resection 
and the initial remnant is removed. Whenever multiple para-
thyroids are resected, it is preferable to cryopreserve tissue, so 
that it may be autotransplanted should the patient become hypo-
parathyroid. Parathyroid tissue usually is transplanted into the 
nondominant forearm. A horizontal skin incision is made over-
lying the brachioradialis muscle a few centimeters below the 
antecubital fossa. Pockets are made in the belly of the muscle, 
and one to two pieces of parathyroid tissue measuring 1 mm 
each are placed into each pocket. A total of 12 to 14 pieces are 
transplanted. Autotransplanted tissue also has been reported to 
function when transplanted into fat.
Indications for Sternotomy  A sternotomy is usually not rec-
ommended at the initial operation, unless the calcium level is 
>13 mg/dL. Rather, it is preferred to biopsy the normal glands 
and subsequently close the patient’s neck and obtain localiz-
ing studies, if they were not obtained previously. Intraoperative 
PTH assay during the operation from large veins may be helpful. 
Using highly selective venous catheterization postoperatively 
also may be needed when noninvasive localization studies are 
negative, equivocal, or conflicting. Lower parathyroid glands 
tend to migrate into the anterior mediastinum in the thymus or 
perithymic fat and usually can be approached via a cervical inci-
sion. A sternotomy is needed to deliver these tumors in approxi-
mately 5% of cases. Generally, the gland can be approached by 
0
0.8
1
1
2
17
44
0.2
2
2
12
80
4
0.2
0.8
6
26
Figure 38-34.  Location of ectopic upper and 
lower parathyroid glands. (Reproduced with 
permission from Akerström G, et al. Surgical 
anatomy of human parathyroid glands. Surgery. 
1984;95:15. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1570
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
a partial sternotomy to the third intercostal space. The midline 
sternotomy can be extended to the left or right side as required. 
Upper glands tend to migrate to the posterior mediastinum in 
the tracheoesophageal groove. Mediastinal glands also may 
be found in the aortopulmonary window or pericardium, or 
attached to the ascending aorta, aortic arch, or its branches.
Special Situations
Normocalcemic Hyperparathyroidism.  This disorder is becoming 
increasingly recognized in clinical practice and is defined by the 
presence of an elevated PTH level with normal calcium (includ-
ing ionized calcium) levels. In addition, other secondary 
causes of elevated PTH should be ruled out, namely, vita-
min D deficiency, osteomalacia, hypercalciuria (renal leak), and 
renal insufficiency. Data regarding the natural history of this 
disorder are limited. In a series of 37 patients, Lowe and col-
leagues71 showed that 19% of patients became frankly hypercal-
cemic within 3 years. In addition, 57% developed osteoporosis, 
11% developed fragility fractures, and 14% developed nephro-
lithiasis. Although the study had some limitations, it led the 
authors to suggest that normocalcemic HPT may represent a 
variant of “symptomatic” PHPT and may not be an early form 
of “asymptomatic” disease. There is still uncertainty about 
whether normocalcemic HPT carries the same cardiovascular 
morbidity that is associated with the more severe form of the 
disease. Limited studies show that parathyroidectomy is more 
likely to be unsuccessful in these patients. In the absence of 
strong data, no guidelines are available for this entity.65 As such, 
most clinicians follow a conservative course unless patients 
have symptoms that can be attributable to HPT.
Parathyroid Carcinoma.  Parathyroid cancer accounts for approx-
imately 1% of PHPT cases. It may be suspected preoperatively 
by the presence of severe symptoms, serum calcium levels 
>14 mg/dL, significantly elevated PTH levels (five times normal), 
and a palpable parathyroid gland.  Local invasion is quite 
common; approximately 15% of patients have lymph node 
metastases and 33% have distant metastases at presentation. 
Intraoperatively, parathyroid cancer is suggested by the pres-
ence of a large, gray-white to gray-brown parathyroid tumor that 
is adherent to or invasive into surrounding tissues like muscle, 
thyroid, RLN, trachea, or esophagus. Enlarged lymph nodes 
also may be present. Frozen sections are generally unreliable. 
Accurate diagnosis necessitates histologic examination. The 
major diagnostic criteria include vascular or capsular invasion, 
trabecular or fibrous stroma, and frequent mitoses. It is, how-
ever, important to emphasize that these classic findings are not 
as frequently noted as previously reported, and some may be 
found in benign adenomas as well.
Treatment of parathyroid cancer consists of neck explo-
ration, with en bloc excision of the tumor and the ipsilateral 
thyroid lobe, in addition to the removal of contiguous lymph 
nodes (tracheoesophageal, paratracheal, and upper mediasti-
nal). The recurrent nerve is not sacrificed unless it is directly 
involved with tumor. Adherent soft tissue structures (strap 
muscles or other soft tissues) should also be resected. Modi-
fied radical neck dissection is recommended in the presence of 
lateral lymph node metastases. Prophylactic neck dissection is 
not advised. If the diagnosis is made postoperatively, a decision 
must be made regarding the adequacy of initial surgery based 
on a review of operative notes, pathology reports, localization 
studies, and calcium and PTH levels. If any question exists, 
histologic review by another experienced pathologist can 
be helpful. Additional procedures can include ipsilateral thyroid 
lobectomy with resection of contiguous structures and lymph 
nodes if the features are typical or the patient remains hypercal-
cemic. Patients with equivocal pathologic findings and normo-
calcemia may be monitored closely. Reoperation is indicated for 
locally recurrent or metastatic disease to control hypercalcemia. 
Adjuvant radiation therapy should be considered in patients at 
high risk of local recurrence such as those with close or positive 
margins, invasion of surrounding structures, or tumor rupture. 
Radiation may also be used as primary therapy in unresectable 
disease or for palliation of bone metastases. Chemotherapy is 
not very effective. Bisphosphonates have shown some effec-
tiveness in treating hypercalcemia associated with parathy-
roid carcinoma. Cinacalcet hydrochloride, a calcimimetic, can 
reduce PTH levels by directly binding to the CASR cells on the 
parathyroid gland and has been shown to be useful in control-
ling hypercalcemia in patients with refractory parathyroid car-
cinoma.72 Other promising approaches include anti-parathyroid 
hormone immunotherapy, octreotide, and the telomerase inhibi-
tor azidothymidine, but additional investigations are needed 
in this area.
Familial Hyperparathyroidism.  PHPT may occur as a component 
of various inherited syndromes such as MEN1 and MEN2A. 
Inherited PHPT also can occur as isolated familial HPT (non-
MEN) or familial HPT with jaw tumors. The diagnosis of famil-
ial HPT is known or suspected in approximately 85% of patients 
preoperatively. Furthermore, patients with hereditary HPT gen-
erally have a higher incidence of multiglandular disease, super-
numerary glands, and recurrent or persistent disease. Therefore, 
these patients warrant a more aggressive approach and are not 
candidates for various focused surgical approaches.66 Although 
not absolutely necessary, preoperative sestamibi scan and ultra-
sound can be obtained in patients with inherited HPT to identify 
potential ectopic glands. A standard bilateral neck explora-
tion is performed, along with a bilateral cervical thymectomy, 
regardless of the results of localization studies. Both subtotal 
parathyroidectomy and total parathyroidectomy with autotrans-
plantation are appropriate, and parathyroid tissue also should be 
cryopreserved. If an adenoma is found in patients with familial 
HPT, the adenoma and the ipsilateral normal parathyroid glands 
are resected. The normal-appearing glands on the contralateral 
side are biopsied and marked, so that only one side of the neck 
will need to be explored in the event of recurrence. Patients with 
MEN2A require total thyroidectomy and central neck dissec-
tion for prevention/treatment of MTC, a procedure that places 
the parathyroids at risk. Moreover, HPT is less aggressive in 
these patients. Hence, only abnormal parathyroid glands need 
to be resected at neck exploration. The other normal parathyroid 
glands should be marked with a clip.
Neonatal Hyperparathyroidism.  Infants with neonatal HPT present 
with severe hypercalcemia, lethargy, hypotonia, and mental retar-
dation. This disorder is associated with homozygous mutations in 
the CASR gene. Urgent total parathyroidectomy (with autotrans-
plantation and cryopreservation) and thymectomy are indicated. 
Subtotal resection is associated with high recurrence rates.
Parathyromatosis.  Parathyromatosis is a rare condition charac-
terized by the finding of multiple nodules of hyperfunctioning 
parathyroid tissue throughout the neck and mediastinum, usu-
ally following a previous parathyroidectomy. The true etiology 
of parathyromatosis is not known. It is postulated to arise either 
from overgrowth of congenital parathyroid rests (ontogenous 
8
9
1571
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
parathyromatosis) or seeding at surgery from rupture of parathy-
roid tumors or subtotal resection of hyperplastic glands. Para-
thyromatosis represents a rare cause of persistent or recurrent 
HPT73 and can be identified intraoperatively. Aggressive local 
resection of these deposits can result in normocalcemia but is 
rarely curative. Some studies suggest that these patients have 
low-grade carcinoma because of invasion into muscle and other 
structures distant from the resected parathyroid tumor.
Postoperative Care and Follow-Up  Patients who have under-
gone parathyroidectomy are advised to undergo calcium level 
checks 2 weeks postoperatively, at 6 months, and then annu-
ally. Recurrences are rare (<1%), except in patients with famil-
ial HPT. Recurrence rates of 15% at 2 years and 67% at 8 years 
have been reported for MEN1 patients.
Persistent and Recurrent Hyperparathyroidism.  Per-
sistence is defined as hypercalcemia that fails to resolve after 
parathyroidectomy and is more common than recurrence, which 
refers to HPT occurring after an intervening period of at least 
6 months of biochemically documented normocalcemia.74 
Recurrent disease is far less common than persistent HPT; 
however, both occur more frequently in the setting of familial 
HPT and MEN1, in particular. The most common causes for 
both these states include ectopic parathyroids, unrecognized 
hyperplasia, or supernumerary glands. More rare causes include 
parathyroid carcinoma, missed adenoma in a normal position, 
incomplete resection of an abnormal gland, parathyromatosis, 
or an inexperienced surgeon. The most common sites of ecto-
pic parathyroid glands in patients with persistent or recurrent 
HPT are paraesophageal (28%), mediastinal (26%), intrathymic 
(24%), intrathyroidal (11%), carotid sheath (9%), and high cer-
vical or undescended (2%) (Fig. 38-35).
Once the diagnosis of persistent or recurrent HPT is sus-
pected, it should be confirmed by the necessary biochemical 
tests. Other causes of an elevated serum PTH such as renal 
insufficiency, renal calcium leak, and GI tract abnormalities 
should be considered. A detailed family history should be per-
formed to screen for familial disease, as this will influence 
the operative approach. In particular, a 24-hour urine collec-
tion should be performed to rule out FHH. In redo-parathyroid 
surgery, the glands are more likely to be in ectopic locations, 
and postoperative scarring tends to make the procedure more 
technically demanding. Cure rates are generally lower (80%–
90% compared with 95%–99% for initial operation), and risk 
of injury to RLNs and permanent hypocalcemia are higher. 
Therefore, an evaluation of severity of HPT and the patient’s 
anesthetic risk (using the American Society of Anesthesiology 
classification of physical status or the Goldman cardiac index) is 
important. There are no published guidelines directly applicable 
to this group of patients. In general, patients with significant and 
ongoing problems such as recurrent kidney stones, a markedly 
elevated calcium level, or ongoing bone loss will need re-explo-
ration. Patients in whom the diagnosis remains in question or 
those with equivocal or minimal symptoms may be considered 
for conservative management. Preoperative localization studies 
are routinely performed. Noninvasive studies such as a sesta-
mibi scan and ultrasound are obtained, supplemented by 4D-CT 
scans. If these studies are negative, discordant, or equivocal, 
obtaining an ultrasound-guided aspirate of a suspicious cervi-
cal lesion or a highly selective venous catheterization for PTH 
High cervical
position
Carotid
sheath
Intrathymic
Intrathyroidal
Anterior
mediastinum
(nonthymic)
Aortopulmonary
window
Posterior
mediastinum
Paraesophageal
5
1
6
9
2
13
3
15
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
T1
T2
T3
T4
Figure 38-35.  Anatomic location of ectopic parathyroid 
glands. Numbers represent number of glands found in each 
location, with a total of 54. (Reproduced with permission 
from Shen W, et al. Re-operation for persistent or recurrent 
primary hyperparathyroidism. Arch Surg. 1996;131:864. 
kkjkjdht © 1996 American Medical Association. All 
rights reserved.)
1572
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
levels (by an experienced angiographer) is recommended. Previ-
ous operative notes and pathology reports should be carefully 
reviewed and reconciled with the information obtained from 
localization studies before any neck re-exploration. An algo-
rithm for the treatment of patients with recurrent and persistent 
HPT is shown in Fig. 38-36.
Generally, these patients are approached with a focused 
exploration. The lateral approach is frequently used and can be 
achieved via the previous incision. The plane between the ster-
nocleidomastoid and strap muscle is opened and allows for early 
identification of the RLN. Parathyroid tissue is cryopreserved 
routinely. Use of adjuncts, such as measuring intraoperative 
PTH levels, is critical to ensure adequate resection and avoid 
potentially harmful additional explorations. In case of difficult 
re-explorations, additional techniques such as bilateral internal 
jugular vein sampling for PTH, thyroid lobectomy on the side of 
the missing gland, cervical thymectomy, and ligation of the ipsi-
lateral inferior thyroid artery (after lobectomy, to cause infarc-
tion of the missing gland) may be needed. Blind mediastinal 
exploration is not recommended. In patients who are denied, 
refuse, or fail exploration, medical options such as cinacalcet 
may be considered.
Hypercalcemic Crisis.  Patients with PHPT may occasionally 
present acutely with nausea, vomiting, fatigue, muscle weakness, 
confusion, and a decreased level of consciousness—a complex 
referred to as hypercalcemic crisis. These symptoms result from 
severe hypercalcemia from uncontrolled PTH secretion, wors-
ened by polyuria, dehydration, and reduced kidney function 
and may occur with other conditions causing hypercalcemia. 
Calcium levels are markedly elevated and may be as high as 16 
to 20 mg/dL. Parathyroid tumors tend to be large or multiple and 
may be palpable. Patients with parathyroid cancer or familial 
HPT are more likely to present with hypercalcemic crisis.
Treatment consists of therapies to lower serum calcium 
levels followed by surgery to correct HPT. The mainstay of 
therapy involves rehydration with a 0.9% saline solution to keep 
urine output >100 cc/h. Once urine output is established, diure-
sis with furosemide (which increases renal calcium clearance) 
is begun. If these methods are unsuccessful, other drugs may be 
used to lower serum calcium levels as outlined in Table 38-13. 
Occasionally, in life-threatening cases, hemodialysis may be 
of benefit.
Secondary Hyperparathyroidism.  Secondary HPT com-
monly occurs in patients with chronic renal failure but also may 
occur in those with hypocalcemia secondary to inadequate cal-
cium or vitamin D intake or malabsorption. The pathophysiol-
ogy of HPT in chronic renal failure is complex and appears to 
be related to hyperphosphatemia (and resultant hypocalcemia), 
deficiency of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D due to loss of renal 
tissue, low calcium intake, decreased calcium absorption, and 
abnormal parathyroid cell response to extracellular calcium or 
vitamin D in vitro and in vivo. Patients generally are hypocalce-
mic or normocalcemic. Aluminum hydroxide, which often was 
used as a phosphate binder, has been shown to contribute to 
the osteomalacia observed in this disease. These patients gener-
ally are treated medically with a low-phosphate diet, phosphate 
binders, adequate intake of calcium and 1, 25-dihydroxy vita-
min D, and a high-calcium, low-aluminum dialysis bath. Calci-
mimetics have been shown to control parathyroid hyperplasia 
and osteitis fibrosa cystica associated with secondary HPT in 
animal studies and to decrease plasma PTH and total and ion-
ized calcium levels in humans.
Surgical treatment was traditionally recommended for 
patients with bone pain, pruritus, and (a) a calcium-phosphate 
product ≥70, (b) calcium >11 mg/dL with markedly elevated 
PTH, (c) calciphylaxis, (d) progressive renal osteodystrophy, 
and (e) soft tissue calcification and tumoral calcinosis, despite 
maximal medical therapy. Assessment of parathyroid mass is 
thought to be an important factor for predicting the response 
to medical management. Therefore, some groups recommend 
parathyroidectomy if the glands are >1 cm (or >500 mm3) on 
ultrasound. These glands are apparently more likely to have 
developed nodular hyperplasia and hence might be refractory 
to medical management. Following the introduction of calci-
mimetics, there appears to have been a reduction in parathy-
roidectomy rates. While parathyroidectomy has been reported 
to maintain biochemical targets for up to 5 years and improve 
bone density, fracture risk, calcinosis, hemoglobin levels, and 
even long-term survival, the effects of calcimimetics on these 
parameters awaits results of various trials. Studies also show 
that calcimimetics may be less cost-effective in the long-term. 
The role of parathyroidectomy in the era of calcimimetics will 
require long-term studies, specifically prospective studies com-
paring outcomes of calcimimetics with standard therapy ver-
sus parathyroidectomy. In general, parathyroidectomy should 
be considered if PTH levels remain high despite therapy that 
includes calcimimetics. Calciphylaxis is a rare, limb- and life-
threatening complication of secondary HPT characterized by 
painful (sometimes throbbing), violaceous, and mottled lesions 
usually on the extremities, which often become necrotic and 
progress to nonhealing ulcers, gangrene, sepsis, and death. Skin 
Recurrent or persistent HPT
1) Confirm diagnosis
2) Rule out FHH
3) Review operative 
    notes and pathology
Parathyroidectomy
Positive
Negative
Noninvasive
localization studies
Negative
Positive
Selective venous catheterization for PTH
Is tumor
localized?
Follow-up
if mild
hypercalcemia  
Parathyroidectomy
Medical therapy
No
Yes
Figure 38-36.  Management of recurrent and persistent hyperpara-
thyroidism (HPT). FHH = familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; 
PTH = parathyroid hormone.
1573
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
biopsy can be helpful to make the diagnosis. These are critically 
ill, high-risk patients, but successful parathyroidectomy some-
times relieves symptoms. Not all patients with calciphylaxis will 
have high PTH levels, and parathyroidectomy should not be 
undertaken in the absence of documented hyperparathyroidism.
Patients should undergo routine dialysis the day before 
surgery to correct electrolyte abnormalities. Localization stud-
ies are not necessary but can identify ectopic parathyroid glands. 
A bilateral neck exploration is indicated. The parathyroid glands 
in secondary HPT are characterized by asymmetric enlarge-
ment and nodular hyperplasia. These patients may be treated 
by subtotal resection, leaving about 50 mg of the most normal 
parathyroid gland or total parathyroidectomy and autotrans-
plantation of parathyroid tissue into the brachioradialis muscle 
of the nondominant forearm, with parathyroid cryopreserva-
tion. Upper thymectomy usually is performed because 15% 
to 20% of patients have one or more parathyroid glands situ-
ated in the thymus or perithymic fat. Some groups recommend 
total parathyroidectomy without autotransplantation because it 
is associated with a lower rate of recurrence. While it may be 
preferable in patients with calciphylaxis, this procedure is con-
traindicated in patients eligible for renal transplant. Since the 
evidence needed to determine the superiority of one approach 
over another is lacking, the choice of procedure is influenced by 
surgeon preference and experience and various patient factors, 
as indicated earlier.75
Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism.  Generally, renal transplan-
tation is an excellent method of treating secondary HPT, but 
some patients develop autonomous parathyroid gland function 
and tertiary HPT. Tertiary HPT can cause problems similar to 
PHPT, such as pathologic fractures, bone pain and worsened 
bone disease, renal stones, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, 
and mental status changes. The transplanted kidney is also at 
risk from tubulointerstitial calcification and volume depletion.76 
Similar to patients with secondary HPT, many patients with ter-
tiary HPT are being treated with cinacalcet. Although the drug 
is effective and well-tolerated in these patients, the long-term 
effects on kidney allograft function are not known, and many 
of these patients have persistence of their hypercalcemic symp-
toms. On the other hand, parathyroidectomy has been shown to 
lead to a more immediate and dramatic reduction in hypercal-
cemic symptoms. As such, operative intervention is indicated 
for symptomatic disease or if autonomous PTH secretion per-
sists for >1 year after a successful transplant in patients who are 
deemed operative candidates. All parathyroid glands should be 
identified. The traditional surgical management of these patients 
consisted of subtotal or total parathyroidectomy with autotrans-
plantation and an upper thymectomy. Some authors suggest 
that these patients derive similar benefit from excision of only 
obviously enlarged glands, while avoiding the higher risks of 
hypocalcemia associated with the former approach. Others rec-
ommend that all parathyroid glands be identified and subtotal 
parathyroidectomy be performed as long-term follow-up studies 
show that limited excisions in these patients are associated with 
an up to fivefold increased risk of recurrent or persistent disease. 
Further studies are needed to define the best operative approach 
for these patients.
Complications of Parathyroid Surgery.  Parathyroidectomy 
can be accomplished successfully in >95% of patients with 
minimal mortality and morbidity, provided the procedure is 
Table 38-13
Medications commonly used to treat hypercalcemia
Medication
Dosage and Administration
Mechanism, Onset of 
Action, and Duration
Side Effects
Bisphosphonates 
(pamidronate)
60–90 mg IV over 4–24 h
Inhibits osteoclastic bone 
resorption; rapid onset, 2–3 d
May cause local pain and 
swelling, low-grade fever, 
lymphopenia, electrolyte 
abnormalities
Calcitonin
4 IU/kg SC/IM
Inhibits osteoclast function, 
augments renal calcium 
excretion; onset of action in 
hours; but short lived, therefore 
not useful as sole therapy
Transient nausea and vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, flushing, 
and local skin reaction
Mithramycin (plicamycin)
25 μg/kg/d IV for 3–4 d
Inhibits osteoclasts RNA 
secretion; rapid onset of action 
(12 h); peaks at 48–72 h and 
lasts days to several weeks
May cause renal, hepatic, and 
hematologic complications, 
nausea and vomiting
Gallium nitrate
200 mg/m2 BSA/d IV for 5 d
Reduces urinary calcium 
excretion; onset of action 
delayed (5–7 d)
Nephrotoxicity, nausea, 
vomiting, hypotension, anemia, 
hypophosphatemia
Glucocorticoids
Hydrocortisone 100 mg IV q8h
Delayed onset of action  
(7–10 d); useful for 
hematologic malignancies, 
sarcoidosis, vitamin D 
intoxication, hyperthyroidism
Hypertension, hyperglycemia
BSA = body surface area; IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; SC = subcutaneous.
1574
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
performed by a surgeon experienced in parathyroid surgery. 
Specific complications include transient and permanent vocal 
cord palsy and hypoparathyroidism. The latter is more likely 
to occur in patients who undergo four-gland exploration with 
biopsies, subtotal resection with an inadequate remnant, or total 
parathyroidectomy with a failure of autotransplanted tissue. 
Furthermore, hypocalcemia is more likely to occur in patients 
with high-turnover bone disease as evidenced by elevated pre-
operative alkaline phosphatase levels. Vocal cord paralysis and 
hypoparathyroidism are considered permanent if they persist for 
>6 months. Fortunately, these complications are rare, occurring 
in approximately 1% of patients undergoing surgery by experi-
enced parathyroid surgeons.
Patients with symptomatic hypocalcemia or those with 
calcium levels <8 mg/dL are treated with oral calcium supple-
mentation (up to 1–2 g every 4 hours). 1,25-Dihydroxy vita-
min D (calcitriol [Rocaltrol] 0.25–0.5 μg bid) may also be 
required, particularly in patients with severe hypercalcemia 
and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels preoperatively 
and with osteitis fibrosa cystica. Intravenous calcium supple-
mentation rarely is needed, except in cases of severe, symp-
tomatic hypocalcemia.
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypocalcemia can be the result of a multitude of conditions, 
which are listed in Table 38-14. The parathyroid glands may 
be congenitally absent in DiGeorge syndrome, which also is 
characterized by lack of thymic development and, therefore, a 
thymus-dependent lymphoid system. By far, the most common 
cause of hypoparathyroidism is thyroid surgery, particularly 
total thyroidectomy with a concomitant central neck dissection. 
Patients often develop transient hypocalcemia due to ischemia of 
the parathyroid glands; permanent hypoparathyroidism is rare. 
Hypoparathyroidism also may occur after parathyroid surgery, 
which is more likely if patients undergo a subtotal resection or 
total parathyroidectomy with parathyroid autotransplantation.
Acute hypocalcemia results in decreased ionized cal-
cium and increased neuromuscular excitability. Patients 
initially develop circumoral and fingertip numbness and 
tingling. Mental symptoms include anxiety, confusion, and 
depression. Physical examination reveals positive Chvostek’s 
sign (contraction of facial muscles elicited by tapping on the 
facial nerve anterior to the ear) and Trousseau’s sign (carpo-
pedal spasm that is elicited by occluding blood flow to the 
forearm with a blood pressure cuff for 2–3 minutes). Tetany, 
which is characterized by tonic-clonic seizures, carpopedal 
spasm, and laryngeal stridor, may prove fatal and should be 
avoided. Most patients with postoperative hypocalcemia can 
be treated with oral calcium and vitamin D supplements; IV 
calcium infusion is rarely required except in patients with pre-
operative osteitis fibrosa cystica.
ADRENAL
Historical Background
Eustachius provided the first accurate anatomic account of the 
adrenals in 1563. The anatomic division of the adrenals into 
the cortex and medulla was described much later, by Cuvier 
in 1805. Subsequently, Thomas Addison in 1855 described the 
features of adrenal insufficiency, which still bear his name. 
DeCreccio provided the first description of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH) occurring in a female pseudohermaphrodite 
in 1865. Pheochromocytomas were first identified by Frankel in 
1885, but were not named as such until 1912 by Pick, who noted 
the characteristic chromaffin reaction of the tumor cells. Adren-
aline was identified as an agent from the adrenal medulla that 
elevated blood pressure in dogs and was subsequently named 
epinephrine in 1897. The first successful adrenalectomies for 
pheochromocytoma were performed by Roux in Switzerland, 
and Charles Mayo in the United States.
In 1932, Harvey Cushing described 11 patients who had 
moon facies, truncal obesity, hypertension, and other features 
of the syndrome that now bears his name. Although several 
individuals prepared adrenocortical extracts to treat adrenalec-
tomized animals, cortisone was first synthesized by Kendall. 
Aldosterone was identified in 1952, and the syndrome result-
ing from excessive secretion of this mineralocorticoid was first 
described in 1955 by Conn.
Embryology
The adrenal or suprarenal glands are two endocrine organs in 
one; an outer cortex and an inner medulla, each with distinct 
embryologic, anatomic, histologic, and secretory features. 
The cortex originates around the fifth week of gestation from 
mesodermal tissue near the gonads on the adrenogenital ridge 
(Fig. 38-37). Therefore, ectopic adrenocortical tissue may be 
found in the ovaries, spermatic cord, and testes. The cortex dif-
ferentiates further into a thin, definitive cortex and a thicker, 
inner fetal cortex. The latter is functional and produces fetal 
adrenal steroids by the eighth week of gestation, but undergoes 
involution after birth, resulting in a decrease in adrenal weight 
during the first three postpartum months. The definitive cor-
tex persists after birth to form the adult cortex over the first 
3 years of life. In contrast, the adrenal medulla is ectodermal in 
origin and arises from the neural crest. At around the same time 
as cortical development, neural crest cells migrate to the para-
aortic and paravertebral areas and toward the medial aspect of 
the developing cortex to form the medulla. Most extra-adrenal 
neural tissue regresses but may persist at several sites. The largest 
of these is located to the left of the aortic bifurcation near the 
Table 38-14
Conditions causing hypocalcemia
Hypoparathyroidism
  • Surgical
  • Neonatal
  • Familial
  • Heavy metal deposition
  • Magnesium depletion
Resistance to the action of parathyroid hormone
  • Pseudohypoparathyroidism
  • Renal failure
  • Medications—calcitonin, bisphosphonates, mithramycin
Failure of normal 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D production
Resistance to the action of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D
Acute complex formation or deposition of calcium
  • Acute hyperphosphatemia
  • Acute pancreatitis
  • Massive blood transfusion (citrate overload)
  • “Hungry bones”
1575
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
inferior mesenteric artery origin and is designated as the organ 
of Zuckerkandl. Adrenal medullary tissue also may be found in 
neck, urinary bladder, and para-aortic regions. Several factors 
are involved in adrenal development and include insulin-like 
growth factor 2; gastric inhibitory peptide; and the dosage-
sensitive, sex-reversal adrenal hypoplasia (DAX1) gene.
Anatomy
The adrenal glands are paired, retroperitoneal organs located 
superior and medial to the kidneys at the level of the eleventh 
ribs. The normal adrenal gland measures 5 × 3 × 1 cm and 
weighs 4 to 5 g. The right gland is pyramidal shaped and lies 
in close proximity to the right hemidiaphragm, liver, and infe-
rior vena cava (IVC). The left adrenal is closely associated 
with the aorta, spleen, and tail of the pancreas. Each gland 
is supplied by three groups of vessels—the superior adrenal 
arteries derived from the inferior phrenic artery, the middle 
adrenal arteries derived from the aorta, and the inferior adrenal 
arteries derived from the renal artery. Other vessels originating 
from the intercostal and gonadal vessels may also supply the 
adrenals. These arteries branch into about 50 arterioles to form a 
rich plexus beneath the glandular capsule and require careful 
dissection, ligation, and division during adrenalectomy. In con-
trast to the arterial supply, each adrenal usually is drained by 
a single, major adrenal vein. The right adrenal vein is usually 
short and drains into the IVC, whereas the left adrenal vein 
is longer and empties into the left renal vein after joining the 
inferior phrenic vein. Accessory veins occur in 5% to 10% of 
patients—on the right, these vessels may drain into the right 
hepatic vein or the right renal vein; on the left, accessory veins 
may drain directly into the left renal vein. The anatomic rela-
tionships of the adrenals and surrounding structures are depicted 
in Fig. 38-38.
The adrenal cortex appears yellow due to its high lipid 
content and accounts for about 80% to 90% of the gland’s vol-
ume. Histologically, the cortex is divided into three zones—the 
zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata, and zona reticularis. The 
outer area of the zona glomerulosa consists of small cells and is 
the site of production of the mineralocorticoid hormone, aldo-
sterone. The zona fasciculata is made up of larger cells, which 
often appear foamy due to multiple lipid inclusions, whereas 
the zona reticularis cells are smaller. These latter zones are the 
site of production of glucocorticoids and adrenal androgens. The 
adrenal medulla constitutes up to 10% to 20% of the gland’s 
volume and is reddish-brown in color. It produces the catechol-
amine hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. The cells of 
the adrenal medulla are arranged in cords and are polyhedral in 
shape. They often are referred to as chromaffin cells because 
they stain specifically with chromium salts.
Adrenal Physiology
Cholesterol, derived from the plasma or synthesized in the adre-
nal, is the common precursor of all steroid hormones derived 
from the adrenal cortex. Cholesterol initially is cleaved within 
mitochondria to 5-δ-pregnolone, which in turn is transported to 
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum where it forms the substrate 
for various biosynthetic pathways leading to steroidogenesis 
(Fig. 38-39).
Mineralocorticoids.  The major adrenal mineralocorticoid 
hormones are aldosterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC), and 
cortisol. Cortisol has minimal effects on the kidney due to hor-
mone degradation. Aldosterone secretion is regulated primarily 
by the renin-angiotensin system. Decreased renal blood flow, 
decreased plasma sodium, and increased sympathetic tone 
all stimulate the release of renin from juxtaglomerular cells. 
Renin, in turn, leads to the production of angiotensin I from 
its precursor angiotensinogen. Angiotensin I is cleaved by pul-
monary angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) to angiotensin 
II; the latter is not only a potent vasoconstrictor, but also leads 
to increased aldosterone synthesis and release. Hyperkalemia 
is another potent stimulator of aldosterone synthesis, whereas 
ACTH, pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin, and antidiuretic hor-
mone are weak stimulators.
Aldosterone is secreted at a rate of 50 to 250 μg/d (depend-
ing on sodium intake) and circulates in plasma chiefly as a 
complex with albumin. Small amounts of the hormone bind to 
corticosteroid-binding globulin, and approximately 30% to 50% 
of secreted aldosterone circulates in a free form. The hormone 
has a half-life of only 15 to 20 minutes and is rapidly cleared 
via the liver and kidney. A small quantity of free aldosterone 
also is excreted in the urine. Mineralocorticoids cross the cell 
membrane and bind to cytosolic receptors. The receptor-ligand 
complex subsequently is transported into the nucleus where 
it induces the transcription and translation of specific genes. 
9
1
2
3
6
7
8
C
A
4
5
B
Figure 38-37.  Cross-section of the embryo depicting adrenal 
development: (1) neural tube, (2) chorda, (3) aorta, (4) base of the 
mesentery, (5) digestive tube, (6) adrenal cortex, (7) undifferenti-
ated gonad, (8) mesonephros, and (9) neural crest. Cells migrate 
from the neural crest to form the ganglia of the sympathetic trunk 
(A), sympathetic plexi (B), and the adrenal medulla and paraganglia 
(C). (Reproduced with permission from Avisse C, et al. Surgical 
anatomy and embryology of the adrenal glands. Surg Clin North 
Am. 2000;80:414. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1576
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Aldosterone functions mainly to increase sodium reabsorption 
and potassium and hydrogen ion excretion at the level of the 
renal distal convoluted tubule. Less commonly, aldosterone 
increases sodium absorption in salivary glands and GI mucosal 
surfaces.
Glucocorticoids.  The secretion of cortisol, the major adrenal 
glucocorticoid, is regulated by ACTH secreted by the anterior 
pituitary, which, in turn, is under the control of corticotrophin-
releasing hormone (CRH) secreted by the hypothalamus. ACTH 
is a 39-amino-acid protein, which is derived by cleavage from a 
Abdominal
aorta
Inferior
vena cava
Left inferior
phrenic
a. and v.
Right phrenic a.
Celiac trunk
Superior
mesenteric a.
Left adrenal gland 
Right adrenal gland 
Left superior adrenal aa.
Right superior adrenal aa.
Inferior adrenal a.
Renal 
a. and v.
Left adrenal v.
Inferior adrenal a.
Right
adrenal
v.
Middle
adrenal
a.
Figure 38-38.  Anatomy of the adrenals and surrounding structures. a. = artery; v. = vein.
Pregnenolone
17α-hydroxypregnenolone
Androstenedione
DHEA
DHEAS
Cortisol
Aldosterone
Cholesterol
1
2
2
17α-hydroxyprogesterone
3
11-deoxycortisol
4
2
Progesterone
3
11-deoxy-
corticosterone
4.5
Corticosterone
5
18-hydroxy-
corticosterone
5
6
7
6
7
8
Figure 38-39.  Synthesis of adrenal steroids. The enzymes involved are (1) p450scc (cholesterol side chain cleavage), (2) 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase, (3) p450c21 (21β-hydroxylase), (4) p450c11 (11β-hydroxylase), (5) p450c11AS (aldosterone synthase), (6) p450c17 
(17α-hydroxylase activity), (7) p450c17 (17,20-lyase/desmolase activity), and (8) sulfokinase. DHEAS = dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate.
1577
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
larger precursor, pro-opiomelanocortin. ACTH is further cleaved 
into α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and corticotrophin-like 
intermediate peptide. ACTH not only stimulates the secretion of 
glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and adrenal androgens, but 
is also trophic for the adrenal glands. ACTH secretion may be 
stimulated by pain, stress, hypoxia, hypothermia, trauma, and 
hypoglycemia. ACTH secretion fluctuates, peaking in the morn-
ing and reaching nadir levels in the late afternoon. Thus, there is 
a diurnal variation in the secretion of cortisol, with peak cortisol 
excretion also occurring in the early morning and declining dur-
ing the day to its lowest levels in the evening (Fig. 38-40). Corti-
sol controls the secretion of both CRH and ACTH via a negative 
feedback loop. A similar mechanism leads to the inhibition of 
CRH secretion by ACTH.
Cortisol is transported in plasma bound primarily to corti-
costeroid-binding globulin (75%) and albumin (15%). Approxi-
mately 10% of circulating cortisol is free and is the biologically 
active component. The plasma half-life of cortisol is 60 to 
90 minutes and is determined by the extent of binding and rate 
of inactivation. Cortisol is converted to di- and tetrahydrocortisol 
and cortisone metabolites in the liver and the kidney. The majority 
(95%) of cortisol and cortisone metabolites are conjugated with 
glucuronic acid in the liver, thus facilitating their renal excre-
tion. A small amount of unmetabolized cortisol is excreted 
unchanged in the urine.
Glucocorticoid hormones enter the cell and bind cytosolic 
steroid receptors. The activated receptor-ligand complex is then 
transported to the nucleus where it stimulates the transcription 
of specific target genes via a “zinc finger” DNA binding ele-
ment. Cortisol also binds the mineralocorticoid receptor with 
an affinity similar to aldosterone. However, the specificity of 
mineralocorticoid action is maintained by the production of 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme that inactivates 
cortisol to cortisone in the kidney. Glucocorticoids have important 
functions in intermediary metabolism but also affect connective 
tissue, bone, immune, cardiovascular, renal, and central nervous 
systems, as outlined in Table 38-15.
Sex Steroids.  Adrenal androgens are produced in the zona 
fasciculata and reticularis from 17-hydroxypregnenolone in 
response to ACTH stimulation. They include dehydroepiandros-
terone (DHEA) and its sulfated counterpart (DHEAS), andro-
stenedione, and small amounts of testosterone and estrogen. 
Adrenal androgens are weakly bound to plasma albumin. They 
exert their major effects by peripheral conversion to the more 
potent testosterone and dihydrotestosterone but also have weak 
intrinsic androgen activity. Androgen metabolites are conju-
gated as glucuronides or sulfates and excreted in the urine. Dur-
ing fetal development, adrenal androgens promote the formation 
of male genitalia. In normal adult males, the contribution of 
adrenal androgens is minimal; however, they are responsible for 
the development of secondary sexual characteristics at puberty. 
Adrenal androgen excess leads to precocious puberty in boys 
and virilization, acne, and hirsutism in girls and women.
Catecholamines.  Catecholamine hormones (epinephrine, 
norepinephrine, and dopamine) are produced not only in the 
central and sympathetic nervous system but also the adrenal 
medulla. The substrate, tyrosine, is converted to catechol-
amines via a series of steps shown in Fig. 38-41A. Phenyletha-
nolamine N-methyltransferase, which converts norepinephrine 
to epinephrine, is only present in the adrenal medulla and the 
organ of Zuckerkandl. Therefore, the primary catecholamine 
produced may be used to distinguish adrenal medullary tumors 
from those situated at extra-adrenal sites. Catecholamines are 
stored in granules in combination with other neuropeptides, 
ATP, calcium, magnesium, and water-soluble proteins called 
chromogranins. Hormonal secretion is stimulated by various 
stress stimuli and mediated by the release of acetylcholine at 
25
20
15
10
5
0
Noon
4 PM
8 PM
Midnight
4 AM
8 AM
Noon
Lunch
Snack
Snack
Dinner
Sleep
B’fast
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Plasma ACTH (pg/mL)
Plasma 11-ohcs (µg/dL) 
Figure 38-40.  Diurnal variation in cortisol levels as determined by half-hourly sampling in a 16-year-old girl. (Reproduced with permission 
from Krieger DT, et al. Characterization of the normal temporal pattern of corticosteroid levels. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1971;32:269. 
kkjkjdht by The Endocrine Society.)
1578
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
the preganglionic nerve terminals. In the circulation, these pro-
teins are bound to albumin and other proteins. Catecholamines 
are cleared by several mechanisms including reuptake by sym-
pathetic nerve endings, peripheral inactivation by catechol 
O-methyltransferase and monoamine oxidase, and direct excre-
tion by the kidneys. Metabolism of catecholamines takes place 
primarily in the liver and kidneys and leads to the formation 
of metabolites such as metanephrines, normetanephrines, and 
VMA, which may undergo further glucuronidation or sulfation 
before being excreted in the urine (Fig. 38-41B).
Adrenergic receptors are transmembrane-spanning mol-
ecules that are coupled to G proteins. They may be subdi-
vided into α and β subtypes, which are localized in different 
tissues, have varying affinity to various catecholamines, and 
mediate distinct biologic effects (Table 38-16). The receptor 
affinities for α receptors are—epinephrine > norepinephrine 
>> isoproterenol; β1 receptors—isoproterenol > epinephrine = 
norepinephrine; and β2 receptors—isoproterenol > epinephrine 
>> norepinephrine.
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex
Hyperaldosteronism.  Hyperaldosteronism may be secondary 
to stimulation of the renin-angiotensin system from renal artery 
stenosis and to low-flow states such as congestive heart failure 
and cirrhosis. Hyperaldosteronism resulting from these condi-
tions is reversible by treatment of the underlying cause. Pri-
mary hyperaldosteronism results from autonomous aldosterone 
secretion, which, in turn, leads to suppression of renin secretion. 
Primary aldosteronism usually occurs in individuals between 
the ages of 30 to 50 years old and accounts for 1% of hyperten-
sion cases. It is associated with hypokalemia; however, more 
patients with Conn’s syndrome are being diagnosed with normal 
potassium levels. Most cases result from a solitary functioning 
adrenal adenoma (∼70%) and idiopathic bilateral hyperplasia 
(30%). Adrenocortical carcinoma and glucocorticoid-suppress-
ible hyperaldosteronism are rare, each accounting for <1% of 
cases. Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism is an 
autosomal dominant form of hypertension in which aldosterone 
secretion is abnormally regulated by ACTH. This condition 
is caused by recombinations between linked genes encoding 
closely related isozymes, 11β-hydroxylase (CYP11B1), and 
aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) generating a dysregulated 
chimeric gene with aldosterone synthase activity.
Symptoms and Signs  Patients typically present with hyperten-
sion, which is long-standing, moderate to severe, and may be 
difficult to control despite multiple-drug therapy. Other symp-
toms include muscle weakness, polydipsia, polyuria, nocturia, 
headaches, and fatigue. Weakness and fatigue are related to the 
presence of hypokalemia.
Diagnostic Studies
Laboratory Studies.  Hypokalemia is a common finding, and 
hyperaldosteronism must be suspected in any hypertensive 
patient who presents with coexisting spontaneous hypokalemia 
(K <3.2 mmol/L) or hypokalemia (<3 mmol/L) while on diuretic 
therapy, despite potassium replacements. However, it is impor-
tant to note that up to 40% of patients with a confirmed aldoste-
ronoma were normokalemic preoperatively. Once the diagnosis 
is suspected, further tests are necessary to confirm the diagno-
sis. Before testing, patients must receive adequate sodium and 
potassium. Antihypertensive medications should be held, if 
possible, and spironolactone, β-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and 
angiotensin II receptor blockers should be avoided. Patients 
with primary hyperaldosteronism have an elevated plasma 
aldosterone concentration level with a suppressed plasma renin 
activity; a plasma aldosterone concentration–to–plasma renin 
activity ratio of 1:25 to 30 is strongly suggestive of the diag-
nosis.77 False-positive results can occur, particularly in patients 
with chronic renal failure. Patients with primary hyperaldo-
steronism also fail to suppress aldosterone levels with sodium 
loading. This test can be performed by performing a 24-hour 
urine collection for cortisol, sodium, and aldosterone after 
5 days of a high-sodium diet or alternatively giving the patient 
2 L of saline while in the supine position, 2 to 3 days after being 
on a low-sodium diet. Plasma aldosterone level <5 ng/dL or a 
24-hour urine aldosterone <14 μg after saline loading essentially 
rules out primary hyperaldosteronism. Once the biochemical 
diagnosis is confirmed, further evaluation should be directed at 
Table 38-15
Functions of glucocorticoid hormones
Function/System
Effects
Glucose metabolism
Increased hepatic glycogen 
deposition, gluconeogenesis, 
decreased muscle glucose 
uptake and metabolism
Protein metabolism
Decreased muscle protein 
synthesis, increased 
catabolism
Fat metabolism
Increased lipolysis in adipose 
tissue
Connective tissue
Inhibition of fibroblasts, loss 
of collagen, thinning of skin, 
striae formation
Skeletal system
Inhibition of bone formation, 
increased osteoclast activity, 
potentiate the action of PTH
Immune system
Increases circulation of 
polymorphonuclear cells; 
decreases numbers of 
lymphocytes, monocytes, 
and eosinophils; reduces 
migration of inflammatory 
cells to sites of injury
Cardiovascular system
Increases cardiac output and 
peripheral vascular tone
Renal system
Sodium retention, 
hypokalemia, hypertension 
via mineralocorticoid 
effect, increased glomerular 
filtration via glucocorticoid 
effects
Endocrine system
Inhibits TSH synthesis and 
release, decreased TBG 
levels, decreased conversion 
of T4 to T3
PTH = parathyroid hormone; T3 = 3,5’,3-triiodothyronine;  
T4 = thyroxine; TBG = thyroxine-binding globulin;  
TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.
1579
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Tyrosine hydroxylase
L-amino acid decarboxylase 
Dopamine-beta-hydroxylase
Phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase
A
Tyrosine
Dopa
(L-dihydroxyphenylalanine)
Dopamine
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
   
MAO
MAO
MAO
MAO
Dihydroxymandelic
acid
3-methoxy-4-
hydroxymandelic acid
COMT
COMT
COMT
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
Metanephrine
Normetanephrine
MAO Monoamine oxidase   COMT Catechol O-methyltransferase
B
Figure 38-41.  A. Synthesis of catecholamines. B. Metabolism of catecholamine hormones.
Table 38-16
Catecholamine hormone receptors and effects they mediate
Receptor
Tissue
Function
α1
Blood vessels
Contraction
Gut
Decreased motility, increased  
sphincter tone
Pancreas
Decreased insulin and glucagon  
release
Liver
Glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis
Eyes
Pupil dilation
Uterus
Contraction
Skin
Sweating
α2
Synapse (sympathetic)
Inhibits norepinephrine release
Platelet
Aggregation
β1
Heart
Chronotropic, inotropic
Adipose tissue
Lipolysis
Gut
Decreased motility, increased sphincter 
tone
Pancreas
Increased insulin and glucagon release
β2
Blood vessels
Vasodilation
Bronchioles
Dilation
Uterus
Relaxation
1580
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
determining which patients have a unilateral aldosteronoma vs. 
bilateral hyperplasia, because surgery is almost always curative 
for the former, but usually not the latter. No biochemical studies 
can make this distinction with 100% sensitivity; thus imaging 
studies are necessary.
Radiologic Studies.  CT scans with 0.5-cm cuts in the adrenal 
area can localize aldosteronomas with a sensitivity of 90%. 
A unilateral 0.5- to 2-cm adrenal tumor with a normal-appearing 
contralateral gland confirms an aldosteronoma in the presence 
of appropriate biochemical parameters. MRI scans are less sen-
sitive but more specific, particularly if opposed phase chemical 
shift images are obtained. MRI scans also have increased use in 
pregnant patients or those unable to tolerate intravenous con-
trast. If adrenal hyperplasia is suspected, the algorithm depicted 
in Fig. 38-42 is useful. Selective venous catheterization and 
adrenal vein sampling for aldosterone have been demonstrated 
to be 95% sensitive and 90% specific in localizing the aldo-
steronoma. In this procedure, the adrenal veins are cannulated, 
and blood samples for aldosterone and cortisol are obtained 
from both adrenal veins and the vena cava after ACTH admin-
istration.78 Measurement of cortisol levels is necessary to con-
firm proper placement of the catheters in the adrenal veins. A 
greater than fourfold difference in the aldosterone:cortisol ratios 
between the adrenal veins indicates the presence of a unilateral 
tumor. Some investigators use this study routinely, but it is invasive, 
requires an experienced interventional radiologist, and can lead 
to adrenal vein rupture in approximately 1% of cases. There-
fore, most groups advocate use of this modality selectively in 
ambiguous cases, when the tumor cannot be localized and in 
patients with bilateral adrenal enlargement to determine whether 
there is unilateral or bilateral increased secretion of aldosterone. 
Scintigraphy with 131I-6β-iodomethyl noriodocholesterol (NP-59) 
also may be used for the same purpose. Like cholesterol, this 
compound is taken up by the adrenal cortex, but unlike cho-
lesterol, it remains in the gland without undergoing further 
metabolism. Adrenal adenomas appear as “hot” nodules with 
suppressed contralateral uptake, whereas hyperplastic glands 
show bilaterally increased uptake. This test, however, is not 
widely available.
Treatment  Preoperatively, control of hypertension and ade-
quate potassium supplementation (to keep K >3.5 mmol/L) are 
important. Patients generally are treated with spironolactone (an 
aldosterone antagonist), amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic 
that blocks sodium channels in the distal nephron), nifedipine 
(a calcium channel blocker), or captopril (an ACE inhibitor). 
Unilateral tumors producing aldosterone are best managed by 
adrenalectomy, either by a laparoscopic approach (preferred) 
or via a posterior open approach. If a carcinoma is suspected 
because of the large size of the adrenal lesion or mixed hormone 
secretion, an anterior transabdominal approach is preferred to 
permit adequate determination of local invasion and distal 
metastases. Only 20% to 30% of patients with hyperaldosteron-
ism secondary to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia benefit from sur-
gery, and as described, selective venous catheterization is useful 
to predict which patients will respond. For the other patients, 
medical therapy with spironolactone, amiloride, or triamterene 
is the mainstay of management. Glucocorticoid-suppressible 
hyperaldosteronism is treated by administering exogenous dexa-
methasone at doses of 0.5 to 1 mg daily. Treatment with spirono-
lactone may help decrease glucocorticoid requirements in this 
condition and avoid symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome. Postop-
eratively, some patients experience transient hypoaldosteronism 
requiring mineralocorticoids for up to 3 months. Rarely, acute 
Addison’s disease may occur 2 to 3 days after adrenalectomy. 
Adrenalectomy is >90% successful in improving hypokalemia 
and about 70% successful in correcting hypertension. Patients 
who respond to spironolactone therapy and those with a shorter 
duration of hypertension with minimal renal damage are more 
likely to achieve improvement in hypertension, whereas male 
patients, those >50 years old, and those with multiple adrenal 
nodules, are least likely to benefit from adrenalectomy.
Cushing’s Syndrome.  Cushing described patients with a pecu-
liar fat deposition, amenorrhea, impotence (in men), hirsutism, 
purple striae, hypertension, diabetes, and other features that con-
stitute the syndrome (Fig. 38-43). He also recognized that sev-
eral of these patients had basophilic tumors of the pituitary gland 
and concluded that these tumors produced hormones that caused 
adrenocortical hyperplasia, thus resulting in the manifestations 
of the syndrome. Today, the term Cushing’s syndrome refers to 
a complex of symptoms and signs resulting from hypersecretion 
of cortisol regardless of etiology. In contrast, Cushing’s disease 
refers to a pituitary tumor, usually an adenoma, which leads to 
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and hypercortisolism. Cushing’s 
syndrome (endogenous) is a rare disease, affecting 10 in 1 million 
individuals. It is more common in adults but may occur in children. 
Women are more commonly affected (male:female ratio 1:8). 
Adrenalectomy
Bilateral 
hyperfunction
or failure to 
localize
Medical 
management
Adrenalectomy
Unilateral
increased 
aldosterone
CT scan or MRI
Unilateral 
adrenal tumor
usually 0.5 - 2 cm
in diameter
Bilaterally
abnormal or normal
adrenals
1) Selective venous
    catheterization for 
    aldosterone and 
    cortisol 
    or
2) NP-59 scan
Figure 38-42.  Management of an adrenal aldosteronoma. CT = 
computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
1581
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
Although most individuals have sporadic disease, Cushing’s 
syndrome may be found in MEN1 families and can result from 
ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors, primary adrenal neoplasms, 
or an ectopic ACTH-secreting carcinoid tumor (more common 
in men) or bronchial adenoma (more common in women).
Cushing’s syndrome may be classified as ACTH-dependent 
or ACTH-independent (Table 38-17). The most common cause 
of hypercortisolism is exogenous administration of steroids. 
However, approximately 70% of cases of endogenous Cushing’s 
syndrome are caused by an ACTH-producing pituitary tumor. 
Primary adrenal sources (adenoma, hyperplasia, and carcinoma) 
account for about 20% of cases, and ectopic ACTH-secreting 
tumors account for <10% of cases. CRH also may be secreted 
ectopically in bronchial carcinoid tumors, pheochromocytomas, 
and other tumors. These patients are difficult to distinguish 
from those with ectopic ACTH production, but can be diag-
nosed by determining CRH levels. Patients with major depres-
sion, alcoholism, pregnancy, chronic renal failure, or stress also 
may have elevated cortisol levels and symptoms of hypercorti-
solism. However, these manifestations resolve with treatment of 
the underlying disorder, and these patients are deemed to have 
pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome.
Primary adrenal hyperplasia may be micronodular, mac-
ronodular, or massively macronodular. Adrenal hyperplasia 
resulting from ACTH stimulation usually is macronodular 
(3-cm nodules). Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical 
disease is a rare cause of ACTH-independent Cushing’s 
syndrome, which is characterized by the presence of small 
(<5 mm), black adrenal nodules. Primary pigmented nodular 
adrenocortical disease may be associated with Carney complex 
(atrial myxomas, schwannomas, and pigmented nevi) and is 
thought to be immune related.
Symptoms and Signs  The classical features of Cushing’s syn-
drome are listed in Table 38-18. Early diagnosis of this disease 
requires a thorough knowledge of these manifestations, cou-
pled with a high clinical suspicion. In some patients, symptoms 
are less pronounced and may be more difficult to recognize, 
particularly given their diversity and the absence of a single 
defining symptom or sign. Progressive truncal obesity is the 
most common symptom, occurring in up to 95% of patients. 
Figure 38-43.  Some characteristic features of Cushing’s 
syndrome—moon facies, hirsutism, and acne.
Table 38-17
Etiology of Cushing’s syndrome
ACTH-dependent (70%)
  • Pituitary adenoma or Cushing’s disease (∼70%)
  • Ectopic ACTH productiona (∼10%)
  • Ectopic CRH production (<1%)
ACTH-independent (20%–30%)
  • Adrenal adenoma (10%–15%)
  • Adrenal carcinoma (5%–10%)
  • Adrenal hyperplasia—pigmented micronodular cortical 
hyperplasia or gastric inhibitory peptide-sensitive 
macronodular hyperplasia (5%)
Other
  • Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome
  • Iatrogenic—exogenous administration of steroids
aFrom small cell lung tumors, pancreatic islet cell tumors, medullary 
thyroid cancers, pheochromocytomas, and carcinoid tumors of the lung, 
thymus, gut, pancreas, and ovary.
ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH = corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone.
Table 38-18
Features of Cushing’s syndrome
System
Manifestation
General
Weight gain—central obesity, 
buffalo hump, supraclavicular 
fat pads
Integumentary
Hirsutism, plethora, purple 
striae, acne, ecchymosis
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Musculoskeletal
Generalized weakness, 
osteopenia
Neuropsychiatric
Emotional lability, psychosis, 
depression
Metabolic
Diabetes or glucose 
intolerance, hyperlipidemia
Renal
Polyuria, renal stones
Gonadal
Impotence, decreased libido, 
menstrual irregularities
1582
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
This pattern results from the lipogenic action of excessive 
corticosteroids centrally and catabolic effects peripherally, 
along with peripheral muscle wasting. Fat deposition also 
occurs in unusual sites, such as the supraclavicular space and 
posterior neck region, leading to the so-called buffalo hump. 
Purple striae are often visible on the protuberant abdomen. 
Rounding of the face leads to moon facies, and thinning of 
subcutaneous tissues leads to plethora. There is an increase in 
fine hair growth on the face, upper back, and arms, although 
true virilization is more commonly seen with adrenocortical 
cancers. Endocrine abnormalities include glucose intolerance, 
amenorrhea, and decreased libido or impotence. In children, 
Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by obesity and stunted 
growth. Patients with Cushing’s disease also may present 
with headaches, visual field defects, and panhypopituita-
rism. Hyperpigmentation of the skin, if present, suggests an 
ectopic ACTH-producing tumor with high levels of circulat-
ing ACTH.
Diagnostic Tests  The aims of diagnostic tests in the evalua-
tion of patients suspected of having Cushing’s syndrome are 
twofold: to confirm the presence of Cushing’s syndrome and to 
determine its etiology (Fig. 38-44).
Laboratory Studies.  Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by 
elevated glucocorticoid levels that are not suppressible by exog-
enous hormone administration and loss of diurnal variation. 
This phenomenon is used to screen patients using the overnight 
low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. In this test, 1 mg of 
a synthetic glucocorticoid (dexamethasone) is given at 11 p.m. 
and plasma cortisol levels are measured at 8 a.m. the following 
morning. Physiologically normal adults suppress cortisol levels 
to <3 μg/dL, whereas most patients with Cushing’s syndrome do 
not. False-negative results may be obtained in patients with mild 
disease; therefore, some authors consider the test positive only 
if cortisol levels are suppressed to <1.8 μg/dL. False-positive 
results can occur in up to 3% of patients with chronic renal 
1) Overnight DST
2) 24-hour urinary free cortisol
3) 11:00 pm salivary cortisol
1) Plasma ACTH
2) High-dose DST and
    urinary cortisol
Confirm 
the 
diagnosis
ACTH gradient?
Determine 
source of 
hypercortisolism
Decreased ACTH
Lack of suppression
CT scan adrenals
Increased ACTH
Positive 
Increased ACTH
Lack of suppression
Equivocal
results
Further testing
Bilateral petrosal
vein sampling
Adrenal
source
Pituitary
source
Ectopic ACTH
source
STEPS IN DIAGNOSIS
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Yes
No
Figure 38-44.  Diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome. ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; CT = computed tomography; DST = dexamethasone 
suppression test.
1583
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
failure, depression, or those taking medications such as phenyt-
oin, which enhance dexamethasone metabolism. In patients with 
a negative test but a high clinical suspicion, the classic low-dose 
dexamethasone (0.5 mg every 6 hours for eight doses, or 2 mg 
over 48 hours) suppression test or urinary cortisol measurement 
should be performed. Measurement of elevated 24-hour urinary 
cortisol levels is a very sensitive (95%–100%) and specific (98%) 
modality of diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome and is particularly 
useful for identifying patients with pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome. 
A urinary cortisol-free excretion of less than 100 μg/dL (in most 
laboratories) rules out hypercortisolism. Recently, salivary cortisol 
measurements using commercially available kits also have dem-
onstrated superior sensitivity in diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome 
and are being increasingly used. Overall, 24-hour urinary tests for 
free cortisol and the overnight dexamethasone suppression test at 
the 5 μg/dL cutoff have the highest specificity for the diagnosis of 
Cushing’s syndrome.79
Once a diagnosis of hypercortisolism is established, further 
testing is aimed at determining whether it is ACTH-dependent 
or ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome. This is best accom-
plished by measurement of plasma ACTH levels (normal 10– 
100 pg/mL). Elevated ACTH levels are found in patients with 
adrenal hyperplasia due to Cushing’s disease (15–500 pg/mL) 
and those with CRH-secreting tumors, but the highest levels 
are found in patients with ectopic sources of ACTH (>1000 pg/
mL). In contrast, ACTH levels are characteristically suppressed 
(<5 pg/mL) in patients with primary cortisol-secreting adrenal 
tumors. The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used 
to distinguish between the causes of ACTH-dependent Cush-
ing’s syndrome (pituitary vs. ectopic). The standard test (2 mg 
dexamethasone every 6 hours for 2 days) or the overnight test 
(8 mg) may be used, with 24-hour urine collections for cortisol 
and 17-hydroxy steroids performed over the second day. Failure 
to suppress urinary cortisol by 50% confirms the diagnosis of an 
ectopic ACTH-producing tumor. Patients suspected of having 
ectopic tumors should also undergo testing for MTC and pheo-
chromocytoma. Bilateral petrosal vein sampling also is helpful 
for determining whether the patient has Cushing’s disease or 
ectopic Cushing’s syndrome.
The CRH test also is helpful in determining the etiology 
of Cushing’s syndrome. Ovine CRH (1 μg/kg) is administered 
intravenously, followed by serial measurements of ACTH and 
cortisol at 15-minute intervals for 1 hour. Patients with a primary 
adrenal hypercortisolism exhibit a blunted response (ACTH peak 
<10 pg/mL), whereas those with ACTH-dependent Cushing’s 
syndrome demonstrate a higher elevation of ACTH (>30 pg/mL). 
CRH stimulation also can enhance the usefulness of petrosal vein 
sampling. Patients with pituitary tumors also have a higher peak 
ACTH than those with ectopic ACTH-producing tumors.
Radiologic Studies.  CT and MRI scans of the abdomen can iden-
tify adrenal tumors with 95% sensitivity. They also are helpful 
in distinguishing adrenal adenomas from carcinomas, as dis-
cussed in the subsequent section Adrenocortical Cancer. MRI 
scans have the added advantage of allowing assessment of vas-
cular anatomy. Adrenal adenomas appear darker than the liver 
on T2-weighted imaging. Radioscintigraphic imaging of the 
adrenals using NP-59 also can be used to distinguish adenoma 
from hyperplasia. Reports suggest that “cold” adrenal nodules 
are more likely to be cancerous, although this distinction is not 
absolute. NP-59 scanning is most useful in identifying patients 
with an adrenal source of hypercortisolism and primary pigmented 
micronodular hyperplasia.
Thin-section head CT scans are 22% sensitive, and con-
trast-enhanced brain MRI scans are 33% to 67% sensitive at 
identifying pituitary tumors. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling for 
ACTH before and after CRH injection has been helpful in this 
regard and has a sensitivity approaching 100%. In this study, 
catheters are placed in both internal jugular veins and a periph-
eral vein. A ratio of petrosal to peripheral vein ACTH level of 
>2 in the basal state and >3 after CRH stimulation is diagnos-
tic of a pituitary tumor. In patients suspected of having ectopic 
ACTH production, CT or MRI scans of the chest and anterior 
mediastinum are performed first, followed by imaging of the 
neck, abdomen, and pelvis if the initial studies are negative.
Treatment  Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the treatment of 
choice for patients with adrenal adenomas. Open adrenalectomy 
is reserved for large tumors (≥6 cm) or those suspected to be 
adrenocortical cancers. Bilateral adrenalectomy is curative for 
primary adrenal hyperplasia.
The treatment of choice in Cushing’s disease is transsphe-
noidal excision of the pituitary adenoma, which is successful in 
80% of patients. Pituitary irradiation has been used for patients 
with persistent or recurrent disease after surgery. However, it 
is associated with a high rate of panhypopituitarism, and some 
patients develop visual deficits. This has led to increased use 
of stereotactic radiosurgery, which uses CT guidance to deliver 
high doses of radiotherapy to the tumor (photon or gamma knife) 
and also bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Patients who fail 
to respond to either treatment are candidates for pharmacologic 
therapy with adrenal inhibitors (medical adrenalectomy) such as 
ketoconazole, metyrapone, or aminoglutethimide.
Patients with ectopic ACTH production are best managed 
by treating the primary tumor, including recurrences, if possible. 
Medical or bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy has been used 
to palliate patients with unresectable disease and those whose 
ectopic ACTH-secreting tumor cannot be localized.
Patients undergoing surgery for a primary adrenal ade-
noma secreting glucocorticoids require preoperative and post-
operative steroids due to suppression of the contralateral adrenal 
gland. These patients are also at increased predisposition for 
infectious and thromboembolic complications, the latter due to 
a hypercoagulable state resulting from an increase in clotting 
factors including factor VIII and von Willebrand’s factor com-
plex, and by impaired fibrinolysis. Duration of steroid therapy 
is determined by the ACTH stimulation test. Exogenous ste-
roids may be needed for up to 2 years but are needed indefi-
nitely in patients who have undergone bilateral adrenalectomy. 
This latter group of patients also may require mineralocorticoid 
replacement therapy. Typical replacement doses include hydro-
cortisone (10–20 mg every morning and 5–10 mg every eve-
ning) and fludrocortisone (0.05–0.1 mg/d every morning).
Adrenocortical Cancer.  Adrenal carcinomas are rare neo-
plasms with a worldwide incidence of two per 1 million. These 
tumors have a bimodal age distribution, with an increased inci-
dence in children and adults in the fourth and fifth decades of life. 
The majority are sporadic, but adrenocortical carcinomas also 
occur in association with germline mutations of p53 (Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome) and MENIN (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1) 
genes. Loci on 11p (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome), 2p (Car-
ney complex), and 9q also have been implicated. Somatic p53 
mutations are present in up to 33% of tumors, and LOH at the 
p53 locus has been reported in >85% of adrenocortical carcino-
mas. In addition, Insulin-like growth factor II is overexpressed 
1584
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
in 90% of tumors, and approximately 30% harbor somatic acti-
vating mutations in the β-catenin gene.80
Symptoms and Signs  Approximately 50% of adrenocortical 
cancers are nonfunctioning.81 The remaining secrete cortisol 
(30%), androgens (20%), estrogens (10%), aldosterone (2%), 
or multiple hormones (35%). Patients with functioning tumors 
often present with the rapid onset of Cushing’s syndrome 
accompanied by virilizing features. Nonfunctioning tumors 
more commonly present with an enlarging abdominal mass and 
abdominal or back pain. Rarely, weight loss, anorexia, and nau-
sea may be present.
Diagnostic Tests  Diagnostic evaluation of these patients begins 
with measurement of serum electrolyte levels to rule out hypo-
kalemia, urinary catecholamines to rule out pheochromocyto-
mas, an overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test, and a 
24-hour urine collection for cortisol and 17-ketosteroids to rule 
out Cushing’s syndrome.
CT and MRI scans are useful to image these tumors 
(Fig. 38-45). The size of the adrenal mass on imaging studies is 
the single most important criterion to help diagnose malignancy. 
In the series reported by Copeland, 92% of adrenal cancers were 
>6 cm in diameter.82 The sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood 
ratio of tumor size in predicting malignancy (based on Sur-
veillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program data) were 
recently reported as 96%, 51%, and 2 for tumors ≥4 cm, and 
90%, 78%, and 4.1 for tumors ≥6 cm.83 Other CT imaging char-
acteristics suggesting malignancy include tumor heterogeneity, 
irregular margins, and the presence of hemorrhage and adjacent 
lymphadenopathy or liver metastases. Moderately bright signal 
intensity on T2-weighted images (adrenal mass–to–liver ratio 
1.2:2.8), significant lesion enhancement, and slow washout after 
injection of gadolinium contrast also indicate malignancy, as 
does evidence of local invasion into adjacent structures such 
as the liver, blood vessels (IVC), and distant metastases. FDG-
PET or PET-CT scans may have some utility in distinguishing 
benign from malignant lesions, as discussed in the section on 
incidentalomas. Once adrenal cancer is diagnosed, CT scans of 
the chest and pelvis or FDG-PET or PET-CT scans are per-
formed for staging. The tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging 
system for adrenocortical carcinoma is depicted in Table 38-19. 
Up to 70% of patients present with stage III or IV disease.
Pathology  Most adrenocortical cancers are large, weighing 
between 100 and 1000 g. On gross examination, areas of hem-
orrhage and necrosis often are evident. Microscopically, cells 
are hyperchromatic and typically have large nuclei and promi-
nent nucleoli. It is very difficult to distinguish benign adrenal 
adenomas from carcinomas by histologic examination alone. 
Capsular or vascular invasion is the most reliable sign of cancer. 
Weiss and associates studied a combination of nine criteria for 
their usefulness in distinguishing malignant from benign adrenal 
tumors: nuclear grade III or IV; mitotic rate greater than 5 per 
50 high-power fields; atypical mitoses; clear cells comprising 
25% or less of the tumor; a diffuse architecture; microscopic 
necrosis; and invasion of venous, sinusoidal, and capsular struc-
ture. Tumors with four or more of these criteria were likely to 
metastasize and/or recur.84 Rarely, the diagnosis of malignancy 
of a completely resected adrenal tumor is often only made in 
retrospect by the finding of metastatic disease many years later. 
Molecular markers such as Ki67 (indicating proliferative activity) 
can also be useful in this regard.
Treatment  The most important predictor of survival in patients 
with adrenal cancer is the adequacy of resection. Patients who 
undergo complete resection have 5-year actuarial survival rates 
ranging from 32% to 48%, whereas median survival is <1 year 
in those undergoing incomplete excision. Therefore, adrenocor-
tical carcinomas are treated by excision of the tumor en bloc 
with any contiguously involved lymph nodes or organs such 
as the diaphragm, kidney, pancreas, liver, or IVC. This is best 
accomplished by open adrenalectomy via a generous subcostal 
incision or a thoracoabdominal incision (on the right side). The 
incisions should permit wide exposure, minimize chances of 
capsule rupture and tumor spillage, and allow vascular control 
of the aorta, IVC, and renal vessels, as needed.
Mitotane or o,p-DDD or 1,1-dichloro-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-
2-(p-chlorophenyl) ethane, which is a derivative of the insec-
ticide DDT, has adrenolytic activity and has been used in the 
Figure 38-45.  Computed tomography scan of the abdomen show-
ing a left adrenocortical cancer with synchronous liver metastasis.
Table 38-19
TNM staging for adrenocortical cancer
Stage
TNM Class
I
T1, N0, M0
II
T2, N0, M0
III
T3, N0, M0
T1–2, N1, M0
IV
T3–4, N1, M0
Any T, any N, M1
Primary tumor (T): T1, size ≤5 cm without local invasion; T2, size >5 cm 
without local invasion; T3, any size with local invasion but no involvement 
of adjacent organs; T4, any size with involvement of adjacent organs.
Nodes (N): N0, no involvement of regional nodes; N1, positive regional 
lymph nodes.
Metastasis (M): M0, no known distal metastases, M1, distant metastases 
present.
Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on 
Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is 
the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition (2010) published by 
Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.
1585
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
adjuvant setting and for the treatment of unresectable or meta-
static disease. However, the therapeutic effectiveness is con-
flicting, and consistent improvement in survival rates is lacking. 
Moreover, the drug is associated with significant GI and neu-
rologic side effects, particularly at the effective doses of 2 to 
6 g/d. Terzolo and associates retrospectively evaluated the use 
of mitotane in the adjuvant setting and reported significantly 
increased recurrence-free survival in the treatment group.85 
However, the routine use of this medication awaits evaluation in 
randomized, controlled trials. Determination of blood mitotane 
levels is helpful to ascertain whether therapeutic and nontoxic 
levels are present. Adrenocortical tumors commonly metasta-
size to the liver, lung, and bone.
Surgical debulking is recommended for isolated, recurrent 
disease and has been demonstrated to prolong survival. Sys-
temic chemotherapeutic agents used in this tumor include etopo-
side, cisplatin, doxorubicin, and, more recently, paclitaxel, but 
consistent responses are rare, possibly due to the expression of 
the multidrug resistance gene (MDR-1) in tumor cells. In vitro 
data indicate that mitotane may be able to reverse this resistance 
when combined with various chemotherapeutic agents. Results 
from the First International Randomized Trial in Advanced or 
Metastatic Adrenocortical Carcinoma Treatment (FIRM-ACT) 
showed that patients receiving etoposide, doxorubicin, cispla-
tin, and mitotane had better response rates and progression-free 
survival rates than patients receiving streptozotocin and mito-
tane.72 There has been recent interest in the use of suramin, a 
growth factor inhibitor, as therapy for adrenocortical carcinoma; 
however, this requires further study, particularly because this 
drug may be associated with significant neurotoxicity. Gos-
sypol, a naturally occurring insecticide (from the cotton plant 
Gossypium species), also appears to inhibit the growth of adre-
nocortical cancer cell lines and tumors in vivo. However, poor 
response rates combined with high death rates in limited clinical 
studies have reduced enthusiasm for this agent. Adrenocortical 
cancers also are relatively insensitive to conventional external-
beam radiation therapy. However, this modality is used in the 
palliation of bony metastases. Ketoconazole, metyrapone, or 
aminoglutethimide may also be useful in controlling steroid 
hypersecretion.
Sex Steroid Excess.  Adrenal adenomas or carcinomas 
that secrete adrenal androgens lead to virilizing syndromes. 
Although women with virilizing tumors develop hirsutism, 
amenorrhea, infertility, and other signs of masculinization, such 
as increased muscle mass, deepened voice, and temporal bald-
ing, men with these tumors are more difficult to diagnose and, 
hence, usually present with disease in advanced stages. Chil-
dren with virilizing tumors have accelerated growth, premature 
development of facial and pubic hair, acne, genital enlargement, 
and deepening of their voice. Feminizing adrenal tumors are less 
common and occur in men in the third to fifth decades of life. 
These tumors lead to gynecomastia, impotence, and testicular 
atrophy. Women with these tumors develop irregular menses 
or dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Vaginal bleeding may occur 
in postmenopausal women. Girls with these tumors experience 
precocious puberty with breast enlargement and early menarche.
Diagnostic Tests  Virilizing tumors produce excessive amounts 
of the androgen precursor, DHEA, which can be measured in 
plasma or urine as 17-ketosteroids. Patients with feminizing 
tumors also have elevated urinary 17-ketosteroids in addition 
to increased estrogen levels. Androgen-producing tumors often 
are associated with production of other hormones such as glu-
cocorticoids.
Treatment  Virilizing and feminizing tumors are treated by adre-
nalectomy. Malignancy is difficult to diagnose histologically but 
is suggested by the presence of local invasion, recurrence, or 
distal metastases. Adrenolytic drugs such as mitotane, aminoglu-
tethimide, and ketoconazole may be useful in controlling symp-
toms in patients with metastatic disease.
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.  CAH refers to a group of 
disorders that result from deficiencies or complete absence of 
enzymes involved in adrenal steroidogenesis. 21-Hydroxylase 
(CYP21A2) deficiency is the most common enzymatic defect, 
accounting for >90% of cases of CAH. This deficiency prevents 
the production of 11-deoxycortisol and 11-DOC from progesterone 
precursors. Deficiency of glucocorticoids and aldosterone leads to 
elevated ACTH levels and overproduction of adrenal androgens 
and corticosteroid precursors such as 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
and Δ4-androstenedione. These compounds are converted to tes-
tosterone in the peripheral tissues, thereby leading to virilization. 
Complete deficiency of 21-hydroxylase presents at birth with 
virilization, diarrhea, hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, 
and hyperpigmentation. Partial enzyme deficiency may present at 
birth or later with virilizing features. These patients are less prone 
to the salt wasting that characterizes complete enzyme deficiency. 
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency is the second most common form of 
CAH and leads to hypertension (from 11-DOC accumulation), 
virilization, and hyperpigmentation. Other enzyme deficiencies 
include 3β-hydroxydehydrogenase and 17-hydroxylase defi-
ciency. Congenital adrenal lipoid hyperplasia is the most severe 
form of CAH, which is caused by cholesterol desmolase defi-
ciency. It leads to the disruption of all steroid biosynthetic path-
ways, thus resulting in a fatal salt-wasting syndrome in phenotypic 
female patients.
Diagnostic Tests  The particular enzyme deficiency can 
be diagnosed by karyotype analysis and measurement of 
plasma and urinary steroids. The most common enzyme defi-
ciency, absence of 21-hydroxylase, leads to increased plasma 
17-hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone levels, because 
these compounds cannot be converted to 11-deoxycortisol and 
11-DOC, respectively. 11β-Hydroxylase deficiency is the next 
most common disorder and results in elevated plasma 11-DOC 
and 11-deoxycortisol. Urinary 17-hydroxyprogesterone, andro-
gens, and 17-ketosteroids also are elevated. The dexamethasone 
suppression test (2–4 mg divided qid for 7 days) can be used to 
distinguish adrenal hyperplasia from neoplasia. CT, MRI, and 
iodocholesterol scans generally are used to localize the tumors.
Treatment  Patients with CAH traditionally have been managed 
medically, with cortisol and mineralocorticoid replacement to 
suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. However, the 
doses of steroids required often are supraphysiologic and lead 
to iatrogenic hypercortisolism. More recently, bilateral laparo-
scopic adrenalectomy has been proposed as an alternative treat-
ment for this disease and has been successfully performed in a 
limited number of patients for various forms of CAH.
Disorders of the Adrenal Medulla
Pheochromocytomas.  Pheochromocytomas are rare tumors 
with prevalence rates ranging from 0.3% to 0.95% in autopsy 
series and approximately 1.9% in series using biochemical 
screening. They can occur at any age, with a peak incidence in the 
fourth and fifth decades of life, and have no gender predilection. 
1586
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Extra-adrenal tumors, also called functional paragangliomas, 
may be found at sites of sympathetic ganglia in the organ of 
Zuckerkandl, neck, mediastinum, abdomen, and pelvis. Pheo-
chromocytomas often are called the 10 percent tumor because 
10% are bilateral, 10% are malignant, 10% occur in pediatric 
patients, 10% are extra-adrenal, and 10% are familial.
Pheochromocytomas occur in families with MEN2A and 
MEN2B in approximately 50% of patients. Both syndromes 
are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and are caused 
by germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. Another 
syndrome with an increased risk of pheochromocytomas is 
von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, which also is inherited in 
an autosomal dominant manner. This syndrome also includes 
retinal angioma, hemangioblastomas of the central nervous 
system, renal cysts and carcinomas, pancreatic cysts, and epi-
didymal cystadenomas. The incidence of pheochromocytomas 
in the syndrome is approximately 14%. The gene causing VHL 
has been mapped to chromosome 3p and is a tumor suppres-
sor gene. Pheochromocytomas also are included within the 
tumor spectrum of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1 gene) and 
other neuroectodermal disorders (Sturge-Weber syndrome and 
tuberous sclerosis), Carney’s syndrome (gastric epithelioid leio-
myosarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, and extra-adrenal para-
ganglioma), MEN1 syndrome, and the familial paraganglioma 
and pheochromocytoma syndrome caused by mutations in the 
succinyl dehydrogenase family of genes (SDHB, SDHC, and 
SDHD), which comprise portions of the mitochondrial com-
plex II.87 More recently, mutations in SDHA and SDH5 have 
also been identified. Additional susceptibility loci include 
TMEM127 (involved in the mTORC1 signaling pathway) and 
MAX (myc-associated factor X).
Symptoms and Signs  Headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis 
constitute the “classic triad” of pheochromocytomas. Symp-
toms such as anxiety, tremulousness, paresthesias, flushing, 
chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, nausea, vomit-
ing, and others are nonspecific and may be episodic in nature. 
Cardiovascular complications such as myocardial infarction and 
cerebrovascular accidents may ensue. These symptoms can be 
incited by a range of stimuli including exercise, micturition, 
and defecation. The most common clinical sign is hyperten-
sion. Pheochromocytomas are one of the few curable causes 
of hypertension and are found in 0.1% to 0.2% of hypertensive 
patients. Hypertension related to this tumor may be paroxys-
mal with intervening normotension, sustained with paroxysms 
or sustained hypertension alone. Sudden death may occur in 
patients with undiagnosed tumors who undergo other surgeries 
or biopsy.
Diagnostic Tests
Biochemical Studies.  Pheochromocytomas are diagnosed by test-
ing 24-hour urine samples for catecholamines and their metab-
olites as well as by determining plasma metanephrine levels. 
Urinary metanephrines are 98% sensitive and also about 98% 
specific for pheochromocytomas, whereas VMA measurements 
are slightly less sensitive and specific. False-positive VMA tests 
may result from ingestion of caffeine, raw fruits, or medica-
tions (α-methyldopa). Fractionated urinary catecholamines 
(norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine) also are very sen-
sitive but less specific for pheochromocytomas. Because extra-
adrenal sites lack phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, 
these tumors secrete norepinephrine, whereas epinephrine is 
the main hormone secreted from adrenal pheochromocytomas. 
Many physiologic and pathologic states can alter the levels of 
plasma catecholamines. Hence, they often are thought to be 
less accurate than urinary tests. Both epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine should be measured, as tumors often secrete one or 
the other hormone. Sensitivities of 85% and specificities of 
95% have been reported using cutoff values of 2000 pg/mL for 
norepinephrine and 200 pg/mL for epinephrine. Clonidine is an 
agent that suppresses neurogenically mediated catecholamine 
excess but not secretion from pheochromocytomas. A normal 
clonidine suppression test is defined by a decrease of basal cate-
cholamine levels to <500 pg/mL within 2 to 3 hours after an oral 
dose of 0.3 mg of clonidine. Chromogranin A is a monomeric, 
acidic protein, which is stored in the adrenal medulla and other 
neuroendocrine tumors and released along with catecholamine 
hormones. It has been reported to have a sensitivity of 83% 
and a specificity of 96% and is useful in conjunction with cat-
echolamine measurement for diagnosing pheochromocytomas. 
Some studies have shown that plasma metanephrines should be 
the first-line test to identify pheochromocytomas, as the pre-
dictive value of a negative test is very high and normal levels 
exclude pheochromocytoma in patients with preclinical disease 
or dopamine secreting tumors. Although sensitivities of 96% to 
100% have been reported, specificity is lower at 85% to 89% 
and may be much lower at 77% in elderly patients. Although 
attractive because of the simplicity of a blood test, measure-
ment of plasma metanephrines is generally reserved for cases 
for which there is a high index of suspicion.
Radiologic Studies.  Radiologic studies are useful to localize 
tumors and to assess the extent of spread once the diagnosis has 
been made with biochemical tests. CT scans are 85% to 95% 
sensitive and 70% to 100% specific for pheochromocytomas 
(Fig. 38-46A). The scans should be performed without con-
trast to minimize the risk of precipitating a hypertensive crisis, 
although some recent studies suggest that intravenous contrast 
may be used. Images should include the region from the dia-
phragm to the aortic bifurcation so as to include the organ of 
Zuckerkandl. CT scans do not provide functional information 
and cannot definitively diagnose pheochromocytomas. MRI 
scans are 95% sensitive and almost 100% specific for pheo-
chromocytomas because these tumors have a characteristic 
appearance on T2-weighted images or after gadolinium. MRI 
is also the study of choice in pregnant women as there is no 
risk of radiation exposure. Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) 
is taken up and concentrated by vesicles in the adrenal medullar 
cells because its structure is similar to norepinephrine. Normal 
adrenal medullary tissue does not take up appreciable MIBG. 
131I-radiolabeled MIBG is, therefore, useful for localizing pheo-
chromocytomas (Fig. 38-46B), especially those in ectopic posi-
tions. This test has a reported sensitivity of 77% to 89% and 
specificity ranging from 88% to 100%.
Treatment  The medical management of pheochromocytomas is 
aimed chiefly at blood pressure control and volume repletion. 
Irreversible, long-acting α-blockers such as phenoxybenzamine 
are started 1 to 3 weeks before surgery at doses of 10 mg twice 
daily, which may be increased to 300 to 400 mg/d with rehydra-
tion. Patients should be warned about orthostatic hypotension. 
β-Blockers such as propranolol at doses of 10 to 40 mg every 6 
to 8 hours often need to be added preoperatively in patients who 
have persistent tachycardia and arrhythmias. β-Blockers should 
only be instituted after adequate α-blockade and hydration to 
avoid the effects of unopposed α stimulation (i.e., hypertensive 
1587
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
crisis and congestive heart failure) and are typically initiated 3 
to 4 days preoperatively. Patients also should be volume repleted 
preoperatively to avoid postoperative hypotension, which ensues 
with the loss of vasoconstriction after tumor removal. Other 
α-blockers such as prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin, which 
are selective α1-adrenergic blockers, have a better side effect 
profile and are preferable to phenoxybenzamine when long-term 
pharmacologic therapy is needed, as in patients with metastatic 
pheochromocytoma. Nicardipine is the most commonly used 
calcium channel blocker and inhibits norepinephrine-mediated 
calcium transport into vascular smooth muscle. When used as the 
primary mode of treatment, it appears to be just as effective as α- 
and β-blockade preoperatively. In some patients, catecholamine-
synthesis inhibitors such as α-methyl-p-l-tyrosine (metyrosine) 
may need to be added if standard α- and β-blockade is poorly 
tolerated or is ineffective in reaching target blood pressure and 
when moderate intraoperative tumor manipulation is anticipated.
Adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with 
pheochromocytoma. The chief goal of surgery is to resect the 
tumor completely with minimal tumor manipulation or rupture 
of the tumor capsule. Surgery should be performed with both 
noninvasive and invasive monitors, including an arterial line and 
central venous lines. In patients with congestive heart failure or 
underlying coronary artery disease, Swan-Ganz catheters may 
be necessary. Stress must be avoided during anesthesia induc-
tion, and use of inhaled agents like isoflurane and enflurane are 
preferred because they have minimal cardiac depressant effects. 
Fentanyl, ketamine, and morphine should be avoided as they 
can potentially stimulate catecholamine release from the tumor. 
The common medications used for intraoperative blood pres-
sure control include nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, phentolamine, 
and nicardipine. Intraoperative arrhythmias are best managed 
by short-acting β-blockers such as esmolol. Adrenalectomy usu-
ally was performed via an open anterior approach to facilitate 
detection of bilateral tumors, extra-adrenal lesions, or metastatic 
lesions. However, most pheochromocytomas <5 cm in diameter 
can be safely resected laparoscopically. Postoperatively, these 
patients are prone to hypotension due to loss of adrenergic 
stimulation and consequent vasodilatation and therefore need 
large volume resuscitation.
Hereditary Pheochromocytomas.  Inherited pheochromo-
cytomas tend to be multiple and bilateral. Generally, unilat-
eral adrenalectomy is recommended in the absence of obvious 
lesions in the contralateral adrenal gland because of Addison’s 
disease, requiring lifelong steroid replacement in patients under-
going bilateral adrenalectomy. For patients with tumors in both 
adrenal glands, cortical-sparing subtotal adrenalectomy may 
preserve adrenocortical function and avoid the morbidity of 
bilateral total adrenalectomy. Laparoscopic subtotal adrenal-
ectomy has been shown to provide short-term clinical results 
comparable to total adrenalectomy, with reduced surgical 
morbidity.88 However, these patients remain at risk for recur-
rent pheochromocytoma, which has been reported in 20% of 
patients with VHL disease a median of 40 months after partial 
adrenalectomy, and in 33% of MEN2 patients followed for 54 to 
88 months after surgery. Autotransplantation of adrenocortical 
tissue after total adrenalectomy may be another option for these 
patients. However, the transplanted cortical tissue rarely provides 
full function, and steroid replacement usually is required.
Malignant Pheochromocytomas.  Approximately 12% to 
29% of pheochromocytomas are malignant, and these tumors 
are associated with decreased survival. There are no definitive 
histologic criteria defining malignant pheochromocytomas. In 
fact, pleomorphism, nuclear atypia, and abundant mitotic fig-
ures are seen in benign tumors. Capsular and vascular invasion 
may be seen in benign lesions as well. Malignancy usually is 
diagnosed when there is evidence of invasion into surrounding 
structures or distant metastases. The most common sites for met-
astatic disease are bone, liver, regional lymph nodes, lung, and 
peritoneum, although the brain, pleura, skin, and muscles may 
also occasionally be involved. Some studies also suggest that 
older patient age and larger tumors are associated with a higher 
risk of malignancy. Although risk of malignancy increases with 
size for all pheochromocytomas, size does not seem to reliably 
predict malignancy in pheochromocytomas with local disease 
B
A
Figure 38-46.  A left-sided pheochromocytoma (arrows) imaged by a computed tomography scan of the abdomen (A) and a metaiodoben-
zylguanidine scan viewed posteriorly (B).
1588
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
only.89 Given this difficulty defining malignancy clinically (in 
the absence of metastatic disease), a number of other features 
such as DNA ploidy, tumor size, and necrosis, neuropeptide Y 
mRNA expression, and serum neuron-specific enolase expression 
have been studied. Malignant pheochromocytomas are more 
likely to express p53 and bcl-2 and have activated telomerase. 
Recent data suggest that flow cytometry and molecular markers 
such as expression of Ki-67, tissue inhibitor of metallopro-
teinase, and COX-2 also have shown some use in determining 
malignancy. When pheochromocytomas develop in the MEN 
syndromes, they rarely are malignant. In contrast, patients with 
germline SDHB mutations appear to have a higher propensity 
for extra-adrenal and malignant tumors. In general, soft tissue 
lesions are treated with resection if feasible. External-beam radi-
ation can be used for unresectable lesions or symptomatic skele-
tal metastases. Therapeutic 131I-MIBG irradiation may be useful 
in patients with diffuse disease showing 123-I-MIBG uptake on a 
diagnostic scan. If the tumor is positive on somatostatin receptor 
imaging, long-acting octreotide may be used.
The Adrenal Incidentaloma
Adrenal lesions discovered during imaging performed for unre-
lated reasons are referred to as incidentalomas. This definition 
excludes tumors discovered on imaging studies performed for 
evaluating symptoms of hormone hypersecretion or staging 
patients with known cancer. The incidence of these lesions iden-
tified by CT scans ranges from 0.4% to 4.4%.
Differential Diagnosis.  The differential diagnosis of adrenal 
incidentalomas is shown in Table 38-20. Nonfunctional corti-
cal adenomas account for the majority (36%–94%) of adre-
nal incidentalomas in patients without a history of cancer. In 
a series of patients from the Mayo Clinic, no nonfunctional 
lesion progressed to cause clinical or biochemical abnormali-
ties. However, other studies indicate that 5% to 20% of patients 
with apparently nonfunctioning cortical adenomas have under-
lying, subtle abnormalities of glucocorticoid secretion, and a 
rare benign-appearing incidentaloma is a cancer.
By definition, patients with incidentalomas do not have 
clinically overt Cushing’s syndrome, but subclinical Cushing’s 
syndrome is estimated to occur in approximately 8% of 
patients. This disorder is characterized by subtle fea-
tures of cortisol excess, such as weight gain, skin atrophy, facial 
10
Table 38-20
Differential diagnosis of adrenal incidentaloma
Functioning Lesions
Nonfunctioning Lesions
Benign
Benign
Aldosteronoma
Cortisol-producing 
adenoma
Sex steroid–producing 
adenoma
Pheochromocytoma
Cortical adenoma
Myelolipoma
Cyst
Ganglioneuroma
Hemorrhage
Malignant
Malignant
Adrenocortical cancer
Metastasis
Malignant 
pheochromocytoma
Adrenocortical cancer
fullness, diabetes, and hypertension, accompanied by loss of 
normal diurnal variation in cortisol secretion, autonomous cor-
tisol secretion, and resistance to suppression by dexamethasone. 
Total cortisol produced and 24-hour urinary cortisol levels may 
be normal. Examination of the natural history of subclinical 
Cushing’s syndrome indicates that, although most patients 
remain asymptomatic, some do progress to clinically evident 
Cushing’s syndrome. Furthermore, cases of postoperative adre-
nal crisis from unrecognized suppression of the contralateral 
adrenal have been reported, making preoperative identification 
of this condition imperative, particularly in the era of early dis-
charge following laparoscopic adrenalectomy.
The adrenal is a common site of metastases of lung and 
breast tumors, melanoma, renal cell cancer, and lymphoma. In 
patients with a history of nonadrenal cancer and a unilateral adre-
nal mass, the incidence of metastatic disease has been reported 
to range from 32% to 73%. Myelolipomas are benign, biochemi-
cally nonfunctioning lesions composed of elements of hematopoi-
etic and mature adipose tissue, which are rare causes of adrenal 
incidentaloma. Other less commonly encountered lesions include 
adrenal cysts, ganglioneuromas, and hemorrhage.
Diagnostic Investigations.  The diagnostic workup of an 
adrenal incidentaloma is aimed at identifying patients who 
would benefit from adrenalectomy (i.e., patients with function-
ing tumors and tumors at increased risk of being malignant). It is 
not necessary for asymptomatic patients whose imaging studies 
are consistent with obvious cysts, hemorrhage, myelolipomas, or 
diffuse metastatic disease to undergo additional investigations. 
All other patients should be tested for underlying hormonally 
active tumors using (a) a low-dose (1 mg) overnight dexametha-
sone suppression test to rule out subclinical Cushing’s syndrome 
and 17-ketosteroids (if sex steroid excess is suspected); (b) a 
24-hour urine collection for catecholamines, metanephrines, 
VMA, or plasma metanephrine to rule out pheochromocytoma; 
and (c) in hypertensive patients, serum electrolytes, plasma 
aldosterone, and plasma renin to rule out an aldosteronoma. In 
patients with a high index of suspicion for subclinical Cushing’s 
(those with hypertension, obesity, or diabetes), three tests (i.e., 
dexamethasone suppression test, salivary cortisol, and 24-hour 
urine free cortisol) may be used. Confirmatory tests can be per-
formed based on the results of the initial screening studies.
Determination of the malignant potential of an inciden-
taloma is more difficult. The risk of malignancy in an adrenal 
lesion is related to its size. Lesions >6 cm in diameter have an 
approximate risk of malignancy of about 25%.82 However, this 
size cutoff is not absolute because adrenal carcinomas also have 
been reported in lesions <6 cm. Carcinomas account for 2% of 
lesions <4 cm and 6% of lesions 4.1 to 6 cm in size. This has led 
to increased use of the imaging characteristics of incidentalomas 
to predict malignancy. Benign adrenal adenomas tend to be 
homogeneous, well encapsulated, and have smooth and regular 
margins. They also tend to be hypoattenuating lesions (<10 
Hounsfield units) on CT scanning. In contrast, adrenal cancers 
tend to be hyperattenuating (>18 Hounsfield units) and inhomo-
geneous, have irregular borders, and may show evidence of 
local invasion or adjacent lymphadenopathy. On MRI 
T2-weighted imaging, adenomas demonstrate low signal inten-
sity when compared to the liver (adrenal mass–to–liver ratio 
<1.4), whereas carcinomas and metastases have moderate inten-
sity (mass-to-liver ratio 1.2:2.8). Pheochromocytomas are 
extremely bright, with mass-to-liver ratios >3. Unfortunately, 
the ranges overlap, and signal intensity is not 100% reliable for 
1589
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
determining the nature of the lesion. Radionuclide imaging with 
NP-59 also has been used to distinguish between various adre-
nal lesions, with some investigators suggesting that uptake of 
NP-59 was 100% predictive of a benign lesion (adenoma), 
whereas absence of imaging was 100% predictive of a nonade-
nomatous lesion. However, the technique has not gained wide-
spread acceptance because patients need to be given cold iodine 
1 week before the study to prevent thyroid uptake, imaging 
needs to be delayed by 5 to 7 days after administration of the 
contrast, and false-positive and false-negative results occur. 
FDG-PET or PET-CT scans may have some utility in distin-
guishing potentially malignant from benign lesions in cases of 
inconclusive CT densitometry. However, caution must be exer-
cised for false-positive (some adenomas and pheochromocyto-
mas) and false-negative results (small lesions or those with 
hemorrhage or necrosis).90 FNAB cannot be used to distinguish 
adrenal adenomas from carcinomas. This being said, 
FNAB is useful in the setting of a patient with a history 
of cancer and a solitary adrenal mass. The positive predictive 
value of FNAB in this situation has been shown to be almost 
100%, although false-negative rates of up to 33% have been 
reported. Biopsies usually are performed under CT guidance, 
and appropriate testing to rule out pheochromocytomas should 
be undertaken before the procedure to avoid precipitating a 
hypertensive crisis.
Management.  An algorithm for the management of patients 
with incidentalomas is shown in Fig. 38-47. The AACE and 
American Association of Endocrine Surgeons (AAES) have 
recently published management guidelines for patients with 
adrenal incidentalomas.91 Patients with functional tumors or 
obviously malignant lesions should undergo adrenalectomy. 
The optimal management of patients with subclinical Cush-
ing’s syndrome is controversial, especially due to the paucity of 
data from high-quality prospective trials. In general, operative 
intervention is advised in patients with subclinical Cushing’s 
syndrome with suppressed plasma ACTH levels and elevated 
urinary cortisol levels because these patients are at high risk for 
progression to overt Cushing’s syndrome. The adrenal inciden-
taloma guidelines also recommend adrenalectomy in patients 
with worsening hypertension, abnormal glucose tolerance, or 
osteoporosis.
For nonfunctional lesions, the risk of malignancy needs to 
be balanced with operative morbidity and mortality. The AACE/
AAES guidelines recommend that lesions with suspicious fea-
tures on imaging studies such as heterogeneity, irregular cap-
sule, or adjacent nodes should be treated by adrenalectomy. 
Nonoperative therapy, with close periodic follow-up, is advised 
for lesions <4 cm in diameter with benign imaging characteris-
tics, whereas adrenalectomy is recommended for lesions ≥4 cm 
in size due to the increased risk of cancer.
However, several important points must be considered in 
the management of these patients. First, size criteria for malig-
nancy are not definitive and are derived from a selected series 
of patients. Second, the actual size of adrenal tumors can be 
underestimated by at least 1 cm by modalities such as CT and 
MRI scans, because tumors are larger in a cephalocaudal axis. 
Third, the natural history of incidentalomas is variable and 
depends on the underlying diagnosis, age of the study popula-
tion, and the size of the mass. Older patients are more likely to 
have nonfunctioning adenomas. Existing data in terms of the 
long-term behavior of these nonfunctional lesions, although 
limited, indicate that malignant transformation is uncommon. 
Furthermore, tumors that increase in size by at least 1 cm over a 
2-year follow-up period and those with subtle hormonal abnor-
malities appear to be more likely to enlarge. Overt hormone 
overproduction is more likely in tumors >3 cm and those with 
increased NP-59 uptake. Surgeons are more likely to operate 
on a 40-year-old patient with a 4-cm lesion, while electing to 
follow an 80-year-old patient with a similar lesion but multiple 
concurrent comorbidities. Based on the above considerations, 
11
Questions
1) 
Low dose DST
2) 
Plasma metanephrines or 24 h
 
urine catecholamines, VMA,
 
metanephrines
3) 
Plasma aldosterone, renin
 
activity, electrolytes
Adrenalectomy
Yes
No
Past history
of cancer?
Yes
Solitary
metastasis
yes
No
Consider
adrenalectomy
Systemic therapy
See question 3
< 4 cm,
Benign imaging features
No
Repeat imaging in 3–6 
months, biochemical
evaluation annually
≥ 4cm, indeterminate or
suspicious imaging
features
Adrenalectomy
1
Is the tumor
functioning?
2
Is the tumor
metastatic?
3
Is it at high
risk of being
malignant?
Figure 38-47.  Management algorithm for an adrenal incidentaloma. CT = computed tomography; DST = dexamethasone suppression test; 
VMA = vanillylmandelic acid.
1590
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
some surgeons use a size threshold for adrenalectomy with 
a nonfunctioning homogeneous tumor of 3 to 4 cm in young 
patients with no comorbidities and 5 cm in older patients with 
significant comorbidity.
Lesions that grow during follow-up also are treated by 
adrenalectomy. Myelolipomas generally do not warrant adrenal-
ectomy unless there is concern regarding malignancy, which is 
rare, or bleeding into the lesion, which is more likely in myelo-
lipomas >4 cm in size. These tumors, even when large, can be 
removed laparoscopically. Resection of solitary adrenal metas-
tases in patients with a history of nonadrenal cancer has been 
demonstrated to lead to prolonged patient survival. Suspected 
adrenal metastases also may be resected for diagnosis.
There is no consensus regarding the follow up of patients 
with adrenal incidentaloma. The AACE/AAES guidelines 
recommend repeating hormonal screening with a 1-mg dexa-
methasone suppression test and urinary catecholamines and 
metabolites yearly for 5 years as the risk of hypersecretion 
appears to plateau after this time period.91 It also recommends 
repeat imaging at 3 to 6 months and then annually for 1 to 2 years. 
Less frequent imaging is reasonable or small (<2 cm), uniform, 
hypodense cortical nodules in patients without a history of 
malignant disease. Adrenalectomy is recommended for lesions 
that grow ≥1 cm or if autonomous hormone secretion develops 
during follow-up.
Adrenal Insufficiency
Adrenal insufficiency may be primary, resulting from adre-
nal disease, or secondary, due to a deficiency of ACTH 
(Table 38-21). The most commonly encountered causes of 
primary adrenal insufficiency are autoimmune disease, infec-
tions, and metastatic deposits. Spontaneous adrenal hemor-
rhage can occur in patients with fulminant meningococcal 
septicemia (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome). Bilateral 
adrenal hemorrhage also can occur secondary to trauma, 
severe stress, infection, and coagulopathies and, if unrecog-
nized, is lethal. Exogenous glucocorticoid therapy with sup-
pression of the adrenal glands is the most common cause of 
secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Symptoms and Signs.  Acute adrenal insufficiency should 
be suspected in stressed patients with any of the relevant risk 
factors. It may mimic sepsis, myocardial infarction, or pulmo-
nary embolus and presents with fever, weakness, confusion, 
nausea, vomiting, lethargy, abdominal pain, or severe hypoten-
sion. Chronic adrenal insufficiency, such as that occurring in 
patients with metastatic tumors, may be more subtle. Symptoms 
include fatigue, salt craving, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain. These patients may appear hyperpigmented 
from increased secretion of CRH and ACTH, with increased 
α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone side-products.
Diagnostic Studies.  Characteristic laboratory findings 
include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, eosinophilia, mild azote-
mia, and fasting or reactive hypoglycemia. The peripheral blood 
smear may demonstrate eosinophilia in approximately 20% 
of patients. Adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed by the ACTH 
stimulation test. ACTH (250 μg) is infused intravenously, and 
cortisol levels are measured at 0, 30, and 60 minutes. Peak cor-
tisol levels <20 μg/dL suggest adrenal insufficiency. ACTH 
levels also allow primary insufficiency to be distinguished from 
secondary causes. High ACTH levels with low plasma cortisol 
levels are diagnostic of primary adrenal insufficiency.
Treatment.  Treatment must be initiated based on clinical sus-
picion alone, even before test results are obtained, or the patient 
is unlikely to survive. Management includes volume resuscita-
tion with at least 2 to 3 L of a 0.9% saline solution or 5% dex-
trose in saline solution. Blood should be obtained for electrolyte 
(decreased Na+ and increased K+), glucose (low), and cortisol 
(low) levels; ACTH (increased in primary and decreased in sec-
ondary); and quantitative eosinophilic count. Dexamethasone 
(4 mg) should be administered intravenously. Hydrocortisone 
(100 mg intravenously every 8 hours) also may be used, but it 
interferes with testing of cortisol levels. Once the patient has 
been stabilized, underlying conditions such as infection should 
be sought, identified, and treated. The ACTH stimulation test 
should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Glucocorticoids 
can then be tapered to maintenance doses (oral hydrocortisone 
15–20 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening). Mineralo-
corticoids (fludrocortisone 0.05–0.1 mg daily) may be required 
once the saline infusions are discontinued.
Adrenal Surgery
Choice of Procedure.  Adrenalectomy may be performed via a 
laparoscopic or open approach. In either approach, the gland may 
be approached anteriorly, laterally, or posteriorly via the retro-
peritoneum. The choice of approach depends on the size and 
nature of the lesion and expertise of the surgeon. Laparoscopic 
adrenalectomy has rapidly become the standard procedure of 
choice for the excision of most benign-appearing adrenal lesions 
<6 cm in diameter. The role of laparoscopic adrenalectomy in the 
Table 38-21
Etiology of adrenal insufficiency
Primary
Secondary
Autoimmune (autoimmune 
polyglandular disease type I 
and II)
Exogenous glucocorticoid 
therapy
Infectious—TB, fungi, CMV, 
HIV
Bilateral adrenalectomy
Hemorrhage—spontaneous 
(Waterhouse-Friderichsen 
syndrome) and secondary 
to stress, trauma, 
infections, coagulopathy, or 
anticoagulants
Pituitary or hypothalamic 
tumors
Metastases
Pituitary hemorrhage 
(postpartum Sheehan’s 
syndrome)
Infiltrative disorders—
amyloidosis, 
hemochromatosis
Transsphenoidal resection of 
pituitary tumor
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
Drugs—ketoconazole, 
metyrapone, 
aminoglutethimide, mitotane
CMV = cytomegalovirus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus;  
TB = tuberculosis.
1591
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
management of adrenocortical cancers is controversial. The data 
with respect to local tumor recurrence and intra-abdominal car-
cinomatosis from laparoscopic adrenalectomy for malignant 
adrenal tumors that were not appreciated as such, preoperatively 
or intraoperatively, are conflicting. Although laparoscopic adre-
nalectomy appears to be feasible and safe for solitary adrenal 
metastasis92 (provided there is no local invasion and the tumor 
can be resected intact), open adrenalectomy or laparoscopic-
assisted open adrenalectomy is the safest option for suspected or 
known adrenocortical cancers and malignant pheochromocyto-
mas. Technical considerations and surgeon experience, rather 
than absolute tumor size, usually determine the size threshold for 
laparoscopic resection. Hand-assisted laparoscopic adrenalec-
tomy may provide a bridge between laparoscopic adrenalectomy 
and conversion to an open procedure. There have been no ran-
domized trials directly comparing open vs. laparoscopic adre-
nalectomy. However, studies have shown that 
laparoscopic adrenalectomy is associated with decreased 
blood loss, postoperative pain, and narcotic use; reduced length 
of hospital stay; and faster return to work. 
Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy.  The procedure is performed 
under general anesthesia. Arterial lines are used routinely, and 
central lines are necessary for patients in whom massive fluid 
shifts are anticipated (e.g., those with large, active pheochro-
mocytomas). A nasogastric tube and Foley catheter are rec-
ommended. Routine preoperative antibiotics are not needed, 
except in patients with Cushing’s syndrome. The adrenals can 
be removed laparoscopically via a transabdominal (anterior 
or lateral) or retroperitoneal (lateral or posterior) approach. 
The lateral approach is preferred by most laparoscopic sur-
geons and uses gravity to aid retraction of surrounding organs. 
Patients, however, need to be repositioned for a bilateral 
procedure. The anterior transabdominal approach offers the 
advantage of a conventional view of the abdominal cavity and 
allows a bilateral adrenalectomy to be performed without the 
necessity of repositioning the patient. The posterior retroper-
itoneal approach has also been gaining popularity in recent 
years, particularly in patients with previous anterior abdominal 
surgery and peritoneal adhesions. In addition, several centers 
have successfully utilized robotic approaches for both lateral 
transabdominal and retroperitoneal laparoscopic adrenal sur-
gery. Single incision laparoscopic adrenalectomy is another 
option; however, widespread use of these latter approaches 
awaits analysis of long-term outcomes data and cost analyses. 
The lateral transabdominal approach is widely used and 
described in detail below.
Lateral Transabdominal Approach  The patient is placed in the 
lateral decubitus position, and the operating table is flexed at the 
waist to open the space between the lower rib cage and the iliac 
crest (Fig. 38-48). The surgeon and assistant both stand on the 
same side, facing the front of the patient. Pneumoperitoneum is 
created using a Veress needle or insufflation via a Hasson port. 
In general, four 10-mm trocars are placed between the midcla-
vicular line medially and anterior axillary line laterally, one to 
two fingerbreadths below the costal margin (see Fig. 38-48), 
although additional ports may be placed, if needed. A 30° lapa-
roscope is inserted through the second or midclavicular port. 
Most of the dissection is carried out via the two most lateral 
ports. However, the instruments and ports may be changed to 
provide optimum exposure, as needed.
For a right adrenalectomy, a fan retractor is inserted 
through the most medial port to retract the liver. An atraumatic 
grasper and an L-hook cautery are inserted via the two lateral 
ports for the dissection. The right triangular ligament is divided 
and the liver is rotated medially (Fig. 38-49A). Rarely, the 
hepatic flexure of the colon may need mobilization during a 
right adrenalectomy. The right kidney is identified visually and 
by palpation with an atraumatic grasper. The adrenal gland is 
identified on the superomedial aspect of the kidney. Gerota’s 
fascia is incised with the hook cautery. Dissection of the adrenal 
is started superomedially and then proceeds inferiorly, dissect-
ing around the adrenal in a clockwise manner. The periadrenal 
tissues are grasped or moved with a blunt grasper to facilitate 
circumferential dissection. The right adrenal vein is identified at 
its junction with the IVC, ligated with clips, and divided using 
endoscopic scissors. Alternatively, a vascular stapler may be 
used to divide the vein endoscopically. There may be a second 
adrenal vein on the right. Generally, two clips are left on the 
vena cava side. Although early identification of the adrenal vein 
is helpful to facilitate mobilization and prevent injury, it can 
be dissected whenever it is safe to do so. Early ligation of the 
adrenal vein makes it easier to mobilize the gland but may make 
subsequent dissection more difficult due to venous congestion. 
The arterial branches to the adrenal gland can be electrocoagu-
lated if small or clipped and divided.
For a left adrenalectomy, the fan retractor is used to retract 
the spleen. The splenic flexure is mobilized early, and the lat-
eral attachments to the spleen and the tail of the pancreas are 
12
Umbilicus
1
2
3
4
Figure 38-48.  Positioning of the patient and placement of trocars for a laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Four trocars are placed from the mid-
clavicular to the anterior axillary line.
1592
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
divided using the electrocautery (Fig. 38-49B). Gravity allows 
the spleen and the pancreatic tail to fall medially. The remain-
der of the dissection proceeds similarly to that described for the 
right adrenal. In addition to the adrenal vein, the inferior phrenic 
vein, which joins the left adrenal vein medially, also needs to be 
dissected, doubly clipped, and divided. As with the right adrenal 
vein, the left-sided veins also can be divided with a vascular 
stapler. Once the dissection is complete, the area of the adrenal 
bed can be irrigated and suctioned. A drain is rarely necessary. 
The gland is placed in a nylon specimen bag, which is brought 
out via one of the ports after morcellation, if necessary.
Posterior Retroperitoneal Approach  The retroperitoneal 
approach provides a more direct access to the adrenal gland and 
avoids abdominal adhesions in patients who have had previous 
abdominal surgery. Furthermore, bilateral adrenalectomy can be 
performed without repositioning the patient. Intraoperative ultra-
sound is helpful for identifying the adrenal, but the dissection and 
exposure are more difficult because the working space is limited. 
This makes vascular control difficult and also renders it unsuit-
able for large (>5 cm) lesions. This technique is being increas-
ingly used for small adenomas causing hyperaldosteronism.
The patient is placed in the prone-jackknife position, 
and the operating table is flexed at the waist to open the space 
between the posterior costal margin and the pelvis. Palpation 
is used to identify the position of the twelfth rib. Percutane-
ous ultrasound is performed to determine the outline of the 
underlying kidney and adrenal. When done laparoscopically, 
the surgeon stands on the side of the adrenal to be removed, 
and the assistant stands on the opposite side. A 1.5-cm incision 
is placed 2 cm inferior and parallel to the twelfth rib, laterally 
at the level of the inferior pole of the kidney. Gerota’s space 
is entered under direct vision using a 12-mm direct viewing 
trocar with a 0° laparoscope through the muscle layers of the 
posterior abdominal wall. Alternatively, blunt dissection with 
the surgeon’s finger also can identify the space behind Gerota’s 
fascia. The trocar is then replaced by a dissecting balloon, which 
is manually inflated using a hand pump under direct vision 
through the laparoscope. A 12-mm trocar is then reinserted into 
this space, and CO2 is insufflated to 12 to 15 mmHg pressure. 
The 0° laparoscope is replaced by a 45° laparoscope. Two addi-
tional 5- or 10-mm trocars are placed, one each on either side 
of the first port. Laparoscopic ultrasound then is used to help 
locate the adrenal gland and vessels. The adrenal dissection is 
begun at the superior pole and then proceeds to the lateral and 
inferior aspect. The medial dissection usually is performed last, 
and the vessels are identified and divided as described in the 
earlier Lateral Transabdominal Approach section.
Open Adrenalectomy.  Open adrenalectomy may be per-
formed via four approaches, each with specific advantages and 
disadvantages. The anterior approach allows examination of the 
abdominal cavity and resection of bilateral tumors via a single 
incision. The posterior approach avoids the morbidity of a lapa-
rotomy incision, especially in patients with cardiopulmonary 
disease and those prone to wound complications (Cushing’s 
syndrome) and avoids abdominal adhesions in patients who 
have undergone previous abdominal surgery. Recovery time is 
also quicker and hospitalization shorter. However, the retroperi-
toneal exposure is difficult, particularly in obese patients, and 
the small working space makes it unsuitable for tumors >6 cm in 
diameter. The lateral approach is best for obese patients and for 
large tumors because it provides a bigger working space. The 
thoracoabdominal approach is most useful for en bloc resection 
of large (>10 cm), malignant lesions. However, it is associated 
with significant morbidity and should be used selectively.
Anterior Approach  The adrenals may be removed via a mid-
line incision or bilateral subcostal incision (Fig. 38-50). The 
former allows adequate infraumbilical exposure for examina-
tion of extra-adrenal tumors, whereas the latter provides better 
superior and lateral exposure. For the right side, the hepatic 
flexure of the colon is mobilized inferiorly, and the triangular 
ligament is incised to retract the liver medially and superiorly. 
A generous Kocher maneuver is used to mobilize the duode-
num anteriorly and expose the retroperitoneal fat and the IVC 
(Fig. 38-51A). Gerota’s fascia is incised, and the gland is freed 
of surrounding fibro-fatty tissue and the kidney inferiorly. The 
lateral and superior surfaces usually are mobilized first. Then, 
the short, right adrenal vein is dissected, ligated, and divided, 
taking care not to injure the hepatic veins and IVC. On the left 
side, the adrenal is located cephalad to the pancreatic tail and 
just lateral to the aorta. For large tumors, the adrenal is best 
approached by medial visceral rotation to mobilize the spleen, 
colon, and pancreas toward the midline (Fig. 38-51B). An alter-
native approach is to enter the lesser sac by division of the 
gastrocolic ligament. The pancreas is mobilized superiorly by 
Triangular ligament
Liver
Inferior 
vena cava
Right adrenal
Spleen
Pancreas
Left adrenal
A
B
Figure 38-49.  Technique of laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Expo-
sure of the right adrenal is facilitated by division of the triangular 
ligament (A) and dissection and reflection of the spleen and tail of 
the pancreas aids in identifying the left adrenal (B).
1593
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
incision of its inferior peritoneal attachments, thus exposing 
the left kidney and adrenal. The gland is then mobilized as on 
the right side.
Posterior Approach  The patient is placed prone on the operat-
ing table, similar to the laparoscopic approach. A hockey stick 
or curvilinear incision may be used, and extended through the 
latissimus dorsi and sacrospinous fascia. The twelfth rib gener-
ally is excised at its base, and the eleventh rib is retracted supe-
riorly to reveal the pleura and the lateral arcuate ligament of the 
liver on the right side. The pleura also is mobilized cephalad, 
and the adrenal and kidney are identified. The superior aspect of 
the gland is dissected first, and the superior vessels are identi-
fied and ligated. This prevents superior retraction of the adrenal 
gland. The remainder of the gland is then dissected and the adre-
nal gland and tumor removed. The resulting space generally is 
filled with perinephric fat and closed in layers. A chest x-ray is 
obtained postoperatively to rule out a pneumothorax.
Lateral Approach  The patient is placed in a lateral position with 
the table flexed, and an incision is made between the eleventh 
and twelfth ribs or subcostally. The dissection then is performed 
as indicated previously in Anterior Approach.
Complications of Adrenal Surgery.  Patients with Cushing’s 
syndrome are more prone to infectious (incisional and intra-
abdominal abscess) and thrombotic complications. Creation of 
pneumoperitoneum may result in injury to various organs from 
Veress needle and trocar insertion, subcutaneous emphysema, 
pneumothorax, and hemodynamic compromise. Excessive 
retraction and dissection may lead to bleeding from injury to 
the IVC and renal vessels, or from injury to surrounding organs 
such as the liver, pancreas, spleen, and stomach. Postopera-
tive hemodynamic instability may be evident in patients with 
pheochromocytomas, and patients are at risk of adrenal insuffi-
ciency after bilateral adrenalectomy and sometimes after unilat-
eral adrenalectomy (unrecognized Cushing’s syndrome or, very 
rarely, Conn’s syndrome). Long-term morbidity results mainly 
A
B
Anterior approach
C
Thoracoabdominal 
approach
Posterior approach
Figure 38-50.  Incisions for open adrenalectomy. Anterior approach 
(A), posterior approach (B), and thoracoabdominal approach (C).
A
B
Right
adrenal
Pancreas
Colon
Left 
kidney
Left
adrenal v.
Spleen
Pancreas
Figure 38-51.  Technique of open adrenalectomy. Exposure of the 
right adrenal is facilitated by a Kocher maneuver to mobilize the 
duodenum and upward retraction of the liver (A). The left adrenal 
can be exposed by medial visceral rotation of the spleen and pan-
creas (B). v. = vein.
1594
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
from injury to nerve roots during trocar insertion, which can 
lead to chronic pain syndromes or muscle weakness, although 
this is more of an issue in case of open procedures.
Approximately 30% of patients who undergo bilateral 
adrenalectomy for Cushing’s disease are at risk of developing 
Nelson’s syndrome from progressive growth of the pre-existing 
pituitary tumor. This leads to increased ACTH levels, hyper-
pigmentation, visual field defects, headaches, and extraocular 
muscle palsies. Transsphenoidal pituitary resection is the ini-
tial mode of therapy, and external-beam radiotherapy is used in 
patients with residual tumor or extrasellar invasion.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	 Plaza CP, Lopez ME, Carrasco CE, Meseguer LM, Perucho Ade 
L. Management of well-differentiated thyroglossal remnant 
thyroid carcinoma: time to close the debate? Report of five new 
cases and proposal of a definitive algorithm for treatment. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2006;13:745-752.
2.	 Cernea CR, Ferraz AR, Nishio S, Dutra A Jr, Hojaij FC, dos 
Santos LR. Surgical anatomy of the external branch of the 
superior laryngeal nerve. Head Neck. 1992;14:380-383.
3.	 Si X, Zhang X, Tang W, Luo Y. Association between the 
CTLA-4 +49A/G polymorphism and Graves’ disease: a meta-
analysis. Exp Ther Med. 2012;4:538-544.
4.	 Hagen F, Chapman EM. Comparison of high and low dosage 
levels of I-131 in the treatment of thyrotoxicosis. N Engl J Med. 
1967;277:559.
5.	 Singer RB. Long-term comparative cancer mortality after use 
of radioiodine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism, a fully 
reported multicenter study. J Insur Med. 2001;33:138.
6.	 Cundiff JG, Portugal L, Sarne DH. Parathyroid adenoma 
after radioactive iodine therapy for multinodular goiter. 
Am J Otolaryngol. 2001;22:374.
7.	 Muller PE, Bein B, Robens E, et al. Thyroid surgery accord-
ing to Enderlen-Hotz or Dunhill: a comparison of two sur-
gical methods for the treatment of Graves’ disease. Int Surg 
2001;86:112.
8.	 Bahn RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. Hyperthyroidism 
and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guide-
lines of the American Thyroid Association and American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Endocr Pract. 
2011;17:456-520.
9.	 Krohn K, Paschke R. Somatic mutations in thyroid nodular 
disease. Mol Genet Metab. 2002;75:202.
10.	 Brook I. Microbiology and management of acute suppura-
tive thyroiditis in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 
2003;67:447.
11.	 Masuoka H, Miyauchi A, Tomoda C, et al. Imaging studies 
in sixty patients with acute suppurative thyroiditis. Thyroid. 
2011;21:1075-1080.
12.	 Moshynska O, Saxena A. Clonal relationship between Hashi-
moto’s thyroiditis and thyroid lymphoma. J Clin Pathol. 
2008;61:438-444.
13.	 Rodondi N, den Elzen WP, Bauer DC, et al. Subclinical hypo-
thyroidism and the risk of coronary heart disease and mortality. 
JAMA. 2010;304:1365-1374.
14.	 Levy JM, Hasney CP, Friedlander PL, Kandil E, Occhipinti 
EA, Kahn MJ. Combined mycophenolate mofetil and predni-
sone therapy in tamoxifen- and prednisone-resistant Reidel’s 
thyroiditis. Thyroid. 2010;20:105-107.
15.	 Knudsen N, Laurberg P, Perrild H, Bulow I, Ovesen L, Jor-
gensen T. Risk factors for goiter and thyroid nodules. Thyroid. 
2002;12:879-888.
16.	 Ron E. Thyroid cancer incidence among people living in areas 
contaminated by radiation from the Chernobyl accident. Health 
Phys. 2007;93:502-511.
17.	 Nose V. Familial thyroid cancer: a review. Mod Pathol. 
2011;(24 Suppl 2):S19-S33.
18.	 Bajaj Y, De M, Thompson A. Fine needle aspiration cytology 
in diagnosis and management of thyroid disease. J Laryngol 
Otol. 2006;120:467.
19.	 Cibas ES, Ali SZ, NCI Thyroid FNA State of the Science 
Conference. The Bethesda System for reporting thyroid 
cytopathology. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009;132:658-665.
20.	 Nobrega LH, Paiva FJ, Nobrega ML, et al. Predicting malig-
nant involvement in a thyroid nodule: role of ultrasonography. 
Endocr Pract. 2007;13:219.
21.	 Sheth S. Role of ultrasonography in thyroid disease. Otolaryngol 
Clin North Am. 2010;43:239-255, vii.
22.	 Nikiforova MN, Nikiforov YE. Molecular genetics of thyroid 
cancer: implications for diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. 
Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2008;8:83-95.
23.	 Caronia LM, Phay JE, Shah MH. Role of BRAF in thyroid 
oncogenesis. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:7511-7517.
24.	 Thomas D, Friedman S, Lin RY. Thyroid stem cells: lessons 
from normal development and thyroid cancer. Endocr Relat 
Cancer. 2008;15:51-58.
25.	 Hay ID, Grant CS, Taylor WF, McConahey WM. Ipsilateral 
lobectomy versus bilateral lobar resection in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of surgical outcome using a 
novel prognostic scoring system. Surgery. 1987;102:1088-1095.
26.	 Cady B, Rossi R. An expanded view of risk-group definition in 
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery. 1988;104:947-953.
27.	 American Joint Committee on Cancer. AJCC Cancer Staging 
Manual. 7th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2010.
28.	 DeGroot LJ, Kaplan EL, McCormick M, Straus FH. Natural 
history, treatment, and course of papillary thyroid carcinoma. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1990;71:414-424.
29.	 Bhaijee F, Nikiforov YE. Molecular analysis of thyroid tumors. 
Endocr Pathol. 2011;22:126-133.
30.	 Cady B, Sedgwick CE, Meissner WA, Wool MS, Salzman FA, 
Werber J. Risk factor analysis in differentiated thyroid cancer. 
Cancer. 1979;43:810-820.
31.	 Lee JH, Lee ES, Kim YS. Clinicopathologic significance of 
BRAF V600E mutation in papillary carcinomas of the thyroid: 
a meta-analysis. Cancer. 2007;110:38-46.
32.	 Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM. Long-term impact of initial surgical 
and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. 
Am J Med. 1994;97:418-428.
33.	 Hay ID, Grant CS, Bergstralh EJ, Thompson GB, van Heerden 
JA, Goellner JR. Unilateral total lobectomy: is it sufficient surgi-
cal treatment for patients with AMES low-risk papillary thyroid 
carcinoma? Surgery. 1998;124:958-964, discussion 64-66.
34.	 Mazzaferri EL, Massoll N. Management of papillary and 
follicular (differentiated) thyroid cancer: new paradigms 
using recombinant human thyrotropin. Endocr Relat Cancer. 
2002;9:227-247.
35.	 Bilimoria KY, Bentrem DJ, Ko CY, et al. Extent of sur-
gery affects survival for papillary thyroid cancer. Ann Surg. 
2007;246:375-381, discussion 81-84.
36.	 American Thyroid Association (ATA) Guidelines Taskforce 
on Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer, 
Cooper DS, Doherty GM, et al. Revised American Thyroid 
Association management guidelines for patients with 
thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 
2009;19:1167-1214.
37.	 Nikiforov YE, Steward DL, Robinson-Smith TM, et al. Molec-
ular testing for mutations in improving the fine-needle aspira-
tion diagnosis of thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2009;94:2092-2098.
1595
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and Adrenal
CHAPTER 38
38.	 Nikiforov YE, Ohori NP, Hodak SP, et al. Impact of muta-
tional testing on the diagnosis and management of patients 
with cytologically indeterminate thyroid nodules: a prospec-
tive analysis of 1056 FNA samples. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:3390-3397.
39.	 Weber F, Teresi RE, Broelsch CE, Frilling A, Eng C. A limited 
set of human MicroRNA is deregulated in follicular thyroid 
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:3584-3691.
40.	 Chia SY, Milas M, Reddy SK, et al. Thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone receptor messenger ribonucleic acid measurement in 
blood as a marker for circulating thyroid cancer cells and its 
role in the preoperative diagnosis of thyroid cancer. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:468-475.
41.	 Alexander EK, Kennedy GC, Baloch ZW, et al. Preopera-
tive diagnosis of benign thyroid nodules with indeterminate 
cytology. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:705-715.
42.	 Iyer NG, Morris LG, Tuttle RM, Shaha AR, Ganly I. Rising 
incidence of second cancers in patients with low-risk (T1N0) 
thyroid cancer who receive radioactive iodine therapy. Cancer. 
2011;117:4439-4446.
43.	 Sherman SI. Targeted therapies for thyroid tumors. Mod Pathol. 
2011;(24 Suppl 2):S44-S52.
44.	 Snozek CL, Chambers EP, Reading CC, et al. Serum thyroglob-
ulin, high-resolution ultrasound, and lymph node thyroglobulin 
in diagnosis of differentiated thyroid carcinoma nodal metasta-
ses. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:4278-4281.
45.	 American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force, Kloos 
RT, Eng C, et al. Medullary thyroid cancer: management 
guidelines of the American Thyroid Association. Thyroid. 
2009;19:565-612.
46.	 Smallridge RC, Ain KB, Asa SL, et al. American Thyroid 
Association guidelines for management of patients with 
anaplastic thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2012;22:1104-1139.
47.	 Sakorafas GH, Kokkoris P, Farley DR. Primary thyroid lym-
phoma (correction of lympoma): diagnostic and therapeutic 
dilemmas. Surg Oncol. 2010;19:e124-e129.
48.	 Linos D. Minimally invasive thyroidectomy: a comprehensive 
appraisal of existing techniques. Surgery. 2011;150:17-24.
49.	 de Perrot M, Fadel E, Mercier O, et al: Surgical management 
of mediastinal goiters: when is a sternotomy required? Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;55:39.
50.	 Barczynski M, Konturek A, Cichon S. Randomized clini-
cal trial of visualization versus neuromonitoring of recur-
rent laryngeal nerves during thyroidectomy. Br J Surg. 
2009;96:240-246.
51.	 Akerstrom G, Malmaeus J, Bergstrom R. Surgical anatomy of 
human parathyroid glands. Surgery. 1984;95:14.
52.	 Akerstrom G, Malmaeus J, Bergstrom R. Surgical anatomy of 
human parathyroid glands. Surgery. 1984;95:14-21.
53.	 Gilmour J. The gross anatomy of the parathyroid glands. 
J Pathol. 1938;46:133.
54.	 Ward BK, Magno AL, Walsh JP, Ratajczak T. The role of the 
calcium-sensing receptor in human disease. Clin Biochem. 
2012;45:943-953.
55.	 Saunders BD, Saunders EF, Gauger PG. Lithium therapy and 
hyperparathyroidism: an evidence-based assessment. World J 
Surg. 2009;33:2314-2323.
56.	 Thakker RV, Newey PJ, Walls GV, et al. Clinical practice 
guidelines for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:2990-3011.
57.	 Balogh K, Racz K, Patocs A, Hunyady L. Menin and its inter-
acting proteins: elucidation of menin function. Trends Endocrinol 
Metab. 2006;17:357-364.
58.	 Proceedings of the NIH Consensus Development Conference 
on diagnosis and management of asymptomatic primary hyper-
parathyroidism. Bethesda, Maryland, October 29-31, 1990. 
J Bone Miner Res. 1991;(6 Suppl 2):S1-S166.
59.	 Silverberg SJ, Shane E, Jacobs TP, Siris E, Bilezikian JP. 
A 10-year prospective study of primary hyperparathyroid-
ism with or without parathyroid surgery. N Engl J Med. 
1999;341:1249-1255.
60.	 Bilezikian JP, Potts JT Jr, Fuleihan Gel H, et al. Summary state-
ment from a workshop on asymptomatic primary hyperparathy-
roidism: a perspective for the 21st century. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2002;87:5353-5361.
61.	 Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, McMahon DJ, et al. The natu-
ral history of primary hyperparathyroidism with or without 
parathyroid surgery after 15 years. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2008;93:3462-3470.
62.	 Khan A, Grey A, Shoback D. Medical management of 
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of 
the third international workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2009;94:373-381.
63.	 Pasieka JL, Parsons L, Jones J. The long-term benefit of para-
thyroidectomy in primary hyperparathyroidism: a 10-year pro-
spective surgical outcome study. Surgery. 2009;146:1006-1013.
64.	 Zanocco K, Angelos P, Sturgeon C. Cost-effectiveness analysis 
of parathyroidectomy for asymptomatic primary hyperparathy-
roidism. Surgery. 2006;140:874-881, discussion 81-82.
65.	 Bilezikian JP, Khan AA, Potts JT Jr, Third International 
Workshop on the Management of Asymptomatic Primary 
Hyperparathyroidism. Guidelines for the management of 
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: summary 
statement from the third international workshop. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94:335-339.
66.	 Rodgers SE, Hunter GJ, Hamberg LM, et al. Improved 
preoperative planning for directed parathyroidectomy 
with 4-dimensional computed tomography. Surgery. 
2006;140:932-940, discussion 40-41.
67.	 Sharma J, Milas M, Berber E, Mazzaglia P, Siperstein A, 
Weber CJ. Value of intraoperative parathyroid hormone moni-
toring. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15:493-498.
68.	Westerdahl J, Bergenfelz A. Unilateral versus bilateral 
neck exploration for primary hyperparathyroidism: five-
year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 
2007;246:976-981.
69.	 Gagner M. Endoscopic subtotal parathyroidectomy in patients 
with primary hyperparathyroidism. Br J Surg. 1996;83:875.
70.	 Augustine MM, Bravo PE, Zeiger MA. Surgical treatment of 
primary hyperparathyroidism. Endocr Pract. 2011;17(Suppl 
1):75-82.
71.	 Lowe H, McMahon DJ, Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, Silverberg 
SJ. Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism: further 
characterization of a new clinical phenotype. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2007;92:3001-3005.
72.	 Silverberg SJ, Rubin MR, Faiman C, et al. Cinacalcet hydro-
chloride reduces the serum calcium concentration in inop-
erable parathyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2007;92:3803-3808.
73.	 Carpenter JM, Michaelson PG, Lidner TK, Hinni ML. Parathy-
romatosis. Ear Nose Throat J. 2007;86:21.
74.	 Udelsman R. Approach to the patient with persistent or recur-
rent primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:2950-2958.
75.	 Pitt SC, Sippel RS, Chen H. Secondary and tertiary hyperpara-
thyroidism, state of the art surgical management. Surg Clin 
North Am. 2009;89:1227-1239.
76.	 Yang RL, Freeman K, Reinke CE, et al. Tertiary hyperpara-
thyroidism in kidney transplant recipients: characteristics of 
patients selected for different treatment strategies. Transplan-
tation. 2012;94:70-76.
77.	 Schirpenbach C, Reincke M. Primary aldosteronism: Current 
knowledge and controversies in Conn’s syndrome. Nat Clin 
Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2007;3:220.
1596
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
78.	 Rossi GP. New concepts in adrenal vein sampling for aldoste-
rone in the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. Curr Hypertens 
Rep. 2007;9:90.
79.	 Pecori Giraldi F, Ambrogio AG, De Martin M, Fatti LM, Scac-
chi M, Cavagnini F. Specificity of first-line tests for the diagno-
sis of Cushing’s syndrome: assessment in a large series. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:4123-4129.
80.	 Bertherat J, Bertagna X. Pathogenesis of adrenocortical cancer. 
Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;23:261-271.
81.	 Rodgers SE, Evans DB, Lee JE, et al. Adrenocortical carci-
noma. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2006;15:535.
82.	 Copeland PM. The incidentally discovered adrenal mass. Ann 
Surg. 1984;199:116.
83.	 Sturgeon C, Shen WT, Clark OH, Duh QY, Kebebew E. Risk 
assessment in 457 adrenal cortical carcinomas: how much does 
tumor size predict the likelihood of malignancy? J Am Coll 
Surg. 2006;202:423-430.
84.	Aubert S, Wacrenier A, Leroy X, et al. Weiss system 
revisited: a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemi-
cal study of 49 adrenocortical tumors. Am J Surg Pathol. 
2002;26:1612-1619.
85.	 Terzolo M, Angeli A, Fassnacht M, et al. Adjuvant mito-
tane treatment for adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:2372-2380.
86.	 Fassnacht M, Terzolo M, Allolio B, et al. Combination che-
motherapy in advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl 
J Med. 2012;366:2189-2197.
87.	 Fishbein L, Nathanson KL. Pheochromocytoma and paragan-
glioma: understanding the complexities of the genetic back-
ground. Cancer Genet. 2012;205:1-11.
88.	 Sackett WR, Bambach CP. Bilateral subtotal laparoscopic 
adrenalectomy for phaeochromocytoma. ANZ J Surg. 
2003;73:664-666.
89.	 Shen WT, Sturgeon C, Clark OH, et al. Should pheochromo-
cytoma size influence surgical approach? A comparison of 
90 malignant and 60 benign pheochromocytomas. Surgery. 
2004;136:1129.
90.	 McDermott S, O’Connor OJ, Cronin CG, Blake MA. Radio-
logical evaluation of adrenal incidentalomas: current methods 
and future prospects. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2012;26:21-33.
91.	 Zeiger MA, Thompson GB, Duh QY, et al. American Asso-
ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Asso-
ciation of Endocrine Surgeons Medical guidelines for the 
management of adrenal incidentalomas. Endocrine Pract. 
2009;15(Suppl 1):3-20.
92.	 Strong VE, D’Angelica M, Tang L, et al. Laparoscopic adre-
nalectomy for isolated adrenal metastasis. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2007;14:3392.
Pediatric Surgery
David J. Hackam, Tracy Grikscheit, Kasper Wang, 
Jeffrey S. Upperman, and Henri R. Ford
39
INTRODUCTION
In his 1953 classic textbook entitled The Surgery of Infancy 
and Childhood, Dr. Robert E. Gross summarized the essential 
challenge of pediatric surgery: “Those who daily operate upon 
adults, even with the greatest of skill, are sometimes appalled – 
or certainly are not at their best – when called upon to operate 
upon and care for a tiny patient. Something more than diminu-
tive instruments or scaled-down operative manipulations are 
necessary to do the job in a suitable manner.” To this day, surgi-
cal residents and other trainees often approach the pediatric sur-
gical patient with the same mix of fear, trepidation, and anxiety. 
Importantly, these same trainees typically complete their pedi-
atric surgical rotations with a profound respect for the resilience 
of young children to undergo complex operations, and with an 
appreciation for the precision required from their caregivers, 
both in the operating room and during the perioperative period. 
Over the decades, the specialty of pediatric surgery has evolved 
considerably to encompass not only the care of the small-
est patients with surgical disorders, who may require in utero 
interventions in certain circumstances, but also the care of older 
infants, children, adolescents, and young adults. Similarly, our 
understanding of the pathophysiology of the diseases that pedi-
atric surgeons face has evolved to the point that some pediatric 
surgical diseases are now understood at the level of molecular 
or cellular signaling pathways. Pediatric surgery provides the 
opportunity to intervene positively in a wide array of diseases 
chapter 
Introduction	
1597
Pediatric Surgical Themes: Pitfalls 
and Pearls	
1598
General Considerations	
1599
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance / 1599
Acid-Base Equilibrium / 1599
Blood Volume and Blood  
Replacement / 1599
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition / 1600
Venous Access / 1601
Thermoregulation / 1601
Pain Control / 1601
Neck Masses	
1601
Lymphadenopathy / 1602
Thyroglossal Duct Remnants / 1602
Branchial Cleft Anomalies / 1602
Lymphatic Malformation / 1602
Torticollis / 1603
Respiratory System	
1603
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia  
(Bochdalek) / 1603
Congenital Lobar Emphysema / 1605
Bronchopulmonary Foregut  
Malformations / 1606
Bronchiectasis / 1607
Foreign Bodies / 1607
Esophagus	
1608
Esophageal Atresia and  
Tracheoesophageal Fistula / 1608
Corrosive Injury of the Esophagus / 1612
Gastroesophageal Reflux / 1613
Gastrointestinal Tract	
1613
An Approach to the Vomiting  
Infant / 1613
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis / 1613
Intestinal Obstruction in  
the Newborn / 1614
Duodenal Obstruction / 1615
Intestinal Atresia / 1615
Malrotation and Midgut Volvulus / 1616
Meconium Ileus / 1617
Necrotizing Enterocolitis / 1619
Short Bowel Syndrome / 1621
Intussusception / 1622
Appendicitis / 1622
Intestinal Duplications / 1624
Meckel’s Diverticulum / 1624
Mesenteric Cysts / 1624
Hirschsprung’s Disease / 1624
Anorectal Malformations / 1626
Jaundice	
1628
The Approach to the Jaundiced  
Infant / 1628
Biliary Atresia / 1628
Choledochal Cyst / 1630
Deformities of the  
Abdominal Wall	
1631
Embryology of the Abdominal Wall / 1631
Umbilical Hernia / 1631
Patent Urachus / 1631
Omphalocele / 1632
Gastroschisis / 1633
Prune-Belly Syndrome / 1634
Inguinal Hernia / 1634
Genitalia	
1635
Undescended Testis / 1635
Vaginal Anomalies / 1636
Ovarian Cysts and Tumors / 1636
Ambiguous Genitalia / 1637
Pediatric Malignancy	
1638
Wilms’ Tumor / 1638
Neuroblastoma / 1639
Rhabdomyosarcoma / 1640
Teratoma / 1641
Liver Tumors / 1641
Trauma in Children	
1642
Mechanisms of Injury / 1642
Initial Management / 1642
Evaluation of Injury / 1643
Injuries to the Central  
Nervous System / 1643
Thoracic Injuries / 1643
Abdominal Injuries / 1643
Fetal Intervention	
1644
Fetal Surgery for Lower Urinary  
Tract Obstruction / 1645
Fetal Surgery for Congenital  
Diaphragmatic Hernia / 1645
Fetal Surgery for  
Myelomeningocele / 1645
The EXIT Procedure / 1645
1598
and to exert a long-lasting impact on the lives of children and 
their grateful parents. The scope of diseases encountered in the 
standard practice of pediatric surgery is immense and includes 
anomalies of the head and neck, thoracic, gastrointestinal, and 
genitourinary areas. This chapter is not designed to cover the 
entire spectrum of diseases a pediatric surgeon is expected to 
master; rather, it presents a synopsis of a handful of pediatric 
surgical conditions that a practicing general surgeon is likely to 
encounter over the course of his or her career.
PEDIATRIC SURGICAL THEMES:  
PITFALLS AND PEARLS
This chapter focuses on the unique considerations regarding the 
diagnosis and management of surgical diseases in the pediatric 
population. Many surgical trainees approach the surgical care 
of children with some degree of fear and trepidation. As any 
pediatric caregiver will attest to, the surgical management of 
infants and children requires delicate, careful, and professional 
interactions with their parents. The stress that the parents of sick 
children experience in the hospital setting can, at times, be over-
whelming. It is due, in part, to the uncertainty regarding a par-
ticular prognosis, the feeling of helplessness that evolves when 
one is unable to care for one’s own child, and in certain cases, 
the guilt or remorse that one feels for not seeking medical care 
earlier or for consenting to a particular procedure. Management 
of the sick child and his or her family requires not only a certain 
set of skills, but also a unique knowledge base. This section 
is included to summarize some important general principles in 
accomplishing this task.
1.  Children are not little adults, but they are little people. In 
practical terms, this often-heard refrain implies that children 
have unique fluid, electrolyte, and medication needs. Thus, 
the dosage of medications and the administration of intrave-
nous fluids should be based on their weight. The corollary 
of this point is that infants and young children are extremely 
sensitive to perturbations in their normal physiology, and as 
such may easily experience fluid overload or dehydration.
2.  Sick children whisper before they shout. Children with sur-
gical diseases can deteriorate very quickly. But before they 
deteriorate, they often manifest subtle physical findings. 
These findings—referred to as “whispers”—may include 
signs such as tachycardia, bradycardia, hypothermia, fever, 
recurrent emesis, or feeding intolerance. Meticulous atten-
tion to these subtle findings may unmask the development of 
potentially serious, life-threatening physiologic disturbances.
3.  Always listen to the mother and the father. Surgical diseases 
in children can be very difficult to diagnose because children 
are often minimally communicative and information that 
they communicate may be confusing, conflicting, or both. 
In all cases, it is wise to listen to the child’s parents, who 
1598
Key Points
1 	 In infants with Bochdalek-type congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia, the severity of pulmonary hypoplasia and the resul-
tant pulmonary hypertension are key determinants of sur-
vival. Barotrauma and hypoxia should be avoided.
2 	 During initial management of an infant with esophageal atre-
sia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula, every effort should 
be made to avoid distending the gastrointestinal tract, espe-
cially when using mechanical ventilation. The patient should 
be evaluated for components of the VACTERRL (vertebral, 
anorectal, cardiac, tracheoesophageal, renal, radial limb) 
anomalies. Timing and extent of surgery are dictated by the 
stability of the patient.
3 	 Although malrotation with midgut volvulus occurs most 
commonly within the first few weeks of life, it should always 
be considered in the differential diagnosis in a child with 
bilious emesis. Volvulus is a surgical emergency; therefore, 
in a critically ill child, prompt surgical intervention should 
not be delayed for any reason.
4 	 When evaluating a newborn infant for vomiting, it is critical 
to distinguish between proximal and distal causes of intesti-
nal obstruction using both prenatal and postnatal history, 
physical examination, and abdominal radiographs.
5 	 Risk factors for necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) include 
prematurity, formula feeding, bacterial infection, and 
intestinal ischemia. Critical to the management of infants 
with advanced (Bell stage III) or perforated NEC is timely 
and adequate source control of peritoneal contamination. 
Early sequelae of NEC include perforation, sepsis, and 
death. Later sequelae include short bowel syndrome 
and stricture.
6 	 In patients with intestinal obstruction secondary to 
Hirschsprung’s disease, a leveling ostomy or endorectal 
pull-through should be performed using ganglionated 
bowel, proximal to the transition zone between gangli-
onic and aganglionic intestine.
7 	 Prognosis of infants with biliary atresia is directly related 
to age at diagnosis and timing of portoenterostomy. Infants 
with advanced age at the time of diagnosis or infants who 
fail to demonstrate evidence of bile drainage after portoen-
terostomy usually require liver transplantation.
8 	 Infants with omphaloceles have greater associated mor-
bidity and mortality than infants with gastroschisis due to 
a higher incidence of congenital anomalies and pulmo-
nary hypoplasia. Gastroschisis can be associated with 
intestinal atresia, but not with other congenital anoma-
lies. An intact omphalocele can be repaired electively, 
whereas gastroschisis requires urgent intervention to 
protect the exposed intestine.
9 	 Prognosis for children with Wilms’ tumor is defined by 
the stage of disease at the time of diagnosis and the his-
tologic type (favorable vs. unfavorable). Preoperative 
chemotherapy is indicated for bilateral involvement, a 
solitary kidney, or tumor in the inferior vena cava above 
the hepatic veins. Gross tumor rupture during surgery 
automatically changes the stage to 3 (at a minimum).
10   Injury is the leading cause of death in children older than 
1 year of age. Blunt mechanisms account for the majority 
of pediatric injuries. The central nervous system is the 
most commonly injured organ system and the leading 
cause of death in injured children.
1599
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
have closely observed their child and know him or her best. 
Most importantly, the child’s parents know with certainty 
whether or not the child is sick despite not always knowing 
the precise diagnosis.
4.  Children suffer pain after surgery. Timely and adequate pain 
management must accompany surgical interventions.
5.  Pediatric tissue must be handled delicately and with pro-
found respect.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance
In managing the pediatric surgical patient, an understanding of 
fluid and electrolyte balance is critical, as the margin between 
dehydration and fluid overload is rather small. This is particu-
larly true in infants, who have little reserve when ill. Failure to 
pay meticulous attention to their hydration status can result in 
significant fluid overload or dehydration. Several surgical diag-
noses such as gastroschisis or short-gut syndrome are character-
ized by a predisposition to fluid loss. Others require judicious 
restoration of intravascular volume in order to prevent cardiac 
failure, as is the case in patients with congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia and associated pulmonary hypertension. The infant’s 
physiologic day is approximately 8 hours in duration. Accord-
ingly, careful assessment of the individual patient’s fluid bal-
ance, including fluid intake and output for the previous 8 hours, 
is essential to prevent dehydration or fluid overload. Clinical 
signs of dehydration include tachycardia, decreased urine out-
put, reduced skin turgor, a depressed fontanelle, absent tears, 
lethargy, and poor feeding. Fluid overload is often manifested 
by the onset of new oxygen requirement, respiratory distress, 
tachypnea, and tachycardia. The physical assessment of the 
fluid status of each child must include a complete head-to-toe 
evaluation, with emphasis on determining whether perturbations 
in normal physiology are present.
At 12 weeks’ gestation, the total body water of a fetus 
is approximately 94 cc/kg. By the time the fetus reaches full 
term, the total body water has decreased to approximately 
80 cc/kg. Total body water drops an additional 5% within the first 
week of life, and by 1 year of life, total body water approaches 
adult levels, around 60 to 65 cc/kg. Parallel to the drop in total 
body water is the reduction in extracellular fluid. These changes 
are accelerated in the preterm infant who may face additional 
fluid losses due to coexisting congenital anomalies or surgery. 
Normal daily maintenance fluids for most children can be esti-
mated using the following formula: 100 mL/kg for the first 
10 kg, plus 50 mL/kg for 11 to 20 kg, plus 25 mL/kg for each addi-
tional kilogram of body weight thereafter. Because intravenous 
(IV) fluid orders are written as milliliters per hour, this can 
be conveniently converted as follows: 4 mL/kg/h up to 10 kg, 
add 2 mL/kg/h for 11 to 20 kg, and add 1 mL/kg/h for each 
additional kilogram of body weight thereafter. For example, a 
26-kg child has an estimated maintenance fluid requirement of 
(10 × 4) + (10 × 2) + (6 × 1) = 66 mL/h in the absence 
of massive fluid losses or shock. A newborn infant with gas-
troschisis will manifest significant evaporative losses from the 
exposed bowel such that fluid requirements may range from 150 
to 180 cc/kg/d. Precise management of a neonate’s fluid status 
requires an understanding of changes in the glomerular filtra-
tion rate (GFR) and tubular function of the kidney. The term 
newborn’s GFR is approximately 21 mL/min/1.73 m2 compared 
to 70 mL/min/1.73 m2 in an adult. Within the first 2 weeks of 
life, GFR increases to approximately 60, and by 2 years of age, 
it is essentially at adult levels. The capacity to concentrate urine 
is very limited in preterm and term infants. Compared with an 
adult who can concentrate urine to 1200 mOsm/kg, infants can 
concentrate urine at best to 600 mOsm/kg. While infants are 
capable of secreting antidiuretic hormone (ADH), the aquapo-
rin water channel–mediated osmotic water permeability of the 
infant’s collecting tubules is severely limited compared with 
that of adults, leading to insensitivity to ADH.
Sodium requirements range from 2 mEq/kg/d in term 
infants up to 5 mEq/kg/d in critically ill preterm infants as a 
consequence of salt wasting. Potassium requirements are on 
the order of 1 to 2 mEq/kg/d. Calcium and magnesium supple-
mentation of IV fluids is essential to prevent laryngospasm, 
dysrhythmias, and tetany.
Acid-Base Equilibrium
Acute metabolic acidosis usually implies inadequate tissue 
perfusion and is a serious disorder in children. Potentially life-
threatening causes that are specific for the pediatric population 
must be sought; they include intestinal ischemia from necrotiz-
ing enterocolitis (in the neonate), midgut volvulus, or incarcer-
ated hernia. Other causes include chronic bicarbonate loss from 
the gastrointestinal tract or acid accumulation as in chronic renal 
failure. Respiratory acidosis implies hypoventilation, the cause 
of which should be apparent. Treatment of acute metabolic aci-
dosis should be aimed at restoring tissue perfusion by address-
ing the underlying abnormality first. For severe metabolic 
acidemia where the serum pH is less than 7.25, sodium bicar-
bonate should be administered using the following guideline: 
base deficit × weight in kilograms × 0.5 (in newborns). The 
last factor in the equation should be 0.4 for smaller children and 
0.3 for older children. The dose should be diluted to a concentra-
tion of 0.5 mEq/mL because full-strength sodium bicarbonate is 
hyperosmolar. One half of the corrective dose is given, and the 
serum pH is measured again. During cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion (CPR), one half of the corrective dose can be given as an IV 
bolus and the other half given slowly via IV.
Respiratory alkalosis is usually caused by hyperventila-
tion, which is readily correctable. Metabolic alkalosis most 
commonly implies gastric acid loss, as in the child with pyloric 
stenosis, or aggressive diuretic therapy. In the child with gastric 
fluid loss, IV fluids of 5% dextrose, 0.5% normal saline, and 
20 mEq KCl/L usually correct the alkalosis.
Blood Volume and Blood Replacement
Criteria for blood transfusion in infants and children remain 
poorly defined. The decision to transfuse a critically ill pediatric 
patient may depend on a number of clinical features that include 
the patient’s age, primary diagnosis, the presence of ongoing 
bleeding, coagulopathy, hypoxia, hemodynamic compromise, 
lactic acidosis, cyanotic heart disease, and overall severity of 
illness. A recent survey of transfusion practices among pedi-
atric intensivists showed that the baseline hemoglobin levels 
that would prompt them to recommend packed red blood cell 
(PRBC) transfusion ranged from 7 to 13 g/dL. Patients with 
cyanotic heart disease are often transfused to higher hemoglobin 
values, although the threshold for transfusion in this popula-
tion remains to be defined. To decrease the need for transfu-
sion, other strategies have been considered. Studies in both 
critically ill adults and neonates have shown that administration 
1600
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
of erythropoietin decreases PRBC transfusion requirements. In 
general terms, there is a trend toward an avoidance of the use 
of PRBC products whenever possible, as current studies suggest 
that lower hemoglobin concentrations are well tolerated by many 
groups of patients, whereas administration of PRBCs may have 
unintended negative consequences. In addition, there is increasing 
evidence that PRBC transfusion may have adverse effects on the 
host immune system, in both children and adults. These effects 
are poorly understood but may be due to red blood cell (RBC) 
storage or factors that are particular to the individual RBC donor.
A useful guideline for estimating blood volume for the 
newborn infant is approximately 80 mL/kg of body weight. 
When PRBCs are required, the transfusion requirement is usu-
ally administered in 10-mL/kg increments, which is roughly 
equivalent to a 500-mL transfusion for a 70-kg adult. The fol-
lowing formula may be used to determine the volume (mL) of 
PRBCs to be transfused:
(Target hematocrit – Current hematocrit) ë weight (kg) ë 80/65 
(65 represents the estimated hematocrit of a unit of PRBC)
In the child, coagulation deficiencies rapidly may assume 
clinical significance after extensive blood transfusion. It is 
advisable to have fresh frozen plasma and platelets available 
if more than 30 mL/kg have been transfused. Plasma is given 
in a dose of 10 to 20 mL/kg, and platelets are given in a dose 
of 1 unit/5 kg. Each unit of platelets consists of 40 to 60 mL of 
fluid (plasma plus platelets). Following transfusion of PRBCs to 
neonates with tenuous fluid balance, a single dose of a diuretic 
(such as furosemide 1 mg/kg) may help to facilitate excretion of 
the extra fluid load. Many clinicians prefer to administer fresh 
products to minimize the deleterious effects of red cell storage.
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition
The nutritional requirements of the surgical neonate must be 
met in order for the child to grow and to heal surgical wounds. 
If inadequate protein and carbohydrate calories are given, the 
child may not only fail to recover from surgery, but may also 
exhibit growth failure and impaired development of the cen-
tral nervous system. In general terms, the adequacy of growth 
must be assessed frequently, by determining both total body 
weight and head circumference. Neonates who are particularly 
predisposed to protein-calorie malnutrition include those with 
gastroschisis, intestinal atresia, or intestinal insufficiency from 
other causes, such as necrotizing enterocolitis. The protein 
and caloric requirements for the surgical neonate are shown in 
Table 39-1.
Nutrition can be provided via either the enteral or paren-
teral route. Whenever possible, the enteral route is preferred 
because it not only promotes the growth and function of the gas-
trointestinal system, but also ensures that the infant learns how 
to feed. There are various enteral feeding preparations available; 
these are outlined in Table 39-2. The choice of formula is based 
on the individual clinical state of the child. Pediatric surgeons 
are often faced with situations where oral feeding is not possi-
ble. This problem can be seen in the extremely premature infant 
who has not yet developed feeding skills or in the infant with 
concomitant craniofacial anomalies that impair sucking, for 
example. In these instances, enteral feeds can be administered 
either via a nasojejunal or a gastrostomy tube.
When the gastrointestinal tract cannot be used because of 
mechanical, ischemic, inflammatory, or functional disorders, 
Table 39-1
Nutritional requirements for the pediatric surgical 
patient
Age
Calories  
(kcal/kg/d)
Protein  
(g/kg/d)
0–6 months
100–120
2
6 months–1 year
100
1.5
1–3 years
100
1.2
4–6 years
90
1
7–10 years
70
1
11–14 years
55
1
15–18 years
45
1
Table 39-2
Formulas for pediatric surgical neonates
Formula
kcal/mL
Protein (g/mL)
Fat (g/mL)
Carbohydrate (g/mL)
Human milk
0.67
0.011
0.04
0.07
Milk-based formula
Enfamil 20
0.67
0.015
0.038
0.069
Similac 20
0.67
0.015
0.036
0.072
Soy-based formula
Prosobee
0.67
0.02
0.036
0.07
Isomil
0.67
0.018
0.037
0.068
Special formula
Pregestimil
0.67
0.019
0.028
0.091
Alimentum
0.67
0.019
0.038
0.068
Preterm
Enfamil Premature
0.80
0.024
0.041
0.089
1601
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
parenteral alimentation must be given. Prolonged parenteral 
nutrition is delivered via a central venous catheter. Peripheral IV 
alimentation can be given, using less concentrated but greater 
volumes of solutions. Long-term parenteral nutrition should 
include supplemental copper, zinc, and iron to prevent the 
development of trace metal deficiencies. A major complication 
of long-term total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is the development 
of parenteral nutrition-associated cholestasis, which can even-
tually progress to liver failure. To prevent this major compli-
cation, concomitant enteral feedings should be instituted and 
the gastrointestinal tract should be used as soon as possible. 
When proximal stomas are in place, gastrointestinal continu-
ity should be restored as soon as possible. Where intestinal 
insufficiency is associated with dilation of the small intestine, 
tapering or intestinal lengthening procedures may be beneficial. 
Other strategies to minimize the development of TPN-related 
liver disease include meticulous catheter care to avoid infection, 
which increases cholestatic symptoms, aggressive treatment of 
any infection, and early cycling of parenteral nutrition in older 
children who can tolerate not receiving continuous dextrose 
solution for a limited period. Preliminary evidence suggests the 
possibility that substituting omega-3 fish oil lipid emulsion in 
parenteral nutrition for the standard soybean-based emulsions 
may prevent the development of TPN-related cholestasis and 
reverse the effects of established liver disease.
Venous Access
Obtaining reliable vascular access in an infant or child is an 
important task that often becomes the responsibility of the pedi-
atric surgeon. The goal should always be to place the catheter in 
the least invasive, least risky, and least painful manner, and in a 
location that is most accessible and allows for use of the catheter 
without complications for as long as it is needed. In infants, 
central venous access may be established using a cutdown 
approach, either in the antecubital fossa, external jugular vein, 
facial vein, or proximal saphenous vein. If the internal jugular 
vein is used, care is taken to prevent venous occlusion. In infants 
over 3 kg and in older children, percutaneous access of the sub-
clavian, internal jugular, or femoral veins is possible in most 
cases, and central access is achieved using the Seldinger tech-
nique. The catheters are tunneled to an exit site separate from 
the venotomy site. Where available, peripherally inserted cen-
tral catheter (PICC) lines may be placed, typically via the ante-
cubital fossa. Regardless of whether the catheter is placed by a 
cutdown approach or percutaneously, a chest x-ray to confirm 
central location of the catheter tip and to exclude the presence 
of a pneumothorax or hemothorax is mandatory. When discuss-
ing the placement of central venous catheters with parents, it is 
important to note that the complication rate for central venous 
lines in children can be high. The incidence of catheter-related 
sepsis or infection approaches 10% in many series, although 
recent reports show a lower incidence. Superior or inferior vena 
caval occlusion is a significant risk after the placement of mul-
tiple lines, particularly in the smallest premature patients.
Thermoregulation
Careful regulation of the ambient environment of infants and 
children is crucial, as these patients are extremely thermolabile. 
Premature infants are particularly susceptible to changes in envi-
ronmental temperature. Because they are unable to shiver and 
lack stores of fat, their potential for thermogenesis is impaired. 
The innate inability to regulate temperature is compounded by 
the administration of anesthetic and paralyzing agents. Since 
these patients lack adaptive mechanisms to cope with the envi-
ronment, the environmental temperature must be regulated. 
Attention to heat conservation during transport of the infant 
to and from the operating room is essential. Transport systems 
incorporating heating units are necessary for premature infants. 
In the operating room, the infant is kept warm by the use of 
overhead heating lamps, a heating blanket, warming the room as 
well as inspired gases, and coverage of the extremities and head 
with occlusive materials. During abdominal surgery, extreme 
care is taken to avoid wet and cold drapes. All fluids used to irri-
gate the chest or abdomen must be warmed to body temperature. 
Laparoscopic approaches for abdominal operations may result 
in more stable thermoregulation due to decreased heat loss from 
the smaller wound size. Constant monitoring of the child’s tem-
perature is critical in a lengthy procedure, and the surgeon should 
continuously communicate with the anesthesiologist regarding 
the temperature of the patient. The development of hypother-
mia in infants and children can result in cardiac arrhythmias or 
coagulopathy. These potentially life-threatening complications 
can be avoided by careful attention to thermoregulation.
Pain Control
All children, including neonates, experience pain. Therefore, 
careful recognition and management of pediatric pain represents 
an important component of the perioperative management of 
all pediatric surgical patients. There is a range of pain manage-
ment options that can improve the child’s well-being, as well 
as the parents’ sense of comfort. The use of a pacifier, which 
may be dipped in sucrose, has been shown to decrease crying 
time and neonatal pain scores after minor procedures. For situa-
tions where more pain is expected, IV narcotic agents should be 
used. Morphine and fentanyl have an acceptable safety margin 
and can be administered judiciously to neonates and children. 
A randomized clinical trial involving neonates on ventilators 
showed that the use of a morphine infusion decreased the inci-
dence of intraventricular hemorrhage by 50%. Additional anal-
gesic modalities include the use of topical anesthetic ointment 
(EMLA cream), regional anesthesia such as caudal blocks for 
hernias, and epidural or incisional catheter infusions (On-Q™) 
for large abdominal or thoracic incisions. In surgical neonates 
who have received large concentrations of narcotics over a pro-
longed period, transient physical dependence should not only 
be expected, but anticipated. When narcotics are discontinued, 
symptoms of narcotic withdrawal may develop, including irri-
tability, restlessness, and episodes of hypertension and tachy-
cardia. Early recognition of these signs is essential, as is timely 
treatment using naloxone and other agents. In the postoperative 
period, patient-controlled analgesia is another excellent method 
of pain control. By ensuring that the pediatric surgical patient 
has adequate analgesia, the surgeon ensures that the patient 
receives the most humane and thorough treatment and provides 
important reassurance to all other members of the healthcare 
team and to the family that pain control is a very high priority.
NECK MASSES
The management of neck masses in children is determined by 
their location and the length of time that they have been pres-
ent. Neck lesions are found either in the midline or lateral com-
partments. Midline masses include thyroglossal duct remnants, 
thyroid masses, thymic cysts, or dermoid cysts. Lateral lesions 
1602
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
include branchial cleft remnants, cystic hygromas, vascular mal-
formations, salivary gland tumors, torticollis, and lipoblastoma 
(a rare benign mesenchymal tumor of embryonal fat occurring 
in infants and young children). Enlarged lymph nodes and rare 
malignancies such as rhabdomyosarcoma can occur either in the 
midline or laterally.
Lymphadenopathy
The most common cause of a neck mass in a child is an enlarged 
lymph node, which typically can be found laterally or in the 
midline. The patient is usually referred to the pediatric surgeon 
for evaluation after the mass has been present for several weeks. 
A detailed history and physical examination often helps deter-
mine the likely etiology of the lymph node and the need for 
excisional biopsy. Enlarged tender lymph nodes are usually the 
result of a bacterial infection (Staphylococcus or Streptococcus). 
Treatment of the primary cause (e.g., otitis media or pharyngi-
tis) with antibiotics often is all that is necessary. However, when 
the involved nodes become fluctuant, incision and drainage are 
indicated. In many North American institutions, there has been 
an increasing prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus infection of the skin and soft tissues, leading to increased 
staphylococcal lymphadenitis in children. More chronic forms 
of lymphadenitis, including infections with atypical mycobacte-
ria, as well as cat-scratch fever, are diagnosed based on serologic 
findings or excisional biopsy. The lymphadenopathy associated 
with infectious mononucleosis can be diagnosed based on serol-
ogy. When the neck nodes are firm, fixed, and others are also 
present in the axillae or groin, or the history suggests lymphoma, 
excisional biopsy is indicated. In these cases, it is essential to 
obtain a chest radiograph to look for the presence of a medias-
tinal mass. Significant mediastinal load portends cardiorespira-
tory collapse due to loss of venous return and compression of 
the tracheobronchial tree with general anesthesia. Accordingly, 
such biopsies should be done under local anesthesia.
Thyroglossal Duct Remnants
Pathology and Clinical Manifestations.  The thyroid gland 
buds off the foregut diverticulum at the base of the tongue in 
the region of the future foramen cecum at 3 weeks of embryonic 
life. As the fetal neck develops, the thyroid tissue becomes more 
anterior and caudad until it rests in its normal position. The 
“descent” of the thyroid is intimately connected with the devel-
opment of the hyoid bone. Residual thyroid tissue left behind 
during the migration may persist and subsequently present in the 
midline of the neck as a thyroglossal duct cyst. The mass is most 
commonly appreciated in the 2- to 4-year-old child when the 
baby fat disappears and irregularities in the neck become more 
readily apparent. Usually the cyst is encountered in the midline 
at or below the level of the hyoid bone, and moves up and down 
with swallowing or with protrusion of the tongue. Occasion-
ally it presents as an intrathyroidal mass. Most thyroglossal duct 
cysts are asymptomatic. If the duct retains its connection with 
the pharynx, infection may occur, and the resulting abscess will 
necessitate incision and drainage, occasionally resulting in a sal-
ivary fistula. Submental lymphadenopathy and midline dermoid 
cysts can be confused with a thyroglossal duct cyst. Rarely, 
midline ectopic thyroid tissue masquerades as a thyroglossal 
duct cyst and may represent the patient’s only thyroid tissue. 
Therefore, if there is any question regarding the diagnosis or 
if the thyroid gland cannot be palpated in its normal anatomic 
position, it is advisable to obtain a nuclear scan to confirm the 
presence of a normal thyroid gland. Although rarely the case 
in children, in adults the thyroglossal duct may contain thyroid 
tissue that can undergo malignant degeneration. The presence 
of malignancy in a thyroglossal cyst should be suspected when 
the cyst grows rapidly or when the ultrasound demonstrates a 
complex anechoic pattern or the presence of calcification.
Treatment.  If the cyst presents with an abscess, treatment 
should first consist of drainage and antibiotics. Following reso-
lution of the inflammation, resection of the cyst in continuity 
with the central portion of the hyoid bone and the tract connect-
ing to the pharynx in addition to ligation at the foramen cecum 
(the Sistrunk operation) is curative in over 90% of patients. 
Lesser operations result in unacceptably high recurrence rates, 
and recurrence is more frequent following infection. Accord-
ing to a recent review, factors predictive of recurrence included 
more than two infections prior to surgery, age under 2 years, and 
inadequate initial operation.
Branchial Cleft Anomalies
Paired branchial clefts and arches develop early in the fourth 
gestational week. The first cleft and the first, second, third, and 
fourth pouches give rise to adult organs. The embryologic com-
munication between the pharynx and the external surface may 
persist as a fistula. A fistula is seen most commonly with the 
second branchial cleft, which normally disappears, and extends 
from the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
superiorly, inward through the bifurcation of the carotid artery, 
and enters the posterolateral pharynx just below the tonsillar 
fossa. In contrast, a third branchial cleft fistula passes posterior 
to the carotid bifurcation. The branchial cleft remnants may con-
tain small pieces of cartilage and cysts, but internal fistulas are 
rare. A second branchial cleft sinus is suspected when clear fluid 
is noted draining from the external opening of the tract at the 
anterior border of the lower third of the sternomastoid muscle. 
Rarely, branchial cleft anomalies occur in association with bili-
ary atresia and congenital cardiac anomalies, an association that 
is referred to as Goldenhar’s complex.
Treatment.  Complete excision of the cyst and sinus tract is 
necessary for cure. Dissection of the sinus tract is facilitated 
with passage of a fine lacrimal duct probe through the exter-
nal opening into the tract and using it as a guide for dissection. 
Injection of a small amount of methylene blue dye into the tract 
also may be useful. A series of two or sometimes three small 
transverse incisions in a “stepladder” fashion is preferred to a 
long oblique incision in the neck, which is cosmetically unde-
sirable. Branchial cleft cysts can present as abscesses. In these 
cases, initial treatment includes incision and drainage with a 
course of antibiotics to cover Staphylococcus and Streptococcus 
species, followed by excision of the cyst after the infection 
resolves.
Lymphatic Malformation
Etiology and Pathology.  Lymphatic malformation (previ-
ously known as cystic hygroma or lymphangioma) occurs as 
a result of sequestration or obstruction of developing lymph 
vessels in approximately 1 in 12,000 births. Although the 
lesion can occur anywhere, the most common sites are in the 
posterior triangle of the neck, axilla, groin, and mediastinum. 
The cysts are lined by endothelium and filled with lymph. 
Occasionally unilocular cysts occur, but more often, there are 
multiple cysts “infiltrating” the surrounding structures and 
1603
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
­distorting the local anatomy. A particularly troublesome vari-
ant of lymphatic malformation is one that involves the tongue, 
floor of the mouth, and structures deep in the neck. Adjacent 
connective tissue may show extensive lymphocytic infiltra-
tion. The mass may be apparent at birth or may appear and 
enlarge rapidly in the early weeks or months of life as lymph 
accumulates; most present by age 2 years (Fig. 39-1A). Exten-
sion of the lesion into the axilla or mediastinum occurs about 
10% of the time and can be demonstrated preoperatively by 
chest x-ray, ultrasound (US), or computed tomography (CT) 
scan. Occasionally lymphatic malformations contain nests of 
vascular tissue. These poorly supported vessels may bleed 
and produce rapid enlargement and discoloration of the mass. 
Infection within the cysts, usually caused by Streptococcus or 
Staphylococcus, may occur. In the neck, this can cause rapid 
enlargement, which may result in airway compromise. Rarely, 
it may be necessary to carry out percutaneous aspiration of a 
cyst to relieve respiratory distress.
The diagnosis of lymphatic malformation by prenatal US, 
before 30 weeks’ gestation, has detected a “hidden mortality” 
as well as a high incidence of associated anomalies, including 
abnormal karyotypes and hydrops fetalis. Occasionally, very 
large lesions can cause obstruction of the fetal airway. Such 
obstruction can result in the development of polyhydramnios by 
impairing the ability of the fetus to swallow amniotic fluid. In 
these circumstances, the airway is usually markedly distorted, 
which can result in immediate airway obstruction unless the air-
way is secured at the time of delivery. Orotracheal intubation or 
emergency tracheostomy while the infant remains attached to 
the placenta, the so-called EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapar-
tum treatment), may be necessary to secure the airway.
Treatment.  The modern management of most lymphatic 
malformations includes the combination of surgical excision 
and image-guided sclerotherapy. The initial treatment typi-
cally involves surgery in an attempt to safely remove all gross 
disease without damaging vital structures. Total removal of 
all gross disease may not be possible because of the extent of 
the lymphatic malformation and its proximity to, and intimate 
relationship with, adjacent nerves, muscles, and blood vessels 
(Fig. 39-1B). Radical ablative surgery is not indicated for this 
lesion. A combined sclerotherapy/resectional approach is par-
ticularly useful for large lymphatic malformations and those that 
extend to the base of the tongue or the floor of the mouth. Con-
servative excision and unroofing of the cysts is advised along 
with sclerotherapy or repeated partial excision for any residual 
lymphatic malformation if necessary, preserving all adjacent 
crucial structures. Postoperative wound drainage is important 
and is best accomplished by closed-suction technique. Never-
theless, fluid may accumulate beneath the surgically created 
flaps, requiring multiple needle aspirations.
Torticollis
The presence of a lateral neck mass in infancy in association 
with rotation of the head toward the opposite side of the mass 
indicates the presence of congenital torticollis. This lesion 
results from fibrosis of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The 
mass may be palpated in the affected muscle in approximately 
two thirds of cases. Histologically, the lesion is characterized 
by the deposition of collagen and fibroblasts around atrophied 
muscle cells. In the vast majority of cases, physical therapy 
based on passive stretching of the affected muscle is of benefit. 
Rarely, surgical transection of the sternocleidomastoid may be 
indicated.
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (Bochdalek)
Pathology.  The septum transversum extends to divide the 
pleural and coelomic cavities during fetal development. This 
precursor of the diaphragm normally completes separation of 
these two cavities at the posterolateral aspects of this mesenchy-
mally derived structure. The most common variant of a con-
genital diaphragmatic hernia is a posterolateral defect, also 
known as a Bochdalek hernia. Diaphragmatic defects allow 
abdominal viscera to fill the chest cavity. The abdominal cavity 
is small and underdeveloped and remains scaphoid after birth. 
Both lungs are hypoplastic, with decreased bronchial and pul-
monary artery branching. Lung weight, lung volume, and DNA 
content are also decreased, and these findings are more striking 
B
A
Figure 39-1.  A. Left cervical lymphatic malformation in a 2-day-old baby. B. Intraoperative photograph showing a vessel loop around the 
spinal accessory nerve.
1604
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
on the ipsilateral side. This anomaly is encountered more com-
monly on the left (80%–90%). Linkage analyses have recently 
implicated genetic mutations in syndromic variants of congeni-
tal diaphragmatic hernias. In many instances, there is a surfac-
tant deficiency, which compounds the degree of respiratory 
insufficiency. Amniocentesis with karyotype may identify chro-
mosomal defects, especially trisomy 18 and 21. Associated 
anomalies, once thought to be uncommon, were identified in 65 
of 166 patients in one study, predominantly of the heart, fol-
lowed by abdominal wall defects, chromosomal changes, and 
other defects. Prenatal ultrasonography is successful in making 
the diagnosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) as early 
as 15 weeks’ gestation, and early antenatal diagnosis is associ-
ated with worse outcomes. US findings include herniated 
abdominal viscera in the chest, which may also look like a mass 
or lung anomaly, changes in liver position, and mediastinal shift 
away from the herniated viscera (Fig. 39-2). Accurate prenatal 
prediction of outcome for fetuses who have CDH is very diffi-
cult. One index of severity for patients with left CDH is the 
lung-to-head ratio (LHR), which is the product of the length and 
the width of the right lung at the level of the cardiac atria divided 
by the head circumference (all measurements in millimeters). 
An LHR value of less than 1.0 is associated with a very poor 
prognosis, whereas an LHR greater than 1.4 predicts a more 
favorable outcome.  The utility of the LHR in predicting out-
come in patients with CDH has recently been questioned, 
due to the tremendous interobserver variability in calculat-
ing this ratio for a particular patient, as well as the lack of reli-
able measures to determine postnatal disease severity.
Following delivery, the diagnosis of CDH is made by 
chest x-ray (Fig. 39-3). The differential diagnosis includes bron-
chopulmonary foregut malformations, in which the intrathoracic 
loops of bowel may be confused for lung or foregut pathology. 
The vast majority of infants with CDH develop immediate 
respiratory distress, which is due to the combined effects of 
three factors. First, the air-filled bowel in the chest compresses 
the mobile mediastinum, which shifts to the opposite side of 
the chest, compromising air exchange in the contralateral lung. 
Second, pulmonary hypertension develops. This phenomenon 
results in persistent fetal circulation, with resultant decreased 
pulmonary perfusion and impaired gas exchange. Finally, the 
lung on the affected side is often hypoplastic, such that it is 
essentially nonfunctional. Varying degrees of pulmonary hypo-
plasia on the opposite side may compound these effects. The 
second and third factors are thought to be the most important. 
Neonates with CDH are usually in respiratory distress requiring 
ventilation and intensive care, and the overall mortality in most 
series is around 50%.
Treatment.  CDH care has improved considerably through 
effective use of improved methods of ventilation and timely can-
nulation for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). 
Many infants are symptomatic at birth due to hypoxia, hyper-
carbia, and metabolic acidosis. Prompt cardiorespiratory stabi-
lization is mandatory. It is noteworthy that in some infants, the 
first 24 to 48 hours after birth are often characterized by a period 
of relative stability with high levels of PaO2 and relatively good 
perfusion. This has been termed the “honeymoon period” and 
is often followed by progressive cardiorespiratory deteriora-
tion. In the past, correction of the hernia was believed to be 
a surgical emergency, and patients underwent surgery shortly 
after birth. It is now accepted that the presence of persistent 
pulmonary hypertension that results in right-to-left shunting 
across the patent foramen ovale or the ductus arteriosus and 
the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia are the leading causes of 
cardiorespiratory insufficiency. Current management therefore 
is directed toward managing the pulmonary hypertension and 
minimizing barotrauma while optimizing oxygen delivery. To 
achieve this goal, infants are placed on mechanical ventilation 
using relatively low or “gentle” settings that prevent overin-
flation of the noninvolved lung. Levels of PaCO2 in the range 
1
Figure 39-3.  Chest x-ray showing a left congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia.
Figure 39-2.  Prenatal ultrasound of a fetus with a congenital dia-
phragmatic hernia. Arrows point to the location of the diaphragm. 
Arrow head points to the stomach, which is in the thoracic cavity.
1605
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
of 50 to 60 mmHg or higher are accepted as long as the pH 
remains ≥ 7.25. If these objectives cannot be achieved using 
conventional ventilation, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation 
(HFOV) may be used to avoid the injurious effects of conven-
tional tidal volume ventilation. Echocardiography will assess 
the degree of pulmonary hypertension and identify the presence 
of any coexisting cardiac anomaly. Intensive care unit goals 
include minimal sedation, meticulous attention to endotracheal 
tube secretions, and gradual changes to ventilator settings to 
avoid inducing pulmonary hypertension via hypoxia. To mini-
mize the degree of pulmonary hypertension, inhaled nitric oxide 
may be administered and, in some patients, improves pulmo-
nary perfusion. Nitric oxide is administered into the ventilation 
circuit and is used in concentrations up to 40 parts per million. 
Correction of acidosis using bicarbonate solution may minimize 
the degree of pulmonary hypertension. As the degree of pulmo-
nary hypertension becomes hemodynamically significant, right-
sided heart failure develops and systemic perfusion is impaired. 
Administration of excess IV fluid will compound the degree of 
cardiac failure and lead to marked peripheral edema. Inotropic 
support using epinephrine, dopamine, and milrinone alone or in 
combination may be useful in optimizing cardiac contractility 
and maintaining mean arterial pressure.
Infants with CDH who remain severely hypoxic despite 
maximal ventilatory care may be candidates for treatment of 
their respiratory failure by ECMO, with access via venovenous 
(VV) or venoarterial (VA) routes. VV bypass is established 
with a single cannula through the right internal jugular vein, 
with blood removed from and infused into the right atrium by 
separate ports. VA bypass provides additional cardiac support, 
whereas VV bypass requires a well-functioning heart and relies 
on the lungs for some oxygenation as well. In VA ECMO, the 
right atrium is cannulated by means of the internal jugular vein 
and the aortic arch through the right common carotid artery. As 
much of the cardiac output is directed through the membrane 
oxygenator as is necessary to provide oxygenated blood to the 
infant and remove carbon dioxide. The infant is maintained on 
bypass until the pulmonary hypertension is resolved and lung 
function, as measured by compliance and the ability to oxygen-
ate and ventilate, is improved. This is usually seen within 7 to 
10 days, but in some infants, it may take up to several weeks 
to occur. Complications associated with ECMO increase after 
14 days and include cannula malposition, bleeding in multiple 
locations, and infection. The use of ECMO is associated with 
significant risk. Because patients require systemic anticoagu-
lation, bleeding complications are the most significant. They 
may occur intracranially or at the site of cannula insertion 
and can be life threatening. Systemic sepsis is a significant 
problem and may necessitate decannulation. Criteria for plac-
ing infants on ECMO include the presence of normal cardiac 
anatomy by echocardiography, the absence of fatal chromosome 
anomalies, and the expectation that the infant would die with-
out ECMO. Traditionally, a threshold of weight greater than 2 
kg and gestational age greater than 34 weeks has been applied, 
although success has been achieved at weights as low as 1.8 kg. 
Upon decannulation, some centers repair the carotid artery. In 
instances in which the child is cannulated for a brief period (5 
days or less) this may be feasible. A recent study failed to show 
any benefit from repairing the carotid artery, although this find-
ing remains to be studied further.
A strategy that does not involve the use of ECMO, but 
instead emphasizes the use of permissive hypercapnia and the 
avoidance of barotrauma, may provide equal overall outcome 
in patients with CDH. This likely reflects the fact that mortality 
is related to the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and the pres-
ence of congenital anomalies, neither of which are correctable 
by ECMO.
The timing of diaphragmatic hernia repair is still 
approached by various routes in major centers, particularly when 
the infant is on ECMO. In patients who are not on ECMO, repair 
should be performed once the hemodynamic status has been 
optimized. In neonates who are on ECMO, some surgeons per-
form early repair on bypass; others wait until the infant’s lungs 
are improved and the pulmonary hypertension has subsided, 
repair the diaphragm, and discontinue bypass within hours of 
surgery. Still others repair the diaphragm only after the infant is 
off bypass. Operative repair of the diaphragmatic hernia may be 
accomplished by either an abdominal or transthoracic approach 
and can be performed either via open or minimally invasive 
techniques. Through a subcostal incision, the abdominal vis-
cera are withdrawn from the chest, exposing the defect in the 
diaphragm. Care must be taken when reducing the spleen and 
liver, as bleeding from these structures can be fatal. The anterior 
margin is often apparent, while the posterior muscular rim is 
attenuated. If the infant is heparinized on bypass, minimal dis-
section of the muscular margins is performed. Electrocautery is 
used liberally to minimize postoperative bleeding. Most infants 
who require ECMO support prior to hernia repair have large 
defects, often lacking the medial and posterior margins. About 
three fourths of infants repaired on bypass require prosthetic 
material to patch the defect, suturing it to the diaphragmatic 
remnant or around ribs or costal cartilages for the large defects. 
If there is adequate muscle for closure, a single layer of nonab-
sorbable horizontal mattress sutures, pledgeted or not, closes the 
defect. Just before the repair is complete, a chest tube may be 
positioned in the thoracic cavity but is not mandatory. Patients 
repaired on ECMO are at risk for developing a hemothorax, 
which can significantly impair ventilation. Anatomic closure of 
the abdominal wall may be impossible after reduction of the 
viscera. Occasionally a prosthetic patch or acellular material 
may be sutured to the fascia to facilitate closure. The patch can 
be removed at a later time, and the ventral hernia can be closed 
at that time or subsequently. In patients who are deemed to be 
candidates for a minimally invasive approach (stable patients, 
>2 kg, no pulmonary hypertension), a thoracoscopic repair may 
be safely performed, although concerns have been raised about 
possible effects of the longer operative time for thoracoscopic 
repair and higher recurrence rates. If the diaphragm has been 
repaired on ECMO, weaning and decannulation are accom-
plished as soon as possible. All infants are ventilated postop-
eratively to maintain preductal arterial oxygenation of 80 to 
100 Torr. Very slow weaning from the ventilator is necessary to 
avoid recurrent pulmonary hypertension.
Congenital Lobar Emphysema
Congenital lobar emphysema (CLE) is a condition manifested 
during the first few months of life as a progressive hyperexpan-
sion of one or more lobes of the lung. It can be life-threatening 
in the newborn period if extensive lung tissue is involved, but in 
the older infant and in cases in which the lesion is less severely 
distended, it causes less respiratory distress. Air entering during 
inspiration is trapped in the lobe; on expiration, the lobe can-
not deflate and progressively overexpands, causing atelectasis 
of the adjacent lobe or lobes. This hyperexpansion eventually 
1606
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
shifts the mediastinum to the opposite side and compromises 
the other lung. CLE usually occurs in the upper lobes of the 
lung (left greater than right), followed next in frequency by the 
right middle lobe, but it also can occur in the lower lobes. It is 
caused by intrinsic bronchial obstruction from poor bronchial 
cartilage development or extrinsic compression. Approximately 
14% of children with this condition have cardiac defects, with 
an enlarged left atrium or a major vessel causing compression 
of the ipsilateral bronchus.
Symptoms range from mild respiratory distress to full-
fledged respiratory failure with tachypnea, dyspnea, cough, and 
late cyanosis. These symptoms may be stationary, or they may 
progress rapidly or result in recurrent pneumonia. Occasionally, 
infants with CLE present with failure to thrive, which likely 
reflects the increased work associated with the overexpanded 
lung. A hyperexpanded hemithorax on the ipsilateral side is 
pathognomonic for CLE. Diagnosis is typically confirmed by 
chest x-ray, which shows a hyperlucent affected lobe with adja-
cent lobar compression and atelectasis. The mediastinum may 
be shifted as a consequence of mass effect to the contralateral 
side causing compression and atelectasis of the contralateral lung 
(Fig. 39-4). Although chest radiograph is usually sufficient, it is 
sometimes important to obtain a CT scan of the chest to clearly 
establish the diagnosis of CLE. This should be done only in the 
stable patient. Unless foreign body or mucus plugging is sus-
pected as a cause of hyperinflation, bronchoscopy is not advisable 
because it can lead to more air trapping and cause life-threatening 
respiratory distress in a stable infant. Treatment is resection of the 
affected lobe, which can be safely performed using either an open 
or thoracoscopic approach. Unless symptoms necessitate earlier 
surgery, resection can usually be performed after the infant is sev-
eral months of age. The prognosis is excellent.
Bronchopulmonary Foregut Malformations
Bronchopulmonary foregut malformations include foregut 
duplication cysts, congenital pulmonary airway malformations, 
and pulmonary sequestrations as discussed below.
Congenital Pulmonary Airway Malformations.  Previ-
ously denoted as congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation 
(CCAM), congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) 
exhibits cystic proliferation of the terminal airway, producing 
cysts lined by mucus-producing respiratory epithelium, and 
elastic tissue in the cyst walls without cartilage formation. There 
may be a single cyst with a wall of connective tissue contain-
ing smooth muscle. Cysts may be large and multiple (type I), 
smaller and more numerous (type II), or resemble fetal lung 
without macroscopic cysts (type III). CPAMs frequently occur 
in the left lower lobe. However, this lesion can occur in any 
location and may occur in more than one lobe on more than one 
side, although this is rare. Clinical symptoms range from none 
to severe respiratory failure at birth. Over time, these malforma-
tions can be subject to repeated infections and produce fever 
and cough in older infants and children. The diagnosis is usu-
ally confirmed by CT for surgical planning and characteristic 
features that might delineate other bronchopulmonary foregut 
malformations (Fig. 39-5). Prenatal US may suggest the diagno-
sis. Resection is curative and may need to be performed urgently 
in the infant with severe respiratory distress. Long term, there 
is a risk of malignant degeneration in unresected CPAMs, but 
this risk occurs over decades and has not been fully defined. 
As a result, resection of the affected lobe is usually performed 
(Fig. 39-6).
Figure 39-5.  Computed tomography scan of the chest showing 
a congenital pulmonary airway malformation involving the left 
lower lobe.
Figure 39-6.  Intraoperative photograph showing left lower lobe 
congenital pulmonary airway malformation seen in Fig. 39-5.
Figure 39-4.  Congenital lobar emphysema of the left upper lobe 
in a 2-week-old boy. Mediastinal shift is present.
1607
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Pulmonary Sequestration.  Pulmonary sequestration is 
uncommon and consists of a mass of lung tissue, usually in the 
left lower chest, occurring without the usual connections to the 
pulmonary artery or tracheobronchial tree, yet with a systemic 
blood supply from the aorta. There are two kinds of sequestra-
tion. Extralobar sequestration is usually a small area of nonaer-
ated lung separated from the main lung mass, with a systemic 
blood supply, located immediately above the left diaphragm. It 
is commonly found in cases of CDH. Intralobar sequestration 
more commonly occurs within the parenchyma of the left lower 
lobe but can occur on the right. There is no major connection 
to the tracheobronchial tree, but a secondary connection may 
be established, perhaps through infection or via adjacent intra-
pulmonary shunts. The blood supply frequently originates from 
the aorta below the diaphragm; multiple vessels may be present 
(Fig. 39-7). Venous drainage of both types can be systemic or 
pulmonary. The cause of sequestration is unknown but most 
probably involves an abnormal budding of the developing lung 
that picks up a systemic blood supply and never becomes con-
nected with the bronchus or pulmonary vessels. Sequestrations 
may, in some cases, exhibit mixed pathology with components 
consistent with CPAMs. Extralobar sequestration is asymptom-
atic and is usually discovered incidentally on chest x-ray. If the 
diagnosis can be confirmed (e.g., by CT scan), resection is not 
necessary. Diagnosis of intralobar sequestration may be made 
prenatally and confirmed on postnatal CT scan. Alternatively, 
the diagnosis of intralobar sequestration may be established 
after repeated infections manifested by cough, fever, and con-
solidation in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe. 
Increasingly the diagnosis is being made in the early months of 
life by US, and color Doppler often can be helpful in delineating 
the systemic arterial supply. Removal of the entire left lower 
lobe is usually necessary since the diagnosis often is made late 
after multiple infections. Occasionally segmental resection of 
the sequestered part of the lung can be performed using an open 
or, ideally, a thoracoscopic approach. If an open approach is 
used, it is important to open the chest through a low intercostal 
space (sixth or seventh) to gain access to the vascular attach-
ments to the aorta. These attachments may insert into the aorta 
below the diaphragm; in these cases division of the vessels as 
they traverse the thoracic cavity is essential. Prognosis is gener-
ally excellent. However, failure to obtain adequate control of 
these vessels may result in their retraction into the abdomen 
and result in uncontrollable hemorrhage. It is also possible to 
perform a combined thoracoscopic and open approach, wherein 
the vessels are clipped and divided thoracoscopically and then 
the lesion is safely removed through a limited thoracotomy.
Bronchogenic Cyst.  Bronchogenic cysts are duplication cysts 
originating from the airway, regardless of the identity of the epi-
thelial lining. They can occur anywhere along the respiratory 
tract and can present at any age, although typically they pres-
ent after accumulation of intraluminal contents, and not within 
the newborn period. Histologically, they are hamartomatous and 
usually consist of a single cyst lined with an epithelium; the mes-
enchyme contains cartilage and smooth muscle. They are prob-
ably embryonic rests of foregut origin that have been pinched off 
from the main portion of the developing tracheobronchial tree 
and are closely associated in causation with other foregut duplica-
tion cysts such as those arising from the esophagus. Bronchogenic 
cysts may be seen on prenatal US but are discovered most often 
incidentally on postnatal chest x-ray. Although they may be com-
pletely asymptomatic, bronchogenic cysts may produce symp-
toms, usually compressive in nature, depending on the anatomic 
location and size, which increase over time if there is no egress 
of accumulating luminal contents. In the paratracheal region of 
the neck, they can produce airway compression and respiratory 
distress. In the lung parenchyma, they may become infected and 
present with fever and cough. In addition they may cause obstruc-
tion of the bronchial lumen with distal atelectasis and infection, or 
they may cause mediastinal compression. Rarely, rupture of the 
cyst can occur. Chest x-ray usually shows a dense mass, and CT 
scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) delineates the precise 
anatomic location of the lesion. Treatment consists of resection of 
the cyst, which may need to be undertaken in emergency circum-
stances for airway or cardiac compression. Resection can be per-
formed either as an open procedure or, more commonly, using a 
thoracoscopic approach. If resection of a common wall will result 
in injury to the airway, resection of the inner epithelial cyst lining 
after marsupialization is acceptable.
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is an abnormal and irreversible dilatation of 
the bronchi and bronchioles associated with chronic suppura-
tive disease of the airways. Usually patients have an underlying 
congenital pulmonary anomaly, cystic fibrosis, or immunologic 
deficiency. Bronchiectasis can also result from chronic infection 
secondary to a neglected bronchial foreign body. The symptoms 
include a chronic cough, often productive of purulent secretions, 
recurrent pulmonary infection, and hemoptysis. The diagnosis 
is suggested by a chest x-ray that shows increased bronchovas-
cular markings in the affected lobe. Chest CT delineates bron-
chiectasis with excellent resolution. The preferred treatment 
for bronchiectasis is medical, consisting of antibiotics, postural 
drainage, and bronchodilator therapy, since many children with 
the disease show signs of airflow obstruction and bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness. Lobectomy or segmental resection is indi-
cated for localized disease that has not responded appropriately 
to medical therapy. In severe cases, lung transplantation may be 
required to replace the terminally damaged, septic lung.
Foreign Bodies
The inherent curiosity of children and their innate propensity 
to place new objects into their mouths to fully explore them 
place them at great risk for aspiration. Aspirated objects can be 
found either in the airway or in the esophagus; in both cases, the 
results can be life-threatening.
Figure 39-7.  Arteriogram showing large systemic artery supply to 
intralobar sequestration of the left lower lobe.
1608
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Airway Ingestion.  Aspiration of foreign bodies most com-
monly occurs in the toddler age group. Peanuts are the most 
common object that is aspirated, although other materials (pop-
corn, for instance) may also be involved. A solid foreign body 
often will cause air trapping, with hyperlucency of the affected 
lobe or lung seen especially on expiration. Oil from the peanut 
is very irritating and may cause pneumonia. Delay in diagnosis 
can lead to atelectasis and infection. The most common ana-
tomic location for a foreign body is the right main stem bronchus 
or the right lower lobe. The child usually will cough or choke 
while eating but may then become asymptomatic. Total respira-
tory obstruction with tracheal foreign body may occur; however, 
respiratory distress is usually mild if present at all. A unilateral 
wheeze is often heard on auscultation. This wheeze often leads 
to an inappropriate diagnosis of “asthma” and may delay the 
correct diagnosis for some time. Chest x-ray will show a radi-
opaque foreign body, but in the case of nuts, seeds, or plastic toy 
parts, the only clue may be hyperexpansion of the affected lobe 
on an expiratory film or fluoroscopy. Bronchoscopy confirms 
the diagnosis and allows removal of the foreign body. It can be 
a very simple procedure, or it may be extremely difficult, espe-
cially with a smooth foreign body that cannot be grasped easily 
or one that has been retained for some time. The rigid broncho-
scope should be used in all cases, and utilization of the optical 
forceps facilitates grasping the inhaled object. Epinephrine may 
be injected into the mucosa when the object has been present for 
a long period of time, which minimizes bleeding. Bronchiectasis 
may be seen as an extremely late phenomenon after repeated 
infections of the poorly aerated lung and may require partial 
or total resection of the affected lobe. The differential diagno-
sis of a bronchial foreign body includes an intraluminal tumor 
(i.e., carcinoid, hemangioma, or neurofibroma).
Foreign Bodies and Esophageal Injury.  The most common 
foreign body in the esophagus is a coin, followed by small toy 
parts. Toddlers are most commonly affected. The coin is retained 
in the esophagus at one of three locations: the cricopharyngeus, 
the area of the aortic arch, or the gastroesophageal junction—
all areas of normal anatomic narrowing. Symptoms are variable 
depending on the anatomic position of the foreign body and the 
degree of obstruction. There is often a relatively asymptomatic 
period after ingestion. The initial symptoms are gastrointestinal 
and include dysphagia, drooling, and dehydration. The longer 
the foreign body remains in the esophagus with oral secretions 
unable to transit the esophagus, the greater the incidence of 
respiratory symptoms including cough, stridor, and wheezing. 
These findings may be interpreted as signs of upper respiratory 
infections. Objects that are present for a long period, particularly 
in children who have underlying neurologic impairment, may 
manifest as chronic dysphagia. The chest x-ray is diagnostic in 
the case of a coin. A contrast swallow, or preferably an esopha-
goscopy, may be required for nonradiopaque foreign bodies. 
Coins lodged within the upper esophagus for less than 24 hours 
may be removed using Magill forceps during direct laryngos-
copy. For all other situations, the treatment is by esophagos-
copy, rigid or flexible, and removal of the foreign body. In the 
case of sharp foreign bodies such as open safety pins, extreme 
care is required on extraction to avoid injury to the esophagus. 
Rarely, esophagotomy is required for removal, particularly of 
sharp objects. Diligent follow-up is required after removal of 
foreign bodies, especially batteries, which can cause strictures, 
and sharp objects, which can injure the underlying esophagus. 
In the case of a retained battery, this case should be handled as a 
surgical emergency, as the negative pole of the battery directly 
damages the surrounding tissue, and tracheoesophageal fistula, 
aortic exsanguination, and mediastinitis have all been described 
after local tissue necrosis at the site where the battery has lodged.
ESOPHAGUS
Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is 
one of the most gratifying pediatric surgical conditions to treat. 
In the not-so-distant past, nearly all infants born with EA and 
TEF died. In 1939, Ladd and Leven performed the first suc-
cessful repair by ligating the fistula, placing a gastrostomy, and 
reconstructing the esophagus at a later time. Subsequently, Dr. 
Cameron Haight in Ann Arbor, Michigan, performed the first 
successful primary anastomosis for EA, which remains the cur-
rent approach for treatment of this condition. Despite the fact that 
there are several common varieties of this anomaly and the under-
lying cause remains obscure, a careful approach consisting of 
meticulous perioperative care and attention to the technical detail 
of the operation can result in an excellent prognosis in most cases.
Anatomic Varieties.  The five major varieties of EA and TEF 
are shown in Fig. 39-8. The most commonly seen variety is EA 
Figure 39-8.  The five varieties of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. A. Isolated esophageal atresia. B. Esophageal atresia 
with tracheoesophageal fistula between proximal segment of esophagus and trachea. C. Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula 
between distal esophagus and trachea. D. Esophageal atresia with fistula between both proximal and distal ends of esophagus and trachea. 
E. Tracheoesophageal fistula without esophageal atresia (H-type fistula).
1609
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
with distal TEF (type C), which occurs in approximately 85% 
of the cases in most series. The next most frequent type is pure 
EA (type A), occurring in 8% to 10% of patients, followed by 
TEF without EA (type E). This occurs in 8% of cases and is also 
referred to as an H-type fistula, based on the anatomic similarity 
to that letter (Fig. 39-9). EA with fistula between both proximal 
and distal ends of the esophagus and trachea (type D) is seen in 
approximately 2% of cases, and type B, EA with TEF between 
proximal esophagus and trachea, is seen in approximately 1% 
of all cases.
Etiology and Pathologic Presentation.  The esophagus and 
trachea share a common embryologic origin. At approximately 
4 weeks’ gestation, a diverticulum forms off the anterior aspect 
of the proximal foregut in the region of the primitive pharynx. 
This diverticulum extends caudally with progressive formation 
of the laryngotracheal groove, thus creating a separate trachea 
and esophagus. Successful development of these structures is 
the consequence of extremely intricate interplay of growth and 
transcription factors necessary for rostral-caudal and anterior-
posterior specification. The variations in clinically observed EA 
and TEF that must result in failure of successful formation of 
these structures are depicted in Fig. 39-8. Although definitive 
genetic mutations have been difficult to identify in isolated EA-
TEF, mutations in N-myc, Sox2, and CHD7 have been character-
ized in syndromic EA-TEF with associated anomalies.
Other congenital anomalies commonly occur in asso-
ciation with EA-TEF. For instance, VACTERRL syndrome is 
associated with vertebral anomalies (absent vertebrae or hemi-
vertebrae) and anorectal anomalies (imperforate anus), cardiac 
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies (renal agen-
esis, renal anomalies), and radial limb hyperplasia. In nearly 
20% of the infants born with EA, some variant of congenital 
heart disease occurs.
Clinical Presentation of Infants with Esophageal Atresia 
and Tracheoesophageal Fistula.
The anatomic variant of infants with EA-TEF predicts the clini-
cal presentation. When the esophagus ends either as a blind 
pouch or as a fistula into the trachea (as in types A, B, C, or D), 
infants present with excessive drooling, followed by chocking 
or coughing immediately after feeding is initiated as a result 
of aspiration through the fistula tract. As the neonate coughs 
and cries, air is transmitted through the fistula into the stomach, 
resulting in abdominal distention. As the abdomen distends, it 
becomes increasingly more difficult for the infant to breathe. 
This leads to further atelectasis and respiratory compromise. In 
patients with type C and D varieties, the regurgitated gastric 
juice passes through the fistula where it collects in the trachea 
and lungs and leads to a chemical pneumonitis, which further 
exacerbates the pulmonary difficulties. In many instances, the 
diagnosis is actually made by the nursing staff who attempt to 
feed the baby and notice the accumulation of oral secretions.
The diagnosis of EA is confirmed by the inability to pass 
an orogastric tube into the stomach (Fig. 39-10). The dilated 
upper pouch may be occasionally seen on a plain chest radio-
graph. If a soft feeding tube is used, the tube will coil in the 
upper pouch, which provides further diagnostic certainty. An 
important alternative diagnosis that must be considered when 
an orogastric tube does not enter the stomach is that of an 
esophageal perforation. This problem can occur in infants after 
traumatic insertion of a nasogastric or orogastric tube. In this 
instance, the perforation classically occurs at the level of the 
piriform sinus, and a false passage is created, which prevents the 
tube from entering the stomach. Whenever there is any diagnos-
tic uncertainty, a contrast study will confirm the diagnosis of EA 
and occasionally document the TEF. The presence of a TEF can 
be demonstrated clinically by finding air in the gastrointestinal 
tract. This can be proven at the bedside by percussion of the 
abdomen and confirmed by obtaining a plain abdominal radio-
graph. Occasionally, a diagnosis of EA-TEF can be suspected 
prenatally on US evaluation. Typical features include failure 
to visualize the stomach and the presence of polyhydramnios. 
These findings reflect the absence of efficient swallowing 
by the fetus.
In a child with EA, it is important to identify whether coex-
isting anomalies are present. These include cardiac defects in 
38%, skeletal defects in 19%, neurologic defects in 15%, renal 
defects in 15%, anorectal defects in 8%, and other abnormalities 
in 13%. Examination of the heart and great vessels with echocar-
diography is important to exclude cardiac defects, as these are 
often the most important predictors of survival in these infants. 
The echocardiogram also demonstrates whether the aortic arch 
is left sided or right sided, which may influence the approach 
to surgical repair. Vertebral anomalies are assessed by plain 
radiography, and a spinal US is obtained if any are detected. 
A patent anus should be confirmed clinically. The kidneys in 
Figure 39-10.  Type C esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal 
fistula. Note the catheter that is coiled in the upper pouch and the 
presence of gas below the diaphragm, which confirms the presence 
of the tracheoesophageal fistula.
Figure 39-9.  Barium esophagram showing H-type tracheoesopha-
geal fistula (arrow).
1610
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
a newborn may be assessed clinically by palpation. An US of 
the abdomen will demonstrate the presence of renal anomalies, 
which should be suspected in the child who fails to make urine. 
The presence of extremity anomalies is suspected when there 
are missing digits and confirmed by plain radiographs of the 
hands, feet, forearms, and legs. Rib anomalies may also be pres-
ent. These may include the presence of a thirteenth rib.
Initial Management.  The initial treatment of infants with 
EA-TEF includes attention to the respiratory status, decom-
pression of the upper pouch, and appropriate timing of surgery. 
Because the major determinant of poor survival is the presence 
of other severe anomalies, a search for other defects including 
congenital cardiac disease is undertaken in a timely fashion. The 
initial strategy after the diagnosis is confirmed is to place the 
neonate in an infant warmer with the head elevated at least 30°. 
A sump catheter is placed in the upper pouch on continuous suc-
tion. Both of these strategies are designed to minimize the degree 
of aspiration from the esophageal pouch. When saliva accumu-
lates in the upper pouch and is aspirated into the lungs, cough-
ing, bronchospasm, and desaturation episodes can occur, which 
may be minimized by ensuring the patency of the sump catheter. 
IV antibiotic therapy is initiated, and warmed electrolyte solu-
tion is administered. Where possible, the right upper extremity is 
avoided as a site to start an IV line, as this location may interfere 
with positioning of the patient during the surgical repair.
The timing of repair is influenced by the stability of the 
patient. Definitive repair of the EA-TEF is rarely a surgical 
emergency. If the child is hemodynamically stable and is oxy-
genating well, definitive repair may be performed within 1 to 
2 days after birth. This allows for a careful determination of the 
presence of coexisting anomalies and for selection of an expe-
rienced anesthetic team.
Management of Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesopha-
geal Fistula in the Preterm Infant.  The ventilated, prema-
ture neonate with EA-TEF and associated hyaline membrane 
disease represents a patient who may develop severe, progres-
sive, cardiopulmonary dysfunction. The TEF can worsen the 
fragile pulmonary status as a result of recurrent aspiration 
through the fistula and increased abdominal distention, which 
impairs lung expansion. Moreover, the elevated airway pres-
sure that is required to ventilate these patients can worsen the 
clinical course by forcing air through the fistula into the stom-
ach, thereby exacerbating the degree of abdominal distention 
and compromising lung expansion.  In this situation, the 
first priority is to minimize the degree of positive pressure 
needed to adequately ventilate the child. This can be accom-
plished using HFOV. If the gastric distention becomes severe, 
a gastrostomy tube should be placed. This procedure can be 
performed at the bedside under local anesthetic, if necessary. 
The dilated, air-filled stomach can easily be accessed through 
an incision in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Once 
the gastrostomy tube is placed and the abdominal pressure is 
relieved, the pulmonary status can paradoxically worsen. This 
is because the ventilated gas may pass preferentially through 
the fistula, which is the path of least resistance, and bypass 
the lungs, thereby worsening the hypoxemia. To correct this 
problem, the gastrostomy tube may be placed under water seal, 
elevated, or intermittently clamped. If these maneuvers are to 
no avail, ligation of the fistula may be required. This procedure 
can be performed in the neonatal intensive care unit if the infant 
is too unstable to be transported to the operating room. These 
interventions allow for the infant’s underlying hyaline mem-
brane disease to improve, for the pulmonary secretions to clear, 
and for the infant to reach a period of stability so that definitive 
repair can be performed.
Primary Surgical Correction.  In a stable infant, definitive 
repair is achieved through performance of a primary esophago-
esophagostomy. There are two approaches to this operation: 
open thoracotomy or thoracoscopy. In the open approach, the 
infant is brought to the operating room, intubated, and placed in 
the lateral decubitus position with the right side up in prepara-
tion for right posterolateral thoracotomy. If a right-sided arch 
was determined previously by echocardiography, consideration 
is given to performing the repair through the left chest, although 
most surgeons believe that the repair can be performed safely 
from the right side as well. Bronchoscopy may be performed to 
exclude the presence of additional, upper pouch fistulae in cases 
of EA (i.e., differentiation of type B, C, and D variants) and to 
identify a laryngotracheoesophageal cleft.
The operative technique for primary repair is as follows 
(Fig. 39-11). A retropleural approach is generally used, as this 
technique prevents widespread contamination of the thorax if a 
postoperative anastomotic leak occurs. The sequence of steps 
is as follows: (a) mobilization of the pleura to expose the struc-
tures in the posterior mediastinum; (b) division of the fistula and 
closure of the tracheal opening; (c) mobilization of the upper 
esophagus sufficiently to permit an anastomosis without tension 
and to determine whether a fistula is present between the upper 
esophagus and the trachea (forward pressure by the anesthesia 
staff on the sump drain in the pouch can greatly facilitate dissec-
tion at this stage of the operation; care must be taken when dis-
secting posteriorly to avoid violation of the lumen of the trachea 
and esophagus); (d) mobilization of the distal esophagus (this 
needs to be performed judiciously to avoid devascularization, 
since the blood supply to the distal esophagus is segmental from 
the aorta; most of the esophageal length is obtained from mobi-
lizing the upper pouch, since the blood supply travels via the 
submucosa from above); (e) performing a primary esophago-
esophageal anastomosis (most surgeons perform this procedure 
in a single layer using 5-0 sutures; if there is excess tension, 
the muscle of the upper pouch can be circumferentially incised 
without compromising blood supply to increase its length; many 
surgeons place a transanastomotic feeding tube in order to insti-
tute feeds in the early postoperative period); and (f) placement 
of a retropleural drain and closure of the incision in layers.
When a minimally invasive approach is selected, the 
patient is prepared for right-sided, transthoracic thoracoscopic 
repair. The same steps as described earlier for the open repair 
are undertaken, and the magnification and superb optics that 
are provided by the thoracoscopic approach provide for superb 
visualization. Identification of the fistula is performed as a 
first step; this can be readily ligated and divided between tho-
racoscopically placed sutures. The anastomosis is performed 
in a single layer. The thoracoscopically performed TEF repair 
requires clear and ongoing communication between the oper-
ating surgeons and the anesthesiologist; visualization can be 
significantly reduced with sudden changes in lung inflation, 
potentially leading to the need to convert to an open repair. 
Although clear guidelines for patient selection for a thoraco-
scopic repair as opposed to an open repair remain lacking, rea-
sonable selection criteria include patients over 2.5 kg who are 
hemodynamically stable and without comorbidities.
2
1611
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Postoperative Course.  The postoperative management strat-
egy of patients with EA-TEF is influenced to a great degree by 
the preference of the individual surgeon and the institutional 
culture. Many surgeons prefer not to leave the infants intubated 
postoperatively, to avoid the effects of positive pressure on the 
site of tracheal closure. However, early extubation may not be 
possible in babies with preoperative lung disease either from pre-
maturity or pneumonia or when there is any vocal cord edema. 
When a transanastomotic tube is placed, feeds are begun slowly 
in the postoperative period. Some surgeons institute parenteral 
nutrition for several days, using a central line. The retropleural 
drain is assessed daily for the presence of saliva, indicating an 
anastomotic leak. Many surgeons obtain a contrast swallow 1 
week after repair to assess the caliber of the anastomosis and to 
determine whether a leak is present. If there is no leak, feedings 
are started. The principal benefit of the thoracoscopic approach 
is that postoperative pain is significantly reduced, as is the 
requirement for postoperative narcotic analgesia.
Complications of Surgery.  Anastomotic leak occurs in 10% 
to 15% of patients and may be seen either in the immediate post-
operative period or after several days. Early leakage (i.e., within 
the first 24 to 48 hours) is manifested by a new pleural effusion, 
pneumothorax, and sepsis, and requires immediate exploration. 
In these circumstances, the anastomosis may be completely 
disrupted, possibly due to excessive tension. Revision of the 
anastomosis may be possible. If not, cervical esophagostomy 
and gastrostomy placement are required, with a subsequent 
procedure to re-establish esophageal continuity. Anastomotic 
leakage that is detected after several days usually heals with-
out intervention, particularly if a retropleural approach is used. 
Under these circumstances, broad-spectrum antibiotics, pulmo-
nary toilet, and optimization of nutrition are important. After 
approximately a week or so, a repeat esophagram should be 
performed, at which time the leakage may have resolved.
Strictures are not infrequent (10%–20%), particularly 
if a leak has occurred. A stricture may become apparent at 
any time, from the early postoperative period to months or 
years later. It may present as choking, gagging, or failure to 
thrive, but often becomes clinically apparent with the transi-
tion to eating solid food. A contrast swallow or esophagoscopy 
is confirmatory, and simple dilatation is usually corrective. 
Occasionally, repeated dilatations are required. These may be 
performed in a retrograde fashion, during which a silk suture is 
placed into the oropharynx and delivered from the esophagus 
through a gastrostomy tube. Tucker dilators are then tied to 
the suture and passed in a retrograde fashion from the gas-
trostomy tube and delivered out of the oropharynx. Increasing 
sizes are used, and the silk is replaced at the end of the proce-
dure where it is taped to the side of the face at one end and to 
the gastrostomy tube at the other. Alternatively, image-guided 
balloon dilation over a guide wire may be performed, using 
intraoperative contrast radiography to determine the precise 
location of the stricture and to assess the immediate response 
to the dilation.
A
B
C
E
D
Azygos Vein
Esophagus
Esophagus
Azygos Vein
Figure 39-11.  Primary repair of type C tracheosophageal fistula. A. Right thoracotomy incision. B. Azygos vein transected, proximal and 
distal esophagus demonstrated, and fistula identified. C. Tracheoesophageal fistula transected and defect in trachea closed. D. End-to-end 
anastomosis between proximal and distal esophagus (posterior row). E. Completed anastomosis.
1612
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
“Recurrent” TEF may represent a missed upper pouch fis-
tula or a true recurrence. This may occur after an anastomotic 
disruption, during which the recurrent fistula may heal spon-
taneously. Otherwise, reoperation may be required. Recently, 
the use of fibrin glue has been successful in treating recurrent 
fistulas, although long-term follow-up is lacking.
Gastroesophageal reflux commonly occurs after repair of 
EA-TEF, potentially due to alterations in esophageal motility 
and the anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction. The clinical 
manifestations of such reflux are similar to those seen in other 
infants with primary gastroesophageal reflux disease. A loose 
antireflux procedure, such as a Nissen fundoplication, is used to 
prevent further reflux, but the child may have feeding problems 
after antireflux surgery as a result of the intrinsic dysmotility 
of the distal esophagus. The fundoplication may be safely per-
formed laparoscopically in experienced hands, although care 
should be taken to ensure that the wrap is not excessively tight.
Special Circumstances.  Patients with type E TEFs (also 
called H-type) most commonly present beyond the newborn 
period. Presenting symptoms include recurrent chest infections, 
bronchospasm, and failure to thrive. The diagnosis is suspected 
using barium esophagography and confirmed by endoscopic 
visualization of the fistula. Surgical correction is generally pos-
sible through a cervical approach with concurrent placement of 
a balloon catheter across the fistula and requires mobilization 
and division of the fistula. Outcome is usually excellent.
Patients with duodenal atresia and EA-TEF may require 
urgent treatment due to the presence of a closed obstruction of 
the stomach and proximal duodenum. In stable patients, treat-
ment consists of repair of the esophageal anomaly and correc-
tion of the duodenal atresia if the infant is stable during surgery. 
If not, a staged approach should be used consisting of ligation 
of the fistula and placement of a gastrostomy tube. Definitive 
repair can then be performed at a later point in time.
Primary EA (type A) represents a challenging problem, 
particularly if the upper and lower ends are too far apart for 
an anastomosis to be created. Under these circumstances, treat-
ment strategies include placement of a gastrostomy tube and 
performing serial bougienage to increase the length of the upper 
pouch. This occasionally allows for primary anastomosis to be 
performed. Occasionally, when the two ends cannot be brought 
safely together, esophageal replacement is required using a 
gastric pull-up, reverse gastric tube, or colon interposition 
(see below).
Outcome.  Various classification systems have been used to 
predict survival in patients with EA-TEF and to stratify treat-
ment. A system devised by Waterston in 1962 was used to strat-
ify neonates based on birth weight, the presence of pneumonia, 
and the identification of other congenital anomalies. In response 
to advances in neonatal care, the surgeons from the Montreal 
Children’s Hospital proposed a new classification system. In 
the Montreal experience, only two characteristics independently 
affected survival: preoperative ventilator dependence and asso-
ciated major anomalies. Pulmonary disease as defined by venti-
lator dependence appeared to be more accurate than pneumonia. 
When the two systems were compared, the Montreal system 
more accurately identified children at highest risk. Spitz and 
colleagues analyzed risk factors in infants who died with EA-
TEF. Two criteria were found to be important predictors of out-
come: birth weight less than 1500 g and the presence of major 
congenital cardiac disease. A new classification for predicting 
outcome in EA was therefore proposed: group I: birth weight 
≥1500 g, without major cardiac disease, survival 97% (283 of 
293); group II: birth weight <1500 g, or major cardiac disease, 
survival 59% (41 of 70); and group III: birth weight <1500 g, 
and major cardiac disease, survival 22% (2 of 9).
In general, surgical correction of EA-TEF leads to a sat-
isfactory outcome with nearly normal esophageal function in 
most patients. Overall survival rates of greater than 90% have 
been achieved in patients classified as stable in all the various 
staging systems. Unstable infants have an increased mortality 
(40% to 60% survival) because of potentially fatal associated 
cardiac and chromosomal anomalies or prematurity. However, 
the use of a staged procedure also has increased survival in even 
these high-risk infants.
Corrosive Injury of the Esophagus
Injury to the esophagus after ingestion of corrosive substances 
most commonly occurs in the toddler age group. Both strong 
alkali and strong acids produce injury by liquefaction or coag-
ulation necrosis, and since all corrosive agents are extremely 
hygroscopic, the caustic substance will cling to the esophageal 
epithelium. Subsequent strictures occur at the anatomic nar-
rowed areas of the esophagus, cricopharyngeus, midesophagus, 
and gastroesophageal junction. A child who has swallowed 
an injurious substance may be symptom free but usually will 
be drooling and unable to swallow saliva. The injury may be 
restricted to the oropharynx and esophagus or may extend to 
include the stomach. There is no effective immediate antidote. 
Diagnosis is by careful physical examination of the mouth and 
endoscopy with a flexible or a rigid esophagoscope. It is impor-
tant to endoscope only to the first level of the burn in order 
to avoid perforation. Early barium swallow may delineate the 
extent of the mucosal injury. It is important to realize that the 
esophagus may be burned without evidence of injury to the 
mouth. Although previously used routinely, steroids have not 
been shown to alter stricture development or modify the extent 
of injury. Therefore, they are no longer part of the management 
of caustic injuries. Antibiotics are administered during the 
acute period.
The extent of injury is graded endoscopically as either 
mild, moderate, or severe (grade I, II, or III). Circumferential 
esophageal injuries with necrosis have an extremely high like-
lihood of stricture formation. These patients should undergo 
placement of a gastrostomy tube once clinically stable. A string 
should be inserted through the esophagus either immediately or 
during repeat esophagoscopy several weeks later. When estab-
lished strictures are present (usually 3–4 weeks), dilatation is 
performed. Retrograde dilatations are safest, using graduated 
dilators brought through the gastrostomy and advanced into the 
esophagus via the transesophageal string. For less severe inju-
ries, dilatation may be attempted in antegrade fashion by either 
graded bougies or balloons. Management of esophageal perfo-
ration during dilation should include antibiotics, irrigation, and 
closed drainage of the thoracic cavity to prevent systemic sepsis. 
When recognition is delayed or if the patient is systemically ill, 
esophageal diversion may be required with staged reconstruc-
tion at a later time.
Although the native esophagus can be preserved in most 
cases, severe stricture formation that does not respond to dila-
tion is best managed by esophageal replacement. The most com-
monly used options for esophageal substitution are the colon 
(right colon or transverse/left colon) and the stomach (gastric 
1613
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
tube or gastric pull-up). Pedicled or free grafts of the jejunum 
are less commonly used. The right colon is based on a pedicle 
of the middle colic artery, and the left colon on a pedicle of 
the middle colic or left colic artery. Gastric tubes are fashioned 
from the greater curvature of the stomach based on the pedicle 
of the left gastroepiploic artery. When the entire stomach is 
used, as in gastric pull-up, the blood supply is provided by the 
right gastric artery. The neoesophagus may traverse: (a) sub-
sternally; (b) through a transthoracic route; or (c) through the 
posterior mediastinum to reach the neck. A feeding jejunostomy 
is placed at the time of surgery, and tube feedings are instituted 
once the postoperative ileus has resolved. In a recent review of 
patients treated by gastric pull-up, long-term outcome was very 
good. Complications included esophagogastric anastomotic leak 
(n = 15, 36%), which uniformly resolved without interven-
tion, and stricture formation (n = 20, 49%), which responded 
to a course of dilation. Long-term follow-up has shown that all 
methods of esophageal substitution can support normal growth 
and development, and the children enjoy reasonably normal 
eating habits. Because of the potential for late complications 
such as ulceration and stricture, follow-up into adulthood is 
mandatory, but complications appear to diminish with time.
Gastroesophageal Reflux
Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) occurs to some degree in 
all children and refers to the passage of gastric contents into 
the esophagus. By contrast, gastroesophageal reflux disease 
(GERD) describes the situation where reflux is symptomatic. 
Typical symptoms include failure to thrive, bleeding, stricture 
formation, reactive airway disease, aspiration pneumonia, and 
apnea. Failure to thrive and pulmonary problems are particu-
larly common in infants with GERD, whereas strictures and 
esophagitis are more common in older children and adoles-
cents. GERD is particularly problematic in neurologically 
impaired children.
Clinical Manifestations.  Because all infants experience 
occasional episodes of GER to some degree, care must be taken 
before a child is labeled as having pathologic reflux. A history 
of repeated episodes of vomiting that interferes with growth 
and development or the presence of apparent life-threatening 
events is required for the diagnosis of GERD. In older children, 
esophageal bleeding, stricture formation, severe heartburn, or 
the development of Barrett’s esophagus unequivocally connotes 
pathologic reflux or GERD. In neurologically impaired chil-
dren, vomiting due to GER must be distinguished from chronic 
retching.
The workup of patients suspected of having GERD 
includes documentation of the episodes of reflux and evalua-
tion of the anatomy. A barium swallow should be performed as 
an initial test. This will determine whether there is obstruction 
of the stomach or duodenum (due to duodenal webs or pyloric 
stenosis) and will determine whether malrotation is present. 
The frequency and severity of reflux should be assessed using a 
24-hour pH probe study. Although this test is poorly tolerated, it 
provides the most accurate determination that GERD is present. 
Esophageal endoscopy with biopsies may identify the presence 
of esophagitis and is useful to determine the length of intra-
abdominal esophagus and the presence of Barrett’s esophagus. 
Some surgeons obtain a radioisotope “milk scan” to evaluate 
gastric emptying, although there is little evidence to show that 
this test changes management when a diagnosis of GERD has 
been confirmed using the above modalities.
Treatment.  Most patients with GERD are treated initially by 
conservative means. In the infant, propping and thickening the 
formula with rice cereal are generally recommended. Some 
authors prefer a prone, head-up position. In the infant unrespon-
sive to position and formula changes and the older child with 
severe GERD, medical therapy is based on gastric acid reduc-
tion with an H2-blocking agent and/or a proton pump inhibitor. 
Medical therapy is successful in most neurologically normal 
infants and younger children, many of whom will outgrow their 
need for medications. In certain patients, however, medical 
treatment does not provide symptomatic relief, and surgery is 
therefore indicated. The least invasive surgical option includes 
the placement of a nasojejunal or gastrojejunal feeding tube. 
Because the stomach is bypassed, food contents do not enter the 
esophagus, and symptoms are often improved. However, as a 
long-term remedy, this therapy is associated with several prob-
lems. The tubes often become dislodged, acid reflux still occurs, 
and bolus feeding is generally not possible. Fundoplication pro-
vides definitive treatment for GER and is highly effective in 
most circumstances. The fundus may be wrapped around the 
distal esophagus either 360° (i.e., Nissen) or to lesser degrees 
(i.e., Thal or Toupet). At present, the standard approach in most 
children is to perform these procedures laparoscopically when-
ever possible. In children with feeding difficulties and in infants 
under 1 year of age, a gastrostomy tube should be placed at 
the time of surgery. Early postoperative complications include 
pneumonia and atelectasis, often due to inadequate pulmonary 
toilet and pain control with abdominal splinting. Late postop-
erative complications include wrap breakdown with recurrent 
reflux, which may require repeat fundoplication, and dysphagia 
due to a wrap performed too tightly, which generally responds 
to dilation. These complications are more common in children 
with neurologic impairment. The keys to successful surgical 
management of patients with GERD include careful patient 
selection and meticulous operative technique.
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
An Approach to the Vomiting Infant
The majority of infants vomit. Because infant vomiting is so com-
mon, it is important to differentiate between normal vomiting, 
which occurs in almost all babies, to some degree, and abnor-
mal vomiting, which may be indicative of a potentially serious 
underlying disorder. To determine the seriousness of a particu-
lar infant’s bouts of emesis, one needs to characterize what the 
vomit looks like and how sick the baby is. Vomit that looks like 
feeds and comes up immediately after a feeding is almost always 
gastroesophageal reflux. This may or may not be of concern, as 
described earlier. Vomiting that occurs a short while after feed-
ing or vomiting that projects out of the baby’s mouth may be 
indicative of pyloric stenosis. By contrast, vomit that has any 
green color in it is always worrisome. This may be reflective of 
intestinal volvulus, an underlying infection, or some other cause 
of intestinal obstruction. A more detailed description of the man-
agement of these conditions is provided in the following sections.
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis
Clinical Presentation.  Infants with hypertrophic pyloric 
stenosis (HPS) typically present with nonbilious vomiting that 
becomes increasingly projectile over the course of several days 
to weeks due to progressive thickening of the pylorus muscle. 
1614
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
HPS occurs in approximately 1 in 300 live births and commonly 
in infants between 3 and 6 weeks of age. Male-to-female ratio 
is nearly 5:1.
Eventually, as the pyloric muscle thickening progresses, 
the infant develops a complete gastric outlet obstruction and 
is no longer able to tolerate any feeds. Over time, the infant 
becomes increasingly hungry, unsuccessfully feeds repeatedly, 
and becomes increasingly dehydrated. Wet diapers become less 
frequent, and there may even be a perception of less passage 
of flatus. HPS may be associated with jaundice due to an indi-
rect hyperbilirubinemia, although the nature of this relationship 
is unclear.
The cause of HPS has not been determined. Studies have 
shown that HPS is found in several generations of the same fam-
ily, suggesting a familial link. Administration of erythromycin 
in early infancy has been linked to the subsequent development 
of HPS, although the cause is unclear. Infant positioning in the 
prone position was implicated as a cause of HPS particularly 
when, in Denmark and Sweden, a drop in both cases of sudden 
infant death syndrome (SIDS) and HPS were reported. More 
recently, a similar drop in both SIDS and HPS was noted in 
Germany, although the distribution of case rate declines were 
different across regions in Germany, suggesting that the etiol-
ogy of HPS is not likely simply due to positioning.
Infants with HPS develop a hypochloremic, hypokale-
mic metabolic alkalosis. The urine pH level is high initially, 
but eventually drops because hydrogen ions are preferentially 
exchanged for sodium ions in the distal tubule of the kidney 
as the hypochloremia becomes severe (paradoxical aciduria). 
The diagnosis of pyloric stenosis usually can be made on physi-
cal examination by palpation of the typical “olive” in the right 
upper quadrant and the presence of visible gastric waves on the 
abdomen. When the olive cannot be palpated, US can diagnose 
the condition accurately in 95% of patients. Criteria for US 
diagnosis include a channel length of over 16 mm and pyloric 
thickness over 4 mm.
Treatment.  Given frequent fluid and electrolyte abnormali-
ties at time of presentation, pyloric stenosis is never a surgical 
emergency. Fluid resuscitation with correction of electrolyte 
abnormalities and metabolic alkalosis is essential prior to induc-
tion of general anesthesia for operation. For most infants, fluid 
containing 5% dextrose and 0.45% saline with added potassium 
of 2 to 4 mEq/kg over 24 hours at a rate of approximately 150 
to 175 mL/kg per 24 hours will correct the underlying deficit. 
It is important to ensure that the child has an adequate urine 
output (>2 cc/kg/h) as further evidence that rehydration has 
occurred. After resuscitation, a Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromy-
otomy is performed (Fig. 39-12). It may be performed using 
an open or laparoscopic approach. The open pyloromyotomy is 
performed through either an umbilical or a right upper quadrant 
transverse abdominal incision. The former route is cosmetically 
more appealing, although the transverse incision provides easier 
access to the antrum and pylorus. In recent years, the laparo-
scopic approach has gained great popularity. Two randomized 
trials have demonstrated that both the open and laparoscopic 
approaches may be performed safely with equal incidence of 
postoperative complications, although the cosmetic result is 
clearly superior with the laparoscopic approach. Whether done 
through an open or laparoscopic approach, surgical treatment of 
pyloric stenosis involves splitting the pyloric muscle while leav-
ing the underlying submucosa intact. The incision extends from 
just proximal to the pyloric vein of Mayo to the gastric antrum; 
it typically measures between 1 and 2 cm in length. Postop-
eratively, IV fluids are continued for several hours, after which 
Pedialyte is offered, followed by formula or breast milk, which 
is gradually increased to 60 cc every 3 hours. Most infants can 
be discharged home within 24–48 hours following surgery. 
Recently, several authors have shown that ad lib feeds are safely 
tolerated by the neonate and result in a shorter hospital stay.
The complications of pyloromyotomy include perforation 
of the mucosa (1%–3%), bleeding, wound infection, and recur-
rent symptoms due to inadequate myotomy. When perforation 
occurs, the mucosa is repaired with a stitch that is placed to tack 
the mucosa down and reapproximate the serosa in the region 
of the tear. A nasogastric tube is left in place for 24 hours. The 
outcome is generally very good.
Intestinal Obstruction in the Newborn
The cardinal symptom of intestinal obstruction in the newborn 
is bilious emesis. Prompt recognition and treatment of 
neonatal intestinal obstruction can truly be life saving. 
The incidence of neonatal intestinal obstruction is 1 in 
2000 live births. The approach to intestinal obstruction in the 
newborn infant is critical for timely and appropriate interven-
tion. When a neonate develops bilious vomiting, one must 
Pyloric “tumor”
Mucosa
A
B
C
Figure 39-12.  Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy. A. Pylorus deliv-
ered into wound and seromuscular layer incised. B. Seromuscular 
layer separated down to submucosal base to permit herniation of 
mucosa through pyloric incision. C. Cross-section demonstrating 
hypertrophied pylorus, depth of incision, and spreading of muscle 
to permit mucosa to herniate through incision.
3
1615
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
consider a surgical etiology. Indeed, the majority of newborns 
with bilious emesis have a surgical condition. In evaluating 
a potential intestinal obstruction, it is helpful to determine 
whether the intestinal obstruction is either proximal or distal 
to the ligament of Treitz.  One must conduct a detailed 
prenatal and immediate postnatal history and a thorough 
physical examination. In all cases of intestinal obstruction, it 
is vital to obtain abdominal films in the supine and upright (or 
lateral decubitus) views to assess the presence of air-fluid levels 
or free air as well as how far downstream air has managed to 
travel. Importantly, one should recognize that it is difficult to 
determine whether a loop of bowel is part of either the small or 
large intestine, as neonatal bowel lacks clear features, such as 
haustra or plica circulares, normally present in older children or 
adults. As such, contrast imaging may be necessary for diagno-
sis in some instances.
Proximal intestinal obstructions typically present with bil-
ious emesis and minimal abdominal distention. The normal neo-
nate should have a rounded, soft abdomen; in contrast, a neonate 
with a proximal intestinal obstruction typically exhibits a flat or 
scaphoid abdomen. On a series of upright and supine abdominal 
radiographs, one may see a paucity or absence of bowel gas, 
which normally should be present throughout the gastrointesti-
nal tract within 24 hours. Of utmost importance is the exclusion 
of a malrotation with midgut volvulus from all other intestinal 
obstructions as this is a surgical emergency.
Distal obstructions typically presents with bilious emesis 
and abdominal distention. Passage of black-green meconium 
should have occurred within the first 24 to 38 hours. Of great 
importance, one should determine whether or not there is ten-
derness or discoloration of the abdomen, visible or palpable 
loops of intestine, and presence or absence of a mass, and 
whether or not the anus is patent and in the appropriate loca-
tion. Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate calcifications, 
which may indicate complicated meconium ileus; pneumatosis 
and/or pneumoperitoneum may indicate necrotizing enteroco-
litis. A contrast enema may show whether there is a microcolon 
indicative of jejunoileal atresia or meconium ileus. If a micro-
colon is not present, then the diagnoses of Hirschsprung’s dis-
ease, small left colon syndrome, or meconium plug syndrome 
should be considered.
Duodenal Obstruction
Whenever the diagnosis of duodenal obstruction is entertained, 
malrotation and midgut volvulus must be excluded. This topic 
is covered in further detail later in this chapter. Other causes of 
duodenal obstruction include duodenal atresia, duodenal web, 
stenosis, annular pancreas, or duodenal duplication cyst. Duo-
denal obstruction is easily diagnosed on prenatal US, which 
demonstrates the fluid-filled stomach and proximal duodenum 
as two discrete cystic structures in the upper abdomen. Associ-
ated polyhydramnios is common and presents in the third tri-
mester. In 85% of infants with duodenal obstruction, the entry 
of the bile duct is proximal to the level of obstruction, such 
that vomiting is bilious. Abdominal distention is typically not 
present because of the proximal level of obstruction. In infants 
with obstruction proximal to the bile duct entry, the vomiting is 
nonbilious. The classic finding on abdominal radiography is the 
“double bubble” sign, which represents the dilated stomach and 
duodenum (Fig. 39-13). In association with the appropriate clin-
ical picture, this finding is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis 
of duodenal obstruction. However, if there is any uncertainty, 
particularly when a partial obstruction is suspected, a contrast 
upper gastrointestinal series is diagnostic.
Treatment.  An orogastric tube is inserted to decompress the 
stomach and duodenum, and the infant is given IV fluids to 
maintain adequate urine output. If the infant appears ill or if 
abdominal tenderness is present, a diagnosis of malrotation and 
midgut volvulus should be considered, and surgery should not 
be delayed. Typically, the abdomen is soft, and the infant is very 
stable. Under these circumstances, the infant should be evaluated 
thoroughly for other associated anomalies. Approximately one 
third of newborns with duodenal atresia have associated Down 
syndrome (trisomy 21). These patients should be evaluated for 
associated cardiac anomalies. Once the workup is complete and 
the infant is stable, he or she is taken to the operating room, 
and the abdomen is entered through a transverse right upper 
quadrant supraumbilical incision under general endotracheal 
anesthesia. Associated anomalies should be searched for at the 
time of the operation. These include malrotation, anterior portal 
vein, a second distal web, and biliary atresia. The surgical treat-
ment of choice for duodenal obstruction due to duodenal steno-
sis or atresia or annular pancreas is a duodeno-duodenostomy. 
This procedure can be most easily performed using a proximal 
transverse-to-distal longitudinal (diamond-shaped) anastomosis. 
In cases where the duodenum is extremely dilated, the lumen 
may be tapered using a linear stapler with a large Foley cath-
eter (24 F or greater) in the duodenal lumen. It is important to 
emphasize that an annular pancreas is never divided but rather 
is bypassed to avoid injury to the pancreatic ducts. Treatment 
of duodenal web includes vertical duodenotomy, excision of 
the web, oversewing of the mucosa, and closing the duodenot-
omy horizontally. Gastrostomy tube placement is not routinely 
performed. Recently reported survival rates exceed 90%. Late 
complications from repair of duodenal atresia occur in approxi-
mately 12% to 15% of patients and include megaduodenum, 
intestinal motility disorders, and GER.
Intestinal Atresia
Obstruction due to intestinal atresia can occur at any point along 
the intestinal tract. Intestinal atresias were previously thought 
to be the result of in utero mesenteric vascular accidents lead-
ing to segmental loss of the intestinal lumen, although, more 
likely they are due to developmental defects in normal intestinal 
organogenesis due to disruption of various signaling pathways 
such as fibroblast growth factor, bone morphogenic protein, and 
β-catenin pathways. The incidence of intestinal atresia has been 
4
Figure 39-13.  Abdominal x-ray showing "double bubble" sign 
in a newborn infant with duodenal atresia. The two "bubbles" are 
numbered.
1616
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
estimated to be between 1 in 2000 and 1 in 5000 live births, with 
equal representation of the sexes. Infants with jejunal or ileal 
atresia present with bilious vomiting and progressive abdomi-
nal distention. The more distal the obstruction, the more dis-
tended the abdomen becomes, and the greater is the number of 
obstructed loops on upright abdominal films (Fig. 39-14).
In cases where the diagnosis of complete intestinal 
obstruction is ascertained by the clinical picture and the pres-
ence of staggered air-fluid levels on plain abdominal films, the 
child can be brought to the operating room after appropriate 
resuscitation. In these circumstances, there is little extra infor-
mation to be gained by performing a barium enema. By contrast, 
when there is diagnostic uncertainty or when distal intestinal 
obstruction is apparent, a barium enema is useful to establish 
whether a microcolon is present and to diagnose the presence 
of meconium plugs, small left colon syndrome, Hirschsprung’s 
disease, or meconium ileus. Judicious use of barium enema is 
therefore required in order to safely manage neonatal intestinal 
obstruction, based on an understanding of the expected level of 
obstruction.
Surgical correction of the small intestinal atresia should 
be performed urgently. At laparotomy, one of several types of 
atresia will be encountered. In type 1, there is a mucosal atresia 
with intact muscularis. In type 2, the atretic ends are connected 
by a fibrous band. In type 3A, the two ends of the atresia are 
separated by a V-shaped defect in the mesentery. Type 3B is 
an “apple peel” deformity or “Christmas tree” deformity in 
which the bowel distal to the atresia receives its blood supply 
in a retrograde fashion from the ileocolic or right colic artery 
(Fig. 39-15). In type 4 atresia, there are multiple atresias with a 
“string of sausage” or “string of beads” appearance. Disparity 
in lumen size between the proximal distended bowel and the 
small diameter of collapsed bowel distal to the atresia has led 
to a number of innovative techniques of anastomosis. However, 
under most circumstances, an anastomosis can be performed 
using the end-to-back technique in which the distal, compressed 
loop is “fish-mouthed” along its antimesenteric border. The 
proximal distended loop can be tapered as described earlier. 
Because the distended proximal bowel rarely has normal motil-
ity, the extremely dilated portion should be resected prior to 
performing the anastomosis.
Occasionally the infant with intestinal atresia will develop 
ischemia or necrosis of the proximal segment secondary to 
volvulus of the dilated, bulbous, blind-ending proximal bowel. 
Under these conditions, an end ileostomy and mucus fistula 
should be created, and the anastomosis should be deferred to 
another time after the infant stabilizes.
Malrotation and Midgut Volvulus
Embryology.  During the sixth week of fetal development, 
the midgut grows too rapidly to be accommodated in the 
abdominal cavity and therefore herniates into the umbilical 
cord. Between the tenth and twelfth weeks, the midgut returns 
to the abdominal cavity, undergoing a 270° counterclockwise 
rotation around the superior mesenteric artery. Because the 
duodenum also rotates caudal to the artery, it acquires a C-loop 
that traces this path. The cecum rotates cephalad to the artery, 
which determines the location of the transverse and ascend-
ing colon. Subsequently, the duodenum becomes fixed retro-
peritoneally in its third portion and at the ligament of Treitz, 
while the cecum becomes fixed to the lateral abdominal wall 
by peritoneal bands. The takeoff of the branches of the supe-
rior mesenteric artery elongates and becomes fixed along a line 
extending from its emergence from the aorta to the cecum in 
the right lower quadrant. Genetic mutations likely disrupt the 
signaling critical for normal intestinal rotation. For instance, 
mutations in the gene BCL6 resulting in absence of left-sided 
expression of its transcript lead to reversed cardiac orientation, 
defective ocular development, and malrotation. The essential 
role of the dorsal gut mesentery in mediating normal intestinal 
rotation and the role of the forkhead box transcription factor 
Foxf1 in formation of the dorsal mesentery in mice are consis-
tent with the noted association of intestinal malrotation with 
alveolar capillary dysplasia, caused by mutations in FOXF1. If 
rotation is incomplete, the cecum remains in the epigastrium, 
but the bands fixing the duodenum to the retroperitoneum and 
cecum continue to form. This results in (Ladd’s) bands extend-
ing from the cecum to the lateral abdominal wall and cross-
ing the duodenum, which creates the potential for obstruction. 
The mesenteric takeoff remains confined to the epigastrium, 
resulting in a narrow pedicle suspending all the branches of the 
superior mesenteric artery and the entire midgut. A volvulus 
may therefore occur around the mesentery. This twist not only 
obstructs the proximal jejunum, but also cuts off the blood 
Figure 39-14.  Intestinal obstruction in the newborn showing sev-
eral loops of distended bowel with air-fluid levels. This child has 
jejunal atresia.
Figure 39-15.  Operative photograph of newborn with “Christmas 
tree” type of ileal atresia.
1617
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
supply to the midgut. Intestinal obstruction and complete 
infarction of the midgut occur unless the problem is promptly 
corrected surgically.
Presentation and Management.  Midgut volvulus can occur 
at any age, although it is seen most often in the first few weeks 
of life. Bilious vomiting is usually the first sign of volvulus, 
and all infants with bilious vomiting must be evaluated rapidly 
to ensure that they do not have intestinal malrotation with vol-
vulus. The child with irritability and bilious emesis should raise 
particular suspicions for this diagnosis. If left untreated, vas-
cular compromise of the midgut initially causes bloody stools, 
but eventually results in circulatory collapse. Additional clues 
to the presence of advanced ischemia of the intestine include 
erythema and edema of the abdominal wall, which progresses 
to shock and death. It must be re-emphasized that the index 
of suspicion for this condition must be high, since abdominal 
signs are minimal in the early stages. Abdominal films show a 
paucity of gas throughout the intestine with a few scattered air-
fluid levels (Fig. 39-16). When these findings are present, the 
patient should undergo immediate fluid resuscitation to ensure 
adequate perfusion and urine output followed by prompt explor-
atory laparotomy. In cases where the child is stable, laparoscopy 
may be considered.
Often the patient will not appear ill, and the plain films 
may suggest partial duodenal obstruction. Under these con-
ditions, the patient may have malrotation without volvulus. 
This is best diagnosed by an upper gastrointestinal series that 
shows incomplete rotation with the duodenojejunal junction 
displaced to the right. The duodenum may show a corkscrew 
effect diagnosing volvulus or complete duodenal obstruction, 
with the small bowel loops entirely in the right side of the 
abdomen. Barium enema may show a displaced cecum, but 
this sign is unreliable, especially in the small infant in whom 
the cecum is normally in a somewhat higher position than in 
the older child.
When volvulus is suspected, early surgical intervention is 
mandatory if the ischemic process is to be avoided or reversed. 
Volvulus occurs clockwise and is therefore untwisted coun-
terclockwise. This can be remembered using the memory aid 
“turn back the hands of time.” Subsequently, a Ladd procedure 
is performed. This operation does not correct the malrotation, 
but does broaden the narrow mesenteric pedicle to prevent vol-
vulus from recurring. This procedure is performed as follows 
(Fig. 39-17). The bands between the cecum and the abdomi-
nal wall and between the duodenum and terminal ileum are 
divided sharply to splay out the superior mesenteric artery and 
its branches. This maneuver brings the straightened duode-
num into the right lower quadrant and the cecum into the left 
lower quadrant. The appendix is removed to avoid diagnostic 
errors in later life. No attempt is made to suture the cecum 
or duodenum in place. With advanced ischemia, reduction of 
the volvulus without the Ladd procedure is accomplished, and 
a “second look” 24 to 36 hours later often will show some 
vascular recovery. A plastic transparent silo may be placed to 
facilitate constant evaluation of the intestine and to plan for 
the timing of re-exploration. Frankly necrotic bowel can then 
be resected conservatively. With early diagnosis and correc-
tion the prognosis is excellent. However, diagnostic delay can 
lead to mortality or to short-gut syndrome requiring intestinal 
transplantation.
A subset of patients with malrotation will demonstrate 
chronic obstructive symptoms. These symptoms may result 
from Ladd’s bands across the duodenum or, occasionally, from 
intermittent volvulus. Symptoms include intermittent abdominal 
pain and intermittent vomiting, which may occasionally be bil-
ious. Infants with malrotation may demonstrate failure to thrive, 
and they may be diagnosed initially as having GERD. Surgi-
cal correction using the Ladd procedure, as described earlier, 
can prevent volvulus from occurring and improve symptoms in 
many instances.
Meconium Ileus
Pathogenesis and Clinical Presentation.  Infants with cystic 
fibrosis have characteristic pancreatic enzyme deficiencies and 
abnormal chloride secretion in the intestine that result in the 
production of viscous, water-poor meconium. This phenotype 
is explained by the presence of mutations in the CFTR gene. 
Meconium ileus occurs when this thick, highly viscous meco-
nium becomes impacted in the ileum and leads to high-grade 
intestinal obstruction. Recently, additional mutations were 
recently identified in genes encoding multiple apical plasma 
membrane proteins of infants with meconium ileus. Meconium 
ileus can be either uncomplicated, in which there is no intesti-
nal perforation, or complicated, in which prenatal perforation 
of the intestine has occurred or vascular compromise of the dis-
tended ileum develops. Antenatal US may reveal the presence 
of intra-abdominal or scrotal calcifications or distended bowel 
loops. These infants present shortly after birth with progressive 
abdominal distention and failure to pass meconium with inter-
mittent bilious emesis. Abdominal radiographs show dilated 
loops of intestine. Because the enteric contents are so viscous, 
air-fluid levels do not form, even when obstruction is complete. 
Small bubbles of gas become entrapped in the inspissated meco-
nium in the distal ileum, where they produce a characteristic 
“ground glass” appearance.
Figure 39-16.  Abdominal x-ray of a 10-day-old infant with bilious 
emesis. Note the dilated proximal bowel and the paucity of distal 
bowel gas, characteristic of a volvulus.
1618
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
The diagnosis of meconium ileus is confirmed by a con-
trast enema, which typically demonstrates a microcolon. In 
patients with uncomplicated meconium ileus, the terminal ileum 
is filled with pellets of meconium. In patients with complicated 
meconium ileus, intraperitoneal calcifications form, producing 
an eggshell pattern on plain abdominal x-ray.
Management.  The treatment strategy depends on whether 
the patient has complicated or uncomplicated meconium 
ileus. Patients with uncomplicated meconium ileus can be 
treated nonoperatively. Either dilute water-soluble contrast 
or N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst¯) is infused transanally via 
catheter under fluoroscopic control into the dilated portion of 
the ileum. Because these agents act by absorbing fluid from 
the bowel wall into the intestinal lumen, infants undergoing 
treatment are at risk of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, 
so appropriate resuscitation of the infant during this maneu-
ver is extremely important. The enema may be repeated at 
12-hour intervals over several days until all the meconium 
is evacuated. Inability to reflux the contrast into the dilated 
portion of the ileum signifies the presence of an associated 
atresia or complicated meconium ileus, and thus warrants 
exploratory laparotomy. If surgical intervention is required 
because of failure of contrast enemas to relieve obstruction, 
operative irrigation with dilute contrast agent, N-acetylcyste-
ine, or saline through a purse-string suture may be successful. 
Alternatively, resection of the distended terminal ileum is per-
formed, and the meconium pellets are flushed from the distal 
small bowel. At this point, an end ileostomy may be created. 
The distal bowel may be brought up as a mucus fistula or 
sewn to the side of the ileum as a Bishop-Koop anastomosis. 
Figure 39-17.  Ladd procedure for malrotation. A. Lysis of cecal and duodenal bands. B. Broadening the mesentery. C. Appendectomy.
1619
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
An end-to-end anastomosis may also be considered in the 
appropriate setting (Fig. 39-18).
Necrotizing Enterocolitis
Clinical Features.  Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the 
most frequent and lethal gastrointestinal disorder affecting the 
intestine of the stressed, preterm neonate. Over 25,000 cases 
of NEC are reported annually. The overall mortality ranges 
between 10% and 50%. Advances in neonatal care such as 
surfactant therapy and improved methods of mechanical venti-
lation have resulted in increasing numbers of low birth weight 
infants surviving neonatal hyaline membrane disease. An 
increasing proportion of survivors of neonatal respiratory dis-
tress syndrome will therefore be at risk for developing NEC. 
Consequently, it is estimated that NEC soon will surpass respi-
ratory distress syndrome as the principal cause of death in the 
preterm infant.
Multiple risk factors have been associated with the devel-
opment of NEC. These include prematurity, initiation of enteral 
feeding, bacterial infection, intestinal ischemia resulting from 
birth asphyxia, umbilical artery cannulation, persistence of a 
patent ductus arteriosus, cyanotic heart disease, and maternal 
cocaine abuse. Nonetheless, the mechanisms by which these 
complex interacting etiologies lead to the development 
of the disease remain undefined. The only consistent 
epidemiologic precursors for NEC are prematurity and enteral 
alimentation, representing the commonly encountered clinical 
situation of a stressed infant who is fed enterally. Of note, there 
is some debate regarding the type and strategy of enteral alimen-
tation in the pathogenesis of NEC. A prospective randomized 
study showed no increase in the incidence of NEC despite an 
aggressive feeding strategy.
The indigenous intestinal microbial flora has been postu-
lated to play a central role in the pathogenesis of NEC. Bacterial 
colonization may be a prerequisite for the development of this 
disease because oral prophylaxis with vancomycin or gentami-
cin reduced the incidence of NEC. The importance of bacteria in 
the pathogenesis of NEC is further supported by the finding that 
NEC occurs in episodic waves that can be abrogated by infec-
tion control measures and the fact that NEC usually develops 
at least 10 days postnatally, when the gastrointestinal tract is 
colonized by coliforms. More recently, outbreaks of NEC have 
Proximal
Distal
A
B
C
D
Proximal
Distal
Proximal
Distal
Proximal
Distal
Distal
Proximal
Typical operative finding
End to back
Thomas taper
Bishop-Koop with distal vent
Mikulicz enterostomy
Figure 39-18.  Techniques of intestinal anastomosis for infants with small bowel obstruction. A. End to back: distal limb has been incised, 
creating “fish mouth” to enlarge the lumen. B. Bishop-Koop: proximal distended limb joined to side of distal small bowel, which is vented 
by “chimney” to the abdominal wall. C. Tapering: portion of antimesenteric wall of proximal bowel excised, with longitudinal closure to 
minimize disparity in the limbs. D. Mikulicz double-barreled enterostomy is constructed by suturing the two limbs together and then exte-
riorizing the double stoma. The common wall can be crushed with a special clamp to create a large stoma. The stoma can be closed in an 
extraperitoneal manner.
5
1620
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
been reported in infants fed formula contaminated with Crono-
bacter sakazakii. Common bacterial isolates from the blood, 
peritoneal fluid, and stool of infants with advanced NEC include 
Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, and occasionally, 
coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species.
NEC may involve single or multiple segments of the intes-
tine, most commonly the terminal ileum, followed by the colon. 
The gross findings in NEC include bowel distention with patchy 
areas of thinning, pneumatosis, gangrene, or frank perforation. 
The microscopic features include the appearance of a “bland 
infarct” characterized by full-thickness necrosis.
Clinical Manifestations.  Infants with NEC present with a 
spectrum of disease. In general, the infants are premature and 
may have sustained one or more episodes of stress, such as 
birth asphyxia, or they may have congenital cardiac disease. 
The clinical picture of NEC has been characterized by Bell 
and colleagues as progressing from a period of mild illness to 
that of severe, life-threatening sepsis. Although not all infants 
progress through the various “Bell stages,” this classification 
scheme provides a useful format to describe the clinical pic-
ture associated with the development of NEC. In the earliest 
stage (Bell stage I), infants present with feeding intolerance. 
This is suggested by vomiting or by the presence of a large 
residual volume from a previous feeding in the stomach at 
the time of the next feeding. Following appropriate treatment, 
which consists of bowel rest and IV antibiotics, many of these 
infants will not progress to more advanced stages of NEC. 
These infants are colloquially described as suffering from a 
“NEC scare” and represent a population of neonates who are 
at risk of developing more severe NEC if a more prolonged 
period of stress supervenes.
Infants with Bell stage II have established NEC that is not 
immediately life threatening. Clinical findings include abdomi-
nal distention and tenderness, bilious nasogastric aspirate, and 
bloody stools. These findings indicate the development of 
intestinal ileus and mucosal ischemia, respectively. Abdominal 
examination may reveal a palpable mass indicating the presence 
of an inflamed loop of bowel, diffuse abdominal tenderness, 
cellulitis, and edema of the anterior abdominal wall. The infant 
may appear systemically ill, with decreased urine output, hypo-
tension, tachycardia, and noncardiac pulmonary edema. Hema-
tologic evaluation reveals either leukocytosis or leukopenia, an 
increase in the number of bands, and thrombocytopenia. An 
increase in the blood urea nitrogen and plasma creatinine levels 
may be found, which signifies the development of renal dys-
function. The diagnosis of NEC may be confirmed by abdomi-
nal radiography. The pathognomonic radiographic finding in 
NEC is pneumatosis intestinalis, which represents invasion of 
the ischemic mucosa by gas-producing microbes (Fig. 39-19). 
Other findings include the presence of ileus or portal venous 
gas. The latter is a transient finding that indicates the presence 
of severe NEC with intestinal necrosis. A fixed loop of bowel 
may be seen on serial abdominal radiographs, which suggests 
the possibility that a diseased loop of bowel, potentially with 
a localized perforation, is present. Although these infants are 
at risk of progressing to more severe disease, with timely and 
appropriate treatment, they often recover.
Infants with Bell stage III have the most advanced form of 
NEC. Abdominal radiographs often demonstrate the presence 
of pneumoperitoneum, indicating that intestinal perforation has 
occurred. These patients may develop a fulminant course with 
progressive peritonitis, acidosis, sepsis, disseminated intravas-
cular coagulopathy, and death.
Pathogenesis of Necrotizing Enterocolitis.  Several theo-
ries have been proposed to explain the development of NEC. 
To more precisely understand the mechanisms that contribute 
to the pathogenesis of NEC, several groups have focused on 
understanding the potential clues that may be revealed by study-
ing patients who have progressed from Bell stage I to Bell stage 
III disease. In general terms, the development of diffuse pneu-
matosis intestinalis, which is associated with the development 
of stage II NEC, is thought to be due to the presence of gas 
within the wall of the intestine from enteric bacteria, suggest-
ing the causative role of bacteria in the pathogenesis of NEC. 
Furthermore, the development of pneumoperitoneum indicates 
disease progression with severe disruption of the intestinal bar-
rier (intestinal perforation). Finally, systemic sepsis with diffuse 
multisystem organ dysfunction suggests the role for circulating 
proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of NEC. It has 
also been demonstrated that the premature intestine responds in 
an exaggerated fashion to bacterial products, rendering the host 
susceptible to barrier dysfunction and the development of NEC. 
As was recently summarized by the 2006 National Institute of 
Child Health and Development (NICHD) workshop on NEC 
research, “NEC can be thought to arise from an uncontrolled 
exuberant inflammatory response to bacterial colonization that 
characterizes the intestine of premature infants.”
Treatment.  In all infants suspected of having NEC, feed-
ings are discontinued, a nasogastric tube is placed, and 
broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics are given. The infant is 
resuscitated, and inotropes are administered to maintain perfu-
sion as needed. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be 
required to maintain oxygenation. TPN is started. Subsequent 
treatment may be influenced by the particular stage of NEC that 
is present. Patients with Bell stage I are closely monitored and 
generally remain NPO (nothing by mouth) and on IV antibiotics 
for 5 to 7 days, prior to reinitiating enteral nutrition. If the infant 
fully recovers, feedings may be reinitiated.
Patients with Bell stage II disease merit close observation. 
Serial physical examinations are performed looking for the 
Figure 39-19.  Abdominal radiograph of infant with necrotizing 
enterocolitis. Arrows point to area of pneumatosis intestinalis.
1621
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
development of diffuse peritonitis, a fixed mass, progressive 
abdominal wall cellulitis, or systemic sepsis. Serial abdominal 
radiographs are obtained at regular intervals to look for the pres-
ence of pneumoperitoneum or a fixed loop of bowel. If infants 
fail to improve after several days of treatment or if abdominal 
radiographs show a fixed intestinal loop, consideration should 
be given to exploratory laparotomy. Paracentesis may be per-
formed, and if the Gram stain demonstrates multiple organisms 
and leukocytes, perforation of the bowel should be suspected, 
and patients should undergo laparotomy.
In the most severe form of NEC (Bell stage III), patients 
have definite intestinal perforation or have not responded to 
nonoperative therapy. Two schools of thought direct further 
management. One group favors exploratory laparotomy. At 
laparotomy, frankly gangrenous or perforated bowel is resected, 
and the intestinal ends are brought out as stomas. When there 
is massive intestinal involvement, marginally viable bowel is 
retained, and a “second look” procedure is carried out after the 
infant stabilizes (24–48 hours). Patients with extensive necro-
sis at the second look may be managed by placing a proximal 
diverting stoma, resecting bowel that is definitely not viable, and 
leaving questionably viable bowel behind, distal to the diverted 
segment. When the intestine is viable except for a localized per-
foration without diffuse peritonitis and if the infant’s clinical 
condition permits, intestinal anastomosis may be performed. In 
cases where the diseased, perforated segment cannot be safely 
resected, drainage catheters may be left in the region of the dis-
eased bowel, and the infant is allowed to stabilize.
An alternative approach to the management of infants with 
perforated NEC involves drainage of the peritoneal cavity. This 
may be performed under local anesthesia at the bedside and can 
be an effective means of stabilizing the desperately ill infant 
by relieving increased intra-abdominal pressure and allowing 
ventilation. When successful, this method also allows for drain-
age of perforated bowel by establishing a controlled fistula. 
Approximately one third of infants treated with drainage alone 
survive without requiring additional operations. Infants who do 
not respond to peritoneal drainage alone after 48 to 72 hours 
should undergo laparotomy. This procedure allows for the 
resection of frankly necrotic bowel diversion of the fecal stream 
and facilitates more effective drainage. It is noteworthy that a 
recent randomized controlled trial demonstrated that outcomes 
were similar in infants with NEC who were treated either with 
primary peritoneal drainage or laparotomy.
Necrotizing Enterocolitis in Older Infants.  Although NEC 
is typically a disease that affects preterm infants, several inde-
pendent groups have reported a tendency for early onset of NEC 
in term and near-term infants. In these patients, the pattern of 
disease was found to be different from that found in premature 
infants. Specifically, NEC in older infants typically is localized 
to the end of the small intestine and beginning of the colon, 
suggestive of an ischemic pathophysiology. There are four perti-
nent associations that are observed in term infants who develop 
NEC: congenital heart disease, in utero growth restriction, poly-
cythemia, and perinatal hypoxic-ischemic events. As with NEC 
in preterm infants, NEC in older patients is also associated with 
formula consumption and is very rare in exclusively breast-fed 
infants. Patients with NEC at full term typically present with 
bloody stools and may be characterized by rapid onset of symp-
toms and a fulminant course. Thus, although it is true that NEC 
is typically a disease of premature babies, in the appropriate 
setting, NEC can develop at any age.
Spontaneous Intestinal Perforation Versus Necrotizing 
Enterocolitis.  In addition to NEC, preterm infants with intes-
tinal pathology may develop spontaneous intestinal perforation 
(SIP). SIP is a distinct clinical entity from NEC and is essen-
tially a perforation in the terminal ileum. The histopathology of 
SIP is different from NEC. Specifically, the mucosa is intact and 
not necrotic, there is no sign of ischemia, and the submucosa is 
thinned at the site of perforation. In contrast to NEC, pneuma-
tosis intestinalis is absent in SIP. Moreover, the demographics 
of NEC and SIP are slightly different, in that patients with SIP 
tend to be slightly more premature, smaller, and more likely 
to have been on inotropic support. However, both NEC and 
SIP occur with similar frequency in low birth weight infants. 
The outcome of patients in the two groups is slightly differ-
ent. Because patients with SIP have isolated disease without 
necrosis or systemic inflammation, they tend to have a better 
outcome. In short, the diagnosis of SIP versus NEC has impor-
tant prognostic significance. The treatment strategies, however, 
are essentially the same.
Outcome.  Survival in patients with NEC is dependent on the 
stage of disease, the extent of prematurity, and the presence of 
associated comorbidities. Survival by stage has recently been 
shown to be approximately 85%, 65%, and 35% for stages I, 
II, and III, respectively. Strictures develop in 20% of medically 
or surgically treated patients, and a contrast enema is manda-
tory before re-establishing intestinal continuity. If all other 
factors are favorable, the ileostomy is closed when the child is 
between 2 and 2.5 kg. At the time of stoma closure, the entire 
intestine should be examined to search for strictures. Patients 
who develop massive intestinal necrosis are at risk of develop-
ing short bowel syndrome, particularly when the total length of 
the viable intestinal segment is less than 40 cm. These patients 
require TPN to provide adequate calories for growth and devel-
opment and may develop parenteral nutrition–associated cho-
lestasis and hepatic fibrosis. In a significant number of these 
patients, transplantation of the liver and small bowel may be 
required.
Short Bowel Syndrome
Short bowel syndrome (SBS) is an expensive, morbid condition 
with an increasing incidence. Various congenital and perinatal 
acquired conditions such as gastroschisis, malrotation, atresia, 
and NEC may lead to SBS. NEC is the most common gastro-
intestinal emergency in neonates and primarily occurs in pre-
mature infants. As rates of prematurity are increasing, so are 
the numbers of children with SBS. Medical and surgical treat-
ment options carry high dollar and human costs and morbidities 
including multiple infections and hospitalizations for vascular 
access, liver failure in conjunction with parenteral nutrition-
associated cholestasis, and death. Small bowel transplant has a 
reported 5-year graft survival of 48%, but is attended by rejec-
tion, the morbidity of major surgery, and a lifelong need for 
antirejection medication. A report on 989 grafts in 923 patients 
by the Intestine Transplant Registry reveals improving out-
comes, but 1-year graft and patient survival rates are 65% and 
77%, respectively. If successful in the human, engineered intes-
tine from autologous cells could avoid the problems of trans-
plantation: donor supply and immunosuppression. Because 
engineered small and large intestine, esophagus, stomach, and 
specific portions of the gastrointestinal tract such as the gastro-
esophageal junction form by the same process, other intestinal 
deficiencies may possibly be addressed.
1622
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Intussusception
Intussusception is the leading cause of intestinal obstruction in 
the young child. It refers to the condition whereby a segment of 
intestine becomes drawn into the lumen of the more proximal 
bowel. The process usually begins in the region of the termi-
nal ileum and extends distally into the ascending, transverse, 
or descending colon. Rarely, an intussusception may prolapse 
through the rectum.
The cause of intussusception is not clear, although one 
hypothesis suggests that hypertrophy of the Peyer’s patches 
in the terminal ileum from an antecedent viral infection acts 
as a lead point. Peristaltic action of the intestine then causes 
the bowel distal to the lead point to invaginate into itself. Idio-
pathic intussusception occurs in children between the ages of 
approximately 6 and 24 months of age. Beyond this age group, 
one should consider the possibility that a pathologic lead point 
may be present. These include polyps, malignant tumors such 
as lymphoma, enteric duplication cysts, or Meckel’s diverticu-
lum. Such intussusceptions are rarely reduced by air or con-
trast enema, and thus the lead point is identified when operative 
reduction of the intussusception is performed.
Clinical Manifestations.  Since intussusception is frequently 
preceded by a gastrointestinal viral illness, the onset may not 
be easily determined. Typically, the infant develops paroxysms 
of crampy abdominal pain and intermittent vomiting. Between 
attacks, the infant may act normally, but as symptoms progress, 
increasing lethargy develops. Bloody mucus (“currant jelly” 
stool) may be passed per rectum. Ultimately, if reduction is 
not accomplished, gangrene of the intussusceptum occurs, and 
perforation may ensue. On physical examination, an elongated 
mass is detected in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium with 
an absence of bowel in the right lower quadrant (Dance’s sign). 
The mass may be seen on plain abdominal x-ray but is more 
easily demonstrated on air or contrast enema.
Treatment.  Patients with intussusception should be assessed 
for the presence of peritonitis and for the severity of systemic 
illness. Following resuscitation and administration of IV antibi-
otics, the child is assessed for suitability to proceed with radio-
graphic versus surgical reduction. In the absence of peritonitis, 
the child should undergo radiographic reduction. If peritonitis 
is present or if the child appears systemically ill, urgent lapa-
rotomy is indicated.
In the stable patient, the air enema is diagnostic and may 
also be curative, and it is the preferred method of diagnosis and 
treatment of intussusception. Air is introduced with a manom-
eter, and the pressure that is administered is carefully moni-
tored. Under most instances, this should not exceed 120 mmHg. 
Successful reduction is marked by free reflux of air into mul-
tiple loops of small bowel and symptomatic improvement as the 
infant suddenly becomes pain free. Unless both of these signs 
are observed, it cannot be assumed that the intussusception is 
reduced. If reduction is unsuccessful and the infant remains sta-
ble, the infant should be brought back to the radiology suite for 
a repeat attempt at reduction after a few hours. This strategy has 
improved the success rate of nonoperative reduction in many 
centers. In addition, hydrostatic reduction with barium may be 
useful if pneumatic reduction is unsuccessful. The overall suc-
cess rate of radiographic reduction varies based on the experi-
ence of the center and is typically between 60% and 90%.
If nonoperative reduction is successful, the infant may be 
given oral fluids after a period of observation. Failure to reduce 
the intussusception mandates surgery. Two approaches are used. 
In an open procedure, exploration is carried out through a right 
lower quadrant incision, delivering the intussuscepted mass into 
the wound. Reduction usually can be accomplished by gentle 
distal pressure, where the intussusceptum is gently milked out 
of the intussuscipiens (Fig. 39-20). Care should be taken not to 
pull the bowel out, as this can cause damage to the bowel wall. 
The blood supply to the appendix is often compromised, and 
appendectomy is performed. If the bowel is frankly gangrenous, 
resection and primary anastomosis are performed. In experi-
enced hands, laparoscopic reduction may be performed, even in 
very young infants. This is performed using a 5-mm laparoscope 
placed in the umbilicus and two additional 5-mm ports in the 
left and right lower quadrants. The bowel is inspected, and if 
it appears to be viable, reduction is performed by milking the 
bowel or using gentle traction, although this approach is nor-
mally discouraged during manual reduction. Atraumatic bowel 
graspers allow the bowel to be handled without injuring it.
IV fluids are continued until the postoperative ileus 
subsides. Patients are started on clear liquids, and their diet 
is advanced as tolerated. Of note, recurrent intussusception 
occurs in 5% to 10% of patients, independent of whether the 
bowel is reduced radiographically or surgically. Patients pres-
ent with recurrent symptoms in the immediate postoperative 
period. Treatment involves repeat air enema, which is success-
ful in most cases. In patients who experience three or more 
episodes of intussusception, the presence of a pathologic lead 
point should be suspected and carefully evaluated using contrast 
studies. After the third episode of intussusception, many pediat-
ric surgeons will perform an exploratory laparotomy to reduce 
the bowel and to resect a pathologic lead point if identified.
Appendicitis
Presentation.  Correct diagnosis of appendicitis in children 
can be one of the most humbling and challenging tasks facing 
the pediatric surgeon. The classical presentation is known to 
all students and practitioners of surgery: generalized abdomi-
nal pain that localizes to the right lower quadrant followed by 
nausea, vomiting, fever, and localized peritoneal irritation in 
the region of McBurney’s point. When children present in this 
manner, there should be little diagnostic delay. The child should 
be made NPO, administered IV fluids and broad-spectrum anti-
biotics, and brought to the operating room for an appendectomy. 
Figure 39-20.  Open reduction of intussusception showing how the 
bowel is milked backward to relieve the obstruction.
1623
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
However, children often do not present in this manner. The 
coexistence of nonspecific viral syndromes and the inability of 
young children to describe the location and quality of their pain 
often result in diagnostic delay. As a result, children with appen-
dicitis often present with perforation, particularly those who are 
under 5 years of age. Perforation increases the length of hospital 
stay and makes the overall course of the illness significantly 
more complex.
Diagnosis of Appendicitis in Children.  Controversy exists 
regarding the role of radiographic studies in the diagnosis of 
acute appendicitis. Because children have less periappendiceal 
fat than adults, CT is less reliable in making the diagnosis. In 
addition, radiation exposure resulting from the CT scan may 
have potentially long-term adverse effects. Likewise, US is 
neither sufficiently sensitive nor specific to accurately make the 
diagnosis of appendicitis, although it is very useful for exclud-
ing ovarian causes of abdominal pain. Therefore, the diagno-
sis of appendicitis remains largely clinical, and each clinician 
should develop his or her own threshold to operate or to observe 
the patient. A reasonable practice guideline is as follows: When 
the diagnosis is clinically apparent, appendectomy should obvi-
ously be performed with minimal delay. Localized right lower 
quadrant tenderness associated with low-grade fever and leu-
kocytosis in boys should prompt surgical exploration. In girls, 
ovarian or uterine pathology must also be considered. When 
there is diagnostic uncertainty, the child may be observed, rehy-
drated, and reassessed. In girls of menstruating age, US may 
be performed to exclude ovarian pathology (cysts, torsion, or 
tumor). If all studies are negative, yet the pain persists, and the 
abdominal findings remain equivocal, diagnostic laparoscopy 
may be employed to determine the etiology of the abdominal 
pain. The appendix should be removed even if it appears to be 
normal, unless another pathologic cause of the abdominal pain 
is definitively identified and the appendectomy would substan-
tially increase morbidity.
Surgical Treatment of Appendicitis.  The definitive treat-
ment for acute appendicitis is appendectomy. Prior to surgery, 
it is important that patients receive adequate IV fluids in order to 
correct dehydration that commonly develops as a result of fever 
and vomiting in patients with appendicitis. Patients should also 
be started on antibiotics (such as a second-generation cepha-
losporin). Most surgeons will perform a laparoscopic appen-
dectomy, which may have some advantage over removing the 
appendix through a single larger incision. During the laparo-
scopic appendectomy, a small incision is made at the umbilicus, 
and two additional incisions are made in the lower abdomen. 
The appendix is typically delivered through the umbilicus, and 
all incisions are then closed with dissolvable sutures. If the 
appendix is not ruptured, the patient may start drinking liquids 
shortly after waking up from the operation and may be advanced 
to a solid diet the next day. In general, the same steps are taken 
when appendectomy is performed through an open approach. 
The most common complication after appendectomy is a 
surgical site infection. Other risks, including bleeding or dam-
age to other structures inside the abdomen, are extremely rare. 
Recovery from surgery is dependent on the individual patient. 
Most children are back to school approximately 1 week after 
surgery and usually are allowed to return to full physical activity 
after 2 to 3 weeks. During the recovery period, over-the-counter 
pain medication may be required. Older patients tend to require 
a longer time for full recovery.
Management of the Child with Perforated Appendicitis.  The 
signs and symptoms of perforated appendicitis can closely 
mimic those of gastroenteritis and include abdominal pain, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. Alternatively, the child may present 
with symptoms of intestinal obstruction. An abdominal mass 
may be present in the lower abdomen. When the symptoms 
have been present for more than 4 or 5 days and an abscess is 
suspected, it is reasonable to obtain a CT of the abdomen and 
pelvis with IV, oral, and rectal contrast to visualize the appendix 
and the presence of an associated abscess, phlegmon, or fecalith 
(Fig. 39-21).
An individualized approach is necessary for the child who 
presents with perforated appendicitis. When there is evidence 
of generalized peritonitis, intestinal obstruction, or systemic 
toxicity, the child should undergo appendectomy. This should 
be delayed only for as long as is required to ensure adequate 
fluid resuscitation and administration of broad-spectrum anti-
biotics. The operation can be performed through an open or 
laparoscopic approach. One distinct advantage of the laparo-
scopic approach is that it provides excellent visualization of the 
pelvis and all four quadrants of the abdomen. At the time of 
surgery, adhesions are gently lysed, abscess cavities are drained, 
and the appendix is removed. Drains are seldom used, and the 
skin incisions can be closed primarily. If a fecalith is identified 
outside the appendix on CT, every effort should be made to 
retrieve it and to remove it along with the appendix, if at all 
possible. Often, the child in whom symptoms have been present 
for more than 4 or 5 days will present with an abscess without 
evidence of generalized peritonitis. Under these circumstances, 
it is appropriate to perform image-guided percutaneous drainage 
of the abscess followed by broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. 
The inflammation will generally subside within several days, 
and the appendix can be safely removed as an outpatient 6 to 
8 weeks later. If the child’s symptoms do not improve or if the 
abscess is not amenable to percutaneous drainage, then laparo-
scopic or open appendectomy and abscess drainage is required. 
Patients who present with a phlegmon in the region of a perfo-
rated appendix may be managed in a similar manner. In general, 
children who are younger than 4 or 5 years of age do not respond 
as well to initial nonoperative approach because their bodies 
do not localize or isolate the inflammatory process. Thus, these 
patients are more likely to require early surgical intervention. 
Patients who have had symptoms of appendicitis for no more 
Figure 39-21.  Computed tomography scan of the abdomen show-
ing the presence of a ruptured appendix with pelvic fluid and a 
fecalith (arrow).
1624
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
than 4 days should probably undergo “early” appendectomy, 
since the inflammatory response is not as excessive during that 
initial period and the procedure can be performed safely.
Other Causes of Abdominal Pain That Mimic Appendicitis 
in Children.  As mentioned earlier, appendicitis can be one of 
the most difficult diagnoses to establish in children with abdom-
inal pain, in part because of the large number of diseases that 
present in a similar fashion. Patients with urinary tract infection 
can present very similar to those with appendicitis. However, 
patients with urinary tract infection are less likely to present 
with vomiting and are likely to also experience difficulty with 
urination, characterized by pressure, burning, and frequency. 
Constipation may be commonly confused with appendicitis in its 
earliest stages. However, patients with constipation rarely have 
fever and will not have abnormalities in their blood work. Ovar-
ian torsion can mimic appendicitis, given the severe abdominal 
pain that accompanies this condition. However, patients with 
ovarian torsion are generally asymptomatic until the acute onset 
of severe pain. By contrast, patients with appendicitis gener-
ally experience gradual onset of pain associated with nausea 
and vomiting. Finally, children and young adults are always 
at risk for the development of gastroenteritis. However, unlike 
appendicitis, patients with gastroenteritis generally present with 
persistent vomiting and occasionally diarrhea, which precedes 
the onset of the abdominal pain.
Intestinal Duplications
Duplications represent mucosa-lined structures that are in con-
tinuity with the gastrointestinal tract. Although they can occur 
at any level in the gastrointestinal tract, duplications are found 
most commonly in the ileum within the leaves of the mesen-
tery. Duplications may be long and tubular, but usually, they 
are cystic masses. In all cases, they share a common wall with 
the intestine. Symptoms associated with enteric duplication 
cysts include recurrent abdominal pain, emesis from intestinal 
obstruction, or hematochezia. Such bleeding typically results 
from ulceration in the duplication or in the adjacent intestine 
if the duplication contains ectopic gastric mucosa. On exami-
nation, a palpable mass is often identified. Children may also 
develop intestinal obstruction. Torsion may produce gangrene 
and perforation.
The ability to make a preoperative diagnosis of enteric 
duplication cyst usually depends on the presentation. CT, US, 
and technetium pertechnetate scanning can be very helpful. 
Occasionally, a duplication can be seen on small bowel follow-
through or barium enema. In the case of short duplications, 
resection of the cyst and adjacent intestine with end-to-end 
anastomosis can be performed. If resection of long duplications 
would compromise intestinal length, multiple enterotomies and 
mucosal stripping in the duplicated segment will allow the walls 
to collapse and become adherent. An alternative method is to 
divide the common wall using the GIA stapler, forming a com-
mon lumen. Patients with duplications who undergo complete 
excision without compromise of the length of remaining intes-
tine have an excellent prognosis.
Meckel’s Diverticulum
A Meckel’s diverticulum is a remnant of a portion of the 
embryonic omphalomesenteric (vitelline) duct. It is located on 
the antimesenteric border of the ileum, usually within 2 ft of 
the ileocecal valve (Fig. 39-22). It may be found incidentally 
at surgery or may present with inflammation masquerading as 
appendicitis. Perforation of a Meckel’s diverticulum may occur 
if the outpouching becomes impacted with food, leading to dis-
tention and necrosis. Occasionally, bands of tissue extend from 
the Meckel’s diverticulum to the anterior abdominal wall, and 
these may represent lead points around which internal hernias 
may develop. This is an important cause of intestinal obstruction 
in the older child who has a scarless abdomen. Similar to dupli-
cations, ectopic gastric mucosa may produce ileal ulcerations 
that bleed and lead to the passage of maroon-colored stools. 
Pancreatic mucosa may also be present. Diagnosis may be made 
by technetium pertechnetate scans when the patient presents 
with bleeding. Treatment is surgical. If the base is narrow and 
there is no mass present in the lumen of the diverticulum, a 
wedge resection of the diverticulum with transverse closure of 
the ileum can be performed. A linear stapler is especially useful 
in this circumstance. When a mass of ectopic tissue is palpable, 
if the base is wide, or when there is inflammation, it is prefer-
able to perform a resection of the involved bowel and end-to-
end ileoileostomy.
Mesenteric Cysts
Mesenteric cysts are similar to duplications in their location 
within the mesentery. However, they do not contain any mucosa 
or muscular wall. Chylous cysts may result from congenital 
lymphatic obstruction. Mesenteric cysts can cause intestinal 
obstruction or may present as an abdominal mass. The diagno-
sis may be made by abdominal US or CT. Treatment involves 
surgical excision. This may require resection of the adjacent 
intestine, particularly for extensive, multicystic lesions. In cases 
where complete excision is not possible due to the close proxim-
ity to vital structures, partial excision or marsupialization should 
be performed.
Hirschsprung’s Disease
Pathogenesis.  In his classic textbook entitled Pediatric 
Surgery, Dr. Orvar Swenson, who is eponymously associated 
with one of the classic surgical treatments for Hirschsprung’s 
disease, described this condition as follows: “Congenital mega-
colon is caused by a malformation in the pelvic parasympathetic 
system which results in the absence of ganglion cells in Auer-
bach’s plexus of a segment of distal colon. Not only is there 
an absence of ganglion cells, but the nerve fibers are large and 
excessive in number, indicating that the anomaly may be more 
extensive than the absence of ganglion cells.” This narrative 
Figure 39-22.  Operative photograph showing the presence of a 
Meckel’s diverticulum (arrow).
1625
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
of Hirschsprung’s disease is as accurate today as it was more 
than 50 years ago and summarizes the essential pathologic fea-
tures of this disease: absence of ganglion cells in Auerbach’s 
plexus and hypertrophy of associated nerve trunks. The cause 
of Hirschsprung’s disease remains incompletely understood, 
although current thinking suggests that the disease results from 
a defect in the migration of neural crest cells, which are the 
embryonic precursors of the intestinal ganglion cell. Under 
normal conditions, the neural crest cells migrate into the intes-
tine from cephalad to caudad. The process is completed by the 
twelfth week of gestation, but the migration from midtransverse 
colon to anus takes 4 weeks. During this latter period, the fetus 
is most vulnerable to defects in migration of neural crest cells. 
This may explain why most cases of aganglionosis involve the 
rectum and rectosigmoid. The length of the aganglionic segment 
of bowel is therefore determined by the most distal region that 
the migrating neural crest cells reach. In rare instances, total 
colonic aganglionosis may occur.
Recent studies have shed light on the molecular basis for 
Hirschsprung’s disease. Patients with Hirschsprung’s disease 
have an increased frequency of mutations in several genes, 
including GDNF, its receptor Ret, or its coreceptor Gfra-1. 
Moreover, mutations in these genes also lead to aganglionic 
megacolon in mice, which provides the opportunity to study 
the function of the encoded proteins. Initial investigations 
indicate that GDNF promotes the survival, proliferation, and 
migration of mixed populations of neural crest cells in culture. 
Other studies have revealed that GDNF is expressed in the gut 
in advance of migrating neural crest cells and is chemoattrac-
tive for neural crest cells in culture. These findings raise the 
possibility that mutations in the GDNF or Ret genes could lead 
to impaired neural crest migration in utero and the development 
of Hirschsprung’s disease.
Clinical Presentation.  The incidence of sporadic Hirschsprung’s 
disease is 1 in 5000 live births. There are reports of increased 
frequency of Hirschsprung’s disease in multiple generations of 
the same family. Occasionally such families have mutations in 
the genes described earlier, including the Ret gene. Because the 
aganglionic colon does not permit normal peristalsis to occur, 
the presentation of children with Hirschsprung’s disease is 
characterized by a functional distal intestinal obstruction. In the 
newborn period, the most common symptoms are abdominal 
distention, failure to pass meconium, and bilious emesis. Any 
infant who does not pass meconium beyond 48 hours of life 
must be investigated for the presence of Hirschsprung’s disease. 
Occasionally, infants present with a dramatic complication of 
Hirschsprung’s disease called enterocolitis. This pattern of pre-
sentation is characterized by abdominal distention and tender-
ness and is associated with manifestations of systemic toxicity 
that include fever, failure to thrive, and lethargy. Infants are 
often dehydrated and demonstrate a leukocytosis or increase 
in circulating band forms on hematologic evaluation. On rectal 
examination, forceful expulsion of foul-smelling liquid feces 
is typically observed and represents the accumulation of stool 
under pressure in an obstructed distal colon. Treatment includes 
rehydration, systemic antibiotics, nasogastric decompression, 
and rectal irrigations while the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s 
disease is being confirmed. In children who do not respond to 
nonoperative management, a decompressive stoma is required. 
It is important to ensure that this stoma is placed in ganglion-
containing bowel, which must be confirmed by frozen section 
at the time of stoma creation.
In approximately 20% of cases, the diagnosis of 
Hirschsprung’s disease is made beyond the newborn period. 
These children have severe constipation, which has usually been 
treated with laxatives and enemas. Abdominal distention and 
failure to thrive may also be present at diagnosis.
Diagnosis.  The definitive diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease 
is made by rectal biopsy. Samples of mucosa and submucosa 
are obtained at 1, 2, and 3 cm from the dentate line. This can be 
performed at the bedside in the neonatal period without anes-
thesia, as samples are taken in bowel that does not have somatic 
innervation and is thus not painful to the child. In older children, 
the procedure should be performed using IV sedation. The histo-
pathology of Hirschsprung’s disease is the absence of ganglion 
cells in the myenteric plexuses, increased acetylcholinesterase 
staining, and the presence of hypertrophied nerve bundles.
It is important to obtain a barium enema in children in 
whom the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease is suspected. 
This test may demonstrate the location of the transition zone 
between the dilated ganglionic colon and the distal constricted 
aganglionic rectal segment. Our practice is to obtain this test 
before instituting rectal irrigations if possible, so that the dif-
ference in size between the proximal and distal bowel is pre-
served. Although the barium enema can only suggest, but not 
reliably establish, the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease, 
it is very useful in excluding other causes of distal intesti-
nal obstruction. These include small left colon syndrome (as 
occurs in infants of diabetic mothers), colonic atresia, meco-
nium plug syndrome, or the unused colon observed in infants 
after the administration of magnesium or tocolytic agents. 
The barium enema in total colonic aganglionosis may show 
a markedly shortened colon. Some surgeons have found the 
use of rectal manometry helpful, particularly in older children, 
although it is relatively inaccurate.
Treatment.  The diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease requires 
surgery in all cases. The classic surgical approach consisted of 
a multiple-stage procedure. This included a colostomy in the 
newborn period, followed by a definitive pull-through operation 
after the child was over 10 kg.  There are three viable 
options for the definitive pull-through procedure that 
are currently used. Although individual surgeons may advocate 
one procedure over another, studies have demonstrated that 
the outcome after each type of operation is similar. For each 
of the operations that is performed, the principles of treatment 
include confirming the location in the bowel where the tran-
sition zone between ganglionic and aganglionic bowel exists, 
resecting the aganglionic segment of bowel, and performing an 
anastomosis of ganglionated bowel to either the anus or a cuff 
of rectal mucosa (Fig. 39-23).
It is now well established that a primary pull-through pro-
cedure can be performed safely, even in the newborn period. 
This approach follows the same treatment principles as a staged 
procedure and saves the patient from an additional surgical pro-
cedure. Many surgeons perform the intra-abdominal dissection 
using the laparoscope. This approach is especially useful in 
the newborn period, as this provides excellent visualization of 
the pelvis. In children with significant colonic distention, it is 
important to allow for a period of decompression using a rectal 
tube if a single-staged pull-through is to be performed. In older 
children with very distended, hypertrophied colon, it may be 
prudent to perform a colostomy to allow the bowel to decom-
press, prior to performing a pull-through procedure. However, 
6
1626
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
it should be emphasized that there is no upper age limit for per-
forming a primary pull-through.
Of the three pull-through procedures performed for 
Hirschsprung’s disease, the first is the original Swenson pro-
cedure. In this operation, the aganglionic rectum is dissected in 
the pelvis and removed down to the anus. The ganglionic colon 
is then anastomosed to the anus via a perineal approach. In the 
Duhamel procedure, dissection outside the rectum is confined 
to the retrorectal space, and the ganglionic colon is anastomosed 
posteriorly just above the anus. The anterior wall of the gangli-
onic colon and the posterior wall of the aganglionic rectum are 
anastomosed using a stapler. Although both of these procedures 
are extremely effective, they are limited by the possibility of 
damage to the parasympathetic nerves that are adjacent to the 
rectum. To circumvent this potential problem, the Soave proce-
dure involves dissection entirely within the rectum. The rectal 
mucosa is stripped from the muscular sleeve, and the gangli-
onic colon is brought through this sleeve and anastomosed to 
the anus. This operation may be performed completely from 
below. In all cases, it is critical that the level at which ganglion-
ated bowel exists be determined. Most surgeons believe that the 
anastomosis should be performed at least 5 cm from the point at 
which ganglion cells are found. This avoids performing a pull-
through in the transition zone, which is associated with a high 
incidence of complications due to inadequate emptying of the 
pull-through segment. Up to one third of patients who undergo 
a transition zone pull-through will require a reoperation.
The main complications of all of the procedures include 
postoperative enterocolitis, constipation, and anastomotic stric-
ture. As mentioned, long-term results with the three procedures 
are comparable and generally excellent in experienced hands. 
These three procedures also can be adapted for total colonic agan-
glionosis in which the ileum is used for the pull-through segment.
Anorectal Malformations
Anatomic Description.  Anorectal malformations describe 
a spectrum of congenital anomalies that include imperforate 
anus and persistent cloaca. Anorectal malformations occur in 
approximately 1 in 5000 live births and affect males and females 
almost equally. The embryologic basis includes failure of 
descent of the urorectal septum. The level to which this septum 
descends determines the type of anomaly that is present, which 
subsequently influences the surgical approach.
In patients with imperforate anus, the rectum fails to 
descend through the external sphincter complex. Instead, the 
rectal pouch ends “blindly” in the pelvis, above or below the 
levator ani muscle. In most cases, the blind rectal pouch com-
municates more distally with the genitourinary system or with 
the perineum through a fistulous tract. Traditionally, anatomic 
description of imperforate anus has been characterized as either 
“high” or “low” depending on whether the rectum ends above 
the levator ani muscle complex or partially descends through 
this muscle (Fig. 39-24). Based on this classification system, 
in male patients with high imperforate anus, the rectum usually 
Figure 39-23.  The three operations for surgical correction of 
Hirschsprung’s disease. A. The Duhamel procedure leaves the rec-
tum in place and brings ganglionic bowel into the retrorectal space. 
B. The Swenson procedure is a resection with end-to-end anastomo-
sis performed by exteriorizing bowel ends through the anus. C. The 
Soave operation is performed by endorectal dissection and removal 
of mucosa from the aganglionic distal segment and bringing the 
ganglionic bowel down to the anus within the seromuscular tunnel.
Figure 39-24.  Low imperforate anus in a male. Note the well-
developed buttocks. The perineal fistula was found at the midline 
raphe.
1627
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
ends as a fistula into the membranous urethra. In females, high 
imperforate anus often occurs in the context of a persistent clo-
aca. In both males and females, low lesions are associated with 
a fistula to the perineum. In males, the fistula connects with the 
median raphe of the scrotum or penis. In females, the fistula 
may end within the vestibule of the vagina, which is located 
immediately outside the hymen or at the perineum.
Because this classification system is somewhat arbitrary, 
Peña proposed a classification system that specifically and 
unambiguously describes the location of the fistulous opening. 
In males, the fistula may communicate with: (a) the perineum 
(cutaneous perineal fistula); (b) the lowest portion of the poste-
rior urethra (rectourethral bulbar fistula); (c) the upper portion 
of the posterior urethra (rectourethral prostatic fistula); or (d) 
the bladder neck (rectovesicular fistula). In females, the fistula 
may open to the perineum between the female genitalia and 
the center of the sphincter (cutaneous perineal fistula) or into 
the vestibule of the vagina (vestibular fistula) (Fig. 39-25). In 
both sexes, the rectum may end in a completely blind fashion 
(imperforate anus without fistula). In rare cases, patients may 
have a normal anal canal, yet there may be total atresia or severe 
stenosis of the rectum.
The most frequent defect in males is imperforate anus 
with rectourethral fistula, followed by rectoperineal fistula then 
rectovesical or rectobladder neck fistula. In females, the most 
frequent defect is the rectovestibular fistula, followed by the 
cutaneous perineal fistula. The third most common defect in 
females is the persistent cloaca. This lesion represents a wide 
spectrum of malformations in which the rectum, vagina, and 
urinary tract meet and fuse into a single common channel. On 
physical examination, a single perineal orifice is observed and 
is located at the place where the urethra normally opens. Typi-
cally, the external genitalia are hypoplastic.
Associated Malformations.  Approximately 60% of patients 
have an associated malformation. The most common is a urinary 
tract defect, which occurs in approximately 50% of patients. 
Skeletal defects are also seen, and the sacrum is most com-
monly involved. Spinal cord anomalies, especially tethered 
cored, are common, particularly in children with high lesions. 
Gastrointestinal anomalies occur, most commonly EA. Cardiac 
anomalies may be noted, and occasionally patients present with 
a constellation of defects as part of the VACTERLL syndrome 
(described earlier).
Management of Patients with Imperforate Anus.  Patients 
with imperforate anus are usually stable, and the diagnosis is 
readily apparent. Despite the obstruction, the abdomen is ini-
tially not distended, and there is rarely any urgency to inter-
vene. The principles of management center around diagnosing 
the type of defect that is present (high vs. low) and evaluating 
the presence of associated anomalies. It may take up to 24 hours 
before the presence of a fistula on the skin is noted, and thus it is 
important to observe the neonate for some period before defini-
tive surgery is undertaken. All patients should therefore have an 
orogastric tube placed and be monitored for the appearance of 
meconium in or around the perineum or in the urine. Investiga-
tion for associated defects should include an US of the abdomen 
to assess for the presence of urinary tract anomaly. Other tests 
should include an echocardiogram and spinal radiographs. A 
US of the spine should be performed to look for the presence of 
a tethered cord. To further classify the location of the fistula as 
either “high” vs. “low,” a lateral abdominal radiograph can be 
obtained with a radiopaque marker on the perineum. By placing 
the infant in the inverted position, the distance between the most 
distal extent of air in the rectum and the perineal surface can be 
measured. This study is imprecise, however, and may add little 
to the overall management of these patients.
The surgical management of infants with imperforate anus 
is determined by the anatomic defect. In general, when a low 
lesion is present, only a perineal operation is required without 
a colostomy. Infants with a high lesion require a colostomy in 
the newborn period, followed by a pull-through procedure at 
approximately 2 months of age. When a persistent cloaca is 
present, the urinary tract needs to be carefully evaluated at the 
time of colostomy formation to ensure that normal emptying 
can occur and to determine whether the bladder needs to be 
drained by means of a vesicostomy. If there is any doubt about 
the type of lesion, it is safer to perform a colostomy rather than 
jeopardize the infant’s long-term chances for continence by an 
injudicious perineal operation.
The type of pull-through procedure favored by most pedi-
atric surgeons today is the posterior sagittal anorectoplasty 
(PSARP) procedure, as described by Peña and DeVries. This 
involves placing the patient in the prone jackknife position, 
dividing the levator ani and external sphincter complex in the 
midline posteriorly, dividing the communication between the 
gastrointestinal tract and the urinary tract, and bringing down 
the rectum after sufficient length is achieved. The muscles are 
then reconstructed and sutured to the rectum. The outcome 
of 1192 patients who had undergone this procedure has been 
reviewed by Peña and Hong. Seventy-five percent of patients 
were found to have voluntary bowel movements, and nearly 
40% were considered totally continent. As a rule, patients with 
high lesions demonstrate an increased incidence of inconti-
nence, whereas those with low lesions are more likely to be 
constipated. Management of patients with high imperforate anus 
can be greatly facilitated using a laparoscopic-assisted approach, 
in which the patient is operated on in the supine position, and 
the rectum is mobilized down to the fistulous connection to the 
bladder neck. This fistulous connection is then divided, and the 
rectum is completely mobilized down to below the peritoneal 
reflection. The operation then proceeds at the perineum, and the 
location of the muscle complex is determined using the nerve 
stimulator. A Veress needle is then advanced through the skin 
at the indicated site, with the laparoscope providing guidance to 
the exact intrapelvic orientation. Dilators are then placed over 
Figure 39-25.  Imperforate anus in a female. A catheter has been 
placed into the fistula, which is in the vestibule of the vagina.
1628
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
the Veress needle, the rectum is pulled through this peritoneal 
opening, and an anoplasty is performed.
JAUNDICE
The Approach to the Jaundiced Infant
Jaundice is present during the first week of life in 60% of term 
infants and 80% of preterm infants. There is usually accumula-
tion of unconjugated bilirubin, but there may also be deposition 
of direct bilirubin. During fetal life, the placenta is the principal 
route of elimination of unconjugated bilirubin. In the newborn 
infant, bilirubin is conjugated through the activity of glucoronyl 
transferase. In the conjugated form, bilirubin is water soluble, 
which results in its excretion into the biliary system and then 
into the gastrointestinal tract. Newborns have a relatively high 
level of circulating hemoglobin and relative immaturity of the 
conjugating machinery. This results in a transient accumula-
tion of bilirubin in the tissues, which is manifested as jaundice. 
Physiologic jaundice is evident by the second or third day of 
life and usually resolves within approximately 5 to 7 days. By 
definition, jaundice that persists beyond 2 weeks is considered 
pathologic.
Pathologic jaundice may be due to biliary obstruction, 
increased hemoglobin load, or liver dysfunction. The workup 
of the jaundiced infant therefore should include a search for 
the following possibilities: (a) obstructive disorders, including 
biliary atresia, choledochal cyst, and inspissated bile syndrome; 
(b) hematologic disorders, including ABO incompatibility, Rh 
incompatibility, and spherocytosis; (c) metabolic disorders, 
including α1-antitrypsin deficiency, galactosemia, and pyruvate 
kinase deficiency; and (d) congenital infection, including syphi-
lis and rubella.
Biliary Atresia
Pathogenesis.  Biliary atresia is a rare disease associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality. This disease is character-
ized by a fibroproliferative obliteration of the biliary tree, which 
progresses toward hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and end-stage liver 
failure. The incidence of this disease is approximately 1 in 8000 
to 1 in 18,000. The etiology of biliary atresia is likely multi-
factorial. In the classic textbook Abdominal Surgery of Infancy 
and Childhood, Ladd and Gross described the cause of biliary 
atresia as an “arrest of development during the solid stage of 
bile duct formation.” Previously proposed theories on the eti-
ology of biliary atresia have focused on defects in hepatogen-
esis, prenatal vasculogenesis, immune dysregulation, infectious 
agents, and exposure to toxins. More recently, genetic mutations 
in the cfc1 gene, implicated in left-right axis determinations, 
were identified in patients with biliary atresia-splenic malforma-
tion syndrome. Additionally, the detection of a higher incidence 
of maternal microchimerism in the livers of males with biliary 
atresia has led to the suggestion that consequent expression of 
maternal antigens may lead to an autoimmune process leading 
to inflammation and obliteration of the biliary tree. Recent ani-
mal studies strongly implicate perinatal exposure to reovirus or 
rotavirus. Such viral exposure may lead to periportal inflamma-
tion mediated by interferon-γ and other cytokines.
Clinical Presentation.  Infants with biliary atresia present 
with jaundice at birth or shortly thereafter. The diagnosis of bili-
ary atresia is frequently not entertained by pediatricians in part 
because physiologic jaundice of the newborn is so common and 
biliary atresia is so uncommon. As such, it is not unusual for there 
to be a delay in diagnosis. However, infants with biliary atresia 
characteristically have acholic, pale gray–appearing stools, sec-
ondary to obstructed bile flow. With further passage of time, these 
infants manifest progressive failure to thrive, and if untreated, 
they develop stigmata of liver failure and portal hypertension, 
particularly splenomegaly and esophageal varices.
The obliterative process of biliary atresia involves the 
common duct, cystic duct, one or both hepatic ducts, and the 
gallbladder, in a variety of combinations. The histopathology 
of patients with biliary atresia includes inflammatory changes 
within the parenchyma of the liver, as well as fibrous deposi-
tion at the portal plates that is observed on trichrome staining 
of frozen tissue sections. In certain cases, bile duct prolifera-
tion may be seen, a relatively nonspecific marker of liver injury. 
Approximately 25% of patients with biliary atresia have coin-
cidental malformations, often associated with polysplenia and 
which may include intestinal malrotation, preduodenal portal 
vein, and intrahepatic vena cava.
Diagnosis.  In general, the diagnosis of biliary atresia is made 
using a combination of studies, as no single test is sufficiently 
sensitive or specific. Fractionation of the serum bilirubin is 
performed to determine if the associated hyperbilirubinemia 
is conjugated or unconjugated. Workup commonly includes 
the analysis of TORCH infection titers as well as viral hepati-
tis. Typically, US is performed to assess the presence of other 
causes of biliary tract obstruction including choledochal cyst. 
The absence of a gallbladder is highly suggestive of the diag-
nosis of biliary atresia. However, the presence of a gallblad-
der does not exclude the diagnosis of biliary atresia because in 
approximately 10% of biliary atresia patients, the distal biliary 
tract is patent and a gallbladder may be visualized, even though 
the proximal ducts are atretic. It is important to note that the 
intrahepatic bile ducts are never dilated in patients with biliary 
atresia. In many centers, a nuclear medicine scan using tech-
netium-99m iminodiacetic acid, performed after pretreatment 
of the patient with phenobarbital, has proven to be an accurate 
and reliable study. If radionuclide appears in the intestine, there 
is patency of the biliary tree and the diagnosis of biliary atresia 
is excluded. If radionuclide is concentrated by the liver but not 
excreted despite treatment with phenobarbital and the metabolic 
screen, particularly α1-antitrypsin determination, is normal, the 
presumptive diagnosis is biliary atresia. A percutaneous liver 
biopsy might potentially distinguish between biliary atresia and 
other sources of jaundice such as neonatal hepatitis. When these 
tests point to or cannot exclude the diagnosis of biliary atresia, 
surgical exploration is warranted. At surgery, a cholangiogram 
may be performed if possible, using the gallbladder as a point 
of access. This may be performed using a laparoscope. The 
cholangiogram demonstrates the anatomy of the biliary tree, 
determines whether extrahepatic bile duct atresia is present, and 
evaluates whether there is distal bile flow into the duodenum. 
The cholangiogram may demonstrate hypoplasia of the extra-
hepatic biliary system. This condition is associated with hepatic 
parenchymal disorders that cause severe intrahepatic cholesta-
sis, including α1-antitrypsin deficiency and biliary hypoplasia 
(Alagille’s syndrome). Alternatively, a cursory assessment of 
the extrahepatic biliary tree may clearly delineate the atresia.
Inspissated Bile Syndrome.  This term is applied to patients 
with normal biliary tracts who have persistent obstructive jaun-
dice. Increased viscosity of bile and obstruction of the canaliculi 
1629
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
are implicated as causes. The condition has been seen in infants 
receiving parenteral nutrition, but it is also encountered in con-
ditions associated with hemolysis or in cystic fibrosis. In some 
instances, no etiologic factors can be defined. Neonatal hepatitis 
may present in a similar fashion to biliary atresia. This disease 
is characterized by persistent jaundice due to acquired biliary 
inflammation without obliteration of the bile ducts. There may 
be a viral etiology, and the disease is usually self-limited. In this 
case, cholangiography is both diagnostic and therapeutic.
Treatment.  If the diagnosis of biliary atresia is confirmed 
intraoperatively, then surgical treatment is undertaken at the 
same setting. Currently, first-line therapy consists of creation of 
a hepatoportoenterostomy, as described by Kasai. The purpose 
of this procedure is to promote bile flow into the intestine. The 
procedure is based on Kasai’s observation that the fibrous tis-
sue at the porta hepatis invests microscopically patent biliary 
ductules that, in turn, communicate with the intrahepatic ductal 
system (Fig. 39-26). Transecting this fibrous tissue at the portal 
plate, invariably encountered cephalad to the bifurcating portal 
vein, opens these channels and establishes bile flow into a surgi-
cally constructed intestinal conduit, usually a Roux-en-Y limb 
of jejunum (Fig. 39-27). Some authors believe that an intus-
suscepted antireflux valve is useful in preventing retrograde 
bile reflux, although the data suggest that it does not impact 
outcome. A liver biopsy is performed at the time of surgery 
to determine the degree of hepatic fibrosis that is present. The 
diameter of bile ducts at the portal plate is predictive of likeli-
hood of long-term success of biliary drainage through the porto-
enterostomy. Numerous studies also suggest that the likelihood 
of surgical success is inversely related to the age at the time 
of portoenterostomy.  Infants treated prior to 60 days of 
life are more likely to achieve successful and long-term 
biliary drainage than older infants. Although the outlook is less 
favorable for patients after the twelfth week, it is reasonable to 
proceed with surgery even beyond this time point, as the alter-
native is certain liver failure. It is noteworthy that a significant 
number of patients have had favorable outcomes after undergo-
ing portoenterostomy despite advanced age at time of diagnosis.
Bile drainage is anticipated when the operation is car-
ried out early; however, bile flow does not necessarily imply 
cure. Approximately one third of patients remain symptom 
free after portoenterostomy; the remainder require liver trans-
plantation due to progressive liver failure. Independent risk 
factors that predict failure of the procedure include bridging 
liver fibrosis at the time of surgery and postoperative cholan-
gitic episodes. A review of the data of the Japanese Biliary 
Atresia Registry (JBAR), which includes the results of 1381 
patients, showed that the 10-year survival rate was 53% with-
out transplantation and 66.7% with transplantation. A com-
mon postoperative complication is cholangitis. There is no 
effective strategy to completely eliminate this complication, 
and the effectiveness of long-term prophylactic antibiotics has 
not been fully resolved. The Childhood Liver Research and 
Education Network (ChiLDREN, formerly the Biliary Atre-
sia Research Consortium) is an active consortium of 15 chil-
dren’s hospitals in the United States, funded by the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), which studies rare cholestatic liver 
diseases of infants and children (http://childrennetwork.org/). 
The primary disease of research interest is biliary atresia, as 
four of the seven active studies are dedicated to biliary atresia. 
Two of these four biliary atresia studies are therapeutic trials. 
Currently, enrollment for an NIH-funded, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to determine if adju-
vant steroids improves outcome of infants undergoing Kasai 
portoenterostomy has been completed. Treatment arms will 
be unblended, and outcomes of patients in this trial in terms of 
successful biliary drainage and survival with patients’ native 
livers will be determined. Additionally, ChiLDREN is about 
to embark on a phase I trial looking at the safety and efficacy 
of adjuvant IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) given to infants with 
biliary atresia following Kasai portoenterostomy.
Figure 39-26.  Operative photograph showing Kasai portoenteros-
tomy. Arrows denote site of the anastomosis. Note the engorged liver.
Figure 39-27.  Schematic illustration of the Kasai portoenteros-
tomy for biliary atresia. An isolated limb of jejunum is brought 
to the porta hepatis and anastomosed to the transected ducts at the 
liver plate.
7
1630
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
From this consortium, Superina and colleagues recently 
reported on the prospectively collected clinical, surgical, and 
outcomes data on 244 patients with biliary atresia. Notably, 
over 80% of infants manifested Ohi type III variant (atresia of 
the porta hepatis) compared with 10% with Ohi type I (atresia 
of the common bile duct) or 7% with Ohi type II (atresia of 
the hepatic duct). Outcomes analysis revealed a significantly 
greater survival with one’s native liver for infants with type 
I compared with those with type II or III. Moreover, infants 
with Ohi distal subtype a (patent common bile duct) had sig-
nificantly improved survival compared to those with Ohi distal 
subtypes b, c, or d (nonpatent common bile duct). Improved 
survival with the child’s native liver was also observed in this 
study in patients less than 75 days old at time of Kasai portoen-
terostomy, no ascites at exploration, nonnodular liver, and low 
fibrosis score. Importantly, clearance of jaundice as defined by 
achieving a total bilirubin of less than 2 mg/dL within 3 months 
after portoenterostomy was highly predictive of survival with 
the native liver. The effect of hospital volume was not the focus 
of this publication. However, Davenport and colleagues recently 
reported on their experience in the United Kingdom where sur-
gical care of infants with biliary atresia has been centralized 
to three hospitals. The authors report successful clearance of 
jaundice in 55% of patients, which is considerably better than 
clearance rates reported from the United States, France, or Swit-
zerland and comparable to clearance rates reported from Taiwan 
where there is centralization of care.
Improved survival with one’s native liver following Kasai 
portoenterostomy has previously been noted by numerous 
authors, as in the ChiLDREN consortium. Tseng and colleagues 
reported on improved rates of early diagnosis of biliary atresia 
(<60 days of age) following implementation of a national screen-
ing program for infant stool color in Taiwan. Given that early 
diagnosis of biliary atresia is associated with greater success of 
bile drainage, the authors reasonably speculate that higher rates 
of early diagnosis of biliary atresia nationally will translate into 
improved outcomes following the Kasai procedure.
Previous authors have published merits of revising the 
portoenterostomy in select patients if drainage of bile stops. 
Recently, Bondoc and colleagues reported on their experience 
with revision of portoenterostomies. Specifically, the authors 
reported on 183 patients who underwent Kasai portoenteros-
tomy for biliary atresia, of whom 24 underwent revision for 
recurrence of nondrainage after successful bypass. Of the 
patients who underwent revision for nondrainage, 75% ulti-
mately again achieved drainage after the second procedure, of 
whom nearly 50% survived long term with their native livers. 
The authors conclude that in selected patients in whom bile flow 
was established following the Kasai procedure and who then 
lost that flow, revision of the portoenterostomy is a reasonable 
treatment option with good success.
Choledochal Cyst
Classification.  The term choledochal cyst refers to a spec-
trum of congenital biliary tract disorders that were previously 
grouped under the name idiopathic dilation of the common bile 
duct. After the classification system proposed by Alonso-Lej, 
five types of choledochal cyst are described. Type I cyst is char-
acterized by fusiform dilatation of the bile duct. This is the most 
common type and is found in 80% to 90% of cases. A type II 
choledochal cyst appears as an isolated diverticulum protruding 
from the wall of the common bile duct. The cyst may be joined 
to the common bile duct by a narrow stalk. Type III choledochal 
cysts arise from the intraduodenal portion of the common bile 
duct and are also known as choledochoceles. Type IVA cysts 
consist of multiple dilatations of the intrahepatic and extra-
hepatic bile ducts. Type IVB choledochal cysts are multiple 
dilatations involving only the extrahepatic bile ducts. Type V 
(Caroli’s disease) consists of multiple dilatations limited to the 
intrahepatic bile ducts.
Choledochal cyst is most appropriately considered the pre-
dominant feature in a constellation of pathologic abnormalities 
that can occur within the pancreato-biliary system. Frequently 
associated with choledochal cyst is an anomalous junction of the 
pancreatic and common bile ducts. The etiology of choledochal 
cyst is controversial. Babbit proposed an abnormal pancreatic 
and biliary duct junction, with the formation of a “common 
channel” into which pancreatic enzymes are secreted. This 
process results in weakening of the bile duct wall by gradual 
enzymatic destruction, leading to dilatation, inflammation, and 
finally cyst formation. Not all patients with choledochal cyst 
demonstrate an anatomic common channel, which raises ques-
tions regarding the accuracy of this model.
Clinical Presentation.  Choledochal cyst is more common in 
females than in males (4:1). Typically these present in children 
beyond the toddler age group. The classic symptom triad con-
sists of abdominal pain, mass, and jaundice. However, this com-
plex is actually encountered in fewer than half of the patients. 
The more usual presentation is that of episodic abdominal pain, 
often recurring over the course of months or years and generally 
associated with only minimal jaundice that may escape detec-
tion. If left undiagnosed, patients may develop cholangitis or 
pancreatitis. Cholangitis may lead to the development of cir-
rhosis and portal hypertension. Choledochal cyst can present 
in the newborn period, where the symptoms are very similar to 
those of biliary atresia. Often neonates will have an abdominal 
mass at presentation.
Diagnosis.  Choledochal cyst is frequently diagnosed in the 
fetus at a screening prenatal US. In the older child or adolescent, 
abdominal ultrasonography may reveal a cystic structure aris-
ing from the biliary tree. CT will confirm the diagnosis. These 
studies will demonstrate the dimensions of the cyst and define 
its relationship to the vascular structures in the porta hepatis, 
as well as the intrahepatic ductal configuration. Endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is reserved for 
patients in whom confusion remains after evaluation by less 
invasive imaging modalities. Magnetic resonance cholangio-
pancreatography may provide a more detailed depiction of the 
anatomy of the cyst and its relationship to the bifurcation of the 
hepatic ducts and into the pancreas.
Treatment.  The cyst wall is composed of fibrous tissue and 
is devoid of mucosal lining. As a result, the treatment of cho-
ledochal cyst is surgical excision followed by biliary-enteric 
reconstruction. There is no role for internal drainage by cysto-
enterostomy, which leaves the cyst wall intact and leads to the 
inevitable development of cholangitis. Rarely, choledochal cyst 
can lead to the development of a biliary tract malignancy. This 
provides a further rationale for complete cyst excision.
Resection of the cyst requires circumferential dissection. 
The posterior plane between the cyst and portal vein must be 
carefully dissected to accomplish removal. The pancreatic 
duct, which may enter the distal cyst, is vulnerable to injury 
during distal cyst excision but can be avoided by avoiding 
1631
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
entry into the pancreatic parenchyma. In cases where the 
degree of pericystic inflammation is dense, it may be unsafe 
to attempt complete cyst removal. In this instance, it is rea-
sonable to dissect within the posterior wall of the cyst, which 
allows the inner lining of the back wall to be dissected free 
from the outer layer that directly overlies the portal vascular 
structures. The lateral and anterior cyst, as well as the internal 
aspect of the back wall, is removed, yet the outer posterior wall 
remains behind. Cyst excision is accomplished, and the proxi-
mal bile duct is anastomosed to the intestinal tract typically 
via a Roux-en Y jejunal limb. More recently, laparoscopic-
assisted resections of choledochal cysts have been described. 
In these cases, the end-to-side jejunojejunostomy is performed 
extracorporeally, but the remainder of the procedure is com-
pleted using minimally invasive techniques.
The prognosis for children who have undergone complete 
excision of choledochal cyst is excellent. Complications include 
anastomotic stricture, cholangitis, and intrahepatic stone forma-
tion. These complications may develop a long time after surgery 
has been completed.
DEFORMITIES OF THE ABDOMINAL WALL
Embryology of the Abdominal Wall
The abdominal wall is formed by four separate embryologic 
folds: cephalic, caudal, right, and left lateral folds. Each of these 
is composed of somatic and splanchnic layers and develops 
toward the anterior center portion of the coelomic cavity, join-
ing to form a large umbilical ring that surrounds the two umbili-
cal arteries, the vein, and the yolk sac or omphalomesenteric 
duct. These structures are covered by an outer layer of amnion, 
and the entire unit composes the umbilical cord. Between the 
fifth and tenth weeks of fetal development, the intestinal tract 
undergoes rapid growth outside the abdominal cavity within 
the proximal portion of the umbilical cord. As development is 
completed, the intestine gradually returns to the abdominal cav-
ity. Contraction of the umbilical ring completes the process of 
abdominal wall formation.
Failure of the cephalic fold to close results in sternal 
defects such as congenital absence of the sternum. Failure of 
the caudal fold to close results in exstrophy of the bladder and, 
in more extreme cases, exstrophy of the cloaca. Interruption of 
central migration of the lateral folds results in omphalocele. 
Gastroschisis, originally thought to be a variant of omphalocele, 
possibly results from a fetal accident in the form of intrauterine 
rupture of a hernia of the umbilical cord, although other hypoth-
eses have been advanced.
Umbilical Hernia
Failure of the umbilical ring to close results in a central defect 
in the linea alba. The resulting umbilical hernia is covered by 
normal umbilical skin and subcutaneous tissue, but the fascial 
defect allows protrusion of abdominal contents. Hernias less 
than a centimeter in size at the time of birth usually will close 
spontaneously by 4 to 5 years of life and, in most cases, should 
not undergo early repair. Sometimes the hernia is large enough 
that the protrusion is disfiguring and disturbing to both the 
child and the family. In such circumstances, early repair may be 
advisable (Fig. 39-28).
Umbilical hernias are generally asymptomatic protrusions 
of the abdominal wall. They are generally noted by parents 
or physicians shortly after birth. All families of patients with 
umbilical hernia should be counseled about signs of incarcera-
tion, which is rare in umbilical hernias and more common in 
smaller (≤1 cm) than larger defects. Incarceration presents with 
abdominal pain, bilious emesis, and a tender, hard mass protrud-
ing from the umbilicus. This constellation of symptoms man-
dates immediate exploration and repair of the hernia to avoid 
strangulation. More commonly, the child is asymptomatic and 
treatment is governed by the size of the defect, the age of the 
patient, and the concerns that the child and family have regard-
ing the cosmetic appearance of the abdomen. When the defect 
is small and spontaneous closure is likely, most surgeons will 
delay surgical correction until 5 years of age. If closure does not 
occur by this time or a younger child has a very large or symp-
tomatic hernia, it is reasonable to proceed to repair.
Repair of uncomplicated umbilical hernia is performed 
under general anesthesia as an outpatient procedure. A small 
curving incision that fits into the skin crease of the umbilicus is 
made, and the sac is dissected free from the overlying skin. The 
fascial defect is repaired with permanent or long-lasting absorb-
able, interrupted sutures that are placed in a transverse plane. 
The skin is closed using subcuticular sutures. The postopera-
tive recovery is typically uneventful, and recurrence is rare, but 
more common in children with elevated intra-abdominal pres-
sures such as those with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
Patent Urachus
During the development of the coelomic cavity, there is free 
communication between the urinary bladder and the abdominal 
wall through the urachus, which exits adjacent to the omphalo-
mesenteric duct. Persistence of this tract results in a communi-
cation between the bladder and the umbilicus. The first sign of 
a patent urachus is moisture or urine flow from the umbilicus. 
Recurrent urinary tract infections can result. The urachus may 
be partially obliterated, with a remnant beneath the umbilicus 
in the extraperitoneal position as an isolated cyst that may be 
identified by US. A urachal cyst usually presents as an inflam-
matory mass inferior to the umbilicus. Initial treatment is drain-
age of the infected cyst followed by cyst excision as a separate 
procedure once the inflammation has resolved.
Figure 39-28.  Umbilical hernia in a 1-year-old female.
1632
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
In the child with a persistently draining umbilicus, a diag-
nosis of patent urachus should be considered. The differential 
diagnosis includes an umbilical granuloma, which generally 
responds to local application of silver nitrate. The diagnosis of 
patent urachus is confirmed by umbilical exploration. The ura-
chal tract is excised and the bladder is closed with an absorbable 
suture. A patent vitelline duct may also present with umbilical 
drainage. In this circumstance, there is a communication with 
the small intestine, often at the site of a Meckel’s diverticulum. 
Treatment includes umbilical exploration with resection of the 
duct remnant (Fig. 39-29).
Omphalocele
Presentation.  Omphalocele refers to a congenital defect of 
the abdominal wall in which the bowel and solid viscera are 
covered by peritoneum and amniotic membrane (Fig. 39-30). 
The umbilical cord inserts into the sac. Omphalocele can vary 
from a small defect with intestinal contents to giant omphalo-
cele in which the abdominal wall defect measures 4 cm or more 
in diameter and contains liver. The overall incidence is approxi-
mately 1 in 5000 live births, with 1 in 10,000 that are giant 
omphaloceles. Omphalocele occurs in association with special 
syndromes such as exstrophy of the cloaca (vesicointestinal 
fissure), the Beckwith-Wiedemann constellation of anomalies 
(macroglossia, macrosomia, hypoglycemia, and visceromegaly 
and omphalocele), and Cantrell’s pentalogy (lower thoracic 
wall malformations [cleft sternum], ectopia cordis, epigastric 
omphalocele, anterior midline diaphragmatic hernia, and car-
diac anomalies). There is a 60% to 70% incidence of associated 
anomalies, especially cardiac (20%–40% of cases) and chromo-
somal abnormalities.  Chromosomal anomalies are more 
common in children with smaller defects. Omphalocele is 
associated with prematurity (10%–50% of cases) and intrauter-
ine growth restriction (20% of cases).
Treatment.  Immediate treatment of an infant with ompha-
locele consists of attending to the vital signs and maintaining 
the body temperature. A blood glucose should be evaluated 
because of the association with Beckwith-Wiedemann. The 
omphalocele should be covered to reduce fluid loss, but moist 
dressings may result in heat loss and are not indicated. No 
pressure should be placed on the omphalocele sac in an effort 
to reduce its contents, as this maneuver may increase the risk 
of rupture of the sac or may interfere with abdominal venous 
return. Prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotics should be 
administered in case of rupture. The subsequent treatment and 
outcome are determined by the size of the omphalocele. In 
general terms, small to medium-sized defects have a signifi-
cantly better prognosis than extremely large defects in which 
the liver is present. In these cases, not only is the management 
of the abdominal wall defect a significant challenge, but these 
patients often have concomitant pulmonary insufficiency that 
can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. If possible 
and if the pulmonary status will permit it, a primary repair of 
the omphalocele should be undertaken. This involves resec-
tion of the omphalocele membrane and closure of the fascia. 
A layer of prosthetic material may be required to achieve clo-
sure. In infants with a giant omphalocele, the defect cannot be 
closed primarily because there is not adequate intraperitoneal 
domain to reduce the viscera (see Fig. 39-30). Some infants 
may have associated congenital anomalies that complicate 
surgical repair, and because cardiac anomalies are common, 
an echocardiogram should be obtained prior to any proce-
dure. If repair is contraindicated, a nonoperative approach 
can be used. The omphalocele sac can be treated with topi-
cal treatments. Various authors describe success with iodine-
containing solutions, silver sulfadiazine, or saline, and some 
surgeons rotate these solutions because of the impact of iodine 
on the thyroid and the difficulty of cleaning off all of the 
silver sulfadiazine and its association with leukopenia. It typi-
cally takes 2 to 3 months before re-epithelialization occurs. In 
the past, mercury compounds were used, but they have been 
discontinued because of associated systemic toxicity. After 
epithelialization has occurred, attempts should be made to 
achieve closure of the anterior abdominal wall, but they may 
be delayed by associated pulmonary insufficiency. Such pro-
cedures typically require complex measures to achieve skin 
closure, including the use of biosynthetic materials or com-
ponent separation. In cases of giant omphalocele, prolonged 
hospitalization is typical.
Figure 39-29.  Patent vitelline duct. Note the communication 
between the umbilicus and the small bowel at the site of a Meckel’s 
diverticulum.
8
Figure 39-30.  Giant omphalocele in a newborn male.
1633
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Gastroschisis
Presentation.  Gastroschisis represents a congenital anomaly 
characterized by a defect in the anterior abdominal wall through 
which the intestinal contents freely protrude. Unlike omphalo-
cele, there is no overlying sac and the size of the defect is usu-
ally <4 cm. The abdominal wall defect is located at the junction 
of the umbilicus and normal skin and is almost always to the 
right of the umbilicus (Fig. 39-31). The umbilicus becomes 
partly detached, allowing free communication with the abdomi-
nal cavity. The appearance of the bowel provides some infor-
mation with respect to the in utero timing of the defect. The 
intestine may be normal in appearance, suggesting that the rup-
ture occurred relatively late during the pregnancy. More com-
monly, however, the intestine is thick, edematous, discolored, 
and covered with exudate, implying a more longstanding pro-
cess. Progression to full enteral feeding is usually delayed, with 
diminished motility that may be related to these changes.
Unlike infants born with omphalocele, associated anoma-
lies are not usually seen with gastroschisis except for a 10% 
rate of intestinal atresia. This defect can readily be diag-
nosed on prenatal US (Fig. 39-32). There is no advantage 
to performing a cesarean section instead of a vaginal deliv-
ery. In a decade-long retrospective review, early delivery did 
not affect the thickness of bowel peel, yet patients delivered 
before 36 weeks had significantly longer length of stay in the 
hospital and time to enteral feeds. Based on these findings, fetal 
well-being should be the primary determinant of the timing of 
delivery for gastroschisis.
Treatment.  All infants born with gastroschisis require urgent 
surgical treatment. Of equal importance, these infants require 
vigorous fluid resuscitation in the range of 150 to 180 cc/kg/d to 
replace significant evaporative fluid losses. In many instances, 
the intestine can be returned to the abdominal cavity, and a pri-
mary surgical closure of the abdominal wall is performed. Some 
surgeons believe that they can facilitate primary closure with 
mechanical stretching of the abdominal wall, thorough orogas-
tric suctioning with foregut decompression, rectal irrigation, 
and evacuation of meconium. Care must be taken to prevent 
markedly increased abdominal pressure during the reduction, 
which will lead to compression of the inferior vena cava, respi-
ratory embarrassment, and abdominal compartment syndrome. 
To avoid this complication, it is helpful to monitor the bladder 
or airway pressures during reduction. In infants whose intestine 
has become thickened and edematous, it may be impossible to 
reduce the bowel into the peritoneal cavity in the immediate 
postnatal period. Under such circumstances, a plastic spring-
loaded silo can be placed onto the bowel and secured beneath 
the fascia or a sutured silastic silo constructed. The silo cov-
ers the bowel and allows for graduated reduction on a daily 
basis as the edema in the bowel wall decreases (Fig. 39-33). 
It is important to ensure that the silo-fascia junction does not 
become a constricting point or “funnel” in which case the intes-
tine will be injured upon return to the peritoneum. In this case, 
the fascial opening must be enlarged. Surgical closure can usu-
ally be accomplished within approximately 1 to 2 weeks. A 
prosthetic piece of material may be required to bring the edges 
of the fascia together. If an atresia is noted at the time of closure, 
Figure 39-31.  Gastroschisis in a newborn. Note the location of the 
umbilical cord and the edematous, thickened bowel.
Figure 39-32.  Prenatal ultrasound of a 30-week gestation fetus 
with a gastroschisis. Arrows point to the bowel outside within the 
amniotic fluid.
8
Figure 39-33.  Use of a silo in a patient with gastroschisis to allow 
the bowel wall edema to resolve to facilitate subsequent closure of 
the abdominal wall.
1634
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
it is prudent to reduce the bowel at the first operation, then to 
return after several weeks once the edema has resolved to cor-
rect the atresia. Intestinal function does not typically return for 
several weeks in patients with gastroschisis. This is especially 
true if the bowel is thickened and edematous. As a result, these 
patients will require central line placement and institution of 
TPN in order to grow. Feeding advancement should be slow 
and typically requires weeks to arrive at full enteral nutrition.
Prune-Belly Syndrome
Clinical Presentation.  Prune-belly syndrome refers to a dis-
order that is characterized by extremely lax lower abdominal 
musculature, dilated urinary tract including the bladder, and 
bilateral undescended testes (Fig. 39-34). The term prune-belly 
syndrome appropriately describes the wrinkled appearance of 
the anterior abdominal wall that characterizes these patients. 
Prune-belly syndrome is also known as Eagle-Barrett syndrome 
and the triad syndrome, because of the three major manifesta-
tions. The incidence is significantly higher in males. Patients 
manifest a variety of comorbidities. The most significant is pul-
monary hypoplasia, which is not survivable in the most severe 
cases. Skeletal abnormalities include dislocation or dysplasia of 
the hip and pectus excavatum.
The major genitourinary manifestation in prune-belly syn-
drome is ureteral dilation. The ureters are typically long and 
tortuous and become more dilated distally. Ureteric obstruction 
is rarely present, and the dilation may be caused by decreased 
smooth muscle and increased collagen in the ureters. Approxi-
mately 80% of these patients will have some degree of vesico-
ureteral reflux, which can predispose to urinary tract infection. 
Despite the marked dilatation of the urinary tract, most children 
with prune-belly syndrome have adequate renal parenchyma for 
growth and development. Factors associated with the develop-
ment of long-term renal failure include the presence of abnor-
mal kidneys on US or renal scan and persistent pyelonephritis.
Treatment.  Despite the ureteric dilation, there is currently no 
role for ureteric surgery unless an area of obstruction develops. 
The testes are invariably intra-abdominal, and bilateral orchio-
pexy can be performed in conjunction with abdominal wall recon-
struction at 6 to 12 months of age. Despite orchiopexy, fertility 
in a boy with prune-belly syndrome is unlikely as spermato-
genesis over time is insufficient. Deficiencies in the production 
of prostatic fluid and a predisposition to retrograde ejaculation 
contribute to infertility. Abdominal wall repair is accomplished 
through an abdominoplasty, which typically requires a transverse 
incision in the lower abdomen extending into the flanks.
Inguinal Hernia
An understanding of the management of pediatric inguinal her-
nias is a central component of modern pediatric surgical prac-
tice. Inguinal hernia repair represents one of the most common 
operations performed in children. The presence of an inguinal 
hernia in a child is an indication for surgical repair. The opera-
tion is termed a herniorrhaphy because it involves closing off 
the patent processus vaginalis. This is to be contrasted with the 
hernioplasty that is performed in adults, which requires a recon-
struction of the inguinal floor.
Embryology.  In order to understand how to diagnose and treat 
inguinal hernias in children, it is critical to understand their 
embryologic origin. It is very useful to describe these events to 
the parents, who often are under the misconception that the her-
nia was somehow caused by their inability to console their crying 
child or by the child’s high activity level. Inguinal hernia results 
from a failure of closure of the processus vaginalis, a finger-like 
projection of the peritoneum that accompanies the testicle as it 
descends into the scrotum. Closure of the processus vaginalis 
normally occurs a few months prior to birth. This explains the 
high incidence of inguinal hernias in premature infants. When 
the processus vaginalis remains completely patent, a commu-
nication persists between the peritoneal cavity and the groin, 
resulting in a hernia. Partial closure can result in entrapped fluid, 
which is known as a hydrocele. A communicating hydrocele 
refers to a hydrocele that is in communication with the perito-
neal cavity and can therefore be thought of as a hernia. Using 
the classification system that is typically applied to adult her-
nias, all congenital hernias in children are by definition indirect 
inguinal hernias. Children also present with direct inguinal and 
femoral hernias, although these are much less common.
Clinical Manifestation.  Inguinal hernias occur more com-
monly in males than females (10:1) and are more common on 
the right side than the left. Infants are at high risk for incar-
ceration of an inguinal hernia because of the narrow inguinal 
ring. Patients most commonly present with a groin bulge that is 
noticed by the parents as they change the diaper (Fig. 39-35). 
Older children may notice the bulge themselves. On examina-
tion, the cord on the affected side will be thicker, and pressure 
Figure 39-34.  Eagle-Barrett (prune-belly) syndrome. Notice the 
lax, flaccid abdomen.
Figure 39-35.  Right inguinal hernia in a 4-month-old male. The 
arrows point to the bulge in the right groin.
1635
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
on the lower abdomen usually will display the hernia on the 
affected side. The presence of an incarcerated hernia is mani-
fested by a firm bulge that does not spontaneously resolve and 
may be associated with fussiness and irritability in the child. 
The infant who has a strangulated inguinal hernia will manifest 
an edematous, tender bulge in the groin, occasionally with over-
lying skin changes. The child will eventually develop intestinal 
obstruction, peritonitis, and systemic toxicity.
Usually an incarcerated hernia can be reduced. Occasion-
ally this may require light sedation. Gentle pressure is applied 
on the sac from below in the direction of the internal inguinal 
ring. Following reduction of the incarcerated hernia, the child 
may be admitted for observation, and herniorrhaphy is per-
formed within the next 24 hours to prevent recurrent incarcera-
tion. Alternatively, the child may be scheduled for surgery at 
the next available time slot. If the hernia cannot be reduced or 
if evidence of strangulation is present, emergency operation is 
necessary. This may require a laparotomy and bowel resection.
When the diagnosis of inguinal hernia is made in an 
otherwise normal child, operative repair should be planned. 
Spontaneous resolution does not occur, and therefore, a non-
operative approach cannot ever be justified. An inguinal hernia 
in a female infant or child frequently contains an ovary rather 
than intestine. Although the gonad usually can be reduced into 
the abdomen by gentle pressure, it often prolapses in and out 
until surgical repair is carried out. In some patients, the ovary 
and fallopian tube constitute one wall of the hernia sac (sliding 
hernia), and in these patients, the ovary can be reduced effec-
tively only at the time of operation. If the ovary is irreducible, 
prompt hernia repair is indicated to prevent ovarian torsion or 
strangulation.
When a hydrocele is diagnosed in infancy and there is 
no evidence of a hernia, observation is proper therapy until the 
child is older than 12 months. If the hydrocele has not disap-
peared by 12 months, invariably there is a patent processus 
vaginalis, and operative hydrocelectomy with excision of the 
processus vaginalis is indicated. When the first signs of a hydro-
cele are seen after 12 months of age, the patient should undergo 
elective hydrocelectomy, which in a child is always performed 
through a groin incision. Aspiration of hydroceles is discour-
aged, since almost all without a patent processus vaginalis will 
resorb spontaneously, and those with a communication to the 
peritoneum will recur and require operative repair eventually. 
Transillumination as a method to distinguish between hydrocele 
and hernia is nonspecific. A noncommunicating hydrocele is 
better identified by palpation of a nonreducible oval structure 
that appears to have a blunt end below the external ring, indicat-
ing an isolated fluid collection without a patent connection to 
the peritoneum.
Surgical Repair.  The repair of a pediatric inguinal hernia can 
be extremely challenging, particularly in the premature child 
with incarceration. A small incision is made in a skin crease 
in the groin directly over the internal inguinal ring. Scarpa’s 
fascia is seen and divided. The external oblique muscle is dis-
sected free from overlying tissue, and the location of the exter-
nal ring is confirmed. The external oblique aponeurosis is then 
opened along the direction of the external oblique fibers over 
the inguinal canal. The undersurface of the external oblique is 
then cleared from surrounding tissue. The cremasteric fibers are 
separated from the cord structures and hernia sac, and these are 
then elevated into the wound. Care is taken not to grasp the vas 
deferens. The hernia sac is then dissected up to the internal ring 
and doubly suture ligated. The distal part of the hernia sac is 
opened widely to drain any hydrocele fluid. When the hernia is 
very large and the patient very small, tightening of the internal 
inguinal ring or even formal repair of the inguinal floor may be 
necessary, although the vast majority of children do not require 
any treatment beyond high ligation of the hernia sac.
Controversy exists regarding the role for exploration of an 
asymptomatic opposite side in a child with an inguinal hernia. 
Several reports indicate that frequency of a patent processus 
vaginalis on the side opposite the obvious hernia is approxi-
mately 30%, although this figure decreases with increasing age 
of the child. Management options include never exploring the 
opposite side or exploring only under certain conditions such as 
in premature infants or in patients in whom incarceration is pres-
ent. The opposite side may readily be explored laparoscopically. 
To do so, a blunt 3-mm trocar is placed into the hernia sac of 
the affected side. The abdominal cavity is insufflated, and the 
2.7-mm 70° camera is placed through the trocar such that the 
opposite side is visualized. The status of the processes vaginalis 
on the opposite side can be visualized. However, the presence 
of a patent processus vaginalis by laparoscopy does not always 
imply the presence of a hernia.
Several authors have now reported a completely laparo-
scopic approach in the management of inguinal hernias in chil-
dren. This technique requires insufflation through the umbilicus 
and the placement of an extraperitoneal suture to ligate the her-
nia sac. Proponents of this procedure emphasize the fact that no 
groin incision is used and there is a decreased chance of injuring 
cord structures. The long-term results of this technique remain 
to be established.
Inguinal hernias in children recur in less than 1% of 
patients, and recurrences usually result from missed hernia sacs 
at the first procedure, a direct hernia, or a missed femoral hernia. 
All children should have local anesthetic administered either by 
caudal injection or by direct injection into the wound. Spinal 
anesthesia in the preterm infant decreases the risk of postopera-
tive apnea when compared with general anesthesia.
GENITALIA
Undescended Testis
Embryology.  The term undescended testicle (cryptorchidism) 
refers to the interruption of the normal descent of the testis into 
the scrotum. The testicle may reside in the retroperineum, in 
the internal inguinal ring, in the inguinal canal, or even at the 
external ring. The testicle begins as a thickening on the uro-
genital ridge in the fifth to sixth week of embryologic life. In 
the seventh and eighth months, the testicle descends along the 
inguinal canal into the upper scrotum, and with its progress, the 
processus vaginalis is formed and pulled along with the migrat-
ing testicle. At birth, approximately 95% of infants have the 
testicle normally positioned in the scrotum.
A distinction should be made between an undescended 
testicle and an ectopic testicle. An ectopic testis, by definition, 
is one that has passed through the external ring in the normal 
pathway and then has come to rest in an abnormal location over-
lying either the rectus abdominis or external oblique muscle, or 
the soft tissue of the medial thigh, or behind the scrotum in the 
perineum. A congenitally absent testicle results from failure of 
normal development or an intrauterine accident leading to loss 
of blood supply to the developing testicle.
1636
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Clinical Presentation.  The incidence of undescended tes-
tes is approximately 30% in preterm infants and 1% to 3% in 
term infants. For diagnosis, the child should be examined in the 
supine position, where visual inspection may reveal a hypoplas-
tic or poorly rugated scrotum. Usually a unilateral undescended 
testicle can be palpated in the inguinal canal or in the upper 
scrotum. Occasionally, the testicle will be difficult or impos-
sible to palpate, indicating either an abdominal testicle or con-
genital absence of the gonad. If the testicle is not palpable in 
the supine position, the child should be examined with his legs 
crossed while seated. This maneuver diminishes the cremasteric 
reflex and facilitates identification of the location of the testicle. 
If there is uncertainty regarding location of a testis, repeated 
evaluations over time may be helpful.
It is now established that cryptorchid testes demonstrate an 
increased predisposition to malignant degeneration. In addition, 
fertility is decreased when the testicle is not in the scrotum. For 
these reasons, surgical placement of the testicle in the scrotum 
(orchidopexy) is indicated. It should be emphasized that this 
procedure does improve the fertility potential, although it is 
never normal. Similarly, the testicle is still at risk of malignant 
change, although its location in the scrotum facilitates poten-
tially earlier detection of a testicular malignancy. Other reasons 
to consider orchidopexy include the risk of trauma to the testicle 
located at the pubic tubercle and increased incidence of torsion, 
as well as the psychological impact of an empty scrotum in a 
developing male. The reason for malignant degeneration is not 
established, but the evidence points to an inherent abnormal-
ity of the testicle that predisposes it to incomplete descent and 
malignancy rather than malignancy as a result of an abnormal 
environment.
Treatment.  Males with bilateral undescended testicles are often 
infertile. When the testicle is not within the scrotum, it is subjected 
to a higher temperature, resulting in decreased spermatogenesis. 
Mengel and coworkers studied 515 undescended testicles by his-
tology and demonstrated a decreasing presence of spermatogo-
nia after 2 years of age. Despite orchidopexy, the incidence of 
infertility is approximately two times higher in men with unilat-
eral orchidopexy compared to men with normal testicular descent. 
Consequently, it is now recommended that the undescended tes-
ticle be surgically repositioned by 1 year of age.
The use of chorionic gonadotropin occasionally may be 
effective in patients with bilateral undescended testes, suggest-
ing that these patients are more apt to have a hormone insuf-
ficiency than children with unilateral undescended testicle. 
The combination of micro-penis and bilateral undescended 
testes is an indication for hormonal evaluation and testoster-
one replacement if indicated. If there is no testicular descent 
after a month of endocrine therapy, operative correction should 
be undertaken. A child with unilateral cryptorchidism should 
have surgical correction of the problem. The operation is typi-
cally performed through a combined groin and scrotal incision. 
The cord vessels are fully mobilized, and the testicle is placed 
in a dartos pouch within the scrotum. An inguinal hernia often 
accompanies a cryptorchid testis. This should be repaired at the 
time of orchidopexy.
Patients with a nonpalpable testicle present a challenge 
in management. The current approach involves laparoscopy to 
identify the location of the testicle. If the spermatic cord is found 
to traverse the internal ring or the testis is found at the ring and 
can be delivered into the scrotum, a groin incision is made and 
an orchidopexy is performed. If an abdominal testis is identified 
that is too far to reach the scrotum, a two-stage Fowler-Stephens 
approach is used. In the first stage, the testicular vessels can be 
clipped via laparotomy or laparoscopically. This promotes neo-
vasculogenesis along the vas deferens. Several months later, the 
second stage is performed during which the testis is mobilized 
intra-abdominally along with a swath of peritoneum with col-
lateralized blood supply along the vas. This may be done laparo-
scopically as well. Preservation of the gubernacular attachments 
with its collaterals to the testicle may confer improved testicu-
lar survival following orchidopexy in over 90% of cases. It is, 
nonetheless, preferable to preserve the testicular vessels when-
ever possible and complete mobilization of the testicle with its 
vessels intact. Some surgeons advocate aggressive mobilization 
of testicular vessels up to the renal hilum if the intra-abdominal 
testis is within 1 or 2 cm of the internal ring. Other surgeons feel 
that the staged approach to orchidopexy is superior. To date, 
no large-scale trial has been performed to answer this question. 
In either case, meticulous mobilization of the intra-abdominal 
testis is critical for its survival and successful pexy.
Vaginal Anomalies
Surgical diseases of the vagina in children are either congeni-
tal or acquired. Congenital anomalies include a spectrum of 
diseases that range from simple defects (imperforate hymen) 
to more complex forms of vaginal atresia, including distal, 
proximal, and, most severe, complete. These defects are pro-
duced by abnormal development of müllerian ducts and/or 
urogenital sinus. The diagnosis is made most often by physical 
examination. Secretions into the obstructed vagina produce 
hydrocolpos, which may present as a large, painful abdomi-
nal mass. The anatomy may be defined using US. Pelvic MRI 
provides the most thorough and accurate assessment of the 
pelvic structures. Treatment is dependent on the extent of the 
defect. For an imperforate hymen, division of the hymen is 
curative. More complex forms of vaginal atresia require mobi-
lization of the vaginal remnants and creation of an anastomo-
sis at the perineum. Laparoscopy can be extremely useful in 
mobilizing the vagina, in draining hydrocolpos, and in evaluat-
ing the internal genitalia. Complete vaginal atresia requires the 
construction of skin flaps or the creation of a neovagina using 
a segment of colon.
The most common acquired disorder of the vagina is the 
straddle injury. This often occurs as young girls fall on blunt 
objects, which cause a direct injury to the perineum. Typical 
manifestations include vaginal bleeding and inability to void. 
Unless the injury is extremely superficial, patients should be 
examined in the operating room where the lighting is opti-
mal and sedation can be administered. Vaginal lacerations are 
repaired using absorbable sutures, and the proximity to the ure-
thra should be carefully assessed. Prior to hospital discharge, it 
is important that girls are able to void spontaneously. In all cases 
of vaginal trauma, it is essential that the patient be assessed for 
the presence of sexual abuse. In these cases, early contact with 
the sexual abuse service is necessary, so that the appropriate 
microbiologic and photographic evidence can be obtained.
Ovarian Cysts and Tumors
Pathologic Classification.  Ovarian cysts and tumors may 
be classified as nonneoplastic or neoplastic. Nonneoplastic 
lesions include cysts (simple, follicular, inclusion, paraovarian, 
or corpus luteum), endometriosis, and inflammatory lesions. 
Neoplastic lesions are classified based on the three primordia 
1637
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
that contribute to the ovary: mesenchymal components of the 
urogenital ridge, germinal epithelium overlying the urogenital 
ridge, and germ cells migrating from the yolk sac. The most 
common variety is germ cell tumors. Germ cell tumors are 
classified based on the degree of differentiation and the cel-
lular components involved. The least differentiated tumors are 
the dysgerminomas, which share features similar to the semi-
noma in males. Although these are malignant tumors, they are 
extremely sensitive to radiation and chemotherapy. The most 
common lesions are the teratomas, which may be mature, imma-
ture, or malignant. The degree of differentiation of the neural 
elements of the tumor determines the degree of immaturity. The 
sex cord stromal tumors arise from the mesenchymal compo-
nents of the urogenital ridge. These include the granulosa-theca 
cell tumors and the Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. These tumors 
often produce hormones that result in precocious puberty or hir-
sutism, respectively. Although rare, epithelial tumors do occur 
in children. These include serous and mucinous cystadenomas.
Clinical Presentation.  Children with ovarian lesions usu-
ally present with abdominal pain. Other signs and symptoms 
include a palpable abdominal mass, evidence of urinary obstruc-
tion, symptoms of bowel obstruction, and endocrine imbalance. 
The surgical approach depends on the appearance of the mass 
at operation (i.e., whether it is benign-appearing or is suspicious 
for malignancy). In the case of a simple ovarian cyst, surgery 
depends on the size of the cyst and the degree of symptoms it 
causes. In general, large cysts (over 4–5 cm in size) should be 
resected, as they are unlikely to resolve, may be at risk of tor-
sion, and may mask an underlying malignancy. Resection may 
be performed laparoscopically; ovarian tissue should be spared 
in all cases.
Surgical Management.  For ovarian lesions that appear 
malignant, it is important to obtain tumor markers including 
α-fetoprotein (teratomas), lactate dehydrogenase (dysgermi-
noma), β-human chorionic gonadotropin (choriocarcinoma), 
and CA-125 (epithelial tumors). Although the diagnostic sen-
sitivity of these markers is not always reliable, they provide 
material for postoperative follow-up and indicate the response 
to therapy. When a malignancy is suspected, the patient should 
undergo a formal cancer operation. This procedure is performed 
through either a midline incision or a Pfannenstiel approach. 
Ascites and peritoneal washings should be collected for cyto-
logic study. The liver and diaphragm are inspected carefully 
for metastatic disease. An omentectomy is performed if there 
is any evidence of tumor present. Pelvic and para-aortic lymph 
nodes are biopsied, and the primary tumor is resected com-
pletely. Finally, the contralateral ovary is carefully inspected, 
and if a lesion is seen, it should be biopsied. Dysgerminomas 
and epithelial tumors may be bilateral in up to 15% of cases. It 
is occasionally possible to preserve the ipsilateral fallopian tube. 
More radical procedures are not indicated.
Ovarian Cysts in the Newborn.  An increasing number of 
ovarian cysts are being detected by prenatal US. In the past, 
surgical excision was recommended for all cysts greater than 
5 cm in diameter because of the perceived risk of ovarian tor-
sion. More recently, it has become apparent from serial US 
examinations that many of these lesions will resolve spontane-
ously. Therefore, asymptomatic, simple cysts may be observed, 
and surgery can be performed only when they fail to decrease 
in size or become symptomatic. Typically, resolution occurs 
by approximately 6 months of age. A laparoscopic approach is 
preferable in these cases. By contrast, complex cysts of any size 
require surgical intervention at presentation.
Ambiguous Genitalia
Embryology.  Normal sexual differentiation occurs in the 
sixth fetal week. In every fetus, wolffian (male) and mülle-
rian (female) ducts are present until the onset of sexual dif-
ferentiation. Normal sexual differentiation is directed by the 
sex-determining region of the Y chromosome (SRY). This is 
located on the distal end of the short arm of the Y chromo-
some. SRY provides a genetic switch that initiates gonadal dif-
ferentiation in the mammalian urogenital ridge. Secretion of 
müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) by the Sertoli cells of the 
seminiferous tubules results in regression of the müllerian duct, 
the anlage of the uterus, fallopian tubes, and the upper vagina. 
Therefore, the result of MIS secretion is a phenotypic male. 
In the absence of SRY in the Y chromosome, MIS is not pro-
duced, and the müllerian duct derivatives are preserved. Thus, 
the female phenotype prevails.
In order for the male phenotype to develop, the embryo 
must have a Y chromosome, the SRY must be normal without 
point mutations or deletions, testosterone and MIS must be pro-
duced by the differentiated gonad, and the tissues must respond 
to these hormones. Any disruption of the orderly steps in sex-
ual differentiation may result in disorders of sex development 
(DSDs), formerly known as intersex syndromes. DSDs are now 
classified as: (a) ovotesticular DSD or 46,XX testicular DSD 
(formerly referred to as true hermaphrodite), (b) 46,XY DSD 
(male pseudohermaphrodite), (c) 46,XX DSD (female pseu-
dohermaphrodite), and (d) mixed gonadal dysgenesis (usually 
underdeveloped or imperfectly formed gonads).
Ovotesticular DSD or 46,XX Testicular DSD.  This represents 
the rarest form of ambiguous genitalia. Patients have both nor-
mal male and female gonads, with an ovary on one side and 
a testis on the other. Occasionally, an ovotestis is present on 
one or both sides. The majority of these patients have a 46,XX 
karyotype. Both the testis and the testicular portion of the 
ovotestis should be removed.
46,XY DSD.  This condition occurs in infants with an XY karyo-
type but deficient masculinization of the external genitalia. 
Bilateral testes are present, but the duct structures differenti-
ate partly as phenotypic females. Causes include inadequate 
testosterone production due to biosynthetic error, inability to 
convert testosterone to dihydrotestosterone due to 5-α-reductase 
deficiency, or deficiencies in androgen receptors. The latter dis-
order is termed testicular feminization syndrome. Occasionally, 
the diagnosis in these children is made during routine inguinal 
herniorrhaphy in a phenotypic female at which time testes are 
found. The testes should be resected due to the risk of malignant 
degeneration, although this should be performed only after a full 
discussion with the family has occurred.
46,XX DSD.  The most common cause of this disorder is con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia. These children have a 46,XX 
karyotype but have been exposed to excessive androgens in 
utero. Common enzyme deficiencies include 21-hydroxylase, 
11-hydroxylase, and 3-β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. These 
deficiencies result in overproduction of intermediary steroid 
hormones, which results in masculinization of the external gen-
italia of the XX fetus. These patients are unable to synthesize 
cortisol. In 90% of cases, deficiency of 21-hydroxylase causes 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) to stimulate the secretion 
1638
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
of excessive quantities of adrenal androgen, which masculinizes 
the developing female (Fig. 39-36). These infants are prone to 
salt loss and require cortisol replacement. Those with mineralo-
corticoid deficiency also require fludrocortisone replacement.
Mixed Gonadal Dysgenesis.  This syndrome is associated with 
dysgenetic gonads and retained müllerian structures. The typical 
karyotype is mosaic, usually 45,XO/46,XY. There is a high inci-
dence of malignant tumors in the dysgenetic gonads, most com-
monly gonadoblastoma. Therefore, they should be removed.
Management.  In the differential diagnosis of patients with 
intersex anomalies, the following diagnostic steps are neces-
sary: (a) evaluation of the genetic background and family his-
tory; (b) assessment of the anatomic structures by physical 
examination, US, and/or chromosome studies; (c) determina-
tion of biochemical factors in serum and urine to evaluate the 
presence of an enzyme defect; and (d) laparoscopy for gonadal 
biopsy. Treatment should include correction of electrolyte 
and volume losses in cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
and replacement of hormone deficiency. Surgical assignment 
of gender should never be determined at the first operation. 
Although historically female gender had been assigned, there 
is abundant and convincing evidence that raising a genotypic 
male as a female has devastating consequences, not only 
anatomically but also psychosocially. This is particularly 
relevant given the role of pre- and postnatal hormones on gen-
der imprinting and identity. In general terms, surgical recon-
struction should be performed after a full genetic workup and 
with the involvement of pediatric endocrinologists, pediatric 
plastic surgeons, and ethicists with expertise in gender issues. 
Discussion with the family also plays an important role. This 
approach will serve to reduce the anxiety associated with these 
disorders and will help to ensure the normal physical and emo-
tional development of these patients.
PEDIATRIC MALIGNANCY
Cancer is the second leading cause of death in children after 
trauma and accounts for approximately 11% of all pediatric 
deaths in the United States. Several features distinguish pedi-
atric from adult cancers, including the presence of tumors that 
are predominantly seen in children, such as neuroblastoma and 
germ cell tumors, and the favorable response to chemotherapy 
observed for many pediatric solid malignancies, even in the 
presence of metastases.
Wilms’ Tumor
Clinical Presentation.  Wilms’ tumor is the most common 
primary malignant tumor of the kidney in children. There are 
approximately 500 new cases annually in the United States, and 
most are diagnosed between 1 and 5 years with the peak incidence 
at age 3. Advances in the care of patients with Wilms’ tumor 
have resulted in an overall cure rate of roughly 90%, even in the 
presence of metastatic spread. The tumor usually develops in 
otherwise healthy children as an asymptomatic mass in the flank 
or upper abdomen. Frequently, the mass is discovered by a par-
ent while bathing or dressing the child. Other symptoms include 
hypertension, hematuria, obstipation, and weight loss. Occasion-
ally the mass is discovered following blunt abdominal trauma.
Genetics of Wilms’ Tumor.  Wilms’ tumor can arise from both 
germline and somatic mutations and can occur in the presence 
or absence of a family history. Nearly 97% of Wilms’ tumors 
are sporadic, in that they occur in the absence of a heritable or 
congenital cause or risk factor. When a heritable risk factor is 
identified, the affected children often present at an earlier age 
and are frequently bilateral. Most of these tumors are associ-
ated with germline mutations. It is well established that there 
is a genetic predisposition to Wilms’ tumor in the WAGR syn-
drome, which consists of Wilms’ tumor, aniridia, genitourinary 
abnormalities, and mental retardation. In addition, there is an 
increased incidence of Wilms’ tumor in certain overgrowth 
conditions, particularly Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and 
hemihypertrophy. The WAGR syndrome has been shown to 
result from the deletion of one copy each of the Wilms’ tumor 
gene, WT1, and the adjacent aniridia gene, PAX6, on chromo-
some 11p13. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is an overgrowth 
syndrome that is characterized by visceromegaly, macroglossia, 
and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. It arises from mutations at 
the 11p15.5 locus. There is evidence to suggest that analysis of 
the methylation status of several genes in the 11p15 locus could 
predict the individual risk of developing Wilms’ tumor. Impor-
tantly, most patients with Wilms’ tumor do not have mutations 
at these genetic loci.
Surgical Treatment.  Before operation, all patients suspected 
of having Wilms’ tumor should undergo abdominal and chest 
CT. These studies characterize the mass, identify the presence 
of metastases, and provide information on the opposite kidney 
(Fig. 39-37). CT scanning also indicates the presence of neph-
rogenic rests, which are precursor lesions to Wilms’ tumor. An 
abdominal US should be performed to evaluate the presence of 
renal vein or vena caval extension.
The management of patients with Wilms’ tumor has been 
carefully analyzed within the context of large studies involving 
thousands of patients. These studies have been coordinated by the 
National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) in North Amer-
ica and the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP), 
mainly involving European countries. Significant differences in 
the approach to patients with Wilms’ tumor have been highlighted 
by these studies. NWTSG supports a strategy of surgery followed 
by chemotherapy in most instances, whereas the SIOP approach 
is to shrink the tumor using preoperative chemotherapy. There are 
instances were preoperative chemotherapy is supported by both 
Figure 39-36.  Ambiguous genitalia manifest as enlarged clitoris 
and labioscrotal folds in a baby with the adrenogenital syndrome.
1639
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
groups, including the presence of bilateral involvement or inferior 
vena cava involvement that extends above the hepatic veins and 
involvement of a solitary kidney by Wilms’ tumor. The NWTSG 
proponents argue that preoperative therapy in other instances 
results in a loss of important staging information, and therefore 
places patients at higher risk for recurrence; alternatively, it may 
lead to overly aggressive treatment in some cases and greater 
morbidity. However, the overall survival rates are not different 
between the NWTSG and SIOP approaches.
The goal of surgery is complete removal of the tumor. It 
is crucial to avoid tumor rupture or injury to contiguous organs. 
A sampling of regional lymph nodes should be included, and 
all suspicious nodes should be sampled. Typically a transverse 
abdominal incision is made, and a transperitoneal approach is 
used. The opposite side is carefully inspected to ensure that there 
is no disease present. Although historically this involved the 
complete mobilization of the contralateral kidney, current evi-
dence indicates that preoperative high-resolution CT scanning 
is of sufficient accuracy for the detection of clinically signifi-
cant lesions if they are present. Provided only unilateral dis-
ease is present, a radical nephroureterectomy is then performed 
with control of the renal pedicle as an initial step. If there is 
spread above the hepatic veins, an intrathoracic approach may 
be required. If bilateral disease is encountered, both lesions 
are biopsied, and chemotherapy is administered followed by a 
nephron-sparing procedure.
Chemotherapy.  Following nephroureterectomy for Wilms’ 
tumor, the need for chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy is 
determined by the histology of the tumor and the clinical stage 
of the patient (Table 39-3).  Essentially, patients who have dis-
ease confined to one kidney that is completely excised 
surgically receive a short course of chemotherapy and can 
expect a 97% 4-year survival, with tumor relapse rare after that 
time. Patients with more advanced disease or with unfavorable 
histology receive more intensive chemotherapy and radiation. 
Even in stage IV, cure rates of 80% are achieved. The survival 
rates are worse in the small percentage of patients considered to 
have unfavorable histology.
Neuroblastoma
Clinical Presentation.  Neuroblastoma is the third most com-
mon pediatric malignancy and accounts for approximately 
10% of all childhood cancers. The vast majority of patients 
have advanced disease at the time of presentation, and unlike 
Wilms’ tumor, in which cure is expected in the vast majority of 
patients, the overall survival of patients with neuroblastoma is 
significantly lower. Over 80% of cases present before the age 
of 4 years, and the peak incidence is 2 years of age. Neuro-
blastomas arise from the neural crest cells and show different 
levels of differentiation. The tumor originates most frequently 
in the adrenal glands, posterior mediastinum, neck, or pelvis 
but can arise in any sympathetic ganglion. The clinical presen-
tation depends on the site of the primary and the presence of 
metastases.
Two thirds of these tumors are first noted as an asymp-
tomatic abdominal mass. The tumor may cross the midline, 
and a majority of patients will already show signs of metastatic 
disease. Occasionally, children may experience pain from the 
tumor mass or from bony metastases. Proptosis and perior-
bital ecchymosis may occur due to the presence of retrobulbar 
metastasis. Because they originate in paraspinal ganglia, neuro-
blastomas may invade through neural foramina and compress 
the spinal cord, causing muscle weakness or sensory changes. 
Rarely, children may have severe watery diarrhea due to the 
secretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide by the tumor or have 
paraneoplastic neurologic findings including cerebellar ataxia or 
opsoclonus/myoclonus.
Diagnostic Evaluation.  Since these tumors derive from the 
sympathetic nervous system, catecholamines and their metabo-
lites will be produced at increased levels. These include elevated 
levels of serum catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine) or 
urine catecholamine metabolites (vanillylmandelic acid [VMA] 
or homovanillic acid [HVA]). Measurement of VMA and HVA in 
serum and urine aids in the diagnosis and in monitoring adequacy 
of future treatment and recurrence. The minimum criterion for 
a diagnosis of neuroblastoma is based on one of the following: 
(a) an unequivocal pathologic diagnosis made from tumor tissue 
by light microscopy (with or without immunohistology, electron 
Figure 39-37.  Wilms’ tumor of the right kidney (arrow) in a 
3-year-old girl.
Table 39-3
Staging of Wilms’ tumor
Stage I: Tumor limited to the kidney and completely 
excised.
Stage II: Tumor that extends beyond the kidney but is 
completely excised. No residual tumor is apparent at or 
beyond the margins of excision. The tumor was biopsied, or 
there was local spillage of tumor confined to the flank.
Stage III: Residual tumor confined to the abdomen. Lymph 
nodes in the renal hilus, the periaortic chains, or beyond 
contain tumor. Diffuse peritoneal contamination by the 
tumor, such as by spillage of tumor beyond the flank before 
or during surgery or by tumor growth that has penetrated 
through the peritoneal surface. Implants are found on the 
peritoneal surfaces. Tumor extends beyond the surgical 
margins either microscopically or grossly. Tumor is not 
completely resectable because of local infiltration into vital 
structures.
Stage IV: Hematogenous metastases
Stage V: Bilateral renal involvement
Source: D’Angio GJ, Breslow N, Beckwith JB, et al. Treatment of 
Wilms’ tumor. Results of the Third National Wilms’ Tumor Study. 
Cancer. 1989;64:349-360.
9
1640
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
microscopy, or increased levels of serum catecholamines or uri-
nary catecholamine metabolites); or (b) the combination of bone 
marrow aspirate or biopsy containing unequivocal tumor cells 
and increased levels of serum catecholamines or urinary catechol-
amine metabolites as described earlier.
The patient should be evaluated by abdominal CT, which 
may show displacement and occasionally obstruction of the 
ureter of an intact kidney (Fig. 39-38). Prior to the institution 
of therapy, a complete staging workup should be performed. 
This includes radiograph of the chest, bone marrow biopsy, and 
radionuclide scans to search for metastases. Any abnormality on 
chest x-ray should be followed up with CT of the chest.
Prognostic Indicators.  A number of biologic variables have 
been studied in children with neuroblastoma. An open biopsy is 
required in order to provide tissue for this analysis. Hyperdip-
loid tumor DNA is associated with a favorable prognosis, and 
N-myc amplification is associated with a poor prognosis regard-
less of patient age. The Shimada classification describes tumors 
as either favorable or unfavorable histology based on the degree 
of differentiation, the mitosis-karyorrhexis index, and the pres-
ence or absence of schwannian stroma. In general, children of 
any age with localized neuroblastoma and infants younger than 
1 year of age with advanced disease and favorable disease char-
acteristics have a high likelihood of disease-free survival. By 
contrast, older children with advanced-stage disease have a sig-
nificantly decreased chance for cure despite intensive therapy. 
For example, aggressive multiagent chemotherapy has resulted 
in a 2-year survival rate of approximately 20% in older children 
with stage IV disease. Neuroblastoma in the adolescent has a 
worse long-term prognosis regardless of stage or site and, in 
many cases, a more prolonged course.
Surgery.  The goal of surgery is complete resection. However, 
this is often not possible at initial presentation due to the exten-
sive locoregional spread of the tumor at the time of presentation. 
Under these circumstances, a biopsy is performed and preopera-
tive chemotherapy is provided based on the stage of the tumor. 
After neoadjuvant treatment has been administered, surgical 
resection is performed. The principal goal of surgery is to obtain 
at least 95% resection, without compromising major structures. 
Abdominal tumors are approached through a transverse inci-
sion. Thoracic tumors may be approached through a posterolat-
eral thoracotomy or through a thoracoscopic approach. These 
may have an intraspinal component. In all cases of intrathoracic 
neuroblastoma, particularly those at the thoracic inlet, it is 
important to be aware of the possibility of a Horner’s syndrome 
(anhidrosis, ptosis, meiosis) developing. This typically resolves, 
although it may take many months to do so.
Neuroblastoma in Infants.  Spontaneous regression of neu-
roblastoma has been well described in infants, especially in 
those with stage IVS disease. Regression generally occurs only 
in tumors with a near triploid number of chromosomes that also 
lack N-myc amplification and loss of chromosome 1p. Recent 
studies indicate that infants with asymptomatic, small, low-
stage neuroblastoma detected by screening may have tumors 
that spontaneously regress. These patients may be observed 
safely without surgical intervention or tissue diagnosis.
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma is a primitive soft tissue tumor that arises 
from mesenchymal tissues. The most common sites of origin 
include the head and neck (36%), extremities (19%), genito-
urinary tract (21%), and trunk (9%), although the tumor can 
arise virtually anywhere. The clinical presentation of the tumor 
depends on the site of origin. The diagnosis is confirmed with 
incisional or excisional biopsy after evaluation by MRI, CT 
scans of the affected area and the chest, and bone marrow 
biopsy. The tumor grows locally into surrounding structures and 
metastasizes widely to lung, regional lymph nodes, liver, brain, 
and bone marrow. The staging system for rhabdomyosarcoma 
is based on the TNM system, as established by the Soft Tissue 
Sarcoma Committee of the Children’s Oncology Group. It is 
shown in Table 39-4. Surgery is an important component of the 
staging strategy and involves biopsy of the lesion and evaluation 
of lymphatics. Primary resection should be undertaken when 
complete excision can be performed without causing disabil-
ity. If this is not possible, the lesion is biopsied, and intensive 
chemotherapy is administered. It is important to plan the biopsy 
so that it does not interfere with subsequent resection. After the 
tumor has decreased in size, resection of gross residual disease 
should be performed. Radiation therapy is effective in achieving 
local control when microscopic or gross residual disease exists 
Figure 39-38.  Abdominal neuroblastoma arising from the right 
retroperitoneum (arrow).
Table 39-4
Staging of rhabdomyosarcoma
Stage 1: Localized disease involving the orbit or head and 
neck (excluding parameningeal sites), genitourinary region 
(excluding bladder/prostate sites), or biliary tract (favorable 
sites).
Stage 2: Localized disease of any other primary site not 
included in the stage 1 category (unfavorable sites). Primary 
tumors must be ≤5 cm in diameter, and there must be no 
clinical regional lymph node involvement by tumor.
Stage 3: Localized disease of any other primary site. These 
patients differ from stage 2 patients by having primary 
tumors greater than 5 cm and/or regional node involvement.
Stage 4: Metastatic disease at diagnosis.
Sources: Lawrence W Jr, Gehan EA, Hays DM, et al. Prognostic signifi-
cance of staging factors of the UICC staging system in childhood rhab-
domyosarcoma: a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study 
(IRS-II). J Clin Oncol. 1987;5:46-54.
Lawrence W Jr, Anderson JR, Gehan EA, et al. Pretreatment TNM stag-
ing of childhood rhabdomyosarcoma: a report of the Intergroup Rhab-
domyosarcoma Study Group. Children’s Cancer Study Group. Pediatric 
Oncology Group. Cancer. 1997;80:1165-1170.
1641
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
following initial treatment. Patients with completely resected 
tumors of embryonal histology do well without radiation ther-
apy, but radiation therapy benefits patients with group I tumors 
with alveolar or undifferentiated histology.
Prognosis.  The prognosis for rhabdomyosarcoma is related to 
the site of origin, resectability, presence of metastases, number 
of metastatic sites, and histopathology. Primary sites with more 
favorable prognoses include the orbit and nonparameningeal 
head and neck, paratestis and vagina (nonbladder, nonprostate 
genitourinary), and biliary tract. Patients with tumors less than 
5 cm in size have improved survival compared to children with 
larger tumors, whereas children with metastatic disease at diag-
nosis have the poorest prognosis. Tumor histology influences 
prognosis. The embryonal variant is favorable, whereas the 
alveolar subtype has an unfavorable prognosis.
Teratoma
Teratomas are tumors composed of tissue from all three embry-
onic germ layers. They may be benign or malignant, may arise 
in any part of the body, and are usually found in midline struc-
tures. Thoracic teratomas usually present as an anterior medi-
astinal mass. Ovarian teratomas present as an abdominal mass 
often with symptoms of torsion, bleeding, or rupture. Retroperi-
toneal teratomas may present as a flank or abdominal mass.
Mature teratomas usually contain well-differentiated tis-
sues and are benign, whereas immature teratomas contain varying 
degrees of immature neuroepithelium or blastemal tissues. Imma-
ture teratomas can be graded from 1 to 3 based on the amount of 
immature neuroglial tissue present. Tumors of higher grade are 
more likely to have foci of yolk sac tumor. Malignant germ cell 
tumors usually contain frankly neoplastic tissues of germ cell ori-
gin (i.e., yolk sac carcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, germinoma, 
or choriocarcinoma). Yolk sac carcinomas produce α-fetoprotein 
(AFP), whereas choriocarcinomas produce β-human chorionic 
gonadotropin (BHCG), resulting in elevation of these substances 
in the serum, which can serve as tumor markers. In addition, ger-
minomas can also produce elevation of serum BHCG but not to 
the levels associated with choriocarcinoma.
Sacrococcygeal Teratoma.  Sacrococcygeal teratoma usually 
presents as a large mass extending from the sacrum in the new-
born period. Diagnosis may be established by prenatal US. In 
fetuses with evidence of hydrops and a large sacrococcygeal 
teratoma, prognosis is poor; thus, prenatal intervention has 
been advocated in such patients. The mass may be as small as 
a few centimeters in diameter or as massive as the size of the 
infant (Fig. 39-39). The tumor has been classified based on the 
location and degree of intrapelvic extension. Lesions that grow 
predominantly into the presacral space often present later in 
childhood. The differential diagnosis consists of neural tumors, 
lipoma, and myelomeningoceles.
Most tumors are identified at birth and are benign. Malig-
nant yolk sac tumor histology occurs in a minority of these 
tumors. Complete resection of the tumor as early as possible 
is essential. The rectum and genital structures are often dis-
torted by the tumor but usually can be preserved in the course 
of resection. Perioperative complications of hypothermia and 
hemorrhage can occur with massive tumors and may prove 
lethal. This is of particular concern in small, preterm infants 
with large tumors. The cure rate is excellent if the tumor is 
excised completely. The majority of patients who develop 
recurrent disease are salvageable with subsequent platinum-
based chemotherapy.
Liver Tumors
More than two thirds of all liver tumors in children are malig-
nant. There are two major histologic subgroups: hepatoblastoma 
and hepatocellular carcinoma. The age of onset of liver cancer 
in children is related to the histology of the tumor. Hepatoblas-
toma is the most common malignancy of the liver in children, 
with most of these tumors diagnosed before 4 years of age. 
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the next most common, with a peak 
age incidence between 10 and 15 years. Malignant mesenchy-
momas and sarcomas are much less common but constitute the 
remainder of the malignancies. The finding of a liver mass does 
not necessarily imply that a malignancy is present. Nearly 50% 
of all masses are benign, and hemangiomas are the most com-
mon lesion.
Most children with a liver tumor present with an abdomi-
nal mass that is usually painless, which the parents note while 
changing the child’s clothes or while bathing the child. The 
patients are rarely jaundiced but may complain of anorexia and 
weight loss. Most liver function tests are normal. AFP levels 
are increased in 90% of children with hepatoblastomas but 
much less commonly in other liver malignancies. Radiographic 
evaluation of these children should include an abdominal CT 
scan to identify the lesion and to determine the degree of local 
invasiveness (Fig. 39-40). For malignant-appearing lesions, a 
Figure 39-39.  Sacrococcygeal teratoma in a 2-day-old boy.
Figure 39-40.  Computed tomography of the abdomen showing a 
hepatocellular carcinoma in a 12-year-old boy.
1642
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
biopsy should be performed unless the lesion can be completely 
resected easily. Hepatoblastoma is most often unifocal, whereas 
hepatocellular carcinoma is often extensively invasive or multi-
centric. If a hepatoblastoma is completely removed, the majority 
of patients survive, but only a minority of patients have lesions 
amenable to complete resection at diagnosis.
A staging system based on postsurgical extent of tumor 
and surgical resectability is shown in Table 39-5. The overall 
survival rate for children with hepatoblastoma is 70%, but is 
only 25% for hepatocellular carcinoma. Children diagnosed 
with stage I and II hepatoblastoma have a cure rate of greater 
than 90% compared to 60% for stage III and approximately 20% 
for stage IV. In children diagnosed with hepatocellular carci-
noma, those with stage I disease have a good outcome, whereas 
stages III and IV are usually fatal. The fibrolamellar variant of 
hepatocellular carcinoma may have a better prognosis.
Surgery.  The abdominal CT scan usually will determine the 
resectability of the lesion, although occasionally this can only 
be determined at the time of exploration. Complete surgical 
resection of the tumor is the primary goal and is essential for 
cure. For tumors that are unresectable, preoperative chemother-
apy should be administered to reduce the size of the tumor and 
improve the possibility for complete removal. Chemotherapy 
is more successful for hepatoblastoma than for hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Areas of locally invasive disease, such as the dia-
phragm, should be resected at the time of surgery. For unre-
sectable tumors, liver transplantation may be offered in select 
patients. The fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma 
may have a better outcome with liver transplantation than other 
hepatocellular carcinomas.
TRAUMA IN CHILDREN
Injury is the leading cause of death among children older than 
1 year. In fact, trauma accounts for almost half of all pediatric 
deaths, more than cancer, congenital anomalies, pneumonia, 
heart disease, homicide, and meningitis combined. Motor vehi-
cle collisions are the leading cause of death in people age 1 to 
19 years, followed by homicide or suicide (predominantly with 
firearms) and drowning. Unintentional injuries account for 65% 
of all injury-related deaths in children younger than 19 years. 
Each year, approximately 20,000 children and teenagers die as 
a result of injury in the United States. For every child who dies 
from an injury, it is calculated that 40 others are hospitalized 
and 1120 are treated in emergency departments. An estimated 
50,000 children acquire permanent disabilities each year, most 
of which are the result of head injuries. Thus, the problem of 
pediatric trauma continues to be one of the major threats to the 
health and well-being of children.
Specific considerations apply to trauma in children that 
influence management and outcome. These relate to the mecha-
nisms of injury, the anatomic variations in children compared to 
adults, and the physiologic responses.
Mechanisms of Injury
Most pediatric trauma is blunt.  Penetrating injuries are seen in 
the setting of gun violence, falls onto sharp objects, or penetra-
tion by glass after falling through windows. Age and 
gender significantly influence the patterns of injury. 
Male children between 14 and 18 years of age are exposed 
to contact sports and gun violence and, in some jurisdictions, 
drive motor vehicles. As a result, they have a different pat-
tern of injury than younger children, characterized by higher 
injury severity scores. In the infant and toddler age group, falls 
are a common cause of severe injury. Injuries in the home are 
extremely common. These include falls, near-drownings, caus-
tic ingestion, and nonaccidental injuries.
Initial Management
The goals of managing the pediatric trauma patient are simi-
lar to those of adults and follow advanced trauma life support 
guidelines as established by the American College of Surgeons 
Committee on Trauma. Airway control is the first priority. In a 
child, respiratory arrest can proceed quickly to cardiac arrest. It 
is important to be aware of the anatomic differences between the 
airway of the child and the adult. The child has a large head, 
shorter neck, smaller and anterior larynx, floppy epiglottis, short 
trachea, and large tongue. The size of the endotracheal tube can 
be estimated by the formula (age + 16)/4. It is important to use 
uncuffed endotracheal tubes in children younger than 8 years in 
order to minimize tracheal trauma. After evaluation of the airway, 
breathing is assessed. It is important to consider that gastric dis-
tention from aerophagia can severely compromise respirations. 
A nasogastric tube should therefore be placed early during the 
resuscitation if there is no head injury suspected, or an orogas-
tric tube should be placed in cases of head injury. Pneumothorax 
or hemothorax should be treated promptly. When evaluating the 
circulation, it is important to recognize that tachycardia is usu-
ally the earliest measurable response to hypovolemia. Other signs 
of impending hypovolemic shock in children include changes in 
mentation, delayed capillary refill, skin pallor, and hypothermia. 
IV access should be rapidly obtained once the patient arrives in 
the trauma bay. The first approach should be to use the antecubi-
tal fossa. If this is not possible, a cut-down into the saphenous at 
the groin can be performed quickly and safely. Intraosseous can-
nulation can provide temporary access in children up to 6 years 
old until IV access is established. Percutaneous neck lines should 
generally be avoided. Blood is drawn for cross-match and evalu-
ation of liver enzymes, lipase, amylase, and hematologic profile 
after the IV lines are placed.
In patients who show signs of volume depletion, a 20 mL/kg 
bolus of saline or lactated Ringer’s should be promptly given. 
If the patient does not respond to two boluses, blood should 
be transfused (10 mL/kg). The source of bleeding should be 
established. Common sites include the chest, abdomen, pelvis, 
extremity fractures, or large scalp wounds. These should be 
carefully sought. Care is taken to avoid hypothermia by infus-
ing warmed fluids and using external warming devices.
Table 39-5
Staging of pediatric liver cancer
Stage I: No metastases, tumor completely resected
Stage II: No metastases, tumor grossly resected with 
microscopic residual disease (i.e., positive margins); or tumor 
rupture, or tumor spill at the time of surgery
Stage III: No distant metastases, tumor unresectable or 
resected with gross residual tumor, or positive lymph nodes
Stage IV: Distant metastases regardless of the extent of liver 
involvement
Source: Douglass E, Ortega J, Feusner J, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCA) in children and adolescents: results from the Pediatric Intergroup 
Hepatoma Study (CCG 8881/POG 8945). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 
1994;13:A-1439.
10
1643
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Evaluation of Injury
All patients should receive an x-ray of the cervical spine, chest, 
and abdomen with pelvis. All extremities that are suspicious 
for fracture should also be evaluated by x-ray. Plain cervical 
spine films are preferable to performing routine neck CT scans 
in the child, as x-rays provide sufficient anatomic detail. But if 
a head CT is obtained, it may be reasonable to obtain images 
down to C2 since odontoid views in small children are difficult 
to obtain. In most children, it is possible to diagnose clinically 
significant cervical spine injuries using this approach while 
minimizing the degree of radiation exposure. Screening blood 
work that includes aspartate aminotransferase, alanine amino-
transferase, and amylase/lipase is useful for the evaluation of 
liver and pancreatic injures. Significant elevation in these tests 
requires further evaluation by CT scanning. The child with sig-
nificant abdominal tenderness and a mechanism of injury that 
could cause intra-abdominal injury should undergo abdominal 
CT scanning using IV and oral contrast in all cases. There is a 
limited role for diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) in children as 
a screening test. Although focused abdominal US (FAST exam) 
is extremely useful in the evaluation of adult abdominal trauma, 
it is not widely accepted in the management of pediatric blunt 
abdominal trauma. In part this relates to the widespread use of 
nonoperative treatment for most solid-organ injuries. Thus a 
positive abdominal US scan would not alter this approach in a 
hemodynamically stable patient. However, FAST exam can be 
very useful in the child who needs to go emergently to the operat-
ing room for management of significant intracranial hemorrhage, 
to ensure that there is no intraabdominal source of bleeding.
Injuries to the Central Nervous System
The central nervous system (CNS) is the most commonly 
injured organ system and is the leading cause of death among 
injured children. In the toddler age group, nonaccidental trauma 
is the most common cause of serious head injury. Findings sug-
gestive of abuse include the presence of retinal hemorrhage on 
funduscopic evaluation, intracranial hemorrhage without evi-
dence of external trauma (indicative of a shaking injury), and 
fractures at different stages of healing on skeletal survey. In 
older children, CNS injury occurs most commonly after falls 
and bicycle and motor vehicle collisions. The initial head CT 
can often underestimate the extent of injury in children. Criteria 
for head CT include any loss of consciousness or amnesia to the 
trauma or inability to assess the CNS status as in the intubated 
patient. Patients with mild, isolated head injury (Glasgow Coma 
Scale [GCS] 14–15) and negative CT scans can be discharged 
if their neurologic status is normal after 6 hours of observa-
tion. Young children and those in whom there is multisystem 
involvement should be admitted to the hospital for observation. 
Any change in the neurologic status warrants neurosurgical 
evaluation and repeat CT scanning. In patients with severe head 
injury (GCS ≤8), urgent neurosurgical consultation is required. 
These patients are evaluated for intracranial pressure monitoring 
and for the need to undergo craniotomy.
Thoracic Injuries
The pediatric thorax is pliable due to incomplete calcification 
of the ribs and cartilages. As a result, blunt chest injury com-
monly results in pulmonary contusion, although rib fractures 
are infrequent. Diagnosis is made by chest radiograph and 
may be associated with severe hypoxia requiring mechanical 
ventilation. Pulmonary contusion usually resolves with care-
ful ventilator management and judicious volume resuscitation. 
Children who have sustained massive blunt thoracic injury may 
develop traumatic asphyxia. This is characterized by cervical 
and facial petechial hemorrhages or cyanosis associated with 
vascular engorgement and subconjunctival hemorrhage. Man-
agement includes ventilation and treatment of coexisting CNS 
or abdominal injuries. Penetrating thoracic injuries may result 
in damage to the lung or in major disruption of the bronchi or 
great vessels.
Abdominal Injuries
In children, the small rib cage and minimal muscular coverage 
of the abdomen can result in significant injury after seemingly 
minor trauma. The liver and spleen in particular are relatively 
unprotected and are often injured after direct abdominal trauma. 
Duodenal injuries are usually the result of blunt trauma, which 
may arise from child abuse or injury from a bicycle handlebar. 
Duodenal hematomas usually resolve without surgery. Small 
intestinal injury usually occurs in the jejunum in the area of fixa-
tion by the ligament of Treitz. These injuries are usually caused 
by rapid deceleration in the setting of a lap belt. There may be a 
hematoma on the anterior abdominal wall caused by a lap belt, 
the so-called “seat belt sign” (Fig. 39-41A). This should alert the 
caregiver to the possibility of an underlying small bowel injury 
(Fig. 39-41B), as well as to a potential lumbar spine injury 
(Chance fracture).
B
A
Figure 39-41.  Abdominal computed tomography of patient who sustained a lap belt injury. A. Bruising is noted across the abdomen from 
the lap belt. B. At laparotomy, a perforation of the small bowel is identified.
1644
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
The spleen is injured relatively commonly after blunt 
abdominal trauma in children. The extent of injury to the 
spleen is graded (Table 39-6), and the management is governed 
by the injury grade. Current treatment involves a nonoperative 
approach in most cases, even for grade IV injuries, assuming 
the patient is hemodynamically stable. This approach avoids 
surgery in most cases. All patients should be placed in a moni-
tored unit, and type-specific blood should be available for 
transfusion. When nonoperative management is successful, 
as it is in most cases, an extended period of bed rest is pre-
scribed. This optimizes the chance for healing and minimizes 
the likelihood of reinjury. A typical guideline is to keep the 
children on extremely restricted activity for 2 weeks longer 
than the grade of spleen injury (i.e., a child with a grade IV 
spleen injury receives 6 weeks of restricted activity). In chil-
dren who have an ongoing fluid requirement or when a blood 
transfusion is required, exploration should not be delayed. 
At surgery, the spleen can often be salvaged. If a splenec-
tomy is performed, prophylactic antibiotics and immuniza-
tions should be administered to protect against overwhelming 
postsplenectomy sepsis. The liver is also commonly injured 
after blunt abdominal trauma. A grading system is used to 
characterize hepatic injuries (Table 39-7), and nonoperative 
management is usually successful (Fig. 39-42). Recent stud-
ies have shown that associated injuries are more significant 
predictors of outcome in children with liver injuries than the 
actual injury grade. Criteria for surgery are similar to those 
for splenic injury and primarily involve hemodynamic insta-
bility. The intraoperative considerations in the management 
of massive hepatic injury are similar in children and adults. 
Renal contusions may occur after significant blunt abdomi-
nal trauma. Nonoperative management is usually successful, 
unless patients are unstable due to active renal bleeding. It is 
important to confirm the presence of a normal contralateral 
kidney at the time of surgery.
FETAL INTERVENTION
One of the most exciting developments in the field of pediat-
ric surgery has been the emergence of fetal therapy. In general 
terms, performance of a fetal intervention may be justified in 
the setting where a defect is present that would cause devastat-
ing consequences to the infant if left uncorrected. For the vast 
majority of congenital anomalies, postnatal surgery is the pre-
ferred modality. However, in specific circumstances, fetal sur-
gery may offer the best possibility for a successful outcome. The 
decision to perform a fetal intervention requires careful patient 
selection, as well as a multidisciplinary center that is dedicated 
to the surgical care of the fetus and the mother. Patient selec-
tion is dependent in part on highly accurate prenatal imaging 
that includes US and MRI. Significant risks may be associated 
with the performance of a fetal surgical procedure, to both the 
mother and the fetus. From the maternal viewpoint, open fetal 
surgery may lead to uterine bleeding due to the uterine relax-
ation required during the procedure. The long-term effects on 
subsequent pregnancies remain to be established. For the fetus, 
in utero surgery carries the risk of premature labor and amni-
otic fluid leak. As a result, these procedures are performed only 
when the expected benefit of fetal intervention outweighs the 
risk to the fetus of standard postnatal care. Currently, open fetal 
intervention may be efficacious in certain instances of large con-
genital lung lesions with hydrops, large teratomas with hydrops, 
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, certain cases of congenital 
lower urinary tract obstruction, and myelomeningocele. This list 
of potential diagnoses that may benefit from a fetal intervention 
is significantly shorter than that of a decade ago, due in part to 
improvements in outcome of several diseases that are managed 
in the postnatal period, as well as the recognition of the relative 
lack of benefit of fetal surgery for many conditions.
Figure 39-42.  Abdominal computed tomography in a child 
demonstrating a grade III liver laceration (arrows).
Table 39-6
Grading of splenic injuries
Grade I: Subcapsular hematoma, <10% surface area 
capsular tear, <1 cm in depth
Grade II: Subcapsular hematoma, nonexpanding, 10%–50% 
surface area; intraparenchymal hematoma, nonexpanding, <2 
cm in diameter; capsular tear, active bleeding, 1–3 cm, does 
not involve trabecular vessel
Grade III: Subcapsular hematoma, >50% surface area 
or expanding; intraparenchymal hematoma, >2 cm or 
expanding; laceration >3 cm in depth or involving trabecular 
vessels
Grade IV: Ruptured intraparenchymal hematoma with 
active bleeding; laceration involving segmental or hilar 
vessels producing major devascularization (>25% of spleen)
Grade V: Shattered spleen; hilar vascular injury which 
devascularizes spleen
Table 39-7
Liver injury grading system
Grade I: Capsular tear <1 cm in depth
Grade II: Capsular tear 1–3 cm in depth, <10 cm length
Grade III: Capsular tear >3 cm in depth
Grade IV: Parenchymal disruption 25%–75% of hepatic 
lobe or 1–3 Couinaud’s segments
Grade V: Parenchymal disruption >75% of hepatic lobe 
or >3 Couinaud’s segments within a single lobe, injury to 
retrohepatic vena cava
Source: Reproduced with permission from Moore EE, Cogbill TH, 
Malangoni MA, et al. Organ injury scaling. Surg Clin North Am. 
1995;75:293-303. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1645
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Fetal Surgery for Lower Urinary  
Tract Obstruction
Lower urinary tract obstruction refers to a group of diseases 
characterized by obstruction of the distal urinary system. Com-
mon causes include the presence of posterior urethral valves and 
urethral atresia, as well as other anomalies of the urethra and 
bladder. The pathologic effects of lower urinary tract obstruc-
tion lie in the resultant massive bladder distention that occurs, 
which can lead to reflux hydronephrosis. This may result in 
oligohydramnios and cause limb contractures, facial anoma-
lies (Potter sequence), and pulmonary hypoplasia. Carefully 
selected patients with lower urinary tract obstruction may ben-
efit from vesicoamniotic shunting. By relieving the obstruction 
and improving renal function, fetal growth and lung develop-
ment may be preserved.
Fetal Surgery for Congenital  
Diaphragmatic Hernia
Given the high mortality associated with the most severe cases 
of CDH, tremendous efforts have been undertaken to determine 
whether fetal intervention could improve the outcome of this 
disease. In 1990, Harrison and colleagues reported the first open 
fetal repair for CDH. The high morbidity of the open technique 
led to the development of fetal tracheal occlusion as a therapeu-
tic approach. This was based on the observation that tracheal 
occlusion could lead to increased lung growth and reduction 
of the intrathoracic viscera in animal models. Tracheal occlu-
sion can be achieved in utero by placement of clips that are 
removed at the time of delivery. Despite initial enthusiasm for 
this approach, a recent randomized trial that compared fetal tra-
cheal occlusion with standard postnatal care for left-sided CDH 
showed no improvement in survival for patients treated with 
tracheal occlusion.
Fetal Surgery for Myelomeningocele
Myelomeningocele refers to a spectrum of anomalies in which 
portions of the spinal cord are uncovered by the spinal column. 
This leaves the neural tissue exposed to the injurious effects 
of the amniotic fluid, as well as to trauma from contact with 
the uterine wall. Nerve damage ensues, resulting in varying 
degrees of lower extremity paralysis as well as bowel and blad-
der dysfunction. Initial observations indicated that the extent of 
injury progressed throughout the pregnancy, which provided the 
rationale for fetal intervention. The current in utero approach 
for the fetus with myelomeningocele has focused on obtaining 
coverage of the exposed spinal cord. The efficacy of in utero 
treatment vs. postnatal repair was recently compared in a large 
multicenter trial and showed that prenatal surgery for myelome-
ningocele reduced the need for shunting and improved motor 
outcomes at 30 months but was associated with maternal and 
fetal risks. The results of this study have paved the way for the 
acceptance of in utero repair of myelomeningocele in certain 
centers with the experience and expertise to perform this pro-
cedure safely.
The EXIT Procedure
The EXIT procedure is an abbreviation for ex utero intrapartum 
treatment. It is used in circumstances where airway obstruction 
is predicted at the time of delivery, due to the presence of a large 
neck mass, such as a cystic hygroma or teratoma (Fig. 39-43), 
or congenital tracheal stenosis. The success of the procedure is 
dependent on the maintenance of utero-placental perfusion for 
a sufficient duration to secure the airway. To achieve this, deep 
uterine relaxation is obtained during a cesarean section under 
general anesthesia. Uterine perfusion with warmed saline also 
promotes relaxation and blood flow to the placenta. On aver-
age, between 20 and 30 minutes of placental perfusion can be 
achieved. The fetal airway is secured either by placement of an 
orotracheal tube or performance of a tracheostomy. Once the 
airway is secured, the cord is cut and a definitive procedure 
may be performed to relieve the obstruction in the postnatal 
period. In general terms, cystic neck masses such as lymphan-
giomas have a more favorable response to an EXIT procedure 
as compared to solid tumors, such as teratomas, particularly in 
premature infants.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al. A randomized trial of 
prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. N Engl 
J Med. 2011;364:993.
Ahuja AT, King AD, King W, et al. Thyroglossal duct cysts: 
sonographic appearances in adults. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
1999;20:579.
American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Orthopaedics. Man-
agement of pediatric trauma. Pediatrics. 2008;121:849-854.
Andersen B, Kallehave F, Anderson H. Antibiotics versus placebo 
for prevention of postoperative infection after appendicectomy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;2:CD001439.
Anderson KD, Rouse TM, Randolph J. A controlled trial of corti-
costeroids in children with corrosive injury of the esophagus. 
N Engl J Med. 1990;323:637.
Azarow K, Messineo A, Pearl R, et al. Congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia—a tale of two cities: the Toronto experience. J Pediatr 
Surg. 1997;32:395.
Ballance WA, Dahms BB, Shenker N, Kliegman RM. Pathology 
of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis: a ten-year experience. 
J Pediatr. 1990;117:S6.
Barraco RD, Cheng JD, Bromberg WJ, et al. Child passenger safety: 
an evidence-based review. J Trauma. 2010;69:1588-1990.
Barthel ER, Pierce JR, Goodhue CJ, Burke RV, Ford HR, Upper-
man JS. Can a pediatric trauma center improve the response 
to a mass casualty incident? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;73:885-889.
Figure 39-43.  The EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapartum treat-
ment) in a 34-week gestation age baby with a large cervical tera-
toma. Intubation is being performed while the fetus is on placental 
support.
1646
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Bell MJ, Ternberg JL, Feigin RD, et al. Neonatal necrotizing 
enterocolitis. Therapeutic decisions based upon clinical 
staging. Ann Surg. 1978;187:1.
Billmire D, Vinocur C, Rescorla F, et al. Malignant mediastinal germ 
cell tumors: an intergroup study. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:18.
Bohn D. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2002;166:911.
Boloker J, Bateman DA, Wung JT, et al. Congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia in 120 infants treated consecutively with permissive 
hypercapnea/spontaneous respiration/elective repair. J Pediatr 
Surg. 2002;37:357.
Bouchard S, Johnson MP, Flake A, et al. The EXIT procedure: 
experience and outcome in 31 cases. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:418.
Branstetter BF, Weissman JL, Kennedy T, et al. The CT appear-
ance of thyroglossal duct carcinoma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2000;21:1547.
Bratton S, Annich G. Packed red blood cell transfusions for criti-
cally ill pediatric patients: when and for what conditions? 
J Pediatr. 2003;142:95.
Breneman JC, Lyden E, Pappo A, et al. Prognostic Factors and 
clinical outcomes in children and adolescents with metastatic 
rhabdomyosarcoma—a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyo-
sarcoma Study IV. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:78.
Brown RL. Epidemiology of injury and the impact of health dispari-
ties. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:321-325.
Bruner JP, Tulipan N, Paschall R, et al. Fetal surgery for myelome-
ningocele and the incidence of shunt-dependent hydrocephalus. 
JAMA. 1999;282:1819.
Callaghan WM, MacDorman MF, Rasmussen SA, Qin C, Lackritz 
EM. The contribution of preterm birth to infant mortality rates 
in the United States. Pediatrics. 2006;118:1566.
Cassady G, Crouse DT, Kirklin JW, et al. A randomized, controlled 
trial of very early prophylactic ligation of the ductus arteriosus 
in babies who weighed 1000 g or less at birth. N Engl J Med. 
1989;320:1511.
Chertin B, De Caluwé D, Gajaharan M, et al. Is contralateral 
exploration necessary in girls with unilateral inguinal hernia? 
J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:756.
Choi RS, Vacanti JP. Preliminary studies of tissue-engineered intes-
tine using isolated epithelial organoid units on tubular synthetic 
biodegradable scaffolds. Transplant Proc. 1997;29:848.
Cikrit D, Mastandrea J, West KW, Schreiner RL, Grosfeld JL. Nec-
rotizing enterocolitis: factors affecting mortality in 101 surgical 
cases. Surgery. 1984;96:648.
Cohen J, Schanen NC. Branchial cleft anomaly, congenital heart 
disease, and biliary atresia: Goldenhar complex or Lambert syn-
drome? Genet Couns. 2000;11:153.
Cohn SL, London WB, Huang D, et al. MYCN expression is not 
prognostic of adverse outcome in advanced-stage neuroblas-
toma with nonamplified MYCN. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3604.
Collins SR, Griffin MR, Arbogast PG, et al. The rising prevalence 
of gastroschisis and omphalocele in Tennessee. J Pediatr Surg. 
2007;42:1221.
Cook RC, Blinman TA. Nutritional support of the pediatric trauma 
patient. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2010;19:242-251.
Coppes MJ, Haber DA, Grundy P. Genetic events in the develop-
ment of Wilms’ tumor. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:586.
Cotterill SJ, Pearson ADJ, Pritchard J, et al. Clinical prognostic 
factors in 1277 patients with neuroblastoma: results of The 
European Neuroblastoma Study Group ‘Survey’ 1982-1992. 
Eur J Cancer. 2000;36:901.
Crystal P, Hertzanu Y, Farber B, et al. Sonographically guided 
hydrostatic reduction of intussusception in children. J Clin 
Ultrasound. 2002;30:343.
Darnell CM, Thompson J, Stromberg D, Roy L, Sheeran P. Effect 
of low-dose naloxone infusion on fentanyl requirements in criti-
cally ill children. Pediatrics. 2008;121:e1363-e1371.
Davit-Spraul A, Baussan C, Hermeziu B, et al. CFC1 gene involve-
ment in biliary atresia with polysplenia syndrome. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2008;46:111-112.
DeRusso PA, Ye W, Shepherd R, et al. Growth failure and 
outcomes in infants with biliary atresia: a report from 
the Biliary Atresia Research Consortium. Hepatology. 
2007;46:1632-1638.
Doné E, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem T, et al. Prenatal diagnosis, 
prediction of outcome and in utero therapy of isolated congeni-
tal diaphragmatic hernia. Prenat Diagn. 2008;28:581-591.
Dunn J, Fonkalsrud E, Atkinson J. Simplifying the Waterston’s 
stratification of infants with tracheoesophageal fistula. Am 
Surg. 1999;65:908.
Ein SH, Njere I, Ein A. Six thousand three hundred sixty-one 
pediatric inguinal hernias: a 35-year review. J Pediatr Surg. 
2006;41:980-986.
Evans GS, Flint N, Somers AS, Eyden B, Potten CS. The develop-
ment of a method for the preparation of rat intestinal epithelial 
cell primary cultures. J Cell Sci. 1992;101(Pt 1):219.
Ferrari A, Bisogno G, Casanova M, et al. Paratesticular rhabdo-
myosarcoma: report from the Italian and German Cooperative 
Group. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:449.
Fisher JC, Jefferson RA, Arkovitz MS, Stolar CJ. Redefining out-
comes in right congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 
2008;43:373-379.
Freedman AL, Johnson MP, Smith C, et al. Long-term outcome in 
children after antenatal intervention for obstructive uropathies. 
Lancet. 1999;354:374.
Gajewski JL, Johnson VV, Sandler SG, Sayegh A, Klumpp TR. A 
review of transfusion practice before, during, and after hemato-
poietic progenitor cell transplantation. Blood. 2008;112:3036.
Geisler DP, Jegathesan S, Parmley M, et al. Laparoscopic explora-
tion for the clinically undetected hernia in infancy and child-
hood. Am J Surg. 2001;182:693.
Geneviève D, de Pontual L, Amiel J, Sarnacki S, Lyonnet S. An 
overview of isolated and syndromic oesophageal atresia. Clin 
Genet. 2007;71:392-399.
Georgeson K. Results of laparoscopic antireflux procedures in neu-
rologically normal infants and children. Semin Laparosc Surg. 
2002;9:172.
Georgeson K. Laparoscopic-assisted pull-through for 
Hirschsprung’s disease. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2002;11:205.
Georgoula C, Gardiner M. Pyloric stenosis a 100 years after Ramst-
edt. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97:741-745
Gollin GA, Abarbanell AA, Baerg J, et al. Peritoneal drainage as 
definitive management of intestinal perforation in extremely 
low-birth-weight infants. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1814.
Gorsler C, Schier F. Laparoscopic herniorrhaphy in children. Surg 
Endosc. 2003;17:571.
Grant D, Abu-Elmagd K, Reyes J, et al. 2003 report of the intes-
tine transplant registry: a new era has dawned. Ann Surg. 
2005;241:607.
Grikscheit TC, Ochoa ER, Ramsanahie A, et al. Tissue-
engineered large intestine resembles native colon with 
appropriate in vitro physiology and architecture. Ann Surg. 
2003;238:35.
Grikscheit TC, Siddique A, Ochoa ER, et al. Tissue-engineered 
small intestine improves recovery after massive small bowel 
resection. Ann Surg. 2004;240:748.
Gura KM, Lee S, Valim C, et al. Safety and efficacy of a fish-
oil-based fat emulsion in the treatment of parenteral nutrition-
associated liver disease. Pediatrics. 2008;121:e678-e686.
Guthrie S, Gordon P, Thomas V, et al. Necrotizing enterocolitis 
among neonates in the United States. J Perinatol. 2003;23:278.
Hackam DJ, Filler R, Pearl R. Enterocolitis after the surgical 
treatment of Hirschsprung’s disease: risk factors and finan-
cial impact. J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:830.
1647
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Hackam DJ, Potoka D, Meza M, et al. Utility of radiographic 
hepatic injury grade in predicting outcome for children after 
blunt abdominal trauma. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:386.
Hackam DJ, Reblock K, Barksdale E, et al. The influence 
of Down’s syndrome on the management and outcome 
of children with Hirschsprung’s disease. J Pediatr Surg. 
2003;38:946.
Hackam DJ, Superina R, Pearl R, et al. Single-stage repair of 
Hirschsprung’s disease: a comparison of 109 patients over 
5 years. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32:1028.
Hamner CE, Groner JI, Caniano DA, Hayes JR, Kenney BD. Blunt 
intraabdominal arterial injury in pediatric trauma patients: 
injury distribution and markers of outcome. J Pediatr Surg. 
2008;43:916-923.
Harrison MR. Fetal surgery: trials, tribulations, and turf. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:275.
Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood S, et al. A randomized trial of 
fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion for severe fetal congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1916.
Harrison MR, Sydorak RM, Farrell J, et al. Fetoscopic temporary 
tracheal occlusion for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: prelude 
to a randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1012.
Heath JK. Transcriptional networks and signaling pathways that 
govern vertebrate intestinal development. Curr Top Dev Biol. 
2010;90:159-192
Hedrick H, Flake A, Crombleholme T, et al. History of fetal diagno-
sis and therapy: Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia experience. 
Fetal Diagn Ther. 2003;18:65.
Hilton EN, Manson FD, Urquhart JE, et al. Left-sided embry-
onic expression of the BCL-6 corepressor, BCOR, is required 
for vertebrate laterality determination. Hum Mol Genet. 
2007;16:1773-1782.
Hirschl RB, Philip WF, Glick L, et al. A prospective, randomized pilot 
trial of perfluorocarbon-induced lung growth in newborns with 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:283.
Huh JW, Raghupathi R. New concepts in treatment of pediatric 
traumatic brain injury. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27:213-240.
Hutchings L, Willett K. Cervical spine clearance in pediatric trauma: 
a review of current literature. J Trauma. 2009;67:687-691.
Johnigan RH, Pereira KD, Poole MD. Community-acquired 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in children and 
adolescents: changing trends. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg. 2003;129:1049-1052.
Johnson MP, Sutton LN, Rintoul N, et al. Fetal myelomeningo-
cele repair: short-term clinical outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2003;189:482.
Kalapurakal J, Li S, Breslow N, et al. Influence of radiation therapy 
delay on abdominal tumor recurrence in patients with favor-
able histology Wilms’ tumor treated on NWTS-3 and NWTS-4: 
a report from the National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;57:495.
Kamata S, Ishikawa S, Usui N, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of abdominal 
wall defects and their prognosis. J Pediatr Surg. 1996;31:267.
Kantarci S, Al-Gazali L, Hill RS, et al. Mutations in LRP2, which 
encodes the multiligand receptor megalin, cause Donnai-
Barrow and facio-oculo-acoustico-renal syndromes. Nat Genet. 
2007;39:957-959.
Katzenstein HM, Krailo MD, Malogolowkin M, et al. Hepatocel-
lular carcinoma in children and adolescents: results from the 
Pediatric Oncology Group and the Children’s Cancer Group 
Intergroup Study. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2789.
Kim HB, Fauza D, Garza J, Oh JT, Nurko S, Jaksic T. Serial trans-
verse enteroplasty (STEP): a novel bowel lengthening proce-
dure. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:425.
Kim HB, Lee PW, Garza J, et al. Serial transverse enteroplasty 
for short bowel syndrome: a case report. J Pediatr Surg. 
2003;38:881.
Kliegman RM. Models of the pathogenesis of necrotizing enteroco-
litis. J Pediatr. 1990;117:S2.
Kliegman RM, Fanaroff AA. Necrotizing enterocolitis. N Engl J 
Med. 1984;310:1093.
Konkin D, O’hali W, Webber E, et al. Outcomes in esophageal 
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. J Pediatr Surg. 
2003;38:1726.
Kosloske AM. Operative techniques for the treatment of neonatal 
necrotizing enterocolitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1979;149:740.
Kosloske AM. Indications for operation in necrotizing enterocolitis 
revisited. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:663.
Kosloske AM, Lilly JR. Paracentesis and lavage for diagnosis 
of intestinal gangrene in neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis. 
J Pediatr Surg. 1978;13:315.
Langer J, Durrant A, de la Torre L, et al. One-stage transanal 
Soave pullthrough for Hirschsprung disease: a multicenter 
experience with 141 children. Ann Surg. 2003;238:569.
Levitt MA, Ferraraccio D, Arbesman M, et al. Variability of 
inguinal hernia surgical technique: a survey of North Ameri-
can pediatric surgeons. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:745.
Lille ST, Rand RP, Tapper D, Gruss JS. The surgical management 
of giant cervicofacial lymphatic malformations. J Pediatr Surg. 
1996;31:1648-1650.
Limmer J, Gortner L, Kelsch G, Schutze F, Berger D. Diagnosis 
and treatment of necrotizing enterocolitis. A retrospective eval-
uation of abdominal paracentesis and continuous postoperative 
lavage. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1994;396:65.
Lintula H, Kokki H, Vanamo K. Single-blind randomized clinical 
trial of laparoscopic versus open appendicectomy in children. 
Br J Surg. 2001;88:510.
Lipshutz G, Albanese C, Feldstein V, et al. Prospective analysis of 
lung-to-head ratio predicts survival for patients with prenatally 
diagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 
1997;32:1634.
Little D, Rescorla F, Grosfeld J, et al. Long-term analysis of chil-
dren with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:852.
Loeb DM, Thornton K, Shokek O. Pediatric soft tissue sarcomas. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:615-627.
Luig M, Lui K. Epidemiology of necrotizing enterocolitis—Part I: 
changing regional trends in extremely preterm infants over 
14 years. J Paediatr Child Health. 2005;41:169.
Lynch L, O’Donoghue D, Dean J, O’Sullivan J, O’Farrelly C, 
Golden-Mason L. Detection and characterization of hemopoi-
etic stem cells in the adult human small intestine. J Immunol. 
2006;176:5199.
Mallick IH, Yang W, Winslet MC, Seifalian AM. Ischemia-
reperfusion injury of the intestine and protective strategies 
against injury. Dig Dis Sci. 2004;49:1359.
Marianowski R, Ait Amer JL, Morisseau-Durand MP, et al. Risk 
factors for thyroglossal duct remnants after Sistrunk proce-
dure in a pediatric population. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 
2003;67:19.
Maris JM, Weiss MJ, Guo C, et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 1p36 
independently predicts for disease progression but not decreased 
overall survival probability in neuroblastoma patients: a Chil-
dren’s Cancer Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:1888.
Martinez-Tallo E, Claure N, Bancalari E. Necrotizing enterocoli-
tis in full-term or near-term infants: risk factors. Biol Neonate. 
1997;71:292.
Meyers RL, Book LS, O’Gorman M, et al. High-dose steroids, urso-
deoxycholic acid, and chronic intravenous antibiotics improve 
bile flow after Kasai procedure in infants with biliary atresia. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:406.
Miyano T, Yamataka A, Kato Y, et al. Hepaticoenterostomy after 
excision of choledochal cyst in children: a 30-year experience 
with 180 cases. J Pediatr Surg. 1996;31:1417.
1648
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
part II
Molik KA, West KW, Rescorla F, et al. Portal venous air: the poor 
prognosis persists. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1143.
Moss R, Dimmitt R, Henry M, et al. A meta-analysis of peritoneal 
drainage versus laparotomy for perforated necrotizing entero-
colitis. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1210.
Moss RL, Das JB, Raffensperger JG. Necrotizing enterocolitis 
and total parenteral nutrition-associated cholestasis. Nutrition. 
1996;12:340.
Moyer V, Moya F, Tibboel F, et al. Late versus early surgical cor-
rection for congenital diaphragmatic hernia in newborn infants. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;CD001695.
Nadler E, Stanford A, Zhang X, et al. Intestinal cytokine gene 
expression in infants with acute necrotizing enterocolitis: inter-
leukin-11 mRNA expression inversely correlates with extent of 
disease. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1122.
Neville HL, Andrassy RJ, Lally K, et al. Lymphatic mapping with sen-
tinel node biopsy in pediatric patients. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:961.
Nio M, Ohi R, Miyano T, et al. Five- and 10-year survival rates 
after surgery for biliary atresia: a report from the Japanese Bili-
ary Atresia Registry. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:997.
O’Donovan DJ, Baetiong A, Adams K, et al. Necrotizing entero-
colitis and gastrointestinal complications after indomethacin 
therapy and surgical ligation in premature infants with patent 
ductus arteriosus. J Perinatol. 2003;23:286.
Olutoye OO, Coleman BG, Hubbard A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and 
management of congenital lobar emphysema. J Pediatr Surg. 
2000;35:792.
Ortega JA, Douglass EC, Feusner J, et al. Randomized comparison 
of cisplatin/vincristine/fluorouracil and cisplatin/continuous 
infusion doxorubicin for treatment of pediatric hepatoblastoma: 
a report from the Children’s Cancer Group and the Pediatric 
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:2665.
Pandya S, Heiss K. Pyloric stenosis in pediatric surgery: an evidence-
based review. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92:527-539, vii-vii.
Panesar J, Higgins K, Daya H, et al. Nontuberculous mycobacterial 
cervical adenitis: a ten-year retrospective review. Laryngoscope. 
2003;113:149.
Pedersen A, Petersen O, Wara P, et al. Randomized clinical trial 
of laparoscopic versus open appendicectomy. Br J Surg. 
2001;88:200.
Pena A, Guardino K, Tovilla J, et al. Bowel management for 
fecal incontinence in patients with anorectal malformations. 
J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:133.
Poenaru D, Laberge J, Neilson IR, et al. A new prognostic classifi-
cation for esophageal atresia. Surgery. 1993;113:426.
Potoka D, Schall L, Ford H. Improved functional outcome for 
severely injured children treated at pediatric trauma centers. 
J Trauma. 2001;51:824.
Potoka DA, Schall LC, Ford H. Risk factors for splenectomy in chil-
dren with blunt splenic trauma. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:294.
Powers CJ, Levitt MA, Tantoco J, et al. The respiratory advantage of 
laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:886.
Pritchard-Jones K. Controversies and advances in the management 
of Wilms’ tumour. Arch Dis Child. 2002;87:241.
Puapong D, Kahng D, Ko A, et al. Ad libitum feeding: safely 
improving the cost-effectiveness of pyloromyotomy. J Pediatr 
Surg. 2002;37:1667.
Quinton AE, Smoleniec JS. Congenital lobar emphysema—the dis-
appearing chest mass: antenatal ultrasound appearance. Ultra-
sound Obstet Gynecol. 2001;17:169.
Reyes J, Bueno J, Kocoshis S, et al. Current status of intestinal 
transplantation in children. J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:243.
Rosen NG, Hong AR, Soffer S, et al. Rectovaginal fistula: a com-
mon diagnostic error with significant consequences in girls with 
anorectal malformations. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:961.
Rothenberg S. Laparoscopic Nissen procedure in children. Semin 
Laparosc Surg. 2002;9:146.
Rothenberg SS. Thoracoscopic pulmonary surgery. Semin Pediatr 
Surg. 2007;16:231-237.
Samuel M, McCarthy L, Boddy S. Efficacy and safety of OK-432 
sclerotherapy for giant cystic hygroma in a newborn. Fetal 
Diagn Ther. 2000;15:93.
Sandler A, Ein S, Connolly B, et al. Unsuccessful air-enema reduc-
tion of intussusception: is a second attempt worthwhile? Pediatr 
Surg Int. 1999;15:214.
Sarioglu A, McGahren ED, Rodgers BM. Effects of carotid artery 
repair following neonatal extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation. Pediatr Surg Int. 2000;16:15-18.
Schier F, Montupet P, Esposito C. Laparoscopic inguinal hernior-
rhaphy in children: a three-center experience with 933 repairs. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:395.
Schonfeld D, Lee LK. Blunt abdominal trauma in children. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:314-318.
Section on Hematology/Oncology. Guidelines for the pediatric 
cancer center and role of such centers in diagnosis and treat-
ment. Pediatrics. 1997;99:139.
Shamberger R, Guthrie K, Ritchey M, et al. Surgery-related factors 
and local recurrence of Wilms tumor in National Wilms Tumor 
Study 4. Ann Surg. 1999;229:292.
Shimada H, Ambros I, Dehner L, et al. The International 
Neuroblastoma Pathology Classification (the Shimada 
system). Cancer. 1999;86:364.
Shivakumar P, Campbell KM, Sabla GE, et al. Obstruction of 
extrahepatic bile ducts by lymphocytes is regulated by IFN-
gamma in experimental biliary atresia. J Clin Invest. 2004;114: 
322-329.
Simons SHP, van Dijk M, van Lingen R, et al. Routine morphine 
infusion in preterm newborns who received ventilatory support: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;290:2419.
Soffer SZ, Rosen NG, Hong AR, et al. Cloacal exstrophy: a unified 
management plan. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:932.
Spitz L, Kiely E, Morecroft J, et al. Oesophageal atresia: at-risk 
groups for the 1990s. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:723.
Strauss RA, Balu R, Kuller J, et al. Gastroschisis: the effect of labor 
and ruptured membranes on neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2003;189:1672.
Sun L, Rommens JM, Corvol H, et al. Multiple apical plasma 
membrane constituents are associated with susceptibility to 
meconium ileus in individuals with cystic fibrosis. Nat Genet. 
2012;44:562-569.
Suzuki N, Tsuchida Y, Takahashi A, et al. Prenatally diag-
nosed cystic lymphangioma in infants. J Pediatr Surg. 1998; 
33:1599.
Teich S, Barton D, Ginn-Pease M, et al. Prognostic classification 
for esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: Waterston 
versus Montreal. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32:1075.
Teitelbaum D, Coran A. Reoperative surgery for Hirschsprung’s 
disease. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2003;12:124.
Thibeault DW, Olsen SL, Truog W, et al. Pre-ECMO predic-
tors of nonsurvival in congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Perinatol. 2002;22:682.
Tolia V, Wureth A, Thomas R. Gastroesophageal reflux disease: 
review of presenting symptoms, evaluation, management, and 
outcome in infants. Dig Dis Sci. 2003;48:1723.
Tsao K, St Peter SD, Sharp SW, et al. Current application of 
thoracoscopy in children. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 
2008;18:131-135.
Tulipan N, Sutton L, Bruner J, et al. The effect of intrauterine 
myelomeningocele repair on the incidence of shunt-dependent 
hydrocephalus. Pediatr Neurosurg. 2003;38:27.
Vargas JV, Vlassov D, Colman D, Brioschi ML. A thermody-
namic model to predict the thermal response of living beings 
during pneumoperitoneum procedures. J Med Eng Technol. 
2005;29:75-81.
1649
Pediatric Surgery
CHAPTER 39
Variations in incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis in Canadian 
neonatal intensive care units. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2004;39:366.
Wang KS, Shaul DB. Two-stage laparoscopic orchidopexy with 
gubernacular preservation: preliminary report of a new 
approach to the intraabdominal testis. J Pediatr Endosurg Inno-
vative Tech. 2004;8:252-255.
Wenzler D, Bloom D, Park J. What is the rate of spontaneous 
testicular descent in infants with cryptorchidism? J Urol. 
2004;171:849.
Wildhaber B, Coran A, Drongowski R, et al. The Kasai portoenter-
ostomy for biliary atresia: a review of a 27-year experience with 
81 patients. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1480.
Wood JH, Partrick DA, Johnston RB Jr. The inflammatory response 
to injury in children. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:315-320.
Yang EY, Allmendinger N, Johnson SM, Chen C, Wilson JM, 
Fishman SJ. Neonatal thoracoscopic repair of congenital dia-
phragmatic hernia: selection criteria for successful outcome. 
J Pediatr Surg. 2005;40:1369-1375.
This page intentionally left blank 
Urology
Karim Chamie, Jeffrey La Rochelle, 
Brian Shuch, and Arie S. Belldegrun
40
ANATOMY
The anatomic structures that fall under the purview of genitouri-
nary surgery are the adrenals, kidneys, ureters, bladder, prostate, 
seminal vesicles, urethra, vas deferens, penis, and testes. Some 
of these structures are situated outside the peritoneum, but uro-
logic surgery frequently involves intraperitoneal approaches to 
the kidney, bladder, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Further-
more, urologists must be familiar with the techniques of intes-
tinal surgery for the purposes of urinary diversion and bladder 
augmentation.
Kidney and Adrenal
The kidneys are paired retroperitoneal organs that are invested in 
a fibro-fatty layer: fascia of Zuckerkandl posteriorly and Gero-
ta’s fascia anteriorly. Posterolaterally, the kidneys are bordered 
by the quadratus lumborum and posteromedially by the psoas 
muscle. Anteriorly, they are confined by the posterior layer of 
the peritoneum. On the left, the spleen lies superolaterally, sepa-
rated from the kidney and Gerota’s fascia by the peritoneum. 
On the right, the liver is situated superiorly and anteriorly and 
also is separated by the peritoneum. The second portion of the 
duodenum is in close proximity to the right renal vessels, and 
during right renal surgery, it must be reflected anteromedially 
(Kocherized) to achieve vascular control. The renal arteries, in 
the typical configuration, are single vessels extending from the 
aorta that branch into several segmental arteries before entering 
the renal sinus. The right renal artery passes posterior to the 
vena cava and is significantly longer than the left renal artery. 
Occasionally, the kidney is supplied by a second renal artery, 
an accessory renal artery, typically to the lower pole. Within 
the kidney, there is essentially no anastomotic arterial flow, 
so the kidneys are prone to infarction when branch vessels are 
interrupted. The renal veins, which course anteriorly to the renal 
arteries, drain directly into the vena cava. The left renal vein 
passes anterior to the aorta and is much longer than the right 
renal vein. This explains why most surgeons prefer to take the 
left kidney for living donor transplantation. The left vein is in 
continuity with the left gonadal vein, the left inferior adrenal 
vein, and a lumbar vein. These veins provide adequate drainage 
for the left kidney in the event that drainage to the vena cava is 
interrupted. The right renal vein has no such collateral venous 
drainage.
The collecting system of the kidney is composed of sev-
eral major and minor calyces that coalesce into the renal pelvis. 
The renal pelvis can have either a mainly intrarenal or extrarenal 
position. The renal pelvis tapers into the ureteropelvic junction 
(UPJ) where it joins with the ureter.
The adrenal glands lie superomedially to the kidneys 
within Gerota’s fascia. There is a layer of Gerota’s fascia 
between the adrenal and the kidney. However, in the pres-
ence of a tumor or inflammatory process, the adrenal can 
become very adherent to the kidney, and separation can be 
difficult. The arterial supply of the adrenals derives from the 
inferior phrenic, aorta, and small branches from the renal 
arteries. The venous drainage on the left is mainly through 
the inferior phrenic vein and through the left renal vein via 
the inferior adrenal vein. On the right, the adrenal is drained 
by a very short (<1 cm) vein to the vena cava. It can be 
avulsed by moderate traction and can be the source of trou-
blesome bleeding.
Anatomy	
1651
Kidney and Adrenal / 1651
Ureter / 1652
Bladder and Prostate / 1652
Penis / 1652
Scrotum and Testes / 1653
Urologic Malignancies	
1653
Bladder Cancer / 1653
Testicular Cancer / 1654
Kidney Cancer / 1655
Prostate Cancer / 1657
Trauma	
1658
Kidney / 1658
Ureter / 1659
Bladder / 1660
Urethra / 1660
Testes / 1660
Penis / 1661
Emergencies	
1661
Acute Urinary Retention / 1661
Testicular Torsion / 1662
Fournier’s Gangrene / 1663
Priapism / 1663
Paraphimosis / 1664
Emphysematous Pyelonephritis / 1664
Infections	
1664
Cystitis / 1664
Pyelonephritis / 1664
Prostatitis / 1664
Epididymo-orchitis / 1665
Lower Urinary Tract  
Obstruction	
1665
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia / 1665
Urethral Stricture / 1665
Upper Urinary Tract  
Obstruction	
1665
Urolithiasis / 1666
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis / 1666
Pediatric Urology	
1667
Ureteropelvic Junction  
Obstruction / 1667
Vesicoureteral Reflux / 1667
Ureteroceles / 1667
Posterior Urethral Valve / 1667
chapter 
PART II
Ureter
The ureters are muscular structures that course anterior to the 
psoas muscles from the renal pelvis to the bladder. The blood 
supply of the proximal ureter derives from the aorta and renal 
artery and comes mainly from the medial direction. However, 
once it crosses the iliac vessels at the pelvic brim near where the 
iliac vessels bifurcate, it derives its blood supply laterally from 
branches from the iliac arteries. The blood supply has implica-
tions for managing ureteral injuries. Mobilizing the distal ureter 
for anastomosis requires releasing its lateral attachments, which 
results in ischemia, so for this reason, distal ureteral injuries are 
typically managed by anastomosing the proximal ureter to the 
bladder.
The ureters course along the pelvic sidewall and pass 
under the uterine arteries in women, making them vulnerable 
to injury during hysterectomy, especially in the context of pel-
vic bleeding. They enter the bladder at the lateral aspect of the 
base. They course through the bladder musculature at an oblique 
angle and open into the bladder at the ureteral orifices that are 
relatively close to the bladder outlet.
Bladder and Prostate
The urinary bladder is situated in the retropubic space in an 
extraperitoneal position. A portion of the bladder dome is adja-
cent to the peritoneum, so ruptures at this point can result in 
intraperitoneal urine leakage. The anatomic relations of the 
bladder are dependent on the degree of filling. A very distended 
bladder can project above the umbilicus. At physiologic volumes 
(200–400 mL), the bladder projects modestly into the abdomen. 
The sigmoid colon lies superolaterally and may become adher-
ent or fistulize to the bladder secondary to diverticulitis. The 
rectum lies posterior to the bladder in males, whereas the vagina 
and uterus are posterior in females.
In males, the prostate is in continuity with the bladder 
neck, and the urethra courses through it. The prostate has a sig-
nificant component of smooth muscle and can provide urinary 
continence even in the absence of the external striated sphincter. 
The puboprostatic ligaments connect the prostate to the pubic 
symphysis, and pelvic fractures often result in proximal ure-
thral injuries due to the traction that these ligaments provide. 
Between the prostate and the rectum lies Denonvilliers’ fascia, 
which is the main anatomic barrier that prevents prostate cancer 
from regularly penetrating into the rectum. Just beyond the apex 
of the prostate is the external (voluntary) sphincter, which is part 
of the genitourinary diaphragm.
Penis
The penis is composed of three main bodies, along with fascia, 
neurovascular structures, and skin. The corpora cavernosum 
are the paired, cylinder-like structures that are the main erec-
tile bodies of the penis. Proximally, they lie along the medial 
aspects of the inferior pubic rami in the perineum. Distally, 
they fuse along their medial aspects and form the pendulous 
penis. The corpora cavernosum consist of a tough outer layer 
called the tunica albuginea and spongy, sinusoidal tissue 
inside that fills with blood to result in erection. The two cor-
pora cavernosum have numerous vascular interconnections, 
so they function as one compartment. The cavernosal arteries, 
which are branches of the penile artery, course through the 
center of the corporal sinusoidal tissue. The sinusoidal tissue 
is innervated by the cavernosal nerves, which are autonomic 
nerves that originate in the hypogastric plexus and play a criti-
cal role in erection. Before entering the penis, the caverno-
sal nerves travel immediately adjacent to the prostate, which 
explains why they often are damaged at radical prostatectomy. 
Injury or excess traction of these nerves may cause erectile 
dysfunction. On the underside of the penis lies the corpus 
spongiosum, which surrounds the urethra. The spongiosum 
does not have the same tunical layers as the corpora caverno-
sum, so it does not exhibit the same firmness during erection. 
The tip of the penis, called the glans, is in continuity with the 
corpus spongiosum. This highlights the point that when men 
develop priapism—persistent erection for greater than 4 hours 
unrelated to sexual stimulation—the two corpora cavernosum 
remain rigid while the glans (derived from the corpora spon-
giosum) can be soft.
1652
Key Points
1
  In the surgical treatment of invasive bladder cancer, a thor-
ough lymph node dissection is essential.
2
  Patients with testicular cancer without radiographic evidence of 
metastasis often harbor microscopic occult deposits of disease 
and require either adjuvant treatment or very close surveillance.
3
  Partial nephrectomy is the mainstay of treatment for small 
renal masses, whereas radical nephrectomy provides a sur-
vival benefit in the setting of metastatic disease.
4
  The vast majority of renal trauma can be treated conserva-
tively, with early surgical intervention reserved for persistent 
bleeding, renal vascular, or ureteral injuries.
5
  Distal ureteral injuries should only be treated with uretero-
neocystostomy (bladder reimplantation) because of the high 
failure rate of distal uretero-ureterostomies.
6
  Extraperitoneal bladder ruptures can be treated conservatively, 
but intraperitoneal ruptures typically require surgical repair.
7
  Nearly all episodes of acute urinary retention can be 
treated with conservative measures such as decreasing 
narcotic usage and increasing ambulation.
8
  Testicular torsion is an emergency where successful tes-
ticular salvage is inversely related to the delay in repair, 
so cases with a high degree of clinical suspicion should 
not wait for a radiologic diagnosis.
9
  Fournier’s gangrene is a potentially lethal condition that 
requires aggressive débridement and close follow-up due 
to the frequent need for repeat débridement.
10
  Most small ureteral calculi will pass spontaneously or 
with the use of medical expulsive therapy, but larger 
stones (>6 mm) are better treated with ureteral stenting or 
lithotripsy.
1653
Urology
CHAPTER 40
Surrounding all three bodies of the penis are the outer dar-
tos fascia and the inner Buck’s fascia. The dorsal nerves of the 
penis, which provide sensation to the penile skin, derive from the 
pudendal nerves and, along with the dorsal penile arteries, travel 
along the dorsum of the penis within Buck’s fascia. The neuro-
vascular bundle of the penis must be avoided during surgical 
exploration of the penis for injuries or reconstruction, as injury 
may result in permanent erectile and/or ejaculatory dysfunction.
Scrotum and Testes
The scrotum is a capacious structure that contains the testes 
and epididymes. Because of its dependent position, significant 
edema can develop when a patient is fluid overloaded. Addition-
ally, since the scrotum is capacious, any significant bleeding 
will result in the accumulation of large hematomas—even as 
large as a basketball. Beneath the skin, from superficial to deep, 
are the dartos, external spermatic, cremasteric, and internal sper-
matic fascias. These layers are not always distinct. Beneath the 
internal fascia are the parietal and visceral layers of the tunica 
vaginalis, between which hydroceles form. The visceral layer 
of the tunica vaginalis is adherent to the testis. The noncompli-
ant outer testis layer is the tunica albuginea. Inside the tunica 
are the seminiferous tubules. The blood supply enters the testis 
at the superior pole by way of the spermatic cord. In addition 
to the vas deferens, the cord carries three separate sources of 
arterial blood flow—the testicular artery that arises from the 
aorta below the renal artery, the cremasteric artery, and the def-
erential artery. Interruption of one of the arteries during vasec-
tomy or inguinal surgery will not result in ischemia to the testis. 
Some children are born with an undescended abdominal testicle. 
Often, it is difficult to derive enough length to place the testicles 
in the scrotum. In these instances, the testicular artery is ligated 
as a first-stage operation, and the testicle is then delivered into 
the scrotum as a second-stage procedure (i.e., Fowler-Stephens 
orchiopexy). Most of these testicles remain viable as a result of 
collaterals. However, if a patient has undergone a prior Fowler-
Stephens procedure, any manipulation of the collaterals during 
inguinal surgery may compromise the testicle. Venous drain-
age parallels the arterial inflow except that the left gonadal vein 
drains into the renal vein rather than the vena cava. Dilation of 
spermatic veins is called a varicocele and may be palpable when 
a patient is standing or with Valsalva. They do not need to be 
treated unless they cause discomfort, are discovered on infertil-
ity workup, or are found in children.
UROLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Bladder Cancer
The most common form of bladder cancer in the United States 
is urothelial carcinoma. Tobacco use is the most frequent risk 
factor, followed by occupational exposure to various carcino-
genic materials such as automobile exhaust or industrial sol-
vents. However, many patients develop bladder cancer without 
any identifiable risks.1 Other forms of bladder cancer, such as 
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, occur in distinct 
patient populations. Patients with chronic irritation from cath-
eters, bladder stones, or schistosomiasis infection are at risk for 
the squamous cell variant, whereas those with urachal remnants 
or bladder exstrophy have an increased risk of adenocarcinoma. 
However, the aforementioned variant histology should not be 
confused with urothelial carcinoma with variant transformation.
Bladder cancer can be categorized into invasive and non-
invasive types. Management of urothelial carcinoma varies 
greatly, depending on the depth of invasion. A complete trans-
urethral resection of the bladder tumor, which allows for staging 
of the tumor, is the first step. The tumor should be completely 
removed, if possible, along with a sampling of the muscular 
bladder wall underlying the tumor. An exam under anesthesia 
should be performed for all patients with newly diagnosed blad-
der tumors. The exam under anesthesia can help determine 
clinical staging and whether there is fixation of the bladder to 
adjacent structures. Radiologic imaging of most bladder tumors 
is of limited benefit in determining the presence, grade, or size/
stage of a bladder tumor. However, in the presence of a known 
bladder tumor, unilateral or bilateral hydronephrosis is an omi-
nous sign of locally advanced disease (at least muscle-invasive 
bladder cancer).2 Computed tomography (CT) scans do provide 
valuable information regarding metastatic involvement of pelvic 
lymph nodes, liver, or lung. Historically, 25% of patients with 
preoperative CT scans demonstrating no evidence of lymphatic 
spread will actually have lymph node involvement during radi-
cal cystectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. The utility of a 
positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan has emerged as 
an important imaging modality to minimize this rate to 5% to 
10%. For patients who have disease invading into bladder mus-
cle (T2), immediate (within 3 months of diagnosis) cystectomy 
with extended lymph node dissection offers the best chance of 
survival.  Additionally, surgeons should send lymph node 
specimens in separate packets and not en bloc in an effort 
to increase nodal yield. Current long-term cure for those pre-
senting with clinically localized disease has not significantly 
changed over the last two decades.3 The addition of neoadjuvant 
or adjuvant chemotherapy in those without discernible meta-
static spread is gaining increasing acceptance and does provide 
a survival benefit.4 Patients with limited lymph node involve-
ment may be cured with surgery alone, but those with extensive 
lymph node involvement have a dismal prognosis.
Patients have multiple reconstructive options, includ-
ing continent and noncontinent urinary diversions. The ortho-
topic neobladder has emerged as a popular urinary diversion 
for patients without urethral involvement. This diversion type 
involves the detubularization of a segment of bowel, typically 
distal ileum, which is then refashioned into a pouch that is anas-
tomosed to the proximal urethra (neobladder) or to the skin 
(continent cutaneous diversion). Detubularization decreases 
intrapouch filling pressure, which improves urinary storage 
capacity. In the case of a neobladder, the external sphincter is 
still intact, and voiding is achieved through sphincteric relax-
ation and a Valsalva maneuver. In the case of the continent 
cutaneous diversion, patients attain continence by utilizing 
a bowel segment (appendix or tapered small bowel) that has 
a high length-to-lumen ratio. The most common diversion is 
noncontinent, the ileal conduit, whereby a segment of distal 
ileum is isolated with one end brought out through the abdomi-
nal wall as a urostomy. Ileal conduits are preferred for renal 
insufficiency because urine is not “stored” and therefore has less 
time in contact with the absorptive surface of the ileal segment. 
Conduits are also used when the bladder is unresectable, but 
urinary diversion is necessary due to intractable bleeding, severe 
voiding pain, and hydronephrosis. Each segment of bowel that 
is used offers its own advantages and inherent complications.
Patients with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer (con-
fined to the bladder mucosa or submucosa) can be managed 
1
1654
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with transurethral resection alone and adjuvant intravesical 
(instilled into the bladder) chemotherapy/immunotherapy. The 
use of these intravesical agents is critical since patients with 
non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer are at risk for tumor recur-
rence and progression. Tumor grade is extremely important in 
assessing the risk of disease progression. Those patients with 
high-grade disease or recurrent tumors can be treated with intra-
vesical agents such as bacille Calmette-Guérin or mitomycin C. 
These agents decrease risk of progression and recurrence, by 
induction of an effective immunologic antitumor response in 
the case of bacille Calmette-Guérin and through direct cytotox-
icity for mitomycin C. Those patients at high risk of progression 
who fail conservative therapy should be offered cystectomy. 
Because upper tract recurrence is fairly common (up to 17% 
of patients with carcinoma in situ), surveillance must be per-
formed with retrograde pyelograms or CT urograms.
Surgical Approaches and Complications.  The typical surgi-
cal approach for cystectomy is a lower midline incision from 
just above the umbilicus to the pubic symphysis. This allows 
adequate exposure of the pelvic contents, iliac vessels, and 
lower abdominal cavity. The peritoneum between the median 
umbilical ligaments (urachal remnant) also is taken with the 
specimen. In men, the prostate is removed with the bladder. In 
women, the uterus, ovaries (in postmenopausal women), and 
anterior wall of the vagina are removed with the bladder. The 
vagina may be spared, depending on the location and extent of 
the tumor, but significantly more operative bleeding results. 
Robotic approaches for cystectomy are increasingly used, but 
the urinary diversion is still usually performed through an open 
incision. The benefits of the robotic portion are decreased blood 
loss during the pelvic dissection (due to pneumoperitoneum) 
and the shortening of the time that the abdomen is open. How-
ever, recent evidence (randomized controlled trials of open ver-
sus robot-assisted radical cystectomy) did not demonstrate any 
difference in oncologic efficacy or complication rates.
Complications of bladder cancer surgery involve bladder 
perforation during transurethral resection of the bladder tumor, 
which requires catheter drainage for several days if small (com-
mon) or open repair if large and intraperitoneal (rare). Cystec-
tomy and urinary diversion may result in prolonged ileus, bowel 
obstruction, intestinal anastomotic leak, urine leak, or rectal 
injury. A urine leak from the ureteroileal anastomoses is a com-
mon cause of ileus, intra-abdominal urinoma, abscess formation, 
and wound dehiscence. Deep venous thrombosis is common after 
cystectomy5 due to the advanced age of most patients, proximity 
of the iliac veins to the resection and lymph node dissection, and 
the presence of malignancy. Pulmonary embolism is one of the 
leading causes of death in the perioperative period after radical 
cystectomy. The utility of subcutaneous heparin in the periopera-
tive period can minimize the risk of venous thromboembolism.
Testicular Cancer
Testicular cancer is the most common solid malignancy in men 
age 15 to 35 years.6 Most men are diagnosed with an asymptom-
atic enlarging mass (Fig. 40-1). A major risk for the develop-
ment of testicular cancer is cryptorchidism. Although the debate 
continues over whether early surgical intervention to bring an 
undescended testis into the scrotum alters the future risk of can-
cer, it is generally accepted that doing so allows much easier 
monitoring for the development of a testicular mass.
Most neoplasms arise from the germ cells, although non–germ 
cell tumors arise from Leydig’s or Sertoli’s cells. The non–germ cell 
tumors are rare and generally follow a more benign course. Germ 
Figure 40-1.  Testicular cancer. Patients often present with 
advanced disease despite scrotal enlargement for several months.
cell cancers are categorically divided into seminomatous and non-
seminomatous forms that follow different treatment algorithms.
Since the vast majority of solid testicular masses are 
cancerous, any observed mass on physical examination and/
or documented on ultrasound is malignant until proven oth-
erwise. Initial studies must include tumor markers, including 
α-fetoprotein, β-human chorionic gonadotropin, and lactate 
dehydrogenase. Elevated tumor markers are found almost 
exclusively in nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, although 
up to 10% of patients with localized seminomas and 25% with 
metastatic seminomas will have a modest rise in β-human 
chorionic gonadotropin. Chest and abdominal imaging must 
be performed to evaluate for evidence of metastasis. The most 
common site of spread is the retroperitoneal lymph nodes 
extending from the common iliac vessels to the renal vessels, 
and abdominal imaging should be performed in all patients. 
There is no role for percutaneous biopsy of testicular masses 
due to (a) the risk of seeding the scrotal wall; (b) changing 
the natural retroperitoneal lymphatic drainage of the testicle 
(because the testes have a remarkably predictable pattern of 
lymphatic drainage); and (c) the propensity of a testicular mass 
being cancerous. In cases where metastatic disease to the tes-
ticle is suspected, an open testicular biopsy by delivery of the 
testicle through the inguinal canal is recommended. Lymphoma 
(especially among the elderly) may involve one or both testes. 
Often, evidence of lymphoma usually is present elsewhere in 
the body, although relapses may be isolated to the testes.
Even in the absence of enlarged lymph nodes on CT imag-
ing (stage I), occult micrometastatic disease is often present 
(30% of the time), so adjuvant surgery, radiation, or chemo-
therapy is offered. However, active surveillance protocols 
have been gaining traction for both seminoma and non-
seminomatous tumors. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection 
2
1655
Urology
CHAPTER 40
(RPLND) is potentially curative in the setting of limited lymph 
node involvement and has been the preferred adjuvant treatment 
of those with stage I nonseminomatous disease. Alternatively, 
patients with stage I nonseminomatous tumors can also choose 
to receive two cycles of chemotherapy. Pure seminoma is exqui-
sitely radiosensitive, and stage I, IIa, and IIb disease can be 
treated with external-beam radiation to the retroperitoneal 
nodes. However, a single dose of carboplatin for stage I semi-
noma was found to be just as effective as radiation therapy. Both 
forms of germ cell tumors, in the setting of disseminated disease 
or large bulky lymph nodes, are best treated with four cycles of 
chemotherapy. However, teratoma frequently is a component of 
retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis, and it is not responsive 
to chemotherapy or radiation and can demonstrate aggressive 
malignant degeneration. Postchemotherapy RPLND for residual 
masses can be challenging. Large bulky metastases may encase 
the great vessels, and vascular graft placement after resection 
occasionally is required.
Surgical Approach and Complications.  For orchiectomy, 
an inguinal incision is made over the external ring and carried 
laterally over the internal ring. It is important to not violate the 
scrotal skin during orchiectomy, for fear (mostly theoretical) 
of altering the lymphatic drainage of the testis. For RPLND, 
a midline incision usually is made from the xiphoid process 
to the umbilicus for most patients with stage I disease. If it is 
in a setting of a postchemotherapy residual mass, the incision 
is extended down to the pubic symphysis. The use of robotic-
assisted RPLND is rarely used for stage I nonseminomatous dis-
ease, although with increasing demand for minimally invasive 
surgery, one would anticipate that it will be the happy compro-
mise for those who wish to avoid a major incision but are not 
interested in active surveillance or systemic chemotherapy.
Complications of testicular cancer surgery include scrotal 
hematoma formation, which can be prevented by meticulous 
hemostasis. Complications after RPLND include bowel obstruc-
tion; excessive bleeding, particularly from retrocaval lumber 
veins; and chylous ascites. Patients who undergo a full, bilateral 
RPLND often suffer from ejaculatory dysfunction due to the 
interruption of the descending postganglionic sympathetic nerve 
fibers that are involved in seminal emission. For this reason, 
right and left templates have been developed that limit bilateral 
dissection (especially below the inferior mesenteric artery) and 
preserve some of these nerves with a low risk of leaving residual 
microscopic cancer.7
Figure 40-2.  Complex renal cyst. A right kidney with a Bosniak 
type 3 renal cyst. Note the enhancing septum (arrow). This cyst 
was removed and found to be a high-grade papillary renal cell 
carcinoma.
Kidney Cancer
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a malignancy of the renal epi-
thelium that can arise from any component of the nephron 
(Fig. 40-2). In 2012, there were over 64,000 new cases in the 
United States, with over 13,000 deaths.8 With the widespread 
use of imaging for many medical complaints, a stage migra-
tion has led to an increased incidence of small renal masses.9 
Surprisingly, this has not led to lower mortality rates. Various 
histologic subtypes include clear cell, papillary (types I and II), 
chromophobe, collecting duct, and unclassified forms. Collect-
ing duct and unclassified forms have dismal prognoses and do 
not routinely respond to systemic therapy. Benign lesions, com-
mon in the setting of a small renal mass, include oncocytomas 
and angiomyolipomas. Renal tumors are usually solid, but they 
also can be cystic. Simple cysts are very common and are not 
malignant, but more complex cysts may be malignant. The Bos-
niak classification system, based on septations, calcifications, 
and enhancement, is used to assess the likelihood of malignancy 
(Table 40-1).10
Most cases of RCC are sporadic, but many hereditary 
forms have been described. These syndromes frequently involve 
Table 40-1. 
Bosniak renal cyst computed tomography classification
Category
Description
Risk of Malignancy/Management
I
Thin-walled cyst with water density with no septations or calcifications.
0%/nonsurgical
II
Thin-walled cyst with few hairline septa that may contain fine or very limited 
thick calcifications. Also includes homogeneously hyperdense cysts <3 cm.
0%/nonsurgical
II F (follow) Multiple hairline or slightly thickened septa without measurable enhancement. 
May contain nodular calcification. Also includes hyperdense cysts >3 cm.
∼5%/should be followed for 
progression
III
Irregular or smooth thickened walls or septa with measurable enhancement.
∼50%/surgical
IV
Same as III, but with enhancing solid components.
∼100%/surgical
Source: Adapted with permission from Israel GM, Bosniak MA. An update of the Bosniak renal cyst classification system. Urology. 2005;66:484. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1656
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
a germline mutation in a tumor suppressor gene. von Hippel-
Lindau disease is associated with multiple tumors including 
clear cell RCC (Fig. 40-3). The involved gene, vhl, also fre-
quently is mutated or hypermethylated in sporadic RCC.11 Other 
rare forms include Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, where patients 
get oncocytomas or chromophobe tumors. Patients with heredi-
tary papillary RCC and hereditary leiomyomatosis develop pap-
illary RCC.
The most common sites of metastasis are the retroperi-
toneal lymph nodes and lungs, but liver, bone, and brain also 
are common sites of spread. Up to 20% to 30% of patients may 
present with metastatic disease, in which case, surgical debulk-
ing can improve survival, as shown in randomized controlled 
trials.12,13 Patients with all but the smallest renal masses should 
undergo testing for the presence of metastatic disease including 
chest CT, bone scan, and liver function tests.
Patients with localized disease may be cured with either 
partial or radical nephrectomy (Fig. 40-4). The oncologic 
efficacy of partial nephrectomy (nephron sparing) appears to 
be similar to that of radical nephrectomy. However, patients 
Figure 40-4.  Partial nephrectomy. A kidney after partial resection 
for a small renal mass. Note the visible collecting system in the base 
of the defect (arrow).
Figure 40-3.  von Hippel-Lindau disease. A computed tomography 
image of a patient with von Hippel-Lindau disease and bilateral 
kidney tumors that are predominantly intrarenal. Note the numerous 
cysts in the head of the pancreas (arrow).
with larger tumors or with a more central tumor location may 
be at increased risk for surgical complications. Nephron-
sparing surgery should be considered in all patients, if fea-
sible, as those patients undergoing a radical nephrectomy are 
at risk for future chronic kidney disease.14 The lack of harm 
from nephrectomy due to malignancy has been extrapolated 
from the fact that kidney donors do not routinely develop 
renal insufficiency. However, kidney donors are a highly 
selected group, and patients with renal tumors are typically 
older and have more comorbidities. Additionally, the risk of 
contralateral RCC is 2% to 3% in most series,15 and a partial 
nephrectomy may prevent the future need for dialysis in case 
of a contralateral kidney tumor. While we should all strive to 
preserve as many nephrons as possible, we do not have 
level 1 evidence that supports the use of partial nephrec-
tomy over radical nephrectomy for patients with small renal 
masses. 
Minimally invasive techniques for renal surgery have 
greatly changed the field of kidney cancer. Laparoscopic and 
robot-assisted laparoscopic renal surgery allows for more 
rapid convalescence and decreased narcotic requirements. 
While laparoscopic partial nephrectomy is challenging and 
is performed only in experienced hands due to its associated 
high rate of complications, the advent of robot-assisted sur-
gery has changed the landscape. Surgeons are now capable 
of performing intracorporeal suturing with much greater 
ease. Ablative techniques such as cryoablation and radiofre-
quency ablation are also popular choices, especially among 
those who are poor surgical candidates. However, long-term 
results from these techniques are currently lacking due to 
their recent development. Active surveillance is another via-
ble alternative for small renal masses, especially in patients 
with multiple comorbidities or advanced age. Most small 
renal masses are low grade with a slow growth rate, and 
patients very rarely progress to metastatic disease after lim-
ited follow-up of 2 to 3 years.16
Up to 10% of RCC invades the lumen of the renal vein or 
vena cava. The degree of venous extension directly impacts the 
surgical approach. Patients with thrombus below the level of 
the liver can be managed with cross-clamping above and below 
the thrombus and extraction from a cavotomy at the insertion of 
the renal vein (Fig. 40-5A). Usually, the thrombus is not adher-
ent to the vessel wall. However, cross-clamping the vena cava 
above the hepatic veins can drastically reduce cardiac preload, 
and therefore, bypass techniques often are necessary. For throm-
bus above the hepatic veins, a multidisciplinary approach with 
either venovenous or cardiopulmonary bypass is necessary. In 
cases of invasion of the wall of the vena cava or atrium, deep 
hypothermic circulatory arrest may be used to give a completely 
bloodless field. Tumor thrombus embolization to the pulmonary 
artery is a rare but known complication during these cases and 
is associated with a high mortality rate (Fig. 40-5B). For cases 
of extensive tumor thrombus, intraoperative transesophageal 
echocardiography should be considered for monitoring and 
assessment of possible thrombus embolization. If a thrombus 
embolization occurs, a sternotomy/cardiopulmonary bypass 
with extraction of the thrombus may be life saving.
Patients undergoing resection of localized renal masses are 
at substantial risk of future recurrence. Many predictive features 
have been recognized, but the most widely accepted prognostic 
findings are tumor stage, grade, and size, each of which exerts an 
independent effect on recurrence. Isolated solitary recurrences, 
3
1657
Urology
CHAPTER 40
either local or distant, can be resected with long-term disease-
free rates approaching 50%.17
Surgical Approach and Complications.  Nephrectomy, 
either partial or radical, can be performed through a number 
of surgical approaches. Flank incisions over the eleventh or 
twelfth ribs from the anterior axillary line to the lateral bor-
der of the rectus muscle provide access to the kidney without 
entering the peritoneum. However, entry into the pleura is not 
uncommon. If small, the pleurotomy usually can be closed 
without need for a chest tube. The anterior subcostal approach 
also is used for nephrectomy. There is no risk for pleural 
entry, but this incision is transperitoneal, so ileus is somewhat 
more likely. Laparoscopic nephrectomy is now common, and 
robot-assisted laparoscopic partial nephrectomy is gaining 
significant traction in the management of small renal masses. 
For large tumors, particularly on the right side where the liver 
makes exposure of the tumor more difficult, a thoracoabdomi-
nal approach is very helpful. In these cases, the flank incision 
is made over the tenth rib and carried further posterior and 
anterior than a typical flank incision. The chest and abdominal 
cavities are intentionally entered for maximum exposure, and 
the diaphragm is partially divided in a circumferential fashion, 
which allows cephalad retraction of the liver. A chest tube 
is used postoperatively. The adrenal gland is no longer rou-
tinely removed unless the tumor is adherent to it. The benefit 
of lymph node dissection when the nodes are not clinically 
involved is uncertain.
Complications of radical nephrectomy include bleed-
ing, pneumothorax, splenic injury, liver injury, and pancreatic 
tail injury. Partial nephrectomy has the added risks of delayed 
bleeding and urine leak. Ileus is not common when the perito-
neal cavity is not entered.
Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is the most common nonskin malignancy in 
men, with an incidence of approximately 200,000 per year. 
Yearly screening consisting of digital rectal exam and serum 
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing has been a topic of 
much debate. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has 
advised against the routine use of prostate cancer screen-
ing. The American Urological Association has advised for 
screening for men 55 to 69 years of age. Patients of African 
American descent or those with a family history of prostate 
cancer should be considered for screening at an earlier age (as 
early as 40). Men with abnormal digital rectal exams or PSA 
elevation have an indication for prostate biopsy to determine 
the presence of the disease. With the advent of PSA screening, 
prostate cancer has experienced a stage migration, with most 
cases now discovered locally confined within the prostate. The 
majority of patients with prostate cancer will not die of the dis-
ease by 10 to 15 years, whether it is treated at diagnosis or not. 
However, those undergoing initial treatment have improved 
cancer-specific survival.18
Prostate cancer is graded according to the Gleason scoring 
system.19 A primary and secondary score are assigned based on 
the most common and second most common histologic patterns. 
Grades range from 1 for the most differentiated to 5 for the 
least. The grades are added to give the Gleason score. In cur-
rent practice, scores below 6 are almost never assigned. Gleason 
score, preoperative PSA level, and digital rectal exam are used 
Figure 40-5.  Inferior vena cava thrombus. A. A multidetector computed tomography image displaying a tumor thrombus extending above the 
diaphragm (arrow) arising from a right renal mass. B. An en bloc removal of a different right renal mass with a tumor thrombus that extended 
to the pulmonary artery. This patient is alive 6 years after surgery.
1658
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
to estimate the likelihood of whether the cancer is localized, 
locally advanced, or metastatic. Prostate cancer with a high 
Gleason score (8 to 10) or a high PSA level (>20) is much more 
likely to have spread, often at a micrometastatic level. After 
definitive treatment, an increasing PSA is indicative of recur-
rent cancer.
The most common site of spread of prostate cancer is the 
pelvic lymph nodes and bone. For patients with high-risk dis-
ease based on clinical stage, grade on biopsy, and PSA level, 
staging includes bone scan and CT imaging to evaluate for 
bony metastases or pelvic lymphadenopathy. Multiple treatment 
options are available for men with localized disease, including 
radical prostatectomy (retropubic, perineal, or robotic-assisted 
laparoscopic approaches), brachytherapy, and external-beam 
radiation therapy. For low-risk disease, the efficacy of each 
treatment modality is thought to be similar. For low-risk dis-
ease, radical prostatectomy (open or robotic) can be performed 
with unilateral or bilateral cavernosal nerve sparing to limit 
postoperative erectile dysfunction (ED). For high-risk disease, 
either non–nerve-sparing surgery or external-beam radiation 
therapy plus androgen deprivation may be performed. The asso-
ciated morbidity of each treatment differs, and it is important 
to discuss the side effects with patients. Irritative voiding and 
bowel symptoms are common after radiation therapy, with ED 
being a late side effect. Radical prostatectomy is associated with 
early incontinence and ED (depending on nerve sparing). Incon-
tinence improves significantly with time, with <1% of men in 
experienced hands suffering severe long-term problems with 
urinary control. Likewise, ED improves with time. The large 
majority of younger men (<55 years of age) regain erectile func-
tion, often with the aid of oral medications, if both cavernosal 
nerves are spared.20 Older men or those with no nerves or one 
nerve spared have lower rates of erectile function.
Active surveillance has emerged as a safe and viable 
option for men with anticipated survival of <10 years, low 
Gleason score (6), early-stage disease (cT1c), and small-
volume disease as determined by biopsy. Patients should be 
monitored closely with digital rectal exam, PSA testing, and 
repeat biopsy at 1 to 2 years to assess the possible progression 
of disease. Once prostate cancer has spread, it is no longer cur-
able. Medications that lower serum testosterone or that block 
the androgen receptor are able to control the disease, often for 
years, but the cancer inevitably becomes resistant to this treat-
ment. Nevertheless, patients with noncurable prostate cancer 
can live many years, and a large number die of causes other 
than prostate cancer.
Surgical Approach and Complications.  The approach for 
an open radical retropubic prostatectomy uses a lower midline 
incision from the pubic symphysis to approximately 5 cm below 
the umbilicus. The peritoneum is not entered. Lymph nodes are 
removed between the external iliac vein and obturator vessels 
bilaterally, although this may be omitted in cases where the 
probability of involvement is very low. Some regularly per-
form a wider dissection that may improve staging, although 
any therapeutic benefit is uncertain. The cavernosal nerves lay 
immediately posterolateral to the prostatic capsule. They may 
be spared if the cancer is not likely to penetrate the capsule on 
that side, which is a function of preoperative parameters such as 
biopsy results, PSA, and clinical examination. Robot-assisted 
laparoscopic radical prostatectomy has superseded laparoscopic 
prostatectomy due to the learning curve and increased agility 
that facilitates intracorporeal suturing. Benefits over open 
Table 40-2. 
American Association for the Surgery of Trauma renal 
injury scale
Grade
Injury Type
Description
1
Contusion
Microscopic or gross hematuria with 
normal imaging
Hematoma
Subcapsular, nonexpanding without 
parenchymal laceration
2
Hematoma
Nonexpanding perirenal hematoma 
confined to renal retroperitoneum
<1 cm in depth without urinary 
extravasation
3
Laceration
>1 cm in depth without collecting 
system rupture or urinary 
extravasation
4
Laceration
Parenchymal laceration through 
cortex, medulla, and collecting 
system
4
Vascular
Main renal artery or vein injury with 
contained hemorrhage
5
Laceration
Completely shattered kidney
5
Laceration
Avulsion of renal hilum leading to 
devascularized kidney
Source: Adapted with permission from Moore EE, Cogbill TH, Malan-
goni MA, et al. Organ injury scaling. Surg Clin North Am. 1995;75:293. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.
radical retropubic prostatectomy include lower blood loss and 
faster convalescence. Some claim faster return of continence 
and lower ED rates, but these findings have not yet been widely 
demonstrated.
Complications of prostatectomy depend on approach. 
Retropubic approaches may result in urine leaks, lymphocele, 
and very rarely, rectal or ureteral injury. Robotic prostatectomy 
uses a transperitoneal approach that can occasionally result in 
ileus, particularly in cases of a urine leak from the vesicoure-
thral anastomosis. All approaches carry a small risk of urinary 
incontinence and a more substantial risk of ED.
TRAUMA
Kidney
Renal injuries are more common during blunt trauma, 
accounting for 90% of injuries to the kidney. Any patient 
with a major deceleration injury, shock, or gross hematu-
ria should undergo radiographic imaging of the kidneys. All 
patients with penetrating injuries to the flank or abdomen 
must undergo imaging unless unstable and requiring immedi-
ate exploration.
Renal injuries are classified by extent of damage 
(Table 40-2). Blunt traumatic injuries usually can be managed 
conservatively, while penetrating renal injuries usually require 
exploration.  Urinary extravasation alone does not require explo-
ration, but reimaging is necessary and, if persistent leakage is 
1659
Urology
CHAPTER 40
present, a stent or nephrostomy tube is indicated. All grade V 
vascular injuries should be considered for immediate explora-
tion, as a delay of several hours greatly decreases the risk 
of renal salvage. High-grade renal injuries are associated 
with significant bleeding, but patients who are stable and with-
out a pulsatile or expanding hematoma can be observed. Even in 
expert hands, the risk of renal loss at surgery is significant and 
must be considered before opening the retroperitoneum. Addi-
tionally, most grade IV injuries can be managed nonoperatively 
(Fig. 40-6).21 Patients typically are placed on restricted activity 
until hematuria resolves. Table 40-3 lists indications for assess-
ing surgical intervention in renal trauma patients.
If immediate operative exploration for other injuries is 
required, renal injury staging can be performed while in the 
operating room. If concern exists over renal injury or the pres-
ence of a retroperitoneal hematoma, a single-shot, 10-minute 
delayed intravenous pyelogram (IVP) (2 mL/kg contrast) is 
useful at assessing the presence of two functional kidneys and 
4
Table 40-3.
Indications for surgical intervention for renal trauma
Absolute indications
  1.  Persistent, life-threatening hemorrhage from probable 
renal injury
  2.  Renal pedicle avulsion (grade 5 injury)
  3.  Expanding, pulsatile, or uncontained retroperitoneal 
hematoma
Relative indications
  1.  Large laceration of the renal pelvis or avulsion of the 
ureteropelvic junction
  2.  Coexisting bowel or pancreatic injuries
  3.  Persistent urinary leakage, postinjury urinoma, or 
perinephric abscess with failed percutaneous or 
endoscopic management
  4.  Abnormal intraoperative one-shot intravenous urogram
  5.  Devitalized parenchymal segment with associated urine 
leak
  6.  Complete renal artery thrombosis of both kidneys or of a 
solitary kidney when renal perfusion appears preserved
  7.  Renal vascular injuries after failed angiographic 
management
  8.  Renovascular hypertension
Source: Reproduced with permission of Wiley-Blackwell. From San-
tucci RA, Wessells H, Bartsch G, et al. Evaluation and management of 
renal injuries: consensus statement of the renal trauma subcommittee. 
BJU Int. 2004;93:937.
Figure 40-6.  Blunt renal trauma after a bicycle accident. A. A 
computed tomography image of a left kidney with several deep 
lacerations into the collecting system and a large perirenal hema-
toma. Delayed images showed urinary extravasation. This patient 
was managed nonoperatively. B. Computed tomography image 
at 45 days showing significant improvement in the appearance of 
the kidney.
extent of injury. If the IVP is abnormal or the hematoma is pul-
satile, renal exploration should be performed.
Renal exploration should begin once the renal hilum is 
controlled. Although rarely necessary, temporary control of 
the renal hilum may decrease the need for nephrectomy when 
a significant injury is found on exploration. Complete expo-
sure is necessary to evaluate the extent of injury. All nonvi-
able tissue should be débrided and segmental and intralobar 
arteries ligated with 4-0 chromic or polydioxanone sutures. If 
the collecting system is injured, it should be repaired at this 
time. A stent and percutaneous drain should be considered to 
prevent urinoma formation. A partial vascular injury to the 
renal vein or artery can be repaired with 5-0 or 6-0 Prolene 
sutures. A complete injury may require débridement, and if an 
end-to-end anastomosis cannot be performed, a vascular graft 
may be required.
Ureter
The retroperitoneal location of the ureter protects it from exter-
nal trauma, and blunt injury is rare but can occur with rapid 
deceleration injuries. Penetrating trauma may occur, but a high 
index of clinical suspicion is required to make the appropriate 
diagnosis. Any penetrating trauma involving the retroperito-
neum should undergo evaluation with intraoperative inspec-
tion, IVP, or CT urogram. A retrograde pyelogram is the most 
sensitive test for ureteral injury, and a stent can be placed if 
a partial transection is observed. The ureter also is frequently 
injured intraoperatively, most commonly from open and lapa-
roscopic surgical procedures including hysterectomy, low ante-
rior colonic resections, or aortic surgery. Endoscopic procedures 
such as ureteroscopy also can lead to ureteral injury such as 
perforation and avulsion.
1660
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Surgical repair depends on location and extent of injury. A 
briefly misplaced suture may be removed usually without conse-
quence. Partial injuries can be primarily repaired, although all 
devitalized tissue must be débrided to avoid delayed tissue break-
down and urinoma formation. Ureteral stents should be placed in 
this situation to facilitate healing without stricture. Lower ureteral 
injuries (below the iliac vessels) are best treated with ureteral 
reimplantation, as the blood supply can be tenuous, and strictures 
are more common with a distal uretero-ureterostomy.  Midure-
teral level injuries can be treated with a uretero-ureterostomy if a 
spatulated, tension-free repair can be achieved. For longer 
defects, the bladder can be mobilized and brought up to the 
psoas muscle (psoas hitch). For additional length, a tubularized 
flap of bladder (Boari flap) can be created and anastomosed to the 
remaining ureter. Renal mobilization with nephropexy by anchor-
ing to the psoas muscle can provide additional length. Autotrans-
plantation, transuretero-ureterostomy, and ileal ureter are rarely 
needed in the acute setting.
Bladder
Bladder injury can occur from penetrating and blunt trauma. 
The diagnosis should be entertained for any lower abdominal 
or pelvic trauma. Intraperitoneal ruptures are less common than 
retroperitoneal injuries but may be seen in the setting of a full 
bladder before injury. Bladder injuries often are associated 
with pelvic fractures and may frequently occur in conjunction 
with urethral injuries. Nearly all patients present with gross 
hematuria, although occasionally microscopic hematuria is 
present. A delayed presentation can be associated with intoxi-
cation, but it also may occur as a result of iatrogenic injury. 
These patients often have electrolyte abnormalities such as 
metabolic derangements, azotemia, and leukocytosis from 
urine absorption. Patients clinically present with fevers or a 
prolonged ileus.
Radiographic evaluation begins with either a fluoroscopic 
or CT cystogram. It is vital to avoid underfilling, as it may lead 
to a false-negative study. A preset amount can be instilled based 
on age calculations, which is typically approximately 300 to 400 
mL in adults. The bladder can be filled under gravity by raising 
the Foley catheter to 15 cm above the pubic ramus. The contrast 
material should be allowed to fill to the natural capacity of the 
bladder. It is important to have a postdrainage film to assess for 
persistent contrast, which may indicate a rupture.
Extraperitoneal bladder injuries can typically be managed 
with catheter drainage for 7 to 10 days.  If intraoperative explo-
ration is to occur for other injuries, repair can be per-
formed at that time. For patients with pelvic injuries that 
require placement of metal hardware, repair of the bladder rup-
ture should be performed concurrently. Intraperitoneal bladder 
injuries should be explored immediately and repaired.  How-
ever, in cases of a missed intraperitoneal injury, patients often 
do well with catheter drainage only. For large ruptures after 
repair, a suprapubic tube is recommended, but a large urethral 
catheter is sufficient for smaller injuries. All injuries, especially 
those managed nonoperatively, should be followed up by a cys-
togram to document healing before catheter removal.
Urethra
Urethral injuries can be divided by anterior (penile and bulbar 
urethra) and posterior (membranous and prostatic) location. Any 
patient with blunt pelvic trauma, blood present at the urethral 
meatus, hematuria, inability to void, or perineal hematoma should 
be considered to have a urethral injury until proven otherwise. 
Urethral injuries should be anticipated with pubic ramus fractures 
and occur in 10% of unilateral ramus and 20% of bilateral rami 
injuries.22
Staging is performed by retrograde urethrography. This 
study can be easily performed in the trauma suite with the 
patient in an oblique position and a 12F catheter placed in the 
urethral meatus. With the penis placed on traction, 30 mL of 
contrast is instilled while an x-ray is obtained during filling. 
The addition of fluoroscopy is a valuable addition to the proce-
dure but can be omitted if not available. A partial or complete 
disruption can be diagnosed based on extravasation or filling 
of the proximal urethra. Catheter placement can be attempted 
in patients with partial urethral injuries. Those with complete 
disruptions should have placement of a suprapubic tube.
Anterior injuries often are related to blunt straddle inju-
ries and penetrating trauma. Blunt anterior urethral injury can 
be managed in multiple ways, and only small series are avail-
able in the literature to compare methods. Immediate surgical 
repair is not recommended in the acute setting with the excep-
tion of low-velocity penetrating injuries. If the patient is stable 
with minimal hematoma formation, repair should be consid-
ered. In the setting of a 1- to 2-cm defect, the urethra can be 
débrided, spatulated, and anastomosed in an end-to-end, water-
tight fashion. Large defects should have treatment deferred, as 
grafts or flaps may be required for repair and the success may 
diminish with infections. For most cases, catheter drainage is 
recommended. Many advocate avoiding placement of a ure-
thral catheter, as it may convert a partial tear to a complete 
dissection. However, a single gentle passage performed by a 
urologist is safe. For a complete disruption, the placement of 
a suprapubic tube is recommended; however, a stricture at the 
site of injury may ensue.
Posterior urethral injuries usually result from pelvic 
crush injuries and shearing forces causing a prostatomembra-
nous disruption. The patient’s other injuries dictate urologic 
management. Initial open surgical exploration of the urethral 
injury should be avoided due to altered anatomy, risk of bleed-
ing, and high likelihood of incontinence and ED from injury 
of adjacent nerves. Patients can be managed with suprapu-
bic tube and delayed repair or with delayed primary realign-
ment. Primary endoscopic realignment, when possible, leads 
to decreased rates of strictures without increasing adverse 
outcomes.23,24
Urethral strictures can be caused by trauma or inflamma-
tory conditions. They should be staged with either a retrograde 
urethrography or voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG). Patients 
with short defects may be amenable to dilatation or cystoscopic 
urethrotomy. Depending on location, length, and severity, open 
repairs may be required. Long defects may require grafting to 
avoid significant penile shortening. Young patients should be 
considered for open surgical management to definitely repair 
the stricture due to the tendency of strictures to recur when 
treated with simple dilation.
Testes
Testicular injury most commonly occurs with blunt injuries 
when the testicle is forcibly compressed against the thigh or 
pubic bone with enough force to rupture the tunica albuginea. 
For patients with scrotal trauma, ultrasound is the preferred 
modality for staging the extent of injury. Ultrasound can 
evaluate the testicular blood flow, the presence of testicular 
5
6
1661
Urology
CHAPTER 40
contusions, intratesticular hematomas, hematoceles, or a dis-
rupted tunica albuginea. The presence of a hematocele should 
increase suspicion for testicular rupture because ultrasound may 
not detect the tunical defect in this setting.25
The goal of surgery is to salvage as much parenchyma as 
possible and to avoid delayed complications such as ischemic 
atrophy or abscess formation. A large hematocele, if not evacu-
ated, could lead to ischemic atrophy, and drainage should be 
considered. A ruptured tunica albuginea can be repaired primar-
ily, and nonviable parenchyma may need to be débrided. For 
penetrating trauma, immediate exploration is recommended for 
accurate staging and repair. Frequently, these injuries result in 
major devascularization and nonviable tissue (especially gun-
shot wounds). Although salvage may be possible, an orchiec-
tomy usually is required.
Penis
Penile fractures are injuries that involve a traumatic rupture 
of the tunica albuginea, usually occurring during sexual inter-
course—usually with the female partner on top. The engorged 
penile corporal bodies can rupture if sufficient force is generated 
against the partner’s pubic symphysis or perineum (Fig. 40-7). 
Men may notice an immediate audible “pop” and experience 
rapid penile detumescence. Immediate swelling develops. If 
Buck’s fascia is disrupted, swelling and ecchymosis can be 
noted throughout the perineum ("butterfly sign"). At presen-
tation, a classic “eggplant” appearance of the penis is often, 
although not always, seen. Exploration by a circumcising (de-
gloving) incision and repair of the defect offers the best chance 
at avoiding permanent ED and penile deformity while also mini-
mizing the risk of infection.26 A retrograde urethrogram should 
be performed to rule out urethral injury at the time of surgery. 
Alternatively, the urethra can be manually occluded intraopera-
tively at the penoscrotal junction and a dilute methylene blue 
solution injected under pressure into the urethral meatus with 
a catheter-tip syringe. Leakage should be visualized if there is 
a urethral disruption. If present, the urethra should be repaired, 
taking care not to significantly narrow the lumen. A Foley cath-
eter is left in place for several days after surgery. Any penetrat-
ing injury to the penis must undergo exploration to repair any 
injuries to the corporal bodies or the urethra.
EMERGENCIES
Acute Urinary Retention
Acute urinary retention (AUR) can happen in men or women 
and results from a variety of causes, although it most commonly 
occurs in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Other 
chronic causes of poor bladder emptying, such as diabetic neu-
ropathy, urethral stricture, multiple sclerosis, or Parkinson’s 
disease, can result in episodes of complete urinary retention, 
often when the bladder becomes overdistended. This frequently 
occurs in the hospital setting when patients have limited mobil-
ity and are receiving medications that decrease bladder contrac-
tility, including opiates or anticholinergics.  Constipation, 
a common side effect of those medications, can itself 
worsen urinary retention. Significant hematuria can result in the 
formation of blood clots, which may block the urethra and cause 
retention.
Although some patients receiving large doses of narcot-
ics or those with chronically decompensated bladders may not 
experience discomfort, most patients with AUR have signifi-
cant pain. If the urinary retention has lasted several days (often 
accompanied by overflow incontinence), patients may develop 
acute renal failure. Treatment should include placement of a 
urethral catheter as quickly as possible. However, BPH or ure-
thral strictures often make the placement of a catheter difficult. 
For men with BPH, a coude (French for curved) catheter is help-
ful in negotiating past the angulation in the prostatic urethra 
(Fig. 40-8A). The curved portion (which is angled in line with 
the balloon port) is maintained at the 12 o’clock position as it is 
passed through the urethra (Fig. 40-8B). A common mistake is 
to use a smaller catheter to bypass the enlarged prostate. How-
ever, a larger (18F to 20F) catheter is less flexible and is more 
likely to push into the bladder rather than curl in the prostatic 
urethra. Smaller catheters are useful for bypassing a urethral 
stricture. A urethral stricture should be suspected when the cath-
eter meets resistance closer to the meatus, as many strictures 
occur in the distal urethra, which is narrower than the proximal 
portion. Using a 12F or 14F catheter often will allow the pas-
sage of the catheter into the bladder. If catheter placement is 
not successful, a urologic consultation should be requested. The 
urologist can either choose to (a) use a cystoscope, guidewire, 
7
Figure 40-7.  Penile fracture. A. A patient with a penile fracture that was suspected based on history and examination. Note the lack of skin 
discoloration that is often present. B. Intraoperative finding of bilateral corporal body ruptures (arrows) along the ventral penile surface. The 
urethra, which is between the surgeon’s fingers, surprisingly escaped injury.
1662
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
and urethral dilators to dilate the stricture and place a Counsel-
tip catheter via Seldinger technique; or (b) place a suprapubic 
tube approximately two fingerbreadths above the pubic symphy-
sis. With regard to the suprapubic tube, aspiration with a finder 
needle should be used first to localize the bladder and avoid 
intra-abdominal contents, although bowel injury is unlikely with 
a distended bladder filling the pelvis. If hematuria is the cause 
of retention, continuous bladder irrigation often is necessary to 
prevent clot formation. This is done through a large three-way 
catheter that has an additional port for fluid inflow. Fluid is 
infused by gravity only because the use of higher pressure may 
result in bladder rupture if outflow is occluded.
A urinalysis should be checked because a poorly empty-
ing bladder is prone to infection. Renal function also should be 
assessed for those in AUR by checking the creatinine level. An 
elevated creatinine level suggests that AUR has resulted in renal 
dysfunction, and these patients are at risk for postobstructive diure-
sis. These patients must be closely watched for excessive urine 
output, often caused by an osmotic diuresis due to retained nitrog-
enous waste products or a temporary renal concentrating defect. 
Fluid and electrolytes must be replaced if the urine output exceeds 
200 mL/h, especially if hemodynamic instability or electrolyte 
imbalances are seen. Fluid replacement typically is 0.5 mL of 0.45 
normal saline for every 1 mL of urine output above 200 mL in 
1 hour, although sodium and potassium supplementation require-
ments depend on the electrolyte status of the patient.
Once the bladder is adequately drained, the cause of AUR 
should be addressed. For men with suspected BPH, an α-blocker 
such as tamsulosin should be started. Although finasteride and 
dutasteride (5α-reductase inhibitors) have been shown to reduce 
the incidence of urinary retention by 50%, they require a few 
months to take effect and, hence, will not provide significant 
benefit in the short term. Narcotics should be tapered as tol-
erated, and constipation should be treated. Acute spinal cord 
compression, which is accompanied by saddle paresthesias, is 
a neurologic emergency that requires neurosurgical or orthope-
dic consultation. In most cases, except severe neurologic inju-
ries, patients will be able to resume voiding, and the catheter 
can be removed after 1 to 2 days. Postvoid residuals should be 
checked with a portable ultrasound device (bladder scanner) or 
by “straight” catheterization to determine the residual amount 
of urine left after the patient tries to empty his or her bladder. In 
patients with severe liver dysfunction, the bladder scanner may 
inadvertently misinterpret ascites for urine. The inability to void 
or the presence of a postvoid residual over 200 mL is concerning 
for development of another episode of AUR. Patients may be 
given the option of an indwelling catheter for another few days 
with a subsequent voiding trial, or learning to clean intermittent 
catheterization (CIC), whereby, after predetermined intervals 
(4–6 hours) or after voiding attempts, the patient passes a cath-
eter into the bladder and empties it. This is the preferred method, 
because it reduces the likelihood of infections from indwell-
ing catheters and may improve bladder functionality. However, 
most patients are resistant to this approach.
Testicular Torsion
The differential diagnosis of acute scrotal pain includes testicu-
lar torsion. This usually occurs in neonates or adolescent males 
but may be observed in other age groups. The blood supply to 
the testicle is compromised due to twisting of the spermatic cord 
within the tunica vaginalis, resulting in ischemia to the epididy-
mis and the testis. In newborns, an extravaginal torsion also 
can occur with twisting of the tunica vaginalis and spermatic 
cord together. Risk factors for torsion include undescended 
testis, testicular tumor, and a “bell-clapper” deformity—poor 
gubernacular fixation of the testicles to the scrotal wall.
Clinical history is vital for diagnosis. Patients describe a 
sudden onset of pain at a distinct point in time, with subsequent 
swelling. Physical examination may demonstrate a swollen, 
asymmetric scrotum with a tender, high-riding testicle. Children 
normally have a brisk cremasteric reflex that usually is lost in 
the setting of torsion. The diagnosis is made by clinical his-
tory and examination, but can be supported by a Doppler ultra-
sound, which typically shows decreased intratesticular blood 
flow relative to the contralateral testis. If an ultrasound is not 
promptly available, timely surgical exploration should ensue if 
there is reasonable suspicion of torsion. However, besides ruling 
out other pathologies, an ultrasound can rule out an associated 
testicular neoplasm that would necessitate tumor serum marker 
evaluation and an inguinal, rather than a scrotal, incision.
Immediate surgical exploration can salvage an isch-
emic testis.  More than 80% of testes can be salvaged if sur-
gery is performed within 6 hours; this rate decreases to <20% 
as time lapses beyond 12 hours.27 At the time of surgery, the 
Bladder
Urethra
Posterior prostate
Anterior prostate
A
Figure 40-8.  Coude catheter. A. A schematic drawing of a lateral 
view of the prostatic urethra showing the upward angulation at 
the bladder neck, which a coude catheter is helpful in negotiating. 
B. The tip of a coude catheter. Note the curved tip, which should 
always point to 12 o’clock when inserted.
1663
Urology
CHAPTER 40
contralateral testes also must be explored and fixed to the 
dartos fascia due to the possibility that the same anatomic 
defect allowing torsion exists on the contralateral side. Midline 
(along the median raphe) or bilateral transverse scrotal incisions 
are made. Once the testis is detorsed, it should be assessed for 
viability after being given time for normal blood flow to resume. 
One can assess for blood flow by intraoperative Doppler or by 
incising the tunica vaginalis and examining for blood. The testes 
are fixed to the dartos fascia with a small, nonabsorbable suture 
on their medial, lateral, and dependent aspects, taking care to 
ensure that the spermatic cord is not twisted before doing so. An 
orchiectomy should be performed to avoid later risk of abscess 
formation only if the testis is clearly necrotic because overall 
testicular function may be improved with testicular preservation 
in cases of moderately delayed (15 hours) presentation.28
Fournier’s Gangrene
Fournier’s gangrene is a necrotizing fasciitis of the male geni-
talia and perineum that can be rapidly progressing and fatal if 
not treated promptly (Fig. 40-9A). The mortality rate has been 
reported to be as high as 30% to 40%.29 Risk factors for Fourni-
er’s gangrene include urethral strictures, perirectal abscesses, 
poor perineal hygiene, diabetes, cancer, human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV), and other immunocompromised states.30 
The infection spreads along the dartos, Scarpa’s, and Colles’ 
fascias. Clinical signs include fevers, perineal and scrotal pain, 
and associated indurated tissue. Cellulitis, eschars, necrosis, 
flaking skin, and crepitus may all be observed. The diagnosis is 
largely made on clinical suspicion, and significantly less often 
made on laboratory or radiographic findings. Classically, the 
patient describes pain out of proportion to the physical findings.
Prompt débridement of nonviable tissue and broad-
spectrum antibiotics are necessary to prevent further spread 
(Fig. 40-9B).  If there is damage to the external anal sphincter, 
patients may require a colostomy.30 Because the testes have a 
separate blood supply, they are usually not threatened and 
do not need to be removed. They may be tucked subcuta-
neously into the thigh ("thigh pouch") to ease postoperative 
management. Patients frequently require return trips to the oper-
ating room for further débridement. Tight glucose control and 
adequate nutrition are necessary to facilitate wound healing. The 
large tissue defect should be initially treated with frequent 
dressing changes. Reconstructive strategies involving skin 
grafting are needed when large tissue defects result from exten-
sive tissue damage.
Priapism
Priapism is a persistent erection for greater than 4 hours unre-
lated to sexual stimulation. Priapism is divided into two types, 
based on the underlying pathophysiology. The most common 
type—low-flow/ischemic priapism—is a medical emergency. 
On examination, the penis is very tender, and both cavernosal 
bodies will be rigid while the glans will be flaccid. Decreased 
venous outflow with persistent inflow results in increased intra-
corporeal pressure and tumescence, which is the normal process 
of erection. Diminished arterial inflow due to elevated intrape-
nile pressure usually is brief under normal circumstances. Pria-
pism is essentially a compartment syndrome.30 With prolonged 
erection (priapism), the sustained decrease in arterial inflow ulti-
mately causes tissue hypoxia, acidosis, and edema and results in 
long-term fibrosis and impotence, and sometimes frank necro-
sis. Risk factors include sickle cell disease or trait, malignancy, 
medications, cocaine abuse, certain antidepressants, and total 
parenteral nutrition.32-34 If a cause is not identified, a hematologic 
workup is necessary to rule out malignancy or blood dyscrasias.
The management of priapism is rapid detumescence with 
the goal of preservation of future erectile function. The abil-
ity to achieve normal erections is directly related to length of 
the episode of priapism.30 Low-flow priapism can be confirmed 
with a penile blood gas of the cavernosal bodies demonstrating 
hypoxic, acidotic blood. Initial management can include oral 
agents such as pseudoephedrine or baclofen, but more aggres-
sive measures usually are necessary to achieve rapid detumes-
cence. Insertion of a large-gauge needle (18-gauge) into the 
lateral aspect of one corporal body allows thorough aspira-
tion and irrigation of both corporal bodies because of widely 
communicating channels. Injection of phenylephrine (up to 
200 mg in 20 mL normal saline) into the corporal bodies may 
be required. For those with sickle cell disease, hydration and 
9
Figure 40-9.  Fournier’s gangrene. A. Necrotic scrotal skin from 
Fournier’s gangrene. B. Débridement of gangrenous tissue. Note 
the extensive débridement, which is commonly required. The right 
testicle required removal in this case (the left is wrapped in gauze), 
but typically the testes are not involved with the necrotic process.
8
1664
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
oxygen administration should be performed first, because these 
are sometimes successful in this group.35
A surgical shunt is sometimes necessary to resolve the 
episode. Distal shunts should be performed first, because they 
can be done quickly in the emergency room with a True-Cut 
needle (Winter shunt). If this fails, an operative distal shunt can 
be performed (Al-Ghorab). Proximal shunts such as Grayhack 
(corporal-saphenous vein) or Quackel (proximal cavernosum-
spongiosum) shunts may be required in refractory cases.
The other form, high-flow/traumatic priapism, is rare and 
is related to penile or perineal trauma resulting in a cavernous 
artery–corporal body fistula. This form is not painful because it 
is not related to ischemia and can be managed conservatively. 
Many cases will resolve with time; those that do not can undergo 
selective arterial embolization.36
Paraphimosis
Foreskin emergencies occur in uncircumcised men. Paraphi-
mosis is a common problem that represents a true medical 
emergency. When foreskin is retracted for prolonged periods, 
constriction of the glans penis may ensue. This is particularly 
likely in hospitalized patients who are confined to bed or who 
have altered mentation. Edema often forms in the genitals 
of supine patients due to the dependent position of that area. 
Patients with diminished consciousness will not be aware of the 
penile pain from paraphimosis, which may delay recognition of 
the problem until too late. Delay can be catastrophic as penile 
necrosis may occur due to ischemia.37 Penile blocks, pain medi-
cation, and sedation are sometimes necessary before manual 
reduction. It is useful to apply firm pressure to the edematous 
distal penis for several minutes. Although painful, this reduc-
tion in penile edema can be the key to success. With the fingers 
pulling the constricting band distally, the thumbs can push the 
glans penis back into normal location. If the foreskin cannot be 
manually reduced, surgical intervention is required.
Emphysematous Pyelonephritis
Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a life-threatening infection 
that results from complicated pyelonephritis by gas-producing 
organisms. It is an acute necrotizing infection of the kidney that 
occurs predominantly in diabetic patients.38 Patients frequently 
present with sepsis and ketoacidosis. Escherichia coli appears 
to be the most frequent organism responsible for this infection.39
Patients require supportive care, intravenous (IV) antibiotics, 
and relief of any urinary tract obstruction. Emphysematous pyelo-
nephritis can be subdivided based on extent of infection. Those with 
gas confined to the parenchyma frequently can be managed conser-
vatively with placement of a nephrostomy tube to allow drainage 
of purulent material. Patients with extensive involvement of the 
perirenal tissue may not respond to conservative management, and 
strong consideration should be given to expeditious nephrectomy, 
particularly if the patient is displaying signs of sepsis.40
INFECTIONS
Cystitis
Cystitis is an infection in the bladder with common symptoms 
of dysuria, urinary frequency, and urgency. Urinary culture 
(105 colony-forming units) is necessary to make a definitive 
diagnosis, although lower thresholds are meaningful if clinical 
suspicion is high. Urinalysis can assist with the diagnosis, as 
leukocyte esterase is a marker of inflammation, and nitrites are 
formed from bacterial reduction of nitrates. Risk factors include 
female gender, urinary instrumentation, urinary obstruction, 
diabetes, and neurologic bladder dysfunction.
An uncomplicated episode of cystitis requires a 3-day 
course of antibiotics. Those with complicated cystitis require 
7 days of antibiotics and possible imaging studies. Asymptom-
atic bacteriuria does not necessarily need to be treated except 
if found in a pregnant woman, before a planned urinary tract 
surgery, or with associated urinary tract obstruction. Patients 
undergoing nonurologic surgery also should be considered for 
treatment, especially in surgery involving cardiac valves or 
orthopedic hardware.
Pyelonephritis
Pyelonephritis is a bacterial infection of the kidney that usually 
manifests itself by fevers and flank tenderness. It is frequently 
attributed to ascending bacteria along the path of the ureters 
and is rarely due to hematogenous bacterial spread. Patients 
typically present with flank pain and fevers. However, very 
young or elderly patients may not demonstrate these symptoms 
but rather irritability, poor appetite, or altered mental status. 
Urinary tract imaging is not required unless urinary obstruction 
or stones are suspected or the patient is not responding to anti-
biotics. Patients who are not septic and can tolerate fluids can be 
discharged home on a 2-week course of oral antibiotics. Other-
wise, they should be hospitalized for IV antibiotics. Fevers from 
pyelonephritis may take 24 to 48 hours to subside in the setting 
of effective antibiotic therapy. Pyelonephritis can result in renal 
scarring that is accelerated in the setting of urinary obstruc-
tion. Emphysematous pyelonephritis can be a life-threatening 
condition with a mortality of up to 30% (see Emphysematous 
Pyelonephritis in the Emergencies section).
Occasionally, pyelonephritis can develop into an abscess 
that can be located within the renal parenchyma (renal abscess) 
or between the capsule and Gerota’s fascia (perinephric abscess). 
Any patient who is not properly responding to antibiotic therapy 
after 72 hours should undergo CT imaging to rule out an abscess 
or obstruction. Treatment consists of broad-spectrum IV antibi-
otics and percutaneous drainage.
Prostatitis
Acute prostatitis is a bacterial infection in the prostate gland, 
most commonly by urinary pathogens. Patients present with 
fevers, dysuria, and perineal or back discomfort. A digital rectal 
examination may indicate an indurated and tender gland. How-
ever, a brisk digital rectal examination should be avoided, as it 
is extremely uncomfortable for patients and is thought to cause 
bacteremia. Patients require a 4- to 6-week course of antibiotic 
therapy, typically a quinolone. Those who continue to have no 
improvement after 48 hours should be considered for imag-
ing to rule out a prostatic abscess. If present, large abscesses 
can be managed with transurethral unroofing or percutaneous 
drainage.
Chronic prostatitis presents with continued lower urinary 
tract symptoms and pelvic pain. Chronic prostatitis may be bac-
terial or nonbacterial, which can be distinguished by culturing 
pre- and postprostatic massage urine. The bacterial form is a 
frequent cause of recurrent urinary tract infections in men and 
can be treated with a prolonged course of antibiotics. Chronic 
nonbacterial prostatitis does not respond to antibiotics or most 
other medications. Biofeedback, physical therapy, and other 
non–prostate-specific treatments may be effective in the treat-
ment of this challenging clinical entity.41
1665
Urology
CHAPTER 40
Epididymo-orchitis
Epididymo-orchitis is typically the result of bacterial infection 
originating in the urinary tract. However, most men will not 
show evidence of urinary tract infection. Symptoms consist of 
unilateral painful swelling of the epididymis and/or testis, often 
with fever. The scrotum may be erythematous on the side of 
involvement. The white blood cell (WBC) count often is ele-
vated. The onset is fairly rapid, but not as sudden as torsion. An 
ultrasound may provide supporting evidence such as increased 
blood flow to the epididymis. A reactive hydrocele may be 
present. Intratesticular infection can result in ischemic orchitis, 
and reduced testicular blood flow can be seen on ultrasound. 
Although the clinical history of gradual onset may point to an 
infectious etiology, scrotal exploration is necessary when blood 
flow is reduced to rule out torsion unless other signs such as 
pyuria, elevated WBC count, or fevers are present.
Treatment is with oral antibiotics if the patient is not mark-
edly febrile and is otherwise stable. Hospitalization and paren-
teral antibiotics are required if the patient has high fevers or 
significantly elevated WBC or is hemodynamic unstable, as sep-
sis from epididymo-orchitis is possible. Intratesticular abscesses 
may form and usually result in orchiectomy. The tunica albu-
ginea of the testis is not compliant, so elevated pressures from 
intratesticular inflammation can result in ischemic necrosis of 
the parenchyma.
LOWER URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
BPH is a clinical diagnosis describing urinary symptoms attrib-
utable to obstruction by the prostate, although some patients 
with BPH have minimally enlarged glands, and some with large 
prostates have no symptoms. The symptoms of BPH are urinary 
frequency, urgency, hesitancy, slow stream, and/or nocturia. 
These symptoms are not specific and may be caused by infec-
tion, urethral strictures, or neurologic dysfunction from diabe-
tes, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, or spinal 
cord injury. Besides voiding symptoms, consequences of BPH 
include gross hematuria, infections due to incomplete emptying, 
bladder calculi, and urinary retention. Over time, incomplete 
emptying may lead to chronic bladder overdistension that can 
result in a defunctionalized bladder.
Medical treatment of BPH is usually the first step. 
α-Blockers act on α receptors in the smooth muscle of the 
prostate and decrease its tone. 5α-Reductase inhibitors, which 
block the conversion of testosterone to the more potent Z, shrink 
the prostate over several months. Both are used either singly 
or in combination as medical therapy for BPH. If medications 
are ineffective at alleviating urinary symptoms or other con-
sequences of BPH, surgical intervention is indicated. Trans-
urethral resection of the prostate is the mainstay of endoscopic 
surgical BPH treatment. It is extremely effective at improving 
flow and decreasing residual urine. Complications are rare but 
include incontinence and excessive fluid absorption of the hypo-
tonic irrigating solution used during resection, resulting in the 
transurethral resection syndrome. It is due to hyponatremia and 
fluid overload, and although rare, can result in death. Mental 
status changes and pulmonary edema are managed by diuresis 
and sodium supplementation with hypertonic saline in severe 
cases. Because of these rare, but potentially dangerous side 
effects, laser or electrovaporization of the prostate has grown 
popular. It is associated with very limited fluid absorption, and 
saline can be used because there is no monopolar electrocautery. 
There also is less bleeding. Urinary outcomes appear to be simi-
lar to transurethral resection of the prostate.42 When the pros-
tate is very enlarged (>100 g), endoscopic management is less 
effective and open surgical procedures can be used. Suprapubic 
(simple) prostatectomy involves enucleation of the majority of 
the prostate, but the capsule is left so there is minimal effect on 
continence and erectile function.
Urethral Stricture
The voiding symptoms of urethral stricture are very similar to 
BPH. Strictures may result from scarring due to infectious ure-
thritis, prior instrumentation, trauma, or cancer. Urethral carci-
noma is very rare, particularly in males, so most strictures are 
due to benign causes. Diagnosis is by retrograde urethrogram or 
cystoscopy. They may be treated with dilation or transurethral 
incision, but they have a tendency to recur after treatment. Open 
surgical excision is preferred for long or recalcitrant strictures, 
and long-term success rates are excellent.43
UPPER URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION
The hallmark of partial or complete upper urinary tract obstruc-
tion is hydroureteronephrosis (HN), with the ureteral dilation 
extending to the level of the obstruction (Fig. 40-10). HN may 
be seen on CT imaging or ultrasound, and it may range from 
very mild to severe, with associated parenchymal thinning in 
chronic cases. In the acute setting, the degree of HN does not 
necessarily correlate with the degree of obstruction, as it may 
take time for severe HN to develop. The obstruction may be 
intrinsic, as with calculi or ureteral tumors, or due to extrinsic 
Figure 40-10.  Hydronephrosis and ureteral calculus. A. Left hydronephrosis from distal obstruction (arrow). B. A 4-mm calculus at the 
ureterovesical junction (arrow).
1666
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
compression due to varied causes, such as an intra-abdominal 
tumor, iliac aneurysm, or gravid uterus. Serum creatinine may 
be elevated, but the contralateral kidney will compensate so 
serum chemistries may not indicate renal impairment. Nor-
mal renal function makes intervention less urgent, but even 
partial obstruction may result in permanent loss of function 
on the affected side if not alleviated within several weeks.44 
Complete occlusion can cause permanent dysfunction within 
2 weeks.45
Treatment of ureteral obstruction is by endoscopic place-
ment of a ureteral stent, which is a temporary plastic tube with 
curls on each end to prevent migration. Stents allow flow both 
through the lumen and around it. When chronic stenting is 
required, it must be changed every 3 months to prevent severe 
encrustation with urinary sediments. Stents commonly become 
colonized with bacteria, but symptomatic infections are less 
common.46 Once a stent is in place, mild residual HN often will 
persist due to ureteral aperistalsis and urinary reflux, but unless 
severe, it does not represent residual obstruction.
When stent placement is unsuccessful or fails to provide 
adequate drainage due to severe extrinsic compression, a percu-
taneous nephrostomy (PCN) should be placed. This is the pre-
ferred approach when a patient is unstable because it requires 
less anesthesia and provides more rapid and reliable decompres-
sion of the renal collecting system.
Urolithiasis
Urolithiasis, or urinary calculus disease, may affect up to 10% 
of the population over the course of a lifetime.47 Calculi are 
crystalline aggregates of one or more components, most com-
monly calcium oxalate. They also may contain calcium phos-
phate, magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite), uric acid, 
or cystine. Calcium- and struvite-containing stones often are 
visible on plain radiographs, but CT scans will demonstrate 
all calculi except those composed of crystalline-excreted indi-
navir, an antiretroviral medication.48 For this reason, noncon-
trast CT scans have become the study of choice to evaluate for 
urolithiasis.
Several underlying causes exist for the formation of uri-
nary calculi. Hypercalciuria due to hyperparathyroidism, sar-
coidosis, “renal leaks,” or idiopathic overabsorption can lead to 
calcium-containing stones. Patients often will develop calculi 
after gastric bypass, which has been attributed to increased oxa-
late excretion in the urine.49 After bypass, dietary calcium is 
bound by unabsorbed dietary fats (saponification), preventing 
it from binding dietary oxalate, thereby making oxalate more 
available for intestinal absorption. Patients with gout are at 
risk for uric acid stones due to increased urinary uric acid and 
decreased urine pH, which diminishes uric acid solubility.
Urinary calculi may occur anywhere in the urinary tract. 
They usually are asymptomatic in the renal pelvis or bladder, but 
they are a very common cause of symptomatic ureteral obstruc-
tion. The obstruction may be partial or complete. Smaller stones 
(up to 6 mm) may cause severe symptoms, such as flank pain and 
nausea, but typically pass without intervention beyond 
supportive care.50  α-Blockers, which relax the distal 
ureter, may be given to reduce renal colic.51 Calculi ≥7 mm are 
more likely to become impacted or to have a prolonged passage 
through the ureter. For this reason, intervention at the time of 
presentation is preferred for larger stones (except in cases where 
the calculus is in the very distal ureter) due to the likelihood of 
repeat emergency room visits for severe symptoms. 
Several methods for treating urinary calculi are available, 
depending on location. Obstructing stones often are tempo-
rized with stent placement, which allows proximal collecting 
system decompression. When urinary infection coexists with 
an obstructing stone, a stent can be placed, but a PCN is pref-
erable if the patient demonstrates any instability. Definitive 
treatment of renal or ureteral calculi (lithotripsy) is through 
ureteroscopy, percutaneous nephrostolithotomy (PCNL), or 
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL). Ureteroscopy 
is performed with a flexible or semirigid device that is passed 
to the level of the calculus. Under direct visualization, a laser 
fiber is passed through the scope, and energy is delivered to 
fragment the calculus. Fragments are extracted, although they 
usually will pass spontaneously. PCNL is performed through 
a percutaneous tract into the kidney, where a larger scope and 
various energy sources (laser, ultrasound) are used to frag-
ment and aspirate large renal calculi. This approach is well 
suited to staghorn calculi. ESWL is completely noninvasive 
and uses a device that delivers convergent shockwave energy 
to the calculus under fluoroscopic guidance. However, the 
lower efficacy rate of ESWL, when compared with ureteros-
copy or PCNL, highlights the point that despite ESWL being 
less invasive, patients will often undergo multiple procedures 
to be rendered stone free.
Complications of lithotripsy are specific to the technique 
used. Ureteroscopy may occasionally lead to strictures due to 
scarring from trauma to the ureter. If performed in the setting of 
infection, endoscopic irrigation can force bacteria into the renal 
parenchyma and result in sepsis. PCNL can cause significant 
bleeding, and if the tract used to access the kidney traverses 
the lower aspect of the pleura, large amounts of irrigating fluid 
can result in a significant hydrothorax. ESWL can occasionally 
cause renal hematomas, and splenic rupture has been seen after 
the treatment of a left-sided stone.52,53
Patients with recurrent stones will benefit from exami-
nation of stone composition and 24-hour urine metabolic 
workup to determine the underlying etiology. Better hydration 
is useful for all etiologies. Additionally, most patients will 
benefit from alkalization of the urine (e.g., potassium citrate). 
Patients with calcium-containing stones do not benefit from 
a reduction in dietary calcium unless they have absorptive 
hypercalciuria, which most do not. In fact, patients with 
higher dietary calcium have, on average, fewer episodes of 
urolithiasis.54
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a process resulting in encasement 
of the ureters, along with the great vessels, in a dense fibrotic 
mass. Many patients present in acute renal failure, and imaging 
demonstrates medially displaced ureters with a homogeneous, 
plaque-like mass in the retroperitoneum. The cause may occa-
sionally be a neoplastic process such as histiocytosis or lym-
phoma—which must be ruled out—but most are idiopathic.55 
Many medications such as the ergot derivative methysergide, 
methyldopa, and β-blockers have been implicated as precipitat-
ing factors for the inflammatory process.56
Bilateral ureteral stent or PCN placement provides tem-
porary relief of the obstruction. Corticosteroids may be given 
to reverse the inflammatory process, but surgical ureterolysis 
still usually is required to free the ureters from retroperitoneal 
encasement. They are brought into the peritoneum and wrapped 
in omentum to prevent re-entrapment.
10
1667
Urology
CHAPTER 40
PEDIATRIC UROLOGY
Ureteropelvic Junction Obstruction
UPJ obstruction is the most common cause of hydronephrosis 
found on prenatal ultrasound. UPJ obstruction also is commonly 
observed in children and young adults. Intrinsic and extrinsic 
causes of UPJ obstruction exist and can be determined by pre-
sentation. Intrinsic UPJ obstruction occurs in neonates due to an 
adynamic or stenotic segment of proximal ureter. This impairs 
flow of urine into the ureter, particularly during times of high 
flow, and causes dilatation of the collecting system. Over time, 
elevated renal pelvic pressures and recurrent infections can 
injure renal parenchyma. Abnormal lower pole (i.e., accessory) 
renal arteries may be a secondary cause of UPJ obstruction by 
kinking the proximal ureter. Nuclear scans (mercaptoacetyltri-
glycine or 99mTc diethylene-triamine-penta-acetic acid) have 
replaced the IVP as the diagnostic modality of choice. Delayed 
clearance of contrast or radiotracer implies obstruction. Inva-
sive pressure-flow examinations (Whitaker test) rarely are per-
formed.
Not every case of UPJ obstruction requires operative inter-
vention. Many children with hydronephrosis due to an appar-
ent UPJ obstruction are not highly obstructed and will improve 
with time. However, patients with infections or impaired renal 
function require repair to improve drainage. Open dismembered 
pyeloplasty is considered the gold standard approach, especially 
in infants. In older children or adults, laparoscopic or robotic 
approaches for pyeloplasty can expedite convalescence and 
diminish postoperative pain. An endoscopic approach, endopy-
elotomy, is also an option in older children and adults. However, 
it is not as effective as a dismembered pyeloplasty. Surgery 
involves ureteroscopy and a full-thickness lateral incision into 
the affected ureteral segment with a laser or knife taking care 
not to injure the renal hilar vessels (or accessory vessels in cases 
of a crossing vessel).
Vesicoureteral Reflux
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is the second most common cause 
of hydronephrosis after UPJ obstruction. Up to two thirds of 
infants presenting with urinary tract infections have VUR.57 
VUR is significantly more common among white children (10 
times as common) than black children. Although VUR is more 
prevalent in male newborns, among children older than 1 year 
of age, girls are five to six times more likely to have VUR than 
boys. The incidence of VUR decreases with advancing age. 
Primary reflux is a congenital anomaly caused by insufficient 
intramural tunneling of the distal ureter, although bladder outlet 
obstruction may cause unilateral or bilateral secondary reflux 
when the ureters are anatomically normal. The primary danger 
of VUR is reflux of infected urine that results in recurrent epi-
sodes of pyelonephritis, which can cause scarring and cumula-
tive renal damage.
Neonates with hydronephrosis detected on prenatal ultra-
sound or infants/children experiencing a urinary tract infection 
should be evaluated for VUR with a voiding cystourethrogram 
(VCUG). VUR is graded according to the International Clas-
sification System. Spontaneous resolution of VUR, which is the 
norm, is a function of the grade of VUR.58 The large major-
ity of low-grade (1–2) reflux cases will spontaneously resolve, 
whereas 30% to 50% of grade 3 and 4 reflux cases and 9% of 
grade 5 reflux cases will resolve.58,59 The initial management 
of VUR is controversial, particularly for moderate degrees. 
Surgical repair with ureteral reimplantation is effective, but 
may be overtreatment for those destined to resolve spontane-
ously. However, conservative management, consisting of anti-
biotic prophylaxis, may result in breakthrough infections with 
resistant organisms. Submucosal injection of bulking agents at 
the ureteral orifice (Deflux¯) is being used with increasing fre-
quency. Although patients with high-grade VUR still undergo 
ureteral reimplantation, those with low-grade VUR are increas-
ingly more likely to undergo submucosal injection of bulking 
agents instead of being managed conservatively. It is a mini-
mally invasive technique that may, in some patients, obviate the 
need for long-term suppressive antibiotics. Submucosal bulking 
is not effective in every case, and patients with severe reflux 
will likely need reimplantation.
Ureteroceles
A ureterocele is a cystic dilation of the terminal ureter thought 
to result from a persistent membrane between the ureteral 
bud and the urogenital sinus. Most patients will have asso-
ciated genitourinary anomalies such as duplicated collecting 
systems or an ectopic ureteral location. Patients frequently 
present during childhood and can present in multiple ways 
depending on size and degree of obstruction. Patients may 
have hydronephrosis and pyelonephritis. A large, prolapsing 
ureterocele can cause bladder outlet obstruction, and rarely, 
a large ureterocele can present as an intralabial mass in a 
newborn child. Diagnosis can be confirmed with cystoscopy, 
VCUG, or IVP.
Patients with a functioning renal moiety can undergo endo-
scopic incision of the ureterocele; however, VUR is common 
postoperatively. A ureterocele in a nonfunctioning duplicated 
system may require a heminephrectomy to avoid infections.
Posterior Urethral Valve
Posterior urethral valves can be a particularly damaging cause 
of bilateral hydronephrosis in a newborn boy. The “valves,” 
which are tissue folds located in the prostatic urethra, cause 
bladder outlet obstruction. Diagnosis is established with a 
VCUG, which may show poor bladder emptying and a dilated 
posterior urethra. A Foley catheter should be placed in the blad-
der to decompress the urinary system in the hopes of facilitat-
ing recovery of renal function. Treatment involves cystoscopic 
ablation or resection of the valve. Even after ablation of the 
valves and elimination of the urethral obstruction, patients with 
posterior urethral valves are at significant risk of renal failure, 
depending on the degree of prenatal obstruction.60 Bladders fre-
quently suffer damage and become partially defunctionalized 
from prolonged prenatal obstruction, and normal voiding pat-
terns often are not established. The most serious outcome of 
posterior urethral valves is pulmonary hypoplasia due to intra-
uterine oligohydramnios, and efforts have been made prenatally 
to transplacentally decompress the urinary bladder and prevent 
this dreaded development.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Wynder EL, Goldsmith R. The epidemiology of bladder can-
cer: a second look. Cancer. 1977;40:1246.
2.	Canter D, Guzzo TJ, Resnick MJ, et al. Hydronephrosis is 
an independent predictor of poor clinical outcome in patients 
treated for muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinoma with 
radical cystectomy. Urology. 2008;72:379.
1668
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
3.	 Stein JP, Cai J, Groshen S, et al. Risk factors for patients 
with pelvic lymph node metastases following radical cys-
tectomy with en bloc pelvic lymphadenectomy: concept of 
lymph node density. J Urol. 2003;170:35.
4.	Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy 
alone for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2003;349:859.
5.	Lawrance WT, Rumohr JA, Chang SS, et al. Contemporary 
open radical cystectomy: analysis of perioperative outcomes. 
J Urol. 2008;179:1313.
6.	Bosl GJ, Motzer RJ. Testicular germ-cell cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 1997;337:242.
7.	Donohue JP, Thornhill JA, Foster RS, et al. Retroperitoneal 
lymphadenectomy for clinical stage A testis cancer (1965 to 
1989): modifications of technique and impact on ejaculation. 
J Urol. 1993;149:237.
8.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10-29.
9.	Hollingsworth JM, Miller DC, Daignault S, et al. Rising 
incidence of small renal masses: a need to reassess treatment 
effect. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:1331.
10.	Israel GM, Bosniak MA. Follow-up CT of moderately com-
plex cystic lesions of the kidney (Bosniak category IIF). AJR 
Am J Roentgenol. 2003;181:627.
11.	Linehan WM, Walther MM, Zbar B. The genetic basis of can-
cer of the kidney. J Urol. 2003;170:2163.
12.	Flanigan RC, Salmon SE, Blumenstein BA, et al. Nephrec-
tomy followed by interferon alfa-2b compared with inter-
feron alfa-2b alone for metastatic renal cell cancer. N Engl 
J Med. 2001;345:1655.
13.	Mickisch GHJ, Garin A, van Poppel H, et al. Radical nephrec-
tomy plus interferon-alfa-based immunotherapy compared 
with interferon alfa alone in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a 
randomized trial. Lancet. 2001;358:966.
14.	Huang WC, Levey AS, Serio AM, et al. Chronic kidney 
disease after nephrectomy in patients with renal corti-
cal tumors: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Oncol. 
2006;7:735.
15.	Rabbani F, Herr HW, Almahmeed T, et al. Temporal change in 
risk of metachronous contralateral renal cell carcinoma: influ-
ence of tumor characteristics and demographic factors. J Clin 
Oncol. 2002;20:2370.
16.	Bosniak MA, Birnbaum BA, Krinsky GA, et al. Small renal 
parenchymal neoplasms: further observations on growth. 
Radiology. 1995;197:589.
17.	Kavolius JP, Mastorakos DP, Pavlovich C, et al. Resection of 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:2261.
18.	Bill-Axelson A, Holmberg L, Filen F, et al. Radical pros-
tatectomy versus watchful waiting in localized prostate 
cancer: the Scandinavian Prostate Cancer Group-4 Ran-
domized Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100:1144.
19.	Gleason DF, Mellinger GT, Veterans Administration Coop-
erative Research Group. Prediction of prognosis for prostatic 
adenocarcinoma by combined histologic grading and clinical 
staging. J Urol. 1974;111:58.
20.	Walsh PC, Marschke P, Ricker D, et al. Patient-reported uri-
nary continence and sexual function after anatomic radical 
prostatectomy. Urology. 2000;55:58.
21.	Buckley JC, McAninch JW. Selective management of 
isolated and nonisolated grade IV renal injuries. J Urol. 
2006;176:2498.
22.	Koraitim MM. Pelvic fracture urethral injuries: the unresolved 
controversy. J Urol. 1999;161:1433.
23.	Moudouni SM, Patard JJ, Manunta A, et al. Early endoscopic 
realignment of post-traumatic posterior urethral disruption. 
Urology. 2001;57:628.
24.	Mouraviev V, Coburn M, Santucci R. The treatment of pos-
terior urethral disruption associated with pelvic fractures: 
comparative experience of early realignment versus delayed 
urethroplasty. J Urol. 2005;173:873.
25.	Corrales JG, Corbel L, Cipolla B, et al. Accuracy of ultrasound 
diagnosis after blunt testicular trauma. J Urol. 1993;150:1834.
26.	Sawh SL, O’Leary MP, Ferreira MD, et al. Fractured penis: a 
review. Int J Impot Res. 2008;20:366.
27.	Donohue RE, Utley WLF. Torsion of the spermatic cord. J 
Urol. 1978;40:33.
28.	Taskinen S, Taskinen M, Rintala R. Testicular torsion: orchi-
ectomy or orchiopexy? J Pediatr Urol. 2008;4:210.
29.	Tahmaz L, Eredemir F, Kibar Y, et al. Fournier’s gangrene: 
report of 33 cases and a review of the literature. Int J Urol. 
2006;13:960.
30.	Pryor J, Akkus E, Alter G, et al. Priapism. J Sex Med. 
2004;1:116.
31.	Verit A, Verit FF. Fournier’s gangrene: the development of a 
classical pathology. BJU Int. 2007;100:1218.
32.	Ekstrom B, Olsson AM. Priapism in patients treated with total 
parenteral nutrition. Br J Urol. 1987;59:170.
33.	Dent LA, Brown WC, Murney JD. Citalopram-induced pria-
pism. Pharmacotherapy. 2002;22:538.
34.	Pecknold JC, Langer SF. Priapism: trazodone versus nefazo-
done. J Clin Psychiatry. 1996;57:547.
35.	Miller ST, Rao SO, Dunn EK, et al. Priapism in children with 
sickle cell disease. J Urol. 1995;154:844.
36.	Hellstrom WJ, Derosa A, Lang E. The use of transcath-
eter superselective embolization to treat high flow priapism 
(arteriocavernosal fistula) caused by straddle injury. J Urol. 
2007;178:1059.
37.	Williams JC, Morrison PM, Richardson JR. Paraphimosis in 
elderly men. Am J Emerg Med. 1995;13:351.
38.	Huang JJ, Tseng CC. Emphysematous pyelonephritis: clinico-
radiological classification, management, prognosis, and patho-
genesis. Arch Int Med. 2000;160:797.
39.	Aswathaman K, Gopalakrishnan G, Gnanaraj L, et al. Emphy-
sematous pyelonephritis: outcome of conservative manage-
ment. Urology. 2008;71:1007.
40.	Abdul-Halim H, Kehinde EO, Abdeen S, et al. Severe emphy-
sematous pyelonephritis in diabetic patients: diagnosis and 
aspects of surgical management. Urol Int. 2005;75:123.
41.	Capodice JL, Bemis DL, Buttyan R, et al. Complementary 
and alternative medicine for chronic prostatitis/chronic pel-
vic pain syndrome. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 
2005;2:495.
42.	Spaliviero M, Araki M, Wong C. Short-term outcomes of 
Greenlight HPS laser photoselective vaporization prostatec-
tomy (PVP) for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). J Endou-
rol. 2008;22:2341.
43.	Andrich DE, Mundy AR. What is the best technique for ure-
throplasty? Eur Urol. 2008;54:1031.
44.	Leahy AL, Ryan PC, McEntree GM. Renal injury and recov-
ery in partial ureteric obstruction. J Urol. 1989;142:199.
45.	Vaughan ED, Gillenwater JY. Recovery following complete 
chronic unilateral ureteral occlusion: functional, radiographic, 
and pathologic alterations. J Urol. 1971;106:27.
46.	Paick SH, Park HK, Oh SJ, et al. Characteristics of bacterial 
colonization and urinary tract infection after indwelling of 
double-J ureteral stent. Urology. 2003;62:214.
47.	Johnson CM, Wilson DM, O’Fallon WM, et al. Renal stone 
epidemiology: a 25-year study in Rochester, Minnesota. 
Kidney Int. 1979;16:624.
48.	Daudon M, Estepa L, Kebede M, et al. Urinary calculi and 
crystalluria in HIV+ patients treated with indinavir sulfate. 
Presse Med. 1997;26:1612.
49.	Cryer PE, Garber AJ, Hoffsten P, et al. Renal failure after small 
intestinal bypass for obesity. Arch Intern Med. 1975;135:1610.
1669
Urology
CHAPTER 40
50.	Ueno A, Kawamure T, Ogawa A, et al. Relation of spontane-
ous passage of ureteral calculi to size. Urology. 1977;10:544.
51.	Sayed MA, Abolysor A, Abdalla MA, et al. Efficacy of tam-
sulosin in medical expulsive therapy for distal ureteral calculi. 
Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2008;42:59.
52.	Rashid P, Steele D, Hunt J. Splenic rupture after extracorpo-
real shock wave lithotripsy. J Urol. 1996;156:1756.
53.	Marcuzzi D, Gray R, Wesley-James T. Symptomatic splenic 
rupture following extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. J 
Urol. 1991;145:547.
54.	Curhan GC, Willett WC, Rimm EB, et al. A prospective 
study of dietary calcium and other nutrients and the risk 
of symptomatic kidney stones. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:833.
55.	Koep L, Zuidema GD. The clinical significance of retroperito-
neal fibrosis. Surgery. 1977;81:250.
56.	Srinivas V, Dow D. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. Can J Surg. 
1984;27:111.
57.	Smellie JM, Normand IC. Clinical features and signifi-
cance of urinary tract infection in children. Arch Dis Child. 
1968;43:468.
58.	Duckett JW. Vesicoureteral reflux: a “conservative” analysis. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 1983;3:139.
59.	Arant BS. Medical management of mild and moderate vesi-
coureteral reflux: Follow up studies of infants and young 
children. A preliminary report of the Southwest Nephrology 
Group. J Urol. 1992;148:1683.
60.	Kousidis G, Thomas DF, Morgan H, et al. The long-term out-
come of prenatally detected posterior urethral valves: a 10 to 
23-year follow-up. BJU Int. 2008;102:1020.
This page intentionally left blank 
Gynecology
Chad Hamilton, Michael Stany, W. Thomas Gregory, 
and Elise C. Kohn
41
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MECHANISMS  
OF DISEASE
The female reproductive tract is a unique component of the 
body with a multitude of tightly regulated functions. Many 
of the activities normally ongoing, such as angiogenesis and 
physiologic invasion, are necessary in order for the reproduc-
tive organs to fulfill their purpose and are usurped in disease. 
Immune surveillance is modified by multiple mechanisms under 
investigation and regulated in a different fashion, in order to 
allow implantation, placentation, and development of the fetus. 
How this potential disruption of normal immune barriers is 
involved in pathologic events is incompletely understood.
The pelvis is a very complex area, with a multitude of 
spatially and temporally varied functions. It is a site where 
pathologies ranging from mechanical events, such as ovarian 
torsion or ruptured ectopic pregnancy, to infection, such as pel-
vic inflammatory disease, to mass effects, including leiomyo-
mata and malignancy, can present with similar and even 
overlapping symptoms and signs. An acute abdomen pre-
sentation in a woman of child-bearing potential can range from 
pregnancy-related catastrophes to appendicitis. 
The ongoing rupture, healing, angiogenesis, and regrowth of 
the ovarian capsule and endometrium during the menstrual cycle uses 
the same series of biological and biochemical events that are also 
active in pathologic events such as endometriosis and endometrio-
mas, mature teratomas, dysgerminomas, and progression to malig-
nancy. Genetic abnormalities, both germline and somatic, that may 
cause competence and/or promote disease are now being uncovered, 
especially in the progression to malignancy, in pharmacogenomics, 
and in surgical risks such as bleeding and clotting. Incorporation of 
genetic and genomic information in disease diagnosis and assess-
ment is a wave for the near future and may alter how we diagnose 
and follow disease, in whom we increase our diligence in searching 
for disease, and ultimately how we use the drug and other therapeutic 
armamentarium available to the treating physician.
These points will be incorporated with surgical approaches 
into discussions of anatomy, diagnostic workup, infection, sur-
gical and medical aspects of the obstetric patient, pelvic floor 
dysfunction, and neoplasms.
ANATOMY
Clinical gynecologic anatomy centers on the pelvis (from Latin 
meaning basin). Aptly named, the bowl-shaped pelvis houses 
the confluence and intersection of multiple organ systems. 
Understanding those structural and functional relationships 
is essential for the surgeon and allows an appreciation for the 
interplay of sexual function and reproduction and a context for 
understanding gynecologic pathology.
Structure and Support of the Pelvis  
and Genitalia
The bony pelvis is comprised by the sacrum posteriorly and 
the ischium, ilium, and pubic bones anteromedially. It supports the 
upper body and transmits the stresses of weight bearing to the 
1
Pathophysiology and Mechanisms  
of Disease	
1671
Anatomy	
1671
Structure and Support of the Pelvis  
and Genitalia / 1671
Vasculature and Nerves  
of the Pelvis / 1672
Vulva / 1673
Vagina / 1674
Fibrovascular Ligaments and Avascular  
Tissue Planes / 1674
Uterus / 1675
Cervix / 1675
Fallopian Tubes / 1675
Ovaries / 1675
Evaluation and Diagnosis	
1675
Elements of a Gynecologic History / 1675
The Gynecologic Examination / 1675
Common Screening and Testing / 1676
Common Office Procedures  
for Diagnosis / 1677
Benign Gynecologic Conditions	 1678
Vulvar Lesions / 1678
Vaginal Lesions / 1680
Cervical Lesions / 1681
Uterine Corpus / 1682
Benign Ovarian and Fallopian Tube 
Lesions / 1689
Other Pelvic Pathology / 1689
Pregnancy-Related Surgical  
Conditions	
1691
Conditions and Procedures Performed 
Before Viability / 1691
Conditions and Procedures Performed  
After Viability / 1692
Pelvic Floor Dysfunction	
1694
Evaluation / 1694
Surgery for Pelvic Organ Prolapse / 1694
Surgery for Stress Urinary  
Incontinence / 1695
Gynecologic Cancer	
1696
Vulvar Cancer / 1696
Vaginal Cancer / 1697
Cervical Cancer / 1697
Uterine Cancer / 1698
Ovarian, Tubal, and Primary  
Peritoneal Cancer / 1701
Minimally Invasive Gynecologic  
Surgery	
1704
Hysteroscopy / 1704
Laparoscopy / 1704
Complications Related to Gynecologic 
Surgery / 1704
Robotic Surgery / 1705
chapter 
lower limbs in addition to providing anchors for the support-
ing tissues of the pelvic floor.1 The opening of the pelvis is 
spanned by the muscles of the pelvic diaphragm (Fig. 41-1). 
The muscles of the pelvic sidewall include the iliacus, the 
psoas, and the obturator internus muscle (Fig. 41-2). These 
muscles contract tonically and include, from anterior to pos-
terior, bilaterally, the pubococcygeus, puborectalis, iliococcy-
geus, and coccygeus muscles. The first two of these muscles 
contribute fibers to the fibromuscular perineal body. The 
urogenital hiatus is bordered laterally by the pubococcygeus 
muscles and anteriorly by the symphysis pubis. It is through 
this muscular defect that the urethra and vagina pass, and it is 
the focal point for the study of disorders of pelvic support such 
as cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse.
Vasculature and Nerves of the Pelvis
The rich blood supply to the pelvis arises largely from the inter-
nal iliac arteries except for the middle sacral artery originating 
at the aortic bifurcation and the ovarian arteries originating from 
the abdominal aorta. The internal iliac, or hypogastric, arter-
ies divide into anterior and posterior branches. The latter sup-
ply lumbar and gluteal branches. From the anterior division of 
1672
Pudendal nerve
and artery
Superficial transverse
perineii muscle
Ischiocavernosus
muscle
Vestibular
bulb
Clitoris
Pubic
ramus
Urethral
meatus
Bulbocavernosus
muscle
Bartholin’s
gland
Perineal
membrane
Perineal
body
External anal
sphincter
Gluteus
maximus
Anus
Vaginal
introitus
Levator ani
muscles
Figure 41-1.  Deeper muscles of the pelvic floor.
Key Points
1 	 Gynecologic causes of acute abdomen include pelvic inflam-
matory disease, tubo-ovarian abcess, ovarian torsion, rup-
tured ectopic pregnancy, and septic abortion. Pregnancy 
must be ruled out early in assessment of reproductive-age 
patients presenting with abdominal or pelvic pain.
2 	 The general gynecology exam must incorporate the whole 
physical examination in order to adequately diagnosis and 
treat gynecologic disorders.
3 	 Benign gynecologic pathologies that are encountered at the 
time of surgery include endometriosis, endometriomas, 
fibroids, and ovarian cysts.
4 	 It is critical that abnormal lesions of the vulva, vagina, and 
cervix are biopsied for diagnosis before any treatment is 
planned; postmenopausal bleeding should always be inves-
tigated to rule out malignancy.
5 	 Early-stage cervical cancer is managed surgically, whereas 
chemoradiation is preferred for stage IB2 and above.
6 	 Pregnancy confers important changes to both the cardio-
vascular system and the coagulation cascade. Trauma in 
pregnancy must be managed with these changes in mind.
7 	 Pelvic floor dysfunction (pelvic organ prolapse, urinary 
and fecal incontinence) is common; 11% of women will 
undergo a reconstructive surgical procedure at some 
point in their lives.
8 	 Radical hysterectomy has unique risks of ureteral fistula 
and bowel dysfunction.
9 	 Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) should 
be considered in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 muta-
tions; RRSO and complete hysterectomy should be con-
sidered in women with Lynch syndrome.
10   Optimal debulking for epithelial ovarian cancer is a critical 
element in patient response and survival. The preferred pri-
mary therapy for optimally debulked advanced-stage ovar-
ian epithelial ovarian cancer is intraperitoneal chemotherapy.
1673
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
the hypogastric arteries arise the obturator, uterine, pudendal, 
middle rectal, inferior gluteal, and superior and middle vesical 
arteries (see Fig. 41-2).
The major nerves found in the pelvis are the sciatic, obtu-
rator, and femoral nerves. Sympathetic fibers course along the 
major arteries, and parasympathetics form the superior and inferior 
pelvic plexus (Fig. 41-3). The pudendal nerve arises from S2-S4 
and travels laterally, exiting the greater sciatic foramen, hooking 
around the ischial spine and sacrospinous ligament, and returning 
via the greater sciatic foramen. It travels through Alcock’s canal 
and becomes the sensory and motor nerve of the perineum (see 
Figs. 41-1 and 41-3). The motor neurons serve the tonically con-
tracting urethral and anal sphincter, and direct branches from the 
S2-S4 nerves serve the levator ani muscles. During childbirth and 
other excessive straining, this tethered nerve (along with the leva-
tor ani muscles) is subject to stretch injury and at least partially 
responsible for many female pelvic floor disorders.
Vulva
The labia majora form the cutaneous boundaries of the lateral 
vulva and represent the female homologue of the male scrotum 
(Fig. 41-4). The labia majora are fatty folds covered by hair-bearing 
Internal iliac
     artery
Lateral sacral
artery
Superior
gluteal
artery
Inferior gluteal
     artery
Coccygeus muscle
Internal pudendal
artery
Uterine artery
Middle rectal
     artery
Obturator 
internus
muscle
Oburator
  artery
Superior vesical
       artery
External iliac
     artery
Common iliac
     artery
Figure 41-2.  The muscles and vasculature of the pelvis.
Hypogastric plexus
Obturator nerve
Vesical 
plexus
Uterovaginal 
plexus 
Rectal 
plexus
Left pelvic 
plexus
Sacral 
plexus
Sympathetic
 ganglion
Figure 41-3.  The nerve supply of the female pelvis.
Clitoris
Labium
minus
Labium
majus
Mouth of
Bartholin’s gland
Fossa
 navicularis
Fourchette
Anus
Hymen
Vagina
Skene’s
ducts
Urethral
orifice
Prepuce of
clitoris
Figure 41-4.  External genitalia. (Reproduced with permission from Rock J, Jones HW. TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology. 9th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003, Fig. 5-1, p. 70.)
1674
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
skin in the adult. They fuse anteriorly over the anterior promi-
nence of the symphysis pubis, the mons pubis. The deeper por-
tions of the adipose layers are called Colles’ fascia and insert 
onto the inferior margin of the perineal membrane, limiting 
spread of superficial hematomas inferiorly. Adjacent and medial 
to the labia majora are the labia minora, smaller folds of con-
nective tissue covered laterally by non–hair-bearing skin and 
medially by vaginal mucosa. The anterior fusion of the labia 
minora forms the prepuce and frenulum of the clitoris; poste-
riorly, the labia minora fuse to create the fossa navicularis and 
posterior fourchette. The term vestibule refers to the area medial 
to the labia minora bounded by the fossa navicularis and the 
clitoris. Both the urethra and the vagina open into the vestibule. 
Skene’s glands lie lateral and inferior to the urethral meatus. 
Cysts, abscesses, and neoplasms may arise in these glands.
Erectile tissues and associated muscles are in the space 
between the perineal membrane and the vulvar subcutaneous 
tissues (see Fig. 41-1). The clitoris is formed by two crura and 
is suspended from the pubis. Overlying the crura are ischio-
cavernosus muscles, which run along the inferior surfaces of 
the ischiopubic rami. Extending medially from the inferior end 
of the ischiocavernosus muscles are the superficial transverse 
perinei muscles. These terminate in the midline in the perineal 
body, caudal and deep to the posterior fourchette. Vestibular 
bulbs lie just deep to the vestibule and are covered laterally by 
bulbocavernosus muscles. These originate from the perineal 
body and insert into the body of the clitoris. At the inferior end 
of the vestibular bulbs are Bartholin’s glands, which connect to 
the vestibular skin by ducts.
Vagina
The vagina is an elastic fibromuscular tube opening from the 
vestibule running superiorly and posteriorly, passing through 
the perineal membrane. The lower third is invested by the 
superficial and deep perineal muscles; it incorporates the ure-
thra in its anterior wall and has a rich blood supply from the 
vaginal branches of the external and internal pudendal arteries. 
The upper two thirds of the vagina are not are not invested by 
muscles. This portion lies in opposition to the bladder base ante-
riorly and the rectum and posterior pelvic cul-de-sac superiorly. 
The cervix opens into the posterior vaginal wall bulging into 
the vaginal lumen.
Fibrovascular Ligaments and Avascular  
Tissue Planes
Figure 41-5 is a view of the internal genitalia as one would 
approach the pelvis from a midline abdominal incision. The cen-
tral uterus and uterine cervix are supported by the pelvic floor 
muscles. They are suspended by the lateral fibrous cardinal, or 
Mackenrodt’s ligament, and the uterosacral ligaments, which 
insert into the paracervical fascia medially and into the mus-
cular sidewalls of the pelvis laterally. Posteriorly, the uterosac-
ral ligaments provide support for the vagina and cervix as they 
course from the sacrum lateral to the rectum and insert into the 
paracervical fascia. Emanating from the uterine cornu and trav-
eling through the inguinal canal are the round ligaments, even-
tually attaching to the subcutaneous tissue of the mons pubis. 
The peritoneum enfolding the adnexa (tube, round ligament, 
and ovary) is referred to as the broad ligament, which separates 
the pelvic cavity into an anterior and posterior component.
The peritoneal recesses in the pelvis anterior and poste-
rior to the uterus are referred to as the anterior and posterior 
cul-de-sacs. The latter is also called the pouch or cul-de-sac of 
Douglas. On transverse section, several avascular, and there-
fore important, surgical planes can be identified (Fig. 41-6). 
These include the lateral paravesical and pararectal spaces and, 
from anterior to posterior, the retropubic or prevesical space of 
Retzius and the vesicovaginal, rectovaginal, and retrorectal or 
presacral spaces.
These avascular tissue planes are often preserved and 
provide safe surgical access when the intraperitoneal pelvic 
anatomy is distorted by tumor, endometriosis, adhesions, or 
infection. As an example, the ureter is at significant risk of 
iatrogenic injury in the context of such pathology. Using the 
avascular retroperitoneal planes, the ureter can be traced into 
the pelvis as it crosses the distal common iliac arteries laterally 
into the pararectal space and then courses inferior to the ovarian 
arteries and veins until crossing under the uterine arteries into 
the paravesical space just lateral to the cervix. After traveling 
to the cervix, the ureters course downward and medially over 
the anterior surface of the vagina before entering the base of the 
bladder in the vesicovaginal space.
Bladder
Uterus
Round 
ligament
External iliac
artery and vein
Fallopian tube
Ovarian
vessels
Ovarian ligament
Broad ligament
Uterosacral 
ligament
Sigmoid
 colon
Ureter
Ovary
Figure 41-5.  Internal pelvic anatomy, from above.
Prevesical space
Paravesical
 space
Vesicovaginal
space
Vesicouterine 
ligament
Cardinal
 ligament
Uterosacral
ligament
Retrovaginal 
space
Retrorectal 
space
Sacrum
Rectum
Pararectal 
space
Cervical
fascia
Cervix
Vesical
fascia
Bladder
Pubovesical 
ligament
Figure 41-6.  The avascular spaces of the female pelvis.
1675
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
Uterus
The typically pear-shaped uterus consists of a fundus, cornua, 
body, and cervix. It lies between the bladder anteriorly and the 
rectosigmoid posteriorly. The endometrium lines the cavity and 
has a superficial functional layer that is shed with menstrua-
tion and a basal layer from which the new functional layer is 
formed. Sustained estrogenic stimulation can lead to hyperplas-
tic changes or carcinoma. Adenomyosis is a condition in which 
benign endometrial glands infiltrate into the muscle or myome-
trium of the uterus. The myometrium is composed of smooth 
muscle, and the contraction of myometrium is a factor in men-
strual pain and is essential in childbirth. The myometrium can 
develop benign smooth muscle neoplasms known as leiomyoma 
or fibroids.
Cervix
The cervix connects the uterus and vagina and projects into 
the upper vagina. The vagina forms an arched ring around 
the cervix described as the vaginal fornices—lateral, anterior, 
and posterior. The cervix is about 2.5 cm long with a fusiform 
endocervical canal lined by columnar epithelium lying between 
an internal and external os, or opening. The vaginal surface 
of the cervix is covered with stratified squamous epithelium, 
similar to that lining the vagina. The squamocolumnar junction, 
also referred to as the transformation zone, migrates at differ-
ent stages of life and is influenced by estrogenic stimulation. 
The transformation zone develops as the columnar epithelium 
is replaced by squamous metaplasia. This transformation zone 
is vulnerable to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and 
resultant dysplastic changes. These changes can be detected by 
microscopic assessment of a cervical cytologic (or Pap) smear. 
If the duct of a cervical gland becomes occluded, the gland dis-
tends to form a retention cyst or Nabothian follicle.
Fallopian Tubes
The bilateral fallopian tubes arise from the upper lateral cornua 
of the uterus and course posterolaterally within the upper border 
of the broad ligament. The tubes can be divided into four parts. 
The interstitial part forms a passage through the myometrium. 
The isthmus is the narrow portion extending out about 3 cm 
from the myometrium. The ampulla is thin-walled and tortuous 
with its lateral end free of the broad ligament. The infundibulum 
is the distal end fringed by a ring of delicate fronds or fimbriae. 
The fallopian tubes receive the ovum after ovulation. Peristal-
sis carries the ovum to the ampulla where fertilization occurs. 
The zygote transits the tube over the course of 3 to 4 days to 
the uterus. Abnormal implantation in the fallopian tube is the 
most common site of ectopic pregnancies. The tubes may also 
be infected by ascending organisms, resulting in tubo-ovarian 
abscesses.
Ovaries
The ovaries are attached to the uterine cornu by the proper ovar-
ian ligaments, or the utero-ovarian ligaments. The ovaries are 
suspended from the lateral pelvis by their vascular pedicles, the 
infundibulopelvic (IP) ligaments or ovarian arteries. The IP 
ligaments are paired branches from the abdominal aorta aris-
ing just below the renal arteries. They merge with the perito-
neum over the psoas major muscle and pass over the pelvic 
brim and the external iliac vessels. The ovarian veins ascend 
at first with the ovarian arteries, and then track more laterally. 
The right ovarian vein ascends to drain directly into the inferior 
vena cava, whereas the left vein drains into the left renal vein. 
Lymphatic drainage follows the arteries to the para-aortic lymph 
nodes. The ovaries are covered by a single layer of cells that is 
continuous with the mesothelium of the peritoneum. Beneath 
this is a fibrous stroma within which are embedded germ cells. 
At ovulation, an ovarian follicle ruptures through the ovarian 
epithelium.
EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Elements of a Gynecologic History
A complete history is a seminal part of any assessment 
(Table 41-1). Many gynecologic diseases can present with 
broad constitutional symptoms, occur secondary to other condi-
tions, or be related to medications. A full history should include 
particular attention to family history; organ system history, 
including breast, gastrointestinal, and urinary tract symptoms; and 
a careful medication, anesthesia, and surgical history. The key 
elements of a focused gynecologic history include the following:
• Date of last menstrual period, if premenopausal
• History of contraceptive and postmenopausal hormone use
• Obstetrical history
• Age at menarche and menopause (method of menopause, e.g., 
drug, surgical)
• Menstrual bleeding pattern
• History of pelvic assessments, including cervical smear results
• History of pelvic infections, including HPV, and human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status
• Sexual history (number of lifetime partners)
• Prior gynecologic surgery(s)
The Gynecologic Examination
For many women, their gynecologist is their primary care physi-
cian. When that is the case, it is necessary that a full medical and 
surgical history be taken and that, in addition to the pelvic 
examination, the minimum additional examination should 
include assessment of the thyroid, breasts, and cardiopulmonary 
system. The pelvic examination starts with a full abdominal 
examination. Inguinal node evaluation is performed before plac-
ing the patient’s legs in the dorsal lithotomy position (in stirrups). 
A flexible, focused light source is essential, and vaginal instru-
ments including speculums of variable sizes and shapes including 
pediatric sizes (Graves and Pederson) are required to assure that 
the patient’s anatomy can be fully and comfortably viewed.
The external genitalia are inspected, noting the distri-
bution of pubic hair, the skin color and contour, the Bartho-
lin and Skene’s glands, and perianal area. Abnormalities are 
documented, and a map with measurements of abnormalities 
is drawn. A warmed lubricated speculum is inserted into the 
vagina and gently opened to identify the cervix if present, or 
the vaginal apex if not. If there is a concern that a malignancy is 
present, careful digital assessment of a vaginal mass and loca-
tion may be addressed prior to speculum placement in order 
to avoid abrading a vascular lesion and inducing hemorrhage. 
The speculum would then be inserted just short of the length to 
the mass in order to view that area directly before advancing. 
An uncomplicated speculum exam includes examination of the 
vaginal sidewalls; assessment of secretions, including culture if 
necessary; and collection of the cervical cytologic specimen if 
indicated (see later section, Common Screening and Testing).
2
1676
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A bimanual examination is performed by placing two fin-
gers in the vaginal canal; one finger may be used if patient has 
significant vaginal atrophy or has had prior radiation with stenosis 
(Fig. 41-7). Carefully and sequentially assess the size and shape 
of the uterus by moving it against the abdominal hand, and assess 
the adnexa by carefully sweeping the abdominal hand down the 
side of the uterus. The rectovaginal examination, consisting of 
one finger in the vagina and one in the rectal vault, is used to fur-
ther examine and characterize the location, shape, fixation, size, 
and complexity of the uterus, adnexa, cervix, and anterior and 
posterior cul-de-sacs. The rectovaginal exam also allows exami-
nation of the uterosacral ligaments from the back of the uterus 
sweeping laterally to the rectal finger and the sacrum, and a stool 
sample for occult blood can be obtained during this exam.
It is critical that presurgical assessments include a full gen-
eral examination. This is particularly important with potential 
oncologic diagnoses or infectious issues, in order to assure that 
the proposed surgery is both safe and appropriate. Complica-
tions such as sites of metastatic cancer or infection, associated 
bleeding and/or clotting issues and history, and drug exposure, 
allergies, and current medications must be addressed.
Common Screening and Testing
Cervical Preinvasive and Invasive Disease Screening.
The most recent cervical cytology guidelines by the U.S. Pre-
ventative Services Task Force has increased the intervals for 
most women given the known natural history of HPV-related 
cervical dysplasia progression to cancer.2 The very high nega-
tive predictive value of the HPV test allows for this change. 
The current recommendations call for cervical smear screen-
ing every 3 years in women age 21 to 65 years. If an HPV test 
Figure 41-7.  Bimanual abdominovaginal palpation of the uterus.
Table 41-1
Key elements of the gynecologic history
Issue
Elements to Explore
Associated Issues
Menstrual history
Age at menarche, menopause.
Bleeding pattern, postmenopausal bleeding, 
  spotting between periods
Any medications (warfarin, heparin, 
  aspirin, herbals, others) or personal 
or family history that might lead to 
prolonged bleeding times
Identifies abnormal patterns related to 
  endocrine, structural, infectious, and oncologic 
etiologies
Obstetrical history
Number of pregnancies, dates, type of 
  deliveries, pregnancy loss, abortion, 
complications
Identifies potential surgical complications due 
  to previous cesarean sections
Infectious diseases
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and 
  treatment and/or testing for these
Also need to explore history of other 
  gastrointestinal diseases that may mimic STD 
(Crohn’s, diverticulitis)
Contraceptive history
Present contraception if appropriate, prior 
  use, type and duration
Concurrent pregnancy with procedure or 
  complications of contraceptives
Cytologic screening
Frequency, results (normal, prior abnormal 
  Pap), any prior surgery or diagnoses, 
human papillomavirus testing history
Prolonged intervals increase risk of cervical 
  cancer
Relationship to anal, vaginal, vulvar cancers
Prior gynecologic surgery
Type (laparoscopy, vaginal, abdominal); 
  diagnosis (endometriosis?, ovarian 
cysts?, tubo-ovarian abscess?); actual 
pathology if possible
Assess present history against this background 
  (for example, granulosa cell pathology; is it now 
recurrent?)
Pain history
Site, location, relationship (with urination, 
  with menses, with intercourse at 
initiation or deep penetration, with bowel 
movements), referral
Assesses relationship to other organ systems 
  and potential involvement of these with process
Common examples presenting as pelvic pain, ureteral 
  stone, endometriosis with bowel involvement, etc.
1677
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
performed at the same time also is negative, a Pap and HPV test 
combination does not need to be repeated in women age 30 to 65 
for 5 years. HPV testing should not be performed as a screening 
test in women under age 30 due to the high prevalence of HPV, 
as well as the high likelihood of resolution of infection. Women 
with a history of cervical dysplasia or cancer need more frequent 
screening based on their diagnosis.
Microscopy of Vaginal Discharge.  During a speculum 
exam, a cotton-tipped applicator is used to collect the vaginal 
discharge; it is smeared on a slide with several drops of 0.9% 
normal saline to create a saline wet mount. A cover slide is 
placed and the slide is evaluated microscopically for the pres-
ence of mobile trichomonads (Trichomonas vaginalis) or clue 
cells (epithelial cells studded with bacteria, seen in bacterial 
vaginosis; Table 41-2). A potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet 
mount is the slide application of the collected vaginal dis-
charge with 10% KOH; this destroys cellular elements. The 
test is positive for vaginal candidiasis when pseudohyphae are 
seen (Table 41-2).
Chlamydia/Gonorrhea Testing.  Nucleic acid amplification 
testing (NAAT) has emerged as the diagnostic test of choice for 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis. A vaginal 
swab, endocervical swab, and/or urine sample can be used for 
this test. The test can be completed within hours and has been 
found to be more sensitive than cultures.
β-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (β-hCG) Testing.  Qual-
itative urinary pregnancy tests for β-hCG are standard prior to 
any surgery in a woman of reproductive age and potential, 
regardless of contraception history. In addition, serum quantita-
tive β-hCG testing is appropriate for evaluation of suspected 
ectopic pregnancy, gestational trophoblastic disease, or ovarian 
mass in a young woman. In the case of ectopic pregnancy, serial 
levels are required when a pregnancy cannot be identified in 
the uterine cavity. As a general rule, 85% of viable intrauterine 
pregnancies will have at least a 66% rise in the β-hCG level 
over 48 hours.
Common Office Procedures for Diagnosis
Vulvar/Vaginal Biopsy.  Any abnormal vulvar or vaginal 
lesion including skin color changes, raised lesions, or ulcer-
ations should be biopsied. Local infiltration with local anes-
thetic is followed by a 3- to 5-mm punch biopsy appropriate to 
the lesion. The specimen is elevated with Adson forceps and cut 
from its base with scissors. The vaginal biopsy can sometimes 
be difficult to perform because of the angle of the lesion. After 
injection with local anesthetic, traction of the area with Allis 
forceps and direct resection of the lesion with scissors or cervi-
cal biopsy instrument (Schubert, Kevorkian, etc.) can achieve 
an adequate biopsy.
Colposcopy and Cervical Biopsy.  In cases of an abnormal 
Pap smear cytology, a colposcopy is performed for a histologic 
evaluation. A colposcope is used to achieve 2× to 15× magni-
fication of the cervix. Once the cervix is visualized, cervical 
mucus, if present, is removed, and then 3% acetic acid is applied 
to the cervix for 1 minute. This application dehydrates cells and 
causes dysplastic cells with dense nuclei to appear white. The 
entire squamocolumnar junction is visualized during an ade-
quate colposcopy. This area is seen as the transition from the 
smooth-appearing squamous ectocervix to the pink endocervical 
tissue. Acetowhite areas or areas with punctation, mosaicism, 
or atypical blood vessels seen during colposcopy may represent 
dysplasia or cancer and should be biopsied.
Endometrial Biopsy.  Endometrial sampling should be per-
formed before planned hysterectomy if there is a history of 
bleeding between periods, heavy and/or frequent menstrual peri-
ods, or postmenopausal bleeding. A patient with the potential for 
pregnancy should have a pregnancy test before the procedure. 
An endometrial pipelle is inserted after cervical cleaning, and 
the depth of the uterine cavity is noted. The endometrial speci-
men is obtained by pulling on the plunger within the pipelle, 
creating a small amount of suction. The pipelle is rotated and 
pulled back from the fundus to the lower uterine segment within 
Table 41-2
Features of common causes of vaginitis
Bacterial Vaginosis
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis
Trichomoniasis
Pathogen
Anaerobic organisms
Candida albicans
Trichomonas vaginalis
% of vaginitis
40
30
20
pH
>4.5
<4.5
>4.5
Signs and symptoms
Malodorous, adherent discharge
White discharge, vulvar 
erythema, pruritus, dyspareunia
Malodorous purulent discharge, 
vulvovaginal erythema, 
dyspareunia
Wet mount
Clue cells
Pseudohyphae or budding yeasts 
in 40% of cases
Motile trichomonads
KOH mount
Pseudohyphae or budding yeasts 
in 70% of cases
Amine test
+
−
−
Treatment
Metronidazole 500 mg bid × 7 d 
or 2 g single dose, metronidazole 
or clindamycin vaginal cream
Oral fluconazole 150 mg single 
dose, vaginal antifungal 
preparations
Metronidazole 2 g single dose 
and treatment of partner
+ = positive; − = negative; bid = twice a day; KOH = potassium hydroxide.
1678
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
the cavity to access all sides.3 Additional passes may be needed 
in order to acquire an adequate amount of tissue.
Evaluation for Fistula.  When a patient presents with copi-
ous vaginal discharge, the provider must be concerned about 
a fistula with the urinary or gastrointestinal tract. A simple 
office procedure can be performed when there is a concern for a 
vesicovaginal fistula. A vaginal tampon is placed, followed by 
instillation of sterile blue dye through a transurethral catheter 
into the bladder; a positive test is blue staining of the tampon. 
If the test is negative, one can evaluate for a ureterovaginal fis-
tula. The patient is given phenazopyridine, which changes the 
color of urine to orange. If a tampon placed in the vagina stains 
orange, the test is positive. Alternatively, the patient can be 
given an intravenous injection of indigo carmine.
Rectal fistula must be considered when a patient reports 
stool evacuation per vagina. It can be identified in a similar 
fashion using a large Foley catheter placed in the distal rectum 
through which dye may be injected or with the use of an oral 
charcoal slurry and timed examination. Common areas for fis-
tulae are at the vaginal apex, at the site of a surgical incision, 
or around the site of a prior episiotomy or perineal repair after 
a vaginal delivery.
BENIGN GYNECOLOGIC CONDITIONS
Vulvar Lesions
Many women suffer with undiagnosed symptoms of vulvar dis-
ease. Patients presenting with chronic vulvar symptoms should 
be carefully interviewed, examined, and a vulvar biopsy 
obtained whenever the diagnosis is in question, the patient 
is not responding to treatment, or premalignant or malignant 
disease is suspected. Vulvar conditions such as contact derma-
titis, atrophic vulvovaginitis, lichen sclerosis, lichen planus, 
lichen chronicus simplex, Paget’s disease, Bowen’s disease, and 
invasive vulvar cancer are not uncommon. Systemic diseases 
like psoriasis, eczema, Crohn’s disease, Behçet’s disease, vitil-
igo, and seborrheic dermatitis may also involve the vulvar skin.
Vulvar Contact Dermatitis.  This dermatitis is a common 
cause of acute or chronic vulvar pruritus and can be irritant 
or allergic.4 Irritant dermatitis usually results from overzeal-
ous hygiene habits, such as the use of harsh soaps and frequent 
douching. It is also common in patients with urinary or fecal 
incontinence, especially the elderly and the disabled. Allergic 
vulvar dermatitis is caused by a variety of allergens, such as 
fragrances and topical antibiotics. The mainstay of treatment 
is to identify and discontinue the offending agent or practice or 
providing a skin barrier in the case of incontinence.
Leukoplakias.  There are three types of leukoplakia, a flat 
white abnormality. Lichen sclerosis is the most common cause 
of leukoplakia.4 It affects women 30 to 40 years of age. Clas-
sically, it results in a figure-of-eight pattern of white epithe-
lium around the anus and vulva resulting in variable scaring 
and itching and, less commonly, pain. Diagnosis is confirmed 
with biopsy, and treatment consists of topical steroids. Lichen 
planus is a cause of leukoplakia with an onset in the fifth and 
sixth decades of life. Lichen planus, in contrast to lichen sclero-
sis, which is limited to the vulva and perianal skin, can involve 
the vagina and oral mucosa, and erosions occur in the majority 
of patients, leading to a variable degree of scaring. Patients usu-
ally have a history and dysuria and dyspareunia and complain 
of a burning vulvar pain. Histology is not specific, and biopsy 
is recommended. Treatment is with steroid ointments. Systemic 
steroids are indicated for severe and/or unresponsive cases. 
Lichen simplex chronicus is the third cause of leukoplakia but is 
distinguished from the other lichen diseases by epidermal thick-
ening, absence of scaring, and a severe intolerable itch.4 Intense 
scratching is not uncommon and contributes to the severity of 
the symptoms and predisposes the cracked skin to infections. 
Treatment consists of cessation of the scratching, which some-
times requires sedation; elimination of any allergen or irritant; 
suppression of inflammation with potent steroid ointments; and 
treatment of any coexisting infections.
Bartholin’s Cyst or Abscess.  Bartholin’s glands, great ves-
tibular glands, are located at the vaginal orifice at the four and 
eight o’clock positions; they are rarely palpable in normal 
patients. They are lined with cuboidal epithelium and secrete 
mucoid material to keep the vulva moist. Their ducts are lined 
with transitional epithelium, and their obstruction secondary to 
inflammation may lead to the development of a Bartholin’s cyst 
or abscess. Bartholin’s cysts range in size from 1 to 3 cm and 
are detected on exam or are recognized by the patient. They 
occasionally result in discomfort and dyspareunia and require 
treatment. Cysts and ducts can become infected and form 
abscesses. Infections are often polymicrobial; however, sexually 
transmitted N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are sometimes 
implicated. Treatment consists of incision and drainage and 
placement of a Word catheter, a small catheter with a balloon 
tip, for 2 to 3 weeks to allow for formation and epithelializa-
tion of a new duct. Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be 
instituted. Recurrent cysts or abscesses are usually marsupial-
ized, but on occasion necessitate excision of the whole gland. 
Marsupialization is done by incising the cyst or abscess wall and 
securing its lining to the skin edges with interrupted sutures.5 
Cysts or abscesses that fail to resolve after drainage and those 
occurring in patients over age 40 should be biopsied to exclude 
malignancy.
Molluscum Contagiosum.  Molluscum contagiosum presents 
with dome-shaped papules and is caused by the poxvirus. The 
papules are usually 2 to 5 mm in diameter and classically have 
a central umbilication. They are spread by direct skin contact 
and present on the vulva, as well as abdomen, trunk, arms, 
and thighs. Lesions typically clear in several months but can 
be treated with cryotherapy, curettage, or cantharidin, a topical 
blistering agent.
Genital Ulcer Syndromes.  The frequency of the infectious 
etiologies of genital ulcers varies by geographic location. The 
most common causes of sexually transmitted genital ulcers 
in young adults in the United States are, in descending order 
of prevalence, herpes simplex virus (HSV), syphilis, and 
chancroid.6 Others infectious causes of genital ulcers include 
lymphogranuloma venereum and granuloma inguinale. Non-
infectious etiologies include Behçet’s disease, neoplasms, and 
trauma. Table 41-3 outlines a rational approach to their evalua-
tion and diagnosis.
Vulvar Condyloma.  Condylomata acuminata (anogenital 
warts) are viral infections caused by HPV.7 Genital infection 
with HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection 
in the United States today. HPV types 6 and 11 are the most 
common low-risk types and are implicated in 90% of cases 
of genital warts.8 High-risk types can be found in association 
3
1679
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
Table 41-3
Clinical features of genital ulcers syndromes
Herpes
Syphilis
Chancroid
Lymphogranuloma 
Venereum
Granuloma Inguinale 
(Donovanosis)
Pathogen
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) 
  type II and less commonly 
HSV type I
Treponema palladium
Haemophilus ducreyi
Chlamydia trachomatis 
  L1-L3
Calymmatobacterium 
  granulomatis
Incubation period
2–7 days
2–4 weeks (1–12 weeks)
1–14 days
3 days–6 weeks
1–4 weeks (up to  
  6 months)
Primary lesion
Vesicle
Papule
Papule or pustule
Papule, pustule, or 
  vesicle
Papule
Number of lesions
Multiple, may coalesce
Usually one
Usually multiple, may coalesce
Usually one
Variable
Diameter (mm)
1–2
5–15
2–20
2–10
Variable
Edges
Erythematous
Sharply demarcated, elevated,  
  round, or oval
Undermined, ragged,  
  irregular
Elevated, round, or oval
Elevated, irregular
Depth
Superficial
Superficial or deep
Excavated
Superficial or deep
Elevated
Base
Serous, erythematous
Smooth, nonpurulent
Purulent
Variable
Red and rough (“beefy”)
Induration
None
Firm
Soft
Occasionally firm
Firm
Pain
Common
Unusual
Usually very tender
Variable
Uncommon
Lymphadenopathy
Firm, tender, often bilateral
Firm, nontender, bilateral
Tender, may suppurate, usually 
  unilateral
Tender, may suppurate, 
  loculated, usually 
unilateral
Pseudo-adenopathy
Treatment
Acyclovir (ACV) 400 mg PO 
  tid for 7–10 days for primary 
infection and 400 mg PO 
tid for 5 days for episodic 
management
Primary, secondary, and early latent 
  (<1 year): penicillin G (PCN-G) 
benzathine 2.4 million U IM × 1
Late latent (>1 year) and latent of 
  unknown duration: PCN-G 
benzathine 2.4 million U IM every 
week × 3
Azithromycin 1 g PO or 
  ceftriaxone 250 mg IM × 1 or 
ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO bid 
for 3 days
Erythromycin base 500 mg PO 
  tid for 7 days
Doxycycline 100 mg 
  PO bid for 21 days 
or erythromycin base 
500 mg PO qid for  
21 days
Doxycycline 100 mg PO 
  bid for 3 weeks 
until all lesions have 
healed
Suppression
ACV 400 mg PO bid for those 
  with frequent outbreaks
bid = twice a day; IM = intramuscular; PO = oral; qid = four times a day; tid = twice a day.
Data from Stenchever M, Droegemueller W, Herbst A, et al. Comprehensive Gynecology. 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2001.
1680
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
with invasive cancers. Genital warts are skin-colored or pink 
and range from smooth flattened papules to verrucous papil-
liform lesions. Lesions may be single or multiple and extensive. 
Diagnosis should be confirmed with biopsy because verrucous 
vulvar cancers can be mistaken for condylomata.9 Treatment 
modalities range from patient-applied ointments to physician-
applied agents and office procedures. If small, self-administered 
topical imiquimod 5% cream or trichloroacetic acid for in-office 
applications may be tried. Extensive lesions may require surgi-
cal modalities that include cryotherapy, laser ablation, cauter-
ization, and surgical excision.
Paget’s Disease of the Vulva.  Paget’s disease of the vulva 
is an intraepithelial disease of unknown etiology that affects 
mostly white postmenopausal women in their sixth decade of 
life. It causes chronic vulvar itching and is sometimes associated 
with an underlying invasive vulvar adenocarcinoma or invasive 
cancers of the breast, cervix, or gastrointestinal tract. Grossly, 
the lesion is variable but usually confluent, raised, erythematous 
to violet, and waxy in appearance. Biopsy is required for diag-
nosis; the disease is intraepithelial and characterized by Paget’s 
cells with large pale cytoplasm. Treatment is assessment for 
other potential concurrent adenocarcinomas, and then surgi-
cal removal by wide local resection of the involved area with 
a 2-cm margin. Free margins are difficult to obtain because the 
disease usually extends beyond the clinically visible area.10,11 
Intraoperative frozen section of the margins can be done; how-
ever, Paget’s vulvar lesions have a high likelihood of recurrence 
even after securing negative resection margins.
Vulvar Intraepithelial Neoplasia (VIN).  VIN is similar to 
its cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) counterpart and is 
graded on the degree of epithelial involvement as mild (VIN I), 
moderate (VIN II), severe (VIN III), or vulvar carcinoma 
in situ (Bowen’s disease).12 Risk factors include HPV 
infection, prior VIN, HIV infection, immunosuppression, smok-
ing, vulvar dermatoses such as lichen sclerosis, CIN, and cervi-
cal cancer. VIN can be unifocal or multifocal. Unifocal lesions 
commonly affect postmenopausal women and lack a clear asso-
ciation with HPV, while multifocal disease mostly affects 
younger reproductive-age females and has a strong association 
with HPV infection. Fifty percent of patients are asymptomatic, 
with vulvar pruritus being the most common complaint in those 
with symptoms. Lesions may be vague or raised and velvety 
with sharply demarcated borders. Diagnosis is made with a vul-
var skin biopsy, and multiple biopsies are sometimes necessary. 
Colposcopy with application of 5% acetic acid and identifica-
tion of the acetowhite lesions of VIN is a valuable diagnostic 
tool for subtle lesions and will help guide the biopsy. Evaluation 
of the perianal and anal area is important as the disease may 
involve these areas, particularly in immunocompromised and/or 
nicotine-addicted women. Once invasive disease is ruled out, 
treatment usually involves wide surgical excision; however, the 
initial treatment approach may include 5% imiquimod cream, 
CO2 laser ablation, or cavitational ultrasonic surgical aspira-
tion, and depends on the number of lesions and their severity. 
When laser ablation is used, a 1-mm depth in hair-free areas is 
usually sufficient, whereas hairy lesions require ablation to a 
3-mm depth because the hair follicles’ roots can reach a depth 
of 2.5 mm. Unfortunately, VIN tends to recur in up to 30% of 
cases, and high-grade lesions (VIN III, carcinoma in situ) prog-
ress to invasive disease in approximately 10% of patients if left 
untreated.13
Vaginal Lesions
Vaginitis (see Table 41-2).  Vulvovaginal symptoms are 
extremely common, accounting for over 10 million office visits 
per year in the United States. The causes of vaginal complaints 
are commonly infectious in origin, but they include a number 
of noninfectious causes, such as chemicals or irritants, hormone 
deficiency, foreign bodies, systemic diseases, and malignancy. 
Symptoms are commonly nonspecific and include abnormal 
vaginal discharge, pruritus, irritation, burning, odor, dyspareu-
nia, bleeding, and ulcers. A purulent discharge from the cervix 
should always raise suspicion of these infections even in the 
absence of pelvic pain or other signs.
Normal vaginal discharge is white or transparent, thick, 
and mostly odorless. It increases during pregnancy, with use 
of estrogen-progestin contraceptives, or at mid-cycle around 
the time of ovulation. Complaints of foul odor and abnormal 
vaginal discharge should be investigated. Candidiasis, bacte-
rial vaginosis, and trichomoniasis account for 90% of vaginitis 
cases. The initial workup includes pelvic examination, vagi-
nal pH testing, microscopy, vaginal cultures if microscopy is 
normal, and gonorrhea/chlamydia NAAT (see earlier section, 
Common Screening and Testing).14 The pH of normal vaginal 
secretions is 3.8 to 4.4, which is hostile to growth of pathogens. 
A pH greater than or equal to 4.9 is indicative of a bacterial or 
protozoal infection. Treatment of vaginal infection before antic-
ipated surgery is appropriate, particularly for bacterial vagino-
sis, which may be associated with a higher risk for vaginal cuff 
infections (Fig. 41-8).
Bacterial Vaginosis (BV).  BV accounts for 50% of vaginal 
infections. It results from reduction in concentration of the nor-
mally dominant lactobacilli and increase in concentration of 
anaerobic organisms like Gardnerella vaginalis, Mycoplasma 
hominis, Bacteroides species, and others.15 Diagnosis is made 
by microscopic demonstration of clue cells. The discharge typi-
cally produces a fishy odor upon addition of KOH (amine or 
Whiff test). Initial treatment is usually a 7-day course of met-
ronidazole.
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis (VVC).  VVC is the most common 
cause of vulvar pruritus. It is generally caused by Candida albi-
cans and occasionally by other Candida species. It is common 
in pregnant women, diabetics, patients taking antibiotics, and 
immunocompromised hosts. Initial treatment is usually with 
topical antifungals, although single-dose oral antifungal treat-
ments are also common.
Trichomonas vaginalis.  Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmit-
ted infection of a flagellated protozoan and can present with 
malodorous, purulent discharge. It is typically diagnosed with 
visualization of the trichomonads during saline wet mount 
microscopy. Initial treatment is usually a 7-day course of met-
ronidazole.
Gartner’s Duct Cyst.  A Gartner’s duct cyst is a remnant of the 
Wolffian tract; it is typically found on the lateral vaginal walls. 
Patients can be asymptomatic or present with complaints of dys-
pareunia or difficulty inserting a tampon. If symptomatic, these 
cysts may be surgically excised or marsupialized. If surgery 
is planned, a preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
scan should be obtained to determine the extent of the cyst.
Vaginal Condyloma.  The etiology and treatment of vaginal 
condyloma is similar to vulvar condyloma (see earlier section, 
Vulvar Condyloma).
4
1681
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
Vaginal Intraepithelial Neoplasia.  Vaginal intraepithelial 
neoplasia, or VaIN, is similar to VIN and is classified based on 
the degree of epithelial involvement as mild (I), moderate (II), 
severe (III), or carcinoma in situ.12 Sixty-five percent to 80% 
of VaIN or vaginal cancers are associated with HPV infection. 
The majority of lesions are located in the upper one third of 
the vagina. Lesions are usually asymptomatic and found inci-
dentally on cytologic screening. Diagnosis is made via guided 
biopsy of acetowhite lesions at the time of colposcopy. Lesions 
may appear flat or raised and white with sharply demarcated 
borders and may show vascular changes. The presence of aber-
rant vessels with marked branching is suggestive of invasive 
disease. VaIN is treated with laser ablation, surgical excision, 
or topical 5-fluorouracil therapy.
Cervical Lesions
Benign Cervical Lesions.  Benign lesions of the cervix include 
endocervical polyps, Nabothian cysts (clear, fluid-filled cysts 
with smooth surfaces), trauma (such as delivery-related cervical 
tear or prior cervical surgery), malformation of the cervix, and 
cervical condyloma. For endocervical polyps, exploration of the 
base of the polyp with a cotton swab tip to identify that it is cer-
vical and not uterine and to identify the stalk characteristics can 
help identify the appropriate surgical approach. Small polyps 
with identifiable base can be removed by grasping the polyp 
with ring forceps and slowly rotating it until separated from its 
base. Use of loop electro-excisional procedure (LEEP) is appro-
priate for larger lesions. Laser or other ablative procedures are 
appropriate for condyloma proven by biopsy.
Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia (CIN).  High-grade cer-
vical dysplasia (CIN II or III) has a high chance of persistent 
HPV infection with risk of transformation to malignancy; 
thus an excisional procedure is usually indicated. This 
serves a therapeutic purpose by removal of dysplastic cells and a 
diagnostic purpose for histologic review to rule out concomitant 
early-stage cervical cancer. Either a LEEP or cold knife coniza-
tion (CKC) may be used for surgical excision of the squamoco-
lumnar junction (SCJ) and outer endocervical canal. Risks of 
both procedures include bleeding, postprocedure infection, cervi-
cal stenosis, and risk of preterm delivery with subsequent preg-
nancies. A looped wire attachment for a standard monopolar 
electrosurgical unit is used to perform a LEEP excision. Loops 
range in a variety of shapes and sizes to accommodate different 
sizes of cervix. Optimally, one pass of the loop should excise the 
entire SCJ. Hemostasis of the remaining cervix is achieved with 
the ball electrode and ferrous sulfate paste (Monsel’s solution).
Different from a LEEP, a cervical CKC does not use 
energy to excise the specimen. The advantage of this procedure 
is that the margin status is not obscured by cauterized artifact. 
This is important in cases of adenocarcinoma in situ and micro-
invasive squamous cell carcinoma, where margin status dictates 
the type of and indication for future therapy. During a CKC, a 
#11 blade is used to circumferentially excise the conical biopsy. 
Hemostasis is achieved with the ball electrode, Monsel’s solu-
tion, or suture.
HPV Vaccine.  Two HPV vaccines have been developed and 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).16 
Gardasil is a quadrivalent vaccine that targets HPV genotypes 
16 and 18, which cause approximately 70% of cervical cancers 
and about 50% of precancerous lesions (CIN II/III) worldwide, 
and HPV genotypes 6 and 11, which cause 90% of genital warts. 
Cervarix is a bivalent vaccine that targets HPV genotypes 16 
and 18. In contrast to natural infection, the vaccine is highly 
immunogenic, activating both humoral and cellular immune 
responses. Vaccination generates high concentrations of neu-
tralizing antibodies to HPV L1 protein, the antigen in both 
5
Vaginal discharge
and/or pruritus
Interview
Exam
Wet & KOH mounts
Vaginal pH
Metronidazole
or
Clindamycin
Candidiasis
Antifungals
Trichomoniasis
pH < 4.5
Hyphae
Budding yeasts
pH > 4.5
Trichomonads
pH > 4.5
Clue cells
Positive whiff test
Ulcers
Pruritic lesions
Vaginal
atrophy
Atrophic vaginitis
Topical estrogen
Biopsy
Oral metronidazole
Bacterial
vaginosis
Figure 41-8.  Treatment algorithm for vulvovaginitis.
1682
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
vaccines. It is thought that vaccination may provide protection 
against HPV infection through neutralization of virus by serum 
immunoglobulin that diffuses from capillaries to the genital 
mucosal epithelium.17
Several randomized clinical trials18-20 involving approxi-
mately 35,000 young women have shown that both Gardasil 
and Cervarix prevent nearly 100% of the HPV subtype-specific 
precancerous cervical cell changes for up to 4 years after vacci-
nation among women who were not infected at the time of vac-
cination; vaccination occurred before sexual debut. These major 
clinical trials have used prevention of CIN II/III and carcinoma 
in situ as the efficacy endpoints. Vaccination has not yet been 
shown to protect women who are already infected with HPV-16 
or HPV-18 at the time of vaccination.
Current FDA approval applies to use in women who are 
between 9 and 26 years of age for the prevention of the follow-
ing: cervical, vulvar, and vaginal cancer caused by HPV-16 or 
-18, genital warts caused by HPV-6 or -11, and lesions caused 
by HPV-6, -11, -16, or -18 (CIN I, II, and III; cervical carci-
noma in situ; VIN; or VaIN II/III). The Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends routine vaccina-
tion for females 11 to 12 years of age, maybe starting at age 9; 
catch-up vaccination is recommended for females 13 to 26 years 
of age who did not get all three doses when they were younger. 
Studies to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccine in healthy women 
26 years of age and older with no prior exposure to HPV is 
ongoing, and additional information on the length of protection 
is forthcoming. In 2009, the FDA approved the quadrivalent 
vaccine for use to prevent genital warts in men and boys, and 
in 2011, the ACIP recommended that all males 11 to 12 years 
of age be vaccinated, stating that this may reduce some of the 
HPV-related burden suffered by women.
Immunocompromised women may receive the quadri-
valent vaccine. Although the safety and immunogenicity of 
HPV vaccination in this population are not well established, the 
vaccine could be beneficial in these women since they are at 
increased risk for HPV-related cancers. Vaccination is not rec-
ommended for pregnant women, although neither vaccine has 
been shown to be causally associated with adverse outcomes in 
pregnant women or their fetuses. If pregnant women are vacci-
nated inadvertently, completion of the series should be delayed 
until after the pregnancy.
Cervical cancer screening continues to play an important 
role in detection and treatment of CIN II/III and prevention 
of cervical cancer in these high-risk patients. Cervical cancer 
screening continues to be of great importance since HPV immu-
nization will not prevent approximately 25% to 30% of cervical 
cancers in HPV-naïve women and does not protect against the 
development of cancer in women already infected with carcino-
genic HPV types.
Uterine Corpus
The average age of menarche, or first menstrual period, in the 
United States is 12 years and 5 months. Duration of normal 
menstruation is between 2 and 7 days, with a flow of less than 
80 mL, cycling every 21 to 35 days.21 Nonpregnant patients, 
who present with heavy bleeding and are 35 years of age and 
older or have risk factors for endometrial cancer, must be ruled 
out for malignancy as the first step in their management (see 
earlier section, Endometrial Biopsy).
Abnormal Uterine Bleeding (AUB).  Abnormal uterine bleed-
ing is described based on the bleeding pattern. Menorrhagia is 
prolonged (>7 days) or excessive (>80 mL daily) menstrual 
cycles occurring at regular intervals, and metrorrhagia is bleed-
ing between menstrual periods. Menometrorrhagia is the occur-
rence of both. Intermenstrual bleeding, also known as spotting, 
is bleeding of variable amounts occurring between regular men-
strual cycles. Poly-, oligo-, and amenorrhea are menstrual cycles 
of less than 21 days, longer than 35 days, or the absence of uter-
ine bleeding for 6 months or a period equivalent to three missed 
cycles, respectively. Because there are many causes of AUB, they 
are divided into two categories: structural causes and nonstruc-
tural causes.22 Structural causes include polyps, adenomyosis, 
leiomyomata, and malignancy. Nonstructural causes can include 
coagulopathy, ovulatory dysfunction, endometrial effects, and 
iatrogenic causes.
Endometrial Polyps.  Endometrial polyps are localized hyper-
plastic growth of endometrial glands and stroma around a vas-
cular core forming sessile or pedunculated projections from the 
surface of the endometrium.23 Endometrial polyps are rarely 
neoplastic (<1%) and may be single or multiple. Many are 
asymptomatic; however, they are responsible for about 25% 
of cases of abnormal uterine bleeding, usually metrorrhagia. 
Polyps are common in patients on tamoxifen therapy and in 
peri- and postmenopausal women. Up to 2.5% of patients with 
a polyp may harbor foci of endometrial carcinoma.24 Diagnosis 
can be made with saline-infused hysterosonography, hysterosal-
pingogram, or direct visualization at the time of hysteroscopy. 
Definitive treatment, in the absence of malignancy, involves 
resection with an operative hysteroscope or by sharp curettage.
Adenomyosis.  Adenomyosis refers to ectopic endometrial 
glands and stroma situated within the myometrium. When dif-
fuse, it results in globular uterine enlargement secondary to 
hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the surrounding myometrium. 
Adenomyosis is very common, tends to occur in parous women, 
and is frequently an incidental finding at the time of surgery. 
Diagnosis is suspected in a parous woman with menorrhagia, 
dysmenorrhea, and diffuse globular uterine enlargement. MRI 
may reveal islands within the myometrium with increased signal 
intensity.25 Hysterectomy is the only treatment, providing mate-
rial for definitive pathologic diagnosis.
Uterine Leiomyomas.  Leiomyomas, also known colloqui-
ally as fibroids, are the most common female pelvic tumor and 
occur in response to growth of the uterine smooth muscle cells 
(myometrium). They are common in the reproductive years, and 
by age 50, at least 60% of white and up to 80% of black women 
are or have been affected. Leiomyomas are described according 
to their anatomic location (Fig. 41-9) as intramural, subserosal, 
submucosal, pedunculated, cervical, and rarely ectopic.21 Most 
are asymptomatic; however, abnormal uterine bleeding caused by 
leiomyomas is the most common indication for hysterectomy in 
the United States. Other manifestations include pain, pregnancy 
complications, and infertility. Pain generally results from degen-
erating myomas that outgrew their blood supply or from compres-
sion of other pelvic organs such as the bowel, bladder, and ureters. 
High levels of pregnancy hormones frequently cause significant 
enlargement of pre-existing myomas, which may lead to signifi-
cant distortion of the uterine cavity resulting in recurrent mis-
carriages, fetal malpresentations, intrauterine growth restriction, 
obstruction of the birth canal and the subsequent need for cesarean 
delivery, abruption, preterm labor, and pain from degeneration.
Bleeding is usually heavy and irregular (menometrorrhagia) 
and can be severe at times, requiring hospitalization. Examination 
1683
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
reveals an enlarged irregular uterus and, in severe cases, a large 
solid pelvic mass extending to the upper abdomen. Diagnosis is 
usually made by transvaginal ultrasonography. Other diagnos-
tic modalities, including MRI, computed tomography (CT), and 
hysterosalpingogram or saline-infused hysterosalpingography, 
are especially useful in the cases of submucosal and intrauterine 
myomas. Most are benign; malignant degeneration occurs in 
less than 1% of cases and is usually encountered in the meno-
pausal years. Management options of leiomyomas are tailored 
to the individual patient depending on her age and desire for 
fertility and the size, location, and symptoms of the myomas. 
Conservative management options include oral contraceptive 
pills, medroxyprogesterone acetate, gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone (GnRH) agonists, uterine artery embolization, and myo-
mectomy.26-28 Uterine artery embolization is contraindicated 
in patients planning future pregnancy and frequently results 
in acute degeneration of myomas requiring hospitalization for 
pain control. Myomectomy is indicated in patients with infertil-
ity and those who wish to preserve their reproductive capac-
ity. Hysterectomy is the only curative therapy. Treatment with 
GnRH agonists for 3 months prior to surgery is recommended 
in anemic patients and may allow them time to normalize their 
hematocrit, avoiding transfusions; GnRH also decreases blood 
loss at hysterectomy and shrinks the myomas by an average 
of 30%. The latter may make the preferred vaginal surgical 
approach more feasible.
Endometrial Hyperplasia.  Endometrial hyperplasia is caused 
by chronic unopposed hyperestrogenic state (relative absence 
of progesterone) and is characterized by proliferation of endo-
metrial glands resulting in increased gland-to-stroma ratio. It 
can be asymptomatic or, more commonly, result in abnormal 
vaginal bleeding. Hyperplasia can be either simple or complex, 
based on the architecture of the glands. Of greater importance 
is the presence or absence of nuclear atypia, described by the 
World Health Organization (WHO) classification.29 Untreated 
endometrial hyperplasia progresses to malignancy in 1%, 
3%, 8%, and 29% of cases of simple, complex, simple with 
atypia, and complex hyperplasia with atypia, respectively.30 
Simple and complex hyperplasias can be treated with proges-
tins, and women should have repeat endometrial sampling in 
3 to 6 months. Atypical hyperplasia is considered a premalig-
nant condition and is treated ideally with simple hysterectomy. 
When a patient has a preoperative diagnosis of complex atypical 
hyperplasia, the likelihood of a concomitant endometrial cancer 
at hysterectomy is 38% to 60%.31 If preservation of fertility is 
desired or surgery contraindicated, treatment with high-dose 
progestins such as megestrol acetate 40 to 160 mg/d usually 
reverses these lesions. Close follow-up and repeated sampling 
are necessary.
Procedures Performed for Structural Causes of Abnormal 
Uterine Bleeding
Dilation and Curettage.  The patient is placed on the operat-
ing table in a lithotomy position, and the vagina and cervix are 
prepared as for any vaginal operation. The cervix is grasped on 
the anterior lip with a tenaculum. Some traction on the cervix is 
necessary to straighten the cervical canal and the uterine cavity. 
A uterine sound is inserted into the uterine cavity, and the depth 
of the uterus is noted. The cervical canal is then systematically 
dilated beginning with a small cervical dilator. Most operations 
can be performed after the cervix is dilated to accommodate 
a number 8 or 9 Hegar dilator or its equivalent. Dilatation is 
accomplished by firm, constant pressure with a dilator directed 
in the axis of the uterus (Fig. 41-10). After the cervix is dilated 
to admit the curette, the endocervical canal should be curetted 
and the sample submitted separately from the endometrial curet-
tings. The endometrial cavity is then systemically scraped with 
a uterine curette. Uterine perforation is the major complication 
of dilatation and curettage, diagnosed when the operator finds 
no resistance to a dilator or curette. Laparoscopy to identify any 
damage to vessels or bowel may be required. Curettage of the 
postabortal uterus must be approached carefully because the 
uterus is extremely soft and perforation can occur with very lit-
tle warning. Using the largest curette available or suction curet-
tage is a safer choice than a small curette, which tends to cause 
perforation with less pressure.
Hysteroscopy.  Hysteroscopy, like laparoscopy, has gained 
widespread support for use both for diagnosis and treatment of 
intrauterine pathology and for ablation of the endometrium as 
an alternative to hysterectomy for the treatment of abnormal 
uterine bleeding. Scopes can have an objective lens that is offset 
from the long axis from 0° to 30°. The diagnostic hysteroscope 
usually has an external diameter of 5 mm. Some diagnostic 
sheaths allow passage of flexible instruments for biopsy and 
cutting. An operative hysteroscope is wider and usually has an 
integral unipolar or bipolar resecting loop identical to a urologic 
resectoscope. The loop can be replaced with a roller ball for 
endometrial ablation.
Several types of distention media exist and vary by elec-
trolyte composition and osmolarity. High-viscosity (e.g., dextran 
70), low-viscosity/electrolyte-poor (e.g., glycine and sorbitol), 
and low-viscosity/electrolyte-containing (e.g., normal saline and 
lactated Ringer’s solution) medias are commonly used for disten-
sion of the uterus during hysteroscopy.32 The use and safety pro-
files of these medias vary, however. Dextran 70 allows excellent 
visibility, but the manufacturer recommends that no more than 
250 mL be absorbed because of the concern for pulmonary edema. 
Anaphylactic reactions and coagulopathy are rare complications 
that have been described.33 Glycine and sorbitol allow the use 
of monopolar cautery during operative hysteroscopy. Large vol-
ume deficits have been associated with secondary hyponatremic 
hypervolemia due to their metabolism to free water after intrava-
sation.33 When fluid deficits reach 1000 to 1500 mL, the proce-
dure should be terminated, and the patient’s serum electrolytes 
assessed. Patients who have excessive intravasation experience 
Subserous
Pedunculated
Submucous
Prolapsed
Intercavitary
Intramural
Figure 41-9.  Types of uterine myomas.
1684
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
headache, nausea, vomiting, and agitation.34 This manifestation 
can progress to pulmonary and cerebral edema. These patients 
require close monitoring and diuretic administration.
Unlike glycine and sorbitol, normal saline and lactated 
Ringer’s solution have physiologic osmolarity and contain 
sodium. Although excessive intravasation does not lead to 
hyponatremia, it can lead to volume overload. Media deficits 
of greater than 2500 mL should prompt conclusion of the pro-
cedure and assessment of electrolytes.35 Fluid-management sys-
tems are available to monitor the amount of distension media 
lost during hysteroscopy. Media intravasation can be lessened 
by using the minimum intrauterine pressure needed to perform 
the hysteroscopy and by minimizing operating time. The physi-
cian must be aware that certain procedures such as endometrial 
ablation and resection of myomas open vascular channels and 
place the patient at increased risk for fluid overload.33
Diagnostic Hysteroscopy.  Following dilation of the cervix, 
a diagnostic hysteroscope is placed and the uterine cavity 
distended with the media of choice. Inspection of the cavity 
includes identifying the uterine fundus, cornua, and any other 
anomalies to include polyps, leiomyomas, or uterine septum.
Hysteroscopic Polypectomy or Myomectomy.  If an intrauter-
ine polyp is discovered, the base of the polyp is incised with 
hysteroscopic scissors, and the polyp is grasped with grasping 
forceps. The hysteroscope, sleeve, and polyp are removed simul-
taneously, because most polyps will not fit through the operat-
ing channel. Extremely large polyps may have to be removed 
piecemeal. Any residual base of the polyp may be removed 
with biopsy forceps. Pedunculated or submucosal leiomyoma 
can be removed safely hysteroscopically. Because myoma tis-
sue is relatively dense, a power cutting instrument is required. 
The most common method is use of electrosurgery. A mono-
polar device may be used with an electrolyte-poor distention 
medium. Only bipolar devices may be used with normal saline 
or lactated Ringer’s solution. Both pedunculated and submu-
cosal fibroids are shaved into small pieces with the hystero-
resectoscope. Stalk resection should only be done to release 
a pedunculated fibroid if it is 10 mm or less in size; larger 
fibroids are difficult to remove in one piece without excessive 
cervical dilatation. Morcellation is much easier when the stalk 
is still attached for stability. Hysteroscopes with a morcellation 
attachment have been recently developed.36
Endometrial Ablation.  A common treatment for abnormal uter-
ine bleeding in the absence of endometrial hyperplasia is abla-
tion of the endometrium. Historically, this was performed with 
an operative hysteroscope using an electrosurgical “roller ball,” 
where the endometrium was destroyed down to the myometrium 
in a systematic fashion. Currently, hysteroscopic endometrial 
ablation has been widely supplanted by various devices, includ-
ing heated free fluid, cryotherapy, thermal balloon, microwave, 
and radiofrequency electricity. Most ablation techniques result 
in amenorrhea in approximately half the patients and decreased 
menstruation in another third of the patients over the first year 
of therapy.37
Myomectomy.  Myomectomy (Fig. 41-11) is the removal of 
fibroids, and it can be treatment for abnormal uterine bleeding, 
bulk symptoms, or infertility. Hemostasis during myomectomy 
can be aided medically by direct injection of dilute vasopressin 
at the site of the intended uterine incision (10 U in 50 mL). It 
can be aided further through the placement of a Penrose drain 
around the base of the uterus, pulled through small perforations 
in the broad ligament lateral to the uterine blood supply on either 
Common
duct
stone
searcher
B
A
C
Figure 41-10.  A through C. Dilatation and curettage of the uterus.
1685
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
side and clamped to form a tourniquet for uterine blood flow. 
An incision is then made through the uterine serosa into the 
myoma. The pseudocapsule surrounding the tumor is identified 
and the tumor is bluntly dissected out with scissors, or bluntly 
if open. Vessels to the myoma are dessicated with the electro-
surgical unit. Several myomas may be removed through a sin-
gle incision, depending on size. The uterine wounds are closed 
with absorbable sutures to obliterate the dead space and provide 
hemostasis. The uterine serosa is closed with a 3-0 absorbable 
suture, placed subserosally if possible. Because myomectomies 
are associated with considerable postoperative adhesion forma-
tion, barrier techniques are used to decrease adhesion formation.
During a laparoscopic myomectomy, hemostasis is 
assisted by intrauterine injection of dilute vasopressin (10 U in 
50 mL) at the site of incision, similar to an open procedure. 
This is usually performed percutaneously with a spinal needle. 
Pedunculated leiomyomas can be excised at the base using scis-
sors or a power instrument. Intramural leiomyomas require deep 
dissection into the uterine tissue, which must be closed subse-
quently with laparoscopic suturing techniques. Removing the 
specimen often requires morcellation, and power morcellators 
have been developed that significantly expedite this technique. 
Adhesion barriers are placed laparoscopically.
Total Abdominal Hysterectomy (Fig. 41-12).  After the abdo-
men is entered, the upper abdomen is examined for evidence 
of extrapelvic disease, and a suitable retractor is placed in the 
abdominal incision. The uterus is grasped at either cornu with 
clamps and pulled up into the incision. The round ligament is 
identified and divided. The peritoneal incision is extended from 
the round ligament to just past the ovarian hilum, lateral to the 
infundibulopelvic ligament, if the ovaries are to be removed. 
The retroperitoneal space is bluntly opened, the ureter identi-
fied on the medial leaf of the broad ligament, and the infun-
dibulopelvic ligament isolated, clamped, cut, and suture-ligated; 
a similar procedure is carried out on the opposite side. If the 
ovaries are to be left in situ, the ureter is identified and an open-
ing below the utero-ovarian ligament and fallopian tube created. 
The fallopian tube and utero-ovarian ligament are clamped, cut, 
and ligated. The bladder is mobilized by sharply dissecting it 
free of the anterior surface of the uterus and cervix. Clamps 
are placed on the uterine vessels at the cervicouterine junction, 
and they are cut and suture-ligated. The cardinal ligaments are 
then serially clamped, cut, and ligated. Following division of 
the remaining cardinal ligaments, the uterus is elevated and the 
vagina clamped. The cervix is amputated from the vagina with 
scissors or a knife. Sutures are placed at each lateral angle of the 
Figure 41-11.  Myomectomy. A. Hemostatic “tourniquet’” in place before myomectomy. B. Uterine incision for myomectomy. C. Removal 
of myoma. D. Several myomas may be removed through a single incision. E. The uterine wound is closed with an absorbable suture. F. The 
uterine wound covered with mesh to retard adhesions.
1686
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Bladder
Bladder
Round 
ligament
Round 
ligament
Fallopian tube
Fallopian tube
Ovary
B
A
D
C
F
E
Ovarian ligament
Uterine
vessels
Ureter
Ureter
Cardinal
ligament
Uterus
Figure 41-12.  Hysterectomy. A. The uterus grasped at the cornua. B. The round ligament is cut. C. The ovarian ligament and fallopian tube 
are isolated. D. The bladder is mobilized. E. The uterine vessels are clamped. F. The cardinal ligaments are clamped. G. The vagina is entered. 
H. The cardinal ligaments are sutured to the vagina. I. The vagina is “closed open.”
1687
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
vagina, and the remainder of the vagina is closed with a running 
absorbable suture. Pelvic reperitonealization is not necessary.
Transvaginal Hysterectomy (Fig. 41-13).  Vaginal hysterec-
tomy is the preferred approach in patients in whom the uterus 
descends and the pubic arch allows enough space for a vagi-
nal operation. A bladder catheter can be placed before the 
procedure, and the patient is placed in a lithotomy position. A 
weighted vaginal speculum is placed in the vagina, and the cervix 
is grasped with a tenaculum and pulled in the axis of the vagina. 
Injection of the cervix and paracervical tissue with analgesic with 
epinephrine may be helpful in defining planes and decreasing 
obscuring bleeding. A circumferential incision may be made 
with a scalpel or scissors. The posterior cul-de-sac is identified 
and entered with scissors. A long weighted speculum is then 
placed through this opening into the peritoneal cavity. Metzen-
baum scissors are used to dissect anteriorly on the cervix down 
to the pubocervical-vesical fascia, reflecting the bladder off the 
lower uterine segment. When the peritoneum of the anterior cul-
de-sac is identified, it is entered with the scissors, and a retractor 
is placed in the defect. The uterosacral ligaments are identified, 
doubly clamped, cut, and ligated. Serial clamps are placed on 
the parametrial structures above the uterosacral ligament; these 
pedicles are cut and ligated. At the cornu of the uterus, the tube, 
round ligament, and utero-ovarian ligament of the ovary are 
doubly clamped and cut. The procedure is carried out usually 
concurrently on the opposite side, and the uterus is removed. 
The pelvis is inspected for hemostasis; all bleeding must be 
meticulously controlled at this point.
The pelvic peritoneum is closed with a running purse-
string suture incorporating the uterosacral and ovarian pedicles, 
those that were held. This exteriorizes those areas that might 
tend to bleed. The sutures attached to the ovarian pedicles are 
cut. The vagina may be closed with interrupted mattress stitches, 
incorporating the uterosacral ligaments into the corner of the 
vagina with each lateral stitch. On occasion, the uterus, which 
is initially too large to remove vaginally, may be reduced in size 
by morcellation (Fig. 41-14). After the uterine vessels have been 
clamped and ligated, serial wedges are taken from the central 
portion of the uterus in order to reduce the uterine mass. This 
procedure will allow the vaginal delivery of even very large 
uterine leiomyomas.
Laparoscopic Hysterectomy.  Laparoscopy has been used to 
augment vaginal hysterectomy to avoid laparotomy in patients 
with known pelvic adhesions, with endometriosis, or in whom 
the uterus is enlarged by leiomyoma. Although multiple varia-
tions in technique exist, there are three basic laparoscopic 
Vagina
Vagina
G
I
H
Cardinal
ligament
Vagina
Figure 41-12.  (Continued )
1688
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
approaches for hysterectomy: laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hys-
terectomy (LAVH), total laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH), and 
laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy (LSH). The techni-
cally simplest is the LAVH. A multiple-port approach is used to 
survey the peritoneal cavity, and any pelvic adhesions are lysed. 
The round ligaments are then occluded and divided, and the 
uterovesical peritoneum and peritoneum lateral to the ovarian 
ligament are incised. The course of the ureter and any adhesions 
or implants, such as endometriosis that might place the ureter in 
the way of the surgical dissection, are carefully dissected. Next, 
the proximal uterine blood supply is dissected for identification 
and then occluded with a laparoscopic energy device. When the 
ovaries are removed, the infundibulopelvic ligaments contain-
ing the ovarian vessels are divided. If the ovaries are conserved, 
the utero-ovarian ligament and blood vessels are divided and 
occluded. In many cases, the posterior cul-de-sac is also incised 
laparoscopically and the uterosacral ligaments separated with 
an energy device. The amount of dissection that is done prior to 
the vaginal portion depends on individual patient characteristics 
and may include as little as ovarian and adhesion management 
to full dissection including bladder dissection, with only the 
last vaginal incision done by the vaginal approach. During a 
Figure 41-13.  Vaginal hysterectomy. A. Traction is placed on the uterus. B. The posterior cul-de-sac is entered. C. The vaginal mucosa is 
circumcised. D. The anterior cul-de-sac is entered. E. The uterosacral ligaments are clamped. F. The uterosacral ligaments are tied. G. The 
fallopian tube, round ligament, and ovarian ligament are ligated. H. The peritoneum is closed. I. The vaginal mucosa is closed.
1689
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
TLH, the vaginal incision is performed laparoscopically, and the 
vaginal incision may be closed with laparoscopic suturing. This 
procedure is used for the indications listed earlier and also when 
lack of uterine descent makes the vaginal approach impossible.
During an LSH, the uterine vessels are divided after the 
bladder is dissected from the anterior uterus. The ascending 
branches of the uterine arteries are occluded, and the entire 
uterine fundus is amputated from the cervix. The endocervix is 
either cauterized or cored out. The fundus is then morcellated 
and removed through a 12-mm abdominal port or through a 
special transcervical morcellator. The end result is an intact 
cervix, with no surgical dissection performed below the uter-
ine artery. This approach avoids both a large abdominal inci-
sion and a vaginal incision. According to its advocates, this 
approach minimizes operating time, recovery time, and risk of 
both infection and ureteral injury. LSH has yet to be widely 
applied, in part out of concern for the subsequent risk of devel-
oping cancer in the residual cervical stump. In addition, women 
may develop bleeding from the remaining lower uterine seg-
ment that can be bothersome, even if preventive measures had 
been taken.
Benign Ovarian and Fallopian Tube Lesions
The most common ovarian benign findings include functional 
follicular cysts, endometriomas (due to ovarian endometriosis), 
and serous cystadenomas or cystadenofibromas. These can 
present with varying degrees or pelvic pain, or sometimes be 
completely asymptomatic. Ultrasound is the best initial imaging 
modality for evaluating ovarian abnormalities.
Ovarian Cystectomy.  When a cystic lesion persists or causes 
pelvic pain, surgical intervention is usually justified. Perform-
ing a cystectomy with ovarian preservation is recommended in 
women who desire future fertility. Whether the cystectomy is 
performed laparoscopically or by laparotomy, the procedure is 
initiated with inspection of the peritoneal cavity, peritoneum, 
diaphragm, liver, and pelvis. In the absence of signs of malig-
nancy, pelvic washings are obtained and the ovarian capsule is 
incised superficially sharply or with the electrosurgical unit. 
The cyst is shelled out carefully through the incision. During 
laparoscopy, it is placed in a bag, intact if possible, and the 
bag opening is brought through a 10-mm port. If a cyst should 
rupture before removal, contents are aspirated thoroughly, and 
the cyst wall is removed and sent for pathologic evaluation. 
The peritoneal cavity is copiously rinsed with Ringer’s lactate 
solution. This is especially important when a dermoid cyst is 
ruptured, because the sebaceous material can cause a chemi-
cal peritonitis unless all the visible oily substance is carefully 
removed. A cyst may need to be drained to facilitate removal, 
but only after bag edges are firmly out of the abdomen assur-
ing no leakage within the abdomen. Hemostasis of the ovary 
is achieved with bipolar electrocoagulation, but the ovary is 
usually not closed. If there are solid growths within the cyst, 
it should be sent for frozen section to verify the absence of the 
malignancy. If malignancy is detected, immediate definitive 
surgery is recommended.
Removal of Adnexa.  Indications for removal of adnexa 
include persistent ovarian cyst, pelvic pain, concern for malig-
nancy, and risk reduction surgery in women with genetic predis-
position for ovarian or endometrial cancers (BRCA1/2 mutation 
carrier, Lynch syndrome). In general, the peritoneum lateral 
to the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament is incised in a parallel 
fashion to allow retroperitoneal dissection and identification 
of the ureter. Once this has been accomplished, the IP liga-
ment is ligated with suture or an energy source (ultrasonic or 
bipolar). The remaining posterior leaf of the broad ligament is 
incised toward the uterus in a direction parallel to the utero-
ovarian ligament, to avoid ureteral injury. The fallopian tube 
and utero-ovarian ligaments are then ligated with either suture 
or an energy source. If performed laparoscopically, the speci-
men or specimens are removed in a bag as described earlier.
Tubal Sterilization.  As in diagnostic laparoscopy, a one- or 
two-port technique can be used. Fallopian tubes are occluded 
in the mid-isthmic section, approximately 3 cm from the cor-
nua, using clips, elastic bands, or bipolar electrosurgery. With 
electrosurgery, approximately 2 cm of tube should be desic-
cated. Pregnancy rates after any of these techniques have been 
reported in the range of 3 per 1000 women.
Other Pelvic Pathology
Chronic Pelvic Pain.  Chronic pelvic pain is defined as pain 
below the umbilicus that has lasted at least 6 months or causes 
functional disability, requiring treatment. While there can be 
gastrointestinal and urologic causes of chronic pelvic pain, 
gynecologic causes are frequently identified. Often, a surgical 
evaluation is needed for diagnosis and/or intervention. The most 
common gynecologic causes of chronic pelvic pain include 
endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine leiomyomas, and adhesive 
disease.
Endometriosis.  Endometriosis is the finding of ectopic endo-
metrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. It affects 10% of 
the general population and is an incidental finding at the time 
of laparoscopy in more than 20% of asymptomatic women. It 
is especially prevalent in patients suffering from chronic pel-
vic pain (80%) and infertility (20%–50%).21 The pathophysiol-
ogy of endometriosis is poorly understood; etiologic theories 
explaining dissemination of endometrial glands include retro-
grade menstruation, lymphatic and vascular spread of endome-
trial glands, and coelomic metaplasia. Endometriosis commonly 
involves the ovaries, pelvic peritoneal surfaces, and uterosacral 
ligaments. Other possible sites include the rectovaginal septum, 
sigmoid colon, intraperitoneal organs, retroperitoneal space, 
ureters, incisional scars, umbilicus, and even the thoracic cav-
ity. Involvement of the fallopian tubes may lead to scarring, 
Figure 41-14.  Uterine morcellation through the vagina.
1690
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
blockage, and subsequent infertility. Ovarian involvement var-
ies from superficial implants to large complex ovarian masses 
called endometriomas or “chocolate cysts.” Endometriomas are 
found in approximately one third of women with endometriosis 
and are often bilateral.
While endometriosis can be totally asymptomatic, more 
commonly, women are symptomatic, and complaints vary 
from mild dyspareunia and cyclic dysmenorrhea to debilitating 
chronic pelvic pain with acute exacerbations at the time of men-
ses. Less common manifestations include painful defecation, 
hematochezia, and hematuria if there is bowel and/or bladder 
involvement. Pelvic examination in symptomatic patients typi-
cally demonstrates generalized pelvic tenderness and nodularity 
of the uterosacral ligaments, and at times, a pelvic mass may 
be appreciated if an endometrioma is present. The severity of 
symptoms does not correlate with the degree of clinical disease 
present. Endometriosis can also cause increases in serum can-
cer antigen 125 (CA-125). Definitive diagnosis usually requires 
laparoscopy and visualization of the pathognomonic endome-
triotic implants. These appear as blue, brown, black, white, or 
yellow lesions that can be raised and at times puckered, giving 
them a “gunpowder” appearance. Biopsy is not routinely done 
but should be obtained if the diagnosis is in doubt.
Treatment is guided by severity of the symptoms and 
whether preservation of fertility is desired and varies from 
expectant, to medical, to surgical.38,39 Expectant management is 
appropriate in asymptomatic patients. Those with mild symptoms 
can be managed with oral contraceptive pills and/or nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory analgesia; moderate symptoms are treated 
with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Severe symptoms are treated 
with GnRH agonists to induce medical pseudo-menopause.
Surgical management for endometriosis varies depending 
on the age and fertility desires of the patient. A diagnostic lapa-
roscopy with biopsies may be indicated to confirm the diagnosis 
of endometriosis. If endometriosis is suspected, an operative lapa-
roscopy with ablation of endometriotic implants usually decreases 
the severity of pelvic pain. Ablation of endometriotic implants 
can be performed with CO2 laser or electrocautery and/or resec-
tion of deep endometriotic implants.38 Endometriomas can cause 
pain and, if found, should be treated by ovarian cystectomy. Com-
plete resection of the cyst wall is required because recurrence of 
the endometrioma is common after partial removal. Conservative 
surgical therapy in endometriosis patients with patent fallopian 
tubes results in pregnancy in about 50% of cases. Unfortunately, 
endometriosis is a chronic disease and conservative therapy, med-
ical or surgical, provides only temporary relief, with the majority 
of patients relapsing with 1 to 2 years. Patients with severe debili-
tating symptoms who do not desire future fertility and have not 
responded to conservative management can undergo extirpative 
surgery to remove the uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes; this 
intervention is curative and should be considered.
Pelvic Adhesive Disease.  Pelvic adhesions usually are related 
to previous surgery, endometriosis, or infection, the latter of 
which can be either genital (i.e., pelvic inflammatory disease) or 
extra-genital (e.g., ruptured appendix) in origin. Adhesions can 
be lysed mechanically with scissors if not vascular, harmonic 
scissors, or any of the power techniques as discussed elsewhere 
in this text. Postoperatively, adhesion barrier methods have 
been shown to decrease adhesion formation in both animal and 
human studies but have not been demonstrated to improve out-
come in terms of either subsequent pregnancies or pain relief.
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.  Pelvic inflammatory disease 
(PID) is an infection of the upper female genital tract involv-
ing the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries resulting in endome-
tritis, salpingitis, and oophoritis. It often involves contiguous 
pelvic organs, resulting in peritonitis, tubo-ovarian abscesses, 
and occasionally perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome). 
Long-term sequelae can include infertility, chronic pelvic pain, 
and increased risk of ectopic pregnancy.40,41 PID is mostly a 
sexually transmitted ascending infection caused by N. gonor-
rhoeae and/or C. trachomatis, but numerous other organisms 
have been implicated, including normal vaginal flora. Screening 
for concomitant HIV infection is strongly recommended. Less 
commonly, PID may result from extension of other pelvic and 
abdominal infections, such as appendicitis and diverticulitis, or 
may be precipitated by a medical procedure, such as hystero-
salpingography, endometrial biopsy, or dilation and curettage.
Differential diagnosis includes appendicitis, cholecysti-
tis, inflammatory bowel disease, pyelonephritis, nephrolithia-
sis, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian torsion.40,41 The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention recommend treatment of sus-
pected PID in patients with pelvic or lower abdominal pain who 
also exhibit cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or 
adnexal tenderness (Table 41-4). Transvaginal ultrasound may 
Table 41-4
CDC recommended treatment of PID (2010)42
oral regimens
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dose plus doxycycline 
100 mg PO bid for 14 days
with or without metronidazole 500 mg PO bid for 14 days
OR
Cefoxitin 2 g IM in a single dose and probenecid 1 g PO 
administered concurrently in a single dose plus doxycycline 
100 mg PO bid for 14 days with or without metronidazole 
500 mg PO bid for 14 days
OR
Other parenteral third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., 
ceftizoxime or cefotaxime) plus doxycycline 100 mg PO  
bid for 14 days with or without metronidazole 500 mg PO 
bid for 14 days
parenteral regimens
Recommended Regimen A
Cefotetan 2 g IV every 12 hours or cefoxitin 2 g IV every  
6 hours plus doxycycline 100 mg PO or IV every 12 hours
Recommended Regimen B
Clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours plus gentamicin 
loading dose IV or IM (2 mg/kg of body weight), followed 
by a maintenance dose (1.5 mg/kg) every 8 hours; single 
daily dosing may be substituted
Alternative Parenteral Regimen
Ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV every 6 hours plus doxycycline 
100 mg PO or IV every 12 hours
bid = twice a day; CDC = Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 
IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; PID = pelvic inflammatory dis-
ease; PO = oral.
1691
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
reveal thickened fluid-filled tubes with or without free pelvic 
fluid. Laparoscopic findings include swollen erythematous 
tubes with exudates. Criteria for hospitalization and intravenous 
antibiotic treatment include the following42: surgical emergen-
cies (e.g., appendicitis), infection during pregnancy, failure to 
respond to or inability to follow or tolerate outpatient oral medi-
cation regimens, severe illness with nausea and vomiting or high 
fever, and tubo-ovarian abscess.
First-line treatment for tubo-ovarian abscess includes 
broad-spectrum antibiotics and, sometimes, percutaneous 
drainage. Surgical intervention becomes necessary if medical 
therapy fails or if the abscess ruptures. Rupture is a surgical 
emergency with a high mortality rate if not recognized and 
managed promptly. In addition to management of the septic 
shock state, hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 
is the procedure of choice; however, conservative surgery must 
be considered in young patients desiring future fertility. The 
abdomen should be explored for metastatic abscesses, and spe-
cial attention must be paid to bowel, bladder, and ureteral safety 
due to the friability of the infected tissue and the adhesions 
commonly encountered at the time of surgery. Placement of an 
intraperitoneal drain and mass closure of the peritoneum, mus-
cle, and fascia with delayed-absorbable or permanent sutures is 
advised. Closure of the skin and subcutaneous layer should be 
avoided in patients with frank pus, and delayed primary closure 
or closure by secondary intention is recommended because of 
the high rate of wound infections. Conservative surgery, when 
feasible, may be attempted by laparoscopy and may involve 
unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy or drainage of the abscess 
and liberal irrigation of the abdomen and pelvis.
PREGNANCY-RELATED SURGICAL CONDITIONS
 Many pregnant women will undergo invasive diagnostic proce-
dures for prenatal diagnosis, and in the United States, nearly one 
third of all births are cesarean deliveries.43 About 1 in 500 
pregnant women will require surgery for nonobstetrical 
issues.44,45 Diagnostic challenges and physiologic changes due 
to pregnancy, as well as the unique anesthesia risks and poten-
tial risks to the pregnancy, should be kept in mind whether the 
primary surgeon is an obstetrician gynecologist or a general sur-
geon (Table 41-5).45
Trauma in the obstetric patient requires stabilization of the 
mother while considering the fetal compartment.45,46 Trauma-
related hypovolemia may be compounded by pregnancy-
induced decreases in systemic vascular resistance and, when 
supine, the weight of the gravid uterus on the vena cava. When 
feasible, a left lateral tilt should be instituted to improve venous 
return to the right heart. Later in pregnancy, the small bowel 
is displaced into the upper abdomen, making it vulnerable to 
complex injury from penetrating upper abdominal trauma. 
Although the small bowel is displaced from the pelvis, the dra-
matic increase in pelvic blood flow can lead to rapid blood 
loss due to penetrating pelvic trauma, fractures, or avulsion of 
pelvic vessels. Gastric motility is decreased, increasing the risk 
of aspiration. Peritoneal signs may be attenuated by the stretch-
ing of the abdominal wall. Several coagulation factors are also 
increased in pregnancy, increasing the likelihood for thrombo-
embolic events, but also giving the unsuspecting surgeon false 
security when low-normal levels are observed during resuscita-
tive efforts. Although treating the maternal compartment is the 
primary concern, it should also be recognized that the fetus will 
be impacted significantly by maternal hypotension, as blood 
may be shunted away from the uterus. Only the third-trimester 
fetus has any ability to autoregulate in the context of decreased 
uterine blood flow and oxygen delivery.
Conditions and Procedures Performed Before 
Viability
Amniocentesis/Chorionic Villus Sampling.  Amniocente-
sis is a procedure in which amniotic fluid is aspirated from 
the uterine cavity, typically under ultrasound guidance with a 
20- to 22-gauge needle. Common indications include prenatal 
genetic testing, assessment of fetal lung maturity, and evalua-
tion for intrauterine infection. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) 
is performed for prenatal genetic testing. During the procedure, 
placental villi are obtained through transcervical or transab-
dominal access to the placenta. CVS is typically performed 
after 9 completed weeks of gestation, while genetic amnio-
centesis is offered between 15 and 20 weeks. Pregnancy loss 
attributable to genetic amniocentesis is 1 in 300 to 500. The rate 
is slightly higher after CVS due in large part to the higher back-
ground spontaneous pregnancy loss between 9 and 16 weeks 
of gestation.47
Pregnancy Terminations.  Although legal nonsurgical options 
are now available for early pregnancy termination, the safest and 
most commonly performed termination procedure is a cervical 
dilation and suction curettage. The uterine cervix is grasped with 
a tenaculum and then mechanically dilated with tapered rods 
occasionally using adjunctive prostaglandins, and an appropri-
ately sized vacuum cannula is inserted into the uterus and rotated 
on its axis to remove the products of conception. Additional 
forceps can be used as needed and will be necessary in later 
6
Table 41-5
Physiologic changes due to pregnancy45
Cardiovascular changes
Increased cardiac output
Increased blood volume
Increased heart rate
Decreased blood pressure
Decreased systemic vascular resistance
Decreased venous return from lower extremities
Respiratory changes
Increased minute ventilation
Decreased functional residual capacity
Gastrointestinal changes
Decreased gastric motility
Delayed gastric emptying
Coagulation changes
Increased clotting factors (II, VII, VIII, IX, X)
Increased fibrinogen
Increased risk for venous thromboembolism
Renal changes
Increased renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate
Ureteral dilation
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gabbe et al.45 kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.
1692
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
second-trimester dilation and extractions. The most common 
complications are infection, hemorrhage due to uterine atony, 
cervical lacerations, uterine perforations, and inadvertent bowel 
injury from the vacuum cannula or forceps.
Cerclage.  Cervical insufficiency is defined as painless cervi-
cal dilation leading to recurrent second-trimester pregnancy 
loss, or shortened cervical length as determined by transvaginal 
ultrasound, or advanced cervical change before 24 weeks gesta-
tion in a woman with either prior preterm birth/loss or signifi-
cant risk factors for insufficiency. A cervical cerclage refers to 
a procedure in which suture or synthetic tape is used to circum-
ferentially reinforce the cervix to improve pregnancy outcome 
in at-risk patients.48 Shirodkar and McDonald techniques have 
been described49,50; both involve transvaginally placing a non-
absorbable suture at the uterocervical junction to lengthen and 
close the cervix. A laparotomy can access the abdominal por-
tion of the lower uterine segment for an abdominal cerclage for 
a patient with a severely shortened or absent cervix.
Ectopic Pregnancies.  Extrauterine pregnancies are most 
commonly located along the fallopian tubes and on the ovary. 
Rarely, implantation can occur primarily on other abdominal 
organs or surfaces. A high index of suspicion and early diagno-
sis, typically using sensitive β-hCG assays and ultrasound, are 
the key to minimizing maternal morbidity and mortality. Early 
ectopic pregnancies can be managed medically with methotrex-
ate, whereas advanced ectopic pregnancies and unstable women 
are managed by laparoscopy or laparotomy. Linear salpingos-
tomy along the antimesenteric border and removal of the prod-
ucts of conception is a reasonable option. The tube should be 
removed (salpingectomy) if the oviduct has already ruptured 
and a large hemoperitoneum already exists.51
Conditions and Procedures Performed  
After Viability
Fetal Surgery.  The Management of Myelomeningocele 
(MOMs) trial tested the safety and efficacy of fetal surgery 
for myelomeningocele between 2003 and 2010. During this 
procedure, surgeons expose the gravid uterus via low trans-
verse or vertical incision and position the fetus manually 
within the uterus under ultrasound guidance with the myelo-
meningocele sac centered at the proposed hysterotomy site. 
The uterus is entered sharply between two full-thickness stay 
sutures, and the hysterotomy is extended 6 to 8 cm with a 
uterine stapling device. The myelomeningocele is closed 
in standard fashion under magnification. Early outcomes 
data revealed that fetal surgery reduced the risk of death or 
need for shunt placement during the first year of life and 
also improved mental development and motor function at 
30 months of age. These outcomes in the fetal surgery arm 
were despite higher preterm delivery rates, and the trial was 
stopped early because of efficacy.52
Obstetric Lacerations and Repair.  The mean biparietal 
diameter of a term infant approaches 10 cm. The measured hia-
tus of the nulliparous vaginal introitus is approximately 2 cm. 
As a result, at the time of vaginal delivery, perineal lacerations 
and, with decreasing frequency, episiotomies are quite com-
mon. These lacerations involve, in varying degrees, the vaginal 
mucosa, the muscular elements inserting onto the perineal body, 
the levator ani, and in 4% to 5% of vaginal deliveries, the anal 
sphincter or anorectal mucosa.
Episiotomies and Perineal Laceration.  First-degree tears 
involve only the perineal skin and may or may not need to be 
reapproximated. Second-degree tears involve the perineal body 
and can generally be repaired with some variation using a single 
continuous, nonlocking suture technique, typically a 2-0 or 3-0 
synthetic delayed absorbable suture. The apex of the vaginal 
epithelial is approximated first including epithelium and under-
lying tissue to build up the rectovaginal septum. Upon reach-
ing the hymenal ring, the perineal body and bulbocavernosus 
muscle are reapproximated, and a transition stitch is placed 
from the vaginal mucosa, which was repaired along a horizontal 
plane, to the deep perineal layer, which lies in a vertically ori-
ented plane. A running closure is then completed incorporating 
the deep perineal tissues from the introitus to the extent of the 
perineal defect. At this point, the perineal skin is closed from 
inferior to superior in a subcuticular fashion and tied just inside 
the introitus.
Third-degree lacerations extend through the perineal body 
and involve the external anal sphincter, whereas fourth-degree 
lacerations involve the internal anal sphincter and rectal mucosa. 
When present, third- and fourth-degree lacerations should be 
repaired first before proceeding with the second-degree repair. 
This is accomplished by first closing the anal mucosa and then 
identifying and closing the internal anal sphincter in a second 
layer. The external anal sphincter is then identified, and the 
muscular cylinder is reconstructed by suturing the severed ends 
together using either an end-to-end or overlapping technique. 
Although these are typically straightforward layered closures, 
knowledge of the anatomy is important. Incomplete reconstruc-
tion, particularly of third- or fourth-degree lacerations, can 
contribute to future pelvic floor disorders, as well as the devel-
opment of fistulae or incontinence.
Cervical and Vaginal Lacerations.  Significant lacerations to 
the cervix or vagina may also occur during childbirth, par-
ticularly with instrumented deliveries or macrosomic infants. 
These lacerations may present as persistent bleeding, not read-
ily recognized due to their location, and often in association 
with a firmly contracted uterus. Vaginal lacerations may be 
repaired primarily but should only be closed after deeper tis-
sues are inspected to ensure no active bleeding. Cervical lac-
erations can be repaired in a running, locking fashion, ensuring 
that the apex of the laceration is incorporated in the closure. 
If the apex is challenging to reach, the closure can be started 
more distally using the suture to apply traction so that the apex 
may be closed.
Puerperal Hematoma.  Trauma during childbirth can occasion-
ally result in significant hematoma formation with or without a 
visible laceration. These hematomas may hide significant blood 
loss and most commonly occur in the vulva, paravaginal, and 
pelvic retroperitoneum. Typical presentation is pain and mass 
effect. Small hematomas can be managed conservatively with 
close observation and patient monitoring. Although there are 
no evidence-based size criteria, an unstable patient or expand-
ing hematomas should prompt surgical intervention. After the 
hematoma is incised and drained, diffuse venous oozing is usu-
ally encountered rather than a single bleeding vessel. Hemo-
stasis can be achieved using electrosurgery or fine absorbable 
suture, although caution must be used due to the proximity of 
bowel, bladder, and ureters to some hematomas. Pressure on the 
vulva or packing the vagina, rather than the hematoma cavity, 
may prevent further bleeding.
1693
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
Cesarean Deliveries.  Typical indications for cesarean deliv-
ery include nonreassuring fetal status, breech or other malpre-
sentations, triplet and higher order gestations, cephalopelvic 
disproportion, failure to progress, placenta previa, and active 
genital herpes. Previous low transverse cesarean delivery is not 
a contraindication to subsequent vaginal birth after cesarean; 
however, much of the increase in cesarean delivery in the past 
decade is attributable to planned repeat cesareans. Cesarean 
deliveries typically are performed via a lower anterior (caudal) 
uterine transverse incision because there is decreased blood 
loss, and the uterine rupture rate with future pregnancies is 
about 0.5% (Fig. 41-15). A prior classical cesarean delivery is 
an absolute indication for a planned repeat cesarean delivery 
because of a high rate of uterine rupture during labor, unlike 
with the lower anterior uterine transverse incision. Abdominal 
access is obtained by a Pfannenstiel or Maylard incision. Once 
the abdomen is entered, a vesicouterine reflection is created if 
a low transverse uterine incision is planned. The uterine inci-
sion is then made and extended laterally, avoiding the uterine 
vessels. After amniotomy, the baby is delivered, and the uterus 
closed. Approximately 1000 mL of blood is typically lost dur-
ing a cesarean delivery. Along with rapid closure of the uterine 
incision, uterotonics, such as intravenous oxytocin, are admin-
istered. A classical, vertical, uterine incision is made in certain 
very early viable gestations or in the case of certain transverse 
lies. Infection, excessive blood loss due to uterine atony, and 
urinary tract and bowel injuries are potential complications at 
the time of cesarean delivery. The risk of those injuries, as well 
as abnormal placentation (placenta accreta, increta, and per-
creta), rises with each subsequent cesarean delivery. Bleeding 
can only be controlled in some instances by performing a cesar-
ean hysterectomy.
Postpartum Hemorrhage.  Postpartum hemorrhage is an 
obstetrical emergency that can follow either vaginal or cesarean 
delivery. Hemorrhage is usually caused by uterine atony, trauma 
to the genital tract, or rarely, coagulation disorders. Manage-
ment consists of mitigating potential obstetric causes while 
simultaneously acting to avert or treat hypovolemic shock. 
In the absence of atony, the genital tract should be thoroughly 
evaluated for trauma. Atony is the most common cause of post-
partum hemorrhage. It is typically treated with fundal massage 
and uterotonics such as oxytocin, methylergonovine, carboprost 
tromethamine, and misoprostol. When aggressive medical man-
agement fails, surgical management may be necessary and life-
saving.53
Uterine Curettage.  Retained products of conception may result 
in uterine atony. It may be possible to remove retained products 
via manual extraction or with ring forceps. Bedside ultrasound may 
be helpful in localization. When clinical suspicion is high, uterine 
curettage is indicated. A blunt, large curette, the banjo curette, is 
introduced, and removal of retained tissue typically results in con-
traction of the myometrium and cessation of bleeding.
Procedures Short of Hysterectomy.  As bleeding from postpar-
tum hemorrhage becomes increasingly acute, interventions short 
of hysterectomy should be carried out expeditiously while sup-
porting the hemodynamic status of the patient and preparing for 
possible definitive surgery. A number of techniques for packing 
and tamponade of the uterus have been described, including a 
balloon device reported by Bakri and colleagues.54 These are 
typically left in place for 24 to 36 hours and appear to be safe 
and often effective conservative measures short of laparotomy 
and hysterectomy. The B-Lynch compression suture may con-
trol bleeding of atony at the time of cesarean section. A suture is 
placed through the hysterotomy, around the fundus of the uterus 
anterior to posterior, and then through the posterior lower uterine 
segment, to the contralateral side. At this point, the steps are 
reversed, with the suture brought around the fundus posterior to 
anterior, through the contralateral side of the hysterotomy, and 
then tied in the midline to compress the uterus. Additional pro-
cedures described include the O’Leary uterine artery ligation and 
the hypogastric artery ligation. “O’Leary stitches” are a series 
of sutures placed around the branches of the uterine artery and 
through the myometrium, resulting in compression of the vessels 
against the uterus. Hypogastric artery ligation entails the isola-
tion of the internal iliac artery at its bifurcation with the external 
iliac artery. The hypogastric artery is ligated at least 3 cm distal 
to the bifurcation to avoid compromising the posterior division.
Hysterectomy.  A cesarean or postpartum (absent a prior cesar-
ean delivery) hysterectomy involves the same steps as in a non-
pregnant patient, but is distinctly different due to the engorged 
vessels and the pliability of the tissues. If a cesarean section has 
been performed, occasionally the incision can be used for trac-
tion to keep the vessels and tissues attenuated. Vascular pedicles 
should be secured with clamps, but not ligated until both uter-
ine arteries have been secured, to fully control bleeding. Lack 
of typical anatomic landmarks requires careful identification of 
the ureters and the dilated cervix visually or by palpation, to 
separate them from the bladder and vagina (Fig. 41-16). This 
procedure is often done for life-threatening hemorrhage; thus, 
appropriate blood products, including packed red blood cells, 
fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and fibrinogen, should be on call 
and are usually required. Fibrinogen is typically elevated in a 
pregnant woman, such that a low-normal fibrinogen level can 
be a cause for alarm, and further fibrinogen may be required 
before consumptive coagulopathy reverses. A massive transfu-
sion protocol is often helpful.
Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.  Gestational trophoblas-
tic disease (GTD) is characterized by abnormal trophoblastic 
proliferations most commonly related to a pregnancy event. 
Figure 41-15.  Uterine incisions for cesarean delivery. A. Low 
transverse incision. B. Low vertical incision. C. Classical incision. 
D. J incision. E. T incision. (Reproduced from Gabbe S, Niebyl J, 
Simpson J. Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2007, Fig. 19-3. kkjkjdht 
Elsevier.)
1694
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Histologic types include hydatidiform moles, invasive moles, 
choriocarcinoma, and placental site trophoblastic tumors. It is 
an important gynecologic entity to consider when uterine size is 
significantly greater than expected for date in pregnancy, when 
bleeding occurs in pregnancy, or with abnormal bleeding after 
pregnancy loss, abortion, or full-term delivery. Diagnosis is usu-
ally made by ultrasound and measurement of serum β-hCG, fol-
lowed by pathologic examination of curettage specimens. There 
are two subtypes of hydatidiform moles. Complete moles con-
tain no fetal tissue and have a diploid karyotype. Partial moles 
contain fetal tissue and have triploid karyotypes. The chromo-
some pattern suggests paternal origin. These can be associated 
with theca lutein ovarian cysts often greater than 6 cm in diam-
eter that are fragile; they should generally be followed without 
surgical intervention as they resolve with removal or treatment 
of the GTD. Metastatic GTD can present on the cervix, vagina, 
liver, or lung, and should not be managed surgically. Chemo-
therapy is primary therapy, and the incidence of bleeding com-
plications is significant.
Primary surgery for diagnosis and initial therapy is a suc-
tion dilatation and curettage. Oxytocin is started either prior to 
anesthesia or immediately as the cervix is being dilated. The 
largest suction catheter possible (12 mm preferred) is gently 
inserted through the cervix and suction turned on, to allow the 
tissue to be removed and the uterus to rapidly decrease with 
less blood loss. Following this, a careful sharp curettage of the 
uterus is done acknowledging the increased risk for perforation. 
β-hCG is then followed weekly until normal for 3 weeks, then 
monthly for at least 6 months. Any increase in β-hCG should 
trigger further evaluation and consideration of chemotherapy.55, 56
PELVIC FLOOR DYSFUNCTION
Pelvic floor disorders can be categorized, from a urogyneco-
logic perspective, into three main topics: female urinary incon-
tinence and voiding dysfunction, pelvic organ prolapse, 
and disorders of defecation.57 Approximately 11% of 
women will undergo surgery for incontinence or prolapse.58 The 
normal functions of support, storage, and evacuation can be 
altered by derangements in neuromuscular function both cen-
trally and peripherally and through acquired changes in connec-
tive tissue. Reconstructive surgeons aim to repair or compensate 
for many of these losses.
Evaluation
Diagnostic evaluations, in addition to the history and examina-
tions described earlier, can aid in the diagnosis of many pelvic 
floor disorders. Cystoscopy, multichannel urodynamics, and/
or fluoroscopic evaluation of the urinary tract can be obtained 
for patients with urinary incontinence or voiding dysfunction.59 
Defecography, anal manometry, and endorectal ultrasound may 
be useful for diagnosis of defecatory dysfunction. A standard-
ized examination called the pelvic organ prolapse quantification 
(POP-Q)59 helps to clarify which vaginal compartment, and 
therefore which specific structure, has lost its anatomic integrity 
in women with uterovaginal prolapse. Finally, dynamic MRI 
and pelvic floor electromyography have demonstrated growing 
utility for all three disorders.
Surgery for Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Many factors are important in determining which reconstruc-
tive operation is optimal for a given patient with pelvic organ 
prolapse. Surgical decisions are often based on case series and 
expert opinions that may not have universal applicability. How-
ever, the few reports with the highest level of evidence sug-
gest that failure rates for prolapse reconstruction may be twice 
as high using the vaginal approach when compared with the 
abdominal route.60,61
Colporrhaphy.  Anterior colporrhaphy, also known as an “ante-
rior repair,” is performed for a symptomatic cystocele. The pro-
cedure begins with incision of the anterior vaginal epithelium in a 
midline sagittal direction. The epithelium is dissected away from 
the underlying vaginal muscularis. The vaginal muscularis is pli-
cated with interrupted delayed absorbable stitches, after which 
the epithelium is trimmed and reapproximated. The vaginal canal 
is therefore shortened and narrowed proportionate to the amount 
of removed epithelium. Posterior colporrhaphy is performed for 
a symptomatic rectocele. This procedure is performed in a simi-
lar manner, often including the distal pubococcygeus muscles in 
the plication. Recently, in attempts to decrease surgical failures 
alluded to earlier, many surgeons have opted to use grafts and 
meshes to augment these vaginally performed procedures. Unfor-
tunately the apparent number of postoperative complications, 
including mesh erosion, pelvic pain and dyspareunia, prompted 
the FDA to publish a warning encouraging a much more limited 
use of vaginal mesh for prolapse repair until greater surveillance 
and more rigorous studies could be completed.62
Sacrospinous and Uterosacral Ligament Fixations.  Both 
the sacrospinous ligament fixation (SSLF) and uterosacral liga-
ment fixation (USLF) procedures are vaginal procedures that 
suspend the apex of the vagina using native tissue for treat-
ment of apical prolapse. The sacrospinous ligament is found 
embedded in and continuous with the coccygeus muscle, which 
extends from the ischial spine to the lateral surface of the 
sacrum. The procedure begins with entry into the rectovaginal 
space, usually by incising the posterior vaginal wall at its attach-
ment to the perineal body. The space is developed to the level 
of the vaginal apex, and the rectal pillar is penetrated to gain 
access to the pararectal space. A long-ligature carrier is used to 
7
Bladder
Ureter identified
Clamps on 
uterine 
vessels
Figure 41-16.  Demonstration of location of distal ureter and blad-
der and their relationship to uterine vessels. (Reproduced from Nich-
ols DH. Gynecologic and Obstetric Surgery, Vol. 1, 1993, Fig. 68-5, 
p. 1130. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1695
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
place sutures medial to the ischial spine, through the substance 
of the ligament-muscle complex. Structures at risk in this pro-
cedure include the pudendal neurovascular bundle, the inferior 
gluteal neurovascular bundle, lumbosacral plexus, and sciatic 
nerve. After the stitches are placed, the free ends are sewn to 
the undersurface of the vaginal cuff. The sacrospinous stitches 
are tied to firmly approximate the vagina to the ligament without 
suture bridging.
When using the uterosacral ligaments for repair of pro-
lapse, it is important to recall that these structures are not “liga-
ments” in the true sense of the word, but rather condensations 
of smooth muscle, collagen, and elastin. Several support sutures 
are placed from the lateral-most portion of the vaginal cuff to 
the distal-most part of the ligament, and from the medial vagi-
nal cuff to the proximal ligament. Intraoperative evaluation of 
the lower urinary tract is important to confirm the absence of 
ureteral compromise.
Colpocleisis.  Colpocleisis is reserved for patients who are 
elderly, who do not wish to retain coital ability, and for whom 
there is good reason not to perform a more extensive recon-
structive operation. A colpocleisis removes of part or all of the 
vaginal epithelium, obliterating the vaginal vault and leaving the 
external genitalia unchanged. The procedure can be performed 
with or without a hysterectomy. Successive purse-string sutures 
through the vaginal muscularis are used to reduce the prolapsed 
organs to above the level of the levator plate.
Sacrocolpopexy.  The best procedure for patient with prolapse of 
the vaginal apex is an abdominal sacrocolpopexy. In these patients, 
the natural apical support structure, the cardinal-uterosacral liga-
ment complex, is often damaged and attenuated. The abdominal 
placement, as opposed to vaginal placement, of graft material 
to compensate for defective vaginal support structures is well 
described.63 Apical support defects rarely exist in isolation, and 
the sacrocolpopexy may be modified to include the anterior 
and posterior vaginal walls as well as the perineal body in the 
suspension. Sacrocolpopexies can be performed via laparotomy 
as well as via laparoscopy. Like rectopexies and low anterior 
resections, deep pelvic access is needed. Significant suturing 
at varied angles is required. The advent of the DaVinci robotic 
laparoscopic system has made visualization and adequate place-
ment of the mesh and sutures easier to perform when using the 
minimally invasive approach.
During a sacrocolpopexy, a rigid stent (usually an EEA 
sizer) is placed into the vagina to facilitate its dissection from 
the overlying bladder and rectum and to allow the graft material 
to be spread evenly over its surface. A strip of synthetic mesh is 
fixed to the anterior and posterior vaginal walls. The peritoneum 
overlying the presacral area is opened, extending to the poste-
rior cul-de-sac. The sigmoid colon is retracted medially, and 
the anterior surface of the sacrum is skeletonized. Two to four 
permanent sutures are placed through the anterior longitudinal 
ligament in the midline, starting at the S2 level and proceeding 
distally. The sutures are passed through the graft at an appropri-
ate location to support the vaginal vault without tension. The 
peritoneum is then closed with an absorbable running suture. 
The most dangerous potential complication of sacrocolpopexy 
is sacral hemorrhage.
Surgery for Stress Urinary Incontinence
Stress incontinence is believed to be caused by lack of urethro-
vaginal support (urethral hypermobility) or intrinsic sphincter 
deficiency (ISD). ISD is a term applied to a subset of stress-
incontinent patients who have particularly severe symptoms, 
including urine leakage with minimal exertion. This condition 
is often recognized clinically as the low pressure or “drainpipe” 
urethra. The urethral sphincter mechanism in these patients is 
severely damaged, limiting coaptation of the urethra. Standard 
surgical procedures used to correct stress incontinence share a 
common feature: partial urethral obstruction that achieves ure-
thral closure under stress.
Burch Procedure.  The most quoted description of this pro-
cedure is that of Tanagho in 1976.64 The space of Retzius is 
approached extraperitoneally, from an abdominal approach, 
allowing the bladder to be mobilized from the surrounding adi-
pose tissue and lateral pelvis. Overlying fat and blood vessels 
in the area of the vesical neck are cleared away. Two pairs 
of large-caliber nonabsorbable sutures, although the original 
description advocated delayed absorbable sutures, are placed 
through the periurethral vaginal wall, one pair at the midure-
thra and one at the urethrovesical junction. Each stitch is then 
anchored to the ipsilateral Cooper’s (iliopectineal) ligament. The 
sutures are tied with the operator’s nondominant hand placed 
vaginally to give preferential support to the urethrovesical junc-
tion relative to the anterior vaginal wall without overcorrection. 
Long-term outcome studies up to 10 years have shown that the 
Burch procedure yields cure rates of 80% to 85%.
Tensionless Sling.  The tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) is a 
modified sling that uses a strip of polypropylene mesh. Unlike 
traditional sling procedures, the mesh is positioned at the 
midurethra, not the urethrovesical junction, and is not sutured 
or otherwise fixed into place. Advantages of TVT include the 
ability to perform the procedure under local anesthesia on an 
outpatient basis. Small subepithelial tunnels are made bilater-
ally to the descending pubic rami through an anterior vaginal 
wall incision. A specialized conical metal needle coupled to a 
handle is used to drive one end of the sling through the peri-
neal membrane, space of Retzius, and through one of two small 
suprapubic stab incisions. The tape is set in place without any 
tension after bringing up the other end of the tape through the 
other side. Recently, multiple modifications have been made to 
carry the tape through the bilateral medial portions of the obtu-
rator space. Risks of the procedure include visceral injury from 
blind introduction of the needle, bleeding, and nerve and muscle 
injury in the obturator space. Additionally, voiding dysfunction 
and delayed erosion of mesh into the bladder or urethra have 
been seen.
Urethral Bulking Injections.  A transurethral or periurethral 
injection of bulking agents is indicated for patients with intrinsic 
sphincter deficiency. Several synthetic injectable agents (e.g., 
polydimethylsiloxane, calcium hydroxylapatite) are now used 
because glutaraldehyde cross-linked (GAX) bovine dermal 
collagen is no longer commercially available.65 Anesthesia is 
easily obtained by using intraurethral 2% lidocaine jelly and/or 
transvaginal injection of the periurethral tissues with 5 mL of 
1% lidocaine. The material is injected underneath the urethral 
mucosa at the bladder neck and proximal urethra at multiple 
positions, until mucosal bulk has improved. Patients must dem-
onstrate a negative reaction to a collagen skin test prior to injec-
tion. The long-term cure rate is 20% to 30%, with an additional 
50% to 60% of patients demonstrating improvement.57 Repeat 
injections are frequently necessary because of migration and 
dissolution of the collagen material.
1696
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
GYNECOLOGIC CANCER
Vulvar Cancer
Vulvar cancer is the fourth most common gynecologic can-
cer. The mean age at diagnosis is 65, although this has trended 
down over the last several decades.66 Evidence supports an 
HPV-dependent pathway of carcinogenesis with risks factors 
similar to VIN in the majority of cases. A second pathway inde-
pendent of HPV is associated with chronic inflammation and 
vulvar dystrophy.67 Patients usually present with a vulvar ulcer 
or mass. Pruritus is a common complaint, and vulvar bleeding 
or enlarged inguinal lymph nodes are signs of advanced dis-
ease. Careful evaluation of the patient is necessary to rule out 
concurrent lesions of the vagina and cervix. Biopsy is required 
and should be sufficient to allow evaluation of the extent of 
stromal invasion. Vulvar carcinomas are squamous in 90% of 
cases. Other less common histologies include melanoma (5%), 
basal cell carcinoma (2%), and soft tissue sarcomas (1%–2%).
Spread of vulvar carcinoma is by direct local extension 
and via lymphatic microembolization. Hematogenous spread 
is uncommon except for vulvar melanoma. Lymphatic spread 
seems to follow a stepwise, predictable pattern traveling from 
superficial, above the cribriform fascia, to deep inguinofemoral 
nodes and ultimately to the pelvic and external iliac nodal basins 
(Fig. 41-17).68,69 The node of Cloquet is an important sentinel 
node situated in the route of spread to the pelvic lymph nodes.
Staging and primary surgical treatment are typically pre-
formed as a single procedure and tailored to the individual 
patient (Table 41-6). Surgical staging accounts for the most 
important prognostic factors including tumor size, depth of 
invasion, inguinofemoral node status, and distant spread. The 
most conservative procedure should be performed in view of the 
high morbidity of aggressive surgical management. This typi-
cally involves radical resection of the vulvar tumor targeting a 
1- to 2-cm margin around the lesion, and carried to the deep 
perineal fascia of the urogenital diaphragm with an ipsilateral 
or bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (Fig. 41-18). For 
tumors ≤2 cm in size with ≤1 mm invasion (International Feder-
ation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] stage IA), lymphad-
enectomy may be safely omitted, and wide local or radical local 
excision is adequate. Patients with stage IB tumors have deeper 
invasion but negative nodes and therefore carry an excellent 
prognosis. Stage II includes patients with local extension and 
negative nodes, and therefore, these patients have a prognosis 
similar to other node-negative patients.
Stage III disease includes patients with lymph node 
metastases, and stage IV disease is either locally advanced or 
distant metastasis. Treatment options for stage III and IV dis-
ease include: (a) chemoradiation followed by limited resection 
if needed; (b) radical vulvectomy; and (c) radical vulvectomy 
coupled with pelvic exenteration. External-beam radiotherapy 
combined with radiosensitizing chemotherapy of cisplatin and 
5-fluorouracil is emerging as the preferred initial management 
Table 41-6
2009 International Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics staging of vulvar carcinoma78
IA   Tumor confined to the vulva or perineum, ≤2 cm in size 
with stromal invasion ≤1 mm, negative nodes
1B  Tumor confined to the vulva or perineum, >2 cm in size 
or with stromal invasion >1 mm, negative nodes
II   Tumor of any size with adjacent spread (1/3 lower 
urethra, 1/3 lower vagina, anus), negative nodes
IIIA  Tumor of any size with positive inguinofemoral lymph 
nodes
(i) 
1 lymph node metastasis ≥5 mm
(ii)  1–2 lymph node metastasis(es) of <5 mm
IIIB  (i) 2 or more lymph nodes metastases ≥5 mm
(ii)  3 or more lymph nodes metastases <5 mm
IIIC  Positive node(s) with extracapsular spread
IVA (i) Tumor invades other regional structures (2/3 upper 
urethra, 2/3 upper vagina), bladder mucosa, rectal 
mucosa, or fixed to pelvic bone
(ii)  Fixed or ulcerated inguinofemoral lymph nodes
IVB  Any distant metastasis including pelvic lymph nodes
Figure 41-18.  Extent of modified radical hemivulvectomy for 
stages I and II squamous cancer of the vulva.
Superficial inferior
epigastric v.
Superficial
external
pudendal v.
Superficial femoral
lymph nodes
Great saphenous v.
Fossa ovalis
Superficial
circumflex iliac v.
Superficial inguinal
lymph nodes
Inguinal ligament
External
inguinal ring
Round ligament
Figure 41-17.  Lymphatic drainage of the vulva delineated by 
Stanley Way.
1697
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
of advanced disease followed by limited surgical resection of 
residual disease.70-72 Reconstruction of the vulva and groin, if 
needed, can be accomplished using grafts and rotational or myo-
cutaneous flaps depending on the size and type of defect.
Inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy is indicated beyond 
clinical stage IA. Unilateral lymphadenectomy is recommended 
for lateralized lesions, and bilateral lymphadenectomy is rec-
ommended for central lesions that cross the midline or those 
involving the periclitoral area (Figs. 41-19 and 41-20). The role 
of vulvar sentinel lymph node biopsy is under investigation by 
the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) and is in use by a 
growing number of gynecologic oncologists. Preliminary data 
are encouraging and may allow patients with negative sentinel 
nodes to avoid complete groin dissection and its attendant mor-
bidity such as lower extremity lymphedema.
Nodal failure in the groin and pelvis is difficult to treat 
successfully, and attention to primary management of these 
areas is key. Postoperative adjuvant inguinal and pelvic radio-
therapy is indicated when inguinal lymph nodes are positive and 
is superior to pelvic lymphadenectomy, which has been largely 
abandoned. It is also indicated when the vulvectomy margins 
are positive or close positive for disease and further surgical 
management is not anatomically feasible.
Vaginal Cancer
Vaginal carcinoma is a rare gynecologic malignancy and accounts 
for about 3% of cancers affecting the female reproductive 
system.66 Squamous cell carcinomas account for 85% to 90% of 
cases; more than two thirds of vaginal cancers are diagnosed in 
women 60 years of age or older. Risk factors are similar to other 
HPV-related cervical and vulvar cancers. Rare clear cell carci-
noma of the vagina is associated with in utero exposure to dieth-
ylstilbestrol (DES), which is now largely of historical interest due 
to aging of the exposed cohort.73 Patients with vaginal cancer usu-
ally present with postmenopausal and/or postcoital bleeding and 
may also complain of vaginal discharge, vaginal mass, dysuria, 
hematuria, rectal bleeding, or pelvic pain, which may be indica-
tive of advanced disease. Diagnosis is made via biopsy of suspi-
cious lesions, which may require colposcopic guidance.67
Vaginal cancer is staged clinically by pelvic exam, chest 
x-ray, cystoscopy, and proctoscopy (Table 41-7).74 Vaginal 
cancer spreads by local extension to adjacent pelvic structures, 
by lymphatic embolization to regional lymph nodes, and less 
commonly via the hematogenous route. Lymphatic drainage is 
complex, but in general, lesions in the upper vagina drain to 
the pelvic lymph nodes, while lesions involving the lower third 
drain to the inguinofemoral lymph nodes.
Stage I disease, involving the upper vagina, may be treated 
surgically or with intracavitary radiation therapy.68,69,75 Surgery 
consists of a radical hysterectomy, upper vaginectomy, and 
bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. Stage I disease in the mid 
to lower vagina is usually treated with radiation and concurrent 
chemotherapy. External-beam pelvic radiation is the mainstay 
of treatment for stage II to IV disease and may be followed by 
intracavitary and/or interstitial brachytherapy. Prognosis for 
treated early-stage disease is excellent, with 5-year survival rates 
greater than 90%. Advanced-stage disease, however, carries a 
poor prognosis, with 5-year survival rates of only 15% to 40%.
Cervical Cancer
General Principles.  There are over 12,000 new cases of cervi-
cal cancer and over 4000 cervical cancer deaths annually in the 
United States. It is a major killer worldwide, causing 275,000 
deaths annually.76 Risk factors for cervical squamous cell carci-
noma and adenocarcinoma, the two most common histologies, 
are largely related to acquisition of and immune response to 
carcinogenic subtypes of the HPV virus. The presence of inher-
ited genetic variations that increase the likelihood of developing 
cervical cancer when exposed to oncogenic subtypes of HPV is 
under active investigation. Cervical screening is correlated with 
Superficial
 femoral nodes
Cribriform
fascia
Deep
 femoral nodes
Femoral a.
Femoral n.
Sartorius m.
Iliopsoas m.
Femur
Epidermus
lateral
medial
Adductor 
longus
Pectineus m.
Femoral v.
Camper’s 
fascia
Figure 41-19.  Superficial inguinal lymphadenectomy. a. = artery; 
m. = muscle; n. = nerve.
Pubic tubercle
Femoral v.
Sapheno-femoral
junction
Figure 41-20.  Incision recommended for superficial inguinal 
lymphadenectomy. v. = vein.
Table 41-7
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 
staging of vaginal carcinoma
0   
Carcinoma in situ; intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3
I   
Tumor limited to the vaginal wall
II   
Tumor has involved the subvaginal tissue but has not 
extended to the pelvic wall
III   Tumor extends to the pelvic wall
IV   Tumor has extended beyond the true pelvis or has 
involved the mucosa of the bladder or rectum
IVA  Tumor invades bladder and/or rectal mucosa and/or 
direct extension beyond the true pelvis
IVB  Distant metastasis
1698
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
early identification and treatment of preinvasive disease.77 Cer-
vical cancer is most commonly identified in women with long 
intervals between screening or with no prior screening.
Early cervical cancer is usually asymptomatic, although 
irregular or postcoital bleeding may be present, particularly in 
more advanced disease. The diagnosis of cervical cancer is made 
by cervical biopsy, either of a gross lesion or a colposcopically 
identified lesion. Cervical cancer is staged clinically.78 Staging 
and management options are outlined in Table 41-8.
Procedures for Cervical Cancer Treatment
Radical Hysterectomy.  This procedure may be performed via 
laparotomy or, increasingly, via a minimally invasive (laparo-
scopic or robotic) approach.79 The key elements are dis-
section of the pelvic and periaortic nodes and the dissection 
of the parametrium from the pelvic sidewall to allow en bloc 
removal with the uterus. The principle steps of an open proce-
dure are demonstrated in Fig. 41-21. In contrast to a typical 
simple hysterectomy, the radical hysterectomy involves dissec-
tion much closer to the bowel, bladder, ureters, and great vessels, 
resulting in a higher complication rate to these organs. Addition-
ally, disruption of the nerves supplying the bladder and the rec-
tum, which traverse the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments, may 
result in temporary or long-term bladder and bowel dysfunc-
tion. Radical hysterectomies allow for the maintenance of the 
ovaries since the incidence of metastases to this area is very 
low, providing a clear advantage of surgery over radiation ther-
apy in the younger patient.
Radical Trachelectomy.  Interest in fertility preservation with 
stage IA1 and IA2 and stage IB1 lesions has led to the develop-
ment of methods of radical trachelectomy with uterine preserva-
tion. This procedure depends on an adequate blood supply to the 
uterus from the ovarian anastomoses, as the cervical portion is 
removed. The lower uterine segment is closed with a cerclage 
and attached directly to the vaginal cuff. The rates of recurrence, 
pregnancy outcomes, and the best surgical candidates for this 
surgery are still under study.80
Pelvic Exenteration for Recurrent Disease (Fig. 41-22).  Cervical 
cancer recurrences after primary surgical management are 
treated with radiation. Surgery may be a consideration in 
selected patients with recurrent cervical cancer who have 
received maximal radiation therapy. If the recurrence is locally 
confined with no evidence of spread or metastatic disease, then 
pelvic exenteration may be considered. Attempted exenteration 
procedures are aborted intraoperatively if metastatic disease is 
found. Exenteration is tailored to the disease size and location 
and may be supralevator or extend below the levator ani muscle 
and require vulvar resection. Reconstruction of the pelvis may 
require a continent urinary pouch (if radiation enteritis is lim-
ited) or ileal conduit and colostomy, as well as rebuilding of 
the pelvic floor and vagina with grafts or myocutaneous flaps.
Uterine Cancer
Endometrial Cancer.  Endometrial cancer is the most common 
gynecologic malignancy and fourth most common cancer in 
8
Table 41-8
2009 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics cervical cancer staging and management options78
Stage
Description
Options for Management
0
Carcinoma in situ
Adenocarcinoma in situ: hysterectomy, although some 
  may be followed for preservation if all margins 
negative on cone
Squamous in situ: local excision with LEEP or cone or 
  laser ablation
I
Confined to the cervix
A1: Confined to the cervix, diagnosed only by 
  microscopy with invasion of ≤3 mm in depth and 
lateral spread ≤7 mm
A2: Confined to the cervix, diagnosed with microscopy 
  with invasion of >3 mm and <5 mm with lateral spread 
≤7 mm
B1: Clinically visible lesion or greater than A2, ≤4 cm in 
  greatest dimension
B2: Clinically visible lesion, >4 cm in greatest dimension
A1 and some A2: fertility preservation through large cone 
  followed by close monitoring, followed by 
hysterectomy
B1 and B2: radical hysterectomy or chemoradiation; 
  radical trachelectomy with uterine preservation for 
childbearing is under investigation for highly selected 
patients
II
A1: Involvement of the upper two thirds of the vagina, 
  without parametrial invasion, ≤4 cm in greatest 
dimension
A2: >4 cm in greatest dimension
B: Parametrial involvement
For some IIA, radical hysterectomy may be considered
IIA and IIB: chemoradiation is preferred
III
A: Involvement of the lower third of the vagina
B: Involvement of a parametria to the sidewall or 
  obstruction of one or both ureters on imaging
Chemoradiation
IV
A: Local involvement of the bladder or rectum
B: Distant metastases
A: Chemoradiation
B: Chemotherapy with palliative radiation as indicated
LEEP = loop electro-excisional procedure.
1699
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
women.66 It is most common in menopausal women in the 
fifth decade of life; up to 15% to 25% of cases occur prior 
to menopause, and 1% to 5% occur before age 40. Risk fac-
tors for the most common type of endometrial cancer include 
increased exposure to estrogen without adequate opposition by 
progesterone, either endogenous (obesity, chronic anovulation) 
or exogenous (hormone replacement). Additional risk factors 
include diabetes, Lynch II syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis 
colorectal cancer), and prolonged use of tamoxifen. Tamoxifen 
is a mixed agonist/antagonist ligand for the estrogen receptor. It 
is an agonistic in the uterus and an antagonistic to the breast and 
ovary. Protective factors for endometrial cancer include smok-
ing and use of combination oral contraceptive pills. Adenocar-
cinomas are the most prevalent histologic type.
B
A
Uterus
Ovary
Fallopian 
tube
C
Round ligament
Vesicouterine
fold
Uterine
vessels
E
D
Pararectal
space
Lymph
nodes
Paravesical 
space
F
External iliac
 vessels
Internal iliac
 artery
G
H
I
Superior vesical
artery
Uterine artery
Figure 41-21.  Radical hysterectomy. A. Exposure of the inferior epigastric vessels before transection of the rectus muscles. B. Ligation 
of the inferior epigastric vessels before transection of the rectus muscles. C. Ligation and division of the round ligaments opens the pelvic 
retroperitoneum. D. First peritoneal incision lateral to the ovarian vessels and across the vesicouterine fold. E. Narrow malleable retractors 
(Indiana retractors) are placed into the paravesical and pararectal spaces to provide excellent access to the lateral pelvic sidewall and pelvic 
lymph nodes. F. Pelvic lymphadenectomy (external and internal iliac vessels). G. Pelvic lymphadenectomy (obturator fossa). H. Development 
of the uterine and superior vesical arteries. I. The uterine artery has been clipped and divided near its origin. J. The proper ovarian ligament 
and proximal fallopian tube are clamped and divided if the ovary is to be preserved. K. The ureters have been detached from the posterior 
peritoneum of the broad ligament and are retracted laterally. The rectovaginal space is developed using blunt finger dissection. L. Transection 
of the uterosacral ligaments. M. Clamps are placed on the lateral vagina, taking care to remove 3 to 4 cm of the upper vagina.
1700
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Endometrial adenocarcinomas are divided into type I 
and type II, although there is a trend to return to histology as 
a divider. Type I tumors are estrogen-dependent endometrioid 
histology and have a relatively favorable prognosis. Type II 
endometrial cancers are estrogen-independent, aggressive, and 
characterized by nonendometrioid, serous, or clear cell histol-
ogy.81 Postmenopausal bleeding is the most common presenta-
tion of type I disease and often permits early-stage diagnosis, 
resulting in a favorable prognosis. Abnormal bleeding should 
prompt endometrial evaluation and sampling, which is usually 
done with an office endometrial biopsy, although at times, it 
requires operative curettage or diagnostic hysteroscopy. Trans-
vaginal ultrasonography (TVUS) often reveals a thickened 
endometrial stripe. An endometrial stripe measuring 5 mm or 
more in a postmenopausal patient raises concern and should be 
followed by endometrial sampling; patients with stripe of 4 mm 
Figure 41-22.  Pelvic exenteration may be limited to the supralevator space (A) or can extend below the levator ani muscle (shaded area) (B).
M
Ureter
Vagina
J
K
Ovary and ligament
Fallopian tube
Ureter
L
Uterosacral
ligament
Figure 41-21.  (Continued )
1701
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
or less rarely have occult malignancy, and TVUS may thus be 
used to triage patients before invasive endometrial sampling. 
Uterine cancer is surgically staged and is graded based on the 
degree of histologic differentiation of the glandular components 
(Table 41-9).78 Grade is an important prognostic factor, inde-
pendent of stage.
Treatment is surgical and most commonly involves hys-
terectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, peritoneal cytol-
ogy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, and resection of 
any gross disease.68,69,75 Evidence supports equivalent oncologic 
outcomes with minimally invasive approaches.82 The utility of 
lymphadenectomy is an area of great controversy. The need for 
postoperative adjuvant radiation or chemotherapy is individu-
alized based on the histology, stage, and risk factors such as 
age, lymphovascular space invasion, and histology. Early-stage 
patients are typically cured with surgery alone, whereas patients 
with high- or intermediate-risk factors, as defined by collaborative 
trials groups, commonly receive intracavitary brachytherapy to 
decrease local recurrence.83,84 Patients with advanced disease 
and adverse histologies commonly receive platinum-based che-
motherapy with or without radiation.
Lynch Syndrome.  Lynch syndrome, a cancer family syn-
drome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer 
(HNPCC), is an autosomal dominant inherited predisposition 
to develop colorectal carcinoma and extracolonic cancers, pre-
dominantly including tumors of the uterus and ovaries, with 
rare but defined inclusion of breast cancer.85 Genes involved in 
HNPCC are those required for proper single-strand DNA repair 
via the mismatch repair pathway; most commonly involved are 
MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6. The risk of colorectal carcinoma is 
as high as 75% by age 75. Affected female patients have a 40% 
and 10% lifetime risk of developing uterine and ovarian can-
cers, respectively. Surveillance has not been proven to identify 
early-stage disease in these patients, although it is recommended 
and should include annual cervical cytology, mammography, 
transvaginal ultrasonography, CA-125 measurements, and an 
endometrial biopsy. Risk reduction salpingo-oophorectomy 
with hysterectomy is now being recommended for women who 
have completed childbearing, ideally 5 to 10 years earlier than 
the first case of endometrial or ovarian cancer in the family.
Uterine Sarcomas.  Uterine sarcomas arise from the uter-
ine muscle and connective tissue elements and are typically 
aggressive tumors with a poorer prognosis compared to the 
more common endometrial carcinomas. The most common 
histopathologic types are endometrial stromal sarcomas, 
undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas, and leiomyosarco-
mas. Risk factors are challenging to assess but may include 
African American race, pelvic radiation, and tamoxifen 
exposure. Patients typically present with bleeding or mass 
effects, although some are discovered incidentally at the time 
of hysterectomy for other indications. Leiomyosarcoma is 
the most common uterine sarcoma, and hysterectomy with 
salpingo-oophorectomy is the treatment of choice. Lymph 
node metastases are rare in sarcomas in general, and in uter-
ine sarcomas in the absence of palpable nodes or extrauterine 
disease. There are limited data to support cytoreduction when 
extrauterine disease is present. Benefits of adjuvant therapy 
are unknown. Advanced disease is typically treated with sys-
temic chemotherapy.86
Ovarian, Tubal, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer
Epithelial Ovarian, Tubal, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer.
There were an estimated 22,280 new cases and 15,500 deaths 
due to ovarian cancers in 2012, yielding a fractional death 
rate of 70% and making ovarian cancer the most deadly of all 
women’s cancers.66 One in 60 to 70 women in the United States 
will develop ovarian cancer during her lifetime, with a median 
age at diagnosis of 63 years. Symptoms for either benign or 
malignant ovarian tumors are nonspecific but frequent. Goff 
and colleagues, in a 2007 publication, described symptoms of 
bloating, pelvic or abdominal pain, difficulty eating or feeling 
full quickly, and urinary symptoms of urgency or frequency,87 
which form the basis of an ovarian cancer symptom index 
(Table 41-10), the use of which is endorsed by the Ovarian Can-
cer National Alliance, the Gynecologic Cancer Foundation, the 
Society of Gynecologic Oncologists, and the American Cancer 
Society. These symptoms, when newly developed and persistent 
or when representing a distinct change from a personal norm, 
should prompt an evaluation specifically targeted for identifica-
tion of gynecologic malignancy.
High-grade, particularly serous epithelial cancers of the 
ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum are clinically similar and 
often combined under the rubric of epithelial ovarian cancer 
(EOC) in clinical practice, as well as in research and clinical 
trials. Risk factors for development of EOC include events that 
appear to increase the number of lifetime ovulations (e.g., early 
menarche, late menopause, nulliparity), whereas events that 
decrease the number of ovulations decrease risk (e.g., preg-
nancy, breastfeeding, oral contraceptives). Additionally, a his-
tory of tubal ligation or hysterectomy also decreases EOC risk. 
Family history of breast cancer and/or EOC is one of the stron-
gest factors for lifetime risk of having breast cancer or EOC. 
Approximately 85% of ovarian cancer is sporadic; of the 
remaining 10% of cases, 75% of hereditary ovarian cancer has 
been attributed to mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, 
7% to HNPCC, and the remainder to familial cancer of unde-
fined genetic origin.88 The lifetime risk of ovarian cancer in 
BRCA1 mutation carriers has been estimated at 40% to 60%, 
and it is 15% to 45% in BRCA2 carriers. The only confirmed 
prevention is risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy 
(RRSO).89,90 The lifetime risk of ovarian or tubal malig-
nancy is reduced to approximately 5% with RRSO, with the 
resultant cancer presenting as a primary peritoneal cancer. 
Physical examination of patients with EOC may reveal 
evidence of metastatic disease, whereas a pelvic mass may be 
9
Table 41-9
2009 International Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics staging of carcinoma of the uterine corpus78
IA    Tumor confined to the uterus, no or <½ myometrial 
invasion
IB   
Tumor confined to the uterus, >½ myometrial invasion
II    Cervical stromal invasion, but not beyond uterus
IIIA  Tumor invades serosa or adnexa
IIIB  Vaginal and/or parametrial involvement
IIIC1  Pelvic node involvement
IIIC2  Para-aortic involvement
IVA  Tumor invasion bladder and/or bowel mucosa
IVB  Distant metastases including abdominal metastases 
and/or inguinal lymph nodes
1702
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
appreciated on exam. Ultrasound is particularly useful in the 
evaluation of a pelvic mass, whereas CT scan may detect evi-
dence of metastatic disease. In the presence of a radiographi-
cally complex mass, CA-125 may provide further evidence for 
or against a possible ovarian malignancy. Concerning physical 
or radiographic exam findings should prompt referral to a gyne-
cologic oncologist (see Table 41-10), as studies demonstrate 
inferior patient outcomes for women who have had primary 
surgery by nongynecologic oncologists.
The objectives of surgery in EOC are threefold. The first 
is to make the histologic diagnosis. The second is to assess the 
extent of disease through complete surgical staging (Tables 41-11 
and 41-12). The third objective is (complete when feasible) sur-
gical cytoreduction or debulking. An optimal cytoreduction is 
defined as no gross residual lesion greater than 1 cm, although 
outcomes are improved with complete resection of all gross dis-
ease. The extent of disease upon entering the abdomen and the 
residual disease upon completion of the debulking surgery are 
independent prognostic variables for patient outcome. When 
EOC is identified on frozen section and disease is grossly lim-
ited to the pelvis, complete staging with node dissection will 
upstage nearly one third of patients.91 Decisions about the ben-
efits and risks of radical debulking for individual presentations 
and diverse pathology depend on the age and medical stability 
of the patient, as well as the pathologic type of the cancer. Con-
servative, fertility-sparing surgery can be considered for likely 
stage I, grade 1 EOC. In a patient who is medically compro-
mised or in whom complete primary cytoreduction is unlikely, 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking may 
be more appropriate and is supported by a recent ran-
domized controlled trial.92 Patients usually receive three 
cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy prior to debulking, and 
then three additional cycles after surgery. 
Early-stage EOC has an excellent outcome. Low-grade, 
stage IA and IB disease can be cured in up to 90% to 95% of 
cases by a complete surgical procedure. The prevailing position 
in the United States is that such patients do not benefit from 
10
Table 41-11
Risk and protective factors for epithelial ovarian and 
fallopian tube cancers
Protective Factors
Risks
Oral contraceptive use, 
especially >5 years
Primary and secondary infertility
Tubal ligation
Nulliparity
Lactation
BRCA1/2 mutation and HNPCC 
syndrome
Pregnancy
Family history without genetic 
risk
Oophorectomy, 
salpingectomy
Endometriosis
Personal history of breast cancer 
or first-degree relative with breast 
cancer
? Hormone replacement therapy
HNPCC = hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Table 41-12
Components of comprehensive surgical staging and 
debulking of epithelial ovarian cancer
Vertical abdominal incision adequate to visualize the 
diaphragms
Evacuation of ascites
Peritoneal washings of each pelvic gutter and diaphragm
En bloc hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
Supracolic omentectomy
Retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph node dissection
Examination of the entire bowel
Random biopsies of apparently uninvolved areas of 
peritoneum, pericolic gutters, diaphragm
Table 41-10
Ovarian cancer symptom index (2007) and ACOG guidelines for patient referral to gynecologic oncology87, 104
Ovarian Cancer Symptom Index
ACOG Guidelines for Referral of  
Premenopausal Women with Mass  
Suspicious for Ovarian Cancer
ACOG Guidelines for Referral of  
Postmenopausal Women with Mass  
Suspicious for Ovarian Cancer
Development of, change in, and/ 
or persistence in:
1 or more of:
1 or more of:
Bloating
CA-125 >200 U/mL
Elevated CA-125
Pelvic or abdominal pain
Ascites
Ascites
Difficulty eating or feeling full quickly
Evidence of abdominal or distant 
metastasis
Nodular or fixed pelvic mass
Urinary symptoms of urgency or 
frequency
Family hx of 1 or more first-degree 
relatives with ovarian or breast cancer
Evidence of abdominal or distant  
metastasis
Family hx of 1 or more first-degree 
relatives with ovarian or breast cancer
ACOG = American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; hx = history.
1703
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
chemotherapy.93 The standard of care for women with stages 
IC and II and all women with grade 3 or clear cell histology is 
adjuvant chemotherapy with three to six cycles of cisplatin or 
carboplatin in combination with paclitaxel or docetaxel.94
Since GOG-11195 was published in 1996, and through 
much of the subsequent decade, standard-of-care adjuvant 
therapy of advanced-stage EOC has been intravenous (IV) 
platinum and taxane. More recent trials have sustained that 
chemotherapy backbone but prompt an individualized, more 
nuanced approach. In 2006, the National Cancer Institute issued 
a Clinical Alert indicating that inclusion of intraperitoneal che-
motherapy administration in adjuvant therapy should be consid-
ered first line for women with optimally cytoreduced (defined 
as no residual lesions >1 cm in diameter) EOC. This was the 
result of completion and analysis of three independent random-
ized clinical trials showing a significant survival advantage for 
intraperitoneal therapy.96,97 It is unclear whether it is the site of 
drug administration and/or the doses and dose density used that 
contributed to the improved outcomes. The intraperitoneal port 
is usually a 9.6-French venous catheter, with the port placed 
over the right or left costal margin. The catheter is tunneled 
caudad with insertion through the fascia in the lower abdomen 
and the tip in the pelvis.
Patients who have suboptimally debulked advanced-stage 
disease and/or who are not candidates for intraperitoneal therapy 
should receive IV adjuvant chemotherapy. Interest has increased 
in both dose-dense IV chemotherapy dosing as well as incor-
poration of biologic agents. The Japanese Gynecologic Oncol-
ogy Group phase III trial of carboplatin and weekly, dose-dense 
paclitaxel demonstrated significant improvement in both pro-
gression-free and overall survival98; the U.S. study of this regi-
men is now maturing. Addition of the angiogenesis inhibitor, 
bevacizumab, to the standard carboplatin-paclitaxel backbone 
and its continuance in maintenance therapy provided a modest 
increase in progression-free survival without an overall survival 
advantage. Patients with bulky disease after primary surgery 
appeared to derive the greatest benefit in post-hoc analysis.99,100
Secondary cytoreduction upon recurrence can be consid-
ered (Table 41-13). Patients who have had a disease-free period 
of at least 12 months, following an initial complete clinical 
response to surgery and initial chemotherapy, who have no evi-
dence of carcinomatosis on imaging, and who have disease that 
can be completely resected are considered optimal candidates. 
A randomized controlled trial is ongoing to validate that cur-
rent state of treatment. Debulking surgery done after subsequent 
relapses or in women with early recurrence has not been shown 
to result in an outcome benefit. Finally, surgery is used to palli-
ate disease complications. The most common cause of palliative 
surgery is bypass of bowel obstruction.
Chemotherapy is the mainstay of therapy for recurrent 
EOC. Treatment approaches are based on platinum sensitivity101 
(Table 41-14). Referral to an oncologist with specific expertise 
in chemotherapeutic treatment of ovarian cancer and access to 
clinical trials is important. In determining secondary and subse-
quent therapy, consideration of prior therapies, sites of disease, 
organs at risk from cancer, organs sustaining injury from prior 
therapy, and quality of life desires of the patient should be taken 
into consideration.
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors.  Ovarian germ cell tumors occur 
most commonly in women under age 30. Malignant forms often 
grow and disseminate rapidly and are symptomatic. The rapid 
growth may be accompanied by torsion producing an acute 
abdomen and need for emergent intervention. Because they are 
derived from primordial germ cells, many produce characteristic 
tumor markers. The most common benign germ cell neoplasm 
is the mature cystic teratoma; approximately 1% of teratomas 
contain a secondary malignancy arising from one of the com-
ponents, most commonly squamous cell cancer. Immature tera-
tomas comprise a significant proportion of malignant germ cell 
tumors and may be associated with elevated lactate dehydroge-
nase (LDH) or α-fetoprotein (AFP). Excluding teratomas, the 
most common malignant germ cell tumor is dysgerminoma, 
made up of pure undifferentiated germ cells. Bilaterality occurs 
in up to 15% of patients; lactate dehydrogenase is commonly 
elevated, and elevated β-hCG may occur. Staging, including 
removal of the involved ovary, biopsy of any suspicious areas, 
node dissection, and omentectomy, should be done initially 
but does not require hysterectomy or removal of the second 
ovary if fertility preservation is of concern and no extension 
of disease is observed. Evidence of extraovarian spread, such 
Table 41-13
Guidelines for secondary debulking of epithelial ovarian cancer
Time from Completion of Primary 
Therapy
Definition
Intervention
Progression on therapy
Platinum-refractory
No value of secondary debulking unless remediating 
  complication such as bowel obstruction
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Platinum with gemcitabine (class I)
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Progression within 6 months of 
  completion of primary therapy
Platinum-resistant
No value of secondary debulking unless remediating 
  complication such as bowel obstruction 
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Platinum with gemcitabine (class I)
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Progression 6 months after completion  
  of primary therapy
Platinum-sensitive
Consider secondary debulking if greater than 12-month interval
Consider platinum +/– taxane +/– bevacizumab, +/– pegylated 
  liposomal doxorubicin, +/– gemcitabine (class I)
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
1704
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
as nodal metastases, requires adjuvant chemotherapy. The cure 
rate remains high, near 90% with metastatic disease; recurrent 
disease is more difficult to eradicate.102
Less common are malignant germ cell tumors, including 
endodermal sinus or yolk sac tumors, embryonal carcinomas, 
mixed germ cell neoplasms, polyembryomas, and choriocarci-
nomas. Endodermal sinus tumors may have elevated AFP levels 
in the blood, whereas embryonal and mixed germ cell tumors 
may have elevated β-hCG, LDH, or AFP. Tumor markers are 
useful to follow during definitive therapy. Early spread of these 
tumors occurs, and other than completely resected stage I, grade 
1 immature teratoma, all others require adjuvant therapy with a 
platinum-containing regimen.103
Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Tumors.  Although rare, sex cord-
stromal cell tumors are derived from cells that support and sur-
round the oocyte and can present with symptoms referable to 
endocrine activity of the tumor. These include granulosa cell 
tumors (female differentiated), fibroma-thecomas, and Sertoli-
Leydig cell tumors (male differentiated). Granulosa cell tumors 
are the most common in this group and are a low-grade malig-
nancy with less than 3% bilaterality. They are treated with 
conservative surgery, similar to germ cell tumors in young 
women.103 Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 
are recommended for women who have completed childbearing. 
Nodal staging can be safely omitted in the absence of grossly 
involved nodes, and fertility preservation is possible in disease 
limited to one ovary, the most common presentation. Debulk-
ing surgery is recommended for more extensive disease. These 
tumors and the thecomas in the same class often stimulate estro-
gen production and can be found in association with endometrial 
hyperplasia and cancer (5%). Granulosa cell tumors can recur 
over a prolonged period given their low rate of proliferation 
and tendency for local or intraperitoneal recurrence. Inhibin has 
been shown to be elaborated by these tumors and often is fol-
lowed to identify recurrence of the disease. The Sertoli-Leydig 
cell tumors can present with virilization as a primary symptom. 
Evaluation of the ovary when this symptom is found is always 
of value.
MINIMALLY INVASIVE GYNECOLOGIC SURGERY
Hysteroscopy
See earlier section, Hysteroscopy, under Procedures Performed 
for Structural Causes of Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.
Laparoscopy
The standard method for gynecologic laparoscopy follows the 
same methods as all minimally invasive surgery. In general, a 
camera port is placed near the umbilicus. Sometimes it must be 
placed more cephalad if the patient has a larger fibroid uterus. 
Two additional ports are placed laterally, usually just superior 
and medial to the anterior superior iliac spines (ASIS). Some-
times one additional suprapubic port is placed for extra traction 
or instrumentation as described elsewhere in this text.
Complications Related to Gynecologic Surgery
Abdominal Wall Vessels.  The vessel at greatest risk of injury 
during the lateral trocar placement is the inferior epigastric 
artery. The superficial epigastric vessels and the superficial cir-
cumflex iliac vessels can be injured as well (Fig. 41-23). The 
primary methods to avoid vessel injury are knowledge of the 
vessels at risk and their visualization prior to trocar placement, 
when possible. The superficial vessels often can be seen and 
avoided by transillumination of the abdominal wall with the 
laparoscope. In contrast, the larger inferior epigastric vessels 
cannot be seen by transillumination because of their deeper 
location; these vessels often can be seen laparoscopically and 
avoided as they course along the peritoneum between the lat-
eral umbilical fold of the bladder and the insertion of the round 
  Deep
vessels
Superficial
   vessels
   Inferior
epigastric
    Deep
circumflex
iliac
Superficial
 epigastric
Superficial
circumflex
      iliac
Figure 41-23.  Location of anterior abdominal wall blood vessels.
Table 41-14
Definitions of platinum resistance and guidelines for treatment of recurrent disease
Platinum Sensitivity
Definition
Intervention
Refractory
Progression while receiving a platinum
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Platinum with gemcitabine
Resistant
Progression within 6 months of completing treatment
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
Platinum with gemcitabine
Sensitive
Progression after 6 months of completing treatment
Consider secondary debulking if
>12 months since treatment
Consider platinum ± taxane
Nonplatinum-based chemotherapy
1705
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
ligament into the inguinal canal. Anatomic variation and anas-
tomoses between vessels make it impossible to know the exact 
location of all the abdominal wall vessels. For this reason, other 
strategies also should be used to avoid vessel injury, including 
the use of trocars with conical tips rather than pyramid tips and 
the use of the smallest trocars possible lateral to the midline.
Intestinal Injury.  Another potentially serious complication of 
laparoscopic surgery is injury to either small or large intestines. 
An unrecognized bowel injury may occur at the time of trocar 
insertion, especially if the patient has had previous abdominal 
procedures that often result in bowel adhesions to the anterior 
abdominal wall peritoneum. An open technique for placement 
of the first port is advocated to minimize the risk of bowel injury 
in patients who have undergone previous laparotomy. Some 
bowel injuries may not be seen during surgery because of the 
limited field of view. These injuries usually manifest 1 to 3 days 
after surgery, well after the patient has been released following 
these primarily outpatient procedures, and any patient concerns 
in this time period should be addressed seriously and rapidly.
Urologic Injuries.  Bladder injury is an uncommon laparo-
scopic injury, occurring as a result of retroperitoneal perforation 
during lower trocar placement or during sharp dissection of the 
bladder from the lower uterine segment during hysterectomy. 
The latter of these two situations is usually recognized intra-
operatively; the first sign of the former may be postoperative 
hematuria or lower-port incisional drainage. Once diagnosed, 
large defects require layered closure, whereas smaller defects 
usually close spontaneously within days or weeks with the aid 
of transurethral catheter drainage. Ureteral injury may occur 
as a result of any procedure that requires dissection or ligation 
of sidewall vessels, such as removal of adnexa, because the 
ureter is adjacent to the pelvic peritoneum in the area of the 
ovarian fossa (see Fig. 41-5). This complication also has been 
reported after fulguration of endometriosis on the pelvic side-
wall. Another common cause of ureteral injury is hysterectomy, 
because the ureter is often located less than 2 cm from the cervix. 
This type of injury appears to be increased during laparoscopic 
hysterectomy, compared to abdominal or vaginal approaches. 
Ureteral injuries, including complete ligation, partial resection, 
or thermal injuries, usually will manifest within hours to days 
of surgery. Complete obstruction most often manifests as flank 
pain, whereas the first sign of partial or complete transection 
may be symptoms of intra-abdominal irritation caused by urine 
leakage. Transperitoneal thermal injuries resulting from fulgu-
ration of endometriosis may be similar to those after transection, 
but the appearance of symptoms may be delayed several days 
until tissue necrosis occurs.
Robotic Surgery
Over the last decade, there has been increased use of robotics for 
gynecologic surgery. With the DaVinci robotic system, the sur-
geon sits at a console and visualizes the operative field with three-
dimensional optics. The laparoscopic instruments are “wristed” 
and move as the surgeon’s hands/fingers move the actuators at 
the console. Robotic surgery uses a camera port, two to three 
robotic ports, and an accessory port. More meticulous dissection, 
improved visualization, and ability to operate with lower intra-
abdominal pressures make the robotic platform advantageous, 
especially in obese patients. Longer set-up time and increased 
cost, however, are distinct disadvantages. The use of robotic sur-
gery has been described for virtually every gynecologic procedure 
that has been performed abdominally or laparoscopically.
REFERENCES
1.	Anson B. Atlas of Human Anatomy. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
ders, 1950.
2.	Screening for Cervical Cancer. Available at: http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf11/cervcancer/cerv-
cancerrs.htm. Accessed March 2012.
3.	Mutch DG, Powell MA, Allsworth JE, Taylor NP, Brooks RA. 
How accurate is Pipelle sampling: a study by Huang et al. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;196:280-281.
4.	Margesson LJ. Vulvar disease pearls. Dermatol Clin. 
2006;24:145-155.
5.	Downs MC, Randall HW Jr. The ambulatory surgical manage-
ment of Bartholin duct cysts. J Emerg Med. 1989;7:623-626.
6.	Workowski KA, Berman SM. Sexually transmitted dis-
eases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR Recomm Rep. 
2006;55(RR-11):1-94.
7.	Stanley M. Chapter 17: Genital human papillomavirus infec-
tions—current and prospective therapies. J Natl Cancer Inst 
Monogr. 2003;31:117-124.
8.	Habel LA, Van Den Eeden SK, Sherman KJ, McKnight B, 
Stergachis A, Daling JR. Risk factors for incident and recur-
rent condylomata acuminata among women. A population-
based study. Sex Transm Dis. 1998;25:285-292.
9.	Brodell LA, Mercurio MG, Brodell RT. The diagnosis and 
treatment of human papillomavirus-mediated genital lesions. 
Cutis. 2007;79(4 Suppl):5-10.
10.	Fanning J, Lambert HC, Hale TM, Morris PC, Schuerch C. 
Paget’s disease of the vulva: prevalence of associated vulvar 
adenocarcinoma, invasive Paget’s disease, and recurrence 
after surgical excision. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;180(1 Pt 1): 
24-27.
11.	Tebes S, Cardosi R, Hoffman M. Paget’s disease of the 
vulva. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002;187(2):281-283, discussion 
83-84.
12.	Cardosi RJ, Bomalaski JJ, Hoffman MS. Diagnosis and man-
agement of vulvar and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia. Obstet 
Gynecol Clin North Am. 2001;28:685-702.
13.	Modesitt SC, Waters AB, Walton L, Fowler WC Jr, Van 
Le L. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia III: occult cancer and 
the impact of margin status on recurrence. Obstet Gynecol. 
1998;92:962-966.
14.	Anderson MR, Klink K, Cohrssen A. Evaluation of vaginal 
complaints. JAMA. 2004;291:1368-1379.
15.	Eschenbach DA, Davick PR, Williams BL, et al. Prevalence of 
hydrogen peroxide-producing Lactobacillus species in normal 
women and women with bacterial vaginosis. J Clin Microbiol. 
1989;27:251-256.
16.	Food and Drug Administration. Product approval information: 
human papillomavirus quadrivalent (types 6, 11, 16, 18) vac-
cine, recombinant. Silver Spring, MD: Food and Drug Admin-
istration.
17.	Kahn JA. HPV vaccination for the prevention of cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:271-278.
18.	Paavonen J, Naud P, Salmeron J, et al. Efficacy of human 
papillomavirus (HPV)-16/18 AS04-adjuvanted vaccine 
against cervical infection and precancer caused by oncogenic 
HPV types (PATRICIA): final analysis of a double-blind, 
randomised study in young women. Lancet. 2009;374:301-
314.
19.	Quadrivalent vaccine against human papillomavirus to prevent 
high-grade cervical lesions. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1915-
1927.
20.	Garland SM, Hernandez-Avila M, Wheeler CM, et al. Quadri-
valent vaccine against human papillomavirus to prevent ano-
genital diseases. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1928-1943.
21.	Stenchever M, Droegemueller W, Herbst A, Mishell D. Com-
prehensive Gynecology. St Louis: Mosby; 2001.
1706
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
22.	Munro MG, Critchley HO, Broder MS, Fraser IS. FIGO clas-
sification system (PALM-COEIN) for causes of abnormal 
uterine bleeding in nongravid women of reproductive age. Int 
J Gynaecol Obstet. 2011;113:3-13.
23.	Van Bogaert LJ. Clinicopathologic findings in endometrial 
polyps. Obstet Gynecol. 1988;71:771-773.
24.	Costa-Paiva L, Godoy CE Jr, Antunes A Jr, Caseiro JD, 
Arthuso M, Pinto-Neto AM. Risk of malignancy in endome-
trial polyps in premenopausal and postmenopausal women 
according to clinicopathologic characteristics. Menopause. 
2011;18:1278-1282.
25.	Byun JY, Kim SE, Choi BG, Ko GY, Jung SE, Choi KH. 
Diffuse and focal adenomyosis: MR imaging findings. Radio-
graphics. 1999;19 Spec No:S161-S170.
26.	Filicori M, Hall DA, Loughlin JS, Rivier J, Vale W, Crow-
ley WF Jr. A conservative approach to the management of 
uterine leiomyoma: pituitary desensitization by a luteinizing 
hormone-releasing hormone analogue. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1983;147:726-727.
27.	Matsuo H, Maruo T. GnRH analogues in the management of 
uterine leiomyoma. Nippon Rinsho. 2006;64(Suppl 4):75-79.
28.	Szabo E, Nagy E, Morvay Z, Palko A, Csernay L. Uterine 
artery embolization for the conservative management of leio-
myoma. Orv Hetil. 2001;142:675-680.
29.	Mutter GL. Diagnosis of premalignant endometrial disease. 
J Clin Pathol. 2002;55:326-331.
30.	Kurman RJ, Kaminski PF, Norris HJ. The behavior of endo-
metrial hyperplasia. A long-term study of “untreated” hyper-
plasia in 170 patients. Cancer. 1985;56:403-412.
31.	Miller C, Bidus MA, Pulcini JP, Maxwell GL, Cosin JA, Rose 
GS. The ability of endometrial biopsies with atypical complex 
hyperplasia to guide surgical management. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2008;199:69.e1-e4.
32.	Stany MP, Farley JH. Complications of gynecologic surgery. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:343-359, vii.
33.	Cooper JM, Brady RM. Intraoperative and early postoperative 
complications of operative hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am. 2000;27:347-366.
34.	Witz CA, Silverberg KM, Burns WN, Schenken RS, Olive 
DL. Complications associated with the absorption of hystero-
scopic fluid media. Fertil Steril. 1993;60:745-756.
35.	ACOG technology assessment in obstetrics and gynecology, 
number 4, August 2005: hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol. 
2005;106:439-442.
36.	van Dongen H, Emanuel MH, Wolterbeek R, Trimbos JB, 
Jansen FW. Hysteroscopic morcellator for removal of intra-
uterine polyps and myomas: a randomized controlled pilot 
study among residents in training. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 
2008;15:466-471.
37.	ACOG Practice Bulletin. Clinical management guidelines for 
obstetrician-gynecologists. Number 81, May 2007. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2007;109:1233-1248.
38.	Boing C, Kimmig R. Surgical management of endome-
triosis—an overview. Gynakol Geburtshilfliche Rundsch. 
2007;47:124-131.
39.	Petta CA, Matos AM, Bahamondes L, Faundes D. Current 
practice in the management of symptoms of endometriosis: 
a survey of Brazilian gynecologists. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 
2007;53:525-529.
40.	Bernstein R, Kennedy WR, Waldron J. Acute pelvic inflamma-
tory disease: a clinical follow-up. Int J Fertil. 1987;32:229-232.
41.	Chow JM, Yonekura ML, Richwald GA, Greenland S, Sweet 
RL, Schachter J. The association between Chlamydia tracho-
matis and ectopic pregnancy. A matched-pair, case-control 
study. JAMA. 1990;263:3164-3167.
42.	Workowski KA, Berman S. Sexually transmitted dis-
eases treatment guidelines, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 
2010;59(RR-12):1-110.
43.	Menacker FHB. Recent trends in cesarean delivery in the 
United States. NCHS data brief. Hyattsville: National Center 
for Health Statistics; 2010.
44.	 Dietrich CS III, Hill CC, Hueman M. Surgical diseases present-
ing in pregnancy. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:403-419, vii-viii.
45.	Gabbe S, Niebyl J, Simpson J. Obstetrics: Normal and Prob-
lem Pregnancies. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.
46.	Brown HL. Trauma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 
2009;114:147-160.
47.	ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 88, December 2007. Invasive pre-
natal testing for aneuploidy. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;110:1459-
1467.
48.	Owen J, Mancuso M. Cervical cerclage for the prevention of 
preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2012;39:25-33.
49.	McDonald IA. Suture of the cervix for inevitable miscarriage. 
J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp. 1957;64:346-350.
50.	Shirodkar V. New method of operative treatment for habitual 
abortions in the second trimester of pregnancy. Antiseptic. 
1955;52:299.
51.	Stock L, Milad M. Surgical management of ectopic preg-
nancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;55:448-454.
52.	Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al. A randomized trial of 
prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. N Engl 
J Med. 2011;364:993-1004.
53.	Porreco RP, Stettler RW. Surgical remedies for postpartum 
hemorrhage. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2010;53:182-195.
54.	Bakri YN, Amri A, Abdul Jabbar F. Tamponade-balloon for 
obstetrical bleeding. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2001;74:139-142.
55.	Lurain JR. Gestational trophoblastic disease I: epidemiology, 
pathology, clinical presentation, and diagnosis of gestational 
trophoblastic disease, and management of hydatidiform mole. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010;203:531-539.
56.	Lurain JR. Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification 
and management of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204:11-18.
57.	Walters M, Karram M. Urogynecology and Reconstructive 
Pelvic Surgery. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2007.
58.	Olsen AL, Smith VJ, Bergstrom JO, Colling JC, Clark AL. 
Epidemiology of surgically managed pelvic organ prolapse 
and urinary incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 1997;89:501-506.
59.	Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bo K, et al. The standardization of 
terminology of female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic floor 
dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:10-17.
60.	Benson JT, Lucente V, McClellan E. Vaginal versus abdomi-
nal reconstructive surgery for the treatment of pelvic support 
defects: a prospective randomized study with long-term out-
come evaluation. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:1418-1421, 
discussion 21-22.
61.	Maher CF, Qatawneh AM, Dwyer PL, Carey MP, Cornish 
A, Schluter PJ. Abdominal sacral colpopexy or vaginal sacro-
spinous colpopexy for vaginal vault prolapse: a prospective 
randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;190:20-26.
62.	Food and Drug Administration. Urogynecologic Surgical 
mesh: update on the safety and effectiveness of transvaginal 
placement for pelvic organ prolapse. Available at: http://www.
fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/safety/alertsandnotices/
ucm262760.pdf. Accessed December 27, 2012.
63.	Nygaard IE, McCreery R, Brubaker L, et al. Abdominal 
sacrocolpopexy: a comprehensive review. Obstet Gynecol. 
2004;104:805-823.
64.	Tanagho EA. Colpocystourethropexy: the way we do it. 
J Urol. 1976;116(December):751-753.
65.	Reynolds WS, Dmochowski RR. Urethral bulking: a urology 
perspective. Urol Clin North Am. 2012;39:279-287.
66.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10-29.
67.	Carter JS, Downs LS Jr. Vulvar and vaginal cancer. Obstet 
Gynecol Clin North Am. 2012;39:213-231.
1707
GYNECOLOGY
CHAPTER 41
68.	Berek J, Hacker N. Practical Gynecologic Oncology. 5th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
69.	Disaia PCW. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. 8th ed. Phila-
delphia: Saunders; 2012.
70.	Montana GS, Thomas GM, Moore DH, et al. Preopera-
tive chemo-radiation for carcinoma of the vulva with N2/
N3 nodes: a gynecologic oncology group study. Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:1007-1013.
71.	Moore DH, Thomas GM, Montana GS, Saxer A, Gallup DG, 
Olt G. Preoperative chemoradiation for advanced vulvar can-
cer: a phase II study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Int 
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;42:79-85.
72.	Shylasree TS, Bryant A, Howells RE. Chemoradiation for 
advanced primary vulval cancer. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2011;4:CD003752.
73.	Goodman A, Schorge J, Greene MF. The long-term effects 
of in utero exposures—the DES story. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:2083-2084.
74.	Beller U, Benedet JL, Creasman WT, et al. Carcinoma 
of the vagina. FIGO 6th Annual Report on the Results of 
Treatment in Gynecological Cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
2006;95(Suppl 1):S29-S42.
75.	Barakat RMM, Randall M: Principles and Practice of Gyne-
cologic Oncology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & 
Wilkins; 2009.
76.	Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D. 
Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011;61:69-90.
77.	Wright TC Jr, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, Spitzer M, Wilkinson 
EJ, Solomon D. 2006 consensus guidelines for the manage-
ment of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or ade-
nocarcinoma in situ. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2007;11:223-239.
78.	Pecorelli S. Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the 
vulva, cervix, and endometrium. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
2009;105:103-104.
79.	 Pikaart DP, Holloway RW, Ahmad S, et al. Clinical-pathologic 
and morbidity analyses of types 2 and 3 abdominal radical hyster-
ectomy for cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;107:205-210.
80.	Kim CH, Abu-Rustum NR, Chi DS, et al. Reproductive out-
comes of patients undergoing radical trachelectomy for early-
stage cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2012;125:585-588.
81.	Leslie KK, Thiel KW, Goodheart MJ, De Geest K, Jia Y, 
Yang S. Endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 
2012;39:255-268.
82.	Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al. Recurrence and 
survival after random assignment to laparoscopy versus lapa-
rotomy for comprehensive surgical staging of uterine cancer: 
Gynecologic Oncology Group LAP2 Study. J Clin Oncol. 
2012;30:695-700.
83.	Creutzberg CL, Nout RA, Lybeert ML, et al. Fifteen-year 
radiotherapy outcomes of the randomized PORTEC-1 trial 
for endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2011;81:e631-e638.
84.	Keys HM, Roberts JA, Brunetto VL, et al. A phase III trial 
of surgery with or without adjunctive external pelvic radia-
tion therapy in intermediate risk endometrial adenocarci-
noma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 
2004;92:744-751.
85.	Aarnio M, Mecklin JP, Aaltonen LA, Nystrom-Lahti M, 
Jarvinen HJ. Life-time risk of different cancers in hereditary 
non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. Int J 
Cancer. 1995;64:430-433.
86.	Reichardt P. The treatment of uterine sarcomas. Ann Oncol. 
2012;23(Suppl 10):x151-x157.
87.	Goff BA, Mandel LS, Drescher CW, et al. Development of an 
ovarian cancer symptom index: possibilities for earlier detec-
tion. Cancer. 2007;109:221-227.
88.	Lu KH. Hereditary gynecologic cancers: differential diagno-
sis, surveillance, management and surgical prophylaxis. Fam 
Cancer. 2008;7:53-58.
89.	Kauff ND, Satagopan JM, Robson ME, et al. Risk-reducing 
salpingo-oophorectomy in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 
mutation. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1609-1615.
90.	American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Elec-
tive and risk-reducing salpingo-oopherectomy. ACOG Prac-
tice Bulletin. 2008;89:1-12.
91.	Young RC, Decker DG, Wharton JT, et al. Staging laparotomy 
in early ovarian cancer. JAMA. 1983;250:3072-3076.
92.	Vergote I, Trope CG, Amant F, et al. Neoadjuvant chemo-
therapy or primary surgery in stage IIIC or IV ovarian cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:943-953.
93.	Young RC, Walton LA, Ellenberg SS, et al. Adjuvant therapy 
in stage I and stage II epithelial ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 
1990;322:1021-1027.
94.	Bell J, Brady MF, Young RC, et al. Randomized phase III trial 
of three versus six cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel 
in early stage epithelial ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic 
Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;102:432-439.
95.	McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Cyclophospha-
mide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in 
patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer (see com-
ments). N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1-6.
96.	Armstrong DK, Bundy BN, Wenzel L, et al. Intraperitoneal 
cisplatin and paclitaxel in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:34-43.
97.	Walker JL, Armstrong DK, Huang HQ, et al. Intraperitoneal 
catheter outcomes in a phase III trial of intravenous versus 
intraperitoneal chemotherapy in optimal stage III ovarian and 
primary peritoneal cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group 
Study. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;100:27-32.
98.	Katsumata N, Yasuda M, Takahashi F, et al. Dose-dense 
paclitaxel once a week in combination with carboplatin every 
3 weeks for advanced ovarian cancer: a phase 3, open-label, 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;374:1331-1338.
99.	Burger RA, Brady MF, Bookman MA, et al. Incorporation 
of bevacizumab in the primary treatment of ovarian cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2473-2483.
100.	Perren TJ, Swart AM, Pfisterer J, et al. A phase 3 trial of beva-
cizumab in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2484-
2496.
101.	Markman M, Reichman B, Hakes T, Jones W. Responses to 
second-line cisplatin-based intraperitoneal therapy in ovarian 
cancer: influence of a prior response to intravenous cisplatin. 
J Clin Oncol. 1991;9:1801-1805.
102.	Parkinson CA, Hatcher HM, Ajithkumar TV. Management 
of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 
2011;66:507-514.
103.	Gershenson DM. Treatment of ovarian cancer in young 
women. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;55:65-74.
104.	Dearking AC, Aletti GD, McGree ME, Weaver AL, Som-
merfield MK, Cliby WA. How relevant are ACOG and SGO 
guidelines for referral of adnexal mass? Obstet Gynecol. 
2007;110:841-848.
This page intentionally left blank 
Neurosurgery
Casey H. Halpern and
M. Sean Grady
42
OVERVIEW
Neurologic surgery provides the operative and nonoperative 
management (i.e., prevention, diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, 
critical care, and rehabilitation) of disorders of the central, 
peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems (ANSs) . Such dis-
orders include those of the brain, meninges, skull and skull 
base, and their blood supply, including surgical and endo-
vascular treatment of disorders of the intracranial and extracra-
nial vasculature supplying the brain and spinal cord; disorders 
of the pituitary gland; disorders of the spinal cord, meninges, 
and vertebral column, including those that may require treat-
ment by fusion, instrumentation, or endovascular techniques; 
and disorders of the cranial and spinal nerves throughout their 
distribution.
An accurate history is the first step toward neurologic 
diagnosis. A history of trauma or of neurologic symptoms is 
of obvious interest, but general constitutional symptoms are 
also important. Neurologic disease may have systemic effects, 
while diseases of other systems may affect neurologic function. 
The patient’s general medical ability to withstand the physi-
ologic stress of anesthesia and surgery should be understood. 
A detailed history from the patient and/or family, along with a 
reliable physical examination, will clarify these issues.
NEUROANATOMY
An understanding of neuroanatomy is the foundation of com-
prehensive neurologic examination and diagnosis. Salient fea-
tures will be considered, from cephalad to caudad. The cerebral 
hemispheres (or telencephalon) consist of the cerebral cortex, 
underlying white matter, the basal ganglia, hippocampus, and 
amygdala. The cerebral cortex is the most recently evolved part 
of the nervous system. Its functions are mapped to discrete ana-
tomic areas. The frontal areas are involved in executive function, 
decision making, and restraint of emotions. The motor strip, or 
precentral gyrus, is the most posterior component of the frontal 
lobes, and is arranged along a homunculus with the head inferior 
and lateral to the lower extremities superiorly and medially. The 
motor speech area (Broca’s area) lies in the left posterior inferior 
frontal lobe in almost all right-handed people and in up to 90% 
of left-handed people. The parietal lobe lies between the central 
sulcus anteriorly and the occipital lobe posteriorly. The postcen-
tral gyrus is the sensory strip, also arranged along a homunculus. 
The rest of the parietal lobe is involved with awareness of one’s 
body in space and relative to the immediate environment, body 
orientation, and spatial relationships. The occipital lobes are 
most posterior. The visual cortex is arrayed along the apposing 
medial surfaces of the occipital lobes. The left occipital lobe 
1
Overview	
1709
Neuroanatomy	
1709
Neurologic Examination	
1711
Diagnostic Studies / 1712
Neurologic and Neurosurgical  
Emergencies	
1713
Raised Intracranial Pressure / 1713
Brain Stem Compression / 1714
Stroke / 1714
Seizure / 1715
Trauma	
1715
Head Trauma / 1715
Spine Trauma / 1721
Peripheral Nerve Trauma / 1726
Cerebrovascular Disease	
1727
Ischemic Diseases / 1727
Thrombotic Disease / 1728
Embolic Disease / 1728
Hemorrhagic Diseases / 1728
Tumors of the Central  
Nervous System	
1732
Intracranial Tumors / 1732
Metastatic Tumors / 1732
Glial Tumors / 1733
Neural Tumors and Mixed Tumors / 1734
Neural Crest Tumors / 1735
Miscellaneous Tumors / 1735
Embryologic Tumors / 1736
Spinal Tumors / 1737
Intradural Extramedullary Tumors / 1738
Spine: Basic Concepts	
1739
Stability / 1739
Neural Compression / 1739
Patterns of Disease / 1740
Spine Fusion Surgery / 1743
Spinal Instrumentation / 1743
Arthrodesis / 1743
Peripheral Nerve	
1744
Peripheral Nerve Tumors / 1744
Entrapment Neuropathies / 1744
Autoimmune and Inflammatory  
Disorders / 1744
Infection	
1745
Cranial / 1745
Spine / 1745
Functional Neurosurgery	
1746
Epilepsy Surgery / 1746
Deep Brain Stimulation / 1747
Trigeminal Neuralgia / 1748
Stereotactic Radiosurgery	
1749
Arteriovenous Malformations / 1749
Vestibular Schwannomas / 1749
Intracranial Metastases / 1749
Congenital and Developmental 
Anomalies	
1749
Dysraphism / 1749
Spina Bifida Occulta / 1749
Spina Bifida with Myelomeningocele / 
1750
Encephalocele / 1750
Craniosynostosis / 1750
Hydrocephalus / 1750
Chiari I Malformation / 1751
chapter 
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
receives and integrates data from the left half of each retina. A 
left occipital lesion would therefore result in an inability to see 
objects right of center. The temporal lobes lie below the sylvian 
fissures. The hippocampus, amygdala, and lower optic radia-
tions (Meyer’s loops) are important components of the temporal 
lobe and are involved in memory, emotion, and vision, respec-
tively. The receptive speech area (Wernicke’s area) typically 
is found in the area of the left posterior superior temporal lobe 
and inferior parietal lobe. The basal ganglia include the caudate, 
putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, substantia nigra, 
and nucleus accumbens. These structures are involved in the 
selection, activation and termination of movement, and facilitate 
learning of appropriate context-dependent motor behaviors.
Lying deep to the cerebral hemispheres is the diencephalon, 
which includes the thalamus and hypothalamus. The thalamus 
is a key processor and relay circuit for most motor and sensory 
information traveling to or from cortex. The hypothalamus regu-
lates homeostasis via the autonomic and neuroendocrine systems.
The brain stem consists of the midbrain (mesencephalon), 
pons (metencephalon), and medulla (myelencephalon). Longitu-
dinal fibers run through the brain stem, carrying motor and sen-
sory information between the cerebral hemispheres and spinal 
cord. The corticospinal tract is the major motor tract, while the 
medial lemniscus and spinothalamic tracts are the major sensory 
tracts. The nuclei of cranial nerves III through XII are also located 
within the brain stem. These nerves relay the motor, sensory, and 
special sense functions of the eye, face, mouth, and throat.
The cerebellum arises from the dorsal aspect of the brain 
stem. It integrates somatosensory, vestibular, and motor infor-
mation for coordination and timing of movement. Midline, or 
vermian, lesions lead to truncal ataxia. Lateral, or hemispheric, 
lesions lead to tremor and dyscoordination in the extremities.
The ventricular system is the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)–
containing contiguous space inside the brain, continuous with 
the subarachnoid space outside the brain. The paired lateral 
ventricles consist of temporal, occipital, and frontal horns, as 
well as the main body. CSF travels from each lateral ventricle 
through the foramina of Monroe to the third ventricle, located 
between the left and right thalami. CSF then drains through 
the cerebral aqueduct to the fourth ventricle within the brain 
stem. The foramen of Magendie (midline) and paired foram-
ina of Luschka (lateral) drain to the subarachnoid space. The 
approximate CSF volume in an average adult is 150 mL, and the 
choroid plexus produces approximately 500 mL of CSF per day.
The spinal cord starts at the bottom of the medulla and 
extends caudally through the spinal canal to the first lumbar verte-
bra, approximately. Motor tracts (efferent pathways) continue from 
the brain stem down via the lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts 
to anterior horn cells, and then exit via ventral nerve roots. Sensory 
information (afferent pathways) enters via dorsal nerve roots, trav-
els cranially via the dorsal columns (proprioception and fine touch) 
or spinothalamic tract (pain and temperature), and into the brain 
stem. Paired nerves exit the spinal cord at each level. There are 31 
pairs: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal.
The dorsal and ventral nerve roots at each level fuse to 
form mixed motor-sensory spinal nerves and spread through the 
body to provide innervation to muscles and sensory organs. The 
C5–T1 spinal nerves intersect in the brachial plexus and divide to 
form the main nerve branches to the arm, including the median, 
ulnar, and radial nerves. The L2–S4 spinal nerves intersect in the 
lumbosacral plexus, and divide to form the main nerve branches 
to the leg, including the femoral and sciatic nerves.
The principal motor tract of the spinal cord is the corticospi-
nal tract. It is a two-neuron path, including an upper motor neuron 
and a lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron cell body is 
located within the motor strip of the cerebral cortex. The axon trav-
els through the internal capsule to the brain stem, decussates at the 
brain stem–spinal cord junction, and travels down the contralateral 
corticospinal tract to the lower motor neuron in the anterior horn 
at the appropriate level. The lower motor neuron axon then travels 
via peripheral nerves to its target muscle. Damage to upper motor 
neurons typically results in hyperreflexia and mild atrophy Damage 
to lower motor neurons results in flaccidity and significant atrophy.
The two major sensory tracts are three-neuron pathways. Fine 
touch and proprioceptive signals enter the spinal cord via the dorsal 
root ganglia and then ascend ipsilaterally via the dorsal columns. 
Then they synapse and decussate in the lower medulla, travel up 
the contralateral medial lemniscus to make a second synapse in the 
thalamus, and then finally ascend to the sensory cortex. Pain and 
temperature fibers first synapse in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord 
1710
Key Points
1 	 Neurologic surgery specializes in primarily surgical manage-
ment of central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous system 
disorders.
2 	 Although clinical examination is paramount, neurosurgical 
diagnosis and treatment are aided largely by a variety of 
modalities, such as MRI and intracranial pressure monitoring.
3 	 The common treatment goals for traumatic brain and spinal 
injury are aimed at preventing secondary insults of hypoxia 
and hypotension.
4 	 Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage remains one of the 
most morbid and intensive neurosurgical diseases. Endovascu-
lar therapy is a growing technology that allows for safer secur-
ing of ruptured aneurysms.
5 	 Brain tumors can arise from primary or metastatic tissues. Treat-
ment typically involves resection, followed by radiation and/or 
chemotherapy, depending on the type and grade of tumor.
6 	 Spinal instrumentation is used for surgical stabilization of 
many types of spinal instability, including traumatic, infec-
tious, oncologic, and degenerative.
7 	 Infection of the nervous system is a serious and prevalent 
medical problem. Operative management is indicated for 
most conditions in which there is symptomatic compres-
sion of neural structures.
8 	 Functional neurosurgery via device implantation is a rapidly 
evolving discipline that has already become the standard of 
care in treating medically refractory Parkinson’s disease 
and essential tremor. A wider variety of deep brain stimula-
tion targets will treat additional neuropsychiatric diseases.
9 	 Stereotactic radiosurgery is a powerful treatment option for 
intracranial disease, whether it is primary or adjunct. 
Gamma knife surgery can be used to treat tumors, vascular 
malformations, and cranial neuralgias.
1711
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
at their entry level, decussate, and then travel up the contralateral 
spinothalamic tracts to the thalamus. The second synapse occurs 
in the thalamus, and the output axons ascend to the sensory cortex.
The aforementioned motor and sensory tracts together consti-
tute the somatic nervous system. In addition to this system, the ANS 
is the other constituent of the nervous system. The ANS carries 
messages for homeostasis and visceral regulation from the central 
nervous system (CNS) to target structures such as arteries, veins, 
the heart, sweat glands, and the digestive tract.1 CNS control of 
the ANS arises particularly from the hypothalamus and the nucleus 
of the tractus solitarius. The ANS is divided into the sympathetic, 
parasympathetic, and enteric systems. The sympathetic system 
drives the “fight or flight” response, using epinephrine to increase 
heart rate, blood pressure, blood glucose, and temperature, as well 
as to dilate the pupils. It arises from the thoracolumbar spinal seg-
ments. The parasympathetic system promotes the “rest and digest” 
state, and uses acetylcholine to maintain basal metabolic function 
under nonstressful conditions. Parasympathetic fibers arise from 
cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X, and from the second to fourth 
sacral segments. The enteric nervous system controls the complex 
synchronization of the digestive tract, especially the pancreas, gall-
bladder, and small and large bowels. It can run autonomously but is 
regulated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems.
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
The neurologic examination is divided into several compo-
nents, and generally is done from head to toe. First, one must 
assess mental status. A patient may be awake, lethargic (will 
follow commands and answer questions, but then returns 
to sleep), stuporous (difficult to arouse), or comatose (no 
purposeful response to voice or pain). Cranial nerves may be 
thoroughly tested in the awake patient, but pupil reactivity, 
eye movement, facial symmetry, and gag are the most rele-
vant measures when mental status is impaired. Motor testing 
is based on maximal effort of major muscle groups in those 
able to follow commands, while assessing for amplitude and 
symmetry of movement to deep central pain may be all that 
is possible for stuporous patients. Table 42-1 details scor-
ing for motor assessment tests. Characteristic motor reac-
tions to pain in patients with depressed mental status include 
withdrawal from stimulus, localization to stimulus, flexor 
(decorticate) posturing, extensor (decerebrate) posturing, or 
no reaction (in order of worsening pathology). Figure 42-1 
diagrams the clinical patterns of posturing. This forms the 
basis of determining the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) motor 
Table 42-1
Motor scoring system
Grade Description
0
No muscle contraction
1
Visible muscle contraction without movement  
  across the joint
2
Movement in the horizontal plane, unable to  
  overcome gravity
3
Movement against gravity
4
Movement against some resistance
5
Normal strength
Figure 42-1.  Patterns of motor responses associated with various lesions. A. Left hemispheric lesion with right hemiplegia and left localiza-
tion. B. Deep cerebral/thalamic lesion with bilateral flexor posturing. C. Midbrain or pontine lesion with bilateral extensor posturing. D. Med-
ullary lesion with general flaccidity. (Adapted with permission from Rengachary SS: Impaired consciousness, in Rengachary SS, Ellenbogen 
RG [eds]: Principles of Neurosurgery, 2nd ed. Edinburgh; New York: Elsevier Mosby, 2005.  kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1712
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
score, as detailed in Table 42-2. Light touch, propriocep-
tion, temperature, and pain testing may be useful in awake 
patients but is often impossible without good cooperation. It 
is critical to document sensory patterns in spinal cord injury 
(SCI) patients. Muscle stretch reflexes should be examined. 
Often comparing left to right or upper extremity to lower 
extremity reflexes for symmetry is the most useful for local-
izing a lesion. Check for ankle-jerk clonus or up-going toes 
(Babinski’s test). Presence of either is pathologic and signifies 
upper motor neuron disease.
Diagnostic Studies
Plain Films.  Plain X-rays of the skull may demonstrate frac-
tures, osteolytic or osteoblastic lesions, or pneumocephaly (air 
in the head). The use of skull plain films has decreased given 
the rapid availability and significantly increased detail of head 
computed tomography (CT) scans. Plain films of the cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar spine are used to assess for evidence of 
bony trauma or soft tissue swelling suggesting fracture. Spinal 
deformities and osteolytic or osteoblastic pathologic processes 
also will be apparent. The shoulder girdle usually poses prob-
lems in visualizing the cervicothoracic junction clearly.
Computed Tomography.  The noncontrast CT scan of the 
head is an extremely useful diagnostic tool in the setting 
of new focal neurologic deficit, decreased mental status, or 
trauma. It is rapid and almost universally available in hospi-
tals in the United States. Its sensitivity allows for the detec-
tion of acute hemorrhage. A contrast-enhanced CT scan will 
help show neoplastic or infectious processes. In the current 
era, contrast CT generally is used for those patients who can-
not undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning due 
to pacemakers or metal in the orbits. Fine-slice CT scanning 
of the spine is helpful for defining bony anatomy and pathol-
ogy, and is usually done after an abnormality is seen on plain 
films, or because plain films are inadequate (especially to 
visualize C7 and T1 vertebrae). Finally, high-speed multislice 
scanners, combined with timed-bolus contrast injections, 
allow CT angiography. A thin-slice axial scan is obtained 
during the passage of contrast through the cerebral arteries 
and reconstructed in three dimensions to assess for vascular 
lesions. CT angiography does not reliably detect lesions, such 
as cerebral aneurysms <3 mm across, but can provide detailed 
morphologic data of larger lesions. Newer, multislice scan-
ner technology is approaching the resolution of conventional 
angiography.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  MRI provides excellent 
imaging of soft tissue structures in the head and spine . It is a 
complex and evolving science. Several of the most clinically 
useful MRI sequences are worth describing. T1 
sequences made before and after gadolinium administra-
tion are useful for detecting neoplastic and infectious pro-
cesses. T2 sequences facilitate assessment of lesion-associated 
edema in the brain and neural compression in the spine by the 
presence or absence of bright T2 CSF signals. Diffusion-
weighted images can detect ischemic stroke earlier than CT. 
Fine-slice time-of-flight axial images can be reformatted in 
three dimensions to build MRI angiograms and MRI veno-
grams. MRI angiograms can detect stenosis of the cervical 
carotid arteries or intracranial aneurysms >3 mm in diameter. 
MRI venograms can assess the dural venous sinuses for 
patency or thrombosis.
Angiography.  Transarterial catheter-based angiography 
remains the gold standard for evaluation of vascular pathology 
of the brain and spine. The current state of the art is biplanar 
imaging to reduce dye load and facilitate interventional proce-
dures. Digital subtraction technologies minimize bony inter-
ference in the resultant images. Bilateral carotid arteries and 
bilateral vertebral arteries may be injected and followed through 
arterial, capillary, and venous phases for a complete cerebral 
angiogram.
Electromyography and Nerve Conduction Studies.  Electro-
myography and nerve conduction studies (EMG/NCS) are use-
ful for assessing the function of peripheral nerves. EMG records 
muscle activity in response to a proximal stimulation of the motor 
nerve. NCS record the velocity and amplitude of the nerve action 
potential. EMG/NCS typically is performed approximately 3 to 
4 weeks after an acute injury, as nerves distal to the injury con-
tinue to transmit electrical impulses normally until degeneration 
of the distal nerve progresses.
Invasive Monitoring.  The most reliable monitor, always, is 
an alert patient with a reliable neurologic examination. If a reli-
able neurologic examination is not possible due to the presence 
of brain injury, sedatives, or paralytics, or if there is active and 
unstable intracranial pathology, invasive monitoring is required. 
There are several methods of monitoring intracranial physiol-
ogy. The three described below are bedside intensive care unit 
(ICU) procedures that allow for continuous monitoring. All 
three procedures involve making a small hole in the skull with 
a hand-held drill. They generally are placed in the right frontal 
2
Table 42-2
The Glasgow Coma Scale scorea
Motor Response
Verbal Response
Eye-Opening Response
Obeys commands
6
Oriented
5
Opens spontaneously
4
Localizes to pain
5
Confused
4
Opens to speech
3
Withdraws from pain
4
Inappropriate words
3
Opens to pain
2
Flexor posturing
3
Unintelligible sounds
2
No eye opening
1
Extensor posturing
2
No sounds
1
No movement
1
aAdd the three scores to obtain the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, which can range from 3 to 15. Add “T” after the GCS if intubated and no verbal 
score is possible. For these patients, the GCS can range from 3T to 10T.
1713
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
region to minimize the neurologic impact of possible complica-
tions such as hemorrhage.
External Ventricular Drain.  An external ventricular drain is 
also known as a ventriculostomy. A perforated plastic catheter is 
inserted into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle. An uninter-
rupted fluid column through a rigid tube allows transduction of 
intracranial pressure (ICP). CSF also can be drained to reduce 
ICP or sampled for laboratory studies.
Intraparenchymal Fiber-Optic Pressure Transducer.  An 
intraparenchymal fiber-optic pressure transducer is commonly 
referred to as a bolt. A threaded post locks securely into the 
hole made in the skull, and holds the fiber-optic catheter in 
place. A bolt allows ICP monitoring only, but it is smaller and 
less invasive than a ventriculostomy, and may be associated 
with fewer complications, although the data do not clearly sup-
port this.
Brain Tissue Oxygen Sensors.  The brain tissue oxygen sen-
sor is a recent development that has already demonstrated a 
mortality benefit in traumatic brain injury patients.2 This sensor 
is part of a bolt, which is screwed into the skull in the same 
manner as the bolt described previously, however, is engineered 
to hold a pressure sensor, oxygen sensor, and brain tempera-
ture sensor. The oxygen sensor catheter has an electrochemical 
oxygen–tension sensitive membrane. Patients with severe brain 
injury due to trauma or aneurysmal hemorrhage may benefit 
from placement of these three sensors in addition to a ven-
triculostomy to drain CSF for control of ICP. Such monitoring 
requires two twist-drill holes, which may be placed on adjacent 
or opposite sides of the head.
NEUROLOGIC AND NEUROSURGICAL 
EMERGENCIES
Raised Intracranial Pressure
ICP normally varies between 4 and 14 mmHg. Sustained ICP 
levels above 20 mmHg can injure the brain. The Monro-Kellie 
doctrine states that the cranial vault is a rigid structure, and 
therefore, the total volume of the contents determines ICP. The 
three normal contents of the cranial vault are brain tissue, blood, 
and CSF. The brain’s contents can expand due to swelling from 
traumatic brain injury (TBI), stroke, or reactive edema. Blood 
volume can increase by extravasation to form a hematoma, 
or by reactive vasodilation in a hypoventilating, hypercarbic 
patient. CSF volume increases in the setting of hydrocephalus. 
Figure 42-2 demonstrates the classic CT findings of hydro-
cephalus. The addition of a lesion, such as a tumor or abscess, 
also will increase ICP. The pressure-volume curve depicted 
in Fig. 42-3 demonstrates a compensated region with a small 
ΔP/ΔV, and an uncompensated region with large ΔP/ΔV. In the 
compensated region, increased volume is offset by decreased 
volume of CSF and blood.
Increased ICP can injure the brain in several ways. Focal 
mass lesions cause shift and herniation. Temporal lesions push 
the uncus medially and compress the midbrain. This phenom-
enon is known as uncal herniation. The posterior cerebral 
artery (PCA) passes between the uncus and midbrain and may 
be occluded, leading to an occipital infarct. Masses higher 
up in the hemisphere can push the cingulate gyrus under the 
falx cerebri. This process is known as subfalcine herniation. 
The anterior cerebral artery (ACA) branches run along the 
medial surface of the cingulate gyrus and may be occluded in 
this case, leading to medial frontal and parietal infarcts. Dif-
fuse increases in pressure in the cerebral hemispheres can lead 
to central, or transtentorial, herniation. Increased pressure in 
the posterior fossa can lead to upward central herniation or 
downward tonsillar herniation through the foramen magnum. 
Uncal, transtentorial, and tonsillar herniation can cause direct 
damage to the brain stem. Figure 42-4 diagrams patterns of 
herniation.
Patients with increased ICP, or intracranial hypertension, 
often will present with headache, nausea, vomiting, and progres-
sive mental status decline. Cushing’s triad is the classic presen-
tation of intracranial hypertension, bradycardia, and irregular 
respirations. Focal neurologic deficits such as hemiparesis may 
be present if there is a focal mass lesion causing the problem. 
Patients with these symptoms should undergo an immediate 
head CT and rapid neurosurgical evaluation.
Initial management of intracranial hypertension 
includes airway protection and adequate ventilation. A 
bolus of mannitol up to 1 g/kg causes free water diuresis, 
increased serum osmolality, and extraction of water from 
the brain. The effect is delayed by about 20 minutes and 
has a transient benefit. Driving serum osmolality above 300 
mOsm/L is of indeterminate benefit and can have deleterious 
cardiovascular side effects, such as hypovolemia that leads 
to hypotension and decreased brain perfusion. A ventricu-
lostomy and/or craniectomy may be needed for definitive 
decompression.
Figure 42-2.  Head computed tomography scan demonstrating 
hydrocephalus. The third ventricle (3rd) is widened and rounded, 
the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles are plump, and pressure-
driven flow of cerebrospinal fluid into brain parenchyma adjacent 
to the ventricles is seen (arrowhead). This is known as transepen-
dymal flow of cerebrospinal fluid.
1714
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
It is critical to note that lethargic or obtunded patients 
often have decreased respiratory drive. This causes the partial 
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (Paco2) to increase, resulting 
in cerebral vasodilation and worsening of intracranial hyperten-
sion. This cycle causes a characteristic “crashing patient,” who 
rapidly loses airway protection, becomes apneic, and herniates. 
Emergent intubation and ventilation to reduce Paco2 to roughly 
35 mmHg can reverse this process.
Brain Stem Compression
The posterior fossa (brain stem and cerebellum) requires special 
consideration because the volume of the posterior fossa within 
the cranial vault is small. Posterior fossa lesions such as tumors, 
hemorrhage or stroke can cause mass effect that can rapidly kill 
the patient in two ways. Occlusion of the fourth ventricle can 
lead to acute obstructive hydrocephalus, raised ICP, herniation, 
and eventually death. This mass effect can also lead directly to 
brain stem compression (Fig. 42-5). Symptoms of brain stem 
compression include hypertension, agitation, and progressive 
obtundation, followed rapidly by brain death. A patient exhibit-
ing any of these symptoms needs an emergent neurosurgical 
evaluation for possible ventriculostomy or suboccipital crani-
ectomy (removal of the bone covering the cerebellum). This 
situation is especially critical, as expeditious decompression can 
lead to significant functional recovery.
Stroke
Patients presenting with acute focal neurologic deficits at a 
clearly defined time of onset (i.e., when the patient was last 
seen in a normal state of health) must be evaluated as rap-
idly as possible. An emergent head CT scan should be done. 
1
3
2
4
Figure 42-4.  Schematic drawing of brain herniation patterns. 1. Subfal-
cine herniation. The cingulate gyrus shifts across midline under the falx 
cerebri. 2. Uncal herniation. The uncus (medial temporal lobe gyrus) 
shifts medially and compresses the midbrain and cerebral peduncle. 
 3. Central transtentorial herniation. The diencephalon and midbrain shift 
caudally through the tentorial incisura. 4. Tonsillar herniation. The cer-
ebellar tonsil shifts caudally through the foramen magnum. (Reproduced 
with permission from Cohen DS, Quest DO: Increased intracranial 
pressure, brain herniation and their control, in Wilkins RH, Rengachary 
SS [eds]: Neurosurgery, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill, 1996, p 349.)
Intracranial volume (arbitrary units)
Intracranial pressure (mmHg)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
∆V
∆P
∆V
∆P
∆V
∆P
Low compliance
e
c
n
ailp
m
o
c 
o
N
e
c
n
ailp
m
o
c 
h
gi
H
Figure 42-3.  Pressure-volume curve demonstrating the effect of changing the volume of intracranial contents on intracranial pressure. Note 
the compensated zone, with little change of pressure with change of volume, and the uncompensated zone, with significant change of pressure 
with change of volume. (Adapted with permission from Morton R, Ellenbogen RG: Intracranial consciousness, in Ellenbogen RG et al (eds): 
Principles of Neurosurgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2012, p 313. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1715
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
The study is often normal, because CT changes from isch-
emic stroke may take up to 24 hours to appear (Fig. 42-6). A 
patient with a clinical diagnosis of acute stroke <3 hours old, 
without hemorrhage on CT, may be a candidate for throm-
bolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). 
An emergent MRI is helpful but not always diagnostically 
necessary.
Seizure
A seizure is defined as an uncontrolled synchronous organiza-
tion of neuronal electrical activity. A new-onset seizure often 
signifies an irritative mass lesion in the brain, particularly 
in adults, in whom tumors commonly present with seizure. 
Patients with traumatic intracranial hemorrhage are at risk 
for seizure. In addition to airway and ventilatory problems, 
a seizing patient is also at risk for neural excitotoxicity if 
the activity is prolonged, such as in status epilepticus. Any 
patient with a new-onset seizure should have imaging of the 
brain after the seizure is controlled and the patient is resus-
citated.
TRAUMA
Trauma is the leading cause of death in children and young 
adults; however, the incidence of death and disability from 
trauma has been slowly decreasing. This decline is partly attrib-
utable to increased awareness of safety devices such as seat belts 
and motorist helmets. Nonetheless, trauma remains a major 
cause of morbidity and mortality, and it can affect every major 
organ system in the body. The three main areas of neurosurgical 
focus are: traumatic brain injury (TBI), spinal cord injury (SCI), 
and peripheral nerve injury.
Head Trauma
Glasgow Coma Scale Score.  The initial assessment of the 
trauma patient includes the primary survey, resuscitation, sec-
ondary survey, and definitive care. Neurosurgical evaluation 
begins during the primary survey with the determination of 
the GCS score (usually referred to simply as the GCS) for the 
patient. The GCS is determined by adding the scores of the best 
responses of the patient in each of three categories. The motor 
score ranges from 1 to 6, verbal from 1 to 5, and eyes from 1 
to 4. The GCS therefore ranges from 3 to 15, as detailed in 
Table 42-2. Tracheal intubation or severe facial or eye swelling 
can impede verbal and eye responses. In these circumstances, 
the patient is given the score of 1 with a modifier, such as verbal 
“1T” where T = tube.
Scalp Injury.  Blunt or penetrating trauma to the head can 
cause injury to the densely vascularized scalp, and significant 
blood loss can result. Direct pressure initially controls the 
bleeding, allowing close inspection of the injury. If a simple 
laceration is found, it should be copiously irrigated and closed 
primarily. If the laceration is short, a single-layer, percuta-
neous suture closure will suffice. If the laceration is long or 
has multiple arms, the patient may need debridement and 
closure in the operating room, with its superior lighting and 
wider selection of instruments and suture materials. Careful 
reapproximation of the galea will provide a more secure clo-
sure and better hemostasis. Blunt trauma also can cause crush 
injury with subsequent tissue necrosis. These wounds require 
debridement and consideration of advancement flaps to cover 
the defect.
Skull Fractures.  The usual classification system for bony 
fractures may be applied to the skull. The fracture may be 
characterized by skull X-rays or head CT.3 A closed fracture is 
covered by intact skin. An open, or compound, fracture is asso-
ciated with disrupted overlying skin. The fracture lines may 
be single (linear); multiple and radiating from a point (stel-
late); or multiple, creating fragments of bone (comminuted). 
Closed skull fractures do not normally require specific treat-
ment. Open fractures require repair of the scalp and operative 
debridement. Indications for craniotomy include depression 
greater than the cranial thickness, intracranial hematoma, and 
frontal sinus involvement.4 Skull fractures generally indicate 
that a significant amount of force was transmitted to the head 
and should increase the suspicion for intracranial injury. Frac-
tures that cross meningeal arteries can cause rupture of the 
underlying vessels and subsequent epidural hematoma (EDH) 
formation.
Depressed skull fractures may result from a focal injury 
of significant force. The inner and outer cortices of the skull 
are disrupted, and a fragment of bone is pressed in toward the 
brain in relation to adjacent intact skull. The fragment may over-
lap the edge of intact bone, or may plunge completely below 
the level of adjacent normal skull. The inner cortex of the bone 
fragments often has multiple sharp edges that can lacerate dura, 
brain, and vessels. Craniotomy is required to elevate the frac-
ture, repair dural disruption, and obtain hemostasis in these 
cases (Fig. 42-7). However, fractures overlying dural venous 
sinuses require restraint. Surgical exploration can lead to life-
threatening hemorrhage from the lacerated sinus.
Fractures of the skull base are common in head-injured 
patients, and they indicate significant impact. They are gener-
ally apparent on routine head CT, but should be evaluated with 
Figure 42-5.  Maturing cerebellar stroke seen as a hypodense area 
in the right cerebellar hemisphere (arrowhead) on head computed 
tomography in a patient with rapidly progressing obtundation 2 
days after the initial onset of symptoms. Swelling of the infarcted 
tissue causes posterior fossa mass effect. The fourth ventricle is 
obliterated and not visible, and the brain stem is being compressed.
1716
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
dedicated fine-slice coronal-section CT scan to document and 
delineate the extent of the fracture and involved structures. If 
asymptomatic, they require no treatment. Skull base fractures 
requiring intervention include those with an associated cranial 
nerve deficit or CSF leak. A fracture of the temporal bone, for 
instance, can damage the facial or vestibulocochlear nerve, 
resulting in vertigo, ipsilateral deafness, or facial paralysis. A 
communication may be formed between the subarachnoid space 
and the middle ear, allowing CSF drainage into the pharynx via 
the eustachian tube or from the ear (otorrhea). Extravasation 
of blood results in ecchymosis behind the ear, known as 
Battle’s sign. A fracture of the anterior skull base can result 
in anosmia (loss of smell from damage to the olfactory nerve), 
CSF drainage from the nose (rhinorrhea), or periorbital ecchy-
moses, known as raccoon eyes.
Copious clear drainage from the nose or ear makes the 
diagnosis of CSF leakage obvious. Often, however, the drain-
age may be discolored with blood or small in volume if some 
drains into the throat. The halo test can help differentiate. 
Allow a drop of the fluid to fall on an absorbent surface such as 
A
C
B
Figure 42-6.  A. Head computed tomography scan of a patient with a 4-day-old stroke that occluded the right middle cerebral and posterior 
cerebral arteries. The infarcted tissue is the hypodense (dark) area indicated by the arrowheads. The patient presented with left-sided weakness 
and left visual field loss, but then became less responsive, prompting this head computed tomography. Note the right-to-left midline shift. B. 
Same patient status post decompressive right hemicraniectomy. Note the free expansion of swollen brain outside the normal confines of the 
skull. C. Patient with a right middle cerebral artery ischemic stroke with areas of hemorrhagic conversion, seen as hyperdense (bright) areas 
within the infarcted tissue. This patient also required hemicraniectomy for severe mass effect. Note the lack of midline shift postoperatively.
1717
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
a facial tissue. If blood is mixed with CSF, the drop will form 
a double ring, with a darker center spot containing blood com-
ponents surrounded by a light halo of CSF. If this test is inde-
terminate, the fluid can be sent for beta-2 transferrin testing, a 
carbohydrate-free isoform of transferrin exclusively found in 
the CSF.
Many CSF leaks will heal with elevation of the head of the 
bed for several days. A lumbar drain can augment this method. 
A lumbar drain is a catheter placed in the lumbar CSF cistern 
to decompress the cranial vault and allow the defect to heal by 
eliminating normal hydrostatic pressure. There is no proven 
efficacy of antibiotic coverage for preventing meningitis in 
patients with CSF leaks.
Traumatic cranial neuropathies generally can be managed 
conservatively, with documentation of the extent of impairment 
and signs of recovery. Patients with traumatic facial nerve pal-
sies may benefit from a course of steroids, although their benefit 
is unproven. Patients with facial nerve palsy of abrupt onset, 
who do not respond to steroids within 48 to 72 hours, may be 
considered for surgical decompression of the petrous portion of 
the facial nerve. Patients also may present with delayed-onset 
facial nerve palsy. Again, steroids are used and surgery can be 
considered, with mixed results.
Closed Head Injury.  Closed head injury (CHI) is the most 
common type of TBI and a significant cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the United States. There are two important factors 
that affect the outcome of CHI in general. The initial impact 
causes the primary injury, defined as the immediate injury to 
neurons from transmission of the force of impact. The long, 
delicate axons of the neurons can shear as they undergo differ-
ential acceleration or deceleration along their projecting 
pathways. Prevention strategies, such as wearing helmets, 
remain the best means to decrease disability from primary 
injury. Subsequent neuronal damage due to the sequelae of 
trauma is referred to as secondary injury. Hypoxia, hypoten-
sion, hydrocephalus, intracranial hypertension, thrombosis, and 
intracranial hemorrhage may all be mechanisms of sec-
ondary injury. One focus of basic research in TBI, critical 
care medicine, and neurosurgical intervention is to decrease the 
effects of secondary injury .
The Brain Trauma Foundation’s most recent summary of 
management recommendations for TBI patients was published 
in 2007 and is endorsed by the American Association of Neuro-
logical Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons, and the 
World Health Organization. The guidelines standardize the care 
of these patients with the hope of improving outcomes. Some 
of the common patterns of CHI, including concussion, contu-
sion, and diffuse axonal injury, are discussed in Types of Closed 
Head Injury.5
Initial Assessment  The initial evaluation of a trauma patient 
remains the same whether or not the primary surveyor suspects 
head injury. The first three elements of the ABCDs of resusci-
tation—airway, breathing, and circulation—must be assessed 
and stabilized. Hypoxia and hypotension are known to worsen 
outcome in TBI (due to secondary injury), making cardiopul-
monary stabilization critical. Patients who cannot follow com-
mands require intubation for airway protection and ventilatory 
control. The fourth element, assessment of “D,” for disability, is 
undertaken next. Motor activity, speech, and eye opening can be 
assessed in a few seconds and a GCS score assigned.
The following is an example of how a primary surveyor 
may efficiently assess disability and GCS: Approach the patient 
3
B
A
Figure 42-7.  A. Bone-window axial head computed tomography (CT) of a patient who presented aphasic after being struck with the bot-
tom of a beer bottle. CT demonstrates a depressed skull fracture in the left posterior temporoparietal area. B. Brain-window axial head CT 
demonstrating intraparenchymal hematoma caused by laceration of cortical vessels by the edge of the fractured bone. Arrowhead indicates 
traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage in the sylvanian fissure.
1718
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
and enter his or her field of view. Observe whether the patient 
is visually attentive. Clearly command: “Tell me your name.” 
Then ask the patient to lift up two fingers on each side sequen-
tially, and wiggle the toes. A visually or verbally unresponsive 
patient should be assessed for response to peripheral stimuli 
such as nail-bed pressure, or deep central painful stimulation, 
such as a firm, twisting pinch of the sensitive supraclavicular 
skin. Watch for eye opening and movement of the extremities, 
whether purposeful or reflexive. Assess the verbal response. 
The motor, verbal, and eye-opening scores may be correctly 
assigned using this rapid examination. An initial assessment of 
the probability of significant head injury can be made, assuming 
that pharmacologic and toxic elements have not obscured the 
examination. The surveyor must also take note of any external 
signs of head injury, including bleeding from the scalp, nose, or 
ear, or deformation of the skull or face.
Medical Management  Several medical steps may be taken to 
minimize secondary injury and the systemic consequences of 
head injury. Patients with a documented CHI and evidence of 
intracranial hemorrhage or a depressed skull fracture should 
receive a 17-mg/kg phenytoin loading dose, followed by 1 week 
of therapeutic maintenance phenytoin, typically 300 to 400 
mg/d. Phenytoin prophylaxis has been shown to decrease the 
incidence of early posttraumatic seizures.6 There is no evidence 
to support long-term use of prophylactic antiepileptic agents. 
Blood glucose levels should be closely monitored by free blood 
sugar checks and controlled with sliding scale insulin. Fevers 
also should be evaluated and controlled with antipyretics, as 
well as source-directed therapy when possible. Hyperglycemia 
and hyperthermia are toxic to injured neurons and contribute 
to secondary injury. Head-injured patients have an increased 
prevalence of peptic ulceration and GI bleeding. Peptic ulcers 
occurring in patients with head injury or high ICP are referred 
to as Cushing’s ulcers. Ulcer prophylaxis should be used. Com-
pression stockings or athrombic pumps should be used when 
the patient cannot be mobilized rapidly for prophylaxis of deep 
venous thrombosis.
Classification  TBI can be classified as mild, moderate, or 
severe. For patients with a history of head trauma, classifica-
tion is as follows: severe head injury if the GCS score is 3 to 8, 
moderate head injury if the GCS score is 9 to 12, and mild head 
injury if the GCS score is 13 to 15. Many patients present to 
emergency rooms and trauma bays with a history of TBI. A tri-
age system must be used to maximize resource utilization while 
minimizing the chance of missing occult or progressing injuries.
TBI patients who are asymptomatic, who have only 
headache, dizziness, or scalp lacerations, and who did not lose 
consciousness, have a low risk for intracranial injury and may 
be discharged home without a head CT scan.7,8 Head-injured 
patients who are discharged should be sent home with reliable 
family or friends who can observe the patient for the first postin-
jury day. Printed discharge instructions, which describe moni-
toring for confusion, persistent nausea, weakness, or speech 
difficulty, should be provided to the caretaker. The patient 
should return to the emergency department for evaluation of 
such symptoms.
Patients with a history of altered consciousness, amne-
sia, progressive headache, skull or facial fracture, vomiting, or 
seizure have a moderate risk for intracranial injury and should 
undergo a prompt head CT. If the CT is normal, and the neuro-
logic examination has returned to baseline (excluding amnesia 
of the event), then the patient can be discharged to the care of a 
responsible adult, again with printed criteria for returning to the 
emergency room. Otherwise the patient must be admitted for a 
24-hour observation period.
Patients with depressed consciousness, focal neurologic 
deficits, penetrating injury, depressed skull fracture, or changing 
neurologic examination have a high risk for intracranial injury. 
These patients should undergo immediate head CT and admis-
sion for observation or intervention as needed.
Types of Closed Head Injury
Concussion  A concussion is defined as temporary neuronal dys-
function following nonpenetrating head trauma. The head CT is 
normal, and deficits resolve over minutes to hours. Definitions 
vary; some require transient loss of consciousness, while others 
include patients with any alteration of mental status. Memory 
difficulties, especially amnesia of the event, are very com-
mon. Concussions may be graded. One method is the Colorado 
grading system.9 Head trauma patients with confusion only are 
grade 1, patients with amnesia are grade 2, and patients who lose 
consciousness are grade 3. Studies have shown that the brain 
remains in a hypermetabolic state for up to a week after injury. 
The brain is also much more susceptible to injury from even 
minor head trauma in the first 1 to 2 weeks after concussion. 
This is known as second-impact syndrome, and patients should 
be informed that, even after mild head injury, they might experi-
ence memory difficulties or persistent headaches.
Contusion  A contusion is a bruise of the brain, and occurs when 
the force from trauma is sufficient to cause breakdown of small 
vessels and extravasation of blood into the brain. The contused 
areas appear bright on CT scan, as seen in Fig. 42-8. The frontal, 
Figure 42-8.  Severe bilateral contusions in the basal aspect of the 
frontal lobes, caused by the brain moving over the rough, irregular 
skull base during sudden cranial acceleration.
1719
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
occipital, and temporal poles are most often involved. The brain 
sustains injury as it collides with rough, bony surfaces. Contu-
sions themselves rarely cause significant mass effect as they 
represent small amounts of blood in injured parenchyma rather 
than coherent blood clots. Edema may develop around a contu-
sion, causing mass effect. Contusions may enlarge or progress 
to frank hematoma, particularly during the first 24 hours. Contu-
sions also may occur in brain tissue opposite the site of impact. 
This is known as a contre-coup injury. These contusions result 
from deceleration of the brain against the skull.
Diffuse Axonal Injury  Diffuse axonal injury is caused by dam-
age to axons throughout the brain, due to rotational acceleration 
and then deceleration. Axons may be completely disrupted and 
then retract, forming axon balls. Small hemorrhages can be seen 
in more severe cases, especially on MRI. Hemorrhage is classi-
cally seen in the corpus callosum and the dorsolateral midbrain.
Penetrating Injury  These injuries are complex and must be 
evaluated individually. The two main subtypes are missile (e.g., 
due to bullets or fragmentation devices) and nonmissile (e.g., due 
to knives or ice picks). Some general principles apply. If avail-
able, skull X-rays and CT scans are useful in assessing the nature 
of the injury. Cerebral angiography must be considered if the 
object passes near a major artery or dural venous sinus. Opera-
tive exploration is necessary to remove any object extending out 
of the cranium, as well as for debridement, irrigation, hemosta-
sis, and definitive closure. Small objects contained within brain 
parenchyma are often left in place to avoid iatrogenic secondary 
brain injury. Antibiotics are given to decrease the chances of 
meningitis or abscess formation. High-velocity missile injuries 
(from high-powered hunting rifles or military weapons) are espe-
cially deadly, because the associated shock wave causes cavitary 
tissue destruction of an area that is much larger than the projec-
tile itself. Projectiles that penetrate both hemispheres or traverse 
the ventricles are almost universally fatal.
Traumatic Intracranial Hematomas.  The various traumatic 
intracranial hematomas contribute to death and disability sec-
ondary to head injury. Hematomas can expand rapidly and cause 
brain shift and subsequent herniation. Emergent neurosurgical 
evaluation and intervention often are necessary.
Epidural Hematoma  EDH is the accumulation of blood 
between the skull and the dura. EDH usually results from arte-
rial disruption, especially of the middle meningeal artery. The 
dura is adherent to bone, and some pressure is required to dis-
sect between the two. EDH has a classic, three-stage clinical 
presentation that is probably seen in only 20% of cases. The 
patient is initially unconscious from the concussive aspect of 
the head trauma. The patient then awakens and has a “lucid 
interval,” while the hematoma subclinically expands. As the 
volume of the hematoma grows, the decompensated region of 
the pressure-volume curve is reached, ICP increases, and the 
patient rapidly becomes lethargic and herniates. Uncal hernia-
tion from an EDH classically causes ipsilateral third nerve palsy 
and contralateral hemiparesis.
On head CT the blood clot is bright, biconvex in shape 
(lentiform), and has a well-defined border that usually respects 
cranial suture lines. An EDH is typically found over the con-
vexities but may rarely occur in the posterior fossa as well.
Open craniectomy for evacuation of the congealed clot 
and hemostasis generally is indicated for EDH. Patients who 
meet all of the following criteria may be managed conserva-
tively: clot volume <30 cm3, maximum thickness <1.5 cm, and 
GCS score >8.10 Prognosis after successful evacuation is better 
for EDH than subdural hematoma (SDH). EDHs are associ-
ated with lower-energy trauma with less resultant primary brain 
injury. Good outcomes may be seen in 85% to 90% of patients, 
with rapid CT scan and intervention.11
Acute Subdural Hematoma  An acute SDH is the result of an 
accumulation of blood between the arachnoid membrane and 
the dura. Acute SDH usually results from venous bleeding, typi-
cally from tearing of a bridging vein running from the cerebral 
cortex to the dural sinuses. The bridging veins are subject to 
stretching and tearing during acceleration/deceleration of the 
head, because the brain shifts in relation to the dura, which 
firmly adheres to the skull. Elderly and alcoholic patients are 
at higher risk for acute SDH formation after head trauma due 
to brain atrophy.
On head CT scan, the clot is bright or mixed-density, cres-
cent-shaped (lunate), may have a less distinct border, and does 
not cross the midline due to the presence of the falx. Most SDHs 
occur over the cerebral hemispheres, but they may also occur 
between the hemispheres or layer over the tentorium.
Open craniotomy for evacuation of acute SDH is indicated 
for any of the following: thickness >1 cm, midline shift >5 mm, 
or GCS drop by two or more points from the time of injury to 
hospitalization. Nonoperatively managed hematomas may sta-
bilize and eventually reabsorb, or evolve into chronic SDHs.12 
This management requires frequent neurologic examinations 
until the clot stabilizes based on serial head CT scans.
The prognosis for functional recovery is significantly 
worse for acute SDH than EDH because it is associated with 
greater primary injury to brain parenchyma from high-energy 
impacts. Prompt recognition and intervention minimizes sec-
ondary injury. The elderly patients with low admission GCS, or 
high postoperative ICP do poorly, with as few as 5% attaining 
functional recovery.13
Chronic Subdural Hematoma  Chronic SDH is a collection 
of blood breakdown products that is at least 2 to 3 weeks old. 
Acute hematomas are bright white (hyperdense) on CT scan 
for approximately 3 days, after which they fade to isodensity 
with brain, and then to hypodensity after 2 to 3 weeks. A true 
chronic SDH will be nearly as dark as CSF on CT. Traces of 
white are often seen due to small, recurrent hemorrhages into 
the collection. These small bleeds may expand the collection 
enough to make it symptomatic. This phenomenon is referred to 
as an acute-on-chronic SDH. Figure 42-9 demonstrates the CT 
appearance of an acute-on-chronic SDH. Vascularized mem-
branes form within the hematoma as it matures. These mem-
branes may be the source of acute hemorrhage.
Chronic SDHs often occur in patients without a clear history 
of head trauma, as they may arise from minor head injury. Alco-
holics, the elderly, and patients on anticoagulation are at higher 
risk for developing chronic SDH. Patients may present with head-
ache, seizure, confusion, contralateral hemiparesis, or coma.
A chronic SDH >1 cm or any symptomatic SDH should 
be surgically drained. Unlike acute SDH, which consists of a 
thick, congealed clot, chronic SDH typically consists of a vis-
cous fluid with the texture and dark brown color reminiscent of 
motor oil. A simple burr hole can effectively drain most chronic 
SDHs. However, the optimal treatment of chronic SDH remains 
controversial.14 Most authorities agree that burr hole drainage 
should be attempted first to obviate the risks of formal crani-
otomy. A single burr hole placed over the dependent edge of the 
1720
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
collection can be made, and the space copiously irrigated until 
the fluid is clear. A second, more anterior burr hole can then 
be placed if the collection does not drain satisfactorily due to 
containment by membranes. The procedure is converted to open 
craniotomy if the SDH is too congealed for irrigation drainage, 
the complex of membranes prevents effective drainage, or per-
sistent hemorrhage occurs that cannot be reached with bipolar 
cautery through the burr hole. The required surgical prepping 
and draping are always performed to allow simple conversion 
to craniotomy, and the scalp incision and burr holes are placed 
to allow easy incorporation into larger skin flaps.
There are various strategies to prevent reaccumulation of 
blood. Subdural or subgaleal drains may be left in place for 1 to 
2 days. Mild hydration and bedrest with the head of the bed flat 
may encourage brain expansion. High levels of inspired oxy-
gen may help draw nitrogen out of the cavity. Regardless of the 
strategy used, follow-up head CT scans are required postopera-
tively and approximately 1 month later to document resolution.
Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage  Isolated hematomas within the 
brain parenchyma are most often associated with hypertensive 
hemorrhage or arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Bleed-
ing may occur in a contused area of brain. Mass effect from 
developing hematomas may present as a delayed neurologic 
deficit. Delayed traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage is most 
likely to occur within the first 24 hours. Patients with contu-
sion on the initial head CT scan should be reimaged 24 hours 
after the trauma to document stable pathology. Indications for 
craniotomy include: any clot volume >50 cm3 or a clot volume 
>20 cm3 with referable neurologic deterioration (GCS 6–8) and 
associated midline shift >5 mm or basal cistern compression.15
Vascular Injury.  Trauma to the head or neck may cause dam-
age to the carotid or vertebrobasilar systems. Generally, dis-
section refers to violation of the vessel wall intima. Blood at 
arterial pressures can then open a plane between the intima and 
media, within the media, or between the media and adventitia. 
The newly created space within the vessel wall is referred to 
as the false lumen. Tissue or organs supplied by dissected ves-
sels may subsequently be injured in several ways. Expansion of 
the hematoma within the vessel wall can lead to narrowing of 
the true vessel lumen and reduction or cessation of distal blood 
flow. Slow-flowing or stagnant blood within the false lumen 
exposed to thrombogenic vessel wall elements may thrombose. 
Pieces of thrombus may then detach and cause distal embolic 
arterial occlusion. Also, the remaining partial-thickness vessel 
wall may rupture, damaging adjacent structures.
Traumatic dissection may occur in the carotid artery (ante-
rior circulation) or the vertebral or basilar arteries (posterior cir-
culation). Dissections may be extradural or intradural. Intradural 
dissection can present with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). 
Traditional angiography remains the basis of diagnosis and 
characterization of arterial dissection. Angiographic abnormali-
ties include stenosis of the true lumen, or “string-sign,” visible 
intimal flaps, and the appearance of contrast in the false lumen. 
Four-vessel cerebral angiography should be performed when 
suspicion of dissection exists.
Historically, patients with documented arterial dissec-
tion have been anticoagulated with heparin and then warfarin 
to prevent thromboembolic stroke. Trauma patients often have 
concomitant absolute or relative contraindications to anticoagu-
lation, complicating management. Antiplatelet therapy is often 
implemented in lieu of full anticoagulation, however, there 
is no randomized clinical trial comparing the two therapies.16 
Consider surgical or interventional techniques for persisting 
embolic disease and for vertebral dissections presenting with 
SAH. Surgical options include vessel ligation and bypass graft-
ing. Interventional radiology techniques include stenting and 
vessel occlusion. Occlusion techniques require sufficient col-
lateral circulation to perfuse the vascular territory previously 
supplied by the occluded vessel.
Carotid Dissection  Carotid dissection may result from neck 
extension combined with lateral bending to the opposite side, 
or trauma from an incorrectly placed shoulder belt tightening 
across the neck in a motor vehicle accident. Extension or bend-
ing stretches the carotid over the bony transverse processes 
of the cervical vertebrae, while seat belt injuries cause direct 
trauma. Symptoms of cervical carotid dissection include con-
tralateral neurologic deficit from brain ischemia, headache, and 
ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome from disruption of the sympa-
thetic tracts ascending from the stellate ganglion on the surface 
of the carotid artery. The patient may complain of a bruit.
Traumatic vessel wall injury to the portion of the carotid 
artery running through the cavernous sinus may result in a 
carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF). This creates a high-pressure, 
high-flow pathophysiologic blood flow pattern. CCFs classically 
present with pulsatile proptosis (the globe pulses outward with 
arterial pulsation), retro-orbital pain, and decreased visual acuity 
or loss of normal eye movement (due to damage to cranial nerves 
Figure 42-9.  Head computed tomography scan of an elderly 
patient with progressing left hemiplegia and lethargy, demonstrat-
ing an acute-on-chronic subdural hematoma. History revealed that 
the patient sustained a fall 4 weeks before presentation. Arrowheads 
outline the hematoma. The acute component is slightly denser and 
is seen as the hyperdense area in the dependent portion.
1721
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
III, IV, and VI as they pass through the cavernous sinus). Symp-
tomatic CCFs should be treated to preserve eye function. Fistulae 
may be closed by balloon occlusion using interventional neuro-
radiology techniques. Fistulae with wide necks are difficult to 
treat and may require total occlusion of the parent carotid artery.
Vertebrobasilar Dissection  Vertebrobasilar dissection may 
result from sudden rotation or flexion/extension of the neck, 
chiropractic manipulation, or a direct blow to the neck. Com-
mon symptoms are neck pain, headache, and brain stem stroke 
or SAH. The risks and benefits of aspirin therapy are unclear 
when a vertebral dissection extends intracranially. The theoreti-
cally increased friability of the vessel wall may increase the risk 
of SAH when coupled with an antiplatelet agent. Consultation 
of a stroke neurologist is recommended in this situation.
Brain Death.  Brain death occurs when there is an absence of 
signs of brain stem function or motor response to deep central 
pain in the absence of pharmacologic or systemic medical con-
ditions that could impair brain function.
Clinical Examination  A neurologist, neurosurgeon, or intensiv-
ist generally performs the clinical brain death examination. Two 
examinations consistent with brain death 12 hours apart, or one 
examination consistent with brain death followed by a consis-
tent confirmatory study generally is sufficient to declare brain 
death (see below). Hospital regulations and local laws regarding 
documentation should be followed closely.
Establish the absence of complicating conditions before 
beginning the examination. The patient must be normotensive, 
euthermic, and oxygenating well. The patient may not be under 
the effects of any sedating or paralytic drugs.
Documentation of no brain stem function requires the fol-
lowing: nonreactive pupils; lack of corneal blink, oculocephalic 
(doll’s eyes), oculovestibular (cold calorics) reflexes; and loss 
of drive to breathe (apnea test). The apnea test demonstrates no 
spontaneous breathing even when Paco2 is allowed to rise above 
60 mmHg.
Deep central painful stimuli are provided by bilateral 
forceful twisting pinch of the supraclavicular skin and pres-
sure to the medial canthal notch. Pathologic responses such as 
flexor or extensor posturing are not compatible with brain death. 
Spinal reflexes to peripheral pain, such as triple flexion of the 
lower extremities, are compatible with brain death.
Confirmatory Studies  Confirmatory studies are performed 
after a documented clinical examination consistent with brain 
death. A study consistent with brain death may obviate the need 
to wait 12 hours for a second examination. This is especially 
important when the patient is a potential organ donor, as brain-
dead patients often have progressive hemodynamic instability. 
Lack of cerebral blood flow consistent with brain death may 
be documented by cerebral angiography or technetium radio-
nuclide study. A “to-and-fro” pattern on transcranial Doppler 
ultrasonography indicates no net forward flow through the cere-
bral vasculature, consistent with brain death. An electroenceph-
alogram (EEG) documenting electrical silence has been used, 
but generally is not favored because there is often significant 
artifact which impairs interpretation.
Spine Trauma
The spine is a complex biomechanical structure. The spine pro-
vides structural support for the body as the principal compo-
nent of the axial skeleton, while protecting the spinal cord and 
nerve roots. Trauma may fracture bones or cause ligamentous 
disruption. Often, bone and ligament damage occur together. 
Damage to these elements reduces the strength of the spine and 
may cause instability, which compromises both supportive and 
protective functions. Spine trauma may occur with or without 
neurologic injury.
Neurologic injury from spine trauma is classified as either 
incomplete or complete. If there is some residual motor or 
sensory neurologic function below the level of the lesion, as 
assessed by clinical examination, the injury is defined as incom-
plete.17 A patient with complete neurologic dysfunction persist-
ing 24 hours after injury has a very low probability of return of 
function in the involved area.
Neurologic injury from spine trauma may occur immedi-
ately or in delayed fashion. Immediate neurologic injury may be 
due to direct damage to the spinal cord or nerve roots from pen-
etrating injuries, especially from stab wounds or gunshots. Blunt 
trauma may transfer sufficient force to the spine to cause acute 
disruption of bone and ligament, leading to subluxation, which 
is a shift of one vertebral element in relation to the adjacent 
level. Subluxation decreases the size of the spinal canal and neu-
ral foramina and causes compression of the cord or roots. Such 
neural impingement can also result from retropulsion of bone 
fragments into the canal during a fracture. Transection, crush 
injury, and cord compression impairing perfusion are mecha-
nisms leading to SCI. Delayed neurologic injury may occur dur-
ing transportation, examination of an improperly immobilized 
patient, or during a hypotensive episode.
The Mechanics of Spine Trauma.  Trauma causes a wide 
variety of injury patterns in the spine due to its biomechanical 
complexity. A mechanistic approach facilitates an understand-
ing of the patterns of injury, as there are only a few types of 
forces that can be applied to the spine. Although these forces are 
discussed individually, they often occur in combination. Several 
of the most common injury patterns are then presented to illus-
trate the clinical results of these forces applied at pathologically 
high levels.
Flexion/Extension  Bending the head and body forward into a 
fetal position flexes the spine. Flexion loads the spine anteriorly 
(the vertebral bodies) and distracts the spine posteriorly (the spi-
nous process and interspinous ligaments). High flexion forces 
occur during front-end motor vehicle collisions, and backward 
falls when the head strikes first. Arching the neck and back 
extends the spine. Extension loads the spine posteriorly and 
distracts the spine anteriorly. High extension forces occur dur-
ing rear-end motor vehicle collisions (especially if there is no 
headrest), frontward falls when the head strikes first, or diving 
into shallow water.
Compression/Distraction  Force applied along the spinal axis 
(axial loading) compresses the spine. Compression loads the 
spine anteriorly and posteriorly. High compression forces occur 
when a falling object strikes the head or shoulders, or when 
landing on the feet, buttocks, or head after a fall from height. A 
pulling force in line with the spinal axis distracts the spine. Dis-
traction unloads the spine anteriorly and posteriorly. Distraction 
forces occur during a hanging, when the chin or occiput strikes 
an object first during a fall, or when a passenger submarines 
under a loose seat belt during a front-end motor vehicle collision.
Rotation  Force applied tangential to the spinal axis rotates the 
spine. Rotation depends on the range of motion of intervertebral 
facet joints. High rotational forces occur during off-center impacts 
to the body or head or during glancing automobile accidents.
1722
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Patterns of Injury.  Certain patterns of injury resulting from 
combinations of the previously mentioned forces occur com-
monly and should be recognized during plain film imaging of 
the spine. Always completely evaluate the spine. A patient with 
a spine injury at one level has a significant risk for additional 
injuries at other levels.
Cervical  The cervical spine is more mobile than the thoraco-
lumbar spine. Stability comes primarily from the multiple liga-
mentous connections of adjacent vertebral levels. Disruption of 
the cervical ligaments can lead to instability in the absence of 
fracture. The mass of the head transmits significant forces to 
the cervical spine during abrupt acceleration or deceleration, 
increasing risk for injury.
Jefferson Fracture  A Jefferson fracture is a bursting fracture 
of the ring of C1 (the atlas) due to compression forces. There 
are usually two or more fractures through the ring of C1. The 
open-mouth odontoid view may show lateral dislocation of the 
lateral masses of C1. The rule of Spence states that 7 mm or 
greater combined dislocation indicates disruption of the trans-
verse ligament. The transverse ligament stabilizes C1 with 
respect to C2. Jefferson fractures dislocated <7 mm usually 
are treated with a rigid collar, while those dislocated 7 mm or 
greater usually are treated with a halo vest. Surgical interven-
tion is not indicated.
Odontoid Fractures  The odontoid process, or dens, is the 
large ellipse of bone arising anteriorly from C2 (the axis) 
and projecting up through the ring of C1 (the atlas). Sev-
eral strong ligaments connect the dens to C1 and to the base 
of the skull. Odontoid fractures usually result from flexion 
forces. Odontoid fractures are classified as type I, II, or III. A 
type I fracture involves the tip only. A type II fracture passes 
through the base of the odontoid process. A type III fracture 
passes through the body of C2. Types II and III are considered 
unstable and should be externally immobilized or fused surgi-
cally. Surgery often is undertaken for widely displaced frac-
tures (poor chance of fusing) and for those that fail external 
immobilization. Type I fractures usually fuse with external 
immobilization only.
Hangman’s Fracture  Traditionally considered a hyperexten-
sion/distraction injury from placement of the noose under the 
angle of the jaw, hangman’s fractures also may occur with 
hyperextension/compression, as with diving accidents, or hyper-
flexion. The injury is defined by bilateral C2 pars interarticularis 
fractures. The pars interarticularis is the bone between superior 
and inferior facet joints. Thus, the posterior bony connection 
between C1 and C3 is lost. Hangman’s fractures heal well with 
external immobilization. Surgery is indicated if there is spinal 
cord compression or after failure of external immobilization.
Jumped Facets—Hyperflexion Injury  The facet joints of the 
cervical spine slope forward. In a hyperflexion injury, the 
superior facet can “jump” over the inferior facet of the level 
above if the joint capsule is torn. Hyperflexion/rotation can 
cause a unilateral jumped facet, whereas hyperflexion/distrac-
tion leads to bilateral jumped facets. Patients with unilateral 
injury usually are neurologically intact. Those with bilateral 
injury, however, typically suffer from spinal cord damage, 
since the anteroposterior diameter of the spinal canal is com-
promised by bilateral injury, leading to spinal cord compres-
sion (Fig. 42-10).
Thoracolumbar  The thoracic spine is stabilized significantly 
by the rib cage. The lumbar spine has comparatively large ver-
tebrae. Thus, the thoracolumbar spine has a higher threshold 
for injury than the cervical spine. A three-column model is 
useful for categorizing thoracolumbar injuries.18 The anterior 
longitudinal ligament and the anterior half of the vertebral body 
constitute the anterior column. The posterior half of the ver-
tebral body and the posterior longitudinal ligament constitute 
the middle column. The pedicles, facet joints, laminae, spinous 
processes, and interspinous ligaments constitute the posterior 
column.
Compression Fracture  Compression fracture is a compression/
flexion injury causing failure of the anterior column only. It is 
stable and not associated with neurologic deficit, although the 
patient may still have significant pain (Fig. 42-11).
Burst Fracture  Burst fracture is a pure axial compression injury 
causing failure of the anterior and middle columns. It is unsta-
ble, and perhaps half of patients have neurologic deficit due to 
compression of the cord or cauda equina from bone fragments 
retropulsed into the spinal canal.
Chance Fracture  Chance fracture is a flexion-distraction injury 
causing failure of the middle and posterior columns, sometimes 
with anterior wedging. Typical injury is from a lap seat-belt 
hyperflexion with associated abdominal injury. It often is unsta-
ble and associated with neurologic deficit.
Fracture-Dislocation  Fracture-dislocation is failure of the ante-
rior, middle, and posterior columns caused by flexion/distrac-
tion, shear, or compression forces. Neurologic deficit can result 
from retropulsion of middle column bone fragments into the 
spinal canal, or from subluxation causing decreased canal diam-
eter (Fig. 42-12).
Initial Assessment and Management.  The possibility of a 
spine injury must be considered in all trauma patients. A patient 
with no symptoms referable to neurologic injury, a normal 
neurologic examination, no neck or back pain, and a known 
mechanism of injury unlikely to cause spine injury is at mini-
mal risk for significant injury to the spine. Victims of moderate 
or severe trauma, especially those with injuries to other organ 
systems, usually fail to meet these criteria or cannot be assessed 
adequately. The latter often is due to impaired sensorium or 
significant pain. Because of the potentially catastrophic conse-
quences of missing occult spine instability in a neurologically 
intact patient, a high level of clinical suspicion should govern 
patient care until completion of clinical and radiographic evalu-
ation.
The trauma patient should be kept on a hard flat board 
with straps and pads used for immobilization. A hard cervi-
cal collar is kept in place. These steps minimize forces trans-
ferred through the spine, and therefore decrease the chance 
of causing dislocation, subluxation, or neural compression 
during transport to the trauma bay. The patient is then moved 
from the board to a flat stretcher. The primary survey and 
resuscitation are completed. Physical examination and initial 
X-rays follow.
For the examination, approach the patient as described 
in the section on Neurologic Examination earlier in this chap-
ter. Evaluation for spine or SCI is easier and more informa-
tive in awake patients. If the patient is awake, ask if he or 
she recalls details of the nature of the trauma, and if there 
1723
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
was loss of consciousness, numbness, or inability to move 
any or all limbs. Assess motor function by response to com-
mands or pain, as appropriate. Assess pinprick, light touch, 
and joint position, if possible. Determining the anatomically 
lowest level of intact sensation can pinpoint the level of the 
lesion along the spine. Testing sensation in an ascending fash-
ion will allow the patient to better discern the true stimulus 
as opposed to determine when it is extinguished. Document 
muscle stretch reflexes, lower sacral reflexes (i.e., anal wink 
and bulbocavernosus), and rectal tone.
A
B
C
D
Figure 42-10.  A. Lateral cervical spine X-ray of an elderly 
woman who struck her head during a backward fall. Arrowhead 
points to jumped facets at C5–C6. Note the anterior displace-
ment of the C5 body with respect to the C6 body. B. Sagittal 
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the same patient, 
revealing compromise of the spinal canal and compression of the 
cord. Note the bright signal within the cord at the level of compres-
sion, indicating spinal cord injury. C. Lateral cervical spine X-ray 
of same patient after application of cervical traction and manual 
reduction. Note restoration of normal alignment. D. Lateral cervi-
cal spine X-ray after posterior cervical fusion to restabilize the 
C5–C6 segment of the spine.
1724
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
American Spinal Injury Association Classification  The Amer-
ican Spinal Injury Association provides a method of classifying 
patients with spine injuries. The classification indicates com-
pleteness and level of the injury and the associated deficit. A 
form similar to that shown in Fig. 42-13 should be available in 
the trauma bay and completed for any spine injury patient. The 
association also has worked to develop recommendations and 
guidelines to standardize the care of SCI patients in an effort to 
improve the quality of care.
Neurologic Syndromes.  Penetrating, compressive, or isch-
emic cord injury can lead to several characteristic presentations 
based on the anatomy of injury. The neurologic deficits may be 
deduced from the anatomy of the long sensory and motor tracts 
and understanding of their decussations (Fig. 42-14). Four pat-
terns are discussed. First, injury to the entire cord at a given 
level results in anatomic or functional cord transection with total 
loss of motor and sensory function below the level of the lesion. 
The typical mechanism is severe traumatic vertebral subluxation 
reducing spinal canal diameter and crushing the cord. Second, 
injury to half the cord at a given level results in Brown-Séquard 
syndrome, with loss of motor control and proprioception ipsilat-
erally and loss of nociception and thermoception contralaterally. 
The typical mechanism is a stab or gunshot wound. Third, injury 
to the interior gray matter of the cord in the cervical spine results 
in a central cord syndrome, with upper extremity worse than 
lower extremity weakness and various degrees of numbness. 
The typical mechanism is transient compression of the cervical 
cord by the ligamentum flavum buckling during traumatic neck 
hyperextension. This syndrome occurs in patients with preex-
isting cervical stenosis. Fourth, injury to the ventral half of the 
cord results in the anterior cord syndrome, with paralysis and 
loss of nociception and thermoception bilaterally. The typical 
mechanism is an acute disc herniation or ischemia from anterior 
spinal artery occlusion.
Studies.  Anteroposterior and lateral plain films provide a 
rapid survey of the bony spine. Plain films detect fractures 
A
B
Figure 42-11.  A. Lateral lumbar spine X-ray showing a compres-
sion fracture of L2. Arrowhead points to anterior wedge deformity. 
Note the posterior wall of the vertebral body has retained normal 
height and alignment. B. Axial computed tomography scan through 
the same fracture. Arrowhead demonstrates a transverse discontinu-
ity in the superior endplate of the L2 body.
Figure 42-12.  Sagittal reconstruction of an axial fine-slice com-
puted tomography scan through the lumbar spine demonstrating a 
severe fracture-dislocation through the body of L2.
1725
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
and dislocations well. Adequate visualization of the lower 
cervical and upper thoracic spine often is impossible because 
of the shoulder girdle. Complete plain film imaging of the 
cervical spine includes an open-mouth view to assess the 
odontoid process and the lateral masses of C1. Fine-slice 
CT scan with sagittal and coronal reconstructions provides 
good detail of bony anatomy and is good for characterizing 
fractures seen on plain films, as well as visualizing C7–T1 
when not well seen on plain films. MRI provides the best 
soft tissue imaging. Canal compromise from subluxation, 
acute disc herniations, or ligamentous disruption is clearly 
seen. MRI also may detect EDHs or damage to the spinal 
cord itself, including contusions or areas of ischemia.
Definitive Management
Spinal-Dose Steroids  The National Acute Spinal Cord Injury 
studies (NASCIS I and II) provide the basis for the common 
practice of administering high-dose steroids to patients with 
acute SCI. A 30-mg/kg IV bolus of methylprednisolone is given 
over 15 minutes, followed by a 5.4-mg/kg per hour infusion 
begun 45 minutes later. The infusion is continued for 23 hours 
if the bolus is given within 3 hours of injury, or for 47 hours if 
Figure 42-13.  The American Spinal Injury Association system for categorizing spinal cord injury patients according to level and degree of 
neurologic deficit.
Dorsal column
(touch, vibration)
Corticospinal tract
(upper motor)
Anterior horn
(lower motor)
Spinothalmic tract
(pain, temperature)
Transection
Central cord
Brown-Sequard
Anterior spinal a.
Figure 42-14.  Spinal cord injury patterns. a. = artery. (Adapted with permission from Hoff J, Boland M: Neurosurgery, in Schwartz SI, et al 
(eds): Principles of Surgery, 7th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999, p 1837. kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
1726
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
the bolus is given within 8 hours of injury. The papers indicate 
greater motor and sensory recovery at 6 weeks, 6 months, and 
1 year after acute SCI in patients who received methylpredniso-
lone.19,20 However, the NASCIS trial data have been extensively 
criticized, as many argue that the selection criteria and study 
design were flawed, making the results ambiguous. Patients 
who receive such a large corticosteroid dose have increased 
rates of medical and ICU complications, such as pneumonias, 
which have a deleterious effect on outcome. Thus, clear con-
sensus on the use of spinal-dose steroids does not exist.21 A 
decision to use or not use spinal-dose steroids may be dictated 
by local or regional practice patterns, especially given the legal 
liability issues surrounding SCI. Patients with gunshot or nerve 
root (cauda equina) injuries, or those who are pregnant, <14 
years old, or on chronic steroids were excluded from the NAS-
CIS studies and should not receive spinal-dose steroids. In addi-
tion to steroids, hypothermia for SCI has also received attention. 
There is even less evidence supporting the use of this treatment, 
and thus, it is not currently recommended.22
Orthotic Devices  Rigid external orthotic devices can stabilize 
the spine by decreasing range of motion and minimizing stress 
transmitted through the spine. Commonly used rigid cervical 
orthoses include Philadelphia and Miami-J collars. Cervical 
collars are inadequate for C1, C2, or cervicothoracic instabil-
ity. Cervicothoracic orthoses brace the upper thorax and the 
neck, improving stabilization over the cervicothoracic region. 
Minerva braces improve high cervical stabilization by bracing 
from the upper thorax to the chin and occiput. Halo-vest assem-
blies provide the most external cervical stabilization. Four pins 
are driven into the skull to lock the halo ring in position. Four 
posts arising from a tight-fitting rigid plastic vest immobilize 
the halo ring. Lumbar stabilization may be provided by thora-
columbosacral orthoses. A variety of companies manufacture 
lines of spinal orthotics. A physician familiar with the technique 
should fit a halo-vest. Assistance from a trained orthotics techni-
cian improves fitting and adjustment of the other devices.
Surgery  Neurosurgical intervention has two goals. First is the 
decompression of the spinal cord or nerve roots in patients 
with incomplete neurologic deficits. These patients should be 
decompressed expeditiously, especially if there is evidence of 
neurologic deterioration over time. Second is the stabilization 
of injuries judged too unstable to heal with external immobi-
lization only. Spine trauma patients with complete neurologic 
deficit, without any signs of recovery, or those without any neu-
rologic deficits who have bony or ligamentous injury requiring 
open fixation, may be medically stabilized before undergoing 
surgery. Surgical stabilization may be indicated for some inju-
ries that would eventually heal with conservative treatment. It 
also can allow early mobilization, aggressive nursing care, and 
physical therapy. Solid surgical stabilization may also allow a 
patient to be managed with a rigid cervical collar who would 
otherwise require halo-vest immobilization.
Continued Care.  Regional SCI centers with nurses, respira-
tory therapists, pulmonologists, physical therapists, physiat-
rists, and neurosurgeons specifically trained in caring for these 
patients may improve outcomes. Frequently encountered ICU 
issues include hypotension and aspiration pneumonia. Chroni-
cally, prevention and treatment of deep venous thrombosis, 
autonomic hyperreflexia, and decubitus ulcer formation are 
important. Many patients with cervical or high thoracic cord 
injuries require prolonged ventilatory support until the chest 
wall becomes stiff enough to provide resistance for diaphrag-
matic breathing. Patients with high cervical cord injuries (C4 
or above) will often require permanent ventilatory support. 
Patients should be transferred to SCI rehabilitation centers after 
stabilization of medical and surgical issues.
Peripheral Nerve Trauma
The peripheral nervous system extends throughout the body and is 
subject to injury from a wide variety of trauma. Peripheral nerves 
transmit motor and sensory information from the CNS to the body. 
An individual nerve may have pure motor, pure sensory, or mixed 
motor and sensory functions. The key information-carrying struc-
ture of the nerve is the axon. The axon transmits information from 
the neuronal cell body and may measure from <1 mm to >1 m in 
length. Axons that travel a significant distance are often covered 
with myelin, which is a lipid-rich, electrically insulating sheath 
formed by Schwann cells. Myelinated axons transmit signals 
much more rapidly than unmyelinated axons because the voltage 
shifts and currents that define action potentials effectively jump 
from gap to gap over the insulated lengths of the axon.
Axons, whether myelinated or unmyelinated, travel 
through a collagenous connective tissue known as endoneurium. 
Groups of axons and their endoneurium form bundles known 
as fascicles. Fascicles run through a tubular collagenous tissue 
known as perineurium. Groups of fascicles are suspended in 
mesoneurium. Fascicles and their mesoneurium run through 
another tubular collagenous tissue known as epineurium. The 
epineurium and its contents form the nerve.
There are four major mechanisms of injury to peripheral 
nerves. Nerves may be lacerated, stretched, compressed, or con-
tused. Knives, passing bullets, or jagged bone fractures may 
lacerate nerves. Adjacent expanding hematomas or dislocated 
fractures may stretch nerves. Expanding hematomas, external 
orthoses such as casts or braces, or blunt trauma over a superficial 
nerve may compress or crush nerves. Shock waves from high-
velocity bullets may contuse nerves. These mechanisms of injury 
cause damage to the various anatomic components of the nerve. 
The patterns of damage are categorized in Types of Injury section.
Certain nerve segments are particularly vulnerable to 
injury. The following four characteristics make a nerve seg-
ment more vulnerable: proximity to a joint, superficial course, 
passage through a confined space, and being fixed in position.
Types of Injury.  The traditional classification system for periph-
eral nerve injury is the Seddon classification. Seddon described 
three injury patterns as defined in the Neurapraxia, Axonotmesis, 
and Neurotmesis sections. The Seddon classification provides a 
simple, anatomically based approach to peripheral nerve injury.23
Neurapraxia  Neurapraxia is defined as the temporary failure of 
nerve function without physical axonal disruption. Axon degen-
eration does not occur. Return of normal axonal function occurs 
over hours to months, often in the 2- to 4-week range.
Axonotmesis  Axonotmesis is the disruption of axons and 
myelin. The surrounding connective tissues, including endo-
neurium, are intact. The axons degenerate proximally and dis-
tally from the area of injury. Distal degeneration is known as 
Wallerian degeneration. Axon regeneration within the connec-
tive tissue pathways can occur, leading to restoration of func-
tion. Axons regenerate at a rate of 1 mm per day. Significant 
functional recovery may occur for up to 18 months. Scarring 
at the site of injury from connective tissue reaction can form a 
neuroma and interfere with regeneration.
1727
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Neurotmesis  Neurotmesis is the disruption of axons and endo-
neurial tubes. Peripheral collagenous components, such as the 
epineurium, may or may not be intact. Proximal and distal axonal 
degeneration occurs. The likelihood of effective axonal regenera-
tion across the site of injury depends on the extent of neuroma for-
mation and on the degree of persisting anatomic alignment of the 
connective tissue structures. For instance, an injury may damage 
axons, myelin, and endoneurium, but leave perineurium intact. In 
this case, the fascicle sheath is intact, and appropriate axonal regen-
eration is more likely to occur than if the sheath is interrupted.
Management of Peripheral Nerve Injury.  The sensory and 
motor deficits should be accurately documented. Deficits are usu-
ally immediate. Progressive deficit suggests a process such as an 
expanding hematoma and may warrant early surgical exploration. 
Clean, sharp injuries may also benefit from early exploration and 
reanastomosis. Most other peripheral nerve injuries should be 
observed. EMG/NCS studies should be done 3- to weeks postin-
jury if deficits persist. Axon segments distal to the site of injury 
will conduct action potentials normally until Wallerian degenera-
tion occurs, rendering EMG/NCS before 3 weeks uninformative. 
Continued observation is indicated if function improves. Surgi-
cal exploration of the nerve may be undertaken if no functional 
improvement occurs over 3 months. If intraoperative electrical 
testing reveals conduction across the injury, continue observa-
tion. In the absence of conduction, the injured segment should 
be resected and end-to-end primary anastomosis attempted. 
However, anastomoses under tension will not heal. A nerve graft 
may be needed to bridge the gap between the proximal and distal 
nerve ends. The sural nerve often is harvested, as it carries only 
sensory fibers and leaves a minor deficit when resected. The con-
nective tissue structures of the nerve graft may provide a pathway 
for effective axonal regrowth across the injury.
Patterns of Injury
Brachial Plexus  The brachial plexus may be injured in a variety 
of ways. Parturition or a motorcycle accident can lead to plexus 
injury due to dislocation of the glenohumeral joint. Attempting 
to arrest a fall with one’s hands can lead to a stretch injury of the 
plexus due to abrupt movement of the shoulder girdle. An api-
cal lung (Pancoast) tumor can cause compression injury to the 
plexus. There are many patterns of neurologic deficits possible 
with injury to the various components of the brachial plexus, and 
understanding them all would require extensive neuroanatomic 
discussion. Two well-known eponymous syndromes are Erb’s 
palsy and Klumpke’s palsy. Injury high in the plexus to the C5 
and C6 roots resulting from glenohumeral dislocation causes 
Erb’s palsy with the characteristic “bellhop’s tip” position. The 
arm hangs at the side, internally rotated. Hand movements are not 
affected. Injury low in the plexus, to the C8 and T1 roots, resulting 
from stretch or compression injury, causes Klumpke’s palsy with 
the characteristic “claw hand” deformity. There is weakness of the 
intrinsic hand muscles, similar to that seen with ulnar nerve injury.
Radial Nerve  The radial nerve courses through the axilla, then 
laterally and posteriorly in the spiral groove of the humerus. 
Improper crutch use can cause damage to the axillary portion. The 
section of the nerve traversing the spiral groove can be damaged 
by humerus fractures or pressure from improper positioning dur-
ing sleep. This classically occurs when the patient is intoxicated 
and is called “Saturday night palsy.” The key finding is wrist drop 
(i.e., weakness of hand and finger extensors). Axillary (proximal) 
injury causes triceps weakness in addition to wrist drop.
Common Peroneal Neuropathy  The common peroneal nerve 
forms the lateral half of the sciatic nerve (the medial half being 
the tibial nerve). It receives contributions from L4, L5, S1, and 
S2. It emerges as a separate nerve in the popliteal fossa and 
laterally wraps around the fibular neck, after which it splits to 
form the deep and superficial peroneal nerves. The superficial, 
fixed location at the fibular neck makes the common peroneal 
nerve susceptible to compression. The classic cause of traumatic 
peroneal neuropathy is crush injury from a car bumper striking 
the lateral aspect of the leg at the knee. Symptoms of common 
peroneal neuropathy include foot drop (weakness of the tibialis 
anterior), eversion weakness, and numbness over the anterolat-
eral surface of the lower leg and dorsum of the foot. In contrast, 
a foot drop due to L5 radiculopathy spares eversion because the 
S1 fibers are intact. Surgical exploration of a common peroneal 
crush lesion is typically a low yield endeavor. Rare cases may 
be due to compressive fibers or adhesions that may be lysed, 
with the possibility of return of function.
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
Cerebrovascular disease is the most frequent cause of new, 
rapid-onset, nontraumatic neurologic deficit. It is far more com-
mon than seizures or tumors. Vascular structures are subject to a 
variety of chronic pathologic processes that compromise vessel 
wall integrity. Diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, 
and smoking are risk factors for vascular disease. These condi-
tions can lead to vascular damage by such mechanisms as ath-
eroma deposition causing luminal stenosis, endothelial damage 
promoting thrombogenesis, and weakening of the vessel wall 
resulting in aneurysm formation or dissection. These processes 
may coexist. For instance, a vessel containing an atheromatous 
plaque will have a decreased luminal diameter. The plaque also 
may have compromised endothelium, providing the opportunity 
for thrombus formation, which can lead to acute total occlusion 
of the remaining lumen. Aneurysms and dissection often occur 
in atheromatous vessels. Specific patterns of disease relevant 
to the cerebrovascular system include atheromatous and throm-
botic carotid occlusion, brain ischemia from proximal embolic 
disease, vessel wall rupture leading to hemorrhage, and rupture 
of abnormal, thin-walled structures, specifically aneurysms and 
AVMs.
Ischemic Diseases
Ischemic stroke accounts for approximately 85% of acute 
cerebrovascular events. Symptoms of acute ischemic stroke 
vary based on the functions of the neural tissues supplied by 
the occluded vessel, and the presence or absence of collateral 
circulation. The circle of Willis provides extensive collateral 
circulation, as it connects the right and left carotid arteries to 
each other and each to the vertebrobasilar system. Patients with 
complete occlusion of the carotid artery proximal to the circle 
of Willis may be asymptomatic if the blood flow patterns can 
shift and provide sufficient circulation to the ipsilateral cerebral 
hemisphere from the contralateral carotid and the basilar artery. 
However, the anatomy of the circle of Willis is highly variable. 
Patients may have a hypoplastic or missing communicating 
artery with resultant bilateral ACA supply by one carotid; or 
the PCA may be supplied by the carotid artery rather than the 
basilar. Similarly, one vertebral artery is often dominant and 
the other is hypoplastic. These variations may make disease in 
a particular vessel more neurologically devastating than in a 
1728
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
patient with full collateral circulation. Occlusion distal to the 
circle of Willis generally results in a stroke in the territory sup-
plied by that particular artery.
Neurologic deficit from occlusive disease may be tempo-
rary or permanent. A patient with sudden-onset focal neurologic 
deficit that resolves within 24 hours has had a transient ischemic 
attack. A patient with permanent deficit has had a completed 
stroke.
Thrombotic Disease
The most common area of neurologically significant vessel 
thrombosis is the carotid artery in the neck. Disease occurs at 
the carotid bifurcation. Thrombosis of a carotid artery chroni-
cally narrowed by atheroma can lead to acute carotid occlu-
sion. As discussed previously, this can be asymptomatic. The 
more common concern is thromboembolus. Intracranial arterial 
occlusion by local thrombus formation may occur, but it is rare 
compared to embolic occlusion.
Management.  Complete occlusion of the carotid artery with-
out referable neurologic deficit requires no treatment. A patient 
with new neurologic deficit and an angiographically confirmed 
complete carotid occlusion contralateral to the symptoms should 
be considered for emergent carotid endarterectomy.24 Surgery 
should be performed within 2 hours of symptom onset. This 
time restriction significantly reduces the number of candidates. 
Surgery should not be performed on obtunded or comatose 
patients. This time restriction significantly reduces the number 
of candidates.
Embolic Disease
Emboli causing strokes may originate from a number of sources, 
including: the left atrium, during atrial fibrillation, a hypokinetic 
left ventricular wall segment, valvular vegetations, an athero-
matous aortic arch, stenotic/atheromatous carotid bifurcations, 
or from the systemic venous system in the presence of a right-
to-left shunt, such as a patent foramen ovale. The majority of 
emboli enter the anterior (carotid) circulation rather than the 
posterior (vertebrobasilar) circulation. Characteristic clinical 
syndromes result from embolic occlusion of the various vessels.
Common Types of Strokes
Anterior Cerebral Artery Stroke  The ACA supplies the medial 
frontal and parietal lobes, including the motor strip, as it courses 
into the interhemispheric fissure. ACA stroke results in contra-
lateral leg weakness.
Middle Cerebral Artery Stroke  The MCA supplies the lateral 
frontal and parietal lobes and the temporal lobe. MCA stroke 
results in contralateral face and arm weakness. Dominant-hemi-
sphere MCA stroke causes language deficits. Proximal MCA 
occlusion with ischemia and swelling in the entire MCA terri-
tory can lead to significant intracranial mass effect and midline 
shift (see Fig. 42-6).
Posterior Cerebral Artery Stroke  The PCA supplies the occip-
ital lobe. PCA stroke results in a contralateral homonymous 
hemianopsia (see Fig. 42-6).
Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery Stroke  The PICA supplies 
the lateral medulla and the inferior half of the cerebellar hemi-
spheres. PICA stroke results in nausea, vomiting, nystagmus, 
dysphagia, ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, and ipsilateral limb 
ataxia. The constellation of symptoms resulting from PICA 
occlusion is referred to as the lateral medullary or Wallenberg’s 
syndrome.
Management.  Ischemic stroke management has two goals: 
reopen the occluded vessel and maintain blood flow to ischemic 
“penumbra” tissues bordering the vascular territory. Reopen-
ing the vessel may be attempted with recombinant tPA.25 tPA 
administration within 3 hours of the onset of neurologic defi-
cit improves outcome at 3 months. In the setting of suspected 
ischemic stroke, a head CT must be performed immediately to 
differentiate ischemic from hemorrhagic stroke. Intracranial 
hemorrhage, major surgery within the previous 2 weeks, GI 
or genitourinary hemorrhage in the previous 3 weeks, plate-
let count less than 100,000/μL, and systolic blood pressure 
>185 mmHg are among the contraindications to tPA therapy.
Patients not eligible for tPA require hemodynamic opti-
mization and neurologic monitoring. Admit such patients to the 
ICU stroke service for blood pressure management and frequent 
neurologic checks. Permissive hypertension allows for maximal 
cerebral perfusion. Systolic blood pressure >180 mmHg may 
require treatment, but the optimal mean arterial pressure goal is 
between 100 to 140 mmHg. Give normal saline solution with-
out glucose (which could injure neurons in the penumbra), and 
aim for normovolemia. A stroke patient who worsens clinically 
should undergo repeat head CT to evaluate for hemorrhage or 
increasing mass effect from swelling, which typically peaks 3 
to 5 days after the stroke. Significant swelling from an MCA or 
cerebellar strokes may cause herniation and brain stem injury. 
A decompressive hemicraniectomy or suboccipital craniectomy 
can be a life-saving intervention for these select stroke patients.
Hemorrhagic Diseases
Intracranial hemorrhage from abnormal or diseased vascular 
structures accounts for approximately 15% of acute cerebrovas-
cular events. Hypertension and amyloid angiopathy account for 
most intraparenchymal hemorrhages, although AVMs, aneu-
rysms, venous thrombosis, tumors, hemorrhagic conversion of 
ischemic infarct, and fungal infections also may be the cause. 
The term intracranial hemorrhage frequently is used to mean 
intraparenchymal hemorrhage and will be used here. Intracra-
nial hemorrhage causes local neuronal injury and dysfunction 
and also may cause global dysfunction due to mass effect if 
sufficiently large. AVM or aneurysm rupture results in SAH 
because the major cerebral and cortical blood vessels travel 
in the subarachnoid space, between the pia and the arachnoid 
membrane. SAH can cause immediate concussive-like neuronal 
dysfunction by exposure of the brain to intra-arterial pressure 
pulsations during the hemorrhage; it can cause delayed ischemia 
from cerebral arterial vasospasm. Patients presenting with intra-
cranial hemorrhages that do not follow typical patterns should 
undergo angiography or MRI to evaluate for possible underly-
ing lesions, such as AVM or tumor.
Hemorrhagic stroke typically occurs within the basal 
ganglia or cerebellum. The patient is usually hypertensive on 
admission and has a history of poorly controlled hyperten-
sion. Such patients are more likely to present with lethargy or 
obtundation, compared to those who suffer an ischemic stroke. 
Depressed mental status results from brain shift and herniation 
secondary to mass effect from the hematoma in deep structures. 
Ischemic stroke does not cause mass effect acutely; and there-
fore, patients are more likely to present with normal conscious-
ness and a focal neurologic deficit. Hemorrhagic strokes tend to 
present with a relatively gradual decline in neurologic function 
as the hematoma expands, rather than the immediately maximal 
symptoms caused by ischemic stroke. Table 42-3 provides a 
1729
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
listing of relative incidences of intracranial hemorrhage by ana-
tomic distribution
Hypertension.  Hypertension increases the relative risk of 
intracranial hemorrhage by approximately fourfold, likely due 
to chronic degenerative vasculopathy. Hypertensive hemor-
rhages often present in the basal ganglia, thalamus, or pons, and 
result from breakage of small perforating arteries that branch off 
of much larger parent vessels (Fig. 42-15).
Most hypertensive hemorrhages should be medically man-
aged. The hematoma often contains intact, salvageable axons 
because the blood dissects through and along neural tracts, and 
surgical clot evacuation destroys these axons. Factors poten-
tially favoring surgery include: superficial clot location, young 
age, nondominant hemisphere, rapid deterioration, and signifi-
cant mass effect. However, the most comprehensive randomized 
clinical trials to date did not show an overall improved outcome 
in surgically evacuated intracranial hemorrhage, except for the 
subgroup of patients with clot <1 cm from the cortical surface.26 
Medical management includes moderate blood pressure control, 
normalizing platelet and clotting function, phenytoin, and elec-
trolyte management. Intubate patients who cannot clearly follow 
commands to prevent aspiration and hypercarbia. Follow and 
Table 42-3
Anatomic distribution of intracranial hemorrhages and correlated symptoms
% of  Intracranial 
Hemorrhages
Location
Classic Symptoms
50
Basal ganglia (putamen, globus 
pallidus), internal capsule
Contralateral hemiparesis
15
Thalamus
Contralateral hemisensory loss
10–20
Cerebral white matter (lobar)
Depends on location (weakness, numbness, partial loss of visual field)
10–15
Pons
Hemiparesis; may be devastating
10
Cerebellum
Lethargy or coma due to brain stem compression and/or 
hydrocephalus
1–6
Brain stem (excluding pons)
Often devastating
Figure 42-15.  A. Head computed tomography scan of a patient with left-sided weakness and progressive lethargy reveals a right basal ganglia 
hemorrhage (arrowhead). The blood clot is bright white. Hypodensity around the clot represents cerebral edema. There is blood within the 
ventricular system. B. Another patient with intraventricular extension of a basal ganglia hemorrhage. The patient developed right-sided weak-
ness and then lethargy. Head computed tomography indicated hydrocephalus. A ventriculostomy was placed for cerebrospinal fluid drainage 
(arrowhead indicates cross-sectional view of the catheter entering the anterior horn of the right lateral ventricle).
1730
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
document the neurologic examination and communicate with 
the family regarding appropriateness for rehabilitation vs with-
drawal of care.
Amyloid Angiopathy.  The presence of pathologic amyloid 
deposition in the media of small cortical vessels compromises 
vessel integrity and tends to cause more superficial (lobar) 
hemorrhages than hypertensive intracranial hemorrhage. Amy-
loid laden vessels may hemorrhage multiple times. The super-
ficial location of amyloid hemorrhages may make surgical 
evacuation less morbid compared to typical deep hypertensive 
hemorrhages. Nonetheless, medical management and family 
counseling should be approached similarly to patients with 
hypertensive hemorrhages.
Cerebral Aneurysm.  An aneurysm is a focal dilatation of 
the vessel wall and is most often a balloon-like outpouching, 
but may also be fusiform. Aneurysms usually occur at branch 
points of major vessels (e.g., internal carotid artery bifurca-
tion), or at the origin of smaller vessels (e.g., posterior com-
municating artery or ophthalmic artery). Approximately 85% 
of aneurysms arise from the anterior circulation (carotid) 
and 15% from the posterior circulation (vertebrobasilar). 
Table 42-4 shows the percentage distribution of cerebral aneu-
rysms by location. Aneurysms are thin walled and at risk for 
rupture. The major cerebral vessels, and therefore aneurysms, 
lie in the subarachnoid space. Rupture results in SAH. The 
aneurysmal tear may be small and seal quickly, or it may not. 
SAH may consist of a thin layer of blood in the CSF spaces, 
or thick layers of blood around the brain and extending into 
brain parenchyma, resulting in a clot with mass effect. Because 
the meningeal linings of the brain are sensitive, SAH usually 
results in a sudden, severe “thunderclap” headache. A patient 
will classically describe “the worst headache of my life.” Pre-
senting neurologic symptoms may range from mild headache 
to coma to sudden death. The Hunt-Hess grading system cat-
egorizes patients clinically (Table 42-5).
Patients with symptoms suspicious for SAH should have 
a head CT immediately. Acute SAH appears as a bright signal 
in the fissures and CSF cisterns around the base of the brain, 
as shown in Fig. 42-16. CT is rapid, noninvasive, and approxi-
mately 95% sensitive. In patients with suspicious symptoms 
but negative head CT, a lumbar puncture (LP) should be 
performed. An LP with xanthochromia and high red blood cell 
counts (usually 100,000/mL), which do not decrease between 
tubes 1 and 4, is consistent with SAH. Negative CT and LP 
essentially rules out SAH. Patients diagnosed with SAH 
Table 42-4
Prevalence of cerebral aneurysm by location
Prevalence
Aneurysm Location (Vernacular 
Name)
Anterior 
circulation 85%
30% Anterior communicating artery 
(A-Comm)
25% Posterior communicating artery 
(P-Comm)
20% Middle cerebral artery bifurcation
10% Other
Posterior 
circulation 15%
10% Basilar artery, most frequently at the 
basilar tip
5% Vertebral artery, usually at the 
posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Table 42-5
The Hunt-Hess clinical grading system for subarachnoid 
hemorrhage
Hunt-Hess 
Grade
Clinical Presentation
0
Asymptomatic; unruptured aneurysm
1
Awake; asymptomatic or mild headache; mild 
nuchal rigidity
2
Awake; moderate to severe headache, cranial nerve 
palsy (e.g., cranial nerve III or IV), nuchal rigidity
3
Lethargic; mild focal neurologic deficit (e.g., 
pronator drift)
4
Stuporous; significant neurologic deficit (e.g., 
hemiplegia)
5
Comatose; posturing
Figure 42-16.  Head computed tomography scan of a patient 
who experienced a sudden, severe headache. Subarachnoid hem-
orrhage is visible as hyperdense signal in the interhemispheric 
fissure (1), bilateral sylvian fissures (2 shows the left fissure), 
and in the ambient cisterns around the midbrain (3). This gives 
the classic five-pointed-star appearance of a subarachnoid hem-
orrhage. Visible temporal tips of the lateral ventricles indicate 
hydrocephalus.
1731
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
require four-vessel cerebral angiography within 24 hours to 
assess for aneurysm or other vascular malformation. Cath-
eter angiography remains the gold standard for assessing the 
patient’s cerebral vasculature, relevant anomalies, and pres-
ence, location, and morphology of the cerebral aneurysms. 
Figure 42-17A demonstrates the typical anteroposterior digi-
tal subtraction angiographic view of a cerebral aneurysm. 
Figure 42-17B shows the anatomy of the circle of Willis in a 
simplified graphic representation to assist in visualizing the 
locations of various cerebral aneurysms.
SAH patients should be admitted to the neurologic ICU. 
Hunt-Hess grade 4 and 5 patients require intubation and hemo-
dynamic monitoring and stabilization. The current standard of 
care for ruptured aneurysms requires early aneurysmal occlu-
sion. There are two options for occlusion. The patient may 
undergo craniotomy with microsurgical dissection and place-
ment of a titanium clip across the aneurysm neck to exclude the 
aneurysm from the circulation and reconstitute the lumen of the 
parent vessel. The second option is to “coil” the aneurysm via an 
endovascular approach. The patient is taken to the interventional 
neuroradiology suite for placement of looped titanium coils 
inside the aneurysm dome. The coils support thrombosis and 
prevent blood flow into the aneurysm. Factors favoring crani-
otomy and clipping include young age, good medical condition, 
and broad aneurysm necks. Factors favoring coiling include age, 
medical comorbidities, and narrow aneurysm necks. Due to coil 
migration or compaction over time, surgical clipping is believed 
to result in a more definitive cure. The decision to clip or coil 
is complex and should be fully explored. The International 
Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial researchers suggested that endo-
vascular occlusion resulted in better outcomes for certain types 
of cerebral aneurysms, although this trial was marred by poor 
selection and randomization techniques, and the validity of its 
conclusions have been questioned.27 Long-term outcomes may 
be better in younger patients with clipped aneurysms.28 Debate 
also continues regarding optimal care for unruptured intracra-
nial aneurysms.29
SAH patients often require 1 to 3 weeks of ICU care after 
aneurysm occlusion for medical complications that accompany 
neurologic injury. In addition to routine ICU concerns, SAH 
patients are also at risk for cerebral vasospasm. In vasospasm, 
cerebral arteries constrict pathologically and can cause isch-
emia or stroke from 4 to 21 days after SAH. Current vasospasm 
prophylaxis includes maintenance of optimal perfusion with 
hypertension and mild hypervolemia, as well as administration 
of nimodipine, a calcium channel blocker that may decrease the 
incidence and degree of spasm. Neurointerventional options for 
treating symptomatic vasospasm include intra-arterial papaverine 
or nicardipine, and balloon angioplasty for larger caliber vessels.
Aneurysmal SAH has an approximate mortality rate of 
50% in the first month. Approximately one-third of survivors 
return to pre-SAH function, and the remaining two thirds 
have mild to severe disability. Most require rehabilitation 
after hospitalization.
Arteriovenous Malformations.  AVMs are abnormal, dilated 
arteries and veins without an intervening capillary bed. The nidus 
of the AVM contains a tangled mass of vessels but no neural tis-
sue. AVMs may be asymptomatic or present with SAH, intrapa-
renchymal hemorrhage, or seizures. Small AVMs present with 
hemorrhage more often than large AVMs, which tend to present 
with seizures. Headache, bruit, or focal neurologic deficits are 
less common symptoms. AVMs hemorrhage at an average rate 
of 2% to 4% a year. Figure 42-18 demonstrates the angiographic 
appearance of an AVM in arterial and venous phases.
There are several management differences for intracranial 
hemorrhage due to AVM vs. aneurysm. Definitive therapy for 
the AVM usually is delayed 3 to 4 weeks to allow the brain 
to recover from acute injury. There is less risk of devastating 
early rebleeding from AVMs, and vasospasm is much less com-
mon. Three therapeutic modalities for AVMs are currently in 
common use: microsurgical excision, interventional radiology 
or endovascular embolization, and stereotactic radiosurgery 
4
A
Intracranial aneurysums
Anterior
communicating artery
30% – 35%
MCA bifurcation
20%
Basilar
5%
Posterior fossa
Miscellaneous sites distal
to circle of Willis
1% – 3%
ICA/posterior
communicating
30% – 35%
B
Figure 42-17.  A. Anteroposterior view after injection of contrast 
dye in the right internal carotid artery demonstrates an aneurysm 
of the middle cerebral artery bifurcation. B. Figure depicting the 
anatomy of the circle of Willis and the common sites for aneurysms. 
ICA = internal cerebral artery; MCA = middle cerebral artery. 
(Reproduced with permission from Osborn AG: Handbook of Neu-
roradiology: Brain and Skull, 1st ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 
Inc., 1991, p 81. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
1732
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
(SRS). AVMs that are large, near eloquent cortex, or that drain 
to deep venous structures are considered high grade and more 
difficult to surgically resect without causing a significant neu-
rologic deficit. Radiosurgery can treat these lesions, although 
it is limited to lesions <3 cm in diameter and has a 2-year lag 
time (i.e., the AVM may bleed in the interval). Embolization 
reduces flow through the AVM. It is usually considered adjunc-
tive therapy, but it may serve as the sole treatment for deep, 
inaccessible lesions.
TUMORS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
A wide variety of tumors affect the brain and spine. Primary 
benign and malignant tumors arise from the various elements of 
the CNS, including neurons, glia, and meninges . Tumors metas-
tasize to the CNS from many primary sources. Presentation 
varies widely depending on relevant neuroanatomy. 
Prognosis depends on histology and anatomy. Modern 
brain tumor centers use team approaches to CNS tumors, as 
patients may require a combination of surgery, radiation ther-
apy, chemotherapy, SRS, and research protocol enrollment. 
Tumors affecting the peripheral nervous system are discussed in 
the Peripheral Nerve section.
Intracranial Tumors
Intracranial tumors can cause brain injury from mass effect, dys-
function or destruction of adjacent neural structures, swelling, 
or abnormal electrical activity (seizures). Supratentorial tumors 
commonly present with focal neurologic deficit, such as contra-
lateral limb weakness, visual field deficit, headache, or seizure. 
Infratentorial tumors often cause increased ICP due to hydro-
cephalus from compression of the fourth ventricle, leading to 
headache, nausea, vomiting, or diplopia. Cerebellar hemisphere 
or brain stem dysfunction can result in ataxia, nystagmus, or 
cranial nerve palsies. Infratentorial tumors rarely cause seizures.
All patients with symptoms concerning for brain tumor 
should undergo MRI with and without gadolinium. Initial man-
agement of a patient with a symptomatic brain tumor gener-
ally includes dexamethasone for reduction of vasogenic edema 
and phenytoin if the patient has seized. Patients with significant 
weakness, lethargy, or hydrocephalus should be admitted for 
observation until definitive care is administered.
Metastatic Tumors
Prolonged cancer patient survival and improved CNS imaging 
have increased the likelihood of diagnosing cerebral metasta-
ses. The sources of most cerebral metastases are (in decreas-
ing frequency): lung, breast, kidney, GI tract, and melanoma. 
Lung and breast cancers account for more than half of cerebral 
metastases. Metastatic cells usually travel to the brain hema-
togenously and frequently seed the gray-white junction. Other 
common locations are the cerebellum and the meninges. Men-
ingeal involvement may result in carcinomatous meningitis, 
also known as leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. MRI pre- and 
postcontrast administration is the study of choice for evalua-
tion. Figure 42-19 demonstrates bilateral cerebellar metasta-
ses. These lesions are typically well circumscribed, round, and 
multiple. Such findings should prompt a metastatic work-up, 
including CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and a 
bone scan.
Management largely depends upon the primary tumor, 
overall tumor burden, patient’s medical condition, and location 
and number of metastases. The beliefs of the patient and family 
regarding aggressive care must be considered. Craniotomy plus 
whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) or stereotactic radiosur-
gery (SRS) to the tumor bed has been shown to benefit patients 
with a single surgically accessible metastatic lesion, compared 
to radiation therapy alone. Median survival increased from 15 to 
40 weeks in one randomized trial.30 Postoperative radiotherapy 
may not increase overall survival but it does significantly reduce 
original lesion recurrence.31 Studies do not support craniotomy 
unless all detectable metastases can be resected. Recent data 
suggest that SRS (e.g., gamma knife) may be applied to multiple 
metastases in one session with improved outcome.32
5
Figure 42-18.  A. Lateral view after injection of contrast dye in the left internal carotid artery demonstrates a 3 × 4 cm left frontal arte-
riovenous malformation indicated by arrowheads. This image was taken 1.06 seconds after dye injection, and is referred to as an arterial 
phase image. B. Same view taken 4.10 seconds after dye injection, providing a venous phase image. The arrow points to the arteriovenous 
malformation nidus. The arrowheads indicate two pathologically enlarged draining veins. ACA = anterior cerebral artery; ICA = internal 
carotid artery; MCA = middle cerebral artery.
1733
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Glial Tumors
Glial cells provide the anatomic and physiologic support for 
neurons and their processes in the brain. The several types of 
glial cells give rise to distinct primary CNS neoplasms.
Astrocytoma.  Astrocytoma is the most common primary 
CNS neoplasm. The term glioma often is used to refer to astro-
cytomas specifically, excluding other glial tumors. Astrocyto-
mas are graded from I to IV. Grades I and II are referred to as 
low-grade astrocytoma, grade III as anaplastic astrocytoma, 
and grade IV as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Prognosis 
varies significantly between grades I/II, III, and IV, but not 
between I and II. Median survival is 8 years after diagnosis 
with a low-grade tumor, 2 to 3 years with an anaplastic astro-
cytoma, and roughly 1 year with a GBM. GBMs account for 
almost two-thirds of all astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocyto-
mas account for two-thirds of the rest, and low-grade astro-
cytomas the remainder. Figure 42-20 demonstrates the typical 
appearance of a GBM.
The great majority of astrocytomas infiltrate adjacent 
brain. Juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas and pleomorphic xantho-
astrocytomas are exceptions. These tumors are circumscribed, 
low grade, and associated with a good prognosis. Histologic 
features associated with higher grade include hypercellularity, 
nuclear atypia, and endovascular hyperplasia. Necrosis is pres-
ent only with GBMs; it is required for the diagnosis.
Gross total resection should be attempted for suspected 
astrocytomas. Motor cortex, language centers, deep or midline 
structures, or brain stem location may make this impossible 
without unacceptable, devastating neurologic deficit. Such 
lesions may be limited to stereotactic needle biopsy specimen. 
Gross total resection followed by radiation therapy improves 
survival for all grades, although radiation therapy may be 
delayed until recurrence in low-grade tumors. Chemotherapy 
such as temozolomide is of limited efficacy and typically is 
reserved for GBM. There are various ongoing research studies 
for GBM adjuvant therapy; these should be discussed with the 
patient and family. Other options include Iotrex-containing bal-
loons for conformal radiation brachytherapy (Glia-Site), placed 
in the resection cavity at the time of surgery for recurrence. 
Adjuvant therapy remains marginally effective; survival has 
changed little over the last several decades.
Oligodendroglioma.  Oligodendroglioma accounts for 
approximately 10% of gliomas. They often present with sei-
zures. Calcifications and hemorrhage on CT or MRI suggest 
the diagnosis. Oligodendrogliomas are also graded from I to 
IV; grade portends prognosis. Prognosis is better overall than 
for astrocytomas. Median survival ranges from 2 to 7 years 
for highest and lowest grade tumors, respectively. Aggressive 
resection improves survival. Many oligodendrogliomas will 
respond to procarbazine, lomustine (CCNU), vincristine (PCV) 
chemotherapy. A particular chromosomal deletion, 1p19q, has 
been associated with robust response to the chemotherapeutic 
agent temozolomide. Radiation has not been clearly shown to 
prolong survival.
Figure 42-19.  A. Precontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating bilateral hemorrhagic cerebellar metastases. 
Patient presented with ataxia and then lethargy progressing to deep coma. This patient has total effacement of the fourth ventricle and severe 
brain stem compression. The fourth ventricle cerebrospinal fluid space should be at the tip of the arrowhead. Patient recovered to normal 
mental status after emergent posterior fossa craniotomy. B. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a 
ring-enhancing lesion in the lateral left temporal lobe with moderate edema. The uncus (U) is compressing the left cerebral peduncle (CP) 
and displacing the brain stem to the right.
1734
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Ependymoma.  The lining of the ventricular system consists 
of cuboidal/columnar ependymal cells from which ependy-
momas may arise. Although most pediatric ependymomas are 
supratentorial, two- thirds of adult ependymomas are infraten-
torial. Supratentorial ependymomas arise from the lateral or 
third ventricles. The infratentorial tumors arise from the floor 
of the fourth ventricle (i.e., off the posterior brain stem). The 
most common symptoms are headache, nausea, vomiting, or 
vertigo, secondary to increased ICP from obstruction of CSF 
flow through the fourth ventricle. The tumors may grow out 
the foramina of Luschka to form a cerebellopontine angle 
mass. They may also spread through the CSF to form “drop 
mets” in the spinal canal. The two main histologic subtypes are 
papillary and anaplastic, the latter characterized by increased 
mitotic activity and areas of necrosis. Gross total resection 
often is impossible because the tumor arises from the brain 
stem. The goal of surgery is to achieve maximal resection 
without injuring the very delicate brain stem. Suboccipital cra-
niotomy and midline separation of the cerebellar hemispheres 
allows access to tumors in the fourth ventricle. Postoperative 
radiation therapy significantly improves survival. Patients with 
CSF spread documented by LP or contrast MRI should also 
have whole-spine radiation plus focused doses to visualized 
metastases.
Choroid Plexus Papilloma.  The choroid plexus is com-
posed of many small vascular tufts covered with cuboidal epi-
thelium. It represents part of the interface between blood and 
brain. The choroid cells create CSF from blood and release it 
into the ventricular system. Choroid plexus papillomas and 
choroid plexus carcinomas (rare, mostly pediatric) may arise 
from these cells. Papillomas usually occur in infants (typically 
supratentorial in the lateral ventricle) but also occur in adults 
(usually infratentorial in the fourth ventricle). Papillomas are 
well circumscribed and vividly enhance due to extensive vas-
culature. Like ependymomas, adult choroid plexus papillomas 
usually present with symptoms of increased ICP. Treatment is 
surgical excision. Total surgical excision is curative; recurrent 
papillomas should be re-resected. Radiation or chemotherapy 
are not indicated for papillomas. Radiation is adjunctive to 
aggressive surgery for carcinomas, but the results are gener-
ally poor.
Neural Tumors and Mixed Tumors
Neural and mixed tumors are a diverse group that includes 
tumors variously containing normal or abnormal neurons and/
or normal or abnormal glial cells. Primitive neuroectodermal 
tumors arise from bipotential cells, capable of differentiating 
into neurons or glial cells.
Medulloblastoma.  Primitive neuroectodermal tumor is the 
most common type of medulloblastoma. Most occur in the 
first decade of life, but there is a second peak around age 30. 
Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant pediatric brain 
tumor. They are usually midline. Most occur in the cerebel-
lum and present with symptoms of increased ICP. Histologic 
characteristics include densely packed small round cells with 
large nuclei and scant cytoplasm. They are generally not encap-
sulated, frequently disseminate within the CNS, and should 
undergo surgical resection followed by radiation therapy and 
chemotherapy.
Figure 42-20.  A. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a ring-enhancing lesion in the anteromedial 
right temporal lobe with central necrosis (dark area) consistent with glioblastoma multiforme. B. T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance 
imaging with extensive bright signal signifying peritumoral edema seen with glioblastoma multiformes.
1735
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Ganglioglioma.  Ganglioglioma is a mixed tumor in which 
both neurons and glial cells are neoplastic. They occur in the 
first three decades of life, often in the medial temporal lobe, as 
circumscribed masses that may contain cysts or calcium and 
may enhance. The presenting symptom is usually a seizure, due 
to the medial temporal location. Patients have a good prognosis 
after complete surgical resection.
Neural Crest Tumors
Multipotent neural crest cells develop into a variety of dispa-
rate cell types, including smooth muscle cells, sympathetic and 
parasympathetic neurons, melanocytes, Schwann cells, and 
arachnoid cap cells. They migrate in early development from 
the primitive neural tube throughout the body.
Miscellaneous Tumors
Meningioma.  Meningiomas are derived from arachnoid cap 
cells of the arachnoidea mater. They appear to arise from the 
dura mater grossly and on MRI and are commonly referred to 
as dural-based tumors. The most common intracranial locations 
are along the falx (Fig. 42-21), the convexities (i.e., over the 
cerebral hemispheres), and the sphenoid wing. Less common 
locations include the foramen magnum, olfactory groove, and 
inside the lateral ventricle. Most are slow growing, encapsu-
lated, benign tumors. Aggressive atypical or malignant menin-
giomas may invade adjacent bone or cerebral cortex. Previous 
cranial irradiation increases the incidence of meningiomas. 
Approximately 10% of patients with a meningioma have multi-
ple meningiomas. Total resection is curative, although involve-
ment with small perforating arteries or cranial nerves may make 
total resection of skull base tumors impossible without signifi-
cant neurologic deficit. Small, asymptomatic meningiomas can 
be followed until symptomatic or until significant growth is 
documented on serial imaging studies. Atypical and malignant 
meningiomas may require postoperative radiation. Patients may 
develop recurrences from the surgical bed or distant de novo 
tumors.
Vestibular Schwannoma (Acoustic Neuroma).  Vestibular 
schwannomas predominantly arise from the superior half of the 
vestibular portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve 
VIII) (Fig. 42-22). Commonly, patients present with progressive 
hearing loss, tinnitus, or balance difficulty. Large tumors may 
cause brain stem compression and obstructive hydrocephalus. 
Bilateral acoustic neuromas are pathognomonic for neurofibro-
matosis type 2 (NF2), a syndrome resulting from mutation of 
chromosome 22. NF2 patients have an increased incidence of 
spinal and cranial meningiomas and gliomas.
Vestibular schwannomas may be treated with microsurgi-
cal resection or SRS (gamma knife or linear accelerator technol-
ogy). The main complication with treatment is damage to the 
facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), which runs through the internal 
auditory canal with the vestibulocochlear nerve. Risk of facial 
nerve dysfunction increases with increasing tumor diameter.
Pituitary Adenoma.  Pituitary adenomas arise from the ante-
rior pituitary gland (adenohypophysis). Tumors <1 cm diameter 
are considered microadenomas; larger tumors are macroad-
enomas. Pituitary tumors may be functional (i.e., secrete 
endocrinologically active compounds at pathologic levels) or 
nonfunctional (i.e., secrete nothing or inactive compounds). 
Functional tumors are often diagnosed when quite small, due 
to endocrine dysfunction. The most common endocrine syn-
dromes are Cushing’s disease, due to adrenocorticotropic 
hormone secretion, Forbes-Albright syndrome, due to prolac-
tin secretion, and acromegaly, due to growth hormone secre-
tion. Nonfunctional tumors are typically diagnosed as larger 
lesions causing mass effects such as visual field deficits due to 
compression of the optic chiasm or panhypopituitarism due to 
compression of the gland. Figure 42-23 demonstrates a large 
pituitary adenoma. Hemorrhage into a pituitary tumor causes 
abrupt symptoms of headache, visual disturbance, decreased 
mental status, and endocrine dysfunction. This is known as 
pituitary apoplexy.
Symptomatic pituitary tumors should be decompressed 
surgically to eliminate mass effect and/or to attempt an endo-
crine cure. However, prolactin-secreting tumors (prolactino-
mas) usually shrink with dopaminergic therapy alone, namely 
bromocriptine, which inhibits production and secretion of pro-
lactin. Consider surgery for prolactinomas with persistent mass 
effect or endocrinologic dysfunction in spite of adequate dopa-
mine agonist therapy. Most pituitary tumors are approached 
through the nose via the transsphenoidal approach, and mini-
mally invasive, endoscopic surgical techniques are being used 
increasingly.
Hemangioblastoma.  Hemangioblastomas occur almost exclu-
sively in the posterior fossa,with about 20% occuring in patients 
with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, a multisystem neoplas-
tic disorder. Other tumors associated with VHL are renal cell 
Figure 42-21.  Postcontrast T1-weighted coronal magnetic reso-
nance imaging demonstrating a brightly enhancing lesion arising 
from the falx cerebri with moderate edema and mass effect on the 
right lateral ventricle. This is a falcine meningioma. Note also the 
small separate meningioma arising from the dura over the cerebral 
convexity.
1736
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and retinal angiomas. Many 
appear as cystic tumors with an enhancing tumor on the cyst 
wall known as the mural nodule. Surgical resection is curative 
for sporadic (non-VHL associated) tumors. Pathology reveals 
abundant thin-walled vascular channels; internal debulking may 
be bloody. En bloc resection of the mural nodule alone, leaving 
the cyst wall, is sufficient.
Lymphoma.  CNS lymphoma may arise either primarily in the 
CNS or secondarily from systemic disease. Recent rising inci-
dence may be due to growing transplant and AIDS populations. 
Presenting symptoms include mental status changes, headache 
due to increased ICP, and cranial nerve palsy due to lymphoma-
tous meningitis (analogous to carcinomatous meningitis). Often, 
lymphoma appears hyperdense on CT due to dense cellularity, 
and most lesions typically enhance with contrast. Surgical exci-
sion is not indicated. A stereotactic needle biopsy specimen 
usually confirms the diagnosis. Subsequent treatment includes 
steroids, whole-brain radiation, and chemotherapy. Intrathecal 
methotrexate is an option.
Embryologic Tumors
Embryologic tumors result from embryonal remnants that 
fail to involute completely or differentiate properly during 
development.
Craniopharyngioma.  Craniopharyngiomas are benign cystic 
lesions that occur most frequently in children. There is a second 
peak of incidence around 50 years of age. Calcification occurs 
in all pediatric and roughly half of adult craniopharyngiomas. 
Symptoms result from compression of adjacent structures, espe-
cially the optic chiasm. Pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction 
or hydrocephalus may develop. Treatment is primarily surgical. 
Excision is somewhat easier in children, as the tumor is often 
soft and easily suctioned. Adult tumors are often firm and adher-
ent to adjacent vital structures. Visual loss, pituitary endocrine 
Figure 42-22.  A. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a brightly enhancing mass on the right vestibular nerve 
with an enhancing tail going into the internal auditory canal (arrowhead). Pathology demonstrated vestibular schwannoma. B. Postcontrast T1-weighted 
sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the same lesion, indicated by the arrowhead. Note small incidental meningioma at the top of the scan.
Figure 42-23.  Postcontrast T1-weighted sagittal magnetic reso-
nance imaging demonstrating a large sellar/suprasellar lesion 
(arrowheads) involving the third ventricle superiorly and abut-
ting the midbrain and pons posteriorly. The patient presented with 
progressive visual field and acuity loss. Pathology and lab work 
revealed a nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma.
1737
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
hypofunction, diabetes insipidus, and cognitive impairment 
from basal frontal injury are common complications.
Epidermoid.  Epidermoid tumors are cystic lesions with strati-
fied squamous epithelial walls from trapped ectodermal cell 
rests that grow slowly and linearly by desquamation into the 
cyst cavity. The cysts contain keratin, cholesterol, and cellular 
debris (Fig. 42-24). They occur most frequently in the cerebel-
lopontine angle and may cause symptoms due to brain stem 
compression. Recurrent bouts of aseptic meningitis may occur 
due to release of irritative cyst contents into the subarachnoid 
space (Mollaret’s meningitis). Treatment is surgical drainage 
and removal of the cyst wall. Intraoperative spillage of cyst 
contents may lead to severe chemical meningitis and must be 
avoided by containment and aspiration.
Dermoid.  Dermoids are less common than epidermoid tumors. 
They contain hair follicles and sebaceous glands in addition to a 
squamous epithelium. Dermoids may be found anywhere along 
the craniospinal axis. They are more commonly midline struc-
tures and are associated with more anomalies than epidermoids. 
They may be associated with trauma, as from a lumbar puncture 
that drags skin structures into the spine. Bacterial meningitis 
may occur when dermoids are associated with a dermal sinus 
tract. Treatment of symptomatic lesions is surgical resection, 
again with care to control cyst contents.
Teratoma.  Teratomas are germ cell tumors that arise in the 
midline, often in the pineal region (the area behind the third 
ventricle, above the midbrain and cerebellum). They contain 
elements from all three embryonal layers: ectoderm, meso-
derm, and endoderm. Teratomas may contain skin, cartilage, GI 
glands, and teeth. Teratomas with more primitive features are 
more malignant, while those with more differentiated tissues are 
more benign. Surgical excision may be attempted. However, the 
prognosis for malignant teratomas is very poor.
Spinal Tumors
A wide variety of tumors affect the spine. Approximately 20% 
of CNS tumors occur in the spine. Unlike cranial tumors, the 
majority of spinal tumors are histologically benign. Under-
standing two major spinal concepts—stability and neural 
compression—facilitates an understanding of the effects of 
spinal tumors. Destruction of bones or ligaments can cause 
spinal instability, leading to deformities such as kyphosis, sub-
luxation, or possible subsequent neural compression. Tumor 
growth in the spinal canal or neural foramina can cause direct 
compression of the spinal cord or nerve roots and cause pain 
and loss of function. Classically, the pain is worse at night. 
Anatomic categorization provides the most logical approach 
to these tumors. Certain tumors present in characteristic loca-
tions. An understanding of the anatomy leads to an under-
standing of the clinical presentation and possible therapeutic 
options.
Extradural Tumors.  Extradural tumors account for approxi-
mately 55% of spinal tumors. This category includes tumors 
arising within the bony vertebral structures and from within the 
epidural space. Destruction of the bone can lead to instability 
and fractures, causing pain and/or deformity. Epidural expan-
sion can lead to spinal cord or nerve root compression with 
myelopathy, radiculopathy, or a combination thereof.
Metastatic Tumors  Metastatic tumors are the most common 
extradural tumors. Spinal metastases most commonly occur in 
the thoracic and lumbar vertebral bodies because the greatest 
volume of red bone marrow is found in these regions. The most 
common primary sources of spine metastasis are lymphoma, 
lung, breast, and prostate. Other sources include renal, colon, 
thyroid, sarcoma, and melanoma. Most spinal metastases create 
osteolytic lesions. Osteoblastic, sclerotic lesions suggest pros-
tate cancer in men and breast cancer in women.
Patients with progressive neurologic dysfunction due to 
a metastatic lesion should undergo urgent surgery followed by 
radiation therapy.33 Patients with debilitating pain may undergo 
radiation therapy with close observation for neurologic deterio-
ration. Preoperative neurologic function correlates with postop-
erative function. Patients may lose function over hours. These 
patients should be given high-dose IV dexamethasone, taken 
immediately to MRI, and then to the OR or radiation therapy 
suite. Indications for surgery include failure of radiation ther-
apy, spinal instability, recurrence after radiation therapy, and the 
need for diagnosis in cases of unknown primary tumors. Most 
cases with significant bone involvement require both decom-
pression and fusion. Bony fusion usually takes 2 to 3 months. 
Prognosis governs operative decisions. Surgery is unlikely to 
improve quality of life for patients with a life expectancy of 
3 months or less, but it is likely to improve quality of life for 
patients with life expectancy of 6 months or more. Benefit for 
patients with 3- to 6-months life expectancy is unclear and 
requires frank discussion with the patient and family. Patients 
who are unlikely to tolerate general anesthesia, are already 
completely paralyzed, or who have very radiosensitive tumors 
such as multiple myeloma and lymphoma, should not generally 
undergo surgery.
Figure 42-24.  Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance 
imaging demonstrating a nonenhancing mass in the left cerebello-
pontine angle with brain stem compression. White arrowhead indi-
cates interface of tumor and brain stem. Black arrowhead indicates 
deformed fourth ventricle. Pathology revealed epidermoid tumor.
1738
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Primary Tumors  Hemangiomas are benign tumors found in 
10% of people at autopsy. They occur in the vertebral bodies 
of the thoracolumbar spine and are frequently asymptomatic. 
They are often vascular and may hemorrhage, causing pain or 
neurologic deficit. Large hemangiomas can destabilize the spine 
and predispose to fracture. Osteoblastic lesions include osteoid 
osteoma and osteoblastoma. The latter tends to be larger and 
more destructive. Aneurysmal bone cysts are nonneoplastic, 
expansile, lytic lesions containing thin-walled blood cavities 
that usually occur in the lamina or spinous processes of the cer-
vicothoracic spine. They may cause pain or sufficiently weaken 
the bone to cause a fracture. Cancers arising primarily in the 
bony spine include Ewing’s sarcoma, osteosarcoma, chondro-
sarcoma, and plasmacytoma.
Intradural Extramedullary Tumors
Intradural extramedullary tumors constitute approximately 40% 
of spinal tumors and arise from the meninges or nerve root ele-
ments. They may compress the spinal cord, causing myelopathy, 
or the nerve roots, causing radiculopathy. The most common 
intradural extramedullary tumors are typically benign, slow 
growing, and well circumscribed. Rare benign epidural masses 
include arachnoid cysts, dermoids, and epidermoids. Rare 
malignant epidural tumors include metastases and high-grade 
gliomas, or “drop” metastases from posterior fossa gliomas.
Meningioma  Meningiomas arise from the arachnoidea mater. 
They appear to be dural based and enhance on MRI. An enhanc-
ing “dural tail” may be seen. They occur most commonly in 
the thoracic spine (Fig. 42-25) but also arise in the cervical and 
lumbar regions. Some spinal meningiomas grow into the epi-
dural space. Growth causes cord compression and progressive 
myelopathy with hyperreflexia, spasticity, and gait difficulties. 
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. The surgeon often 
finds a clean margin between the tumor, dura, and spinal cord, 
allowing en bloc resection without damage to the cord.
Schwannoma  Schwannomas are derived from peripheral nerve 
sheath Schwann cells. They are benign, encapsulated tumors 
that rarely undergo malignant degeneration. While two- thirds 
are entirely intradural, one-sixth are entirely extradural, and one-
sixth have a classic “dumbbell” shape from intradural and extra-
dural components. Symptoms result from radiculopathy, often 
presenting as pain or myelopathy. Symptomatic lesions should 
be surgically resected. The parent nerve root usually can be pre-
served. Patients with multiple schwannomas likely have NF2. 
In these patients, a careful neurologic examination is needed to 
determine which lesions are symptomatic and require resection.
Neurofibroma  In contrast to schwannomas, neurofibromas tend 
to appear more fusiform and to grow within the parent nerve, 
rather than forming an encapsulated mass branching off the 
nerve. Neurofibromas are benign but not encapsulated. They 
present similarly to schwannomas, and the two may be difficult 
to differentiate on imaging. Salvage of the parent nerve is more 
challenging with neurofibromas. To improve the likelihood of 
total resection, thoracic and high cervical nerve roots may be 
sacrificed with minimal deficit. Patients with multiple neurofi-
bromas likely have NF1, also known as von Recklinghausen’s 
neurofibromatosis. Resection for symptomatic lesions should 
be offered.
Intramedullary Tumors.  Intramedullary tumors constitute 
approximately 5% of spinal tumors. They arise from within the 
parenchyma of the spinal cord. Common presenting symptoms 
are local dysesthesia, burning pain, radicular pain, sensory loss, 
weakness, or sphincter dysfunction. Patients with such symp-
toms should undergo MRI of the entire spine with and without 
enhancement.
Ependymoma  Ependymomas are the most common intramed-
ullary tumors in adults. There are several histologic variants. 
The myxopapillary type occurs in the conus medullaris or the 
filum terminale in the lumbar region and has the best progno-
sis after resection. The cellular type occurs more frequently in 
the cervical cord. Many spinal ependymomas have cystic areas 
and may contain hemorrhage. Surgical removal can improve 
function. A distinct tumor margin often exists, allowing safer 
excision. Postoperative radiation therapy after subtotal resection 
may prolong disease control.
Astrocytoma  Astrocytomas are the most common intramedul-
lary tumors in children, although they also occur in adults. They 
may occur at all levels, although more often in the cervical cord. 
The tumor may interfere with the CSF-containing central canal 
of the spinal cord, leading to a dilated central canal, referred 
to as syringomyelia (syrinx). Spinal astrocytomas are usually 
Figure 42-25.  T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging 
of the midthoracic spine demonstrating a well-encapsulated tumor 
arising from the dura posteriorly and compressing the spinal cord. 
Arrowhead points to dorsal location of the mass. The patient pre-
sented with worsening gait and lower extremity spasticity. Pathol-
ogy demonstrated meningioma.
1739
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
low grade, but complete excision is rarely possible due to the 
nonencapsulated, infiltrative nature of the tumor. As a result, 
patients with astrocytomas fare worse overall than patients with 
ependymomas.
Other Tumors.  Other types of rare tumors include high-grade 
astrocytomas, dermoids, epidermoids, teratomas, hemangiomas, 
hemangioblastomas, and metastases. Patients usually present 
with pain. Prognosis generally depends on preoperative func-
tion and the histologic characteristics of the lesion.
SPINE: BASIC CONCEPTS
The spine is a complex structure and is subject to an extensive 
array of pathologic processes, including degeneration, inflam-
mation, infection, neoplasia, and trauma. Discussions of spine 
trauma, tumor, and infection are addressed separately in this 
chapter in the Infection—Spine, Spinal Tumors, and Spine 
Trauma sections. General concepts, common patterns of dis-
ease, and basic operative interventions are presented here.
The spine consists of a series of stacked vertebrae, inter-
vening discs, and longitudinal ligaments. The vertebrae consist 
of the vertebral body anteriorly and the pedicles, articular facets, 
laminae, and spinous processes posteriorly. The intervertebral 
discs have two components. The tough, fibrous ring that runs 
around the outer diameter of the two adjacent vertebral bodies 
is known as the annulus fibrosus. The spongy material inside the 
ring of the annulus is known as the nucleus pulposus. The annu-
lus and the nucleus provide a cushion between adjacent verte-
bral bodies, absorb forces transmitted to the spine, and allow 
some movement between the vertebral bodies. The ligaments 
stabilize the spine by limiting the motion of adjacent vertebrae.
Stability and neural compression are the two concepts crit-
ical to understanding the mechanics and pathologic processes 
affecting the spine.
Stability
The spinal column is the principal structural component of the 
axial spine, and it must bear significant loads. The vertebrae 
increase in size from the top to the bottom of the spine, cor-
relating with the increased total loads that the more caudal ele-
ments must bear. The cervical spine is the most mobile. Cervical 
stability depends greatly on the integrity of the ligaments that 
run from level to level. The thoracic spine is the least mobile, 
due to the stabilizing effect of the rib cage. The lumbar spine 
has relatively massive vertebrae, supports heavy loads, and has 
intermediate mobility. The sacral spine is fused together and 
has no intrinsic mobility. The load borne by the lumbar spine is 
transmitted to the sacrum, and then the pelvis through the sacro-
iliac joints. The coccyx is the most inferior segment of the spine 
and has no significant contribution to load bearing or mobility.
A stable spine is one that can bear normally experienced 
forces resulting from body mass, movement, and muscle con-
traction, while maintaining normal structure and alignment. 
An unstable spine will shift or sublux under these forces. The 
determinants of spinal stability vary throughout the cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar portions. In elementary form, stability 
depends on the structural integrity of the hard, bony elements of 
the vertebral column, as well as the tensile integrity and security 
of the supporting ligamentous attachments. Plain X-rays and CT 
scans are sensitive for detecting bony defects such as fractures 
or subluxation, while MRI better detects disruptions of the soft 
tissues, including ligaments and intervertebral discs. Specific 
patterns of abnormalities seen on imaging studies may suggest 
or diagnose spinal instability.
A common form of nontraumatic spinal instability is lum-
bar spondylolisthesis, which is typically a forward slippage of a 
lumbar vertebra relative to the lower vertebra on which it rests. 
This results from congenital or degenerative disruption of the 
pars interarticularis, the critical bridge of bone that spans adja-
cent facet joints. In the setting of a pars defect, there is no solid 
bony connection between the adjacent vertebrae. The spine is 
unstable and anterior listhesis (slippage) may result. Patients 
typically present with severe low back pain that is exacerbated 
with movement and load bearing (mechanical low back pain). 
Radiculopathy in this setting indicates neuroforaminal compres-
sion. Figure 42-26 demonstrates an L4 and L5 spondylolisthesis.
Neural Compression
Besides providing a stable, central element of the body’s support 
structure, the spine also protects the spinal cord and nerve roots 
as they pass through the neural foramina to form the peripheral 
nervous system. In a healthy spine, the spinal cord and nerve 
roots are suspended in CSF, free of mechanical compression. 
Pathologic processes that can lead to CSF space impingement 
and neural compression include: hypertrophic degenerative 
changes in the intervertebral discs and facet joints, expansion 
of epidural masses such as tumors or abscesses, and subluxation 
(i.e., slippage) of adjacent vertebral bodies. Subluxation may be 
due to trauma that exceeds the spine’s load-bearing capabilities 
and leads to structural failure, or chronic structural degrada-
tion by degenerative disease, infection, or tumor. Subluxation 
Figure 42-26.  Lateral lumbar spine X-ray demonstrates a 25% 
anterior slippage of L4 on L5 due to a defect in the L4 pars interar-
ticularis. This is called spondylolisthesis.
1740
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
reduces the cross-sectional area of the central canal and the neu-
ral foramina (see Fig. 42-10B). Reduced central canal area can 
lead to myelopathy. Reduced neural foraminal area can lead to 
radiculopathy.
Myelopathy.  Compression of the spinal cord can cause distur-
bance of function known as myelopathy. This dysfunction may 
be secondary to the direct effects of compression, cord isch-
emia due to reduced perfusion, or pathologic changes due to 
repeated cord trauma. These mechanisms lead to demyelination 
of the corticospinal tracts, which are long descending motor 
tracts. Corticospinal tract damage leads to upper motor neuron 
signs and symptoms, including hyperreflexia, spasticity, and 
weakness. These mechanisms also cause damage to the dorsal 
columns, which carry ascending proprioception, vibration, and 
two-point discrimination information. Loss of proprioception 
makes fine motor tasks and ambulation difficult.
Radiculopathy.  Compression of the nerve roots causes distur-
bance of root function, known as radiculopathy. Characteristic 
features of radiculopathy include lower motor neuron signs and 
symptoms (hyporeflexia, atrophy, and weakness) and sensory 
disturbances such as numbness or tingling sensations (paresthe-
sias), burning sensations (dysesthesias), and shooting (radicular) 
pain. Myelopathy and radiculopathy often present together in 
diseases that involve the central canal and the neural foramina. 
This combination can lead to lower motor neuron dysfunction at 
the level of disease, and upper motor neuron dysfunction below 
that level.
Patterns of Disease
Cervical Radiculopathy.  The cervical nerve roots exit the 
central canal above the pedicle of the same-numbered verte-
bra and at the level of the higher adjacent intervertebral disc. 
For example, the C6 nerve root passes above the C6 pedicle at 
the level of the C5–C6 discs. The cervical nerve roots may be 
compressed acutely by disc herniation, or chronically by hyper-
trophic degenerative changes of the discs, facets, and ligaments. 
Table 42-6 summarizes the effects of various disc herniations. 
Most patients with acute disc herniations will improve with-
out surgery. NSAIDs or cervical traction may help alleviate 
symptoms. Patients whose symptoms do not resolve or who 
have significant weakness should undergo decompressive sur-
gery. The two main options for nerve root decompression are 
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) and posterior 
cervical foraminotomy (keyhole foraminotomy). ACDF allows 
more direct access to and removal of the pathology (anterior 
to the nerve root). However, the procedure requires fusion 
because discectomy causes a collapse of the interbody space 
and instability will likely occur. Figure 42-27 demonstrates a 
C6–C7 ACDF with the typical interposed graft and plating sys-
tem. Keyhole foraminotomy allows for decompression without 
requiring fusion, but it is less effective for removing centrally 
located canal pathology.
Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy.  The term spondylosis 
refers to diffuse degenerative and hypertrophic changes of the 
discs, intervertebral joints, and ligaments, which collectively 
result in spinal stenosis. Spinal cord dysfunction (myelopathy) 
due to cord compression from cervical spinal degenerative dis-
ease is therefore referred to as cervical spondylotic myelopathy 
(CSM). Classically CSM presents with spasticity and hyperre-
flexia due to corticospinal tract dysfunction, upper extremity 
weakness and atrophy from degeneration of the motor neu-
rons in the anterior horns of the spinal gray matter, and loss 
of lower extremity proprioception due to dorsal column injury. 
Figure 42-28 demonstrates typical findings. Some patients com-
plain of difficulty buttoning shirts, using utensils, and ambu-
lating. Spondylosis is usually diffuse, so the usual treatment 
for CSM is multilevel (usually C3–C7) cervical laminectomy, 
although patients with disease localized over one to three lev-
els may be candidates for anterior decompression and fusion. 
Figure 42-29 demonstrates the postoperative appearance of a 
vertebral corpectomy and fusion for CSM. Thorough cervical 
laminectomy decompresses the cord posteriorly. Patients often 
have slow recovery due to the extensive chronic changes in the 
cervical cord and may benefit from rehabilitation programs. The 
other disease that classically presents with combined upper and 
lower motor neuron symptoms is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). Care must be taken to avoid offering cervical laminec-
tomy to a patient with undiagnosed ALS. Two findings help 
differentiate CSM from ALS: cranial nerve dysfunction such as 
dysphagia (not typically caused by cervical spine disease) and 
sensory disturbance (not found in ALS).
Thoracic Disc Herniation.  Thoracic disc herniation accounts 
for <1% of herniated discs. A patient may present with radicular 
pain or sensorimotor changes in the lower extremities due to cord 
compression. A posterior approach via midline incision and lami-
nectomy should be avoided because of the high incidence of cord 
injury from manipulation and retraction. Anterior approaches via 
thoracotomy minimize risk to the cord and allow excellent access 
to the disc. The radicular arteries running from the aorta to the 
thoracic cord should be spared, when possible, to avoid ischemia. 
Alternatively, a posterolateral approach is possible via resection 
of the rib head and facet joint. Finally, a transpedicular approach 
may be attempted for lateral disc herniations.34
Lumbar Radiculopathy.  Lumbar nerve roots exit the thecal 
sac, pass over the higher adjacent disc space, and exit the canal 
under the pedicle of the same-numbered vertebra. Therefore, 
Table 42-6 
Cervical disc herniations and symptoms by level
Level
Frequency (%)
Root Injured
Reflex
Weakness
Numbness
C4–C5
2
C5
—
Deltoid
Shoulder
C5–C6
19
C6
Biceps
Biceps brachii
Thumb
C6–C7
69
C7
Triceps
Wrist extensors (wrist drop)
Second and third digits
C7–T1
10
C8
—
Hand intrinsics
Fourth and fifth digits
Source: Adapted with permission from Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery, 7th ed. New York: Thieme, 2010. Table 18–18, p 461.
1741
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
B
A
Figure 42-27.  A. Anteroposterior cervical spine X-ray showing the position of an anterior cervical plate used for stabilization after C6–C7 
discectomy. Patient presented with right triceps weakness and dysesthesias in the right fifth digit. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 
right paracentral C6–C7 herniated disc compressing the exiting C7 nerve root. B. Lateral cervical spine X-ray of the same patient clearly 
demonstrates the position of the plate and screws. The allograft bone spacer placed in the drilled-out disc space is also apparent.
Figure 42-28.  T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging 
of the cervical spine showing multilevel degenerative changes caus-
ing spinal stenosis that is worst at C5–C6. Note the bright signal 
within the cord at that level, consistent with myelopathy.
Figure 42-29.  Lateral cervical spine X-ray status post C5 corpec-
tomy for cervical spondylotic myelopathy. This involves removal 
of the C4–C5 disc, C5 vertebral body, and C5–C6 disc, decom-
pressing at two levels. A bone strut is visible bridging C4 to C6. 
The plate and screws stabilize the segments.
1742
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
the L5 nerve root passes over the L4–L5 disc space and exits 
under the L5 pedicle (Fig. 42-30). Lumbar discs may herniate 
with or without a history of trauma or straining. Normally they 
cause lancinating (radicular) pain down the leg (Table 42-7). 
Most acute herniated lumbar discs improve symptomatically 
without surgery. Surgery is indicated for symptoms persisting 
more than 6 to 8 weeks, progressive motor deficit (e.g., foot 
drop), or for patients with incapacitating pain not manageable 
with analgesics.
Discectomy is performed using a midline incision, partial 
removal of the overlying laminae (hemilaminectomy or lami-
notomy), identification of the thecal sac and nerve root, and 
extraction of disc fragments. Free-floating disc fragments may 
be found. Often, however, the herniated disc material is still 
contained within the annulus, requiring incision of the poste-
rior longitudinal ligament and curettage of the disc space. After 
lumbar discectomy, approximately two-thirds of patients will 
have complete relief of pain, and up to 85% will have significant 
improvement.
Neurogenic Claudication.  Neurogenic claudication is char-
acterized by low back and leg pain that occurs while walk-
ing and is relieved by stopping, leaning forward, or sitting. It 
is normally caused by degenerative lumbar stenosis causing 
compression of the cauda equina. Neurogenic claudication 
must be distinguished from vascular claudication, which tends 
to resolve quickly with cessation of walking. There is typically 
no need to change position, and the pain follows a stocking 
distribution rather than a dermatomal distribution. Pallor and 
coldness of the feet, and normal neurologic examination are 
also typical, though diabetic patients may present a challenge 
with microvascular neuropathy. Patients with neurogenic clau-
dication have a slowly progressive course and may be surgical 
candidates when their pain interferes with their lifestyle. The 
usual surgery is an L3 to L5 lumbar laminectomy to decom-
press the nerve roots.
Cauda Equina Syndrome.  Cauda equina syndrome is due to 
compression of the cauda equina and may result from massive 
disc herniation, EDH, epidural abscess, tumor, or subluxation 
from trauma. Patients with cauda equina compression often 
present with urinary retention, saddle anesthesia, or progressing 
leg weakness. Saddle anesthesia is numbness in the perineum, 
genitals, buttocks, and upper inner thighs. Patients with sus-
pected cauda equina syndrome should undergo immediate 
MRI of the lumbar spine to evaluate for a surgical lesion. Mass 
lesions should be removed urgently via laminectomy to preserve 
sphincter function and ambulation.
A
B
Figure 42-30.  A. T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging shows an L5–S1 disc herniation causing significant canal compromise 
and displacement of nerve roots. B. T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging of the same patient shows the large left paracentral disc 
herniation at L5–S1. Arrowheads delineate the extent of the herniation. The arrow indicates the right S1 nerve root passing through free of 
compression. The left S1 nerve root is under severe compression and is not seen.
Table 42-7
Lumbar disc herniations and symptoms by level
Level
Frequency (%)
Root Injured
Reflex
Weakness
Numbness
L3–L4
5
L4
Patellar
Quadriceps
Anterior thigh
L4–L5
45
L5
—
Tibialis anterior (foot drop)
Great toe
L5–S1
50
S1
Achilles
Gastrocnemius
Lateral foot
Source: Adapted with permission from Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery, 7th ed. New York: Thieme, 2010. Table 18–13, p 445.
1743
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Spine Fusion Surgery
Fusion surgery is often required for patients with spinal 
instability resulting from disease, surgical intervention, or 
both. Fusion procedures lock adjacent vertebrae together. 
Fusion occurs when the body forms a solid mass of bone 
incorporating the adjacent vertebrae, eliminating normal 
intervertebral movement. Stabilization and immobilization 
promote bony fusion. Internal instrumentation and external 
orthoses are often used to stabilize and immobilize the fused 
spinal segments.
Spinal Instrumentation
Internal fixation devices for spinal segmental immobiliza-
tion have been developed for all levels of the spine. Most 
spinal instrumentation constructs have two elements. 
The first element is a device that solidly attaches to the 
vertebral bodies. Options include wires wrapped around 
laminae or spinous processes, hooks placed under the lamina 
or around the pedicles, or screws placed in the pedicles or 
the vertebral bodies. The second element is a device that tra-
verses vertebral segments. Options include rods and plates 
that lock directly to the wires, hooks, or screws at each ver-
tebral level. Spinal instrumentation devices are available for 
anterior and posterior fusion in the cervical, thoracic, and 
lumbar regions. Most modern spinal instrumentation devices 
are made of titanium to minimize problems with future MRI 
scanning (Fig. 42-31). All spinal instrumentation constructs 
will eventually fail by loosening or breaking if bony fusion 
does not occur.
Arthrodesis
Arthrodesis refers to the obliteration of motion or instabil-
ity by incorporating the relevant components into a solid 
mass of bone. Arthrodesis must occur in any fused segment 
to have long-term stability. Failure of arthrodesis results in 
failed fusion, often in the form of a fibrous nonunion. The 
rates of successful fusion are higher in the cervical spine 
than the lumbar spine. Arthrodesis requires ingrowth of new 
bone formed by the patient’s osteoblasts across the unstable 
defect. Inserting graft material, such as autograft or allograft, 
into the defect provides a bridge for osteoblasts and promotes 
fusion. The term autograft refers to the patient’s own bone, 
often harvested from the iliac crest. Iliac crest bone graft is 
a source of both cortical and cancellous bone. Cortical bone 
provides structural support, while cancellous bone provides 
a matrix for bony ingrowth. The term allograft refers to ster-
ilized bone from human tissue banks. Allografts also may 
be cortical, cancellous, or both. Allograft lacks the array of 
osteoinductive endogenous compounds intrinsic to autograft, 
although supplemental products such as demineralized bone 
matrix paste can be added to encourage new bone formation. 
Other techniques for increasing the rates of successful fusion 
are being developed, including the integration of osteoinduc-
tive bone morphogenetic proteins, known as BMPs, into the 
fusion constructs.
Dynamic stabilization refers to the creation of spi-
nal stability without achieving a bony fusion. The con-
cept applies to both cervical and lumbar motion segments. 
Artificial lumbar and cervical disc replacement therapies 
are recent developments in degenerative spine disease that 
address this concept. However, their use is limited to very 
select cases. Another motion preservation technique that 
may hold promise is segmental “soft” stabilization.35 In 
6
A
 
B
Figure 42-31.  A. Lateral lumbar spine X-ray showing pedicle screws 
and connecting rods used to stabilize L4 with respect to L5. This 
instrumentation was placed as part of a fusion operation to stabilize 
progressive L4–L5 spondylolisthesis with intractable low back pain. 
 B. Anteroposterior lumbar spine X-ray showing L3 to L5 instrumenta-
tion with pedicle screws and connecting rods. The patient had previ-
ously sustained an L4 burst fracture. Note the significant loss of height 
of the L4 body compared to adjacent levels. The small row of staples to 
the right delineates the incision over the iliac crest used to harvest can-
cellous bone as a nonstructural osteoinductive autograft fusion designed 
to induce formation of a solid bone bridge from L3 to L5 (arthrodesis).
1744
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
cases of degenerative spondylolisthesis, such systems in the 
lumbar spine allow for decompressive laminectomy with-
out increasing slippage. In theory, adjacent level facets and 
discs are spared the stresses of a neighboring bony fusion 
moment arm.
PERIPHERAL NERVE
Common pathologic processes that compromise function of the 
peripheral nervous system include mechanical compression, 
ischemia, inflammation, and neoplasia.
Peripheral Nerve Tumors
Most peripheral nerve tumors are benign and grow slowly. 
Significant pain increases the likelihood that the patient has a 
malignant tumor. Treatment for peripheral nerve tumors is sur-
gical resection to establish diagnosis and evaluate for signs of 
malignancy. These tumors have various degrees of involvement 
with the parent nerve. Some can be resected with minimal or no 
damage to the nerve. Tumors that grow within the nerve often 
contain functioning fascicles. Total excision of these tumors 
requires sacrifice of the parent nerve. The choice of subtotal 
resection, nerve preservation, and observation, vs. total resection 
with nerve sacrifice depends on tumor histology and the function 
of the parent nerve.
Schwannoma.  Schwannomas are the most common periph-
eral nerve tumors, also referred to as neurilemomas or neuri-
nomas. Most occur in the third decade of life. These benign 
tumors arise from Schwann cells, which form myelin in 
peripheral nerves. The most characteristic presentation is a 
mass lesion with point tenderness and shooting pains on direct 
palpation. Spontaneous or continuous pain suggests malig-
nancy. Schwannomas tend to grow slowly and eccentrically 
on parent nerves. The eccentric location and discrete encapsu-
lated nature of these tumors often allow total resection with-
out significant damage to the parent nerve. Subtotal resection 
and observation is reasonable for schwannomas entwined in 
important nerves, as the incidence of malignant transforma-
tion is extremely low.
Neurofibroma.  Neurofibromas arise within the nerve and 
tend to be fusiform masses, unlike schwannomas, which tend 
to grow out of the nerve. Neurofibromas often present as a 
mass that is tender to palpation. They usually lack the shooting 
pains characteristic of schwannomas. Neurofibromas are often 
difficult to resect completely without sacrifice of the parent 
nerve. Neurofibromas have a higher incidence of malignant 
transformation; therefore, patients with known residual tumors 
require close observation. Patients with NF1 often have mul-
tiple neurofibromas. These patients should be offered resection 
for symptomatic tumors. Risk of malignant degeneration is up 
to 10%. Malignant neurofibromas have the histologic charac-
teristics of sarcoma.
Malignant Nerve Sheath Tumors.  Malignant nerve sheath 
tumors include solitary sarcomas, degenerated neurofibromas, 
and neuroepitheliomas. Patients with malignant peripheral 
nerve tumors typically complain of constant pain, rather than 
pain only on palpation, and are more likely to have motor and 
sensory deficits in the distribution of the parent nerve. Treat-
ment for these tumors is radical excision. This often requires 
sacrifice of the parent nerve. Invasion of nearby soft tissues may 
occur and necessitate wide resection or amputation in an attempt 
to prevent systemic metastasis.
Entrapment Neuropathies
Entrapment neuropathy presents as neurologic dysfunction in 
nerves passing through a pathologically small, fixed space. 
Nerve dysfunction may result directly from chronic, repetitive 
pressure on the nerve, or from ischemic damage due to impaired 
perfusion.36 Entrapment causing dysfunction of nerve signaling 
may be associated with numbness, paresthesias, weakness, or 
muscle atrophy. The two most common sites of entrapment neu-
ropathy are the ulnar nerve at the medial aspect of the elbow 
and the median nerve at the wrist. Usually EMG/NCS demon-
strate slowing across the entrapped segment of nerve. Mechani-
cal peripheral nerve disorders resulting from trauma (brachial 
plexus disruption, radial nerve damage from humerus fractures, 
and common peroneal nerve crush injuries) are discussed in the 
section on Trauma.
Ulnar Neuropathy.  The ulnar nerve has contributions from 
the C7, C8, and T1 nerve roots, arises from the medial cord of 
the brachial plexus, and supplies most of the intrinsic hand mus-
cles (interossei and third and fourth lumbricals), and sensation 
to the fourth and fifth digits. It passes posteriorly to the medial 
epicondyle at the elbow in the condylar groove. This segment 
is superficial and subject to external compression and repeti-
tive minor impacts. Patients with ulnar entrapment at the elbow 
present with numbness and tingling in the medial palm, as well 
as the fourth and fifth digits. Motor deficits include weakness 
and wasting of the intrinsic hand muscles. Treatment for symp-
tomatic ulnar entrapment neuropathy is surgical exploration and 
incision of the fibrous aponeurotic arch that overlies the nerve. 
A 6-cm curvilinear incision centered between the medial epi-
condyle and the olecranon allows exploration of up to 10 cm of 
nerve and lysis of compressive tissues.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.  The median nerve has contribu-
tions from the C5 to T1 nerve roots, arises from the medial and 
lateral cords of the brachial plexus, and supplies the muscles of 
wrist and finger flexion and sensation to the palmar aspect of the 
first, second, and third digits. The median nerve passes through 
the carpal tunnel in the wrist, lying superficial to the four deep 
and four superficial flexor tendons. The transverse carpal liga-
ment is a tough, fibrous band that forms the roof of the carpal 
tunnel. The ligament attaches to the pisiform and hamate medi-
ally and the trapezium and scaphoid laterally. Patients complain 
of numbness and tingling in the supplied digits, clumsiness, and 
worsening with sleep or repetitive wrist movement. Patients 
may notice wasting of the thenar eminence. Treatment for 
symptomatic carpal tunnel syndrome unresponsive to splinting, 
analgesics, and rest is surgical division of the flexor retinacu-
lum. This often provides prompt relief of pain symptoms and 
slow recovery of numbness and strength.
Autoimmune and Inflammatory Disorders
These are not surgical diseases, but they merit brief mention 
as they are included in the differential diagnosis for new-onset 
weakness. Their characteristic presentations help distinguish 
them from weakness due to structural lesions.
Guillain-Barré Syndrome.  Guillain-Barré syndrome is 
an acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy 
often occurring after viral infection, surgery, inoculations, or 
1745
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
mycoplasma infections. Patients classically present with weak-
ness ascending from the legs to the body, arms, and even cranial 
nerves. Symptoms usually progress over 2 to 4 weeks and then 
resolve. Care is supportive. Respiratory weakness may require 
ventilatory support.
Myasthenia Gravis.  Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune 
process in which antibodies form to the acetylcholine recep-
tors of muscles, leading to fluctuating weakness. Most patients 
have either thymic hyperplasia or thymoma. The most common 
symptoms are diplopia, ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia. More 
severe cases have limb or respiratory involvement. Weakness 
worsens with repetitive movement. Treatment is with acetylcho-
linesterase inhibitors and possible thymectomy.
Eaton-Lambert Syndrome.  Eaton-Lambert syndrome is an 
autoimmune process with antibodies to the presynaptic calcium 
channels. This is a paraneoplastic syndrome most commonly 
associated with oat cell carcinoma. Patients have weakness of 
proximal limb muscles that improves with repetitive movement. 
This diagnosis must prompt oncologic evaluation.
INFECTION
CNS infections of interest to neurosurgeons include those that 
cause focal neurologic deficit due to mass effect, require 
surgical aspiration or drainage because antibiotic therapy 
alone is insufficient, cause mechanical instability of the 
spine, or occur after neurosurgical procedures.
Cranial
Osteomyelitis.  The skull is highly vascular and resistant 
to infections. Osteomyelitis of the skull may develop by 
contiguous spread from pyogenic sinus disease or from con-
tamination by penetrating trauma. Staphylococcus aureus 
and S. epidermidis are the most frequent causative organ-
isms. Patients usually present with redness, swelling, and 
pain. Contrast head CT aids diagnosis and shows the extent 
of involved bone, along with associated abscesses or empy-
ema. Osteomyelitis treatment entails surgical debridement 
of involved bone followed by 2 to 4 months of antibiotics. 
Craniotomy wound infections are a special concern because 
performing a craniotomy creates a devascularized free bone 
flap susceptible to infection and not penetrated by antibiotics. 
These wounds must be débrided and the bone flaps removed 
and discarded. Subsequent care involves appropriate antibi-
otic therapy, observation for signs of recurrent infection off 
antibiotics, and return to the OR for titanium or methylmeth-
acrylate cranioplasty 6 to 12 months later.
Subdural Empyema.  Subdural empyema is a rapidly progres-
sive pyogenic infection. The subdural space lacks significant 
barriers to the spread of the infection, such as compartmental-
ization or septations. Subdural empyemas usually occur over 
the cerebral convexities. Potential infectious sources include 
sinus disease, penetrating trauma, and otitis. Streptococci and 
staphylococci are the most frequent sources. Presenting symp-
toms include fever, headache, neck stiffness, seizures, or focal 
neurologic deficit. Neurologic deficit results from inflammation 
of cortical blood vessels, leading to thrombosis and stroke. The 
most common deficit is contralateral hemiparesis. Patients with 
suggestive symptoms should undergo rapid contrast CT scan. 
LP frequently fails to yield the offending organism and risks 
herniation due to mass effect. Typical treatment is wide hemi-
craniectomy, dural opening, and lavage. The pus may be thick 
or septated, making burr hole drainage or small craniotomy 
insufficient. Patients then require 1 to 2 months of antibiotics. 
Subdural empyema has 10% to 20% mortality risk and common 
chronic sequelae, including development of a seizure disorder 
and residual hemiparesis. However, many patients do make a 
good recovery.
Brain Abscess.  Brain abscess is encapsulated infection 
within the brain parenchyma. It may spread hematogenously 
in patients with endocarditis or intracardiac or intrapulmonary 
right-to-left shunts, by migration from the sinuses or ear, or via 
direct seeding by penetrating trauma. Disorganized cerebritis 
often precedes formation of the organized, walled-off abscess. 
Patients may present with nonspecific symptoms such as head-
ache, nausea, or lethargy, or with focal neurologic deficit such 
as hemiparesis. Alternatively, patients may present in extremis 
if the abscess ruptures into the ventricular system. Abscesses 
appear as well-demarcated, ring-enhancing, thin-walled lesions 
on CT scan and MRI, and often have associated edema and 
mass effect. Patients require antibiotic therapy after needle 
aspiration or surgical evacuation. Antibiotic therapy with-
out surgical evacuation may be considered for patients with 
small, multiple, or critically located abscesses. Abscesses that 
are large, cause mass effect, decreased mental status, or that 
fail to decrease in size after 1 week of antibiotics, should be 
evacuated. Nonsurgical management still requires aspiration or 
biopsy specimen for organism culture and sensitivities. Blood 
and CSF cultures rarely give definitive diagnosis. Removal of 
an encapsulated abscess significantly shortens the length of 
antibiotic therapy required to eliminate all organisms. Common 
chronic sequelae after successful treatment include seizures or 
focal neurologic deficit.
Spine
Pyogenic Vertebral Osteomyelitis.  Pyogenic vertebral 
osteomyelitis is a destructive bacterial infection of the verte-
brae, usually of the vertebral body. Vertebral osteomyelitis fre-
quently results from hematogenous spread of distant disease, 
but may occur as an extension of adjacent disease, such as psoas 
abscess or perinephric abscess. S. aureus and Enterobacter 
spp. are the most frequent etiologic organisms. Patients usu-
ally present with fever and back pain. Diabetics, IV drug abus-
ers, and dialysis patients have increased incidence of vertebral 
osteomyelitis. Epidural extension may lead to compression of 
the spinal cord or nerve roots with resultant neurologic deficit. 
Osteomyelitis presents a lytic picture on imaging and must be 
distinguished from neoplastic disease. Adjacent intervertebral 
disc involvement occurs frequently with pyogenic osteomyeli-
tis, but rarely with neoplasia. Plain films and CT help assess 
the extent of bony destruction or deformity such as kyphosis. 
MRI shows adjacent soft tissue or epidural disease. Most cases 
can be treated successfully with antibiotics alone, although the 
organism must be isolated to steer antibiotic choice. Blood cul-
tures may be positive. Surgical intervention may be required for 
debridement when antibiotics alone fail, or for stabilization and 
fusion in the setting of instability and deformity.
Tuberculous Vertebral Osteomyelitis.  Tuberculous vertebral 
osteomyelitis, also known as Pott’s disease, occurs most commonly 
in underdeveloped countries and in the immunocompromised. 
7
1746
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Several features differentiate tuberculous osteomyelitis from 
bacterial osteomyelitis. The infection is indolent and symptoms 
often progress slowly over months. Tuberculosis rarely involves 
the intervertebral disc. The involved bodies may have sclerotic 
rather than lytic changes. Multiple nonadjacent vertebrae may 
be involved. The upper lumbar and lower thoracic vertebrae are 
most commonly affected. Diagnosis requires documentation of 
acid-fast bacilli. Treatment involves long-term antimycobacterial 
drugs. Patients with spinal instability or neural compression from 
epidural inflammatory tissue should undergo debridement and 
fusion as needed.
Discitis.  Primary infection of the intervertebral disc space, or 
discitis, is most commonly secondary to postoperative infec-
tions. Spontaneous discitis occurs more commonly in children. 
S. aureus and S. epidermidis account for most cases. The pri-
mary symptom is back pain. Other signs and symptoms include 
radicular pain, fevers, paraspinal muscle spasm, and localized 
tenderness to palpation. Many cases will resolve without anti-
biotics, which generally are given for positive blood or biopsy 
specimen cultures or persistent constitutional symptoms. Most 
patients will have spontaneous fusion across the involved disc 
and do not need debridement or fusion.
Epidural Abscess.  Epidural abscesses may arise from or 
spread to the adjacent bone or disc, so distinguishing between 
vertebral osteomyelitis or discitis and a spinal epidural abscess 
may be difficult. The most common presenting signs and symp-
toms are back pain, fever, and tenderness to palpation of the 
spine. The most significant risk of epidural abscess is weakness 
progressing to paralysis due to spinal cord or nerve root dam-
age. Cord and root damage may be due to direct compression 
or to inflammatory thrombosis resulting in venous infarction. S. 
aureus and Streptococcus spp. are the most common organisms. 
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus now constitutes a significant pro-
portion of these infections, as high as 40%.37 The source may be 
hematogenous spread, local extension, or operative contamina-
tion. MRI best demonstrates the epidural space and degree of 
neural compromise. Patients with spinal epidural abscess and 
neurologic compromise should undergo surgical debridement 
for decompression and diagnosis, followed by culture-directed 
antibiotic therapy. Relative contraindications to surgery include 
prohibitive comorbidities or total lack of neurologic function 
below the involved level. Patients with no neurologic deficits 
and an identified organism may be treated with antibiotics alone 
and very close observation. However, this management strat-
egy remains somewhat controversial because these patients can 
undergo rapid and irreversible neurologic decline. Most epidural 
abscesses can be accessed via laminectomy without fusion. Col-
lections predominantly anterior to the cervical or thoracic cord 
may require anterior approach and fusion.
FUNCTIONAL NEUROSURGERY
Epilepsy Surgery
Seizures result from uncontrolled neuronal electrical activity. 
Seizures may result from irritative lesions in the brain, such as 
tumors or hematomas, or from physiologic or structural abnor-
malities. Seizures may involve a part of the brain (focal) or the 
entire brain (generalized). Focal seizures may be associated 
with normal consciousness (simple) or decreased consciousness 
(complex). All generalized seizures cause loss of conscious-
ness. Focal seizures may secondarily generalize. Patients with 
multiple unprovoked seizures over time are considered to have 
epilepsy. The type of epilepsy depends on such factors as type 
of seizures, electroencephalographic (EEG) findings, associated 
syndromes, and identifiable etiologies. All patients with unex-
plained seizures (i.e., no obvious cause such as head trauma 
or alcohol withdrawal) require thorough neurologic evaluation, 
including imaging to evaluate for a mass lesion. Antiepileptic 
drugs (AEDs) form the first line of therapy for epilepsy, initially 
as monotherapy, then as combination therapy. Epilepsy patients 
who have failed satisfactory trials of several AED combination 
regimens may be candidates for surgical intervention. Lack of 
seizure control or patient intolerance of the medications may 
constitute failure. Epilepsy surgery can decrease the frequency 
of seizures by resection of the electrical source of the seizures, 
or decrease the severity of seizures by disconnecting white mat-
ter tracts through which the abnormal electrical activity spreads. 
Four types of epilepsy surgery are discussed in sections that fol-
low. Epilepsy surgery appears to be extremely underused, given 
the relatively low risk of the procedures, and the crippling social 
and economic effects of uncontrolled or partially controlled 
epilepsy.38 Patients with symptoms, imaging abnormalities, and 
EEG analysis compatible with a specific seizure focus are most 
likely to have good results from epilepsy surgery.
Anterior Temporal Lobectomy.  Medial temporal lobe struc-
tural abnormalities can lead to complex partial seizures (CPS). 
Many patients with CPS have poor seizure control on medi-
cations. Patients with CPS may have significant reduction in 
seizure frequency or cessation of seizures after resection of the 
anterior temporal lobe. The amygdala and the head of the hip-
pocampus are removed as part of the lobectomy. Resection may 
be taken back approximately 4.5 cm from the temporal tip in the 
language-dominant hemisphere, and 6 cm from the temporal 
tip in the language nondominant hemisphere, with low risk of 
significant neurologic deficits.39 The two main risks of anterior 
temporal lobectomy are memory impairment and visual loss. 
Removal of the hippocampus in a patient with an atrophied or 
nonfunctional contralateral hippocampus causes a global mem-
ory deficit. Interruption of the optic radiations, which carry 
visual signals from the contralateral superior visual quadrants 
of both eyes, causes a contralateral superior quadrantanopia, 
known as a pie in the sky field cut.
Corpus Callosotomy.  Patients with generalized seizures, 
atonic seizures associated with drop attacks, or absence sei-
zures, who are found to have bilaterally coordinated patho-
logic cortical discharges on EEG and who fail AED therapy, 
may be candidates for corpus callosotomy. The corpus cal-
losum is a large white matter tract that connects the cerebral 
hemispheres. Loss of consciousness requires simultaneous 
seizure activity in both hemispheres. Focal or partial seizures 
may spread via the corpus callosum to the contralateral hemi-
sphere, causing generalization and loss of consciousness. Divi-
sion of the corpus callosum can interrupt this spread. Patients 
may have decreased numbers of seizures and/or fewer epi-
sodes of lost consciousness. Usually only the anterior half or 
two-thirds of the corpus callosum is divided, as more extensive 
division increases the risk of disconnection syndrome. Patients 
with disconnection syndrome are unable to match objects in 
the opposite visual hemifields, to identify objects held in one 
hand with the other hemifield, and to write with the left hand 
or name objects held in the left hand (in left hemisphere–
dominant patients).
1747
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Hemispherectomy.  Children with intractable epilepsy, struc-
tural anomalies in one hemisphere, and contralateral hemiple-
gia, may have improved seizure control after resection of the 
hemisphere (anatomic hemispherectomy) or disruption of all 
connections to the hemisphere (functional hemispherectomy). 
Functional hemispherectomy often is preferred over anatomic 
hemispherectomy because of the high incidence of complica-
tions such as hematoma formation and ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt dependence associated with the latter.
Vagus Nerve Stimulation.  Neuromodulatory treatments 
like vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), approved by the FDA in 
1997, are less invasive and offer some titratability in addition 
to reversibility unlike the resective surgical options previously 
described. Since first reported in 1985, VNS has proven to be 
efficacious in certain patient populations for several disorders 
such as treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, bipolar 
disorder, and epilepsy. In VNS, a pulse generator is placed 
under the skin in the chest and is connected to the vagus nerve 
by an electrical lead. Chronic, intermittent VNS has been proven 
to be an effective option for patients suffering from medically 
refractory seizures who are not candidates for surgical resec-
tion. Although only a small minority of patients will be entirely 
seizure-free, three blinded, randomized-controlled trials have 
examined VNS, and demonstrated significant clinical improve-
ment compared to sham.40-42 Generally VNS is well-tolerated 
and safe, as device implantation is associated with a low rate of 
perioperative complications. Additionally, the majority of side 
effects are stimulation-dependent and thus, reversible. For the 
most part, VNS is limited in its application because it can only 
exert its effects by altering neural activity via the vagus nerve. 
Procedures with brain region-specificity are being investigated.
Deep Brain Stimulation
The following summary of deep brain stimulation (DBS) will 
include a review of the current U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA)-approved indications, as well the expanding applica-
tions of this therapy, currently being investigated preclinically 
and in clinical trials. While the mechanism of action of DBS 
continues to elude our understanding, it is well-established that 
administering electrical stimulation to a nucleus in the brain 
known to be involved in a given disease can disrupt the patho-
logic signals emanating to or from this brain region. A fine 
electrical lead is placed in a deep brain nucleus and connected 
to pulse generators placed in the chest in a manner similar to 
cardiac pacemakers. Connector wires travel from the genera-
tors in the subcutaneous space up the neck and in the subgaleal 
space in the head, to connect the pulse generators to the electri-
cal leads. Proper lead placement is accomplished with stereo-
tactic guidance. A frame is rigidly fixed to the patient’s head, 
and an MRI is obtained with the frame in place. Calculation 
of the coordinates of the millimeter-sized deep brain nuclei is 
performed in relation to the three-dimensional space defined by 
the fixed frame, allowing for accurate targeting of the nucleus 
(Fig. 42-32). Postoperatively, the pulse generators can be inter-
rogated and adjusted with hand-held, transcutaneous, noninva-
sive devices as needed for symptom control.
Essential Tremor.  Essential tremor is the most common 
movement disorder in the western world and is characterized 
by action tremor (4–8 Hz rhythmic oscillations) of the hands, 
forearms, head, and voice. Essential tremor often starts in the 
third or fourth decade of life, and increases in frequency and 
amplitude with age. Beta blockers can decrease symptoms, but 
patients with poor medical control and significant functional 
impairment significantly benefit from placement of a deep brain 
stimulator in the contralateral ventralis intermediate nucleus of 
the thalamus. In properly selected patients, DBS of this region 
of the thalamus appears to provide robust and durable symptom 
control. 43,44
Parkinson’s Disease.  Parkinson’s disease is a progressive dis-
order characterized by rigidity, bradykinesia, and resting tremor, 
due to loss of dopamine-secreting neurons in the substantia 
nigra. Dopaminergic agents such as levodopa/carbidopa and 
anticholinergic agents such as amantadine and selegiline form 
the basis of medical therapy. Patients with poor medical control 
or significant drug side effects may benefit significantly from 
placement of bilateral deep brain stimulators in the subthalamic 
nuclei. Although the globus pallidus interna has also been a 
widely targeted area, the subthalamic nuclei is now the 
most accepted target in deep brain stimulation for Parkin-
son’s disease.45 Deep brain stimulation provides durable symp-
tom relief with good postoperative neuropsychologic function 
in properly selected patients .46
Recently, a large randomized controlled trial compared 
bilateral DBS (n=121) to best medical therapy in advanced Par-
kinson’s disease (n=134).47 The DBS group did significantly bet-
ter in both motor function and quality of life. While adverse events 
were 3.8 times more likely in the DBS group, 99% of these events 
had resolved by 6 months. There was a 0.8% risk of death due 
to the procedure, and there was no difference in risk of adverse 
events when comparing older (≥70 years) to younger patients 
(<70 years). Thus, the benefits of DBS over medical therapy are 
clear, especially when considering quality of life measures.
Another recent randomized controlled trial focused on 
defining the optimal targets for DBS in Parkinson’s disease.48 
While the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the globus pallidus 
interna (GPi) have been successfully targeted in the past, a direct 
comparison of the two was lacking. In this study, 299 subjects 
8
Figure 42-32.  Fast spin echo coronal magnetic resonance imaging 
demonstrating position of deep brain stimulator leads in the subtha-
lamic nuclei bilaterally. The electrodes appear thick and wavy due 
to magnetic susceptibility artifact.
1748
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
were randomized to receive either bilateral STN or GPi stimula-
tors and were evaluated for 2 years. The primary outcome was 
motor function, as assessed by part III of the Unified Parkin-
son’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS). The study found no sig-
nificant difference in motor improvement between target sites. 
However, a significant difference was found in a secondary 
outcome measuring depression. On the Beck Depression Inven-
tory, the pallidal stimulation group improved slightly compared 
with the STN group, which actually worsened slightly. Never-
theless, the actual incidence of depressive episodes requiring 
prolonged or new hospitalization was 2.6% and 0.7% in GPi and 
STN, respectively, which was not significantly different. On the 
other hand, the STN group was found to require less adjunctive 
dopaminergic pharmacotherapy than the GPi group. In terms of 
overall severe adverse events, there was no difference between 
groups. The investigators concluded that both target sites are 
effective and that nonmotor factors such as psychiatric symp-
toms may be a consideration in DBS target selection.
Dystonia.  The FDA humanitarian device exemption has been 
made for DBS for dystonia, but is limited to patients ≥7 years of age 
with primary dystonia, including generalized and/or segmental dys-
tonia, hemidystonia, or cervical dystonia (torticollis). Dystonia is 
characterized by sustained muscle contractions that cause repetitive 
movements and involuntary postures. Cognitive function is typi-
cally spared, and pharmacological therapy is frequently inadequate. 
The positive impact of DBS on Parkinson’s and essential tremor 
has led neurologists and neurosurgeons to direct their attention to 
DBS for treatment of idiopathic focal and generalized dystonia.
Although the pathophysiology of idiopathic dystonia is 
unclear, positron-emission tomography studies have shown 
disturbed glucose metabolism in the GPi, suggesting second-
ary pathologic activation of the motor cortex. Indeed, the GPi 
is currently considered the most efficacious target for dystonia, 
and controlled trials indicate approximately a 50% improvement 
in motor function and disability.49 Since many patients undergo-
ing surgery for dystonia are children and young adults, DBS is 
an attractive surgical option because it can be titrated, revised 
and reversed according to individual needs and growth patterns.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.  The safety and efficacy 
of DBS, as well as its titratability and reversibility, that have 
been demonstrated for the treatment of movement disorders in 
the 1990s and 2000s has spawned an increasing interest and 
awareness of the capabilities of nonlesional surgical treatments 
for diseases of the brain. An obvious outgrowth of DBS for 
movement disorders has been the treatment of medically refrac-
tory psychiatric disorders. Despite the dark history of frontal 
leucotomy procedures that dominated the early 20th century, 
nonlesional DBS for psychiatric disorders are now considered 
potential treatment strategies.
Functional neuroimaging has implicated certain brain 
regions in the pathogenesis of a variety of psychiatric disorders. 
The FDA has approved a humanitarian device exemption for 
DBS targeting the ventral capsule/ventral striatum for severe 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Recent case reports and 
pilot studies have reported remission in patients suffering from 
refractory OCD following DBS. A pilot study using a blinded, 
staggered-onset design found that four (66.7%) of six patients 
met a stringent criterion as “responders” (≥35% improvement), 
according to the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale 
after 12 months of stimulation.50 In this study, patients did not 
improve during the sham phase. Adverse events were generally 
mild and modifiable with setting changes, and stimulation inter-
ruption led to rapid yet reversible development of depressive 
symptoms in two cases. Thus, DBS has promise as a therapy of 
last resort for carefully selected cases of severe OCD.
Expanding Indications of Deep Brain Stimulation.  There 
are multiple disorders, both psychiatric and neurologic, that have 
exhibited significant promise as potential indications for DBS in 
large-scale trials. Recently, there have been reports of significant 
improvements in refractory depression with DBS. Lozano and 
colleagues performed an open label study with extended follow-
up on 20 patients targeting an area within the subcallosal cin-
gulate gyrus (SCG) with bilateral DBS.51 At the last follow-up 
visit in this study (range: 3–6 years), the average response rate 
was 64%, according to the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depres-
sion. Of note, impairment in social functioning was improved, 
and no significant adverse events were reported. Because two 
patients died by suicide during depressive relapses, it remains 
unclear if DBS can only improve quality of life or significantly 
suppress relapses and extend life-span in this extremely delicate 
patient population. Of note, as seen in OCD, the ventral capsule/
ventral striatum has also been targeted for depression, as well 
as the nucleus accumbens directly, which lies within the ventral 
striatum. Studies of DBS in this region report an approximate 
40% to 60% response rate, and results from a recent, multicenter 
randomized controlled trial are pending.52
DBS as a potential therapy for epilepsy targeting the ante-
rior nucleus of the thalamus has been investigated in a multi-
center, double-blind, randomized trial (SANTE).53 In this trial, 
the group receiving DBS showed a 29% greater reduction in 
seizure frequency in relation to the sham group in the last month 
of the blinded phase. Complex partial and the “most severe” 
seizures were significantly reduced in the DBS-on group. After 
the blinded phase of the trial was complete, 54% of patients 
had a seizure reduction of at least 50%. Fourteen patients were 
seizure-free for at least 6 months; eight were seizure-free for at 
least one year, four for at least two years, and one patient for 
more than four years. Because of the modest benefit during the 
blinded phase of this trial, FDA-approval has yet to be granted 
to DBS for epilepsy targeting the thalamus in the United States, 
though approval has been given in Europe and Canada.
The region-specific, neuromodulatory capabilities of DBS 
have inspired the open label use of this technique in many other 
neurologic and psychiatric disorders, including but not limited 
to Tourette syndrome, Huntington’s disease, and Alzheimer dis-
ease. Preclinical studies of both substance abuse and obesity 
have also shown promise.54,55 The opportunity to model reward-
seeking behaviors associated with these disorders in animals 
provides the ability to not only test safety, but also study mecha-
nisms and inform the design of future clinical trials.
Trigeminal Neuralgia
Trigeminal neuralgia, also known as tic douloureux, is char-
acterized by repetitive, unilateral, sharp, and lancinating pains 
in the distribution of, typically, the second, but sometimes 
third, branch of cranial nerve V, the trigeminal nerve. The 
patient may describe a “trigger point,” an area on the face 
that elicits the pain when touched. A current leading etiologic 
hypothesis for trigeminal neuralgia is irritation and pulsatile 
compression of the root entry zone of the nerve by an artery 
in the posterior fossa, usually a loop of the superior cerebellar 
artery. The pain is excruciating and can be debilitating. Medi-
cal therapy, including carbamazepine and amitriptyline, may 
1749
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
reduce the frequency of events. Options for medically refrac-
tory cases include percutaneous injection of glycerol into the 
path of the nerve, peripheral transection of the nerve branches, 
SRS, and microvascular decompression (MVD).
MVD involves performing a small posterior fossa craniot-
omy on the side of the symptoms, retraction of the cerebellar hemi-
sphere, and exploration of cranial nerve V. If an artery is found 
near the nerve, the vessel is freed of any adhesions and nonab-
sorbable material is placed between the nerve root and the artery. 
MVD remains the first definitive management option because SRS 
is associated with a substantial incidence of facial numbness.56,57
STEREOTACTIC RADIOSURGERY
The term stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) refers to techniques that 
allow delivery of high-dose radiation that conforms to the shape of 
the target and has rapid isodose fall-off, minimizing damage 
to adjacent neural structures . The two most common devices 
used for conformal SRS for intracranial lesions are the LINAC 
(linear accelerator) and the gamma knife. LINAC delivers a 
focused beam of X-ray radiation from a port that arcs part way 
around the patient’s head. Linear accelerators are commonly used 
to provide fractionated radiation for lesions outside the CNS. They 
are found in most radiation oncology departments. After upgrades 
to the software and collimators, SRS can be performed with these 
existing units, . The gamma knife delivers 201 focused beams of 
gamma radiation from cobalt sources through a specially designed 
colander-like helmet. Gamma knife units are used only for intra-
cranial disease and cost up to $5 million; thus, they are most appro-
priate in high patient–volume centers. There is ongoing debate in 
the literature regarding the two technologies.58–60 Both continue to 
evolve, allowing more precise and complex isodose conformation 
to complex lesions. Most lesions can be treated equally well with 
either technology. Lesions abutting the medulla or the spinal cord 
should not be treated with SRS, because these structures do not 
tolerate the radiation dose delivered to structures within millime-
ters of the target. Also, medullary or spinal cord compression can 
result from swelling of the lesion after the radiosurgery dose, 
resulting in devastating neurologic deficit.
Proton beam is an evolving SRS technology that may play 
a specialized role in treatment of lesions where posttarget exit-
ing radiation limits photon-based therapies.61 For example, the 
physical properties of photons cause destruction upon entry and 
exit from tissue, which can be particularly harmful to skull-base 
or clival lesions such as chordoma, in which the exiting pathway 
travels through the brain stem. Proton beam therapy uses accel-
erated protons, which dissipate energy upon impact and do not 
cause additional exiting damage. Currently, there are very few 
centers using this technology.
CyberKnife is another radiosurgery system that has neu-
rosurgical application. It is a frameless, robotic, LINAC-based 
system that allows for targeting of spinal neoplasms with higher 
resolution than conventional external beam radiotherapy.62 
Using imaging tracking in real time, the CyberKnife is able to 
adjust to breathing artifact and patient movement. The applica-
tion of this technology is rapidly growing.
Arteriovenous Malformations
SRS has been found to be an effective stand-alone therapy for 
AVMs up to 3 cm in diameter. SRS is best for lesions that are 
difficult to access surgically due to high likelihood of post-
operative neurologic deficit. However, SRS is not effective 
for lesions >3 cm. Effective obliteration and elimination of 
the risk of hemorrhage takes 2 to 3 years. Overall, there is an 
approximately 2% annual incidence of AVM hemorrhage,63 
although one study found a 50% decrease in hemorrhage 
rate during the latency period before angiographic oblitera-
tion.64 Nonetheless, surgical excision remains the preferred 
therapeutic modality, while SRS is reserved for cases deemed 
very high-risk for surgery due to location or patient factors.65 
Some patients with large AVMs who undergo surgery will 
have unresectable residual lesions. In these patients, SRS 
may be used as an effective adjunctive therapy in these 
patients.
Vestibular Schwannomas
SRS has been introduced as a therapeutic alternative to 
microsurgical resection for vestibular schwannomas up to 
2.5 cm in maximum diameter. SRS provides high rates of 
tumor growth arrest and possible reduction in size with low 
rates of facial nerve palsy. Patients with functional ipsilateral 
preprocedure hearing may be more likely to retain functional 
hearing postprocedure than with microsurgery. The limita-
tions of SRS include inability to treat tumors >2.5 cm, the 
possibility of radiation-induced malignant transformation of 
these benign tumors, and lack of long-term follow-up. SRS 
centers are accumulating experience with these tumors and 
accumulating data on long-term results.66,67 The indications 
for microsurgery and SRS will continue to evolve. Either 
approach should be undertaken at a high-volume center, as 
studies show the patient outcomes improve with increased 
surgeon experience.68
Intracranial Metastases
Patients with solitary or multiple intracranial metastases may 
be treated primarily with SRS.69 Patients have improved sur-
vival after SRS compared to no treatment or WBRT, and similar 
survival to patients undergoing total surgical resection. Patients 
with lesions >3 cm in diameter or evidence of ICH should 
undergo surgical decompression rather than SRS. Some studies 
show improved survival with up to seven intracranial masses. 
Patients with multiple intracranial masses have almost zero 
long-term survival, and most will die of their intracranial dis-
ease. Patients with intracranial metastases live 3 to 6 months on 
average with medical care and WBRT. This can be extended to 
9 to 16 months with SRS or surgery, depending on tumor type, 
age, and patient condition.70
CONGENITAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALIES
Dysraphism
Dysraphism describes defects of fusion of the neural tube involv-
ing the neural tube itself, or overlying bone or skin. Dysraphism 
may occur in the spine or head. Neural tube defects are among 
the most common congenital abnormalities. Prenatal vitamins, 
especially folic acid, reduce the incidence of neural tube defects.
Spina Bifida Occulta
Spina bifida occulta is congenital absence of posterior vertebral 
elements. The spinous process is always missing, the laminae 
may be missing to various degrees, but the underlying neural 
tissues are not involved. Spina bifida occulta is found in 25% of 
the general population, and is asymptomatic unless associated 
with other developmental abnormalities.
9
1750
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Spina Bifida with Myelomeningocele
Spina bifida with myelomeningocele describes the congenital 
absence of posterior vertebral elements with protrusion of the 
meninges through the defect, with underlying neural structural 
abnormalities. Common findings include weakness and atrophy 
of the lower extremities, gait disturbance, urinary incontinence, 
constipation, and deformities of the foot. Myelomeningoceles 
arising from the high lumbar cord usually cause total paraly-
sis and incontinence, while those arising from the sacral cord 
may have only clawing of the foot and partial urinary function 
loss. Myelomeningocele patients often have hydrocephalus and 
a Chiari II malformation, an abnormal downward herniation of 
the cerebellum and brain stem through the foramen magnum. 
Patients with abnormal protrusion of meninges through the bony 
defect without abnormalities of the underlying neural tissue 
have a meningocele. Most of these patients are neurologically 
normal.
Encephalocele
Herniation of brain encased in meninges through the skull that 
forms an intracranial mass is referred to as encephalocele. 
Herniation of meninges without brain tissue is referred to as 
a meningocele. Most occur over the convexity of the skull. 
More rarely, the tissue protrudes through the skull base into the 
sinuses. Treatment involves excision of the herniated tissue and 
closure of the defect. Most patients with encephaloceles and 
meningoceles have impaired cognitive development. Patients 
with greater amounts of herniated neural tissue tend to have 
more severe cognitive deficits.
Craniosynostosis
Craniosynostosis is the abnormal early fusion of a cranial suture 
line with resultant restriction of skull growth in the affected area 
and compensatory bulging at the other sutures. Skull growth 
occurs at the cranial sutures for the first 2 years of life, at the end 
of which the skull has achieved >90% of its eventual adult size. 
Fusion of the sagittal suture, or sagittal synostosis, results in a 
boat-shaped head, known as scaphocephaly. Unilateral coronal 
synostosis results in ipsilateral forehead flattening and outward 
deviation of the orbit, known as plagiocephaly. The contralat-
eral normal forehead appears to bulge by comparison. Bilat-
eral coronal synostosis results in a broad, flattened forehead, 
known as brachycephaly, and is often associated with maxil-
lary hypoplasia and proptosis. Unilateral or bilateral lambdoid 
synostosis results in flattening of the occiput. Occipital flat-
tening can result from abnormal suture fusion (synostosis), or 
from physical remolding of the skull caused by always placing 
the baby in the supine position for sleep (known as positional 
plagiocephaly). Placing the baby in the prone position or tilted 
onto the contralateral side may restore near-normal skull shape 
in most cases of lambdoid synostosis, avoiding surgery. Treat-
ment for synostoses in general is surgical, involving resection 
of the fused suture, or more complex reconstructive techniques 
for severe or refractory cases.
Hydrocephalus
Excess CSF in the brain that results in enlarged ventricles is 
known as hydrocephalus. CSF flows from the ventricles to the 
subarachnoid space and is then absorbed into the venous blood 
through the arachnoid granulations. Hydrocephalus may be 
classified as communicating or obstructive (outlined in the next 
two sections), and congenital or acquired. Congenital lesions 
associated with or causing hydrocephalus include stenosis of 
the cerebral aqueduct, Chiari malformation, myelomeningo-
cele, and intrauterine infection. Acquired hydrocephalus may 
result from occlusion of arachnoid granulations by meningitis, 
germinal matrix hemorrhage, or SAH. CSF pathways may be 
occluded by adjacent tumors (Fig. 42-33).
A
B
Figurve 42-33.  A. Axial head computed tomography scan reveal-
ing dilated ventricular system. Note dilated atria of the lateral ven-
tricles (arrowheads) and rounded third ventricle (arrow). The large 
size of the ventricles and lack of transependymal flow indicate a 
chronic process (contrast to Fig. 42-2). The patient had normal-
pressure hydrocephalus and had improved ambulation after place-
ment of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. B. Higher cut from same scan 
showing ventricular catheter in place in the frontal horn of the right 
lateral ventricle.
1751
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
Communicating Hydrocephalus.  Obstruction at the level of 
the arachnoid granulations constitutes communicating hydro-
cephalus. This usually causes dilation of the lateral, third, and 
fourth ventricles equally. The most common causes in adults are 
meningitis and SAH. Hydrocephalus may be transient after SAH, 
with re-establishment of normal CSF absorption after the protein 
content of the CSF returns to normal and the granulations reopen.
Obstructive Hydrocephalus.  Obstruction of CSF pathways is 
known as obstructive hydrocephalus. Ventricles proximal to the 
obstruction dilate, while those distal to the obstruction remain nor-
mal in size. Typical patterns include dilation of the lateral ventricles 
due to a colloid cyst occluding the foramen of Monro, dilation of 
the lateral and third ventricles due to a tectal (midbrain) glioma or 
pineal region tumor occluding the cerebral aqueduct, or dilation of 
the lateral and third ventricles with obliteration of the fourth ven-
tricle by an intraventricular tumor of the fourth ventricle. Obstruc-
tive hydrocephalus may present precipitously and require urgent 
shunting to prevent herniation.
Chiari I Malformation
Chiari I malformation is the caudal displacement of the cerebellar 
tonsils below the foramen magnum. It may be seen as an inciden-
tal finding on MRI scans in asymptomatic patients. Symptomatic 
patients usually present with headache, neck pain, or symptoms 
of myelopathy, including numbness or weakness in the extremi-
ties. A syrinx may be associated, but the brain stem and lower 
cranial nerves are normal in Chiari I malformations. Chiari II 
malformations are more severe and involve caudal displacement 
of the lower brain stem and stretching of the lower cranial nerves. 
Symptomatic patients may be treated with suboccipital craniec-
tomy to remove the posterior arch of the foramen magnum, along 
with removal of the posterior ring of C1. Removal of these bony 
structures relieves the compression of the cerebellar tonsils and 
cervicomedullary junction, and may allow re-establishment of 
normal CSF flow patterns. Figure 42-34 demonstrates typical 
MRI appearance of a Chiari I malformation.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Kandel E, Schwartz J, Jessell T. Principles of Neural Science, 
4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional;2000.
2.	Stiefel MF, Spiotta A, Gracias VH, et al. Reduced mortality rate 
in patients with severe traumatic brain injury treated with brain 
tissue oxygen monitoring. J Neurosurg. 2005;103:805-811.
3.	Masters SJ, McClean PM, Arcarese JS, et al. Skull x-ray 
examinations after head trauma. Recommendations by a 
multidisciplinary panel and validation study. N Engl J Med. 
1987;316:84-91.
4.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical man-
agement of depressed cranial fractures. Neurosurgery. 
2006;58:S56-S60.
5.	Brain Trauma Foundation, American Association of 
Neurological Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons. 
Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain 
injury. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24:S91-S95.
6.	Temkin NR, Dikmen SS, Wilensky AJ, et al. A randomized, 
double-blind study of phenytoin for the prevention of post-
traumatic seizures. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:497-502.
7.	Ingebrigtsen T, Romner B. Routine early CT-scan is cost sav-
ing after minor head injury. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 
1996;93:207-210.
8.	Stein SC, Ross SE: The value of computed tomographic 
scans in patients with low-risk head injuries. Neurosurgery. 
1990;26:638-640.
9.	Kelly JP, Nichols JS, Filley CM, et al. Concussion in sports. 
Guidelines for the prevention of catastrophic outcome. JAMA. 
1991;266:2867-2869.
10.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical management 
of acute epidural hematomas. Neurosurgery. 2006;58:S7-S15.
11.	Jones NR, Molloy CJ, Kloeden CN, et al. Extradural hae-
matoma: trends in outcome over 35 years. Br J Neurosurg. 
1993;7:465-471.
12.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical man-
agement of acute subdural hematomas. Neurosurgery. 
2006;58:S16-S24.
13.	Howard MA III, Gross AS, Dacey RG Jr, et al. Acute subdural 
hematomas: an age-dependent clinical entity (see comment). 
J Neurosurg. 1989;71:858-863.
14.	Hamilton MG, Frizzell JB, Tranmer BI. Chronic subdural 
hematoma: the role for craniotomy reevaluated. Neurosurgery. 
1993;33:67-72.
15.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical manage-
ment of traumatic parenchymal lesions. Neurosurgery. 
2006;58:S25-S46.
16.	Lyrer P, Engelter S. Antithrombotic drugs for carotid artery 
dissection. Stroke. 2004;35:613-614.
17.	Maynard FM Jr, Bracken MB, Creasey G, et al. International 
standards for neurological and functional classification of spi-
nal cord injury. American Spinal Injury Association. Spinal 
Cord. 1997;35:266.
18.	Denis F: The three column spine and its significance in the 
classification of acute thoracolumbar spinal injuries. Spine 
1983;8:817-831.
19.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF, et al. A randomized, 
controlled trial of methylprednisolone or naloxone in the 
treatment of acute spinal-cord injury. Results of the second 
national acute spinal cord injury study (see comment). N Engl 
J Med. 1990;322:1405-1411.
20.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF Jr, et al. Methyl-
prednisolone or naloxone treatment after acute spinal cord 
injury: 1-year follow-up data. Results of the second national 
acute spinal cord injury study (see comment). J Neurosurg. 
1992;76:23-31.
Figure 42-34.  T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging 
of a patient with a Chiari I malformation. The large arrowhead 
points to the cerebellar tonsils. The small arrowhead points to the 
posterior arch of the foramen magnum.
1752
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
21.	Hugenholtz H, Cass DE, Dvorak MF, et al. High-dose methyl-
prednisolone for acute closed spinal cord injury—only a treat-
ment option. Can J Neurol Sci. 2002;29:227-235.
22.	Resnick DK, Kaiser MG, Fehlings M, et al: Hypothermia and 
Human Spinal Cord Injury: Position Statement and Evidence 
Based Recommendations from the AANS/CNS Joint Section 
on Disorders of the Spine and the AANS/CNS Joint Section on 
Trauma. Washington: AANS/CNS Joint Section of Disorders 
of the Spine and Peripheral Nerves; 2007.
23.	Seddon HJ. Three types of nerve injury. Brain. 1943;66:237.
24.	North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy 
Trial Collaborators. Beneficial effect of carotid endarter-
ectomy in symptomatic patients with high-grade carotid 
stenosis. (see comment). N Engl J Med. 1991;325: 443-445.
25.	The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
rt-PA Stroke Study Group. Tissue plasminogen activator for 
acute ischemic stroke. (see comment). N Engl J Med.1995; 
333:1581-1588.
26.	Mendelow AD, Gregson BA, Fernandes HM, et al. Early 
surgery versus initial conservative treatment in patients 
with spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral haemato-
mas in the International Surgical Trial in Intracerebral 
Haemorrhage (STICH): A randomised trial. Lancet. 2005; 
365:387-397.
27.	Molyneux A, Kerr R, Stratton I, et al. International sub-
arachnoid aneurysm trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clipping 
versus endovascular coiling in 2143 patients with ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms: a randomised trial (see comment) 
(reprint in J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 11:304, 2002). Lancet. 
2002;360:1267-1274.
28.	Mitchell P, Kerr R, Mendelow AD, et al. Could late rebleeding 
overturn the superiority of cranial aneurysm coil embolization 
over clip ligation seen in the international subarachnoid aneu-
rysm trial? J Neurosurg. 2008;108:437.
29.	Raftopoulos C, Goffette P, Vaz G, et al. Surgical clipping 
may lead to better results than coil embolization: results from 
a series of 101 consecutive unruptured intracranial aneurysms. 
Neurosurgery. 2003;52:1280, discussion 1287.
30.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Walsh JW, et al. A randomized 
trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the 
brain. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:494-500.
31.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Postoperative radio-
therapy in the treatment of single metastases to the brain: a 
randomized trial. JAMA. 1998;280:1485-1489.
32.	Aoyama H, Shirato H, Tago M, et al: Stereotactic radiosurgery 
plus whole-brain radiation therapy vs stereotactic radiosurgery 
alone for treatment of brain metastases: A randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2483-2491.
33.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Direct decompres-
sive surgical resection in the treatment of spinal cord compres-
sion caused by metastatic cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet. 
2005;366:643-648.
34.	Le Roux PD, Haglund MM, Harris AB. Thoracic disc disease: 
experience with the transpedicular approach in twenty con-
secutive patients. Neurosurgery. 1993;33:58-66.
35.	Mulholland RC, Sengupta DK. Rationale, principles, and 
experimental evaluation of the concept of soft stabilization. 
Eur Spine J. 2002;11:S198-S205.
36.	Dawson D, Hallett M, Wilbourn A. Entrapment Neuropathie, 
3rd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Raven;1999.
37.	Darouiche RO. Spinal epidural abscess. N Engl J Med. 
2006;355:2012-2020.
38.	Benbadis SR, Heriaud L, Tatum WO, et al. Epilepsy surgery, 
delays and referral patterns—are all your epilepsy patients 
controlled? Seizure. 2003;12:167-170.
39.	Rausch R, Kraemer S, Pietras CJ, et al. Early and late cog-
nitive changes following temporal lobe surgery for epilepsy 
(see comment). Neurology. 2003;60:951-959.
40.	Ben-Menachem E, Manon-Espaillat R, Ristanovic R, et al. 
Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of partial seizures. A 
controlled study of effect on seizures. First International Vagus 
Nerve Stimulation Study Group. Epilepsia. 1994;35:616–626.
41.	Handforth A, DeGiorgio CM, Schachter SC, et al. Vagus nerve 
stimulation therapy for partial-onset seizures: a randomized 
active-control trial. Neurology. 1998;51:48–55.
42.	Amar AP, Heck CN, Levy ML, et al: An institutional experience 
with cervical vagus nerve trunk stimulation for medically refrac-
tory epilepsy: rationale, technique, and outcome. Neurosurgery. 
1998;1265-1276.
43.	Fields JA, Troster AI, Woods SP, et al: Neuropsychological 
and quality of life outcomes 12 months after unilateral tha-
lamic stimulation for essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2003;74:305.
44.	Rehncrona S, Johnels B, Widner H, et al: Long-term efficacy 
of thalamic deep brain stimulation for tremor: Double-blind 
assessments. Mov Disord. 2003;18:163.
45.	Kleiner-Fisman G, Herzog J, Fisman DN, et al: Subthalamic 
nucleus deep brain stimulation: Summary and meta-analysis of 
outcomes. Mov Disord. 2006;21:S290.
46.	Perozzo P, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al: Deep brain 
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: 
Comparison of pre- and postoperative neuropsychological 
evaluation. J Neurol Sci. 2001;192:9.
47.	Weaver FM, Follett K, Stern M, et al. Bilateral deep brain 
stimulation vs. best medical therapy for patients with advanced 
Parkinson disease: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2009;301:63-73.
48.	Follett KA, Weaver FM, Stern M, et al. Pallidal versus sub-
thalamic deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362(22): 2077-2091.
49.	Vidailhet M, Vercueil L, Houeto JL, et al. Bilateral deep-brain 
stimulation of the globus pallidus in primary generalized dys-
tonia. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(5): 459-467.
50.	Goodman WK, Foote KD, Greenberg BD, et al. Deep brain 
stimulation for intractable obsessive compulsive disor-
der: pilot study using a blinded, staggered-onset design. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67:535-542.
51.	Lozano AM, Giacobbe P, Hamani C, et al. A multicenter pilot 
study of subcallosal cingulate area deep brain stimulation for 
treatment-resistant depression. J Neurosurg 2012;116:315-322.
52.	Bewernick BH, Kayser S, Sturm V, et al. Long-term effects 
of nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation in treatment-
resistant depression: evidence for sustained efficacy. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 2012;37:1975-1985.
53.	Fisher R, Salanova V, Witt T, et al. Electrical stimulation of 
the anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory 
epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2010;51:899-908.
54.	Vassoler FM, Schmidt HD, Gerard ME, et al. Deep brain 
stimulation of the nucleus accumbens shell attenuates cocaine 
priming-induced reinstatement of drug seeking in rats. 
J Neurosci. 2008;28:8735-8739.
55.	Halpern CH, Tekriwal A, Santollo J, et al. Amelioration of 
binge eating by nucleus accumbens shell deep brain stimula-
tion in mice involves D2 receptor modulation. J Neurosci, in 
press.
56.	Barker FG II, Jannetta PJ, Bissonette DJ, et al. The long-term 
outcome of microvascular decompression for trigeminal neu-
ralgia. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1077-1083.
57.	Kondo A. Microvascular decompression surgery for trigemi-
nal neuralgia. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2001;77:187-189.
58.	Bova FJ, Goetsch SJ. Modern linac stereotactic radiosurgery 
systems have rendered the gamma knife obsolete. Medical 
Physics. 2001;28:1839-1841.
59.	Konigsmaier H, de Pauli-Ferch B, et al. The costs of radiosur-
gical treatment: comparison between gamma knife and linear 
accelerator. Acta Neurochirurgica. 1998;140:1110-1111.
1753
Neurosurgery
CHAPTER 42
60.	Suh JH, Barnett GH, Miller DW, et al. Successful conversion 
from a linear accelerator-based program to a gamma knife 
radiosurgery program: The Cleveland Clinic experience. 
Stereot Funct Neurosurg. 1999;72:159-167.
61.	Chen CC, Chapman P, Petit J, et al. Proton radiosurgery in 
neurosurgery. Neurosurg Focus. 2007;23:E5.
62.	 Gerszten PC, Ozhasoglu C, Burton SA, et al. CyberKnife frame-
less stereotactic radiosurgery for spinal lesions: clinical experience 
in 125 cases. Neurosurgery. 2004;55:89-98, discussion 98-99.
63.	Karlsson B, Lax I, Soderman M. Risk for hemorrhage during 
the 2-year latency period following gamma knife radiosurgery 
for arteriovenous malformations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2001;49:1045-1051.
64.	Maruyama K, Kawahara N, Shin M, et al. The risk of hemor-
rhage after radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:146-153.
65.	Pan DH, Guo WY, Chung WY, et al. Gamma knife radiosur-
gery as a single treatment modality for large cerebral arteriove-
nous malformations. J Neurosurg. 2000;93:113-119.
66.	Regis J, Pellet W, Delsanti C, et al. Functional outcome after 
gamma knife surgery or microsurgery for vestibular schwan-
nomas. J Neurosurg. 2002;97:1091-1100.
67.	Shin M, Ueki K, Kurita H, et al. Malignant transformation 
of a vestibular schwannoma after gamma knife radiosurgery. 
Lancet. 2002;360:309-310.
68.	Elsmore AJ, Mendoza ND. The operative learning curve 
for vestibular schwannoma excision via the retrosigmoid 
approach. Br J Neurosurg. 2002;16:448-455.
69.	Gerosa M, Nicolato A, Foroni R, et al. Gamma knife radio-
surgery for brain metastases: a primary therapeutic option. 
J Neurosurg. 2002;97:515-524.
70.	Pollock BE, Brown PD, Foote RL, et al. Properly selected 
patients with multiple brain metastases may benefit from 
aggressive treatment of their intracranial disease. J Neurooncol. 
2003;61:73-80.
This page intentionally left blank 
Orthopedic Surgery
Bert J. Thomas, Freddie H. Fu, Bart Muller, 
Dharmesh Vyas, Matt Niesen, Jonathan Pribaz,  
and Klaus Draenert
43
Introduction	
1756
Orthopedic Trauma	
1756
Introduction / 1756
Open Fractures / 1757
Compartment Syndrome / 1757
Treatment of Fractures and  
Dislocations	
1757
Clavicle Fractures / 1757
Scapula Fractures / 1759
Shoulder Dislocations / 1759
Proximal Humerus Fractures / 1759
Humeral Shaft Fractures / 1759
Distal Humerus Fractures / 1759
Elbow Dislocations / 1759
Radial Head Fractures / 1759
Olecranon Fractures / 1760
Forearm Fractures / 1760
Pelvic Fractures / 1760
Acetabular Fractures / 1760
Hip Dislocations / 1760
Hip Fractures / 1760
Femoral Shaft Fractures / 1762
Distal Femur Fractures / 1762
Knee Dislocations / 1762
Patella/Extensor Mechanism  
Injuries / 1762
Tibial Plateau Fractures / 1762
Tibial Shaft Fractures / 1764
Tibial Plafond (Pilon) Fractures / 1764
Ankle Dislocations / 1764
Ankle Fractures / 1764
Calcaneal Fractures / 1764
Talus Fractures / 1764
Foot Fractures / 1765
Introduction	
1765
Sports Medicine / 1765
Shoulder	
1765
Rotator Cuff / 1765
Shoulder Instability / 1765
Superior Labrum and Biceps  
Tendon / 1766
Impingement Syndromes / 1766
The Acromioclavicular Joint / 1766
Knee	
1767
Menisci / 1767
Collateral Ligaments / 1768
Cruciate Ligaments / 1768
Posterolateral Corner / 1769
Hip	
1769
Femoroacetabular Impingement / 1769
Spine	
1770
Spinal Trauma / 1770
Occipital Cervical Dislocation / 1770
Fractures of C1 (Jefferson  
Fracture) / 1770
Fractures of C2 (Odontoid  
Fracture) / 1770
Hangman’s Fractures of C2 / 1770
Compression Fracture of the Cervical 
Spine / 1770
Burst Fractures of the Cervical  
Spine / 1770
Unilateral and Bilateral Facet  
Dislocation / 1770
Clay-Shoveler’s Injury / 1770
Fractures of the Thoracic  
and Lumbar Spine	
1770
Thoracic Lumbar Spine Injury / 1770
Compression Fracture / 1770
Burst Fracture / 1771
Seatbelt Injuries (Flexion  
Distraction Injuries) / 1771
Fracture Dislocations of the Spine / 1771
Disc Herniation / 1771
Spinal Stenosis / 1771
Back Pain and Degenerative  
Disc Disease / 1771
Scoliosis / 1771
Idiopathic Scoliosis / 1772
Neuromuscular Scoliosis / 1772
Joint Reconstruction	
1772
Introduction to Arthritis / 1772
Conservative Management and  
Prevention of Arthritis / 1772
Examination of the Patient / 1772
Injections / 1772
Surgical Management of Arthritis / 1772
Computer Navigation and Joint  
Arthroplasty / 1776
Fixation Options in Joint  
Arthroplasty / 1776
Orthopedic Pathology  
and Oncology	
1778
Diagnosis of Malignant  
Bone Tumors / 1778
Osteosarcoma	
1779
Parosteal Osteosarcoma / 1779
Periosteal Osteosarcoma / 1779
Paget’s Sarcoma / 1779
Radiation-Induced Sarcoma / 1779
Ewing’s Sarcoma	
1779
Cartilage Forming Tumors	
1780
Chondrosarcomas / 1780
Fibrous Lesions of Bone	
1780
Desmoplastic Fibroma / 1780
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma  
of Bone / 1780
Malignant Vascular Tumors / 1780
Hemangiopericytoma / 1780
Angiosarcoma of Bone / 1780
Miscellaneous Tumors	
1780
Giant Cell Tumor of Bone / 1780
Ossifying Fibroma and  
Adamantinoma / 1781
Primary Lymphoma of Bone / 1781
Chordoma / 1781
Multiple Myeloma / 1781
Metastatic Bone Tumors	
1781
Pediatric Orthopedics	
1781
Birth Injuries	
1781
Brachial Plexus Palsy / 1781
Cerebral Palsy / 1782
Skeletal Growth / 1782
Pediatric Fractures / 1782
Classification of Growth Plate  
Injuries / 1782
Diaphyseal Injuries in a Pediatric Patient 
/ 1782
Fractures of the Pediatric Hip / 1782
Fractures of the Femoral Shaft / 1782
Pediatric Ankle Fractures / 1783
Pediatric Elbow Fractures / 1783
Developmental Disease	
1783
Developmental Dysplasia of  
the Hip / 1783
Treatment of DDH / 1783
chapter 
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
1756
Key Point
1 	 The main principle of internal fixation for fracture care 
(most commonly intramedullary nails or plate and screw 
fixation) is to create a stable construct that will allow the 
fracture to heal in proper alignment.
2 	 Often, in open fractures, definitive treatment of the fracture 
is delayed until the wound is sufficiently cleaned and healthy 
soft tissue is available to cover the fracture.
3 	 When compartment syndrome is suspected, emergent fasciot-
omy must be performed in which the overlying tight fascia is 
released through long incisions. These must be done as soon as 
possible because the damage to muscles and nerves will result 
in irreversible necrosis and contractures causing severe loss of 
function.
4 	 Fractures of the scapula often result from significant trauma 
and can be associated with injuries to the head, lungs, ribs, 
and spine.
5 	 The shoulder is one of the most commonly dislocated joints 
and most dislocations are anterior. Posterior dislocations are 
associated with seizures or electric shock.
6 	 Humeral shaft fractures occur from direct trauma to the arm 
or from a fall on an outstretched arm, especially in elderly 
patients. The radial nerve spirals around the humeral shaft 
and is at risk for injury, therefore a careful neurovascular 
exam is important.
7 	 Hemorrhage from pelvic trauma can be life threatening. An 
important first line treatment in the emergency room is the 
application of a pelvic binder or sheet that is wrapped 
tightly around the pelvis to control bleeding.
8 	 In spinal injury spinal stability must be assessed, and the 
patient immobilized until his spine is cleared. CT scan 
is more reliable in assessing spine injury than plain 
radiographs.
9 	 Spinal cord injuries should be triaged to trauma centers 
since trauma center care is associated with reduced paral-
ysis.
10   According to the CDC and the National Health Interview 
Survey approximately 50 million adults (22% of the US 
population) have been diagnosed with some form of arthri-
tis. This number is projected to grow to an astounding 67 
million adults by 2030 (or 25% of the U.S. population).
11   Weight loss of as little as 11 pounds has been shown to 
decrease the risk of developing knee osteoarthritis in 
women by 50%. Similarly, patients who engage in regu-
lar physical activity have been found to have lower inci-
dence of arthritis.
12   Smaller incisions come with the disadvantage of 
decreased visualization intra-operatively and associated 
risks of component malposition, intraoperative fracture 
and nerve or vascular injury. The only documented ben-
efit of minimally invasive techniques appears to be 
improved cosmesis.
Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease / 1783
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis / 1783
Lower Extremity Rotational  
Abnormalities / 1783
Congenital Talipes Equinovarus / 1783
Osgood-Schlatter Disease / 1783
INTRODUCTION
Orthopedic surgery is a specialty with which every physician should 
be familiar. Anyone who cares for patients in an outpatient or emer-
gency room setting will find that the majority of presenting com-
plaints involve the musculoskeletal system. A basic understanding 
of musculoskeletal anatomy is assumed, and understanding the 
principles of care for musculoskeletal trauma is essential.
For physicians, the field of orthopedics offers an array of sub-
specialties with such diversity that it seems that “there is something 
for everyone.” Trauma specialists have the satisfaction of physi-
cally putting complex fractures back together. Sports medicine 
offers remarkably rapid recovery in athletes who have suffered 
fibrocartilage tears with ever improving arthroscopic techniques 
and instrumentation. Spine surgeons see remarkable results from 
their minimally invasive microscopic techniques, while also man-
aging massive deformities with new instrumentation and open 
surgery. Joint reconstruction is one of our most exciting subspe-
cialties, working with orthopedic bioengineers to develop improved 
designs, biomaterials, and minimally invasive surgical approaches 
to return function faster for patients crippled by arthritis and injury. 
Musculoskeletal oncology offers the intellectual challenge of 
arriving at appropriate differential diagnoses as well as the tech-
nical challenge of limb salvage and major reconstructive surgery. 
­Pediatric orthopedics is an especially challenging and rewarding 
subspecialty because of the remarkable ability of children to heal 
even severe injuries rapidly and completely. The incredible array 
of congenital and developmental disorders makes pediatrics a 
uniquely intellectually challenging field as well. The authors hope 
that our readers will share our enthusiasm for orthopedic surgery 
and all of its subspecialties: trauma, sports, spine, joint replace-
ment, musculoskeletal oncology, and pediatric orthopedics.
ORTHOPEDIC TRAUMA
Introduction
Musculoskeletal injuries resulting from trauma include fractures 
of bones, damage to joints, and injuries to soft tissues. Long bone 
fractures can be described as transverse, oblique, spiral, segmen-
tal, or comminuted (Fig. 43-1). The goals of treating musculo-
skeletal injuries are to restore the normal anatomy, immobilize 
injured extremities for both pain relief and to allow for healing, 
and to repair or reconstruct these injuries to restore function.
Fractures frequently result from high energy trauma as 
well as from falls onto an extremity (Fig. 43-2).The majority 
of fractures can heal well with immobilization, which stabilizes 
the fracture while new bone forms at the fracture site. Meth-
ods of immobilization can vary and depend on the fracture 
being treated. The most common tool used in orthopedics to 
1757
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
treat fractures is immobilization with a splint or cast, and their 
proper application is important to successfully treat the injury 
without causing additional problems. A successful splint con-
tains adequate padding on the underlying skin, and particularly 
over bony prominences, to prevent pressure or burns that can 
be caused by plaster. Splints, which are not circumferential, are 
preferred for acute injuries because they allow room for swell-
ing which inevitably occurs after a fracture.
Fractures that are displaced or angulated require closed 
reduction to properly realign the bone. This is done using anal-
gesia, local or general anesthesia, and often muscle relaxation. 
Reduction is performed with axial traction and reversal of the 
mechanism of injury in order to restore length, rotation, and 
angulation. A splint is then applied and can be gently molded to 
help hold the reduction in place. It is important to obtain X-rays 
after a close reduction to verify acceptable alignment of the frac-
ture, and to perform a neurovascular exam to ensure the splint 
is not too tight.
For certain fractures, splint or cast immobilization alone 
is not enough and in these instances internal fixation is used. 
Figure 43-1.  Types of fractures A. normal femur, B. transverse, 
C. oblique, D. spiral, E. segmental, F. comminuted.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 43-2.  Transverse tibia fracture and segmental fibula fracture.
The main principle of orthopedic implants for fracture care is 
to create a stable construct that will allow the fracture to heal in 
proper alignment. Screws can be placed across a fracture 
to create compression at the fracture site, which promotes 
healing. Plates can be placed on the cortex of bones and held 
with screws, which creates a long area of fixation to stabilize 
the fracture. Intramedullary rods are commonly used for long 
bone fractures, such as the femur and tibia (Fig. 43-3A). Prior 
to their placement, the marrow in the canal is usually removed 
with a reamer. The rod is then inserted into the canal. Screws 
can then be placed across the cortices of the bone through holes 
in the rod proximal and distal to the fracture to create a locked 
construct that further stabilizes the rod (Fig. 43-3B). In situ-
ations where patients are severely injured and cannot safely 
undergo surgery, or when the soft tissues are too swollen or 
injured to allow for surgical incisions to be safely made, an 
external fixation device can be used to temporarily immobi-
lize the fracture. External fixators involve pins placed in bone 
proximal and distal to the fracture through healthy tissues that 
are connected by strong rods on the outside extremity, creating 
a stable construct.
Open Fractures
An open fracture occurs when the bone breaks through the skin. 
These typically result from high energy injuries and are often 
associated with significant damage to the surrounding soft tis-
sues and contamination of the wound (Fig. 43-4A). These 
injuries require immediate irrigation and debridement in the 
operating room and treatment with antibiotics to prevent wound 
infections and osteomyelitis (Fig. 43-4B). They can also cause 
injuries to surrounding vessels and nerves, which must 
be addressed as well. Often, definitive treatment of the 
fracture is delayed until the wound is sufficiently cleaned and 
healthy soft tissue is available to cover the fracture. 
Compartment Syndrome
Compartment syndrome is an orthopedic emergency caused 
by significant swelling within a compartment of an injured 
extremity that jeopardizes blood flow to the limb. Increased 
pressure within the compartment compromises perfusion to 
muscles and can cause ischemia or necrosis. Patients com-
plain of pain and numbness, and passive stretch of muscles 
within the compartment causes severe pain. While the diag-
nosis is based on clinical exam, pressures can be measured 
with needles placed into the compartment, which is necessary 
in unconscious patients who will not show these exam find-
ings. When compartment syndrome is suspected, emergent 
fasciotomy must be performed in which the overlying tight 
fascia is released through long incisions. These must be 
done as soon as possible because the damage to muscles 
and nerves will result in irreversible necrosis and contractures 
causing severe loss of function.
TREATMENT OF FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS
Clavicle Fractures
Fractures of the clavicle are one of the most common fractures 
in orthopedics. They typically occur following a fall onto the 
shoulder and the majority of clavicle fractures occur in the 
middle third of the clavicle. Since the bone is subcutaneous, 
the fracture is often evident on inspection. Most clavicle frac-
tures can be treated nonoperatively with a sling, range of motion 
1
2
3
1758
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
­exercises, and gradual return to normal activities. Fractures that 
are significantly displaced and shortened, or that penetrate the 
skin, are treated with open reduction internal fixation, typically 
with plate and screw fixation.
Distal clavicle fractures are less common and may occur 
along with coracoclavicular ligament ruptures. These injuries 
can be more troublesome and are at risk for nonunion if the bone 
ends are not in contact. If there is displacement of the fracture, 
surgical management is often recommended.
Acromioclavicular (AC) joint injuries occur from either 
a fall directly onto the shoulder or onto an outstretched 
hand and can result in tears of the acromioclavicular and 
coracoclavicular ligaments. A step-off, or separation, of the 
AC joint may be apparent on radiographs. The majority of 
Figure 43-3.  A. Transverse femur fracture. B. Intra-
medullary rod stabilizes femur fracture.
A
B
A
B
Figure 43-4.  A. Open grade 3 comminuted tibia-fibula fracture (motorcycle injury). B. External fixator temporarily stabilizes grade 3 open 
tibia fracture.
1759
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
these injuries can be treated with a sling and gentle range 
of motion. Injuries resulting in severe displacement of the 
clavicle may require open reduction and surgical repair.
The sternoclavicular (SC) joint is the only articulation 
between the upper extremity and the axial skeleton, and injuries 
to this joint are rare. Anterior dislocations occur more frequently 
and closed reduction can be attempted, followed by sling 
immobilization. Posterior SC joint dislocations can be danger-
ous, resulting in pulmonary or neurovascular compromise, and 
closed reduction under general anesthesia is recommended with 
a vascular surgeon present in case of vascular injury.
Scapula Fractures
Fractures of the scapula often result from significant trauma and 
can be associated with injuries to the head, lungs, ribs, and spine. 
Most scapula fractures are treated nonoperatively with the 
exception of fractures to the glenoid. As with most intra-
articular fractures, displacement of the articular surface of the 
glenoid is an indication for open reduction and internal fixation.
Shoulder Dislocations
The shoulder is one of the most commonly dislocated joints and 
most dislocations are anterior. They are often associated with 
injuries to the labrum (Bankart lesion), impression fractures of 
the humeral head (Hill-Sachs lesion), and rotator cuff tears. Pos-
terior dislocations are associated with seizures or electric 
shock. Adequate radiographs are required to diagnose a 
shoulder dislocation, with the axillary view being the most criti-
cal. If proper X-rays are not performed then dislocations can be 
missed and can result in significant debilitation of the shoulder. 
Dislocation of the shoulders can be managed with closed reduc-
tion followed by a short period of sling immobilization.
Proximal Humerus Fractures
Proximal humerus fractures occur most frequently in elderly 
patients following a fall onto the shoulder, though they can also 
occur following high-energy trauma. They have historically 
been classified by the number of fracture fragments using the 
Neer classification, which divides the proximal humerus into 
4 parts: the humeral head, greater and lesser tuberosities, and the 
humeral shaft. Treatment is determined by the displacement of 
the fracture fragments, the amount of angulation of the fracture, 
and the amount of comminution (which means multiple fracture 
fragments). If there is suspicion of an intra-articular fracture, 
a computerized tomography (CT) scan is often indicated. The 
majority of proximal humerus fractures is minimally displaced 
and can be treated with sling immobilization, followed by early 
shoulder motion and pendulum exercises. Displaced fractures 
and fractures involving the humeral head are at increased risk 
for osteonecrosis and therefore surgery is often recommended. 
If there is adequate bone stock and the fracture can be success-
fully reduced, open reduction internal fixation with plate and 
screw fixation is the treatment of choice. Older patients with 
osteoporotic bone and comminuted fractures are typically 
treated with a prosthetic replacement of the humeral head, or a 
hemiarthroplasty.
Humeral Shaft Fractures
Humeral shaft fractures occur from direct trauma to the arm 
or from a fall on an outstretched arm, especially in elderly 
patients. The radial nerve spirals around the humeral shaft and 
is at risk for injury, therefore a careful neurovascular exam 
is important. Most radial nerve injuries are neuropraxias, 
or stretching of the nerve, and function typically returns in 3 
to 4 months. The majority of humeral shaft fractures can heal 
with nonsurgical management if they are within an acceptable 
degree of angulation. They are treated with a coaptation splint 
or functional bracing, which consists of a plastic clamshell brace 
with Velcro straps. Close follow-up with serial radiographs is 
important to verify healing of the fracture, and gentle motion 
exercises are begun within 1 to 2 weeks. Fractures with signifi-
cant angulation are most commonly treated with open reduction 
and plate fixation, with care to protect the radial nerve as it often 
lies close to the fracture site. Intramedullary nailing can also be 
performed, though it carries the risk of shoulder pain from the 
nail insertion.
Distal Humerus Fractures
Fractures of the distal humerus result from falls onto the elbow 
or onto an outstretched arm. Supracondylar fractures are most 
common, occurring above the elbow joint and do not involve the 
articular surface. Those minimally displaced can be treated with 
a posterior long arm splint, with the elbow typically flexed to 
90 degrees. Fractures involving the articular surface are treated 
with plate fixation, and depending on the fracture pattern may 
require 2 plates, one placed medially and one posterolaterally. As 
with other intra-articular fractures, the goals of treatment are ana-
tomic reduction of the joint surface with stable fixation, restoration 
of the anatomic alignment of the joint, and early range of motion. 
Severely comminuted fractures, especially in the elderly, may be 
treated with a total elbow replacement, which involves replacing 
the joint surfaces of the distal humerus, proximal ulna, and radial 
head with prosthetic components. Fractures about the elbow are 
notorious for developing stiffness and therefore early motion of 
the elbow is paramount to a successful outcome. Range of motion 
should be started as soon as the patient can tolerate therapy.
Elbow Dislocations
Dislocations of the elbow are common and typically occur 
posteriorly after a fall on an outstretched hand. A dislocation 
results in injury to the joint capsule and rupture of the lateral 
collateral ligament, though the medial collateral ligament can 
also be involved. They may even be associated with a fracture 
of the radial head, coronoid, or the epicondyles of the humerus. 
Simple elbow dislocations should be urgently reduced with the 
patient under sedation and treated briefly in a posterior long arm 
splint. Stiffness of the elbow is a common complication follow-
ing elbow dislocations and therefore short-term immobilization 
(about 7–10 days) and early range of motion is recommended.
Dislocations associated with fractures may be treated sur-
gically if there is any instability of the elbow joint. A severe 
injury, known as the “Terrible Triad,” includes an elbow dislo-
cation, a radial head fracture, and a coronoid fracture. These are 
unstable injuries and require repair of the torn lateral collateral 
ligament (LCL), fixation or replacement of the radial head, and 
possible fixation of the coronoid depending on the size of the 
fracture fragment.
Radial Head Fractures
Most fractures of the radial head can be treated nonoperatively, 
simply with a sling for 1 to 2 days followed by motion exer-
cises. However, if there is a displaced fracture or if the fracture 
blocks pronation or supination of the forearm, then surgery is rec-
ommended. If the fracture can be well reduced, it is fixed with 
1 or 2 screws. If the radial head is fractured into multiple pieces, 
the treatment of choice is a radial head replacement with a ­ 
4
5
6
1760
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
metallic implant. Excision of the radial head can also be performed, 
but this is reserved for elderly patients with limited demands and 
may contribute to elbow instability or wrist symptoms over time.
Olecranon Fractures
Olecranon fractures occur following a fall directly onto a flexed 
elbow. Nondisplaced fractures are treated with a splint in 
45 to 90 degrees of flexion for a short time followed by range 
of motion exercises to prevent stiffness. Because the triceps 
inserts on the olecranon, the pull of the muscle often displaces 
the fracture, causing a loss of the ability to actively extend the 
elbow, and therefore should be fixed surgically. Simple trans-
verse fractures can be fixed with a tension band construct, which 
consists of cerclage wiring passed through the ulna and wrapped 
in a figure-of-8 fashion around 2 pins placed proximally into the 
olecranon, creating a compressive force across the fracture to 
promote healing. Comminuted fractures are treated with plate 
and screw fixation. Because of the subcutaneous location of the 
olecranon, this hardware can be irritating to the patient and may 
need to be removed after the fracture has healed.
Forearm Fractures
Forearm fractures are common injuries that result from high 
energy trauma or from falls onto an outstretched arm. Both bone 
forearm fractures often require surgery with plate and screw fix-
ation. The radius has a bow and rotates around the straight ulna 
for proper pronation and supination of the forearm, and there-
fore this anatomic relationship needs to be restored to maintain 
function. An isolated fracture of the ulna shaft, or a “nightstick 
fracture,” occurs from a direct blow to the side of the forearm. 
These can usually be treated in a cast, though fractures that are 
angulated or displaced can be treated with open reduction and 
plate fixation. A Monteggia fracture is an ulna shaft fracture 
along with a radial head dislocation. The radial head dislocation 
may be missed without radiographs of the elbow and therefore a 
fracture of the ulna should raise suspicion of this injury. These 
injuries require surgery to fix the ulna fracture with plate and 
screw fixation and to reduce radial head. A Galeazzi fracture 
is a radial shaft fracture with disruption of the distal radioulnar 
joint (DRUJ ) at the wrist. After the radius is fixed with plate 
and screw fixation, the DRUJ is assessed for stability and may 
need wires placed across the joint temporarily.
Pelvic Fractures
Pelvic fractures are indicative of high energy trauma and are 
associated with head, chest, abdominal, and urogenital inju-
ries. Hemorrhage from pelvic trauma can be life threatening 
and patients can present with hemodynamic instability, requir-
ing significant fluid resuscitation and blood transfusions. The 
bleeding that occurs is often due to injury to the venous plexus 
in the posterior pelvis, though it can also be due to a large vessel 
injury such as a gluteal artery. Immediate resuscitation is critical 
and these patients may require surgical exploration or interven-
tional radiology embolization to stop the bleeding. An important 
first-line treatment in the emergency room is the application of 
a pelvic binder or sheet that is wrapped tightly around the pel-
vis to help control bleeding. An external fixator may also 
be placed in the operating room. Other associated injuries 
are bladder and urethral injuries that manifest with bleeding 
from the urethral meatus or blood in the catheter and need to be 
assessed with a retrograde urethrogram.
The pelvis is a ring structure made up of the sacrum 
and the two innominate bones that are held together by 
strong ­ligaments. Because it is a ring, displacement can only 
occur if the ring is disrupted in two places. This may occur either 
from fractures of the bones or tears of the ligaments. There are 
three main fracture patterns that occur from trauma to the pelvis. 
An anteroposterior force to the pelvis causes an “open book” 
injury pattern in which the pelvis springs open, hinged on the 
intact posterior ligaments with widening of the pubic symphy-
sis. A lateral compression pattern results from a crush injury that 
causes fractures to the ileum, sacrum, and pubic rami. Vertical 
shear injuries are very unstable since they result from disrup-
tion of the strong posterior pelvic ligaments and are associated 
with significant blood loss and visceral injuries. Fractures of the 
sacrum may be difficult to see on x-ray and therefore CT scans 
are often needed to visualize the fracture pattern. The sacral 
nerves pass through foramen in the sacrum and therefore frac-
tures that are close to this foramen can result in nerve injuries.
Treatment of pelvic fractures depends on the fracture pat-
tern. Stable, minimally displaced fractures can be treated nonop-
eratively with protected weight bearing. Open book injuries in 
which the pubic symphysis is widened and the posterior pelvic 
ligaments are also injured need to be fixed surgically, which is 
typically performed with screws placed percutaneously through 
the ileum into sacrum to stabilize the pelvis posteriorly and a 
plate and screws over the pubic symphysis to stabilize it ante-
riorly. Displaced sacral fractures and iliac wing fractures are 
treated with screws or plates, while pubic rami fractures can 
usually be managed nonoperatively. While most pelvic fractures 
are caused by high energy trauma, elderly patients with osteo-
porotic bone can also suffer pelvic fractures after a fall, usually 
fracturing the pubic rami. Since these are stable injuries, they 
can be managed nonoperatively with protected weight bearing.
Acetabular Fractures
The acetabulum forms the socket of the hip joint, and fractures 
occur when the femoral head is driven into it in the setting of 
high energy trauma. CT scans are important to visualize the 
fracture pattern. These fractures often require surgery in order to 
restore a congruent, stable acetabulum, because incongruity of 
the hip can lead to early degenerative changes and osteoarthritis. 
These are best treated in the hands of experienced orthopedic 
trauma surgeons.
Hip Dislocations
Hip dislocations almost always result from high energy trauma 
and most commonly occur posteriorly. They can cause injury to 
the sciatic nerve, which runs directly posterior to the hip joint, 
and may be associated with a fracture of the acetabulum or 
femoral head. Hip dislocations need to be emergently reduced 
because of the risk of osteonecrosis of the femoral head when 
reduction is delayed. They can usually be reduced in the emer-
gency room with adequate sedation and muscle relaxation, but 
sometimes patients need general anesthesia to aid in the reduc-
tion. If this is unsuccessful, or if a fracture fragment gets trapped 
inside the joint, then an open reduction is performed. Hip dis-
locations that are associated with a femoral head fracture are at 
increased risk for osteonecrosis of the femoral head and post-
traumatic osteoarthritis.
Hip Fractures
Hip fractures are an extremely common injury seen in ortho-
pedics and are associated with significant morbidity and mor-
tality. They most often occur in elderly patients after grounds 
level falls, are much more common in women than men, and 
7
1761
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
occur more commonly in patients with osteoporosis. Patients 
who suffer hip fractures are at increased risk for many compli-
cations, including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, 
pneumonia, deconditioning, pressure sores, and even death, as 
the mortality rate in the first year following a hip fracture is 
around 25%. One of the most important reasons for performing 
surgery is to prevent these complications, and getting patients 
out of bed and walking as soon as possible diminishes their risk. 
Therefore, surgery is almost always the treatment of choice for 
hip fractures, and the type of surgery performed is determined 
by the anatomic location of the fracture and the fracture pat-
tern. Surgery should be performed as soon as possible, typically 
within 24 to 48 hours; however, since many of these patients 
suffer other comorbidities, they must be properly medically 
optimized before surgery. The goals of surgery are to minimize 
pain, restore hip function, and allow early mobilization, the 
importance of which cannot be overemphasized. The functional 
outcome for patients following a hip fracture is largely based 
on their level of mobility and independence before their injury. 
Many patients become less independent, may require assistive 
devices to help them walk, and some may require a long-term 
nursing or rehabilitation facility.
Femoral Neck Fractures  Femoral neck fractures occur with 
the capsule of the hip joint. The blood supply to the femoral 
neck and head comes from branches of the medial and lateral 
femoral circumflex arteries, which run along the femoral neck, 
and therefore fractures in this area put the vascular supply at 
risk and can lead to osteonecrosis. Femoral neck fractures 
that are nondisplaced have a low risk of disruption of blood 
flow and therefore can be treated with in situ internal fixation. 
Three cancellous screws are placed through a small incision over 
the lateral proximal femur, directed up through the femoral neck 
and into the femoral head. Patients can usually begin protected 
weight bearing immediately after surgery. Displaced femoral 
neck fractures will likely disrupt the blood supply and therefore 
need to be treated with a prosthetic replacement. Most com-
monly a hemiarthroplasty is performed in which the femoral 
neck and head are replaced with a metal stem into the femoral 
canal and a metal head (Fig. 43-5A). Patients who have severe 
osteoarthritis of the hip joint and had significant arthritic hip 
pain before their fracture may receive a total hip replacement, 
in which the acetabulum is also replaced with a prosthesis, typi-
cally a plastic cup inside a metal shell (Fig. 43-5B). Patients can 
begin weight bearing immediately after surgery.
Intertrochanteric Hip Fractures. Intertrochanteric hip 
fractures occur between the greater and lesser trochanters of the 
proximal femur. Because the blood supply to this area is abun-
dant, osteonecrosis is uncommon and therefore these fractures 
can be fixed with internal fixation. Displaced fractures need to 
be realigned, and this involves placing the patient on a fracture 
table where traction and rotation can be applied to the affected 
leg to reduce the fracture. There are two devices that can be 
used. A sliding hip screw includes a large screw placed from the 
lateral cortex of the proximal femur across the fracture and into 
the femoral neck and head, followed by a side plate along with 
lateral cortex of the femur, which is then fixed to the shaft with 
screws. A cephalomedullary nail includes a nail placed down the 
medullary canal from the piriformis fossa and a large screw that 
engages the nail as it is passed from the lateral cortex up into the 
neck and head. Both devices form stable constructs (though the 
Figure 43-5.  A. Failed hip hemiarthro-
plasty (periprosthetic fracture). B. Peripros-
thetic fracture repaired with modular femoral 
­component.
A
B
1762
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
cephalomedullary nail is preferred for certain fracture patterns) 
and allow protected weight bearing postoperatively.
Subtrochanteric Hip Fractures. Subtrochanteric hip 
fractures occur in the proximal femoral shaft just distal to the 
lesser trochanter in an area of high biomechanical stresses. 
While they can occur in elderly patients after a fall, they are also 
seen in high energy trauma. Because of the forces of muscles 
attached to the fractured segments, they tend to be significantly 
displaced and it can be difficult to reduce these fractures. They 
are most often treated with a long cephalomedullary nail that 
includes a screw distally to lock the nail in place and prevent 
rotation of the femur. Fractures that cannot be reduced closed 
on a fracture table or that are severely comminuted require open 
reduction followed by a cephalomedullary nail or by a plate and 
screws that is placed over the lateral cortex of the femoral shaft. 
In most cases, protected weight bearing can begin soon after 
surgery.
Femoral Shaft Fractures
Fractures of the femoral shaft are caused by high energy trauma 
and may be associated with other severe injuries. Long bone 
fractures, such as femoral shaft fractures, put these patients are 
risk for complications such as thromboembolic events and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and therefore it is impor-
tant to fix these quickly, typically within 24 hours. They are 
most commonly fixed with an intramedullary nail that can be 
placed antegrade (from the piriformis fossa or greater trochanter 
down the canal) or retrograde (through an incision into the knee 
joint and up the canal), with screws placed through proximal 
and distal holes to lock the nail in place, creating a stable fixa-
tion to allow weight bearing. Trauma patients who are hemody-
namically unstable or who have other life-threatening injuries 
are treated temporarily with an external fixator until they can 
safely undergo surgery.
Distal Femur Fractures
Distal femur fractures are the result of a fall from a height or 
from high-energy trauma. They can also occur in elderly patients 
with osteoporotic bone after a fall onto the knee. While nondis-
placed fractures in the elderly may be treated nonoperatively 
with a hinged knee brace and motion exercises, most require 
surgery. These fractures can involve the articular surface of the 
knee joint, so anatomic reduction of the joint surface is crucial. 
They are fixed with plates and screws placed over the medial or 
lateral cortex, depending on the fracture pattern, and early knee 
range of motion is encouraged to prevent stiffness. These intra-
articular fractures require the patient to be nonweight bearing 
until the fracture shows signs of healing.
Knee Dislocations
Dislocation of the knee is a rare but devastating injury that can 
be limb-threatening. When the knee dislocates, the anterior cru-
ciate ligament (ACL) and posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) are 
torn, and various degrees of injury occur to the LCL, medial 
collateral ligament (MCL), posterolateral corner, joint capsule, 
and menisci. The danger however is due to the close proximity 
of the popliteal artery that runs directly behind the knee, which 
may kink or suffer a tear of the intimal wall when the knee 
dislocates. A neurovascular exam is extremely important, fol-
lowed by immediate reduction of the knee and repeat exam of 
the pulses. If there is evidence of diminished or absent pulses, 
an angiogram must be performed, and vascular surgery may 
need to perform emergent vascular repair. With regard to the 
ligamentous injuries, an MRI will identify what structures have 
been torn. Because a dislocation causes so much damage to the 
knee, multiligamentous reconstruction is recommended in order 
to stabilize the knee joint. Stiffness and instability of the knee 
are common complications after this injury.
Patella/Extensor Mechanism Injuries
The extensor mechanism is comprised of the quadriceps tendon, 
the patella, and the patella ligament and functions to extend the 
knee. Injuries can result after a fall directly onto the knee or 
from forcible contraction of the quadriceps. It is important to 
examine the knee for the ability to actively extend the knee, 
since quadriceps tendon ruptures, patella fractures, or patella 
ligament ruptures can result in a loss of active knee extension, 
requiring surgery. Nondisplaced patella fractures can be treated 
nonoperatively with a cast or knee immobilizer, holding the 
knee in full extension, and weight bearing is permitted. Dis-
placed or comminuted fractures require surgery with either ten-
sion band wiring or screws. Acute osteochondral fractures can 
be managed with internal fixation (Fig. 43-6A and B). Quad-
riceps tendon and patella ligament ruptures with loss of active 
knee extension are treated with suture repair. After surgery, the 
knee is held in extension and knee flexion is slowly increased 
over several weeks using a hinged knee brace.
Patella dislocations are common injuries that occur when 
the femur is forcibly internally rotated on an externally rotated 
tibia while the foot is planted on the ground. They typically 
dislocate laterally and often relocate spontaneously. Patients 
present with a significant knee effusion and on physical exam 
may elicit a positive apprehension test, in which a lateral force 
to the patella elicits pain and the sensation of an impending dis-
location. Dislocated patellas can be reduced by extending the 
knee and manual reduction, and are treated with temporary knee 
immobilization. There is a high risk for recurrent dislocations, 
which may require surgical intervention. Osteochondral inju-
ries to the trochlear groove and patella may be managed with 
the Draenert technique of autologous osteochondral transplant 
(Fig. 43-7A and B).
Tibial Plateau Fractures
The tibial plateau is comprised of the articular surfaces and 
underlying cancellous bone of the medial and lateral plateaus 
of the proximal tibia. Fractures of the plateau result from axial 
loads sustained in falls from a height or high energy trauma, and 
are often associated with injuries to the menisci and cartilage 
of the knee. Fractures can involve the medial, lateral, or both 
plateaus with significant comminution, angulation, and depres-
sion, creating a challenging injury to fix. A CT scan is impor-
tant to visualize the intra-articular involvement of the fracture. 
Minimally displaced fractures may be treated nonoperatively 
with strict nonweight bearing until the fracture heals. Fractures 
associated with displaced articular fragments require surgery in 
order to restore the smooth contour of the articular surface. They 
are treated with plates and screws placed medially, laterally, or 
both. Since there is often a depression of the cancellous bone, 
bone graft or bone substitutes may be needed to buttress the 
articular surface and restore the anatomic alignment of the tibia. 
Patients are kept strictly nonweight bearing for several weeks 
until the fracture begins to heal, though early range of motion is 
encouraged. Repair of ligament or meniscus injuries may also 
be indicated at the time of surgery. Knee stiffness and osteoar-
thritis are common complications of these injuries.
1763
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
Figure 43-6.  A. Osteochondral Patella Fracture. B. Internal fixation of osteochondralpatellar fracture.
A
B
Figure 43-7.  A. Knee traumatic articular lesion (trochlear groove). B. Lesion repaired with Draenert technique (autologous osteochondral 
transplant).
A
B
1764
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Tibial Shaft Fractures
Tibial shaft fractures are the most common long bone fractures 
and they occur following high energy trauma, direct blows, and 
severe twisting injuries. Trauma and direct blows to the tibia 
result in transverse or comminuted fracture patterns, while tor-
sional injuries cause spiral fractures. Fractures with minimal 
angulation can be treated with reduction and casting, followed 
by transition to a functional brace and slow return to weight bear-
ing, and may need to be immobilized for several months since 
these fractures can be slow to heal. Most tibial shaft fractures, 
especially comminuted and angulated fractures, are treated with 
an intramedullary nail placed down the tibial canal, with inter-
locking screws placed proximally and distally, and weight bear-
ing can begin soon after surgery. Plate and screw fixation can 
also be used, however since the tibia is subcutaneous, hardware 
placed along the shaft can increase the risk of wound breakdown, 
and therefore intramedullary nailing is the preferred treatment. 
Fibula shaft fractures often occur along with tibial shaft frac-
tures, though they usually heal well without surgery.
Tibial Plafond (Pilon) Fractures
The tibial plafond is the distal tibial articular surface of the ankle 
joint. Pilon fractures are typically high energy injuries from 
axial compression or a shear force. These injuries can cause sig-
nificant soft tissue injury, severely comminuted intra-articular 
fragments, and wound healing problems, making these fractures 
very difficult to treat. Due to the soft tissue injury, these frac-
tures are initially treated with external fixation until the swelling 
subsides, which may take several days to weeks. The goals of 
surgery are to restore the articular surface, fix the fibula in order 
to maintain and establish anatomic length, bone graft any can-
cellous bone defects, and stabilize the distal tibia with plate and 
screw fixation. Patients are kept nonweight bearing for many 
weeks until the fracture heals. Despite best efforts, patients may 
suffer from ankle pain and stiffness, arthritis, wound healing 
problems, infection, nonunion, and some patients eventually 
need ankle fusion in the future.
Ankle Dislocations
The ankle joint is a complex hinge joint comprised of the distal 
tibial plafond, medial malleolus, and lateral malleolus and their 
articulation with the talus. Several ligaments also contribute to 
the stability of the ankle joint, including the deltoid ligament 
medially, the syndesmotic ligaments between the tibia and fibula, 
and the anterior talofibular, posterior talofibular, and calcaneo-
fibular ligaments laterally. Dislocations of the ankle joint result 
from a severe twisting injury and often occur with fractures. At 
times, dislocations can place significant pressure on the over-
lying skin and can cause neurovascular compromise, therefore 
prompt reduction is extremely important followed by splinting.
Ankle Fractures
Ankle fractures are very common and result from a twisting 
injury to the ankle. The patterns of ankle fractures depend on the 
direction of force and the position of the foot and ankle at the 
time of injury. The goals of treating ankle fractures are to restore 
the anatomy of the ankle joint and to restore the length and rota-
tion of the fibula. Initial treatment includes closed reduction and 
placement of a well-padded splint in order to protect the skin. 
Swelling can be a significant problem so elevation of the foot is 
encouraged. If surgery is to be performed, it is usually delayed 
1 to 2 weeks until the swelling decreases to limit the risk of 
wound healing problems.
Lateral Malleolus Fractures  Isolated fractures of the lateral 
malleolus require anatomic reduction of the fracture in order 
to restore normal ankle joint congruity. The talus can sublux 
laterally following lateral malleolus fractures, and even 1 mil-
limeter of talar shift decreases the surface contact between the 
talus and the tibia by 40%, increasing the risk of developing 
arthritis. Closed reduction and casting can be successful, how-
ever if the fracture cannot be adequately reduced, then open 
reduction internal fixation of the fibula is done with plate and 
screw fixation.
Medial Malleolar Fractures  An isolated fracture of the medial 
malleolus is usually an avulsion-type injury. Minimally dis-
placed fractures can be treated with a cast or walking boot, while 
displaced fractures are fixed with screws placed up through the 
tip of the malleolus.
Bimalleolar Fractures  Fractures to both the medial and lateral 
malleoli often require surgery. These injuries are more unstable 
and the talus will often sublux or completely dislocate laterally. 
They are treated by reducing and fixing both malleoli during 
surgery. Occasionally, the posterior articular surface of the dis-
tal tibia, or posterior malleolus, can be fractured as well, result-
ing in a trimalleolar ankle fracture. Often it is a small fragment 
and does not need to be fixed, however if it involves >25% of 
the articular surface it should be fixed with screws placed either 
anteriorly or posteriorly.
Syndesmosis injuries  The syndesmosis is comprised of several 
ligaments between the distal tibia and fibula that provide stabil-
ity to the ankle joint by resisting axial, rotational, and transla-
tional forces. The syndesmosis can be disrupted at the time of 
ankle fractures and requires special attention. Widening of the 
space between the distal tibia and fibula after fixing the fractures 
is indicative of a syndesmosis injury and it is treated with 1 or 
2 screws placed laterally from the fibula into the tibia, parallel to 
the ankle joint. Patients are kept non-weight bearing for several 
weeks. The screws are often removed after 12 weeks, though 
they can be left in place and are typically asymptomatic.
Calcaneal Fractures
Calcaneal fractures occur following a fall from a height and 
are often associated with other injuries, including lumbar spine 
fractures. These injuries are often intra-articular and can result 
in collapse of weight-bearing posterior facet of the calcaneous. 
CT scans are useful to better visualize the fracture pattern. Most 
fractures can be treated nonoperatively in a well-padded splint 
and patients are kept nonweight bearing for up to 12 weeks. 
Displaced intraarticular fractures can be treated surgically once 
the swelling subsides with lag screws or with a thin plate and 
screw fixation. Despite adequate treatment, calcaneal fractures 
can be debilitating injuries, leading to significant heel pain and 
arthritis.
Talus Fractures
Fractures of the talus commonly result from forced dorsi-
flexion of the ankle, causing the talar neck to impact on the 
anterior distal tibia. The blood supply to the talus can be jeop-
ardized after a fracture and may lead to osteonecrosis, which 
is an unfortunately common complication following talus frac-
tures. Nondisplaced fractures are treated with a cast and have a 
15% risk of osteonecrosis, while displaced fractures are often 
treated ­surgically with screw fixation. There is a high risk of 
osteonecrosis, ranging from 30% to 100%, and a high risk of 
arthritis.
1765
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
Foot Fractures
The tarsal bones, including the navicular, the cuboid, and the 
three cuneiform bones, link the hind foot to the metatarsals and 
provide mechanical stability to the arch of the foot. Isolated frac-
tures to these bones are rare and are often treated nonoperatively 
with a cast or boot. The Lisfranc ligament, which connects the 
2nd metatarsal head to the medial cuneiform, is an important 
stabilizer of the midfoot. Lisfranc injuries can be seen following 
torsional forces to the foot or from crush injuries. These inju-
ries often require surgery since anatomic reduction is extremely 
important for a successful outcome. Metatarsal fractures simi-
larly result from twisting or crush injuries and most can be treated 
nonoperatively with a hard-soled shoe and weight bearing as tol-
erated. The base of the 5th metatarsal, however, warrants close 
attention. Fractures at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction of the 
proximal 5th metatarsal (Jones fractures) can jeopardize blood 
flow and are at risk for nonunion. Therefore, Jones fractures need 
close follow-up to assess for healing and may need screw fixa-
tion. Injuries to the metatarsal-phalangeal joints and phalangeal 
fractures can be treated symptomatically or with buddy taping 
with weight bearing as tolerated in a hard-soled shoe.
INTRODUCTION
Sports Medicine
Sports medicine deals with the prevention and treatment of inju-
ries related to sports and exercise. These injuries encompass 
various areas in the musculoskeletal system. In recent years, 
sports-related injuries have increased and the sports medicine 
field has been expanding. The growth in sports and sports-
related injuries has likely to do with: a) that athletes participate 
in sport-specific training year round (and in multiple sports) 
rather than just seasonal training, b) that there has been an 
increase in “weekend warriors,” c) that patients have become 
more aware of physical fitness, are better educated, and have 
higher performance expectations, and d) that more people 
undertake recreational activities.
The orthopedic subspecialty of sports medicine treats a 
broad spectrum of patients, ranging from children who have just 
started participating in their first sports to the specialized care of 
professional athletes. Medical treatment of athletes, recreational 
or professional, can be complex as short- and long-term out-
comes are influenced by the higher demand that athletes put on 
their bodies. Additionally, the orthopedic sports medicine spe-
cialist does not only treat the patient’s injuries, but also has to 
consider the return to activity in a later stadium. “Getting back 
in the game” is sometimes subject to pressure from third parties 
(e.g., team members, coaches, parents, fans), which makes treat-
ment and the rehabilitation a challenging process.
Surgical intervention for ligament and cartilage injuries 
in sports medicine patients is usually done using arthroscopic 
techniques. The most frequently injured joints are the shoulder, 
hip and knee. Therefore, treatment of common injuries in these 
joints will be the scope of this paragraph.
SHOULDER
Rotator Cuff
Rotator cuff injuries are among the most common reasons to 
visit an orthopedic sports specialist. Often, these injuries are 
associated with either forceful or repeated overhead or pulling 
movements. The rotator cuff provides shoulder movement and 
glenohumeral joint stability and injuries typically lead to pain, 
weakness and restricted movement of the arm. Over recent 
years, the treatment of the rotator cuff injuries has consider-
ably improved with regard to indication for surgery, surgical 
techniques and rehabilitation protocols. With the introduction 
of arthroscopy, shoulder surgery has become less invasive with 
all advantages associated. Currently, it has been established that 
arthroscopic techniques are equal or superior to open techniques 
for most indications. Controversies surrounding rotator cuff 
repair remain and include, but are not limited to, use of acromio-
plasty, enhancement of healing with orthobiologics (Fig. 43-8), 
single- vs. double-row fixation and the treatment of massive 
or large tears. Rehabilitation after surgery plays an important 
role to restore strength, motion and function and to enable the 
patient to return to sports. Typically, rehabilitation is made up 
of three consecutive stages: immobilization, passive exercise, 
and active exercise. Immobilization and passive exercise usu-
ally start in the first 4 to 6 weeks after surgery. Immobilization 
can be established by using a sling and passive exercise should 
be initiated by the therapist. The therapist moves the arm in 
different positions to improve range of motion (ROM) while 
providing support. After 4 to 6 weeks, active exercises can be 
gradually introduced. At 8 to 12 weeks, muscle strength and 
improvement of arm control are increased by starting a strength-
ening exercise program.
Shoulder Instability
The most common etiology for shoulder instability is related 
to trauma, especially shoulder dislocation. After a shoulder has 
dislocated, it becomes vulnerable to repeat episodes of instabil-
ity and may develop to being a chronic problem. Most of the 
shoulder’s stability is provided by the rotator cuff and shoulder 
capsule. The most common dislocation is in the anterior-inferior 
direction, although posterior dislocations do occur. Typically, 
patients with an anterior dislocation present with pain and an 
internally rotated shoulder. Younger patients are more suscep-
tible to suffer from repeat dislocations than older patients.6–8 
The position of the humeral head with respect to the glenoid 
and other bony pathology can be identified with radiographs. 
Views from different angles should be obtained to thoroughly 
evaluate; an anterior-posterior (AP) view, along with glenoid 
(axillary) view, and a “ Y” view of the shoulder are recom-
mended in assessing this injury. Since most of the shoulder’s 
stability is provided by soft tissue, usually this is also injured. 
Following successful reduction magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) should be obtained to identify underlying causes and 
concomitant ­injuries.
Relocation of the shoulder is generally accomplished with 
the patient in supine position and the arm under gentle ­traction 
and slight abduction. Some sedation is helpful as it relaxes the 
patient’s musculature and relieves the pain. Whether or not 
to immobilize a first-time-dislocated shoulder or not, remains 
controversial, as well as the position of immobilization or the 
early surgical repair of capsulolabral structures. Prolonged 
immobilization is not recommended since this will often lead 
to substantial stiffness in the shoulder and does not appreciably 
decrease the redislocation rate. A small minority of patients with 
atraumatic multidirectional instability can generally be treated 
with shoulder rehabilitation. Unfortunately, many patients expe-
rience recurrent dislocations, in which case surgical stabilization 
of the shoulder should be considered. Many open stabilizing 
procedures have been described and, depending on etiology, 
1766
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
many are still being applied such as the open Bankart repair, 
Latarjet procedure, remplissage and humeral head restoration. 
However, arthroscopic soft-tissue restoration has been the front-
line treatment for recurrent instability. After surgery, the shoul-
der is temporarily immobilized with a sling. When the sling is 
removed, exercises to rehabilitate the ligaments, improve ROM 
and prevent from scarring, will be started. Strengthening exer-
cises will gradually be added to the rehabilitation plan.
Superior Labrum and Biceps Tendon
The labrum helps to deepen the socket and stabilizes the gle-
nohumeral joint. Additionally, it serves as an attachment point 
for many of the shoulder ligaments, as well one of the biceps 
tendons. A superior labrum anterior and posterior lesion may 
occur in the superior part of the labrum, usually anterior and 
posterior to the attachment of the biceps tendon, with occasional 
involvement of the biceps tendon in certain cases. Injuries to 
the superior labrum can be caused by trauma or by repetitive 
shoulder motion. Radiographs are generally obtained to evaluate 
for concomitant injuries or osteoarthritic changes. The labrum 
itself, and other soft tissue, is better visualized with MRI with 
addition of a gadolinium arthrogram adding sensitivity for labral 
injury detection (Fig. 43-9).
Conservative and operative treatments have had mixed 
results depending on the patient’s age, activity level, type of 
tear and presence of concomitant injuries. If symptoms do not 
improve with adequate physical therapy and/or nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), surgical intervention is usu-
ally indicated. Some SLAP injuries involve the biceps tendon, 
which may require either tenotomy or tenodesis.10,11
After surgical labrum repair, the shoulder needs to 
be immobilized to protect the repair and allow for healing. 
Usually a sling is used for 4 weeks after surgery. Then a ­physical 
therapy program will gradually start improving ROM and pre-
vent from scar formation and stiffness to develop. As healing 
progresses, exercises to strengthen the shoulder muscles and the 
rotator cuff will gradually be added to the program around 4 
to 6 weeks after surgery. Return to early interval throwing can 
generally be allowed around 3 to 4 months after surgery.
Impingement Syndromes
After minor trauma or repetitive injury, patients may experience 
pain and discomfort which can be due to irritation of the tissues 
in the subacromial space. In many cases these shoulder impinge-
ment syndromes are caused by simple bursitis or tendonitis of 
the long head of the biceps or supraspinatus tendon.5 Occasion-
ally, impingement syndromes can progress to tears of the supra-
spinatus tendon, which can be confirmed by MRI or ultrasound.
The goal of treatment is to reduce pain and restore func-
tion. Initial treatment is generally nonsurgical and based on rest, 
NSAIDs, and physical therapy. If pain is not relieved, an injection 
of a local anesthetic and a cortisone preparation may be helpful.
If conservative treatment does not relieve pain, surgery is 
recommended, with the goal to excise the bursa and create more 
subacromial space. Generally, surgery is performed arthroscopi-
cally and encompasses bursectomy and subacromial decompres-
sion via acromioplasty. If the rotator cuff (supraspinatus tendon) 
is also injured, arthroscopic repair is usually indicated to restore 
function, sometimes is accompanied by a bony resection of the 
inferior portion of the acromion.
The Acromioclavicular Joint
The acromioclavicular joint is a gliding synovial joint and not 
very mobile. The joint is stabilized by three ligaments: the supe-
rior acromioclavicular ligament, the inferior acromioclavicular 
A
B
rotator cuff tear
greater tuberosity/
RC attachment site
rotator cuff repair
C
Figure 43-8.  Imaging and treatment of rotator cuff tears. A. MRI coronal T2 image showing a full-thickness and moderately retracted tear 
(arrow) of the supraspinatus tendon. B. Arthroscopic image showing the supraspinatus tendon tear as viewed from a posterior portal during the 
surgery. C. Arthroscopic image showing completion of repair of the supraspinatus tendon tear using suture anchors imbedded in the greater 
tuberosity of the humerus and attached sutures that capture and reduce the torn tendon to its native insertion site.
1767
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
ligament, and the coracoclavicular ligament. Injuries to these 
ligaments are commonly sustained playing contact sports such 
as football and ice hockey and may cause displacement of the 
joint. An acromioclavicular sprain is referred to as a shoulder 
separation and type I and II are usually treated symptomatic. 
Controversy exists however regarding early or delayed surgical 
reconstruction for type III tears. Frank tearing of the coracocla-
vicular ligaments, associated with significant displacement, is 
oftentimes reconstructed surgically.
KNEE
The knee is the largest joint in the human body and is a piv-
otal hinge joint, which allows flexion and extension as well 
as a medial and lateral rotation. The knee bears tremendous 
axial loads as well as torsional and sheer forces, making it 
vulnerable to both acute injury and the development of osteo-
arthritis. In sports, the major stabilizing structures such as the 
ACL and the medial collateral ligament (MCL) are frequently 
injured. Other frequent knee injuries are to the menisci, pos-
terolateral corner, the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) or 
patellofemoral.
Menisci
The menisci are crescent-shaped pieces of fibrocartilage shaped 
that provide joint stability, shock absorption, load distribution, 
and proprioception. Sudden meniscal tears often happen during 
sports, usually during contact or while squatting and twisting 
the knee. Typical symptoms associated with meniscus injury 
are pain, stiffness and swelling, catching or locking of the knee, 
buckling or “ giving way” and impaired ROM. Radiographs are 
typically obtained to assess possible concomitant injuries, the 
presence of (early) osteoarthritis, and leg alignment. However, 
since menisci do not show on radiographs, an MRI is obtained 
to assess the status of the menisci and the soft tissue surrounding 
the knee joint (Fig. 43-10). Small tears on the outer edge of the 
meniscus may not cause symptoms and—provided the knee is 
stable—nonsurgical treatment may be sufficient.
The most commonly performed surgical procedure for 
meniscus tears is partial (subtotal) meniscectomy. How-
ever, it has become increasingly clear over recent years that 
preservation of the load-distributing function of the menis-
cus is important in preventing from development of early 
osteoarthritis. Research into the use of orthobiologics (e.g. 
microfracture of the notch, fibrin clot) for meniscal repairs 
has expanded the indications for repair over (subtotal) men-
iscectomy.15–19 Tears have been reported in virtually all 
portions of the meniscus, with radial and longitudinal tears 
being the most common. Tears of the root of the meniscus 
are less common, but are increasingly being recognized as 
devastating injuries that cause serious alterations of knee 
contact forces. Surgical techniques are developing to repair 
the root to restore its function.20,21 Meniscus transplantation 
may be an option for young patients with a largely deficient 
meniscus.22
The paradigm of treatment of torn menisci is shifting 
thanks to the development of superior surgical techniques, use 
of orthobiologics and promising first results with root repair 
and meniscus transplantations. Physicians must be further edu-
cated on the significance of meniscal preservation when there is 
potential for healing.
Directly after surgery, the knee is immobilized with a 
brace and weight bearing is protected to allow the meniscus to 
heal. When healing is complete, ROM and strength will need 
Figure 43-9.  Imaging and treatment of a shoulder glenoid labrum tear. A. MRI axial T1 image showing a tear of the posterior superior 
labrum (arrow). B. Arthroscopic image with the patient in the lateral decubitus position showing detachment of the torn labrum away from 
the glenoid. C. Arthroscopic image demonstrating repair of the labrum to its attachment site using anchors in the glenoid and sutures that 
fixes the labrum to the glenoid.
A
B
LIGHT
labral repair
glenoid
humeral
head
C
1768
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
to be regained. Physical therapy is an integral component of 
­healing and return to play, which usually is allowed between 
4 to 6 months after surgery.
Collateral Ligaments
The MCL is the most frequently injured knee ligament, which 
usually occurs after excessive valgus stress of the knee. Often-
times, this is associated with (medial) meniscus injury and 
sometimes with an ACL. The combination of MCL, medial 
meniscus, and ACL injury is also known as the “unhappy triad” 
and occurs most commonly in contact sports.
The MCL has good healing potential and grade I and II 
injuries usually improve with bracing and activity modification. 
Grade III injuries may also improve with conservative treatment 
and often these injuries are treated non-operatively initially. The 
majority of MCL injuries occur in the mid-substance or at the 
femoral insertion side. There is a small subset of tibial sided 
grade III tears though, that is associated with worse clinical out-
come and surgical repair is more often advocated. Reconstruc-
tion is rare, since surgical repair is usually effective in restoring 
the MCL. Lateral collateral ligament (LCL) injuries are much 
less common than MCL ligament injuries, but similarly most 
often managed conservatively.
With return of ROM and normal gait pattern, patients are 
functionally progressed towards return to sports. A functional 
brace during sports is advised.
Cruciate Ligaments
The cruciate ligaments are situated centrally within the intercon-
dylar notch of the knee. The biomechanical function of both the 
ACL and the PCL is complex and three-dimensional, but to sim-
plify: both play an important role in providing antero-posterior 
and rotational stability of the knee.
ACL tears are a common sports injury, especially in sud-
den cutting and stopping sports (e.g. soccer, basketball) or con-
tact sports (e.g. football). A torn ACL will result in altered knee 
biomechanics and kinematics and thus potentially lead to the 
early development of degenerative changes in the knee joint. 
Since a torn ACL will not heal without surgery, surgical ACL 
reconstruction is generally treatment of choice in patients who 
are young and active. Patients with a more sedentary lifestyle 
and who experience no persisting or disabling instability in 
daily life, may be effectively treated with conservative manage-
ment (i.e., bracing and physical therapy).
A patient with an ACL tear typically presents with pain 
and swelling, instability, loss of ROM, joint line tenderness 
(with associated meniscus injury), and discomfort while walk-
ing. Radiographs are obtained to evaluate joint condition and 
possible associated osseous injuries. To visualize the ACL 
and other soft tissue in the knee however, an MRI should be 
obtained. Although an MRI is not required to make the diag-
nosis, the information it provides is invaluable with regard to 
objectifying anatomic characteristics by taking measurements, 
A
B
C
Figure 43-10.  Imaging and treatment of a knee lateral and meniscus tear. A. MRI sagittal T2 image of the knee showing a displaced bucket-
handle lateral meniscus tear (arrow). B. Arthroscopic image showing the remnant rim of the lateral meniscus prior to reduction and fixation 
of the torn bucket-handle fragment. C. Arthroscopic image after the torn segment is reduced and fixed to the remaining meniscus and the 
lateral capsule using suture.
1769
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
assessing concomitant injuries and presurgical planning in 
­general (Fig. 43-11).
Reconstruction is performed with use of a tendon-graft that 
will replace the native ACL. Commonly used graft sources are 
the patellar tendon, the hamstrings and the quadriceps tendon. 
These tendons can be harvested from the same knee (i.e., auto-
grafts), during the same procedure. Alternatively a donor graft 
(i.e., allograft) can be used. Both have their own subset of pros 
and cons, with the most important pro being absence of donor-site 
morbidity for allograft and better healing potential for autograft.
Injuries of the PCL are less common than other knee liga-
ment injuries. Frequently seen causes are a bent knee hitting 
a dashboard in a car accident or falling on a knee that is bent 
during running. A rupture of the PCL is usually better tolerated 
than ACL rupture, since many tears (i.e., grade I and II) have the 
potential to heal on their own and do not result in much knee sta-
bility problems. Most Grade I and II injuries are treated nonop-
eratively. Combined PCL/PLC and PCL/MCL and Grade III PCL 
injuries however, do present a challenge with regard to manage-
ment decision-making. Chronic PCL-deficient (Grade III) knees 
have an increased incidence of osteoarthrosis, particularly in 
the patellofemoral and medial knee compartments. Indication 
for surgery is influence by age, activity level, and presence of 
concomitant injuries. Different surgical techniques have been 
proposed; the most common are the “ inlay” technique and the 
transtibial technique.
The goal of cruciate ligament (both ACL and PCL) recon-
struction is to restore native knee kinematics, to provide the 
patient with the best potential for a successful outcome and to 
prevent from the development of long-term complications, such 
as osteoarthrosis.
Posterolateral Corner
Critical structures of the posterolateral corner (PLC) are the 
LCL, popliteus tendon and popliteofibular ligament. These 
structures each contribute to the static and dynamic stability 
of the knee and are commonly injured concomitant with other 
ligamentous injury, mostly together with the torn ACL.38 The 
importance of closely evaluating the PLC after knee injury is 
demonstrated by the fact that a deficient PLC causes altered 
knee biomechanics and subsequently increases stress on sur-
rounding stabilizing structures. As such, it has been shown that 
a deficient PLC is a primary cause of cruciate ligament recon-
struction failure.
Acute high-grade injuries of the PLC with obvious defi-
cient structures require surgical intervention. Since primary repair 
becomes increasingly difficult as time between injury and sur-
gery increases, a cut-off of 2 to 3 weeks is usual to either repair 
or reconstruct the deficient structures. With more chronic PLC 
injuries, reconstruction is recommended to restore knee stability.
HIP
Femoroacetabular Impingement
Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a pathologic condition 
that refers to impingement of the anterior femoral head-neck 
junction against the anterosuperior labrum. This is frequently 
caused by abnormal bony offset at the femoral head-neck junc-
tion, abnormal acetabular anteversion or excessive anterolateral 
acetabular bony rim coverage (Pincer lesion), and combined 
CAM-Pincer lesions. Recognition of FAI can be clinically and 
radiologically difficult. However, familiarity with this disorder 
is essential, as FAI can lead to labral tears, cartilage delamina-
tion, and if untreated, osteoarthritis.
Commonly, patients present with anterior groin pain 
exacerbated by activities involving hip flexion or pain over the 
greater trochanter as well as grinding or popping. Patients report 
pain with flexion and internal rotation and after prolonged sit-
ting. On examination, there is a decrease in internal rotation 
that appears out of proportion to the loss of the other ranges of 
motion and there is limited flexion. The impingement test, elic-
ited by 90 degrees of flexion, adduction and internal rotation of 
the hip, is almost always positive.
The imaging findings of FAI can be seen on plain radio-
graphs, CT scan, MRI, and MRA. Some of the abnormalities 
seen include abnormal lateral femoral head/neck offset seen as 
a lateral femoral neck bump, os acetabulae, synovial herniation 
pits, acetabular over-coverage, hyaline cartilage abnormalities, 
and labral tears.
Figure 43 -11.  MR imaging of a torn ACL. (A-C) Proton density sagittal cuts; showing anteroposterior tibial insertion site length measure-
ment “x”, intra-articular ligament length measurement “y” and ACL inclination angle measurement “z”. Oblique (in the same plane as the 
ACL runs) coronal cuts showing a complete ACL tear with separate images of a PL bundle tear (D) and an AM bundle tear (E).
A
x
y
z
B
C
D
E
1770
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Treatment of FAI has traditionally been surgical and has 
come from open surgical treatment with open acetabuloplasty, 
and later open procedures through a transtrochanteric approach 
and combined open-arthroscopy assisted techniques to full 
arthroscopic approaches. Hip arthroscopy is becoming increas-
ingly popular and being more frequently applied for this indica-
tion. This popularity is largely the result of studies reporting 
on improvement of functional outcome measures with follow-
up up to 10 years, with low complication rates in several large 
study populations.
SPINE
Spinal Trauma
In spinal injury spinal stability must be assessed, and the patient 
immobilized until his spine is cleared. CT scan is more 
reliable in assessing spine injury than plain radiographs. 
When neurologic deficits are present a decompressive procedure 
may be indicated. In spinal cord compression, prompt decom-
pression should be performed. Animal models of spinal cord 
injury suggest that prompt decompression can lead to objective 
improvement of recovery. Spinal cord injuries should be triaged 
to trauma centers since trauma center care is associated 
with reduced paralysis. 
Occipital Cervical Dislocation
Motor vehicle accidents can cause dislocation of the occiput 
on the condyles of the atlas (C1). Most patients with this injury 
suffer cervical cord injury, and do not survive. Traction on the 
spine is contraindicated. Treatment consists of stabilization and 
fusion in situ using a screw plate from the mid cervical spine 
to the occiput.
Fractures of C1 (Jefferson Fracture)
Fracture of the C1 ring was described by Jefferson in 1920. The 
thin anterior and posterior rings of the C1 vertebra fracture with 
axial loads. C1 fracture causes the e lateral masses of C1 to 
spread, which is visible on a through- the- mouth AP X-Ray 
image of the cervical spine. This injury is rarely associated with 
neurologic injury. Bracing with a cervicothoracic orthosis or a 
halo ring and vest is the recommended treatment for a Jefferson 
fracture.
Fractures of C2 (Odontoid Fracture)
Half of normal cervical rotation occurs at the atlanto-axial joint. 
The odontoid (Dens) is a small bony process which arises from 
the body of C2, and articulates with the body of C1 (the Atlas). 
Odontoid fractures are most often type I fractures (an avulsion 
fracture off the tip of the dens). Type I fractures occur when 
there is tension applied to the alar ligaments (which span from 
the tip of the odontoid to the skull bypassing the C1 vertebra). 
Type I fractures are stable and managed nonoperatively.
A type II fracture, at the base of the odontoid, results from 
lateral loading forces. Operative stabilization is the preferred 
treatment since immobilization in a halo vest results in non-
union rates ranging from 20% to 80%. Transfixing the odontoid 
fracture with a screw maintains rotational movement. Poste-
rior fusion of C1 on C2 with sublaminar wiring resulting in 
decreased range of motion is another option.
Type III fractures extend into the body of C2, below the 
origin of the odontoid process. Type III fractures are generally 
treated with halo brace. (Anderson and D’Alonzo)
Hangman’s Fractures of C2
Hangman’s fractures result from sudden extension forces on the 
neck and occur between the superior and inferior facets (pars 
interarticularis) of C2. Treatment is simple immobilization in 
a halo vest. Higher energy injuries causing severe extension 
forces can dislocate the C2-3 facet complex and damage the 
C2-3 disc. Such fractures can compromise the spinal canal, and 
death can occur from compromise of respiration. Significantly 
displaced Hangman’s fractures are managed by internal fixation 
and bone grafting between C2 and C3.
Compression Fracture of the Cervical Spine
In C3 to C7 an axial load can cause fracture of the endplate 
while preserving the posterior cortex of the vertebral body. 
These fractures generally heal well, and are treated nonopera-
tively with analgesics and a cervical brace.
Burst Fractures of the Cervical Spine
Diving accidents are the classic cause of Burst fractures of the 
cervical spine. The axial load when an unrestrained passenger 
in an automobile accident strikes the windshield the posterior 
cortex of the vertebral body fractures leading to displacement 
of bony fragments into the canal injuring the spinal cord. Burst 
fractures are treated surgically by anterior debridement of the 
fracture and reconstruction using a bone graft strut stabilized 
with a plate and screws.
Unilateral and Bilateral Facet Dislocation
Another injury associated with motor vehicle accidents is facet 
dislocation. A restrained passenger can suffer forced flexion 
with distraction resulting in dislocation of the facets. The diag-
nosis can be made on lateral radiographs. Treatment consists 
of axial traction with cranial tongs, graduated application of 
weight, and periodic X-Rays. The patient is kept awake for 
safety concerns. When reduction is attained, patients are taken 
to surgery for posterior fusion with interspinous process wiring 
or a screw plate.
Clay-Shoveler’s Injury
Clay-Shoveler’s injury can result from a motor vehicle accident 
or from shoveling soil or clay. The injury (of C6, C7, T1, and T2) 
is the result of avulsion fracture of the spinous process by the 
paraspinal muscle forces. The fracture is treated nonoperatively 
with analgesics and a soft collar.
FRACTURES OF THE THORACIC  
AND LUMBAR SPINE
Thoracic Lumbar Spine Injury
The ribs stabilize fractures of the thoracic spine, making these 
fractures more stable than similar fractures of the lumbar spine. 
Neurologic injuries are more common in the thoracic and proxi-
mal lumbar spine because of the presence of the spinal cord, 
which ends at the L2 level.
Compression Fracture
Compression fractures result from osteoporosis and abnormal 
bone density as well as trauma. Compression fractures involve 
a fracture of the superior or inferior endplate without associated 
posterior cortex fracture. Thoracolumbar compression fractures 
are treated nonoperatively with braces and analgesics.
8
9
1771
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
Burst Fracture
Burst fractures are caused by falls and high energy automobile 
accidents. One or both endplates and the anterior cortex of the 
vertebrae with an associated fracture of the posterior cortex. The 
posterior cortex fracture differentiates the burst fracture from 
a compression fracture and results in retropulsion of bone into 
the canal, which can cause nerve injury. A vertical lamina frac-
ture may contain an invaginated segment of the dura mater with 
accompanying nerve roots, and posterior surgery can result in 
dural tear or nerve injury.
If nerve injury is noted, treatment is an anterior exposure 
and removal of the fractured anterior elements (corpectomy) 
and a strut graft is placed. A laterally placed plate and screws 
add stability to the construct.
Seatbelt Injuries (Flexion  
Distraction Injuries)
A seatbelt injury occurs when there is acute forward flexion of 
the trunk and anterior (i.e. seatbelt) restraint. The pelvis and 
upper torso move forward, and failure of the spine under ten-
sion begins with the posterior elements. Tearing of the dorsal 
fascia, the interspinous ligament, dislocation of the facets, and 
tearing of the discs occurs. The bone of the spinous process, 
the lamina, the pedicles, and the vertebral body fail in tension 
(“Chance Fracture”).
In flexion distraction injuries through soft tissue, posterior 
internal fixation and bone graft is recommended. “Chance frac-
tures” are treated with bracing.
Fracture Dislocations of the Spine
Fracture dislocations of the spine displace the bony elements 
by translation or rotation resulting in canal narrowing and nerve 
injury.
Reduction of the displaced bones is the best way to 
improve the canal dimensions.
Patients with fracture dislocations of the spine and par-
tial nerve function can recover. Fracture dislocations are treated 
operatively with surgical stabilization.
Disc Herniation
Disc herniation, most common between ages of 20 and 50, can 
occur in the cervical, thoracic, or the lumbar spine, and consists 
of a tear of the annulus allowing the nucleus pulposus material 
to extrude through the annulus and enter the canal, pressing on 
the exiting nerve or the ‘traversing’ nerve roots. In the cervical 
spine, spinal cord compression can occur.
Symptoms of most disc herniations resolve within eight 
weeks as the nerve root accommodates and inflammation 
recedes. The bulk of the extruded nucleus pulposus resorbs over 
time. When symptoms persist beyond six to eight weeks, exci-
sion of the involved disc and decompression of the nerve roots 
may be indicated.
In cervical disc herniation an anterior approach to the 
spine is performed with dissection through a transverse incision 
on the neck. Dissection is carried between the trachea and the 
carotid sheath. The disc is then removed. The disc space may be 
bone grafted to fuse the vertebrae. A locking screw low profile 
titanium plate is then attached to the vertebrae.
Posterior decompression and laminectomy exposes the pos-
terior elements of the spine. A portion of the lamina is removed 
to allow access to the canal to correct foraminal impingement or 
to remove lateral disc herniations. While the posterior approach 
does not require fusion with plates and screws, central disc her-
niation cannot be managed through a posterior approach since 
the spinal cord cannot be safely retracted.
For lumbar disc herniation a midline incision is used and 
laminectomy allows visualization of the lateral recess. Retrac-
tion of the dura allows visualization of the traversing nerve roots 
as well as of the disc fragment.
Spinal Stenosis
A loss of hydration of the discs causes loss of disc height and 
bulging of annular tissue and the ligamentum flavum which 
effectively narrows the canal (spinal stenosis). Osteophyte for-
mation on the facet joints can also cause nerve impingement. 
Cervical stenosis can cause myelopathic symptoms (hyperre-
flexia, ataxia, balance problems, weakness, and pain).
Lumbar stenosis causes neurogenic claudication ­(progressive 
pain, weakness, and numbness in the legs). The claudication 
symptoms result from standing and walking which increases 
lumbar lordosis. The symptoms resolve with sitting and bend-
ing forward (decreasing lumbar lordosis).
Spinal stenosis is treated with epidural steroid injections 
and physical therapy. Resistant cases may require surgical 
decompression and stabilization with plates and screws.
Spinal stenosis usually occurs in patients over 50 years 
of age. With degenerative spondylolisthesis or scoliosis fusion 
procedures with instrumentation may be required to prevent 
progression of the deformity.
Back Pain and Degenerative Disc Disease
Back pain occurs in the majority of adults but is usually self-
limited resolving in one to two weeks. Chronic unremitting 
back pain suggests the possibility of infection, malignancy, or 
­metastatic disease.
While radiographs are one option in the management of 
disabling low back pain, they are ineffective at ruling out malig-
nancy, and radiographic findings correlate poorly with symp-
toms. Patients with severe degenerative symptoms may have 
no pain, while others with mild degenerative findings complain 
of severe pain. The potential for secondary gain and psychiatric 
problems and the unpredictable results of spine fusion add to the 
difficulty of diagnosis and choosing a treatment plan.
Intervertebral disc replacement prostheses are now used 
to treat degenerative disc disease. The potential for loosening, 
creation of wear debris, and bone loss complicating revision 
surgery are concerns, as are the proximity of the device to the 
spinal canal and the great vessels.
Scoliosis
Scoliosis is a lateral curvature of the spine. Lateral bending of the 
spine is always accompanied by rotational deformity ­(coupling).
In order to measure the severity of scoliosis lines are 
drawn along the endplates of the vertebral bodies at either end 
of the curve and the angle formed when these lines intersect is 
magnitude of the curve.
Scoliotic curves are classified as congenital, degenera-
tive, metabolic (mucopolysaccharidoses), neurogenic (cerebral 
palsy), and myogenic curves (muscular dystrophy). Idiopathic 
scoliosis is the most common form, and represents a spectrum 
of genetic disease.
Adults with scoliosis may present with axial pain and imbal-
ance in posture. Treatment for scoliosis may include ­medications, 
therapy, and activity modification. In severe cases with objective 
deformity surgical correction of the deformity may be indicated.
1772
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Idiopathic Scoliosis
The majority of idiopathic scoliosis curves become apparent 
during adolescence and progress during skeletal growth. Ini-
tial management consists of observation. Rapidly progressing 
curves are treated with braces. Brace treatment is recommended 
for curves between 20 and 40 degrees. For patients with large 
curves, surgical intervention may be needed using rods with 
grafting and fusion.
Neuromuscular Scoliosis
Neurologic conditions such as polio and cerebral palsy can lead 
to ‘uncompensated’ scoliosis curves where the patient is unable 
to lean with his upper body to restore balance. Scoliosis correc-
tion surgery may be needed to facilitate sitting balance, and to 
avoid skin breakdown caused by pelvic obliquity.
JOINT RECONSTRUCTION
Introduction to Arthritis
Arthritis refers to a large number of medical conditions, ­including 
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, septic arthritis, and post-­
traumatic arthritis. Each has the potential to lead to loss of articular 
cartilage lining the joints. According to the CDC and the National 
Health Interview Survey approximately 50 million adults (22% of 
the U.S. population) have been diagnosed with some form of 
arthritis. This number is projected to grow to an astounding 
67 million adults by 2030 (or 25% of the U.S. population). 
The number of individuals suffering from arthritic con-
ditions will continue to rise as the ‘baby boomer’ generation 
enters old age and with the rise in obesity in the U.S. population, 
as age and obesity are two major factors in the onset of arthritis.
Conservative Management and  
Prevention of Arthritis
Conservative measures to treat arthritis include weight loss, activ-
ity modification, rest, bracing, physical therapy, pain management, 
and assistive devices such as canes or walkers. Conservative mea-
sures have the potential to decrease symptoms and improve func-
tion and quality of life. These measures can successfully manage 
a patient’s condition and avoid a surgical procedure. Osteoarthri-
tis symptoms tend to be intermittent in nature or associated with 
high impact activities. Initially treat all patients with conservative 
measures and avoid surgery if possible
Conservative measures can also play a role in the preven-
tion of arthritis. Weight loss of as little as 11 pounds has been 
shown to decrease the risk of developing knee osteoarthritis in 
women by 50%. Similarly, patients who engage in regu-
lar physical activity have been found to have lower inci-
dence of arthritis.
Arthritis causes pain, loss of range of motion, decreased 
ability to perform work duties or participate in social functions, 
and decreased quality of life. Despite conservative therapy, fre-
quently more invasive treatments are needed to effectively man-
age the patient’s symptoms.
Examination of the Patient
A thorough history and physical examination (H&P) is indicated 
for all orthopedic patients. Patient history should include loca-
tion, quality, severity, timing, and radiation of pain along with 
any referred pain, associated signs and symptoms, ­modifying 
factors, prior treatments, including both conservative and sur-
gical treatments. Other details within the H&P are equally 
important for diagnostic purposes and to successfully develop a 
treatment plan. If you listen carefully to your patient, they will 
often tell you their diagnosis. Location of “hip pain” can nar-
row a differential diagnosis. Patients with activity related groin 
pain often are found to have hip arthritis, whereas patients with 
peri-trochanteric pain (lateral hip pain) may be suffering from 
trochanteric bursitis. The importance of listening and focusing 
on the patient’s description of location and type of pain cannot 
be overemphasized.
Physical examination should begin by observing the 
patient’s gait, both with and without assistive devices if pos-
sible. This demonstrates how significantly the patient is affected 
functionally and the effect of the patient’s pain. Typical gait pat-
terns include a “Trendelenburg gait” where abductor weakness 
may lead to a poor outcome following total hip arthroplasty. 
Other aspects of the exam include assessment for leg length dis-
crepancy, joint contractures, skin changes, assessment for prior 
surgical incisions to evaluate for prior treatments or to plan 
future surgical approaches, neurovascular examination, strength 
and range of motion. These details document functional status 
and help to formulate a differential diagnosis. Patients with ‘hip 
pain’ may have lumbar spinal stenosis, radiculopathy, or vascu-
lar disease that may be playing a large role in their presentation. 
Once an appropriate physical examination is complete, weight-
bearing radiographs are needed. Advanced imaging, including 
CT and MRI are rarely indicated in initial work up of patients. 
Once a diagnosis is made, specific treatment directed towards 
the patient’s condition can be initiated. The goals of treatment 
are to improve pain, preserve motion and to maximize patient 
function, independence, and quality of life.
Injections
Joint injections are commonly performed into the knee and 
shoulder. Common injections into the knee include corticoste-
roids and Hyaluronic-acid gels. Corticosteroid injections can 
decrease inflammation within the joint. These injections are 
usually administered in combination with a local anesthetic, 
such as Lidocaine, in order to provide more immediate relief 
for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. If the patient has 
immediate relief of their pain symptoms with injection of the 
joint, this localizes the source of the patient’s pain to the joint 
and may assists with diagnosis. At the same time any benefit 
received is therapeutic for the patient. Hyaluronic acid injec-
tions have become popular and are commonly referred to as 
“viscosupplemenation.” The exact mechanism of these injec-
tions is not known, however patients may benefit from these 
injections by increasing the viscosity of the synovial fluid. The 
injections do not lead to articular cartilage repair. There is a risk 
of joint infection, cartilage injury from the needle, hemarthro-
sis, and failure to receive benefit. A theoretical risk of altered 
glucose metabolism in diabetics also exists with corticosteroid 
injections.
Surgical Management of Arthritis
The most commonly performed procedure for arthritis of a major 
joint is arthroplasty, or joint replacement. Joint replacements, 
including hip and knee arthroplasty are considered two of the 
most successful procedures performed in all of surgery. How-
ever, other nonarthroplasty options exist. These are ­typically 
performed for specific diagnoses under specific indications.
11
10
1773
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
head and neck are replaced. Hip resurfacing is a form of hip 
arthroplasty, used in younger patients with end stage arthritis. 
Resurfacing of the femoral head is performed with a metal cap 
(without performing a femoral neck cut and placing a stemmed 
femoral component) and the acetabular surface is replaced with 
a metal cup. Resurfacing functionally achieves the same result 
as a total hip arthroplasty, however it preserves femoral bone for 
later conversion to total hip arthroplasty if necessary. Finally, 
hemiarthroplasty describes the replacement of the femoral head 
and neck with a stemmed femoral component in isolation. The 
acetabulum is not addressed surgically.
History of Hip Arthroplasty  The history of hip arthroplasty 
(hip replacement) may be broken down into a “Pre-Charnley” 
era and a “Post-Charnley” era, referring to the significant contri-
butions of Sir John Charnley to the evolution of hip arthroplasty. 
Prior to Charnley’s contributions, hip arthroplasty consisted 
of a variety of procedures with highly variable results. Early 
attempts at relieving hip pain were made with interpositional 
arthroplasty, where tissue layers, plastic, or metal were placed 
between the worn articular surfaces. Fracture of the interposed 
material or loosening of components often led to failure. 
Later attempts introduced stemmed components to 
improve fixation. One of the earliest femoral components was 
designed by Austin-Moorem. This prosthesis replaced the fem-
oral head and neck with a metal component secured into the 
femoral shaft with a stem extending down the diaphysis. This 
prosthesis was utilized in hemiarthroplasty for many years and 
served as a step in the development of total hip arthroplasty with 
the later addition of the acetabular component.
Surgical Approaches to the Hip  A variety of approaches to 
the hip joint have been utilized in joint arthroplasty, includ-
ing anterior approach (Smith Petersen), anterolateral approach 
Osteotomy.  Osteotomy is cutting the bone to change the 
position of the fragments in order to improve length, rotation, 
alignment, or angulation. Osteotomy can be performed for both 
congenital and acquired deformities that are thought to be con-
tributing to the patient’s pain or development or progression of 
disease. Pelvic and femoral osteotomy can be utilized in treat-
ment of developmental dysplasia of the hip. With this procedure 
the position of the acetabulum can be altered in order to provide 
more appropriate coverage of the femoral head, which is usually 
deficient anteriorly and laterally. Femoral osteotomies can also 
be performed to correct anteversion and varus/valgus deformity 
of the femoral neck. Osteotomies are performed to obtain more 
normal alignment and coverage of the femoral head within the 
acetabulum to prevent or delay future disease.
An osteotomy commonly used in the knee is a proximal 
tibia osteotomy. An adult patient who presents with isolated 
medial compartment knee arthritis and associated varus defor-
mity would be an ideal candidate for valgus (high tibial) osteot-
omy. An osteotomy that realigns the knee into slight valgus has 
the potential to off-load the medial compartment, slow disease 
progression and prevent or delay the need for more invasive 
procedures (unicompartmental or total knee arthroplasties).
Arthrodesis.  Arthrodesis is a treatment option for severe arthri-
tis where the overlying articular cartilage is removed and the two 
opposing bones are allowed to heal together. After successful 
arthrodesis no motion is possible through the joint and the source 
of pain is removed. Arthrodesis of large joints, such as the knee, 
shoulder or hip, are typically explored as an option in the face of 
infection, in elderly, low demand patients or in young and active 
patients who are considered too young for a joint replacement (con-
cern for component wear and need for early revision). Arthrodesis 
can also serve as a “last resort” procedure in orthopedics, when 
joint preserving treatments fail, fracture, infection, etc. Arthrodesis 
requires removal of overlying articular cartilage from bone and fre-
quently the use of autograft or allograft bone and the use of hard-
ware for internal fixation or temporary external fixation.
Joint Arthroplasty/Joint Replacement.  Joint arthroplasty is 
considered the final option for patients suffering from pain associ-
ated with arthritis in the joint. The surfaces of the bones are replaced 
after removing the damaged articular cartilage. The amount of bone 
and the determination of how to make the bone cuts is made based 
on pre-operative radiographs and templating, cutting guides, com-
puter navigation, and anatomic measurements. The cut bony sur-
faces are covered with new components, usually made of metal, 
ceramic, or polyethylene. These new components are sized to 
appropriately match the patient, based on templating pre-operative 
radiographs, intra-operative measurements, and examination for 
stability, leg length, alignment, and range of motion.
If all compartments or surfaces of the joint are replaced, the 
arthroplasty is referred to as a total joint arthroplasty. In compari-
son, if only one surface or compartment of the joint is replaced, 
it is referred to as hemiarthroplasty (hip, shoulder) or unicom-
partmental arthroplasty (knee). Total hip and knee arthroplas-
ties are considered the most successful of all surgical procedures 
performed in terms of patient outcome and improvement in pain.
Hip Arthroplasty
Background  Hip arthroplasty is utilized for end stage arthri-
tis in the hip that has failed a reasonable trial of non-operative 
measures (Fig. 43-12). Conventional hip arthroplasty com-
monly refers to total hip arthroplasty where both the femoral 
Figure 43-12.  Osteoarthritis femoral head. Note erosion of weight-
bearing cartilage and peripheral osteophytes.
1774
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
­(Watson-Jones), lateral approach (Hardinge), and posterior 
approach (Kocher Langenbach). Each approach contains a 
unique set of advantages and disadvantages. Below, a compari-
son of the anterior and posterior approaches is made.
	 	 Anterior approach (Smith Petersen)—This approach uti-
lizes the internervous plane between the femoral nerve and 
superior gluteal nerve. Superficially, the plane between the 
sartorius (femoral nerve) and tensor fasciae lata (superior 
gluteal nerve) is dissected, while deep, the plane between 
the rectus femoris (femoral nerve) and gluteus minimus 
(superior gluteal nerve) is dissected. The anterior approach 
to the hip is a “muscle sparing approach” and theoretically 
leads to less muscle damage and functional loss. Measuring 
serum CK values, the level of CK found with a posterior 
approach is nearly 2 times the value found in comparison 
to that seen with an anterior approach to the hip. Other 
advantages to this approach include low dislocation rates, 
decreased postoperative restrictions, and excellent acetabu-
lar exposure. Downsides include difficult preparation and 
placement of the femoral component and lack of a true 
extensile approach.
	 	 Posterior approach (Kocher Langenbach)—In comparison 
to the anterior approach, the posterior approach is a muscle 
splitting approach. In addition, there is no true interner-
vous plane. After incising the skin and subcutaneous fat, 
the fascia lata is incised along with the gluteus maximus 
in line with the skin incision. The short external rotators 
are exposed and dissected, including the piriformis, supe-
rior and inferior gemelli, obturatorinternus and externus, 
and quadratus femoris. This allows internal rotation of 
the hip along with flexion and adduction to dislocate the 
femoral head for exposure. The posterior approach has an 
increased risk of post-operative dislocation, however this 
is minimized if soft tissue repair is performis. Postopera-
tively patients are required to follow strict hip precautions 
to minimize risk of dislocations; avoiding placing the hip 
in excessive flexion, adduction, and internal rotation (“The 
Heisman pose”). The posterior approach is extensile and 
provides excellent exposure of both the femur and acetabu-
lum for complex and revision cases.
Minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty has been advo-
cated in recent years. Theoretical benefits include improved cos-
mesis, decreased soft tissue damage, and decreased blood loss, 
quicker postoperative recovery and a shorter hospital stay. How-
ever, smaller incisions come with the disadvantage of decreased 
visualization intra-operatively and associated risks of 
component malposition, intraoperative fracture, and 
nerve or vascular injury. In fact, the only documented benefit of 
minimally invasive techniques appears to be improved cosmesis. 
A greater trochanteric osteotomy can be performed in 
order to mobilize the abductors. This can improve exposure 
to the acetabulum and femur and can be useful particularly in 
­revision cases.
Bearing Surfaces in Hip Arthroplasty  The most common com-
bination of bearing surfaces used in total hip arthroplasty is a 
metal femoral head (generally cobalt chrome), articulating with 
a polyethylene liner. Ceramic and metal are alternative bearing 
surfaces commonly utilized in total hip arthroplasty, either used 
in combination with a polyethylene acetabular liner (ceramic 
on poly or metal on poly) or in metal on metal and ceramic on 
12
Figure 43-13.  Failed ceramic on metal hip arthroplasty compo-
nents. Note the metallic staining on the ceramic femoral head.
ceramic articulations. Metal on metal and ceramic on ceramic 
articulations have the advantage of lower friction and decreased 
wear rates in comparison to metal on polyethylene articulations. 
Metal on metal articulation is utilized commonly in hip resur-
facing, however its use in total hip arthroplasty is controversial. 
Metal on metal articulation has many advantages, including 
lower wear rates and decreased associated osteolysis. The 
surgeon also has the ability to use a larger femoral head, thus 
achieving a greater femoral head to neck ratio and providing the 
patient a greater arc of motion prior to impingement and sub-
sequent dislocation. Metal on metal (MOM) articulations have 
been associated with production of metal ions, pseudotumors, 
hypersensitivity reactions, and early failure when used in total 
hip arthroplasty (Fig. 43-13). Metal ions pose a theoretic risk of 
causing problems with pregnancy or a theoretic risk of cancer. 
Studies have failed to demonstrate a statistical increase in can-
cer in patients who have MOM articulations in comparison to 
metal on poly articulations. Ceramic on ceramic articulations 
have the lowest wear rate and friction of all current bearing 
combinations. However, ceramic has poor mechanical proper-
ties and can lead to component fracture due to its comparatively 
brittle nature.
Alignment of Hip Arthroplasty Components  Proper alignment 
of hip arthroplasty components is vital to a successful proce-
dure and patient outcome. Surgeons aim for appropriate align-
ment of components to restore a functional and stable range of 
motion. This is accomplished with combined anteversion of the 
femoral and acetabular components, appropriate abduction of 
the acetabulum and focus on staying true to Sir John Charnley’s 
principles: establishing a low friction articulation, medializing 
the acetabular component and center of rotation and restoring 
abductor length and tension with restoration of appropriate 
length and femoral offset. Inappropriate placement of compo-
nents can lead to early failure, accelerated component wear, 
dislocation, need for revision surgery and poor patient outcome 
and satisfaction.
Knee Arthroplasty
Background  Knee Arthroplasty is indicated for end stage arthri-
tis within the knee that has failed to respond to a reasonable trial 
of non-operative and conservative measures. (Figs. 43-14 and 
43-15) Knee arthroplasty commonly refers to total knee arthro-
plasty where the distal femur, tibia, and patella are resurfaced 
after any remaining articular cartilage and a layer of subchon-
dral bone are resected. A unicompartmental knee arthroplasty 
1775
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
consists of replacing one compartment of the knee, most com-
monly the medial compartment, for unicompartmental disease. 
Similarly, isolated replacement of the patellofemoral joint can 
be performed for end stage patellofemoral arthritis
Surgical Approach to the Knee  Total knee arthroplasty is gen-
erally accomplished through a medial parapatellar approach. 
This approach utilizes a longitudinal skin incision, usually mid-
line over the patella, extending on average from 5 cm proximal 
to the patella to the tibial tubercle distally. Dissection is carried 
down to the capsule where a medial parapatellar arthrotomy is 
performed to gain access to the joint. This approach provides 
excellent exposure to all three compartments of the knee after 
patellar dislocation. On occasion, a lateral parapatellar arthrot-
omy is warranted and this can be performed safely. In the 
event that the patella does not dislocate, the arthrotomy can be 
extended proximally through the quadriceps. This has no effect 
on patient outcome.
Once the joint surfaces are adequately exposed, remaining 
articular cartilage and a thin layer of underlying bone are removed 
prior to placement of prosthetic components. Bone cuts are made 
based on pre-operative templating, cutting guides, computer navi-
gation, and anatomic measurements (Figs. 43-16 and 43-17).
Bearing Surfaces in Knee Arthroplasty  The femoral com-
ponent consists of a metal prosthetic cap designed and sized 
to fit the normal shape of the femoral condyles. The tibia is 
cut perpendicular to the anatomic and mechanical axis and a 
flat, stemmed, metal tray is placed, which most often articu-
lates with a polyethylene liner. The patella is resurfaced with 
a polyethylene component. Options exist for a mobile bearing 
Figure 43-14.  Valgus deformity. Osteoarthritis of lateral compart-
ment right knee.
Figure 43-15.  Osteoarthritis of both knees. Note varus align-
ment of right knee, and valgus alignment of left knee (“windswept 
­deformity”).
Figure 43-16.  Standard total knee instruments.
1776
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
knee ­arthroplasty. With this design the polyethylene component 
is not fixed rigidly to the metal tibial tray and has the ability 
to more highly conform to the femoral component through the 
range of motion arc with designed ability for motion in its artic-
ulation with the tibial tray. Although excellent results have been 
published, this design has not been proven to lead to improved 
outcome or decreased component wear.
Two types of primary total knee arthroplasty systems 
exist, including cruciate retaining and posterior stabilized sys-
tems. As the name implies, with cruciate retaining systems, 
the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) is retained in hopes of 
preserving more normal knee kinematics and femoral rollback 
with flexion, while in posterior stabilized systems the ligament 
is sacrificed and the components are designed to accommodate 
for the loss. These two systems have equivalent results in knee 
arthroplasty.
Alignment and Balancing in Knee Arthroplasty  Appropriate 
alignment of the components and balancing of the flexion and 
extension gaps are essential for a successful result in knee 
arthroplasty. Inappropriate component position can lead to 
early wear and failure, knee instability, pain, and post-oper-
ative stiffness with poor range of motion. The surgeon must 
perform appropriate soft tissue balancing and bone cuts to 
accomplish this and subsequently must place the appropriate 
sized components, usually replacing the exact amount of bone 
and cartilage that was removed to create the articulation, and 
restore stability. The knee must be stable to varus and valgus 
stress at all points through the range of motion arc and still be 
able to attain a full range of motion arc from full extension to 
deep flexion.
A
B
Figure 43-17.  A. Varus knee with osteoarthritis. B. Right total knee replacement.
Computer Navigation and Joint Arthroplasty
Computer navigated joint arthroplasty has the theoretical ben-
efit of more accurate and consistent placement of arthroplasty 
components through intraoperative feedback to the surgeon 
regarding component position, planned bone cuts and alignment 
(Fig. 43-18). In theory this would lead to improved patient 
outcomes (Fig. 43-19A and B). Negatives include increased 
costs of the technology and prolonged operative times. Use of 
computer navigation in total joint arthroplasty has been shown 
to provide statistically significant improvement in accuracy of 
component placement. Use of computer navigation will likely 
increase in the future as technology continues to improve.
Fixation Options in Joint Arthroplasty
Components in hip and knee arthroplasty can be secured into 
position with cement or biologic fixation. The cement most 
commonly used is polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). PMMA 
serves as a grout between the component and the bone sur-
face. Components secured without cement are grit blasted or 
porous coated to allow bony ongrowth or ingrowth, respec-
tively. Hydroxyapatite can also be utilized on the implant 
surfaces to promote bone ingrowth or ongrowth through 
osteoconductive properties. A majority of hip joint arthro-
plasty components are now secured without cement where 
initial fixation of components is accomplished through press 
fit techniques. In knee arthroplasty, cement utilization is gen-
erally preferred. In hip replacement patients where biologic 
fixation would be unreliable such as an elderly, osteoporotic 
patient, or patients with prior radiation, cement may be a better 
option. With revision total hip arthroplasty, cement fixation 
1777
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
of components has been shown to lead to earlier mechanical 
failure.
Osteolysis and Aseptic loosening.  Osteolysis is a term 
used to describe abnormal resorption of bone. Osteolysis can 
be caused by underlying infection, metastatic disease, or in 
the case of joint replacement, the production of wear debris. 
Even with appropriately positioned components, some wear 
of the bearing surfaces is expected. However, the wear rates 
and the size and amount of wear debris with the different bear-
ing surfaces can be quite different. The wear rate of ceramic 
Figure 43-18  Computer assisted 
robotic targeting arm for total knee 
replacement.
Figure 43-19.  A. Valgus knee with osteoarthritis. B. Robotic assisted total knee.
A
B
1778
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Dislocation Following Hip Arthroplasty.  Dislocation can 
result from malpositioned components (inadequate combined 
anteversion of the femoral neck and acetabulum, excessive 
ab- or adduction of the acetabular component), non-­compliant 
patients, those with cognitive or neuromuscular disorders, 
inadequate soft tissue repair or excessive soft tissue loss from 
surgeries or revision surgery, fracture, improper restoration of 
length, and/or offset. Historically, there has been significant 
debate as to the role of the surgical approach and incidence 
of hip dislocation following hip arthroplasty. However, com-
parable dislocation rates have been found with anterolateral 
(0.70%), lateral (0.43%), and posterior with soft tissue repair 
(1.01%) approaches. Dislocation is often the result of poor 
patient compliance with post-operative restrictions, neuro-
muscular or cognitive conditions, or excessive soft tissue loss. 
History, physical examination and appropriate radiographs 
are vital to proper treatment of dislocation. Closed reduction 
can usually be performed with conscious sedation and gentle 
traction or manipulation. Rarely, open reduction may be nec-
essary. Patients with multiple dislocations should be assessed 
for improperly positioned components. Patients with recurrent 
dislocations and improperly positioned components may need 
revision of the component. Patients with recurrent dislocations 
and properly positioned components should be considered for 
conversion to hemiarthroplasty or to a constrained total hip 
arthroplasty which provides improved stability.
ORTHOPEDIC PATHOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY
Diagnosis of Malignant Bone Tumors
History.  Diagnosis of musculoskeletal tumors begins with a 
thorough patient history. A history of unremitting pain, unre-
lated to activity, or pain that interferes with sleep, suggests 
malignancy. Patient age can help in establishing a differen-
tial. Round blue cell lesions are most likely neuroblastoma in 
a five-year old, Ewing’s sarcoma in a 10-year old, lymphoma 
in a 20-year old, and myeloma in a 60-year old. Gender also 
adds information, for instance, giant cell tumor is more common 
in females, osteosarcoma in males. Multiple bone involvement 
may suggest fibrous dysplasia, enchondromas (Ollier disease, 
Maffucci’s syndrome), or osteochondromas (multiple hereditary 
exostoses).
Laboratory Test.  Laboratory tests determine the level of cellu-
lar turnover (lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]) or of bone destruc-
tion (calcium, alkaline phosphatase). Elevated Prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA) suggests prostate cancer.
Imaging.  Radiographic studies are critical to the diagnosis 
of bony tumors. Radiographs can help assess the aggressive-
ness of the tumor. Four questions should be addressed when 
assessing radiographs: (a) Where is the tumor—in which bone 
(Table 43-1) and in which part of the bone (Table 43-2)? 
(b) What is the tumor doing to the bone (clinical behavior)? 
(c) What is the bone doing to the tumor (biologic response)? 
(d) What is the matrix pattern? Matrix is the acellular interstitial 
substance produced by tumor cells. Particular attention should 
be paid to the junction between the tumor and the host bone 
since this margin can also indicate the aggressiveness of the 
tumor. Ewing’s sarcoma has a characteristic ‘onion skin’ peri-
osteal reaction pattern. This reaction pattern also occurs in other 
tumors and infections.
on ceramic articulations is the lowest of all bearing surfaces, 
however there is increased risk of component fracture and 
postoperative “squeaking.” In metal on polyethylene articula-
tions, wear debris is produced and polyethylene particles are 
phagocytized by local macrophages. “Activated” macrophages 
lead to an osteolytic process and bone resorption. Particulate 
methylmethacrylate cement debris can also play a role in oste-
olysis. Improperly positioned components or patient related 
factors such as high impact activities can lead to a high wear 
rate. A substantial osteolytic response may occur and lead to 
component micromotion and aseptic loosening. Patients who 
present to clinic with pain following joint arthroplasty and an 
increasing zone of osteolysis in the periprosthetic region fre-
quently need revision surgery (Fig. 43-20) Alternative bear-
ing surfaces continue to be explored in hopes of decreasing 
or completely preventing wear of components and associated 
osteolysis and aseptic loosening.
Complications in Joint Arthroplasty.  The risk of any com-
plication following joint arthroplasty procedures falls in the 
range of 5% to 10%. Risks shared by hip and knee arthroplas-
ties include infection, intra-operative or post-operative fracture, 
vascular injury with need of intra-operative or post-operative 
blood transfusion, nerve injury or nerve palsy (most commonly 
involving the deep peroneal nerve and loss of ankle dorsiflex-
ion), periprosthetic fracture, stress shielding, component frac-
ture or wear, and medical complications, including venous 
thromboembolic disease (DVT and PE), myocardial infarction, 
or cerebrovascular accident. Complications unique to total hip 
arthroplasty include dislocation, leg length discrepancy, ilio-
psoas impingement, or tendonitis.
Figure 43-20  Failed total knee replacement. Note subsided, loose, 
tibial component.
1779
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
OSTEOSARCOMA
The most common primary malignant bone tumor is osteo-
sarcoma (Fig. 43-21). Osteosarcomas are classified as osteo-
blastic, chondroblastic, fibroblastic, telangiectatic, round cell, 
and MFH-like, according to the predominant cell type. Most 
­osteosarcomas present in patients between 10 and 20 years of 
age. Secondary osteosarcomas occur in older patients in abnor-
mal bone affected by Paget’s disease or radiation.
Table 43-1
Common locations of bone tumors
Femur
Distal posterior
Parosteal osteosarcoma
Distal anterior
Periosteal osteosarcoma, 
periosteal chondroma or 
chondrosarcoma, myositis 
ossificans
Tibia
Adamantinoma, chondromyxoid, Fibroma
Hands and feet
Enchondroma, exostosis
Calcaneus
Unicameral bone cyst, 
lipoma, chondroblastoma, 
osteosarcoma
Spine
Anterior
Metastatic, myeloma, 
Paget disease, vascular 
malformation, Giant Cell 
Tumor
Posterior
Osteoid osteoma, 
osteoblastoma; Aneurysmal 
Bone Cyst
Pelvis
Metastatic, myeloma, chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor, 
aneurysmal bone cyst, Paget disease, Ewing’s Sarcoma
Sacrum
Chordoma (midline), chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor, 
aneurysmal bone cyst, lymphoma
Ribs
Metastatic, myeloma, fibrous dysplasia, chondrosarcoma
Table 43-2
Tumor location in bone
Epiphysis
Chondroblastoma, clear cell chondrosarcoma, GCT, 
infection, dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica (DEH)
Metaphysis
Most common site of involvement
Diaphysis
FEGNOMASHIC: F-Fibrous dysplasia, EG-Eosinophilic 
Granuloma, N- NonOssifying Fibroma, O-Osteoid osteoma, 
M- Myeloma, A-Adamantinoma, S-Simple Bone Cyst, 
H-Histiocytosis, I-Infection
Figure 43-21.  Osteosarcoma.
Parosteal Osteosarcoma
Parosteal osteosarcomas occur in women ages 20 to 50, “pasted 
on” the surface of the posterior distal femoral metaphysis. The 
preferred treatment is wide surgical excision.
Periosteal Osteosarcoma
Periosteal osteosarcoma occurs on the anterior surface of the 
distal femur or proximal tibia. The lesion appears chondroblas-
tic on histology. Radiographs show scalloping of the underlying 
cortex with a ‘sunburst’ periosteal reaction. Treatment is wide 
surgical excision.
Paget’s Sarcoma
Paget’s sarcoma is a rare complication of Paget’s disease. In 
Paget’s disease with multiple bone involvement, osteogenic 
sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and MFH have 
occurred, most often in the pelvis, but also in the humerus, 
femur, spine, and skull. Imaging may demonstrate osteolytic 
areas, and loss of normal fatty marrow and multifocal lesions. 
Treatment of Paget’s sarcoma is surgical excision, but the 
prognosis is poor.
Radiation-Induced Sarcoma
The three criteria for diagnosis sarcoma of radiation induced 
sarcoma are: (a) histology different from the original lesion, 
(b) sarcoma develops in the irradiated field, and (c) 3 to 5 
year latent period between radiation and sarcoma develop-
ment. Radiation for carcinoma of the breast and cervix can 
result in osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, or 
MFH. Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and 
­surgery.
EWING’S SARCOMA
Ewing’s sarcoma is the second most common primary bone 
tumor in patients under 30. The typical presentation is a 
tumor in the diaphysis of the femur in a young white male. 
1780
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
An “onion skin” periosteal reaction may be seen on radiographs. 
A large soft-tissue extension from the primary bone tumor may 
be seen and histology reveals a small round blue cell tumor 
(Fig. 43-22). Diagnosis is confirmed with bone marrow biopsy 
specimen. Bone scan can identify multiple lesions. Treatment 
is chemotherapy and surgery or radiation therapy for spine or 
pelvic lesions.
CARTILAGE FORMING TUMORS
Chondrosarcomas
Chondrosarcomas typically occur in male patients over 40 years 
of age, and are the third most common primary bone malig-
nancies. Primary chondrosarcomas can form clear cell, mes-
enchymal, or dedifferentiated neoplastic cartilage. Secondary 
chondrosarcomas may also develop in pre-existing lesions such 
as exostoses or enchondromas. Pelvis, shoulder, and ribs are 
frequent locations. Chondroid or “popcorn” calcifications are 
typical on radiographs. Clear cell chondrosarcoma and mesen-
chymal chondrosarcoma occur in younger patients (second to 
fifth decades of life). Clear cell chondrosarcomas are low-grade 
lesions that often affect the epiphyses.
The treatment of chondrosarcoma is surgical excision, 
since cells are not chemosensitive or radiosensitive. For high-
grade lesions, wide or radical resection is recommended. Pelvic 
and scapular chondrosarcomas have a high recurrence rate and 
adjuvant chemotherapy does not improve survival rates.
FIBROUS LESIONS OF BONE
Desmoplastic Fibroma
Desmoplastic fibroma is a rare tumor occurring in the mandible, 
femur, pelvis, radius, or tibiain young adults. Radiographs show 
a metadiaphyseal “soap bubble” appearance and endosteal scal-
loping. Histology resembles desmoid tumors or fibromatosis. 
Recommended treatment is wide excision.
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma of Bone
MFH occurs in the metadiaphysis of long bones after condi-
tions like nonossifying fibromas and bone infarcts. Radiographs 
typically show destructive lesions with soft-tissue extension. 
Figure 43-22.  Ewing’s sarcoma.
Histology resembles osteosarcoma with fibroblasts, histiocytes 
and giant cells, but no neoplastic osteoid formation. Treatment 
is wide surgical excision.
Malignant Vascular Tumors
Hemangioendothelioma.  Hemangioendothelioma is a 
malignant neoplasm arising from vascular endothelium in long 
bones. Radiographs show a metadiaphyseal lytic lesion with a 
“soap bubble” appearance. Histology reveals eosinophilic cells 
in a basophilic stroma. Lesions may be multifocal. Treatment 
­consists of curettage for low-grade lesions and wide excision 
for high-grade lesions.
Hemangiopericytoma
Hemangiopericytoma is usually a solitary lesion occurring in 
the soft tissues or the axial skeleton and proximal long bones 
in middle-aged or elderly males. Histology reveals branching 
“staghorn” vascular spaces. The tumor cells resemble cells nor-
mally seen adjacent to capillaries. Treatment is wide excision.
Angiosarcoma of Bone
Angiosarcoma is a soft tissue malignancy usually seen in 
elderly males. Histology reveals vascular channels with ana-
plasia. Treatment is wide excision, or if inaccessible surgically, 
­radiation.
MISCELLANEOUS TUMORS
Giant Cell Tumor of Bone
Giant cell tumor occurs in the knee, distal radius, proximal 
humerus, and pelvis in women 20 to 40 years of age. Presenting 
complaints include pain and pathologic fracture. Imaging 
reveals eccentric, epimetaphyseal lytic lesions eroding the sub-
chondral bone. Histology reveals multinucleate giant cells and 
mononuclear stromal cells (Fig. 43-23). These tumors can occa-
sionally metastasize to the chest. Primary malignant giant cell 
tumor has a poor prognosis. Treatment of giant cell tumors is 
with curettage and high-speed burr. Recurrence rates are high 
with simple curettage, and the use of cryosurgery, phenol, or 
polymethylmethacrylate bone cement may help decrease recur-
rence rates. After pathologic fractures, wide excision may 
Figure 43-23.  Giant cell tumor.
1781
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
be required. In tumors that are inaccessible surgically, radiation 
may be indicated.
Ossifying Fibroma and Adamantinoma
Ossifying fibroma occurs in the anterior cortex of the tibial 
diaphysis of young males. Radiographs have a soap bubble 
appearance. Patients may present with pain but often the diag-
nosis is incidental on radiographs. Histology resembles fibrous 
dysplasia, but with osteoblastic rimming. Ossifying fibroma 
may be a precursor to adamantinoma.
Adamantinomas are low grade malignancies capable of 
metastasis seen in the tibia. Histology reveals a tubular, basa-
loid, squamoid, or spindled pattern (Fig. 43-24). While ossi-
fying fibroma is benign, careful monitoring is needed because 
they may be a precursor of adamantinoma. The treatment of 
adamantinoma is with wide surgical excision.
Primary Lymphoma of Bone
Primary lymphoma accounts for about 5% of all neoplasms of 
bone. Long bone involvement is more frequent than spine. Lym-
phoma of bone typically occurs in males in their forties. Histol-
ogy reveals large B cell lymphomas. Treatment is a combination 
of chemotherapy and radiation. Surgery may be required for 
stabilization of pathologic fractures.
Chordoma
Chordoma arises from notochordal rests in the sacrum. These 
tumors are found in middle-aged to older men and presents with 
bladder and bowel symptoms. An MRI shows a destructive 
lesion with a large soft-tissue mass. Histology shows epitheli-
oid cells arranged in cords with vacuolated physaliferous cells. 
Treatment is surgical excision and muscle flaps and a mesh for 
reconstruction. Urinary diversion and colostomy may be needed 
for loss of bladder and bowel control.
Multiple Myeloma
Myeloma, the most common primary bone malignancy, is a 
proliferative disorder of B cells, with plasma cells, evidence of 
monoclonal M protein in the serum and/or urine, and hyper-
calcemia, renal insufficiency, anemia, or bone disease. A 
solitary myeloma lesion in bone is known as a plasmacytoma  
(Fig. 43-25). Presenting symptoms in myeloma range from bone 
pain and osteopenia, to focal lytic lesions with pathologic frac-
tures and hypercalcemia. Myeloma protein 1-alpha ­stimulates 
Figure 43-24.  Adamantinoma.
osteoclast formation. Osteoclast activating factors increase 
receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL) in the 
bone marrow. RANKL induces osteoclast differentiation and 
activation. Myeloma cells inhibit osteoblast differentiation and 
activity. Serum and urine electrophoresis detect the M protein. 
Work up also includes complete blood cell count, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, calcium levels, renal function assessment, 
and β-2-microglobulin levels, and a skeletal survey. Bone scans 
may show a false-negative result in more than two-thirds of 
patients and a dual energy X-ray absorptiometry scan. Plasma-
cytoma is usually treated with radiation to the lesion. Myeloma 
is treated with chemotherapy, stem cell transplantation, and 
radiation therapy. Many patients with myeloma develop a ver-
tebral compression fracture. Kyphoplasty can be useful in pro-
viding pain relief. The risks of cement extravasation and related 
complications are lower with kyphoplasty than with vertebro-
plasty. If there is instability or if there is neural compression, 
surgical stabilization may be required.
METASTATIC BONE TUMORS
Metastatic bone tumors are more common than primary bone 
tumors. Metastatic tumors affect the lung, liver, and bone. Can-
cers that commonly metastasize to bone are breast, prostate, lung, 
thyroid, and kidney. In patients older than 40 years of age, metas-
tases and myeloma are the most common lesions in bone. The 
most common site of involvement is the axial skeleton and proxi-
mal ends of long bones. Bronchogenic and renal cell carcinomas 
can metastasize distal to the knee and elbow. Malignant cells are 
able to detach from one location and set up a focus at a distant 
site. Work up of a patient with suspected metastatic disease to 
bone should include CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, mam-
mography, tumor markers, serum, and urine electrophoresis, and 
bone scans.
PEDIATRIC ORTHOPEDICS
BIRTH INJURIES
Brachial Plexus Palsy
Injury of the brachial plexus during delivery occurs in two births 
in every 1000. Large birth weight, forceps delivery, breech pre-
sentation, and prolonged labor are risk factors. Brachial plexus 
Figure 43-25.  Plasmacytoma.
1782
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
injury usually represents a stretch injury on the nerve roots. 
Management is therapy and passive exercise to preserve motion 
in the shoulder while awaiting return of neurologic and motor 
function. Surgical repair of injured nerve roots and trunks may 
be required in severe cases.
Cerebral Palsy
Cerebral palsy results from an injury to the brain which may be 
associated with mental impairment. Cerebral palsy is classified as 
spastic, athetotic, ataxic, and may present with spasticity, hemi-
plegia, diplegia, or scoliosis. The typical cerebral palsy patient is 
hyperreflexic with increased muscle tone and spasm. Treatment 
includes tendon lengthening procedures, release of contractures, 
and tendon transfers to maintain motion and function.
Hip dislocation or subluxation results from unbalanced 
muscle forces in many cerebral palsy patients. Treatment con-
sists of abductor tendon releases. When soft tissue releases are 
unsuccessful, tendon balancing procedures may be combined 
with open reduction of a hip joint and acetabular reconstruction 
and osteotomy of the proximal femur. Knee contractures are 
treated with hamstring lengthening.
Foot and ankle deformities are treated even in nonambu-
latory patients to facilitate shoe wear. The most common foot 
deformity in cerebral palsy is an equinovalgus foot caused by 
heel cord contracture and peroneal spasm. Tendon balancing is 
usually necessary and bony reconstruction may also be needed 
in severe cases.
Skeletal Growth
Injury, inflammatory disease, and developmental disorders in 
actively growing bones requires special attention to preserv-
ing the growth plates. The pediatric skeleton is incompletely 
ossified making diagnosis of an injury difficult, since signifi-
cant portions of the skeleton are invisible on radiographs. The 
epiphysis, generally containing an articular surface, is found at 
the ends of the long bone. The physis or growth plate is found 
beneath the epiphysis. The physis has six specific zones: the 
reserve zone, the zone of differentiation, the zone of prolifera-
tion, the zone of maturation, the hypertrophic zone, and finally, 
the zone of calcification.
Injury or insult to the growth plate can lead to premature 
growth arrest or angular deformity of the limb. Surrounding the 
metaphyseal and diaphyseal bone, is the periosteum. This meta-
bolically active layer of tissue synthesizes new bone onto the 
diaphyseal and metaphyseal bone and provides circumferential 
growth of the bones.
Ossification centers in the epiphysis and appear in a pre-
dictable order, and can help determine “bone age.”
Pediatric Fractures
In a pediatric patient, the epiphyseal growth plate is unossified 
and at risk of fracture. Reduction and stabilization of epiphyseal 
fractures is critical to minimize permanent growth disturbances 
and deformity.
Classification of Growth Plate Injuries
Salter and Harris described a useful classification for epiphyseal 
fractures. A Salter-Harris Type I injury is a simple transverse 
fracture through the physis. A Salter-Harris Type II fracture 
contains a component of fracture through the growth plate 
in continuity with a fracture of the metaphysis. Salter-Harris 
Type III fracture occurs through the physis and exits through the 
growth plate. While a Salter-HarrisType IV fracture line extends 
through the physis from the metaphysis into the epiphysis. A 
Salter-Harris Type V fracture crushes the physis itself.
Treatment of growth plate fracture requires anatomic 
reduction of the fragments. Internal fixation avoids placing 
hardware across the growth plate to minimize the chance of 
premature growth plate closure.
Diaphyseal Injuries in a Pediatric Patient
Long bones diaphyseal fractures are generally treated closed. 
Pediatric patients are capable of extensive remodeling so that an 
angular deformity within the plane of an adjacent joint is often 
completely remodeled by the growth of the child. When internal 
fixation of a diaphyseal fracture is required, the physis is avoided.
Fractures of the Pediatric Hip
Pediatric patients with hip fractures may be treated with a spica 
cast. The spica cast includes the abdomen, lower back, pelvis, 
and lower limb, and derives its name from the resemblance of 
the plaster wrap over the hip to wheat (“spica” ).
Fractures of the Femoral Shaft
Femoral shaft fractures in a child younger than six years old 
may be managed with a spica cast. Femur fractures in patients 
older than six years of age can be managed by internal fixation 
with a flexible intramedullary nail. Children 14 years of age are 
treated with an adult style intramedullary reamed nail. Extra-
articular fractures of the distal femur or proximal tibia are man-
aged in a long leg cast.
Pediatric Ankle Fractures
Salter-Harris I and II fractures are managed with casting. Salter-
Harris III or IV fractures are managed by closed reduction and 
internal fixation with percutaneous pins or screws. Smooth pins 
are used, and the physis is avoided unless necessary for stability.
The Tillaux (Salter-Harris Type II) fracture involves a 
fracture through the lateral epiphysis and the lateral physis. In 
these patients the growth plate is in the process of closing and 
open reduction and internal fixation is needed. The “triplane” 
fracture (Salter-Harris Type IV) is managed by closed reduction 
with percutaneous pinning.
Pediatric Elbow Fractures
Management of pediatric elbow fractures is complex. A fracture 
of the distal humeral epiphysis can be misdiagnosed as a dislo-
cation of the elbow. Familiarity with the timing of the ossifica-
tion centers’ appearance aids in diagnosis. Treatment is closed 
reduction and percutaneous pinning.
Injury to the brachial artery, the radial, ulnar, and medial 
nerves are possible. Neurovascular exam is required before, dur-
ing, and after treatment. Close follow-up for maintenance of 
reduction and neurovascular status is needed.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASE
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is seen in firstborn 
females with a positive family history, and breech birth.
Untreated hip dislocations can lead to a dysplastic acetab-
ulum. Newborns are examined for hip instability within the first 
72 hours. Ortolani’s test consists of gentle elevation and abduc-
tion of the femur causing a palpable click in the relocation of a 
dislocated hip. Barlow’s test is gentle adduction and ­depression 
of the femur which causes a palpable click as a hip slips into a 
dislocated position. Infants with a dislocated or dislocatable hip 
1783
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
will have apparent length discrepancies of the femur when hip 
is positioned in 90 degrees. Since the bones are not yet ossi-
fied, X-ray images of the acetabulum and femoral head are not 
reliable for diagnosis. Ultrasound can often demonstrate a dis-
located or dislocatable hip. Early treatment with abduction and 
flexion in a Pavlik harness can result in a normal hip joint.
Treatment of DDH
In a child with a dislocatable hip, a Pavlik harness can maintain 
the hips in flexion and abduction. Avoid severe abduction to 
avoid avascular necrosis of the head. For mild to moderate dys-
plasia, 6 to 12 weeks in a Pavlik harness is sufficient. In severe 
disease, adductor tenotomy may be needed.
If treatment is delayed, open reduction may be necessary. 
Through an anterior approach the pulvinar can be removed 
and the femoral head located. Adductor tenotomy and femoral 
shortening may be indicated. Osteonecrosis of the femoral head 
can result from open reduction resulting in pain and decreased 
motion. Some patients with severe DDH may require pelvic 
osteotomy creating an acetabular shelf, or a varus osteotomy of 
the proximal femur, or a combination of the two.
Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease
Osteonecrosis of the proximal femoral epiphysis can cause 
flattening of the femoral head called Legg-Calvé Perthes dis-
ease. The typical patient is a 7-year-old male who presents 
with groin or knee pain, decreased hip motion, and a limp. ­ 
Treatment includes traction, physical therapy, abduction 
exercises, and crutches. Femoral and pelvic osteotomies may 
be needed in extreme cases.
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Children ages 10 to 16 years old can develop displacement of 
the epiphysis on the femoral neck with no history of injury. 
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis(SCFE) is associated with 
African American heritage, obesity, and is more common in 
boys than in girls. One-quarter of cases are bilateral. Patients 
generally present with groin and anterior thigh or even knee 
pain and decreased motion. In pediatric patients with knee pain, 
assess the ipsilateral hip as well.
Treatment for slipped capital femoral epiphysis patients is 
percutaneous screw fixation through the femoral neck to engage 
the epiphysis. Reduction of the slipped epiphysis is not recom-
mended because of an increased risk of avascular necrosis. One 
screw is adequate to prevent further slip.
Lower Extremity Rotational Abnormalities
Intoeing can result from femoral anteversion, tibial torsion, and 
metatarsus adductus. Remember that a mild degree of intoeing 
is normal in young children 3 to 5 years of age.
Excessive internal rotation of the femur will usually correct 
by age 8. Severe rotation with functional impairment that does not 
correct by age 10 or 11 may require rotational femoral osteotomy.
Bilateral intoeing gait in one- and two-year-old children 
can result from tibial torsion which generally will completely 
resolve without treatment.
Metatarsus adductus in infants will also resolve spontane-
ously in most cases.
Congenital Talipes Equinovarus
Club foot is a common problem associated with contractures 
of the medial tendons of the foot, a tight Achilles tendon, 
and contractures of the ankle, hindfoot, and midfoot. Talipes 
­equinovarus can be corrected by sequential corrective casting 
of the foot. A successful program of casting may be complete 
in one to five months. In patients with severe disease or who 
initiate treatment after nine months of age, surgical release of 
contracted soft tissues may be necessary.
Osgood-Schlatter Disease
Osgood-Schlatter disease is a common problem most often seen 
in athletically active adolescents. This disorder is characterized 
by ossification in the distal patellar tendon at the point of its tibial 
insertion. This disorder is thought to result from mechanical stress 
on the tendinous insertion. Radiographs show calcified ossicles 
within the tendon at its insertion. The disease presents with severe 
local pain and tenderness in the area of the tibial tubercle.
Treatment for the disease is activity restriction. If the 
symptoms are improved, athletic participation can be resumed. 
Symptoms regress after skeletal maturity or the discontinuance 
of active athletic participation.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
Trauma
Bone LB, Johnson KD, Weigelt J, et al. Early vs. delayed stabili-
zation of femoral fractures. A prospective randomized study. 
J Bone Joint Surg.1989;71:336-340.
Bottlang M, Krieg JC, Mohr M, Simpson TS, Madey SM. Emer-
gent management of pelvic ring fractures with use of cir-
cumferential compression. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-A 
Suppl 2:43-47.
Burgess AR, Eastridge BJ, Young JWR, et al. Pelvic ring disrup-
tions: Effective classification system and treatment protocols. 
J Trauma.1990;30:848.
Chandler RWW. Principles of internal fixation. In: Bucholz RW, 
Heckman JD, eds. Rockwood and Green’s Fractures in Adults, 
5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
De Ugarte DA, Morizono K, Elbarbary A, et al. Comparison of 
multi-lineage cells from human adipose and bone marrow. 
Cells, Tissue, and Organs. 2003;174:101-109.
Dragoo JL, Samimi B, Zhu M, et al. Tissue-engineered cartilage 
and bone using stem cells from human infrapatellar fat pads. 
JBJS. 2003; 85-B:740-747.
Holstein A, Lewis GB. Fractures of the humerus with radial-nerve 
paralysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1963;45:1382-1388.
Lauge-Hansen N. Fractures of the ankle. II. Combined experimental-­
surgical and experimental-roentgenologic investigations. Arch 
Surg. 1950;60:957-985.
Letournel E. Acetabulum fractures: classification and management. 
ClinOrthop. 1980;151:81-106.
Lin J. Treatment of humeral shaft fractures with humeral locked 
nail and comparison with plate fixation. J Trauma. 1998 
May;44(5):859-864.
Moran CG, Wenn RT, Sikand M, Taylor AM. Early mortality 
after hip fracture: is delay before surgery important? J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2005;87:483-489.
Moro JK, Werier J, MacDermid JC, Patterson SD, King GJ. Arthro-
plasty with a metal radial head for unreconstructible fractures 
of the radial head. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-A(8): 
1201-1211.
Nicoll EA. Fractures of the tibial shaft: a survey of 705 cases. J 
Bone Joint Surg Br. 1964;46:373-387.
Nork SE, Cannada LK. Hip dislocations and femoral head and 
neck fractures. In: Baumgaertner MR, Tornetta P III, eds. 
Orthopaedic Knowledge Update: Trauma 3. Rosemont: 
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 2005:365-376.
Ring D, Jupiter JB, Zilberfarb J. Posterior dislocation of the elbow 
with fractures of the radial head and coronoid. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am. 2002;84:547-551.
1784
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Ring D, Quintero J, Jupiter JB. Open reduction and internal fixa-
tion of fractures of the radial head. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002; 
84-A(10):1811-1815.
Roberts CS, Pape HC, Jones AL. Damage control orthopaedics: 
Evolving concepts in the treatment of patients who have 
sustained orthopaedic trauma. Instr Course Lect. 2005;54: 
447-462.
Ross G, McDevitt ER, Chronister R, Ove PN. Treatment of simple 
elbow dislocation using immediate motion protocol. AJSM. 
1999;27:308-311.
Sarmiento A, Kinman PB, Galvin EG, et al. Functional bracing of 
fractures of the shaft of the humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
1977;59:596-601.
Schatzker J, McBroom R, Bruce DD. The tibial plateau fracture: 
The Toronto experience 1968-1975. ClinOrthop. 1979;138: 
94-104.
Schemitsch EH, Richards RR. The effect of malunion on func-
tional outcome after plate fixation of fractures of both bones 
of the forearm in adults. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1992;74(7): 
1068-1078.
Shin SSS. Circulatory and vascular changes in the hip following 
traumatic hip dislocation. ClinOrthop. 1979;140:255-261.
Tile MM. Acute pelvic fracture II. Principles of management. J Am 
AcadOrthop. 1996:4:152-161.
Tile MM. Acute pelvic fracture: I. Causation and classification. 
J Am AcadOrthop. 1996;4:143-151.
Yagishita K, Thomas BJ. Use of allograft for large Hill-Sachs 
lesion associated with anterior glenohumeral dislocation. A 
case report. Injury. 2002;33:791-794.
Sports
Allaire R, Muriuki M, Gilbertson L, Harner CD. Biomechani-
cal consequences of a tear of the posterior root of the medial 
meniscus. Similar to total meniscectomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2008;90(9):1922-1931.
Araujo P, Van Eck CF, Torabi M, Fu FH. How to optimize the 
use of MRI in anatomic ACL reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports 
TraumatolArthrosc. 2013;21(7):1495-1501.
Arnoczky SP, Warren RF, Spivak JM. Meniscal repair using an 
exogenous fibrin clot. An experimental study in dogs. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 1988;70(8):1209-1217.
Brophy RH, Marx RG. The treatment of traumatic anterior insta-
bility of the shoulder: nonoperative and surgical treatment. 
Arthroscopy. 2009;25:298-304.
Ceccarelli E, Bondì R, Alviti F, Garofalo R, Miulli F, Padua R. 
Treatment of acute grade III acromioclavicular dislocation: a 
lack of evidence. J OrthopTraumatol. 2008;9(2):105-108.
Clarke MT, Arora A, Villar RN. Hip arthroscopy: complications in 
1054 cases. Clinical orthopaedics and related research. 84–88.
Frank C, Amiel D, Akeson WH. Healing of the medial collat-
eral ligament of the knee. A morphological and biochemical 
assessment in rabbits. Acta Orthop Scand. 1983;54(6):917-
923.
Frank C, Woo SL, Amiel D, Harwood F, Gomez M, Akeson W. 
Medial collateral ligament healing. A multidisciplinary assess-
ment in rabbits. Am J Sports Med. 1983;11(6):379-89.
Frost A, Zafar MS, Maffulli N. Tenotomy versus tenodesis in the 
management of pathologic lesions of the tendon of the long 
head of the biceps brachii. Am J Sports Med. 2009;37(4): 
828-833.
Gartsman GM. Arthroscopic management of rotator cuff disease. 
J Am AcadOrthop Surg. 1998;6(4):259-266.
Goldberg BA, Scarlat MM, Harryman DT. Management of the stiff 
shoulder. J Orthop Sci. 1999;4(6):462-471.
Harner CD, Mauro CS, Lesniak BP, Romanowski JR. Biomechani-
cal consequences of a tear of the posterior root of the medial 
meniscus. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91 Suppl 2:257-270.
Hovelius L. The natural history of primary anterior dislocation of 
the shoulder in the young. J Orthop Sci. 1999;4(4):307-317.
Ishida K, Kuroda R, Miwa M, et al. The regenerative effects of 
platelet-rich plasma on meniscal cells in vitro and its in vivo 
application with biodegradable gelatin hydrogel. Tissue Eng. 
2007;13(5):1103-1112.
Jakobsen BW, Johannsen HV, Suder P, Sφjbjerg JO. Primary repair 
versus conservative treatment of first-time traumatic anterior 
dislocation of the shoulder: a randomized study with 10-year 
follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2007;23:118–123.
Kim S, Bosque J, Meehan JP, Jamali A, Marder R. Increase in out-
patient knee arthroscopy in the United States: a comparison 
of National Surveys of Ambulatory Surgery, 1996 and 2006. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2011;93(11):994-1000.
McAndrews PT, Arnoczky SP. Meniscal repair enhancement tech-
niques. Clin Sports Med. 1996;15(3):499-510.
Mohtadi NG, Hollinshead RM, Sasyniuk TM, Fletcher JA, Chan 
DS, Li FX. A randomized clinical trial comparing open to 
arthroscopic acromioplasty with mini-open rotator cuff repair 
for full-thickness rotator cuff tears: disease-specific quality of 
life outcome at an average 2-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med. 
36:1043-1051.
Morse K, Davis AD, Afra R, Kaye EK, Schepsis A, Voloshin I. 
Arthroscopic versus mini-open rotator cuff repair: a com-
prehensive review and meta-analysis. Am J Sports Med. 
2008;36:1824-1828.
Nho SJ, Shindle MK, Sherman SL, Freedman KB, Lyman S, Mac-
Gillivray JD. Systematic review of arthroscopic rotator cuff 
repair and mini-open rotator cuff repair. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2007;89:127-136.
Pallis M, Svoboda SJ, Cameron KL, Owens BD. Survival compari-
son of allograft and autograft anterior cruciate ligament recon-
struction at the United States Military Academy. Am J Sports 
Med. 2012;40(6):1242-1246.
Rodeo SA. Arthroscopic meniscal repair with use of the outside-in 
technique. Instructional course lectures. 2000;49:195-206.
Sekiya JK, West RV, Groff YJ, Irrgang JJ, Fu FH, Harner CD. 
Clinical outcomes following isolated lateral meniscal allograft 
transplantation. Arthroscopy. 2008;22:771-780.
Silliman JF, Hawkins RJ. Classification and physical diagnosis of 
instability of the shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res.1993;291:7-19.
Simovitch R, Sanders B, Ozbaydar M, Lavery K, Warner JJP. Acro-
mioclavicular joint injuries: diagnosis and management. J Am 
AcadOrthop Surg. 2009; 17(4):207-219.
Tashman S, Kolowich P, Collon D, Anderson K, Anderst 
W. Dynamic function of the ACL-reconstructed knee during 
­running. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2007; 454:66-73.
Tumia NS, Johnstone AJ. Platelet derived growth factor-
AB enhances knee meniscal cell activity in vitro. Knee. 
2009;16(1):73-76.
Verma NN, Dunn W, Adler RS, et al. All-arthroscopic versus mini-
open rotator cuff repair: a retrospective review with minimum 
2-year follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2006;22:587-594.
Wolf RS, Zheng N, Weichel D. Long head biceps tenotomy versus 
tenodesis: a cadaveric biomechanical analysis. Arthroscopy.? 
2005; 21:182-185.
Li H, Tao H, Cho S, Chen S, Yao Z, Chen S. Difference in graft 
maturity of the reconstructed anterior cruciate ligament 2 years 
postoperatively: a comparison between autografts and allografts 
in young men using clinical and 3.0-T magnetic resonance imag-
ing evaluation. Am J Sports Med. 2012;40(7):1519-1526.
Baer GS, Harner CD. Clinical outcomes of allograft versus auto-
graft in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Clin Sports 
Med. 2007;26(4):661-681.
Carey JL, Dunn WR, Dahm DL, Zeger SL, Spindler KP. A sys-
tematic review of anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction 
with autograft compared with allograft. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2009;91(9):2242-2250.
1785
Orthopedic Surgery
CHAPTER 43
Samuelsson K, Andersson D, Karlsson J. Treatment of anterior cru-
ciate ligament injuries with special reference to graft type and 
surgical technique: an assessment of randomized controlled tri-
als. Arthroscopy. 2009;25:1139-1174.
Van Eck CF, Lesniak BP, Schreiber VM, Fu FH. Anatomic single- 
and double-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction 
flowchart. Arthroscopy. 2010;26:258-268.
Skyhar MJ, Warren RF, Ortiz GJ, Schwartz E, Otis JC. The effects 
of sectioning of the posterior cruciate ligament and the pos-
terolateral complex on the articular contact pressures within the 
knee. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1993;75(5):694-699.
Harner CD, Vogrin TM, Höher J, Ma CB, Woo SL. Biomechanical 
analysis of a posterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Defi-
ciency of the posterolateral structures as a cause of graft failure. 
Am J Sports Med. 2000;28(1):32-39.
MacGillivray JD, Stein BES, Park M, Allen AA, Wickiewicz 
TL, Warren RF. Comparison of tibial inlay versus transtibial 
techniques for isolated posterior cruciate ligament recon-
struction: minimum 2-year follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2006;22: 
320-328.
Seon JK, Song EK. Reconstruction of isolated posterior cruciate 
ligament injuries: a clinical comparison of the transtibial and 
tibial inlay techniques. Arthroscopy. 2006; 22:27-32.
Ranawat A, Baker CL, Henry S, Harner CD. Posterolateral corner 
injury of the knee: evaluation and management. J Am AcadOr-
thop Surg. 2008;16(9):506-518.
LaPrade RF, Resig S, Wentorf F, Lewis JL. The effects of grade III 
posterolateral knee complex injuries on anterior cruciate liga-
ment graft force. A biomechanical analysis. Am J Sports Med. 
1999;27(4):469-475.
Swenson TM, Harner CD. Knee ligament and meniscal inju-
ries.Current concepts. Orthop Clin North Am. 1995;26(3): 
529-546.
Ganz R, Parvizi J, Beck M, Leunig M, Nötzli H, Siebenrock KA. 
Femoroacetabular impingement: a cause for osteoarthritis of the 
hip. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2003;417:112-120.
Byers PD, Contepomi CA, Farkas TA. A post mortem study of the 
hip joint. Including the prevalence of the features of the right 
side. Ann Rheum Dis. 1970;29(1):15-31.
Leunig M, Beck M, Woo A, Dora C, Kerboull M, Ganz R. Acetabu-
lar rim degeneration: a constant finding in the aged hip. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res. 2003;413:201-207.
Seldes RM, Tan V, Hunt J, Katz M, Winiarsky R, Fitzgerald RH. 
Anatomy, histologic features, and vascularity of the adult 
acetabular labrum. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2001;382:232-40.
Byrd JWT, Jones KS. Arthroscopic femoroplasty in the manage-
ment of cam-type femoroacetabular impingement. Clin Orthop 
Relat Res. 2009;467:739–746
Byrd JWT, Jones KS. Prospective analysis of hip arthroscopy with 
10-year followup. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010;468:741-746.
Ilizaliturri VM, Orozco-Rodriguez L, Acosta-Rodríguez E, Cama-
cho-Galindo J. Arthroscopic treatment of cam-type femoroac-
etabular impingement: preliminary report at 2 years minimum 
follow-up. J Arthroplasty. 2008;23:226-234.
Larson CM, Giveans MR. Arthroscopic management of femoroac-
etabular impingement: early outcomes measures. Arthroscopy. 
2008; 24:540-546.
Philippon MJ, Briggs KK, Yen YM, Kuppersmith DA. Outcomes 
following hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement 
with associated chondrolabral dysfunction: minimum two-year 
follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2009;91:16-23.
Sampson TG Complications of hip arthroscopy. Clinics in sports 
medicine. 2001;20:831-835.
Spine
Bailitz J, Starr F, Beecroft M, et al: CT should replace three-
view radiographs as the initial screening test in patients 
at high, moderate, and low risk for blunt cervical spine 
injury: A prospective comparison. J Trauma. 2009; 66(6): 
1605-1609.
Bellabarba C, Mirza SK, West GA, et al. Diagnosis and treat-
ment of craniocervical dislocation in a series of 17 consecutive 
survivors during an 8-year period. J Neurosurg Spine. 
2006;4(6):429-440.
Ben Galim PJ, Sibai T, Hipp JA, et al. Internal Decapitation: Survival 
After Head to Neck Dissociation Injuries. Spine. 2008; 33:16
Dimar JR, Glassman SD, Raque GH, Zhang YP, Shields CB. The 
influence of spinal canal narrowing and timing of decompres-
sion on neurologic recovery after spinal cord contusion in a rat 
model. Spine. 1999;24:1623-1633.
Fehlings MG, Sekhon LH, Tator C. The role and timing of decom-
pression in acute spinal cord injury. Spine. 2001;26:s101-s110.
Fehlings MG, Tator CH: An evidence-based review of decompres-
sive surgery in acute spinal cord injury: Rationale, indications, 
and timing based on experimental and clinical studies. J Neurosurg 
Spine. 1999;91:1-11.
Macias CA, Rosengart MR, Puyana JC, et al: The effects of 
trauma center care, admission volume, and surgical volume 
on paralysis after traumatic spinal cord injury. Ann Surg. 
2009;249(1):10-17.
Shields CB, Zhang YP, Shields LB, Han Y, Burke DA, Mayer 
NW. The therapeutic window for spinal cord decompres-
sion in a rat spinal cord injury model. J Neurosurg Spine. 
2005;3:302-307.
Joint Reconstruction
Alazzawi S, Bardakos NV, Hadfield SG, Butt U, Beer ZH, Field 
RE. Patient-reported complications after elective joint replace-
ment surgery: are they correct? Bone Joint Surg Br. 2012;94(8): 
1120-1125. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.94B8.29040.
Am J Prev Med 2006;30(5):385–393. [Data Source: 2002 NHIS]
Arch Intern Med 2001;161(19):2309-2316. [Data Source: FAST 
Trial]
Arthritis Care Res 2011;63(6):788-99. [Data Source: 2005, 2007, 
2009 BRFSS]
Arthritis Rheum 1998;41(8):1343-1355. [Data source: Framingham 
Osteoarthritis Study]
Arthritis Rheum 2004;50(9, suppl):5641. [Data Source: 2002 NHIS]
Arthritis Rheum 2008;59(9):1207-1213. abstract [Data Source: 
1999-2003 Johnston County Osteoarthritis Project data]
Bergin PF, Doppelt JD, Kephart CJ, et al. Comparison of minimally 
invasive direct anterior vs. posterior total hip arthroplasty. JBJS 
Am. 2011; 93(15):1392-1398.
Cheng YJ, Hootman JM, Murphy LB, Langmaid GA, Helmick CG. 
Prevalence of doctor-diagnosed arthritis and arthritis-attributable 
activity limitation—United States, 2007-2009. MMWR. 
2010;59(39):1261-1265.
Davis CM III, Berry DJ, Harmsen WS. Cemented revision of failed 
uncemented femoral components of total hip arthroplasty. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85-A(7):1264-1269.
Haaker RG, Tiedjen K, Ottersbach A, Rubenthaler F, Stockheim 
M, Stiehl JB Comparison of conventional versus computer-
navigated acetabular component insertion. J Arthroplasty. 
2007;22(2):151-159.
Hootman JM, Helmick CG. Projections of U.S. prevalence of 
arthritis and associated activity limitations. Arthritis Rheum. 
2006;54(1):266-229.
Johnston RC, Brand RA, Crowninshield RD. Reconstruction of the 
hip. A mathematical approach to determine optimum geometric 
relationships. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1979;61:639-652.
Kim YH, Park JW, Kim JS. Computer-Navigated Versus Conven-
tional Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Prospective Randomized 
Trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2012; 94(22):2017-24.
Kwon MS, Kuskowski M, Mulhall KJ, Macaulay W, Brown TE, 
Saleh KJ. Does surgical approach affect total hip arthroplasty 
dislocation rates? Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2006;447:34-38.
1786
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Pospischill M, Kranzl A, Attwenger B, Knahr K. Minimally inva-
sive compared with traditional transgluteal approach for total 
hip arthroplasty: a comparative gait analysis. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 2010 Feb;92(2):328-337.
Soong M, Rubash HE, Macaulay W. Dislocation after total hip 
arthroplasty. Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2004 ;12: 314-321.
Vail, T, Callaghan, J. Minimal incision total hip arthroplasty. J Am 
Acad Orthop Surg. 2007;15:707-715.
Orthopedic Oncology
Giuffrida AY, Burgueno JE, Koniaris LG, Gutierrez JC, Duncan 
R, Scully SP. Chondrosarcoma in the United States (1973 to 
2003): an analysis of 2890 cases from the SEER database. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(5): 1063-1072.
Jawad MU, Cheung MC, Min ES, Schneiderbauer MM, Koniaris 
LG, Scully SP. Ewing’s sarcoma demonstrates racial disparities 
in incidence-related and sex-related differences in outcome: an 
analysis of 1631 cases from the SEER database, 1973-2005. 
Cancer. 2009;115(15): 3526-3536.
Mirabello L, Troisi RJ, Savage SA. Osteosarcoma incidence 
and survival rates from 1973 to 2004: data from the sur-
veillance, epidemiology, and end results program. Cancer. 
2009;115(7):1531-1543.
Rougraff BT. Evaluation of the patient with carcinoma of unknown 
origin metastatic to bone. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2003; 
(415, Suppl):S105-S109.
Spychalski JN, Thomas BJ. Treatment and Rehabilitation of Patho-
logic Fractures, State of the Art Reviews: Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation. 1995;9(1):77-92.
Visuri T, Pukkala E, Paavolainen P, Pulkkinen P, Riska EB. Cancer 
risk after metal on metal and polyethylene on metal total hip 
arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1996 Aug;(329 Suppl): 
S280-S289.
Pediatric Orthopedics
Crawford AH, Mehlman CT, Slovek RW. The fate of untreated 
developmental dislocation of the hip: Longterm follow-up of 
eleven patients. J Pediatr Orthop. 1999;19(5):641-644.
Jessel RH, Zurakowski D, Zilkens C, Burstein D, Gray ML, Kim 
YJ. Radiographic and patient factors associated with pre-­
radiographic osteoarthritis in hip dysplasia. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 2009;91(5):1120-1129.
Mahan ST, Katz JN, Kim YJ. To screen or not to screen? A decision 
analysis of the utility of screening for developmental dysplasia 
of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(7):1705-1719.
Murray AW, Wilson NI. Changing incidence of slipped capital 
femoral epiphysis: a relationship with obesity? J Bone Joint 
Surg Br. 2008;90(1):92-94.
Palocaren T, Holmes L, Rogers K, Kumar SJ. Outcome of in 
situ pinning in patients with unstable slipped capital femoral 
epiphysis: Assessment of risk factors associated with avascular 
necrosis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2010;30(1):31-36.
Parsch K, Weller S, Parsch D. Open reduction and smooth Kirschner 
wire fixation for unstable slipped capital femoral epiphysis. 
J Pediatr Orthop. 2009;29(1):1-8.
Stevenson DA, Mineau G, Kerber RA, Viskochil DH, Schaefer C, 
Roach JW. Familial predisposition to developmental dysplasia 
of the hip. J Pediatr Orthop. 2009;29(5):463-466.
Tokmakova KP, Stanton RP, Mason DE. Factors influencing the 
development of osteonecrosis in patients treated for slipped 
capital femoral epiphysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003; 
85(5):798.
Trousdale RT. Acetabular osteotomy: indications and results. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res. 2004;429:182-187.
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
Scott D. Lifchez and J. Alex Kelamis
44
INTRODUCTION
The highly mobile, functional, and strong hand is a major dis-
tinguishing point between humans and the nonhuman primates. 
The hand is an essential participant for activities of daily living, 
vocation, and recreational activities. The hand is even adaptable 
enough to read for the blind and speak for the mute. The under-
lying goal of all aspects of hand surgery is to maximize mobil-
ity, sensibility, stability, and strength while minimizing pain. 
These goals are then maximized to the extent possible given 
the patient’s particular pathology. Hand surgery is a regional 
specialty. Hand surgeons integrate components of neurologic, 
orthopedic, plastic, and vascular surgery in the care of 
patients with disorders of the upper extremities. 
ANATOMY OF THE HAND AND WRIST
In order to understand any disorder of the hand, one must under-
stand the anatomy of the underlying structures. Examination of 
the hand is based on demonstrating the function or lack 
thereof of each of these structures. 
Bones
The hand is highly mobile in space to allow maximum flex-
ibility in function. As such, a number of directions particular 
to the hand are necessary in order to properly describe posi-
tion, motion, and so on.1 Palmar (or volar) refers to the anterior 
surface of the hand in the anatomic position; dorsal refers to 
the posterior surface in the anatomic position. The hand can 
Introduction	
1787
Anatomy of the Hand and Wrist	1787
Bones / 1787
Muscles Affecting the Hand  
and Wrist / 1788
Tendons and Pulleys / 1791
Vascular / 1791
Nerve / 1792
Hand Examination	
1793
Emergency Room/Inpatient  
Consultation / 1793
Hand Imaging	
1794
Plain X-Rays / 1794
Computed Tomography / 1794
Ultrasonography / 1794
Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1794
Angiography / 1794
Trauma	
1795
Local Anesthesia / 1795
Fractures and Dislocations / 1796
Tendons / 1798
Nerve Injuries / 1798
Vascular Injuries / 1799
Special Considerations	
1800
Amputations and Replantation / 1800
Fingertip Injuries / 1800
High-Pressure Injection Injuries / 1801
Compartment Syndromes / 1801
Complications	
1801
Nonunion / 1801
Stiffness / 1805
Neuroma / 1805
Regional Pain Syndromes / 1805
Nerve Compression	
1805
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome / 1805
Cubital Tunnel Syndrome / 1806
Other Sites of Nerve Compression / 1806
Degenerative Joint Disease	
1806
Small Joints (Metacarpophalangeal  
and Interphalangeal) / 1807
Wrist / 1807
Rheumatoid Arthritis / 1808
Dupuytren’s Contracture	
1808
Infections	
1809
Cellulitis / 1809
Abscess / 1809
Collar-Button Abscess / 1810
Osteomyelitis / 1810
Pyogenic Arthritis / 1811
Necrotizing Infections / 1811
Infectious Flexor Tenosynovitis / 1811
Felon / 1813
Paronychia / 1813
Tumors	
1814
Benign Soft Tissue Tumors / 1815
Malignant Soft Tissue  
Tumors—Cutaneous / 1817
Malignant Soft Tissue  
Tumors—Noncutaneous / 1818
Benign Bone Tumors / 1818
Malignant Bone Tumors / 1819
Secondary Metastatic Tumors / 1820
Burns	
1820
Acute Management / 1820
Surgical Management / 1821
Reconstruction / 1821
Special Considerations / 1822
Vascular Disease	
1822
Progressive Thrombotic Disease / 1822
Systemic Vasculopathy / 1822
Vasospastic Disorders / 1823
Congenital Differences	
1823
Failure of Formation / 1823
Failure of Differentiation / 1823
Duplication / 1823
Overgrowth / 1823
Undergrowth / 1823
Constriction Band Syndrome / 1823
Generalized Skeletal Anomalies  
and Syndromes / 1824
Reconstructive Transplantation  
of the Upper Extremity	
1824
1
2
chapter 
rotate at the wrist level; rotation to bring the palm down is called 
pronation, rotation to bring the palm up is called supination. 
Because the hand can rotate in space, the terms medial and 
lateral are avoided. Radial and ulnar are used instead as these 
terms do not vary with respect to the rotational position of the 
hand. Abduction and adduction, when used on the hand, refer to 
movement of the digits away from and toward the middle finger, 
respectively (Fig. 44-1).
The hand is comprised of 19 bones arranged in five rays.2 
A ray is defined as a digit (finger or thumb) from the metacarpal 
base to the tip of the digit (Fig. 44-2A). The rays are numbered 
1 to 5, beginning with the thumb. By convention, however, they 
are referred to by name: thumb, index, middle, ring, and small. 
There are five metacarpals, comprising the ­visible palm of the 
hand. Each digit has a proximal and a distal phalanx, but only 
the fingers have a middle phalanx as well. The metacarpopha-
langeal (MP) joint typically allows 90° of flexion with a small 
amount of hyperextension. In addition, the fingers can actively 
abduct (move away from the middle finger) and adduct (move 
toward the middle finger). The thumb, in contrast, moves princi-
pally in the flexion-extension arc at the MP joint. Although there 
can be laxity in the radial and ulnar direction, the thumb cannot 
actively move in these directions at the MP level. The proximal 
interphalangeal joint (PIP) is the critical joint for ­finger mobil-
ity. Normal motion is 0 to 95° (full extension to flexion). The 
distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) also moves only in a flexion-
extension plane from 0 to 90° on average. The thumb interpha-
langeal joint (IP) also moves only in a flexion-extension plane. 
Its normal motion is highly variable between individuals, but 
averages 0 to 80°.
Each of the MP and IP joints has a radial and ulnar col-
lateral ligament to support it. The IP joint collateral ligaments 
are on tension with the joint fully extended. For the fingers, 
the MP joint collateral ligaments are on tension with the joint 
bent 90°. Collateral ligaments have a tendency to contract when 
not placed on tension; this becomes relevant when splinting the 
hand (see later Trauma section on splinting).
The wrist consists of eight carpal bones divided into two 
rows (Fig. 44-2B).2 The proximal row consists of the scaph-
oid, lunate, and triquetrum. The lunate is the principle axis of 
motion of the hand onto the forearm. It bears approximately 
35% of the load of the wrist onto the forearm. The scaphoid 
is shaped like the keel of a boat and bears 55% of the load of 
the hand onto the forearm, but also serves as the principle link 
between the proximal and distal rows, allowing for motion while 
­maintaining stability. Both the scaphoid and the lunate articulate 
with the radius. The triquetrum resides ulnar to the lunate. It 
does not interact with the ulna proximally; rather, it interacts 
with a cartilage suspended between the ulnar styloid and the dis-
tal radius called with triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) 
(Fig. 44-2B). The remaining 10% of load of the hand onto the 
forearm is transmitted through the TFCC.3
The distal row consists of four bones. The trapezium 
resides between the scaphoid and the thumb metacarpal. Dis-
tally, it has a saddle-shaped surface, which interacts with a 
reciprocally saddle-shaped base of the thumb metacarpal to 
allow for high mobility of the thumb carpometacarpal (CMC) 
joint in radial-ulnar and palmar-dorsal directions and opposition 
(Fig. 44-1B). The trapezoid rests between the scaphoid and the 
index finger metacarpal. The capitate, the largest carpal bone 
and first to ossify in a child, lies between the lunate and the 
middle finger metacarpal, but also interacts with the scaphoid on 
its proximal radial surface. The index and middle finger CMC 
joints are highly stable and have minimal mobility. The hamate 
is the ulnar-most bone in the distal row, sitting between the tri-
quetrum proximally and the ring and small finger metacarpals 
distally. The ring and small finger CMC joints are mobile, prin-
cipally in the flexion-extension direction.
The pisiform is a carpal bone only by geography. It is 
a sesamoid bone within the FCU tendon (see below). It does 
not bear load and can be excised, when necessary, without 
consequence.
Muscles Affecting the Hand and Wrist
The wrist is moved by multiple tendons that originate from the 
forearm and elbow. The digits of the hand are moved by both 
intrinsic (originating within the hand) and extrinsic (originat-
ing in the forearm) muscles. All of these muscles are inner-
vated by the median, radial, or ulnar nerves (or their branches) 
(Fig. 44-3).
Three muscles flex the wrist, all of which originate from 
the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The flexor carpi radialis 
(FCR, median nerve) inserts on the volar base of the index fin-
ger metacarpal. The flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU, ulnar nerve) also 
originates from the proximal ulna and inserts on the volar base 
of the small finger metacarpal. The palmaris longus (PL) tendon 
does not insert on a bone; it inserts on the palmar fascia, located 
deep to the skin in the central proximal palm, and is absent in 
up to 15% of patients. The FCR also deviates the wrist radially, 
whereas the FCU deviates the wrist ulnarly.
1788
Key Points
1 	 Surgery of the hand is a regional specialty, integrating compo-
nents of neurologic, orthopedic, plastic, and vascular surgery.
2 	 Understanding hand anatomy is the key to proper diagnosis of 
injury, infection, and degenerative disease of the hand.
3 	 After evaluation and/or treatment, patients should be splinted 
to protect the injured digits and keep the collateral ligaments 
of the injured joints on tension (metacarpophalangeal joints 
flexed, interphalangeal joints extended).
4 	 Healing of an injured or diseased structure in the hand is not 
the endpoint of treatment; the goal of any intervention must be 
to obtain structure healing, relief of pain, and maximization 
of function.
5 	 If a patient managed conservatively for cellulitis does not 
improve within 24 to 48 hours of appropriate intravenous 
antibiotics, abscess must be suspected.
6 	 Clinical examination, particularly noting the area of great-
est tenderness and/or inflammation, is the most useful diag-
nostic tool for hand infections.
1789
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
A
B
C
D
Figure 44-1.  Directions of finger, hand, and wrist motion. A. Finger abduction (white arrows) and adduction (black arrows). B. Thumb 
radial (black arrow) and palmar (white arrow) abduction. C. Thumb and small finger opposition. D. Hand/wrist pronation (black arrow) and 
supination (white arrow).
All three wrist extensors are innervated by the radial nerve 
or its branches. The extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) origi-
nates from the distal shaft of the humerus and inserts on the 
dorsal base of the index finger metacarpal. The extensor carpi 
radialis brevis (ECRB) originates from the lateral epicondyle of 
the humerus and inserts on the dorsal base of the middle finger 
metacarpal. The extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) also originates 
from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts on the 
dorsal base of the small finger metacarpal. The ECRL deviates 
the wrist radially, whereas the ECU deviates the wrist ulnarly.
The long flexors of the fingers all originate from the 
medial epicondyle of the humerus. The flexor digitorum super-
ficialis (FDS) inserts on the base of the middle phalanx of each 
finger and primarily flexes the PIP joint. The flexor digitorum 
profundus (FDP) inserts on the base of the distal phalanx and 
primarily flexes the DIP joint. The flexor pollicis longus (FPL) 
originates more distally, from the ulna, radius, and interosseous 
membrane between them in the forearm. It inserts on the base of 
the distal phalanx of the thumb and primarily flexes the IP joint. 
All of these tendons can also flex the more proximal joint(s) in 
their respective rays. All of these muscles are innervated by the 
median nerve (or its branches) except the FDP to the ring and 
small fingers, which are innervated by the ulnar nerve.
The extrinsic extensors of the fingers and thumb are all 
innervated by the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN, branch of 
the radial nerve). The extensor digitorum communis (EDC) orig-
inates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and extends the 
MP joints of the fingers. Unlike most tendons that attach directly 
into a bone, the EDC tendons do not insert on the dorsal base of 
the proximal phalanx, but rather into a soft tissue sling called the 
1790
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
ECRL/ECRB
EPL
EDQ
ECU
TCL
2
3
4
5
5
4
3
2
Radial A
A
N
Ulnar
S
C
H
Median N
APL
EPB
FPL
P
FCR
EIP/EDC
Figure 44-3.  Cross-section of the wrist at the midcarpal level. The relative geography of the neurologic and tendinous structures can be seen. 
The transverse carpal ligament (TCL) is the roof of the carpal tunnel, passing volar to the median nerve and long flexor tendons. The TCL is 
also the floor of the ulnar tunnel, or Guyon’s canal, passing dorsal to the ulnar artery and nerve. The wrist and digital extensor tendons are 
also seen, distal to their compartments on the distal radius and ulna. Bones: C = capitate; H = hamate; P = pisiform; S = scaphoid. Tendons 
(flexor digitorum superficialis is volar to flexor digitorum profundus within the carpal tunnel): 2 = index finger; 3 = middle finger; 4 = ring 
finger; 5 = small finger. A = artery; APL = abductor pollicis longus; ECRB = extensor carpi radialis brevis; ECRL = extensor carpi radialis 
longus; ECU = extensor carpi ulnaris; EDC = extensor digitorum communis; EDQ = extensor digiti quinti; EIP = extensor indices proprius; 
EPB = extensor pollicis brevis; EPL = extensor pollicis longus; FCR = flexor carpi radialis; FPL = flexor pollicis longus; N = nerve.
sagittal hood, which surrounds the proximal phalanx base and 
pulls up on the volar surface in a hammock-like ­manner. More 
distally in the dorsal forearm, the extensor indices proprius (EIP) 
and extensor digiti quinti (EDQ) originate from the ulna, radius, 
and posterior interosseous membrane and insert on the sagittal 
hood of the index and small fingers, respectively.
The thumb has three separate extrinsic extensors. All of 
these originate from the dorsal ulna in the mid-forearm and 
are innervated by the PIN. The abductor pollicis longus (APL) 
inserts on the radial base of the thumb metacarpal to produce 
some extension, but mostly abduction. The extensor pollicis 
brevis (EPB) inserts on the base of the thumb proximal ­phalanx. 
Figure 44-2.  Bony architecture of the hand and wrist. A. Bones of the hand and digits. All rays have metacarpophalangeal (MP) joints. The 
fingers have proximal and distal interphalangeal joints (PIP and DIP), but the thumb has a single interphalangeal (IP) joint. B. Bones of the 
wrist. The proximal row consists of the scaphoid, lunate, and capitate. The distal row bones articulate with the metacarpals: the trapezium with 
the thumb, the trapezoid with the index, the capitate with the middle, and the hamate with the ring and small. The pisiform bone is a sesamoid 
within the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon. It overlaps the triquetrum and hamate but does not contribute to a carpal row. CMC = carpometacarpal; 
TFCC = triangular fibrocartilage complex.
1791
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
The extensor pollicis longus (EPL) inserts on the base of the 
thumb distal phalanx.
The intrinsic muscles of the hand are what allow humans 
fine, subtle movements of the hand. Microsurgery, typing, and 
even video gaming would be difficult, if not impossible, without 
them.
The thenar muscles originate from the volar radial surface 
of the scaphoid and trapezium and the flexor retinaculum. The 
abductor pollicis brevis (APB) inserts on the radial base of the 
thumb proximal phalanx and abducts the thumb in a radial and 
volar direction. The opponens pollicis (OP) inserts on the radial 
distal aspect of the thumb metacarpal and draws the thumb 
across the palm toward the small finger. The flexor pollicis 
­brevis (FPB) inserts on the base of the thumb proximal phalanx 
and flexes the thumb MP joint. The APB, OP, and superficial 
head of the FPB are all innervated by the thenar motor branch 
of the median nerve.
The lumbrical muscles are unique in the body in that they 
originate from a tendon. Each finger’s lumbrical originates from 
the FDP tendon in the palm. The lumbrical tendon passes along 
the radial aspect of the digit to flex the MP and extend the IP 
joints. The index and middle lumbricals are median nerve inner-
vated, and the ring and small finger lumbricals are ulnar nerve 
innervated.
The hypothenar muscles originate from the pisiform, 
hamate, and flexor retinaculum and insert on the ulnar base of 
the small finger proximal phalanx. The abductor digiti quinti 
(ADQ) abducts the small finger. The opponens digiti quinti 
(ODQ) brings the small finger across the palm in reciprocal 
motion to the OP. The flexor digiti quinti (FDQ) flexes the small 
finger metacarpal. All of these muscles are innervated by the 
ulnar nerve.
The interosseous muscles occupy the space between the 
metacarpal bones. Their tendons insert on the bases of the proxi-
mal phalanges. All act to flex the MP joints and extend the IP 
joints. The three palmar interosseous muscles adduct the fin-
gers. The four dorsal interosseous muscles abduct the fingers. 
The adductor pollicis originates from the middle finger metacar-
pal and inserts on the ulnar base of the thumb proximal phalanx. 
It acts to adduct the thumb. All of these muscles, as well as the 
deep head of the FPB, are innervated by the ulnar nerve.
Tendons and Pulleys
Multiple pulleys pass over or surround the extrinsic tendons en 
route to or within the hand. There purpose is to maintain tendon 
position near the bone, allowing maximal translation of tendon 
excursion into joint motion.
The most well known of the wrist-level pulleys is the flexor 
retinaculum, also known as the transverse carpal ­ligament. It 
attaches to the scaphoid tubercle and trapezium radially and 
the hook of the hamate bone and pisiform ulnarly. Deep to 
this ligament, between the scaphoid (radially) and the hamate 
(ulnarly), pass the FDS, FDP, and FPL tendons as well as the 
median nerve. This area is also known as the carpal tunnel (see 
Fig. 44-3).
On the dorsum of the wrist, the extensor retinaculum is 
divided into six compartments. Beginning on the radial aspect 
of the radius, the first compartment contains the APL and EPB 
tendons. The second holds the ECRL and ECRB tendons. The 
EPL passes through the third compartment. The fourth com-
partment contains the EIP and EDC tendons, the fifth the EDQ, 
and the sixth the ECU. The sixth compartment is located on the 
A5
C3
A4
C2
A3
C1
A2
A1
Figure 44-4.  Drawing of anteroposterior and lateral view of the 
pulley system.
ulnar aspect of the distal ulna. Although the compartments end 
at the radiocarpal/ulnocarpal joints, the relative geography of 
the tendons is preserved over the carpal bones (see Fig. 44-3).
In the hand, the pulleys maintain the long flexor tendons in 
close apposition to the fingers and thumb. There are no extensor 
pulleys within the hand. Each finger has five annular and three 
cruciate pulleys (Fig. 44-4). The second and fourth (A2 and A4) 
pulleys are the critical structures to prevent bowstringing of the 
finger.4 The remaining pulleys can be divided as needed for 
­surgical exposure or to relieve a stricture area.
Vascular
Two major arteries serve the hand. The radial artery travels 
under the brachioradialis muscle in the forearm. At the junc-
tion of the middle and distal thirds of the forearm, the artery 
becomes superficial and palpable, passing just radial to the FCR 
tendon. At the wrist level, the artery splits into two branches. 
The smaller, superficial branch passes volarly into the palm 
to contribute to the superficial palmar arch. The larger branch 
passes dorsally over the scaphoid bone, under the EPL and EPB 
tendons (known as the anatomic snuffbox) and back volarly 
between the proximal thumb and index finger metacarpals to 
form the superficial palmar arch.
The ulnar artery travels deep to the FCU muscle in the 
forearm. When the FCU becomes tendinous, the ulnar artery 
resides deep and slightly radial to it. At the wrist, the artery 
travels between the hamate and pisiform bones superficial to 
the transverse carpal ligament (known as Guyon’s canal) into 
the palm. The larger, superficial branch forms the superficial 
palmar arch. The deeper branch contributes to the deep palmar 
1792
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
arch (Fig. 44-5A). In 97% of patients, at least one of the deep or 
superficial palmar arches is intact, allowing for the entire hand 
to survive on the radial or ulnar artery.5
Each digit receives a radial and ulnar digital artery. For the 
thumb, the radial digital artery may come from the deep palmar 
arch or the main body of the radial artery. The larger ulnar digi-
tal artery comes off the deep arch as either a discrete unit, the 
princeps pollicis artery, or less frequently as the first common 
digital artery, which then splits into the radial digital artery to 
the index finger and the ulnar digital artery to the thumb. The 
second, third, and fourth digital arteries typically branch off the 
superficial palmar arch and pass over the similarly named inter-
osseous spaces respectively, ultimately dividing into two proper 
digital arteries each. The ulnar digital artery of the small finger 
comes off as a separate branch from the superficial arch. Within 
the finger, the proper digital arteries travel lateral to the bones 
and tendons, just palmar to the midaxis of the digit, but dorsal 
to the proper digital nerves (Fig. 44-5B).
Nerve
Three principal nerves serve the forearm, wrist, and hand: the 
median, radial, and ulnar nerves. The most critical of these from 
a sensory standpoint is the median nerve. The median nerve 
begins as a terminal branch of the medial and lateral cords of the 
brachial plexus. It receives fibers from C5–T1. The palmar cuta-
neous branch of the median nerve separates from the main body 
of the nerve 6 cm proximal to the volar wrist crease and serves 
the proximal, radial-sided palm. The main body of the median 
nerve splits into several branches after the carpal tunnel: a radial 
digital branch to the thumb, an ulnar digital nerve to the thumb, 
and a radial digital nerve to the index finger (sometimes begin-
ning as a single first common digital nerve); the second common 
digital nerve that branches into the ulnar digital nerve to the 
index finger and the radial digital nerve to the middle finger; 
and a third common digital nerve that branches into the ulnar 
digital nerve to the middle finger and a radial digital nerve to 
the ring finger. The digital nerves provide volar-sided sensation 
from the metacarpal head level to the tip of the digit. They also, 
through their dorsal branches, provide dorsal-sided sensation to 
the ­digits from the midportion of the middle phalanx distally via 
dorsal branches. The thenar motor branch of the median nerve 
most commonly passes through the carpal tunnel and then trav-
els in a recurrent fashion back to the thenar muscles. Less com-
monly, the nerve passes through or proximal to the transverse 
carpal ligament en route to its muscles.
In the forearm, the median nerve gives motor branches to 
all of the flexor muscles except the FCU, and the ring and small 
finger portions of the FDP. Distal median motor fibers (with the 
exception of those to the thenar muscles) are carried through a 
large branch called the anterior interosseous nerve.
The ulnar nerve is a terminal branch of the medial cord 
of the brachial plexus. It receives innervation from C8 and 
T1 roots. The FCU and FDP (ring/small) receive motor fibers 
from the ulnar nerve. In the distal forearm, 5 cm above the head 
of the ulna, the nerve gives off a dorsal sensory branch. Once 
in the hand, the nerve splits into the motor branch and sensory 
branches. The motor branch curves radially at the hook of the 
hamate bone to innervate the intrinsic muscles, as described 
­earlier. The sensory branches become the ulnar digital nerve 
to the small finger and the fourth common digital nerve, which 
splits into the ulnar digital nerve to the ring finger and the radial 
digital nerve to the small finger. The sensory nerves provide 
distal dorsal sensation similar to the median nerve branches.
The radial nerve is the larger of two terminal branches of 
the posterior cord of the brachial plexus. It receives fibers from 
C5–T1 nerve roots. It innervates all of the extensor muscles of the 
forearm and wrist through the PIN branch except for the ECRL, 
which is innervated by the main body of the radial nerve in the 
distal upper arm. There is no ulnar nerve contribution to exten-
sion of the wrist, thumb, or finger MP joints. As noted earlier, the 
ulnar innervated intrinsic hand muscles are the principle exten-
sors of the finger IP joints, although the long finger extensors 
(EDC, EIP, EDQ) make a secondary contribution to this function.
In the proximal dorsal forearm, the superficial radial nerve 
(SRN) is the other terminal branch of the radial nerve. It travels 
deep to the brachioradialis muscle until 6 cm proximal to the radial 
styloid, where it becomes superficial. The SRN provides sensation 
to the dorsal hand and the radial three and a half digits up to the 
A
B
Figure 44-5.  Arteries of the hand and 
­finger. A. Relative position of the super-
ficial and deep palmar arches to the bony 
structures and each other; note the radial 
artery passes dorsal to the thumb metacar-
pal base, through the first web space, and 
anterior to the index metacarpal base as it 
forms the deep arch. B. The ­neurovascular 
bundles lay volar to the midaxis of the 
digit with the artery dorsal to the nerve; 
­Grayson’s ligament (volar) and Cleland’s 
ligament (dorsal) connect the bone to the 
skin surrounding the bundle.
1793
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
level of the mid-middle phalanx (where the dorsal branches of the 
proper digital nerves take over, as described earlier). The dorsal 
branch of the ulnar nerve provides sensation to the ulnar one and 
a half digits and dorsal hand in complement to the SRN.
HAND EXAMINATION
Emergency Room/Inpatient Consultation
A common scenario in which the hand surgeon will be intro-
duced to the patient is in trauma or other acute situations. The 
patient is evaluated by inspection, palpation, and provocative 
testing.
On inspection, one should first note the position of the 
hand. The resting hand has a normal cascade of the fingers, 
with the small finger flexed most and the index finger least 
(Fig. 44-6). Disturbance of this suggests a tendon or skeletal 
problem. Also note any gross deformities or wounds and what 
deeper structures, if any, are visible in such wounds. Observe 
Figure 44-6.  In the normal resting hand, the fingers assume a 
slightly flexed posture from the index finger (least) to the small 
finger (most).
for abnormal coloration of a portion or all of the hand (this 
can be confounded by ambient temperature or other injuries), 
edema, and/or clubbing of the fingertips.
Palpation typically begins with the radial and ulnar artery 
pulses at the wrist level. Pencil Doppler examination can sup-
plement this and evaluate distal vessels. A pulsatile signal is 
normally detectable by pencil Doppler in the pad of the finger at 
the center of the whorl of creases. Discrepancies between digits 
should be noted. If all other tests are inconclusive, pricking the 
involved digit with a 25-gauge needle should produce bright red 
capillary bleeding. If an attached digit demonstrates inadequate 
or absent blood flow (warm ischemia), the urgency of complet-
ing the evaluation and initiating treatment markedly increases.
Sensation must be evaluated prior to any administration of 
local anesthetic. At a minimum, light and sharp touch sensation 
should be documented for the radial and ulnar aspects of the tip 
of each digit. Beware of writing “sensation intact” at the conclu-
sion of this evaluation. Rather, one should document what was 
tested (e.g., “light and sharp touch sensation present and sym-
metric to the tips of all digits of the injured hand”). In the setting 
of a sharp injury, sensory deficit implies a lacerated structure 
until proven otherwise. Once sensation has been evaluated and 
documented, the injured hand can be anesthetized for patient 
comfort during the remainder of the examination (see below).
Ability to flex and extend the wrist and digital joints is 
typically examined next. At the wrist level, the FCR and FCU 
tendons should be palpable during flexion. The wrist extensors 
are not as readily palpated due to the extensor retinaculum. 
Ability to flex the DIP joint (FDP) is tested by blocking the 
finger at the middle phalanx level. To test the FDS to each fin-
ger, hold the remaining three fingers in slight hyperextension 
and ask the patient to flex the involved digit (Fig. 44-7). This 
maneuver makes use of the fact that the FDP tendons share a 
common muscle belly. Placing the remaining fingers in exten-
sion prevents the FDP from firing, and allows the FDS, which 
Figure 44-7.  The examiner holds the untested fingers in full exten-
sion, preventing contracture of the flexor digitorum profundus. In 
this position, the patient is asked to flex the finger, and only the 
flexor digitorum superficialis will be able to fire.
1794
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
has a separate muscle belly for each tendon, to fire. Strength in 
grip, finger abduction, and thumb opposition is tested and com-
pared to the uninjured side. Range of motion for the wrist, MP, 
and IP joints should be noted and compared to the opposite side.
If there is suspicion for closed space infection, the hand 
should be evaluated for erythema, swelling, fluctuance, and 
localized tenderness. The dorsum of the hand does not have 
fascial septae; thus dorsal infections can spread more widely 
than palmar ones. The epitrochlear and axillary nodes should be 
palpated for enlargement and tenderness. Findings for specific 
infectious processes will be discussed in the Infections section.
Additional exam maneuvers and findings, such as those 
for office consultations, will be discussed with each disease pro-
cess covered later in this chapter.
HAND IMAGING
Plain X-Rays
Almost every hand evaluation should include plain X-rays of 
the injured or affected part. A standard, anteroposterior, lateral, 
and oblique view of the hand or wrist (as appropriate) is rapid, 
inexpensive, and usually provides sufficient information about 
the bony structures to achieve a diagnosis in conjunction with 
the symptoms and findings.6
Lucencies within the bone should be noted. Most com-
monly, these represent fractures, but they can on occasion rep-
resent neoplastic or degenerative processes. Great care should 
be taken to evaluate the entire X-ray, typically beginning away 
from the area of the patient’s complaint. Additional injuries can 
be missed, which might affect the treatment plan selected and 
eventual outcome.
Congruency of adjacent joints should also be noted. The 
MP and IP joints of the fingers should all be in the same plain 
on any given view. Incongruency of the joint(s) of one finger 
implies fracture with rotation. At the wrist level, the proxi-
mal and distal edge of the proximal row and proximal edge of 
the distal row should be smooth arcs,7 known as Gilula’s arcs 
(Fig. 44-8A). Disruption of these implies ligamentous injury or 
possibly dislocation (Fig. 44-8B).
Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the hand and wrist 
can provide additional bony information when plain X-rays 
are insufficient. Comminuted fractures of the distal radius can 
be better visualized for number and orientation of fragments. 
Scaphoid fractures can be evaluated for displacement and com-
minution preoperatively as well as for the presence of bony 
bridging postoperatively (Fig. 44-9). CT scans are also useful 
for CMC fractures of the hand where overlap on a plain X-ray 
lateral view may make diagnosis difficult.
Unlike the trunk and more proximal extremities, CT scans 
with contrast are less useful to demonstrate abscess cavities due 
to the small area of these spaces.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography has the advantages of being able to demon-
strate soft tissue structures and being available on nights and 
weekends. Unfortunately, it is also highly operator dependent. 
In the middle of the night when magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) is not available, ultrasound may be able to demonstrate a 
large deep infection in the hand but is rarely more useful than a 
thorough clinical examination.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI provides the best noninvasive visualization of the soft tis-
sue structures. With contrast, MRI can demonstrate an occult 
abscess. Unfortunately, it is often not available on an urgent 
basis for hand issues when this information is often needed. 
MRI can also demonstrate soft tissue injuries such as cartilage 
or ligament tears or tendonitis (usually by demonstrating edema 
in the area in question). It can demonstrate occult fractures that 
are not sufficiently displaced to be seen on X-ray or CT (again, 
by demonstrating edema). MRI can also demonstrate vascular 
disturbance of a bone, as in a patient with avascular necrosis of 
the scaphoid (Fig. 44-10).
Angiography
Angiography of the upper extremity is rarely used. In many cen-
ters, MRI and CT angiography provide sufficient resolution of the 
vascular structures to make traditional angiography unnecessary. 
A
B
Figure 44-8.  Gilula’s arcs are seen shown in this normal patient (A) and in a patient with a scaphoid fracture and perilunate dislocation (B).
1795
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
A
B
Figure 44-9.  A. Preoperative images demonstrate a nonunion of a scaphoid fracture sustained 4 years earlier. Postoperatively, cross-sectional 
imaging with a computed tomography scan in the coronal plan demonstrates bone crossing the previous fracture line. This can be difficult to 
discern on plain X-rays due to overlap of bone fragments.
For a patient with vascular disease of the upper extrem-
ity, angiography of the upper extremity is usually performed 
through a femoral access much like with the leg. An arterial 
catheter can be used to deliver thrombolytic drugs to treat a 
thrombotic process.
TRAUMA
The upper extremity–injured patient may have additional inju-
ries to other parts of the body. All injured patients should receive 
an appropriate trauma survey to look for additional injuries.
The patient with upper extremity trauma is evaluated as 
described in the Hand Examination section. Sensory examina-
tion should be performed early. Once sensory status has been 
documented, administration of local anesthesia can provide com-
fort to the patient during the remainder of the evaluation and 
subsequent treatment. Patients should receive tetanus toxoid for 
penetrating injuries if more than 5 years have passed since the 
last vaccination.
Local Anesthesia
Anesthetic blockade can be administered at the wrist level, dig-
ital level, or with local infiltration as needed. Keep in mind that 
all local anesthetics are less effective in areas of inflammation.
Figure 44-10.  T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows 
perfused bone as white. In this patient, there is the absence of white-
ness where the scaphoid should be (dashed circle), consistent with 
avascular necrosis.
Also, primary ­vascular disease of the upper extremity is relatively 
uncommon. In the trauma setting, vascular disturbance usually 
mandates exploration and direct visualization of the structures in 
­question, and angiography is thus obviated.
1796
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
The agents most commonly used are lidocaine and 
­bupivacaine. Lidocaine has the advantage of rapid onset, whereas 
bupivacaine has the advantage of long duration (average 6– 
8 hours).8 Although bupivacaine can produce irreversible heart 
block in high doses, this is rarely an issue with the amounts 
typically used in the hand. For pediatric patients, the tolerated 
dose is 2.5 mg/kg. This can be easily remembered by noting 
that when using 0.25% bupivacaine, 1 mL/kg is acceptable 
dosing.
A commonly held axiom is that epinephrine is unac-
ceptable to be used in the hand. Several recent large series 
have dispelled this myth.9 Epinephrine should not be used in 
the fingertip and not in concentrations higher than 1:100,000 
(i.e., what is present in commercially available local anesthetic 
with epinephrine). Beyond that, its use is acceptable and may 
be ­useful in an emergency room (ER) where tourniquet con-
trol may not be available. Also, because most ER procedures 
are done under pure local anesthesia, many patients will not tolerate 
the discomfort of the tourniquet beyond 30 minutes.10 Epinephrine 
will provide hemostasis and also prolong the effect of the local 
anesthetic.
Simple lacerations, particularly on the dorsum of the hand, 
can be anesthetized with local infiltration. This is performed in 
the standard fashion.
Blocking of the digital nerves at the metacarpal head level 
is useful for volar injuries distal to this point and for dorsal 
injuries beyond the midpoint of the middle phalanx (via dor-
sal branches of the proper digital nerves). Fingertip injuries are 
particularly well anesthetized by this technique. A digit can be 
anesthetized via a flexor sheath approach or via the dorsal web 
space (Fig. 44-11A,B).
Blocking one or more nerves as they cross the wrist can 
provide several advantages: anesthesia for multiple injured dig-
its, avoiding areas of inflammation where the local anesthetic 
agent may be less effective, and avoiding injection where the 
volume of fluid injected may make treatment harder (such 
as fracture reduction). Four major nerves cross the wrist: the 
median nerve, SRN, ulnar nerve, and dorsal sensory branch of 
the ulnar nerve (Fig. 44-11C–E). When blocking the median and 
ulnar nerves, beware of intraneural injection, which can cause 
irreversible neural scarring. If the patient complains of severe 
paresthesias with injection or high resistance is encountered, the 
needle should be repositioned.
Fractures and Dislocations
For dislocations and displaced fractures, a visible deformity 
is often present. Nondisplaced fractures may not show a gross 
deformity but will have edema and tenderness to palpation 
at the fracture site. A fracture is described by its displace-
ment, rotation, and angulation. A fracture is also described 
in terms of comminution and the number and complexity of 
fracture fragments. Displacement is described as a percentage 
of the diameter of the bone; rotation is described in degrees 
of supination or pronation with respect to the rest of the hand; 
angulation is described in degrees. To avoid confusion, it is 
useful to describe which direction the angle of the fracture 
points. All injuries should be evaluated for nearby wounds 
(open) that may introduce bacteria into the fracture site or 
joint space.
Once the initial force on the fracture ceases, the ten-
dons passing beyond the fracture site provide the principal 
deforming force. Their force is directed proximally and, 
to a lesser extent, volarly. Based on this, the stability of a 
­fracture can be determined by the orientation of the fracture 
with respect to the shaft of the bone. Transverse fractures are 
typically stable. Oblique fractures typically shorten. ­Spiral 
fractures typically rotate as they shorten and thus require 
surgical treatment.
Fractures of the tuft of the distal phalanx are common. 
Catching of a finger in a closing door is a common causative 
mechanism. These fractures are often nondisplaced and do not 
require treatment beyond protection of the distal phalanx from 
additional trauma while the fracture heals.
Displaced transverse fractures of the phalanges can usu-
ally be reduced with distraction. The distal part is pulled away 
from the main body of the hand and then pushed in the direc-
tion of the proximal shaft of the finger, and then distraction is 
released. Postreduction X-rays should routinely be performed 
to document satisfactory reduction. Oblique and spiral frac-
tures usually are unstable after reduction. The involved digit(s) 
should be splinted until appropriate surgical intervention can 
be performed.
Articular fractures of the IP and MP joints are worri-
some because they may compromise motion. Chip fractures 
must be evaluated for instability of the collateral ligaments. 
If the joint is stable, the patient should initially be splinted for 
comfort. Motion therapy should be instituted early (ideally 
within the first week) to prevent stiffness. For larger fractures, 
the patient should be splinted until surgical treatment can be 
performed. In surgery, the fracture is typically internally fix-
ated to allow for early motion, again with the goal of preventing 
stiffness.11
Dislocations of the PIP joints produce traction on the 
neurovascular structures but usually do not lacerate them. In 
general, the patient should not be sent home with a joint that 
remains dislocated. Most commonly, the distal part is dorsal 
to the proximal shaft and sits in a hyperextended position. For 
this patient, the examiner gently applies pressure to the base of 
the distal part until it passes beyond the head of the proximal 
phalanx. Once there, the relocated PIP joint is gently flexed, 
confirming the joint is in fact reduced. The joint is splinted in 
slight flexion to prevent redislocation. On occasion, the head 
of the proximal phalanx may pass between the two slips of the 
FDS tendon. For these patients, the joint may not be reducible 
in a closed fashion.
Angulated fractures of the small finger metacarpal neck 
(“boxer’s fracture”) are another common injury seen in the ER. 
Typical history is that the patient struck another individual or 
rigid object with a hook punch. These are often stable after 
reduction using the Jahss maneuver (Fig. 44-12).
Fractures of the thumb metacarpal base are often unstable. 
The Bennett fracture displaces the volar-ulnar base of the bone. 
The remainder of the articular surface and the shaft typically 
dislocate dorsoradially and shorten. The thumb often appears 
grossly shortened, and the proximal shaft of the metacarpal 
may reside at the level of the trapezium or even the scaphoid 
on X-ray. In a Rolando fracture, a second fracture line occurs 
between the remaining articular surface and the shaft. These 
fractures nearly always require open reduction and internal 
fixation.
Most nondisplaced fractures do not require surgical treat-
ment. The scaphoid bone of the wrist is a notable exception to 
this rule. Due to peculiarities in its vascular supply, particularly 
vulnerable at its proximal end, nondisplaced scaphoid fractures 
1797
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
Figure 44-11.  Local anesthesia can be administered at the digital or the wrist level. A. A single injection into the flexor tendon sheath at the 
metacarpal head level provides complete anesthesia for the digit. B. Alternatively, one can inject from a dorsal approach into the web space 
on either side. C. The superficial radial nerve is blocked by infiltrating subcutaneously over the distal radius from the radial artery pulse to the 
distal radioulnar joint. The dorsal sensory branch of the ulnar nerve is blocked in similar fashion over the distal ulna. D. To block the ulnar 
nerve, insert the needle parallel to the plane of the palm and deep to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon; aspirate to confirm the needle is not in 
the adjacent ulnar artery. E. To block the median nerve, insert the needle just ulnar to the palmaris longus tendon into the carpal tunnel. One 
should feel two points of resistance: one when piercing the skin, the second when piercing the antebrachial fascia.
1798
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
can fail to unite in up to 20% of patients even with appropriate 
immobilization. Recent developments in hardware and surgi-
cal technique have allowed stabilization of the fracture with 
minimal surgical exposure. One prospective randomized series 
of scaphoid wrist fractures demonstrated shortening of time 
to union by up to 6 weeks in the surgically treated group, but 
no difference in rate of union.12 Surgery may be useful in the 
younger, more active patient who would benefit from an earlier 
return to full activity.
Ligament injuries of the wrist can be difficult to recognize. 
Patients often present late and may not be able to localize their 
pain. In severe cases, the ligaments of the wrist can rupture to 
the point of dislocation of the capitate off the lunate or even 
the lunate off the radius. Mayfield and colleagues classified the 
progression of this injury into four groups.13 In the most severe 
group, the lunate dislocates off the radius into the carpal tunnel. 
In some circumstances, the scaphoid bone may break rather than 
the scapholunate ligament rupturing. Attention to the congru-
ency or disruption of Gilula’s arcs will help the examiner to 
recognize this injury. For patients with type 4 (most severe) and 
some with type 3 injury, the examiner should also evaluate for 
sensory disturbance in the median nerve distribution because 
this may indicate acute carpal tunnel syndrome and necessitate 
more urgent intervention. Although the Mayfield pattern of 
injury is most common, force can also transmit along alternate 
paths through the carpus.14
After reduction of fractures and dislocations (as well as 
after surgical repair of these and many other injuries), the hand 
must be splinted in a protected position. For the fingers, MP 
joints should be splinted 90°, and the IP joints at 0° (called 
the intrinsic plus position). The wrist is generally splinted at 
20° extension because this puts the hand in a more functional 
­position.  This keeps the collateral ligaments on tension 
and helps prevent secondary contracture. In general, one 
of three splints should be used for the ER patient (Fig. 44-13). 
The ulnar gutter splint uses places plaster around the ulnar 
Figure 44-12.  The Jahss maneuver. The surgeon fully flexes the 
patient’s small finger into the palm and secures it in his distal hand. 
The proximal hand controls the wrist and places the thumb on the 
patient’s fracture apex (the most prominent dorsal point). The exam-
iner distracts the fracture, pushes dorsally with the distal hand  (up 
arrow), and resists dorsal motion with the proximal hand (down 
arrow).
­border of the hand. It is generally appropriate for small finger 
injuries only. Dorsal plaster splints can be used for injuries of 
any of the ­fingers. Plaster is more readily contoured to the dorsal 
surface of the hand than the volar surface, particularly in the set-
ting of trauma-associated edema. For thumb injuries, the thumb 
spica splint is used to keep the thumb radially and palmarly 
abducted from the hand.
Tendons
Injuries to the flexor and extensor tendons compromise the 
mobility and strength of the digits. On inspection, injury is nor-
mally suspected by loss of the normal cascade of the fingers. 
The patient should be examined as described earlier to evaluate 
for which tendon motion is deficient. If the patient is unable to 
cooperate, extension of the wrist will produce passive flexion of 
the fingers and also demonstrate a deficit. This is referred to at 
the tenodesis maneuver.
Flexor tendon injuries are described based on zones 
(Fig. 44-14). Up until 40 years ago, zone 2 injuries were always 
reconstructed and never repaired primarily due to concern that 
the bulk of repair within the flexor sheath would prevent tendon 
glide. The work of Dr. Kleinert and colleagues at the University of 
Louisville changed this “axiom” and established the principle of 
primary repair and early controlled mobilization postoperatively.15 
Flexor tendon injuries should always be repaired in the operat-
ing room. Although they do not need to be repaired on the day 
of injury, the closer to the day of injury they are repaired, the 
easier it will be to retrieve the retracted proximal end in surgery. 
The laceration should be washed out and closed at the skin level 
only using permanent sutures. The hand should be splinted as 
described earlier; one notable difference is that the wrist should 
be splinted at slight flexion (about 20°) to help decrease the 
retracting force on the proximal cut tendon end.
Extensor tendons do not pass through a sheath in the 
­fingers. As such, bulkiness of repair is less of a concern. With 
proper supervision/experience and equipment, primary extensor 
tendon repair can be performed in the ER.
Very distal extensor injuries near the insertion on the dor-
sal base of the distal phalanx may not have sufficient distal ten-
don to hold a suture. Closed injuries, called mallet fingers, can 
be treated with extension splinting of the DIP joint for 6 contin-
uous weeks. For patients with open injuries, a dermatotenodesis 
suture is performed. A 2-0 or 3-0 suture is passed through the 
distal skin, tendon remnant, and proximal tendon as a mattress 
suture. Using a suture of a different color than the skin clos-
ing sutures will help prevent removing the dermatotenodesis 
suture(s) too soon. The DIP joint is splinted in extension.
More proximal injuries are typically repaired with a 3-0 
braided permanent suture. Horizontal mattress or figure-of-eight 
sutures should be used, two per tendon if possible. Great care 
should be used to ensure matching the appropriate proximal 
and distal tendon ends. The patient is splinted with IP joints in 
extension and the wrist in extension per usual. MP joints should 
be splinted in 45° flexion, sometimes less. Although this posi-
tion is not ideal for MP collateral ligaments, it is important for 
taking tension off of the tendon repairs.
Nerve Injuries
In the setting of a sharp injury, a sensory deficit implies a nerve 
laceration until proven otherwise. For blunt injuries, even dis-
placed fractures and dislocations, nerves are often contused but 
not lacerated and are managed expectantly. Nerve repairs require 
3
1799
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
Figure 44-13.  Commons splints used for hand injuries/surgeries. A. Ulnar gutter splint. The ring and small fingers are included. The surgeon 
pushes on the dorsum of the fingers with the distal hand to produce interphalangeal (IP) joint extension and metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint 
flexion to 90°, while the proximal hand controls wrist position. B. Dorsal four-finger splint. As with the ulnar gutter splint, finger MP joints 
are flexed to 90° with IP joints kept fully extended. C. Thumb spica splint. One easy method to fabricate is to place one slab of plaster radially 
over the wrist and thumb with a second square of plaster over the thenar eminence, which joins the first. In this patient, the IP joint was not 
included. For injuries at, or distal to, the MP joint, the IP should be included in the splint.
appropriate microsurgical equipment and suture; they should not 
be performed in the ER. As with tendons, nerve injuries do not 
require immediate exploration. However, earlier exploration will 
allow for easier identification of structures and less scar tissue 
to be present. The nerve must be resected back to healthy nerve 
fascicle prior to repair. Delay between injury and repair can thus 
make a difference between the ability to repair a nerve primarily 
or the need to use a graft. The injured hand should be splinted 
with MPs at 90° and IPs at 0°, as described earlier.
Vascular Injuries
Vascular injuries have the potential to be limb or digit threatening. 
A partial laceration of an artery at the wrist level can potentially 
cause exsanguinating hemorrhage. Consultations for these inju-
ries must be evaluated urgently.
Initial treatment for an actively bleeding wound should 
be direct local pressure for no less than 10 continuous minutes. 
If this is unsuccessful, an upper extremity tourniquet inflated 
to 100 mmHg above the systolic pressure should be used. One 
should keep this tourniquet time to less than 2 hours to avoid 
tissue necrosis. Once bleeding is controlled well enough to 
evaluate the wound, it may be cautiously explored to evaluate 
for bleeding points. One must be very cautious if attempting to 
ligate these to ensure that adjacent structures such as nerves are 
not included in the ligature.
The hand must be evaluated for adequacy of perfusion to 
the hand as a whole as well as the individual digits. Capillary 
refill, turgor, Doppler signal, and bleeding to pinprick all provide 
useful information regarding vascular status. The finger or hand 
with vascular compromise requires urgent operative exploration. 
Unlike the complete amputation, in which the amputated part 
can be cold preserved (see below), devascularization without 
amputation produces warm ischemia, which is tolerated only 
for a matter of hours.
For the noncritical vascular injury, two treatment options 
exist. Simple ligation will control hemorrhage. At least one of 
the palmar arterial arches is intact in 97% of patients,5 so this 
will usually not compromise hand perfusion. Each digit also 
has two arterial inflows and can survive on one (see Amputa-
tions and Replantation section below). In the academic hospital 
setting, however, consideration should be given to repairing all 
vascular injuries. Instructing a resident in vascular repair in the 
noncritical setting will produce a more skilled and prepared resi-
dent for when a critical vascular injury does arise.
1800
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Amputations and Replantation
After replantation was first reported,16 replantation was 
attempted for nearly all amputations. Over the ensuing decades, 
more stringent guidelines have been established regarding what 
should be replanted. Indications for replantation include ampu-
tations of the thumb, multiple digit amputations, and amputa-
tions in children. Relative contraindications to replantation 
include crush injuries, injuries to a single digit distal to the PIP 
joint, and patients who are unable to tolerate a long surgical 
procedure. As with all guidelines, one should evaluate the par-
ticular needs of the injured patient.
In preparation for replantation, the amputated part and 
proximal stump should be appropriately treated. The ampu-
tated part should be wrapped in moistened gauze and placed 
in a sealed plastic bag. This bag should then be placed in an 
ice water bath. Do not use dry ice, and do not allow the part to 
contact ice directly; frostbite can occur in the amputated part, 
which will decrease its chance of survival after replantation. 
Bleeding should be controlled in the proximal stump by as mini-
mal a means necessary, and the stump should be dressed with a 
nonadherent gauze and bulky dressing.
For digital amputations deemed unsalvageable, revision 
amputation can be performed in the ER if appropriate equip-
ment is available. Bony prominences should be smoothed off 
with a rongeur and/or rasp. Great care must be taken to identify 
the digital nerves and resect them back as far proximally in the 
wound as possible; this helps decrease the chance of painful 
Figure 44-14.  The zones of flexor tendon injury. I. Flexor digi-
torum superficialis insertion to the flexor digitorum profundus 
­insertion. II. Start of the A1 pulley to the flexor digitorum super-
ficialis insertion. III. End of the carpal tunnel to the start of the A1 
pulley. IV. Within the carpal tunnel. V. Proximal to the carpal tunnel.
neuroma in the skin closure. Skin may be closed with perma-
nent or absorbable sutures; absorbable sutures will spare the 
patient the discomfort of suture removal several weeks later. 
For more proximal unsalvageable amputations, revision should 
be performed in the operating room to maximize vascular and 
neural control.
Prostheses can be made for amputated parts. The more 
proximal the amputation, the more important to function the 
prosthesis is likely to be. Although finger-level prostheses are 
generally considered cosmetic, patients with multiple finger 
amputations proximal to the DIP have demonstrable functional 
benefit from their prosthesis as well.17
Fingertip Injuries
Fingertip injuries are among the most common pathologies seen 
in an ER. The usual history is that a door closed on the finger 
(commonly the middle, due to its increased length) or something 
heavy fell on the finger.
Initial evaluation should include: wound(s) including the 
nail bed, perfusion, sensation, and presence and severity of 
fractures. For the common scenario, complex lacerations with 
minimally displaced fracture(s) and no loss of perfusion, the 
wound is cleansed, sutured, and splinted in the ER. To properly 
assess the nail bed, the nail plate (hard part of the nail) should 
be removed. A Freer periosteal elevator is well suited for this 
purpose. Lacerations are repaired with 6-0 fast gut suture. Great 
care must be taken when suturing because excessive traction 
with the needle can further lacerate the tissue. After repair, the 
nail folds are splinted with the patient’s own nail plate (if avail-
able) or with aluminum foil from the suture pack. This is done 
to prevent scarring from the nail folds down to the nail bed that 
would further compromise healing of the nail.
In some situations, tissue may have been avulsed in the 
injury and be unavailable for repair. Choice of treatment options 
depends on the amount and location of tissue loss (Fig. 44-15). 
Fingertip injury
Greater than 50%
nailbed remaining
Heal by secondary
intention
Sufficient same digit
tissue
Volar V-Y
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cross-finger flap
Bilateral V-Y
Moberg flap
(Thumb only)
Shorten bone for
primary stump
closure
Tissue loss
Thenar flap
Wound <1 cm2 and
no exposed bone
Primary repair
Figure 44-15.  Treatment algorithm for management of fingertip 
injuries. See text for description of flaps.
1801
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
For wounds less than 1 cm2 with no exposed bone, secondary 
intention will produce excellent functional and aesthetic results. 
For larger wounds or wounds or with bone exposed, one must 
decide if the finger is worth preserving at the current length or 
if shortening to allow for primary closure is a better solution. 
A useful guideline is the amount of fingernail still present; if 
greater than 50% is present, local or regional flap coverage may 
be a good solution.
If sufficient local tissue is present, homodigital flaps can be 
considered. A wide range of antegrade and retrograde homodig-
ital flaps can be mobilized to cover the defect. Some carry 
­sensation or can receive nerve coaptation to recover sensation 
over time.18 For the thumb only, the entire volar skin including 
both neurovascular bundles can be raised and advanced distally 
up to 1.5 cm.19 The thumb receives separate vascularity to its 
dorsal skin from the radial artery. This flap is not appropriate for 
the fingers. Patients retain full sensibility in the advanced skin 
and can be mobilized within days of surgery (Fig. 44-16A–C).
For wounds too large to cover with homodigital tis-
sue, regional flaps can be considered. The skin from the distal 
radial thenar eminence can be raised as a random pattern flap 
(Fig. 44-16D–F). The finger is maintained in flexion for 14 to 21 
days until division of the flap pedicle and inset of the flap. Some 
authors have reported prolonged stiffness in patients over 30 years 
old, but careful flap design helps minimize this complication.20 
Alternatively, the skin from the dorsum of the middle phalanx 
of an adjacent digit can be raised as a flap to cover the volar P3 
(Fig. 44-16G–I). The flap is inset at 14 to 21 days. Long-term 
studies have shown this flap develops sensation over time.21
Patients with fingertip injures must be assessed for the 
possibility of salvage of the injured digit(s) taken within the 
context of the patient’s recovery needs and goals. The surgeon 
then matches the available options to the particular patient 
needs.
High-Pressure Injection Injuries
High-pressure devices are commonly used for cleaning and 
applications of liquids such as lubricants and paint. Most com-
monly, the inexperienced worker accidentally discharges the 
device into his nondominant hand at the base of the digit. Sever-
ity of injury depends on the amount and type of liquid injected; 
hydrophobic compounds cause greater damage.
These injuries are typically quite innocuous to inspection. 
They are, however, digit-threatening emergencies. The patient 
should be informed of the severity of the injury, and explora-
tion is ideally performed within 6 hours of injury. Up to 50% 
of such injuries result in loss of the digit, but early recogni-
tion and treatment are associated with increased chance of digit 
­survival.22 Early frank discussion with the patient and initiation 
of appropriate treatment produce the best results and medicolegal 
protection.
Compartment Syndromes
Compartment syndromes can occur in the forearm and/or 
the hand. As in other locations, these are potentially limb-­
threatening issues. Principle symptoms are pain in the affected 
compartments, tense swelling, tenderness to palpation over the 
compartment, and pain with passive stretch of the muscles of the 
compartment.23 Pulse changes are a late finding; normal pulses 
do not rule out compartment syndrome.
There are three compartments in the forearm and four 
groups of compartments in the hand. The volar forearm is one 
compartment. On the dorsum of the forearm, there is the dorsal 
compartment as well as the mobile wad compartment, begin-
ning proximally over the lateral epicondyle. In the hand, the the-
nar and hypothenar eminences each represent a compartment. 
The seven interosseous muscles each behave as a separate 
­compartment.
Compartment syndrome can be caused by intrinsic and 
extrinsic causes. Intrinsic causes include edema and hematoma 
due to fracture. Extrinsic causes include splints and dressings 
that are circumferentially too tight and intravenous infiltrations. 
Infiltrations with hyperosmolar fluids such as x-ray contrast are 
particularly dangerous, because additional water will be drawn 
in to neutralize the hyperosmolarity.
Measurement of compartment pressures can be a useful 
adjunct to assessment of the patient. The Stryker pressure mea-
surement device or similar device is kept in many operating 
rooms for this purpose. The needle is inserted into the compart-
ment in question, a gentle flush with 0.1 to 0.2 cc of saline clears 
the measurement chamber, and a reading is obtained. Studies 
have disagreed about whether the criterion is a measured pres-
sure (30–45 mmHg, depending on the series) or within a certain 
amount of the diastolic blood pressure.24
Compartment releases are performed in the operating 
room under tourniquet control. Release of the volar forearm 
compartment includes release of the carpal tunnel. As the inci-
sion travels distally, it should pass ulnar and then curve back 
radially just before the carpal tunnel. This avoids a linear inci-
sion across a flexion crease and also decreases the chance of 
injury to the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve. One 
dorsal forearm incision can release the dorsal compartment and 
the mobile wad. In the hand, the thenar and hypothenar com-
partments are released each with a single incision. The interos-
seous compartments are released with incisions over the index 
and ring metacarpal shafts. Dissection then continues radial and 
ulnar to each of these bones and provides release of all the mus-
cle compartments. Any dead muscle is débrided. Incisions are 
left open and covered with a nonadherent dressing. The wounds 
are reexplored in 2 to 3 days to assess for muscle viability. Often 
the incisions can be closed primarily, but a skin graft may be 
needed for the forearm.
If the examiner feels the patient does not have a compart-
ment syndrome, elevation and serial examination are mandatory. 
When in doubt, it is safer to release an early compartment 
syndrome than wait to release and risk muscle necrosis. 
Progression of compartment syndrome can lead to Volkmann’s 
ischemic contracture with muscle loss and scarring that may 
compress nerves and other critical structures. Medicole-
gally, it is far easier to defend releasing an early compartment 
syndrome than delaying treatment until the process has 
progressed to necrosis and/or deeper scarring.
COMPLICATIONS
Nonunion
Any fractured bone has the risk of failing to heal. Fortunately, in 
the fingers and hand, this is a rare problem. Tuft injuries, where 
soft tissue interposes between the fracture fragments, have rela-
tively higher risk of this problem. The nonunited tuft can be 
treated with débridement and bone grafting or revision amputa-
tion depending on the needs and goals of the patient. Phalan-
geal and metacarpal nonunions are also quite rare. They can 
similarly be treated with débridement of the nonunion, grafting, 
1802
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 44-16.  Local flaps for digital tip coverage. A–C. For thumb injuries, Moberg described elevation of the entire volar skin with both 
neurovascular bundles for distal advancement. Sensation to the advanced skin is maintained. D–F. An 8-year-old girl underwent fingertip 
replantation that did not survive. A thenar flap was transferred to cover the defect. Some authors advise against its use in patients over 30 years 
old. G–I. In this 45-year-old man, the entire skin of P3 of the long finger was avulsed and unrecoverable. A cross-finger flap was transferred 
and provides excellent, durable coverage. The border of the flap and surrounding skin is still apparent 4.5 months after surgery.
1803
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
Figure 44-16­  (Continued)
1804
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 44-16­  (Continued)
1805
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
and rigid fixation.25 More proximally, the scaphoid bone of the 
wrist has a significant risk of nonunion even if nondisplaced 
(see Fig. 44-9A). Any patient suspected of a scaphoid injury, 
namely those with tenderness at the anatomic snuffbox, should 
be placed in a thumb spica splint and reevaluated within 2 weeks 
even if initial X-rays show no fracture. Scaphoid nonunions can 
be quite challenging to repair,26 and immobilization at the time 
of injury in a thumb spica splint is essentially always warranted.
Stiffness
The desired outcome of any hand injury is a painless, mobile, 
functional hand. Multiple factors can contribute to decreased 
mobility, including complex injuries of soft tissue and bone, 
noncompliance of the patient with postoperative therapy, and 
inappropriate splinting. The surgeon performing the initial eval-
uation can greatly impact this last factor. The goal of splinting 
is to keep the collateral ligaments on tension (MPs at 90°, IP 
joints straight). For severe cases of stiffness, mobilization sur-
geries such as tenolysis and capsulotomies27 can be performed, 
but these rarely produce normal range of motion. Prevention of 
joint contractures with appropriate splinting and early, protected 
mobilization is the best option to maximize mobility at the end 
of healing. Healing of an injured or diseased structure in the 
hand is not the endpoint of treatment; the goal of any interven-
tion must be to obtain structure healing, relief of pain, and 
maximization of function. 
Neuroma
Any lacerated nerve will form a neuroma. A neuroma consists of 
a ball of scar and axon sprouts at the end of the injured nerve.28 
In unfavorable circumstances, this neuroma can become painful. 
The SRN is particularly notorious for this problem. By provid-
ing proximal axon sprouts a target, nerve repair is an excellent 
preventive technique. In some circumstances, such as injuries 
requiring amputation, this is not possible. As mentioned earlier, 
the surgeon should resect the nerve stump as far proximally in 
the wound as possible to avoid the nerve stump healing in the 
cutaneous scar to minimize this risk.
For the patient who develops a painful neuroma, nonsurgi-
cal treatments are initiated first. The neuroma can be identified 
by the presence of a Tinel’s sign. Therapy techniques of desen-
sitization, ultrasound, and electrical stimulation have all proven 
useful. Corticosteroid injection to the neuroma has also proven 
useful in some hands.
When these techniques fail, surgery is contemplated. The 
neuroma can be resected, but a new one will form to replace it. 
The nerve ending can be buried in muscle or even bone to pre-
vent the neuroma from residing in a superficial location where 
it may be impacted frequently.
Regional Pain Syndromes
Injuries to the upper extremity can occasionally result in the 
patient experiencing pain beyond the area of initial injury. 
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy and sympathetic mediated pain 
are two terms that have been used in the past to describe this 
phenomenon. Both are inaccurate, as the sympathetic ner-
vous system is not always involved. Current terminology for 
this condition is complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). 
Type I occurs in the absence of a documented nerve injury; type 
II occurs in the presence of one.29
CRPSs manifest as pain beyond the area of initial 
­injuries. There is often associated edema and changes in hair 
and/or sweat distribution. Comparison to the unaffected side 
is useful to better appreciate these findings. There are cur-
rently no imaging studies that can be considered diagnostic 
for CRPS.30
For the patient in whom the diagnosis of CRPS is not 
clear, no definitive diagnostic study exists. Patients suspected 
of CRPS should be referred for aggressive hand therapy. Brief 
trials of oral corticosteroids have been successful in some series. 
Referral to a pain management specialist including a trial of stel-
late ganglion blocks is also frequently employed.
NERVE COMPRESSION
Nerves conduct signals along their axonal membranes toward 
their end organs. Sensory axons carry signals from distal to 
proximal; motor axons from proximal to distal. Myelin from 
Schwann cells allows faster conduction of signals. Signals jump 
from the start of one Schwann cell to the end of the cell (a loca-
tion called a gap junction) and only require the slower mem-
brane depolarization in these locations.
Nerve compression creates a mechanical disturbance of 
the nerve.31 In early disease, the conduction signal is slowed 
across the area of compression. When compression occurs to 
a sufficient degree for a sufficient time, individual axons may 
die. On a nerve conduction study, this manifests as a decrease 
in amplitude. Muscles receiving motor axons may show electri-
cal disturbance on electromyogram (EMG) when sufficiently 
deprived of their axonal input.
Compression of sensory nerves typically produces a com-
bination of numbness, paresthesias (pins and needles), and pain. 
Knowledge of the anatomic distribution of the peripheral nerves 
can aid in diagnosis. Sensory disturbance outside an area of dis-
tribution of a particular nerve (e.g., volar and dorsal radial-sided 
hand numbness for median nerve) makes compression of that 
nerve less likely. Diseases that cause systemic neuropathy (e.g., 
diabetes) can make diagnosis more difficult.
Nerve compression can theoretically occur anywhere 
along a peripheral nerve’s course. The most common sites of 
nerve compression in the upper extremity are the median nerve 
at the carpal tunnel, ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel, and ulnar 
nerve at Guyon’s canal. Other, less common locations of nerve 
compression are described as well. In addition, a nerve can 
become compressed in scar due to a previous trauma.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
The most common location of upper extremity nerve compres-
sion is the median nerve at the carpal tunnel, called carpal tunnel 
syndrome (CTS). The carpal tunnel is bordered by the scaphoid 
bone radially, the lunate and capitate bones dorsally, and the 
hook of the hamate bone ulnarly (see Fig. 44-3). The transverse 
carpal ligament, also called the flexor retinaculum, is its super-
ficial border. The FPL, four FDS, and four FDP tendons pass 
through the carpal tunnel along with the median nerve. Of these 
10 structures, the median nerve is relatively superficial and 
radial to the other nine.
An estimated 53 per 10,000 working adults have evidence 
of CTS. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health website asserts, “There is strong evidence of a positive 
association between exposure to a combination of risk factors 
(e.g., force and repetition, force and posture) and CTS.”32 There 
is disagreement among hand surgeons regarding whether occur-
rence of CTS in a patient who does repetitive activities at work 
represents a work-related injury.
4
1806
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Initial evaluation of the patient consists of symptom inven-
tory: location and character of the symptoms, sleep disturbance 
due to symptoms, history of dropping objects, and difficulty 
manipulating small objects such as buttons, coins, or jewelry 
clasps.
Physical examination should begin with inspection. Look 
for evidence of wasting of the thenar muscles. Tinel’s sign 
should be tested over the median nerve from the volar wrist 
flexion crease to the proximal palm, although this test has sig-
nificant interexaminer variability.33 Applying pressure over the 
carpal tunnel while flexing the wrist has been shown in one 
series to have the highest sensitivity when compared to Phalen’s 
and Tinel’s signs.34 Strength of the thumb in opposition should 
also be tested.
Early treatment of CTS consists of conservative man-
agement. The patient is given a splint to keep the wrist at 20° 
extension worn at nighttime. Many patients can have years 
of symptom relief with this management. As a treatment and 
diagnostic modality, corticosteroid injection of the carpal tun-
nel is often employed. Mixing local anesthetic into the solution 
provides the benefit of early symptom relief (corticosteroids 
often take 3–7 days to provide noticeable benefit), and report 
of postinjection anesthesia in the median nerve distribution 
confirms the injection went into the correct location. Multiple 
authors have shown a strong correlation to relief of symptoms 
with corticosteroid injection and good response to carpal tunnel 
release.35
When lesser measures fail or are no longer effective, 
carpal tunnel release is indicated. Open carpal tunnel release 
is a time-tested procedure with documented long-term relief 
of symptoms. A direct incision is made over the carpal tun-
nel, typically in line with where the ring finger pad touches the 
proximal palm in flexion. Skin is divided followed by palmar 
fascia. The carpal tunnel contents are visualized as they exit the 
carpal tunnel. The transverse carpal ligament is divided with the 
median nerve visualized and protected at all times. Improve-
ment in symptoms is typically noted by the first postoperative 
visit, although symptom relief may be incomplete for patients 
with long-standing disease or systemic nerve-affecting diseases 
such as diabetes.
Endoscopic techniques have been devised to address CTS. 
All involve avoidance of incising the skin directly over the 
carpal tunnel. In experienced hands, endoscopic carpal tunnel 
release provides the same relief of CTS with less intense and 
shorter lasting postoperative pain. After 3 months, however, the 
results are equivalent to open release.36 In inexperienced hands, 
there may be a higher risk of injury to the median nerve with the 
endoscopic techniques; this procedure is not for the occasional 
carpal tunnel surgeon.
Cubital Tunnel Syndrome
The second most common location of upper extremity nerve 
compression is the ulnar nerve where it passes behind the elbow 
at the cubital tunnel. The cubital tunnel retinaculum passes 
between the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the olec-
ranon process of the ulna. It stabilizes the ulnar nerve in this 
location during elbow motion. Over time, or sometimes after 
trauma, the ulnar nerve can become less stabilized in this area. 
Motion of the elbow then produces trauma to the nerve as it 
impacts the retinaculum and medial epicondyle.
Cubital tunnel syndrome may produce sensory and motor 
symptoms.37 The small finger and ulnar half of the ring fingers 
may have numbness, paresthesias, and/or pain. The ulnar nerve 
also innervates the dorsal surface of the small finger and ulnar side 
of the ring finger, so numbness in these areas can be explained by 
cubital tunnel syndrome. The patient may also report weakness 
in grip due to effects on the FDP tendons to the ring and small 
fingers and the intrinsic hand muscles. Patients with advanced 
disease may complain of inability to fully extend the ring and 
small finger IP joints.
Physical examination for cubital tunnel syndrome begins 
with inspection. Look for wasting in the hypothenar eminence 
and the interdigital web spaces. When the hand rests flat on the 
table, the small finger may rest in abduction with respect to the 
other fingers; this is called Wartenberg’s sign. Tinel’s sign is 
often present at the cubital tunnel. Elbow flexion test will often 
be positive. Grip strength and finger abduction strength should 
be compared to the unaffected side. Froment’s sign can be tested 
by placing a sheet of paper between the thumb and index finger 
and instructing the patient to hold on to the paper while the 
examiner pulls it away without flexing the finger or thumb (this 
tests the strength of the adductor pollicis and first dorsal inter-
osseous muscles). If the patient must flex the index finger and/
or thumb (FDP-index and FPL, both median nerve supplied) to 
maintain traction on the paper, this is a positive response.
Early treatment of cubital tunnel syndrome begins with 
avoiding maximal flexion of the elbow. Splints are often used 
for this purpose. Corticosteroid injection is rarely done for this 
condition; unlike in the carpal tunnel, there is very little space 
within the tunnel outside of the nerve. Injection in this area runs 
a risk of intraneural injection, which can cause permanent scar-
ring of the nerve and dysfunction.
When conservative management fails, surgery has been 
contemplated. Treatment options include releasing the cubital 
tunnel retinaculum with or without transposing the nerve ante-
rior to the elbow. While some authors advocate anterior trans-
position into the flexor-pronator muscle group with the goal of 
maximizing nerve recovery,37 recent studies have demonstrated 
equivalent results between transposition and in situ release of 
the nerve even in advanced cases.38 For this reason, the simpler 
in situ release, either open or endoscopic, is preferred by many 
surgeons.
Other Sites of Nerve Compression
All nerves crossing the forearm have areas described where 
compression can occur.37 The median nerve can be compressed 
as it passes under the pronator teres. The ulnar nerve can be 
compressed as it passes through Guyon’s canal. The radial 
nerve, or its posterior interosseous branch, can be compressed 
as it passes through the radial tunnel (distal to the elbow where 
the nerve divides and passes under the arch of the supinator 
muscle). The SRN can be compressed distally in the forearm 
as it emerges from under the brachioradialis tendon, called 
­Wartenberg’s syndrome. As mentioned previously, any nerve 
can become compressed in scar at the site of a previous trauma.
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE
As with other joints in the body, the joints of the hand and wrist 
can develop degenerative changes. Symptoms typically begin 
in the fifth decade of life. Symptoms consist of joint pain and 
stiffness and often are exacerbated with changes in the weather. 
Any of the joints can become involved. As the articular carti-
lage wears out, pain typically increases and range of motion 
1807
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
decreases. The patient should always be asked to what degree 
symptoms are impeding activities.
Physical findings are documented in serial fashion from 
the initial visit and subsequent visits. Pain with axial loading of 
the joint may be present. Decreased range of motion may be a 
late finding. Instability of the collateral ligaments of the joint is 
uncommon in the absence of inflammatory arthritis.
Plain X-rays are typically sufficient to demonstrate arthritis. 
Initially, the affected joint has a narrower radiolucent space 
between the bones. As joint degeneration progresses, the joint 
space further collapses. Bone spurs, loose bodies, and cystic changes 
in the bone adjacent to the joint all may become ­apparent. 
X-ray findings do not always correlate with patient symptoms. 
Patients with advanced x-ray findings may have minimal symp-
toms, and vice versa. Treatment is initiated and progressed 
based on the patient’s symptoms regardless of imaging findings.
Initial management begins with rest of the painful joint. 
Splints are often useful, but may significantly impair the patient 
in activities and thus are frequently used at nighttime only. Oral 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen 
and naproxen are also useful. Patients on anticoagulants and 
antiplatelet medications may not be able to take these, and some 
patients simply do not tolerate the gastric irritation side effect 
even if they take the medication with food.
For patients with localized disease affecting only one or a 
few joints, corticosteroid injection may be contemplated. ­Needle 
insertion can be difficult since these joint spaces are quite 
­narrow even before degenerative disease sets in. Also, many 
corticosteroid injections are suspensions, not solutions; injected 
corticosteroid will remain in the joint space and can be seen as 
a white paste if surgery is performed on a joint that has been 
previously injected.
Small Joints (Metacarpophalangeal  
and Interphalangeal)
When conservative measures fail, two principal surgical options 
exist: arthrodesis and arthroplasty. The surgeon and patient must 
decide together as to whether conservative measures have failed. 
Surgery for arthritis, whether arthrodesis or arthroplasty, is per-
formed for the purpose of relieving pain. Arthrodesis, fusion of 
a joint, provides excellent relief of pain and is durable over time. 
However, it comes at the price of total loss of motion.
Silicone implant arthroplasty has been available for over 
40 years.39 Rather than a true replacement of the joint, the sili-
cone implant acts as a spacer between the two bones adjacent 
to the joint. This allows for motion without bony contact that 
would produce pain. Long-term studies have shown that all 
implants fracture over time, but usually continue to preserve 
motion and pain relief.40
In the past 15 years, resurfacing implant arthroplasties 
have become available for the small joints of the hand. Multiple 
different materials have been used to fabricate such implants. 
These are designed to behave as a true joint resurfacing (as knee 
and hip arthroplasty implants are) and have shown promising 
outcomes in short- and intermediate-term studies.40 Neither the 
silicone nor the resurfacing arthroplasties preserve (or restore) 
full motion of the MP or PIP joints.
Wrist
The CMC joint of the thumb, also called the basilar joint, is 
another common location of arthritis pain. Pain in this joint par-
ticularly disturbs function because the CMC joint is essential for 
opposition and cylindrical grasp. Patients will typically com-
plain of pain with opening a tight jar or doorknob and strong 
pinch activities such as knitting. Conservative management is 
used first, as described earlier. Prefabricated, removable thumb 
spica splinting can provide excellent relief of symptoms for 
many patients.
Multiple surgical options exist for thumb CMC arthritis. 
Many resurfacing implants have been used in the past; often 
they have shown good short- and intermediate-term results 
and poor long-term results. Resection of the arthritic trape-
zium provides excellent relief of pain; however, most authors 
feel that stabilization of the thumb metacarpal base is nec-
essary to prevent shortening and instability.41 Recently, one 
author demonstrated excellent long-term results from resec-
tion of the trapezium without permanent stabilization of the 
metacarpal base.42 For both of these operations, the thumb 
base may not be sufficiently stable to withstand heavy labor. 
For these patients, fusion of the thumb CMC in mild opposi-
tion provides excellent pain relief and durability. The patient 
must be warned preoperatively that he will not be able to lay 
his hand flat after the surgery. This loss of motion can be 
problematic when the patient attempts to tuck in clothing or 
reach into a narrow space.
Degenerative change of the radiocarpal and midcarpal 
joints is often a consequence of scapholunate ligament injury. 
Often the initial injury goes untreated, with the patient believ-
ing it is merely a “sprain”; the patient is first diagnosed with 
the initial injury when he presents years later with degenerative 
changes.
Degenerative wrist changes associated with the scaph-
olunate ligament follow a predictable pattern over many 
years, called scapholunate advanced collapse or SLAC wrist.43 
Because of this slow progression (Fig. 44-17A), patients can 
usually be treated with a motion-sparing procedure. If there is 
truly no arthritic change present, the scapholunate ligament can 
be reconstructed.
If arthritis is limited to the radiocarpal joint, two motion-
sparing options are available. The proximal carpal row 
(scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum) can be removed (proximal 
row carpectomy [PRC]). The lunate facet of the radius then 
articulates with the base of the capitate, whose articular sur-
face is similar in shape to that of the base of the lunate. Most 
series show maintenance of about 66% of wrist motion and 
66% of hand strength or more, as compared to the opposite 
side.44 Alternatively, the scaphoid can be excised, and four-
bone fusion (lunate, capitate, hamate, and triquetrum) can be 
performed. This maintains the full length of the wrist and the 
lunate in the lunate facet of the radius. Some series have shown 
better strength but less mobility with this technique, others 
have shown equivalent results to the PRC.45 The four-bone 
fusion does appear to be more durable for younger patients 
and/or those who perform heavy labor.
If the patient presents with pancarpal arthritis or motion-
sparing measures have failed to alleviate pain, total wrist fusion 
is the final surgical option. The distal radius is fused, through 
the proximal and distal carpal rows to the third metacarpal, typi-
cally with a dorsal plate and screws. Multiple long-term studies 
have shown excellent pain relief and durability; this comes at 
the cost of total loss of wrist motion. This is surprisingly well 
tolerated in most patients, especially if the other hand/wrist is 
unaffected. The only activity of daily living that cannot be done 
with a fused wrist is personal toileting.
1808
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory arthritis that can 
affect any joint in the body. Inflamed synovium causes articular 
cartilage breakdown with pain and decreased range of motion. 
The goals of hand surgery for the RA patient are relief of pain, 
improvement of function, slowing progression of disease, and 
improvement in appearance.46 In addition, swelling of the joint 
due to the inflammation can cause laxity and even failure of the 
collateral ligaments supporting the joints. Recent advances in 
Figure 44-17.  Arthritis of the hand and wrist. A. This patient 
injured her scapholunate ligament years prior to presentation. 
The scapholunate interval is widened (double arrow), and the 
radioscaphoid joint is degenerated (solid oval), but the radiolunate 
and lunocapitate joint spaces are well preserved (dashed ovals). 
B. This patient has had rheumatoid arthritis for decades. The classic 
volar subluxation of the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers 
(dashed oval) and radial deviation of the fingers are apparent.
the medical care of RA have made the need for surgical care of 
these patients far less common than in previous decades.
MP joints of the fingers are commonly affected. The base 
of the proximal phalanx progressively subluxates and eventually 
dislocates volarly with respect to the metacarpal head. The col-
lateral ligaments, particularly on the radial side, stretch out and 
cause the ulnar deviation of the fingers characteristic of the rheu-
matoid hand. In more advanced cases, the joint may not be sal-
vageable (Fig. 44-17B). For these patients, implant arthroplasty 
is the mainstay of surgical treatment. Silicone implants have been 
used for over 40 years with good results.47 The silicone implant 
acts as a spacer between proximal and distal bone, rather than 
as a true resurfacing arthroplasty. The radial collateral ligament 
must be repaired to appropriate length to correct the preoperative 
ulnar deviation of the MP joint. Extensor tendon centralization is 
then performed, as needed, at the end of the procedure.
For MP joint and PIP joint disease, fusion is an option. 
However, since RA usually affects multiple joints, fusion is 
typically avoided due to impaired function of adjacent joints, 
which would leave a severe motion deficit to the finger.
Failure of the support ligaments of the distal radioulnar 
joint (DRUJ) leads to the caput ulnae posture of the wrist with 
the ulnar head prominent dorsally. As this dorsal prominence 
becomes more advanced, the ulna head, denuded of its cartilage 
to act as a buffer, erodes into the overlying extensor tendons. 
Extensor tenosynovitis, followed ultimately by tendon rupture, 
begins ulnarly and proceeds radially. Rupture of the ECU ten-
don may go unnoticed due to the intact ECRL and ECRB ten-
dons to extend the wrist. EDQ rupture may go unnoticed if a 
sufficiently robust EDC tendon to the small finger exists. Once 
the fourth compartment (EDC) tendons begin to fail, the motion 
deficit is unable to be ignored by the patient.
Surgical solutions must address the tendon ruptures as 
well as the DRUJ synovitis and instability and ulna head break-
down that led to them.46 Excision of the ulna head removes the 
bony prominence. The DRUJ synovitis must also be resected. 
Alternatively, the DRUJ can be fused and the ulna neck resected 
to create a pseudoarthrosis to allow for rotation. For both pro-
cedures, the remaining distal ulna must be stabilized. Multiple 
techniques have been described using portions of FCU, ECU, 
wrist capsule, and combinations thereof.
The ruptured extensor tendons are typically degenerated 
over a significant length. Primary repair is almost never pos-
sible, and the frequent occurrence of multiple tendon ruptures 
makes repair with graft less desirable due to the need for mul-
tiple graft donors.
Strict compliance with postoperative therapy is essential to 
maximizing the surgical result. Due to the chronic inflammation 
associated with RA, tendon and ligament repairs will be slower 
to achieve maximal tensile strength. Prolonged nighttime splint-
ing, usually for months, helps prevent recurrence of extensor lag. 
Finally, the disease may progress over time. Reconstructions that 
were initially adequate may stretch out or fail over time. Medical 
management is the key to slowing disease progression and maxi-
mizing the durability of any surgical reconstruction.
DUPUYTREN’S CONTRACTURE
In 1614, a Swiss surgeon named Felix Plater first described con-
tracture of multiple fingers due to palpable, cord-like structures 
on the volar surface of the hand and fingers. The disease state he 
described would ultimately come to be known as Dupuytren’s 
1809
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
contracture. Dupuytren’s name came to be associated with the 
disease after he performed an open fasciotomy of a contracted 
cord before a class of medical students in 1831.48
The palmar fascia consists of collagen bundles in the palm 
and fingers. These are primarily longitudinally oriented and 
reside as a layer between the overlying skin and the underlying 
tendons and neurovascular structures. There are also connec-
tions from this layer to the deep structures below and the skin 
above. Much is known about the progression of these structures 
from their normal state (called bands) to their contracted state 
(called cords), but little is known on how or why this process 
begins.
Increased collagen deposition leads to a palpable nodule 
in the palm. Over time, there is increased deposition distally 
into the fingers. This collagen becomes organized and linearly 
­oriented. These collagen bundles, with the aid of myofibroblasts, 
contract down to form the cords, which are the hallmark of the 
symptomatic patient. Detail of the molecular and cell biology of 
Dupuytren’s disease is beyond the scope of this chapter but is 
available in multiple hand surgery texts.49
Most nonoperative management techniques will not delay 
the progression of disease. Corticosteroid injections may soften 
nodules and decrease the discomfort associated with them but 
are ineffective against cords. Splinting has similarly been shown 
not to retard disease progression.
Disruption of the cord with a needle is an effective means 
of releasing contractures, particularly at the MP joint level. 
Long-term studies have demonstrated more rapid recovery from 
needle fasciotomy, as the procedure is called, but more durable 
results with fasciectomy.50 Injectable clostridial collagenase was 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2009 
and shows good early results.51
For patients with advanced disease including contractures 
of the digits that limit function, surgery is the mainstay of therapy. 
Although rate of progression should weigh heavily in the 
­decision of whether or not to perform surgery, general guide-
lines are MP contractures ≥30° and/or PIP contractures ≥20°.52
Surgery consists of an open approach through the skin 
down to the involved cords. Skin is elevated off of the underly-
ing cords. Great care must be taken to preserve as much of the 
subdermal vascular plexus with the elevated skin flaps to mini-
mize postoperative skin necrosis. All nerves, tendons, and blood 
vessels in the operative field should be identified. Once this is 
done, the involved cord is resected while keeping the critical 
deeper structures under direct vision. Skin is then closed, with 
local flap transpositions as needed, to allow for full extension of 
the fingers that have been released (Fig. 44-18).
Alternative cord resection techniques include removal 
of the skin over the contracture (dermatofasciectomy). This 
requires a skin graft to the wound and should only be done if 
skin cannot be separated from the cords and local tissue cannot 
be rearranged with local flaps to provide closure of the wound.
Complications of surgical treatment of Dupuytren’s dis-
ease occur in as many as 24% of cases.53 Problems include digi-
tal nerve laceration, digital artery laceration, buttonholing of the 
skin, hematoma, swelling, and pain, including some patients 
with CRPS (see earlier section on CRPS). Digital nerve injury 
can be quite devastating, producing annoying numbness at best 
or a painful neuroma in worse situations.
Hand therapy is typically instituted within a week of sur-
gery to begin mobilization of the fingers and edema control. The 
therapist can also identify any early wound problems because 
he or she will see the patient more frequently than the surgeon. 
Extension hand splinting is maintained for 4 to 6 weeks, with 
nighttime splinting continued for an additional 6 to 8 weeks. 
After this point, the patient is serially followed for evidence of 
recurrence or extension of disease.
INFECTIONS
Trauma is the most common cause of hand infections. Other 
predisposing factors include diabetes, neuropathies, and 
immunocompromised patients. Proper treatment consists of 
incision and drainage of any collections followed by débridement, 
­obtaining wound cultures, antibiotic therapy, elevation, and 
immobilization. Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are the 
offending pathogens in about 90% of hand infections. Infec-
tions caused by intravenous drug use or human bites and 
those associated with diabetes will often be polymicrobial, 
including gram-positive and gram-negative species. Heavily 
contaminated injuries require anaerobic coverage. Although 
α-hemolytic Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus are 
the most commonly encountered pathogens in human bites, 
Eikenella corrodens is isolated in up to one-third of cases and 
should be considered when choosing antimicrobial ­therapy. 
Ziehl-Neelsen staining and cultures at 28°C to 32°C in 
­Lowenstein-Jensen medium must be performed if there is a 
suspicion for atypical ­mycobacteria.54
Cellulitis
Cellulitis is characterized by a nonpurulent diffuse spreading 
of inflammation characterized by erythema, warmth, pain, 
swelling, and induration. Skin breakdown is a frequent cause, 
but often no inciting factor is identified. Group A β-hemolytic 
Streptococcus is the most common offending pathogen and 
causes a more diffuse spread of infection. S. aureus is the 
second most common offending pathogen and will cause a 
more localized cellulitis. The diagnosis of cellulitis is clini-
cal. ­Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, an abscess, a deep-space 
infection, and necrotizing fasciitis are severe infectious pro-
cesses that may initially mimic cellulitis. These must be ruled 
out appropriately before initiating treatment, and serial exams 
should be ­conducted to ensure proper diagnosis. Treatment of 
­cellulitis consists of elevation, splint immobilization, and anti-
biotics that cover both Streptococcus and Staphylococcus. 
­Intravenous antibiotics are usually initiated for patients 
with severe comorbidities and those who fail to improve on 
oral antibiotics after 24 to 48 hours. Failure to improve after 
24 hours indicates a need to search for an underlying abscess or 
other infectious cause.54 
Abscess
An abscess will present much like cellulitis, but they are two 
clinically separate entities. The defining difference is an area 
of fluctuance. Skin-puncturing trauma is the most common 
cause. S. aureus is the most common pathogen, followed by 
Streptococcus. Treatment consists of incision and drainage 
with appropriate débridement, wound cultures, wound pack-
ing, elevation, immobilization, and antibiotics. The packing 
should be removed in 12 to 24 hours or sooner if there is clini-
cal concern, and warm soapy water soaks with fresh packing 
should be initiated. Most should be allowed to heal second-
arily. Delayed primary closure should only be performed after 
repeat washouts for larger wounds where complete infection 
has been achieved.
5
1810
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 44-18.  Dupuytren’s disease. A. This patient has cords affecting the thumb, middle, ring, and small fingers. B. The resected specimens 
are shown. C. Postoperatively, the patient went on to heal all his incisions and, with the aid of weeks of hand therapy, recover full motion.
Collar-Button Abscess
This is a subfascial infection of a web space and is usually 
caused by skin trauma that becomes infected; it often occurs 
in laborers. The adherence of the palmar web space skin to the 
­palmar fascia prevents lateral spread, so the infection courses 
dorsally, resulting in both palmar web space tenderness and 
dorsal web space swelling and tenderness. The adjacent fingers 
will be held in abduction with pain on adduction (Fig. 44-19). 
Incision and drainage, often using separate volar and dorsal inci-
sions, is mandatory, and follows the same treatment as for any 
abscess or deep-space infection.
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis in the hand usually occurs due to an open fracture 
with significant soft tissue injury. The presence of infected hard-
ware, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes, and alcohol or drug 
abuse are also predisposing factors. Presentation includes per-
sistent or recurrent swelling with pain, erythema, and possible 
drainage. It will take 2 to 3 weeks for periosteal reaction and 
osteopenia to be detected on radiographs. Bone scans and MRI 
are useful modalities to aid in diagnosis. Erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) have low specific-
ity but are useful for monitoring the progress of treatment, with 
CRP being more reliable. Treatment consists of antibiotics alone 
in the early stage as long as there is favorable response. All 
necrotic bone and soft tissue, if present, must be débrided. Initial 
intravenous antibiotic therapy should cover S. aureus, the most 
common pathogen, and should then be adjusted according to 
bone cultures. Antibiotic therapy is continued for 4 to 6 weeks 
once the patient clinically improves and there is no further need 
for débridement. For osteomyelitis in the setting of an acute 
fracture with internal fixation in place, the hardware should 
1811
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
be left in place as long as it is stable and the fracture has not 
yet healed. If the hardware is unstable, it must be replaced. An 
external fixation device may be useful in this setting. If osteo-
myelitis occurs in a healed fracture, all hardware and necrotic 
bone and soft tissue must be removed.55
Pyogenic Arthritis
Infection of a joint will progress quickly to severe cartilage and 
bony destruction if not addressed quickly. Direct trauma and 
local spread of an infection are the most common causes. Hema-
togenous spread occurs most commonly in patients who are 
immunocompromised. S. aureus is the most common pathogen, 
followed by Streptococcus species. Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the 
most common cause of atraumatic septic arthritis in an adult less 
than 30 years of age. Presentation includes exacerbation of pain 
with any joint movement, severe pain on axial load, ­swelling, 
Figure 44-19.  A. The fingers surrounding the involved (second) 
web space rest in greater abduction than the other fingers. B. ­Dorsal 
and volar drainage incisions are made, separated by a bridge of 
intact web skin; a Penrose drain prevents the skin from closing too 
early.
erythema, and tenderness. Radiographs may show a foreign 
body or fracture, with widened joint space early in the process 
and decreased joint space late in the process due to destruc-
tion. Joint aspiration with cell count, Gram stain, and culture is 
used to secure the diagnosis. Treatment of nongonococcal septic 
arthritis includes open arthrotomy, irrigation, débridement, and 
packing the joint or leaving a drain in place. Intravenous antibi-
otics are continued until there is clinical improvement, followed 
by 2 to 4 weeks of additional oral or intravenous antibiotics. 
Gonococcal septic arthritis is usually treated nonoperatively. 
Intravenous ceftriaxone is first-line therapy. Joint aspiration 
may be used to obtain cultures and decrease joint pressure.56
Necrotizing Infections
Necrotizing soft tissue infections occur when the immune 
system is unable to contain an infection, leading to extensive 
spread with death of all involved tissues. This is different from 
an abscess, which forms when a functioning immune system is 
able to “wall off” the infectious focus. Necrotizing infections 
can result in loss of limb or life, even with prompt medical care.
Bacteria spread along the fascial layer, resulting in the 
death of soft tissues, which is in part due to the extensive blood 
vessel thrombosis that occurs. An inciting event is not always 
identified. Immunocompromised patients and those who abuse 
drugs or alcohol are at greater risk, with intravenous drug users 
having the highest increased risk. The infection can by mono- or 
polymicrobial, with group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus being 
the most common pathogen, followed by α-hemolytic Strep-
tococcus, S. aureus, and anaerobes. Prompt clinical diagnosis 
and treatment are the most important factors for salvaging limbs 
and saving life. Patients will present with pain out of proportion 
with findings. Appearance of skin may range from normal to 
erythematous or maroon with edema, induration, and blister-
ing. Crepitus may occur if a gas-forming organism is involved. 
“Dirty dishwater fluid” may be encountered as a scant grayish 
fluid, but often there is little to no discharge. There may be no 
appreciable leukocytosis. The infection can progress rapidly and 
can lead to septic shock and disseminated intravascular ­coagulation. 
Radiographs may reveal gas formation, but they must not 
delay emergent débridement once the diagnosis is suspected. 
­Intravenous antibiotics should be started immediately to cover 
gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic bacteria. Patients 
will require multiple débridements, and the spread of infection 
is normally wider than expected based on initial assessment.54
Necrotizing myositis, or myonecrosis, is usually caused by 
Clostridium perfringens due to heavily contaminated wounds. 
Unlike necrotizing fasciitis, muscle is universally involved and 
found to be necrotic. Treatment includes emergent débridement 
of all necrotic tissue along with empirical intravenous antibiotics.
Wet gangrene is most common in diabetics with renal 
failure and an arteriovenous shunt. It is usually polymicrobial. 
Patients will present with a necrotic digit that is purulent and 
very malodorous, with rapidly evolving pain, swelling, skin 
discoloration, and systemic collapse. Emergent treatment is the 
same as for other necrotizing infections, and amputation of the 
involved digit or extremity must often be performed.
Infectious Flexor Tenosynovitis
Flexor tenosynovitis (FTS) is a severe pathophysiologic state 
causing disruption of normal flexor tendon function in the hand. 
A variety of etiologies are responsible for this process. Most 
acute cases of FTS are due to purulent infection. FTS also can 
1812
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
occur secondary to chronic inflammation as a result of diabetes, 
RA, crystalline deposition, overuse syndromes, amyloidosis, 
psoriatic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and sarcoidosis.
The primary mechanism of infectious FTS usually is 
penetrating trauma. Most infections are caused by skin flora, 
including both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species. 
Bacteria involved vary by etiology of the infection: bite wounds 
(Pasteurella multocida—cat, E. corrodens—human); diabetic 
patients (Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Haemophilus species, 
gram-negative organisms); hematogenous spread (Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis, N. gonorrhoeae); or water-related punctures 
(Vibrio vulnificus, Mycobacterium marinum). Infection in any 
of the fingers may spread proximally into the wrist, carpal 
tunnel, and forearm, also known as Parona’s space.57
Suppurative FTS has the ability to rapidly destroy a finger’s 
functional capacity and is considered a surgical emergency. Sup-
purative FTS results from bacteria multiplying in the closed space 
of the flexor tendon sheath and culture-rich synovial fluid medium 
causing migration of inflammatory cells and subsequent swell-
ing. The inflammatory reaction within the closed tendon sheath 
quickly erodes the paratenon, leading to adhesions and scarring, 
as well as increase in pressures within the tendon sheath that may 
lead to ischemia. The ultimate consequences are tendon necrosis, 
disruption of the tendon sheath, and digital contracture.
Patients with infectious FTS present with pain, redness, 
and fever (Fig. 44-20). Physical examination reveals Kana-
vel’s “cardinal” signs of flexor tendon sheath infection: finger 
held in slight flexion, fusiform swelling, tenderness along the 
flexor tendon sheath, and pain over the flexor sheath with pas-
sive extension of the digit.58 Kanavel’s signs may be absent in 
patients who are immunocompromised, have early manifesta-
tions of infection, have recently received antibiotics, or have a 
chronic, indolent infection.
If a patient presents with suspected infectious FTS, empiric 
intravenous antibiotics should be initiated. Prompt medical ther-
apy in early cases may prevent the need for surgical drainage. 
For healthy individuals, empiric antibiotic therapy should cover 
Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. For immunocompromised 
patients (including diabetics) or infections associated with bite 
wounds, empiric treatment should include coverage of gram-
negative organisms as well.
Adjuncts to antibiotics include splint immobilization 
(intrinsic plus position preferred) and elevation until infec-
tion is under control. Hand rehabilitation (i.e., range-of-motion 
exercises and edema control) should be initiated once pain and 
inflammation are under control.
If medical treatment alone is attempted, then initial inpa-
tient observation is indicated. Surgical intervention is necessary 
if no obvious improvement has occurred within 12 to 24 hours.
Several surgical approaches can be used to drain infec-
tious FTS. The method used is based on the extent of the 
infection. Michon developed a classification scheme that 
can be useful in guiding surgical treatment (Table 44-1).59 
Figure 44-20B & C demonstrates drainage of a stage II FTS. A 
Brunner incision allows better initial exposure but may yield 
difficulties with tendon coverage if skin necrosis occurs. A 
16-gauge catheter or 5-French pediatric feeding tube then is 
inserted into the tendon sheath through the proximal incision. 
The sheath is copiously irrigated with normal saline. Avoid 
excessive fluid extravasation into the soft tissue, because 
the resulting increase in tissue pressure can lead to necrosis of 
the digit. The catheter is removed after irrigation. The incisions 
Figure 44-20.  Suppurative flexor tenosynovitis of the ring finger. 
A. The finger demonstrates fusiform swelling and flexed posture. 
B. Proximal exposure for drainage. C. Distal drainage incision.
1813
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
are left open. Some ­surgeons prefer a continuous irrigation tech-
nique for a period of 24 to 48 hours. The catheter is sewn in 
place, and a small drain is placed at the distal incision site. Con-
tinuous or intermittent irrigation every 2 to 4 hours with sterile 
saline can then be performed through the indwelling catheter.
After surgery, an intrinsic plus splint is applied, the hand is 
elevated, and the appropriate empiric antibiotic coverage is insti-
tuted while awaiting culture results. The hand is reexamined the 
following day. Whirlpool therapy and range of motion are begun. 
Drains are removed before discharge from the hospital. The wounds 
are left open to heal by secondary intention. In severe cases, repeat 
irrigation and operative débridement may be required.
Antibiotic therapy is guided by culture results as well as 
clinical improvement. Once there is no further need for debride-
ment, a 7- to 14-day course of oral antibiotics is generally 
prescribed. Consultation with an infectious disease specialist 
should be considered early in order to maximize efficiency and 
efficacy of therapy.
Felon
A felon is a subcutaneous abscess of the fingertip and is most 
commonly caused by penetrating trauma. S. aureus is the most 
common pathogen. The fingertip contains multiple septa con-
necting the distal phalanx to the skin. These septa are poorly 
compliant, and presence of an abscess will increase pressure 
and lead to severe pain and tissue death. Patients will experience 
erythema, swelling, and tenderness of the volar digital pad. Oral 
antibiotics may resolve the infection if diagnosed very early, but 
incision and drainage is indicated when fluctuance is identified. 
A digital block should be performed, followed by a longitudi-
nal incision over the point of maximal fluctuance (Fig. 44-21). 
Transverse and lateral incisions should be avoided, and the 
incision should never extend across the distal phalangeal joint 
crease. Deep incision should not be performed as this may cause 
seeding of bacteria into the flexor tendon sheath. The wound is 
irrigated and packed, with warm soapy water soaks and packing 
changes initiated within 24 hours and performed two to three 
times daily until secondarily healed. Antibiotic coverage should 
cover for Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species.60
Paronychia
Paronychia is an infection beneath the nail fold. The nail plate 
can be viewed as an invagination into the dorsal skin ­extending 
down to the distal phalanx periosteum. Predisposing factors 
include anything that causes nail trauma, such as manicures, 
Table 44-1
Michon’s stages of suppurative flexor tenosynovitis 
and appropriate treatment
Stage
Findings
Treatment
I
Increased fluid in 
sheath, mainly a 
serous exudate
Catheter irrigation
II
Purulent fluid, 
granulomatous 
synovium
Minimal invasive 
drainage ± indwelling 
catheter irrigation
III
Necrosis of the 
tendon, pulleys, or 
tendon sheath
Extensive open 
débridement and possible 
amputation
B
A
Figure 44-21.  Felon. A. Lateral view of the digit showing fluctu-
ance between the skin of the pad and the underlying distal phalanx 
bone. B. The authors prefer to drain felons with a longitudinal inci-
sion (dashed line) directly over the area of maximal fluctuance.
artificial nails, or nail biting. The infection may spread around 
the nail plate from one side to the other, or it may extend into 
the pulp and result in a felon. An acute paronychia is usually 
caused by S. aureus or Streptococcal species. Patients report 
pain, erythema, swelling, and possibly purulent drainage involv-
ing the periungual tissue. Treatment consists of warm water 
soaks and oral antibiotics if diagnosed early. If purulence or 
fluctuance is present, then a freer elevator or 18-gauge needle 
can be passed along the involved nail fold to decompress the 
collection (Fig. 44-22). If the infection involves the eponychial 
Figure 44-22.  Paronychia. A. Fluctuance in the nail fold is the 
hallmark of this infection. B. The authors prefer to drain a paro-
nychia using the bevel of an 18-gauge needle inserted between the 
nail fold and the nail plate at the location of maximal fluctuance.
A
B
1814
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
fold, a small proximally based flap of eponychium is created 
by using a scalpel, followed by irrigation and packing. The nail 
plate must be removed if the infection extends beneath the nail 
plate. Packing is kept in place for 24 to 48 hours, followed by 
warm water soaks and local wound care. Usually, the wound 
cannot be repacked once the dressing is removed.60
A chronic paronychia is most commonly caused by 
­Candida species and is most often found in patients who 
­perform jobs involving the submersion of their hands in water 
or other moist environments. These develop into thickened 
nails with callus-like formation along the nail folds and may 
­occasionally become red and inflamed. They do not respond to 
antibiotic treatment, and nail plate removal with marsupializa-
tion of the skin proximal to the eponychial fold will allow the 
wound to heal secondarily. The environmental factors leading 
to the chronic paronychia must also be corrected in order for 
treatment to be successful.
All hand infections other than cellulitis will require surgi-
cal management. Clinical examination, particularly noting the 
area of greatest tenderness and/or inflammation, is the single 
most useful diagnostic tool to localize any purulence requir-
ing drainage. Specific recommendations for differentiat-
ing among the possible locations of hand infection are 
included in the diagnostic algorithm shown in Fig. 44-23.
TUMORS
Tumors of the hand and upper extremity can be classified as 
benign soft tissue tumors; malignant soft tissue tumors (subclas-
sified into cutaneous and noncutaneous malignancies); benign 
bony tumors; malignant bony tumors; and secondary metastatic 
tumors. Initial investigation for any mass starts with a complete 
history and physical exam. Hand and/or wrist X-rays should be 
obtained in every patient presenting with a mass unless clearly 
not indicated (e.g., a superficial skin lesion with no aggressive/
malignant features). The workup proceeds in an orderly fashion 
until a diagnosis is obtained. Once a benign diagnosis is secured 
(by strong clinical suspicion in an experienced hand surgeon, 
radiographic evidence, or tissue biopsy), further workup is not 
needed; this may occur at any point in the workup of a mass.
Most hand masses are benign and can be readily diagnosed 
without advanced imaging or tissue biopsy. When necessary, 
additional workup may include baseline laboratory studies, CT 
and/or MRI of the involved region, and a bone scan or positron 
emission tomography (PET) scan. Staging of a malignant tumor 
may occur before biopsy if a malignancy is strongly suspected, 
or it may occur after formal biopsy. Staging includes a chest 
X-ray and CT with intravenous contrast of the chest, abdomen, 
and pelvis to detect possible metastasis. Biopsy of the mass is 
always the last step of a workup and should occur only after all 
other available information has been gathered. Any mass that is 
over 5 cm in size, is rapidly increasing in size (as judged by an 
experienced surgeon or oncologist), is symptomatic or painful, 
or has an aggressive clinical or radiographic appearance war-
rants workup and biopsy to rule out malignancy.
CT scans are useful for detecting bony tumor extension 
across planes and identifying tumors of small bones, such as 
the carpal bones. MRI is useful for evaluating soft tissue tumor 
involvement (e.g., which muscle compartments are involved) 
as well as intramedullary lesions. Most soft tissue tumors will 
appear dark on T1-weighted images and bright on T2-weighted 
images. Hematomas, hemangiomas, lipomas, liposarcomas, 
6
Nondiagnostic
Fracture
Foreign body
Cellulitis
admit, IV Abx
serial exam
Site of fluctuance
Entire finger
s
e
Y
o
N
Pyogenic FTS
Kanavel’s
signs present
MRI if no
fluctuance
Subcutaneous
abscess
Thenar
abscess
Midpalm
abscess
Hypothenar
abscess
Distal
Loss of
palmar
concavity
Radial to
IF MC
Ulnar to
SF MC
Web space
abscess
Palm
Pain with
axial loading
of joint
Pyogenic vs
crystalline
arthritis
Consider
arthrocentesis
No improvement
in 48 hours
Hand inflammation
Plain x-rays
Partial finger
Dorsal
Centered
on joint
Between
digits
Localized fluctuance
Figure 44-23.  Diagnostic algorithm. Diagnostic workup for a patient with hand inflammation to evaluate for infection. See text for details 
about particular infectious diagnoses. Abx = antibiotics; FTS = flexor tenosynovitis; IF MC = index finger metacarpal; MRI = magnetic 
resonance imaging; SF MC = small finger metacarpal.
1815
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
and adipose tissue will appear bright on T1-weighted images 
and dark on T2-weighted images. Scintigraphy uses methylene 
diphosphonate attached to technetium-99m. This complex will 
attach to hydroxyapatite. Immediate uptake is seen in areas of 
increased vascularity, such as infection, trauma, and neoplasia. 
Increased uptake 2 to 3 hours later is seen in “pooled” areas 
where new bone formation has occurred. This modality is useful 
for detecting areas of tumor invasion or metastases not other-
wise seen on prior CT, MRI, or radiographs.
Biopsy is reserved for masses that cannot be diagnosed as 
benign based on prior clinical and radiographic exams. Needle 
biopsy is not reliable for primary diagnosis, but it can be useful 
for recurrent or metastatic disease. Open excisional (if mass is 
<5 cm in size) or incisional (if mass is >5 cm in size) biopsy 
is the most common biopsy method. Proper surgical oncologic 
technique is strictly adhered to in order to prevent tumor spread 
into uninvolved tissues or compartments. This includes making 
all incisions longitudinally using sharp dissection and meticu-
lous hemostasis; carrying the incision directly down to the tumor 
with no development of tissue planes (i.e., making a straight-line 
path from skin to tumor); incising through the fewest number 
of muscle compartments; and avoiding critical neurovascular 
structures. The CT or MRI images will help determine the best 
surgical approach for biopsy or resection in order to avoid unin-
volved compartments and critical structures.61
Benign Soft Tissue Tumors
Ganglion Cyst.  This is the most common soft tissue tumor of 
the hand and wrist, comprising 50% to 70% of all soft tissue 
tumors in this region. They can occur at any age but are most 
common in the second to fourth decades with a slight predilec-
tion toward females. Patients may report a slow-growing soft 
mass that may fluctuate in size and can sometimes be associated 
with mild pain. Compressive neuropathies may be seen if they 
occur in Guyon’s canal or the carpal tunnel, but are uncommon. 
There are no reports of malignant degeneration.62 History and 
physical exam are usually sufficient to establish a diagnosis. 
Occurrence by location is as follows: 60% to 70% occur on 
the dorsal wrist between the third and fourth extensor compart-
ments and are connected by a stalk to the scapholunate ligament 
(Fig. 44-24); 18% to 20% occur on the volar wrist; and 10% 
to 12% occur in the digits as volar retinacular or flexor tendon 
sheath cysts. The cyst transilluminates. There is always a stalk 
that communicates with the underlying joint or tendon sheath. 
The cyst wall is composed of compressed collagen fibers with 
no epithelial or synovial cells present. Clear viscous mucin fills 
the cyst and is composed of glucosamine, albumin, globulin, 
and hyaluronic acid. The etiology is unclear. The most accepted 
theory currently is Angelides’ who proposed that repeated stress 
of a joint, ligament, or tendon sheath causes an increase of 
mucin-producing cells and subsequent mucin production. The 
increased mucin production dissects superficially and coalesces 
into a cyst. The successful treatment of dorsal ganglion cysts by 
excising only the stalk supports this theory.63
Treatment consists of observation if asymptomatic. If 
symptoms exist or the patient desires removal for cosmetic 
appearance, aspiration of the cyst may be performed with a 
successful cure rate ranging from 15% to 89%. The benefit of 
injected steroids is inconclusive. Aspiration of a volar wrist 
ganglion cyst can be dangerous due to the potential of injuring 
neurovascular structures. Open excision and arthroscopic exci-
sion of the cyst stalk are surgical options for cysts that are not 
Figure 44-24.  Dorsal wrist ganglion cyst. These typically occur 
between the third and fourth dorsal extensor compartments and 
have a stalk connecting the base of the cyst to the scapholunate 
ligament.
amendable to aspiration. Recurrence rate after surgical excision 
ranges from 4% to 40%.62
Mucous Cyst.  A mucous cyst is a ganglion cyst of the DIP joint. 
They occur most commonly in the fifth to seventh decades, and 
the underlying cause is associated osteoarthritis of the DIP joint. 
They are slow growing and usually occur on one side of the termi-
nal extensor tendon between the DIP joint and the ­eponychium. 
The earliest clinical sign is often longitudinal grooving of the 
involved nail plate followed by a small enlarging mass and then 
attenuation of overlying skin. X-rays will show signs of osteoar-
thritis within the DIP joint. Heberden nodes (osteophytes within 
the DIP joint) are often seen on X-ray.
Possible treatment includes observation, aspiration, or 
excision. If the cyst is not draining and the overlying skin is 
intact, the patient may be offered reassurance. A draining cyst 
poses risk of DIP joint infection due to the tract communicating 
with the DIP joint and should be excised. If the cyst is symp-
tomatic, painful, or the patient desires removal for cosmetic pur-
poses, excision should be performed. Any osteophytes in the 
DIP joint must be removed to reduce recurrence. Aspiration is 
an option for treatment, but this poses the risk of DIP joint infec-
tion through seeding of bacteria into the joint or by the devel-
opment of a draining sinus tract. It is generally not performed.
Giant Cell Tumor of the Tendon Sheath.  Also known 
as a fibrohistocytoma, fibrous xanthoma, localized nodular 
1816
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
­synovitis, or pigmented villonodular synovitis, this is the sec-
ond most common soft tissue mass of the hand and wrist. It is a 
benign lesion with no clear pathogenesis. The tumor is a growth 
of polyclonal cells with no risk of metastases. Despite the simi-
larity in name, it is not histopathologically related to giant cell 
tumor of the bone.64
Giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath occurs as a firm 
slow-growing painless mass over months to years and will often 
feel bumpy or nodular, which is a distinguishing characteristic 
helpful for diagnosis. It has a predilection for occurring in close 
proximity to joints along flexor surfaces of the wrist, hands, 
and digits (especially the PIP joints of the radial digits) and 
occurs most commonly between the second and fifth decades 
(Fig. 44-25A). These tumors do not transilluminate. Direct 
extension into joints and ligaments can make complete exci-
sion difficult. Gross appearance of the tumor will show a well-­
circumscribed nodular firm mass with a deep brown color due to 
the large amount of hemosiderin content, which is easily detected 
on histologic staining (Fig. 44-25B). Multinucleated giant cells 
and hemosiderin-laden macrophages are characteristic.64
This tumor is not visible on radiographs. Approximately 
20% will show extrinsic cortical erosion on X-ray. This is a risk 
factor for recurrence, and removal of the cortical shell should 
be considered. MRI is useful for delineating involvement with 
tendons, ligaments, and joints.
The standard treatment is marginal excision. These tumors 
will often grow next to or around neurovascular bundles, and 
an Allen’s test should always be performed preoperatively to 
­confirm adequate blood supply by both ulnar and radial arteries 
as well as dual blood supply to an involved digit via the ulnar and 
radial proper digital arteries. It is important to completely excise 
the stalk because this will greatly reduce tumor recurrence even 
in the setting of residual tumor. If tumor is suspected to have 
extended into the joint, the joint must be opened and all tumor 
removed. Despite this being a benign lesion, local recurrence is 
approximately 30% (range, 5%–50%). Some variants can mimic 
more aggressive processes, and malignancy must be considered if 
aggressive features are identified, such as direct bony invasion.64
Lipoma.  Lipomas of the hand and wrist may occur in multiple 
anatomic locations, including subcutaneous tissues; intramus-
cularly (especially thenar or hypothenar muscles); deep spaces; 
carpal tunnel or Guyon’s canal; and rarely bone or nerve. They 
typically present as a painless, slow-growing, soft, and mobile 
mass over a period of months to years. Painful findings sug-
gest close approximation to a neurovascular structure or, less 
commonly, a malignant lesion such as liposarcoma. Lipomas 
do not transilluminate. They resemble mature fat histologically. 
X-rays typically reveal no abnormality. MRI is the most helpful 
imaging modality to evaluate a lipoma and will show a bright 
T1 lesion and dark T2 lesion.65
Asymptomatic lesions with no aggressive findings may 
be observed. Marginal excision is recommended for symp-
tomatic, painful, or enlarging lipomas or those that cause dys-
function. MRI is recommended for deep lipomas to evaluate 
proximity or involvement of critical structures, followed by 
marginal excision if MRI findings are consistent with a lipoma. 
If MRI findings are not consistent with a lipoma, incisional 
biopsy is warranted. Recurrence after marginal excision is rare. 
­Malignant degeneration to liposarcoma is exceedingly rare but 
has been reported.
Schwannoma.  A schwannoma, also known as a neurilem-
moma, is a type of benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor. It 
is the most common benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 
of the upper extremity.66 The majority occur as single soli-
tary masses. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) 
or 2 (NF2) may develop multiple schwannomas involving 
large peripheral nerve trunks or bilateral acoustic schwan-
nomas, respectively. These tumors arise from the Schwann 
cell and occur most often in the middle decades of life. They 
grow as painless, slow-growing, firm, round, well-encapsu-
lated masses with a predilection toward flexor surfaces of 
the forearm and palm (given their presence of large nerves). 
Schwannomas grow from the peripheral nerve sheath and are 
usually connected by a pedicled stalk. The tumor is well demar-
cated and can be readily separated from the nerve fascicles 
(Fig. 44-26). Unlike neurofibromas, they do not grow within the 
nerve. Paresthesias or other neurologic findings may occur, but 
they are usually absent, as is the Tinel’s sign. Findings such as 
pain, paresthesias, or numbness should raise concern for a tumor 
causing a compressive neuropathy or a tumor that is malignant.66
Histologic exam reveals Antoni type A palisades of spin-
dle cells with large oval nuclei with interlacing fascicles. Less 
cellular regions appear as Antoni type B areas. Mutations of 
the schwanomin gene on chromosome 22 are found in 50% of 
sporadic cases and 100% of acoustic schwannomas in patients 
with NF2.67
Surgical treatment is reserved for symptomatic tumors and 
those that require biopsy to rule out a malignant process. An 
MRI should be obtained prior to surgery to confirm that the 
A
B
Figure 44-25.  Giant cell tumor of tendon sheath. A. The mass pro-
duces lobulated enlargement of the external finger. B. The excised 
giant cell tumor has a multilobulated, tan-brown appearance.
1817
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
tumor is not located within the nerve (i.e., a neurofibroma) and 
that it is consistent with a schwannoma. Operative treatment 
involves excisional biopsy. If the tumor is adherent to adjacent 
soft tissue or not encapsulated, incisional biopsy is performed 
and excision is delayed pending pathology results. Malignant 
degeneration is exceedingly rare.66
Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors—Cutaneous
Squamous Cell Carcinoma.  Squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC) is the most common primary malignant tumor of 
the hand, accounting for 75% to 90% of all malignancies 
of the hand. Eleven percent of all cutaneous SCC occurs in 
the hand.68 It is the most common malignancy of the nail 
bed. Risk factors include sun exposure, radiation exposure, 
chronic ulcers, immunosuppression, xeroderma pigmentosa, 
and actinic keratosis. Marjolin’s ulcers represent malignant 
degeneration of old burn or traumatic wounds into an SCC 
and are a more aggressive type. Transplant patients on immu-
nosuppression have a four-fold increased risk and patients 
with xeroderma pigmentosa have a 1000-fold increased 
risk of developing an SCC. They often develop as small, 
firm nodules or plaques with indistinct margins and surface 
irregularities ranging from smooth to verruciform or ulcer-
ated (Fig. 44-27). They are locally invasive, with 2% to 
5% lymph node involvement. Metastasis rates of up to 
20% have been reported in radiation or burn wounds. 
Standard treatment is excision with 0.5- to 1.0-cm margins. Other 
treatment options include curettage and electrodessication, 
cryotherapy, and radiotherapy.68
Basal Cell Carcinoma.  Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the sec-
ond most common primary malignancy of the hand, account-
ing for 3% to 12%; 2% to 3% of all BCCs occur on the hand. 
Risk factors are similar for SCC and include chronic sun expo-
sure, light complexion, immunosuppression, inorganic arse-
nic exposure, and Gorlin’s syndrome. Presentation includes a 
small, well-defined nodule with a translucent, pearly border and 
Figure 44-26.  Schwannomas grow as a firm, round, 
­well-encapsulated mass within the epineurium of a peripheral nerve. 
­Schwannomas are able to be separated from the nerve ­fascicles 
­relatively easily because they do not infiltrate between them (unlike 
neurofibromas).
Figure 44-27.  Squamous cell carcinoma involving the nail fold 
and nail bed. Note the wart-like and ulcerated appearance.
overlying telangiectasias (Fig. 44-28). Metastasis is very rare. 
Standard treatment is excision with 5-mm margins. Other treat-
ment options include curettage and electrodessication, cryother-
apy, and radiotherapy.68
Figure 44-28.  Basal cell carcinoma of the dorsal hand with sur-
rounding telangiectasia.
1818
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Melanoma.  Melanoma accounts for approximately 3% of 
all primary malignant hand tumors.69 Risk factors include sun 
exposure (especially blistering sunburns as a child), dysplastic 
nevi, light complexion, family history of melanoma, and con-
genital nevi. Pigmented lesions with irregular borders, color 
changes, increase in growth, or change in shape are suggestive 
of melanoma. Breslow thickness is the most important factor in 
predicting survival for a primary melanoma. Surgical treatment 
includes excision with 1-cm margins for lesions up to 1 mm in 
thickness and 2-cm margins for lesions over 1 mm in thickness. 
Sentinel lymph node biopsy is done for lesions over 1 mm in 
thickness or for any lesion that is ulcerated and over 0.76 mm 
in thickness.70 Any clinically palpable lymph node requires a 
formal lymph node dissection of the involved basin, as do sen-
tinel lymph nodes positive for melanoma. Lymph node dissec-
tion has not been shown to offer any survival benefit, but the 
information gained from sentinel lymph node biopsy (or lymph 
node dissection) does offer valuable staging information that is 
important for prognosis. Subungual melanomas are treated with 
DIP amputation, with 5-year survival reported at 66%.71
Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors—Noncutaneous
Primary soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity are very 
rare, and most hand surgeons will only see several throughout 
their entire career. Only 14% of all soft tissue sarcomas occur 
in the entire upper extremity. Statistical inference is limited 
due to the rare occurrence of these tumors, but mortality rate is 
very high despite the aggressive treatments. Fewer than 5% of 
soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity will develop lymph 
node metastasis. Cutaneous malignancies must be considered 
in the differential diagnosis for any patient with palpable lymph 
nodes in the setting of any upper extremity mass. Any lesion 
of the upper extremity that is over 5 cm in diameter, rapidly 
enlarges, or is painful should be considered malignant until 
proven ­otherwise.72
Treatment for soft tissue sarcomas can range from pallia-
tive debulking to attempted curative resection. Many muscles 
of the upper extremity and their compartments cross joints 
(e.g., forearm flexors). Any malignancy within a compartment 
mandates complete resection of that compartment, and there-
fore, amputations must often be performed at levels much more 
proximal than the level of the actual tumor. Many soft tissue 
sarcomas are not responsive to radiation or chemotherapy, and 
use of these adjuvant treatments must be decided upon after 
discussion with medical and radiation oncologists in a multi-
disciplinary team. Several studies have shown higher mortality 
rates in patients who undergo initial tumor biopsy of sarcomas at 
institutions from which they do not ultimately receive treatment. 
These studies recommend biopsy be performed at the institution 
at which definitive treatment will be provided.73 Institutions best 
suited for such treatment should have pathologists familiar with 
soft tissue sarcomas, medical and radiation oncologists, surgical 
oncologists, and a multidisciplinary tumor board.
An in-depth review of each type of soft tissue sarcoma 
is beyond the scope of this chapter. Epithelioid sarcoma is the 
most common primary soft tissue sarcoma of the upper extrem-
ity and usually presents as a benign-like slow-growing mass 
during the third or fourth decades. It has a propensity for the 
forearm, palm, and digits. Spread to lymph nodes has been 
reported. It typically spreads along fascial planes.74 Synovial 
sarcoma is argued by some to be the most common primary 
soft tissue sarcoma of the hand and wrist, but the paucity of 
case reports is inconclusive. It is a high-grade malignancy that 
is painless and slow-growing and usually occurs adjacent to, 
but not involving, joints. It is most common in the second to 
fifth decades of life. Tumor size (>5 cm) is positively corre-
lated with mortality. Other sarcomas include malignant fibrous 
histiocytoma, liposarcoma, fibrosarcoma, dermatofibrosarcoma 
protuberans, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and 
more information can be found in further selected reading.75 
The majority of metastases to the hand involve secondary bone 
tumors and are discussed later in the section Secondary Meta-
static Tumors.
Benign Bone Tumors
Primary benign bone tumors of the hand and wrist make up 
a total of 7% of all primary benign bone tumors in the body. 
Benign tumors of cartilage origin comprise 79% of all primary 
benign bone tumors of the hand and wrist.76
Enchondroma.  This is the most common primary benign bone 
tumor of the hand and wrist and is of cartilage origin. Up to 
90% of all bone tumors in the hand and wrist are enchondro-
mas, with 35% to 54% of all enchondromas occurring in the 
hand and wrist. They are often found incidentally on X-rays 
taken for other reasons (e.g., hand trauma). They are usually 
solitary and favor the diaphysis of small tubular bones and 
are most common in the second and third decades of life. The 
most common location is in the proximal phalanges, followed 
by the metacarpals and then middle phalanges. Enchondroma 
has never been reported in the trapezoid. Presentation is usu-
ally asymptomatic, but pain may occur if there is a pathologic 
fracture or impending fracture. The etiology is believed to be 
from a fragment of cartilage from the central physis. Histology 
shows well-differentiated hyaline cartilage with lamellar bone 
and calcification.76
Two variants of enchondroma include Ollier’s ­disease 
(multiple enchondromatosis) and Maffucci’s syndrome 
­(multiple enchondromatosis associated with multiple soft ­ 
tissue hemangiomas). Malignant transformation is very rare in 
the solitary form, but there is a 25% incidence by age 40 in 
Ollier’s patients and a 100% life-time incidence in Maffucci’s 
patients. When malignant transformation does occur, it is almost 
uniformly a chondrosarcoma with pain and rapid growth.77
Diagnosis is usually made based on history, physical 
exam, and X-rays. There is a well-defined, multilobulated cen-
tral lucency in the metaphysis or diaphysis that can expand caus-
ing cortical thinning or, sometimes, thickening (Fig. 44-29A). 
Further imaging is seldom needed, but a CT would be the study 
of choice.
Observation is indicated for asymptomatic enchondromas 
with no risk of impending fracture, followed by annual X-rays 
for 2 years. If a pathologic fracture is found, it is treated with 
immobilization until fracture union and then surgically treated. 
If there is any uncertainty as to whether it is an enchondroma, 
incisional biopsy is indicated and definitive treatment is post-
poned pending final pathology. Symptomatic lesions and those 
with impending fracture are treated surgically. Surgical treat-
ment consists of an open incisional biopsy and confirmation 
by frozen section that it is well-differentiated hyaline cartilage. 
Curettage and high-speed burring are used to ablate the tumor. 
Intraoperative fluoroscopy is used to confirm complete ablation 
(Fig. 44-29B). The defect is then packed with bone graft or bone 
substitute. Recurrence ranges from 2% to 15%. X-rays should 
be obtained serially after surgery.76
1819
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
Periosteal Chondroma.  Periosteal chondromas are benign 
bone tumors of cartilage origin that arise most commonly within 
or adjacent to periosteum at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junc-
tion in phalanges. They occur usually in the second or third 
decade as solitary lesions with pain, swelling, deformity, and 
possible pathologic fracture. X-rays reveal a subperiosteal lytic, 
unilobular lesion with erosion into adjacent cortex. There is 
often a rim of sclerosis. Histologically, they appear as aggres-
sive cartilage with atypia, and it can be difficult to differentiate 
these from chondrosarcomas.76
Diagnosis involves X-rays with incisional biopsy to con-
firm the benign diagnosis and avoid unnecessary amputation. 
Treatment includes en-bloc resection of periosteum and corti-
cocancellous bone. Recurrence is less than 4%.
Osteoid Osteoma.  This is a tumor of bone origin. Approxi-
mately 5% to 15% of all osteoid osteomas occur in the hand 
and wrist and are most often found in the proximal phalanx 
or ­carpus. They usually occur in the second or third decade 
and present with a deep, dull ache that is classically worse at 
night and relieved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs). X-rays reveal a central lucency that is usually less 
than 1 cm in diameter surrounded by reactive sclerosis. Bone 
scan or CT is helpful to secure the diagnosis.78
Treatment consists of NSAID therapy only, and resolution 
occurs at an average of 33 months. If the patient does not wish to 
undergo prolonged discomfort with conservative therapy, 
curettage or percutaneous ablation of the nucleus may be 
­performed.78
Giant Cell Tumor of Bone.  Giant cell tumors of bone make 
up only 5% of all benign bone tumors in the body, and only 12% 
of these occur in the hand or wrist. Although its name is similar 
to that of “giant cell tumor of tendon sheath,” they are two sepa-
rate tumors and do not share the same clinical or histopathologic 
characteristics. Approximately 2% occur in the hand and 10% 
occur in the distal radius; those within the distal radius are more 
aggressive. They usually occur in the fourth decade with pain 
and swelling and possibly pathologic fracture.79
Giant cell tumor of the bone is unique in that it is benign 
on histology but does have metastatic potential and can cause 
death. It should be considered a low-grade ­malignancy.79 
Workup includes a CT of the chest and total-body scin-
tigraphy to evaluate for metastases and multifocal lesions 
and MRI to evaluate the extent of local tissue involvement. 
Treatment consists of amputation of involved phalanges or 
metacarpals and wide excision of entire carpal rows. Local 
and systemic surveillance must be done for at least 10 years 
because metastasis has been reported to occur as late as 10 
years postoperatively.79
Malignant Bone Tumors
Malignant primary and secondary bone tumors of the hand, 
like soft tissue malignancies, are exceedingly rare. An in-depth 
review is beyond the scope of this chapter. The same principles 
for soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity apply here with 
regard to evaluation, biopsy, and treatment.
Chondrosarcoma comprises 41% of all primary malignant 
bone tumors of the hand and wrist but only 1.5% of all chon-
drosarcomas overall. It is most likely to occur from malignant 
degeneration from a preexisting lesion, with enchondromatosis 
and osteochondromatosis being the most common. It usually 
presents as a slow-growing, painless mass in the fourth to sixth 
decades and can be difficult to differentiate from its benign 
counterparts. X-ray reveals endosteal erosion, cortical expan-
sion, cortical destruction, and calcification. Metastasis has never 
been reported for chondrosarcomas of the hand. Chondrosarco-
mas are not responsive to chemotherapy or radiation.80
Osteosarcoma of the hand is exceedingly rare; only 0.18% 
of osteosarcomas occur in the hand. It usually presents as a 
painful swelling with pathologic fracture in the fifth to eighth 
decades of life. Radiation exposure is believed to be a possible 
risk factor. X-ray findings vary widely, with 90% of tumors 
occurring at a metaphyseal location. Findings include an osteo-
blastic or osteolytic lesion, cortical breakthrough with soft tissue 
extension, a “sunburst” pattern radially, or periosteal elevation 
(Codman’s triangle). The presence or absence of metastasis is 
the most important prognostic factor, with a 5-year survival of 
70% in the absence of metastases and a 5-year survival of 10% 
if present. Preoperative chemotherapy is usually given, but radi-
ation therapy plays no role.81
A
B
Figure 44-29.  Enchondroma. A. X-ray of the phalanx 
demonstrates a well-defined central lucency. Surrounding 
cortex may thin or thicken. Thinning of the cortex contrib-
utes to risk of pathologic fracture. B. Intraoperative fluo-
roscopy after curettage of the tumor. A radiopaque ribbon 
is used to occupy the defect to help ensure that there is no 
tumor (similarly radiolucent to the defect after curettage) 
left behind prior to bone grafting.
1820
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Secondary Metastatic Tumors
Metastases to the hand or wrist are rare, with only 0.1% of skel-
etal metastases occurring in the hand. The majority of metasta-
ses to the hand are bone lesions, but soft tissue metastases have 
been reported. The most common primary site is the lung (40%), 
followed by the kidney (13%) and the breast (11%). Approxi-
mately 16% will have no known diagnosis of cancer.82 The most 
common sites are the distal phalanges, followed by the proximal 
and middle phalanges, metacarpals, and carpus. Patients will 
present with pain, swelling, and erythema. Differential diag-
nosis includes felon, gout, osteomyelitis, trauma, RA, or skin 
cancer. Treatment of a hand or wrist metastatic lesion must not 
interfere with treatment of the primary cancer. Treatment is usu-
ally palliative (simple excision or amputation). The average life 
expectancy for these patients is less than 6 months.82
BURNS
The palm of the hand makes up only 1% of total body surface 
area. A burn involving the entire hand and digits is unlikely 
to cause life-threatening injury or shock, but seemingly small 
burns to the hand may cause severe permanent loss of function 
if not treated appropriately. Burns to the hand can cause seri-
ous short- and long-term disability. All burns to the hand are 
considered severe injuries that warrant transfer to a dedicated 
burn center for specialized treatment. This management will 
include a multidisciplinary team consisting of hand surgeons, 
burn surgeons, burn-specialized nurses, occupational therapists, 
case managers, and social workers.
First-degree burns involve damage to the epidermis only 
and present with erythema, no blistering, and full sensation with 
blanching of skin. These will heal without scarring. Second-
degree burns are classified as superficial or deep. Superficial 
second-degree burns involve damage to the papillary dermis; 
all skin appendages are preserved, and therefore, these readily 
reepithelialize with minimal to no scarring. Superficial second-
degree burns are sensate and present with pain, erythema, blis-
tering, and blanching of skin. Topical dressings are the mainstay 
of treatment. Deep second-degree burns involve damage to the 
reticular dermis with damage to skin appendages, as well as the 
dermal plexus blood vessels and nerves. These have decreased 
sensation and no cap refill and appear pale or white. Blistering 
may be present. Damage to the skin appendages and blood sup-
ply in the dermal plexus precludes spontaneous healing with-
out scar. Excision with skin grafting is needed. Third-degree 
burns involve full-thickness damage through the dermis and are 
insensate with no blistering. They appear dry, leathery, and even 
charred.
Acute Management
Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines should be fol-
lowed. After primary survey, circulation to the hand should 
be assessed. Palpation and Doppler ultrasound should be used 
to evaluate blood flow within the radial and ulnar arteries, the 
palmar arches, and digital blood flow at the radial and ulnar 
aspect of each volar digital pad. A sensorimotor exam should 
be performed. Objective evidence of inadequate perfusion 
(i.e., deteriorating clinical exam with changes in or loss of 
pulse or Doppler signal) indicates the need for escharotomy, 
especially in the setting of circumferential burns. Escharot-
omy may be performed at bedside with scalpel or electrocau-
tery under local anesthesia or intravenous sedation. The depth 
of the escharotomy incision should extend into the dermis 
but not into subcutaneous tissues. In the forearm, axially ori-
ented midradial and midulnar incisions are made for the entire 
extent of the burn. Escharotomy should proceed as distally as 
necessary into the wrist and hand to restore perfusion. Digital 
escharotomies are made via a midaxial (the middle of the lon-
gitudinal axis on sagittal view) incision over the radial aspects 
of the thumb and small finger and the ulnar aspects of the 
index, middle, and ring fingers.83 These locations for digital 
escharotomies avoid painful scars on the heavy-contact sur-
faces of each respective digit. After primary survey, vascular, 
and sensorimotor exams are complete, careful documentation 
should be made of all burns. This is best done with a Lund 
and Browder chart and includes location, surface area, and 
initial depth of burn.
The burns should be dressed as soon as examination is 
complete. Gauze moistened with normal saline is a good initial 
dressing because it is easy, readily available, and will not leave 
ointment or cream on the wounds, which can hinder frequent 
examinations in the initial period. It is critical that no dressing 
is wrapped in a circumferential manner around any body part. 
Edema and swelling can lead to extremity ischemia if a circum-
ferential dressing is in place. It is important to maintain body 
temperature above 37°C, especially in burn patients who have 
lost thermoregulatory function of the skin and now have moist 
dressings in place. The hands should be elevated above heart 
level to decrease edema formation, which can hinder motion and 
lead to late scar contracture. The hand should be splinted in the 
intrinsic plus position with the MPs flexed to 90° (placing MP 
collateral ligaments under tension), the IPs in straight extension 
(prevents volar plate adhesion), and the wrist in approximately 
15° of extension.84 If the burn involves the thenar eminence, 
thumb, or first web space, the thumb should be splinted in full 
abduction (to open up the first web space). Any other web 
space that is burned should have the adjacent fingers splinted 
in abduction. This will help prevent web space contracture. In 
rare cases, Kirschner wires or heavy steel wires/pins are needed 
to keep a joint in proper position. These are placed percutane-
ously through the involved joint and serve as a temporary joint 
stabilizer.
After the primary and secondary surveys are complete, the 
wound should be evaluated again. Devitalized tissue should be 
débrided. Wounds should be cleansed twice daily, typically with 
normal saline. Second-degree superficial burns may be dressed 
with Xeroform gauze and Bacitracin. Silver sulfadiazine cream 
is another option for any second- or third-degree wound. It cov-
ers gram-positive and gram-negative microbes, but it does not 
penetrate eschar. It should be applied at least one-sixteenth of 
an inch thick. Sulfamylon can be used in conjunction with silver 
sulfadiazine or alone. It deeply penetrates eschar and tissues and 
has good gram-positive coverage.
After débridement of necrotic skin, grafting will eventu-
ally be necessary. Allograft (human cadaver skin) is an expen-
sive but useful temporary dressing for second- and third-degree 
burns. It can remain in place for up to 14 days before the body 
will reject it. It typically is left in place for 7 days. Allograft 
stimulates a wound to begin healing and can also serve as a way 
of “testing” a wound that needs skin grafting. If the allograft is 
adherent and there is evidence of temporary ingrowth, this sug-
gests that the wound is ready to receive a skin graft.
Occupational hand therapy has played a major role in pre-
serving hand function following burn injuries. Reestablishment 
1821
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
of hand function is pivotal for burn patients and is directly depen-
dent on their ability or effort to participate with an occupational 
therapist. Early work with an occupational therapist can mini-
mize the need for later reconstruction.84 Hand therapy should 
be initiated as soon as possible. Hand therapists are also able to 
make customized molded splints that facilitate frequent dressing 
changes.
Surgical Management
Any burn wound will eventually heal with proper wound care. 
However, this may involve unacceptable scarring, deformity, 
contractures, pain, and unstable wounds that are prone to 
breakdown. The goal is to restore preinjury function as much 
as possible with a wound that is durable, supple, nonpainful, 
and allows the patient to return to society as an active member. 
Local wound care is the ideal treatment for wounds that can heal 
completely within 14 days while not sacrificing function. Purely 
cosmetic concerns are addressed after complete scar maturation 
(∼12 months). In other cases, surgical excision and skin graft-
ing are necessary. Skin grafting should be done as soon as it 
becomes obvious that a wound will not be healed completely 
by postburn day 14. It should also be considered for wounds 
that are likely to cause contractures, especially along the joints 
and web spaces.84
Considerable controversy surrounds the need, timing, and 
method of grafting burns. Careful consideration must be given 
to the patient’s overall status, their preinjury state, and the type 
of work and recreational activities they enjoyed in order to have 
a better understanding of which issues should to be addressed.85 
Tangential excision of the wounds should be performed under 
tourniquet to minimize blood loss and is carried down to viable 
tissue. Avoid excising through fascia (epimysium) overlying 
muscles or exposing tendons, bone, joint capsules, or neuro-
vascular structures. Tissues capable of receiving a skin graft 
include well-vascularized fat, muscle, perineurium, paratenon, 
perichondrium, and periosteum. Exposure of deep structures 
without an adequately graftable bed mandates further coverage 
before skin grafting can occur (discussed later in Reconstruc-
tion section).
Once there is an adequate bed, grafting is the next step. If 
there is any doubt as to whether the wound bed can support a 
skin graft, a temporary dressing should be placed and the patient 
reexamined frequently for signs of granulation tissue and wound 
bed viability. Skin grafts to the dorsum of the hand are typically 
split-thickness sheet grafts (not meshed). There are no func-
tional differences between a sheet graft and a meshed graft, but 
sheet grafts have a much better final appearance. Skin grafts to 
the palmar aspects of the hand should be full-thickness in order 
to provide the dermal durability needed for daily functions.84 
Skin grafts are secured with staples, sutures, fibrin glue, or even 
skin glue. It is important to bolster every skin graft. This pre-
vents shearing loss and also keeps the skin graft in contact with 
the wound bed, preventing fluid collections that can lead to graft 
loss. A bolster may consist of a tie-over bolster and a splint or 
a negative-pressure dressing. The hand should be splinted in 
intrinsic plus for 7 days after skin grafting. Once the graft is 
adherent, hand therapy should begin, consisting of active and 
passive range-of-motion exercises and modalities.
Reconstruction
Reconstruction of burn wounds can begin as early as the acute 
setting and continue into the subacute and late stages. Burns 
may initially be superficial but later convert to deep burns (espe-
cially with grease, oil, and alkali burns) due to infection, tissue 
desiccation, or continued trauma, or they may be deep from the 
outset of injury. Débridement or excision of burns may result 
in exposure of viable muscle, bone, tendon, cartilage, joints, 
and neurovascular structures, as well as loss of fascial lay-
ers that are required for overlying soft tissue to glide during 
movement. Simply skin grafting these exposed structures will 
result in unstable wounds that are prone to chronic breakdown. 
Soft tissue contractures will develop as the skin grafts adhere 
to the structures, effectively anchoring them in static position. 
This is especially true for tendons, where gliding capability is 
paramount for function. Flap coverage is required in these situ-
ations. The reversed radial forearm flap is a local flap and is 
often the first choice for flap coverage of the hand. If the zone 
of injury or size of defect precludes its use, other skin and fat 
flaps, including the free lateral arm, free anterolateral thigh, or 
even free parascapular flaps, may be useful, provided the patient 
can tolerate a free tissue transfer (see Chapter 45) operation 
(Fig. 44-30). The digits may also be buried subcutaneously in 
the lower abdominal skin or groin crease. Vascular ingrowth 
from the digits into the abdominal or groin skin occurs over 
2 to 3 weeks, allowing division of the flap(s) and achieving full-
thickness coverage of the wounds.84,85
An acellular dermal regenerative substitute (e.g., Integra) 
may be used for wounds that have exposed structures and 
require more durability than is offered by a skin graft86 such as 
full-thickness loss overlying the extensor tendons of the wrist 
and hand. Dermal substitute is a good option for wounds that are 
not extensive enough to warrant a flap and for patients who are 
poor candidates for an extensive surgery. Integra is composed of 
acellular cross-linked bovine tendon collagen and glycosamino-
glycan with an overlying silicone sheet. It is applied much like 
a skin graft. After incorporation in 14 to 21 days, it is capable 
of accepting a skin graft (after removing the silicone sheet). 
Conceptually, it works by replacing the lost dermis and adds 
durability to a wound bed. It may be reapplied multiple times to 
the same area if thicker neodermis is desired. Although cultured 
autologous keratinocytes have been used, they are expensive, 
time-consuming, and do not provide prompt or durable cover-
age. They are not widely used.
Web space contractures are the most common deformity 
resulting after hand burns. They may occur late despite the best 
Figure 44-30.  Free anterolateral thigh flap reconstruction of a 
large dorsal hand wound. Once wound coverage is stable, this flap 
will need to be surgically revised to achieve proper contour.
1822
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
efforts. In the normal web space, the leading edge of the volar 
aspect of the web is distal to the dorsal aspect. This is reversed 
in web space contractures and limits digit abduction. Local 
modified Z-plasty (double-opposing Z-plasty) is the preferred 
treatment (Fig. 44-31).
Special Considerations
Chemical burns pose a risk to healthcare providers and should 
be considered hazardous material. They must also be removed 
from the patient or continued burn injury will occur. A com-
plete discussion of all chemicals causing burns is beyond the 
scope of this chapter. Hydrofluoric acid produces a slow onset 
of severe pain and continues to penetrate deeper structures. 
It avidly binds tissue and circulating calcium and can lead to 
hypocalcemia and cardiac arrest. The wound should be irrigated 
Figure 44-31.  Z-plasty release of web space contracture. A. First 
web space burn contracture. B. Immediate postoperative result.
copiously with water followed by topical application of an aque-
ous mixture of calcium gluconate. Calcium gluconate may also 
be infiltrated intradermally throughout the wound. Effectiveness 
of treatment is assessed by relief of pain. Intra-arterial injection 
of calcium gluconate into the artery supplying blood flow is 
another alternative if the other measures fail.87 Alkaline and acid 
burns require copious irrigation with water, with alkali burns 
often requiring hours of irrigation. Phenol burns should be irri-
gated with water and treated topically with polyethylene glycol. 
Phosphorus burns leave phosphorus particles within the wound. 
A 0.5% copper sulfate solution is applied to stain the particles 
black, followed by débridement.84,85
VASCULAR DISEASE
Vascular disease encompasses a broad spectrum of disorders 
leading to compromised perfusion to the hand and digits and 
may potentially cause ischemia and necrosis. Chronic vascular 
disorders tend to develop slowly and are typically seen in older 
patients. This includes progressive thrombosis, aneurysms, sys-
temic vasculopathy, and vasospastic disorders. Disorders unique 
or common to the hand are discussed in the following sections.
Progressive Thrombotic Disease
Hypothenar hammer syndrome involves occlusion of the ulnar 
artery at the wrist and is the most common occlusive vascular 
disorder of the upper extremity. The etiology is believed to be 
chronic trauma to the ulnar artery as it exits Guyon’s canal. The 
classic example is a construction worker who frequently uses 
heavy equipment, such as jackhammers, that cause prolonged 
vibration and repetitive impact on the ulnar aspect of the palm. 
This causes periadventitial arterial damage that results in scar-
ring and eventual compression, as well as medial and intimal 
damage.88 The artery then becomes weakened and prone to 
aneurysm and/or thrombosis. If a thrombus forms, it may embo-
lize, producing digital ischemia. Symptoms may be chronic or 
acute and include pain, numbness and tingling, weakness of 
grip, discoloration of the fingers, and even gangrene or ulcers 
of the fingertips.
If acute in onset, proximal occlusions may be extracted 
with a balloon catheter or, sometimes, under direct vision via 
an arteriotomy. Very distal embolism may require infusion of 
thrombolytics to dissolve clots and allow reperfusion. Large-
vessel acute embolism and reperfusion may result in edema and 
compartment syndrome, requiring fasciotomy. A high index of 
suspicion must be maintained.
For the more common scenario of chronic, progres-
sive occlusion, the involved segment of ulnar artery should 
be resected. There is disagreement in the literature regarding 
whether simple ligation and excision is sufficient for patients 
with sufficient distal flow or if all patients should undergo vas-
cular reconstruction.89 The authors’ personal preference is to 
reconstruct all patients.
Systemic Vasculopathy
Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans) is an inflamma-
tory occlusive disease affecting small and medium-sized arter-
ies and veins. It is strongly influenced by smoking and will 
often resolve upon smoking cessation. Typical onset is before 
50 years of age. Migratory phlebitis occurs distal to the elbow, 
resulting in ischemia, ulceration, and necrosis of the digits. It 
can continue to cause more proximal ischemia and ultimately 
lead to loss of the hands. Treatment must start with ­smoking 
1823
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
cessation. Failure to stop smoking will make any surgical inter-
vention unsuccessful. Arteriography is useful to determine arte-
rial flow and whether bypass is possible. If direct bypass is not 
possible, alternatives include arterialization of the venous sys-
tem by connecting the dorsal venous network to the brachial 
artery or possible free microvascular omental transfer beneath 
the dorsal forearm or hand for indirect revascularization.90
Vasospastic Disorders
Raynaud’s syndrome results from excessive sympathetic ner-
vous system stimulation. Perfusion is diminished and fingers 
often become cyanotic. Although the onset of the symptoms 
is benign, chronic episodes can result in atrophic changes and 
painful ulceration or gangrene of the digits. Raynaud’s disease 
occurs without another associated disease. This disease predom-
inately affects young women and is often bilateral. The vascular 
system is structurally intact without any obstructions. There is 
no ulceration, gangrene, or digit loss. In contrast, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon is associated with an underlying connective tissue 
disorder, such as scleroderma. Arterial stenosis is present due 
to disease changes in blood vessels as a result of the specific 
medical disorder.90
Scleroderma is an autoimmune connective tissue disorder 
resulting in fibrosis and abnormal collagen deposition in tissue. 
Many organs can be affected, with the skin most commonly and 
noticeably involved. In this disease, blood vessels are injured 
by intimal fibrosis leading to microvascular disease. The ves-
sels become subject to Raynaud’s phenomenon, and patients 
develop painful, ulcerated, and sometimes necrotic digits.91,92
Sympathectomy can provide pain relief and healing of 
ulcers for patients with scleroderma and Raynaud’s phenom-
enon. In this procedure, adventitia is stripped from the radial 
artery, ulnar artery, superficial palmar arch, and digital arter-
ies in various combinations based on the affected digits being 
treated. The decrease in sympathetic tone allows for vasodila-
tion and increased blood flow. If the patient notes significant 
distal pain relief and/or previously ischemic tissue improves in 
color after a test administration of local anesthetic, sympathec-
tomy may provide the same results in a long-term fashion.91,92
CONGENITAL DIFFERENCES
Congenital differences in a newborn can be particularly dis-
abling as the child learns to interact with the environment by 
using the hands. The degree of anomaly can range from minor, 
such as a digital disproportion, to severe, such as total absence 
of a forearm bone. In recent years, increasing knowledge of 
the molecular basis of embryonic limb development has sig-
nificantly enhanced the understanding of congenital differences. 
Congenital hand differences have an incidence of 1:1500 births. 
The two most common differences encountered are syndactyly 
and polydactyly.93
There are numerous classification systems for hand 
­differences. The Swanson classification, adopted by the 
­American Society for Surgery of the Hand, delineates seven 
groups organized based on anatomic parts affected by types of 
embryonic failures.94
Failure of Formation
The failure of the formation of parts is a group of congenital 
differences that forms as a result of a transverse or longitudinal 
arrest of development. Conditions in this group include radial 
club hand, a deformity that involves some or all of the tissues 
on the radial side of the forearm and hand, and ulnar club hand, 
which involves underdevelopment or absence of the ulnar-sided 
bones.
Failure of Differentiation
The failure of the differentiation of parts comprises conditions 
where the tissues of the hand fail to separate during embryo-
genesis. Syndactyly, in which two or more fingers are fused 
together, is the most common congenital hand deformity and 
occurs in seven out of every 10,000 live births. There is a famil-
ial tendency to develop this deformity. This deformity often 
involves both hands, and males are more often affected than 
females. Syndactyly is classified as either simple (soft tissue 
only) or complex (bone and/or cartilage also involved), and 
complete (full length of the digits) or incomplete (less than the 
full length).
Surgical release of syndactyly requires the use of local 
flaps to create a floor for the interdigital web space and to 
partially surface the adjacent sides of the separated digits 
(Fig. 44-32). Residual defects along the sides of the separated 
fingers are covered with full-thickness skin grafts. Surgery usu-
ally is performed at 6 to 12 months of age.
Duplication
Duplication of digits is also known as polydactyly. Radial 
polydactyly is usually manifests as thumb duplication. Wassel 
described a classification system for thumb duplications based 
on the level of bifurcation.95 When two thumbs are present in 
the same hand, they are rarely both normal in size, alignment, 
and mobility. In the most common form of thumb duplication, 
a single broad metacarpal supports two proximal phalanges, 
each of which supports a distal phalanx. Optimal reconstruction 
requires merging of elements of both component digits. Usually 
the ulnar thumb is maintained. If the duplication occurs at the 
MP joint, the radial collateral ligament is preserved with the 
metacarpal and attached to the proximal phalanx of the retained 
ulnar thumb. Surgery is usually performed at 6 to 12 months of 
age. Ulnar-sided polydactyly may often be treated by simple 
excision of the extra digit.
Overgrowth
Overgrowth of digits also is known a macrodactyly, which 
causes an abnormally large digit. In this situation, the hand and 
the forearm also may be involved. In this rare condition, all parts 
of a digit are affected; however, in most cases, only one digit 
is involved, and it is usually the index finger. This condition is 
more commonly seen in males. Surgical treatment of this condi-
tion is complex, and the outcomes may be less than desirable. 
Sometimes, amputation of the enlarged digit provides the best 
functional result.
Undergrowth
Underdeveloped fingers or thumbs are associated with many 
congenital hand deformities. Surgical treatment is not always 
required to correct these deformities. Underdeveloped fingers 
may include the following: small digits (brachydactyly), miss-
ing muscles, underdeveloped or missing bones, or absence of 
a digit.
Constriction Band Syndrome
Constriction band syndrome is a set of congenital differences 
that occurs when a tissue band forms around the digit(s) or arm 
in utero, impairing blood flow and growth. This condition may 
1824
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
be associated with other problems such as clubfoot, cleft lip, 
cleft palate, or other craniofacial anomalies. The cause of the 
ring constrictions is unknown. Some theories suggest that folds 
or bands in the amniotic membrane may be responsible for this 
condition.
Figure 44-32.  Syndactyly. Hand of a 1-year-old patient with 
complex syndactyly between the long and ring fingers. ­Complex 
syndactyly refers to fingers joined by bone or cartilaginous union, 
usually in a side-to-side fashion at the distal phalanges. The 
­syndactyly is divided with interdigitating full-thickness flaps, a 
­dorsal trapezoidal-shaped flap to resurface the floor of the web 
space, and full-thickness skin grafts. Note the skin grafts on the 
ulnar and radial sides of the new web space.
Generalized Skeletal Anomalies  
and Syndromes
This is a rare and complex group of unclassified problems.
RECONSTRUCTIVE TRANSPLANTATION  
OF THE UPPER EXTREMITY
Hand transplantation was first performed in humans in the late 
1990s both in Louisville, Kentucky, and Lyon, France.96 The 
treating surgeons were able to successfully remove an upper 
extremity from a brain-dead donor, attach it to an upper extrem-
ity amputee, and have the tissue survive. In the subsequent 15 
years, many additional centers have achieved technical success 
with upper extremity transplantation as well.
The technical considerations of hand transplantation have 
proven to be only the beginning of challenges in bringing this 
treatment option to the general public. Replantation of an ampu-
tated limb was first reported by Malt in 1962.97 In a limb replan-
tation, there is a zone of injury, and cold preservation of the 
amputated part does not begin immediately. In a limb transplant, 
the harvest can be done as proximally as necessary to ensure that 
only healthy tissue is present on both sides of the repair and to 
obviate the need for limb shortening, and cold preservation of 
the amputated part can begin immediately after harvest.
A major concern regarding the use of limb transplanta-
tion is the immunosuppression medications required to prevent 
rejection of the transplanted limb. Unlike organ transplantation, 
which provides a critical organ without which the recipient 
could not survive or would require chronic mechanical support 
(e.g., hemodialysis), the absence of one or even multiple limbs 
does not represent an immediate threat to a patient’s survival. 
Multiple studies have documented the nephrotoxic and other 
side effects of tacrolimus (FK 506), the principle antirejection 
agent used in transplant immunomodulation protocols.98,99
Due to these concerns, much research has been directed 
at minimizing the amount of antirejection medication as well 
as promoting tolerance or even chimerism. Donor bone mar-
row transplantation to the limb transplant recipient has been 
shown to be beneficial toward this purpose and is part of the 
limb transplant protocol in some centers.100 Recent research 
with donor bone marrow infusions has shown that lower lev-
els of immunosuppressive drugs may be possible, as well as 
fewer immunosuppressive agents.100 Further research is needed 
in order to determine the efficacy and utility of donor bone mar-
row transfusions and how they impact transplant recipients in 
the short and long term.
The final challenge in consideration of a patient for limb 
transplantation is selection of an appropriate candidate. There 
are multiple patient factors that need to be considered to deter-
mine if a patient is an appropriate candidate for hand transplan-
tation. These include medical concerns, such as immunologic 
issues (both antibodies and the presence of occult neoplasms or 
indolent viruses such as cytomegalovirus), hematologic issues 
including coagulopathies, and anatomic issues such as quality 
of skin envelope and amputation level of the bone and neuro-
muscular structures. Psychological and social factors must also 
be considered related to the recipient’s ability to comply with 
postoperative medication and therapy protocols as well as to 
cope with a continuous visible presence of a limb originating 
from another person.101
The promise of upper limb transplantation as a reconstruc-
tive technique remains high. Both civilian and military amputees 
1825
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
stand to receive a marked functional benefit from this treatment. 
With the number of transplants performed worldwide approach-
ing 100 as well as decades of animal research, understanding of 
how best to use this technique from functional, patient safety, 
and cost-effectiveness standpoints continues to grow.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	American Society for Surgery of the Hand. The Hand: 
­Examination and Diagnosis. 3rd ed. New York: Churchill 
Livingstone; 1990:5-13.
2.	Moore KL. The upper limb. In: Moore KL, ed. Clinically 
Oriented Anatomy. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 
1992:501-635.
3.	Schuind F, Cooney WP, Linscheid RL, An KN, Chao EY. 
Force and pressure transmission through the normal wrist. 
A theoretical two-dimensional study in the posterioanterior 
plane. J Biomech. 1995;28:587-601.
4.	Gordon JA, Stone L, Gordon L. Surface markers for locating 
the pulleys and flexor tendon anatomy in the palm and fingers 
with reference to minimally invasive incisions. J Hand Surg 
Am. 2012;37:913-918.
5.	Dumanian GA, Segalman K, Buehner JW, Koontz CL, Hen-
drickson MF, Wilgis EF. Analysis of digital pulse-volume 
recordings with radial and ulnar artery compression. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:1993-1998.
6.	 Green DP. General principles. In: Green DP, Hotchkiss RN, 
­Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 
5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2005:3-24.
7.	Gilula LA. Carpal injuries: analytic approach and case 
­exercises. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1979;133:503-517.
8.	Cousins MJ, Mather LE. Clinical pharmacology of local 
anaesthetics. Anaesth Intensive Care. 1980;8:257-277.
9.	Lalonde D, Bell M, Benoit P, Sparkes G, Denkler K, Chang 
P. A multicenter prospective study of 3110 consecutive 
cases of elective epinephrine use in the fingers and hand: 
the Dalhousie Project clinical phase. J Hand Surg Am. 
2005;30:1061-1067.
10.	Yousif NJ, Grunert BK, Forte RA, Matloub HS, Sanger JR. 
A comparison of upper arm and forearm tourniquet tolerance. 
J Hand Surg Br. 1993;18:639-641.
11.	Hastings H II, Carroll C IV. Treatment of closed articular frac-
tures of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints. 
Hand Clin. 1988;4:203-227.
12.	Bond CD, Shin AY, McBride MT, Dao KD. Percutaneous 
screw fixation or cast immobilization for nondisplaced scaph-
oid fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83A:483-488.
13.	Mayfield JK, Johnson RP, Kilcoyne RF. The ligaments 
of the wrist and their functional significance. Anat Rec. 
1976;186:417-428.
14.	Apostolides JG, Lifchez SD, Christy MR. Complex and 
rare fracture patterns in perilunate dislocations. Hand (NY). 
2011;6:287-294.
15.	Kleinert HE, Kutz JE, Atasoy E, Stormo A. Primary repair 
of flexor tendons. Orthop Clin North Am. 1973;4:865-876.
16.	Komatsu S, Tamai S. Successful replantation of a completely 
cut-off thumb: case report. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1968;42: 
374-377.
17.	Lifchez SD, Marchant-Hanson J, Matloub HS, Sanger JR, 
Dzwierzynski WW, Nguyen HH. Functional improvement 
with digital prosthesis use after multiple digit amputations. 
J Hand Surg Am. 2005;30:790-794.
18.	Bickel KD, Dosanjh A. Fingertip reconstruction. J Hand Surg 
Am. 2008;33:1417-1419.
19.	Moberg E. The treatment of mutilating injuries of the upper 
limb. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:1107-1113.
20.	Melone CP Jr, Beasley RW, Carstens JH Jr. The thenar flap: 
an analysis of its use in 150 cases. J Hand Surg Am. 1982;7: 
291-297.
21.	Johnson RK, Iverson RE. Cross-finger pedicle flaps in the 
hand. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1971;53:913-919.
22.	Bekler H, Gokce A, Beyzadeoglu T, Parmaksizoglu F. The 
surgical treatment and outcomes of high-pressure injection 
injuries of the hand. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2007;32:394-399.
23.	Kalyani BS, Fisher BE, Roberts CS, Giannoudis PV. Compart-
ment syndromes of the forearm: a systematic review. J Hand 
Surg Am. 2011;36:535-543.
24.	Gulgonen A. Compartment syndrome. In: Green DP, Hotch-
kiss RN, Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW. Green’s Operative 
Hand Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 
2005:1985-2013.
25.	Wray RC Jr, Glunk R. Treatment of delayed union, nonunion, 
and malunion of the phalanges of the hand. Ann Plast Surg. 
1989;22:14-18.
26.	Munk B, Larsen CF. Bone grafting the scaphoid nonunion: a 
systematic review of 147 publications including 5246 cases of 
scaphoid nonunion. Acta Orthop Scand. 2004;75:618-629.
27.	Curtis RM. Capsulectomy of the interphalangeal joints of the 
fingers. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1954;36-A:1219-1232.
28.	Nath RK, Mackinnon SE. Management of neuromas of the 
hand. Hand Clin. 1996;12:745-756.
29.	Stanton-Hicks M, Jänig W, Hassenbusch S, Haddox JD, 
Boas R, Wilson P. Reflex symptathetic dystrophy: changing 
concepts and taxonomy. Pain. 1997;63:127-133.
30.	Schürmann M, Zaspel J, Löhr P, et al. Imaging in early post-
traumatic complex regional pain syndrome: a comparison of 
diagnostic methods. Clin J Pain. 2007;23:449-457.
31.	Mackinnon SE. Pathophysiology of nerve compression. Hand 
Clin. 2002;18:231-241.
32.	National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Hand/
wrist musculoskeletal disorders (carpal tunnel syndrome, 
hand/wrist tendinitis, and hand/arm vibration syndrome): evi-
dence for work-relatedness. NIOSH Publication No. 97-141. 
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/97-141/pdfs/97-
141e.pdf. Accessed December 4, 2013.
33.	Lifchez SD, Means KR Jr, Dunn RE, Williams EH, Dellon 
AL. Intra- and inter-examiner variability in performing Tinel’s 
test. J Hand Surg Am. 2010;35:212-216.
34.	Williams TM, Mackinnon SE, Novak CB, McCabe S, Kelly L. 
Verification of the pressure provocative test in carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Ann Plast Surg. 1992;29:8-11.
35.	O’Gradaigh D, Merry P. Corticosteroid injection for the 
treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2000;59:918-919.
36.	Trumble TE, Diao E, Abrams RA, Gilbert-Anderson MM. 
Single-portal endoscopic carpal tunnel release compared with 
open release: a prospective, randomized trial. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am. 2002;84-A:1107-1115.
37.	Mackinnon SE, Novak CB. Compression neuropathies. 
In: Green DP, Hotchkiss RN, Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW, 
eds. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:999-1045.
38.	Goldfarb CA, Sutter MM, Martens EJ, Manske PR. Incidence 
of re-operation and subjective outcome following in situ 
decompression of the ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel. J Hand 
Surg Eur Vol. 2009;34:379-383.
39.	Swanson AB. Implant resection arthroplasty of the proximal 
interphalangeal joint. Orthop Clin North Am. 1973;4: 
1007-1029.
40.	Branam BR, Tuttle HG, Stern PJ, Levin L. Resurfacing arthro-
plasty versus silicone arthroplasty for proximal interphalan-
geal joint osteoarthritis. J Hand Surg Am. 2007;32:775-788.
41.	Burton RI Pellegrini VD Jr. Surgical management of basal joint 
arthritis of the thumb. Part II. Ligament reconstruction with 
1826
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
tendon interposition arthroplasty. J Hand Surg Am. 
1986;11:324-332.
42.	Gray KV, Meals RA. Hematoma and distraction arthroplasty 
for thumb basal joint osteoarthritis: minimum 6.5 year follow-
up evaluation. J Hand Surg Am. 2007;32:23-29.
43.	Watson HK, Ballet FL. The SLAC wrist: scapholunate 
advanced collapse pattern of degenerative arthritis. J Hand 
Surg Am. 1984;93:358-365.
44.	Stern PJ, Agabegi SS, Kiefhaber TR, Didonna ML. Proximal 
row carpectomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87(Suppl 1): 
166-174.
45.	Goldfarb CA, Stern PJ, Kiefhaber TR. Palmar midcarpal 
instability: the results of treatment with 4-corner arthrodesis. 
J Hand Surg Am. 2004;29:258-263.
46.	Feldon P, Terrono AL, Nalebuff EA, Millender LH. 
­Rheumatoid arthritis and other connective tissue disorders. In: 
Green DP, Hotchkiss RN, Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW. Green’s 
­Operative Hand Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Liv-
ingstone; 2005:2049-2136.
47.	Swanson AB. Finger joint replacement by silicone rubber 
implants and the concept of implant fixation by encapsulation. 
Ann Rheum Dis. 1969;28(Suppl):47-55.
48.	Elliot D, Ragoowansi R. Dupuytren’s disease secondary to 
acute injury, infection or operation distal to the elbow in the 
ipsilateral upper limb—a historical review. J Hand Surg Br. 
2005;30:148-156.
49.	McGrouther DA. Dupuytren’s contracture. In: Green 
DP, Hotchkiss RN, Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW. Green’s 
Operative Hand Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2005:159-185.
50.	van Rijssen AL, ter Linden H, Werker PM. Five-year results 
of a randomized clinical trial on treatment in Dupuytren’s 
disease: percutaneous needle fasciotomy versus limited 
­fasciectomy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129:469-477.
51.	Hurst LC, Badalamente MA, Hentz VR, et al. Injectable colla-
genase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren’s contracture. 
N Engl J Med. 2009;361:968-979.
52.	Saar JD, Grothaus PC. Dupuytren’s disease: an overview. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;106:125-134.
53.	Crean SM, Gerber RA, Le Graverand MP, Boyd DM, 
­Cappelleri JC. The efficacy and safety of fasciectomy and fas-
ciotomy for Dupuytren’s contracture in European patients: a 
structured review of published studies. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 
2011;36:396-407.
54.	Abrams RA, Botte MJ. Hand infections: treatment recom-
mendations for specific types. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 
1996;4:219-230.
55.	Honda H, McDonald JR. Current recommendations in the 
management of osteomyelitis of the hand and wrist. J Hand 
Surg Am. 2009;34A:1135-1136.
56.	Murray PM. Septic arthritis of the hand and wrist. Hand Clin. 
1998;14:579-587.
57.	Boles SD, Schmidt CC. Pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis. Hand 
Clin. 1998;14:567-578.
58.	Kanavel AB. The treatment of acute suppurative 
tenosynovitis—­discussion of technique. In: Infections of 
the Hand; A Guide to the Surgical Treatment of Acute and 
Chronic Suppurative Processes in the Fingers, Hand, and 
Forearm. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1925:985.
59.	Michon J. Phlegmon of the tendon sheaths. Ann Chir. 
1974;28:277-280.
60.	Hausman MR, Lisser SP. Hand infections. Orthop Clin North 
Am. 1992;23:171-185.
61.	Athanasian E. Bone and soft tissue tumors. In: Green DP, 
Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, Wolfe SW, eds. Green’s 
Operative Hand Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2005:2211-2264.
62.	Angelides AC. Ganglions of the hand and wrist. In: Green DP, 
Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, eds. Operative Hand ­Surgery. 
vol. 2, 4th ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1999: 
2171-2183.
63.	Rizzo M, Berger RA, Steinmann SP, et al. Arthroscopic 
resection in the management of dorsal wrist ganglions: results 
with a minimum 2-year follow-up period. J Hand Surg Am. 
2004;29:59-62.
64.	Glowacki KA, Weiss APC. Giant cell tumors of tendon sheath. 
Hand Clin. 1995;II:245-253.
65.	Calandruccio JH, Jobe MT. Tumors and tumorous conditions 
of the hand. In: Canale ST, Campbell WC, eds. Campbell’s 
Operative Orthopaedics. 9th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1998: 
3703-3733.
66.	Phalen GS. Neurilemomas of the forearm and hand. Clin 
Orthop. 1976;114:219-222.
67.	Lekanne Deprez RH, Bianchi AB, Groen NA, et al. Frequent 
NF2 gene transcript mutations in sporadic meningiomas 
and vestibular schwannomas. Am J Hum Genet. 1994;54: 
1022-1029.
68.	TerKonda SP, Perdikis G. Non-melanotic skin tumors of the 
upper extremity. Hand Clin. 2004;20:293-301.
69.	Glat PM, Shapiro RL, Roses DF, et al. Management consid-
erations for melanonychia striata and melanoma of the hand. 
Hand Clin. 1995;11:183-189.
70.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Smith T, et al. Long-term results of a 
prospective surgical trial comparing 2 cm vs. 4 cm excision 
margins for 740 patients with 1-4 mm melanomas. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2001;8:101-108.
71.	Heaton KM, El-Naggar A, Ensign LG, et al. Surgical man-
agement and prognostic factors in patients with subungual 
­melanoma. Ann Surg. 1994;219:197-204.
72.	Mahajan A. The contemporary role of the use of radiation 
therapy in the management of sarcoma. Surg Oncol Clin N 
Am. 2000;9:503-524.
73.	Mankin HJ, Mankin CJ, Simon MA. The hazards of the biopsy, 
revisited. Members of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society. 
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996;78:656-663.
74.	 Athanasian EA. Bone and soft tissue tumors. In: Green DP, 
Hotchkiss RN, Pederson WC, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Sur-
gery. 4th ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1999:2223-2253.
75.	Murray PM. Soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity. 
Hand Clin. 2004;20:325-333.
76.	Unni KK, Dahlin DC. Dahlin’s Bone Tumors: General Aspects 
and Data on 11,087 Cases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
Raven; 1996.
77.	Schwartz HS, Zimmerman NB, Simon MA, et al. The malig-
nant potential of enchondromatosis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
1987;69:269-274.
78.	Marcuzzi A, Acciaro AL, Landi A. Osteoid osteoma of the 
hand and wrist. J Hand Surg Br. 2002;27:440-443.
79.	Maloney WJ, Vaughan LM, Jones HH, et al. Benign metas-
tasizing giant-cell tumor of bone. Report of three cases and 
review of the literature. Clin Orthop. 1989;243:208-215.
80.	Ogose A, Unni KK, Swee RG, et al. Chondrosarcoma of small 
bones of the hands and feet. Cancer. 1997;80:50-59.
81.	Okada K, Wold LE, Beabout JW, et al. Osteosarcoma of 
the hand: a clinicopathologic study of 12 cases. Cancer. 
1993;72:719-725.
82.	Amadio PC, Lombardi RM. Metastatic tumors of the hand. 
J Hand Surg Am. 1987;12:311-316.
83.	Sheridan RL. Acute hand burns in children: management and 
long-term outcome based on a 10-year experience with 698 
injured hands. Ann Surg. 1999;229:558-564.
84.	Robson MC, Smith DJ. Burned hand. In: Jurkiewicz MJ, ed. 
Plastic Surgery: Principles and Practices. St. Louis: C.V. 
Mosby Co; 1990.
1827
Surgery of the Hand and Wrist
CHAPTER 44
85.	Herndon DN, ed. Total Burn Care. 2nd ed. London: WB 
Saunders; 2002.
86.	Haslik W, Kamolz LP, Nathschläger G, et al. First experi-
ences with the collagen-elastin matrix Matriderm as a dermal 
substitute in severe burn injuries of the hand. Burns. 2007;33: 
364-368.
87.	Hatzifotis M, Williams A, Muller M, et al. Hydrofluoric acid 
burns. Burns. 2004;30:156-159.
88.	Conn J Jr, Bergan JJ, Bell JL. Hypothenar hammer syndrome: 
posttraumatic digital ischemia. Surgery. 1970;68:1122-1128.
89.	Lifchez SD, Higgins JP. Long-term results of surgical treat-
ment for hypothenar hammer syndrome. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2009;124:210-216.
90.	McClinton MA, Wilgis EFS. Ischemic conditions of the hand. 
In: Mathes SJ, Hentz VR, eds. Plastic Surgery. Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 2006:791-822.
91.	Ruch DS, Holden M, Smith BP, et al. Periarterial sympathec-
tomy in scleroderma patients: intermediate-term follow-up. 
J Hand Surg Am. 2002;27:258-264.
92.	Jones NF. Acute and chronic ischemia of the hand: 
pathophysiology, treatment, and prognosis. J Hand Surg. 
1991;16A:1074-1083.
93.	Giele H, Giele C, Bower C, et al. The incidence and epidemi-
ology of congenital upper limb anomalies: a total population 
study. J Hand Surg Am. 2001;26:628-634.
94.	Swanson AB. A classification for congenital limb malfor-
mations. J Hand Surg Am. 1976;1:8-22.
95.	Wassel HD. The results of surgery for polydactyly of the 
thumb. A review. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1969; 64:175-193.
96.	Lee WP, Mathes DW. Hand transplantation: pertinent data and 
future outlook. J Hand Surg Am. 1999;24:906-913.
97.	Malt RA, McKhann CF. Replantation of severed arms. JAMA. 
1964;189:716.
98.	Starzl TE, Fung J, Jordan M, et al. Kidney transplantation 
under FK 506. JAMA. 1990;264:63-67.
99.	Gorantla VS, Brandacher G, Schneeberger S, et al. Favoring 
the risk-benefit balance for upper extremity transplantation: 
the Pittsburgh Protocol. Hand Clin. 2011;27:511-520.
100.	Schneeberger S, Gorantla VS, Brandacher G, et al. Upper-
extremity transplantation using a cell-based protocol to mini-
mize immunosuppression. Ann Surg. 2013;257:345-351.
101.	Shores JT. Recipient screening and selection: who is the 
right candidate for hand transplantation. Hand Clin. 2011;27: 
539-543.
This page intentionally left blank 
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Joseph E. Losee, Michael L. Gimbel, J. Peter Rubin, 
Christopher G. Wallace, and Fu-Chan Wei
45
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The field of plastic surgery focuses on the restoration of form 
and function to those who have congenital and acquired defor-
mities. Plastic surgery routinely addresses novel problems 
and challenges; therefore, the plastic surgeon must have an 
expert knowledge of anatomy and surgical technique to address 
new challenges.
The word plastic is derived from the Greek plastikos, 
meaning “to mold.” Although the term plastic surgery can 
be found in several medical writings from the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, it was John Staige Davis who established 
the name of the specialty with the 1919 publication Plastic 
­Surgery—Its Principles and Practice.
One of the earliest accounts of reconstructive surgery can 
be found in the Sushruta Samhita, an early text from the sixth or 
seventh century b.c. by the practitioner Sushruta. In this writing, 
the reconstruction of an amputated nose with a pedicled fore-
head flap and the reconstruction of the ear with cheek flaps were 
described. In addition, in the first century a.d., the Roman phy-
sicians Aulus Cornelius Celsus and Paulus Aegineta described 
operations for facial reconstruction.
The first textbook of plastic surgery is believed to be Gas-
para Tagliacozzi’s 1597 publication De Curtorum Chirurgia 
per Insitionem. This text describes the reconstruction of 
the nose with a pedicled arm flap. The nineteenth century 
saw advances in reconstructive surgery, including Giuseppe 
Baronio’s successful grafting of sheepskin. The techniques for 
perfecting human skin grafting followed later in the nineteenth 
century.
Great advances in plastic surgery occurred as a result of 
the first and second world wars. Out of the fields of dental sur-
gery, otolaryngology, ophthalmology, and general surgery, the 
discipline of plastic surgery was established. The founders of 
the field include Sir Harold Gillies, an otolaryngologist who 
established a center for the treatment of maxillofacial injuries 
in England; V. H. Kazanjian, a dental surgeon from Boston, 
who established a center in France for the treatment of facial 
injuries incurred in World War II; and Vilray P. Blair, from 
St. Louis, who established centers for the treatment of soft tissue 
and maxillofacial reconstruction for the U.S. Army. With the 
onset of World War II, centers of excellence for hand recon-
struction appeared as well.
In the last 50 years, advances in plastic surgery have included 
the transplantation of both autologous and allogeneic tis-
sue, tissue expansion, regional muscle and myocutaneous 
flap transfers, distant transfer of free flaps using microsurgery, 
replantation of traumatically amputated extremities and digits, 
and the emergence of craniofacial surgery. The future of plastic 
surgery will likely see further advances in the realms of regenera-
tive medicine, fetal surgery, and reconstructive transplantation.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Skin Incisions
Human skin exists in a state of tension created by internal and 
external factors. Externally, skin and underlying subcutane-
ous tissue are acted on by gravity and clothing. Internally, skin 
is subjected to forces generated by underlying muscles, joint 
chapter 
Historical Background	
1829
General Principles	
1829
Skin Incisions / 1829
Wound Healing / 1830
Skin Grafts and Skin Substitutes / 1832
Flaps / 1833
Free Tissue Transfer / 1838
Tissue Expansion / 1840
Pediatric Plastic Surgery	
1840
Cleft Lip and Palate / 1840
Craniofacial Anomalies / 1844
Vascular Anomalies / 1849
Congenital Melanocytic Nevi / 1852
Reconstructive Surgery	
1852
Facial Reconstruction  
after Fracture / 1852
Ear Reconstruction / 1855
Nasal Reconstruction / 1856
Lip Reconstruction / 1856
Eyelid Reconstruction / 1858
Skull and Scalp Reconstruction / 1860
Head and Neck Reconstruction / 1860
Facial Reanimation / 1865
Breast Reconstruction / 1866
Trunk and Abdominal  
Reconstruction / 1872
Extremity Reconstruction / 1876
Pressure Sore Treatment / 1880
Reconstructive Transplant Surgery / 1881
Aesthetic Surgery	
1882
Assessment of Facial Aesthetics / 1882
Blepharoplasty and Browlift / 1882
Facelift / 1883
Rhinoplasty / 1883
Suction Lipectomy / 1883
Autologous Fat Grafting / 1885
Excisional Body Contouring / 1886
Reduction Mammaplasty / 1887
Mastopexy / 1889
Augmentation Mammaplasty / 1890
Gynecomastia / 1891
1
2
extension and flexion, and tethering of fibrous tissues from 
zones of adherence. As a result, when skin is incised linearly, 
it gapes to variable degrees. When a circular skin excision is 
performed, the skin defect assumes an elliptical configuration 
paralleling the lines of greatest tension. Carl Langer, an anato-
mist from Vienna, first fully described these tension lines in the 
mid-1800s based on his studies of fresh cadavers.1 A. F. Borges 
described another set of skin lines that, different from Langer’s 
lines, reflect the vectors of relaxed skin tension.2 Although the 
term Langer’s lines often is used interchangeably with the term 
relaxed skin tension lines, the former lines describe skin tension 
vectors observed in the stretched integument of cadavers exhib-
iting rigor mortis, whereas the latter lines lay perpendicular to 
and more accurately reflect the action of underlying muscle2 
(Fig. 45-1). Relaxed skin tension lines may be exploited to cre-
ate incisions that minimize anatomic distortion and improve 
cosmesis. In areas of anatomic mobility, such as the neck or 
over joints, incisions are oriented less for aesthetic reasons and 
more with the goal of avoiding scar contractures and subsequent 
functional compromise. In general, incisions are placed perpen-
dicular to the action of the joint.
There are situations, however, in which the direction of the 
incision has been preestablished, as in acute lacerations, burns, 
or old contracted and distorting scars. In these circumstances, 
the principles of proper incision placement can be combined 
with simple surgical techniques to reorient the scar and lessen 
the deformity. The Z-plasty technique uses the transposition of 
random skin flaps both to break up a linear scar and to release 
a scar contracture through lengthening (Fig. 45-2; Table 45-1). 
W-plasty is the technique of scar excision and reconstruction in 
zigzag fashion to camouflage the resulting scar.
Wound Healing
The fundamentals of plastic surgery are based on wound heal-
ing physiology. Wound repair consists of an exquisitely regu-
lated symphony of molecular and cellular instruments that act 
in concert to restore the local tissue environment to prewound 
conditions. Metabolic imbalances in the wound milieu drive this 
orchestration and continue to direct it until healing resolves the 
disturbance. Although a detailed review of wound physiology is 
presented elsewhere in this text, it is useful to emphasize several 
points.
Tissue injury disrupts the tissue microenvironment and 
sets into motion a cascade of events that combine to reestab-
lish the environmental status quo. Disrupted blood vessels fill 
the wound space with red blood cells and plasma. Injured cells 
1830
Figure 45-1.  Relaxed skin tension lines. (Reprinted with permission from Wilhelmi et al.1)
Key Points
1 	 Plastic surgery is the field of surgery that addresses 
congenital and acquired defects, striving to return form and 
function.
2 	 Plastic surgery has been a field of innovation. The future of the 
specialty likely includes advancements in the areas of regen-
erative medicine, fetal surgery, and reconstructive transplanta-
tion with composite tissue allotransplants.
3 	 Children diagnosed with cleft and craniofacial anomalies ben-
efit from interdisciplinary care at a specialized center focusing 
on team care. Long-term follow-up during growth and devel-
opment is critical for optimal outcomes.
4 	 Reconstructive surgery attempts to restore form and func-
tion through techniques that include skin grafting, use of 
muscle flaps, bone grafting, tissue expansion, free tissue 
transfer with microsurgery, and replantation.
5 	 Aesthetic surgery is surgery performed to reshape the nor-
mal structure of the body to improve the patient’s appear-
ance and self-esteem. Patients undergoing aesthetic surgery 
present a unique challenge. The most important outcome 
parameter is patient satisfaction, and therefore, a thorough 
understanding of the patient’s motivations, goals, and 
expectations is critical.
1831
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
release factor III (thromboplastin), which accelerates the clot-
ting cascade. Clotting factors in the plasma are activated, and 
the coagulation cascade forms thrombin and eventually fibrin. 
Simultaneously, the complement system activates and produces 
chemoattractive complement protein fragments. Platelets, acti-
vated by thrombin and exposed collagen, release a number of 
growth factors and cytokines. Traumatized vessels contract in 
response to both direct physical stimulation and prostaglandins 
released by platelets. Intact local microvasculature vasodilates 
and leaks plasma in response to inflammatory mediators such as 
histamine, kinins, and serotonin. These early events, and others, 
establish inflammation and, finally, homeostasis.3
Platelet activation initiates the first major escalation in 
the inflammatory response. Within minutes, platelets release 
signaling molecules from their α-granules to attract macro-
phages, polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs), fibroblasts, and 
vascular endothelial cells. Within a few hours of injury, PMNs 
and macrophages invade the wound and remove tissue debris, 
coagulation proteins, and bacteria. Although both PMNs and 
macrophages begin to marginate early, PMNs dominate during 
the first few days. PMNs also constitute the primary defense 
against invading organisms that have breached the epithelial 
barrier. PMNs and macrophages, in concert with the comple-
ment system, form the basis of “natural” or “nonspecific” immu-
nity. If there is no infection or foreign material, the neutrophil 
population diminishes by the second day, whereas macrophages 
continue to amass.3
Macrophages become the major population by the third 
day after injury. These cells then dominate the wound region for 
days to weeks. Macrophages are the “masterminds” behind the 
finely tuned array of repair events that characterizes the prolifer-
ative phase of healing. Like neutrophils, activated macrophages 
continue the task of wound débridement. They are a rich source 
of degradative enzymes that process the extracellular matrix to 
make room for remodeling. Tightly coordinated release of the 
many growth factors, colony-stimulating factors, interleukins, 
interferons, and cytokines gives the macrophage the ability to 
regulate migration, proliferation, and specific protein synthesis 
of multiple cell lines. Macrophages lead the procession of new 
tissue into the wound dead space. Immature, replicating fibro-
blasts follow the macrophages. Mature fibroblasts then advance 
into the wound and are, in turn, followed by newly forming 
capillary buds, the last cells in the procession.3
Thus, injury perturbs the microenvironment and leads to 
the autoamplifying inflammatory phase. As a result of these 
processes, three changes occur in the wound: the environment 
becomes hypoxic, acidotic, and hyperlactated. One biochemi-
cal pathway by which this low redox potential state can signal 
cells to take biologic action is the adenosine diphosphoribose 
(ADPR) system. Recent evidence has shown that alterations of 
the polyADPR system affect regulation of collagen and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) transcription.3 Consequently, 
the metabolic state that is so deranged in the wound microen-
vironment is intimately linked to altered cellular function and 
leads to reparative cell phenotypes.
After inflammation has begun, fibroblasts are attracted by 
many stimuli and then proliferate and migrate into the site of 
injury. Fibroblasts are the major producers of collagen in the 
repair response. Substances that increase collagen deposition 
and maturation include lactate, oxygen, and growth factors. 
Lack of these agents as well as steroid treatments decrease col-
lagen in wounds.
Macrophages also usher along angiogenesis, largely 
through the release of VEGF. VEGF production is upregulated 
by the same wound metabolic environment that stimulates colla-
gen production. As neovascularization takes place, many of the 
conditions that signaled the start of the inflammatory and pro-
liferative phases are resolved, and the wound healing response 
recedes.
Epidermal cells are attracted to the healing wound by the 
same cytokines that attract other wound cells. Epithelialization 
proceeds best in a moist environment with high oxygen tension.3
A
A
B
1
2
3
3
4
1
4
2
C
C
D
B
D
Figure 45-2.  Schematic of the Z-plasty technique. Top: Simple 
Z-plasty. Middle: Four-flap Z-plasty. Bottom: Five-flap Z-plasty. 
(Modified with permission from Hudson DA: Some thoughts on 
choosing a Z-plasty: The Z made simple. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;106:665.)
Table 45-1
Tissue lengthening with Z-plasty
Type of Z-Plasty
Increase in Length of 
Central Limb (%)
Simple 45°
50
Simple 60°
75
Simple 90°
100
Four-flap with 60° angles
150
Double-opposing
75
Five-flap
125
Source: Modified with permission from Hudson DA. Some thoughts 
on choosing a Z-plasty: the Z made simple. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;106:665.
1832
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative interven-
tions may be taken by the surgeon to minimize infection and 
optimize wound healing (Tables 45-2–45-4). These measures 
all draw on what we understand of the physiologic wound heal-
ing process.
Skin Grafts and Skin Substitutes
Skin is comprised of 5% epidermis and 95% dermis. The der-
mis contains sebaceous glands, whereas sweat glands and hair 
follicles are located in the subcutaneous tissue. The dermal 
thickness and concentration of skin appendages vary widely 
from one location to another on the body. The skin vascula-
ture is superficial to the superficial fascial system and parallels 
the skin surface. The cutaneous vessels branch at right angles 
to penetrate subcutaneous tissue and arborize in the dermis, 
finally forming capillary tufts between dermal papillae.4
Skin grafting techniques date back >3000 years to India, 
where forms of the technique were used to resurface nasal 
defects in thieves who were punished for their crimes with 
nose amputation. Modern skin grafting methods include split-­
thickness grafts, full-thickness grafts, and composite tissue 
grafts (Table 45-5). Each technique has advantages and dis-
advantages. Selection of a particular technique depends on the 
requirements of the defect to be reconstructed, the quality of the 
recipient bed, and the availability of donor site tissue.
Split-Thickness Grafts.  Split-thickness skin grafting repre-
sents the simplest method of superficial reconstruction in plastic 
surgery. Many of the characteristics of a split-thickness graft 
are determined by the amount of dermis present. Less dermis 
translates into less primary contraction (the degree to which a 
graft shrinks in surface area after harvesting and before graft-
ing), more secondary contraction (the degree to which a graft 
shrinks during healing), and better chance of graft survival. 
Thin split grafts have low primary contraction, high second-
ary contraction, and high reliability of graft take, often even 
in imperfect recipient beds. Thin grafts, however, tend to heal 
with abnormal pigmentation and poor durability compared with 
thick split grafts and full-thickness grafts. Thick split grafts 
have more primary contraction, less secondary contraction, and 
may take less hardily. Split grafts may be meshed to expand the 
surface area that can be covered. This technique is particularly 
useful when a large area must be resurfaced, as in major burns. 
Table 45-2
Preoperative management
•  Assess and optimize cardiopulmonary function; correct 
hypertension.
•  Treat vasoconstriction: attend to blood volume, 
thermoregulatory vasoconstriction, pain, and anxiety.
•  Assess recent nutrition and provide treatment as 
appropriate.
•  Treat existing infection.
•  Assess wound risk using the SENIC index.
•  Start administration of vitamin A in patients taking 
glucocorticoids.
•  Maintain tight blood glucose control.
SENIC = Study on the Efficacy of Nosocomial Infection Control.
Source: Modified with permission from Hunt TK, Hopf HW. Wound 
healing and wound infection: what surgeons and anesthesiologists can 
do. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77:587. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Table 45-4
Postoperative management
•  Keep patient warm.
•  Provide analgesia to keep patient comfortable, if not pain 
free.
•  Keep up with third-space losses. Remember that fever 
increases fluid losses.
•  Assess perfusion and react to abnormalities.
•  Avoid diuresis until pain is gone and patient is warm.
•  Assess losses (including thermal losses) if wound is open.
•  Assess need for parenteral/enteral nutrition and respond.
•  Continue to control hypertension and hyperglycemia.
Source: Modified with permission from Hunt TK, Hopf HW. Wound 
healing and wound infection: what surgeons and anesthesiologists can 
do. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77:587. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Table 45-3
Intraoperative management
•  Administer appropriate prophylactic antibiotics at start 
of procedure. Keep antibiotic levels high during long 
operations.
•  Keep patient warm.
•  Maintain gentle surgical technique with minimal use of ties 
and cautery.
•  Keep wounds moist.
•  Perform irrigation in cases of contamination.
•  Elevate tissue oxygen tension by increasing the level of 
inspired oxygen.
•  Delay closure of heavily contaminated wounds.
•  Use appropriate sutures (and skin tapes).
•  Use appropriate dressings.
Source: Modified with permission from Hunt TK, Hopf HW. Wound 
healing and wound infection: what surgeons and anesthesiologists can 
do. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77:587. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
Table 45-5
Classification of skin grafts
Type
Description
Thickness (in)
Split thickness
Thin (Thiersch-Ollier)
0.006–0.012
Intermediate  
(Blair-Brown)
0.012–0.018
Thick (Padgett)
0.018–0.024
Full thickness
Entire dermis (Wolfe-
Krause)
Variable
Composite tissue Full-thickness skin 
with additional tissue 
(subcutaneous fat, 
cartilage, muscle)
Variable
Source: Modified with permission from Andreassi A, Bilenchi R, Biagioli 
M, et al. Classification and pathophysiology of skin grafts. Clin Dermatol. 
2005;23:332. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1833
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Meshed grafts usually also have enhanced reliability of engraft-
ment, because the fenestrations allow for egress of wound fluid 
and excellent contour matching of the wound bed by the graft. 
The fenestrations in meshed grafts reepithelialize by secondary 
intention from the surrounding graft skin. The major drawbacks 
of meshed grafts are poor cosmetic appearance and high second-
ary contraction. Meshing ratios used usually range from 1:1.5 to 
1:6, with higher ratios associated with magnified drawbacks.
Full-Thickness Grafts.  By definition, full-thickness skin 
grafts include the epidermis and the complete layer of dermis. 
The subcutaneous tissue is carefully removed from the deep 
surface of the dermis to maximize the potential for engraft-
ment. Full-thickness grafts are associated with the least sec-
ondary contraction upon healing, the best cosmetic appearance, 
and the highest durability. As a result, they are frequently used 
in reconstructing superficial wounds of the face and the hands. 
These grafts require pristine, well-vascularized recipient beds 
without bacterial colonization, previous irradiation, or atro-
phic wound tissue.
Graft Take.  Skin graft take occurs in three phases: imbibition, 
inosculation, and revascularization. Plasmatic imbibition refers 
to the first 24 to 48 hours after skin grafting, during which 
time a thin film of fibrin and plasma separates the graft from the 
underlying wound bed. It remains controversial whether this 
film provides nutrients and oxygen to the graft or merely a 
moist environment to maintain the ischemic cells temporarily 
until a vascular supply is reestablished. After 48 hours, a fine 
vascular network begins to form within the fibrin layer. These 
new capillary buds interface with the deep surface of the der-
mis and allow for transfer of some nutrients and oxygen. This 
phase, called inosculation, transitions into revascularization, 
the process by which new blood vessels either directly invade 
the graft or anastomose to open dermal vascular channels and 
restore the pink hue of skin. These phases are generally com-
plete by 4 to 5 days after graft placement. During these ini-
tial few days, the graft is most susceptible to interference in 
engraftment caused by infection, mechanical shear forces, and 
hematoma or seroma.4
Composite Grafts.  Composite tissue grafts are donor tissue 
containing more than just epidermis and dermis. They com-
monly include subcutaneous fat, cartilage and perichondrium, 
and muscle. Although less common than skin grafts, grafts of 
this type are particularly useful in select cases of nasal recon-
struction. Excision of the thick skin of the nasal lobule may 
create too deep a defect to reconstruct with a full-thickness 
skin graft. The ear lobe composite graft provides thicker cov-
erage with good color match and a fairly inconspicuous donor 
site (Fig. 45-3). Similarly, the root of the helix of the ear may 
be used to reconstruct the alar rim, providing skin coverage, 
cartilaginous support, and internal lining in a single technique.
Flaps
A flap is a vascularized block of tissue that is mobilized from 
its donor site and transferred to another location, adjacent or 
remote, for reconstructive purposes. The difference between a 
graft and a flap is that a graft brings no vascular pedicle and 
derives its blood flow from recipient site revascularization, 
whereas a flap arrives with its blood supply intact.
Random Pattern Flaps.  Random pattern flaps have a blood 
supply based on tiny blood vessels in the dermal-subdermal 
plexus, as opposed to the discrete, well-described vessels of 
axial pattern flaps (Fig. 45-4).5 Random flaps are typically used 
to reconstruct relatively small, full-thickness defects that are not 
amenable to skin grafting. Unlike axial pattern flaps, random 
flaps are limited by their geometry. The generally accepted reli-
able length-to-width ratio for a random flap is 3:1. Exceptions 
to this rule abound, however. There are many different types of 
random cutaneous flaps that differ in geometry and mobility. A 
transposition flap is rotated about a pivot point into an adjacent 
defect (Fig. 45-5). A Z-plasty is a type of transposition flap in 
which two flaps are rotated, each into the donor site of the other, 
to achieve central limb lengthening (see Fig. 45-2). Another 
common transposition flap is the rhomboid (Limberg) flap  
(Fig. 45-6). Rotational flaps are similar to transposition flaps 
but differ in that they are semicircular (Fig. 45-7). Advancement 
flaps slide forward or backward along the flap’s long axis. Two 
common variants include the rectangular advancement flap and 
the V-Y advancement flap (Fig. 45-8). Like transposition flaps, 
interpolation flaps rotate about a pivot point. Unlike transposi-
tion flaps, they are inset into defects near, but not adjacent, to 
the donor site. An example of an interpolation flap is the thenar 
flap for fingertip reconstruction (Fig. 45-9).
Fasciocutaneous and Myocutaneous Flaps.  The composi-
tion of a flap describes its tissue components. For example, a 
cutaneous flap contains skin accompanied by a variable amount 
of subcutaneous fat. A fasciocutaneous flap contains skin and 
fascia, whereas an adipofascial flap contains subcutaneous fat 
and fascia without overlying skin. A muscle flap contains muscle 
only, whereas a myocutaneous flap also contains the overlying 
skin and intervening tissues. An osseous flap contains vascular-
ized bone only, whereas an osteomyocutaneous flap contains, in 
addition, muscle, skin, and subcutaneous tissues.
The contiguity of a flap describes its position related to its 
source. Local flaps are transferred from a position adjacent to the 
defect. Regional flaps are from the same anatomic region of the 
body as the defect (e.g., the lower extremity region or the head 
and neck region). Distant flaps are transferred from a different 
anatomic region to the defect. They may remain attached to the 
source anatomic region (pedicled flaps) or may be transferred as 
free flaps by microsurgery. These are completely detached from 
the body, and their blood supply is reinstated by microvascular 
anastomoses to recipient vessels close to the defect.
The term pedicle was originally used to describe a bridge 
of tissue that remained between a flap and its source, similar to 
how a peninsula remains attached to its mainland. However, as 
knowledge of flap blood supply and (micro)vascular anatomy 
has improved over the years, the term pedicle has increasingly 
become reserved for describing the blood vessels that nourish 
the flap. Thus its current use is, in essence, vascular pedicle in 
shortened form. As a refinement, it is possible to dissect the 
pedicle free of its surrounding tissues (termed skeletonization) 
to allow any tortuosity of the supplying blood vessels to be 
released in order to maximize their reach toward a given defect. 
This is usually performed in a retrograde direction starting from 
where the pedicle enters the flap tissues. Similarly, it is pos-
sible to detach the desired skin paddle circumferentially from 
all unneeded surrounding tissues in order to maximize the free-
dom with which the flap can be inset to reconstruct the defect. 
Hence, a pedicled island flap has had its cutaneous component 
circumferentially incised while preserving its vascular pedicle. 
Therefore, a free flap and a pedicled island flap differ only in 
1834
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 45-3.  Composite graft reconstruction of nasal lobule. A. Scarred lobule from previous lesion excision. B. Scar excision markings. 
C. Insetting of composite ear lobe skin and subcutaneous fat graft. D. Postoperative day 3; note the pink hue of revascularization. E. Appear-
ance at 5 weeks postoperatively. F. Donor site at 5 weeks postoperatively.
Segmental a.
Muscle
Dermal-subdermal plexus
Perforating aa.
Figure 45-4.  Random pattern flap architecture. a. = artery. (Repro-
duced with permission from Aston et al.5)
Primary defect
Secondary defect
Figure 45-5.  Random pattern transposition flap.
1835
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Defect
Line of greatest tension
Pivot point
Figure 45-7.  Random pattern rotational flap. (Reproduced with 
permission from Aston et al.5)
A
B
E
E´
F
D
Loose
skin
A
B
120°
60°
D´
C
C
D
E´
D´
F
E
A
Figure 45-6.  A and B. Random pattern transposition flap, the rhom-
boid flap. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
Burow’s triangle
A
B
Figure 45-8.  Random pattern advancement flap. A. Rectangular 
advancement flap with Burow’s triangle excision. B. V-Y advance-
ment flap. (Reproduced with permission from Aston et al.5)
1836
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
that the former requires transection of the vascular pedicle for 
anastomosis to alternative recipient vessels, whereas the pedicle 
of the latter remains in continuity.
Such flaps that are supplied by an anatomically defined 
configuration of vessels are described as having an axial pattern 
blood supply and can be transferred as local, regional, or dis-
tant, and pedicled, island pedicled, or free flaps.6 Arising from 
the aorta are arteries that supply the internal viscera and other 
deep vessels that divide to form the main arterial supplies to 
the trunk, head, and extremities. They ultimately feed intercon-
necting vessels that supply the vascular plexuses of the fascia, 
subcutaneous tissue, and skin. These interconnecting vessels 
reach the skin via either fasciocutaneous (also called septocu-
taneous) vessels that traverse fascial septae between muscles, 
musculocutaneous perforators that penetrate muscle bellies, or 
direct cutaneous vessels that traverse neither muscle bellies nor 
fascial septae.7 Axial pattern flaps, incorporating suprafascial 
tissues, are supplied by these fasciocutaneous (septocutaneous), 
musculocutaneous, or direct cutaneous arteries. The internal vis-
cera are also a source of axial pattern flaps, such as the jejunum 
flap and omentum flap. The circulation of bone- and muscle-
containing flaps also is mainly axial in pattern. It also is possible 
to design local flaps, such as V-Y advancements and rhomboid 
flaps, as axial pattern flaps. In contrast to axial pattern flaps, 
random pattern flaps are only commonly transferred as local 
flaps by virtue of their lack of a defined vascular pedicle and 
cannot be transferred as island pedicled or free flaps. Axial pat-
tern flaps may possess some areas with random pattern circula-
tion, usually located at the flap periphery.
The volume of tissue reliably vascularized by the pedicle 
of an axial pattern flap defines its limits. In other words, the por-
tion of a flap that extends beyond the capabilities of its vascular 
pedicle to perfuse it reliably will ordinarily undergo necrosis of 
that portion. This can be clarified conceptually. The arterial tree 
can be described in terms of its angiosomes.8 An angiosome is a 
block of tissue that is reliably supplied by a given artery. Neigh-
boring angiosomes overlap, just as the dermatomes of neighbor-
ing nerves overlap. An anatomic angiosome is defined by the 
limits of an artery’s ramifications, where it forms anastomoses 
with a neighboring anatomic angiosome. The vessels that pass 
Figure 45-9.  Random pattern interpolation flap—the thenar flap. A. Middle fingertip injury with exposed bone and tendon. B. Elevation of 
distally based random pattern thenar flap. C. Insetting. D and E. Function and form at 3 months, after skin grafting of donor site. (Photographs 
reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1837
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
between these anatomic angiosomes are called choke vessels. In 
life, these may open or close in response to physiologic changes 
to increase or decrease, respectively, an artery’s dynamic angio-
some momentarily. Accordingly, at any given time point, the 
dynamic angiosome of an artery may be approximated by the 
volume of tissue stained by an intravascular administration of 
fluorescein into that artery (indicating the reach of blood flow 
from that artery into tissues). The potential angiosome of an 
artery is the volume of tissue that can be included in a flap that 
has undergone conditioning (see below). Both the dynamic and 
potential angiosomes extend beyond the anatomic angiosome 
of an artery. Although the angiosomal concept provides some 
guidance to the size and volume limits of a flap harvest, there 
remains no quantifiable method to predict safe flap harvest lim-
its exactly.
Conditioning refers to any procedure that increases the 
reliability of a flap by enlarging the angiosome of the pedicle 
artery from its dynamic toward its potential angiosome. Invok-
ing the delay phenomenon, for example, has improved the 
survival of flaps that otherwise would more frequently be com-
plicated by unpredictable partial necrosis, such as the pedicled 
transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap. The 
procedure can be particularly useful in patients at higher risk, 
such as those who are obese, smoke, or have received radio-
therapy. One method of delay for the pedicled TRAM flap is 
to divide a major portion of its blood supply, the deep inferior 
epigastric artery on both sides, approximately 2 weeks before 
transfer. In response, blood from the anatomic angiosome of 
the superior epigastric artery appears to flow into that of the 
interrupted deep inferior epigastric artery via intervening choke 
vessels. As a result, the flap becomes conditioned to rely on the 
superior epigastric artery. The TRAM flap can then be trans-
ferred based on the superior epigastric artery with less risk of its 
distal portions becoming ischemic and possibly necrotic. Sev-
eral theories have been proposed to explain the delay phenom-
enon, including metabolic compensatory responses to relative 
ischemia and dilatation of choke vessels; however, its mecha-
nisms remain incompletely understood.9
Further subclassifications of flap circulation have been 
introduced for muscular and fasciocutaneous flaps.10 Individual 
muscles have been classified by Mathes and Nahai into five 
types (I–V) according to their blood supply (Table 45-6). This 
classification is also applied to the respective myocutaneous 
flaps. Fasciocutaneous flaps also have been classified by these 
authors into types A, B, and C (Table 45-7). The inclusion of 
muscle in a flap may serve to increase flap bulk (so as to obliter-
ate dead space) or to provide a functioning component with the 
harvest of its motor nerve for coaptation to a recipient motor 
nerve. The purported advantages of muscle-containing flaps 
over fasciocutaneous flaps for use in previously infected tissue 
beds or for fracture healing have been debated.
With progressive advancements in flap transfer techniques 
and in understanding of microvascular flap anatomy, plastic sur-
geons have steadily increased the number and variety of avail-
able flaps, thereby improving the results of flap reconstructions. 
In addition, this knowledge has reduced the morbidity associ-
ated with flap harvest. Perhaps the most important advancement 
in flap surgery within recent decades has been the introduction 
of the perforator flap.11 Perforator flaps evolved from the obser-
vation that the muscle component of myocutaneous flaps served 
as a carrier of blood vessels to the overlying fasciocutaneous tis-
sues. Prior to this, it had been deemed mandatory to include the 
muscle for reliable harvest of fasciocutaneous tissues supplied 
by musculocutaneous perforators, even if it was not necessary 
to include that muscle for the reconstruction. This unfortunately 
caused an unnecessary muscular deficit at the donor site, and for 
this reason, fasciocutaneous flaps that were supplied by muscu-
locutaneous perforators instead of septocutaneous vessels were 
sometimes abandoned. The introduction of intramuscular ret-
rograde dissection techniques, however, allowed the skeletoni-
zation of a musculocutaneous perforator from its encasement 
within a muscle belly, which spared that muscle from flap har-
vest and preserved its donor site function.7,11 Further refinement 
of this concept gave rise to the harvest of cutaneous flaps based 
on any vessel that penetrated the fascia, which preserved the 
muscle (when the vessel was a musculocutaneous perforator) 
as well as the fascia (by suprafascial dissection). Within the last 
decade, free-style flap harvest has also been introduced.12 With a 
handheld Doppler ultrasound probe, the surgeon is able to iden-
tify an arterial supply to almost any area of skin with the desired 
reconstructive characteristics and trace that pedicle in retrograde 
fashion along whatever direction it takes, preserving donor site 
fascia and muscle as necessary. Although the exact definition 
of what a perforator flap is remains contentious, its advantages 
Table 45-6
Mathes-Nahai classification of muscular flaps
Classification
Vascular Supply
Example
Type I
One vascular pedicle
Gastrocnemius
Type II
Dominant and minor 
pedicles (the flap cannot 
survive based only on 
the minor pedicles)
Gracilis
Type III
Two dominant pedicles
Rectus 
abdominis
Type IV
Segmental pedicles
Sartorius
Type V
One dominant pedicle 
with secondary 
segmental pedicles (the 
flap can survive based 
only on the secondary 
pedicles)
Pectoralis 
major
Table 45-7
Nahai-Mathes classification of fasciocutaneous flaps
Classification Vascular Supply
Example
Type A
Direct cutaneous 
vessel that penetrates 
the fascia
Temporoparietal 
fascial flap
Type B
Septocutaneous vessel 
that penetrates the 
fascia
Radial artery 
forearm flap
Type C
Musculocutaneous 
vessel that penetrates 
the fascia
Transverse 
rectus abdominis 
myocutaneous 
flap
1838
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
remain clear: reduced donor site morbidity, reduced flap bulk, 
and increased flexibility in choosing desired flap components 
for reconstruction. The circulation of perforator flaps is axial in 
pattern; consequently, they can be transferred as pedicled island 
flaps or by microvascular free tissue transfer.
Free Tissue Transfer
A free tissue transfer, often referred to as a free flap procedure, 
is an autogenous transplantation of vascularized tissues. Any 
axial pattern flap with pedicle vessels of a suitable diameter can 
be transferred as a free flap. This involves three main steps: 
(a) complete detachment of the flap, with devascularization, 
from the donor site; (b) revascularization of the flap with anas-
tomoses to blood vessels in the recipient site; and (c) an inter-
vening period of flap ischemia. Flap circulation must be restored 
within a tolerable ischemia time.
Given the small diameter of most flap pedicle vessels 
(usually between 0.8 and 4.0 mm), these anastomoses are usu-
ally performed using an operative microscope that provides 
dedicated illumination and between 6× and 40× magnification. 
Any surgery performed with the aid of an operative micro-
scope is termed microsurgery; such anastomoses are therefore 
termed microvascular anastomoses. High-magnification surgi-
cal loupes are usually used for flap harvest, especially for dis-
secting the flap pedicle, because they allow greater operator 
freedom. Aside from microvascular anastomosis, microsurgi-
cal techniques include microneural coaptation, microlymphatic 
anastomosis, and microtubular anastomosis.
The first successful free tissue transfer in humans was of a 
jejunal free flap for cervical esophagus reconstruction in 1957; 
however, the surgeons did not use microsurgery for the anasto-
moses. The first microvascular free tissue transfers in humans 
were carried out during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Free flaps 
were initially considered to be a last-resort option to reconstruct 
the most complex defects. However, as a result of improved 
microsurgical techniques and microinstrumentation, as well as 
proper patient and free flap selection and effective postoperative 
monitoring methods, the success rates have increased to exceed 
95%.13 Today, free tissue transfer is often the first-choice treat-
ment for many defects and is no longer considered the last-ditch 
effort. It is now ubiquitously used in appropriate patients by 
reconstructive plastic surgeons worldwide.
The predetermining factor in free flap failure is occlu-
sion of its blood supply due to thrombosis. As enumerated by 
­Virchow’s triad, any factors that alter normal laminar blood 
flow, cause endothelial damage, or change the constitution 
of blood (producing hypercoagulability) increase the risk of 
thrombosis (Table 45-8).14 Avoidance of this complication, 
therefore, begins with a thorough patient evaluation for the 
presence of acquired or inherited thrombophilic tendencies. The 
patient’s hemodynamic status influences that of the free flap and 
should be optimized. The effect of tobacco smoking on free flap 
success has been debated, with some larger retrospective stud-
ies reporting no difference in thromboembolic complications; 
however, smoking is well known to affect wound healing.13,15 
Smoking and the use of potentially vasoconstrictive agents, such 
as caffeine, should be avoided for several weeks before and after 
a free flap procedure. The restoration of normal laminar blood 
flow and avoidance of endothelial damage are addressed prin-
cipally by careful flap insetting and meticulous microvascular 
surgical technique.
Planning a free flap goes beyond a simple calculation of 
matching flap and defect dimensions and tissue characteris-
tics. The surgeon must, in addition, consider several important 
technicalities: what flap pedicle length and size are required 
(affected by flap choice); which recipient vessels to use; how 
to orient anastomoses (end to end or end to side), deal with 
mismatched donor and recipient vessel dimensions, overcome 
unhealthy donor and/or recipient vessels (e.g., traumatic dis-
section, scarred surgical field due to previous operation or 
radiotherapy), inset flap tissues (to maximize functional and 
cosmetic results without detriment to flap circulation), route 
the pedicle (to restore normal blood flow without pedicle kink-
ing, twisting, or compression), position the patient (especially 
if the flap is to be inset over mobile soft tissue or joints), and 
place postoperative dressings (so as to produce no compres-
sion of the flap or pedicle); and what donor site morbidity will 
likely result (there is a risk-benefit decision between defect 
severity and flap choice).16 In addition, the surgeon must have 
a suitable backup plan to overcome intraoperative troubles; 
for example, insufficient pedicle length can be addressed with 
an interpositional vein graft adjoining the donor and recipient 
vessels, and iatrogenic vessel injury or severely aberrant anat-
omy may necessitate use of a backup flap or backup recipient 
vessels.13
A clear understanding of the blood supply to the free flap 
and its tissue components is a prerequisite to harvesting a viable 
free flap. Pedicle vessels must be identified and protected and 
handled minimally and atraumatically to avoid thrombogenic 
factors (see Table 45-8). Meticulous technique also reduces the 
risk of vasospasm, but the latter can be ameliorated by topical 
lidocaine or papaverine should it occur. Critical vessels con-
necting flap components must also be recognized and preserved. 
Under microscope magnification, the donor and recipient 
Table 45-8
Thrombogenic factors that can affect free flap pedicles and anastomoses
Altered Laminar Blood Flow
Endothelial Damage
Hypercoagulability
Tension or intimal malalignment at 
the anastomosis site; twisting, kinking, 
compression, or vasospasm of pedicle 
vessels
Iatrogenic damage (e.g., back-walled 
anastomotic suture, poor vessel handling, 
too many sutures)
Acquired thrombophilic tendency (e.g., 
pregnancy, paraneoplastic Trousseau’s 
syndrome, antiphospholipid antibody 
syndromes)
Intraluminal structures (e.g., 
atherosclerotic plaque, venous valves, 
back-walled anastomotic suture)
Previous vessel damage (e.g., 
atherosclerosis, trauma)
Hereditary thrombophilias (e.g., activated 
protein C resistance, protein C/protein  
S deficiency, hyperhomocysteinemia)
1839
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
­vessels should be dissected back to health. The presence of, for 
example, venous valves, atherosclerotic plaques, intimal trauma, 
and intraluminal prolapse of adventitial tissue at or adjacent to 
the anastomosis site increases the risk of thrombosis. The ves-
sel ends should be cleared of periadventitial tissues for 3 to 
5 mm with sharp dissection under the microscope. Periadventitial 
dissection should be limited to this extent, so as to avoid poten-
tial devascularization of the vessel wall by removal of the vasa 
vasorum and prevent the subsequent delayed development of a 
perianastomotic pseudoaneurysm. Adventitiectomy also helps 
relieve vasospasm by increasing compliance of the vessel wall 
and by inducing a local sympathectomy effect. The vessel ends 
usually are stabilized with a double approximating microvas-
cular clamp for anastomosis. Interrupted sutures or, less com-
monly, continuous sutures can accomplish the anastomosis. The 
microneedle typically has a three-eighths circle curvature and is 
between 30 and 150 μm in size. Its monofilament microsuture 
is usually between 9-0 and 11-0 caliber. The dimensions of the 
vessels to be anastomosed define the choice of microneedle and 
microsuture. Less commonly, suture alternatives such as fibrin 
adhesives or laser welding (these remain largely experimental) 
and mechanical anastomotic devices (e.g., venous couplers) may 
be used. Triangulating or bisecting suturing techniques can help 
to achieve an even placement of sutures. Normally, each suture 
should include the full thickness of both vessel walls, none 
should catch the opposite vessel wall (which causes disastrous 
luminal occlusion and intimal trauma), and the size of each bite 
should approximate the vessel wall thickness. The configuration 
of the anastomosis can be either end-to-end (Fig. 45-10), if the 
distal circulation can be adequately preserved, or end-to-side 
(Fig. 45-11), if the distal circulation must be preserved, as in the 
case of an extremity supplied by one dominant vessel. An end-
to-side orientation may also be useful to overcome dramatically 
mismatched donor-recipient vessel dimensions. Whatever the 
method chosen, microanatomic differences between the vessels 
should be respected so as to achieve accurately approximated 
A
B
C
D
Figure 45-10.  A through D. End-to-end anastomosis.
intimal surfaces in a tension-free anastomosis, devoid of redun-
dancy that might promote kinking.13
The clinical monitoring of a free flap should start during 
flap harvest, especially before its pedicle is divided. A free flap 
that is struggling to maintain normal perfusion characteristics 
during harvest most likely has insufficient circulation, which 
may be due to arterial or venous compromise or a combination 
of both (Table 45-9). Flap compromise may be due to reversible 
factors such as pedicle kinking, tensioning, or twisting; patient 
hemodynamic compromise; or an overly large flap harvest for 
the chosen pedicle vessels. If poor flap perfusion continues 
despite the absence or correction of all these factors, an inher-
ent flap problem or a critical vascular injury to the flap or its 
pedicle must be considered, and it may not be safe to continue 
its harvest. This is one example of a situation in which a backup 
plan may require execution.
Clinical flap monitoring continues after successful resto-
ration of arterial inflow and venous outflow. The mainstay of 
postoperative free flap monitoring is clinical assessment (see 
Table 45-9), although supplementary instrument monitoring 
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 45-11.  A through E. End-to-side anastomosis.
Table 45-9
Clinical signs of arterial and venous compromise in a 
free flapa
Clinical Sign
Arterial  
Compromise
Venous Compromise
Color
Becoming paler
Increasingly reddish  
or purplish
Temperature
Becoming cooler
Becoming warmer
Tissue turgor
Reducing
Increasing
Capillary  
refill time
Becoming slower
Becoming faster
Pinprick 
bleeding
Increasingly 
sluggish
Quickening (and 
darkening)
aNote that venous and arterial compromise may coexist, and one may 
lead to the other.
1840
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
also can be helpful. Doppler ultrasound assessment of arterial 
and venous signals is useful for monitoring buried or concealed 
flaps. If flap perfusion was healthy before division of its donor 
site pedicle, then poor perfusion after anastomoses is likely 
due to either a technical error or insufficient systemic hemo-
dynamics. The latter usually is correctable by ensuring that 
the patient and the patient’s environment are suitably warm 
and by initiating intravenous colloid challenge or, if indicated, 
blood transfusion. Numerous potential technical errors, which 
have been described in the earlier paragraphs on planning and 
anastomosis technique, may occur. Routine postoperative 
patient monitoring includes measurement of total fluid inputs, 
urinary catheter output (which should be >1 mL/kg per hour), 
core temperature, and arterial blood pressure (systolic pressure 
should be >100 mmHg), as well as pulse oximetry. The patient 
and free flap are best monitored in an intensive care setting by 
experienced staff until both are stable enough for routine ward 
assessments.17
Occlusion of the anastomosis most commonly arises from 
intraluminal thrombosis or from external compression of the ped-
icle, such as from surrounding tissues, fluid accumulation (e.g., 
hematoma and tissue edema), or overly tight dressings or skin 
sutures. Because there is a threshold of ischemia beyond which a 
flap will sustain irreversible tissue and/or microcirculatory dam-
age, it is important that the early signs of flap circulatory com-
promise be recognized as quickly as possible and the underlying 
problem diagnosed and corrected promptly if flap health is to be 
restored successfully.17 Different tissues tolerate differing dura-
tions of ischemia in correlation with their tissue-specific basal 
metabolic rate. Although cooling free flaps (to reduce basal meta-
bolic rate) has a variably protective effect in experimental set-
tings, it appears that this practice contributes little to improving 
free flap success in the clinical setting as long as warm ischemia 
times are kept to <4 hours for most tissues; exceptions include 
bowel flaps, which are more susceptible to ischemia.13
Given that the predisposing factor for free flap failure is 
thrombus formation, it is understandable that plastic surgeons 
have looked to anticoagulant therapies in an effort to improve 
success rates. Although such drugs, including the dextrans, aspi-
rin, heparins, and also some fibrinolytics, appear beneficial in 
experimental settings, large clinical trials have failed to show 
any conclusive associations between their use and either free 
flap success or failure rates.18 It seems intuitive to use these 
drugs for failing free flaps as an adjunctive measure alongside 
operative reexploration and surgical intervention. The surgeon 
must be aware of their contraindications and recognize that 
their side effects, apart from bleeding, are occasionally serious. 
Venous congestion may be addressed by surgical measures as 
well as by application of medicinal Hirudo medicinalis leeches 
(with concomitant Aeromonas hydrophila prophylaxis) or by 
chemical “leeching” (topical heparin combined with dermal 
punctures).
Unfortunately, the “no-reflow” phenomenon is occa-
sionally witnessed and leads to irreversible flap failure. This 
describes a situation in which no venous return drains into the 
pedicle vein of the flap, even though adequate arterial inflow 
passes the arterial anastomoses and is seen to enter the flap 
tissues. The no-reflow phenomenon sometimes follows an 
extended ischemic insult and appears to be a self-perpetuating 
cycle of endothelial cellular swelling, inflammatory vasocon-
striction, impaired microcirculatory flow, stasis, microcircula-
tory thromboses, progressive ischemia, and flap failure.13
Despite these potential problems, free flap success rates 
exceed 95% in experienced hands. There is no doubt that 
increasing microsurgical experience is critical to improving 
free flap success rates. The laboratory setting is an excellent 
environment in which to progress beyond the early portion of 
one’s learning curve through supervised microsurgical training 
and execution of microvascular anastomoses and microvascular 
free flap procedures in small animals.
Tissue Expansion
Although skin grafts and local flaps are very useful in recon-
structing many superficial defects, they are not without their 
drawbacks. Both leave donor site defects with cosmetic and/
or functional sequelae. Grafts are limited in color match and 
durability, whereas local flaps may supply insufficient tissue 
and produce contour irregularities. The advent of tissue expan-
sion has created the potential to increase the amount of local, 
well-matched tissue that can be advanced or transposed as a flap 
while decreasing donor site morbidity.
The most common method of skin expansion involves 
the placement of an inflatable silicon elastomer balloon with 
an integrated or remote port beneath the skin and subcutaneous 
tissue followed by serial inflation with saline. After completion 
of expansion, usually over weeks to months, the expander is 
removed and the redundant overlying skin may be advanced 
into an adjacent defect. Expanders are available in a multitude 
of shapes and sizes that can be tailored to the reconstruction. In 
breast reconstruction, the tissue expander is replaced with a per-
manent implant instead of using the tissue as a flap to re-create 
the volume of the breast mound. Histologically, expanded skin 
demonstrates thickened dermis with enhanced vasculature and 
diminished subcutaneous fat. Studies have shown that the skin 
expansion is due not merely to stretch or creep but also to actual 
generation of new tissue.19
The technique of tissue expansion comes with its share of 
potential complications, including infection, hematoma, seroma, 
expander extrusion, implant failure, skin necrosis, pain, and 
neurapraxia. Furthermore, an inflated expander is a very vis-
ible, albeit temporary, deformity that may cause patients much 
distress.
Despite these imperfections, tissue expansion has become 
a major treatment modality in the management of giant con-
genital nevi, secondary reconstruction of extensive burn scars, 
scalp reconstruction, and breast reconstruction. The technique 
has permitted the plastic surgeon to perform reconstructions 
with tissue of similar color, texture, and thickness with minimal 
donor site morbidity.
PEDIATRIC PLASTIC SURGERY
Cleft Lip and Palate
Orofacial clefting is the most common congenital anomaly and 
is known to occur in 1 in 500 live white births.20 The incidence 
is lower in African Americans and higher in Native Americans 
and Asians. Clefting of the lip and/or palate is felt to occur 
around the eighth week of embryogenesis, either by failure of 
fusion of the medial nasal process and the maxillary prominence 
or by failure of mesodermal migration and penetration between 
the epithelial bilayer of the face. The cause of orofacial clefting 
is felt to be multifactorial. Factors that likely increase the inci-
dence of clefting include increased parental age, drug use and 
infections during pregnancy, smoking ­during pregnancy, and 
1841
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
a family history of orofacial clefting. The increased chance of 
clefting when there is an affected parent is approximately 4%.
The primary palate is defined as all tissue anterior to the 
incisive foramen, including the anterior hard palate (premaxilla), 
alveolus, lip, and nose. The secondary palate includes every-
thing posterior to the incisive foramen, including the majority of 
the hard palate and the soft palate (velum). Clefting can involve 
the lip and nose, with or without a palatal cleft. Clefts of the lip 
and/or palate are first classified as unilateral or bilateral and then 
as complete or incomplete (Fig. 45-12). Complete clefts of the 
lip affect the entire lip and extend up into the nose. Incomplete 
clefts affect only a portion of the lip and contain a bridge of tis-
sue connecting the central and lateral lip elements, referred to 
as Simonart’s band.
Treatment Protocol.  Considerable controversy remains over 
the details of the timing, technique, and protocol for treating chil-
dren with orofacial clefting. The treatment protocol described in 
this chapter is accepted at many large cleft centers around the 
United States. All infants born with cleft-craniofacial anomalies 
benefit from care by a specialized team dedicated to the treatment 
of congenital anomalies. Today, this is widely accepted as 
the standard of care. Often, patients are seen prenatally 
after a diagnosis is made using sophisticated antenatal ultraso-
nography. The prenatal consultation has proven to be beneficial 
to parents, serving to dispel fears and uncertainties, and assuring 
them that treatment exists. After the infant’s birth, a team evalu-
ation occurs, and input is obtained from the surgeon, speech and 
language pathologist, social worker, craniofacial orthodontist, 
geneticist, otorhinolaryngologist, and pediatrician. For infants 
born with orofacial clefting, initial concerns relate to successful 
feeding and breathing. Infants with palatal clefts cannot generate 
negative pressure when suckling and therefore need milk dis-
pensed into their mouths from a specialized nurser when they 
make suckling motions.
Once adequate nutrition and a safe airway are ensured, 
attention is turned to the cleft anomaly. Attempts to lessen the 
deformity and set the stage for the surgical repair of the lip and 
nose begin with a process known as presurgical infant ortho-
pedics (PSIO), which includes procedures such as nasoalveolar 
molding (NAM) (Fig. 45-13). NAM repositions the neonatal 
alveolar segments, brings the lip elements into close approxima-
tion, stretches the deficient nasal components, and turns wide 
complete clefts into the morphology of narrow “incomplete” 
clefts. After PSIO with NAM, the definitive single-stage cleft 
lip and nose repair is performed at 3 to 6 months of age. With 
this initial operation, the lip deformity is repaired and a primary 
nasoplasty reconstructs the cleft lip nasal deformity. If the fam-
ily does not have access to PSIO or have the resources for this 
time-intensive therapy, a cleft lip adhesion can be performed as 
an initial stage in the repair. The preliminary cleft lip adhesion 
unites the upper lip and nasal sill, truly converting complete 
clefts into incomplete clefts. A cleft lip adhesion is performed in 
the first or second month of life, and the definitive cleft lip and 
nose repair follows at 4 to 6 months. After the definitive cleft 
lip and nose repair, the cleft palate is repaired in a single stage 
at 9 to 12 months of age.
Unilateral Cleft Lip.  The unilateral cleft lip is classically asso-
ciated with a cleft lip nasal deformity. The cleft lip nasal deformity 
includes lateral, inferior, and posterior displacement of the alar 
cartilage. This results from the deficient and clefted underlying 
skeleton as well as the unopposed pull of the clefted orbicularis 
Figure 45-12.  A. Unilateral cleft lip and palate. B. Bilateral cleft 
lip and palate. C. Incomplete unilateral cleft lip.
oris muscle abnormally inserted on the alar base (Fig. 45-14A). 
The maxillary minor segment (the smaller alveolar/maxillary 
­segment on the clefted side) is collapsed medially. The process 
of unilateral cleft lip repair can be thought of as “philtral subunit 
reconstruction.” The goal of the operation is to level Cupid’s bow 
and reconstruct the central philtrum of the lip, ideally placing 
the incision and subsequent scar as close to the normal philtral 
3
1842
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 45-13.  A. Complete left-sided cleft lip, nose, and palate. B. Nasoalveolar molding. C. After nasoalveolar molding, preoperative 
appearance before cleft lip and nose repair. D. Frontal view after cleft lip and nose repair. E. Worm’s-eye view after cleft lip and nose repair.
1843
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
column as possible. The surgical repair is performed under gen-
eral anesthesia, and local anesthesia containing epinephrine is used. 
Many different techniques of cleft lip and nose repair have been 
proposed; however, most of the commonly used procedures are 
variations of a “rotation-advancement” procedure.21 The rotation-
advancement procedure, as championed by Millard (Fig. 45-14B), 
rotates the philtral subunit of the central lip downward to level 
Cupid’s bow as the lateral lip element is advanced into the defect 
created by the downward rotation of the philtrum. Some surgeons 
choose to perform primary closure of the alveolar cleft at the time 
of primary lip and nose repair, called a gingivoperiosteoplasty. If 
the alveolar cleft is to be repaired, the gingivoperiosteoplasty is 
performed by raising mucoperiosteal flaps within the alveolar cleft 
margin and reapproximating them across the alveolar cleft defect. 
This creates a bony tunnel closed with periosteal flaps and facili-
tates the generation of bone in the alveolar defect. It is accepted 
today that some form of primary nasoplasty should be performed 
at the time of primary definitive lip repair. Techniques to release 
and reposition the nasal tip cartilages, as well as the ala, are per-
formed with variations of tip rhinoplasties using suture methods. 
Some surgeons choose to use postoperative internal and/or external 
splints to maintain the nasal correction achieved at surgery during 
the healing process.
Bilateral Cleft Lip.  In the complete bilateral cleft lip and 
nose deformity, the central lip element, called the prolabium, is 
entirely separate from the rest of the upper lip. The prolabium 
is displaced on top of the central alveolar segment, called the 
premaxilla, containing the unerupted four central incisors. Often, 
the premaxilla and prolabium are outwardly displaced. This is 
referred to as a flyaway premaxilla. For the child with a complete 
bilateral cleft lip and nose, PSIO is a very important step in pre-
paring the child for definitive lip and nose surgery by retracting 
the premaxilla into the maxillary arch, repositioning the lip seg-
ments, and stretching the rudimentary columella. Bilateral cleft 
lip and nose repairs often are versions of straight-line repairs, with 
the Mulliken technique being the more commonly performed 
(Fig. 45-15). In the bilateral cleft lip deformity, the new ­philtrum 
is made from the prolabium and is united to the lateral lip ele-
ments on top of the repaired orbicularis oris muscle.22
Cleft Palate.  During the eighth to twelfth weeks of gestation, 
the mandible becomes more prognathic, the tongue drops from 
beneath the clefted lateral palatine processes, and the palatal 
Dome on cleft side
is obtuse
Hypertrophic
inferior turbinate
Base of the ala
is displaced 
posteriorly and 
inferiorly
Flattened ala
results in horizontal
orientation of
the nostril
Base of the
columella is
deviated to
the noncleft 
side
Columella shorter
on cleft side
A
Nasal tip displaced
and asymmetric
B
Figure 45-14.  A. Unilateral cleft lip and nose deformity. B. The 
rotation-advancement repair.
n
sn
sn
cphs
cphi
al
ls
c
prn
sto
Figure 45-15.  Mulliken bilateral cleft lip and nose repair. al = ala nasi; c = highest point of columella nasi; cphi = crista philtri inferior; cphs 
= crista philtri superior; ls = labiale superius; n = nasion; prn = pronasale; sn = subnasale; sto = stomion.
1844
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
shelves migrate upward into a more horizontal position and 
fusion occurs. A cleft palate results from the failure of fusion of 
the two palatal processes. As with labial clefting, isolated clefts 
of the palate are multifactorial in etiology, and isolated clefts of 
the palate are more likely to be associated with other anomalies. 
Between 8% and 10% of isolated clefts of the palate are associ-
ated with the 22q deletion of velocardiofacial syndrome.23
The main goal of cleft palate surgery is to help the patient 
attain normal speech, which results from velopharyngeal com-
petence. During speech, the soft palate, or velum, is moved pos-
teriorly and superiorly, primarily by the levator palatini muscle 
sling that suspends the velum from the skull base. Velopharyn-
geal competence is obtained during attempted speech when the 
velum approximates the posterior pharyngeal wall, preventing 
air and liquid from regurgitating into the nasal cavity. Velo-
pharyngeal competence allows intraoral pressure to be built up 
for speech sounds. A cleft palate precludes this from occurring 
and results in velopharyngeal incompetence (VPI). Because it 
is impossible for the oral and nasal cavities to be partitioned in 
the patient with a cleft palate, it is also difficult for the patient 
to develop negative intraoral pressure for an effective suck. 
Therefore, specialized nursers are used to dispense liquid into 
the infant’s mouth during the suckling motions. Children with 
clefts of the palate have an increased incidence of otitis media; 
this may be related to the abnormality of the velar musculature 
and ineffective function of the eustachian tube. The increased 
incidence of otitis media can result in hearing loss if not treated 
appropriately. In addition, VPI and nasal air escape during 
speech results in hypernasal speech.
As with the repair of cleft lip and nose, the timing, tech-
nique, and protocols for cleft palate repair are controversial. Most 
agree that palate repair should be performed before the devel-
opment of speech. The cleft palate usually is repaired when the 
infant is between 6 and 18 months of age. Cleft palate repair also 
is performed under general anesthesia, with the head slightly 
hyperextended and a retractor, such as the Dingman mouth gag, 
placed intraorally to retract the tongue and endotracheal tube. An 
epinephrine solution is injected into the palate. Techniques of hard 
palate closure include the use of unipedicled hard palate muco-
periosteal flaps as in the Wardill-Veau-Kilner repair or bipedicled 
hard palate mucoperiosteal flaps as in the von Langenbeck repair. 
Both the unipedicled and bipedicled hard palate palatoplasty tech-
niques rely on the greater palatine neurovascular pedicle. Soft 
palate or velar closure techniques are divided into straight-line 
and Z-plasty procedures. With either a straight-line or Z-plasty 
velar repair, the levator palatini muscle should be independently 
repaired; this is called an intravelar veloplasty. The clefted levator 
is identified coursing sagittally in an anterior-posterior direction, 
abnormally inserted onto the posterior edge of the hard palate. 
In intravelar veloplasty, it is released from the posterior edge of 
the hard palate in the midline and dissected free from abnormal 
attachments to the aponeurosis of the tensor veli palatini muscle 
and superior constrictor laterally. After its complete release, the 
levator palatini muscle is united in the midline, with reconstruc-
tion of the levator muscle sling that suspends the velum from the 
skull base and aids in velopharyngeal competence.
The authors prefer the double opposing Z-plasty technique 
of soft palate or velar reconstruction known as the Furlow pala-
toplasty.24 The procedure uses four triangular flaps, two oral 
and two nasal, with the posteriorly based flaps containing the 
released levator muscles. The Z-plasty lengthens the soft palate, 
prevents longitudinal scarring from a straight-line repair, and 
produces a secondary pharyngoplasty effect by narrowing the 
velopharyngeal port (Fig. 45-16).
Complications of palatoplasty include wound healing prob-
lems resulting in a breakdown of the suture line and the devel-
opment of a fistula. The literature reports fistula rates ranging 
from approximately 1% to 20%. Treatment of palatal fistulae is 
particularly challenging, because the recurrence rates have been 
noted to approach 96%. The second most common complication 
of palatoplasty is the incomplete correction of speech and the 
development of postoperative VPI. The literature reports postop-
erative VPI rates ranging from 10% to 40%. Some of the best 
rates of velopharyngeal competence have been reported with the 
Furlow double opposing Z-plasty palatoplasty. Postoperative VPI 
is treated with pharyngoplasty—either a posterior pharyngeal flap 
pharyngoplasty or a sphincter pharyngoplasty. A posterior pharyn-
geal flap is a static flap formed from the posterior pharyngeal wall 
including mucosa and a portion of the superior constrictor muscle. 
The midline superiorly based pharyngeal flap is inset into the pos-
terior free edge of the soft palate, permanently attaching it to the 
posterior pharyngeal wall. The sphincter pharyngoplasty has been 
reported to involve creation of a dynamic sphincter made with the 
bilateral posterior tonsillar pillars containing the palatopharyngeus 
muscle. The superiorly based tonsillar pillars are elevated from the 
lateral pharynx and inset into a horizontal incision on the posterior 
pharyngeal wall at the level of the adenoid pad.
Craniofacial Anomalies
History, Overview, and Classification System.  Craniofacial 
surgery is the subspecialty of plastic surgery dealing with hard 
and soft tissue deformities of the craniofacial skeleton, treat-
ing the congenital, developmental, and acquired defects of the 
cranial and/or facial skeleton. Craniofacial surgery addresses 
the functional and equally important appearance-related issues 
surrounding these deformities. Attempting to separate the func-
tional impairment from the appearance-related issues is arbitrary, 
because it can be argued that the most important function of a face 
is to look like a face.25 Numerous studies have established the 
importance of facial form and the significant emotional impact 
that facial deformities have on a person’s life and sense of self.
The field of craniofacial surgery finds its origins in the 
aftermath of the world wars and the need to treat massive facial 
injuries. In 1967, Dr. Paul Tessier, now recognized as the father 
of craniofacial surgery, first publicly presented his concepts of 
using wide exposure and a transcranial route to treating cra-
niofacial deformities with large segmental movements of bone. 
An American disciple of Dr. Tessier, Dr. Linton Whitaker of 
the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, working with the Com-
mittee on Nomenclature and Classification of Craniofacial 
Anomalies of the American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Associa-
tion, presented a simple and practical classification system for 
craniofacial anomalies (Table 45-10).
It is the standard of care today that an interdisciplinary team 
of experts with specialized knowledge and training in treating 
children with craniofacial anomalies care for children who have 
such anomalies. The preoperative workup and evaluation must 
be thorough and should include imaging (computed tomography 
[CT], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], and cephalography), 
photography, blood work, anesthesia consultation, and other 
components as the condition dictates. Craniofacial procedures 
are often long, complicated surgeries of significant magnitude, 
with an attendant risk of blood loss, serious morbidity, and even 
mortality. Significant blood loss is a realistic possibility, and 
1845
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
C
B
A
Figure 45-16.  A. Markings for the Furlow double opposing Z-plasty palatoplasty. B. Raising the oral flaps in a Furlow palatoplasty. C. The 
complete dissection of a Furlow palatoplasty.
1846
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
preparation for blood conservation and transfusion must be 
made. The routine surgical approach to the craniofacial skeleton 
can be via a coronal incision, and after a bifrontal craniotomy, 
the orbital and facial skeleton can be addressed. Bone grafts 
for reconstruction can be split calvarial grafts or, alternatively, 
grafts from the ribs or iliac crest. Rigid fixation is obtained with 
bioresorbable plates, screws, and sutures. Despite the magnitude 
of the procedures, significant morbidity (e.g., blindness, brain 
injury, significant infection, cerebrospinal fluid leak, intracra-
nial hematoma) or mortality is rare.
Craniofacial Clefts.  The rare craniofacial clefts have been 
subclassified by Tessier (Fig. 45-17). The Tessier classification 
Table 45-10
Classification of craniofacial anomalies
  I.  Clefts
    a. Centric
    b. Acentric
 II.  Synostoses
    a. Symmetric
    b. Asymmetric
III.  Atrophy, hypoplasia
IV.  Neoplasia, hypertrophy, hyperplasia
 V.  Unclassified
14
13 12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
0
1 2
3
4
3
2
1
Figure 45-17.  Tessier’s classification of craniofacial clefts.
of craniofacial clefts considers the orbit as the center around 
which the clefts radiate as the spokes of a wheel, numbered from 
0 to 14. The facial clefts (0 to 7) and their cranial extensions 
(8 to 14) are often associated and total 14 (Fig. 45-18). Treacher 
Collins syndrome (Fig. 45-19), also known as mandibulofacial 
dysostosis, is a type of craniofacial clefting disorder represent-
ing bilateral 6-7-8 clefts. This autosomal dominant disorder with 
variable penetrance has the following manifestations: hypopla-
sia of the zygomas, asymmetry and hypoplasia of the mandible, 
ear anomalies, and colobomas of the lower eyelids. Craniofacial 
microsomia, also known as hemifacial microsomia, can be clas-
sified as a form of clefting as well (Fig. 45-20). Manifestations 
of this anomaly usually involve the hard and soft tissue of one 
half of the craniofacial skeleton. Deformities range in severity 
from complete absence of an affected facial component (globe, 
mandible, ear) to mild asymmetries. Ear deformities range 
from complete absence of the ear to only preauricular skin tags. 
Similarly, the eye deformities range from complete absence of 
the globe to various anomalies including epibulbar dermoids. 
Hypoplasia of the temporal skull, maxilla and zygoma, and orbit 
are seen in varying degree and affect the underlying skeleton 
as well as the overlying soft tissues. The classical deformity of 
hemifacial microsomia affects the mandible. Hypoplasia of the 
hemimandible, as well as the maxilla, results in dental maloc-
clusions (Fig. 45-20C). Mandibular hypoplasia may range from 
Figure 45-18.  Craniofacial cleft. (Reproduced with permission 
from Losee J, Kirschner R, eds. Comprehensive Cleft Care. 1st 
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2008, Chap. 27, Fig. 3. 
kkjkjdht © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)
1847
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Figure 45-19.  Child with Treacher Collins syndrome. A. Frontal view. B. Lateral view. C. Three-dimensional computed tomographic scan 
of the craniofacial skeleton.
minor underdevelopment of otherwise normal components to 
complete absence of the condyle, ramus, and proximal body.
Treatment of hemifacial microsomia includes manage-
ment of the airway and attention to other functional conditions. 
Treatment of the mandibular deformity includes distraction 
osteogenesis during growth and orthognathic procedures at 
skeletal maturity. Ear deformities are reconstructed with tech-
niques using costal cartilage and local soft tissue. Soft tissue 
deficiencies of the hemiface can be treated with fat injections, 
dermal-fat grafts, or free tissue transfer. Orbital hypertelorism is 
yet another type of midline craniofacial (0-14) clefting. Orbital 
hypertelorism is defined as a lateralization of the entire orbit, 
increasing the intraorbital distance and resulting from midline 
conditions such as encephaloceles, frontonasal dysplasia, and 
syndromic craniosynostosis. The treatment of severe orbital 
hypertelorism includes a transcranial approach to four-wall 
1848
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 45-20.  Child with left-sided craniofacial/hemifacial 
­microsomia. A. Frontal view. B. Lateral view. C. Bite plane.
orbital box osteotomies, resection or treatment of the abnormal 
midline process, mobilization, medialization of the orbital com-
plexes, and nasal reconstruction with a cantilever nasal bone 
graft.
Craniosynostosis.  The craniosynostoses are a group of dis-
orders that result from the abnormal obliteration or prema-
ture fusion of the cranial sutures. The craniosynostoses can 
be subdivided into simple or single-suture craniosynostoses, 
and complex, syndromic, or multiple-suture craniosynostoses. 
The cranial sutures allow for the normal growth of the skull, 
and therefore, the classic presentation of craniosynostosis is 
an abnormal head shape. The resultant abnormal head shapes 
are secondary to an inhibition of skull growth at right angles to 
the fused suture and a compensatory overexpansion of the skull 
perpendicular to the fused suture into areas with open sutures. 
These abnormal head shapes provide a basis for the classifi-
cation of craniosynostoses. In addition to appearance-related 
deformities resulting from craniosynostosis, important func-
tional aspects include the potential for intracranial hypertension, 
which may result from brain growth restricted by an unyielding 
skull. The chances of intracranial hypertension increase with 
the number of sutures affected. Blindness and mental defi-
ciencies secondary to an increase in intracranial pressure can 
likely be prevented by the surgical expansion of the cranium 
to release the fused suture, correct the abnormal head shape, 
and remodel the skull. The standard procedure used today in 
the correction of these synostotic deformities is fronto-orbital 
advancement. Fronto-orbital advancement, performed using a 
transcranial approach, includes a frontal craniotomy and orbital 
repositioning. The complex or multisutural synostoses are often 
syndromic, resulting from gain-of-function mutations of the 
fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3). 
These syndromes of craniosynostosis include Apert’s, Crouzon’s, 
Pfeiffer’s, and Saethre-Chotzen syndromes. The syndromic 
craniosynostoses not only include bicoronal synostosis but 
also involve the midface, with resulting exorbitism and mid-
face hypoplasia. Multilevel airway anomalies, obstructive sleep 
apnea, corneal exposure, intracranial hypertension, feeding dif-
ficulties, and severe malocclusion are some of the associated 
anomalies found in children with syndromic craniosynostoses. 
In addition to fronto-orbital advancement, facial osteotomies 
(i.e., Le Fort III craniofacial disjunction) are required to treat 
the orbital, midfacial, and occlusal deformities.
Atrophy and Hypoplasia.  The categories of craniofacial atro-
phy and hypoplasia encompass many conditions such as Pierre 
Robin sequence and Romberg’s progressive hemifacial atrophy. 
Pierre Robin sequence is characterized by three pathognomonic 
findings: microretrognathia, glossoptosis, and respiratory dis-
tress. Pierre Robin sequence may or may not be associated with 
a palatal cleft. It is thought by some to occur secondary to a 
fixed and flexed fetal head position that inhibits mandibular 
growth and results in micrognathia. The micrognathia prevents 
the natural caudal migration of the tongue from between the 
clefted palatal shelves, and the resulting deformity as described 
earlier. The functional consequences include intermittent respi-
ratory obstruction and obstructive sleep apnea that may affect 
feeding, growth, and safety of the airway. Treatment of a child 
mildly affected with Pierre Robin sequence may include simply 
positioning the child prone until the child “grows out” of the 
condition. However, if the child is severely affected and unable 
to feed adequately or has an unsafe airway, surgical intervention 
1849
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
is required. For decades, tracheotomy was the initial and defini-
tive treatment of choice; however, today many initially attempt 
a tongue-lip adhesion, treating the glossoptosis and alleviating 
respiratory obstruction by suturing the tongue tip to the lower 
lip. The tongue-lip adhesion is taken down at the time of pala-
toplasty. Should the tongue-lip adhesion not adequately cor-
rect the obstruction, then neonatal mandibular distraction can 
be used to correct the underlying microretrognathia and relieve 
the obstructive symptoms (Fig. 45-21). Another syndrome of 
atrophy and hypoplasia is Romberg’s progressive hemifacial 
atrophy, also known as Parry-Romberg syndrome (Fig. 45-22). 
Romberg’s disease is a disorder of unknown etiology, beginning 
in childhood or adolescence, in which hemifacial atrophy of the 
skin, subcutaneous fat, muscle, bone, and cartilage progresses 
for a variable period of time before spontaneously ceasing or 
“burning out” 2 to 10 years after beginning. Most believe treat-
ment should be delayed until at least 1 year after the process of 
atrophy has ceased. Some hematologists and oncologists have 
treated the early presentation of Romberg’s disease with che-
motherapy. After the cessation of atrophy, reconstruction of the 
craniofacial skeleton and soft tissues may begin with bone and/
or cartilage grafts, alloplastic implants, dermal-fat grafts, fat 
grafting, and possibly free tissue transfers.
Hyperplasia, Hypertrophy, and Neoplasia.  The categories 
of craniofacial hyperplasia, hypertrophy, and neoplasia encompass 
a wide variety of conditions affecting the craniofacial skeleton. 
These include vascular anomalies (discussed later in this chapter), 
neurofibromatosis, hemifacial hypertrophy, and bony conditions 
such as osteomas and fibrous dysplasia. Fibrous dysplasia can be 
monostotic, affecting a single location, or polyostotic, affecting 
more than a single location in the skeleton; it may be associated 
with skin pigmentation abnormalities and endocrine involvement, 
and be termed polyostotic or McCune-Albright syndrome. Treat-
ment of fibrous dysplasia of the craniofacial skeleton includes 
block resection and reconstruction with bone grafts. If extensive 
involvement exists and block resection is not possible or feasible, 
partial resection and contouring of the affected bone is possible, as 
long as there is the understanding that long-term outcomes and the 
behavior of the disease are unpredictable.
Vascular Anomalies
Vascular anomalies are vascular birthmarks that all appear 
similar: flat or raised, in various shades of red and purple.26 For 
centuries, they have been named by similarly colored food and 
drink (i.e., strawberry hemangioma, port-wine stain). Today 
these vascular birthmarks have been biologically classified as 
either hemangiomas or vascular malformations. The Greek 
suffix -oma means “swelling” or “tumor” and today connotes 
a lesion characterized by hyperplasia. Hemangiomas are con-
genital vascular anomalies that undergo a phase of rapid growth 
followed by slow regression, based on endothelial cell kinet-
ics. Malformations are abnormal vascular channels lined with 
quiescent endothelium, usually are seen at birth, never regress, 
and have the potential to expand. The differential diagnosis of 
vascular anomalies is routinely made by a detailed accurate his-
tory and clinical examination. For deep lesions, radiographic 
studies may help determine the diagnosis. Biopsy is used if the 
diagnosis is uncertain or there is concern over the potential of 
malignancy.
Hemangiomas.  The infantile hemangioma is the most com-
mon birthmark, affecting 10% to 12% of whites, with a 3:1 
to 5:1 predilection for females and an increased incidence in 
Figure 45-21.  A. Lateral view of a child with Pierre Robin 
sequence and mandibular microretrognathia. B. Intraoperative 
photo of a submandibular incision and planning for the placement 
of a buried mandibular distractor. C. Lateral view of the child after 
mandibular distraction with slight overcorrection of retrognathia. 
The distractor is still in place as evident from the activating rod seen 
exiting the skin retroauricularly.
1850
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Around the second month of life, they enter the proliferating 
phase in which rapid growth is seen caused by plump, rapidly 
dividing endothelial cells. If the hemangioma is superficial, 
the skin becomes crimson and raised; if the lesion is deep, a 
dark blue or purple color is noted with less superficial swelling. 
Hemangioma growth frequently peeks before the first year, and 
then the lesions enter the involuting phase in which growth is 
commiserate with the child. The involuting phase is character-
ized by diminishing endothelial activity and luminal enlarge-
ment. The lesion begins to “gray,” losing its intense reddish 
color and taking on a purple-gray shade with overlying “crepe 
paper” skin. The involution phase continues until 5 to 10 years 
of age. Regression of the lesion is then complete. The involuted 
phase begins in 50% of children by 5 years of age and in 70% by 
7 years. If there was cutaneous ulceration during the prolifera-
tive phase, a cutaneous scar may persist, along with the yellow-
gray crepe paper–like skin with fibro-fatty deposition. In 50% 
of children, near-normal skin is restored.
The treatment of hemangiomas is largely observational, 
with reassurance of parents that regression and involution will 
occur. Cutaneous ulceration secondary to a proliferating hem-
angioma occurs in 5% of cases and more frequently with lip 
or urogenital lesions. Local wound care, topical application of 
lidocaine for pain, and laser cauterization may be beneficial 
treatment modalities. Problematic or endangering hemangiomas 
(i.e., periocular lesions threatening amblyopia, airway lesions, 
facially disfiguring lesions) occur in 10% of cases. The first-
line treatment for problematic hemangiomas is systemic corti-
costeroid therapy, which is particularly effective (85% response 
rate). Second-line therapies include interferon and vincristine, 
each with its own attendant effectiveness and morbidity. Laser 
therapy has been claimed by some to be effective in the treat-
ment of early hemangiomas; however, there has been no con-
clusive proof that laser therapy either diminishes lesion bulk or 
induces involution. Laser therapy has been effective in lighten-
ing affected skin. Surgery for hemangiomas in the proliferating 
phase is largely limited to treatment of problematic lesions (i.e., 
eyelid lesions threatening amblyopia). Hemangioma surgery 
usually is reserved for the treatment of secondary deformities 
and residual fibro-fatty depositions, among other indications.
Vascular Malformations.  Vascular malformations are sub-
classified by vessel type, such as lymphatic, capillary, venous, 
or arterial, and by rheologic characteristics, such as slow flow 
and fast flow. Slow-flow lesions include capillary malforma-
tions (CMs) and telangiectasias, lymphatic malformations 
(LMs), and venous malformations (VMs). Fast-flow lesions 
include arterial malformations (AMs) and arteriovenous mal-
formations (AVMs). In addition, there are combined malforma-
tions. One such combined lesion occurs in Klippel-Trénaunay 
syndrome in which CMs, LMs, and VMs are found and may be 
associated with soft tissue and skeletal hypertrophy in one or 
more of the limbs (Fig. 45-24A).
CMs are pink-red macular vascular stains that are present 
at birth and persist throughout life. These lesions tend to become 
more verrucous and darker throughout life. CMs are effectively 
treated with a pulsed-dye laser, and the results often are better 
with treatment in infancy and young childhood. Laser therapy 
often is repetitive and prolonged. CMs of the head and neck, his-
torically called port-wine stains, may be associated with Sturge-
Weber syndrome, which includes vascular involvement of the 
leptomeninges and ocular pathology (Fig. 45-24B).
Figure 45-23.  Hemangioma of the ear and retroauricular region.
Figure 45-22.  Frontal view of a child with left-sided Romberg’s 
progressive hemifacial atrophy.
preterm infants (23%) (Fig. 45-23). Hemangiomas are solitary 
in 80% of cases and multiple in 20%. In children with multiple 
(more than three) cutaneous hemangiomas, abdominal ultra-
sound is suggested to rule out hemangiomatosis with visceral 
involvement. Hemangiomas do not cause bleeding disorders; 
however, more invasive lesions such as kaposiform hemangio-
endothelioma can result in Kasabach-Merritt syndrome, charac-
terized by platelet trapping and disordered bleeding.
Hemangiomas are usually first noted around 2 weeks of 
life as a flat pink spot, often confused with a superficial scratch. 
1851
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Figure 45-24.  A. Klippel-Trénaunay syndrome, with combined vascular anomaly (capillary malformation, lymphatic malformation, venous 
malformation) of the leg. B. Sturge-Weber syndrome, with V1 and V2 capillary malformation of the left face. C. Lymphatic malformation of 
the neck, previously referred to as cystic hygroma. D. Venous malformation of the forehead.
1852
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
LMs are anomalous lymphatic channels that never regress 
and have the potential to affect underlying muscle and bone, 
causing significant swelling and bony overgrowth. They have 
historically been called lymphangiomas or cystic hygromas 
(Fig. 45-24C). LMs can be classified as microcystic, mac-
rocystic, or both. LMs expand or contract with the flow of 
lymph, infection, or intralesional hemorrhage. Superficial LMs 
that affect the skin often produce cutaneous vesicles that may 
coalesce and weep lymph fluid. Sclerotherapy remains a major 
treatment modality for LMs, and lesions that are macrocystic 
can be aspirated before sclerotherapy. Although surgery rarely 
removes the entire lesion, surgical resection is the only possibil-
ity for cure. These resections often are challenging, lengthy, and 
associated with significant blood loss, and the potential exists 
for regeneration of lymph channels and recurrence of the LMs 
postoperatively.
VMs are frequently bluish, soft, and compressible, and 
swell when dependent (Fig. 45-24D). VMs grow with the child, 
expand slowly, and may enlarge during puberty. Patients often 
complain about stiffness and pain with thrombosis. VMs can 
affect the skin, muscle, and bone. MRI is the modality of choice 
for imaging these lesions. Preoperative sclerosis followed by 
surgical extirpation is the treatment of choice for VMs that 
cause functional or appearance-related disability. VMs have the 
tendency to recanalize and re-expand. Use of elastic support 
stocking and low-dose aspirin therapy are important adjunctive 
treatment modalities for VMs involving the legs.
Pure AMs are rare and more commonly present as AVMs. 
AVMs appear as red violaceous skin with a palpable mass 
beneath. Local warmth, bruit, and thrill are frequently pres-
ent. AVMs have the likely consequences of ischemic changes, 
ulceration, intractable pain, and intermittent bleeding. The natu-
ral history of AVMs has been described as consisting of four 
stages: quiescence, expansion, destruction, and decompensa-
tion. Usually, treatment for AVM is initiated when signs and 
symptoms of ischemic pain, ulceration, bleeding, or hemody-
namic instability (stages 3 and 4) are evident. Surgical treatment 
includes arterial embolization to temporarily occlude the nidus 
24 to 72 hours before surgical extirpation. The nidus and overly-
ing affected skin must be widely excised, and reconstruction can 
be performed afterward.
Congenital Melanocytic Nevi
Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMNs) contain nevus cells and 
are usually present at birth. Lesions are frequently light to dark 
brown and round or oval, and vary greatly in size, pattern, 
and anatomic location. The most common location of CMNs 
is the trunk, followed by the extremities and head and neck. 
Frequently, larger lesions are associated with multiple smaller 
satellite lesions. Over time, these lesions may become less (or 
sometimes more) pigmented and develop hypertrichosis and 
a variegated texture, including nodularity. Small CMNs are 
<1.5 cm in diameter, and large ones are >10 cm. Giant CMNs 
usually are >20 cm in their greatest dimension in adulthood, 
and this correlates with a 9-cm scalp lesion or a 6-cm trunk 
lesion in an infant. All CMNs should be monitored for wor-
risome changes that indicate the need for biopsy, including 
ulceration, uneven pigmentation, change in shape, and nodular-
ity. There is controversy over the actual incidence of malig-
nant transformation of CMNs; however, most experts believe 
that melanoma may arise directly from a CMN. No convinc-
ing study to date has proven that excision of a CMN reduces 
the rate of malignant transformation to melanoma; however, 
many clinicians feel that excision serves at least to debulk the 
lesion. The reported lifetime risk for melanoma arising in small 
or large CMNs is between 0% and 5%; the risk for giant CMNs 
is estimated to be between 5% and 10%.27 In addition to being 
at risk for melanoma, patients with large or giant CMNs are at 
risk for neurocutaneous melanocytosis (leptomeningeal mela-
nosis), and this condition includes collections of melanocytes 
in the leptomeninges. Neurocutaneous melanocytosis carries a 
lifetime nonreducible risk of central nervous system melanoma 
and other morbidity and mortality from seizures, hydrocephalus, 
and other central nervous system conditions. MRI screening for 
infants born with large or giant CMNs is recommended to make 
the diagnosis of neurocutaneous melanocytosis.
Many different treatments have been advocated for the 
child with CMN; however, the overwhelming goals are to 
remove (or at least reduce) the risk of malignant transforma-
tion, preserve function, and improve cosmesis. Dermabrasion, 
chemical peels, and laser therapy have been reported to improve 
the appearance; however, none of these modalities completely 
removes nevus cells. To address malignant potential, only com-
plete excision is a possible solution, and this is difficult, because 
nevus cells may extend beyond the skin and into the deep sub-
cutaneous tissue and even the underlying muscle. The surgi-
cal options include direct excision and primary closure, serial 
excision, excision and skin grafting, and staged tissue expan-
sion with subsequent lesion excision and flap reconstruction 
(Fig. 45-25). Treatment options have particular indications with 
respect to the location of the nevus. Scalp lesions are best 
treated with tissue expansion. Full-thickness skin grafting is best 
used for ear and eyelid reconstruction. Tissue expansion is 
associated with increased morbidity in lower extremity recon-
struction, and therefore excision and grafting, even with previ-
ously expanded full-thickness skin grafts, is often the treatment 
of choice. In summary, CMNs often are treated surgically to 
decrease the risk of malignant degeneration to melanoma as 
well as to correct the significant appearance-related deformity.
RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY
Facial Reconstruction after Fracture
General Principles.  As technologic advances raise the level of 
energy involved in modern systems of transportation, recreation, 
and weaponry, so follow increases in the degree of maxillofacial 
destruction related to misadventures with this technology. The 
first phase of care for the patient with maxillofacial trauma is 
activation of the advanced trauma life support protocol. Con-
comitant injuries beyond the face are the rule rather than the 
exception. The most common life-threatening considerations 
in the facial trauma patient are airway maintenance, control of 
bleeding, identification and treatment of aspiration, and iden-
tification of other injuries. Once the patient’s condition has 
been stabilized and life-threatening injuries treated, attention is 
directed to diagnosis and management of craniofacial injuries.
Physical examination of the face with attention to lacera-
tions, bony step-offs, instability, tenderness, ecchymosis, facial 
asymmetry, and deformity guides the examiner to underlying 
hard tissue injuries. Traditional specialized radiography has 
largely been replaced by widely available high-resolution CT. 
Coronal, sagittal, and three-dimensional reconstructions of 
images further elucidate complex injuries.
4
1853
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Mandible Fractures.  Mandibular fractures are common inju-
ries that may lead to permanent disability if not diagnosed and 
properly treated. The mandibular angle, ramus, coronoid pro-
cess, and condyle are points of attachment for the muscles of 
mastication, including the masseter, temporalis, lateral ptery-
goid, and medial pterygoid muscles (Fig. 45-26). Fractures are 
frequently multiple, and disturbances in dental occlusion reflect 
the forces of the many muscles of mastication on the fracture 
segments. Dental occlusion is perhaps the most important 
basic relationship to understand about fracture of the midface 
and mandible. The Angle classification system describes the 
relationship of the maxillary teeth to the mandibular teeth. 
Class I is normal occlusion, with the mesial buccal cusp of the 
first maxillary molar fitting into the intercuspal groove of the 
mandibular first molar. Class II malocclusion is characterized 
by anterior (mesial) positioning, and class III malocclusion is 
posterior (distal) positioning of the maxillary teeth with respect 
to the mandibular teeth (Fig. 45-27).
Nonsurgical treatment may be used in situations in which 
there is minimal displacement, preservation of the pretraumatic 
occlusive relationship, and normal range of motion. The goals 
of surgical treatment include restoration of pretraumatic den-
tal occlusion, reduction and stable fixation of the fracture, and 
repair of soft tissue. Operative repair involves seating of the 
Figure 45-25.  A. Congenital melanocytic nevus (CMN) of the posterior shoulder. B. Treatment of CMN of the posterior shoulder with tissue 
expansion. C. Appearance of the posterior shoulder after removal of tissue expanders, excision of the CMN, and flap coverage.
1854
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
postoperative objectives is release from maxillary-mandibular 
fixation and resumption of range of motion as soon as possible 
to minimize the risk of ankylosis. Other potential complications 
include infection, nonunion, malunion, malocclusion, facial 
nerve branch injury, infra-alveolar or mental nerve injury, and 
dental fractures.
Orbital Fractures.  Treatment of all but the simplest orbital 
injuries should include evaluation by an eye specialist to assess 
visual acuity and rule out globe injury. Orbital fractures may 
involve the orbital roof, floor, or lateral or medial walls. The 
most common orbital fracture is the orbital floor blow-out frac-
ture caused by direct pressure to the globe and sudden increase 
in intraorbital pressure. Because the medial floor and inferior 
medial wall are made of the thinnest bone, fractures occur most 
frequently at these locations. These injuries may be treated 
expectantly if they are sufficiently small and without complica-
tion. However, larger blow-out fractures and those associated 
with enophthalmos (increased intraorbital volume), entrapment 
of inferior orbital tissues, or diplopia lasting >2 weeks gener-
ally require surgical treatment.28 There are many approaches 
to the orbital floor, including the transconjunctival, subciliary, 
and lower blepharoplasty incisions. All provide access to the 
orbital floor and allow for repair with a multitude of different 
autogenous and synthetic materials. Late complications include 
persistent diplopia, enophthalmos, ectropion, and entropion.
Lateral and inferior orbital rim fractures also are not 
uncommon and are often associated with the zygomaticomaxil-
lary complex fracture pattern, as discussed later.
Special mention should be made of two uncommon com-
plications after orbital fracture. Superior orbital fissure syn-
drome results from compression of structures contained in the 
superior orbital fissure in the posterior orbit. These include 
cranial nerves III, IV, and VI, and the first sensory division of 
cranial nerve V. Compression of these structures leads to symp-
toms of eyelid ptosis, globe proptosis, paralysis of the extraocu-
lar muscles, and anesthesia in the cranial nerve V1 distribution. 
If the optic nerve (cranial nerve II) is also involved, symptoms 
include blindness and the syndrome is dubbed orbital apex syn-
drome. Both of these syndromes are medical emergencies, and 
steroid therapy and surgical decompression are considered.
Zygoma and Zygomaticomaxillary Complex Fractures.  
The zygoma forms the lateral and inferior borders of the orbit. 
It articulates with the sphenoid bone in the lateral orbit, the 
maxilla medially and inferiorly, the frontal bone superiorly, 
and the temporal bone laterally (Fig. 45-28). Zygoma fractures 
may involve the arch alone or many of its bony relationships. 
Isolated arch fractures manifest as a flattened, wide face with 
associated edema and ecchymosis. Nondisplaced fractures may 
be treated nonsurgically, whereas displaced and comminuted 
arch fractures may be reduced and stabilized indirectly (Gilles 
approach) or, for more complicated fractures, directly through 
a coronal incision.
The zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fracture 
involves disruption of the zygomatic arch, the inferior orbital 
rim buttress, the zygomaticomaxillary buttress, the lateral orbital 
wall, and the zygomaticofrontal buttress. The fracture segment 
tends to rotate laterally and inferiorly, creating an expanded 
orbital volume, limited mandibular excursion, an inferior cant 
to the palpebral fissure, and a flattened malar eminence. ZMC 
fractures are almost always accompanied by numbness in the 
infraorbital nerve distribution and subconjunctival hematoma. 
Coronoid
process
Ramus
Angle
Body
Symphysis
Condyle
Figure 45-26.  Mandibular anatomy. (Reproduced with permission 
from Thornton J, Hollier L. Facial fractures II: lower third. Selected 
Readings Plast Surg. 2002;9:1.)
I
III
II
Figure 45-27.  Angle classification. Class I: The mesial buccal 
cusp of the maxillary first molar fits into the intercuspal groove 
of the mandibular first molar. Class II: The mesial buccal cusp of 
the maxillary first molar is mesial to the intercuspal groove of the 
mandibular first molar. Class III: The mesial buccal cusp of the 
maxillary first molar is distal to the intercuspal groove of the man-
dibular first molar. (Reproduced with permission from Thornton 
J, Hollier L. Facial fractures II: lower third. Selected Readings 
Plast Surg. 2002;9:1.)
condyles within the glenoid fossa, achievement of maxillary-
mandibular fixation with arch bars or intermaxillary screws to 
establish proper dental occlusion, and intraoral, extraoral, or 
combination surgical exposure of fracture lines. The mandib-
ular plating approach follows one of two schools of thought: 
rigid fixation as espoused by the Association for Osteosynthe-
sis/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation (AO/ASIF) 
and less rigid but functionally stable fixation (Champy tech-
nique). Regardless of the stabilization approach, one of the 
1855
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
deformity from collapse of the nose, ethmoids, and medial 
orbits; displacement of medial canthal ligament fixation; and 
nasolacrimal apparatus disruption. Telecanthus is produced 
by splaying apart of the nasomaxillary buttresses to which the 
medial canthal ligaments are attached. Treatment typically 
involves plating or wiring all bone fragments meticulously, 
potentially with primary bone grafting, to restore their normal 
configuration. Key to the successful repair of an NOE fracture 
is the careful re-establishment of the nasomaxillary buttress and 
restoration of the pretrauma fixation points of the medial can-
thal ligaments. If comminution is severe, this may be achievable 
using transnasal wiring of the ligaments.
Frontal Sinus Fractures.  The region of the frontal sinus is a 
relatively weak structural point in the upper face. For this rea-
son, it is a common location for fracture in facial trauma. The 
paired sinuses each have an anterior bony table that determines 
the contour of the forehead and a posterior table that separates 
the sinus from the dura. Each sinus drains through the medial 
floor into its frontonasal duct, which empties into the middle 
meatus within the nose. Treatment of a frontal sinus fracture 
depends on the fracture characteristics (Fig. 45-29).
Nasal Fractures.  The nose is the most common facial fracture 
site due to its prominent location, and such fracture can involve 
the cartilaginous nasal septum, the nasal bones, or both. It is 
important to perform an intranasal examination to determine 
whether a septal hematoma is present. If present, a septal hema-
toma must be incised, drained, and packed to prevent pressure 
necrosis of the nasal septum and long-term midvault collapse. 
Closed reduction of nasal fractures may be performed under 
local or general anesthesia. Unfortunately, many, if not most, 
show some deformity upon final healing, requiring rhinoplasty 
if airway obstruction is present or if improved appearance is 
desired.
Panfacial Fractures.  Fractures of multiple bones in various 
locations fall into the category of panfacial fracture. These may 
involve frontal and maxillary sinus fractures, NOE fractures, 
orbital and ZMC fractures, palatal fractures, and complex man-
dible fractures. The difficulty in the repair of these injuries lies 
not in the technical aspects of fixation but in the reestablishment 
of normal relationships between facial features in the absence of 
all pretraumatic reference points. Without proper correction of 
bony fragment relationships, facial width is exaggerated and 
facial projection is lost. The key point in approaching the patient 
with a panfacial fracture is first to reduce and repair the zygo-
matic arches and frontal bar to establish the frame and width of 
the face. The nasomaxillary and zygomaticomaxillary buttresses 
may then be repaired within this correct frame. Next, the maxilla 
may be reduced to this framework, followed by palatal fixation 
if needed. Finally, now that the midface relationships have been 
corrected, maxillary-mandibular fixation can be applied with 
the mandible in correct occlusion followed by plating of any 
mandibular fractures.29
Ear Reconstruction
Acquired defects of the auricle have many causes, and many 
different choices for reconstruction are available. Reconstruc-
tive approach often is determined by the size and location of the 
defect. Small helical lesions may be simply excised as a wedge 
and closed primarily. Larger defects of the upper and middle 
thirds of the ear may use antihelical and conchal cartilage reduc-
tion patterns to reduce the circumference of the helix to allow 
Frontal
Temporal
Sphenoid
Zygoma
Maxilla
Sphenoid
Frontal
Zygoma
Maxilla
Temporal
A
B
Figure 45-28.  Facial bone anatomy. (Reproduced with permission 
from Hollier and Thornton.28)
Displaced fractures are treated by exposure through multiple 
incisions to gain access to all of the buttresses requiring fixation. 
These include the upper eyelid incision (zygomaticofrontal but-
tress and lateral orbital wall), the subtarsal or transconjunctival 
incision (orbital floor and infraorbital rim), and the maxillary 
gingivobuccal sulcus incision (zygomaticomaxillary buttress). 
Again, significantly complex zygomatic fractures require wide 
exposure through a coronal approach.5
Naso-Orbital-Ethmoid Fractures.  Naso-orbital-ethmoid 
(NOE) fractures are often part of a constellation of panfacial 
fractures and intracranial injuries. Anatomically, the fracture 
pattern involves the medial orbits, nasal bones, nasal pro-
cesses of the frontal bone, and frontal processes of the maxilla. 
These injuries result in severe functional deficit and cosmetic 
1856
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
primary closure. When helical defects are too large for this solu-
tion, local flaps may be used to close or re-create the missing 
tissue. Postauricular flaps created in staged procedures may be 
manipulated to create a skin tube mimicking the furled helix 
and bridging the gap of a defect. Alternatively, use of an Antia-
Buch chondrocutaneous advancement flap combined with car-
tilaginous reduction allows for closure of defects30 (Fig. 45-30). 
Even larger defects of the upper and middle thirds of the ear 
may be reconstructed with large local skin flaps combined with 
contralateral cartilage grafts or contralateral composite grafts. 
Although ear lobe defects are relatively simple to close primar-
ily, lower third auricular defects that involve more than just the 
lobe are complex and require cartilaginous support, often com-
bined with local skin flaps.
Nasal Reconstruction
Reconstruction of the nose requires appreciation of the nine 
aesthetic subunits that are defined by normal anatomic con-
tours and lighting patterns (Fig. 45-31). In general, if a defect 
involves ≥50% of a subunit, the remainder of the subunit should 
be excised and included in the reconstruction. The nose can 
be thought of as being composed of three layers: skin cover, 
structural support, and mucosal lining. When a defect or antici-
pated defect is evaluated, it is useful to consider what layers of 
tissue will be missing so that a reconstruction can be devised 
that replaces each layer. Healing by secondary intention is suc-
cessfully used in concavities such as the alar groove. Split- or 
full-thickness skin grafts may be used for superficial defects of 
the nasal dorsum or sidewall. Composite grafts may be used 
for the nasal tip or alar rim (see Fig. 45-3). Local random pat-
tern flaps are useful in closing small defects of the dorsum 
and tip and may be combined with cartilage grafts if structural 
support is needed. Axial pattern flaps are commonly used for 
larger defects. These flaps have the advantage of being able to 
cover and revascularize underlying cartilage grafts and enjoy a 
close color match to surrounding skin. Workhorse flaps used in 
nasal reconstruction include the nasolabial flap and the parame-
dian forehead flap (Fig. 45-32). Even larger defects may require 
scalping flaps or free radial forearm flaps. Split calvarial canti-
lever bone grafts may provide the nasal dorsum support. Lining 
is generally achieved with scar tissue turnover flaps, mucoperi-
chondrial flaps from within the nasal vestibule, or skin grafting 
of the underside of transposed flaps.
Lip Reconstruction
The lips are important for articulate speech, eating, maintenance 
of oral competence, facial expression, and aesthetic harmony 
of the lower face. Three layers of tissue form the upper and 
lower lips: skin, muscle, and mucosa. Blood supply is through 
the facial artery and its branches to the lip, the superior and 
inferior labial arteries. Lip defects can arise from trauma, burns, 
neoplasms, congenital lesions, clefts, or infection. As with 
almost all types of reconstruction, choice of technique is heav-
ily dependent on defect size, location, and deficient structures. 
The goals of lip reconstruction are restoration of the competent 
oral sphincter with vermilion apposition, preservation of sensa-
tion, and avoidance of microstomia, all while preserving a near-
normal static and dynamic appearance. In the upper and lower 
lip, vermilion-only defects can be corrected with advancement 
of the labial mucosa, often called a lip shave. In defects of less 
than one-third the horizontal length, enough redundancy is pres-
ent to allow primary closure. More complex decisions must be 
made for defects that are between one-third and two-thirds of 
the total lip length.
Closed
Open
Yes
Yes
No
No
Anterior
table only
Anterior and
posterior
tables 
Observation
Anterior ORIF
Anterior ORIF
Anterior ORIF
Cranialization of sinus
Obliteration of NF duct
bone grafting orifice
fat/fascial grafting orifice
flap coverage of cavity
removal of posterior table
burring of mucosa
-
-
-
-
-
Exploration
Establish Diagnosis
Physical exam
CT scan
Depressed?
CSF leak or
displaced
posterior wall?
Figure 45-29.  Algorithm for the treatment of frontal sinus fracture. CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; CT = computed tomography; NF = nasofron-
tal; ORIF = open reduction, internal fixation.
1857
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
The two categories of lip flap technique are transoral 
cross-lip flaps and circumoral advancements flaps. Cross-lip 
flaps include the Abbé flap and the Estlander flap. The Abbé 
flap was originally designed to reconstruct central upper lip 
(tubercle) defects with lower lip full-thickness tissue vascular-
ized by one of the labial arteries (Fig. 45-33). The technique 
requires a second-stage procedure for division of the pedicle. 
The Estlander flap is similar in principle but is based laterally at 
the oral commissure and is used to reconstruct lateral upper or 
lower lip lesions. Both the Estlander and Abbé flaps are dener-
vated, but sensation and perhaps even motor function return 
over months.31 The Karapandzic technique is an advancement-
rotation flap technique designed for central lower lip defects. 
Although good function, sensation, and mobility are preserved, 
a side effect is reduction in the size of the oral aperture. The 
Webster-Bernard technique uses cheek tissue advancement 
flaps to replace defects with full-thickness or partial-thick-
ness cheek incisions extended laterally from the commissure 
(Fig. 45-34). When performed bilaterally, both the Karapandzic 
and the Webster-Bernard methods can be used to reconstruct a 
complete upper or lower lip.
In addition, microvascular free tissue transfer reconstruc-
tion may be necessary in cases where there is no remaining lip. 
The radial forearm free flap is the most commonly used for this 
purpose, usually transferred with the palmaris longus tendon 
for lip support.
Figure 45-30.  Modified Antia-Buch ear reconstruction. A. Superior helix lesion. B. Excision pattern and reconstruction markings. C. Defect, 
flap elevation, and cartilage reduction. D. V-Y advancement of the flap. E. Flap insetting. F. Appearance at 1 month after surgery. (Photographs 
reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1858
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
dorsum
sidewall
sidewall
tip
ala
ala
soft triangle
columella
soft triangle
Figure 45-31.  Nasal aesthetic subunits. (Photograph reproduced 
with permission from M. Gimbel.)
Figure 45-32.  Nasal reconstruction with axial pattern flaps. Top row: Nasolabial flap reconstruction of an alar defect. Bottom row: Parame-
dian forehead flap reconstruction of the nasal lobule. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
Eyelid Reconstruction
The eyelids protect the eye from exposure and are another cru-
cial aesthetic structure of the face. They consist of an anterior 
lamella (skin and orbicularis oculi muscle) and a posterior 
lamella (tarsus and conjunctiva). The eyelid blood supply is 
robust, and ischemia is rarely a concern in reconstruction.
Upper Eyelid.  Defects comprising <25% of the upper eyelid 
can generally be closed primarily in pentagonal approximating 
fashion (Fig. 45-35). For defects involving 25% to 50% of the 
upper eyelid, lateral canthotomy (release of the lateral canthal 
tendon) and cantholysis (release of the superior limb of the lat-
eral palpebral tendon) can be performed to allow advancement 
and are often combined with use of a lateral semicircular flap 
(Fig. 45-36). Defects larger than 50% of the upper eyelid may be 
reconstructed with a Cutler-Beard full-thickness advancement 
flap or a modified Hughes tarsoconjunctival advancement flap 
(Fig. 45-37).
Lower Eyelid.  Lower eyelid reconstruction considerations 
parallel those for the upper eyelid. In addition, special atten-
tion must be given to the prevention of scleral visibility and 
ectropion, which can arise from excessive vertical tension due 
to either technique or scarring. Similar reconstructive meth-
ods may be used, including direct closure, semicircular flaps 
and canthal release, and advancement flaps. Grafts may also 
be used if the defect is partial thickness. Full-thickness con-
tralateral upper eyelid skin grafts are suitable for replacing 
the anterior lamella. The posterior lamella requires sturdy, 
nonkeratinized graft tissue, such as cartilage (tarsal, ear, or 
1859
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
nasal septal) or hard palate mucosal grafts, to allow globe 
apposition.32
Ptosis.  In the normal eyelid, the orbicularis oculi muscle, 
Müller’s muscle, and levator palpebrae muscle act in concert to 
open and close the palpebral aperture and to maintain the level 
of the upper eyelid with respect to the pupil. Eyelid ptosis is cre-
ated by derangement of this cooperative action. Ptosis may be 
congenital or acquired. Congenital ptosis is caused by lid anom-
alies, ophthalmoplegia, and synkinesis, whereas acquired ptosis 
can be neurogenic, myogenic, or traumatic in nature. Horner’s 
syndrome is a form of neurogenic ptosis caused by interrupted 
sympathetic innervation that leads to ptosis, miosis, and anhy-
drosis. A thorough evaluation of the ptotic patient includes a 
general eye and visual acuity examination, attention to signs of 
exposure or irritation, measurement of marginal-reflex distance, 
observation of the height of the supratarsal fold, and assess-
ment of levator function. Severity of ptosis and degree of levator 
dysfunction are critical in deciding the appropriate corrective 
procedure (Table 45-11). Mild ptosis may be addressed with 
the Fasanella-Servat procedure, which involves excision of the 
superior tarsal edge, conjunctiva, and levator aponeurosis, and 
mullerectomy. Other corrections of mild ptosis usually involve 
variations on this procedure. Moderate ptosis with fair to good 
levator function may be treated with some form of a levator apo-
neurosis shortening procedure. Severe ptosis with poor levator 
Figure 45-33.  Abbé flap upper lip reconstruction. A. Defect and flap design. B. Rotation of the flap and primary closure of the donor site. 
C. Division of the pedicle (after 2 to 3 weeks) and final insetting.
Figure 45-34.  Webster-Bernard lip reconstruction technique. 
(Reproduced with permission from Closmann JJ, Pogrel A, Schmidt 
BL. Reconstruction of perioral defects following resection for oral 
squamous cell carcinoma. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2006;64:367. 
kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Figure 45-35.  Upper eyelid defect of <25%. Primary closure. 
(Reproduced with permission from Pham RT. Reconstruction of the 
upper eyelid. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2005;38:1023. Copy-
right Elsevier.)
Incision in nasolabial
skin crease
Mucosal incision
for lower lip 
reconstruction
Base of triangle 
1/2 width of defect
Area to be resected 
with 1 cm margins
Area to become
lip mucosa
1860
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
function requires use of an alternate eyelid motor. The frontalis 
muscle fascial sling technique, which uses strips of fascial grafts 
sutured to the frontalis muscle, is one such solution.
Skull and Scalp Reconstruction
Scalp Reconstruction.  The scalp is formed of five layers: 
Skin, subCutaneous tissue, galea Aponeurotica, Loose areolar 
tissue, and Pericranium (SCALP). The scalp is well vascu-
larized bilaterally by branches of the external carotid artery, 
including the superficial temporal arteries, the occipital arter-
ies, and the posterior auricular arteries. In addition, the bilat-
eral supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries contribute to the 
A
B
Figure 45-36.  Upper eyelid defect of 25% to 50%. A. Lateral can-
thotomy. B. Semicircular flap. (Reproduced with permission from 
Pham RT. Reconstruction of the upper eyelid. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am. 2005;38:1023. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
­forehead and anterior scalp blood supply. These vessels run 
in the subcutaneous tissue layer, just superficial to the galea. 
Because of this rich blood supply, scalp lacerations can lead to 
dramatic blood loss, an event that usually can be curtailed by a 
simple running/locking suture closure.
Partial-thickness scalp loss due to trauma usually occurs 
at the level of the loose areolar tissue plane and is treated 
initially with débridement of devitalized tissue. If a partial-
thickness defect is small enough, primary closure or skin graft 
can be used. Although the cosmetic result is often less than 
desirable, all layers of the scalp will accept a skin graft, includ-
ing the calvaria if it is burred down to its diploë. Because the 
scalp is relatively inelastic, scoring of the galeal layer often 
facilitates closure of full-thickness defects, but care must be 
taken to avoid lacerating the blood vessels just superficial to the 
galea. Larger areas of loss (4–8 cm) may be covered with large 
scalp flaps, as classically described by Orticochea.33 Grafting 
of defects or donor sites leaves a visible area of alopecia. Tis-
sue expansion has been very successful in replacing scarred or 
grafted regions with hair-bearing skin. Defects larger than 8 to 
10 cm are best treated with microsurgical free tissue transfer. 
Total or subtotal scalp avulsions are rare injuries that usually 
occur when a person’s long hair becomes caught in rotating 
machinery. These potentially devastating injuries are ideally 
treated by scalp replantation, because the avulsed segment usu-
ally has preserved vessels (Fig. 45-38).
Calvarial Reconstruction.  Autogenous bone remains the 
material of choice for reconstruction of skull defects. Its advan-
tages include resistance to infection and ability to heal with 
strength. All autogenous bone sources have the disadvantage 
of donor site morbidity. Bone grafts can be harvested from a 
normal area of the calvaria, of which the outer table may be used 
as a graft for defects of limited size. Care must be taken during 
harvest to avoid compromise of the inner table. Rib bone may 
also be used, either as a split-rib graft or as a microsurgical free 
osseous flap. Unfortunately, use of ribs to reconstruct the skull 
may give an unappealing “washboard” appearance to the scalp. 
Another disadvantage of bone grafts, although not flaps, is graft 
resorption over time.
Alternative materials to autogenous bone exist for cal-
varial reconstruction, including methyl methacrylate, titanium, 
and hydroxyapatite (with or without bone morphogenic pro-
tein). Although they have the advantage of no donor site, these 
plastics and metals are associated with a higher risk of infec-
tion necessitating removal. Various formulations of calcium 
phosphate hydroxyapatites are being actively studied as bone 
replacement materials.
Head and Neck Reconstruction
The head and neck region has a compact arrangement of criti-
cal and complex structures encasing the essential routes to the 
gastrointestinal and respiratory systems. The tissues of the face, 
mouth, and cavities serve as a primary communication interface 
with the external environment through facial and verbal expres-
sion. Therefore, cancer resections with adequate safety margins 
can be severely and multiply debilitating. The management of 
head and neck cancer patients demands an integrated multi-
disciplinary team approach that includes the skills of ablative 
and reconstructive surgeons, medical and radiation oncologists, 
pathologists, nutritionists, and functional and psychological 
rehabilitation specialists.
1861
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Tumor-Ablative Surgery.  The freedom available to the 
ablative surgeon to completely excise a tumor is limited, at 
least partly, by the capability of the reconstructive surgeon 
to restore anatomic continuity and achieve successful wound 
healing. A neck dissection to remove cervical lymphatics and 
nodes may be performed for prophylactic or curative intent, 
for more accurate prognostication by operative staging, and/
or for solidification of plans for adjunctive treatments. It 
is important to be familiar with the tumor-node-metastasis 
(TNM) classification and staging of head and neck cancers. 
The N and M parameters are fairly constant for most head 
and neck cancers, whereas the T parameter varies according 
to tumor location.
A
C
B
D
Figure 45-37.  Upper eyelid defect of >50%. A and B. Cutler-Beard full-thickness lower eyelid advancement flap. C and D. Hughes lower 
eyelid tarsoconjunctival advancement flap. (Reproduced with permission from Pham RT. Reconstruction of the upper eyelid. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am. 2005;38:1023. kkjkjdht Elsevier.)
Table 45-11
Eyelid ptosis classification
Classification of ptosis severity
  Mild
1–2 mm
  Moderate
3 mm
  Severe
4+ mm
Classification of levator function
  Excellent
12–15 mm
  Good
8–12 mm
  Fair
5–7 mm
  Poor
2–4 mm
1862
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Principles of Reconstruction.  The reconstructive surgeon 
aims to restore lost anatomic components adequately. Residual 
deficits, seemingly inconsequential, may progress to psycholog-
ical morbidity, societal malacceptance, and social withdrawal. 
Uncomplicated and timely wound healing is important to allow 
adjuvant therapies when indicated and smooth discharge to 
home and occupation.
Each defect can be addressed by a number of methods, 
but the technique must be decided for each individual patient. 
Although a more complex reconstruction might offer improved 
outcomes, it may bring an increased risk of complications. Some 
patients may therefore benefit from use of a simpler method 
with more acceptable anesthetic and operative risk rather than a 
gold-standard reconstruction. Such an approach may be appro-
priate, for example, for an elderly patient with an advanced T4 
cancer and short life expectancy. Reconstruction is impossible 
for some functional losses, such as the enucleation of an eye, 
but replacement by a reasonably aesthetic prosthesis may be 
achievable.34
Reconstructive Options by Region.  Before the 1970s, 
autogenous tissue reconstructions were largely restricted to 
local or regional pedicled flaps, including the trapezius, pec-
toralis, and deltopectoral workhorse flaps. With microvascular 
free tissue transplantation, defects that were previously deemed 
nearly impossible to reconstruct can now be addressed in a sin-
gle operation. Consequently, head and neck cancers that were 
historically unresectable have become more operable.
Intraoral Structures  The reconstructive choice for floor of 
mouth, tongue, and other intraoral defects is dictated by the 
dimension of the defect, the volume of tissue lost, and residual 
tongue mobility. The tongue and adjacent mucosal surfaces heal 
exceptionally well, so small defects may be treated by primary 
closure or even left to heal spontaneously. Smaller defects, less 
than one-fourth glossectomy, may be treated with a skin graft or 
perhaps primary closure if tongue mobility is preserved. Larger 
defects, more than one-third glossectomy, call for reconstruc-
tion by free tissue transfer, commonly a free radial forearm or 
anterolateral thigh flap for smaller- or larger-volume defects, 
Figure 45-38.  Twenty-five-year-old woman with 70% scalp avulsion after a pedestrian-automobile accident. Top row: Defect and specimen 
intraoperatively. Bottom row: Appearance 9 weeks after microsurgical scalp replantation. (Photographs reproduced with permission from 
M. Gimbel.)
1863
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
respectively. Total glossectomy defects are a major challenge, 
and no ideal method exists to restore tongue motor functions. 
The primary goal is to protect the airway from aspiration. Swal-
lowing and articulation are often suboptimal after total glos-
sectomy reconstructions. Options include bulkier myocutaneous 
free flaps harvested from the anterolateral thigh, the back (latis-
simus dorsi), or the abdomen (rectus abdominis), or pedicled 
regional flaps (e.g., latissimus dorsi).35
The reconstructive choice for other intraoral soft tissue 
defects should also take into consideration the specific char-
acteristics of the defect, such as its thickness and dimensions, 
and involvement of the oral commissure, facial skin, and/or 
neck. Buccal defects, for example, may be adequately treated 
with a radial forearm free flap or a thin anterolateral thigh 
flap. Thicker defects may be more appropriately reconstructed 
with a fasciocutaneous anterolateral thigh free flap. Those that 
extend through the full thickness of the cheek to involve the 
external facial skin may be reconstructed with a cutaneous or 
myocutaneous anterolateral thigh free flap that has been folded 
to address the internal mucosal, external skin, and intervening 
soft tissue defects simultaneously.36 When the contour of the 
neck is expected to be sunken and asymmetric after a neck 
dissection, it is possible to improve symmetry by insetting 
part of the flap into the neck. This maneuver also obliterates 
dead space and helps protect the adjacent major neurovascular 
structures.
Mandible and Midface  Mandibular defects may arise from the 
ablation of tumors involving the bone itself or from the need to 
satisfy clearance margins for adjacent soft tissue tumors. Seg-
mental mandibular defects can be classified as isolated bone 
defects, compound defects (bone and oral lining or skin), com-
posite defects (bone, oral lining, and skin), or extensive com-
posite defects (bone, oral lining, skin, and soft tissues).37 The 
primary goals of mandibular reconstruction are to restore bony 
continuity, masticatory (with accurate dental occlusion) and 
speech functions, and facial contour, and to maintain tongue 
mobility. Occasionally, a small segmental mandibular defect 
may be amenable to reconstruction with a nonvascularized bone 
graft, but these are poorly suited to the forces of mastication 
and are prone to resorption and failure amid radiotherapy or 
infection.
The best option for most segmental mandibular defects is 
the fibula bone free flap with an adjoined skin island supplied 
by reliable septocutaneous vessels (occasionally musculocu-
taneous perforators) from the peroneal artery and vein; this is 
termed a fibula osteoseptocutaneous free flap.38 Its many desir-
able characteristics include (a) the ability to withstand multiple 
osteotomies (as long as the periosteal blood supply is protected) 
so that the bone can be folded to re-create the contour of any 
mandibular region, (b) an unmatched supply of sturdy bone 
length (22–26 cm in the adult) sufficient to reconstruct even 
angle-to-angle defects, (c) a bicorticocancellous structure that 
can tolerate the forces of mastication as well as the incorpora-
tion of osseointegrated dental implants, (d) acceptable donor 
site morbidity when the flap is appropriately harvested, and (e) 
a donor site location that allows a two-team approach for simul-
taneous tumor ablation and flap harvest.39,40 Reasonable alterna-
tives include vascularized bone flaps from the iliac crest, radius, 
or ribs. Extensive composite mandibular defects may demand 
more than one free flap (such as one anterolateral thigh free flap 
with one fibula osteoseptocutaneous free flap) to reconstruct the 
entire anatomy in one operation.41 Later, dental rehabilitation 
can be achieved with conventional dentures if alveolar ridge 
height and soft tissue quality allow. However, for select patients, 
osseointegrated dental implants offer a far superior alternative. 
These can be secured into the neomandible, either at the time 
of reconstruction (primarily; Fig. 45-39) or more commonly at 
a later stage (secondarily), and ultimately will support a dental 
prosthesis that can closely match the native dentition for excel-
lent aesthetic and masticatory outcomes.42
Similar principles are also applicable to other bony defects 
in the head and neck region, including maxillary and other mid-
facial defects, although non–load-bearing, facial, bone-only 
defects may be more amenable to nonvascularized bone grafting 
such as from the calvarium. The goals of midface reconstruction 
include the restoration of facial contour and projection, achieve-
ment of accurately occlusive maxillary dentition, provision of 
appropriate infraocular support, and sealed separation of adja-
cent nasal and oral cavities.
Esophagus and Hypopharynx  The goals of reconstruction for 
esophageal and hypopharyngeal defects, which may be cir-
cumferential or partial, are to maintain luminal patency, restore 
speech and swallowing, and avoid strictures, fistulas, and gastro-
intestinal anastomotic leaks. Reconstructive options for partial 
defects include primary closure, if luminal narrowing is insig-
nificant, and skin (or dermal) grafts for partial-lining defects. 
A regional muscle flap may be useful for patching small full-
thickness defects, but larger defects call for free tissue transfer of 
a jejunal flap or a tubed fasciocutaneous flap.43 The jejunal flap 
involves the harvest of a proximal segment based on its mesen-
teric blood supply and inset into the neck in the isoperistaltic 
direction. Disadvantages of the jejunal flap include halitosis, 
slow swallowing transit times, and a “wet” voice. Tubed fascio-
cutaneous free flap options, including the anterolateral thigh and 
radial forearm flaps, are also popular; however, they may have a 
greater risk of stricturing than the free jejunal flap. Nevertheless, 
proponents of such flaps favor the resultant vocal qualities and 
faster transit times.
Recipient Vessels in the Head and Neck for Free Flaps  Com-
monly used recipient arteries for free tissue transfer in the head 
and neck include the ipsilateral superior thyroid, lingual, facial, 
superficial temporal, and transverse cervical arteries. End-
to-side anastomosis with the carotid artery is associated with 
potentially lethal carotid blow-out injury. Anastomoses with 
contralateral vessels are useful when ipsilateral vessels are not 
available, such as in patients with recurrent cancer who have 
undergone previous free flap procedures or irradiation.36 Vein 
grafts can be avoided by using carefully planned flaps that 
offer longer pedicles (such as the anterolateral thigh of fibula 
osteoseptocutaneous free flaps) but may occasionally be nec-
essary. For venous drainage, tributaries of the superficial and 
deep jugular systems are convenient. Finally, protection of the 
major vessels and nerves of the neck is possible after neck dis-
section by overlaying residual free flap tissues. This also aids in 
improving the contour and symmetry of the neck for aesthetic 
purposes and obliterates any dead space.
Complications  Apart from the general complications that may 
be encountered with any major operation, there are several 
specific potential complications of head and neck ablative and 
reconstructive surgery. Specific intraoperative complications 
include air embolus, pneumothorax, and injuries to important 
1864
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
C
D
F
E
Figure 45-39.  Free double-barreled fibula osteoseptocutaneous flap with primary osseointegrated dental implants used to reconstruct a 
compound segmental mandibular defect from ameloblastoma resection. A. Left parasymphyseal segmental mandibulectomy with contiguous 
dentition and oral lining. B. The osteotomized fibula osteoseptocutaneous free flap ready to be double-barreled; note that a segment of bone 
between the two struts (barrels) has been discarded to allow safe folding of the construct without compression or kinking of the interven-
ing periosteal blood supply. C. Segmental reconstruction of the resected inferior alveolar nerve with a cutaneous nerve graft from the fibula 
donor site to restore mentolabial sensation; note the extent of the segmental mandibular defect. D. Three osseointegrated dental fixtures have 
been loaded into the upper barrel of the fibula; abutments are fitted to the fixtures to allow accurate occlusal matching with the corresponding 
maxillary dentition before finalizing fibula fixation. E. The de-epithelialized portion of the skin paddle was used to cover the reconstruction 
plate as well as to contour the soft tissue profile of the neomandibular margin. F. The skin paddle has been inset to reconstruct the oral lining; 
note that the fibula osteoseptocutaneous flap is best raised with a skin paddle even when there is no cutaneous defect so that it can provide a 
sentinel flap monitor of the underlying bone as well as facilitate wound closure. At this point, the dental fixtures are sealed with cover plates 
under the flap skin paddle but will later be fitted with final abutments and a dental prosthesis. G. Panorex radiograph: By 5 months postop-
eratively, the fibula had consolidated with the native mandible. H and I. At 10 months, the patient has an aesthetic neomandibular margin as 
well as functional and accurate occlusion after finalization with a dental prosthesis. (Photographs reproduced with permission from F. Wei.)
A
B
1865
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
vessels, lymphatics, or cranial nerves. Specific perioperative 
complications include carotid artery blow-out, flap necrosis, 
infections, saliva or chyle leakage, airway problems, and acute 
psychiatric disturbances. Examples of later complications are 
prolonged pain syndromes, fistulas, scar contractures, and prob-
lems associated with radiotherapy such as flap shrinkage (poten-
tially with metalwork exposure) and osteoradionecrosis.
Facial Reanimation
Facial nerve paralysis is a debilitating and emotionally depress-
ing condition that presents many functional and aesthetic prob-
lems. Loss of mimetic muscle activity leads to poor articulation 
and drooling from oral incompetence, exposure keratopathy 
from dysfunctional lacrimation and paralytic ectropion, and 
impaired socialization from facial disfigurement and difficulty 
expressing emotion. Facial nerve dysfunction has a number of 
possible causes, including oncologic resection, temporal bone 
or skull base surgery, trauma, congenital conditions (Möbius’ 
syndrome), and idiopathic origin. The main considerations 
in treatment are management of forehead and brow symme-
try, eyelid closure, oral competence and symmetry, and smile 
dynamics. The long-term goals include normal static appear-
ance, symmetry with movement, and restoration of voluntary 
muscular control. Although the best results usually require 
multistaged, complex surgeries, the elderly patient is better 
served by a single-stage procedure that provides immediate 
improvement.
Neural Techniques.  Traumatic injuries to the facial nerve 
without segmental nerve loss are best treated with primary end-
to-end neurorrhaphy of the facial nerve stumps. The success of 
this repair depends on accurate approximation of nerve ends and 
achievement of a tension-free epineural repair with fine sutures. 
In segmental facial nerve loss due to trauma or oncologic resec-
tion, interpositional nerve grafts lead to the most successful 
reconstruction and may approach the results of primary repair. 
Grafting ideally is performed at the time of the injury rather than 
in delayed fashion. Donor nerves include the cervical plexus, 
great auricular nerve, and sural nerve. Timing of reanimation 
after nerve repair depends on distance of the repair from the 
motor end plates. Axonal regeneration proceeds at approxi-
mately 1 mm/d, whereas motor end plates deteriorate at approxi-
mately 1% per week and are gone by 2 to 3 years. In general, 
facial tone returns approximately 6 months after repair and vol-
untary motion a few months later.44 Problems associated with 
facial nerve repair and grafting are weakness, mass movement 
(synkinesia), and dyskinesia. If the proximal facial nerve stump 
is available but the distal stumps are not, the cervical plexus can 
be harvested and proximally anastomosed to the facial nerve 
stump and distally implanted into the mimetic muscles to allow 
neurotization and partial restoration of function.
G
H
I
Figure 45-39.  (Continued )
1866
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Nerve transfer techniques borrow other local cranial nerves 
to innervate the distal facial nerve stump if grafting cannot be 
done. This requires the availability of distal facial nerve or nerve 
branch stumps. Typically used donor nerves include the ipsilat-
eral hypoglossal nerve, spinal accessory nerve, and cross-face 
sural nerve graft from a contralateral facial nerve branch (redun-
dant buccal or zygomatic branch). Disadvantages of this tech-
nique include those of nerve repair or grafting plus loss of donor 
nerve function and facial hypertonia. Transfer of the complete 
hypoglossal nerve creates ipsilateral tongue paralysis and hemi-
tongue atrophy with mild to moderate intraoral dysfunction.44
Muscle Transposition Techniques.  All of the aforemen-
tioned neural techniques rely on the presence of a functional 
distal neuromuscular unit. When the distal neuromuscular unit 
is deficient, as in congenital facial paralysis or in situations in 
which reconstruction is not undertaken until 2 to 3 years after 
the original insult, muscle transposition is considered. Muscle 
transposition techniques require intense muscular retraining to 
achieve the intended dynamics. A classic muscle dynamic facial 
sling uses the temporalis muscle, innervated by the trigeminal 
nerve and perfused by the deep temporal branch of the internal 
maxillary artery. The muscle is released along with its aponeu-
rosis from the temporal fusion line, reflected inferomedially, 
and attached to the modiolus at the oral commissure, the naso-
labial fold, and potentially the orbicularis oculi. Disadvantages 
include lack of spontaneous movement, temporomandibular 
joint dysfunction, and soft tissue fullness over the zygomatic 
arch. Other transferable muscle units include the masseter mus-
cle and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle.44
Innervated Free Tissue Transfer.  Microsurgical free inner-
vated muscle transfer may be considered in the same situations 
as local muscle transfers but is especially appropriate when con-
comitant soft tissue augmentation is needed. Muscles described 
for this purpose include the gracilis, latissimus dorsi, serratus 
anterior, and pectoralis minor muscles. The procedure may be 
performed in a single stage if the proximal facial nerve stump is 
available for anastomosis or if a long enough donor muscle nerve 
is present to reach the contralateral facial nerve branches. Often, 
however, it is a staged procedure beginning with establishment of 
a local neural source via cross-facial nerve grafting. The extent of 
axonal regeneration through the graft is monitored using Tinel’s 
test. After sufficient axonal progression, approximately 6 to 
12 months, the free muscle transfer is performed via vascular 
anastomoses to the superficial temporal or facial vessels, recipi-
ent and donor nerve coaptation, and fixation of the muscle to the 
zygoma superolaterally and to the nasolabial fold, upper lip orbi-
cularis, and lower lip orbicularis inferomedially. Disadvantages 
of free muscle transfer include donor site morbidity, lengthy sur-
gical times, and the need for specialized microsurgical skills.
Ancillary Procedures.  One of the most important goals of 
treatment for facial paralysis is rehabilitation of the periocular 
region. This objective may be simply achieved with implanta-
tion of gold or platinum upper eyelid weights, which allows 
gravity to assist with lid closure. Static fascial slings are used 
to improve symmetry when comorbid conditions preclude more 
extensive and staged surgeries. Sling materials include tensor 
fasciae latae, Gore-Tex, and human acellular dermal allograft. 
Nonsurgical techniques play a significant role in improving 
facial symmetry, both as a primary intervention and an adjunct 
to surgery. Contralateral mimetic muscle hypertonicity is 
tempered with botulinum toxin injections. Finally, soft tissue 
rejuvenative techniques such as cervicofacial rhytidectomy, 
blepharoplasty, browlift, and midface lift can improve the soft 
tissue effects of facial nerve paralysis (Fig. 45-40).
Breast Reconstruction
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the second 
leading cause of cancer-related death among women in the 
United States. One in eight women will develop breast cancer 
sometime during their life. Breast reconstruction began as a 
means to reduce chest wall complications and deformities from 
mastectomy. Reconstruction has now been shown to benefit 
women in terms of psychological well-being and quality of 
life.45 The goal of breast reconstruction is to re-create form and 
symmetry while avoiding delay in adjuvant cancer treatment. A 
number of studies have shown that breast reconstruction, both 
immediate and delayed, does not impede standard oncologic 
treatment, does not delay detection of recurrent cancer, and does 
not change the overall mortality associated with the disease.46-48
Preoperative counseling of the breast cancer patient 
regarding reconstruction options should include discussion of 
the timing and type of reconstruction, alternatives to surgical 
reconstruction, and realistic expectations. The plastic surgeon 
and surgical oncologist must maintain close communication to 
achieve optimal results.
Timing of Reconstruction.  Immediate reconstruction is 
defined as initiation of the breast reconstructive process at the 
time of the ablative surgery. This is usually done in patients 
with early-stage disease for whom there is low expectation of 
postoperative radiation therapy. Immediate reconstruction takes 
advantage of the preserved, supple skin envelope made possible 
by the skin-sparing mastectomy approach. In general, this allows 
a more aesthetically pleasing and symmetric reconstruction. It 
is also psychologically advantageous to the patient to avoid liv-
ing with the mastectomy deformity, as in delayed reconstruc-
tion. Furthermore, the cost to the medical system is less with 
immediate reconstruction because fewer operations are required 
than for staged procedures. Disadvantages include the potential 
delay of adjuvant therapy due to surgical site complication, par-
tial necrosis of mastectomy skin flaps, and the possibility that 
unanticipated postoperative radiation therapy is required. Breast 
reconstructions by all techniques are adversely affected by radi-
ation therapy, and many surgeons feel reconstruction should be 
delayed until at least 6 months after treatment.
Delayed breast reconstruction is initiated at least 3 to 
6 months after mastectomy. This approach avoids mastectomy 
flap unreliability and radiation therapy unpredictability. How-
ever, the patient is subjected to an additional operative proce-
dure, and overall cosmetic result is often worse (especially with 
autologous tissue reconstruction).
Partial Breast Reconstruction.  Over the last decade, many 
women have chosen breast conservation therapy (BCT) con-
sisting of segmental mastectomy with sentinel lymph node 
biopsy and/or axillary lymph node dissection combined with 
postoperative whole-breast irradiation. Although this less 
invasive cancer treatment is quite beneficial to many women, 
significant breast deformity can result from the tissue removal 
and radiation-induced changes, especially in women with small 
breasts. Oncoplastic surgery refers to the set of techniques devel-
oped to lessen breast deformity from partial mastectomy, both 
1867
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
in the delayed and the immediate settings. One of the most com-
mon methods of minimizing defect visibility in large-breasted 
women is to rearrange the breast parenchyma at the time of 
tumor extirpation using reduction mammoplasty techniques. 
Dermatoglandular pedicles supporting the nipple-areolar com-
plex can be designed in any number of orientations to avoid 
the defect location. This procedure, combined with traditional 
contralateral breast reduction, can result in excellent cos-
metic outcomes, often better than the preoperative appearance 
(Fig. 45-41). The lateral thoracodorsal flap, based on the lateral 
intercostal perforators at the inframammary fold, is particularly 
useful in correcting lateral breast defects49
One drawback of these oncoplastic techniques when per-
formed at the time of segmental mastectomy is the chance that, 
if the specimen margins are not clear, the reconstruction must be 
taken down to allow for reexcision. The oncologic implications 
of reusing the flap in this setting are unclear. Another shortcom-
ing is the potential for fat necrosis, especially distally, in these 
nonaxial pattern flaps.
Implant-Based Reconstruction.  By necessity or patient 
choice, many women undergo mastectomy for local control of 
breast cancer. In fact, recently in response to the increased rec-
ognition of multifocal disease and experience with poor aes-
thetic results after BCT in small-breasted patients, some women 
have chosen mastectomy despite being candidates for BCT. 
The simplest method of reconstructing the breast is placement of an 
implant into the mastectomy defect. Occasionally an implant may 
be placed at the time of mastectomy as a one-stage mound recon-
struction. Usually, however, the first stage involves placement of 
a silicone shell tissue expander under the chest wall musculature 
(pectoralis major, serratus anterior, superior rectus sheath), fol-
lowed by expansion of the skin and pocket regularly over the fol-
lowing few months. The patient then returns to the operating room 
for removal of the expander and placement of a saline or silicone 
breast implant (Figs. 45-42 and 45-43). After exhaustive investiga-
tion, silicone implants have been proven as safe and effective as 
saline implants in breast augmentation and reconstruction. After 
another few months, the nipple is reconstructed.
The advantages of the tissue expander/implant–based 
reconstruction are absence of donor site morbidity, short opera-
tive times, and short recovery periods. The disadvantages 
include the need for more reconstructive stages and longer 
cumulative time to completion of reconstruction. Implant breast 
reconstructions tend to lack the natural breast feel and ptotic 
appearance. This is particularly noticeable in unilateral recon-
structions. Some of these disadvantages have been mitigated by 
the advent of nipple-sparing mastectomy and immediate, acel-
lular dermal matrix-assisted implant reconstruction (Fig. 45-44). 
Complications related to prosthetic-based breast reconstruction 
include infection, malposition, hematoma, seroma, and rupture 
Facial nerve injury < 2 y?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is direct nerve 
repair possible?
Are proximal and distal
nerve stumps available?
No
Is a distal 
stump available?
No
Is proximal 
stump available?
No
No
Is patient healthy/young?
Is patient healthy/young?
Ancillary procedures:
Static sling
Botulinum toxin
Gold weights
Ancillary procedures:
Static sling
Botulinum toxin
Gold weights
Direct nerve repair
Yes
Interposition nerve graft
Yes
Nerve transfer +
ancillary procedures
Yes
Muscle transfer or
free muscle flap
Yes
Distal nerve grafting and 
neurotization +
ancillary procedures
Muscle transfer or 
free muscle flap +
ancillary procedures
Figure 45-40.  Facial reanimation treatment algorithm.
1868
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
D
Figure 45-41.  Preoperative (top row) and 3-week postoperative (bottom row) photos of a 52-year-old patient with cancer at the 6 o’clock 
position of the left breast. Oncoplastic superomedial pedicle reduction on the left breast was performed simultaneously with a left segmental 
mastectomy of the lesion and a contralateral symmetrization reduction. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1869
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
The cosmetic results worsen and the rate of complications 
increases when implants are placed in an irradiated chest wall, 
regardless of whether the radiation therapy occurs before or 
after reconstruction.
Total Autologous Tissue Reconstruction.  An entirely dif-
ferent way to reconstruct the breast avoids the placement of 
implants in favor of using only the patient’s own redundant 
tissue. Indications for total autologous breast reconstruction 
are many and varied, including patient preference, previous or 
anticipated chest wall radiation treatment, a ptotic contralateral 
breast, and previous failed implant reconstruction. Contraindi-
cations are lack of a suitable donor site due to scarring or mini-
mal adiposity, morbid obesity, and serious comorbidities that 
preclude a longer surgery and recovery period.
The most commonly used donor site is the abdomen. Most 
women in the breast cancer patient population have redundant 
skin and fat in the lower abdomen that may be transferred to the 
chest wall and fashioned into a breast mound. Many techniques 
have been developed to transfer this tissue, both as pedicled 
myocutaneous flaps and as free flaps. The workhorse abdominal 
flap for breast reconstruction is the pedicled transverse rectus 
abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap. This flap is based on 
the superior epigastric vessels that run on the undersurface of 
the rectus abdominis muscle. A transversely oriented skin paddle 
with underlying fat is isolated based on its perforating vessels 
that course through the rectus muscle to join the main supe-
rior epigastric pedicle. The flap, along with the rectus muscle 
and blood supply, is tunneled under the anterior chest wall and 
Figure 45-43.  Bilateral tissue expander/implant–based breast reconstruction. Appearance preoperatively (A) and 2 months after saline 
implant exchange (B). (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
Figure 45-42.  Tissue expansion and implant-based breast recon-
struction. (Illustrations reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
and deflation. Long term, the most common problem requiring 
reoperation is the formation of dense scarring around the implant 
(capsular contracture) causing firmness, visible deformity, and 
even discomfort. In addition, implants are medical devices that 
undergo mechanical wear, ultimately leading to leakage and 
deflation. All in all, the chance that a woman will need addi-
tional unanticipated surgery on her reconstructed breast within 5 
years of prosthetic-based reconstruction is approximately 35%.50 
1870
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
A
B
C
D
Figure 45-44.  Immediate single-stage implant-based breast reconstruction after bilateral prophylactic nipple-sparing mastectomy (NSM). 
A. Preoperative photo. B. Postoperative photo after bilateral NSM and immediate acellular dermal matrix-assisted silicone gel implant recon-
struction. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1871
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Figure 45-45.  Deep inferior epigastric perforator 
flap breast reconstruction. (Illustrations reproduced 
with permission from M. Gimbel.)
delivered into the mastectomy defect, where it is then shaped into 
a breast mound. The donor site is closed in a manner similar to 
an abdominoplasty. The advantages of this and all total autolo-
gous reconstruction techniques are creation of a breast that looks 
and feels natural, that changes volume along with the patient’s 
weight (and the contralateral natural breast), and that avoids the 
potential complications of breast implants. In addition, patients 
are often pleased to have the incidental benefit of an abdomi-
noplasty. The pedicled TRAM flap procedure is also relatively 
quick for a total autologous reconstruction. Downsides include 
the potential for partial or complete flap failure, fat necrosis, full-
ness in the upper abdomen from the tunneled pedicle, abdominal 
wall bulge or hernia, and abdominal wall weakness.
The free TRAM flap was introduced to improve on the 
sometimes limited volume of tissue that can be carried by the 
relatively indirect blood supply of the pedicled TRAM’s supe-
rior epigastric vessels. The free TRAM flap is similar to the 
pedicled TRAM flap but is based on the deep inferior epigas-
tric vessels, which are the dominant blood supply to the lower 
abdomen. The flap is harvested as a free flap, and the deep 
inferior epigastric artery and vein are anastomosed to recipient 
vessels in the chest, usually the internal mammary or the tho-
racodorsal vessels. A refinement to this method is the muscle-
sparing free TRAM flap procedure, in which less fascia and 
rectus abdominis muscle is harvested with the flap to minimize 
donor site morbidity. The ultimate muscle-sparing free TRAM 
flap is the deep inferior epigastric perforator flap (Fig. 45-45). 
In this case, the fascia is opened but no muscle is included 
with the flap, and the perforating vessels of the deep inferior 
epigastric system are dissected between the muscle fibers to 
join the main pedicle. When patients are carefully selected, 
muscle-sparing techniques decrease abdominal wall morbid-
ity and increase useful pedicle length for microsurgery without 
significantly compromising flap perfusion51 (Fig. 45-46A,B). 
Finally, in some patients, the lower abdominal tissue may be 
transferred to the breast as a free flap without violating the 
abdominal wall fascia at all. The superficial inferior epigas-
tric artery is often capable of supporting enough abdominal 
tissue volume to reconstruct the breast. Because this artery 
and its accompanying vein do not traverse the anterior rectus 
sheath, the flap can be harvested with no more abdominal wall 
­morbidity than an abdominoplasty. Unfortunately, this artery 
is frequently absent or too diminutive in size to be used in the 
majority of patients. Despite the many advantages of micro-
surgical total autologous breast reconstruction, it is associated 
with longer operative times than pedicled TRAM procedures, 
requires expertise in microsurgery, and has the potential for 
complete flap failure due to microvascular thrombosis.
Implant and Autologous Tissue Reconstruction.  The 
pedicled latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap procedure is a 
straightforward, reliable method used for breast reconstruc-
tion. It is often reserved for reconstructing breasts when other 
methods have previously failed. The latissimus flap is relegated 
to second-choice status because it carries the major disadvan-
tage of autologous tissue reconstruction (donor site morbidity) 
as well as all of the potential complications associated with 
breast implants. That aside, the latissimus flap/implant–based 
reconstruction can produce excellent cosmetic results with rel-
atively low donor site morbidity (Fig. 45-47). The latissimus 
dorsi muscle with overlying skin paddle is elevated based on 
its thoracodorsal vessel pedicle, tunneled through the axilla, 
and delivered into the mastectomy site. After partial insetting, 
either a tissue expander or permanent implant is usually placed 
behind the muscle to give adequate volume to the reconstruc-
tion (Fig. 45-48). Drawbacks specific to this method include 
contour irregularity of the back, high rate of donor site seroma, 
and shoulder weakness (uncommon).
Accessory Procedures.  After creation of the breast mound, 
refinements and accessory procedures are performed after approx-
imately 3 months. These may include breast mound revision, scar 
revisions, fat grafting, and nipple-areola complex reconstruction. 
Scores of methods have been described for reconstructing the 
nipple. These include local flap techniques (e.g., star flap, skate 
flap, C-V flap), grafting techniques (contralateral nipple/areola 
sharing, groin skin, labia skin), and tattooing.
1872
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Radiation-Related Considerations.  With some notable 
exceptions, most surgeons advocate avoidance of implant-based 
breast reconstruction in chest walls that have previously received 
radiation or are likely to receive radiation due to the relatively 
high rate of complications and disappointing results. Delayed 
total autologous reconstructions bring healthy nonirradiated tis-
sue to replace the damaged fibrotic tissue and are the preferred 
mode of breast reconstruction in this setting. Similarly, latissi-
mus dorsi/implant reconstructions replace much of the irradiated 
skin, which probably explains to some degree why, in the face of 
previous irradiation, implants fair better with an overlying latis-
simus flap than without.
The question of whether total autologous reconstructions 
should be done before or after anticipated radiation therapy is 
still controversial. Those in favor of delaying the reconstruction 
argue that an irradiated flap will exhibit shrinkage and fibrosis 
that subtracts from the overall aesthetic result. Those in favor 
of performing immediate reconstruction in this setting feel that, 
because immediate reconstructions have inherently better aes-
thetics, the imperfect result due to irradiation it is still compara-
ble to the result of delayed reconstruction without the additional 
operation. To date, no prospective study has been performed 
comparing the two approaches.
Trunk and Abdominal Reconstruction
In the trunk, as in most areas of the body, choice of recon-
structive method is determined by the location and size of the 
defect and the properties of the deficient tissue. A distinction 
is made between partial-thickness and full-thickness defects 
in deciding between grafts, flaps, synthetic materials, or a 
combination of techniques. Unlike the head and the lower leg, 
the trunk harbors a relative wealth of regional transposable 
axial pattern flaps that allow sturdy reconstruction, only rarely 
requiring distant free tissue transfer. Indeed, the trunk serves 
as the body’s arsenal, providing its most robust flaps to rebuild 
its largest defects.
Thoracic Wall.  The chest wall is a rigid framework designed 
to resist both the negative pressure associated with respiration 
and the positive pressure from coughing and from transmitted 
intra-abdominal forces. Furthermore, it protects the heart, lungs, 
and great vessels from external trauma. Reconstructions of chest 
wall defects must emulate these functions.
Figure 45-46.  A. Left upper and lower panels: Free transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (FTRAM) flap and its donor site defect. 
Middle upper and lower panels: Muscle-sparing FTRAM flap and its donor site defect. Right upper and lower panels: Deep inferior epigastric 
perforator flap and its donor site defect. B. Preoperative and postoperative photos of a 43-year-old woman with a left muscle-sparing FTRAM 
breast reconstruction and right symmetrization reduction mammoplasty. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1873
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
The pectoralis major muscle is the workhorse pedicled 
flap for coverage of the sternum, upper chest, and neck. It is 
a Mathes and Nahai type V flap with one dominant pedicle 
(pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery) and several 
secondary segmental pedicles (intercostal perforators and the 
pectoral branch of the lateral thoracic artery).52 The muscle may 
be advanced or transposed on its dominant pedicle or used as a 
Figure 45-46.  (Continued )
turnover flap based on its internal mammary perforators. Both 
methods are useful in covering the sternum after dehiscence or 
infection. Before the turnover flap is elevated, previous opera-
tive notes should be reviewed carefully to determine whether 
the internal mammary artery is still a viable perfusion source; 
the artery, especially the left, is frequently used for heart revas-
cularization. The muscle may also be used for obliteration of 
1874
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
intrathoracic dead space infections and as a myocutaneous flap 
for head and neck reconstruction. Although it is a reliable flap, 
the loss of the pectoralis major muscle results in upper extrem-
ity weakness and cosmetic deformity from loss of the anterior 
axillary fold.53
The rectus abdominis muscle is a type III axial pattern flap 
that can be based on the superior epigastric vessels or the deep 
inferior epigastric vessels.51 When elevated as a myocutaneous 
flap it can be designed with a transverse (TRAM) or vertical rec-
tus abdominis myocutaneous skin paddle. Although the vertical 
rectus abdominis muscle flap has better vascularized skin due to 
its multiple longitudinally oriented perforators, the TRAM flap 
provides a larger area of donor skin that can be primarily closed 
with an easily concealable scar. The rectus abdominis muscle 
is frequently used for lower sternum reconstruction when the 
pectoralis muscle is insufficient. It can also be used in pedicle 
or free flap configuration for repair of large chest wall defects 
from cancer resection (Fig. 45-49).
The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap is probably the 
most widely used flap in nonsternal chest wall reconstructions 
due to its broad size, location, reliability, and pedicle length. 
The flap is based on the thoracodorsal vessels arising from the 
subscapular system. Its secondary blood supply comes from the 
posterior intercostal and lumbar vessels.52 The arc of rotation of 
this flap can extend to most areas on the ipsilateral torso as well 
as to the abdomen, head and neck, and upper arm. The serratus 
anterior muscle can be included on the same vascular pedicle to 
further increase its surface area. Use of this donor site is rela-
tively well tolerated, but shoulder weakness can be significant. 
The major drawbacks of the latissimus flap are its conspicuous 
scar and the high risk of seroma.53
The trapezius muscle flap, based on the transverse cervical 
vessels, is generally used as a pedicled flap to cover the upper 
midback, base of neck, and shoulder. The superior portion of 
the muscle along with the acromial attachment and spinal acces-
sory nerve are preserved to maintain shoulder elevation function. 
Figure 45-47.  Preoperative and postoperative photos of a 58-year-old woman with a left latissimus dorsi flap/silicone implant breast recon-
struction and right symmetrization mastopexy. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
Figure 45-48.  Latissimus dorsi flap/implant–based breast recon-
struction. (Illustrations reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1875
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Other useful flaps of the thoracic region include the scapular/
parascapular fasciocutaneous flap, the external oblique flap, the 
medially or laterally based thoracoepigastric skin flaps, and the 
omental flap.
When a full-thickness defect of the chest wall involves 
more than two adjacent ribs, the inherent rigidity of soft tissue 
flaps may provide insufficient chest wall integrity. Although 
cadaveric bone and autologous bone grafts have been used in the 
past to lend structural support, the availability of well-tolerated 
synthetic and biologic materials has become more common. 
These materials include polypropylene (Prolene), polyethyl-
ene (Marlex), and polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) meshes, 
methyl methacrylate, and acellular dermal allograft. Even if 
these avascular foreign bodies must be removed due to chronic 
infection, often a thick fibrous layer of tissue will have formed 
that can maintain chest wall stability.53
Abdominal Wall.  The abdominal wall also protects the 
internal vital organs from trauma, but with layers of strong 
torso-supporting muscles and fascia rather than with osseous 
structures. The goals of reconstruction are restoration of struc-
tural integrity, prevention of visceral eventration, and provision 
of dynamic muscular support. Defects in the abdominal wall 
may arise from trauma, oncologic resection, congenital deformi-
ties, and infection. By far the most common reason for abdomi-
nal wall deficiency, however, is incisional fascial dehiscence 
and herniation after laparotomy. When a reconstruction plan is 
being formulated, careful physical examination and review of 
the medical history will help prevent selection of an otherwise 
sound strategy that, because of previous incisions and trauma, 
is destined for failure.
Partial Defects of the Abdominal Wall.  Large defects of 
the abdominal skin and subcutaneous tissue are usually easily 
controlled with skin grafts, local advancement flaps, or tissue 
expansion. Myofascial defects are more difficult to manage. The 
abdominal wall fascia requires a minimal-tension closure to avoid 
dehiscence, recurrent incisional hernia formation, or abdominal 
compartment syndrome.54 Prosthetic meshes are frequently used 
to replace the fascia in clean wounds and in operations that cre-
ate myofascial defects. When the area of fascial deficiency is 
contaminated, as in infected mesh reconstructions, enterocutane-
ous fistulas, or viscus perforations, prosthetic mesh is avoided 
because of the risk of infection. A delayed reconstruction can 
be prefaced by insetting a resorbable polyglactin (Vicryl) mesh 
that will eventually granulate to allow skin grafting. The ensuing 
hernia is repaired later with prosthetics under cleaner conditions. 
The separation-of-components procedure has enjoyed much suc-
cess in closing large midline defects without resorting to mesh. 
This procedure involves advancement of bilateral myofascial 
flaps consisting of the anterior rectus fascia/rectus abdomi-
nis/internal oblique/transversus abdominis muscle complex. 
Figure 45-49.  Top row: Free transverse rectus abdominis muscle reconstruction of a large partial-thickness chest wall defect. Bottom row: 
Full-thickness chest wall defect reconstructed in two layers with human acellular dermal allograft and overlying pedicled vertical rectus 
abdominis muscle flap. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1876
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Mobility of this myofascial unit is created by release of the 
external oblique muscle at the semilunate line. Midline defects 
measuring up to 10 cm superiorly, 18 cm centrally, and 8 cm 
inferiorly can be closed using separation of components.55 This 
technique is less effective in closing lateral defects, for which 
regional muscle and fascial flaps are usually better suited (rectus 
abdominis flap, internal oblique flap, external oblique flap).54
Full-thickness abdominal defects and large myofascial 
defects require large robust pedicled flaps or free flaps for 
closure. The tensor fasciae latae pedicled flap, based on the 
ascending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral vessels, is 
useful in reconstructing the lower two-thirds of the abdomen. 
Bilateral flaps can be used for very large defects, although the 
skin-grafted donor site is unsightly. The rectus femoris flap and 
the vastus lateralis flap can be used for smaller lower abdominal 
defects. The “mutton-chop” flap, which is an extended rectus 
femoris flap with fascia lata included distally, has been used 
successfully in closing massive defects.56,57 Large defects of the 
upper abdominal wall may be repaired with pedicled extended 
latissimus dorsi flaps with attached pregluteal fascia. Very large 
full-thickness defects, especially superiorly, are best treated 
with free tissue transfer of large myofascial units such as the 
latissimus dorsi or the tensor fasciae latae. These can also be 
innervated flaps to reestablish contractile force and strength in 
the abdominal wall.
Extremity Reconstruction
Posttraumatic Reconstruction.  With the beginnings of mod-
ern orthopedic and plastic surgery, improvements in the under-
standing of anesthesia, trauma resuscitation, infection, and the 
availability of early antibiotics, the requirement to amputate 
almost all open (compound) lower extremity fractures as a life-
saving procedure gradually decreased while attempts at limb 
salvage became more realistic. The introduction and maturation 
of microsurgical techniques witnessed increasing successes in 
distal extremity replantations and free flap reconstructions. Soft 
tissue reconstruction thus advanced alongside evolving tech-
niques of bone fixation, joint reconstruction, general vascular 
surgery, and acute multitrauma management. Current lower 
extremity reconstruction incorporates the use of vascularized 
bone, bone distraction techniques, composite tissue flaps, and 
functioning muscle transfers tailored to the given defect.58 The 
future may behold the use of cadaveric vascularized composite 
allografts or even tissue-engineered vascularized composite tis-
sue constructs.
Common causes of high-energy lower extremity trauma 
include road traffic accidents, falls from a height, direct blows, 
sports injuries, and gunshots. Understanding the anatomy of 
the lower limb compartments, nerve and vascular supplies, 
muscle functions, skeletal structure, and mechanics is essential 
for accurate bony and soft tissue restoration for function and 
appearance. Several limb-salvage scoring systems have been 
suggested to aid in the decision regarding whether to amputate 
or attempt limb salvage, but their routine use remains contro-
versial; nevertheless, they can provide guidance during this 
life-altering decision process.59 Compound fractures are often 
classified according to the system devised by Gustilo and col-
leagues (Table 45-12).60
In addition to following standard multiple trauma evalu-
ation and resuscitation guidelines, the multidisciplinary team 
must assess the injured limb for neurovascular status, soft 
tissue defects and degloving, configuration of fractures, and 
presence of compartment syndrome. Neurovascular status and 
evidence for compartment syndrome require frequent reas-
sessment, particularly following interventions such as fracture 
reduction, splintage, and surgery. Bony stabilization may be 
critical to controlling fracture hemorrhage. Doppler ultrasound 
examination may help assess vascular integrity. Angiography 
is a lengthier procedure that provides more detailed informa-
tion, but the team must be cognizant that delay to revascular-
ization increases the risk of massive reperfusion injury and 
multiple organ failure.61 Compartment syndrome must be 
released with urgent fasciotomies when present. Its most criti-
cal early feature is increasingly severe pain especially on pas-
sive stretch of the compartment’s musculature; pulselessness, 
pallor, paresthesia, and paralysis are late signs. Compartment 
pressure monitors are useful in patients who are unconscious 
or have proximal nerve blocks in place. Antitetanus vaccine 
and antibiotics should be provided as soon as possible accord-
ing to contemporary guidelines.62 An evaluation of the patient 
as a whole allows treatment to be planned within the context 
of comorbidities, socioeconomic considerations, and reha-
bilitative potential. The loss of plantar sensation historically 
favored below-knee amputation, but this is no longer an abso-
lute recommendation.61
With the availability of microvascular free tissue trans-
plantation, radical débridement (i.e., wound excision) can be 
adequate even for the largest wound. Early one-stage wound 
coverage and bony reconstruction is generally advocated and 
should be performed jointly by extremity trauma orthopedic 
and plastic surgical teams whenever possible.61,62 It is reason-
able for reconstruction to be deferred briefly if there remain 
tissues of questionable viability so that these can be reassessed 
and débrided as required. Placement of a temporary negative 
pressure dressing between débridements helps reduce bacterial 
ingress and the inflammatory response. If débridement pro-
duces an irregular dead space that cannot be completely obliter-
ated, or if tissues remain questionable even after a second look, 
the resultant cavity may be filled with antibiotic-impregnated 
beads or available vascularized soft tissues to act as a spacer 
Table 45-12
Gustilo and Anderson classification of compound 
fractures
Classification
Description
Grade I
Wound <1 cm; minimal contamination, 
comminution, and soft tissue damage
Grade II
Wound >1 cm; moderate soft tissue 
damage and minimal periosteal 
stripping
Grade IIIa
Substantial contamination and severe 
soft tissue damage but adequate fracture 
coverage; usually due to high-energy 
trauma
Grade IIIb
Substantial contamination, periosteal 
stripping, severe soft tissue damage, and 
inadequate fracture coverage; usually 
due to high-energy trauma
Grade IIIc
Any open fracture with an associated 
arterial injury requiring repair
1877
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Table 45-13
Some lower extremity reconstructive options for soft 
tissue coverage after fracture
Area of Defect
Reconstructive Options
Femur
Sartorius muscle/MC flap (anterior 
  defects)
TFL muscle/MC flap (posterior defects)
Vastus lateralis/medialis muscle/MC  
  (mid to lower thigh defects)
ALT/AMT and posterior thigh 
  fasciocutaneous flap
Free osseous flaps (e.g., double-barreled 
  fibula osteoseptocutaneous flap) useful 
for segmental femur defects
Knee and 
proximal  
third of tibia
Gastrocnemius muscle (medial or lateral 
  head, or both) with SSG
Island pedicled fasciocutaneous flaps 
  (e.g., distally based anterolateral thigh 
flap; medial sural artery perforator  
flap)
Free tissue transfer for larger defects
Middle third  
of tibia
Soleus muscle with SSG
Gastrocnemius head(s) with SSG
Tibialis anterior muscle “open-book flap” 
  (preserves function)
Island pedicled fasciocutaneous flaps 
  (e.g., posterior tibial and peroneal 
perforator flaps)
Free tissue transfer for larger defects
Distal third  
of tibia
Free tissue transfer usually the  
  first choice
Reverse flow sural neurofasciocutaneous 
  flap
Island pedicled fasciocutaneous flaps 
  (e.g., posterior tibial and peroneal 
perforator flaps)
Local muscle flaps for smaller defects
ALT = anterolateral thigh; AMT = anteromedial thigh; MC = myocuta-
neous; SSG = split-thickness skin graft; TFL = tensor fasciae latae.
until definitive reconstruction is possible. This applies also to 
segmental bone losses within a soft tissue envelope of doubtful 
viability. In these situations, soft tissue coverage preferably is 
still achieved early; bony reconstruction can be completed at 
a later date, when both the bone and soft tissue envelope are 
stable and healthy. It remains debated whether fasciocutaneous 
or muscular flaps are superior for treating compound fractures. 
Dead space is critical to obliterate, and this is more readily 
achieved using muscle. Fasciocutaneous flaps may be supe-
rior for coverage of metaphyseal fractures, particularly around 
the ankle. Reviewed experimental data in animals suggest that 
diaphyseal tibial fractures with periosteal stripping are better 
covered by muscle instead of fasciocutaneous flaps.63 Perfo-
rator-based chimeric flaps, such as the anterolateral thigh flap 
with a chimeric portion of vastus lateralis, can be designed to 
incorporate the best features of both tissue types for the given 
defect.
Once meticulous débridement is complete, the order of 
surgical repair is fracture stabilization followed by vascular 
repair and reconstruction of a stable soft tissue envelope. The 
choice of method for soft tissue coverage is determined by the 
location and extent of the injury (Table 45-13). Coverage for 
weight-bearing areas should be durable, stable (nonshearing), 
and sensate. Properly fitted footwear provides essential protec-
tion against pressure-related complications. Split-thickness skin 
grafts are reasonable for coverage of exposed healthy muscle or 
soft tissue. Local flaps may be used to cover smaller defects. 
Island pedicled perforator-based flaps are more versatile in 
design and inset, preserve viable muscles by excluding them 
from flap harvest, and can be a useful option when there is no 
significant degloving injury (Fig. 45-50). Using retrograde ped-
icle dissection, they can be harvested in freestyle fashion both 
to avoid the zone of injury and to suit the defect requirements.64 
Free tissue transplantation is preferred for larger or more com-
plex defects, particularly in the middle and lower thirds of the 
leg where there are less soft tissues available for reconstruc-
tion. Free flaps need not be limited to providing only soft tis-
sue coverage; incorporation of vascularized bone, such as of 
fibula or iliac crest, can aid in fracture management.65 Chimeric 
flap configurations can improve flap insetting into composite 
defects. Flow-through designs, such as the anterolateral thigh 
flow-through free flap, can be used to bridge segmental vascular 
defects to revascularize the distal extremity.66 Muscular flaps 
can be motor innervated to restore lost muscle functions at the 
recipient site.67 Other techniques such as bone distraction and 
tissue expansion may be indicated in select circumstances. Tra-
ditional cross-leg flaps are almost never used now; they cause 
complete immobilization and increase the risk of deep vein 
thrombosis and contracture formation.
Osteomyelitis often complicates inadequately débrided 
compound leg fractures. Delayed coverage also appears to 
increase the risk of this dreaded complication. Generous irriga-
tion, débridement, removal of dead bone (even in a segment), 
expedient antibiotic therapy, and healthy soft tissue coverage 
are important in both acute compound fracture and established 
posttraumatic osteomyelitis. Large segmental bone losses can 
be addressed with microvascular free transplantation of osseous 
flaps or distraction lengthening.61,68
When limb salvage either is not possible or is not in the 
best interests of the patient, attention is directed to providing soft 
tissue stump coverage suitable for weight bearing and allowing 
ambulation with a properly fitted prosthesis. Ideally, local tissues 
are used; however, when they are unavailable or inadequate, the 
amputated part can be a useful source of skin grafts or tissues for 
microvascular free transfers to the stump, which preserves length 
and avoids a more proximal amputation.
Reconstruction after Oncologic Resection.  The refine-
ments in surgical ablation techniques, in adjuvant radiation 
therapy and chemotherapy, and in limb reconstruction methods 
have opened the possibility for curative limb-sparing treatments 
instead of amputation. Extensive soft tissue and segmental 
long bone defects from radical tumor resection and radiation-­
compromised wound healing can often be reconstructed now by 
liberal importation of fresh tissues through microvascular free 
tissue transplantation tailored to the defect.
Diabetic Ulceration.  The pathophysiology of primary dia-
betic lower limb complications has three main components: 
peripheral neuropathy (motor, sensory, and autonomic), periph-
eral vascular disease, and immunodeficiency. Altered foot 
1878
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
F
E
C
D
A
B
Figure 45-50.  Perforator-based island pedicled anterolateral thigh flap for soft tissue coverage of the upper third lateral leg. A. Soft tissue 
defect with exposed tibial metaphysis after débridement. Note the arterial handheld Doppler signal (red dot) around which the flap has been 
designed. The flap has been reverse-planned and the pivot point determined along the axis of the descending branch of the lateral circumflex 
femoral artery (black line). B. The flap has been harvested and its pedicle skeletonized to maximize freedom of flap motion; note the addi-
tional backup vein in case venous supercharge might be required. C. Satisfactory flap perfusion following inset. D. Flap perfusion became 
compromised postoperatively but (E) improved with bedside maneuvers; if improvement did not occur, backup venous supercharge would 
have been available. F. The regional fasciocutaneous flap has provided durable, color- and texture-matched soft tissues for reconstruction 
around the knee; importantly, the pliability of the flap tissues has allowed for a full range of knee movement to be maintained. (Photographs 
reproduced with permission from L. Lin.)
1879
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
­biomechanics and gait caused by painless collapse of ligamen-
tous support, foot joints, and foot arches change weight-bearing 
patterns. Blunted pain allows cutaneous fissuring and ulcer-
ation to progress. Multiflora infections are established amid 
local immunodeficiency and microvasculopathy. Frank neu-
roarthropathic Charcot’s foot deformities may ultimately 
result. Cutaneous ulcerations may chronically deteriorate rel-
atively painlessly, involving deeper tissues, including bone. 
Persistent soft tissue infection and osteomyelitis, worsened 
by peripheral vascular compromise and immunodeficiency, 
traditionally ends in gangrene and amputation. More than 
60% of nontraumatic lower extremity amputations occur in 
diabetics.69 Indeed, the age-adjusted lower extremity amputa-
tion rate in diabetics (5.5 per 1000 diabetics) was approxi-
mately 28 times that of people without diabetes (0.2 per 1000 
­people).69 Improved patient education and medical manage-
ment, timelier detection of diabetic foot problems and refer-
ral for treatment, and the use of more refined techniques for 
wound management play important roles in improving the 
chances of limb preservation.70
Diabetic patients with lower limb disease often have sig-
nificant multisystemic comorbidities that must be optimized 
for surgery; strict perioperative control of blood glucose levels 
is mandatory. Clinical examination must include documenta-
tion of sensory deficits, vascular insufficiencies, and evidence 
of osteomyelitis. Plain radiographs, MRI, nuclear bone scans, 
and angiography or duplex imaging may be indicated. A patient 
with significant vascular disease may be a candidate for lower 
extremity endovascular revascularization or open bypass.71 
Nerve conduction studies may diagnose surgically reversible 
neuropathies at compressive sites and aid in decisions about 
whether to perform sensory nerve transfers to restore plantar 
sensibility.70 Antibiotic and fungal therapies should be guided 
by tissue culture results.
Plastic surgical management starts with thorough débride-
ment of devitalized or infected tissues, purulent cavities, and 
osteomyelitic bone. Methods of wound closure are dictated 
by the extent and location of the postdébridement defect 
(Table 45-14). Vacuum-assisted closure may be appropriate for 
superficial defects. Skin grafts should be used cautiously and 
not in weight-bearing areas. Local and regional flaps can be 
used after careful evaluation of their vascularity given concur-
rent peripheral vascular disease and possible recent distal vas-
cular bypass procedures. Microvascular free tissue transfers are 
appropriate when defects are large or when local flaps are not 
available. Combination lower extremity bypass and free flap 
coverage has proved beneficial for the treatment of the diabetic 
foot in terms of healing and reduction of disease progression.72 
Orthopedic surgeons should be consulted to improve foot bio-
mechanics and address bony prominences to reduce the risk 
of recurrent ulceration. Proper footwear (including orthotic 
devices and off-loading shoe inserts), hygiene, and toenail and 
skin care are essential.70
Lymphedema.  The lymphatic system provides a high-volume 
transport mechanism, clearing proteins and lipids from the 
interstitial space to the systemic vasculature by means of differ-
ential pressure gradients. Factors that contribute to circulatory 
lymphatic flow include segmental lymphangion contractility, 
skeletal muscle activity, and one-way valves that prevent back-
flow.73,74 The lymphatics course throughout the body alongside 
the venous system, into which they eventually drain via the 
major thoracic and cervical ducts. With lymphatic obstruction, 
abnormal connections form between the superficial and deep 
lymphatics and between the lymphatic and venous systems. 
Lymphatic stagnation, hypertension, and valvular incompetence 
contribute to edema, inflammatory fibrovascular proliferation, 
and collagen deposition, causing firm, nonpitting swelling with 
peau d’orange cutaneous changes. Lymphoscintigraphy reveals 
the lymphatic anatomy and quantifies lymphatic flow. MRI pro-
vides anatomic information regarding lymphatic trunks, nodes, 
and obstructive lesions. It is essential to rule out neoplastic lym-
phatic invasion, especially after oncologic ablation, as a cause 
of secondary lymphedema. Lymphangiosarcoma is a rare cause 
of lymphedema that is deadly if diagnosed late.75
Primary lymphatic obstruction may arise from congenital 
malformations of the lymphatic system such as lymphatic hypo-
plasia, functional insufficiency, or absence of lymphatic valves. 
Identified genetic causes include the autosomal dominant 
­Milroy’s disease. Lymphedema praecox accounts for >90% of 
cases of primary lymphedema, generally appears during puberty 
but sometimes as late as the third decade, and occurs more 
commonly in females. It is usually unilateral and limited to the 
foot and calf. Lymphedema tarda appears after the age of 
35 years and is relatively rare. Secondary (acquired) lymph-
edema is much more common, with filariasis being the leading 
cause worldwide.76 In Western countries, secondary lymph-
edema is more commonly the result of neoplasms and their sur-
gical treatments and radiotherapy.76
The mainstays of management for lower extremity lymph-
edema are patient education and nonsurgical measures, including 
one or more of the following: use of external compressive garments 
and devices, limb elevation, administration of antibiotics for epi-
sodes of cellulitis, and specialized complex physical therapy.77,78 
Table 45-14
Some reconstructive options for the diabetic foot
Area of Defect
Reconstructive Options
Forefoot
V-Y advancement
Toe island flap
Single toe amputation
Lisfranc’s amputation
Midfoot
V-Y advancement
Toe island flap
Medial plantar artery flap
Free tissue transfer
Transmetatarsal amputation
Hindfoot
Lateral calcaneal artery flap
Reversed sural artery flap
Medial plantar artery flap ± flexor 
  digitorum brevis
Abductor hallucis muscle flap
Abductor digiti minimi muscle flap
Free tissue transfer
Syme’s amputation
Foot dorsum
Supramalleolar flap
Reversed sural artery flap
Thinner free flaps (e.g., temporoparietal 
  fascia, radial forearm, groin, thinned 
anterolateral thigh flaps)
1880
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Until recently, the efficacy of available surgical options was gen-
erally poor, so they were reserved for cases in which aggressive 
nonsurgical measures had failed. The classic Charles procedure 
involved radical excision of lymphedematous suprafascial tis-
sues with skin grafting for coverage; cosmetic outcomes were 
often disastrous, and functional problems arose due to high rates 
of contracture, wound breakdown, and ulcerations. This method 
was later modified into multiple staged excisions of subcutaneous 
tissues. Other techniques include liposuction and bridging proce-
dures.78 Microsurgical lymphatic-lymphatic, lymphatic-venous, 
lymphatic-venous-lymphatic, and lymph node–venous anasto-
moses were all tried historically, with some techniques showing 
efficacy early on but long-term results showing high variability.79 
Recently, however, with an increased understanding of its patho-
physiology and improved preoperative investigations, objective 
staging of lymphedema severity has become more accurate and 
allowed microsurgeons to tailor treatments for properly selected 
patients.80,81 These factors, alongside improvements in microsurgi-
cal techniques, instrumentation, and long-term postoperative care, 
have provided better surgical results and a resurgence in interest 
in microsurgical treatment for lymphedema.76 Nonsurgical tech-
niques can be, and usually are, combined with any of the surgical 
methods.
Pressure Sore Treatment
A pressure ulcer is defined as tissue injury, usually over a bony 
prominence, due to pressure or a combination of pressure and 
shear forces. These wounds occur in patients debilitated by age, 
illness, immobilization from orthopedic injuries, or spinal cord 
injury. Prevention of pressure ulcers first requires identifica-
tion of susceptible patients. Once such patients are identified, 
measures to prevent development of ulceration include frequent 
position changes (by both the patient and caretakers), use of 
pressure reduction equipment (low air loss mattresses and seat 
cushions, heel protectors), nutritional optimization, hygienic 
control of incontinence, and medical and/or surgical treat-
ment of muscle spasm and joint contracture. Once an ulcer has 
developed, these same factors must be carefully evaluated and 
deficiencies corrected before embarking on a complex recon-
structive treatment plan. Successful reconstruction also requires 
a medically stable, cooperative, motivated patient with adequate 
social support.
Pressure ulcers are described by their stage, based on depth 
of tissue injury (Table 45-15).82 Stage I and II ulcers are treated 
conservatively with dressing changes and basic pressure ulcer 
prevention strategies as already discussed. Patients with stage III 
or IV ulcers should be evaluated for surgery. The wound is 
examined for soft tissue infection or abscess, osteomyelitis, and 
involvement of deeper structures or spaces (e.g., joint space, 
urethra, spinal canal) to determine the urgency and specific 
requirements of the problem. Blood laboratory work and imag-
ing studies are performed to help establish whether soft tissue 
or bone infection is present. Radiographs are usually adequate 
to rule out osteomyelitis; CT and MRI are helpful when plain 
films are equivocal. Wet gangrenous tissue and abscesses should 
be surgically débrided without delay to prevent or treat sepsis. 
In patients who do not meet the strict reconstruction criteria, 
débridement to healthy tissue without subsequent reconstruction 
may be the optimal treatment. If bone is present at the wound 
base, it should be débrided only to bleeding bone and left with a 
smooth contour. Complete ischiectomy should not be performed 
for ischial decubitus ulcers, because removal of one ischium only 
transfers subsequent pressure trauma to the contralateral ischium 
or the perineum. If osteomyelitis is present, which is best proven 
by culture of specimens obtained by intraoperative bone biopsy, 
long-term antibiotic therapy guided by microorganism sensitiv-
ity is indicated. A special note should be made regarding surgi-
cal treatment of spinal cord injury patients with T5 or higher 
injuries. In these patients, manipulation of a pressure ulcer and 
even simple urinary retention can trigger autonomic hyperre-
flexia. This dangerous condition is characterized by critically 
high blood pressure elevation and sympathetic discharge. Effec-
tive management is immediate recognition and reversal of trig-
ger factors along with prompt administration of pharmacologic 
agents to prevent complications such as intracranial and retinal 
hemorrhage, seizure, cardiac irregularities, and death.
Direct closure of a pressure ulcer is rarely performed because 
it usually creates tension in the healing tissues already stressed 
by nonphysiologic external pressure, predisposing the closure to 
breakdown. Skin grafting is useful for shallow ulcers with well-
vascularized beds that are not subjected to high mechanical shear. 
Unfortunately, these requirements remove most pressure ulcers 
from skin graft candidacy. The mainstay of deep pressure ulcer 
reconstruction is coverage with well-vascularized local flaps. 
There is debate over whether myocutaneous flaps are better than 
fasciocutaneous flaps for resurfacing regions prone to excess 
pressure and shear. Although myocutaneous flaps have excellent 
bulk and blood supply, muscle has low tolerance for ischemic 
injury. From an anatomic viewpoint, there is no pressure point on 
the human body where bone is padded by muscle. On the other 
hand, although fasciocutaneous flaps provide reasonable bulk and 
are teleologically appropriate, some argue that subcutaneous fat 
and fascia have low resistance to pressure and shear forces and 
have less robust perfusion than muscle.83
The anatomic location of the pressure ulcer naturally has 
a profound impact on flap choice. Regardless of the wound site, 
however, the flap design should be very large, more than needed 
for closure, so that if the ulcer recurs the flap can be readvanced. 
In addition, care should be taken to place suture lines, the weak-
est part of the reconstruction, away from pressure points. Over 
the last few decades, patterns have developed in the selection 
of particular flaps for particular pressure sores. Sacral decu-
biti are well treated with gluteus maximus myocutaneous flaps 
(Fig. 45-51). In ambulatory patients, either the superior or the 
inferior gluteus muscle is spared to preserve hip extension func-
tion. The downside of using the gluteal muscle is the relatively 
Table 45-15
National pressure ulcer advisory panel staging system
Classification
Description
Stage I
Intact skin with nonblanchable redness
Stage II
Partial-thickness loss of dermis; may 
present as blister
Stage III
Full-thickness loss of dermis with 
visible subcutaneous fat (no deeper 
structures exposed)
Stage IV
Full-thickness loss of dermis with 
exposed bone, tendon, or muscle
Unstageable
Full-thickness loss of dermis with ulcer 
base obscured by eschar
1881
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
bloody dissection. A common alternative is the gluteal fasciocu-
taneous advancement or rotational flap. Ischial pressure sores are 
generally due to sitting in a wheelchair with improper cushion-
ing or insufficient position changes. A good first-choice flap for 
ischial wound reconstruction is the hamstring V-Y myocutaneous 
flap. The gluteus maximus flap may also be transposed inferiorly 
to cover this wound. A fasciocutaneous alternative is the posterior 
thigh flap, based on the continuation of the inferior gluteal artery. 
Trochanteric ulcers develop from prolonged positioning in the 
lateral decubitus position or from poorly fitting seat or wheel-
chair equipment. The tensor fasciae latae myocutaneous flap is 
an expendable muscle unit in ambulatory patients that has a reli-
able blood supply. It can be advanced superiorly or transposed 
on its long arc of rotation (see Fig. 45-51). Good second-choice 
flaps are the rectus femoris muscle flap and the vastus lateralis 
myocutaneous flap. When pressure sores are neglected, they can 
become confluent, forming large areas of deep tissue destruction. 
This dire situation may require hip disarticulation and use of the 
upper leg soft tissue as a total thigh flap for coverage.
The postoperative care after flap reconstruction of pressure 
ulcers is as important for success as the surgery itself. The authors 
recommend transfer of the patient from the operating room table 
onto an air-fluidized bed, where the patient will remain for the 
next 7 to 10 days in the hospital. Meticulous instructions must be 
given to the nursing staff and therapists regarding the position-
ing and rolling of the patient to prevent stressing the suture lines 
during these maneuvers. Nutrition and muscle spasm control are 
carefully maintained. The posthospitalization care plan, which 
should have been arranged preoperatively, is confirmed to 
avoid lapses in proper care. Patients with ischial sores are 
advised to abstain from sitting for 6 weeks to allow for sufficient 
healing. Care of the pressure ulcer patient is a labor-intensive 
process that requires attention to detail by the surgeon, nurses, 
therapists, caseworkers, and family. Unfortunately, small gaps 
in care inevitably lead to large gaps in the debilitated patient’s 
integument.
Reconstructive Transplant Surgery
Composite tissue allotransplantation (CTA), such as hand and 
face transplantation, has become a clinical reality and offers 
enormous potential for many reconstructive problems, includ-
ing amputation of extremities. However, as with solid organ 
transplantation, there remains the issue of allograft rejection. 
In contrast to visceral organ transplantation, which involves 
homogeneous tissues, CTA may involve a combination of skin, 
subcutaneous tissue, nerve, blood vessels, muscle, tendon, and 
bone, and thus carry the antigenicities of all these tissue types. 
The basic principles of immunosuppression for solid organ 
Figure 45-51.  Flap reconstruction of pressure ulcers. Top row: Preoperative and 1-month postoperative photos of a stage IV sacral decubitus 
ulcer treated with a myocutaneous gluteus maximus flap. Bottom row: Preoperative and 1-month postoperative photos of a stage IV trochan-
teric ulcer treated with a myocutaneous V-Y tensor fasciae latae flap. (Photographs reproduced with permission from M. Gimbel.)
1882
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
transplantation have been applied to CTA and include therapy 
with a variety of combinations of T-cell–depleting agents, 
monoclonal antibodies, calcineurin inhibitors, antimetabolites, 
and rapamycin. The complications associated with immuno-
suppression are well known, including opportunistic infections, 
metabolic disturbances, and malignancies. Patients selected to 
undergo CTA, specifically hand transplantation, are young and 
healthy and therefore more resistant to immunosuppressive side 
effects than typically less robust solid organ recipients.
As with any surgical procedure, the benefits, success rate, 
and complications must be understood. Unlike solid organ trans-
plantation, CTA is not a lifesaving procedure. There remains 
much debate over the risks associated with lifelong adminis-
tration of potentially dangerous immunosuppressive agents to 
patients who have no life-threatening illness. The ultimate goal 
in CTA research is immune tolerance in which the recipient 
of the allograft remains fully immunocompetent yet does not 
mount an immunologic response to the transplanted allograft. 
Accomplishment of this goal would allow the decrease or possi-
ble elimination of immunosuppressive medications. If immune 
tolerance is achieved, CTA clinical applications will broaden 
dramatically as they become the next frontier in reconstructive 
surgery84 (Fig. 45-52).
AESTHETIC SURGERY
The American Medical Association defines cosmetic surgery 
as “surgery performed to reshape normal structures of the body 
to improve the patient’s appearance and self-esteem.” 
Reconstructive surgery is performed on structures of the 
body that are abnormal due to congenital defects, developmental 
abnormalities, trauma, infection, tumors, or disease. It is gener-
ally performed to improve function but may also be done to 
approximate a normal appearance.85 In practical terms, there 
are both reconstructive and cosmetic elements to almost every 
plastic surgery case, and the definition of “normal” structure is 
sometimes unclear. Nevertheless, there are patients for whom it 
is a priority to make surgical changes to their bodies in the clear 
absence of a functional deformity. Aesthetic surgery patients 
present a unique challenge to the plastic surgeon, because the 
most important outcome parameter is not truly appearance, but 
patient satisfaction. Optimally, a good cosmetic outcome will 
be associated with a high level of patient satisfaction. For this 
to be the case, the plastic surgeon must do a careful analysis of 
the patient’s motivations for wanting surgery, along with the 
patient’s goals and expectations. The surgeon must make a rea-
sonable assessment that the improvements that can be achieved 
through surgery will meet the patient’s expectations. The sur-
geon must appropriately counsel the patient about the magni-
tude of the recovery process, the exact location of scars, and 
potential complications. If complications do occur, the surgeon 
must manage these in a manner that preserves a positive doctor-
patient relationship.
Assessment of Facial Aesthetics
A thorough evaluation of the patient who presents for facial 
aesthetic surgery should start with elicitation of the patient’s 
chief complaint, and the examination should be focused on 
that region. Physical examination of the entire face should note 
skin quality as well as the presence of redundant skin on the 
neck, jowls, and eyelids. Depth of the nasolabial folds and the 
presence of “marionette” lines on the chin should be noted. 
Brow position should be evaluated, along with the distance 
from brow to hairline. Bulging fat in the lower eyelid region 
and the presence of a “tear trough” deformity, or deep fold at the 
lid-cheek junction, should be evaluated. Facial fat atrophy and 
descent, a hallmark of facial aging, should be noted.
Blepharoplasty and Browlift
Excess skin and adipose deposits of the upper eyelid are 
approached through an incision based on the supratarsal crease. 
Figure 45-52.  Hemifacial composite tissue allotransplantation in a 
rat model. (Photographs reproduced with permission from K. McLean.)
5
1883
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Careful attention to marking will avoid the complication of 
overresection. A strip of orbicularis muscle is often excised to 
accentuate the supratarsal fold. Fat deep to the orbital septum 
is resected selectively. In the lower lid, excess skin is removed 
through a subciliary incision. Lower eyelid fat may be either 
excised or repositioned. Complications can include hematoma, 
lower lid retraction, and injury to ocular muscles. If a hematoma 
forms in the retro-orbital region, a true surgical emergency exists. 
Permanent vision loss can occur if it is not immediately decom-
pressed. Brow ptosis, judged relative to the superior orbital rim, 
can be corrected through a number of incisions (Fig. 45-53).86
Facelift
Correction of jowls, nasolabial folds, and redundant neck skin 
can be accomplished with a facelift procedure that both removes 
skin and tightens the superficial musculoaponeurotic system 
(SMAS) layer. The SMAS lies deep to the subcutaneous tis-
sue and contains the muscles of facial expression. The facial 
nerves are in a plane just deep to the SMAS. The SMAS can 
be simply plicated or a portion of it excised and closed. A sub-
SMAS dissection technique can help to elevate and develop this 
layer in separate fashion, with care being taken to avoid injury 
to the underlying facial nerves. The incisions for most facelift 
techniques are preauricular with extension into the temporal 
hairline superiorly and into the retroauricular region posteriorly 
and inferiorly (Figs. 45-54 and 45-55). The platysmal layer is 
continuous with the SMAS layer and can be plicated through a 
small neck incision to eliminate the appearance of vertical bands 
along the muscle edge. The most common facelift complication 
is hematoma, which may require operative drainage to prevent 
skin flap necrosis. Injury to facial nerves, most often temporal 
Figure 45-54.  Incisions for cervicofacial rhytidectomy.
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 45-53.  Incisions for browlift. A, Temporal scalp incision; B, 
temporal hairline incision; C, midline scalp incision; D, mid-hairline 
incision; E, direct eyebrow incision; F, direct forehead incision.
branch and marginal mandibular branch, is seen in approxi-
mately 1% of cases.87
Rhinoplasty
The key to understanding rhinoplasty is appreciating the com-
plex nasal anatomy (Fig. 45-56) and the way in which altering 
this framework will impact the appearance of the nose. Evalu-
ation of the rhinoplasty patient not only should include the aes-
thetic complaints, but also should consider the function of the 
nasal airways. Nasal airway obstruction can occur from several 
structural problems. A deviated septum can severely impede air-
flow, as can problems with the internal nasal valve. Obstruction 
at the internal nasal valve, which is the junction of the upper 
lateral cartilage and septum, can be identified by applying lat-
eral traction on the cheek skin to open the valve and observ-
ing whether airflow improves (Cottle sign). Airway obstruction 
can be addressed surgically at the time of rhinoplasty. Aesthetic 
deformities of the dorsum of the nose are treated by a combina-
tion of osteotomies, which serve to reposition the nasal bones, 
and rasping of the bone. Aesthetic deformities of the tip of the 
nose are treated by reducing the width of the lower lateral carti-
lages and/or sewing the cartilages together to reduce tip width. 
Small tips can be augmented with cartilage grafts harvested 
from septum or auricle (Fig. 45-57). Complications of rhino-
plasty include induction of new nasal airway obstruction and a 
variety of aesthetic deformities.88
Suction Lipectomy
Liposuction involves the removal of adipose tissue through 
minimal incisions using a hollow suction cannula. Although the 
scarring is quite innocuous, a key principle of liposuction is that 
fat is being removed without skin tightening. Therefore, one 
relies on the patient’s inherent skin elasticity to provide retrac-
tion over the treated adipose depot. Assessment of skin tone is 
1884
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 45-55.  Facelift. A. Preoperative appearance. B. Postoperative appearance.
Naso-frontal angle
Naso-labial angle
Tip-columellar angle
Lower lateral 
cartilage
Upper lateral 
cartilage
Figure 45-56.  Rhinoplasty anatomy.
1885
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
a vital part of the patient evaluation. If there is skin laxity in the 
area to be treated, it may worsen after liposuction. Importantly, 
liposuction should be used as a tool for contouring prominent 
adipose depots and is not considered a weight loss treatment. 
The best candidates for liposuction are individuals who are 
close to their goal weight and have focal adipose deposits that 
are resistant to diet and exercise (Fig. 45-58). The suction can-
nula removes fat by avulsing small parcels of adipose tissue into 
small holes at the cannula tip. With standard suction lipectomy, 
fat is removed only when the cannula is actively moved through 
the tissue planes. Minimal tissue effects are seen when the can-
nula is stationary. In general, larger-diameter cannulas remove 
adipose tissue at a faster rate but carry a higher risk of caus-
ing contour irregularities such as grooving and uneven removal 
of fat. Newer liposuction technology uses an ultrasonic probe 
to emulsify the fat via cavitation before suction. Advocates of 
ultrasonic liposuction report that the technique provides a more 
even and uniform removal of adipose tissue. Recognizing that 
no one technique is best for all patients and all anatomic regions, 
many surgeons use ultrasonic energy selectively.
A major advance in the field of liposuction was the devel-
opment of tumescent local anesthesia. This method involves the 
infiltration of very dilute lidocaine and epinephrine (lidocaine 
0.05% and epinephrine 1:1,000,000) in large volumes throughout 
the subcutaneous tissues. Tumescent volumes may range from 
one to three times the anticipated aspirate volume. The dilute 
lidocaine provides sufficient anesthesia to allow the liposuction 
to be performed without additional agents, although many sur-
geons prefer to use sedation or even general anesthetic when large 
volumes of fat are to be removed. When general anesthesia is 
used, the lidocaine dose may be reduced or even eliminated. With 
tumescent anesthesia, the absorption of the dilute lidocaine from 
the subcutaneous tissue is very slow, with peak plasma concen-
trations occurring approximately 10 hours after the procedure.89 
Therefore, the standard lidocaine dosing limit of 7 mg/kg may 
be safely exceeded. Current recommendations suggest a limit of 
35 mg/kg of lidocaine with tumescent anesthesia.90 A very impor-
tant component of the tumescent anesthetic solution is the dilute 
epinephrine, which limits blood loss during the procedure.
Safety issues are paramount for liposuction because 
of potential fluid shifts postoperatively and hypothermia. If 
≥5000 mL of aspirate is to be removed, the procedure should be 
performed in an accredited acute care hospital facility. After the 
procedure, vital signs and urinary output should be monitored 
overnight in an appropriate facility by qualified and competent 
staff who are familiar with perioperative care of the liposuction 
patient.90
Autologous Fat Grafting
The concept of reinjecting fat tissue harvested by liposuction 
has been put into practice for decades. Key to the technique 
is a processing step in which the sterilely collected fat is sepa-
rated from the aqueous (primarily tumescent fluid) and free lipid 
fractions. This can be done by centrifugation or filtering. The 
adipose grafts are then injected into the tissues using specially 
designed blunt-tipped cannulas. Small aliquots of graft material 
are injected with each cannula pass, and the fat is interposed 
within the vascularized tissues of the recipient bed in small 
channels. Autologous fat grafting has been used primarily for 
facial aesthetic augmentation of the midface, but has been gain-
ing popularity for breast aesthetic applications, buttock augmen-
tation, and breast reconstruction.
Figure 45-57.  Rhinoplasty. A. Preoperative appearance. B. Post-
operative appearance.
1886
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
Excisional Body Contouring
When significant skin laxity is present, improvement in con-
tour can be achieved only through skin excision. Therefore, all 
body-contouring surgery represents a trade of excess skin for 
scar, and this must be emphasized during patient consultation. 
The patient willing to accept scars in exchange for improved 
contour is likely to be satisfied with the procedures. With the 
increased number of bariatric surgery procedures over the past 
decade, body-contouring surgery has become very popular and 
is emerging as a new subspecialty of plastic surgery.
Figure 45-58.  A and B. Preoperative photos of a 22-year-old woman with focal adipose deposits on the trunk and extremities. C. Patient 3 
months after surgery.
1887
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
Abdominoplasty/Panniculectomy.  Abdominoplasty/pan-
niculectomy is the most common body-contouring procedure 
and can range from a limited-incision skin removal in the lower 
abdomen to a major skin excision with transposition of the 
umbilicus and placation of the rectus muscles to further enhance 
contour.91 Some patients may benefit from a concurrent vertical 
incision to remove skin in two vectors (Fig. 45-59). Possible 
complications include skin necrosis, persistent paresthesias of 
the abdominal wall, seroma, and wound separation. Necrosis 
of the umbilicus may complicate preservation of that struc-
ture if the stalk is excessively long or an umbilical hernia is 
repaired. Adding a vertical resection increases the incidence of 
skin necrosis, especially at the confluence of scars in the lower 
abdomen.
Brachioplasty (Arm Lift).  Brachioplasty, or arm lift, leaves 
a visible longitudinal scar on the upper arm. Therefore, it is 
reserved for patients with excessive skin in that region. The 
patient willing to accept the scar can be happy with the results. 
Complications include distal seroma and wound separation. 
Paresthesias in the upper arm and forearm may occur second-
ary to injury of sensory nerves passing through the resection 
area, although this rarely affects function. Scar contracture in 
the axilla may limit shoulder excursion in rare cases and require 
revision.
Thigh and Buttock Lift.  Treatment of loose skin on the thighs 
and buttocks involves a spectrum of operations customized to 
the individual patient. The outer thighs can be lifted at the same 
time that an abdominoplasty is performed with one continuous 
scar along the belt line. The same scar can be continued all the 
way around the back to lift the buttocks as well. This combina-
tion of abdominoplasty, thigh lift, and buttock lift is commonly 
referred to as a circumferential lower body lift. The inner thighs 
can be contoured by lifting the skin and placing the incisions 
along the groin crease. Firmly anchoring the deep thigh fascia 
to Colles’ fascia is essential to help prevent spreading of the 
labia. In cases of severe excess skin on the inner thighs, a long 
vertical incision is necessary. Complications of thigh and but-
tock lift include seroma, wound separation, skin necrosis, and 
change in the shape of the genital region (with possible sexual 
dysfunction). Blood loss during the procedure may necessitate 
transfusion.
Reduction Mammaplasty
Breast reduction is performed to treat symptoms of macromas-
tia, most commonly consisting of the triad of upper back pain, 
bra strap grooving, and rashes under the fold of the breasts. 
Although this procedure has reconstructive indications, the 
aesthetic outcome is of considerable importance. Fundamental 
to the success of the procedure is the establishment of sym-
metric and proper nipple position. Nipple ptosis is graded by 
the nipple position relative to the inframammary fold (IMF). 
Grade 1 ptosis describes a nipple ≤1 cm below the IMF. Grade 2 
ptosis describes a nipple 1 to 3 cm below the IMF. Grade 3 
ptosis describes a nipple position >3 cm below the IMF. Pseu-
doptosis or bottoming out is a term used to describe the descent 
of the breast tissue below the nipple and is a potential long-term 
complication of breast reduction. In addition to classification of 
Figure 45-59.  A. Preoperative photo of 35-year-old woman after gastric bypass and massive weight loss. B. Patient 12 months after a fleur-
de-lis abdominoplasty.
1888
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
nipple ptosis, a thorough preoperative evaluation also includes 
measurement of the distance from sternal notch to nipple bilater-
ally, as well as measurement of the distance from nipple to IMF. 
The base width of the breast should also be considered. Many 
patients are found to have significant baseline asymmetries in 
these measurements. Preoperative breast cancer screening con-
sistent with current American Cancer Society guidelines should 
be performed for all patients undergoing elective breast reshaping 
surgery. The planned new nipple position should be symmetrical 
at the IMF along the breast meridian. There are many technical 
variations of the breast reduction procedure, but nearly all of them 
have common elements of reshaping the skin envelope in three 
dimensions and moving the nipple to a new location on a vas-
cularized tissue pedicle. The pedicle is de-epithelialized to pre-
serve the subdermal vascular plexus. Fig. 45-60 shows the classic 
“keyhole” Wise pattern reduction technique. The skin resection is 
designed to create a conical shape, and the nipple is transposed on 
an inferiorly based pedicle.92 This results in an inverted T-shaped 
B
A
D
C
De-epithelialized
area
Excised area
Figure 45-60.  Inferior pedicle reduction mammaplasty. A. Markings for Wise pattern reduction. B. Purple area is region to be de-epithelialized. 
C. Dark blue region is area to be resected. A segment of the inferior pedicle is de-epithelialized. The inferior pedicle is dissected straight down to 
the chest wall, with maintenance of an 8- to 10-cm pedicle width. Lateral and medial segments are resected. After this is accomplished, the superior 
flap is dissected to the clavicle. Breast subcutaneous tissue and parenchyma are resected from the superior pole. The vertical limbs are brought 
together and to the meridian of the inframammary fold. The nipple is then set in its new superior position. D. T-shaped incision on final closure.
1889
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
scar. Fig. 45-61 shows a patient treated using this technique. All 
breast reduction techniques keep the scars on the lower half of 
the breast so they are covered by clothing. Techniques have 
been designed to minimize scar length and even eliminate the 
horizontal component in the IMF. Fig. 45-62 depicts a vertical 
scar skin resection pattern with the nipple preserved on a supe-
rior pedicle.93,94 For excessively large breasts, the required 
pedicle length may be too long to provide adequate blood 
supply to the nipple. In such cases, the nipple is removed and 
replaced onto a viable tissue bed as a full-thickness skin graft. 
Complications of breast reduction include decreased nipple 
sensation, nipple loss (rare), skin necrosis, hematoma, and fat 
necrosis. This last complication can result in a firm mass of 
scar within the breast that may need careful evaluation and 
follow-up to distinguish it from a neoplastic mass. Long-term 
complications include inability to breastfeed and pseudopto-
sis, as mentioned earlier.
Mastopexy
In contradistinction to breast reduction, in which patients are 
treated for symptoms related to heavy breasts, mastopexy is a 
three-dimensional reshaping of the breast performed with no 
or minimal volume removal. The principles are the same, how-
ever. The skin envelope is contoured, and the nipple location 
is optimized. Because the degree of ptosis may be less severe 
than in breast reduction cases, the patterns of skin resection can 
vary widely. Minimal patterns may involve excision of just a 
crescent of skin from above the areola or a periareolar (“donut”) 
resection. The Wise keyhole pattern can be used for larger skin 
excisions.
Figure 45-61.  A and B. Preoperative photos of a 25-year-old woman with symptoms of upper back pain, bra strap grooving, and rashes under 
the folds of her breasts treated with a Wise pattern inferior pedicle reduction. C and D. Patient 6 months after surgery.
1890
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
B
A
D
C
De-epithelialized
area
Undermined
area
Excised
area
Figure 45-62.  Vertical reduction mammaplasty, Lejour technique. A. Markings for vertical reduction. B. Purple area is region to be 
­de-epithelialized. C. Dark blue region represents inferior pole to be resected. The shaded regions are the lateral and medial segments that are 
to be undermined; these areas can also be liposuctioned. The superior pedicle is de-epithelialized and dissected to the chest wall. The tissue and 
parenchyma from the inferior pole are resected. The pillars from the lateral and medial segments are sewn together. The nipple is transposed 
on its pedicle to its new position. D. Closure of the vertical mammaplasty. There is bunching up of skin and tissue along the vertical limb that 
will resolve over time; in addition, the new inframammary fold will declare itself superior to the original one.
Augmentation Mammaplasty
Although the use of prosthetic implants can successfully 
increase breast size, the surgeon must fully understand both 
the risks of the biomaterials and the way in which a specific 
implant of given shape and size can be surgically integrated 
into the existing breast mound to achieve the desired result.95 
To address the latter point, the surgeon must first consider 
the possible surgical approaches for implant placement. The 
three commonly used incisions for placement of cosmetic 
breast implants are inframammary, periareolar, and axillary 
(Fig. 45-63).96 A transumbilical breast augmentation technique 
has been advocated by some surgeons more recently, but crit-
ics of this approach point out that there is poor control over the 
dissection of the implant pocket and that direct access to the 
1891
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
tissues of the breast is inadequate to control bleeding vessels. 
In addition, only saline implants can be used with transumbili-
cal breast augmentation because the prefilled silicone implants 
are too large to pass through the incision and narrow tunnel. 
The implants may be placed in a subglandular or subpectoral 
position (Fig. 45-64). Many surgeons prefer the subpectoral 
placement because it provides greater soft tissue coverage in 
the upper pole of the breast and can hide contour irregularities 
related to the implant. This soft tissue coverage is especially 
important with saline implants, because visible rippling can 
occur. The next issue to consider is existing nipple position. If 
a patient has mild ptosis, the sheer volume of the implant may 
raise the nipple to an acceptable level. For more severe ptosis, 
a concurrent mastopexy is necessary. Some surgeons advocate 
performing the mastopexy as a second stage after the implant 
has settled into position.
Potential complications related to the implant itself are 
numerous, and the patient must be fully informed of these pos-
sibilities before undergoing surgery. One important point is that 
there is a high likelihood that the patient will require a second 
operation to address an implant problem. The implant compli-
cations are essentially all local. Although there was concern in 
the past that implants might be associated with systemic con-
nective tissue disorders, large epidemiologic studies have not 
supported such a link. The fears over implant safety were so 
strong that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) declared 
a moratorium on the use of silicone gel implants in 1992. At 
that time, saline-filled implants were still allowed for general 
cosmetic use. Data were compiled on silicone gel implants, 
and these devices were approved by the FDA for general use 
in 2006.97 A potential implant complication is rupture of the 
device. For saline implants, this results in rapid deflation. For 
silicone gel implants, the rupture may be not be obvious and 
can be confirmed by MRI. Another complication is capsular 
contracture, which results in a tight envelope of scar that can 
distort the shape of the implant and cause pain in severe cases. 
A complication more common to saline devices is the appear-
ance of rippling in the upper pole of the device. Implant malpo-
sition can also distort the breast shape and require reoperation. 
Safety data printed on the official FDA-approved package 
insert from one of the device manufacturers show the inci-
dence of reoperation to be 29.9% over 7 years in a study of 
901 women undergoing primary breast augmentation with 
saline-filled implants (postapproval study). The rate of severe 
capsular contracture (grade 3 or 4 on a 4-point scale) was 
15.7%, and the rate of implant rupture was 9.8%.98 For sili-
cone gel–filled implants, the reoperation rate was observed to 
be 23.5% over 4 years in a study of 455 women undergoing 
primary breast augmentation. The rate of severe capsular con-
tracture (grade 3 or 4 on a 4-point scale) was 13.2%, and the 
rate of implant rupture (evaluated by MRI) was 2.7%. The three 
most common reasons for operation, in order, were capsular 
contracture (28.9%), implant malposition (15.6%), and ptosis 
(14.1%). For secondary augmentation, complication rates were 
much higher, with the reoperation rate over 4 years rising to 
35.2%. The rate of capsular contracture was 17.0%, and the rate 
of implant rupture was 4.0%.99
Another concern regarding breast implants is the issue 
of whether adequate mammography can be performed after 
augmentation. Displacement techniques can be used by the 
mammographer to view the breast tissue. Although patients 
are advised that implants may affect mammography, a study 
surveying women who did and did not undergo breast augmen-
tation found no statistical difference in survival or detection of 
carcinoma between the two cohorts.100
Gynecomastia
Male breast excess or gynecomastia can be caused by a host 
of medical diseases and pharmacologic agents. Medical con-
ditions associated with gynecomastia include liver dysfunc-
tion, endocrine abnormalities, Klinefelter’s syndrome, renal 
disease, testicular tumors, adrenal or pituitary adenomas, 
secreting lung carcinomas, and male breast cancer. Causative 
pharmacologic agents include marijuana, digoxin, spirono-
lactone, cimetidine, theophylline, diazepam, and reserpine. 
Although these numerous causes must be considered, a major-
ity of patients present with either idiopathic enlargement of 
the breast parenchyma (more common in teenagers) or simple 
skin ptosis and excess adipose deposits on the chest wall (con-
sidered pseudogynecomastia; more common in adult males). 
To obtain a flat chest, both liposuction and/or skin excision 
techniques can be used.101
B
A
C
Figure 45-63.  Incisions for augmentation mammaplasty. A, Infra-
mammary; B, axillary; C, periareolar.
Implant
B
A
Pectoralis major
muscle
Figure 45-64.  Placement of breast implant. A. Subglandular. 
B. Subpectoral.
1892
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references. 
1.	Wilhelmi BJ, Blackwell SJ, Phillips LG. Langer’s lines: to use 
or not to use. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1999;104:208-214.
2.	Borges AF. Elective Incisions and Scar Revision, vol. 1. 
­Boston: Little, Brown; 1973:2.
3.	Gimbel ML, Hunt TK. Wound healing and hyperbaric 
oxygen. In: Kindwall EP, Whelan HT, eds. Hyperbaric 
Medicine Practice. 2nd ed. Flagstaff: Best Publishing 
Company; 1999:169.
4.	Kelton PL. Skin grafts and skin substitutes. Selected Readings 
Plast Surg. 1999;9:1.
5.	Aston JS, Beasley RW, Thorne CHM, eds. Grabb and Smith’s 
Plastic Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven 
­Publishers; 1997.
6.	McGregor IA, Morgan G. Axial and random pattern flaps. 
Br J Plast Surg. 1973;26:202-213.
7.	Wei FC, Jain V, Suominen S, et al. Confusion among perfo-
rator flaps: what is a true perforator flap? Br J Plast Surg. 
2001;107:874-876.
8.	Taylor GI, Palmer JH. The vascular territories (angiosomes) 
of the body: experimental study and clinical applications. Br J 
Plast Surg. 1987;40:113-141.
9.	Ghali S, Butler PE, Tepper OM, et al. Vascular delay revisited. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007;119:1735-1744.
10.	Mathes SJ, Nahai F. Reconstructive Surgery: Principles, Anat-
omy, and Technique. Vol. 1. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 
1997.
11.	Koshima I, Soeda S. Inferior epigastric artery skin flaps 
without rectus abdominis muscle. Br J Plast Surg. 1989;42: 
645-648.
12.	Wei FC, Mardini S. Free-style free flaps. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2004;114:910-916.
13.	Wei FC, Souminen S. Principles and techniques of micro-
vascular surgery. In: Mathes SJ, ed. Plastic Surgery. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:507.
14.	Widmaier EP, Raff H, Strang KT. Cardiovascular physiology. 
In: Vander, Sherman, and Luciano’s Human Physiology—The 
Mechanisms of Body Function. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2004:375.
15.	Chang DW, Reece GP, Wang B, et al. Effect of smoking on 
complications in patients undergoing free TRAM flap breast 
reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:2374-2380.
16.	Lutz BS, Wei FC. Microsurgical workhorse flaps in head 
and neck reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg. 2005;32:421-430.
17.	Chen KT, Mardini S, Chuang DC, et al. Timing of presen-
tation of the first signs of vascular compromise dictates the 
salvage outcome of free flap transfers. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2007;120:187-195.
18.	Kroll SS, Miller MJ, Reece GP, et al. Anticoagulants and 
hematomas in free flap surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1995;96:643-647.
19.	Kayser MR. Surgical flaps. Selected Readings Plast Surg. 
1999;9:1.
20.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Improved national 
prevalence estimates for 18 selected major birth defects—
United States, 1999–2001. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2006;54:1301-1305.
21.	Salyer KE, Marchac A, Chang MS, et al. Unilateral cleft lip/
nose repair. In: Losee JE, Kirschner RE, eds. Comprehensive 
Cleft Care. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2008.
22.	Mulliken JB. Mulliken bilateral cleft nasolabial repair. In: 
Losee JE, Kirschner RE, eds. Comprehensive Cleft Care.  
New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2008.
23.	McDonald-McGinn D, Zackai EH. 22q11.2 deletion syn-
drome. In: Losee JE, Kirschner RE, eds. Comprehensive Cleft 
Care. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2008.
24.	LaRossa D, Kirschner RE. Modified Furlow cleft palate repair. 
In: Losee JE, Kirschner RE, eds. Comprehensive Cleft Care. 
New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2008.
25.	Whitaker LA, Barlett SP. Craniofacial anomalies. In: 
Jurkiewicz MJ, Krizek TJ, Mathes SJ, et al, eds. Plastic 
Surgery: Principles and Practice. Vol. 1. St. Louis: Mosby; 
1990:99.
26.	Mulliken JB. Vascular anomalies. In: Thorne CH, ed. Grabb 
and Smith’s Plastic Surgery. Part III. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2007:191.
27.	Jenson J, Gosain A. Congenital melanocytic nevi. In: Thorne 
CH, ed. Grabb and Smith’s Plastic Surgery. Part II. Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2007:120.
28.	Hollier L, Thornton J. Facial fracture I: upper two-thirds. 
Selected Readings Plast Surg. 2002;9:1.
29.	Gruss JS, Bubak PJ, Egbert MA. Craniofacial fractures: an algo-
rithm to optimize results. Clin Plastic Surg. 1992;19:195-206.
30.	Antia NH, Buch MS. Chondrocutaneous advancement 
flap for the marginal defect of the ear. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1967;39:472-477.
31.	Anvar BA, Evans BC, Evans GR. Lip reconstruction. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2007;120:57e-64e.
32.	Chandler DB, Gausas RE. Lower eyelid reconstruction. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2005;38:1033-1042.
33.	Orticochea M. New three-flap reconstruction technique. Br J 
Plast Surg. 1971;24:184-188.
34.	Tanner PB, Mobley SR. External auricular and facial pros-
thetics: a collaborative effort of the reconstructive sur-
geon and anaplastologist. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 
2006;14:137-145.
35.	Yu P, Robb GL. Reconstruction for total and near-total glos-
sectomy defects. Clin Plast Surg. 2005;32:411-419.
36.	Wei FC, Jain V, Celik N, et al. Have we found an ideal soft-
tissue flap? An experience with 672 anterolateral thigh flaps. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2002;109:2219-2226.
37.	Daniel R. Mandibular reconstruction with vascularized iliac 
crest: a 10-year experience (discussion). Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1988;82:792-803.
38.	Wei FC, Chen HC, Chuang CC, et al. Fibular osteosepto-
cutaneous flap: anatomic study and clinical application. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 1986;78:191-200.
39.	Wei FC, Santamaria E, Chang YM, et al. Mandibular recon-
struction with fibular osteoseptocutaneous free flap and 
simultaneous placement of osseointegrated dental implants. 
J Craniofac Surg. 1997;8:512-521.
40.	Wei FC, Seah CS, Tsai YC, et al. Fibula osteoseptocutaneous 
flap for reconstruction of composite mandibular defects. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1994;93:294-304.
41.	Wei FC, Yazar S, Lin CH, et al. Double free flaps in head and 
neck reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg. 2005;32:303-308.
42.	Wallace CG, Chang YM, Tsai CY, Wei FC. Harnessing the 
potential of the free fibula osteoseptocutaneous flap in man-
dible reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;125:305-314.
43.	Archibald S, Young JE, Thoma A. Pharyngo-cervical esopha-
geal reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg. 2005;32:339-346.
44.	Tate JR, Tollefson TT. Advances in facial reanimation (review). 
Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006;14:242-248.
45.	Wilkins EG, Cederna PS, Lowery JC, et al. Prospective analy-
sis of psychosocial outcomes in breast reconstruction: one-year 
postoperative results from the Michigan Breast Reconstruction 
Outcome Study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;106:1014-1025.
46.	Alderman AK, Wilkins EG, Kim HM, et al. Complications in 
postmastectomy breast reconstruction: two-year results of the 
Michigan Breast Reconstruction Outcome Study. Plast Recon-
str Surg. 2002;109:2265-2274.
47.	Wilson CR, Brown IM, Weiller-Mithoff E, et al. Immediate 
breast reconstruction does not lead to a delay in the delivery of 
adjuvant chemotherapy. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2004;30:624-627.
1893
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
CHAPTER 45
48.	Newman LA, Kuerer HM, Hunt KK, et al. Presentation, treat-
ment, and outcome of local recurrence after skin-sparing 
mastectomy and immediate breast reconstruction. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 1998;5:620-626.
49.	Munhoz AM, Montag E, Arruda EG, et al. The role of the 
lateral thoracodorsal fasciocutaneous flap in immediate con-
servative breast surgery reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2006;117:1699-1710.
50.	Handel N, Cordray T, Gutierrez J, et al. A long-term study of 
outcomes, complications, and patient satisfaction with breast 
implants. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2006;117:757-767, discussion 
768.
51.	Nahabedian MY, Manson PN. Contour abnormalities of the 
abdomen after transverse rectus abdominis muscle flap breast 
reconstruction: a multifactorial analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2002;109:81-87.
52.	Mathes SJ, Nahai F. Reconstructive Surgery: Principles, Anat-
omy, and Technique. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1997.
53.	Skoracki RJ, Chang DW. Reconstruction of the chest wall and 
thorax. J Surg Oncol. 2006;94:455-465.
54.	Rohrich RJ, Lowe JB, Hackney FL, et al. An algorithm 
for abdominal wall reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:202-216.
55.	Shestak KC, Edington HJ, Johnson RR. The separation of ana-
tomic components technique for the reconstruction of massive 
midline abdominal wall defects: anatomy, surgical technique, 
applications, and limitations revisited. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:731-738.
56.	Brown DM, Sicard GA, Flye MW, et al. Closure of complex 
abdominal wall defects with bilateral rectus femoris flaps with 
fascial extensions. Surgery. 1993;114:112-116.
57.	Dibbell DG, Mixter RC, Dibbell DG Sr. Abdominal wall 
reconstruction (the “mutton chop” flap). Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1991;87:60-65.
58.	Wu CW, Wallace CG, Wei FC. Lower extremity reconstruc-
tion following trauma and tumors. In: Sieninow M, Eisenman-
Klein M, eds. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery. New York: 
Springer; 2010:631-644.
59.	Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ, Kellam JF, et al. An analysis of out-
comes of reconstruction or amputation after leg-threatening 
injuries. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1924-1931.
60.	Gustilo RB, Merkow RL, Templeman D. The management of 
open fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1990;72:299-304.
61.	British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic 
Surgeons amd British Association of Orthopaedic Sur-
geons. Standards for the Management of Open Fractures of 
the Lower Limb. London: Royal Society of Medicine Press; 
2009.
62.	Crowley DJ, Kanakaris NK, Giannoudis PV. Débridement and 
wound closure of open fractures: the impact of the time factor 
on infection rates. Injury. 2007;38:879-889.
63.	Chan JK, Harry L, Williams G, Nanchahal J. Soft-tissue 
reconstruction of open fractures of the lower limb: mus-
cle versus fasciocutaneous flaps. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2012;130:284e-295e.
64.	Gir P, Cheng A, Oni G, Mojallal A, Saint-Cyr M. Pedicled-
perforator (propeller) flaps in lower extremity defects: a sys-
tematic review. J Reconstr Microsurg. 2012;28:595-602.
65.	Yazar S, Lin CH, Wei FC. One-stage reconstruction of com-
posite bone and soft-tissue defects in traumatic lower extremi-
ties. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2004;114:1457-1466.
66.	Tseng WS, Chen HC, Hung J, et al. “Flow-through” type 
free flap for revascularization and simultaneous coverage of 
a nearly complete amputation of the foot: case report and lit-
erature review. J Trauma. 2000;48:773-776.
67.	Lin CH, Wei FC, Lin YT, et al. Lateral circumflex femoral 
artery system: warehouse for functional composite free-tissue 
reconstruction of the lower leg. J Trauma. 2006;60:1032-1036.
68.	Patzakis MJ, Zalavras CG. Chronic posttraumatic osteomy-
elitis and infected nonunion of the tibia: current management 
concepts. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2005;13:417-427.
69.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007 National 
Diabetes Fact Sheet. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and ­Prevention; 
2008.
70.	Colen LB, Uroskie T. Foot reconstruction. In: Mathes SJ, ed. 
Plastic Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:1403.
71.	Hinchliffe RJ, Andros G, Apelqvist J, et al. A system-
atic review of the effectiveness of revascularization of the 
ulcerated foot in patients with diabetes and peripheral arterial 
disease. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2012;28(Suppl 1):179-217.
72.	Fitzgerald O’Connor EJ, Vesely M, Holt PJ, et al. A system-
atic review of free tissue transfer in the management of non-
traumatic lower extremity wounds in patients with diabetes. 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011;41:391-399.
73.	Szuba A, Rockson SG. Lymphedema: anatomy, physiology, 
and pathogenesis. Vasc Med. 1997;2:321-326.
74.	Szuba A, Rockson SG. Lymphedema: classification, diagnosis, 
and therapy. Vasc Med. 1998;3:145-156.
75.	Chung KC, Kim HJ, Jeffers LL. Lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart-
Treves syndrome) in postmastectomy patients. J Hand Surg 
Am. 2000;25:1163-1168.
76.	Warren AG, Brorson H, Borud LJ, et al. Lymphedema: a com-
prehensive review. Ann Plast Surg. 2007;59:464-472.
77.	Beahm EK, Walton RL, Lohman RF. Vascular insufficiency 
of the lower extremity: lymphatic, venous, and arterial. In: 
Mathes SJ, ed. Plastic Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2006:1455.
78.	Brorson H, Svensson H, Norrgren K, et al. Liposuction 
reduces arm lymphedema without significantly altering the 
already impaired lymph transport. Lymphology. 1998;31: 
156-172.
79.	O’Brien BM, Mellow CG, Khazanchi RK, et al. Long-term 
results after microlymphaticovenous anastomoses for the 
treatment of obstructive lymphedema. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1990;85:562-572.
80.	Salgado CJ, Mardini S, Spanio S, Tang WR, Sassu P, Chen 
HC. Radical reduction of lymphedema with preservation of 
perforators. Ann Plast Surg. 2007;59:173-179.
81.	Demirtas Y, Ozturk N, Yapici O, et al. Comparison of pri-
mary and secondary lower extremity lymphedema treated 
with supermicrosurgical lymphaticovenous anastomosis 
and lymphaticovenous implantation. J Reconstr Microsurg. 
2010;25:137-143.
82.	Black J, Baharestani MM, Cuddigan J, et al. National Pressure 
Ulcer Advisory Panel’s updated pressure ulcer staging system. 
Adv Skin Wound Care. 2007;20:269-274.
83.	Sorensen JL, Jorgensen BJ, Gottrup F. Surgical treatment of 
pressure ulcers. Am J Surg. 2004;188:42S.
84.	Hettiaratchy S, Randolph MA, Petit F, et al. Composite tissue 
allotransplantation—a new era in plastic surgery? Br J Plast 
Surg. 2004;57:381-391.
85.	American Medical Association. H-475.992 Definitions of 
“Cosmetic” and “Reconstructive” Surgery. Chicago: American 
Medical Association; 2002.
86.	Paul MD. The evolution of the brow lift in aesthetic plastic 
surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;108:1409-1424.
87.	Thorne CM, Aston SG. Aesthetic surgery of the aging face. In: 
Aston SG, Beasley RW, Thorne CH, eds. Grabb and Smith’s 
Plastic Surgery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven 
Publishers; 1997:633.
88.	Sheen JH. Aesthetic Rhinoplasty. St. Louis: Mosby; 1987.
89.	Rubin JP, Bierman C, Rosow CE, et al. The tumescent tech-
nique for local anesthesia: the effect of high tissue pressure 
and dilute epinephrine on absorption of lidocaine. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1999;103:990-996.
1894
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
PART II
90.	Iverson RE, Lynch DJ. Practice advisory on liposuction. Plast 
Reconstr Surg 2004;113:1478-1490.
91.	Ramirez OM. Abdominoplasty and abdominal wall reha-
bilitation: a comprehensive approach. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:425-435.
92.	Courtiss EH, Goldwyn RM. Reduction mammaplasty by the infe-
rior pedicle technique. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1977;59:500-507.
93.	Lassus C. A 30-year experience with vertical mammaplasty. 
Plast Reconstr Surg 1996;97:373-380.
94.	Lejour M. Vertical mammaplasty without inframammary 
scar and with breast liposuction. Perspect Plast Surg. 1990;4: 
369-379.
95.	Tebbetts JB. A system for breast implant selection based on 
patient tissue characteristics and implant—soft tissue dynam-
ics. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2002;109:1396-1409.
96.	Hidalgo DA. Breast augmentation: choosing the optimal 
incision, implant, and pocket plane. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:2202-2216.
97.	U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Breast implants home 
page, 2006. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/breastim-
plants/index.html. Accessed January 15, 2008.
98.	Allergan saline-filled breast implants (package insert). Santa 
Barbara: Allergan; 2007.
99.	Allergan silicone-filled breast implants (package insert). 
Santa Barbara: Allergan; 2007.
100.	Miglioretti DL, Rutter CM, Geller BM, et al. Effect of breast 
augmentation on the accuracy of mammography and cancer 
characteristics. JAMA. 2004;291:442-450.
101.	Braunstein GD. Gynecomastia. N Engl J Med. 1993;328: 
490-495.
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
Robert S. Dorian
46
TRUE COLLABORATION
The discipline of anesthesia embodies control of three great 
concerns of humankind: consciousness, pain, and movement. 
The field of anesthesiology combines the administration of 
anesthesia with the perioperative management of the patient’s 
concerns, pain management, and critical illness. The fields 
of surgery and anesthesiology are truly collaborative and 
continue to evolve together, enabling the care of sicker 
patients and rapid recovery from outpatient and mini-
mally invasive procedures. 
BRIEF HISTORY OF ANESTHESIA
The discovery of anesthesia is one of the seminal American 
contributions to the world. Along with infection control and 
blood transfusion, anesthesia has enabled surgery to occupy 
its fundamental place in medicine. Before the advent of mod-
ern anesthesia in the 1840s, many substances and methods 
were tried in the search for pain relief and better operating 
conditions. Opium, alcohol, exposure to cold, compression of 
peripheral nerves, constriction of the carotid arteries to pro-
duce unconsciousness, and hypnosis (mesmerism) all proved 
less than satisfactory and dictated rapid and crude surgical 
procedures. Patients had to be restrained by several attendants, 
and only the most stoic could tolerate the screams heard in the 
operating theater. Charles Darwin, who witnessed two such 
operations, “rushed away before they were completed. Nor did 
I ever attend again, for hardly any inducement would have been 
strong enough to make me do so; this being long before the 
blessed days of chloroform. The two cases fairly haunted me 
for many a long year.”1
Modern Beginnings
Although Humphrey Davy (1778–1829) suggested using nitrous 
oxide for the relief of pain in surgical procedures in 1800, this 
was not pursued until 1844 by dentist Horace Wells (1815–1848). 
Wells astutely observed that a man who was injured after inhal-
ing nitrous oxide during an exhibition of the “laughing gas” 
displayed no awareness of pain. After experimenting on 
himself, Wells attempted to demonstrate the analgesic effects of 
nitrous oxide for a dental procedure at Harvard Medical School 
in 1845. The public demonstration was a failure because nitrous 
oxide has analgesic properties, but does not suffice as the sole 
anesthetic agent in every patient. Wells never recovered from 
his humiliating experience and eventually committed suicide. 
However, he does hold a place in history as the first person to 
recognize and use the only anesthetic from the 1800s that is still 
in use today—nitrous oxide.
In 1842, Crawford Long (1815–1878), a physician in rural 
Georgia, used diethyl ether to induce surgical anesthesia for 
the removal of two small neck tumors. Diethyl ether had been 
known for over 800 years but was not used for analgesic pur-
poses. It became an inexpensive and popular recreational drug 
in the mid-nineteenth century and was used by American medi-
cal students at “ether frolics.” Although Long did experiments 
to verify the analgesic effects of ether, he did not publish his 
work until 1848, in the Southern Medical Journal, too late to be 
the unquestioned discoverer of anesthesia.2
Ether Day
William Morton (1819–1868) was a dentist and partner of 
­Horace Wells. After taking a course in anesthesia from Wells, 
Morton left the partnership in Hartford, Connecticut, and estab-
lished himself in Boston. He continued his interest in anesthesia, 
chapter 
True Collaboration	
1895
Brief History of Anesthesia	
1895
Modern Beginnings / 1895
Ether Day / 1895
The First Anesthesiologists / 1896
Cocaine: The First Local  
Anesthetic / 1896
The Twentieth Century / 1897
Anesthesiology Today—The  
Perioperative Physician / 1897
Basic Pharmacology	
1897
Pharmacokinetics / 1897
Pharmacodynamics / 1898
Potency, Efficacy, Lethal Dose,  
and Therapeutic Index / 1898
Anesthetic Agents	
1899
General Anesthesia / 1899
Local Anesthetics / 1902
Regional Anesthesia: Peripheral  
vs. Central / 1903
Anesthesia Management	
1904
Preoperative Evaluation and  
Preparation / 1904
Risk Assessment / 1905
Intraoperative Management	
1909
Induction of Anesthesia / 1909
Management of the Airway / 1910
Fluid Therapy / 1911
Transfusion of Red Blood Cells / 1914
Recovery from Anesthesia	
1915
Reversal of Neuromuscular  
Blockade / 1915
The Postanesthesia Care Unit / 1915
Postoperative Nausea and  
Vomiting / 1915
Pain: The Fifth Vital Sign / 1915
Multimodal Analgesia	
1916
The Transversus Abdominis  
Plane Block	
1916
Malignant Hyperthermia	
1918
Future Direction of Anesthesia	 1918
1
but with diethyl ether replacing nitrous oxide. Ether proved a 
good choice, as it supports respiration and the cardiovascular 
system at analgesic levels and is potent enough to administer 
in room air without hypoxia. He practiced the administration 
of ether on a dog and then used it when extracting teeth from 
patients in his office. On October 16, 1846, Morton gave the 
first public demonstration of ether as an anesthetic for Johns 
Collins Warren, distinguished surgeon and a founder of Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital. In attendance in the surgical 
amphitheater were several surgeons, medical students, and a 
newspaper reporter. After anesthesia was induced using a make-
shift inhaler, Warren successfully removed a vascular mass from 
the patient’s neck with no ill effects. Warren was an originator 
of the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal (now The New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine), and by November 1846, the demon-
stration was published in an article by Henry J. Bigelow.3 The 
stature of Warren and Bigelow lent considerable credence to the 
advent of surgical anesthesia; as news spread rapidly, surgeons 
around the world were quick to adopt this “American invention.” 
Massachusetts General Hospital has restored and preserved the 
original amphitheater where the demonstration took place, now 
called the Ether Dome. It is designated as a Registered National 
Historic Landmark commemorating the first public demonstra-
tion, rather than discovery, of the use of ether as an anesthetic.
The First Anesthesiologists
John Snow (1813–1858) made science out of the art of anesthesia. 
He was a respected London physician who applied a scholarly, 
scientific method to investigate the clinical properties and phar-
macology of ether, chloroform, and other anesthetic agents. Snow 
was an astute observer and published a detailed account of the 
five degrees of etherization in 1847. He vastly improved the appa-
ratus for administering ether and mastered the clinical techniques 
of anesthetizing patients. As the leading anesthetist of his day, he 
gave anesthetics to the royal family, including chloroform dur-
ing labor to Queen Victoria for the birth of Prince Leopold. The 
Queen’s endorsement of “that blessed chloroform” removed the 
moral and social stigma against relieving pain during childbirth 
and brought anesthesia into public awareness. Chloroform, popu-
larized in England by James Simpson (1811–1870), had a narrow 
therapeutic index and placed great clinical demands on the anes-
thetist. Ether, with its ability to maintain the cardiovascular and 
respiratory systems, remained in common use in the United States 
and often was administered by house staff, medical students, 
or nurses. Snow encouraged the administration of anesthesia by 
a physician and felt that a physician dedicated specifically to that 
purpose was appropriate and necessary. Snow and other excep-
tional British physicians specializing in anesthesia (Joseph Clover 
[1825–1882] and Sir Frederick Hewitt [1857–1916]) created a 
standard of excellence in the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
This atmosphere of professionalism led to the formation of anes-
thesia societies and the publication of papers in the prestigious 
British Medical Journal and The Lancet in England years before 
such organizations existed in America.4
Cocaine: The First Local Anesthetic
The ancient Incas chewed coca leaves as a stimulant and may 
have been aware of its local anesthetic properties, allegedly facili-
tating trephination of the skull by chewing a clump of coca leaves 
and dripping the resultant saliva into the wound. The active alka-
loid of the coca leaf was synthesized in 1860 and called cocaine 
by German chemist Albert Niemann, who noted that it “benumbs 
the nerves of the tongue, depriving it of feeling.”5 Sigmund Freud 
(1856–1939) of Vienna received a supply of cocaine from Merck, 
studied its properties, and wrote the famous monograph “Uber 
Coca” in 1884. Freud was primarily interested in the stimulant 
and euphoric effects of cocaine and attempted to use it to treat 
morphine addiction. Freud and Karl Koller (1857–1944), an oph-
thalmologic intern, began to perform physiologic experiments 
with cocaine, measuring its effects on muscle strength. Although 
they both noted that the drug caused numbness of the tongue 
when swallowed, it was Koller who first instilled it into his own 
cornea; report of its use as a local anesthetic galvanized the medi-
cal world. Soon after, young American surgeons William Halsted 
(1852–1922) and Richard Hall described intradermal injection of 
cocaine and were the first to use it for regional blocks of the facial 
nerves, brachial plexus, and internal pudendal and posterior tibial 
nerves.6 Halstead later became the first professor of surgery and 
chief surgeon at Johns Hopkins University, where he remained 
for more than 30 years. One of the founding fathers of modern 
surgery, he pioneered radical mastectomy with lymphadenectomy 
and the use of rubber gloves. While experimenting on themselves, 
Halstead and other early researchers became addicted to cocaine.7 
Its toxic effects were the stimulus to find other local anesthetics—
procaine was synthesized in 1905 and lidocaine in 1943.
The New York neurologist Leonard Corning (1855–1923) 
observed the regional blocks of Halstead and Hall, analytically 
studied local anesthesia effects on dogs, applied his knowledge 
1896
Key Points
1 	 The incremental interchange of ideas across the specialties of 
anesthesia and surgery demonstrates the collaborative nature 
of science in general and medicine in particular. Many sur-
geons contributed to the growth in anesthesia; more compre-
hensive anesthesia, in turn, allowed more complex surgery to 
develop.
2 	 The role of the anesthesiologist has expanded to become the 
perioperative physician. The anesthesiologist evaluates the 
patient preoperatively, provides the anesthetic, and is involved 
in postoperative pain relief.
3 	 New and improved airway and intubation devices, such as the 
laryngeal mask airway and the video laryngoscope, along with 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ airway man-
agement algorithm, have led to improved management and 
control of routine and difficult airways.
4 	 The specialties of critical care medicine and pain medicine 
have grown out of the expanded field of anesthesiology. 
The postanesthesia care unit gave rise to the intensive care 
unit; the treatment of acute and chronic pain syndromes by 
anesthesiologists contributed to the growth of pain medi-
cine as a specialty.
5 	 The study of proteomics will lead to anesthetics tailored to 
individuals, maximizing effects and reducing side effects 
of various anesthetic drugs.
1897
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
to humans, and published the first textbook on local anesthesia 
in 1886. After experimenting on the spinal nerves of a dog, he 
intradurally injected a solution of cocaine into a patient, called 
it spinal anesthesia, and commented that it might be useful in 
surgery. His suggestion went unheeded for more than 10 years, 
until August Bier (1861–1949), a prominent German surgeon, 
gave the first deliberate spinal anesthetic.8 This incremen-
tal interchange of ideas and advances across the Atlantic and 
across the specialties of anesthesia and surgery demonstrates 
the collaborative nature of science in general and medicine in 
particular. The development of surgery and anesthesia exempli-
fies the dichotomy of two fledgling specialties that are mutually 
dependent, yet increasingly autonomous.
The Twentieth Century
Developments in anesthesia on both sides of the Atlantic pro-
gressed rapidly in the twentieth century. The convergence of 
technologies that produced the hollow needle and syringe, 
coupled with the synthesis of barbiturates, gave rise to intrave-
nous (IV) anesthesia in the early 1900s. Barbital, followed by 
hexobarbital and thiopental in 1934, produced rapid and more 
pleasant induction of anesthesia than the inhaled gases. The con-
cept of “balanced anesthesia” began in 1925, when John Lundy 
(1894–1973) proposed the use of thiopentone for induction, fol-
lowed by inhaled agents for maintenance of anesthesia. Lundy 
directed the department of anesthesiology at the Mayo Clinic for 
28 years. He established the first recovery room and blood bank, 
authored the first textbook on modern anesthesia, and helped 
found the American Board of Anesthesiology.
Nitrous oxide, diethyl ether, and chloroform, all discov-
ered fortuitously by observation, remained the dominant inha-
lation agents until the accidental discovery of cyclopropane’s 
anesthetic properties in 1923. Although rapid acting and pleas-
ant smelling, cyclopropane was limited by its flammability 
and cardiac irritability. Because it was known that fluorina-
tion would reduce or eliminate flammability of chemical com-
pounds, British chemist Charles Suckling set out to synthesize 
an anesthetic that was stable, potent, volatile, and not flamma-
ble. He successfully produced halothane in 1953. Introduced 
into clinical practice in 1956 after extensive testing in Manches-
ter, England, and paired with an accurate calibrated vaporizer, 
halothane quickly became the most widely used fluorinated 
anesthetic. Enflurane and isoflurane, synthesized in the United 
States by Ross Tyrell, were introduced into clinical practice in 
1972 and 1981, respectively. The newest agents, desflurane and 
sevoflurane, were introduced into clinical practice in the early 
1990s. They possess a low solubility and are characterized by 
rapid onset and recovery, making them particularly well suited 
to outpatient surgery.
The motto of the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) is “Vigilance,” and to that end, there has been contin-
ued progress in objective mechanical measurement of patient 
well-being. The early anesthesiologists used clinical signs such 
as patient color, depth of respiration, and pulse rate to monitor 
depth of anesthesia and patient homeostasis. Harvey Cushing, 
who eventually became Moseley Professor of Surgery at the 
Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, began the first anesthesia records 
or “ether charts” in 1895 while a medical student. They recorded 
pulse, respiratory rates, pupillary diameter, and the amounts of 
ether and other drugs administered. He later introduced the use 
of the portable sphygmomanometer of Riva-Rocci to measure 
blood pressure and the precordial stethoscope to monitor breath 
and heart sounds. Monitoring has since progressed to its current 
state with incremental developments in electrocardiography, 
pulse oximetry, and mass spectrometry, all mandatory for the 
safe administration of any anesthetic.
The control of the patient’s airway and respiration as 
the purview of the anesthesiologist evolved with techniques 
of endotracheal intubation as pioneered by Sir Ivan Magill 
(1888–1986) and the invention of the cuffed endotracheal 
tube by Arthur Guedel (1883–1965). This later merged with 
the invention of mechanical ventilation and its introduction 
to the operating room as the embodiment of today’s anesthe-
sia machine. It was this expertise at control of respiration that 
paved the way for the most revolutionary modern development 
in anesthesia—the use of muscle relaxants. Curare, a nondepo-
larizing muscle relaxant, was popularized by Harold Griffith of 
Montreal. His report of the successful use of curare was a galva-
nizing event that revolutionized the practice of anesthesia, as the 
relaxation of abdominal muscles could be controlled to facilitate 
surgery.9 The depolarizing relaxant succinylcholine was intro-
duced in 1949, and research has continued to provide the newer 
nondepolarizing drugs mivacurium, pancuronium, rocuronium, 
atracurium, and cisatracurium.
Anesthesiology Today—The  
Perioperative Physician
The specialty of anesthesia is no longer limited to the operating 
room.  It is natural that anesthesiology, born out of the 
quest to relieve pain, gave rise to the field of acute and 
chronic pain medicine. The anesthesiologist consulting on the 
acute pain service may recommend oral, intramuscular, or IV 
analgesia with a variety of agents, or patient-controlled analge-
sia. Postsurgical patients also may be treated with nerve blocks: 
regional (e.g., brachial plexus, popliteal, and femoral) or neur-
axial (epidural or intrathecal). The discipline of chronic pain 
addresses patients who suffer for months or years with cancer or 
other debilitating diseases. Treatment modalities escalate from 
orally administered drugs, to diagnostic and therapeutic nerve 
blocks, to more invasive measures like dorsal column nerve 
stimulators and radiofrequency or cryosurgical nerve ablation.
Daily management of the airway, fluids and transfusions, 
ventilation, drug delivery, monitoring, and caring for the sickest 
patients in the postanesthesia care unit prepared anesthesiolo-
gists to become major contributors to the development of criti-
cal care medicine. Of the 28 founding members of the Society 
of Critical Medicine, 10 were anesthesiologists.10
The American Board of Anesthesiology became an 
independent board in 1941 and, since then, has granted board 
certification to more than 25,000 diplomates. Certificates in 
Anesthesia Pain Management and Anesthesia Critical Care 
Medicine are granted to those completing additional postgradu-
ate training. The ASA has more than 35,000 members, and its 
official journal, Anesthesiology, has a monthly circulation of 
40,000 worldwide.
BASIC PHARMACOLOGY
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics or the time dependency of a drug describes 
the relationship between the dose of a drug and its plasma or 
tissue concentration. It is what the body does to the drug. It 
relates to absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination. 
The route of administration, metabolism, protein binding, and 
2
1898
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
tissue distribution all affect the pharmacokinetics of a particu-
lar drug.
Administration, Distribution, Metabolism, and Elimination.  
Administration of a drug affects its pharmacokinetics, as there 
will be different rates of drug entry into the circulation. For 
example, the oral and IV routes are subject to first-pass effect 
of the portal circulation; this can be bypassed with the nasal or 
sublingual route. Other routes of drug administration include 
transdermal, intramuscular, subcutaneous, or inhalation.
Distribution is the delivery of a drug from the systemic 
circulation to the tissues. Once a drug has entered the systemic 
circulation, the rate at which it will enter the tissues depends on 
several factors:
• Molecular size of the drug, capillary permeability, polar-
ity, and lipid solubility. Small molecules will pass more 
freely and quickly across cell membranes than large ones, 
but capillary permeability is variable and results in differ-
ent diffusion rates. Renal glomerular capillaries are per-
meable to almost all non–protein-bound drugs; capillaries 
in the brain are fused (i.e., they have tight junctions) and 
are relatively impermeable to all but the tiniest molecules 
(the blood-brain barrier). Un-ionized molecules pass more 
­easily across cell membranes than charged molecules; 
­diffusability also increases with increasing lipid solubility.
• Plasma protein and tissue binding. Many drugs bind to 
circulating proteins like albumin, glycoproteins, and glob-
ulins. Disease, age, and the presence of other drugs will 
affect the amount of protein binding; drug distribution is 
affected because only the unbound free portion of the drug 
can pass across the cell membrane. Drugs also bind revers-
ibly to body tissues; if they bind with high affinity, they are 
said to be sequestered in that tissue (e.g., heavy metals are 
sequestered in bone).11
• The fluid volume in which a drug distributes is termed the 
volume of distribution (Vd). This mathematically derived 
value gives a rough estimation of the overall physical dis-
tribution of a drug in the body. A general rule for volume 
distribution is that the greater the Vd, the greater the diffus-
ability of the drug. Because drugs have variable ionization 
rates and bind differently to plasma proteins and tissues, 
the Vd is not a good predictor of the actual concentration of 
the drug after administration. Determining the apparent Vd 
(dose/concentration) is an attempt to more accurately ascer-
tain the drug dose administered and its final concentration.
Metabolism is the permanent breakdown of original 
compounds into smaller metabolites. Drug elimination varies 
widely; some drugs are excreted unchanged by the body, some 
decompose via plasma enzymes, and some are degraded by 
organ-based enzymes in the liver. Many drugs rely on multiple 
pathways for elimination (i.e., metabolized by liver enzymes 
and then excreted by the kidney).
When a drug is given orally, it reaches the liver via the 
portal circulation and is partially metabolized before reaching 
the systemic circulation. This is why an oral dose of a drug often 
must be much higher than an equally effective IV dose. Some 
drugs (e.g., nitroglycerine) are hydrolyzed presystemically in 
the gut wall and must be administered sublingually to achieve 
an effective concentration.
It is important to remember that the response to drugs var-
ies widely. The disposition of drugs is affected by age; weight; 
sex; pregnancy; disease states; and the concomitant use of alco-
hol, tobacco, and other licit and illicit drugs. Genetic polymor-
phism, or variations in genes that cause differing drug effects, 
is another explanation of varying drug response. This will be 
discussed later in the Future Direction of Anesthesia section 
on proteomics. This as yet unpredictable response to drugs 
underscores the importance of the most important monitor in 
the operating room—the anesthesiologist, who continuously 
assesses the patient’s vital signs and adjusts the doses of anes-
thetic agents to match the surgical stimulus.
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacodynamics, or how the plasma concentration of a drug 
translates into its effect on the body, depends on biologic vari-
ability, receptor physiology, and clinical evaluations of the 
actual drug. It is what the drug does to the body. An agonist is 
a drug that causes a response. A full agonist produces the full 
tissue response, and a partial agonist provokes less than the 
maximum response induced by a full agonist. An antagonist is a 
drug that does not provoke a response itself, but blocks agonist-
mediated responses. An additive effect means that a second drug 
acts with the first drug and will produce an effect that is equal 
to the algebraic summation of both drugs. A synergistic effect 
means that two drugs interact to produce an effect that is greater 
than expected from the two drugs’ algebraic summation.12
Hyporeactivity means a larger than expected dose is 
required to produce a response, and this effect is termed tol-
erance, desensitization, or tachyphylaxis. Tolerance usually 
results from chronic drug exposure, either through enzyme 
induction (e.g., alcohol) or depletion of neurotransmitters (e.g., 
cocaine).
Potency, Efficacy, Lethal Dose,  
and Therapeutic Index
The potency of a drug is the dose required to produce a given 
effect, such as pain relief or a change in heart rate. The average 
sensitivity to a particular drug can be expressed through the cal-
culation of the effective dose; ED50 would have the desired effect 
in 50% of the general population. The efficacy of any therapeutic 
agent is its power to produce a desired effect. Two drugs may 
have the same efficacy but different potencies. The difference in 
potency of the two drugs is described by the ratio ED50b/ED50a, 
where a is the less potent drug. If the ED50b equals 4 and the 
ED50a equals 0.4, then drug a is 10 times as potent as drug b. 
For example, 10 mg of morphine produces analgesia equal to 
that of 1 mg of hydromorphone. They are equally effective, but 
hydromorphone is 10 times as potent as morphine.
Dose-response curves show the relationship between the 
dose of a drug administered (or the resulting plasma concentra-
tion) and the pharmacologic effect of the drug. The pharmaco-
logic effect might be secretion of a hormone, a change in heart 
rate, or contraction of a muscle. Between 20% and 80% of the 
maximum effect, the logarithm of the dose and its response has 
a linear relationship. The term dose only applies to the amount 
administered and not the actual concentration. If the concentra-
tion of an antagonist is increased (in the presence of a fixed con-
centration of agonist), the dose-response curve will be shifted 
to the right, and a higher agonist concentration will be required 
to achieve the desired effect. A basic dose-response curve is 
shown in Fig. 46-1.
The lethal dose (LD50) of a drug produces death in 50% 
of animals to which it is given. The ratio of the lethal dose and 
1899
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Figure 46-1.  Basic dose-response curve.
Response
Log (Dose)
effective dose, LD50/ED50, is the therapeutic index. A drug with 
a high therapeutic index is safer than a drug with a low or nar-
row therapeutic index.
ANESTHETIC AGENTS
Anesthesia can be local, regional, or general (Table 46-1). 
Local anesthesia is accomplished using a local anesthetic drug 
that can be injected intradermally and is used for the removal 
of small lesions or to repair traumatic injuries. Local anesthesia 
is the most frequent anesthetic administered by surgeons and 
may be accompanied by IV sedation to improve patient comfort.
General Anesthesia
General anesthesia describes a triad of three major and separate 
effects: unconsciousness (and amnesia), analgesia, and muscle 
relaxation (see Table 46-1). IV drugs usually produce a single, 
Table 46-1
Anesthetic agents, their actions, and their clinical uses
Effect
Monitor
IV Drugs
Potent Gases
Weak Gas
Local  
­Anestheticsc
Unconscious 
(amnesia) 
(anxiolysis)
EEG and/or 
clinical signs
Benzodiazepines
  Midazolam
  Lorazepam
  Diazepam
Barbiturates
Etomidate
Ketaminea
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
Halothane
Nitrous oxideb
Analgesia
Heart rate
Blood pressure
Respiratory rate
Opioids
  Fentanyl
  Morphine
  Hydromorphone
Nonopioid
  Ketaminea
  Parecoxib
  Dexmedetomidine
  Acetaminophen IV
  Ketorolac
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
Halothane
Nitrous oxideb 
Amides
Lidocaine
Bupivacaine 
Ropivacaine
Prilocaine 
Mepivacaine 
Esters
Cocaine
Procaine
Chloroprocaine
Tetracaine
Benzocaine
Muscle 
relaxation 
(paralysis)
Nerve stimulator
Depolarizer
  Succinylcholine
Nondepolarizers
  Pancuronium
  Vecuronium
  Rocuronium
  Atracurium
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
Halothane
EEG = electroencephalogram; IV = intravenous.
aNote that the IV agents are quite specific in their effects, except for ketamine, which has both amnestic and analgesic qualities.
bThe potent inhalational anesthetics contribute to all three components of anesthesia, but nitrous oxide has weak amnestic and analgesic properties and pro-
vides no muscle relaxation at all.
CThe local anesthetics produce excellent analgesia and muscle relaxation but contribute nothing to amnesia or anxiolysis; these anesthetics must be supple-
mented with an IV sedative.
Peripheral nerve blocks
(brachial plexus, femoral, etc.)
Central nerve blocks
(spinal, epidural)
1900
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
discrete effect, while most inhaled anesthetics produce elements 
of all three. General anesthesia is achieved with a combination 
of IV and inhaled drugs, each used to its maximum benefit. 
The science and art of anesthesia are dynamic processes. As 
the amount of stimulus to the patient changes during surgery, 
the patient’s vital signs are used as a guide and the quantity of 
drugs is adjusted, maintaining an equilibrium between stimulus 
and dose. General anesthesia is what patients commonly think 
of when they are to be “put under” and can be a cause of con-
siderable preoperative anxiety.13
Intravenous Agents
Unconsciousness and Amnesia  The IV agents that produce 
unconsciousness and amnesia are frequently used for the induc-
tion of general anesthesia. They include barbiturates, benzodiaz-
epines, propofol, etomidate, and ketamine. Except for ketamine, 
the following agents have no analgesic properties and do not 
cause paralysis or muscle relaxation.
Barbiturates  The most common barbiturates are thiopental, 
thiamylal, and methohexital. The mechanism of action is at 
the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor, where they inhibit 
excitatory synaptic transmission. They produce a rapid, smooth 
induction within 60 seconds, and wear off in about 5 minutes. 
In higher doses and in patients with intravascular depletion, they 
cause hypotension and myocardial depression. The barbiturates 
are anticonvulsants and protect the brain during neurosurgery by 
reducing cerebral metabolism.
Propofol  Propofol is an alkylated phenol that inhibits synaptic 
transmission through its effects at the GABA receptor. With a 
short duration, rapid recovery, and low incidence of nausea and 
vomiting, it has emerged as the agent of choice for ambulatory 
and minor general surgery. Additionally, propofol has bron-
chodilatory properties that make its use attractive in asthmatic 
patients and smokers. Propofol may cause hypotension and 
should be used cautiously in patients with suspected hypovole-
mia and/or coronary artery disease (CAD), the latter of which 
may not tolerate a sudden drop in blood pressure. It can be used 
as a continuous infusion for sedation in the intensive care unit 
setting. Propofol is an irritant and frequently causes pain on 
injection.
Benzodiazepines  The most important uses of the benzodiaz-
epines are for reduction of anxiety and to produce amnesia. Fre-
quently used IV benzodiazepines are diazepam, lorazepam, and 
midazolam. They all inhibit synaptic transmission at the GABA 
receptor but have differing durations of action. The benzodiaz-
epines can produce peripheral vasodilatation and hypotension 
but have minimal effects on respiration when used alone. They 
must be used with caution when given with opioids; a syner-
gistic reaction causing respiratory depression is common. The 
benzodiazepines are excellent anticonvulsants and only rarely 
cause allergic reactions.
Etomidate  Etomidate is an imidazole derivative used for IV 
induction. Its rapid and almost complete hydrolysis to inactive 
metabolites results in rapid awakening. Like the above IV agents, 
etomidate acts on the GABA receptor. It has little effect on car-
diac output and heart rate, and induction doses usually produce 
less reduction in blood pressure than that seen with thiopental 
or propofol. Etomidate is associated with pain on injection and 
more nausea and vomiting than thiopental or ­propofol.
Ketamine  Ketamine differs from the above IV agents in that it 
produces analgesia as well as amnesia. Its principal action is on 
the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor; it has no action on the GABA 
receptor. It is a dissociative anesthetic, producing a cataleptic 
gaze with nystagmus. Patients may associate this with delirium 
and hallucinations while regaining consciousness. The addi-
tion of benzodiazepines has been shown to prevent these side 
effects. Ketamine can increase heart rate and blood pressure, 
which may cause myocardial ischemia in patients with CAD. 
Ketamine is useful in acutely hypovolemic patients to maintain 
blood pressure via sympathetic stimulation but is a direct myo-
cardial depressant in patients who are catecholamine depleted. 
Ketamine is a bronchodilator, making it useful for asthmatic 
patients, and rarely is associated with allergic reactions.
Analgesia.  The IV analgesics most frequently used in anesthe-
sia today have little effect on consciousness, amnesia, or muscle 
relaxation. The most important class is the opioids, so called 
because they were first isolated from opium, with morphine, 
codeine, meperidine, hydromorphone, and the fentanyl family 
being the most common. The most important nonopioid analge-
sics are ketamine (discussed earlier in the Ketamine section) and 
ketorolac, an IV nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID).
Opioid Analgesics  The commonly used opioids—morphine, 
codeine, oxymorphone, meperidine, and the fentanyl-based 
compounds—act centrally on μ-receptors in the brain and spi-
nal cord. The main side effects of opioids are euphoria, seda-
tion, constipation, and respiratory depression, which also are 
mediated by the same μ-receptors in a dose-dependent fashion. 
Although opioids have differing potencies required for effective 
analgesia, equianalgesic doses of opioids result in equal degrees 
of respiratory depression. Thus, there is no completely safe opi-
oid analgesic. The synthetic opioid fentanyl and its analogues 
sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil are commonly used in 
the operating room. They differ pharmacokinetically in their 
lipid solubility, tissue binding, and elimination profiles and thus 
have differing potencies and durations of action. Remifentanil 
is remarkable in that it undergoes rapid hydrolysis that is unaf-
fected by sex, age, weight, or renal or hepatic function, even 
after prolonged infusion. Recovery is within minutes, but there 
is little residual postoperative analgesia.
Naloxone and the longer-acting naltrexone are pure opi-
oid antagonists. They can be used to reverse the side effects of 
opioid overdose (e.g., respiratory depression), but the analgesic 
effects of the opioid also will be reversed.
Nonopioid Analgesics  Ketamine, an N-methyl-d-aspartate 
receptor antagonist, is a potent analgesic, but is one of the few 
IV agents that also causes significant sedation and amnesia. 
Unlike the μ-receptor agonists, ketamine supports respiration. 
It can be used in combination with opioids, but the dysphoric 
effects must be masked with the simultaneous use of sedatives, 
usually a benzodiazepine like midazolam.
Ketorolac is a parenteral NSAID that produces analge-
sia by reducing prostaglandin formation via inhibition of the 
enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX). Intraoperative use of ketoro-
lac reduces postoperative need for opioids. Two forms of COX 
have been identified: COX-1 is responsible for the synthesis 
of several prostaglandins as well as prostacyclin, which pro-
tects gastric mucosa, and thromboxane, which supports plate-
let function. COX-2 is induced by inflammatory reactions to 
produce more prostaglandins. Ketorolac (as well as many oral 
NSAIDs, aspirin, and indomethacin) inhibits both COX-1 
and COX-2, which causes the major side effects of gastric 
bleeding, platelet dysfunction, and hepatic and renal damage. 
1901
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Parecoxib is a parenteral, predominantly COX-2 NSAID that 
presumably produces analgesia and reduces inflammation with-
out causing gastrointestinal bleeding or platelet dysfunction.
Dexmedetomidine is an IV α2-adrenergic agonist, admin-
istered as a continuous infusion, and has sedative and analgesic 
properties. It is useful for sedation in an intensive care unit set-
ting and as an adjunct to general anesthesia. Side effects are 
hypotension and bradycardia.
IV acetaminophen is an analgesic drug and antipyretic of 
moderate potency; its site of action is in the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS), not peripherally. It does not have anti-inflammatory 
properties and is not considered an NSAID.14 When used as part 
of postoperative analgesic therapy, it will reduce the amount of 
opioids required, reducing side effects (e.g., constipation, seda-
tion, respiratory depression).
Neuromuscular Blocking Agents.  Neuromuscular block-
ing agents have no amnestic, hypnotic, or analgesic properties; 
patients must be properly anesthetized before and in addition to 
the administration of these agents. A paralyzed but unsedated 
patient will be aware, conscious, and in pain, yet be unable 
to communicate their predicament. Inappropriate administra-
tion of a neuromuscular blocking agent to an awake patient is 
one of the most traumatic experiences imaginable. Neuromus-
cular blockade is not a substitute for adequate anesthesia, but 
is rather an adjunct to the anesthetic. Depth of neuromuscular 
blockade is best monitored with a nerve stimulator to ensure 
patient immobility intraoperatively and to confirm a lack of 
residual paralysis postoperatively.15
Unlike the local anesthetics, which affect the ability of 
nerves to conduct impulses, the neuromuscular blockers have 
no effect on either nerves or muscles, but act primarily on the 
neuromuscular junction.
There is one commonly used depolarizing neuromuscu-
lar blocker—succinylcholine. This agent binds to acetylcholine 
receptors on the postjunctional membrane in the neuromuscular 
junction and causes depolarization of muscle fibers.
Although the rapid onset (<60 seconds) and rapid offset 
(5–8 minutes) make succinylcholine ideal for management of 
the airway in certain situations, total body muscle fasciculations 
can cause postoperative aches and pains, an elevation in serum 
potassium levels, and an increase in intraocular and intragas-
tric pressure. Its use in patients with burns or traumatic tissue 
injuries may result in a high enough rise in serum potassium 
levels to produce arrhythmias and cardiac arrest. Unlike other 
neuromuscular blocking agents, the effects of succinylcholine 
cannot be reversed. Succinylcholine is rapidly hydrolyzed by 
plasma cholinesterase, also referred to as pseudocholinesterase. 
There are many reasons for a patient to have low pseudocholin-
esterase levels, such as liver disease, concomitant use of other 
drugs, pregnancy, and cancer. These factors are usually not 
clinically problematic, delaying return of motor function only 
by several minutes. Some patients have a genetic disorder mani-
festing as atypical plasma cholinesterase; the atypical enzyme 
has less-than-normal activity, and/or the patient has extremely 
low levels of the enzyme. The incidence of the homozygous 
form is approximately 1 in 3000; the effects of a single dose of 
succinylcholine may last several hours instead of several min-
utes. Treatment is to keep the patient sedated and unaware he 
or she is paralyzed, continue mechanical ventilation, test the 
return of motor function with a peripheral nerve stimulator, 
and extubate the patient only after he or she has fully regained 
motor strength. Two separate blood tests must be drawn: pseu-
docholinesterase level to determine the amount of enzyme pres-
ent, and dibucaine number, which indicates the quality of the 
enzyme. Patients with laboratory-confirmed abnormal pseudo-
cholinesterase levels and/or dibucaine numbers should be coun-
seled to avoid succinylcholine as well as mivacurium, which is 
also hydrolyzed by pseudocholinesterase. First-degree family 
members should also be tested. Succinylcholine is the only IV 
triggering agent of malignant hyperthermia (discussed later in 
the Malignant Hyperthermia section).
There are several competitive nondepolarizing agents 
available for clinical use. The longest acting is pancuronium, 
which is excreted almost completely unchanged by the kid-
ney. Intermediate-duration neuromuscular blockers include 
vecuronium and rocuronium, which are metabolized by both 
the kidneys and liver, and atracurium and cisatracurium, which 
undergo breakdown in plasma known as Hofmann elimination. 
The agent with shortest duration is mivacurium, the only nonde-
polarizer that is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase, and like 
succinylcholine, is subject to the same prolonged blockade in 
patients with plasma cholinesterase deficiency. All nondepolar-
izers reversibly bind to the postsynaptic terminal in the neuro-
muscular junction and prevent acetylcholine from depolarizing 
the muscle. Muscle blockade occurs without fasciculation and 
without the subsequent side effects seen with succinylcholine. 
The most commonly used agents of this type and their advan-
tages and disadvantages are listed in Table 46-2.
The reversal of neuromuscular blockade is not a true 
reversal of the drug (as with protamine reversal of heparin) 
but a reversal of the effect of the neuromuscular blockade. 
­Neuromuscular blocking reversal agents, usually neostigmine, 
edrophonium, or pyridostigmine, increase acetylcholine lev-
els by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that breaks 
Table 46-2
Advantages and disadvantages to common nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
Agent
Duration (h)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Pancuronium
>1
No histamine release
Tachycardia; slow onset; long duration
Vecuronium
<1
No cardiovascular effects
Intermediate onset
Rocuronium
<1
Fast onset; no cardiovascular effects
—
Mivacurium
<1
Fast onset; short duration & histamine release
—
Source: Adapted with permission from Rutter TW, Tremper KK. Anesthesiology and pain management. In: Mulholland MW et al, eds. Greenfield’s Sur-
gery: Scientific Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:271.
1902
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
down acetylcholine. The subsequently increased circulating 
levels of acetylcholine prevail in the competition for the post-
synaptic receptor, and motor function returns. Use of the periph-
eral nerve stimulator is required to follow depth and reversal 
of motor blockade, but it is essential to correlate data from the 
nerve stimulator with clinical signs that indicate return of motor 
function, including tidal volume, vital capacity, hand grip, and 
5-second sustained head lift.
Inhalational Agents.  Unlike the IV agents, the inhalational 
agents provide all three characteristics of general anesthesia: 
unconsciousness, analgesia, and muscle relaxation. However, 
it would be impractical to use an inhalation-only technique in 
larger surgical procedures, because the doses required would 
cause unacceptable side effects, so IV adjuncts such as opioid 
analgesics and neuromuscular blockers are added to optimize 
the anesthetic. All inhaled anesthetics display a dose-dependent 
reduction in mean arterial blood pressure except for nitrous 
oxide, which maintains or slightly raises the blood pressure. 
Nitrous oxide, although not potent enough to use alone, pro-
vides partial anesthesia and allows a second agent to be used in 
smaller doses, reducing side effects.
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is a measure of 
anesthetic potency. It is the ED50 of an inhaled agent (i.e., the 
dose required to block a response to a painful stimulus in 50% of 
subjects). The higher the MAC, the less potent an agent is. The 
potency and speed of induction of inhaled agents correlate with 
their lipid solubility, and this is known as the Meyer-Overton 
rule. Nitrous oxide has a low solubility and is a weak anesthetic 
agent, but has the most rapid onset and offset. The “potent” 
gases (e.g., desflurane, sevoflurane, enflurane, and halothane) 
are more soluble in blood than nitrous oxide and can be given in 
lower concentrations, but have longer induction and emergence 
characteristics.
Sevoflurane and desflurane are the two most recently 
introduced inhalational agents in common use. Because of their 
relatively lower tissue and blood solubility, induction and recov-
ery are more rapid than with isoflurane or enflurane.
All of the potent inhalational agents (e.g., halothane, iso-
flurane, enflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane), as well as the 
Table 46-3
Advantages and disadvantages of common inhalational agents
Agent
MAC (%)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Nitrous oxide
105
Analgesia; minimal cardiac and respiratory 
depression
Sympathetic stimulation; expansion of closed 
air space
Halothane
0.75
Effective in low concentrations; minimal airway 
irritability; inexpensive
Cardiac depression and arrhythmia hepatic 
necrosis; slow elimination
Enflurane
1.68
Muscle relaxation
Strong smell; seizures
No effect on cardiac rate or rhythm
Isoflurane
1.15
Muscle relaxation; no effect on cardiac rate or 
rhythm
Strong smell
Desflurane
6
Rapid induction and emergence
Coughing; high cost
Sevoflurane
1.71
Rapid induction and emergence; pleasant smell; 
ideal for mask induction
High cost; metabolized by liver
MAC = minimum alveolar concentration.
Source: Adapted with permission from Rutter TW, Tremper KK. Anesthesiology and pain management. In: Mulholland MW et al, eds. Greenfield’s Sur-
gery: Scientific Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:270.
depolarizing agent succinylcholine, are triggering agents for 
malignant hyperthermia. Table 46-3 lists the advantages and 
disadvantages of each agent.
Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetics are divided into two groups based on their 
chemical structure: the amides and the esters. In general, the 
amides are metabolized in the liver, and the esters are metabo-
lized by plasma cholinesterases, which yield metabolites with 
slightly higher allergic potential than the amides (Table 46-4).
Amides.  Lidocaine, bupivacaine, mepivacaine, prilocaine, and 
ropivacaine have in common an amide linkage between a ben-
zene ring and a hydrocarbon chain that, in turn, is attached to 
a tertiary amine. The benzene ring confers lipid solubility for 
penetration of nerve membranes, and the tertiary amine attached 
to the hydrocarbon chain makes these local anesthetics water 
soluble. Lidocaine has a more rapid onset and is shorter act-
ing than bupivacaine; however, both are widely used for tissue 
infiltration, regional nerve blocks, and spinal and epidural anes-
thesia. Ropivacaine is the most recently introduced local anes-
thetic. It is clinically similar to bupivacaine in that it has a slow 
onset and a long duration, but is less cardiotoxic. All amides are 
95% metabolized in the liver, with 5% excreted unchanged by 
the kidneys.
Esters.  Cocaine, procaine, chloroprocaine, tetracaine, and 
benzocaine have an ester linkage in place of the amide linkage 
mentioned earlier in the Amides section. Unique among local 
anesthetics, cocaine occurs in nature, was the first used clini-
cally, produces vasoconstriction (making it useful for topical 
application, e.g., for intranasal surgery), releases norepinephrine 
from nerve terminals resulting in hypertension, and is highly 
addictive. Cocaine is a Schedule II drug. Procaine, synthesized 
in 1905 as a nontoxic substitute for cocaine, has a short duration 
and is used for infiltration. Tetracaine has a long duration and is 
useful as a spinal anesthetic for lengthy operations. Benzocaine 
is for topical use only. The esters are hydrolyzed in the blood 
by pseudocholinesterase. Some of the metabolites have a greater 
allergic potential than the metabolites of the amide anesthetics, 
but true allergies to local anesthetics are rare.
1903
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Table 46-4
Biologic properties of commonly used local anesthetics
Agent
Equianesthetic  
Concentration (%)
Approximate Anesthetic  
Duration (min)
Site of Metabolism
Esters
  Procaine
2
50
Plasma
  Chloroprocaine
2
45
Plasma
  Tetracaine
0.25
175
Plasma
Amides
  Prilocaine
1
100
Liver/lung
  Lidocaine
1
100
Liver
  Mepivacaine
1
100
Liver
  Bupivacaine
0.25
175
Liver
  Ropivacaine
0.3
150
Liver
  Etidocaine
0.25
200
Liver
Source: Reproduced with permission from Mather LE, Tucker GT. Properties, absorption, and disposition of local anesthetic agents. In: Cousins MJ, 
Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Cousins and Bridenbaugh’s Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2009:49.
The common characteristic of all local anesthetics is a 
reversible block of the transmission of neural impulses when 
placed on or near a nerve membrane. Local anesthetics block 
nerve conduction by stabilizing sodium channels in their closed 
state, preventing action potentials from propagating along the 
nerve. The individual local anesthetic agents have different 
recovery times based on lipid solubility and tissue binding, but 
return of neural function is spontaneous as the drug is metabo-
lized or removed from the nerve by the vascular system.
Toxicity of local anesthetics results from absorption into 
the bloodstream or from inadvertent direct intravascular injec-
tion. Toxicity manifests first in the more sensitive CNS and then 
the cardiovascular system.
Central Nervous System Toxicity.  As plasma concentration 
of local anesthetic rises, symptoms progress from restlessness 
to complaints of tinnitus. Slurred speech, seizures, and uncon-
sciousness follow. Cessation of the seizure via administration of 
a benzodiazepine or thiopental and maintenance of the airway 
are the immediate treatment. If the seizure persists, the trachea 
must be intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube to guard 
against pulmonary aspiration of stomach contents.
Cardiovascular System Toxicity.  With increasingly elevated 
plasma levels of local anesthetics, progression to hypotension, 
increased P-R intervals, bradycardia, and cardiac arrest may 
occur. Bupivacaine is more cardiotoxic than other local anes-
thetics. It has a direct effect on ventricular muscle, and because 
it is more lipid soluble than lidocaine, it binds tightly to sodium 
channels (it is called the fast-in, slow-out local anesthetic). 
Patients who have received an inadvertent intravascular injec-
tion of bupivacaine have experienced profound hypotension, 
ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation, and complete atrioven-
tricular heart block that is extremely refractory to treatment. The 
toxic dose of lidocaine is approximately 5 mg/kg; that of bupi-
vacaine is approximately 3 mg/kg.
Calculation of the toxic dose before injection is impera-
tive. It is helpful to remember that for any drug or solution, 
1% = 10 mg/mL. For a 50-kg person, the toxic dose of bupiva-
caine would be approximately 3 mg/kg, or 3 × 50 = 150 mg. A 
0.5% solution of bupivacaine is 5 mg/mL, so 150 mL/5 mg/mL 
= 30 mL as the upper limit for infiltration. For lidocaine in the 
same patient, the calculation is 50 kg × 5 mg/mL = 250 mg toxic 
dose. If a 1% solution is used, the allowed amount would be 250 
mg/10 mg/mL = 25 mL.
Additives to Local Anesthetics.  Epinephrine has one physi-
ologic and several clinical effects when added to local anes-
thetics. Epinephrine is a vasoconstrictor, and by reducing local 
bleeding, molecules of the local anesthetic remain in proximity 
to the nerve for a longer time period. Onset of the nerve block is 
faster, the quality of the block is improved, the duration is longer, 
and less local anesthetic will be absorbed into the bloodstream, 
thereby reducing toxicity. Although epinephrine 1:200,000 
(5 g/mL) added to a local anesthetic for infiltration will greatly 
lengthen the time of analgesia, epinephrine-containing solutions 
should not be injected into body parts with end-arteries, such as 
toes or fingers, as vasoconstriction may lead to ischemia or loss 
of a digit. When added to the local anesthetic, sodium bicarbon-
ate will raise the pH, favoring the nonionized uncharged form 
of the molecule. This speeds the onset of the block, especially 
in local anesthetics that are mixed with epinephrine. The pH of 
such solutions is around 4.5; therefore, the addition of sodium 
bicarbonate results in a relatively large increase in pH.16
Regional Anesthesia: Peripheral vs. Central
Peripheral Nerve Blocks.  Local anesthetic can be injected 
peripherally, near a large nerve or plexus, to provide anesthesia 
to a larger region of the body. Examples include the brachial 
plexus for surgery of the arm or hand, blockade of the femo-
ral and sciatic nerves for surgery of the lower extremity, ankle 
block for surgery of the foot or toes, intercostal block for anal-
gesia of the thorax postoperatively, or blockade of the cervi-
cal plexus, which is ideal for carotid endarterectomy. Risks of 
peripheral regional nerve blocks are dependent on their location. 
1904
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
For example, nerve blocks injected into the neck risk puncture 
of the carotid or vertebral arteries, intercostal nerves are in close 
proximity to the vascular bundle and have a high rate of absorp-
tion of local anesthetic, and nerve blocks of the thorax run the 
risk of causing pneumothorax. All peripheral nerve blocks 
may be supplemented intraoperatively with IV sedation and/or 
analgesics.
Central Nerve Blocks: Spinal and Epidural.  Local anes-
thetic injected centrally near the spinal cord—spinal or epidural 
anesthesia—provides anesthesia for the lower half of the body. 
This is especially useful for genitourinary, gynecologic, ingui-
nal hernia, or lower extremity procedures. Spinal and epidural 
anesthesia block the spinal nerves as they exit the spinal cord. 
Spinal nerves are mixed nerves; they contain motor, sensory, 
and sympathetic components. The subsequent block will cause 
sensory anesthesia, loss of motor function, and blockade of the 
sympathetic nerves from the level of the anesthetic distally to 
the lower extremities. Subsequent vasodilation of the vascula-
ture from sympathetic block may result in hypotension, which 
is treatable with IV fluids and/or pressors.
Spinal Anesthesia  Local anesthetic is injected directly into 
the dural sac surrounding the spinal cord. The level of injec-
tion is usually below L1 to L2, where the spinal cord ends in 
most adults. Because the local anesthetic is injected directly 
into the cerebrospinal fluid surrounding the spinal cord, only 
a small dose is needed, the onset of anesthesia is rapid, and the 
blockade is thorough. Lidocaine, bupivacaine, and tetracaine are 
commonly used agents of differing durations; the block wears 
off naturally via drug uptake by the cerebrospinal fluid, blood-
stream, or diffusion into fat. Epinephrine as an additive to the 
local anesthetic will significantly prolong the blockade.
Possible complications include hypotension, especially 
if the patient is not adequately prehydrated; high spinal block 
requires immediate airway management; and postdural punc-
ture headache sometimes occurs. Spinal headache is related to 
the diameter and configuration of the spinal needle and can be 
reduced to approximately 1% with the use of a small 25- or 
27-gauge needle.
Cauda equina syndrome is injury to the nerves emanating 
distal to the spinal cord resulting in bowel and bladder dysfunc-
tion and lower extremity sensory and motor loss. It has mainly 
been seen in cases in which indwelling spinal microcatheters 
and high (5%) concentrations of lidocaine were used. Indwell-
ing spinal catheters are no longer used.
Epidural Anesthesia  Epidural anesthesia could also be called 
extradural anesthesia, because local anesthetics are injected 
into the epidural space surrounding the dural sac of the spinal 
cord. Much greater volumes of anesthetic are required than with 
spinal anesthesia, and the onset of the block is longer—10 to 
15 minutes. As in spinal anesthesia, local anesthetic bathes the 
spinal nerves as they exit the dura; the patient achieves analge-
sia from the sensory block, muscle relaxation from blockade of 
the motor nerves, and hypotension from blockade of the sym-
pathetic nerves as they exit the spinal cord. Note that regional 
anesthesia, whether peripheral or central, provides only two of 
the three major components of anesthesia—analgesia and mus-
cle relaxation. Anxiolysis, amnesia, or sedation must be attained 
by supplemental IV administration of other drugs (e.g., the ben-
zodiazepines or propofol infusion).
Complications are similar to those of spinal anesthesia. 
Inadvertent injection of local anesthetic into a dural tear will 
result in a high block, manifesting as unconsciousness, severe 
hypotension, and respiratory paralysis requiring immediate 
aggressive hemodynamic management and control of the air-
way. Indwelling catheters are often placed through introducers 
into the epidural space, allowing an intermittent or continuous 
technique, as opposed to the single-shot method of spinal anes-
thesia. By necessity, the epidural-introducing needles are of a 
much larger diameter (17- or 18-gauge) than spinal needles, and 
accidental dural puncture more often results in a severe head-
ache that may last up to 10 days if left untreated.
ANESTHESIA MANAGEMENT
Preoperative Evaluation and Preparation
The ASA has adopted basic standards for the evaluation of 
patients before surgery. These standards require the anesthesi-
ologist to determine the medical status of the patient by devel-
oping a plan of anesthetic care and to discuss this plan with the 
patient and/or legal guardian.
The preoperative visit results in a summary of all pertinent 
findings, including a detailed medical history, current drug ther-
apy, complete physical examination, and laboratory and specific 
testing results. Based on these findings, the anesthesiologist 
may find that the patient is not in optimal medical condition to 
undergo elective surgery. These findings and opinions are then 
discussed with the patient’s primary physician, and the surgery 
may be delayed or cancelled until the patient’s medical condi-
tion is further tested and optimized.
The detailed medical history obtained at the preoperative 
visit should include the patient’s previous exposure and expe-
rience with anesthesia, as well as any family history of prob-
lems with anesthesia. History of atopy (medication, foods, or 
environmental) is an important aspect of this evaluation in that 
it may predispose patients to form antibodies against antigens 
that may be represented by agents administered during the peri-
operative period. A careful review of major organ systems and 
their function also should be performed.
The physical examination is targeted primarily at the CNS, 
cardiovascular system, lungs, and upper airway. Specific areas 
to investigate are shown in Table 46-5.
Table 46-5
Preoperative physical examination
Central Nervous System
Cardiovascular System
Respiratory System
Oral Airway
Consciousness; 
neurocognition; peripheral 
sensory
Blood pressure; standing and 
sitting, bilateral; peripheral 
pulses; heart auscultation; heart 
rate; murmur; rhythm
Auscultation of lungs; 
wheezes; rales
Cervical spine mobility; 
visualize uvula; artificial teeth; 
thyromental distance
1905
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Concurrent medications must be fully explored, and 
adverse interactions with agents administered during the peri-
operative period need to be considered. However, concurrent 
medications that produce desired effects (i.e., β-blockade, anti-
hypertensive, and antiasthma medications) can and should be 
continued throughout the perioperative period; patients should 
be counseled to continue these medications up to and includ-
ing the morning of surgery. Careful documentation will allow 
the anesthesiologist to make informed decisions about the peri-
operative selection of drugs and therapy as well as monitoring 
techniques.
Preoperative laboratory data and specific testing for elec-
tive surgery should be patient and situation specific. Examples 
include serum potassium for a patient on diuretics, glucose in 
a diabetic patient, or hemoglobin concentration in any surgery 
with a high risk of blood loss. Coagulation tests are not neces-
sary if the patient is not receiving anticoagulants or has no signs 
or symptoms of abnormal clotting. Otherwise healthy patients 
usually do not need preoperative laboratory testing, and tests 
performed within the previous 6 months are usually sufficient.17 
Other tests that should be generated by history and physi-
cal examination include chest radiograph if there is evidence 
of chest disease and pulmonary function tests in patients who 
are morbidly obese, severe asthmatics, or patients undergoing 
pulmonary resection surgery. An electrocardiogram should be 
performed in all symptomatic patients and in asymptomatic men 
age 45 years or older and asymptomatic women age 50 years or 
older. Urine pregnancy testing should be performed on the day 
of surgery in all women of childbearing age.
Risk Assessment
An integral part of the preoperative visit is for the anesthesiolo-
gist to assess patient risk. Risk assessment encompasses two 
major questions: (a) Is the patient in optimal medical condi-
tion for surgery? and (b) Are the anticipated benefits of surgery 
greater than the surgical and anesthetic risks associated with the 
procedure?
Research into quantifying preoperative factors that corre-
late with the development of postoperative morbidity and mor-
tality has recently gained great interest. Originally designed as 
a simple classification of a patient’s physical status immediately 
before surgery, the ASA physical status scale is one of the few 
prospective scales that correlate with the risk of anesthesia and 
surgery (Table 46-6).
Criticism of the ASA scale is primarily due to its exclu-
sion of age and difficulty of intubation (discussed later in 
Table 46-6
American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 
classification system
P1 A normal healthy patient
P2 A patient with mild systemic disease
P3 A patient with severe systemic disease
P4 A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant  
  threat to life
P5 A moribund patient who is not expected to survive  
  without the operation
P6 A declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being  
  removed for donor purposes
Table 46-7
American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 
and mortality
Score
Mortality (%)
P1
0.1
P2
0.2
P3
1.8
P4
7.8
P5
9.4
Source: Reproduced with permission from Aitkenhead AR, Rowbotham 
D, Smith G, eds. Textbook of Anesthesia. 4th ed. New York: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2001:288. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
this ­chapter). Cullen and associates examined 1095 patients 
undergoing total hip replacement, prostatectomy, or cholecys-
tectomy, and found that both age and ASA scale accurately 
­predict postoperative morbidity and mortality18 (Table 46-7). 
The ASA scale remains useful and should be applied to all 
patients during the preoperative visit.
Evaluation of the Airway.  The airway examination is an 
effort to identify those patients in whom management of the air-
way and conventional endotracheal intubation may be ­difficult. 
It is vitally important to recognize such patients before admin-
istering medications that induce apnea.
Mallampati Classification.  The amount of the posterior phar-
ynx one can visualize preoperatively is important and correlates 
with the difficulty of intubation. A large tongue (relative to the 
size of the mouth) that also interferes with visualization of the 
larynx on laryngoscopy will obscure visualization of the phar-
ynx. The Mallampati classification (Fig. 46-2, Table 46-8) is 
based on the structures visualized with maximal mouth opening 
and tongue protrusion in the sitting position.
Other predictors of difficult intubation include obesity, 
immobility of the neck, interincisor distance <4 cm in an adult, 
a large overbite, or the inability to shift the lower incisors in 
front of the upper incisors. The thyromental distance (i.e., the 
distance from the thyroid cartilage to the mentum [tip of the 
chin]) should be >6.5 to 7 cm.
Consideration of Patients with Comorbidities.  A thor-
ough knowledge of the pathophysiology of concurrent medical 
conditions regardless of the reason for surgery is essential for 
optimal perioperative care. Optimal anesthesia extends beyond 
pharmacology and technical procedures. Specifically, ischemic 
heart disease, renal dysfunction, pulmonary disease, metabolic 
and endocrine disorders, CNS diseases, and diseases of the liver 
and biliary tract can have major impact on the management of 
anesthesia.
Ischemic Heart Disease.  Ischemic heart disease is the result 
of the heart demanding more oxygen (O2) than its supply 
can provide. A supply problem may be due to many factors, 
including hypoxia, anemia, hypotension and coronary artery 
atherosclerosis, thrombosis, or spasm. Additionally, the prob-
lem may be an increase in myocardial O2 demand (tachycar-
dia). In the vast majority of cases, the most responsible lesion 
is a reduction in the luminal area of coronary arteries due to 
atherosclerosis.
1906
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
An estimated 14 million people in the United States have 
ischemic heart disease. Of these, as many as 4 million have few 
or no symptoms and are unaware that they are at risk for angina 
pectoris, myocardial infarction, or sudden death.
An important goal of the preoperative visit is for the anes-
thesiologist to ascertain the patient’s severity, progression, and 
functional limitations induced by ischemic heart disease. Fur-
thermore, this visit can elucidate the possibility of previously 
undiagnosed ischemic heart disease. A thorough investigation 
of risk factors for ischemic heart disease is essential during the 
preoperative visit. The risk of perioperative death due to myo-
cardial infarction in patients without ischemic heart disease is 
approximately 1%.19 In contrast, the risk in patients with known 
or suspected ischemic heart disease is approximately 3%,19 and 
in patients undergoing surgery for peripheral vascular disease, 
the combined risk of death due to cardiac causes is 29%.20
Major Risk Factors for Coronary Artery Disease.  The risk 
of hypercholesterolemia is proportional to the increased serum 
level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Reduction achieved 
via decreased dietary fat or pharmacotherapy reduces risk.
Hyperlipidemia may be familial and thus may account 
for the fact that a strong family history of premature CAD is a 
significant risk factor. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol is 
protective.
Although definitely a risk factor, hypertension alone prob-
ably does not cause plaques. Rather, it may act synergistically 
with hypercholesterolemia by first causing mechanical wall 
stress and damage.
Smoking causes endothelial damage, and therefore promotes 
plaque thrombosis. Cessation greatly reduces the risk of CAD.
Table 46-8
Mallampati classification
Class I: soft palate, fauces, uvula, pillars
Class II: soft palate, fauces, portion of uvula
Class III: soft palate, base of uvula
Class IV: hard palate only
Figure 
46-2.  The Mallampati 
­classification.
CLASS 1
CLASS 1: Soft palate, fauces, uvula, pillars
CLASS 2: Soft palate, fauces, portion of uvula
CLASS 3: Soft palate, base of uvula
CLASS 4: Hard palate only
MALLAMPATI CLASSIFICATION
CLASS 2
CLASS 3
CLASS 4
Diabetes mellitus is a strong independent risk factor. 
A hypothesis is that glycosylation products cause release of 
growth factors that stimulate smooth muscle proliferation.
Other Risk Factors.  Hyperhomocysteinemia is becoming an 
established independent risk factor, but is still under evaluation. 
Reduction of levels by folate therapy may be beneficial.
Advanced age, male sex, obesity, and a sedentary life-
style can also put a person at risk for developing ischemic heart 
­disease.21
Drugs used for the medical management of patients with 
ischemic heart disease should be continued throughout the 
perioperative period. Withdrawal of an antihypertensive drug 
or suspension of β-blockade can induce unwanted increases in 
sympathetic nervous system activity.12 Induction of anesthesia 
in patients with ischemic heart disease can be safely accom-
plished with a number of IV drugs. As many as 45% of patients 
have been shown to have myocardial ischemia during the stress 
of tracheal intubation, and direct laryngoscopy should be used 
for the shortest time possible to minimize the magnitude of 
stimulation.22
The intraoperative anesthetic technique should allow for 
the prompt control of hemodynamic variables; the maintenance 
of the balance between myocardial O2 delivery and myocardial 
O2 demand is probably the single most important factor in man-
aging patients with ischemic heart disease. In this regard, mus-
cle relaxants with minimal to no effects on heart rate and blood 
pressure, such as vecuronium and rocuronium, are attractive 
choices for neuromuscular blockade. Additionally, controlled 
myocardial depression using a volatile anesthetic in patients 
with a normal left ventricular ejection fraction may help to min-
imize the stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system and 
subsequent increases in myocardial O2 requirements. In patients 
with impaired left ventricular function, continued myocardial 
depression with volatile anesthetics may not be tolerated; the 
addition of short-acting opioids such as fentanyl is beneficial. 
In cardiac surgical patients, it is not uncommon for high-dose 
opioids to be used as the predominant anesthetic.
Pulmonary Disease.  Chronic pulmonary disease has developed 
into a worldwide public health problem. Chronic ­obstructive 
1907
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
pulmonary disease (COPD), distinguished from asthma, which is 
characterized by reversible airway smooth muscle constriction, 
is a progressive disease that leads to the destruction of the lung 
parenchyma.
Infection, noxious particles, and gases can exacerbate 
COPD. Historically, certain lung function parameters (i.e., sig-
nificantly abnormal spirometry or arterial blood gas analysis) 
were once considered contraindications for anesthesia. How-
ever, anesthetic techniques have improved, and it has been 
shown that patients with severe lung disease can safely undergo 
anesthesia.23 Zollinger and Pasch found no specific parameters 
of lung function that were predictive of postoperative lung com-
plications. The highest predictive parameter found was upper 
abdominal surgery and thoracic surgery.24
General anesthesia can be performed safely in patients 
with pulmonary disease.25 Inhaled anesthetics are often used due 
to their bronchodilating properties.26 Some authors have advo-
cated pretreatment with salbutamol, a long-acting β-agonist, 
which may prevent bronchoconstriction during anesthetic 
induction.27,28
Regional and local anesthesia have the benefit of avoid-
ing tracheal irritation and stimulating bronchospasm. How-
ever, patients with COPD may become hypoxic while lying 
strictly supine, and sensory levels of anesthetic above T10 are 
associated with the impairment of respiratory muscle activ-
ity necessary for patients with COPD to maintain adequate 
ventilation.12
Intraoperatively, mechanical ventilation using a slow 
breathing rate (at eight breaths per minute) should be used to 
allow for passive exhalation in the presence of increased airway 
resistance. This slow breathing, facilitated by high inspiratory 
flow rate, may allow for improved maintenance of normal par-
tial pressure of arterial oxygen (Pao2) and partial pressure of 
arterial carbon dioxide (CO2) levels. Patients should also be well 
hydrated during the procedure with adequate crystalloid/colloid 
volume therapy, which may allow for less viscous pulmonary 
secretions following surgery.
Renal Disease.  Five percent of the adult population may have 
pre-existing renal disease that could contribute to periopera-
tive morbidity.29 In addition, the risk of acute renal failure is 
increased by certain events or patient characteristics indepen-
dent of pre-existing renal disease, such as hypovolemia and 
obstructive vascular disease. Ischemic tubular damage (i.e., 
acute tubular necrosis) is the most likely cause of acute renal 
failure in the perioperative period, reflecting events that cause 
an imbalance of O2 supply to O2 demand in the medullary 
ascending tubular cells.
Virtually all anesthetic drugs and techniques are associ-
ated with decreases in renal blood flow, the glomerular filtra-
tion rate, and urine output, reflecting multiple mechanisms such 
as decreased cardiac output, altered autonomic nervous system 
activity, neuroendocrine changes, and positive pressure ventila-
tion. Renal blood flow (15%–25% of the cardiac output) far 
exceeds renal O2 needs, but ensures optimal clearance of wastes 
and drugs. Prehydration and the depth of anesthesia may influ-
ence the renal response to anesthesia.
Management of anesthesia in patients with chronic renal 
disease requires attention to intraoperative fluid management 
and tight control of ventilation, as respiratory alkalosis will shift 
the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, and respiratory acidosis 
could raise serum potassium to dangerous levels. Because of 
decreased excretion by the kidney, doses of opioids and neuro-
muscular blocking agents must be attenuated.
Hepatobiliary Disease.  Management of anesthesia for the 
patient with liver disease requires an understanding of the many 
physiologic functions of the liver: synthesis of albumin and 
coagulation factors, metabolism of drugs, glucose homeostasis, 
and the production of bilirubin. Data from the 1970s suggested 
that approximately 1 in every 700 adult patients who are sched-
uled for elective surgical procedures has unknown liver disease 
or is in the prodromal phase of viral hepatitis. Severe hepatic 
necrosis following surgery and anesthesia is most often due to 
decreased hepatic O2 delivery rather than the anesthetic.
Regional anesthesia may be useful in patients with 
advanced liver disease, assuming coagulation status is accept-
able. When general anesthesia is selected, administration of 
modest doses of volatile anesthetics with or without nitrous 
oxide or fentanyl often is recommended. Selection of nonde-
polarizing muscle relaxants should consider clearance mech-
anisms for these drugs. For example, patients with hepatic 
cirrhosis may be hypersensitive to mivacurium because of the 
lowered plasma cholinesterase activity. Perfusion to the liver 
is maintained by administering fluids (guided by filling pres-
sures) and maintaining adequate systemic pressure and cardiac 
output.
The coexisting presence of liver disease may influence 
the selection of volatile anesthetics. Halothane is the anesthetic 
most studied regarding possible hepatotoxicity. Halothane hepa-
titis occurs rarely (approximately 1:25,000 patients) and may 
have an immune-mediated mechanism stimulated by repeated 
exposures to halothane.30 Halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, and 
desflurane all yield a reactive oxidative trifluoroacetyl halide 
and may be cross-reactive, but the magnitude of metabolism of 
the volatile anesthetics is a probable factor in the ability to cause 
hepatitis.31 Halothane is metabolized 20%, enflurane 2%, isoflu-
rane 0.2%, and desflurane 0.02%; desflurane probably has the 
least potential for liver injury. Sevoflurane does not yield any 
trifluoroacetylated metabolites and is unlikely to cause hepatitis. 
An estimated 15 to 20 million adults in the United States have 
biliary tract disease. Treatment of gallbladder disease by open 
or laparoscopic cholecystectomy is most often performed with 
general anesthesia supplemented with muscle relaxants. Com-
plete biliary tract obstruction could interfere with the clearance 
of some muscle relaxants dependent on liver metabolism, such 
as vecuronium and pancuronium. Anesthetic considerations 
for laparoscopic cholecystectomy are similar to those for other 
laparoscopic procedures. Insufflation of the abdominal cavity 
with CO2 results in increased intra-abdominal pressure that may 
interfere with the ease of ventilation and venous return. During 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, placement of the patient in the 
reverse Trendelenburg position favors movement of abdominal 
contents away from the operative site and may improve ventila-
tion. However, this position may further interfere with venous 
return and reduce cardiac output, emphasizing the need to main-
tain intravascular fluid volume. Mechanical ventilation of the 
lungs is recommended to ensure adequate ventilation in the 
presence of increased intra-abdominal pressure and to offset the 
effects of systemic absorption of CO2 used during insufflation 
of the abdominal cavity. High intra-abdominal pressure may 
increase the risk of passive reflux of gastric contents. Tracheal 
intubation with a cuffed tube is advised to minimize the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration.
1908
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Metabolic and Endocrine Disease.  Metabolic and endocrine 
disorders encompass a wide range of diseases. These diseases 
may be the primary reason for surgery or can exist in patients 
requiring surgery for other unrelated disorders. Preoperative 
evaluation of endocrine function consists of relevant medical 
history, glucose or protein in the urine, vital signs, history of 
fluctuations in body weight, survey of sexual function, and con-
comitant medications. The three metabolic and endocrine con-
ditions that are most prevalent in patients undergoing surgery 
are diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and obesity. The preva-
lence of all three conditions, either alone or in combination, in 
the general population has been steadily rising throughout the 
world for the past 20 to 30 years.12,32 The aging population and 
changes in the diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus are sure 
to continue this trend.12,33
Patients with diabetes are at an increased risk for periop-
erative myocardial ischemia, stroke, renal dysfunction or fail-
ure, and increased mortality.34 Increased wound infections and 
impairment of wound healing also are associated with the pre-
existence of diabetes in patients undergoing surgery.35
The stress response to surgery is associated with hypergly-
cemia in nondiabetic patients due to increased secretion of cata-
bolic hormones and a combination of reduced insulin secretion 
and increased insulin resistance.36,37 Improved glycemic control 
in diabetic patients undergoing major surgery has been shown 
to improve perioperative morbidity and mortality; avoidance of 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemic events is the standard of care 
in these patients.33, 38-40
Anesthetic techniques in the diabetic patient can modulate 
the secretion of catabolic hormones.41 However, regional anes-
thesia may carry greater risks to the diabetic patient with auto-
nomic neuropathy, and the hypotension associated with regional 
anesthesia may be deleterious to the diabetic patient with coex-
isting CAD.33 There is no evidence that regional anesthesia or 
general anesthesia, either alone or in combination, offers any 
benefit to the diabetic surgical patient in terms of morbidity or 
mortality.33
Hypothyroidism is a deficiency in the secretion of the 
thyroid hormones, thyroxine and 3,5′,3-triiodothyronine, by the 
thyroid gland. More than 5 million Americans have this com-
mon medical condition, and as many as 10% of women may 
have some degree of thyroid hormone deficiency. Controlled 
clinical trials have not shown an increase in risk when patients 
with mild to moderate hypothyroidism undergo surgery.42 Nev-
ertheless, close monitoring of these patients for adverse effects 
of anesthesia, including delayed gastric emptying, adrenal insuf-
ficiency, and hypovolemia, is warranted.43
The prevalence of significant obesity continues to rise both 
in developed and developing countries and is associated with an 
increased incidence of a wide spectrum of medical and surgical 
pathologies44 (Table 46-9). In the United States, one-third of 
people have a body weight more than 20% above their ideal 
weight.45 Body mass index (BMI) is calculated by dividing the 
weight in kilograms by the square of the height in meters. In the 
United States, the prevalence of a BMI >25 kg/m2 is 59.4% for 
men, 50.7% for women, and 54.9% for adults overall. Patients 
with a BMI >28 kg/m2 have increased perioperative morbidity 
over the general population.
Anesthetic management of the obese patient is prob-
lematic, and tasks such as establishing IV access, applying 
monitoring equipment, managing the airway, and transporting 
the patient are more difficult. Ventilation may be a particular 
Table 46-9
Disease conditions associated with obesity
Category
Examples
Cardiovascular disease
Sudden death, 
cardiomyopathy, 
hypertension, coronary artery 
disease, peripheral vascular 
disease
Respiratory disease
Restrictive lung disease, 
sleep apnea
Endocrine disease
Diabetes mellitus, 
hypothyroidism
GI disease
Hernia, gallstones
Malignancy
Breast, prostate, colorectal 
cancer
Musculoskeletal
Osteoarthritis, back pain
Source: Reproduced with permission from Adams JP, Murphy PG.  
Obesity in anaesthesia and intensive care. Br J Anaesth. 2000;85:91.  
By permission of Oxford University Press.
­problem because of obstructive sleep apnea or because obe-
sity itself imposes a restrictive ventilatory state with decreased 
expiratory reserve and vital capacity.12 Induction of anesthe-
sia is particularly challenging in the obese patient, as there is 
increased risk of pulmonary aspiration, and the increased mass 
of soft tissue about the head and neck makes establishing and 
maintaining a patent airway difficult.
The impact of obesity on the pharmacokinetics of anes-
thetic drugs is variable. For example, blood volume is often 
increased in obese patients, which can decrease predicted con-
centrations of drugs, but adipose tissue has low blood flow, 
which could elevate blood concentrations of these agents. It is 
prudent to calculate the first dose of anesthetic based on ideal 
body weight and to base subsequent dosages on the patient’s 
responsiveness.12,46
Central Nervous System Disease.  Diseases of the CNS 
present unique situations for the anesthesiologist and require 
an understanding of the relationship between intracranial pres-
sure (ICP), cerebral blood flow (CBF), and cerebral metabolic 
rate of O2 consumption (CMRO2). Preoperative assessment of 
ICP is difficult, as symptoms of headache, nausea, and vomit-
ing are nonspecific, and signs of retinal changes do not occur 
acutely. A midline shift on computed tomography scanning or 
magnetic resonance imaging may indicate an expanding lesion 
in the brain.
Provision of anesthesia for intracranial procedures must 
balance hemodynamic factors such as fluid volume, mean arte-
rial pressure, ICP, and CBF. For intracranial tumors, the mass 
effect of the tumor makes control of ICP and CBF critical. In 
intracranial aneurysm surgery, the goal of the anesthetic is to 
prevent sudden increases in systemic blood pressure that could 
rupture the aneurysm, especially during the stress of laryngos-
copy and endotracheal intubation. The relationship between 
mean arterial pressure, ICP, and CBF is affected by pharma-
cologic agents. Inhalational agents in high concentrations 
(>0.6 MAC) cause dilation of the cerebral vasculature, decreas-
ing cerebral vascular resistance. CBF is therefore increased in a 
dose-dependent fashion, despite decreases in CMRO2.12
1909
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Propofol decreases CBF, ICP, and CMRO2.47 Propo-
fol may also decrease systemic blood pressure, resulting in a 
decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure; however, propofol does 
not alter the autoregulation of CBF.48 Etomidate is a potent cere-
bral vasoconstrictor that reduces CBF and ICP and should be 
used with caution in patients with epilepsy due to its excitatory 
effects seen on electroencephalograms.49
Opioids decrease CBF and may also decrease ICP under 
certain conditions. However, Sperry and associates have 
reported increases in ICP with the administration of fentanyl in 
head trauma patients.50 Additionally, opioids have a depressant 
effect on consciousness and ventilation that may increase ICP if 
accompanied by an increase in partial pressure of arterial CO2; 
opioids should be used with caution in head trauma patients.
Regardless of the drugs or technique selected, maintenance 
of stable hemodynamics is optimal. Recovery from anesthesia 
should be smooth, avoiding pain, coughing, and straining, all of 
which can increase blood pressure and ICP and cause bleeding 
at the surgical site.
Fluid therapy can increase cerebral edema and ICP when 
administered in large quantities, resulting in hypervolemia. 
Euvolemia should be the goal in head trauma patients, whereas 
hypervolemia may be beneficial for patients with intracranial 
aneurysms to reduce vasospasm.
INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Induction of Anesthesia
During induction of anesthesia, the patient becomes unconscious 
and rapidly apneic, myocardial function is usually depressed, 
and vascular tone abruptly changes. The induction of general 
anesthesia is the most critical component of practicing anes-
thesia, as the majority of catastrophic anesthetic complications 
occur during this phase. There are several different techniques 
used for the induction of general anesthesia, each with signifi-
cant advantages and disadvantages (Fig. 46-3). Each patient 
must be carefully evaluated during the preoperative period to 
ensure that the most efficacious and safe technique is used.
IV induction, used primarily in adults, is smooth and is 
associated with a high level of patient satisfaction. The addition 
of opioids will blunt the response of laryngoscopy and intuba-
tion to avoid hypertension and tachycardia.
In a patient with a full stomach, the standard induction 
technique may result in vomiting and pulmonary aspiration of 
stomach contents. The goal of rapid sequence induction is to 
achieve secure protection of the airway with a cuffed endotra-
cheal tube while preventing vomiting and aspiration.
Rapid sequence induction is performed as follows:
• Proceed only after evaluation of the airway predicts an 
uncomplicated intubation.
• Preoxygenate the patient.
• Rapidly introduce an IV induction agent (e.g., propofol).
• An assistant to the anesthesiologist presses firmly down on 
the cricoid cartilage to block any gastric contents from being 
regurgitated into the trachea, a muscle relaxant is injected, 
and the trachea is quickly intubated.
• The assistant is instructed not to release pressure on the cri-
coid cartilage until the cuff of the endotracheal tube is inflated 
and the position of the tube is confirmed.
Patients undergoing inhalation induction progress through 
three stages: (a) awake, (b) excitement, and (c) surgical level of 
anesthesia. Adult patients are not good candidates for this type 
of induction, as the smell of the inhalation agent is unpleasant 
and the excitement stage can last for several ­minutes, which may 
cause hypertension, tachycardia, laryngospasm, vomiting, and 
aspiration. Children, however, progress through stage 2 quickly 
and are highly motivated for inhalation induction as an alterna-
tive to the IV route. The benefit of postinduction IV cannulation 
is the avoidance of many presurgical anxieties, and inhalation 
induction is the most common technique for ­pediatric surgery.
Figure 46-3.  Techniques for the induction 
of general anesthesia.
High-risk for aspiration
Adults
Endotracheal
intubation
Endotracheal
intubation
Endotracheal
intubation
Endotracheal
intubation
Mask ventilation
Mask ventilation
Neuromuscular
blockade
Neuromuscular
blockade
Mask inhalation
Anesthetic maintenance
Mask inhalation
Rapid induction
agent
Rapid induction agent
(i.e., Midazolam)
Rapid induction agent
(i.e., Midazolam)
Preoxygenation
Preoxygenation
Preoxygenation
Children
Intravenous
Rapid sequence
Inhalation
Combined
Adults
1910
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Management of the Airway
After induction of anesthesia, the airway may be managed in sev-
eral ways, including by face mask, with a laryngeal mask airway 
(LMA), or, most definitively, by endotracheal intubation with a 
cuffed endotracheal tube. Nasal and oral airways can help 
establish a patent airway in a patient being ventilated with 
a mask by creating an air passage behind the tongue (Fig. 46-4).
The LMA is a cuffed oral airway that sits in the orophar-
ynx. It is passed blindly, and the cuff is inflated to push the soft 
tissues away from the laryngeal inlet. Because it does not pass 
through the vocal cords, it does not fully protect against aspi-
ration. It should not be used in patients with a full stomach 
(Fig. 46-5; lower left). The accurate placement of an endotracheal 
tube requires skill and proper equipment and conditions. Usu-
ally, the patient is unconscious and immobile (including paralysis 
of the muscles of respiration). Intubation is typically performed 
under direct visualization by looking through the mouth with a 
laryngoscope directly at the vocal cords (direct laryngoscopy) and 
watching the endotracheal tube pass through the cords into the 
trachea. To obtain a direct line of sight, the patient is placed in the 
sniffing position. The neck is flexed at the lower cervical spine 
and extended at the atlanto-occipital joint. This flexion and exten-
sion are amplified during laryngoscopy. Laryngoscope handles 
contain batteries and can be fitted with curved (Macintosh) or 
straight (Miller) blades (see Fig. 46-5, top row).
Some patients have physical characteristics or a history 
suggesting difficulty in placing an endotracheal tube. A short 
neck, limited neck mobility, small interincisor distance, short 
thyromental distance, and Mallampati class IV may all represent 
a challenge to endotracheal intubation. Several devices have 
been developed to assist in management of the difficult airway. 
The Bullard rigid fiberoptic laryngoscope is a self-contained 
device that can be passed through a mouth with a narrow open-
ing (Fig. 46-6). The head and neck also can be kept in a neutral 
position, as a direct line of sight needed with a standard laryn-
goscope is not necessary. Another new intubating device is the 
Glidescope, which allows visualization of the vocal cords on a 
screen (Fig. 46-7)
The intubating laryngeal mask airway (ILMA) is an 
advanced form of LMA designed to maintain a patent airway as 
Figure 46-4.  From left to right: two 
nasal airways and three oral airways.
NASAL AIRWAYS
ORAL AIRWAYS
Figure 46-5.  (Top) Laryngoscopes with curved straight blades. 
(Bottom) Laryngomask airway, intubating laryngomask airway, 
and Bullard rigid fiberoptic laryngoscope.
well as facilitate tracheal intubation with an endotracheal tube. 
The ILMA can be placed in anticipated or unexpectedly difficult 
airways as an airway rescue device and as a guide for intubating 
the trachea. An endotracheal tube can be passed blindly through 
the ILMA into the larynx, or the ILMA can be used as a conduit 
for a flexible fiberoptic scope (Fig. 46-8).
The flexible fiberoptic intubation scope is the gold stan-
dard for difficult intubation. It is indicated in difficult or com-
promised airways where neck extension is not desirable or in 
cases with risk of dental damage. The scope is constructed of 
fiberoptic bundles and cables encased in a sheath. The cables 
3
1911
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
permit manipulation of the tip of the scope by adjustments made 
at the operating end of the device. There is a port for suction 
and/or insufflation of O2. The scope gives excellent visualiza-
tion of the airway with minimal hemodynamic stress when used 
properly. It can be used nasally or orally in an awake, spontane-
ously ventilating patient whose airway has been treated with 
topical anesthetic. It requires skill for proper use, is expensive, 
and requires careful maintenance (Fig. 46-9).
The ASA has developed algorithms for management of the 
difficult airway (Figs. 46-10 and 46-11).51
Fluid Therapy
Numerous preparations of IV fluid are available for the replace-
ment of perioperative fluid losses in patients undergoing 
surgery. Different fluid preparations may influence clinical 
parameters (e.g., platelet function) and may also affect postop-
erative outcome.
Figure 46-6.  The Bullard rigid fiber-
optic laryngoscope with endotracheal 
tube.
Figure 46-7.  Video laryngoscope showing view of vocal cords.
Traditionally, IV fluids have been classified according 
to whether they are crystalloid or colloid in nature. Crystalloid 
fluids comprise electrolyte solutions with or without a bicarbon-
ate precursor such as acetate or lactate. The colloids contain a 
complex sugar or protein suspended in an electrolyte solution. 
A further distinction between IV fluid types may be based on 
the nature of the solution. Normal saline-based (0.9% sodium 
chloride) preparations (crystalloid or colloid) contain no elec-
trolytes other than sodium and chloride. In contrast, balanced 
salt-based fluids such as lactated Ringer’s solution contain other 
electrolytes, with or without a bicarbonate precursor.
Several types of colloids are available, but three are most 
commonly used—hydroxyethyl starch (HES), gelatin, and albu-
min. The HES preparations differ from one another according 
to their concentration, molecular weight, and extent of hydroxy-
ethylation or substitution, with resultant varying physiochemical 
properties. HES solutions most often are described according 
to their weight-averaged mean molecular weight in kilodal-
tons (kDa): high molecular weight (450 kDa), middle molec-
ular weight (200 kDa, 270 kDa), and low molecular weight 
(130 kDa, 70 kDa). HES 450 kDa solutions are available in a 
normal saline solution (HES 450/NS) and in a lactated, balanced 
salt solution (HES 450/BS). Although all of these colloids are 
used in Europe, gelatins are not available in the United States, 
and the only HES preparations approved by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration are the 6% high molecular weight 
(450 kDa) formulations.
The administration of a large volume of any type of IV 
fluid will cause dilution of platelets and coagulation factors 
and may lead to coagulopathy (i.e., dilutional coagulopathy). 
In addition, fluids can have a direct impact on blood clotting 
through effects on circulating components of the coagulation 
cascade or by altering platelet function.
Recent evidence suggests that the nature of the solution 
itself may influence coagulation and bleeding. HES 450/NS may 
be associated with more bleeding than other fluids. HES 450 in 
a balanced salt solution appears to be equivalent to 5% albumin 
1912
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 46-8.  Intubating laryngeal 
mask airway with endotracheal tube.
Figure 46-9.  Flexible fiberoptic 
intubation scope with endotracheal 
tube.
1913
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Figure 46-10.  American Society of Anesthesiologists airway management algorithm, Part I. CO2 = carbon dioxide. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from Practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway: An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Management of the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 2003;98:1269.)
*Confirm intubation with exhaled CO2
Awake intubation
Intubation attempts after
induction of general anesthesia
Airway approached
by non-surgical intubation
Airway secured
by surgical access
Initial intubation attempt
successful
Initial intubation attempt
unsuccessful
Succeed
Fail
From this point onward repeatedly
consider the advisability of:
1) Returning to spontaneous
    ventilation
2) Awakening the patient
3) Calling for help
Cancel
case
Consider feasibility
of other options
Surgical
airway*
Go to emergency or non-emergency
pathway in Fig. 46-11
Non-emergency pathway
Patient anesthetized, intubation successful,
mask ventilation adequate
Emergency pathway
Patient anesthetized, intubation unsuccessful,
mask ventilation inadequate
If mask ventilation
becomes inadequate
Alternative approaches
to intubation
Call for help
Succeed
Fail after
multiple attempts
Emergency non-surgical
airway ventilation
One more
intubation attempt
Succeed
Fail
Succeed
Fail
Surgery under
mask anesthesia
Surgical
airway*
Awaken
patient
Emergency
surgical airway*
Definitive
airway
*Confirm intubation with exhaled CO2
Figure 46-11.  American Society of Anesthesiologists airway management algorithm, Part II. CO2 = carbon dioxide. (Reproduced with 
permission from Practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway: An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Management of the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 2003;98:1269.)
1914
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
with respect to bleeding outcomes.52-54 Waters and colleagues 
reported that patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm 
repair who received lactated Ringer’s solution received smaller 
volumes of platelets and had less blood product exposure than 
those treated with normal saline.55
It is possible that certain fluids may induce hypercoag-
ulability that may be reflected not only by less bleeding, but 
also by an increased incidence of postoperative thrombotic 
complications (e.g., deep vein thrombosis and cerebrovascular 
accident). There are laboratory data56 to suggest that IV fluid 
administration may induce a hypercoagulable state, but the 
clinical significance of this remains unclear. The type of fluid 
administered intraoperatively to a patient can have a significant 
impact on renal function. The administration of HES/NS or 
­normal saline to critically ill patients or elderly patients under-
going major surgery was associated with the development of 
renal ­dysfunction.57-59
The administration of adequate IV fluids during the periop-
erative period results in a lower incidence of nausea, vomiting, 
and antiemetic use after minor or day case surgery.60 In major 
noncardiac surgical patients, the administration of HES 450 (in 
a balanced salt or normal saline solution, or a combination of 
balanced crystalloid and colloid) has been associated with less 
postoperative nausea, vomiting, and antiemetic use and earlier 
return of postoperative bowel function, as reflected by first con-
sumption of solid food, than the administration of 5% albumin, 
lactated Ringer’s solution, or normal saline alone.61 Studies of 
patients undergoing ambulatory surgery have shown that peri-
operative IV fluid administration decreases the incidence of 
dizziness, drowsiness, thirst, and headache.62 In a randomized 
crossover study of healthy volunteers, subjective deterioration 
in mental status (lassitude and difficulty in abstract thinking) 
was reported only by individuals who received 0.9% sodium 
chloride and not by those who received lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion.63 The possible effect of different IV fluid preparations on 
CNS function has not yet been fully explored.
The relative impact of crystalloids and/or colloids on pul-
monary function has been the subject of long-standing debate. 
No difference in postoperative pulmonary function was seen in 
cardiac surgery patients, orthopedic patients, or urologic surgery 
patients treated intraoperatively with different colloids.57,64,65 In 
a number of studies in major surgical patients that compared 
crystalloid (lactated Ringer’s solution) with colloid (HES 130/
NS, HES 450/NS, 5% albumin/BS),66-68 no difference was seen 
in the incidence or duration of mechanical ventilation or other 
indices of respiratory function. These findings suggest that the 
intraoperative administration of crystalloids does not have a 
detrimental effect on pulmonary function compared with the 
administration of colloids.
Transfusion of Red Blood Cells
ABO Blood Groups.  There are four different ABO groups, 
which are determined by whether or not an individual’s red 
blood cells (RBCs) carry the A antigen, the B antigen, both A 
and B antigens, or neither. From early in childhood, normal 
healthy individuals make antibodies against A or B antigens 
that are not expressed on their own cells. People who are group 
A have anti-B antibodies in their plasma, people who are group 
B have anti-A antibodies, people who are group O have anti-A 
and anti-B antibodies, and people who are group AB have nei-
ther of these antibodies. These naturally occurring antibodies 
are mainly immunoglobulin M that attack and rapidly destroy 
RBCs. Anti-A antibodies attack RBCs of group A (or AB), and 
anti-B antibodies attack RBCs of group B (or AB).
ABO-Incompatible Red Cell Transfusion.  If RBCs of the 
wrong group are transfused, in particular if group A RBCs are 
infused into a recipient who is group O, the recipient’s anti-A 
antibodies bind to the transfused cells. This activates the com-
plement pathways, which damages the red cell membranes and 
lyses the RBCs. Hemoglobin released from the damaged RBCs 
is toxic to the kidneys, while the fragments of ruptured cell 
membranes activate the blood-clotting pathways. The patient 
suffers acute renal failure and disseminated intravascular 
coagulation.
Basics of Red Blood Cell Compatibility.  Ensuring that 
the right blood group is transfused is imperative. It is essen-
tial to ensure that no ABO-incompatible RBC transfusion is 
ever given. This avoidable accident is likely to kill or harm 
the patient. Procedures in which compatibility is determined 
by establishing both transfusion recipient and donor blood 
ABO types via crossmatch analysis have evolved over years 
of clinical and laboratory experience to minimize the risk of 
this disastrous error. These procedures will continue to evolve 
as improved computerized systems are introduced to help staff 
avoid errors in blood administration.
Rhesus D Antigen and Antibody  In a white population, about 
15% will lack the Rhesus D (Rh D) antigen and are termed Rh D 
negative. Antibodies to Rh D antigen occur only in individuals 
who are Rh D negative and as a consequence of transfusion or 
pregnancy. Even small amounts of Rh D–positive cells entering 
the circulation of an Rh D–negative person can stimulate the 
production of antibodies to Rh D, usually immunoglobulin G.
Physiologic Response and Tolerance of Anemia.  O2 is 
carried in blood in two distinct forms: bound to hemoglobin 
(Hb) within the RBC and dissolved in the plasma. The actual 
oxygen content of arterial blood (Cao2) is determined by the 
concentration of Hb in the blood, the arterial oxygen saturation 
of Hb (Sao2), the O2-binding capacity of Hb, the Pao2, and the 
O2 solubility of plasma. These variables are interrelated and can 
be expressed in the following equation:
Cao2 = (Hb × Sao2 × Hb O2 binding capacity) + 
     (Pao2 × plasma O2 solubility).
Adult Hb consists of four protein chains, each carrying 
one heme group. One mole of Hb is able to bind to a maxi-
mum of 4 moles of O2. O2-binding capacity per gram of Hb is 
1.39 g/mL. The relationship between Pao2 and Hb O2 satura-
tion is shown in Fig. 46-12. The steep part of this curve (partial 
pressure of oxygen [Po2] 20–40 mmHg) facilitates O2 release 
from Hb. Tissue Po2 values of different organs are also shown 
in Fig. 46-12 and lie on this steep part of the curve, facilitating 
O2 release from Hb.
Hemodilution and Critical Hematocrit.  The intentional 
dilution of blood volume often is referred to as acute normo-
volemic hemodilution (ANH) anemia. ANH is a technique in 
which whole blood is removed from a patient, while the circu-
lating blood volume is maintained with acellular fluid. Blood is 
collected via central lines with simultaneous infusion of crys-
talloid or colloid solutions. Collected blood is reinfused after 
major blood loss has ceased, or sooner, if indicated. Blood units 
are reinfused in the reverse order of collection. Under conditions 
of ANH, the increased plasma compartment becomes an impor-
tant source of O2, which is delivered to the tissues.
1915
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Oxygenation is maintained by increased cardiac output 
and increased O2 extraction by the tissues, and when these 
compensatory mechanisms fail to match the O2 needs of the 
tissues, the “critical hematocrit” is said to have been reached. 
The critical hematocrit has been a source of debate for many 
years. A theoretical model was developed that describes the 
relation between hematocrit, myocardial O2 demand, and the 
required coronary blood flow during progressive hemodilu-
tion.69 Using this model, the determinants of critical hematocrit 
and the limits of ANH can be calculated based on the limits of 
coronary reserve. Because the critical hematocrit varies with O2 
consumption and degree of CAD, a fixed critical hematocrit as 
a transfusion trigger is not appropriate in most patients. Rather, 
the indication for blood transfusions must individually take 
into account the specific circumstances of the patient, such as 
expected blood loss and required O2 transport capacity reserves, 
hemodynamic stability, CAD, and systemic O2 consumption.
RECOVERY FROM ANESTHESIA
Reversal of Neuromuscular Blockade
The elimination of neuromuscular blocking agents from the 
body and subsequent resumption of neuromuscular transmission 
takes a considerable amount of time, even with drugs such as 
vecuronium that have relatively short half-lives. Additionally, 
it is time consuming to wait for complete spontaneous recovery 
at the end of a surgical procedure. Therefore, it has become rou-
tine to antagonize the neuromuscular block pharmacologically 
with the use of reversal agents. Reversal agents raise the 
­concentration of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine to a higher 
level than that of the neuromuscular blocking agent. This is 
accomplished by the use of anticholinesterase agents, which 
reduce the breakdown of acetylcholine. The most commonly 
used agents are neostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edrophonium.
Figure 46-12.  Oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve. O2 = 
­oxygen; Po2 = partial pressure of oxygen.
20
0
40
60
80
100
20
Oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve
PO2 (mmHg)
Percent O2 saturation of hemoglobin (Hb)
40
60
80
100
The common side effects of these three anticholinesterase 
agents are bradycardia, bronchial and intestinal smooth muscle 
contractions, and excessive secretions from salivary and bron-
chial glands. These effects are primarily mediated by effects 
on muscarinic receptors, which are effectively blocked by the 
concomitant use of antimuscarinic drugs such as atropine or gly-
copyrrolate. To ensure adequate ventilation postoperatively, it 
is important that the neuromuscular blocking agents are fully 
reversed, as assessed by monitoring twitch strength with a nerve 
stimulator and clinically correlating this with signs such as grip 
strength or 5-second head lift.
The Postanesthesia Care Unit
It is of primary importance that all patients awakening from 
anesthesia are followed in a recovery room, as approximately 
10% of all anesthetic accidents occur in the recovery period. 
As more serious surgeries are performed on older and sicker 
patients, the number of patients requiring postoperative ventila-
tion and medications to support their circulation increases with 
age. The new trend for postoperative pain control with continu-
ous epidural administration of local anesthetics and narcotics 
demands close observation, because respiratory depression can 
occur. In most hospitals, the number of intensive care beds is too 
small to accommodate the increasing number of these patients. 
What originally began as the recovery room now must function 
as an intensive care unit setting for short stays. The name “recov-
ery room” has been changed to postanesthetic care unit (PACU). 
A variety of physiologic disorders that can affect different organ 
systems need to be diagnosed and treated in the PACU during 
emergence from anesthesia and surgery. Postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV), airway support, and hypo-
tension requiring pharmacologic support have been observed to 
be the most frequent complications in the PACU.70 Abnormal 
bleeding, hypertension, dysrhythmia, myocardial infarction, and 
altered mental status are not uncommon.70
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
PONV typically occurs in 20% to 30% of surgical cases,71 with 
considerable variation in frequency reported between studies 
(range, 8%–92%).72 PONV is generally considered a transient, 
unpleasant event carrying little long-term morbidity; however, 
aspiration of emesis, gastric bleeding, and wound hematomas may 
occur with protracted or vigorous retching or vomiting. Trouble-
some PONV can prolong recovery room stay and hospitalization 
and is one of the most common causes of hospital admission fol-
lowing ambulatory surgery. Published evidence suggests that pro-
phylactic administration of antiemetics is not cost-effective in the 
surgical setting.73 Recent consensus guidelines using data from 
systematic reviews, randomized trials and studies, and logistic 
regression models have been published (Fig. 46-13).73
Agents usually administered for PONV are the serotonin 
receptor antagonists (e.g., ondansetron, dolasetron, granisetron, 
and tropisetron). The safety and efficacy of the compounds, 
when given at the end of surgery, are virtually identical.73,74 
Metoclopramide (not a true antiemetic), when used in the stan-
dard dose of 10 mg, is ineffective for PONV.75 Although some 
studies have shown higher doses (20 mg) to have some effect 
on PONV, most evidence suggests that the serotonin receptor 
antagonists are the most efficacious choice.
Pain: The Fifth Vital Sign
Analgesic research methodology has been enhanced since the 
1960s through the use of graduated and visual analog scales, 
4
1916
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
tools that permit the standardization of pain scores. One fre-
quently used graduated scale is a four-point measure of pain 
intensity (0 = no pain, 1 = mild pain, 2 = moderate pain, and 
3 = severe pain) and a five-point measure of relief (0 = no relief, 
1 = a little relief, 2 = some relief, 3 = a lot of relief, and 4 = 
complete relief).
Acute postoperative pain and its treatment (or prophy-
laxis) are significant challenges for the healthcare professional. 
Despite the recent development of new nonnarcotic analgesics 
and a better understanding of the side effects associated with 
pain medication of all types, acute postoperative pain remains 
a significant concern for patients and represents an extremely 
negative experience for patients undergoing surgery. Many 
patients experience pain in the postoperative period despite 
the use of potent techniques such as patient-controlled analge-
sia, epidural analgesia, and regional anesthesia. The culture of 
acceptance of postoperative pain is changing. The American 
Pain Society has advocated the assessment of pain as the fifth 
vital sign, along with temperature, pulse, blood pressure, and 
respiratory rate. The four vital signs provide a quick snapshot 
of a patient’s general condition, but pain management advo-
cates claim the picture is not complete without including pain 
as the fifth vital sign.
This approach may improve the efficacy of pain treatment. 
Many departments of anesthesiology support an active pain 
Figure 46-13.  Algorithm for the management of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV). (Reproduced with permission from 
Gan TJ, Meyer T, Apfel CC, et al: Consensus guidelines for manag-
ing postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2003;97:62.)
Not indicated
Initiate
combination
therapy
Evaluate risk of PONV
in surgical patient
Moderate
High
Low
No prophylaxis
unless there is risk
of medical sequelae 
from vomiting
Patient at
moderate risk
Patient at
high risk
If general anesthesia
is used, reduce
baseline risk factors
Consider anti-emetic therapy
with mono (adults) or combination
(children and adults) therapy
Consider regional
anesthesia
service and provide consultation for postoperative pain relief, 
including the administration of nerve blocks.
MULTIMODAL ANALGESIA
Opioids, long the staple of postoperative pain management, 
reduce pain by acting on the μ-receptor. Analgesia is accom-
panied by unwanted side effects also promulgated by the 
μ-receptor (e.g., sedation, nausea and vomiting, constipation, 
respiratory depression). Reducing opioid use and those side 
effects by the addition of nonopioid analgesics is called mul-
timodal analgesia.76 Analine derivatives (IV acetaminophen),77 
NSAIDs like celecoxib78 and ketorolac,79 steroids (dexametha-
sone),80 and anticonvulsants (gabapentin and pregabalin)81,82 
have all been used as opioid-sparing methods to attenuate post-
operative pain. The best mixture of drugs is yet to be found; 
continued work is necessary to find the idea combination.83
Regional analgesia, (i.e., nerve blocks) is an effective 
method for reducing postoperative pain while minimizing opi-
oid consumption. Nerve blocks can be of the upper or lower 
extremities, truncal, epidural, or paravertebral (Fig. 46-14).
THE TRANSVERSUS ABDOMINIS PLANE BLOCK
The transversus abdominal plane (TAP) block is truncal regional 
analgesia that results in analgesia to the anterior abdominal 
wall and has rapidly gained popularity. Pain secondary to 
any transgression of the abdominal wall can be attenuated by 
a TAP block, including laparoscopic procedures84; vertical or 
Pfannenstiel incisions; inguinal,85 incisional, or umbilical her-
nia repair; hysterectomy; cholecystectomy; and appendectomy 
(Figs. 46-15–46-18).86-88
Somatic nerves supplying the abdominal wall travel in the 
plane between the internal oblique muscle and the transversus 
abdominis muscle (Fig. 46-19). Injection of local anesthetic into 
this plane under ultrasound guidance results in pain relief for 
8 to 12 hours (Figs. 46-20–46-22).
Figure 46-14.  Use of ultrasound to identify the popliteal nerve for 
analgesia of the ankle.
1917
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
Figure 46-15.  Kidney transplant recipient incisions.
Figure 46-16.  Inguinal hernia incisions.
Figure 46-17.  Laparoscopy incisions.
Figure 46-18.  Pain from these incisions is reduced by transversus 
abdominal plane block.
Figure 46-19.  Sensory nerves travel to the 
anterior abdominal wall in the plane between 
the internal oblique and transversus abdominis 
muscles. (Reproduced with permission from 
Ultrasound for Regional Anesthesia website, 
www.usra.ca.)
Rectus
abdominis
External oblique
muscle and
aponeurosis
Transversus abdominis
Internal oblique
Latissimus Dorsi
Triangle of Petit
Iliac crest
1918
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 46-20.  The use of ultrasound to perform a transversus 
abdominal plane block.
External oblique
Internal oblique
Transversus abdominus
Figure 46-21.  Ultrasound view of external oblique, internal 
oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles.
External oblique
Internal oblique
Local anesthestic
Transversus abdominus
Needle tip
Figure 46-22.  Ultrasound image of local anesthetic above the 
transversus abdominis.
MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a hereditary, life-threatening, 
hypermetabolic acute disorder, developing during or after 
receiving general anesthesia.89 The clinical incidence of MH is 
about 1:12,000 in children and 1:40,000 in adults. A genetic 
predisposition and one or more triggering agents are necessary 
to evoke MH. Triggering agents include all volatile anesthet-
ics (e.g., halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and 
desflurane) and the depolarizing muscle relaxant succinylcho-
line. Volatile anesthetics and/or succinylcholine cause a rise in 
the myoplasmic calcium concentration in susceptible patients, 
resulting in persistent muscle contraction.
MH is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with 
several gene loci, predominantly the ryanodine receptor gene 
RYR1. MH can be diagnosed with the caffeine-contracture halo-
thane test (which requires muscle biopsy). Genetic testing is 
helpful after the fact; there is no simple reliable blood screening 
test yet available.
The classic MH crisis entails a hypermetabolic state, 
tachycardia, and the elevation of end-tidal CO2 in the face of 
constant minute ventilation. Respiratory and metabolic aci-
dosis and muscle rigidity follow, as well as rhabdomyolysis, 
arrhythmias, hyperkalemia, and sudden cardiac arrest. A rise 
in temperature is often a late sign of MH. Treatment must be 
aggressive and begin as soon as a case of MH is suspected:
• Call for help.
• Stop all volatile anesthetics and give 100% O2.
• Hyperventilate the patient up to three times the calculated 
minute volume.
• Give bicarbonate to treat acidosis if dantrolene is ­ineffective.
• Treat hyperkalemia with insulin, glucose, and calcium.
• Avoid calcium channel blockers
• Begin infusion of dantrolene sodium, 2.5 mg/kg IV. Repeat 
as necessary, titrating to clinical signs of MH. Repeat dan-
trolene at 1 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours at least twice, and 
monitor the patient in an intensive care unit setting for 
24 hours or more for possible recrudescence.
• Call the MH hotline to report the case and get advice: 1-888-
274-7899.
FUTURE DIRECTION OF ANESTHESIA
The general mantra of “gene therapy is the future of medicine” 
must be more specifically related to how those genes create, 
shape, and regulate proteins. The study of how proteins manifest 
their activity and/or concentration is called proteomics (from 
proteome—a fusion of “protein” and “genome”).
As the technology advances to biologically identify indi-
vidual proteins, studies of individual levels of proteomes will 
allow the study of disease processes on the molecular 
level, directly aiding diagnosis and therapeutics.90 
Specifically to the field of anesthesiology, the technology 
of proteomics will be used to elucidate the actual mechanism of 
action of our anesthetic drugs and how these drugs have differ-
ing effects on different individuals. There will be a day when a 
5
1919
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
buccal swab in the preoperative clinic will become routine, with 
the results telling us which opioids carry the fewest side effects 
for that particular patient, for example, or which antiemetics 
are most effective, or which postoperative analgesics to use—a 
tailored anesthetic.
Recent studies in mice have examined the α5 subunit of 
the GABA receptor, which appears to regulate memory. The 
human genome is polymorphic for the α5 gene; because each 
variant may manifest in different amounts of memory/amnesia, 
proteomics may someday lead to tests that determine the pro-
pensity of a particular patient to experience awareness and allow 
us to tailor the anesthetic even further.91
Genetic testing for cytochrome P450 deficiencies is now 
commercially available.92 As the number of enzymes able to be 
tested increases, we will be able to choose the most appropriate 
match between drug and patient.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Darwin F, Darwin C. The Autobiography of Charles Darwin. 
Kallista, Victoria, Australia: Totem Books; 2003:12.
2.	Calverly RK. Anesthesia as a specialty: past, present, and 
future. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, eds. Clinical 
Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1996:6.
3.	Bigelow HJ. Insensibility during surgical operations produced 
by inhalation. Boston Med Surgical J. 1846;35:356.
4.	Vandam LD. History of anesthetic practice. In: Miller RD, 
ed. Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000:7.
5.	Meade RH. An Introduction to the History of General Surgery. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co; 1968:78.
6.	Rushman GB, Davies NJH, Atkinson RS. A Short History of 
Anaesthesia. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1998:140.
7.	Hall RJ. Hydrochlorate of cocaine. NY Med J. 1884;40:643.
8.	Rushman GB, Davies NJH, Atkinson RS. A Short History of 
Anaesthesia. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1998:145.
9.	Griffith HR, Johnson GE. The use of curare in general anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology. 1942;3:418.
10.	Stoelting RK, Miller RD. Basics of Anesthesia. Philadelphia: 
Churchill-Livingstone; 2000:436.
11.	Hull CJ. Principles of pharmacokinetics. In: Hemmings 
H, Hopkins PM, eds. Foundations of Anesthesia. London: 
Mosby; 2000:77.
12.	Stoelting RD, Dierdorf SF. Stoelting’s Anesthesia and Co-
Existing Disease. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008.
13.	Royston D, Cox F. Anaesthesia: the patient’s point of view. 
Lancet. 2003;362:1648-1658.
14.	Chandrasekharan NV, Dai H, Roos KL, et al. COX-3, a 
­cyclooxygenase-1 variant inhibited by acetaminophen and 
other analgesic/antipyretic drugs: cloning, structure, and 
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:13926-13931.
15.	Savarese JJ, Caldwell JE, Lien CA, et al. Pharmacology of 
muscle relaxants and their antagonists. In: Miller RD, ed. 
Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000:414.
16.	Butterworth JF IV. Local anesthetics and regional anesthesia. 
In: Hemmings H, Hopkins PM, eds. Foundations of Anesthe-
sia. London: Mosby; 2000:298.
17.	Kaplan EB, Sheiner LB, Boeckmann AJ, et al. The useful-
ness of preoperative laboratory screening. JAMA. 1985;253: 
3576-3581.
18.	Cullen DJ, Apolone G, Greenfield S, et al. ASA physical status 
and age predict morbidity after three surgical procedures. Ann 
Surg. 1994;220:3-9.
19.	Mangano DT, Goldman L. Preoperative assessment of patients 
with known or suspected coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
1995;333:1750-1756.
20.	Wong T, Detsky AS. Preoperative cardiac risk assessment for 
patients having peripheral vascular surgery. Ann Intern Med. 
1992;116:743-753.
21.	Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, et al. Derivation 
and prospective validation of a simple index for prediction 
of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery. Circulation. 
1999;100:1043-1049.
22.	 Kleinman B, Henkin RE, Glisson SN, et al. Qualitative eval-
uation of coronary flow during anesthetic induction using 
thallium-201 perfusion scans. Anesthesiology. 1986;64: 
157-164.
23.	Smetana GW. Preoperative pulmonary evaluation. N Engl J 
Med. 1999;340:937-944.
24.	Zollinger AH, C Pasch T. Preoperative pulmonary evaluation: 
facts and myths. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2002;14:59-63.
25.	Warner DO, Warner MA, Offord KP, et al. Airway obstruc-
tion and perioperative complications in smokers undergoing 
abdominal surgery. Anesthesiology. 1999;90:372-379.
26.	Mutlu GM, Factor P, Schwartz DE, et al. Severe status asth-
maticus: management with permissive hypercapnia and inha-
lation anesthesia. Crit Care Med. 2002;30:477-480.
27.	Scalfaro P, Sly PD, Sims C, et al. Salbutamol prevents the 
increase of respiratory resistance caused by tracheal intubation 
during sevoflurane anesthesia in asthmatic children. Anesth 
Analg. 2001;93:898-902.
28.	Groeben H, Schlicht M, Stieglitz S, et al. Both local anesthet-
ics and salbutamol pretreatment affect reflex bronchoconstric-
tion in volunteers with asthma undergoing awake fiberoptic 
intubation. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:1445-1450.
29.	Byrick RJ, Rose DK. Pathophysiology and prevention of 
acute renal failure: the role of the anesthetist. Can J Anaesth. 
1990;37:457-467.
30.	Elliott RH, Strunin L. Hepatotoxicity of volatile anaesthetics. 
Br J Anaesth. 1993;70:339-348.
31.	Njoku D, Laster MJ, Gong DH, et al. Biotransformation of 
halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, and desflurane trifluoroacety-
lated liver proteins: association between protein acylation and 
hepatic injury. Anesth Analg. 1997;84:173-178.
32.	Eldridge AJ, Sear JW. Peri-operative management of diabetic 
patients. Any changes for the better since 1985? Anaesthesia. 
1996;51:45-51.
33.	McAnulty GR, Robertshaw HJ, Hall GM. Anaesthetic man-
agement of patients with diabetes mellitus. Br J Anaesth. 
2000;85:80-90.
34.	Risum O, Abdelnoor M, Svennevig JL, et al. Diabetes mel-
litus and morbidity and mortality risks after coronary artery 
bypass surgery. Scand J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;30: 
71-75.
35.	Zacharias A, Habib RH. Factors predisposing to median ster-
notomy complications. Deep vs. superficial infection. Chest. 
1996;110:1173-1178.
36.	Halter JB, Pflug AE. Effects of anesthesia and surgical stress 
on insulin secretion in man. Metabolism. 1980;29:1124-1127.
37.	Thorell A, Nygren J, Hirshman MF, et al. Surgery-induced 
insulin resistance in human patients: Relation to glucose trans-
port and utilization. Am J Physiol. 1999;276:E754-E761.
38.	Das UN. Is insulin an endogenous cardioprotector? Crit Care. 
2002;6:389-393.
39.	Das UN. Insulin and inflammation: further evidence and dis-
cussion. Nutrition. 2002;18:526-527.
40.	Das UN. Insulin and the critically ill. Crit Care. 2002;6: 
262-263.
41.	Hall GM. The anaesthetic modification of the endocrine 
and metabolic response to surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 
1985;67:25-29.
42.	Weinberg AD, Brennan MD, Gorman CA, et al. Outcome of 
anesthesia and surgery in hypothyroid patients. Arch Intern 
Med. 1983;143:893-897.
1920
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
43.	Murkin JM. Anesthesia and hypothyroidism: a review of thy-
roxine physiology, pharmacology, and anesthetic implications. 
Anesth Analg. 1982;61:371-383.
44.	Adams JP, Murphy PG. Obesity in anaesthesia and inten-
sive care. Br J Anaesth. 2000;85:91-108.
45.	Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Hirsch J. Obesity. N Engl J Med. 
1997;337:396-407.
46.	Bouillon T, Shafer SL. Does size matter? Anesthesiology. 
1998;89:557-560.
47.	Pinaud M, Lelausque JN, Chetanneau A, et al. Effects of pro-
pofol on cerebral hemodynamics and metabolism in patients 
with brain trauma. Anesthesiology. 1990;73:404-409.
48.	Strebel S, Kaufmann M, Guardiola PM, et al. Cerebral vaso-
motor responsiveness to carbon dioxide is preserved during 
propofol and midazolam anesthesia in humans. Anesth Analg. 
1994;78:884-888.
49.	 Reddy RV, Moorthy SS, Dierdorf SF, et al. Excitatory effects 
and electroencephalographic correlation of etomidate, thiopental, 
methohexital, and propofol. Anesth Analg. 1993;77:1008-1011.
50.	Sperry RJ, Bailey PL, Reichman MV, et al. Fentanyl and suf-
entanil increase intracranial pressure in head trauma patients. 
Anesthesiology. 1992;77:416-420.
51.	American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Man-
agement of the Difficult Airway. Practice guidelines for 
management of the difficult airway: an updated report 
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Management of the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 
2003;98:1269-1277.
52.	Bennett-Guerrero EFR, Mets B, Manspeizer HE, et al. Impact 
of normal saline based versus balanced salt intravenous fluid 
replacement on clinical outcomes: a randomized blinded trial. 
Anesth Analg. 2001;95:A147.
53.	Gan T. Randomized comparison of coagulation profile when 
Hextend or 5% albumin is used for intraoperative fluid resus-
citation. Anesth Analg. 2001;95:A193.
54.	Petroni KG, Brimingham S. Hextend is a safe alternative to 
5% albumin for patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 2001;95:A198.
55.	Waters JH, Gottlieb A, Schoenwald P, et al. Normal saline ver-
sus lactated Ringer’s solution for intraoperative fluid manage-
ment in patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: 
an outcome study. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:817-822.
56.	Gan TJ, Bennett-Guerrero E, Phillips-Bute B, et al. Hextend, 
a physiologically balanced plasma expander for large volume 
use in major surgery: a randomized phase III clinical trial. 
Hextend Study Group. Anesth Analg. 1999;88:992-998.
57.	Gallandat Huet RC, Siemons AW, Baus D, et al. A novel 
hydroxyethyl starch (Voluven) for effective perioperative 
plasma volume substitution in cardiac surgery. Can J Anaesth. 
2000;47:1207-1215.
58.	Cittanova ML, Leblanc I, Legendre C, et al. Effect of hydroxy-
ethylstarch in brain-dead kidney donors on renal function in 
kidney-transplant recipients. Lancet. 1996;348:1620-1622.
59.	Schortgen F, Lacherade JC, Bruneel F, et al. Effects of 
hydroxyethylstarch and gelatin on renal function in severe 
sepsis: a multicentre randomised study. Lancet. 2001;357: 
911-916.
60.	Elhakim M, el-Sebiae S, Kaschef N, et al. Intravenous fluid 
and postoperative nausea and vomiting after day-case termina-
tion of pregnancy. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1998;42:216-219.
61.	Gan TJ, Soppitt A, Maroof M, et al. Goal-directed intraopera-
tive fluid administration reduces length of hospital stay after 
major surgery. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:820-826.
62.	Yogendran S, Asokumar B, Cheng DC, et al. A prospective 
randomized double-blinded study of the effect of intravenous 
fluid therapy on adverse outcomes on outpatient surgery. 
Anesth Analg. 1995;80:682-686.
63.	Williams EL, Hildebrand KL, McCormick SA, et al. The 
effect of intravenous lactated Ringer’s solution versus 0.9% 
sodium chloride solution on serum osmolality in human vol-
unteers. Anesth Analg. 1999;88:999-1003.
64.	Vogt NH, Bothner U, Lerch G, et al. Large-dose administra-
tion of 6% hydroxyethyl starch 200/0.5 total hip arthroplasty: 
plasma homeostasis, hemostasis, and renal function compared 
to use of 5% human albumin. Anesth Analg. 1996;83:262-268.
65.	Vogt N, Bothner U, Brinkmann A, et al. Peri-operative tol-
erance to large-dose 6% HES 200/0.5 in major urological 
procedures compared with 5% human albumin. Anaesthesia. 
1999;54:121-127.
66.	Lang K, Boldt J, Suttner S, et al. Colloids versus crystal-
loids and tissue oxygen tension in patients undergoing major 
abdominal surgery. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:405-409.
67.	Marik PE, Iglesias J, Maini B. Gastric intramucosal pH 
changes after volume replacement with hydroxyethyl starch 
or crystalloid in patients undergoing elective abdominal aortic 
aneurysm repair. J Crit Care. 1997;12:51-55.
68.	Virgilio RW, Rice CL, Smith DE, et al. Crystalloid vs. col-
loid resuscitation: is one better? A randomized clinical study. 
Surgery. 1979;85:129-139.
69.	Hoeft A, Wietasch JK, Sonntag H, et al. Theoretical limits of 
“permissive anemia.” Zentralbl Chir. 1995;120:604-613.
70.	Hines R, Barash PG, Watrous G, et al. Complications occur-
ring in the postanesthesia care unit: a survey. Anesth Analg. 
1992;74:503-509.
71.	Watcha MF, White PF. Postoperative nausea and vomit-
ing. Its etiology, treatment, and prevention. Anesthesiology. 
1992;77:162-184.
72.	Camu F, Lauwers MH, Verbessem D. Incidence and aetiol-
ogy of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
1992;9:25-31.
73.	Gan TJ, Meyer T, Apfel CC, et al. Consensus guidelines for 
managing postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 
2003;97:62-71.
74.	Sun R, Klein KW, White PF. The effect of timing of ondanse-
tron administration in outpatients undergoing otolaryngologic 
surgery. Anesth Analg. 1997;84:331-336.
75.	Henzi I, Walder B, Tramer MR. Metoclopramide in the pre-
vention of postoperative nausea and vomiting: a quantitative 
systematic review of randomized, placebo-controlled studies. 
Br J Anaesth. 1999;83:761-771.
76.	Kehlet H, Dahl JB. The value of “multimodal” or “balanced 
analgesia” in postoperative pain treatment. Anesth Analg. 
1993;77:1048-1056.
77.	Gorocs TS, Lambert M, Rinne T, Krekler M, Modell S. Effi-
cacy and tolerability of ready-to use intravenous paracetamol 
solution as monotherapy or as an adjunct analgesic therapy 
for postoperative pain in patients undergoing elective ambu-
latory surgery: open, prospective study. Int J Clin Pract. 
2009;63:112-120.
78.	Sun T, Sacan O, Whit PF, et al. Perioperative vs. postopera-
tive celecoxib on patient outcome after major plastic surgery 
procedures. Anesth Analg. 2008;106:950-958.
79.	De Oliveira GS, Agarwal D, Benzon HT. Perioperative single 
dose ketorolac to prevent postoperative pain: a meta-analysis 
of randomized trials. Anesth Analg. 2012;114:424-433.
80.	Coloma M, Duffy LL, White PF, Kendall Tongier W, Huber 
PJ Jr. Dexamethasone facilitates discharge after outpatient 
anorectal surgery. Anesh Analg. 2001;92:85-88.
81.	Clarke H, Pereira S, Kennedy D, et al. Gabapentin decreases 
morphine consumption and improves functional recov-
ery following total knee arthroplasty. Pain Res Manage. 
2009;14:217-222.
82.	Agarwal A, Gautam S, Gupta D, et al. Evaluation of a single 
preoperative dose of pregabalin for attenuation of postoperative 
1921
Anesthesia for the Surgical Patient
CHAPTER 46
pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Anaesth. 
2008;101:700-704.
83.	Buvanendran A, Kroin JS. Multimodal analgesia for con-
trolling acute postoperative pain. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2009;22:588-593.
84.	Chetwood A, Agrawal S, Hrouda D, Doyle P. Laparoscopic 
assisted transversus abdominal plane block: a novel insertion 
technique during laparoscopic nephrectomy. Anaesthesia. 
2011;66:317-318.
85.	Heil JW, Ilfeld BM, Loland VJ, Sandhu NS, Mariano ER. 
Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane catheters and 
ambulatory perineural infusions for outpatient inguinal hernia 
repair. Reg Anesthes Pain Med. 2010;35:556-558.
86.	McDonnell JG, Laffey JG. Transversus abdominis plane 
block. Anesthes Analg. 2007;105:883.
87.	Bharti N, Kumar P, Bala I, Gupta V. The efficacy of a novel 
approach to transversus abdominis plane block for postop-
erative analgesia after colorectal surgery. Anesthes Analg. 
2011;112:1504-1508.
88.	Mukhtar K, Khattak I. Transversus abdominis plane blocks for 
renal transplant recipients. Br J Anaesth. 2010;104:663-664.
89.	Rosenberg H, Davis M, James D, Pollock N, Stowell K. 
Malignant hyperthermia. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007;2:21
90.	Atkins JH, Johansson JS. Technologies to shape the future: 
proteomics applications in anesthesiology and critical care 
medicine. Anesth Analg. 2006;102:1207-1216.
91.	Orser BA, Mazer CD, Baker AJ. Awareness during anesthesia. 
CMAJ. 2008;178:185-188.
92.	Tennant F. Interpretations and actions following cytochrome 
P450 testing. Practical Pain Manage. 2013;47-50.
This page intentionally left blank 
Surgical Considerations  
in the Elderly
Rosemarie E. Hardin and Michael E. Zenilman
47
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
As our population ages, a dramatic increase is anticipated in 
the number of geriatric patients that will require various surgi-
cal interventions. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that the 
number of people age 65 years and older will double between 
2010 and 2050.1 By 2030, people 65 years of age or older will 
account for 20% of the overall population. Furthermore, half 
of all Americans currently alive can expect to reach the ninth 
decade of life.2 Geriatric patients represent a unique surgical 
challenge due to the complexity of comorbid conditions coupled 
with the physiologic changes that occur with aging. As a result 
of these considerations, and in response to research and special-
ized care protocols which are tailored for its age range, geriatric 
surgery has emerged as a subspecialty of surgery much as pedi-
atric surgery developed decades ago.
Physiologic age is of greater importance in periopera-
tive management of elderly surgical patients than chronologic 
age because it takes into account the burden of comorbid dis-
ease. It is, therefore, an accurate predictor of postoperative 
morbidity and mortality. The hallmark of physiologic aging 
or ­“senescence” is decreased functional reserve of critical 
organ systems, resulting in the decreased ability of these sys-
tems to respond to a challenge, with surgical stress being a 
prime example. The age of 70 years is typically accepted as 
the start of senescence because age-related organ dysfunction 
and the development of comorbid conditions sharply increases 
between ages 70 and 75 years.3 This criterion for senescence is 
in ­contrast to clinical studies published just 50 years ago that 
categorized elderly patients as those over the age of 55 years. 
With improved technologies and expanded criteria for surgical 
interventions in extremely aged patients, increased awareness 
of the special needs of this population is required to ensure a 
comprehensive preoperative assessment, delivery of optimal 
surgical care, and minimization of postoperative complications. 
It is also critical that a multidisciplinary approach be developed, 
which involves the patient and their home caregivers, geriatric 
physicians, surgeons, and, at times, specialists in intensive care.
It is estimated that, by the year 2030, there will be 70 million 
people >65 years old in the United States, a stark increase over 
the 35 million in 2000.4 This ever growing elderly population 
will increasingly require surgical care, and patients >65 years 
old already account for approximately 60% of the general sur-
geon’s workload.5 Patients >65 years old account for approxi-
mately 50% of all emergent operations and 75% of operative 
mortality.4 These statistics challenge a surgeon to have an 
­in-depth understanding of the careful perioperative evaluation 
required in elderly patients and the tailoring of surgical inter-
ventions based on the unique changes in physiologic reserve 
and comorbid conditions that make elderly patients more 
susceptible to postoperative complications.
The goal of this chapter is to highlight salient management 
strategies for aged surgical patients to achieve optimal care and 
reduce postoperative complications. Particular problems in the 
elderly population which impact on surgical care include the 
potential delay in surgical treatment due to a missed or delayed 
diagnosis secondary to an atypical presentation of disease, and 
the postponement of needed elective surgery because of the mis-
conception that an elderly patient will suffer a poor outcome 
as a result of advanced age alone. For example, elective ingui-
nal and umbilical hernia repairs are often postponed due to age 
bias; this can lead to potentially devastating consequences of 
bowel ischemia, gangrene, and perforation, to which elderly 
patients respond poorly. As a result, emergency hernia repairs 
are among the most common procedures performed in older 
patients; approximately 40% of hernia repairs are performed for 
incarceration or bowel obstruction in patients >65 years old.5 
Emergency repair of hernias is associated with an increased 
morbidity rate of approximately 50% and a mortality rate rang-
ing between 8% to 14%; a significant increase from the 2% 
mortality rate following elective repair in age-matched patients.5
Another significant consideration with the geriatric popu-
lation is the need to balance optimal health care delivery with ris-
ing health care costs. The goal of surgical therapy in the elderly 
is to provide needed interventions which result in maximum 
benefit to the patient without compromising quality of life or 
General Considerations	
1923
Physiology of Aging	
1924
Surgery in the Elderly	
1924
Preoperative Assessment	
1926
Specific Considerations	
1929
Cardiovascular / 1929
Valve Replacement / 1930
Cancer / 1931
Breast Cancer / 1932
Colorectal Cancer / 1933
Lung Cancer / 1933
Trauma / 1934
Minimally Invasive Surgery	
1935
Laparoscopy / 1935
Endovascular Surgery / 1936
Thyroid Surgery	
1936
Parathyroid Surgery	
1937
Palliative Surgery	
1938
The Role of the Surgeon  
in Geriatric Patients  
Is Not Limited to the OR	
1938
chapter 
1
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
unwanted adverse outcomes. For example, screening for breast 
or colorectal cancer should be performed if the patient has a rea-
sonable expectation of quality and quantity of life. An extensive 
and/or invasive workup should not be performed if the patient 
would not tolerate the anticipated therapeutic intervention.
Finally, a fifth of elderly patients die in ICU settings 
and half of them require mechanical ventilation and a quarter 
undergo cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the days before their 
death.6 Although Medicare expenditures in the last year of life 
are approximately five times higher than in nonterminal years, 
the actual quality of care at the end of life is often poor due to 
debilitating and persistent symptoms. Even more worrisome is 
the fact that some patients receive treatments which are incon-
sistent with their preferences for end of life measures. An addi-
tional component of geriatric surgery is therefore the provision 
of compassionate care that is more focused on symptomatic 
relief than on cure in patients who are near the end of life.
PHYSIOLOGY OF AGING
Elderly surgical patients are a heterogeneous cohort with vari-
ous degrees of functional impairments and comorbid burdens. 
The “young old patient” may lead an active lifestyle with few, 
if any, comorbid conditions. But even for this seemingly healthy 
individual, it is crucial to remember that there are inherent phys-
iologic changes that occur with aging and which affect every 
organ system. These physiologic changes may become more 
apparent and clinically consequential with the stress of major 
illness and operative interventions.
An important criterion in the geriatric surgery patient is 
the frailty score. Frailty is a syndrome associated with advanced 
age that results from decreased physiologic reserve and which 
makes patients less resistant to major stressors such as inva-
sive surgical procedures. Frail patients are prone to poorer 
outcomes, due to falls, disability, impaired ability to perform 
activities of daily living (ADLs), prolonged hospitalizations and 
an increase in mortality.1 Frail patients are more likely to require 
discharge to skilled nursing facilitiespostoperatively. Prior to 
surgery,frailpatients and their family members should be aware 
of this possibility. Therefore, the frailty score is a more accurate 
representation of the patient’s physiologic age.
Chronologic age is rarely an accurate predictor of mor-
bidity and mortality from surgical interventions. It is, however, 
an accurate marker for declining physiologic reserve and the 
likelihood of the presence of comorbid conditions. These place 
elderly patients at higher risk because of impaired cardiac, pul-
monary, renal, and neurological reserves, which increase the 
morbidity and mortality risk of surgical interventions. Physi-
ologic age, in addition to comorbid conditions, more accurately 
predicts surgical outcomes in the elderly than chronologic age. 
The physiologic changes of aging are summarized in Table 47-1.
The terms “frailty,” “disability” and “comorbidity” have 
mistakenly been used interchangeably. These terms have very 
different connotations for the geriatric patient. Disability is 
defined as dependence on assistance with ADLs, and contrib-
utes to the risk of frailty. Comorbidity is defined as the pres-
ence of two or more existing diseases, and is quantified by the 
Charlson comorbidity index.7 Geriatric assessment markers for 
frailty and disability include cognition, albumin level, history 
of falls, hematocrit level, and dependance on assistance with 
ADLs. These objective measures have been shown to predict six 
month postoperative mortality or the need for long term institu-
tionalized care after surgery.7 (Table 47-2)
SURGERY IN THE ELDERLY
It is critical in the assessment of any elderly patient to maintain a 
high index of suspicion for surgical pathology. Elderly patients 
often present with atypical symptoms and/or a misleadingly 
benign-appearing abdominal examination that may mask an 
intra-abdominal catastrophe. The effects of age-related impair-
ments in immune function can be compounded by co-existent 
medical problems and altered mentation as a result of dementia, 
drugs, infection, or dehydration.
Acute appendicitis and acute cholecystitis are clas-
sic examples of common acute surgical pathologies in which 
elderly patients have a delay in diagnosis or misdiagnosis. This 
often leads to higher rates of perforation and complications that 
adversely affect morbidity and mortality.8 Biliary tract disease, 
including acute cholecystitis, is the most common indication 
for surgical intervention in the elderly. This is likely related to 
age-related changes within the biliary system, such as increased 
lithogenicity of bile and an increased prevalence of cholelithiasis. 
Delayed diagnosis due to atypical or misleading symptoms may 
lead to complications such as ascending cholangitis, gallbladder 
perforation, or gallstone ileus.
1924
Key Points
1 	 Frailty, dementia, and geriatric syndromes have recently been 
identified as major factors in the development of postoperative 
complications in the elderly.
2 	 Emergency surgery in the elderly carries a mortality rate that 
is 3 to 4 times that seen after elective surgery.
3 	 Impaired cardiac function is responsible for more than half of 
the postoperative deaths in elderly patients, so careful attention 
must be paid to intravascular volume status in the periopera-
tive period.
4 	 In elderly patients with acute appendicitis or acute cholecysti-
tis, one-third lack fever, one-third lack an elevated white blood 
cell count, and one-third lack physical findings of peritonitis.
5 	 Physiologic age, not chronologic age, is the consequence 
of diminished functional reserve due to comorbid condi-
tions, and is the major predictor of perioperative morbidity 
and mortality in the elderly.
6 	 Laparoscopic approaches to surgical management, includ-
ing the use of exploratory laparoscopy to rule out surgical 
disease, are associated with fewer complications and more 
rapid recovery in the elderly.
7 	 New tools exist to help assess perioperative risk in geriatric 
patients, in addition to medical comorbidities. They include 
identification of geriatric syndromes, frailty indicators.
1925
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
Table 47-1
Physiologic limitations of aging, their clinical consequences, and “best practices” in the elderly 
surgical patient.
Age-Related Changes
Clinical Consequences
Best Practices
Body Composition
•  Significantly decreased muscle mass, 
accounting for much of decreased lean 
tissue mass
•  Increased fat mass
•  Erosion of muscle mass during acute 
illness may result in strength rapidly 
falling below important clinical 
thresholds (e.g., impaired coughing, 
decreased mobility, increased risk of 
venous thrombosis)
•  Altered volumes of drug distribution
•  Maintain physical function through 
effective pain relief, avoiding tubes, 
drains, and other “restraints,” early 
mobilization, and assistance with 
mobilization.
•  Minimize fasting, provide early 
nutritional supplementation or support 
(both protein-calorie and micronutrient).
•  Adjust drug dosages for volume of 
distribution.
Respiratory
•  Decreased vital capacity
•  Increased closing volume
•  Decreased airway sensitivity and 
clearance
•  Decreased partial pressure of oxygen
•  Less effective cough
•  Predisposition to aspiration
•  Increased closure of small airways 
during tidal respiration, especially 
postoperatively and when supine, 
leading to increased atelectasis and 
shunting
•  Predisposition to hypoxemia
•  Provide early mobilization, assumption 
of upright rather than supine position.
•  Ensure effective pain relief to allow 
mobilization, deep breathing.
•  Provide routine supplemental oxygen in 
the immediate postoperative period, and 
then, as needed.
•  Minimize use of nasogastric tubes.
Cardiovascular
•  Decreased maximal heart rate, cardiac 
output, ejection fraction 
•  Reliance on increased end-diastolic 
volume to increase cardiac output
•  Slowed ventricular filling, increased 
reliance on atrial contribution
•  Decreased baroreceptor sensitivity
•  Thermoregulation
•  Diminished sensitivity to ambient 
temperature and less efficient 
mechanisms of heat conservation, 
production, and dissipation
•  Febrile responses to infection may be 
blunted in frail or malnourished elderly 
and those at extreme old age.
•  Greater reliance on ventricular filling 
and increases in stroke volume (rather 
than ejection fraction) to achieve 
increases in cardiac output
•  Intolerant of hypovolemia
•  Intolerant of tachycardia, dysrhythmias, 
including atrial fibrillation
•  Predisposition to hypothermia (e.g., 
decline in body temperature during 
surgery is more marked unless 
preventive measures are taken)
•  If there is hypothermia, shivering 
may result, associated with marked 
increases in oxygen consumption and 
cardiopulmonary demands.
•  Fever may be absent despite serious 
infection, especially in frail elderly.
•  Use vigorous fluid resuscitation to 
achieve optimal ventricular filling.
•  Nonvasoconstricting inotropes and 
afterload reduction may be more 
effective, if pharmacologic support is 
required.
•  Use active measures to maintain 
normothermia during surgical 
procedures and to rewarm after trauma: 
warmed IV fluids, humidified gases, 
warm air.
•  Maintaining intraoperative 
normothermia reduces wound 
infections, adverse cardiac events, and 
length of hospital stay.
•  Be aware of hypothermia in trauma 
resuscitation.
(Continued )
1926
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Table 47-1
Physiologic limitations of aging, their clinical consequences, and “best practices” in the elderly 
surgical patient.
Renal function, fluid-electrolyte homeostasis
•  Decreased sensitivity to fluid, 
electrolyte perturbations
•  Decreased efficiency of solute, water 
conservation, and excretion
•  Decreased renal mass, renal blood flow, 
and glomerular filtration rate
•  Increased renal glucose threshold
•  Predisposition to hypovolemia
•  Predisposition to electrolyte disorders, 
(e.g., hyponatremia)
•  Predisposition to hyperglycemia
•  Predisposition to hyperosmolar states
•  Pay meticulous attention to fluid and 
electrolyte management.
•  Recognize that a “normal” serum 
creatinine value reflects decreased 
creatinine clearance because muscle 
mass (i.e., creatinine production) is 
decreased concurrently.
•  Select drugs carefully: Avoid those 
that may be nephrotoxic (e.g., 
aminoglycosides) or adversely affect 
renal blood flow (e.g., NSAIDs).
•  Adjust drug dosages as appropriate for 
altered pharmacokinetics.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Watters JM: Surgery in the elderly. Can J Surg 45:106, 2002. © 2002 Canadian Medical Association.
Elderly patients with acute peritonitis may not present with 
typical symptoms of acute abdominal pain, fever, or leukocytosis, 
due to a depressed immune response. In older patients presenting 
with acute appendicitis, the initial diagnosis is correct in less than 
half of the patients.8 A careful assessment and high index of suspi-
cion are crucial to achieve timely operative intervention.
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT
Surgical risk increases with advancing age as a consequence 
of physiologic decline and the development of comorbid con-
ditions that make the elderly surgical patient more susceptible 
to postoperative complications. Geriatric patients may have 
masked vulnerabilities due to their unique physiologic state that 
requires a more detailed preoperative assessment. Comorbid ill-
ness serves as the basis for the American Society of Anesthesi-
ologists’ (ASA) physical status classification. This is a valuable 
tool for identifying elderly patients who are at high risk for 
postoperative complications because it is based on organ sys-
tem dysfunction and severity of functional impairment. It helps 
to identify subgroups of patients in whom appropriate mea-
sures should be taken to reduce the risk of adverse outcomes. 
Importantly, it also quantifies the risks of morbidity and 
mortality for emergency surgery.A careful assessment of 
potential problems in the perioperative period combined with 
implementation of preventative measures can significantly 
reduce complications associated with general anesthesia in the 
elderly patient.9 A useful algorithm for the preoperative assess-
ment of an elderly surgical patient is provided in Fig. 47-1.
Cardiac complications are the leading cause of periop-
erative complications and death in surgical patients of all age 
groups, but particularly among the elderly. This is because 
patients often have co-existing cardiac dysfunction, combined 
with normal physiologic decline and poor functional reserve. 
The combined effect of depletion of intravascular volume, age-
related impairment of response to catecholamines, and increased 
myocardial relaxation time adversely affects the cardiac func-
tion of an elderly patient under stress in the perioperative 
period.10 Aging has been demonstrated to cause a decrease in 
cardiac output by approximately 1% per year. Older individ-
uals fail to augment heart rate to the same extent as younger 
individuals. More importantly, the ability to increase cardiac 
output with aging is dependent on ventricular dilatation, which 
is determined by preload.11 Therefore careful attention must be 
paid to volume status in the perioperative period. Dehydration 
or poor resuscitation may occur in elderly surgical patients for 
a variety of reasons, and both are poorly tolerated. Over one 
half of all postoperative deaths in elderly patients and 11% of 
postoperative complications are a result of impaired cardiac 
function under physiologic stress. Incomplete emptying 
of the ventricle at end systole and subsequent reduction in 
ejection fraction is characteristic of the aging heart.10 Reduced 
distensibility, in addition to acute stressors, leads to impaired 
coronary perfusion and cardiac ischemia.
As a result, the physiologic stress of general anesthesia and 
surgical interventions can unmask the limited cardiac reserve 
of the elderly patient. Poor reserve may become evident with 
increased myocardial oxygen demand resulting from tachycardia 
or loss of vascular tone from the vasodilatory effects of many 
general anesthetic agents. An important predictor of surgical 
Table 47-2
Frailty, disability, and comorbidities measures which 
are significant preoperative predictors of outcomes in 
the geriatric patient.7
Marker
Measure
Frailty
Cognition (Mini-Cog test ≤3)
Falls ≥ 1 in last six months
Albumin ≤3.3 gm/dL
Hematocrit ≤35%
Disability
DependanceDependence on ≥1 activity of 
daily living
Comorbidity
Charlson index ≥3
2
3
(continued)
1927
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
Figure 47-1.  Useful preoperative algorithm to determine elderly patient’s suitability for definitive surgical intervention balancing therapeutic goals, physiologic reserve, and quality of 
life with palliative treatment and surgery as viable options. ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Is elderly patient an
acceptable surgical risk? 
No
Is disease state immediately
 life threatening?
No
Observe with symptom
management (i.e. pain management) 
Yes
s
n
o
it
a
g
it
s
e
v
n
i 
c
it
s
o
n
g
a
i
D
n
o
it
s
e
u
Q
1) Assess ASA class
2) Assess co-morbid conditions
      •  Cardiac reserve?
      •  Pulmonary reserve?
      •  Renal reserve?
3) Complete nutritional assessment
4) Complete cognitive assessment
5) Complete functional assessment
Yes
Palliative surgery
Does patient have
 physiologic reserve?
Can quality of life
be maintained? 
Yes
No
Definitive surgical
intervention
Palliative treatment
Yes
No
Definitive surgical
intervention
Assess risk/benefit ratio
 with patient and family
Treatment
1928
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
­outcomes and cardiac complications in the elderly is congestive 
heart failure (CHF). CHF is present in approximately 10% of 
patients older than 65 years and is the leading cause of postopera-
tive morbidity and mortality.12 This prevalence will likely increase 
as percutaneous interventions and medical therapy prolongs sur-
vival from myocardial ischemia and acute myocardial infarction. 
Therefore, identifying correctable and uncorrectable cardiovascu-
lar disease is critical before elective surgical interventions.
Pulmonary complications are a major source of morbid-
ity and mortality in elderly surgical patients. The age-related 
changes that occur in the respiratory system limits the maximal 
breathing capacity by age 70 to 50% of the capacity present at 
age 30.12 In addition, there is a decline in the forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) with advancing age. It is estimated 
that humans lose 35 mL of their FEV1 per year over the age 
of 35 years old. There is a slow decline between ages 35 and 
65 years old followed by a much more progressive decline at 
approximately 75 years of age.13 Pulmonary complications 
account for up to 50% of postoperative complications and 20% 
of preventable deaths.14 Risk factors for pulmonary complica-
tions include a positive smoking history, presence of shortness 
of breath, or clinical evidence of chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease. All elderly patients undergoing major surgical 
interventions should have a baseline chest radiograph. Screen-
ing spirometry can be performed to determine forced vital 
capacity and FEV1. A baseline arterial blood gas measurement 
also will help to identify hypoxemia and hypercapnia, both of 
which may increase postoperative complications. If abnormali-
ties are found, perioperative use of bronchodilators and incen-
tive spirometry may be invaluable. When possible, regional 
anesthetic techniques may provide excellent analgesia while 
helping to reduce the postoperative pulmonary complications 
associated with general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation.
Renal complications are also increased in elderly surgi-
cal patients in the perioperative period. Renal size and volume 
decrease with age, accompanied by intrarenal vascular changes. 
There is a decrease in the number of glomeruli and nephron mass, 
resulting in decreased filtration area. Serum creatinine concentra-
tion is an insensitive indicator of renal function in the elderly, 
however.10 The physiologic age-related changes in renal function 
increase susceptibility to renal ischemia as well as to nephrotoxic 
agents. Age-related changes in renal function result from progres-
sive glomerulosclerosis and reduction in renal mass resulting in 
decreased creatinine clearance and glomerular filtration rate. This 
is worsened by a decline in cardiac output with increasing age 
and subsequent decrease in renal blood flow. It has been shown 
that patients with impaired glomerular filtration rate are more 
susceptible to volume changes that occur in the perioperative 
period. Furthermore, decreased drug elimination can potentiate 
the effects of nephrotoxic drugs and prolong the sedative effects 
of anesthetics and narcotic used for postoperative pain manage-
ment.12 Acute renal failure is proven to dramatically increase 
morbidity and mortality in elderly patients. The mortality risk of 
perioperative renal failure in all patients is approximately 50% 
and may be even higher in elderly patients. Therefore, careful 
management of fluid and electrolyte status is prudent to avoid 
imbalances and limit exposure to nephrotoxic diagnostic stud-
ies and medications in the perioperative period. Patients >70 
years old may be susceptible to the nephrotoxic effects of certain 
anesthetic agents, and thus should be protected by hydration and 
diuresis, as long as they can tolerate the fluid load.10 Prompt rec-
ognition of renal compromise, marked by an elevation of blood 
urea nitrogen or creatinine levels or oliguria, requires aggressive 
correction of underlying causes. Furthermore, electrolyte imbal-
ances can lead to potentially devastating cardiac conduction 
abnormalities and arrhythmias.12 Although not routinely advo-
cated in younger patients, elderly patients should have routine 
electrolyte panels and urinalysis before all surgical interventions 
to identify potential renal dysfunction.15 Underlying causes of 
abnormalities found on screening should be corrected before sur-
gery and may necessitate intravascular volume repletion to ensure 
adequate renal perfusion perioperatively.
A functional evaluation which includes an assessment of the 
cognitive level of functioning is an important part of the preopera-
tive evaluation of elderly surgical candidates. This ensures that 
operative intervention will not significantly impair the quality of 
life of an elderly surgical candidate. The ability to withstand the 
stress of surgical interventions is dependent on functional reserve 
and the ability to build an appropriate response to peri-operative 
stress.10 The ability to perform ADLs such as feeding, dressing, 
bathing, and toileting have been correlated with postoperative 
morbidity and mortality (Table 47-2). Preoperative functional 
assessment can be measured by hand grip strength, timed “up and 
go,” and functional reach tests7. All of these tests independently 
predicted better recovery and shorter time to recover ADLs after 
major surgery. In addition, these tests provide an accurate assess-
ment of a patient’s muscle mass, nutritional status, coordination, 
gait speed, balance, and mobility.5 Proper functional assessment 
will accurately predict rehabilitation needs, estimate biologic 
reserve, and indicate an enhanced risk of complications.10
The functional status of an elderly patient is directly and 
inversely correlated to pulmonary and cardiac complications 
that may ensue following surgical interventions. For example, 
functional impairment often leads to immobility, which can lead 
to increased risk of postoperative atelectasis, pneumonia, deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT), and pulmonary embolism. Further-
more, proper functional assessment has been shown to improve 
diagnostic and therapeutic outcomes as well as to lead to identi-
fication of previously undiagnosed conditions that may be treat-
able preoperatively or managed peri-operatively.10
Cognitive function often is overlooked in the preoperative 
assessment of patients, because patients are not typically for-
mally evaluated before surgical intervention (i.e., mini-mental 
state examination). However, knowledge of baseline cognitive 
function provides invaluable information because subtle changes 
in cognition often herald postoperative complications, such as 
underlying infection. Cognitive impairment, including delirium 
and confusion commonly occur in the elderly patient during the 
early postoperative period and can result in increased morbidity, 
delayed functional recovery, and prolonged hospitalizations. The 
etiology of this postoperative cognitive dysfunction may be mul-
tifactorial. Advanced age, history of alcohol abuse, baseline cog-
nitive disturbance, hypoxia, and hypotension have all been shown 
to be contributing factors.16 It is crucial that careful attention be 
paid to adequate postoperative analgesia to improve recovery 
while avoiding compromise of cognitive function. Methods such 
as “Beer’s Criteria” are useful tools to assess whether a particular 
drug is appropriate for the aged patient. Finally, dementia is a 
known predictor of poor long-term survival.
A formal nutritional assessment is invaluable in the periop-
erative assessment of elderly patients. Poor nutritional status in 
elderly patients is common and results from the interplay between 
physiologic, psychosocial, and economic changes that accom-
pany the aging process. Elderly patients may have poor nutritional 
1929
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
patients with poorly defined symptoms or who present with 
more advanced disease. In acute abdominal conditions, such as 
acute appendicitis and acute cholecystitis, one third of elderly 
patients will lack an elevated white blood cell count, one third 
will lack fever, and one third will lack physical findings of 
localized peritonitis. These deficits contribute to a three-
fold higher rate of perforated appendicitis and of gan-
grene of the gallbladder in elderly patients compared to young 
patients. An “unimpressive” physical exam in an elderly 
patient with acute onset of abdominal symptoms should never 
be taken as a sign of the absence of surgical disease.
The value of the multifaceted geriatric preoperative 
assessment led to the formation of an expert geriatric surgery 
panel by the American College of Surgeons National Surgical 
Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) and the Ameri-
can Geriatric Society (AGS). The panel formulated best practice 
guidelines for surgery in the elderly that have been adopted as 
standards for training programs (see Fig. 47-2). This checklist 
may prove to be a useful tool in the preoperative identifica-
tion of issues that may play an important role in the outcome of 
a surgical procedure. This not only highlights the importance 
of the factors described previously but also provides a tool 
that physicians can utilize in the nonurgent setting to institute 
­preventative or corrective measures to help the geriatric patient 
maintain their quality of life. (Table 47-3)
status because of either poor intake due to the underlying illness 
or pre-existing comorbid conditions. In the outpatient setting, it is 
estimated that 9% to 15% of persons >65 years old are malnour-
ished. This increases to 12% to 50% and 25% to 60% in the acute 
inpatient hospital setting and chronic institutional settings, respec-
tively.17 The cycle of frailty that occurs with chronic undernutri-
tion or malnutrition can lead to progressive functional decline, 
loss of muscle mass, and decreased oxygen consumption and met-
abolic rate in this population.17 Therefore, adequate assessment of 
nutritional status of these patients preoperatively and the prompt 
institution of nutritional support is of utmost importance. This is 
an integral component of the preoperative assessment, consider-
ing that nutritional status is a proven independent predictor of 
surgical outcomes. Deterioration of a patient’s nutritional state 
in the perioperative period contributes to adverse outcomes. Poor 
nutrition can lead to increased nosocomial infections, multiorgan 
system dysfunction, poor wound healing, and impaired functional 
recovery. Therefore, nutritional assessment and support, if neces-
sary, not only give patients additional reserve to minimize post-
operative complications, but aid in appropriate wound healing, 
functional recovery, and rehabilitation.
Protein energy malnutrition (PEM) also can result from 
maintaining compromised surgical patients nil per os (NPO). 
PEM may occur quickly in the elderly, malnourished surgi-
cal patient in a hypermetabolic state induced by stress of ill-
ness and surgery. The physiologic consequences of PEM are 
multiple and include anorexia, hepatic dysfunction, decreased 
mucosal proliferation, and sarcopenia.17 A good marker of PEM 
is hypoalbuminemia, also shown to be an extremely accurate 
predictor of surgical outcomes. The incidence of postoperative 
complications is increased in patients with serum albumin levels 
<3.5 g/L.17 Current recommendations indicate that if patients 
demonstrate compromise of nutritional status as defined by 
>10% weight loss and serum albumin level <2.5 g/dL, they 
should be considered for a minimum of 7 to 10 days of nutri-
tional repletion prior to surgery.10
The significant impact of nutritional status on surgical out-
comes and functional recovery in the elderly population after 
surgical intervention underscores the importance of an accurate 
preoperative nutritional assessment. In busy surgical practices, 
the question arises as to whether this can be done in a simple, 
reproducible, and cost-effective manner while obtaining vital 
information. There are several methods of assessing nutritional 
status, including anthropomorphic measures (i.e., body mass 
index), biochemical laboratory values (i.e., transferrin, albumin, 
and prealbumin), and clinical assessments.17
The Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) is an established, 
validated nutritional assessment tool which can be useful for the 
preoperative assessment of the elderly surgical candidate. The 
MNA consists of a screening portion assessing the patient’s cur-
rent body mass index, food intake and weight loss, mobility, and 
presence of stressors, depression, or dementia, all of which can 
exacerbate undernutrition or malnutrition in the elderly patient. 
The goal is to identify patients at risk for malnutrition, and who 
need further evaluation involving a more complete psychosocial 
assessment and determination of mode of feedings. This tool 
helps to identify undernutrition and malnutrition in older indi-
viduals, >65 years old, and helps to direct timely interventions 
which result in improved functional recovery.
The combined effects of poor nutrition, decreased cogni-
tion, and immune impairments due to nutritional or pharma-
cologic factors create a treacherous circumstance for elderly 
4
In addition to conducting a complete history and physical
    examination of the patient, the following assessments are
    strongly recommended:
Checklist for the Optimal Preoperative Assessment of the
Geriatric Surgical Patient
Assesss the patient’s cognitive ability and capacity to
understand the anticipated surgery.
Screen the patient for depression.
Identify the patient’s risk factors for developing postoperative
delirium.
Screen for alcohol and other substance abuse/dependence.
Perform a preoperative cardiac evaluation according to the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
algorithm for patients undergoing noncardiac surgery.
Identify the patient’s risk factors for postoperative pulmonary
complications and implement appropriate strategies for
prevention.
Document functional status and history of falls.
Determine baseline frailty score.
Assess patient’s nutritional status and consider preoperative
interventions if the patient is at severe nutritional risk.
Take an accurate and detailed medication history and consider
appropriate perioperative adjustments. Monitor for
polypharmacy.
Determine the patient’s treatment goals and expectations in the
context of the possible treatment outcomes.
Determine patient’s family and social support system.
Order appropriate preoperative diagnostic tests focused on
elderly patients.
Figure 47-2.  Checklist of questions to be used during assessment 
of geriatric patient. This novel tool takes into consideration issues 
unique to geriatric patients, including frailty, cognition, and support 
systems. (From Chow WB et al1 with permission from Elsevier. © 
2012 American College of Surgeons.)
1930
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
Cardiovascular
It is estimated that approximately 40% of the projected 
25 million octogenarians comprising the U.S. population by the 
year 2025 will suffer cardiovascular symptoms, many of whom 
will require cardiovascular surgical treatment.18 With advances 
in cardiopulmonary bypass technique, myocardial protection, 
and improved perioperative care, coronary artery bypass graft-
ing (CABG) and valve replacement operations can be safely 
performed in elderly patients. Senile calcific aortic stenosis is 
common within this population, and referral for aortic valve 
replacement is increasing, encompassing many patients who are 
>75 years old. Interestingly, despite some degree of age bias in 
the referral of patients for major cardiac surgery, advanced age 
alone is not a predictor of poorer outcomes or increased mor-
tality compared to younger patients. It has been demonstrated 
that emergency operations, preoperative New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) functional class 3 or greater, and chronic 
renal failure were the main predictors of increased operative 
mortality, but not patient age, per se.18 In one study, preopera-
tive renal dysfunction, cerebrovascular disease, valve surgery, 
and catastrophic state were independent predictors of increased 
mortality in elderly patients.19 Elderly patients with nondialysis-
dependent renal dysfunction had a 60% chance of death during 
a 5-year follow-up period compared to 25% in elderly patients 
without a history of renal dysfunction. Similarly, the presence of 
cerebrovascular disease resulted in a two-fold increase in mor-
tality among elderly patients.19 Even patients who were 80 years 
of age or more did not have any significant increase in surgical 
risk and within this population, the 4-year actuarial survival was 
70.5% with an event-free survival of approximately 60.6%.19
There has been an increase in definitive operative interven-
tion to elderly patients requiring CABG. Although older patients 
have higher morbidity and mortality rates after cardiac surgery 
than do younger patients, these rates are decreasing. The Soci-
ety of Thoracic Surgeons reports that perioperative mortality 
rates range from 1.6% in patients 51 to 60 years of age to 7.7% 
in those 81 to 90 years of age.20 This decline in morbidity and 
mortality rates likely reflects better preoperative assessment and 
patient selection. Furthermore, this decline has occurred despite 
the advancing age of cardiac patients at time of referral, advanced 
disease, and greater comorbid disease burden. Elderly patients 
are more likely to have significant triple-vessel disease accom-
panied by poor ejection fraction, left ventricular hypertrophy, 
significant valvular disease, and previous history of myocardial 
infarction than are younger patients.20 Elderly patients also are 
more likely to be classified as NYHA functional class 3 or higher 
and are more likely to present on an emergent basis, in part 
because of reluctance to provide elective surgical intervention 
because of presumptive poorer outcome. Despite the increased 
risk of morbidity and mortality compared to younger patients, 
elderly patients, including those >80 years old, can undergo 
CABG with acceptable mortality risk. The overall mortality rate 
is approximately 7% to 12% for elderly patients, including those 
in whom CABG is performed under emergency conditions. The 
mortality rate decreases to ­approximately 2.8% when CABG is 
performed electively with careful preoperative evaluation.21
Valve Replacement
There also is an increasing percentage of the geriatric popula-
tion who present with symptomatic valvular disease requiring 
intervention. The most common valvular abnormality present 
in elderly patients is calcific aortic stenosis, which can lead to 
angina and syncope.22 The operative mortality from aortic valve 
replacement is estimated to be between 3% and 10%, with an 
average of approximately 7.7%.20 If aortic stenosis is allowed 
to progress without operative intervention, CHF will ensue. 
The average survival of these patients is approximately 1.5 to 
2 years. If a patient is a candidate for operative intervention, 
age should not be a deterrent, especially considering the poten-
tial to increase life expectancy. It has been recommended that 
the carefully selected, minimally symptomatic octogenarian 
with aortic stenosis should be considered a low-risk patient 
and be expected to experience an uneventful operative course 
and expedient recovery. More importantly, if elective proce-
dures are delayed until symptoms or left ventricular dysfunc-
tion develop, patients may suffer from unnecessary increased 
operative risk and mortality.18 Early intervention results in a 
demonstrable improvement in quality of life in these patients, 
with many improving their NYHA functional classification.
Elderly patients require surgery for mitral valve disease 
when ischemic regurgitation is present. Surgery for mitral valve 
disease carries a higher morbidity and mortality risk than for 
aortic intervention, with an estimated mortality rate as high 
as 20%.20 Left ventricular function usually is compromised in 
patients requiring intervention, leading to a poorer outcome in 
these patients. The surgical outcome for mitral valve procedures 
depends on the extent of the disease, age of the patient, pres-
ence of pulmonary hypertension, and extent of coronary artery 
disease. The presence of comorbid conditions combined with 
the emergent nature of surgery in a large percentage of elderly 
patients further worsens the outcome. Therefore, a deci-
sion regarding management of mitral valve disease should 
be individualized to each patient with the previously mentioned 
below factors considered. Another concern regarding elderly 
patients who require surgery for valve disease is the additional 
requirement for coronary revascularization. This increases the 
morbidity and mortality from surgical intervention. An elderly 
patient with many comorbid conditions in need of a com-
bined procedure should only have critically stenosed vessels 
bypassed.22 Therefore, advanced age is not a contraindication to 
performing combined procedures; however, a higher mortality 
rate should be expected. Neurologic complications from valve 
surgery are particularly common in elderly patients. It has been 
estimated that approximately 30% of patients >70 years old who 
undergo valve procedures develop either transient or permanent 
5
Table 47-3
Goals for ethical decision making in elderly surgical 
patient.
1.  Acknowledge medical futility; physicians are not required 
to provide life-sustaining treatment that is deemed 
medically futile.
2.  Clarify patients’ wishes regarding life-sustaining 
therapies in accordance with Patient Self-Determination 
Act (i.e., advance directives, living wills, do not intubate/
resuscitate orders).
3.  Respect patient autonomy: right to accept and refuse 
treatment despite consequences of decision.
  • Ensure mental competency before establishing 
autonomy.
  • May appoint surrogate decision maker in case of 
incapacitation.
1931
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
neurologic dysfunction.22 This often is a result of embolism 
from debris dislodged from the valve during the procedure or 
from a formed thrombus in the right atrium.
An important consideration in valve replacement proce-
dures in elderly patients is the type of prosthesis to be used. 
Elderly patients are at increased risk from bleeding-associated 
anticoagulation complications. This is especially significant 
in patients who have experienced falls and minor trauma that 
have resulted in intracranial hemorrhage. To avoid the lifelong 
requirement for anticoagulants, bioprosthetic valves should 
be used in place of mechanical valves whenever possible.22 
Although the bioprosthetic valves are not as durable as mechan-
ical valves, studies demonstrate excellent structural integrity 
10 years postprocedure, making it an appropriate choice in an 
elderly patient.
Cancer
The incidence of most cancers is age dependent, and the expanding 
aged population is rapidly increasing the number of elderly patients 
who require multimodal therapy for various oncologic diseases, 
including lung, breast, pancreas, esophagus, stomach, and colorec-
tal malignancies. Approximately 50% of cancer diagnoses are cur-
rently made in patients aged 70 years or older.10 It is ­predicted 
that the increase in the elderly population will account for up to 
a 50% increase in the number of patients undergoing oncologic 
procedures by the year 2020. The increased life expectancy of 
the geriatric patient coupled with the increasing incidence of can-
cer with advancing age will lead to an increased prevalence of 
malignant disease requiring surgical intervention. This is an area 
of great interest given that randomized clinical trials to determine 
the outcomes of elderly patients undergoing curative resections, 
as well as neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy, are lacking. In addi-
tion, elderly patients are rarely included in clinical trials; therefore, 
treatment decisions are often based on individual surgeon experi-
ence and non-geriatric data, and may be flawed by inherent biases 
regarding the outcome of complete oncologic resections in elderly 
patients. Surgeons may also be reluctant to expose older patients 
to the toxic effects of chemotherapy and radiation without proven 
efficacy in this geriatric population. This highlights the need for 
research targeting the specific needs of elderly patients with malig-
nancy to aid in the development of specific treatment guidelines 
for various cancers within this age cohort.
Currently, the geriatric population is undertreated for 
malignant diseases and does not receive curative resections or 
adjuvant therapies afforded to same-stage younger patients.11 
Potential reasons include poorer functional status compared to 
younger patients, patient and family preference, age bias, life 
expectancy, and concerns regarding quality of life after major 
operative interventions.23 Surgeons will be challenged to decide 
whether major surgery is justified in elderly patients, especially 
those with limited life expectancy. Effectiveness of oncologic 
surgery in elderly patients depends on whether a cure can be 
achieved safely without compromise to functional status or 
quality of life. Postoperative life expectancy should be improved 
by surgery, or, at the very least, not diminished. A useful treat-
ment algorithm is provided in Fig. 47-3. A study undertaken 
Life expectancy
> Cancer survival
< Cancer survival
Frailty
QOL
Absent
Palliation
Treatment risks & benefits
Benefits > risks
Benefits < risks
Life-prolonging treatment
Present
Compromised
Not compromised
Observation
Figure 47-3.  A useful treatment algorithm to illustrate the effectiveness of oncologic surgery depends on the balance between achieving 
cure and maintaining functional quality of life (QOL). (Reproduced with permission from Balducci L, Beghe C. Cancer Control. Journal of 
the Moffitt Cancer Center. 1999; 6:466.)
1932
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
using the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results database 
assessing cancer-directed surgery (CDS) for localized disease 
for solid malignancies found that the rates of CDS declined 
with increasing age for all cancers, especially noted for the aged 
elderly >70 years old. In addition, CDS was less likely to occur 
with patients found to have lung, esophagus, stomach, liver, 
or pancreatic cancer. A careful assessment of the general and 
cancer-related condition of the patient is crucial to planning the 
best surgical intervention and postoperative adjuvant therapy.
Formulating a comprehensive, multimodal treatment plan 
for an elderly patient with a malignancy amendable to surgical 
intervention is based on careful consideration of the patient’s 
expected life span, specifically if the life span is expected to 
exceed survival from the malignancy. Additionally, consider-
ations include the patient’s ability to tolerate the surgery and 
any complications that may ensue, as well as the likelihood that 
the patient would suffer a complication from the cancer which 
would adversely impact quality of life.24 An ongoing interna-
tional study that is titled “Preoperative Assessment of Cancer 
in the Elderly (PACE)” is designed to evaluate a scoring sys-
tem that aids in assessing the oncogeriatric patient for surgical 
intervention. The PACE study incorporates several validated 
instruments that assess the functional and physiologic status of 
patients, including the Mini Mental State Examination, capac-
ity to perform ADLs, Geriatric Depression Scale, and the ASA 
classification among other useful instruments. Interestingly, the 
PACE assessment also includes The Physiological and Operative 
Severity Score which has been shown to predict morbidity and 
postoperative mortality in general surgery and in patients with 
lung and colorectal malignancy. This score includes the age of 
the patient and gives consideration to operative factors, including 
the type of surgical procedure used, the presence and extent of 
malignancy, and the timing of the operation (i.e., planned elec-
tive procedure or an emergency intervention).10 Palliative inter-
ventions are a part of the therapeutic armamentarium; however, a 
surgeon must weigh these variables carefully to determine which 
surgical intervention (i.e., palliative vs. curative) is appropriate.
Breast Cancer
It is projected that there will be a 72% increase in the number 
of elderly women diagnosed with breast cancer in the United 
States by 2025. Furthermore, 50% of breast cancers occur after 
the age of 65 years old and 25% after the age of 75 years old.25 
The estimated risk for development of new breast cancer is one 
in 14 women aged 60 to 79 years old compared to one in 24 
in women aged 40 to 59 years old.25 Mortality rates following 
breast cancer surgery in elderly women is <1%, and therefore, 
surgical interventions remain the cornerstone of therapy for 
breast cancer in elderly women. However, as expected, the pres-
ence of comorbid conditions affects clinical outcomes in elderly 
patients with breast cancer. A recent study demonstrated the 
presence of comorbid conditions in patients with breast cancer 
rose to as high as 55% in patients >80 years of age, with car-
diovascular disease, diabetes, and previous cancer being most 
common.26 As expected, the resulting 5-year survival rate was 
lower in patients with two or more comorbid conditions.
A recent study on risk factors for breast cancer in patients 
>75 years of age showed similarity to younger women and 
included obesity, nulliparity, family history, and advanced age at 
menopause.27 Interestingly, although breast cancer presentation in 
elderly patients may be diagnosed at more advanced stages, both 
clinical and pathologic data demonstrate less aggressive disease 
in elderly women with more favorable biologic characteristics. 
Elderly breast cancer patients are more likely to have estrogen-
positive tumors and increasing endocrine responsiveness.27 Despite 
these relative advantages, a large number of elderly women are 
not offered conventional therapies for breast cancer. Moreover, 
elderly patients who are offered breast conservation surgery for 
breast ­cancer are less likely to have axillary dissection, postop-
erative radiation, and chemotherapy. This will undoubtedly influ-
ence surgical outcomes in elderly patients with breast cancer 
considering that local recurrence rates after conservative surgery 
without radiotherapy are reported as high as 47%. Advancing age 
has been demonstrated to be an independent predictor of noncon-
cordance with treatment guidelines for definitive surgical therapy 
and adjuvant chemotherapy, as well as hormonal therapy. One 
study demonstrated that the odds of receiving a recommendation 
for chemotherapy decreased by 22% for each year of advancing 
patient age.23 The nonsurgical management of breast cancer in 
elderly patients is falling out of favor because there is currently 
no rationale for denying surgical therapy for elderly breast can-
cer patients. Surgery and hormonal therapy were the best options 
for overall survival, breast cancer–specific survival, and disease-
free survival. A Cochrane Review concluded that treatment with 
tamoxifen alone is not an acceptable option because of higher 
local progression of disease; 81% compared to 38% with surgical 
intervention. Furthermore, the response rate only lasts for approx-
imately 18 to 24 months.23 The final conclusion is that surgery 
remains the standard of care for elderly patients with breast cancer. 
Alternative therapies should be reserved for patients who have 
multiple comorbid conditions leading to poor candidacy for opera-
tive intervention, those who are frail, or those who refuse surgery.
A timely study comparing the mortality after breast-conserving 
surgery (BCS) alone, BCS plus radiation therapy, mastectomy, 
and the receipt of adjuvant tamoxifen in elderly breast cancer 
patients confirmed that less than standard treatment for these 
patients resulted in increased mortality. Elderly women receiving 
BCS without radiotherapy have more than twice the rate of breast 
cancer mortality compared to women undergoing mastectomy. In 
addition, in older women with estrogen receptor and progesterone 
receptor positive tumors receiving tamoxifen, the rate of breast 
cancer death increased substantially with the decreasing duration 
of tamoxifen use.28 The standard of treatment for elderly patients 
with breast cancer should be the same as younger patients; BCS 
plus radiotherapy when indicated. If patients decline postoperative 
radiotherapy or are medically unfit for radiotherapy, mastectomy 
should be performed. Furthermore, elderly patients with tumor 
size <2 to 3 cm and no clinical evidence of axillary involvement 
should be offered sentinel node biopsy.29
One of the most interesting controversies surrounding 
breast cancer in elderly women is the appropriate age limits 
of screening. A retrospective study demonstrated a decline in 
cancer-related mortality among women who underwent regular 
screening mammography up to 75 years of age.27 Women who 
underwent at least two mammographic examinations between 
the ages of 70 and79 years experienced a two-and-one-half–fold 
reduction in breast cancer mortality compared to elderly women 
who did not undergo screening.23 The screening benefits depend 
on life expectancy. In women with multiple comorbidities, the 
decision to perform screening should be based on estimated life 
expectancy. People with <5 years of life expectancy are unlikely 
to benefit from screening. The American Geriatric Society rec-
ommends that screening should be individualized rather than set 
by age-specific guidelines. The current recommendation is that 
1933
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
no upper age limit for screening be set as long as the estimated 
life expectancy is 4 or more years.
Colorectal Cancer
The incidence of colorectal cancer (CRC) increases with advanc-
ing age, similar to most other malignant conditions. Approximately 
90% of cases of CRC are diagnosed in patients >55 years old.33 Of 
concern is the increased postoperative morbidity and mortality 
following extensive surgical resections in elderly patients, with 
a significant increase in patients >70 years old. In fact, inhospi-
tal mortality for patients >85 years old undergoing surgery for 
colorectal malignancy is estimated to be nine-fold greater than 
for younger patients.30 Furthermore, elderly patients often have 
decreased cancer-specific survival compared to younger patients. 
It has been proven that the 5-year cancer-specific survival for 
CRC is similar among the age cohorts. Therefore, age is not an 
independent factor accounting for the decreased survival among 
elderly patients. It is rather a consequence of comorbid condi-
tions and impaired physical capacity necessary for recovery from 
perioperative physiological stress.30 This leads to bias regarding 
poorer outcomes in elderly patients. For this reason, many elderly 
patients are receiving suboptimal cancer therapy and limited resec-
tions resulting in decreased survival rates and poorer outcomes. 
With the ever aging population, this must be addressed and clini-
cal modifications implemented to improve outcomes of elderly 
patients undergoing surgical interventions for colorectal malignan-
cies. Elderly patients should have continued, aggressive screening 
for colorectal malignancy and strict adherence to accepted surgical 
and adjuvant treatment guidelines.
One of the most important aspects to delivering appropriate 
care to elderly patients with CRC is to consider the patient’s 
wishes as well as expectations from the surgical intervention. 
In this respect, functional outcomes and quality of life take pre-
cedence in treating elderly patients, especially the aged elderly. 
Of patients >75 years old who underwent elective surgery, few 
demonstrated protracted decline in ADLs and most experienced 
significant improvement in quality of life.31 Approximately 10% 
of elderly patients >80 years old have protracted postoperative 
disability. Estimation of physical ability and surgical stress is 
useful for predicting decline in ADLs and postoperative disabil-
ity. It has been shown that, in patients <80 years of age, a com-
plete resection for cure is most important, whereas in patients 
>80 years old, avoidance of a stoma becomes paramount. These 
are important considerations for the geriatric surgeon.30
A prospective study was recently undertaken to specifi-
cally evaluate the epidemiology and risk of surgical intervention 
for CRC in elderly patients. A large cohort of 47,455 patients 
was divided based on age <75 years old and >75 years old.30 
It was determined that a significant portion of elderly CRC 
patients are female, with multiple comorbidities leading to 
advanced ASA levels of 3 and above. The study determined that 
elderly patients underwent surgical interventions less often than 
younger patients (81% vs. 88%, respectively, P <.001), more 
frequently required urgent or emergency operations, and were 
more likely to have operative procedures in which the primary 
cancer was not resected. Obstructive tumors are significantly 
more common in patients >70 years old, and elderly patients 
are still presenting far too commonly with surgical emergencies 
resulting from obstruction and perforation in up to 40% of the 
cases.11 In addition, elderly patients had higher postoperative 
mortality than younger patients (10.6% vs. 3.8%, respectively). 
Right colectomies, Hartmann’s procedures with colostomy, 
transanal endoscopic microsurgery, and transanal resection of 
tumors were more common in elderly patients, whereas formal 
resections, including low anterior and abdominoperineal resec-
tions, were more common in younger patients.30 Elderly patients 
are less likely to undergo CDS; with each half a decade increase 
in age >70 years old, the odds of receiving cancer-directed sur-
gery were reduced by 44%. Interestingly, many of these patients 
presented with lesions of lower-stage Duke’s cancer classifica-
tion. However, this was not secondary to earlier presentations 
as one might assume, but rather secondary to understaging from 
surgical treatment. Accurate staging may not be possible with 
local resections, limiting the number of lymph nodes avail-
able for proper staging.32 Elderly patients also are less likely to 
undergo preoperative irradiation and neoadjuvant chemother-
apy, reducing the likelihood of curative resection.30
Liver resection for CRC liver metastases in properly selected 
elderly patients 70 years of age or greater is feasible with older 
patients having similar operative survival to younger patients. 
Palliative surgery remains a viable option for elderly patients with 
disseminated CRC and should be aimed at the reduction of symp-
toms such as pain, obstruction, or hemorrhage. Bowel obstruction 
can be relieved with intestinal bypass or a diverting colostomy. 
The most common site of disseminated disease is the liver, and 
uncontrolled liver metastases are responsible for pain, abdominal 
distention, jaundice, and inferior vena caval obstruction. Elderly 
patients with metastatic disease who are not candidates for cura-
tive resection may be considered for ablation of the lesions by 
local destruction, cryotherapy, or radiofrequency ablation. More 
traditional means such as chemotherapy, which can be adminis-
tered via the hepatic artery or radiation, also may be used.33
Similar to breast cancer, an upper age limit for CRC has not 
been clearly established. Screening for CRC may not lead to an 
observed survival benefit until 5 years or longer after screening 
had occurred. This would limit the benefit of screening in aged 
populations with limited life expectancy. An interesting way of 
looking at this controversy is from a recent study that determined 
that the number of screening colonoscopies needed to prevent one 
CRC-related death (the number necessary for survival or NNS) 
increased as with increasing age and comorbidities. For example, 
in healthy men and women aged 75 to 79 years old, the NNS 
was 50. The corresponding NNS in patients 90 years and older 
was 279 in women and 482 in men.34 Consideration for continued 
screening in very elderly patients should take into account age 
and predicted life expectancy, comorbid burden, expected dura-
tion of the protective effect of screening, risk for cancer, results of 
previous screening colonoscopies, and patient preference.34
Lung Cancer
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the 
United States for patients >70 years old. National Cancer Insti-
tute statistics show that the peak incidence of lung cancer is 
between 75 and 79 years of age. Elderly lung cancer patients 
also have a higher mortality rate, and therefore, the peak mor-
tality rate is between ages 75 and 84 years.35 Non–small cell 
lung cancer accounts for roughly 80% of all lung cancer cases, 
and >50% of these patients are >65 years of age. Interestingly, 
approximately 30% of these patients are 70 years or older at 
diagnosis.36 Lung cancer is highly prevalent among elderly 
patients, so much so that a 2-cm, asymptomatic, solitary pulmo-
nary nodule in a 70-year-old male smoker has a >70% chance 
of being an occult lung cancer. Squamous cell carcinomas are 
more common among elderly patients than among younger 
1934
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
patients, and these tumors are associated with a higher incidence 
of local disease, tend to have lower recurrence rates, and have 
longer survival times than nonsquamous cancers.35 In cases of 
resectable primary lung cancer, surgery remains the treatment 
of choice independent of age.11
The estimated life expectancy of untreated lung cancer 
is approximately 9 months. This can increase to as high as 
18 months with palliative chemotherapy and radiation. 
­However, the life expectancy of an elderly patient who has 
undergone a successful operative resection is estimated to be 
as high as 31 months, making this the preferred option when 
feasible.13 ­However, despite this and the fact that more elderly 
patients present with stage 1 disease, elderly patients are offered 
curative surgery less frequently than younger counterparts. The 
same holds true for chemotherapy and radiation.
Advanced age is an independent risk factor for death 
after thoracotomy, with significantly increased mortality after 
age 65. These reasons are multifactorial partly due to the phys-
iologic debilitation that occurs with division of the intratho-
racic muscles that aid in respiratory function and the loss of 
lung volume after resections.13 One study demonstrated that 
patients 70 years of age or older who underwent thoracotomy 
for lung cancer had an operative mortality rate of 14%, which 
is directly related to the extent of the pulmonary resection. In 
one of the largest prospective, multi-institutional trials con-
ducted, The Lung Cancer Study Group, increasing age led to 
a ­significant increase in 30-day mortality for patients under-
going thoracotomy and lung resection.13 They found overall 
mortality to be approximately 3.5% in patients <65 years old, 
which rose to 7.3% for patients 70 years or older and as high as 
8.1% for ­octogenarians. However, with improved surgical 
options, including minimally invasive video-assisted thoracic 
surgery (VATS) in the past decade, the mortality rate has ranged 
from 3% to 5% in carefully selected patients.2 In a recent study 
conducted to determine if VATS resulted in lower morbidity 
in the elderly population in comparison to open, rib-spreading 
thoracotomy, the overall morbidity for minimally invasive 
surgery was 28%; this increased to 45% with traditional open 
procedures.36 Furthermore, elderly patients undergoing VATS 
tended to have less severe complications compared to patients 
undergoing thoractomy.36 Limited resections (segmentecto-
mies) may be a consideration in elderly patients with limited 
life expectancy or poor cardiac and pulmonary reserve who 
may not tolerate a more extensive procedure. Some studies 
have shown that limited resections may provide a comparable 
survival rate to lobectomies in elderly patients as long as the 
resection includes all foci of tumors and provides a microscopi-
cally free margin. The most striking finding was that any sur-
vival difference between treatment modalities disappeared after 
71 years of age. Interestingly, even smaller resections such as 
VATS and wedge resection may be a viable oncologic option in 
an elderly patient with resectable disease but limited life expec-
tancy.13 This is limited to very small tumors <7 mm in diameter 
and not yet proven to be clinically efficacious. Of particular 
interest is that VATS procedures may result in lower rates of 
postoperative confusion in elderly patients and this may be sec-
ondary to the decreased physiologic stress of minimally inva-
sive procedures, faster recovery rates, and decreased narcotic 
requirement for pain control.13 Careful preoperative selection 
and optimization combined with aggressive postoperative care 
and rehabilitation make surgical intervention for resectable 
­disease feasible in aged populations.
Trauma
Patients >65 years of age currently account for approximately 
23% of total hospital trauma admissions—many of which are 
multisystem and life threatening.37 Geriatric trauma will con-
tinue to challenge surgeons in understanding the physical and 
physiologic impact of various mechanisms of injury, the need 
for careful assessment of comorbid conditions with particular 
attention to medication regimens, the rehabilitative capacity of 
an elderly trauma patient, and the knowledge of specific inter-
ventions that help to minimize morbidity and mortality in this 
population following traumatic injury.
The current geriatric population has fewer disabilities and is 
considerably more active than previous generations, which pre-
disposes them to traumatic injuries. The most common type of 
trauma is blunt injury resulting from falls and motor vehicle col-
lisions or pedestrian accidents. Falls currently account for 20% of 
severe injuries in elderly patients. Many underlying chronic and 
acute diseases common to elderly patients place them at increased 
risk for falls. These diseases include postural hypotension, lead-
ing to syncopal “drop attacks”; dysrhythmias from sick sinus 
syndrome; autonomic dysfunction; polypharmacy with improper 
dosage of antihypertensive and oral hypoglycemic agents result-
ing in hypotension; and hypoglycemia, respectively.38
Elderly patients also can fall victim to penetrating trauma, 
especially in elderly patients who may have underlying depres-
sion and suicidal ideations or are victims of elder abuse. It is esti-
mated that approximately 40% of all trauma patients by 2050 will 
be >65 years old.39 With the expanding elderly population, this 
will be an increasing source of morbidity and mortality; the risk 
of death after major trauma with multi-system and life-threatening 
injuries rises steeply after age 45 years old and doubles by age 
75 years old. In contrast to what is observed for abdominal and 
thoracic surgery, even after controlling for injury severity and 
pre-existing medical conditions, patients aged 65 years and older 
sustaining traumatic injury were 4.6 times more likely to die than 
younger patients.39 Of note, there are several interesting aspects 
of care of the acutely injured elderly patient that must be kept 
in mind. First, physiologic reserve can be challenged by trauma. 
For example, previously unknown disease such as cardiac impair-
ment may be acutely unmasked. Secondly, medications common 
to elderly patients, such as beta blockers and anticoagulation, can-
not only inhibit the physiologic response to stress but may even 
worsen injury. Finally, elderly patients with impaired functional 
status posttrauma are more likely to lose their ability to function 
independently without the support of a nursing home.
Elderly patients are particularly susceptible to trauma due to 
changes that occur with aging, specifically, gait instability, decreased 
hearing and visual acuity, presence of confusion or dementia, under-
lying comorbid conditions, and poor to tolerate the physiologic stress 
of traumatic injuries. Pre-existing medical conditions increase the 
risk of death after trauma significantly (up to ­three-fold).37 This is 
worsened when combined with an elderly patient’s decreased func-
tional reserve for handling physiologic abnormalities accompanying 
major trauma, such as hypotension and hypoxia. It is important to 
consider a trauma patient’s age, as patients aged 65 to 80 years old 
have a 6.6% overall mortality rate after traumatic injury, which rises 
to 10% in patients 80 years or older.42
Despite the increased risk of morbidity and mortality 
after traumatic injury, it is interesting to note that there is cur-
rently an undertriaging of elderly patients to level 1 trauma 
centers despite high injury severity scores.39 In one study, 
elderly patients >65 years old were five times more likely to be 
1935
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
­undertriaged to nondesignated trauma hospitals than younger 
counterparts.39 However, a reduction in morbidity and mortality 
and posttraumatic complications as well as faster rehabilitation 
can result from better triaging practices. In one particular study 
involving acutely injured octogenarians with injury severity 
scores between 21 and 45, inhospital survival was as high as 
56% in trauma centers, and this dramatically decreased to 8% 
in those treated at nontrauma hospitals.39
It is important to determine the medication regimen of 
elderly trauma patients. Medications such as beta blockers, cal-
cium channel blockers, diuretics, and afterload reduction agents 
may impair critical augmentation of myocardial function in 
trauma patients, especially if they are hypovolemic. Approxi-
mately 20% of the elderly population with coronary artery dis-
ease and 10% of those with hypertension are currently on beta 
blocker therapy.39 Therefore, tachycardia, one of the most val-
ued signs of continued hypovolemia from either ongoing blood 
volume loss or underresuscitation, is lost in the elderly patient 
on beta blocker therapy. This makes interpretation of hemody-
namic parameters in elderly patients inaccurate and, at times, 
misleading, which could lead to delays in appropriate interven-
tions and resuscitation. However, it is important to keep in mind 
that, to date, evidence supporting early hemodynamic monitor-
ing in elderly patients is lacking.
The other medication class that can be detrimental to an 
elderly, acutely injured patient is anticoagulation, ranging from 
aspirin and clopidogrel (Plavix) to warfarin, which may, at 
times, be supratherapeutic. Massive intracranial hemorrhages 
resulting from minor falls from standing in elderly patients 
are demonstrated in Fig. 47-4. Warfarin therapy may be used 
Figure 47-4.  Massive intracranial hemorrhage resulting from 
seemingly minor trauma. An 86-year-old patient fell from a stand-
ing position and presented to the emergency room with six hours 
of injury with a Glascow Coma Scale of 5 and a blood pressure of 
167/55. She was on aspirin and clopidogrel therapy for ischemic 
heart disease, along with 14 other medications for congestive heart 
failure, diabetes, and hypertension. She expired from her intracra-
nial wounds. (Photo used with permission of Dany Westerband, 
MD, Suburban Hospital, Bethesda, MD).
in patients with atrial fibrillation, DVT, and prosthetic heart 
valves. The mortality rate of elderly patients on warfarin with 
a traumatic intracranial hemorrhage was 48% compared with 
10% in an age-matched cohort not on anticoagulation therapy; 
it is unknown for the newer factor Xa inhibitors.39 One of the 
most important caveats to treating elderly patients on antico-
agulation with blunt head injury is the potential for significant, 
life-threatening intracranial hemorrhage despite initial normal 
head (computed tomography) CT scans. In one study, >70% of 
patients with minor mechanisms and negative CT scan, admit-
ted for observation subsequently, clinically deteriorated within 
12 hours of admission with a Glasgow Coma Scale of <10 and 
were subsequently found to have significant intracranial hemor-
rhages.39 Therefore, prompt reversal of anticoagulation, particu-
larly if supratherapeutic, is warranted to reduce morbidity and 
mortality following blunt head injury. In addition to increased 
risk of mortality in elderly patients sustaining blunt head trauma, 
a significant portion fail to resume functional independence after 
traumatic injury. It is estimated that approximately 20% to 25% 
of elderly trauma patients require discharge to a skilled nursing 
facility for long-term care and rehabilitation.37 Poor functional 
outcome has been attributed to several factors among which are 
age >75 years old, presence of shock on admission, severe head 
injury, and development of infectious complications.
MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY
Laparoscopy
Open abdominal procedures may require more intensive post-
operative care, longer hospital stays, and an increased need for 
postoperative rehabilitation and possible institutionalization for 
elderly patients with limited reserve. However, the increasing 
experience with laparoscopic techniques, combined with mini-
mized pain, decreased length of hospital stay, and low morbid-
ity and mortality rates, has led to the increased use of minimal 
access procedures among elderly patients. It has expanded from 
cholecystectomies to more complex procedures, including colon 
resections, gastrectomies, and cardiac surgery.
Minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery reduces com-
mon postoperative complications such as atelectasis, gastroin-
testinal ileus, and wound infections. In elderly surgical patients, 
these complications easily progress to pneumonia, DVT, and 
metabolic and electrolyte disturbances.40 Decreased postop-
erative pain from smaller incisions leads to faster return to a 
preoperative level of functioning, including early ambulation, 
which decreases complications from prolonged bed rest, such as 
DVT and pneumonia from compromised pulmonary mechanics. 
The latter is especially important for elderly patients because 
deconditioning occurs with long hospital stays, which depresses 
their ability to return to preoperative functional status. Laparo-
scopic surgery also provides the added benefit of reduction of 
the inflammatory, hormonal, and metabolic stress induced by 
major open surgical operations. The net result is that patients 
who undergo laparoscopic procedures may do better; in colon 
surgery it has been shown to increase the chance that the 
patient returns home over an interim rehabilitation center.
However, these benefits must be balanced against the 
potential adverse effects of carbon dioxide (CO2) insufflation and 
hemodynamic alterations induced by pneumoperitoneum and 
increased intra-abdominal pressure with concomitant decrease in 
venous return.41 Therefore, decisions to perform minimal access 
procedures in the elderly must be individualized to the patient 
6
1936
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
with careful consideration of the impact of comorbid conditions 
and the potential for poor cardiopulmonary reserves. This helps 
to provide the optimal circumstance for intervention resulting in 
improved surgical outcomes.
It is important to consider using a reduced intra-abdomi-
nal insufflation pressure during a laparoscopic procedure in an 
elderly patient. Pressures up to 20 mmHg are associated with 
increased filling pressures and cardiac output. However, fur-
ther increased elevations result in decreased central venous 
pressures and cardiac output, which can be life threatening in a 
patient with preexisting cardiac dysfunction and poor functional 
reserve.
Studies have demonstrated that both advanced age 
>70 years old and an ASA classification of 3 or 4 are ­associated 
with higher conversion rates for laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy to open cholecystectomy.42 These additional challenges, 
­however, are not a contraindication to attempting the less inva-
sive approach because conversion to an open procedure does 
not adversely impact the overall morbidity and mortality of the 
patient.
A particularly useful application of minimally invasive 
techniques is to rule out a surgical abdomen in an elderly patient 
presenting with acute abdominal pain. Vague, poorly local-
ized pain, further obscured by several underlying confound-
ing comorbid conditions, as is the case with ischemic colitis 
and mesenteric ischemia, may subject an elderly patient with 
poor reserve to the risk of general anesthesia and a negative 
exploratory laparotomy (Fig. 47-5). Analysis of several studies 
directed at the application of laparoscopic techniques for the 
patient with acute abdominal pain demonstrated that approxi-
mately 41% had pathology necessitating open laparotomy, 10% 
had pathology amendable to laparoscopic intervention (i.e., 
acute cholecystitis), and 48% had nonsurgical disease that was 
subsequently managed nonoperatively, avoiding a negative 
exploration.42 Therefore, laparoscopic evaluation of abdominal 
pain in the critically ill elderly patient may prove to be a valu-
able tool.
Figure 47-5.  Diagnostic laparoscopy in an 80-year-old patient 
with abdominal pain, elevated white blood cell count and signs of 
bowel obstruction and sepsis. Comorbidities included severe aortic 
stenosis. Findings included a localized segment of bowel which was 
necrotic, associated with an adhesive band. The rest of the small 
intestine and colon were inspected, all of which were viable. A local 
resection was performed, and the patient recovered quickly.
Endovascular Surgery
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a disease that primar-
ily affects the elderly male patient. With increasing use of 
screening abdominal CT scans and ultrasounds for evaluation 
of various abdominal complaints, AAAs are being identified 
with greater frequency, most of which are diagnosed in elderly 
patients, given the increased prevalence of AAA with increas-
ing age. In fact, the percentage of AAA rises from about 1% at 
age 55 to 60 years to approximately 10% in patients 80 years of 
age or older.43 Elderly patients, and octogenarians in particular, 
were deemed poor operative candidates for the traditional open 
repair given the frequent presence of comorbid conditions and 
limited cardiopulmonary reserve to tolerate a major opera-
tion or the many hours of required operative time and general 
­anesthesia. Elderly patients had an increased perioperative mor-
bidity and mortality following open aortic surgery in comparison 
to younger cohorts. However, the introduction of endovascular 
techniques for repair of AAA has shifted the risk-benefit ratio 
for operative intervention, allowing greater life expectancy for 
the elective repair of this potentially life-threatening condition 
with the benefits of minimally invasive techniques as previously 
described.
Studies have demonstrated that endovascular aortic 
repair (EVAR) is feasible and efficacious in elderly patients, 
including those previously considered unfit for open repair. 
EVAR is a minimally invasive technique in which a prosthetic 
graft is introduced into the aortic lumen via the common fem-
oral artery to exclude the aortic aneurysm sac. EVAR sig-
nificantly reduces operative and anesthesia times, blood loss, 
intensive care needs, length of stays, and major postoperative 
morbidity associated with open AAA repair. The most com-
mon complication following EVAR in elderly patients is renal 
impairment. Typically, patients are discharged 1 to 2 days 
following surgery and the graft is deployed via small bilateral 
groin incisions, obviating the need for a major laparotomy 
incision. Figure 47-6 demonstrates the endovascular repair 
of AAA and right iliac artery aneurysm via bilateral groin 
access in an 82-year-old man who was discharged from the 
hospital on postoperative Day 2. This procedure also can be 
done using epidural anesthesia for high-risk candidates who 
may tolerate general anesthesia poorly. Endovascular repair 
has even been described under local anesthesia in patients at 
extreme high risk of rupture and death or after rupture and 
hemodynamic instability, precluding the ability to tolerate 
general anesthesia.44
Careful consideration of the life expectancy and the risk of 
rupture dictate the necessity for intervention. EVAR remains a 
viable option in elderly patients. Nonoperative management is 
justified in frail elderly patients with multiple comorbidities and 
reduced life expectancy whose operative risks outweigh the risk 
of rupture and in those who are unlikely to survive long enough 
to benefit from the repair.
THYROID SURGERY
The prevalence of thyroid disease increases with advancing 
age. The etiologies, risk factors, and presentations of thyroid 
disease are similar across all ages, and therefore, are not dis-
cussed in detail. Of note, however, is that elderly patients more 
often present with cardiac manifestations of hyperthyroidism, 
such as atrial fibrillation, than do their younger counterparts. 
A common finding requiring evaluation in elderly patients is 
1937
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
the presence of a thyroid nodule, usually detected by physical 
examination. These nodules usually are single and four times 
more common in women, making them a particular concern for 
postmenopausal elderly women. Papillary carcinoma in elderly 
patients tends to be sporadic with a bell-shaped distribution of 
age at presentation, occurring primarily in patients aged 30 to 
59 years old. The incidence of papillary carcinoma decreases in 
patients >60 years of age.45 However, patients >60 years of age 
have increased risk of local recurrence and for the development 
of distant metastases. Metastatic disease may be more com-
mon in this population secondary to delayed referral for surgi-
cal intervention because of the misconception that the surgeon 
will be unwilling to operate on an elderly patient with thyroid 
disease. Age is also a prognostic indicator for patients with fol-
licular carcinoma. There is a 2.2 times increased risk of mortal-
ity from follicular carcinoma per 20 years of increasing age.46 
Therefore, prognosis for elderly patients with differentiated 
thyroid carcinomas is worse compared to younger counterparts. 
The higher prevalence of vascular invasion and extracapsular 
extension among older patients is, in part, responsible for the 
poorer prognosis in geriatric patients. Advancing age leads to 
increased mortality risk for patients with thyroid cancer and is 
demonstrated by the AMES (age, metastases, extent of primary 
tumor, and size of tumor) classification system developed by 
the Lahey Clinic.
PARATHYROID SURGERY
Approximately 2% of the geriatric population, including 3% 
of women 75 years of age or older, will develop primary 
­hyperparathyroidism.47 Geriatric patients are usually referred 
to surgery only when advanced disease is present because 
of ­concerns regarding the risks of surgery, but low rates of 
­morbidity and negligible mortality combined with high cure 
rates of approximately 95% to 98% make parathyroidectomy 
safe and effective. Convincing evidence of the benefit of sur-
gery is the usual marked symptomatic improvement, which 
greatly improves the quality of life for most patients. The 
National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Statement 
recommends curative therapy after diagnosis of primary hyper-
thyroidism is established in a patient regardless of age. Specific 
indications for operative intervention regardless of age include 
a 30% decrease in creatinine clearance, 24-hour urinary calcium 
excretion >400 mg, and decreased bone density.48
Elderly patients are especially prone to developing men-
tal manifestations of hyperparathyroidism that may be severe 
enough to produce a dementia-like state. There often is a sig-
nificant improvement in mental status after parathyroidectomy. 
Another specific symptom of hyperparathyroidism that may eas-
ily be mistaken for osteoporosis and can be present in postmeno-
pausal, elderly women is orthopedic disease; specifically back 
pain, and possibly, the occurrence of vertebral fractures. This 
pain can be of moderate intensity, leading to impaired mobil-
ity and severely affecting the quality of life of elderly patients. 
The decreased bone density observed in elderly patients with 
hyperparathyroidism tends to improve during the first 2 years 
after successful parathyroid surgery.
Limited parathyroidectomies with minimal dissection in 
geriatric patients are an effective alternative. This is a viable 
option in patients with multiple comorbid conditions in whom 
the increased risk of surgical intervention or general anesthesia 
remains a concern. One study demonstrated that preoperative 
Figure 47-6.  Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms 
(AAAs) is gaining favor for suitable elderly patients to prevent 
rupture. Through minimal groin incisions, this 82-year-old patient 
underwent repair of an AAA and right iliac artery aneurysm and 
was discharged on postoperative day 2.
1938
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
localization of the hyperfunctioning gland with the aid of 99mTc-
sestamibi nuclear scanning, as well as intraoperative parathyroid 
hormone (PTH) assays to rapidly confirm that all hypersecreting 
glands have been removed, allows limited parathyroidectomy to 
be performed with accuracy in elderly patients.47 This procedure 
is described as “limited” because bilateral neck dissection for 
identification and biopsy of the remaining glands to determine 
if they are hypersecreting becomes unnecessary. The half-life of 
intact PTH is approximately 3 to 4 minutes. Therefore, a drop 
in the intraoperative PTH level at approximately 10 minutes 
after resection of the suspect hypersecreting gland suggests a 
98% probability that the patient will return to normocalcemic 
levels postoperatively.47
PALLIATIVE SURGERY
Palliative surgery is defined as surgical intervention targeted 
to alleviate a patient’s symptoms, thus improving the patient’s 
quality of life despite minimal impact on the patient’s survival.54 
With an increasing number of aging surgical patients who often 
present with advanced disease, surgeons must be familiar with 
the concept of palliation to control disease. This concept focuses 
on providing the maximal benefit to the patient using the least-
invasive intervention. Ultimately, this leads to symptom relief 
and preservation of the quality of life in terminal disease states. 
The uses of palliative surgery can range from extensive debulk-
ing operations aimed at aiding in the effectiveness of chemo-
therapy and radiation, to less complex operations to alleviate 
symptoms such as intractable vomiting, severe pain, cachexia, 
and anorexia that are common to terminal disease states. The 
success of palliative surgery is a careful balance between 
achieving symptom relief while ensuring that the development 
of new symptoms from the palliative intervention itself does 
not occur.
THE ROLE OF THE SURGEON IN GERIATRIC 
PATIENTS IS NOT LIMITED TO THE OR
The need for surgical input in helping elderly patients make 
decisions has never been more important. Inherent biases to 
age exist, such that patients who can be cured or palliated by 
surgical procedures are in many cases not being helped. For 
example, O’Connell demonstrated a decrease in referrals to 
surgery in aged patients with potentially curable oncologic 
illnesses, including those of breast, gastrointestinal, and lung 
(Fig. 47-7).50 Only a surgeon with knowledge of the current best 
practice approach for the aged patient can help a patient—and 
his or her referring physicians—understand the real risks and 
potential benefits of an intervention, be it curative or palliative.
The challenge for us is to improve perioperative care of 
the elderly surgical patient using new tools for careful patient 
selection, accurately assess risk factors to reduce postoperative 
morbidity and mortality, and deliver quality surgical inter-
ventions without compromising functional vitality.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
  1.	 Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP, Ko CY, Esnaola 
NF; American College of Surgeons National Surgical 
­Quality Improvement Program; American Geriatrics 
­Society. Optimal preoperative assessment of the geriatric sur-
gical patient: a best practices guideline from the American 
­College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program and the American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2012 Oct;215(4)453-466, doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg. 
2012.06.017. Epub 2012 Aug 21.
  2.	 Jaklitsch MT, Bueno R, Swanson SJ, et al. New surgical options 
for elderly lung cancer patients. Chest. 1999;116:480S-485.
  3.	 Asmis TR, Ding K, Seymour L et al. Age and comorbidity 
as independent factors in the treatment of non-small cell 
Figure 47-7.  Decreased referrals of patients to oncologic surgery based on age. This graph includes potentially resectable lesions. The authors 
found that only 10% of patients over the age of 70 who had liver or pancreatic cancers were referred for cancer-directed surgery. (Reproduced 
with permission from O’Connell JB, Maggard MA, Ko CY. Cancer-directed surgery for localized disease: decreased use in the elderly. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2004;11:962. With kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media.)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
40–44 45–49 50–54 55–59 60–64 65–69
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
Age Group
Breast
Colon
Rectum
Sarcoma
Stomach
Liver
Lung
Esophagus
Pancreas
years
years
years
years
70–74 75–79 80–84 85–89
90+
% Receiving Surgery
100
Receipt of Cancer-Directed Surgery by Age Group
90
80
7
1939
Surgical Considerations in the Elderly
CHAPTER 47
lung cancer: a review of National Cancer Institute of Canada 
­Clinical Trials Group Trials. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:54-59.
  4.	 Richardson J, Cocanour C, Kern J, et al. Perioperative risk 
assessment in the elderly and high risk patients. J Am Coll 
Surg. 2004;199:133-146.
  5.	 Williams SL, Jones PB, Pofahl WE. Preoperative manage-
ment of the older patient—A surgeon’s perspective: part 1. 
Clin Geriatr. 2006;14:24.
  6.	 Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR, et al. The intensity and 
variation of surgical care at the end of life: a retrospective 
cohort study. Lancet. 2011;378:1408-1413.
  7.	 Robinson TN, Eiseman B, Wallace JI, et al. Redefining 
geriatric preoperative assessment using frailty, disability 
and co-morbidity. Ann Surg. 2009;250:449-455.
  8.	 Zenilman ME. Surgery in the elderly.  Curr Probl Surg. 
1998;35:99-179.
  9.	 Hazen SE, Larsen PD, Martin JL. General anesthesia and 
elderly surgical patients. AORN J. 1997; 65:819.
10.	 Pasetto LM, Lise M, Monfardini S. Preoperative assessment of 
elderly cancer patients. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007; 64:10.
11.	 Ramesh HS, Pope D, Gennari R, et al. Optimising surgical manage-
ment of elderly cancer patients. World J Surg Oncol. 2005; 3:17.
12.	 Loran DB, Zwischenberger JB, et al.Thoracic surgery in the 
elderly. J Amer Coll Surg. 2004;199:773, 2004.
13.	 Jaklitsch MT, Pappas-Estocin A, Bueno R. Thoracoscopic sur-
gery in elderly lung cancer patients. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 
2004;49:154-171.
14.	 Ergina PL,Gold SL, Meakins JL. Preoperative care of the 
elderly surgical patient. World J Surg. 1993;17:192-198.
15.	 Beck LH. Perioperative renal, fluid, and electrolyte manage-
ment. Clin Geriatr Med. 1990;6:557-569.
16.	 Chen X, Xhao M, White PF, et al. The recovery of cognitive 
function after general anesthesia in elderly patients: a compari-
son of desflurane and sevoflurane. Anesth Analg. 93:1489-1494.
17.	 Rosenthal RA. Nutritional concerns in the older surgical 
patient. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;199:785-791.
18.	 Cerillo AG, Kodami AA, Solinas M, et al. Aortic valve surgery 
in the elderly patient: aretrospective review. Interact Cardio-
vasc Thorac Surg. 2007;6:308-313.
19.	 Srinivasan AK, Oo AY, Grayson AD, et al. Mid-term survival 
after cardiac surgery in elderly patients: Analysis of predic-
tors for increased mortality. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 
2004;3:289-293.
20.	 Davis EA, Gardner TJ, Gillinov AM, et al.Valvular disease 
in the elderly: influence on surgical results. Ann Thorac 
Surg.1993;55:333-337.
21.	 Richmond TS, Kaunder D, Strumpf N, et al. Characteristics 
and outcomes of serious traumatic injury in older adults. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2002;50:215-222.
22.	 Aziz S, Grover FL. Cardiovascular surgery in the elderly. 
Cardiol Clin. 1999;17:213-231.
23.	 Giordano SH, Hortobagyi GN, Kau SC, et al. Breast cancer treat-
ment guidelines in older women. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23: 783-791.
24.	 Hoekstra HJ. Cancer surgery in the elderly. Eur J Cancer. 
37:S235-S244.
25.	 Dellapasqua S, Colleoni M, Castiglione M, et al. New criteria 
for selecting elderly patients for breast cancer adjuvant treat-
ment studies. Oncologist. 2007;12:952-959.
26.	 Scalliet P, Kirkove C. Breast cancer in elderly women: can 
radiotherapy be omitted? Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:2264.
27.	 Gennari R. Breast cancer in elderly women. Optimizing the 
treatment. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008;110:199-209.
28.	 Yood MU, Owusu C, Buist DSM, et al. Mortality impact of 
less than standard treatment in older breast cancer patients. J 
Amer Coll Surg. 2008;206:66-75.
29.	 Wildiers H, Kunkler I, Biganzoli L, et al. Management of 
breast cancer in elderly individuals: recommendations of the 
International Society of Geriatric Oncology. Lancet Oncol. 
2007;8:1101-1115.
30.	 Tan E, Tilney H, Thompson M, et al. The United Kingdom 
National Bowel Cancer Project: Epidemiology and surgical 
risk in the elderly. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:2285-2294.
31.	 Amemiya T, Oda K, Ando M, et al. Activities of daily living 
and quality of life of elderly patients after elective surgery for 
gastric and colorectal cancers. Ann Surg. 2007;246:222-228.
32.	 Chang GJ, Skibber JM, Feig BW. Are we undertreating rectal 
cancer in the elderly? Ann Surg. 2007;246:215-221.
33.	 McCahill LE, Krouse RS, Chu DZ, et al. Decision making in 
palliative surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2002; 195:411-422.
34.	 Kahi CJ, Azzouz F, Juliar BE, Imperiale TF. Survival of 
elderly persons undergoing colonoscopy: implications for 
colorectal cancer screening and surveillance. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2007;66:544-550.
35.	 Mery CM, Pappas AN, Bueno R, et al.Similar long-term sur-
vival of elderly patients with non-small cell lung cancer treated 
with lobectomy or wedge resection within the surveillance, epi-
demiology, and end results database. Chest. 2005;28:237-245.
36.	 Cattaneo SM, Park BJ, Wilton AS, et al. Use of video-assisted 
thoracic surgery for lobectomy in the elderly results in fewer 
complications. Ann Thoracic Surg. 2008;85:231-235.
37.	 Richmond TS, Kaunder D, et al. Characteristics and outcomes 
of serious traumatic injuries in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2002;50:215-222.
38.	 Rubenstein LZ, Josephson KR.The epidemiology of falls and 
syncope. Clin Geriatr Med. 2002;18:141-158.
39.	 Chang TT, Schecter WP. Injury in the elderly and end-of-life 
decisions. Surg Clin North Am. 2007;87:229-245.
40.	 Stewart BT, Stitz RW, Lumley JW. Laparoscopically assisted 
colorectal surgery in the elderly. Br J Surg. 1999;86:938-941.
41.	 Ballista-Lopez C, Cid JA, Poves I, et al. Laparoscopic surgery 
in the elderly patient: Surg Endosc. 2003;17:333.
42.	 Rosenthal RA, Zenilman ME, Katlic MR (eds). Principles 
and Practice of Geriatric Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 2011.
43.	 Biebl M, Lau LL, Hakaim AG, et al. Midterm outcomes of endo-
vascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in octogenarians: 
asingle institution’s experience. J Vasc Surg. 2004;40:435-442.
44.	 Morales JP, Irani FG, Junes KG, et al. Endovascular repair of a 
ruptured aortic aneurysm under local anesthesia. Brit J Radiol. 
2005;78:62-64.
45.	 McConahey WM, Hay ID, Wodner LB, et al. Papillary thyroid 
cancer treated at the Mayo Clinic, 1946 through 1970: initial 
manifestations, pathologic findings, therapy, and outcome. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 1986;61:978-996.
46.	 Mueller-Gaertner H, Brzac HT, Rehpenning W. Prognostic 
indices for tumor relapse and tumor mortality in follicular 
thyroid carcinoma. Cancer. 1991;67:1903-1911.
47.	 Irvin GL, Carneiro DM. “Limited” parathyroidectomy in geri-
atric patients. Ann Surg. 2001;233:612-616.
48.	 Sheldon DG, Lee FT, Neil NJ, Ryan JA Jr. Surgical treatment 
of hyperparathyroidism improves health related quality of life. 
Arch Surg. 2002;137:1022-1026.
49.	 O’Connell JB, Maggard MA, Ko CY. Cancer-directed surgery 
for localized disease: decreased use in the elderly. Ann Surg 
Oncol. 2004;11(11):962-969.
50.	 Sullivan DJ, Hansen-Flaschen J. Termination of life support 
after major trauma. Surg Clin North Am. 2000;80:1055-1066.
51.	 Hinshaw DB, Carnahan JM, Johnson DL. Depression, anxiety, and 
asthenia in advanced illness. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;195:271-277.
52.	 Dunn GP, Milch RA, Mosenthal AC, et al. Palliative care by 
the surgeon: how to do it. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;194:509-537.
53.	 Conner SR. Hospice: Practice, Pitfalls, and Promise. 
­Washington: Taylor and Francis;1988.
54.	 Sheehan DC, Forman WB:.Hospice and Palliative Care Con-
cepts and Practice. Boston: Jones and Bartlett;1996.
55.	 Breen CM, Abernethy AP, Abbott KM, et al. Conflict associ-
ated with decisions to limit life-sustaining treatment in inten-
sive care units. J Gen Intern Med. 16:283-289.
This page intentionally left blank 
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care 
at the End of Life
Daniel E. Hall, Peter Angelos, Geoffrey P. Dunn, 
Daniel B. Hinshaw, and Timothy M. Pawlik
48
Dedicated to the advancement of surgery along its scientific and 
moral side.
June 10, 1926, dedication on the Murphy Auditorium, the 
first home of the American College of Surgeons
WHY ETHICS MATTER
Ethical concerns involve not only the interests of patients, but 
also the interests of surgeons and society. Surgeons choose 
among the options available to them because they have particular 
opinions regarding what would be good (or bad) for their patients. 
Aristotle described practical wisdom (Greek: phronesis) as the 
capacity to choose the best option from among several imperfect 
alternatives (Fig. 48-1).1 Frequently, surgeons are confronted 
with clinical or interpersonal situations in which there is incom-
plete information, uncertain outcomes, and/or complex personal 
and familial relationships. The capacity to choose wisely in such 
circumstances is the challenge of surgical practice.
DEFINITIONS AND OVERVIEW
Biomedical ethics is the system of analysis and deliberation 
dedicated to guiding surgeons toward the “good” in the prac-
tice of surgery. One of the most influential ethical “systems” 
in the field of biomedical ethics is the principalist approach as 
articulated by Beauchamp and Childress.2 In this approach to 
ethical issues, moral dilemmas are deliberated by using four 
guiding principles: autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, 
and justice.2
The principle of autonomy respects the capacity of individu-
als to choose their own destiny, and it implies a right for indi-
viduals to make those choices. It also implies an obligation for 
physicians to permit patients to make autonomous choices about 
their medical care. Beneficence requires that proposed actions aim 
Why Ethics Matter	
1941
Definitions and Overview	
1941
Specific Issues in Surgical  
Ethics	
1942
Informed Consent / 1942
The Boundaries of Autonomy:  
Advanced Directives and Powers of 
Attorney / 1944
Withdrawing and Withholding  
Life-Sustaining Therapies / 1945
Palliative Care	
1946
General Principles of Palliative  
Care / 1946
Concepts of Suffering, Pain, Health,  
and Healing / 1947
Effective Communication and  
Negotiating the Goals of Care / 1947
Care at the End of Life	
1948
The Syndrome of Imminent  
Demise / 1948
Common Symptoms at the End of Life 
and Their Management / 1948
Pronouncing Death / 1949
Professional Ethics: Conflict of  
Interest, Research, and Clinical 
Ethics	
1949
Conflict of Interest / 1949
Research Ethics / 1952
Special Concerns in Surgical Research / 
1952
Surgical Innovation and Surgical 
Research / 1952
Clinical Ethics: Disclosure of Errors / 1952
at and achieve something good whereas nonmaleficence aims at 
avoiding concrete harm: primum non nocere∗. Justice requires 
fairness where both the benefits and burdens of a particular action 
are distributed equitably.
The history of medical ethics has its origins in antiquity. The 
Hippocratic Oath along with other professional codes has guided 
the actions of physicians for thousands of years. However, the 
growing technical powers of modern medicine raise new ques-
tions that were inconceivable in previous generations. Life sup-
port, dialysis, and modern drugs, as well as organ and cellular 
transplantation, have engendered new moral and ethical questions. 
As such, the ethical challenges faced by the surgeon have become 
more complex and require greater attention.
The case-based paradigm for bioethics is used when the 
clinical team encounters a situation in which two or more val-
ues or principles come into apparent conflict. The first step is to 
clarify the relevant principles (e.g., autonomy, beneficence, non-
maleficence, and justice) and values at stake (e.g., self-determi-
nation, quality of life, etc.). After identifying the principles and 
values that are affecting the situation, a proposed course of action 
is considered given the circumstances. 
Much of the discourse in bioethics adopts this “principlist” 
approach in which the relevant principles are identified, weighed 
and balanced, and then applied to formulate a course of action. 
This approach to bioethics is a powerful technique for thinking 
through moral problems because the four principles help identify 
what is at stake in any proposed course of action. However, the 
principles themselves do not resolve ethical dilemmas. Working 
together, patients and surgeons must use wise judgment to choose 
the best course of action for the specific case.
Choosing wisely requires the virtue of practical wisdom first 
described by Aristotle (Fig. 48-1). Along with the other cardinal 
virtues of courage, justice and temperance, practical wisdom is a 
central component of virtue ethics which complement principlist 
*“First do no harm.”
chapter 
ethics by guiding choices toward the best options for treatment. 
Practical wisdom cannot be learned from books and is developed 
only through experience. The apprenticeship model of surgical 
residency fosters the development of practical wisdom through 
experience. More than teaching merely technical mastery, surgical 
residency is also moral training. In fact, the sociologist Charles 
Bosk argues that the “postgraduate training of surgeons is above 
all things an ethical training.”3
1942
Key Points
1 	 The physician should document that the patient or surrogate 
has the capacity to make a medical decision.
2 	 The physician discloses to the patient details regarding the 
diagnosis and treatment options sufficient for the patient to 
make an informed consent.
3 	 Living wills are written to anticipate treatment options and 
choices in the event that a patient is rendered incompetent by 
a terminal illness.
4 	 The durable power of attorney for healthcare identifies surro-
gate decision makers and invests them with the authority to 
make healthcare decisions on the patient’s behalf in the event 
that they are unable to speak for themselves.
5 	 Surgeons should encourage their patients to clearly identify 
their surrogates early in the course of treatment.
6 	 Earlier referral and wider use of palliative and hospice care 
may help more patients achieve their goals at the end of 
life.
7 	 Seven requirements for the ethical conduct of clinical trials 
have been articulated: value, scientific validity, fair subject 
selection, favorable risk-benefit ratio, independent review, 
informed consent, and respect for enrolled subjects.
8 	 Disclosure of error is consistent with recent ethical 
advances in medicine toward more openness with patients 
and the involvement of patients in their care.
Figure 48-1.  Bust of Aristotle. Marble, Roman copy after a 
Greek bronze original by Lysippos from 330 b.c. [From http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Aristotle_Altemps_Inv8575.jpg: ­Ludovisi 
Collection, Accession number Inv. 8575, Palazzo Altemps, Loca-
tion Ground Floor, Branch of the National Roman Museum. 
Photographer/­source Jastrow (2006) from Wikipedia (accessed 
April 8, 2014).]
SPECIFIC ISSUES IN SURGICAL ETHICS
Informed Consent
Although a relatively recent development, the doctrine of 
informed consent is one of the most widely established tenets 
of modern biomedical ethics. During the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries, most physicians practiced a form of benign 
paternalism whereby patients were rarely involved in the 
decision-making process regarding their medical care, relying 
instead on the beneficence of the physician. Consensus among 
the wider public eventually changed such that surgeons are now 
expected to have an open discussion about diagnosis and treat-
ment with the patient to obtain informed consent. In the United 
States, the legal doctrine of simple consent dates from the 1914 
decision in Schloendorff vs. The Society of New York Hospital 
regarding a case in which a surgeon removed a diseased uterus 
after the patient had consented to an examination under anesthe-
sia, but with the express stipulation that no operative excision 
should be performed. The physician argued that his decision 
was justified by the beneficent obligation to avoid the risks of a 
second anesthetic. However, Justice Benjamin Cardozo stated:
Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right 
to determine what shall be done with his body; and a surgeon 
who performs an operation without his patient’s consent com-
mits an assault, for which he is liable in ­damages . . . except 
in cases of emergency, where the patient is unconscious, 
and where it is necessary to operate before consent can be 
obtained.4
Having established that patients have the right to deter-
mine what happens to their bodies, it took some time for the 
modern concept of informed consent to emerge from the ­initial 
doctrine of simple consent. The initial approach appealed to 
a professional practice standard whereby physicians were 
obligated to disclose to patients the kind of information that 
experienced surgeons customarily disclosed.5 However, this dis-
closure was not always adequate for patient needs. In the 1972 
landmark case, Canterbury vs. Spence, the court rejected the 
professional practice standard in favor of the reasonable person 
standard whereby physicians are obliged to disclose to patients 
all information regarding diagnosis, treatment options, and risks 
that a “reasonable patient” would want to know in a similar situ-
ation. Rather than relying on the practices or consensus of the 
medical community, the reasonable person standard empowers 
1943
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
the public (reasonable persons) to determine how much infor-
mation should be disclosed by physicians to ensure that con-
sent is truly informed. The court did recognize, however, that 
there are practical limits on the amount of information that can 
be communicated or assimilated.5 Subsequent litigation has 
revolved around what reasonable people expect to be disclosed 
in the consent process to include the nature and frequency of 
potential complications, the prognostic life expectancy,6 and the 
surgeon-specific success rates.4 Despite the litigious environ-
ment of medical practice, it is difficult to prosecute a case of 
inadequate informed consent so long as the clinician has made 
a concerted and documented effort to involve the patient in the 
decision-making process.
Adequate informed consent entails at least four basic 
elements: (a) the physician documents that the patient or sur-
rogate has the capacity to make a medical decision; (b) 
the surgeon discloses to the patient details regarding the 
diagnosis and treatment options sufficiently for the patient 
to make an informed choice; (c) the patient demonstrates 
understanding of the disclosed information before (d) authoriz-
ing freely a specific treatment plan without undue influence 
(Fig. 48-2). These goals are aimed at respecting each patient’s 
prerogative for autonomous self-determination. To accomplish 
these goals, the surgeon needs to engage in a discussion about 
the causes and nature of the patient’s disease, the risks and ben-
efits of available treatment options, as well as details regarding 
what patients can expect after an operative intervention.7–14
Informed consent can be challenging in certain clinical 
settings. For example, obtaining consent for emergency ­surgery, 
where decisions are often made with incomplete information, 
can be difficult. Emergency consent requires the ­surgeon 
to consider if and how possible interventions might save a 
patient’s life, and if successful, what kind of disability might be 
­anticipated. Surgical emergencies are one of the few instances 
where the limits of patient autonomy are freely acknowledged, 
and surgeons are empowered by law and ethics to act promptly 
in the best interests of their patients according to the surgeon’s 
judgment. Most applicable medical laws require physicians to 
provide the standard of care to incapacitated patients, even if 
it entails invasive procedures without the explicit consent of 
the patient or surrogate. If at all possible, surgeons should seek 
the permission of their patients to provide treatment, but when 
emergency medical conditions render patients unable to grant 
that permission, and when delay is likely to have grave conse-
quences, surgeons are legally and ethically justified in provid-
ing whatever surgical treatment the surgeon judges necessary 
to preserve life and restore health.4 This justification is based 
on the social consensus that most people would want their lives 
and health protected in this way, and this consensus is mani-
fest in the medical profession’s general orientation to preserve 
life. It may be that subsequent care may be withdrawn or with-
held when the clinical prognosis is clearer, but in the context of 
initial resuscitation of injured patients, incomplete information 
makes clear judgments about the patient’s ultimate prognosis or 
outcome impossible.
The process of consent can also be challenging in the pedi-
atric population. For many reasons, children and adolescents 
cannot participate in the process of giving informed consent in 
the same way as adults. Depending on their age, children may 
lack the cognitive and emotional maturity to participate fully 
Figure 48-2.  Algorithm for navigating the process of informed consent. (From Childers R, Lipsett A, Pawlik T. Informed consent and the 
surgeon. J Am Coll Surg. E-pub Jan. 21, 2009. kkjkjdht 2009, with permission from Elsevier.)
Patient establishes self
as decision-maker
No
Yes
Engage patient
directly in informed
consent process and
in all aspects of care
Identify patient’s cultural
identity and, if possible,
explicit preferences for
making decisions,
including degree of family
involvement.
Maintain heightened
awareness of patient-
family or patient-
surrogate interactions
Make sure family or
other surrogate is willing
participant in informed
consent process
Continuously reassess
for signs that patient is
unhappy with current role in
informed consent process
Secure private discussion
with patient and remind
patient of right to
informed consent process.
Make sure patient has
not deferred decision-
making involuntarily
1
2
1944
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
in the process. In addition, depending on the child’s age, their 
specific circumstances, as well as the local jurisdiction, children 
may not have legal standing to fully participate on their own 
independent of their parents. The use of parents or guardians as 
surrogate decision makers only partially addresses the ethical 
responsibility of the surgeon to involve the child in the informed 
consent process. The surgeon should strive to augment the role 
of the decision makers by involving the child in the process. 
Specifically, children should receive age-appropriate informa-
tion about their clinical situation and therapeutic options so that 
the surgeon can solicit the child’s “assent” for treatment. In this 
manner, while the parents or surrogate decision makers formally 
give the informed consent, the child remains an integral part of 
the process.
Certain religious practices can present difficulties in treat-
ing minor children in need of life-saving blood transfusions; 
however, case law has made clear the precedent that parents, 
regardless of their held beliefs, may not place their minor 
­children at mortal risk. In such a circumstance, the physician 
should seek counsel from the hospital medicolegal team, as well 
as from the institutional ethics team. Legal precedent has, in 
general, established that the hospital or physician can proceed 
with providing all necessary care for the child.
Obtaining “consent” for organ donation deserves specific 
mention.15 Historically, discussion of organ donation with fami-
lies of potential donors was performed by transplant profession-
als, who were introduced to families by intensivists after brain 
death had been confirmed and the family had been informed of 
the fact of death. In other instances, consent might be obtained 
by intensivists caring for the donor, as they were assumed to 
know the patient’s family and could facilitate the process. 
­However, issues of moral “neutrality” as part of end-of-life care 
in the intensive care unit have caused a shift in how ­obtaining 
­“consent” for organ donation is handled. Responsibility for 
obtaining consent from the donor family is now vested in trained 
“designated requestors” (or “organ ­procurement ­coordinators”)16 
or by “independent” intensivists who do not have a therapeutic 
clinical relationship with the potential donor.17 In this way, the 
donor family can be allowed to make the decision regarding 
donation in a “neutral” environment without erosion of the ther-
apeutic relationship with the treating physician.
The process of informed consent also can be limited by the 
capacity of patients to assimilate information in the context of 
their illness. For example, despite the best efforts of surgeons, 
evidence suggests that patients rarely retain much of what is dis-
closed in the consent conversation, and they may not remember 
discussing details of the procedure that become relevant when 
postoperative complications arise.18 It is important to recognize 
that the doctrine of informed consent places the most emphasis 
on the principle of autonomy precisely in those clinical situa-
tions when, because of their severe illness or impending death, 
patients are often divested of their autonomy.
The Boundaries of Autonomy: Advanced 
Directives and Powers of Attorney
Severe illness and impending death can often render patients 
incapable of exercising their autonomy regarding medical 
­decisions. One approach to these difficult situations is to make 
decisions in the “best interests” of patients, but because such 
decisions require value judgments about which thoughtful 
­people frequently disagree, ethicists, lawyers. and legislators 
have sought a more reliable solution. Advanced directives of 
various forms have been developed to carry forward into the 
future the autonomous choices of competent adults regarding 
health care decisions. Furthermore, the courts often accept 
“informal” advanced directives in the form of sworn testimony 
about statements the patient made at some time previous to 
their illness. When a formal document expressing the patient’s 
advanced directives fails to exist, surgeons should consider the 
comments patients and families make when asked about their 
wishes in the setting of debilitating illness.
Living wills are written to anticipate treatment options and 
choices in the event that a patient is incapacitated by a terminal 
illness. In the living will, the patient indicates which treat-
ments she wishes to permit or prohibit in the setting of ter-
minal illness. The possible treatments addressed often include 
mechanical ventilation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, artificial 
nutrition, dialysis, antibiotics, or transfusion of blood products. 
Unfortunately, living wills are often too vague to offer concrete 
guidance in complex clinical situations, and the language (“ter-
minal illness,” “artificial nutrition”) can be interpreted in many 
ways. Furthermore, by limiting the directive only to “terminal” 
conditions, it does not provide guidance for common clinical 
scenarios like advanced dementia, delirium, or persistent veg-
etative states where the patient is unable to make decisions, but 
is not “terminally” ill. Perhaps even more problematic is the 
evidence that demonstrates that healthy patients cannot reliably 
predict their preferences when they are actually sick. This phe-
nomenon is called “affective forecasting” and applies to many 
situations. For example, the general public estimates the health-
related quality of life (HRQoL) score of patients on dialysis at 
0.39, although dialysis patients themselves rate their HRQoL at 
0.56.19 Similarly, patients with colostomies rated their HRQoL 
at 0.92, compared to a score of 0.80 given by the general pub-
lic for patients with colostomies.19 For these and other reasons, 
living wills are often unable to provide the extent of assistance 
they promise.20
An alternative to living wills is the durable power of attor-
ney for health care in which patients identify surrogate decision 
makers and invest them with the authority to make health care 
decisions on their behalf in the event that they are unable to 
speak for themselves. Proponents of this approach hope 
that the surrogate will be able to make decisions that 
reflect the choices that the patients themselves would make 
if they were able. Unfortunately, several studies demonstrate 
that surrogates are not much better than chance at predicting 
the choices patients make when the patient is able to state a 
­preference. For example, a recent meta-analysis found that sur-
rogates predicted patients’ treatment preferences with only 68% 
accuracy.21 These data reveal a flaw in the guiding principle of 
surrogate decision making: Surrogates do not necessarily have 
privileged insight into the autonomous preferences of patients. 
However, the durable power of attorney at least allows patients 
to choose the person who will eventually make prudential 
decisions on their behalf and in their best interests; therefore, 
respecting the judgment of the surrogate is a way of respecting 
the self-determination of the incapacitated patient.22
There is continuing enthusiasm for a wider use of advanced 
directives. In fact, the 1991 Patient Self Determination Act 
requires all U.S. health care facilities to (a) inform patients of 
their rights to have advanced directives, and (b) to document 
those advanced directives in the chart at the time any patient is 
admitted to the health care facility.4 However, only a minority 
of patients in U.S. hospitals have advanced directives despite 
3
4
1945
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
concerted efforts to teach the public of their benefits. For exam-
ple, the ambitious SUPPORT trial used specially trained nurses 
to promote communication between physicians, patients, and 
their surrogates to improve the care and decision making of 
critically ill patients. Despite this concerted effort, the interven-
tion demonstrated “no significant change in the timing of do 
not resuscitate (DNR) orders, in physician-patient agreement 
about DNR orders, in the number of undesirable days (patients 
experiences), in the prevalence of pain, or in the resources 
consumed.”23
Some of the reluctance around physician-patient agree-
ment about DNR orders may reflect patient and family anxiety 
that DNR orders equate to “do not treat.” Patients and families 
should be assured, when appropriate, that declarations of DNR/
do not intubate will not necessarily result in a change in ongoing 
routine clinical care. The issue of temporarily rescinding DNR/
do not intubate orders around the time of an operative procedure 
may also need to be addressed with the family.
Patients should be encouraged to clearly identify their sur-
rogates, both formally and informally, early in the course of 
treatment, and before any major elective operation. Often, 
around the time of surgery or at the end of life, there are 
limits to patient autonomy in medical decision making. Seeking 
an advanced directive or surrogate decision maker requires time 
that is not always available when the clinical situation deteriorates. 
As such, these issues should be clarified as early as possible in 
the patient-physician relationship.
Withdrawing and Withholding  
Life-Sustaining Therapies
The implementation of various forms of life support technol-
ogy raise a number of legal and ethical concerns about when 
it is permissible to withdraw or withhold available therapeu-
tic technology. There is general consensus among ethicists 
that there are no philosophic differences between withdrawing 
(stopping) or withholding (not starting) treatments that are no 
longer beneficial.24 However, the right to refuse, withdraw, and 
withhold beneficial treatments was not established before the 
landmark case of Karen Ann Quinlan. In 1975, Quinlan lapsed 
into a persistent vegetative state requiring ventilator support. 
After several months without clinical improvement, ­Quinlan’s 
parents asked the hospital to withdraw ventilator support. 
The ­hospital refused, fearing prosecution for euthanasia. The 
case was appealed to the New Jersey Supreme Court where the 
­justices ruled that it was permissible to withdraw ventilator 
support.25 This case established a now commonly recognized 
right to withdraw “extraordinary” life-saving technology if it is 
no longer desired by the patient or the patient’s surrogate.
The difference between “ordinary” and “extraordinary” 
care, and whether there is an ethical difference in withhold-
ing or withdrawing “ordinary” vs. “extraordinary” care, has 
been an area of much contention. The 1983 Nancy Cruzan case 
highlighted this issue. In this case, Cruzan had suffered severe 
injuries in an automobile crash that rendered her in a persistent 
vegetative state. Cruzan’s family asked that her tube feeds be 
withheld, but the hospital refused. The case was appealed to the 
U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled that the tube feeding could 
be withheld if her parents demonstrated “clear and convincing 
evidence” that the incapacitated patient would have rejected the 
treatment.26 In this ruling, the court essentially ruled that there 
was no legal distinction between “ordinary” vs. “extraordinary” 
life-sustaining therapies.27 In allowing the feeding tube to be 
Double effect
Conditions
Action
Good effect
Bad effect
Good effect
Bad effect
Act
Intrinsic moral wrong
Agent
Intends
Good effect
Bad effect
1
2
3
4
Act
Bad effect
Good effect
Figure 48-3.  The four elements of the double effect principle: 
a) The good effect is produced directly by the action and not by the 
bad effect. b) The person must intend only the good effect, even 
though the bad effect may be foreseen. c) The act itself must not 
be intrinsically wrong, or needs to be at least neutral. d) The good 
effect is sufficiently desirable to compensate for allowing the bad 
effect.
removed, the court accepted the principle that a competent per-
son (even through a surrogate decision maker) has the right to 
decline treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. 
Constitution. The court noted, however, that there has to be 
clear and convincing evidence of the patient’s wishes (principle 
of autonomy) and that the burdens of the medical intervention 
should outweigh its benefits (consistent with the principles of 
beneficence and nonmaleficence).
In deliberating the issue of withdrawing vs. withholding 
life-sustaining therapies, the principle of “double effect” is 
often mentioned. According to the principle of “double effect,” 
a treatment (e.g., opioid administration in the terminally ill) that 
is intended to help and not harm the patient (i.e., relieve pain) 
is ethically acceptable even if an unintended consequence (side 
effect) of its administration is to shorten the life of the patient 
(e.g., by respiratory depression). Under the principle of double 
effect, a physician may withhold or withdraw a life-sustaining 
therapy if the surgeon’s intent is to relieve suffering, not to 
hasten death. The classic formulation of double effect has four 
­elements (Fig. 48-3).
Withholding or withdrawing of life-sustaining therapy is 
ethically justified under the principle of double effect if the phy-
sician’s intent is to relieve suffering, not to kill the patient. Thus, 
in managing the distress of the dying, there is a fundamental eth-
ical difference between titrating medications rapidly to achieve 
relief of distress and administering a very large bolus with the 
intent of causing apnea. It is important to note, however, that 
although the use of opioids for pain relief in advanced illness is 
frequently cited as the classic example of the double effect rule, 
opioids can be used safely without significant risk. In fact, if 
administered appropriately, in the vast majority of instances the 
5
1946
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
rule of double effect need not be invoked when administering 
opioids for symptom relief in advanced illness.28
In accepting the ethical equivalence of withholding and 
withdrawing of life-sustaining therapy, surgeons can make diffi-
cult treatment decisions in the face of prognostic uncertainty.24 In 
light of this, some important principles to consider when consid-
ering withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy include: (a) Any and 
all treatments can be withdrawn. If circumstances justify with-
drawal of one therapy (e.g., IV pressors, antibiotics), they may 
also justify withdrawal of others; (b) Be aware of the ­symbolic 
value of continuing some therapies (e.g., nutrition, hydration) 
even though their role in palliation is questionable; (c) Before 
withdrawing life-sustaining therapy, ask the patient and family if 
a spiritual advisor (e.g., pastor, imam, rabbi, or priest) should be 
called; and (d) Consider requesting an ethics consult.
Although the clinical setting may seem limited, a range 
of options usually exists with respect to withdrawing or with-
holding treatment, allowing for an incremental approach, for 
example (a) continuing the current regimen without adding new 
interventions or tests; (b) continuing the current regimen but 
withdrawing elements when they are no longer beneficial; and 
(c) withdrawing and withholding all treatments that are not tar-
geted to relieve symptoms and maximize patient comfort.29
The surgeon might consider discussing the clinical situ-
ation with the patient or proxy decision maker, identify the 
various therapeutic options, and delineate the reasons why 
withholding or withdrawing life-sustaining therapy would be 
in the patient’s best interest. If the patient (or designated proxy 
decision maker) does not agree with withholding or withdraw-
ing life-sustaining therapy, the surgeon should consider or 
recommend a second medical opinion. If the second opinion 
corroborates that life-sustaining therapy should be withheld 
or withdrawn but the patient/family continues to disagree, the 
surgeon should consider assistance from institutional resources 
such as the ethics committee and hospital administration. 
Although the surgeon is not ethically obligated to provide treat-
ment that he or she believes is futile, the surgeon is responsible 
for continued care of the patient, which may involve trans-
ferring the patient to a surgeon who is willing to provide the 
requested intervention.24
PALLIATIVE CARE
General Principles of Palliative Care
Palliative care is a coordinated, interdisciplinary effort that aims 
to relieve suffering and improve quality of life for patients and 
their families in the context of serious illness.34 It is offered 
simultaneously with all other appropriate medical treatment, 
and its indication is not limited to situations associated with a 
poor prognosis for survival. Palliative care strives to achieve 
more than symptom control, but it should not be confused with 
noncurative treatment.
The World Health Organization defines palliative care 
as “an approach that improves the quality of life of patients 
and their families facing the problems associated with life-
threatening illness, through the prevention and relief of suffering 
by means of early identification and impeccable assessment and 
treatment of pain and other problems, physical, psychosocial, and 
spiritual.”29 Palliative care is both a philosophy of care and an 
organized, highly structured system for delivering care.
Palliative care includes the entire spectrum of intervention 
for the relief of symptoms and the promotion of quality of life. 
Table 48-1
Indications for palliative care consultation
Patients with conditions that are progressive and life-limiting,  
  especially if characterized by burdensome symptoms,  
  functional decline, and progressive cognitive deficits
Assistance in clarification or reorientation of patient/family  
  goals of care
Assistance in resolution of ethical dilemmas
Situations in which patient/surrogate declines further  
  invasive or curative treatments with stated preference for  
  comfort measures only
Patients who are expected to die imminently or shortly after  
  hospital discharge
Provision of bereavement support for patient care staff,  
  particularly after loss of a colleague under care
No specific therapy, including surgical intervention, is excluded 
from consideration. Therefore, surgeons have valuable contri-
butions to make to palliative care. In fact, the term palliative 
care was coined in 1975 by Canadian surgeon, Balfour Mount. 
Furthermore, surgical palliative care can be defined as the treat-
ment of suffering and the promotion of quality of life for seri-
ously or terminally ill patients under the care of surgeons.31 The 
standard of palliative treatment lies in the agreement between 
patient and physician that the expected outcome is relief from 
distressing symptoms, lessening of pain, and improvement of 
quality of life. The decision to intervene is based on the treat-
ment’s ability to meet the stated goals, rather than its impact on 
the underlying disease.
The fundamental elements of palliative care consist of pain 
and nonpain symptom management, communication among 
patients, their families, and care providers, and continuity of 
care across health systems and through the trajectory of illness. 
Additional features of system-based palliative care are team-
based planning that includes patient and family; close attention 
to spiritual matters; and psychosocial support for patients, their 
families, and care providers, including bereavement support.
Indications for palliative care consultation in surgical 
practice include: (a) patients with conditions that are progres-
sive and life-limiting, especially if characterized by burden-
some symptoms, functional decline, and progressive cognitive 
deficits; (b) assistance in clarification or reorientation of patient/
family goals of care; (c) assistance in resolution of ethical 
dilemmas; (d) situations in which a patient/surrogate declines 
further invasive or curative treatments with stated preference 
for comfort measures only; (e) patients who are expected to die 
imminently or shortly after hospital discharge; and (f) provi-
sion of bereavement support for patient care staff, particularly 
after loss of a colleague under care31 (Table 48-1). Although all 
patients, regardless of prognosis, may benefit from the services 
of a palliative care physician, hospice care is a specific form 
of palliative care intended for patients who have an estimated 
prognosis of 6 months or less to live. Hospice care is covered 
under Medicare Part A, and benefits may be continued beyond 
the original 6 months of estimated survival if physicians cer-
tify that life expectancy remains limited to 6 months or less. 
Although most Americans indicate a preference to die at 
home, nearly 75% die in an institutional setting. Earlier 
referral and wider use of the hospice benefit may help more 
patients achieve their goal of dying at home.
6
1947
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
Table 48-2
Simple prognostication tool in advanced illness 
(especially cancer)
Functional Level
Performance 
Status (ECOG)
Prognosis
Able to perform all basic 
ADLs independently and 
some IADLs
2
Months
Resting/sleeping up to 
50% or more of waking 
hours and requiring some 
assistance with basic ADLs
3
Weeks to a 
few months
Dependent for basic ADLs 
and bed-to-chair existence
4
Days to a 
few weeks at 
most
These observations apply to patients with advanced, progressive, 
­incurable illnesses (e.g., metastatic cancer refractory to treatment).
Basic ADL = activities of daily living (e.g., transferring, toileting, 
­bathing, dressing, and feeding oneself); IADL = instrumental activities 
of daily living (e.g., more complex activities such as meal preparation, 
performing household chores, balancing a checkbook, shopping, etc.); 
ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group functional  
(performance) status.
Concepts of Suffering, Pain, Health,  
and Healing
Palliative care addresses specifically the individual patient’s 
experience of suffering due to illness. Indeed, the philosophical 
origins of palliative care began with attention to suffering 
and the existential questions suffering engenders. More than 
mere technologic evolution in the management of symptoms, 
the early proponents of palliative care sought a revolution in the 
moral foundations of medicine that challenged the assumptions 
that so often seemed to result in futile invasive intervention, 
and identified many of the problems that were subsequently 
taken up by medical ethicists. This reorientation of the goals of 
medical care from a focus on disease and its management to the 
patient’s experience of illness focuses attention on the purpose 
of medicine and the meaning of health and healing.
Over the past half century, several concepts and theo-
ries about the nature of pain, suffering, and health have been 
proposed in service of the evolving conceptual framework of 
palliative care. For example, while considering the differences 
between disease-oriented and illness-oriented approaches to the 
care of seriously ill patients, psychiatrist Arthur ­Kleinman wrote, 
“There is a moral core to healing in all societies. ­[Healing] is the 
central purpose of medicine . . . the purpose of medicine is both 
control of disease processes and care for the illness experience. 
Nowhere is this clearer than in the relationship of the chroni-
cally ill to their medical system: For them, the control of disease 
is by definition limited; care for the life problems created by the 
disorder is the chief issue.”34
The relief of pain has been the clinical foundation for hos-
pice and palliative care. It has been defined by the International 
Association for the Study of Pain as “An unpleasant sensory and 
emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue 
damage, or described in terms of such damage.”35 For purposes 
of interdisciplinary palliative care, Saunders’s concept of “Total 
Pain”31 is a more useful definition and is frequently used as the 
basis for palliative assessments. Total Pain is the sum total of 
four principal domains of pain: physical, psychologic, social or 
socioeconomic, and spiritual. Each of these contributes to, but 
is not synonymous with, suffering.
Effective Communication and Negotiating  
the Goals of Care
Changing the goals of care from cure to palliation near the 
end of life is both emotionally and clinically challenging, and 
it depends on a clear prognosis and effective communication. 
Unfortunately, prognostication can be notoriously difficult and 
inaccurate in advanced illness, and Christakis has argued that, 
to a large degree, physicians have abdicated their traditional 
responsibility to provide clear prognosis regarding incurable 
disease and approaching death.37 However, there are validated 
tools for prognosis in critical illness (APACHE, MODS, etc.), 
and with most advanced diseases, functional status is the most 
powerful predictor of survival. For example, patients with 
advanced metastatic cancer who are resting/sleeping for 50% 
or more of normal waking hours and require some assistance 
with activities of daily living (ADL) have a projected survival of 
weeks, and patients who are essentially bedfast and dependent 
for ADL have a projected survival of days to a week or two at 
best. Table 48-2 shows a simple prognostic tool to aid clinicians 
in recognizing patients nearing the end of life.
Alternatively, the Karnofsky Performance Scale is a scale 
of functional status ranging from 100 (high level of function) to 
0 (death). It is commonly used in palliative care to roughly assess 
patient anticipated needs as well as prognosis. The Palliative 
Performance Scale38 is a validated39 expansion of the ­Karnofsky 
Performance Scale that includes five palliative-focused domains, 
including ambulation, activity level, self-care, intake, and level of 
consciousness, in addition to evidence of disease. The Missoula-
Vitas Quality of Life Index is a 25-question scale specifically 
for palliative care and hospice patients that scores symptoms, 
function, interpersonal relationships, well-being, and spirituality. 
Updates and Spanish versions are available.36
Regardless of the prognostic tool used, the prognosis should 
be conveyed to the patient and family. If done well, communica-
tion and negotiation with patients and families about advanced 
terminal illnesses can potentially avoid great psychologic harm 
and help make a difficult transition easier. To communicate effec-
tively and compassionately, it is helpful to pursue an organized 
process similar to the structured history and physical central to 
the evaluation of any patient. One such structured approach to 
delivering unfavorable news proposes six steps that can be easily 
learned by clinicians: (a) getting started by selection of the appro-
priate setting, introductions, and seating; (b) determining what 
the patient or family knows; (c) determining what the patient or 
family wants to know; (d) giving the information; (e) expressing 
empathy; and (f) establishing expectations, planning, and aftercare 
(Table 48-3).40 Success with this approach to breaking bad news 
is critically dependent upon the clinician’s ability to empathically 
respond to the patient’s (and family’s) reaction to the news.41 The 
empathic response does not require the surgeon to share the same 
emotions of the patient, but it does require the surgeon to identify 
the patient’s emotion and accurately reflect that awareness back 
to the patient. Patient assessment in these conversations should 
give the highest priority to identifying and responding to the most 
immediate source of distress. Relieving a pressing symptom is pre-
requisite for a more thorough search for other potential sources of 
1948
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
suffering, and the assessment process, itself, can be therapeutic if 
conducted in a respectful and gentle manner.
CARE AT THE END OF LIFE
The process of dying and the care of a patient at the time of 
death is a distinct clinical entity that demands specific skills from 
­physicians. The issues specific to dying and the available tools for 
compassionate care at the end of life are addressed in this section.
The Syndrome of Imminent Demise29,42
In a patient who has progressed to the terminal stage of an 
advanced illness (e.g., cancer), a number of signs provide evi-
dence of imminent death. As terminally ill patients progress 
toward death, they become increasingly bedbound, requiring 
assistance for all basic ADL. There is a steady decrease in desire 
and requests for food and fluids. More distressing to the dying 
patient is a progressively dry mouth that may be confused by the 
treating team as thirst. It is often exacerbated by anticholinergic 
medications, mouth breathing, and supplemental oxygen (O2) 
administered without humidification.
With progressive debility, fatigue, and weight loss, it is 
common for terminally ill patients to experience increasing 
difficulty swallowing. This may result in aspiration episodes 
and an inability to swallow tablets, requiring alternative routes 
for medication administration (e.g., IV, SC, PR, sublingual, 
buccal, or transdermal). In addition to the increased risk of 
aspiration, patients near death develop great difficulty clearing 
oropharyngeal and upper airway secretions, leading to noisy 
breathing or the so-called “death rattle.” As death approaches, 
the respiratory pattern may change to increasingly frequent 
periods of apnea often following a Cheyne-Stokes pattern of 
rapid, progressively longer breaths leading up to an apneic 
period. As circulatory instability develops near death, patients 
may exhibit cool and mottled extremities. Periods of confusion 
are often accompanied by decreasing urine output and episodes 
of fecal and urinary incontinence.
A number of cognitive changes occur as death approaches. 
Patients who are in the last days of life may demonstrate some 
signs of confusion or delirium. Agitated delirium is a promi-
nent feature of a difficult death. Other cognitive changes that 
may be seen include a decreased interest in social interactions, 
increased somnolence, reduced attention span, disorientation 
to time (often with altered sleep-wake cycles), and an altered 
dream life, including vivid “waking dreams” or visual halluci-
nations. Reduced hearing and visual acuity may be an issue for 
some patients; however, patients who appear comatose may still 
be aware of their surroundings. Severely cachectic patients may 
lose the ability to keep their eyes closed during sleep because of 
loss of the retro-orbital fat pad.
Common Symptoms at the End of Life  
and Their Management29,42,43
The three most common, major symptoms that threaten the 
comfort of dying patients in their last days are respiratory dis-
tress, pain, and cognitive failure. General principles that are 
applicable to symptom management in the last days of life 
include: (a) anticipating symptoms before they develop; (b) 
minimizing technologic interventions (usually manage symp-
toms with medications); and (c) planning alternative routes for 
medications in case the oral route fails. It may be possible to 
cautiously reduce the dose of opioids and other medications as 
renal clearance decreases near the end of life, but it is important 
to remember that increased somnolence and decreasing respira-
tions are prominent features of the dying process independent 
of medication side effects. Sudden cessation of opioid analge-
sics near the end of life could precipitate withdrawal symptoms, 
and therefore, medications should not be stopped for increasing 
somnolence or slowed respirations.
The principles of pharmacotherapy for pain and non-
pain symptoms in the palliative care setting are outlined in 
Table 48-4. The World Health Organization,30 the United States 
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research,44 the Academy 
of Hospice and Palliative Medicine,45 and many other agencies 
have endorsed a “step ladder” approach to cancer pain man-
agement that can predictably result in satisfactory pain control 
in most patients (Table 48-5). More refractory pain problems 
require additional expertise, and occasionally, more invasive 
approaches (Tables 48-6 and 48-7).
The primary treatment of dyspnea (air hunger) in the dying 
is opioids, which should be cautiously titrated to increase com-
fort and reduce tachypnea to a range of 15 to 20 breaths/min. 
Air movement across the face generated by a fan can some-
times be quite helpful. If this is not effective, empirical use of 
supplemental O2 by nasal cannula (2–3 L/min) may bring some 
subjective relief, independent of observable changes in pulse 
oximetry. Supplemental O2 should be humidified to avoid exac-
erbation of dry mouth. Typical starting doses of an immediate 
release opioid for breathlessness should be one-half to two-
thirds of a starting dose of the same agent for cancer pain. For 
patients already on opioids for pain, a 25% to 50% increment in 
the dose of the current immediate release agent for breakthrough 
pain often will be effective in relieving breathlessness in addi-
tion to breakthrough pain.
The availability and variety of drugs should not prevent 
consideration of nonpharmacologic therapy. Massage therapy, 
music therapy, art therapy, guided imagery, hypnosis, physical 
therapy, pet therapy, and others play a constructive role not only 
for the relief of symptoms, but for promoting a sense of hope 
through improving function, aesthetic pleasure, and social con-
nectedness. Talents and capacities neglected during the treat-
ment and progression of disease can be recovered even in the 
most advanced stages of illness.
Pain is often less of a problem in the last days of life 
because the reduced activity level is associated with lower inci-
dent pain. This, combined with lower renal clearance of opioids, 
Table 48-3
Communicating unfavorable news: Important principles
•  Setting: Find a quiet, private place to meet. Sit down close 
to the ­patient.
•  Listen: Clarify the patient’s and/or the family’s 
understanding of the situation.
•  “Warning shot”: Prepare patient and family and obtain 
their permission to communicate bad news (e.g., “I’m 
afraid I have bad news.”).
•  Silence: Pause after giving bad news. Allow patient/family 
to absorb/react to the news.
•  Encourage: Convey hope that is realistic and appropriate 
to the circumstances (e.g., patient will not be abandoned; 
symptoms will be controlled).
1949
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
Table 48-4
Principles of pharmacotherapy in palliative care
•  Believe patient report of symptoms.
•  Modify pathologic process when possible and appropriate.
•  In terminally ill, avoid medications not directly linked to 
symptom control.
•  Use a multidisciplinary approach.
•  Consider nonpharmacologic approaches whenever 
possible.
•  Engage participation of clinical pharmacist in treatment 
plan.
•  Select drugs that can multitask (i.e., use haloperidol for 
agitated delirium and nausea).
•  For pain, use adjuvant medications when possible (see 
Table 48-7).
•  When using opioids, spare when possible (adjuvant 
medication, local or regional anesthetics, surgical 
interventions, etc.).
•  Avoid fixed combination drugs.
•  Avoid excessive cost.
•  Select agents with minimum side effects.
•  Anticipate and prophylax against side effects.
•  For the elderly, the hypoproteinemic, theazotemic: “Start 
low and go slow.”
•  Oral route whenever possible and practical.
•  No IM injections.
•  Scheduled dosing, not prn, for persistent symptoms.
•  Stepwise approach. (See the World Health Organization 
Analgesic Ladder for pain. See Table 48-5.)
•  Reassess continuously and titrate to effect.
•  Use equianalgesic doses when changing opioids (see  
Table 48-5).
•  Assess patient/family’s comprehension of management 
plan.
Table 48-5
The World Health Organization three-step ladder for 
control of cancer pain30
Step:1 mild pain (visual analogue scale, 1–3)
  Nonopioid ± adjuvant medication
Step 2: moderate pain (visual analogue scale, 4–6)
  Opioid for mild to moderate pain and nonopioid ± an 
adjuvant
Step 3: severe pain (visual analogue scale, 7–10)
  Opioid for moderate to severe pain ± nonopioid ± an 
adjuvant
may result in greater potency of the prescribed agents. Severe 
pain crises are fortunately rare, but when they are inadequately 
addressed, can cause great and lasting distress (complicated 
grief) for loved ones who witness the final hours or days of 
agony. Such situations may require continuous administration 
of parenteral opioids. As death approaches and patients become 
less verbal, it is important to assess pain frequently, includ-
ing the use of close observation for nonverbal signs of distress 
(e.g., grimacing, increased respiratory rate). Adequate dosing of 
opioid analgesics may require alternate route(s) of administra-
tion as patients become more somnolent or develop swallowing 
­difficulties. Opioids should not be stopped abruptly, even if the 
patient becomes nonresponsive because sudden withdrawal can 
cause severe distress.46,47
Cognitive failure at the end of life is manifested in most 
patients by increasing somnolence and delirium. Gradually 
increasing somnolence can be accompanied by periods of disori-
entation and mild confusion, and it may respond to the reassuring 
presence of loved ones and caregivers with minimal need for med-
ications. A more distressing form of delirium also can develop, 
manifested by increasing agitation that may require the use of neu-
roleptic medications. Increasing amounts of opioids and/or benzo-
diazepines may exacerbate the delirium (especially in the elderly).
Pronouncing Death48
If the body is hypothermic or has been hypothermic, such as a 
drowning victim pulled from the water in the winter, the phy-
sician should not declare death until warming attempts have 
been made. In the hospital, hospice, or home setting, the dec-
laration of death becomes part of the medical or legal record 
of the event. There are a number of physical signs of death a 
physician should look for in confirming the patient’s demise: 
complete lack of responsiveness to verbal or tactile stimuli, 
absence of heart beat and respirations, fixed pupils, skin color 
change to a waxen hue as blood settles, gradual poikilothermia, 
and sphincter relaxation with loss of urine and feces. For deaths 
in the home with patients who have been enrolled in hospice, 
the hospice nurse on call should be contacted immediately. In 
some states, deaths at home may require a brief police investiga-
tion and report. For deaths in the hospital, the family must be 
notified (in person, if possible). A coroner or medical examiner 
may need to be contacted under specific circumstances (e.g., 
deaths in the operating room), but most deaths do not require 
their services. However, the pronouncing physician will need 
to complete a death certificate according to local regulations. 
Survivors may also be approached, if appropriate, regarding 
potential autopsy and organ donation. Finally, it is important 
to accommodate religious rituals that may be important to the 
dying patient or the family. Bereavement is the experience of 
loss by death of a person to whom one is attached. Mourning is 
the process of adapting to such a loss in the thoughts, feelings, 
and behaviors that one experiences after the loss.49 Although 
grief and mourning are accentuated in the immediate period 
around death, it is important to note that patients and families 
may begin the process of bereavement well before the time 
of death as patients and families grieve incremental losses of 
independence, vitality, and control. In addition to the surviving 
loved ones, it is important to acknowledge that caregivers also 
experience grief for the loss of their patients.50,51
PROFESSIONAL ETHICS: CONFLICT OF INTEREST, 
RESEARCH, AND CLINICAL ETHICS
Conflict of Interest
Conflicts of interest for surgeons can arise in many situations in 
which the potential benefits or gains to be realized by the surgeon 
are, or are perceived to be, in conflict with the responsibility to 
put the patient’s interests before the surgeon’s own. Conflicts 
of interest for the surgeon can involve actual or perceived situ-
ations in which the individual stands to gain monetarily by his 
or her role as a physician or investigator. In the academic com-
munity, monetary gain may not be the primary factor. Instead, 
1950
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Table 48-6
Analgesics for persistent pain
Drug
Initial Dosing (Adult, >60 kg)
Comments
Mild persistent pain, visual 
analogue scale (VAS) 1–3
  Acetaminophen (Tylenol)
325–650 mg PO qid
  Maximum = 3200 mg/24 h
Use <2400 mg if other potentially hepatotoxic drugs  
  taken. Acetaminophen contained in concurrent  
  nonprescription medications can easily exceed  
  maximum daily allowable dose.
  Aspirin
600–1500 mg PO qid
Gastric bleeding, platelet dysfunction
  Choline magnesium trisalicylate  
  (Trilisate)
750–1500 mg PO bid
Useful for avoiding platelet dysfunction
  Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin)
200–400 mg PO qid
  Maximum = 3200 mg/24 h
Gastropathy, nephropathy, decreased platelet  
  aggregation
  Naproxen (Naprosyn)
250 mg PO bid
  Maximum = 1300 mg/24 h
Available as a transcutaneous gel
Moderate persistent pain, VAS 4–6
  Hydrocodone (Vicodin, Lortab)
5–7.5 mg PO q4h
Most prescribed drug in the United States
Acetaminophen in compounded drug limits use to  
  moderate pain.
  Oxycodone
5 mg PO q4h
Sold as single agent or compounded with aspirin or  
  acetaminophen.
Slow release form available (Oxycontin)
Severe persistent pain, VAS 7–10
  Morphine
10 mg PO q2–4h
  2–4 mg IV, SC q1–2h
Standard drug for comparison to alternative opioids. 
Avoid or caution when giving to the elderly, patients with 
  diminished glomerular filtration rate, or liver disease. 
Slow release PO form available (MS Contin).
  Hydromorphone
1–3 mg PO, PR q4h
  1 mg IV, SC q1–2h
Suppository form available
Oral dose forms limited to 4 mg maximum
  Fentanyl, transdermal
12 μg/h patch q72h
Not for acute pain management. Do not use on opioid-naive 
  patients. Absorption unpredictable in cachectic patients.
  Methadone
Consultation with pain  
  management, clinical  
  pharmacists, or palliative  
  care/hospice services  
  skilled in methadone use  
  is recommended for those  
  inexperienced in prescribing  
  methadone.
Not a first-line agent, although very effective, especially  
  for pain with a neuropathic component
Very inexpensive
Can be given PO, IV, SC, PR, sublingually, and vaginally
Its long half-life makes dosing more difficult than  
  alternative opioids and close monitoring is required  
  when initiating
Numerous medications, alcohol, and cigarette smoking  
  can alter its serum levels
Physicians who write methadone prescriptions for pain  
  should specify this indication. Methadone use for drug  
  withdrawal treatment requires special licensure.
Risk factors for NSAID-induced nephropathy include: advanced age, decreased glomerular filtration rate, congestive heart failure, hypovolemia, pressors, 
hepatic dysfunction, concomitant nephrotoxic agents. Dose reduction and hydration reduce risk.
Opioids compounded with aspirin or acetaminophen are limited to treatment of moderate persistent pain because of dose-limiting toxicities of acetaminophen 
and aspirin.
Slow-release preparations of morphine and oxycodone may be given rectally.
Timed-release tablets or patches should never be crushed or cut.
Opioid analgesics are the agents of choice for severe cancer-related pain. Sedation is a common side effect when initiating opioid therapy. Tolerance to this 
usually develops within a few days. If sedation persists beyond a few days, a stimulant (methylphenidate 2.5–5 mg PO bid) can be given.
Initiate bowel stimulant prophylaxis for constipation when prescribing opioids unless contraindicated.
Adjuvant or coanalgesic agents are drugs that enhance analgesic efficacy of opioids, treat concurrent symptoms that exacerbate pain, or provide indepen-
dent analgesia for specific types of pain (e.g., a tricyclic antidepressant for treatment of neuropathic pain). Coanalgesics can be initiated for persistent pain 
at any visual analogue scale level. Gabapentin is commonly used as an initial agent for neuropathic pain.
No place for meperidine (Demerol), propoxyphene (Darvon, Darvocet, or mixed agonist-antagonist agents [Stadol, Talwin]) in management of persistent pain.
Always consider alternative approaches (axial analgesia, operative approaches, etc.) when managing severe persistent pain.
Note: These are not recommendations for specific patients. The inter- and intraindividual variability to opioids requires individualizing dosing and titration to effect.
Source: Adapted with permission from Dunn GP: Surgical palliative care, in Cameron JL (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 
2008. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1951
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
Table 48-7
Examples of adjuvant medications for treatment of neuropathic, visceral, and bone paina
Drug Class
Initial Dosing (Adult, >60 kg)
Comments
Tricyclic antidepressants
  Best for continuous burning or tingling  
    pain and allodynia
  Efficacy for pain not due to 
  antidepressant effect
Amitriptyline 10–25 mg PO qhs
Sedating properties may be useful for  
  relief of other concurrent symptoms.  
  Side effects may precede benefit.  
  Avoid in the elderly due to  
  anticholinergic side effects.
  Dose generally less than that required  
    for antidepressant effect
Nortriptyline 10–25 mg PO qd
Less anticholinergic effect
  Dose titrated up every few days until 
  effect. Pain may respond to  
  alternative antidepressants if no  
  response to initial agent.
Doxepin 10–25 mg PO qhs
Imipramine 10–25 mg PO qd
Anticonvulsants
  For shooting, stabbing pain
Gabapentin 100–300 mg PO qd. Titrate  
  up rapidly as needed. Max: 1800 mg qd
Commonly used first-line agent. Generally 
  well tolerated. Does not require blood  
  level monitoring.
Carbamazepine 200 mg PO q12h
Effective. Well studied. Requires blood  
  monitoring.
Valproic acid 250 mg PO tid
Local anesthetics
  Systemic use requires monitoring. 
Nebulized local anesthetics (lidocaine,  
  bupivacaine) can be used for severe,  
  refractory cough.
Lidocaine transdermal patch 5%. Apply  
  to painful areas. Max: 3 simultaneous  
  patches over 12 h (each patch contains  
  700 mg lidocaine).
Lidocaine/prilocaine topical. Apply to  
  painful areas.
Systemic toxicity can result from applying 
  more than recommended number per  
  unit time and in patients with liver  
  failure. Effective for postherpetic  
  neuralgia.
Miscellaneous
Bisphosphonates (pamidronate, zoledronic 
  acid)
For bone pain and reduced incidence  
  of skeletal complications secondary to  
  malignancy—best results in myeloma  
  and breast cancer. Contraindicated in  
  renal failure.
Calcitonin nasal spray
Refractory bone pain
Dexamethasone
For bone pain, acute nerve compression,  
  visceral pain secondary to tumor  
  infiltration or luminal obstruction by  
  reducing inflammatory component of  
  tumor
Radionuclides (Sr-89)
For malignant bone pain secondary to  
  osteoclastic activity. 4–6 wk delay in  
  benefit. Requires adequate bone  
  marrow reserve. For prognosis of  
  more than 3 mo.
Octreotide
Reduces GI secretions that contribute to  
  visceral pain
aRecommendations are based on experience of practitioners of hospice and palliative medicine and in some instances do not reflect current clinical trials.
Source: Adapted, with permission from Dunn GP: Surgical palliative care, in Cameron JL (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 
2008. kkjkjdht Elsevier.
1952
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
motivators such as power, tenure, or authorship on a publica-
tion may serve as potential sources of conflict of interest. For 
example, the accrual of subjects in research studies or patients 
in surgical series may ensure surgeons better authorship or more 
financial gains. The dual-role of the surgeon-­scientist therefore 
needs to be considered because the duty as surgeon can conflict 
with the role of scientist or clinical researcher.
Research Ethics
Over the last three decades in the United States, the ethi-
cal requirements for the conduct of human subject research 
have been formalized and widely accepted. Although detailed 
informed consent is a necessary condition for the conduct of 
ethically good human subject research, other factors also 
­determine whether research is designed and conducted ethi-
cally. Emanuel and colleagues52 described seven requirements 
for all clinical research studies to be ethically sound: (a) value—
enhancement(s) of health or knowledge must be derived 
from the research; (b) scientific validity—the research 
must be methodologically rigorous; (c) fair subject selec-
tion—scientific objectives, not vulnerability or privilege, and 
the potential for and distribution of risks and benefits, should 
determine communities selected as study sites and the inclu-
sion criteria for individual subjects; (d) favorable risk-benefit 
ratio—within the context of standard clinical practice and the 
research protocol, risks must be minimized, potential benefits 
enhanced, and the potential benefits to individuals and knowl-
edge gained for society must outweigh the risks; (e) independent 
review—unaffiliated individuals must review the research and 
approve, amend, or terminate it; (f) informed consent—indi-
viduals should be informed about the research and provide their 
voluntary consent; and (g) respect for enrolled subjects—sub-
jects should have their privacy protected, the opportunity to 
withdraw, and their well-being monitored.52
Special Concerns in Surgical Research
A significant issue for clinical surgical research is that it is 
often analyzed in a retrospective manner and not commonly 
undertaken in a prospective double-blind, randomized fashion. 
For a randomized trial to be undertaken, the researchers 
should be in a state of equipoise—that is, there must be a state 
of genuine uncertainty on the part of the clinical investigator 
or the expert medical community regarding the comparative 
therapeutic merits of each arm in a trial.53 To randomize sub-
jects to receive two different treatments, a researcher must 
believe that the existing data are not sufficient to conclude 
that one treatment strategy is better than another. In designing 
surgical trials, surgeons usually have biases that one treatment 
is better than another and often have difficulty maintaining 
the state of equipoise. As such, it is frequently difficult to 
demonstrate that a randomized trial is necessary or feasible, 
and treatment options that question the validity of clinical 
tenets are difficult to accept. Meakins has suggested that a 
slightly different hierarchy of evidence applies to evidence-
based surgery.54
A second major issue for surgical trials is whether it is 
ethically acceptable to have a placebo-controlled surgical trial. 
Some commentators have argued that sham surgery is always 
wrong because, unlike a placebo medication that is harmless, 
every surgical procedure carries some risk.55 Others have argued 
that sham operations are essential to the design of a valid ran-
domized clinical trial because, without a sham operation, it is 
not possible to know if the surgical intervention is the cause 
of improvement in patient symptoms or whether the improve-
ment is due to the effect of having surgery.56,57 Most surgeons 
readily agree that designing an appropriately low-risk sham sur-
gical procedure would create problems for the surgeon-patient 
relationship in that the surgeon would need to keep the sham a 
secret.58 In this sense, a sham surgical arm of a trial is very differ-
ent from a placebo medication in that there cannot be blinding of 
the surgeon as to which procedure was undertaken. As a result, 
to have a sham surgery arm in a clinical trial, the interactions 
between the surgeon and the subject must be limited and the 
surgeon performing the procedure should not be the researcher 
who follows the subject during the trial. Despite difficulties with 
designing a surgical trial in which the surgeon could ethically 
perform a sham operation, there are specific ­circumstances that 
allow for placebo operations to be conducted, so long as certain 
criteria are met and are analyzed on a case by case basis.59,60
Surgical Innovation and Surgical Research
An important issue is whether surgical innovation should be 
treated as research or as standard of care. Many of the advances 
in surgical technique and surgical technology have resulted 
from the innovations that individual surgeons have discov-
ered or created during the course of challenging operations. 
As every patient is different and the surgeon is always trying 
to determine the best way to complete an operation, innova-
tions have developed that have often moved the field of sur-
gery forward.61 In the Korean and Vietnam wars, the military 
guidelines for the treatment of vascular injuries recommended 
ligation and amputation rather than interposition grafting of 
vascular ­injuries. Individual surgeons chose to ignore those 
guidelines and subsequently demonstrated the value of recon-
structive techniques that ultimately became the standard of 
care. It is debated whether modifications in an accepted sur-
gical technique based on the circumstances of an individual 
patient and the skill and judgment of an individual surgeon 
should require the same type of prior approval that enroll-
ment in a clinical trial would warrant.62 However, if a surgeon 
decides to use a new technique on several occasions and to 
study the outcomes, Institutional Review Board approval and 
all other ethical requirements for research are necessary. These 
situations require strict oversight as well as explicit consent by 
the patient.63 In particular, when developing new and innova-
tive techniques, the surgeon should work in close consultation 
with his or her senior colleagues, including the chairperson 
of the department. Frequently, more senior individuals can 
provide sage ethical advice regarding what ­constitutes minor 
innovative changes in a technique vs. true novel research.
Compared to the formalized process for new drug approval 
by the Food and Drug Administration, the process for a surgeon 
developing an innovative operation is relatively unregulated and 
unsupervised.
Clinical Ethics: Disclosure of Errors
Disclosure of error—either in medical or research matters—is 
important, but often difficult (see Chap. 12). Errors of judg-
ment, errors in technique, and system errors are responsible for 
most errors that result in complications and deaths. Hospitals 
are evaluated based on the number of complications and deaths 
that occur in surgical patients, and surgeons traditionally review 
their complications and deaths in a formal exercise known as 
7
1953
Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care at the End of Life
CHAPTER 48
the mortality and morbidity conference, or M&M. The exercise 
places importance on the attending surgeon’s responsibility for 
errors made, whether he or she made them themselves, and the 
value of the exercise is related to the effect of “peer pressure”—
the entire department knows about the case—on reducing 
repeated occurrences of such an error. Although a time-honored 
ritual in surgery, the M&M conference is nonetheless a poor 
method for analyzing causes of error and for developing meth-
ods to prevent them. Moreover, the proceedings of the M&M 
conference are protected from disclosure by the privilege of 
“peer review,” and the details are rarely shared with patients or 
those outside the department.
A report from the United States Institute of Medicine 
titled “To Err Is Human” highlighted the large number of medi-
cal errors that occur and encouraged efforts to prevent patient 
harm.64 Medical errors are generally considered to be “prevent-
able adverse medical events.”65 Given that medical errors clearly 
occur with some frequency, the question becomes what and how 
should patients be told of medical errors and what is the sur-
geon’s ethical responsibility for this disclosure.66
Disclosure of error is consistent with the ethical tenets of 
openness with patients and the involvement of patients in their 
care. In contrast, failing to disclose errors to patients under-
mines public trust in medicine and potentially compromises 
the treatment of the consequences of errors. In addition, failure 
to self-disclose medical errors can be construed as a breach of 
professional ethics, as it is a failure to act solely for the patient’s 
best interests. Patients require information regarding medical 
errors so that additional harm can be avoided. In addition, infor-
mation regarding a medical error may be needed so that patients 
can make independent and well-informed decisions about future 
aspects of their care. The principles of autonomy and justice dic-
tate that surgeons need to respect individuals by being fair in pro-
viding accurate information about all aspects of their care—even 
the medical errors.
Disclosing one’s own errors is therefore part of the ethi-
cal standard of honesty and putting the patient’s interests above 
one’s own. Disclosing the errors of others is more complicated 
and may require careful consideration and consultation. Surgeons 
sometimes discover that a prior operation has included an apparent 
error; an injured bile duct or a stenotic anastomosis may lead to the 
condition for which the surgeon is now treating the patient. Declar-
ing a finding as an “error” may be inaccurate, however, and a non-
judgmental assessment of the situation is usually advisable. When 
clear evidence of a mistake is at hand, the surgeon’s responsibility 
is defined by his or her obligation to act as the patient’s agent.
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
  1.	 Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics, Book VI. In Ackrill J, ed. 
A New Aristotle Reader. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press; 1987, p 416.
  2.	 Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical 
Ethics, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1989.
  3.	 Bosk, C. Forgive and Remember, 2nd ed. Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 2003 (1979).
  4.	 McCullough LB, Jones JW, Brody BA, (eds): Surgical Ethics. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
  5.	 Faden RR, Beauchamp TL. A History and Theory of Informed 
Consent. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.
  6.	 Bernat JL, Peterson LM. Patient-centered informed consent in 
surgical practice. Arch Surg. 2006;141:86-92.
  7.	 Schneider CE. The Practice of Autonomy: Patients, Doctors, and 
Medical Decisions. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.
  8.	 Robb A, Etchells E, Cusimano MD, et al. A randomized 
trial of teaching bioethics to surgical residents. Am J Surg. 
2005;189:453-457.
  9.	 Steinemann S, Furoy D, Yost F, et al. Marriage of professional 
and technical tasks: a strategy to improve obtaining informed 
consent. Am J Surg. 2006;191:696-700.
10.	 Guadagnoli E, Soumerai SB, Gurwitz JH, et al: Improving dis-
cussion of surgical treatment options for patients with breast 
cancer: local medical opinion leaders versus audit and perfor-
mance feedback. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2000.61:171-2000.
11.	 Braddock CH III, Edwards KA, Hasenberg NM, et al. 
Informed decision making in outpatient practice: time to get 
back to basics. JAMA. 1999;282:2313-2320.
12.	 Leeper-Majors K, Veale JR, Westbrook TS, et al. The effect 
of standardized patient feedback in teaching surgical resi-
dents informed consent: results of a pilot study. Curr Surg. 
2003;60:615-622.
13.	 Courtney MJ. Information about surgery: what does the public 
want to know? ANZ J Surg. 2001;71:24-26.
14.	 Newton-Howes PA, Dobbs B, Frizelle F. Informed consent: 
what do patients want to know? N Z Med J. 1998;111:340-342.
15.	 Streat S. Clinical review: moral assumptions and the pro-
cess of organ donation in the intensive care unit. Crit Care. 
2004;8:382-388.
16.	 Williams MA, Lipsett PA, Rushton CH, et al. The physician’s 
role in discussing organ donation with families. Crit Care 
Med. 2003;31:1568-1573.
17.	 Pearson IY, Zurynski Y. A survey of personal and professional 
attitudes of intensivists to organ donation and transplantation. 
Anaesth Intensive Care. 1995;23:68-74.
18.	 Sulmasy DP, Lehmann LS, Levine DM, et al. Patients’ percep-
tions of the quality of informed consent for common medical 
procedures. J Clin Ethics. 1994;5:189-194.
19.	 Ubel PA, Loewenstein G, Jepson C.Whose quality of life? 
A commentary exploring discrepancies between health state 
evaluations of patients and the general public. Qual Life Res. 
2003;12:599-607.
20.	 Schneider CE. After autonomy. Wake Forest Law Review. 
2006;41:411.
21.	 Shalowitz, DI, Garrett-Mayer, E, et al. The accuracy of surro-
gate decision makers: A systematic review. Archives of Inter-
nal Medicine. 2006;166(5): 493-497.
22.	 Sulmasy DP, Hughes MT, Thompson RE, et al. How would 
terminally ill patients have others make decisions for them in 
the event of decisional incapacity? A longitudinal study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2007;55:1981-1988.
23.	 SUPPORT Principle Investigators. A controlled trial to 
improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients. The study 
to understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and 
risks of treatments (SUPPORT). The SUPPORT Principal 
Investigators. JAMA. 1995;274:1591-1598.
24.	 Pawlik TM.Withholding and withdrawing life-sustaining treat-
ment: a surgeon’s perspective. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:990-994.
25.	 In re Quinlan. 355 A2d 647 (JN). Vol 429 US 9221976.
26.	 Cruzan vs. Director, Missouri Dept of Health, 497(1990).
27.	 Annas GJ. Nancy Cruzan and the right to die. N Engl J Med. 
1990;323:670-673.
28.	 Sykes N, Thorns A. The use of opioids and sedatives at the end 
of life. Lancet Oncol. 2003;4:312-318.
29.	 Nelson KA, Walsh D, Behrens C, et al. The dying cancer 
patient. Semin Oncol. 2000;27:84.
30.	 WHO. Definition of Palliative Care, 2008, World Health Orga-
nization. Available at: www.who.int/cancer/palliative/defini-
tion/en/print.html [accessed March 25, 2009].
31.	 Dunn G. Surgical palliative care. In: Mosby, ed. Current 
Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008.
8
1954
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
32.	 Saunders C. The challenge of terminal care. In: Syming-
ton T, Carter R, eds. Scientific Foundations of Oncology. 
­London: Heineman; 1976, p 673.
33.	 Nuland S. How We Die: Reflections on Life’s Final Chapter. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf; 1994.
34.	 Kleinman A. The Illness Narratives. Suffering, Healing & the 
Human Condition. New York: Basic Books; 1988.
35.	 International Association for the Study of Pain, Subcommittee 
on Taxonomy. Part II. Pain Terms: acurrent list with defini-
tions and notes on usage. Pain. 1979;6:249.
36.	 Byock IR, Merriman MP. Measuring quality of life for patients 
with terminal illness: The Missoula-VITAS quality of life 
index. Palliat Med. 1998;12:231-244.
37.	 Christakis NA, Lamont EB. Extent and determinants of error 
in doctors’ prognoses in terminally ill patients: prospective 
cohort study. BMJ. 2000;320:469-472.
38.	 Anderson F, Downing GM, Hill J, et al. Palliative performance 
scale (PPS): a new tool. J Palliat Care. 1996;12:5-11.
39.	 Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, et al.Validity of the palliative 
performance scale from a survival perspective. J Pain Symp-
tom Manage. 1999;18:2-3.
40.	 Buckman R. How to Break Bad News. A Guide for Health Care 
Professionals. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 
1992.
41.	 Kubler-Ross E. On Death and Dying. London: Routledge; 
1973.
42.	 Twycross R, Lichter I. The terminal phase. In: Doyle D, Hanks 
G, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative ­Medicine. 
New York: Oxford University Press; 1998, p 977.
43.	 Hinshaw DB. Spiritual issues in surgical palliative care. 
Surg Clin North Am. 2005;85:257-272.
44.	 Jacox A, Carr D, Payne R, et al. Management of cancer 
pain. AHCPR Publication No. 94-052: Clinical Practice 
Guideline No. 9. Rockville: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service;1994.
45.	 Storey P, Knight C. UNIPAC Three: Assessment and Treat-
ment of Pain in the Terminally Ill, 2nd ed. New York: Mary 
Ann Liebert, Inc; 2003.
46.	 Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW. Principles and practice of with-
drawing life-sustaining treatment in the ICU. In: Curtis JR, 
Rubenfeld GD, eds. Managing Death in the Intensive Care 
Unit. New York: Oxford University Press; 2001.
47.	 Rousseau P. Existential distress and palliative sedation. Anesth 
Analg. 2005;101:611-612,
48.	 The EPEC-O Project, Educating Physicians in End-of-Life 
Care-Oncology: Module 6: Last Hours of Living. Bethesda: 
National Cancer Institute; 2007.
49.	 Worden J. Bereavement Care. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
­Williams and Wilkins; 2002.
50.	 Bishop JP, Rosemann PW, Schmidt FW. Fides ancilla medici-
nae: on the ersatz liturgy of death in biopsychosociospiritual 
medicine. The Heythrop Journal. 2008;49:20.
51.	 Schroeder-Sheker T. Transitus: A Blessed Death in the 
­Modern World. Mt. Angel: St. Dunstan’s Press; 2001.
52.	 Emmanuel EJ, Wendler D, Grady C: What makes clinical 
research ethical? JAMA 2000;283:2701-2711.
53.	 Freedman B. Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research. 
N Engl J Med. 1987;317:141-145.
54.	 Meakins J. Innovation in surgery. The rules of evidence. Am 
J Surg. 2002;183:399-405.
55.	 Lefering R, Neugebauer E. Problems of randomized controlled 
trials in surgery. Paper presented at: Nonrandomized Compar-
ative Clinical Studies 1997, Heidelberg.
56.	 Flum DR. Interpreting surgical trials with subjective outcomes: 
avoiding UnSPORTsmanlike conduct. JAMA. 2006;296: 
2483-2485.
57.	 Moseley JB, O’Malley K, Petersen NJ, et al. A controlled trial 
of arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl 
J Med. 2002;347:81. Summary for patients in: J Fam Pract. 
2002;51:813.
58.	 Angelos PA. Sham surgery in research: asurgeon’s view. Am 
J Bioeth. 2003;3:65-66.
59.	 Miller FG. Sham surgery: an ethical analysis. Sci Eng Ethics. 
2004;10:157-166.
60.	 Angelos P. Sham surgery in clinical trials. JAMA. 2007;297: 
1545-1546, author reply 1546.
61.	 Riskin DJ, Longaker MT, Gertner M, et al. Innovation in 
­surgery: a historical perspective. Ann Surg. 2006;244:686-693.
62.	 Biffl WL, Spain DA, Reitsma AM, et al. Responsible devel-
opment and application of surgical innovations: A posi-
tion statement of the Society of University Surgeons (draft 
­statement of 2/19/08).
63.	 McKneally MF, Daar AS. Introducing new technologies: pro-
tecting subjects of surgical innovation and research. World 
J Surg. 2003;27:930-934.
64.	 Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System. Washington: National Acad-
emy Press; 2000.
65.	 Brennan TA, Leape LL, Laird NM, et al. Incidence of adverse 
events and negligence in hospitalized patients. Results 
of the Harvard Medical Practice Study I. N Engl J Med. 
1991;324:370-376.
66.	 Hebert PC, Levin AV, Robertson G. Bioethics for clinicians: 
23. Disclosure of medical error. CMAJ. 2001;164:509-513.
Global Surgery
Raymond R. Price and Catherine R. deVries
49
INTRODUCTION
Modern surgery can save lives, help expand economies, and 
offer hope to individuals and communities. Prior to the accep-
tance and availability of aseptic technique to prevent or decrease 
infections, and improved anesthesia for controlling pain, sur-
gery as a specialty was held in very low esteem. Over the last 
100 years, surgery has developed into an elite discipline that 
not only provides opportunities for curing certain diseases, but 
fulfills a special role in preventing and mitigating disability.
Yet, surgery is currently unavailable to most people world-
wide. The vast majority—90%—of the world’s population 
receives only 10% of the surgical care delivered. Said another 
way, 90% of the world’s surgical resources are consumed by 
the most privileged 10% of the world’s population. More than 
2 billion people lack access to even basic surgical care.1 Very 
few surgical procedures occur in countries spending less than 
US $100/ person on health care per year compared to countries 
spending greater than U.S. $1000/ person (Fig. 49-1).2
Examples of disparities abound. In many countries, includ-
ing the wealthiest, deep pockets of poverty coexist within cities 
replete with material resources. Tertiary level hospitals operate 
within eyesight of slums whose inhabitants have no access to 
even basic care. Most of the people without access—people in 
rural areas and in countries with poor infrastructure—are the 
very people most at risk for death or disability due to lack of 
surgical care. Often the poor accept and endure many painful 
and potentially correctable fatal conditions as a fact of life.3-6 
Care for trauma and obstetrical emergencies are considered 
basic surgical needs but are absent in many rural regions. Other 
chronic conditions—often equally debilitating—progress to 
death or serious disability due to lack of available, safe surgery 
and anesthesia.
Many factors contribute to the disparity in access to surgi-
cal care. Poverty, a primary risk factor for all types of diseases, 
is a major obstacle hindering access to surgery. Healthcare pro-
fessionals, including surgeons, migrate from areas of need due 
to a lack of infrastructure (hospitals, roadways, and stable elec-
trical sources), limited supplies and equipment, lack of human 
resources, few opportunities for professional development, and 
concerns for personal safety. Finally, the lack of information 
about the burden of surgical disease and surgery’s impact on 
communities has led to misconceptions of policy makers that 
quality surgical care is cost prohibitive and too complex to 
be seriously considered a viable conduit for improving global 
health.7,8
Disparities in care and outcomes are multidimensional, and 
no simple solution exists to improve access to appropriate 
and affordable surgical care. Yet, five major forces are reshaping 
priorities and strategies leading the charge for the globalization 
of surgical care:
1.  The epidemiologic transition of diseases from primarily 
infectious to more chronic conditions;
2.  The mobile nature of the world’s populations allows more 
convenient travel opportunities for people to move freely 
between more isolated areas of the world leading to a more 
integrated global community;
3.  Ubiquitous information access exponentially enabling uni-
versal participation in understanding and designing inno-
vative opportunities for high-quality surgical care;
4.  A revolution for equity and human rights where the world’s 
poor are demanding benefits to surgical care similar to 
those found in developed countries;
5.  Recognition of the cost-effectiveness of surgical care, and 
its potential to build economies, demonstrating the potential 
value of, including surgery in global health strategies.9,10
The potential benefits of surgical care for economic productivity 
are astounding. Considering that the annual economic loss from 
road traffic injuries alone exceeds U.S. $500 billion globally, 
a panel of expert economists at the Copenhagen Consensus 
of 2012, including four Nobel prize laureates, understandably 
­prioritized strengthening surgical capacity as the eighth most 
cost-effective investment for addressing the world’s current 
most pressing problems.8,11 Good health, which fosters pro-
ductive economies and political stability, must include access 
to the full spectrum of health care, including surgical care to 
Introduction	
1955
Defining Global Surgery	
1956
Global Surgery Ecosystem / 1956
Burden of Surgical Disease / 1957
Human Resources / 1960
Strategies for Development	
1963
Initiatives for Outreach and  
Engagement / 1963
International Organizations / 1963
Global Surgery and Public Health / 1968
Cancer Initiatives / 1970
Advanced Surgical Care for Resource-Poor 
Areas / 1976
Academic Partnerships / 1977
Ethics / 1977
Innovation in Global Surgery / 1978
The Future for Global Surgery	
1978
1
chapter 
“advance the quality of life for billions of citizens around the 
world.”8
This chapter examines the need for expanding surgical 
care globally, explores some of the seemingly insurmount-
able challenges, and presents potential guiding concepts along 
1956
Key Points
1 	 There are five major forces reshaping priorities and strat­
egies for the globalization of surgical care:
a.  The epidemiologic transition of diseases
b.  The mobile nature of the world’s populations
c.  Ubiquitous information access
d.  A revolution for equity and human rights
e.  Recognition of the cost-effectiveness of surgical care
2 	 Understanding and addressing the necessary communica-
tion, energy and transportation technologies along with the 
underlying cultural context represent the foundation critical 
to implementing sustainable infrastructure necessary for 
appropriate surgical care.
3 	 The key components of the global surgery ecosystem include 
technology, education, community, healthcare, business, and 
multidisciplinary engagement between a variety of disciplines.
4 	 There has been a significant shift from communicable, 
maternal, neonatal, and nutritional causes to noncommuni-
cable causes, many of which require surgical care.
5 	 Patients and their communities in low-middle income coun-
tries (LMICs) bear a much greater share of the burden of 
cancer than high-income countries.
6 	 Globally, trauma has become a leading cause of death 
and disability; 90% of trauma deaths occur in LMICs.
7 	 The burden of disease is greatest in areas where human 
resources—physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other 
healthcare workers—are the least.
8 	 Surgery is gaining an increasingly recognized role for 
improving public health.
9 	 Surgery has a role in prevention as well as treatment.
10   The cost-effectiveness of various aspects of surgical care 
has allowed surgical initiatives to be included when pri-
oritizing public health initiatives.
11   Developing advanced surgical capabilities in resource-
poor countries has the potential to decrease overall cost 
and actually develop the infrastructure necessary to 
entice physicians and other healthcare workers to remain 
in their own countries.
12   Academic involvement in global surgery provides train-
ing for the next generation of surgical leaders.
13   Surgical innovations that consider cost as well as quality 
and design for challenging energy environments will fos-
ter equity in surgical care for LMICs.
Figure 49-1.  Worldwide distribution of surgical procedures. (Data 
from Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An estima-
tion of the global volume of surgery: a modeling strategy based 
on available data. Lancet. 2008;372(9633):139-144. Illustration 
reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
$100
$101-400
$401-1,000
> $1,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
Number of Procedures/100,000 Population
US Dollars/Person
Healthcare/Year
with examples of successful strategies for sustainable surgical 
development.
DEFINING GLOBAL SURGERY
Global Surgery Ecosystem
To understand how surgery fits into healthcare systems and 
to understand its unique needs, it is helpful to consider global 
surgery as an ecosystem. The emerging field of global surgery 
considers surgical care to be a fundamental component of global 
health. As a system with both local and international scope, 
global surgery encompasses not just the medical and techni-
cal aspects of surgical care but also the societal and environ-
mental context in which surgery is performed. Surgery as an 
ecosystem considers the diverse but interrelated systems that 
must be functional for quality surgical care to be delivered. 
Only part of these systems falls within the traditional training 
of surgeons. Yet, modern surgical care requires these systems 
to work in a coordinated fashion to support three priorities criti-
cal for expanding surgery globally—accessibility, affordability, 
and innovation (Fig. 49-2). Global surgery is a way to consider 
a “systems-based practice” beyond a single hospital or com-
munity for the benefit of people worldwide. Many of the inter-
related components of this surgical ecosystem originate outside 
the hospital.
Disparities in surgical care have geographical, socioeco-
nomic, and cultural components. Most people who live 
in major cities in northern and western hemisphere countries 
take for granted a functioning energy grid. The development 
of energy beyond major cities has enabled many wealthier 
communities to imagine, and indeed, to expect healthcare to 
be available at all times and to be affordable. Yet, a lack of 
reliable energy sources is a major limiting factor. Communica-
tion and transportation technologies, for example, the mobile 
phone and air and ground travel, have dramatically progressed 
2
1957
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
in high- and middle-income countries but are still rudimentary 
in poor countries. Many of the current disparities in health care, 
particularly surgical care, are due to the lack of penetration of 
these technologies. Understanding and addressing the necessary 
communication, energy and transportation deficits as well as the 
underlying cultural nuances are necessary to support the sustain-
able development of surgical care (Fig. 49-3).
Electricity is necessary for all modern surgery. Anesthesia 
monitoring, OR lighting, cautery, suction, and patient warming 
devices all require sources of electricity that are stable, with-
out huge electrical surges. Only in the last 50 years or so could 
stable electricity be expected in most wealthy cities. However, 
in rural areas of even wealthy countries, electricity remains 
unpredictable (Fig. 49-4).
In poorer countries, the cost and availability of electric-
ity is frequently the limiting factor for more advanced diagnos-
tic and therapeutic technology—from laboratories that require 
refrigeration to radiology in all of its various branches. Modern 
design for surgical devices has, for the most part, not taken into 
account the wide range of energy environments where surgery is 
practiced. Fragile instruments and monitors that cannot survive 
the rigors of the real working environment limit the types of 
surgery that can be provided.
Components of the Global Surgery Ecosystem.  Improve-
ments in energy, transportation, and communication are 
critical to support the growth of six key components of 
surgical care (Fig. 49-5).9 While building capacity within each 
component is important, it is the interaction between the compo-
nents that creates a functioning, sustainable system.
When surgeons think of surgery, they usually think in terms 
of science and hands-on technical expertise. However, global 
Figure 49-2.  Global surgery priorities. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from University of Utah Center for Global Surgery and Inter-
mountain Healthcare.)
GLOBAL
SURGERY
Accessibility
Innovation
Affordability
surgery requires a broader understanding of systems in other 
disciplines. Surgeons must work collaboratively with engineers 
and business leaders to develop technology that can function in 
lower resource environments. These innovations can provide a 
source of economic growth for the community, which in turn 
supports better health care.
No sustainable surgical system in the modern age can 
function without specialists in bioengineering, sterile process, 
supply chain, hospital safety and waste management. These 
often unappreciated colleagues make possible the daily practice 
of surgery. Similarly, specialists in anesthesia, nursing, and the 
diagnostic specialties of radiology, pathology, and laboratory 
services are fundamental to a fully functional surgical service.
Burden of Surgical Disease
Epidemiologic Transition of Disease.  The population on 
Earth currently stands at more than 7 billion.While the rate of 
growth has slowed in recent years, projections estimate that the 
population will continue to grow to 9 billion by 2050.12 When 
thinking about global surgery, it is helpful to step back from 
the individual and consider families, communities, and nations. 
Each entity has its unique cultural and economic history and 
geographic advantages or disadvantages. Each has its own sys-
tem for addressing surgical care but operates within a larger 
ecosystem, including energy availability, telecommunications 
and social networks, an interdependent global economy, and 
local material resources.
Population characteristics are changing rapidly. According 
to United Nations estimates, the human population of the entire 
world is aging, even in low-income countries, and by 2050, 
2 billion people will be over the age of 60. Currently, Asia is 
home to 55% of the world’s population over the age of 60.13 
Until recently, infectious diseases dominated public health strat-
egy. Now with major scourges like polio isolated to relatively 
small regions of the world and HIV and malaria decreasing in 
their relative impact worldwide, chronic diseases and their com-
plications, as well as the effects of aging, are gaining dominance 
in health care needs. Many of these chronic diseases are best 
approached by surgery.
The lack of metrics and paucity of data identifying the 
unmet burden of surgical need in many countries have 
been obstacles facing global surgery initiatives. The 2010 Global 
Burden of Disease Study was the first worldwide comprehen-
sive burden of disease evaluation since the initial 1990 epidemi-
ologic study. Using the disability-adjusted life years (DALY), 
a metric initially proposed for the 1990 study that captures both 
premature mortality and the prevalence and severity of illnesses, 
disease burdens were calculated for 291 causes in 21 regions of 
the world (including 187 countries) for 1990, 2005, and 2010 
to enable identification of significant trends over time.14 While 
the global DALYs remained stable from 1990 to 2010, the study 
identified a significant shift from communicable, maternal, 
neonatal, and nutritional causes to noncommunicable causes 
(Fig. 49-6).15
In the 2006 Disease Control Priorities 2nd edition, the 
global burden of premature death and disability from surgi-
cally treatable conditions was estimated at 11% of the total 
global burden of disease.10 Recently, country-wide population 
surveys using the Surgeons OverSeas Assessment of Surgical 
Need (SOSAS) methodology identified a large unmet burden 
of surgical disease. In Sierra Leone, 25% of deaths of house-
hold members during the previous year might have been averted 
Figure 49-3.  Foundation for creating surgical infrastructure. 
(Reproduced with permission from Catherine R. deVries, M.D., 
University of Utah, and Intermountain Healthcare.)
C U
LT
U R
E
Communication Energy Transportation
3
4
1958
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Figure 49-4.  Map of world elec-
trification. (NASA, Visible Earth, 
http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view.
php?id=79765)
Figure 49-5.  Key components of the global surgery ecosystem. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
Global
Surgery
Multidisciplinary
Engagement
Surgical
Care
by timely surgical care; 25% of respondents also reported a 
­current condition needing surgical attention.16. In Rwanda, in 
2011, the SOSAS survey found 41.2% of the population had 
at least one operative condition during their life time; 6.4% of 
the population was found to have a current surgically treatable 
condition.17 Using the percentage of the population currently 
needing surgical care from Rwanda and Sierra Leone combined 
with the 2012 population in Sub-Saharan Africa of almost 
900 million, there are between 56 million and 218 million peo-
ple just in Sub-­Saharan Africa needing surgical attention today! 
Untreated acute and chronic surgical conditions represent a 
­significant unmet burden of disease that have major impact on 
the ­economies of these nations.18
Cancer.  Patients and their communities in low- and middle-
income countries(LMICs) bear a much greater share of 
the burden of cancer than high-income countries. The 
dramatic increase in the proportion of reported cancer cases in 
LMICs is a result of population growth, aging populations, and 
the decreased mortality from infectious diseases. In 1970, only 
15% of newly reported cancer cases worldwide were from the 
developing world; by 2008, this proportion rose ­dramatically 
to 58% and is expected to grow to 70% by 2030.19 Previously 
thought to be a disease almost exclusive to high-income 
countries, nearly two-thirds of the 7.6 million cancer deaths 
worldwide occur in LMICs. Mortality from cancer correlates 
inversely with a country’s economy for certain treatable can-
cers, including breast, testicular, and cervical cancer—LMICs 
have higher case fatality rates than high-income countries 
(Fig. 49-7).19,20
For example, breast cancer case fatality rates illustrate the 
great disparity in outcomes between regions. Case fatality rates 
in East Africa reach an unacceptable 59% compared to 19% in 
the United States.20 In LMICs, patients have very limited access 
to screening. They present for care with much later stages of 
cancer. In Haiti, after the great earthquake, in 2010, and after 
the initial onslaught of orthopedic injuries, many aid organiza-
tions found themselves faced with the unmet underlying burden 
of disease, including late stage breast cancer and other tumors 
(Fig. 49-8).
Trauma.  Trauma has become a leading cause of death and 
disability around the world; 90% of trauma deaths 
occur in LMICs.21 Approximately 32% more people die 
5
6
1959
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
47
35
43
54
10
11
1990
2010
% Worldwide DALYs
Communicable, maternal, neonatal, nutritional
Non-communicable
Injuries
Figure 49-6.  Shift in disease burden 1990–2010. (Data from Murray CJ, Vos T, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) 
for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2012;380(9859):2197-2223. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
Figure 49-7.  Ratio of mortality to incidence by solid tumor type and country income (2008). (Data  from Farmer P, Frenk J, Knaul FM, 
et al. Expansion of cancer care and control in countries of low and middle income: a call to action. Lancet. 2010;376(9747):1186-1193. 
Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
Thyroid
High
High-middle
Low-middle
Low
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Ratio of mortality to incidence
Income class
Breast
Cervical
Testicular
Prostate
Colorectal
Figure 49-8.  Underlying unmet cancer burden in Haiti (2010).(Photos reproduced with permission from R. Dirk Noyes, MD; layout repro-
duced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
1960
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
as a result from injuries than from malaria, tuberculosis, and 
HIV/AIDS combined representing 10% of the world’s deaths 
(Fig. 49-9).22,23 In the United States, a patient presenting with 
an injury in a rural community has a higher mortality than those 
from an urban setting.24 This disparity is much more pronounced 
in economically disadvantaged societies where seriously injured 
patients from road traffic accidents are twice as likely to die 
compared to similarly injured patients in a high-income set-
ting (Fig. 49-10).22,25 Additionally, death is much more likely to 
occur in the pre-hospital settings for injured patients from low-
income countries. The lack of integrated communication and 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Deaths per year 
(millions)
Injury
HIV/AIDS, TB, and Malaria
Injuries and Violence:
the Scale of the Problem
Figure 49-9.  Injuries and violence: the scale of the problem. 
­(Injuries and violence: the facts. Geneva, World Health Organi-
zation, 2010, http://www.who.int/violence_ injury_ prevention/
key_ facts/VIP_key_ fact_1.pdf  )
Figure 49-10.  Change in traffic fatal-
ity risk (deaths/10,000 persons), 1975-
1998). (Data from Kopits E, Cropper M. 
Traffic fatalities and economic growth. 
Accid Anal Prev.  2005;37(1):169-178. 
Illustration reproduced with permis-
sion from Intermountain Healthcare.)
Canada
Austria
France
India
China
United States
Columbia
Botswana
400
350
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
HIGH INCOME COUNTRIES
LOW INCOME COUNTRIES
HIGH INCOME COUNTRIES
LOW INCOME COUNTRIES
Percentage change
emergency transportation systems contribute to the pre-hospital 
risk, while the lack of infrastructure, supplies, and personnel 
contribute to in-hospital mortality.
Burns.  Almost 11 million people worldwide sought medical or 
surgical care related to burns in 2004. However, the vast major-
ity of burned people never present for medical care. Burns repre-
sent a significant cause of death as well as disability globally.26 
The vast majority of deaths from fires (95%) occur in LMICs. 
Burns result in nearly 200,000 deaths each year from fires while 
other forms of burns, including scalds and electrical burns, rep-
resent another significant source of death and disability. Women 
and children in LMICs are most likely to be burned in domestic 
kitchens; men are more likely to be burned in the workplace. 
The economic and social impact from long hospitalizations and 
from the resulting disfigurement provides a significant negative 
stigma causing ostracism and rejection.
Of all the forms of trauma worldwide, burns are the only 
type that predominantly afflicts women and children. Southeast 
Asia accounts for 27% of the burn-related deaths worldwide; 
70% of people dying from burns in the region are women.27 
Cooking on wood, charcoal, or low kerosene stoves also puts 
children at risk, particularly from scalding (Fig. 49-11). Small 
children in the WHO African region have triple the number of 
burn deaths as children worldwide. Contrast this with the United 
States, where more burns and burn deaths affect men.
People living in rural areas suffer disproportionately 
because there are fewer facilities capable of managing the acute 
and chronic aspects of burn management and because the popu-
lation is generally poorer. Surgical grafting and management 
of contractures is often best done in specialized burn centers, 
but these are rare in LMICs. Telemedicine has been shown to 
be effective in managing burns and preventing complications.28
Human Resources
The greatest burden of disease occurs in areas where human 
resources—physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other 
healthcare workers—are scarce (Fig. 49-12).29 The proportion 
of physicians is low both in high population areas and in areas 
7
1961
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
where the population is growing most rapidly (Fig. 49-13).30,31 
Fully trained surgeons and anesthesiologists comprise only a 
small proportion of the total number of the Human Resources 
in Health (HRH). In the Eastern Mediterranean, Southeast Asia, 
and Africa, HRH per 1000 people falls below the WHO mini-
mum threshold (Fig. 49-14).29 Many countries in Africa—for 
example Tanzania and Ethiopia—have only 0.6 surgeons per 
100,000 population while the United States and Canada have 
51 and 26 surgeons per 100,000 population, respectively.32 To 
provide the same concentration of surgeons in East Africa that 
currently exists in Canada would require training an estimated 
additional 42,000 surgeons.33
Primary care physicians, nurses, midwives, or advanced 
care practitioners (ACPs) provide much of the basic surgical 
and anesthetic care in LMICs. Where regulations allow, “task 
shifting,” or training ACPs to deliver surgery and anesthesia 
services previously allowed only under the purview of fully 
trained specialists, can provide expanded access to care.34-36  
Non-M.D. practitioners, variously known as assistant medical 
officers (AMOs) or “tecnicos de cirurgia” in Mozambique, often 
have extensive operative experience, including obstetrical care 
and are the primary providers of surgical care in a region.37-38 
Task shifting to ACPs also occurs in the United States and other 
countries where they fill a need otherwise unmet by specialists 
Figure 49-11.  Domestic kitchen: risk factor for burns in 
women and children in LMICs. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from James H. Kenney, Jr.)
Figure 49-12.  Distribution of healthcare workers by burden of disease in WHO regions. (Redrawn from Fig 5.1, The Business of Health in 
Africa (29) by permission. Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Percent of global disease burden
Percent of global workforce
Americas
Europe
Western
Pacific
South-East
Asia
Africa
Eastern
Mediterranean
* Even with grants and loans from abroad.
0
5
40
45
30
35
20
25
10
15
Africa suffers from 24% of the 
global burden of disease but has 
access to only 3% of health 
workers and less than 1% of the 
world's financial resources.*
1962
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
0 - 17
17 - 34
34 - 50
 
Physicians (Per 10,000 Population)
2005-2010
50 - 67
200,000,000 - 600,000,000
0 - 200,000,000
600,000,000 - 1,400,000,000
 
Population
2012
0.48% - 1.96%
1.96% - 3.45%
3.45% - 4.93%
 
Population Growth Rate
2012
–1.01% - –0.48%
Figure 49-13.  Number of physicians, world populations, and world population growth rates. (Figure Created from Data: Number of phy-
sicians per 10,000 population, 2005-2010,WHO, World Health Statistics 2012, available at: http://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_
health_statistics/2012/en/index.html. See also, WHO, Global Health Observatory, available at: http://www.who.int/gho/database/en/; 
Population 2012, Sources:CIA, The World Factbook, available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/.)
even in major tertiary care centers.39 However, concerns about 
the quality of care, lack of adequate supervision, and the effect 
on prestige and professional development for specialists and 
ACPs, continue to be topics for debate.40
Migration of practitioners to economically and cultur-
ally favorable locales is universal and not restricted to low-
resource countries.41 However, the net impact on poor countries 
is greater. In a 2004 study, more than 23% of U.S. physicians 
received their medical training from other countries; of these 
64% were from low-income countries.42 Investments in training 
greater numbers of doctors in these countries, including sur-
gical specialists, have been only partially successful in meet-
ing the demand in poor countries. Until economic conditions 
improve or opportunities for professional development increase, 
1963
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
WHO
threshold
2.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
South-East Asia
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
Americas
Europe
1.3
2.0
1.7
2.9
11.1
7.0
HRH per 1,000 capitas
Medical doctors (MDs)
Nurses and midwives
Total (MDs, nurses, midwives)
Substitute medical doctors
Community health workers
Total (all delivery)
Managers
Clinical researchers
Population health leadership
Total (all) 
0.21
1.07
1.28
0.03
0.07
1.38
0.04
0.01
0.01
1.44
Figure 49-14.  Human resources for health (HRH) by WHO region, 2006. (Redrawn from Fig 5.2, The Business of Health in Africa (29) by 
permission. Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
and ­incentives enticing migration of health care workers to 
high-income countries abate, it is unlikely that the most skilled 
practitioners will remain in resource-poor areas beyond their 
immediate obligations.43-47
STRATEGIES FOR DEVELOPMENT
Initiatives for Outreach and Engagement
Many models for outreach and engagement have had a positive 
impact on the accessibility of surgery. Organizations participat-
ing in outreach are guided by a wide range of motivations and 
resources (Fig. 49-15). Some organizations are purely humani-
tarian and service oriented; others are primarily educational. 
Some even use the promise of healthcare to advance political, 
religious, or personal agendas.
Responding to the challenges of disparities, new genera-
tions of students, faculty, philanthropists, private industry lead-
ers and policy makers have demonstrated a growing passion to 
address global surgery as part of global health. Prior to 1984 
only 0.32% of physicians and 0.12% of nurses were involved in 
international health (either paid or volunteer).48 Recently, inter-
est in global health has exploded among medical students in the 
United States. A 2009 survey indicated that 25% of U.S. medi-
cal students have traveled to LMICs for clinical and research 
electives. At some medical schools the number has risen to 
over 50%.49,50 In 2004, 40% of medical students in the United 
­Kingdom spent their 6 to 12 week elective rotation in devel-
oping countries.51 A structured questionnaire was administered 
anonymously to all American College of Surgeons resident 
members. Approximately 94% of the respondents were general 
surgery residents, and 92% were interested in an international 
elective with many planning to volunteer in the future.52
Many patients have benefited from the multitude of 
­service-oriented volunteer “missions” providing much needed 
surgical care that would otherwise have been unavailable. While 
volunteerism and medical missions are laudable activities, they 
are not a sustainable solution to long-term manpower shortages 
for health.53 Comprehensive initiatives are also necessary to 
engage local healthcare professionals and organizations, gov-
ernments, and academic institutions to build capacity at home.54
International Organizations
United Nations (UN).  Committed to maintaining interna-
tional peace, developing friendly relations between nations, 
and promoting better standards of living (conquering hunger, 
disease, and illiteracy) and human rights, representatives from 
51 nations in 1945 signed the United Nations Charter at the 
United Nations Conference on International Organization held in 
San Francisco, California.55 There are now 193 member states.56 
The UN promotes a social justice agenda advocating for worldwide 
health, engagement of philanthropies and civil society in global 
health initiatives, and supports the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs).
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  Leaders from 189 
countries gathered at the UN headquarters in September 2000 
and agreed on eight specific “Millennium Development Goals” 
(Table 49-1).57 Some have argued that strengthening basic surgi-
cal care at district level hospitals is critical to reaching MDGs 
4, 5, and 6 (reducing child and maternal mortality and halting 
and reversing the spread of AIDS).6,58 In poor countries, the 
enormous shortfalls in infrastructure, and human and material 
resources severely limits the capabilities to provide access to 
life-saving and life-changing services such as timely Cesarean-
section, control of peri-partum hemorrhage, appropriate care for 
pediatric trauma, and treatment for a multitude of congenital 
diseases.3,59-64 While the evolution of public policy has been 
slow to accept surgical care as integral to poverty reduction and 
public healthcare, surgeons are actively campaigning for and 
joining the process of negotiating for inclusion of surgical care 
development into the new post-2015 to 2030 MDGs.65
1964
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
World Health Organization (WHO).  The initial UN Confer-
ence in 1945 voted to establish a new international health orga-
nization. The Constitution of the World Health Organization 
(WHO) was approved and ratified in 1948.55 The first World 
Assembly in 1948 established malaria, tuberculosis, venereal 
diseases, maternal and child health, sanitary engineering, and 
nutrition as WHO priorities. One of the WHO’s greatest pub-
lic health stories is the worldwide eradication of smallpox that 
began with the USSR proposal for the WHO-led program in 
1958 culminating in the last identified case in Somalia in 1977.
Politicians/
Administrators
Resources
Financial
Human
Political
Motivations
Humanitarian
Educational
Academic
Political
Other
Cataract
Hernia
Vesico-vaginal
fistula
Laparoscopic
surgery
Educators
Individual
people
Healthcare
providers
Country
Province
Urban vs.
Rural
Disease
(Technique Specific)
Geographic
Targeted Audience
Global
Surgery 
Initiatives
Politicians/
Administrators
Figure 49-15.  Global surgery initiatives. (Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
Table 49-1
Millennium development goals 2000–2015
1.  Reduce by half the number of people who suffer from 
hunger and whose income is < $ 1/ day
2.  Provide universal primary education
3.  Promote gender equality
4.  Reduce mortality rate for children < 5 years by two-thirds
5.  Reduce maternal mortality rate by three quarters
6.  Halt and reverse the spread of AIDS, malaria, 
tuberculosis, and other major diseases
7.  Improve the environment
8.  Strengthen the global partnership for development.
Data adapted from Millennium Development Goals. http://www.undp.
org/content/undp/en/home/mdgoverview/
While the disease burden from communicable diseases has 
abated in large part from these successful international coopera-
tive interventions, little has been done to address the growing 
global burden of surgical disease. Despite the laudable 1978 
Declaration of Alma Alta that expressed the need for urgent 
action for the world community to protect and promote the health 
for all people, the declaration did so by crowning primary health 
care as the key to achieving the goal of health for all—which 
was then accepted by the member countries in the World Health 
Organization.66 Although the Alma-Ata slogan “Health for all 
by 2000” did not materialize, it did galvanize efforts for global 
partnerships for healthcare improvements and poverty reduction.
The Violence and Injury Prevention Program (VIP) and 
the Global Initiative for Emergency and Essentials Surgical 
Care (GIEESC) are two programs related to surgery within the 
WHO that began before 2008. But, as a response to a growing 
recognition of the significant unmet surgical need, in 2008, the 
WHO for the first time included basic surgery as a component 
for community primary health care(Fig. 49-16).67
The Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical 
Care (GIEESC).  The Clinical Procedures (CPR) team in the 
WHO Department of Essential Health Technologies (EHT) con-
vened a multidisciplinary group of experts from various surgical 
disciplines, professionals and civic leaders from national and 
international organizations, and representative from various 
WHO departments in December 2005 in Geneva, Switzerland, 
to formally organize the GIEESC.68 GIEESC’s main aim was 
1965
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
Waste disposal
inspection
Mammography
Alcoholism
Hernia
Placenta
praevia
Traffic
accident
Consultant
support
Referral for
multi-drug
resistance
Referral for
complications
Gender
violence
Surgery
Maternity
Environmental 
health lab
Training centre
Training
support
Cancer
screening
centre
Women’s
shelter
Alcoholics
anonymous
Community
mental
health unit
Emergency
department
Hospital
Specialized care
Diagnostic
services
TB 
control
centre
Diabetes 
clinic
CT
Scan
Cytology
lab
Diagnostic support
Pap smears
Self-help
group
Liaison
community
health worker
Other
Other
Social
services
NGOs
Specialized 
prevention services
Community
Primary-care team:
continuous,
comprehensive,
person-centred care
Figure 49-16.  Emergency and essential surgery: an integral component of primary care. (The World Health Report 2008, Primary Health 
Care Report, Now More Than Ever, p. 55, Figure 3.5. http://www.who.int/whr/2008/en/ )
Mongolia GIEESC
The WHO situational analysis tool developed in 2007 to assess the availability of emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) 
at individual health facilities has been utilized in 35 different countries documenting the limited infrastructure, human resources, 
procedures, equipment and supplies available for even basic EESC.69 For example, there were no trained surgeons or anesthetists 
at 44 first referral hospitals in Mongolia.3 Only 66% of the facilities had electricity and 45% had running water (Fig. 49-17).
Most facilities lacked any policy for EESC, disaster preparedness, basic equipment to provide EESC, or any access to training for 
EESC. Adopting a health systems strengthening approach to rectify these glaring deficiencies, Mongolia implemented a nationwide 
EESC program involving 14 of the 21 provinces (Aimags) from 2004 to 2010 (Fig. 49-18).70 In six years, dramatic improvements 
in short-term process measures were identified using the WHO Monitoring and Process form: 57.1% increase in availability of 
emergency rooms; 59.1% increase in the supply of emergency tool kits; and a 73.6% increase in the recording of emergency cases 
(Figs. 49-19 and 49-20).70 More important, countrywide morbidity and mortality dropped significantly (Fig. 49-21). 71
to assist member states with capacity strengthening in the safe 
and appropriate use of emergency and essential surgical care 
(procedures, equipment) at resource-limited healthcare facilities 
through training and education programs. The training program 
was built around the WHO “Integrated Management of Emer-
gency and Essential Surgical Care (IMEESC)” tool kit.69 The 
tool kit included best practice protocols, guidelines on policies, 
training curriculum, emergency equipment, teaching slides, and 
monitoring and evaluation instructions. Additionally, low-cost 
editions of the manual Surgical Care at the District Hospital 
have been made available in local languages. A Mongolian 
edition facilitated early expansion of GIEESC throughout the 
country. Mongolia has improved basic infrastructure, human 
resources and capabilities; and the use of the tool kit system has 
led to its incorporation into the countrywide healthcare plan.70 
(Box: Mongolia GIEESC)
Figure 49-17.  First Level (Soum) Hospital. (Photos reproduced with permission from Raymond R. Price MD. Layout reproduced with 
permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
1966
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Bayankhongor
Khentii
Bayan-Ulgii
Bulgan
Tuv
Dundgobi
Khovd
Altai
Uvurkhangai
Dornod
Darkhan
Uul
Sukhbaatar
Orkhon
Gobi-Sumber
187 Soum doctors from 14 Aimags (Soum doctors = Doctor of Health Care Centers)
657 Surgeons and anesthesia doctors from Aimag and City Hospitals 
29 Midwife and feldshers from rural provinces
50 Nurses from rural provinces
Figure 49-18.  EESC Project: Mongolia 2004–2010. (Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, Price RR, Lundeg G, Kehrer B. Strengthening Surgical 
Services at the Soum (First-referral) Hospital: The WHO Emergency and Essential Surgical Care (EESC) Program in Mongolia. World J 
Surg. 2012;36(10):2367, Fig. 2, With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.)
Before
After
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Wound debridement
Wound suturing, dressing, suture removal
Incision and drainage of abscesses
Resuscitation
Fracture management
Penetrating injuries
Blunt injuries
Amputation
Burns management
Skin grafting
Contracture release
Chest tube insertion
Cricothyroidotomy/Tracheostomy
Removal of foreign body
Venous peripheral cutdown
Uterine rupture/ectopic pregnancy
Suprapubic puncture/cystostomy
Local anaesthestic infiltration
Figure 49-19.  Surgical procedures performed 1-2 years Post-training (13 soum hospitals evaluated). (Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, Price RR, 
Lundeg G, Kehrer B. Strengthening Surgical Services at the Soum (First-referral) Hospital: The WHO Emergency and Essential Surgical Care 
(EESC) Program in Mongolia. World J Surg. 2012;36(10):2367, Fig. 6, With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.)
1967
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
Figure 49-20.  Pilot Soum hospitals’ evaluation 2 years post-training. (Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, Price RR, Lundeg G, Kehrer B. 
Strengthening Surgical Services at the Soum (First-referral) Hospital: The WHO Emergency and Essential Surgical Care (EESC) Program 
in Mongolia. World J Surg. 2012;36(10):2367, Fig. 5, With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Establishment
of emergency
room
Supply of
emergency kits
Recording of
emergency
care cases
Instructions on
facility and
instrument
usage
Before
After
.60
.50
.40
.30
.20
.10
.00
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Percentage of deaths
Percentage of complications
Figure 49-21.  Surgical morbidity and mortality: Mongolia 2001–2009.(Adapted from Indicators of Surgical Operation (Mongolia 2001–
2009). 2010 [cited 2011 November 2]; Available from: www.doh.gov.mn. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Health-
care.)
1968
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Table 49-2
Ten basic and essential objectives for safe surgery 
(WHO*)
  1.  Operate on the correct patient at the correct site
  2.  Use method known to prevent harm from anesthetic 
administration, while protecting the patient from pain
  3.  Recognize and effectively prepare for life-threatening 
loss of airway or respiratory function
  4.  Recognize and effectively prepare for risk of high blood 
loss
  5.  Avoid inducing any allergic or adverse drug reaction 
known to be a significant risk for the patient
  6.  Consistently use method known to minimize risk of 
surgical site infection
  7.  Prevent inadvertent retention of instruments or sponges 
in surgical wounds
  8.  Secure and accurately identify all surgical specimens
  9.  Effectively communicate and exchange critical patient 
information for the safe conduct of the operation
10.  Establish routine surveillance of surgical capacity, 
volume, and results
*WHO: World Health Organization.
Data from WHO Guidelines for Safe Surgery 2009 http://whqlibdoc.
who.int/publications/2009/9789241598552_eng.pdf.
Violence and Injury Prevention (VIP).  The Violence and 
Injury Prevention (VIP) program promotes numerous activities 
to assist countries to prevent and mitigate the consequences of 
violence and injury.72 While injury prevention is paramount, 
VIP provides guidance for strengthening trauma systems in 
countries of all economic levels to improve emergency care and 
rehabilitation. VIP also encourages development of systematic 
data collection and analysis to better guide appropriate interven-
tions. Prevention programs include the WHO Helmet initiative 
while the Essential Trauma Care Project (ESTC) creates stan-
dards for the care of injured patients and promotes systematic 
capacity building.
WHO Safe Surgery Saves Lives Initiative.  Surgeons have 
always sought ways to prevent peri-operative complications. 
Aseptic technique, one of the greatest forms of prevention in 
surgical care, requires vigilant reinforcement to prevent seri-
ous wound infections. In resource-limited areas inadequate pre-, 
intra-, and post-operative monitoring, lack of critical medica-
tions, and poor documentation can be severely lacking placing 
patients at increased risk for serious complications. The WHO 
Safe Surgery Saves Lives Initiative is a worldwide attempt to 
prevent peri-operative complications.73
Deaths from surgery occur at 0.4% to 0.8% globally; 
however, they may exceed 5% to 10% in developing countries. 
There are about 1 million deaths and 7 million disabling com-
plications related to surgery worldwide, 50% of which are esti-
mated to be preventable. The WHO Safe Surgery Saves Lives 
initiative targets preventable surgical injuries.73 The initiative 
identified 10 basic and essential objectives that can help pre-
vent peri-operative injuries (Table 49-2).74 A three-stage simple 
checklist (initiated as the patient entered the operating room, 
just before the procedure, and just prior to the patient leaving 
the room) implemented in 8 countries from high-, middle-, and 
low-income countries found a 50% reduction in the failure to 
meet basic safety standards resulting in a 50 % decrease in mor-
tality (Fig. 49-22).75
Global Surgery and Public Health
Surgical care is increasingly recognized as an integral 
component of public health. Traditional public health 
teaching portrays surgery as the antithesis of public health: treat-
ing the individual instead of the community, reactionary instead of 
preventative, and too expensive especially for countries with 
developing economies. Yet in reality, surgery and public health 
priorities overlap in many areas (Fig. 49-23). For example, pro-
viding access to obstetrical care or birth attendants for every 
delivery could prevent the majority of vescio-vaginal fistulas 
and markedly decrease the most common cause of maternal 
death—hemorrhage—for entire communities.
Even after Learmonth presented his landmark lecture in 
1949 “The Contributions of Surgery to Preventive Medicine” 
at the University of London’s Health Clark Lecture series, sur-
gery has been neglected as a component of public health.7,76 
The World Bank, in the 2006 Disease Priorities, 2nd edition, 
included its first chapter on surgery. An entire volume dedicated 
to surgical care is planned for the 3rd edition. There are three 
significant developments helping to accelerate the integration of 
surgery and public health:
1.  Improved understanding of the burden of surgical disease 
and its significant component of the overall burden of 
global disease;
2.  Recognition that surgery has a primary, secondary, and ter-
tiary preventative role; and
3.  Documentation that surgical care can be cost-effective for 
community-based healthcare.
Assigning Disease Priorities.  Global surgery interventions 
can be prioritized to identify those conditions in which clini-
cians and public health professionals should collaborate most 
closely—targeting those diseases that impose the largest bur-
den on a society and have a highly successful surgical outcome 
(Table 49-3).69,77 Levels defining public health burden, success, 
and feasibility have not been precisely defined. However, four 
broad, high-priority areas where surgery has an important role 
for public health interventions include: trauma care; obstetri-
cal emergencies; acute-surgical emergencies; and nonacute 
surgical conditions that significantly affect the quality of life 
(Table 49-4).10
Trauma Care.  The Essential Trauma Care Project (EsTC) 
begun in 2001 is a collaboration effort between the Interna-
tional Association for Trauma Surgery and Intensive Care, an 
integrated society within the International Society of Surgery-
Societe-Internationale Chirurgie (ISS-SIC) and the World 
Health Organization (WHO), specifically the Violence and 
Injury Prevention unit. The project culminated in a document 
that identified 11 core Essential Trauma Care services (identi-
fied as the “rights of the injured patient”) that should be available 
at all levels of healthcare facilities (Table 49-5).78 In addition, 
the document delineated 260 human and physical resources that 
should be available based on the type of facility (Table 49-6).
The EsTC recommendations provide a cost-effective 
framework for LMICs to improve their trauma care. These 
recommendations have been used as a planning guide and as 
an advocacy statement. To catalyze strengthening trauma and 
8
1969
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
emergency care in low-and middle-income countries, in 2007, 
the World Health Assembly (WHA) adopted a resolution on 
Emergency Care Systems (Resolution WHA 60.22).79,80 This 
first-ever WHA resolution dedicated specifically to trauma care 
highlights the importance accorded by world governments in 
caring for their injured.
Obstetrical and Other Acute Surgical Emergencies.  Reduc-
tion of maternal deaths and long term disability are high priori-
ties for the international community.81 Despite the 47% reduction 
in maternal deaths from 1990 to 2010, many women—mostly 
Figure 49-22.  Surgical safety checklist. (WHO surgical safety checklist. 2009, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598590_
eng_Checklist.pdf. © World Health Organization 2009 All rights reserved.)
Before induction of anaesthesia 
Before skin incision
Before patient leaves operating room
Surgical Safety Checklist
(with at least nurse and anaesthetist)
(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)
(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)
This checklist is not intended to be comprehensive. Additions and modifications to fit local practice are encouraged.
Nurse Verbally Confirms:
 
The name of the procedure
 
Completion of instrument, sponge and
 
needle counts
 
Specimen labeling (read specimen labels
 
aloud, including patient name)
 
Whether there are any equipment problems
 
to be addressed
To Surgeon, Anaesthetist and Nurse:
 
What are the key concerns for recovery and
 
management of this patient?
Based on the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598590_eng_Checklist.pdf
© World Health Organization 2009 All rights reserved
Has the patient confirmed his/her identity,
site, procedure, and consent?
 
Yes
Is the site marked?
 
Yes
 
Not applicable
Is the anaesthesia machine and medication
check complete?
 
Yes
Is the pulse oximeter on the patient and
functioning?
 
Yes
Does the patient have a:
Known allergy?
 
No
 
Yes
Difficult airway or aspiration risk?
 
No
 
Yes, and equipment/assistance available
Risk of >500ml blood loss (7ml/kg in children)?
 
No
 
Yes, and two IVs/central access and fluids
 
planned
 
Confirm all team members have
 
introduced themselves by name and role.
 
Confirm the patient’s name, procedure,
 
and where the incision will be made.
Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given
 
within the last 60 minutes?
 
Yes
 
Not applicable
Anticipated Critical Events
To Surgeon:
 
What are the critical or non-routine steps?
 
How long will the case take?
 
What is the anticipated blood loss?
To Anaesthetist:
 
Are there any patient-specific concerns?
To Nursing Team:
 
Has sterility (including indicator results)
 
been confirmed?
 
Are there equipment issues or any concerns?
Is essential imaging displayed?
 
Yes
 
Not applicable
in LMICs—still die daily from preventable causes related to 
pregnancy and childbirth.82 The global maternal mortality ratio 
(the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births) declined 
by only 3.1% per year which is significantly less than the 
5.5% reduction necessary to achieve MDG 5—to decrease 
maternal mortality by 75% by 2015.82 For every maternal 
death, 30 women are incapacitated by chronic problems that 
reduce their quality of life and ability to care for their families. 
High priority surgical procedures to improve maternal health 
include Cesarean-section, hysterectomy for postpartum bleed-
ing and uterine rupture, management of ectopic pregnancy, and 
­dilatation and curettage.77
About 90% of other acute surgical emergencies could be 
addressed by developing the capability to care for the 10 most 
common acute surgical conditions in any local region. While a 
few types of disease processes vary by geographical location, 
there are many that are universal, including appendicitis, stran-
gulated hernia, small bowel obstruction, perforated peptic ulcer, 
fractures, lacerations, and wounds.
Nonacute Surgical Conditions.  Even common nonacute 
conditions can have significant impact on the quality of life. 
Hernias can prevent otherwise healthy individuals from work-
ing, especially in societies where the economy relies heavily on 
manual labor. Cleft lip and cleft palate deformities interfere with 
the ability to speak or eat properly and predispose affected indi-
viduals to chronic ear infections leading to hearing loss. Many 
live in isolation because social ostracism prevents them from 
attending school, marrying, or holding jobs.83 Plastic surgeons 
who pioneered global outreach for reconstructive procedures for 
Prevention
Diagnosis
Treatment
Rehabilitation
Surgery
Public
Health
Figure 49-23.  Overlapping priorities of surgery and public health. 
(Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain 
Healthcare.)
1970
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
cleft lip and palate opened the door for subsequent outreach by 
other specialties, including ophthalmology, orthopedics, general 
surgery, urology, and dentistry.84-86
The most common form of blindness is caused by cataracts. 
Cataracts decrease the quality of life and the socioeconomic 
status for both the blind person and his family. The fact that 
90% of blind people no longer work, places extra burdens on the 
family members who care for them.87 The Himalayan ­Cataract 
Project (HCP) is a highly successful initiative focusing on cat-
aracts in Asia and Africa. HCP priorities and measurable out-
comes illustrates how combining key public health concepts 
with a comprehensive approach to surgical care creates a model 
for curing disease, building economies, and delivering hope in 
resource-poor areas.9 (Box: The Himalayan Cataract Project: A 
Sustainable Public Health Approach for Curing Blindness)
Cancer Initiatives
Surgery for cancer in public health plays a role not only for 
curative surgery, but also for early diagnosis, prevention, and 
Table 49-5
Essential trauma care services
  1.  Obstructed airway appropriately maintained
  2.  Impaired breathing supported
  3.  Pneumothorax and hemothorax promptly diagnosed and 
treated
  4.  Bleeding promptly stopped (internal or external)
  5.  Shock recognized and treated appropriately (I.V. fluids)
  6.  Timely decompression of space occupying lesions to 
prevent secondary brain injury
  7.  Abdominal injuries diagnosed and promptly repaired 
(intestinal injuries and others)
  8.  Disabling extremity injuries corrected
  9.  Potentially unstable spine injuries identified and 
managed (early immobilization)
10.  Minimize consequences of injuries by appropriate 
rehabilitative services
11.  Medication to provide above services and relieve pain 
readily available
Data adapted from Mock C, Joshipura M, Goosen J, Maier R. Overview 
of the Essential Trauma Care Project. World J Surg. 2006;30(6): 
919–929.
Table 49-3
Prioritization of surgical conditions
Priority*
Public Health  
Burden
Surgical Procedure Successful
Cost-effective and Feasible to 
­Promote Globally
1
High
Highly
Highly
2
Moderate
Moderately
Moderately
3
Low
Neither highly or moderately
Low
*Priority one implies that all three conditions must be met. The priority should be shifted to 2 or 3 if any of the conditions are moderate or low.
Data adapted from: Mock C, et al. Developing priorities for addressing surgical conditions globally: furthering the link between surgery and public health 
policy. World J Surg. 2010;34(3): 381–385.
Table 49-4
The role of surgery for public health strategies
Trauma care
Prevention of death and 
chronic disability by the 
provision of timely, expert, 
and complete surgical care
Obstetrical emergencies
Timely surgical intervention 
in obstructed labor, in pre- 
and post-partum hemorrhage, 
and other obstetrical 
complications
Acute surgical emergencies
Provision of competent 
surgery to treat a wide range 
of emergency abdominal and 
nonabdominal conditions
Nonacute surgical conditions
Surgical care for several 
elective conditions that 
have a significant effect 
on the quality of life such 
as cataract, otitis media, 
clubfoot, and hernias
Data adapted from Debas, HT, et al, Surgery, in Disease Control Pri-
orities in Developing Countries. 2nd ed. Jamison DT, Breman JG, 
Measham AR et al (eds.) New York: Oxford University Press for The 
World Bank, 2006, p. 1245–59.
palliation.19,91-93 Solid tumors, in their early stages, presents 
insidiously as a nonacute surgical problem. Due to cancer’s 
recent recognition as a leading cause of death, cancer has been 
identified as a health priority in LMICs. Most solid tumors are 
incurable without surgery and at a minimum require surgical 
excision of the primary lesion.91
It is often not appreciated that surgeons provide a signif-
icant amount of primary care and are the principle providers 
involved in endoscopic screening and treatment of gastrointes-
tinal tumors in LMICs. In countries without specialized ser-
vices, low-cost and effective treatment options combining early 
prevention and treatment with off-patent drug use have led to 
coverage of cancer treatment in several middle-income coun-
tries’ national health insurance plans.19 Cancer care provides 
significant opportunity for including surgery in community-
wide public health programs as a high priority according to the 
prioritization model; cancer has a high public health burden, 
is treated with highly successful procedures, and can be cost-
effective and feasible globally. In 2009, a coalition of leaders in 
cancer care and public health organized the Global Task Force 
on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control in Developing 
Countries (GTFCCC).94 GTFCCC’s mission is to expand access 
1971
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
The Himalayan Cataract Project (HCP): A Sustainable Public Health Approach for Curing Blindness
According to the WHO criteria, 180 million people worldwide are visually disabled. Of that population, 45 million are classified as 
bilaterally blind; 90% live in the developing world where poor water quality, lack of sanitation, malnutrition, and inadequate services 
cause a higher incidence of eye disease.87 The most common cause of avoidable blindness in LMICs is cataract (50%). Nepal has 
one of the highest incidences of cataracts due to increased exposure to ultraviolet sunlight encountered at its higher elevations; 70% 
of curable blindness in Nepal is due to cataracts.88
In 1995, Sanduk Ruit joined forces with Geoffrey Tabin to establish the Himalayan Cataract Project (HCP). In the early 1990’s, 
difficult geography and lack of transportation, the cost of the intraocular lens, and lack of trained ophthalmologists, assistants, and 
nurses limited access to cataract surgery for the poor.
HCP developed and defined six priorities each with an associated public health principle and outcome measurements that provided 
the basis for assessing success and for implementing change (Fig. 49-24). HCP’s care model targeted the entire population of 
blind people with cataracts regardless of the ability to pay. Since most of the potential patients lived in remote areas, HCP found it 
imperative to take cataract surgery to the local communities. The Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology (TIO) in Katmandu, Nepal, 
has served as a base from which over 100 doctors and100 ophthalmic assistants and nurses have been trained.89 Through the TIO 
and its outreach programs, over 2,573,000 people have been screened and more than 172,000 eye surgeries have been performed 
since 1994 (Fig. 49-25).89
The TIO developed an ophthalmology residency training program implementing standards set forth by the American Academy 
of Ophthalmology. In addition to the formal residency program for ophthalmologists, HCP established training programs for 
community eye care workers in a three-year Ophthalmic Assistant Training Program.
Ruit developed an innovative suture-less technique for cataract surgery yielding equivalent results to those in developed countries but 
also reproducible in resource-constrained areas. By redesigning the intraocular lens and mass producing it locally in Nepal for U.S. $4.00, 
Ruit and Tabin provided a low cost alternative to the higher-priced lens produced in developed countries. A local business—the Fred 
Hollows Intraocular Lens Factory—mass produces the lenses and helps support the local economy by introducing a new sustainable 
business locally.90
HCP also designed a socially acceptable method for cost-recovery that involves a sliding scale for payment: 45% of patients pay 
U.S. $120.00; 20% pay a smaller amount based on their economic situation; and 35% receive cataract surgery for free.
Table 49-6
Airway management recommendations for physical and human resources based on type of facility(sample from EsTC*)
Facility Level
Knowledge and Skills
Basic
General Practitioner
Specialist
Tertiary
Assessment of airway compromise
E
E
E
E
Manual maneuvers (chin lift, jaw thrust)
E
E
E
E
Insertion of oral or nasal airway
D
E
E
E
Endotracheal Intubation
D
D
E
E
Equipment and supplies
Oral or nasal airway
D
E
E
E
Laryngoscope
D
D
E
E
Endotracheal tube
D
D
E
E
Capnography
I
D
D
D
E: essential; D: desirable; I: irrelevant (not usually to be considered at the level in question).
*EsTC: Essential Trauma Care.
Data adapted from Mock C, Lormand JD, Goosen J, Joshipura M, Peden M. Guidelines for essential trauma care, 2004, Geneva: World Health Organiza-
tion, p. 21.
1972
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
HCP
Priorities
Public Health
Principles
Implementation
Accessible
Appropriate
Disruptive Technology
Sustainable Growth
Affordable
Sustainability
Humanitarian
High Quality
Innovation
Direct Impact
Affordability
Replication
Entire Population
Care at Local Level
Care Comparable to Western Standards
Disease with High Incidence/Prevalence
Designed $4 lens
Local Business
Skills Transfer
Building Infrastructure
Delivery Model
$20 Cost/Cataract
Meet Needs of Current Population
Culturally and Economically Acceptable
Figure 49-24.  Himalayan cataract 
project priorities, public health prin-
ciples, and outcome measurements. 
(Redrawn from Himalayan Cata-
ract Project and Tilganga Eye Cen-
ter, (Cureblindness.org) (82-84) by 
permission. Illustration reproduced 
with permission from Intermountain 
Healthcare.)
to cancer prevention, detection, and care in LMICs. Success-
ful partnerships have already been entered into Haiti, Rwanda, 
Mexico, Malawi, and Jordan.
The Preventive Role of Surgery.  Surgery plays a significant 
role at all levels of prevention of disease (Table 49-7). 
Trying to disassociate treatment from prevention presents 
challenges. Treatments can also be a form of prevention. For 
example, one of the root causes for the development of a vesico-
vaginal fistula is lack of access to appropriate peri-partum care. 
Expeditiously performing a Cesarean-section (a form of sec-
ondary prevention) for obstructed labor primarily prevents the 
development of vesico-vaginal fistulas (primarily preventing the 
development of a different disease).
The surgeon’s role for disease prevention in the develop-
ing world is in its infancy of realization. Diseases commonly 
present in very late stages in LMICs and in disadvantaged popu-
lations in developed countries. Many morbid conditions could 
have been cured while localized in their earlier stages and likely 
eradicated by a local surgical procedure. Early recognition and 
treatment of surgically correctable diseases is a critical preven-
tive role for surgery. Many surgical procedures are not only a 
form of tertiary prevention, but are also forms of primary pre-
vention (Table 49-8).91
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
20,000
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
Surgeries
Year
Figure 49-25.  Eye surgeries Tilganga eye 
center and outreach. (Redrawn from Himalayan 
Cataract Project and Tilganga Eye Center, 
(Cureblindness.org) (82-84) by permission. 
Illustration reproduced with permission from 
Intermountain Healthcare.)
9
1973
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
Cost-effectiveness of Surgical Care.  Funders in healthcare 
look for measurable return on their investments. While com-
parison of outcomes and objective measures would be ideal, 
reality demonstrates that healthcare budgets more commonly 
are dictated by politics rather than actual need. Nevertheless, in 
a world of limited resources and tightening budgets for health-
care, cost-effective analysis of various options for intervention 
are critical for policy makers. Comparing various options that 
have different outcomes is an approach called cost-utility analy-
sis (CUA). Surgical interventions can be evaluated by specific 
diseases or conditions, or by systems or services required to 
support the delivery of surgical care. In 1990, the World Bank 
defined the Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY) as the sum 
of Years of Life Lost (YLL) due to premature mortality in the 
population and the Years Lost due to Disability (YLD) for peo-
ple living with the health condition or its consequences.  (DALY 
= YLL + YLD). Evaluating the cost per DALY averted is one 
approach for comparing the cost-utility between medical and 
surgical interventions. Recent surgical cost/DALY stud-
ies identifying the cost-effectiveness of various types of 
Table 49-7
Prevention strategies
Prevention 
Strategy
Target
Goal
1.  Primary
Root causes of 
disease
Eliminate or reduce risk 
of developing illness
2.  Secondary
Illness or disease 
at earliest stages
Limit progression of 
disease
3.  Tertiary
Disease at later 
stages
Cure or limit the effect 
of existing disease
Data adapted from deVries, C. and R.R. Price. Global Surgery and 
Public Health: A New Paradigm. 1st ed, 2012, Sudbury, MA: Jones & 
Bartlett Learning, LLC, p. 43-45.
surgical care have allowed surgical initiatives to be considered 
when prioritizing public health initiatives.
The World Bank arbitrarily defined U.S. $100/DALY 
averted per day in low-income countries as highly cost-effective. 
Compared to other public health initiatives, developing basic 
and emergency surgical care at the district level hospital is as 
cost-effective as or more so than typical public health programs 
such as retroviral treatments for HIV/AIDS or immunization for 
measles (Table 49-9).95-99
Using the WHO’s cost-effectiveness standards, invest-
ing in emergency obstetrical systems, including timely Cae-
sarean delivery can also be considered “highly cost-effective” 
for 48 of 49 countries in which there are currently inadequate 
numbers of Cesarean deliveries100,101. The median cost per 
DALY averted by Cesarean-section was $304. In addition, 
the cost-benefit ratio in 46 of 49 countries was >1, suggesting 
that investment in Caesarean delivery is a viable economic 
proposition.
Table 49-8
The role of surgery for primary prevention of cancer
Tertiary Surgical ­ 
Procedure
Primary Cancer 
Prevented
Breast lumpectomy for ductal 
carcinoma in situ
Breast
Colonoscopic polypectomy
Colon
Colposcopy and excision
Cervical
Resection of actinic keratosis
Skin
Resection of leukoplakia and 
erythroplakia
Oral
Data adapted from Riviello R, Meara JG,  Rogers SO. Commentary: 
Cancer Care and Control - the role of surgery. Global Surgery and Anes-
thesia. 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from http://www.ghdonline 
.org/surgery/discussion/cancer-care-and-control-the-role-of-surgery/
Table 49-9
Cost effectiveness of public health measures
Public Health Intervention
Cost-effectiveness (U.S. $/DALY* averted)
Rapid impact package for neglected tropical diseases
2–9a
Measles vaccination
5a
Basic surgical services district hospital
11–33a
Antiviral therapy for HIV
300–500a
Lichtenstein hernia repair with mosquito net mesh Western Ghana
12b
Lichtenstein hernia repair with polypropylene or mosquito net Ecuador
78c
Emergency systems for Caesarean delivery
304d
Cataract surgery
57e
*DALY: Disability Adjusted Life Year
(a. Ozgediz D, Riviello R. The “other” neglected diseases in global public health: surgical conditions in sub-Saharan Africa. PLoS Med. 2008. 5(6):e121; 
b. Shillcutt SD, Clarke MG, Kingsnorth AN. Cost-effectiveness of groin hernia surgery in the Western Region of Ghana. Arch Surg. 2010;145(10): 
954–961; c. Shillcutt SD, et al. Cost-effectiveness of ingunial hernia surgery in northwestern Ecuador. World J Surg. 2013;37(1):32–41; d. Alkire BC,  
et al. Obstructed labor and caesarean delivery: the cost and benefit of surgical intervention. PLoS One. 2012;7(4): e34595; e. Baltussen R, Sylla M, Mari-
otti SP. Cost-effectiveness analysis of cataract surgery: a global and regional analysis. Bull WHO. 2004;82:338–345.)
10
1974
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Inguinal hernia repair is one of the most common opera-
tions performed worldwide. Tension-free inguinal hernia repairs 
performed with mosquito netting or polypropylene mesh was 
cost-effective in Western Ecuador and Western Ghana ($78.18/ 
DALY and $12.88/ DALY averted, respectively).96,102 Using 
mosquito netting in India was 3700 times cheaper than using 
traditional polypropylene mesh.103
Factors Affecting Utilization and Outcome for Surgical 
Care.  There are three major factors that severely limit utiliza-
tion of surgical services:
1.  socioeconomic and cultural
2.  accessibility of facilities and
3.  quality of care (Fig. 49-26)104
The decision to seek timely care is affected by the costs associated 
with time off from work and inability to support the family during 
the absence, transportation and lodging, and the surgical services 
themselves. Cultural and religious traditions may define accept-
ability of various treatment options. For example, many people 
in Mongolia refuse to have surgery on Tuesdays as this is viewed 
as a “bad luck” day. Understanding local customs and cultural 
concerns can improve utilization of surgical services.
Austere environments, difficult terrain, and long distances 
from health care facilities significantly delay or prevent access 
to surgical care. Triage and transfer guidelines along with tele-
medicine have the potential to mitigate the limitations of geog-
raphy. However, without adequately trained care providers and 
support staff, the risk for poor outcomes is increased.
Recognizing these three important factors for increasing 
utilization and outcomes, Mongolia initiated a public health 
approach for the management of gallbladder disease incorpo-
rating minimally invasive surgery. (Box: The Public Health 
Approach to Management of Gallbladder Disease in Mongolia)
in the vast rural areas (Fig. 49-27). Significant deficiencies 
in infrastructure, supplies, equipment, and human resources 
at primary healthcare facilities exist: sporadic electricity, no 
fully qualified surgeons or anesthesiologists, and less than 
half the facilities with running water.3In 2006, Healthcare 
expenditures reached only U.S. $23.2 per capita.106,107
The second most common cause of inpatient morbidity in 
Mongolia has transitioned to gastrointestinal diseases with 
liver disease, appendicitis, and gallbladder disease the 
top three causes.108 While laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
was introduced in Mongolia in 1994, by 2005 only 2% of 
gallbladders were removed laparoscopically, and then, only 
in the capital city.109 A cohort study in 2005 comparing open 
with laparoscopic cholecystectomy by Dr. Sergelen, the chief 
of surgery at the Health Sciences University of Mongolia 
(HSUM), found the wound infection rate to be significantly 
lower, hospital stays shorter, and hospital expenditures 50% 
less with laparoscopy compared to open cholecystectomy.110
Dr. Sergelen formulated a plan to expand access to laparo-
scopic surgery throughout Mongolia. This plan targeted the 
three main areas affecting utilization and outcome.
a)  Quality of Care Develop a laparoscopic training didac-
tic and practical course to train surgical teams. 
b)  Accessibility of Quality Care Begin training surgical 
teams in the capital city, but then expand them to four 
carefully selected regional diagnostic treatment and 
referral centers (RDTRCs) in all four quadrants of the 
country. 
c)  Quality of Care Improve the surgical infrastructure for 
each facility. 
d)  Socioeconomic/Cultural Factors Educate the pub-
lic on the increased benefits of laparoscopic surgery 
so they would initiate lobbying efforts demanding the 
government increase funding for these services. 
e)  Socioeconomic/Cultural Factors Educate government 
leaders about the need and benefit of laparoscopic cho-
lecystectomy for the Mongolian people. 
f)  Quality of Care Expand the surgical residency to 
include laparoscopic training. 
g)  Accessibility and Quality Invite industry to offer cost-
affordable supplies and replacement parts to sustain the 
laparoscopic equipment in Mongolia. 
Figure 49-26.  Factors affecting utilization 
and outcome of surgical care. (Adapted from 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA); Providing emergency obstetric 
and newborn care to all in need. [cited 2013 
February 27]; Available from: http://www.
unfpa.org/public/mothers/pid/4385. Illustra-
tion reproduced with permission from Inter-
mountain Healthcare.)
Socioeconomic/
Cultural Factors
Accessibility of
Facilities
Quality of
Care
PHASE I
Decision to
Seek Care
PHASE II
Identifying & Reaching
Medical Facility
PHASE III
Receipt of Adequate &
Appropriate Treatment
FACTORS AFFECTING
UTILIZATION & OUTCOME
PHASES OF DELAY
The Public Health Approach to Management of Gallbladder 
Disease in Mongolia
Mongolia, the most sparsely populated country in the world, 
covers a large geographic area nestled between China 
and Siberia.105 The austere environment with extremes of 
weather, dry deserts, and high mountains present significant 
obstacles for road building limiting transportation for patients
1975
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
Figure 49-27.  Rural Ger. (Photo reproduced with permission from Michelle K. Price.)
Figure 49-28.  Regional diagnostic treatment and referral centers of Mongolia (RDTRCs). (Illustration reproduced with permission from 
Intermountain Healthcare.) 
Khovd
Choybalsan
Ulaanbaatar
Erdenet
Arvaikheer
Murun
Arvaikheer Regional
Diagnostic and Treatment
Referral Center
Hospital #1
Hospital #2
Cancer Hospital
Nomun Hospital
Murun
General Hospital
Erdenet Regional
Diagnostic and Treatment
Referral Center
Khovd Regional
Diagnostic and Treatment
Referral Center
Choybalsan Regional
Diagnostic and Treatment
Referral Center
Russia
China
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been expanded within 
the capital city and established in the initial 4 key Regional 
Diagnostic and Treatment Referral Centers (RDTRCs) and an 
additional fifth regional hospital creating countrywide access 
to high-quality modern surgery for a regionally prevalent dis-
ease through a multinational partnership directed by the chief 
of surgery at HSUM (Fig. 49-28).105,111
As people began to see their neighbors return to func-
tional ability faster with the laparoscopic approach, the Mon-
golian people developed increased trust in their healthcare
providers and the quality of care they could receive. This led 
to not only an increase in laparoscopic cholecystectomy but 
an increase in open cholecystectomy and many other proce-
dures (Fig. 49-29).105
The Mongolian surgical residency has been expanded 
to incorporate laparoscopic training. The MOH has commit-
ted to increase funding for laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
and change existing laws making it easier for hospitals to 
purchase their needed supplies.
1976
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
Advanced Surgical Care for Resource-Poor 
Areas
Limited financial, physical, and human resources, political 
and social conflicts, and austere environments cause many to 
believe that advanced surgical care is inappropriate in resource 
poor countries.77,112-114 Misconception of the needs and abilities 
Figure 49-29.  Cholecystectomy trends in Mongolia. (Adapted 
from: Unursaikhan C. (2010). Information of biliary track surgery 
in Mongolia. Health Sciences University of Mongolia, unpublished 
data. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain 
Healthcare.)
of people in LMICs cause some policy makers to dis-
count the desire of people worldwide for advanced sur-
gical care.105  Developing these capabilities in resource-poor 
countries has the potential to decrease overall cost and actu-
ally develop the infrastructure necessary to entice physicians 
and other healthcare workers to remain in their own countries. 
Establishing advanced surgical care requires expertise and ser-
vices that symbiotically support and improve general medical 
care. Therefore, many developing countries are actively build-
ing capacity and capability to provide the full spectrum of mod-
ern surgical care locally.115
As economies improve and the benefits of laparoscopic 
surgery for resource-poor areas become better delineated, 
patients and doctors, surgical societies, ministries of health, 
and industries are demanding the benefits of minimally inva-
sive surgery for patients and communities.111,116-122 The eco-
nomic impact of laparoscopy may be even greater in LMICs 
than in developed countries.123 Worldwide surgeons have 
identified laparoscopic training as one of their greatest needs. 
In a recent survey, developing laparoscopic and endoscopic 
skills were identified as the most important skills desired by 
surgeons from the West Africa College of Surgeons (WACS) 
(Fig. 49-30).124
Transplantation is another area of great interest to people 
in poor countries partly because of the high prevalence of kid-
ney failure and because chronic dialysis facilities are limited. 
Hepatoma and liver failure are very common in countries with 
a strong prevalence of hepatitis B and C. Transplantation has 
become the treatment of choice for end-stage kidney disease 
in developed countries as it dramatically improves the quality 
of life and increases survival rates compared to medical man-
agement.125 Yet, transplantation eludes most of the developing 
world. Initial attempts to transport critically ill patients from 
LMICs to developed countries for kidney transplantation were 
Figure 49-30.  West African College of Surgeons: 
most desired skills. (Adapted from Trigen Sur-
vey WACS: Akporiaye L. (2010). Trigen Survey: 
West African College of Surgeon. Port-Harcourt: 
Unpublished data. Illustration reproduced with 
permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
11
Year
Number of Cases
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Total 
Cholecystectomy
Laparoscopic 
Cholecystectomy
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Open surgical skills
(suturing, dissection)
Minimal access skills
Endoscopic skills
Surgical critical care
Intraoperative respiratory &
hemodynamic monitoring
Radiologic image interpretation
(ultrasound, CT, MRI)
Ultrasound skills
1977
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
cost-prohibitive.126 With the alarming increase in the rate at 
which young people have been presenting with kidney disease 
in developing countries, the increased utilization placed on the 
few dialysis machines has been overwhelming.127 Dialysis units 
which previously were utilized three times a week, now oper-
ate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and cannot begin to provide 
the needed services to the multitudes needing treatment. Even 
programs to develop peritoneal dialysis cannot fully ease the 
demand.
The majority of kidney transplants in developing countries 
are from living related donation. Laparoscopic living related 
donation has the potential to increase the voluntary donor pool 
as patients have less postoperative pain, return to work and 
activities quicker, and have much better cosmesis than open 
surgery.128 Adapting to the limited resources, surgeons have 
described various cost-saving techniques to facilitate the lapa-
roscopic approach in resource poor areas such as using endo-
clips instead of staplers for vascular control, modifications to 
the surgical approach, and suprapubic extraction of the kidney 
rather than endocatch removal.128-130
Academic Partnerships
Academic institutions have historically pioneered discovery in 
disease causation and treatment. As globalization expands, aca-
demic surgical programs are beginning to respond by broadening 
their vision for an interdisciplinary and collaborative approach 
to research, education, development, and advocacy.131-132
Academic involvement in global surgery provides train-
ing for the next generation of surgical leaders. Leaders 
for the 21st century will need to know how to provide outstand-
ing cost-effective clinical care for all environments. With a 
more global view, the significant advances in scientific knowl-
edge and clinical practice realized through basic and clinical 
research will potentially provide solutions for access to surgical 
care for all patients worldwide. Partnering academic programs 
with NGOs provides another opportunity for collaboration. 
(Box: Academic Global Surgery Partnerships)
Ethics
The ethics involved in working outside one’s own home country 
are complex. While a practitioner’s scope of practice is usu-
ally constrained by regulation in America and Europe, in many 
countries the limits of what one can do are neither regulated 
nor enforced. Guidelines for what should be done—where, and 
under what circumstances are beyond the expertise of some min-
istries of health. Some problems are so episodic that they are not 
anticipated, and few guidelines exist. For example, in natural 
disasters and emergencies, should any willing provider from any 
country be granted permission to provide care? Should specific 
disaster-related training be encouraged or required?134,135 In the 
research, and mentoring throughout the length of their surgical 
residency at BWH. During the research years, GHE residents 
engage in collaborative field-based programs and research 
that link and support many of BWH global surgery activities. 
Projects to date include: Understanding Trauma Epidemiology 
in Rwanda, Understanding Surgical Epidemiology of Burera 
District, Cost-Effectiveness analysis of the Team Heart global 
cardiac surgery program, and Breast cancer epidemiology of 
Rwanda.133” —Robert Riviello MD
B.  Rwanda Human Resources for Health (HRH) Program
“The Rwanda HRH program is an ambitious 7-year long, 
U.S. federally funded, collaborative program of the Rwanda 
Ministry of Health (MOH) and 13 U.S. academic medical 
centers and universities. HRH seeks to greatly expand and 
improve Rwanda’s health care workforce by strengthening 
national training programs of specialized physicians, nurses, 
oral health providers, and hospital managers by recruiting U.S. 
faculty educators to join the National University of Rwanda 
(NUR) training faculty. In year one of the program (August 
2012–July 2103), BWH contributed the largest number of 
physician educators to the program, recruiting 40% of the U.S. 
HRH physician faculty, including 6 surgeons. These surgeons 
have worked closely with their Rwandan faculty counterparts 
to restructure and organize the NUR surgery residency 
program, including development of curriculum, organizing 
didactic and clinical teaching, and greatly strengthening 
resident supervision and mentorship133.” —Robert Riviello MD
C.  Coordinating Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) 
and Academic Organizations: IVUmed
Nonprofit organizations (NGO) have filled a niche in 
establishing surgical care in countries where training centers and 
healthcare systems are historically non-existent or understaffed. 
More recently, professional organizations have developed a 
focus on specific diseases or patient groups and have become a 
resource for education and training in poor countries.
  For more than 20 years, the IVUmed NGO has focused on 
urological education and hands-on training in Africa, Asia, 
and Latin America. IVUmed evolved from a need identified by 
plastic surgeons that had seen many children with hypospadias 
and other urological anomalies such as exstrophy, when 
providing care for children with cleft lip and palate. Adult 
surgeons were not trained in the delicate reconstruction of 
pediatric genitourinary anomalies, and pediatric surgeons were 
not trained in endoscopic or reconstructive urological surgery. 
The program has expanded to support training in all aspects 
of urological care, including adult reconstruction, oncology, 
and endoscopic management of stones and prostatic disease.
  As a nonprofit organization, IVUmed is a partnership 
between surgeons, anesthesiologists and nurses, academic 
medical centers, urological professional associations, indus-
try and the public with urologic surgery training in more 
than 20 countries. It also provides North American trainees 
scholarships to travel to low-resource countries to learn and 
to share knowledge gained in their own programs. Many for-
mer scholars become mentors for other residents when they 
complete their training. The sites with the longest collabo-
rations have developed their own educational programs in 
general urology or subspecialty areas and are now providing 
advanced training and care locally (Fig. 49-31).
12
Academic Global Surgery Partnerships
A.  Global Health Equity Residency
“In 2012, Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) Center 
for Surgery and Public Health (CSPH) launched the Global 
Health Equity in Surgery (GHE-S) residency program. 
Related to its sister program in Internal Medicine at BWH, 
the GHE-S program seeks to create future leaders in academic 
global surgery through structured education, field work, 
1978
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
non-acute setting, should practitioners not licensed or creden-
tialed in their home environments be allowed to ­perform vol-
unteer surgery in other countries? What entity should ­oversee 
the flow of volunteer practitioners? Can a standard set of guide-
lines meet the needs of most countries? Currently, there is little 
cross national agreement between state entities, like ministries 
of health and independent organizations and individuals. While 
many countries require at least temporary licensure, some do 
not. In many cases enforcement is inconsistent.
With respect to research, the poor historically have not 
received benefit from research performed on them. In inter-
national studies, even local collaborators have been left out 
of study design and publication.136 As Internet communica-
tions have improved, these lapses no longer are tolerated.137 
Informed consent for surgical procedures, given in the appro-
priate language and respectful of local customs, are becoming 
more the norm. Few hospitals outside academic medical centers 
have institutional review boards (IRBs) to oversee the imple-
mentation and review of clinical research. In recent years, peer 
reviewed journals have become more mindful of attribution of 
credit, and authors are strongly encouraged to design and report 
studies with local input at all levels.
With regard to transplantation, many countries have laws 
against cadaveric transplants because of the very real concern 
for illegal marketing of organs. Even living-donor transplanta-
tion has seen effects of coercion in some regions and for some 
populations such as prisoners. Nevertheless, the need and popu-
lar desire for transplantation is accelerating acquisition of skills 
and technology to make transplantation available worldwide.138
Finally, what is considered ethical in one country or one 
community might be considered highly unethical in another. 
Consent for surgery may in one setting rest with the patient, but 
in another, with the community or family. And values about pri-
vacy vary markedly from region to region. Health information 
in many cultures is considered to be a community concern and 
not the personal property of an individual patient.
Innovation in Global Surgery
The pressing need for surgical care at all levels and the short-
age of fully trained surgeons, anesthesiologists and support 
personnel, equipment and supplies means that oppor-
tunities abound for innovation. Innovations in educa-
tion, including simulation, can potentially shorten the time 
necessary for learning technical skills. Gaming technology 
can potentially teach algorithms for decision making and 
Figure 49-31.  Training outcomes from NGO/academic partner-
ship. (Reproduced with permission from IVUmed and Intermoun-
tain Healthcare.)
interpretation of X-rays and ultrasounds. Telemedicine/tele-
health has the potential to transform education through com-
binations of clinical case-based learning and massively open 
online courses (MOOC). The potential for education innova-
tion in surgery beyond the apprenticeship system championed 
by Halsted in 1904 is vast.
Innovation that radically changes the way we do things, 
that changes a paradigm of a service or system is called “disrup-
tive”; it abruptly changes an older and more expensive system 
in favor of a less expensive, more widely available technology 
or process. The ability for disruptive innovations to transform 
products and services into affordable realities requires three 
main factors (Fig. 49-32).139
Regulations and standards that vary between countries and 
locales can facilitate or impede disruptive change. While disrup-
tions often are not qualitatively superior to the status quo, they 
make the process both less expensive and more accessible, and 
through multiple iterations, ultimately improve quality as they 
cycle through the transformative process.
De-centralizing education, laboratory testing, and medi-
cal records have been made possible through Free and Open 
Source Software, apps, and devices such as smart phones, tab-
lets, and laptop computers. Monitoring devices, laparoscopic 
instruments, and imaging devices designed for low resource 
environments have the potential to not only improve accessibil-
ity in poor countries, but also to radically reduce surgical costs 
in wealthy ones.
THE FUTURE FOR GLOBAL SURGERY
Surgeons of the future will need to educate themselves in areas 
that have not historically been taught in surgical curricula. 
Beyond the business of surgical practice, there is a complex eco-
system that supports surgical care. Surgeons must become more 
aware of the complexities of cost in order to be able to shape the 
Figure 49-32.  Elements of disruptive innovation. (Redrawn with 
permission from Christensen CM, Grossman JH, Hwang J. The 
Innovator’s Prescription. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009. kkjkjdht 
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Illustration reproduced with 
permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)
13
Training
Site
Visiting
Team
Patient Care
Research
Publications
Presentations
Community
Outreach
Residents
Fellows
Sophisticated
technology that
simplifies
Low-cost,
innovative
business models
Economically
coherent value
network
Regulations and 
standards that
facilitate
change
1979
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
environment in which they work. They must understand better 
what patients are seeking from the surgical experience rather 
than focusing primarily on a narrow view of what surgery might 
have to offer. Surgeons must engage in policy development and 
advocate for affordable and accessible surgical care without 
sacrificing quality. Thoughtful technology design can focus 
on improving quality and on decreasing cost, both in poor and 
wealthy countries. As our colleagues in public health and the 
World Bank, Paul Farmer and Jim Kim have challenged us, “We 
need our surgical colleagues to speak fluently about rebuilding 
infrastructure, training, personnel, and delivering high-quality 
care to the very poorest.”7
REFERENCES
Entries highlighted in bright blue are key references.
1.	Funk VA, Thomas-Oates JE, Kielland SL, Bates PA, ­Olafson 
RW. Global operating theatre distribution and pulse oxim-
etry supply: an estimation from reported data. Lancet. 
2010;376(9746):1055-1061.
2.	Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An 
estimation of the global volume of surgery: a modelling 
strategy based on available data. Lancet. 2008;372(9633): 
139-144.
3.	Chang L, Lacy BE, Spiegel BM. Quantifying surgical and 
anesthetic availability at primary health facilities in Mongolia. 
World J Surg. 2011;35(2):272-279.
4.	Contini S, Taqdeer A, Cherian M, et al. Emergency and essen-
tial surgical services in Afghanistan: still a missing challenge. 
World J Surg. 2010;34(3):473-479.
5.	Choo S, Perry H, Hesse AA, et al. Assessment of capacity 
for surgery, obstetrics and anaesthesia in 17 Ghanaian hos-
pitals using a WHO assessment tool. TropMed Int Health. 
2010;15(9):1109-1115.
6.	Kushner AL, Cherian MN, Noel L, Spiegel DA, Groth S, 
­Etienne C. Addressing the Millennium Development Goals 
from a surgical perspective: essential surgery and anes-
thesia in 8 low- and middle-income countries. Arch Surg. 
2010;145(2):154-159.
7.	Farmer PE, Kim JY. Surgery and global health: a view from 
beyond the OR. World J Surg. 2008; 32(4):533-536.
8.	Casey KM, Putting the “global” back in global health. Arch 
Surg. 2012; 147(5):404-407.
9.	deVries C, Price RR. Global Sugery and Public Health: A 
New Paradigm. 1st ed. Sudbury Jones and Bartlett Learn-
ing, LLC; 2012:300.
10.	Debas HT. Surgery. In: Jamison DT, ed. Disease Control 
Priorities in Developing Countries. 2006;1245-1259.
11.	Copenhagen Consensus: Nobel Laureates: More should be 
spent on hunger, health: Top economists identify the smart-
est investments for policy-makers and philanthropists. 2012; 
Available at: www.copenhagenconsensus.
12.	Global population to pass 10 billion by 2100, UN projec-
tions indicate. UN News Centre 2011 [cited 2013 February 
20]; Available from: http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.
asp?NewsID=38253#.UST1tDfheSp.
13.	Population ageing and development: Ten years after Madrid, 
in Population Facts, U. Nations, Editor 2012, United Nations, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population 
­Division. p. 4.
14.	Salomon JA, Vos T, Hogan DR. Common values in assessing 
health outcomes from disease and injury: disability weights 
measurement study for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2129-2143.
15.	Murray CJ, Vos T, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life 
years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 
1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of 
Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2197-2223.
16.	Groen RS, Samai M, Stewart KA, et al.Untreated surgical con-
ditions in Sierra Leone: a cluster randomised, cross-sectional, 
countrywide survey. Lancet. 2012;380(9847):1082-1087.
17.	Petroze RT, Groen RS, Niyonkuru F, et al. Estimating opera-
tive disease prevalence in a low-income country: results of a 
nationwide population survey in Rwanda. Surgery.2012.
18.	Duda RB, Hill AG. Surgery in Developing Countries: should 
surgery have a role in population-based health care? American 
College of Surgeons Bulletin. 2007;92(5):12-18, 35.
19.	Farmer P, Frenk J, Knaul FM, et al. Expansion of cancer care 
and control in countries of low and middle income: a call to 
action. Lancet. 2010;376(9747):1186-1193.
20.	Mody GN, Nduaguba A, Ntirenganya F, Riviello R. Characteris-
tics and presentation of patients with breast cancer in Rwanda. 
Am J Surg. 2013;205:409-413.
21.	Mock C, Joshipura M, Goosen J, Maier R. Overview of 
the Essential Trauma Care Project. World J Surg. 2006;30: 
919-929.
22.	Mock C. Strengthening care for the injured globally. 
J Trauma. 2011;70(6):1307-1316.
23.	Injury and Violence: the Facts. 2004 [cited 2013 January 30]; 
Available from: http://www.who.int/violence_injury_preven-
tion/key_facts/VIP_key_fact_1.pdf.
24.	Foley TM, et al. Rural Trauma Team Development Course, 3d 
edition. 2nd ed, ed. A.C.o. Surgeons2011, Chicago: American 
College of Surgeons.
25.	Kopits E, Cropper M. Traffic fatalities and economic growth. 
Accid Anal Prev. 2005;37: 169-178.
26.	Burns: World Health Organization Fact Sheet. 2012 [cited 
2013 February 23]; Available from: http://www.who.int/medi-
acentre/factsheets/fs365/en/index.html.
27.	CM., et al. A WHO plan for burn prevention and care, W.H. 
Organization, Editor 2008, World Health Organization: Geneva.
28.	Saffle JR, et al. Telemedicine evaluation of acute burns 
is accurate and cost-effective. J Trauma. 2009;67(2): 
358-365.
29.	The Business of Health in Africa: Partnering with the Pri-
vate Sector to Improve People’s Lives, W.B.G. Interna-
tional Finance Corporation, Editor 2008, International 
Finance Corporation, World Bank Group: Washington 
DC. pp. 1-136.
30.	CIA World Fact Book. 2013 [cited 2013 February 23]; Avail-
able from: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/
31.	World Health Statistics 2012. Global Health Observatory 
2012 [cited 2013 February 23]; Available from: http://www.
who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/2012/en/.
32.	Merson MH, Black RE, Mills AJ. International Public Health: 
Disease, Programs, Systems, and Policies. Frederick; Aspen 
Publishers:2001.
33.	Taylor RH, Hollaar G. Review of a Canadian forum on inter-
national surgery: the Bethune Round Table. Can J Surg. 
2005;48(6):479-484.
34.	Chu K, et al. Surgical task shifting in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
PLoS Med. 2009;6: e1000078.
35.	Sheldon GF, Ricketts TC, Charles A, King J, Fraher EP, 
Meyer A. The global health workforce shortage: role of sur-
geons and other providers. Adv Surg. 2008;42:63-85.
36.	Mkandawire N, Ngulube C, Lavy C. Orthopaedic clinical 
officer program in Malawi: a model for providing ortho-
paedic care. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research. 
2008;466(10):2385-2391.
37.	Pereira C, Cumbi A, Malalane R, et al. Meeting the need for 
emergency obstetric care in Mozambique: work performance 
and histories of medical doctors and assistant medical officers 
trained for surgery. BJOG. 2007;114(12):1530-1553.
1980
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
38.	Kruk ME, Pereira C, Vaz F, Bergström S, Galea S. Economic 
evaluation of surgically trained assistant medical officers in 
performing major obstetric surgery in Mozambique. BJOG. 
2007;114(10):1253-1260.
39.	Sherwood KL, Price RR, White TW, Stevens MH, Van 
­Boerum DH. A role in trauma care for advanced practice cli-
nicians. JAAPA. 2009;22(6):33-36, 41.
40.	Ozgediz D, Kijjambu S, Galukande M, et al. Africa’s neglected 
surgical workforce crisis. Lancet. 2008;371:627-628.
41.	Mullan, F. The metrics of the physician brain drain. N Engl J 
Med. 2005;353(17):1810-1818.
42.	Hagopian A, Thompson MJ, Fordyce M, Johnson KE, Hart LG. 
The migration of physicians from sub-Saharan Africa to the 
United States of America: measures of the African brain drain. 
Hum Resour Health. 2004;2(1):17.
43.	Hagander LE, Hughes CD, Nash K, et al. Surgeon migration 
between developing countries and the United States: train, 
retain, and gain from brain drain. World J Surg.2013;37(1): 
14-23.
44.	Mills EJ, Schabas WA, Volmink J, et al. Should active recruit-
ment of health workers from sub-saharan africa be viewed as 
a crime? Lancet. 2008;371:685-688.
45.	McCoy D, Bennett S, Witter S, et al. Salaries and 
incomes of health workers in sub-Saharan Africa. Lancet. 
2008;371(9613):675-681.
46.	Riviello R, Ozgediz D. International medical graduates and 
the global surgical workforce: the perspective from the other 
side. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(1):143-144.
47.	Chambostl, Health workers for all and all for heatlh work-
ers. The Kampala declaration and agenda for global action., 
in The First Global Forum on Human Resources for Health, 
G.H.W. Alliance, Editor 2008, The First Global Forum on 
Human Resources for Health: Kampala, Uganda. p. 2.
48.	 Baker TD, Weisman C, Piwoz E. U.S. physicians in interna-
tional health. Report of a current survey. JAMA. 1984;251(4): 
502-504.
49.	Busnaina I. Medical School Admissions Doctor. 2012 [cited 
2013 January 12]; Available from: http://www.usnews.
com/education/blogs/medical-school-admissions-­doctor/ 
2012/04/09/medical-students-should-consider-overseas-­
clinical-experience.
50.	Provenzano AM, Graber LK, Elansary M, Khoshnood K, 
­Rastegar A, Barry M. Short-term global health research 
­projects by U.S. medical students: ethical challenges for 
­partnerships. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010;83(2):211-214.
51.	Banerjee, A. Medical electives: a chance for international 
health. J R Soc Med. 2010; 103(1):6-8.
52.	Powell AC, Casey K, Liewehr DJ, Hayanga A, James TA, 
Cherr GS. Results of a national survey of surgical resident 
interest in international experience, electives, and volun-
teerism. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208(2):304-312.
53.	Kingham TP, Price RR, Casey KM, Rogers SO, Kushner AI. 
Beyond volunteerism: augmenting surgical care in resource-
limited settings. Bull Am Col Sur. 2011;96(7).
54.	Gosselin RA, Gyamfi YA, Contini S. Challenges of meet-
ing surgical needs in the developing world. World J 
Surg.2011;35(2):258-261.
55.	History of the United Nations. 2013 [cited 2013 January 16]; 
Available from: http://www.un.org/eboutun/history/.
56.	UN at a Glance. 2013 [cited 2013 January 16]; Available 
from: http://www.un.org/en/aboutun/index.shtml.
57.	Hulme, D, ed. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): 
A Short History of the World’s Biggest Promise. ed. B.W.P. 
Institute 2009, Brooks World Poverty Institute: Manchester. 55.
58.	The Millennium Development Goals Report 2012, U. Nations, 
Editor 2012, United Nations: New York City. 72.
59.	Liu L, Johnson HL, Cousens S, Perin J, et al. Global, regional, 
and national causes of child mortality: an updated system-
atic analysis for 2010 with time trends since 2000. Lancet. 
2012;79(9832):2151-2161.
60.	Henry JA, Windapo O, Kushner AL, Groen RS, Nwomeh 
BC. A survey of surgical capacity in rural southern Nige-
ria: opportunities for change. World J Surg. 2012;36(12): 
2811-2818.
61.	Abdullah F, Choo S, Hesse AA, et al. Assessment of surgical 
and obstetrical care at 10 district hospitals in Ghana using on-
site interviews. J Surg Res. 2010.
62.	Mock C, Abantanga F, Goosen J, Joshipura M, Juillard C. 
Strengthening care of injured children globally. Bull World 
Health Organ. 2009;87(5):382-389.
63.	Kingham TP, Kamara TB, Cherian MN. Quantifying surgical 
capacity in Sierra Leone: a guide for improving surgical care. 
Arch Surg. 2009;144(2): 122-127; discussion 128.
64.	Mock C, Nguyen S, Quansah R, Arreola-Risa C, Viradia R, 
Joshipura M. Evaluation of trauma care capabilities in four 
countries using the WHO-IATSIC guidelines for essential 
trauma care. World J Surg. 2006;30(6):946-956.
65.	Maru, DS, R, et al. Global surgical care in 2030: metrics and 
strategies for expansion in access and quality. 2012.
66.	Alma Alta Declaration. 2012 October 31, 2012 [cited 2013 
January 17]; Available from: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Alma_Ata_Declaration.
67.	The World Health Report: Primary Health Care: Now more 
than ever, W.H. Organization, Editor 2008, World Health 
Organization: Geneva. p. 148.
68.	WHO, Report: WHO meeting towards a global initiative 
for emergency and essential surgical care (GIEESC), 2005, 
World Health Organization: Geneva. p. 30.
69.	Spiegel DA, Abdullah F, Price RR, Gosselin RA, Bickler SW. 
World health organization global initiative for emergency 
and essential surgical care: 2011 and beyond. World J Surg. 
2012;1462-1469.
70.	Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, Price RR, Lundeg G, Keh-
rer B. Strengthening surgical services at the Soum (First-
referral) hospital: the WHO emergency and essential 
surgical care (EESC) program in Mongolia. World J Surg. 
2012;36(10):2359-2370.
71.	Indicators of Surgical Operation (Mongolia 2001-2009). 2010 
[cited 2011 November 2]; Available from: www.doh.gov.mn.
72.	World Health Organization, Violence and Injury Prevention 
(VIP). [cited 2013 February 28]; Available from: http://www.
who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/en/.
73.	Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety 
checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global popula-
tion. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(5):491-499.
74.	WHO guidelines for safe surgery 2009: Safe surgery saves 
lives. ed. W.H. Organization2009, World Health Organiza-
tion: Geneva. 133.
75.	WHO surgical safety checklist. 2009 [cited 2013 Februrary 
4]; Available from: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/ 
2009/9789241598590_eng_Checklist.pdf
76.	Learmonth, J. The Contributions of Surgery to Preven-
tive Medicine. London: Oxford University Press, Geoffrey 
Cumberlege, Publisher to the University;1951:55.
77.	Mock C, Cherian M, Juillard C, et al. Developing priorities 
for addressing surgical conditions globally: furthering the 
link between surgery and public health policy. World J Surg, 
2010;34(3):381-385.
78.	Mock C, Lormand JD, Goosen J, Joshipura M, Peden 
M, Guidelines for essential trauma care. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2004:106.
79.	Health systems: emergency-care systems (Sixtieth World 
Health Assembly: WHA 60.22), W.H. Assembly, Editor 2007, 
World Health Assembly: New York. p. 3.
80.	Mock C. WHA resolution on trauma and emergency care ser-
vices. Inj Prev. 2007;13(4):285-286.
1981
Global Surgery
CHAPTER 49
81.	Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, Gülmezoglu AM, Van Look 
PF. WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic 
review. Lancet. 2006;367(9516):1066-1074.
82.	Maternal Mortality Fact Sheet. 2013 [cited 2013 February 9]; 
Available from: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs348/en/index.html.
83.	Corlew DS. Perspectives on plastic surgery and global health. 
Ann Plast Surg. 2009;62(5):473-477.
84.	Smile Train. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; Available from: 
http://www.smiletrain.org/.
85.	Operation Smile. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; Available 
from: http://www.operationsmile.org/.
86.	ReSurge International. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; Avail-
able from: http://resurge.org/home/home.cfm.
87.	World Blindness Overview. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; 
Available from: http://www.cureblindness.org/world-blind-
ness/.
88.	Nepal. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; Available from: http://
www.cureblindness.org/where/himalayas/nepal/.
89.	Tilganga Eye Centre. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; Avail-
able from: http://www.cureblindness.org/what/infrastructure/
specialty-hospitals/tilganga/.
90.	HCP’s Eye Care Model. 2013 [cited 2013 February 15]; 
Available from: http://www.cureblindness.org/what/hcp-eye-
care-model/.
91.	Riviello R, Meara JG, Rogers SO. Commentary: Cancer Care 
and Control - the role of surgery. Global Surgery and Anes-
thesia 2010 [cited 2013 February 20]; Available from: http://
www.ghdonline.org/surgery/discussion/cancer-care-and-con-
trol-the-role-of-surgery/.
92.	Kushner, A. Malawi Esophageal Cancer Palliative Care Pro-
gram. In: Kingham P, ed. Quarterly Newsletter, Society of 
International Humanitarian Surgeons. New York; Society of 
International Humanitarian Surgeons:2009.
93.	Agarwal G, Ramakant P, Forgach ER, et al. Breast cancer 
care in developing countries. World J Surg. 2009;33(10): 
2069-2076.
94.	Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control 
in Developing Countries: 2013 [cited 2013 February 24]; Avail-
able from: “http://gtfccc.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword= 
k69586&tabgroupid=icb.tabgroup132925.
95.	Ozgediz D, Riviello R. The “other” neglected diseases in 
global public health: surgical conditions in sub-Saharan 
Africa. PLoS Med. 2008;5(6):e121.
96.	Shillcutt SD, Clarke MG, Kingsnorth AN. Cost-effectiveness 
of groin hernia surgery in the Western Region of Ghana. Arch 
Surg. 2010;145(10):954-961.
97.	Gosselin RA, Heitto M. Cost-effectiveness of a district 
trauma hospital in Battambang, Cambodia. World J Surg. 
2008;32(11):2450-2453.
98.	Gosselin RA, Thind A, Bellardinelli A. Cost/DALY averted in 
a small hospital in Sierra Leone: what is the relative contribu-
tion of different services? World J Surg. 2006;30(4):505-511.
99.	McCord C, Chowdhury Q. A cost effective small hospital 
in Bangladesh: what it can mean for emergency obstetric 
care. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2003;81(1): 83-92.
100.	 Alkire BC, Vincent JR, Burns CT, Metzler IS, Farmer PE, 
Meara JG. Obstructed labor and caesarean delivery: the cost and 
benefit of surgical intervention. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34595.
101.	Murray CJ. Quantifying the burden of disease: the techni-
cal basis for disability-adjusted life years. Bull World Health 
Organ. 1994;72:429-445.
102.	Shillcutt SD, Sanders DL, Teresa Butrón-Vila M, Kingsnorth 
AN. Cost-effectiveness of ingunial hernia surgery in north-
western ecuador. World J Surg. 2013;37(1):32-41.
103.	Tongaonkar RR, et al. Preliminary multicentric trial of cheap 
indigenous mosquito-net cloth for tension-free hernia repair. 
Indian Jounal of Surgery. 2003;65(1):89-95.
104.	United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA); Providing emer-
gency obstetric and newborn care to all in need. [cited 2013 
February 27]; Available from: http://www.unfpa.org/public/
mothers/pid/4385.
105.	Price R, Sergelen O, Unursaikhan C. Improving surgical 
care in Mongolia: a model for sustainable development.
World J Surg. 2012;37:1492-1499.
106.	Gunsentsoodol B, Nachin B, Dashzeveg T. Surgery in Mongo-
lia. Arch Surg.2006;141(12):1254-1257.
107.	WHO. World Health Statistics 2011. 2011 [cited 2011 Nov 
27, 2011]; Available from: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_
of_countries_by_total_health_expenditure_%28PPP%29_
per_capita.
108.	Health Indicators 2006, N.C.f.H.D. Health Statistics Depart-
ment, Editor 2007, National Center for Health Development: 
Ulaanbataar p. 93.
109.	Rusher AH. Outreach surgery. Surgical technology arrives 
in Mongolia. Bulletin of the American College of Surgeons. 
1999;84(3):21-25.
110.	Sergelen O. Development of Laparoscopic Surgery in Mongo-
lia. 2006 [cited 2010 March 13]; Available from: http://www.
gfmer.ch/Medical_education_En/PGC_RH_2006/Reviews/
pdf/Orgoi_laparoscopy_2006.pdf.
111.	Straub CM, Price RR, Matthews D, Handrahan DL, Sergelen 
D. Expanding laparoscopic cholecystectomy to rural Mongo-
lia. World J Surg. 2011;35(4):751-759.
112.	Manning RG, Azziz AQ. Should laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy be practiced in the developing world? The experience 
of the first training program in Afghanistan. Ann Surg. 2009; 
249(5):794-798.
113.	Contini S, Taqdeer A, Gosselin RA. Should laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy be practiced in the developing World? The 
experience of the first training program in Afghanistan. Ann 
Surg. 2010;251(3):574; author reply 575.
114.	Alfa-Wali M, Antoniou A. Should laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomy be practiced in the developing world? Ann Surg. 
2010;251(2):387; author reply 387-388.
115.	Castadot RG, Magarick RH, Sheppard L, Burkman RT. 
A review of ten years’ experience with surgical equipment 
in international health programs. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
1986;24(1):53-60.
116.	Udwadia TE. Navigating laparoscopic surgery into the 
next decade in developing countries—a personal perspec-
tive. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2007;392(1):99-104.
117.	Udwadia TE. One world, one people, one surgery. Surg 
Endosc. 2001;15(4):37-343.
118.	Vargas G, Price RR, Sergelen O, Lkhagvabayar B, Batcholuun 
P, Enkhamagalan T. A successful model for laparoscopic 
training in Mongolia. Int Surg. 2012;97(4):363-371.
119.	Clegg-Lamptey JN, Amponsah G. Laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy at the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, Accra, Ghana: an 
initial report. West Afr J Med. 2010; 29(2):113-116.
120.	Baigrie RJ, Stupart D. Introduction of laparoscopic 
colorectal cancer surgery in developing nations. Br J Surg. 
2010;97(5):625-627.
121.	Udwadia TE. Low-cost laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J 
Surg. 2002; 89:1602-1607). Br J Surg. 2003;90(6):761.
122.	 Piukala S. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: complications and 
experiences in Tonga. Pac Health Dialog. 2006;13(2):107-110.
123.	Udwadia TE, Udwadia RT, Menon K. et al. Laparoscopic 
surgery in the developing world. An overview of the Indian 
scene. Int Surg. 1995;80(4):371-375.
124.	Akporiaye L. Trigen Survey: West African College of Sur-
geon, in Unpublished data 2010, Trigen, Lagos, Nigeria, 
Unpublished data.
125.	Al-Bazzaz PH. Kidney transplantation in Erbil, Iraq: a 
single-center experience. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 
2010;21(2):359-362.
1982
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
UNIT II
UNIT II
PART II
126.	Basinda SL, Maro EE, McLarty DG, Young AE, Wing AJ. 
Ten Tanzanian transplants: problems and perspectives. Post-
grad Med J.1988; 64(756):778-782.
127.	Korle-Bu to begin kidney transplant in last quarter. 2012 
[cited 2013 January 23]; Available from: http://www.
ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/artikel.
php?ID=238839.
128.	Kumar A, Dubey D, Gogoi S, Arvind NK. Laparoscopy-­
assisted live donor nephrectomy: a modified cost-effective 
approach for developing countries. J Endourol. 2002;16(3): 
155-159.
129.	Kumar A, Chaudhary H, Srivastava A, Raghavendran M. Lap-
aroscopic live-donor nephrectomy: modifications for develop-
ing nations. BJU Int. 2004, 93(9):1291-1295.
130.	Simforoosh N, Basiri A, Tabibi A, Shakhssalim N. Laparo-
scopic donor nephrectomy—an Iranian model for developing 
countries: a cost-effective no-rush approach. Exp Clin Trans-
plant. 2004;2(2):249-253.
131.	Mitchell KB, Tarpley MJ, Tarpley JL, Casey KM. Elective 
global surgery rotations for residents: a call for cooperation 
and consortium. World J Surg. 2011;35(12):2617-2264.
132.	American College of Surgeons: Operation Giving Back: Resi-
dents. 2013 [cited 2013 February 24]; Available from: http://
www.operationgivingback.facs.org/content2271.html.
133.	Riviello R. Academic Global Surgery Partnerships, 
R.R. Price, Editor 2013: Salt Lake City. p. 1.
134.	Sztajnkrycer MD, Madsen BE, Alejandro Báez A. Unstable 
ethical plateaus and disaster triage. Emerg Med Clin North 
Am. 2006;24(3):749-768.
135.	Ramsey KM, Weijer CR. Ethics of surgical training in devel-
oping countries. World J Surg. 2007;31(11):2067-2069; dis-
cussion 2070-2071.
136.	Zumla A, Costello A. Ethics of healthcare research in develop-
ing countries. J R Soc Med. 2002;95(6): 275-276.
137.	Kushner AL, Kyamanywa P, Adisa CA, et al. Editorial policy 
on co-authorship of articles from low- and middle-income 
countries. World J Surg, 2011;35:2367-2368.
138.	Cameron JS, Hoffenberg R. The ethics of organ transplanta-
tion reconsidered: paid organ donation and the use of executed 
prisoners as donors. Kidney Int.1999;55(2):724-732.
139.	Christensen CM, Grossman JH, Hwang J, The Innovator’s 
Prescription 2009, New York McGraw-Hill. 441.
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by t indicate tables; those followed by f indicate figures.
A
A-A index in vascular trauma, 182
Abatacept, 328
Abbe-Estlander flap in lip reconstruction, 
582
Abbé flap in lip reconstruction,  
1857, 1859f
Abdominal aortic aneurysms, 850–859
anatomy in, 851–852, 851f
clinical manifestations in, 851
computed tomography angiography in, 
832f, 852f
diagnostic evaluation in, 852, 852f
in elderly, 1936, 1937f
endovascular repair with stent graft, 
850, 853–857, 854f
advantages and risks of, 855–856
compared to open repair, 857–858
complications in, 855–856, 859
cost analysis of, 858
devices available for, 855, 857–858
in elderly, 1936, 1937f
endoleaks in, 855–856, 858–859, 
858f, 859t
endotension phenomenon in, 859
indications for, 855, 855t
secondary interventions in, 859
Seldinger technique, 856
surveillance after, 857
technical considerations in, 856–857, 
856f
etiology and pathogenesis in, 787–788
with iliac artery aneurysm, 855, 856
mortality rate in, 850, 851
natural history of, 850–851, 851t
physical examination in, 829
risk of rupture in, 850, 851t
surgical repair of, 852–853, 853f, 854f
advantages and risks of, 852–853
annual number of, 375, 375t
compared to endovascular repair, 
857–858
quality and safety in, 375
Abdominal compartment syndrome, 
217–218, 218f–219f. See also 
Compartment syndromes, 
abdominal
Abdominal infections, 149–150, 256
abscess in, 150, 391
adhesions in, 263
antibiotics in, 142
postoperative, 146, 391
in transplantation procedures, 329
of liver, 329, 351
of pancreas, 329
Abdominal pain
in appendicitis, 1243
in colorectal disorders, 1183
differential diagnosis in, 1246–1248
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1248
in elderly, 1936
in mesenteric ischemia, 860, 861, 1167
in peptic ulcer disease, 1059
Abdominal trauma, 179–181, 203–212
blunt, 181
algorithm on evaluation of, 181f
emergent exploration in, 188–189
in children, 222–223, 1643–1644
of colon, 209–210, 1234
compartment syndrome in,  
217–218, 218f–219f. See also 
Compartment syndromes, 
abdominal
damage control surgery in, 195, 196f
diagnostic peritoneal lavage and 
aspiration in, 180–181, 180f, 
181t
in pregnancy, 218, 221
emergent exploration in, 188–191, 
189f–191f
of gallbladder, 204, 1331–1332
of genitourinary tract, 211–212
grading of injuries in, 181, 183t, 1644, 
1644t
hemorrhage in, 181, 182f, 189–191
of liver, 203–206, 1644, 1644t
of pancreas, 207–209, 1341
penetrating, 179–181
algorithm on evaluation of, 180f
emergent exploration in, 189
in pregnancy, 221
of rectum, 209–210
in seat belt injuries, 223, 1643–1644, 
1643f
of small intestine, 207, 1643, 1643f
of spleen, 206–207, 1644
of stomach, 207
vascular injuries in, 181, 182f, 210–211, 
214–215
of liver, 203–204
Abdominal wall, 1449–1462, 1631–1635
acquired disorders of, 1453–1456
anatomy of, 1449–1450, 1450f, 1451f, 
1452f
blood supply of, 1449–1450, 1452f
and vascular injuries in laparoscopy, 
1704–1705, 1704f
congenital disorders of, 1453,  
1631–1635
desmoid tumors, 1454
embryonic development of, 1453, 1631
gastroschisis of, 1633–1634
hernias of, 1454–1456. See also Hernia, 
abdominal
incisions in, 1451–1453, 1452f
hernia of, 1454–1455, 1455
innervation of, 1450, 1452f
muscular layers of, 1449, 1451f,  
1496, 1499f
omphalocele of, 1632
in patent urachus, 1631–1632
physiology of, 1450–1451
in prune-belly syndrome, 1634
reconstructive surgery of, 1875–1876
flaps in, 1875–1876
prosthetic mesh in, 1875
in rectus abdominis diastasis, 1453, 
1453f
Abdominoperineal resection, 1189
Abdominoplasty, 1887
after bariatric surgery and weight loss, 
1129, 1130f, 1887f
Abductor muscles of hand, anatomy of, 
1791
Ablative carbon dioxide laser, in burn, 235
ABO blood groups, 96, 1914
Abortion, induced, 1691–1692
Abrasions in head and neck injuries, 575
Abscess
abdominal, 150, 391
anorectal, 1227–1229
in Crohn’s disease, 1200
of Bartholin’s glands, 1678
of brain, 1745
of breast, 506
subareolar, 511, 511t
treatment in, 511
cryptoglandular, 1227–1228
epidural, 1746
of hand, 1809
of kidney, 1664
of liver, 150, 1284–1285, 1284f, 1285
amebic, 1285
pyogenic, 387
of lung, 650–651, 650t, 652f, 653t
of pancreas, 150–151, 1375t
pelvic, in diverticulitis, 1202f
perinephric, 1664
psoas, in Crohn’s disease, 1198
retroperitoneal, 1460, 1461f
of spleen, splenectomy in, 1430t, 1436
tubo-ovarian, 1691
Absorption
in gallbladder, 1313
in large intestine, 1179
in small intestine, 1140–1143
Abuse
of children, 222, 1636
of elderly, 1934
Accommodation response
of rectum, in defecation, 1180
of stomach, 1047
Accreditation Council for Graduate 
Medical Education, in surgery 
leadership, 3, 4t, 9
Acetabulum, fractures of, 1760
Acetaminophen, 1901
hepatotoxicity of, 1276, 1277
liver transplantation in, 347, 1277, 
1277t
1984
Index
Acetaminophen (Cont.):
liver metabolism of, 1270
overdose of, 1270, 1276
in persistent pain, 1949t
Acetylcholine, 19, 19f, 35f
in gastric acid secretion, 1041, 1043, 
1044f
in pepsinogen secretion, 1044
N-Acetylcysteine in acetaminophen 
overdose, 1276
Achalasia, 990–992, 991f, 992f
bird’s beak appearance in, 991, 992f
botulinum toxin injection in, 998, 1000, 
1003
esophageal myotomy in, 991f
Heller technique, 997–999
laparoscopic, 1000
open, 1000
peroral, 434f
outcome assessment in, 1000–1003
pneumatic dilation in, 1000, 1003
perforation of esophagus in, 1019, 
1019f, 1020f
vigorous, 992, 997, 1000
Achlorhydria in VIPoma, 1392
Acid-base balance, 73–76
buffering systems in, 73
in children, 1599
homeostasis, 73
in shock, 130–131
hemorrhagic, 120, 121f
Acidemia, metabolic, in children, 1599
Acidosis
metabolic, 73–75, 74t, 75t
in children, 1599
etiologies of, 74, 75t
lactic acid, 74
in renal failure, 81
in shock, 115
in trauma, 217
and bloody vicious cycle, 185,  
193, 194f
respiratory, 75
acute, 74t
in children, 1599
chronic, 74t
etiologies of, 75, 75t
Acid secretion, gastric, 1041–1044
analysis of output in, 963, 1051
basal output in, 963, 1044, 1051
gastrin as stimulant of, 1041, 1043, 
1044f, 1045
in gastrinoma, 1073
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 1054
maximal output in, 1044, 1051
parietal cells in, 1041–1043, 1043f
in peptic ulcer disease, 1055–1057, 
1057f
physiology of, 1041–1044, 1043f,  
1044f
in response to food ingestion, 1043, 
1043–1044
in short bowel syndrome, 1171
somatostatin in regulation of, 1043, 
1045
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 1073
Acid substances
ingestion of, 1021
by children, 1612
skin injuries from, 479–480
burns in, 1822
Acinar cells of pancreas, 1347, 1347f, 
1348, 1353–1354, 1354f
Acrochordons, 486
Acrodermatitis enteropathica, 249
Acromegaly, colorectal cancer risk in, 
1204
Acromioclavicular joint injuries, 1758
Actinomycosis, 484, 651
Activators, 449
Active transport, 1140
Acute coagulopathy of trauma (ACOT), 
184
Acute lung injury, 385
Acyl-coenzyme A, 47, 47f, 48f, 49f
Adalimumab, in Crohn’s disease, 
 1197
Adamantinoma, ossifying, 1781, 1781f
Additive effect of drugs, 1898
Adductor pollicis muscle, 1791
Adenitis, acute mesenteric, differential 
diagnosis of, 1246
Adenocarcinoma
of anus, 1218
of appendix, 1258
colorectal, 1203–1216
diagnosis, 628f
differentiated from mesothelioma,  
688, 688t
endometrial, 1699–1700
of esophagus
in Barrett’s esophagus, 969, 970f, 
979, 1003
chemoradiation in, 1005, 1014t
epidemiology of, 1003
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
967, 969, 979
selection of treatment approach in, 
1007
of lung, 614–615, 615t, 623
colloid, 615
in situ, 615
invasive, 615, 616f
lepidic, 615
minimally invasive, 615
of pancreas, 1395
ampullary, 1408
of small intestine, 1159, 1160, 1161, 
1161t
of stomach, 1074–1084
of vagina, 1697
Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS), 615
Adenoid cystic carcinoma, 599–600
of breast, 556
of lung, 617
of trachea, 610
Adenoidectomy of trachea, 571
Adenoiditis, 570
Adenoids and tonsils, 570
hypertrophy of, 570, 571
Adenolipoma of breast, 509
Adenoma
of breast, 509
colorectal, carcinoma development in, 
1205–1206
of liver, 1290–1291, 1290f
of pancreas, periampullary, 1408
of parathyroid, 672, 1556
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560, 1565, 
1567–1568, 1569
parathyroidectomy in, 1567–1568, 
1569
of pituitary
Cushing’s disease in, 1583, 1735
parathyroidectomy in, 1735, 1736f
prolactin-secreting, 554, 1735
of small intestine, 1159, 1159f, 1160
treatment in, 1161
of thyroid, hyperthyroidism in,  
1533–1534
Adenomatoid malformation, congenital 
cystic, 1606, 1606f
Adenomatous hyperplasia of lungs, 
atypical, 614
Adenomyomatosis of gallbladder, 1320
Adenomyosis of uterus, 1682
Adenosine diphosphoribose, in wound 
healing, 1831
Adenosine monophosphate, cyclic, 43f, 50
in fatty acid oxidation, 47, 47f
Adenosine triphosphate, and cellular 
metabolism in shock, 114–115
Adenosis, sclerosing, of breast, 508, 509, 
510–511
Adenotonsillitis, 570, 571
Adhesions
pelvic, laparoscopy in, 1689
peritoneal, 263, 263f
postoperative, intestinal obstruction in, 
386, 1146, 1150
prevention of, 1151
Adipose cells
in obesity, 1101
of parathyroid gland, 1557, 1557f
Adjuvant! Online, 535
Adnexa, removal of, 1689
Adolescents
breast hypertrophy in, 507
gynecomastia in, 505
informed consent for, 1943
obesity in, 1125–1126
and bariatric surgery, 1125–1126
Adoptive transfer in cancer 
immunotherapy, 311
Adrenal artery anatomy, 1575, 1576f
Adrenalectomy, 1590–1594
in adrenocortical carcinoma, 1584, 1591
in breast cancer, 553
complications of, 1593–1594
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1583, 1591
complications of, 1593–1594
historical aspects of, 1574
in hyperaldosteronism, 1580
in incidentaloma, 1589–1590
laparoscopic, 1591–1592, 1591f, 1592f
hand-assisted, 1591
lateral transabdominal approach, 
1591–1592
posterior retroperitoneal approach, 
1592
open procedure, 1592–1593, 1593f
anterior approach, 1592–1593
lateral approach, 1593
posterior approach, 1593
in pheochromocytoma, 1587, 1591
in sex steroid excess, 1585
Adrenal gland, 1574–1594
adenoma of
adrenalectomy in, 1583
differentiated from carcinoma,  
1583, 1584
hyperaldosteronism in, 1578, 1580
nonfunctioning, 1588, 1588t
sex steroid excess in, 1585
adrenalectomy of, 1590–1594. See also 
Adrenalectomy
anatomy of, 1575, 1576f, 1651
cancer of, 1583–1585
adrenalectomy in, 1584, 1591
diagnosis of, 1584, 1584f
differentiated from adenoma, 1583, 
1584
hyperaldosteronism in, 1578, 1580
sex steroid excess in, 1585
staging of, 1584, 1584t
1985
Index
symptoms and sign in, 1584
treatment in, 1584–1585
cortical insufficiency of, 21, 1590
etiologies of, 1590, 1590t
postoperative, 392
Cushing’s syndrome of, 1580–1583
ectopic tissue, 1574
embryonic development of, 1574–1575
historical studies of, 1574
hormones released by, 1575–1578
aldosterone, 22–23, 1575–1576
catecholamines, 22, 1577–1578, 
1579f, 1579t
glucocorticoids, 1576–1577, 1578t
mineralocorticoids, 1575–1576
sex steroids, 1577, 1585
in shock response, 113
hyperaldosteronism of, 1578–1579
hyperplasia of
adrenalectomy in, 1583
congenital, 1574, 1585
ambiguous genitalia in, 1637–1638, 
1638f
Cushing’s syndrome in, 1581
hyperaldosteronism in, 1578, 1580
incidentalomas of, 1588–1590
diagnosis of, 1588–1589
differential diagnosis in, 1588, 1588t
treatment of, 1589–1590, 1589f
pheochromocytoma of, 1585–1588
physiology of, 1575–1578
Adrenal vein anatomy, 1575, 1576f
β-Adrenergic antagonists
in aortic dissection, 812–813
in elderly, 1935
Adrenergic receptors, 1578, 1579t
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, 20
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1580,  
1581–1582, 1581t, 1583
deficiency of, 1590
elevated levels in lung cancer,  
626–627
in glucocorticoid production, 20f, 
1576–1577
pituitary tumor secreting, 1580
in response to stress and injury, 20
in shock, 113
stimulation test in adrenocortical 
insufficiency, 1590
Adrenogenital syndrome, 1638f
Advance directives, 1944
Advanced Trauma Life Support, 161
Advancement flaps, 1833, 1837
endorectal
in fistula in ano, 1231
in rectovaginal fistula, 1231, 1232f
Adverse events, 367t
risk management in, 380
Surgical Care Improvement Project on, 
374, 374t
Aerodigestive tract, upper
cancer of, 578–600
anatomy in, 578, 579f
second primary tumors in, 580
staging of, 580, 581t
papillomavirus infections of, 579
recurrent, 572
Aesthetic surgery, 1882–1891
Affiliative leadership, 9
Afterload, cardiac, 114, 402
in shock, 114, 125
Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality on patient safety 
indicators, 373, 373t
Age-related changes, 221, 221t, 1923, 
1924, 1925t–1926t
in breasts, 500, 504, 504f
and benign breast disorders, 507–508, 
507t
in colorectal cancer risk, 1203
in inguinal hernia prevalence, 1500
in nutritional requirements, 1600t
in wound healing, 252–253
AGES scoring system in papillary 
carcinoma of thyroid, 1543
Agonist drugs, 1898
Air embolism, 171, 172f
in central venous catheterization, 381
Airway management
in anesthesia, 1909f, 1910–1911, 1910f, 
1911f, 1912f
algorithms on, 1913f
in bariatric surgery, 1106
preoperative evaluation for, 1905, 
1906f, 1906t
in burns, 227, 230
ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure in, 1645, 1645f
in hemoptysis, 662
recommendations for healthcare 
workers, 1971t
in trauma, 161–163
in children, 222, 1642
of head, 1717
Airway pressures, 409–410
peak, 409–410
plateau, 409–410
Alagille’s syndrome, 1628
Alanine transaminase serum levels in liver 
disorders, 1270, 1271–1272
Albumin, 1911
in chyle, 686t
liver synthesis of, 1271
in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
serum levels of
and calcium serum levels, 1558
in cirrhosis, Child-Turcotte-Pugh 
score on, 1280t
Albuterol in hyperkalemia, 78
Alcohol use and alcoholism
breast cancer risk in, 511
esophageal cancer in, 1003
head and neck tumors in, 578, 579, 586
liver disorders in, 1271
transplantation of liver in, 346
pancreatitis in
acute, 1352
chronic, 1362–1365, 1363f, 1368, 
1368f
cessation of alcohol use in, 1379
pseudocyst in, 1376f
survival in, 1374, 1375f
Aldosterone, 22–23, 1575–1576, 1576f
elevated levels of, 1578–1579
Aldosteronoma, 1578
Alemtuzumab, 325, 325t
Alfentanil, 1900
Alginic acid in gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, 971
Alkaline agents
ingestion of, 1021
in children, 1612
skin injuries from, 479–480, 480f
Alkaline phosphatase, 1271
to antibiotics, 1270
in diagnostic peritoneal lavage in 
abdominal trauma, 181t
Alkaloids, plant, in chemotherapy,  
307, 308t
Alkalosis
metabolic, 75, 75t
in children, 1599
etiologies of, 75, 75t
respiratory, 75, 75t
in children, 1599
ALK gene in familial neuroblastoma, 288t
Alkylating agents in chemotherapy, 307, 
308t
Allelic loss, 287
Allergic reactions
to antibiotics, 146
aspergillosis in, 655
fungal sinusitis in, 569
in transfusions, 100–101, 102t
Allografts
in burns, 1820
composite tissue, 1881–1882, 1882f
heart valve, 750
in spinal arthrodesis, 1743
Altemeier procedure in rectal prolapse, 1219
Alteplase
in arterial vasospasm, 215t
in venous thromboembolism, 924
Alvarado Scale on appendicitis diagnosis, 
1245, 1245t
Alveolar mucosa tumors of oral cavity, 585
mandibulotomy in, 585, 586f
Alveolar spaces, pulmonary, 612
Amastia, 500
Amaurosis fugax in cerebral ischemia, 839
Ambiguous genitalia, 1637–1638, 1638f
Amebic infections
anorectal, 1233
liver abscess in, 1285
Amenorrhea, 1682
American Association for the Surgery of 
Trauma grading scale for solid 
organ injuries, 181, 183t
American Burn Association, 227
American Cancer Society cancer screening 
guidelines, 297, 298t–299t, 299, 
513
American Joint Committee on Cancer 
cancer staging system, 300
in breast cancer, 531, 531t–532t
in colorectal cancer, 1211t
in esophageal cancer, 1005, 1006t
in head and neck tumors, 580, 581t
in lung cancer, 634t
in melanoma, 488
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1470–1471
in stomach cancer, 1079
American Society of Anesthesiologists
airway management algorithms, 1911, 
1913f
classification of surgical risk, 1905, 
1905t, 1926
American Society of Clinical Oncology 
guidelines, 301
American Spinal Injury Association 
classification of spine injuries, 
1724, 1725f
AMES classification of papillary thyroid 
carcinoma, 1543
Amikacin, 144t
Amine precursor uptake and 
decarboxylation cells, 1390
Amino acids
in enteral nutrition, 53–54
metabolism of, 53–54
in injury, 50
in parenteral nutrition, 58
in wound healing, 254–255
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, 447
1986
Index
ε-Aminocaproic acid, 92
in cardiopulmonary bypass, 95
Aminoglycosides, 144t
5-Aminosalicylic acid in Crohn’s disease, 
1156
Amitriptyline in pain, 1950t
Ammonia absorption in colon, 1179
Amnesia in general anesthesia, 1900
Amniocentesis, 1691
Amoxicillin in peptic ulcer disease, 1061t
Amphibole asbestos fibers, 688
Amphotericin B, 141t, 658
in aspergillosis, 655–656
in blastomycosis, 661
in candidal infections, 658
in coccidioidomycosis, 661
Ampicillin-sulbactam, 143t, 257t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
AMPLE history in trauma, 173
Amputation
surgical
in femoropopliteal occlusive disease, 
898
in soft tissue sarcoma, 1473, 1474
in trauma, 1877
traumatic, in hand injuries, 1800, 
1802f–1804f
replantation in, 1800
Amrinone, in cardiogenic shock, 127
Amsterdam criteria on hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, 
292, 292t
Amyand, Claudius, 1241
Amylase
in carbohydrate digestion, 1141, 1142f
in diagnostic peritoneal lavage in 
abdominal trauma, 181t
pancreatic secretion of, 1347, 1348t
serum levels in acute pancreatitis,  
1355–1356, 1357
Amylin, 1349t, 1350
Amyloidosis
intracranial hemorrhage in, 1730
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1438
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, differential 
diagnosis in, 1740
Anaerobic bacterial infections, 140, 140t
antibiotic therapy in, 143t–145t
Anal canal
abdominoperineal resection of, 1189
anatomy of, 1176, 1177–1178, 1177f, 
1178f
lymphatic, 1178–1179, 1217, 1217f
nerve supply in, 1179
vascular, 1178, 1179f
anesthesia in surgery of, 1194
clinical evaluation of disorders,  
1180–1185
Crohn’s disease of, 1200, 1200f
endoscopy of, 1180–1181
fissures in, 1225–1227, 1226f
hemorrhoids of, 1222–1225
positioning of patient for surgery of, 
1194
preoperative preparations for surgery of, 
1194–1195
trauma of, 1235
tumors of, 1217–1218
ultrasonography of, endoanal, 1181, 
1185, 1185f
Analgesia, 1900–1901
in children and infants, 1601
nonopioid, 1900–1901
opioid, 1900
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1379
in persistent pain, 1949t
postoperative, 1916, 1916f
Anal gland infections, 1227–1228
Anal sphincters, 1178, 1185f
artificial, 1235
division in anal fissure, 1225, 1226f
in fecal continence, 1180, 1185, 1185f, 
1235
innervation of, 1179
trauma of, 1235
sphincteroplasty in, 1235, 1235f
ultrasonography of, endoanal, 1185
Anaphylaxis in antibiotic therapy, 146–147
Anaplastic carcinoma of thyroid,  
1550–1551, 1551f
Anastomosis
in aortic coarctation repair, 705
biliary enteric, 1327, 1329f
in colorectal surgery, 1189–1191, 1190f, 
1191f
end-to-end, 1190, 1190f, 1191f
end-to-side, 1190, 1190f
hand-sutured technique, 1190–1191, 
1190f
ileal pouch anal anastomosis in, 1188, 
1189f, 1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
1207
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
side-to-end, 1190
side-to-side, 1190, 1190f
stapled technique, 1190f, 1191, 1191f
in esophagus caustic injury, 1023f
in free tissue transfer, 1838, 1839f
end-to-end, 1839, 1839f
end-to-side, 1839, 1839f
microvascular, 1838
occlusion of, 1838, 1839
in liver transplantation, 348–349
in lung transplantation, 357, 357f
in pancreaticoduodenectomy,  
1403–1407
Roux-en-Y. See Roux-en-Y anastomosis
Anastrozole, 552–553
Androgens, adrenal, 1577
excess of, 1585
Androstenedione, 1577
Anemia, 1914
hemolytic, 1272
in hiatal hernia, 981
postoperative, in gastric surgery, 1094
transfusions in, 98
wound healing in, 253
Anesthesia, 1895–1919
agents used in, 1899–1904, 1899t
in anorectal procedures, 1194
in bariatric surgery, 1106–1107
in colon surgery, 1194
future trends in, 1917–1919
general, 1899–1902
induction of, 1909, 1909f
rapid sequence, 1909
inhalational agents in, 1902, 1902t
intravenous agents in, 1900–1901
neuromuscular blocking agents in, 
1901–1902, 1901t
in hand and wrist injuries, 1795–1796, 
1797f
historical aspects of, 1895–1897
in inguinal hernia repair, 1505, 1515
intraoperative management of,  
1909–1915
airway management in, 1910–1911
fluid therapy in, 1911, 1914
transfusions in, 1914–1915
local, 1902–1903, 1903t
additives in, 1903
cardiovascular disorders in, 1903
central nervous system disorders in, 
1903
malignant hyperthermia in, 393,  
1916–1917
in minimally invasive surgery, 419
pharmacology of, 1897–1899
preoperative evaluation and preparation 
for, 1904–1905
risk assessment in, 1905–1909
recovery from, 1915–1916
regional, 1903–1904
epidural, 1903t, 1904
peripheral nerve blocks in,  
1903–1904
spinal, 1897, 1904
Aneurysms
of aorta. See Aorta, aneurysms of
in Behçet’s syndrome, 903
of carotid artery, 848, 849f
in fibromuscular dysplasia, 847, 848
cerebral, 1728–1732
locations of, 1730, 1730t
subarachnoid hemorrhage in,  
1730–1731, 1730f, 1730t, 1731f
of coronary arteries in Kawasaki 
syndrome, 902
of iliac artery, with abdominal aortic 
aneurysm, 855, 856
of left ventricle, postinfarction,  
766–768, 767f
of splenic artery, 1438
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1438
Angina pectoris, 735–736
in aortic stenosis, 758
chronic, 742
in coronary artery disease, 742
indications for bypass surgery in,  
742
results of bypass surgery in, 745
disability assessment in, 737, 737t
risk of noncardiac surgery in, 738
Angioembolization, 203
Angiogenesis
in tumors, 283–284
in breast cancer, 535
in wound healing, 243t, 244, 1831
Angiography, 832–833, 918
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 791
bronchial, in hemoptysis, 663
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
840–841, 841f
in colorectal disorders, 1181
complications of, 382–383
computed tomography technique. 
See Computed tomography 
angiography
coronary preoperative, 834
digital subtraction technique, 833, 833f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
840–841
in renal artery stenosis, 869
in gastrinoma, 1073
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882
magnetic resonance technique, 882. 
See also Magnetic resonance 
angiography
in mesenteric ischemia, 862
nephropathy from contrast agents in, 
383
in neurologic examination, 1712
in portal hypertension, 1280
1987
Index
in renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia, 
867, 867f
of spleen, 1429
in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 1731, 
1731f
in Takayasu’s arteritis, 901, 901t
of upper extremity, 1794–1795
in venous thromboembolism, 921
Angiopathy, amyloid, 1730
Angioplasty
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 879–880, 
881
balloons used in, 835–836, 836f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
842–843, 845–847
compared to endarterectomy,  
842–843
embolic protection devices in,  
845–846, 846t
in fibromuscular dysplasia, 904
technique in, 845–846, 846f
coronary
in cardiogenic shock, 128
compared to bypass surgery,  
742–743, 743t
prior to other surgeries, 834
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 892–894, 893f
compared to surgical treatment, 899
complications of, 896–897
cryoplasty technique, 892, 893f, 897
subintimal technique, 892, 894, 
896–897
in mesenteric artery occlusive disease, 
864, 865
percutaneous transluminal, 879–880, 
892–894
in renal artery occlusive disease, 
870–871
Angiopoietins in angiogenesis, 284
Angiosarcoma, 493, 776, 1468, 1470, 
1476, 1481, 1780
of breast, 556
Angiosomes, 1837–1838
Angiotensin, 1575
and renin activity. See Renin-
angiotensin system
Angle classification of dental occlusion 
in mandibular fractures, 1853, 
1854f
Anidulafungin, 141t, 658
Animal bites, 478, 479f
Animal models in genetic research, 
463–467
gene knockout in, 464–466, 465f
transgenic mice in, 463–464, 463f
Anion gap in metabolic acidosis, 74, 75t
Ankle
dislocations of, 1764
fractures of, 1764
in children, 1783
syndesmosis of, 1764
Ankle-brachial index, 829
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 872
calculation of, 829, 830f
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882
Ankyrin, 1429
Annuloplasty
of mitral valve, 756, 756f
of tricuspid valve, 763
Annulus fibrosus, 1739, 1771
Anorectoplasty in imperforate anus, 
1627–1628
Anorexia, in appendicitis, 1243
Anoscopy, 1180
Antacids in gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, 971
Antagonist drugs, 1898
Anterior cord syndrome, 1724, 1725f
Anterior partial fundoplication, 976, 
978–979
Anthrax, 136
as biologic warfare agent, 156–157
Antia-Buch ear reconstruction technique, 
1856, 1857f
Antibiotics, 142, 143t–145t, 146–147
allergic reactions to, 146
antitumor, 307, 308t
in appendicitis, 1248, 1251
in children, 1623
in asplenia, 1445
in bronchiectasis, 653–654
in cholecystitis, acute, 1321
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1196
in cystitis, 1664
duration of therapy with, 142, 146
empiric therapy with, 142
in epididymo-orchitis, 1665
historical development of, 136–137
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1156, 
1196
in liver abscess, 1284
in lung abscess, 651
in lymphedema, 936
in mastitis, 506
misuse of, 147
in otitis media, 566
ototoxicity of, 384
for pancreatitis, acute, 1359
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
in peritonitis, 150
in pneumonia, 385
in portal hypertension and variceal 
bleeding, 1282–1283
in postsplenectomy infections, 1445
prophylactic use of, 142, 146t
in bowel preparation, 1194
in surgery, 255–256, 257t
in trauma, 185–187
in prostatitis, 1664
pseudomembranous colitis associated 
with, 1222
selection of, 142
in sepsis, 154, 155t
and shock, 124–125
in sinusitis, 567, 568
in soft tissue infections, 151, 152
in surgical drains, 389, 390
in surgical site infections, 142, 255–256, 
257t–258t, 389
in urinary tract infections, 390
in wound infections, 265
Antibodies
anticardiolipin, in antiphospholipid 
syndrome, 93
antineutrophil cytoplasmic, in Crohn’s 
disease, 1155
depleting, 325
monoclonal, 325, 328–329
nondepleting, 325
polyclonal, 325
thyroid, 1529
Anticardiolipin antibodies in 
antiphospholipid syndrome, 93
Anticholinesterase agents in reversal of 
neuromuscular blockade, 1915
Anticoagulation therapy, 94–95
in elderly, 1931, 1935
in free tissue transfer, 1840
heparin in. See Heparin therapy
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 887
perioperative management in, 94–95
in bariatric surgery, 1105
in emergency operations, 94
in valve replacement, 761, 1931
in venous thromboembolism, 921–923
warfarin in. See Warfarin therapy
Anticonvulsant drugs
in pain, 1950t
in seizures, 1746
Antidepressants, tricyclic, in pain, 1950t
Antidiuretic hormone secretion
inappropriate, 80
hyponatremia in, 69, 80
in lung cancer, 626
Antiepileptic drugs
in pain, 1950t
in seizures, 1746
Antifungal agents, 140, 141t
in blastomycosis, 661
in candidal infections, 658
in coccidioidomycosis, 661
in histoplasmosis, 659
in pulmonary infections, 661
Antigen-presenting cells, 324
Antihypertensive therapy in aortic 
dissection, 812, 819
Anti-inflammatory drugs, nonsteroidal
peptic ulcer disease from, 1053, 1054, 
1057–1058
hospitalization rates in, 1058t
medical treatment in, 1061
perforation in, 1068
risk factors in, 1058, 1059t
Anti-inflammatory response
cholinergic pathways in, 19
counterregulatory syndrome (CARS), 
14f
Antimetabolites in chemotherapy, 307, 
308t
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody in 
Crohn’s disease, 1155
Antiphospholipid syndrome, 93–94
α2-Antiplasmin, 88
Antireflux surgery, 973–980
in Barrett’s esophagus, 969, 972
indications for, 972
outcome of, 979, 979t
reoperation of, 979–980
Belsey repair in, 973f
in children, 1613
in esophageal motility disorders, 995, 
995f
and Heller myotomy, 997–999,  
1000, 1001f
outcome assessment in, 1001, 1002t
failure of, 1002t
in gastroesophageal reflux, 965–967
in hiatal hernia, 983
indications for, 972
Nissen fundoplication in, 974–975. See 
also Nissen fundoplication
outcome in, 977–978
preoperative evaluation in, 972–973
principles of, 973–974, 973f
reoperation in failure of, 979–980
in respiratory disorders, 971
Toupet fundoplication in, 975–976
Antithrombin globulin in chyle, 686t
Antithrombin III, 88
Antithrombotics
in cerebrovascular injuries, 199, 199f
in venous thromboembolism, 921–923
1988
Index
Antithymocyte globulin, 325
Antithyroid drugs in Graves’ disease, 1532
Antrectomy in peptic ulcer disease, 1062t, 
1063, 1071f
Antroduodenal motility testing, 1053
Anus
abdominoperineal resection of, 1189
anatomy of, 1177–1178
Crohn’s disease of, 1200, 1200f
embryonic development of, 1175–1176
fissures in, 1225–1227, 1226f
fistula of, 1229–1231, 1229f, 1230f
imperforate, 1626–1628, 1626f, 1627f
anomalies associated with, 1627
classification of, 1627
resection in total proctocolectomy, 1188
tumors of, 275t, 1217–1218
Aorta, 785–820
abdominal
aneurysms of, 850–859. See also 
Abdominal aortic aneurysms
atherosclerosis of, 872–881
anatomy of, 785, 786f
aneurysms of
abdominal, 850–859. See also 
Abdominal aortic aneurysms
in aortic arch, 795–796, 798f
hybrid repair of, 804, 803f, 
805f–806f
in aortic root, 758
with aortic valve insufficiency, 758–761, 
789, 793
ascending
anatomy of, 785
dissection of, 813–815, 814f, 819
atherosclerosis of, 872–881
aneurysm in, 787, 850
balloon pump in, 768
in cardiogenic shock, 127
coarctation of, 705–706
compared to dissection, 807
descending, dissection of, 815–816, 820
dissection of, 806–816
acute, 808
endovascular repair in, 815–816
open repair in, 816
with aortic valve insufficiency, 760, 
809, 813
ascending, 813–815, 814f, 819
blood pressure control in, 812, 815
chronic, 808, 815
endovascular repair in, 816
open repair in, 816, 817f–818f
clinical history of, 809
clinical manifestations in, 809–810, 
811t
compared to aneurysm, 807
complications in, 809–810, 811t
descending, 815–816, 820
diagnostic evaluation of, 810–812, 
812f
endovascular treatment in, 815–816
fenestration technique, 815
outcome in, 820
indications for surgery in, 815
initial assessment and management 
in, 812–813
location of, 807, 809f
malperfusion syndrome in, 807, 810, 
811
endovascular treatment in, 815
iliofemoral, 815
indications for surgery in, 815
open repair in, 816
management algorithm on, 810f
nonoperative management of, 815, 
820
open repair in, 816, 820
outcomes in, 819, 820
pathology and classification of,  
806–809, 807f, 808f
proximal extension of, 807
retrograde, 807
risk factors for, 809
subacute, 808
thoracic aortic aneurysm in, 787
true and false lumen in, 806
variants of, 808–809
distal
anatomy of, 785
aneurysm repair in, 799–804,  
819–820
in double-outlet right ventricle, 721–722
fusiform, 785, 795
intimal tear of, 807
in Marfan’s syndrome, 902
Takayasu’s arteritis of, 901, 901t
in transposition of great arteries, 
720–721
intramural hematoma of, 807f, 808–809
in Marfan’s syndrome, 248, 787, 789
dissection of, 813, 815
mega, 785
outcome of surgery in, 816–820
proximal
anatomy of, 785
aneurysm repair in, 793–799, 795t, 
817, 818–819
pseudoaneurysms of, 785, 788
saccular, 785, 789, 795
Takayasu’s arteritis of, 788
thoracic, 785–806. See also Thoracic 
aortic aneurysms
anatomy of, 785, 786f
aneurysms of, 785–806. See also 
Thoracic aortic aneurysms
medial degeneration of, 787
thoracoabdominal, 799–801, 800f, 
803–804
hybrid repair technique in, 804
open repair in, 819–820
outcome of surgery in, 819–820
trauma of, 177–178, 200–201, 200f
chest radiography in, 177, 178f, 178t
computed tomography in, 177, 179f
damage control surgery in, 193
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
189–190, 190f
endovascular stenting in, 201
interposition graft repair in, 201, 210
ulcer of, penetrating, 808, 809
endovascular treatment of, 816
Aortic arch
aneurysms in, 795–797, 798f
hybrid repair of, 803f, 804, 805f–806f
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716–719
interrupted, 729, 729f
anatomic types of, 729, 729f
surgical repair of, 729
Aortic root
aneurysm of, 758
replacement in thoracic aortic aneurysm 
repair, 793–795, 794f
Aortic stenosis
congenital, 698–702
anatomy and classification of, 
698–699
diagnosis of, 699
disorders associated with, 698–699
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
pathophysiology in, 699
subvalvular, 698, 699f, 702
supravalvular, 698, 699f, 702
treatment of, 699–702, 700f
Konno procedure in, 702, 703f
pulmonary valve transposition in, 
701–702, 701f–702f
Ross procedure in, 701–702, 702
valvular, 698, 699, 699f, 716. See also 
Aortic valve disorders, stenosis
Aortic valve disorders, 756–762, 757f, 
759t
atresia in hypoplastic left-heart 
syndrome, 716
bicuspid valve, 756, 758
thoracic aortic aneurysm in, 788
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716–719
insufficiency and regurgitation, 758–761
in aortic dissection, 760, 809, 813
indications for surgery in, 747, 761
repair procedure in, 761–762
in thoracic aortic aneurysm, 789, 793
minimally invasive surgery in, 761
with mitral valve disease, 763
myxomatous degeneration, 758
prosthetic replacement in, 749, 761–762
in congenital stenosis, 701–702, 
701f–702f
in elderly, 761, 1930
indications for, 761
minimally invasive technique, 761
operative technique in, 757f,  
761–762, 761f
postoperative care in, 761
pulmonary valve autograft in, 751, 
762
results in, 761
Ross procedure in, 751, 762
transcatheter aortic valve, 762
repair procedures in, 761–762
valve-sparing root replacement, 761
in rheumatic heart disease, 756
stenosis, 747, 756–758
calcific, 756–757, 757f
in elderly, 1930
congenital, 698, 699, 699f
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
degenerative or senile, 756–757
indications for surgery in, 758
with tricuspid valve disease, 763
trileaflet, 756
Aortitis, 788
in syphilis, 788
Aortobifemoral bypass in aortoiliac 
occlusive disease, 876–877, 
876f, 880–881
Aortoiliac occlusive disease, 872–881
classification of, 873–875, 874f
Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society 
Consensus
system in, 875, 875f, 875t
collateral pathways in, 873, 873f
diagnostic evaluation in, 872
differential diagnosis in, 872–873
endovascular therapy in, 875, 879–881
compared to surgical treatment, 
880–881
complications of, 880
surgical reconstruction in, 876–878
aortobifemoral bypass in, 876–877, 
876f, 880–881
1989
Index
axillofemoral bypass in, 877
compared to endovascular therapy, 
880–881
complications of, 878–879, 878t
endarterectomy in, 877
femorofemoral bypass in, 877
iliofemoral bypass in, 877, 877f
obturator bypass in, 878
thoracofemoral bypass in, 878
type I, 873–874, 874f
type II, 874, 874f
type III, 874, 874f, 875f
Aortoplasty in coarctation of aorta, 705
Aortopulmonary window region
congenital disorder, 711–712, 711f, 712f
classification of, 711f
two-patch repair technique in,  
711–712, 712f
lung cancer metastasis to, 671, 673f
Aortorenal bypass in renal artery occlusive 
disease, 869
APACHE II score in acute pancreatitis, 
1357
APC gene
in colorectal cancer, 1183, 1204
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 288t, 
291, 1206–1207
Apligraf in venous ulcer treatment,  
932–933, 933f
Apnea in sleep, obstructive, 572
in obesity, 1105, 1128
bariatric surgery affecting, 1111, 
1112t, 1128
respiratory disturbance index in, 572
Apocrine carcinoma of breast, 556
Apocrine glands, 475
Apoeccrine glands, 475
Apoplexy, pituitary, 1735
Apoptosis, 37f, 450, 451f
activation of, 450
in breast cancer, indicators of, 535
in cancer cells, 281–283
differentiated from necrosis, 281
pathways in, 281–282, 450, 451f
Apoptosome, 281
Appendectomy, 1251–1256
in children, 1623
compared to antibiotics in appendicitis, 
1251
historical aspects of, 136, 1241
incidence of, 1243
incidental, 1257
financial issues in, 1257
indications for, 1257
incomplete, 1257
and inflammatory bowel disease, 
1242–1243
interval, 1251, 1252t
laparoscopic, 1252–1256, 1253f, 1254f
in children, 1623
compared to open procedure,  
1253–1254, 1255t
in pregnancy, 436
open, 1251–1252
compared to laparoscopic procedure, 
1253–1254, 1255t
in pregnancy, 436
in tumors of appendix, 1258, 1259
urgent versus emergent, 1250, 1250t
Appendicitis, 1243–1251
acute, 1243–1251
in children, 1622–1624
Alvarado Scale on, 1245, 1245t
antibiotics in, 1248, 1251
in children, 1623
bacteriology of, 1243
in children. See Children and infants, 
appendicitis in
clinical scoring systems, 1245
complicated, 1250–1251
diagnostic laparoscopy in, 1254
differential diagnosis in, 1246–1248
in children, 1246, 1624
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1248
in elderly, 1246, 1256, 1924, 1929
etiology and pathogenesis in, 1243
historical treatment of, 136, 1241
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1248
imaging studies in, 1245–1246
in children, 1623, 1623f
incidence of, 1243
and incidental appendectomy, 1257
initial management of, 1248–1251, 
1249t
interval appendectomy following 
nonoperative management, 1251
operative versus nonoperative, 1248, 
1251
laboratory findings in, 1244–1245
laparoscopic single-incision 
appendectomy, 1254
natural orifice transluminal endoscopic 
surgery in, 1254, 1256
perforation and rupture in, 1243,  
1250–1251
age-related differences in, 1246–1248
in children, 1246, 1256, 1623–1624, 
1623f
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1248
in pregnancy, 1248, 1256–1257
signs and symptoms in, 1243–1244, 
1244t
in children, 1622–1623
stump, 1257
uncomplicated, 1248–1250
Valentino’s, 1252
Appendicitis Inflammatory Response 
Score, 1245, 1245t
Appendix vermiform, 1241–1259
anatomy and function of, 1242–1243
appendectomy of. See Appendectomy
appendicitis of, 1243–1251. See also 
Appendicitis
critical view, 1253, 1254f
embryonic development of, 1241–1242
operative interventions, 1251–1256
perforation and rupture in appendicitis, 
1250–1251
age-related differences in, 1246–1248
in children, 1244, 1251, 1256,  
1623–1624, 1623f
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1248
in pregnancy, 1248, 1256–1257
retrocecal, 1244
tumors of, 1257–1259
Appetite, ghrelin regulation of, 1045
Apple peel deformity in intestinal atresia, 
1616
Aprotinin, in cardiopulmonary bypass, 95
Aquaporins, 1140–1141
Arachidonic acid, 31–32, 31f, 43f
released from platelet membranes, 85
Arantius’ ligament, 1265
Arcuate ligament syndrome, median, 861, 
862f, 866
surgical repair in, 864
Arcuate line of Douglas, 1449, 1451f
Areola, anatomy of, 501
Argatroban in venous thromboembolism, 
922–923
Arginine, 54
in wound healing, 254–255, 255f
Arginine vasopressin, 113. See also 
Antidiuretic hormone secretion
Argon beam coagulation, 428
Aristotle, 1941, 1942f
Arm lift procedure, 1887
Aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer, 
552–553
Arrhythmias, 770–772
atrial fibrillation. See Atrial fibrillation
in central venous catheterization, 381
Cox-Maze IV procedure, 771–772, 771f
defibrillators in, implantable, 770
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 719
electrocardiography in, 401
pacemaker implantation in, 770
postoperative, 386, 393
in tetralogy of Fallot, 725–726
signs and symptoms in, 736
in trauma, 171
Arterial disorders, 827–906
angiography in, 832–833
ankle-brachial index in, 829, 830f
aortic aneurysms
abdominal, 850–859
thoracic, 785–806
aortoiliac occlusive disease, 872–881
arteritis. See Arteritis
in Behçet’s syndrome, 903
in Buerger’s disease, 906
of carotid artery, 837–850
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 901–902
endovascular therapy in, 834–837
in fibromuscular dysplasia, 904–905
general approach to, 828–834
history of patient in, 828–829, 828t
in Kawasaki syndrome, 902
lower extremity occlusive disease, 
881–900
in malformations, 1850, 1852
in Marfan’s syndrome, 902
of mesenteric artery, 859–866
pain in, 828
on ambulation, 828
at rest, 828
physical examination in, 829
of popliteal artery, 905–906
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum, 902
in Raynaud’s syndrome, 904
of renal artery, 866–872
segmental limb blood pressure in, 
829–830
in thromboangiitis obliterans, 906
ultrasonography in, 830
Arteriography, 1051
Arteriovenous malformations, 574, 1850, 
1852
intracranial hemorrhage in, 1731, 1732f
stereotactic radiosurgery in, 1749
Arteritis
classification of, 903, 903t
giant cell, 788, 901
inflammatory, 902–903
in polyarteritis nodosa, 903
radiation-induced, 903–904
Takayasu’s, 788, 901, 901t
Arthritis
conservative management and 
prevention of, 1772
of hand and wrist, 1806–1808, 1808f
septic, 1811
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196
introduction of, 1772
rheumatoid
1990
Index
Arthritis, rheumatoid (Cont.):
aortitis in, 788
of hand and wrist, 1808, 1808f
septic
of hand and wrist, 1811
surgical treatment of, 1772–1776, 1773f, 
1774f, 1775
Arthrodesis, 1772
of hand and wrist joints, 1807
spinal, 1743–1744
Arthroplasty, 1773–1778
complications of, 1777–1778
osteolysis in, 1777–1778
wear debris in, 1777–1778
computer navigation and, 1776, 1777f
fixation options in, 1776–1778
of hand and wrist, 1807, 1808
of hip, 1773–1774, 1773f
of knee, 1774–1776, 1775f–1776f, 
1777f, 1778f
Arthroscopy, in meniscus tears, 1768f
Asbestos exposure, 293
amphibole fiber type in, 687
interaction with smoking, 293, 619
mesothelioma in, 687
serpentine fiber type in, 687
Ascariasis, 1286, 1324
ASCERT Study, 743
Aschoff-Rokitansky sinuses, 1319
Ascites
abdominal hernia in, 1279, 1455
chylous, 1169–1170
etiologies of, 1169
in cirrhosis, 1279
Child-Turcotte-Pugh score on,  
1280t
liver transplantation in, 347
pancreatic, 1378, 1378f
in portal hypertension, 1281
postoperative, 387
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt in, 347
Aspartate transaminase serum levels in 
liver disorders, 1270, 1271–1272
Aspergilloma, pulmonary, 655–656, 657f
Aspergillus infections
pulmonary, 655–658, 657f
invasive, 658
sinusitis in, 569–570, 570
Aspiration
of foreign body by children, 1608
of gastric contents in gastroesophageal 
reflux, respiratory disorders in, 
970–971
Aspiration procedure, peritoneal, in 
abdominal trauma, 180–181, 
180f
Aspirin
in carotid artery occlusive disease,  
841, 846
peptic ulcer disease from, 1057–1058, 
1059t
perforation in, 1068
risk factors for, 1058, 1059t
in persistent pain, 1949t
platelet dysfunction from, 91–92
Asthma
in gastroesophageal reflux, 969, 971
in obesity, 1105, 1128–1129
Astrocytoma
intracranial, 1733
spinal, 1738–1739
Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis 
Study, 842
Atelectasis, postoperative, 384, 1444
Atherectomy in lower extremity arterial 
occlusive disease, 895–896
complications of, 897
devices used in, 895
laser technique, 896
Atherosclerosis
angiography in, 832–833
aortic aneurysm in
abdominal, 850
thoracic, 787
aortoiliac, 872–881
of carotid artery, 837–847
of coronary arteries, 741–747.  
See also Coronary arteries, 
atherosclerosis of
general approach to patient in, 828–834
of hand, 1822–1823
lower limb ischemia in, 882
atherectomy in, 895–896
mesenteric ischemia in, 859, 860, 1167
surgical repair in, 864
preoperative evaluation in, 742, 793, 
833–834, 1905
renal artery occlusion in, 866, 866f
surgical repair in, 870
risk factors for, 741–742
Athletic injuries. See Sports injuries
Atlantoaxial instability in Down syndrome 
adenotonsillectomy precautions 
in, 571
Atlas, cervical
in atlantoaxial instability, 571
Jefferson fracture of, 1722, 1770
in occipital dislocation, 1770
ATM gene, 288t
Atracurium, 1901
Atresia
of aortic valve in hypoplastic left-heart 
syndrome, 716
biliary, 1628–1630. See also Biliary 
tract, atresia of
of esophagus, 1608–1612. See also 
Esophagusatresia of
intestinal, 1615–1616, 1616f
of duodenum, 1612, 1615–1616, 
1616f
of jejunum, 1616f
of mitral valve in hypoplastic left-heart 
syndrome, 716
of tricuspid valve, 712–716
Atrial fibrillation, 771–772
in mitral insufficiency, 752
in mitral stenosis, 752
peripheral artery embolism in, 885
signs and symptoms in, 736
Atrial natriuretic peptides, 43
Atrioventricular canal defects, 726f, 
727–729
classification of, 727–729, 728f
complete, 727, 728f, 729
operative repair of, 729
partial, 727, 728f
Atrium
arrhythmias of
fibrillation. See Atrial fibrillation
lesion sets, 772
postoperative, 386
in cor triatriatum, 710, 711f
myxomas of, 775–776, 775f
septal defect of, 695–698
anatomy of, 695–696, 696f
in cor triatriatum, 710, 711
diagnosis of, 697
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 719
embryology of, 695
pathophysiology in, 696–697
percutaneous closure in, 698
results of treatment in, 698
in tricuspid atresia, 712
Atrophy
craniofacial, 1848–1849, 1849f, 1850f
gastritis in, 1077, 1077f
intestinal, in parenteral nutrition, 59
Atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), 510
Auditory canal tumors, 594
Auerbach’s myenteric plexus, 1039
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
Augmentation mammaplasty, 1890–1891, 
1891f
Authoritative leadership, 9
Autografts
in aortic valve replacement, 751, 762
in spinal arthrodesis, 1743
Autoimmune disorders
Graves’ disease in, 1531
hemolytic anemia in, 1430t, 1431–1432
pancreatitis in, 1365t, 1366
of peripheral nerves, 1744–1745
Autonomic nervous system, 1711
hormones regulated by, 20t
parasympathetic. See Parasympathetic 
nervous system
in shock response, 112
sympathetic. See Sympathetic nervous 
system
Autonomy principle, 1941
in informed consent, 1944
in withdrawing or withholding of life-
sustaining therapies, 1945
Autophagy in cancer cells, 283
Autotransplantation, 322
of islet cells in chronic pancreatitis, 
1390
Axillary artery
in axillofemoral bypass, 877
palpation of, 829
Axillary lymph nodes
anatomy of, 502–503, 502f
in breast cancer, 547–548, 554
dissection after chemotherapy, 
551–552
dissection in mastectomy, 548–549, 
548f
early invasive, 539–541
in elderly, 1932
historical aspects of surgery in, 498
natural history in, 518, 519f
and sentinel node dissection, 545, 547
staging of, 531, 531t–532t
in unknown primary cancer, 554
Axillary vein
anatomy of, 916
thrombosis of, 928–929
Axillofemoral bypass in aortoiliac 
occlusive disease, 877
Axis, cervical
in atlantoaxial instability, 571
fractures of, 1722, 1770
Axitinib, 310t
Axon injury, 251, 1726
diffuse, 1719
Axonotmesis, 251, 1726
Azathioprine
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1196
in immunosuppression, 323, 325t, 326, 
327t
side effects of, 326, 326t
in ulcerative colitis, 1196
Azithromycin, 145t
Aztreonam, 144t
1991
Index
B
B cells
in small intestine immune function, 
1144
in transplant rejection, 324
Bacille Calmette-Guérin in bladder cancer, 
1654
Bacillus anthracis, 136
as biologic warfare agent, 156–157
Back pain, 625
Bacteria
in cutaneous microflora, 137, 141
in intestinal microflora, 137, 1179
in necrotizing enterocolitis,  
1619–1620
translocation of, 151
transcription in, 447
Bacterial colonization, 258, 389
Bacterial contamination, 258
in surgery, 141, 146, 147t, 148t, 256
in transfusions, 100, 102t
Bacterial infections, 139–140, 140t
anorectal, 1232–1233
aortic aneurysm in, 788
appendicitis in, 1243–1251
common organisms in, 1243
of breast, 506
in central venous catheterization, 381
compared to contamination and 
colonization, 258
cystitis in, 1664
empyema in, 683–684
epididymo-orchitis in, 1665
liver abscess in, 150, 1284
of lungs, 650–658
abscess in, 650–651
peritonitis in, 149–150
pharyngitis in, 570
prostatitis in, 1664
pyelonephritis in, 1664
sinusitis in, 568
of skin and subcutaneous tissues, 477, 
483–484
of surgical site, 142, 256, 257t–258t, 
1257
in transplant recipients, 329
vulvovaginitis in, 1677t, 1680, 1681f
Balloon dilatation, 430–431
in aortic coarctation, 705
Balloon expulsion test, 1182
Balloon pump, intra-aortic, 768
in cardiogenic shock, 127
Balloon valvotomy in congenital aortic 
stenosis, 700–701
Balloon valvuloplasty in mitral stenosis, 
753
Banding of stomach, 1108–1112. See also 
Gastric banding
Banting, Frederick, 4, 1349
Barbiturates in general anesthesia, 1900
Bariatric surgery, 1099–1131
in adolescents, 1125–1126
anemia risk in, 1094
anesthesia in, 1106–1107
biliopancreatic diversion and duodenal 
switch in, 1103, 1107,  
1119–1121
in centers of excellence, 1099, 1107
complications in, in sleeve gastrectomy, 
1124
contraindications to, 1104, 1104t
in biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch, 1120
in gastric bypass, 1115
in diabetes mellitus, 1112t, 1127
gastric banding in, 1111, 1128
gastric bypass in, 1116, 1127
in elderly, 1125–1126
in fatty liver, 1106, 1129
gastric banding in, 1108–1112. See also 
Gastric banding
gastric bypass in, Roux-en-Y, 1103, 
1112–1119. See also Gastric 
bypass surgery, Roux–en–Y
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
1105, 1116, 1128
ghrelin levels after, 1045, 1046f
in hyperlipidemia, 1112t, 1116, 1128
in hypertension, 1111, 1112t, 1116, 
1128
indications for, 1104, 1104t, 1107
laparoscopic, 1103
biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch in, 1120, 1121
compared to open procedures, 1107, 
1118, 1118t
conversion to open procedure, 1107t
gastric banding in, 1108–1112
gastric bypass in, 1112–1118
hand-assisted, 1107
sleeve gastrectomy in, 1121–1125
malabsorptive, 1102, 1103t, 1107, 
1119–1121
combined with restrictive 
mechanisms, 1102, 1103t
in metabolic syndrome, 1127–1128
open
biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch in, 1119–1121
compared to laparoscopic procedures, 
1107, 1118, 1118t
conversion of laparoscopic procedure 
to, 1107t
gastric bypass in, 1118–1119
outcomes in, 1112t
in biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch, 1120–1121
in gastric banding, 1111–1112
in gastric bypass, 1116–1118, 1117t, 
1118t, 1119
in sleeve gastrectomy, 1124
overview of, 1102–1104
patient education in, 1106
patient selection for, 1105
in biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch, 1120
in gastric banding, 1110
in gastric bypass, 1115, 1118
in sleeve gastrectomy, 1121–1125
plastic surgery after, 1129, 1130f, 1887f
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1107–1108
in biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch, 1120
in gastric banding, 1110–1111, 1111f
in gastric bypass, 1115–1116,  
1118–1119
in sleeve gastrectomy, 1123–1124
pregnancy after, 1126
preoperative assessment and 
preparation, 1105–1106
in biliopancreatic diversion and 
duodenal switch, 1120
in gastric banding, 1110
in gastric bypass, 1115, 1118
in sleeve gastrectomy, 1121–1125
recent trends in, 1099–1100, 1104f
restrictive, 1102, 1103t
combined with malabsorptive 
mechanisms, 1102, 1103t
historical development of, 1103
revolution in, 1103–1104
in sleep apnea, 1105, 1111, 1112t, 1128
sleeve gastrectomy in, 1103, 1104, 
1121–1125
Barium studies
in colorectal cancer screening, 1208t, 
1209
colorectal injury in, 1234
of eosinophilic esophagitis, 986
of esophagus, 950–951, 953f, 963
in antireflux surgery, 973
in diverticula, 994f
in leiomyoma, 1017, 1017f
in sarcoma, 1015, 1016f
in gastric disorders, 1051, 1052f
in hiatal hernia, 950–951, 953f, 982
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
in large intestine disorders, 1181
in ulcerative colitis, 1197
Baroreceptors, 68, 69
in shock response, 112
Barotrauma, 410
Barrett, Norman, 969
Barrett’s esophagus, 967, 969, 979
adenocarcinoma in, 969, 970f, 972, 1003
risk for, 1003
surgical treatment of, 1008
antireflux surgery in
indications for, 972
outcome of, 979, 979t
reoperation of, 979–980
surveillance for, 969
columnar-lined esophagus in, 950, 969, 
1003
drug therapy in, 971
in duodenal reflux, 967–968
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
intestinal metaplasia in, 950, 969
structurally defective sphincter in, 967t
surveillance for, 979
Bartholin’s glands, 1674
cyst and abscess of, 1678
Basal cell carcinoma, 486–487
of anus, 1218
of hand, 1817, 1817f
Moh’s microsurgery in, 486
types of, 486
Basal cell nevus syndrome, 486
Base deficit
in shock, 130–131
hemorrhagic, 120, 121f
in trauma, 217
Basilar artery injuries, 1720, 1721
Basilic vein anatomy, 917
Basiliximab, 325, 325t
Bassini repair in inguinal hernia, 1495, 
1506, 1507f
Battle’s sign, 174
in skull fractures, 1716
Baux score in burns, 230
Bax death signal protein in breast cancer, 
535
Bcl-2 proteins, 282
in breast cancer, 535
Bcr-Abl, and imatinib therapy in chronic 
myeloid leukemia, 455, 455f
Beck’s triad, 128, 167
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 1638
Beclin gene, in autophagy, 283
Bed rest in lymphedema, 936
Beer’s law, 409
Beger procedure in chronic pancreatitis, 
1385–1386, 1387, 1387f
Behavioral modification in obesity, 1102
1992
Index
Behçet’s syndrome, 903
Belatacept, 325t, 326t, 328
Bell’s palsy, 567
Bell stages in necrotizing enterocolitis, 
1620
Belsey fundoplication, 973f
lower esophageal sphincter myotomy 
with, 999
Beneficence principle, 1941
in withdrawing or withholding of life-
sustaining therapies, 1945
Bennett fracture, 1796
Bentall procedure in thoracic aortic 
aneurysm repair, 795, 797f
Bentiromide test in chronic pancreatitis, 
1374
Benzocaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 
1902
Benzodiazepines in general anesthesia, 
1900
Bereavement, 1951
Bernard-Soulier syndrome, 89
Berne procedure in chronic pancreatitis, 
1387, 1389f
Best, Charles, 1349
Beta blockers
in aortic dissection, 812–813
in elderly, 1935
Betel nut quid, head and neck tumors 
associated with, 579
Bevacizumab, 310t
in breast cancer, 535
in ovarian and fallopian tube cancer, 
1703
Bezoars, 1089, 1089f
Bicarbonate
in gastrointestinal secretions, 69t
in parenteral nutrition, 76t
therapy with
in hyperkalemia, 78, 78t
in metabolic acidosis, 74
Bier, August, 1897
Bifunctional RNAi technology, 467–468
Bigelow, Henry J., 1896
Bile, 1312–1313
composition of, 69t, 1270, 1312–1313, 
1318f
formation of, 1270, 1312–1313
functions of, 1270
gallbladder storage and regulation of, 
1313
leak in cholecystectomy complications, 
1333, 1333f
reflux of, gastritis in, 1093–1094
Bile acids, 1270, 1312
in fat metabolism, 1143
in gastroesophageal reflux, 967–968, 
968f
Bile ducts
anatomy of, 1268, 1310–1311, 1311f
anomalies in, 1312
carcinoma of, 1291–1293,  
1335–1338, 1336f. See also 
Cholangiocarcinoma
cholangiography of. See 
Cholangiography
common
anatomy of, 1310–1311
choledocholithiasis in, 1322, 
1325–1327. See also 
Choledocholithiasis
cysts of, 1330, 1330f, 1630–1631
idiopathic dilatation of, 1630
laparoscopic exploration of, 
1325–1327, 1328f
outlet stenosis of, 1331
hamartoma of, 1291
radionuclide scans of, 1315
strictures of, 1331, 1332f
trauma of, 1332–1334
in cholecystectomy, 1331,  
1332–1333, 1332f, 1333f
ultrasonography of, 1314
Bile salts, 1270, 1312
Biliary ascites, in liver trauma, 205
Biliary tract, 1309–1338
acute pancreatitis in disorders of, 1352
anatomy of, 1309–1311
anesthesia in disorders of, 1907
atresia of, 1628–1630
clinical presentation in, 1628
diagnosis of, 1628
etiology of, 1628
liver transplantation in, 349, 1629
pathogenesis in, 1628
portoenterostomy in, 1629–1630, 
1629f
treatment of, 1629–1630, 1629f
Caroli’s disease of, 1289
cholangiocarcinoma of, 1291–1293, 
1335–1338. See also 
Cholangiocarcinoma
cholangitis of, 1331. See also 
Cholangitis
cystadenoma of, 1288
cysts of, 1330, 1630–1631
classification of, 1330, 1330f, 1630
clinical presentation in, 1630
diagnosis of, 1630
etiology of, 1630
treatment of, 1630–1631
diagnostic studies of, 1313–1316
gallbladder in. See Gallbladder
gallstones in, 1316–1327. See also 
Gallstones
hamartoma of, 1291
Oddi sphincter in. See Oddi sphincter
physiology of, 1312–1313
postoperative disorders of, 387
in liver transplantation, 351
in pancreatic cancer, 1399–1400, 
1400f
stent placement in
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1337
in chronic pancreatitis, 1380, 1381f
in pancreatic cancer, 1406
strictures of bile ducts in, 1331, 1332f
trauma of, 1331–1334
in cholecystectomy, 1331,  
1332–1333, 1332f, 1333f
Biliopancreatic diversion procedure, 1103
configuration in, 1119f, 1120
with duodenal switch, 1103, 1107, 
1119–1121
laparoscopic, 1120, 1121
operative technique in, 1120
outcomes in, 1112t, 1120–1121
patient selection and preparation in, 
1120
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1120
historical aspects of, 1103, 1119
Bilirubin
conjugated or direct, 1271, 1272
in diagnostic peritoneal lavage in 
abdominal trauma, 181t
esophageal exposure to, in 
gastroesophageal reflux, 968, 
968f
metabolism in liver, 1270, 1271–1272
serum levels of, 1271–1272
in liver disorders, 1270, 1271–1272, 
1280t
postoperative, 387
unconjugated or indirect, 1271, 1272
Bilirubin diglucuronide, 1313
Billroth, C. A. Theodor, 1521
Billroth techniques, 207
in gastroduodenostomy, in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1063, 1067f
in gastrojejunostomy
in bile reflux gastritis, 1093
in peptic ulcer disease, 1063, 1067f
in stomach cancer, 1081
Biloma in liver trauma, 205, 205f
Bioengineering of blood vessels in 
coronary artery disease, 747
Bioimpedance, 407
Biologic warfare agents, 156–157
Biomarkers of tumors, 301–304
in breast cancer, 303, 531–536, 536t
predictive, 534
prognostic, 534
surrogate endpoint, 534
in colorectal cancer, 301, 302–303, 
1182–1183
in fallopian tube cancer, 1702
in mediastinal tumors, 672
in ovarian cancer, 1702
Biomolecular therapy in coronary artery 
disease, 747
Biopsy, 299–300
in breast cancer, 529, 531
excisional technique with needle 
localization, 544–545, 544f, 
545f, 546f
incisions in, 544, 544f, 545f
mammography in, 544–545, 546f
nonpalpable lesions, 529
palpable lesions, 529, 531
of sentinel lymph nodes, 305–306, 
545–547
of cervix uteri, 1677
in chest wall tumors, 665–666
complications of, 383
core-needle, 300
in breast cancer, 529, 531
in chest wall tumors, 666
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1469
endometrial, 1677–1678
excisional, 300
in breast cancer, 544–545, 544f, 545f, 
546f
in chest wall tumors, 666
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1470
fine-needle aspiration, 300
in breast cancer, 529, 531
in chest wall tumors, 666
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1469
in thyroid nodule, solitary,  
1538–1540, 1540
in hand tumors, 1815
incisional, in soft tissue sarcomas, 
1469–1470
of liver
in cirrhosis, 1279
in incidental mass, 1288
of lung, 630
in lymph node assessment, 631, 632t
in mediastinal tumors, 672–673
in melanoma, 488, 489, 489f, 489f–490f
in neck mass, 595
open, 300
rectal, in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
of sentinel lymph nodes
1993
Index
in breast cancer, 305–306, 545–547
in melanoma, 489, 489f–490f
in vulvar cancer, 1697
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1469–1470
in stomach cancer, 1080
of thyroid, in solitary nodule,  
1538–1540, 1540
of vagina, 1677
of vulva, 1677
Bird’s beak appearance in achalasia, 991, 
992f
Birth injuries, 1782–1783
maternal, perineal lacerations in, 1692
neonatal, brachial plexus palsy in, 1782
Bishop-Koop anastomosis, 1618, 1619f
Bismuth-Corlette classification of bile duct 
carcinoma, 1335–1336, 1335f, 
1336–1337
Bismuth subsalicylate in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1061t
Bispectral index in 
electroencephalography, 411
Bisphosphonates
in bone pain, 1950t
in hypercalcemia, 1573t
in hyperparathyroidism, 1563–1564
Bisulfite sequencing, 462
Bite wounds, 478–479
of hand, 1812
in human bites, 1812
risk for infections in, 478–479, 479f
Bivalirudin in venous thromboembolism, 
922
Black pigment gallstones, 1318
Bladder
anatomy of, 1652
cancer of, 1653–1654
cystectomy in, 1654
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
278t, 618f
urinary diversion procedures in, 1653, 
1654
fetal surgery for anomalies of, 1645
fistula of
with colon in diverticulitis, 1203
with vagina, 1678
infections of, 1664–1665
Candida albicans, 390
pressure measurement, 411
in abdominal compartment syndrome, 
217, 217t, 411
trauma of, 211–212, 1660
extraperitoneal, 212, 1660
in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
intraperitoneal, 212, 1660
in laparoscopy, 1515, 1705
Blalock-Taussig shunts in tricuspid atresia, 
713
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 329
Blastomycosis, 661
Blatchford score in peptic ulcer disease, 
1059, 1060t
Bleeding time test, 103
Bleomycin in esophageal cancer, 1013t
Blepharoplasty, 1882–1883
Blindness, transient monocular, in cerebral 
ischemia, 839
Blood
banked whole, 96
fresh whole, 96, 184
oxygen-carrying capacity of, 97–98
transfusion of. See Transfusions
Blood-borne infections, 156
occupational exposures to, 156
universal precautions in, 156
Blood gas analysis, 409
Blood groups, ABO, 96, 1914
Blood pressure, 400–401
ankle-brachial index of, 829, 830f
in aortic dissection, 812, 815
in burns, 230
diastolic, 400
in hemorrhagic shock, 119, 120f, 122
in hypertension. See Hypertension
in hypotension. See Hypotension
invasive monitoring of, 401
complications in, 401
resonance frequency and damping 
in, 401
in kidney transplantation, 339
noninvasive measurement of, 400–401
segmental limb, in arterial disease, 
829–830
systolic, 400
in trauma
of head, 197
initial evaluation and management 
of, 165
monitoring of, 216–217
persistent hypotension in, 171–173
Blood volume in children, 1599–1600
Bloody vicious cycle in trauma, 185, 193, 
194f
Bloom syndrome, 288t
Blowout fractures, orbital, 577, 577f
Blunt trauma, 173–174
in children, 1643
of heart, 127, 171
BMPRIA in juvenile polyposis coli, 288t
Boari flap in ureteral trauma, 212, 1660
Bochdalek’s hernia, 1603–1605
Body contouring, excisional, 1886–1887, 
1887f
Body lift procedure, circumferential, 1887
Body mass index
in obesity, 1100–1101, 1100t, 1102, 
1908
bariatric surgery affecting, 1116, 1125
in medical management, 1102
in single-incision laproscopic surgery, 
434
Boerhaave’s syndrome, 1018
Bombesin, 1045
Bone marrow
micrometastasis in, 304
splenectomy in disorders of, 1435–1436
Bone morphogenic proteins, 251
Bones
angiosarcoma of, 1780
cysts of aneurysmal, 1738
fibrous lesions of, 1780
fractures of, 1757–1765. See also 
Fractures
grafts in spinal arthrodesis, 1743
growth of, 1782
growth plate injuries of, 1782
of hand and wrist, 1787–1788, 1790f
healing of, 249–251
in hyperparathyroidism, 1556, 1560–
1561, 1561f, 1563
malignant fibrous histiocytoma of, 1780
metabolic disorders in gastric surgery, 
1094–1095
mineral density in hyperparathyroidism, 
1561, 1563
ossification centers in, 1782
osteoporosis of. See Osteoporosis
Paget’s sarcoma of, 1779
remodeling fractures of, 250
tumors of
in chest wall, 666, 667
in eosinophilic granuloma, 666
epidemiology of, 275t
giant cell, 1780–1781, 1780f
metastatic, 454, 1782
in lung cancer, 627
in osteochondroma, 666
in sarcomas of chest wall, 667
Bookwalter retractor, 1453, 1453f
Borst’s elephant trunk technique in aortic 
aneurysm repair, 795, 798f, 799f
Bortezomib, in immunosuppression, 325t
Bosniak classification of renal cysts, 1655, 
1655t
Bosutinib, 310t
Botulinum toxin in achalasia, 998, 1000, 
1003
Bovine aortic arch, 788
Bowel preparation, preoperative,  
1194–1195
antibiotics in, 1194
mechanical, 1194–1195
Bowen’s disease, 487, 1217–1218, 1680
Boxer’s fracture, 1796
Boyd perforator veins, 916
Brachial artery
atherosclerosis of, 1822–1823
injuries of, 215
palpation of, 829
puncture for endovascular therapy 
access, 834–835, 835f
Brachial plexus injuries, 215, 1727
in birth, 1782
Brachioplasty, 1887
Brachycephaly, 1750
Brachydactyly, 1823
Brachytherapy, 313
in soft tissue sarcoma of extremity, 1474
Bradycardia in trauma, 170
Bradykinin, 33, 88
Brain
abscess of, 1745
afferent signals to, in inflammatory 
response, 18–23, 19f
deep stimulation of, 1747–1748, 1747f
herniation of
central or transtentorial, 1713, 1714f
in encephalocele, 1750
in intracranial pressure increase, 
1713–1714, 1714f
subfalcine, 1713, 1714f
uncal, 1713, 1714f
oxygen consumption rate in anesthesia, 
1908–1909
oxygen tension in tissue, 412
sensors monitoring, 1713
traumatic injury of, 195, 1717–1720
in children, 222, 1643
contre-coup, 1719
contusion in, 1718–1719, 1718f
diffuse axonal, 1719
intracranial pressure increase in, 411
intraparenchymal hemorrhage in, 
1720
monitoring in, 411, 412
tumors of, 1732–1737
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 
618f
metastatic, 1732, 1733f
stereotactic radiosurgery in, 1749
Brain death, 1721
diagnosis of, 330, 1721
organ donation process in, 330–331
multiple organ procurement in, 331, 
331f
1994
Index
Brain stem
anatomy of, 1710
compression of, 1714, 1715f
Branchial cleft, 1602
cyst of, 598, 598f
fistula of, 1602
Braun enteroenterostomy in bile reflux 
gastritis, 1093–1094
BRCA1 and BRCA2, 514–517
in breast cancer, 514–517, 514t
in breast-ovarian syndrome, 288t, 291
in ovarian cancer, 515, 1701
risk management in, 516–517, 1701
testing for mutations in, 515–516
BRCAPRO model on breast cancer risk, 
512
Breast, 497–557
aberrations of normal development and 
involution (ANDI), 507–508, 
507t
abscess of, 506
subareolar, 511, 511t
treatment in, 511
accessory, 500
age-related changes in, 500, 504, 504f
and benign breast disorders, 507–508, 
507t
anatomy of, 500–503, 500f
benign disorders and diseases of, 
507–511
classification of, 507, 509t
nonproliferative, 508–509
pathology in, 508–509
proliferative, 509–510
blood supply of, 501–502, 502f
calcium deposits in, 509
cancer of, 511–557. See also Breast 
cancer
cysts of, 508, 510, 528f
development of, 499–500, 503–504
disorders in, 507–508, 507t
embryonic, 499–500
hormones affecting, 500, 503–504, 
503f
ductal ectasia of, 508, 509
fibroadenomas of, 507, 508f, 509
treatment of, 510
fibrocystic disease of, 509
in gynecomastia, 505–506. See also 
Gynecomastia
hyperplasia of, 507, 508f, 508t
cancer risk in, 508, 508t, 509–510
pathology in, 509–510
inactive and active, 501
infectious and inflammatory disorders 
of, 506–507
innervation of, 502
lobular involution of, 508
lymphatics of, 502–503, 502f
levels of, 503
and mammary milk line, 500, 500f
mastitis of. See Mastitis
nipple discharge from, 554
nodularity of, 508
Paget’s disease of, 506, 521
phyllodes tumors of, 555, 555f
physical examination of, 523, 523f
physiology of, 503–506
plastic and reconstructive surgery of, 
1866–1872. See also Breast 
plastic and reconstructive 
surgery
in pregnancy and lactation, 500, 501, 
501f, 504–505, 504f
epithelial hyperplasia of, 508
radial scars of, 509, 511
sarcoma of, 556, 1481
sclerosing adenosis of, 508, 509, 
510–511
Breast cancer, 511–557
adenoid cystic, 556
advanced local-regional, 541–543
angiogenesis in, 535
as therapy target, 535
antiestrogen therapy in, 552
anti-HER-2/Neu antibody therapy in, 
535, 553–554
apocrine, 556
axillary lymph nodes in. See Axillary 
lymph nodes, in breast cancer
biomakers in, 303, 531–536, 536t
biopsy in, 529, 531
excisional, with needle localization, 
544–545, 544f, 545f, 546f
incisions in, 544, 544f, 545f
mammography in, 544–545, 546f
of sentinel lymph nodes, 305–306, 
545–547
breast conservation surgery in, 547. See 
also Breast conservation surgery
chemoprevention of, 315, 513–514,  
552
chemotherapy in, 307, 550–552. See 
also Chemotherapy, in breast 
cancer
circulating tumor cells in, 303
conserving surgery, 499
diagnosis of, 522–531
ductography in, 526–527, 527f
magnetic resonance imaging in, 527, 
529
mammography in, 523–526, 
524f–526f
physical examination in, 523, 523f
ultrasonography in, 527, 528f, 529f, 
530f
ductal carcinoma. See Ductal carcinoma 
of breast
early invasive, treatment of, 537–541
in elderly, 1932–1933
endocrine therapy in, 308–309, 552
ablative, 553
neoadjuvant, 552
epidemiology of, 274, 276, 278t,  
517–519, 618f
compared to other cancers, 275t, 276t, 
277f
incidence rates in, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
279f, 517
international variations in, 517
mortality rates in, 275t, 276t,  
517–518, 518f, 519f
survival rates in, 517–518, 519f
estrogen and progesterone receptor 
status, 534, 535–536
fatality rates, 1958
genetic factors in. See Genetic factors, 
in breast cancer
grave signs of, 498
histopathology of, 519–522
historical development of therapy in, 
497–499
immunotherapy in, 454
inflammatory, 555–556, 556f
differentiated from noninflammatory 
cancer, 556, 556t
in situ (stage 0)
histopathology in, 519–520
treatment of, 537–538
invasive, 520–522
risk for, in ductal carcinoma in situ, 
520, 521f
lobular carcinoma. See Lobular 
carcinoma of breast
local-regional recurrence of, 543–544
lymphatic mapping in, 305, 305f, 
545–546
in male, 554–555
mammary lymph nodes in, internal, 543
mastectomy in, 497–499, 548–549. 
See also Mastectomy in breast 
cancer
medullary carcinoma, 521
metastasis of, 285, 543
ablative endocrine therapy in, 553
to axillary lymph nodes. See Axillary 
lymph nodes, in breast cancer
bone marrow micrometastasis in, 304
distant (stage IV), 518–519, 543
to mammary lymph nodes, 543
natural history in, 518–519, 519f
staging of, 531, 531t–532t
trastuzumab therapy in, 553–554
mucinous carcinoma, 520–521
multicentricity in, 519, 520t
multifocality in, 519
natural history of, 518–519
in axillary lymph node metastasis, 
518, 519f
in distant metastasis, 518–519
in primary cancer, 518
nipple discharge in, 554
oncoplastic surgery in, 547, 1866–1867, 
1868f, 1869f
Oncotype DX assay in, 301–302
papillary carcinoma, 522
in pregnancy, 554
prognosis in, 544
radiation therapy in, 550. See also 
Radiation therapy, in breast 
cancer
radium treatment, 499
rare types of, 556–557
reconstructive surgery in, 549–550, 
1866–1872
recurrence risk in, 301–302, 301f
risk factors for, 511–517
assessment of, 296, 297t, 511–512, 
512t
Claus model on, 512
in elderly, 1932
Gail model on, 296, 512, 512t
management of, 512–514, 516–517
risk-reducing surgery, 514
screening for, 298t, 299
in elderly, 1932–1933
magnetic resonance imaging in, 516
mammography in, 513, 523–526
sentinel lymph node surgery in,  
305–306, 545–547
and breast conservation surgery, 547
and chemotherapy, 551–552
specimen processing in, 546
squamous cell, 556
staging of, 531, 531t–532t, 533t
and prognosis, 544
and treatment options, 536–544
tubular carcinoma, 522
Breast Cancer Prevention Trial, 513–514
Breast conservation surgery, 547
in advanced local-regional breast cancer, 
543
in ductal carcinoma in situ, 539
in early invasive breast cancer, 539
in elderly, 1932
1995
Index
local-regional recurrence of breast 
cancer in, 543
oncoplastic techniques in, 547,  
1866–1867, 1868f, 1869f
in pregnancy, 554
and radiation therapy, 550
reconstructive surgery after, 1866–1867, 
1868f
sentinel lymph node dissection in, 547
Breast plastic and reconstructive surgery, 
1866–1872
accessory procedures in, 1871
augmentation mammaplasty in,  
1890–1891, 1891f
autologous tissue reconstruction in, 
1872f–1873f
with implant, 1871, 1874f
total, 1869–1871
in cancer, 549–550, 1866–1872
epigastric perforator flap in, 1871, 1871f
in gynecomastia, 1891
implants in, 1867–1869, 1869f, 1870f
with autologous tissue reconstruction, 
1871, 1874f
latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap in, 
550, 1871, 1874f
in mastectomy for breast cancer, 
549–550
mastopexy in, 1889
nipple reconstruction in, 1871
radiation therapy affecting, 1872
reduction mammaplasty in, 1887–1889, 
1888f, 1889f, 1890f
Wise pattern reduction technique in, 
1888–1889, 1888f, 1889f
timing of, 1866
tissue expansion for, 1840, 1867–1869, 
1869f, 1870f
transverse rectus abdominis 
myocutaneous flap in,  
1869–1871
free, 1871, 1872f–1873f
pedicle, 1869–1871
Briefings, preoperative, 370, 370t
BRIP1 in breast cancer, 288t
Broad ligament of uterus, anatomy of, 
1674, 1674f
Bronchial arteries, 661
hemoptysis in bleeding from, 663
Bronchial gland tumors, 617
Bronchiectasis, 651–654, 653f
in children, 1607
diagnosis of, 653
etiologies of, 651–653
hemoptysis in, 653
management of, 653–654
types of, 653
Bronchioles, 612
Bronchiolitis obliterans, 664, 664f
Bronchogenic cysts, 679, 1018, 1607
Bronchopleural fistula, drainage in, 681f
Bronchoscopy, 651
complications of, 382
in hemoptysis, 662–663
in lung cancer, 629–630
in tracheal neoplasms, 610
Brooke ileostomy, 1188, 1192, 1192f
functional results in, 1194
Browlift, 1882–1883, 1883f
Brown pigment gallstones, 1318–1319
Brown-Séquard syndrome, 176, 1724, 
1725f
BUB1B gene, 288t
Buccal mucosa tumors, 586
reconstructive surgery in, 586, 1863
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1283–1284
Buerger’s disease, 906, 1822–1823
Buffering systems in acid-base balance, 73
Bulbocavernosus muscles, 1674
Bullard rigid fiberoptic laryngoscope, 
1910, 1910f, 1911f
Bupivacaine, 1899t, 1902, 1903t
cardiotoxicity of, 1903
in hand and wrist injuries, 1796
in wound care, 264
Burch procedure in stress urinary 
incontinence, 1695
Burns, 227–236, 1820–1822
acute management in, 1820–1821
from caustic substances, 479–480, 1021, 
1021t
chemical, 229, 479–480, 1822
classification of, 228–229
compartment syndromes in, 233–234
complications in, 233
Curling ulcer in, 1058
death due to, 1960
depth of, 229–230
electrical, 228–229
of esophagus, 1021, 1021t
excision and grafting in, 234, 1820, 
1821
fluid therapy in, 228, 230–231
future research on, 236
of hand, 1820–1822
reconstructive surgery in, 1821–1822, 
1821f, 1822f
vacuum-assisted closure devices in, 
1822f
hypermetabolic response in, 232, 233
hyperthermic, 480
inhalation injuries in, 231–232
initial evaluation in, 227–228
nutrition in, 232–233
prevention of, 235
prognosis in, 230
radiation, 235–236
referral to specialized burn center in, 
227, 228t
rehabilitation in, 235
rule of nines on, 228, 229f
skin substitutes in, 234
surgical management in, 1821
topical agents for wound care in, 232
total body surface area involved in, 227, 
229f, 230
and caloric requirements, 232–233
transfusions in, 231
ventilatory support in, 232
zone of hyperemia in, 230
Burow’s triangle, 1835f
Burst fractures, 1722
of cervical spine, 1770
of thoracic and lumbar spine, 1771
Buschke-Lowenstein tumor, 1218
Butterfly sign in penile trauma, 1661
Buttock lift procedure, 1887
Bypass
aortobifemoral, in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 876–877, 876f, 880–881
aortorenal, in renal artery occlusive 
disease, 869
axillofemoral, in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 877
biliary-enteric, in pancreatic cancer, 
1399, 1400f
cardiopulmonary, 740–741. See also 
Cardiopulmonary bypass
coronary, 742–747. See also Coronary 
arteries, bypass surgery
femorofemoral, in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 877
femoropopliteal, 897–898
compared to endovascular therapy, 
899–900
endobypass with stent graft, 895
with saphenous vein graft, 898, 899
stenosis of, 897–898
gastric Roux-en-Y. See Gastric bypass 
surgery, Roux-en-Y
hepatorenal, in renal artery occlusive 
disease, 869–870
ileocolic, in obesity, 1103
iliofemoral, in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 877, 877f
intestinal, in Crohn’s disease, 1157
jejunoileal, in obesity, 1103, 1107
mesenteric artery, 864
obturator, in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 
878
splenorenal, in renal artery occlusive 
disease, 869–870
thoracofemoral, in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 878
venoarterial, in congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia, 1605
venovenous
in congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 
1605
in liver transplantation, 348
in liver trauma, 204, 204f
Bystander effect in radiation exposure, 295
C
Cabozantinib, 310t
Cabrol technique in thoracic aortic 
aneurysm repair, 795
Cadherins, 283, 292
in gastric cancer, 292
Cajal interstitial cells, 1047, 1481
Calcaneus, fractures of, 1764
Calcification
of breast, 509
of pulmonary nodule, solitary, 622
Calcimimetics in hyperparathyroidism, 
1564
Calciphylaxis, 1572
Calcitonin, 1558
secretion of, 1525
serum levels of, 1529
in medullary thyroid cancer, 1550
therapy with
in bone pain, 1950t
in hypercalcemia, 1573t
Calcitonin gene-related peptide, 1346
Calcium
absorption of, 1143, 1559
gastric surgery affecting, 1094
extracellular, 1558
in intracellular signaling pathways, 119
in parenteral nutrition, 76t
released from endoplasmic reticulum, 
35f
serum levels of, 72, 78
in cancer patients, 81, 82
in hypercalcemia, 72, 72t. See also 
Hypercalcemia
in hyperparathyroidism, 1560–1563, 
1563t
hypocalcemia, 72. See also 
Hypocalcemia, 72t
parathyroid gland affecting, 1556, 
1558–1559, 1558f, 1559f
supplemental, in children and infants, 
1599
1996
Index
Calcium (Cont.):
urine levels of
in familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia, 1562
in hyperparathyroidism, 1562, 1563t
Calcium channel blockers in aortic 
dissection, 813
Calcium chloride
in hyperkalemia, 78
in hypermagnesemia, 78
Calcium gluconate in hyperkalemia, 78, 
78t
Calculi
gallstones. See Gallstones
urinary, 1666
in hyperparathyroidism, 1560, 1666
Callus formation in fracture healing, 250
Caloric requirements, 44t
age-related differences in, 1600t
in burns, 232–233
in enteral nutrition, 53, 54
for children, 1600t
estimation of, 51, 52t
in burns, 232–233
and overfeeding in overestimation 
of, 52
in fasting, 46
hypocaloric feeding, 53
in injury, 46, 46f
in obesity
and bariatric surgery, 1106
in medical management, 1102
in parenteral nutrition, 56
sources of, 44t
Calorimetry, indirect, 51
Calvarial reconstruction, 1860
Cambridge classification of pancreatitis, 
1369t, 1374t
Camera systems
in endoscopy, 424–427, 427f
in robotic surgery, 430
Canadian Cardiovascular Society anginal 
classification, 737, 737t
Cancer, 273–316. See also Tumors
Cancer antigens, 454
CA 15-3, 303
CA 19-9, 303
in pancreatic cancer, 1397, 1407
CA 27-29, 303
CA 125 in ovarian and fallopian tube 
cancer, 1702
in melanoma, 311
Candidal infections
of bladder, 390
pharyngitis in, 571
pulmonary, 658
vulvovaginitis in, 1677t, 1680, 1681f
Cantlie’s line, 1265
Capacitive coupling, 427–428, 428f
Capillary malformations, 574, 1850, 1852f
Capillary perfusion in shock, 114
Capitate
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
dislocation of, 1798
Capnometry, 410
Capsule endoscopy, 1180–1181
in Crohn’s disease, 1154, 1155f
in obscure gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 
1168
Captopril in renal scanning in renal artery 
stenosis, 867
Caput medusa, 1279
Carbamazepine in pain, 1950t
Carbapenems, 144t
Carbohydrates
dietary sources of, 1141
in enteral nutrition solutions for 
children, 1600t
metabolism of, 48–50, 49f
in injury, 48–50, 49f
in liver, 1269
in small intestine, 48, 1141, 1142f
Carbon dioxide
arterial partial pressure, 410
in intracranial pressure increase, 1714
concentration in shock, 131
diffusion in lungs, in lung cancer
prediction of postoperative values, 
636, 636f
preoperative assessment of, 636, 638f
in end-tidal exhaled gas, 410, 411
partial rebreathing approach to cardiac 
output measurement, 408
permissive hypercapnia in congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia, 1605
in pneumoperitoneum for laparoscopy, 
417, 417f
tissue capnometry, 410
Carbonic acid, 4
Carbon monoxide poisoning in burns, 228
Carboplatin
in lung cancer, 644t
in ovarian or tubal cancer, 1703, 1703t
Carbuncles, 483
Carcinoembryonic antigen, 302–303
in colorectal cancer, 1182–1183
in medullary thyroid cancer, 1550
Carcinogenesis. See Tumorigenesis
Carcinogens
chemical, 293, 294t
physical, 293, 295
viral, 295–296, 295t, 296t
Carcinoid tumors
of appendix, 1258
colorectal, 1216
of liver, 1294
of lung, 617
of small intestine, 1160, 1161–1162, 
1161t
of stomach, 1085–1086
Carcinoma
adrenal, 1583–1585
adrenalectomy in, 1584, 1591
diagnosis of, 1584, 1584f
differentiated from adenoma, 1583, 
1584
hyperaldosteronism in, 1578, 1580
sex steroid excess in, 1585
staging of, 1584, 1584t
symptoms and sign in, 1584
treatment of, 1584–1585
anal and perianal, 1218
basal cell. See Basal cell carcinoma
of bile ducts, 1335–1338, 1336f
of bladder, 1653–1654
of breast, 519–522
ductal. See Ductal carcinoma of 
breast
inflammatory, 555–556, 556f, 556t
lobular. See Lobular carcinoma of 
breast
rare types of, 556–557
colorectal, 1203–1216
endometrial, 1699–1700, 1701t
of esophagus, 1003–1014
of gallbladder, 1334–1335
of hand, 1817, 1817f
hepatocellular. See Hepatocellular 
carcinoma
of lung, 623–645
adenoid cystic, 617
large cell, 617
mucoepidermoid, 617
neuroendocrine, 617
non–small cell, 614–617
small cell. See Small cell carcinoma 
of lung
squamous cell, 616–617
of pancreas, 1394
of parathyroid, hyperparathyroidism in, 
1560, 1570
renal cell, 288t, 1655–1657
of skin, 487, 487f, 492
squamous cell. See Squamous cell 
carcinoma
thymic, 676
of thyroid, 1540–1556, 1937
anaplastic, 1550–1551
in elderly, 1937
follicular, 1544–1546
Hürthle cell, 1546
medullary, 1549–1550
papillary, 1542–1544, 1937
of trachea, 610
of vagina, 1697
of vulva, 1696–1697
Carcinoma in situ
of breast
ductal. See Ductal carcinoma of 
breast, in situ
lobular, 519–520, 537–538
of lungs, 613–614, 615
Carcinomatosis, leptomeningeal, 1732
Carcinosarcoma of esophagus, 1015, 1017
Cardiac death, organ donation in, 331–332
Cardiac evaluation in burn, 231
Cardiac output, 399, 402–409, 739
in Doppler ultrasonography, 407
Fick calculation method, 403, 739
in impedance cardiography, 407
in partial carbon dioxide rebreathing, 
408
preload affecting, 408–409
in pulse contour analysis, 408
in shock, 113, 114, 131
cardiogenic, 127
septic, 124
thermodilution technique for 
measurement of, 403–404
in transesophageal echocardiography, 
408
Cardiogenic shock. See Shock, cardiogenic
Cardiography, impedance, 407
Cardiomyopathy
ischemic
coronary bypass grafting in, 765
in mitral regurgitation, 765–766
peripheral artery embolism in, 885
restrictive, 773
Cardiomyotomy, laparoscopic, 1000, 
1001f–1002f
Cardioplegia, for myocardial protection in 
cardiopulmonary bypass, 741
Cardiopulmonary bypass, 740–741
in aortic aneurysm repair, thoracic, 797, 
798f, 799f
in aortic valvotomy for congenital 
stenosis, 700, 700f
in artial septal defect, 697
in atrioventricular canal defect repair, 
727
bleeding disorders in, 95
historical development of, 740
myocardial protection in, 741
systemic response to, 741
1997
Index
technique in, 740
in tetralogy of Fallot repair, 724
in truncus arteriosus repair, 707
in ventricular septal defect repair, 726
Cardiovascular disorders
acquired, 735–776
arterial, 827–906
congenital, 695–729
in elderly, 1925t, 1929–1930
endovascular surgery in, 1936
surgical risk in, 1926, 1928
of kidney transplantation, 335
in local anesthesia, 1903
in obesity, 1128, 1908t
physical examination in, 737
in postoperative complications, 374, 
375t, 386
preoperative assessment of, 1905–1906
in bariatric surgery, 1105
in elderly, 1926, 1928
in esophageal cancer, 1007
in noncardiac surgery, 737–738
in thoracic aortic aneurysm repair,  
793
venous, 915–936
Cardioverter-defibrillator, implantable, 770
Carditis in gastroesophageal reflux, 967
Carney complex, 1539t, 1581
Carnitine, 47, 48f, 49f
Caroli’s disease, 1289, 1630
Carotid artery, 837–850
aneurysms of, 848, 849f
in fibromuscular dysplasia, 847, 848
arteritis of, radiation-induced, 903–904
dissection of, 848, 848f
traumatic, 850, 1720–1721
elongation and kinking of, 847, 847f
endarterectomy of, 842–845. See also 
Endarterectomy, carotid
fibromuscular dysplasia of, 847–848, 
848f, 904
injuries of, 198, 850, 1720–1721
carotid-cavernous fistula in, 1720
operative approach for exposure in, 
187f, 188
transposition procedure for repair in, 
192, 193f
metastasis involving, 597
occlusive disease of, 837–847, 1728
angioplasty and stenting in, 842–843, 
845–847
approved stents in, 845, 847t
complications of, 846–847
contraindications to, 845, 846t
embolic protection devices in, 
845–846, 846t
technique in, 845–846, 846f
asymptomatic, 842
atheroembolism in, 838, 838f
diagnostic evaluation in, 839–841
endarterectomy in, 842–845
epidemiology and etiology of, 
837–838
grading of stenosis in, 840, 840t
physical examination in, 829
signs symptoms in, 828, 839
stroke risk in, 841–842
transient ischemic attacks in, 838, 
839, 841
treatment in, 841–847
palpation of, 829
thrombosis of, 1728
Carotid body tumors, 849–850, 849f
Carpal bones
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
in degenerative wrist changes, 1807, 
1808f
Carpal ligament, transverse, 1790f, 1791
Carpal tunnel
anatomy of, 1790f, 1791
median nerve compression in, 1744, 
1805–1806
Carpentier classification of mitral 
regurgitation, 765–766
Carpometacarpal joint
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
arthritis of, 1807
Cartilage
healing of injuries, 251
tumors forming, 1780
CA. See Cancer antigens
Caspases in apoptosis, 37f, 281, 282
Caspofungin, 141t, 658
Cataract and global surgery, 1970, 1973f
Catecholamines, 22, 50, 1577–1578, 
1579f, 1579t
in fight or flight response, 109
serum levels in neuroblastoma, 1639
in shock response, 113
as therapy in cardiogenic shock, 127
urine levels of
in neuroblastoma, 1639
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
Cathepsin B, 1354
Catheterization
arterial, complications of, 381
cardiac, 739, 740f
in aortic aneurysm, 791
in aortic insufficiency, 761
in aortic stenosis, 758
in atrial septal defect, 697
in pericarditis, chronic constrictive, 
773–774
in total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection, 708
central venous
in children, 1601
compared to pulmonary artery 
catheterization, 405–406, 405t
complications of, 380–381
oxygen saturation measurements in, 
404–405
directed thrombolysis, 924
in endovascular therapy
access for, 834, 835f
with angioplasty balloon, 835–836, 836f
guidewires for, 835
introducer sheaths for, 835, 835f
types of catheters in, 835
for fluid therapy in trauma, 165–166, 
165f
infections related to, 381
in burns, 233
in parenteral nutrition, 58–59
postoperative, 152–154
urinary, 390
pulmonary artery, 402–403
in burns, 230
rupture of pulmonary artery in, 381
in trauma, 216–217
urinary
in acute urine retention, 1661–1662, 
1662f
complications of, 390
for renal monitoring, 410–411
in trauma, 173
Cauda equina syndrome, 1742, 1904
Caudate lobe of liver, 1267
Caustic and corrosive substances
burns from, 479–480, 1021, 1021t
ingestion of, 942, 1020–1023
by children, 1020, 1608, 1612–1613
grades of injury in, 1021, 1021t, 1612
locations of injury in, 1021, 1021t
management algorithm on, 1022f
skin injuries from, 479–480
Cautery, 95
Cavopulmonary anastomosis in tricuspid 
atresia, 713–715, 714f
C cells of thyroid, 1525, 1549, 1558
CD14, 37f
CD18, 41t
CD20, in rituximab therapy, 328
CD25, monoclonal antibodies against, 325
CD29, 41t
CD31, 535
CD52, in alemtuzumab therapy, 325
CD95, 36
in apoptosis, 37f
CD117, in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 
1481
CDH1 in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, 
288t, 292
CDK (cyclin-dependent kinases), 450
CDK4, 288t, 292
inhibitors of, 288t, 450
Cecum, 1220
anatomy of, 1176
Crohn’s disease of, 1198–1199
diverticula of, 1203
ileocolic resection of, 1187
volvulus of, 1219
Cefazolin, 257t–258t
Cefepime, 144t
Cefotaxime, 143t
Cefotetan, 143t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
Cefoxitin, 143t, 257t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
Ceftaroline, 144t
Ceftazidime, 144t
Ceftriaxone, 144t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
in portal hypertension and variceal 
bleeding, 1282
Cefuroxime, 144t, 257t
Celecoxib in peptic ulcer disease, 1058t
Celiac artery, 860
compression syndrome, 861, 862f, 864
Celiac plexus neurolysis in chronic 
pancreatitis, 1380
Cells
apoptosis of, 450. See also Apoptosis
cancer
apoptosis alterations in, 281–283
autophagy in, 283
cell cycle of
in chemotherapy, 307
circulating, 303–304
dysregulation in, 279
metastasis of, 277–278, 454, 454f
proliferation and transformation 
of, 454f
in radiation therapy, 313
culture of, 462–463, 462f
cycle of, 450, 450f
in cancer, 279
and chemotherapy, 307
in radiation therapy, 313
phases in, 279, 281f, 450, 450f
hypoperfusion in shock, 115
response to injury, 34–36
apoptosis in, 37f
inflammatory response in, 38–40
signaling pathways in, 34–36
1998
Index
Cells (Cont.):
signaling pathways of, 34–36, 118–119. 
See also Signal transduction 
pathways
transfection of, 462f, 463
CellSearch, 303
Cellulitis, 151, 483
of hand, 1809
in lymphedema, 934, 935, 936
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS), 1099
Central cord syndrome, 176, 1724, 1725f
Central nervous system, 1711
anesthesia affecting, 1903
anesthesia in disorders of, 1908–1909
brain in. See Brain
congenital and developmental anomalies 
of, 1749–1751
infections of, 1745–1746
in inflammatory response, 18–23, 19f
spinal cord in. See Spinal cord
tumors of, 1732–1739
Central venous catheterization
in children, 1601
compared to pulmonary artery 
catheterization, 405–406, 405t
complications of, 380–381
oxygen saturation measurements in, 
404–405
Cephalexin, 143t
Cephalic vein
anatomy of, 916
thrombosis of, 928, 928f
Cephazolin, 143t
Cerclage, cervical, 1692
Cerebellar artery, posterior inferior, stroke 
in occlusion of, 1728
Cerebellar tumors, metastatic, 1732, 1733f
Cerebral arteries
aneurysms of, 1728–1732
stroke in occlusion of, 1716f, 1728
Cerebral palsy, 1782
scoliosis in, 1782
Cerebral perfusion
in anesthesia, 1909
in aortic aneurysm repair, 797, 798f, 
799f
in aortic dissection repair, 813
pressure of, 411
in head trauma, 195
Cerebral salt wasting, 81
Cerebrospinal fluid, 1710
in hydrocephalus, 1750–1751
leak in skull fractures, 1716–1717
Cerebrovascular disorders, 1727–1732
acute, 1715
completed stroke, 839
hemorrhagic, 837, 1728–1732. See also 
Hemorrhage, intracranial
ischemic, 838, 1727–1728. See also 
Ischemia, cerebral
postoperative, 384
stroke in evolution, 839
in trauma, 1720
assessment of, 175, 175f
in blunt injuries, 198–198, 199f
Denver grading scale of, 198f
Cervical fascia of neck, deep, 598–599
Cervical lymph nodes
in head and neck tumors, 595–597,  
596f, 597f
anatomy and levels of, 595, 595f
modified radical neck dissection in, 
596
radical neck dissection in, 596
selective neck dissection in, 596
lateral, 596, 596f
posterolateral, 596, 597f
supraomohyoid, 596, 596f
skip metastasis in, 595, 596
in parathyroid carcinoma, 1570
pediatric disorders of, 1602
in thyroid cancer, 1555, 1555f
Cervical spine
intervertebral disc herniation in, 1740, 
1740t, 1741f, 1771
level and symptoms in, 1740t
surgical treatment of, 1771
spondylosis of, 1740, 1741f
stability of, 1739
and atlantoaxial instability in Down 
syndrome, 571
stenosis of, 1771
trauma of, 197–198, 1722
in children, 1643
clay shoveler’s injury in, 1770
dislocations in, 1770
evaluation in, 175–177
facet dislocation in, 1722, 1723f
fractures in, 1722
immobilization and protection in, 
162, 1722
orthotic devices in, 1726
Cervix uteri
anatomy of, 1675
benign lesions of, 1681
biopsy of, 1677
cancer of, 1697–1698
epidemiology of, 275t, 278t
pelvic exenteration in, 1698, 1700f
radical hysterectomy in, 1686f–1687f, 
1698, 1699f–1700f
screening for, 298t, 1676–1677
staging of, 1697, 1698t
trachelectomy in, 1698
cerclage technique, 1692
condylomata of, 1678–1679
papillomavirus infections of, 1676–1677
polyps of, 1681–1682
Cesarean delivery, 1693, 1693f
incisions in, 1693, 1693f
indications for, 1693
Cetuximab, 310t
CFTR in chronic pancreatitis, 1361–1362, 
1366
Chagas’ disease, megacolon in, 1221
Chamberlain procedure in lung cancer, 674
Champy technique in mandibular fractures, 
1854
Chance fractures, 1722
Chancroid, 1232, 1678, 1679t
Charcot’s triad in cholangitis, 1323
Charles procedure in lymphedema, 1880
Chemicals
burns from, 229, 479–480, 1822
carcinogenic, 293, 294t
soft tissue sarcoma associated with, 
1466
Chemodectomas, 678, 849
Chemoembolization in hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 1295–1296
Chemokines, 40–41
Chemoprevention of cancer, 315
of breast, tamoxifen in, 513–514, 552
Chemoreceptors in shock response, 112
Chemotherapy, 306–308, 455
adjuvant, 307, 455
in adrenocortical carcinoma, 1585
agents used in, 306–308, 308t
administration of, 308
combination of, 307–308, 455
resistance to, 312–313, 313t
toxicity of, 308
in anal and perianal tumors, 1218
in bladder cancer, 1654
in breast cancer, 550–552
adjuvant, 550–552, 551t
advanced local-regional, 544
in distant metastasis, 543
early invasive, 537–541
in elderly, 1932
neoadjuvant, 550–552
in pregnancy, 554
and trastuzumab therapy, 553–554
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1292, 1337
in colorectal cancer, 1212, 1215
in elderly, 1933
in endometrial cancer, 1701
in esophageal cancer, 1004, 1008,  
1012–1014, 1013t, 1014t
salvage esophagectomy after, 1011
extravasation injuries in, 480
in fallopian tube cancer, 1703, 1703t
in histiosarcoma, malignant fibrous, 
668t
in laryngeal cancer, 591–592
in liposarcoma, 668t
in liver tumors, 1296
in children, 1642
hepatic artery pump chemoperfusion 
of, 1296
in lung cancer
early-stage, 643
in elderly, 1934
locoregional advanced, 644t
preoperative, 644t
survival rates in, 644t
in melanoma, 491
in mesothelioma, 688
in nasopharyngeal cancer, 594
in neuroectodermal tumors, primitive, 
668t
in ovarian cancer
interval debulking in, 1703
intraperitoneal therapy in, 1703, 
1703t
in pancreatic cancer, 1400, 1407
in paranasal sinus tumors, 593
postoperative, 307
preoperative, 307
principles of, 307
with radiation therapy, 314
response to, 307
in rhabdomyosarcoma
of chest wall, 667, 668t, 669
in children, 1486, 1640
in sarcoma
of bone, 667, 668t
of chest wall, 667, 668t, 669
in children, 1486, 1640
Ewing’s, 667, 668t
of extremity, 1475–1476
isolated regional perfusion 
technique in, 1473–1474
in multimodality therapy,  
1475–1476
with radiation therapy, 1474
metastatic, 1478–1479
response to, 667, 668t
retroperitoneal, 1480
in stomach cancer, 1083
in thymoma, 676
in thyroid cancer, 1548
anaplastic, 1551
in lymphoma, 1551
1999
Index
in vaginal cancer, 1697
in vulvar cancer, 1696
in Wilms’ tumor, 1639
wound healing in, 253
Chest pain
in cardiac disorders, 735, 742, 965
differential diagnosis in, 965
noncardiac causes of, 736, 965, 993
in esophageal motility disorders,  
992, 993
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
965
Chest trauma, 177–179, 200–203
blunt, 177, 203
heart injury in, 127, 171, 202
cardiac tamponade in, 166–167
in children, 222, 1643
damage control surgery in, 194–195
in elderly, 222
flail chest in, 164, 165f, 203
heart injuries in, 201–202
blunt, 127, 171, 202
penetrating, 201–202, 201f
hemothorax in, 166, 166f, 177, 177f, 200
indications for operative treatment in, 
200–203, 200t
operative approaches and exposure in, 
188, 189f
penetrating, 178–179
heart injuries in, 201–202, 201f
pneumothorax in, 164, 165f, 177, 200
respiratory disorders in, 202
vascular injuries in, 203
of aorta, 177, 178f, 178t, 179f,  
200–201, 200f, 201f
hematoma in, 177, 178f
of innominate artery, 200, 200f
Chest tubes
complications of, 382
in empyema, 685
in lung abscess, 651
in pleural effusions, 681f
in pneumothorax, 164, 164f, 649
Chest wall, 664–670
reconstructive surgery of, 1872–1875, 
1875f
flaps in, 670, 670f, 1873–1874, 1875f
prosthetic materials in, 670, 670f, 
1875
in tumors, 670, 670f
trauma of, 203
tumors of, 664–669
benign, 666
biopsy in, 665–666
in bone, 666, 667
clinical approach to, 664–665, 665f
laboratory tests in, 665
malignant, 665, 666–669
radiography in, 665
reconstructive surgery in, 669–670, 
670f
in soft tissue, 666–669, 668t
Chiari malformations, 1751, 1751f
Chief cells
of parathyroid gland, 1557, 1557f
of stomach, 1040, 1041f, 1042f, 1042t
pepsinogen secretion of, 1041, 1044
Children and infants, 1597–1645
abdominal wall deformities in,  
1631–1635
abused, 222, 1636
acid-base balance in, 1599
ambiguous genitalia in, 1637–1638
anorectal malformations in, 1626–1628, 
1626f, 1627f
aortic coarctation in, 705, 706
appendicitis in, 1244, 1246, 1251, 
1622–1624
clinical presentation of, 1622–1623
differential diagnosis in, 1246, 1624
imaging studies in, 1623, 1623f
perforation and rupture in, 1244, 
1251, 1256, 1623–1624, 1623f
astrocytoma in, 1738–1739
blood volume in, 1599–1600
bone growth in, 1782
brachial plexus palsy in, 1782
branchial cleft anomalies in, 1602
bronchiectasis in, 1607
bronchogenic cysts in, 1607
burns in, 228, 233
fluid therapy in, 230
skin grafts in, 234
caustic and corrosive substances 
ingested by, 1020, 1608,  
1612–1613
cerebral palsy in, 1782
cervical lymphadenopathy in, 1602
choledochal cysts in, 1630–1631
chondroma in, 666
cleft lip and palate in, 1840–1844
craniofacial anomalies in, 1844–1849
atrophy and hypoplasia in,  
1848–1849, 1849f, 1850f
classification of, 1844, 1846f, 1846t
clefts in, 1846–1847, 1846f, 
1846f–1848f
craniosynostosis in, 1848
hyperplasia and hypertrophy in, 1849
craniopharyngioma in, 1736–1737
Cushing’s syndrome in, 1582
diaphragmatic hernia in, congenital, 
1603–1605, 1604f
emphysema in, congenital lobar,  
1605–1606, 1606f
eosinophilic granulomas in, 666
ependymoma in, 1734
esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula in, 
1608–1612
esophageal injury from corrosive 
substance ingestion in,  
1612–1613
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 1599
foreign bodies in, 1607–1608
fractures in, 1782–1783
growth plate injuries in, 1782
ganglioneuroblastoma in, 678
gastroesophageal reflux in, 1613
in esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula, 1612
gastroschisis in, 1633–1634
general principles of surgery in,  
1599–1601
hand and wrist injuries in, 1796
heart disorders in, congenital, 695–729
hemangiomas in, 574, 1849–1850, 1850f
Hirschsprung’s disease in, 1624–1626, 
1626f
historical aspects of surgery in,  
1597–1598
hyperparathyroidism in, 1570
hypothyroidism in, 1534
informed consent for, 1943
inguinal hernia in, 1500, 1502f,  
1634–1635
clinical manifestations of, 1634–1635, 
1634f
embryology of, 1634
incarcerated, 1635
laparoscopic repair of, 1635
intestinal atresia in, 1615–1616
intestinal duplications in, 1624
intestinal malrotation in, 1616–1617
intestinal obstruction in, 1614–1615
intestinal transplantation in, 352
in short bowel syndrome, 1621
intussusception in, 1170, 1622, 1622f
jaundice in, 1628–1631
laparoscopy in, 435–436
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease in, 1783
liver transplantation in, 349
in biliary atresia, 1629
split-liver procedure, 349
liver tumors in, 1641–1642
lymphatic malformations in, 1602–1603, 
1603f
Meckel’s diverticulum in, 1624, 1624f
meconium ileus in, 1617–1619
mediastinal tumors in, 671, 673t
melanocytic nevi in, congenital, 1852
mesenteric cysts in, 1624
neck mass in, 595, 1601–1603
necrotizing enterocolitis in, 1619–1621
neuroblastoma in, 678, 1639–1640
nutrition in, 1600–1601, 1600t
enteral, 1600–1601, 1600t
parenteral, 1601
obesity in, 1101, 1125
omphalocele in, 1632
orthopedic surgery in, 1782–1783
ovarian cysts and tumors in, 1636–1637
pain control in, 1601
parathyroid gland in, 1557
Pavlik harness in developmental hip 
dysplasia, 1783
pharyngitis in, streptococcal, 571
plastic and reconstructive surgery in, 
1840–1852
postoperative complications in, 393
prune-belly syndrome in, 1634, 1634f
pulmonary airway malformation in, 
congenital, 1606, 1606f
pulmonary sequestration in, 1607, 1607f
pyloric stenosis in, hypertrophic,  
1613–1614, 1614f
retinoblastoma in, 287
rhabdomyosarcoma in, 1485–1486, 
1640–1641
sarcoma in, 1465, 1485–1486,  
1640–1641
short bowel syndrome in, 1621
surgical themes in, 1598–1599
teratoma in, 1641
testicular torsion in, 1662
thermoregulation in, 1601
thrombocytopenic purpura in, 
idiopathic, 1433–1434
thyroglossal duct cysts in, 1602
tonsillectomy in, 571
torticollis in, congenital, 1603
transfusions in, 1599–1600
trauma in, 222–223, 1642–1644
abdominal, 188, 1643–1644
in abuse, 222, 1636
age-appropriate equipment in 
treatment of, 222
of central nervous system, 1643
and fluid therapy, 168–171
of head, 222, 1643
initial management in, 1642
mechanisms of injury in, 1642
thoracic, 1643
vaginal, 1636
undescended testis in, 1635–1636
2000
Index
Children and infants (Cont.):
ureterocele in, 1667
ureteropelvic junction obstruction in, 
1667
urethral valves in, posterior, 1667
vaginal anomalies in, 1636
vascular anomalies in, 1849–1852
venous access in, 1601
vesicoureteral reflux in, 1667
vocal cord paralysis in, 574
volvulus of midgut in, 1616–1617, 
1617f
vomiting of, differential diagnosis in, 
1613
Wilms’ tumor in, 1638–1639
Child-Turcotte-Pugh score in cirrhosis, 
1280, 1280t
Chimeras, 465–466
CHK2, 288t
Chlamydia trachomatis infections, 
lymphogranuloma venereum in, 
1678, 1679t
Chloride
absorption in large intestine, 1179
in gastrointestinal secretions, 69t
in parenteral nutrition, 76, 76t
serum levels in hyperparathyroidism, 
1562, 1563t
Chloroform, historical use of, 1895
Chloroprocaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 
1902, 1903t
Choke vessels, 1837
Cholangiocarcinoma, 1291–1293, 1292f, 
1335–1338
Bismuth-Corlette classification of, 
1335–1336, 1335f, 1336–1337
and cholangitis, 1292, 1331, 1335, 1336
clinical manifestations and diagnosis in, 
1292, 1336
computed tomography in, 1315f, 1336
etiologies of, 1335
hilar, 1292
incidence of, 1335
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196
liver transplantation in, 347
pathology in, 1292, 1335–1336
percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography in, 1316f, 1336, 
1337f
peripheral or intrahepatic, 1292
prognosis in, 1293, 1337–1338
recurrent, 1338
risk factors for, 1335
stent placement in, 1337
treatment of, 1292, 1336–1337, 1337f
Cholangiography
in choledocholithiasis, 1321–1322
endoscopic retrograde, 1315, 1317f
intraoperative, 1325, 1327f
of liver, 1274
percutaneous transhepatic, 1315, 1316f
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1316f, 1336, 
1337f
Cholangiohepatitis, 1324
Cholangiojejunostomy in 
cholangiocarcinoma, 1336
Cholangiopancreatography
endoscopic retrograde, 1315–1316
in chronic pancreatitis, 1370–1371, 
1371f, 1374, 1374t
in gallstone pancreatitis, 1358–1359
pancreatitis after, 1352, 1358–1359
small intestine perforation in, 1169
magnetic resonance, 1315, 1317f
in chronic pancreatitis, 1370, 1370f
Cholangitis, 1322–1323
and cholangiocarcinoma, 1292, 1331, 
1335, 1336
in gallstone disease, 1322–1323
primary sclerosing, 1331
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196, 
1331
liver transplantation in, 346, 1331
recurrent pyogenic, 1324
secondary sclerosing, 1331
Cholecystectomy
in acalculous cholecystitis, 1330
in carcinoma of gallbladder, 1335
in choledocholithiasis, 1322
retained or recurrent stones in, 1322, 
1323f
complications of, 387
bile duct trauma in, 1331, 1332–1333, 
1332f, 1333f
bile leak in, 1333, 1333f
in gallstones, 1324–1325. See also 
Gallstones, cholecystectomy in
laparoscopic, 1325
in acute cholecystitis, 1321
anesthesia in, 1907
bile duct strictures after, 1331, 1332f
bile duct trauma in, 1331, 1332–1333, 
1332f
in chronic cholecystitis, 1320
in elderly, 436–437, 1936
in gallstones, 1320, 1321, 1324, 1325, 
1326f
in pregnancy, 436, 1320
technique in, 1325, 1326f
in natural orifice transluminal 
endoscopic surgery, 433f
in single-incision laproscopic surgery, 
435, 435f
trends in Mongolia, 1974–1975, 1976f
Cholecystitis
acute, 1320–1321
acalculous, 1320, 1327, 1330
clinical manifestations in, 1320
diagnosis of, 1320–1321, 1321f
in elderly, 1924, 1929
in gallstones, 1320–1321
pathogenesis in, 1320
radionuclide scans in, 1315,  
1320–1321
treatment of, 1321
chronic, 1319–1320
clinical presentation in, 1319, 1319f
diagnosis of, 1319–1320
in gallstones, 1319–1320
management of, 1320
Cholecystography, oral, 1314
Cholecystokinin, 1145, 1146t, 1313, 1348
effects on gallbladder and sphincter of 
Oddi, 1313, 1314f
in gastric motility and emptying, 1049, 
1049f
Cholecystostomy in gallstones, 1322, 
1324, 1324f
Choledochoduodenostomy, 1327, 1329f
Choledochojejunostomy, 1327, 1329f
Choledocholithiasis, 1321–1322
drainage procedures in, 1327, 1329f
endoscopic sphincterotomy in, 1322, 
1322f
laparoscopic exploration in, 1325–1327, 
1328f
retained or recurrent stones in, 1322, 
1323f
transduodenal sphincterotomy in, 1327
ultrasonography in, 1321
Choledochotomy in choledocholithiasis, 
1325, 1328f
Cholelithiasis. See also Gallstones
carcinoma risk in, 1334
Cholescintigraphy, 963
Cholestasis, 387, 1271, 1314
Cholesteatoma, 567
Cholesterol
in bile, 1313, 1318, 1318f
in chyle, 686t
in gallstones, 1317, 1318, 1318f
serum levels in coronary artery disease, 
742, 1906
steroid synthesis from, 20f, 1575, 1576f
Cholesterolosis, 1320
Choline magnesium trisalicylate in 
persistent pain, 1949t
Cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathways, 
19
Chondrocytes, 251
Chondroitin sulfate, 245
Chondroma, 1781
of chest wall, 666
periosteal, 1819
Chondrosarcoma, 1780, 1819
chemotherapy in, 1475
of chest wall, 666, 667, 669f
Chordoma, retrorectal, 1217
Choriocarcinoma, 1641
ovarian, 1637
Chorionic villus sampling, 1691
Choroid plexus
anatomy of, 1710
papilloma of, 1734
Christmas factor (factor IX), 88, 99t, 103
Christmas tree deformity in intestinal 
atresia, 1616, 1616f
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
sequencing, 462
Chromogranins, 1577
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
anesthesia in, 1906–1907
lung transplantation in, 663–664
lung volume reduction surgery in, 663
Chvostek’s sign, 72, 73, 1574
Chyle, 685, 1169–1170
composition of, 685, 686t
Chylomicrons, 1169–1170
Chylothorax, 685–687
etiologies of, 685, 686t
management of, 686–687, 687f
pathophysiology in, 685–686
Chymotrypsin, 1347, 1348t
Chymotrypsinogen, 1347, 1348t
Cineradiography of esophagus, 955, 961, 
961f
in motility disorders, 987–988
Ciprofloxacin, 144t, 257t
Circulation
collateral
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 873, 
873f
in mesenteric artery occlusion, 860, 
860f
enterohepatic, 1270, 1312
extracorporeal, 740–741. See also 
Cardiopulmonary bypass
homeostasis in, 114
left dominant, 739
mechanical support of, 768–770
microvascular, 114
right dominant, 739
in trauma, initial evaluation and 
management of, 164–167
in children, 1643
2001
Index
Circulatory arrest
in aortic aneurysm repair, 797, 801
perfusion strategies in, 797, 798f, 
799f
in aortic dissection repair, 813
Cirrhosis, 1277–1280
Child-Turcotte-Pugh score in, 1280, 
1280t
clinical manifestations of, 1279, 1280t
compensated, 1279
decompensated, 1279
end-stage liver disease in, 1277, 1280
etiology of, 1278–1279, 1278t
hepatic reserve in, 1279–1280
hepatocellular carcinoma in, 1279, 1291
histology of, 1278f
laboratory findings in, 1279
liver biopsy in, 1279
liver transplantation in, 346, 347, 1277, 
1283
macronodular, 1278
micronodular, 1278
minimally invasive surgery in, 437
morphologic classification of,  
1277–1278
portal hypertension in, 1280, 1282
postoperative complications in, 387
preoperative assessment of surgical risk 
in, 1279–1280
variceal bleeding in, 1281
Cisatracurium, 1901
Cisplatin
in esophageal cancer, 1012, 1013t
in lung cancer, 644t
in ovarian cancer, 1703, 1703t
in pancreatic cancer, 1407
Clarithromycin, 145t
in peptic ulcer disease, 1061t
Claudication
neurogenic, 1742
differential diagnosis in, 1742
in spinal stenosis, 1771
vascular intermittent, 828, 882
differential diagnosis in, 882, 884t
nonatherosclerotic causes of, 882, 
885t
Claus model on breast cancer risk, 512
Clavicle fractures, 203, 1757–1759
Clay shoveler’s injury, 1770
CLDN2, 1362
Cleaning agents
ingestion of, 1021
skin injuries from, 479
Clear-cell sarcoma, 1467, 1470
Cleft
craniofacial, 1846–1847, 1846f, 
1846f–1848f
of lip and palate, 1840–1844,  
1969–1970
bilateral, 1841, 1841f, 1843, 1843f
Mulliken technique in, 1843, 1843f
complete, 1841, 1842f
Furlow palatoplasty in, 1844, 1845f
incomplete, 1841, 1841f
nasoalveolar molding technique in, 
1841, 1841f
presurgical infant orthopedics in, 
1841, 1843
treatment protocol in, 1841
unilateral, 1841–1843, 1841f, 1843f
incomplete, 1841, 1841f
rotation-advancement procedure in, 
1843, 1843f
Clindamycin, 145t, 257t
in human bites, 479
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
Clitoris, anatomy of, 1674
Cloaca, persistent, 1176, 1627
Cloning, 444, 456–457
Clonorchis, 1335
Clopidogrel
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 841, 
842, 845, 846
platelet dysfunction from, 91–92
Clostridium difficile infections
in appendicitis, 1243
pseudomembranous colitis in, 1222
Clotting factors. See Factors, clotting
Clover, Joseph, 1896
Club hand, radial, 1823
Coaching style leadership, 9
Coagulation
clotting factors in. See Factors, clotting
disorders of, 88–89, 123f
in anticoagulation therapy, 94–95
in antiphospholipid syndrome, 93–94
in congenital deficiency of clotting 
factors, 88–89
in fluid therapy, 1914
in liver disease, 92–93, 92t, 348
mortality risk in, 123
in trauma, 93, 94f, 185, 193, 194f
disseminated intravascular, 92, 104, 389
extrinsic pathway in, 87, 87f
final common pathway in, 87, 87f
intrinsic pathway in, 87, 87f
kinetics, 104
laboratory tests of, 87, 102–104
preoperative, 102–104
thromboelastography in, 103, 103f
Coagulation devices, bipolar, 428, 428f
Coarctation of aorta, 705–706
Cobalamin deficiency, 1044
in gastric surgery, 1094
in malabsorption, 1143
Cobblestone appearance
in Crohn’s disease, 1195
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 950, 
951f
Cocaine, as anesthetic, 1896–1897, 1899t, 
1902
Cocarcinogens, 293
Coccidioides immitis, 330
Coccidioidomycosis, pulmonary, 659, 661
Coccygeus muscle, 1672
Cockett perforator veins, 259, 915–916
Codeine, 1900
Codon, 447
Coercive leadership, 9
Cognitive function
in dying patients, 1951
in elderly, preoperative assessment of, 
1928–1929
in neurologic examination, 1711
postoperative changes in, 383, 383t
Cold exposure, frostbite injury in, 480–481
Cold preservation of organs for 
transplantation, 331
Colectomy, 1185–1188
anastomosis in, 1189–1191, 1190f, 
1191f
ileorectal, 1198, 1207
anterior, 1188–1189, 1193–1194
bowel preparation for, 1194
in colorectal cancer, 1185, 1186f, 1212
laparoscopic, 1216
in emergency, 1185–1187
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 1207
functional results in, 1193–1194
in Hartmann’s procedure, 1189
left, 1187
extended, 1187
minimally invasive technique, 1187
in colorectal cancer, 1216
mucus fistula in, 1189, 1193
positioning of patient in, 1194
right, 1187
extended, 1187
segmental, in Crohn’s disease,  
1199–1200
sigmoid, 1187–1188
in diverticulitis, 1202, 1203
subtotal, 1188
total, 1188
transverse, 1187
types of, 1187–1188, 1188f
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
Colic arteries, anatomy of, 1176
Colic, biliary, in gallstone disease, 1317, 
1319–1320
Colipase, 1348
Colitis
cystica profunda, 1219
diversion, 1179
fulminant, 1195, 1197, 1198, 1199
indeterminate, 1195, 1201
epidemiology of, 1195
treatment of, 1201
infectious, 1222
ischemic, 1221–1222
in aortic aneurysm repair, 853
diagnosis of, 1222
signs and symptoms in, 1222
treatment of, 1222
pseudomembranous, 1222
ulcerative, 1195, 1197–1198
diagnosis of, 1197
differentiated from Crohn’s disease, 
1154, 1195
elective surgery in, 1198
emergent surgery in, 1198
epidemiology of, 1195
etiology of, 1195
indications for surgery in, 1197
nonoperative management of, 1196–
1197
pathology and differential diagnosis 
in, 1195–1196
Collagen, 475
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 246, 787, 
902
injection in stress urinary incontinence, 
1695
synthesis of, 244–245, 244f
in gastrointestinal tract, 249, 250f, 
250t
types of, 244, 475
in inguinal hernia, 1502
in wound healing, 242f, 243f, 244–245
in cartilage, 251
corticosteroid therapy affecting, 253
in gastrointestinal tract, 249, 250f
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 
261, 262
nutrition affecting, 254, 254f
in tendons, 251
Collagenase, 249, 250t
Collagenolysis, 245
in gastrointestinal tract, 249, 250f
Collar button abscess, 1810, 1811f
Collateral circulation
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 873, 873f
in mesenteric artery occlusion, 860, 860f
Collateral ligaments of knee injuries, 
1768–1769
2002
Index
Collett and Edwards classification of 
truncus arteriosus, 706, 706f
Collis gastroplasty, 977, 977f
in hiatal hernia, 983
in scleroderma of esophagus, 985
Colloid carcinoma, 520–521
Colloid solutions, 76, 1911, 1914
in burns, 230
Colography, computed tomographic, in 
colorectal cancer, 1209
Colon, 1175–1236
anatomy of, 1176–1179
landmarks in, 1176
lymphatic, 1177
nerve supply in, 1177
vascular, 1176–1177, 1177f
anesthesia in surgery of, 1194
cancer of. See Colorectal cancer
carcinoid tumors of, 1216
clinical evaluation of disorders,  
1180–1185
colitis of. See Colitis
composition of secretions, 69t
diverticular disease of, 1201–1203
embryonic development of, 1175–1176
endoscopy of, 1180–1181. See also 
Colonoscopy
as esophageal substitute, 1024–1025
in composite with stomach and 
jejunum, 1025
in vagal sparing esophagectomy, 
1025–1026
fistula with pancreas in chronic 
pancreatitis, 1378
gastrointestinal stromal tumors of, 1216
inflammatory bowel disease of,  
1195–1201
leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma of, 
1216
lipoma of, 1216
lymphoma of, 1216
microflora in, 1179
motility of, 1180
multidisciplinary approach to disorders 
of, 1195
preoperative preparations for surgery of, 
1194–1195
pseudo-obstruction of, 1221
resection of, 1185–1189. See also 
Colectomy
sarcoma of, 1481
trauma of, 209–210, 209f, 1234–1235
blunt, 1234
colostomy in, 209–210, 1234t
damage control surgery in, 195
iatrogenic, 1234–1235
penetrating, 1233–1234
suture repair and anastomosis in, 209
volvulus of, 1219–1220
sigmoid, 1219–1220, 1221f
transverse, 1220
Colonization, bacterial, 258, 389
Colonography, computed tomographic, 
1181
in colorectal cancer, 1209
Colonoscopy, 1180
perforation in, 1234–1235
in screening for colorectal cancer, 1208t, 
1209
in elderly, 1933
virtual, in colorectal cancer screening, 
1208t, 1209
Colony-forming units, 137
Colony-stimulating factors, granulocyte-
macrophage, 28t, 30–31, 248t
Colorectal cancer, 1203–1216
clinical presentation in, 1209
diagnostic algorithm on, 1214f
differential diagnosis in, 1246
drug resistance in, 313
in elderly, 1933
epidemiology of, 274, 276,  
1203–1204
compared to other cancers, 275t, 276t, 
277f, 278t, 618f
familial, 1206–1207, 1210t
fecal occult blood testing in, 1182, 
1183, 1208–1209
field defect in, 1212
follow-up and surveillance in, 1215
genetic factors in, 1183, 1204–1207
in heterozygosity loss, 1205
in replication errors, 1205
hereditary nonpolyposis, 289t, 291–292, 
1183, 1207
Amsterdam criteria on, 292, 292t
endometrial cancer associated with, 
1701
genetic factors in, 1207
screening guidelines in, 1210t
in inflammatory bowel disease
risk for, 1197, 1199, 1204
screening for, 1210t
locally advanced, 1214–1215
metastasis of, 1209–1211, 1213, 1215
to liver, 1210, 1213, 1293–1294, 1295
in elderly, 1933
hepatectomy in, 1301
to lymph nodes, 1212, 1215
staging of, 1210, 1211t
natural history and routes of spread in, 
1209
pathogenesis of, 1204–1205
in polyps, 1205–1206
preoperative evaluation in, 1211–1212
recurrent, 1212, 1215–1216
resection procedures in, 1185, 1186f, 
1212–1215
in colon carcinoma, 1212
in elderly, 1933
minimally invasive, 1216
in rectal carcinoma, 1213
risk factors for, 1203–1204
screening for, 298t, 299, 1208–1209
advantages and disadvantages in, 
1208t
in elderly, 1933
guidelines on, 1209, 1210t
second primary tumors in, 1212, 1215
sentinel lymph nodes in, 1177
staging of, 1209–1212, 1211t
and treatment options, 1212–1215
survival rates in, 1210–1211, 1211t
total mesorectal excision in, 305, 1213
treatment of, 1212–1215
in colonic carcinoma, 1212–1215
in rectal carcinoma, 1213–1215
in recurrence, 1215–1216
tumorigenesis in, 278, 280f
tumor markers in, 301, 302–303, 
1182–1183
ultrasonography in, endorectal,  
1211–1212, 1211f
Colostomy, 1193, 1193f
in colorectal trauma, 209–210, 211f, 
1234t
complications of, 1193
diversion colitis in, 1179
end, 1193, 1193f
Hartmann’s procedure in, 1189, 1193
loop, 1193
mucus fistula created in, 1189, 1193
Colostrum, 501
Colpocleisis, 1695
Colporrhaphy, 1694
anterior, 1694
posterior, 1694
Colposcopy, 1677
Colposuspension, retropubic, in stress 
urinary incontinence, 1695
Coma
hepatic, 1276
myxedema, in hypothyroidism, 1535
Commissurotomy, mitral, 753
operative technique in, 755
Communication
as core competency, 4t
in culture of safety, 368–369
implementation of, 372
risk management in, 380
in handoffs of patient care, 369
sign outs in, 371–372
on medical errors, 380, 1952
in operating room, 368, 369, 370–371
safety checklist on, 370, 371f
in surgical counts, 378
in wrong-site surgery, 378
in palliative care, 1946–1947, 1947t
in postoperative debriefings, 370–371
in preoperative briefings, 370, 370t, 372f
in teleconsultation and telementoring, 
437
Comorbidity, 1924, 1926t
Compartment syndromes
abdominal, 217–218, 218f–219f
bladder pressure in, 217, 217t, 411
in burns, 233, 234
closure technique in, 218, 218f–219f, 
220f
complications in, 218, 220f
decompression in, 217, 389
grades of, 217t
multiple organ impact of, 217, 218f
postoperative, 389
in burns, 233
in fractures, 1757
of lower extremity
fasciotomy in, 215, 216f, 888
in ischemia treatment complications, 
888–889, 889f, 889t
in trauma, 215
postoperative, 388, 389
thoracic, in burns, 233, 234
of upper extremity, 1801
Complement system, 33
in microbial invasion response, 138
in shock response, 118
Complex regional pain syndrome in upper 
extremity trauma, 1805
Compliance with therapy, in compression 
therapy for venous insufficiency, 
931
Complications, postoperative, 380–393. 
See also Postoperative period
Comprehensive unit-based safety program 
(CUSP), 372–373
Compression injury
of cauda equina, 1742
of peripheral nerves
in hand and wrist, 1744, 1805–1806
in orbital fractures, 1854
of popliteal artery, 905t
of spinal cord, 1739–1740
of spine, 1721
fractures in, 1722, 1724f, 1770
2003
Index
Compression therapy
in hypertrophic scars, 263
in lymphedema, 935–936
in thromboembolism prevention, 186
in varicose veins, 929
in venous insufficiency, 259–260,  
931–933, 931f, 932f
compliance with, 931
and ulcerations, 259–260, 931–933
Computed tomography
in abdominal trauma, 180, 181, 183f
of abdominal wall tumors, 1454
in adrenal carcinoma, 1584, 1584f
in aortic aneurysm
abdominal, 832f, 852, 852f
in endoleaks, 858–859, 858f
in postoperative surveillance, 857
thoracic, 790–791
in aortic dissection, 811–812, 812f, 815
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 874f
in appendicitis, 1246
in children, 1623, 1623f
in biliary disorders, 1315, 1315f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 840, 
841f
in cerebrovascular disorders,  
1714–1715, 1716f
in cervical spine trauma, 175
in chest wall tumors, 665, 667f
of coronary arteries, 739–740
in esophageal cancer, 1004–1005, 1008
in gallbladder cancer, 1334, 1334f
in goiter, 1538f
of hand and wrist, 1794
in hand tumors, 1815
in head trauma, 175, 175f, 1718
in children, 1643
in skull fractures, 1715–1716, 1717f
in inguinal hernia, 1504, 1504f
in large intestine disorders, 1181
virtual colonoscopy in, 1181, 1208t, 
1209
of liver, 1273–1274, 1274f
in benign lesions, 1289, 1290, 1290f
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 1291, 
1292f
in incidental mass, 1288
in pyogenic abscess, 1284, 1284f
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882, 883f
of lungs, 622f
in cancer assessment, 629, 631, 633
screening for, 619–621
in solitary nodule, 621–622
in mediastinal tumors, 671–672
in mesenteric ischemia, 862, 862f
in minimally invasive surgery, 416
in neurologic examination, 1712
in pancreatic cancer, 1397–1398, 1398f
in pancreatitis
acute, 1355, 1355f, 1358, 1358f
chronic, 1369–1370, 1370f
of parathyroid gland, in preoperative 
localization studies, 1565–1566, 
1565t
in pheochromocytoma, 1586, 1587f
in sinusitis, 567, 568–569, 568f
in small intestine obstruction,  
1147–1149, 1148f, 1149f
in soft tissue sarcomas
in initial assessment, 1468, 1468f
retroperitoneal, 1479, 1479f
in surveillance for recurrence,  
1477–1478
in spine trauma, 1725
of spleen, 1428
of stomach, 1051, 1052f
in cancer, 1080
of thyroid, 1530
virtual colonoscopy in, 1181, 1208t, 
1209
Computed tomography angiography, 830, 
832, 832f
in abdominal aortic aneurysm, 832f, 
852f
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 874f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 840, 
841f
coronary, 739–740
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882, 883f
in mesenteric ischemia, 862f
Computer enhanced surgery, 415, 430
Concussion in head trauma, 1718
Conditioning of flaps, 1837
Condyloma acuminata, 485, 1232, 1233, 
1678, 1680
cervical, 1678–1679
giant, 1218
Conflict resolution technique, 7
Conflicts of interest, ethical issues in, 1951
Congenital disorders
of abdominal wall, 1453, 1453f,  
1631–1635
adenomatoid malformation in, cystic, 
1606, 1606f
adrenal hyperplasia in, 1574, 1585, 
1637–1638, 1638f
ambiguous genitalia in, 1637–1638, 
1638f
aortic stenosis in, 698–702
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
of branchial cleft, 1602
of breast, 500
of central nervous system, 1749–1751
cleft lip and palate in, 1840–1844
clotting factor deficiencies in, 88–89
diaphragmatic hernia in, 1603–1605
emphysema in, lobar, 1605–1606, 1606f
esophageal cysts in, 1018
of hand, 1823–1824
of heart, 695–729
hepatic cysts in, 1288
inguinal hernia in, 1500, 1502f,  
1634–1635
of large intestine, 1179
lymphedema in, 934
Meckel’s diverticulum in, 1163–1165
nevi in, 485
giant, 485
melanocytic, 1852, 1853f
pulmonary airway malformation in, 
1606, 1606f
small intestine obstruction in, 1146
talipes equinovarus in, 1783
torticollis in, 1603
of vagina, 1636
Conjoined tendon, anatomy of, 1496
Connective tissue disorders, 246–249
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 246, 787, 
901
inguinal hernia in, 1502, 1502t
in Marfan’s syndrome, 248, 787, 902
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum, 902
Conn’s syndrome, 1578
Consent, informed, 1941–1944
autonomy principle in, 1944
for children and adolescents, 1943
elements of, 1942, 1943f
legal issues in, 1941–1942, 1943
professional practice standard, 1942
reasonable person standard, 1942
in research, 1951
surgical emergency and, 1942–1943
Constipation, 1183–1184
Constriction band syndrome, 1823–1824
Consultations, in teleconsultation and 
telementoring, 437
Contact dermatitis of vulva, 1678
Contamination, bacterial, 102t, 258
in surgery, 141, 146, 147t, 148t, 256
in transfusions, 100
Continence
fecal, 1180
disorders of, 1185. See also 
Incontinence, fecal
urinary, disorders of, 1695. See also 
Incontinence, urinary
Contractility, cardiac, 114, 402
ejection fracture as measure of, 403t
isovolumic pressure line in, 402
in shock, 125, 127
Contraction of wounds, 246
Contractures
in burns, 1821, 1822f
Dupuytren’s, 1808–1809, 1810f
postoperative, 388
Contrast agents, renal toxicity of, 383, 791
Contusion
cardiac, 202
cerebral, 1718–1719, 1718f
pancreatic, 207
pulmonary
in children, 1643
in elderly, 222
renal, 1658t
in children, 1644
Cooper’s ligament
anatomy of, 1496, 1497f, 1498f
in McVay repair of inguinal hernia, 
1507f, 1508
Corditis of vocal cord, polypoid, 573
Core competencies for leadership in 
surgery, 3–8
Cori cycle, 45, 45f
Corkscrew deformity of esophagus, 992, 
992f
Corneal abrasions in surgery, 383
Corning, Leonard, 1896–1897
Corona radiata sign in solitary pulmonary 
nodule, 622, 622f
Coronary arteries
aneurysm in Kawasaki syndrome, 902
angiography of
in atherosclerosis, 739, 740f
computed tomography technique, 
739–740
preoperative, 834
angioplasty of, percutaneous 
transluminal
in cardiogenic shock, 128
compared to bypass surgery,  
742–743, 743t
prior to other surgeries, 834
atherosclerosis of, 741–747
angina pectoris in, 742
indications for bypass surgery in, 
742
results of bypass surgery in, 745
angiography in, 739, 740f
biomolecular therapy and tissue 
engineering in, 747
bypass grafting in, 742–747
clinical manifestations in, 742
2004
Index
Coronary arteries, atherosclerosis of 
(Cont.):
in elderly, 1930
etiology and pathogenesis in, 741
historical aspects of, 741
laser revascularization in, 
transmyocardial, 747
preoperative assessment of, 742, 
833–834
in anesthesia management, 1906
in aortic aneurysm repair, 793
in noncardiac surgery, 738
risk factors for, 741–742, 1906
bypass surgery, 742–747
anastomotic devices in, 749
compared to percutaneous 
interventions, 742–743, 743t
in elderly, 1930
endoscopic, 746
historical development of, 741
indications for, 742
in ischemic cardiomyopathy, 765
mammary artery graft in, 741,  
743–744, 745f, 746
median sternotomy incision in,  
745, 745f
minimally invasive direct technique, 
746
off-pump technique, 745–746, 746f
operative techniques in, 743–747, 
745f
prior to other surgeries, 834
results of, 745, 746
saphenous vein graft in, 741, 744
occlusion of
in aortic dissection, 809
in atherosclerosis, 741–747
in transposition of great arteries, 
720–721
in truncus arteriosus, 706
Coronary ligament of liver, 1265
Corpus callosotomy in seizures, 1746
Corrigan’s pulse in aortic insufficiency, 
760
Corrosive substances. See Caustic and 
corrosive substances
Corticospinal tract, anatomy of, 1710
Corticosteroid therapy
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in carpal tunnel syndrome, 1806
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1196
in hypercalcemia, 1573t
in immunosuppression, 325–326, 325t, 
327t
adverse effects of, 326, 326t
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1156, 
1196
intra-articular, 1772
intralesional, in hypertrophic scars and 
keloids, 262
postoperative, 392
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1583
in septic shock, 126, 154, 155t
in spinal cord injury, 197–198,  
1725–1726
stress dose in, 392
in thrombocytopenic purpura, 
idiopathic, 1433
wound healing in, 253
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone, 1576
in Cushing’s syndrome diagnosis, 1583
Cortisol, 1575, 1576f, 1577
functions of, 1577
serum levels of, 1575
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1583
diurnal variation in, 1575, 1577f
in shock response, 113
Cor triatriatum, 710–711, 711f
Cosmetic surgery, 1882–1891
Cost-utility analysis (CUA), 1973
Cottle sign, 1883
Coude catheter in acute urinary retention, 
1661, 1662f
Couinaud, Claude, 1265
Counterregulatory anti-inflammatory 
response syndrome (CARS), 14f
Counts, surgical, in prevention of retained 
surgical items, 378
Cowden disease, 289t, 292, 1206, 1539t
breast cancer risk in, 517
diagnostic criteria on, 292
thyroid cancer in, 1537
COX-2 in stomach cancer, 1075, 1077f
Cox-Maze IV procedure, 771–772, 771f
Craniofacial disorders
in children, 1844–1849
atrophy and hypoplasia in, 1848–
1849, 1849f, 1850f
classification of, 1844, 1846f, 1846t
clefts in, 1846–1847, 1846f, 
1846f–1848f
craniosynostosis in, 1750, 1848
hyperplasia and hypertrophy in, 1849
in Le Fort fractures, 577
Craniopharyngioma, 1736–1737
Craniosynostosis, 1750, 1848
Crawford classification of 
thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysm, 801, 801f
C-reactive protein, in acute pancreatitis, 
1357
Creatinine
clearance ratio to calcium, in 
hyperparathyroidism, 1562, 
1563t
serum levels in kidney transplantation, 
339
Cremaster muscle, 1499
CREST syndrome, 993
Cretinism, 1534
Crick, Francis H. C., 443, 444, 445t
Cricohyoidoepiglottopexy in laryngeal 
cancer, 591
Cricopharyngeal muscle
anatomy of, 943–944, 943f
motility disorders of, 987–988
myotomy of, 989
Cricopharyngotomy, endoscopic, 989–990, 
990f
Cricothyroidotomy in trauma, 163, 163f
in children, 222
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, 1272
Criminal nerve of Grassi, 1039
Crisis
hypercalcemic, 1572
splenic sequestration, 1432
Critical illness
growth hormone resistance in, 23
hyperglycemia and insulin resistance 
in, 23
Crocidolite asbestos fibers, 688
Crohn’s disease, 1153–1157, 1195
acute inflammatory, 1198
anal and perianal, 1200, 1200f
in appendectomy, 1243
capsule endoscopy in, 1154, 1155f
chronic fibrotic, 1198
cobblestone appearance in, 1195
diagnosis of, 1154–1155, 1155f, 1198
differential diagnosis of, 1154,  
1195–1196, 1252
epidemiology of, 1153, 1195
etiology of, 1195
fat wrapping of intestines in, 1154, 
1154f
genetic factors in, 1153
ileocolic, 1198–1199
intestinal obstruction in, 1146, 1150, 
1156
pathology and differential diagnosis in, 
1195–1196
rectovaginal fistula in, 1200, 1231
recurrent, 1157, 1200
signs and symptoms in, 1154
extraintestinal, 1154, 1155t, 1196
treatment of, 1155–1157, 1198
drug therapy in, 1155–1156,  
1196–1197, 1200
surgical, 1156–1157, 1156t, 1157f, 
1198
Cronkite-Canada syndrome, 1206
Cruciate ligaments, injuries of, 1768–1769, 
1769f
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur, 1279
Cruzan, Nancy, 1945
Cryoplasty, in lower extremity arterial 
occlusive disease, 892, 893f, 897
Cryoprecipitate in massive transfusions, 
101t
Cryopreserved grafts in femoropopliteal by 
pass, 899
Cryosurgery in liver tumors, 1295
Cryptococcosis, 658
Cryptoglandular abscess, 1227–1228
Cryptorchidism, 1635–1636
risk for testicular cancer in, 1636, 1654
two-stage repair in, 1636
Crypts of small intestine, 1138
Crystalloid solutions, 98, 1911, 1914
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
in trauma, 216
CTLA-4 in cancer immunotherapy, 312
Cubital tunnel syndrome, 1806
Cuboid bone fracture, 1765
Cullen’s sign, 1356
Cultured epithelial autografts (CEAs), 
266–267
Culture, organizational
communication in, 368–369
safety issues in, 368
assessment of, 368
in high reliability organizations, 
365–366
in operating room, 368
teamwork in, 368–369
Cultures, cell, 462–463, 462f
Cuneiform bone fracture, 1765
Curling ulcer in burns, 1058
Curreri formula on caloric requirements in 
burns, 233
Cushing, Harvey, 1574, 1897
Cushing’s disease, 1580
in pituitary adenoma, 1583, 1735
treatment of, 1583, 1594
Cushing’s syndrome, 1580–1583
adrenalectomy in, 1583, 1590
complications of, 1593–1594
in adrenal incidentaloma, 1588
adrenocorticotropic hormone in, 1580, 
1581–1582, 1581t, 1583
clinical features in, 1580, 1581–1582, 
1581f, 1581t
diagnosis of, 1582–1583, 1582f
historical aspects of, 1574
2005
Index
in lung cancer, 626–627
obesity in, 1582
treatment of, 1583
Cushing’s triad in intracranial pressure 
crease, 1713
Cushing’s ulcer, 1058, 1718
Cutler-Beard advancement flap in eyelid 
reconstruction, 1858, 1861f
Cyanide, and burn, 228
Cyclin, 450
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK), 450
CDK4, 288t, 292
inhibitors of, 450
Cyclooxygenase, 31f, 32, 85
Cyclophosphamide
in lung cancer, 644t
in ovarian cancer, 1703t
Cyclosporine, 323, 325t, 327t, 328
adverse effects of, 326t, 328
in inflammatory bowel disease,  
1196–1197
in liver transplantation, 346
in lung transplantation, 355
metabolism of, 328
Cystadenocarcinoma of pancreas
mucinous, 1410–1413
serous, 1409–1410
Cystadenoma
biliary, 1288
of pancreas, 1409–1410
mucinous, 1410–1413
serous, 1409–1410, 1410f
Cystectomy in bladder cancer, 1654
robotic approach in, 1654
Cystectomy, ovarian, 1689
Cystic artery anatomy, 1309–1310
anomalies in, 1312, 1312f
Cystic duct anatomy, 1310, 1311f
Cystic fibrosis
lung transplantation in, 663–664
meconium ileus in, 1618
Cystic hygroma, 598, 1602–1603, 1852, 
1852f
treatment of, 598
ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure in, 1645
Cystitis, 1664
Cystogastrostomy in pancreatic 
pseudocyst, 1377, 1377f
Cystosarcoma phyllodes, 555, 555f, 1481
Cystourethrogram, voiding, 1660
Cysts
of Bartholin’s glands, 1678
biliary, 1330, 1630–1631. See also 
Biliary tract, cysts of
bone, aneurysmal, 1738
branchial cleft, 598, 598f, 1602–1603
of breast, 508, 510, 528f
bronchogenic, 679, 1018, 1607
dermoid, 486, 1217, 1737
enteric, 679, 1018
epidermal, 486
epidermoid, retrorectal, 1217
of esophagus, 679, 1017, 1018
foregut duplication, 1607
ganglion, of hand and wrist, 1815, 1815f
of liver, 1288–1289. See also Liver, 
cysts of
mediastinal, 673t, 679
mesenteric, 1459–1460, 1460f, 1624
mucous, of hand and wrist, 1815
omental, 1457
ovarian. See Ovaries, cysts of
of pancreas, 1410–1413, 1410f
pericardial, 679
of popliteal artery adventitia, 905
in pulmonary airway malformation, 
1606, 1606f
renal, 1655, 1655f, 1655t
Bosniak classification of, 1655, 1655t
of spleen, 1437f
in parasitic infections, 1430t,  
1436–1437
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1436–1437
thymic, 679
thyroglossal duct, 598, 1521–1522, 1602
of thyroid, 1540
trichilemmal, 486
of vocal cord, 573, 573f
Cytokine receptor, 34
Cytokines, 26–30, 27t–28t
anti-inflammatory, 26–30, 116–118, 
118t
in microbial invasion response, 138
proinflammatory, 26–30, 116–118, 118t
in shock, 114, 116–118
in wound healing, 243, 244
Cytology
cervical, 1677
peritoneal, in stomach cancer,  
1080–1081
Cytomegalovirus infections in transplant 
recipients, 329
Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 in 
cancer immunotherapy, 312
D
D cells of stomach, 1040
in regulation of gastric acid secretion, 
1043, 1044f
somatostatin secretion of, 1040, 1044, 
1045, 1146t
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 
1054
D-dimers, 88
in aortic dissection, 811
Dabigatran, 94
Dacron graft, 4
Dalrymple’s sign in Graves’ disease, 1531
Damage-associated molecular pattern 
molecules (DAMPs), 14–17
in shock, 110, 115, 116t, 117f, 123
Damage control resuscitation strategy, 98, 
100
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
Damage control surgery, 192–195, 
194f–196f
in liver trauma, 194, 194f, 204
Damus-Kaye-Stansel anastomosis
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 716
in Taussig-Bing syndrome, 723
DaNang lung, 110
Dance’s sign in intussusception, 1622
Dantrolene sodium in malignant 
hyperthermia, 1917
Daptomycin, 145t
Darwin, Charles, 1895
Dasatinib, 310t
Da Vinci robotic system, 415, 417, 427, 
430
Davy, Humphrey, 1895
DCC in colorectal cancer, 1205
Death
brain death, 1721
diagnosis of, 330, 1721
organ donation process in, 330–331, 
331f
cardiac death, organ donation in, 
331–332
declaration of, 1951
Death domains, 36, 37f
Death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), 
282
DeBakey classification of aortic dissection, 
808, 809f
DeBakey, Michael E, 4
Decubitus ulcers, 260–261. See also 
Pressure ulcers
Deep brain stimulation, 1747–1748, 1747f
expanding indications of, 1748
Defecation, 1180
accommodation response in, 1180
evacuation studies of, 1182
incontinence in. See Incontinence, fecal
neurophysiologic testing in, 1182
obstructed, 1183–1184
sampling reflex in, 1180
Defecography, 1182
Defibrillators, implantable, 770
Degenerative disorders
of hand and wrist joints, 1806–1808
of spine
scoliosis in, 1771
of thoracic aorta, medial
cystic, 787
nonspecific, 787
wallerian, 251
Dehydration in children, 1599
Dehydroepiandrosterone, 1577
Delivery, 1693
brachial plexus palsy from injuries in, 
1782
cesarean, 1693, 1693f
ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure in, 1645, 1645f
perineal lacerations in, 1692
Delorme procedure in rectal prolapse, 
1219
Deltopectoral fasciocutaneous flap in head 
and neck reconstructive surgery, 
601
Democratic leadership, 9
Dendrocytes, 475–476
Denonvilliers’ fascia, 1177
Dense granule deficiency, 89
Dental occlusion in mandibular 
reconstruction, 1853, 1854f, 1863
Dentate line, 1177
11-Deoxycorticosterone, 1575, 1576f
Dermatan sulfate, 245
Dermatitis
perianal, 1231–1232
of vulva, 1678
Dermatofibromas, 486
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans,  
492–493, 1470, 1485
Dermis
anatomy and histology of, 475–476
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans of, 
492–493, 1470, 1485
fibers of, 475
replacement products, 482
Dermoid tumors
of central nervous system, 1737
cutaneous, 486
retrorectal, 1217
Desflurane, 1902, 1902t, 1907
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Desmoid tumors, 1485
of abdominal wall, 1454
of chest wall, 666
common locations of, 1485
disorders associated with, 666
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 1207
genetic factors in, 1485
2006
Index
Desmoplastic fibroma, 1780
Desmopressin acetate
in cardiopulmonary bypass, 95
in von Willebrand’s disease, 89
Dexamethasone
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in bone pain, 1950t
suppression test in Cushing’s syndrome, 
1582–1583
Dexmedetomidine, 1901
Dextran in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
Dextrose
in parenteral nutrition solutions, 58, 76
in postoperative fluid therapy, 80
in preoperative fluid therapy, 79
Diabetes insipidus, 81
central, 81
drug-induced, 81
nephrogenic, 81
Diabetes mellitus
anesthesia management in, 1908
bariatric surgery in, 1112t, 1127
adjustable gastric banding in, 1111, 
1128
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in, 1116, 
1127
coronary artery disease in, 742, 1906
diagnosis of, 1349
foot reconstruction in, 1877, 1879, 
1879t
gastroparesis in, 1087
in glucagonoma, 1393
laboratory findings in, 1350t
pancreas transplantation in, 340
islet cell, 344–345
pancreatic cancer in, 1394
pancreatogenic, 1372–1373
parenteral nutrition in, 59
type II, 1373
insulin signaling pathway in, 452
type III, in chronic pancreatitis, 1373
ulcers in, 260, 267
reconstructive surgery in, 1877, 1879
wound healing problems in, 253, 260, 
267
Diaphragmatic hernia
congenital, 1603–1605
chest radiography in, 1604, 1604f
fetal surgery in, 1645
honeymoon period in, 1604
lung-to-head ratio in, 1604
prenatal ultrasonography in, 1604, 
1604f
giant paraesophageal, 980–984
Diaphragm, trauma of, 202–203
Diaphysis, fractures of, 1782
Diarrhea, 1184–1185
chronic, 1184–1185
postgastrectomy, 1093
in pseudomembranous colitis, 1222
in VIPoma, 1392
Diastasis recti, 1453, 1453f
Dibucaine number, 1901
Diencephalon, 1710
Diethylstilbestrol exposure, vaginal cancer 
associated with, 1697
Diet. See Nutrition
Dieulafoy’s lesion, 1089
DiGeorge’s syndrome, 706, 1574
Digestion
bile functions in, 1270
in small intestine, 1140–1143
Digital subtraction angiography, 833, 833f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
840–841
in renal artery stenosis, 869
Dilatation and curettage procedure
in gestational trophoblastic disease, 
1694
for termination of pregnancy, 1692
uterine bleeding, 1683, 1684f
Diphtheria, pharyngitis in, 571
Disability, 1924, 1926t
Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY), 
1957, 1973, 1974
Disability assessment
in heart disease, 737, 737t
in trauma, 168
Discitis, 1746
Discrimination in obesity, 1101
Discs, intervertebral. See Intervertebral 
discs
Disease burden and global surgery,  
1957–1960, 1959f
Dislocations
of ankle, 1764
of elbow, 1759
in hand, 1796–1798
of hip, 1760
after arthroplasty, 1778
in cerebral palsy, 1782
of knee, 1762
of patella, 1762
perilunate, 1794f
of shoulder, 1759
of spinal facets, cervical, 1722, 1723f, 
1770
Dissection, aortic, 806–816. See also 
Aorta, dissection of
Distribution of drugs
factors affecting, 1898
volume of, 1898
Diuretic drugs, hypercalcemia from, 1562
Diverticulectomy
in esophageal diverticula, 993–994, 995, 
997
Zenker’s, 989, 990f
in small intestine diverticula, 1165, 1167
Diverticulitis, 1201–1203
complicated, 1202–1203
differential diagnosis in, 1201, 1203, 
1246
Hinchey staging system in, 1202
in Meckel’s diverticula, 1163–1165, 
1246
differential diagnosis in, 1252
pelvic abscess in, 1202f
uncomplicated, 1201–1202
Diverticulopexy in Zenker’s diverticulum, 
989, 990f
Diverticulosis, 1201, 1201f
Diverticulotomy, and endoscopic 
cricopharyngotomy in Zenker’s 
diverticulum, 988–989, 990f
Diverticulum
of esophagus, 987f, 988–989, 993–994, 
994f
diverticulectomy in, 989, 990f,  
993–994, 995, 997
diverticulopexy in, 989, 990f
endoscopic cricopharyngotomy and 
diverticulotomy in, 988–989, 
990f
endoscopic evaluation of, 950
epiphrenic, 994, 995, 997, 998f
fistula in, 1023
with hiatal hernia, 994
with motility disorders of esophagus, 
993
pulsion, 994
traction, 994, 994f
of large intestine, 1201–1203
false, 1201
giant colonic, 1203
hemorrhage in, 1201, 1203
right-sided, 1203
Meckel’s. See Meckel’s diverticulum
of small intestine, 1163–1167
acquired, 1165–1167
duodenal, 1165, 1166, 1166f
false, 1165
hemorrhage in, 1164, 1167
jejunoileal, 1165, 1166, 1166f
juxtapapillary, 1165
Meckel’s, 1163–1165
periampullary, 1165, 1166
peri-Vaterian, 1165
of stomach, 1089, 1089f
DNA, 35, 444f
analysis of, 457–462
microarray technology in, 459–460, 
461f
polymerase chain reaction technique 
in, 458, 459f
Southern blot hybridization in,  
457–458, 457f
cloning of, 444, 456–457
double-helical structure of, 444, 445f
double-strand breaks in, 293
and hereditary, 444–446
loss of heterozygosity, colorectal cancer 
in, 1205
microsatellite instability, 292
colorectal cancer in, 1205
mismatch repair, 292
in hereditary nonpolyposis colon 
cancer, 1207
next-generation sequencing, 460, 462
radiation damage of, 313
recombinant technology, 444, 456–457, 
457f
in transfusion products, 97
replication of, 443, 446, 446f
errors in, and colorectal cancer, 1205
transfection with, 463, 463f, 467
in transgenic mice, 463–464, 463f
DNA tumor viruses, 295
Dobutamine
in cardiogenic shock, 127
in sepsis, 125
in stress echocardiography, 738
Docetaxel, 1703t
in lung cancer, 644t
in ovarian or tubal cancer, 1703
Docosahexaenoic acid, 32
Dog bites, 478, 479f
Domperidone in delayed gastric emptying, 
1050t
Donabedian model on quality 
measurement, 366–367, 367f
Donors
in blood transfusion, 1914
in organ transplantation, 330–332
consent issues in, 1943–1944
deceased, 330–332
brain death diagnosis in, 330
in cardiac death, 331–332
multiple organ procurement from, 
331, 331f
organ preservation methods in, 331
of kidney, 322, 331, 334
operative technique in, 333f
living, 332
non–heart-beating, 331–332
of pancreas, 331, 343–344
2007
Index
Donovanosis, 1678, 1679t
Dopamine, 1577–1578, 1579f
in cardiogenic shock, 127
in neurogenic shock, 130
Doppler ultrasonography, 407, 830
in brain death, 1721
cardiac output in, 407
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 839
flow time corrected parameter in, 407
of liver, 1272
in portal hypertension, 1280
transcranial, 411–412
Dor fundoplication and esophageal 
myotomy, 999, 1001, 1001f
Dormancy phenomenon in tumors, 285
Dorsalis pedis artery palpation, 829
Dose of drugs
equianalgesic, 1900
lethal, 1898–1899
and response curves, 1898, 1899f
Double effect principle, 1945, 1945f
Double-outlet right ventricle, 721–722
ventricular septal defect in, 722–723, 
723f
doubly committed, 722, 723, 723f
noncommitted, 722–723, 723f
subaortic, 722, 723, 723f
Douglas pouch, 1674
Down syndrome
atlantoaxial instability in, and 
adenotonsillectomy precautions, 
571
duodenal atresia in, 1615
Doxepin in pain, 1950t
Doxorubicin
in skin injury, 480
in soft tissue sarcoma of extremity, 
1475–1476
Doxycycline, 145t, 257t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
Drainage techniques, 389–340, 390f
antibiotic therapy in, 390
choledochal, 1327, 1329f
indications for, 389–340
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1383–1384, 
1384f, 1385f
in pleural effusions, 681–682, 681f
DREAM trial, 857
Dressings, 265–266
absorbable materials in, 266
absorbent, 265
alginate, 266
in burns, 232, 234, 1820
and skin grafts, 234
for compression therapy in venous 
insufficiency, 931, 931f, 932
desired characteristics of, 266t
historical development of, 241
hydrocolloid and hydrogel, 265–266
hydrophilic and hydrophobic, 265
medicated, 266
nonadherent, 265
occlusive and semiocclusive, 265
primary, 265
secondary, 265
Drug-eluting stents, 432, 836
Drug-induced disorders
in elderly, 1935
gynecomastia in, 506
hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen, 1276
liver transplantation in, 347, 1277, 
1277t
hypercalcemia in, 71, 1562
hyperkalemia in, 71
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560
hypokalemia, 71
hyponatremia in, 69
liver failure in, from acetaminophen, 
1276
ototoxicity of aminoglycoside 
antibiotics, 384
pancreatitis in, 1353
peptic ulcer disease in, 1053, 1054, 
1057–1058, 1058t, 1059t
hospitalization rates in, 1058t
medical treatment in, 1061
perforation in, 1068
thrombocytopenia from heparin, 90–91, 
95, 389, 922
in burns, 233
toxic epidermal necrolysis in, 477, 477f
Drug resistance in tumors, 312–313
Drugs
additive effects of, 1898
agonist, 1898
antagonist, 1898
distribution of, 1898
dose of
equianalgesic, 1900
lethal, 1898–1899
and response curve, 1898, 1899f
efficacy of, 1898
hyporeactivity, 1898
metabolism of, 1898
liver functions in, 1270
pharmacodynamics of, 1898
pharmacokinetics of, 1897–1898
potency of, 1898
resistance to
in bacterial infections, 143t–145t
in chemotherapy, 312–313, 313t
plasmids encoding markers, 457
in sepsis, 155
in tuberculosis, 654, 655
synergistic effects of, 1898
therapeutic index on, 1899
tolerance to, 1898
Drummond marginal artery, 1177
Dubin-Johnson syndrome, 1272
Ductal carcinoma of breast
in situ
growth patterns in, 520
histopathology in, 520, 520t, 521f
in male, 555
pathology in, 510
radiation therapy in, 537, 550
risk for invasive cancer in, 520, 521f
tamoxifen therapy in, 552
treatment of, 537–538
invasive, 520–521, 522f
Ductography in breast cancer diagnosis, 
526–527, 527f
Ductus arteriosus patency, 702–705
anatomy in, 702–703
and aortic stenosis, 698, 699
clinical manifestations and diagnosis of, 
703–704
incidence of, 703
and interrupted aortic arch, 729
natural history in, 703
persistent, 703
prolonged, 703
treatment in, 704, 704f
catheter-based, 704
outcomes of, 704–705
surgical closure, 704, 704f
in tricuspid atresia, 712
Duhamel procedure in Hirschsprung’s 
disease, 1626, 1626f
Dumping syndrome, 1049, 1090–1092
early reaction in, 1091
late reaction in, 1091
medical therapy in, 1091
surgical management of, 1091–1092
Duodenal switch, biliopancreatic diversion 
with, 1119–1121
configuration in, 1119f, 1120
Duodenojejunostomy, Roux-en-Y, in 
duodenal injuries, 207, 208f
Duodenum
access for enteral nutrition, 55, 55t
anatomy of, 1138
atresia of, 1612, 1615–1616, 1616f
compression from superior mesenteric 
artery, 1147
diverticula of, 1165, 1166f, 1167
embryonic development of, 1139, 1140f
fistula in trauma, 209
neoplasms of, 1159f, 1160
treatment in, 1161
obstruction of
double bubble sign in, 1615, 1615f
in neonates, 1615, 1615f
in pancreatic cancer, 1399
peptic ulcer disease of, 1053–1073
perforation of, 1169
reflux of secretions, 967–968, 968f
trauma of, 207–209, 208f
in children, 1643
damage control surgery in, 195
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
191
pyloric exclusion procedure in, 209, 
209f
Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy in, 
207, 208f
Duplex ultrasonography, 830, 918
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 839, 
840t
grading of stenosis in, 840, 840t
in lymphedema, 935
in mesenteric ischemia, 862
in renal artery stenosis, 867–868, 868t
in venous insufficiency, 930, 931f
in venous thromboembolism, 920, 920f
Duplications, intestinal, 1624
Dupuytren’s contracture, 1808–1809, 
1810f
Durable power of attorney for health care, 
1944
Duval procedure in chronic pancreatitis, 
1383, 1384f
Dysgerminoma, ovarian, 1637, 1703
Dysostosis, mandibulofacial, 1846, 1847f
Dysoxia, 115
Dyspepsia, 1050
Dysphagia, 625
barium studies in, 953
in cancer of esophagus, 1004
functional grades of, 1008, 1008t
preoperative nutritional status in, 
1008
esophagoscopy in, 953
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 965
and hiatal hernia, 981
indications for surgery in, 972
outcome of surgery in, 977, 979, 980
postoperative recurrence of, 980
in hiatal hernia, 981
postoperative, 983
in hypertensive lower esophageal 
sphincter, 993
in motility disorders of esophagus, 986
long esophageal myotomy in,  
995–997
2008
Index
Dysphagia (Cont.):
in sarcoma of esophagus, 1014
in Schatzki’s ring, 984
Dysplasia
of colon
high-grade, 1209, 1212
in ulcerative colitis, 1197
fibromuscular, 904–905
of carotid artery, 847–848, 848f, 904
of renal artery, 866, 867f, 904
endovascular therapy in, 871
fibrous, of chest wall, 666
of hip, in children
Pavlik harness in, 1783
of lungs, squamous, 613–614
of stomach, adenocarcinoma 
development in, 1078
Dysplastic nevus syndrome, 488
Dyspnea
in cardiac disorders, 735, 736
in aortic valve insufficiency, 760
in aortic valve stenosis, 758
in dying patients, 1948
Dysraphism, 1749
Dystonia, deep brain stimulation in, 1748
E
Eagle-Barrett syndrome, 1634, 1634f
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ 
Collaborative Group (EBCTCG), 
499
Ears
infections of, 565–567
common organisms causing, 565, 566
myringotomy and tube placement in, 
566f, 567
otitis in. See Otitis
postoperative, 383–384
postoperative complications of,  
383–384
reconstructive surgery of, 1855–1856, 
1857f
tumors of, 594–595
Eaton-Lambert syndrome, 1745
Ebstein’s anomaly, 719–720
one-and-a-half ventricle repair in, 720
Starnes procedure in, 720
Eccrine glands, 475
Echinocandins, 658
Echinococcosis, hydatid disease in, 
1285–1286
Echocardiography, 738–739
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 790
in aortic dissection, 811–812
in aortic stenosis, 699, 758
in aortic valve insufficiency, 760–761
in atrial septal defect, 697
dobutamine stress technique, 738
in double-outlet right ventricle, 722
in mitral stenosis, 752
speckle-tracking, 738–739
in total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection, 708
transesophageal, 738, 811
cardiac output in, 408
transthoracic, 738
in tricuspid valve disorders, 763
in truncus arteriosus, 707
in valvular heart disease, 749t
Eck fistula, in portal hypertension and 
gastroesophageal varices, 1282, 
1283
Ectasia, ductal, of breast, 508, 509
Ectopic conditions
of adrenal gland, 1574
of endometrial glands, 679, 1557, 1568, 
1569f
in adenomyosis, 1682
in endometriosis, 1689–1690
of parathyroid gland, persistent 
hyperparathyroidism in, 1571, 
1571f
in pregnancy, 1692
differential diagnosis in, 1248
testing for, 1677
of testis, 1635
of thyroid gland, 679, 1522–1523
Eculizumab, 325t, 329
Edema
in burns, 1820
cerebral, in liver failure, 347
of leg, in chronic venous insufficiency, 
916f, 917
lymphedema, 934–936. See also 
Lymphedema
pulmonary
in mitral stenosis, 751
postexpansion, 682
of vocal cord, 573
Edrophonium reversal of neuromuscular 
blockade, 1915
Education of patients, in bariatric surgery, 
1105–1106
Efficacy of drugs, 1898
Effort thrombosis, 928
Effusions, pleural, 680
access and drainage in, 680–682, 681f
diagnostic work-up in, 680–682
differential diagnosis in, 682, 683t
etiologies of, 680, 681t
exudative, 681, 681t, 682, 683t
in lung cancer, 632–633
malignant, 682, 684t
transudative, 681, 681t, 682, 683t
treatment algorithm on, 682, 684f
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 246, 248t, 787, 
901–902
aortic aneurysms in, 787
clinical features in, 246, 248t
inheritance of, 248t, 901–902
types of, 248t, 787, 902
Eicosanoids, 31–33, 32t
Eicosapentaenoic acid, 32
Eisenmenger’s syndrome, 727
Ejection fraction, 403t
Elastase, 1348, 1348t
Elastography, ultrasonography, 1273
Elbow
dislocations of, 1759
fractures of
in children, 1783
ulnar nerve compression at, 1744,  
1806
Elderly, 1923–1938
abuse of, 1934
appendicitis in, 1246, 1256, 1924, 1929
bariatric surgery in, 1127
body composition in, 1925t
cancer in, 1931–1934
of breast, 1932–1933
colorectal, 1933
effectiveness of oncologic surgery in, 
1931f, 1938f
of esophagus, 1007
of lung, 1933–1934
palliative care in, 1938
of pancreas, 1393
of thyroid, 1937
cardiovascular disorders in, 1925t, 
1929–1930
and endovascular surgery, 1936, 
1937f
and surgical risk, 1926, 1928
cerebrovascular disorders in, 1930–1931
cholecystitis in, 1924, 1929
cognitive function in, 1928–1929
drug-induced disorders in, 1935
falls in, 1934
functional status of, 1928
hemorrhagic shock in, 119–120
kidney function in
age-related changes in, 1926t, 1928
and surgical risk, 1928
minimally invasive surgery in, 436–437, 
1935–1936
nutritional status of, 1929
osteoporosis in, 1937
pain in, abdominal, 1936
palliative care of, 1938
parathyroid gland in, 1937–1938
physiologic effects of aging in, 221, 
221t, 1923, 1924, 1925t–1926t
postoperative complications in, 386, 393
preoperative assessment in, 1926–1929, 
1930f
algorithm on, 1927f
in cancer, 1931–1932
preoperative predictors of outcomes, 
1924, 1926t
respiratory disorders in, 1925t
and surgical risk, 1928
surgical risk assessment in, 1926
thyroid disorders in, 1936–1937
trauma in, 1934–1935
of head, 221–222, 1935, 1935f
intracranial hemorrhage in, 1935, 
1935f
umbilical hernia in, 1923
valve replacement in, 1930–1931
aortic, 761, 1930
wound healing in, 252–253
Electrical burns, 228–229
Electricity in global surgery, 1957
Electrocardiography, 401–402, 738
in aortic dissection, 810–812
in aortic insufficiency, 760
in aortic stenosis, 699, 758
in atrial fibrillation, 886
in atrial septal defect, 697
continuous monitoring in, 401
12-lead, 401
in mitral stenosis, 752
Electrocautery, 95
Electroencephalography, 411
bispectral index in, 411
in brain death, 1721
continuous monitoring in, 411
Electrogastrography, 1053
Electrohydraulic lithotriptors, 429
Electrolarynx, for speech rehabilitation 
after laryngectomy, 592
Electrolytes, 65–82
calcium, 72, 78
in children, 1599
magnesium, 73, 78
normal exchange of, 67
in parenteral solutions, 76, 76t
phosphorus, 73, 78
potassium, 70–71, 77
in preoperative fluid therapy, 79
sodium, 68, 77
Electromyography, 1712
in peripheral nerve trauma, 1727
of puborectalis muscle, 1182
Electrosurgery, 427–428
2009
Index
bipolar, 427, 428f
capacitive coupling in, 427–428, 428f
monopolar, 427, 428
Elephant trunk procedure in aortic 
aneurysm repair, 818
Borst’s technique, 795, 798f, 799f
completion of, 804
frozen, 813
reversed technique, 802, 802f
Elliptocytosis, hereditary, splenectomy in, 
1430t, 1431
Elongation factors, 447
Embolectomy
in limb ischemia
endovascular technique, 887
surgical technique, 887–888
pulmonary, 925
Embolic protection devices in carotid 
angioplasty and stenting,  
845–846, 846t
Embolism
air, 171, 172f
in central venous catheterization, 381
in aortic aneurysm, 789
in carotid angioplasty and stenting, 
845–846, 846t
cerebral, 1728
gas, in laparoscopy, 418
limb ischemia in, 881, 885–886
clinical manifestations in, 887
endovascular therapy in, 887
surgical treatment in, 887–888
mesenteric artery, 860, 861f, 863–864, 
1167
surgical repair in, 864
pulmonary, 924–925, 925f, 927
in burns, 233
computed tomography of, 926f
diagnosis of, 385–386
epidemiology of, 918
in kidney transplantation, 339
in laparoscopy, 418
pleural effusions in, 680, 681t, 682, 
683t
prevention and treatment of, 386
in trauma, 186
Embolization
in hemoptysis, 663
in liver tumors
chemoembolization in, 1295–1296
radioembolization in, 1296
of portal vein, prior to liver resection, 
1300–1301
of splenic artery, 1429, 1438
Embryonic development
of abdominal wall, 1453, 1631
of adrenal gland, 1574–1575, 1575f
of aortic coarctation, 705
of aortopulmonary window, 711
of appendix vermiform, 1241–1242
of atrial septum, 695
of breast, 499–500
of gastrointestinal tract, 1175,  
1616–1617
midgut in, 1175, 1179, 1616–1617
small intestine in, 1139–1140, 1140f
of inguinal hernia, 1500, 1634
of Meckel’s diverticulum, 1139, 1164, 
1453
of mesentery, 1457, 1458f
of omentum, 1457
of pancreas, 1344, 1344f
of parathyroid gland, 1556–1557, 1557f
sexual differentiation in, 1637
of spleen, 1424
of testis, 1635
of thyroid, 1521, 1522f, 1602
abnormalities in, 1521–1523
of total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection, 707–708, 708f
of truncus arteriosus, 706
tumors from remnants in, 1736–1737
Emesis, in burn, 236
Emphysema
congenital lobar, 1605–1606, 1606f
lung volume reduction surgery in, 663
Emptying studies, gastric, 963
liquid, 1049–1050, 1050f
solid, 1050
Empyema, 682–685
etiologies of, 682–683, 685t
of gallbladder, 1320
management of, 685
pathophysiology in, 682–685
postoperative, 390–391, 682–683
subdural, 1745
in trauma, 202, 682–683
Encephalocele, 1750
Encephalopathy, hepatic, 1276
in cirrhosis, Child-Turcotte-Pugh score 
on, 1280t
extracorporeal liver support in, 1277
liver transplantation in, 347
Enchondromas, 1778
of hand and wrist, 1818
Enchondromatosis, multiple, 1778
End-of-life care, 1947–1951
advance directives and living wills on, 
1944
in cognitive failure, 1951
declaration of death in, 1951
in dyspnea, 1948
pain management in, 1946, 1948, 1950
adjuvant medications in, 1950t
in persistent pain, 1949t
step ladder approach to, 1948, 1948t
prognostic tools in, 1946–1947, 1947t
signs of imminent death in, 1947–1948
syndrome of imminent demise in, 
1947–1948
withdrawing or withholding life-
sustaining therapies in, 1944–1945
Endarterectomy
aortoiliac, 877
carotid, 842–845
compared to angioplasty and stenting, 
842–843
compared to medical therapy,  
841–842
complications in, 384, 843, 845
high-risk, 842, 842t
surgical technique in, 843–845, 843f, 
844f, 845f
in femoropopliteal occlusive disease, 897
in mesenteric occlusive disease, 864
in renal artery occlusive disease, 869
Endocarditis
in aortic valve replacement, 761
in ductus arteriosus patency, 703, 704
peripheral artery embolism in, 885
Endocrine cells of stomach, 1041, 1042f, 
1042t
Endocrine system. See also specific glands
anesthesia in disorders of, 1908
ectopic glands of, 679
pancreas in, 1348–1351
neoplasms of, 1390–1391
small intestine functions in, 1145,  
1146t
Endodermal sinus tumors, 1704
Endogastrostomy, percutaneous, 
complications of, 382
Endoleaks
in abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, 
855–856, 858–859, 858f, 859t
detection of, 858–859
types of, 858–859, 858f, 859t
in thoracic aortic aneurysm repair, 806, 
806t
Endoluminal surgery, 428, 430–432, 431t
energy sources for, 427–429
Endometrial cancer screening, 298t
Endometriomas, 1690
Endometriosis, 1689–1690
ovarian, 1636, 1689–1690
Endometrium
ablation procedure in abnormal 
bleeding, 1684
anatomy of, 1675
biopsy of, 1677–1678, 1684
cancer of, 1698–1701, 1701t
staging in, 1701, 1701t
hyperplasia of, 1683
polyps of, 1682
sarcoma of, 1481, 1701
Endoneurium, 1726
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP), 203, 387
Endoscopy
of anal canal, 1180
capsule, 1180–1181
in Crohn’s disease, 1154, 1155f
in obscure gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage, 1168
of colon, 1180–1181. See also 
Colonoscopy
complications of, 382
coronary artery bypass surgery in, 746
energy sources in, 427–429, 428f
of esophagus, 950
in hiatal hernia, 950, 981, 982f
mucosal resection in, 1008, 1009
in gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 1168
in gastrointestinal sarcomas, 1480
in hiatal hernia, 950, 981, 982f
historical aspects of, 416
in inguinal hernia repair complications, 
1515–1516
natural orifice transluminal endoscopic 
surgery. See Natural orifice 
transluminal endoscopic surgery
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1380–1383, 1381f
parathyroidectomy in, 1567
in portal hypertension and variceal 
bleeding, 1282
in sinusitis, 568, 568f
and nasal polyps, 568, 568f
small intestine perforation in, 1169
of stomach, 1050t
in cancer
gastrectomy in, 1083–184
ultrasonography in, 1051, 1080
indications for, 1050–1051
ultrasonography in, 1051, 1080
surgical access to, 423
thyroidectomy in, 1553f, 1554
transanal microsurgery scope, 434, 434f
ultrasonography in
in biliary disorders, 1316
in esophageal cancer, 1005, 1008
in gastric disorders, 1051, 1080
in cancer, 1051, 1080
in pancreatitis, 1369, 1370f, 1374
video systems in, 424–427, 427f
2010
Index
Endotension in aortic aneurysm repair, 859
Endothelial cells in wound healing, 244
Endothelins, 42–43, 43f
Endothelium, 40–43
and neutrophil interactions, 40, 42f, 118
Endothelium-derived relaxing factor, 41
Endotracheal intubation
in anesthesia, 1910–1911
preoperative airway evaluation for, 
1905, 1906f, 1906t
in hemoptysis, 662, 663
injury of trachea in, 605, 607–608, 608f
in trauma, 162
in children, 222, 1642
Endovascular therapy, 430–432, 834–837
angioplasty balloons in, 835–836, 836f
in aortic aneurysm
abdominal, 850, 853–857, 854f
thoracic, 792–793, 797, 804
complications of, 805–806
endoleaks in, 806, 806t
outcome in, 819
in aortic dissection, 815–816
fenestration technique in, 815
outcome in, 820
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 875, 
879–881
compared to surgical treatment, 
880–881
complications of, 880
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 842, 
845–847
catheters in, 835
guidewires in, 835
hemostatic sheaths in, 835, 835f
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882
acute, 887
chronic, 891–892
advantages and disadvantages of, 
892t
infrapopliteal, 891, 892t, 894
stent grafts in, 895
stent placement in, 895, 900
technical considerations in, 
891–892
compared to surgical treatment, 
899–900
complications of, 896–897
in mesenteric ischemia, 864–865
clinical results of, 865–866
compared to open surgical repair,  
866
complications of, 865
techniques in, 865
needles and vascular access in, 834–835, 
835f
in renal artery occlusive disease, 
870–872
clinical results of, 871–872, 872t
complications of, 870
indications for, 869
techniques in, 870
stent grafts in, 836–837, 838f. See also 
Stent grafts
stent placement in, 836, 837f. See also 
Stent placement
Enflurane, 1902, 1902t, 1907
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Entamoeba histolytica infections
anorectal, 1233
liver abscess in, 1285
Enteral nutrition, 52–56. See also 
Nutrition, enteral
Enteric nervous system, 1145, 1711
Enteritis
radiation, 1162–1163
acute, 1162, 1163
chronic, 1162, 1163
diagnosis of, 1162–1163, 1163f
outcomes in, 1163
treatment and prevention of, 1163
Enterochromaffin-like cells of stomach, 
1040, 1043
carcinoid tumors of, 1085–1086
Enteroclysis
in Meckel’s diverticulum, 1164
in radiation enteritis, 1163
in small intestine neoplasms, 1161
Enterococcal infections, antibiotic therapy 
in, 143t–145t
resistance to, 143t–145t
Enterocolitis
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
necrotizing, 1619–1621
Bell stages in, 1620
clinical manifestations in, 1620
intestinal perforation in, 1620, 1621
compared to spontaneous 
perforation, 1621
in older infants, 1621
pathogenesis in, 1620
pneumatosis intestinalis in, 1620, 
1620f
risk factors for, 1619
short bowel syndrome in, 1621
treatment of, 1620–1621
neutropenic, 1236
Enterocytes, 1139
Enteroendocrine cells of small intestine, 
1139
Enteroenterostomy in laparoscopic Roux-en 
Y gastric bypass, 1114f, 1116
Enteroplasty, serial transverse, in short 
bowel syndrome, 1172, 1172f
Enteroscopy in gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage, 1168
push technique, 1168
Sonde technique, 1168
wireless capsule technique, 1168
Enterostomal therapy nurse, 1192
Entrapment syndromes. See also 
Compression injury
of peripheral nerves, 1744
in hand and wrist, 1744, 1805–1806
of popliteal artery, 905–906, 905t
Environmental factors in colorectal cancer 
risk, 1204
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot 
(ELISPOT) analysis, 468
Enzymes, pancreatic, 1348–1349, 1348t
in acute pancreatitis, 1353–1354, 1355
in chronic pancreatitis, administration 
of, 1379–1380, 1380t
Eosinophilic esophagitis, 986–987, 986f
Eosinophils, functions of, 39
Ependymoma
intracranial, 1734
spinal, 1738
Epidemiologic transition of disease in 
global surgery, 1957–1958
Epidermal appendages, 475
Epidermal growth factor, 247t
Epidermal growth factor receptors,  
281, 288t
in breast cancer, 534–535
in lung cancer, 627
Epidermis, 486
anatomy and histology of, 473
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis, 485
Epidermoid tumors
anal and perianal, 1218
of breast, 556
of central nervous system, 1737, 1737f
Epidermolysis bullosa, 248–249
squamous cell carcinoma in, 487
Epididymo-orchitis, 1665
Epidural anesthesia, 1904
Epigastric arteries, 1450, 1452f
inferior, 1497, 1516
injury in laparoscopy, 1704–1705, 1704f
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
rectus sheath hematoma in hemorrhage 
from, 1455
Epigastric perforator flap in breast 
reconstruction, 1871, 1871f
Epigastric veins, 1497
Epiglottis, anatomy of, 580, 589
Epilepsy
drug therapy in, 1746
surgical treatment in, 1746–1747
Epinephrine, 22, 1577–1578, 1579f
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
in shock response, 115
therapy with
in cardiogenic shock, 127
in hand and wrist injuries, 1796
in local anesthesia, 1903
in wound care, 264
Epineurium, 1726
Epiphysis, 1782
slipped capital femoral, 1783
Epiploic foramen, 1265, 1265f
Epirubicin in soft tissue sarcoma of 
extremity, 1476
Epistaxis, postoperative, 384
Epithelial cells of stomach, 1039–1040, 
1041f, 1042t
surface, 1039–1040, 1044–1045
restitution of, 1045
Epithelialization in wound healing,  
245–246, 245f, 1831
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), 
in tumor invasion, 285
Epithelial tumors of ovary, 1637
Epithelioid cells, 660f
Epithelioid sarcoma, 1818
Epsilon cells, pancreas, 1350
Epstein-Barr virus infections
pharyngitis in, 571
in transplant recipients, 329
and posttransplant 
lymphoproliferative disorder, 
329
tumors associated with
of nasopharynx, 593
and posttransplant 
lymphoproliferative disorder, 
295t
of stomach, 1075
Equinovalgus foot deformity in cerebral 
palsy, 1782
c-erbB-2, 281
Erb’s palsy, 1727
Erection of penis, 1652
in priapism, 1663–1664
prostatectomy affecting, 1658
Erlotinib, 310t
Errors, medical
in communication issues,  
368–369
disclosure of, 380, 1952
high-profile, 368
Institute of Medicine report on, 366, 
1952
2011
Index
legal issues in, 380, 380t
in wrong-site surgery, 378–379
and near misses, 367t
retained surgical items in, 377–378, 377t
risk management in, 380
in surgical specimen labeling, 371, 371f
systems change in, 367
types of, 367t
wrong-site surgery in, 378
Ertapenem, 144t
Erythema nodosum in inflammatory bowel 
disease, 1196
Erythrocytes. See Red blood cells
Erythromycin, 145t
in delayed gastric emptying, 1050t
in preoperative bowel preparation, 1194
Erythroplasia of Queyrat, 487
ESCAPE trial, 406
Escharotomy in burns, 234, 1820
Escherichia coli
antibiotics for infections of, 143t–145t
in DNA recombinant technology, 457, 
457f
Esmolol in aortic injuries, 201
Esophageal speech after laryngectomy, 592
Esophagectomy
in cancer of esophagus, 1009
in cervical portion, 589
Ivor Lewis en bloc technique, 1011
salvage procedure, 1011
transhiatal approach, 1009–1012, 
1011–1012
minimally invasive, 1010–1011, 
1010f
open, 1010
transthoracic approach, 1011–1012
minimally invasive three-field, 
1010–1011
minimally invasive two-field, 
1010–1011
open three-field, 1011
in caustic injury of esophagus, 1022
Ivor-Lewis
in cancer of esophagus, 1011
complications of, 386
reconstructive surgery after, 1024–1025
thoracic duct injury and chylothorax in, 
685, 686f
vagal sparing, colon interposition in, 
1025–1026
Esophagitis in gastroesophageal reflux, 
967, 967t, 968, 969
antireflux surgery in, 972
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
Esophagoesophagostomy, in esophageal 
atresia and tracheoesophageal 
fistula, 1610
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, indications 
for, 1050–1051, 1050t
Esophagogastrojejunostomy in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1071f
Esophagoscopy, 950
in hiatal hernia, 950, 982, 982f
mucosal resection in, 1008, 1009
Esophagus, 941–1026
achalasia of, 990–992, 991f, 992f.  
See also Achalasia
anatomy of, 941–947, 942f, 943f
abdominal, 944
lymphatic, 946–947, 946f
muscles in, 944–945
nerves in, 946, 946f
normal areas of narrowing in, 942, 
943f
thoracic, 944, 944f
vascular, 945–946, 945f, 946f
atresia of, 1608–1612
anatomic varieties of, 1608–1609, 
1608f
clinical presentation in, 1609–1610, 
1609f
coexisting anomalies in, 1609
complications of surgery in,  
1611–1612
etiology and pathologic presentation 
in, 1609
initial management of, 1610
outcome in, 1612
postoperative management in, 1611
in preterm infant, 1610
primary surgical correction of, 1610
Barrett’s. See Barrett’s esophagus
benign tumors of, 1017–1018
burns of, in caustic ingestion, 1020, 
1021t
cancer of, 1003–1014
algorithm on management of, 1014, 
1015f
in Barrett’s esophagus, 969, 970f, 
972, 979, 1003
in cervical portion, 588, 1005, 1007f
clinical manifestations in, 1003–1004
endoscopic mucosal resection in, 
1007, 1008, 1009
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 
618f, 1003, 1004f
esophagectomy in, 1009. See also 
Esophagectomy, in cancer of 
esophagus
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
967, 969, 979
general approach to, 1005
locations of, 1005, 1007f
palliative treatment in, 1005, 1007f
preoperative evaluation in, 1007
risk factors for, 1003
staging of, 1004–1005, 1006t
treatment decisions based on,  
1005
surgical treatment of, 1009
factors affecting decision for, 1005, 
1007f
caustic and corrosive injury of, 942, 
1020–1023
in children, 1020, 1608, 1612–1613
grades of, 1021, 1021t, 1612
management algorithm on, 1022f
in caustic injury, 1020–1023
columnar-lined, in Barrett’s esophagus, 
950, 969, 1003
complications in surgery of, 386
corkscrew deformity of, 992, 992f
cysts of, 679, 1017, 1018
congenital, 1018
diverticulum of. See Diverticulum, of 
esophagus
evaluation of, 950–964
duodenogastric function tests in, 
963–964
functional, 953–964
structural, 950–953
fistula of, 1023–1024
with trachea, 609, 1608–1612. See 
also Tracheoesophageal fistula
foreign body in, 942
in children, 1607–1608
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
964–980
hiatal hernia of, 980–984
leiomyoma of, 1017–1018, 1017f
Mallory-Weiss tears of, 1020
manometry of. See Manometry, 
esophageal
motility of
barium studies of, 950–951, 953f
disorders of, 986–995
end-stage, 1003
of esophageal body and lower 
esophageal sphincter, 990–994
long esophageal myotomy in, 
995–997, 995f, 996f–997f
nonspecific, 993
pharyngoesophageal, 986–990
primary, 990–993, 990t, 991t
in scleroderma, 984–985, 985f
secondary, 990t, 993
manometry in assessment of,  
953–955, 990
radionuclide scans of, 955
in swallowing mechanism, 947–949
video- and cineradiography of, 955, 
961, 961f
nutcracker, 992–993
perforation of, 1018–1020
diagnosis of, 1018, 1019f
management in, 1018–1020, 1019f, 
1020f
pH monitoring of, 949, 955, 962f
composite score in, 962, 962t
equipment used in, 963–964, 964f
with gastric pH monitoring,  
963, 964f
in gastroesophageal reflux, 961–963, 
964, 964f, 967, 968f
and respiratory disorders, 969–972, 
971
in hiatal hernia, 983
normal values in, 962, 962t
sensitivity and specificity of, 963–964
physiology of, 947–949
pseudodiverticulosis of, 992
reconstructive surgery of, 1024–1026, 
1863
in caustic and corrosive injury,  
1020–1023, 1022f, 1023f, 
1612–1613
composite of colon, jejunum, and 
stomach in, 1025
in end-stage motor disorders, 1003
jejunal flap in, 1863
in partial esophageal resection, 1024, 
1024f
in total esophagectomy, 1024–1025
resection of. See Esophagectomy
sarcoma of, 1014–1017, 1016f
polypoid, 1015
Schatzki’s ring of, 984, 984f
scleroderma of, 984–985, 985f, 993
spasm of, diffuse and segmental, 992, 
992f, 993f
sphincter muscles of, 944
in achalasia, 992
in gastroesophageal reflux, 949, 
965–967, 966f, 972
and antireflux surgery, 973, 973f
and hiatal hernia, 966–967
permanently defective, 966
Heller myotomy of, 997–999, 999f
hypertensive, 993
manometry of, 953–955, 965
motility disorders of, 990–994
pressure regulation, 949
in scleroderma, 985
in swallowing mechanism,  
947–949
2012
Index
Esophagus (Cont.):
strictures of
in caustic ingestion, 1021, 1022, 1611
stent placement in, 1022, 1022f
in gastroesophageal reflux, 967–969, 
967t
indications for antireflux surgery 
in, 972
outcome of surgery in, 979
structural abnormalities of, 950–953
trauma of, 178, 200, 202
from caustic and corrosive 
substances, 942, 1020–1023, 
1608, 1612–1613
fistula in, 1023
from foreign bodies, 1018, 1608
perforation in, 1018, 1019
varices of, 1283. See also Varices, 
gastroesophageal
Essential Trauma Care project (ESTC), 1968
Estlander flap in lip reconstruction, 1857
Estrogen
and breast cancer risk, 511
antiestrogen therapy in, 552–553
in breast development and function, 500, 
503, 505
Estrogen receptor status in breast cancer, 
534, 535–536
and endocrine therapy, 552
Ethanol, percutaneous injection in 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1295
Ether, historical use of, 1895–1896
Ethical issues, 1941–1952
in advance directives and living wills, 
1944
in conflicts of interest, 1951
definitions of terminology related to, 
1941
in disclosure of errors, 1952
in informed consent, 1941–1944
in palliative care, 1946–1947
in power of attorney for health care, 
1944
in research, 1951–1952
in withdrawing and withholding life 
sustaining therapies, 1944–1945
Ethmoid sinus
in naso-orbital-ethmoid fractures, 1855
tumors of, 593
Etomidate, 1900, 1909
Etoposide in lung cancer, 644t
Eukaryotes, transcription in, 447
European Carotid Surgery Trial, 841, 842
European Organization for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 
protocol, 537, 1476–1477, 1484
Evacuation studies, rectal, 1182
EVAR-1 trial, 857
Everolimus, 310t
Evoked potentials, somatosensory and 
brain stem, 411
Ewing’s sarcoma, 665, 667, 1465
chemotherapy in, 667, 668t
genetic factors in, 1467
Excimer laser atherectomy, 896
Excisional biopsy, 300
in breast cancer, 544–545, 544f, 545f, 
546f
in chest wall tumors, 666
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1470
Excisional body contouring, 1886–1887, 
1887f
Exenteration, pelvic
in cervical cancer recurrence, 1698, 
1700f
in rectal cancer recurrence, 1213
Exercise in obesity
and bariatric surgery, 1108
in medical management, 1102
Exercise testing
preoperative, 637t
in cardiac risk assessment, 738, 739
in lung cancer, 637
radionuclide scans in, 739
Exocrine pancreas, 1348–1349
neoplasms of, 1393–1412, 1410t
Exons, 446
Extensor muscles of hand, 1789–1791
Extensor retinaculum, 1791
Extracellular fluids
composition of, 65, 66
osmolality of, 67
third-space or nonfunctional losses of, 
79
volume deficit in, 67
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
in burns, 232
in congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 
1604–1605
Extracorporeal perfusion, 740–741. See 
also Cardiopulmonary bypass
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, 
429, 1666
in pancreatic duct stones, 1380–1383, 
1382f
Extradural anesthesia, 1904
Extravasation injuries, 480, 481f
Extremities
lower. See Lower extremity
reconstructive surgery of, 1876–1880
in diabetic ulceration, 1877, 1879
in lymphedema, 1879–1880
in trauma, 1876–1877
in tumors, 1877
trauma of
fractures in, 214–215, 1876–1877, 
1876t
in elderly, 1935f
reconstructive surgery in,  
1876–1877
in tumors, 185t
vascular injuries in, 182–183, 184f, 
185t, 214–215
tumors of
in osteosarcoma, 1779
reconstructive surgery in, 1877
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1472–1479
upper. See Upper extremity
Ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure, 1645, 1645f
Eye
cancer of, 275t
inflammatory bowel disease involving, 
1196
postoperative complications of, 383–384
Eyelid
lacerations of, 575, 575f
plastic and reconstructive surgery of, 
1858–1860
blepharoplasty in, 1882–1883
Cutler-Beard advancement flap in, 
1858, 1861f
Hughes advancement flap in, 1858, 
1861f
of lower eyelid, 1858–1859
in ptosis, 1859–1860, 1861t
of upper eyelid, 1858, 1859f, 1860f, 
1861f
ptosis of, 1859–1860, 1861t
classification of, 1861t
F
Face
anatomy of bones in, 1854f
buttresses supporting midface, 577, 577f
plastic and reconstructive surgery of, 
1882–1883
browlift in, 1882–1883, 1883f
in cleft lip and palate, 1840–1844
composite tissues in, 1834f,  
1881–1882, 1882f
facelift in, 1883, 1883f, 1884f
in fractures, 1852–1855, 1853f, 1854f, 
1855f
reanimation in, 1865–1866
skin tension lines in, 1830f
trauma of, 197, 197f, 576
fractures in, 197, 197f, 576–578, 
576f–578f
panfacial, 1855
reconstructive surgery in,  
1852–1855, 1853f, 1854f, 1855f
Facelift, 1883, 1883f, 1884f
Facet dislocation in cervical spinal trauma, 
1722, 1723f, 1770
Facial nerve
paralysis of, 1865–1866, 1867f
ancillary procedures in, 1866
idiopathic, 567
innervated free tissue transfer in, 
1865–1866
muscle transposition techniques in, 
1866
nerve transfer techniques in, 1866
neurorrhaphy in, 1865
in otitis media complications, 567
in skull fractures, 1717
in temporal bone fractures, 578
treatment algorithm on, 1867f
in viral infections, 567
trauma of, 567, 576
in temporal bone fractures, 576, 578
Factor I, 87, 99t. See also Fibrinogen
Factor II, 86, 87, 99t. See also Prothrombin
Factor V, 86, 87, 88, 99t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
Leiden mutation, 88
venous thromboembolism in, 918
Factor VII, 86, 87, 88, 99t
administration of, 89
deficiency of, 89, 99t
Factor VIII, 86, 87, 88, 99t
deficiency of, 88, 89, 99t
inhibitors of, 89
laboratory tests of, 103
Factor IX, 86, 87, 88, 99t
administration of, 89
deficiency of, 88, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
Factor X, 86, 87, 88, 99t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
Factor XI, 86, 87, 99t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
Factor XII, 86, 87, 99t
deficiency of, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
Factor XIII, 88, 89, 99t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
Factors, clotting, 86f, 87, 87f
deficiency of
congenital, 88–89
replacement in, 99t
laboratory tests of, 102–104
liver disease affecting, 92t, 93
2013
Index
liver synthesis of, 1271
vitamin K–dependent, 92t, 93, 94, 103
Falciform ligament, 1264, 1264f, 1265
Fallopian tubes
anatomy of, 1675
benign neoplasms of, 1689
cancer of, 1701–1703
biomarkers in, 1702
chemotherapy in, 1703, 1703t
recurrent, 1703–1704, 1704t
risk factors for, 1702, 1702t
risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy 
in, 1701
endometriosis of, 1689, 1689–1690
intraepithelial neoplasia of, 1689
laparoscopic occlusion for sterilization, 
1689
trauma of, 212
in tubo-ovarian abscess, 1691
Fallot, Ettienne Louis, 724
Fallot tetralogy, 724–726
anatomy in, 724–726, 724f
classic presentation in, 724
operative repair in, 724–725, 725f
Falls
in children, 222
in elderly, 1934
in pregnancy, 218
FANG™ ( furin-knockdown and GMCSF-
augmented), 468
Fas-associated death domain, 36, 37f
Fascial planes of neck, deep, 598–599
Fasciitis
necrotizing, 151, 153f, 256, 483
postoperative, 391
Fasciocutaneous flaps, 1833, 1836–1838, 
1837t
in head and neck reconstructive surgery, 
601
Fasciotomy in compartment syndrome, 
215, 216f, 888
Fasting, metabolism in, 44–46, 44t
in extended starvation, 45, 45f
in short-term fast, 44f
Fat
in chyle, 686t
in enteral nutrition solutions for 
children, 1600t
malabsorption in chronic pancreatitis, 
1371f, 1372
metabolism of
in fasting, 44f, 44t, 45f
in injury, 46, 46f
in small intestine, 1142–1143, 1143f
in parenteral nutrition, 58
in stool, in chronic pancreatitis, 1374
Fatigue
in cardiac disorders, 736
in hyperparathyroidism, 1561
Fatty acids, 32–33
deficiency in parenteral nutrition, 58
in enteral nutrition, 54
metabolism of
in fasting, 46
in injury, 46–47, 47f
oxidation in, 47, 48f, 49f
in small intestine, 1142–1143, 1143f
short-chain, 1179
Fatty liver
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196
in obesity, 1129
bariatric surgery in, 1106, 1129
FEC-75, 553
Feces. See Stool
Felon, 1813, 1813f
Felty’s syndrome, 1438
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1438
Femoral artery
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
and aortobifemoral bypass, 876–877
and axillofemoral bypass, 877
and femorofemoral bypass, 877
and iliofemoral bypass, 877, 877f
and thoracofemoral bypass, 878
injuries of, 215
occlusive disease of, 828
angioplasty in, 892–894, 893f, 899
bypass grafting in, 897–898, 899, 900
chronic, 889, 891f
computed tomography angiography 
in, 832f, 891f
endarterectomy in, 897
stent graft in, 895
stent placement in, 895, 900
complications of, 897, 897f
symptoms in, 889–890
pulse palpation, 829
in limb ischemia, 887
puncture for endovascular therapy 
access, 834, 835f
antegrade technique, 834, 835f
in aortic aneurysm repair, 856, 856f
in mesenteric artery occlusive disease, 
865
in renal artery occlusive disease, 870
retrograde technique, 834
Femoral canal, 1496
Femoral hernia, 1504
in children, 1634
classification of, 1496
diagnosis of, 1504
McVay repair in, 1507–1508
Femoral lymph nodes in vulvar cancer
anatomy of, 1696, 1696f
staging of involvement, 1696
Femoral nerve, lateral cutaneous
anatomy of, 1498f, 1499
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Femoral pseudohernia, 1504
Femoral vein
anatomy of, 215
thromboembolism in, 920f, 924
Femorofemoral bypass in aortoiliac 
occlusive disease, 877
Femoropopliteal occlusive disease
atherectomy in, 895–896
classification of, 883, 885t, 886f
endovascular therapy in, 891–892
angioplasty in, 892–894, 893f,  
896–897, 899
compared to surgical treatment, 
899–900
complications of, 896–897
stent graft in, 895, 897
stent placement in, 895, 897, 897f, 
900
surgical treatment of, 897–898
amputation in, 898
bypass grafting in, 897–898, 899, 900
compared to endovascular therapy, 
899–900
complications of, 898
endarterectomy in, 897
symptoms in, 889–890
Femur
fractures of, 1758f
in children, 1782
distal, 1762
hemorrhage in, 173
intertrochanteric, 1761–1762
in neck, 1761
reconstructive surgery in, 1877t, 
1878f
in shaft, 1762
subtrochanteric, 1762
vascular injury in, 186f
osteosarcoma of, 1779
rotational abnormalities of, 1783
slipped capital epiphysis of, 1783
Fentanyl for pain control, 1900
in children and infants, 1601
in persistent pain, 1949t
Ferguson hemorrhoidectomy, 1223
Fernel, Jean, 1241
Fertility issues
alpha-Fetoprotein, 302–303
in cryptorchidism, 1636
in obesity, 1126
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 1279
Fetus
death of, in trauma, 218, 221
diagnosis of disorders in, 1691
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 1599
interventions for disorders in,  
1644–1645
ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure in, 1645, 1645f
monitoring of
in laparoscopy, 436
in trauma, 220–221
prenatal ultrasonography of
in diaphragmatic hernia, 1604, 1604f
in gastroschisis, 1633, 1633f
in ovarian cysts, 1637
wound healing in, 251–252
Fever
in liver trauma, 205
puerperal, 135, 241
in transfusion reactions, 100, 102t
Fiber in enteral formulas, 53
Fiberoptic pressure transducer, 
intraparenchymal, in intracranial 
pressure monitoring, 1713
Fibrillation
atrial, 736, 771–772. See also Atrial 
fibrillation
ventricular, 736
Fibrillin, 245
abnormalities in Marfan’s syndrome, 
248, 787, 902
Fibrin
dissolution of, 88, 88f, 263
formation of, 87
in peritoneal adhesions, 263, 263f
in topical hemostatic agents, 96
Fibrin glue in fistula, 1231
Fibrinogen, 87, 99t
in chyle, 686t
deficiency of, 92, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
radioactive uptake in venous 
thromboembolism, 921
Fibrinolysis, 86f, 88, 88f, 184, 263
pathologic, 92
Fibrinopeptides A and B, 87
Fibroadenomas of breast, 507, 508f, 509
treatment in, 510
Fibroblast growth factor, 246, 247t
Fibroblasts, 475
fetal, 252
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 
261–262
and skin substitutes, 267
in wound healing, 242f, 243f, 244, 259
Fibrocystic disease of breast, 509
2014
Index
Fibroelastomas of heart, 776
Fibroelastosis, endocardial, 699
Fibroids, uterine, 1682–1683, 1683f
Fibroma
desmoplastic, 1780
of heart, 776
ossifying, 1781
Fibromuscular dysplasia, 904–905. See 
also Dysplasia, fibromuscular
Fibronectin in wound healing, 245
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 
261–262
Fibroplasia, 253
Fibrosarcoma, 669
chemotherapy in, 1475
Fibrosis
cystic
lung transplantation in, 663–664
meconium ileus in, 1618
hepatic, in cirrhosis, 1277
pancreatic
asymptomatic, 1365t, 1367
in chronic pancreatitis, 1367–1368, 
1367f, 1368f
periductal, 508
pulmonary idiopathic, lung 
transplantation in, 663–664
retroperitoneal, 1460–1462
urinary obstruction in, 1666
Fibrous tumors of pleura, 688, 690
Fibula
fractures of, 1757f, 1764
osteocutaneous flaps from
in femoral fracture, 1878f
in mandibular reconstruction, 601, 
1863, 1864f–1865f
Fick equation, 404, 408
Fick method of cardiac output 
measurement, 403, 739
Field defect in colorectal cancer, 1212
Field effect in cancer, 278
Fight or flight response, 109
Financial issues
in endovascular repair of aortic 
aneurysm, 858
in incidental appendectomy, 1257
in minimally invasive surgery, 437
Finney pyloroplasty
in Crohn’s disease, 1157, 1157f
in peptic ulcer disease, 1063, 1065f
Fisher, Bernard, 499
Fish-eye lesion in intraductal papillary 
mucinous neoplasms of 
pancreas, 1411f, 1412
Fissures, anal, 1225–1227, 1226f
Fistulas, 149f
anal, 1229–1231, 1229f, 1230f
in Crohn’s disease, 1200, 1200f
aortoenteric, in aortoiliac reconstruction, 
879
biliary, in liver trauma, 205
of bladder
with colon in diverticulitis, 1203
with vagina, 1678
branchial cleft, 1602
bronchopleural
drainage in, 681f
carotid-cavernous, 1720
esophageal, 1023–1024
with trachea, 609, 1608–1612
extrasphincteric, 1230
gastrointestinal, 386
intersphincteric, 1230
intestinal, 1157–1159
in Crohn’s disease, 1198
in diverticulitis, 1203
spontaneous closure of, 1158, 1158t
in trauma, 209
treatment of, 1158
mammary duct, 508
mucus, in colorectal resection, 1189, 
1193
pancreatic
in chronic pancreatitis, 1378
postoperative, in 
pancreaticoduodenectomy, 
1403–1407
in trauma, 209
periductal, 511
rectal, 1678
with vagina, 1231
in Crohn’s disease, 1200, 1231
endorectal advancement flap in, 
1231, 1232f
suprasphincteric, 1230
tracheal, 608–609
tracheoesophageal, 609, 1608–1612
tracheoinnominate artery, 608–609, 
609f
in tracheostomy complications, 
382, 382f, 608–609
transsphincteric, 1230
ureteral, 1678
of vagina
with bladder, 1678
with colon in diverticulitis, 1203
with rectum, 1231
in Crohn’s disease, 1200, 1231
endorectal advancement flap in, 
1231, 1232f
vitelline duct, 1453
Fistulogram in intestinal fistulas, 1158
Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome, 1690
Fitz, Reginald, 1241
FK506, 325t, 326t, 327t, 328
Flail chest, 164, 165f, 203
Flaps, 1833–1840
advancement, 1833, 1835f
endorectal
in anal fistula, 1231
in rectovaginal fistula, 1231, 1232f
axial pattern, 1836
free transfer of, 1838
in nasal reconstruction, 1856, 1859f
bipedicle, 1833
Burow’s triangle in, 1835f
circulation in, 1836
in free tissue transfer, 1838–1840
Mathes-Nahai classification of, 1837, 
1837t
monitoring of, 1839–1840, 1839t
conditioning of, 1837
cutaneous, 1833, 1836–1838, 1837
fasciocutaneous, 1833, 1836–1838
vascular supply of, 1836, 1837t
free, 1833, 1838–1840
anastomosis in, 1838, 1839f
occlusion of, 1838, 1839
fibula osteocutaneous
in femoral fracture, 1878f
in mandibular reconstruction, 601, 
1863, 1864f–1865f
in head and neck reconstruction, 
601–602, 601f, 1863
monitoring of circulation in,  
1839–1840, 1839t
no-reflow phenomenon in, 1840
thrombosis affecting, 1838, 1838t, 
1839
in hand reconstruction
in burns, 1821–1822, 1821f
in fingertip injuries, 1801, 
1802f–1804f, 1833, 1836f
interpolation flaps in, 1833, 1836f
in head and neck reconstruction,  
600–601, 601f
mandibular, 601, 1863, 1864f–1865f
interpolation, 1833, 1836f
local, 1836
in head and neck reconstruction, 600
muscular, 1836
blood supply of, 1837
myocutaneous, 1833, 1836–1838, 1837
in breast reconstruction, 549, 550, 
1869–1871, 1872f–1873f
in chest wall reconstruction, 670, 
670f, 1874, 1875f
in head and neck reconstruction, 601
in pressure ulcers, 1880–1881, 1881f
perforator, 1837–1838
in breast reconstruction, 1871, 1871f
random pattern, 1833, 1834f, 1835f, 
1836f
regional, 1836
in head and neck reconstruction, 600
rhomboid, 1833, 1835f
rotational, 1833, 1835f
tissue expansion for, 1840
transposition, 1833, 1835f
Fleischer’s syndrome, 500
Flexion injuries of spine, 1721, 1722, 1771
Flexor muscles of hand, 1791
examination of, 1793–1794, 1793f
Flexor retinaculum, 1791
Fluconazole, 141t, 658
Fludrocortisone
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1583
in septic shock, 126
Fluids, 65–76
absorption of
in large intestine, 1179
in small intestine, 1140–1141, 1140f
in children, 1599
classification of body fluids, 67–68
compartments, 65
composition of
of body fluids, 65–66, 67f
changes in, 68, 70–73
in therapy, 76, 76t
extracellular, 65, 66
interstitial, 65, 66f, 67f
intracellular, 65, 66f, 67f
normal exchange of, 67
osmolality of, 67
pH of, 73–76
therapy with, 76–80
in acute pancreatitis, 1357–1358
in burns, 228, 230–231
composition of solutions in, 76, 76t
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
in hypernatremia, 77
intraoperative, 79, 1911, 1914
in kidney transplantation, 339
for maintenance, 78
postoperative, 78–80
preoperative, 78–80
in sepsis, 154, 155t
and shock, 125
in trauma, 218
in initial management, 165–166, 
165f, 168–171
intraosseous infusions of, 165–166, 
165f
response to, 171
2015
Index
saphenous vein access for,  
165–166, 165f
in total body water, 65–66
volume of body fluids, 68–69, 68t
Fluids and Catheters Treatment Trial 
(FACTT), 406
Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography, 1275
Fluoroquinolones, 144t
5-Fluorouracil
in esophageal cancer, 1012, 1013t
in pancreatic cancer, 1407
Fluorouracil, in basal cell carcinoma, 487
Folate deficiency in gastric surgery, 1094
Follicle-stimulating hormone, 504
Follicular carcinoma of thyroid,  
1544–1546, 1544t, 1545f
Folliculitis, 483, 483
Fondaparinux in venous 
thromboembolism, 921, 922, 927
Fontaine classification of peripheral 
arterial disease, 883, 885t
Fontan procedures
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 718
in tricuspid atresia, 713–715, 714f
Food. See also Nutrition
gastric acid secretion in response to, 
1043–1044, 1044f
and gastric cancer risk, 1074
Foot
diabetic ulcers of, 260, 1877, 1879, 
1879t
equinovalgus deformity in cerebral 
palsy, 1782
metatarsal fractures in, 1765
metatarsal-phalangeal joint in
fractures of, 1765
tarsal fractures of, 1765
trash foot or gangrene of, in aortoiliac 
occlusive disease, 874, 874f
Foramen ovale
embryonic development of, 695
patent, 698
Forced expiratory volume in lung cancer
prediction of postoperative value, 
636–637
preoperative assessment of, 636, 638f
Forearm
compartment syndrome of, 1801
fractures of, 1760
Foregut
duplication cyst of, 1607
embryonic development of, 1175
Foreign bodies
carcinogenesis in, 293
in children, 1607–1608
rectal, 1235
in retained surgical items, 377–378, 377t
counting protocol for prevention of, 
378
risk factors for, 377, 377t
in stomach, 1089–1090
Formulas in enteral nutrition, 53–55
c-fos, 281
Fossa navicularis, 1674
Fothergill’s sign in rectus sheath 
hematoma, 1454
Fourchette, posterior, 1674
Fournier’s gangrene, 484, 1663, 1663f
Fractures, 1757–1765
of ankle, 1764
in children, 1783
Bennett, 1796
of calcaneus, 1764
in children, 1782–1783
growth plate injuries in, 1782
of clavicle, 203, 1757–1759
compartment syndrome in, 1757
of elbow
in children, 1783
in extremity trauma, 214–215, 1876–
1877, 1876t
in elderly, 1935f
soft tissue coverage in, 1877, 1877t, 
1878f
facial, 197, 197f, 576–578, 576f–578f
panfacial, 1855
reconstructive surgery in, 1852–1855, 
1853f, 1854f, 1855f
of femur. See Femur, fractures of
of forearm, 1760
Gustilo and Anderson classification of, 
1875–1876, 1876t
in hand, 1796–1798
Jahss maneuver in, 1796, 1798f
nonunion of, 1801, 1805
types of, 1798f
hangman’s, 1722, 1770
healing process in, 249–251
growth factors in, 251
stages in, 250
of hip, 1760–1762
in children, 1782
of humerus, 1759
internal fixation techniques in, 1763f
Jefferson, 1722, 1770
of knee, 1767–1769
malleolar, 1764
metatarsal, 1765
of metatarsal-phalangeal joint, 1765
nose, 197
open, 1757, 1758f
of orbit, 197, 1854
blowout, 577, 577f, 1854
in naso-orbital-ethmoid fractures, 
1855
of patella, 1762
pelvic. See Pelvic fractures
of radius, 1759–1760
of ribs, 202–203
in children, 1643
in elderly, 222
hemorrhage in, 173, 203
Rolando, 1796
of scapula, 1759
of shoulder, 1759
of skull, 1715–1717, 1717f
of spine, 1722, 1724f, 1770
cervical, 1722
of talus, 1764
of tarsal bones, 1765
of temporal bone, 578, 578f
of tibia, 1762, 1764
hemorrhage in, 173
reconstructive surgery in, 1877t
types of, 1757f
of ulna, 1760
Frailty, 1924, 1926t
Francisella tularensis as biologic warfare 
agent, 157
Frank-Starling curve, 114
Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy in 
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, 
1614, 1614f
Free tissue transfer, 1838–1840
anastomosis in, 1838, 1839f
end-to-end, 1839, 1839f
end-to-side, 1839, 1839f
occlusion of, 1838, 1839
in facial nerve paralysis, 1865–1866
fibula osteocutaneous
in femoral fracture, 1878f
in mandibular reconstruction, 601, 
1863, 1864f–1865f
in head and neck reconstruction, 601, 
601f, 1863
of mandible, 601, 1863, 1864f–1865f
monitoring of circulation in, 1839–1840, 
1839t
no-reflow phenomenon in, 1840
thrombosis affecting, 1838, 1838t,  
1839
French Federation of Cancer Centers soft 
tissue sarcoma classification 
system, 1470
Freud, Sigmund, 1896
Frey procedure in chronic pancreatitis, 
1386, 1387, 1388f, 1390
Froment’s sign, 1806
Frontal sinus fractures, 1855, 1856f
Frostbite, 480–481
Fruchaud myopectineal orifice, 1497, 
1498f
Fructose, 48, 1141, 1142f
transport of, 1141, 1142f
Frugardi, Roger, 1521
Fundoplication procedures, 973–980
anterior partial, 976, 978–979
in children, 1613
in esophageal motility disorders, 995, 
995f
and Heller myotomy, 997–999, 1000, 
1001f
outcome assessment in, 1001, 1002t, 
1003
in hiatal hernia, 983
Nissen technique, 974–975. See also 
Nissen fundoplication
outcome in, 977–978
in scleroderma of esophagus, 984–985
Toupet technique, 975–976
esophageal myotomy with, 999, 1000, 
1001f
Fungal ball
pulmonary, 655, 657f
sinus, 569–570, 570f
Fungal infections, 140, 140t, 141t
of bladder, 390
of breast, 506
drug therapy in, 140, 141t
pharyngitis in, 571
pulmonary, 655–658
sinusitis in, 569–570, 570f
in transplant recipients, 329
Furlow palatoplasty in cleft palate, 1844, 
1845f
Furuncles, 483
Fusion surgery, spinal, 1743, 1743f
G
G cells of stomach, 1041
gastrin secretion of, 1041, 1045
in regulation of gastric acid secretion, 
1044f
Gabapentin in pain, 1950t
Gail model on breast cancer risk, 296–297, 
512, 512t
Gait trendelenburg, 1772
Galactose, 48, 1141, 1142f
transport of, 1141, 1142f
Galanin, 1346, 1350
Galen of Pergamum, 241, 497
Gallbladder
absorption in, 1313
adenomyomatosis of, 1320
2016
Index
Gallbladder (Cont.):
anatomy of, 1309–1310, 1310f
anomalies in, 1312
anesthesia in disorders of, 1907
in biliary atresia, 1628
cancer of, 1293, 1334–1335
clinical manifestations and diagnosis 
of, 1334–1335
epidemiology of, 275t
etiology of, 1334
incidence of, 1334
pathology in, 1334, 1334f
prognosis in, 1335
recurrent, 1335
treatment of, 1335
cholecystectomy of. See 
Cholecystectomy
cholecystitis of. See Cholecystitis
cholecystokinin affecting, 1313, 1314f
computed tomography of, 1315
disease in Mongolia, 1974
emphysematous, 1320
empyema of, 1320
functions of, 1313
hydrops of, 1319
lymphatics, 1309–1310
magnetic resonance imaging of, 1315
motor activity of, 1313
neurohormonal regulation of, 1313
porcelain, 1317–1318
carcinoma risk in, 1334
radionuclide scans of, 1315
secretions of, 1313
sludge in, 1319–1320
strawberry, 1320
trauma of, 204, 1331–1332
ultrasonography of, 1314, 1314f, 1320, 
1321f
Gallium nitrate in hypercalcemia, 1573t
Gallstones, 1316–1327
carcinoma of gallbladder in, 1334
cholangiography in
endoscopic retrograde, 1315, 1317f
intraoperative, 1325, 1327f
cholangitis in, 1322–1323
cholecystectomy in, 1324–1325
in acute cholecystitis, 1321
and bariatric surgery in obesity, 1105
in chronic cholecystitis, 1320
complications of, 1324
contraindications to, 1324
laparoscopic, 1320, 1321, 1324, 1325, 
1326f
open procedure, 1320, 1321, 1324, 
1325
in pancreatitis, 1358–1359
cholecystitis in, 1319–1321
acute, 1320–1321
chronic, 1319–1320
cholecystography in, oral, 1314
cholecystostomy in, 1321, 1324f
choledocholithiasis in, 1321–1322
cholesterol stones, 1317, 1318, 1318f
epidemiology of, 1316–1317
formation of, 1318–1319
natural history in, 1317–1318
in obesity, 1105
pain in, 1319
common sites of, 1319, 1319f
pancreatitis in, 1324, 1351–1352
Ranson criteria on, 1356t
treatment of, 1358–1359
pigment stones, 1317, 1318–1319
black, 1318
brown, 1318–1319
postoperative, in gastric surgery, 1094
in pregnancy, 1320
ultrasonography in, 1314, 1314f, 1319–
1320, 1321f
Gammopathies, monoclonal, platelet 
dysfunction in, 92
Ganglioglioma, 1735
Ganglion cell tumors, mediastinal, 677t, 
678
Ganglion cysts of hand and wrist, 1815, 
1815f
Ganglioneuroblastoma, mediastinal, 678
Ganglioneuroma, mediastinal, 678
Gangrene, 149f, 151
of foot, in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 
874, 874f
Fournier’s, 484, 1663, 1663f
Gardner’s syndrome, 666, 1207, 1485
Gas, intestinal, 1179
Gases, arterial blood, 409
Gastrectomy
in biliopancreatic diversion procedure, 
1120
complications of, 1090–1094
anemia in, 1094
bile reflux gastritis in, 1093–1094
bone disease in, 1094–1095
diarrhea in, 1093
dumping syndrome in, 1090–1092
gallstones in, 1094
gastric stasis in, 1093
Roux syndrome in, 1094
weight loss in, 1094
ghrelin levels after, 1045, 1045f, 1046f
in peptic ulcer disease, 1063, 1071f
cancer in gastric remnant in, 1078
sleeve, in obesity, 1103, 1104,  
1121–1125
complications in, 1124
outcomes in, 1124
patient selection and preparation in, 
1121–1125
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1123–1124
technique in, 1121f, 1122–1123, 
1122f, 1123f
in stomach cancer, 1081–1082, 1081f, 
1082f
endoscopic procedure, 1083–1084
reconstruction after, 1081, 1082f
survival rates in, 1082, 1082t
Gastric acid secretion. See Acid secretion, 
gastric
Gastric arteries, anatomy of, 1037, 1038f
Gastric banding
adjustable, 1103, 1107, 1108–1112
band adjustments in, 1111, 1111f
with cholecystectomy for gallstones, 
1105
complications in, 1112
diabetes mellitus resolution in, 1111, 
1128
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
1128
outcomes in, 1111–1112, 1112t
patient selection and preparation in, 
1110
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1110–1111, 1111f
pregnancy after, 1126
technique in, 1108–1110, 1108f, 
1109f, 1110f
fixed, 1103
Gastric bypass surgery, Roux-en-Y, 
1112–1119
in adolescents, 1125–1126
annual number performed, 1104f, 1112
configuration in, 1113, 1113f
in fatty liver, 1129
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 1128
historical development of, 1103
laparoscopic, 1103, 1107, 1112–1118
antecolic approach, 1114
with cholecystectomy for gallstones, 
1106
compared to open procedure, 1118, 
1118t
complications in, 1116–1118, 1117t, 
1118t
creation of gastric pouch in, 1114, 
1114f
enteroenterostomy in, 1114f, 1116
gastrojejunostomy in, 1115, 1115f
stenosis of, 1118
hematemesis in, 1118
leaks in, 1118
length of Roux limb in, 1114
outcomes in, 1116–1118, 1117t, 
1118t
patient selection and preparation in, 
1115
port placement in, 1113–1114, 1113f
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1115–1116
retrocolic approach, 1114
small intestine obstruction after, 
1116f, 1117
technique in, 1113–1115, 1113f, 
1114f–1116f
in metabolic syndrome, 1128
open, 1107, 1118–1119
with cholecystectomy for gallstones, 
1105
compared to laparoscopic procedure, 
1118, 1118t
complications in, 1118t, 1119
outcomes in, 1118t, 1119
patient selection and preparation in, 
1118
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1118–1119
technique in, 1118
outcomes in, 1112t
in diabetes mellitus, 1116, 1127
in laparoscopic procedure,  
1116–1118, 1117t, 1118t
pregnancy after, 1126
small intestine intussusception in, 1170
Gastric veins, anatomy of, 1037
Gastrin
elevated serum levels of. See 
Hypergastrinemia
G cell secretion of, 1041, 1045
in stimulation of gastric acid secretion, 
1041, 1043, 1044f, 1045
Gastrinoma, 1391–1392, 1392f
diagnosis of, 1072–1073, 1073f, 1392
familial, 1071
locations of, 1071, 1073, 1073f, 1391f, 
1392
metastasis of, 1392
sporadic or nonfamilial, 1073
treatment of, 1392
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome in,  
1071–1073, 1391–1392
Gastrin-releasing peptide, 1045
Gastritis, 1073–1074
atrophic, 1077, 1077f
in bile reflux, 1093–1094
etiologies of, 1073–1074
2017
Index
in Helicobacter pylori infections,  
1054, 1076f
in stress, 1073–1074
Gastrocolic ligament, 1457
Gastroduodenal artery
anatomy of, 1344–1345
pseudoaneurysm of, 1376f
Gastroduodenostomy in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1063, 1067f
cancer of gastric remnant in, 1078
Gastroenteritis, acute, differential 
diagnosis in, 1246
Gastroenterostomy, cancer of gastric 
remnant in, 1078
Gastroepiploic artery, anatomy of, 1037, 
1038f
Gastroepiploic vein, anatomy of, 1037
Gastroesophageal flap valve, endoscopic 
appearance of, 950, 952f–953f
Gastroesophageal junction, anatomy of, 
1035
Gastroesophageal reflux, 964–980
adenocarcinoma in, 967, 969, 970f, 979
antireflux surgery in, 965–967, 973–980. 
See also Antireflux surgery
Barrett’s esophagus in, 967, 967t, 969, 
1003
antireflux surgery in, 969, 972
outcome of, 979, 979t
reoperation of, 979–980
drug therapy in, 971
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
bile acid concentration in, 967–968, 
968f
bilirubin exposure in, 968, 968f
in children, 1613
in esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula, 1612
cobblestone appearance in, 950, 951f
complications of, 967–972, 967t
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
diaphragmatic repair, 983
duodenal origin of, 967–968, 968f
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
eosinophilic esophagitis in, 986–987, 
986f
esophageal impedance in evaluation of, 
955
esophageal rupture in, 1018
esophagitis in, 967, 967t, 968, 969
endoscopy in, 950, 951f
and hiatal hernia, 966–967, 966f
antireflux surgery in, 983
clinical manifestations in, 981–982
pathophysiology in, 982
indications for surgery in, 972
lower esophageal sphincter function in, 
949, 965–966, 966f
and indications for surgery, 972
medical therapy in, 971
in obesity
bariatric surgery affecting, 1116, 1128
preoperative evaluation of, 1105
pathophysiology in, 964–965
in hiatal hernia, 982
pH monitoring in, 961–963, 967, 968f
gastric and esophageal, 964, 964f
in respiratory disorders, 971
physiologic, 949–950
preoperative evaluation in, 972–973
principles of surgical therapy in, 
973–974
radiographic detection of, 963
respiratory disorders in, 969–972
antireflux surgery in, 971
in aspiration of gastric contents, 
970–971
pH monitoring in, 971
reflex mechanisms in, 970–971
and Schatzki’s ring, 984
and scleroderma of esophagus, 985
selection of procedure in, 974
stepwise approach to therapy in, 
971–972
symptoms in, 964, 965t
in hiatal hernia, 981–982
preoperative evaluation of, 972–973
Gastrohepatic ligament, 1037, 1265, 1265f, 
1457
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors,  
1481–1485
colorectal, 1216
genetic factors in, 1482
localized, 1482
locally advanced, 1482–1483
metastatic, 1482–1483
multidisciplinary approach to, 1483, 
1483f
prognostic factors in, 1482
of small intestine, 1159, 1160, 1161f, 
1161t
outcome in, 1162
treatment in, 1162
of stomach, 1074, 1084–1085, 1086f
Gastrointestinal tract
bacteria in, 137, 1179
in necrotizing enterocolitis,  
1619–1620
translocation of, 151
diverticulum of. See Diverticulum
embryonic development of, 1175–1176, 
1616–1617
midgut in, 1175, 1179, 1616–1617
small intestine in, 1139–1140, 1140f
endogenous microflora of, 137
enterocolitis of, necrotizing, 1619–1621
gastrointestinal disorders in
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
healing of wounds in, 249, 250f, 250t
in anastomosis, 249
compared to skin healing, 250t
hemorrhage from. See Hemorrhage, 
gastrointestinal
Hirschsprung’s disease of, 1624–1626, 
1626f
in hyperparathyroidism, 1561
intestinal duplications in, 1624
intestinal perforation of
in necrotizing enterocolitis, 1620, 
1621
spontaneous, 1621
intestinal transplantation procedure, 
352–354, 353f–354f
living donor in, 332
in short bowel syndrome, 1172
intussusception of. See Intussusception
large intestine in, 1175–1236. See also 
Large intestine
malrotation of, 1616–1617
multivisceral transplantation, 352–354
obstruction of, 1146–1151
double bubble sign in, 1615, 1615f
in inguinal hernia, 1505
in Meckel’s diverticulum, 1163f, 1164
in neonates, 1614–1615
in pancreatic cancer, 1399
postoperative, 386
in bariatric surgery, 1116f, 1117
in inguinal hernia repair,  
1515–1516
pediatric disorders of, 1613–1628
peritoneal adhesions affecting, 263
postoperative disorders of, 386–387
in bariatric surgery, 1116, 1116f
ileus, 1151–1153
in inguinal hernia repair, 1515–1516
nausea and vomiting, 1914, 1915, 1916f
small intestine obstruction,  
1149–1150
sarcomas of, 1480–1481
short bowel syndrome of, 1621
small intestine in, 1137–1174. See also 
Small intestine
stomach in, 1035–1095. See also 
Stomach
stromal tumors of, 1480–1481. See also 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors
trauma of, 207, 209–210
damage control surgery in, 195
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
191
in inguinal hernia repair, 1515–1516
in laparoscopy, 1705
wound healing in, 249, 250f, 250t
volvulus of. See Volvulus
Gastrojejunostomy
in bile reflux gastritis, 1093–1094
in Crohn’s disease, 1157
dumping syndrome in, 1092
in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, 1115, 1115f
stenosis of, 1118
in peptic ulcer disease, 1062, 1063f
Billroth technique, 1063, 1067f
Roux-en-Y technique, 1063, 1068f
Roux syndrome in, 1094
in stomach cancer, 1081
volvulus of. See Volvulus
Gastroparesis, 1087
in diabetes mellitus, 1087
etiologies of, 1087t
postoperative, 1093
Gastropathy, hypertrophic, 1088, 1088f
Gastroplasty
Collis
in hiatal hernia, 983
in scleroderma of esophagus, 985
vertical banded, 1103, 1108
Gastroschisis, 1453, 1631, 1633–1634, 
1633f
anomalies associated with, 1633
clinical presentation of, 1633, 1633f
fluid requirements in, 1599, 1633
prenatal ultrasonography in, 1633, 1633f
treatment of, 1633–1634, 1633f
silo device in, 1633, 1633f
Gastrosplenic ligament, 1425, 1425f, 1457
Gastrostomy, 1090
open technique, 56, 1090
percutaneous endoscopic, 55–56, 1090, 
1091f
complications of, 56
indications for, 55
Janeway technique, 1090, 1092f
with jejunostomy, 56
placement of, 55–56
Stamm technique, 1090, 1090f
Witzel technique, 1090
Gateway technology, 457
Gatifloxacin, 257t
Gaucher’s disease, splenectomy in, 1430t, 
1437–1438
GDNF in Hirschsprung’s disease,  
1624–1625
Gefitinib, 310t
2018
Index
Gelatin, 1911
in topical hemostatic agents, 96
Gelofusine in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
Gemcitabine
in pancreatic cancer, 1400, 1407
in soft tissue sarcoma of extremity, 1476
Gene array, 460
Gene chips, 460, 461f
Gene knockout in mice, 464–466, 465f
Genes
analysis of
animal models in, 463–467
DNA microarray technology in, 
459–460, 461f
expression and regulation of, 446–449
in breast cancer, 536
in cancer initiation, 278–279, 280f
in metastasis, 285
in shock, 115, 119
in human genome, 449
manipulation of, 463–468
metastasis-suppressor, 287
mismatch repair, 292
oncogenes, 278, 279–281, 287
tumor suppressor, 278, 280f
in hereditary cancer syndromes, 
287–291
GeneSearch Breast Lymph Node Assay, 
541
Gene therapy, 1917–1919
in cancer, 311f, 312, 455–456
of pancreas, 1408
vector systems in, 312, 455
in coronary artery disease, 747
in situ, 455
in wound healing, 267–268
Genetic code, 447, 448t
Genetic factors
in aortic aneurysms, thoracic, 787, 792
in biliary atresia, 1628
in breast cancer, 512
expression of, 536
health insurance concerns in, 516
in hereditary syndromes, 288t, 291, 
514–517, 514t
as predictive markers, 301–302
prophylactic mastectomy in, 513, 514
risk assessment in, 296
in cancer, 287–291
and gene therapy, 311f, 312, 455–456
Knudson’s two-hit hypothesis on, 
287, 287f
somatic mutations in, 286, 286f
surgical prevention in, 315
and targeted therapy, 309, 310t
in colorectal cancer, 1183, 1204–1207
CpG island methylation, 1205
in heterozygosity loss, 1205
in replication errors, 1205
in Crohn’s disease, 1153
in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, 
1485
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 248t, 902
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 1482
in Graves’ disease, 1531
in head and neck tumors, 580
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
in hyperparathyroidism, 1560
in kidney cancer, 1656
manipulation of, 463–468
in Marfan’s syndrome, 248, 902
in neuroblastoma, 1640
in neuroectodermal tumors, primitive, 
669
in ovarian cancer, 288t, 291, 515, 1701
risk management in, 516–517, 1701
in pancreatic cancer, 1395
in therapy, 1408
in pancreatitis, 1352, 1360–1362
in pheochromocytoma, 1586, 1587
in polycystic liver disease, 1288
in polyposis, familial adenomatous, 
288t, 291, 1183, 1206–1207
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum, 902
in rhabdomyosarcoma, 1486
in small intestine neoplasms, 1159
in soft tissue sarcoma, 1467–1468
in stomach cancer, 1075–1076, 1077t, 
1078
in thyroid cancer, 1539t, 1540, 1541f, 
1541t, 1542
follicular, 1545
medullary, 1549t, 1550
papillary, 1543
of thyroid, in solitary nodule, 1537
in venous thromboembolism, 918–919
in Wilms’ tumor, 1638
Genetic instability, 446
Genetic testing for BRCA mutations, 
515–516
Gengraf and Neoral, 328
Genitalia, ambiguous, 1637–1638
Genitofemoral nerve, anatomy of,  
1498–1499, 1498f, 1499f
Genome, 448
human, 449
Genomics, 444f, 449
functional, 449
in personalized medicine, 468
Genotoxins, 293
Genotype
in gene knockout mice, 466
and phenotype correlations, 291
in transgenic mice, 464
Gentamicin, 144t, 257t
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
Geriatric patients. See Elderly
Germ cell tumors, 1641
of central nervous system, 1737
mediastinal, 678–679
biomarkers in, 672
incidence of, 673t
signs and symptoms in, 674t
ovarian, 1637, 1703–1704
testicular, 1654–1655
Germ theory of Pasteur, 135
Gestational trophoblastic disease,  
1693–1694
Ghon complex, 654
Ghrelin, 22, 1045, 1047, 1348
in appetite regulation, 1045, 1350
functions of, 1349t, 1350
serum levels of, 1045
in bariatric surgery, 1045, 1046f
in gastrectomy, 1045, 1045f, 1046f
Giant cell arteritis, 788, 901
Giant cell tumors
of bone, 1780–1781, 1780f, 1816f, 1819
of tendon sheath in hand, 1815–1816, 
1816f
Giardia lamblia infections, anorectal,  
1233
Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium equation, 66
Gigantomastia, 507
Gilbert syndrome, 1272
Gilula’s arc, 1794, 1794f, 1798
Gimbernat ligament, 1496
Gingiva, tumors of, 585
Gingivoperiosteoplasty, 1843
Glanzmann thrombasthenia, 89
Glasgow Coma Scale, 168, 170t, 1711, 
1712t
in head trauma, 195, 1712t, 1715, 1717, 
1718
in children, 1643
in initial assessment, 1717, 1718
Gleason scoring of prostate cancer,  
1657–1658
Gleevec, in myeloid leukemia, chronic, 
455, 455f
Glenn shunts
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 718f
in tricuspid atresia, 713–715, 714f
Glial tumors, 1733–1734, 1734f
Glide scope, 1910, 1912f
Glioblastoma multiforme, 1733, 1734f
Glisson’s capsule, 1264
Global surgery
academic training in, 1977, 1978f
assigning disease priorities, 1968, 1970t
benefits for economic productivity, 1955
burden of disease, 1957–1960, 1959f
burns and, 1960
cancer and, 1958, 1970–1976, 1973t
definitions of terminology related to, 
1956–1963
ecosystem of, 1956–1957
components of, 1957, 1958f
electricity in, 1957
emergency care, 1969
ethics, 1977–1978
future trends in, 1978–1979
healthcare workers for, 1960–1963, 
1961f, 1962f, 1963f, 1971t
innovation in, 1978, 1978f
international organizations in,  
1963–1966
introduction of, 1955–1979
millennium development goals, 1963, 
1964t
outreach and engagement initiatives, 
1963, 1964f
priorities of, 1956, 1957f
and public health, 1968–1970, 1969f, 
1970t
safety checklist, 1969f
strategies for, 1963–1978
trauma and, 1958–1960, 1968–1969, 
1970t
violence and injury prevention program, 
1963, 1965
and world health organization, 1964, 
1968
worldwide distribution of, 1956f
Glomerular filtration rate in children, 1599
Glossectomy in tongue cancer, 584, 587
reconstructive surgery after, 1862–1863
Glottis
anatomy of, 579, 589, 589f
tumors of, 590, 591
laryngeal preservation techniques in 
treatment of, 591
laryngectomy in, 590f
Glucagon, 1348
deficiency in chronic pancreatitis, 1373
functions of, 1349t
secretion of, 1350
serum levels in glucagonoma, 1393
Glucagon-like peptide 2 (GLP-2), 1145, 
1146t
Glucagonoma, 1393
Glucocorticoid receptor, 19f, 20–21
Glucocorticoids, 1576–1577, 1578t
functions of, 1577, 1578t
synthesis of, 20f
2019
Index
Gluconeogenesis
in injury, 46f
in starvation, 45–46, 45f
Glucose, 1141, 1142f
administration of, 48
excessive, 48–49
in hyperkalemia, 78, 78t
in parenteral nutrition, 59
blood levels of
in anesthesia management, 1908
in burns, 233
in critical illness, 22
in hyperglycemia. See Hyperglycemia
in hyponatremia, 69
in injury, 49, 1718
liver functions affecting, 1269
in pancreas transplantation, 340
in parenteral nutrition, 58
postoperative, 392
in septic shock, 125
intolerance in parenteral nutrition, 59
metabolism of
in fasting, 44
in injury, 48–50, 49f
and osmolality of body fluids, 67
tolerance tests, 1349
transport and signaling, 50, 50t, 1141, 
1142f
urine levels in parenteral nutrition, 58
Glucose-dependentinsulinotropic 
polypeptide, 1349
Glucose-6-phosphate, 48, 49f
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency, splenectomy in, 
1430t, 1431
Glucose transporters (GLUTs), 50, 50t, 
1141, 1142f
Glucuronyl transferase, 1628
Glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, 1271
Glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, 1271
Glutamine, 53–54, 1142
γ-Glutamyltranspeptidase serum levels in 
liver disorders, 1270, 1271
Gluteus maximus myocutaneous flap in 
pressure ulcers, 1880–1881, 
1881f
Glycerol as fuel, 47
Glycogen
in liver, 44, 44t, 45f
in muscle, 44, 50
Glycogen in, 44t, 45f
Glycogenolysis, 45
Glycopeptides, 144t
Glycoprotein ligand-1, 40
Glycosaminoglycans, 245
Goblet cells
in small intestine, 1139
in tracheobronchial tree, 612
Goiter
historical aspects of, 1521
intrathoracic, 1554
sternotomy in, 1554, 1554f
mediastinal, 1554
nontoxic, 1536–1537, 1536t, 1538f
toxic
diffuse, 1531–1533
multinodular, 1533
Goldenhar’s complex, 1602
Gonadal dysgenesis, mixed, 1638
Gonadotropin, chorionic
in cryptorchidism, 1636
in gestational trophoblastic disease, 
1694
in pregnancy test, 1677
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone, 504
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists
in endometriosis, 1690
in leiomyoma of uterus, 1690
Gonorrhea, proctitis in, 1232
Goodsall’s rule on fistula in ano, 1229, 
1229f
GPC3 gene in Simpson-Golabi-Behmel 
syndrome, 288t
G-protein, 35f, 452
Graafian follicle rupture, 1246
Gracilis muscle transposition in anal 
sphincter injury, 1235
Grafts
bone, in spinal arthrodesis, 1743
composite tissue, 1833, 1881–1882
skin, 264–265, 266, 1832–1833. See 
also Skin grafts
vascular, 192, 200, 210, 211
in aortic aneurysm, 853, 853f, 854f
in aortoiliac occlusive disease,  
876–877, 878
in femoropopliteal occlusive disease, 
898
in renal artery occlusive disease, 
869–870
stent grafts in. See Stent grafts
Gram-negative bacteria, 140, 140t
Gram-positive bacteria, 140, 140t
Gram’s stain, 139–140
Granular cell tumors, 486
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor, 28t, 30–31, 
247t
Granuloma
eosinophilic, of chest wall, 666
inguinale, 1232, 1678, 1679t
laryngeal, 572–573, 572f
mediastinal, 674t
pulmonary, 622
in histoplasmosis, 659, 660f
in tuberculosis, 654
Granulomatous disease, chronic, 258
Granulosa cell tumors, 1637, 1704
Grassi criminal nerve, 1039
Graves’ disease, 1531–1533
clinical features in, 1531, 1532f
diagnostic tests in, 1529, 1531–1532
treatment of, 1532–1533
Great Ormond Street Score in Ebstein’s 
anomaly, 719
Greenfield filter in pulmonary embolism, 
386
Grey Turner’s sign, 1356
Grief and mourning, 1951
Griffith, Harold, 1897
Gross, Robert E., 1597
Ground substance, 475
Growth factors in wound healing, 246, 
247t, 259
in bone injuries, 251
fetal, 252
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 262
in nerve injuries, 251
therapeutic use of, 267
Growth hormone, 21–22
Growth hormone-releasing hormone, 21
Growth plate of bones, injuries of, 1782
Guanosine monophosphate, cyclic, 41, 43f
Guedel, Arthur, 1897
Guidewires n endovascular therapy, 835
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1745–1746
Gunshot wounds, 174
abdominal, 180
in pregnancy, 221
of chest, 178–179, 202
hemorrhage and persistent hypotension 
in, 172
Gustilo and Anderson classification of 
fractures, 1876, 1876t
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue, 1143, 
1144f
Gut hormones, 1145
Gynecologic disorders, 1671–1705
anatomy in, 1671–1675
diagnosis of, 1675–1678
biopsy in, 1677–1678
history-taking in, 1675, 1676t
in fistulae, 1678
hysterectomy in, 1684
hysteroscopy in, 1683–1684
in infections
pelvic inflammatory disease in, 
1690–1691
screening for, 1676–1677
ulcer syndromes in, 1678, 1679t
myomectomy in, 1684
in neoplasms, 1696–1704
in obesity, 1126
pathophysiology and disease 
mechanisms in, 1671
in pelvic organ prolapse, 1694–1695
physical examination in, 1675–1676, 
1676f
bimanual, 1676, 1676f
with speculum, 1675
in ulcer syndromes, 1678, 1679t
urinary incontinence in, 1695
Gynecomastia, 505–506
breast cancer risk in, 555
clinical classification of, 505
pathophysiology of, 505, 505t
refeeding, 505
surgical treatment in, 1891
H
Haemophilus ducreyi infections, chancroid 
in, 1678, 1679t
Hageman factor (factor XII), 86, 87, 99t, 
103
Hair follicles, 474
Hairy cell leukemia, splenectomy in, 
1430t, 1434
Hall, Richard, 1896
Halothane, 1902, 1902t
hepatotoxicity of, 1907
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Halstead’s concept of surgical mentor, 10
Halsted radical mastectomy, 498–499, 547
Halsted theory on lymphadenectomy in 
cancer, 305
Halsted, William, 498, 1896
Hamartoma
of bile duct, 1291
of breast, 509
Hamburg procedure in chronic pancreatitis, 
1386, 1389f
Hand, 1787–1825
anatomy of, 1787–1793, 1790f
bite wounds of, 1812
bones in, 1787–1788, 1790f
fractures of, 1796–1798
burns of, 1820–1822, 1822f
reconstructive surgery in, 1821–1822, 
1821f, 1822f
congenital anomalies of, 1823–1824
degenerative joint disorders of,  
1806–1808
Dupuytren’s contracture of,  
1808–1809
examination of, 1793–1794, 1793f
2020
Index
Hand (Cont.):
fractures in, 1796–1798
Jahss maneuver in, 1796, 1798f
nonunion of, 1801, 1805
types of, 1798f
imaging of, 1794–1795
infections of, 1794, 1809–1814
diagnostic algorithm on, 1814f
joint space, 1810
necrotizing, 1811
osteomyelitis in, 1810–1811
palmar space, 1810
web space, 1810, 1811f
mallet finger in, 1798
motions of, 1788, 1789f, 1793–1794
stiffness in, 1805
muscles in, 1788–1791
nerves in, 1792–1793
compression of, 1805–1806
injuries of, 1798–1799, 1805
neuroma in, 1805
reconstructive surgery of
in burns, 1821–1822, 1821f, 1822f
in fingertip injuries, 1801, 
1802f–1804f, 1833, 1836f
interpolation flaps in, 1833, 1836f
tendons in, 1791
examination of, 1793
inflammation of, 1811–1813, 1812f, 
1813f
injuries of, 1798
tenodesis maneuver in, 1798
zones in, 1798, 1800f
and pulley system, 1791, 1791f
tenosynovitis of flexor, 1811–1813, 
1812f, 1813f
trauma of, 1795–1799
amputation and replantation in, 1800, 
1802f–1804f
in bites, 1812
in burns, 1820–1822
of fingertips, 1800–1801, 1800f, 
1802f–1804f
interpolation flaps in, 1833, 1836f
in high pressure injection injuries, 
1801
local anesthesia in, 1795–1796,  
1797f
reconstructive surgery in, 1801, 
1802f–1804f
splints in, 1796, 1799f, 1805
stiffness and limited mobility in,  
1805
tumors of, 1814–1820, 1815f, 1816f
biopsy in, 1815
diagnosis of, 1815–1816
melanoma, 488, 1818
vascular supply of, 1791–1792, 1792f
disorders in, 1822–1823
injuries of, 1799, 1821–1822
Hand-assisted laparoscopy, 1187
access for, 423, 424f
splenectomy in, 1441, 1443
Handoff communication, 369
sign outs in, 371–372
Hand washing for infection control, 135
Hangman’s fracture, 1722, 1770
Harris-Benedict equation, 51, 232–233
Hartley-Dunhill procedure in 
hyperthyroidism, 1533
Hartmann’s procedure, 210, 1189, 1193
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 1529, 1535–1536
Hasson technique in laparoscopy, 422
Headache in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
1730
Head and neck disorders, 565–602
in adenotonsillar hyperplasia, 
obstructive, 571
benign, 565–575
in children, 1840–1852
of ears, 565–567, 594–595, 1855–1856
in hemorrhage. See Hemorrhage, 
intracranial
of larynx, 572–574, 589–591
of lips, 579, 580, 582, 1856
long-term management and 
rehabilitation in, 602
of nose and paranasal sinuses, 567–570, 
592–593, 1855, 1856
of pharynx, 570–571
plastic and reconstructive surgery in. 
See Head and neck plastic and 
reconstructive surgery
tracheostomy in, 602
in trauma, 195–197, 575–578,  
1715–1721. See also Head trauma
in tumors, 578–600, 1862–1863
anatomy and histopathology in, 578, 
579f
carcinogenesis in, 580
epidemiology of, 578
etiology of, 578
follow-up care in, 602
genetic factors in, 580
intracranial, 1732–1737
lymph node metastasis in, 595–597, 
595f, 596f, 597f
second primary tumors in, 580
staging of, 580, 581t
of unknown primary site, 592
of upper aerodigestive tract, 580–592
in vascular lesions, 574–575
Head and neck plastic and reconstructive 
surgery, 600–602, 1860–1865
aesthetic, 1882–1883
blepharoplasty and browlift in,  
1882–1883
browlift in, 1882–1883, 1883f
in children, 1840–1852
in cleft lip and palate, 1840–1844
complications in, 1863, 1865
composite tissues in, 1834f, 1881–1882, 
1882f
of ears, 1855–1856
of eyelids, 1858–1860, 1882–1883
facelift in, 1883, 1883f, 1884f
in facial fractures, 1852–1855, 1853f, 
1854f, 1856f
free flaps in, 601–602, 601f, 1863
in mandibular reconstruction, 601, 
1863, 1864f–1865f
of lips, 580, 582, 582f, 583f, 1856
local flaps in, 600
nasal, 1856, 1883
reanimation in, 1865–1866
regional flaps in, 600
rhinoplasty in, 1883
skin tension lines in, 1830f
skull and scalp reconstruction in, 1860
in tumors, 580, 583f, 600–602, 1861
of buccal mucosa, 586, 1863
in floor of mouth, 584–585, 585f, 
1862
free tissue transfer in, 601–602, 601f
of larynx, 591, 591f
of lip, 582, 582f, 1856
of temporal bone, 594–595
of tongue, 583, 583f, 587, 1862
Head trauma, 195–197, 575–578,  
1715–1721
brain death in, 1721
in children, 222, 1643
classification of, 1718
closed injury in, 1717–1719
concussion in, 1718
contusion in, 1718–1719, 1718f
diffuse axonal injury in, 1719
in elderly, 221–222, 1935, 1935f
epidural hematoma in, 175f, 1719
burr hole placement for 
decompression in, 195, 197f
evaluation of, 174–175, 175f
in initial assessment, 1717–1718
facial fractures in, 197, 197f, 576–578, 
576f–578f
panfacial, 1855
reconstructive surgery in, 1852–1855, 
1853f, 1854f, 1856f
Glasgow Coma Scale in, 195, 1712t, 
1715, 1717, 1718
in children, 1643
in initial assessment, 1717, 1718
hemorrhage in, 195, 197, 1720
in scalp injuries, 166, 173, 1715
intracranial, 195–197
intracranial pressure increase in, 195, 
197, 411
lacerations in, 575–576, 575f–576f
of scalp, 166, 173, 1715
maxillofacial, 197, 197f
medical management of, 1718
neurologic monitoring in, 411, 412
penetrating, 175, 1719
scalp injury in, 1715, 1860, 1862f
hemorrhage in, 166, 173, 1715
seizures in, 1718
skull fractures in, 1715–1717
soft tissue injuries in, 575–576
subdural hematoma in, 1719–1720
vascular injuries in, 1720
wound closure in, 575–576, 575f–576f
Healing process, 241–268
in bones, 249–251
in burns, 234, 1820
in cartilage, 251
cellular events in, 1831
in connective tissue diseases, 246–249
delayed, 252, 252f
epithelialization in, 245–246, 245f, 1831
excessive, 261–263
factors affecting, 252–259, 253t
fetal, 251–252
in fractures, 249–251
in gastrointestinal tract, 249
growth factors in, 246, 267
historical aspects of, 241
impaired, 252, 252f
incisional hernia in disorders of, 1455
inflammatory response in, 242–244, 
242f, 243f, 1831
fetal, 251
matrix synthesis in, 242f, 243t, 244–245
maturation and remodeling in, 242f, 245
in nerves, 251
phases in, 241–246, 242f, 1831
in plastic and reconstructive surgery, 
1830–1832
postoperative, 1832, 1832t
preoperative and intraoperative 
management in, 1832, 1832t
by primary intention, 252, 252f
proliferation in, 242f, 243f, 244
by secondary intention, 246, 252, 252f
in tendons, 251
by tertiary intention, 252, 252f
2021
Index
Healthcare workers for global surgery, 
1960–1963, 1961f, 1962f, 1963f, 
1971t
Health insurance concerns in hereditary 
breast cancer risk, 516
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
516
Health-related quality of life, 1944
Heart
acquired disorders of, 735–776
in aortic coarctation, 705–706
in aortic stenosis, 698–702
in aortopulmonary window, 711–712
arrhythmias of, 770–772. See also 
Arrhythmias
assessment of disorders, 735–740
on disability, 737, 737t
in noncardiac surgery, 737–738
atrial septal defect of, 695–698
atrioventricular canal defects of, 
727–729
cardiomyopathy of. See 
Cardiomyopathy
catheterization. See Catheterization, 
cardiac
congenital disorders of, 695–729
in coronary artery disease, 741–747
in cor triatriatum, 710–711
double-outlet right ventricle of, 721–722
in ductus arteriosus patency, 702–705
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 719–720
hypoplastic left-heart syndrome of, 
716–719
in interrupted aortic arch, 729
mechanical circulatory support in 
disorders of, 768–770
myocardial disorders of. See 
Myocardium
neoplasms of, 774–776
metastatic, 776
myxomas, 775–776, 775f
pericardial disorders of, 772–774
physical examination in, 737
signs and symptoms in disorders of, 735
in Taussig-Bing syndrome, 723–724
in tetralogy of Fallot, 724–726
in total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connections, 707–710
total artificial, 770
transplantation of, 354–358
complications in, 356
evaluation of, 355
historical aspects of, 323, 354
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
718
indications of, 355
with lung transplantation, 354–358, 
664
organ preservation methods and time 
in, 331
postoperative care in, 356
surgical procedure in, 355–356
ventricular assist devices as bridge to, 
769–770, 770
in transposition of great arteries, 
720–721
trauma of, 201–202
blunt, 127, 171, 202
penetrating, 200f, 201–202, 201f
in truncus arteriosus, 706–707
valvular disorders of, 712–716, 747–
751. See also Valvular heart 
disease
ventricular septal defect of, 726–727
Heartburn in gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, 964–965, 965t, 969
and hiatal hernia, 981
outcome of surgery in, 977, 980
postoperative recurrence of, 980
Heart failure, 764–770
in aortic stenosis, 758
in coronary artery disease, 742
epidemiology of, 764–765
etiology of, 765
mechanical circulatory support in, 
768–770
in mitral insufficiency, 753
in obesity, 1128
pathophysiology in, 765
pleural effusions in, 680, 681t, 683t
pulmonary artery catheterization in, 406
signs and symptoms in, 736
total artificial heart in, 770
in tricuspid atresia, 713
ventricular assist devices in, 768
in ventricular septal defect, 727
Heart Rhythm Society, 771
Heart sounds
in atrial septal defect, 697
in mitral stenosis, 752
Heat applications for local hemostasis, 95
Heat shock proteins, 19f, 20, 282
Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty
in Crohn’s disease, 1157, 1157f
in peptic ulcer disease, 1063, 1064f
Heinz bodies, 1426
Helicobacter pylori infections
gastric cancer in, 293, 1076f
risk for, 1074–1075
gastric lymphoma in, 1054, 1084
peptic ulcer disease in, 1051, 1054–
1055, 1076f
diagnosis of, 1059, 1059t, 1061
pathophysiology in, 1054–1055, 
1054f, 1055f, 1056f, 1057f
treatment of, 1059t, 1061, 1061t, 
1062t
testing for, 1051, 1053f
fecal antigen test in, 1051
in peptic ulcer disease, 1059
urea breath test in, 1051, 1053f
Heller, Ernst, 1000
Heller myotomy, 997–999, 999f
laparoscopic, 1000, 1001f–1002f
modified, 1000
outcome assessment in, 1003
Hemangioblastoma, 1735–1736
mural nodule in, 1736
Hemangioendothelioma, 1780
Hemangiomas, 485
capillary, 575
in children, 574, 1849–1850, 1850f
of head and neck, 574–575, 1849–1850, 
1850f
of liver, 1289–1290, 1290f
spinal extradural, 1737
Hemangiopericytoma, 1780
Hematemesis, postoperative, in 
laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, 1118
Hematocele in testicular trauma, 1661
Hematochezia, 1183
Hematocrit, critical, 1914–1915
Hematologic disorders, postoperative, 
389–390
Hematoma
aortic intramural, 807f, 808–809
auricular, 576
in chest trauma, 177, 178f
duodenal, 207
epidural, 175f, 1719
burr hole placement for 
decompression in, 195, 197f
in skull fracture, 1715
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
rectus sheath, 1453–1454, 1454f
in renal trauma, 1658t
subdural, 174, 1719–1720
acute, 1719
chronic, 1719–1720, 1720f
Hematopoiesis, spleen functions in, 1428
Hemihepatectomy
left, 1299–1300
right, 1298–1299
Hemispherectomy in epilepsy, 1747
Hemobilia in liver trauma, 205
Hemodilution, acute normovolemic, 
1914–1915
Hemodynamic monitoring, 399–412
of arterial blood pressure, 400–401
of cardiac output and related parameters, 
399, 402–409
normal range of values in, 404t
pulmonary artery catheterization for, 
403, 403t
in valvular heart disease, 748t
Hemoglobin, 97–98
in anemia, 98, 1432
and oxygen dissociation curve, 1914, 
1914f
oxygen saturation, 1914
arterial, 410
tissue, 409
polymerized human, 98
sickle cell, 1432
splenectomy in disorders of, 1432
in thalassemia, 1432
in trauma resuscitation, optimal level 
of, 216
Hemolysis in transfusion reactions, 101, 
102t
Hemolytic anemia, 1272
autoimmune
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1431–1432
warm-antibody, 1430t, 1431–1432
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1431–1432
outcome of, 1444
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, 91
Hemoperitoneum, massive, 166
Hemophilia, 88–89
Hemoptysis
in aspergillosis, 657
in bronchiectasis, 653
in coccidioidomycosis, 661
in lung abscess, 651
massive, 661–663
anatomy in, 661
etiologies of, 661, 662t
treatment of, 661–663, 662t, 663t
urgent surgery in, 663, 663t
in tuberculosis, 655
Hemorrhage
in abdominal trauma, 181, 182f,  
189–191
blood pressure in, 122
and mortality risk in, 120, 120f
in persistent hypotension, 171–172, 
173
bloody vicious cycle in, 185, 193,  
194f
in chest trauma, 201, 203
compensatory mechanisms in, 119
damage control surgery in, 193, 194f
excessive perioperative, 104
2022
Index
Hemorrhage (Cont.):
gastrointestinal, 386–387, 387t,  
1167–1168, 1183
angiography in, 1181
common causes of, 386–387, 387t
in diverticula, 1201, 1203
acquired, 1166
Meckel’s, 1164
in gastric varices, 1088
initial evaluation and management 
of, 1183
in Mallory-Weiss tear, 1020, 1090
massive, 1087–1088
obscure, 1167–1168, 1169f
occult, 1167, 1182, 1183
in colorectal cancer, 1208–1209
overt, 1167–1168
in peptic ulcer disease, 1059–1061, 
1064–1068
risk stratification in, 1059, 1060t
treatment algorithms on, 1069f, 
1070f
perioperative, 386–387
from small intestine, 1167–1168
treatment algorithms on, 1069f, 1070f, 
1169f, 1184f
in head trauma, 195, 197, 1720
in scalp injuries, 166, 173, 1715
hemoptysis in, massive, 661–663
hemostasis in, 95
mechanical procedures for, 95
thermal agents for, 95
topical agents for, 96
hemothorax in, 166, 166f
identification of blood loss source in, 
120, 122, 172
initial evaluation and management of, 
164–167
intracranial, 1728–1732
in amyloid angiopathy, 1730
in arteriovenous malformations, 1731, 
1733f
in cerebral aneurysms, 1728–1732
in elderly, 1935, 1935f
in head trauma, 195, 197
in hypertension, 1729–1730
in limb ischemia treatment 
complications, 888
locations and symptoms in, 1729t
subarachnoid, 1730–1731. See also 
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
intraparenchymal, in head trauma,  
1720
in kidney transplantation, 339
in liver transplantation, 351
neuroendocrine response to, 112
in pancreaticoduodenectomy, 1407
in pelvic fractures, 173, 181, 212–214
in portal hypertension, liver 
transplantation in, 347
postpartum, 1693
resuscitation in, 121–123, 166
damage control strategy in, 98, 100
historical development of, 110
in trauma, 166
in scalp injury, 166, 173, 1715
shock in, 110, 119–123. See also Shock, 
hypovolemic/hemorrhagic
in transfusion reactions, 104
transfusions in, 184
indications for, 97–98
in trauma, 184
uterine, 1682
endometrial ablation in, 1684
in leiomyomas, 1682–1683
vascular repair techniques in, 191–192, 
192f–193f
volume of blood loss in, 98, 119, 120t, 
171, 173
Hemorrhoidal venous plexus, 1178
Hemorrhoidectomy, 1223–1224
closed submucosal, 1223–1224, 1225f
complications in, 1224–1225
stapled, 1224
Hemorrhoids, 1222–1225
in Crohn’s disease, 1200
Doppler-guided artery ligation, 1224
external, 1223
thrombosed, excision of, 1223
internal, 1223
grades of, 1223
postpartum, 1223
treatment of, 1223–1224
rubber band ligation in, 1223, 1224f
Hemostasis, 85–104
biology of, 85–88, 86f
clotting factors in, 86f, 87, 87f. See also 
Factors, clotting
disorders of, 88–96
acquired, 90–96
in congenital factor deficiencies, 
88–89
fibrinolysis in, 86f, 88, 88f
laboratory tests of, 87, 102–104
preoperative, 102–104
local, 95
in liver trauma, 204
mechanical procedures in, 95
thermal agents in, 95
topical agents in, 96
platelet function in, 85–86, 86f, 87f
congenital disorders of, 89–90
qualitative disorders of, 90t, 91
quantitative disorders of, 90–91, 90t
preoperative evaluation of, 102–104
primary, 85
thromboelastography in, 103, 103f
vasoconstriction in, 85, 86f
in wound healing, 242–244, 243f
Hemostatic sheaths in endovascular 
therapy, 835, 835f
Hemothorax, 200
caked, 177, 177f
in children, 222
massive, 166, 166f
postoperative, 384
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 131
Heparin therapy, 94–95
in aortic aneurysm repair, 852, 856
in aortic trauma, 201
in burns, 233
in cardiopulmonary bypass, 740
in carotid endarterectomy, 844
in cerebrovascular trauma, 199
coagulation tests in, 103
complications of, 922
emergency operations in, 95
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 892
low molecular weight heparin in, 922
in mesenteric ischemia, 865
in splenectomy, 1439
thrombocytopenia in, 90–91, 95, 233, 
389, 922
unfractionated heparin in, 921–922
in venous thromboembolism, 921–922, 
925
duration of, 923t
in prevention, 186, 927
Hepatectomy, 1296–1301
in cancer of liver, 1294–1295
in colorectal cancer metastasis, 1301
recurrent, 1301
devices and procedures in, 1296–1297, 
1297t
historical aspects of, 1264
ischemic preconditioning in, 1300
laparoscopic, 1301–1302
left, 1299–1300, 1299f
in living donor kidney transplantation, 
332, 333f
nomenclature on, 1296, 1297f, 1297t
portal vein embolization prior to, 
1300–1301
Pringle maneuver in, 1300
right, 1298–1299, 1298f
steps in, 1297–1300
two-stage, 1301
Hepatic artery
anatomy of, 1266–1267, 1266f, 1345
common variations in, 1266–1267, 
1266f, 1312, 1345
as route for chemoembolization in 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1296
thrombosis in liver transplantation, 351
Hepatic duct anatomy, 1268, 1269f, 1310
common variations in, 1268, 1269f, 
1312
Hepaticojejunostomy, 1327, 1329f
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1337
Hepatic veins
anatomy of, 1267–1268, 1268f
Budd-Chiari syndrome in obstruction of, 
1283–1284
pressure measurement in, 1280–1281
thrombosis of, 1283, 1284
Hepatitis
anesthesia management in, 1907
in kidney transplant recipients, 335
neonatal, 1629
Hepatitis A, 1286
liver transplantation in, 347
Hepatitis B, 156, 1286
liver transplantation in, 347
tumors associated with, 295, 295t
vaccination, 156
Hepatitis C, 156, 1286
in kidney transplant recipients, 335
tumors associated with, 295, 295t
Hepatitis E, liver transplantation in, 347
Hepatoblastoma in children, 1641–1642
Hepatocellular carcinoma, 295, 295t, 1291, 
1292f, 1294–1296
chemoembolization in, 1295–1296
in children, 1641–1642, 1641f, 1642t
staging of, 1642, 1642t
treatment of, 1642
in cirrhosis, 1279, 1291
ethanol ablation in, 1295
hepatectomy in, 1294–1295
recurrent, 1301
liver transplantation in, 347, 1291, 1295, 
1642
Milan criteria on, 347, 1291
positron emission tomography for,  
1275
radiofrequency ablation in, 1295
risk factors for, 1291
treatment algorithm on, 1291, 1293f
tumor markers in, 302–303
Hepatocyte growth factor, 283
Hepatoduodenal ligament, 1265, 1265f, 
1457
Hepatogastric ligament, 1037, 1265,  
1265f, 1457
2023
Index
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, liver 
transplantation in, 348
Hepatorenal bypass in renal artery 
occlusive disease, 869–870
Hepatorenal syndrome, liver 
transplantation in, 347
Hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen, 1276
liver transplantation in, 347, 1277, 1277t
Hereditary, 444–446
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, 90
Hermaphroditism, true, 1637
HER2/neu, 281
in breast cancer, 454, 534–535, 535–536
as therapy target, 309, 310t, 535, 
553–554
signaling pathways, 281, 282f
Hernia
abdominal, 1454–1456
epigastric, 1455
incarcerated, 1455
incisional, 1454–1455, 1455
inguinal, 1634–1635
in liver disease and ascites, 1279, 
1455
spigelian, 1455
strangulated, 1455
umbilical, 1455, 1631, 1631f
in elderly, 1923
ventral, 1454–1455
diaphragmatic. See Diaphragmatic 
hernia
femoral. See Femoral hernia
hiatal. See Hiatal hernia
inguinal. See Inguinal hernia
Littre’s, 1164
Meckel’s diverticula in, 1164
mesocolic, 1458, 1458f
parastomal, 1193
small bowel obstruction in, 1146
Herniation
of brain, 1713–1714, 1714f. See also 
Brain, herniation of
of intervertebral discs, 1771
cervical, 1740, 1740t, 1741f, 1771
lumbar, 1742, 1742f, 1742t, 1771
thoracic, 1740, 1771
Herniorrhaphy in inguinal hernia,  
1504–1517
anesthesia in, 1505
in children, 1634, 1635
laparoscopic, 1635
complications of, 1514–1516
endoscopic procedures, 1509–1513
open procedures, 1504–1509
postoperative pain in, 1514–1515
Herpes simplex virus infections
anorectal, 1233
facial nerve paralysis in, 567
genital, 1678, 1679t
in transplant recipients, 329
Hetastarch in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
Hewitt, Frederick, 1896
Hextend in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
Hiatal hernia, 980–984
clinical manifestations in, 981–982
diagnosis of, 982
barium studies in, 950–951, 953f, 982
endoscopy in, 950, 981, 982f
diaphragmatic repair, 983
and esophageal diverticula, 994
esophageal rupture in, 1018
etiology of, 980–981
and gastroesophageal reflux, 966–967, 
966f
antireflux surgery in, 983
pathophysiology in, 982
symptoms in, 981–982
giant paraesophageal, 980–984
incidence of, 980–981
indications for surgery in, 982–983
intrathoracic stomach in, 980, 981f, 982
laparoscopic repair in, 983
pathophysiology in, 982
postoperative recurrence of, 983
results of surgery in, 984
and Schatzki’s ring, 984, 984f
and scleroderma of esophagus, 985
sliding, 980f, 981, 981f, 982
surgical approach in, 982–983
types of, 980, 980f–981f
Hidradenitis suppurativa, 476, 506, 1233
High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), 
28t, 38
High-pressure injection injuries of hand, 
1801
Hinchey staging system in diverticulitis, 
1202
Hindgut, embryonic development of, 
1175–1176, 1179
Hip
arthroplasty of, 1773–1774, 1773f, 1774f
alignment of components, 1774
bearing surfaces in, 1774
history of, 1773
surgical approach, 1773–1774
dislocations of, 1760
in cerebral palsy, 1782
failed hemiarthroplasty, 1761f
fractures of, 1760–1762
in acetabulum, 1760
in children, 1782
intertrochanteric, 1761–1762
subtrochanteric, 1762
pain, patient examination in, 1772
Hirschsprung’s disease, 1624–1626, 1626f
clinical presentation of, 1625
congenital megacolon in, 1220–1221, 
1624
diagnosis of, 1625
genetic factors in, 1625
pathogenesis of, 1624–1625
treatment of, 1625–1626, 1626f
ultrashort-segment, 1221
Hirudin in venous thromboembolism, 922
Histamine, 34
gastric cells secreting, 1040
receptor subtypes, 34
in stimulation of gastric acid secretion, 
1041, 1043, 1044f
Histamine2 blockers
in peptic ulcer disease, 1061
Histiocytes, 660f, 666, 668
Histiocytoma, malignant fibrous, 1465, 
1470, 1780
of chest wall, 667, 668, 668t
Histiocytosis, Langerhans cell, 666
Histoplasma capsulatum, 330
Histoplasmosis, 658–659, 660f
Historical aspects
of adrenal disorders, 1574
of anesthesia, 1895–1897
of appendicitis, 136, 1241
of bariatric surgery, 1103
of breast cancer therapy, 497–499
of cardiopulmonary bypass, 740
of coronary artery disease, 741
of gastric surgery, 1035, 1036t
of genetics and molecular biology, 443, 
445t
of inguinal hernia treatment, 1495–1496
of liver surgery, 1263–1264
of minimally invasive surgery, 415–417
of parathyroid gland, 1556
of pediatric surgery, 1597–1598
of plastic and reconstructive surgery, 
1829, 1832
craniofacial, 1844
free tissue transfer in, 1838
of shock, 109–110
of solitary thyroid nodule, 1537
of spleen studies, 1423–1424
of surgical infections, 135–137
of thyroid surgery, 1521
of transplantation, 322–323, 323t
of kidney, 322–323, 334
of liver, 323, 345–346
of pancreas, 323, 340
of wound healing, 241
History-taking
in anesthesia management, 1904
in arterial disease, 828, 828t
in cardiac disorders, 737
in gynecologic disorders, 1675, 1676t
in inguinal hernia, 1502–1503
in large intestine disorders, 1180
in trauma, 173
HIV infection and AIDS, 156
appendicitis in, 1248
coccidioidomycosis in, 661
gastrointestinal disorders in, 1235–1236
postexposure prophylaxis in, 156
skin manifestations in, 485
transfusion-associated, 388, 388t
tuberculosis in, 654
tumors associated with, 295t
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 485
lymphoma, 1736
HLA antigens, 334, 336, 901
in Behçet’s syndrome, 903
functions of, 324
in giant cell arteritis, 901
in Graves’ disease, 1531
in transplantation procedures, 324
HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1),  
28t, 38
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
of breast, 557
mediastinal, 678
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1434
stages of, 1434
types of, 1434
Hofmann elimination, 1901
Hollenhorst plaque, 839
Homeostasis, 109
circulatory, 114
Homocysteine serum levels in ischemic 
heart disease, 1906
Homograft heart valves, 750–751
Hormones
adrenal, 22–23, 1575–1578
and breast cancer risk, 511, 513, 534, 
535–536
in breast development and function, 500, 
503–504, 503f, 505
in cancer therapy, 308–309
gastric, 1045–1047
gut, 1145
in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, 
19–21, 20t
pancreatic, 1348–1351, 1349t
parathyroid. See Parathyroid hormone
in postmenopausal therapy, 513
in shock response, 113–114
in stress response, 19–23, 112
of thyroid, 1525–1528
2024
Index
Horner’s syndrome, 623
Hospice care
in head and neck tumors, 602
pain management in, 1946
Host defense mechanisms, 137–138
skin in, 137
small intestine in, 1144
spleen in, 1426
Houston valves of rectum, 1177
HRAS gene in Costello syndrome, 288t
HRPT2 in hyperparathyroidism, 288t, 
1560
Hughes advancement flap in eyelid 
reconstruction, 1858, 1861f
Human bite wounds, 479
Humerus
fractures of, 1759
distal, 1759
proximal, 1759
in shaft, 1759
osteosarcoma of, 1779
Hunter, John, 241
Hunt-Hess grading system for 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, 1730, 
1730t
Hurewitz, Mike, 376, 377t
Hürthle cell carcinoma of thyroid, 1546
Hyaluronic acid
in fetal wound healing, 252
joint injections of, 1772
Hydatid disease, 1285–1286
Hydrocele, 1634, 1635
communicating, 1634
Hydrocephalus, 1713, 1713f, 1750–1751, 
1750f
communicating, 1751
obstructive, 1751
Hydrochloric acid secretion, gastric.  
See Acid secretion, gastric
Hydrocodone in persistent pain, 1949t
Hydrocortisone
in adrenocortical insufficiency, 1590
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1583
in hypercalcemia, 1573t
in septic shock, 126, 154, 155t
Hydrofluoric acid, skin injuries from, 480
Hydrofluoride, skin injury, 479
Hydromorphone in persistent pain, 1949t
Hydronephrosis, 1665–1666, 1665f
in bladder cancer, 1653
in children, 1667
in posterior urethral valves, 1667
in ureteropelvic junction obstruction, 
1667
in vesicoureteral reflux, 1667
Hydrops of gallbladder, 1319
Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, 31f, 32, 32t
Hydroxyethyl starch solutions, 77, 1911, 
1914
21-Hydroxylase deficiency, 1585, 1637
5-Hydroxytryptamine, 33–34
Hygroma, cystic, 598, 1852, 1852f
treatment of, 598
ex utero intrapartum therapy (EXIT) 
procedure in, 1645
Hymen imperforate, in children, 1636
Hyperaldosteronism, 1578–1579
Hyperamylasemia in acute pancreatitis, 1356
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy in soft tissue 
infections, 152
Hyperbilirubinemia, 1271–1272
postoperative, 387
Hypercalcemia, 71
differential diagnosis in, 1561–1562, 
1562f, 1563t
drug-induced, 71
etiologies of, 72
familial hypocalciuric, 1562
in hyperparathyroidism, 72, 1560–1563
crisis in, 1572
disorders associated with, 1561
pancreatitis in, 1353, 1365
persistent and recurrent, 1571
of malignancy, 82, 1561–1562
in lung cancer, 626
signs and symptoms in, 72, 72t
treatment of, 78, 1572, 1573t
Hypercapnia, permissive, in congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia, 1605
Hypercholesterolemia, coronary artery 
disease in, 1906
Hypercoagulopathy, in kidney transplant 
recipients, 336
Hypercortisolism, Cushing’s syndrome in, 
1580, 1581
Hyperemia zone in burns, 230
Hypergastrinemia, 1045
algorithm on diagnosis and management 
of, 1072f
chronic, 1045
differential diagnosis in, 1071–1072
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 1055
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome,  
1071–1073
Hyperglycemia
in burns, 233
in critical illness, 23
in head trauma, 1718
hyponatremia in, 69
in parenteral nutrition, 59
in septic shock, 125
Hyperhomocysteinemia, ischemic heart 
disease in, 1906
Hyperkalemia, 71
in cancer, 81
drug-induced, 71
etiology of, 71, 71f
signs and symptoms in, 71, 72t
treatment of, 77–78, 78t
Hyperkeratosis in lymphedema, 934, 934f
Hyperlipidemia
coronary artery disease in, 742, 1906
in obesity
bariatric surgery affecting, 1112t, 
1116, 1128
ileocolic bypass in, 1103
pancreatitis in, 1352–1353, 1365
Hypermagnesemia, 73
etiologies of, 73
signs and symptoms in, 72t, 73
treatment of, 78
Hypernatremia, 69–70, 70f
in cancer, 81
etiologies of, 69
hypervolemic, 69
hypovolemic, 69, 77
postoperative, 392
signs and symptoms in, 69, 71f
treatment of, 77
Hyperparathyroidism, 1559–1574
in adenoma of parathyroid, 1560
bone disease in, 1556, 1560–1561, 
1561f, 1563
in carcinoma of parathyroid, 1560,  
1570
in elderly, 1937
familial, 1560, 1570
gastrointestinal disorders in, 1561
hypercalcemia in, 72, 1560–1563, 1571
crisis in, 1572
disorders associated with, 1561
pancreatitis in, 1353, 1365
neonatal, 1570
neuropsychiatric disorders in, 1561
normocalcemic, 1570
parathyroidectomy in, 1563–1574, 1567f
operative procedure in, 1566–1569, 
1568f
preoperative localization tests in, 
1564–1566, 1565t
in secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
1572–1573
in tertiary hyperparathyroidism, 1573
persistent and recurrent, 1571–1572, 
1572f
primary, 1559–1571
clinical manifestations in, 1560–1561
diagnostic studies in, 1562–1563
differential diagnosis in, 1561–1562
etiology of, 1559–1560
genetic factors in, 1560
treatment of, 1563–1574
renal disease in, 1560
secondary, 1559, 1572–1573
tertiary, 1559, 1573
urinary calculi in, 1560, 1666
Hyperphosphatemia, 73
in cancer, 81, 82
treatment of, 78
Hyperplasia
of adrenal gland. See Adrenal gland, 
hyperplasia of
of breast, 507, 508f, 508t
atypical ductal, 510
cancer risk in, 508, 508t, 509–510
pathology in, 509–510
craniofacial, 1849
endometrial, 1683
of liver, focal nodular, 1290f, 1291
of lungs, 614, 617
of prostate, benign, 1662, 1665
of thymus, 674–675
Hypersensitivity reactions. See Allergic 
reactions
Hypersplenism, 1427
differentiated from splenomegaly, 1427
in Gaucher’s disease, 1437–1438
Hypertelorism, orbital, 1847
Hypertension
aortic dissection in, 812, 815
coronary artery disease in, 742
in elderly, 1935
in hyperaldosteronism, 1578, 1580
intra-abdominal, 217, 218f, 389
intracranial, 411, 1713–1714
brain herniation in, 1713–1714, 1714f
in head trauma, 195, 197, 411
pressure-volume curve in, 1713, 
1714f
intracranial hemorrhage in, 1729–1730
in obesity, bariatric surgery affecting, 
1111, 1112t, 1116, 1128
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
portal, 1280–1281. See also Portal 
hypertension
postoperative, 386
in aortic coarctation, 705
intra-abdominal, 389
pulmonary
in congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 
1604, 1605
liver transplantation in, 348
lung transplantation in, 664
renovascular, 865, 867
diagnosis of, 867
2025
Index
endovascular therapy in, 871–872, 
871f
surgical treatment in, 870
Hyperthermia
in aortic dissection repair, 813
malignant, 393, 1916–1917
skin injuries in, 480
Hyperthyroidism, 1530–1534
differential diagnosis in, 1531t
in elderly, 1937
in goiter, 1531–1533
in Graves’ disease, 1531–1533
Jod-Basedow, 1533
postoperative, 392
radioactive iodine uptake in, 1530, 
1531t
thyroid function tests in, 1529
in thyroid storm, 1534
in toxic adenoma, 1533–1534
Hypertonic formulas in burns, 230
Hypertriglyceridemia, chronic pancreatitis 
in, 1365
Hypertrophy
adenotonsillar, 570, 571
of breast in adolescents, 507
craniofacial, 1849
left ventricular, 757–758
Hypervolemia, 68t
hypernatremia in, 69
postoperative, 80
signs and symptoms in, 68t, 80
Hypocalcemia, 72, 78
in cancer, 81
etiologies of, 72, 1574, 1574t
hyperparathyroidism in, secondary, 1572
in hypoparathyroidism, 1574, 1574t
postoperative, 384
in parathyroidectomy, 1574
in thyroidectomy, 1556
signs and symptoms in, 72, 72t
treatment of, 78, 78t
Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, familial, 
1562
Hypodermis, 476
Hypofibrinogenemia, acquired, 92
Hypogastric nerve plexus, 1179
Hypokalemia, 71
in cancer, 81
drug-induced, 71
etiologies of, 71, 71f
in hyperaldosteronism, 1578, 1580
and hypomagnesemia, 71
signs and symptoms in, 71, 72t
treatment of, 78, 78t
in VIPoma, 1392
Hypomagnesemia, 73
in cancer, 81
etiologies of, 73
and hypokalemia, 71
signs and symptoms in, 72t, 73
treatment of, 78, 78t
Hyponatremia, 69, 70f
in cancer, 81, 626
dilutional, 69
drug-induced, 69
etiologies of, 69
in inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
secretion, 69, 80
postoperative, 392
signs and symptoms in, 69, 71f, 77
treatment of, 77
Hypoparathyroidism, 1574
hypocalcemia in, 1574, 1574t
postoperative
in parathyroidectomy, 1574
in thyroidectomy, 1574
Hypoperfusion, wound healing in, 253
Hypopharyngeal cancer, 588f, 589
anatomy in, 580, 588, 588f
metastasis in, 588f, 589
reconstructive surgery in, 1863
Hypophosphatemia, 73
in cancer, 81, 82
treatment of, 78, 78t
Hypophysectomy in breast cancer, 553
Hypoplasia
craniofacial, 1848–1849, 1849f, 1850f
of left heart, 716–719, 717f, 718f
of right ventricle in tricuspid atresia, 712
Hypotension
in hemorrhage, 119, 120f, 122, 171–172, 
173
in neurogenic shock, 130
in trauma, 171–173
of head, 195
initial evaluation and management 
of, 163
persistence of, 168–169, 171–173
Hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal (HPA) axis, 
19–21
Hypothalamus
anatomy of, 1710
hormones regulated by, 20t, 1526, 1529f
Hypothenar hammer syndrome, 1822
Hypothenar muscles, 1791
Hypothermia
in aortic aneurysm repair, 797, 801, 818
in hemorrhagic shock, 123, 187
in organ preservation for transplantation, 
332, 334
postoperative, 393
skin injuries in, 480–481
in trauma, 187
in bloody vicious cycle, 185, 193, 
194f
Hypothyroidism, 1534–1535
anesthesia management in, 1908
clinical features in, 1534
diagnostic tests in, 1529, 1534
etiologies of, 1534t
postoperative, 392–393
treatment of, 1534–1535
Hypoventilation
in obesity, 1105, 1106
respiratory acidosis in, 75, 75t
Hypovolemia, 67, 68t
hypernatremia in, 69, 77
postoperative, 80
in kidney transplantation, 339
preoperative fluid therapy in, 79
shock in. See Shock, hypovolemic/
hemorrhagic
signs and symptoms in, 68t, 80
in trauma, 168
in children, 1642
response to fluid therapy in, 170
Hypoxia
in head trauma, 195
wound healing in, 253
Hysterectomy, 1683–1684, 1684
abdominal procedure, 1685, 
1686f–1687f, 1687
in endometrial cancer, 1698
laparoscopic, 1687–1689
in leiomyomas of uterus, 1683
peripartum, 1693, 1694f
radical, in cervical cancer, 1686f–1687f, 
1698, 1699f–1700f
vaginal procedure, 1684
Hysteroscopy, 1683–1684
distention media and pumps in, 1683
indications for, 1683–1684
instruments in, 1683
I
Ibuprofen
in ductus arteriosus patency, 704
gastrointestinal disorders from, 1058t
in persistent pain, 1949t
Ifosfamide
in lung cancer, 644t
in soft tissue sarcoma of extremity, 
1475–1476, 1476
Ileal pouch anal anastomosis, 1188, 1189f, 
1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 1207
pouchitis in, 1194
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
Ileitis, backwash, 1154
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1195
Ileocolic artery, superior, 1176
Ileocolic resection, 1187
Ileostomy, 210, 1191f, 1192–1193, 1192f
Brooke, 1188, 1192, 1192f, 1194
complications of, 1193
diversion colitis in, 1179
end, 1193
and total proctocolectomy in 
ulcerative colitis, 1198
functional results in, 1193–1194
Kock pouch, 1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
1207
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
loop, 1189f, 1192–1193
divided, 1192–1193
marking ideal site for, 1191f
permanent, 1193
temporary, 1189f, 1192–1193
Ileum
anatomy of, 1138, 1138f
Crohn’s disease of, 1198–1199
diverticula of, 1165, 1167
Meckel’s, 1163f
neoplasms of, 1160
sarcoma, 1481
treatment in, 1161
perforation of, 1168–1169
spontaneous, 1621
resection of
ileocolic, 1187
short bowel syndrome in, 1171
Ileus
differentiated from mechanical 
obstruction, 1147
etiologies of, 1151–1152, 1151t, 1152t
meconium, 1617–1619, 1619f
postoperative, 386, 1151–1153, 1152t
in gastrointestinal tract trauma, 207
resection of short bowel syndrome in, 
1151–1153
treatment of, 1152–1153
Iliac arteries
anatomy of, 1672
aneurysm of, with abdominal aortic 
aneurysm, 855, 856
occlusive disease of, 828, 872–881
clinical results of treatment in, 832f, 
880–881
endovascular therapy in, 879–880
trauma of
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
190–191, 191f
in laparoscopy, 1704–1705, 1704f
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
2026
Index
Iliac arteries, trauma of (Cont.):
transposition procedure for repair in, 
193f
Iliac crest osteocutaneous flap in head and 
neck reconstructive surgery, 601
Iliacus muscle, 1672
Iliac vein trauma, emergent abdominal 
exploration in, 190–191, 190f
Iliococcygeus muscle, 1178, 1672
Iliofemoral bypass in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 877, 877f
Iliofemoral vein thromboembolism, 924
Iliohypogastric nerve
anatomy of, 1498, 1498f, 1499f
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Ilioinguinal nerve
anatomy of, 1497–1498, 1498f, 1499f
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Iliopubic tract
anatomy of, 1496, 1498f
repair procedure, 1509, 1509f
Imaging systems in minimally invasive 
surgery, 424–427, 426f, 427f
Imatinib, 309, 310t
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 
1483–1485, 1483f
resistance to, 1482–1483, 1485
in small intestine neoplasms, 1162
Imipenem-cilastatin, 144t
Imipramine in pain, 1950t
Imiquimod, in basal cell carcinoma, 487
Immobilization
in cervical spine trauma, 162, 1722
hypercalcemia in, 1562
Immune globulin, intravenous, in 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, 1433
Immune response
danger signaling in, 115, 117f
enteral nutrition affecting, 53–54
eosinophils in, 39
lymphocytes in, 38–39, 39f
monocytes in, 39–40
neutrophils in, 40
in shock, 115
small intestine function in, 1144
spleen function in, 1426–1427, 1428
Immunobiology in transplantation, 323
Immunoblotting, 458, 460f
Immunocompromised hosts
coccidioidomycosis in, 661
gastrointestinal disorders in, 1235–1236
histoplasmosis in, 659, 660f
in HIV infection and AIDS. See HIV 
infection and AIDS
perianal sepsis in, 1229
Immunofluorescence, 458
Immunoglobulins in microbial invasion 
response, 138
Immunohistochemistry, 458
Immunomodulators, in skin inflammatory 
conditions, 476
Immunoprecipitation, 458–459, 461f
Immunosuppression
corticosteroids in, 325–326, 325t
in inflammatory bowel disease,  
1196–1197
in transplantation, 324–328
agents used in, 324–328, 325t
complications of, 326t, 329–330
gastrointestinal disorders in, 1236
heart, 356
historical aspects of, 322–323
intestinal, 352
of kidney, 328, 335
of liver, 346, 351
of pancreas, 340
islet cell, 345
Immunotherapy in tumors, 309, 311–312, 
454–455
adoptive transfer in, 311
antigen-specific, 309, 311–312
nonspecific, 309
Impedance, electrical
in cardiography, 407
cardiac output measurements in, 407
in esophageal studies, 955, 961f
in plethysmography, 921
Imperforate anus, 1626–1628, 1626f,  
1627f
Impingement syndromes in shoulder, 1766
Implants, breast
in augmentation mammaplasty,  
1890–1891, 1891f
in reconstruction after mastectomy, 
1867–1869, 1869f, 1870f
with autologous tissue reconstruction, 
1871, 1874f
Incidentaloma, adrenal, 1588–1590
diagnosis in, 1588–1589
differential diagnosis in, 1588, 1588t
treatment in, 1589–1590, 1589f
Incisional biopsy, in soft tissue sarcomas, 
1469–1470
Incisions
in abdominal wall, 1451–1453, 1452f
hernia in, 1454–1455, 1456t, 1457f
components separation technique 
in, 1455
laparoscopic repair of, 1456
mesh repair of, 1455–1456
in laparoscopy, 421–422, 1451, 1452
in plastic and reconstructive surgery, 
1829–1830, 1830f, 1831f, 1831t
Incontinence
fecal, 1185
in anal sphincter injury, 1235, 1235f
anatomic causes of, 1185
endoanal ultrasonography in, 1185, 
1185f
neurogenic causes of, 1185, 1235
sacral nerve stimulation in, 1235
surgical repairs in, 1235, 1235f
urinary
overflow, in acute urine retention, 
1661
in prostatectomy for prostate cancer, 
1658
stress
in obesity, 1126
surgery for, 1695
Incretins, 1349
Indigestion, 1050
Individualized medicine
in cancers, 316
genomic, 468
Indomethacin in ductus arteriosus patency, 
704
Infants. See Children and infants
Infarction
myocardial. See Myocardium,  
infarction of
omental, 1457
Infections, 135–157
abdominal, 149–150. See also 
Abdominal infections
anorectal, 1227–1229, 1227f, 1228f
aortic aneurysm in, 788
in aortoiliac reconstruction, 878
of appendix vermiform, 1243–1251
bacterial, 139–140, 140t. See also 
Bacterial infections
from biologic warfare agents, 156–157
in bite wounds, 479, 479f
of bladder, 390, 1664–1665
blood-borne, 156
occupational exposures to, 156
of breast, 506–507
catheter-related. See Catheterization, 
infections related to
of central nervous system, 1745–1746
definition of, 15t
of ears, 565–567
empyema in, 683–684
fungal, 140, 140t, 141t. See also Fungal 
infections
gynecologic
pelvic inflammatory disease in, 
1690–1691
screening for, 1676–1677
ulcer syndromes in, 1678, 1679t
of hand, 1794, 1809–1814
historical aspects of, 135–137
host defense mechanisms in, 137–138
skin in, 137
small intestine in, 1144
spleen in, 1426
inflammatory response to
systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome in, 138, 139f
of liver, 150, 1284–1287
mediastinitis in, 679–680
microbiology of, 139–141
osteomyelitis in, 1745–1746, 1877
of pancreas, 150–151, 1353
in parenteral nutrition, 58–59
pathogenesis of, 137–139
peritonitis in, 149–150
pharyngitis in, 570
postoperative, 152–154, 374, 375t
of surgical site. See Surgical site 
infections
postsplenectomy, 207
antibiotics in, 1445
overwhelming, 1444–1445
vaccinations in prevention of,  
1439–1440, 1445
prevention and treatment of, 141–147
antibiotics in, 142, 143t–145t, 146–147
general principles in, 141
source control in, 141–142
pulmonary, 650–661
pyelonephritis in, 1664
emphysematous, 1664
retroperitoneal, 1460, 1461f
sepsis in. See Sepsis
sinusitis in, 567–570
of skin, 151–152, 483–485
of soft tissues, 152, 153f
necrotizing, 152, 153f, 483, 1229
of spleen, 1436
rupture in, 1436
of subcutaneous tissue, 483–485
of surgical site. See Surgical site 
infections
transfusion-related, 102, 388, 388t
and transplantation, 329–330
in transplant recipients, 329–330
in kidney transplantation, 335
in liver transplantation, 351
in pancreas transplantation, 343
of urinary tract, 1664–1665
viral, 140–141, 140t. See also Viral 
infections
of wounds, 255–259, 265
2027
Index
Infertility
in cryptorchidism, 1636
in obesity, 1126
Inflammatory bowel disease, 1195–1201
in appendectomy, 1242–1243
cholangitis in, primary sclerosing, 1196, 
1331
colorectal cancer in
risk for, 1197, 1199, 1204
screening for, 1210t
Crohn’s disease, 1153–1157, 1195. See 
also Crohn’s disease
drug therapy in, 1196–1197
epidemiology of, 1195
extraintestinal manifestations of, 1196
indeterminate colitis, 1195
nutrition in, 1197
ulcerative colitis, 1195. See also Colitis, 
ulcerative
Inflammatory carcinoma of breast,  
555–556, 556f
differentiated from noninflammatory 
cancer, 556, 556t
Inflammatory response
acute phase proteins in, 1272
and anti-inflammatory response
cholinergic pathways in, 19
counterregulatory syndrome, 14f
cell-mediated, 38–40
central nervous system in, 18–23, 19f
macrophage migration-inhibiting factor 
affecting, 21
mediators of, 26–34
in shock, 115–119
in pancreatitis
acute, 1354, 1355–1359
chronic, 1372
in shock, 112, 115–119
systemic syndrome in, 19, 138, 139f
antibiotics in, 142
in cardiopulmonary bypass, 741
definition of, 15t
diagnostic criteria on, 138, 139t, 
391–392, 391t
mortality risk in, 391, 391t
phases in, 14f
postoperative, 391–392
vagus nerve in, 19, 19f
in wound healing, 242–244, 242f, 243f, 
1831
fetal, 251
Infliximab
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1197, 1197
in ulcerative colitis, 1197
Informed consent, 1941–1944. See also 
Consent, informed
Infrapopliteal occlusive disease
classification of, 885
endovascular therapy in, 891, 892t, 894
Infundibulopelvic ligaments, 1675
Inguinal canal anatomy, 1496, 1497f
Inguinal hernia, 1495–1517, 1974
age-related differences in, 1496t, 1500
anatomy in, 1496–1500, 1497f
anterior perspective, 1496, 1499f, 
1500f
circle of death in, 1499
ligaments in, 1496, 1498f
nerves in, 1497–1499, 1498f,  
1499f
posterior perspective, 1496–1497, 
1498f
triangle of doom and triangle of pain 
in, 1499, 1501f
anesthesia in, 1505, 1515
in children, 1500, 1634–1635. See also 
Children and infants, inguinal 
hernia in
classification of, 1498t
complications in, 1514–1516, 1514t
in connective tissue disorders, 1502, 
1502t
conservative management in, 1505
diagnosis of, 1502–1504
history-taking in, 1502–1503
imaging in, 1504, 1504f
physical examination in, 1503–1504, 
1503f
differential diagnosis of, 1503, 1503t
direct
in children, 1634
classification of, 1496
diagnosis of, 1503
elective repair of, 1505
emergent repair of, 1505
endoscopic repair in, 1509–1513
transabdominal preperitoneal, 1510
historical treatment of, 1495–1496
incarceration of, 1505
in children, 1635
emergent repair in, 1505
indirect
in children, 1634
classification of, 1496
diagnosis of, 1503
laparoscopic repair in
in children, 1635
complications of, 1515–1516
intraperitoneal onlay mesh procedure 
in, 1513
patient position and room setup for, 
1511f
totally extraperitoneal procedure, 
1511, 1512f, 1513
transabdominal preperitoneal, 1512f
mesh repair in. See Mesh repair, in 
inguinal hernia
open repair of, 1504–1509
anesthesia in, 1505
Bassini technique, 1506, 1507f
giant prosthetic reinforcement of 
visceral sac in, 1509, 1509f
iliopubic tract repair in, 1509, 1509f
incisions in, 1505, 1506f
Lichtenstein technique, 1508, 1508f
McVay technique, 1507–1508, 1507f
plug and patch technique, 1508–1509, 
1508f
Prolene hernia system in, 1509, 1509f
Shouldice technique, 1506–1507, 
1507f
wound closure in, 1509
outcomes in, 1516–1517
pathophysiology of, 1496t, 1500–1502
postoperative pain in, 1514–1515
chronic, 1514
neuropathic, 1514
somatic, 1514
visceral, 1514
prosthetic repairs in, 1508–1509
recurrent, 1514
signs and symptoms in, 1503
sliding, 1505
strangulation in, 1505
emergent repair in, 1505
tension repairs in, 1505
tissue repairs in, 1505–1508
Inguinal ligament, 1449, 1496, 1498f
Inguinal lymph nodes in vulvar cancer
anatomy of, 1696, 1696f
dissection of, 1697, 1697f
staging of involvement, 1696
Inguinal ring, 1496
Inguinodynia, 1515
Inhalational agents in general anesthesia, 
1902, 1902t
Inhalation injuries in burns, 227,  
231–232
complications in, 233
Injury. See Trauma
Injury Severity Score in elderly, 222
Innominate artery
fistula with trachea in tracheostomy 
complications, 382, 382f
injury of, 177, 178f, 200, 200f
bypass exclusion repair technique in, 
200, 200f
Inosculation, 1833
Inotropic agents in sepsis, 154, 155t
Inspissated bile syndrome, 1628–1629
Institute of Medicine report on medical 
errors, 366, 1952
Instruments, surgical, in minimally 
invasive surgery, 429
Insulin, 23, 1349–1350, 1349t
deficiency in chronic pancreatitis, 1373
functions of, 1349–1350, 1349t
in parenteral nutrition solutions, 58
receptors for, 1350
resistance to
in critical illness, 23
in septic shock, 125
in type 2 diabetes, 452
secretion of, 1348, 1349
signaling pathway, 452, 452f
therapy
in burns, 233
in hyperglycemia, 23
in pancreas transplantation, 340
postoperative, 392
in septic shock, 125
Insulin-like growth factors, 21–22
in wound healing, 246, 247t
Insulinoma, 1391
Insulin receptor substrate, 452, 452f
Integrated Management of Emergency 
and Essential Surgical Care 
(IMEESC), 1965
Integrins, 41t, 42f, 283
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy 
(IMRT), 314
Intensive care unit management in trauma, 
215–217
Intercellular adhesion molecules
ICAM-1, 41t
ICAM-2, 41t
Intercostal artery injuries, 203
Interferon-α, 30
Interferon-β, 30
Interferon-γ, 28t, 30
Interferon in melanoma therapy, 491
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study 
Group, 1486
Interleukins, 27t–28t
IL-1, 26, 27t, 28–29
receptors for, 29
in shock response, 116
IL-2
in cancer immunotherapy, 309, 
454–455
in shock response, 27t, 29,  
116–118
IL-3, 27t, 30–31
IL-4, 27t
IL-5, 27t, 30–31
2028
Index
Interleukins (Cont.):
IL-6, 27t–28t, 29
in shock response, 118
IL-8, 28t
IL-10, 28t, 29–30
in shock response, 118
IL-11, in coagulopathy of liver disease, 
93
IL-12, 28t, 30
IL-13, 28t
IL-15, 28t
IL-18, 28t, 30
IL-21, 28t
Internal fixation of fractures, 1763f
International Association for the Study of 
Lung Cancer lung cancer staging 
system, 634t
International Federation of Gynecology 
and Obstetrics staging system
in cervical cancer, 1698, 1698t
in endometrial cancer, 1701t
in ovarian cancer, 1703t
in vaginal carcinoma, 1697t
in vulvar cancer, 1696, 1696t
International Normalized Ratio, 102, 103
in liver disease, 93
Child-Turcotte-Pugh score on, 1280t
in warfarin therapy, 921
International Pancreas Transplant Registry, 
344
International Registry of Lung Metastases 
(IRLM), 622, 623t
International Sensitivity Index, 103
International Society of Paediatric 
Oncology Wilms’ tumor 
treatment approach, 1638–1639
International Union Against Cancer cancer 
staging system, 300
in stomach cancer, 1079
Interosseous muscles of hand, 1791
Interpectoral lymph nodes, 503
Interpersonal skills as core competency, 4t
Interphalangeal joints of hand
degenerative disorders of, 1807
distal, 1788, 1790f
fractures of, 1796
proximal, 1788, 1790f
dislocations of, 1796
rheumatoid arthritis of, 1808
Intersphincteric space, 1227
abscess of, 1227, 1228
Interstitial cells of Cajal, 1047, 1481
Interstitial fluid, 65–66
composition of, 65–66, 66f, 67f
Intervertebral discs, 1739, 1740
cervical, 1741f
herniation of, 1740, 1740t, 1741f, 
1771
in spondylotic myelopathy, 1740
infections of, 1746
lumbar, herniation of, 1742, 1742f, 
1742t, 1771
thoracic, herniation of, 1740, 1771
Intestinal ischemia, in aortoiliac 
reconstruction, 878
Intestinal transplantation, 352–354, 353f, 
353f–354f
complications of, 354
indications of, 352
leading cause of intestine failure, 352t
with liver transplantation, 352, 353f
living donor in, 332, 352, 354f
multivisceral, 352–354, 353f
postoperative care in, 353–354
recipient selection in, 352
in short bowel syndrome, 1172
surgical procedure in, 352–353
Intra-abdominal infections. See Abdominal 
infections
Intracellular fluid, 65, 66f, 67f
composition of, 65
osmolality of, 67
Intracranial hemorrhage. See Hemorrhage, 
intracranial
Intracranial pressure
increase in, 411, 1713–1714, 1714f
brain herniation in, 1713–1714, 1714f
in head trauma, 195, 197, 411
pressure-volume curve in, 1713
monitoring of, 411, 1712–1713
in anesthesia management,  
1908–1909
intraparenchymal fiberoptic pressure 
transducer in, 1713
ventriculostomy in, 411, 1713
Intracranial tumors, 1732–1737
metastatic, stereotactic radiosurgery in, 
1749
Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm 
(IPMN), 1410f, 1411f,  
1412–1413, 1412f
Intraepithelial neoplasia
anal, 1217–1218
cervical, 1681
of fallopian tube, 1689
pancreatic, 1395, 1396f
vaginal, 1681
vulvar, 1680
Intraoperative period
fluid therapy in, 80, 1911, 1914
hemorrhage in, excessive, 104
infection prophylaxis in, 142, 1832, 
1832t
radiation therapy in, 314
resuscitation in, 130
wound healing interventions in, 1832, 
1832t
Intravenous fluid extravasation, skin injury 
in, 480, 481f
Intrinsic factor, 1044, 1143
Introducer sheaths in endovascular therapy, 
835, 835f
Introns, 446
Intussusception, 1622, 1622f
clinical manifestations in, 1622
ileocolic, 1170
recurrent, 1622
of small intestine, 1170, 1170f
retrograde, 1170
target sign in, 1170, 1170f
treatment of, 1622, 1622f
open reduction in, 1622, 1622f
Iodine
dietary
deficiency of, 1536t, 1537, 1544
sources of, 1525
metabolism of, thyroid function in, 1525
radioactive
and fibrinogen uptake in venous 
thromboembolism, 921
in hyperthyroidism therapy,  
1532–1533
in thyroid cancer therapy, 1546–1548, 
1547f
in thyroid imaging, 1529–1530, 1530f
in hyperthyroidism, 1530, 1531t
Ion channels, 35f, 452
Ipilimumab in cancer immunotherapy, 312
IPMN, 1410f, 1411f, 1412–1413, 1412f
Iron
absorption of, 1143
deficiency in gastric surgery, 1094
Irrigation of wounds, 264
Irritable bowel syndrome, 1185
Ischemia
arterial, ulcers in, 259
cerebral, 838, 1727–1728
in carotid artery disorders, 837–850, 
1727–1728
clinical manifestations in, 838–839
in embolism, 1728
management of, 1728
motor and sensory deficits in, 839
reversible neurologic deficits in, 839
in thrombosis, 1728
colitis in, 1221–1222
in aortic aneurysm repair, 853
distal, 401
limb, 881–900
of liver
in aortic aneurysm repair, 801
in preconditioning for surgery, 1300
mesenteric, 859–866, 1167
acute, 860, 861, 1167
diagnosis of, 861–862
endovascular therapy in, 864–865
surgical repair in, 863–864
causes of, 859
chronic, 859, 860, 861, 1167
diagnosis of, 862–863
endovascular therapy in, 864
surgical repair in, 864
diagnostic evaluation in, 861–863
incidence of, 859
nonocclusive, 860–861, 861
diagnosis of, 863, 863f
endovascular therapy in, 865
symptoms in, 828, 859, 861, 1167
no-reflow phenomenon in, 114
of testis, in torsion, 1662
Ischemic attack, transient, 838
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 838, 
839, 841
crescendo, 838
symptoms in, 828
Ischiocavernosus muscles, 1674
Ischiopubic rami, 1674
Ischiorectal fossa, 1227
abscess of, 1227, 1227f, 1228, 1228f
Islet cells of pancreas, 1348–1351, 1349t
nonfunctioning tumors of, 1393
regulation of, 1350
transplantation of, 344–345
in chronic pancreatitis, 1390
types of, 1350
Isoflurane, 1902, 1902t, 1907
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Isotonic enteric nutrition formulas
with fiber, 54
low-residue, 54
Itraconazole, 141t, 658
in blastomycosis, 661
Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy
in cancer of esophagus, 1011
complications of, 386
IVUmed, 1977
Ivy’s test, 103
J
Jaboulay pyloroplasty in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1063, 1066f
Jahss maneuver in hand fractures, 1796, 
1798f
Janeway gastrostomy, 1090, 1092f
Janus kinase, 30, 34–35, 34f
2029
Index
Jaundice, 1271–1272, 1628–1631
in biliary atresia, 1628–1630
in children and infants, 1628–1631
in choledochal cysts, 1630–1631
in inspissated bile syndrome, 1628–1629
intrahepatic causes of, 1272
obstructive, 1315
in pancreatic cancer, 1396–1397, 1399
physiologic, 1628
posthepatic causes of, 1272
prehepatic causes of, 1272
Jefferson fracture, 1722, 1770
Jejunostomy, 56
Jejunum
access for enteral nutrition, 55, 55t, 56
anatomy of, 1138, 1138f
atresia of, 1616f
diverticula of, 1165, 1166f, 1167
as esophageal substitute, 1024, 1024f, 
1025
in composite with colon and stomach, 
1025
flap in esophageal reconstruction, 1863
neoplasms of, 1160, 1161f
treatment in, 1161
perforation of, 1168–1169
pneumatosis intestinalis in, 1170–1171
sarcoma of, 1481
short bowel syndrome in resection of, 1171
Jobs, Steve, 5
Jod-Basedow hyperthyroidism, 1533
Johnson classification of peptic ulcer 
disease, 1055–1056, 1057f
Johnson, Robert Wood, 241
Joint Commission protocol for prevention 
of wrong-site surgery, 378–379
Joints
arthrodesis of, 1772
in hand and wrist, 1807
spinal, 1743–1744
arthroplasty of, 1773–1778. See also 
Arthroplasty
injection techniques, 1772
Jugular vein
as access for pulmonary artery 
catheterization, 402
oxygen saturation in, 412
trauma of, 198, 199
c-jun, 281
Justice principle, 1941
K
Kaiser system, 7
Kallikrein, 33, 88
Kanavel’s signs, 1812
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 485
Karapandzic flap in lip reconstruction, 582, 
583f, 1857
Kasabach-Merritt syndrome, 1850
Kasai portoenterostomy in biliary atresia, 
1629–1630, 1629f
Kawasaki syndrome, 902
Kawashima procedure in Taussig-Bing 
syndrome, 723
Kayexalate in hyperkalemia, 77, 78t
Kelling-Madlener procedure in peptic 
ulcer disease, 1071f
Keloids, 261–263, 261f
Keratin, 473
in cutaneous cysts, 486
Keratinocyte growth factor, 247t
Keratinocytes, 473–474
corneum layer, 474
cultured, as skin substitute, 267, 267t
granular layer, 474
Keratosis
actinic, 486
seborrheic, 486
solar, 486
Ketamine in general anesthesia, 1900
Ketoconazole, 659
Ketogenesis in injury, 47–48
Ketone bodies as fuel source in fasting, 
45, 46
Ketorolac in general anesthesia, 1900–
1901
Keynes, Geoffrey, 499
Ki-67 antigen in breast cancer, 534–535
Kidneys
abscess of, 1664
acute failure of
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 81
postoperative, 387, 388t
anatomy of, 1651
calculi in, 1560, 1666
cancer of, 1655–1657
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 
618f
genetic factors in, 1656
nephrectomy in, 1656–1657, 1656f
tumor thrombus in, 1656, 1657f
chronic disease of
anesthesia management in, 1907
hyperparathyroidism in, 1573
contrast agents affecting, 383, 791
cysts of, 1655, 1655f, 1655t
Bosniak classification of, 1655, 1655t
in elderly
age-related changes in, 1926t, 1928
perioperative disorders of, 1928
enteral nutrition formulas in failure of, 
54
fluid therapy affecting, 1914
in hyperparathyroidism, 1560
ischemia in aortic aneurysm repair, 801
monitoring of, 410–411
postoperative disorders of, 387–388
preoperative evaluation of
in anesthesia management, 1907
in aortic aneurysm repair, 793
in elderly, 1928
pyelonephritis of, 1664
transplantation of, 334–340
cardiovascular disorders of, 335
complications in, 335–336, 339
contraindications to, 334
En Bloc grafts, 338
historical aspects of, 322–323, 334
immunologic evaluation of, 336
immunosuppressive therapy in, 328, 
335
indications for, 334
infections, 335
intraoperative care in, 339
living donor in, 323, 332, 334
operative technique in, 333f
medical evaluation in, 335–336
multiple renal arteries grafts, 337, 
338f
organ preservation methods and time 
in, 331
pancreas transplantation after, 340, 
344
postoperative care in, 339
preoperative care, 338–339
preoperative evaluation in, 334
psychosocial evaluation of, 336
recipient surgical procedure in, 333f, 
336–337, 337f
results in, 339–340
simultaneous with pancreas 
transplantation, 340, 344
surgical evaluation of, 336
survival rates in, 339–340
tumors, 335
urologic evaluation of, 336
vascular evaluation of, 336
trauma of, 211–212, 212f, 1658–1659
in children, 1644
grades of injury in, 1658t, 1659
indications for surgery in, 1659, 1659t
nonoperative treatment of, 211–212, 
1659, 1659f
vascular injuries in, 211, 1658t, 1659
tubular necrosis of, acute, 387–388
Wilms’ tumor of, 1638–1639, 1639f
Kinetic resistance in tumors, 312
King, Dr. Martin Luther, 5
King, Josie, 372, 377t
Kininogen, 33
Kinins, 33
c-Kit in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 
288t, 1481, 1482, 1483, 1484
Klatskin’s tumor, 1292
Kleinman, Arthur, 1946
Klinefelter’s syndrome, gynecomastia in, 
505
Klippel-Trénaunay syndrome, 1850, 1852f
Klumpke’s palsy, 1727
Knee
arthroplasty of, 1774–1776, 
1775f–1776f, 1777f, 1778f
alignment of components, 1776
background of, 1774–1775
bearing surfaces in, 1775–1776
osteolysis in, 1778
surgical approach, 1775
collateral ligament injuries, 1768–1769
contracture in cerebral palsy, 1782
cruciate ligaments injury, 1768–1769, 
1769f
dislocation of, 1762
fractures of, 1767–1769
ligaments injuries of, 1768–1769
meniscus tears of, 1767–1768, 1768f
posterolateral injury, 1769
Knockout mouse technology, 464–466, 
465f
embryonic lethality in, 466
target vector in, 464
Knowledge, medical, as core competency, 
4t
Knudson’s two-hit hypothesis on tumor 
formation, 287, 287f
Kocher, Emil Theodor, 4, 1521
Kocher incision, 1452
Kocher maneuver, 191
Koch, Robert, 136
Kock pouch ileostomy, 1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 1207
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
Koller, Karl, 1896
Korotkoff sounds, 400
Kouchoukos’s technique in aortic 
aneurysm repair, 795
KTP (potassium thionyl phosphate) laser, 
428
Kulchitsky cells in tracheobronchial tree, 
612, 613f
L
Labeling of surgical specimens, frequency 
of errors in, 371, 371f
Labetuzumab in medullary thyroid cancer, 
1550
2030
Index
Labia majora and minora, anatomy of, 
1673–1674
Labyrinthitis, 567
Lacerations
in head and neck injuries, 575, 
575f–576f
closure in, 575–576, 575f–576f
of scalp, 166, 173, 1715
of kidney, 1658t
of liver, 203, 204
in obstetric injuries, 1692
of small intestine, 207
of vagina in children, 1636
Lactate
in gluconeogenesis, 45, 45f, 48
serum levels of
in burns, 230
in shock, 120, 121f, 130
Lactation
breast changes in, 501, 501f, 504–505, 
504f
mastitis in, 506
Lactic acidosis, 74
in shock, 130
Lactose digestion and absorption, 1141, 
1142f
Lacunar ligament anatomy, 1496
Ladd’s bands, 1616
Ladd’s procedure in malrotation, 1617, 
1618f
Lambert-Eaton syndrome in lung cancer, 
627
Lamina propria, 1144, 1144f
Laminectomy in intervertebral disc 
herniation, 1771
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 666
Langerhans cells, 474, 654, 666
Langer’s lines, 1830
Laparoscopy
with abdominal lift device, 418
access for, 421–422, 421f
adrenalectomy in, 1591–1592, 1591f, 
1592f
anesthesia in, 419
appendectomy in, 1252–1256, 1253f, 
1254f
in children, 1623
in pregnancy, 436
in appendicitis, 1252–1256, 1253f, 
1254f
diagnostic, 1254
in pregnancy, 436
bariatric surgery in. See Bariatric 
surgery, laparoscopic
in children, 435–436
cholecystectomy in. See 
Cholecystectomy, laparoscopic
colon resection in, 1187
in colorectal cancer, 1216
common bile duct exploration in,  
1325–1327, 1328f
complications of, 418, 1704–1705
bladder trauma in, 1515, 1705
in elderly, 1935–1936
in inguinal hernia repair,  
1515–1516
in Crohn’s disease, 1157, 1198
in elderly, 436–437, 1935–1936
endocrine response to, 418
esophagectomy in, in cancer of 
esophagus, 1010–1011, 1010f
gastric, 1095
in cancer diagnosis, 1080–1081
in gynecologic disorders, 1687–1690
hand-assisted, 423, 424f, 1187
access for, 423, 424f
splenectomy in, 1441, 1443
Hasson technique in, 422
hiatal hernia repair in, 983
historical aspects of, 416
incisional hernia repair in, 1456, 1457f
incisions in, 421–422, 1451, 1452
single, 1443
inguinal hernia repair in, 1509–1513
in children, 1635
complications of, 1515–1516
liver resection in, 1301–1302
nephrectomy in, in kidney cancer, 
1656–1657
Nissen fundoplication in, 974–975, 974f, 
975f–976f
in pancreatic cancer, 1398–1399, 1398f
physiology and pathophysiology in, 
417–419
pneumoperitoneum in, 417–419
in elderly, 1935
positioning of patients in, 420, 421f
in pregnancy, 436
appendectomy in, 436
cholecystectomy in, 1320
prostatectomy in, 1658
single-incision. See Single-incision 
laproscopic surgery
in small intestine obstruction,  
1150–1151
splenectomy in, 1440–1441, 1440f, 
1441f, 1442f
team approach to, 419–420
telescopes in, 424, 426f
three-dimensional, 426–427
ultrasonography in, 1325
venous thromboembolism in, 418
Veress needle in, 421, 421f
video systems in, 424
Lapatinib, 310t
LaPlace’s law, 787
Large cell carcinoma of lung, 617
Large intestine, 1175–1236
anatomy of, 1176–1179
clinical evaluation of, 1180–1185
colitis of, 1222
colon in. See Colon
congenital anomalies of, 1179
diverticular disease of, 1201–1203
embryonic development of, 1175–1176
in immunocompromised patient, 1236
inflammatory bowel disease of,  
1195–1201
megacolon of, 1220–1221
neoplasms of, 1203–1218
physiology of, 1179–1180
pseudo-obstruction of, 1221
sarcoma of, 1480
trauma of, 1233–1235
in laparoscopy, 1705
volvulus of, 1219–1220
Laryngeal disorders, 572–574
cancer, 589–591
anatomy in, 579, 589, 589f
diagnosis of, 589, 589f
epidemiology of, 275t
lymph node involvement in,  
591
pectoralis flap reconstruction in, 591, 
591f
preservation of larynx in, 591–592
rehabilitation in, 592
staging of, 590
fracture, 176f, 200
granulomas, 572–573, 572f
papillomavirus infections, recurrent, 572
polypoid, 573
Laryngeal mask airway, 1910, 1910f
intubating, 1910, 1912f
Laryngeal nerves
anatomy of, 1524–1525, 1524f, 1525f, 
1526f
and parathyroid gland, 1524–1525, 
1526f
identified in thyroidectomy, 1553–1554, 
1553f
injury in surgery, 384
in thyroidectomy, 1554, 1556
lung cancer involving, 623, 671, 673f
Laryngectomy
in esophageal cancer, 589
in hypopharyngeal cancer, 589
in laryngeal cancer, 590f, 591
pectoralis flap reconstruction in,  
591, 591f
rehabilitation in, 591
supracricoid technique, 591
Laryngitis, polypoid, 573
Laryngopharyngectomy in hypopharyngeal 
cancer, 588, 589
Laryngoplasty in vocal cord paralysis, 574, 
574f
Laryngoscopy, fiberoptic, 1106
Laryngoscopy for airway management in 
anesthesia, 1910, 1910f, 1911f
Laser therapy, 428–429
in atherectomy, 896
in hemangiomas, 574
in prostate hyperplasia, benign, 1665
in transmyocardial revascularization, 
747
in varicose veins, 929
in vocal cord cancer, 591
Latarjet nerve anatomy, 1038, 1039f
Lateral ligaments of rectum, 1177
Latissimus dorsi flaps
in breast reconstruction, 550, 1871, 
1874f
in chest wall reconstruction, 1874
in head and neck reconstruction, 601
Lavage, peritoneal
in abdominal trauma, 180–181, 180f, 
181t
in pregnancy, 218, 221
complications of, 382, 382f
Leadership in surgery
areas of medical knowledge in, 4t
on core competencies, 3–8, 4t
definitions of terminology related to, 3
fundamental principles of, 3–8
interpersonal and communication skills, 
4t
introduction of, 3
medical knowledge, 4t
mentoring of, 10–11
patient care skills, 4t
practice-based learning and 
improvement, 4t
professionalism, 4t
styles in, 9
systems-based practice, 4t
time management, 7–8, 8f
training modules in, 10t
training programs in, 9–10, 10t
vision of, 3–4
willingness, 4–7
to communicate effectively, 6–7
to lead, 5–6
to learn, 6
to resolve conflict, 7
2031
Index
Leapfrog Group, on standards of health 
care quality and safety, 375
Learning and improvement, practice-
based, as core competency, 4t
Lecompte maneuver in transposition of 
great arteries, 721, 722f
Le Fort fractures, 577, 577f
Legal issues
in advance directives and living wills, 
1944
in consent to procedures, 1941–1942, 
1943
malpractice claims in, 380, 380t
in medical errors, 380, 380t
in wrong-site surgery, 378–379
in withdrawing or withholding life-
sustaining therapies, 1944–1945
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease, 1783
Lehman, Betsy, 368, 377t
Leiomyoblastoma of esophagus, 1016f, 
1017
Leiomyoma
colorectal, 1216
esophageal, 1017–1018, 1017f
gastric, 1086–1087
uterine, 1683, 1683f
Leiomyosarcoma, 776, 1465, 1468f, 1470
of chest wall, 668, 668t
colorectal, 1216
of esophagus, 1015, 1016f, 1017
retroperitoneal, 1479
uterine, 1481
Lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma 
(LPA), 615
Leptin, 1045, 1049
Letrozole, 552–553
Leukemia
acute myeloid, 1430t, 1435
chronic lymphocytic, 1430t, 1435
chronic myeloid, 455, 1430t, 1435
chronic myelomonocytic, 1430t, 1435
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 618f
hairy cell, 1430t, 1434
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1434, 1435
stem cells in, 285
Leukocytes. See White blood cells
Leukoplakia
anogenital, 1678
of vocal fold, 573
Leukotrienes, 31f, 32, 32t
Levator ani muscles, 1178
anatomy of, 1673
Levatorplasty, postanal intersphincteric, in 
anal sphincter injury, 1235
Levofloxacin, 144t, 257t
in peptic ulcer disease, 1061t
Leydig cell tumors, 1637, 1704
Lichen
planus, 1678
sclerosis, 1678
simplex chronicus, 1678
Lichtenstein tension-free inguinal hernia 
repair, 1508, 1508f, 1513
Lidocaine, 1899t, 1902, 1903t, 1950t
in hand and wrist injuries, 1796
in wound care, 264
Lifestyle factors
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 972
in obesity, 1102
and bariatric surgery, 1108
Life support measures, 1944–1945
advance directives and living wills on, 
1944
double effect of, 1945, 1945f
ethical issues in, 1944–1945
right to refuse, 1944–1945
withdrawing or withholding of,  
1944–1945
Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 287, 290t, 291, 
1468
breast cancer risk in, 517
Ligaments
of acromioclavicular joint, injuries of, 
1758
healing of, 251
hepatic, 1264–1265, 1264f, 1265f
of knee injuries, 1768–1769
of spleen, suspensory, 1425, 1425f
of wrist, injuries of, 1798
Ligand-gated ion channels, 35f
Ligation of the intersphincteric fistula tract 
(LIFT), 1231
Limberg flap, 1833
Limb ischemia, 881–900
Linea alba, 1449, 1450f
Linea semilunaris, 1449
Linezolid, 145t
Lip
cancer of, 579, 580, 582, 1856–1857
lymph node metastasis of, 582, 582f
reconstructive surgery in, 582, 
1856–1857
wedge resection in, 582f
cleft, 1840–1844. See also Cleft, of lip 
and palate
lacerations of, 576, 576f
plastic and reconstructive surgery of, 
582, 1856–1857
Abbé flap in, 1857, 1859f
Bernard-Webster technique in, 1857, 
1859f
Karapandzic flap in, 582, 583f, 1857
Lipase, 47f, 1347, 1348t
in chronic pancreatitis, deficiency of, 
1371f, 1372
replacement therapy in, 1380t
Lipectomy, suction, 1883, 1885, 1886f
Lipid droplets (LDs), 32
Lipids
elevated serum levels of. See 
Hyperlipidemia
metabolism of, 46–47
in liver, 1269
in small intestine, 1143
in parenteral nutrition solutions, 58
storage disorders, splenectomy in, 
1437–1438
Lipodermatosclerosis, 259, 917, 929
Lipodystrophy, mesenteric, 1458, 1459f
Lipolysis, 1142–1143
in injury, 47, 47f
Lipomas, 486
cardiac, 776
colorectal, 1216
gastric, 1087
of hand and wrist, 1816
Lipopolysaccharide, immunocyte 
recognition of, 37f
Liposarcoma, 1465
chemotherapy in, 668t, 1475, 1476
of chest wall, 668–669, 668t
metastatic to liver, 1471f
myxoid, 1470, 1479
genetic factors in, 1467
retroperitoneal, 1479, 1479f, 1480
well-differentiated, 1470, 1479, 1480
Liposuction, 1883, 1885, 1886f
Lipoxygenase, 31f, 32
Lisfranc’s joint, 1765
fracture-dislocation of, 1765
Lister, Joseph, 4, 135–136, 241
Lithium therapy, hyperparathyroidism in, 
1560
Lithostathine, 1368, 1368f
Lithotripsy, extracorporeal shock wave, 
429, 1666
in pancreatic duct stones, 1380–1383
Lithotriptors, electrohydraulic, 429
Littre’s hernia, 1164
Liver, 1263–1302
abdominal hernia in disease of, 1279, 
1455
abscess of, 150, 1285
amebic, 1285
pyogenic, 1284–1285, 1284f
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, 1276
liver transplantation in, 347, 1277, 
1277t
acute failure of, 1275–1277
clinical presentation in, 1276
diagnosis and clinical management in, 
1276–1277, 1276t
emerging technologies, 1277
etiology of, 1276
extracorporeal liver support in, 1277
laboratory evaluation in, 1276, 1276t
prognosis in, 1277
transplantation in, 347, 348, 1277
adenoma of, 1290–1291, 1290f
albumin synthesis in, 1271
anatomy of, 1264–1269
ligaments in, 1264–1265, 1264f, 
1265f
lymphatic, 1268–1269
neurologic, 1268–1269
segmental, 1265, 1265f
vascular, 1266–1268, 1266f, 1267f, 
1268f
anesthesia in disorders of, 1907
benign lesions of, 1288t, 1289–1291
bilirubin metabolism in, 1270,  
1271–1272
biopsy of
in cirrhosis, 1279
in incidental mass, 1288
Budd-Chiari syndrome of, 1283–1284
cancer of, 1288t, 1291–1294
chemoembolization in, 1295–1296
in children, 1641–1642, 1641f, 1642t
staging of, 1642, 1642t
treatment of, 1642
in cirrhosis, 1279, 1291
in colorectal cancer metastasis, 1210, 
1213, 1293–1294, 1295
in elderly, 1933
epidemiology of, 618f
hepatectomy in, 1301
downstaging of, 1296
epidemiology of, 275t, 276–277, 
276t, 277f, 279f
ethanol ablation in, 1295
hepatectomy in, 1294–1295
in colorectal cancer metastasis, 
1301
in recurrence, 1301
liver transplantation in, 347, 348, 
1291, 1295, 1642
Milan criteria on, 347, 1291
in pancreatic cancer metastasis, 
1398f, 1407
radiofrequency ablation in, 1295
risk factors for, 1291
treatment algorithm on, 1291, 1293f
carcinoid tumor of, 1294
caudate lobe of, 1267
2032
Index
Liver (Cont.):
cirrhosis of, 1277–1280. See also 
Cirrhosis
clotting factors synthesized in, 1271
coagulopathy in disorders of
transplantation of liver in, 348
cysts of, 1288–1289
in Caroli’s disease, 1289
congenital, 1288
in hydatid disease, 1285
laparoscopic resection in, 1301
in polycystic disease, 1288–1289
end-stage disease of
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
in cirrhosis, 1277, 1280
MELD score in, 347, 437, 1280, 1295
enteral nutrition in failure of, 54–55
fatty infiltration of
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196
in obesity, bariatric surgery in, 1129
function tests of, 1270
glycogen in, 44
hemangioma of, 1289–1290, 1290f
hepatocellular injury of, 1271–1272
historical aspects of surgery on,  
1263–1264
hyperplasia of, focal nodular, 1290f, 
1291
incidental mass of, 1287–1288
diagnostic algorithm on, 1287f
differential diagnosis in, 1288, 1288t
infections of, 1284–1287
inflammatory bowel disease involving, 
1196
ischemia of
in aortic aneurysm repair, 801
in preconditioning for surgery, 1300
liposarcoma metastatic to, 1471f
physiology of, 1269–1272
portal hypertension of, 1280–1281
quadrate lobe of, 1265
radiologic evaluation of, 1272–1275
radionuclide scans of, 1315
resection techniques, 1296–1301.  
See also Hepatectomy
soft tissue sarcoma metastatic to, 1478
transplantation of, 345–352, 1283
in acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, 347, 
1277, 1277t
in acute failure, 347, 348, 1277
in biliary atresia, 349, 1629
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
in children, 349, 1629
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 1642
split-liver procedure in, 349
in cholangiocarcinoma, 347, 1292
in cholangitis, primary sclerosing, 
346, 1331
in cirrhosis, 346, 347, 1277, 1283
complications in, 351–352
contraindications to, 348
donor in, 346
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 347, 
1291, 1295, 1642
historical aspects of, 345–346, 347
immunosuppressive therapy in, 346
complications of, 351
indications for, 346–347, 346t, 1277t, 
1283, 1295
indicators of graft function in, 351
with intestinal transplantation, 352, 
353f
living donor in, 332, 333f, 346
operative technique in, 349, 
350f–351f
Milan criteria on, 347
orthotopic, 348
in polycystic liver disease, 1289
postoperative care in, 349–351
preoperative evaluation in, 347
primary nonfunction of graft in, 351
split-liver procedure, 349
surgical procedure in, 348–349, 
348f–349f
piggyback technique in, 349
survival rates in, 349
trauma of
in children, 1644, 1644t, 1645f
grading scale on, 1644, 1644t
in variceal bleeding, 347, 1283
venovenous bypass in, 348
waiting time for, 348
treatment options, 1294t
Living donor transplantation procedures, 
332
kidney, 323, 332, 334
operative technique in, 333f
liver, 332, 346
operative technique in, 349, 
350f–351f
pancreas, 343–344
Living wills, 1944
Lobectomy
hepatic
left, 1299–1300, 1299f
right, 1298–1299, 1298f
pulmonary
compared to limited resection, 640t
functional status assessment in, 
633–634, 638f
of temporal lobe in epilepsy, 1746
Lobular carcinoma of breast
in situ
histopathology in, 520, 520t
pathology in, 510
pleomorphic, 510
treatment of, 537–538
invasive, 520–521, 522, 522f
Locoregional lymphadenectomy, 1473
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, 787
Long, Crawford, 1895
Long esophageal myotomy, 995–997, 995f, 
996f–997f
Loop ileostomy, 1189f, 1192–1193
Lorcaserin in obesity, 1102
Lower extremity
arterial occlusive disease of, 881–900
acute, 882, 885–889
bypass graft thrombectomy in, 888
clinical manifestations of, 882t, 
886–887
complications of treatment in, 
888–889, 888t
embolectomy in, 887–888
endovascular therapy in, 887
etiology of, 885–886
reperfusion syndrome in, 888
chronic, 882–883, 889–900
atherectomy in, 895–896, 897
clinical manifestations of, 889–890, 
890t, 891f
endovascular therapy in, 891–892, 
896–897
in femoropopliteal disease, 897
surgical treatment in, 897–898
classification of, 883, 885, 885t–886t
computed tomography angiography 
in, 882, 883f
diagnostic evaluation in, 882
differential diagnosis of, 882–883
epidemiology of, 882
intermittent claudication in, 882, 
884t, 885t
pain in, 828
physical examination in, 829
symptoms in, 828
compartment syndrome of
fasciotomy in, 215, 216f, 888
in ischemia treatment complications, 
888–889, 889f, 889t
in trauma, 215
edema of, after surgical treatment of 
limb ischemia, 898
fractures of, 1876–1877, 1876t
osteomyelitis in, 1877
soft tissue coverage in, 1877, 1877t, 
1878f
lymphedema of, 934, 934f, 936
reconstructive surgery in, 1879–1880
reconstructive surgery of, 1876–1880
in diabetic ulceration, 1877, 1879
in lymphedema, 1879–1880
in trauma, 1876–1877
in tumors, 1877
ulcers of
in diabetes mellitus, 1877, 1879
ischemic, 889, 890t, 891f
neuropathic, 890t, 891f
veins in, 915–916
Lumbar spine
intervertebral disc herniation in, 1742, 
1742f, 1742t, 1771
level and symptoms in, 1742t
surgical treatment in, 1771
spondylolisthesis of, 1739, 1740f
stability of, 1739
stenosis of, 1771
trauma of, 1722, 1724f
fractures in, 1770–1772
orthotic devices in, 1726
Lumbrical muscles, 1791
Luminal tamponade, in variceal 
hemorrhage, 1282
Lumpectomy, 547, 554. See also Breast 
conservation surgery
in breast cancer, 537
Lunate bone
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
dislocation of, 1798
Lundy, John, 1897
Lungs, 611–664
abscess of, 650–651, 650t, 652f, 653t
chest radiograph in, 651, 652f
clinical features and diagnosis, 
650–651
etiologies of, 650, 650t
primary, 650, 650t
secondary, 650, 650t
surgical drainage of, 651, 653t
acute injury of, 384–386
transfusion-related, 101, 102t
anatomy of, 611–612, 661
alveolar spaces in, 612
lymphatic, 611–612, 612f, 613f
segmental, 611, 612f
tracheobronchial tree in, 612, 613f
biopsy of, 630
blood supply of, 661
in sequestration, 1606f, 1607
cancer of, 623–645
chemotherapy in. See Chemotherapy, 
in lung cancer
diagnosis, 628f
drug resistance, 313
in elderly, 1933–1934
2033
Index
epidemiology of, 274, 275t, 276t, 
277f, 278t, 617–619, 618f
etiologies of, 617–619
functional status assessment in, 
635–637, 638f
histology of, 614–615
lymph node involvement in
anatomy of, 611–612, 612f, 613f
assessment of, 631–633, 632f, 632t
in locoregional advanced disease, 
640–641
staging of, 631–635, 634t
management, 627–637, 629t
metastatic, 627, 631–633
staging of, 633–635, 634t
molecular subsets, 287f
osteoarthropathy in, hypertrophic, 
626, 626f
paraneoplastic syndromes in,  
625–627, 625t
preinvasive lesions in, 613–614
risk factors for, 617–619, 619t, 620t
screening for, 299, 299t, 619–621
signs and symptoms in, 623–627, 
625t
in metastasis, 627
nonpulmonary thoracic, 623–625, 
625t
pulmonary, 623, 625t
small cell. See Small cell carcinoma 
of lung
staging of, 633–635, 634t
and treatment, 637–645, 638–645
survival rates in, 637–638
in chemotherapy, 644t
treatment in, 637–645, 638–645
in early-stage disease, 637–641, 
638–641
in elderly, 1934
in locoregional advanced disease, 
639
in stage IV disease, 641–642
computed tomography of
in cancer assessment, 629, 631
screening, 619–621
in solitary nodule, 621–622, 622f
contusion of
in children, 1643
in elderly, 222
end-stage disease of, 663–664
lung transplantation in, 663–664, 664f
lung volume reduction surgery in, 
663–664
foreign body in, in children, 1607–1608
function testing of
in aortic aneurysm repair, 793
in lung cancer, 635–637, 638f
in hemoptysis, massive, 661–663
histology of, 612–613, 613f
hyperplasia of, 614, 617
infections of, 650–661
metastatic lesions, 622–623
in pancreatitis, acute, 1354
in pneumothorax, spontaneous,  
649–650
soft tissue sarcoma metastasis to,  
1471–1472, 1478, 1478f
solitary nodule in, 621–622
biopsy and resection in, 630f
calcification of, 622
corona radiata sign in, 622, 622f
differential diagnosis in, 621
imaging in, 621–622, 622f
management algorithm on, 630f
surgical approaches to, 642–644
transplantation of, 354–358, 663–664, 
664f
bilateral sequential, 663
complications in, 357–358
evaluation of, 356–357
with heart transplantation, 354–358, 
664
historical aspects of, 354–355
indications for, 356, 663–664
living donor in, 332, 356–357
organ preservation methods and time 
in, 331
postoperative care in, 357–358
rejection in, 664
surgical procedure in, 357
survival rates in, 664, 664f
trauma of, 202
volume reduction surgery of, 663
Lupus anticoagulant in antiphospholipid 
syndrome, 93
Luteinizing hormone, 504
Lymphadenitis, cervical, in children, 1602
Lymphadenopathy, cervical, in children, 
1602
Lymphangiography, 935, 935t, 936f
in lymphedema, 935
Lymphangiomas, 575, 598, 1602–1603, 
1852, 1852f
Lymphangiosarcoma, 1466
Lymphatic malformations, 1602–1603, 
1603f, 1850–1852, 1852f
Lymphatic sump of Borrie, 611, 613f
Lymphatic system
of anal canal, 1217, 1217f
of colon, 1177
of esophagus, 946–947, 946f
of head and neck, 595, 595f
of liver, 1268–1269
of lungs, 611–612, 612f, 613f
of pancreas, 1344–1346, 1346f
of stomach, 1038, 1039f
of thyroid, 1525, 1527f
Lymphedema, 934–936, 1879–1880
chronic, lymphangiosarcoma in, 1466, 
1467f
clinical diagnosis of, 934–935, 934f
congenital, 934
hyperkeratosis in, 934, 934f
management of, 935–936
nonsurgical, 1880
surgical options in, 1880
in mastectomy, modified radical, 549
pathophysiology in, 934
praecox, 934, 1879
primary, 934, 1879
radiologic diagnosis of, 935, 935t, 936f
reconstructive surgery in, 936
secondary, 934, 1879
tarda, 934
Lymph nodes, 300–301, 305–306
in breast cancer, 531t–532t
axillary lymph nodes in. See Axillary 
lymph nodes, in breast cancer
historical aspects of surgery, 498
internal mammary lymph nodes in, 
543
mapping of, 305, 305f, 545–546
sentinel node dissection in, 305–306, 
545–547
staging of, 531
cervical. See Cervical lymph nodes
in colorectal cancer, 305, 1210, 1210f
colon carcinoma involving, 1213
rectal carcinoma involving, 1215
sentinel nodes in, 1177
staging of, 1210, 1211t
in esophageal cancer
dissection of, 1011
staging of, 1004–1005, 1006t
in gallbladder cancer
staging of, 1335
Halsted theory on dissection of, 305
in head and neck tumors, 595–597, 596f, 
597f
anatomy and levels in, 595, 595f
of larynx, 591
of lips, 582, 582f
of oral cavity, 583, 583f
of oropharynx, 587
staging of involvement, 581t
in lung cancer
anatomy of, 611–612, 612f, 613f
assessment of, 631–633, 632f, 632t
in locoregional advanced disease, 
640–641
staging of, 631–635, 634t
mapping of, 305, 305f, 545–546
in breast cancer, 305, 305f, 545–546
mediastinal. See Mediastinal lymph 
nodes
in melanoma, 488, 489–490, 489f–490f
in nanometastasis, 306
in pancreatic cancer, staging of, 1395, 
1397t
in parathyroid carcinoma, dissection of, 
1570
in prostate cancer, 1658
sentinel. See Sentinel lymph nodes
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1471, 1473
in squamous cell carcinoma, 487
in stomach cancer, 1038, 1080, 1082
dissection of, 1038, 1082
staging of, 1080t
in testicular cancer, 1654–1655
dissection of, 1654–1655
in thyroid cancer, 1544t
dissection of, 1555–1556, 1555f
medullary, 1550
in vaginal cancer, 1697
in vulvar cancer, 1696–1697, 1697f
anatomy of, 1696, 1696f
staging of, 1696–1697, 1696t
Lymphocele in kidney transplantation, 336
Lymphocytes, 38–39, 475
B cells
in small intestine immune function, 
1144
in transplant rejection, 324
in chyle, 686t
T cells, 38–39, 39f
allorecognition by, 324
in small intestine immune function, 
1144
in transplant rejection, 324
in wound healing, 243–244
Lymphogranuloma venereum, 1678,  
1679t
Lymphoma
of appendix, 1259
of bone, 1781
of breast, 556–557
of central nervous system, 1736
colorectal, 1216
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 278t, 
618f
in HIV infection and AIDS, 1736
Hodgkin’s. See Hodgkin’s lymphoma
mediastinal, 671, 678
biopsy in, 673
differentiated from thymoma, 675
2034
Index
Lymphoma, mediastinal (Cont.):
incidence of, 671, 673t, 678
signs and symptoms in, 674t
of pancreas, 1413
of small intestine, 1160, 1161t
outcome in, 1162
treatment in, 1162
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1434–1435
of stomach, 1074, 1084
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 
1054
of thyroid, 1536, 1551
in transplant recipients, 330
Lymphoproliferative disorder
mediastinal, 671
posttransplant, 329
Lymphoscintigraphy, 545, 935, 935t
in lymphedema, 935
Lynch syndrome, 291–292, 1207–1208, 
1210t
Amsterdam criteria on, 292, 292t
endometrial cancer in, 1701
M
MACIS scale on papillary carcinoma of 
thyroid, 1543
Mackenrodt’s ligament, 1674
Macroadenomas of pituitary, 1735
Macrocysts of breast, 508, 509
Macrodactyly, 1823
Macrolides, 145t
Macrophage antigen 1 (Mac-1), 41t
Macrophage migration-inhibiting factor, 
21
Macrophages
in inflammatory response, 21, 39–40
in microbial invasion response, 138
stimulation by interferon-γ, 30–31
in wound healing, 242f, 243, 243f, 243t, 
1831
MADH4 gene in juvenile polyposis, 289t
Mafenide acetate in burns, 232
Maffucci’s syndrome, 1778, 1818
Magill, Ivan, 1897
Magnesium
absorption of, 1143
daily dietary intake of, 73
in parenteral nutrition, 76t
serum levels of, 73, 78
in cancer patients, 81
in hypermagnesemia, 72t, 73, 78
in hypomagnesemia. See 
Hypomagnesemia
in kidney transplantation, 339
supplemental, in children and infants, 
1599
Magnetic resonance angiography, 832, 
833f
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 791
in aortic dissection, 811, 815
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 840
in celiac artery compression, 862f
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882
in mesenteric ischemia, 862, 862f, 863f
in renal artery stenosis, 867f, 868, 868f
Magnetic resonance imaging
of abdominal wall tumors, 1454
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 791
in aortic dissection, 811, 815
in biliary disorders, 1315, 1317f
in breast cancer, 516, 527, 529, 530f, 
531f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 840
in celiac artery compression, 862f
in chest wall tumors, 665
in colorectal disorders, 1181
of hand and wrist, 1794, 1795f
in hand tumors, 1815–1816
of heart, 739
in cardiomyopathy, 765
in inguinal hernia, 1504
of liver, 1274–1275, 1315
in incidental mass, 1288
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 882
in lung cancer, 629
in distant metastasis, 633
in mediastinal tumors, 671
in mesenteric ischemia, 862, 862f, 863f
in minimally invasive surgery, 417
in neurologic examination, 1712
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1370, 1370f
of parathyroid gland, in preoperative 
localization studies, 1565, 1565t
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
in renal artery stenosis, 867f, 868, 868f
in soft tissue sarcomas
in initial assessment, 1468–1469, 
1468f–1469f
in surveillance for recurrence, 1477
in spine trauma, 1725
of spleen, 1429
of stomach, 1051
in cancer, 1080
of thyroid, 1530
Malabsorption
in bariatric surgery, 1102, 1103t, 1107, 
1119–1121
historical aspects of, 1103
in pancreatitis, 1371f, 1372, 1379
in short bowel syndrome, 1171
Malignant fibrous histocytoma, 493
Malignant hyperthermia, 393, 1916–1917
Mallampati classification in airway 
evaluation, 1905, 1906f, 1906t
Malleolus, fractures of, 1764
bimalleolar, 1764
lateral, 1764
medial, 1764
posterior, 1764
Mallet finger, 1798
Mallory-Weiss tear, 1018, 1020, 1090
Malnutrition
in elderly, 1929
refeeding syndrome in, 81
respiratory quotient in, 385
wound healing in, 254–255, 254f
Malperfusion syndrome in aortic 
dissection, 807, 810, 811
endovascular treatment in, 815
indications for surgery in, 815
open repair in, 816
Malpractice claims, common causes of, 
380, 380t
Malrotation, intestinal, 1616–1617
Ladd’s procedure in, 1617, 1618f
Mammaplasty
augmentation, 1890–1891, 1891f
implant placement in, 1890–1891, 
1891f
incisions in, 1890, 1891f
reduction, 1887–1889, 1888f, 1889f, 
1890f
scar location and length in, 1889
vertical technique in, 1890f
Wise technique in, 1888–1889, 1888f, 
1889f
MammaPrint test in breast cancer,  
536
Mammary artery graft in coronary artery 
bypass surgery, 742, 743–744, 
745f, 746
Mammary duct fistulas, 507
Mammary lymph nodes, 502–503
in breast cancer, 543
Mammography
compared to ultrasonography, 528f
in diagnosis of breast cancer, 523–526, 
524f–526f
in excisional biopsy with needle 
localization, 544–545, 546f
risk assessment for breast cancer in, 296
in screening for breast cancer, 513, 
523–526
in elderly, 1932
recommendations on, 525–526
Mandible
anatomy of, 1854f
fractures of, 576, 576f, 1853–1854, 
1854f
dental occlusion in, 1853, 1854f
intermaxillary fixation in, 576
maxillary-mandibular fixation in, 
1854
in hemifacial microsomia, 1846
involvement in head and neck tumors, 
584–585, 585
of alveolar mucosa, 585, 586f
of buccal mucosa, 586
of oropharynx, 587
reconstructive surgery in, 601, 1863, 
1864f
resection technique in, 585, 586f
of retromolar trigone, 586
reconstructive surgery of
dental occlusion in, 1853, 1854f, 1863
fibula osteocutaneous flap in, 601, 
1863, 1864f–1865f
in fractures, 1853–1854, 1854f
in tumors, 601, 1863, 1864f–1865f
Mandibulectomy
in alveolar mucosa tumors, 585
in retromolar trigone tumors, 586
Mandibulofacial dysostosis, 1846, 1847f
Mandibulotomy in alveolar mucosa 
tumors, 585, 586f
Mannitol in intracranial pressure increase, 
1713
Manometry
anorectal, 1181–1182
high pressure zone in, 1182
rectoanal inhibitory reflex in, 1182
resting and squeeze pressures in, 1182
esophageal, 953–955, 954f, 954t
high-resolution, 955, 956f–960f
normal values in, 954, 954t, 966t
in nutcracker esophagus, 992
preoperative
in antireflux surgery, 972
in long esophageal myotomy, 995
pressure profile in, 954, 954f
asymmetry of, 954, 954f
in primary motility disorders, 990, 
991t
in scleroderma, 985, 985f
in spasm, diffuse and segmental, 992
transit scintigraphy, 955
Mapping, lymphatic, in cancer, 305, 305f
of breast, 305, 305f, 545–546
Marfan’s syndrome, 246, 248, 759, 787, 902
aortic abnormalities in, 248, 787, 902
aneurysms, 787, 789, 792, 793, 795
dissection, 813, 815
genetic factors in, 248, 902
2035
Index
Marginal artery of Drummond, 1177
Marjolin’s ulcer, 259, 1817
Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure in 
stress urinary incontinence, 1695
Masaoka staging system in thymoma, 675, 
675t
Massage, lymphatic, in lymphedema, 936
Mastalgia, cyclical, 508
Mast cells in inflammatory response, 39
Mastectomy in breast cancer, 548–549
in advanced local-regional disease, 
542–543
in ductal carcinoma in situ, 537
in early invasive disease, 538–539
in elderly, 1932
Halsted radical procedure, 498–499, 547
historical aspects of, 497–499
local-regional recurrence in, 543
modified radical procedure, 498–499, 
548–549, 548f
axillary lymph node dissection in, 
548–549, 548f
Patey technique, 547, 548f, 549, 549f
in pregnancy, 554
nipple-areolar sparing, 547–548
partial procedure, 547. See also Breast 
conservation surgery
prophylactic, 513, 514, 516
and radiation therapy, 499, 550
reconstructive surgery after, 549–550, 
1866–1872
timing of, 1866
skin-sparing technique, 547, 549–550
survival rates in, 499
Mastitis, 506
epidemic puerperal, 506
nonepidemic (sporadic) puerperal, 506
periductal, 508, 509, 511
recurrent, 506
Mastoiditis, 567
Mastopexy, 1889
Mathes-Nahai classification of flaps, 1837, 
1837t
Matrix metalloproteinases, 283
tissue inhibitors of, 283
Matrix synthesis in wound healing, 242f, 
243t, 244–245
fetal, 252
Maturation phase of wound healing, 242f, 
245
Maxillary sinus tumors, 592
Maxillofacial injuries, 197, 197f
May-Thurner syndrome, 919
McBurney, Charles, 136, 1241
McBurney incision in appendectomy, 
1251, 1452
McBurney’s point, 1244, 1245f
McCune-Albright syndrome, 1539t, 1849
M cells, 1144
McVay repair of inguinal hernia, 1495, 
1507–1508, 1507f
Mechanical heart valves, 749, 750f
Mechanical injuries, 478
Mechanical ventilation. See Ventilatory 
support
Meckel’s diverticulum, 1163–1165, 1624, 
1624f
differential diagnosis in, 1246, 1252
embryonic development of, 1139, 1164, 
1453
intestinal obstruction in, 1163f, 1164, 
1164f, 1624
locations of, 1164, 1624
perforation of, 1624
radionuclide scans in, 1165, 1165f, 1624
treatment of, 1165–1166, 1624
Meconium ileus, 1617–1619
complicated, 1617
operative management of, 1618–1619, 
1619f
uncomplicated, 1617
Median nerve, 1788
anatomy of, 1792
anesthetic block in hand injuries, 1796, 
1797f
compression in carpal tunnel, 1744, 
1805–1806
Mediastinal lymph nodes, 611–612
biopsy of, 673–674
in lung cancer, 631–633, 632f, 632t, 
673f
mediastinoscopy in assessment of
in lung cancer, 631, 632, 632f
Mediastinitis, 679–680
acute, 679–680, 680t
chronic, 680
sclerosing or fibrosing, 680
in histoplasmosis, 659
Mediastinoscopy
in lung cancer, 631, 632, 632f
in mediastinal mass, 673–674
transesophageal, 425f
Mediastinotomy, anterior, in lung cancer, 
674
Mediastinum, 670–680
anatomy of, 670–671, 671f
compartments of, 670–671, 671f
contents of, 670–671
disorders associated with, 671, 673t
cysts of, 679
ectopic endocrine glands in, 679
infections of, 679–680
lymphoproliferative disorders of, 671
tumors of, 671–679
biopsy in, 672–673
in children, 671, 673t
diagnostic evaluation in, 672–673
history and physical examination in, 
671, 674t
radionuclide scans in, 672, 674t
types of, 671, 673t
Medical education
on minimally invasive surgery, 437
morbidity and mortality conferences in, 
1952
Medical knowledge as core competency, 4t
Medroxyprogesterone acetate in 
endometriosis, 1690
Medullary carcinoma
of breast, 521
of thyroid, 1549–1550
in multiple endocrine neoplasia, 1570
Medulloblastoma, 1734
Megacolon, 1220–1221
acquired, 1221
chronic, 1219
congenital, 1220–1221, 1624
toxic, 1195, 1198, 1199
hemorrhagic, 1197
Meissner’s submucosal plexus, 1039
Melanin, 474–475
Melanocytes, 474–475
malignant transformation of, 488, 488f
Melanoma, 488–492
acral lentiginous, 488
anorectal, 1218
cancer antigens in, 311
circulating tumor cells in, 303
common sites of, 488
diagnosis of, 488–489, 489f
epidemiology of, 276t, 277f, 278t, 618f
genetic factors in, 288t, 292, 488
of hand, 1818
subungual, 488, 1818
incidence of, 488
lentigo maligna, 488
lymphadenectomy in, 490–491
metastasis of, 488, 491
nodular, 488, 488f
ocular, 491–492
pathogenesis of, 488, 488f
in pregnancy, 491
prognostic indicators in, 488
sentinel lymph node biopsy in, 305, 489, 
489f–490f
staging of, 488
subungual, 488, 1818
superficial spreading, 488
surgery for metastasis, 491, 491f
surgical margins in, 304
survival rates in, 490
treatment in, 489–491, 489f–490f
types of, 488
ulceration of, 488
MELD (Model for End-Stage Liver 
Disease) scoring system, 347, 
436, 1280, 1295
Melphalan
in melanoma, 491
in soft tissue sarcoma of extremity,  
1473
MEN1, 289t, 1560
Mendel, Gregor, 444, 445t
Ménétrier’s disease, 1088, 1088f
Meningioma
intracranial, 1735, 1735f
spinal, 1738, 1738f
Meningitis
carcinomatous, 1732
in otitis media complications, 567
Meningocele, 1750
Meniscus, tears of, 1767–1768, 1768f
Menometrorrhagia, 1682
in leiomyomas, 1682–1683
Menopause
breast cancer therapy in, 553
breast changes in, 505
endometrial cancer in, 1701
hormone replacement therapy in, 513
ovarian cancer in, 1701, 1702t
Paget’s disease of vulva in, 1680
Menorrhagia, 1682
Menstrual cycle
and breast cancer risk, 511
breast changes in, 501, 504
Mental status
of dying patients, 1951
of elderly, preoperative assessment of, 
1929
in neurologic examination, 1711
postoperative changes in, 383, 383t
Mentors, in telementoring, 437
Meperidine, 1900
Mepivacaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 
1902, 1903t
Meralgia paresthetica, postoperative, in 
inguinal hernia repair, 1515
6-Mercaptopurine
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1196
in ulcerative colitis, 1196
Merkel cell, 475
carcinoma, 492, 492f
Meropenem, 144t
Mesencephalon, 1710
Mesenchymal tumors, mediastinal, 673t
2036
Index
Mesenteric arteries
collateral flow in, 860, 860f
embolism in, 860, 861f, 863, 1167
surgical repair in, 864
inferior, 860
anatomy of, 1176
ischemia, 859–866, 1167. See also 
Ischemia, mesenteric
meandering, 860
occlusive disease of, 859–866
anatomy and pathophysiology in, 860, 
860f
clinical manifestations in, 861
diagnostic evaluation of, 861–863
endovascular therapy in, 864–865
clinical results of, 865–866
compared to open surgical repair, 
866
complications of, 865
techniques in, 865
surgical repair in, 863–864
clinical results of, 865–866
compared to endovascular therapy, 
866
types of, 860–861
regulation of blood flow in, 860
superior, 860
anatomy of, 1176, 1344
syndrome of, 1147
trauma of, 211
emergent abdominal exploration 
in, 190
interposition graft in, 211
thrombosis in, 860, 863, 1167
surgical repair in, 864
Mesenteric veins
anatomy of, 1177, 1267, 1267f, 1346
thrombosis of, 929, 1167
Mesenteritis
retractile, 1458
sclerosing, 1458–1459, 1459f
Mesentery, 1457–1460
anatomy of, 1457–1458, 1458f
cysts of, 1459–1460, 1460f, 1624
embryonic development of, 1457, 1458f
sclerosing mesenteritis of, 1458–1459, 
1459f
tumors of, 1460
Mesh repair
in abdominal wall defects, 1875
in hiatal hernia, 983
in incisional hernia, 1455–1456, 1456t, 
1457f
in inguinal hernia, 1496, 1513–1514
fixation of mesh in, 1513–1514
in giant prosthetic reinforcement of 
visceral sac, 1509, 1509f
in intraperitoneal onlay mesh 
laparoscopic procedure, 1513
in Lichtenstein technique, 1508, 
1508f
materials used in, 1513
in plug and patch technique, 1508f, 
1513
in Prolene hernia system, 1509, 1509f
in totally extraperitoneal laparoscopic 
procedure, 1511, 1512f, 1513
in transabdominal preperitoneal 
laparoscopic procedure, 1510
Mesocaval shunt, in portal hypertension 
and gastroesophageal varices, 
1282, 1283f
Mesocolon, 1458
Mesothelioma, malignant
clinical presentation in, 688
differentiated from adenocarcinoma, 
688, 688t
management of, 688
pathophysiology in, 687–688
staging of, 688, 689t
MET, 1541t
Metabolic syndrome in obesity, 1127–1128
Metabolism, 43–50
aerobic, 399
anaerobic, 115
of bilirubin, 1270, 1271–1272
in burns, hypermetabolic response in, 
232, 233
disorders of
acid-base disorders in, 73–75
anesthesia management in, 1908
liver transplantation in, 346–347
postoperative, 392–393
wound healing in, 253–254
of drugs, 1898
liver functions in, 1270
in fasting, 44–46, 44t
extended, 45, 45f
short-term, 44f
in injury, 46–47, 46f
of iodine, thyroid function in, 1525
liver functions in, 1269
in shock, 114–115
in surgical patients, 43–50
and energy requirements, 51, 52t
Metacarpal bones, 1788, 1790f
Metacarpophalangeal joint
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
degenerative disorders of, 1807
fractures of, 1796
rheumatoid arthritis of, 1808
splinting of, 1798
Metachronous tumors, 580
Metaiodobenzylguanidine scan in 
pheochromocytoma, 1586, 1587f
Metaplasia
agnogenic myeloid, splenectomy in, 
1430t, 1436
intestinal
in Barrett’s esophagus, 950, 969
gastric cancer risk in, 1077, 1078f
Metastasis, 284–285, 284f, 454, 454f
to adrenal gland, 1588
to axillary lymph nodes
in breast cancer. See Axillary lymph 
nodes, in breast cancer
in unknown primary cancer, 554
to bone, 454
in lung cancer, 627
to brain, 1732, 1733f
stereotactic radiosurgery in, 1749
of breast cancer. See Breast cancer, 
metastasis of
of colorectal cancer. See Colorectal 
cancer, metastasis of
distant, surgical management of, 306
of endometrial cancer, 1701t
of esophageal cancer, 1004
staging of, 1004–1005, 1006t
of gallbladder cancer, 1335
of gastrinoma, 1392
of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 
1482–1483
genetic factors in, 285
of hand tumors, 1820
of head and neck tumors
to cervical lymph nodes, 595–597, 
596f, 597f
anatomy and levels of, 595,  
595f
dissection techniques in, 596, 596f, 
597, 597f
skip metastasis in, 595, 596
in hypopharyngeal cancer, 588f, 589
in lip cancer, 582, 582f
in oropharyngeal cancer, 587
in salivary gland tumors, 599, 600
staging of, 580, 581t
to heart, 776
to liver, 1293–1294
of colorectal cancer, 1210, 1213, 
1293–1294, 1295
in elderly, 1933
hepatectomy in, 1301
of lung cancer, 627, 631–633
staging of, 633–635, 634t
to lungs, 622–623
lymphatic mapping in, 305, 305f
in breast cancer, 305, 305f, 545–546
of melanoma, 488
of mesothelioma, 688, 689t
micrometastasis in, 304
nanometastasis in, 306
of ovarian cancer, 1703, 1703t
of pancreatic cancer, 1407–1408
to liver, 1398f, 1407
staging of, 1395, 1397t
of parathyroid carcinoma, 1570
seed and soil theory on, 285
sentinel lymph nodes in, 305–306. See 
also Sentinel lymph nodes
to small intestine, 1159
treatment in, 1162
of soft tissue sarcomas, 1471–1472, 
1471f, 1473
surveillance for, 1477
to spine, 1737
staging of, 300, 301
of stomach cancer, staging of, 1080t
of thyroid cancer, 1544t
neck dissection in, 1555–1556, 1555f
to thyroid gland, 1551
of vaginal cancer, 1697, 1697t
of vulvar cancer, 1696
staging of, 1696, 1696t
Metastasis-suppressor genes, 285
Metatarsal fractures, 1765
Metatarsal-phalangeal joint fractures, 1765
Metencephalon, 1710
Methadone in persistent pain, 1949t
Methemoglobinemia, 456
Methicillin in staphylococcal infections
resistance to, 143t–145t
sensitivity to, 143t–145t
Methimazole in Graves’ disease, 1532
Methotrexate
in Crohn’s disease, 1156, 1197
in ulcerative colitis, 1197
Methylprednisolone in spinal cord injuries, 
197–198, 1725–1726
Metoclopramide
in delayed gastric emptying, 1050t
in postoperative nausea and vomiting, 
1915
Metronidazole, 145t, 257t
in amebic liver abscess, 1285
in pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690t
in peptic ulcer disease, 1061t
in preoperative bowel preparation, 1194
Metrorrhagia, 1682
Meyer-Overton rule, 1902
Micafungin, 141t, 658
Mice models in genetic research, 
 463–467
Microadenomas of pituitary, 1735
2037
Index
Microarray in Node-Negative Disease 
May Avoid Chemotherapy 
(MINDACT) trial, 302, 536
Microcirculation, 114
Microflora, endogenous
of gastrointestinal tract, 137, 1179
in necrotizing enterocolitis,  
1619–1620
translocation of, 151
of skin, 137, 141
Micrometastasis in bone marrow, 304
Microsatellite instability, 292
colorectal cancer in, 1205
Microsomia, craniofacial or hemifacial, 
1846, 1848f
Microsurgery, 1838
Microwave ablation in liver tumors, 1295
Midgut
embryonic development of, 1175, 1179, 
1616–1617
volvulus of, 1616–1617, 1617f
Migrating motor complex in gastric 
motility, 1048–1049, 1048f
Mikulicz enterostomy, 1619f
Milan criteria on liver transplantation, in 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 347, 
1291
Milk-alkali syndrome, hypercalcemia in, 
1562
Millennium development goals in global 
surgery, 1963, 1964t
Milligan and Morgan hemorrhoidectomy, 
1224
Milrinone in cardiogenic shock, 127
Mineralocorticoids, 20f, 22–23,  
1575–1576
Minerals
absorption in small intestine, 1143
dietary requirements for, 51–52
in parenteral nutrition, 58
in wound healing, 255
Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma 
(MIA), 615
Minimally invasive surgery, 415–439
access for, 421–422
extraperitoneal, 422–423
subcutaneous, 422–423, 423f
anesthesia in, 419
balloon inflation technique for, 419, 
419f
in cancer, 436
in children, 435–436
in cirrhosis and portal hypertension, 437
economics of, 437
education and training on, 437
in elderly, 436–437, 1935–1936
energy sources in, 427–429, 428f
extracavitary, 419, 419f
hand-assisted, 1187
access for, 423, 424f
historical aspects of, 415–417
imaging systems in, 424–427, 426f, 427f
innovations in, 437–439
instrumentation in, 429
in laparoscopy. See Laparoscopy
in natural orifice transluminal 
endoscopic surgery. See Natural 
orifice transluminal endoscopic 
surgery
physiology and pathophysiology in, 
417–419
port placement in, 424, 426f
in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric by 
pass, 1113–1114, 1113f
positioning of patients in, 420, 421f
in pregnancy, 436
surgical suite for, 420, 420f
team approach in, 419–420
telescopes in, 424, 426f, 427f
in thoracoscopy, 421
in esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula, 1610
Minimum alveolar concentration, 1902
Mini Nutritional Assessment, 1929
Minocycline, 145t
Mirizzi’s syndrome, 1320, 1331
Mismatch repair genes, 292
Misoprostol in peptic ulcer disease, 1058t, 
1061
Mithramycin in hypercalcemia, 1573t
Mitogen-activated protein kinases 
(MAPK), 34f, 281
in insulin pathway, 452, 452f
in thyroid cancer, 1542
Mitomycin
in bladder cancer, 1654
in lung cancer, 644t
Mitosis, 446
Mitotane in adrenocortical carcinoma, 
1584–1585
Mitral valve disorders, 751–755
ACC/AHA guidelines, 754t
annuloplasty in, 756, 756f
with aortic valve disease, 763
atresia, 716
balloon valvuloplasty in, 753
commissurotomy in, 753, 755
in elderly, 1930
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716–719
insufficiency and regurgitation, 749, 
753–755
atrial fibrillation in, 752
diagnostic studies in, 753, 755
functional, 765–766
indications for surgery in, 755
ischemic cardiomyopathy in, 765–766
jet lesion in, 756
repair procedures in, 751
types of, 753
prolapse, 755–756, 755f
prosthetic replacement in, 749, 755
operative technique in, 755
in stenosis, 751f
repair procedures in, 755–756
anterior leaflet, 756
double-orifice, 756
edge-to-edge technique, 756
in ischemic cardiomyopathy, 766
in leaflet perforation, 756
operative technique in, 755–756
posterior leaflet, 755f, 756
in rheumatic heart disease, 751
prosthetic replacement in, 755
stenosis, 751–753
atrial fibrillation in, 752
balloon valvuloplasty in, 753
calcific, 751, 751f
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
prosthetic replacement in, 751f
with tricuspid valve disease, 763, 764
Mittelschmerz, 1248
Mivacurium, 1901, 1901t
MLH1, 289t, 292
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease 
(MELD) scoring system, 347, 
436, 1280, 1295
Moh’s microsurgery, 486, 487
in ear cancer, 594
Molecular biology, 443–468
atomic theory of disease, 456
cell cycle and apoptosis in, 450
cell manipulations in, 462–463
detection of nucleic acids and proteins 
in, 457–462
DNA and hereditary in, 444–446
DNA cloning in, 456–457
gene regulation in, 446–449
gene therapy and molecular drugs in, 
309, 453–456
genetic manipulations in, 463–468
historical aspects of, 443, 445t
human genome in, 449
overview of, 443–444
personalized genomic medicine in, 468
signal transduction pathways in, 
450–453
stem cell research in, 468
Molluscum contagiosum, 1678
Mondor’s disease, 507
Monitoring, 399–412
of blood pressure, 400–401
of cardiac output and related parameters, 
402–409
electrocardiographic, 401–402
fetal
in laparoscopy, 436
in trauma, 220–221
neurologic, 411–412
renal, 410–411
respiratory, 409–410
Monoclonal antibodies, 325, 328–329
Monocytes, 39–40, 243
Monro-Kellie doctrine, 1713
Montgomery’s glands, 501, 504
Morbidity and mortality conference,  
1952
Morel-Lavallee lesions, 217
Morgagni columns, 1178
Morphine, 1900
in children and infants, 1601
in persistent pain, 1949t
Mortality and morbidity conference, 7, 
1952
Mortality rates, 274
in cancer, 274–277, 275t, 276t, 277, 
618f
age-adjusted, 618f–619f
of esophagus, 1004f
of lung, 617
of stomach, 1075f, 1082, 1082t
in medical errors, 366
in pulmonary artery catheterization, 
405–407
in systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome, 391, 391t
Morton, William, 1895–1896
Moschcowitz’s operation in rectal 
prolapse, 1219
Motilin, 1146t, 1313
Motility
antroduodenal, 1053
of esophagus. See Esophagus, motility 
of
of large intestine, 1180
of small intestine. See Small intestine, 
motility of
of stomach. See Stomach, motility and 
emptying of
Motor function assessment, 1711
Glasgow Coma Scale in, 1711,  
1712t
response patterns in, 1711f
scoring system in, 1711t
2038
Index
Motor vehicle accidents, 1960, 1960f
mechanisms and patterns of injury in, 
174
pediatric trauma in, 222
in pregnancy, 218
seat belt injuries in, 223, 1643–1644, 
1643f, 1771
Mourning process, 1951
Mouse models in genetic research,  
463–467, 463f
chimeric, 465–466
gene knockout in, 464–466, 465f
transgenic mice in, 463–464
Mouth cancer. See Oral cavity cancer
Moxifloxacin, 257t
MPL gene in familial essential 
thrombocythemia, 289t
hMSH2, 289t, 292
hMSH6, 289t, 292
MUC1, 303
Mucinous carcinoma, 520–521
Mucocele of appendix, 1258
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma of lung, 617
Mucormycosis, 658
Mucosa
of oral cavity
alveolar, 585, 586f
buccal, 586, 1863
of small intestine, 1138–1139, 1139f
of stomach, 1039, 1040f
barrier function of, 1044–1045, 1044t
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue of 
stomach, 1084
Mucous cyst, 1815
Müllerian inhibiting substance, 1637
Mulliken technique in bilateral cleft lip, 
1843, 1843f
Multicentricity of breast cancer, 519, 520t
Multidisciplinary approach
to cancer therapy, 304
in head and neck tumors, 578
to colorectal surgery, 1195
Multifactor Leadership Questionaire 
(MLQ), 10
Multifocality of breast cancer, 519
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1, 289t
Cushing’s syndrome in, 1581
gastric carcinoid tumors in, 1086
gastrinoma in, 1071, 1072, 1073, 
1391–1392
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560, 1567, 
1570
pancreatic neoplasms in, 1390, 
1391–1392
type 2A, 293, 1549–1550, 1549t
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560, 1567, 
1570
medullary thyroid carcinoma in, 1570
pheochromocytoma in, 1586
type 2B, 293, 1549–1550, 1549t
clinical features in, 1549, 1549f
pheochromocytoma in, 1586
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
complement activation in, 118
neutrophils in, 118
postoperative, 391–392
in traumatic shock, 123
Multivisceral transplantation, 352–354
Mupirocin in burns, 232
Murmurs
in aortic insufficiency, 760
in aortic stenosis, 758
in atrial septal defect, 697
in ductus arteriosus patency, 703
in mitral insufficiency, 753
in mitral stenosis, 752
in tricuspid valve disorders, 763
in truncus arteriosus, 707
in valvular heart disease, 748t
Murphy’s sign in cholecystitis, 1320
Muscles
flaps of, 1836, 1837
of hand and wrist, 1788–1791
transposition technique in facial nerve 
paralysis, 1866
Muscularis mucosa, 1039
Muscularis propria, 1139, 1144
Musculoskeletal disorders
orthopedic surgery in, 1756–1783
postoperative, 388
Mustard procedure in transposition of 
great arteries, 721
Mutations, 286, 446
Mutator phenotypes in cancer, 286
MUTYH gene in adenomatous polyposis 
coli, 289t
Myasthenia gravis, 1745
thymoma in, 675
c-myc, 281, 729
N-myc in neuroblastoma, 1640
Mycobacterial infections, 140, 654–655, 
656f
algorithm on treatment of, 655, 656f
in bronchiectasis, 653
surgical treatment in, 655, 656t
tuberculosis in. See Tuberculosis
Mycophenolate mofetil, 325t, 326–327, 
327t
adverse effects of, 326t, 327
mechanism of action, 326–327
Mycotic infections of lungs, 655–658
Myelencephalon, 1710
Myelofibrosis, splenectomy in, 1430t, 
1436
Myeloid metaplasia, agnogenic, 
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1436
Myeloma
multiple, 1781–1782
epidemiology of, 275t, 278t
stem cells in, 285
solitary, 1781
Myelomeningocele
fetal surgery in, 1645
and spina bifida, 1750
Myelopathy, 1740
cervical spondylotic, 1740, 1741f
Myeloproliferative disorders, 92
platelet dysfunction in, 92
splenectomy in, 1435–1436
MYH
in colorectal cancer, 1204
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 1207
Myocardium
infarction of
cardiogenic shock in, 126, 127–128
in coronary artery disease, 742
left ventricular aneurysm in, 766–768, 
767f
left ventricular remodeling in, 765, 
767, 768
perioperative, 374
postoperative, 386
risk of noncardiac surgery in, 738
transfusion triggers in, 98
in trauma, initial management of, 171
ischemia of
angina pectoris in, 735, 742
in aortic valve stenosis, 757
in coronary artery disease, 741–747
diagnostic studies in, 738
laser revascularization in, 747
postoperative, 386
preoperative assessment of,  
1905–1906
radionuclide scans in, 739
silent, 735
transfusion triggers in, 98
protection in cardiopulmonary bypass, 
741
viability assessment, 765
Myocutaneous flaps, 1833, 1836–1838
in breast reconstruction, 549, 550, 
1869–1871, 1872f–1873f
in chest wall reconstruction, 670, 670f, 
1874, 1875f
in head and neck reconstruction, 601
in pressure ulcers, 1880–1881, 1881f
Myoglobinuria, 388
Myomectomy, 1684, 1684–1685, 1685f, 
1685f
in hysteroscopy, 1684
laparoscopic, 1685
Myometrium, anatomy of, 1675
Myopectineal orifice of Fruchaud, 1497, 
1498f
Myositis, necrotizing, 483
Myotomy, esophageal
cricopharyngeal, 989
failure of, 1002t
Heller, 997–999, 999f
laparoscopic, 1000, 1001f–1002f
outcome assessment in, 1003
long, 995–997, 995f, 996f–997f
open technique, 1000
outcome assessment in, 1001, 1002t, 
1003
peroral, 434f, 1000
Myringotomy in ear infections, 566f, 567, 
571
Myxedema in hypothyroidism, 1534
Myxomas, cardiac, 775–776, 775f
N
Nafcillin, 143t
Nails, 475
melanoma of, subungual, 1818
paronychia of, 1813–1814, 1813f
Naloxone, 1900
Naltrexone, 1900
Nanometastasis, 306
Naproxen
gastrointestinal disorders from, 1058t
in persistent pain, 1949t
Nasal disorders. See Nose
Nasoenteric feeding tubes, 55, 55t
Nasogastric intubation
for enteral nutrition, 55, 55t
in small intestine obstruction, 1149
tracheoesophageal fistula in, 609
in trauma, 173
Nasopharynx
anatomy of, 579, 588f, 593
cancer of, 580, 593–594
Nasotracheal intubation, 162
National Cancer Institute, 512
soft tissue sarcoma classification 
system, 1470
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), 
619–621
National Quality Forum, 376
on “never” events in surgery, 376, 376t
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and 
Bowel Project trials, 301, 499, 
551
2039
Index
on early invasive breast cancer, 538
on prevention of breast cancer, 513
on sentinel node surgery in breast 
cancer, 546–547
National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program, 374–375
National Wilms Tumor Study Group, 
1638–1639
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic 
surgery (NOTES), 415, 425f, 
432–434
access for, 421, 423
in appendicitis, 1254, 1256
cholecystectomy in, 433f
historical aspects of, 416
instrumentation in, 429
team approach in, 420
Nausea, postoperative, 1915, 1916f
intraoperative fluid therapy affecting, 
1914
Navicular fracture, 1765
NBS1 gene in Nijmegen breakage 
syndrome, 289t
Nd:YAG (neodymium yttrium-aluminum 
garnet) lasers, 428–429
Neck. See also Head and neck disorders
cervical lymph nodes in. See Cervical 
lymph nodes
cervical spine in. See Cervical spine
masses in, 595–599
benign, 598
in cervical lymph node disorders, 
595–597, 1602
in children, 1601–1603
in deep fascial planes, 598–599
diagnostic evaluation of, 595
in parapharyngeal space, 597–598
trauma of, 197–200
airway management in, 161–162, 
163f
blunt, 175
evaluation of, 175–177
laryngeal fracture in, 176f
operative approaches and exposure in, 
187–188, 187f
penetrating, 176, 176f, 177f
vascular, 198–199, 198f–199f, 200f
zones of injury of, 176f, 177, 177f
Necrosis
in colostomy, 1193
differentiated from apoptosis, 281
in ileostomy, 1193
of pancreas, 150–151, 152f, 1375t
in acute pancreatitis, 1356, 1358f, 
1359
renal tubular, 387–388
in soft tissue infections, 152,  
153f, 483
Necrotizing enterocolitis, 1619–1621
Needle
in endovascular therapy, 834–835
Veress, 421, 421f
Needlestick injuries, 156
Needle suspension technique, transvaginal, 
in stress urinary incontinence, 
1695
Negligence, 367t
Nelson’s syndrome, 1594
Neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet 
(Nd:YAG) lasers, 428–429
Neomycin in preoperative bowel 
preparation, 1194
Neonates
ambiguous genitalia in, 1637–1638, 
1638f
anorectal malformations in, 1626–1628, 
1626f, 1627f
blood volume and replacement in, 
1599–1600
brachial plexus palsy in, 1782
choledochal cysts in, 1630–1631
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 1599
gynecomastia in, 505
hepatitis in, 1629
Hirschsprung’s disease in, 1624–1626
hyperparathyroidism in, 1570
intestinal duplications in, 1624
intestinal obstruction in, 1614–1615
jaundice in, 1628–1631
necrotizing enterocolitis in, 1619–1621
pain control in, 1601
parenteral nutrition in, 57
short bowel syndrome in, 1621
testicular torsion in, 1662
thermoregulation in, 1601
urethral valves in, posterior, 1667
vesicoureteral reflux in, 1667
Neostigmine reversal of neuromuscular 
blockade, 1915
Nephrectomy
in cancer of kidney, 1656–1657, 1656f
complications of, 1657
laparoscopic technique, 1656–1657
in living donor kidney transplantation, 
333f, 335
Nephrocalcinosis in hyperparathyroidism, 
1560
Nephrolithiasis, 1560
Nephropathy from contrast agents, 383, 
791
Nephrostolithotomy, percutaneous, in 
urolithiasis, 1666
Nephrostomy, percutaneous, in upper 
urinary tract obstruction, 1666
Nephroureterectomy in Wilms’ tumor, 1639
Nerve conduction studies, 1712
in peripheral nerve trauma, 1727
Nerve sheath tumors
malignant, 1744
mediastinal, 677–678, 677t
Nerves
anesthetic blocks of, 1903–1904
of anorectum, 1179
of breast, 502
of colon, 1177
of esophagus, 946, 946f
of gallbladder, 1309
of hand and wrist, 1792–1793
compression of, 1805–1806
injuries of, 1798–1799, 1805
of inguinal region, 1497–1499, 1498f, 
1499f
of pancreas, 1346, 1347f
of pelvic floor, 1672–1673, 1673f, 1674f
of stomach, 1038–1039, 1039f, 1047, 
1047f
of thyroid gland, 1524f
trauma of, 251, 1726–1727
in hand and wrist, 1798–1799, 1805
tumors of, 1744
Nervi erigentes, 1179
neu, 281. See also HER2/neu
Neural crest
in persistent truncus arteriosus, 706
tumors of, 1735
Neuralgia, trigeminal, 1748–1749
Neural tube defects, 1749
Neurapraxia, 251, 1726
Neurilemomas, 486, 1744
mediastinal, 677, 677f
Neurinomas, 1744
Neuroblastoma, 289t, 678, 1639–1640, 
1640f
Neuroectodermal tumors, primitive, 668t, 
669
Neuroendocrine hyperplasia of lung, 617
diffuse idiopathic, 614
Neuroendocrine tumors
of liver, 1294
of lung, 617
of skin, 492
Neurofibroma, 486, 1744
mediastinal, 677–678
spinal, 1738
Neurofibromatosis, 677, 1468
type 1, 289t, 1468, 1738, 1744
type 2, 289t
Neurofibrosarcoma, mediastinal, 678
Neurogenic claudication, 1742, 1771
Neurogenic shock. See Shock, neurogenic
Neurogenic tumors, mediastinal, 677–678, 
677f
classification of, 677t
incidence of, 671, 673t
Neurologic disorders
autoimmune and inflammatory,  
1744–1745
emergencies in, 1713–1715
in entrapment neuropathies, 1744, 
1805–1806
of median nerve, 1744, 1805–1806
of ulnar nerve, 1744, 1806
examination in, 1711–1713. See also 
Neurologic examination
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 80–81
lower extremity ulcers in, compared to 
ischemic ulcers, 890t, 891f
in lung cancer, 623, 625
in paraneoplastic syndromes, 627
monitoring in, 411–412
postoperative, 383, 393
surgery in, 1709–1751. See also 
Neurosurgery
traumatic, 251, 1726–1727
in hand and wrist, 1798–1799, 1805
Neurologic examination, 1711–1713
in brain death, 1721
diagnostic studies in, 1713
motor tests in, 1711, 1711f, 1711t,  
1712t
sensory tests in, 1712
in trauma, 168, 170t
of head, 1718
of spine, 1722–1723
Neurolytic therapy in chronic pancreatitis, 
1380
Neuroma
acoustic, 1735, 1736f
in hand, 1805
Neuromuscular blocking agents,  
1901–1902, 1901t
reversal of, 1915
Neuropathy
entrapment, 1744, 1805–1806
of median nerve, 1744, 1805–1806
of ulnar nerve, 1744, 1806
lower extremity ulcers in, compared to 
ischemic ulcers, 890t, 891f
traumatic, of common peroneal nerve, 
1727
Neuropsychiatric disorders in 
hyperparathyroidism,  
1561
Neurorrhaphy in facial nerve paralysis, 
1865
2040
Index
Neurosurgery, 1709–1751
anatomy in, 1732
in brain abscess, 1745
in brain stem compression, 1714
in cerebrovascular disorders,  
1714–1715, 1727–1732
in congenital and developmental 
anomalies, 1749–1751
in cranial infections, 1745
in facial nerve paralysis, 1866
in head trauma, 1715–1721
in intracranial pressure increase,  
1713–1714
in intracranial tumors, 1732–1737
neurologic examination in, 1711–1713
of peripheral nerves, 1744–1745
in trauma, 1726–1727
in seizures, 1715, 1746–1747
of spine, 1739–1743
in infections, 1745–1746
in trauma, 1721–1726
in tumors, 1737–1739
stereotactic radiosurgery techniques in, 
1749
in subdural empyema, 1745
in trauma, 1715–1727
in trigeminal neuralgia, 1748–1749
Neurotensin, 1146t
Neurotmesis, 251, 1726
Neurotransmitters, 32, 33–34
Neutropenia, 1236
enterocolitis in, 1236
Neutrophils
and endothelium interactions, 40, 42f, 
118
functions of, 40
in microbial invasion response, 138
polymorphonuclear, 118, 138
reduced number of, 1236
in shock response, 118
in wound healing, 242f, 243, 243f
and infections, 258
“Never events” in surgery, 376–379, 376t
Nevi, 485, 488
acquired melanocytic, 485
congenital, 485
giant, 485
melanocytic, 1852, 1853f
dysplastic, 488
melanoma risk in, 488
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma, 289t
New York Heart Association classification 
of heart disease, 737, 737t
New York State Study Group on coronary 
stenting and bypass surgery,  
742
Next-generation sequencing, 460, 462
NF1, 289t
NF2, 289t
Niemann, Albert, 1896
Niemann-Pick disease, splenectomy in, 
1430t, 1438
Night stick fractures, 1760
Nilotinib, 310t
Nipples
accessory, 500
ampulla of, 501
anatomy of, 501
discharge from, 509–510, 554
bilateral, 554
bloody, 508
unilateral, 554
hidradenitis suppurativa of, 506
inversion of, 508
treatment in, 511
Paget’s disease of, 506, 521
position in reduction mammaplasty, 
1887–1888
ptosis of, 1887–1888
reconstructive surgery of, 1871
Nissen fundoplication, 973f, 974–975, 
974f, 975f–976f
vs anterior partial fundoplication, 978
laparoscopic, 974–975, 974f, 975f–976f
outcome of, 977–978
vs Toupet fundoplication, 978
Nissen, Rudolph, 974
Nitrates in diet, and gastric cancer risk, 
1074
Nitric oxide, 41–42, 43f
in gastric relaxation, 1047
Nitric oxide synthase, in septic shock, 124
Nitroblue tetrazolium reduction test in 
chronic granulomatous disease, 
258
Nitrogen
dietary intake, postoperative, 51
urine levels in injury, 50
Nitroglycerin in arterial vasospasm, 215t
Nitroprusside in aortic dissection, 813
Nitrous oxide, 1902, 1902t
Nocardiosis, 651
Nodularity of breast, 508
Nodules
of lungs, solitary, 621–622. See also 
Lungs, solitary nodule in
mural, in hemangioblastoma, 1736
of thyroid
in elderly, 1937
hyperthyroidism in, 1533
solitary, 1537–1540
Non–Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 1434–1435
Noninsulinoma hyperinsulinemia 
hypoglycemia syndrome, 1391
Nonmaleficence principle, 1941
in withdrawing or withholding of life-
sustaining therapies, 1945
Non–small cell lung carcinoma, 614–617
Nonunion of fractures in hand, 1801, 1805
No-reflow phenomenon, 114
Norepinephrine, 22, 154, 1577–1578, 
1579f
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
in shock response, 115
North American Symptomatic Carotid 
Endarterectomy Trial, 841
Northern blot hybridization, 458
Nortriptyline in pain, 1950t
Norwood procedure in hypoplastic left-
heart syndrome, 716, 717, 718
Nose
fractures of, 197, 1855
in naso-orbital-ethmoid fractures, 
1855
plastic and reconstructive surgery of, 
1856, 1858f, 1859f
aesthetic subunits in, 1858f
anatomy in, 1884f
axial pattern flaps in, 1856, 1859f
composite tissue grafts in, 1834f, 
1856
rhinoplasty in, 1883, 1884f, 1885f
polyps of, 568, 568f, 569
postoperative complications of, 383–384
tumors of, 592–593
Nosocomial infections, postoperative, 
152–154
respiratory, 152–154, 384–385
of surgical site, 142, 152–154, 389
of urinary tract, 390
NOTES. See Natural orifice transluminal 
endoscopic surgery
Nuclear factor-κB, 37f
in acute pancreatitis, 1355
Nucleus pulposus, 1739, 1771
Nutcracker esophagus, 992–993
Nutrition, 50–59
affecting inflammatory response,  
53–54
age-related differences in requirements 
for, 1600t
arginine in, 54
in burns, 232–233
in children, 1600–1601, 1600t
enteral, 1600–1601, 1600t
parenteral, 57, 1601
in chylous ascites, 1170
colorectal cancer risk factors in, 1204
in elderly, 1929
energy requirements in, 51
enteral, 52–56
access for, 55–56, 55t
in burns, 232–233
in children, 1600–1601, 1600t
compared to parenteral nutrition, 52
complications of, 55, 56, 57t
early initiation of, 53
formulas used in, 53–55
in gastrointestinal trauma, 207
indications for, 52–53, 392
in pancreatitis, 1358
in short bowel syndrome, 1171
trophic feedings, 53
in esophageal cancer, preoperative, 
1007–1008
gastric cancer risk factors in, 1074
glutamine in, 53–54
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1197
in intestinal fistulas, 1158
in obesity
and bariatric surgery
postoperative, 1108, 1116,  
1120–1121
preoperative, 1105–1106
in medical management, 1102
omega-3 fatty acids in, 33, 54
overfeeding in, 52
in parenteral nutrition, 59
in pancreatitis
acute, 1358
chronic, 1366
parenteral, 56–59
access for, 59
central or total, 57
in children, 57, 1601
compared to enteral nutrition, 52
complications of, 56, 57t, 58–59, 392
contraindications to, 57
electrolytes in, 76, 76t
indications for, 57
initiation of, 58
in pancreatitis, 1358
peripheral, 57–58
in short bowel syndrome,  
1171–1173
postoperative, 385, 392–393
in bariatric surgery, 1108, 1116, 
1120–1121
and refeeding syndrome, 81
in ventilatory support, 385
vitamin and mineral requirements in, 
51–52
and wound healing, 254–255, 254f
Nyhus classification of inguinal hernia, 
1496, 1498t
2041
Index
O
Obesity
anesthesia management in, 1908
appendectomy in, laparoscopic, 1254
asthma in, 1105, 1128–1129
bariatric surgery in, 1099–1131.  
See also Bariatric surgery
body mass index in, 1100–1101, 1100t, 
1908
in medical management, 1102
breast cancer risk in, 511
in children, 1101
in Cushing’s syndrome, 1582
diabetes mellitus in, 1112t, 1127
adjustable gastric banding in, 1111, 
1128
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in, 1116, 
1127
discrimination in, 1101
disorders associated with, 1908, 1908t
endoscopic procedures in, 1129–1131
experimental procedures in, 1129–1131
fatty liver in, 1106, 1129
gastroesophageal reflux disease in, 
1105, 1116, 1128
hyperlipidemia in, 1112t, 1116, 1128
hypertension in, 1111, 1112t, 1116, 
1128
implantable gastric stimulation device 
in, 1129–1130
inguinal hernia in, 1501
medical management of, 1101–1102
metabolic syndrome in, 1127–1128
nutrition in
in bariatric surgery
postoperative, 1108, 1116,  
1120–1121
preoperative, 1105–1106
in medical management, 1101–1102
plastic surgery after weight loss in, 
1129, 1130f, 1887f
polycystic ovary syndrome in, 1126
postoperative complications in, 393
pregnancy in, 1126
prevalence of, 1101
factors contributing to, 1101
prognosis in, 1101
sleep apnea in, 1105, 1111, 1112t, 1128
stress urinary incontinence in, 1126
vagal stimulation in, 1131
wound healing problems in, 254
Oblique abdominal muscles
external, 1449, 1450, 1450f, 1451f, 
1499f
internal, 1449, 1450, 1451f, 1499f
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, deep brain 
stimulation in, 1748
Obstructive shock, 128–129
Obstructive sleep apnea, 572
Obturator bypass in aortoiliac occlusive 
disease, 878
Obturator internus muscle, 1672
Obturator sign, in appendicitis, 1244
Occipital dislocation, 1770
Occlusion, dental, in mandibular 
reconstruction, 1853, 1854f, 
1863
Occupational exposures
to blood-borne pathogens, 156
to chemicals, soft tissue sarcoma risk 
in, 1466
Octreotide
in carcinoid syndrome, 1162
in chylous ascites, 1170
in dumping syndrome, 1091
in gastrinoma scan, 1072, 1073f
in intestinal fistulas, 1158
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1380
in portal hypertension and variceal 
bleeding, 1282
in visceral pain, 1950t
Octyl-cyanoacrylate tissue glues, 265
Oddi sphincter
anatomy of, 1310, 1311, 1311f
cholecystokinin affecting, 1313, 1314f
functions of, 1313
incompetent, acute pancreatitis in, 1352
sphincteroplasty in chronic pancreatitis, 
1382–1383, 1383f, 1384f
sphincterotomy in choledocholithiasis
endoscopic, 1322, 1322f
transduodenal, 1327
stenosis of, 1331
Odontoid process fractures, 1722, 1770
Off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery, 
745–746, 746f
Ofloxacin, 257t
Ogilvie’s syndrome, 1221
Ohngren’s line, 592, 592f
Olecranon fractures, 1760
Oligodendroglioma, 1733
Oligomenorrhea, 1682
Ollier’s disease, 1778, 1818
Omega-3 fatty acids, 32–33, 54
Omega-6 fatty acids, 31–32, 54
Omentum, 1456–1457
anatomy of, 1456–1457
cysts of, 1457
as gatekeeper of abdomen, 138, 1457
infarction of, 1457
lesser, 1037
neoplasms of, 1457
physiology of, 1457
Omeprazole in gastroesophageal reflux 
disease, 971, 979
Omphalocele, 1453, 1631, 1632, 1632f
anomalies associated with, 1632
treatment of, 1632, 1632f
Oncogenes, 278, 279–281, 280f, 296t
in hereditary cancer syndromes, 287
in metastasis, 285
of RNA viruses, 295
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1467
Oncology, 273–316. See also Tumors
Oncoplastic surgery in breast cancer, 547, 
1866–1867, 1868f, 1869f
Oncotype DX assay in breast cancer, 301, 
536
Oophorectomy
in breast cancer, 553
in ovarian cancer, 516, 1701
Open fractures, 1757, 1758f
Operating room
communication in, 369, 370–371
in postoperative debriefings, 370–371
in preoperative briefings, 370, 370t, 
372f
safety checklist on, 370, 371f
in surgical counts, 378
in wrong-site surgery, 378
for minimally invasive surgery, 420
for robotic surgery, 430, 431f
safety issues in
best practices for, 379, 379t
in organizational culture, 368
in retained surgical items, 377–378, 
377t
and risk management, 380
in wrong-site surgery, 378
team work in, 369, 369f, 370t
Operon, 447
Ophthalmopathy in Graves’ disease, 1531, 
1532f, 1533
Opioids, 1900, 1909
equianalgesic dosage of, 1900
respiratory depression from, 1900
Opponens pollicis, 1791
Opsonins, 1427
Opsonization, 138
Oral cavity cancer, 582–586, 1862–1863
in alveolus/gingiva, 585
anatomy in, 578, 579f, 582, 583f, 584f
in buccal mucosa, 586
reconstructive surgery in, 586, 1863
epidemiology of, 276t, 278t, 618f
etiology of, 578–579
in floor of mouth, 584–585, 585f
anatomy in, 584f
reconstructive surgery in, 584–585, 
585f, 1862
in palate, 586
in retromolar trigone, 586
staging of, 581t, 582
in tongue, 583, 583f, 587, 1862
reconstructive surgery in, 1862
Orbit
fractures of, 197, 1854
blowout, 577, 577f, 1854
complications in, 1854
in naso-orbital-ethmoid fractures, 
1855
hypertelorism of, 1847
Orbital apex syndrome, 1854
Orbital fissure syndrome, superior, 1854
Orchidopexy in cryptorchidism, 1636
Orchiectomy
in testicular cancer, 1655
in testicular torsion, 1663
Orchitis, 1665
ischemic, in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Organizational culture. See Culture, 
organizational
Orlistat in obesity, 1102
Ormond disease, 1460
Oropharyngeal cancer, 586–587, 588f
anatomy in, 579, 586
metastasis of, 587
rehabilitation in, 587–588
Orotracheal intubation, 162–163
Orphan Annie nuclei, 1542
Orthopedic surgery, 1756–1783
in children, 1782–1783
in fractures and dislocations,  
1757–1765
joint reconstruction in, 1772–1778
in shoulder disorders, 1765–1767
trauma, 1756–1757
Orthopnea, 736
Orthotic devices in spine trauma, 1726
Osgood-Schlatter disease, 1783
Osler, William, 137
Osmolality, 67
of serum, 67
of urine, 67
Osmoreceptors, 68
Osmotic pressure, 66–67
Ossification centers, 1782
Osteitis
fibrosa cystica, 1556, 1560–1561,  
1561f, 1563
pubis, in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Osteitis pubis, 1515
Osteoarthropathy, pulmonary hypertrophic, 
in small cell lung carcinoma, 
626, 626f
2042
Index
Osteochondroma, 1778
of chest wall, 666
Osteocutaneous flaps in head and neck 
reconstruction, 601
in mandibular reconstruction, 601, 1863, 
1864f–1865f
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 248, 248t
Osteolysis in arthroplasty complications, 
1777–1778
Osteoma, osteoid, 1819
Osteomyelitis, 1810–1811
in fracture complications, 1877
of skull, 1745
in tuberculosis, 1745–1746
vertebral, 1745–1746
Osteonecrosis of scaphoid, 1794, 1795f
Osteopenia, 1561
Osteophyte formation, spinal stenosis in, 
1771
Osteoporosis
in breast cancer, 553
in elderly, 1937
in hyperparathyroidism, 1561
Osteosarcoma, 1779, 1779f, 1819
of chest wall, 665, 666, 667, 668t
parosteal, 1779
periosteal, 1779
tumor location of, 1779t
Osteotomy, 1773
Ostium primum defects
anatomy in, 695, 696f
pathophysiology in, 697
Ostium secundum defects
anatomy of, 695–696, 696f
treatment of, 698
percutaneous closure in, 698
Ostomy procedures, 1191–1192
colostomy, 1193. See also Colostomy
ileostomy, 1192–1193. See also 
Ileostomy
preparation preparations for, 1191f
selection of site for, 1191f
Otitis, 565–566
externa, 565
acute, 565
malignant, 565
postoperative, 384
media, 565–566, 566f
acute, 565–566, 566f
chronic, 567
in cleft palate, 1844
complications of, 567
myringotomy and tube placement in, 
566f, 567, 571
postoperative, 384
Otorrhea in skull fractures, 1716
Ototoxicity of aminoglycoside antibiotics, 
384
Ovarian arteries, 1675
Ovarian ligament anatomy, 1674f, 1675
Ovaries
abscess of, tubo-ovarian, 1691
anatomy of, 1674f, 1675
benign neoplasms of, 1689
cancer of, 1701–1704
biomarkers in, 1702
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 
618f
genetic factors in, 289t, 291, 515, 
1701
risk management in, 516–517, 
1701
interval debulking surgery in, 1703
intraperitoneal chemotherapy in, 
1703, 1703t
metastasis of, 1703, 1703t
primary debulking surgery in, 1703, 
1703t
recurrent, 1703–1704, 1704t
risk factors for, 1702, 1702t
salpingo-oophorectomy in,  
risk-reducing, 1701
staging of, 1703–1704, 1703t
symptoms in, 1701, 1702t
cysts of
in children, 1636–1637
chocolate, 1690
in polycystic disease, 1126
torsion of, 1637
differential diagnosis in, 1248
endometriosis of, 1636, 1689–1690
trauma of, 212
Overfeeding, 52
in parenteral nutrition, 59
Oxandrolone in burns, 233
Oxidation of fatty acids, 47, 48f, 49f
Oximetry
jugular venous, 412
mixed venous, 404–405
pulse, 410
Oxycodone in persistent pain, 1949t
Oxygen
arterial content, 98, 399, 404–405
arterial partial pressure, 410
in shock, 131
arterial saturation, 410
cerebral consumption rate in anesthesia, 
1908–1909
cerebral tissue tension, 412
debt in shock, 115, 130
delivery of, 400
critical point in, 400
determinants of, 409
fraction of inspired, 410
hemoglobin dissociation curve, 1914, 
1914f
hemoglobin saturation, 1914
arterial, 410
tissue, 409
hyperbaric oxygen therapy in soft tissue 
infections, 152
jugular venous saturation, 412
maximum consumption in lung cancer, 
preoperative assessment of, 637, 
637t
in mixed venous blood, 404–405
transport in shock, 131
utilization of, 400
Oxygenation, extracorporeal membrane, in 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 
1604–1605
Oxygen radicals, 23
in shock, 118
Oxymorphone, 1900
Oxyntic (parietal) cells of stomach, 1037, 
1040–1041, 1041f, 1042f, 1042t
acid secretion of, 1041–1043, 1043f
Oxyphil cells of parathyroid gland, 1557
Oxytocin, 505
in cesarean delivery, 1693
in gestational trophoblastic disease, 
1694
P
p15, 453
p16
in melanoma, 288t, 292
in pancreatic cancer, 292
in thyroid cancer, 1541t, 1542
p50, 37f
p53
in breast cancer, 535
in colorectal cancer, 1204–1205
in head and neck tumors, 580
in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 287, 290t, 
291, 1468
in parathyroid carcinoma, 1560
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1467
in stomach cancer, 1075, 1077t
in thyroid cancer, 1541t, 1542, 1543
p65, 37f
Pacesetter leadership, 9
Paclitaxel
in breast cancer, 535, 553
in lung cancer, 644t
in ovarian or tubal cancer, 1703, 1703t
Paget’s cells, 493, 521
Paget-Schroetter syndrome, 928
Paget’s disease
extramammary, 493
perianal, 1218
of nipple, 506, 521
of vulva, 1680
Paget’s sarcoma of bone, 1779
Pain
abdominal. See Abdominal pain
anorectal, 1183
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 789, 792
in aortic dissection, 809, 810, 811
in arterial disease, 828
on ambulation, 828
at rest, 828
in back, 625
in burns, 228
in chest. See Chest pain
in chest wall tumors, 665
in children and infants, management of, 
1601
in complex regional pain syndrome, 
1805
in elderly, abdominal, 1936
in gallstones, 1319, 1320
sites of, 1319, 1319f
in limb ischemia, 882, 886
in lung cancer, 623
in mesenteric ischemia, 1167
palliative care in, 1946, 1948, 1950
adjuvant medications in, 1950t
in pancreatic cancer, 1399
in persistent pain, 1949t
step ladder approach to, 1948, 1948t
in pancreatic cancer, 1396–1397, 1399
in pancreatitis
acute, 1357
chronic, 1371–1372, 1371f
treatment of, 1379, 1380, 1380f
pelvic, 1183
postoperative, 1915–1916
in inguinal hernia repair,  
1514–1515
in thoracic surgery, 645f
Saunder’s concept, 1946
scrotal, in testicular torsion, 1662
in shoulder impingement syndromes, 
1765–1766
sympathetic mediated, 1805
in thyroiditis, 1535
in trigeminal neuralgia, 1748–1749
Palate
cleft, 1840–1844. See also Cleft, of lip 
and palate
primary, 1841
tumors of, 586
Palatoplasty in cleft palate, 1844, 1845f
PALB2, 289t
2043
Index
Palliative care, 1946–1947
communication skills in, 1946–1947, 
1947t
definition of, 1946
of elderly, 1938
general principles of, 1946
in head and neck tumors, 602
health and healing, 1946
indications for, 1946, 1946t
pain management in, 1946, 1948, 1950
adjuvant medications in, 1950t
in pancreatic cancer, 1399
in persistent pain, 1949t
step ladder approach to, 1948, 1948t
in pancreatic cancer, 1399–1400
pharmacotherapy principles in, 1948, 
1948t
radiation therapy, in recurrent soft tissue 
sarcoma, 1479
surgical, 1946
Palmaris longus tendon, 1788
Palmar space infections, 1810
Palpitations, 736
Palsy
brachial plexus, 1782
cerebral, 1782
Pamidronate in bone pain, 1950t
Pancoast, Henry, 642
Pancoast’s tumor, 623
treatment of, 641–642, 641f
Pancolitis, 1195
Pancreas, 1341–1413
abscess of, 150–151, 1375t
adenoma of, periampullary, 1408
anatomy of, 1341–1346
lymphatic, 1344–1346, 1346f
neurologic, 1346, 1347f
relationships in, 1342, 1343f
vascular, 1342–1346, 1343f, 1345f
cancer of, 1393–1410
ablation for, 1400–1401
acute pancreatitis in, 1352
algorithm on diagnosis and treatment 
of, 1399f
ampullary, 1408
biliary-enteric bypass in, 1399–1400, 
1400f
biomarkers in, 1397, 1407
in chronic pancreatitis, 1375, 1375f, 
1394
diagnosis of, 1395–1399, 1398f, 
1399f
in elderly, 1393
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 278t, 
618f, 1393–1395
genetic factors in, 292, 1395
in therapy, 1408
in hereditary pancreatitis, 1394
metastatic to liver, 1398f, 1407
palliative care in, 1399–1400
pancreatectomy in, 1402
pancreaticoduodenectomy in,  
1401–1402, 1402f, 1411f
anastomosis techniques in,  
1403–1407
complications of, 1403–1407
outcome and value of, 1407
recurrence of cancer in, 1407–1408
pancreaticojejunostomy in, 
1403f–1405f
pathology in, 1395, 1396f
periampullary, 1408
risk factors for, 1393–1395
signs and symptoms in, 1341
staging of, 1395, 1397t
cholangiopancreatography of
endoscopic retrograde, 1316
magnetic resonance, 1275,  
1315–1316, 1317f
cystic neoplasms of, 1410–1413, 1410f
management algorithm on, 1410f
divisum, 1344, 1344f, 1365–1366
chronic pancreatitis in, 1365–1366, 
1380
embryonic development of, 1344, 1344f
endocrine, 1348–1351
neoplasms of, 1390–1391
enzymes of, 1348–1349, 1348t
in acute pancreatitis, 1353–1354, 
1355
in chronic pancreatitis, administration 
of, 1379–1380, 1380t
exocrine, 1348–1349
neoplasms of, 1393–1412, 1410t
fibrosis of
asymptomatic, 1365t, 1367
in chronic pancreatitis, 1367–1368, 
1367f, 1368f
fistula of
enteric, in chronic pancreatitis, 1378
internal, in chronic pancreatitis, 1378
postoperative, in 
pancreaticoduodenectomy, 
1403–1407
traumatic, 209
fluid collections in, 1376t
gastrinoma of, 1391–1392
glucagonoma of, 1393
histology and physiology of, 1346–1351
hormones of, 1348–1351, 1349t
infections of, 150–151
necrotizing, 150–151, 152f
treatment of, 151, 152f
inflammatory mass in head of, in 
chronic pancreatitis, 1379, 1380t
insulinoma of, 1391
intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms of, 1411f, 1412–1413, 
1412f
fish-eye lesion in, 1411f, 1412
intraepithelial neoplasia of, 1395, 1396f
islet cells of, 1348–1351. See also Islet 
cells of pancreas
lymphoma of, 1413
necrosis of, 150–151, 152f, 1376t
in acute pancreatitis, 1356, 1358f, 
1359
pancreatitis of, 1351–1390. See also 
Pancreatitis
postoperative disorders of, 387
pseudocysts of, 209, 1342, 1409
in chronic pancreatitis, 1375–1378
pseudopapillary tumor of, solid, 1412f, 
1413
regions of, 1341–1343
secretions of, 1348–1349, 1348t
composition of, 69t, 1349f
somatostatinoma of, 1393
transplantation of, 340–344
complications in, 329, 343
contraindications to, 340–341
donor in, 340–341
historical aspects of, 323, 340
immunosuppression in, 340
in islet cell transplantation, 345
indications for, 340–341
islet cell, 344–345
in chronic pancreatitis, 1390
after kidney transplantation, 340, 344
living donor in, 332, 343–344
operative techniques in, 341–342, 
341f–344f
bladder drainage procedure, 341, 
342, 342f–343f, 343
enteric drainage procedure, 341, 
342, 342f–343f, 343
organ preservation methods and time 
in, 331
preoperative evaluation in, 341
preoperative preparation of, 341
procurement and preservation, 
340–341
rejection in, 343
results of, 344
simultaneous with kidney 
transplantation, 340, 344
survival rates in, 344
trauma of, 207–209, 1341
complications in, 209
with duodenal injuries, pyloric 
exclusion procedure in, 209, 
209f
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
191
identification of, 207–208
Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy 
in, 208–209, 208f
vasoactive intestinal peptide-secreting 
tumors of, 1392–1393
Pancreastatin, 1350
functions of, 1349t
Pancreatectomy
in chronic pancreatitis, 1382,  
1384–1390
in pancreatic cancer, 1402
in pseudocyst of pancreas, 1378
in trauma of pancreas, 208, 209
Pancreatic arteries, anatomy of,  
1344–1345
Pancreatic duct
anatomy of, 1344
calculi in, extracorporeal shock wave 
lithotripsy in, 1380–1383, 1382f
distortion, 1368–1369
obstruction of, 1368
sphincteroplasty in chronic pancreatitis, 
1382–1383, 1383f, 1384f
stent placement in chronic pancreatitis, 
1380, 1381f
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
(PanIN), 1395, 1396f
Pancreaticoduodenal artery, anatomy of, 
1344
Pancreaticoduodenal vein, anatomy of, 
1346
Pancreaticoduodenectomy
in duodenal neoplasms, 1161
in pancreatic cancer, 1401–1402, 1402f, 
1411f
anastomosis techniques in,  
1403–1407
complications of, 1403–1407
outcome and value of, 1407
recurrence of cancer in, 1407–1408
in pancreatic injuries, 208
Pancreaticojejunostomy
in ascites, pancreatic, 1378, 1378f
in cancer of pancreas, 1403f–1405f
in chronic pancreatitis, 1383, 1384f, 
1390
in trauma of pancreas, 208–209,  
208f
Pancreatic polypeptide, 1348, 1350–1351
in chronic pancreatitis, 1373, 1374f
functions of, 1349t, 1351
2044
Index
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor 
(PTSI), 1347
in hereditary pancreatitis, 1366
Pancreatic stone protein (PSP), 1368
Pancreatic thread protein, 1368
Pancreatitis, 150–151, 1351–1390
acute, 1351–1360
in alcohol use and alcoholism, 1352
APACHE-II score in, 1357
assessment of severity, 1357
colocalization theory of, 1352
complications of, 1357t, 1359
computed tomography in, 1355, 
1355f, 1358, 1358f
definition of, 1351
diagnosis of, 1355–1357
drug-induced, 1353
etiologies of, 1351, 1352t
factors affecting severity of, 1355
fluid therapy in, 1357–1358
in gallstones, 1323, 1351–1352
iatrogenic, 1352
idiopathic, 1353
incidence of, 1351
infections in, 1361f
inflammatory response in, 1354, 1355
local complications of, 1355t
lung injury associated with, 1354
management of, 1355
necrotizing, 150–151, 152f, 1356, 
1358f, 1359
nutrition in, 1358
pathophysiology in, 1353, 1353f, 
1354f
prognostic signs in, 1356t, 1357
Ranson criteria in, 1356t, 1357
sequential organ failure assessment, 
1356t
severity of, 1369t
treatment of, 1361f, 1379–1390
chronic, 1360–1390
antisecretory therapy in, 1380
ascites in, 1378, 1378f
autoimmune, 1365t, 1366
burned out, 1372
calcific, 1365, 1365t, 1368, 1368f
cancer of pancreas in, 1375, 1375f, 
1394
classification of, 1365, 1365t, 1369t
complications of, 1375–1379
definition of, 1360
diabetes mellitus in, 1372–1373
drainage procedures in, 1383–1384, 
1384f, 1385f
enzyme therapy in, 1379–1380, 1380t
epidemiology of, 1360
etiologies of, 1360, 1362t
fibrosis in, 1367–1368, 1367f, 1368f
histology in, 1367, 1367f, 1368f
inflammatory, 1365t, 1366
inflammatory mass in, 1379, 1380t
laboratory tests in, 1373–1375, 1373t
lipase deficiency in, 1371f, 1372
replacement therapy in, 1380t
obstructive, 1365–1366, 1365t, 1368
results of surgery in, 1381f, 1382
pain in, 1371–1372, 1371f
treatment of, 1379, 1380, 1380t
prognosis and natural history in, 
1374–1375, 1374f, 1375f
pseudocyst in, 1375–1378
radiologic imaging in, 1369–1371, 
1370f
resection procedures in, 1384–1390
signs and symptoms in, 1371–1372
sphincteroplasty in, 1382–1383, 
1383f, 1384f
stent placement in, 1380, 1381f
survival rates in, 1374, 1374f, 1375f
tropical (nutritional), 1360,  
1366–1367
in gallstones, Ranson criteria on, 1356t
hereditary, 1347, 1352, 1360–1362
pancreatic cancer in, 1394
in hyperparathyroidism, 1561
multiple hit theory on, 1363, 1363f
postoperative, 387
in transplanted pancreas, 343
Pancreatostomy in chronic pancreatitis, 
1382, 1383
Pancuronium, 1901, 1901t
Paneth cells, 1139
Panfacial fractures, 1855
PanIN, 1395, 1396f
Panitumumab, 310t
Panniculectomy, 1887
Panniculitis, mesenteric, 1458
Papanicolaou smear in cervical cancer 
screening, 1677
Papaverine
in arterial vasospasm, 215t
in mesenteric ischemia, nonocclusive, 
865
Papillary carcinoma
of breast, 522
of thyroid, 1542–1544, 1543f
in elderly, 1937
Papilloma
of breast, intraductal, 509–510
of choroid plexus, 1734
Papillomavirus infections
anorectal, 1233
condyloma acuminata in, 485, 1233, 
1678, 1680
respiratory recurrent, 572
of skin and subcutaneous tissue, 485
testing for, 1676–1677
tumors associated with, 295–296, 295t
cervical, 1697
of head and neck, 579
of skin and subcutaneous tissue, 485
vaginal, 1697
vulvar, 1696
Paracentesis in chylous ascites, 1170
Paracervical fascia, 1674
Parafollicular cells of thyroid, 1525, 1549
Paraganglioma
of carotid body, 849
familial, 289t
functional, 1586
hereditary, 289t
Paraganglionic tumors, mediastinal, 677t, 
678
Paralysis
agitans, 1747–1748
of facial nerve, 1865–1866. See also 
Facial nerve, paralysis of
of vocal cord, 574, 574f
Paranasal sinuses
fungal ball in, 569–570, 570f
inflammatory disease of, 567–570.  
See also Sinusitis
tumors of, 592–593, 592f
Paraneoplastic syndromes in lung cancer, 
625–627, 625t
Parapharyngeal space masses, 597–598, 
597f
Paraphimosis, 1664
Parasitic infections
anorectal, 1233
cholangiohepatitis in, 1324
splenic cysts in, 1430t, 1436–1437
Parasympathetic nervous system, 1711
of anorectum, 1179
of colon, 1177
of esophagus, 946
of liver, 1268–1269
of pancreas, 1346
of stomach, 1038, 1047
of thyroid gland, 1525
Parathyroidectomy, 1563–1574, 1567f
autotransplantation of tissue in, 1569, 
1573
complications of, 384, 1573–1574
in elderly, 1937–1938
endoscopic, 1567
in familial hyperparathyroidism, 1570
historical aspects of, 1556
indications for, 1564, 1564t
minimally invasive, 1567
in neonatal hyperparathyroidism, 1570
operative procedure in, 1566–1569, 
1568f
intraoperative identification of 
parathyroid glands in,  
1567–1568, 1569
standard bilateral exploration in, 
1567–1569
postoperative care and follow-up in, 
1571
preoperative localization tests in,  
1564–1566, 1565t
radio-guided, 1567
in secondary hyperparathyroidism, 
1572–1573
in tertiary hyperparathyroidism, 1573
Parathyroid gland, 1556–1574
adenoma of, 672, 1556
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560, 1565, 
1567–1568
parathyroidectomy in, 1567–1568, 
1569
anatomy and histology of, 1525, 1526f, 
1557–1558, 1557f
autotransplantation of, 1567–1568, 1573
and calcium homeostasis, 1556,  
1558–1559, 1558f, 1559f
carcinoma of, hyperparathyroidism in, 
1560, 1570
ectopic, 679, 1557, 1568, 1569f
persistent hyperparathyroidism in, 
1571, 1571f
in elderly, 1937–1938
embryonic development of, 1556–1557, 
1557f
historical descriptions of, 1556
hyperparathyroidism, 1559–1574. See 
also Hyperparathyroidism
hyperplasia of, 1569
hypoparathyroidism, 1574
injury in thyroidectomy, 1556
physiology of, 1558–1559, 1558f, 1559f
supernumerary, 1557
Parathyroid hormone
in calcium homeostasis, 1558, 1558f, 
1559f
ectopic secretion in lung cancer, 626
in hyperparathyroidism, 1562–1563, 
1562f, 1563t
intraoperative quick assay of,  
1563–1564, 1566f
Parathyromatosis, 1570–1571
Paratracheal lymph nodes, 611–612
in lung cancer, 632, 632f
Parecoxib, 1901
2045
Index
Parenteral nutrition, 56–59. See also 
Nutrition, parenteral
Parietal cells of stomach, 1037,  
1040–1041, 1041f, 1042f, 1042t
acid secretion of, 1041–1043, 1043f
intrinsic factor secretion of, 1044
Parietal cell vagotomy in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1062f, 1062t
Parietal lobe, anatomy of, 1709
Parietal pleura, anatomy of, 680
Parkinson, Cyril Northcote, 8
Parkinson’s disease, 1747–1748
deep brain stimulation in, 1747–1748
Parkinson’s law, 8
Parkland formula in burns, 230
Parks hemorrhoidectomy, 1223
Parona’s space, 1812
Paronychia, 1813–1814, 1813f
Parosteal osteosarcoma, 1779
Parotid gland tumors, 599, 599f
Parry-Romberg syndrome, 1849, 1850f
Passaro’s triangle, 1392, 1392f
Passive transport, 1140
Pasteur, Louis, 135, 241
Patella
dislocation of, 1762, 1763f
fractures of, 1762, 1763f
Patey modified radical mastectomy, 547, 
548f, 549, 549f
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns, in 
shock, 110, 116
Patient care
skill in, as core competency, 4t
training on, 4t
Patient Safety Indicators of Agency 
for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, 373, 373t
Patient Self Determination Act (1991), 
1944
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in 
shock, 110, 115, 117f
traumatic, 123
Pauchet procedure in peptic ulcer disease, 
1071f
Pavlik harness in hip dysplasia, 1783
Pazopanib, 310t
Pectinate line, 1177
Pectineal ligament anatomy, 1496
Pectoralis muscles
flap
in chest wall reconstruction, 1873
in head and neck reconstruction, 591, 
591f, 601
preserved in modified radical 
mastectomy, 548, 548f, 549f
Pediatric disorders, 1597–1645. See also 
Children and infants
Pelvic examination, 1676, 1676f
Pelvic exenteration
in cervical cancer recurrence, 1698, 
1700f
in rectal cancer recurrence, 1213
Pelvic floor
anatomy of
muscles in, 1178, 1671–1672, 1672f
nerves in, 1672–1673, 1673f, 1674f
disorders of, 1694–1695
prolapse of pelvic organs in,  
1694–1695
stress urinary incontinence in, 1695
in fecal continence, 1180
function testing of, 1181–1182
Pelvic fractures, 166, 181, 183f, 185f, 
212–214, 1760
bladder trauma in, 1660
hemorrhage in, 173, 181, 212–214
and hemodynamic instability, 213, 
213f
pelvic packing in, 213, 215f
open wound in, 214
in pregnancy, 221
Pelvic inflammatory disease, 1690–1691
differential diagnosis of, 1246, 1690
treatment of, 1690t, 1691
Pelvic organ prolapse, 1694–1695
Pelvic pain, 1183
Pemberton’s sign in goiter, 1537
Pendred’s syndrome, 1534
Penetrating injuries, 174
abdominal, 179–181
diagnostic peritoneal lavage in,  
180–181, 180f, 181t
in pregnancy, 221
of chest, 178–179, 201–202
in children, 1642
hemorrhage and persistent hypotension 
in, 172
removal of weapon in, 172, 172f
Penicillin, 143t, 257t
allergic reactions to, 146
in lymphedema, 936
in soft tissue infections, 152
Penis
anatomy of, 1652–1653
cancer of, 275t
erection of, 1652
in priapism, 1663–1664
prostatectomy affecting, 1658
paraphimosis of, 1664
trauma of, 1661, 1661f
fracture in, 1661, 1661f
priapism in, 1664
Pepsinogen secretion, 1041, 1044
Peptic ulcer disease, 1053–1073
in anti-inflammatory drug use, 1053, 
1054, 1057–1058
hospitalization rates in, 1058t
medical treatment in, 1061
perforation in, 1068
risk factors in, 1058, 1059t
Blatchford score in, 1059, 1060t
clinical manifestations in, 1059
complications of, 1059–1061, 
 1064–1068
diagnosis of, 1059
differentiated from gastric cancer, 1080
drug therapy in, 1061
etiologies of, 1053–1055, 1054f
gastric acid secretion in, 1055–1057, 
1057f
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 1051, 
1054–1055, 1076f
diagnosis of, 1059, 1059t, 1061
pathophysiology in, 1054–1055, 
1054f, 1055f, 1056f, 1057f
treatment of, 1059t, 1061, 1061t, 
1062t
hemorrhage in, 1059–1061, 1064–1068
risk stratification in, 1059, 1060t
treatment algorithms on, 1069f,  
1070f
in hyperparathyroidism, 1561, 1562
intractable or nonhealing, 1069–1071, 
1071t
differential diagnosis in, 1069, 1071t
Johnson classification of, 1055–1056, 
1057f
obstruction in, 1061, 1068–1069
pathophysiology in, 1053–1055
perforation in, 1061, 1068
surgical treatment of, 1068, 1071f
treatment algorithm on, 1071f
Rockall score in, 1059, 1060t
in smoking, 1058
in stress, 1058
surgical treatment in, 1061–1064
antrectomy in, 1062t, 1063
cancer of gastric remnant in, 1078
in gastric outlet obstruction, 1069
in hemorrhage, 1064–1068
highly selective or parietal cell 
vagotomy in, 1062f, 1062t
in intractable or nonhealing ulcer, 
1069–1071, 1071t
pyloroplasty in, 1062–1063, 1062t, 
1064f, 1065f, 1066f
selection of procedure in, 1063–1064, 
1068t
truncal vagotomy in, 1062–1063, 
1062t, 1063f
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome,  
1071–1073
Perforator flaps, 1837–1838
in breast reconstruction, 1871, 1871f
Perforator vein surgery, subfascial 
endoscopic, in chronic venous 
insufficiency, 933, 933f
Perianal space, 1227
abscess of, 1227f, 1228, 1228f
Pericardial disease, 772–774
acute pericarditis, 772–773, 772t
chronic constrictive pericarditis, 
773–774
cysts, 679
relapsing pericarditis, 773
tamponade, 625
Pericardial knock in chronic constrictive 
pericarditis, 773
Pericardiectomy in chronic constrictive 
pericarditis, 774
Pericardiocentesis
in acute pericarditis, 773
in cardiac tamponade, 129, 167, 167f
Pericarditis
acute, 772–773, 772t
chronic constrictive, 773–774
relapsing, 773
Pericardium, 670–671
Perilunate dislocation, 1794f
Perineum, necrotizing soft-tissue 
infections of, 1229
Perineurium, 1726
Periosteal osteosarcoma, 1779
Peri-pancreatic fluid collection (PPFC), 
1376
Peripheral arteries
occlusive disease of, 881–900
trauma of, 183f
signs and symptoms of, 185t
Peripheral nerves, 1744–1745
anesthetic blocks of, 1903–1904
autoimmune and inflammatory disorders 
of, 1744–1745
entrapment neuropathies of, 1744, 
1805–1806
trauma of, 251, 1726–1727
management of, 1727
patterns of injury in, 1726–1727
types of injuries in, 251,  
1726–1727
tumors of, 1744
Peristalsis
in esophagus, 948
in nutcracker esophagus, 992
in small intestine, 1144
2046
Index
Peritoneal lavage and aspiration
in abdominal trauma, 180–181, 180f, 
181t
in pregnancy, 218, 221
complications of, 382, 382f
Peritoneum
adhesion formation in trauma of, 263, 
263f
visceral, 1041
Peritonitis, 149–150
duration of antibiotic therapy in, 146
spontaneous bacterial
in cirrhosis, 1279
liver transplantation in, 347
in transplantation procedures, 329
Peroneal nerve, common, traumatic 
neuropathy of, 1727
Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM), 
416, 433
Personalized medicine
in cancers, 316
genomic, 468
Pertuzumab, 310t
Peustow and Gillesby 
pancreaticojejunostomy in 
chronic pancreatitis, 1383, 1384f
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 290t, 1206
polyps in, 1160, 1161f, 1206
Peyer’s patches, 1138, 1144, 1144f
Pfannenstiel incision, 1452, 1637
pH
esophageal, monitoring of. See 
Esophagus, pH monitoring of
gastric, monitoring of, 963–964
with esophageal pH monitoring, 964, 
964f
tissue, 410
in shock, 131
vaginal, 1677t, 1680, 1681f
Phagocytosis, 138, 243, 243t
Phalangeal bones of hand
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
fractures of, 1796
Phalen’s sign in carpal tunnel syndrome, 
1806
Pharmacodynamics, 1898
Pharmacokinetics, 1897–1898
in obesity, 1908
Pharmacologic resistance in tumors, 312
Pharyngitis, 570–571
Pharyngoesophageal swallowing disorders, 
986–990, 987f, 988f
Pharynx, 570–571
anatomy of, 579
cancer of, 580, 618f
constrictor muscles of, 943–944, 943f
in swallowing mechanism, 948
Phenocopy, breast cancer, 516
Phenotypes
in gene knockout mice, 466
and genotype correlations, 291
in transgenic mice, 464
Phenoxybenzamine in pheochromocytoma, 
1586–1587
Phenylephrine in neurogenic shock, 130
Phenytoin in head trauma, 1718
Pheochromocytoma, 1574, 1585–1588
adrenalectomy in, 1587, 1591
diagnosis of, 1586, 1587f
hereditary, 290t, 1586, 1587
historical aspects of, 1574
malignant, 1587–1588
in multiple endocrine neoplasia, 1550, 
1586, 1587
thoracic, 678
Phlegmasia
alba dolens, 919, 920f
cerulea dolens, 919, 924
Phosphate serum levels in 
hyperparathyroidism,  
1562–1563, 1563t
Phosphoinositide-3-kinase pathway, 281, 
282, 452, 452f
in Cowden disease, 292
Phospholipase A2, 31, 31f, 1348, 1348t
Phospholipids in bile, 1313
Phosphorus
dietary intake of, 73
serum levels of, 73, 78
in cancer, 81, 82
in hyperphosphatemia, 73, 78, 81, 82
in hypophosphatemia, 73, 78, 81, 82
Phosphorylation, 246, 452
oxidative, 115
Photocoagulation, infrared, in 
hemorrhoids, 1223
Photodynamic therapy, 429
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1337
Photoplethysmography, 400–401
Phrenic nerve involvement in lung cancer, 
623
Phrenoesophageal membrane, 944, 945f
Phrenosplenic ligament, 1425
Phyllodes tumors, 555, 555f
Physical examination
in anesthesia management, 1902t, 1904, 
1904t
in arterial disease, 829
in breast cancer diagnosis, 523, 523f
in cardiac disorders, 737
gynecologic, 1675–1676, 1676f
of hand, 1793–1794, 1793f
in inguinal hernia, 1503–1504, 1503f
in large intestine disorders, 1180
in mediastinal tumors, 671–672, 674t
in trauma, 173
Physical therapy in burns, 235
Pierre Robin syndrome, 1848, 1849f
Pigmentation changes in chronic venous 
insufficiency, 917, 917f
Pigment gallstones, 1317, 1318–1319
black, 1318
brown, 1318–1319
Pilon fractures, 1764
Pilonidal disease, 1233
Pilosebaceous units, 475
Pincushion deformity in lacerations, 575, 
575f
Piperacillin, 143t
with tazobactam, 143t
PIRO staging system on sepsis, 139
Pisiform bone anatomy, 1788, 1790f
Pituitary gland
ACTH-secreting tumor of, 1580
adenoma of, 1735, 1736f
Cushing’s disease in, 1583, 1735
prolactin-secreting, 554, 1735
hormones released by, 21–22
in shock response, 113–114
hypophysectomy in breast cancer, 553, 
554
thyroid hormones regulated by, 1526, 
1529f
Plagiocephaly, 1750
positional, 1750
Plague in biologic warfare, 157
Plant alkaloids in chemotherapy, 307, 308t
Plasma, 65–66, 66f
composition of, 65–66, 67f
fresh-frozen, 97
in hemorrhagic shock, 122, 123f
in massive transfusions, 101t
in thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, 1434
in trauma, 184
Plasma contact system, 33
Plasmacytoma, 1781, 1781f
of chest wall, 665, 669
Plasmids, 457
Plasmin, 88, 88f, 283
Plasminogen, 88
activators of, 88
tissue. See Tissue plasminogen 
activator
urokinase, 88, 283
Plastic and reconstructive surgery,  
1829–1891
of abdominal wall, 1875–1876
aesthetic, 1882–1891
arthroplasty in, 1773–1778
after bariatric surgery and weight loss, 
1129, 1130f, 1887f
of breast, 1866–1872. See also Breast 
plastic and reconstructive 
surgery
of chest wall, 1872–1875, 1875f
flaps in, 670, 670f, 1873–1874, 1875f
prosthetic materials in, 670, 670f, 
1875
in tumors, 670, 670f
in children, 1840–1852
composite tissue allotransplantation in, 
1881–1882
of esophagus, 1024–1026, 1863. See 
also Esophagus, reconstructive 
surgery of
excisional body contouring in,  
1886–1887
extremity reconstruction in, 
1802f–1804f, 1876–1880
in burns of hand, 1821–1822, 1821f, 
1822f
in fingertip injuries, 1801
flaps in, 1833–1840. See also Flaps
free tissue transfer in, 1838–1840
of hand. See Hand, reconstructive 
surgery of
of head and neck, 1860–1865. See 
also Head and neck plastic and 
reconstructive surgery
historical aspects of, 1829
craniofacial surgery in, 1844
free tissue transfer in, 1838
skin grafts in, 1832
liposuction in, 1883, 1885
in pressure ulcers, 1880–1881
skin grafts in, 1832–1833. See also Skin 
grafts
skin incisions in, 1829–1830
skin substitutes in, 266–267, 267t
in burns, 234
in venous insufficiency, 932–933, 
933f
tissue expansion techniques in, 1840
in breast reconstruction, 1840,  
1867–1869, 1869f, 1870f
wound healing in, 1830–1832
Platelet-activating factor (PAF), 43
Platelet-derived growth factor
in angiogenesis, 283, 284
in diabetic foot ulcers, 267
in wound healing, 246, 247t
therapeutic use of, 267
Platelet-endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (PECAM-1), 41t
2047
Index
Platelet factor 3, 86
Platelet factor 4, 86, 90, 91
Platelets
aggregation of, 85–86
impaired, 91
count of, 85, 102–103
reduced, in thrombocytopenia, 90–91
in hemostasis, 85–86, 86f, 87f
congenital disorders of, 89–90
qualitative disorders of, 90t, 91
quantitative disorders of, 90–91, 90t
wound healing of, 243
splenectomy in disorders of, 1432–1434
splenic sequestration of, 91, 93, 1428
transfusion of, 91, 97, 99t
in hemorrhagic shock, 123
in massive transfusions, 101t
in thrombocytopenia, 91, 388
in wound healing, 1831
Pleomorphic Sarcoma and 
Myxofibrosarcoma, 
undifferentiated, 493
Plethysmography, 918
in venous insufficiency, 930
in venous thromboembolism, 921
Pleural disorders, 680–690
access and drainage in, 680–682
anatomy in, 680
chylothorax, 685–687
effusions, 680. See also Effusions, 
pleural
empyema, 682–685
tumors, 687–690
fibrous, 688, 690
mesothelioma, 687–688
Pleurectomy with decortication in 
mesothelioma, 688
Plicae circulares, 1138
Plug and patch technique in inguinal 
hernia repair, 1508–1509, 1508f, 
1513
Plummer’s disease, hyperthyroidism in, 
1532
hPMS1, 289t, 292
hPMS2, 289t, 292
Pneumatocele, traumatic, 202
Pneumatosis intestinalis, 56, 1149f, 
1170–1171
in necrotizing enterocolitis, 1620, 1620f
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 330
Pneumocytes, 612–613
Pneumonectomy
in lung cancer
in early-stage disease, 643
functional status assessment in, 
633–634, 638f
in mesothelioma, 688
Pneumonia
aspiration, 650
community-acquired, 651
necrotizing, 651
pathogenesis, 650
nosocomial, 153–154, 384–385
pleural effusions in, 680, 681t, 683t
postoperative, 384–385
ventilator-associated, 153–154, 384–385
in burns, 233
Pneumonitis, postoperative, 384
Pneumoperitoneum
in laparoscopy, 417–419
with carbon dioxide, 417, 417f
in elderly, 1935
in pregnancy, 436
in necrotizing enterocolitis, 1620
Pneumothorax
in central venous catheterization, 381
in chest trauma, 164, 165f, 177, 200
in children, 222
chest tubes in, 164, 164f, 649
in laparoscopy, 419
open, 164, 165f
postoperative, 384
spontaneous, 649–650
catamenial, 650
tension, 163–164, 164f, 171
obstructive shock in, 128
Poland’s syndrome, 500
Polidocanol in varicose veins 
sclerotherapy, 929
Polyarteritis nodosa, 903
Polyclonal antibodies in 
immunosuppressive therapy, 325
Polycystic disease
of liver, 1288–1289
of ovary, 1126
Polycythemia vera, 92
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1435–1436
Polydactyly, 1823
Polymastia, 500
Polymenorrhea, 1682
Polymerase chain reaction technique, 458, 
459f
Polymorphisms, single nucleotide, 449
Polymorphonuclear cells in wound 
healing, 1831
Polypectomy, 1212
colorectal, 1206
uterine, 1684
Polyposis
familial adenomatous, 1206–1207
attenuated, 1207
diagnosis of, 1206–1207
genetic factors in, 288t, 291, 1183, 
1206–1207
operative procedures in, 1206–1207
screening for colorectal cancer in, 
1210t
thyroid cancer in, 1537, 1539t
hyperplastic, 1206
juvenile polyposis coli, 289t, 1206
nasal, 568, 568f, 569
Polyps
colorectal, 1205–1206
hyperplastic, 1206
neoplastic, 1205–1206
pedunculated, 1205–1206, 1211f, 
1212
removal of, 1212
serrated, 1206
sessile, 1205–1206, 1211f, 1212
gastric, 1076–1077, 1077f
nasal, 568, 568f, 569
of small intestine, 1159f, 1160, 1160f, 
1161f
treatment in, 1161
uterine
cervical, 1681
endometrial, 1682
hysteroscopy in, 1684
of vocal cord, 573
Polythelia, 500
Ponatinib, 310t
Popliteal artery
entrapment syndrome, 905–906, 905t
differential diagnosis in, 905, 905t
treatment of, 906
injuries of, 215
occlusive disease of. See also 
Femoropopliteal occlusive 
disease
adventitial cystic, 905
symptoms in, 889–890
pulse palpation, 829
in limb ischemia, 886
Popliteal space access in acute trauma, 
215, 215f
Popliteal vein
anatomy of, 165f
injury of, 215
Porcelain gallbladder, 1317–1318
Porfimer sodium in photodynamic therapy, 
429
Portacaval shunt
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
in gastroesophageal varices, 1282
Porta hepatis, 1267
Portal hypertension, 1280–1281, 1281f
Budd-Chiari syndrome in, 1283–1284
in cirrhosis, 1280, 1282
definition of, 1281
etiologies of, 1281, 1281t
gastric varices in, isolated, 1088
gastroesophageal varices in, 1281, 
1282–1283
hemorrhage in, 347, 1282, 1283
liver transplantation in, 347
surgical shunts in, 1282–1283, 1283f
transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt in, 1282, 
1283
imaging in, 1280–1281
liver transplantation in, 347, 1283
measurement of portal venous pressure 
in, 1280–1281
minimally invasive surgery in, 437
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1438
Portal vein
anatomy of, 1267, 1267f, 1280, 1281f
variations in, 1342–1343, 1343f
embolization prior to liver resection, 
1300–1301
imaging of, 1280–1281
pressure in
elevated, 1280–1281
measurement of, 1280–1281
normal values for, 1280
thrombosis of
in liver transplantation, 351
in pancreatitis, 1379
in splenectomy, 1439
Portoenterostomy in biliary atresia,  
1629–1630, 1629f
Portosystemic shunt, transjugular 
intrahepatic
in ascites, 347
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
in gastric varices, isolated, 1088
in gastroesophageal varices, 1282, 1283
Port placement in minimally invasive 
surgery, 424, 426f
in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, 1113–1114, 1113f
Port-wine stain, 485, 574, 1850
Posaconazole, 141t, 658
Positron emission tomography
in cancer staging, 300
in cardiac disorders, 739
in colorectal disorders, 1181
in esophageal cancer, 1005, 1008
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 1482
of liver, 1275, 1275f
in lung cancer, 631
in distant metastasis, 633
in mediastinal tumors, 672
in pulmonary nodule, solitary, 622
2048
Index
Positron emission tomography (Cont.):
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1469
in stomach cancer, 1080
of thyroid, 1530
Postanal space, deep, 1227
Postanesthesia care unit, 1915
Posterolateral knee injuries, 1769
Postoperative period, 380–393
abdominal abscess in, 391
abdominal compartment syndrome in, 
389
anesthesia recovery in, 1915–1916
antibiotics in, 142, 146
appendicitis in, 1257
in bariatric surgery, 1107–1108
cardiac disorders in, 374, 375t, 386
in carotid endarterectomy, 384
chemotherapy in, 307
in children, 393
debriefings in, 370–371
drain management in, 389–340
ear disorders in, 383–384
in elderly, 393
empyema in, 390–391
eye disorders in, 383–384
fluid therapy in, 78–80
gastrointestinal disorders in, 386–387
in bariatric surgery, 1116, 1116f
ileus, 1151–1153
nausea and vomiting, 1914, 1915, 
1916f
small intestine obstruction,  
1149–1150
glucose levels in, 392
hematologic disorders in, 389–390
hemorrhage in, excessive, 104
hepatobiliary disorders in, 387
hyperthermia in, 393
hypothermia in, 393
kidney disorders in, 387–388
in lung surgery, pain in, 645f
metabolic disorders in, 392–393
in minor procedures, 380–383
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome in, 
391–392
musculoskeletal disorders in, 388
necrotizing fasciitis in, 391
neurologic disorders in, 383
nose disorders in, 383–384
nosocomial infections in, 152–154
nutrition in, 392–393
in obesity, 393
pain in, 1915–1916
in inguinal hernia repair, 1514–1515
in thoracic surgery, 645f
pancreatitis in, 387
in parathyroid surgery, 384
radiation therapy in, 314
respiratory disorders in, 384–386
intraoperative fluid therapy affecting, 
1914
in nosocomial infections, 153–154, 
384–385
sepsis in, 391–392
Surgical Care Improvement Project on, 
374, 375t
surgical site infections in, 142, 152–154, 
389, 1257
systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome, 391–392
in thyroid surgery, 384
urinary catheterization in, 390
wound healing in, 1832, 1832t
Potassium
absorption in large intestine, 1179
dietary intake of, 70
in children and infants, 1599
in gastrointestinal secretions, 69t
in parenteral nutrition, 58, 76t
in postoperative fluid therapy, 80
in preoperative fluid therapy, 79
serum levels of, 70–71, 72t, 77
in cancer patients, 81
in hyperkalemia. See Hyperkalemia
in hypokalemia. See Hypokalemia
in parenteral nutrition, 58
Potassium thionyl phosphate (KTP) laser, 
428
Potency of drugs, 1898
Pott’s disease, 1745
Pouch
in ileal pouch anal anastomosis, 1188, 
1189f, 1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
1207
inflammation of, 1194
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
in Kock pouch ileostomy, 1194
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
1207
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
Pouchitis, 1194
Pouch of Douglas, anatomy of, 1674
Poupart’s ligament, 1496
Power of attorney for health care, 1944
Practice
learning and improvement based on, 4t
systems-based, 4t
PRAD1 in hyperparathyroidism, 1560
Praziquantel in schistosomiasis, 1286
Predictive markers, 301
Prednisone
in immunosuppressive therapy, 326
in thrombocytopenic purpura, 
idiopathic, 1433
Pregnancy, 1691–1694
amniocentesis in, 1691
appendectomy in, 436, 1248, 1257
appendicitis in, 1248, 1256–1257
appendix changes in, 1248, 1256–1257
breast cancer in, 554
breast changes in, 500, 501, 501f,  
504–505, 504f
epithelial hyperplasia in, 508
chorionic villus sampling in, 1691
cystitis in, 1664
delivery in, 1693. See also Delivery
ectopic, 1692
differential diagnosis in, 1248
testing for, 1677
fetal interventions in, 1644–1645
gallstones in, 1320
gestational trophoblastic disease in, 
1693–1694
laparoscopy in, 435–436
and appendectomy, 436
and cholecystectomy, 1320
melanoma in, 491
in obesity, 1126
and bariatric surgery, 1126
physiologic effects of, 218, 220, 220t, 
1691, 1693f
syphilis in, 1678
termination of, 1691–1692
testing for, 1677
trauma in, 218–221, 1691
fetal death in, 218, 221
fetal monitoring in, 220–221
Prekallikrein, 33
Preload, cardiac, 124, 126, 131, 402
cardiac output response to changes in, 
408–409
determinants of, 402
in shock, 114
Premature infants
ductus arteriosus patency in, 703, 704
esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula in, 
1610
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 1599
inguinal hernia in, 1634, 1635
jaundice in, 1628
necrotizing enterocolitis in, 1619–1621
short bowel syndrome in, 1621
thermoregulation in, 1601
Premaxilla in bilateral cleft lip, 1843
Preoperative period
anesthesia management in, 1904–1909
in aortic aneurysm repair, 793
in bariatric surgery, 1105–1107
bowel preparation in, 1194–1195
cardiac risk assessment in, 737–738
chemotherapy in, 307
for elderly, assessment in, 1926–1929, 
1927f, 1930f
in cancer, 1931–1932
fluid therapy in, 78–80
hemostasis evaluation in, 102–104
infection prophylaxis in, 142, 1832, 
1832t
antibiotics in, 142
operating room briefings in, 370, 370t, 
372f
pulmonary function assessment in, in 
lung cancer, 635–637
radiation therapy in, 314
wound healing interventions in, 1832, 
1832t
Preperitoneal repair of inguinal hernia
endoscopic, 1510
laparoscopic, 1512f
Presacral tumors, 1217
Presacral fascia, 1177
Preservation methods in organ 
transplantation, 332, 334
Pressure ulcers, 259, 260–261, 482, 482f, 
1880–1881
flap reconstruction in, 1880–1881, 1881f
postoperative, 388
skin grafts in, 1880
staging of, 1880, 1880t
Pretracheal fascia, 598
Prevertebral fascia, 598
Priapism, 1663–1664
high flow/traumatic, 1664
low flow/ischemic, 1663–1664
Prilocaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 1902, 
1903t
Primary survey in trauma, 161–173
life-threatening injuries identified in, 
162t
Pringle maneuver, 95, 189, 189f, 1300
in liver trauma, 203, 205
Probenecid in pelvic inflammatory disease, 
1690t
Probiotics in pseudomembranous colitis, 
1222
Procaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 1902, 
1903t
Processus vaginalis
closure of, 1500, 1502f, 1634
patent, 1500–1501, 1502f, 1635
Procidentia, 1185
Procollagen, 245
Proctalgia fugax, 1183
2049
Index
Proctitis, 1232
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1195
Proctocolectomy, 1187–1188
restorative, 1188, 1189f
ileal pouch anal anastomosis in, 1188, 
1189f
total, 1188
Brooke ileostomy in, 1188
end ileostomy in, in ulcerative colitis, 
1198
Kock pouch in
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
1207
in ulcerative colitis, 1198
Proctoscopy, 1180
Proctosigmoiditis in inflammatory bowel 
disease, 1195
Proenzymes, 1353
Professionalism as core competency, 4t
Progesterone, in breast development and 
function, 500, 503, 505
Progesterone receptor status in breast 
cancer, 534, 535–536, 553
Prognostic markers, 301
Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) in 
cancer immunotherapy, 312
Prokaryotes, transcription in, 447
Prolabium in bilateral cleft lip, 1843
Prolactin, 504
in breast development, 503
pituitary adenoma secreting, 554, 1735
Prolapse
of mitral valve, 755–756, 755f
of pelvic organs, 1694–1695
rectal, 1218–1219, 1219f
Prolene hernia system in inguinal hernia 
repair, 1509, 1509f
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen in breast 
cancer, 535
Proliferation indicators in breast cancer, 
535
Proliferation phase of wound healing, 242f, 
243f, 244
Promoter regions, 447
Properdin, 1427
Propofol in general anesthesia, 1900, 1909
Propylthiouracil in Graves’ disease, 1532
Prostacyclin, 32, 42, 43f, 85
Prostaglandins, 31f, 32, 32t
in ductus arteriosus patency, 703
Prostate
anatomy of, 1652
benign hyperplasia of, 1665
acute urinary retention in, 1662
drug therapy in, 1662, 1665
laser vaporization of prostate in, 1665
symptoms in, 1665
transurethral resection of prostate in, 
1665
cancer of, 1657–1658
epidemiology of, 274, 275, 275t, 
276t, 277f, 278t, 618f
Gleason score in, 1657–1658
hormone therapy in, 308–309
prostatectomy in, 1658
screening for, 299t, 1657
tumor markers in, 302
infections of, 1664
Prostatectomy
in benign hyperplasia of prostate, 1665
in cancer of prostate, 1658
complications of, 1658
laparoscopic, 1658
perineal approach, 1658
retropubic, 1658
robotic, 430, 1658
suprapubic, 1665
Prostate-specific antigen, 302
in screening for prostate cancer,  
1657–1658
Prostatitis, 1664
Prosthesis
in femoropopliteal bypass graft, 899
in hand amputations, 1800
for heart valves, 749–750
aortic. See Aortic valve disorders, 
prosthetic replacement in
autografts in, 751
in elderly, 761, 1930–1931
homografts in, 750–751
mechanical, 749, 750f
mitral. See Mitral valve disorders, 
prosthetic replacement in
tissue, 749, 749–750, 750f
tricuspid, 764
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 720
in joint arthroplasty, 1772–1778.  
See also Arthroplasty
Protamine, 95
Protein
age-related differences in dietary 
requirements for, 1600t
analysis of
immunoblotting in, 458, 460f
immunoprecipitation in, 458–459, 
461f
bone morphogenic, 251
in chyle, 686t
in enteral nutrition, 53, 54
for children, 1600t
functional properties and structure of, 
448f
heat shock, 19f, 20
metabolism of
in fasting, 44, 44t, 45–46, 45f
in injury, 46f, 50, 51f
in liver, 1269
small intestine digestion and 
absorption in, 1141–1142, 1142f
postoperative dietary intake, 51
synthesis of, 19f, 447
Protein C, 88
Protein energy malnutrition in elderly, 
1929
Protein kinase C, 35f
Protein kinase, mitogen-activated, 34f
Protein S, 88
Proteoglycans, 245, 251
Proteolysis
in injury, 50
in starvation, 45, 45f
Proteomics, 444f, 449, 1917–1919
Prothrombin, 86, 87, 99t
in chyle, 686t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103, 120
Prothrombin time, 87, 103
in liver disease, 93, 1271
Proton pump inhibitors
in gastroesophageal reflux, 971,  
972, 979
and respiratory disorders, 971
in peptic ulcer disease, 1061, 1061t
Proto-oncogenes, 295, 729
in colorectal cancer, 1204
PRSS1, 1347
in acute pancreatitis, 1352
in chronic pancreatitis, 1360–1361
Pruitt-Inahara shunt in mesenteric artery 
injury, 211
Prune-belly syndrome, 1634, 1634f
Pruritus ani, 1231–1232
Pseudoaneurysm
of aorta, 785, 788
in Behçet’s syndrome, 903
of carotid artery, 848, 850
in liver trauma, 205
in pancreatic pseudocyst, 1376, 1376f
Pseudocholinesterase, 1901
Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, 1583
Pseudocyst
of pancreas, 209, 1342, 1409
in chronic pancreatitis, 1375–1378
alcoholic, 1376f
cystogastrostomy in, 1377, 1377f
pancreatectomy in, 1378
pseudoaneurysm in, 1376, 1376f
stent placement in, 1377, 1378f
treatment of, 1376–1378, 1377f
definition of, 1376t
of spleen, 1437
Pseudodiverticulosis of esophagus, 992
Pseudohermaphroditism
female, 1637–1638
male, 1637
Pseudohernia, femoral, 1504
Pseudohyponatremia, 69
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections
antibiotic therapy in, 143t–145t
of ear, 565
Pseudomyxoma peritonei, 1258–1259
Pseudo-obstruction, intestinal, 1151–1152, 
1152t, 1153
in Ogilvie’s syndrome, 1221
treatment of, 1153
Pseudopapillary tumor of pancreas, solid, 
1412f, 1413
Pseudopolyps, colorectal, 1206
Pseudostratified ciliated columnar cells in 
tracheobronchial tree, 612, 613f
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, 902
Psoas abscess in Crohn’s disease, 1198
Psoas hitch procedure in ureteral trauma, 
212, 1660
Psoas muscle, 1672
Psoas sign in appendicitis, 1244
Psychological issues
in bariatric surgery, preoperative 
evaluation of, 1105
in burns, 235
PTCH in nevoid basal cell carcinoma, 289t
PTEN
in colorectal cancer, 1205
in Cowden disease, 289t, 292
in thyroid cancer, 1541t
Ptosis
of eyelid
classification of, 1861t
reconstructive surgery in, 1859–1860, 
1861t
of nipple, 1887–1888
Puberty
breast development in, 500, 504
gynecomastia in, 505
Pubococcygeus muscle, 1178, 1672
Puborectalis muscle, 1178, 1672
electromyography of, 1182
in fecal continence, 1180
Pudendal artery, internal, 1179
Pudendal nerve, 1179
anatomy of, 1673
neurophysiologic testing of, 1182
trauma of, 1673
Puerperal fever, 135, 241
Pulley system in hand, 1791, 1791f
2050
Index
Pull-through procedures
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1626, 1626f
in imperforate anus, 1627
Pulmonary artery
catheterization, 402–403
in burns, 230
compared to central venous pressure 
monitoring, 405–406, 405t
complications of, 406–407
hemodynamic measurements in, 403, 
403t
indications for, 406t
minimally invasive alternatives to, 
407
outcome in, 405–407
placement procedure in, 402–403
rupture of pulmonary artery in, 381
in trauma, 216–217
in double-outlet right ventricle, 721–722
in Taussig-Bing syndrome, 723–724
in transposition of great arteries, 
720–721
Pulmonary metastasectomy, 623, 624f, 
625t
Pulmonary valve
as autograft for aortic valve 
replacement, 750, 762
transposition for aortic valve 
replacement, 701–702, 
701f–702f
Pulmonary vascular resistance in atrial 
septal defect, 697
Pulmonary veins
in cor triatriatum, 710–711
isolation, 772
partial anomalous connections, sinus 
venosus atrial septal defect with, 
697
total anomalous connections, 707–710
anatomy and embryology in,  
707–708, 708f
operative correction of, 708–709, 709f
types of, 707–708
Pulse
in aortic valve insufficiency, 760
in aortic valve stenosis, 758
contour analysis, 408
Corrigan’s, 760
detection in blood pressure 
measurement, 400
parvus et tardus, 758
peripheral, 829
grading of, 829, 829t
pressure variation, 408–409
volume recording, 830, 831f
water-hammer, 760
Pulsed dye laser (PDL), in burn, 235
Pulse oximetry, 410
Purpura
thrombocytopenic
idiopathic or immune, 90, 90t
splenectomy in, 1429, 1430t, 
1432–1434, 1444, 1444t, 1445t
thrombotic, 90, 91
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1434
in transfusion reactions, 104
Push enteroscopy in obscure 
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 
1168
Pyelonephritis, 1664
emphysematous, 1664
Pyloric exclusion procedure in duodenal 
injuries, 209, 209f
Pyloric stenosis, hypertrophic, in children 
and infants, 1613–1614, 1614f
Pyloromyotomy in hypertrophic pyloric 
stenosis, 1614, 1614f
Pyloroplasty
in Crohn’s disease, 1157, 1157f
dumping syndrome after, 1091, 1092
in peptic ulcer disease, 1062–1063, 
1062t, 1064f, 1065f, 1066f
bleeding, 1066
Pylorus, functions of, 1049
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 476–477
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1196
Pyridostigmine reversal of neuromuscular 
blockade, 1915
Pyruvate, 45f, 49, 49f
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, splenectomy 
in, 1430t, 1431
Q
Qsymia in obesity, 1102
Quadrate lobe of liver, 1265
Quality improvement, in surgical site 
infections, 147, 148t
Quality measurement
Donabedian model on, 366–367, 367f
structure, process, and outcome 
components of, 367–368, 367f
in surgery, 373–376
Quality-of-life issues
in advance directives and living wills, 
1944
in antireflux surgery, 979
in dialysis, 1944
for elderly, 1929
in colorectal cancer, 1933
in palliative care, 1946
Quinlan, Karen Ann, 1944–1945
Quinupristin-dalfopristin, 145t
R
Raccoon eyes in skull fractures, 1716
Radial artery
anatomy of, 1791–1792
atherosclerosis of, 1822–1823
direct monitoring of blood pressure in, 
401
as graft in coronary artery bypass 
surgery, 744
palpation of, 829, 1793
Radial forearm fasciocutaneous flap in 
head and neck reconstruction, 
601, 601f
Radial nerve, 1788
anatomy of, 1792–1793
anesthetic block in hand injuries, 1796, 
1797f
trauma of, 1727
in humerus fractures, 1759
neuroma in, 1805
Radiation exposure
arteritis in, 903–904
breast cancer risk in, 511
bystander effect in, 295
carcinogenic effects of, 295
colorectal cancer risk in, 1204
enteritis in, 1162–1163
hyperparathyroidism in, 1560
skin injuries in, 486, 493
soft tissue sarcoma risk in, 1466
thyroid nodule in, solitary, 1537
Radiation therapy, 313–314
adjuvant, 314
in adrenocortical carcinoma, 1585
in anal and perianal tumors, 1218
arteritis from, 903–904
in brain cancer, metastatic, 1732–1733
in breast cancer, 550
advanced local-regional, 543
in ductal carcinoma in situ, 537, 550
early invasive, 538–539
in elderly, 1932
and mastectomy, 499, 550
partial breast irradiation in, 550
and reconstructive surgery, 1872
breast cancer risk in, 511
in cervical lymph node involvement in 
head and neck tumors, 597
with chemotherapy, 314
in extremity sarcoma, 1477
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1292, 1337
in colorectal cancer of elderly, 1933
colorectal cancer risk in, 1204
dosage in, 314, 315f
in endometrial cancer, 1701
enteritis from, 1162–1163
in esophageal cancer, 1004, 1008,  
1012–1014, 1013t, 1014t
salvage esophagectomy after, 1011
in extremity sarcoma, 1472, 1473, 
1474–1475
brachytherapy technique, 1474
with chemotherapy, 1477
complications of, 1475
external beam, 1474
intensity-modulated technique, 1475
metastatic, 1479
timing of, 1474
fractionation of, 313
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 
262–263
in hypopharyngeal tumors, 588
intraoperative, 314
in laryngeal tumors, 590, 591–592
in lung cancer
in early-stage disease, 643
in elderly, 1934
in locoregional advanced disease, 
640–641
in melanoma, 491
in mesothelioma, 688
in nasopharyngeal tumors, 594
in oropharyngeal tumors, 587
in pancreatic cancer, 1400, 1407
in paranasal sinus tumors, 593
physical basis of, 313–314
planning and simulation of, 314
postoperative, 314
preoperative, 314
in prostate cancer, 1658
reassortment of, 313
in rectal cancer, 1213, 1215
in retroperitoneal sarcoma, 1480
in rhabdomyosarcoma, 1486
in children, 1640–1641
in salivary gland tumors, 600
sensitizing agents in, 314
side effects of, 314, 315f, 315t
skin damage in, 493
in spinal tumors, 1737
in squamous cell carcinoma, 487
in stomach cancer, 1083
in temporal bone tumors, 594
in thymoma, 676
in thyroid cancer, 1548
anaplastic, 1551
in lymphoma, 1551
medullary, 1550
thyroid nodule associated with, solitary, 
1537
in tracheal neoplasms, 611
in vaginal cancer, 1697
2051
Index
in vulvar cancer, 1696, 1697
Radiculopathy, 1740, 1771
cervical, 1740, 1740t, 1741f
lumbar, 1740, 1742, 1742f, 1742t
Radioembolization in liver tumors, 1296
Radiofrequency electrosurgery, 427–428
argon beam coagulation in, 428
capacitive coupling in, 427–428, 428f
in liver tumors, 1295
in varicose veins, 929
Radiography
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 790, 790f
in aortic dissection, 811
in atrial septal defect, 697
in cardiac disorders, 738
in chest trauma, 177, 178f, 178t
in chest wall tumors, 665
in diaphragmatic hernia, congenital, 
1604, 1604f
of esophagus, 950–953, 953f
in gastroesophageal reflux, 963
in perforation, 1018, 1019f
of hand and wrist, 1794, 1794f
in large intestine disorders, 1181
in lung abscess, 651, 652f
in mediastinal tumors, 671–672
in mesenteric ischemia, 861–862
in neurologic examination, 1712
of small intestine
in neoplasms, 1161
in obstruction, 1147
in radiation enteritis, 1162, 1163f
in spine trauma, 1725
of spleen, 1428–1429
of stomach, 1051
Radioiodine. See Iodine, radioactive
Radionuclide scans
biliary atresia, 1628
of biliary tract, 963, 1315
in acute cholecystitis, 1315,  
1320–1321
of esophageal transit, 955
in gastrinoma, 1072, 1073f
in gastrointestinal hemorrhage, obscure, 
1168
in lymphedema, 935
in Meckel’s diverticulum, 1165, 1165f, 
1624
in mediastinal tumors, 672, 674t
of myocardial perfusion, 739
in pancreatic neoplasms, 1391, 1391f
of parathyroid gland
in preoperative localization studies, 
1565, 1565t, 1566f
in radio-guided parathyroidectomy, 
1567
of spleen, 1429
of stomach, 1051
of thyroid, 1529–1530, 1530f
hot and cold lesions in, 1530,  
1530f
in solitary nodule, 1540
in venous thromboembolism, 921
Radiosurgery, stereotactic, 1749
in liver tumors, 1296
Radioulnar joint, synovitis of, 1808
Radius fractures, 1760
in head, 1759–1760
with ulna fracture, 1760
Radon exposur in cancer of lung, 617
B-Raf in thyroid cancer, 1541t, 1542,  
1543
Raloxifene in breast cancer prevention, 
315, 514
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 567
Random pattern flaps, 1833, 1834f, 1835f, 
1836f
Ranson criteria in acute pancreatitis, 
1356t, 1357
ras, 280f, 281, 729
in colorectal cancer, 1204
in pancreatic cancer, 1394–1395
signaling pathways, 281
in thyroid cancer, 1541t, 1542
Rasmussen’s aneurysm, 661
Rastelli operation
in Taussig-Bing syndrome, 723
in transposition of great arteries, 721
Raynaud’s disease, 1823
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 1823
Raynaud’s syndrome, 904, 1823
rb1 gene in retinoblastoma, 287
Reactive oxygen species, 23
Reconstructive surgery, 1829–1891. See 
also Plastic and reconstructive 
surgery
Rectal arteries, anatomy of, 1176, 1178
Rectal veins, anatomy of, 1178
Rectopexy in rectal prolapse, 1219
Rectosigmoidectomy in rectal prolapse, 
1219, 1220f
Rectum
anatomy of, 1176, 1177–1178, 1178f
lymphatic, 1178–1179, 1210f
nerve supply in, 1179
vascular, 1178, 1179f
anesthesia in surgery of, 1194
biopsy in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
cancer of. See also Colorectal cancer
diagnostic algorithm on, 1214f
endorectal ultrasonography in,  
1211–1212, 1211f
epidemiology of, 275t, 276, 276t, 
277f, 278t, 618f
locally advanced, 1214–1215
local therapy in, 1213
recurrent, 1212, 1215–1216
staging of, 1210–1211
total mesorectal excision of, 305, 
1213
tumorigenesis in, 278, 280f
carcinoid tumors of, 1216
clinical evaluation of disorders,  
1180–1185
digital examination of, 1676, 1676f
embryonic development of, 1175–1176
endoscopy of, 1180
fistula of, 1678
with vagina, 1200, 1231
foreign body in, 1235
gastrointestinal stromal tumors of, 1216
inflammatory bowel disease of, 1195
leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma of, 
1216
lipoma of, 1216
lymphoma of, 1216
multidisciplinary approach to disorders 
of, 1195
positioning of patient for surgery of, 
1194
preoperative preparations for surgery of, 
1194–1195
proctocolectomy, sarcoma of, 1481
prolapse of, 1218–1219, 1219f
resection of
abdominoperineal, 1189
anastomosis in, 1189–1191, 1190f, 
1191f
anterior, 1188–1189
high, 1188
low, 1188–1189
low extended, 1189
in carcinoma, 1213–1215
Hartmann’s procedure, 1189
mucus fistula in, 1189
in proctocolectomy, 1187–1188
trauma of, 209–210, 1233–1235
blunt, 1234
colostomy in, 209–210, 211f, 1234t
complications in, 210
iatrogenic, 1234–1235
penetrating, 1233–1234
ulcer of, solitary, 1219
ultrasonography of, endorectal, 1181, 
1182f
in cancer, 1211–1212, 1211f
Rectus abdominis flaps, 1837
in breast reconstruction, 550,  
1869–1871, 1872f–1873f
in chest wall reconstruction, 670, 670f, 
1874, 1875f
in head and neck reconstruction, 602
Rectus abdominis muscle, 1449, 1450, 
1450f
diastasis of, 1453, 1453f
sheath of
anatomy of, 1449
hematoma of, 1453–1454, 1454f
Red blood cells
in chyle, 686t
count in diagnostic peritoneal lavage, 
180–181, 181t
disorders of, 1429–1432
spleen function in removal of, 1426
transfusions of, 1914–1915. See also 
Transfusions, red blood cell
Red pulp of spleen, 1425–1426, 1426f
Reduction mammaplasty, 1887–1889, 
1888f, 1889f, 1890f
Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin’s disease, 
1434
Refeeding syndrome, 81
Referral to specialized burn center, 227, 228t
Refetoff syndrome, 1529
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy, 1805
Reflux
of bile, gastritis in, 1093–1094
gastroesophageal
in children, 1613
in esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula, 1612
in obesity
bariatric surgery affecting, 1116, 
1128
preoperative evaluation of, 1105
venous, 930
vesicoureteral, 1667
reg gene, 1368
Regional Diagnostic Treatment and 
Referral Centers (RDTRC), 
1974, 1975, 1975f
Registration peptides, 245
Regorafenib, 310t
Regurgitation, 753–755
aortic valve, 758–761. See also Aortic 
valve disorders, insufficiency 
and regurgitation
of gastric contents in gastroesophageal 
reflux disease, 965
and hiatal hernia, 981
outcome of surgery in, 977, 980
postoperative recurrence of, 980
mitral valve, 749. See also Mitral valve 
disorders, insufficiency and 
regurgitation
2052
Index
Rehabilitation
in burns, 235
in head and neck tumors, 602
of larynx, 592
of oropharynx, 587
of palate, 587
Reinke’s edema of vocal cord, 573
Rejection in transplantation, 324
acute, 324
chronic, 324
hyperacute, 324
intestinal, 352–354
of lung, 664
of pancreas, 343
in xenotransplantation, 358
Religious beliefs on transfusions, 1943
REMATCH trial, 770
Remifentanil, 1900
Remodeling
of bones
in fractures, 250
left ventricular, after myocardial 
infarction, 765, 767, 768
in wound healing, 245
Renal artery
anatomy of, 1651
fibromuscular dysplasia of, 866, 867f, 
904
endovascular therapy in, 871
occlusive disease of, 866–872
in atherosclerosis, 866, 866f, 870
clinical manifestations in, 867
diagnostic evaluation in, 867–869
duplex ultrasonography in, 867–868, 
868t
endovascular therapy in, 869,  
870–872, 872t
etiology of, 866–867
hyperaldosteronism in, 1578
indications for treatment in, 868t, 869
magnetic resonance angiography in, 
867f, 868, 868f
renovascular hypertension in, 866, 
867
endovascular therapy in, 871–872, 
871f
surgical treatment in, 870
surgical reconstruction in, 869–870
redundant, 870
thrombosis in kidney transplantation, 
339
trauma of, 211
Renal cell carcinoma, 1655–1657
hereditary, 288t, 1656
nephrectomy in, 1656–1657, 1656f
tumor thrombus in, 1656, 1657f
Renal vein
anatomy of, 1651
trauma of, 211
Renin-angiotensin system, 20t, 1575
in hyperaldosteronism, 1578
in renal artery stenosis, 868, 1578
in shock, 113
Reperfusion syndrome, in limb ischemia 
treatment complications, 888
Repressors, 449
Research, ethical issues in, 1951–1952
in innovations, 1952
in sham operations, 1951–1952
Residency training. See Medical education
Resistance to drugs
in bacterial infections, 143t–145t
in chemotherapy, 312–313, 313t
plasmids encoding markers, 457
in tuberculosis, 654, 655
Resolution in videoendoscopic imaging, 427
Respiratory depression from opioids, 1900
Respiratory disorders
acid-base disorders in, 75
in bronchiectasis, 651–654, 1607
in bronchogenic cysts, 679, 1018, 1607
in burns and inhalation injuries,  
227–228, 231–232, 233
in children, 1603–1608, 1642
in diaphragmatic hernia, congenital, 
1603–1605, 1604f
in dying patient, 1948
in elderly, 1925t
surgical risk in, 1928
in emphysema
congenital lobar, 1605–1606, 1606f
lung volume reduction surgery in, 663
in esophageal cancer, 1003
in gastroesophageal reflux, 969–972
in hemorrhagic shock, 110
in infections, 650–661
host defense mechanisms in, 137
inguinal hernia in, 1501
in lung cancer, 623–645
monitoring in, 409–410
in obesity, 1105, 1106, 1128–1129, 
1908t
bariatric surgery affecting, 1111, 
1112t, 1128–1129
in pancreatitis, acute, 1354
in papillomavirus infections, recurrent, 
572
postoperative, 384–386
intraoperative fluid therapy affecting, 
1914
in nosocomial infections, 153–154, 
384–385
preoperative assessment of
in anesthesia management,  
1906–1907
in aortic aneurysm repair, 793
in bariatric surgery, 1105, 1106
in elderly, 1928
in esophageal cancer, 1007
in lung cancer, 635–637, 638f
in pulmonary airway malformations, 
congenital, 1606, 1606f
in pulmonary sequestration, 1606f, 1607
in septic shock, 125
in sleep apnea, obstructive, 572
in obesity, 1105, 1111, 1112t, 1128
respiratory disturbance index in, 572
in transfusions, 101, 102t
in trauma, 123
airway management in, 227, 1642
of chest, 202, 1643
in children, 1642
initial evaluation and management of, 
161–164, 1642–1643
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute
in burns, 231
complement activation in, 118
diagnostic criteria on, 385, 385t
in hemorrhagic shock, 110
in pancreatitis, 1354
postoperative, 385
in septic shock, 125
in traumatic shock, 123
Respiratory failure
enteral nutrition in, 54
in hemorrhagic shock, 110
Respiratory quotient, 47, 385
Resuscitation
damage control strategy, 98, 100, 122
historical development of, 110
in sepsis, 154, 155t
in shock
endpoints in, 111, 130–131
hemorrhagic, 111, 121–123
in trauma, 215–217
RET
in Hirschsprung’s disease, 1625
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, 
289t, 293, 1549, 1549t
in parathyroid carcinoma, 1560
in pheochromocytoma, 1586
in thyroid cancer, 1540, 1541f, 1541t, 
1542, 1543
medullary, 1549, 1549t, 1550
Retained surgical items, 377–378, 377t
risk factors for, 377, 377t
surgical counts in prevention of, 378
Reteplase in venous thromboembolism, 
924
Retinoids, topical, in hypertrophic scars 
and keloids, 263
Retromolar trigone tumors, 586
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection in 
testicular cancer, 1654–1655
Retroperitoneum, 1460–1462
anatomy of, 1460, 1461f
fibrosis of, 1460–1462
urinary obstruction in, 1666
infections of, 1460, 1461f
sarcoma of, 1468, 1479–1480, 1479f
Retrorectal space tumors, 1217
Retroviruses, tumors associated with, 295, 
296t
Retzius space anatomy, 1497
Reynolds pentad in cholangitis, 1323
Rhabdomyomas, 776
Rhabdomyosarcoma, 1465, 1470
alveolar, 1467, 1486
chemotherapy in, 1486, 1640
of chest wall, 668t, 669
in children, 1485–1486, 1486,  
1640–1641
embryonal, 1486
prognosis in, 1641
radiation therapy in, 1640–1641
staging of, 1640, 1640t
surgical-pathologic groupings of, 1486
Rh blood groups, 96, 1914
Rhesus D antigen and antibody, 1914
Rheumatic heart disease
of aortic valve, 756
of mitral valve, 751
prosthetic replacement in, 755
multivalve disease in, 764
of tricuspid valve, 762
Rheumatoid arthritis
aortitis in, 788
of hand and wrist, 1808, 1808f
Rhinoplasty, 1883, 1884f, 1885f
Rhinosinusitis, 567–570
Rhytidectomy, cervicofacial, 1883f
Ribs
eosinophilic granulomas of, 666
fibrous dysplasia of, 666
fractures of, 202–203
in children, 1643
in elderly, 222
hemorrhage in, 173, 203
Riedel’s thyroiditis, 1536
Rifampin, 145t
Rights of patients
autonomy principle in, 1941
in informed consent, 1944
in withdrawing or withholding of life 
sustaining therapies, 1945
2053
Index
in end-of-life care, 1944–1945
to informed consent, 1941–1944
Ringer’s solution, lactated, 76, 76t
Ripsten rectopexy in rectal prolapse, 1219
Rituximab, 325t, 328
Rivaroxaban, 94
RNA, 444f
analysis in Northern blot hybridization, 
458
bifunctional, 467–468
double-stranded, 466
interference technology, 466–467, 466f
messenger, 279, 443, 446, 447, 448
microRNA, 443
noncoding, 443
piwi-interacting, 443
processing control, 448
ribosomal, 443, 446, 447
small interfering, 466–467, 466f
synthesis of, 443, 446–447
transfection with, 467
transfer, 443, 446
transport control, 448
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), 
467
RNA polymerase, 447, 449
RNA sequencing, 462
RNA viruses, oncogenic, 295
Robotic surgery, 415, 429–430, 431f
in bladder cancer, 1654
historical development of, 415–417
instruments and hand controls, 430f
in minimally invasive surgery, 417
in prostate cancer, 1657
for resection, 1187
single-incision laproscopic, 435, 436f
splenectomy in, 1443
Rockall score in peptic ulcer disease, 1059, 
1060t
Rocky-Davis incision in appendectomy, 
1251
Rocuronium, 1901, 1901t
Rofecoxib in peptic ulcer disease, 1058t
Rolando fracture, 1796
Romberg’s progressive hemifacial atrophy, 
1848, 1849, 1850f
Ropivacaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 
1902, 1903t
Ross procedure, 702, 751, 762
in aortic aneurysm, 795
in aortic stenosis, congenital,  
701–702
Rotator cuff impingement, 1765, 1766f
Rotor’s syndrome, 1272
Rotter’s lymph nodes, 503
Round ligament of liver, 1264, 1264f
Round ligament of uterus
anatomy of, 1674, 1674f
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Roundworm infections, 1286
Roux-en-Y anastomosis
in choledochojejunostomy, 208
in duodenojejunostomy, 207, 208f
in esophagogastrojejunostomy, 1071f
in gastric bypass surgery, 1112–1119. 
See also Gastric bypass surgery, 
Roux–en–Y
in gastrojejunostomy, 1063, 1068f
in pancreaticojejunostomy
in chronic pancreatitis, 1383, 1384f, 
1390
in pancreatic ascites, 1378, 1378f
in pancreatic injuries, 208–209, 208f
Roux syndrome, 1094
Rovsing sign in appendicitis, 1244
Rubber band ligation of hemorrhoids, 
1223, 1224f
Rule of nines in burns, 228, 229f
Rutherford classification of peripheral 
arterial disease, 883, 885t
S
Sacral arteries, 1672
Sacral nerve stimulation in fecal 
incontinence, 1235
Sacrectomy in rectal cancer recurrence, 
1213
Sacrocolpopexy in pelvic organ prolapse, 
1695
Sacrospinous fixation in pelvic organ 
prolapse, 1694–1695
Sacrospinous ligament, 1673
“Safe Surgery Saves Lives” program of 
World Health Organization, 370, 
371f, 375–376
Safety Attitudes Questionnaire, 369
Safety issues, 365–393
Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality indicators on, 373, 373t
best practices for, 379t
in children, 393
communication skills in, 368–369
in complications of surgery, 380–393
Comprehensive unit-based safety 
program (CUSP), 372–373
disclosure of, 380, 1952
in elderly, 393
in high reliability organizations,  
365–366
Institute of Medicine report on, 366, 1952
Joint Commission Universal Protocol 
on, 378–379
in medical errors. See Errors, medical
in obesity, 393
in organizational culture, 365–366, 368
and quality in surgery, 373–376
in retained surgical items, 377–378, 377t
risk management in, 380
in wrong-site surgery, 378
Salicylates in inflammatory bowel disease, 
1196
Saline solutions, 76t, 77
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
in intraoperative fluid therapy, 80
Salivary gland tumors, 599–600, 599f
benign, 599
malignant, 599
in minor glands, 586, 594, 599
Salivary gland-type tumors, 617
Salpingo-oophorectomy in risk for ovarian 
or tubal cancer, 1701
Salter-Harris fractures, 1782
Sampling reflex in defecation, 1180
Sandimmune, 328
Sano shunt in hypoplastic left-heart 
syndrome, 717
Santorini duct, 1344, 1344f
Saphenous veins, 915
catheterization for fluid therapy in 
trauma, 165, 165f
graft
in coronary artery bypass surgery, 
741, 744
in femoropopliteal bypass, 898, 899
Trendelenburg’s test of valves in, 
917–918
varicose, 929
ligation and stripping in, 929
Sarcoidosis
hypercalcemia in, 1562
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1438
Sarcoma, 1465–1487
amplification-associated, 1467
of bones
in chest wall, 667
Ewing’s, 1779–1780, 1780f
of breast, 556, 1481
of chest wall, 666–669, 668t
of bone, 667
of soft tissues, 666–669, 668t
in children, 1465, 1485–1486
complex genomic rearrangements in, 
1467–1468
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans,  
492–493, 1470, 1485
desmoid tumors, 1485
endometrial, 1481, 1701
epidemiology of, 1466
epithelioid, 1818
of esophagus, 1014–1017, 1016f
Ewing’s, 665, 669, 1465
of bone, 1779–1780, 1780f
chemotherapy in, 668t, 669
genetic factors in, 1467
of extremity, 1472–1479, 1779
amputation in, 1473, 1474
chemotherapy in, 1475–1476
with isolated regional perfusion 
technique, 1473–1474
in metastasis, 1478–1479
in multimodality therapy,  
1475–1476
preoperative, 1477
with radiation therapy, 1474
diagnostic imaging in, 1468–1469, 
1469f
management of, 1472t
margin status after resection in, 1472
radiation therapy in, 1472, 1473, 
1474–1475, 1477
in metastasis, 1479
recurrence of, 1478–1479
surveillance in, 1477–1478
treatment recommendations on, 1472
wide local excision of, 1472–1473
gastrointestinal, 1480–1481
genetic factors in, 1467–1468
histologic types of, 1465, 1466t
incidence of, 1465
initial assessment in, 1468–1472
Kaposi’s, 485
liposarcoma. See Liposarcoma
molecular pathogenesis of, 1466–1468
radiation induced, 1779
retroperitoneal, 1468, 1479–1480, 1479f
of soft tissues, 1465–1487
adjuvant medications in, 1477
biopsy in, 1469–1470
in chest wall, 666–669
clinical presentation in, 1468
diagnostic imaging in, 1468–1469, 
1468f–1469f
differential diagnosis in, 1468
fusion transcripts in, 1467t
histologic grade of, 1470–1471
lymph node involvement in, 1471, 
1473
metastasis of, 1471–1472, 1471f, 
1473
to lungs, 1471–1472, 1478, 1478f
surveillance for, 1477
treatment in, 1478–1479
pathologic classification of, 1470
prognostic factors in, 1470, 1471, 
1472
2054
Index
Sarcoidosis, of soft tissues (Cont.):
recurrent, 1473, 1474, 1478–1479
chemotherapy for, 1478–1479
palliative radiation therapy, 1479
size of tumor in, 1471
staging of, 1470–1472, 1471f
targeted therapies, 1476
of spleen, 1437
synovial, 668t, 1465, 1470, 1476, 1818
chemotherapy in, 1476, 1477
genetic factors in, 1467
translocation-associated, 1467
uterine, 1481–1482
Saunder’s concept of Total pain, 1946
Scalded skin syndrome, staphylococcal, 
477
Scalene lymph nodes, 612
Scalp
reconstructive surgery of, 1860, 1862f
trauma of, 1715, 1860, 1862f
hemorrhage in, 166, 173, 1715
lacerations in, 166, 173, 1715
reconstructive surgery in, 1860, 1862f
Scaphocephaly, 1750
Scaphoid bone
anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
avascular necrosis of, 1794, 1795f
fracture of, 1794f, 1796, 1798
nonunion in, 1802, 1805
Scapholunate ligament trauma, 1798, 1807
Scapula, fractures of, 203, 1759
Scapular flap in head and neck 
reconstruction, 601–602
Scapular lymph nodes, 502, 503
Scars
hypertrophic, 261–263
maturation and remodeling of, 245
peritoneal, 263
Schatzki’s ring, 984, 984f
in gastroesophageal reflux, 967
Schistosomiasis, hepatic, 1286
Schwann cells, 486, 1744
Schwannomas, 486, 1744, 1816–1817, 
1817f
mediastinal, 677
spinal, 1738
vestibular, 1735, 1736f, 1749
Scimitar sign, 1217
Scintigraphy, 1051
esophageal transit, 955
Scleroderma
esophageal disorders in, 984–985, 985f, 
993
hand disorders in, 1823
Sclerosingadenosis, 509, 510–511
Sclerosis
amyotrophic lateral, 1740
tuberous, 290t
Sclerotherapy
in hemorrhoids, 1223
in varicose veins, 929
Scoliosis, 1771–1772
in cerebral palsy, 1782
degenerative, 1771
idiopathic, 1772
neuromuscular, 1772
Scorpion sting, pancreatitis in, 1353
Screening for cancer, 297–299, 298t–299t
of breast, 298t, 299
in elderly, 1932–1933
magnetic resonance imaging in,  
516
mammography in, 513, 523–526
cervical, 298t, 1676–1677
colorectal, 298t, 299, 1208–1209
advantages and disadvantages in, 
1208t
in elderly, 1933
guidelines on, 1209, 1210t
of lungs, 299
of prostate, 302, 1657
recent trends and evolving technologies 
in, 316
of stomach, 1084
Scrotum, anatomy of, 1653
Scurvy, 255
Seat belt injuries, 223
abdominal, 223, 1643–1644, 1643f
spinal, 223, 1771
Sebaceous glands, 475
Secondary survey in trauma, 173
Secretin, 1145, 1146t, 1348
stimulation test in Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome, 1073
Segmentectomy
of liver, left lateral, 1300
in lung cancer, 639, 640t
in elderly, 1934
Seizures, 1715
complex partial, 1746
drug therapy in, 1746
in head trauma, prevention of, 1718
surgical treatment in, 1746–1747
Seldinger technique
catheterization, 402–403
for vascular access, 421
Selectins, 40, 41t, 42f
Selective angioembolization (SAE), 206
Self-image in obesity, 1101
Seminomas
mediastinal, 678–679
biomarkers in, 672
testicular, 1654–1655
Semmelweis, Ignaz Philipp, 135, 241
Sendes procedure in peptic ulcer disease, 
1071f
Senning operation in transposition of great 
arteries, 721, 721f
Sensory tests
in hand examination, 1793
in neurologic examination, 1712
Sentinel events, 367t
high-profile, 368
root causes of, 369f
in wrong-site surgery, 379
Sentinel lymph nodes
in breast cancer, 305–306, 545–547
and breast conservation surgery, 547
specimen processing in, 546
in colorectal cancer, 1177
in melanoma, 489, 489f–490f
in vulvar cancer, 1697
Sepsis, 154–156
anorectal, 1227–1228
in immunocompromised host, 1229
definition of, 15t
diagnostic criteria on, 124
disseminated intravascular coagulation 
in, 92
mortality rate in, 123
in necrotizing enterocolitis, 1620
in parenteral nutrition, 58
PIRO Staging System on, 139, 139t
postoperative, 391–392
postsplenectomy, 207, 1444–1445
severe, 124, 138–139, 154–156, 391
shock in. See Shock, septic
subareolar, 511, 511t
systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome in, 138, 139f
thrombocytopenia in, and bleeding, 104
treatment of, 124–126, 125f
guidelines on, 154–156, 155t
Septal defects
atrial, 695–698. See also Atrium, septal 
defect of
ventricular, 726–727. See also 
Ventricles, cardiac, septal defect 
of
Sequential organ failure assessment 
(SOFA) score, 1356t
Sequestration
of platelets in spleen, 91, 93, 1428
pulmonary, 1606f, 1607
Seroma
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
in mastectomy complications, 549
Serosa of small intestine, 1139
Serotonin, 33–34, 1350
Serpentine asbestos fibers, 687
Serrated polyposis syndrome, 1206
Sertoli cells, 1637
tumors of, 1637, 1704
Setons in fistula in ano treatment, 1231
Sevoflurane, 1902, 1902t, 1907
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Sex cord-stromal cell tumors, 1637, 1704
Sex steroids, 1577
excess secretion of, 1585
synthesis of, 20f
Sexual abuse of child, 1636
Sexual development
ambiguous genitalia in, 1637–1638
embryology in, 1637
Sexually transmitted diseases, 1232–1233
SGLT1, 1141, 1142f
Shimada classification of neuroblastoma, 
1640
Shock, 109–131
cardiogenic, 109, 126–128, 126t
differential diagnosis of, 171
hemodynamic response to, 113t, 126
in trauma, 127, 171
cellular hypoperfusion in, 115
classification of, 109–110, 110t
compensated phase in, 111, 112f, 130
danger signaling in, 115, 117f
decompensated phase in, 111, 112f
definitions of, 15t, 110–111, 126, 130, 
139
hemodynamic response to, 113, 113t, 
126
historical aspects of, 109–110
hypovolemic/hemorrhagic, 109, 110, 
119–123
base deficit in, 120, 121f
blood pressure in, 119, 120f, 122
diagnosis of, 119–121
hemodynamic response to, 113t
hypothermia in, 123, 187
neutrophils in, 118
pathophysiology in, 112f, 118
resuscitation endpoints in, 130
signs and symptoms in, 168–169, 
170t
source of blood loss in, 120, 122
thermal protection in, 186
in trauma, 168–171, 170t, 173, 187
in children, 1642
treatment of, 121–123
volume of blood loss in, 119, 120t
inflammatory and immune responses in, 
112, 115–119
irreversible phase of, 111, 112f
metabolic effects of, 114–115
2055
Index
neurogenic, 109, 129–130, 129t
hemodynamic response to, 113t
pathophysiology in, 111
in trauma, 129, 171
obstructive, 110, 128–129, 128t
overview of, 109
pathophysiology of, 111–114,  
111f, 112f
afferent signals in, 112
circulatory homeostasis in, 114
efferent signals in, 113–114
“vicious cycle” in, 111
resuscitation endpoints in, 111, 130–131
cellular, 130, 130t
systemic, 130, 130t
tissue-specific, 130, 130t
septic, 109, 124–126, 138–139, 391
causes of, 123, 124t
clinical manifestations of, 124
complement activation in, 118
definition of, 15t, 138–139
diagnosis of, 124
hemodynamic response to, 113t
pathophysiology in, 111, 114
resuscitation endpoints in, 130
in trauma, 169
treatment of, 124–126, 125f, 154
in trauma, 110, 123, 168–171, 186–187
cardiogenic, 127, 171
in children, 1642
hemorrhagic, 119–120, 122
hypovolemic/hemorrhagic, 168–171, 
170t, 173, 186–187, 1642
initial evaluation and management of, 
168–171
neurogenic, 129–130, 171
obstructive, 128
persistent hypotension in, 171–173
resuscitation endpoints in, 130
septic, 171
signs and symptoms in, 168–169, 
170t
vasodilatory, 124–126
vasogenic, 109
Shock lung, 110
Short bowel syndrome, 352, 1171–1173
intestinal lengthening procedure in, 
1172
intestinal transplantation in, 1172,  
1621
in neonates, 1621
in radiation enteritis, 1163
risk factors for, 1171, 1171t
serial transverse enteroplasty in, 1172, 
1172f
Shotgun sequencing, 460
Shotgun wounds, 174
abdominal, 180
Shoulder, 1765–1767
acromioclavicular joint in, 1766–1767
dislocations of, 1759
impingement syndromes of, 1766
labrum tear, 1766, 1767f
Shouldice repair of inguinal hernia, 1495, 
1506–1507, 1507f
Shunting
left-to-right
in aortopulmonary window, 711
in atrial septal defect, 697
in ductus arteriosus patency, 703
right-to-left
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
in total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection, 708
Shunt procedures
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 717f, 
718, 718f
in portal hypertension and 
gastroesophageal varices
surgical shunts in, 1282–1283, 1283f
transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt in, 1282, 
1283
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
in ascites, 347
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
in gastric varices, isolated, 1088
in gastroesophageal varices, 1282, 
1283
in tricuspid atresia, 713–715, 714f
Sick-euthyroid syndrome, 392–393
Sickle cell disease, 1430t, 1432
Sigma factors, 447
Sigmoidoscopy, flexible, 1180
in colorectal cancer screening,  
1208–1209, 1208t
Signal transduction pathways, 34–36, 
450–453, 451f
adhesive interactions in, 451
in apoptosis, 37f, 281–282, 450, 451f
enzyme-linked receptors in, 452
G-protein–coupled receptors in, 35f, 452
hormonal signalling, 451
insulin pathway, 452, 452f
ion channels in, 452
nuclear hormone receptor superfamily 
in, 452
in shock response, 117f, 118–119
transforming growth factor-β pathway, 
452–453, 453f
in transplant rejection, 324
Silver nitrate in burns, 232
Silver sulfadiazine in burns, 232
Simonart’s band, 1841
Simpson, James, 1896
Simulation of radiation therapy, 314
Single-incision laproscopic surgery 
(SILS), 415, 426f, 434–435
access for, 423–424
body mass index and, 434
challenges faced by surgeon, 434
cholecystectomy in, 435, 435f
contraindications for, 434–435
historical aspects of, 416
instruments used in, 435f, 435t
recommendations for, 435t
robotic, 435, 436f
Single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT)
in cardiac disorders, 739
in mediastinal tumors, 672
Sinuses
paranasal
fungal ball in, 569–570, 570f
inflammatory disease of, 567–570. 
See also Sinusitis
tumors of, 592–593, 592f
thyroglossal duct and, 1521–1522
venous, 916
Sinusitis, 567–570
acute, 567–568
chronic, 568
diagnosis of, 568–569, 568f–569f
management of, 568, 569
and nasal polyps, 568, 568f, 569
classification of, 567
fungal, 569–570, 570f
history consistent with, 567
Sinus venosus defects
anatomy in, 695, 696f
future approaches to surgical closure, 
698
with partial anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection, 697
pathophysiology in, 696–697
treatment of, 697
Sirolimus, 325t, 327–328, 327t
mechanism of action, 327
side effects of, 326t, 328
Sistrunk operation in thyroglossal duct 
cyst, 1522
Situational debriefing model, 372
Skene’s glands, 1674
Skin, 473–493
anatomy and histology of, 473–476, 
474f, 1832
basement membrane of, 478
cutaneous enervation, 476
cutaneous vasculature, 476
dermis layer of, 475–476
epidermis layer of, 473
grafts of. See Skin grafts
in HIV infection and AIDS, 485
in host defense mechanisms, 137
hypodermis, 476
infections of, 151–152, 483–485
inflammatory diseases of, 476–477
injuries of, 477–482
from caustic substances, 479–480
coagulative, 480
in intravenous fluid extravasation, 
480, 481f
liquefactive, 479
mechanical, 478
pressure, 482, 482f
in radiation exposure, 477–478, 486, 
493
temperature-related, 480–481
thermal, 480–481, 481f–482f
perianal disorders of, 1231–1232
substitute replacement products,  
266–268, 267t, 482–483
in burns, 234
in venous insufficiency, 932–933, 
933f
tumors of, 478, 485–493, 1817
benign, 485–486
of ear, 594
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
278t
in hand, 1817f, 1818
malignant, 487–493
melanoma, 488–492. See also 
Melanoma
in sun exposure, 295
in transplant recipients, 330, 335
ulcers of, 259, 482, 482f. See also 
Ulcers, of skin
wound healing in, compared to 
gastrointestinal wound healing, 
250t
Skin grafts, 264–265, 266, 1832–1833
allogenic, 266
anatomy in, 1832
autologous, 266
in breast reconstruction, 549–550
in burns, 232, 234
donor sites in, 234
of hand, 1820
classification of, 1832t
composite tissue, 1832t, 1833, 1834f
full-thickness, 266, 600, 1832t, 1833
in head and neck tumors, 600
historical aspects of, 1832
2056
Index
Skin grafts (Cont.):
phases of graft take in, 1833
split-thickness, 266, 600, 1832–1833, 
1832t
xenogeneic, 266
Skin substitutes, 266–267, 267t, 482–483
in burns, 234
in venous insufficiency, 932–933, 933f
Skin tags
anal and perianal, 1223
in Crohn’s disease, 1200
Skull
chordoma of, 1781
craniosynostosis of, 1750, 1848
fractures of, 1715–1717, 1717f
osteomyelitis of, 1745
reconstructive surgery of, 1860
Sleep apnea, obstructive, 572
in obesity, 1105, 1128
bariatric surgery affecting, 1111, 
1112t, 1128
respiratory disturbance index in, 572
Sleeve gastrectomy in obesity, 1103, 1104, 
1121–1125
operative technique in, 1121f,  
1122–1123, 1122f, 1123f
Sleeve resection in lung cancer, 636
Sling procedures in stress urinary 
incontinence, 1695
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis, 1783
SMAD4, 453
Small cell carcinoma of lung, 617
osteoarthropathy in, hypertrophic, 626, 
626f
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 625–627
Small intestine, 1137–1174
access for enteral nutrition, 55, 55t, 56
anatomy of, 1137–1138, 1138f
atresia of, 1615–1616
apple peel deformity in, 1616
Christmas tree deformity in, 1616, 
1616f
duodenal, 1612, 1615–1616, 1616f
ileal, 1616f
jejunal, 1616f
barrier and immune functions of,  
1143–1144, 1144f
in chylous ascites, 1169–1170
composition of secretions, 69t
Crohn’s disease of, 1153–1157,  
1198–1199
digestion and absorption in, 1140–1143
of carbohydrates, 48, 1141, 1142f
of fat, 1142–1143, 1143f
of fluids and electrolytes, 1140–1141, 
1140f, 1141t
of protein, 1141–1142, 1142f
regulation of, 1141t
of vitamins and minerals, 1143
diverticulum of, 1163–1167. See also 
Diverticulum, of small intestine
duodenum in. See Duodenum
duplications of, 1624
embryonic development of, 1139–1140, 
1140f
endocrine functions of, 1145, 1146t
fistulas of, 1157–1159
hemorrhage from, 1167–1168
histology of, 1138–1139, 1139f
ileum in. See Ileum
ileus and motility disorders of,  
1151–1153
intussusception of, 1170
jejunum in. See Jejunum
layers of wall, 1138–1139, 1139f
mesenteric ischemia of, 1167
motility of, 1144–1145, 1144f
ascending excitation and descending 
inhibition of, 1144–1145, 1144f
disorders of, 1151–1153
fasting pattern or interdigestive motor 
cycle in, 1145
fed or postprandial pattern in, 1145
regulation of, 1145
rhythmic segmentations in, 1145
neoplasms of, 1159–1162
clinical presentation in, 1160
diagnosis of, 1161
epidemiology of, 275t
intestinal obstruction in, 1160, 1161
pathophysiology in, 1159–1160
prognosis and outcomes in, 1162
treatment of, 1161–1162
types of, 1160, 1161t
obstruction of, 1146–1151
clinical presentation in, 1147
closed loop, 1147
complete, 1147, 1148f, 1149
diagnosis of, 1147–1149, 1148f
double bubble sign in, 1615, 1615f
in early postoperative period,  
1149–1150
epidemiology of, 1146–1147
etiologies of, 1146–1147, 1146t
in inguinal hernia, 1505
in Meckel’s diverticulum, 1163f, 
1164, 1164f
in neonates, 1614–1615, 1615f
in neoplasms, 1160, 1161
of pancreas, 1399
partial, 1147, 1148f, 1149
pathophysiology in, 1147
postoperative, 386
in bariatric surgery, 1116f, 1117
prevention of, 1151
prognosis and outcome in, 1151
strangulated, 1147
treatment in, 1149–1151, 1150f
in neonates, 1615
perforation of, 207, 1168–1169
physiology of, 1140–1146
in pneumatosis intestinalis, 1170–1171
radiation enteritis of, 1162–1163
resection of
intestinal adaptation in, 1145–1146
short bowel syndrome after,  
1171–1173, 1621
sarcoma of, 1480
transplantation in short bowel 
syndrome, 1621
trauma of, 207
in children, 1643, 1643f
damage control surgery in, 195
laceration in, 207
in laparoscopy, 1705
perforation in, 207, 1168–1169
pyloric exclusion procedure in, 
209, 209f
Smallpox
as biologic warfare agent, 157
vaccination, 157
Small round-cell tumors, desmoplastic, 
1467
SMARCB1 in rhabdoid predesposition 
syndrome, 290t
Smith Surgical Papyrus, 497
Smoke inhalation injuries, 231–232
Smoking
cessation of, preoperative, 636
colorectal cancer in, 1204
coronary artery disease in, 742, 1906
esophageal cancer in, 1003
head and neck tumors in, 578, 579
interaction with asbestos exposure, 293, 
619
lung cancer in
and postoperative complications, 636, 
636f
risk for, 617, 619t, 620t
in secondhand exposure, 617
tumor types associated with,  
613–614
pancreatic cancer in, 1393
pancreatitis in, 1363
peptic ulcer disease in, 1058
thromboangiitis obliterans in, 906
Snoring, 572
in obstructive sleep apnea, 572
Snow, John, 1896
Snuffbox, anatomic, 1791
Soave procedure in Hirschsprung’s 
disease, 1626, 1626f
Sodium
absorption of
in large intestine, 1179
in small intestine, 1141, 1141f
in cerebral salt wasting, 81
dietary intake of, 67, 69
in children and infants, 1599
in gastrointestinal secretions, 69t
and osmolality of body fluids, 67
in parenteral nutrition, 76, 76t
in resuscitative fluids, 76t, 77
serum levels of, 68, 70f, 77
in cancer, 81
in hypernatremia. See Hypernatremia
in hyponatremia. See Hyponatremia
in inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
secretion, 69, 81
urine levels of, 68, 69, 70
Sodium chloride
in parenteral nutrition, 76, 76t
in preoperative fluid therapy, 79
Sodium-dependent glucose transporters, 
50, 1141, 1142f
Sodium tetradecyl sulfate in varicose vein 
sclerotherapy, 929
Soft tissues
infections of, 152, 153f
necrotizing, 152, 153f, 484f, 1229
injuries in head and neck trauma, 
575–576
tumors of, 486
in chest wall, 666–669, 668t
sarcomas, 666–669, 1465–1487.  
See also Sarcoma, of soft tissues
Solid tumors and global surgery, 1959f, 
1970, 1973t
Somatic mutations in cancer, 286
Somatic nervous system, 1711
Somatostatin, 1313, 1346, 1348, 1350
administration of, 1145
in chronic pancreatitis, 1380
D-cell secretion of, 1040, 1043, 1045, 
1146t
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 
1054
functions of, 1146t, 1349t
in gastric acid secretion, 1043, 1044f, 
1045
in growth hormone secretion, 21
islet cell secretion of, 1349t
in pepsinogen secretion, 1044
in portal hypertension and variceal 
bleeding, 1282
2057
Index
receptors for, 1350
tumor secretion of, 1393
Somatostatinoma, 1393
Sonde enteroscopy in gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage, 1168
Sorafenib, 310t
in liver tumors, 1296
Southern blot hybridization, 457–458, 457f
Spasm
esophageal, 992, 992f, 993f
vascular
in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 1731
treatment of, 215t
Specimen labeling errors, frequency of, 
371, 371f
Spectrin, 1429
Spectroscopy, near infrared, 409
in shock, 131, 409
transcranial, 412
Speech
in cleft palate, 1844
in laryngeal cancer, rehabilitation of, 
592
velopharyngeal competence in, 1844
Spermatic cord, 1496, 1497
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Spermatic veins, 1653
Spherocytosis, hereditary, 1429, 1430t, 
1431
Sphincter muscles
anal. See Anal sphincters
esophageal. See Esophagus, sphincter 
muscles of
of Oddi. See Oddi sphincter
pyloric, 1035
urethral, urinary incontinence in 
intrinsic deficiency of, 1695
Sphincteroplasty
in anal sphincter injury, 1235, 1235f
in pancreatitis, chronic, 1382–1383, 
1383f, 1384f
Sphincterotomy
anal, in anal fissures, 1226–1227,  
1226f
of Oddi sphincter
endoscopic, in choledocholithiasis, 
1322, 1322f
transduodenal, in choledocholithiasis, 
1327
Spigelian hernias, 1455
Spina bifida
with myelomeningocele, 1750
occulta, 1749
Spinal anesthesia, 1897, 1904
Spinal canal stenosis, 1771
Spinal cord
anatomy of, 1710
compression of, 1739–1740
in intervertebral disc herniation, 1771
injury of, 1725f
anterior cord syndrome in, 1724, 
1725f
Brown-Séquard syndrome in, 176, 
1724, 1725f
central cord syndrome in, 1724, 1725f
cervical, 175, 198
corticosteroid therapy in, 197–198, 
1725–1726
in fracture dislocations of spine, 1771
ischemic, in aortic aneurysm repair, 
801t, 802–803
neurogenic shock in, 129
neurologic examination in, 1712
surgery in, 1726
in transection, 1724, 1725f
myelopathy of, 1740
cervical, 1740, 1741f
Spinal nerves, anatomy of, 1710
Spine, 1737–1744
anatomy of, 1739
cervical. See Cervical spine
fusion surgery of, 1743
instrumentation in, 1743, 1743f
intervertebral discs in. See Intervertebral 
discs
osteomyelitis of, 1745–1746
stability of, 1739
in fusion surgery, 1743
stenosis of, 1771
trauma of, 1721–1726
cervical, 175–177, 197–198, 1722
classification of, 1722, 1725f
in compression or distraction, 1721, 
1722, 1724f, 1770
corticosteroid therapy in, 197–198, 
1725–1726
facet dislocation in, 1722, 1723f, 
1770
in flexion or extension, 1721, 1722, 
1771
fracture-dislocation in, 1722, 1724f
fractures in, 1722, 1724f, 1770
cervical, 1722
initial assessment and management 
in, 1722–1723
neurologic syndromes in, 1724, 
1725f, 1771
orthotic devices in, 1726
rotational forces in, 1721
surgery in, 1726
thoracolumbar, 1722
tumors of, 1737–1739, 1738f
extradural, 1737
intradural extramedullary, 1738–1739
intramedullary, 1738–1739
metastatic, 1737
primary, 1738
SPINK1, 1347, 1352
in pancreatitis, 1361, 1367
Spiral valves of Heister, 1310
Spleen, 1423–1445
abscess of, 1430t, 1436
accessory, 1424, 1425f
anatomy of, 1424–1426, 1425f, 1426f
cysts of, 1430t, 1436–1437, 1437f
embryology of, 1424
enlargement of. See Splenomegaly
functions of, 1428
historical studies of, 1423–1424
imaging of, 1428–1429
infections of, 1436
mobilization in emergent abdominal 
exploration, 189, 189f
physiology and pathophysiology of, 
1426–1428
pseudocysts of, 1437
red pulp of, 1425–1426, 1426f
sequestration of platelets in, 91, 93, 
1428
splenectomy of, 1429–1445. See also 
Splenectomy
suspensory ligaments of, 1425, 1425f
trauma of, 183f, 206–207
autologous transplantation in, 206, 
206f
in children, 1644, 1644t
grading scale on, 183t, 1644, 1644t
hemorrhage in, 206, 206f
inadvertent intraoperative, 1443
nonoperative management in, 206
splenectomy or splenorrhaphy in, 
206–207
tumors of, splenectomy or 
splenorrhaphy in, 1437
wandering, 1438
white pulp of, 1426, 1426f
Splenectomy, 1429–1445
in bone marrow or myeloproliferative 
disorders, 1435–1436
complications of, 207, 1444
deep vein thrombosis prevention in, 
1439
hand-assisted, 1441, 1443
historical aspects of, 1424
indications for, 1429–1438, 1430t
infections after, 207
antibiotics in, 1445
overwhelming, 1444–1445
vaccinations in prevention of,  
1439–1440, 1445
laparoscopic, 1440–1441, 1440f, 1441f, 
1442f
double-access technique, 1440
open technique, 1439–1440, 1439f
outcome in, 1443–1445, 1444t, 1445t
partial, 1443
in platelet disorders, 1432–1434
preoperative evaluation in, 1428
preoperative preparation in, 1439
in red blood cell disorders, 1429–1432
robotic approach in, 1443
in trauma of spleen, 206–207
in white blood cell disorders,  
1434–1435
Splenic artery, 1425
anatomy of, 1345
aneurysm of, 1430t, 1438
angiography of, 1429
distributed type, 1425
embolization of, 1429, 1438
magistral type, 1425
Splenic index, 1428
Splenic vein thrombosis, 1438
gastric varices in, 1088
in pancreatitis, 1379
Splenocolic ligament, 1425, 1425f
division in open splenectomy, 1439, 
1439f
Splenomegaly, 1427f, 1428
differentiated from hypersplenism, 1427
in Gaucher’s disease, 1437–1438
in myeloproliferative disorders, 1435
in portal hypertension, 1438
in sarcoidosis, 1438
Splenorenal bypass in renal artery 
occlusive disease, 869–870
Splenorenal ligament, 1425
Splenorenal shunt in portal hypertension 
and gastroesophageal varices, 
1283, 1283f
Splenorrhaphy in trauma of spleen, 206
Splints in hand and wrist injuries, 1798, 
1799f, 1805
Spondylolisthesis, 1771
lumbar, 1739, 1740f
Spondylosis, cervical, 1740, 1741f
Sports injuries
of acromioclavicular joint, 1766–1767
of knee, 1768
medicine for, 1765
Sprains of acromioclavicular joint,  
1766–1767
Squamous cell carcinoma
anal and perianal, 1218
of breast, 556
2058
Index
Squamous cell carcinoma (Cont.):
of head and neck, 578–594
of lung, 616–617
radiation therapy, 487
of skin, 487, 487f
in hand, 1817, 1817f
Moh’s microsurgery in, 487
of trachea, 610
of vagina, 1697
Squamous dysplasia of lungs, 613–614
Squamous intraepithelial lesions, anal, 
1217–1218
Square root sign in chronic constrictive 
pericarditis, 774
Stab avulsion technique in varicose veins, 
929–930, 930f
Stab wounds, 172f, 174
abdominal, 180–181
diagnostic peritoneal lavage in,  
180–181, 180f, 181t
hemorrhage and persistent hypotension 
in, 172
removal of weapon in, 172
Staging of tumors, 300–301
of adrenal gland, 1584, 1584t
of breast, 531, 531t–532t, 533t
and prognosis, 544
and treatment options, 536–544
of cervix uteri, 1698, 1698t
colorectal, 1209–1212, 1211t
of endometrium, 1701, 1701t
of esophagus, 1004–1005, 1006t
treatment decisions based on, 1005
of gallbladder, 1334
of head and neck, 580, 581t
of liver in children, 1642, 1642t
of lungs, 633–635, 634t
and treatment, 637–645, 638–645
in melanoma, 488
in mesothelioma, 688, 689t
ovarian, 1701–1702, 1703t
of pancreas, 1395, 1397t
preoperative, 304
in rhabdomyosarcoma, 1640, 1640t
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1470–1472
of stomach, 1080, 1080t
in thymoma, 675, 675t
of thyroid, 1544t
papillary, 1543
of vagina, 1697, 1697t
of vulva, 1696–1697, 1696t
in Wilms’ tumor, 1639
Stamm gastrostomy, 1090, 1090f
Stanford classification of aortic dissection, 
807, 809f
Staphylococcal infections
antibiotic therapy in, 143t–145t
breast abscess in, 506
methicillin-resistant, 143t–145t, 155
methicillin-sensitive, 143t–145t
scalded skin syndrome in, 477
Stapled techniques
in hemorrhoidectomy, 1224
in intestinal anastomosis, 1190f, 1191, 
1191f
Starling’s law, 402
Starnes procedure in Ebstein’s anomaly, 
720
Starvation, metabolism in, 44–46, 45f
STAT (signal transducer and activator of 
transcription), 30, 34–35, 34f
Status epilepticus, 1715
Steatorrhea in chronic pancreatitis, 1372
Stellate cells, pancreatic, 1367–1368
Stem cells, 456, 456f
cancer, 285
introduction of the targeting vector, 465
transplantation of, 358
Stent grafts, 836–837, 838f
in abdominal aortic aneurysm, 850, 
853–857, 854f
compared to open repair, 857–858
complications of, 855–856, 859
devices available for, 855, 857–858
endoleaks in, 855–856, 858–859, 
858f, 859t
endotension phenomenon in, 859
in aortic dissection, 813, 815, 816
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 880–881
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 895
complications of, 897
in thoracic aortic aneurysm, 797, 802, 
803–804
complications of, 805–806
endoleaks in, 806
Stent placement, 430–432, 432f
in aortic aneurysm, 797, 802, 803–804
complications of, 805–806
endoleaks in, 806
in aortic dissection, 813, 815, 816
in aortic injuries, 201
in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 879–881
biliary
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1337
in chronic pancreatitis, 1380, 1381f
in pancreatic cancer, 1400, 1400f, 
1406
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
842–843, 845–847
approved stents in, 845, 847t
compared to endarterectomy,  
842–843
complications of, 846–847
contraindications to, 845, 846t
embolic protection devices in,  
845–846, 846t
technique in, 845–846, 846f
in coronary artery disease, 742
in esophagus
in cancer, 1008
in caustic injury, 1022, 1022f
indications for, 431, 836
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 894–895
compared to surgical treatment, 900
complications of, 897, 897f
in mesenteric artery occlusive disease, 
864–865
in pancreatic pseudocyst, 1377, 1378f
in renal artery occlusive disease
clinical results in, 871–872, 871f, 
872t
technique in, 870
types of vascular stents in, 431–432, 
836, 837f
balloon-expandable, 836, 837f
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
845, 847t
drug-eluting, 432, 836
self-expanding, 432, 432f, 836, 837f
ureteral
prior to colorectal surgery, 1195
in trauma of ureter, 1660
in upper urinary tract obstruction, 
1666
Stereotactic radiosurgery, 1749
in arteriovenous malformations, 1749
with gamma knife, 1749
in intracranial metastasis, 1749
with linear accelerator, 1749
in liver tumors, 1296
proton beam, 1749
in vestibular schwannoma, 1749
Sterilization procedures, tubal, 
laparoscopic technique, 1689
Sternoclavicular dislocation, 1759
Sternotomy
in chest trauma, 188
in coronary artery bypass surgery, 745
in goiter, 1554, 1554f
in hyperparathyroidism, 1569–1570
in mediastinal mass biopsy, 673
Sternum fractures, 203
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 477
Stewart-Hamilton equation, 404
Stewart-Treves syndrome, 493
STI571. See Imatinib
St. Jude heart valves, 749, 750f, 761f
STK11 in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 290t
Stomach, 1035–1095
acid secretion of, 1041–1044. See also 
Acid secretion, gastric
alarm symptoms in, 1050t, 1059
anatomy of, 1035–1040, 1037f
histologic, 1039–1041, 1040f
lymphatic, 1038, 1039f
vascular, 1037–1038, 1038f
balloon placement in, for weight loss in 
obesity, 1131
banding of, for weight loss in obesity, 
1108–1112. See also Gastric 
banding
bezoars in, 1089
blood supply of, 1037–1038, 1038f
bypass surgery. See Gastric bypass 
surgery, Roux-en-Y
cancer of, 1074–1086
carcinogenesis in, 1076f
chemotherapy in, 1083
clinical manifestations of, 1079–1080
diagnostic evaluation in, 1080–1081
differentiated from peptic ulcer 
disease, 1080
diffuse form, 1074
early, 1078, 1079f, 1079t
endoscopic ultrasound in, 1051, 1080
epidemiology of, 275, 275t, 278t, 
279f, 1074, 1075f
etiologies of, 1074–1078
fungating, 1078
gastrectomy in, 1081–1082, 1081f, 
1082f
endoscopic, 1083–1084
reconstruction after, 1081, 1082f
survival rates in, 1082, 1082t
in gastrectomy remnant, 1078
genetic factors in, 1075–1076, 1077t, 
1078
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 293, 
1076f
risk for, 1074–1075
hereditary diffuse, 288t, 292
histologic subtypes of, 1078–1079, 
1079t
intestinal form, 1074
lymphadenectomy in, 1038,  
1082–1083
mortality rates in, 1075t
pathology in, 1078–1079
polypoid, 1078
prognosis in, 1084
radiation therapy in, 1083
risk factors for, 1074–1078, 1075t
scirrhous, 1078
2059
Index
screening for, 1084
staging of, 1079, 1080t
treatment, 1081–1083
ulcerative, 1078
World Health Organization 
classification of, 1079, 1079t
carcinoid tumors of, 1085–1086
composition of secretions, 69t
diagnosis of disorders, 1050–1053
Dieulafoy’s lesion of, 1089
diverticula of, 1089, 1089f
dysplasia of, adenocarcinoma 
development in, 1078
ectasia of, 1088, 1088f
electrical stimulation device implanted 
in obesity treatment, 1129–1130
endocrine cells of, 1041, 1042f, 1042t
enterochromaffin-like cells of, 1040, 
1043
epithelial cells of, 1039–1040, 1041f, 
1042t
surface, 1039–1040, 1044–1045
as esophageal substitute, 1024–1025
in composite with colon and jejunum, 
1025
foreign bodies in, 1089–1090
gastrectomy of. See Gastrectomy
gastritis of. See Gastritis
gastrointestinal stromal tumors of, 1074, 
1084–1085, 1086f
gastrostomy of, 1090
hemorrhage from, 1038, 1087–1088, 
1090
historical aspects of surgery, 1035, 
1036t
hormones of, 1045–1047
hypertrophic gastropathy of, 1088
innervation of, 1038–1039, 1039f, 1047f
and motility, 1047
intestinal metaplasia of, 1077, 1078f
intrathoracic, in hiatal hernia, 980, 981f, 
982
laparoscopy of, 1095
in cancer diagnosis, 1080–1081
leiomyoma of, 1086–1087
lipomas of, 1087
lymphoma of, 1074, 1084
in Helicobacter pylori infections, 
1054, 1084
treatment algorithm on, 1085f
Mallory-Weiss tear of, 1090
motility and emptying of, 1047–1050, 
1048f, 1050f
cholecystokinin in, 1049, 1049f
disorders in, 1087
postoperative, 1093
drugs affecting, 1050, 1050t
emptying studies of, 963
liquid, 1049–1050, 1050f
solid, 1050
intracellular electrical activity in, 
1048, 1048f
migrating motor complex in,  
1048–1049
nutrient composition affecting, 1049
pylorus functions in, 1049
segmental, 1047–1049
testing of, 963, 1053
mucosa of, 1039, 1040f
barrier function of, 1044–1045,  
1044t
muscularis externa of, 1041
outlet obstruction in peptic ulcer 
disease, 1061, 1068–1069
pH monitoring of, 963–964
with esophageal pH monitoring, 963, 
964f
physiology of, 1041–1050
polyps of, 1076–1077, 1077f
premalignant conditions of, 1076, 1077f
pyloric stenosis of, hypertrophic, 1613–
1614, 1614f
submucosa of, 1041
tonometry in shock, 131
trauma of, 207
damage control surgery in, 195
emergent abdominal exploration in, 
191
ulcers of
in peptic ulcer disease, 1053–1073. 
See also Peptic ulcer disease
risk for gastric cancer in, 1077f, 1078
stress, 1073–1074
varices of, 1088. See also Varices, 
gastroesophageal
volvulus of, 1090, 1090f
watermelon, 1088
Stoma procedures. See Ostomy procedures
Stool
continence of, 1180
disorders of, 1185. See also 
Incontinence, fecal
fat levels in chronic pancreatitis, 1374
laboratory studies of, 1182–1183
occult blood in, 1182, 1183
in colorectal cancer, 1182, 1183, 
1208–1209, 1208t
Stoppa repair of inguinal hernia, 1509
Storage disorders, splenectomy in,  
1437–1438
Storage pool disease of platelets, 89
Strawberry tongue, 571
Streptococcal infections
antibiotic therapy in, 143t–145t
pharyngitis in, 571
Streptokinase in venous thromboembolism, 
924
Stress
gastritis and gastric ulcers in,  
1073–1074
hormone response in, 19–23, 113
peptic ulcer disease in, 1058
Stress fibers, 246
Stress testing, cardiac, 738
Stress urinary incontinence
in obesity, 1126
surgery for, 1695
Stricturoplasty in Crohn’s disease, 1157, 
1157f, 1198, 1199f
Stroke volume, 404–405
Stromal cell tumors, 1704
Stromal tumors, gastrointestinal,  
1481–1485. See also 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors
Stuart-Prower factor (factor X), 86, 87, 
88, 99t
deficiency of, 89, 99t
laboratory tests of, 103
Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene 
(STAR) trial, 514
Sturge-Weber syndrome, 1850, 1852f
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
in aneurysm rupture, 1730–1731, 1730f, 
1730t
angiography in, 1731, 1731f
coil occlusion in, 1731
Hunt-Hess grading system for, 1730, 
1730t
vasospasm in, 1731
in arteriovenous malformations, 1731
Subcarinal lymph nodes, 611
in lung cancer, 632, 632f
Subclavian artery flap in aortoplasty for 
aortic coarctation, 705
Subclavian vein
as access for pulmonary artery 
catheterization, 402
anatomy of, 916
thrombosis of, 928–929
Subclavicular lymph nodes, 502–503
Subcutaneous tissue
benign tumors of, 485–486
infections of, 483–485
injuries of, 477–482
Subglottis
anatomy of, 580, 589, 589f
tumors of, 590, 591
laryngeal preservation techniques in 
treatment of, 591
Sublingual gland tumors, 599
Submandibular gland tumors, 599,  
600
Submucosal glands, bronchial, 617
salivary gland-type tumors of, 617
Submucosa of small intestine, 1139
Substance abuse of alcohol. See Alcohol 
use and alcoholism
Suburethral sling procedure in stress 
urinary incontinence, 1695
Succinylcholine, 1901
malignant hyperthermia from, 1917
Suckling, Charles, 1897
Sucrose digestion and absorption, 1141, 
1142f
Suction lipectomy, 1883, 1885, 1886f
Sufentanil, 1900
Sugiura procedure in portal hypertension 
and variceal bleeding, 1283
Sulfasalazine in inflammatory bowel 
disease, 1196
Sunburns, 478
Sun exposure
lip cancer in, 579
skin injury in, 478, 486
cancer associated with, 295, 478, 486
of hand, 1818
keratosis in, 486
Sunitinib, 309, 310t
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 1476, 
1483
Superior sulcus tumors, 623
Supracolic injuries, 189–190
Supraglottis
anatomy of, 580, 589, 589f
tumors of, 590, 591
Supralevator space, 1227
abscess of, 1229
Supraspinatus tendon impingement, 1766
Surgeons OverSeas Assessment of Surgical 
Need (SOSAS) survey,  
1957–1958
Surgery, leadership. See Leadership in 
surgery
Surgical care
advanced care in resource poor areas, 
1976–1977
cost-effectiveness of, 1973–1974
factors affecting utilization and outcome 
of, 1973–1976, 1974f
preventive role, 1972
vision of, 3–4
Surgical Care Improvement Project, 374, 
375t
Surgical counts, in prevention of retained 
surgical items, 378
2060
Index
Surgical site infections, 142, 149f,  
152–154, 255–256, 374, 389
in appendicitis, 1257
in femoropopliteal bypass graft, 898
incidence of, 374
prevention and treatment of, 142,  
255–256, 257t–258t, 374, 389
quality improvement efforts related to, 
147, 148t, 374
rates, 148t
risk factors for, 147, 147t
surveillance for, 148
Suture techniques, 264
Swallowing
barium studies of, 950–951, 953f
innervation of, 948
motility disorders of, 986–995
peristalsis in, 948
pharyngoesophageal phase of, 986–990, 
987f, 988f
physiology of, 947–949, 947f
pressures in, 947–948, 947f, 948f
rehabilitation of, in laryngeal cancer, 
592
sequence of events in, 947, 947f
video- and cineradiography of, 955, 961, 
961f
Swan-Ganz catheters, pulmonary artery 
rupture from, 381
Sweat glands, 475
Swenson, Orvar, 1624
Swenson procedure in Hirschsprung’s 
disease, 1626, 1626f
Swimmer’s ear, 565
Symmastia, 500
Sympathetic nervous system, 1711
of anorectum, 1179
of colon, 1177
of liver, 1268–1269
of pancreas, 1346
in shock response, 113
of stomach, 1039, 1047
of thyroid gland, 1525
Symphysis pubis, 1672, 1674
Synchronous neoplasm, 580
Syncope
in aortic stenosis, 758
differential diagnosis in, 736
Syndactyly, 1823, 1824f
Syndesmosis of ankle, 1764
Synergistic effect of drugs, 1898
Synovial sarcoma, 1818
Synovitis of distal radioulnar joint, 1808
SYNTAX trial, 743
Syphilis, 1232
aortic aneurysm in, 788
genital ulcers in, 1678, 1679t
pharyngitis in, 571
Syringomyelia, 1739
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome. See Inflammatory 
response, systemic syndrome in
Systems-based practice, as core 
competency, 4t
T
T cells, 38–39, 39f
allorecognition by, 324
helper, 39f
in small intestine immune function, 
1144
in transplant rejection, 324
in wound healing, 243–244
Tachycardia
in trauma, 170
ventricular, 736
Tacrolimus, 325t, 326t, 327t, 328
Takayasu’s arteritis, 788, 901, 901t
Talipes equinovarus, congenital, 1783
Talus fracture, 1764
Tamoxifen in breast cancer, 537, 552–553
early invasive, 539
in elderly, 1932
in prevention, 315, 513–514, 516, 
552–553
Tamponade, cardiac
diagnosis of, 128–129, 167, 167f
obstructive shock in, 128
in trauma, 166–167
treatment of, 128–129, 167–168
emergency department thoracotomy 
in, 167–168, 167t, 168f–169f
pericardiocentesis in, 129, 167, 167f
Tapeworm infections, hydatid disease in, 
1285
Targeted therapies in cancer, 309, 310t, 
1476
Tarsal fractures, 1765
TATA boxes, 448, 449f
Taussig-Bing syndrome, 722, 723–724, 
723f
Tazobactam with piperacillin, 143t
T-cell lymphotropic virus infections, 
tumors associated with, 295t
Team approach
communication in, 368–369
in minimally invasive surgery,  
419–420
in operating room, 369, 369f, 370t
Technetium-99m radionuclide scans
in cardiac disorders, 739
of esophageal transit, 955
of thyroid, 1530
Teeth and dental occlusion in mandibular 
reconstruction, 1853, 1854f, 
1863
Telementoring and teleconsultation, 437
Telescopes in minimally invasive surgery, 
424, 426f, 427f
Telesurgery, 430
Temporal arteritis, 788, 901
Temporal bone
fractures of, 578, 578f
facial nerve injuries in, 576, 578
longitudinal, 578, 578f
transverse, 578, 578f
tumors of, 594–595
reconstructive surgery in, 594–595
resection techniques in, 594, 594f
Temporal lobe
anatomy of, 1710
anterior lobectomy in epilepsy, 1746
Temsirolimus, 310t
Tendons
in hand, 1791. See also Hand, tendons in
healing of, 251
in rotator cuff, impingement of, 1766, 
1766f
Tenecteplase in venous thromboembolism, 
924
Teniae coli, 1176
Tenodesis maneuver in tendon injuries of 
hand, 1798
Tenosynovitis of hand and wrist flexor, 
1811–1813, 1812f, 1813f
Tensor fascia latae myocutaneous flap in 
pressure ulcers, 1881, 1881f
Teratocarcinoma, mediastinal, 679
Teratoma, 1641
of central nervous system, 1737
cervical, ex utero intrapartum therapy 
(EXIT) procedure in, 1645, 
1645f
mediastinal, 679
ovarian, 1637, 1641, 1703
retroperitoneal, 1641
retrorectal, 1217
sacrococcygeal, 1641, 1641f
thoracic, 1641
Terminal illness. See End-of-life care
Tessier classification of craniofacial clefts, 
1844, 1846f
Tessier, Paul, 1844
Testicular feminization syndrome, 1637
Testis
anatomy of, 1653
bell-clapper deformity of, 1662
cancer of, 1654–1655, 1654f
in cryptorchidism, 1636, 1654
epidemiology of, 275t, 278t
orchiectomy in, 1655
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection 
in, 1654–1655
ectopic, 1635
infections of, 1665
torsion of, 1662–1663
trauma of, 1660–1661
in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
undescended, 1635–1636
cancer risk in, 1636, 1654
embryology in, 1635
two-stage repair in, 1636
Tetanus prophylaxis in trauma, 186, 264
Tetany in hypocalcemia, 1574
Tetracaine in local anesthesia, 1899t, 1902, 
1903t
Tetracyclines, 145t
Tetralogy of Fallot, 724–726
anatomy in, 724–726, 724f
classic presentation in, 724
operative repair in, 724–725, 725f
results of, 724–725
Thalamus, anatomy of, 1710
Thalassemia, 1430t, 1432
Thallium-201 scans of myocardial 
perfusion, 739
Thecomas, 1704
The Global Initiative for Emergency 
and Essential Surgical Care 
(GIEESC), 1964–1967, 
1965f–1967f
The Himalayan cataract project (HCP), 
1971, 1972f
Themacrocysts of breast, 508
The National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network, 1477
Thermal agents for local hemostasis, 95
Thermal injuries of skin, 480–481, 
481f–482f
Thermodilution technique for cardiac 
output measurement, 403–404
Thermoregulation
in children and infants, 1601
postoperative disorders of, 393
Thiazide diuretics, hypercalcemia from, 
1562
Thigh flap, anterolateral, in head and neck 
reconstruction, 601
Thigh lift procedure, 1887
Third-space fluid losses, 79, 110
Thirst in hypernatremia, 70
Thoracentesis
in empyema, 684–685
in pleural effusions, 680
Thoracic aortic aneurysms, 785–806
2061
Index
aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome, 788
aortic root replacement in, 793–795, 
794f
cardiopulmonary bypass perfusion 
strategies in, 797, 798f, 799f
clinical history in, 789
clinical manifestations in, 789
descending, 803–804
diagnostic evaluation in, 789–791
distal, 799–804
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 787
elephant trunk repair in, 795, 798f, 799f
reversed, 802, 802f
endovascular repair in, 792–793, 797, 
803–804
complications of, 805–806
endoleaks in, 806, 806t
outcome of, 819
etiology and pathogenesis in, 787–788, 
787t
familial, 787–788
genetic factors in, 787, 792
graft replacement in, 793, 794f
hybrid approach to repair of, 797–799, 
800f, 803f, 804, 805f–806f
incidence of, 785
indications for surgery in, 792
management algorithm on, 791f
in Marfan’s syndrome, 787, 789, 792, 
793, 795
open repair in, 792–793, 799–803, 804
outcome of, 819–820
outcome of surgery in, 816–820
preoperative assessment and preparation 
in, 793
proximal, 793–799
risk for dissection and rupture in, 787
saccular, 789
severity of disease, 792
spinal cord and visceral protection 
during repair of, 801, 801t
Thoracic artery
as graft in coronary artery bypass 
surgery, 743–744
internal, 1497
Thoracic duct
anatomy of, 685, 686f
chylothorax in injury of, 685
functions of, 685
Thoracic outlet syndrome
arterial, 829
venous, 928
Thoracic spine
intervertebral disc herniation in, 1740, 
1771
stenosis of, 1771
trauma of, 1722
clay shoveler’s injury in, 1770
fractures in, 1770–1772
orthotic devices in, 1726
Thoracic surgery
approaches to, 642–644
pain in, 645f
video-assisted. See Video-assisted 
thoracic surgery
Thoracic trauma. See Chest trauma
Thoracofemoral bypass in aortoiliac 
occlusive disease, 878
Thoracoscopy, 633
access for, 421
in esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula, 1610
in lung cancer, 631, 632
physiology in, 419
in pneumothorax, 650
positioning of patients in, 421f
Thoracotomy
anterolateral, 188, 188f
in chest trauma, 188, 188f, 201
clamshell, 188, 188f
in ductus arteriosus patency, 704, 704f
in emergency department
algorithm on use of, 168f
in cardiac tamponade, 167–168, 167t, 
168f–169f
indications and contraindications for, 
167–168, 167t
technique in, 167–168, 168f–169f
lateral, 674
in lung cancer, 629, 631
in elderly, 1934
in lung transplantation, 357
in mediastinal masses, 674
pain in, 645f
posterolateral, 188
trap door procedure, 188
Thrombasthenia, 89
Thrombectomy
in arterial thrombosis, percutaneous 
technique, 888
in bypass graft, 888
in deep vein thrombosis, 924–925
Thrombin, 85, 86, 87, 88
direct inhibitors of, 922
in topical hemostatic agents, 96
Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, 
87, 88
Thromboangiitis obliterans, 906,  
1822–1823
Thrombocythemia, essential, 289t, 1430t, 
1435
Thrombocytopenia, 90–91, 1428
bleeding in, intraoperative or 
postoperative, 104
heparin-induced, 90–91, 95, 389, 741, 922
in burns, 233
immune, 90–91
in liver disease, 93
platelet administration in, 91, 388
and purpura
idiopathic or immune, 90, 90t
splenectomy in, 1429, 1430t, 
1432–1434, 1444, 1444t, 1445t
thrombotic, 90, 91
splenectomy in, 1430t, 1434
in transfusions, 104
Thrombocytosis, 92
Thromboelastography, 93, 103–104, 103f, 
123
Thromboembolism. See Thrombosis and 
thromboembolism
Thrombolytic therapy
in lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 887, 887t
in mesenteric ischemia, catheter-directed 
therapy in, 865
in venous thromboembolism, 922–923
Thrombomodulin, 88
Thrombophlebitis
migrans, 927
Mondor’s disease in, 507
superficial vein, 927–928
Thromboplastin, 103
Thromboplastin time, activated partial, 87, 
102, 103
Thrombopoietin, 93
Thrombosis and thromboembolism
in aortic valve replacement, 761
in aortoiliac reconstruction, 878
arterial
of carotid artery, 1728
in kidney transplantation, 339
limb ischemia in, 881, 886
in bypass graft, 888
drug therapy in, 887
surgical treatment in, 888
in liver transplantation, 351
mesenteric, 860, 863, 1167
surgical repair in, 864
in pancreas transplantation, 343
of ulnar artery, 1822
in free tissue transfer, 1838, 1838t, 1839
in kidney transplantation, 339
in liver transplantation, 351
in pancreas transplantation, 343
in thrombocytopenic purpura, 1434
venous, 918–927
in burns, 233
diagnosis of, 919–921
duplex ultrasonography in, 918, 920, 
920f
effort, 928
epidemiology of, 918
in general surgery, 924–925
genetic factors in, 918–919
hepatic vein, Budd-Chiari syndrome 
in, 1283, 1284
incidence of, 374
in laparoscopy, 418
in liver transplantation, 351
mesenteric, 929, 1167
in pancreas transplantation, 343
in pancreatitis, 1379
paradoxical arterial embolism in, 886
portal vein, 351, 1379, 1439
prevention of, 374, 375t, 386,  
925–927, 926t–927t
in bariatric surgery, 1105
risk factors for, 918–919, 918t, 919t
and prophylaxis guidelines, 919t, 
925–927, 926t–927t
risk scoring systems, 919
secondary, 918
signs and symptoms in, 919
in splenectomy, 1439
splenic vein, 1088, 1379, 1438
spontaneous, 918
in trauma, 186
treatment of, 921–925
in upper extremity, 928–929, 928f
vena cava filter placement in, 386, 
924, 925f, 927, 1105
Thrombospondin, 86, 535
Thromboxane, 31, 31f, 32t, 85
Thrombus, tumor, in renal cell carcinoma, 
1656, 1657f
Thymoglobulin in immunosuppressive 
therapy, 325
Thymolipoma, 676–677, 676f
Thymomas, 675–676, 675f, 675t
biopsy in, 675
incidence of, 673t
invasive, 675
in myasthenia gravis, 675
signs and symptoms in, 674t
staging of, 675, 675t
and survival rates, 675, 675f
Thymus gland, 670, 671f, 674
cysts of, 679
hyperplasia of, 674–675
tumors of, 675–676, 675f, 675t
Thyroglobulin, 1525–1526
serum levels of, 1529
after thyroidectomy for thyroid 
cancer, 1548
2062
Index
Thyroglossal duct, 1521
cysts of, 598, 1521–1522, 1602
persistence as pyramidal lobe, 1522
Thyroid arteries, anatomy of, 1523–1524, 
1524f, 1525f
Thyroidectomy, 1551–1556
in anaplastic carcinoma of thyroid, 1551
complications of, 384, 1556
hypoparathyroidism in, 1574
in follicular carcinoma of thyroid,  
1545–1546, 1545f
in hyperthyroidism, 1533
subtotal procedure in, 1533
in lymphoma of thyroid, 1551
in medullary carcinoma of thyroid, 1550
minimally invasive, 1553f, 1554
operative procedure in, 1551–1556, 
1552f
in papillary carcinoma of thyroid,  
1543–1544, 1545f
in solitary thyroid nodule, 1540
Thyroid gland, 1521–1556
anatomy of, 1523–1525, 1523f
lymphatic, 1525, 1527f
nerves in, 1524–1525, 1524f
vascular, 1523–1524
antibodies to, 1529
autoregulation of, 1526
benign disorders of, 1530–1537
cancer of, 1540–1556, 1937
anaplastic, 1544t, 1550–1551, 1551f
chemotherapy in, 1548, 1551
in elderly, 1937
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
278t, 618f
familial, 1537, 1539t, 1549t, 1550
follicular, 1544–1546, 1544t, 1545f
diagnosis of, 1544–1545
pathology in, 1545
prognosis, 1545–1546
treatment of, 1545–1546
follow-up in, 1548–1551, 1550
genetic factors in. See Genetic 
factors, in thyroid cancer
Hürthle cell, 1546
medullary, 1544t, 1549–1550,  
1549t, 1570
metastatic from other sites, 1551
in multiple endocrine neoplasia,  
293, 1570
papillary, 1542–1544, 1543f, 1544t
in elderly, 1937
pathology in, 1542, 1543f
prognostic indicators in, 1542–
1543
treatment of, 1543–1544
postoperative management in, 1546–
1548, 1548–1551
radiation therapy in, 1548, 1550, 1551
radioiodine therapy in, 1546–1548, 
1547f
radionuclide scans in, 672, 674t
recurrent, 1547f, 1548
risk factors for, 1537
staging of, 1544t
cysts of, 1540
ectopic tissue of, 679, 1522–1523
embryonic development of, 1521, 1522f, 
1602
abnormalities in, 1521–1523
evaluation of disorders, 1528–1530
follicular cells of, 1525, 1528f
function tests of, 1528–1529
preoperative, in bariatric surgery, 
1106
goiter of, 1536–1537
histology of, 1525, 1528f
historical surgery of, 1521
hormones of, 1525–1528
functions of, 1527–1528
regulation of, 1526, 1529f
synthesis of, 1525–1526, 1529f
hyperthyroidism, 1530–1534. See also 
Hyperthyroidism
hypothyroidism, 1534–1535. See also 
Hypothyroidism
imaging studies of, 1529–1530
in cancer, 672, 674t, 1548–1549
in iodine metabolism, 1525
lateral aberrant, 1522–1523, 1542
lingual, 1522
lymphoma of, 1536, 1551
nodules of
in elderly, 1937
hyperthyroidism in, 1533
solitary, 1537–1540
diagnosis of, 1538–1540
history, 1537
physical examination in, 1537
treatment of, 1539f, 1540
physiology of, 1525–1528
postoperative disorders of, 392–393
pyramidal lobe of, 1522
thyroidectomy of. See Thyroidectomy
thyroiditis of, 1529, 1535–1536
Thyroiditis, 1535–1536
Hashimoto’s, 1529, 1535–1536
subacute, 1535
suppurative/acute, 1535
Thyroid-stimulating hormone, 1526, 1529f
serum levels of, 1529
in cancer of thyroid, 1548
in hypothyroidism, 1534
in solitary thyroid nodule, 1540
Thyroid storm, 1534
Thyrotoxicosis
postoperative, 393
thyroid function tests in, 1529
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone, 1526, 
1529, 1529f
Thyroxine, 1526
free, 1529
replacement therapy
in hypothyroidism, 1534–1535
in thyroid cancer, 1548
serum levels in hypothyroidism, 1534
total, 1529
Tibia
fractures of, 1762, 1764
distal, 1764
hemorrhage in, 173
open, 1758f
pilon, 1764
in plateau, 1762
reconstructive surgery in, 1877t
in shaft, 1764
transverse, 1757f
osteosarcoma of, 1779
Tibial artery pulse palpation, 829
Ticarcillin-clavulanate, 143t
Tic douloureux, 1748–1749
Tigecycline, 145t
Tillaux’s sign in mesenteric cysts, 1459
Time management in surgery, 7–8, 8f
Time out protocol, 7
Tinel’s sign in carpal tunnel syndrome, 
1806
Tinidazole in peptic ulcer disease, 1061t
Tissue engineering in coronary artery 
disease, 747
Tissue expansion techniques, 1840
in breast reconstruction, 1840,  
1867–1869, 1869f, 1870f
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor, 88
Tissue heart valves, 749, 749–750, 750f
Tissue plasminogen activator, 88, 283
in arterial vasospasm, 215t
in ischemic stroke, 1728
in venous thromboembolism, 924
TNFR-associated death domain (TRADD), 
36
TNM staging of cancer
adrenocortical, 1584, 1584t
of breast, 531, 531t–532t
colorectal, 1209–1210, 1211t
of head and neck, 580, 581t
of lungs, 633–635, 634t
of stomach, 1079, 1080t
of thyroid, 1543, 1544t
Tobacco use. See also Smoking
head and neck tumors in, 578, 579, 586
Tobin Index in weaning from mechanical 
ventilation, 385
Tobramycin, 144t, 257t
Toker cells, 475
Tolerance to drugs, 1898
Toll-like receptors, 37f
in shock, 115, 117f
TLR4, 37f
Tongue
cancer of, 583, 583f, 587, 1862
reconstructive surgery of, 1862
strawberry, 571
Tonometry, gastric in shock, 131
Tonsillar herniation, 1714f
Tonsillectomy, 571
Tonsillitis, 570, 571
Tonsils, 570
hypertrophy of, 570, 571
infections of, 570, 571
tumors of, 587
Topical hemostatic agents, 96
Topoisomerase II, 307
TORCH infections, 1628
Torsion
of ovarian cyst, 1248, 1637
testicular, 1662–1663
Torticollis, congenital, 1603
Toupet fundoplication, 975–976, 978–979
esophageal myotomy with, 999, 1000, 
1001f
Tourniquet use for local hemostasis, 95, 
166
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 477
Trachea, 605–611
anatomy of, 605, 607f, 608f
blood supply of, 605, 607f
C-rings, 605
fistulas of, 608–609
with esophagus, 609, 1608–1612. See 
also Tracheoesophageal fistula
intubation of. See Endotracheal 
intubation
neoplasms of, 609–611, 611f
stenosis of, postintubation, 607–608, 
608f
trauma of, 163, 164f, 178, 200, 202
iatrogenic, 605, 608f
Trachelectomy, radical, in cervical cancer, 
1698
Tracheobronchial lymph nodes, 611
Tracheobronchial tree
cell types in, 612–613, 613f
histology of, 612–613, 613f
salivary gland-type tumors of, 617
2063
Index
Tracheoesophageal fistula, 608–609, 
1608–1612
anatomic varieties of, 1608–1609, 1608f
in cancer of esophagus, 1004
clinical presentation in, 1609–1610, 
1609f
complications of surgery in, 1611–1612
etiology and pathologic presentation in, 
1609
H-type, 1609, 1609f, 1612
initial management of, 1610
outcome in, 1612
postoperative management in, 1611
in preterm infant, 1610
primary surgical correction of, 1610, 
1611f
recurrent, 1612
single-stage operation for closure of, 
610f
in ventilatory support, 608–609
Tracheoesophageal puncture, for speech 
rehabilitation after laryngectomy, 
592
Tracheoinnominate artery fistula, 608–609, 
609f
emergency management of, 609, 609f
in tracheostomy complications, 382, 
382f, 608–609
Tracheostomy, 602
in burns, 233
complications of, 382, 382f, 602
tracheal stenosis in, 607–608, 608f
tracheoinnominate artery fistula in, 
382, 382f, 608–609
indications for, 602
in trauma, 163
in children, 222
Tracheostomy in burns, 233
Tranexamic acid, in blood transfusion, 97
Transanal endoscopic microsurgery, 434, 
434f
in rectal cancer, 1213
Transanal excision in rectal cancer, 1213
Transanal minimally invasive surgery in 
rectal cancer, 1213
Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society Consensus 
classification
of aortoiliac occlusive disease, 875, 
875f, 875t
of lower extremity arterial occlusive 
disease, 885, 886f, 886t
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(TAVR), 762
Transcription, 279, 443, 444f, 446–447, 
446f
control of, 448, 449f
in eukaryotes, 447
in prokaryotes, 447
Transcription factors, 449
Transfection, 462f, 463
small interfering RNA in, 467
transient, 463
Transformation procedure in recombinant 
DNA technology, 457
Transforming growth factor-α in wound 
healing, 247t
Transforming growth factor-β, 36
signaling pathway, 452–453, 453f
in cancer, 453
in wound healing, 244, 245, 247t
in hypertrophic scars and keloids, 262
Transfusions, 96–102, 1914–1915
ABO blood groups in, 96, 1914
allergic reactions in, 100–101, 102t
in anemia, 98
autologous, 96
of banked whole blood, 96
in burns, 231
in children, 1599–1600
circulatory overload in, 101, 102t
complications of, 100–102, 102t, 388, 
388t
in damage control resuscitation, 98, 100
febrile reactions in, 100, 102t
of fresh whole blood, 96, 184
hemoglobin in, human polymerized, 98
hemolytic reactions in, 101, 102t
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
indications for, 97–98, 184–185, 388
infection transmission in, 102, 388, 388t
massive, 98, 101t
protocol in, 184–185, 186f
thrombocytopenia and hemorrhage 
in, 104
plasma in, fresh-frozen, 97, 184
of platelets, 91, 97, 99t
in hemorrhagic shock, 123
in massive transfusions, 101t
in thrombocytopenia, 91, 388
purpura in, 104
recombinant DNA technology in, 97
red blood cell, 1914–1915
in children, 1599–1600
frozen, 96
in hemorrhagic shock, 122
indications for, 97–98
packed, 96, 98, 184
in resuscitation strategies, 98, 100, 
100t
in thalassemia, 1432
washed/leukocyte-reduced, 96–97
religious beliefs on, 1943
replacement therapy, 96–97
Rh blood groups in, 96, 1914
in sepsis, 154, 155t
tranexamic acid in, 97
typing and cross matching, 96
in variceal bleeding, 1282
Transgenic mice, 463–464, 463f
genotyping of, 464
phenotype analysis of, 464
production of, 464
Translation, 279, 443, 444f, 446, 446f, 447
control of, 448
Translocation of bacteria, 151
Transoral endoscopic restrictive implant 
system, 1131
Transoral gastroplasty, 1131
Transplantation, 321–358
allotransplants in, 322, 1881–1882, 
1882f
autotransplants in, 322
donors in, 330–332. See also Donors, in 
organ transplantation
of heart. See Heart, transplantation of
historical aspects of, 322–323, 323t
immunobiology in, 323
immunosuppression in, 324–328. See 
also Immunosuppression, in 
transplantation
infection risk in, 329–330
infections and malignancies, 329–330
intestinal, 352–354
in short bowel syndrome, 1172, 1621
of kidney, 334–340, 1976–1977. See 
also Kidneys, transplantation of
of liver, 345–352, 1975. See also Liver, 
transplantation of
of lung, 332, 354–358, 663–664. See 
also Lungs, transplantation of
lymphoproliferative disorder after, 330
organ procurement and preservation in, 
330–334
of pancreas, 340–344. See also 
Pancreas, transplantation of
in poor countries, 1976–1977
rejection in, 324. See also Rejection in 
transplantation
of spleen, autologous, 206, 206f
stem cell, 358
types of, 322
waiting lists for, 321, 322f–323f, 332
xenotransplants in, 322, 358
Transport
active, 1140
passive, 1140
Transposition of great arteries, 720–721
Lecompte maneuver in, 721, 722f
Senning operation in, 721, 721f
Transversalis fascia anatomy, 1496
Transverse abdominal muscles, 1449, 
1451f
Transverse rectus abdominis 
myocutaneous (TRAM) flaps, 
1837
in breast reconstruction, 550, 1869–
1871, 1872f–1873f
free flap in, 1871, 1872f–1873f
pedicle flap in, 1837, 1869–1871
in chest wall reconstruction, 1874, 1875f
conditioning of, 1837
Transversus abdominal plane (TAP) block, 
1916, 1917f, 1918f
Trapezium, anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
Trapezius muscle flap
in chest wall reconstruction, 1874
in head and neck reconstruction, 601
Trapezoid bone anatomy, 1788, 1790f
Trash foot in aortoiliac occlusive disease, 
874, 874f
Trastuzumab, 309, 310t, 454, 1083
in breast cancer, 535, 541, 553–554
Trauma, 161–223
abdominal, 179–181, 203–212. See also 
Abdominal trauma
air embolism in, 171, 172f
airway management in, 161–163
in children, 222
antibiotics in, prophylactic, 185–187
biliary, 1331–1334
in cholecystectomy, 1331,  
1332–1333, 1332f, 1333f
of bladder, 211–212, 1515, 1660, 1705
bloody vicious cycle in, 185, 193, 194f
blunt injuries in, 173–174
in children, 1643
of heart, 127, 171
in burns, 227–236, 1820–1822. See also 
Burns
of carotid artery, 198, 850
operative approach for exposure in, 
187f, 188
transposition repair procedure in, 192, 
193f
cellular response to, 34–36
cervical spine immobilization and 
protection in, 161–163, 1722
of chest, 177–179, 200–203. See also 
Chest trauma
in children, 222–223, 1642–1644. 
See also Children and infants, 
trauma in
coagulopathy in, 93, 94f, 185
in bloody vicious cycle, 185, 193, 
194f
2064
Index
Trauma (Cont.):
of colon, 209–210, 1234–1235. See also 
Colon, trauma of
compartment syndromes in, 215
abdominal, 217–218, 218f–219f
of lower extremity, 215
damage control surgery in, 192–195, 
194f–196f
definition of, 161
of duodenum, 207–209, 208f. See also 
Duodenum, trauma of
in elderly, 221–222, 1934–1935, 1935f
endothelium-mediated, 40–43
of esophagus. See Esophagus, trauma of
of extremities, 181–183
fractures in, 214–215, 1876–1877, 
1876t
reconstructive surgery in, 1876–1877
of facial nerve, 567
of gallbladder, 204, 1331–1332
general principles of management, 
183–195
and global surgery, 1958–1960,  
1968–1969, 1970t
of hand, 1795–1799. See also Hand, 
trauma of
of head. See Head trauma
history-taking in, 173
hormone response to, 19–23
hypothermia in, 186, 193, 194f
initial evaluation and management in, 
161–183
in burns, 227–228
in children, 1642–1643
primary survey in, 161–173
secondary survey in, 173
intensive care management in, 215–217
of kidneys, 211–212, 1658–1659
of liver. See Liver, trauma of
mechanisms and patterns of injury in, 
173–174
in children, 1642
metabolism after, 46f, 47
mortality rate in, 161
of neck, 175–177, 197–200
airway management in, 161–162, 
163f
cervical spine injuries in. See Cervical 
spine, trauma of
operative approaches and exposure in, 
187–192
pelvic, 181
fractures in, 181, 185f, 212–214
penetrating injuries in. See Penetrating 
injuries
of penis, 1661, 1661f
fracture in, 1661, 1661f
priapism in, 1664
of peripheral nerves, 251, 1726–1727
peritoneal adhesions in, 263, 263f
physical examination in, 173
in pregnancy, 218–221, 1691
shock in. See Shock, in trauma
of skin and subcutaneous tissue,  
478–479
soft tissue sarcoma in, 1466
of spine, 1721–1726
of spleen. See Spleen, trauma of
of testis, 1660–1661
tetanus prophylaxis in, 186
thermal protection in, 187
of thoracic and lumbar spine, 1770
of trachea, 163, 164f, 178, 200, 202
acute management of, 608
in intubation, 607–608, 608f
transfusions and resuscitation strategies 
in, 98
of ureters, 212, 1659–1660
of urethra, 212, 1660
of urinary tract, 211–212, 1658–1661
in laparoscopy, 1705
vascular injuries in. See Vascular injuries
wound healing in, 241–268
Treacher Collins syndrome, 1846, 1847f
Tremors
deep brain stimulation in, 1747, 1747f
essential, 1747
in Parkinson’s disease, 1747
Trendelenburg gait, 1772
Trendelenburg’s test, 917–918
Treponema pallidum infections, 1678, 
1679t. See also Syphilis
Trial Assessing Individualized Options for 
Treatment (TAILORx), 302, 536
Triangle of doom, 1499, 1501f
Triangle of pain, 1499, 1501f
Triangular ligaments of liver, 1264f, 1265
Tricarboxylic acid cycle, 47, 48f, 49f, 50
Trichobezoars, 1089, 1089f
Trichomoniasis, vulvovaginitis in, 1677t, 
1680, 1681f
Tricuspid valve disorders, 762–764
annuloplasty in, 763
with aortic valve disease, 763, 764
atresia, 712–716
classification of, 712, 713f
Fontan procedures in, 713–715, 714f
Glenn shunts in, 713–715, 714f
treatment of, 713–715
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 719–720
insufficiency, 762–764
with mitral valve disease, 763, 764
prosthetic replacement in, 764
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 720
stenosis, 762–764
Trigeminal neuralgia, 1748–1749
Triglycerides
long-chain, 46–47, 1142–1143
medium-chain
in enteral nutrition formulas, 47, 1143
metabolism of
in fasting, 44f, 45f
in injury, 46–47, 46f, 47f
in small intestine, 1142–1143, 1143f
serum levels in chronic pancreatitis, 
1365
short-chain, 1143
Triiodothyronine, 1526
free, 1529
functions of, 1527–1528
therapy in thyroid cancer, 1548
total, 1529
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 145t
Triolein breath test in chronic pancreatitis, 
1374
Triquetrum, anatomy of, 1788, 1790f
TRK1 in thyroid cancer, 1541t
Trophoblastic disease, gestational,  
1693–1694
Tropical pancreatitis, 1366–1367
Trousseau’s sign, 72, 73, 1574
Truncus arteriosus, 706–707
chest radiography in, 708
classification of, 706, 706f
repair techniques in, 707
results of, 709–710
survival after repair, 710f
Trypsin, 1142, 1142f, 1347, 1348t
activation of, 1353
Trypsinogen, 1347, 1348t
activation of, 1353–1354
inhibition of, 1347
TSC1 in tuberous sclerosis, 290t
TSC2 in tuberous sclerosis, 290t
Tuberculosis, 654–655, 656f
drug-resistant, 654, 655
hemoptysis in, 655
in HIV infection and AIDS, 654
in kidney transplant recipents, 335
osteomyelitis in, 1745–1746
surgical treatment in, 655, 656t
treatment algorithm for, 655, 656f
Tuberous sclerosis, 290t
Tubular carcinoma of breast, 522
Tuftsin, 1427
Tularemia in biologic warfare, 157
Tumorigenesis, 278–279, 280f
chemical carcinogens in, 293
in head and neck tumors, 580
as multistep process, 453, 580
initiation and promotion phases in, 
580
physical carcinogens in, 293, 295
proliferation and transformation of 
cancer cells in, 453, 454f
in stomach cancer, 1076f
in thyroid cancer, 1540, 1541f, 1541t, 
1542
viral carcinogens in, 295–296, 295t, 
296t
Tumor lysis syndrome, 81, 82
Tumor necrosis factor, 282
in inflammatory bowel disease, 1197
in injury response, 26
in shock response, 116
sources of, 27t
in wound healing, 243, 244
Tumor necrosis factor receptors, 26, 36
TNFR-1, 26, 37f
TNFR-2, 26, 37f
Tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis-
inducing ligand (TRAIL), 282
Tumors, 273–316. See also specific 
anatomic locations
adjuvant therapy in, 273
of adrenal gland, 1583–1585
anal and perianal, 1217–1218
of appendix vermiform, 1257–1259
incidence, 1257–1258, 1258t
of biliary tract, 1334–1338
biology of, 277–285, 281f
angiogenesis in, 283–284
apoptosis alterations in, 281–283
autophagy in, 283
cell cycle dysregulation in, 279, 281f
cell proliferation and transformation 
in, 277–278
invasion in, 283
oncogenes in, 278–279, 279–281
stem cells in, 285
steps in tumorigenesis in, 278–279
therapeutic implications of, 280f
biomarkers of, 301–304. See also 
Biomarkers of tumors
of bladder, 1653–1654
of breast, 511–557
of carotid body, 849–850, 849f
cartilage-forming, 1780
of central nervous system, 1732–1739
of cervix uteri, 1698
chemotherapy in, 306–308, 455.  
See also Chemotherapy
of chest wall, 664–669
in children, 1636–1642
in chronic wounds, 259
2065
Index
circulating tumor cells in, 303–304
colorectal, 1203–1216
diagnosis of, 299–300
dormancy phenomenon in, 285
in elderly, 1931–1934. See also Elderly, 
cancer in
of endometrium, 1698–1701, 1701t
epidemiology of, 274–277
incidence of, 274–277
incidence rates in, 274–277, 275t, 
276t, 277f, 279f
initiation of, 278–279, 280f
mortality rates in, 274–277, 275t, 
276t
survival rates in, 274, 278t
of esophagus, 1003–1018. See also 
Adenocarcinoma, of esophagus
etiology of, 285–296
of fallopian tubes, 1701–1703
fluid and electrolyte balance in, 81–82
of gallbladder, 1293, 1334–1335
genetic factors in, 287–291, 454
and gene therapy, 311f, 312, 455–456
Knudson’s two-hit hypothesis on, 
287, 287f
and surgical prevention, 315
in targeted therapies, 309, 310t
and global surgery, 1958, 1973t
of hand and wrist, 1814–1820
of head and neck, 578–600
of heart, 774–776
heterogeneity, 290f
hormone therapy in, 308–309
hypercalcemia in, 82, 626, 1561
immunotherapy in, 309, 311–312, 
454–455
individualized therapy in, 316
intracranial, 1732–1737
invasive, 283
of kidneys, 1655–1657
of liver, 1289–1291
in children, 1641–1642
classification of, 1288t
incidental discovery of, 1287–1288
of lungs, 623–645
mediastinal, 671–679
mesenteric, 1460
mesothelioma, 687–688
metastasis of, 284–285, 284f. See also 
Metastasis
minimally invasive surgery in, 436
mortality to incidence ratio, 1958, 1959f
multidisciplinary approach to, 304
of omentum, 1457
of ovary, 1636–1637, 1701–1704
of pancreas, 1390–1413
pelvic, 1696–1704
of peripheral nerves, 1744
pleural, 687–690
pleural effusions in, 681t, 682, 683t, 
684t
prevention of, 314–315
prognostic and predictive markers in, 
301–302
of prostate, 1657–1658
radiation therapy in, 313–314. See also 
Radiation therapy
retroperitoneal, 1479–1480, 1479f
retrorectal/presacral, 1217
risk assessment for, 296–297
screening for, 297–299, 298t–299t.  
See also Screening for cancer
serum markers, 302–303
of skin, 485–493
of small intestine, 1159–1162
small intestine obstruction in, 1146, 
1149
of soft tissues, 486, 666–669,  
1465–1487
of spine, 1737–1739, 1738f
of spleen, 1437
staging of, 300–301, 304. See also 
Staging of tumors
of stomach, 1074–1090
surgical approaches to, 273–274, 
304–306
lymph node management in, 304–306
negative surgical margins in, 304
as primary therapy, 273
recent trends and evolving 
technologies in, 316
targeted therapy in, 309, 310t
of testis, 1654–1655
of thyroid, 1540–1556
of trachea, 609–611
transforming growth factor-β signaling 
pathway in, 453
in transplant recipients, 330, 335
trends and evolving technology in, 316
of vulva, 1696–1697
Tumor suppressor genes, 278, 280f
in colorectal cancer, 1204–1205
in hereditary cancer syndromes,  
287–291
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1467–1468
Tunica albuginea, 1652
traumatic rupture of, 1661
Turcot’s syndrome, 1207
Turner’s syndrome, 500
Tylectomy in breast cancer, 547
Tympanoplasty in otitis media, 567
Typhlitis, 1236, 1241
Tyrell, Ross, 1897
Tyrer-Cuzick model on breast cancer risk, 
512
Tyrosine kinase in soft tissue sarcomas, 
1486
Tyrosine kinase receptor, 35f
U
Ubiquitin-proteosome system, 50
Ulcerative colitis, 1195, 1197–1198.  
See also Colitis, ulcerative
Ulcers
of aorta, penetrating, 808, 809
endovascular treatment in, 816
genital, 1678, 1679t
pressure, 260–261
rectal solitary, 1219
of skin, 259, 482, 482f
in arterial ischemia, 259
compared to neuropathic ulcers, 
890t, 891f
of lower extremity, 889, 890t, 
891f
in diabetes mellitus, 260, 267
reconstructive surgery, 1877, 
1879
malignant transformation of, 259, 
260f
neuropathic, compared to ischemic 
ulcers, 890t, 891f
pressure or decubitus. See Pressure 
ulcers
in venous insufficiency, 259–260, 
917, 917f, 930, 931–933
compression therapy in,  
259–260, 931–933
skin substitutes in, 932–933, 
933f
of stomach and duodenum
gastric cancer risk in, 1077f, 1078
in head trauma, 1718
in peptic ulcer disease, 1053–1073. 
See also Peptic ulcer 
disease
postoperative, in Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, 1116
in stress, 1073–1074
Ulna, fractures of, 1760
with radius fracture, 1760
in shaft, 1760
Ulnar artery
anatomy of, 1791–1792
aneurysmal thrombosis of, 1822
atherosclerosis of, 1822
pulse palpation, 1793
Ulnar nerve, 1788
anatomy of, 1792
anesthetic block in hand injuries, 1796, 
1797f
compression at elbow, 1744, 1806
Ultimobranchial bodies, 1521, 1549
Ultrasonography, 918
in abdominal trauma, 182f
in aortic aneurysm, thoracic, 790
in appendicitis, 1246
in arterial disease, 830
in biliary disorders, 1314, 1314f
endoscopic technique, 1316
in brain death, 1721
in breast cancer diagnosis, 527, 528f, 
529f, 530f
in Budd-Chiari syndrome, 1284
cardiac output estimated in, 407
in carotid artery occlusive disease, 
839–840, 840t
in choledocholithiasis, 1321
contrast-enhanced, 1272–1273
Doppler technique. See Doppler 
ultrasonography
endoanal, 1181, 1185, 1185f
endobronchial, in lung cancer, 630
endorectal, 1181, 1182f
in rectal cancer, 1211–1212, 1211f
in esophageal cancer, endoscopic 
technique, 1005, 1008
in fecal incontinence, 1185, 1185f
in gallbladder cancer, 1334
in gallstones, 1314, 1314f, 1319–1320, 
1321f
of hand and wrist, 1794
in inguinal hernia, 1504
laparoscopic, 1325
of liver, 1272–1273, 1273f
elastography, 1273
intraoperative, 1273, 1273f
in lung cancer, 632
in lymphedema, 935
in mesenteric ischemia, 862
in pancreatitis
chronic, 1369, 1370f
endoscopic technique, 1369, 1370f, 
1374
in portal hypertension, 1280
prenatal
in diaphragmatic hernia, 1604, 1604f
in gastroschisis, 1633, 1633f
in ovarian cysts, 1637
in renal artery stenosis, 867–868, 868t
in soft tissue sarcomas, 1468
of spleen, 1428
of stomach, 1051
endoscopic technique in cancer, 1051, 
1080
2066
Index
Ultrasonography (Cont.):
of thyroid, 1530, 1530f
in solitary nodule, 1540
in venous insufficiency, 930, 931f
in venous thromboembolism, 920, 920f
Ultraviolet radiation
lip cancer associated with, 579
skin damage from, 478, 486
cancer associated with, 486
UVA, 478, 486
UVB, 478, 486
UVC, 478
Umbilical hernia, 1455, 1631, 1631f
in elderly, 1923
Umbilical ligament, medial, 1498f
Umbilical vein
graft in femoropopliteal bypass, 899
in portal hypertension, 1281
Unconsciousness in general anesthesia, 
1900
United nations and global surgery, 1963
Universal precautions in blood-borne 
infections, 156
University of Wisconsin solution for organ 
preservation, 332
Unna’s boot in venous insufficiency, 
931–932
Unstirred water layer, 1143
Upper extremity
arteries in, 1791–1792
angiography of, 1794–1795
physical examination of, 829, 1793
compartment syndromes in, 1801
hand disorders of, 1787–1825. See also 
Hand
shoulder in, 1765–1767. See also 
Shoulder
trauma of, 1795–1799
regional pain syndromes in, 1805
veins in, 916
thrombosis of, 928–929, 928f
Urachus, 1453
patent, 1631–1632
Urea breath test for Helicobacter pylori, 
1051, 1053f
Urea nitrogen in blood, and osmolality of 
body fluids, 67, 68
Uremia
platelet dysfunction in, 92
wound healing problems in, 254
Ureterocele, 1667
Ureteroneocystostomy, 337
Ureteropelvic junction obstruction,  
1667
Ureters
anatomy of, 1652, 1674
cancer of, 275t
obstruction of
in calculi, 1666
stent placement in
in obstruction of upper urinary tract, 
1666
prior to colorectal surgery, 1195
in trauma of ureter, 1660
trauma of, 212, 1659–1660
in gynecologic procedures, 1705
Urethra
fetal surgery for anomalies of, 1645
intrinsic sphincter deficiency of, urinary 
incontinence in, 1695
strictures of, 1660, 1665
acute urinary retention in, 1661–1662
trauma of, 212, 1660
anterior, 1660
posterior, 1660
Urethral valve, posterior, 1667
fetal surgery in, 1645
Urethrography, retrograde, in trauma of 
urethra, 1660
Urinary tract, 1651–1668
anatomy of, 1651–1653
bladder in. See Bladder
cancer of, 1653–1658
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
278t, 618f
catheterization of
in acute urine retention, 1661–1662, 
1662f
complications in, 390
for renal monitoring, 410–411
diversion procedures in bladder cancer, 
1653, 1654
emergency disorders of, 1661–1664
infections of, 1664–1665
catheter-related, 390
kidneys in. See Kidneys
obstruction of, 1665–1667
acute urine retention in, 1661–1662
in children, 1667
fetal surgery for, 1645
hydronephrosis in, 1665–1666, 1665f, 
1667
in prostate hyperplasia, benign, 1665
at ureteropelvic junction, 1667
in urethral strictures, 1665
in urolithiasis, 1666
pediatric disorders of, 1667
postoperative disorders of, 388
in nosocomial infections, 152–153
trauma of, 211–212, 1658–1661
in laparoscopy, 1705
Urine
concentration in children, 1599
daily water loss in, 67, 68t
incontinence of
overflow, in acute urinary retention, 
1661
in prostatectomy for prostate cancer, 
1658
stress
in obesity, 1126
surgery for, 1695
output of, 410–411
in kidney transplantation, 339
postoperative, 388
retention of
acute, 1661–1662, 1662f
in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Urinoma formation
in renal trauma, 1659
in ureteral trauma, 212
Urogenital hiatus, 1672
Urokinase, in venous thromboembolism, 
924
Urokinase plasminogen activator, 88, 283
Urolithiasis, 1666
in hyperparathyroidism, 1666
recurrent, 1666
Urology, 1651–1668
Utero-ovarian ligaments, 1675
Uterosacral ligaments, 1674, 1674f
in repair of pelvic organ prolapse, 1695
Uterus
abnormal bleeding from, 1682
endometrial ablation in, 1684
in leiomyomas, 1689
adenomyosis of, 1682
anatomy of, 1674f, 1675
benign disorders of, 1682–1689
cancer of
cervical, 1697–1698
endometrial, 1698–1701
epidemiology of, 275t, 276t, 277f, 
278t, 618f
cervical portion of. See Cervix uteri
endometriosis of, 1689–1690
endometrium of. See Endometrium
hyperplasia of, 1683
hysterectomy of, 1684. See also 
Hysterectomy
hysteroscopy of, 1683–1684
intraepithelial neoplasia of
cervical, 1681
endometrial, 1683
leiomyomas or fibroids of, 1682–1683, 
1683f
polyps of
cervical, 1681
endometrial, 1682
hysteroscopy in, 1684
prolapse of, 1694
sarcoma of, 1481–1482
septum resection in hysteroscopy, 1684
trauma of, 212
in pregnancy, 221
V
Vaccinations
in cancer immunotherapy, 309, 311–312
hepatitis B, 156
smallpox, 157
in splenectomy, 1439–1440, 1445
VACTERLL syndrome, 1609, 1627
Vacuum-assisted wound closure, 149, 266, 
389
in burns of hand, 1822f
Vagina
anatomy of, 1674
biopsy of, 1677
cancer of, 1697
epidemiology of, 275t
staging in, 1697, 1697t
colpocleisis of, 1695
colporrhaphy of, 1694
fistula of, 1678
with bladder, 1678
with colon in diverticulitis, 1203
with rectum, 1231
in Crohn’s disease, 1200
endorectal advancement flap in, 
1231, 1232f
intraepithelial neoplasia of, 1681
microscopy of, 1677
pediatric disorders of, 1636
pH of, 1677t, 1680, 1681f
physical examination of, 1675–1676, 
1676f
prolapse of, 1694
trauma of, 212
in children, 1636
Vaginitis, 1231, 1680
bacterial, 1677t, 1680
candidal, 1677t, 1680
common causes of, 1677t, 1680
treatment algorithm on, 1681f
in trichomoniasis, 1677t, 1680, 1681f
Vaginosis, bacterial, 1677t, 1680
Vagotomy
anemia in, 1094
diarrhea in, 1093
gallstones in, 1094
gastric stasis in, 1093
2067
Index
in peptic ulcer disease
with gastric outlet obstruction, 1069
with hemorrhage, 1065–1066, 1069
highly selective or parietal cell 
procedure, 1062f, 1062t
with perforation, 1068
truncal procedure, 1062–1063, 1062t, 
1063f
weight loss in, 1094
Vagus nerve
in inflammatory response, 19, 19f
preserved in esophagectomy, 1025–1026
stimulation
in epilepsy surgery, 1746
in obesity treatment, 1131
in stomach innervation, 1038–1039, 
1039f
Valentino’s appendicitis, 1252
Valley fever, 659
Valproic acid in pain, 1950t
Valsalva maneuver, 1450
in inguinal hernia, 1503
Valve-sparing root replacement, 761
Valvotomy in congenital aortic stenosis, 
700–701, 700f
balloon technique, 700–701
cardiopulmonary bypass in, 700, 700f
Valvular heart disease, 747–751
aortic, 756–762, 757f. See also Aortic 
valve disorders
in elderly, 1930–1931
aortic, 761, 1930
mitral, 1930
general principles of treatment, 747
indications for surgery in, 747–749
mitral, 751–755. See also Mitral valve 
disorders
multivalve, 764
prosthetic replacement in, 749–750
autografts in, 751
in elderly, 761, 1930–1931
homografts in, 750–751
mechanical valves in, 749, 750f
tissue valves in, 747, 749–750, 750f
repair procedures in, 751
Ross procedure in, 751
surgical options in, 747–749
tricuspid, 712–716, 762–764. See also 
Tricuspid valve disorders
Valvuloplasty, balloon, in mitral stenosis, 
753
Vancomycin, 145t, 257t–258t
enterococcal infections resistant to, 145t
Vandetanib, 310t
Van Praagh classification of truncus 
arteriosus, 706, 706f
Varicella zoster virus infections, facial 
nerve paralysis in, 567
Varices
anorectal, 1223, 1281
gastric, isolated, 1088
gastroesophageal, 1281
hemorrhage in, 347, 1282, 1283
liver transplantation in, 347, 1283
surgical shunts in, 1282–1283
transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt in, 1282, 
1283
of lower extremity veins, 929–930
Varicocele, 1653
Varicose veins, 929–930
compression stockings in, 929
endovenous laser treatment and 
radiofrequency ablation in, 929
ligation and stripping in, 929
primary, 929
sclerotherapy in, 929
secondary, 929
stab avulsion technique in, 929–930, 
930f
Variola in biologic warfare, 157
Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 
(VCAM-1), 41t
Vascular endothelial growth factor
in angiogenesis, 283–284, 1831
in breast cancer, 535
in wound healing, 244, 247t
Vascular injuries, 214–215
in abdominal trauma, 181, 182f,  
189–191, 210–211
of kidneys, 211
of liver, 203–204
bloody vicious cycle in, 185, 193–194, 
194f
in chest trauma, 203–204
of aorta, 177–178, 178f, 178t, 179f, 
200–201, 200f, 201f
hematoma in, 177, 178f
of innominate artery, 200, 200f
damage control surgery in, 193–194, 
194f
in extremity trauma, 182–183, 184f, 
185t, 214–215
of hand and wrist, 1799
in head trauma, 1720
in laparoscopy, 1704–1705
in inguinal hernia repair, 1516
in neck trauma, 198–199, 198f–199f, 
200f
operative repair techniques in, 191–192, 
192f–193f
end-to-end anastomosis in, 191–192, 
192f
interposition grafts in, 192, 200, 210, 
211
parachute technique in, 192, 192f
transposition procedures in, 192, 193f
types of, 191–192, 191t
in venous trauma, 192
Vascular malformations, 485, 574–575, 
1850–1852, 1852f
Vascular tumors of skin and subcutaneous 
tissue, 485
Vasculitis, 902–903, 903t. See also 
Arteritis
Vas deferens
anatomy of, 1497, 1498f
injury in inguinal hernia repair, 1515
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, 1313, 
1346, 1350
in gastric relaxation, 1047
tumor secretion of, 1392–1393
Vasoconstriction
in hemostasis process, 85, 86f
in shock response, 112
Vasodilatory shock, 124–126
Vasopressin in portal hypertension and 
variceal bleeding, 1282
Vasopressors in sepsis, 154, 155t
Vasospasm, arterial
in subarachnoid hemorrhage, 1731
treatment of, 215t
Vecuronium, 1901, 1901t, 1915
Veins, 915–936
ambulatory pressure, 930
anatomy of, 915–916
chronic insufficiency of, 930–934,  
931f
compression therapy in, 259–260, 
931–933, 931f, 932f
evaluation in, 930, 931f
leg edema in, 916f, 917
perforator vein surgery in, subfascial 
endoscopic, 933, 933f
pigmentation changes in, 917, 917f
reconstructive surgery in, 933–934
skin substitutes in, 932–933, 933f
stenting, 934
ulceration in, 259–260, 917, 917f, 
930, 931–933
venous valve reconstruction in, 
933–934
evaluation of, 916–918
in chronic insufficiency, 930, 931f
invasive techniques, 918
noninvasive techniques, 918
filling index, 930
intima of, 915
of lower extremity
anatomy of, 915–916
varicose, 929–930
malformations of, 1850, 1852, 1852f
in head and neck, 574–575
recovery time, 930
signs of abnormalities in, 917, 917t
stenting, 934
structure of, 915
thrombophlebitis of, 927–928
thrombosis and thromboembolism 
of. See Thrombosis and 
thromboembolism, venous
of upper extremity
anatomy of, 916
thrombosis of, 928–929, 928f
valves in, 915
reconstruction in incompetence of, 
933–934
reflux in disorders in, 930
Trendelenburg’s test of, 917–918
Velopharyngeal competence in speech, 
1844
Vemurafenib, 309, 310t
Vena cava
inferior, 386
filter placement in pulmonary 
embolism, 924, 925f, 927
prior to bariatric surgery, 1105
renal cell carcinoma involving, 1656, 
1657f
trauma of, emergent abdominal 
exploration in, 190, 190f
superior, syndrome in lung cancer, 623, 
625
Venography, 918
in portal hypertension, 1280
in venous thromboembolism, 921
Ventilatory support
airway pressures in, 409–410
in burns, 232
complications of, 232, 233
high-frequency oscillatory ventilation 
in, 232
complications of, 385
in burns, 233
lung injury in, 410
in malnutrition, 385
pneumonia in, 153–154, 233, 384–385
in diaphragmatic hernia, congenital, 
1604
in septic shock, 125
in trauma, 163–164
weaning from, 385
2068
Index
Ventricles, cardiac, 736
arrhythmias of, 386
assist devices for, 768
contraction force, 114
left
aneurysm of, postinfarction, 767, 767f
hypoplastic, 716–719
and aortic stenosis, 698, 699
remodeling after myocardial 
infarction, 766–768, 768
stroke volume, 408
right
double-outlet, 721–722
Ebstein’s anomaly of, 719–720
ejection fraction, 403t
end-diastolic pressure, 402
end-diastolic volume index in shock, 
131
hypoplastic, in tricuspid atresia, 712
septal defect of, 726–727
anatomy in, 726–727, 726f
atrioventricular canal or inlet, 726f, 
727–729
clinical presentation in, 727
diagnosis of, 727
in double-outlet right ventricle,  
722–723, 723f
doubly committed, 722, 723, 723f
noncommitted, 722–723, 723f
subaortic, 722, 723, 723f
subpulmonic, 722, 723f
in hypoplastic left-heart syndrome, 
716
with interrupted aortic arch, 729
muscular, 726–727
operative repair of, 727, 728f
pathophysiology in, 727
perimembranous, 726, 726f, 728f
spontaneous closure of, 727
supracristal or outlet, 726, 726f
“Swiss-cheese” type, 727
in tetralogy of Fallot, 724
in transposition of great arteries, 721
in tricuspid atresia, 712
types of, 726, 726f
Ventricles, cerebral
anatomy of, 1710
ependymoma of, 1734
external drain in, 1713
in hydrocephalus, 1750–1751, 1750f
Ventricular assist devices, 768
biventricular, 770
as bridge to transplantation, 769–770, 
770
as destination therapy, 770
Ventricular outflow tract obstruction
left
in aortic stenosis, 698–702
in truncus arteriosus, 706
right, in tetralogy of Fallot, 724
Ventriculostomy, intracranial pressure 
monitoring in, 1713
right, in tetralogy of Fallot, 411
Verapamil in arterial vasospasm, 215t
Veress needle, 421, 421f
Verruca vulgaris, 485
Verrucous carcinoma, anal and perianal, 
1218
Vertebral artery injuries, 198–199, 1720, 
1721
Vertebral column. See Spine
Very late antigen-4 (VLA-4), 41t
Vesicoureteral reflux, 1667
Veterans Affairs hospital system
medical error disclosure program in, 380
National Surgical Quality Improvement 
Program in, 374
VHL in von Hippel-Lindau disease, 290t
Video-assisted retroperitoneal drainage 
(VARD), 151
Video-assisted thoracic surgery, 646f
in ductus arteriosus patency, 704
in esophageal cancer, 1010
indications for, 645t
in lung cancer
in elderly, 1934
lymph node biopsy in, 631, 632
in mediastinal masses, 674
in pneumothorax, 650
in solitary pulmonary nodule, 623, 630f
in thymoma, 675
Video defecography, 1182
Videoradiography of esophagus, 955, 961, 
961f
in motility disorders, 987–988
Video systems in endoscopy, 424–427, 
427f
Villi of small intestine, 1138
Vinblastine in esophageal cancer, 1013t
Vindesine
in esophageal cancer, 1013t
in lung cancer, 644t
Violence and Injury Prevention Program, 
1964, 1965
VIPomas, 1392–1393
Viral infections, 140–141, 140t
anorectal, 1233
facial nerve paralysis in, 567
pharyngitis in, 570
of skin and subcutaneous tissues, 485
transmission in transfusions, 388, 388t
in transplant recipients, 329
tumors associated with, 295–296, 295t, 
296t
Virchow triad, 918
Virtual colonoscopy, 1181
in colorectal cancer, 1209
Visceral pleura, anatomy of, 680
Viscosupplemenation, 1772
Vitamin A
absorption of, 1143
deficiency of, 255
in wound healing, 255
Vitamin B12 deficiency, 1044
in gastric surgery, 1094
in malabsorption, 1143
Vitamin C
deficiency of, 255
in wound healing, 255
Vitamin D, 1558–1559
absorption of, 1143
gastric surgery affecting, 1094
in calcium absorption, 1094, 1143, 1559
deficiency of, 1563
in gastric surgery, 1094
hyperparathyroidism in, secondary, 
1572
Vitamin E absorption, 1143
Vitamin K
absorption of, 1143
antagonists in venous 
thromboembolism, 921, 923
clotting factors dependent on, 92t, 93, 
103
deficiency of, 93
Vitamins
absorption in small intestine, 1143
in parenteral nutrition, 58
requirements for, 51–52
Vitelline duct, 1453
fistula of, 1453
patent, 1632, 1632f
Vocal cords
anatomy of, 580, 589, 589f
cancer of, 590
laryngeal preservation techniques in, 
591–592
cysts of, 573, 573f
edema of, 573
paralysis of, 574, 574f
in aortic aneurysm repair, 802–803
laryngoplasty in, 574, 574f
in parathyroidectomy, 1574
polyps of, 573
Vocal fold leukoplakia, 573
Voice disorders, 572–574
in laryngeal cancer, 589–590
in laryngeal granulomas, 572–573, 572f
in lung cancer, 623
in vocal cord paralysis, 574, 574f
Volvulus, 1219–1220
cecal, 1219, 1220
gastric, 1090, 1090f
midgut, 1616–1617, 1617f
sigmoid, 1219–1220, 1221f
of transverse colon, 1220
Vomiting
in children and infants, differential 
diagnosis in, 1613
esophageal rupture in, 1018
in ileus, 1152
postoperative, 1915, 1916f
intraoperative fluid therapy affecting, 
1914
in small bowel obstruction, 1147
von Graefe’s sign in Graves’ disease, 1531
von Hippel-Lindau disease, 290t
hemangioblastoma in, 1735
kidney cancer in, 1656, 1656f
pheochromocytoma in, 1586, 1587
von Recklinghausen’s disease, 486, 677, 
1468, 1738
von Willebrand’s disease, 89
von Willebrand’s factor, 85, 89
Voriconazole, 141t, 658
in aspergillosis, 658
Vulva, 1678–1680, 1696–1697
anatomy of, 1672f, 1673–1674, 1673f
biopsy of, 1677
cancer of, 1696–1697, 1696f, 1696t, 
1697f
epidemiology of, 275t
lymphatic spread of, 1696
anatomy in, 1696, 1696f
lymphadenectomy in, 1697, 1697f
staging of, 1696–1697, 1696t
staging of, 1696–1697, 1696t
condyloma of, 1678, 1680
contact dermatitis of, 1678
infections of, 1680
intraepithelial neoplasia of, 1680
leukoplakia of, 1678
Paget’s disease of, 1680
Vulvectomy in vulvar cancer, 1696, 1697, 
1697f
Vulvovaginitis, 1680
candidal, 1677t, 1680
W
WAGR syndrome, 1638
Waiting lists for organ transplantation, 
321, 322f–323f, 332
of liver, 348
Waldeyer’s anorectal fascia, 1177
Waldeyer’s tonsillar ring, 570
2069
Index
Wallerian degeneration, 251
Wantz repair of inguinal hernia, 1509f
Warfare, biologic agents in, 156–157
Warfarin therapy, 94, 94t
in aortic valve replacement, 761
complications of, 923
drug interactions in, 94, 94t
reversal of, 388
in venous thromboembolism, 921, 925
duration of, 923, 923t
Warming techniques
in postoperative hypothermia, 393
in trauma, 187
Warren, Johns Collins, 1896
Warren shunt, in portal hypertension and 
gastroesophageal varices,  
1282–1283, 1283f
Wartenberg’s syndrome, 1806
Warts in papillomavirus infections, 485, 
1233, 1678, 1680
Water
absorption in small intestine,  
1140–1141
total body, 65
Water-clear cells of parathyroid gland, 
1557–1558
Water-hammer pulse in aortic 
insufficiency, 760
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, 1590
Watermelon stomach, 1088
Watson, James D., 443, 444, 445t
Weakness in hyperparathyroidism, 1561
Weaning from mechanical ventilation, 385
Wear debris in arthroplasty, 1777–1778
Web-based medical education, 6
Website resources
on breast cancer, 512, 535
on chemical carcinogens, 293
Web space infections of hand, 1810, 1811f
Webster-Bernard technique in lip 
reconstruction, 1857, 1859f
Weight
loss of
bariatric surgery for, 1099–1131.  
See also Bariatric surgery
in pancreatitis, 1372
physiology of, 1124–1125
unintentional, after gastric surgery, 
1094
total body water in, 65
Wells, Horace, 1895
Wells rectopexy in rectal prolapse, 1219
Werner’s syndrome, thyroid cancer in, 
1537, 1539t
Werner syndrome, 290t
Wharton, Thomas, 1521
Whipple procedure
in cholangiocarcinoma, 1337
in chronic pancreatitis, 1385, 1386f
in pancreatic cancer, 1401–1402, 1402f, 
1411f
in pancreatic injuries, 208
Whipple’s triad in insulinomas, 1391
White blood cells
count in diagnostic peritoneal lavage, 
181t
disorders of, 1434–1435
in host defense mechanisms, 138
spleen function in removal of, 1427
in transfusion products, 96–97
Whitehead’s deformity, 1224, 1225
Whitehead’s hemorrhoidectomy, 1224, 
1225
White pulp of spleen, 1426, 1426f
Williams syndrome in aortic stenosis, 702
Wilms’ tumor, 290t, 1638–1639, 1639f
chemotherapy in, 1639
genetic factors in, 1638
staging of, 1639
Window gazers disease, 828
Winslow foramen, 1265, 1265f
Wirsung duct, 1344, 1344f
Wise pattern reduction technique in 
reduction mammaplasty,  
1888–1889, 1888f, 1889f
Witch’s milk, 500
Withholding or withdrawal of life-
sustaining therapy, 1944–1945
Witzel gastrostomy, 1090, 1091f
Wolff-Chaikoff effect, 1526
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, 770
in Ebstein’s anomaly, 719
World Health Organization
on gastric cancer classification, 1079, 
1079t
and global surgery, 1964, 1968
on pain management, 1948, 1948t
safe surgery saves lives initiative, 1968, 
1968t
“Safe Surgery Saves Lives” program, 
370, 371f, 375–376
on surveillance of surgical care,  
375–376
Wounds
acute, 252, 252f, 264f
antibiotic therapy in, 265
in surgical site infections, 142,  
255–256, 257t–258t
in burns
excision and grafting in treatment of, 
234, 1820, 1821
healing of, 234, 1820
topical therapies for, 232
chronic, 252, 259–261
malignant transformation of, 259, 
260f
classification of, 252
in surgical wounds, 147, 147t
closure of
in head and neck trauma, 575–576, 
575f–576f
sutures in, 264
tissue glues in, 265
vacuum-assisted, 149, 266, 389
contraction of, 246
dressings for, 265–266
gene or cell therapy, 267–268
growth factor therapy in, 267
healing of, 241–268. See also Healing 
process
infections of, 255–259, 265
deep, 256
in surgical site. See Surgical site 
infections
irrigation of, 264
local care of, 264–265
skin grafts in, 264–265, 266. See also 
Skin grafts
skin substitutes in, 266–268, 267t, 
482–483
in burns, 234
in venous insufficiency, 932–933, 
933f
surgical, 252
classification of, 147, 147t
in femoropopliteal bypass graft, 898
vacuum-assisted closure of, 149
W-plasty, 1830
Wrist
anatomy of, 1787–1793
degenerative disorders of, 1807, 1808f
ligament injuries of, 1798
median nerve compression at, 1744, 
1805–1806
pyogenic arthritis of, 1811
Wrist drop in radial nerve trauma, 1727
Wrong-site surgery, 378
incidence of, 378
Joint Commission protocol for 
prevention of, 378–379
reporting of, 378
WT in Wilms’ tumor, 290t
X
Xenotransplantation, 322, 358
Xeroderma pigmentosum, 288t, 290t, 487
Xeromammography, 526
Y
Yasui procedure, in Taussig-Bing 
syndrome, 723
Yersinia pestis in biologic warfare, 157
Yolk sac tumors, 1641, 1704
Yttrium 90 microspheres in 
radioembolization of liver 
tumors, 1296
Z
Zenker’s diverticulum, 987f, 988–989
diverticulopexy and diverticulectomy in, 
989, 990f
endoscopic cricopharyngotomy and 
diverticulotomy in, 988–989, 
990f
Zinc
deficiency of, 255
in wound healing, 255
Zion, Libby, 367, 377t
Zoledronic acid in bone pain, 1950t
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 1071–1073
diagnosis of, 1392
gastric carcinoid tumors in, 1086
in gastrinoma, 1071–1073, 1391–1392
treatment of, 1392
Z-plasty, 1830, 1831f, 1831t, 1833
in burns of hand, 1822, 1822f
in cleft palate, 1844, 1845f
Zuska’s disease, 506
Zygoma fractures, 577, 1854–1855
Zygomaticomaxillary complex fractures, 
1854–1855
Zymogenic cells of stomach, 1041
Zymogens or proenzymes of pancreas, 
1354
Material from the disk that accompanies the  
printed version of this eBook may be obtained
from McGraw-Hill Professional’s MediaCenter 
at http://mhprofessional.com/mediacenter. 
Some material may require a desktop  
or laptop computer for full access. 
Enter this eBook’s ISBN and your e-mail 
address at the MediaCenter to receive 
an e-mail message with a download link.  
This eBook’s ISBN is 978-0-07-180092-1.
Back
